Phenomena of Materialisation (Albert von Schrenck-Notzing, 1920)
================================================================
Albert von Schrenck-Notzing — The Munich physician's ectoplasm experiments — the landmark study of materialization phenomena. Public domain. Scan via Internet Archive (phenomenaofmater00schr) — 1923 reprint of 1920 English translation.

BOSTON 
PUBLIC 
tlBRARY 

PHENOMENA  OF  MATERIALISATION 

PHENOMENA     OF 
MATERIALISATION 

A    CONTRIBUTION   TO 
THE  INVESTIGATION  OF  MEDIUMISTIC   TELEPLASTICS 

o     BY 

BARON   VON   SCHRENCK   NOTZING 

PRACTISING   PHYSICIAN   IN   MUNICH 

TRANSLATED   BY 

E.  E.  FOURNIER  d'ALBE,  D.Sc.  (Lond.  and  Birm.) 

Author  of  ''The  Electron  Theory,"  "Two  New   Worlds," 
"New  Light  on  Immortality,"  etc. 

Reissue  of  the  First  English  Edition 

WITH    225    ILLUSTRATIONS 

LONDON 
KEGAN   PAUL,   TRENCH,   TRUBNER  &  CO.    Ltd. 

NEW   YORK:    E.    P.   DUTTON   &   CO. 
1923 

'"/  ""y^' 

PRINTED   IN   GREAT   BRITAIN   BY 
THE   EDINBURGH   PRESS,    9   AND    II    YOUNG  STREET,    EDINBURGH 

Preface  to  the   First  German   Edition 

"  Nothing  is  too  wonderful  to  be  true." — Faraday. 

It  is  not  without  some  misgiving  that  I  publish  in  the  present  work 
the  results  of  four  years'  observations  of  the  medium  Eva  C.  For  the 
observations  of  mediumistic  phenomena  hitherto  made,  do  not,  up  to 
now,  in  spite  of  their  continuity  and  their  independent  agreement,  and 
in  spite  of  the  high  reputation  of  the  authors  whose  names  vouch  for 
the  facts  stated,  fulfil  the  requirements  of  an  exact  scientific  method. 
This  may,  however,  be  due  to  the  character  of  the  occurrences 
themselves. 

Any  dealings  with  the  discredited  so-called  **  spiritistic"  phenomena 
are  attended,  even  now,  by  certain  disadvantages  to  the  investigator. 
Not  only  are  his  powers  of  observation,  his  critical  judgment  and  his 
credibility  brought  into  question,  not  only  is  he  exposed  to  ridicule 
by  the  reproach  of  charlatanism — as,  for  example,  was  the  famous 
criminal  anthropologist,  Lombroso — but  he  even  incurs  the  danger  of 
being  regarded  as  mentally  deficient,  or  even  as  insane,  as  was  the 
case  with  the  astronomer,  Zollner,  and  the  English  chemist,  Crookes. 

The  open  or  secret  opponents  of  scientific  men  thus  discredited 
are  in  the  habit  of  deriving  some  advantage  from  the  destruction  of 
their  scientific  authority.  Recognising  this  fact,  the  well-known  French 
psychologist,  Charles  Richet,  has  for  the  present  entirely  withdrawn 
from  any  dealings  with  the  forbidden  subject. 

As  to  the  means  sometimes  adopted  by  those  who  wish  to  prove 
the  supposed  fraud  underlying  mediumistic  phenomena,  the  experience 
of  the  author  furnishes  an  instructive  contribution.  Convinced  that 
the  author  was  the  victim  of  expert  deceptions  practised  by  two 
women,  i.e.^  the  medium  Eva  C.  and  her  protectress  Mme.  Bisson, 
somebody  secretly  and  without  the  author's  knowledge  instructed  a 
well-known  Parisian  detective  office  to  watch  these  two  ladies.  The 
employees  of  this  firm,  besides  gathering  the  necessary  information 
about  the  medium  herself,  also  gained  illegal  possession  of  a  number 
of  photographic  copies  of  the  negatives  obtained  during  the  experi- 
ments, though  these  were  the  exclusive  property  of  the  author  and 
his  collaborator. 

In  spite  of  the  unwelcome  annoyances   to   which  these  two  ladies 

V 

vi  PREFACE  TO   THE   FIRST   GERMAN  EDITION 

were  exposed  by  the  tools  of  this  anonymous  agency,  not  only  in  the 
street  but  in  their  domestic  and  family  life  for  eight  months,  the 
agency  did  not  succeed  in  furnishing  any  proof  of  fraud  or  in  finding 
the  firm  which  supplied  what  they  supposed  to  be  the  material  required 
for  the  sittings,  in  the  way  of  hand-shapes  of  all  kinds,  of  veils, 
muslins,  plaster  casts  of  faces,  or  portrait  drawings  of  four  entire 
phantom  images.  One  can  hardly  imagine  a  more  miserable  fiasco 
of  this  well-meant,  but  incorrect,  method  of  serving  the  truth,  if  the 
alleged  fraud  had  actually  taken  place.  One  remembers  that  in  the 
case  of  the  German  flower  medium,  Anna  Rothe,  and  the  Australian, 
Charles  Bailey,  the  purveyors  of  the  objects  required  as  "  apports  " 
during  the  sittings  were  easily  found,  even  without  spies.  Clever 
detectives  are  in  the  habit  of  solving  more  difficult  problems  in  a 
shorter  time  than  was  available  in  this  case. 

Though  we  may  condemn  the  method  here  described,  we  must 
acknowledge  that  a  healthy  scepticism  and  an  open,  benevolent  and 
reasoned  opposition  may  contribute  to  the  elucidation  of  mediumistic 
problems.  For  they  lead  to  the  subsequent  testing  of  the  objections 
brought  forward,  and  thus  often  to  an  improvement  in  the  methods 
of  investigation. 

The  great  astronomer,  Johann  Kepler,  was  right  when  he  said 
*'Only  resistance  awakens  slumbering  forces.  The  works  of  foolish- 
ness perish.  They  must  further  what  they  seem  to  hinder.  But  that 
which  comes  from  the  fountain-head  is  eternal."  Since  all  honest 
investigation  means  a  step  forward  in  knowledge,  the  author  has,  in 
spite  of  all  these  hesitations,  made  up  his  mind,  after  a  twenty-five 
years'  experience  on  the  subject  of  mediumship,  that  he  will  no 
longer  withhold  from  the  public  the  four  years'  observations  with 
Eva  C.  For,  possibly,  we  may  succeed  in  again  directing  attention 
to  a  dark  and  unexplored  side  of  human  Soul  Life,  and  in  particular 
to  certain  problematical  psycho-physical  effects,  and,  furthermore, 
furnish  an  incitement  towards  further  tests. 

Whatever  view  we  may  take  of  this  question,  we  cannot  deny  that 
the  method  of  experiment  employed  in  the  observations  with  Eva  C. 
and  Stanislava  P.  marks  a  distinct  step  in  advance  in  comparison 
with  former  similar  investigations,  so  that  further  progress  along  the 
same  road  may  yield  even  better  results. 

The  present  work  records  in  as  impartial  a  manner  as  possible, 
and  with  the  avoidance  of  attempts  at  explanations  which  would,  at 
present,  be  premature,  observations  and  occurrences  in  the  case  of  the 
medium  Eva  C,  which  were  objectively  recorded  by  free  photography. 
The  majority  of  the  experiments  took  place  in  Paris,  and  the  author 
has  stayed  there  as  often  as  possible  in  order  to  continue  these  studies. 

PREFACE   TO  THE  FIRST  GERMAN  EDITION  vii 

During  his  absences  the  sittings  were  regularly  continued  under  the 
accepted  conditions,  and  in  this  case  his  collaborator,  Mme.  Bisson, 
made  considerable  use  of  the  author's  photographic  apparatus. 

In  order  to  give  a  continuous  view  of  the  development  of  the 
mediumistic  phenomena  during  that  time,  nearly  all  the  photographs 
taken  by  Mme.  Bisson  herself,  dating  from  May  1909,  are  also 
published,  as  well  as  numerous  personal  observations  made  by  her 
{e.g.  on  the  spontaneous  occurrences  of  the  phenomena),  which  were 
facilitated  by  several  years  of  her  joint  residence  with  the  medium. 
These  communications  furnish  a  valuable  and  necessary  supplement  to 
the  author's  own  experimental  material.  Besides,  the  reports  could 
often  be  confirmed  by  a  subsequent  repetition  in  the  author's  presence 
of  such  occurrences  as  were,  in  the  first  instance,  observed  by 
Mme.  Bisson  alone,  so  that  there  is  no  occasion  to  doubt  the  correct- 
ness of  these  supplementary  reports.  The  photographic  plates  were 
always  inserted  by  the  author  himself  during  his  experiments.  They 
were  developed  also  in  his  presence  either  by  Barenne  &  Co.  (Rue 
Duret  27  bis),  or  in  Munich  by  the  Photo-Chemical  Institute  of 
Dr  Hauberrisser  (Dienerstrasse  19). 

The  majority  of  the  materialisation  phenomena  photographed  were 
also  taken  as  stereoscopic  photographs,  but  these  could  not,  from 
considerations  of  clearness  and  brevity,  be  reproduced  in  the  present 
work. 

Since  in  the  first  year,  on  account  of  the  imperfect  working  of  the 
flash-light  apparatus,  the  photographs  were  often  failures,  certain 
situations  of  some  apparent  importance  were  reconstructed,  according 
to  the  records,  by  the  welcome  assistance  of  the  painter,  Karl 
Gampenrieder.  Such  pictorial  representations  cannot,  of  course,  be 
regarded  as  substitutes  for  photographs,  and  they  only  claim  a 
relative  value  as  graphic  renderings  of  certain  interesting  moments. 

In  the  present  year  (1913J  the  author  had  the  unexpected  opportunity 
of  observing  materialisation  phenomena  in  the  case  of  a  young  Pole, 
Stanislava  P.,  whose  mediumistic  powers  are  not  yet  sufficiently 
developed.  These  observations  took  place  at  Munich  under  similar 
conditions  as  with  Eva  C,  but  in  a  less  rigid  and  convincing  form. 
The  independent  agreement  of  certain  performances  of  the  Polish 
medium  with  those  of  Eva  C.  is  so  striking,  that  certain  selected 
photographs  from  these  sittings,  together  with  explanatory  notes,  are 
added  to  this  work  in  a  special  chapter. 

As  regards  the  criticism  of  the  occurrences  related  in  the  case  of 
the  medium  Eva  C,  such  men  of  science  must  be  acknowledged 
as  qualified  in  the  first  instance  who  command  adequate  knowledge 
and   a   special   study   of  the   subject   of   Physical   Mediumship.       He 

viii  PREFACE   TO   THE   FIRST  GERMAN  EDITION 

who  has  not  read  the  works  of  Lombroso  and  Zollner,  nor  is  acquainted 
with  the  several  years'  investigations  of  Sir  W.  Crookes,  will  possibly 
arrive  at  an  erroneous  conception  or  even  a  denial  of  the  results 
communicated.  But  new  acquisitions  of  knowledge  must  not  be 
judged  according  to  their  probability  or  improbability  ;  they  need  not 
be  swayed  by  temporarily  dominant  scientific  dogmas  or  by  popular 
opinion. 

Even  though,  at  the  present  moment,  we  cannot  comprehend  the 
strange  capacities  of  mediums,  we  have  not  to  deal  with  "miracles" 
in  the  religious  sense,  but  with  occurrences  happening  fairly  regularly 
under  certain  conditions,  though  their  causes  and  laws  are  at  present 
unknown.  As  Richet  justly  observes :  ''  Nothing  is  touched  that 
belongs  to  the  classical  treasury  of  science." 

Let  the  reader  then  approach  without  prejudice  and  with  an  open 
mind  the  study  of  the  present  work,  and  let  him  not  be  shaken  in  his 
judgment  by  prevalent  opinion,  nor  by  the  numerous  failures  and 
disappointments  hitherto  encountered  in  the  history  of  "Occultism." 

As  the  author  was  guided  in  his  experiments,  so  may  also  the 
reader  be  guided  by  the  words  of  Frederick  the  Great:  "I  seek  the 
truth  everywhere,  and  respect  it  wherever  I  find  it,  and  1  submit  to 
it  whenever  it  is  shown  to  me." 

ALBERT  VON  SCHRENCK  NOTZING. 

Munich,  iz^th  October  19 13. 

TRANSLATOR'S  PREFACE 

This  first  English  version  of  Dr  von  Schrenck  Notzing's  Materialisa- 
tions-Phcenomene  embodies  not  only  the  original  volume  but  also  the 
more  important  parts  of  the  supplementary  work  entitled  Der  Kampf 
um  die  Materialisations  Phcenoviene^  published  early  in  19 14,  as  well 
as  certain  subsidiary  material  accumulated  since  these  researches 
were  first  made  public.  The  English  version  has  been  prepared  in 
consultation  with  the  author  and  with  Mme.  Bisson,  and  it  may 
be  taken  to  represent  their  results  and  views  as  finally  arrived  at 
in   1920  and  embodied  in  the  forthcoming  Second  German  Edition. 

The  English-speaking  public  has,  therefore,  now  an  opportunity 
of  studying  these  remarkable  results  at  first  hand.  The  present  work 
is  unique,  in  that  it  gives  a  full  scientific  account  of  a  set  of  strange 
occurrences  observed  under  the  strictest  conditions  of  control,  and 
as  yet  quite  unexplained.  With  admirable  candour  the  author  takes 
us  into  his  confidence,  and  publishes  his  results  in  full,  regardless  of 
the  dangers  of  misinterpretation  by  superficial  and  prejudiced  critics. 
It  cannot  be  expected  that  the  facts  here  stated  will  be  readily  accepted 
as  presented.  Nobody  believes  facts  merely  because  they  are  true. 
They  must  also  link  up  with  other  facts,  they  must  fit  into  our 
prevailing  habits  of  thought,  they  must  be  "useful"  in  the  sense 
of  leading  to  workable  practical  conclusions.  But  any  intelligent  man 
may  safely  be  challenged  to  read  through  this  work  with  an  open 
mind,  and  then  deny  that  the  case  for  the  reality  of  the  phenomena, 
and  for  the  novelty  and  abnormality  of  their  mode  of  production, 
has  been  completely  established ;  and  once  that  point  of  view  is 
attained,  the  new  branch  of  knowledge  will  soon  find  its  place  in  the 
intellectual  inheritance  of  our  race. 

The  translator  is  convinced  of  the  authenticity  of  the  phenomena, 
not  only  from  the  perusal  of  this  work  but  from  the  opportunities  he 
had,  through  the  kindness  of  the  Society  for  Psychical  Research,  of 
witnessing  some  of  the  phenomena  presented  by  the  medium  Eva  C. 
in  London.  He  does  not  venture  an  explanation,  but  agrees  in  the 
main  with  the  author  in  regarding  them  as  a  new,  or  rather  a  hitherto 
unexplored,  function  of  certain  human  organisms.     He  also  takes  the 

ix 

X  TRANSLATOR'S   PREFACE 

author's  view  that  a  spiritistic  interpretation  has  not,  so  far,  become 
unavoidable. 

In  reading  the  reports  of  some  of  the  Sittings  one  cannot  help 
regretting  that  certain  excessively  severe  precautions  to  eliminate  the 
hypothesis  of  fraud  should  have  been  considered  necessary,  and  hoping 
that  the  physical  and  emotional  martyrdom  undergone  by  the  French 
medium  should  suffice  to  silence  the  most  ruthless  and  exacting  critic, 
and  so  pave  the  way  for  more  humane  methods  of  investigation.  That 
the  medium  has  retained  her  mental  and  moral  equilibrium  through 
so  many  years  of  experimentation  is  entirely  due  to  the  wisdom, 
patience  and  devotion  of  Mme.   Bisson. 

The  world  is  now  for  the  first  time  in  possession  of  a  Monograph 
on  these  mysterious  and  much-controverted  phenomena,  investigated 
by  a  trained  observer,  and  recorded  by  him  with  the  aid  of  great 
scientific  resources.  The  work  demands,  and  is  entitled  to,  an 
unprejudiced  and  respectful  hearing.  The  verdict  as  to  its  value 
in  the  advancement  of  knowledge  can  be  safely  left  to  an  enlightened 
public  opinion. 

E.  E.   FOURNIER  d'ALBE. 

London,  Aug^ust  1920. 

CONTENTS 

PART  I.— 1909-1913. 

INTRODUCTION. 

General  and  Historical 

On  Method  in  Mediumistic  Investigations 

Facts  and  Hypotheses 

PAGE 

I 

14 
28 

PHENOMENA  WITH  EVA  C. 

Sittings  in  May  and  June  1909  (Paris)      ......  37 

Sittings  in  November  1909  (Paris)             ......  44 

Sittings  in  May  and  June  1910  (Paris)      ......  50 

Observations  in  Biarritz      ........  57 

Sittings  in  October  and  November  1910  (Paris)  .....  59 

Sittings  in  December  1910  and  January  191 1  (Paris)      .  .  .  .80 

Sittings  in  March  and  April  191 1  (Paris) .             .....  86 

Sittings  in  May  and  June  191 1  (Paris)      ......  91 

Further  Observations  in  June  and  July  191 1  (Paris)        .  .  .  .97 

Sittings  in  July  and  August  191 1  (St  Jean  de  Luz)  .  .  .  .99 

Further  Observations  in  September  191 1  (St  Jean  de  Luz)         .             .             .  115 

Sittings  in  October  and  November    191 1  (Paris)              ....  117 

Observations  in  December  191 1  (Paris)    ......  134 

Sittings  in  December  191 1  and  January  1912  (Paris)      ....  137 

Observations  in  March  and  April  191 2  (Paris)     .....  145 

Sittings  in  April  1912  (Paris)         •.....,  147 

Psychical  Phenomena        •••.....  149 

Sittings  in  May  and  June  1912  (Paris)      ......  156 

Observations  in  June  and  July  1912  (Paris)          .....  169 

Sittings  in  July,  August  and  September  1912  (Munich)  .             .             .             .  171 

Sittings  in  October  and  November  19 12  (Paris)  .....  207 

Observations  in  December  1912  and  January  and  February    1913  (Paris)        .  216 
Sittings  in  February  and  March  191 3  (Paris)       .             .             .             .             .222 

Observations  in  March,  April  and  May  1913  (Paris)       ....  228 

Sittings  in  May  and  June  1913  (Paris)      ......  231 

Observations  in  June  and  July  19 1 3  (Paris  and  La  Baule)          .             .             .  243 

Result  of  the  Microscopic  Examinations  .             .....  246 

xi 

xii  CONTENTS 

PHENOMENA  WITH  STANISLAVA  P. 

Introduction  ..... 

Sittings  in  January  and  February  1913  (Munich) 
Sittings  in  June  and  July  1913  (Munich) 
Results  of  the  Observations 

251 
252 
257 
259 

RETROSPECT. 

Negative  Points  and  the  Hypothesis  of  Fraud    . 
Artistic  and  Technical  Opinions    ..... 
Method  of  Observation  and  Development  of  Teleplastic  Structures 
Head  Fragments,  Faces  and  Phantoms    .... 
Conclusion  ........ 

260 
271 
274 
279 
283 

PART  II.— 1913-1919. 

Introduction  ...... 

The  Rumination  Hypothesis         .... 

Front  Page  Illustrations  from  the  Journal  Le  Miroir     . 

Sittings   with    Eva   C.    in    November    and    December   1913   and    January 
1914  (Paris)      ...... 

Sittings  with  Eva  C.  in  May  and  June  1914  (Paris) 

Result  of  the  Observations  .... 

Reports  of  French  Investigators  1916  (Paris) 

Dr  V.  Gustave  Geley  (Paris)  on  his  Observations  with  Eva  C.  in  1918  (Paris) 

Conclusion  .......... 

28s 
286 
292 

306 

311 

320 

324 
327 
336 

PHENOMENA  OF    MATERIALISATION. 

INTRODUCTION. 

GENERAL    AND    HISTORICAL. 

The  history  of  Science  in  the  last  few  decades  confirms,  more  perhaps 
than  in  any  previous  age,  the  justice  of  the  words  of  the  great  mathe- 
matician Arago,  that  the  word  "  impossible  "  should  be  very  sparingly 
used  outside  mathematics.  Among  the  "  impossibilities  "  of  former 
opinion  we  may  enumerate  the  following  : — free  motor  traction  on 
ordinary  roads  ;  flying  ;  the  arbitrary  production  of  psychic  dependence 
of  a  human  being  (hypnotic  suggestion) ;  vision  into  closed  spaces 
(Rontgen  rays)  ;  colour  photography  ;  wireless  telegraphy ;  and  radio- 
activity ;  not  to  mention  other  facts  of  recent  research. 

Hypnotism,  which  encountered  more  opposition  than  anything 
else,  is  now  the  common  property  of  psychology,  and  the  cure  of  nervous 
disease.  At  all  times  new  discoveries  have  encountered  violent  opposi- 
tion. Facts  were  denied  because  they  did  not  fit  into  the  theories 
prevailing  at  the  time,  or  because  fantastic  people  drew  unwarrantable 
conclusions  from  them. 

A  particularly  instructive  example  of  this  kind  is  furnished  by 
meteoric  stones,  whose  actuality  struggled  long  for  recognition.  Thus 
Chladni^  complains  in  his  work  on  "  Fiery  Meteors  "  of  the  treatment 
accorded  to  him  by  his  colleagues  :  "  When  my  work  appeared,  the 
majority  of  them  declared  the  whole  contents  to  be  foolishness,  as 
indeed  I  had  expected.  It  was  said  in  the  General  German  Library 
that  my  assertions  were  unworthy  of  refutation."  J.  A.  du  Luc 
expressed  himself  in  this  sense,  that  if  he  had  seen  such  a  stone  fall  at 
his  feet  he  would  have  said,  "  I  have  seen  it,  and  yet  I  do  not  believe  it." 

But,  as  a  rule,  people  make  the  matter  easy  for  themselves  by 
distorting  the  facts  newly  announced,  or  by  simply  denying  them, 
instead  of  taking  the  trouble  to  make  further  investigations.  Dis- 
belief went  so  far  that  most  of  the  meteorites  which  had  been  kept 
in  public  collections  were  simply  thrown  away  by  the  Keepers,  for  fear 
of  being  made  ridiculous  and  being  regarded  as  uneducated  if  they 
admitted  the  possibility  of  the  thing.  This  a  priori  resistance  to 
new  phenomena,  an  old  inherited  scientific  sin,  is  seen  more  particularly 
in  medicine,  which  owed  originally  to  laymen  so  many  of  its  present 
secure  possessions.     Let  us  remember  the  violent  resistance  opposed  to 

^  Chladni,  Tiber  Feuermeteore,  Vienna,  1819. 

2  PHENOMENA  OF  MATERIALISATION 

Harvey's  discovery  of  the  circulation  of  the  blood  (this  excellent 
investigator  was  even  declared  to  be  insane),  also  the  opposition  of  the 
French  Academy  to  vaccination  for  smallpox,  as  proposed  by  Jenner. 

The  history  of  Science  offers  numerous  examples  of  this  kind,  which 
may  be  found  enumerated  in  the  writings  of  Flammarion,  Zollner, 
and  Kemmerich.i 

Our  investigation  of  Nature  is  subject  to  change.  We  have  no 
justification  for  condemning  a  priori,  though  a  healthy  scepticism 
can  only  contribute  to  the  furtherance  of  truth.  A  recollection  of  the 
revolutionary  results  of  investigation  obtained  in  the  last  few  decades 
may,  however,  have  cleared  the  judgment  of  the  present  world  of 
science.  Thus  our  present  time  appears  to  be  better  disposed  towards 
the  reception  and  sober  examination  of  new  facts,  however  strange 
and  absurd  they  may  appear  to  be. 

Another  important  advance  is  the  abandonment  of  the  materialistic 
conception  of  the  universe  which,  even  thirty  years  ago,  was  in  sole 
possession.  Modern  physics  regards  matter  as  a  form  of  motion,  and  is 
dominated  by  the  idea  of  energy.  Psychology  also  is  gradually  emanci- 
pating itself  from  the  purely  physiological  conception  of  mental  life  ; 
and  under  the  leadership  of  the  philosopher  Bergson,  it  tends  to 
acknowledge  the  superiority  of  the  psychical  over  the  physical.  Thus 
the  circumstances  are  much  more  favourable  to  the  investigation  of 
great  new  problems  and  facts  than  they  were  some  decades  ago. 

Among  the  more  important  problems  we  may  place  the  scientific 
investigation  of  the  physical  phenomena  of  mediumship  which,  up  to 
now,  has  been  entirely  in  the  hands  of  superstitious  spiritists. 

In  view  of  the  improvement  of  our  natural  knowledge  there  is  no 
a  priori  reason  against  the  possibility  of  abnormal  phenomena  and 
effects  which  may  have  their  origin  in  the  wonderful  human  organism. 
Our  knowledge  of  that  which  we  call  life  is  limited.  The  riddles  of 
propagation,  of  growth,  of  the  transmission  of  racial  qualities,  are 
entirely  unsolved,  although  they  take  place  daily  before  our  eyes. 
Perhaps,  as  Kayserling  ^  supposes,  the  individual  is  only  a  stage  in  the 
process  of  life.  If  that  is  so,  the  real  in  Nature  is  based  upon  some- 
thing ideal.  The  principle  of  life  is  not  exhaustively  represented  by 
its  temporary  appearance.  According  to  this  view  we  overestimate 
the  importance  of  consciousness,  which  does  not  imply  anything  essential 
to  life,  and  so  we  exaggerate  the  sense  of  personal  existence. 

Now  we  find  abnormal  phenomena  of  human  nature,  as  presented 
by  mediumistic  processes,  at  all  times  in  the  history  of  civilisation, 
so  that,  for  this  reason  alone,  an  examination  of  them  is  justified  quite 
apart  from  any  subsequent  explanation.  Is  it  only  a  matter  of  fraud, 
superstition  and  self-deception  ?  Even  if  that  were  so,  an  investigation 
of  the  subject,  and  a  re-education  of  the  persons  thus  misled  and 
deceived,  would  appear  to  be  necessary. 

But  if,  as  has  been  asserted,  we  have  to  deal  with  genuine  phenomena 
of  an  unknown,  transcendental  origin,  then  the  study  of  these  facts 
is  one  of  the  most  important  tasks  ever  imposed  upon  science.     For 

1  Flammarion,  Les  Forces  Inconnues  de  la  Nature;  Zollner,  Wissemchaftliche  Abhand- 
lungen,  1878,  Leipzig  ;  Kemmerich,  Kultur-Kuriosa,  Vol.  II.  (Langen,  Munich,  1910). 

2  Kayserling,  TJnsterblichkeit ,  Munich,  1907. 

INTRODUCTION  8 

it  must  bring  about  an  unexpected  widening  of  the  knowledge  of  the 
processes  of  human  life. 

The  unprejudiced  and  sober  examination  of  the  records  contributed 
to  literature  by  well-known  investigators  familiar  with  the  methods 
of  scientific  observation,  shows  that  it  is  absolutely  necessary  to  make 
further  tests  of  their  results  if  there  is  a  suitable  opportunity  of  doing  so. 
The  best  known  of  such  records  are  those  made  1870  to  1874  by  the 
late  Sir  William  Crookes,  the  great  English  chemist  and  physicist, 
which  were  undertaken  with  the  medium,  Florence  Cook,  then  fifteen 
years  of  age,  and  with  Daniel  Dunglas  Home.  The  investigations 
of  this  savant  were  conducted  with  such  care  that  it  is  difficult  to  deny 
him  any  credibility  simply  on  account  of  his  cursory  and  sometimes 
rather  startling  form  of  publication,  as  was  done  by  Alfred  Lehmann.^ 
Crookes  employed  self-registering  measuring  apparatus  and  treated 
the  medium  as  a  sort  of  power-engine.  He  published  the  first  record 
of  certain  phenomena  in  the  case  of  Home  in  1871,  and  eighteen  years 
later  further  notes  on  the  same  sittings.  In  these  we  get  a  picture 
of  some  occurrences  rather  different  from  that  presented  in  the  original 
publication.  Thus  Lehmann,  who  exposes  a  few  contradictions  in  the 
two  publications,  finds  fault  with  the  dependence  of  the  experimenter 
on  the  wish  of  the  medium,  the  defective  illumination,  the  free  movement 
of  the  medium  during  the  experiments,  and  many  inaccuracies  in  the 
records.  According  to  him  a  conscientious  investigator  should  only 
publish  such  results  as  he  has  repeatedly  obtained  under  definite  con- 
ditions, and  the  records  should  be  published  in  full,  together  with  a 
description  of  all  accompanying  circumstances. 

Even  if  we  admit  certain  faults  in  Crookes's  records  of  his  experi- 
ments, these  do  not  impair  the  value  of  any  single  definite  experiment, 
or  of  a  self-contained  single  observation.  Must  these  results,  therefore, 
have  been  observed  inaccurately  and  falsely,  because  they  are  not 
recorded  as  Lehmann  justly  desires  it  ? 

As  regards  the  good- will  of  the  medium,  we  may  take  it  that  all 
experiments  are  dependent  on  that,  and  the  education  of  the  mediums 
(who  have  a  very  imperfect  understanding  of  the  requirements  of 
scientific  method),  so  as  to  make  them  into  useful  subjects  for  research, 
is  one  of  the  most  difficult  problems  which  investigators,  in  this  subject, 
have  to  solve. 

As  regards  the  famous  materialisations  of  "  Katie  King,"  Podmore  ^ 
showed  that  the  decisive  proofs  were  not  obtained  in  Crookes's  own 
house,  but  at  the  house  of  the  Cook  family  in  Hackney,  where  the  bed- 
room of  the  medium  was  used  as  the  cabinet. 

The  electric  control  of  the  medium  proposed  by  Varley  did  not, 
according  to  Lehmann,  exclude  fraud.  Yet  this  critic  admits  that 
Katie  King  was  a  living  being  !  Must  we  take  it  that  the  circum- 
stances of  the  medium's  bedroom  being  used  in  some  cases  as  a  dark 
cabinet  has  anything  to  do  with  the  value  of  the  results  obtained  by 
Crookes,  who,  in  the  course  of  four  years,  made  hundreds  of  experiments 
in  his  own  laboratory  ?  Decision  can  only  rest  with  the  conditions 
of  the  single  experiment  performed.     The  genuineness  of  the  medium- 

'  Lehraanrij  Ahergluube  und  Zaufierei,  Enke,  Stuttgart,  1908. 
"  Podmore,  Modern  Spiritualism,  Vol.  II.,  p.  155. 

4  PHENOMENA  OF  MATERIALISATION 

istic  phenomenon  should  be  considered  as  completely  established  by 
the  generation  and  disappearance  of  a  figure  without  any  artificial 
means  before  the  eyes  of  the  experimenter,  as  was  so  often  described 
by  Crookes.  That  this  phenomenon  accompanied  the  medium,  and  was 
effected  even  better  in  the  rooms  in  which  she  lived,  is  quite  natural. 

Lehmann  says  nothing  about  the  photographs  taken  by  Crookes, 
which  proved  that  Katie  King  and  Florence  Cook  weve  two  different 
living  beings.  When,  several  years  after  the  medium's  marriage  with 
Mr  Corner,  during  a  sitting  of  the  9th  January  1880,  the  spirit  "  Mary  " 
was  seized  and  found  to  be  the  medium  in  a  flannel  dress  and 
corsets,  and  when,  later,  six  unsatisfactory  sittings  were  held 
by  Polish  men  of  science,  it  was  said  everywhere  that  the  celebrated 
medium  of  Professor  Crookes  was  a  fraud,  and  that  she  had  deceived 
him  during  several  years.  Whether  this  exposure  was  really  a  case  of 
"  transfiguration,"  "  transmutation,"  or  pseudo-materialisation,  such 
as  often  occurs,  and  has  also  been  observed  by  the  author,  may  be  left 
aside  for  the  moment.  But  the  readers  of  Crookes's  reports  may  remem- 
ber the  farewell  sitting  of  Katie  King,  in  which  she  declared  that  she 
would  depart  and  would  never  return. 

Possibly  this  termination  was  a  hint  of  the  close  of  Miss  Cook's 
mediumship.  We  may  find  it  humanly  comprehensible  that  she  made 
further  attempts,  and  that,  in  spite  of  the  failure  of  her  mediumistic 
powers,  she  consented  to  sittings  which  came  to  a  lamentable  end. 

But  even  this  circumstance  cannot  diminish  the  importance  of  the 
facts  which  Crookes  obtained  with  the  medium  at  the  height  of  her 
creative  power.  Of  the  whole  of  Lehmann's  criticism  of  the  English 
investigator  only  one  justifiable  objection  remains,  viz.,  that  the 
record  of  these  interesting  phenomena  might  have  been  more  complete 
and  accurate. 

Besides,  the  late  Sir  William  Crookes,  who  was  regarded  as  one  of 
England's  greatest  chemists  and  physicists,  never  recanted  a  single 
one  of  his  statements  on  this  matter.  In  this  connection  he  has  made  the 
following  pronouncement  :  ^ 

"  Thirty  years  have  passed  since  I  published  a  report  concerning 
experiments  purporting  to  show  that  behind  our  scientific  knowledge 
a  power  exists  which  differs  from  that  common  to  all  mortals.  ...  To 
stop  in  an  investigation  which  promises  to  open  wide  the  gates  of 
knowledge,  to  hesitate  for  fear  of  difficulties  and  hostile  criticism, 
would  mean  exposmg  science  to  censure.  The  investigator  has  nothing 
to  do  but  to  go  straight  ahead,  to  gather  information  everywhere,  to 
follow  the  light  inch  by  inch  with  the  aid  of  his  reason,  wherever  the 
light  may  lead,  even  should  it  resemble  a  will-o'-the-wisp  !  " 

Among  other  mediums  referred  to  in  the  literature  of  the  latter 
part  of  the  nineteenth  century  and  the  first  years  of  the  twentieth,  a 
few  may  be  mentioned  here,  whose  performances  furnish  links  and 
parallels  with  the  statements  contained  in  the  present  work. 

The  private  medium,  Mrs  d'Esperance,  born  in  London  in  1852, 
is  described  by  all  who  came  in  contact  with  her  as  an  honest  and 
credible  person.     In  spite  of  her  truthful  character  she  was  not  spared 

1  Hyslop,  Enigmas-  of  Psychical  Research  (passage  retranslated  fiom  the  Germau). 

INTRODUCTION  5 

an  "  exposure."  While  she  was  believed  to  be  sleeping  in  the  cabinet, 
her  shadow  friend  "  Yolande  "  was  seized.  On  this  she  says  :  "  The 
man  who  had  seized  her  said  it  was  I.  This  assertion  appeared  to  me 
so  extraordinary  and  incomprehensible  that  I  could  have  laughed,  if  my 
utter  helplessness  and  weakness  had  not  rendered  me  incapable  of 
thinking  or  even  of  moving."  In  consequence  of  this  shock,  this  lady  of 
unimpeachable  character  broke  down  completely,  became  seriously  ill, 
retired  from  the  world,  and  ceased  to  give  any  sittings  for  a  long  time. 
She  had  devoted  herself  to  mediumistic  studies  solely  from  a  love  of 
the  subject  and  from  a  thirst  for  knowledge.  From  these  and  other 
remarks  Lehmann  arrives  at  the  reasonable  conclusion  that  Mrs  d'Esper- 
ance,  during  the  exposure,  played  the  part  of  Yolande  automatically 
in  a  dream.  In  general,  he  adopts  the  view  that  the  spirit  forms  are 
unconscious  figments  dramatically^  enacted  by  the  materialising  mediums. 
Mrs  d'Esperance  was  a  dreamer  even  as  a  child.  She  had  a  lively 
imagination.  At  fourteen  she  believed  herself  to  be  insane,  on  account 
of  numerous  visual  and  auditory  hallucinations.  Under  the  influence 
of  spiritists  she  commenced  with  table-tilting,  psychography,  and 
automatic  drawing  and  writing,  (She  had  been  taught  drawing  and 
painting.)  The  genesis  of  her  own  materialisation  phenomena  she 
describes  just  as  they  are  observed  in  other  mediums  :  a  white  heap  of 
muslin  lying  on  the  floor  becomes  animated  and  ascends  in  the  form  of 
white  clouds,  until,  under  the  folds  of  the  drapery,  a  living  being  in  human 
shape  appears.  On  p.  254  of  her  book  ^  the  same  process  is  described  as 
follows  : — 

"  First  a  filmy,  cloudy  patch  of  something  white  is  observed  on  the 
floor  in  front  of  the  cabinet.  It  then  gradually  expands,  visibly  extend- 
ing itself  as  if  it  were  an  animated  patch  of  muslin,  lying  fold  upon  fold, 
on  the  floor,  until  extending  about  two  and  a  half  by  three  feet,  and 
having  a  depth  of  a  few  inches — perhaps  six  or  more.  Presently  it 
begins  to  rise  slowly  in  or  near  the  centre,  as  if  a  human  head  were 
underneath  it,  while  the  cloud}^  film  on  the  floor  begins  to  look  more 
like  muslin  falling  into  folds  about  the  portion  so  mysteriously  rising. 
By  the  time  it  has  attained  two  or  more  feet  in  height,  it  looks  as  if 
a  child  were  under  it  and  moving  its  arms  about  in  all  directions  as  if 
manipulating  something  underneath.  It  continues  rising,  oftentimes 
sinking  somewhat  to  rise  again  higher  than  before,  until  it  attains  the 
height  of  about  five  feet,  when  its  form  can  be  seen  as  if  arranging  the 
folds  of  drapery  about  its  figure.  Presently  the  arms  rise  considerably 
above  the  head  and  open  outwards  through  a  mass  of  cloud-like  spirit 
drapery,  and  Yolande  stands  before  us  unveiled,  graceful  and  beautiful, 
nearly  five  feet  in  height,  having  a  turban-like  head-dress,  from  beneath 
which  her  long  black  hair  hangs  over  her  shoulders  and  do\vn  her  back. 
....  The  dematerialising  of  Yolande's  body  occupies  from  two  to 
five  minutes,  while  the  disappearance  of  the  drapery  occupies  from  a 
half  to  two  minutes." 

In  one  of  the  illustrations  published  in  her  book  she  is  photographed 
with  her  "  spirit  "  Yolande.  Later,  she  took  hundreds  of  photographs, 
to  test  whether  she  could  exert  some  mediumistic  influence  upon  the 

^  Shadow  Land,  by  E.  d'Esperanee.     London.     George  Redway^  1898. 

6  PHENOMENA    OF    MATERIALISATION 

plate.  On  some  plates,  heads  and  nebulous  human  shapes  were  found 
beside  the  person  photographed.  Professors  Butlerow  and  Aksakoff 
succeeded  in  obtaining  materialisation  photographs  with  Mrs  d'Esperance. 
Oxley  made  the  interesting  experiment,  unknown  to  the  medium  up 
to  the  time  of  the  experiment,  of  mixing  the  seed  of  an  Indian  plant, 
Ixora  crocata,  with  sand  and  water  in  a  decanter,  and  requesting  the 
medium  to  accelerate  its  growth.  It  is  said  that,  under  the  eyes  of 
twenty  persons,  the  plant  developed  to  a  height  of  twenty-two  inches, 
with  a  flower  composed  of  some  150  four-star  corollas  and  twenty-nine 
leaves. 

Mrs  d'Esperance  lives  in  retirement  in  the  country,  or  travels,  and 
has  quite  ceased  her  mediumistic  activity.     (She  died  in  1919 — Tr.) 

The  incompleteness  and  imperfection  of  the  materialisations  was 
already  evident  to  the  observers  of  the  phantom  "  Yolande,"  which 
appeared  with  Mrs  d'Esperance  on  13th  March  1896.^  The  heads 
sometimes  gave  the  impression  of  masks,  and  this  was  also  found  by 
Comte  Bullet  during  the  photography  of  a  phantom  with  another 
medium.  According  to  his  view,  a  flat  surface  is  materialised  first, 
and  this  is  modelled  subsequently.  This  view  receives  some  support 
from  the  author's  observations  as  recorded  in  this  work. 

As  in  Mrs  d'Esperance' s  book  Professor  Mangin  -  describes  materiali- 
sation as  a  fugitive  structure  suddenly  generated,  which  assumes  a 
human  or  animal  shape.  Its  material  is  not  permanent,  but  phantom- 
like. It  contains  the  minimum  of  substance  necessary  to  produce  in  the 
witnesses  the  illusion  that  they  have  a  living  body  before  them.  Mostly 
it  consists  of  outlines  or  sketches  of  hands  or  heads,  and  in  order  to  save 
work  in  the  formation  of  heads,  the  mysterious  artist  employs  drapery. 
In  a  harmonious  concatenation  of  all  the  best  conditions  a  "  Katie 
King  "  can  be  born  and  equipped  up  to  the  limit  of  illusion.  She  must 
vanish  like  the  dream  she  is.  The  substance  borrowed  from  the  medium 
nmst  return  whence  it  came  ;  the  child  disappears  into  the  lap  of  its 
mother.  In  connection  with  the  dress  of  the  phantom  Mangin  asks 
whether  it  consists  of  "  apports "  or  materialisations,  and  recalls  the 
well-known  scene  in  which  Katie  King  cut  off  portions  of  her  garment 
and  distributed  them  among  those  present.  She  then  filled  up  the 
gaps  by  simply  covering  them  with  the  intact  portion  of  her  drapery. 
They  were  immediately  filled  up,  and,  in  spite  of  the  closest  inspection, 
Crookes  was  unable  to  find  a  seam. 

Similar  to  the  above  is  the  description  given  by  the  French  physiolo- 
gist, Professor  Charles  Richet,^  of  the  process  as  observed  in  his  Algiers 
sittings.  "  I  see  something  like  a  white  luminous  ball  of  undetermined 
outline  suspended  above  the  floor.  Then  suddenly  there  appears, 
emerging  from  this  white  orb  of  light  as  from  a  trap-door,  the  phantom 
'  Bien  Boa.'  It  is  of  moderate  height.  He  is  draped  in  a  flowing 
garment  with  a  belt  round  his  waist.  '  Bien  Boa  '  is  halting  and 
lame  in  his  walk.  One  cannot  say  whether  he  walks  or  glides.  .  .  . 
Without  opening  the  curtain  he  suddenly  collapses  and  vanishes  on 
the  floor.  At  the  same  time  one  hears  the  noise  of  a  body  falling  on 
the  floor.     Three  or  four  minutes  afterwards  the  same  white  orb  appears 

1  Psychische  Studien,  1907,  p.  119.         ^  Annales  des  Sciences  Psychiques,  Dec.  1907. 
3  Psychische  Studieri,  1906,  p.  82. 

INTRODUCTION  7 

in  the  opening  of  the  curtain  above  the  floor,  then  a  body  is  seen  quickly 
rising  straight  up  and  attaining  the  height  of  an  adult,  and  then  it  again 
collapses  on  the  floor." 

Richet  regards  this  as  decisive,  and  says :  "  Before  my  eyes  outside 
the  curtain,  a  living  body  has  been  formed,  which  emerged  from  the 
floor  and  vanished  into  the  floor."  (There  was  no  trap-door.)  The 
photograph  of  the  phantom  taken  by  Richet  on  this  occasion  covers 
the  upper  body  and  the  head  of  the  medium.  One  might  l)e  justified 
in  raising  the  objection  that,  viewed  merely  as  a  photograph,  without 
regard  to  the  conditions  of  the  experiment,  it  does  not  prove  the  exist- 
ence of  any  living  being  besides  the  medium,  but  that  it  gives  the 
impression  of  a  transfiguration,  as  already  pointed  out  by  Professor 
Gabriel  Max. 

Within  the  last  forty  years  hardly  any  medium  has  stimulated 
the  study  of  spiritistic  phenomena  to  such  an  extent,  nor  earned  as 
many  convinced  adherents  among  men  of  science,  as  Eusapia  Paladino. 
The  author  followed  her  development  for  about  sixteen  years. 

The  first  series  of  sittings  took  place  in  1894,  in  the  presence  of 
Richet,  Lombroso  (Turin),  Danilewski  (Petrograd),  and  others. 

In  1898  (May-June),  1903  (February-March),  there  were  investiga- 
tions in  Munich  in  conjunction  with  German  savants,  and  Professor 
Flournoy  (Geneva).  The  author  also  took  part  in  the  tests  of  the 
medium  arranged  by  Richet  in  August  1894  in  the  South  of  France, 
attended  by  the  physicist  Sir  Oliver  Lodge,  Professor  and  Mrs  Sidgwick, 
Frederick  Myers  and  some  French  physicians.  Lacking  confidence 
in  the  accuracy  of  his  own  results,  the  author  felt  the  need  of  repeated 
supplementary  tests,  and  these  took  place  at  Rome  (May  1896),  Naples 
(May  1898),  Rome  and  Naples  (April  1902),  Rome  (March  1903),  and 
lastly  in  Genoa  and  Nice  (April  1909). 

This  lack  of  confidence  was  also  the  reason  why  no  details  have 
been  hitherto  published  with  regard  to  the  results  of  these  fifty-five 
sittings. 

Meanwhile  Eusapia  submitted  herself  to  further  numerous  and 
lengthy  examinations  by  scientific  commissions  in  Genoa,  Turin,  Naples, 
Paris,  and  other  places.  The  careful  experimental  investigations  of 
the  General  Psychological  Institute  ^  in  Paris  extended,  with  inter- 
ruptions, over  several  years.  As  in  the  case  of  the  author  and  others 
who  have  repeatedly  and  thoroughly  examined  the  medium,  the 
investigators  reached,  in  general,  positive  conclusions  in  regard  to 
the  reality  of  certain  mediumistic  phenomena  of  a  special  kind.  I 
cannot,  however,  deal  with  these  in  this  Introduction.  The  pheno- 
mena observed   were   the   motion   of   objects   at   a    distance   without 

^  "  Rapport  sur  les  seances  d'Eusapia  Paladino  a  I'Institut  General  Psychologique  eu 
190.5,  1906,  1907,  1908,"  par  Jules  Courtier  (Bulletin  de  I'Institut  General  Psychologique, 
1908,  p.  415).  Presi'ut. — M.  and  Mme.  Curie,  Branly,  Richet,  d'Arsonval,  Bergson, 
Langevin,  Yourjewich,  Miquel,  etc.  The  Report  confirms  the  motion,  registered  by 
automatic  apparatus,  of  inanimate  objects  without  contact  with  the  medium,  luminous 
phenomena,  appearance  of  human  shapes,  contact  and  other  telekinetic  phenomena,  and  a 
certain  proportion  of  fraud.  For  the  majority  of  Eusapia's  performances  fraud  could  not 
be  assumed.  The  conditions  of  control  give  a  great  probability  against  it ;  but  the  doubts 
occasioned  by  the  frauds  discovered,  prevented  the  observers  from  speaking  of  a  scientifically 
"  impregnable  "  certainty  of  proof,  and  only  admit  of  subjective  judgments. 

8  PHENOMENA   OF  MATERIALISATION 

contact,  table-tiltings,   raps,  the  production  of  tactile  sensations  and 
simUar  performances. 

Like  Home,  Slade,  and  Eglinton,  Eusapia  is  chiefly  a  physical 
medium.  The  sittings  mostly  took  place  in  a  feeble  red  light,  partly 
also  in  total  darkness,  but  nearly  all  observers  record  some  phenomena 
in  a  bright  electric  light. 

By  her  long  years  of  intercourse  with  sceptical  savants  she  is  accus- 
tomed to  experimental  conditions  of  the  most  varied  kinds,  and  is  herself 
anxious  to  maintain  a  good  illumination  and  an  accurate  control. 

Nevertheless,  there  is  complete  agreement  among  all  these  investi- 
gators, both  those  who  have  vouched  for  the  genuineness  of  her  pheno- 
mena, and  those  who  are  not  convinced  on  this  point,  that  Eusapia 
often  deceives  by  well-known  manipulations,  that  she  knows  how  to 
free  a  hand  or  a  foot,  or  even  both  hands,  and  thus  brings  about  some 
of  these  phenomena  mechanically  with  the  aid  of  her  own  limbs. 

Thus  the  author  had  alread3%  in  April  1894  in  Rome,  discovered 
the  change  of  the  hands  and  the  use  of  a  stretched  hair  for  moving 
a  letter  balance.  During  a  similar  experiment  in  February  1903,  in 
Munich,  the  author  captured  the  hair  which  she  used. 

In  the  case  of  a  sitting  at  Munich,  in  May  1898,  Professor  Lipps 
noticed  that,  instead  of  Eusapia's  hand,  he  held  the  hand  of  the  sitter 
controlling  the  left  side  of  the  medium.  In  this  way  she  had  freed 
both  hands  by  a  trick.  Also  the  savants,  Dr  Eugen  Albrecht,  Dr 
Minde  and  Dr  Loeb,  who  conducted  the  sittings  in  1903,  at  Munich, 
found  a  regular  freeing  of  arm  or  leg. 

On  the  22nd  of  February  1903  Professor  Flournoy  of  Geneva  con- 
trolled her  left  side  during  a  sitting  at  Munich.  The  author  stood 
behind  the  chair  of  the  medium  and  saw,  at  the  moment  when  Professor 
Flournoy  felt  himself  touched  on  the  right  side,  the  sole  of  a  foot  and 
the  heel  quite  clearly.  It  cannot,  therefore,  be  doubted  that  the  clever 
Neapolitan  used  her  foot  in  order  to  touch  the  Professor  while  the 
latter  believed  he  was  controlling  the  foot. 

On  the  20th  of  February  1903  she  produced  a  "  direct  writing  " 
on  my  cuff.  But  I  had  remarked  beforehand  that  she  was  playing 
with  a  pencil,  and  the  point  of  this  pencil  was  afterwards  found  to  be 
broken  off,  and  was  probably  used  by  her. 

On  the  11th  of  April  1894  she  pretended  to  bring  about  a  suspension 
of  her  body,  a  so-called  levitation,  in  the  dark,  during  a  sitting  at  Rome, 
but  I  found  that  her  foot  was  firmly  planted  on  the  table.  She  had 
therefore  simply  got  on  to  the  table.  In  fact,  she  utilised  in  a  clever 
way,  besides  her  usual  and  well-known  tricks,  the  weakness  of  the 
observers.  Thus  she  diverts  the  attention  to  the  unoccupied  side,  and 
complains  of  too  great  pressure  by  those  holding  her  hand.  She  is 
able  to  displace  her  chair  by  small  and  imperceptible  jerks,  so  that  she 
may,  for  instance,  upset  a  small  table  standing  behind  her  by  a  violent 
jerk  of  the  back  of  her  chair  backwards  (Munich,  May  1898).  Or  she 
uses  the  train  of  her  dress  to  pull  objects  towards  her.  Whole  sittings 
were  often  filled  with  such  manoeuvres,  which  always  aimed  at  out- 
witting the  controlling  sitters.  And  so  it  often  happens  that  highly 
critical  sitters  see  their  expectations  entirely  repJised,  and  believe  they 
can  explain  all  the  phenomena  by  means  of  these  frauds. 

INTRODUCTION  9 

During  a  sitting  at  Munich,  which  took  place  in  a  gathering  of 
friends  on  the  4th  of  March  1903,  there  was  a  sudden  appearance  of 
a  branch  with  red  flowers.  As  we  found  afterwards,  the  branch  fitted 
exactly  on  to  the  broken  stem  of  an  azalea  bush  which  Eusapia  had 
placed  in  her  room.  It  is,  therefore,  quite  probable  that  she  brought 
the  branch  with  her  into  the  sitting  room.  If  that  was  done  intention- 
ally, then  this  would,  m  my  experience,  be  the  only  one  during  a  long 
number  of  years  in  which  she  had  prepared  a  phenomenon  before  the 
sitting.  For,  as  a  rule,  she  improvised  her  deceptions  by  a  clever  adapta- 
tion to  the  situation  of  the  moment  and  by  the  simplest  means,  which 
were  sometimes  extremely  naive,  barefaced  and  clumsy.  For  instance, 
when,  during  her  farewell  sitting  at  Munich  in  June  1898  the  table 
would  not  tilt,  she  simply  put  her  whole  arm  under  the  table  and  raised 
it  up.  Even  in  the  case  of  those  phenomena,  which  must  be  regarded 
as  genuine,  she  often  helps.  Thus  she  uses  the  support  of  her  shin 
to  raise  the  table  into  the  air,  or  employs  curtains  in  order  to  manipulate 
more  freely. 

Although  this  mechanical  production  of  mediumistic  occurrences 
has  often  been  observed  by  me,  I  have  not  been  able  to  agree  with  the 
assertions  of  the  English  investigators  (Sidgwick,  Hodgson,  and  the 
conjuror,  Maskelyne  of  London,  1895-6)  that  she  worked  with  small 
apparatus  brought  into  the  sitting.  I  not  only  examined  her  dress 
with  a  ruler  before  every  sitting,  or  had  a  special  dress  made  for  her,  but 
I  also  had  occasion  to  examine  her  whole  luggage  down  to  the  last 
needle.  Not  the  slightest  suspicious  objects,  such  as  are  required  by 
every  conjuror,  could  be  discovered. 

In  Eusapia's  case  we  may  regard  the  following  as  the  causes  of  her 
fraudulent  performances  :  lack  of  productivity,  incorrect  control  on 
the  part  of  inexperienced  and  other  sceptical  observers,  the  suggestive 
influence  of  mental  surroundings  unfavourable  to  the  proper  psychic 
tone,  the  desire  to  fulfil  the  wishes  of  the  participators,  a>  well  as  bodily 
ailments  or  psj^chic  discord.  But,  however  frequent  deceptions  may 
have  been  in  the  case  of  Eusapia,  they  do  not  furnish  any  explanations  of 
the  genuine  mediumistic  phenomena  observed  under  the  most  rigid 
control  of  the  medium,  as  the  author  was  able  in  numerous  cases  to 
verify. 

Since  she  often  fell  into  a  deep  trance,  we  must  not  judge  her  fraudu- 
lent practices  without  determining  in  every  case  how  far  she  acted 
intentionally  or  unconsciously.  The  somnambulic  activity  of  a  medium 
must  not  be  mistaken  for  deliberate  fraud.  Eusapia  Paladino's  perform- 
ances have  been  examined  several  times  by  em.inent  conjurors  (such  as 
Rybka  of  Warsaw  on  the  13th  of  December  1893),  and  have  been 
acknowledged  in  their  written  testimony.  Thus  the  American  conjuror, 
M.  Howard,  said  the  following  on  the  occasion  of  Eusapia's  sittings  in 
America  : — 

"  I  have  been  a  conjuror  all  my  life,  and  have  up  to  now  exposed 
numerous  mediums  who  produced  physical  phenomena,  but  I  am 
convinced  that  this  medium  (Eusapia)  actually  produced  elevations 
of  the  table,  and  I  undertake  to  contribute  a  thousand  dollars  to  a 
charity  if  any  one  can  prove  to  me  that  Eusapia  is  unable  to  raise  a 

10  PHENOMENA   OF   MATERIALISATION 

table  into  the  air  without  trick,  without  fraud  and  without  help,  exclud- 
ing the  use  of  fraudulent  manipulations  of  knees  or  feet  or  any  other 
part  of  her  body  or  utensils." 

Carrington,  who,  in  conjunction  with  other  conjurors,  examined 
the  Neapolitan,  at  the  instance  of  the  Society  for  Psychical  Research, 
for  several  months  at  her  home,  and  who  also  arrived  at  a  result  favour- 
able to  the  ijiediumship  of  Eusapia,  wrote  in  a  letter  addressed  to 
Light : 

"  Several  times  I  saw  a  third  arm  appearing,  which  closely  resembled 
that  of  Eusapia.  It  proceeded  from  her  shoulder  and  touched  the 
experimenter  sitting  on  the  right.  Both  Eusapia's  hands  were  visible 
on  the  table.  During  the  sittings  in  the  Columbia  University  a  hole' 
was  made  in  the  roof  of  the  cabinet  and  one  of  the  experimenters  con- 
stantly observed  the  behaviour  of  the  subject  through  this  small  opening 
while  the  phenomena  took  place.  On  three  different  occasions  I  saw 
strange  projections  emerging  from  Eusapia's  body — once  from  the  middle 
of  her  back — and  then  receding  into  her  body.  These  pseudopods  were 
wrapped  in  the  material  of  the  curtain,  so  that  their  consistency  cannot 
be  determined.  The  clearest  observation  was  made  of  a  pointed  shape, 
about  a  foot  long,  which  developed  from  her  foot.  It  approached  the 
small  table,  touched  the  top  and  threw  objects  standing  upon  it  to  the 
floor.     All  this  was  clearly  observed." 

With  reference  to  Muensterberg's  exposure  of  this  medium,  the 
well-known  American  psychologist.  Professor  Hyslop,  says  this  : 

"  The  report  of  Professor  Muensterberg  is  not  to  be  taken  seriously, 
for  it  does  not  prove  any  actual  fact,  but  only  attempts  an  explana- 
tion." 

Eusapia  during  the  sittings  fell  into  a  deep  hysterical  somnambulism, 
and  was  often  in  a  slightly  dazed  condition  after  the  close.  When  the 
trance  set  in,  she  turned  pale,  her  head  swerved  to  and  fro,  and  the  eyes 
were  turned  upwards  and  inwards.  She  was  hypersensitive,  especially 
to  the  touch,  and  also  to  light  ;  she  had  hallucinations,  delirium,  fits  of 
laughter,  weeping,  or  deep  sleep,  and  showed  other  typical  hysterical 
convulsions.  Digestive  troubles  also  sometimes  set  in,  especially  when 
she  had  eaten  before  the  sitting.  In  a  sudden  light  or  at  a  sudden  rough 
touch,  she  cried  out  and  shuddered,  as  she  would  under  unexpected 
violent  pain.  Her  comprehension  was  extremely  rapid  during  her 
ecstasy  ;  she  guessed  the  thoughts  of  those  present  very  easily,  especially 
if  one  of  them  suspected  fraud. 

As  may  be  seen  from  the  symptoms  of  the  deep  trance,  great  care 
and  reserve  are  necessary  during  such  experiments.  Records  made  by 
authors  familiar  with  the  sources  of  error,  and  having  great  experience 
in  the  observation  of  people,  should  be  accorded  more  weight.  For 
this  reason  those  materials  seem  to  be  the  most  valuable  which  are 
collected  by  experts,  psychologists,  physicians,  nerve  specialists, 
physicists,  chemical  anthropologists  and  official  representatives  of 
science.  It  is  true  that  even  such  men  may  be  victims  of  refined  fraud, 
but  they  employ  scientific  methods  of  investigation,  and  in  the  publica- 
tion   of    their    reports    they   risk   their    scientific    reputations.     Their 

INTRODUCTION  11 

responsibility,  is  therefore,  considerably  greater  than  that  of  any  private 
reporter. 

If,  for  instance,  a  savant  like  Morselli,  Professor  of  Psychiatry  in 
Genoa,  who  for  many  years  conducted  a  literary  war  against  spiritism, 
first  took  part  as  a  novice  and  an  unbeliever  in  the  sittings  with  the 
medium,  Eusapia  Paladino,  then  convinced  himself  of  the  reality  of 
mediumistic  processes,  and  finally  studied  this  subject  with  a  scientific 
exactness  and  thoroughness,  the  judgment  of  such  an  eminent  psycholo- 
gist must  be  of  great  weight. 

In  reality  he  extended  his  investigation  over  several  years,  has 
studied  the  whole  literature  of  the  subject,  and  has  finally  published, 
in  1908,  a  vvork  of  1000  pages  in  two  volumes,  which  in  exactness,  scientific 
acumen,  rigid  self-control,  and  thorough  information,  can  be  compared 
to  the  best  works  of  scientific  literature. 

He  again  and  again  emphasises  that  there  cannot  be  the  slightest 
doubt  of  the  reality  of  the  Eusapian  phenomena,  and  in  this  the  author 
entirely  agrees  with  him,  in  spite  of  the  fraudulent  instances  above 
specified.  Besides,  a  large  number  of  scientific  authorities,  both  in 
Italy  and  elsewhere,  have  confirmed  the  authenticity  of  the  phenomena 
with  Eusapia  under  the  most  rigid  control.  According  to  Morselli, 
the  explanation  of  Eusapia's  performances  by  the  fraudulent  change 
of  hands  and  feet  is  a  thing  of  the  past.  "  The  time  has  come  to  break 
with  this  exaggerated  negative  attitude,  this  constant  casting  of  the 
shadow  of  doubt  with  its  smile  of  sarcasm." 

Spiritism,  according  to  Morselli's  view,  is  a  religion,  and  as  such 
has  its  apostles,  its  priests,  its  dogmas,  its  ritual,  and  its  sermons. 
He  regards  Eusapia's  controlling  spirit,  "  John  King,"  as  a  suggestive 
creation  from  the  medium's  subconsciousness,  as  a  fantastic  dream 
image,  as  already  shown  by  Professor  Ochorowicz  in  Warsaw.  Many 
phenomena  are  also  in  direct  contradiction  to  the  spiritistic  teaching. 

The  physical  phenomenonology  of  the  mediums,  whatever  their 
names  (Politi,  Miller,  d'Esperance,  etc.),  is  to-day  a  matter  of  spirit- 
istic tradition.  Therefore,  the  savants  are  obliged  to  use  the  small 
table,  magnetic  chains,  the  control  of  hands  and  feet,  the  cabinet, 
darkness,  the  red  light,  plasticine  and  other  limitations  of  the  present 
investigation. 

It  is  true  that  Morselli  corrected  this  view  by  admitting  that  the 
phenomena  themselves  required  certain  conditions.  Do  not  certain 
chemical  combinations  require  to  be  formed  in  darkness  in  the  labora- 
tory ?  Do  not  photographic  plates  require  a  ruby  light  ?  And  does 
not  the  night  produce  changes  in  the  functions  of  animal  and  vegetable 
organisms  ? 

It  is,  therefore,  quite  possible  that  the  metapsychical  or  biodynamical 
performances  of  the  medium  are  neutralised  or  impeded  by  light, 
which  thus  prevents  him  from  producing  the  main  phenomena  of  material- 
isation. 

Control  also  paralyses  the  medium  and  influences  him  unfavourably  ; 
it  often  stops  the  occurrence  of  the  phenomena.  Morselli  admits  that 
mediumship  is  not  a  purely  mechanical  function  like  that  of  physical 
apparatus,  but  depends  upon  the  psychic  constitution  of  the  person  in 
question. 

12  PHENOMENA  OF  MATERIALISATION 

For  this  reason  alone  it  is  not  right  to  demand  objective  results 
from  the  mediums  in  the  sense  of  physics  and  chemistry,  however 
desirable  it  may  be  to  replace  the  record  of  the  senses  by  registering 
apparatus. 

Mediumship  has  its  own  essential  conditions,  which  must  be  respected 
and  studied  by  the  observer.  So  long  as  spiritism  develops  outside 
scientific  laboratories,  the  traditional  usages  of  the  sittings  must  be 
put  up  with.  It  is  only  when  science  has  seriously  tackled  the  subject 
that  one  can  attempt  to  reduce  the  phenomena  to  a  system.  Modern 
spiritism  has  the  same  relation  to  the  future  science  of  mediumistic 
processes  as  astrology  had  to  astronomy,  and  alchemy  to  chemistry. 
We  must,  therefore,  endeavour  to  get  beyond  the  state  of  raw  empiricism 
in  which  we  stand  at  present,  to  increase  the  confidence  of  the  mediums 
in  science  and  in  its  representatives,  and  use  physical  instruments  and 
apparatus.  Better  even  than  dynamometers,  balances  and  metro- 
nomes, in  Morselli's  opinion,  is  the  photographic  camera,  since  it 
gives  positive  proofs  in  the  real  sense  of  the  word.  In  this  con- 
nection, a  large  use  has  been  made  in  the  following  investigations  of 
photography,  larger  than  has  ever  been  done  hitherto  in  the  study  of 
materialisation  phenomena. 

Although  the  nature  of  the  various  physical  phenomena  of  medium- 
ship  is  not  yet  entirely  known,  although  in  certain  groups  there  is  not 
yet  any  clear  view  of  their  subjective  or  objective  character,  various 
authors,  like  Aksakoff,  Geley,  Anastay  and  Morselli,  have  attempted  the 
classification  of  mediumistic  occurrences. 

Thus  Morselli  describes  as  the  parakinetic  phenomena  of  medium- 
ship  the  mechanical  changes  in  or  about  inanimate  objects  touched 
by  the  medium,  such  as  the  oscillations,  motions  and  liftings  of  a  table, 
and  the  touching  and  motions  of  objects  when  touched  by  the  hand  of 
the  medium.  It  is  an  open  question  whether  the  play  of  involuntary 
muscular  action  is  able  to  give  a  sufficient  explanation  for  all  processes 
of  this  kind.  One  might  have  some  hesitation  in  classifying  such  per- 
formances in  any  sense  as  physical  mediumship. 

Morselli  has  attempted  to  classify  the  Eusapian  phenomena  under 
the  head  of  subjective  and  objective  phenomena.  Among  the  subjective 
phenomena  he  enumerates  ten  subdivisions ;  in  the  objective  ones, 
eight  classes  with  numerous  subdivisions.  To  me  this  elaborate 
classification  seems  much  too  complicated,  as  well  as  unnecessary, 
in  the  presence  of  a  subject  in  which  the  question  of  fact  is  not,  as  yet, 
sufficiently  clear. 

Since  the  present  work  only  concerns  itself  with  subjective  occur- 
rences and  mental  mediumship  (modifications  of  consciousness,  intellec- 
tual performances,  dramatisation  of  personalities,  automatism  and 
psychography)  in  so  far  as  they  are  necessary  to  understand  the 
physical  performances  of  Eva  C.,  I  refer  those  readers  who  wish 
to  inform  themselves  in  detail  to  the  special  literature,  and  particu- 
larly to  the  extremely  careful  investigations  of  Professor  Flourno}^ 
in  his  work  Esprits  et  Mediums  (Geneva  and  Paris,  1911),  as  also 
to  the  observations  of  Mrs  Piper  by  the  British  and  American 
Societies  for  Psychical  Research  (communicated  in  their  respective 
Proceedings). 

INTRODUCTION  13 

The  most  important  objective  performances  of  mediumship  may  be 
divided  into  two  main  groups  : — 

1.  Telekinetic  Phenomena. 

This  class  comprises  every  sort  of  action  upor>  inanimate  objects 
without  contact,  such  as  oscillations,  the  moving  of  tables  (attraction 
and  repulsion),  the  levitation  of  objects  (raising  and  suspension),  infla- 
tions and  motions  of  a  curtain,  the  mechanics  of  motion  connected  with 
the  so-called  "  apports,"  and  finally  the  generation  of  musical  notes 
and  noises  at  a  distance  (including  raps  and  other  auditory  impressions). 
Also  effects  upon  musical  instruments,  direct  writing — in  a  word,  all 
forms  of  action  at  a  distance,  no  matter  whether  in  their  case  the  manner 
of  production  by  the  mediumistic  force  was  the  same. 

2.  Teleplastic  Phenomena. 

This  group  includes  the  so-called  materialisation  phenomena  of  the 
spiritists,  i.e.,  the  production  of  forms  and  materials  of  organic  or  even 
inorganic  matter,  in  accordance  with  definite  conceptions  and  thought 
images  of  the  medium,  which  may  have  their  origin  in  the  memory, 
or  in  the  psychic  under-currents  of  the  medium,  in  the  mentality  of 
one  of  the  witnesses,  or  (in  the  spiritistic  sense)  in  forces  and  intelli- 
gences outside  the  medium. 

On  account  of  their  psychogenic  origin  they  may  also  be  called 
"  ideoplastic  "  occurrences.  To  these  belong  the  alleged  vital  efflores- 
cences observed  in  the  case  of  Eusapia  Paladino  by  Lodge,  Richet  and 
the  author  ;  the  production  of  whitish  threads  ("  Rigid  Rays  ")  ;  clouds 
and  mists  ;  materials  resembling  muslin  used  for  the  clothing  of  the 
apparitions  or  of  the  medium  (during  transfiguration)  ;  the  appearance 
of  forms  of  an  undefined  character  ;  vague  half-shadows  ;  visible  and 
tangible  hands,  fingers,  and  heads  of  structures  resembling  human 
limbs  ;  impressions  of  these  on  lamp-blacked  paper,  or  in  clay  ;  photo- 
graphic reproductions  of  ideoplastic  forms  in  various  stages  of  develop- 
ment, including  those  invisible  to  the  normal  human  eye  ;  sketches  of 
artistic  reproductions  of  faces,  or  fragments  of  animal  and  human  limbs  ; 
and  finally,  fully  formed  phantoms  of  distinct  character  and  definite 
features  and  forms. 

In  the  wider  sense  we  may  reckon  among  the  teleplastic  occurrences 
certain  temporary  changes  in  the  state  of  aggregation  of  matter,  as 
well  as  the  dissolution  and  restoration  of  forms  of  distinct  inanimate 
objects,  e.g.,  the  celebrated  "  knot  experiment,"  the  interpenetration 
of  matter,  the  introduction  of  objects  not  contained  in  the  experimental 
room  ("  apports  ")  and  the  production  of  luminous  objects. 

Beside  the  phenomena  enumerated  here,  there  are  a  number  of  phen- 
omena the  existence  of  which  is  doubted  by  an  investigator  as  thorough 
and  free  from  prejudice  as  Morselli,  e.g.,  change  of  weight  of  the  medium, 
or  of  objects  touched  by  the  medium,  and  levitation  of  the  medium 
(a  telekinetic  occurrence  in  the  sense  that  the  body  of  the  medium  itself 
is  acted  upon  by  the  force  in  question). 

14  PHENOMENA  OF  MATERIALISATION 

During  1915  and  1916  Dr  W.  J.  Crawford,  Lecturer  in  Mechanical 
Engineering,  Queen's  University,  Belfast,  published  some  new  and 
detailed  investigations  on  levitation  and  raps.  The  medium  is  seated 
on  a  weighing-machine,  and,  when  the  table  is  levitated  without  any 
contact  in  a  bright  red  light,  her  weight  increases  by  approximately 
the  weight  of  the  table.  Any  vertical  oscillation  of  the  table  is  accom- 
panied by  an  oscillation  of  the  balance.  The  connection  between 
medium  and  object  is  maintained  by  a  "  psychical  structure,"  of  unknown 
composition,  derived  from  the  body  of  the  medium.  This  structure 
is  of  the  "  cantilever  "  kind,  being  fixed  in  the  medium's  bod}'  without 
other  support,  unless  the  objects  levitated  are  heavy,  when  a  support 
is  found  on  the  floor.  The  object  is  gripped  by  this  structure  in  a  manner 
resembling  suction.  Raps  are  produced  by  the  impact  of  the  hard 
end  of  such  a  "  psychic  rod  "  on  a  hard  surface.  See  W.  J.  Crawford, 
D.Sc,  The  Reality  of  Psychic  Phenomena  and  Experiments  in  Psychical 
Science  (Watkins,  London). 

The  sensations  of  cold,  heat,  and  other  radiations,  which  are  often 
described,  and  which  Morselli  terms  "  thermoradiant  "  phenomena, 
are,  when  registered  by  sensitive  apparatus,  to  be  regarded  merely 
as  preparatory  and  concomitant  phenomena  of  one  of  the  real  mani- 
festations. 

The  physical  phenomena — assuming  them  to  be  genuine — take  the 
same  course  with  all  mediums.  There  are  always  the  telekinetic  and 
teleplastic  processes  classified  above. 

ON   METHOD   IN   MEDIUMISTIC   INVESTIGATIONS. 

Even  though  the  psychic  and  moral  conditions  of  mediuniship  are  not 
as  yet  sufficiently  known,  we  may  confidently  say  already  that  they  lie 
apart  from  the  normal  course  of  psychic  events.  As  in  the  case  of 
mediums  for  mental  manifestations,  the  hystero-hypnotic  complex  of 
symptoms  plays  a  great  part  in  the  genesis  of  physical  manifestations, 
for  the  stronger  phenomena  require,  as  a  rule,  the  presence  of  a  condition 
of  deep  trance. 

Assuming  that  mediuniship  comprises  genuine  telekinetic  and 
teleplastic  performances,  the  possibility  of  such  action  is  no  doubt 
confined  within  definite  limits.  Its  production  corresponds  to  a  certain 
degree  of  exhaustion  of  the  medium's  organism,  and  this  conversion 
must  be  accompanied  by  a  strong  bodily  reaction  of  the  medium.  The 
natural  principle  of  conservation  of  energy  is  here  also  brought  into 
action,  and  the  forces  seem  to  decrease  with  increasing  distance.  In 
an  impartial  examination  of  the  subject  we  must,  therefore,  reckon 
with  the  possibility  that  the  transformation  process  does  not  always 
follow  a  regular  course,  that  it  is  accompanied  by  a  strong  reaction  of 
the  medium,  and  that  it  depends  upon  the  momentary  psychic  con- 
stellation, and  principally  on  the  mood  and  bodily  condition  of  the 
person  under  examination.  In  this  sense  we  must  regard  the  simultan- 
eous sympathetic  inuscular  contractions,  which,  especially  in  the  case 
of  Eusapia  Paladino,  were  definitely  established,  as  regular  physiological 
accompaniments  of  telekinetic  occurrences.    To  bring  about  the  genesis 

METHOD   IN   MEDIUMISTIC   INVESTIGATIONS  15 

of  any  desired  effect,  a  strong  psycho-physical  effort,  a  vivid  act  of 
volition  of  the  medium  is  required.^  The  person  under  test  may,  if  the 
effort  does  not  succeed  at  once,  or  if  the  forces  available  do  not  suffice, 
easily  be  led  to  assist,  to  some  extent  unconsciously,  with  the  muscles, 
e.g.,  to  further  the  development  of  the  phenomenon  with  a  coup  de  pouce. 
Thus  we  get  transition  products  of  a  mixed  character,  e.g.,  help  in  table- 
tiltings,  which  the  radical  sceptic  would  inevitably  attribute  to  fraud  on 
account  of  the  motor  assistance  observed. 

During  actions  at  a  distance  upon  inanimate  objects,  many  mediums 
move  parts  of  their  body  in  the  desired  direction  in  order  to  facilitate 
the  transfer  of  force  ;  for  all  experience  points  towards  these  medium- 
istic  forces  being  limited  in  their  effect,  as  already  mentioned. 

In  the  case  of  Eva  C.  also,  the  participation  of  the  voluntary  muscles 
could  be  regularly  verified  during  the  genesis  of  the  materialisations. 
In  both  Eusapia  Paladino  and  in  Eva  C.  the  violent  muscular  action, 
combined  with  pain,  groans,  and  gasps,  reminds  one  of  the  labour  of 
childbirth.  The  expression  "  mediumistic  labour  "  denotes,  perhaps, 
quite  definite  and  frequently  observed  physiological  concomitants 
of  telekinetic  and  teleplastic  performances. 

These  motor  concomitants  of  mediumship  are  a  factor  not  to  be 
neglected  in  observations.  In  combination  with  a  vivid  desire  for  success 
they  easily  lead  to  an  unconscious  mechanical  execution  of  the  task  by 
the  limbs. 

Ver\^  frequently  somnambulists  play,  or  represent,  the  "  spirit  " 
themselves.  As  soon  as  a  dream-like  condition  sets  in,  all  consciousness 
of  deception  may  be  absent.  In  the  case  of  the  still  more  frequent 
representation  of  "  spirits  "  by  conjuring  tricks,  one  always  finds  textile 
fabrics,  clothes,  beards,  and  other  "  properties  "  for  the  masquerade. 
Apart,  therefore,  from  coarse  prestidigitation,  we  have  to  consider  three 
classes  in  the  production  of  mediumistic  occurrences  : — 

1.  The    unconsciously    fraudulent    representation    of    mediumistic 

performances  in  the  waking  and  somnambulic  states. 

2.  Mixed  phenomena,  combined  with  automatic  reflex  motions. 

3.  Pure  unfalsified  mediumistic  phenomena. 

Professor  Ochorowicz  ^  is  probably  right  in  distinguishing  conscious 
deception,  i.e.,  the  conjuror's  dramatisation  of  mediumistic  performances, 
from  the  frauds  of  mediumship.  In  the  case  of  disguised,  or  open, 
somnambulism  we  should  liave  unconscious  deception  without  respon- 
sibility, since  there  is  no  consciousness  of  fraud.  To  the  layman  the 
medium  may  in  that  case  appear  to  be  awake,  but  the  alteration  in  the 
eye,  and  in  the  whole  psychic  demeanour  of  the  person  under  test,  will 
not  escape  the  trained  medical  observer. 

The  question  of  the  substitution  of  illusory  facts  for  genuine  ones 
is  not  always  easily  answered.  A  reasonably  reliable  opinion  on  the 
character  of  the  occurrence  in  question  presupposes  a  rigid  impartiality. 

1  The  author  has  known  cases  in  which  the  medium  in  a  deep  trance  appeared  quite 
passive,  without  participation  or  volition.  But  the  psycho-physical  exhaustion  was  always 
proportional  to  the  performance. 

-  Ochorowicz.  "  La  question  de  la  fraude  dans  les  experiences  avec  Eusapia  Paladino  " 
(Ann.  des  sciences  psychiques,  2nd  Sept.  189(5). 

16  PHENOMENA  OF  MATERIALISATION 

There  must  be  a  combination  of  an  extreme  degree  of  scientific  scepticism 
with  a  personal  benevolence  towards  the  medium.  The  accounts 
furnished  by  credible  and  reliable  observers  and  found  in  the  literature 
of  the  subject  must  be  examined  sine  ira  et  studio.  Many  so-called 
exposures  have  exposed  nothing  but  the  ignorance  of  the  exposers. 
But,  on  the  other  hand,  we  must  bear  in  mind  the  important  part 
played  by  subjective  colouring,  imagination,  unavoidable  errors  of 
observation,  lapse  of  memory,  and  strain  effects,  in  such  observations 
and  reports. 

We  know  that  psychologists  like  Davey,  Hodgson,  and  Lehmann 
could,  after  acquiring  the  necessary  conjuring  proficiency,  deceive 
a  number  of  calmly  thinking  persons,  and  impart  to  them  a  belief  in 
their  own  mediumistic  powers.  And  it  cannot  be  denied  that  in  the 
case  of  nearly  all  professional,  and  many  private,  mediums,  the  mechani- 
cal performance  of  some  of  their  effects  has  been  established.  Thus  in 
the  case  of  Eusapia  Paladino  10  per  cent,  of  the  phenomena  are  false, 
15  per  cent,  doubtful,  and  75  per  cent,  genuine,  according  to 
Morselli. 

Conjuring  tricks,  which  usually  imply  study  and  practice,  must, 
therefore,  not  be  put  in  the  same  category  with  mediumistic  deceptions, 
at  least,  so  far  as  mediums  of  the  class  of  Eusapia  Paladino  and  Eva  C. 
are  concerned.  As  a  rule,  mediums  like  these  are  placed  at  the  mercy  of 
their  hosts  or  their  investigators,  who  have  every  opportunity  of  exam- 
ining their  usually  sparse  luggage. 

Besides,  the  conjuror  is  not  dependent  upon  the  malicious,  hostile, 
or  frivolous  mentality  of  his  audience.  But  the  disturbing  influences 
on  the  medium  increase  with  the  number  of  people  present.  The  con- 
juror usually  provides  the  necessary  apparatus  himself,  changes  the 
programme,  and  permits  no  interference  with  his  experiments.  In 
the  case  of  the  medium  all  this  is  reversed. 

Now  there  are  people  who  have  the  greatest  respect  for  conjuring, 
and  believe  that  art  to  be  all-powerful.  But  this  overestimate  is  solely 
due  to  ignorance.^  If  we  consider  it  a  priori  impossible  to  protect 
ourselves  against  prestidigitation  and  other  fraud  practised  by  the 
mediums,  we  thereby  declare  the  human  senses  to  be  incapable  of 
scientific  determinations  of  any  kind.  We  should  have  to  renounce  all 
investigation,  and  particularly  the  psychological  analysis  of  the  insane, 
of  criminals,  and  of  simulators.  Such  an  indefensible  point  of  view 
clearly  leads  ad  absurdum.  A  serious  interest  in  this  subject  means, 
indeed,  in  the  larger  circle  of  savants  and  educated  people,  even  now, 
a  martyrdom  for  the  investigator  and  the  risk  of  being  regarded  as 
mentally  inferior.  Yet  it  is  just  the  neglected  subject  of  physical 
phenomena,  constituting  mediumship  in  the  truest  and  narrowest 
sense,  which  deserves  the  attention  and  devotion  of  savants  free  from 
prejudice. 

On  the  other  hand,  every  serious  investigator  who  undertakes  this 
research  must  guard  himself  against  the  exploitation  of  his  observations 
by  visionaries  to  satisfy  some  need  of  religious  belief.  For  the  spiritistic 
hypothesis  rests  essentially  on  the    metaphysical  tendency  implanted 

^  It  is  conceivable  that  a  medium  might  combine  genuine  forces  with  conjuring  tricks, 
just  as  professional  soothsayers  may  have  some  real  clairvoyance. 

METHOD   IN   MEDIUMISTIC    INVESTIGATIONS  17 

in  mankind  (experimental  religion).  As  Richet  very  truly  remarks  ^ 
"  We  must  make  sure  of  the  facts  before  we  formulate  general  laws." 

It  appears  to  be  extraordinarily  difficult  to  place  a  fact  upon  so  firm 
a  basis  as  to  be  unshakable.  This  requires  absolute  accuracy.  "  It 
is  a  great  drawback  to  scientific  progress  that  spiritists,  theosophists, 
mesmerists  and  mystics  have  erected  such  fanciful  structures  on  such 
a  tiny  and  insecure  basis.  Let  us  be  satisfied  with  faultless  experiments. 
Theory  will  follow  in  the  natural  course." 

In  another  place  Richet  ^  writes  similarly  : — 

"  At  the  same  time  I  do  not  consider  myself  justified  in  despising 
the  '  metapsychic  '  facts,  which  must  be  methodically  studied  without 
prejudice.  .  .  .  We  must  not  be  appalled  by  what  is  strange  .  .  . 
that  which  marks  a  discovery,  the  unforeseen,  the  unexpected,  the  new. 
It  may  clash  with  popular  opinion,  it  may  contradict  the  classic  official 
teaching.  Otherwise  it  would  not  be  a  discovery.  And  after  it  has 
come  forward,  it  encounters  a  thousand  denials.  Even  if  it  is  as  clear 
as  the  sun,  it  is  not  accepted.  ...  It  is  only  with  difficulty  that  we 
form  the  conviction  of  having  lived  in  error,  of  having  made  wrong 
assertions.  .  .  .  Only  unusual  phenomena  astonish  us.  A  thing 
appears  true  because  we  have  often  seen  it,  but  not  at  all  because  we 
have  understood  it,  for  all  natural  phenomena  are  incomprehensible." 

It  is  difficult,  more  especially  for  savants  who  have  acquired  a  wide 
knowledge  by  hard  work,  to  free  themselves  entirely  from  preconceived 
opinions  and  old  habits  of  thought. 

Many  an  investigator  is  not  convinced  by  reason.  Conviction 
only  sets  in  when  he  has  himself  observed  certain  facts  so  often  that 
their  existence  has  become  to  him  a  mental  habit,  a  familiar  thino-. 
Zollner^  already  found  this  psychic  law  of  inertia,  and  added  :  "  This  is 
a  curious  phase  of  the  human  spirit,  and  is  particularly  strong  in  savants, 
indeed  stronger,  in  them,  I  believe,  than  in  others.  For  this  reason 
we  must  not  always  regard  a  man  as  dishonest  because  for  a  long  time 
he  keeps  beyond  the  reach  of  proof.  The  ancient  wall  of  belief  requires 
much  siege  artillery  for  its  demolition." 

Careful  researches  by  English  investigators  have  shown  that  human 
powers  of  observation  are  very  imperfect.  In  his  excellent  work 
(already  referred  to)  on  Superstition  and  Sorcery,  the  well  -  known 
psychologist  Lehmann  of  Copenhagen  has  fully  dealt  with  the  sources 
of  errors  of  observation,  especially  in  mediumistic  investigations.  These 
should  be  minutely  studied  by  any  one  who  approaches  these  experi- 
ments, so  as  to  avoid  self-deception  as  much  as  possible.  Reports  by 
persons  lacking  the  necessary  practice  in  observation  should  be  received 
with  caution.  As  a  rule,  there  is  hardly  time  during  mediumistic  tests, 
in  presence  of  the  often  surprising  and  varying  occurrences,  to  direct 
the  attention  to  the  most  essential  points.  In  this  connection  we  must 
remember  the  conjuror's  well-known  stratagem  of  directing  the  attention 
to   quite   secondary  matters.     And,  further,  the   employment   of   the 

^  Richet,  Experimental  Studies  in  Thought  Transference,  with  a  Preface  by  v.  Schrenck- 
Notzing  (Enke,  Stuttgart,  1891). 

2  Richet,  "The  Future  of  Psychology"  (Ubersinnliche  Welt,  Feb.  1907). 
2  ZoUner,  Abhandlungen,  Vol.  II. 

18  PHENOMENA    OF   MATERIALISATION 

sense  organs,  especially  in  dark  sittings,  is  not  possible  to  the  usual 
extent,  the  sense  of  sight,  being  in  abeyance.  There  are  well-known 
errors  in  the  mere  estimation  of  distances,  weights,  etc.,  and  therefore 
accurate  measures  in  figures,  etc.,  appear  to  be  necessary.  One  is  also 
easily  deceived  as  to  the  direction  and  source  of  sound.  Similar  con- 
siderations apply  to  time.  Sense  impressions  are  often  falsely  inter- 
preted ("  illusion  "). 

As  a  matter  of  fact  we  find  cases  in  the  experiments  with  Eva  C., 
in  which  a  materialised  structure  in  the  shape  of  a  hand,  which  in 
the  red  light  was  not  easily  distinguished  from  a  real  hand,  simu- 
lated the  presence  of  the  latter,  while  the  real  hand  executed  the 
expected  mediumistic  performance.  Similar  observations  were  made  by 
Professor  Ochorowicz  with  Eusapia  Paladino.  The  author  succeeded 
indeed,  in  photographically  recording  this  interesting  process.  In  the 
case  of  the  Polish  medium,  St.  P.,  also,  it  was  sometimes  difficult 
to  decide  whether  the  red  patches  visible  in  her  lap  were  really  her 
hands. 

But  the  most  frequent  sources  of  error  in  the  observation  of  medium- 
istic phenomena  are  gaps  in  the  recollection.  Unless  a  careful  record 
is  kept  during  each  observation  ^  a  retroactive  falsification  of  memory 
during  the  preparation  of  a  subsequent  record  may  reduce  its 
value. 

Facts  and  events  are  unintentionally  mixed  up,  their  order  of  succes- 
sion is  inaccurately  recollected,  apparently  unessential  points  are  omitted, 
and  the  report  is  unintentionally  supplemented  according  to  sub- 
jective interpretation.  Thus  the  spiritist  will,  in  accordance  with  his 
religious  habit  of  thought,  only  retain  that  which  he  regards  as  essential, 
and  his  fancy  will  travel  the  old  road  in  supplementing  it.  But,  in  the 
same  way,  the  rooted  associations  of  a  determmed  opponent  will  render 
valueless  an  experiment  which  is  successful  in  the  wider  sense,  i.e., 
which  contradicts  his  negative  conviction,  so  soon  as  the  above-mentioned 
failure  of  memory  sets  in.  Without  hesitation  he  will  unconsciously 
fill  up  the  gaps  of  memory  in  his  own  way.  He  will  see  fraud  where 
none  exists,  just  as  the  believing  spiritist  will  see  manifestations  of 
spirits  where  there  are  nothing  but  conjuring  tricks.  And  since  most 
people  are  already  committed  to  some  decided  point  of  view,  favourable 
or  unfavourable,  of  these  phenomena,  it  is  exceedingly  difficult  to  obtain 
quite  unprejudiced  and  purely  objective  determinations. 

In  this  way  the  author  found,  not  only  in  the  Munich  sittings  with 
Eusapia  Paladino,  but  also  in  the  experiments  with  Eva  C,  that  the 
facts  of  the  phenomena  were  afterwards  distorted  by  learned  witnesses 
under  the  compelling,  though  unconscious,  influence  of  their  anti-spirit- 
istic habit  of  thought.  Thus  an  eminent  psychologist,  who  had  observed 
Eusapia  Paladino  in  the  author's  presence,  asserts  that  during  the  well- 
known  phenomenon  of  the  inflation  of  her  dress,  he  had  seen  a  black 
rod  manipulated  by  her  feet,  in  order  to  pull  forward  some  objects 
with  the  help  of  a  hook  attached  to  the  rod.  The  author  can  guarantee 
the  inaccuracy  of  this  assertion,  as  he  not  only  took  part  in  observing 

J  For  this  purpose  the  Roueograph,  brought  out  by  Pathe  Freres  in  Paris,  is  especially 
to  be  recommended.  It  is  a  sort  of  phonograph,  whose  wax  plates  receive  the  dictated 
record  during  the  sitting  and  reproduce  it  afterwards. 

METHOD   IN   MEDIUMISTIC   INVESTIGATIONS  19 

the   phenomenon,    but   minutely   controlled    the   medium   before   and 
after  the  sitting. 

Another  observer  is  at  present  entirely  convinced  that  Eusapia 
wears  on  her  left  shoe  an  iron  sole,  so  that  she  can  without  detection 
withdraw  the  left  foot  and  use  it  fraudulently,  while  the  weight  of  the 
shoe  standing  on  the  foot  of  the  controller  on  the  left,  is  to  produce  the 
impression  of  a  strong  pressure  with  the  foot.  The  numerous  and 
detailed  observations  of  the  medium  have  not  substantiated  this  hypo- 
thesis. 

Another  example  :  An  observer  of  the  sittings  with  Eva  C.  asserted 
in  a  supplementary  record,  written  six  months  after  the  sitting,  that  the 
medium  had  only  been  examined  over  her  dress,  whereas  the  written 
record  prepared  by  another  savant  immediately  after  the  sitting  gives 
an  accurate  account  of  the  examination  over  the  bare  body,  in  con- 
formity with  the  statements  of  the  other  witnesses. 

These  examples  can  easily  be  paralleled  by  similar  experiences. 
Single  determinations  may  often  be  of  paramount  importance  for  a 
decision  as  to  the  genuineness  or  falsity  of  a  phenomenon. 

We  must  add  that  m  many  mediumistic  performances  it  is  hardly 
possible  for  one  person  to  execute  the  control  and  observation  of  1)he 
medium  single-handed  with  sufficient  accuracy.  The  help  of  a  second 
observer  must  bo  secured.  Now,  however  careful  has  been  the  control 
by  these  two  trained  and  credible  observers,  however  much  both  of 
them  may  asseverate  that  they  had  held  the  medium  during  the  critical 
moment,  yet  it  is  natural  that,  in  these  extraordinary  manifestations, 
most  savants  would  rather  assume  an  error  of  attention,  or  observation, 
in  the  case  of  the  other  controller,  than  acknowledge  the  genuineness 
of  the  phenomenon  in  question.  That,  at  least,  is  the  author's  experi- 
ence. And  if,  in  spite  of  this,  all  objections  can  be  met,  the  imagination 
will  finally  make  soine  arbitrary  addition  or  invention.  The  convenience 
of  thought,  the  tough  adherence  to  old  preconcejjtions,  is  in  most  people 
too  powerful  to  be  put  out  of  gear  by  any  single  observation. 

If,  therefore,  we  are  to  obtain  reliable  results,  we  must  have  a  frequent 
repetition  of  the  same  occurrence,  the  same  experiment,  so  that,  after 
every  experiment  the  objections  and  doubts  suggested  by  mature 
reflection  inay  be  examined  as  to  their  justification  during  the  repetition 
of  the  experiment.  One  should,  therefore,  always  have  a  large  number 
of  sittings  with  the  same  medium — six  at  least — and  arrange  the  whole 
method,  so  that  the  same  experiment  may  be  repeated  as  often  as  possible 
in  the  various  sittings.  The  conditions  may  be  changed,  at  discretion, 
at  every  sitting,  so  long  as  the  externalisation  of  the  mediumistic  force 
is  not  thereby  impeded. 

How  much  emotional  agitation,  tension,  expectation,  fear,  terror, 
and  nervousness  may  hinder  the  power  of  observation  and  attention, 
inflame  the  imagination,  and  so  produce  errors  of  sense  perception, 
amounting  even  to  hallucination,  is  sufficiently  known.  Now,  since  as 
a  rule — as  Lehmann  justly  remarks— two  people  never  commit  the  same 
errors  of  observation,  their  independent  reports  of  the  same  event  do 
not  generally  agree. 

The  same  accuracy  of  proof  as  is  demanded  for  the  genuineness 
and  objectivity  of  mediumistic  phenomena  must  be  furnished  in  an 

20  PHENOMENA    OF    MATERIALISATION 

even  higher  degree  for  the  negative  proof,  i.e.,  for  the  presence  of  fraudu- 
lent manipulations  when  there  is  reason  for  suspicion.  The  latter 
problem  is  much  the  easier,  but  it  requires  a  juridical  accuracy  in  the 
establishment  of  guilt,  i.e.,  it  is  essential  to  the  formation  of  a  judgment 
that  all  positive  and  negative  evidence  be  weighed  before  a  final  con- 
clusion is  drawn. 

Any  hasty  generalisation,  importing  destructive  criticism  of  the 
representatives  of  the  opposite  standpoint,  nmst  be  regarded  as  unjust, 
illogical,  and  as  the  product  of  a  very  superficial  acquaintance  with  the 
actual  state  of  things.  The  fact  that  a  medium  has  been  detected  in 
fraud  under  certain  circumstances,  cannot,  as  Eduard  von  Hartmann 
correctly  observes,  lead  to  the  conclusion  that  the  same  medium  has 
been  nothing  but  fraudulent  in  every  case  and  under  the  most  varying 
conditions.  "  We  must  examine  the  conditions  of  each  case,  and  one 
undoubtedly  positive  instance  cannot  be  refuted  even  by  a  hundred 
negative  ones."  Or  will  it  be  asserted,  simply  because  simulation  is 
often  indistinguishable  from  hysteria,  that  all  symptoms  of  hysteria 
are  simulated  ? 

After  all,  the  point  is  not  whether  errors  and  deceptions  occur  in 
this  subject,  as  in  many  other  fields  of  scientific  activity,  but  simply 
whether,  in  this  case,  new  and  genuine  facts  of  a  special  kind  really 
exist.  Even  gold  diggers  must  first  separate  the  noble  metal  from  its 
ore. 

The  author  of  this  work,  who  has  occupied  himself  more  than  twenty- 
five  years  with  this  subject,  has  had  opportunities  of  observing  mediums 
of  all  shades,  both  professional  and  private.  In  conjunction  with  other 
savants  he  has  had  occasion  to  reduce  a  whole  spiritistic  epidemic  to 
its  fraudulent  causes  (superstition  and  fanaticism)  by  means  of  careful 
and  detailed  investigations.  He  has  become  acquainted  with  the 
manipulations  of  the  medium  Eglinton,  the  sources  of  experimental 
error  with  the  mediums  Lucia  Sordi  and  Linda  Gazerra,  which  he  has 
dealt  with  in  special  memoirs,  and  his  own  large  experience  has  com- 
pletely convinced  him  that  conscious  and  unconscious  fraud  play  an 
enorrnous  part  in  this  matter,  and  that  nearly  all  mediums  will,  when 
the  conditions  are  unfavourable,  when  their  mediumistic  powers  are 
declining,  or  simply  from  greed  and  ambition,  take  to  fraudulent  or 
mechanical  production  of  the  phenomena. 

According  to  my  experience,  I  can  only  agree  with  Richet  and 
Ochorowicz  in  regarding  the  psychic  and  moral  conditions  of  medium- 
ship,  and  of  the  trance  condition  as  hitherto  unknown,  and  in  considering 
its  aggregate  of  symptoms  as  different  from  the  normal  occurrences 
of  psychic  action.  '  Indeed,  it  almost  seems  as  if  the  tendency  towards 
deception  and  to  the  mechanical  production  of  mediumistic  occurrences 
is  a  frequent  quality  of  mediumship,  just  as  simulation  appears  as  a 
symptom  of  hysteria,  or  as  pseudologia  phantastica  is  inseparable  from 
certain  degenerative  conditions  of  the  brain. 

We  may  be  sure  that  absence  of  criticism,  credulity,  and  the  fana- 
ticism of  spiritists,  have  greatly  hindered  the  education  of  mediums  for 
scientifically  useful  objects.  Fanatical  eagerness  to  experience  some- 
thing a  toutprix,  to  witness  miracles,  to  receive  signs  from  the  "  beyond," 
has  rendered  the  crowd  quite  blind  to  the  distinction  between  facts 

METHOD   IN   MEDIUMISTIC   INVESTIGATIONS  21 

explicable  according  to  the  present  conditions  of  psycho-pathology,  and 
those  which  are  not  so  explicable.  The  whole  method  of  the  spiritistic 
education  of  mediums,  with  their  ballast  of  unnecessary  conceptions,  gives 
indeed  an  encouragement  to  fraud.  When  the  believing  congregation 
ends  by  seeing  the  work  of  a  spirit  hand  in  the  falling  of  an  umbrella, 
it  is  quite  prepared  to  receive  even  the  coarsest  conjuring  tricks  of 
mediums  as  spirit  greetings. 

It  is  true  that  the  violent  excitement  of  the  medium  during  the 
performance,  especially  in  dark  sittings,  makes  control  very  difficult, 
although  on  the  other  hand,  it  draws  the  attention  of  the  observer 
beforehand  to  the  occurrence  of  phenomena,  and  this  guards  him  against 
surprise.  We  have  already  pointed  out  that  the  methods  usual  in  science 
often  here  entirely  fail  the  observer.  It  will,  therefore,  be  a  problem 
for  future  investigators  to  devise  a  special  method  for  the  examination 
of  mediumistic  processes. 

We  should,  as  Sir  Oliver  Lodge  proposes,  have  a  kind  of  psychic 
laboratory  furnished  for  all  kinds  of  experimental  psychology  and 
psycho-physics.  Registration  should,  of  course,  be  made  independent 
of  the  sense  organs,  which  are  subject  to  deception,  and  should,  as  far 
as  possible,  be  transferred  to  physical  apparatus.  A  self-registering 
balance,  the  full  use  of  photographic  and  electrical  aids  (such  as  photo- 
graphs with  ultra-violet  light),  the  use  of  various  degrees  of  brightness 
of  light  and  of  spectrum  colours,  thermometers,  and  other  specially 
constructed  instruments,  may  find  their  place  in  such  an  institute. 
Other  apparatus  of  a  more  physiological  kind  would  be  necessary 
for  investigations  of  the  medium's  organism  (weight,  temperature, 
respiration,  etc.). 

But  of  more  importance  than  all  these  instrumental  aids  towards 
the  study  of  this  new  force  (assuming  such  to  exist),  would  be  the  correct 
training  of  mediums  for  scientific  investigations. 

Such  a  dream  of  the  future  can,  of  course,  not  be  realised  in  the 
narrow  circle  of  a  private  residence,  especially  if  the  medium,  as  in  the 
case  of  Eva  C,  is  regarded  as  one  of  the  family,  and  only  resigns  herself 
to  these  experiments  voluntarily,  and  to  a  limited  extent.  Thus, 
in  such  a  case,  we  have  no  complete  independence  in  the  arrangement 
of  a  laboratory,  and  the  author  found  himself  in  the  situation  of  an 
observer  anxious  to  determine  the  existence  of  a  new  class  of  natural 
phenomena  in  the  human  organism. 

In  spite  of  this,  it  was  possible,  through  the  intelligent  co-operation 
of  the  lady  of  the  house,  who  conducted  the  mediumistic  education 
of  Eva  C.  with  great  ability,  to  make  the  conditions  during  the  four 
years  of  experiment  gradually  more  and  more  rigid  and  exact.  The 
spiritistic  group  of  ideas,  which  at  first  required  the  formation  of  chains, 
the  singing  and  the  addressing  of  the  personifications  appearing  during 
the  sittings,  was  afterwards  put  into  the  background,  and  during  the 
last  year  played  hardly  any  part.  We  had  gradually  discarded  the 
spiritistic  tradition  by  a  slow  education  of  the  medium.  Besides,  all 
the  sittings  took  place  in  a  red  light,  so  that  during  the  four  years  there 
was  not  a  single  dark  seance.  We  began  with  a  single  lamp  and  ended 
with  a  six-lamp  chandelier  of  more  than  one  hundred  candle-power. 
The  necessary  dark  room  was  furnished  by  the  cabinet. 

22  PHENOMENA    OF    MATERIALISATION 

The  experiments  took  place  in  two  different  Paris  lodgings,  in  a 
villa  at  the  seaside,  and  in  the  author's  house  in  Munich,  so  that  any 
preparation,  of  the  walls  or  floor  of  the  cabinet,  for  the  hiding  of  objects, 
was  practically  eliminated. 

The  objective  registration  was  based  upon  photography,  which  has 
been  indicated  by  Lodge,  Morselli,  and  other  investigators  as  desirable. 
We  began  with  a  single  camera,  but  at  the  end  of  the  fourth  year  we 
sometimes  had  nine  cameras,  including  several  stereoscopic  cameras, 
in  action  at  the  same  time.  From  one  to  three  cameras  were  then 
mounted  in  the  cabinet  itself.  They  were  focused  for  short  distances, 
and  have  been  admirably  serviceable.  This  method  has  not  hitherto 
been  mentioned  in  the  literature  of  the  subject,  and  was  used  for  the 
first  time  with  success.  Unfortunately,  a  kinematograph,  mounted  by 
the  author,  for  which  a  special  electrical  connection  was  arranged,  gave 
no  results  m  the  case  of  Eva  C. 

That  the  control  of  the  medium  herself,  both  before  and  after  every 
sitting,  was  executed  with  the  necessary  care  is  obvious. 

The  whole  of  the  present  work  is  really  a  monograph  devoted  to 
materialisation.  For  in  the  case  of  this  medium,  who  is  specially  gifted 
for  the  production  of  teleplastic  phenomena,  it  seemed  advisable  to 
develop  this  gift  by  suggestive  education  in  every  possible  way,  so 
as  to  form  a  firm  empirical  foundation  for  the  study,  by  photographic 
means,  of  this  teleplastic  phenomenon  so  rarely  found  in  mediums 
at  present.  It  is  possible  that  telekinetic  phenomena,  also,  are  founded 
upon  a  sort  of  materialisation,  as  indicated  by  the  experiments  of  Pro- 
fessor Ochorowicz  with  Stanislawa  Tomczyk.  In  this  case  also  the 
process  of  materialisation  might  be  regarded  as  the  foundation  of  phy- 
sical mediumship  and  as  the  point  of  departure  of  physical  performances. 
According  to  our  observations,  it  is  clear  that  the  general  direction 
and  subject  matter  of  the  thoughts  of  the  persons  taking  part  in  the 
experiments  have  an  influence  {either  in  a  favourable  or  unfavourable 
sense),  upon  the  psychic  condition  of  the  medium,  and  sometimes 
also  upon  the  character  of  the  phenomena  produced.  The  mediumistic 
organism  seems  to  be  an  exceedingly  delicate  reagent,  very  much  open 
to  the  influence  of  suggestion.  Strange  as  it  may  seem,  active  thoughts 
about  exposures  and  trickery  might,  in  the  opinion  of  some  investi- 
gators, suggestively  influence  the  medium  in  this  direction  and  lead  to 
the  employment  of  such  manual  aids.  During  any  careful  investi- 
gation one  must  also  pay  attention  to  this  source  of  error,  and  one  should 
exclude  so-called  professional  exposers  entirely  from  such  observations, 
if  they  are  such  as  scent  corruption  everywhere,  without  any  appreciation 
of  the  psychological  delicacy  and  difficulty  of  the  problem,  and  prefer 
to  assume  collusion  between  the  observer  and  the  medium  with  a 
deceptive  object,  as  the  onh'  reality  in  these  occurrences. 

Occasionally  one  finds  savants  with  a  compelling,  but  unconscious, 
idiosyncrasy  as  regards  this  field  of  mvestigation.  They  do  indeed 
attempt  to  put  themselves  into  a  state  of  benevolence  towards  the 
medium,  and  to  attune  their  mentality  to  the  special  conditions  of  the 
experiment.  They  even  declare  that  they  will  be  satisfied  if  an  experi- 
ment succeeds  under  certain  precautions,  but,  afterwards,  they  succumb 
to  the  strong  influence  of  their  unconscious  mental  resistance  ;  they  then 

METHOD    IN   MEDIUMISTIC   INVESTIGATIONS  23 

bring  forward  quite  senseless  objections,  and  make  every  effort  to  avoid 
having  to  admit  the  possibility  of  these  phenomena.  Their  view  is 
that  there  is  no  other  possibility  than  that  of  deception.  Their  whole 
effort,  during  the  sittings,  is  not  directed  towards  a  determination  free 
from  objection,  but  simply  towards  detection  of  the  fraudulent  mech- 
anism. That  such  a  condition  of  mind  may  suggestively  influence 
the  instrument  of  research,  and  hinder  its  productivity,  is  shown  by 
numerous  experiences.  Since  this  mediophobia  belongs  to  the  realm 
of  pathological  inhibitions,  it  is  advisable  to  exclude  persons  subject 
to  it  from  the  sittings,  as  was  done  by  Eusapia  Paladino  on  account  of 
the  diminution  of  her  powers,  and  so  as  not  to  be  induced  to  practise 
fraud  by  such  influence. 

Nothing  should  be  left  undone  to  make  the  psychic  conditions 
for  the  medium  as  favourable  as  possible.  That  is  not  always  easy, 
especially  if  the  medium,  in  consequence  of  his  or  her  low  state  of 
education,  has  only  a  slight  understanding  of  the  precautions  necessary 
for  a  scientific  investigation.  Nevertheless,  we  should  never  forget 
that  the  success  of  the  experiment  is  bound  up  with  the  mood,  the 
confidence,  and  the  undisturbed  comfort  of  the  medium.  By  suspicion, 
even  suppressed  suspicion,  by  haughty  or  indifferent  treatment,  the 
instrument  can  easily  be  put  out  of  tune.  I  again  agree  entirely  with 
Eduard  von  Hartmann  that  it  is  not  right  that  scientific  men  should  refuse 
investigation  of  these  manifestations,  simply  for  the  reason  that  they  re- 
quire conditions  which  are  not  always  within  the  power  of  the  observer. 

Our  lack  of  knowledge  of  the  psychogenic  factors,  of  the  necessary 
physical  and  chemical  concomitants  inside  and  outside  the  medium's 
organism,  as  well  as  the  absence  of  a  tried  experimental  method  for  the 
investigation  of  the  psycho-physical  performances  which  really  form 
a  part  of  biology,  distinguish  these  investigations  from  laboratory 
experiments  or  ordinary  physiology.  But  even  laboratory  experiments 
are  often  dependent  upon  very  complicated  conditions,  and,  in  any  case, 
a  physician  does  not  allow  his  zeal  for  investigation  to  be  influenced  even 
by  the  most  laboriously  attempted  deceptions  of  hysteria  patients  or 
insane  persons. 

This  does  not  imply  that  any  novice  can,  without  further  ado,  Avithout 
any  experience  or  previous  knowledge,  without  a  study  of  the  literature 
of  the  subject,  prescribe  to  the  medium  his  own  conditions.  The 
inevitable  consequence  of  such  procedure  is  a  disturbing  effect  on  the 
psychic  condition  of  the  medium  and  an  interference  with  the  medium- 
istic  phenomena.  If  the  mediumistic  performances  really  represent 
a  new  kind  of  unknown  force,  every  unprejudiced  investigator  must, 
in  the  first  instance,  make  up  his  mind  to  be  a  passive  spectator  of  what 
may  be  called  a  new  class  of  natural  phenomena.  In  the  course  of 
every  observation  of  these  occurrences,  which  depend  upon  such  delicate 
conditions,  he  will  learn  to  adapt  himself  to  the  peculiarities  of  this  kind 
of  investigation,  as  well  as  to  the  personality  of  the  medium.  As  the 
confidence  of  the  medium  in  the  investigator  increases,  he  will  be  allowed 
to  exert  an  influence  on  the  experiments,  to  choose  the  class  of  phenomena 
he  wants  to  observe,  and,  finally,  he  will  be  allowed,  even  during  the 
experiment,  to  exercise  certain  arbitrary  interferences  which  will  help 
him  to  arrive  at  a  definite  judgment. 

24  PHENOMENA    OF    MATERIALISATION 

The  author  used  this  method  of  investigation  both  in  the  case  of 
Eusapia  Paladino  and  Eva  C.  In  both  cases  he  was  allowed,  after 
a  considerable  number  of  sittings,  and  after  the  first  suspicions  had 
vanished,  to  make  suitable  interpositions  and  arrangements  to  facilitate 
objective  determination.  Still,  one  must  not  overlook  certain  diffi- 
culties inherent  in  the  character  of  such  persons.  Fear  and  modesty 
may  control  young  female  mediums  to  such  an  extent  that  they  resist 
investigation  of  the  bare  body,  and  indeed  will  refuse  any  experiment 
rather  than  allow  such  misinterpreted  interference  with  their  feminine 
feelings. 

A  medium  of  this  kind  is  Linda  Gazerra.  The  great  gap  in  the 
conditions  established  in  her  case  cancels  the  value  of  the  whole  work 
devoted  to  her  by  Imoda,  as  the  author  has  shown  in  a  special  study, 
for  any  untrustworthiness  in  the  experimental  arrangements  must 
necessarily  shake  the  confidence  of  the  critical  reader,  and  must  finally 
lead  to  a  negative  attitude  even  though  the  phenomena  be  genuine. 

In  all  interferences  with  the  phenomena  themselves,  we  must  also 
take  into  account  the  exaggerated  sensitiveness,  and  condition  of 
excitement,  in  which  the  medium's  organism  is  placed  during  its  par- 
ticular performances. 

The  frequently  observed  vital  efflorescences  and  the  doubling  of 
limbs  apparently  can  give  occasion  for  erroneous  interpretations  and 
mistaken  interferences.  Should  the  latter  be  coarse  and  brusque, 
they  injure  the  bodily  condition  of  the  entranced  medium  in  all  cases. 
We  must  therefore  establish  the  following  fundamental  rule  : 

All  conditions,  controls,  interferences,  and  experiments  must,  as  far 
as  possible,  be  arranged  in  such  a  way  that  the  play  of  these  forces  and  the 
mediumistic  performances  as  such,  are  not  hindered  or  interrupted  in  their 
development  or  mode  of  action.  This  must  be  done,  even  at  the  risk  of 
being  accused  of  superficial  and  uncritical  behaviour. 

Fanaticism  for  exactitude  may  lead  to  the  drying  up  of  the  fountain 
from  which  we  wish  to  draw  our  material. 

It  is  clear  that  the  normal  personality  of  the  medium,  as  already 
shown  by  the  whole  somnambulistic  objectivity  of  the  type,  is  opposed 
to  the  psychic  processes  employed  in  the  mediumistic  performances 
as  to  something  strange  and  compulsory.  The  mental  contents  of  the 
mediumistic  field  and  of  the  normal  personality  of  the  medium  are 
usually  self-contained,  have  no  association  with  each  other,  and  are 
brought  alternately  into  nervous  action.  Thus  we  can  understand 
the  astonishment  of  the  mediums  about  their  own  performances,  their 
lack  of  remembrance  of  them,  the  feeling  of  strangeness  in  comparison 
with  their  own  sphere  of  action,  their  frequent  inability  to  determine 
beforehand  the  success  or  the  kind  of  occurrences,  and  their  sensation 
of  innocence  when  found  out  in  manipulations.  Finally,  we  may  under- 
stand their  lack  of  appreciation  of  the  importance  of  pure  experiments 
as  distinguished  from  occurrences  exposed  to  objection. 

Following  up  this  train  of  thought  further,  we  may  suppose  that 
soft  substances,  such  as  the  flowing  dress  of  the  medium,  curtains  hanging 
near,  etc.,  can  be  of  some  advantage,  and  may  form  conductors  and 
reservoirs  of  power,  from  which  the  effects  may  take  their  origin,  besides 
giving  points  of  support  for   the  materialised   structures.      Both  for 

METHOD   IN   MEDIUMISTIC    INVESTIGATIONS  25 

the  materials  for  the  furnishing  of  the  cabinet,  as  well  as  for  the  dress 
of  the  medium  (for  which  knitted  fabrics  are  preferable),  a  black  colour 
is  to  be  recommended.  For  with  a  black  background  even  the  finest, 
hardly  visible  materialised  fabrics  can  be  seen.  Besides,  this  colour 
increases  the  darkness  in  the  cabinet,  and  thus  contributes  indirectly 
to  the  development  of  the  phenomena.  If  care  is  taken  that  the  medium 
has  nothing  white  about  her,  the  materialisation  structures,  appearing 
grey  or  white  on  a  black  background,  are  very  convincing.  Thus 
darkness  behind  these  structures  appears  to  be  a  necessity  for  the 
development  of  the  teleplasm.  Yet  these  thoughts,  which  are  the  pro- 
duct of  uniform  observation  of  various  mediums,  are  not  to  be  a  rigid 
rule,  but  only  a  hint.  All  observations  made  by  the  author  concerning 
mediums  agree  in  this,  that  a  white  light  has  a  hindering  and  disturbing 
effect  on  the  phenomena,  and  an  unfavourable  action  on  the  develop- 
ment of  the  teleplasm.  It  is  possible  that  the  education  of  the  medium 
in  this  point  also  plays  a  part,  for,  on  the  other  hand,  I  often  succeeded 
in  observing  the  course  of  the  whole  phenomenon  from  beginning  to 
end  in  a  red  light  or  in  the  shade  of  the  curtain  in  the  case  of  Eva  C. 
According  to  the  spiritistic  view,  the  closed  cabinet  opposes  the  disper- 
sion of  the  fluid  emanating  from  the  medium.  For  the  carping  critic, 
the  cabinet,  the  darkness  of  the  reduced  light,  only  exist  in  order  to 
hide  the  manipulations  by  means  of  which  the  phenomena  are  fraudu- 
lently produced.  That  this  easily  understood  view  is  generally 
applauded  is  not  surprising. 

The  recent  investigations  by  W.  J.  Crawford  ^  have  shown  that  white 
light  acts  destructively  on  the  pseudopods  or  psychic  projections  from 
the  medium's  body  necessary  for  the  production  of  telekinetic  pheno- 
mena. It  appears  to  produce  a  molecular  softening  of  the  invisible 
'"  rods  ;  "  while  red  light  acts  much  more  feebly.  It  is,  therefore,  necessary 
to  consider  the  reflection,  refraction  and  absorption  of  the  light  used  in 
the  seance  room. 

Professor  Ochorowicz  employed  with  success  a  faint  blue  light. 
So  did  Paul  Gibier,^  the  Director  of  the  Pasteur  Institute  in  New  York. 
But,  in  any  case,  the  long-wave  red  rays  are  preferable,  since  they  allow 
us  to  leave  the  shutter  of  the  photographic  apparatus  open.  On  the 
whole  it  is  better  to  renounce  the  show-pieces  of  the  medium  in  the  dark, 
and  to  use  a  faint  illumination  with  a  feebler  manifestation.  It  is  true 
that  in  a  feebler  light,  and,  therefore,  also  in  the  red  light,  we  only  see 
indirectly  with  the  rods  of  the  retina,  which  are  more  sensitive  to  light, 
and  less  to  colour,  whereas  in  fixation  in  a  feeble  red  light,^  we  use  the 
"  cones,"  on  account  of  their  central  position.  But  these,  on  account 
of  their  greater  sensitiveness  to  colour  than  to  light,  in  general  give  a 
feebler  general  effect.  Objects  on  which  the  glance  is  fixed,  or  con- 
centrated in  a  red  light  appear,  therefore,  feebler  than  they  do  subse- 
quently on  the  photograph.  The  eye  is  very  easily  fatigued  and  subject 
to  error.  Hence  it  is  advisable  often  to  close  the  eye  and  to  rest  it, 
instead  of  fixing  it  with  an  effort  for  a  length  of  time. 

The  exhaustion  of  the  medium  is,  as  a  rule,  in  proportion  to  the 
strength  of  the  phenomena.     But  the  effort  involved  in  the  action  of 

1  See  p.  14.     '-'  Gibier,  Ann.  des  Sc.  Ps.,  1901. 

3  Graetz,  "Physical  Ray  Phenomena/'  Munch.  Med.  Wochenschrift ,  No.  14,  1904. 

26  PHENOMENA    OF    MATERIALISATION 

the  medium's  organism  is  much  greater  when  the  composition  of  the 
audience  is  unfavourable.  Occasionally  the  mood  of  the  mediums 
may  be  adversely  affected  by  unsympathetic  personalities,  or  by  con- 
temptuous treatment ;  they  are  abashed,  nervous,  and  incapable  of 
any  performance  ;  for  the  latter  necessarily  involves  a  consciousness 
of  capacity  and  the  feeling  of  not  being  hindered.  The  somewhat 
suspicious  refusal  of  very  rigid  conditions  of  control  may  be  the  result 
of  a  correct  instinctive  knowledge  that  they  produce  a  ps3'^chic  inhibition 
which  places  the  whole  result  in  jeopardy.  Mediumistic  activity  may 
be  compared  with  artistic  creation.  A  good  artist,  be  he  musician,  poet 
or  painter,  requires  the  necessary  emotional  state  in  order  to  develop 
his  creative  artistic  power.  He  also  is  dependent  on  details  of  surround- 
ings, trifling  disturbances,  bodily  well-being,  etc.  This  is  also  the  reason 
why  sittings  in  circles  having  a  spiritualistic  and  religious  colouring, 
in  which  the  medium  is  almost  venerated  as  a  saint,  are  often  attended 
by  better  success  than  the  so-called  scientific  sittings.  The  wise 
experimenter  will,  therefore,  take  care  to  secure  the  necessary  emotional 
state  of  the  medium,  and  avoid  any  useless  waste  of  power.  He  will 
be  satisfied  with  one  to  three  sittings,  in  order  that  the  medium  may 
recover,  and  from  time  to  time  he  will  allow  longer  rest  intervals. 
Eusapia  Paladino  used  to  be  very  exhausted  after  every  successful 
sitting,  especially  after  she  had  been  in  a  state  of  trance.  She  some- 
times slept  until  the  next  midday,  and  was  for  the  rest  of  the  day 
apathetic,  peevish,  and  monosyllabic.  Her  skin  was  usually  cold  after 
tihe  sittings,  her  pulse  rapid  (110°  per  minute),  and  she  had  a  strong 
feeling  of  fatigue.  Her  subsequent  sleep  was  often  restless  and  inter- 
rupted by  vivid  dreams.  She  had  a  sensitive  feeling  as  to  whether  her 
performances  had  satisfied  the  audience  or  not,  and  put  her  ambition 
into  the  conviction  of  those  present,  meeting  all  their  wishes  so  far  as 
possible.  After  a  failure,  or  perhaps  a  very  strong  effort,  she  might 
have  a  feeling  of  deep  depression  and  increased  sensitiveness.  She 
then  gave  way  to  tears  and  lamented  her  sad  fate.  From  a  conjuring 
point  of  view  all  this  would  naturally  be  superfluous  comedy,  but  from 
the  psychological  point  of  view  it  confirms  the  opinion  of  Richet, 
according  to  whom  the  psychic  condition  of  the  medium  is  different 
from  the  normal  state,  and  requires  further  study.  In  the  case  of  Eva  C. 
also,  where  the  number  of  negative  sittings  is  very  considerable,  she 
feels  much  exhausted,  according  to  the  degree  of  her  performances, 
and  after  exhaustive  positive  sittings  she  usually  needs  from  twenty-eight 
to  forty-four  hours  to  recover  the  deficit  in  her  strength.  Also,  she 
is  often,  on  the  following  da}',  dazed,  and  complains  of  headache  and 
lack  of  appetite. 

Even  in  the  case  of  the  more  or  less  spontaneous  occurrence  of 
her  teleplastic  activity,  it  may  happen  that,  though  for  several  days  in 
succession  she  gives  positive  performances,  she  may  remain  entirely 
indifferent  for  weeks,  and  even  months,  afterwards. 

No  medium  escapes  the  decreasing  phase  of  efficiency,  and  in  the 
case  of  professional  mediums  who  make  their  living  out  of  their  sittings, 
it  requires  a  great  strength  of  character  to  withdraw,  and  to  refrain 
from  filling  up  the  gaps  by  manual  expedients,  i.e.,  by  fraud. 

Therefore  the  subsequent  behaviour  of  such  mediums,  who  in  view 

METHOD    IN   MEDIUMISTIC   INVESTIGATIONS  27 

of  their  usually  feeble  will-power  are  affected  by  momentary,  including 
unfavourable,  influences,  is  irrelevant  to  the  experimental  results  obtained 
objectively  by  investigators  when  the  former  are  in  the  fulness  of  their 
power. 

Eva  C.  is  not  a  professional  medium,  i.e.,  she  is  not  obliged  to  engage 
herself  for  sittings  for  money,  but  can  return  at  any  moment  to  her 
parents  and  sisters.  But  she  prefers  her  independence  and  lends  her 
remarkable  power  freely  to  Mme.  Bisson  and  her  collaborators  for 
scientific  purposes,  from  gratitude  for  the  years  of  hospitality  enjoyed 
in  the  house  of  the  Bisson  family.  She  has  no  binding  obligation 
towards  them  ;  she  is  fully  in  possession  of  her  liberty,  and  can  dis- 
continue the  experiments  whenever  she  likes.  On  the  other  hand, 
Mme.  Bisson  is  undoubtedly  under  a  moral  obligation  to  the  family 
of  Eva  C.  to  guard  her  against  any  injury  to  her  health,  or  danger  to  her 
mind,  and  she  also  has  to  undertake  a  legal  responsibility  for  the  girl 
against  such  things  as  negligence  resulting  in  bodily  injury. 

The  method  of  education  pursued  in  these  four  years  has  proved 
itself  correct  and  appropriate,  by  the  success  of  the  experiments  on 
the  one  hand,  and  on  the  other  hand  by  the  complete  preservation 
of  the  bodily  and  mental  equilibrium  of  Eva  C.  This  indicates  a  delicate 
appreciation  of  the  sensitive  and  abnormal  nature  of  such  persons. 

FACTS    AND    HYPOTHESES 

Granting  the  assumption  that  the  mediumistic  phenomena  of 
telekinetics  and  teleplasties,  induding  the  intellectual  manifestations, 
are  not  the  product  of  fraud,  we  must  at  once  frankly  confess  that, 
whether  all  phenomena  have  the  same  origin,  or  different  origins,  we 
cannot  in  any  way  explain  them.  This  must  not  deter  us  from  the 
attempt  to  put  facts  once  acknowledged  in  proper  order,  to  analyse 
them,  to  form  auxiliary  conceptions  when  terms  are  wanting,  and  to 
put  forward  hypotheses  which  only  retain  their  temporary  value  so 
long  as  they  serve  the  progress  of  knowledge. 

A  collection  of  facts  is  not  yet  a  science  any  more  than  a  heap  of 
stones  is  an  edifice.  They  must  be  collated,  sifted  and  ordered,  accord- 
ing to  a  definite  point  of  view,  in  order  that  we  may  draw  conclusions 
from  them.  It  is  therefore  interesting  to  cast  a  glance  at  the  present 
standpoint  of  these  lines  of  investigation  with  a  special  reference  to 
the  theoretical  interpretation  of  mediumistic  phenomena.  Most  modern 
investigators  are  inclined  to  adopt  the  "  subliminal  "  consciousness, 
proposed  by  Myers,  as  a  basis  for  the  explanation  of  the  mental  mani- 
festations of  mediums,  including  the  phenomena  of  clairvoyance, 
psychometry,  telfesthesia,  etc.  This  subliminal  consciousness  comprises 
the  transcendental  faculties,  and  must  not  be  mistaken  for  Dessoir's 
"  subliminal  consciousness,"  which  only  comprises  normal  faculties. 
Indeed,  long  before  Myers,  the  philosopher  Dr  Carl  du  Prel,  formulated 
a  similar  theory,  with  the  sole  difference  that  he  denoted  Myers's  sub- 
liminal consciousness  by  the  term  "  transcendental  subject."  The  idea 
was  therefore  in  existence,  even  before  the  time  of  Myers,  and  found 
considerable  acceptance  even  at  the  time  of  du  Prel.^ 

Since  certain  tj^pes  of  personification,  which  suggest  an  identity 
with  deceased  persons,  cannot  be  explained  fully  by  the  theory  of 
Myers  (quite  apart  from  physical  occurrences),  investigators  like  Sir 
Oliver  Lodge,  Hodgson,  Lombroso,  Flammarion  and  others,  have 
been  induced  to  return  to  the  spirit  hypothesis,  and  to  the  belief  in 
personal  survival. 

1  Reference  may  be  made  to  the  following:  Myers^  Human  Personality,  ('arl  du  Prel, 
Philosophie  der  Mystik,  1885.  Oliver  Lodge,  The  Survival  of  Man.  ^Villiam  James, 
Psychology  and  Memories  and  Studies,  1911.  Maeterlinck,  La  Mart.  Lombroso,  Hypnoti.9che 
und  Spiritistische  Forschungen.  Delanne,  Apparitions  Materialisees,  Paris,  191 1.  Aksakoff, 
Animismus  und  Spiritismus,  1894.  Flournoy,  Esprits  et  Mediums.  Von  Hartmann,  Der 
Spiritismus  (1898). 

28 

FACTS   AND   HYPOTHESES  29 

Flammarion  says  on  this  subject :  "  At  the  same  time  it  seems  to  me 
that  the  spiritistic  hypothesis  may  be  mentioned  with  the  same  right 
as  the  other,  for  all  discussions  on  it  have  not  proved  that  it  is  untenable." 

Professor  William  James  indicates  a  greater  reserve  in  the  following 
words  :  "  If  one  sticks  to  the  detail,  one  may  draw  an  anti-spiritist 
conclusion  ;  if  one  thinks  more  of  what  the  whole  mass  may  signify, 
one  may  well  incline  to  spiritist  interpretations  ;  "  and  in  another  place  : 
"  Probably  a  strange  will  is  also  brought  into  account."  In  his  Psy- 
chology William  James  does  not  hold  back  this  conviction,  and  adds  :  "  I 
communicate  my  view,  not  of  course  in  order  to  convert  any  one  to  my 
opinion,  but  because  I  am  convinced  that  a  serious  study  of  these 
phenomena  is  of  the  greatest  importance  to  psychology,  and  because 
I  think  that  my  personal  confession  may  lead  a  reader  or  two  to  approach 
the  region  of  investigation  which  is  usually  treated  with  contempt  by 
so-called  men  of  science."  ^ 

In  another  place  this  great  psychologist  says  : — 

"  Really  powerful  mediums  are  rare,  but  when  one  commences  to 
work  with  them  and  descends  into  the  dim  regions  of  automatism, 
one  is  inclined  to  take  many  rare  coincidences  for  rudimentary  forms  of 
truth.  .  .  .  The  phenomena,  infinitely  complex  in  their  elements, 
are  as  yet  so  little  understood  that  concise  judgments  expressed  by  the 
words  "  spirits,"  or  "  nonsense,"  are  equally  unreasonable.  As  regards 
the  question  whether  such  types  of  phenomena  which  are  ignored  by 
official  science  exist,  I  am  completely  convinced  that  they  do  exist."  ^ 

A  detailed  discussion  of  the  Anglo-American  investigations  centring 
round  the  experiments  with  Mrs  Piper  is  contained  in  M.  Maeterlinck's 
book  La  Mori  (Paris — Charpentier,  1913).  He  says,  among  other 
things  :  "  The  survival  of  the  spirit  is  not  more  improbable  than  the 
marvellous  capacities  which  we  must  attribute  to  the  medium  if  we 
deny  them  to  the  dead,  and  the  existence  of  the  medium  is  undeniable 
in  contrast  with  that  of  the  '  spirit.'  The  marvellous  capacities  astonish 
us  because  they  are  isolated.  Fundamentally  they  are  not  more  wonder- 
ful than  our  thought,  our  memory,  our  imagination.  .  .  .  On  the 
whole  the  entire  dispute  is  a  question  of  fact  which  can  only  be  solved 
by  a  series  of  careful  experiments.  The  time  for  drawing  conclusions 
has  not  yet  come."  For  Lombroso,  the  totality  of  all  observations 
of  mediums  forms  so  close  a  network  of  proofs  that  it  resists  all  attacks 
of  the  most  rigid  scepticism. 

His  view  approaches  that  of  du  Prel  concerning  the  "  astral  body  " 
and  the  solidarity  of  the  phantom  with  the  body  of  the  medium,  and 
he  argues  :  "  For,  if  the  soul  is  reduced  to  a  fluid  material  which  only 
becomes  visible  and  manifest  under  quite  definite  conditions,  it  surely 
belongs  still  to  the  world  of  matter  "  (when  the  word  "  matter  "  is  not 
used  in  the  sense  in  which  it  is  used  in  the  present  doctrine  of  energy). 

The  two-volume  book  of  Delanne  represents,  just  like  Aksakoff's 
Animism  and  Spiritism,  the  spiritistic  point  of  view  of  the  old  school. 
These  two  works  contain  large  collections  of  material. 

On  the  other  hand.  Professor  Flournoy  (Geneva),  without  recog- 
nising, on  the  basis  of  sense  observations,  the  reality  of  mediumistic 

^  Passage  retranslated  from  the  German  {Tr.). 

30  PHENOMENA    OF    MATERIALISATION 

phenomena,  still  considers  spiritism  as  an  error,  and  believes  it  to  be  a 
serious  mistake  to  ascribe  the  remarkable  phenomena  presented  by 
mediums  to  the  spirits  of  the  dead. 

He  is  convinced  that  the  supernormal  occurrences  owe  their  genesis 
to  hidden  forces  and  laws  which  we  do  not  yet  know. 

These  materialisations  do  not  offer  a  rigid  demonstration  of  inter- 
ferences from  "  Beyond,"  since  the  analysis  of  their  psychological 
contents  shows  that  they  are  merely  creations  of  the  medium's  imagina- 
tion, creations  of  his  subliminal  consciousness. 

Among  the  best  and  most  thorough  works  in  German  literature 
on  this  subject  we  may  reckon  the  works  of  the  philosopher,  Eduard 
von  Hartmann,  who  also  assumes  the  reality  of  the  mediumistic  pheno- 
mena, but,  apart  from  formal  essential  difficulties,  he  regards  the  spirit 
hypothesis  as  really  superfluous,  since  in  the  case  of  both  inspirational 
and  physical  processes,  including  materialisation,  he  depends  upon 
the  medium.  Here  we  contravene  an  important  principle  of  method : 
"  The  principles  used  in  explanation  must  not  be  needlessly  multiplied, 
and  we  must  not  suppose  a  second  kind  of  causes  so  long  as  one  kind 
suffices."  The  existence  of  these  causes  lying  outside  the  medium  is  not 
proved,  and  the  value  of  this  hypothesis  is  only  to  be  demonstrated 
by  an  explanation  of  the  phenomena  in  question.  Thus  the  assumption 
of  such  causes  indicates  a  serious  lack  of  critical  caution. 

De  Vesme,  the  author  of  the  three-volume  History  of  Spiritism 
(Mutze,  Leipzig,  1909),  and  Editor  of  the  Annates  des  Sciences  Psychiques, 
considers  himself  bound  to  maintain  that  a  key  will  never  be  found 
which  fits  all  the  metapsychical  phenomena,  which  he  considers  to 
be  true  as  a  whole.  In  the  case  of  physical  manifestations  we  may  in 
his  view  discard  the  spiritistic  hypothesis  during  experiments.  But 
so  soon  as  they  are  accompanied  by  manifestations  of  intelligence, 
or  when  we  have  to  deal  with  purely  mental  phenomena,  we  need  this 
hypothesis,  but  only  as  a  working  hypothesis.  In  other  words,  the 
experimenter  must,  in  order  to  get  results  at  all,  adapt  himself  to  the 
"  dramatised  personifications  "  under  which  all  mediums  in  the  som- 
nambulic state  carry  out  their  performances  during  the  sitting,  but  he 
must  reserve  himself  complete  liberty  for  a  subsequent  psychological 
analysis  and  explanation. 

i)e  Vesme  also  prefers,  on  the  whole,  the  psycho-dynamic  point  of 
view,  since  it  corresponds  more  closely  with  scientific  minds  than  does 
the  spirit  hypothesis,  though  it  may  be  difficult  to  bring  all  observations 
into  harmony  with  it. 

With  Flournoy  and  De  Vesme  the  author  believes  that  the  spirit 
hypothesis  not  only  fails  to  explain  the  slightest  detail  of  these  occur- 
rences, but  that  it  impedes  and  hinders  in  every  way  serious  scientific 
investigation.  For  the  anthropomorphic  need  and  the  metaphysical 
tendency,  slumbering  deep  within  the  human  soul,  have  historically 
always  taken  charge  of  those  objects  and  natural  phenomena,  which 
mankind  could  not  explain  with  the  help  of  the  learning  of  his  time. 

That  it  is  not  impossible  to  bring  about  harmony  between  this 
problem  lying  on  the  borderland  of  human  cognition  and  modern 
physical  theory  has  already  been  pointed  out  by  the  well-known  German 
chemist.  Professor  Ostwald,  on  the  occasion  of  his  review  of  Flam- 

FACTS   AND   HYPOTHESES  31 

marion's  work,  Unknown  Forces  of  Nature.  Ostwald  cannot  escape  the 
conclusion  that,  in  the  case  of  the  scientifically  useful  materials  collected 
by  Flammarion,  we  have  to  deal  with  observed  facts  which  we  cannot, 
in  general,  justly  deny.  Special  emphasis  is  attached  to  the  point 
that  nearly  all  mediums  are  fraudulent,  because  they  cannot  always 
produce  the  desired  phenomena,  and  yet  do  not  wish  to  lose  their 
reputation  for  special  gifts.  They,  therefore,  employ  artificial  means 
if  the  phenomena  will  not  come.  But,  even  after  deducting  these 
deceptions,  there  remains,  as  Ostwald  explains,  such  a  large  amount 
of  well-authenticated  fact  that  we  must  attempt  to  get  into  touch 
with  it.  Ostwald  applies  the  energy  theory  in  the  following  manner  to 
the  mediumistic  phenomena.  "  Certain  human  beings  are  capable  of 
transforming  their  physiological  store  of  energy  (which,  as  we  know, 
is  almost  exclusively  present  in  the  form  of  chemical  energy),  of  trans- 
mitting it  through  space,  and  of  transforming  it  at  prescribed  points 
back  into  one  of  the  known  forms  of  energy.  It  results  from  this  that 
the  mediums  themselves  are  usually  much  exhausted,  i.e.,  that  they 
use  up  their  bodily  energy.  A  transformation  into  psychic  energy  seems 
also  to  be  possible.  The  mediumistic  form  of  energy  can  be  compared, 
as  regards  velocity  of  propagation,  with  light,  and  it  appears  to  have 
polarity,  for  there  are  persons  whose  actions  neutralise  each  other. 
This  view  implies  no  fundamental  contradiction  of  any  laws  of  Nature. 
We  have,  therefore,  the  possibility  of  a  science." 

This  science  is  regarded  by  Ostwald  as  in  its  infancy,  since  it  is  not 
yet  possible  to  produce  the  phenomena  at  will.  "  But  since  apparently 
the  mediumistic  properties  are  not  at  all  rare,  but  are  found  in  nearly 
every  other  person,  though  only  feebly  developed,  a  rapid  development, 
in  the  scientific  sense,  is  quite  possible,  and  will,  perhaps,  take  place 
sooner  than  we  think." 

Though  we  may  not  share  Ostwald's  view  as  regards  the  frequency 
of  mediumistic  gifts,  we  must  approve  of  his  attempt  to  conceive  and 
explain  phenomena  with  the  help  of  the  energy  theory  of  the  Universe. 

This  theory  also  dominates  the  peculiar  work  written  by  Professor 
Staudenmaier,  Die  Magic  als  Experimentelle  Naturwisscnschaft  ("  Magic 
as  an  Experimental  Science,"  Leipzig,  1912).  This  author  thinks  that 
the  physical  phenomena  occurring  with  mediums  must  be  produced 
arbitrarily  and  according  to  plan.  Physiologically  speaking,  the  specific 
energy,  travelling  over  the  various  nerves,  is  driven  in  opposite  direc- 
tions from  that  which  corresponds  to  normal  working.  In  seeing, 
smelling,  hearing  and  feeling,  the  specific  excitation  travels  from  the 
sense  organs  to  the  brain,  and  finally  to  the  consciousness.  In  producing 
optical,  auditory,  and  other  hallucinations,  we  must  learn  to  transmit 
the  energy  in  a  centrifugal  direction.  According  to  this  view,  which 
is  opposed  to  the  present  doctrine  of  hallucination,  we  must  suppose 
that  virtual  reality  is  at  the  base  of  the  false  perception.  Staudenmaier 
seeks  to  explain  the  physical  phenomena  of  mediumship  b}'  the  expulsion 
of  such  forms  of  energy  {e.g.,  of  motor  energy  from  the  fingers),  as  well  as 
voluntary  transformation  of  large  quantities  of  energy  in  the  nervous 
system.  But  as  long  as  such  experiments  in  "  magic "  cannot  be 
produced  in  a  manner  free  from  objection,  the  hypothesis  is  not  worth 
discussing.  Perhaps  the  greatest  advance  in  the  knowledge  of  the 
elementary  phenomena  of  materialisation  is  furnished  by  the  experi- 

32  PHENOMENA    OF    MATERIALISATION 

merits  of  Professor  Ochorowicz  ^  with  the  medium  Stanislawa  Tomczyk. 
In  the  first  place,  this  experimenter  observed  the  occurrence  of 
"  rigid  organic  rays,"  in  1893,  in  the  case  of  Eusapia  Paladino,  and  subse- 
quently with  the  above-mentioned  medium.  These  "  rigid  rays  "  are 
thread-like  connections,  which  are  formed  between  the  fingers  of  the 
medium  when  she  brings  her  hands  together.  These  may  remain  invisible, 
and  yet  exert  mechanical  effects,  as,  for  instance,  by  the  motion  and 
raising  of  small  objects  without  contact.  When  condensed,  they  are 
visible  and  can  be  photographed.  The  author  was  present  in  Paris  at 
such  a  sitting  and  can  vouch  for  the  accuracy  of  this  observation. 
Besides,  it  was  successfully  tested  by  several  Commissions,  composed 
of  photographic  experts  and  savants.  These  rays  can,  however,  not 
be  compared  with  Reichenbach's  "  Odic  Effluvia,"  nor  with  the  "  N  " 
rays  of  Blondlot  and  Charpentier.  We  have  here  to  deal  with  fiuidic 
threads,  which  were  also  observed  in  the  sitting  with  Eva  C.  by  the 
author.  Under  a  magnifying  glass  it  appears  that  the  thread  is  composed 
of  points.  Following  up  this  study  the  author  obtained  radiographic 
drawings  and  impressions  on  black  paper,  and  later,  mediumistic  radio- 
graphs of  hands  in  total  darkness,  fluidic  shadow-duplication  of  hands 
of  the  medium,  with  an  imperfect  impression  on  the  negative,  and 
finally  impressions  on  the  photographic  negative  corresponding  to  the 
thought  images  of  the  medium,  i.e.,  "  thought  photography."  This 
thought  image  acquires  a  capability  of  externalisation,  and  thus  produces 
an  objective  picture.  Such  an  occurrence  must  be  called  "  material 
ideoplastics."  It  furnishes  a  transition  towards  an  understanding 
of  materialisation  phenomena,  and  is  indeed  of  great  importance  for 
their  explanation.  Ochorowicz  illustrated  his  systematic  experiments 
by  numerous  photographs.  Unfortunately,  the  other  works  are  dis- 
persed among  periodicals,  instead  of  being  available  to  the  reader  in 
a  continuous  book.  Not  only  the  author's  experiments  with  Eva  C, 
but  also  those  cited  in  what  follows  (which  were  obtained  quite  inde- 
pendently of  Ochorowicz's  observations),  point  in  the  same  direction 
to  an  ideoplastic  material  expression  of  thought  images  of  an  optical 
character. 

Dr  Kotik,2  ^f  ]\loscow,  put  before  a  person  acting  as  agent  a  clear 
sheet  of  notepaper,  and  a  picture  post-card,  with  a  request  to  imagine 
vividly  the  picture  transferred  to  the  blank  sheet,  and  to  fix  the  atten- 
tion upon  the  sheet  for  several  minutes  with  that  idea.  Then  the  blank 
sheet,  so  treated,  was  shown  to  another  person  acting  as  the  percipient 
and  living  in  another  place.  This  person's  description  regularly  corre- 
sponded to  what  was  represented  on  the  picture  post-card.  Kotik 
assumes,  in  consequence  of  the  success  of  a  series  of  such  experiments, 
that  a  psycho-physical  radiant  energy  is  secreted  by  the  brain  at  the 
moment  of  thought,  and  can  be  transferred  to  a  piece  of  paper ;  that  it 
is  there  preserved,  and  subsequently  may  produce  the  same  impression 
on  the  brains  of  persons  having  peculiar  gifts.  This  energy,  according 
to  Kotik,  possesses  psychical  and  physical  properties.  It  can,  for 
instance,  be  collected  on  the  surface  of  the  body,  and  can  be  conducted 
or  absorbed.     He  regards  the  subconscious  self  as  the  place  of  storage, 

1  Ann.  desSc.  Psychiques,  1909,  p.  41  ;  1911,  p.  126. 

2  Die  Emanation  der  Psychophysischen  Energie  (Bergmanu,  Wiesbaden,  1908). 

FACTS   AND    HYPOTHESES  33 

According  to  his  view,  thinking  is  accompanied  by  the  emission  of 
brain-rays  having  a  great  penetrative  power.  These  are  accompanied 
by  a  psycho-physical  element,  which  may  have  a  small  penetrative  power, 
and  another  element,  which  is  purely  psychical.  We  have,  therefore, 
in  the  experiments  of  Ochorowicz,  a  psycho-physical  emanation  analo- 
gous to  the  manifestations  of  radio-active  substances  and  radio-active 
emanation.  The  small  particles  of  the  psycho-physical  emanation 
he  denotes  by  the  term  "  psycho-physical  atoms,"  or,  in  accordance 
with  the  newest  views,  as  "  psycho-physical  electrons."  Kotik  believes 
that  by  means  of  this  mysterious  agency  he  is  enabled  to  explain  numer- 
ous actual  phenomena  of  spiritism.  However  daring  and  unconvincing 
Kotik's  arguments  may  appear  at  first  sight,  they  indicate  a  path  of 
research,  and  offer  us  a  welcome  auxiliary  hypothesis  for  the  com- 
prehension of  the  occurrence  of  mediumistic  ideoplastics  in  so  far  as 
their  actuality  cannot  be  denied. 

In  the  work  already  mentioned  by  the  author  and  discussed  in 
detail,  Imoda's  Phantasmal  Photography,  numerous  teleplastic  portraits 
taken  by  flash-light  are  reproduced.  Among  these  there  is  a  photo- 
graph, taken  at  Professor  Charles  Richet's  house,  by  De  Fontenay  on  the 
29th  of  April  1909,  representing  a  rather  distorted  masculine  face, 
with  eyes  directed  upwards.  Long  after,  on  the  1st  of  March  1913, 
the  newspaper,  Le  Matin,  proved  that  this  picture  is  strikingly  similar 
to  an  angel  head  painted  by  Rubens.  Comparing  the  two  pictures, 
there  can  be  no  doubt  that  this  picture  was  the  model  for  the  medium- 
istic reproductions.  If,  in  consideration  of  the  trustworthiness  of  both 
photographers,  we  may  dismiss  the  possibility  of  fraud,  we  have  here 
a  typical  ideoplastic  reproduction  by  the  medium,  Linda  G.  This  is 
supported  by  the  following  circumstances  :  The  medium  takes  a  great 
interest  in  painting,  and  has  certainly  seen  the  collection  of  pictures 
in  the  Louvre,  where  the  original  may  be  found.  This  Rubens  angel 
head  left  a  vivid  remembrance  in  her  subliminal  consciousness.  In  the 
state  of  trance  the  dream  memory  of  this  head  was  translated  into  a 
reality.  The  image  gives  the  impression  more  of  an  artistic  recollection 
than  that  of  a  true  copy,  as  we  should  expect,  if  there  had  been  a  virtual 
use  of  a  photographic  copy.  Apart  from  the  distorted  expression  in 
comparison  with  the  original,  the  right  eye  is  entirely  covered  with  a 
black  substance  which  may  be  regarded  as  a  veil  or  hair  which  is  not 
found  in  the  original. 

Besides,  the  picture  as  a  whole  departs  considerably  from  Rubens's 
representation.  According  to  the  view  of  De  Fontenay,  the  medium 
has  materialised  her  dream  impression.  In  any  case,  it  is  an  interesting 
example  of  mediumistic  ideoplastics,  if  we  assume  the  genuineness  of 
the  phenomenon.^ 

Professor  Morselli  ^  has  also  adopted  this  view  for  the  explanation 
of  the  Eusapian  phenomena.  He  says  :  "In  this  case  the  idea  of 
the  phenomenon,  as  grasped  by  Eusapia  in  a  waking  or  half-waking 
condition,  rises  into  the  medium's  subconsciousness,  where  the  still 
unknown    bio-psychic    power   of   mediumship   elaborates   it.     It   then 

^  See  Schrenck-NotzLng,  Die  Phcenomene  des  Mediums  Linda  Gazerra,  Mutze, 
Leipzig,  1912. 

2  Psychhche  Studien,  1907,  p.  420. 

34  PHENOMENA    OF    MATERIALISATION 

externalises  itself,  and  extends  over  a  distance  corresponding  to  her 
mechanical  power  as  a  luminous  '  ideoplastic,'  or  '  materialised  product.' 
During  the  more  important  phenomena  the  medium  is  always  in  a  state 
of  trance,  and  her  own  will  is  in  abeyance.  There  is,  so  to  speak,  an 
automatic  liberation  of  forces  which  we  may  term  '  medianimic,'  and 
which  are  stored  in  the  nerve  centres." 

In  another  place  ^  he  admits  that  we  know  nothing,  nothing,  nothing 
as  to  how  these  things  occur.  Understanding  must  come  later.  He 
discusses  no  less  than  twenty-five  explanations  of  mediumship.  He 
regards  the  spiritistic  hypothesis  as  superfluous,  full  of  contradictions, 
uncultured,  childish,  too  abstract  and  confused,  and  also  as  immoral, 
in  the  sense  that  it  does  not  fit  in  with  our  religious  and  social  ideals, 
and  offends  against  human  dignity.  He  also  maintains  that  it  is  not 
proved  by  a  single  manifestation,  at  least  so  far  as  Eusapia  Paladino 
is  concerned.  And  the  few  communications  which  cannot  be  explained 
in  this  way,  such  as  those  of  Mrs  Piper  and  Mrs  Thompson,  do  not  offer  a 
sufficient  foundation  for  a  magnificent  edifice,  such  as  has  been  attempted 
during  the  last  few  decades  with  such  doubtful  material. 

The  psycho-dynamical  phenomena  which  Morselli  classes  under  the 
provisional  name  of  "  medianimity,"  comprise  indefinite,  undefinable, 
and  unintelligible  capacities  of  the  human  organism,  which  perhaps 
every  one  possesses  to  a  quite  small  and  unrecognisable  degree,  but 
which  some  personalities  possess  to  such  an  extraordinary  extent 
that  they  succeed  in  expressing  their  vital  and  psychic  activity 
beyond  the  limits  of  the  body.  These  powers  disappear  with  the 
mechanism  which  produces  them,  and  have,  therefore,  no  survival. 
The  intimate  dynamics  of  such  capacities  are  unknown  to  us. 

As  one  may  gather  from  the  above  review,  nearl}'  all  the  investi- 
gators who  have  lately  studied  the  phenomena  of  physical  mediums-hip 
— which,  in  view  of  the  psychogenic  character  of  the  occurrences  must 
always  retain  some  connection  with  psychical  phenomena — incline 
towards  a  rejection  of  the  spiritistic  theory  in  favour  of  the  psycho- 
dynamical  conception,  and  towards  a  purely  observational  attitude, 
as  represented  by  Morselli,  Bottazzi,  Foa,  Richet,  Ochorowicz,  Kotik, 
Ostwald,  Flournoy,  de  Vesme,  de  Rochas,  Maxwell,  etc.  This  is 
also  the  point  of  view  adopted  by  the  author  in  the  following 
studies. 

In  this  sense  the  observations  with  Eva  C.  were  conducted  as  impar- 
tially and  conscientiously  as  possible,  the  records  written  down  after 
each  sitting,  and  in  the  last  six  months  even  during  the  sittings  them- 
selves. Since  Eva  C.'s  special  gift  is  entirely  confined  to  teleplastics 
or  materialisation,  the  only  possible  objection  that  can  be  raised  is  that 
the  materialisation  products  are  somehow  fraudulently  smuggled  into 
the  sittings.  The  problem  of  control  is,  therefore,  very  simple.  It  has 
only  to  guard  against  the  introduction  or  handing  in  of  objects  and  their 
subsequent  removal.  Now.  not  one  of  the  observers  present  in  the 
course  of  four  years  was  able  to  prove  that  prepared  pictures  or  materials 
had  been  brought  into  the  sittings  or  had  been  removed  after  use. 
Even  the  boldest  hypotheses,  based  upon  the  mechanical  production 
of  the  phenomena,  have  been  refuted  by  a  repetition  of  the  experiments 
^  Psychische  Studien,  1907,  p.  545. 

FACTS   AND   HYPOTHESES  35 

under  modified  conditions  which  paid  special  attention  to  the  possi- 
bilities suggested.  The  result  is,  and  remains,  a  negative  one,  that  is 
to  say,  it  remains  favourable  to  the  medium. 

When,  in  view  of  the  rigorous  control  of  the  medium  before  and 
after  the  sittings,  it  became  impossible  to  cast  suspicion  upon  her, 
the  criticism  directed  itself  upon  her  protectress,  Mme.  Bisson.  But, 
quite  apart  from  the  unjustifiable  and  insulting  insinuation  against 
that  lady,  she  has,  in  the  spirit  of  a  purely  scientific  research,  repeatedly 
allowed  herself  to  be  examined  by  the  author,  both  before  and  after 
the  sittings,  without  any  reason  for  suspicion  ever  being  discovered. 
And,  besides,  if  one  really  wished  to  continue  this  train  of  thought, 
with  what  motive  could  Mme.  Bisson,  living  in  Paris,  try  to  deceive  a 
foreign  savant  for  four  years,  and  with  an  even  greater  success  in  Munich, 
in  the  author's  own  workrooms,  and  under  the  suspicious  eyes  of  German 
colleagues  ? 

Financial  motives  are  also  put  out  of  court  by  the  favourable  and 
well-regulated  circumstances  of  the  Bisson  family.  The  lady's  own 
expenses  for  these  experiments  (housing,  clothing,  and  feeding  of  the 
medium  for  three  and  a  half  years,  rent  and  furniture  of  the  flat  taken 
for  the  purpose  of  the  experiments,  extras  for  the  sittings  themselves) 
are  many  times  those  incurred  by  the  author.  Hysteria  and  a  love  of 
sensation  do  not  play  any  part,  since  Mme.  Bisson's  bodily  and  mental 
equilibrium  are  intact.  Besides,  for  spiritistic  sensations  more  suitable 
objects  could  be  found  in  Paris.  There  cannot,  therefore,  be  the  slightest 
doubt  that  Mme.  Bisson,  who  also  experimented  with  many  other 
persons  in  the  author's  absence,  has  conducted  this  four  years'  investi- 
gation out  of  a  pure  interest  in  the  subject,  in  the  scientific  exploration 
of  the  mediumistic  problem.  This  is  borne  out  by  the  French  edition 
of  her  studies  and  observations  with  Eva  C,  written  by  herself,  and 
published  simultaneously  with  the  present  work.  This  step  into 
publicity  vouches  for  the  authoress's  bona  fides.  The  imputation  of 
fraudulent  assistance  is  thus  deprived  of  any  reasonable  basis. 

In  order  to  remain  within  the  range  of  a  rigid  objectivity,  the  author 
has  also  published  the  subjective  interpretations  of  the  scientific  wit- 
nesses, though,  naturally,  some  of  these  opinions  are  negative,  in  view 
of  the  limited  experience  of  the  persons  concerned.  To  the  author, 
the  most  essential  thing  was  the  confirmation  by  independent  witnesses 
of  the  effects  they  had  observed.  To  form  a  judgment,  the  author  had 
four  years  of  observation  to  fall  back  upon.  It  is  easily  understood 
that  a  final  judgment  may  be  different  from  that  of  witnesses  who  have 
only  attended  a  few  sittings. 

But  the  reader  ought  not  to  be  swayed  by  the  author's  personal 
view.  He  should  himself  follow  the  development  of  the  phenomena, 
with  the  aid  of  the  records,  and  then  form  his  own  judgment. 

In  order,  however,  to  offer  the  chance  of  a  theoretical  comprehension 
of  the  mysterious  phenomena  obtained  with  Eva  C,  the  author  thought 
well  to  give  the  above  short  review  of  the  present  condition  of  medium- 
istic research,  with  special  regard  to  the  present  hypotheses  and  attempts 
at  explanation. 

Yet,  in  reality,  it  is  more  advisable  to-day  simply  to  verify,  to  observe, 
and  to  refrain  from  conclusions. 

36  PHENOMENA    OF    MATERIALISATION 

For,  as  Maeterlinck  ^  truly  remarks  :  "  Let  us  not  forget  that  we 
here  have  to  deal  with  a  science  of  to-day  and  yesterday,  which  is 
still  groping  for  its  utensils,  ways,  methods,  and  aims,  and  that  in 
the  midst  of  a  night  which  is  darker  than  the  earthly  night.  Not  in 
thirty  years  will  be  built  the  boldest  bridge  which  has  ever  been  auda- 
ciously thrown  across  the  river  of  death.  Most  sciences  have  centuries 
of  useless  effort  and  barren  uncertainty  behind  them,  and  among  the 
youngest  of  them  there  are  probably  few  which  promise  such  a  harvest, 
even  in  the  first  stages — a  harvest  which  may  not  correspond  to  what 
we  believe  ourselves  to  have  sown,  but  which  already  shows  many 
buds  of  a  strange  and  unknoAvn  fruit." 

^  Maeterlinck,  "^On  Life  after  Death"  {Neue  Rundschau,  Feb.  1913,  Vol.  II.). 

MATERIALISATION    PHENOMENA   WITH   EVA    C. 

Sittings  of  May  and  June  1909  (Paris). 

Observers  and  Medium. 

The  well-known  author,  Alexandre  Bisson,  whose  dramas  have  also 
been  performed  in  Germany,  was  induced  by  the  phenomena  observed 
in  the  ease  of  Eusapia  Paladino  to  collect  further  experiences  on  the 
subject  of  mediumship.  He  and  his  wife  are  neither  prejudiced  spiritists 
nor  hypersceptical  critics,  but  simply  desire  to  serve  truth  without 
any  preconceived  opinion.  The  circle  of  friends,  collected  for  this 
purpose  by  them,  does  not  consist  of  credulous  persons  undertaking 
these  researches  on  account  of  a  metaphysical  need,  or  with  the  object 
of  establishing  communication  with  the  "  Beyond."  It  consists  of 
sober-minded  observers,  who  wish  to  judge  the  facts  in  question  on  the 
basis  of  their  own  tests.  For  this  purpose  the  arrangement  of  the 
experiments  was  directed  towards  the  elimination  of  fraudulent  mani- 
pulations and  self-deception.  Hence,  at  each  sitting  :  complete  un- 
dressing of  the  medium,  strict  examination  of  the  cabinet,  use  of  photo- 
graphy. 

Through  the  kindness  of  M.  Delanne,  the  author  w."  introduced 
into  this  circle,  which  had  already,  for  three  months  befoi*.  iJs  arrival, 
experimented  several  times  per  week.  The  medium  was  a  young  girl 
of  the  middle  classes  who  had  already  shown  materialisation  phenomena 
in  other  circles,  and  had  only  come  to  Paris  in  1908.  Since  the  author 
is  not  justified  in  publishing  details  concerning  her  personal  and  family 
affairs,  he  need  only  mention  here  that  although  Eva  C.  has  an 
unfavourable  heredity,  she  has  not  passed  through  any  serious  illness. 
The  relatives  of  the  girl  are  all  in  respectable  situations  in  industry,  or 
the  Civil  Service. 

Eva  C.i  is  twenty-three  years  of  age,  of  middle  height,  and  slender 
build.  She  has  fair  hair  and  her  body  is  well-nourished.  She  is  said 
to  have  suffered  in  her  second  year  from  convulsions  of  nervous  origin, 
but  without  any  serious  crises.  Menstruation  set  in  in  the  twelfth  year, 
and  is  generally  normal.  Occasional  tendency  to  bladder  trouble 
after  a  cystitis  six  years  ago.  In  1907  she  had  an  operation  on  her 
left  eye  for  squinting  {Strabismus  convergens),  and  she  is  slightly  feeble- 
sighted.  At  the  age  of  seventeen  to  nineteen  she  had  chlorotic  symptoms, 
which  have  since  ceased.     Her  internal  organs  are  healthy,  her  pulse 

^  This  report  was  written  down  by  the  author  in  June  1913,  in  the  light  of  the  four 
years'  observations. 

37 

38  PHENOMENA    OF    MATERIALISATION 

small  and  soft,  84  to  90  per  minute.  Her  weight  varies  between 
110  and  117  lbs.  No  signs  of  degeneration.  Largest  circmnference 
of  skull  twenty-two  inches.  Fairly  striking  slant  in  the  well-developed 
nose  towards  the  left,  but  otherwise  both  sides  of  the  face  are  equal, 
A  few  carious  teeth.  No  disturbance  of  sensitiveness,  or  reaction  to 
pressure,  on  tapping  the  skull.  Eyelids  equally  wide  on  both  sides. 
Pupils  of  normal  aperture  and  prompt  reaction  to  incident  light.  On 
the  left  a  slight  limitation  of  the  field  of  vision.  No  disturbances  of 
visual  acuity  or  sense  of  colour.  The  scleral  and  corneal  reflexes  are 
present,  but  there  is  no  reflex  of  the  roof  of  the  mouth  or  of  the  gullet. 
The  deep-seated  reflexes,  such  as  those  of  the  triceps  muscle  and  the 
knee-cap,  as  well  as  the  skin  reflexes,  take  place  without  difficulty. 
The  dynamometric  force  is  fifty-two  on  the  left,  sixty-eight  on  the 
right.     There  are  no  disturbances  of  motion  or  equilibrium. 

The  ticking  of  a  watch  is  perceived  at  eleven  inches  on  the  left  and 
at  twelve  inches  on  the  right. 

Eva  C.  is  very  sensitive  to  olfactory  impressions,  while  her  sense 
of  taste  is  normal. 

The  sensitiveness  of  the  skin  in  the  axillar  region  of  both  upper 
arms  is  exaggerated.  There  is  a  slight  hypersesthesia  for  pin-pricks, 
but  the  sensations  of  touch,  heat  and  cold,  of  pain  and  of  pointed  and 
blunt  objects,  as  well  as  suggestions  of  the  muscular  sense,  are  correctly 
perceived  and  localised. 

Pronunciation,  comprehension  of  words,  and  optical  recollections 
are  undisturbed.  Hallucinations  are  denied.  Sleep  and  appetite 
in  general  are  good.  Eva  left  school  at  seventeen  and  a  half  years. 
Her  mediumistic  gifts  were  discovered  by  accident  when  a  relative 
operated  in  her  presence  with  another  test  person.  In  her  family 
circle  spiritualistic  sittings  were  held  with  Eva  C.  four  or  five  years 
before  the  beginning  of  the  Paris  experiments.  Another  series  of  tests 
was  made  in  the  house  of  an  English  lady. 

As  regards  her  psychology  there  are  no  disturbances  of  attention, 
Eva  easily  follows  conversations  taking  place  in  her  presence,  and 
sometimes  shows  a  vivid  interest.  She  is  well-informed  on  general 
conditions  of  life,  so  far  as  they  affect  her  personally,  and  readily  answers 
questions  about  her  life-history,  and  about  events  of  the  near  and 
remote  past.  Her  range  of  knowledge  corresponds  to  her  level  of 
education.  She  can  quote  what  she  reads,  hears,  or  sees,  with  facility, 
and  can  correctly  render  the  details  of  a  picture  she  has  contemplated 
for  a  single  second.  She  has  a  good  memory  for  figures,  and  solves 
arithmetical  problems  without  difficulty. 

She  has  a  vivid  imagination,  which  is  sometimes  so  exaggerated 
that  truth  and  fiction  can  no  longer  be  distinguished.  She  has  a  high 
suggestibility,  especially  for  momentary  impressions.  She  gives  no 
coherent  answers  to  abstract  questions,  such  as  :  What  is  the  difference 
between  a  storm  and  a  hurricane  ;  why  a  stone  falls  to  the  ground 
and  does  not  ascend  towards  the  sky  ;  or  how  the  political  parties 
of  her  country  are  composed  ?  She  obviously  regards  such  questions 
as  distasteful.  There  is  very  imperfect  development  of  the  logical 
faculty.  Instead,  there  is  a  mechanical  reproduction  of  opinions  over- 
heard, without  the  consciousness  that  these  are  taken  from  memorv. 

SITTINGS   OF   MAY   AND   JUNE    1909   (PARIS)  39 

and  are  not  the  result  of  her  own  thought.  Her  mood  is  unstable, 
and  easily  excitable.  The  momentary  emotion  dominates  her  mental 
life.  She  greatly  depends  upon  her  emotional  state,  and  is  quite  inacces- 
sible to  any  educational  influences  during  her  intermittent  fits  of  temper. 
In  such  cases  one  must  either  await  the  subsidence  of  the  crisis,  which 
may  last  for  days,  or  try  to  eliminate  it  by  hypnotism  and  suggestion. 

Her  sympathy  and  antipathy  towards  people  are  very  vivid.  But 
her  ethical  feelings  are  purely  egocentric.  She  has  a  lack  of  sincerity 
towards  herself  ;  but  in  social  intercourse  she  usually  gives  a  friendly, 
serene  and  amiable  impression,  though  she  knows  how  to  hide  her 
feelings  in  order  afterwards  to  give  way  to  them  with  an  hysterical 
exaggeration.  She  is  easily  influenced  and  impulsive,  and  is  readily 
led  to  make  unfounded  accusations,  and  to  fall  into  fits  of  rage.  The 
emotions  are  subject  to  sudden  changes,  so  that  depressions  may  follow 
a  happy  mood  without  any  apparent  reason.  It  is  clear  that  in  the 
crises  above  mentioned,  in  which  Eva  C.  must  not  be  regarded  as  respon- 
sible, nervous  and  other  constitutional  excitations  play  a  part.  Her 
sense  of  sex  is  feebly  developed,  but  she  has  a  vivid  erotic  imagination. 
No  mania  or  compulsory  ideas.  Tendency  towards  bodily  depression 
and  self-pity.  Exaggerated  notions  concerning  her  feminine  charms 
and  her  influence  over  the  male  sex. 

The  great  weakness  of  will  in  the  character  of  the  medium  is  explained 
by  the  prevalence  of  her  emotional  character,  and  by  the  lack  of  inde- 
pendence. She  has  a  great  faculty  of  adaptation  to  persons,  and  one 
might  compare  her  relation  to  Mme.  Bisson  with  that  of  a  faithful 
dog  to  its  master.  But,  in  these  circumstances,  one  can  understand 
that  Mme.  Bisson  cannot  surrender  her  medium  into  other  hands  for 
the  sake  of  experiments,  since  Eva  would  be  equally  accessible  to  the 
new  influences  as  soon  as  she  was  accustomed  to  them. 

This  passivity  is  accompanied  by  great  susceptibility  to  hypnotisa- 
tion,  as  well  as  the  faculty  of  accepting  the  ideas  and  intentions  of 
the  persons  present  at  the  sittings,  and  of  realising  these  suggestively, 
or  of  allowing  herself  to  be  dominated  by  states  of  consciousness  involving 
strong  emotion. 

At  the  same  time,  we  can  also  understand  the  danger  which  the 
suggestive  idea  of  fraud,  in  the  minds  of  the  persons  present  at  the 
sittings,  might  imply  for  the  medium. 

Under  such  an  influence  she  might  be  led  to  fraudulent  manipulation, 
unconsciously  suggested,  because  distinctly  expected  by  such  a  person. 
The  hysterical  disposition,  indicated  by  some  of  the  abnormalities 
above  specified,  is  placed  beyond  doubt  by  her  general  psychological 
condition.  It  is,  however,  not  a  case  of  an  actual  disease,  which  would 
imply  hysterical  fits  and  paralyses,  but  a  constitutional  peculiarity, 
which  may  facilitate  the  comprehension  of  the  occurrences  to  be  described 
in  this  book,  in  so  far  as  they  are  affected  by  the  personality  of  the 
medium. 

After  Eva  C.  had,  during  the  first  period  of  her  mediumistic  activity 
in  the  Bissons'  house  (from  February  1909),  lived  outside,  she  was 
received  into  the  family  in  the  autumn  of  1910,  and  lived  at  first  in 
the  studio  flat  of  Mme.  Bisson,  who  was  occupied  with  sculpture.  When 
the  latter  moved  to  a  new  place,  after  the  death  of  her  husband  in 

40  PHENOMENA    OF    MATERIALISATION 

the  spring  of  1912,  Eva  was  given  a  room  in  the  new  flat.  From  the 
moment  of  her  reception  into  the  family  she  was  always  treated  as  one 
of  the  family,  though  she  was  constantly  controlled. 

As  shown  by  records,  some  40  per  cent,  of  the  sittings  were  without 
result  in  the  first  year,  and  60  per  cent,  in  the  later  years.  In  the 
aggregate,  54  per  cent.  In  the  successful  sittings  no  phenomena, 
except  materialisations,  were  observed  ;  no  other  physical  manifesta- 
tions, such  as  those  usually  observed  in  the  case  of  Eusapia  and  other 
mediums.  Thus  we  find,  in  the  case  of  Eva  C,  no  raps,  no  table-tiltings, 
no  "  apports,"  no  telekinetic  phenomena,  but  her  special  faculty  consists 
entirely  in  the  production  of  materially  formed  bodies,  beginning  in 
barely  visible  and  optically  cloud-like  or  amorphous  structures,  and 
ending  in  the  formation  of  solid  materials,  or  organic  shapes. 

The  records  kept  of  the  sittings  preceding  the  21st  May  1909,  by 
one  of  those  present,  relate  to  such  phenomena.  While  at  first  only 
white  patches  of  an  irregular  shape  were  observed,  masses  of  material 
were  gradually  developed,  and  outlines  of  human  forms.  At  first 
hands  and  arms  of  a  sketchy  outline,  but  without  the  rest  of  the  body, 
became  visible.  The  impressions  were  very  fugitive  and  the  red  light 
was  rather  dim.  It  was  found  possible  to  increase  the  illumination 
gradually  as  the  confidence  of  the  medium  increased,  as  well  as  the 
strength  of  the  phenomena.  These  optical  impressions  only  lasted  a 
few  seconds  ;  apart  from  the  rigorous  control  to  which  the  medium 
was  subjected  before  and  after  the  sittings,  both  hands  could  in  this 
period  of  experiment  be  observed  to  remain  at  rest  in  the  same  position 
while  the  occurrences  took  place.  In  the  end  some  human  faces  were 
seen  and  flash-light  photos  could  be  taken.  As  a  rule,  the  medium  had 
no  subsequent  recollection  of  her  trance  condition. 

Sitting  of  the  21st  May  1909. 

Present, — M.  and  Mme.  Alexandre  Bisson,  M.  and  Mme.  Andre  Bisson, 
M.  Chevreuil  (Painter),  Mr  R.  M.,  M.  Delanne,  and  the  author. 

Scene  of  the  Sittings. — Small  room  resembling  a  studio,  situated  on 
the  fifth  floor  of  the  house.  No.  199  Avenue  Victor  Hugo. 
This  room  was  17  feet  long  and  10  feet  wide,  and  had 
a  single  door  leading  into  an  adjacent  bedroom.  This  door 
led  into  a  kind  of  recess,  formed  by  a  stove  occupying  32 
inches  square,  and  having  a  chimney  slanting  towards  the 
ceiling.  The  opening  of  this  recess  was  closed  up  by  means 
of  a  heavy^  curtain.  The  whole  inner  wall  consisted  of  a  black 
lining  material  ;  the  piece  hanging  over  the  door  had  to  be 
lifted  if  the  door  was  to  be  opened.  The  lining  was  fastened 
by  means  of  tacks. 

In  the  same  way  the  light  wicker  chair  in  which  Eva  sat  was  covered 
with  black  stuff.  A  careful  examination  of  the  cabinet  and  the  chair 
gave  a  negative  result.  There  were  no  secret  doors  or  compartments. 
Wherever  a  hand  could  be  introduced  into  the  stuff  Lhis  was  done. 

SITTINGS   OF  MAY   AND   JUNE   1909   (PARIS)  41 

but  with  no  result.  The  door  itself  was  locked  by  me  personally  and 
sealed  with  my  seal  at  all  the  sittings  at  which  I  was  present,  except 
at  the  sitting  of  the  21st  May.  The  control  after  the  sittings  always 
showed  the  seals  to  be  intact.  At  the  sitting  of  the  21st  May  I  kept 
the  keys  of  the  adjacent  bedroom  and  of  the  experimental  room  in 
my  pocket  after  having  locked  the  doors  myself.  As  soon  as  the  medium 
had  been  hypnotised  in  the  cabinet,  which  was  originally  done  by  the 
girl's  relative,  Mr  R.  M.  (who,  however,  did  not  attend  the  later  sittings), 
the  curtains  were  closed.  In  order  to  divide  the  cabinet  entirely  from 
the  room  occupied  by  those  present,  a  large  brown  meshed  net  had 
been  nailed  to  the  walls  and  ceiling  of  the  cabinet.  This  could  only 
be  opened  at  one  side  to  give  access  to  the  cabinet.  At  the  beginning 
of  each  sitting  it  was  also  fastened  to  the  floor,  so  that  now  the  recess 
was  entirely  isolated.  In  these  circumstances  it  would  have  been  impos- 
sible to  throw  or  smuggle  any  small  parcel  of  material  or  any  other 
utensil,  from  without  into  the  cabinet.  Afterwards,  in  November 
1909,  Mme.  Bisson  removed  the  cabinet  into  another  room  and  omitted 
the  net.  Eva  requires  to  be  hypnotised  from  time  to  time  during 
the  sittings.  This  was  done  in  the  first  series  of  sittings  through  the 
net,  and  in  the  second  series  by  the  hypnotiser  entering  the  cabinet. 
The  illumination  of  the  experimental  room  was  provided  by  a  sixteen 
candle-power  electric  lamp,  covered  by  several  pieces  of  red  paper 
or  red  cloth.  By  adding  or  removing  some  of  these  pieces  one  could 
make  the  room  brighter  or  darker.  As  a  rule,  the  illumination  sufficed 
for  reading  the  hands  of  a  watch  even  near  the  curtain  (Diagram  1). 

Eva  undressed  before  the  sitting  completely,  and  was  requested 
to  dress  in  the  garments  provided  by  those  present,  and  carefully 
examined.  This  consisted  of  combined  drawers  and  stockings  of  black 
knitted  wool,  without  any  opening,  reaching  to  the  hips  and  there 
sewn  on  to  a  simple  black  dress  (bodice  and  skirt  in  one)  belonging  to 
Mme.  Bisson,  with  half  sleeves.  She  was  then  sewn  up  in  this  dress 
by  Mme.  Bisson.  No  other  garment  or  undergarment  was  used.  The 
opening  at  the  neck,  and  those  at  the  sleeves  were  also  sewn  up  by 
Mme.  Bisson,  and  Eva  entered,  as  a  rule,  the  experimental  cabinet  with- 
out shoes.^  When  Eva,  after  this  examination  entered  the  cabinet, 
it  was  safe  to  assume  that  no  white  or  otlier  materials  or  apparatus 
for  the  artificial  production  of  phenomena  could  be  hidden  either  behind 
the  curtain  or  on  her  body.  As  soon  as  she  had  taken  her  seat  (I  stood 
beside  her),  Mr  M.  approached  her,  rolled  up  his  sleeves  to  the  elbows, 
and  hypnotised  Eva  by  mesmeric  passes.  In  about  half  a  minute  she 
sank  back  and  went  into  trance. 

Mr  R.  M.  retired,  ]Mme.  Bisson  closed  the  curtain  and  fastened  the 
net  to  the  floor. 

The  duration  of  the  sitting  was  from  9.20  to  10.50  p.m. 

The  first  part  of  these  sittings  still  took  place  under  the  spiritistic 
conditions  and  customs,  which  later  were  abandoned. 

After  a  short  time  the  medium  desired  the  circle  to  sing.  Then 
those  present  intoned  all  kinds  of  tunes  in  chorus,  while  the  less  musical 
ones  hummed  in  time.  After  about  half  an  hour  the  curtain  was 
opened  from  4  to  6  inches,  but  only  for  two  or  three  seconds.     I  saw 

^  At  several  sittings  gynaecological  and  anal  examinations  also  took  place. 

42 

PHENOMENA    OF    MATERIALISATION 

the  outline  of  a  profile  of  a  white-clad  figure  of  the  size  of  an  adult, 
which  was  then  seen  about  six  times  in  succession,  sometimes  in  profile, 
sometimes  in  front  view.  We  could  distinctly  see  a  white-clad  figure 
of  middle  size  and  strongly  marked  features,  though  we  could  not  see 
whether  it  was  male  or  female.  On  the  head  was  a  closely  rolled 
turban  of  white  stuff,  covering  the  forehead  and  resembling  a  surgical 
bandage.  The  medium  was  not  visible  at  the  same  time.  Once  the 
head  was  seen  fairly  close  to  the  floor  and  rose  rapidly,  after  which 
the  whole  form  was  seen  in  profile.  The  hands  of  the  medium  were 
partly  seen  as  bright  patches. 

Under  these  conditions  the  phantom  appeared  once  on  the  right 
side  of  the  medium  in  the  same  costume.  The  curtain  was  drawn  in 
from  behind  and  opened  again  at  once.  The  medium  in  her  black  dress 
stood  before  us.  Hardly  two  seconds  had  been  required  to  make  the 
image  disappear. 

After  the  sitting  Eva  was  again  carefully  examined,  and  so  was  the 
cabinet,  but  no  suspicious  circumstances  were  found. 

Cabinet 

mil 

J2//7J. 

i 

"/Ve? 

% 

X 
> 

X           ^ 
<              X 

X        Jea/s 

Camera 

/O/A 

Diagram  I. 

SITTINGS   OF   MAY   AND   JUNE    1909   (PARIS)  43 

Sitting  of  the  25th  May  1909. 

Present. — M.  and  Mme.  Alexandre  Bisson,  M.  Andre  Bisson  (son  of 
the  last-named),  M.  Chevreuil,  Mr  R.  M.,  Dr  V.  (Physician), 
and  the  author. 

Preparations. — Control  and  dress  of  the  medium,  illumination,  locking 
of  the  doors,  etc.,  as  on  the  21st. 

Time  of  Sitting.— 9. So  to  10.20  p.m. 

Before  commencing  the  experiments  the  medium  was  undressed  and 
Mme.  Bisson  performed  a  gynaecological  examination. 

Eva  was  to-day  only  hypnotised  by  her  relative  after  the  net  had 
been  lowered  and  fastened.  Mr  R.  M.  touched  her  fingers  through 
the  meshes  and  hypnotised  the  medium  by  Braid's  method.  I  sat 
immediately  in  front  of  the  curtains  and  saw,  as  a  first  phenomenon,  a 
white  and  apparently  soft  mass,  ascending  on  the  side  of  the  left  ankle 
of  the  medium  in  the  shape  of  a  v/hite  column  about  2  inches  wide. 
It  attained  a  length  of  about  20  inches  and  then  disappeared. 
During  this  occurrence  the  left  hand  lay  quietly  visible  on  the  left  knee. 

Shortly  afterwards  we  saw  during  the  next  very  short  exposure  a 
white-clad  figure  in  front  view,  with  its  head  surrounded  by  a  turban- 
like bandage.  The  face  was  beardless,  the  dress  of  the  upper  body  was 
light,  of  a  bluish  colour.  The  body  was  bent  over  in  front,  but  no  arms 
or  legs  were  visible. 

This  figure  showed  itself  three  times,  but  only  for  a  few  seconds. 
It  may  have  been  the  medium  "  transfigured." 

When  the  curtain  was  opened  for  the  third  time  the  magnesium 
light  was  flashed.  At  this  instant  I  clearly  recognised  a  human  face  of 
female  aspect. 

Immediately  after  the  exposure  the  medium  opened  the  curtain 
and  advanced  towards  the  net  from  the  cabinet.  The  difference  of 
time  between  our  perception  of  a  white  form  and  the  appearance  of 
the  black-clad  medium  was  only  a  few  seconds.  Even  an  expert  con- 
juror would  have  found  it  difficult  to  make  the  white  costume  dis- 
appear in  so  short  a  period.  I  was  the  first  to  enter  the  cabinet.  I 
examined  the  dress  and  body  of  the  medium  before  the  other  persons 
had  approached,  also  the  cabinet,  and  the  chair,  and  found  that  the 
seals  were  intact. 

Mme.  Bisson  undressed  the  medium,  and  assisted  her  to  dress,  in 
my  presence.  Neither  by  me  nor  by  any  other  observer  was  any  white 
material  or  anything  else  found  which  gave  rise  to  suspicion. 

Eva's  pulse  was  90  before  the  sitting  and  120  afterwards.  A 
picture  drawn  by  one  of  those  present,  but  which  is  not  here  reproduced, 
showed  the  medium  in  white  material.  The  front  of  the  head  is  covered 
by  thi'  material  down  to  the  eyes  and  falls  down  as  far  as  the  hands. 

[Sittings  of  the  28th  May  and  the  1st  June  unsuccessful] 

44  PHENOMENA    OF    MATERIALISATION 

Sittings  of  November  1909. 

Sitting  of  13th  November. 

Place. — Avenue  Victor  Hugo,  199. 

Present. — Baron  Pigeard  de  W.,  Dr  G.  V.,  Mme.  Bisson,  and  author. 

The  cabinet,  transferred  to  a  more  suitable  room,  is  lined  entirely 
with  black  stuff  ;  the  floor  is  covered  by  a  carpet  which  covers  the  whole 
room.  The  wickerwork  easy  chair  is  covered  in  black.  Black  curtains 
of  a  total  width  of  64  inches.  The  upper  part  of  the  cabinet  is 
closed  b}'  a  partition.  The  stuff  is  everywhere  tacked  on.  Illumina- 
tion by  electric  light  on  the  mantelpiece  covered  with  several  sheets 
of  red  tissue  paper  which  make  the  room  rather  dark.  Near  the  lamp 
large  print  can  be  read,  but  not  in  front  of  the  curtain,  though  the  hands 
of  the  clock  can  be  read  there. 

Before  the  sitting,  detailed  inspection  of  the  experimental  room. 
Solid  floor,  no  depression.  I  pass  my  hand  along  the  hem  of  the  carpet 
to  ascertain  whether  anything  is  hidden  there,  also  under  the  stuff 
tacked  on.  The  wardrobe  and  chair  are  similarly  tested,  but,  in  spite 
of  every  care,  nothing  suspicious  is  found  which  could  have  been  used 
for  the  artificial  production  of  the  phenomena.  Eva  undressed  com- 
pletely and  put  on  a  knitted  garment,  which  consisted  of  a  combination 
of  drawers  and  stockings.  This  reached  to  her  waist,  and  was  there 
se^vn  on  to  the  black  dress,  and  the  sleeves  and  neck  were  sewn  up  as 
before. 

The  supposition  that  she  might  have  secreted  some  white  stuff 
in  a  leather  case  is  negatived  by  the  repeated  examinations  already 
mentioned,  but,  supposing  she  had  succeeded  in  concealing  a  small 
packet  and  producing  it  at  her  neck,  by  pushing  it  upwards  along  the 
skin,  the  subsequent  folding  up  of  such  an  amount  of  stuff  as  would 
cover  several  square  yards,  packing  it  up,  and  taking  it  back  to  its 
hiding-place,  would  not  have  been  possible  in  the  time  allowed  (two 
to  three  seconds).     (Diagram  2.) 

Mr  R.  M.,  who  had  hypnotised  the  medium  in  the  spring,  was  no 
longer  present  at  these  experiments.  Before  the  sitting  and  after  it, 
the  author  examined  the  medium  :  her  arm-pits,  mouth  and  feet. 
Eva  entered  the  cabinet  without  slippers. 

Baron  Pigeard,  who  during  the  last  summer  had  made  the  medium's 
acquaintance  at  Biarritz,  hypnotised  the  medium  from  now  onwards. 

Eva  took  her  place  behind  the  curtain,  P.  sat  down  in  front  of 
her,  touched  her  hands  and  fixed  her  eyes.  The  net  was  no  longer 
used.  For  fraudulent  assistance  of  the  medium  by  one  of  those  present 
could  not  be  assumed,  since  the  circle  was  often  completely  changed. 
Only  the  lady  of  the  house  was  present  at  all  sittings.  Any  suspicion 
against  her  is  disposed  of  by  the  fact  that  the  phenomena  did  not  depend 
on  her  presence,  for  previously  Eva  C.  had  obtained  the  same  results, 
in  other  circles,  without  Mme.  Bisson. 

SITTINGS   OF   NOVEMBER   1909 

45 

The  medium  either  held  her  hands  on  her  knees  or  toolc  hold  of 
both  sides  of  the  curtain,  to  close  the  cabinet  or  half-open  it  for  a  short 
exposure  of  her  creations.  Sometimes  she  opened  the  curtain  under 
the  impression  that  the  manifestations  were  already  visible  to  us,  but 
those  present  could  see  nothing. 

Most  frequently  the  optical  impression  was  too  fugitive,  and  so 
faint  in  the  dim  red  light  that  no  detail  could  be  made  out.  This 
particularly  applies  to  representations  of  whole  figures,  no  matter 
whether  these  are  to  be  regarded  as  genuine  materialisations  or  only 
as  transfigurations  of  the  medium. 

The  first  apparition,  which  occurred  after  about  one  hour,  was 
on  the  right-hand  side  of  the  medium,  and  was  preceded  by  a  luminous 
haze  on  that  side.  I  saw  a  figure,  clad  in  light  grey  and  partly  white 
material,  which  was  shown  in  half  profile,  and  bent  sideways  over  the 
medium's  chair.     The  apparition  lasted  only  one  or  two  seconds. 

r 

Seance /fcxpm/ro/r?  /I^^,  ^^^^ 

I 

/Var^r<pl>e 

,w 

•^ 

P 

/^ccr 

o 

Cffr?7era 

C/7//r7/7e(/  P/ece 

Cc/rAsr//?  /y/Tp/^fcf/eu/J 

I 

Diagram  II. 

In  order  to  represent  this  figure,  the  medium  would  have  to  leave 
her  chair  and  stand  on  the  right  side  of  it.  The  garments  of  the  figure 
appeared  to  be  well  fastened,  but  the  impression  was  very  fugitive 
and  the  medium  was  not  simultaneously  visible. 

After  a  short  time  the  phenomenon  was  seen  again.  This  time 
it  stood  in  front  of  the  chair  and  showed  itself  in  front  view  through 
the  gap  in  the  curtains.  I  thought  I  recognised  the  medium's  face, 
and  could  distinctly  see  a  turban  covering  the  head. 

Immediately  the  curtain  was  closed  Eva  groaned  and  wished  to 
be  soothed  by  the  hypnotiser.  Baron  P.  He  opened  the  curtains,  entered 
the  cabinet  and  seized  her  hands.     Neither  he  nor  any  of  the  others 

46  PHENOMENA    OF    MATERIALISATION 

could  see  a  trace  of  white  material  when  the  curtain  was  opened  on 
the  dark  background. 

Baron  P,  retired,  closed  the  cabinet  and  sat  down  on  his  chair. 
He  had  hardly  taken  his  place  when  the  curtain  was  opened  again, 
and  this  time  a  quite  brightly  clad  apparition  stood  on  the  left  side 
of  the  medium,  a  middle-sized  figure.  It  showed  no  distinctly  marked 
shape,  but  collapsed  before  our  eyes,  as  though  vanishing  into  the  floor. 
This  process  was  also  very  short,  and  allowed  of  no  detailed  observations. 

In  future,  minor  processes  of  imperfect  materialisation  will  only 
be  mentioned  for  purpose  of  completeness. 

Eva  was  then  awakened  by  the  hypnotiser,  and  was  examined  by 
us  again  without  our  detecting  anything  suspicious.  The  subsequent 
examination  which  I  made  of  the  cabinet  and  the  chair  was  also  nega- 
tive. The  awakened  medium  had  no  recollection  of  what  had  happened 
during  the  sitting. 

Sitting  of  19th  November  1909. 

Negative.     At  this  sitting  the  author  hypnotised  and  awakened 
the  medium. 

Sitting  of  21st  November  1909. 

Conditions  as  on  13th  November  1909. 

Present. — M.  and  Mme.  Bisson,  Baron  Pigeard,  Dr  M.,  several  ladies 
and  the  author. 

Dr  M.  joined  me  in  examining  the  cabinet  and  the  medium.  The 
red  light  was,  on  this  day,  a  little  darker  than  usual. 

After  about  forty-five  minutes  a  white  strip,  about  a  yard  high, 
was  first  seen  at  the  lower  gap  in  the  curtains,  and  then  a  white-clad 
figure. 

Then,  at  the  right  side  of  the  curtain,  an  apparition  was  seen,  obviously 
taller  than  the  medium,  which  put  out  a  rather  voluminous  head 
seemingly  wrapped  up  in  veils.  Several  beginnings  or  attempts  at 
materialisations  were  seen,  masses  of  fabric  of  a  cloudy  or  veil-like 
consistency  and  light  grey  in  colour.  These  were  seen  several  times, 
and  once  a  long  moving  strip  of  white  below,  as  if  a  hand  had  imparted 
a  wavy  motion  to  the  veil. 

We  also  saw  the  same  white-clad  female  figure  with  turban  as 
in  the  previous  sittings. 

Eva  herself  is  not  clear  as  regards  the  degree  of  development  of 
visibility  of  these  structures.  Often  she  opened  the  curtains  and 
said  that  the  creation  was  complete,  when  those  present  could  see 
no  change  either  in  the  cabinet  or  in  the  medium.  We  may  here  have 
to  deal  with  incomplete  stages  of  development  of  the  supposed  process 
of  materialisation  which  the  medium  passes  through,  and  feels  in  her 
own  body.     But  this  process  requires  a  certain  increase  or  change. 

SITTINGS   OF   NOVEMBER   1909  47 

in  order  to  become  visible  to  the  observer.     Subsequent  examination 
negative. 

Sitting  of  25th  November  1909. 

Present. — M.  and  Mme.  Alex.  Bisson,  M.  and  Mme.  Andre  Bisson, 
Frau  von  H.,  Messrs  D.,  L.,  and  Chevreuil,  also  Baron  Pigeard, 
with  his  wife  and  the  author. 

The  illumination  was  brighter  than  before,  since  two  electric  bulbs 
with  red  glass  were  attached  to  the  ceiling  chandelier  (about  twenty 
candle-power).  The  increased  light  enabled  us  to  see  details  which 
could  not  be  observed  before. 

A  photographic  camera  was  placed  in  front  of  the  chimney,  and 
beside  it  a  paper  cylinder  about  a  yard  high  and  half  a  yard  wide  to 
catch  the  magnesium  vapour. 

Hypnotisation  by  Baron  Pigeard,  who  sat  in  front  of  the  curtain. 
I  sat  immediately  behind  him  at  the  best  distance  to  enable  me  to 
observe  what  happened  at  the  opening  of  the  curtains.  When  the 
observer  is  too  close  it  is  impossible,  if  whole  figures  appear,  to  survey 
all  the  details  in  the  short  time  of  only  a  few  seconds. 

The  medium  before  the  sitting  felt  nervous  and  tired.  Instructions 
about  the  behaviour  of  those  present  were  given  by  the  hypnotised 
medium  in  a  whisper.  These  instructions  were  partly  answers  to  the 
questions  of  Mme.  Bisson  and  Baron  Pigeard  and  partly  independent 
statements. 

Thus  the  question  is  always  put,  whether  there  is  sufficient  power 
to  produce  the  desired  manifestations,  whether  the  circle  is  to  sing 
or  to  form  a  chain,  or  whether  the  sitting  is  to  be  closed.  Several 
times  during  the  sitting  the  medium  calls  Baron  Pigeard,  and  some- 
times other  persons,  including  the  author,  into  the  cabinet,  and  gives 
them  her  hands  for  a  short  time,  as  if  she  could,  from  this  contact, 
derive  power  for  the  generation  of  the  phenomena.  As  soon  as  Eva 
feels  that  the  phenomena  are  about  to  take  place,  she  asks  the  circle 
to  sing.  In  quite  a  similar  manner  Eusapia  usually  asked  those  present 
to  talk  (parlare).  The  kind,  character,  and  language  of  the  songs  are 
immaterial.  Hymns  or  slow  chants  are  as  welcome  as  the  Marseillaise, 
or  tunes  from  Carmen.  It  is  also  immaterial  whether  or  not  the  singing 
is  in  tune  or  in  time. 

We  must  here  take  into  account  that  a  strained  expectation  and 
an  attention,  too  vividly  concentrated  upon  the  beginning  of  the  pheno- 
mena may,  according  to  the  spiritistic  view,  interfere  with  the  necessary 
psychic  tuning  of  the  medium.  It  is  also  possible  that  the  fact  of 
those  present  being  occupied  with  an  activity  of  the  vocal  organs 
perceptible  to  the  medium,  has  a  soothing  effect  upon  the  latter.  A 
short-sighted  scepticism,  on  the  other  hand,  only  sees  in  this  a  diversion 
of  the  attention  necessary  for  conjuring  tricks. 

From  the  beginning  of  the  sitting,  about  twenty  minutes  elapsed 
before  the  first  phenomena  were  seen.  The  curtain  was  drawn  open 
from  within  (by  Eva's  feet  ?)  and  remained  open  for  the  whole  duration 

48  PHENOMENA    OF    MATERIALISATION 

of  the  ensuing  phenomena,  so  as  to  form  a  triangular  opening  narrowing 
towards  the  top,  through  which  the  medium  (in  the  trance  condition), 
and  the  occurrences  themselves  could  be  fairly  well  observed  in  a  good 
illumination. 

The  hands  rested  on  the  medium's  knees  and  remained  visible 
during  the  manifestations.  Eva's  head  was  bent  towards  one  side  and 
almost  disappeared  in  the  darkness.  The  hems  of  the  curtains  touched 
the  knees  of  the  medium  from  the  outside. 

Without  any  change  in  the  position  of  the  hands  or  the  curtain,  we 
saw  first  at  the  medium's  left  side,  above  her  left  hand,  an  illumination 
of  the  curtain  at  the  height  of  about  a  foot  and  a  half.  This  resembled 
a  bright  phosphorescent  strip,  which,  however,  was  odourless.  Then 
out  of  this  there  appeared,  at  about  the  level  of  Eva's  head,  a  form- 
less mas^  of  a  light  grey  colour,  about  a  foot  in  vertical  height,  which 
disappeared  and  reappeared  without  a  change  in  the  position  of  the 
curtains  or  the  hands.  The  shape  appeared  at  first  vague  and  inde- 
finite, with  a  fluctuating  motion,  then  it  became  visibly  brighter  and 
more  solid,  until  it  changed  into  a  white  luminous  material,  like  a  heap 
of  the  finest  white  chiffon  veiling,  apparently  stretched  out  beyond 
the  curtain  by  a  hand  and  again  withdrawn.  Some  of  those  present 
thought  they  saw  a  small  female  hand  which  held  the  stuff.  In  spite 
of  the  most  accurate  observation  I  could  not  perceive  anything  of  this. 
The  mass  dissolved  before  our  eyes,  losing  first  its  solid  shape.  Finally 
we  onl}^  saw  a  light  strip,  which  ascended  from  the  quiescent  hand 
and  gave  the  impression  as  if  a  column  of  luminous  smoke  were  ascending 
from  it.  The  total  duration  of  this  remarkable  process  may  have 
been  thirty  to  sixty  seconds.  After  a  short  pause  some  indefinite 
structures  of  various  shapes  w'ere  seen,  which  condensed  to  luminous 
strips  and  balls,  moved  about  and  changed  their  shapes,  ascended  and 
descended,  disappeared  and  reappeared. 

The  strongest  impression  was  obtained  by  the  observers  when  the 
luminous  smoke,  proceeding  from  the  region  of  the  upper  part  of  the 
body  of  the  medium,  changed  into  a  long  white  band,  about  2  inches 
thick  and  about  16  inches  long,  which,  horizontally  above  the 
floor,  at  a  height  of  4|  feet,  joined  the  two  hems  of  the  open 
curtain,  hanging  parallel  to  the  floor.  If  a  comparison  is  allowable, 
which  perhaps  does  not  quite  apply)  we  might  compare  the  optical 
impression  of  this  structure  with  the  shape  of  a  bleached  human  thigh- 
bone. In  this  apparently  solid  form,  which  ascended  and  descended 
in  the  air  as  a  broad  w^hite  strip,  there  hung  a  bright  white  veil -like 
material  about  16  inches  square,  so  that  the  whole  apparition 
resembled  a  small  flag  held  horizontally.  Without  changing  the  posi- 
tion, this  form  ascended  to  a  height  of  about  6  feet,  then  descended, 
and  remained  twenty  seconds  before  it  disappeared.  The  optical 
phenomenon  filled  the  whole  opening  of  the  curtains.  The  medium's 
hands  lay  as  before  motionless  and  visible  on  her  knees. 

It  is  impossible  to  describe  this  process  as  it  was  shown  to  our  eyes. 
While  the  white  column,  condensed  from  amorphous  material,  some- 
times gave  the  impression  of  a  solid  body,  it  usually  appeared  to  stream 
through  the  cabinet  in  strips  like  a  white  creamy  substance,  some- 
times proceeding  in  a  straight  line,  sometimes  breaking  into  zigzags 

Fig.  3.     Drawing  from  report  of  sitting  of  17  May 

I9IO,    M/.DF,    BY    GaMPENRIEDER. 

Fig.  i.    Photograph  by  Mons.  Andr:£ 
BissoN  on  25  November,  1909. 

Fig.  2.     Enlargement  of  the  hand  of  Fig.  i. 

SITTINGS   OF  NOVEMBER   1909  49 

or  serpentine  waves.  Before  its  dissolution  it  became  thinner,  more 
colourless,  resembling  smoke,  and  then  disappeared,  usually  in  the 
direction  of  the  body  of  the  medium.  The  reddish  light  in  the  seance 
room  increased  the  attractiveness  of  this  interesting  play  of  colours, 
bathing  the  nebulous  and  half-liquid  or  solid  structures  in  a  pale  rose 
colour.  The  development  of  these  creations  took  the  form  of  an  emana- 
tion of  rays  and  streaks  from  the  body  of  the  medium  as  from  a  material 
radiation  of  energy,  which  however,  probably  influenced  by  uncon- 
scious volitional  impulses,  tended  in  its  form  towards  definite  representa- 
tions, finally  flowing  back  into  the  organism  (like  the  rigid  organic 
rays  described  by  Professor  Ochorowicz). 

In  the  last  successful  sitting  one  could  already  recognise  distinct 
attempts  to  produce  human  forms.  Thus,  in  this  sitting,  the  grey 
material  repeatedly  assumed  a  spherical  shape,  a  more  solid  white 
nucleus  formed  within  it,  in  size  and  shape  like  a  human  head,  while 
the  outer  parts  appeared  to  change  themselves  into  veils  and  textile 
fabrics. 

It  was  decided  to  attempt  a  photographic  flash-light  record 
with  the  consent  of  the  medium.  For  this  purpose  a  camera 
had  already  been  set  up  before  the  sitting,  opposite  the  curtain  near 
the  stove  behind  the  observers.  Behind  it  a  paper  cylinder  more 
than  a  yard  long  had  been  suspended  to  receive  the  magnesium  vapour. 

The  curtain  was  opened.  We  again  saw  before  us  a  figure  clothed 
in  a  long  white  flowing  veil  which  covered  the  face  (medium  ?).  The 
flash-light  was  ignited  (Figs.  1  and  2),  but,  at  the  same  moment,  the  paper 
cylinder  caught  fire,  and  it  appeared  as  if  the  flames  would  spread. 
A  panic  took  place  among  the  audience,  some  of  the  ladies  screamed 
with  fright,  and  fled.     But  we  succeeded  in  extinguishing  the  fire. 

With  a  cry  of  pain  the  medium  sank  back  into  the  chair  gasping 
convulsively.  Baron  Pigeard  at  once  entered  the  cabinet  to  soothe 
her,  but  the  white  clothing  and  veiling  had  disappeared.  The  medium 
had  fainted,  and  lay  in  the  chair  bleeding  from  the  nose,  and  the  sitting 
had  to  be  closed.  I  slowly  wakened  Eva  by  suggestion.  A  close 
examination  of  the  medium  and  the  cabinet  showed  nothing  suspicious. 
No  white  or  veil-like  materials  were  found. 

The  whole  fire  episode  was  the  work  of  a  few  seconds.  A  fraudulent 
medium  would  not  have  been  able  to  hide  the  necessary  masks  and 
clothing  during  this  unexpected  interruption  of  her  performance. 

On  awakening,  Eva  C.  was  obviously  exhausted,  and  showed  a 
trembling  of  the  arms.     Pulse  108.     Subsequent  control  negative. 

Hallucination  of  the  witnesses,  who  all  made  the  same  observations, 
is  excluded,  since  the  photographic  records  confirm  the  optical  impres- 
sions. A  better  illumination  and  a  longer  duration  of  the  materialised 
structures  rendered  a  more  exact  observation  possible  than  on  previous 
occasions. 

No  reasonable  grounds  for  the  supposition  of  fraud  by  the  medium 
can  be  found,  however  strictly  one  may  adhere  to  the  view  that  these 
unusual  occurrences  require  the  greatest  caution  and  scepticism. 

The  above  record  offers  perhaps  a  contribution  to  the  observation 
of  a  materialisation  in  the  nascent  state. 

The  picture  taken  on  the  26th  November  shows  the  head  of  the 

So  PHENOMENA    OF   MATERIALISATION 

medium,  who  had  obviously  risen  from  the  chair,  in  the  opening  of  the 
curtains.  A  long  veil,  or  an  obviously  very  transparent  soft  white 
material,  whose  threads  reminded  one  of  cashmere  wool,  falls  from  her 
head  to  her  knees.  On  Eva's  hair  on  the  right-hand  side  a  soft  vague 
and  sketchy  form  of  a  miniature  left  hand  (female),  with  a  first  finger 
pointing  upwards,  is  to  be  seen.  This  starts  from  a  sort  of  stalk  or 
band  quite  continuous  wdth  the  fabric,  as  shown  by  the  magnification 
of  the  photograph,  and  which  appears  to  be  formed  of  the  same  stuff 
as  the  veil.  With  the  help  of  an  artificial  hand-shape  brought  in  for 
this  purpose,  consisting  perhaps  of  cloth  or  paper,  which  then  would 
have  had  to  be  placed  on  the  hair  under  the  veil,  it  would  hardly  have 
been  possible  to  obtain  this  indefinite  shadowy  form  with  the  soft 
fluid  outline,  though  one  has  to  consider  a  possible  fault  in  the  focusing 
of  the  apparatus. 

Sittings  of  May  and  June  1910  in  Paris. 

Sitting  of  the  13th  May  1910. 

From  the  9th  December  1909  till  10th  May  1910  Eva  C.  had  gone 
to  the  Riviera,  and  had  made  no  mediumistic  experiments  during  this 
period.  The  resumption  of  the  sittings  coincided  with  the  time  of  my 
stay  in  Paris.  I  was  therefore  able  to  be  present  at  the  first  sitting 
after  her  arrival  at  the  Bissons'  house  on  the  13th  May  1910.  Though 
this  six  months'  cessation  was  favourable  to  the  recovery  of  the  medium, 
we  were  prepared  to  have  to  commence  from  the  beginning  until  Eva 
recovered  the  necessary  practice  in  the  production  of  the  phenomena. 

Present  at  the  Sitting. — M.  Paul  D.  (Bisson's  nephew),  M.  and  Mme. 
Bisson,  Baron  and  Baroness  Pigeard,  and  the  author. 

A  stereoscopic  apparatus  for  flash-light  photographs,  which  I  had 
brought  with  me,  was  put  up  before  the  sitting.  The  conditions, 
room  and  clothing  of  the  medium  were  exactly  the  same  as  at  previous 
sittings.  But  I  may  again  emphasise  that  before  and  after  every 
sitting  I  carefull}^  examined  the  whole  cabinet. 

The  complete  undressing  of  Eva  C.  took  place  regularly  in  the 
presence  of  Mme.  Bisson  and  the  other  female  witnesses. 

Costume  :  black  knitted  tights  and  black  dress  (no  shoes).  The 
dress  in  this  and  all  subsequent  sittings  was  sewn  up  to  the  tights, 
and  also  sewn  up  at  the  neck  and  at  the  sleeves,  so  that  the  body  could 
not  be  touched  without  tearing  the  clothing. 

Before  each  of  the  sittings  now  to  be  described,  the  author  examined 
the  medium's  hair,  nose,  ears,  mouth,  teeth,  arm-pits,  feet,  hands 
and  finger-nails.  During  the  whole  following  series  of  sittings  I  did 
not  find  anything  suspicious  either  before  or  after  the  sittings,  so  that 
the  objection  that  the  medium  might  have  concealed  small  packets 
of  veiling,  etc.,  appears  unfounded. 

SITTINGS   OF  MAY  AND   JUNE   1910   IN   PARIS  51 

The  illumination  consisted  regularly  of  three  ten  candle-power 
electric  lamps,  under  red  glass.  With  this  illumination  large  type 
could  be  easily  read. 

In  these  and  the  following  sittings  the  hypnotising  was  performed 
by  Mme.  Bisson  herself.  On  the  13th  of  May  this  was  done  in  my 
presence  at  9.40  p.m.,  after  Eva  had  taken  her  seat  in  the  cabinet. 
Only  after  the  trance-like  condition  had  set  in  did  the  others  enter 
the  room. 

After  about  forty-five  minutes  we  saw  between  the  curtains  a  broad, 
bright,  whitish  wisp,  proceeding  from  the  mouth  of  the  medium,  like 
a  broad  band  across  her  body  and  ending  at  the  knees.  Its  length 
was  30  to  34  inches.  During  this  phenomena  her  hands  rested 
on  her  knees,  and  were  distinctly  visible,  as  was  her  head  resting  on 
the  back  of  the  chair.  This  apparition  then  disappeared.  We  then 
saw  several  times  some  grey  or  whitish  flakes,  clouds  or  wisps  of  an 
indefinite  and  varying  shape.  The  nearest  red  electric  lamp  was  then 
extinguished  in  order  to  increase  the  phenomena,  but  the  brightness 
appeared  to  be  nearly  the  same  with  the  remaining  two  lamps. 

For  me,  the  only  remarkable  phenomenon  in  the  second  part  of 
the  sitting  was  the  sudden  appearance  of  a  female  form,  wrapped  in 
light  grey  veiling,  whose  head,  as  I  noticed  clearly,  was  swathed  as  in 
a  turban  in  a  cloth  of  the  same  colour.  The  figure  stood  there  and 
opened  the  curtains  for  not  more  than  one  or  two  seconds.  I  had 
the  impression  of  seeing  the  medium  wrapped  in  veils.  After  the 
disappearance  of  this  curious  picture  the  medium  made  several  attempts 
to  produce  similar  phenomena,  opened  the  curtain  several  times  and 
asked  if  we  did  not  see  anything.  But  those  present  during  these 
attempts  only  perceived  Eva  in  her  black  dress.  This  and  similar 
observations  suggest  the  conclusion  that  the  medium  herself  is  not 
quite  clear  concerning  the  condensation  process  in  her  teleplastic  action. 
She  may  feel  that  emanation  is  proceeding  from  her  body,  but  in  order 
to  become  visible  to  the  human  eye  the  process  of  condensation  of 
all  materialisations  must  have  advanced  to  a  certain  point.  It  seems 
not  always  possible  for  the  medium  to  recognise  this  point,  unless  the 
materialisation  is  rapidly  and  strongly  developed. 

The  phenomena  of  this  sitting  were  too  inconstant  and  too  feeble 
for  photographic  record.  Besides,  the  colour  of  the  veiling  was  of  a 
greyish  yellow,  or  whitish,  and  did  not  show  a  brilliant  white,  as  in 
the  previous  sittings.     The  sitting  was  closed  at  11.40  p.m. 

Sitting  of  the  17th  May  1910. 

Present. — Dr  V.  (Physician),  M.  and  Mme.  Bisson,  and  the  author. 

Commencement  at  9.30.  Illumination,  three  lamps.  Clothing  and 
examination  of  the  medium,  and  other  conditions,  as  on  the  13th  May. 
Hypnotisation  by  Mme.  Bisson.  This  time  the  phenomena  commenced 
at  once  (Fig.  3). 

The  medium  opens  the  curtain  and  lies  on  the  chair  in  a  passive 
trance.     Her  head  turns  sideways,  so  that  the  face  is  partly  shadowed 

52  PHENOMENA    OF    MATERIALISATION 

by  the  curtain.  The  hands  rest  on  her  knees  before  our  eyes,  and  are 
held  during  some  of  the  phenomena  by  my  colleague,  Dr  V.  (on  the 
left),  and  myself.  She  bends  the  head  back,  so  that  it  is  fully  illuminated. 
We  see  in  front  of  the  lower  half  of  her  face  a  cloudy  mass,  at  first  resem- 
bling a  grey  mist,  which  moves,  grows  and  condenses,  somewhat  re- 
sembling a  torn  handkerchief  of  fine  grey  tulle.  The  lower  hem 
was  torn,  and  several  small  pieces  and  strips  depended  from  it.  The 
image  dissolved.  We  attempted  a  flash-light  photograph,  but  the 
ignition  apparatus  failed.  The  medium  then  asked  me  to  enter  the 
cabinet.  Opening  the  curtain  I  knelt  on  the  floor  at  her  right-hand 
side,  so  that  my  head  was  exactly  at  the  height  of  her  own.  Both 
my  hands  held  her  right  hand,  while  her  left  held  the  curtain  on  that 
side.  Then  I  saw  immediately  in  front  of  my  eyes  a  large  striped, 
flocculent  substance,  which  seemed  to  issue  from  her  mouth,  while  she 
made  deep  respirations  and  convulsive  muscular  efforts.  It  grew 
and  condensed.  The  structure  may  have  been  2  or  3  inches  broad, 
and  16  to  20  inches  long.  I  approached  my  head  to  within  about 
6  or  8  inches,  in  order  to  observe  more  accurately,  and  saw  this  mass 
slowly  sink  with  an  inert  motion,  resembling  a  heap  of  the  finest 
striped  grey  veiling.  This  followed  every  motion  made  by  the 
medium's  head,  and  yet  appeared  to  detach  itself  from  it.  The 
structure  disappeared  behind  the  curtain.  Her  hands  had  not  changed 
their  position  during  the  whole  minute  that  this  occurrence  lasted. 

The  author  left  the  cabinet  and  resumed  his  place  outside  it.  The 
medium  rested  while  the  curtains  were  opened,  moving  her  head  deeper 
into  the  shadow,  but  her  hands  still  lay  upon  her  knees  and  were  motion- 
less. 

After  a  short  pause  she  exposed  her  head  under  the  same  condi- 
tions entirely  to  the  light.  To  our  astonishment  we  could  no  longer 
see  her  features,  for  her  whole  head  was  enveloped  in  a  large  veil-like 
cloud,  from  which  bright  fragments  and  strips  hung  down  upon  her 
breast  and  knees.  Before  our  eyes  this  structure  dissolved  like  a 
fog,  and  the  face  was  again  distinctly  seen.  During  the  last  pheno- 
menon her  hands  were  held,  Dr  V.  holding  her  right,  and  I  her  left. 
The  curtain  remained  equally  open  from  beginning  to  end.  Immediately 
after  the  disappearance  of  the  substance  I  examined  her  face,  her 
scalp,  her  hair,  etc.,  without  findmg  anything  by  means  of  which  this 
phenomenon  might  have  been  produced.  The  face  was  indeed  quite 
moist  as  if  with  mucus.  Her  hands  trembled  (hysterical  tremor). 
Her  muscles  showed  a  tendency  to  spasmodic  contraction. 

During  the  phenomena  she  groaned  and  trembled,  and  when  she 
was  awakened,  after  the  sitting  had  lasted  one  hour  and  a  half,  she 
was  very  exhausted. 

The  conditions  of  experiment  during  the  phenomena  described 
constitute  a  great  step  in  advance.  The  subsequent  control  was 
negative. 

Sitting  of  the  20th  May  1910. 
Negative.     Eva  was  indisposed.     Hot  and  stormy  weather. 

SITTINGS   OF  MAY  AND   JUNE   1910   IN   PARIS  53 

Sitting  of  the  25th  May  1910. 

Present. — M.  Chevreuil,  Mme.  Bisson,  and  the  author. 

Conditions  as  before,  except  that  to-day  four  red  electric  lamps 
were  lighted  instead  of  three.  But  soon,  at  the  request  of  the  medium, 
one  lamp  had  to  be  extinguished,  so  that  the  illumination  consisted 
of  three  electric  lamps. 

As  the  corporeal  examination  before  the  sitting  indicated,  Eva 
had  a  piece  of  wadding  in  her  right  ear.  She  had  just  been  treated 
by  a  dentist  for  toothache.  The  wadding  was  minutely  inspected 
and  put  back  in  the  ear.  After  the  hypnotisation  of  the  medium 
we  took  our  places  in  front  of  the  curtain,  Mme.  Bisson  in  the  centre, 
Chevreuil  on  her  left,  and  I  on  her  right,  and  so  we  waited  thirty-five 
or  forty  minutes  for  the  occurrence  of  the  first  phenomenon. 

Eva's  head  was  visible  through  the  open  curtain.     She  took  hold 
of  the  curtain  on  my  side  and  moved  it  to  and  fro,  as  if  she  wanted 
carefully  to  expose   a   structure   formed   in  the   darkness  tentatively 
to  the  red  rays.     But,  in  spite  of  the  obvious  efforts  of  the  medium, 
we  could  not  perceive  anything.     During  the  first  phenomenon  with 
open  curtains,  Chevreuil  held  her  right  hand  and  the  author  her  left 
hand.     Loud,  convulsive  coughing,  muscular  contractions  in  the  arms, 
deep  groaning  and  respiration.     At  first  a  nebulous,  flocculent  substance 
of   irregular   shape   appeared,    gradually   condensing,    and   descending 
slowly  from  her  chin  to  her  breast,  but  retaining  its  connection  with 
her  mouth.     On  the  left  outer  rim  of  this  mass  a  thread-like  projection 
of  about  4  inches  hung  down.     On  my  expressing  a  wish  to  see  more 
clearly  her  head,  which  was  bent  towards  the  left,  she  brought  it  into 
the  full  light  and  shook  it  several  times.     We  then  saw  that  the  grey 
structures  already  detached  from  her  head  had  sunk  into  her  lap.     They 
resembled  a  grey,  folded,  filmy  veil  of  a  wh'tish  colour.     In  attempting 
a  photograph  the  magnesium  ignition  failed.     As  I  went  back  to  it 
the  medium  rose  and  came  in  front  of  the  curtain.     The  mass  of  material 
adhered  to  her  dress.     She  then  sank  back  into  the  chair.     As  soon 
as  I  ha^  resumed  my  seat  she  repeated  the  process  above  described 
once  more.     Again  we  saw  the  emanation  of  a  smoky  filmy  substance 
produced  as  if  by  deep  breathing.     During  this  experiment  she  held 
the  sides  of  the  curtain  with  both  hands,  Avhich  were  perfectly  visible 
to  us.     Again  the  medium  rose  and  left  the  cabinet  and  stood  before 
me,  her  head  inclined  towards  the  left  and  holding  the   curtains  as 
if  for  support. 

Bringing  my  face  to  within  6  inches  of  her,  I  saw  that  a  flocculent 
whitish  grey  mass  floated  from  her  mouth  and  hung  down  over  her 
left  shoulder,  behind,  down  to  her  knees,  in  the  form  of  a  consistent 
substance.  The  structure  might  have  been  a  yard  long  and  some 
6  inches  wide,  and  resembled  a  large  muslin  veil  of  the  finest  texture. 
A  draught  would  set  it  in  motion.  Eva  remained  about  half  a  minute 
in  this  position.  I  expressed  a  wish  to  touch  the  fabric.  But  she 
said,  perhaps  out  of  nervousness  :  "  Not  yet,  later." 

While  she  returned  behind  the  curtain  and  sat  down,  her  hands 
remained  tightly  clenched  on  the  hems  of  the  curtain.     The  veil  dis- 

54  PHENOMENA    OF    MATERIALISATION 

appeared  from  my  eyes  in  the  darkness  of  the  cabinet,  as  if  dissolving 
into  vapour.  In  this  process,  therefore,  the  hands  did  not  play  any 
part. 

The  conditions  of  observation  of  the  whole  process  from  beginning 
to  end  were  rather  favourable. 

Before  the  last  experiment  of  this  sitting,  and  while  the  curtain 
was  open,  she  took  my  hands  in  hers,  and  asked  me  to  close  the  curtain 
as  quickly  as  possible  the  moment  she  let  go  my  hands. 

After  about  half  a  minute  she  let  me  go,  and  I  closed  the  curtain. 
Shortly  afterwards  she  quickly  opened  the  curtain  with  both  hands, 
and  we  saw  standing  before  us  a  female  figure,  covered  from  head  to 
foot  in  fine  white  veils,  the  ojiening  of  the  curtain  being  about  1 
foot.  After  hardly  one  second  the  curtain  was  again  closed,  and  then 
again  quickly  opened.  We  found  Eva  lying  on  her  chair,  and  the 
mysterious  veils  had  disappeared.  Obviously  the  apparition  was  the 
medium  herself  wrapped  in  those  veils  whose  production  and  dis- 
appearance we  cannot  explain. 

Eva  was  then  awakened  and  was  again  carefully  examined.  But 
neither  on  her  body,  nor  in  the  black  garment,  nor  in  the  cabinet, 
did  we  find  a  trace  of  that  strange  material  which  we  had  so  well 
observed. 

Sitting  of  the  27th  May  1910. 

Present. — M.  and  Mme.  Bisson,  M.  Chevreuil,  Drs  V.  and  D., 
and  the  author. 

Conditions  as  in  the  previous  sittings.  Eva  was  not  well  disposed 
to-day,  and  gave  a  sullen  impression.  The  only  phenomenon  in  this 
sitting  was  the  appearance  of  a  bright  vertical  wisp  about  a  foot 
long  and  2|  inches  wide  on  her  left  breast.  Face  and  hands 
were  visible  before  and  during  the  phenomenon  when  the  curtain  was 
opened.  The  phenomenon  disappeared  after  a  short  time,  and  the 
sitting  had  to  be  adjourned. 

Sitting  of  the  31st  May  1910. 
No  result. 

Sitting  of  the  1st  June  1910. 

Examination  as  usual.  Four  combs  were  found  in  the  hair,  all 
other  conditions  as  usual. 

Present. — Mme.  Bisson,  M.  Chevreuil,  and  the  author. 

Commencing  at  9  o'clock.     First  phenomenon,  9.40. 

Curtain  opened — head  and  hands  visible.  Eva  bends  forward 
and  opens  her  mouth.  An  amorphous  material  issues  from  it  to  a 
distance   of  about    1  inch   beyond   the  lips.     The  medium  first  grasps 

SITTINGS   OF   MAY  AND   JUNE   1910   IN   PARIS  55 

the  right  hand  of  Mme.  Bisson  and  guides  the  first  finger  to  her  mouth 
to  touch  the  substance.  Then  she  grasps  my  right  liand  and  makes 
the  same  experiment  with  me.  My  finger  touched  a  soHd  substance 
of  dark  or  nearly  black  colour.  The  sensation  of  touch  may  be  compared 
with  the  impression  obtained  by  touching  the  dark  skin  of  a  mush- 
room. During  the  touch  which  she  herself  made  with  my  finger,  she 
gave  a  strong  and  painful  shudder  and  trembled  violently,  and  it  seemed 
as  if  she  made  every  effort  to  overcome  her  physical  aversion  to  this 
touch.     The  mass  then  disappeared. 

After  a  short  pause  Eva  allowed  her  left  hand  to  be  held  by  Mme. 
Bisson,  and  her  right  hand  by  me.  In  this  situation  she  rose  from  her 
chair,  with  her  head  bent  towards  the  veil,  so  that  the  right-hand  curtain 
covered  her  face.  Again,  as  in  a  previous  sitting,  she  tentatively 
brought  her  head  into  the  red  illumination  until  at  last  she  exposed 
herself  to  the  light  completely.  As  before,  a  material  issues  from  her 
mouth,  which  at  first  appears  cloudy,  then  condenses  and  grows  to 
a  length  of  about  14  inches  with  a  diameter  of  3  or  4  inches. 
At  first  this  cloud,  resembling  cigarette  smoke,  remained  floating 
in  the  air  without  sinking.  This  time  also  she  approached  first  Mme. 
Bisson's  hand,  and  then  my  right  hand  to  this  structure,  in  order  to 
touch  it.  The  painful  shudder  was  repeated  at  the  touch.  Great 
nervousness  and  self-abnegation  were  evident.  In  touching  the  cloud 
I  had  the  sensation  as  if  I  destroyed  a  spider's  web  with  my  finger. 
She  then  drew  her  head  behind  the  curtain  and  the  phenomenon  dis- 
appeared. 

After  a  short  pause  for  rest  the  bright  light  appeared  on  her  left 
hip,  the  curtain  being  open  and  her  hands  resting  visibly  on  her  knees. 
Without  any  motion  of  the  medium,  this  bright  strip  became  broader 
and  longer,  assumed  the  shape  of  a  veil  bunched  up  and  partly  torn, 
and  finally  hung  down  over  her  feet.  To  obtain  a  photograph  I  returned 
to  the  apparatus  standing  3  yards  in  front  of  the  curtain,  and  at 
this  distance  I  could  still  distinctly  make  out  the  structure,  which 
hung  down  from  her  head  over  the  whole  of  her  left  side.  Eva  now 
rose  and  stood  in  front  of  the  curtain.  In  this  case,  also,  the  photo- 
graph was  a  failure.  The  phenomenon  dissolved  as  if  into  invisible 
vapour. 

During  the  next  apparition  the  luminosity  appeared  first  in  her 
lap  and  over  her  right  hip.  It  then  fell  like  a  wisp  over  her  right  knee, 
as  if  by  its  own  motion,  and  hung  down  to  her  ankle.  The  lower  end 
ended  in  a  zigzag  and  resembled  torn  drapery.  During  this  process 
I  held  the  medium's  right  hand,  and  Mme.  Bisson  the  left  hand.  The 
mouth  had  no  connection  with  the  fabric,  as  I  proved  by  putting  my 
finger  into  her  mouth.  In  these  circumstances  the  substance  showed 
an  independent  power  of  motion.  Having  first  hung  down  to  the 
feet,  it  then  crept  like  a  snake  slowly  over  the  knee  to  the  hip.  The 
luminosity  became  ever  smaller  and  the  veil  ever  shorter,  and-disappeared 
between  right  hip  and  shoulder. 

Towards  the  close  of  the  sitting  there  was  a  repetition  of  the  last 
phenomenon  of  the  sitting  of  the  25th  May. 

I  held  both  her  hands  in  mine.  She  requested  me  this  time  to 
close  the  curtains  as  quickly  as  possible  as  soon  as  she  released  me. 

56  PHENOMENA    OF    MATERIALISATION 

I  carefully  executed  her  wish,  and  was  about  to  sit  down  when  the 
curtain,  just  closed,  was  quickly  opened,  closed  again  as  quickly,  and 
then  opened  for  the  second  time. 

At  the  first  opening  a  female  form  wrapped  from  head  to  foot  in 
light  grey  veils  became  visible.  Although  the  optical  appearance 
only  lasted  one  second,  I  was  able  to  notice  that  the  veils  were  crossed 
over  the  head.  Behind  the  veil  there  was  a  female  face,  whose  features 
were,  however,  not  recognisable,  owing  to  the  shortness  of  the  exposure. 
At  the  second  opening  we  found  the  medium  reclining  quietly  on  her 
chair.  Not  a  trace  of  the  veiled  image  remained.  The  double  opening 
and  closing  of  the  curtain  had  hardly  taken  four  or  five  seconds.  In 
this  space  of  time  we  saw,  before  and  after  the  phenomenon,  the  medium 
dressed  in  black,  and,  in  between,  the  brightly  veiled  image  of  an 
upright  female  figure. 

The  medium  would  hardly  have  had  time  to  rise  from  the  rather 
low  chair,  i.e.,  from  a  half  reclining  position,  to  open  the  curtain  twice 
and  close  it  once.  But  that  she  should  also  have  been  able  in  this  short 
time  to  wrap  herself,  with  her  own  hands,  in  veils,  to  fasten  them 
to  her  hair,  and  to  make  them  disappear  again,  is  quite  out  of  the 
question.  Even  the  ablest  conjuror  could  not  bring  about  a  similar 
transformation  in  five  seconds  under  the  same  conditions.  Whether 
it  was  the  medium  which  here  appeared  in  veils,  or  whether  we  had 
here  to  deal  with  an  ectoplastic  projection  of  the  female  figure,  is  difficult 
to  decide.  After  all  his  practice  with  Eva  during  numerous  experi- 
ments the  author  is  sure  of  having  made  no  mistake  in  estimating  the 
time. 

The  sitting  closed  at  11.10,  with  a  final  control  of  Eva  C.  and  the 
cabinet,  without  anything  suspicious  being  discovered. 

Sitting  of  the  4th  June  1910. 

Present. — Baron  Pigeard,  with  his  wife,  Mme.  Bisson,  M.  Chevreuil, 

and  the  author. 

Commencement,  9.30  p.m. 

At  10  o'clock  I  held  the  left  hand  of  the  medium  an^  Mme.  Bisson 
the  right. 

Head  visible. 

Suddenly  the  right  wing  of  the  curtain  above  her  hand  was  illumi- 
nated from  behind,  as  if  a  light  were  upon  it.  Then  we  saw,  under 
the  hem  of  the  curtain,  a  white  mass  about  16  inches,  which  grew 
broader  below  and  then  vanished.  Then  the  veiled  figure  already 
referred  to  was  seen  again.  In  order  to  take  a  flash-light  photograph  I 
struck  a  match,  since  the  ignition  apparatus  did  not  work.  The  pheno- 
menon disappeared  immediately  before  the  eyes  of  those  present. 
Sitting  closed. 

Sitting  of  the  6th  June  1910. 

Negative. 

OBSERVATIONS   IN   BIARRITZ  57 

Sitting  of  the  10th  June  1910. 
Present. — M.  Chevreuil,  Mme.  Bisson,  Mme.  M.  M.,  and  the  author. 

This  time  Eva  was  indisposed  (menses)  and  suffering  from  a  cold, 
and  only  held  the  sitting  to  oblige  the  author,  since  he  departed  the 
next  day.  Otherwise  the  sitting  probabl}'^  would  not  have  taken 
place.  From  9.15  to  11.15  no  phenomena.  One  of  the  three  lamps 
was  then  extinguished,  in  order  to  make  it  easier  for  the  medium.  At 
last  came  the  appearance  of  a  light -coloured  veil-like  fabric,  about 
20  inches  long,  and  issuing  from  the  mouth.  This  developed  with 
the  curtain  open,  and  while  I  held  both  her  hands.  The  fabric  lay  like 
a  large  rag  on  her  left  shoulder  and  breast.  This  formation  was  pre- 
ceded by  violent  efforts  by  the  medium,  who  wished  to  produce  some- 
thing at  any  cost,  and  was  accompanied  by  deep  respirations,  hysterical 
sobs  and  convulsive  contractions  of  the  arms. 

The  material  only  remained  visible  for  a  short  time,  and  then  dis- 
appeared. 

The  experiment  was  instructive,  inasmuch  as  it  showed  that,  even 
under  very  unfavourable  conditions,  a  special  effort  of  will  on  the 
part  of  the  medium,  combined  with  perseverance  on  the  part  of  the 
sitters,  may  have  some  influence  upon  the  result. 

The  medium  lost  a  considerable  quantity  of  blood  during  the  evening  ; 
she  also  coughed  a  good  deal,  was  feverish,  fatigued,  and  hoarse.  Final 
control  negative. 

OBSERVATIONS   IN   BIARRITZ. 

The  sittings  held  after  my  departure  in  June  1910  did  not  yield 
any  essentially  new  results.  At  the  end  of  the  month  the  Bisson 
family  took  up  their  residence  in  Biarritz  for  the  whole  summer,  and 
Eva  C.  followed  them  in  the  middle  of  August. 

During  this  new  period  of  sitting  the  medium  was  hypnotised 
every  daj^  by  Mme.  Bisson  in  order  to  gain  a  suggestive  influence  upon 
the  development  of  the  powers  of  mediumship  and  the  formation 
of  the  phenomena.  The  psychic  condition  during  these  hypnoses 
is  identical  with  the  trance  of  the  sittings.  Self-contained,  it  includes 
all  memory  images  and  conceptions  relating  to  the  sittings.  The 
individual  consciousness  does  not  differ  from  the  waking  personality. 
It  is  always  Eva  C.  who  speaks,  answers,  and  gives  instructions  and 
explanations.  Never,  during  this  period  of  her  mediumistic  develop- 
ment, does  the  change  of  personality,  so  usual  in  spiritistic  circles, 
occur,  in  which  imaginary  individualities,  regarded  as  foreign,  speak 
or  write  through  the  medium.^ 

The  mental  contents  of  the  second  condition  are  not  remembered 

1  This  phase  of  mediumship  was  only  observed  several  years  later  with  Eva  C. 

58  PHENOMENA    OF    MATERIALISATION 

after  awakening,  though  the  whole  psychic  character  may  appear 
clearer  and  less  constrained.  The  kind  of  phenomena  observed  is  the 
same  as  that  found  by  me  during  the  next  Paris  sittings  to  be  described 
later. 

According  to  Mme.  Bisson  the  sojourn  in  a  sunny  climate  had  a 
favourable  influence  on  Eva's  mediumship,  inasmuch  as  negative  sittings 
hardly  ever  occurred.  Her  performances  became  stronger  and  prompter, 
and  commenced  to  adapt  themselves  to  the  wishes  of  the  circle. 

The  conditions  as  regards  red  illuminations  and  the  clothing  of 
the  medium  were  the  same  as  in  Paris.  The  phenomena  usually  occurred 
with  open  curtain.  The  hands  and  head  were  visible,  and  the  former 
were  often  held  by  those  present. 

In  the  sitting  of  the  30th  August,  at  which  the  oculist,  Dr  T.  B., 
was  present,  Mme.  Bisson  succeeded  for  the  first  time  in  drawing  the 
teleplasm,  or  fundamental  substance  of  materialisation,  outside  the 
region  of  the  curtain  and  observing  it  carefully.  Mme.  Bisson  writes 
on  this  subject  in  a  letter  of  2nd  September  1910  : 

"  Eva's  left  hand  rested  in  the  hands  of  Dr  B.,  who  sat  in  front 
of  her.  Her  right  was  held  in  both  my  hands.  The  curtain  was  fully 
opened.  Suddenly  I  felt  on  my  hands  a  cool  sticky  mass,  which  touched 
me.  I  took  hold  of  it  and  brought  it  carefully  outside  the  curtain, 
without  letting  go  Eva's  hand.  The  mass  lengthened  out  in  my  fingers 
and  hung  down  from  my  hand,  and  I  could  observe  it  for  one  or  two 
minutes.  But  while  I  continued  to  unravel  it  carefully  it  dissolved 
and  disappeared  in  my  hands.  It  is  very  difficult  to  describe  this 
substance.  I  had  the  impression  of  a  flat,  striped,  thread-like,  sticky, 
cool,  and  living  substance.  It  was  odourless,  and  had  a  light  grey  or 
whitish  colour.  IMy  fingers  remained  moist  from  the  touch.  The 
phenomenon  was  repeated  about  eight  times,  and  four  times  I  was 
able  to  take  hold  of  the  mass  and  show  it  to  Dr  B." 

In  the  sitting  of  the  2nd  September  this  interesting  experiment 
was  continued.     In  this  case  the  report  is  as  follows  : 

"  Curtains  wide  open.  Dr  B.  held  the  left  hand  of  the  medium. 
A  sort  of  veil  or  drapery  proceeding  from  Eva's  neck  hung  over  her 
left  arm  down  to  the  ground.  She  carefully  led  my  hands,  held  by 
her  left  hand,  towards  the  veil,  and  I  took  hold  of  it.  She  cried  out  ; 
'  That  hurts  me,  but  I  wish  it  all  the  same.'  I  drew  the  stuff  towards 
me.  It  was  quite  similar  to  the  mass  which  I  had  touched  on  the  30th 
August.  Again  the  same  sensation  of  cool,  moist,  living  threads. 
My  fingers  became  moist.  Finally  I  drew  the  piece  in  front  of  the  curtain 
and  formed  out  of  it  a  sort  of  veil,  by  spreading  it  out.  This  veil  covered 
Eva's  whole  left  side.  Eva  suffered  severely.  The  whole  fabric  of 
stuff  and  threads  was  reabsorbed  and  disappeared." 

Besides  the  phenomena  obtained  in  previous  sittings,  the  medium 
endeavoured,  in  this  series  of  sittings,  to  form  the  teleplasm  into  human 
shapes.  The  members  of  the  circle  desired,  for  instance,  a  hand,  a 
foot,  or  a  head,  and  also  sometimes  wished  for  the  form  to  appear  in 
a  given  place  near  the  medium.  These  experiments  only  partially 
succeeded,  and  the  forms  remained  imperfect.     Though  the  outlines 

OBSERVATIONS   IN   BIARRITZ  59 

of  a  hand  or  a  head  were  recognised,  they  were  not  fully  formed,  and  were 
extremely  fugitive.  Since  the  next  report  of  my  sittings  deals  ex- 
haustively with  this  class  of  occurrences,  any  further  details  in  this 
place  are  not  called  for. 

But  I  might  mention  that  Mme.  Bisson  had  a  sitting  with  Eva 
without  any  other  witnesses,  and  during  this  sitting  Eva  wore  nothing 
but  a  dressing-gown.  After  the  beginning  of  the  sitting  Mme.  Bisson 
persuaded  the  hypnotised  medium  to  open  the  dressing-gown,  and  thus 
had,  for  the  first  time,  an  occasion  to  observe  the  emanation  of  the 
teleplasm  from  the  bare  body  of  the  medium.  It  seemed  to  emerge 
primarily  from  the  bodily  orifices,  mouth,  teats,  and  genitals,  and  also 
from  the  hands  and  under  the  arm-pits.  The  emanation  had  a  smoke- 
like or  gaseous  character,  and  formed  clouds,  from  which  structures, 
like  veils  and  fabrics,  and  eventually  all  kinds  of  forms,  resembling 
human  limbs,  developed. 

After  the  return  from  Biarritz  Mme.  Bisson  received  Eva  C.  per- 
manently into  her  house,  where  she  was  treated  as  a  member  of  the 
family.  This  step  eliminated  the  danger  of  the  professional  exploita- 
tion of  her  mediumistic  power,  for  which  favourable  proposals  had 
come  from  various  quarters.  It  not  only  enabled  her  to  exercise  an 
absolute  control  of  the  3'oung  girl's  mode  of  life,  but  also  to  conduct 
lengthy  and  uninterrupted  observations  of  her  powers,  which  developed 
more  and  more. 

Sittings  of  October  and  November  1910  (Paris). 

Preparations. 

During  the  last  series  of  sittings  in  Paris,  the  dark  cabinet  was 
arranged  beside  a  window,  which  did  not  close  perfectly.  Since  Eva 
C,  was  occasionally  inconvenienced  by  the  draught,  Mme.  Bisson 
arranged  the  cabinet  on  the  opposite  side  of  the  room  and,  at  the  same 
time,  enlarged  it.  All  the  walls,  the  floor  and  the  roof  consisted  of 
black  lining,  sewn  together  by  machine,  in  such  a  way  that  the  inner 
space  showed  not  the  slightest  opening,  and  appeared  to  be  made  of 
one  piece.  I  may  here  mention  specially  that  the  cabinet  was  most 
minutely  examined  by  me,  before  and  after  every  sitting,  with  the  help 
of  an  electric  lamp.  There  was  not  the  slightest  opening  through 
which  one  could  put  a  finger.  Even  where  the  narrow  side  of  the 
wardrobe  touched  the  cabinet  there  was  a  wall  of  the  black  material. 
The  area  of  the  cabinet  was  larger  than  before.  Length  7  feet 
inside,  depth  4  feet.  Above,  it  was  entirely  closed  off  at  a  height 
of  7  feet  by  a  roof,  so  that  it  would  have  been  impossible  to  intro- 
duce objects  from  above.  The  lining  was  tacked  on  to  the  floor  and 
sewn  up  with  the  carpet.  The  curtain  was  made  of  the  same  black 
material  and  liung  on  rings  running  on  a  metal  rod  covered  with  a 
strip  of  lining.  There  was  no  connection  with  the  wardrobe,  the  con- 
tents of  which  I  examined.  There  was  no  double  bottom  or  secret 
passage.     There  was  no  access  to  the  interior  of  tlie  cabinet  except 

60 

PHENOMENA    OF   MATERIALISATION 

through  the  curtains.  Door  No.  2  led  into  the  passage  and  was  locked 
at  the  beginning  of  every  sitting.  Door  No.  1  led  into  an  adjoining 
room,  resembling  a  studio,  which  had  no  other  door. 

The  light  straw  armchair,  which  stood  in  the  cabinet,  had  a  rather 
high  back,  inclined  backwards,  and  arm-rests.  The  seat  sloped  down- 
wards behind,  and  was  fairly  long  and  comfortable,  the  lowest  point 
being  about  a  foot  from  the  floor.  This  easy  chair  was  also  covered 
with  black  lining,  and  was  thoroughly  examined  before  and  after 
every  sitting,  without,  however,  discovering  anything  suspicious. 

Seance  /^oo/t?  fr^?/??  0c/:/gf'O 

< — 7//-.: 

I 

X         ^  X 

^      6        ^ 

^    SearAs 
C/    >   ..... 

:    o   ''_C/?a/7c/e//er 

Co^ 

Ma^nes/u/n  app 

\ 

90 

/V//7a^iPa> 

Diagram  III. 

The  illumination  during  the  sittings  was  given  by  three  or  four  twenty 
candle-power  lamps  in  a  pendant  in  the  middle  of  the  ceiling.  Each 
of  these  lamps  was  contained  in  a  ruby  glass  globe,  as  used  in  the  develop- 
ment of  photographic  plates.  This  illumination  continued  during  the 
whole  of  the  sittings  of  this  series,  and  sufficed  for  reading  large  print 
and  for  taking  notes  during  the  sittings. 

Two  cameras  belonging  to  the  author,  one  of  which  was  a  stereo- 
scopic camera,  were  placed  by  him  near  the  window  (see  plan  of  the 

SITTINGS  OF  OCTOBER  AND  NOVEMBER  1910  (PARIS)     61 

room),  before  every  sitting.     The  red  light  permitted  us  to  leave  the 
camera  open  as  long  as  necessary  during  the  sittings. 
^-  '  The  slides  with  the  plates  (manufactured  by   Hauff  &    Lumiere) 
I  put  into  the  camera  myself  before  each  sitting,  and  I  removed  them 
myself  afterwards. 

For  the  flash-light  several  arrangements  were  tried  successively 
(igniting  rods,  matches,  fuses,  caps).  These  worked  quite  irregularly, 
and  were  apt  to  fail  at  the  critical  moment.  The  electric  ignition, 
on  the  other  hand,  turned  out  to  be  the  most  reliable  when  it  was  con- 
nected with  the  lighting  supply  by  means  of  a  plug  adapter.  A  pressure 
switch  held  in  the  hand,  with  flexible  cord  attached,  allowed  of  a  quicker 
action  of  the  apparatus  than  the  previous  arrangements.  Afterwards 
the  optical  impression  coidd  be  compared  with  the  photographic  result. 
As  soon  as  a  photograph  was  to  be  taken,  those  present  withdrew 
from  the  opening  of  the  curtain,  in  order  not  to  obstruct  the  picture. 

The  clothing  of  the  medium,  before  each  of  the  sittings  now  to 
be  described,  was  the  same  as  in  previous  experiments.  Eva  un- 
dressed completely  before  Mme.  Bisson  (if  requested,  also  in  the  presence 
of  other  lady  witnesses),  put  on  the  knitted  garment  already  described, 
which  reached  up  to  her  hips,  and  over  it,  after  very  careful  examina- 
tion, the  black  dress,  which  onl}'^  had  an  opening  in  the  neck.  On  several 
occasions  the  medium  allowed  us  to  examine  her  in  this  half-dressed 
condition  before  the  dress  was  sewn  up  in  our  presence  at  the  neck 
and  wrists,  and  sew^i  up  with  the  tricot  at  her  hips.  But,  even  after 
this,  she  allowed  us  to  make  sure  by  touch  that  no  materials  or  utensils 
were  concealed  between  the  dress  and  the  skin.  The  tricot  and  dress 
were  thin  enough  to  show  the  whole  superficial  anatomy  of  the  body 
through  the  light  fabric.  No  contact  with  the  skin  was  possible  without 
either  tearing  or  ripping  the  material. 

In  order  to  exclude  the  possibility  of  her  having  concealed  rolled- 
up  pieces  of  material  in  a  hollow  tooth,  in  her  cheeks,  in  the  external 
ear  passages,  or  in  her  nose,  I  made  her  breathe  before  every  sitting 
through  the  nose  (each  side  separately),  asked  her  to  open  her  mouth 
widely,  examined  her  cheeks,  external  ears  and  passages,  her  arm-pits 
and  the  felt  slippers  on  her  feet,  as  well  as  her  hair  and  scalp.  Often 
she  removed  the  combs  and  black  velvet  ribbon  from  her  coiffure, 
so  that  it  was  only  held  together  by  hairpins. 

Immediately  after  every  sitting  the  author  examined  all  the  seams 
of  the  dress,  the  hair,  and  dress,  and  body  surface  again,  without  ever 
discovering  any  suspicious  change  either  in  the  medium  or  in  her  dress, 
l"  This  examination  and  the  sewing  up  took  place  regularly  in  the 
seance  room.  Immediately  after  the  examination  Eva  entered  the 
cabinet,  sat  down  on  the  chair,  and  was  put  into  the  hypnotic  trance 
by  Mme.  Bisson,  by  touching  her  hands  and  fixing  her  eyes.  This 
lasted  barely  half  a  minute.  The  participators  were  always  allowed 
to  witness  this  process  in  the  cabinet.  Then  Mme.  Bisson  closed  the 
curtain  and  sat  down  on  chair  B  or  C.  The  chair  A  was  regularly 
occupied  by  the  author. 

After  the  hypnotisation  of  the  medium  the  white  electric  lamp 
was  extinguished,  the  red  illumination  having  been  already  switched  on. 

62  PHENOMENA    OF    MATERIALISATION 

Sitting  of  the  19th  October  1910. 
No  result. 

Sitting  of  the  22nd  October  1910. 

Present. — Mme.  Bisson,  the  author  and  his  wife. 

Examination  and  dress  of  the  medium,  and  examination  of  the 
cabinet  as  usual.  Illumination  :  three  red  lamps.  Chair  A  occupied 
by  the  author,  Chair  B  by  Mme.  Bisson,  Chair  C  by  the  author's  wife 
(see  Diagram). 

Commencement,  9  p.m. 

The  author  sat  barely  1  yard  away  from  the  medium,  and  could 
follow  the  phenomena  even  at  a  closer  range.  Very  soon  after  the 
beginning  of  the  sitting  Eva  opened  the  curtain  with  her  hand,  so 
that  her  whole  figure  became  visible,  but  specially  her  knees  and  hands. 
We  saw  on  the  left  some  grey  patches,  hardly  distinguishable  from 
the, black  background,  which  gradually  grew  brighter  and  denser.  Sud- 
denly we  saw  about  16  inches  above  her  left  hand,  which  rested 
quietly  by  the  open  curtain,  a  shape  having  the  outline  of  a  human 
hand.  This  showed  itself,  disappeared  and  reappeared,  remaining 
visible  hardly  more  than  a  second,  and  reappeared  again  and  again. 
I  put  forward  my  open  right  hand,  and  it  was  several  times  in  succession 
touched,  as  by  a  blow  from  the  hand-shaped  body  which  was  visible 
at  the  same  time.  Several  times  it  passed  over  my  face,  from  right  to 
left,  and  I  had  the  sensation  of  being  touched  by  a  strongly  developed, 
and  rather  large,  cool  and  moist  male  hand.  My  forehead  after  this 
occurrence  was  moistened  as  if  by  a  sponge. 

While  the  hand,  apparently  suspended  in  mid-air,  and  having  the 
tips  of  its  fingers  directed  rather  towards  the  medium,  was  producing 
these  effects,  Eva's  hands  remained  steadily  visible  and  did  not  stir 
from  her  knees. 

Just  then  we  suddenly  saw  on  the  floor  outside  the  curtain,  opposite 
the  chair  C,  the  appearance  of  a  bright  patch  where  the  curtain  touched 
the  floor,  15  or  20  inches  away  from  the  left  foot  of  the  medium 
(Fig.  4).  On  looking  closer  we  had  the  impression  that  it  was  the  limb 
of  a  living  being  (hand  or  foot)  which  emerged  from  the  curtain.  The 
shape  was  fiat,  about  3  inches  long,  and  of  a  bright  pink  colour, 
and  most  closely  resembled  the  four  fingers  of  a  left  male  hand,  lying 
on  the  floor,  with  only  the  upper  two  joints  of  the  finger  showing.  I 
knelt  down,  and  made  sure,  at  the  same  instant,  with  my  hand,  that 
both  the  medium's  feet  were  in  her  slippers  and  had  not  changed  their 
position.  Her  hands  lay  on  her  knees.  In  about  half  a  minute  this 
phenomenon  disappeared. 

Probably  this  was  the  same  half-developed  limb  which  had  touched 

me.     I  could   not  perceive  any  finger-nails  or  any  other  details.     The 

resemblance  to  a  hand  was  only  in  bulk  and  outline.      Its  motions 

and  the  sensations  of  contact  produced  by  it  had  an  animal  character. 

In  this  sittmg  we  again  repeatedly  saw,  in  various  places  and  usually 

SITTINGS  OF  OCTOBER  AND  NOVEMBER  1910  (PARIS)     63 

joined  in  some  way  to  the  body  of  the  medium,  fabrics,  resembling 
veils  or  clouds,  in  the  form  of  delicate  strips,  threads,  and  fragments, 
and  having  a  motion  of  their  own.  The  medium's  head  was  some- 
times inclined  towards  the  left,  and  in  the  shadow  of  the  curtain,  and, 
therefore,  as  a  rule,  invisible.  But  the  manner  of  production  was 
obviously  the  same  as  in  previous  sittings.  During  the  preparation 
or  development  of  the  phenomena  the  medium  groaned,  gasped  or 
whined  softly,  and  one  had  the  impression  of  a  strong  bodily  exertion. 
Once  Eva  gave  me  both  her  hands  during  the  development  of  these 
remarkable  structures.  At  that  moment  a  narrow  luminous  delicate 
ribbon,  of  some  sort  of  veiling  stuff,  an  inch  or  two  wide,  released 
itself  from  her  lap,  and  appeared  to  connect  both  her  hands  from  one 
thumb  to  the  other.  It  only  remained  visible  for  a  few  seconds,  and 
disappeared  before  my  eyes,  without  her  having  released  my  hands  from 
hers. 

Eva  wished  to  be  hypnotised.  Mme.  Bisson  entered  the  cabinet, 
placed  her  hand  on  her  head,  and  encouraged  the  medium  by  suggestion. 
As  she  came  out,  some  greyish  fragments  of  the  consistency  of  spider 
webs  were  found  on  the  front  of  her  dress  and  on  her  hair,  but  in  a 
few  seconds  these  disappeared,  as  if  destroyed  by  the  light.  During 
the  development  of  these;,  apparently  textile  aggregates,  I  took  the 
liberty  of  putting  my  headj^in  between  the  open  curtains  to  see  what 
was  happening  there.  Once  I ;  saw  a  greyish  white  cloudy  column 
proceeding  from  her  left  upper|arm,  and,  later,  from  her  right  upper 
arm.  It  was  about  20  inches  long  and  2  or  3  inches  thick,  and  at 
the  upper  end  there  was  the  form  of  a  small  female  hand,  endoAved 
with  a  motion  of  its  own,  and  with  its  broad  side  towards  us.  This 
hand  executed  graceful  and  beckoning  motions,  while  the  vapour  column 
moved  to  and  fro,  as  if  keeping  time  with  it. 

Both  the  medium's  hands  lay  quietly  before  us  on  her  knees,  fully 
illumined  by  the  red  light.  Her  head  reclined  on  the  back  of  the  chair. 
The  same  phenomenon  was  repeated  on  the  right-hand  side.  We 
could  not  see  whether  the  palm  or  the  back  of  the  hand-shaped  body 
was  turned  towards  us,  neither  could  we  see  any  details  in  the  design 
of  the  hand. 

The  same  shape  also  appeared  to  execute  beating  and  waving 
motions  with  something  resembling  a  strip  of  muslin.  This  strip, 
in  the  course  of  its  movement,  became  visible  in  front  of  the  medium, 
and  on  one  occasion  touched  my  face  (Fig.  5).  * 

I  also  perceived  a  white  patch  in  her  lap  resembling  a  strip  of  muslin 
bunched  up.  This  disappeared  rapidly  without  any  perceptible  aid 
from  her  hand.  For  the  first  time  the  author  could,  during  this  sitting, 
witness  attempts  at  the  formation  of  heads.  But  the  optical  impressions 
described  in  what  follows  were  so  swift,  lasting  barely  a  second,  that 
the  recognition  of  details  appeared  hardly  possible,  in  spite  of  the 
closest  attention.  In  this  and  the  following  sittings  the  forms  resem- 
bling heads  were  shown  mostly  near  the  curtain  on  the  medium's  left, 
i.e.,  in  front  of  the  medium,  about  30  inches  away  from  her  head, 
and  at  the  level  of  the  head  of  a  man  of  medium  height  standing 
upright.  At  first  they  were  only  fragments  of  heads,  and  partial  forma- 
tions,  in  which  certain  lines  and  forms,  resembling  faces,   could  be 

64  PHENOMENA    OF    MATERIALISATION 

clearly  recognised,  while  the  rest  appeared  to  be  a  dark  undeveloped 
mass.  Thus,  I  saw  in  this  sitting  a  face  looking  upwards,  in  which 
I  could  recognise  the  bridge  of  the  nose,  the  forehead,  the  hair  and  a 
rough  outline  of  the  head.  A  broad  band  surrounded  the  forehead. 
Owing  to  the  fugitiveness  of  the  impression,  eyes  and  other  details 
could  not  be  recognised.  The  medium,  of  course,  remained  visibly  seated 
on  her  chair  during  these  phenomena. 

Since  the  curtain  appeared  to  be  inflated  on  Eva's  left  side,  I  again 
inserted  my  head  in  the  cabinet.  To  my  greatest  astonishment  I 
then  saw,  on  my  right,  behind  the  curtain,  and  as  far  as  I  could  see 
suspended  in  mid-air,  a  completely  developed  female  bust,  with 
its  head,  neck  and  breast  completely  swathed  in  veils.  This  was 
at  the  height  of  a  person  standing  upright,  while  on  my  left,  tangible 
and  fully  illuminated,  the  medium's  whole  body  lay  stretched  in  the 
chair.  The  features  of  the  apparition  could  not  be  recognised  on 
account  of  the  veiling.  This  appearance  lasted  about  four  seconds, 
and  was  clear,  beyond  all  doubt,  and  most  convincing. 

The  sitting  lasted  from  9.15  till  11.30. 

The  closest  examination  of  the  medium  and  cabinet  after  the  mediun 
awoke,  and  before  she  left  the  room,  yielded  no  result. 

Sitting  of  the  25th  October  1910. 

Present — Mme.  Bisson,  her  daughter-in-law,  her  two  sons,  and  the 

author  and  his  wife. 

Time— ^.15  till  11.30. 

All  conditions  as  on  22nd  October. 

Very  soon  after  the  beginning  of  the  sitting  Eva  opened  the  curtain 
so  that  her  hands  and  body  could  be  seen.  Her  head  appeared  as 
a  bright  patch,  which  then  grew  gradually  darker.  I  had  the  impression 
as  if  a  grey  misty  veil  was  covering  her  face,  and  that  it  could,  at  last, 
be  seen  by  the  eye  as  a  cloudy  drapery  falling  over  her  chest  and 
becoming  more  and  more  dense.  This  remarkable  appearance  seemed 
again  to  proceed  from  her  organs  of  respiration,  and  ended  in  a  sudden 
transformation  of  the  fabric  into  a  bright  pink  strip,  resembling  a 
veil,  and  extending  from  her  mouth  to  the  thumb  of  her  right  hand, 
with  a  thickness  of  about  2  inches.  This  appearance  developed 
without  any  perceptible  motion  of  the  hands,  which  were  resting  on  her 
knees  before  our  eyes,  while  her  head  was  inclined  to  the  right.  The 
bright  band  remained  visible  for  about  half  a  minute,  and  disappeared 
quickly,  like  an  electric  light  when  it  is  switched  off. 

The  same  process  was  repeated  on  the  left  side,  the  band  joining 
her  face  with  her  left  hand  and  appearing  rather  longer  and  more 
curved. 

After  this  phenomenon  had  disappeared,  we  saw  vague  and  inde- 
finite forms,  clouds  and  strips  as  they  appear  in  nearly  every  sitting, 
which  seem  to  furnish  the  elementary  substance  for  the  morphogenetic 
work.  At  least  they  represent  a  regular  precursor  for  more  distinctly 
marked  outlines  and  plastic  forms  resembling  human  limbs  (Fig.  6). 

o  ^ 

w 

. 

« 

K 

a 

« 

e3 

w 

o 

H 

H 

^K 

U 

<;u 

a  . 
a:  o 
o  « 

H  o 

< 

l-H 

K 

a> 

IT 

w 

O 

H 

M 

O 

(4 

K 

B 

a<  o 

<o 

'riA 

SITTINGS  OF  OCTOBER  AND  NOVEMBER  1910  (PARIS)     65 

The  next  observation  took  place  under  even  more  stringent  con- 
ditions. The  medium  placed,  for  purposes  of  control,  her  left  hand 
in  my  right  hand,  and  her  right  in  my  wife's  right  hand.  Thus  both 
hands  were  held  and  were  visible  in  front  of  the  curtain.  She  gripped 
the  curtain  with  the  fingers  of  the  hand  held  by  me,  as  if  wishing  to 
shield  the  impending  creation  from  a  too  intense  illumination.  In 
these  circumstances  we  saw  on  her  left  bare  forearm  between  the  wrist 
and  the  sleeve  two  completely  formed  hands  lying  on  her  forearm 
at  right  angles  to  it  and  resembling  a  woman's  or  child's  fists.  The 
knuckles,  and  the  furrow  between  the  fingers,  were  clearly  recognis- 
able, even  at  the  first  impression.  The  skin  appeared  a  delicate  pink 
in  the  red  light  of  the  room.  Several  times  the  medium  exposed  this 
plastic  product  to  the  light  by  the  motion  of  her  forearm,  but  never 
for  more  than  a  second,  so  that  further  observation  of  detail  was  not 
possible.  This  phenomenon  also  disappeared  in  the  darkness  of  the 
curtain  without  any  alteration  in  the  control  of  the  medium's  hands. 
I  now  brought  my  left  hand  to  the  place  where  the  fists  had  been  visible, 
while  my  right  hand  still  clasped  Eva's  left,  and  her  right  was  held 
by  my  wife,  and  I  requested  to  be  touched.  As  quick  as  lightning 
a  hand  and  forearm  emerged  from  the  curtain  at  the  place  indicated 
and  touched  the  palm  of  my  left  hand.  The  touch  was  cool  and  moist 
and  gave  an  impression  as  if  I  had  been  touched  by  the  fist  of  a  child, 
or  the  healed  amputation  stump  of  a  child's  arm.  It  lasted  hardly 
half  a  second.  This  appearance  seems  very  remarkable,  especially 
as  two  senses  were  engaged  in  the  control  of  the  medium  and  the  observa- 
tion of  the  phenomenon.  The  opening  of  the  curtain,  at  a  height 
of  about  50  inches  from  the  floor,  was  about  28  inches. 

We  must  add  that  it  was  repeatedly  and  very  emphatically  suggested 
to  the  medium  by  Mme.  Bisson  that  she  should  form  a  hand.  After 
the  attempt  at  contact  just  described,  Mme.  Bisson,  at  my  request, 
particularised  the  suggestion  in  the  sense  that  a  hand  should  become 
visible  in  the  medium's  lap  between  her  two  hands. 

Meanwhile  the  lady  of  the  house  held  the  medium's  hands,  which 
had  a  soothing  effect  upon  the  latter.  On  one  occasion  we  saw  some- 
thing resembling  a  small  piece  of  a  dark  grey  veil  proceeding  from 
the  arm  of  the  medium,  covering  the  back  of  Mme.  Bisson's  hand 
and  hanging  down  from  it  in  the  form  of  a  strip  8  inches  long.  After 
a  few  seconds  this  structure  disappeared  before  our  eyes. 

The  curtain  then  closed  further,  so  that  we  could  no  longer  see  the 
medium's  left  arm.  Again  I  endeavoured  to  surprise  her  in  her  work 
of  preparation  by  putting  my  head  into  the  cabinet.  To  my  greatest 
surprise  I  now  saw,  not  two,  but  three  forearms  lying  in  her  lap.  The 
third  arm,  of  a  pink  colour,  had  developed  from  the  medium's  left 
elbow  outwards,  was  smaller  than  a  child's  arm,  vague  and  trans- 
parent, and  somewhat  resembled  a  child's  hand. 

The  suggestion  that  a  hand  should  form  between  the  medium's 
hands  was  repeated,  although  the  appearance  just  described  should 
perhaps  have  been  interpreted  in  that  sense. 

What  follows  happened,  however,  under  conditions  less  open  to 
objection,  inasmuch  as  her  hands  from  beginning  to  end  held  the  hems 
of  the  curtains,  and  were  motionless  and  always  visible.     A  bright, 

£ 

66  PHENOMENA    OF    MATERIALISATION 

white  patch,  appearing  red  in  the  red  illumination,  and  of  consider- 
able size,  was  formed  in  her  lap,  and  appeared  to  consist  of  a  moving 
and  living  material  resembling  an  organic  substance.  From  this,  material, 
elongations,  resembling  pseudopods,  originated  with  a  flowing  motion, 
which  soon  assumed  the  form  of  the  fingers  of  a  skeleton  hand.  Finally 
the  form,  in  its  outline,  completely  resembled  a  white,  transparent 
hand,  in  which,  however,  all  finer  details  were  lacking.  One  might 
perhaps  produce  a  similar  impression  with  a  hand  cut  out  of  white  paper. 

I  pressed  the  electric  button  in  order  to  photograph  the  three  hands, 
but  the  current  only  acted  at  the  fourth  pressure.  By  that  time  the 
form  of  the  hand  had  already  faded,  and  I  only  succeeded  in  photo- 
graphing the  white  material  in  her  lap  (Fig.  7). 

In  any  case  the  experiment  is  remarkable  enough.  The  independent 
mobility  of  the  aggregate,  termed  teleplasm,  the  clear  endeavour 
to  carry  out  our  suggestion,  and  the  production  of  a  white  form  in  the 
rough  outline  of  a  left  hand,  i.e.,  without  any  recognisable  aid  of  the 
medium's  hands,  which  are  always  visible, — in  a  word,  under  careful 
control,  are  the  elements  constituting  the  value  of  this  observation. 

The  stereoscopic  photograph  shows  the  medium  with  her  head  bent 
forward,  sitting  on  her  chair  in  the  black  dress.  One  sees  distinctly 
the  white  stitches  on  the  bodice  of  the  dress.  Both  hands  are  visible 
holding  the  open  curtain.  The  white  mass  is  lying  between  her  thighs, 
the  distant  part  of  it  reseinbling  a  white  cloth  bunched  up,  with  a 
projection  in  front  showing  the  shape  of  a  first  finger.  In  front 
of  this,  i.e.,  nearly  between  the  knees,  there  is  a  hemispherical  body 
fiat  at  the  top,  the  exterior  of  which  seen  in  the  stereoscope  appears 
to  be  striped.  On  the  enlargement  of  this  picture  the  stripes  appear 
to  project  parallel  rays,  which  are  visible  over  a  portion  of  the  black 
dress.  The  picture  here  reproduced  does  not  show  the  same  detail 
as  the  stereoscope. 

V  The  whole  thing  is  very  mysterious  and  unexplainable.  How 
should  Eva  be  able  to  introduce  a  spherical  solid  body,  which,  according 
to  the  picture,  must  be  at  least  6  inches  across,  into  the  sitting,  in 
spite  of  our  rigorous  examination  ? 

The  flash  of  the  magnesium  light  gave  a  violent  shock  to  Eva's 
nervous  system,  and,  at  the  same  time,  brought  about  the  total  dis- 
appearance of  the  materialisation  phenomena. 

When  Eva  was  to  be  awakened,  about  twenty  minutes  ensued  before 
she  regained  consciousness.  Pulse  100,  small,  and  barely  perceptible. 
Violent  hysterical  tremor  in  arms  and  legs,  which  only  ceased  after 
soothing  suggestion.  Traces  of  blood  in  mouth  and  nose.  Tendency 
towards  contraction  of  the  voluntary  muscles. 

The  structures  and  shapes  produced  by  the  medium  were  exposed 
to  the  light  and  to  our  observation,  rather  shyly  and  tentatively,  and 
with  evident  reluctance.  A  fright,  or  a  feeling  of  repugnance,  even 
a  fluctuation  in  the  emotional  state  of  the  medium,  seems  to  be  able 
to  destroy  the  teleplastic  structures  as  if  by  magic,  and  to  make  them 
invisible.  This  was  also  the  inducement  never  to  interfere,  or  to  disturb 
her,  hut  our  endeavours,  on  the  other  hand,  were  directed  towards  strength- 
ening the  courage  and  confidence  of  the  medium,  so  that  a  gradual  training 
and  adaptation  to  our  wishes  should  enable  her  better  to  differentiate  her 

SITTINGS  OF  OCTOBER  AND  NOVEMBER  1910  (PARIS)     67 

products,  to  make  them  sharper  and  more  plastic,  and  to  expose  them 
longer  to  the  light.  On  the  other  hand,  a  brusque  procedure  could  entirely 
destroy  any  possibility  of  observation.  That  is  why  we  had  to  resist 
the  temptation  to  seize  the  white  mass  and  to  hold  it  in  our  hands. 
The  following  night  Eva  slept  badly  and  felt  out  of  sorts  on  the  following 
day.  As  a  rule,  she  requires  two  days  to  overcome  the  nervous  exhaus- 
tion resulting  from  a  sitting. 

Sitting  of  the  28th  October  1910. 

Present. —  Mme.  Bisson,  the  author  and  his  wife. 
Time  of  Sitting.— 9.15  to  11.15. 
Conditions  as  on  22nd  October. 

The  curtains  remained  open  from  the  beginning  of  the  sitting. 
Since  one  of  the  flaps  overshadowed  the  head,  which  was  turned  to  the 
left,  and  reclined  upon  the  back  of  the  chair,  the  curtain  was  with- 
drawn further  at  the  desire  of  the  author.  The  medium's  head  was 
then  entirely  exposed  to  the  illumination.  I  brought  my  head  to 
within  16  inches  of  it,  in  order  to  be  able  to  observe  more  closely. 
The  features  and  the  colour  of  the  skin,  which  normally  appears  bright 
pink,  were  no  longer  recognisable.  A  veil  lay  on  the  face,  and  made 
it  unrecognisable,  as  if  the  whole  head  were  swathed  in  it. 

Then  there  appeared  the  bright  and  nearly  white  outline  of  a  hand 
lying  on  the  shoulder,  with  the  fingers  towards  the  front,  just  as  if 
a  person  standing  behind  the  chair  had  placed  a  hand  on  the  medium's 
shoulder.  The  shape,  which  from  the  formation  of  the  fingers  was 
evidently  a  left  hand,  appeared  flat,  and  of  a  white  colour.  The  optical 
impression  was  not  at  all  that  of  real  life  (Fig.  8). 

The  medium's  arms  rested  from  the  beginning  of  the  sittings  on 
her  knees,  so  that,  with  the  open  curtain,  they  were  always  controlled 
and  took  no  part  in  the  occurrences.  After  several  seconds  the  image 
disappeared,  and  the  same  process  of  development  commenced  on  the 
left  shoulder.  This  time  I  determined  the  period  of  visibility  with 
a  stop-watch.  The  structure  remained  visible  to  my  eye  exactly 
forty  seconds.  The  fingers  appeared  as  white  strips  of  slightly  vague 
outline  and  little  plasticity,  clearly  marked  off  from  each  other,  but 
without  any  detailed  structure.  Whether  it  was  a  right  or  a  left  hand 
could  not  be  clearly  distinguished  on  account  of  the  imperfect  develop- 
ment. 

Without  any  change  in  the  control,  the  long  veil-like  strip,  apparentlj^ 
proceeding  from  the  organs  of  respiration,  reappeared.  Since  the 
head  was  turned  towards  the  left,  a  part  of  this  was  seen  on  the 
left  shoulder,  whence  it  fell  to  the  ground  backwards,  so  that  it  was 
partly  covered  by  the  left  arm,  and  only  became  visible  again  at  the 
hip. 

There  followed  some  further  attempts  to  form  hands,  but  the  struc- 
tures disappeared  at  once,  and  appeared  to  have  an  insufficient  con- 
sistency. My  wish  that  the  hand  should  grasp  a  small  object  (an 
ivory  paper-knife)  remained  unfulfilled.     During  these  morjohogenetic 

68  PHENOMENA    OF    MATERIALISATION 

endeavours  I  was  able,  on  one  occasion,  to  verify  the  existence  of  a 
second  profile  beside  her  head  on  the  right,  so  that  both  profiles  became 
visible  side  by  side,  and  parallel  to  each  other.  I  quickly  put  my  head 
into  the  cabinet  to  see  more  clearly,  and  thought  I  observed  the  features 
of  an  old  woman.  The  whole  appearance  lasted  only  a  few  seconds. 
An  attempt  to  photograph  the  veil-like  mass  described  above  was  a 
failure,  because  one  of  the  ladies  covered  the  medium's  body  at  the 
moment  of  the  flash. 

Eva  had,  in  the  hypnotic  trance,  given  Mme.  Bisson  on  the  previous 
day  detailed  instructions  how  to  treat  her  after  the  flash-light  photo- 
graphs, which  always  produced  a  severe  nervous  shock.  She  demanded 
an  instant  closing  of  the  curtain,  the  silence  of  the  spectators  and 
a  period  of  rest.  On  carrying  out  these  instructions  the  present  sitting 
was  continued  with  success. 

This  time  there  appeared  between  the  curtains,  opened  to  the 
extent  of  15  to  20  inches,  and  high  above  the  medium's  hands,  a 
white  strip  of  fabric,  which  was  pulled  from  one  side  to  the  other,  as 
if  by  an  invisible  hand,  with  lightning  rapidity,  or  waved  with  a  beating 
or  zigzag  motion.  This  was  repeated  at  an  approximate  height  of 
5  feet  above  the  floor,  six  or  eight  tim.es,  and  towards  the  front 
of  the  cabinet,  while  Eva's  upper  body  lay  back  m  the  chair,  and 
was  approximately  3  feet  from  the  apparition,  and  her  hands  were 
visible  and  motionless.  I  then  requested  to  be  hit  in  the  face  with 
the  strip  of  material,  and  put  my  head  into  the  cabinet.  Suddenl)'^ 
I  felt  a  pretty  violent  blow,  as  of  a  wet  ball  of  stufi  about  the  size  of 
a  walnut.  It  appeared  to  be  attached  to  a  cord,  and  hit  my  left  eye  so 
that  it  watered.  The  eye  was  even  slightly  painful  after  the  sitting, 
and  the  conjunctiva  was  reddened. 

This  observation  appeared  to  me  as  inexplicable  as  the  others, 
since  Eva's  head  and  hands  did  not  participate.  That  the  curtain 
remained  open  during  the  first  half  of  the  sitting,  and  that  I  was  able 
to  look  into  the  mysterious  workshop  as  often  as  I  wished,  are  the 
remarkable  characteristics  of  this  sitting.  My  wish  to  subject  the 
materialised  fabrics  to  the  test  of  the  sense  of  touch  unfortunately 
remained  unfulfilled.  Those  responsible  for  the  experiments  took 
the  view  that  the  further  development  of  the  medium  must  not  be 
interrupted  by  such  stipulations. 

After  the  sitting  the  pulse  was  90,  and  there  was  some  fatigue. 
During  the  state  of  trance  Eva  is  quite  conscious  of  her  activity.  The 
extrusion  of  the  material  forming  the  teleplasm  requires  a  great  mus- 
cular and  volitional  effort,  accompanied  by  groaning  and  whimpering. 
The  same  thing  was  noted  in  the  case  of  Eusapia  Paladino  at  the  time 
of  her  performances. 

In  the  semi-somnolent  or  somnambulic  state,  there  is  a  close  mental 
rapport  with  all  those  present,  and  particularly  with  Mme.  Bisson,  for 
whom  Eva  feels  a  close  friendship.  During  the  sitting  she  carries 
on  a  conversation  with  her  protectress,  tries  to  read  her  innermost  soul, 
asks  again  and  again  whether  her  protectress  is  not  tired,  and  whether 
she  can  see  her  creations,  whether  any  ideas  are  preoccupying  her; 
in  short,  she  gauges  with  a  correct  instinct  the  psychological  state 
of  the   sitters,    often   intervenes   in   their   conversation,   and   corrects 

<  o 
Z  en 

c-*     A 

<  > 
O 

5   ro 

ca 

^  > 
o 

O   CO. 

SITTINGS  OF  OCTOBER  AND  NOVEMBER  1910  (PARIS)     69 

erroneous  interpretations,  but  shows  great  delicacy  in  avoiding  saying 
anything  which  might  be  disagreeable  to  those  present. 

Sitting  of  the  2nd  November  1910. 

Present. — Mme.  Bisson  and  the  author.     No  result. 

Eva  had  spent  that  day  mostly  in  town  shopping,  and  had  been 
invited  to  lunch.  She  received  a  number  of  distracting  and  diverting 
impressions.     Besides,  the  weather  was  bad,  with  wind  and  rain. 

Sitting  of  the  3rd  November  1910. 

Present. — Mme.  Bisson,  Public  Prosecutor  M.,  and  the  author. 
Time  of  Sitting. — 9.15  to  11.30.     All  other  conditions  as  before. 

The  flaps  of  the  open  curtain  touched  the  medium's  knees.  The 
flap  on  the  left-hand  side  moved  gently  to  and  fro,  as  if  moved  by 
her  left  foot,  so  that  the  left  hand,  seen  on  her  knee  in  the  red  light, 
was  sometimes  seen  and  sometimes  disappeared. 

There  was  evidently  great  nervousness  in  exposing  the  ectoplastic 
product  to  the  light,  and  to  our  gaze,  for  any  length  of  time.  During 
all  the  phenomena  of  this  sitting  her  hands  were  visible,  either  resting 
on  her  knees  or  grasping  the  curtains.  The  first  appearance  was 
on  Eva's  right  side,  about  the  level  of  her  head.  It  was  a  large, 
reddish,  nebulous  patch,  3  or  4  inches  across,  which  gradually, 
before  our  eyes,  and  in  the  course  of  about  half  a  minute,  changed  into 
a  bright  shape  resembling  a  hand,  larger  than  the  hand  of  the  medium, 
and  resembling  a  rather  large  male  hand.  The  dorsal  surface,  the  forma- 
tion of  the  fingers,  and  the  division  of  the  thumb,  were  clearly  marked, 
but  all  finer  detail,  such  as  nails,  wrinkles  and  knuckles  were  lacking. 
What  we  saw  might  be  compared  to  a  large  white  and  rather  flat  seam- 
less glove,  which  appeared  pink  in  the  red  light.  In  a  short  time 
(twenty  seconds  at  most)  the  form  disappeared,  and  was  replaced  by 
teleplastic  emanations  of  indefinite  shape,  such  as  patches  and  strips, 
which  were  mostly  seen  near  the  head  and  the  right  shoulder. 

At  Eva's  request  Mme.  Bisson  entered  the  cabinet  several  times, 
and  put  her  hand  on  the  medium's  forehead.  During  one  of  these 
visits  we  suggested  to  the  medium  that  she  should  materialise  a  hand 
with  forearm.  While  the  lady  of  the  house  held  Eva's  head  in  the 
cabinet,  INI.  grasped  her  left  hand  and  I  her  right.  With  this  reliable 
control  we  saw  before  our  eyes,  and  with  open  curtains,  a  bright  patch 
lying  in  her  lap,  resembling  a  handkerchief.  It  appeared  to  be  viscous 
and  endowed  with  life,  for  it  moved  and  altered  its  appearance, 
and  assumed  a  shape  about  2  by  8  inches.  At  the  front  of 
this  shape,  which  was  turned  towards  us,  elongations  appeared  which 
resembled  pseudopods.  Finally,  the  outline  of  a  whitish  hand  was 
formed.  We  saw  before  us  the  outline  of  a  left  forearm,  about  the 
size  of  a  child's  arm,  but  flat  and  without  any  detail.     After  about 

70  PHENOMENA    OF    MATERIALISATION 

thirty  seconds  the  form  dissolved,  returned  into  an  amorphous  mass 
of  indefinite  appearance,  and  then  entirely  disappeared. 

In  the  course  of  the  sitting  I  suddenly  saw  something  resembling 
a  bunched-up  grey  veil  fall  from  her  right  shoulder  into  her  lap.  My 
wish  to  take  this  ball  into  my  hands  was  not  acceded  to  by  the  lady 
of  the  house.  Mme.  Bisson  thought  that  any  sudden  intervention 
taking  the  medium  by  surprise  would  injure  her  health  and  jeopardise 
the  development  of  the  phenomena.     I  therefore  abandoned  the  idea. 

The  material  lying  in  her  lap  resembled  a  grey  placenta-like  pap, 
traversed  by  fairly  thick  round  strips  and  cords.  It  was  fairly  immobile 
and  remained  visible  at  least  two  minutes.  After  a  short  closing 
of  the  curtains  by  the  medium  the  material  had  disappeared,  but 
the  dress  on  her  breast  was  lighted  up.  A  white  band  about  2| 
inches  thick,  falling  from  her  right  shoulder  into  her  lap,  was  partly 
covered  at  the  shoulder  by  a  fine  bright  transparent  veil,  and  ended 
in  her  lap  like  a  hand  with  three  fingers.  The  whole  structure  most 
closely  resembled  a  long  white  lady's  glove,  having  only  three  fingers 
(thumb,  first  and  third  fingers),  and  perforated  on  the  back  by  a  hole 
nearly  an  inch  long,  which  appeared  as  a  black  spot  (Fig.  9). 

The  whole  structure  gave  a  flat  and  hollow  impression.  There 
was  evidently  an  attempt  to  form  a  hand  and  forearm,  but  the  necessary 
power  was  lacking  for  constancy,  accurate  delineation,  detailed  structure, 
and  plastic  form.  The  same  shape  altered  its  position,  sank  down, 
and  remained  lying  in  her  lap.  In  anj'^  case  this  structure  showed 
mobility  of  its  own,  and  was  visible  without  the  co-operation  of  the 
hand  in  two  places  (right  shoulder  and  lap).  The  shape  remained 
fairly  long,  and  showed  itself  for  the  third  time  during  the  flash-light 
exposure  in  front  of  Eva's  face.  The  moment  I  saw  the  white  mass 
with  the  fingers  at  about  the  height  of  the  medium's  throat,  I  ignited 
the  flash-light  (Fig.  10)  with  the  electric  button.  I  myself  removed 
the  plates  in  their  slides  and  kept  them  until  they  were  developed 
the  following  day.  The  plates  entirely  corroborate  the  visual  impression, 
and  prove  that  we  had  observed  correctly.  Magnification,  and  the 
stereoscopic  transparency  of  these  photographs  on  glass,  permitted 
an  accurate  study  of  the  structure. 

The  right  side  of  the  face  is  invisible  and  covered  by  a  diffused 
apparently  black  and  white  mass,  looking  like  a  tangled  mass  of  threads. 
From  the  right  shoulder  down  to  the  breast  a  piece  of  veiling  with  a 
right-angled  corner  is  hanging.  Underneath  this  one  sees  two  short 
white  rounded  strips,  the  outlines  of  which  might  correspond  to  the 
outermost  joints  of  the  first  and  third  fingers  of  a  rather  large  left  hand. 
The  stereoscopic  pictures  which  we  reproduced  on  glass  distinctly 
show  the  transparent  meshwork  of  a  large  net.  Underneath,  a  white 
band  bent  outwards  is  seen,  which  would  correspond  to  a  thumb  M'itb 
its  joint  bent  outwards.  The  shapes  of  the  first  and  third  fingers  can 
be  followed  up  under  the  net.  In  the  place  of  the  second  finger  there 
is  a  gap.  The  first  finger  projects  and  throws  a  distinct  shadow  on  the 
dress  of  the  medium.  Eva's  hands  clutch  the  curtain.  The  strips 
resembling  fingers  show  no  detail.  They  appear  flat,  and  have  no 
seams,  such  as  a  kid  glove  would  have.  Besides,  they  are  abnormally 
long,  and  larger  than  the  medium's  fingers. 

SITTINGS  OF  OCTOBER  AND  NOVEMBER  1910  (PARIS)     71 

One  can  hardly  maintain  that  the  photograph  shows  anything 
corresponding  to  a  living  form,  but  we  seem  to  have  before  us  the 
formation  of  the  outlines  of  three  fingers  of  a  male  left  hand  in  a  white 
material,  the  nature  of  which  cannot  be  determined  from  the  photo- 
graph. 

The  photograph  is  the  final  link  in  the  chain  of  observations.  It 
confirms  the  reality  of  the  phenomena,  as  well  as  the  correctness  of 
our  previous  observations,  in  which  we  also  saw  an  imperfect  shape 
resembling  an  arm  with  three  fingers.  This  remained  constant,  though 
appearing  in  three  different  places,  and  maintained  its  peculiar  trun- 
cated character.  I  ought  to  mention  that  we  had  asked  for  the  pro- 
duction of  a  hand,  above  or  near  her  head,  before  we  made  the  photo- 
graphic exposure.  She  herself  seemed  to  feel  that  the  present  stage 
of  development  was  not  ripe  for  the  production  of  detailed  forms, 
and  asked  us,  repeatedly,  to  defer  photography.  On  account  of  the 
extraordinary  fugitiveness  of  the  vitalised  aggregates,  a  sudden  and 
complete  disappearance  of  the  forms  we  saw  was  to  be  feared.  For 
this  reason  I  did  not  await  her  consent,  but  ignited  the  flash-light  as 
soon  as  I  could  distinctly  see  the  white  shape  at  her  head.  Besides, 
these  structures,  even  when  imperfectly  developed,  are  valuable  for 
the  study  of  such  phenomena. 

Immediately  after  the  flash-light  Eva,  with  a  loud  groan,  closed 
the  curtains  she  was  clutching,  but  without  altering  the  position  of  her 
convulsively  closed  fingers.  Mme.  Bisson  closed  the  upper  aperture, 
by  sliding  the  rings  together,  and  took  hold  of  the  right  hand,  while 
Monsieur  M.  took  hold  of  the  left.  Her  hands  therefore  remained  after 
the  photographic  exposure  in  the  position  shown  in  the  picture,  not 
having  been  withdrawn  behind  the  curtains,  even  for  an  instant. 

This  situation  was  still  unchanged  when,  having  removed  the  slides 
from  the  cameras,  I  took  up  a  position  behind  the  low  chair  of  Mme. 
Bisson,  which  stood  in  front  of  the  curtain,  so  that  my  head  was 
about  2  feet  higher  than  that  of  the  seated  lady,  and  about  18  inches 
in  front  of  the  curtain.  Suddenly  the  latter  was  opened  for  about 
a  second,  in  front  of  my  eyes,  to  an  extent  of  8  inches  at  the  most, 
and  was  immediately  closed  again,  while  nothing  had  been  changed 
concerning  the  medium's  clenched  and  closed  hands  (Fig.  11). 

In  spite  of  the  shortness  of  the  time  I  saw  in  front  of  me  the  face 
and  upper  body  of  a  young  and  fully  developed  female  swathed  in 
grey  veils  down  to  the  waist.  The  time  of  observation  was  too  short 
to  tell  whether  the  face  under  the  veil  resembled  Eva  or  not. 
In  order  to  show  herself  to  me,  she  would  have  had  to  stand  up,  and 
clothe  herself  with  the  veils.  For  this  she  required  her  hands  as  much 
as  for  the  opening  of  the  curtain.  But  her  hands  were  visible  outside 
the  curtain.  Their  position  corresponded  with  the  sitting  posture 
of  the  medium,  and  were  held  by  two  persons. 

We  must  further  ask  :  Could  she  rise  from  her  chair  without  any 
noise  and  without  the  two  persons  sitting  in  front  of  her  noticing  any- 
thing ?  Her  standing  up  would  also  have  involved  raising  her  hands 
to  the  level  of  the  upright  position.  Neither  of  the  controllers  (who 
could  not  see  the  apparition  visible  above  their  heads)  perceived  the 
least  change  in  the  attitude  of  the  medium.     But  the  female  body 

72  PHENOMENA    OF    MATERIALISATION 

perceived  corresponded  in  its  height  above  the  floor  to  the  height  of 
a  female  form  standing  upright.  The  apparition  disappeared,  with  the 
same  Hghtning  rapidity  and  silence  as  it  came.  The  question  as  to 
whether  it  was  the  medium,  or  whether  it  was  a  separate  form,  I 
cannot  answer.  In  any  case,  the  transformation  of  a  shape  resembling 
a  hand,  into  long  grey  veils  which  enveloped  a  female  figure  down  to 
the  waist,  without  the  aid  of  the  medium's  hands,  is  a  riddle  difficult 
to  explain. 

At  11.30  the  sitting  closed.  Final  and  complete  examination  of 
the  medium  and  the  cabinet  with  no  result. 

Sitting  of  the  5th  November  1910. 

Present. — Professor  Charles  Richet,  Mme.  Bisson,  and  the  author. 

All  conditions  with  regard  to  examination,  dress  of  the  medium, 
examination  of  the  cabinet,  and  illumination,  as  in  the  previous  sittings. 
Richet  occupied  the  middle  place  in  front  of  the  curtain.  I  sat  on  his 
left,  and  Mme.  Bisson  on  his  right. 

This  time  the  phenomena  began  immediately  after  the  commence- 
ment of  the  sitting  and  at  the  medium's  left  hand,  as  at  the  last  sitting. 
We  had  a  visual  impression  as  if  a  slight  black  shadow  passed,  to  and 
fro,  along  the  back  of  the  left  hand.  While  the  right  hand  remained 
quiet  and  visible  in  the  opening  of  the  curtain,  the  left  was  withdrawn 
from  our  gaze,  now  and  then,  by  the  curtain  falling  over  it.  Besides, 
the  left  flap  of  the  curtain  was  stretched  and  inflated  as  if  a  living 
being  were  active  behind  it.  The  imperfectly  visible  head  was  bent 
towards  the  left  and  swathed  in  fine  grey  veils,  which  condensed  more 
and  more,  and  became  visible  on  the  breast  and  on  the  shoulder, 
so  that,  finally,  we  could  make  out  a  rough  outline.  When  the 
condensation  process  of  this  grey  material  had  made  some  progress, 
we  saw  a  white  or  greyish  luminosity,  as  if  produced  by  white  chiffon 
or  veiling.  These  light  grey  patches  of  a  vague  shape  showed  themselves 
in  turn  on  the  right  shoulder,  on  the  left  under  the  chin,  on  the  lap, 
and  then  at  the  hem  of  the  curtain,  corresponding  roughly  with 
the  height  of  Eva's  head,  which  was  about  3  feet  behind.  These 
patches,  balls  and  bands  occurred  simultaneously  in  different  places. 
They  gave  the  impression  of  being  independent  of  the  body  of  the  medium, 
showed  a  tendency  towards  the  production  of  fingers  and  forms  resem- 
bling hands,  and  were  obviously  directed  by  a  psychic  form  of  energy. 
The  structures  did  not,  however,  suffer  the  light  more  than  a  few  seconds. 
They  emerged  and  disappeared,  and  had  a  tendency  to  avoid  a  lengthy 
exposure  to  light.  Finally,  we  also  saw  on  the  medium's  left  side, 
on  a  level  with  her  head,  a  white  shape  near  the  curtain,  which  resembled 
a  female  right  hand  and  forearm,  and  disappeared  after  a  few  seconds. 
Some  attempts  to  form  heads  were  also  observed,  but  these  were  more 
rapid  and  fugitive  than  the  other  teleplastic  emanations.  Among 
the  suddenly  appearing  forms  sometimes  visible  near  the  top  of  the 
curtain,  I  once  thought  that  I  recognised  the  upturned  face  of  an  old 
man  with  a  white  beard,  while  at  the  same  time  the  entranced  medium, 
her  head,  body  and  hands,  were  completely  visible.  The  two  heads 
may  have  been  30  inches  apart. 

D 

OS 

o 

o 

HI 

C) 

a\ 

W 

K 

^ 

a 

PS 

w 

W 

cq 

H 
< 

S 
W 
> 

o 

o 

:^ 

w 

cq 

a 

Uh 

M 

< 

> 

O 

o 

V, 

z 

ir 

< 

a 

ri   I-" 

a; 

« 

w 

a 

n 

« 

S 

H 

w 

tt. 

> 

<! 

o 

O 

?; 

Z 

H 

p 

0    'H 

SITTINGS  OF  OCTOBER  AND  NOVEMBER  1910  (PARIS)     73 

The  play  of  whitish  grey  aggregations  adjoining  different  parts 
of  the  medium's  body  then  continued,  her  hands  remaining  at  rest. 
One  of  these  bands  joined  her  head  with  her  right  hand.  At  the  same 
time  I  saw  emerging  from  the  wrist  or  out  of  the  sewn-up  sleeve  a 
white,  apparently  viseous  mass  which  flowed  down  to  the  ground 
before  my  eyes  (Fig.  12). 

Suddenly,  by  an  invisible  impulse,  this  whole  mass  of  elementary 
material  was  drawn  across  the  right  knee  and  then  across  the  left  knee 
of  the  medium,  i.e.,  right  across  the  opening  of  the  curtains  into  the 
region  behind  the  left  flap  of  the  curtain,  while  the  head  and  hands 
of  the  medium  remained  visible  and  immobile.  Some  attempts  to 
form  human  shapes  out  of  the  teleplasm  became  evident  on  the  right- 
hand  side,  behind  the  curtain,  at  the  same  level  as  before,  and,  apparently, 
due  to  an  unknown  volition.  While  Richet  concentrated  his  whole 
attention  on  that  process  I  looked  into  her  lap  to  make  sure  that  her 
hands  were  still  there.  But  what  was  my  astonishment  when,  instead 
of  two  arms,  I  perceived  three  !  The  third  arm  started  from  the  right 
elbow.  It  resembled  a  long  narrow  strip  of  the  size  of  a  child's  arm, 
and  exhibited  next  the  medium's  right  hand  a  small  hand  with  five 
distinct  fingers.  Richet  confirmed  this  observation  when  I  drew 
his  attention  to  it.  We  therefore  saw  at  the  same  time  four  hands 
(Fig.  13),  three  in  the  medium's  lap,  and  a  fourth  in  the  process  of  develop- 
ment, near  the  flap  of  the  curtain  on  the  medium's  left,  while  the  third 
hand,  lying  on  the  medium's  lap,  remained  visible  for  about  thirty  seconds. 
Richet's  right  hand,  which  he  held  forward  about  a  foot  above  the 
medium's  visible  hand,  was  touched  by  the  hand  coming  out  of  the 
curtain.  I  ought  to  mention  that  we  had  wished  to  see  hands,  and  had 
requested  the  medium  accordingly. 

After  these  phenomena  had  disappeared,  we  asked  for  the  formation 
of  a  head.  After  a  short  rest-pause  we  saw  a  repetition  of  the  pheno- 
menon recorded  in  the  last  sitting,  in  which  a  packet  of  some  kind  of 
material  was  observed  to  fall.  This  time  it  fell  into  the  lap  of  the 
medium,  who  sat  in  front  of  us  with  her  hands  visible.  It  fell  as  if 
projected  from  the  roof  of  the  cabinet  by  an  unknown  psychic  force. 
This  mass  also  disappeared  from  our  gaze.  Then  began  the  develop- 
ment of  forms  resembling  heads,  which  showed  themselves  with  lightning 
speed  behind  the  left  flap  of  the  curtain  high  above  the  medium  and 
disappeared  as  quickly,  so  that  there  was  hardly  time  to  see  the  medium 
and  the  head  simultaneously.  In  this  case,  Eva  held  the  curtain  flaps 
with  hands  always  visible,  and  opened  and  closed  them  very  rapidly. 
Since  the  effect  was  produced  seven  or  eight  times,  I  directed  my 
attention  exclusively  to  the  medium,  in  some  cases,  while  Richet 
observed  the  apparition  of  the  heads.  Occasionally,  I  could  verify 
accurately  that  Eva  lay  in  her  chair,  without  any  change  in  the  position 
of  her  head  and  of  her  hands.  In  one  case  the  phenomenon  lasted  two 
seconds,  so  that  it  was  possible  to  see  both  heads  simultaneously.  The 
materialised  head  showed  the  features  of  a  young  woman  whose  hair 
was  completely  covered  by  a  turban.  In  this  I  could  distinctly  see 
the  slanting  folds  of  the  material.  Unfortunately,  the  attempt  at 
photography  was  a  failure. 

Towards  midnight  the  sitting  closed.     Final  examination  negative. 

74  PHENOMENA    OF    MATERIALISATION 

Since  the  medium  had  a  special  veneration  for  Richet,  she  may  have 
been  satisfied  with  the  good  result  of  this  sitting.  In  any  case,  she 
slept  well  the  following  night,  and  showed  no  after-effects  to  speak  of. 

Sitting  of  the  8th  November  1910. 

Present. — Mme.  Bisson,  M.  Chevreuil,  and  the  author. 
No  result. 

The  weather  was  rainy,  Eva  had,  during  the  day,  been  shopping 
with  her  sisters,  and  had  passed  the  whole  day  in  town. 

Contact  with  other  people,  and  distractions,  appeared  to  hinder 
the  productions  when  immediately  preceding  a  sitting.  The  medium 
herself  attributed  the  lack  of  success  to  unfavourable  atmospheric 
influences. 

Sitting  of  the  11th  November  1910. 

Present. — Mme.  Bisson  and  the  author. 

This  day,  as  well  as  in  all  subsequent  sittings,  four  twenty  candle- 
power  electric  lamps  were  used. 

Conditions  as  usual.  The  cabinet  was  again  carefully  examined 
with  an  electric  torch.  Eva's  hair  was  held  by  a  velvet  ribbon  (no 
combs). 

Duration  of  sitting,  9.15  to  11.45. 

Hypnotisation  by  Mme.  Bisson. 

Some  twenty  minutes  elapsed  before  the  phenomena  set  in.  The 
curtain  was  half  closed,  and  its  left  flap  covered  up  Eva's  left  hand, 
which  lay  on  her  knee.  Mme.  Bisson,  who  sat  opposite  the  left  curtain, 
eventually  pushed  it  back  in  order  to  see  Eva's  left  hand.  This  unex- 
pected interference  provoked  a  violent  reaction.  The  medium  shud- 
dered convulsively  and  complained  strongly.  For  us,  the  whole  occur- 
rence had  this  interest — that  on  her  left  knee  and  underneath  her  left 
hand  we  saw  a  white  mass,  larger  than  a  hand,  resembling  a  white 
unformed  aggregate  endowed  with  life.  This,  under  cover  of  the  curtain, 
assumed  the  shape  of  a  child's  forearm,  which  seemed  to  attach  itself 
from  the  outside  to  the  medium's  left  elbow,  and  terminated  in  the 
outlines  of  a  hand  (Fig.  14). 

We  then  suggested  that  Eva  should  produce  a  well-developed 
forearm  with  hand.  The  medium,  whose  hands  were  constantly 
controlled,  evidently  made  strong  efforts  to  carry  out  the  suggestion. 
She  made  deep  and  audible  respirations,  and  groaned  and  whimpered. 
At  last  we  saw,  on  the  inner  side  of  her  left  arm,  and  starting  from  the 
elbow,  the  outlines  of  a  left  forearm,  gradually  becoming  more  dis- 
tinct. A  hand  and  fingers  were  formed  in  a  rudimentary  and  imperfect 
way  at  first.  But,  before  our  eyes,  this  semi-liquid  substance,  endowed 
with  some  kind  of  animal  life,  changed  its  appearance,  until  it  assumed 
the  form  of  a  correctly-draA\T[i  left  hand,  somewhat  smaller  than  the 

SITTINGS  OF  OCTOBER  AND  NOVEMBER  1910  (PARIS)     75 

medium's  arm,  and  showing  all  the  imperfections  already  mentioned 
as  regards  modelling,  muscular  development,  detailed  structure,  and 
nails. 

By  closing  the  curtain,  this  structure  was  withdrawn  from  our 
gaze  after  barely  fifteen  seconds,  and  when  the  curtain  was  opened 
again,  the  apparition  had  crossed  to  the  right  side  of  the  medium 
(Fig.  15). 

This  time  the  vitalised  structure  was  detached  from  her  body,  and 
had  the  form  of  a  double  colunm  of  mist  or  smoke  tapering  towards  the 
top.  It  ascended  on  her  right  side  from  the  floor,  and  the  two  branches 
joined  about  the  level  of  her  shoulder,  where  they  formed  the  dorsal 
aspect  of  a  female  right  hand.  The  column  may  have  been  from 
8  to  12  inches  thick,  and  stood  about  16  inches  behind  the  right  curtain 
on  the  floor  beside  the  medium,  whose  whole  body  remained  visible 
during  the  process.  The  hand  then  moved,  beckoned  to  us,  and  appeared 
more  distinctly  formed,  showing  graceful  lines  like  a  living  female 
hand.  Although  the  teleplastic  structure  stood  back  in  the  cabinet, 
it  was  distinctly  seen  by  all  present,  and  for  a  sufficiently  long  time. 
I  myself  introduced  my  head  for  this  purpose  through  the  open  curtain 
into  the  cabinet.     The  structure  remained  visible  about  twenty  seconds. 

When,  after  a  rest-pause,  the  phenomena  were  continued,  the  same 
female  hand  lay  on  the  right  shoulder  of  the  medium,  with  its  dorsal 
surface  and  fingers  towards  the  front. 

Thereupon  Mme.  Bisson  entered  the  cabinet  in  order  to  lay  her  hand 
on  the  medium's  forehead.  At  the  moment  of  her  entry  into  the 
cabinet  all  the  phenomena  disappeared. 

On  continuing  the  sitting,  I  asked  the  medium  whether  some  of  the 
plastic  material  used  for  the  materialisation  process  could  be  placed 
in  a  German-silver  box  I  had  brought  for  the  purpose.  The  box  had 
a  well-closing  lid,  and  contained  a  porcelain  dish.  It  had  not  left  my 
pocket.  While  the  medium's  hands  clutched  the  curtains  and  remained 
distinctly  visible,  I  brought  the  open  box,  held  in  my  right  hand,  close 
to  the  curtain,  at  the  level  of  about  a  foot  above  her  right  hand,  while, 
at  the  same  time,  Mme.  Bisson  held  my  right  wrist.  At  that  moment 
the  other  two  persons  saw  three  well -developed  fingers  coming  out  of 
the  curtain  and  touching  the  box.  I  myself  could  only  see  one  finger, 
since  I  sat  too  far  towards  the  left.  This  finger  entered  the  open  box 
on  its  narrow  side  and  executed  several  shaking  motions.  I  seized 
this  moment  to  close  the  lid  and  hide  the  box  in  my  pocket.  On 
examining  the  dish  afterwards  in  a  white  electric  light  I  found  on  the 
inner  narrow  side  of  the  porcelain  dish,  as  if  stuck  to  it,  two  pieces 
which,  under  the  microscope,  were  recognised  to  be  human  skin  ^ 
(Figs.  16  and  17). 

Eva's  hands,  which  held  the  curtains,  remained  during  this  experi- 
ment visibly  under  our  control.  During  the  final  examination  no 
defect  of  skin  could  be  found  either  on  the  girl's  hands  or  on  her  feet. 

It  appeared,  from  a  microscopic  examination,  that  the  tissue 
was  a  piece  of  superficial  epidermis,  16  mm.  long,  11  mm. 
wide,   and    I  mm.   thick.       Even   a   simple   magnification   shows   the 

^  Whether  we  have  here  to  deal  with  tissue  produced  during  the  sitting,  or  intro- 
duced, iu  spite  of  the  rigid  control,  or  with  an  "  apport,"  one  cannot  say  with  any  certainty. 

76  PHENOMENA    OF    MATERIALISATION 

characteristic  marbling  of  the  skin,  and  a  horny  thickening  of  one  half 
of  it. 

The  second  piece  of  skin,  12  mm.  in  diameter,  is  considerably 
thinner  and  finer.  Under  the  microscope  one  distinctly  sees  the  pig- 
mented epithelium  cells.  The  products  do  not  in  any  point  differ  from 
the  histological  structure  of  human  skin,  but  it  is  difficult  to  say  from 
what  part  of  the  body  they  are  derived. 

After  this  experiment  we  asked  for  a  hand  above  the  medium's 
head  for  the  purpose  of  photography.  I  went  and  stood  beside  the 
apparatus  on  my  right,  whence  I  could  see  through  the  open  curtain 
everything  happening  on  the  left.  Very  soon  a  fairly  large  shape 
appeared  above  Eva's  head,  a  shape  which  at  a  distance  resembled 
a  white  male  hand.  The  flash-light  was  ignited,  and  both  photographs 
succeeded  well  (Fig.  18).  Unfortunately,  the  plates  only  show  half  of 
what  was  perceived,  because  the  left  curtain  half  concealed  the  medium's 
face. 

Owing  to  the  various  positions  of  the  cameras,  three  fingers  are 
seen  on  one  negative,  but  on  the  stereoscopic  negatives  only  two,  and 
these  are  the  backs  of  a  thumb  and  forefinger  of  a  left  hand.  On  the 
picture  with  tliree  fingers,  half  the  hand  is  seen  up  to  the  wrist,  the 
third  joint  of  the  first  finger  being  bent,  and  lying  in  the  inner  corner 
of  the  medium's  right  eye.  Hence  the  finger  appears  foreshortened. 
Whether  the  slanting  shadow  falling  upon  the  upper  part  of  the  arm  is 
due  to  that  finger  cannot  be  decided.  Of  the  middle  finger,  only  the 
first  joint  is  seen,  the  second  and  third  being  bent  in,  or  entirely  lacking. 
On  the  stereoscopic  plate  the  curtain  covers  this  finger.  The  curvature 
produced  by  the  metacarpal  muscle  of  the  thumb  in  a  state  of  contrac- 
tion is  well  developed  at  the  root  of  the  thumb,  and  the  first  and  second 
joints  of  the  thumb  are  distinctly  outlined.  No  nail  depression  i^.  seen 
on  the  thumb,  although  the  tip  has  the  natural  shape. 

Here,  again,  we  cannot  say  what  material  the  hand  is  made  of. 
There  is  no  question  of  a  glove,  because  the  outlines  corresponding  to 
the  muscular  modelling  are  too  detailed.  Besides,  seams  would  be 
visible  in  some  place  or  other.  Nor  does  the  material  appear  to  consist 
of  paper,  for  the  sheen  of  white  paper  is  easily  recognisable  on  a  photo- 
graph, and  the  fibres  are  seen  in  magnification.  The  freely-exposed 
thumb  does,  indeed,  produce  a  flat  impression,  especially  in  the  stereo- 
scopic picture.  But  the  photograph  shows  other  and  very  remarkable 
things.  We  see  a  white  and  closely-twisted  tissue,  resembling  veiling 
or  lace,  the  end  of  which  passed  round  the  middle  finger  of  her  right 
hand.^  This  twisted  strip  is  visible  on  Eva's  lap,  and  is  directed 
towards  her  left  shoulder,  which,  unfortunately,  is  not  visible.  This 
tissue  covers  the  wrist  of  the  visible  hand,  and  becomes  visible  again 
on  her  hair  on  the  right  side,  falling  upon  her  right  shoulder.  In  the 
place  where  the  thumb  and  forefinger  join,  a  pointed  white  patch  is 
seen  on  the  hair,  which  is  apparently  due  to  the  material  lying  on 
the  head.  We  can  recognise  in  the  transparent  unfolded  tissue  a  folded 
margin  and  a  net -like  system  of  meshes. 

^  A  comparison  with  numerous  later  photographs  of  the  filmy  teleplastic  veiling 
shows  a  constant  repetition  of  the  same  image,  consisting  of  fibres,  threads,  bundles,  and 
stripes,  joined  in  meshes  or  nets,  and  sometimes  in  a  parallel  arrangement. 

Fig.   i6.     Portion  of  the  porcelain  dish,   with   piece  of  skin. 

X 

M 

o 

^ 

« 

-J 

w 

n 

-t- 

S 

^ 

w 

b 

> 

0 

7; 

:?; 

2^  1-1 
o  „ 

z  " 

H   " 
X 
O   2 

,  o 

o  z 

0 

H 

W 

n 

U 

W 

w 

n, 

0 

K 

w 

K 

'tH 

H 

SITTINGS  OF  OCTOBER  AND  NOVEMBER  1910  (PARIS)      77 

On  the  magnification  (Fig.  19)  of  the  single  picture,  we  can  see,  with 
the  aid  of  magnifying  glasses,  that  the  second  and  third  joints  of  Eva's 
left  forefinger  and  middlefinger,  as  well  as  the  second  Joint  of  the 
thumb,  are  enveloped  in  an  extremely  fine  veil-like  tissue,  which  also 
covers  a  portion  of  the  finger-nails.  This  observation  is  confirmed  by 
a  detailed  examination  of  the  stereoscopic  photograph. 

If  we  assume  fraud,  what  would  have  been  the  object  of  covering 
the  left  hand,  which  happened  to  be  half  covered  by  the  curtain,  and 
took  no  part  in  the  principal  phenomena,  with  veils  of  the  finest  material — 
a  material  which  could  only  be  discovered  by  the  artificial  means  of 
magnification  ? 

The  sitting  was  continued  after  the  photographs  had  been  taken. 
The  endeavours  to  show  shapes  of  heads,  in  accordance  with  our  wish, 
led  to  no  distinct  success.  But,  on  one  occasion,  we  saw  in  the  curtain, 
rapidly  opened  and  then  again  closed,  a  female  figure  draped  from  head 
to  foot  in  veils,  obviously  the  medium  using  the  veils  already  formed 
and  described  above.  The  aperture  of  the  curtain  on  that  occasion 
was  not  more  than  4  inches,  and  the  appearance  lasted  only  one  second. 
The  sitting  ended  at  midnight.     Final  examination  negative. 

Sitting  of  the  15th  November  1910. 

Present. — Professor  Charles  Richet,  M.  Chevreuil,  Mme.  Bisson, 

and  the  author. 

During  the  day  Eva  had  an  emotional  disturbance,  and  did  not 
appear  particularly  disposed  for  a  sitting.  All  conditions  as  before. 
During  the  examination  the  medium,  dressed  in  the  tights,  allowed  me 
to  examine  her  bare  upper  body.  It  was  also  clear  from  an  examination 
through  the  thin  tights  that  no  material  was  concealed  about  her  lower 
body.  The  medium  removed  the  three  combs  from  her  hair,  so  that 
the  hair  was  only  fastened  by  a  velvet  ribbon. 

The  development  of  the  phenomena  began  again  at  her  left  hand, 
as  in  previous  sittings,  and  took  the  form  of  bright  shimmering  strips, 
appearing  at  the  shoulder  and  at  the  rim  of  the  curtain.  We  repeated 
our  previous  request  that  Eva  might  allow  the  substratum  of  the 
materialisations  to  touch  our  hands.  For  this  purpose  M.  Richet, 
Mme.  Bisson,  and  the  author,  in  turn  approached  their  hands  to  that 
portion  of  the  curtain  where  we  had  seen  the  white  strip.  All  our 
hands  were  touched  several  times,  the  author  having  the  impression 
as  if  several  points  of  his  right  hand  had  been  touched  by  a  solid  object 
with  a  slippery  surface.  It  reminded  him  of  moist,  soft  glove-leather. 
The  material  producing  the  touches  did  not  remain  motionless,  and  in 
spite  of  many  attempts  it  could  not  be  grasped.  I  also  felt  light  blows 
on  the  palm  of  my  hand,  as  if  with  whipcord,  and  I  saw  something 
resembling  a  ribbon  crossing  my  hand.  During  this  process  Eva's 
hands  were  constantly  controlled,  and  we  could  often  see  the  outlines 
of  her  face.  The  blows  were  therefore  undoubtedly  not  due  to  her 
hands,  nor  produced  by  her  mouth. 

After  one  such  blow  I  closed  my  hand  quickly  and  grasped  some- 
thing resembling  a  fine  rubber  cord,  which,  however,  felt  moist,  and 

78  PHENOMENA    OF    MATERIALISATION 

escaped  from  my  fingers  with  a  strong  jerk  and  a  serpentine  motion, 
while  the  frightened  medium  gave  a  cry  of  pain. 

We  then  asked  to  see  a  female  head.  For  this  purpose,  as  generally 
in  this  class  of  phenomena,  the  curtain  was  completely  closed.  It 
only  opened  at  the  moment  of  the  phenomena,  but  we  could  always  see 
both  hands,  and  sometimes  Eva's  head  during  the  exposure.  The  face 
we  wished  for  showed  itself  six  or  seven  times,  always  to  the  medium's 
left,  and  at  a  level  corresponding  to  the  head  of  a  person  standing  upright. 
During  the  second  appearance  of  the  phenomenon,  I  could  quite  clearly 
make  out  Eva's  head  and  Jiands. 

During  the  third  experiment  I  concentrated  my  whole  attention 
upon  the  medium,  and  again  verified  that  she  lay  in  her  chair  without 
participating.  The  head  images  were  visible  hardly  a  second.  The 
well-developed  face  corresponded  to  that  of  a  good-looking  young 
woman,  and  the  forehead  was  covered  by  a  broad  band.  As  the  head 
fell  down  I  followed  it  with  my  eyes,  and  I  saw  it  hasten  towards  the 
head  of  the  medium,  where  it  disappeared,  as  if  reabsorbed  by  her  body. 
On  one  occasion  we  had  the  impression  that  the  medium  had  risen  and 
sat  down  again.  This  observation  led  us  to  increase  our  watchfulness. 
In  other  cases  the  materialised  head,  and  the  medium,  could  be  seen 
at  the  same  time.  Immediately  after  one  exposure  Eva  opened  the 
curtain,  came  towards  me,  and  requested  me  to  examine  her.  I  found 
nothing  suspicious.  She  then  re-entered  the  cabinet  in  a  somnambulic 
state,  while  Richet  followed  her  into  the  cabinet,  and  placed  his  hand 
on  her  forehead. 

On  continuing  the  sitting  another  flash-light  photograph  (Fig.  20)  was 
taken.  It  shows  the  medium  holding  both  curtains,  while  Mme.  Bisson's 
hand  attempts  to  put  back  the  left  curtain  flap.  A  twisted  band, 
about  16  feet  long  and  resembling  lace,  and  having  traces  of  a  pattern, 
hangs  from  the  medium's  upper  coiffure  nearly  do\\Ti  to  her  feet.  A 
portion  of  it  is  undoubtedly  attached  above  her  forehead  to  her  hair, 
while  the  rest  of  it  disappears  over  her  head  towards  the  back.  The 
meshed  tissue  of  the  material  is  very  similar  to  that  which  at  the  last 
sitting  lay  on  her  head.  On  the  magnification  of  the  picture  (Fig.  21), 
we  distinctly  see  the  last  joint  of  a  thumb  and  forefinger  emerging 
from  Eva's  hair,  which  appear  to  hold  the  material. 

After  this  experiment  the  sitting  closed,  and  a  very  thorough 
examination  of  the  medium  and  cabinet  gave  no  result. 

Sitting  of  the  18th  November  1910. 

Present. — Professor  C.  Richet,  Mme.  Bisson,  M.  Chevreuil, 
and  the  author. 

Conditions  as  usual. 

Eva  was  this  day  under  the  influence  of  menstruation,  which  had 
just  set  in.  She  felt  fatigued,  and  complained  of  subjective  difficulties. 
The  sitting  began  at  9  o'clock.     We  waited  an  hour  without  any  result. 

For  the  comprehension  of  one  of  the  phenomena  about  to  be 
described,  it  should  be  mentioned  that  in  discussing  with  Mme.  Bisson 

Fig.  19.     Magnification  of  portion  of  Iig.  iS. 

Fig.     20.     Flashlight     photograph     by     the 
author  during  sitting  of  i5  november,  iqio. 

SITTINGS  OF  OCTOBER  AND  NOVEMBER  1910  (PARIS)     79 

the  imperfect  development  of  the  photographic  fingers,  I  had  drawn 
attention  to  the  absence  of  finger-nails. 

After  10  o'clock  the  development  of  the  teleplastic  substance 
commenced.  We  saw  in  the  opening  of  the  curtain,  while  the  medium's 
hands  were  visible  and  immobile,  a  broad  luminous  band,  about 
12  inches  wide,  in  front  of  her  chest,  and  then  under  her  left  arm,  and 
also  a  white  mass  of  material  at  the  skirt  of  her  dress,  between  her  feet. 

The  simultaneous  occurrence  of  teleplastic  productions  at  the  feet 
and  under  the  arm  is  very  remarkable,  especially  as  its  production 
occurred  2  feet  from  us,  while  the  medium  was  quite  visible  and  reclining 
tranquilly.  Again  we  saw  on  her  chest  and  in  her  lap  some  white 
ribbons  and  patches.  The  substance  on  her  chest  already  gave  an 
impression  of  solidity,  and  resembled  a  forearm,  or  a  tibia,  with  hand 
and  fingers,  in  skeleton  form. 

Exactly  at  the  same  place  as  before,  i.e.,  to  the  left  of  the  left  hand 
which  lay  on  her  knee,  and  about  12  or  15  inches  above  it,  we  saw  a 
white  shape  emerging  from  the  curtain,  which  disappeared  again  very 
rapidly. 

During  the  next  experiment  (Fig.  22)  Mme.  Bisson  held  Eva's  left, 
while  I  held  her  right  in  my  left  hand.  All  the  hands  were  distinctly 
visible.  At  the  same  place  as  before  a  form  became  visible,  which 
resembled  a  child's  arm  ending  in  a  stump.  It  resembled  an  amputa- 
tion stump.  But  this  stump  ended  in  three  fingers  (second  and  third 
joints  only),  whose  total  length  was  only  about  1  or  1|  inch.  This 
remarkable  fragment  was  seen  by  all  of  us  quite  clearly.  It  was  plastic, 
and  otherwise  resembled  a  living  member.  The  shape  approached  my 
left  hand,  as  it  held  Eva's  right,  and  pressed  two  of  the  rudimentary 
finger  stumps  into  the  back  of  my  left  hand.  The  pressure  lasted  about 
two  seconds,  and  was  very  firm,  as  if  exerted  by  a  cool,  strong,  moist 
male  hand.  The  points  of  the  nails  were  pressed  firmly  into  my  skin. 
This  was  probably  in  answer  to  the  remarks  I  had  made  concerning 
the  imperfection  of  the  fingers  photographed,  and  the  intention  may  have 
been  to  prove  to  me,  on  my  own  body,  that  this  intelligent  creative  power 
w^as  also  capable  of  producing  finger-nails. 

In  order  that  there  should  not  be  the  slightest  doubt,  the  experiment 
was  repeated  three  times.  All  those  present  saw  the  remarkable  limb 
fragment  during  this  phenomenon  of  contact.  This  performance  was 
always  accompanied  by  the  groaning  of  the  medium  and  an  energetic 
display  of  will-power,  just  as  v/as  observed  in  the  case  of  Eusapia 
Paladino.  The  manner  in  which  the  experiment  was  conducted, 
the  control  of  the  phenomenon  through  two  senses,  the  simultaneous 
verification  of  the  same  appearance  by  all  present,  the  absolute  exclusion 
of  any  mechanical  help  by  the  medium,  the  threefold  reproduction  of 
the  same  experiment,  and  the  rest  of  the  conditions  already  stated, 
render  this  result  free  from  any  objection. 

During  the  next  experiment  Richet  held  Eva's  left  hand  while 
I  held  her  right  with  my  left.  We  wished  to  repeat  the  last  experiment. 
I  took  the  small  metal  box  previously  mentioned  out  of  my  pocket, 
opened  it,  and  held  it  near  the  curtain,  in  the  place  where  the  shapes 
usually  showed  themselves,  with  the  request  that  a  portion  of  the 
teleplastic  substance  should  be  placed  inside.     Suddenly  the  box  in 

80  PHENOMENA    OF    MATERIALISATION 

my  hand  was  seized  by  the  stumpy  fingers,  one  of  them  on  the  outside 
and  the  other  inside,  and  was  then  forcibly  pushed  down,  so  that  my 
hand,  in  spite  of  its  resistance,  was  pressed  down  against  my  will.  I 
saw  the  limb  fragment,  and  heard  how  the  porcelain  dish  rattled  against 
the  metallic  case  as  the  box  was  pushed  down.  This  experiment  also 
was  twice  repeated,  rather  slowly,  taking  three  or  four  seconds.  The 
medium's  head  was  seen  as  a  bright  patch,  and  we  held  her  hands. 
Again  there  was  a  great  expenditure  of  energy  and  muscular  contraction 
by  the  medium.  This  phenomenon  was,  therefore,  perceived  at  the 
same  time  through  the  senses  of  sight,  hearing,  and  touch. 

The  sitting  then  closed,  and  the  subsequent  examination  was  negative. 

Sittings  of  December  1910  and  January  1911. 

After  the  author's  departure,  in  December  1910,  the  sittings  were 
contmued  as  usual  twice  a  week.  But  no  progress  was  recorded  in  the 
development  of  the  phenomena,  and  at  the  beginning  of  December  1910 
there  was  an  unexpected  interruption,  as  Mme.  Bisson  informed  me  by 
letter. 

After  the  appearance  of  a  number  of  teleplastic  forms,  at  one  of  the 
sittings  Eva  requested  Mme.  Bisson  to  join  hands  with  her  through 
the  gap  in  the  curtain.  This  was  done.  Suddenly  a  strong,  fully- 
developed,  male  forearm  with  hand  became  visible,  seized  the  girl 
brutally  against  the  breast  and  flung  her  violently  back  into  the  chair. 
The  medium  gave  a  cry  of  terror,  and  was  so  excited  that  the  sitting 
had  to  be  abandoned.  It  was  several  weeks  before  she  recovered  from 
the  nervous  shock,  and  it  was  Christmas  before  she  was  able  to  continue 
the  experiments.  This  unwelcome  interruption  was  probably  the 
cause  of  the  diminution  of  her  mediumistic  efficiency,  which  is  clearly 
evident  in  the  following  series  of  sittings.  The  author  considered  it 
his  dut3%  for  the  sake  of  an  objective  record,  to  mention  this  event, 
though  it  contradicts  the  experiences  hitherto  recorded  ;  but  he  refrains 
from  drawing  any  conclusions. 

Sitting  of  the  28th  December  1910. 

Conditions,  illumination,  and  control  as  in  the  last  sittings  of 
November  1910. 

Present. — M.  M.,  Mme.   Bisson,   Professor  B.   (a  German 
scientist),  and  the  author. 

Before  the  sitting  three  photographic  cameras  were  set  up  by 
Professor  B.  and  the  author,  a  stereoscopic  camera,  and  a  camera  taking 
pictures  9|  by  7  inches,  about  10  feet  in  front  of  the  curtain,  and  a 
camera  5|  by  3|  inches  in  the  corner  of  the  cabinet  to  the  right  of  the 
medium.  "  All   three   cameras   had    Zeiss   lenses.     The   object    of   this 

Fig.   21.     Magnification  from  Fig.   20. 

fe  s 

Z  K 

o  < 

0^    « 

M     CI 

H    S 

<  > 

o 

Ir'  CO 

SITTINGS  OF  DECEMBER  1910  AND  JANUARY  1911       81 

arrangement  was  to  obtain  side  views  of  the  various  shapes,  even  if 
they  were  half  covered  by  the  curtain,  as  in  some  previous  sittings. 
Unfortunately,  the  camera  in  the  cabinet  was,  on  account  of  the  smallness 
of  its  field  of  view,  not  suitable  for  obtaining  a  picture  of  the  occurrences 
at  a  distance  of  half  a  yard.  Besides,  everything  not  in  the  centre  of  the 
field  would  necessarily  be  out  of  focus.  But  the  use  of  a  photographic 
camera  inside  the  cabinet  means  a  considerable  progress  in  the  method  of 
investigation,  though  the  elaboration  of  this  method  requires  the  construc- 
tion of  special  wide-angle  lenses  for  photographing  objects  at  close  range. 

Professor  B.,  who  only  once  before  had  attended  a  sitting  (in  a 
larger  circle)  conducted  a  specially  careful  and  detailed  investigation  of 
the  cabinet,  of  the  chair  on  which  Eva  sat,  and  of  the  medium's  dress. 
The  bodily  examination  took  place  as  usual  before  every  sitting,  while 
Mme.  Bisson  sewed  the  two  garments  together,  but  nothing  suspicious  was 
found.  Professor  B.  took  the  place  in  front  of  the  cabinet.  The  author 
sat  at  his  left,  Mme.  Bisson  at  his  right,  and  M.  M.  in  the  second  row. 

During  the  first  half  of  the  sitting  Eva's  hands  remained  visible  on 
her^  knees  and  the  curtains  remained  open.  Immediately  after  the 
beginning  of  the  sitting  Mme.  Bisson  and  the  author  perceived,  on 
both  the  medium's  shoulders,  a  barely  visible  luminosity  which  dis- 
appeared in  the  direction  of  her  hips. 

After  about  an  hour,  during  which  time  the  position  of  the  hands 
was  not  changed,  a  pink  luminous  band,  about  8  inches  long,  appeared 
to  join  the  medium's  two  thumbs.  It  had  rough,  torn,  and  irregular 
edges,  and  changed  its  shape  like  india-rubber,  some  parts  being  bulkier 
than  others.  When  the  hands  moved,  this  band  contracted,  and  it 
became  narrow  on  moving  the  hands  apart.  In  some  places  the  band 
was  transparent,  like  a  delicate  veil.  Its  appearance  might  best  be 
compared  to  an  irregular,  torn,  and  partly-twisted  elastic  and  filmy 
band  of  tissue.  It  was  observable  for  about  a  minute,  and  disappeared 
before  our  eyes,  without  our  seeing  any  noticeable  movement  of  the 
medium's  hands.  Shortly  afterwards  a  thread-like  band  became 
visible,  which  ran  down  the  middle  of  the  dress  from  the  knees  to  the 
feet,  and  corresponded,  in  length,  to  that  of  the  medium's  shins.  This 
also  disappeared  very  rapidly. 

I  then  expressed  the  wish  to  see  a  freely  suspended  hand  a  little 
higher  than  her  head,  between  the  curtains.  This  point,  as  found  by 
subsequent  measurements,  is  about  3  feet  away  from  the  medium's 
head  when  she  reclines  as  usual  against  the  back  of  the  chair,  while  the 
chair  itself  is  always  so  placed  that  the  curtains  can  be  closed  immediately 
in  front  of  the  medium's  knees.  When  the  hands  rest  on  the  knees 
this  distance  is  exactly  27  inches.  The  cameras  were  focused  on  this 
point  in  this  and  in  the  following  sittings.  If  the  medium  moves  her 
head  forward  or  takes  hold  of  the  curtain  with  her  hands,  it  may  alter 
this  distance  from  4  to  8  inches.  But  even  then  the  distance  from  the 
body  of  the  medium  would  be  at  least  1|  feet. 

A  considerable  time  after  the  phenomena  described  had  taken  place, 
and  after  the  curtain  had  been  closed  several  times,  thus  hiding  the 
hands,  the  distinct  form  of  a  hand  appeared  four  times  in  succession, 
in  the  place  indicated.  Once  it  was  a  female  left  hand,  with  fingers 
longer  than  those  of  the  medium. 

82  PHENOMENA  OF  MATERIALISATION 

The  hands  hardly  remained  visible  for  a  second,  so  that  it  was  not 
possible  to  concentrate  the  attention  and  the  gaze  upon  Eva's  body 
at  the  same  time. 

I  succeeded,  indeed,  twice,  and  Professor  B.  once,  in  perceiving  the 
medium's  hands  resting  in  her  lap,  while  the  third  hand  was  visible. 
The  author  could  distinctly  see  movements  of  the  separate  fingers  of 
the  hand  shown  (bending  and  stretching).  Eva  was  unable  to  continue 
the  sitting,  and  it  had  to  be  closed. 

Sitting  of  the  29th  December  1910. 
Present. — M.  ,M.,  Professor  B.,  Mme.  Bisson,  and  the  author. 

When  the  medium  put  on  the  knitted  hose  garment,  before  the 
sitting,  Mme  Bisson,  in  my  presence,  introduced  her  finger  into  the 
medium's  vagina.  She  was  also  explored  by  Professor  B.  and  the 
author  through  the  garment,  but  with  negative  result. 

Assuming  that  a  female  medium  wished  to  use  the  vagina  as  a  hiding- 
place  for  closely  rolled  packets,  e.g.,  chiffon  gauze,  she  would  have  to 
attach  some  kind  of  cord  or  ribbon  to  the  packet  beforehand,  in  order 
to  be  able  to  withdraw  it.  This  cord  would  be  detected  during  the 
exploration  at  the  mouth  of  the  vagina,  and  any  finger  introduced 
mto  the  vagina  would  feel  the  foreign  body.  In  the  case  of  persons 
with  a  very  wide  vaginal  entrance,  it  might  be  possible  to  withdraw 
the  packet  by  means  of  the  fingers,  deeply  inserted.  But  such  a 
manipulation  supposes  that  the  genitals  are  not  separated  from  the 
hand  by  any  partition,  even  a  knitted  one,  and  that  the  person  is  in  a 
standing  or  reclining  position.  She  might  have  touched  the  external 
genitals  through  the  garment,  but  could  not  have  penetrated  to  any  depth. 

The  hiding  of  objects  in  the  anal  aperture,  and  their  withdrawal 
from  it,  is  even  less  possible,  on  account  of  its  closure  by  a  firm  ring 
muscle,  which  hinders  the  introduction  of  a  finger.  Hidden  packets  can 
only  be  withdrawn  by  means  of  a  cord  of  suitable  strength,  the  external 
end  of  which  would  have  been  immediately  discovered  during  the 
corporeal  examination  ;  but  never  with  the  sole  help  of  the  person's 
own  finger. 

The  restoration  of  the  material  to  its  hiding-place  would  be  even 
more  difficult.  It  presupposes  a  careful  folding-up  and  packing  in  the 
darkness  of  the  cabinet.  An  introduction  of  the  packet  into  the  anal 
opening  would  be  almost  unthinkable  without  the  use  of  vaseline. 
But  all  such  manipulations  are  doubly  difficult  in  the  dark. 

The  bodily,  and  especially  the  gynaecological,  examination,  the 
sewing-up  of  the  tights  to  the  dress,  of  the  dress  at  the  neck  and  wrists, 
dispose  of  these  objections,  since  the  medium  cannot  touch  her  own 
skm  except  at  the  head.  Besides,  the  manner  of  appearance  and 
disappearance,  and  the  automatism  of  the  materials  and  forms  pro- 
duced, tell  against  the  possibility  of  fraud. 

As  soon  as  Professor  B.  had  convinced  himself  that  Eva  had  no 
material  or  apparatus  concealed  about  her  person,  the  sitting  com- 
menced in  the  usual  way.  The  examination  of  the  cabinet,  illumination, 
hypnotisation,  as  usual. 

After  about  half  an  hour's  waiting  a  bright  patch  appeared  under 

SITTINGS  OF  DECEMBER  1910  AND  JANUARY  1911       83 

the  medium's  left  hand.  Eva  opened  and  closed  the  curtain  several 
times,  thus  alternately  exposing  the  patch  to  illumination  and  shading 
it.  Eventually  it  grew  towards  the  upper  arm  and  the  right  hand,  so 
that  it  had  a  rectangular  appearance.  Length,  12  to  14  inches  ;  width, 
about  4  inches.  She  then  took  both  my  hands  and  brought  the  first 
finger  of  my  left  hand  towards  the  material  lying  in  her  lap.  I  was 
surprised  when  my  finger  touched  a  firm,  hard,  rounded  object,  with  a 
rough  surface.  The  sensation  was  like  touching  a  rough  bone.  The 
object  I  touched  appeared  of  a  pink  colour,  and  lay  on  the  medium's 
left  thigh. 

We  then  asked  to  see  a  hand.  After  a  pause  of  ten  minutes,  during 
which  the  curtain  remained  closed,  she  opened  the  curtain  again.  A 
broad  white  band  fell  like  a  veil  from  the  left  upper  side  into  the  lap, 
like  a  flowing  mass.  The  portion  on  her  lap  seemed  mobile  and  changed 
its  shape.  We  could  distinctly  see  stripes,  and  the  slowly  developing 
design  of  a  limb.  Eva's  hands  clutched  the  curtains,  and  at  that 
moment  I  ignited  the  flash-light  (Fig.  23). 

The  curtain  had  immediately  to  be  closed,  since  Eva  whimpered 
and  groaned  in  great  fright. 

Finally  we  saw,  during  a  quick  opening  and  shutting  of  the  curtain, 
a  veiled  female  face,  probably  the  face  of  the  medium.  Eva's  hands 
then  became  hot,  always  a  sign  that  she  could  not  produce  anything 
more.  A  renewed  and  minute  examination  of  the  medium,  as  well  as 
the  chair  and  cabinet,  after  the  sitting,  had  no  result.  As  soon  as  she 
had  changed  her  dress  Professor  B.  examined  the  seance  dress,  to  see 
if  any  moisture  adhered  to  it,  but  nothing  suspicious  was  found.  The 
sitting  closed  at  11.30. 

Unfortunately,  the  photographic  record  is  not  clear.  The  camera 
(7  by  9 1  inches)  obviously  stood  too  near  the  curtain,  so  that  the 
medium's  left  hand,  holding  the  curtain,  cannot  be  distinctly  recog- 
nised. We  see  the  white  material  falling  from  a  point  on  a  level  with 
Eva's  head,  out  of  the  curtain  over  her  left  shoulder  into  her  lap,  but 
without  any  detail.  The  shape  of  the  mass  resembles,  in  its  rough 
outlines,  a  lower  leg  with  ankle  and  foot  in  the  course  of  formation. 

On  the  basis  of  this  photograph  we  can  only  assert  that  it  confirms 
and  amplifies  our  optical  impression,  and  therefore  offers  a  strong  argu- 
ment for  the  actuality  of  this  mediumistic  process,  under  the  precautions 
described.  It  should  be  noticed  that  the  material  emerges  from  the 
left  curtain  at  a  point  higher  than  Eva's  head,  although  her  left  hand 
was  visible  to  us  holding  the  curtain. 

Sitting  of  the  3rd  January  1911. 

No  result.  Eva  had  been  on  the  1st  and  2nd  January  staying  with 
friends,  and  was  still  probably  under  the  diverting  influence  of  their 
hospitality. 

Sitting  of  the  4th  January  1911. 

Present. — Mme.  Bisson,  her  sister,  and  the  author. 

Conditions  as  before.  Complete,  including  gynaecological,  examina- 
tion.    Commencement,  10.30.     The  first  phenomena  appeared  at  11.30. 

84  PHENOMENA  OF  MATERIALISATION 

Eva  meanwhile  breathed  deeply  and  audibly,  showing  light  tremors, 
and  had  cold  and  moist  hands.     She  gave  an  impression  of  suffering. 

Several  times  Mme.  Bisson,  who  sat  on  a  low  wicker  chair  in  front 
of  the  curtain,  had  to  hold  her  hands.  Under  these  conditions  we  saw 
at  a  level  of  17  inches  above  Eva's  visible  hands,  which  were  held  by 
those  present,  some  well-developed  structures,  resembling  limbs  emerging 
from  the  curtain  on  the  left,  at  a  distance  of  20  to  23  inches  from  her 
head.  These  objects  appeared  eight  times  in  succession.  The  medium 
requested  me  to  bring  my  head  near  the  aperture  of  the  curtain.  In 
order  to  entice  the  apparition  further  outside,  I  brought  my  forehead 
closer,  but  not  sufficiently  so.  Twice  this  hand-shaped  structure 
•attempted  by  very  rapid  motion  to  reach  my  forehead,  but  without 
success.  When  I  further  reduced  the  distance,  I  twice  felt  a  strong 
and  distinct  touch  on  my  forehead,  while  the  medium  appeared  to 
make  a  great  muscular  effort.  The  touch  resembled  that  of  a  broad, 
strongly-developed  finger  of  a  large  male  hand  (or  a  big  toe  ?).  I 
distinctly  felt  the  pressure  as  from  a  soft  finger-tip,  together  with  the 
feeling  of  cool  and  moist  human  skin.  Just  as  a  gymnast  contracts 
the  muscles  of  his  body  with  an  extreme  effort  of  will  in  order  to  bring 
about  a  single  extraordinary  muscular  feat,  so  Eva,  with  many  gasps 
and  groans,  endeavoured  to  bring  about  a  contact  by  means  of  this 
structure,  which  was  obviously  amenable  to  psychic  direction.  The 
course  of  this  phenomenon  was  characteristic,  and  was  observed  by 
me  in  the  same  manner  in  the  case  of  Eusapia  Paladino,  although  the 
two  mediums  had  never  seen  each  other  in  their  lives. 

The  duration  of  contact  might  have  been  one  or  two  seconds,  but 
the  structures  stretched  forward  remained  visible  hardly  one  second, 
so  that  one  can  only  state  the  fact  without  saying  anything  about  the 
detailed  building-up  of  the  limbs.  And,  generally,  the  appearances  are 
the  more  fugitive  the  less  close  the  connection  with  the  body  of  the 
medium,  while  the  phenomena  taking  place  at  the  body  itself  show  a 
greater  durability  under  light  and  observation. 

Again,  we  saw  at  the  same  part  of  the  left  curtain  a  white  form 
about  8  inches  long  and  4  inches  wide.  The  medium  called  out 
"  prenez-le."  I  pressed  the  electric  button.  The  light  flared  up,  and 
convinced  that  I  had  this  time  obtained  a  specially  interesting  photo- 
graph, I  took  charge  of  the  closed  slides. 

It  should  be  mentioned  that  during  the  last  phenomena  Eva's  hands 
held  both  sides  of  the  curtain,  and  were,  therefore,  distinctly  visible. 
This  time,  also,  the  sudden  interruption  of  the  phenomena  by  the  light 
meant  the  end  of  the  sitting.  But  before  I  had  asked  for  Eva's  awaken- 
ing she  requested  Mme.  Bisson  to  unpick  the  seam  between  tights  and 
dress.  When  this  was  done,  she  asked  me  to  examine  her.  In  the 
course  of  the  gynaecological  examination  I  introduced  the  middle  finger 
of  my  right  hand  pretty  deep  into  the  vagina,  without,  however,  finding 
anything  beyond  a  softening  of  the  epithelium.  It  is,  therefore,  certain 
that  the  genital  passage  was  not  used  as  a  hiding-place.  Eva  was 
awakened,  and  passed  a  restless,  sleepless  night.  The  sitting  closed  at 
midnight 

To  our  great  surprise  the  development  of  the  plate  gave  a  negative 
result.     The  photographs  as  such  are  successful,  especially  the  stereo- 

SITTINGS  OF  DECEMBER  1910  AND  JANUARY  1911      85 

scopic  ones.  Eva  lies  on  the  chair  with  her  body  stretched  out,  and  her 
head  rests  on  the  back  of  the  chair,  which  is  quite  visible.  The  mouth 
and  eyes  are  tightly  compressed,  and  the  face  screwed  up  as  if  blinded 
by  the  light.  Her  arms  are  stretched  out,  and  both  hands  clutch  the 
sides  of  the  curtain,  so  that  they  are  visible  with  the  fingers  outward. 

The  camera  mounted  inside  the  cabinet  (Fig.  24)  showed  a  portion 
of  the  left  curtain  from  the  inside.  Embedded  in  its  folds  one  sees  a 
white,  round  sphere  with  a  shadowy  patch  above  it.  Above  the 
shadow  is  a  faintly  illuminated  broad  cross-streak  of  a  cloudy  character. 
The  first  impression  made  by  the  photograph  upon  photographic  experts 
is  that  the  white  sphere  is  a  flare  spot  produced  by  the  diaphragm  of 
the  camera  in  consequence  of  a  reflection.  In  this  sense  the  second 
cloudy  circle,  which  becomes  visible  upon  magnification,  and  partly 
covers  the  first  circle,  is  also  interpreted.  On  the  other  hand,  no 
reflecting  objects  were  contained  in  the  cabinet,  and  the  white  patch 
gives  the  impression  of  a  real  solid  ball  rather  than  of  a  circle.  The 
view  is  confirmed  by  the  manner  in  which  the  feebler  cloudy  structure 
forms  a  slanting  cover  towards  the  back.  But  assuming  the  circle 
were  the  result  of  reflection,  how  shall  we  explain  the  misty  luminosity 
extending  downwards  and  getting  brighter  below  on  which  the  sphere 
is  lying  ?  Also,  the  broad,  cloudy  cross-band  above  the  sphere.  These 
two  things  are  not  due  to  errors  or  accidents  during  exposure,  but 
correspond  to  structures  really  present. 

We  must  also  remember  that  white  luminous  balls  have  been  seen 
by  numerous  observers  of  materialisation  phenomena,  and  have  been 
described  by  them  as  preliminary  stages. 

Finally,  it  is  also  remarkable  that  the  sphere  and  the  luminous 
streaks  were  photographed  at  the  very  spot  on  the  hem  of  the  curtain 
where  I  saw  the  white  substance  emerge  beyond  the  curtain  at  the 
moment  of  photography.  We  must,  therefore,  reckon  with  the  pos- 
sibility that  the  white-formed  substance  observed  by  us  changed  into 
the  shape  of  a  sphere.  But  the  retrogressive  process,  and  the  displace- 
ment towards  the  origin,  occurred  more  quickly  than  the  ignition  of 
the  flash-light  by  the  button.  Now  it  is  quite  possible  that  the  camera 
in  the  cabinet  may  have  photographed  a  fragment  of  the  mass,  in 
retrogressive  development,  as  it  retired  behind  the  curtain. 

Taken  by  themselves,  the  feeble  photographic  results  of  this  sitting 
prove  little  or  nothing.  In  connection  with  previous  results  they  tell 
against  any  suspicion  of  a  possible  fraudulent  arrangement  of  the 
occurrences.  But  for  the  investigator  who  sees  here  the  working  of 
unknown  forces,  any  detail,  however  small,  may  become  significant. 
The  discussion  of  these  side  issues,  therefore,  appeared  desirable. 

Sitting  of  the  6th  January  1911. 

Present. — Mme.  Bisson,  M.  M.,  and  the  author. 

Conditions  as  before.  An  external  examination  of  genitals  through 
the  tights  gave  a  negative  result. 

After  nearly  an  hour's  waiting,  a  bright  luminosity  appeared  under 
the  medium's  left  arm.     While  the  medium,  as  usual,  clutched  the  sides 

86  PHENOMENA    OF    MATERIALISATION 

of  the  curtain,  her  hands  being  visible  during  the  whole  phenomena  of 
this  sitting,  a  small  arm  with  hand  appeared  on  the  left,  but  hardly 
remained  visible  a  second.  In  the  short  time  no  details  could  be 
observed. 

After  this  we  saw  an  equally  fugitive,  but  recognisable,  male  hand 
(Fig.  25)  in  side  view,  with  its  thumb  in  front,  and  its  finger  stretched 
upwards.  As  already  stated,  the  distance  between  the  hand  and  the 
medium's  head  was  from  20  to  27  inches,  and  the  distance  from  her 
hands  16  to  24  inches. 

While  Eva  held  both  curtains  and  moved  them  to  and  fro,  a  narrow 
bright  band  developed  between  her  hands,  and  increased  to  a  width  of 
3  inches  and  a  length  of  12  to  14  inches.  The  material  appeared  to  be 
elastic,  viscous,  and  endowed  with  a  mobility  of  its  own.  Before  our 
eyes  it  transformed  itself  into  the  shape  of  a  human  forearm,  which 
was  rather  long  and  provided  with  a  hand.  The  latter  lay  across  the 
right  hand  of  the  medium,  while  the  elbow  portion  lay  on  the  base  of 
the  thumb  of  the  medium's  left  hand  and  vanished  behind  the  curtain. 
The  strip  then  became  thinner  again.  Eva  closed  the  curtain  for  a 
moment,  and  when  she  opened  it  again  the  same  play  of  a  more  or  less 
liquid,  variable  form  recommenced.  This  time  it  corresponded  to  a 
human  lower  leg,  the  sole  of  the  foot  touching  the  medium's  right,  and 
the  toes  being  directed  upwards.  The  knee  portion  disappeared  above 
her  left  hand  behind  the  curtain. 

This  whole  metamorphosis  resisted  the  influence  of  the  light  and  of 
our  gaze  unusually  long,  perhaps  sixty  seconds,  but  never  showed  a 
permanent  firm  shape.  The  constantly  changing  momentary  creations 
only  resembled  human  limbs  in  their  outline. 

Before  awakening,  Eva  again  asked  for  the  tights  to  be  detached 
from  the  dress  and  submitted  to  a  gynaecological  examination.  The 
introduction  of  my  right  middle  finger  into  the  vagina  gave  a  negative 
result,  as  did  the  remaining  examination  of  medium,  dress,  cabinet, 
and  chair. 

Sittings  of  March  and  April  1911  (Paris). 

Sitting  of  the  13th  March  1911. 

Present. — Mme.  Bisson,  her  sister,  Professor  Richet, 
M.  de  Fontenay  and  the  author. 

Time  of  Sitting.— 10  to  11.30. 

Illumination  and  control  as  in  previous  sittings.  Arrangement. — 
Mme.  Bisson  in  the  centre,  in  front  of  the  curtain  ;  the  author  on 
her  left  ;  Richet  on  her  right ;  De  Fontenay  in  the  second  row. 

The  cameras  were  set  up  by  me  before  the  sitting  at  a  distance  of 
10  feet,  one  camera  for  plates  7  by  9|  inches,  and  a  stereoscopic  camera. 
In  addition,  De  Fontenay  set  up  a  "  veroscope,"  at  a  distance  of  10  feet 
and  a  height  of  6  feet,  on  the  wardrobe. 

Fig.  24.     Photograph  taken  by  flashlight  with 
camera  inside  the  cabinet.     (sitting  of  4  janu- 
ARY,    I9II). 

Fig.  25.     Drawing  after  the  record  of  sitting 
of  6  january,   i9ii. 

SITTINGS  OF  MARCH  AND  APRIL  1911  (PARIS)  87 

The  phenomena  began  about  twenty  to  twenty-five  minutes  after 
the  commencement  of  the  sittmg.  When  the  curtain  opened  for  the 
first  time  the  medium's  hands  rested  on  her  knees.  The  skirt  had 
subsided  between  her  knees,  and  in  this  depression  we  saw  a  whitish, 
jelly-like  material,  8  or  10  inches  long  and  about  6  inches  wide,  and 
endowed  with  its  own  mobility.  On  approaching  my  head  I  could 
distinctly  make  out  the  form  of  the  hand  of  a  child  of  one  or  two  years. 
The  half-flexed  first  finger  and  thumb  were  directed  towards  us.  The 
other  three  fingers  disappeared  downwards.  The  whole  structure 
exhibited  a  rather  inert  motion,  and  remained  visible  for  one  or  two 
minutes.  During  this  time,  Eva  opened  and  closed  the  curtain  several 
times.  In  the  ensuing  part  of  the  sitting  hands,  of  various  shapes  and 
sizes,  appeared  from  the  right  and  left  of  the  curtain.  Several  times 
they  appeared  in  the  medium's  lap,  where  they  remained  longer  than  the 
others  (several  seconds),  and  could,  therefore,  be  more  carefully  observed. 
The  visual  impressions  interpreted  by  us  as  hands  were  manifested 
about  thirty  times,  while  the  medium's  hands  were  visible  on  her  lap 
all  the  time,  or  were  holding  the  curtains.  In  some  cases  the  curtain 
before  us  fell  so  far  over  the  medium's  right  knee  that  the  left  hand 
disappeared  from  my  view.  In  such  cases  I  asked  Professor  Richet, 
who  sat  on  the  right,  whether  he  could  see  the  medium's  right  hand 
from  his  side,  and  he  always  answered  in  the  affirmative. 

It  is  impossible  to  describe  at  all  adequately  the  impressions  we 
obtained.  Out  of  a  rich  store  a  few  are  worthy  of  special  mention. 
Thus,  I  saw  a  small  closed  female  hand,  which  appeared  to  be  wrapped 
in  a  veil,  the  end  of  which  hung  down.  From  this  I  distinctly  saw  two 
finely  modelled  female  fingers  emerge.  On  the  first  finger  I  could  see 
the  shape  of  a  nail.  The  phenomenon  lasted  about  three  seconds  and 
was  repeated  several  times,  being  withdrawn  behind  the  curtain  and 
then  again  emerging  into  the  light.  Another,  and  rather  better 
developed  hand  was  exposed  at  the  same  place,  i.e.,  to  the  right  of  the 
medium,  and  appeared  to  be  a  large  male  hand,  with  partially  flexed 
fingers.  I  observed  one  of  these  fingers  carefully,  and  compared  it 
with  those  of  the  medium's  visible  hand.  It  was  twice  as  large  as 
Eva's  fingers. 

During  another  phenomenon,  which  took  place  to  the  left  of  the 
medium,  the  hand  of  an  adult  appeared  as  a  white  compact  mass,  in 
which  the  formation  of  a  hand  and  fingers  could  be  distinguished  in 
low  relief.  The  whole  thing  recalled  a  white  block  of  marble,  from 
which  only  the  profiles  of  fingers  and  hand  emerged,  while  the  inter- 
stices between  the  fingers  were  filled  with  the  mass. 

During  one  such  materialisation  Richet  held  the  left  and  the  author 
the  right  hand  of  the  medium.  The  curtain  was  pretty  widely  open. 
Suddenly,  out  of  the  dark  on  the  left  of  the  medium's  head,  a  hand  and 
forearm,  visible  up  to  the  elbow,  appeared  with  a  downward  motion 
towards  the  medium's  lap.  At  the  same  time  a  hand  became  visible 
at  the  level  of  her  shoulder.  I  could  not  distinctly  see  this  hand  on 
account  of  my  sitting  on  the  left,  whereas  the  other  persons  could  see 
the  phenomenon  better.  No  details  could  be  made  out  beside  the 
unmistakable  outlines. 

In  contrast  with  this,  and  while  the  medium  grasped  both  curtains 

88  PHENOMENA    OF    MATERIALISATION 

with  her  hands,  a  white  patch  formed  between  her  feet  in  front  of  us, 
and  from  this  a  white  column  of  smoke  curled  upward  (Fig.  26).  At  its 
upper  end  a  distinctly  visible  hand  formed,  ascending  to  Eva's  knees, 
and  then  disappearing. 

When  another  hand  was  observed  on  my  left,  i.e.,  to  the  right  of 
the  medium,  I  quickly  inserted  my  head  behind  the  curtain  and  saw  that 
this  hand,  thrust  into  the  illuminated  portion  of  the  gap,  Avas  attached 
to  a  white  column  which  had  the  approximate  length  of  an  adult's  fore- 
arm. It  emerged  from  the  elbow- joint  of  the  medium  in  an  upward 
and  forward  direction  half  to  the  left,  while  her  own  forearm  rested 
on  her  right  thigh,  so  that  two  forearms  appeared  to  issue  from  her 
elbow.  Although  shaded  by  the  curtain,  the  appearance,  owing  to  its 
light  grey  or  almost  white  colour,  was  bright  enough  to  be  distinctly 
seen  against  the  faintly  illuminated  background.  The  hand  itself 
moved,  the  fingers  bending  and  stretching.  The  whole  emanation  did 
not  last  long  enough  to  perceive  any  details. 

After  this  we  saw  a  white  mass  developing  on  her  breast,  starting 
from  her  neck.  During  its  development  Eva  gave  Richet  her  left  and 
the  author  her  right  hand,  and  expressed  a  wish  to  be  photographed  in 
that  situation.  Though  closely  observing  this  self-moving  and  ever- 
varying  substance,  I  did  not  succeed  in  recognising  a  perfectly  clearly 
materialised  hand.  Fearing  lest  the  mass  might  disappear  again, 
I  gave,  after  about  thirty  seconds,  the  sign  to  switch  on  the  electric 
current. 

The  three  photographs  (Fig.  27)  are  quite  successful,  and  will  be 
described  at  the  end  of  this  record.  The  curtain  was  at  once  closed, 
in  order  to  allow  Eva  to  recover  from  the  shock. 

Although  in  other  sittings  the  flash-light  exposure  generally  meant 
the  end  of  the  phenomena,  this  time  the  medium  was  able  to  continue 
her  performances.  We  saw  several  veiled  heads  on  Eva's  left,  and  at 
about  the  height  of  a  person  standing  upright,  but  these  hardly  remained 
visible  a  second. 

The  medium  several  times  requested  Mme.  Bisson  to  hypnotise 
her  by  laying  her  hand  on  her  forehead.  The  lady  of  the  house  entered 
the  cabinet  and  closed  the  curtain  behind  her.  As  she  was  emerging, 
and  closing  the  curtain  behind  her,  a  veiled  female  head  became  momen- 
tarily visible.  The  whole  occurrence  took  place  with  such  rapidity 
that  the  head  had  already  disappeared  at  the  second  opening  of  the 
curtain,  even  before  Mme.  Bisson  had  sat  down.  The  medium  repeated 
this  experiment  three  or  four  times,  calling  her  protectress  into  the 
cabinet  each  time.  The  bodily  contact  with  her  seemed  to  strengthen 
and  soothe  Eva.  The  impression  made  was  as  if  Mme.  Bisson  were 
about  to  draw  the  picture  of  the  head,  by  an  invisible  thread,  out  of  the 
curtain  behind  her. 

The  mixed  series  of  heads,  amounting  to  about  a  dozen,  shows  some 
variations.  In  one  case  a  rather  long  bright  fragment  hung  down  from 
the  nose  or  chin  of  the  materialisation.  On  another  occasion  the  figure 
recalled  the  head  of  an  incompletely  sculptured  marble  bust,  as  in  the 
case  of  the  hand  previously  described. 

Although  I  was  unable,  from  my  seat,  to  see  Eva's  head  at  the  same 
time,  I  did  not  have  the  impression  that  she  could  have  produced  these 

Fig.    26.     Drawing   after   record   of  sitting   of 
13  ;\Iarch    191 1. 

Fig.  27.     Flashlight  photograph  by  the  author,   13  March,   igii. 

SITTINGS  OF  MARCH  AND  APRIL  1911  (PARIS)  89 

faces,  which  appeared  instantaneously,  as  if  projected  by  a  magic 
lantern,  by  means  of  her  head  alone.  The  time  available  for  putting 
on,  or  removing,  a  mask,  and  setting  up  and  dismantling  the  phantom, 
only  amounted  to  one  or  two  seconds  in  most  cases.  Another  head, 
emerging  from  the  curtain  on  the  left,  distinctly  showed  female  features, 
eyes,  and  veil.  The  nose  resembled  Eva's  nose,  and  the  phenomenon 
recalled  the  photograph  of  the  13th  May  1910,  Whether,  in  this 
last  case,  the  medium  had  risen,  and  had  shown  herself  to  us  veiled 
("  transfigured  "),  cannot  be  decided.  This  is  possible,  although  the 
picture  itself  appeared  finer,  more  etheresl  and  delicate  than  Eva's 
face. 

This  day's  experiments  were  remarkable  for  the  sculptural  character 
of  the  teleplastic  projections.  Some  of  the  head  and  hand  shapes 
resembled  unfinished  plastic  works  of  marble,  plaster,  or  clay,  on  a 
white  background.  Perhaps  this  extraordinary  circumstance  is 
explained  by  the  fact  that  Eva  inhabits  a  room  connected  with 
Mme.  Bisson's  studio.  She  is  surrounded  by  sculptures  of  all  sorts, 
and  has,  through  the  artistic  activity  of  her  protectress,  daily  oppor- 
tunities of  observing  the  various  phases  of  the  development  of  such 
products.  Memory  images  of  this  kind  may  have  influenced  her 
mediumistic  productions. 

The  last  remarkable  phenomenon  of  this  sitting  was  the  emergence 
of  an  extraordinarily  voluminous  mass  of  white  fabric  from  the  roof 
of  the  cabinet,  and  mainly  from  the  strip  hiding  the  suspension  of  the 
curtains  at  a  height  of  7  feet.  It  resembled  a  large  bundle  of  muslin, 
entering  the  gap  of  the  curtains  from  above,  and  falling  down  and 
disappearing  in  the  dark.  The  quantity  would  have  sufficed  to  clothe 
an  adult  person  completely.  In  this,  and  the  previous  occurrences, 
Eva's  hands  held  the  curtains,  and  opened  them  at  each  new  pheno- 
menon. Half  an  hour  after  the  flash-light  exposure  the  sitting  was 
closed.  Still  in  the  hypnotic  condition,  Eva  took  off  the  tights  and 
asked  to  be  gynaecologically  examined.  This  and  the  rest  of  the 
examination  was  negative. 

The  photograph  of  the  13th  March  1911  shows  the  medium  in  the 
cabinet  on  her  chair,  with  her  face  turned  to  the  right  and  painfully 
drawn.  Her  left  hand  is  held  by  Professor  Richet  and  her  right  by  the 
author. 

From  the  opening  of  her  dress  at  the  neck  a  white,  flocculent  mass  of 
material,  about  6  inches  wide  in  the  middle,  extends  over  her  chest  to 
her  right  thigh,  forming  a  voluminous  package  of  material  in  her  lap, 
and  then  falling  down  outside  over  her  left  thigh,  and  ending  in  a 
point. 

The  stereoscopic  image,  taken  from  the  wardrobe,  distinctly  shows 
the  round  hem  of  the  neck  opening.  The  substance  is  not,  therefore, 
as  one  might  conclude  from  the  photographs,  taken  at  the  same  level, 
tucked  in  like  a  napkin,  but  is  freely  fixed  to  the  material  of  the  dress. 

The  mass  itself  is  not  a  uniform  structure  like,  e.g.,  a  large  piece  of 
muslin,  but  shows  a  loose  consistency  with  quite  a  rough  exterior, 
like  fur  or  wadding,  composed  of  a  bundle  of  stripes  and  cords, 
resembling  lint  or  wool,  intermixed  with  transparent  veiling.  The 
stereoscopic  transparency  shows  the  structure  more  clearly  than  the 

90  PHENOMENA    OF    MATERIALISATION 

simple  photograph.  Just  in  the  middle,  on  Eva's  breast,  there  lies 
a  solid  piece  of  a  flat  white  substance,  larger  than  a  hand,  and  resembling 
a  white  paper  glove.  One  also  distinctly  sees  four  finger-tips,  two  of 
which  are  flattened  and  bent  upwards,  also  an  excrescence  pointed 
upwards,  and  above  it  a  solid,  round,  plastic  structure  recalling  a  thumb- 
joint  with  a  nail.  The  flat  white  and  sharply  bordered  piece  also 
emerges  in  a  point  from  under  the  substance  on  the  right  side,  and 
can  be  recognised  through  the  substance  lying  over  it. 

On  her  left  shoulder  is  a  flat  form  resembling  a  hand,  with  an  extra 
long  thumb  ;  the  finger-tips  bent  upwards,  and  the  little  finger  twisted 
about  its  own  axis.  This  shape  resembles  not  so  much  a  glove  as  a 
very  fine,  soft,  white  paper  shape.  Any  one  who  is  not  familiar  with 
the  observation  of  mediumistic  processes  will  jump  to  the  conclusion 
that  this  is  gross  fraud,  and  will  see  an  intention  of  producing  the 
optical  impression  of  hands,  by  means  of  rough  models  made  of  some 
fibrous  material.  Here,  again,  the  examination  of  the  photograph  alone 
is  not  sufficient  to  form  a  judgment.  One  must  take  into  account  the 
record  of  the  sitting  in  conjunction  with  further  data. 

Sittings  of  the  8th  and  18th  April. 

An  unusually  interesting  photograph  (Fig.  28)  was  taken  by  M.  de 
Fontenay  at  the  sitting  of  the  8th  April  1911,  in  the  author's  absence. 
Eva  sits  on  the  chair,  both  her  hands  being  held  by  two  gentlemen 
present.  A  broad  scarf-shaped  band,  with  a  distinctly  parallel  striping, 
runs  across  her  head,  entirely  covering  it  nearly  down  to  the  forehead. 
The  left  portion  falls  over  the  breast  in  the  shape  of  two  long  fibrous 
fragments,  while  the  other  end  of  the  shawl,  lying  more  in  the  shade 
on  the  right,  or  darker  in  colour,  also  consists  of  parallel  stripes,  and 
allows  two  white  rounded  ends,  of  a  plastic  appearance,  to  emerge 
below,  producing  the  distinct  impression  of  plastically  modelled  fingers. 
The  photograph  (Fig.  29)  taken  by  De  Fontenay  on  the  18th  April  is 
also  instructive  when  the  stereoscopic  transparency  is  examined. 
While  Eva's  hands  are  being  held  and  the  curtain  is  wide  open,  the 
medium  is  seen  on  her  chair  with  her  head  bent  forward.  Over  the 
back  of  it  there  is  something  like  a  broad  cloth,  adhering  to  the  hair 
like  soft  and  yielding  material,  and  extended  like  a  shawl.  The  two 
ends  hang  down  on  both  sides  to  the  middle  of  Eva's  chest,  the  left 
portion  ending  in  a  leaf-shaped  branch,  turning  and  widening  upwards. 
The  whole  appears  to  consist  of  one  piece,  as  shown  in  the  photograph. 
This  photograph  is  remarkable  by  the  fact  of  the  fabric  being  thick, 
soft,  and  yielding  at  the  top,  like  a  woollen  material,  while  the  two 
extremities,  hanging  down,  give  the  appearance  of  a  thin,  sharply 
bordered,  flat  structure,  resembling  paper.  This  clearly  marked 
contrast  in  the  consistency  of  the  same  piece  of  material  is  remark- 
able. 

If  the  teleplasma  can  undergo  such  changes,  this  picture  may  be 
regarded  as  an  instructive  preparation  for  the  flat,  sharply  bordered 
materials,  resembling  paper,  occuring  so  often  at  later  sittings,  as,  for 
instance,  in  the  portraits  of  heads. 

Fig. 

i8.     Flashlight    photograph    taken    by    Mons. 

FONTENAY    AT    SITTING    OF    8    APRIL,     IQII. 

Fig. 

29.     Flashlight    photograph    by    Mons. 

TENAY    AT    SITTING    OF    18    ApRIL,     IQII. 

DE      FON 

SITTINGS  OF  MAY  AND  JUNE  1911  (PARIS)  91 

Sittings  of  May  and  June  1911  (Paris). 

The  experiments  undertaken  between  13th  March  and  8th  May  1911 
neither  showed  any  progress,  nor  any  deviations,  from  the  previous 
phenomena.  More  than  two-thirds  of  these  sittings  were  negative, 
and  the  positive  phenomena  fell  short  of  previous  performances.  My 
arrival  in  Paris  on  8th  May  1911  occurred  during  this  unfavourable 
period. 

The  first  four  sittings  at  which  I  was  present,  8th  to  23rd  May, 
were  without  result,  and  one  sitting  had  to  be  abandoned  on  account 
of  the  sickness  of  the  medium.  The  first  change  in  Eva's  condition 
took  place  at  8  p.m.  on  the  18th  May,  when  Mme.  Bisson  had,  as  usual, 
hypnotised  the  medium.  While  the  latter  was  alone  with  the  medium 
in  the  cabinet,  a  smoke-like  substance  suddenly  began  to  emanate  from 
Eva's  mouth,  while  her  hands  were  being  held.  In  order  not  to  weaken 
the  medium,  in  view  of  the  sitting  arranged  for  the  next  evening,  the 
hypnotisation  was  stopped.  Still,  the  sitting  on  the  19th  May  remained 
negative. 

Sitting  of  the  23rd  May  1911. 

Present — M.  de  Fontenay,  Mme.  Bisson,  and  the  author. 

The  conditions  were  the  same  as  regards  inspection  and  control  of 
the  medium  and  cabinet,  as  well  as  dress  and  illumination.  On  this  day 
only  three  electric  lamps  were  lighted,  since  the  electric  circuit  had 
become  defective. 

This,  however,  did  not  make  any  perceptible  difference  to  the  lighting 
of  the  room. 

Although  no  less  than  seven  photographic  cameras  had  been  set 
up,  no  flash-light  photographs  were  taken,  on  account  of  the  short 
visibility  of  the  very  unstable  phenomena. 

After  waiting  three-quarters  of  an  hour,  a  grey  and  gradually  growing 
mass  was  seen  on  the  medium's  lap,  about  the  size  of  a  large  cocoa-nut. 
Eva's  hands  were  visibly  clutching  the  curtains.  The  mass  of  material 
appeared  to  weigh  down  Eva's  thin  dress,  sank  in  the  depression  of  the 
dress,  and  changed  its  shape  with  an  independent  motion.  Looking 
closer,  I  recognised  the  form  of  a  very  small  child's  hand,  which,  however, 
did  not  remain  there  long.  Eva  drew  the  curtains  together.  After 
this  some  forms  in  the  shape  of  hands  appeared,  on  the  left-hand  side, 
at  the  part  of  the  curtain  before  referred  to,  but  these  were  too  fugitive 
to  make  out  any  detail. 

At  Eva's  wish  the  participators,  one  after  the  other,  approached 
their  foreheads  to  the  curtain  and  were  touched  several  times.  The 
pressure  perceived  by  the  author  at  such  a  contact  was  always  that  of 
a  fairly  large  member,  having  a  cool,  hard  skin.  For  a  finger  the  mass 
producing  the  contact  seemed  to  be  fairly  broad,  and  reminded  me 
rather  of  a  large  toe,  or  the  thumb  of  an  unusually  large  hand.  To 
eliminate  any  doubt,  I  repeatedly  made  sure  during  the  experiment 
that  Eva's  left  knee  had  not  left  its  place. 

92  PHENOMENA    OF    MATERIALISATION 

The  author  therefore  reasoned  as  follows  : — 

If  the  hand,  or  whatever  member  it  may  be,  is  as  clearly  developed 
as  the  touch  suggests,  it  should  be  able  to  grasp  and  hold  an  object. 

With  this  idea  he  took  a  piece  of  cardboard,  the  size  of  a  post-card, 
out  of  his  pocket,  and  held  it  in  the  place  where  the  member  appeared, 
requesting  it  to  take  hold  of  the  cardboard.  Immediately  there  were 
attempts  to  grasp  the  cardboard,  but  without  success.  The  cardboard 
was  clearly  touched,  moved  to  and  fro,  and  pressed  against  my  hand, 
but  Avithout  being  really  grasped.  Perhaps  the  object  was  unsuitable. 
I  therefore  put  it  away  and  held  out  my  handkerchief.  It  was  imme- 
diately seized,  and  was  pulled  out  of  my  hand  and  thrown  behind  the 
curtain  with  a  violent  jerk.  Afterwards  it  was  found  to  the  left  of  the 
medium  on  the  floor.  I  then  held  up  a  golden  brooch  belonging  to 
Mme.  Bisson,  provided  with  four  short  golden  chains  with  breloques 
(4  inches  long  and  weighing  one  and  a  third  ounces).  The  brooch  was 
also  grasped  by  the  ends  of  the  chain,  pulled  to  and  fro  as  if  in  play, 
and  then  thrown  with  a  strong  jerk  behind  the  curtain,  where  it  fell  to 
the  ground. 

During  this  phenomenon  Eva's  hands  were  held  by  M.  de  Fontenay 
and  myself.  Her  head  lay  in  the  shade  of  the  curtain,  on  the  back  of 
the  chair.  Eva  talked  during  these  occurrences,  so  that  the  mechanical 
participation  of  her  mouth  is  excluded.  The  last  performance  had 
fatigued  the  medium  to  such  an  extent  that  the  sitting  had  to  be 
closed. 

For  the  critical  discussion  of  these  observations  it  should  be  pointed 
out  that  although  the  three  experiments  were  extemporised,  they  still 
succeeded.  They  could,  therefore,  not  have  been  prepared  for  in  any 
way. 

Final  control  negative. 

Sitting  of  the  24th  May  1911. 

Conditions,  participators,  and  cameras  as  on  23rd  May. 

The  medium  passed  the  night  of  the  23rd-24th  without  sleep.  Yet 
she  wished  for  a  further  sitting  on  the    24th. 

During  the  first  hour  Eva  lay  obviously  in  a  deep  sleep,  and  did  not 
attempt  to  produce  phenomena.  She  appeared  unconscious  and 
unconcerned.  Her  regular  breathing  was  the  only  audible  sign  of  life. 
According  to  our  experience  no  phenomena  occur  during  this  stage  of 
deep  somnolence.  As  soon  as  a  partial  awakening  from  the  deep  sleep 
occurs,  and  a  stage  of  active  somnambulism  sets  in,  in  which  the  second 
personality  dominates  Eva's  reduced  consciousness,  mediumistic  per- 
formances may  be  expected.^ 

During  the  phenomena  there  is  always  a  spiritual  connection  of  the 
medium  with  those  present,  even  when  the  medium  appears  sunk  in 
a  passive  lethargy  and  quite  taken  up  with  the  act  of  production.  But, 
as  a  rule,  she  takes  part  in  the  conversation  of  those  present,  puts  in 
remarks  or  instructions,  and  sometimes  asks  questions,  e.g.,  whether 

^  This  is  an  individual  peculiarity,  and  not  common  to  all  mediums. 

SITTINGS  OF  MAY  AND  JUNE  1911  (PARIS)  93 

the  developing  creation  is  already  visible  to  us.  As  before  mentioned, 
Eva's  personality  reappears  in  the  somnambulic  state,  but  combined 
with  an  increase  in  her  mental  functions. 

During  the  deep  sleep  the  connection  with  the  external  world  is 
almost  broken  off.  The  deep  sleep  may  often  be  converted  into  the 
half-awakened  state  of  consciousness  by  verbal  suggestion,  unless  it 
occurs  spontaneously  after  some  time.  On  this  occasion  Eva  began 
to  enter  the  state  of  active  somnambulism  after  about  an  hour.  She 
gave  signs  of  life,  entered  into  the  conversation,  and  showed,  by  blowing 
actions  of  the  mouth  and  deep  audible  respirations,  the  endeavour  to 
materialise. 

The  somnambulist  appeared  anxious  to  continue  where  she  had 
left  off  the  day  before.  Just  as  was  described  in  the  last  sitting,  we 
saw  plastically  developed  hand  shapes  emerge  several  times  in  succession 
from  the  left  curtain,  in  the  same  place  as  before.  On  my  stretching 
forward  my  left  hand  it  was  touched  several  times  on  its  palm,  and 
again  I  had  the  impression  of  being  touched  by  a  big  toe.  An  attempt 
at  photography  failed,  the  phenomenon  having  disappeared  at  the 
moment  of  the  flash.  After  the  photograph,  a  forearm  and  hand 
became  visible,  and  a  fist  appeared  at  right  angles  to  her  right  hand. 
Those  present  were  several  times  touched  on  the  forehead  and  hand. 
Final  examination  negative.  Close  of  the  sitting,  11.15  p.m.,  after  a 
duration  of  an  hour  and  a  half. 

Sitting  of  the  27th  May  1911. 

Present. — M.  S.,  Mme.  Bisson,  and  the  author. 

Three  cameras  ;    conditions  and  illumination  as  on  the  23rd. 
The  whole  sitting  lasted  twenty  minutes,  and  showed  nothing  new. 
A  nebulous  mass  was  seen  in  the  medium's  lap,  and  fugitive  shapes, 
of  very  short  duration,  between  the  curtains. 

Sitting  of  the  29th  May  1911. 

Present. — M.  de  Fontenay,  Mme.  Bisson,  and  the  author. 

Conditions  as  on  23rd  May.  Six  cameras.  A  camera,  specially 
prepared  for  close-range  photographs,  was  attached  to  the  wall  in  the 
cabinet  on  the  medium's  right.  Three  cameras  faced  the  medium,  and 
two  were  on  the  wardrobe. 

The  kind  of  phenomena  seen  did  not  differ  from  those  of  the  last 
sittings.  Some  forms,  resembling  human  members,  became  visible  at 
the  curtain  to  the  left  of  the  medium,  about  2  feet  above  her  hands, 
and  about  32  inches  from  her  head.  Touches  on  the  forehead  and 
hand,  as  in  previous  sittings.  The  skm  was  hard  and  cool,  and  the 
touching  surface  was  wider  than  a  finger. 

The  failure  of  the  last  photographic  exposure  suggested  to  the 
author  the  idea  of  providing  for  the  rapidly  disappearing  structure 
a  point  of  attachment  (Fig.  29). 

94  PHENOMENA    OF    MATERIALISATION 

I  took  a  cigarette  from  my  case  and  requested  the  medium  to  grasp 
the  cigarette  when  held  against  the  curtain  gap  by  means  of  the 
materialised  structure.  Since  I  had  no  success,  Mme.  Bisson  held  the 
cigarette  towards  the  spot  described.  At  the  moment  when  the  struc- 
ture approached  the  cigarette,  touched  it  and  became  visible,  the 
flash-light  was  ignited. 

Eva's  hands  at  that  moment  grasped  the  curtain.  In  spite  of  the 
nervous  shock  consequent  on  the  photograph,  the  phenomena  continued. 
Among  these  should  be  mentioned  the  appearance  of  a  small  child's 
hands  between  Eva's  hands,  as  they  rested  on  her  knees.  This  hand 
lay  across  the  medium's  lap,  opened  and  closed  into  a  fist.  It  also 
several  times  beat  with  its  palm  upon  the  back  of  Eva's  right  hand, 
and  we  could  distinctly  hear  the  clapping  sound.  In  this  case,  therefore, 
the  visual  impression  was  confirmed  by  the  sense  of  hearing. 

At  Eva's  request,  Mme.  Bisson  then  took  both  the  medium's  hands 
in  hers.  Even  under  those  conditions  the  small  mobile  hand  remained 
visible. 

Final  control  negative.     Sitting  closed  at  11.30. 

The  negative  (Fig.  30)  produced  by  the  camera  facing  the  cabinet 
(7  by  9|  inches)  shows  in  the  background  the  medium's  face  with  the 
mouth  half  open,  both  hands  in  the  foreground  grasping  the  curtain. 
Above  the  left  hand,  about  the  level  of  the  medium's  head,  we  see  a 
portion  of  a  plasticdlly-formed  member  in  a  curious  foreshortening.  It 
is  undoubtedly  a  left  foot.  One  sees  the  big  toe  as  if  seen  from  below, 
with  a  distinct  fold  of  skin  on  the  ball  of  the  foot,  and  the  tips  of  the 
second  and  third  toes.  The  lower  surface  of  the  big  toe  projects  beyond 
the  horizontally-held  cigarette,  so  that  the  latter  nearly  touches  the 
tip  of  the  second  toe.  It  looks  like  an  attempt  to  hold  the  cigarette 
between  the  first  and  second  toe.  The  stereoscopic  apparatus  confirms 
the  picture,  and  particularly  the  plastic  formation  of  the  member. 

The  cameras  standing  on  the  wardrobe,  and  being  pointed  down 
from  above,  give  a  different  picture,  in  this  sense — that  one  sees  the 
cigarette  lower,  and  the  first  and  second  toe  projecting  beyond  it.  A 
careful  examination  of  the  magnified  photographs  eliminated  any 
doubts  that  this  member  could  be  anything  but  the  point  of  a  foot. 
The  author's  first  impression  was  that  it  belonged  to  the  medium's  left 
foot. 

In  order  to  examine  this  question  in  greater  detail,  I  went  as  soon 
as  the  plate  had  been  developed,  i.e.,  before  either  Mme.  Bisson  or  the 
medium  knew  the  result,  to  the  seance  room,  and  made  them  give  me 
the  black  knitted  tights  used  by  Eva  for  the  sittings. 

The  material  covering  the  sole  of  the  left  foot  did  indeed  show 
some  holes  nearly  an  inch  wide,  apparently  due  to  ordinary  wear, 
but  not  large  enough  to  allow  the  three  toes  and  the  ball  of  the  foot 
to  pass  through — these  amounting  to  about  one-third  of  the  foot, 
according  to  the  photograph. 

Further  investigations  with  the  medium  in  the  cabinet  show  that 
it  is  impossible  for  Eva  to  raise  her  left  foot  so  high,  and  to  put  it  in 
the  place  where  the  toes  were  photographed,  while  maintaining  the 
upright  position  shown  in  the  photograph. 

Fig.  30.    Flashlight  photograph  by  the  author, 
29  May,   1911. 

Fig.    31.     Flashlight   photograph    by    the   author,    7    June,    1911. 

SITTINGS   OF   MAY   AND   JUNE   1911    (PARIS)  95 

The  left  leg  would  have  had  to  be  raised  outside  the  left  arm. 
Finally,  the  size  and  the  build  of  Eva's  left  foot  do  not  accord  with 
the  structure  photographed.  Measured  by  comparison  with  the  length 
of  the  cigarette,  the  medium's  big  toe  is  relatively  larger  than  the  toe 
photographed.  Although,  on  our  part,  all  possible  objections  were 
investigated,  the  evidential  force  of  this  photograph  does  suffer  by  the 
presence  of  the  holes  in  the  sole  of  the  stocking.  In  order  to  guard 
against  such  a  source  of  error  in  the  future,  the  author  bought  a  new 
pair  of  black  woollen  tights,  made  in  one  piece,  which  extended  from 
the  feet  to  above  the  hips.  These  were  regularly  used  in  the  following 
sittings. 

Sittings  of  the  3rd  and  6th  June  1911. 
Without  result. 

Sitting  of  the  7th  June  1911. 

Present. — M.  de  Fontenay,  Mme.  Bisson,  and  the  author. 

Sitting  commenced  at  9.30  p.m.  The  defective  electric  lamp  having 
been  repaired,  four  electric  lamps  lighted  up  the  room  during  the  whole 
sitting.  Conditions  and  control  as  usual.  Eva  this  day  wore  the 
new  tights.  She  undressed  in  the  seance  room  and  put  on  the  seance 
costume  in  our  presence,  after  we  had  carefully  examined  it. 

Five  cameras  were  ready,  two  on  the  wardrobe,  two  facing  the 
curtain  at  a  distance  of  10  feet,  and  one  in  the  cabinet,  which,  as  usual, 
had  been  carefully  searched. 

Obviously,  m  consequence  of  the  discussion  of  the  toes  photo- 
graphed, the  medium  demanded  a  special  control  of  her  feet.  She 
stretched  herself  on  her  chair,  and  laid  them  on  our  knees,  so  that 
M.  de  Fontenay  had  charge  of  her  left  foot  and  I  of  her  right  foot,  outside 
the  curtain.  She  also  gave  me  her  right  hand  and  M.  de  Fontenay 
her  left  hand.  Her  head  was  visible  as  soon  as  she  had  opened  the 
curtain  with  the  hands  held  by  us.  The  control  demanded  by  the 
medium  herself,  which,  in  addition  to  an  illumination  by  four  electric 
lamps,  placed  her  hands  and  feet  entirely  in  our  power,  and  excluded  all 
co-operation  of  these  members  during  the  production  of  the  phenomena, 
may  surely  be  taken  as  meeting  every  objection.  In  these  circum- 
stances there  appeared  on  her  left  side,  at  about  the  level  of  her  head, 
but  more  than  20  inches  away  from  it,  the  distinct  form  of  a  left  hand, 
with  a  portion  of  an  arm  corresponding  approximately  in  size  to  a  female 
hand. 

This  strongly  luminous,  strongly  outlined,  and  freely  suspended 
structure,  apparently  made  up  of  a  paplike  mass,  quickly  moved 
down  to  about  the  middle  of  her  breast,  and  disappeared  behind  the 
curtain.  The  whole  process  took  two  or  three  seconds — -rather  a  long 
time — and  was  repeated  five  times,  so  that  we  had  sufficient  time  for 
exact   observation.     The   fingers   were  separated  and  directed  down- 

96  PHENOMENA    OF    MATERIALISATION 

wards,  but  showed  no  skin  colour,  nor  any  other  detail.  In  fact,  they 
accurately  corresponded  in  their  appearance  with  those  hand  shapes 
which  we  had  photographed  on  several  occasions. 

Special  interest  attaches  to  the  undoubted  perception  that  the  hand 
shape  appeared  to  be  quite  flat,  as  seen  in  previous  photographs.  We 
had,  therefore,  under  these  rigid  conditions,  the  freely  suspended  flat 
sketch  of  a  female  hand  endowed  with  independent  motion.  In  spite 
of  its  imperfect  development,  it  was  mobile,  and  independent  of  the 
medium's  body.  The  whole  observation  is  of  importance  in  connection 
with  the  criticism  of  the  glove-like  forms  seen  in  several  photographs. 
It  tells  against  the  hypothesis  of  fraud,  and  in  favour  of  the  genuine 
character  of  this  peculiar  formative  process. 

Releasing  the  foot,  I  extended  my  right  hand  into  the  curtain  and 
asked  to  be  touched  on  the  palm  by  the  materialised  hand.  Four  times 
it  approached  to  within  about  4  inches,  but  it  regularly  disappeared 
again,  as  if  repelled  by  the  radiation  from  the  human  skin. 

Again,  at  a  critical  moment,  unfortunately  the  electric  circuit  for 
the  ignition  of  the  magnesium  failed.  On  this  occasion  it  would  have 
been  easy  to  photograph  the  freely  suspended  hand,  since  it  remained 
exposed,  for  several  seconds,  to  the  influence  of  our  gaze  and  to  the 
light.  The  fault  in  the  circuit  was  found  and  remedied,  so  that,  at 
least  in  the  second  half  of  the  sitting,  a  photograph  was  possible.  After 
we  had  taken  our  places  again,  and  had  re-established  the  previous 
control,  we  soon  saw  on  Eva's  breast,  and  in  her  lap,  that  veil-like 
mass  which  had  once  before  been  photographed.  I  approached  my 
hand  in  order  to  grasp  it,  but  it  regularly  receded  before  me  and  dis- 
appeared. While  the  medium's  hands  and  feet  were  held  by  the 
observers  as  described,  we  saw  a  veil -like  strip,  about  4  inches  broad 
and  20  inches  long,  descending  from  the  left-hand  upper  region.  It 
was  more  feebly  developed,  and  was  less  distinctly  seen,  than  the 
previous  phenomena  (Fig.  30). 

On  again  perceiving  the  apparently  woven  fabric,  in  the  medium's 
lap,  the  flash-light  was  ignited,  and  the  phenomenon  disappeared  at  the 
same  moment. 

The  sitting  closed  at  11.30.  Examination  of  the  medium  and 
cabinet  negative. 

Taking  into  account  the  wearing  of  the  new  tights  and  the  strict 
supervision  of  her  extremities,  the  results  of  this  evening  form  a  justifi- 
cation for  the  medium,  as  they  prove  that  Eva  does  not  require  either 
her  hands  or  feet  for  the  production  of  the  phenomena. 

The  photographs  (Figs.  31  and  32),  both  simple  and  stereoscopic, 
show  the  following  aspect  :  the  author  holds  the  medium's  right  hand 
and  right  foot,  while  her  right  foot  rests  on  his  left  knee.  On  the 
other  side,  De  Fontenay  holds  her  left  hand  with  his  right,  her  left  foot 
rests  on  De  Fontenay's  left  knee,  and  is  held  by  Mme.  Bisson's  hand. 
In  his  left  hand  De  Fontenay  holds  the  press-button  for  igniting  the 
magnesium  light,  and  his  thumb  is  just  exerting  the  pressure. 

The  medium  herself  has  her  head  bent  forward.  The  features 
indicate  a  certain  energetic  concentration  of  the  will.  On  her  chest  is 
seen,  at  the  height  of  her  shoulders,  a  broad  white  fabric  resembling 
muslin,  which  falls  down  into  her  lap  and  is  shaded  just  where  it  bends 

O   w 

§1 

H 

0.  z; 

2  ^ 

EC  o 

< 

OS  w 

W  K 

H  H 

U<    (J 

Fig.     3^^.     Flashlight     photograph     by     de 
FoNTENAY,   24  June,    lyii. 

SITTINGS   OF  MAY  AND   JUNE   1911   (PARIS)  97 

to  the  left,  while  it  vanishes  on  her  right  side  into  the  material  of  the 
dress.  On  the  left  side,  the  fabric  is  transparent,  and  underneath  it 
are  seen  two  sharply-defined  forms,  resembling  fuiger-tips  cut  out  of 
white  paper. 

The  photograph  taken  by  the  camera  set  up  in  the  cabinet  (Fig.  32) 
shows  the  medium  in  profile.  In  that  photograph  the  fabric  gives 
the  impression  of  a  material  strongly  bulging  forward,  and  having  a 
sharp  edge  below,  recalling,  to  some  extent,  a  mass  of  plaster  of  Paris. 
One  also  recognises  the  form  of  a  finger-tip.  The  upper  part  of  the 
fabric  is  surrounded  by  a  radiating  aura.  But  whether  this  is  simply 
the  effect  of  the  luminous  white  colour  on  the  photographic  plate,  or  is 
produced  by  the  composition  of  the  fabric,  is  difficult  to  decide. 

Further  Observations  during  June  and  July  1911 

(Paris). 

Sittings  of  the  10th  and  24th  June  1911. 

On  the  10th  June  1911,  M.  de  Fontenay  succeeded  in  photographing 
the  material  radiating  from  the  top  of  the  medium's  head  (Fig.  33). 
Although  the  picture  is  somewhat  blurred,  the  stereoscopic  trans- 
parency shows  the  situation  best.  Eva  sits  with  head  bent  forward 
in  the  cabinet.  A  broad  strip  of  white  material  runs  from  the  back  of 
her  head,  on  the  left,  over  the  top,  and  ends  in  a  fork  with  a  projection. 
Two  broad  strips  branch  out  from  the  main  portion,  backwards  and 
downwards,  while  a  portion  resembling  a  leaf,  and  attached  to  the  main 
body  by  a  narrow  stalk,  lies  over  the  hair  in  front.  The  photograph 
(Fig.  34),  taken  on  the  24th  June  1911  by  De  Fontenay,  in  the  author's 
absence,  is  interesting  as  throwing  a  light  on  the  genesis  of  the  so-called 
transfiguration,  i.e.,  in  the  spiritistic  sense,  the  medium  takes  upon 
herself  the  part  of  the  "  spirit,"  endeavouring  to  dramatise  the  character 
of  the  person  in  question,  by  clothing  herself  in  the  materialised  fabrics. 
This  transition  stage  is  found  in  nearly  all  materialisation  mediums. 
The  literature  of  the  subject  records  a  large  number  of  attempts  at 
exposure  of  mediums  thus  impersonating  "  spirits,"  e.g.,  that  of  the 
medium  Bastian  by  the  Crown  Prince  Rudolph ;  that  of  Crookes's 
medium,  Miss  Cook  ;  that  of  Mrs  d'Esperance,  etc.  In  all  these  cases 
the  medium  was  seized,  but  the  fabrics  used  for  masking  immediately 
disappeared,  and  were  not  afterwards  found. 

In  our  case,  Mme.  Bisson  held  the  medium's  right  hand.  The 
medium  had  risen  from  her  chair,  bent  forward,  and  stretched  her 
head  out  of  the  curtains,  while  her  left  opened  the  curtain.  Of  Eva's 
face  we  only  see  the  nose,  a  portion  of  the  cheeks,  and  the  mouth. 
The  whole  upper  head,  and  the  upper  half  of  the  nose,  is  bound  up  in 
a  striped  dark  material  in  several  layers  and  in  the  form  of  a  helmet, 
so  that  the  eyes  are  completely  covered.  Over  this  is  a  fabric  recalling, 
in  its  transparency  and  in  its  uniform  parallel  pattern,  the  previous 
creations.     A  second  and  larger  packet  of  material,  of  the  same  com- 

G 

^h  PHENOlVIENA    OF    MATERIALISATION 

position,  is  held  in  her  mouth.  This  material  hangs  down  upon  her 
hands,  and  seems  connected  with  the  head-covering.  For  this  inter- 
esting masquerade  a  considerable  quantity  of  some  bright  transparent 
material,  also  of  some  dark  material,  would  have  been  necessary. 

Communication  by  Letter. 

The  following  description  is  contained  in  a  letter  of  Mme.  Bisson  to 
the  author,  of  the  3rd  July  1911  : — 

"  At  nine  o'clock  last  night  (2nd  July  1911)  I  hypnotised  Eva, 
as  usual,  in  the  cabinet.  I  had  hardly  approached  her  when  she  threw 
herself  on  one  side,  with  her  mouth  open,  and  with  that  stertorous 
breathing  that  you  are  familiar  with.  Much  astonished,  I  closed  the 
curtains  behmd  me  and  remained  with  Eva  in  the  cabinet,  holding  her 
two  hands  and  waiting,  as  I  foresaw  the  occurrence  of  phenomena. 
Eva's  hands  had  grown  cold,  and  the  stertorous  breathing  continued. 
Then  I  saw,  descending  from  her  left  shoulder,  masses  of  material, 
which  fell  over  her  chest  down  on  the  right  side. 

"  I  then  asked  that  the  mass  should  come  to  me.  Almost  imme- 
diately after  I  had  uttered  this  wish,  a  large  packet  was  thrown  on 
my  head  from  behind.  It  glided  over  my  face  and  eyes,  moving  inde- 
pendently like  an  animal  with  a  moist  skin.  I  had  the  sensation  as 
of  touching  a  snail,  and  the  material  had  a  peculiar  smell,  difficult  to 
define. 

"  During  these  occurrences  I  continued  to  hold  both  the  medium's 
hands.  The  living  material  glided  along  down  my  back,  hanging  over 
from  one  shoulder  to  the  other,  and  entirely  enveloping  me,  something 
like  what  is  seen  in  the  case  of  the  medium  in  the  last  photograph. 

''  The  whole  mass  dissolved  quite  suddenly  and  disappeared,  while 
I  still  held  the  medium's  hand.  After  a  pause  of  several  minutes, 
Eva  said  to  me,  '  It  will  now  come  into  your  hand.  Stretch  out  your 
hand  as  flat  as  possible,  and  bring  it  near  my  left  side.' 

"  She  then  took,  my  right  arm  in  both  her  hands,  and  in  this  position 
I  stretched  forward  my  right  hand.  Immediately  afterwards  I  felt,  in 
the  hollow  of  my  hand,  something  resembling  a  pigeon's  egg,  which, 
however,  was  connected  with  Eva's  left  shoulder  by  a  broad  band  of 
the  substance.  I  then  withdrew  quite  slowly,  still  holding  this  egg-like 
substance  in  my  hand,  and  my  arm  still  held  by  both  Eva's  hands. 
Thus  I  gradually  got  into  the  light  at  the  opening  of  the  curtain, 

"  The  material  has  an  ash-grey  aspect,  and  is  traversed  by  threads 
like  a  delicate  skin.  It  is  cool,  moist  and  living.  I  slowly  approached 
my  left  hand  to  the  material,  touched  it  and  followed  it  with  my  hand 
up  to  its  origin.  A  large  knot  of  dense  and  tough  substance  was 
found  emerging  from  Eva's  left  shoulder. 

'•  Suddenly  the  material  was  withdrawn  from  my  right  hand,  and 
I  felt  that  it  receded  towards  Eva's  left  shoulder,  escaping  from  under 
my  hand. 

"  Another  pause,  after  which  the  phenomena  recommenced.  Laying 
my  right  hand  on  Eva's  left  shoulder,  and  holding  with  my  left  her 
two  joined  hands,  I  felt  myself  pulled  and  touched  on  the  hair  with  the 
fingers. 

OBSERVATIONS  DURING  JUNE  AND  JULY  1911  (PARIS)     99 

"  Thereupon  Eva  took  my  right  arm  in  both  her  hands.  This  time 
the  material  was  thrown  on  my  right  hand  and  on  her  hands,  com- 
pletely enclosing  our  hands.  I  then  commenced  to  pull  again  and  to 
draw  the  material  outwards,  proceeding  as  tenderly  as  possible,  in 
order  not  to  hurt  the  medium.  When  I  began  to  examine  the  material, 
it  had  curled  right  round  my  hand.  Suddenly  Eva  made  a  movement 
with  her  hands,  lying  on  my  arm,  and  involuntarily  pulled  at  the 
material  held  by  me.  It  obviously  frightened  and  hurt  her,  lor  she 
screamed,  and  gave  me  great  anxiety.  I  tried  to  soothe  her,  but  she 
complained  of  a  strong  nausea.  The  material,  this  time,  quickly  dis- 
appeared on  her  left  breast.  The  nausea  continued  for  about  ten 
minutes.  Immediately  after  the  scream  she  fled,  in  her  hypnotic 
condition,  out  of  the  cabinet  into  the  room,  and  would  not  return.  I 
soothed  her  gradually,  and  awakened  her  outside  the  cabinet." 

In  a  letter  of  the  9th  July,  the  above  communications  were  sup- 
plemented as  follows,  in  answer  to  some  questions  of  mine  :— 

"  As  I  stood  in  the  cabinet,  and  Eva's  stertorous  breathing  com- 
menced, I  carefully  opened  the  left  flap  of  the  curtain  behind  me,  and 
the  light  thus  entering,  allowed  me  to  see  the  phenomena.  In  holding 
the  material  in  my  hand,  I  had  the  impression  of  some  dense  but  soft 
matter,  neither  quite  hard  nor  quite  soft.  The  material  penetrated 
Eva's  dress,  and,  the  moment  I  touched  the  shoulder  with  my  left 
hand,  it  quickly  disappeared.  Eva  felt  all  my  movements,  including 
that  by  which  I  touched  the  material.  The  touch  itself  does  not  make 
her  suffer,  but  it^  hurts  her  when  I  begin  to  draw  the  material  away. 
A  pin  inserted  in^the  material  would  cause  Eva  pain. 

"One  might  succeed  in  removing  the  material  as  soon  as  the 
materialisation  is  sufficiently  separated  from  her.  But  one  must  not 
try  to  cut  off  a  piece,  or  to  pull  it  away  brusquely,  while  the  material 
is  still  in  connection  with  her.  In  any  case,  one  must  avoid  hurting 
her  by  an  incorrect  procedure.  ^ 

"  In  her  somnambulistic  condition,  Eva  says  :  '  It  is  not  I  who 
produce  or  create.  It  is  an  entity  independent  of  me,  which  borrows 
material  from  me,  and  can  go  out  beyond  my  body.  That  cannot 
take  place  in  the  light  and  in  the  daytime.'  This  is  also  corroborated 
by  the  circumstance  that  she  has  produced  phenomena  at  moments 
miexpected  by  herself  or  by  me.  She  claims  to  submit  to  an  unknown 
power,  which  directs  her.  She,  therefore,  never  knows  whether  she 
can  produce  or  not.     She  looks  upon  herself  simply  as  a  machine." 

Sittings  of  July  and  August  ipii  at  St  Jean  de  Luz. 

The  Bisson  family  had  taken  for  the  summer  of  1911  a  villa  at  St  Jean 
de  Luz,  a  picturesquely  situated  watering-place  10  miles  from  Biarritz. 
The  medium,  Eva  C,  accompanied  them  thither. 

In  order  to  continue  his  observations,  the  author  went  to  Biarritz 

100 

PHENOMENA    OF    MATERIALISATION 

in  July,  and  between  the  21st  July  and  the  26th  August  1911  he  took 
part  in  eighteen  sittings. 

Experimental  Room. — A  room  on  the  ground  floor,  with  a  single 
entrance,  was  reserved  exclusively  for  the  sittings.  An  inspection  of 
the  external  walls  showed  no  opening,  or  access,  except  the  window. 
The  window  itself  had  wooden  shutters,  which  were  closed  before  every 
sitting.  x\lso,  the  only  door  was  locked,  before  everj^  sitting,  with  a 
key,  which  the  author,  or  one  of  the  other  sitters,  kept  in  his  pocket. 

The  cabinet  arranged  for  our  purposes  had  walls  lined  with  thin 
black  material,  and  had  a  roof  at  a  height  of  7|  feet.  The  separate 
portions  of  the  material  were  joined  by  a  sewing-machine,  and  had  no 
folds  or  pockets  into  which  one  could  have  inserted  a  finger,  much 
less  a  hand.  The  curtains  were  mounted  on  rings  running  along  a 
metal  rod.  They  consisted  of  the  same  black  stuff,  sewn  on  to  the 
lining  of  the  cabinet  wall  at  the  sides.  A  light  wicker  chair,  enamelled 
black,  and  partly  covered  with  the  same  material,  was  used  by  the 
medium  as  a  seat.     Everything  else  can  be  seen  from  the  Diagram. 

Sea/7 ce  /fffo/n  a?""  SUea/7  e/e  Luz 

/6/2J/:. 

//e/f/?/  G/c<7S//?ef  6//:  Sj'n 
a,6,c  ^J/fferj. 

Diagram  IV. 

Illumination. — The  pendant  hanging  from  the  centre  of  the  ceiling 
had  four  electric  lamps,  the  middle  one  of  thirty-two  candle-power  and 

SITTINGS   AT  ST  JEAN  DE   LUZ,   1911  101 

the  three  others  of  sixteen  candle-power  each.  The  thirty-two  candle- 
power  lamp  was  surrounded  by  a  red  globe.  The  other  three  only  had 
a  simple  shade  of  red  glass  ;  but,  since  the  carpet  and  ceiling  appeared 
nearly  white,  they  gave  such  an  intense  light  that  at  first  we  also 
reduced  these  lamps,  by  encasing  them  in  red  globes,  so  that  the 
electric  light  then  had  to  traverse  a  double  layer  of  red  glass. 

Since  the  room  then  appeared  too  dark,  we  removed  the  ruby  globe 
from  one  of  the  lamps  before  the  sitting  of  the  2nd  August,  while  the 
other  two  lamps  retained  their  double  red-glass  envelope.  This 
illumination  made  the  room  appear  considerably  lighter  than  it  did  in 
Paris. 

If  we  desired  to  reduce  the  light  we  could  switch  off  the  sixteen 
candle-power  lamps,  so  that  only  the  thirty-two  candle-power  lamp 
shone  through  a  white  and  a  ruby  glass. 

The  dress  of  the  medium  consisted  of  the  tights  supplied  by  the 
author  in  Paris,  which  enveloped  her  up  to  the  hips,  and  a  black  dress 
made  at  St  Jean  de  Luz,  without  any  trimmings  or  collar,  which  closed 
tight  round  the  neck,  and  was,  before  each  sitting,  sewn  up  behind, 
from  the  neck  down  to  the  waist.  Furthermore,  Mme.  Bisson,  before 
every  sitting,  joined  the  tights  to  the  dress  by  a  close-stitched  seam 
passing  round  the  waist,  and  sewed  up  both  sleeves  at  the  wrist,  in 
such  a  Avay  that  the  sleeves  fitted  closely  to  the  wrist.  For  this  purpose 
eight  or  nine  white  threads  w^ere  necessary,  which  were  always  joined 
by  knots. 

The  searching  of  the  medium  took  place  before  and  after  each 
sitting,  in  the  same  w^ay  as  in  Paris,  The  inedium  entered  the  room 
with  the  seance  costume,  and  put  on  the  tights  in  our  presence.  Before 
every  sitting  we  were  allowed  to  insert  the  hand  between  the  dress  and 
the  skin,  to  make  sure  that  no  white  veils  or  similar  things  were  con- 
cealed about  the  body.  Besides  this,  the  hair,  nose,  and  mouth  were 
examined,  but  always  without  result. 

The  inspection  of  the  cabinet,  before  and  after  the  experiments, 
by  the  various  sitters,  never  showed  anything  remarkable,  in  spite  of 
the  greatest  care. 

The  hypnotisation  of  the  medium  was  done  regularly  by  Mme.  Bisson, 
who  took  a  seat  in  front  of  the  cabinet,  and  always  under  the  eyes  of 
those  present.  Fixation  of  the  eyes  and  touching  of  the  medium's 
hands  sufficed  to  put  her  into  a  state  of  trance  in  barely  half  a  minute. 
Only  after  this  was  the  white  light  extinguished,  so  that  the  red  lamps 
alone  were  burning. 

The  photographic  exposures  during  the  sittings  were  prepared  by 
the  author,  and  were  all  carried  out  with  his  three  cameras,  placed 
some  10  feet  in  front  of  the  cabinet. 

The  magnesium  itself  (about  a  tenth  of  an  ounce)  was  ignited  by 
the  electric  current  derived  from  the  mains,  with  the  help  of  a  pear- 
push  held  in  the  author's  hand  and  connected  by  a  flexible  cord.  All 
the  slides  were  inserted  by  the  author  himself.  The  cameras  were 
opened  in  the  red  light  only,  and  reiriained  open  during  the  whole 
sitting.  It  onl}'^  required  a  pressure  on  the  contact  to  photograph 
any  situation  which  appeared  suitable  to  the  author.  The  first  three 
sittings  of  21st,  22nd,  and  25th  July  were  without  result. 

102  PHENOMENA    OF   MATERIALISATION 

Sitting  of  the  28th  July  1911. 
Present. — Mme.  Bisson  ;  a  German  physician,  Dr  A.,  and  the  author. 

Commencement  of  the  experiment  at  8.45.  Conditions  of  control 
as  above.  Dr  A.  himself  searched  the  cabinet,  the  seance  costume, 
and  the  medium  before  and  after  the  sitting,  and  took  charge  of  the 
key  of  the  room.     Illumination  as  above  described. 

Very  soon  after  the  commencement  of  the  sitting  some  large  patches 
were  seen  on  the  medium's  upper  arm,  and  some  strips  about  a  foot 
long. 

We  formed  a  chain.  Mme.  Bisson  sitting  in  the  centre  gave  her 
right  hand  to  Dr  A.  and  her  left  to  me.  Eva  gave  her  left  hand  into 
Dr  A.'s  right,  and  her  right  hand  into  my  left,  so  that  the  circle  was 
closed,  with  the  curtains  open.  The  latter,  however,  the  medium  held 
with  her  thumbs,  so  as  to  be  able  to  bring  the  phenomena  from  the 
shade  into  the  light,  by  moving  the  curtains. 

Her  feet  were  stretched  out  and  lay  in  Mme.  Bisson's  lap.  Under 
these  conditions  two  large  faint  patches  appeared  on  her  upper  body, 
changing  from  place  to  place  ;  then  some  sketchy,  white,  imperfectly 
developed  structures,  which  were  not  visible  to  us  longer  than  from 
one  to  three  seconds,  but  which  already  showed  a  tendency  to  the 
formation  of  hands. 

The  shapes  were  flat,  emerged  from  a  mass  showing  automatic 
motion,  and  showed  finger-shaped  excrescences,  which  seemed  to  move 
of  their  own  accord.  Finally,  we  saw  emerging  from  the  curtain  on 
the  left,  a  clearly  drawn  female  right  hand  (of  the  size  of  Eva's  hand), 
with  a  forearm  swathed  in  a  wide  sleeve,  resembling  veiling  or 
lace. 

'^  This  shape  was  not  apparently  in  direct  connection  with  Eva's 
body.  It  remained  visible  for  two  or  three  seconds,  but  was  flat,  as 
if  cut  out  of  paper. 

During  further  formations  of  this  sort,  which  all  showed  a  tendency 
to  take  the  shapes  of  hands  or  arms,  the  flat  character  became  less 
noticeable.  More  or  less  plastically  developed  forearms,  with  hands, 
showed  themselves  about  six  times. 

In  one  case,  a  hand  came  from  the  medium's  left  side  and  disappeared 
on  the  right,  behind  the  curtain.  This  appearance  was  at  about  the 
level  of  the  medium's  head.  I  may  add  that,  during  the  whole  of  these 
occurrences,  the  head  was  always  under  the  scrutiny  of  our  eyes,  and 
often  exposed  to  the  light.  Out  of  the  series  of  visual  perceptions, 
which  only  represent  repetitions  and  variations  of  the  same  theme,  a  few 
characteristic  ones  may  be  mentioned. 

While  the  conditions  of  the  experiment  remained  unchanged,  so 
that  Eva's  whole  body  was  under  control,  she  closed  the  curtains  with 
the  hands  held  by  A.  and  by  me.  Suddenly,  a  third  hand  appeared  about 
a  foot  above  Eva's  hands,  in  the  shape  of  a  fist,  emerging  from  the 
curtain.  It  was  plastically  well  developed,  but  appeared  to  possess 
only  three  fingers. 

In  a  few  cases  we  saw  hands  above  her  head,  with  fingers  pointing 
forward.     On  the  whole,  the  phenomena  appeared  less  distinct  and 

SITTINGS   AT   ST   JEAN   DE   LUZ,    1911  103 

less  materialised  than  during  the  last  observations  in  Paris.  This 
may  have  been  due  to  the  brighter  illumination  and  change  of  climate. 

Among  other  appearances,  I  may  mention  a  broad  veil-like  mass, 
which  came  from  the  left  shoulder,  descended  into  Eva's  lap,  showed 
automatic  motion,  and  disappeared  before  our  eyes. 

Only  once  after  the  majority  of  the  phenomena  mentioned  occurred 
did  Mme.  Bisson  enter  the  cabinet,  in  order  to  soothe  the  tired  medium 
by  placing  her  hand  on  her  forehead. 

Then,  when  Eva's  hands  became  warm — a  sign  that  she  could  not 
produce  anything  more — the  sitting  had  to  be  closed. 

Still  in  the  state  of  somnambulism,  Eva  rose,  approached  Dr  A., 
and  asked  to  be  searched.  Dr  A.  verified  that  all  the  seams  and  the 
whole  dress  were  in  order,  and  was  the  first  to  enter  the  cabinet  for  the 
final  search,  which  was  also  negative. 

Sitting  of  the  31st  July. 

Negative. 

M.  Bisson,  on  the  SOth  July,  had  a  paralytic  stroke,  with  left-sided 
hemiplegia.  This  sad  occurrence,  the  excitements  and  anxieties  in  the 
family,  brought  about  by  it,  and  the  sleepless  night  spent  in  nursing 
him,  from  the  30th  to  31st  July,  disturbed  the  psychic  equilibrium  of 
the  sitters  required  for  a  successful  sitting. 

Sitting  of  the  2nd  August  1911. 

Present. — Mme.  Bisson,  Dr  A.,  and  the  author. 

Conditions  as  on  the  28th  July.  Time,  9  to  11  p.m.  Illumination 
as  above. 

The  medium's  body,  including  mouth,  nose,  hair,  and  arm-pits, 
her  dress  and  the  cabinet,  were  thoroughly  examined  by  Dr  A.  and  the 
author.  Without  the  knowledge  of  the  ladies  concerned,  Dr  A.  had 
made  a  red  mark  on  Eva's  dress,  in  order  to  make  sure  that  there  was 
no  substitution  of  clothing. 

Dr  A.  also  watched  most  minutely  the  process  of  hypnotisationfrom 
beginning  to  end.  Mechanical  aids  towards  the  production  of  pheno- 
mena were  not  found  hidden  anywhere. 

A  quarter  of  an  hour  after  the  hypnotisation,  what  we  may  call 
the  "  transformation  of  energy  "  in  Eva's  organism  began.  This  time 
the  large  white  mass  seemed  to  issue  from  the  mouth,  which  was  bent 
to  the  left.  The  substance  extended  from  the  left  shoulder,  in  the 
shape  of  large  patches,  8  to  12  inches  wide,  on  to  her  breast,  and  changed 
their  character  several  times.  Eva's  hands,  meanwhile,  held  the 
curtain,  and  were  constantly  visible.  The  substance  appeared  several 
times  lying  on  her  hair,  and  flat  forms  of  hands  were  seen. 

At  the  commencement  of  this  stage,  Eva  gave  her  two  hands  to 
Dr  A.  and  myself,  as  in  the  sitting  of  28th  July.  These  hands  we  held 
during  the  ensuing  phenomena  without  interruption.     But  the  medium's 

104  PHENOMENA    OF   MATERIALISATION 

thumbs  held  the  curtams,  in  order  to  be  able  to  close  them  more  or  less, 
and  so  regulate  the  light  falling  on  the  materialised  products.  She 
also  laid  her  feet  on  our  knees,  her  left  foot  on  Dr  A.'s,  and  her  right 
on  mine.  The  head,  as  in  the  sitting  of  28th  July,  was  always  under 
scrutiny,  and  was  seen  by  me  during  nearly  all  the  phenomena.  By 
this  procedure  Eva  had  excluded  all  her  limbs  from  co-operation  in 
the  phenomena.  Our  first  optical  perceptions  during  this  period  were 
at  about  the  level  of  Eva's  head.  At  first  we  saw  large  indistinct  patches 
which,  with  a  gradual  and  automatic  flowing  motion,  formed  themselves 
into  flat  hands  without  any  detail.  Their  colour  was  white,  but  appeared 
reddish  under  the  illumination.  Their  size  was  variable.  Sometimes 
the  forms  resembled  female  hands,  and  sometimes  male  hands.  On 
one  occasion  a  male  forearm  and  hand,  clothed  in  a  sleeve  and  extending 
up  to  the  elbow,  proceeded  from  a  point  at  the  level  of  her  head.  This 
arm  made  a  rapid  movement  downward  towards  a  position  in  front  of 
her  face  and  disappeared. 

A  further  group  of  optical  images  developed  at  her  right  hip  under 
the  elbow,  i.e.,  on  my  side,  in  such  a  manner  that  they  were  covered 
by  the  curtain  and  invisible  to  me,  but  were  clearly  observed  by  Dr  A., 
who  sat  directly  opposite.  Dr  A.  found  that  this  substance  developed 
into  a  hand.  Then  followed  a  rest-pause.  The  curtain  was  closed 
and  the  limbs  liberated. 

The  same  conditions  were  then  restored  as  regards  the  control  of 
hands  and  feet.  On  reopening  the  curtains  the  mass,  invisible  to  me, 
lay  on  her  right  shoulder.  Dr  A.  observed  that  a  hand  emerged  from 
this  viscous  and  apparently  luminous  substance.  He  also  thought  he 
observed  the  lifting  of  this  hand  from  the  body  of  the  medium,  and 
some  motions  of  the  fingers. 

On  his  giving  the  sign  for  the  ignition  of  the  magnesium  light,  I 
pressed  the  button.  The  photographs  were  successful,  and  confirmed 
the  accuracy  of  the  visual  impressions,  especially  the  stereoscopic 
plate. 

The  photograph  (Figs.  35  and  36)  shows  the  control  of  the  hands 
and  feet.  Mme.  Bisson  holds  the  medium's  right  foot,  lying  on  my 
left  knee,  the  tip  of  her  left  foot  projects  beyond  A.'s  left  knee.  Both 
her  hands,  which  hold  the  curtain,  are  held  ^  by  A.  and  me.  The 
medium's  head  is  bent  and  clearly  visible.  The  seam  in  her  dress  is 
clearly  seen,  and  behind  the  head  a  portion  of  the  back  of  the  chair. 

On  her  right  shoulder  is  a  broad  mass  resembling  a  thick  white 
cloth,  and  hanging  dovm  to  the  middle  of  her  chest.  Over  her  shoulder, 
at  the  sleeve,  a  flat  white  hand,  with  four  clearly-dra\Mi  fingers,  is  seen, 
the  joints  of  which  follow  the  rounding  of  the  shoulder  and  appear  bent 
in  front.  The  whole  of  the  back  of  the  hand  is  distinctly  seen,  and  the 
relative  sizes  are  correct.  The  thumb  is  not  there,  but  the  first  finger 
and  the  part  of  the  hand  which  would  join  the  thumb  is  seen  to  merge 
into  a  white  substance  without  any  demarcation,  as  if  the  hand  were 
only  part  of  the  whole  substance.  Besides  the  fingers,  there  is  a  narrow 
stalk  which  emerges  from  the  base  of  the  hand  backwards  and  points 
over  the  shoulders." '  The  form  of  the  hand  is  flat,  and  its  surface  lacks 

'  Visible  on  the  original  plates.  This  part  was  omitted  in  the  above  picture,  so  that 
the  other  foot  is  not  seen. 

H    ii' 

o  a\ 
o    . 

SITTINGS   AT  ST  JEAN  DE   LUZ,   1911  105 

all  detail.  This  whole  experiment  is  of  interest,  inasmuch  as  Dr  A., 
while  controlling  all  the  medium's  limbs,  observed  the  growth  of  a 
hand-shaped  body  out  of  an  automatically-moving  substance,  from 
beginning  to  end,  and  gave  the  signal  for  the  photographic  record  when 
he  considered  the  process  terminated.  The  photograph  confirms  the 
correctness  of  the  appearance.  In  this  case  the  time  of  observation 
was  about  one  minute. 

When  the  flash-light  flared  up  Eva  screamed.  Mme.  Bisson  took 
her  handkerchief  and  entered  the  cabinet  to  wipe  Eva's  face  and  mouth. 
When  she  came  out  and  showed  us  the  handkerchief  it  was  quite  wet, 
and  showed  traces  of  blood. 

After  a  short  pause  the  sitting  continued.  The  hands  and  feet 
were  left  free,  but  the  hands  could  be  regularly  seen  during  the  occur- 
rences about  to  be  described,  either  lying  on  her  knees  or  holding  the 
curtain.  The  appearance  of  hands  and  arms  at  a  level  of  the  medium's 
head  was  repeated  several  times. 

On  one  occasion  Eva  closed  the  curtain,  though  her  hands  remained 
visible  at  the  curtain  from  without.  Suddenly,  I  saw  at  a  height  of 
16  inches  above  her  hands,  a  fist,  which  fell  like  a  meteorite  in  front 
of  our  eyes  and  disappeared  on  the  floor. 

While  Eva's  hands  rested  visibly  on  her  knees,  and  the  curtain  was 
half  open,  suddenly  a  third  hand  grasped  the  left-hand  flap  of  the 
curtain  from  within  and  closed  it.  This  third  hand,  at  Dr  A.'s  wish, 
gave  a  tap  on  the  back  of  his  right  hand. 

Subsequently  some  misty  or  cloudy  spherical  forms,  about  the  size 
of  a  head,  became  visible  above  Eva's  head.  On  one  occasion  the  profile 
of  a  human  face  appeared  instantaneously  on  the  left.  Then  a  piece 
of  veil  came  on  the  left,  out  of  the  curtain,  and  fell  on  Eva's  hand.  It 
was  large  and  transparent,  so  that  the  hand  could  be  seen  through  it, 
and  was  withdrawn  by  a  turning  motion,  while  Eva's  hands  were  quite 
motionless. 

After  the  conclusion  of  the  sitting  a  detailed  examination  of  the 
medium  and  cabinet  was  undertaken.  Eva  had  emerged  from  the 
curtain  in  the  somnambulic  state,  and  requested  to  be  searched,  but 
the  final  examination  was  without  result. 

Sittings  of  the  5th  and  7th  August. 

Negative. 

On  the  5th  August  Eva  was  out  of  sorts  before  the  sitting,  and 
strongly  resisted  all  attempts  to  awaken  her  from  the  somnambulic 
state.  In  order  to  produce  a  slight  shock  in  her  nervous  system,  the 
author  took  a  needle  and  made  a  prick  in  her  neck.  The  medium 
reacted  to  this  harmless  intervention  with  a  violent  fit  of  rage,  followed 
by  an  hysterical  crisis,  with  nausea  and  convulsive  weeping.  Not 
quite  completely  awakened,  she  went  to  bed,  and  turned  up  the  next 
morning  with  her  head  wrapped  up.     Even  shortly  after  the  sitting  a 

106  PHENOMENA    OF    MATERIALISATION 

red  patch,  the  size  of  a  florin,  was  observed  on  her  neck,  probably  the 
result  of  an  auto-suggestive  local  hyperaemia. 

It  was  only  on  the  6th  August,  in  the  evening,  after  very  serious 
representations  by  Mme.  Bisson,  that  Eva's  excitement  subsided. 

Sitting  of  the  8th  August  1911. 
Sitters, — Mme.  Bisson  and  the  author. 

This  day  Eva  took  part  in  a  motor  excursion,  and  was  apparently 
well  disposed. 

Conditions  as  on  the  2nd  August. 

Eva  showed  the  strongest  desire  to  produce  some  phenomena,  but 
for  a  long  time  her  efforts  remained  unavailing.  In  order  to  facilitate 
the  process  of  development,  the  author  reduced  the  light,  extinguishing 
the  three  sixteen  candle-power  lamps,  so  that  only  the  thirty-two 
candle-power  lamp  remained. 

Then  followed  feeble  attempts  at  materialisation.  First,  at  Eva's 
left  shoulder,  some  grey  and  indefinite  cloudy  patches  were  seen  ;  then, 
while  her  hands  were  visible,  a  three-cornered  mass,  the  size  of  a  5s.  piece, 
appeared  in  her  lap,  which  sometimes  was  bright  and  sometimes  was 
darker,  then  disappeared  and  reappeared.  It  finally  receded,  leaving 
only  a  bright  point,  which  slowly  vanished. 

This  evening's  experiences  are  instructive,  inasmuch  as  they  show 
that  the  phenomena  do  not  solely  depend  on  the  medium's  will,  but 
that  other  entirely  unknown  factors  play  a  part  in  their  genesis. 

Sitting  of  the  9th  August  1911. 
Sitters. — Dr  A.,  Mme.  Bisson,  and  the  author. 

Conditions  as  on  2nd  August.  Minute  inspection  of  medium  and 
cabinet. 

Immediately  after  the  beginning  of  the  sitting  the  well-known  large 
strips  and  veils  were  perceived  at  her  left  shoulder.  These  were  in 
constant  motion,  while  the  visible  hands  were  at  rest.  They  fell  down, 
changed  their  shape,  and  swathed  Eva's  left  lower  arm  as  with  a 
bandage.  On  one  occasion  they  sank  down  to  the  floor,  and  remained 
lying  in  the  cabinet  on  the  medium's  left,  without  her  making  any 
movement. 

Dr  A.  then  took  Eva's  left  hand,  and  the  author  her  right,  as  described 
in  the  sitting  of  the  2nd  August.  She  placed  her  feet  in  the  lap  of  the 
lady  of  the  house,  who  sat  between  us. 

Under  these  conditions  the  same  play  of  formations  began,  already 

SITTINGS   AT   ST   JEAN   DE   LUZ,    1911  107 

repeated!}^  described,  sometimes  to  the  right  of  her  head,  sometimes 
to  the  left  of  it,  sometimes  above  her  head,  which  remained  constantly 
under  our  supervision.  Some  of  these  formations  took  the  form  of 
hands. 

We  then  expressed  a  wish  that  a  hand  might  be  formed,  indepen- 
dently of  her  body,  i.e.,  without  any  visible  support,  and  that  this 
hand  should  grasp  a  cigarette,  held  by  Mme.  Bisson  against  the  left 
curtain.  We  then  saw  a  bright,  freely  suspended  white  patch,  which 
condensed  and  seemed  to  form  a  hand.  This  hand  made  several 
attempts  to  approach  the  cigarette.  There  were  five  or  six  such 
attempts  without  the  desired  result.  This  cloudy  structure  invariably 
recoiled  from  the  cigarette,  at  a  distance  of  from  4  to  6  inches.  But 
Mme.  Bisson's  hand,  holding  the  cigarette,  was  several  times  touched 
through  the  curtain. 

The  formative  tendencies  were  at  work  for  about  twenty  minutes. 
Sometimes  we  distinctly  saw  hands,  which,  however,  did  not  remain 
visible  for  more  than  a  second.  Again,  as  in  the  sitting  of  the 
2nd  August,  a  hand  emerged  out  of  the  curtain  from  the  left,  dis- 
appearing behind  the  curtain  on  the  right,  at  the  level  of  the  medium's 
head.  On  the  whole,  the  formations  had  a  less  developed  and  more 
fugitive  character  than  in  previous  sittings. 

We  thereupon  released  the  hands  (held  up  to  then),  though  we 
could  control  them  during  the  ensuing  phenomena,  when  they  usually 
held  the  curtain. 

At  this  stage  of  the  sitting  there  was  a  remarkable  appearance  of  a 
hand  above  Eva's  head.  It  appeared  a  faint  gre}',  was  finely  drawn, 
with  fingers  directed  downwards,  and  wrists.  I  had  the  impression  of 
its  being  a  right  hand.  This  optical  appearance  was  also  fugitive,  and 
limited  to  about  one  second. 

Dr  A.  was  able  to  recognise,  above  Eva's  head,  a  spherical  structure. 
Then  there  emerged  from  the  left  curtain,  always  at  the  level  of  Eva's 
head,  some  white  veils  and  patches,  which  receded  extremely  rapidly, 
and  gave  the  impression  as  if  a  third  person  behind  the  curtain  brought 
about  these  phenomena. 

Just  as  a  white  ball  of  this  description,  about  the  size  of  a  child's 
head,  was  exposed  again,  I  pressed  the  electric  button  for  the  magnesium 
light.  Of  the  photographs  taken,  only  the  stereoscopic  plate  shows 
a  positive  result.  Both  the  medium's  hands,  and  especially  the  whole 
left  forearm,  are  distinctly  visible  on  it.  The  whole  upper  body  is 
behind  the  right  curtain,  while  at  the  left  curtain,  at  the  level  of  the 
medium's  head,  the  remainder  of  the  white  mass  is  distinctly  seen. 
There  is  no  connection  between  this  structure  and  the  medium's  right 
arm,  which  is  about  14  inches  below. 

The  experiment  must  therefore  be  regarded  as  a  successful  one,  for 
a  portion  of  the  receding  structure  was  caught  by  the  camera.  The 
optical  impression  made  upon  the  sitters  coidd  not  be  reproduced, 
since  the  withdrawal  of  this  substance  took  a  shorter  time  than  the 
ignition  of  the  flash-light.  This  experiment  proves  the  extraordinary 
mobility  of  structures  clearly  separated  from  the  medium's  body. 
After  the  photograph  the  phenomena  tailed  off  to  such  an  extent  that 
the  sitting  was  closed.     Final  examination  negative. 

108  PHENOMENA    OF   MATERIALISATION 

Sitting  of  the  11th  August  1911. 

Sitters. — Mme.  Bisson  and  the  author. 

Conditions  as  on  the  8th  August.     IHumination  by  all  the  four  lamps. 

Hardly  was  the  white  light  switched  off  w^hen  a  groaning  from  Eva 
indicated  the  beginning  of  the  phenomena.  She  herself  opened  the 
curtain  from  time  to  time,  and  exposed  the  products  of  her  remarkable 
power  to  the  red  light.  The  same  misty  and  veil-like  substances  were 
produced,  mostly  connected  with  her  body,  on  the  right  and  the  left, 
on  her  chest  and  in  her  lap,  on  the  shoulder  or  at  her  head.  The  high 
back  of  the  chair  served  as  a  support.  We  saw  on  Eva's  left  a  white 
mass,  which  was  photographed  by  me.  All  three  cameras  gave  the 
situation  in  successful  photographs  (Fig.  37),  each  camera  in  a  different 
way,  according  to  its  position.  On  the  stereoscopic  picture  the  medium's 
body  covers  the  material,  which  lies  like  a  napkin  over  the  high  chair 
back.  The  camera  for  the  7  by  9|  inches  photographs  gave  a  negative 
on  which  part  of  the  mass  is  covered  by  the  head  and  left  upper  arm, 
while  the  third  photograph  (3|  by  4|  inches)  shows  a  long  strip,  hanging 
down  the  back  of  the  chair  as  far  as  the  seat,  and  crossed  by  the  left 
arm.  A  corner  of  the  material  is  bent  forward  on  the  inside,  and  where 
it  is  folded  over  the  back  it  shows  a  hole. 

The  observation  as  described  is  given  by  the  author  according  to 
the  actual  facts,  without  any  comment,  and  will  probably  create  the 
impression  among  persons  not  familiar  with  this  subject  that  we  have 
here  to  deal  with  simple  fraudulent  manipulation  of  a  white  piece  of 
materia]  resembling  a  handkerchief. 

After  the  photograph  was  taken  the  sitting  was  continued.  Out  of 
the  mobile  fundamental  substance  a  distinctly  visible  third  hand  of 
flat  appearance  formed  in  Eva's  lap.  On  this  occasion  I  also  saw,  at 
12  inches  above  her  head,  a  fairly  w3ll-formed  hand.  When  the 
phenomenon  repeated  itself  several  times,  and  again  appeared  above 
her  head,  I  again  took  a  photograph,  which  is  highly  remarkable 
(Fig.  38).  In  the  place  of  her  right  hand  we  see  the  flat  hand  observed 
several  times,  of  which  three  fingers  and  the  larger  part  of  the  back 
are  visible.  The  three  finger-shaped  flat  projections  are  unequal,  and, 
as  in  the  case  of  a  hand  photographed  on  the  shoulder  during  a  former 
sitting,  they  show  depressions  which  apparently  adapt  themselves  to 
the  folds  of  the  dress.  The  substance,  therefore,  seems  in  this  case  to 
be  soft,  yielding,  and  pulpy,  and  seems  to  adapt  itself  to  its  support  by 
gravity,  as  showed  by  a  magnification  not  here  reproduced.  The 
inaccuracy  of  the  design  is  also  characteristic,  the  second  finger  being 
obviously  too  long.  The  first  and  second  fingers  show  the  same  foldings, 
probably  due  to  a  fold  of  the  dress  crossing  them.  If  we  wish  to  adopt 
the  view  that  it  was  an  artificial  production,  it  could  not  have  been 
a  paper  hand,  since,  on  account  of  its  lightness  and  consistency,  it 
would  not  adapt  itself  to  its  support.  The  magnification  neither  shows 
the  structure  of  textile  fabrics  nor  that  of  leather,  such  as  a  glove. 
Textile  fabrics  of  the  same  diameter  would  probably  be  too  light  and 
too  little  flexible  to  fit  thus  into  the  fold  of  the  dress.  We  see,  in  the 
same    photograph,    above    Eva's    head,    a    remarkable    four-cornered 

Fig.  39.      First  flashlight  photograph  by  the  author, 
16  August,   191  i. 

Fig.    40.     Magnification    of    portion    of    Fig.    39. 

SITTINGS   AT   ST  JEAN   DE   LUZ,    1911  109 

structure,  with  a  shape  of  which  the  lower  part  is  irregular.  One  may 
assume  that  the  medium's  right  hand  held  above  her  head  supports 
this  substance. 

Whether  the  hand  shape  on  the  lap  is  to  produce  a  deceptive 
appearance  of  Eva's  right  hand,  in  order  to  maintain  the  usual  scheme 
of  optical  control,  we  can  only  guess.  In  this  case  we  should  have  a 
genuine  phenomenon  with  a  fraudulent  tendency — the  image  of  the 
right  hand  of  the  medium  being  deceptively  represented,  in  order  that 
Eva's  living  hand  should  produce  phenomena,  and  give  us  the  impression 
as  if  it  were  the  product  of  materialisation.^ 

After  the  second  photograph  the  phenomena  were  continued.  A 
strip  of  material,  about  12  inches  wide  and  20  inches  long,  was  thrown 
over  to  us  out  of  the  curtain,  but  withdrawn  immediately.  We  also 
saw,  coming  from  the  left,  a  hand  well  developed  in  all  detail,  with  a 
forearm  and  five  fingers  spread  out  (medium's  hand  ?),  while  both 
Eva's  hands  (one  a  pseudo-hand  ?)  lay  visibly  on  her  lap.  This  structure 
made  a  turning  motion,  remained  visible  for  four  or  five  seconds,  and 
was  then  withdrawn.  From  the  forearm  depended  a  rather  large  piece 
of  a  veil-like  substance.  This  same  hand  touched  the  back  of  my 
left  hand,  and  pressed  the  tips  of  its  fingers  into  my  skin,  so  that  I 
clearly  felt  the  finger-nails  (obviously  Eva's  hand).  After  this  a  very 
large  hand,  wrapped  in  a  white  cloth,  became  visible,  its  outline  being 
visible  through  the  cloth.  This  outline  also  produced  strong  touches 
on  our  heads  when  brought  near  to  the  curtain,  ruffling  the  hair. 

The  sitting  then  closed.  The  photograph  leaves  the  question  open 
whether  one  of  the  hands  lying  on  her  knee  did  not,  in  this  phenomenon 
also,  simply  present  the  deceptive  image  of  a  hand,  in  which  case  the 
very  material  character  of  the  final  phenomena  is  explained  as  being 
due  to  the  action  of  one  of  the  medium's  hands. 

Sittings  of  the  13th  and  14th  August. 
Negative. 

Sitting  of  the  16th  August  1911. 

Present. — Mme.  Bisson  and  the  author. 

Conditions  as  on  the  11th  August. 

Immediately  the  red  lights  had  been  switched  on — I  had  not  even 
taken  my  seat — the  veil-like  strips  and  patches  began  to  appear  at 
various  parts  of  the  medium's  body,  on  the  right  or  left,  on  her  breast, 
or  in  her  lap.  There  were  also  sketchy  hands  on  her  lap,  and  on  her 
head,  and  a  white  drapery  over  her  face,  of  which  I  took  a  photograph 
(Fig.  39).  On  this  we  see  a  fairly  large  piece  of  material,  rather  too 
densely  woven  for  a  veil,  which  falls  from  the  head  to  the  middle  of 
the  chest,  and  entirely  covers  Eva's  face.  Narrowing  towards  the 
bottom,  this  oblong  substance  ends  in  a  rectangular  piece.     The  frag- 

^  Thie  possibility  of  deception  is  already  known  from  the  sittings  of  Eusapia  Paladino. 

110  PHENOMENA    OF    IVIATERIALISATION 

ment  on  the  right  has  a  hole  in  it,  and  gives  the  impression  of  a  piece 
of  Hnen  dipped  in  viscous  white  paint.  It  seems  to  vary  in  density, 
and  to  be  transparent  in  some  places  ;  also  to  have  a  greater  consist- 
ency at  the  irregular  wavy  rims  than  in  the  centre.  The  magnification 
(Fig.  40)  shows  a  broad  regular  strip  running  down  in  parallel  lines. 

During  one  of  these  experiments,  while  Mme.  Bisson  held  both  the 
medium's  hands,  I  observed  that  a  flat  hand  appeared  on  Eva's  hair, 
and  made  distinct  motions  with  all  the  five  fingers.  It  seemed  to  lie 
on  her  head  with  the  fingers  pointing  forwards,  and  became  imme- 
diately visible  when  Eva  bent  forward.  She  did  not  accede  to  my 
wish  to  touch  the  product. 

On  the  appearance  of  a  veiled  female  face,  which  could  not  be 
immediately  recognised  as  Eva's  face,  in  the  opening  of  the  curtains, 
the  author  took  a  second  photograph  (Figs.  41  and  42),  in  order  to  clear 
up  the  matter.  The  sitting  was  then  closed,  and  the  final  examination 
was  negative. 

The  second  photograph  reproduces  the  medium  holding  the  curtain 
at  the  instant  when  she  rises  from  her  chair,  and  bends  forward  her 
head,  which  is  covered  with  a  white  cloth.  The  cloth  has  p  distinct 
longitudinal  stripe,  and  is  laid  across  Eva's  head  from  the  left  to  the 
right  shoulder.  We  still  see  a  small  portion  of  the  chin  and  a  bit  of 
the  nose.  The  cloth  covers  the  whole  head  and  leaves  a  triangular 
opening.  There  is  a  small  hole  about  the  region  of  the  nose.  A  critic 
would  at  once  have  the  impression  that  Eva  had  put  a  handkerchief 
over  her  head,  and,  indeed,  the  picture  gives  this  superficial  impression, 
but,  as  we  see  on  further  inspection,  especially  of  the  stereoscopic  plate, 
there  is  below  the  three-cornered  aperture,  and  low  down  on  the 
neck,  an  irregular  ring-shaped  piece  of  substance,  from  which  a  broad, 
voluminous  round  stalk,  with  a  longitudinal  stripe  emerges,  like  the 
stalk  of  a  mushroom.  This  is  continued  under  the  cloth  in  an  upward 
and  right-hand  direction  (Eva's  hair  ?).  Where  the  stalk  touches  it 
the  cloth  shows  a  clear  impression  outward.  This  dark  grey  structure 
cannot  be  explained  by  the  photograph. 

In  this  sitting  also  the  medium  was  obviously  anxious  to  mask 
herself  with  her  teleplastie  productions. 

Sitting  of  the  20th  August  1911. 

No  result.  Eva,  on  the  first  day  of  her  indisposition,  was  in  a  very 
unfavourable  mood.  In  the  somnambulic  state  she  became  violent, 
and  did  not  want  to  give  any  more  sittings,  but  to  go  home.  Her 
nervous  irritability  rendered  her  treatment  difficult. 

Sitting  of  the  21st  August. 

Sitters. — Mme.  Bisson  and  the  author 

Conditions  as  usual.     Second  day  of  menses. 

A  patch  about  the  size  of  a  fist  appeared  immediately  at  the  begin- 
ning of  the  sitting,  in  the  medium's  lap,  and  changed  into  a  broad  band 

^IG.    41.        Author's    second    flashlight 

PHOTOGRAPH,      16     AUGUST,      IQII. 

IG.     4^.       I'lXLARGEMENT    FROM     FiG.    4I. 

Fig.   43.     First  flashlight  photograph  by   the  author,   21   August,    1911. 

Fig.   44.     Magnification  of  cart  of  Fig.  4J. 

Fig.  45.     Author's  second  flashlight  photograph,  21   August,   1911. 

SITTINGS   AT   ST   JEAN   DE  LUZ,    1911  111 

joining  one  hand  to  the  other.  Then  followed  the  usual  changes  of 
position  of  the  substance  from  one  part  of  the  body  to  the  other,  and 
the  automatic  changes  of  shape,  while  the  medium's  hands  were 
controlled.  Eva's  hands  were  held  by  Mme.  Bisson  and  by  me,  and 
her  right  foot  was  placed  against  mine,  or  laid  on  my  knee,  while 
Mme.  Bisson  controlled  her  left  foot.  Her  hands  grasped  the  curtains, 
and  the  head  was  visible  from  time  to  time.  Under  these  conditions 
she  attempted  to  fulfil  my  oft -repeated  wish  that  the  material  should 
be  placed  in  my  hand.  Again  and  again  there  appeared  in  the  light 
a  long  fragment  of  the  fabric,  apparently  in  direct  connection  with  her 
body,  and  directed  by  the  motion  of  the  body.  Evidently  somewhat 
nervous  during  this  experiment,  the  medium  asked  that  Mme.  Bisson 
should  join  her  left  hand  to  my  left  hand.  Mme.  Bisson  accomplished 
this  by  touching  my  hand  from  below  with  her  open  fingers.  The  two 
hands  thus  joined  we  first  held  higher  than  the  hands  of  the  medium, 
and  then  about  10  inches  lower.  In  this  situation  the  end  of  a  long 
piece  of  fabric  was  repeatedly  placed  in  the  palm  of  my  left  hand, 
though  at  first  it  was  always  withdrawn  again  very  quickly.  At  last, 
after  six  or  eight  attempts,  the  fragment  remained  so  long  that  I  had 
ample  time  for  a  photograph.  This  photograph  (Figs.  43  and  44) 
gives  an  accurate  view  of  the  situation,  and  it  succeeded  with  all  the 
three  cameras.  The  strip,  which  finally  remained  in  position  for  six 
seconds,  started  from  Eva's  mouth,  as  shown  by  the  stereoscopic  trans- 
parency, and  ended  in  my  hand. 

It  was  partly  transparent  and  flexible,  like  rubber.  The  substance 
lying  in  my  hand  seemed  to  me  heavy  in  comparison  to  its  size,  and 
comparable  to  a  heavy  organic  substance  (mesentery  ?).  It  Avas  moist, 
cool,  and  viscous,  and  gave  the  impression  of  a  long,  irregular,  fibrous 
strip  of  skin,  of  definite  design  and  consistency. 

I  may  mention  that  during  this  occurrence  my  extended  hand  was 
touched  both  from  below  (on  its  back)  and  from  above.  The  mechanical 
co-operation  of  the  medium  in  this  must  be  excluded,  on  account  of 
the  conditions. 

This  experiment  realises  a  long-desired  result.  I  was  intentionally 
passive,  for  any  grasping  or  pulling  or  closing  of  the  hand  might  have 
resulted  in  a  fit,  and  ended  the  experiment. 

After  this,  hands  in  various  shapes  appeared,  some  of  them  with 
sleeves,  veils,  and  forearms.  On  one  occasion  I  could  observe  a  flat 
hand  with  long  pointed  fingers,  which  descended  in  front  of  her  face. 

Although  the  room  was  filled  with  magnesium  vapour,  a  second 
photograph  (Fig.  45)  was  taken,  which  is  perhaps  the  most  interesting 
of  all  those  taken  at  St  Jean  de  Luz.  On  the  cleaned  and  enlarged 
plate  we  see  both  the  medium's  hands  holding  the  curtains,  and  her 
head  stretched  through  the  opening.  The  curtains  touched  the  face, 
so  that  the  projecting  part  of  the  latter,  and  the  piece  of  material 
issuing  from  the  mouth  and  held  by  it,  are  outside  the  curtain.  The 
larger  and  more  compact  piece  has  two  rectangular  terminals  of  different 
breadth.  From  the  inner  edge  of  the  left-hand  piece  a  thin  thread 
falls  down  to  the  back  of  Eva's  left  hand.  The  third  joint  of  the  middle 
finger  of  the  left  hand  is  covered  by  a  patchy  amorphous  material, 
which  seems  to  coalesce  with  it. 

112  PHENOMENA    OF    MATERIALISATION 

The  piece  of  material  held  in  the  mouth  shows  a  pattern  of  parallel 
stripes.  Three  broad  flat  stripes  and  two  quite  short  ones  run  from 
Eva's  left  cheek  to  the  lower  edge  of  her  chin  on  the  external  surface 
of  the  fabric,  suggesting  the  initial  process  of  the  formation  of  fingers. 
These  lie  partly  in  the  fabric  itself,  since  the  cross-hatched  pattern  is 
visible  at  the  same  time. 

Perhaps  even  more  remarkable  than  the  structure  itself  is  the 
radiation  phenomenon  visible  in  the  picture.  The  materialised  products, 
as  well  as  the  parts  of  the  medium's  skin  lying  in  front  of  the  curtain, 
emit  rays  in  three  directions,  which  cross  the  folds  of  the  curtain.  The 
origins  of  these  rays  correspond  exactly  with  the  parts  named.  Neither 
photographers  nor  ph^^sicists  could  explain  this  remarkable  phenomenon 
satisfactorily,  although  it  was  natural  to  bring  the  magnesium  smoke 
filling  the  room  into  question.  The  author  simply  mentions  the  fact 
as  shown  by  the  plate,  though  it  is  possible  that  a  simple  physical 
solution  may  be  subsequently  found. 

Towards  the  close  of  the  sitting  veiled  heads  appeared  in  the  gap 
of  the  curtain,  though  it  was  impossible  to  decide  whether  they  were 
Eva's  head  or  independent  formations.  No  accurate  observation  was 
possible. 

Sitting  closed  after  a  duration  of  two  hours.  Final  examination 
without  result. 

Sitting  of  the  23rd  August  1911. 

Sitters. — Mme.  Bisson  and  the  author. 

Conditions  as  in  previous  sittings. 

This  day  Eva  showed  a  cheerful  disposition.  Hardly  had  the  trance 
condition  set  in — I  hardly  had  time  to  open  the  cameras — when  the 
phenomena  began,  with  the  appearance  of  a  long  strip  passing  from 
the  chin,  over  the  knees,  to  the  floor. 

After  the  well-known  movement  of  the  substance,  a  veiled  head 
appeared  again,  which  we  immediately  recognised  as  Eva's  head. 

Our  efforts  on  this  occasion  were  directed  towards  prevailing  upon 
Eva  to  place  a  piece  of  material  in  the  porcelain  dish  used  on  previous 
occasions.  Mme.  Bisson  made  several  suggestions  in  this  direction, 
and  held  the  dish  before  my  eyes,  against  the  gap  in  the  curtains. 
Eva's  hands  grasped  the  curtain.  While  the  hands  and  arms  were 
motionless  I  observed  that,  after  several  attempts,  a  long  filmy  strip 
slid  forward  with  a  creeping  motion  over  the  medium's  left  forearm 
(coming  from  her  mouth  ?),  and  inserted  a  tentacle  resembling  a  living 
member  into  the  porcelain  dish.  This  substance  was  withdrawn  with 
a  sharp  jerk.  This  was  repeated  three  or  four  times.  At  the  third 
attempt  the  material  completely  filled  the  dish,  flowing  together  in 
spirals  as  if  by  its  own  weight. 

After  the  tentacle  had  been  withdrawn,  we  were  requested  to  see 
what  was  in  the  box.  On  close  examination  we  found  on  the  bottom 
of  the  porcelain  dish,  3  or  4  cubic  cm.  of  a  transparent  viscid 
liquid  (without  air  bubbles).     I  preserved  this  secretion  in  order  to 

SITTINGS   AT   ST   JEAN   DE   LUZ,    1911  113 

have  it  examined  on  the  following  day  in  a  pharmaceutical  laboratory 
at  Bayonne. 

During  the  experiment  itself  Eva's  head  was  bent  to  the  left,  and 
did  not  come  near  the  dish. 

A  loud  noise  in  the  water  supply  waked  the  medium,  and  the 
sitting  came  to  an  end. 

Final  examination  negative. 

The  analysis  of  the  liquid  gave  the  following  result : — Colour,  none  ; 
appearance,  slightly  turbid  ;  consistency,  liquid,  not  viscous  ;  smell, 
none  ;    precipitate,  whitish  ;    reaction,  slightly  alkaline. 

Microscopic  examination  : — Numerous  plate  epithelia,  some  saliva 
granules,  some  fat  grains,  numerous  epithelium  granulations,  and  a 
large  number  of  meat  particles.  The  liquid  also  contained  traces  of 
potassium  sulpho-cyanide.  The  dried  residue  was  8*6  grammes  per 
litre.     Ashes,  3  grammes. 

Conclusion. — The  microscopical  and  chemical  character  of  the 
liquid  shows  that  we  have  to  deal  with  cell  detritus  and  saliva.  The 
remnants  of  food  also  indicate  the  mouth  as  the  origin.  One  cannot 
decide  from  the  examination  whether  the  organic  remains  are  derived 
from  the  material,  or  simply  from  the  epithelium  of  the  mouth  and  the 
salivary  glands. 

Sittings  of  the  24th  and  25th  August. 
In  presence  of  Professor  B,,  a  German  scientist.     Negative. 

Sitting  of  the  26th  August  1911. 

Sitters. — Mme.  Bisson,  Professor  B.,  and  the  author. 
Duration,  9  to  11.15.     Conditions  as  in  the  other  sittings. 

Professor  B.  examined  Eva's  dress,  the  body  surface,  including 
mouth,  hair,  and  arm-pits,  as  well  as  the  cabinet,  and  declared,  before 
the  sitting  commenced,  that  he  had  found  nothing  which  could  be  used 
for  the  artificial  production  of  the  phenomena. 

The  hypnotisation  of  the  medium  was  watched  by  Professor  B. 
from  beginning  to  end. 

Very  soon,  hardly  a  minute  after  the  beginning  of  the  sitting,  a 
large  reddish  patch  became  visible  on  Eva's  breast.  While  her  hands 
held  the  curtain,  the  substance  appeared  in  her  lap,  the  size  of  a  hand. 
It  grew  and  assumed  a  triangular  shape,  and  then  diminished  and 
disappeared  before  our  eyes.  This  patch  was  joined  to  the  head  by  a 
band  which  moved  with  the  motion  of  her  head.  Mme.  Bisson  then 
entered  the  cabinet  in  order  to  sew  up  a  seam  which  had  given  way  in 
the  medium's  tights.  From  this  moment  till  the  end  of  the  sitting 
Professor  B.  and  the  author  held  the  medium's  hands,  while  her  feet 
rested  on  the  knees  of  these  two  observers. 

Under  these  conditions  we  first  saw  a  broad  strip  coming  from  her 

114  PHENOMENA    OF    MATERIALISATION 

mouth  and  reaching  down  to  her  knees.  This  irregular  strip,  grey 
and  partly  transparent,  emerged  from  the  left  side  of  the  curtain  under 
the  hand  held  by  Professor  B.  (length  about  6  inches  and  width  about 
I  inch)  and  disappeared  from  our  view,  after  Professor  B.  had  been 
several  times  touched  on  his  right  hand  from  below. 

The  material  reappeared  from  the  left  over  Eva's  arm,  and  its  end 
was  laid  on  the  open  right  hand  of  Professor  B.  as  he  brought  it  near 
the  curtains,  while  Eva  held  his  wrist.  It  gave  him  the  impression  of 
a  mass  of  soft  dough  tapering  towards  the  top.  The  whole  occurrence 
lasted  three  to  five  seconds.  As  Professor  B.  was  slowly  withdrawing 
his  arm  from  the  gap  of  the  curtain,  the  substance  was  suddenly  with- 
drawn and  di  .appeared. 

Professor  B.  had  the  impression  that  the  object  touched  by  him 
was  moist,  cool,  and  comparatively  heavy,  as  if  a  reptile  had  sat  on  his 
hand.  After  this  experiment,  Professor  B.  was  asked  to  feel  behind 
the  curtain  with  his  right  hand,  held  by  the  medium  at  the  level  of 
Eva's  visible  head.  He  then,  at  a  distance  of  10  to  12  inches  from  her 
head,  touched  something  which  felt  like  a  broad  vertical  band,  indepen- 
dent of  the  medium's  body.  This  contact  also  reminded  him  of  a 
reptile  with  a  cold  moist  skin. 

In  repeating  the  same  experiment,  the  author  had  the  impression 
of  touching  a  moist,  cool,  firm,  and  fibrous  fabric.  After  this,  the 
same  ribbon  gave  a  blow  on  his  face  from  the  closed  curtain,  and  a  third 
hand  emerged  for  an  instant  from  the  curtain. 

When  Eva  then  opened  the  curtains,  her  head  was  covered  with 
a  white  cloth  hanging  down  over  her  neck,  which  quite  corresponded 
with  the  photograph  taken  on  the  previous  occasion. 

She  then  turned  her  head  to  the  left.  As  I  sat  on  her  right,  I  could 
observe  that  this  cloth  was  slowly  drawn  away  from  her  head  on  one 
side,  so  that  her  face  became  gradually  visible.  As  already  mentioned, 
the  hands  were  held  by  Professor  B.  and  myself  during  these  phenomena. 

The  sitting  closed.  Final  control  negative.  Professor  B.  was  the 
first  to  enter  the  cabinet.  The  medium,  still  in  a  somnambulic  state, 
allowed  herself  to  be  examined  by  the  author  (including  a  gynaecological 
examination). 

COMMUNICATION   OF  PROFESSOR  B. 

CONCERNING    HIS    OBSERVATIONS. 

The  author  engaged  in  a  correspondence  with  his  friend.  Professor  B., 
who  had  been  present  at  some  sittings,  but  who,  as  a  non-medical  man, 
is  unfamiliar  with  the  medical  and  psychological  aspects  of  the  investi- 
gation. The  following  points  are  culled  from  his  impressions  thus 
communicated  : — 

"  1.  There  was  certainly  no  other  person  in  Eva's  cabinet,  nor 
could  any  one  have  entered  it  without  detection.  This  excludes  all 
attempts  at  explanation  based  on  the  assumption  of  a  confederate. 

COMMUNICATION  OF  PROFESSOR  B.  115 

2.  I  satisfied  myself,  by  searching  the  cabinet  and  chair  before 
itting, 
afterwards. 

the  sitting,  that  nothing  was  hidden  there  which  could  have  been  used 

"  3.  My  search  of  the  medium  convinced  me  that  she  had  no  fabrics, 
veils,  etc.,  or  anything  that  one  could  feel  about  the  exterior  of  her 
body.  Even  if  she  had,'  I  do  not  see  how  she  could  have  produced 
them,  so  long  as  she  was  sewn  up  (but  I  emphasise  the  fact  that  the 
seam  once  parted  and  was  renewed  during  the  sitting). 

"4.  As  regards  the  nature  of  the  materials  which  I  have  seen,  I 
repeat  that,  to  the  touch,  it  gives  the  impression  of  a  moist  organic 
substance.     But  that  is  only  my  personal  impression. 

"  In  these  circumstances,  which  dispose  of  quite  a  number  of  explana- 
tions suggested,  I  must,  in  accordance  with  my  way  of  thinking,  ask 
myself  the  question  :  How  can  these  phenomena  be  artificially  produced 
under  the  given  conditions  ?  " 

Professor  B.  then  suggests  the  possibility  that  the  medium  secretes 
a  particularly  consistent  mucus,  uses  it  in  some  way  to  form  the  shapes 
seen,  and  finally  swallows  it. 

This  suggestion  need  not  be  discussed  in  this  place,  more  especially 
as  it  is  ruled  out  by  subsequent  observations. 

Further  Observations  in  St  Jean  de  Luz, 
September  ipii. 

Sitting  of  the  11th  September  1911. 

The  photograph  (Fig.  46),  taken  on  the  11th  September  in  the  author's 
absence  by  M.  Bourdet,  shows  the  medium  with  her  hands  held  by 
Mme.  Bisson  and  M.  Bourdet.  Eva's  head  is  completely  covered  by 
a  white  disk-shaped  structure  which,  after  intensifying  the  negative, 
shows  the  drawing  of  a  male  head,  with  its  front  portion  cut  off  by  the 
curtain.  In  its  design,  the  picture  corresponds  completely  to  the  male 
face  subsequently  photographed  by  the  author  on  the  5th  November 
1911,  in  Paris.  In  the  photograph  of  the  11th  September,  it  looks 
rather  flat,  like  a  drawing,  whereas  in  the  picture  of  the  5th  November 
it  looks  plastic  and  mask-like.  Since  the  design  of  the  hairy  portions, 
of  the  eyes  and  the  whole  face,  shows  no  difference  from  the  picture  of 
the  5th  November,  the  reader  may  refer  to  the  detailed  description 
given  in  the  discussion  of  the  sitting  of  the  5th  November. 

Sittings  of  the  10th  and  11th  September  1911, 

The   following  report  is  taken   from  a  letter  of  Mme.  Bisson,   of 
12th  September  1911,  from  St  Jean  de  Luz  : — 

"  On  the   10th   September  Eva   proposed  that  we  should  try  to 
produce  phenomena  alone,  as  she  felt  so  strange.     Although  we  had 

116  PHENOMENA    OF    MATERIALISATION 

arranged  for  a  sitting  on  the  11th,  I  hypnotised  her  at  8.45  p.m.  Imme- 
diately after  hypnosis  the  characteristic  breathing  began,  and  a  curious 
materialised  form  appeared  on  the  medium's  left  shoulder,  even  before 
I  had  closed  the  curtains.     I  sat  down  in  front  of  the  cabinet. 

"  The  material  then  detached  itself  from  Eva's  shoulder,  and  a 
white  patch  moved  over  the  dark  background  of  the  cabinet.  I  held 
Eva's  hands  all  the  time. 

"  Eva  then  opened  the  curtains  very  wide,  and  I  beheld  at  the  back 
of  the  cabinet,  about  20  inches  from  Eva's  head,  a  sort  of  face  which 
seemed  to  look  at  me,  although  it  was  not  possible  to  recognise  any 
detail.  I  counted  altogether  seventy  seconds  without  the  apparition 
making  any  movement.     Eva's  hands  were  always  in  mine. 

"  Obviously  attracted  by  the  phenomenon,  Eva  extended  her  arm 
(still  holding  my  hand)  towards  the  disappearing  apparition,  screamed, 
and  fainted  away.  Afterwards  she  told  me  that  the  materialisation, 
injured  by  the  strong  incident  light,  had  suddenly  retired  to  her  body, 
making  her  so  ill  that  she  lost  consciousness.  I  then  closed  the  curtain, 
still  holding  Eva's  hands,  and  allowed  her  to  recover  a  little. 

"  Quite  gradually  she  opened  the  curtains  again,  and  again  I  saw 
a  head  at  the  back  of  the  cabinet  beside  that  of  Eva.  For  nineteen 
seconds  this  apparition  remained  motionless.  Then  it  decreased  and 
gradually  disappeared. 

"  Suddenly  Eva  requested  me  to  undo  the  seams.  She  removed 
the  clothes  and  sat  naked  in  front  of  me.  Then  followed  a  series  of 
remarkable  phenomena. 

"  A  large,  flat,  dark-grey  patch  appeared  on  her  breast,  white  at 
the  rims.  It  remained  for  some  time,  and  then  disappeared  in  the 
region  of  the  navel.     I  clearly  saw  it  being  reabsorbed  there. 

"  The  curtains  were  then  kept  closed  for  several  seconds,  without 
my  releasing  her  hands.  A  round  patch  again  appeared  on  her  skin 
at  the  opening  of  the  curtains.  It  had  the  same  kind  of  shape  as  the 
first,  but  was  larger.  To  this  was  joined,  in  the  left  ovarial  region,  a 
large,  black,  ball-shaped  structure,  white  in  the  middle  and  dark  grey 
at  the  rims.  With  the  curtain  open,  I  counted  twenty-two  seconds. 
Suddenly  the  material  folded  itself  together  at  right  angles  to  the  axis 
of  her  body,  and  formed  a  broad  band  extending  from  hip  to  hip  under 
the  navel.  This  apparition  then  folded  up  and  disappeared  in  the 
vagina. 

"  On  my  expressing  a  wish,  the  medium  parted  her  thighs  and  I 
saw  that  the  material  assumed  a  curious  shape,  resembling  an  orchid, 
decreased  slowly,  and  entered  the  vagina.  During  the  whole  process 
I  held  her  hands.  Eva  then  said,  '  Wait,  we  will  try  to  facilitate  the 
passage.'  She  rose,  mounted  on  the  chair,  and  sat  down  on  one  of  the 
arm-rests,  her  feet  touching  the  seat.  Before  my  eyes,  and  with  the 
curtain  open,  a  large  spherical  mass,  about  8  inches  in  diameter,  emerged 
from  the  vagina  and  quickly  placed  itself  on  her  left  thigh  while  she 
crossed  her  legs.  I  distinctly  recognised  in  the  mass  a  still  unfinished 
face,  whose  eyes  looked  at  me.  As  I  bent  forward  in  order  to  see  better, 
this  head-like  structure  rose  before  my  eyes,  and  suddenly  vanished 
into  the  dark  of  the  cabinet  away  from  the  medium,  disappearing  from 
my  view.     Again  the  medium  fainted. 

Fig.  46.    Flashlight  photograph  by  the  author, 
II   September,   1911. 

Fig.  47.     Flashlight  photograph  by  the  author,   i  November.   1911. 

OBSERVATIONS  IN  ST  JEAN  DE  LUZ,  SEPTEMBER  1911     117 

"  When  Eva,  in  her  armchair,  had  recovered  her  somnambuhc 
consciousness,  I  saw,  eight  times  in  succession,  a  head  covered  with 
veils,  which  was  quite  detached  from  the  medium.  The  phenomena 
then  ceased,  and  I  closed  the  sitting  at  10  p.m. 

"  In  spite  of  these  exhausting  results,  Eva,  at  a  sitting  on  11th  Sep- 
tember, at  which  the  physician,  Dr  B.,  and  the  author,  Bourdet,  and 
his  wife  were  present,  again  produced,  soms  twenty  times  in  succession, 
a  matsrialised  head,  with  a  distinct  forehead  and  grey  and  white  veil- 
ings ;  then  a  wonderfully-shaped  profile  drawn  upon  ths  material  as 
a  base.  Beard  and  hair  were  also  represented  in  the  material.  I  had 
the  impression  that  this  profile  resembled  a  deceased  near  relative  of 
mine,  but  I  do  not  wish  to  assert  anything — I  only  believe  that  I  saw 
it.     The  sitting  closed  at  11  p.m." 

Sitting  of  the  26th  September  1911. 

In  a  letter  from  St  Jean  de  Luz  (September  1911),  Mme.  Bisson 
communicates  the  following  result  :— - 

"  The  day  before  yesterday  (26th  Septembei  1911)  I  hypnotised  Eva 
while  she  sat  naked  in  the  cabinet.  As  she  had  said  she  felt  numbed, 
I  had  decided  to  have  a  sitting  alone  with  her.  She  had  hardly  entered 
the  trance  when  the  phenomena  appeared  in  great  number.  This 
time  they  began  in  her  neck  and  at  the  top  of  her  head.  A  face  was 
quickly  formed,  and  supported  on  Eva's  head.  When  I  noticed  the 
strength  of  the  phenomena,  I  asked  the  medium  to  concentrate  her 
whole  power  upon  my  being  able  to  obtain  a  piece  of  the  material. 
This  was  refused,  on  the  ground  that  the  connection  of  the  material 
with  Eva's  body  was  too  close,  so  that  it  would  injure  her.  But  I  could 
try  and  take  some  hair  from  the  materialised  head.  I  then  grasped 
the  end  of  a  piece,  which  hung  down,  with  my  left  hand.  During  the 
first  three  attempts  to  detach  a  piece,  Eva  screamed.  Only  at  the  fourth 
attempt  did  I  succeed  in  doing  so.  I  immediately  switched  on  the  white 
light,  and  was  considerably  astonished  to  hold  in  my  hand  a  lock  of 
fair  hair,  which  did  not  in  any  way  resemble  Eva's  darker  hair.  My 
hand  was  covered  with  mucus  and  moisture.  Understand  clearly — I 
thought  I  tore  off  a  piece  of  material,  and  I  had  a  bundle  of  hair  in  my 
hand.  During  this  whole  process  Eva  held  my  hands  by  the  wrists, 
in  order  to  be  able  to  withdraw  them  if  I  hurt  her  too  much.  If  this 
remarkable  occurrence  had  not  happened  to  myself  under  extraordinary 
conditions,  in  a  red  light,  with  a  naked  medium,  in  my  own  house, 
and  in  a  cabinet  constructed  by  myself,  I  should  never  have  credited 
the  reality  of  such  an  unheard-of  phenomenon.  I  sit  for  hours  and 
think  over  it,  without  finding  the  least  explanation." 

Sittings  of  October  and  November  19 ii  (Paris). 

On  25th,  27th,  29th  and  30th  October  negative  sittings. 

Eva  was  indisposed,  suffered  from  bladder  troubles,  and  the  menses 

118  PHENOMENA    OF    MATERIALISATION 

were  retarded  by  nine  days.  After  the  negative  sitting  of  30th  October 
she  Vent  to  bed  while  still  in  the  hypnotic  condition.  Mme.  Bisson 
followed  her.  Suddenly  the  medium,  already  in  bed,  began  to  breathe 
stertorously,  and  requested  Mme.  Bisson  to  remove  the  bedclothes 
and  control  her  abdomen.  Favoured  by  the  light  still  coming  through 
the  window,  Mme.  Bisson  was  able  to  verify  the  recurrence  of  the 
materialisation  process,  the  phenomena  this  time  emerging  from  the 
genital  passage.  She  carefully  lighted  up  in  order  to  observe  better, 
and  saw  a  digital  excrescence  between  the  labia  majora,  parallel  to  the 
thighs  at  first,  and  afterwards  crosswise.  Every  time  the  light  fell 
upon  this  product,  Eva  reacted  violently  and  painfully  against  it. 

On  the  morning  of  the  31st  the  menses  had  set  in,  the  retardation 
of  which  appeared  to  have  been  the  cause  of  the  stoppage  of  the 
phenomena. 

On  31st  October  Eva  remained  the  whole  day  dazed  and  uninter- 
ested. In  the  evening,  Mme.  Bisson  dressed  her  in  the  seance  costume 
in  order  to  hypnotise  her  in  the  cabinet.  The  author  was  not  present. 
Hardly  had  the  somnambulic  condition  set  in,  when  Eva  requested 
Mme.  Bisson  to  loosen  the  seam  joining  the  tights  to  the  dress.  In 
the  red  electric  light,  Mme.  Bisson  observed  a  material  emerging  from 
the  navel,  whose  shape  and  movement  resembled  vaseline  pressed  out 
from  a  tube.  The  viscous  substance  emerged  in  a  columnar  form, 
and  fell  by  its  owti  weight,  spreading  out  and  widening,  and  forming 
on  the  skin  a  hand  without  any  detail.  The  colour  of  the  material  was 
grey,  but  gradually  became  brighter  and  whiter,  Mme.  Bisson  closed 
the  sitting,  as  she  wished  to  preserve  Eva's  power  for  the  next  evening. 

Sitting  of  the  1st  November  1911. 

Sitters. — Mme.  Bisson  and  the  author. 

Seance  room  and  cabinet  as  during  the  last  series  of  sittings  held 
in  this  room.  The  large  Gothic  wardrobe,  standing  against  the  long 
windowless  wall  opposite  the  chimney-piece,  had  been  removed  from 
the  room,  so  that  now  the  room  contained  no  objects  or  furniture  not 
required  for  the  sittings.     (See  Diagram  5.) 

With  the  space  thus  gained,  the  pendant,  with  four  twenty-five 
candle-power  electric  lamps  in  ruby  globes,  was  hung  immediately  in 
front  of  the  cabinet.  Two  of  the  globes  were  contained  in  additional 
red  glass  cases,  so  that  their  light  had  to  pass  through  a  double  red 
screen,  while  the  others  had  only  a  single  red-glass  screen.  This 
arrangement  greatly  increased  the  ilUimination  of  the  room.  As  soon 
as  the  eye  had  got  accustomed  to  the  reduced  light,  every  detail  of  the 
room  was  clearly  visible,  and  large  print  and  the  face  of  a  watch  could 
be  distinctly  read.  Since  the  light  was  above  our  heads,  it  fell  from 
the  right  into  the  cabinet,  on  opening  the  curtains,  so  that  the  foreground 
of  the  cabinet  was  better  illuminated  than  the  background. 

The  easy  chair  in  the  cabinet  had  been  replaced  by  the  chair  used 
in  St  Jean  de  Luz,  as  the  latter  had  a  low  back  and  a  perforated  seat. 
But  in  this  chair  also  the  various  rods  were  either  lacquered  black  or 
covered  with  black  stufi. 

SITTINGS  OF  OCTOBER  AND  NOVEMBER  1911  (PARIS)     119 

The  two  tables  in  the  room  served  for  keeping  the  articles  required 
for  photography  and  the  magnesium  light.  The  flash-light  apparatus 
(A)  was  ignited  by  means  of  the  electric  supply.  The  contact  push 
and  its  cord,  14  feet  long,  was  placed  beside  the  author  at  the  seat  (a). 

Seance  /?0o/77y ram  A/oi/.  >y// 

DiAGRABI    V. 

Arrangement  of  the  Cameras.— hmowg  the  author's  five  photographic 
cameras  there  were  two  stereoscopic  cameras,  one  of  which  (II.)  was 
mounted  at  a  height  of  45  inches,  and  at  a  distance  of  10  feet  from  the 
cabinet,  while  the  other  was  placed  on  a  shelf  fixed  agamst  the  wall, 
6|  feet  above  the  floor  and  7  feet  in  front  of  the  cabinet.     The  two 

120  PHENOMENA    OF    MATERIALISATION     . 

stereoscopic  cameras  took  pictures  3|  by  5|  inches.  The  largest 
camera  (II.)  took  7  by  9-|  inches  pictures,  and  stood  fairly  in  the  middle, 
in  front  of  the  cabinet,  10  feet  away  from  the  medium's  chair,  Avhile  a 
smaller  camera  (HI.)?  taking  3|  by  4|  inches,  was  focused  on  the 
gap  in  the  curtain,  and  was  intended  to  reproduce  the  phenomena 
in  the  foreground  at  the  curtain  itself.  Finally,  the  author  had  set  up 
a  fifth  apparatus  (V.),  3|  by  5-|  inches,  on  a  square  wooden  support, 
fastened  to  the  wall  of  the  front  right-hand  corner  of  the  cabinet.  This 
was  intended  for  photographing  objects  occurring  20  to  80  inches  in 
front  of  it.  In  this  case,  we  must  remember  that  only  a  small  portion 
of  the  surface  of  the  object  could  be  taken,  and  that  this  would  be  in 
side  view. 

Cameras  IV.  and  V.  had  been  specially  constructed  at  the  author's 
request  for  the  sittings,  since  the  lenses  on  the  market  are  not 
designed  for  taking  photographs  in  close  proximity  thereto.  The  five 
cameras  were  intended  for  the  mutual  confirmation  of  the  negatives, 
and  for  the  study  of  the  objects  taken  from  various  points  of  view, 
from  various  distances,  from  different  sides,  and  in  different  sizes,  as 
well  as  simply  and  stereoscopically. 

As  at  St  Jean  de  Luz,  the  medium  was  dressed  in  black  tights  and 
black  dress,  sewn  together  round  the  waist,  and  sewn  up  behind  from 
the  neck  to  the  waist,  and  at  the  wrists,  as  before. 

Examination  of  medium  and  cabinet  as  in  previous  sittings. 
Hypnotisation  of  Eva  by  Mme.  Bisson.  Commencement  of  the  sitting 
about  10  P.M.  When  the  medium,  x  few  minutes  afterwards,  opened 
the  curtain  with  her  hands,  we  perceived  in  her  lap  a  bright  pink 
phosphorescent  mass  the  size  of  a  hen's  egg.  It  had  a  compact  appear- 
ance, and  had  nothing  cloudy  or  veil-like  about  it.  The  medium  closed 
the  curtain,  and  on  opening  it  again  shortly  afterwards,  the  material 
appeared  again  as  grey  patches,  or  packets,  the  size  of  a  hand,  at  her 
shoulders,  in  her  lap,  or  at  her  chest.  The  hands  were  often  withdrawn 
behind  the  curtains. 

Probably  in  consideration  of  the  camera  mounted  upon  the  medium's 
right,  and  focused  upon  her  head,  the  chief  display  took  place  in  this 
and  the  following  sittings  on  her  right  shoulder.  It  may  be  mentioned 
that  the  author  had  repeatedly  asked  for  phenomena  to  be  produced 
at  this  point,  upon  which  the  cameras  w^ere  focused,  and  this  was 
actually  done,  for  a  materialisation  on  Eva's  left  shoulder  would 
have  been  hidden  by  her  head  from  the  camera  inside  the  cabinet. 
An  object  appearing  further  away  from  her  body  would  have  been 
beyond  the  field  of  the  apparatus,  and,  even  with  different  focusing, 
could  probably  not  have  been  photographed  at  the  same  time  as  the 
medium.  Our  whole  endeavour  was  concentrated  upon  regularly 
taking  the  medium  and  the  materialisation  together  on  the  same 
plates. 

The  product  appearing  on  her  right  shoulder  was  not  sufficiently 
clearly  visible  when  the  curtain  was  opened,  since  the  pendant,  hanging 
rather  towards  the  right,  illuminated  chiefly  the  foregroujid  of  the 
cabinet,  as  already  mentioned,  and  the  background  only  on  the  medium's 
left.  On  account  of  this  indistinctness,  Eva  allowed  me  to  illuminate 
the  structure  by  means  of  a  red  electric  torch  specially  reduced  by 

(X,  > 

Fig.   49. 

Author's   flashlight   photograph, 
5  November,   1911. 

Fig.  51.     Object  shown  in  last  Fig. 

simultaneously    taken  from    withik 

the  cabinet. 

Fig.  50.     Portion  of  Fig.  49,  magnified 

SITTINGS  OF  OCTOBER  AND  NOVEMBER  1911  (PARIS)     121 

means  of  transparent  black  stuff  as  soon  as  she  opened  the  curtain,  so 
that  I  could  observe  more  distinctly  v.hat  occurred  on  the  right  side 
of  her  head.  This  was  done  very  quickly,  but  about  eight  times  in 
succession.  I  thus  saw  on  Eva's  right  shoulder  a  white  mass  partly 
covering  her  head,  and  showing  the  indistinct  profile  of  a  face.  The 
hair  of  the  head-like  structure  seemed  to  be  of  a  lighter  colour  than 
the  medium's  hair.  The  medium's  face  and  the  materialisation  Avere 
turned  away  from  each  other,  and  gave  the  impression  of  a  Janus 
head. 

At  the  next  opening  of  the  curtains  I  ignited  the  flash-light  and 
obtained  admirable  photographs  with  three  of  the  cameras.  The 
shock  produced  by  the  flash  had  broken  Eva's  power.  The  structure 
had  disappeared  without  leaving  a  trace.  The  sitting  was  closed, 
having  lasted  one  hour.  Strict  examination  followed.  Dress  was 
intact,  but  moistened  by  menstrual  discharge,  which  tells  against  the 
possibility  of  concealing  objects.  Search  of  cabinet  also  negative. 
Eva  went  to  bed  in  the  somnambulic  state. 

The  photograph  (Figs.  47  and  48)  shows  for  the  first  time  in  three 
years'  observation  a  clearly-marked,  but  imperfectly-modelled,  male 
profile,  in  which  the  nose  is  wanting.  The  whole  gives  the  impression 
of  an  unfinished  sketch  of  a  death-mask  made  with  the  help  of  a  soft, 
white,  pulpy  substance.  The  small  photograph,  taken  by  the  camera 
in  the  cabinet  (Fig.  48,  second  picture),  gives  the  complete  outline 
drawing  of  a  head.  The  line  of  the  chin  is  covered  by  Eva's  sleeve. 
That  which,  in  the  small  photograph  taken  with  the  cabinet  apparatus, 
looks  like  the  neck  of  the  head,  is  nothing  but  Eva's  chin,  as  shown 
by  comparison  with  the  other  photographs.  In  all  the  photographs 
the  nose  is  wanting.  In  the  photograph  with  the  cabinet  camera, 
and  in  the  stereoscopic  transparency,  we  see  a  black  veil-like  fabric 
falling  over  the  forehead,  left  eye,  and  the  region  of  the  nose,  so  that  two- 
thirds  of  the  forehead  and  the  whole  nasal  region  are  covered.  The 
mouth  is  represented  in  rough  modelling  as  a  square  hole,  while  the 
design  of  the  lips  is  clearly  perceptible. 

The  left  corner  of  the  mouth  is  serrated.  Where  the  hair  would 
begin  on  the  forehead  there  is  a  white  piece  of  material  forming  a 
transition  to  the  mass,  which  must  be  interpreted  as  hair,  and  which 
extends  from  the  left  ear  down  to  the  neck.  It  must  be  remarked 
that  this  curious  grey,  roughly-fibred  material,  covered  with  numerous 
small  white  shadows,  gives  on  the  photograph  the  impression  of  hair. 
Whether  we  have  to  deal  with  real  hair  cannot  be  decided  from  the 
photographs,  neither  by  the  positives,  nor  by  the  magnifications.  It 
is  doubtful  whether  any  right  half  of  the  face  is  there  to  match  the 
left  profile.  This  whole  structure,  which  has  a  distinct  relief,  may  be 
compared  v.ith  an  extremely  rough  sculptor's  model  in  a  white,  soft- 
yielding  material,  the  first  attempt  at  a  death-mask  of  a  male  face. 

As  shown  by  this  sitting,  there  is  an  imperfect  attempt  at  forming 
the  shape  of  a  face  out  of  the  white  fundamental  substance. 

The  production  gives  an  immediate  and  convincing  impression  of 
an  elementary  natural  product,  as  distinct  from  the  impression  which 
would  be  produced  by  the  shape  of  a  face  mechanically  prepared  for 
fraudulent  purposes. 

122  PHENOMENA    OF    MATERIALISATION 

Sitting  of  the  4th  November. 

Negative.  On  this  day  Eva  made  an  excursion  to  see  some  relatives. 
Her  attention  was  possibly  thereby  deflected  too  strongly  from  her 
mediumistic  activity. 

Sitting  of  the  5th  November  1911. 

Sitters. — Mme.  Bisson  and  the  author. 

Conditions  as  before.  All  the  cameras  had  been  opened  since  the 
red  light  was  established.  A  change  in  the  suspension  of  the  red  lamps 
allowed  of  a  better  illumination  of  the  cabinet. 

As  soon  as  Eva  had  entered  the  hypnotic  state,  she  asked, 
"  Juliette,  do  you  see  anything  ?  " 

I  had  feared  another  negative  sitting,  since  the  more  vivid  accom- 
panying conditions  (groaning  and  stertorous  breathing)  were  absent 
this  time.  But  hardly  had  Mme.  Bisson  directed  her  attention  to  the 
interior  of  the  cabinet  when  a  pink  luminous  mass  of  material  fell  from 
the  roof  of  the  cabinet,  like  a  shooting  star,  into  Eva's  lap.  It  might 
have  been  the  size  of  a  child's  hand.  It  immediately  disappeared  from 
the  medium's  dress. 

When  the  light  again  fell  into  the  cabinet,  its  rays  illuminated  a 
long  vertical  strip,  resembling  veiling  or  muslin,  standing  about  4  feet 
away  from  the  medium,  and  having  a  length  of  from  4-6  feet.  The 
medium  then  worked  the  curtain  in  such  a  way  that  she  again  and 
again  opened  and  closed  it,  obviously  in  order  to  avoid  the  destruction 
of  the  formation  by  a  lengthy  exposure  to  light.  In  this  case  we  could 
observe  the  changes  in  the  strip,  standing  by  itself  behind  her  on  the 
left,  at  least  ten  to  fifteen  times,  although  not  distinctly,  on  account 
of  the  distance  and  the  half -shadow.  The  top  of  the  strip  seemed  to 
be  surmounted  by  a  half-round  shape  resembling  a  head.  This  ghostly 
phenomenon  showed  no  connection  with  the  medium,  who  was  sitting 
quietly  in  her  chair,  and  whose  hands,  at  the  same  time,  were  constantly 
visible  at  the  curtain.  Every  time  it  exposed  itself,  hardly  for  longer 
than  a  second,  to  the  light,  and  always  returned  into  the  dark.  It 
looked  as  though  the  repetition  of  the  process  had  for  its  object  a  gradual 
adaptation  to  the  light.  Sometimes  it  seemed  as  if  the  head  portion 
were  growing  more  distinct,  and  the  strip  growing  longer.  Gradually 
a  freely-suspended  form,  with  a  long  white  train,  approached  the  gap 
in  the  curtains,  traversing  a  path  of  about  6  feet.  Here  I  had  the 
impression  of  seeing  a  masculine  face,  with  its  upper  half  finished,  while 
the  lower  was  covered  with  a  fragmentary  mass,  and  was  not  all 
developed. 

In  spite  of  a  repeated  approach  towards  the  curtains,  the  appearance 
of  the  face  seemed  to  change.  Once  I  thought  I  recognised  a  profile 
consisting  of  a  mosaic  of  small  white  pieces,  and  of  a  stratified  modelling. 

SITTINGS  OF  OCTOBER  AND  NOVEMBER  1911  (PARIS)     123 

resembling  a  sculptural   form  in  the  rough.     The  forehead  and  the 
hollows  of  the  eyes  were  always  easiest  to  recognise. 

Eva  asked  for  the  red  electric  torch  already  mentioned,  and  made 
some  attempts  at  illumination  behind  the  curtains,  in  the  first  instance 
talking  in  a  low  voice  to  the  form  standing  beside  her.  I  heard  expres- 
sions like  the  following  : — "  Pourquoi  ne  veux-tu  pas  ?  "  "  II  faut 
s'habituer  a  la  lumiere."  Again  opening  the  curtains  (probably  with 
her  feet),  Eva  illuminated  the  structure  with  a  torch.  This  time  I 
could  not,  indeed,  recognise  a  head,  or  anything  resembling  it,  but  in 
its  place  a  white  bunched-up  cloth  about  the  size  of  a  man's  handker- 
chief, and  the  long  strip  hanging  down.  She  then  returned  the 
torch. 

Mme.  Bisson,  who  wished  to  get  a  clear  impression  of  the  features, 
waited  until  the  phenomenon  was  visible  again,  and  approached  the 
cabinet  quite  closely,  put  her  head  through  the  curtains,  and  claimed 
distinctly  to  recognise  a  masculine  face  with  a  full  beard.  The  appari- 
tion then  became  visible  in  front  of  Eva's  chest,  whence  it  seemed  to 
advance  into  the  gap  of  the  curtains.  In  one  of  these  attempts  I 
succeeded  in  observing  quite  closely  a  masculine  face,  with  a  pointed 
beard  and  closed  eyes,  between  her  hands,  which  held  the  cur- 
tains. The  perception  was  so  distinct  that  an  optical  illusion  is 
out  of  the  question.  In  consideration  of  the  position  of  the 
camera,  we  expressed  a  wish  to  see  the  phenomenon  to  the  right  of 
the  medium. 

At  first  we  saw,  still  on  the  medium's  left,  just  at  the  hem  of  the 
curtain,  a  white  strip  about  20  inches  long,  which  became  visible  several 
times  behind  the  hem  and  parallel  to  it,  near  the  middle.  Then  a 
separate  white  mass,  not  quite  the  size  of  a  hand,  showed  itself  round 
the  hem  of  the  curtain  outside,  remaining  visible  for  about  twenty 
seconds,  and  then  disappeared. 

At  the  next  exposure,  I  just  saw  that  her  right  shoulder  was  covered 
with  the  white  luminous  mass,  and  I  quickly  ignited  the  flash-light. 

The  phenomenon  disappeared  at  once.  When  Eva  had  been  care- 
fully examined  by  me,  with  a  negative  result,  she  was  taken  to  bed  in 
a  dazed  condition.     A  final  examination  of  the  cabinet  gave  no  result. 

During  the  whole  sitting  Mme.  Bisson  only  entered  the  cabinet  twice, 
the  first  time  being  after  the  phenomenon  in  the  corner  had  become 
visible  several  times. 

As  the  successful  negatives  show  (Figs.  49,  50,  51),  Eva  has  her  head 
bent  forward  to  the  left  at  the  moment  of  exposure.  Her  whole  profile  and 
her  hair  are  seen  as  far  as  the  right  temple.  The  hands  keep  the  curtain 
open.  A  mask-like  form  is  tilted  over  her  hair.  A  white  and  partly- 
transparent  fabric  hangs  from  the  hairy  portion  of  the  mask  over  her 
right  upper  arm,  and  disappears  behind  the  curtain.  Tapering  towards 
the  hair  of  the  medium,  the  upper  half  of  the  veil  is  covered  by  a  broad 
crosswise  portion,  but  the  object  of  this  is  not  clear  from  the  picture. 
The  whole  fabric  is  some  4-6  inches  away  from  the  chin  and  neck  of 
the  medium,  and  only  touches  Eva's  body  again  on  her  upper  arm. 
The  medium's  head,  with  the  apparition,  appears  to  be  some  4-6  inches 
away  from  the  back  of  the  chair,  against  which  she  only  appears  to 
lean  her  left  shoulder.     One  also  sees  behind  the  face  profile  a  white 

124  PHENOMENA    OF    MATERIALISATION 

flat  mass,  about  the  size  of  a  hand,  with  an  irregular-pointed  margin 
hanging  over  the  back  of  the  chair. 

We  now  come  to  the  mask  itself.  We  see,  at  the  first  glance,  that 
it  is  intended  to  represent  a  male  head,  although  in  an  extremely  rough 
and  imperfect  form.  The  line  of  the  profile  is  so  clearly  marked  on  the 
stereoscopic  transparency  that  it  gives  the  impression  as  if  the  mask- 
like form  were  cut  off,  and  had  no  right  half  to  its  face.  The  left  visible 
portion  is  clearlj^  modelled  in  relief.  The  portion  representing  the  nose 
is  much  too  long,  and  too  much  curved  and  distorted,  and  reminds  one 
of  the  nose  of  Cyrano  de  Bergerac.  The  hairy  portions — beard  and 
hair  of  the  head — are  distinctly  seen  in  the  right  proportion  as  dark 
patches  adjoining  the  face.  Instead  of  the  lines  of  the  mouth  there  is 
a  lip  depression  in  the  profile  covered  by  a  moustache,  with  hair  which 
appears  to  be  very  short  and  rough,  as  well  as  curly,  like  fur.  While 
the  beard,  on  all  the  plates  taken  from  in  front  of  the  cabinet,  is  obscured 
by  the  veil  in  its  lower  portion,  it  is  seen  in  the  photograph  taken  from 
within  the  cabinet  to  continue  into  a  broad  "  imperial  "  beard,  and 
the  straight  line  of  the  lower  chin  becomes  visible.  On  this  plate  the 
point  of  the  nose  appears  to  be  cut  off,  which  is  explained  by  the  lateral 
mounting  of  the  camera.  The  modelling  of  the  strongly-flattened  and 
receding  forehead  is  not  completed  on  the  picture.  One  cannot  escape 
the  impression  that  the  unknown  sculptor  had  left  his  work  unfinished, 
or  had  been  interrupted  in  his  work  by  the  flash-light.  In  this  case 
the  rest  of  the  material  available  would  naturally  remain  lying  on  the 
back  of  the  chair.  The  position  of  the  closed  eye  is  indicated  in  an 
approximately  correct  place  by  a  broad  black  shadow,  which  is  slightly 
too  long.  The  line  of  the  eyebrows  looks  like  a  similarly  sketched 
second  eye,  and  is  much  too  high,  though  the  beginning  of  the  hair  is 
in  its  right  place. 

The  hair  itself  is  distinctly  shown  as  a  dark  grey  rough  mass  at  the 
corner  of  the  forehead.  In  the  middle  of  the  head  there  lies  a  small 
irregularly-shaped  piece  of  white  material.  The  ear  is  absent.  In  its 
place  we  see  a  few  broad  rough  strips  and  irregular  projections  in 
relief,  as  well  as  parallel  clefts,  which  had  already  occurred  in  the 
earliest  representations  of  heads,  and  which  recur,  together  with  folds, 
in  nearly  all  head  forms. 

Perhaps  the  reader  will  not  prevail  upon  himself  to  recognise  a 
masculine  face-mask  in  this  very  clumsy,  irregular,  and  imperfect  form. 
That  its  left  side  is  evolved  in  relief,  i.e.,  plastically,  is  placed  beyond 
all  doubt  by  an  inspection  of  the  transparency,  but  the  mask  appears 
to  be  hollow,  and  nothing  in  it  bears  the  marks  of  life. 

Sittings  of  the  7th,  9th  and  11th  November. 

Negative. 

A  friend  of  the  medium's  family  had  come  to  Paris  during  these 
days,  and  daily  claimed  Eva's  company.  Such  invitations  appeared 
to  absorb  the  medium's  attention  so  completely  that  one  could  count 
upon  negative  results. 

SITTINGS  OF  OCTOBER  AND  NOVEMBER  1911  (PARIS)     125 

Sitting  of  the  12th  November  1911. 

Sitters. — Mme.  Bisson  and  the  author. 

Time,  9  p.m.     Control  and  ilhimination  as  before. 

A  few  minutes  after  the  beginning  of  the  sitting  a  semicircular 
fiat  mass,  the  size  of  a  man's  hand,  appeared  on  the  medium's  lap,  between 
her  hands,  which  rested  with  fingers  spread  out  on  her  knees.  The 
fingers  themselves  appeared  to  be  joined  by  a  fine  web-like  membrane 
of  a  grey  and  veil-like  appearance,  which  filled  up  the  intervals  between 
the  fingers  of  both  hands.  Where  this  web  touched  the  skin  there  was 
a  shadow.  It  is,  therefore,  also  possible  that  this  fabric  was  only 
covered  by  her  fingers,  and  only  gave  the  optical  impression  of  such 
a  junction. 

While  Eva  was  thus  passively  allowing  the  materialisation  process 
to  take  place,  an  electric  bell  suddenly  rang  in  the  next  room,  the  signal 
for  the  sick  nurse  of  the  master  of  the  house.  Eva  took  fright,  and 
the  material  observed  immediately  disappeared. 

The  creative  process,  which  requires  the  undisturbed  passivity  of 
the  somnambulist,  was  interrupted.  Only  after  a  pause  for  rest  did 
the  mass  become  visible  again,  in  the  form  of  more  or  less  large  irregular 
patches,  at  the  shoulder  and  in  the  medium's  lap. 

Next,  a  compact  mass  formed  on  the  right  beside  her  head,  which 
again  resembled  an  imperfect  human  profile.  Then  a  long  white  veil 
appeared  above  her  head,  while  she  opened  the  curtains  with  her 
hands,  and  this  veil  disappeared  behind  her  head.  The  uppermost 
point  of  the  veil  was  about  20  inches  above  her  head.  Then  the  white 
veil  rested  on  her  head,  covering  it  like  a  nun's  head-dress. 

White  patches  and  fragments  were  seen  disseminated  over  her 
body,  but  the  mediumistic  force  did  not  seem  to  suffice  for  real  forma- 
tions, or  further  transformations.  Even  these  feeble  phenomena 
disappeared  after  about  half  an  hour.  Eva  declared  herself  unable  to 
continue  the  sitting.  She  appeared  to  have  been  waked  from  the 
trance  condition  and  disturbed  in  her  work  by  the  ringing  of  the  bell. 
Perhaps  she  was  still  under  the  influence  of  the  visit  above  mentioned. 
These  feeble  and  diffused  phenomena  can  only  be  regarded  as  the 
result  of  an  unfavourable  psychic  tuning. 

The  final  examination  gave  a  negative  result. 

Negative. 

Sitting  of  the  14th  November  1911. 

Sitting  of  the  16th  November  1911. 

Sitters. — Mme.  Bisson  and  the  author. 

Control  and  illumination  as  before. 

The  phenomena  of  the  sitting  about  to  be  described  were  obtained 
without  the  participation  of  the  medium's  hands.     For  the  latter  were 

126  PHENOMENA    OF    MATERIALISATION 

either  steadily  visible  on  her  knees,  or  they  grasped  the  two  curtains 
in  order  to  close  them  or  open  them,  and  only  seldom  were  they  with- 
drawn from  observation.  Often  the  hands  were  seen  resting  in  the 
shadow  of  the  curtain  when  we  unexpectedly  looked  behind  the  curtain. 
I  repeatedly  assured  myself,  by  a  turn  of  the  head  and  a  withdrawal  of 
the  curtain,  as  to  the  inactivity  of  the  hands  during  the  sitting.  The 
medium's  head  was  visible  as  soon  as  the  curtain  was  sufficiently  opened. 
Sometimes  she  did  this  with  her  feet,  which  was  easy,  since,  as  a  rule, 
she  does  not  wear  slippers  during  the  sittings.  In  some  cases  one  even 
had  the  impression  that  while  the  feet  were  at  rest  the  curtains  were 
opened  or  closed  by  an  invisible  power. 

The  medium's  head,  lying  on  the  back  of  the  chair,  only  became 
visible  when  the  curtain  was  sufficiently  widely  opened  to  enable  the 
light  to  shine  upon  it,  or  when  the  medium  herself  changed  her  position 
in  order  to  bring  the  head  into  the  light. 

A  few  minutes  after  the  commencement  of  the  sitting  (9  p.m.)  a 
vertical  white  strip  about  a  yard  long  appeared  on  the  left,  beside  the 
medium  in  the  corner  of  the  cabinet,  i.e.,  about  30  inches  from  her  left 
shoulder.  It  again  looked  veil-like,  and  appeared  to  be  held  and  moved 
at  a  higher  level  than  her  head.  The  light  falling  slantingly  into  the 
cabinet  enabled  us  to  verify  that  this  structure  had  no  visible  connection 
with  her  body,  but  appeared  to  be  independent  and  quite  separated 
from  Eva.  Its  profile  entered  the  illuminated  portion  of  the  cabinet 
again  and  again.  At  the  upper  end  a  mass  was  bunched  together. 
The  hidden  power  seemed  to  be  at  work,  for  we  heard  noises  as  if 
textile  fabrics  were  being  rubbed  together,  and  we  also  saw  lively 
motions  in  the  veil-like  matter.  Eva  left  the  curtain  open  for  a  fairly 
long  time,  so  that  the  appearance  stood  the  light  longer  than  usual. 
As  it  approached  the  curtains  we  recognised  the  outlines  of  a  large 
hand.  Quite  clearly  we  saw  three  middle  fingers  holding  a  veil,  and 
retiring  with  a  turning  motion  behind  the  curtain. 

The  white  shape  did  not  disappear,  but  became  visible  again  and 
again  at  the  back  of  the  left  curtain  beside  Eva's  left  knee.  Since  my 
place  on  the  opposite  side  permitted  me  to  see  behind  the  curtain,  I 
saw  in  that  place  a  broad,  white,  columnar  mass,  16-20  inches  long, 
and  forked  at  the  top  and  bottom. 

The  curtain  was  closed  and  again  opened.  Now  the  right  curtain 
covered  both  hands,  which,  however,  could  still  be  seen  in  the  shadow. 
Starting  from  her  body  and  crossing  her  left  lower  arm,  in  the  illuminated 
portion  of  the  cabinet,  two  strongly  luminous  strips  about  2  inches  wide 
and  8  inches  long,  and  somewhat  resembling  the  bones  of  a  lower  arm, 
became  visible.  These  ended  in  prolongations,  resembling  indistinct 
fingers,  or  skeleton  hands,  which  appeared  to  unravel  an  extremely 
fine  and  strongly  luminous  mass  of  threads,  resembling  a  spider's  web, 
on  the  medium's  dress,  this  mass  becoming  apparently  broader  by  the 
withdrawal  of  the  left  curtain.  The  optical  impression  of  this  play 
belongs  to  the  most  curious  observations  of  this  mediumistic  period. 
On  one  side  the  inactivity  of  Eva's  arms  and  hands,  which  at  any 
moment  could  be  verified  by  a  glance  into  the  half-opened  cabinet  ; 
on  the  other  side — that  is  to  say,  to  the  left  of  the  medium — these 
arm-like  projections  proceeding  from  Eva's  body,  which  appeared  to 

SITTINGS  OF  OCTOBER  AND  NOVEMBER  1911  (PARIS)     127 

unravel  a  tangle  of  innumerable  luminous  threads  and  transparent 
veils.  This  picture  showed  a  constant  motion,  a  visible  working  of  the 
mysterious  power.  It  is  not  conceivable  that,  with  the  help  of  any 
known  technical  appliances,  such  a  performance  could  be  brought 
about. 

The  whole  phenomena  lasted  from  a  minute  to  a  minute  and  a  half, 
a  comparatively  long  time,  until  the  interesting  play  was  withdrawn 
from  our  gaze  by  the  closing  of  the  curtain. 

Eva  then  requested  Mme.  Bisson  to  enter  the  cabinet  and  hold 
her  head.  She  reports  that  the  white  material  was  now  again  on  Eva's 
left  side,  but  separated  from  her  body.  Mme.  Bisson  touched  it. 
While  she  was  still  in  the  cabinet,  her  left  lower  arm  was  completely 
enveloped  in  the  delicate  veiling.  During  this  time  I  was  able  to 
observe  that  Eva's  two  arms  did  not  stir  from  their  place.  Mme.  Bisson 
then  endeavoured  to  bring  her  arm  slowly  into  the  light,  and  she  even- 
tually succeeded.  On  her  left  arm  hung  a  fragment  of  material  about 
8  inches  long,  which  gave  an  impression  similar  to  that  photographed 
in  St  Jean  de  Luz,  as  it  lay  in  my  hand. 

The  bringing  forward  of  the  material  on  the  arm  was  evidently 
painful  to  Eva.  She  screamed,  and  at  the  same  instant  the  whole 
mass  disappeared  into  her  mouth  with  a  lapping  and  chewing  motion, 
as  Mme.  Bisson  in  the  cabinet  could  verify. 

After  a  short  pause  the  plastic  process  appeared  to  recommence. 
Eva  said  she  felt  the  development  of  the  material  about  her  abdomen. 
She  quickly  seized  my  hand  and  guided  it  to  the  region  of  the  navel. 
To  my  great  astonishment  I  felt  through  the  thin  stuff  a  small  knot, 
the  size  of  a  cherry,  on  the  left  of  the  navel.  Under  my  touch  I  felt  the 
knob  getting  smaller  until  it  disappeared,  as  if  it  had  been  flattened 
out  or  absorbed  into  the  medium's  body. 

The  same  process  repeated  itself  under  Mme.  Bisson's  hand  at  the 
medium's  left  breast.  In  order  to  show  me  the  process,  and  without 
informing  Eva,  Mme.  Bisson  took  my  hand  and  led  it  to  the  place 
indicated.  The  medium,  who  obviously  regarded  this  interference  as 
a  disturbance,  screamed  with  fright,  so  that  the  experiment  had  to  be 
discontinued  without  result.  This  nervous  shock  stopped  the  generating 
force  immediately,  so  that,  in  spite  of  verbal  suggestion  and  lengthy 
waiting,  no  more  phenomena  occurred.  This  unexpected  interference 
also  deprived  us  of  the  photograph  we  had  hoped  for. 

The  sitting  was  closed  with  the  ordinary  examination  of  the  medium 
and  cabinet,  without  result. 

'^  This  experience  teaches  us  again  that  it  is  advisable  to  let  such 
experiments  be  preceded  by  an  understanding  with  the  medium,  and 
that  any  method  which,  without  consideration  of  the  medium's  nervous 
condition,  takes  her  by  surprise,  or  proceeds  by  violence  {e.g.,  the  grasping 
of  the  structures,  which  has  often  been  proposed  by  savants  inex- 
perienced in  this  subject),  totally  misses  its  object  in  the  case  of  the 
"  genuine  "  medium,  since  the  fountain  of  observations  is  dried  up  by 
the  psychic  shock  which  always  results  from  such  interferences.^     The 

*  If  it  is  a  case  of  mediums  who  only  operate  in  the  dark,  who  refuse  hodily  examina- 
tion and  other  methods  of  control,  and  give  serious  grounds  for  suspicion  of  fraudulent 
manipulation,  it  is  the  duty  of  the  experimenter  to  interfere  without  compunction. 

128  PHENOMENA    OF    MATERIALISATION 

same  negative  result  also  occurs  often  enough  when  Eva  agrees  with 
the  interference,  or  even  undertakes  it  herself.  In  this  connection  I 
may  mention  an  occurrence  from  a  later  sitting.  Eva  attempted  to 
illuminate  the  materialised  structures  with  a  red  lantern  w^hich  we 
handed  her,  but  they  disappeared,  and  did  not  reappear  that  evening. 
The  flaring-up  of  the  magnesium  light  also  produces  a  sort  of  injury 
which,  although  expected  and  desired  by  her,  always  shortens  the 
sitting,  and  often  brings  it  to  an  end. 

On  17th  November  Eva  was  out  of  sorts,  and  we  expected  that  the 
sitting  arranged  for  the  18th  would  be  negative.  For  this  reason 
Mme.  Bisson,  who  had  had  no  opportunity  of  hypnotising  Eva  on  the 
17th,  went  to  the  bedside  of  the  sleeping  medium  at  one  o'clock  at  night, 
at  the  author's  suggestion.  By  verbal  suggestion  she  easily  transformed 
the  normal  deep  sleep  into  a  state  of  hypnosis  with  rapport,  as  was 
clear  from  Eva's  answers.  Mme,  Bisson  made  some  verbal  suggestions 
with  regard  to  the  sitting  of  the  18th,  and  as  to  her  psychic  attitude 
towards  it. 

On  the  18th  itself  Eva  was  constantly  in  the  society  of  her  pro- 
tectress, who,  during  the  afternoon  hours,  was  busy  with  sculptural 
work  in  her  studio.  By  her  conversation  also,  Mme.  Bisson  sought  to 
stimulate  Eva's  interest  for  the  sitting  of  that  evening.  This  kind  of 
psychic  preparation  was  of  astonishing  success,  as  will  be  seen  by  the 
report  of  the  evening  sitting. 

Sitting  of  the  18th  November  1911. 

Present. — Mme.  Bisson  and  the  author. 

Conditions  as  usual. 

The  appearance  of  a  white  patch,  very  soon  after  the  beginning  of 
the  sitting  (9  p.m.)  to  the  left  of  the  medium,  which  appeared  to  change 
into  a  long,  narrow,  veil-like  strip,  implied  the  commencement  of  a 
positive  sitting.  Finally,  the  veil  lengthened  out  to  7  or  8  feet,  and 
approached  the  gap  in  the  curtains,  while  the  medium's  hands  were 
controlled,  so  that  it  was  in  the  full  light. 

As  the  phenomenon  was  repeated  and  more  closely  examined  we 
saw  a  hand,  which  appeared  to  grasp  the  veil  above  and  pull  it  along  ; 
the  lower  end  seemed  to  trail  along  the  floor.  Then  Eva's  body  was 
covered  with  the  material,  particularly  her  face  and  shoulder.  On  one 
occasion  I  thought  I  recognised  beside  Eva  a  face  in  profile,  which  did 
not  resemble  the  medium,  and  quickly  disappeared.  When,  subse- 
quently, something  white  again  appeared,  clinging  to  Eva's  hair,  as 
the  curtain  was  opened,  I  ignited  the  flash-light.  The  successful  photo- 
graph (Fig.  52)  does  not  show  a  head,  but  material,  in  the  shape  of  two 
superimposed  leaves,  attached  to  the  back  of  Eva's  head,  and  corre- 
sponding in  size  to  her  face.  The  lower  leaf  is  quite  white,  and  resembles 
a  handkerchief.  Over  this  there  lies  a  rather  larger  piece  of  grey  stuff 
of  a  patchy  and  veil-like  structure,  with  two  deep  parallel  folds  and 
several  smaller  folds.  The  ribbons  appear  torn,  and^in  two  places  have 
small  thread-like  projections  resembling  the  fur  of  a  rat  or  rabbit. 

Fig.  52.     Author's  first  flashlight  photograph,   18  November,   igii. 

Fig.  53.     Author's  second  flashlight  photogkai'h,   iS  November,   1911. 

SITTINGS  OF  OCTOBER  AND  NOVEMBER  1911  (PARIS)     129 

A  third  of  the  substance  appears  light  grey,  and  the  rest  dark  grey, 
with  a  rough  surface. 

With  reference  to  later  sittings,  it  may  be  mentioned  here  that  these 
dark  felt-like  or  fur-like  substances  play  a  great  part  in  later  photo- 
graphs, especially  of  modelled  structures,  and  are  mostly  used  for  the 
representation  of  the  hairy  portions  of  faces  and  heads.  It  is  only  by 
the  close  examination  and  comparison  of  the  stereoscopic  transparencies 
with  the  simple  photographs  that  this  material  is  recognised,  which  now 
appears  for  the  first  time  on  the  negative. 

As  the  sitting  progressed,  the  author  obtained  a  clearer  and  clearer 
impression  that  this  material  would  form  itself  into  a  face.  As  the 
head-like  structure  approached  the  gap  of  the  curtains,  it  gave  quite 
a  flat  impression,  not  like  a  picture,  but  like  a  mask  of  a  face,  on  which 
the  features  of  a  face  were  to  be  modelled  by  the  sketchy  insertion  of 
small  grey  and  white  patches  of  somxC  soft  material.  Thus,  a  black 
pointed  beard  was  most  clearly  marked,  while  the  features  were  only 
very  roughly  sketched.  This  remarkable  thing  moved  freely,  and  drew 
a  long  white  veil  after  it,  which  suddenly  detached  itself  and  fell  to  the 
ground,  while  the  mask-like  object  disappeared  backwards.  When, 
on  the  medium's  left  side,  an  oblong  white  mass  was  again  exposed, 
the  author  took  another  photograph  (Fig,  53),  after  which  the  sitting 
had  to  be  closed  on  account  of  Eva's  fatigue. 

The  final  examination  was  negative. 

The  second  photograph  shows  an  oblong,  white,  and  rather  thick 
piece  of  material  issuing  from  the  back  of  Eva's  head,  as  if  attached  to 
her  hair,  falling  over  her  left  shoulder  and  upper  sleeve,  and  disappearing 
in  the  dark  of  the  cabinet.  The  material  is  closely  folded.  On  its 
upper  portion,  at  the  level  of  Eva's  head,  it  gives  the  impression  of 
stiff  crumpled  paper  with  sharply-cut  edges. 

On  this  there  lies  a  piece  of  the  grey,  flat,  rough-haired  substance 
above  described,  which  resembles  below  a  masculine  beard  and 
moustache.  At  the  place  of  the  nose  is  a  great  dark  patch.  The  part 
corresponding  to  the  face  is  a  dark  grey  colour.  Where  the  hair  join;^ 
the  forehead  the  dark  grey  substance  commences  again.  Over  that 
again  is  a  white  cross-piece.  The  eyes  are  absent.  The  part  corre- 
sponding to  the  right  half  of  the  face  is  bent  outward.  The  whole 
consists  of  a  flat  sharp-rimmed  structure,  formed  of  two  pieces  of 
material,  lying  one  over  the  other,  the  upper  one  having  a  dark 
colour.  The  shape  recalls  the  process  of  formation  of  an  incomplete 
mask. 

The  comparison  of  the  first  picture  of  this  sitting  with  the  second 
suggests  that  the  two  kinds  of  material  photographed  and  described 
are  used  for  the  reproduction  of  flat  mask-like  shapes  of  faces,  the 
dark  fur-like  material  being  used  for  the  hairy  portions. 

Sitting  of  the  21st  November  1911. 

The  medium  told  us  that  she  had  waked  in  the  night,  or  rather 
half-waked,  and  had  seen  a  large  white  heap  of  material  on  her  chest, 
which  greatly  frightened  her,  but  she  soon  went  to  sleep  again. 

I 

130  PHENOMENA    OF    MATERIALISATION 

Sitting  of  the  22nd  November  1911, 
Present. — Mme.  Bisson  and  the  author. 

This  time  Eva  had  a  veiled  look  and  did  not  feel  well.  Her  hands 
were  cold  and  her  pulse  accelerated.  There  was  no  preparatory 
hypnotism,  as  she  seemed  well  disposed.  Careful  searching  of  her  body 
and  dress,  and  of  the  cabinet,  gave  no  result.  The  cameras  were  fixed 
at  a  distance  of  12  to  14  feet.  The  magnesium  charge  was  3j 
grammes. 

Immediately  after  the  beginning  of  the  sitting  a  white  mass,  the 
size  of  her  two  hands,  appeared  in  her  lap.  In  order  to  get  a  good 
result,  and  not  to  disturb  the  development  by  the  light  admitted  by 
the  repeated  opening  of  the  curtains,  the  author  asked  Eva  only  to  open 
the  curtain  as  soon  as  a  shape  was  sufficiently  developed.  Thus,  at  the 
author's  special  wish,  the  curtains  remained  longer  closed  this  time, 
in  order  to  allow  the  materialisation  process  to  ripen. 

The  question  of  the  artificial  production,  or  the  fraudulent  manipu- 
lation, of  the  manifestations  may  be  now  regarded  as  settled,  at  least 
for  Mme.  Bisson  and  the  author,  especially  in  view  of  the  remaining 
conditions  governing  the  sittings.  In  any  case,  there  is  no  occasion 
to  refer  to  this  question  of  control  by  a  special  verification  as  each  new 
phenomenon  arises.  The  interest  of  the  highest  possible  advancement 
of  the  phenomenon  is  greater  than  the  constant  diversion  of  the  medium's 
attention  towards  the  control,  as  such  control  hinders  the  natural 
development  of  the  phenomena  and  reduces  the  efficiency.  The 
general  course  was  the  same  as  in  previous  sittings.  To  the  left  of  the 
medium  in  the  corner,  at  the  first  exposure,  a  white  form  was  visible, 
resembling  a  pile  of  white  stuff.  This  mass  was  about  5  or  6  feet  from 
the  curtain  and  28  inches  from  Eva's  face,  and  appeared  about  to 
assume  a  head-like  form,  but  the  curtain  closed  again.  Eva  whimpered 
and  groaned,  with  deep  and  loud  expirations,  and  appeared  to  suffer, 
and  be  profoundly  troubled.  Then  we  heard  a  rustling  as  if  some  silk 
material  was  being  crumpled.  When  the  curtain  was  again  withdrawn, 
the  incident  light  seemed  to  illuminate  a  female  face,  which  shyly  and 
slightly  exposed  itself  to  the  light  and  approached  us.  The  apparition 
was  on  the  medium's  left.  At  our  request,  Eva,  who  herself  wished 
for  a  good  photograph,  caused  the  phenomenon  to  take  up  her  position 
on  the  right  side  of  her  head,  so  that  it  could  be  taken  simultaneously 
by  the  various  cameras,  and  fall  within  their  fields  of  vision.  (Possibly 
she  arranged  it  with  her  hands.) 

I  then  requested  her  to  decide  the  moment  for  exposure  herself, 
according  to  her  own  feeling,  by  opening  the  curtain  widely.  This  was 
done.  The  author  pressed  the  electric  button,  but  the  action  failed. 
To  discover  the  fault,  I  unscrewed  the  push,  but  Eva  called  out  "  C'est 
le  contact."  This  meant  the  plug  in  the  wall.  I  should  not  have  had 
this  idea,  but  should  have  looked  for  the  fault  in  the  attachment  of  the 
flexible  cord  of  the  ignition  apparatus,  in  one  of  its  screws,  or  in  the 
hygroscopic  character  of  the  magnesium  powder.  But  it  was  found 
that  the  plug  had  actually  been  put  in  the  wrong  way. 

Fig.  54.     Author's  flashlight  photograph  of  21  November,   1911. 

[Front  view.) 

SITTINGS  OF  OCTOBER  AND  NOVEMBER  1911  (PARIS)     131 

When,  after  this  interruption,  the  medium  opened  the  curtains 
again,  the  flash-hght  was  ignited.  After  a  short  pause  the  sitting  was 
continued.  Then  a  head,  apparently  freely  suspended,  approached 
the  opening  of  the  curtains,  and  was  clearly  recognised  by  Mme.  Bisson 
and  myself.  In  size  it  resembled  a  child's  head,  which  was  clothed 
like  that  of  a  nun  with  a  white  veil.  During  these  creations 
Mme.  Bisson,  as  if  moved  by  an  unconscious  impulse,  suddenly  seized 
Eva's  left  hand.  At  the  same  moment  I  saw  the  head,  which  was  on 
the  medium's  left,  sink  to  the  ground  with  lightning  speed  and  dis- 
appear, just  as  an  object  maintained  in  suspension  by  some  electric 
attraction  would  fall  immediately  on  breaking  the  circuit.  The  face 
itself  gave  me  a  sketchy  and  unfinished  impression. 

When  the  little  head  showed  itself  again  the  author  heard  Eva 
speak  at  the  same  time.  She  wished  that  Mme.  Bisson  should  cut  a 
lock  of  hair  off  the  head.  As  the  apparition  approached,  Mme.  Bisson 
took,  with  her  right  hand,  a  pair  of  scissors  which  I  held  out  to  her. 
Her  left  hand  was  guided  by  Eva's  right  hand  towards  the  head 
situated  at  the  rim  of  the  curtain.  Mme.  Bisson  then,  under  my  eyes 
and  while  I  could  observe  everything  quite  closely,  took  a  lock  of  hair 
and  cut  off  a  length  of  about  4  inches.  She  at  once  gave  half  the  hair 
to  me,  and  I  took  charge  of  it. 

The  materialised  structure  suddenly  disappeared  in  the  direction  of 
the  medium,  accompanied  by  a  scream  from  Eva.  It  seemed  as  if 
the  substance  dissolved  and  was  reabsorbed  by  the  medium's  organism. 
A  detailed  examination  showed  that  the  tights  had  traces  of  moisture 
near  the  left  calf  to  the  extent  of  the  size  of  a  hand.  The  patch  had  no 
odour,  and  resembled  the  serous  moistening  of  bandages  over  wounds. 
Otherwise  the  subsequent  examination  was  negative. 

As  the  successful  photographs  show  (Figs.  54,  55  and  56),  Eva  has 
widely  opened  the  curtains  with  her  right  hand,  so  that  her  whole  body 
is  visible.  Her  face,  bent  towards  the  left  and  front,  is  painfully 
contracted.  The  centre  of  the  materialised  structure  corresponds  to 
the  position  of  her  right  ear.  In  an  artistic  frame  of  white  veils  we 
see  two-thirds  of  a  pretty  female  face,  appearing  to  be  about  half 
the  size  of  Eva's.  The  forehead,  left  temple,  and  ear  are  covered 
by  the  veil,  and  the  right  eye  and  the  right  temple  by  hair  hanging 
down. 

The  stereoscopic  picture  leaves  it  doubtful  whether  the  left  upper 
half  of  the  face  is  developed  at  all.  The  left  eye,  directed  towards  me 
and  inwards,  is  as  natural  and  vivacious  in  expression  as  it  would  aj^pear 
in  a  good  photograph  from  life,  and  seems  designed  accordingly.  With 
the  help  of  masks,  reproduced  photographs,  or  ha'rdressers'  models  of 
heads,  a  similar  result  cannot,  in  the  opinion  of  artists  and  other  experts, 
be  obtained. 

The  excellent  drawing  of  the  face,  the  softness  of  the  finely-modelled 
form  of  the  small  head,  lightly  inclining  to  the  right,  the  shadows 
everywhere  strictly  corresponding  to  the  direction  of  the  incident 
light,  increase  the  impression  of  natural  truth.  In  spite  of  the  smallness 
of  the  face,  it  corresponds  more  to  the  type  of  a  young  woman's  than  a 
child's  face.  The  pretty  mouth,  with  the  dimples  in  its  corners,  the 
slender   and    regularly-built    nose,    the    rounded    and    rather    broadly 

132  PHENOMENA    OF    MATERIALISATION 

developed  chin,  the  well -nourished  curve  of  the  cheek,  together  with 
the  vivacious  expression  of  the  eye,  express  a  certain  brightness  and 
contentment  which  might  correspond  to  an  age  of  twenty  to  twenty- 
four  years. 

The  manner  in  which  this  small  face  presents  itself  in  its  frame  of 
veiling  makes  an  artistic  impression,  and  even  suggests  a  trace  of 
coquetry  and  vanity.  In  any  case,  it  argues  a  careful  preparation  of 
the  toilet.  The  materials  falling  in  natural  lines  are  partly  trans- 
parent, with  flat  solid  pieces  devoid  of  structure.  The  edges  visible 
on  the  photograph  run,  as  in  almost  all  the  other  photographs,  in  very 
wavy  or  pointed  lines,  with  irregular  corners  and  hanging  fragments 
and  threads,  but  never  in  straight  lines.  A  regular  pattern,  which 
might  give  an  indication  of  the  mode  of  weaving,  cannot  be  seen  either 
in  the  transparencies  or  in  the  magnifications.  The  side  version  of 
the  picture  by  the  camera  inside  the  cabinet  is  also  excellent.  Here 
we  see  the  small  head  more  from  in  front,  and  the  portion  of  the  coiffure 
covering  the  left  ear  becomes  visible.  The  rounded  form  of  the  face  is 
more  clearly  marked.  The  shadows,  again  exactly  corresponding  to 
the  incident  light,  especially  to  the  left,  on  the  chin,  mouth,  and  nose, 
have  here  become  a  little  brighter  and  softer. 

Yet  the  face,  in  spite  of  the  completed  details,  does  not  give  a 
finished  impression.  In  the  magnifications  we  see  several  fissures  and 
patches  {e.g.,  on  the  left  cheek,  in  the  corner  of  the  mouth,  and  on  the 
bridge  of  the  nose)  which  resemble  either  pimples  or  a  fine  veil, 
folded  and  torn  in  some  places.  But  these  might  also  be  due  to 
fissures  in  the  ground  substance  out  of  which  these  forms  are  made. 
Under  the  veil  covering  the  forehead  we  see  the  regularly  folded 
white  material  used  as  a  base  for  covering  the  right  side  of  the 
forehead. 

The  whole  picture,  in  its  expression,  in  the  position  of  the  head,  in 
its  drapery,  and  in  the  manner  in  which  the  veils  are  arranged  and  fall, 
makes  such  a  natural,  elemental,  and  harmonious  impression,  in  spite 
of  its  incompleteness  and  sketchiness,  as  would  be  astonishing  in  an 
instantaneous  creation  of  nature. 

The  back  of  the  head  is  wanting.  We  have  before  us  only  a  flat, 
one-sided  development  of  facial  relief,  which  lies  flat  against  Eva's 
right  ear,  and  even  appears  fixed  above  against  the  hair  by  a  small 
projection. 

Owing  to  the  fact  that  the  longer  piece  of  material  on  the  right  lies 
with  its  outer  edge  on  Eva's  right  shoulder,  and  so  is  prevented  from 
covering  the  right  half  of  the  face,  a  hole  is  created  between  the  right 
half  of  the  face  and  the  veil  arrangement — a  sort,  of  cave,  which  is  clearly 
seen  in  the  stereoscopic  transparency.  The  unfinished  surface,  which 
would  correspond  to  the  other  half  of  the  face,  is  covered  by  something 
black,  which  looks  like  hair  hanging  down,  and  cannot,  in  any  case, 
be  regarded  as  developed.  There  are  important  arguments  against  a 
possible  doubt  that  this  remarkable  face  is  in  reality  plastic,  i.e.,  deve- 
loped in  low  relief,  rather  than  in  one  flat  piece,  with  a  face  dra^vn  or 
photographed  upon  it.  The  fall  of  the  shadows  corresponds  exactly 
with  the  direction  of  the  incident  magnesium  light.  A  difference 
between  these   shadows   in  the  front   view  picture  produced  by  the 

Fig.  56.     Lateral  view,   with  magnification,  of  Fig.  54,   taken  from   the  cabinet 

I  A 

!■■■■"»  yi 

II  A 

I  B 

II  B 
Fig.   57.     MiCROPHOTOGRAPHS   OF  Eva's   hair   (ii)   and   "Estelle's"   hair   (i). 

SITTINGS  OF  OCTOBER  AND  NOVEMBER  1911  (PARIS)     133 

camera  in  the  cabinet  and  the  profile  picture  of  the  external  camera 
would  be  impossible  in  the  case  of  a  photograph  previously  illuminated, 
or  in  the  case  of  a  product  of  lithography  or  graphic  art,  also  provided 
with  shadows  before  exposure.  Although  this  would  suffice  to  decide 
the  question,  I  arranged  for  the  careful  measurement  of  the  different 
stereoscopic  pictures  magnified  to  6  feet.  The  distance  between  the 
two  cameras  brings  about  certain  changes  in  size  and  in  the  design  of 
the  chief  features  on  the  negatives,  and  these  sizes  were  correctly 
measured,  with  special  reference  to  the  nose  projection.  The  difference 
amounts  to  1|  mm.,  which  is  easily  understood,  considering  the 
smallness  of  the  objects  measured,  and  this  again  gives  a  further  proof 
of  the  plastic  relief  of  the  face.  Also,  the  high  light  on  the  eye  corre- 
sponds with  the  incident  light,  and  argues  a  convex  form  of  the  eyeball, 
which  increases  the  living  impression. 

The  hair  obtained  at  the  same  sitting  is  evidently  derived  from  the 
strands  of  hair  seen  hanging  on  the  right  half  of  the  face  down  to  the 
neck.  After  the  sitting  I  cut  a  lock  of  hair  from  the  medium,  with  her 
permission,  so  as  to  get  material  for  comparison.  While  Eva's  hair 
showed  altogether  a  brunette  character,  the  hair  taken  from  the  small 
head  was  light  blonde.  This  impression  is  completely  corroborated  by 
the  chemical  examination  and  microphotography  of  the  samples  of 
hair  of  Eva  and  "  Estelle  "  (the  name  by  which  the  medium  denotes 
the  face  photographed),  which  was  made  by  Dr  Steiner  in  Munich. 

In  the  samples  of  hair,  the  expert  says  that  the  marrow  cylinder  is 
absent,  so  that  it  must  be  regarded  as  hair  of  the  head.  That  we  have 
to  deal  with  human  hair  is  shown  by  the  microphotograph  of  the  hair 
in  air  (magnified  440  times).  The  epidermis  (Fig.  57)  is  furrowed 
crossways  over  the  whole  width  in  a  manner  characteristic  of  human 
hair  only.  The  microphotographs  of  the  two  hair  samples,  in  glycerined 
gelatine,  bring  out  the  difference  between  the  two  samples  as  much 
as  the  microphotograph  in  air.  While  Estelle' s  hair  only  shows 
slight  pigmentation,  Eva's  hair  is  distinctly  provided  with  granular 
pigment.  Seen  in  polarised  light,  both  samples  show  double  refraction, 
with  the  optical  axis  in  the  direction  of  growth. 

Treated  with  sulphuric  acid,  potash,  and  chromic  acid,  both  samples 
split  up  into  elementary  fibrils  without  showing  any  peculiar  character- 
istic features. 

The  differences  in  the  two  hair  samples  as  regards  pigmentation, 
structure  of  the  fibres,  and  of  the  epidermis,  does  not  yet  make  it 
certain  that  the  hair  is  drawn  from  different  individuals,  since  different 
colours  of  hair  grow  in  one  and  the  same  person.  The  difference  in 
the  epidermal  structure  may  be  due  to  different  ages  of  the  hair.  But 
the  expert  noticed,  when  treating  the  samples  with  warm  sulphuric 
acid  (80  per  cent.,  temperature  50°  C),  that  the  sample  taken  from 
Eva  dissolved  into  its  fibrils  much  more  cleanly  than  Estelle's  hair 
when  treated  in  the  same  manner.  Eva's  hair  dissolved  very  naturally 
into  its  elements,  while  Estelle's  hair  not  only  showed  this  dissolution, 
but  a  partial  solution  of  the  fibrils  themselves.  This  difference  indicates 
a  difference  in  the  chemical  constitution  of  the  substance,  which  is  not 
seen  in  one  and  the  same  individual.  It  is  therefore  probable  that  both 
samples  of  hair  belong  to  different  individuals. 

134  PHENOMENA    OF    MATERIALISATION 

Sitting  of  the  25th  November  1911. 

Present. — Mme.  Bisson  and  the  author. 

Conditions  as  in  previous  sittings. 

After  several  exposures  of  a  white  material  on  Eva's  left  shoulder, 

1  saw,  to  the  left  of  her  head,  a  white  disk-like  structure.  At  the  next 
opening  of  the  curtain  I  turned  on  the  current,  and  took  a  photograph. 
The  sitting  was  then  closed,  and  the  final  examination  was  negative. 

The  pictures  (Figs.  58  and  59)  are  very  successful,  and  show  Eva 
with  compressed  mouth  and  closed  eyes  in  her  chair.  The  face  is 
turned  half  to  the  left.     A  fairly  long  fragment  of  material,   about 

2  inches  wide,  and  folded  several  times,  joins  the  back  of  her  hair  with 
the  left  curtain  from  within,  and  appears  to  be  fastened  at  both  ends 
(by  Eva's  hands  ?).  From  this  hangs  a  second  piece  of  fur-like  sub- 
stance, the  size  and  shape  of  a  lady's  handkerchief,  forming  a  rectangular 
fiat  surface  with  irregular  margins.  This  is  attached  to  the  strip  by 
its  narrow  edge.  An  examination  of  the  piece  of  material  in  the  stereo- 
scopic transparency  shows  that  the  surface  is  covered  with  numerous 
irregular  folds,  both  small  and  large.  The  light  grey  centre  is  well 
marked  off  in  the  middle,  from  the  darker  and  broader  margin.  The 
whole  makes  an  impression  more  of  rough  fur  or  skin  than  of  a  woven 
fabric  or  a  product  of  wood  fibre.  In  its  whole  composition  it  recalls 
the  piece  photographed  on  the  18th  November  1911.  As  we  shall  see 
later,  the  same  substance  is  used  as  a  base  for  the  head  structures. 

Observations  in  December  1911  (Paris). 

The  physical  need  towards  materialisation  often  occurred  spon- 
taneously with  Eva  at  odd  times,  and  appears  to  depend  upon  her 
physical  condition. 

As  already  mentioned,  Mme.  Bisson  was  in  the  habit  of  hypnotising 
Eva  every  evening  in  the  cabinet  (but  in  her  day  dress),  in  order  to 
maintain  the  suggestive  rapport  and  to  influence  her  psychic  condition 
favourably  towards  the  sittings. 

In  a  letter  of  9th  December  1911,  she  reports  as  follows  : — 

"  Yesterday  I  hypnotised  Eva  as  usual,  and  she  unexpectedly  began 
to  produce  phenomena.  As  soon  as  they  began,  Eva  allowed  me  to 
undress  her  completely.  I  then  saw  a  thick  thread  emerge  from  the 
vagina.  It  changed  its  place,  left  the  genitals,  and  disappeared  in  the 
navel  depression. 

"  More  material  emerged  from  the  vagina,  and  with  a  sinuous  serpen- 
tine motion  of  its  own  it  crept  up  the  girl's  body,  giving  the  impression 
as  if  it  were  about  to  rise  into  the  air.  Finally  it  ascended  to  her  head, 
entered  Eva's  mouth,  and  disappeared. 

"  Eva  then  stood  up,  and  again  a  mass  of  material  appeared  at  the 
genitals,  spread  out,  and  hung  suspended  between  her  legs.     A  strip 

OBSERVATIONS   IN   DECEMBER   1911    (PARIS)  135 

of  it  rose,  took  a  direction  towards  me,  receded,  and  disappeared.  All 
this  happened  while  Eva  stood  up.  She  then  sat  down  on  the  floor, 
supported  her  head  on  her  joined  hands,  and  her  elbows  on  my  knees. 
At  that  moment  another  broad  strip  of  material  appeared,  lying  across 
her  knees.  At  one  end  of  it  the  shape  of  an  imperfectly  materialised, 
but  quite  recognisable,  hand  became  visible.  A  further  mass  of  material 
appeared  on  Eva's  left  shoulder.  Then  the  whole  mass  disappeared 
and  did  not  reappear." 

The  above  report  is  supplemented  by  a  letter  of  13th  December, 
which  contains  answers  to  questions  put  by  the  author.  It  appears 
that  the  material  vanished  after  its  first  appearance  as  if  it  had  been 
dissolved,  also  at  the  end  of  the  sitting.  During  the  whole  process 
the  curtains  were  open,  and  the  red  lights  were  burning  as  during  the 
sittings.  Mme.  Bisson  was  in  front  of  the  cabinet  and  Eva  inside. 
During  the  upward  motion  of  the  strip,  from  the  genital  passage  to 
the  mouth,  the  material  showed  slowly  undulating  movements. 

At  one  moment  the  material  rose  in  the  air,  and  seemed  to  try  and 
detach  itself  from  the  medium's  body,  while  Eva  was  motionless.  It 
gave  the  impression  of  being  directed  by  some  unseen  force,  while  she 
herself  was  passive.  Slowly,  as  if  of  very  light  weight,  the  material 
sank  back. 

Mme.  Bisson  was  able  to  observe  these  phenomena  from  beginning 
to  end  without  interruption.  The  colour  of  the  material  was  grey, 
without  transparency.  She  adds  :  "I  know  that  these  facts,  having 
been  observed  by  me  alone,  are  therefore  of  less  value  in  the  eyes  of 
many  savants.  Discoveries  increase  in  importance  in  proportion  to 
the  amount  of  the  observational  material.  Even  if  you,  and  other 
sitters,  do  not  succeed  in  obtaining  the  same  results  as  I,  my  collected 
experiences,  committed  to  writing,  may  yet  serve  the  truth.  It  is  quite 
natural  that  I,  who  live  with  the  medium,  and  observe  her  the  whole 
day,  hypnotising  her  regularly,  should  get  to  see  more  than  savants, 
wLo  only  participate  from  time  to  time." 

In  a  letter  of  11th  December,  Mme.  Bisson  touches  the  ques- 
tion raised  by  the  author  as  to  detaching  a  piece  of  the  material 
produced  by  Eva.  She  refers  to  the  fact  that  the  well-known 
medium,  Mrs  d'Esperance,  was  seriously  injured  in  her  health  by  one 
of  those  present  grasping  the  transfiguration  :  "  To  an  invitation  to 
Paris,  this  lady,  who  was  not  a  professional  medium,  but  gave  sittings 
solely  in  the  interests  of  science,  replied  that  she  would  never  again 
offer  herself  for  any  kind  of  experiments,  not  because  she  lacked  con- 
fidence in  her  own  powers,  but  because  she  mistrusted  the  savants, 
who,  in  her  somnambulic  condition,  had  grasped  the  material.  In 
consequence  she  was  seriously  ill  for  several  months,  and  had  never 
regained  her  full  health.  Yet  I  know  that  it  woidd  be  of  the  highest 
scientific  interest  to  obtain  a  piece  of  this  material.  In  my  opinion, 
its  analysis  would  only  yield  organic  substances  derived  from  Eva's 
body.  At  the  present  moment,  when  the  phenomena  originate  in  the 
vagina,  they  would  probably  only  contain  cells,  and  cell  products, 
corresponding  to  the  anatomical  structure  of  the  vagina.  I  therefore 
do  not  wish  to  employ  any  force  or  compulsion  which  might  injure  the 

136  PHENOMENA    OF    MATERIALISATION 

medium,  quite  apart  from  the  unpleasantness  I  might  thereby  incur 
with  her  relatives.  Believe  me,  she  prefers  her  health  to  any  sort  of 
phenomena.  She  lends  herself  to  these  experiments  to  please  me. 
She  has  no  conception  of  the  importance  of  the  phenomena,  not  being 
sufficiently  well  informed.  Nor  does  she  want  to  read  anything  about 
them,  and  keep  herself  up  to  date.  Every  day  she  tells  me  that  she  is 
bored,  and  wants  to  marry.  Still,  I  have  the  desire  and  the  intention 
to  possess  a  piece  of  the  material.  But  I  wish  to  get  it  from  her,  i.e., 
with  her  consent.  I  expect  to  succeed  by  great  patience  and  per- 
.severance,  but  not  by  violence.  Do  not  say  that  Eva  runs  no  risk. 
You  cannot  be  sure  of  that,  since  you  do  not  know  yourself  what  the 
material  consists  of,  nor  how  it  is  connected  with  her  body.  In  yes- 
terday's sitting  I  saw,  about  ten  times  running,  a  completely  materialised 
hand  of  an  extraordinarily  firm  consistence,  which  several  times  touched 
ray  hand,  and  each  time  laid  a  piece  of  veil  on  the  palm  of  my  hand. 
The  little  finger  and  thumb  were  joined  by  a  fine  ribbon.  I  never  saw 
a  hand  as  clear  as  this." 

Answering  some  questions  concerning  the  phenomenon,  the  lady 
supplemented  her  report  in  a  letter  of  16th  December  as  follows  : — 

"  While  the  materialised  hand  touched  me,  both  Eva's  hands  visibly 
held  the  curtain,  and  in  order  to  be  quite  certain  I  touched  both  Eva's 
hands  with  my  left  hand." 

She  continues  her  report  (letter  of  11th  December)  as  follows  : — 
"  Suddenly  Eva  declared  she  felt  nothing  more.  She  hiccoughed  as  if 
about  to  vomit,  complained  of  sickness,  and  said  :  '  I  wish  to  go  to  bed 
without  being  wakened.'  I  therefore  took  her  to  bed.  She  appeared 
to  suffer,  and  cried  out.  I  hesitated  to  waken  her,  but  suddenly  she 
said  I  was  wrong  to  close  the  sitting,  as  '  they  '  (meaning  the  entities  in 
the  mediumistic  sense)  were  annoyed,  since  they  were  still  there  and 
wanted  to  show  themselves. 

"  Thereupon  the  phenomena  commenced  again  in  the  bed,  the 
material  again  emerging  from  the  vagina,  as  some  days  before.  Eva  lay 
stretched  on  her  back,  and  I  knelt  in  front  of  the  bed.  The  mass 
emerging  from  the  genitals  had  the  shape  of  a  thick  and  solid  strip, 
passing  along  the  thigh,  and  appearing  to  recede  into  her  body.  Sud- 
denly she  exclaimed,  '  Look,  look,  it  comes  again  ;  I  feel  a  head.'  Then 
a  round  and  fairly  solid  sphere,  of  the  shape  and  size  of  a  billiard  ball, 
fell  into  my  hand  as  it  lay  with  the  palm  upwards  between  her  legs. 
Also  another,  quite  small,  one.  The  sphere  was  attached  to  her  body 
by  a  ribbon.  I  thus  held  in  my  hand  this  mysterious  living  mass, 
which  moved  on  the  palm  of  my  hand.  I  rose  with  the  intention  of 
closing  my  hand  in  order  to  achieve  the  long-desired  success,  when 
suddenly  the  whole  thing  disappeared  from  my  hand  as  if  it  had  been 
vaporised.  I  searched  in  the  bed  and  under  the  medium,  but  found 
no  trace.     All  had  disappeared,  and  remained  so. 

"  Eva  felt  free  and  at  rest,  and  I  could  go  to  bed.  Can  you  give 
me  the  key  to  these  mysterious  occurrences,  which  I  report  to  you  just 
as  I  have  experienced  them  ?  " 

Fig.    58.     Author's    flashlight    photograph    of 
25  November,   lyii.      [Front  view.) 

Fi*^'    59-     The  same   taken   in   side  view   from 

THE    CABINET. 

Fig.  6o.     Flashlight  photograph  by  the  author,  30  December,   191  i. 

SITTINGS  OF  DECEMBER  1911  AND  JANUARY  1912      137 

Further,  Mme.  Bisson  reports  in  a  letter  of  18th  December  1911  : — 
"  Last  night  I  held  a  sitting,  in  which  a  lady  took  part.  After  the 
entity  '  la  petite  Estelle  '  had  shown  itself  several  times,  a  male  face 
appeared,  and  three  times  I  clearly  recognised  my  deceased  nephew. 
The  apparition  disappeared  slowly,  being  wafted  upwards.  Then  the 
medium  said,  '  I  see  nothing  more,  nothing  at  all.'  I  then  wanted  to 
awaken  Eva,  but  found  her  still  so  dazed  that  I  took  her  to  bed  in  that 
condition.  I  did  not  leave  her,  but  waited  to  see  if  anything  further 
would  happen.  Ten  minutes  after  she  had  lain  down,  the  stertorous 
breathing  began  again,  and  she  fell  into  catalepsy.  Then  phenomena 
appeared  in  the  region  of  the  vagina.  A  fiat  ribbon  of  material  emerged 
from  the  genitals,  remaining  joined  to  them  by  a  small  junction.  I 
touched  it  and  pulled  at  it  (which  made  Eva  scream),  and  hoped  to 
withdraw  a  small  piece  hanging  loose.  But,  unfortunately,  I  did  not 
succeed,  as  Eva  resisted  too  much,  and  the  whole  product  was  reabsorbed 
into  the  vagina.  The  material  was  white,  and  showed  in  the  centre 
a  black  patch  like  a  hole.  After  it  had  disappeared,  Eva  exclaimed, 
'  Oh,  I  suffer  no  more  ;  I  feel  very  well.'  I  let  her  lie,  and  suggested 
to  her  to  sleep  well  till  the  morning.  She  awoke  refreshed  the  next 
morning,  and  was  cheerful  the  whole  morning.  But  already  by 
2  o'clock  on  that  day  she  became  numbed,  and  her  eyes  assumed  a 
peculiar  expression.  The  afternoon  passed  without  anything  special 
happening.  But  hardly  had  I  hypnotised  her  at  9  p.m.  when  the 
entity  '  la  petite  Estelle  '  showed  itself  seven  times  in  succession,  but 
too  far  behind  the  curtain  to  be  photographed." 

Sittings  of  December  ipii  and  January  1912  (Paris). 

Sittings  of  the  27th  and  29th  December  1911. 

Sittings  negative. 

Eva's  attention  had  been  distracted  by  the  presence  of  a  friend  of 
the  family  in  Paris.  She  appeared  nervously  excited,  and  passed 
through  one  of  those  crises  which  take  several  days  to  subside. 

Sitting  of  the  30th  December  1911. 

Sitters. — Mme.  Bisson  and  the  author. 

Conditions,  control,  and  illumination  as  in  previous  sittings. 

Immediately  after  ths  extinction  of  the  white  light  and  the  setting-in 
of  the  somnambulic  state,  Eva  made  the  well-known  noises  of  long-drawn 
expirations  and  stertorous  groaning  and  gasping.  Hardly  had  I  taken 
my  place  to  the  medium's  right,  when  a  white  mass,  double  the  size  of 
a  hand,  became  visible  in  her  lap.  During  the  following  twenty  minutes 
the  psychophysical  efforts  continued.  The  substance  changed  its 
place,  and  at  the  next  exposure  we  saw  it  on  Eva's  head.  I  requested 
her  to  show  the  female  face  previously  photographed,  which,  according 

138  PHENOMENA    OF    MATERIALISATION 

to  the  medium,  belongs  to  an  entity  "  Estelle,"  and  this  was  promised. 
Also,  the  head  was  to  be  visible  in  a  larger  size  than  before. 

After  another  ten  minutes  the  curtain  opened  again,  and  I  saw 
attached  to  Eva's  head,  on  the  right  side,  a  female  face  in  profile,  swathed 
like  a  nun.  The  bandage  went  over  the  forehead  and  covered  the  ears, 
but  the  image  was  only  visible  for  a  moment  in  the  light.  When  next 
the  curtains  were  opened  the  head  stood  a  little  lower,  about  the  level 
of  her  chest,  20  inches  above  her  right  hand.  I  then  saw  the  same 
pretty  female  face  quite  distinctly,  and  I  was  so  surprised  by  the 
natural  colour  and  the  life-like  expression,  that  my  first  impression  was 
that  it  might  be  the  (not  simultaneously  visible)  head  of  the  medium 
swathed  in  material  ("  transfiguration  "). 

I  communicated  this  idea  to  Mme.  Bisson,  and  did  not  attach  to 
the  phenomenon  the  importance  which  it  assumed  afterwards. 

Again  I  addressed  a  request  to  the  medium- — or,  rather,  to  the 
intelligence  here  at  work — that  "  la  petite  Estelle  "  might  expose 
herself  for  photography  at  the  right  place,  i.e.,  to  Eva's  right,  since  the 
camera  inside  the  cabinet  was  focused  on  that  point.  As  soon  as  the 
female  profile  showed  itself  again,  I  switched  on  the  current. 

The  nervous  shock  produced  by  the  light  resulted  in  a  tetanic 
contraction  of  the  medium's  voluntary  muscles.  Respiration  ceased, 
and  was  only  slowly  restored.  After  the  exposure  Mme.  Bisson  entered 
the  cabinet,  in  order  to  soothe  Eva  and  enable  her  to  recover. 

After  she  had  recovered  and  the  plates  had  been  changed,  the  female 
face  was  seen  again.  This  time,  however,  the  curtain  covered  Eva's 
head,  so  that  the  profile  of  the  materialised  female  head  could  only  be 
seen  through  the  magnesium  smoke  in  the  room.  In  bearing  and 
position  the  two  heads,  taken  within  seven  minutes  of  each  other,  are 
equal.  After  this  the  sitting  had  to  be  closed,  on  account  of  the  exhaus- 
tion of  the  medium.  The  subsequent  examination  showed  that  the 
tights  were  stained  with  blood  in  the  genital  region  (menses).  Eva  had 
removed  the  usual  bandages  before  the  sitting. 

On  developing  the  photographs  (Figs.  60,  61,  and  62)  it  was  found  at 
once  that  the  female  face  seen  and  photographed  by  the  author  did 
not  belong  to  the  medium.  The  photographic  results  of  the  five  cameras 
count  among  the  best  of  the  collection.  The  two  stereoscopic  pictures 
differ  only  in  the  size  of  the  objects  shown,  while  the  two  profile  photo- 
graphs, i.e.,  that  of  the  interior  lateral  camera,  and  that  of  the  7  by  9| 
inches  camera,  show  the  same  head,  but  from  different  points  of  view. 

The  female  face — one-third  smaller  than  the  medium's  head,  but, 
according  to  my  wish,  larger  than  the  last  photograph  of  Estelle — 
covers  with  its  back  portion  the  whole  of  Eva's  head  (turned  to  the 
left  and  forward)  from  the  right  ear  down  to  the  neck  of  the  dress.  It 
appears  as  if  growing  out  of  the  medium's  neck.  The  neck  of  the 
apparition,  visible  along  its  whole  length,  is  attached  like  a  stalk  to 
Eva's  neck,  as  if  growing  from  it,  and  this  gives  the  picture  the  character 
of  a  Janus-like  double  head.  Unfortunately,  a  fragmentary  hanging 
strip  of  the  much-folded  grey  and  white  head-covering  covers  with  its 
shadow  the  very  point  where  the  two  heads  appear  to  join. 

The  face,  completely  developed  in  its  design,  is  regular.  The 
particular  characteristics   of   this  type  are :    the    lines  of    the   small 

Fig.  6i.     Magnification  from  I-ig.  oo. 

Fig.  62.     Side  view  of  Fig.  00  takex  inside  the  cabinet,  with  exl.^rgemext. 

SITTINGS  OF  DECEMBER  1911  AND  JANUARY  1912       139 

bridge  of  the  nose,  which,  without  an  indentation,  passes  into  the 
forehead  in  almost  a  straight  hne  ;  the  fine  drawing  of  the  side  of  the 
nose  ;  the  comparatively  great  distance  between  the  nose  and  the 
upper  lip  ;  the  small  closed  mouth,  with  straight  thin  lips  ;  and  the 
rather  short  rounded  chin,  tapering  forward  and  appearing  almost 
angular  in  this  photograph,  with  its  lower  line  almost  as  if  cut  straight 
Avhere  it  passes  towards  the  throat. 

The  rather  large,  well -shaped,  and  deep-set  eye  has  a  dreamy 
expression,  and  is  almost  half  covered  by  the  upper  eyelid.  The  left 
cheek,  on  the  other  hand,  gives  the  impression  of  a  dull  surface  without 
high  lights  or  half  shadows,  without  folds  or  modelling,  and  this  does 
not  contribute  to  the  vivacity  of  the  expression.  The  forehead  down 
to  the  eyebrows  is  capped  with  a  thick,  dark  grey,  felt-like  stuff,  which, 
however,  seems  to  dissolve  into  transparent  veils,  and  completely 
envelopes  the  face  and  head.  This  veil,  carefully  arranged  in  folds,  is 
joined  in  a  loose  knot  under  the  chin.  Over  the  junction  of  the  hair  of 
the  two  women  there  lies  the  cap-like  fabric  already  mentioned,  from 
which  a  strip  hangs  down  to  the  middle  of  Eva's  breast. 

The  observer's  curiosity  as  to  how  these  two  heads  are  joined  is 
left  unsatisfied.  The  magnified  picture  taken  by  the  inner  camera 
corresponds,  by  virtue  of  its  finer  drawing,  to  the  classical  profile,  and 
recalls  heads  on  Etruscan  and  Greek  vases — as  a  work  of  art  it  is  an 
excellent  production.  From  the  study  of  these  photographs  alone, 
one  cannot  decide  how  far  these  face  forms  are  developed  plastically. 
To  me,  personally,  the  profile  view  of  the  face  appears  flat,  while  the 
whole  drapery  of  the  head,  including  the  veils,  consists  of  real  materials. 
The  stereoscopic  photographs  leave  no  doubt  of  this. 

Neither  can  the  question  be  decided  as  to  whether  there  is  a  right 
half  of  the  face,  nor  whether  it  is  plastically  developed.  In  beauty  of 
form  and  purity  of  drawing,  this  face  stands  in  the  foremost  rank. 

The  second  negative  (Fig.  63),  obtained  at  the  same  sitting,  is  some- 
what veiled  by  the  inagnesium  smoke  in  the  room.  It  only  gives  the 
head  of  "  Estelle,"  which,  when  magnified,  appears  softer,  more  vivid, 
and  more  plastic  than  in  the  last  photograph. 

It  shows  some  essential  differences  from  the  first  picture.  We  see 
nothing  of  the  lace  cover  of  the  head,  while  the  turban-like  head  orna- 
ment remains,  and  is  more  closely  bound.  In  addition,  the  shape  of 
the  chin  is  more  rounded,  and  the  expression  brighter,  and,  generally, 
the  second  photograph  looks  more  complete  than  the  first.  There  is  a 
remarkable  difference  in  the  way  the  head  is  held  in  the  two  photo- 
graphs. In  the  first  one  the  face  is  stretched  forward,  so  that  the 
throat  and  the  lower  chin  form  nearly  a  straight  line,  whereas,  in 
the  second  picture,  they  are  distinctly  curved  by  the  head  being 
withdrawn.  This  is  clear  on  comparing  the  stereoscopic  pictures  with 
the  others. 

In  a  careful  examination  of  the  first  two  photographs,  as  compared 
with  the  three-quarter  profile  taken  from  the  side,  the  differences  in 
the  lenses  used,  and  the  different  positions  of  the  cameras,  must  be  taken 
into  account.  Nevertheless,  the  slightly  different  shadows  in  the  three 
pictures  show  that  it  was  not  a  rigid  form  on  an  immovable  foundation, 
as,  for  instance,  a  drawing  on  paper. 

140  PHENOMENA    OF    MATERIALISATION 

Sittings  of  the  2nd,  3rd  and  4th  January  1912. 

Negative. 

This  failure  is  possibly  explained  by  the  various  diversions  and 
entertainments  connected  with  the  New  Year.  My  disappointment 
was  not  lost  on  Eva.  On  the  4th  January  she  made  great  efforts  to 
bring  about  phenomena,  and,  in  the  somnambulic  state  towards  the 
close  of  the  sitting,  she  said,  "  Je  voudras  lui  donner  ma  tete  si  je 
pourrais."  So  she  was  ready  to  make  every  sacrifice  in  order  to  satisfy 
the  sitters.  This  little  observation  shows  how  easily  a  professional 
medium  might,  under  less  rigid  conditions,  be  influenced  by  the  strong 
suggestion  of  her  own  ambition,  and  the  keen  desire  of  the  sitters,  and 
led  to  indulge  in  fraudulent  manipulations. 

The  despair  of  the  medium  also  shows  that  the  production  of  pheno- 
mena does  not  depend  only  upon  her  own  will,  though  she  may,  indeed, 
be  able  to  furnish  psychic  conditions  favourable  or  unfavourable  to 
the  occurrence  of  phenomena.  Even  a  strong  deflection  oi  her  attention, 
a  vivid  mental  preoccupation,  and  other  things  (e.g.,  a  letter  from  a 
friend,  a  question  of  dress,  visits,  stimulating  conversation  before  the 
sitting,  impatient  waiting  for  late  sitters),  suffice  to  destroy  the  necessary 
passive  and  receptive  condition  of  the  mediumistic  mind,  which  is  so 
essential  to  the  phenomena.  In  such  cases  a  sort  of  psychic  impotence 
brings  about  an  inhibition  of  the  necessary  emotional  state,  and  a 
resistance  to  the  physiological  process  of  teleplastic  emanations  ;  hence 
the  unsatisfying  condition  of  trial,  and  failure  sets  in. 

Sitting  of  the  5th  January  1912. 

Sitters. — Mme.  Bisson  and  the  author. 

Conditions  as  usual. 

Even  before  the  sitting,  while  in  the  waking  state,  Eva  gave  a 
peculiar  dream-like  and  dazed  impression  (condition  of  slight  hysterical 
absence).  Mme.  Bisson  said,  "  Elle  est  deja  prise."  Hypnotisation 
required  barely  fifteen  seconds.  The  author  opened  the  camera  in  the 
cabinet  while  Mme.  Bisson  held  Eva's  hands.  Immediately  after 
hypnotisation,  while  the  curtain  was  being  drawn,  we  heard  loud,  long, 
and  deep  expirations,  lasting  from  three  to  twenty  seconds.  These 
expirations  gave  the  subjective  impression  as  if  with  this  intense 
breathing  she  exhaled  some  kind  of  material. 

Mme.  Bisson  steadily  held  her  hands.  After  about  five  seconds, 
Eva  disengaged  her  left  hand,  and  used  it  for  opening  the  curtain,  so 
that  both  hands  still  remained  visible.  We  then  saw  attached  to  her 
head,  which  was  turned  to  the  left,  a  white  mass,  20  inches  long,  with 
torn  and  ragged  edges.  She  opened  and  closed  the  curtains  several 
times  without  changing  the  position  of  her  hands,  as  described.  The 
material  had  then  disappeared  from  the  head,  shoulder,  and  upper 
arm,  and  could  not  be  discovered  anywhere  in  the  cabinet. 

Obviously  the  substance  had  separated  from  her  body  in  order  to 

Fig.   63.     .Magnification   of  part   of  author's   second   flashlight   photograph   of 

30  December,   ign. 

I'IG.     O4.       AUiaOKs     ilKbi      ILASHIIGHX     PilOlOGKAPH,      7      JANUARY,      Iyl2. 

Jr'iG.    G5.     Side    view    of    last    picture,    taken 

INSIDE    THE    CABINET. 

SITTINGS  OF  DECEMBER  1911  AND  JANUARY  1912      141 

serve  as  material  for  the  coming  phenomena.  We  expressed  a  wish  to 
see  again  the  female  face,  described  by  the  medium  as  "  Estelle,"  which 
had  been  photographed  at  the  last  sitting,  and  this  time  we  wished  to 
see  it  in  front  view,  and  with  a  smiling  expression. 

Eva  then  withdrew  her  hands.  The  curtain  remained  closed 
entirely  for  about  a  quarter  of  an  hour,  while  her  gasping  and  whim- 
pering indicated  that  something  was  happening.  During  the  next 
exposure  the  curtain  usually  remained  open  for  about  three  seconds, 
so  that  we  had  sufficient  time  to  make  a  general  survey  of  the  picture, 
with  its  chief  characteristics. 

First,  we  saw,  in  front  of  her  face,  the  upper  part  of  a  male  face, 
which  appeared  plastically  developed,  with  forehead,  eyes,  and  temples, 
but  resembling  a  mask  half  cut  off.  The  place  of  the  nose  was  taken 
by  a  long,  narrow,  white  fragment  which  was  freely  mobile.  The  mouth 
and  lower  jaw  were  absent.  The  eyes  could  not  be  recognised.  I 
could  not  make  up  my  mind  to  take  a  photograph,  since  I  wanted  to 
secure  a  finished,  and  more  distinctly  developed,  face. 

After  this  rough  shape  had  shown  itself  several  times  we  saw,  to 
the  right  of  Eva's  head,  the  lower  half  of  a  male  face,  again  resembling 
a  portion  of  a  mask.  The  mouth  was  half  open  and  seemed  to  smile, 
as  we  had  wished.     There  was  no  beard. 

Next  we  saw,  in  the  left  corner  of  the  cabinet,  a  white  head-like 
patch,  separated  from  the  medium,  and  standing  about  6  feet  high.  It 
gave  the  impression  of  a  beardless  male  face  in  profile.  This  imperfect 
formation  did  not  approach  us,  in  spite  of  several  invitations.  As  we 
could  distinctly  see  through  the  rather  narrow  gap  in  the  curtains 
(3  or  4  inches  wide),  the  object  had  separated  from  the  medium's  body. 
Eva  herself  expressed  a  wish  that  it  should  come  forward  and  become 
more  distinct.  As  this  wish  still  remained  without  response,  she 
borrowed  my  little  red  electric  torch  in  order  to  illuminate  the  product 
herself.  But  when  the  light  fell  on  it  the  apparition  immediately 
disappeared,  and  did  not  come  again  that  evening. 

Again  we  saw  on  Eva's  right  shoulder  a  white  veil -like  mass,  and 
noticed  a  female  face  in  miniature,  the  size  of  a  small  child's  head,  seen 
from  the  front. 

Eva  asked  us  to  wait  for  the  photograph,  as  the  head  would  grow 
larger.  She  again  borrowed  the  little  red  torch  and  illuminated  the 
apparition,  so  that  I  could  observe  it  more  closely. 

My  first  impression  was  that  of  a  flat  picture  framed  in  a  cleverly- 
arranged  veil.  Without  a  knowledge  of  the  conditions,  one  might  be 
tempted  to  consider  the  apparition  as  fraudulent,  and  as  brought  about 
by  well-known  means.  When  the  curtain  again  opened,  I  had  the 
distinct  impression  that  this  female  face  was  plastic  and  modelled  in 
low  relief,  and  had  therefore  changed  its  appearance.  The  colour  of 
the  face  was  grey,  and  the  size  of  the  head  corresponded  to  that  of  a 
child  about  two  years  of  age. 

After  that  a  white  mass  developed  in  the  same  place  without  a 
distinct  form  or  features.  This  disappeared  completely,  and  the 
sitting  ended.     Final  examination  of  cabinet  and  medium  negative. 

We  must  deny  any  life-like  character  to  the  forms  seen  to-day. 
They  were  simply  fragments  of  a  mask-like  or  picture-like  character. 

142  PHENOMENA    OF    MATERIALISATION 

SjTTING    OF    THE    6TH    JaNUARY   1912. 

Negative. 

Sitting  of  the  7th  January  1912. 

Present. — Mme.  Bisson  and  the  author. 

Conditions  as  usual.     Commenced  at  8.30  p.m. 

Eva  had  very  cold  hands  before  the  sitting.  The  curtain  remained 
closed  for  half  an  hour,  while  Eva's  behaviour  indicated  positive 
results.  After  half  an  hour  I  saw  through  the  barely-open  curtain 
a  white  mass  pretty  high  over  the  medium's  head.  The  whole 
behaviour   of  the   medium  gave  an   impression    of    deep    trance    and 

great  effort. 

Only  towards  9.45  did  she  give  glimpses  into  the  cabinet  by  opening 
the  curtain,  saying  that  "  la  petite  Listelle  "  wanted  to  show  herself  to 
us.  Eva  had  turned  her  head  to  the  left,  and  I  could  see  perched  on 
her  hair  a  female  face  in  profile,  not  quite  normal  size,  the  two  faces 
being  turned  away  from  each  other.  The  forehead  and  head  were 
draped  with  white  cloths  and  veils. 

Curiously  enough,  Eva  exclaimed  beforehand,  "I  see  hair — much 
hair."  (The  photograph  taken  subsequently  furnishes  the  explanation 
of  these  words.) 

Nevertheless,  the  profile,  which  resembled  the  female  face  photo- 
graphed at  the  previous  sitting,  gave  a  less  clear  impression.  After 
several  efforts  by  the  medium  the  face  appeared  to  grow  more  distinct. 
A  long  fragmentary  strip  hung  down  from  her  right  shoulder. 

As^soon  as  she  opened  the  curtain  again,  I  closed  the  electric  contact, 
and  changed  the  plates  at  once.  Meanwhile,  Mme.  Bisson  entered  the 
cabinet,  in  order  to  soothe  Eva,  who  had  been  violently  affected  by  the 
light,  and  was  trembling.  She  says  that  as  she  entered  the  cabinet 
the  apparition  disappeared,  though  Eva  had  not  changed  her  position. 
But  in  the  left  comer  of  the  cabinet  she  saw  a  long  white  structure, 
resembling  a  strip  of  muslin.  When  Eva  had  recovered,  some  minutes 
later,  Mme.  Bisson  resumed  her  place.  Immediately  the  same  female 
face  appeared,  in  the  same  place. 

After  changing  the  plates  and  adjusting  the  flash-light  powder 
(about  seven  minutes)  I  resumed  my  seat,  and,  during  the  next  opening, 
I  took  a  second  photograph.  The  structure  disappeared,  like  the  others, 
without  leaving  a  trace,  and  the  sitting  had  to  be  closed. 

Eva  showed  an  accelerated  pulse  of  104  per  minute,  and,  after  being 
carefully  searched,  she  was  taken  to  bed  in  a  shaken  condition.  Some 
mucus  and  a  little  blood  issued  from  her  mouth  and  genital  passage. 
Final  examination  negative. 

The  observations  of  the  sitting  were  confirmed,  on  all  essential 
points,  on  the  development  of  the  plates. 

In  the  first  series  (Figs.  64,  65  and  66)  we  see  a  pretty  female  profile 
perched  on  the  right-hand  portion  of  Eva's  head  and  neck,  and  resting 

Fig.  67.     Author's  second  flashlight  photograph,  7   January,   1912. 

SITTINGS  OF  DECEMBER  1911  AND  JANUARY  1912      143 

on  her  right  shoulder.  This  seems  to  consist  of  a  white  mass,  and 
shows  little  indication  of  plastic  modelling,  as  far  as  the  face  alone  is 
concerned.  The  lower  part  of  the  profile  (the  line  from  the  corner  of 
the  mouth  to  the  nose)  is  surprisingly  long  as  compared  with  the  upper 
part. 

The  face  is  covered  by  a  fine  transparent  veil,  which  appears  to  be 
torn  in  the  region  of  the  left  eye.  The  forehead,  which  is  slightly  too 
low,  is  encased  in  black  shiny  material,  which  covers  the  head  like  a  cap, 
and  then  covers  the  hair  in  curious  loops  and  knots,  folded  something- 
like  black  taffetas. 

Besides  this  bandage  there  are  three  layers  of  a  veil-like  substance, 
appearing  partly  light  grey  and  partly  dark  grey.  The  particularly 
fine  turban -like  arrangement,  which  could  only  be  unravelled  by  careful 
study  of  the  stereoscopic  transparencies,  forms  the  principal  origin  of 
a  rich  variety  of  broad,  well-dressed  locks  of  hair,  covering  the  whole 
hinder  portion  of  the  face,  from  the  eye  and  the  corner  of  the  mouth 
backwards,  so  completely  that  only  in  one  place  does  the  white  base 
shine  through.  The  colour  of  the  hair  was  dark  (black  in  the  photo- 
graph). It  ends  on  Eva's  shoulder  in  curls,  turned  upward  and  appearing 
as.  if  singed  with  curling-irons.  Underneath  these  a  long  transparent 
veil  hangs  down  to  Eva's  hips. 

The  stereotyped  expression  of  the  first  photograph,  and  the  dis- 
proportionately small  eye,  do  not  allow  this  picture  to  seem  true  to 
life.  The  side-view,  taken  from  the  interior  of  the  cabinet  durino-  the 
same  flash,  shows  a  vague  profile,  and  is  too  indistinct  to  justify  any 
conclusions. 

While  in  this  case  the  face  is  directed  rather  upwards,  the  second 
photograph  shows  the  same  formation  with  a  slight  inclination  down- 
wards. The  downward  flowing  curls  have  disappeared,  the  head  is 
covered  in  the  same  way  in  front,  but  the  cheek  portion  of  the  face  is 
freer.  Instead  of  the  hair  there  is  a  conglomeration  of  grey,  black,  and 
white  veils.  The  hanging  white  veil  appearing  in  the  first  picture  is 
now  collected  into  a  narrow  strip,  fastened  to  the  back  of  Eva's  head 
with  a  knot,  and,  hanging  down  to  Eva's  neck,  it  forms  the 
termination  between  the  hair  of  the  medium  am.  the  attachment  of 
the  formation. 

In  the  second  profile  photograph  (Figs.  67  and  68)  the  expression 
of  the  face  is  more  clearly  brought  out.  It  seems  pleasanter,  and  the 
lines  of  the  profile  are  strikingly  soft.  The  cheek  is  traversed  by  a 
crease,  or  crack,  which  is  also  indicated  in  the  first  picture.  The 
composition  and  arrangement  of  this  head  appear  to  be  a  remarkably 
artistic  performance,  quite  apart  from  the  question  as  to  how  it  was 
done. 

The  question  now  arises  as  to  the  origin  of  this  hair.  We  see  real 
black-looking  hair  in  long  shiny  strands,  well  dressed  and  arranged  in 
curls.  Does  this  hair  belong  to  Eva's  head,  or  is  it  a  sort  of  materialised 
wig  ?  My  personal  impression  favours  the  simpler  assumption,  viz., 
that  Eva's  coiffure  was  opened  out  broadly,  and  used  for  decorating 
the  picture,  especially  as  the  lowermost  curl  can  be  followed  direct 
from  the  medium's  hair.  It  is  dressed  in  the  same  way,  and  is  as  long 
as  the  rest  of  her  hair,  and  similarly  arranged.     The  cap-like  structure 

144  PHENOMENA    OF    MATERIALISATION 

is  therefore  only  apparently  the  division  between  the  two  heads.  It  is 
partly  attached  to  Eva's  head,  and  gives  the  impression  of  an  indepen- 
dent coiffure.  In  the  second  series  of  pictures  the  curls  have  dis- 
appeared, having  been  restored  to  Eva's  head,  and  their  place  is  taken 
by  the  veil  conglomeration  already  referred  to.  That  this  extra- 
ordinarily artistic  arrangement  could  be  produced  in  the  dark, 
without  a  mirror,  by  some  power  as  yet  unknown,  is  in  any  case 
remarkable. 

The  following  point  appears  much  more  remarkable  than  any 
hitherto  enumerated.  In  photograph  (1)  we  have  an  upward  position 
of  the  head  with  a  downward  gaze,  whereas  in  photograph  (2)  we  have 
a  downward  position  of  the  head  with  an  upward  gaze.  On  the  first 
picture  the  upper  eyelid  covers  half  the  pupil,  and  is  therefore  half 
closed  ;  while  on  the  second  picture  the  upper  eyelid  is  wide  open  and 
the  pupil,  with  the  high  light,  is  completely  visible. 

All  the  negatives,  including  the  stereoscopic  ones,  show  the  same 
state  of  things,  which  is  therefore  not  due  to  some  accidental  indis- 
tinctness. This  change,  in  conjunction  with  the  better  modelling  of 
the  corner  of  the  mouth,  which  is  drawn  slightly  upwards,  produces 
a  pleasant  impression  in  the  second  picture,  which  also  appears  more 
finished. 

If  we  take  into  account  that  all  the  rest  of  the  characteristics  of 
both  profiles,  including  imperfections  and  faults,  are  identical  in  the 
two  pictures,  and  that  both  photographs  were  taken  in  succession 
with  an  interval  of  about  seven  minutes,  and  with  the  same  experi- 
mental conditions,  we  may  consider  the  fact  established  that  in  both 
cases  we  have  to  deal  with  the  same  picture,  which,  in  consequence  of 
its  non-rigid,  variable,  and  half-soft  condition,  was  modified  and 
perfected,  before  the  second  photograph,  by  the  anonymous  artistic 
intelligence. 

Sittings  of  the  9th,  10th  and  12th  January  1912. 
Negative. 

Sitting  of  the  27th  January  1912. 

Alex.  Bisson,  the  author,  whose  wife  had  devoted  herself  in  the 
most  generous  manner  to  the  exploration  of  mediumistic  phenomena, 
succumbed,  after  six  months'  illness,  to  the  effects  of  a  paralytic 
stroke. 

Eva,  who  lived  in  the  house  and  was  treated  as  a  member  of  the 
family,  was  affected  by  the  occurrence  as  much  as  any  of  the  family. 
Although  a  few  positive  sittings  took  place  in  the  author's  absence, 
the  productive  power  of  the  medium  entirely  ceased  between  20th 
February  and  22nd  March,  although  several  times  a  week  experiments 
were  regularly  tried. 

Fig.   OS         EXLAKGEMENT    OF    rORTION    OF    FiG.   6;, 

Fig.  69.     Mme.  Bisson's  first  flashlight  photo- 
graph,  14  February,   1912. 

%2 

Kl 

I^^H 

^^^^^ 

^ 

Wk 

^H| 

^^^^^^tf 

r^y"  1 

J 

■ 

^E 

ih 

Fig.    70.     Side    view    of   previous    picture. 

OBSERVATIONS  IN  MARCH  AND  APRIL  1912  (PARIS)      145 

Observations  in  Marcli  and  April  1912  (Paris). 

Sittings  of  the  5th  and  14th  February  1912. 

Mme.  Bisson  writes  in  a  letter,  dated  8th  February  1912  : — "  On 
5th  February  1912,  shortly  after  the  death  of  my  husband,  Eva  was 
occupied  in  a  psychographic  exercise,  when  she  suddenly  stopped  and 
produced  what  wa^"  for  me  an  extraordinary  phenomenon  of  incarnation 
(dramatic  representation  of  a  personality  in  the  trance  condition). 
M.  Bisson  appeared,  represented  by  Eva,  and  spoke  to  me  with  his  own 
voice  and  his  own  gestures.  He  repeated  the  last  words  addressed  to 
me  before  his  death,  with  his  own  intonation  and  characteristics.  I 
ought  to  say  that,  since  my  return  from  St  Jean  de  Luz  in  October  1911, 
i.e.,  during  the  last  three  months,  Eva  had  not  entered  the  sick  room. 
During  this  performance  the  medium  breathed  very  audibly.  Without 
desiring  to  convince  you  or  to  make  any  reflections  on  this  event,  I  must 
confess  that  the  impression  made  upon  me  was  a  very  deep  one.  The 
girl  then  fell  into  catalepsy,  and  recovered  very  slowly."  On  15th 
February,  also,  Mme.  Bisson  observed  the  same  procedure,  and  she 
reports  :  "  This  time  I  put  a  question  which  M.  Bisson  alone  was  able 
to  answer.     The  reply  was  appropriate." 

During  a  sitting  on  the  14th  February  1912,  in  my  absence, 
Mme.  Bisson  took  two  photographs.  When  Eva  had  been  hypnotised, 
a  portrait  appeared  which  was  not  apparently  drawn  from  life,  but 
reproduced  from  memory  of  a  picture.  It  appeared  first  between 
Eva  and  the  curtain,  then  on  her  head  (Figs.  69  and  70),  and  finally  on 
her  shoulder  (Fig.  71). 

It  recalls  the  painting  by  Leonardo  da  Vinci  of  Monna  Lisa,  which 
had  disappeared  from  the  Louvre.  It  is  quite  possible  that  the 
numerous  reproductions  of  this  picture  in  the  public  press  left  a  per- 
manent impression  on  the  memory  of  the  medium,  and  that  the  portrait 
of  the  14th  February  was  the  result. 

The  head,  seen  from  the  front,  is  quite  flat,  and  is  attached  to  Eva's 
hair  by  a  round  neck  piece,  being  bent  slightly  backwards.  The  drawing 
is  somewhat  stiff  and  conventional,  like  the  portraits  of  old  Italian  and 
German  masters,  but  otherwise  very  purely  and  carefully  executed 
The  identity  of  the  Monna  Lisa  is  vouched  for  by  the  prominent  cheek 
bones,  the  short  double  chin,  the  broad  bridge  to  the  nose,  the  deep-set 
dark  eye  (without  high  lights),  and  the  long  loose  hair.  The  drawing 
of  the  left  eye,  and  of  the  eye-sockets,  is  not  only  out  of  proportion,  but 
also  wooden  and  amateurish.  Two  white  spots  (of  teleplasm  ?)  lie  on 
the  hair  and  the  left  eye,  covering  the  latter,  and  these  recur  in  all  the 
pictures  of  the  series.  It  is  interesting  to  note  how  the  artist  has  given 
the  impression  of  wavy  and  curly  hair-dressing  by  the  distribution  of 
light  and  shade.  The  basis  for  the  hair  silhouette,  with  its  sharp  outer 
margin,  is  the  dark  material  product  already  previously  referred  to, 
which  has  no  resemblance  to  cardboard,  but  which  has  a  soft  and  more 
felt-like  character.  Both  on  the  face  and  on  the  hair  are  numerous 
folds  running  across  the  portrait.  On  the  head,  towards  the  left,  there 
is  a  real  veil  hanging  dowTi  over  Eva's  face,  and  in  the  second  photo- 

K 

146  PHENOMENA    OF    MATERIALISATION 

graph  this  covers  a  portion  of  the  hair  on  the  right,  and  otherwise  shows 
differences  of  arrangement. 

After  several  weeks'  cessation,  during  my  absence,  the  phenomena 
were  resumed  on  the  22nd  March,  and  the  new  series  of  experiments 
was  attended  by  M.  de  Vesme,  Editor  of  the  Annales  des  Sciences 
Psychiques,  and  also,  in  turn,  by  the  sons  of  Mme.  Bisson. 

The  photographs  from  this  period  are  mostly  head  fragments  or 
preliminary  stages  in  the  development  of  faces,  but  are  more  valuable 
on  account  of  their  originality,  and  their  curious  form.  The  endeavour 
towards  fuller  formation  is  perceptible  throughout. 

Sittings  of  the  2nd,  8th,  14th,  15th,  20th  and  23rd  April  1912. 

In  the  sitting  of  2nd  April  M.  de  Vesme  photographed  too  early. 
The  curtains  were  not  sufficiently  widely  open.  Only  the  photograoh 
with  the  apparatus  in  the  cabinet  succeeded. 

We  see,  in  the  side  view,  on  the  back  of  Eva's  head  a  white  mass 
resembling  a  small  tower,  which  has  not  yet  acquired  a  distinct  shape, 
and  which  reaches  nearly  down  to  her  neck  below  (Fig.  72).  It  seems 
to  be  composed  of  ribbon-shaped  pieces  twisted  together.  The  observa- 
tion of  the  sitters  (Andre  Bisson,  M.  de  Vesme,  and  Mme.  Bisson)  that 
the  exposure  was  made  during  the  beginning  of  the  materialisation 
and  therefore  too  early,  is  confirmed  by  the  photograph.  We  have 
here  apparently  amorphous  teleplasm  in  a  stage  preliminary  to  the 
development  of  a  face.  This  is  indicated  by  the  structure  and  com- 
position of  the  substance. 

The  photograph  (Fig.  73)  taken  on  8th  April  was  again  due  to 
M.  de  Vesme.  The  head,  only  developed  as  far  as  the  nose,  is  placed 
on  Eva's  hair  like  a  helmet.  The  mouth  portion  is  not  yet  developed, 
and  forms  an  open,  narrow,  rectilinear  base  for  the  upper  half  of  the 
face,  the  latter  being  framed  in  a  white  fibrous  mass  as  in  a  wig.  The 
remnants  of  this  half-formed  substance  hang  down  in  one  mass  on  the 
right  side  of  the  face  down  to  the  medium's  shoulder.  The  picture 
forms  a  valuable  contribution  to  the  study  of  heads  in  course  of 
development. 

The  front  view  of  the  medium,  taken  by  De  Vesme  on  14th  April, 
shows  on  the  hair  a  portion  of  material  in  which  three  finger-points  are 
developed  in  low  relief,  while  two  ribbons  joined  in  a  loop  hang  down 
towards  the  forehead  (Fig.  74). 

The  side  view  of  the  same  picture,  taken  inside  the  cabinet,  and 
with  the  same  flash,  give  another  view  quite  independent  of  the  front 
view.  The  substance  is  built  up  on  the  top  of  Eva's  head,  and  points 
upw^ards,  while  broad  bands  of  matter  pass  down  the  parting  of  the 
hair,  and  also  towards  the  back.  A  face  can  only  be  recognised  as  a 
shortened  profile  turned  towards  the  ceiling.  The  forehead  is  somewhat 
compressed  and  drawn  out  in  length.  The  hair  is  well  marked  from 
the  forehead  to  the  ears.  The  eyelid,  nose,  and  upper  lip  are  unmis- 
takable, although  imperfect.  The  lower  part  of  the  whole  head  dis- 
appears in  the  white  fabric  lying  round  chin,  ears,  and  neck,  like  a 
bandage,  and  this  fabric  also  joins  the  face  with  the  base  and  materials 

C    3N 

Fig.  73.     De  Vesme's  flashlight  photograph  of  S  april, 
1912. 

Fig. 

De   \'esme's   flashlight   photo- 
graph OF  14  APRIL,  I912. 

a 

X 

z 

5 

■** 

< 

u 

t) 

re 

u 

t-i 

K 

H 

o 

Z 

a 

^ 

H 

w 

& 

OBSERVATIONS  IN  MARCH  AND  APRIL  1912  (PARIS)      147 

on  the  head.  Again  a  fragment,  a  further  link  in  the  genesis  of  tele- 
plastic  head  forms  (Fig.  75).  Here,  for  the  first  time,  we  see  two 
different  and  independent  structures  represented  by  the  same 
materialised  substance.  From  the  front  it  appears  as  three  finger- 
points,  while  the  negative  in  the  cabinet  shows  a  female  face  turned 
towards  the  ceiling.  A  rare  phenomenon  !  Another  imperfect  forma- 
tion is  shown  by  the  photograph,  taken  on  15th  April  1912,  also  in  De 
Vesme's  presence,  and  consisting  of  a  female  face  on  Eva's  head  (Fig.  76). 

The  left  side,  as  compared  with  the  right,  seems  to  be  displaced 
a  little  upwards,  as  indicated  by  the  higher  and  slanting  position  of 
the  right  supra-orbital  region.  The  chin  portion  is  obviously  unfinished. 
Again  the  hair  is  arranged  like  a  white  wig,  and  there  is  a  streak  (a  rent, 
or  the  lower  veil  margin)  across  the  face,  over  the  bridge  of  the  nose. 
As  in  the  case  of  the  former  head  arrangement,  this  face,  in  the  stereo- 
scope, gives  the  impression  of  a  plastic  form  in  low  relief.  In  the  tangle 
of  fragments  of  material  hanging  down,  two  parallel  strips  of  a  finer, 
muslin-like  material  proceeding  from  the  mouth,  are  conspicuous. 
The  whole  structure  is  remarkable  for  its  imperfections  and  its  grotesque 
appearance. 

A  few  days  later  (20th  April  1912)  M.  Andre  Bisson,i  son  of 
Mme.  Bisson,  took  a  further  photograph,  in  which  Eva  holds  the  curtain 
with  her  hands.  The  head  is  turned  towards  the  left.  In  front  of  her 
face,  and,  therefore,  certainly  20  inches  behind  the  left  curtain,  we  see 
a  broad  rectangular  formation  with  irregular  margins,  which  is  either 
separated  by  the  back  of  the  chair  or  hangs  free  (Figs.  77  and  78). 

This  packet  of  material  is  joined  to  Eva's  mouth  by  a  broad  band, 
appearing  dark  grey  or  black  in  the  photograph,  which  passes  from  the 
open  mouth  slantingly  upwards.  From  the  neck  of  her  dress,  in  two 
places,  we  see  small  quantities  of  material  projecting  over  the  hem, 
and  corresponding  in  shape  to  three  flat  glove-fingers.  On  the  magnifi- 
cation of  the  picture  these  projections  seem  to  coalesce  with  the  epidermis 
of  Eva's  throat,  and  one  cannot  say  definitely  whether  they  are  tucked 
in  and  bent  round,  as  one  might  conclude  from  the  first  impression. 
The  magnification  gives  no  hint  of  a  textile  product,  since  the  structure 
gives  more  the  impression  of  a  ribbon  without  any  characteristic 
markings.  A  further  interesting  study  is  furnished  by  a  picture  taken 
by  Mme.  Bisson  on  23rd  April,  especially  in  the  side  view.  In  a  ma^ss 
of  amorphous  substance  the  size  of  a  head,  and  consisting  of  heaps  or 
packets  of  miscellaneous  hanging  strips  and  fragments,  we  see  the 
beginnings  of  a  face  formation,  including  two  e3'es  and  a  broad  thick 
nose,  and  beneath  it  some  beginnings  of  a  mouth.  Everything  else  is 
imperfect,  but  yet  gives  an  impression  of  an  elementary  creation  sui 
generis.     Unfortunately,  both  views  are  ill-defined  (Figs.  79  and  80). 

Sittings  in  April  1912  (Paris). 

Between  1st  and  10th  March  the  author  was  present  at  six  sittings, 
all  of  which  were  negative. 

^  M.  Andre  Bisson  holds  an  office  in  the  Ministry  of  Finance. 

148  PHENOMENA    OF    MATERIALISATION 

Sitting  of  the  29th  April  1912. 

Present. — M.  de  Vesme,  Mme.  Bisson,  her  son  Pierre  (aged  13),  and 

the  author. 

Conditions  as  during  previous  experiments. 

Eva  fell  into  a  deep,  quiet  sleep  which  resembled  normal  sleep. 
No  bodily  symptoms  (stertorous  breathing  or  whimpering)  indicated 
that  the  psychic  condition  necessary  for  the  occurrence  of  phenomena 
was  present.  She  remained  dumb,  and  did  not  seem  to  stand  en  rapport 
with  those  present. 

After  a  fruitless  waiting  of  three-quarters  of  an  hour,  Mme.  Bisson 
tried  to  convert  the  passive  state  of  sleep  into  a  light  active  somnam- 
bulism by  laying  on  her  hand,  and  making  urgent  verbal  suggestions. 
Eva  began  to  show  greater  activity.  She  spoke  and  moaned,  and  her 
respiration  became  loud  and  vigorous.  After  10  o'clock  a  white  wisp 
appeared  over  her  left  shoulder  while  her  head  was  bent  to  the  right. 
The  hands,  which  were  always  visible,  opened  and  closed  the  curtain, 
and  then  remained  motionless  on  her  knees,  while  she  opened  and 
closed  the  curtain  with  her  feet. 

We  then  saw  some  small  white  hand  shapes  enter  the  circle  of  light 
near  her  head,  and  disappear  again  with  lightning  rapidity.  On  one 
occasion  a  shape  resembling  a  child's  hand  appeared  to  grow  with  a 
revolving  motion,  and  then  to  disappear  suddenly.  On  several  occasions 
Eva's  head  and  hands  were  simultaneously  visible  during  the  pheno- 
mena. Some  of  the  images  gave  the  impression  of  a  well-developed 
female  hand,  but  they  hardly  remained  visible  for  a  second. 

In  order  to  observe  more  accurately,  I  rose  and  stood  behind 
Mme.  Bisson,  who  sat  in  the  middle  in  front  of  the  curtain.  I  then 
clearly  recognised  a  hand  shape,  coming  out  of  the  dark  of  the  cabinet 
and  disappearing,  while  De  Vesme  simultaneously  controlled  both  the 
medium's  hands.  After  the  last  apparition  Eva  declared  that 
"  Berthe,"  who  had  latterly  assumed  control  of  the  medium  in  the 
spiritistic  sense,  had  gone  away  and  would  not  return.  She  rose,  came 
out  of  the  cabinet,  and  allowed  herself  to  be  completely  examined,  the 
result  being  negative. 

The  sitting  closed  towards  11  o'clock.  Eva  had  had  a  bad  day, 
and  was  in  a  bad  humour,  though  we  could  not  discover  the  cause 
of  it. 

Sitting  of  the  30th  April  1912. 

Present. — Mme.  Bisson,  M.  de  Vesme,  M.  Pierre  Bisson,  the  author  and 

his  wife. 

Conditions  and  control  as  in  the  previous  sittings. 

My  place  was  to  the  right  of  the  medium,  as  usual. 

Since  a  large  number  of  the  phenomena  happened  to  occur  on  this 
side,  the  author  could  not  observe  them,  while  those  sitting  on  the 
medium's  left  had  the  advantage. 

■^     ON 

0< 

Q   X 

z  5; 

^   OS 

PSYCHICAL  PHENOMENA  149 

Immediately  after  the  extinction  of  the  white  light,  a  white  hand 
shape  appeared  on  the  left,  at  the  level  of  the  medium's  shoulders, 
while  Eva's  hands  during  this  and  the  following  observations  always 
remained  quietly  on  her  knees,  and  often  enough  were  simultaneously 
visible  with  the  phenomena  on  the  opening  of  the  curtain  (with  the 
feet). 

Some  ten  or  fourteen  times  the  same  form  of  a  hand  appeared, 
usually  on  the  right  side  of  the  head,  but  it  was  too  fugitive  to  be 
photographed. 

After  Mme.  Bisson  had  been  touched  on  her  right  hand,  which  she 
stretched  into  the  cabinet  at  the  level  of  the  medium's  head,  my  wife's 
extended  hand  was  grasped  by  a  hand  with  broad,  cool  and  round 
fingers  (Eva's  fingers  are  small,  narrow,  and  pointed).  Then  something 
white  appeared  on  Eva's  left  shoulder,  but  nothing  could  be  recognised. 

The  phenomena  then  disappeared,  and  the  sitting  seemed  at  an  end, 
but  on  the  urgent  suggestion  and  request  of  Mme.  Bisson  the  hand 
became  visible  once  or  twice,  though  very  fugitive.  Final  examination 
negative. 

Thus  ended  the  last  sitting  in  the  Bissons'  flat,  Avenue  Victor  Hugo, 
in  Paris. 

On  2nd  May  the  author  was  present  at  the  dismantling  of  the 
mediumistic  cabinet,  consisting  of  curtains,  walls,  and  roof.  He 
examined  the  whole  construction,  the  material,  the  walls,  etc.,  again, 
without  finding  anything  remarkable.  The  lining  had  no  holes  any- 
where and  the  walls  were  intact. 

PSYCHICAL    PHENOMENA. 

For  the  understanding  of  what  follows,  it  seems  important  to  insert 
here  some  remarks  on  the  class  of  psychical  phenomena  already  men- 
tioned, which  Mme.  Bisson  usually  observed  alone  with  Eva  in  the 
hypnotic  preparatory  sittings.  In  a  few  cases  the  author  was  present 
at  these.  The  original  object  of  these  experiments  was  to  tune  the 
psychical  condition  of  the  medium,  in  a  manner  favourable  for  materiali- 
sations, by  means  of  a  suggestive  rapport,  to  counteract  her  mental 
inhibitions,  to  concentrate  her  attention  and  her  interest  on  the 
phenomena — in  short,  to  attain  by  a  systematic  psychical  training  a 
gradually  increasing  arbitrary  influence  over  the  development  of  her 
abnormal  psycho-physical  performances. 

Although  Eva's  peculiar  character,  combined  with  a  certain  indiffer- 
ence regarding  her  peculiar  faculties,  was  very  inaccessible  to  educational 
influences  in  the  waking  state  and  offered  great  resistance  in  the  somnam- 
bulic state,  the  subsequent  results  have  justified  the  correctness  of  the 
procedure. 

As  already  mentioned,  the  psychical  personality  of  the  somnambulist 
differs  from  that  of  the  medium  in  the  waking  condition.  The  latter  is 
rather  indifferent  to  the  results  of  the  sittings,  but  gladly  occupies 

150  PHENOMENA    OF    MATERIALISATION 

herself  with  feminine  problems — the  cut  of  a  new  dress,  a  new  hat, 
some  amusement,  a  harmless  flirtation,  a  compliment  on  her  looks,  can 
engage  her  whole  interest,  change  her  emotional  state,  and  influence 
her  course  of  action.  To  these  were  added,  at  irregular  intervals, 
fitful  lapses  of  temper,  not  warranted  by  external  conditions,  spells 
of  anger,  under  the  influence  of  which  she  sometimes  lost  her  self- 
control  and  plied  those  about  her  with  unfounded  accusations.  The 
appreciation  of  the  scientific  importance  of  her  faculty  was  lacking. 
Any  acknowledgment  of  her  mediumistic  performances  she  used  to 
regard  as  a  compliment  to  her  female  nature.  Her  interest  in  the  photo- 
graphs taken  during  the  sittings  was  slight.  She  rarely  inquired  of 
her  own  accord  how  they  had  succeeded,  and  hardly  noticed  it  when 
the  photographs  were  not  shown  to  her  at  all.  On  the  other  hand, 
Eva  possesses  a  passive  and  fundamentally  good-natured  disposition, 
and  gives  the  unprejudiced  observer  the  impression  of  a  harmless  and 
modest  young  girl.  When  she  is  in  emotional  equilibrium  she  is  bright, 
childlike,  and  amiable,  and  is  much  pleased  by  any  small  attentions 
shown  to  her. 

Her  hysterical  temperament  explains,  perhaps,  this  psychological 
diagnosis.  That  Mme.  Bisson  faced  the  great  difficulties  necessarily 
attending  the  daily  intercourse  with  a  girl  of  a  lower  educational  level 
for  several  years,  for  the  sake  of  mediumistic  investigations,  must  be 
specially  acknowledged,  besides  her  other  services  to  the  cause. 

From  time  to  time  Eva  had  the  same  succession  of  emotional  crises. 
First,  a  latent  state  of  tension,  bad  humour,  and  embitterment,  which 
might  last  for  days,  and  was  always  followed  by  negative  sittings. 
Often  Eva  declared  that  the  sittings  were  nothing  to  her,  that  she 
wanted  to  go  back  to  her  people. 

In  such  cases  Mme.  Bisson  acquiesced  in  her  wish,  and  made  her 
pack  her  boxes.  This  action,  in  conjunction  with  an  authoritative 
bearing,  or  a  suggestion  in  the  somnambulic  state,  often  led  to  a  ter- 
mination of  the  mood,  in  a  flood  of  tears,  and  an  entire  reversal  of  the 
emotional  state.  After  the  reaction  Eva  was  always  willing,  tractable, 
amiable,  and  sociable.  She  was  easily  influenced,  and  the  sittings  were 
successful. 

It  is  possible  that  the  state  of  control,  on  the  basis  of  a  hysterical 
disposition,  produces  a  state  of  embitterment  and  tension — a  sort  of 
ressentiment. 

The  character  of  the  somnambulic  Eva  is  not  fundamentally  different 
from  that  of  the  medium  in  the  waking  condition.  But  her  whole 
nature  appears  spiritualised,  elevated,  better  balanced,  and  more 
sensitive.  Obstinacy  and  fits  of  temper  are  not  often  observed  ;  only 
in  rare  cases  is  the  irritable  mood  carried  over  from  the  waking  into 
the  somnambulic  state.  Displays  of  anger,  as  a  rule,  occur  only  in 
consequence  of  interference,  possibly  necessary,  by  the  sitters,  which 
hurts  her  feminine  sense  of  honour  or  modesty.  Any  abrupt  and 
unexpected  procedure,  e.g.,  awakening  her  (pin-pricks),  touching  the 
materialisations  (attempted  exposure),  making  a  thorough  gynaeco- 
logical examination,  or  expressing  doubt  as  to  her  honesty,  may  produce 
anger,  violent  disturbances  of  pulse  and  respiration,  hysterical  crises, 
and  fainting  fits. 

PSYCHICAL    PHENOMENA  151 

The  psychic  adjustment  of  the  medium  is  of  the  greatest  importance 
for  the  success  of  the  experiments.  As  ah'eady  mentioned,  she  feels 
the  phenomena  to  be  something  foreign  to  her,  and  a  sort  of  compulsion, 
in  spite  of  the  efforts  she  herself  has  to  make  in  producing  them. 
According  to  Eva's  conception;  the  phenomena  are  brought  about  by 
intelligent  powers,  independent  of  herself,  by  means  of  her  own  vitality 
and  psychical  energy. 

If,  in  this  sense,  we  wish  to  judge  the  psychological  relation  of  the 
medium  towards  the  phenomena,  for  the  practical  purposes  of  the 
sittings,  we  may  distinguish  three  periods  or  emotional  stages. 

Phase  I. — In  this  phase  Eva's  state  is  unfavourable.  Bodily 
indisposition,  ill-humour,  lack  of  will-power,  preoccupation  of  the 
attention  by  extraneous  subjects,  reluctance,  and  indifference  to  the 
required  psycho-physical  effort,  and  its  resulting  fatigue,  hinder  every 
kind  of  production,  even  when  the  intelligent  power  outside  her  is 
active  and  wishes  to  manifest  itself.  In  such  cases  there  are  always 
negative  sittings. 

Phase  II. — The  medium's  general  condition  is  favourable.  She 
wishes  to  fulfil  her  task.  But  the  will-power  is  too  weak  for  the 
mediumistic  act.  In  this  stage  the  medium  requires  strong  suggestive 
encouragement  by  her  protectress,  or  by  those  present,  in  order  to 
overcome  the  resistance  of  the  inertia.  She  herself  has  a  feeling  of 
requiring  some  help,  and  even  expresses  it  by  the  words  "  Aide  moi, 
Juliette  !  "  But  one  of  the  conditions  for  the  occurrence  of  positive 
effects  is  that  the  intelligent  personified  factor,  felt  by  her  to  be  an 
independent  entity,  wishes  to  manifest  itself.  She  usually  expresses 
this  by  the  words,  "  Je  le  (or  les)  sens,"  or  "  Je  ne  le  (or  les)  sens  pas." 

It  is  only  when  these  two  factors  co-operate  that  results  can  be 
expected,  but,  in  spite  of  the  favourable  psychical  adjustment  of  the 
medium,  her  efforts  remain  fruitless  if  the  presence  of  the  factor  referred 
to  is  not  felt  during  the  sitting. 

Finally,  there  is  the  possibility  of  a  negative  sitting  if,  in  spite  of 
every  effort,  the  inertia  cannot  be  overcome.  The  phenomena  brought 
about  in  Phase  II.  are  mostly  feeble,  or  of  medium  strength,  and  are 
always  accompanied  by  strong  bodily  reactions  of  the  medium  (pressing 
and  gasping,  violent  muscular  contractions,  a  quick  pulse,  and  expres- 
sions of  pain). 

Although  the  author  has  taken  into  consideration  the  medium's 
subjective  view,  it  does  not  follow  that  that  view  is  correct.  On  the 
contrary,  the  observer  even  gets  an  impression  that  the  medium 
produces  the  phenomena  on  her  own  initiative  alone,  especially  when 
they  consist  in  the  production  of  simple  aggregations  and  forms.  This 
also  is  suggested  by  the  frequent  adaptation  of  the  phenomena  to  the 
wishes  of  the  sitters,  as  when  they  urgently  suggest  the  occurrence  of 
some  definite  phenomena  {e.g.,  a  hand,  a  female  or  a  male  face). 

Phase  III. — The  medium  is  under  the  influence  of  a  sort  of  fit  of 
compulsory  organic  necessity  towards  psycho-physical  emanations. 
This  shows  itself  in  a  certain  confusion  of  consciousness  and  a  tendency 

152  PHENOMENA    OF    MATERIALISATION 

towards  spontaneous  production.  In  such  cases  one  must  carefully 
postpone  the  productions  until  the  time  of  the  sitting,  or  the  sittings 
must  be  arranged  as  quickly  as  possible,  in  order  to  produce  the  necessary 
relief.  The  preparatory  symptoms  consist  of  a  dazed  and  dreamy 
state,  a  feeling  of  sickness,  a  veiled  gaze  and  quickened  pulse  (100  to 
110  beats  per  minute),  a  feeling  of  uneasiness,  loss  of  appetite,  and 
sensory  symptoms  (such  as  a  swelling  of  the  mammary  glands).  In 
this  case  the  hands  are  always  remarkably  cool. 

As  soon  as  the  comm.unication  is  made  to  the  sitters  "  Elle  est  prise," 
one  can  reckon  on  the  certainty  of  a  positive  sitting.  The  phenomena 
in  this  phase  occur  immediately  after  the  extinction  of  the  white  light, 
and  are  often  perfectly  developed — as,  for  instance,  in  the  form  of 
head  shapes.  In  some  sittings  the  author  had  not  even  enough  time 
to  open  the  cameras,  which  requires  only  a  few  seconds. 

The  phenomena  thus  produced  are,  as  a  rule,  durable  in  the  light, 
and  resist  certain  interferences,  so  that  one  can  sometimes  take  three 
flash-light  photographs  in  succession. 

The  production  of  the  phenomena  is  usually  accompanied  by  a 
great  relief  for  Eva,  "  Elle  est  degagee."  The  sitting  therefore  acts  as 
a  liberation,  although  great  exhaustion  may  follow  for  twenty-four 
hours. 

But  if  any  complete  relief  takes  place,  this  may  occur  after  she  has 
retired  to  bed,  and  take  the  form  of  unusual  materialisation  phenomena, 
sometimes  associated  with  the  genital  organs. 

In  this  fitful  occurrence  of  the  materialisation  impulse,  the  medium 
is  blindly  subject  to  a  stronger  power,  and  does  not  seem  to  be  able 
to  resist  it  by  her  own  will.  The  subjective  factors,  mentioned  in 
Phases  I.  and  II.,  are  quite  placed  in  the  background. 

Instead  of  this  period  of  active  production,  we  may  have  a  variation 
of  the  same  condition  in  the  shape  of  a  latent  tension,  lasting  for  several 
days,  and  relieved  by  several  minor  eruptions  of  phenomena.  If  no 
relief  is  obtained  at  the  sittings,  these  phenomena  may  take  place 
irregularly  during  the  day  (mostly  in  twilight),  or  during  the  sleep  at 
night,  which  then  passes  into  a  state  of  active  somnambulism. 

In  general,  the  observer  is  forced  to  the  assumption  that,  in  the 
production  of  positive  results,  an  intelligent  factor,  independent  of  the 
medium,  comes  into  play,  although  it  seems  immaterial  whether  that 
factor  is  to  be  looked  for  in  the  medium's  subliminal  consciousness  or 
not.  For  the  purpose  of  experiment  we  must  take  into  account  this 
apparently  independent  will-power,  and  must  come  to  an  understanding 
with  it  concerning  the  method  of  procedure. 

There  is  some  justification  for  speaking  of  a  duplex  personality  in 
the  case  of  Eva,  although  it  may  only  be  a  case  of  a  freer  development 
of  her  psyche  in  the  trance  condition.  Her  manner  of  expression  in 
somnambulism  is  better,  she  appreciates  the  importance  of  her 
mediumistic  performances,  and  makes  an  effort  (though  not  always) 
to  produce  a  favourable  emotional  state  by  a  passive  behaviour.  She 
usually  shows  a  certain  emotional  softness,  and  instinctively  reads  the 
desires  and  thoughts  of  the  sitters.  There  is  also  a  greater  suggestibility 
and  a  more  vivid  play  of  imagination.  During  the  phenomena  them- 
selves her  whole  effort  is  directed  towards  making  them  as  convincing 

PSYCHICAL   PHENOMENA  153 

as  possible  to  the  sitters,  and  towards  being  strictly  controlled.  Several 
times  she  rose  from  her  chair  immediately  after  a  production  of  pheno- 
mena, stood  in  front  of  the  curtain,  and  demanded  an  examination  of 
her  body  and  her  dress  ;  or  she  took  a  red  or  white  electric  torch  in 
order  to  illuminate  the  phenomena,  if  they  were  not  sufficiently 
clearly  visible  for  us.  Often  enough  she  destroyed  the  phenomena 
by  this  procedure.  Or,  after  the  end  of  the  sitting,  she  may  demand 
tests  which  do  not  even  appear  necessary  to  those  present.  Thus  she 
sometimes  would  undo  the  tights  and  ask  for  a  gynaecological 
examination. 

Her  relation  to  Mme.  Bisson  in  somnambulism  is  that  of  love, 
attachment,  and  gratitude.  While  the  waking  Eva  always  addresses 
her  protectress  respectfully  and  in  the  plural,  the  somnambulist  uses 
the  singular,  and  usually  calls  her  "  ma  petite  Juliette."  She  is  anxious 
about  Mme.  Bisson  like  a  mother  about  her  child.  When  Mme.  Bisson 
is  fatigued,  or  out  of  humour,  she  always  inquires  the  cause,  gives 
amiable  consolation,  and  wishes  to  hear  her  voice.  Her  attention 
and  her  detective  sense  are  exaggerated  ;  nothing  escapes  her  in  the 
conversation  of  the  sitters,  as  her  frequent  apposite  remarks  testify. 
The  exception  from  this  rule  occurs  in  the  states  of  deep  trance  during 
production,  in  which  she  gives  an  impression  of  great  suffering, 
resembling  the  pains  of  parturition,  and  is  quite  occupied  with  herself. 
On  a  few  occasions  I  have  observed  a  trace  of  hysterical  supersensi- 
tiveness  and  affectation.  When  her  nerves  are  shaken  by  the  shock 
of  the  sudden  flash-light,  or  when  she  tries  in  vain  to  produce  pheno- 
mena, she  is  soothed  by  Mme.  Bisson  touching  her  hands,  and  head, 
and  the  region  of  her  heart.  She  asks  Mme.  Bisson  to  comfort  her 
and  to  help  her  own  efforts,  by  an  exertion  of  her  will-power. 
This  whole  behaviour  is  foreign  to  Eva's  character  in  the  waking 
condition,  and  indicates  a  difference  in  the  two  states  of  consciousness. 

The  presence  of  her  protectress,  who  has  her  fullest  confidence, 
probably  became  a  psychological  necessity  for  her  production  in  the 
course  of  the  several  years  of  training  and  habituation.  Owing  to 
her  great  lack  of  will-power  in  the  waking  and  somnambulistic  states 
(often  found  in  mediums),  she  requires  psychic  guidance,  and  constant 
incentive,  from  without.  The  importance  of  the  spiritual  link  joining 
the  two  women,  for  the  production  of  phenomena,  is  easily  underrated. 
Mme.  Bisson  has,  so  to  speak,  become  an  indispensable  active  psychic 
supplement  to  her,  since  she  just  possesses  the  qualities  lacking  in  her, 
knows  Eva's  mentality  intimately,  and  during  the  frequent  incidents 
of  the  sittings,  which  would  leave  any  other  experimenter  helpless, 
she  always  finds  the  right  means  to  restore  the  disturbed  psychical 
and  physical  equilibrium  of  the  medium. 

If,  therefore,  some  savants  assert  that  Mme.  Bisson's  mere  presence 
at  the  sittings  constitutes  a  source  of  error,  this  shows  a  deplorable 
lack  of  understanding  of  the  complicated  mechanism  of  the  medium- 
istic  occurrences,  quite  apart  from  the  unworthy  attempt  to  cast 
suspicion  upon  an  experimenter,  and  exclude  her  from  her  own  work, 
because  she  is  not  of  the  male  sex,  or  has  not  passed  through  a  regular 
University  course.  No  doubt  some  other  person  could  undertake  the 
part  of  the  hypnotiser,  with  all  its  consequences,  in  the  case  of  this 

154  PHENOMENA    OF    MATERIALISATION 

medium,  if  Eva  gradually  got  accustomed  to  the  other  person.  I  may 
recall  that  in  the  first  period  of  the  experiments  in  the  Bissons'  flat, 
one  of  Eva's  relatives  and  Baron  Pigeard  hypnotised  the  medium,  and 
that  before  the  Bisson  period  a  series  of  sittings  took  place  in  the 
residence  of  an  English  lady  in  Paris. 

The  hypnotic  education  which  Mme.  Bisson  has  given  to  her  medium 
has  been  directed  systematically  towards  progress  and  the  higher 
development  of  the  mediumistic  faculties,  and  towards  the  preservation 
of  the  suggestive  and  authoritative  state  of  dependence.  Thus  she 
has  adhered  to  the  rule  of  hypnotising  Eva  on  the  days  on  which 
materialisation  sittings  did  not  take  place.  If,  on  the  day  of  the  sitting, 
the  medium  was  not  favourably  disposed,  or  for  other  reasons,  she 
also  hypnotised  the  medium  on  the  days  of  the  sittings  themselves. 
The  hypnotic  sleep,  often  prolonged  for  several  hours  without  experi- 
ments, was  also  an  excellent  means  of  disposing  of  the  symptoms  of 
exhaustion,  which  often  followed  positive  sittings  on  the  next  day, 
and  also  of  eliminating  slight  disturbances  of  humour  and  nervous 
affections.  That  this  whole  procedure  was  successful  is  shown  by  the 
gradual  increase  and  higher  development  of  the  mediumistic  perform- 
ances, while  the  bodily  and  mental  equilibrium  of  the  medium  remained 
intact  during  four  years  of  experiments,  which  were  sometimes  very 
fatiguing. 

The  mental  manifestations  of  the  somnambulist  usually  took  the 
form  of  automatic  writing,  or  speaking  in  simple  or  dramatised  form. 
Ostensibly  such  entities,  or  personifications,  manifested  through  the 
medium,  were  regarded  by  the  medium  during  the  materialisation 
sittings  as  the  originators  of  the  phenomena,  and  as  giving  rise  to  the 
objects  photographed.  During  the  last  month  the  chief  guidance  of 
the  medium  was  undertaken  by  an  "  entity,"  calling  herself  "  Bert  he." 
This  entity  was  supposed  to  guide  the  pointer  held  in  Eva's  hand  with 
lightning  rapidity  over  the  table  of  letters,  while  Eva,  with  closed  eyes, 
and  without  any  apparent  participation,  leant  her  head  against 
Mme.  Bisson's  shoulder,  and  appeared  quite  unable  to  control  the 
composition  of  letters  by  her  right  hand,  or  to  read  what  she  had 
automatically  written.  Mme.  Bisson,  even,  could  hardly  keep  pace  in 
noting  down  the  letters,  and,  in  any  case,  during  this  operation  she  did 
not  appreciate  the  sense  of  what  was  being  written.  The  subsequent 
study  showed  messages  giving  a  connected  sense,  usually  referring  to 
a  sitting,  and  giving  explanations  and  instructions  as  to  how  to  treat 
the  medium. 

"  Bert  he  "  presents  a  self-contained  psychological  existence 
elaborated  in  detail.  Whether  she  manifests  through  Eva  psychically 
or  physically,  in  both  cases  her  action  is  relatively  less  trying  for  the 
medium  than  the  manifestations  of  other  personifications,  especially 
male  ones.  She  also  expresses  herself,  though  more  rarely,  directly 
through  the  mouth  of  the  somnambulist,  and  addresses  her  as  a  third 
person,  so  that  Eva  repeats  verbatim  what  "  Berthe  "  communicates 
to  her.  "  Berthe "  is  even  dissatisfied  with  Eva's  behaviour  in  a 
waking  condition,  criticises  it  intelligently,  gives  advice  how  to  treat 
Eva,  and  how  to  cross  her  ideas  and  plans,  and  promises,  on  her  own 
part,  a  psychic  influence  upon  her.     (Thus,  in  one  case,  in  compliance 

PSYCHICAL   PHENOMENA  155 

with  such  a  promise,  she  manifested  herself  miexpectedly  in  Eva's 
waking  state  by  a  sudden  semi-somnambulic  trance  with  a  complete 
change  of  disposition.)  On  several  occasions,  during  the  observation 
of  Eva's  somnambulic  inspiration,  Mme.  Bisson  observed  a  "  lucid  " 
moment,  in  which  apposite  remarks  were  made  concerning  occurrences 
beyond  the  range  of  the  knowledge  of  the  medium.  In  some  cases 
these  also  referred  to  future  events.  I  ought  to  remark  that  the  whole 
material  of  observation  was  entered,  after  every  sitting,  by  Mme.  Bisson 
in  a  note-book,  which  allowed  of  an  accurate  verification  afterwards. 
Such  utterances  always  came  spontaneously  in  the  form  of  communi- 
cations from  the  somnambulist,  or  from  "  Berthe,"  as  a  product  of  an 
inspiration  originating  in  the  Unconscious.  In  almost  all  cases,  messages 
of  this  kind  were  correct,  while  answers  to  questions  were  usually 
incorrect  and  unreliable. 

The  course  of  our  whole  four  years  of  investigation  was  directed 
towards  the  impartial  record  of  facts,  iminfluenced  by  any  theory. 
We  succeeded  in  gradually  liberating  the  materialisation  sittings  from 
the  influence  of  the  spiritistic  tradition  (formation  of  a  chain,  singing, 
etc.),  and  we  only  made  such  concessions  as  were  indispensable  con- 
ditions for  success  {e.g.,  dark  cabinet,  red  light,  etc.). 

If  the  results  of  our  objective  researches,  in  spite  of  ourselves,  may 
yet  be  explained  better  by  a  spiritistic  theory  than  in  any  other  way, 
we  must  put  this  down  to  our  lack  of  influence  upon  the  quality  of  the 
phenomena,  not  to  any  bias  in  the  experimenters.  Without  wishing  to 
prejudice  this  question,  the  author  is  of  the  opinion  that,  even  though 
most  of  the  spiritistic  phenomena  should  turn  out  to  be  true,  an 
animistic  explanation  is  to  be  preferred,  and  that  it  does,  on  the 
whole,  suffice. 

This  remark  appears  necessary  in  view  of  the  case  now  to  be  related. 
Shortly  after  the  death  of  M.  Bisson  a  new  psychical  entity  manifested 
itself  through  Eva  in  the  trance  state.  It  came  into  play  in  a  very 
sudden  manner,  and  in  apparent  conflict  with  the  medium,  ^vith  violent 
defensive  motions  and  convulsive  muscular  contractions.  This  personi- 
fication called  itself  "  Alexandre  Bisson."  It  spoke  through  the  mouth 
of  the  medium,  with  a  deep  voice.  It  only  remained  for  a  short  time, 
and  caused  profound  bodily  exhaustion  to  the  medium.  I  myself  have 
never  seen  this  "  incarnation,"  and  only  know  of  it  through  the  reports 
of  my  collaborator,  who,  after  thirty  years  of  happy  marriage,  would 
know  her  husband  better  and  more  exactly  than  any  other  person. 
Indeed,  according  to  her  report,  the  personification  "  Bisson  "  com- 
manded the  memory,  the  language,  the  mode  of  expression,  and  the 
character  of  her  dead  husband.  Mme.  Bisson  w^as  convinced  that  she 
was  in  the  presence  of  the  psychic  existence  of  her  husband.  She 
repeatedly  asked  him  questions  which  he  alone  could  answer,  and  his 
answers  were  always  correct.  M.  Bisson,  when  alive,  stammered, 
especially  when  in  a  state  of  excitement,  and  this  stammering  occurred 
in  the  conversation. 

The  commimications  of  the  type  "  Bisson  "  referred  to  his  family 
life,  to  the  completion  of  a  drama  left  unfinished,  and  to  our  sittings. 
"  Bisson  "  said  we  were  on  the  right  way,  and  should  not  allow  ourselves 
to  be  discouraged  by  anything  from  continuing  with  the  investigations. 

156  PHENOMENA    OF    MATERIALISATION 

It  also  appears  remarkable  that  the  personification  "  Bisson  "  usually 
occurs  at  "  critical  "  moments.  Occasionally  there  were  moments  in 
which  Mme.  Bisson  had  lost  courage,  in  consequence  of  the  difficulties 
caused  by  Eva's  character,  and  the  opposition  offered  to  her  suggestions. 
When  inclined  to  discontinue  thc^e  investigations,  or  depressed  by 
family  troubles,  the  type  "  Bisson  "  regularly  appeared,  in  order  to 
console  his  wife  with  words  known  to  her  in  his  life. 

We  must  ask  ourselves  :  "  Is  it  possible  for  a  girl,  with  Eva's  lack  of 
education  and  gifts,  to  create  a  true  psychic  copy  of  the  personality  of 
the  deceased,  and  even  subconsciously  to  make  his  mentality  and 
knowledge  her  own  ?  "  Even  assuming  an  unusually  highly-developed 
somnambulic  detective  sense,  such  a  psychological  reconstruction 
would  remain  a  remarkable  and  puzzling  performance. 

Sittings  of  May  and  June  19 12  (Paris). 

The  new  flat.  Rue  Georges  Sand  33,  contained  two  completely  separated 
rooms,  one  of  which  was  used  entirely  for  the  sittings,  and  could  be 
locked,  so  that,  besides  the  sitters,  nobody  had  access  to  it  in  the  absence 
of  the  observers,  not  even  the  servants. 

The  dark  cabinet  was  now  in  the  corner  opposite  the  window.  The 
photographic  cameras  were  momited  in  the  usual  way.  One  camera 
was  placed  in  the  cabinet  to  the  right  of  the  medium's  chair,  and  the 
rest  outside. 

The  author  intended  to  use  here,  for  the  first  time,  a  kinematograph 
(Pathe  Freres),  and  in  order  to  provide  for  the  necessary  illumination 
by  a  projection  apparatus,  he  had  caused  a  special  cable  to  be  laid. 
But  the  experiment  was  attended  by  such  extraordinary  and  unexpected 
difficulties  that  the  plan  was  not  carried  out  in  the  first  instance. 

The  author  was  piesent  at  the  construction  of  the  cabinet.  It 
consisted  of  two  side  walls  joining  in  a  corner  and  a  roof,  all  provided 
with  a  black  lining.  The  floor  of  the  cabinet  was  also  covered  with 
black.  In  front  of  the  curtains  a  carpet  was  nailed  to  the  parquet 
floor,  in  order  to  avoid  unnecessary  noise  by  walking  during  the  sittings. 
The  accompanying  Diagram  gives  the  necessary  details  (Diagram  VI.) 

Sitting  of  the  5th  May  1912. 

Present. — Mme.  Bisson  and  the  author. 

Negative. 

Illumination  by  five  red  lamps,  eighty  to  one  hundred  candle-power. 
The  dress  of  the  medium  and  control,  as  in  the  Rue  Victor  Hugo. 
Hypnotisation  by  Mme.  Bisson.  During  somnambulism  Eva  was 
extremely  timid.     The  whole  surroundings  appeared  strange  to  her. 

SITTINGS   OF   MAY   AND   JUNE   1912   (PARIS)  157 

Sitting  of  the  6th  May  1912. 

Present. — Mme.  Bisson,  the  author  and  his  wife. 

The  dress  and  control  of  the  medium  and  the  cabinet  were  as  in 
previous  sittings. 

iY//7C/<PU/ 

P> 

I 

I 

''''''     xA       < 

f 

o 

u 

Z/^Grape/j//7^ 

^ 

.5^ 

/P^ipr 

S.  _  Mr?7e  B/S50/7S  sea/- 

Diagram  VI. 

158  PHENOMENA    OF    MATERIALISATION 

Strong  and  loud  expirations  and  gasps  were  heard.  After  about 
forty-five  minutes  there  appeared  above  Eva's  head  a  white  shape 
the  size  of  a  fist,  then  a  hght-coloured  smoke-Hke  wisp  issuing  from  her 
mouth.  Then  we  saw,  in  the  gap  of  the  curtains,  sometimes  from  the 
left,  sometimes  from  the  right,  a  white  shape  resembling  a  hand,  some- 
times looking  like  a  clenched  fist,  and  sometimes  like  several  bent 
fingers.  The  phenomena  were  obviously  independent  of  her  body,  and 
followed  each  other  so  rapidly  that  the  time  was  too  short  for  a  photo- 
graph. For  the  half-hour  during  which  the  phenomena  lasted  the 
medium's  hands  remained  clasping  the  curtain,  and  were  continually 
exposed  to  the  red  light. 

Final  examination  negative. 

Sitting  of  the  8th  May  1912. 

Present. — JNIme.  Bisson,  the  author  and  his  wife. 

Dresr,  illumination,  and  control  as  on  6th  May.  Commencement, 
9.30  P.M. 

Loud  and  long-continued  expirations  during  the  first  twenty  minutes. 
At  the  opening  of  the  curtains  a  mask-like  face  was  seen  attached  to 
the  medium's  back  hair.  It  resembled  a  half-soft  pulp,  traversed  by 
softer  material,  and  kneaded  into  shape.  Only  the  forehead  and  eyes 
were  recognisable,  which  gave  the  impression  of  a  female  face.  This 
shape  was  seen,  sometimes  to  the  right  and  sometimes  to  the  left  of 
the  medium  (on  her  shoulders),  and  sometimes  appeared  to  detach 
itself  from  her  body  and  remain  freely  suspended,  while  her  head  and 
hands  were  under  visible  control.  The  author  also  observed  that  this 
form  three  times  inclined  forwards,  though  he  could  not  tell  whether 
Eva's  head  moved  simultaneously.  The  structure  moved  forward  once 
as  far  as  the  curtain  gap.  Once  it  subsided  on  Eva's  head.  While  the 
lower  part  touched  her  hair,  the  upper  part  sank  slowly  backwards,  as 
if  the  formation  was  about  to  flatten  itself  out  and  cover  Eva's  head 
as  with  a  veil.  I  succeeded  in  photographing  the  peculiar  formation 
on  Eva's  right  shoulder.  After  the  flash-light  the  sitting  had  to  be 
closed. 

Final  examination  of  the  medium  and  the  cabinet  negative. 

The  photographs  (Figs.  81,  82  and  83)  show  a  remarkable  half- 
finished  structure  arrested  in  its  development.  It  is  fastened  to  the 
hair  of  the  back  of  Eva's  head  on  the  right,  and  does  not  appear  to 
exceed  in  size  the  face  of  a  new-born  baby  or  a  fairly  large  doll. 

If  we  wished  to  make  a  comparison,  we  might  say  as  follows  : — 
The  whole  thing  looks  like  a  half-finished  sketch  of  a  female  face-mask 
from  nature,  composed  of  pulp  and  softened  cardboard  and  fragments 
of  veil-like  material,  or  perhaps  made  of  a  special  mass  resembling 
plasticine.  The  forehead,  cheeks,  nose,  and  eyes,  and  the  upper  face 
generally,  are  sufficiently  finished  to  recognise  the  intention  of  the 
modeller  to  compose  a  female  face.  Where  the  point  of  the  nose  should 
be,  a  break  goes  right  across  the  face,  dividing  it  into  two  storeys,  the 
lower  storey  being  pushed  backwards  in  comparison  with  the  upper. 

Fig.  8i.     Author's  flashlight   photograph  of  «  May,   1912. 

Fig.  82.     Enlargement  of  portion  of  Fig.  81. 

Fig.   S3.     Lateral  view   of  Fig.   81   taken   inside  cabinet,   with    enlakgement. 

Figs.  84  and  85.     Author's  flashlight  photographs  of   14  .May,   1912. 
Fig.  84.     Front  view.  Fig.  85.     View  from  the  left. 

SITTINGS   OF   MAY  AND   JUNE   1912   (PARIS)  159 

but  under  the  rents  and  creases  and  fragments  we  can  distinctly  see  a 
mouth,  with  broad  lips  and  the  left  part  of  the  chin  (magnified  front 
photograph  of  the  18  by  24  inches  camera).  The  left  side  is  out  of 
drawing,  and  the  left  eye  squints. 

The  face  is  surrounded  by  fabric  in  the  stereoscopic  photograph, 
and  shows  a  distinct  low  relief,  like  a  sculptural  sketch  for  the  mask 
of  a  female  head.  The  surface  of  the  formation  is  covered  by  numerous 
folds,  holes,  and  creases,  while  the  lower  half  appears  to  consist  of 
several  broadcloth  or  paper  bands  unfolded,  placed  one  upon  the 
other,  and  organically  joined  and  felted  up  with  a  veiling  material. 
A  crumpled  mask,  such  as  can  be  bought,  would  have  a  more  complete 
appearance,  and  would  hardly  be  organically  connected  with  cloth 
fragments  and  veils,  as  is  the  case  with  the  present  structure. 

Sittings  of  the  10th  and  11th  May  1912. 

Negative. 

Sitting  of  the  14th  May  1912. 

Present. — Mme.  Bisson  and  the  author. 

Conditions  as  in  previous  sittings. 

During  the  hypnosis,  on  the  13th  May,  Mme.  Bisson  had  sugges- 
tively prepared  Eva  for  to-day's  sitting,  so  that  she  was  more  favourably 
disposed. 

About  a  quarter  of  an  hour  after  hypnotisation  a  long  veil-like 
strip  of  matter  appeared,  covering  first  the  medium's  breast  and  then 
the  left  upper  arm,  with  a  large  part  hanging  down  over  her  dress  on 
the  left.  This  strip,  about  a  yard  long  and  about  half  a  yard  wide, 
and  resembling  fine  muslin,  was  fixed  on  the  back  of  the  curtain  at 
Eva's  left,  while  her  hands  remained  fixed  to  the  curtain,  and  it  was 
repeatedly  seen  in  the  light,  quite  separated  from  her  body. 

Although  a  round  globular  mass  showed  itself  several  times,  we 
could  not  recognise  any  features.  Yet  Eva  pointed  with  a  finger  to 
the  structure  opposite  her,  and  said,  "  Don't  you  see  ?  Here's  the 
nose,  here's  the  mouth,  etc." 

When  the  white  round  form  appeared  clearly  in  the  curtain  gap 
I  ignited  the  flash-light. 

Sitting  closed.     Final  examination  negative. 

Before  the  sitting  Eva  weighed  not  quite  120  lbs.  After  the  sitting 
she  weighed  119  lbs.,  though  there  were  slight  oscillations  of  the  balance, 
owing  to  her  restlessness. 

Aji  examination  of  the  photographs  (Figs.  84  and  85)  taken  at  this 
sitting  shows  that  Eva's  hands  grasped  the  curtain  at  about  the  level 
of  her  knees,  and  that  3  or  4  feet  above,  rather  higher  than  the 
level  of  her  head,  there  is  a  white  elongated  shape,  which  looks  like  a 
cloud.  On  the  stereoscopic  picture,  which  is  rather  more  successful, 
is  seen  a  white  compact  mass  emerging  from  the  left  curtain,  to  the 

160  PHENOMENA    OF    MATERIALISATION 

back  of  which  the  invisible  portion  of  this  shape  might  be  fixed,  although 
in  the  front  view  the  left  margin  of  the  material  does  not  seem  to  touch 
the  curtain  on  the  same  side.  Whether  this  structure,  8  inches  long 
and  4  inches  wide,  consists  entirely  of  the  primitive  elementary  sub- 
stance of  materialisations,  or  veil-like  or  other  stuff,  cannot  be  judged 
from  the  photographs  alone.  The  medium's  head  was  over  3  feet 
behind  the  form,  and  for  the  first  time  in  the  series  of  experiments  we 
have  succeeded  in  photographing  this  material,  apparently  used  for 
forming  heads  and  faces,  quite  separated  from  the  medium,  and 
apparently  freely  suspended  in  the  curtain  gap. 

Sitting  of  the  15th  May  1912, 

Present. — Mme.  Bisson  and  the  author. 

Conditions  as  before. 

In  order  to  make  the  conditions  of  control  still  more  rigid,  Mme. 
Bisson  allowed  me  to  search  her  from  head  to  foot  before  the  sitting, 
so  as  to  dispose  of  the  allegation  that  she  could  have  supplied  any 
objects  to  the  medium  in  the  cabinet  for  producing  the  phenomena. 
Eva  was  not  favourably  disposed  on  this  day.  When  the  first  half-hour 
had  passed,  without  result,  there  were  no  indications  of  a  positive 
action  by  the  medium,  so  Mme.  Bisson  began  to  talk  to  Eva,  urging  her 
to  put  an  end  to  this  condition  of  indifference  by  an  energetic  con- 
centration of  the  will,  and  the  direction  of  the  attention  to  the  occurrence 
of  phenomena.  Eva  then  asked  her :  "  Venez,  Juliette,  me  tenir  la 
tete,"  and  Mme.  Bisson  entered  the  cabinet  and  touched  the  forehead 
and  neck  of  the  medium  about  one  minute  with  her  hands. 

After  we  had  again  made  urgent  requests  for  positive  efforts,  we 
saw  at  last  (about  one  hour  after  the  sitting  commenced),  in  her  lap, 
a  packet  of  white  material,  which  moved  and  finally  assumed  a  rough 
outline  of  a  white  female  arm,  lying  across  her  lap,  while  the  medium's 
hands  held  the  curtain. 

The  author  then  expressed  a  wish  to  be  allowed  to  touch  this  sub- 
stance. Eva  then  brought  my  right  hand  towards  the  mass,  but  with 
obvious  reluctance  and  instinctive  fear.  The  author  touched  a  firm, 
cool,  moist  mass,  which,  however,  disappeared  at  his  touch  as  if  by 
magic. 

Some  white  amorphous  material  appeared  several  times  in  her  lap, 
but  Eva's  power  did  not  seem  to  suffice  for  any  further  development 
of  the  phenomena,  so  that  the  sitting  had  to  be  closed. 

Final  control  negative.  The  medium  weighed,  before  the  sitting, 
119  lbs.  ;   afterwards,  120  lbs. 

Sitting  of  the  17th  May  1912. 

Present. — Mme.  Bisson  and  the  author. 

Eva's  weight  before  and  after  the  sitting  was  118  lbs.     Conditions 
as  usual. 

C5  M 

Figs.  ?8  and  89.  Flashlight  photographs  of  21  May,  1912. 
Left  :  First  photograph.  Right  :  Second  photograph. 

SITTINGS   OF   MAY   AND   JUNE   1912   (PARIS)  161 

While  the  medium's  hands  held  the  curtains  half  open,  a  grey 
smoke-like  wisp,  some  8  or  10  inches  long,  appeared  to  emerge  from 
the  medium's  mouth,  accompanied  by  convulsive  groans  and  long- 
drawn  expirations.  Towards  the  end  it  gradually  became  denser  and 
whiter,  and  from  this  end  there  emerged  the  unmistakable  outlines  of 
four  obviously  flat  white  fingers  of  middle  size,  which  were  kept  in 
constant  motion,  as  if  by  a  draught,  and  changed  their  shape  every 
moment.  When  the  curtain  was  opened  wide  the  material  was  separated 
off,  and  became  visible  first  on  the  shoulder  and  then,  in  a  very  remark- 
able shape,  on  the  head,  giving  an  impression  of  white. 

The  electric  contact  was  pressed  and  a  photograph  taken.  The 
medium  was  exhausted,  and  the  sitting  came  to  an  end.  Final  examina- 
tion negative. 

The  grey  shape  visible  on  the  photographs  (Fig.  86)  lies  on  the  middle 
of  the  medium's  head,  and  resembles  an  old  felt  slipper  bent  backwards, 
but  of  miniature  size.  The  stereoscopic  picture  shows  Eva's  feet,  also 
in  felt  slippers.  By  its  appearance  and  quality  this  picture  is  quite 
out  of  the  run  of  the  series  of  observations,  which  show  a  more  or  less 
uniform  tendency  of  development. 

Sitting  of  the  20th  May  1912. 

Present. — Mme.  Bisson  and  the  author. 

Conditions  as  usual.  Examination,  also,  of  Mme.  Bisson,  as  on  the 
15th  May. 

In  this  sitting  the  phenomena  took  approximately  the  same  course 
as  in  the  last.  White  wisps  and  balls  on  the  lap  and  shoulder,  and  the 
mouth  phenomenon  as  described  on  17th  May.  The  material  attached 
itself  again  to  the  back  of  the  left  curtain,  and  sometimes  passed  beyond 
the  hem  of  the  curtain  into  the  circle  of  light.  The  request  to  take  hold 
of  a  proffered  cigarette  was  not  fulfilled.  In  her  efforts  to  carry  out 
the  request,  Eva  moved  the  curtains  pretty  rapidly  to  and  fro.  I  saw 
distinctly,  from  my  place  near  the  right  curtain,  that  the  white  mass 
was  drawn  to  and  fro  with  the  left  curtain,  as  if  it  was  attached  to  it. 
When  the  mass  reappeared  on  the  left  shoulder  I  took  a  photograph, 
and  the  sitting  came  to  an  end. 

The  photograph  (Fig.  87)  taken  in  this  sitting  is  very  similar  to  the 
last.  Again  an  object  resembling  a  slipper,  which  appeared  to  me 
white,  comes  out  grey  in  the  photograph.  It  lies  on  the  left  shoulder, 
and  is  apparently  held  with  the  mouth.  The  long  bag-shaped  object 
broadens  out  backwards. 

The  similarity  of  the  object  to  that  photographed  in  the  last  sitting 
is  too  striking  to  be  overlooked.  Both  shapes  belong  to  the  same 
kind,  and  show  on  the  whole  the  same  composition  and  design,  without 
being  absolutely  identical.  In  the  course  of  the  sittings  we  observed 
repeatedly  that  the  tendency  towards  identical  forms  continued  over 
several  sittings.  This  experience  was  repeated  later  in  the  case  of  face 
formations,  whose  type  and  chief  characteristics  were  sometimes 
preserved  for  several  successive  sittings. 

162  PHENOMENA    OF    MATERIALISATION 

Sitting  of  the  21st  May  1912. 

Present. — Mme.  Bisson,  her  younger  son,  and  the  author. 

Conditions  as  usual. 

On  this  day  Mme.  Bisson  did  not  enter  the  cabinet  during  the  whole 
sitting.  After  somnambulism  had  set  in  we  heard  loud  expirations  and 
stertorous  breathing. 

The  white  material  first  seen  on  the  medium's  lap  is  again  supported 
behind  the  left  curtain,  exposing  itself  to  the  light  from  time  to  time. 
The  impression  given  was  as  if  Eva  rolled  up  the  curtain  with  the  fingers 
of  her  left  hand  and  drew  it  back  slightly  at  the  same  time.  On  opening 
her  hand,  the  curtain  fell  back  over  the  image.  This  process  indicates 
a  fixation  of  the  object  or  image  on  the  inside  of  the  curtain.  We 
saw  the  features  of  an  imperfectly-formed  face,  which,  on  account  of 
its  favourable  position,  I  photographed  (Figs.  88  and  89)  three  times, 
changing  the  plates  after  each  exposure.  I  then  saw  a  long  white  frag- 
ment, and  had  the  impression  as  if  the  face  were  suspended  in  mid-air, 
subsequently  moving  back  towards  Eva's  head,  in  order  to  lie  on  her 
hair.  Eva  asked  us  to  give  her  the  red  electric  torch,  and  illuminated 
the  rather  flat  image,  from  which  a  number  of  flakes  and  fibres  hung  down, 
resembling  white  curls  made  up  of  thick  cotton  thread. 

After  this  occurrence  the  author  sat  inside  the  cabinet  on  the  floor, 
with  Eva's  consent,  in  order  to  observe  any  further  phenomena  from 
the  back.  Unfortunately,  the  medium  was  too  exhausted  to  continue 
the  sitting.  I  then  entered  the  cabinet  before  anybody  else  and 
examined  Eva  over  the  whole  skin.  Nowhere  could  I  find  anything 
suspicious,  neither  on  her  body  nor  in  the  cabinet.     Sitting  closed. 

All  three  series  of  photographic  records  show  pictures  of  the  same 
object. 

This  day's  type  of  face  corresponds  in  its  structure  and  its  com- 
position to  that  of  14tli  May.  While  the  latter  was  attached  to  Eva's 
hair,  to-day's  structure  is  quite  detached  from  the  medium's  body, 
and  is  obviously  attached  to  the  curtain  inside,  or  supported  by  it. 

In  the  second  series  the  face  appears  in  the  same  place,  and  in  the 
stereoscopic  photographs  gives  the  impression  of  free  suspension,  but 
that  may  be  an  optical  illusion,  as  a  fold  of  the  curtain,  pushed  back 
by  the  medium's  left  hand,  furnishes  a  support  for  the  image.  The 
hem  of  the  curtain  projecting  forward  throws  a  shadow  on  the  image. 

The  whole  form  of  the  object  recalls  a  first  sketch  of  a  face  in  wet 
plaster  or  papier  mdchL  We  find  the  same  building  up  of  the  face  in 
storeys  as  on  14th  May.  The  face  terminates  in  the  upper  lip,  the 
lower  part  being  displaced  backwards  and  showing  a  gaping  hole — at 
least,  in  Series  I.  The  eyes  are  just  recognisable,  the  bridge  of  the  nose 
is  twice  broken,  or  at  least  traversed,  by  two  great  rents.  The  whole 
consists  of  a  conglomeration  of  fragments  of  an  unknown  mass,  like  the 
sketch  of  a  face-mask  in  low  relief.  The  structure  is  flat,  like  that  of 
14th  May. 

The  photographs  of  the  second  and  third  series  closely  resemble 
those  of  the  first,  differing  only  in  details.  Thus,  in  the  second  series, 
a  deep  rent  appears  on  the  right  cheek,  which  is  absent  in  Series  I. 

SITTINGS   OF  MAY   AND   JUNE    1912   (PARIS)  163 

To-day's  experience  is  interesting,  inasmuch  as  in  the  sittings  from 
14th  to  21st  May  the  same  type  recurs  with  extremely  characteristic 
faults  and  imperfections. 

Sitting  of  the  24th  May  1912. 
Negative. 

Sitting  of  the  25th  May  1912. 

Present. — Mme.  Bisson  and  the  author. 

Strict  examination  of  both  women  and  the  cabinet  before  the 
sitting,  as  on  15th  May  1912.  Illumination  and  other  conditions  as  in 
previous  sittings. 

Since  the  weight  of  the  medium,  both  before  and  after  the  sittings, 
showed  no  material  change,  these  weighings  were  not  continued. 

Commencement,  9.15  p.m.  Bodily  reactions  indicate  positive  per- 
formances. Half  an  hour  after  hypnotisation  a  white  patch  was  seen 
at  the  level  of  the  medium's  head  on  the  back  of  the  left  curtain,  and 
after  Eva's  left  hand  had  several  times  carefully  rolled  up  the  curtain. 
The  patch  turned  out  to  be  a  flat  white  hand,  with  wrist  and  part  of  an 
arm,  attached  to  the  curtain  in  such  a  way  that  the  fingers  hung  down. 
The  author  had  the  personal  impression  of  a  lifeless  form  without  motion 
of  its  own.  By  pulling  in  or  rolling  up  the  curtain  three  fingers  were 
made  clearly  visible.  The  phenomenon  was  observed  more  easily  from 
my  place  than  from  that  of  Mme.  Bisson.  Since  I  perceived  no  motion, 
I  saw  no  chance  of  a  proffered  cigarette  being  grasped.  The  shape  of 
the  hand  was  elongated.  It  appeared  mummified  and  shrivelled,  and 
was  provided  with  extraordinarily  long  and  pointed  fingers.  In  thick- 
ness it  appeared  flat,  but  thicker  than  a  hand  shape  made  of  leather  or 
paper.  Its  thickness  might  have  been  about  one-fifth  of  an  inch. 
Shortly  afterwards  some  fingers  appeared  at  the  same  level,  but  this 
time  they  were  alive,  and  grasped  the  curtain  inside  and  out.  My 
whole  attention  was  turned  towards  Eva's  left  hand,  and  when  the 
curtain  was  withdrawn  again  I  saw  the  flat  hand-formation  on  her  left 
knee  instead  of  the  real  hand.  There  is  hardly  a  doubt  that  the  living 
fingers  grasping  the  curtain  were  those  of  Eva.  This  situation,  already 
photographed  at  St  Jean  de  Luz,  is  psychologically  explained  by  the 
endeavour  to  fulfil  our  wish  for  the  grasping  of  a  cigarette.  Since  the 
flat  lifeless  shape  did  not  suffice  for  this,  the  somnambulist  exchanged 
the  parts  of  the  living  and  the  lifeless  hand. 

Doubts  of  this  kind  were  just  passing  through  my  head  when  a  new 
phenomenon  attracted  my  attention.  Both  Eva's  hands  were  clearly 
visible  on  her  knees,  when  suddenly  a  third  hand,  coming  from  the  left, 
crossed  Eva's  left  hand,  touched  it  on  the  back  with  the  finger-tips,  and 
then  quickly  withdrew.  This  phenomenon  occurred  several  times  in 
succession,  but  so  quickly  that  I  did  not  succeed  in  taking  a  photograph 
of  it. 

164  PHENOMENA    OF    MATERIALISATION 

These  two  contradictory  events  happened  in  close  succession,  and 
were  observed  with  equal  exactness  and  impartiality.  In  the  course 
of  the  sitting  the  curtain-rod  suddenly  came  loose,  so  that  it  hung  down. 
Yet  I  tried  to  photograph  the  hand.  The  photographs  failed  on  account 
of  the  disturbance  mentioned.  Only  the  stereoscopic  transparency 
shows  how  Eva's  left  hand  opens  the  curtain  widely,  and  how  she  looks 
back  towards  the  back  of  the  cabinet.  One  sees  a  white  elongated  shape 
with  fingers  recalling  a  long  female  glove  attached  to  the  back  wall, 
but  no  such  thing  was  found  during  a  strict  search  of  the  medium  and 
the  cabinet.     The  object  had  disappeared  without  a  trace. 

Close  of  the  sitting,  11  p.m.     Final  examination  negative. 

Sittings  of  the  27th,  28th  and  30th  May  1912. 
Negative. 

Sitting  of  the  1st  June  1912. 

Present. — Mme.  Bisson  and  the  author. 

Commencement,  8.45  ;   end,  10.30  p.m. 

On  this  day  Mme.  Bisson  hypnotised  the  medium  at  5  p.m.  in 
preparation  for  the  evening's  sitting.  The  personification  calling  herself 
"  Berthe  "—the  controlling  spirit  in  the  spiritistic  sense — announced 
through  the  somnambulist's  mouth  extraordinary  phenomena  for 
to-day's  sitting.  "  Berthe  "  would  endeavour  to  show  us  the  head  of 
a  person  closely  related  to  us,  and  would,  if  possible,  appear  simul- 
taneously.    She  would  see  if  we  would  recognise  her. 

Before  the  sitting  Eva  had  a  dreamy  and  dazed  expression,  and 
already  showed  a  quickened  pulse  two  hours  beforehand.  The  definite 
announcement  of  a  positive  result  induced  us  to  make  the  examination 
of  the  medium  and  the  cabinet  as  thorough  and  as  strict  as  possible. 
As  in  all  previous  sittings,  the  medium  undressed  completely  and  put 
on  the  black  seance  costume,  consisting  of  tights  and  dress. 

Illumination  with  red  light,  aggregating  about  one  hundred  candle- 
power. 

Eva  had  hardly  been  hypnotised  on  her  chair  by  Mme.  Bisson  when 
she  breathed  loudly  and  stertorously,  with  every  sign  of  deep  trance. 
The  teleplastic  creative  process  commenced  at  once.  At  the  place  in 
the  curtain  which  had  been  made  familiar  by  practice,  and  in  which 
the  phenomena  had  shown  themselves  at  the  last  sittings,  i.e.,  on  the 
inside  of  the  left  curtain,  at  about  the  level  of  the  medium's  head,  a 
white  luminosity,  as  of  a  strip  of  muslin  20  inches  long,  became  visible. 
Eva  then  tried  gradually  to  expose  the  image  to  the  light  by  rolling  up 
the  left  curtain  flap  with  her  left  hand,  and  thus  gradually  allowing 
the  red  light  to  fall  upon  the  object,  obviously  fixed  inside. 

To  my  greatest  astonishment  I  seemed  to  recognise  in  the  masculine 
face,  shown  with  the  well-kno^\^l  drapery  of  veiling,  but  sketched  as 
with  black  chalk  on  a  fiat  surface,  the  features  of  Alexandre  Bisson, 
the   husband   of   my   collaborator,    who    had   died   in    January    1912. 

Fig.  qo  and  qi.     Author's  flashlight  photograph  of  i  June,  1912  (second  series), 

On  the  right  :    enlargement. 

Fig.  92.     Author's  third  flashlight  photograph  of  i   June,  1912. 
Portrait  of  M.  Bisson. 

SITTINGS   OF  MAY  AND   JUNE   1912  (PARIS)  165 

Although  I  saw  that  she  had  immediately  recognised  her  husband  and 
showed  deep  emotion,  I  was  not  certain  of  my  impression,  and  con- 
sidered the  possibility  of  a  self-deception.  As  soon  as  the  face  showed 
itself  again,  I  ignited  the  flash-light  by  means  of  the  electric  contact 
in  my  hand.  After  changing  the  plates,  I  succeeded  in  taking  two 
further  photographs,  so  that  out  of  the  three  series  of  photographs, 
taken  with  five  cameras,  nine  successful  photographs  are  available  for 
study,  the  remaining  photographs  having  been  unsuccessful.  Before 
the  third  flash-light  the  object  appeared  smaller  than  before  the  first. 
Mme.  Bisson  claimed  to  have  recognised  two  he^ds  during  the  first 
exposure — a  male  head  and  underneath  a  female  head  (the  portrait 
of  the  entity  "  Berthe  ") — and  this  was  corroborated  on  developing 
the  plates.     The  pictures  of  the  third  series  only  contained  one  face. 

The  pictures  (Figs.  90,  91,  92  and  93)  recall  face-masks  artistically 
composed  with  clever  veil  drapery,  but  without  any  signs  of  real  life, 
in  spite  of  the  greatest  portrait  resemblance.  Besides,  no  plastic 
development  of  the  features  could  be  established  with  any  certainty 
either  in  the  sittings  or  from  the  photographs,  while  the  base  of  the 
pictures  appears  to  me  to  resemble  paper.  The  transition  towards  the 
pictorial  representation  of  the  face  proceeded  in  stages,  since  in  the 
beginning,  as  in  previous  sittings,  the  only  thing  to  be  seen  was  material 
in  rather  large  veils  and  fragments,  with  which  Eva  would  sometimes 
cover  her  own  face. 

In  spite  of  the  three  flash-light  exposures,  the  phenomena  continued. 
The  structure  now  appeared  on  the  left  shoulder.  Eva  illuminated  it 
first  with  the  red  and  then  with  the  white  electric  torch,  but  the  image, 
in  which  I  distinctly  perceived  a  male  bearded  face,  with  a  high  fore- 
head, would  not  suffer  the  light,  and  disappeared  behind  the  back  of 
Eva's  chair  towards  the  back  of  the  cabinet,  without  Eva  having  changed 
the  position  of  her  hands.  Since  I  had  closely  followed  the  image  from 
the  shoulder,  I  did  not  let  it  go  out  of  sight,  but  rose  and  put  my  head 
deep  into  the  cabinet,  bending  over  Eva  as  she  sat  quietly,  and  keeping 
the  curtain  closed  under  my  chin.  In  this  way  a  ray  of  light  passed 
over  my  head,  through  the  top  of  the  curtain,  on  to  the  back  of  the 
cabinet,  without  disturbing  the  medium.  The  male  face  then  stood 
facing  me  like  a  male  portrait  in  life-size,  fixed  on  the  back  wall, 
remained  for  about  six  seconds,  and  then  revolved  about  its  own  axis 
flat  on  the  wall,  the  upper  part  of  the  face  falling  down,  and  finally  dis- 
appeared towards  the  floor  behind  the  medium's  back.  During  this 
whole  observation  Eva's  body  was  motionless,  and  under  my  observa- 
tion. The  image  was  entirely  separated  from  her.  Its  motion  and 
disappearance  appeared  to  be  under  the  control  of  an  unseen  power. 

Thus  ended  this  extremely  remarkable  sitting,  during  which 
Mme.  Bisson  had  not  entered  the  cabinet  at  all.  Eva  rose  from  her 
chair  and  stood  in  front  of  the  curtain.  She  tore  open  the  seam  joining 
the  black  tights  to  the  dress,  so  that  I  could  make  a  complete  bodily 
examination.  Again  I  searched  her  with  the  greatest  care,  made  her 
open  her  mouth,  examined  her  hair  and  ears,  and  performed  a  gynaeco- 
logical examination,  without  finding  anything  either  on  her  body  or 
on  the  seance  costume.  The  subsequent  examination  of  the  cabinet 
was  also  negative.     The  image  I  had  seen  falling  had  totally  disappeared. 

166  PHENOMENA    OF    MATERIALISATION 

Eva  was  much  indisposed  after  the  sitting,  and  several  times  vomited 
blood — about  a  wine-glass  full,  mixed  with  food  remnants.  She  also 
complained  of  headache.  The  condition  of  exhaustion  lasted  several 
days. 

The  author  was,  as  usual,  present  at  the  development  of  the  plates. 
The  first  and  second  series  showed  two  faces,  one  above  the  other — a 
male  face  above  and  a  female  face  below — while  the  third  series  only 
showed  a  male  face.  The  remarkable  similarity  of  the  male  face  to 
that  of  the  late  author,  Alex.  Bisson,  is  immediately  obvious.  Proofs 
of  the  photographs  sent  to  members  of  the  family  were  recognised  by 
all  the  relatives  (wife,  four  children,  etc.)  and  friends  of  M.  Bisson,  as 
his  portrait  at  the  age  of  about  thirty-eight.  When  Eva  saw  the 
pictures  she  fainted.  The  author  made  some  tests  himself,  and  showed 
the  pictures  to  persons  who  had  known  Bisson  in  his  life.  These  persons 
also  recognised  the  deceased  at  first  sight. 

The  third  exposure  shows  the  complete  life-sized  face  of  a  bearded 
man,  with  his  head  bent  towards  the  left,  and  directing  a  look  full  of 
expression  upon  us  from  behind  the  curtain.  The  curtain  covers  half 
the  left  eye.  Eye-glasses  are  distinctly  seen  on  the  eyes.  Several 
veil-like  fragments  hang  down  from  the  right  side  of  the  head.  From 
the  point  of  the  nose,  part  of  the  mouth,  and  nearly  the  whole  beard, 
are  covered  by  partly  transparent  material  hanging  down  for  a  length 
of  from  8  to  12  inches. 

Among  the  remarkable  characteristics  we  may  mention  the  high 
broad  forehead,  the  straight  line  of  the  hair,  the  deep-set  eye-sockets, 
the  vivacity  and  cleverness  of  the  eyes,  and  the  short  sight  (glasses), 
all  being  peculiarities  of  the  late  M.  Bisson,  as  may  also  be  seen  by 
comparison  with  extant  photographs.  A  closer  examination  of  the 
stereoscopic  picture  also  shows  that  the  corner  of  the  mouth,  visible  on 
it,  is  directed  downwards  as  in  photographs  from  life. 

The  beard  is  comparatively  long.  In  portraits  from  life,  M.  Bisson' s 
beard  is  rather  shorter.  But  at  various  times  in  his  life  M.  Bisson  wore 
his  beard  in  various  shapes  and  lengths,  so  that  this  point  is  not 
important. 

The  first  and  second  series  of  photographs,  which  show,  below 
Bisson's  portrait,  the  pretty  features  of  a  young  woman,  reproduce  the 
same  sketch  of  a  face  corresponding  in  every  detail  to  the  photograph 
just  discussed  (Figs.  90  and  91).  Only  the  draping  of  the  veiling  is 
different.  The  veil  in  this  case  covers  the  greatest  part  of  the  hair  of 
the  head,  and  hangs  down  in  streamers  quite  a  yard  long,  which  form, 
in  the  middle,  a  fairly  compact  mass,  part  of  which  was  photographed 
by  the  camera  inside  the  cabinet,  i.e.,  from  behind  (Fig.  93). 

The  partly  transparent  veils  are  themselves  thickened  at  the  hems, 
and  show  a  pattern  of  parallel  fibres. 

The  female  face,  the  deeper  shading  of  which  suggests  the  beginning 
of  a  plastic  modelling,  has  regular  and  good  features,  though  its  expres- 
sion may  be  described  as  rigid.  Both  these  faces,  placed  one  above 
the  other,  are  lacking  in  the  finer  half-shadows,  which  are,  for  instance, 
expressed  so  clearly  in  the  medium's  face  beside  them. 

We  have,  therefore,  here  to  deal  with  flat  images  draped  with  veil 
material,  with  artistic  sketches,  soft  charcoal,  or  other  black  and  white 

SITTINGS   OF   MAY  AND   JUNE   1912   (PARIS)  167 

drawings,  but  not  with  photographs  from  nature  or  reproductions  of 
photographs,  though  the  portraits  themselves  have  a  natural  expression. 
Quite  apart  from  the  fact  that  no  photograph  of  Bisson  exists  in  half- 
profile  with  the  expression  and  position  of  our  pictures  (as  shown  by 
inquiries  within  the  family),  the  sketchiness  of  the  drawings,  and  the 
lack  of  fine  modelling  of  the  face,  speak  against  the  possible  use  of  a 
photograph.  Thus,  even  the  worst  photographic  reproduction  would 
never  give  the  outlines  of  the  eye-glasses  in  such  an  irregular,  half- 
finished  and  distorted  way  as  is  shown  in  our  pictures.  The  same 
remarks  apply  to  other  details  when  closely  examined,  e.g.,  the  artistic 
treatment  of  the  beard,  the  eye-sockets,  the  forehead,  etc.  While  in 
the  photographs  from  life  both  eyebrows  make  a  straight  line,  in  our 
pictures  they  proceed  in  obtuse  angles  upward  and  outward.  In  spite 
of  the  obvious  defects  of  drawing,  the  liveliness  of  the  expression, 
especially  of  the  eyes,  is  not  surpassed  in  any  extant  photograph.  And 
it  was  just  the  intelligent  vivacious  eye  which  distinguished  Bisson's 
physiognomy.  Very  characteristic  of  the  deceased  was  the  breadth 
and  shortness  of  his  nose.  If  one  of  his  photographs  had  been  used, 
how  was  it  that  this  particularly  characteristic  part  was  covered  ? 
There  would  be  no  sense  in  it,  but  we  find  the  same  principle  in  other 
materialisation  photographs.  Perhaps  the  rendering  of  this  part  offers 
special  difficulties  for  the  teleplastic  projections.  Or  the  artistic  intelli- 
gence made  a  special  point  of  showing  in  the  face  sufficient  characteristic 
traits  to  ensure  recognition,  and  of  saving  any  further  unnecessary  and 
superfluous  additions  for  the  sake  of  economy  of  power.  Thus  the 
contrasts  between  the  vivacious  expression  of  the  face  on  the  one  hand, 
and  the  imperfection  and  lack  of  details  on  the  other,  would  be  explained 
by  this  impressionistic  tendency. 

As  regards  the  position  of  the  medium's  head  in  the  photographs 
taken  from  the  interior  of  the  cabinet,  Bisson's  portrait  and  the  stereo- 
scopic pictures  show  that  the  upper  part  of  her  body  is  about  3  feet 
behind  the  images,  and  completely  separated  from  them,  while  the 
hands  are  visible  at  the  curtain  in  all  the  pictures.  The  lateral  view 
from  within  the  cabinet  is  of  special  interest  as  giving  a  section  of  a 
portion  of  the  teleplastic  creation  from  behind,  with  an  estimated 
diameter  of  6  inches. 

The  result  of  the  sitting  of  1st  June  1912  is  probably  one  of  the 
most  interesting  results  of  our  four  years  of  observation,  always  supposing 
that  fraudulent  manipulations  were  excluded  by  the  experimental 
arrangements.  We  are  face  to  face  with  the  fact  that  the  features  of 
a  deceased  person  are  reconstructed  in  a  portrait  by  mediumistic  power. 
The  injurious  effect  which  a  fact  of  this  kind,  with  its  apparent  fulfilment 
of  the  far-reaching  hopes  of  spiritualism  may  exercise  on  superstitious 
minds,  must  not  be  underestimated.  For  this  and  other  reasons  we 
refrain  from  any  theoretical  interpretation  of  the  fact,  and  confine  our- 
selves to  a  simple  record  of  the  observations. 

Sitting  of  the  4th  June  1912. 
Negative. 

J 

168  PHENOMENA    OF    MATERIALISATION 

Sitting  of  the  5th  June  1912. 

Before  the  beginning  of  this  day's  experiment,  Bisson's  three  sons 
appeared  in  the  seance  room  (the  eldest  is  employed  in  the  Ministry  of 
Finance,  the  second  is  an  airman,  and  the  third  is  a  thirteen-year-old 
schoolboy)  to  express  their  thanks  for  copies  of  the  photographs,  and 
their  deep  emotion  on  beholding  the  features  of  their  late  father,  obtained 
in  so  remarkable  a  manner.  Another  visitor  was  a  painter,  R.  M.,  a 
friend  of  Bisson's  of  twenty  years'  standing,  who  presented  his  con- 
gratulations on  the  success  of  the  sitting  of  1st  June.  He  also,  at  the 
first  glance,  had  recognised  his  friend  from  the  picture. 

Present. — Mme.  Bisson,  her  son  Pierre,  and  the  author. 

Conditions  as  in  previous  sittings. 

About  fifteen  minutes  after  hypnotisation  I  saw  a  long  white  wisp 
or  veil,  which  appeared  to  come  from  the  back  wall  of  the  cabinet,  and 
hung  down  over  Eva's  left  shoulder.  This  gradually  advanced,  as 
could  be  seen  on  the  repeated  opening  of  the  curtains,  until  finally  the 
features  of  a  female  face  were  seen  in  the  upper  portion.  While  the 
medium's  hands  were  quiet  and  visible,  the  head,  with  its  tail  of  long 
veiling,  moved  up  along  the  left  hem  of  the  curtain,  as  if  the  head  were 
creeping  up,  until  it  nearly  reached  the  curtain-pole  (9  feet  up),  and  then 
rapidly  descended.     A  photographic  record  was  made  with  a  flash-light. 

A  white  hand  also  appeared  at  the  curtain,  and  when  Mme.  Bisson 
approached  her  head,  she  was  pulled  by  the  hair,  while  Eva's  hands 
remained  visible.  On  closer  inspection  I  recognised  the  same  glove-like 
form  which  we  had  observed  and  photographed  on  25th  May  1912. 
This  ended  the  sitting.  Final  examination  without  result. 
i  V  The  negatives  of  to-day's  sitting  (Fig.  94)  show  the  same  female 
type  of  face  as  that  photographed  on  1st  June  with  M.  Bisson,  and  they 
appear  in  the  same  favourite  place  on  the  back  of  the  left  curtain.  By 
mounting  a  stereoscopic  apparatus  just  opposite  at  the  right  curtain,  I 
had  succeeded  in  getting  a  front  view  of  the  face  only  half-illuminated 
behind  the  curtain,  whereas  the  other  cameras,  owing  to  the  slanting 
position  of  the  head,  only  show  a  distorted  picture. 

The  position  of  the  head  is  vertical,  and  at  right  angles  to  the 
curtain,  which  is  touched  by  the  left  ear.  The  nice-looking  female  face, 
with  its  natural  expression,  is  now  undoubtedly  in  low  relief,  and  is 
surrounded  by  fabrics,  wisps,  and  fragments,  which  fall  over  the  face 
down  to  the  mouth.  A  rich  bundle  of  the  finest  veil -like  fabric  hangs 
down  on  to  Eva's  left  shoulder,  and  four  white  finger-tips  project  from 
it,  obviously  belonging  to  the  hand  which  we  observed  during  the  sitting. 

The  side  view  taken  from  within  the  cabinet  corroborates  this 
picture,  and  shows  that  the  fingers  look  flat,  as  if  cut  out  of  paper,  and 
are  quite  irregularly  formed. 

As  regards  the  modelling  of  the  face,  the  nose  appears  to  be  dis- 
tinctly developed,  and  to  project  in  the  right  proportion.  In  the  same 
way  the  eye-sockets,  mouth  and  chin  appear  to  be  plastic  impressions, 
like  the  work  of  a  competent  artist.  The  shadows  of  the  face  are  strong, 
deep,  and  correctly  arranged. 

P 

^^'  '1^1 

^■■' 

'fl'    ~  ^^M 

i'*  '■-  '' 

•;j^^^^^H 

i-*"'; 

^^1 

^^^^^^^^^^^^^^F^ 

^ 

1 

^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^H  ;^ ,. 

a 

i 

%      Ih 

B-       VHHHHHP  -^^ 

'^K-^^H 

^K       ■»"    j'^r^og'  >^ 

i^U 

Fig.    93.     Photograph    of    a    cross    section    of    Fig.    90, 
taken  inside  the  cabinet. 

Fig.  96.     Side  view  of  Fig  95,  taken  within  the  cabinet. 

OBSERVATIONS  IN  JUNE  AND  JULY  1912  (PARIS)       169 

The  extremely  fine  veiling  stuff  resembles  a  spider's  web,  and  bears 
a  remarkable  likeness  to  the  productions  of  the  medium  Stanislava  P. 

Observations  in  June  and  July  1912  (Paris). 

From  12th  to  24th  June  there  were  chiefly  negative  sittings,  or  positive 
ones  with  slight  results.  Only  on  24th  June  Mme.  Bisson  succeeded  in 
taking  a  new  photograph.  This  sitting  was  attended  by  Dr  Bourdet 
(an  author),  his  wife,  and  young  Pierre  Bisson.  In  the  face  shown, 
Mme.  Bisson  recognised  the  features  of  her  deceased  nephew,  Georges 
Thurner,  a  literary  man.  She  succeeded  in  taking  the  photograph  with 
three  cameras,  which  confirmed  the  observation.  In  a  letter  of 
1st  July,  she  communicates  the  following  :  "  Yesterday  I  showed  the 
photograph  of  24th  June  to  my  sister  (the  mother  of  Georges),  without 
telling  her  anything  or  making  any  remark.  The  impression  made  upon 
her  was  an  unexpectedly  violent  one.  She  exclaimed,  '  Georges,  my 
dear  son,  it  is  you  !  My  God,  my  God,  how  wonderful,  and  yet  how 
terrible  I  '     Then  she  broke  into  sobs  and  tears." 

Similar  emotions  were  produced  by  the  appearance  of  the  portrait 
in  the  case  of  a  grandmother  and  an  aunt  of  the  deceased. 

At  my  request,  INIme.  Bisson  asked  her  sister  to  give  her  a  statement 
in  writing,  and  this  is  as  follows  : — 

"  My  Dear  Juliette, 

"  Immediately  on  seeing  the  photograph  I  recognised  my 
deceased  son  Georges.  I  am  grateful  to  have  a  proof  that  he  thinks  of 
me,  and  am  looking  forward  to  seeing  him  again  some  day. 

"  Yours,  with  all  my  heart, 
"  Eugenie." 

After  these  statements,  one  is  justified  in  assuming  that  the  picture 
obtained  on  24th  June  bears  a  close  resemblance  to  the  deceased 
Georges  Thurner. 

The  technical  composition  of  this  image  (Fig.  95)  is  extremely 
curious.  A  comparison  of  the  stereoscopic  transparency  with  the  side 
view  and  the  front  view  shows  very  clearly  two  layers  in  the  structure. 
The  upper  and  outer  layer  exposed  to  the  light  shows  a  clean-cut  surface, 
consisting  of  a  thin  layer  resembling  paper,  and  in  its  size  and  its  outline 
corresponds  to  a  life-sized  male  face  with  a  long  beard,  beyond  which 
it  projects  below.  On  this  surface  are  two  projections,  one  in  the  place 
of  the  right  moustache,  and  the  other  in  the  place  of  the  lower  beard 
on  the  right.  The  lower  one  is  bent  upwards.  The  lower  termination 
of  the  surface  is  straight,  as  if  cut  off  with  a  knife.  On  this  groundwork, 
which  appears  to  be  fixed  to  the  left  curtain,  there  is  the  drawing  of  a 
man's  face,  from  twenty-five  to  thirty-five  years  of  age,  in  half  profile, 
with  eyes  turned  towards  the  left,  and  generally  resembling  a  brown 
charcoal  drawing.  A  striking,  and,  at  first  sight,  rather  strange  pecu- 
liarity, is  a  deep  indentation  running  parallel  to  the  mouth  across  the 
whole  beard,  from  which  two  other  indentations  descend,  in  parallel 
lines,  to  the  lower  edge.     The  one  on  the  left  crosses  the  horizontal 

170  PHENOMENA    OF    MATERIALISATION 

indentation,  makes  a  deep  cut,  and  disappears  in  the  white  of  the  left 
cheek.  The  rectangular  and  parallel  character  of  the  crease  is  even 
visible  on  the  back  of  the  lower  portion  (Fig.  96),  so  that  the  whole 
structure  resembles  a  rectangular  balloon. 

The  lower  layer  of  this  whole  head-composition  projects  beyond  the 
leaf -shaped  upper  layer  in  an  irregular  shape  below,  covers  the  whole 
back  of  the  picture,  as  shown  by  the  side  view,  and  appears  at  the  right 
forehead  with  a  fold  as  of  a  transparent  veil.  The  visible  hair  of  the 
right  side  and  the  point  of  the  nose  are  plastically  added  to  the  drawing 
to  increase  the  vivacity  of  the  expression. 

On  the  forehead  the  veil  is  twisted  up  into  a  thick  cord,  which 
replaces  the  bridge  of  the  nose,  and  passes  into  the  tip  of  the  nose. 
Whether  the  dark  broad  full  beard  is  drawn  or  composed  of  the  dark 
substance  previously  mentioned  cannot  be  decided  from  the  photo- 
graphs. The  principles  of  formation  are  the  same  as  in  the  other 
pictures.  The  author  of  this  head  is  less  concerned  with  anatomical 
accuracy  and  technical  completion  than  with  the  psychical  expression. 
In  spite  of  the  simple  realism  in  the  use  of  the  means  of  presentation 
(drawing  supported  by  sculptural  presentation  and  decorative  veil 
ornaments),  the  desired  impression  is  produced,  and  the  essential 
character  is  maintained. 

The  short,  straight,  tight-closed  mouth,  with  comparatively  large 
nostrils,  strong  bushy  eyebrows,  the  earnest  eyes  turned  towards  the 
left  (which,  however,  are  very  badly  drawn),  in  connection  with  the  long 
square  beard,  give  to  the  portrait  the  expression  of  manly  dignity, 
severity,  and  decision.  It  is  just  this  production  which,  more  than 
many  other  pictures  of  our  collection,  combines  the  negative  and 
positive  qualities  of  the  unkno^\^l  artist,  as  regards  technical  construc- 
tion, use  of  material,  and  artistic  treatment. 

In  the  sitting  of  21st  June  (also  held  in  the  author's  absence) 
Mme.  Bisson  perceived  three  types ;  first,  the  type  of  her  deceased 
nephew,  Georges  ;  second,  the  type  "  Berthe  "  ;  third,  the  type  of  her 
deceased  husband,  Alex.  Bisson.  Of  the  latter,  she  succeeded  in 
making  a  new  portrait,  which  is  quite  different  from  that  made  by  the 
author  on  1st  June.  While  the  author's  photograph  is  three-quarter 
face,  we  find  on  21st  June  a  full-faced  portrait.  Although  both  negatives 
represent  the  same  object,  they  have  hardly  any  common  characteristic, 
and  on  the  negative  on  21st  June  the  eye-glasses  are  wanting. 

Mme.  Bisson  is  of  the  opinion  that  the  photograph  of  21st  June 
represents  her  husband,  as  he  was  in  the  last  years  of  his  life,  while  the 
pictures  of  1st  June  represent  an  earlier  period  of  his  life. 

Now  we  might  ask  :  Is  this  a  portrait  of  the  deceased  at  all  ?  The 
author  can  answer  this  question  in  the  affirmative  by  what  he  remembers 
of  Bisson,  and  after  the  study  of  photographs.  The  picture  (Fig.  97) 
shows  the  following  : — 

Eva's  distorted  face  is  turned  to  the  right,  while  the  portrait 
appears  to  lie  on  the  left  side  of  her  head,  or  to  be  attached  to  it.  The 
sharply  contoured  head  is  drawn  in  broad  lines  under  the  thick  trans- 
parent veil,  covering  the  whole  flat  surface.  It  is  drawn  as  if  by  a 
heavy  awkward  hand  of  a  sculptor  making  a  charcoal  drawing.  The 
hair  is  wanting,  or  is  entirely  covered  by  the  veil.     The  line  of  the 

Fig.  97.     M.ME.  Bisson's  flashlight  photograph  of  21  June,   1912. 

Fig.  99.    Side  view  of 

Fig.      98       TAKEN      FROM 
WITHIN      THE      CABINET. 

Fig.     98.     Mme.     Bisson's     flashlight     photograph     of 
6  July,   1912. 

OBSERVATIONS  IN  JUNE  AND  JULY  1912  (PARIS)       171 

eyebrows  here  also  makes  an  obtuse  angle,  instead  of  being  straight, 
as  in  the  photographs  from  life.  The  eye-sockets,  especially  the  left 
one,  are  so  strongly  marked  by  deep  dark  shadows  that  one  might 
describe  them  as  plastic.  The  expression  of  the  eyes  is  extremely 
vivacious,  especially  in  the  left  eye,  which  is  less  covered  by  veils.  The 
nose  appears  to  be  rudimentary,  and  only  a  stump  is  seen.  On  the 
other  hand,  the  falling  line  of  the  bushy  moustache  corresponds  exactly 
to  the  photographs  from  life,  and  the  building  of  the  forehead,  the 
eye-sockets,  and  especially  the  eyes,  removes  all  doubt  as  regards  the 
resemblance  to  Bisson.  A  piece  of  material  resembling  paper  projects 
from  the  veil  below.  The  arched  forehead  appears  as  if  split  by  a  broad 
vertical  fissure  in  the  middle.  There  are  also  three  parallel  creases 
crossing  it  downwards  at  equal  intervals.  The  lower  portion  of  the  face 
vanishes  under  the  veils. 

In  this  production,  also,  an  artistic  will  has  attempted  to  materialise 
its  interpretation,  and  has  strongly  emphasised  the  main  points,  in 
order  to  produce  the  desired  resemblance,  with  the  least  expenditure 
of  power.  The  present  portrait  is  no  doubt  designed  from  nature, 
and  not  after  photographs.  In  spite  of  its  coarse  imperfections  it 
produces  a  much  more  living  impression  than  the  reproductions  from 
life.     The  technical  treatment  is  exactly  the  same  as  in  previous  pictures. 

The  production  of  two  entirely  different  types  of  images  of  the 
same  deceased  person,  without  any  help  from  existing  photographs, 
must,  in  any  case,  be  recognised  as  a  very  remarkable  mediumistic 
performance. 

In  the  sitting  of  6th  July  another  fragment  of  a  face  was  photo- 
graphed (Figs.  98  and  99),  consisting  of  a  right  eye  with  a  piece  of 
cheek  and  forehead,  framed  with  fabric  and  veil  draperies.  The  whole 
object  appears  to  be  fixed  to  the  curtain,  which  is  rolled  up  by  Eva's 
hand.  The  life-sized  eye  might  correspond  to  that  of  a  female  person. 
This  fragment  of  a  face  is  the  last  flash-light  photograph  produced  at 
Paris  in  July  1912. 

In  the  second  half  of  July  Mme.  Bisson  and  Eva  were  alone  in  the 
family  villa  at  La  Baule  at  the  mouth  of  the  Loire,  in  order  to  make 
preparations  for  the  move  from  Paris.  On  19th  July  Mme.  Bisson 
hypnotised  her  medium  in  the  photographic  dark-room  of  the  house 
while  the  door  was  open,  i.e.,  in  semi-darkness.  Eva  wore  her  day 
costume.  Suddenly  the  female  image  known  as  "  Berthe  "  showed 
itself  several  times  on  Eva's  clothed  body.  This  observation  is  interest- 
ing as  a  spontaneous  materialisation,  without  cabinet  and  without 
seance  costume,  occurring  in  half  daylight. 

SITTINGS  IN  JULY,  AUGUST  AND  SEPTEMBER 

1912  (MUNICH). 

ARRANGEMENT    OF    THE    EXPERIMENTAL    ROOM. 

In  response  to  the  author's  invitation,  Mme.  Bisson  and  Eva  C.  stayed 
in  Munich  from  the  25th  July  till  13th  September  1912,  and  sittings 

172 

PHENOMENA    OF    MATERIALISATION 

were    held    in    a    room  adjoining    the    author's    working-rooms,    and 
arranged  for  the  purpose  {see  Diagram). 

6//:  /7€?^r 

% 

D1A6BAU  VII. 

For  the  construction  of  the  cabinet  a  large  three-cornered  wooden 
framework  had  been  prepared,  having  two  sides,  6  feet  wide  at  right 
angles  to  each  other,  the  extreme  ends  of  which  were  nearly  9  feet 
apart,  and  were  joined  by  the  curtain-rod.  This  gave  a  cabinet  4|  feet 
in  depth  and  8|  feet  high.  The  cross-bar  in  front  was  8  inches  wide, 
and  to  its  inner  surface  was  attached  a  stereoscopic  camera  (Zeiss  Protar, 
F=  1*6  inches,  f/18,  3|  by  5  inches),  enabling  me  to  photograph  the  occur- 
rences inside  the  cabinet  from  above  at  a  distance  of  30  to  60  inches. 

The  whole  framework  was  movable  and  collapsible,  and  was  covered 
with  a  thin  black  cotton  lining,  as  was  the  ceiling  and  the  floor  of  the 
cabinet.  A  second  photographic  camera  ("  Special  Wiphot,"  3|  by 
5  inches,  Rietschel  Linear  Anastigmah,  f/4-8,  F  =  4|  inches)  was  placed 
in  the  corner  of  the  cabinet  on  the  medium's  right,  at  a  height  of 
57  inches,  in  order  to  photograph  the  occurrences  near  Eva's  head  and 
shoulders,  at  a  distance  of  40  inches  (as  in  the  Paris  seance  room). 
The  camera  could  be  worked  on  the  medium's  right  by  drawing  back 

SITTINGS  IN  JULY,  AUGUST  AND  SEPTEMBER  1912       173 

the  curtain,  which  was  only  fixed  to  the  framework  for  the  upper  half 
of  its  height,  while  the  left  curtain  was  nailed  to  the  framework  all  the 
way  down,  so  that  no  connection  could  be  established  with  the  medium 
on  that  side.  The  easy-chair  intended  for  the  cabinet  was  partly  painted 
black  and  partly  covered  with  black  material.  It  consisted  of  basket- 
work,  with  a  simple  smooth  seat  and  back. 

The  electric  pendant  held  five  lamps  with  red  glass  bulbs,  two  of 
sixteen  candle-power  and  three  of  twenty-five  candle-power,  thus 
yielding  an  illumination  of  one  hundred  candle-power,  which  sufficed 
for  reading  the  hands  of  a  watch  and  large  print,  especially  on  the  seats 
in  front  of  the  curtain. 

The  electrically-ignited  flash-light  was  contained  in  a  large  metal 
box,  10  feet  away  from  the  cabinet,  with  its  door  opening  towards  the 
cabinet,  the  frame  of  the  door  being  covered  with  a  transparent  incom- 
bustible fabric.  A  tube  joining  the  box  to  the  stove-pipe  immediately 
removed  the  smoke  of  the  burnt  magnesium  powder.  This  arrangement 
enabled  us  to  take  several  photographs  in  succession  without  being 
inconvenienced  by  the  magnesium  smoke. 

Besides  the  two  cameras  already  mentioned  as  placed  in  the  cabinet, 
four  other  cameras  were  used,  mounted  in  places  which  remained  the 
same  in  all  the  Munich  sittings.  These  cameras  were  furnished  with 
Zeiss  lenses.  There  were  two  stereoscopic  cameras  with  Tessar  lenses, 
f/6-3,  F=-4|  inches;  one  camera  7  by  9^  inches,  f/6-3,  F=14  inches'; 
and  one  3|  by  5  inches,  f/4-5,  F  =  6  inches. 

A  kinematograph  by  Pathe  Freres,  for  which  an  electric  projection 
lamp  with  an  instantaneous  shutter  provided  the  illumination,  was  also 
in  readiness,  but  it  could  only  be  brought  into  action  once,  and  that 
without  success.  For  this  reason  the  position  of  the  kinematograph  is 
not  shown  on  the  Diagram. 

The  electric  contact  for  igniting  the  flash-light  was  provided  with 
sufficient  flexible  wire  to  enable  the  author  to  work  it  from  his  seat. 
All  the  electric  arrangements  of  the  seance  room  derived  their  current 
from  the  house  installation. 

Sitting  of  the  25th  July  1912. 

Present. — Mme.  Bisson,  Dr  Specht,  and  the  author. 

Negative. 

During  this  and  all  the  following  sittings  Eva  wore  the  well-known 
Paris  seance  costume,  consisting  of  black  tights,  with  stockings  in  one 
piece,  and  the  black  apron  dress.  As  in  Paris,  Mme,  Bisson,  in  our 
presence,  sewed  up  the  medium  before  each  sitting  in  the  room  adjoining 
the  seance  room,  after  a  bodily  examination.  The  seam  passed  round 
her  waist  in  order  to  join  the  tights  to  the  dress,  and  then  up  from  the 
waist  to  the  neck,  as  well  as  round  the  wrists.  The  costume  remained 
in  my  house,  and  was  closely  examined  before  and  after  each  sitting 
by  the  sitters,  with  the  help  of  an  electric  torch  shining  through  it. 
Only  after  completing  the  preparation  of  the  costume,  and  after  searching 
the  medium,  did  the  two  ladies  enter  the  seance  room  together  with 

174  PHENOMENA    OF    MATERIALISATION 

the  other  sitters,  the  room  then  being  illuminated  with  white  electric 
light. 

Eva  took  her  seat  in  the  cabinet  and  extended  her  hands,  Mme.  Bisson 
taking  hold  of  her  thumbs,  Hypnotisation  was  carried  out,  by  fixation 
of  gaze  and  suggestion,  in  thirty  to  sixty  seconds.  Mme.  Bisson  then 
sat  back.  One  of  those  present  closed  the  curtain  and  extinguished 
the  white  light,  while  the  red  light  was  burning  all  the  time.  The 
hypnotisation  process  described  was  the  same  in  all  the  sittings. 
'  Besides  the  above  precautions,  the  sitters  also  examined  the  cabinet 
before  and  after  each  sitting.  The  windows  were  closed  by  wooden 
shutters  and  curtains  and  the  doors  locked  with  keys,  which,  in  some 
sittings,  were  put  in  charge  of  the  observers.  Dr  Specht  had  on  the 
25th  spent  an  hour  and  a  half,  in  the  afternoon,  in  the  seance  room, 
in  order  to  examine  it,  and  especially  the  cabinet,  thoroughly  in  every 
part. 

Sitting  of  the  26th  July  1912. 

Present. — Mme.  Bisson,  Dr  Specht,  and  the  author. 

Time,  8.30  p.m.  Examination  and  illumination  as  on  25th  July.  I 
passed  my  hand  over  the  medium's  skin  under  the  dress  and  found  that 
there  were  no  veils  or  other  objects  concealed.  Dr  Specht  followed  my 
hand  from  the  outside.  Eva  undid  her  hair,  opened  her  mouth,  and 
pronounced  vowels.  The  examination  of  her  teeth,  ears,  arm-pits,  and 
feet  had  negative  results. 

Specht  carefully  followed  the  process  of  hypnotisation.  The  white 
light  was  extinguished  by  the  author  at  the  moment  when  Eva  was 
hypnotised  and  subsided  into  her  chair.  Mme.  Bisson  sat  in  the  middle 
in  front  of  the  curtain,  I  on  her  left,  and  Specht  to  the  right.  Eva  held 
the  curtain  closed  for  about  twenty  minutes,  while  breathing  stertor- 
ously,  as  in  the  Paris  sittings.  When  she  opened  the  curtain  I  saw 
beside  her  left  elbow  a  white  mass,  which  was  fugitive  but  clear  enough 
to  be  recognised. 

A  few  minutes  later,  Mme.  Bisson  and  the  author  saw  a  male  face, 
with  a  dark  beard,  on  the  left  behind  Eva,  resembling  the  photographs 
of  the  type  Bisson.  I  exchanged  places  with  Specht.  When  the 
curtain  was  opened  again,  the  latter  thought  he  saw  an  object  resembling 
a  skull.  During  the  next  phenomenon  Eva's  head,  resting  on  the  back 
of  the  chair,  and  her  hands,  opening  the- curtain  by  about  8  inches, 
were  all  visible.  Above  her  left  hand  a  bright  wisp  about  5  inches  long 
appeared,  which  seemed  to  be  self-luminous.  After  this  the  image  of 
the  type  "  Bisson  "  was  seen  to  advance  slowly  into  the  circle  of  light 
and  expose  itself  to  view.  It  was  above  the  medium's  hand  behind  the 
left  curtain,  and  appeared  flat  without  any  relief.  Specht  had  the 
impression  that  the  image  had  become  clearer  after  the  medium's  forced 
expirations  and  blowing.  The  image  disappeared.  Eva  declared,  after 
a  short  time,  she  did  not  feel  any  more.  The  sitting  was  at  an  end. 
She  rose,  walked  up  to  Dr  Specht,  tore  open  the  seams,  and  allowed 
him  to  examine  her  thoroughly.  Result,  negative,  as  was  also  the 
searching  of  the  cabinet. 

SITTINGS  IN  JULY,  AUGUST  AND  SEPTEMBER  1912       175 

Dr  Specht  considers  the  phenomena  unexplained,  and  that  the 
proof  is  complete  as  far  as  the  facts  are  concerned.  Only  he  wished 
that  the  white  light  should  be  switched  off  after  the  curtain  had  been 
completely  closed.  The  sudden  change  of  illumination  produces  a 
blinding  of  the  eye  for  a  short  period,  and  this  only  disappears  when  the 
eyes  have  got  accustomed  to  the  red  light.  This  involves  a  source  of 
error,  for  if  fraud  was  intended,  one  could  at  that  moment  pass  objects 
to  the  medium  in  the  cabinet  without  detection. 

Sitting  of  the  28th  July  1912. 

Present. — Mme.  Bisson,  Dr  Specht,  and  the  author. 

In  order  to  eliminate  all  sources  of  error  and  possible  objections 
regarding  Mme.  Bisson's  part  in  the  phenomena,  the  latter  asked  to  be 
examined  before  the  sitting.  She  entered  another  room  and  undressed 
completely  in  the  author's  presence.  She  wore  a  chemise,  knickers, 
stockings,  and  shoes,  all  coloured  black,  and  over  them  a  long  black 
dress  in  one  piece,  which  was  carefully  examined.  Neither  in  the 
shoes,  nor  under  the  stockings,  was  anything  suspicious  found.  A 
strict  search  of  the  hair  and  the  surface  of  the  body  gave  negative  results. 

I  then  conducted  the  lady  into  the  room  adjoining  the  seance  room, 
where  she  sewed  up  Eva,  in  our  presence,  into  the  seance  costume, 
after  the  medium  had  been  examined  as  on  the  25th  July.  That  the 
costume  and  cabinet  had  been  previously  searched  by  Dr  Specht  goes 
without  saying. 

We  then  entered  the  seance  room  together.  Eva  was  hypnotised 
as  on  25th  July.  Mme.  Bissor  closed  the  curtain,  and  took  her  place 
in  front  of  it  on  the  left.  Only  then,  at  a  sign  from  Dr  Specht,  did 
the  author  extinguish  the  white  light. 

During  the  first  twenty  minutes  the  medium  breathed  and  blew 
heavily.  Then,  as  the  curtain  was  opened,  there  appeared  on  the  left, 
behind  the  medium,  against  the  wall,  at  the  level  of  her  head,  the  same 
male  image  as  we  had  observed  on  25th  July.  It  was  shown  four 
times.  Dr  Specht  regarded  it  as  remarkable  that  during  the  first 
exposure  the  picture  was  visible  in  p  place  from  which  it  had  disappeared 
at  the  second  exposure,  reappearing  in  the  same  place  at  the  third 
opening,  although  Eva's  hands  had  been  visible  all  the  time,  and  had 
not  left  the  curtain  for  an  instant.  At  the  urgent  request  of  Mme.  Bisson, 
that  the  phenomenon  might  come  forward,  the  portrait  changed  its 
place,  placed  itself  on  Eva's  head,  then  on  her  right  side,  then  partly 
disappeared  from  our  view,  finally  fixing  itself  on  the  back  of  the 
curtain,  on  the  left.  Eva  tried  carefully  to  expose  the  structure  gradu- 
ally to  the  light  by  manipulating  the  curtain.  During  the  next  opening, 
I  worked  the  electric  contact  for  the  flash-light. 

Until  then  Mme.  Bisson  had  not  entered  the  cabinet,  but  now  she 
extended  her  hands,  which  were  held  by  Dr  Specht,  into  the  cabinet, 
in  order  to  soothe  the  frightened  medium,  by  placing  her  hand  on  her 
head  and  her  heart. 

The  image  corresponding  to  the  type  "  Bisson  "  showed  itself  a  few 

176  PHENOMENA    OF    MATERIALISATION 

more  times,  while  I  looked  after  the  plates,  but  Eva  declared  herself 
to  be  exhausted,  and  could  not  continue  the  sitting. 

The  sitters  having  been  requested  not  to  leave  their  places,  the 
white  electric  light  was  switched  on.  The  first  to  enter  the  cabinet 
was  Dr  Specht,  who  examined  the  cabinet  and  the  medium  without 
finding  anything  which  could  have  served  for  the  artificial  production 
of  what  had  been  seen. 

Mme.  Bisson,  still  sitting  in  her  place,  was  then  searched  from  head 
to  foot  with  a  negative  result.  Dr  Specht  then  declared  that  the 
experimental  conditions  were  perfect,  and  that  the  impression  made 
upon  him  by  the  occurrences  was  favourable  and  positive. 

The  photographs  (Figs.  100  and  101)  taken  at  the  sitting  of  28th  July 
show  through  the  gap  of  the  curtain,  which  is  only  10  or  12  inches  wide, 
the  medium  oii  her  chair,  with  her  head  bent  to  the  right.  The  left 
curtain  is  partly  rolled  up  by  her  left  hand.  At  the  level  of  Eva's  head 
we  see  an  elongated,  fiat,  sharply-cut  picture,  of  a  substance  resembling 
paper  or  cardboard,  with  a  bearded  male  face.  The  image  appears  to 
be  fixed  with  its  left  side  against  the  back  of  the  left  curtain,  and  to 
extend  at  right  angles  to  it  in  a  direction  towards  the  wall,  so  that, 
with  the  exception  of  the  lowest  portion,  the  whole  image  was  invisible 
from  in  front,  and  only  visible  from  the  medium's  right,  where  the 
stereoscopic  camera  was  mounted. 

The  image  looks  quite  distorted,  the  nose  being  wanting  except  for 
a  stump  under  the  eyes.  Two  broad  creases  pass  over  the  forehead 
parallel  to  each  other.  One  of  these  ends  at  the  root  of  the  nose,  while 
the  other  passes  over  the  left  eye  do^vTi  to  the  corner  of  the  mouth.  A 
short  distinct  crease  passes  horizontally  over  the  left  temple.  The 
rectangular  surface  at  the  bottom,  especially  the  lighter-coloured  con- 
tinuation under  the  beard,  shows  numerous  creases,  projections,  and 
folds.  The  whole  form  is  produced  on  such  a  dark,  black,  partly  grey, 
and  spotted  ground  that  the  features  can  only  be  made  out  after  pro- 
longed study. 

In  spite  of  its  fiat  construction,  this  production  resembles  an  unfinished 
sculptural  sketch  in  grey  clay.  On  account  of  the  depth  of  the  shadows 
we  get  the  impression  of  a  low  relief  about  the  mouth  and  eye-sockets. 
Any  one  unacquainted  with  the  conditions  of  the  experiments  would 
consider  the  appearance  of  this  mediumistic  product  very  suspicious. 
He  would  take  it  for  a  crumpled,  spoilt,  mask-like  portrait,  with  eyes 
too  small  in  comparison  with  the  other  features,  which  are  themselves 
out  of  proportion.  But  a  closer  examination  will  not  be  satisfied  with 
that.  For  the  whole  thing  looks  bizarre.  In  spite  of  its  flatness,  it 
looks  kneaded,  with  an  unusual  distribution  of  darker  and  lighter 
portions,  of  real  forms,  and  formless  pieces  of  material. 

Whether  paper  or  cardboard  creases  have  the  character  of  the 
creases  in  the  picture  must  be  left  in  doubt.  The  vertical  rent  over  the 
left  eye  gives  the  impression  as  if  the  face  consisted  of  two  portions. 
The  treatment  of  the  whole  portrait,  in  its  design  and  execution,  appears 
rough  and  clumsy.  The  margin,  shown  in  the  picture  taken  by  the 
opposite  camera,  projecting  beyond  the  right  curtain,  does  not  show 
the  creases  characteristic  of  crumpled  paper,  nor  the  hard  substratum 
peculiar  to  paper,  but  looks  rather  like  a  soft  yielding  material  (Fig.  102). 

Fig.    ioo.     Author's    flashlight    photo- 
GRAPH  OF  28   July,   1912. 

Fig.   ioi.     Enlargkment  of  Fig.   100^ 

Fig.  102.     Author's  flashlight  photograph  of  2S  July,  1912. 

SITTINGS  OF  JULY,  AUGUST  AND  SEPTEMBER  1912      177 

The  very  defects  of  this  strange  product  characterise  it  in  a  manner 
such  as  could  hardly  be  paralleled  by  the  crumpling  of  ordinary  pictures 
or  masks. 

Although  the  author  could  hardly  expect  from  Dr  Specht,  after  only 
two  positive  sittings  and  poor  phenomena,  a  final  judgment,  either 
pro  or  con,  he  received  from  him  a  letter  dated  6th  August  1912,  from 
Sweden,  whither  he  had  meanwhile  departed,  and  I  may  as  well  quote 
some  passages  from  it,  as  they  show  in  a  typical  manner  how  a  man's 
fresh  recollections  of  his  own  observations  cannot  hold  their  own 
against  his  habitual  thoughts  and  rooted  prejudices.     He  writes  : — 

"  Even  at  the  end  of  the  second  sitting  I  was  firmly  convinced  that 
the  phenomena  were  impostures,  but  the  source  of  error  pointed  out 
by  me  (premature  extinction  of  the  white  light)  was  eliminated  in  the 
third  sitting.  I  observed  all  that  happened  during  and  after  hypnosis  ; 
I  also  considered  it  impossible  that  there  was  a  corporeal  contact 
between  the  medium  and  Mme.  Bisson  after  the  disappearance  of  the 
phenomena.  I  was,  therefore,  speechless  after  what  I  had  seen.  I  was 
face  to  face  with  a  riddle.  Indeed,  in  the  third  sitting,  what  I  saw 
appeared  monstrous  to  me.  For  I  had  the  impression  that,  while  the 
phenomena  appeared,  disappeared,  and  reappeared,  the  medium  had 
her  hands  continuously  at  the  curtain  at  the  level  of  her  knees.  It 
seemed  to  me  quite  impossible  to  produce  the  phenomena  as  they 
appeared  in  the  third  sitting  by  trickery.  Thus  my  impression  after 
the  third  sitting  was  quite  different  from  what  it  was  after  the  first 
and  second.     It  was  a  favourable  one,  as  I  said  at  the  time. 

"  To-day,  after  over  a  week  has  passed,  I  am  convinced  that  every- 
thing was  trickery.  The  black  background,  the  injunction  against 
touching  the  products,  may  be  specially  noted,  because  the  deception 
is  not  possible  without.  Nor  do  I  consider  myself  competent  to  discover 
tricks  by  which  the  snake-charmers  of  Ceylon  perform  their  feats.  In 
spite  of  the  closest  search  of  the  two  ladies,  something  may  have  escaped 
you,  and  why  should  you  not  have  been  deceived  for  three  years  ?  My 
impression,  on  the  whole,  is  that  we  are  shown  materialisations  which 
do  not  exist." 

On  account  of  this  negative  attitude,  Dr  Specht  was  not  invited  to 
further  sittings. 

Sittings  of  the  30th  and  81st  July. 

Present. — Mme.  Bisson,  Dr  Kafka  (Privatdozent  in  Psychology),  and 

the  author. 

Negative. 

In  order  to  meet  the  requirements  of  scientific  sitters  still  further, 
Mme.  Bisson  resolved  to  change  her  dress  like  the  medium  before  the 
sittings,  and  the  author  selected  for  this  purpose  from  her  wardrobe  a 
light  grey  thin  dressing-gown,  which,  like  Eva's  seance  costume,  was 
kept  in  the  seance  room. 

M 

178  PHENOMENA    OF    MATERIALISATION 

Eva  C.  seemed  little  satisfied  with  her  stay  at  Munich.  She  did 
not  feel  happy  in  the  strange  surroundings,  wished  to  depart,  and  showed 
no  interest  in  the  sights  of  the  strange  city.  It  was  notable  that  before 
the  sitting  of  31st  July  she  had  a  decided  squint. 

Sitting  of  the  3rd  August  1912. 

Present. — Mme.  Bisson  and  the  author. 

Conditions,  hypnotisation,  etc.,  as  in  previous  sittings. 

Prolonged  blowing  expirations.  After  about  twenty-five  minutes 
we  saw,  against  the  dark  background,  the  distinct  shape  of  a  white 
half-mask  of  a  face,  near  the  medium's  head,  with  two  black  eye-holes. 
When  the  curtain  opened  again  the  male  face,  as  in  the  last  sitting, 
appeared,  and  in  this  case  its  pictorial  character  was  clearly  preserved, 
on  the  left,  behind  the  medium,  against  the  wall.  Both  rents  across 
the  forehead  were  clearly  visible. 

The  medium  seemed  to  make  great  efforts.  She  whimpered  and 
moaned  as  if  in  pain,  and  there  followed  some  unusually  deep  tones, 
with  a  convulsive  tetanic  stretching  of  the  whole  body.  Suddenly  she 
screamed  as  if  in  violent  pain  (such  as  might  be  produced  by  a  surgical 
operation),  and  made  lively  defensive  movements,  as  if  repelling  a 
strange  power  intruding  upon  her.  This  incident  obliged  Mme.  Bisson 
to  enter  the  cabinet  and  look  after  Eva.  Slowly  she  grew  calmer,  but 
the  sitting  could  not  be  continued.  Final  control  negative.  Eva 
squinted  strongly,  complained  of  indisposition,  and  vomited  some 
blood. 

Sitting  of  the  5th  August  1912. 

Present. — Mme.   Bisson,    Professor   Albert   von   Keller    (painter),   and 

the  author. 

Conditions. — Examination  of  the  medium  and  Mme.  Bisson  as  on 
28th  July. 

Before  the  sitting  Eva  was  restless  and  complained  of  palpitation, 
a  sign  that  we  could  expect  a  favourable  sitting.  Already  in  the  after- 
noon, during  the  preparatory  hypnotisation  in  their  lodgings,  Mme. 
Bisson  had  to  waken  the  medium  and  cut  short  the  procedure,  because 
even  at  that  early  hour  the  medium's  whole  behaviour  indicated  the 
immediate  occurrence  of  phenomena.  Otherwise,  the  success  of  the 
evening  sitting  might  have  been  interfered  with. 

It  was  only  after  Professor  von  Keller  had  made  a  preliminary 
examination  and  declared  that  there  was  nothing  suspicious,  either 
about  the  two  women  or  about  the  cabinet,  that  the  hypnotisation 
commenced,  in  the  same  manner  as  on  28th  July. 

The  curtain  was  not  yet  closed,  and  the  white  light  was  still  shining, 

Fig.  103.     Author's  first  photograph  of  5  August,   1912. 
(a)  Original.         [b)  Enlargement. 

I^^^^^^^^B  t2H 

1 

^^^^K^^^^t^^UtM 

^1 

Hi^^^l^^l 

H 

^Sm^hIHbI^-^    ^^^^I 

^H 

^^^^^^^^2 

^i^HJ^^^^^^^^^^^HBlll^                    '^-Jt^W 

^\t1H 

^^  "^^^^M 

^^^Hwlt 

a^^l 

^^^^HH^^^^^^^^^^HlL.            .:^jl|l|b^/^gittV 

J^H 

^^^^^^^^^F^^^^t"-'.  '               ^^ 

IT^S 

,    < 
o 

SITTINGS  OF  JULY,  AUGUST  AND  SEPTEMBER  1912      179 

when  the  well-known  loud  sound  of  expiration  set  in  in  great  strength. 
The  author  had  hardly  time  to  switch  off  the  light  and  sit  down  when 
the  first  phenomenon  appeared  through  the  slightly  open  curtain,  in 
the  shape  of  a  long  wisp  of  material  on  the  medium's  left  upper  arm. 
This  peculiar  shape  appeared  on  the  left,  behind  the  medium,  and  we 
recognised  a  female  face,  which  repeatedly  changed  it .  position,  appearing 
sometimes  on  the  medium's  breast,  and  sometimes  on  her  right  or  left 
shoulder,  while  the  hands,  as  she  opened  and  closed  the  curtain,  were 
continuously  visible. 

As  soon  as  the  image  was  again  seen  on  the  medium's  left  shoulder, 
the  first  photograph  was  taken,  which,  on  this  day,  produced  less 
shock  than  usual  upon  the  medium.  While  the  plates  were  being 
quickly  changed,  the  image  took  up  a  position  against  the  wall  on  the 
left.  This  situation  was  quickly  photographed  again,  and  then  a  third 
photograph  was  taken,  at  the  moment  when  the  female  face  emerged 
between  the  curtains  at  the  level  of  Eva's  chest.  The  female  face 
withstood  even  the  third  magnesium  flash,  and  showed  itself  several 
times  afterwards.  It  was  only  when  the  author  switched  on  the  electric 
arc-lamp  for  the  purpose  of  a  fourth  photograph  that  the  mediumistic 
activity  was  impaired,  so  that  the  phenomenon  disappeared  without 
a  trace.  The  white  electric  light  was  then  switched  on,  while  all  the 
sitters  remained  in  their  places.  The  final  examination,  undertaken 
by  Professor  von  Keller  and  the  author,  was  negative,  both  as  regards 
Mme.  Bisson  and  the  medium,  as  also  was  the  examination  of  the  cabinet. 

In  spite  of  the  comparatively  fatiguing  performances  of  this  sitting, 
Eva  was  not  over-tired,  and  slept  well. 

On  the  first  of  the  eleven  successful  photographs  (Fig.  103)  the 
facial  muscles  of  the  medium  are  convulsively  contracted,  as  if  by  strong 
concentration  of  the  will.  The  female  face  on  her  left  shoulder  is  some- 
what vague  in  its  details,  and  in  its  softness  resembles  a  Japanese 
picture,  painted  or  drawn  on  the  finest  silk.  It  is  half  suspended,  and 
half  leaning,  with  its  right  side  against  Eva's  apparently  black  hair, 
while  there  seems  to  be  a  lower  point  of  support  in  the  two  ribbons  of 
material  hanging  down  on  each  side  of  the  head-dress,  and  crossing  on 
Eva's  upper  arni.  The  remaining  parts  of  the  head,  especially  the 
neck  covered  with  a  creased  collar,  are  freely  suspended,  and  are 
separated  from  Eva's  shoulder,  as  shown  in  the  stereoscopic 
photographs. 

Again  we  have  to  do  with  the  product  of  an  artistic  activity,  a  sort 
of  sketchy  drawing  of  a  portrait,  but  certainly  not  a  photographic 
reproduction  from  life,  quite  apart  from  the  question  whether  the 
performance  is  valuable  or  not,  whether  it  is  made  by  an  amateur  or  a 
professional,  or  what  is  the  base  on  which  it  is  drawn,  whether  paper, 
fine  gauzy  fabric,  or  some  plastic  substance.  It  is  obvious  that  the 
cap-like  head  covering  is  treated  technically  in  the  same  way  as  the 
face  and  collar.  This  is  clearly  shown  on  the  stereoscopic  photographs. 
On  the  supposition  that  the  whole  was  a  drawing,  the  cap  also  would 
have  been  drawTi.  But  then  the  cap  ends  in  long  distinct  folded 
ribbons,  flowing  down  over  Eva's  upper  arm,  and  continuing  in  broad 
bands  of  material.  Here,  then,  the  drawing  would  suddenly  be  con- 
verted into  a  plastic  reality.     On  the  other  hand,  the  cap  might  be  of 

180  PHENOMENA    OF    MATERIALISATION 

plastic  material,  with  a  drawing  on  the  surface.  But  this  is  not  at  all 
the  impression  conveyed  by  the  picture.  However  this  may  be,  the 
transition  from  the  pictorial  to  the  plastic  is  a  pleasing  characteristic 
of  the  image.  The  uniform  treatment  of  the  whole  image  is  also  shown 
by  the  numerous  folds  of  the  collar,  which  appears  to  consist  of  the  same 
material  as  the  cap. 

The  enlargements  show  that  the  whole  portrait  is  covered  by 
numerous  parallel  rents  and  creases,  the  most  conspicuous  of  which 
cuts  vertically  across  the  right  eye. 

Some  irregular  transverse  creases  are  also  seen  on  close  inspection. 
An  impartial  observer,  who  did  not  know  the  origin  of  the  head,  might 
assume  that  thin  paper  had  served  as  a  basis  for  the  portrait,  and  had 
then  been  unfolded  and  smoothed  out,  showing  traces  of  such  folding. 
This  supposition  can  hardly  be  brought  into  harmony  with  the  woolly 
character  of  the  cap,  ribbons,  and  collar.  But  if  the  image  is  an 
artistic  sketch  on  a  woven  basis,  the  peculiar  character  of  the 
creases,  which  could  be  easily  smoothed  out  in  a  fabric,  would  be 
difficult  to  explain. 

This  question  is  answered  with  some  certainty  by  the  photograph 
taken  from  within  the  cabinet  (Figs.  104  and  105),  which  shows  the 
product  taken  in  profile  from  behind. 

On  this  photograph  we  see  that  the  product  consists  of  a  single 
fabric,  in  the  shape  of  a  soft,  clinging,  fibrous  mass.  Paper  would  look 
in  profile  like  a  clear  rigid  surface.  But  here,  on  the  other  hand,  the 
head  ends  in  a  wide  rounded  parcel  of  material. 

On  the  stereoscopic  transparency  Eva's  dress,  over  her  right  thigh, 
shows  a  number  of  white  patches,  and  another  such  patch  appears  in 
front  on  the  right,  under  the  seam  of  the  hip.  As  was  observed  at  later 
sittings,  such  patches  are  due  to  the  emanated  teleplasm,  and  are 
residues  of  the  organised  material. 

In  the  second  flash-light  photograph  of  the  same  sitting  (Fig.  106), 
the  medium  inclines  her  head  towards  the  left,  and  holds  the  curtain 
wide  open,  so  that  we  can  now  distinctly  see  the  image  fixed  to  the 
background  on  the  left.  Very  probably  it  is  the  same  female  portrait. 
But  a  thick  and  broad  parcel  of  material,  with  a  straight  lower  rim, 
hangs  over  the  left  half  of  the  face  down  to  the  chin.  Starting  from 
the  image,  a  cord,  over  3  feet  long  and  irregularly  twisted,  joins  Eva's 
head  with  the  image.  Its  lower  end  passes  up  to  Eva's  right  ear, 
ending  in  a  loop.  There  are  two  knots  in  the  cord.  A  second  such 
cord  branches  off  downward  on  the  left  and  falls  over  the  medium's 
left  upper  arm. 

The  termination  of  the  face  on  the  right  is  different,  m  this  picture, 
from  the  last.  While  in  the  first  photograph  the  face  ends  in  a  straight 
line  on  the  right,  so  that  the  ear  is  not  visible  and  the  cap  on  the  head 
appears  flat,  in  the  second  picture  the  lower  half  of  the  left  ear  comes 
out  clearly,  and  the  line  of  the  throat  down  to  the  collar  curves  down  in 
a  natural  way.  The  line  of  the  hair  and  its  covering  rises  plastically 
from  the  foundation.  The  portion  between  ear  and  throat  appears  to 
be  filled  with  a  veil-like  material.  On  the  left  side  of  the  face  we  only 
see  portions  of  the  nose  and  mouth,  the  remainder  being  covered  by 
the  curtain,  while  the  whole  lower  portion  of  the  image  is  the  same  as 

Fig.  io6.     Author's  second  flasiimcht   i  hotograi'h,    5   Aigi-st,   1912. 

Fig.    107.      Author's   third   flash- 
light  PHOTOGRAPH,   5   AUGUST.    I0I2. 

SITTINGS  OF  JULY,  AUGUST  AND  SEPTEMBER  1912      181 

in  the  first  negative.  On  the  breast  of  Eva's  dress,  about  the  region 
of  her  heart,  a  new  long  white  patch  has  appeared,  which  was  absent 
in  the  first  picture. 

The  third  series  of  photographs  of  this  sitting  (Figs.  107  and  108) 
shows  a  much  more  distinct  picture,  quite  in  front  in  the  curtain  gap, 
and  from  8  to  12  inches  higher  than  Eva's  knees. 

On  the  first  photograph  the  image  does  not  appear  to  be  quite 
developed.  It  resembles  the  face  of  a  young  woman  of  about  twenty-five 
years.  The  face  gives  a  slender  and  juvenile  impression,  owing  to  the 
way  in  which  it  terminates  at  the  side.  The  right  cheek  is  a  little 
distorted  down  to  the  chin.  The  whole  sketchy,  and  somewhat  vague, 
drawing  shows  a  remarkable  softness  and  delicacy  which  may  be 
intentional . 

Quite  different  is  the  third  photograph.  Here  we  see  a  pleasant, 
round,  female  face,  which  might  correspond  to  an  age  of  about  forty 
years.  The  features  come  out  clear  and  distinct,  especially  the  correct 
curves  of  the  left  cheek  (Fig.  108).  The  double  chin  is  clearly  marked, 
and  the  mouth,  nose,  and  eyes  are  more  distinct  than  in  the  first  photo- 
graph (Fig.  103).  The  collar  also  is  broader  in  the  middle.  The 
ribbons  of  the  cap  have  disappeared,  and  the  head  covering  is  con- 
verted into  a  piece  of  fabric  (lace  ?)  lying  on  the  parted  hair.  From 
the  head  covering  a  broad  ribbon  falls  down  on  the  left  side  over  the 
collar,  ending  in  twisted  fibres,  which  exactly  resemble  the  threads  of 
an  unravelled  woollen  cord. 

Those  portions  of  the  picture  which  represent  the  hair,  the  fabric, 
and  the  collar  give  the  impression  of  being  formed  of  the  same  material, 
as  they  do  not  differ  in  structure  or  colour.  Here,  again,  we  have  a 
combination  of  plastic,  fabric,  and  pictorial  drawing  forming  a  har- 
monious whole.  The  technical  process  employed  in  these  pheno- 
mena, and  the  artistic  development,  seem  to  be  the  same  in  all  the 
pictures. 

The  sceptic  will  direct  the  severest  criticism  against  the  last  picture, 
as  it  is  crossed  with  parallel  folds  and  rents,  just  like  the  first.  One 
involuntarily  recalls  the  cracks  in  old  portraits  painted  on  wood,  which 
would  appear  just  like  this. 

The  most  interesting  conclusion  yielded  by  a  comparative  study  of 
the  three  photographs  of  5th  August  seems  to  me  to  consist  in  the 
perfection  of  the  third  photograph,  as  compared  with  the  first.  In 
both  cases  we  have  the  same  type  of  face,  and,  indeed,  the  same  person, 
as  shown  by  a  comparison  of  the  expression  of  the  eyes  and  the  design 
of  the  nose,  forehead,  and  eye-sockets.  In  the  first  portrait  we  might 
have  before  us  a  woman  of  twenty-eight  years,  and  in  the  third  portrait 
the  picture  of  the  same  lady  at  the  age  of  forty.  Tlie  ethereal,  delicate, 
and  undeveloped  young  woman  has  become  a  fully  developed,  portly 
woman  of  mature  age.  The  manner  of  dressing  the  hair  with  the  head 
covering,  and  the  collar,  also  correspond  to  the  spirit  and  taste  of  the 
two  different  ages.  Either  that,  or  the  second  picture  is  a  much  more 
perfect  portrait  than  the  first,  though  only  separated  by  a  short  interval 
of  time.  In  any  case,  we  have  not  to  deal  with  rigid  drawings  or  an 
unchanging  surface,  but  with  a  mobile  and  varying  product,  showing 
changes  in  numerous  details. 

N. 

182  PHENOMENA    OF    MATERIALISATION 

Sitting  of  the  7th  August  1912. 

Present. — Mme.  Bisson,  Professor  von  Keller,  Dr  A.,  and  the  author. 
Negative. 

Sitting  of  the  9th  August  1912. 

Present. — Mme.  Bisson,  Dr  A,,  and  the  author. 

Examination. — Mme.  Bisson  was  examined  by  the  author  in  a 
separate  room,  as  on  28th  July.  She  put  on  the  light  grey  dressing- 
gown,  which  had  been  examined  carefully  by  Dr  A.  with  the  help  of  an 
electric  torch.  After  she  had  taken  off  her  shoes,  we  made  sure  that 
nothing  was  concealed  in  her  stockings,  nor  in  her  hair.  We  also 
examined  her  mouth,  arm-pics,  and  ears. 

We  then  entered  the  room  adjoining  the  seance  room,  where  we 
found  Eva,  who  had  put  on  the  seance  costume,  after  examination  by 
Dr  A.  Close  examination  of  the  medium's  body,  hair,  mouth,  and 
ears  gave  no  result.  The  cabinet  had  already  been  examined  by  Dr  A. 
We  then  entered  the  seance  room.  Hypnotisation  as  on  28th  July, 
while  the  white  electric  light,  standing  on  the  table,  brightly  illuminated 
the  hands  of  the  two  ladies.  Hypnotisation  was  complete  in  thirty 
seconds.  Mme.  Bisson  retired,  so  that  she  was  from  3  to  5  feet  from 
the  curtain.  Dr  A.  closed  the  curtain  and  took  the  lady's  hands.  I 
switched  off  the  white  light.  As  soon  as  our  eyes  had  got  accustomed 
to  the  red  light,  Dr  A.  released  Mme.  Bisson's  hands.  During  the 
sitting  he  sat,  or  lay,  in  front  of  the  cabinet,  while  Mme.  Bisson  took 
her  place  h-^r.ind  him. 

As  soon  as  the  behaviour  of  Eva  indicated  a  positive  sitting,  by  the 
loud  blowing  expirations  after  hypnotisation,  the  author  quickly 
opened  the  cameras. 

I  had  hardly  sat  down  in  my  chair  when  the  medium  opened  the 
curtain  and  showed  on  her  left  upper  arm  a  long  white  wisp,  which 
afterwards  covered  her  head.  The  left  hand  often  disappeared  behind 
the  curtain,  while  the  right  hand  usually  remained  visible. 

During  the  next  opening  we  perceived  a  pictorial  female  face  on 
her  left  shoulder.  Eva  said  she  had  not  sufficient  power,  and  would 
have  to  take  hold  of  the  materialisation  with  her  hand  in  order  to  pull 
it  away  from  herself  towards  the  curtain.  She  asked  us  to  wait  for  the 
photograph,  "  Cela  suit  ma  main."  The  manipulations  with  the  right 
hand  were  observed  by  us.  As  soon  as  I  again  saw  the  image,  I  ignited 
the  magnesium  powder.  Mme.  Bisson  then  laid  her  hands,  which  were 
held  by  Dr  A.,  on  the  medium's  neck  and  heart.  On  this  occasion  he 
again  saw  something  white  oil  Eva's  left  shoulder.  Then  the  curtain 
was  closed. 

Continuation  of  the  Sitting. — The  white  mass  on  the  medium's 
shoulder  appeared  again.  This  time  the  author,  without  warning, 
illuminated  the  object  with  the  white  light  of  a  pocket-lamp.     We  saw 

Fig.  io3.     Eni.aroemext  of  Fig.  107. 

Fig.  109.     Author's  first  flashlight  photograph,  9  August,  1912. 

SITTINGS  OF  JULY,  AUGUST  AND  SEPTEMBER  1912      183 

a  flat  triangular  structure  about  the  size  of  a  hand,  with  dark  rims  and 
a  white  centre.  It  stood  the  exposure  of  the  white  light  for  about  three 
seconds,  and  then,  turning  about  a  vertical  axis,  it  disappeared  back- 
ward and  vanished  from  our  sight.  When  the  female  face  appeared 
again  I  made  a  second  exposure.  The  medium  was  exhausted,  and 
the  sitting  closed. 

The  cameras  were  closed  while  all  kept  their  places.  The  white 
electric  light  was  switched  on.  Dr  A.  found  all  the  seams  in  Eva's 
dress  intact.  The  medium  was  subjected  to  a  strict  search,  with  a 
negative  result,  and  after  it  was  finished  Mme.  Bisson,  who  had  not 
left  her  seat,  was  also  examined,  with  the  same  result.  After  the  two 
ladies  had  withdrawn  the  cabinet  was  examined.  As  in  the  previous 
sittings,  Eva  was  wakened  from  hypnosis  after  the  final  examination. 

Of  the  first  series  of  photographs  (Figs.  109  and  110),  taken  on 
9th  August,  the  stereoscopic  transparency,  which  was  most  successful, 
shows  that  Eva  had  opened  the  curtain  with  her  right  foot,  and  was 
holding,  with  her  right  arm  stretched  over  her  head  towards  the  left, 
a  sort  of  mask,  while  the  original  place  of  her  right  hand  on  her  knee 
was  occupied  by  a  white  mass.  The  junction  of  the  thumb  and  fore- 
finger of  the  left  hand  is  also  marked  by  a  narrow,  fiat  strip  of  matter 
which  passes  over  the  back  of  the  hand.  This  was  the  first  occasion 
on  which  the  stereoscopic  apparatus  attached  to  the  roof  of  the  cabinet 
was  brought  into  action.  For  the  study  of  the  shape,  dimensions, 
and  proportions  of  the  object  photographed  in  the  sitting  of  9th  August, 
we  have  at  our  disposal  two  stereoscopic  photographs,  one  from  above 
and  one  from  in  front,  as  well  as  a  side  view  taken  from  inside  the 
cabinet. 

A  comparison  of  these  three  photographs  makes  it  quite  certain 
that  the  mask  held  by  Eva  was  a  profile  of  a  female  face  modelled  in 
low  relief.  It  is  cut  off  sharp  and  flat  at  the  back,  and  the  whole  face 
rises  on  this  flat  base  in  a  hemispherical  form  to  an  approximate  height 
of  2  inches.  That  the  shape  is  modelled,  and  does  not  consist  of  a 
sheet  of  paper  bent  by  the  hand,  is  clearly  proved  by  the  photographs 
taken  from  within  the  cabinet.  The  broad  covering  of  hair  over  the 
forehead  clearly  projects  down  to  the  right  ear,  and  the  right  temple 
is  also  clearly  arched.  The  ear  appears  to  be  covered  by  hair.  The 
portion  of  the  face  exposed  to  the  light  is  traversed  by  rents  like  the 
"  craquelures  "  of  an  old  picture.  From  the  inner  corner  of  the  right 
eye,  which  is  just  visible,  a  thick  black  line,  probably  a  rent,  passes  to 
the  right  eyebrow,  but  without  continuing  downwards. 

Such  a  rent  is  also  seen  in  the  photographs  of  the  5th  August 
(Fig.  108),  but  in  this  case  it  commences  in  the  eye  and  passes  downward, 
while  the  upper  eyelid  remains  free.  The  negatives  of  the  9th  August 
show  the  reverse  case,  the  rent  beginning  in  the  same  place,  but  passing 
upward.  This  peculiar  coincidence  does  not,  therefore,  prove  the 
identity  or  similarity  of  the  two  objects.  Unfortunately,  all  the  other 
portions  of  the  face  are  covered  by  the  shadow  of  the  curtain,  so  that 
this  mask-like  face  cannot  be  compared  with  the  other  pictures.  But, 
on  account  of  their  well-marked  plastic  development,  these  photographs 
form  an  important  supplement  to  the  numerous  flat  pictures. 

Eva  exhibited  the  structure  to  the  sitters  apparently  by  holding  it 

184  PHENOMENA    OF    MATERIALISATION 

by  the  part  corresponding  to  the  hair.  A  severe  critic  would  object 
not  only  to  the  mask-like  appearance,  but  also  to  the  manner  of  demon- 
stration. He  would  contend  that  the  white  mass  on  the  lap  is  intended 
to  represent  a  hand  indistinctly  visible  in  the  shadow.  But  if  in  this 
case  something  is  represented  which  does  not  exist,  Eva,  in  her  waking 
condition,  could  not  be  made  responsible  for  such  an  action  while 
hypnotised.  In  any  case,  this  view  does  not  affect  the  central  point  of 
the  mediumistic  phenomena.  This  consists  in  the  creation  of  these 
objects  and  their  disappearance.  All  the  experimental  conditions 
employed  up  to  now,  which  exclude  the  concealment  of  objects,  have 
not  brought  us  any  nearer  to  the  solution  of  i  his  question. 

A  free  suspension  of  the  materialised  objects  was,  in  all  the  sittings, 
only  observed  when  combined  with  rapid  motion.  But  in  order  to 
become  visible  when  at  rest,  the  object  seems  to  require  a  point  of 
support,  such  as  the  dress  of  the  medium,  the  curtain,  or  the  back  wall. 
It  is  therefore  easily  understood  psychologically  that  when  Eva 
endeavours  to  show  the  materialised  product  to  the  sitters,  she  touches 
it,  places  it,  or  even  fastens  it  somewhere,  and  that  these  manipulations 
require  the  use  of  her  hands.  This  applies  especially  to  such  sittings 
in  which  her  mediumistic  power  does  not  suffice.  It  is  less  objectionable 
as  regards  the  sitting  of  9th  August,  as  Eva  announced,  in  her  own 
words,  the  co-operation  of  her  hands.  The  appearance  of  the  picture 
by  itself,  without  a  knowledge  of  the  records  and  experimental  con- 
ditions, must  necessarily  produce  an  incorrect  and  unfavourable 
impression. 

The  second  photograph  (Fig.  Ill),  of  9th  August,  shows  at  once 
the  same  type  of  female  face  as  was  photographed  three  times  on 
5th  August.  Essentially  we  have  again  a  flat  pictorial  production  with 
sharply-cut  margins,  which  is  apparently  fastened  to  Eva's  hair  above 
and  touches  her  left  shoulder  below.  The  triangular  head  covering, 
with  rounded  points,  projects  in  a  straight  line  over  the  forehead,  and 
casts  a  shadow  upon  it  like  a  superimposed  piece  of  fabric.  The  patchy 
grey,  narrow,  twisted  strips  hanging  down  to  the  collar  on  both  sides 
of  the  face  are  obviously  intended  to  represent  hair.  The  right-hand 
position  of  the  collar,  which  in  its  shape  resembles  that  of  25th  July, 
seems  to  be  a  superimposed  piece,  as  does  the  head  covering.  The  left 
cheek,  which  in  the  third  photograph  of  5th  August  is  so  typically 
rounded,  here  gives  a  twisted  impression,  and  the  anatomy  resembles 
that  of  an  old  woman.  In  the  drawing  of  the  mouth  and  nose  also  we 
miss  the  firm  lines  of  the  forty-year-old  woman  of  the  previous  sitting. 
The  double  chin  is  no  longer  clear,  but  the  chin  appears  to  have  grown 
more  pointed  and  less  firm.  The  face  looks  thin,  wrinkled,  and 
shrivelled,  although,  on  the  whole,  it  preserves  the  roundish  type  of 
the  age  of  forty. 

The  somewhat  ill-defined  sketchy  drawing  of  nose,  eyes,  and  fore- 
head, as  well  as  the  whole  structure  of  the  face,  suggest  that  we  may 
have  here  a  greater  age  (sixty-five  to  seventy  years)  than  on  5th  August. 
The  treatment  of  hair  and  clothing  also  supports  this.  While  the 
twenty-eight-year-old  "  Berthe "  wears  a  coquettish  cap  with  long 
streamers  joined  in  a  loop  below,  the  head  covering  of  the  forty-year-old 
person  has  been  simplified.     It  is  still  placed  on  the  hair  in  a  picturesque 

Fig.  iio.     Enlargemkxt  of  Fig.  109. 

Fig.  III.     Author's  second  flashlight  photograph,  9  August,   1912. 
(a)  Enlargement.         (b)   Full  picture. 

SITTINGS  OF  JULY,  AUGUST  AND  SEPTEMBER  1912      185 

manner,  and  ends  in  a  shoiter  streamer,  but  it  suits  the  dignity  of  that 
age.  The  person  of,  say,  sixty-eight,  shows  less  interest  in  her  appearance, 
as  shown  by  the  unadorned  and  unbecoming  piece  of  material  laid  over 
the  head.  The  hair,  still  nicely  parted  at  forty,  hangs  down  over  the 
temples  in  a  haphazard  way  in  the  last  picture. 

This  view  of  the  pictures  only  occurred  to  the  author  four  months 
afterwards,  during  a  minute  comparison  of  the  photographs,  and 
neither  the  medium  nor  Mme.  Bisson  knew  about  it.  The  reader  should 
form  his  own  judgment  on  the  basis  of  the  three  pictures. 

Finally,  we  ought  to  notice  that  in  the  picture  a  small  packet  of 
white  material  lies  on  the  shoulder  beside  the  chin.  The  stereoscopic 
pictures  also  show  that  the  material  observed  on  Eva's  left  thigh,  in 
the  first  photograph,  has  left  behind  at  two  places  some  traces  in  the 
form  of  white  patches. 

Assuming  that  the  manifestations  of  9th  August  were  fraudulently 
produced  by  Eva,  this  implies  the  smuggling  in  (against  all  the  pre- 
cautions taken)  of — 

(1)  A  plastic  mask  of  natural  size,  apparently  made  of  some 

solid  material  ; 

(2)  a  head  shape  of  paper  or  textile  fabric  ;   and 

(3)  a  quantity  of  substance,  the  size  of  a  hand,  which  leaves 

traces  on  the  dress. 

These  products  would  have  to  be  well  packed  in  a  small  compass,  con- 
cealed on  the  bare  body,  in  spite  of  all  precautions,  brought  into  the 
cabinet,  opened  out,  used,  then  folded  up  into  equally  small  packets, 
and  again  concealed  about  the  bare  body,  so  that  the  most  thorough 
search  could  discover  nothing  !  A  conjuring  performance  of  this  kind 
would  be  novel,  and  would  reveal  a  world  of  deception  hitherto  unknown. 
But,  so  long  as  no  such  trick  is  actually  performed  under  the  same  con- 
ditions, and  cannot  be  performed,  the  discussion  of  the  hypothesis  seems 
superfluous. 

Sitting  of  the  14th  August  1912. 

Negative. 

Sitting  of  the  15th  August  1912. 

Present. — Mme.  Bisson,  Dr  A.,  and  the  author. 

Control. — Mme.  Bisson  changed  her  dress  in  the  author's  })resence, 
in  his  study,  and  was  strictly  examined  by  him.  She  wore  a  black 
chemise,  knickers,  and  over  them  she  put  on  the  grey  dressing-gown, 
after  it  had  been  examined  by  Dr  A.,  and  fastened  it  with  a  grey  belt, 
which  had  also  been  examined.  An  examination  of  her  hair,  ears,  etc., 
was  also  negative. 

Eva  entered  the  room  adjoining  the  seance  room  in  the  seance 
costume.     The  author  undid  her  hair  and  examined  the  whole  surface 

186  PHENOMENA    OF    MATERIALISATION 

of  her  body,  including  her  arm-pits,  mouth,  nose,  ears,  hands,  and  feet, 
all  with  a  negative  result. 

Eva  was  then  sewn  into  the  seance  costume  by  Mme.  Bisson,  as 
already  described.  The  seams  were  so  close  that  one  could  not  pass  a 
finger  through  them.  Dr  A.  conducted  Eva  into  the  seance  room, 
after  it  had  been  very  strictly  examined  by  him.  After  his  examina- 
tion, nobody  had  meanwhile  entered  it.  Eva  took  her  seat  in  the 
cabinet.  After  Dr  A.  had  made  sure  that  Mme.  Bisson's  hands  were 
empty,  the  hypnotisation  took  place  in  such  a  way  that  Mme.  Bisson 
grasped  Eva's  thumbs,  which  were  stretched  forward  out  of  the  cabinet, 
and  fixed  her  gaze  until,  in  half  a  minute,  a  state  of  trance  had  set  in. 
Mme.  Bisson  then  withdrew  her  hands,  and  Dr  A.  closed  the  curtains. 
Mme.  Bisson  sat  fiom  5  to  7  feet  from  the  curtain,  on  the  floor,  and 
gave  her  hands  to  Dr  A.  Only  then  was  the  white  light  switched  off, 
and  the  red  light  left  burning.  As  soon  as  the  eyes  had  got  accustomed 
to  the  illumination,  Dr  A.  released  Mme.  Bisson's  hands,  and  also  sat 
down  on  the  carpet  between  her  and  the  curtains. 

The  phenomena  commenced  immediately.  With  the  well-known 
physical  accompaniments,  Eva's  hands  grasped  the  curtain  and  showed 
a  long  white  wisp  on  her  breast  about  16  inches  long  and  3  or  4  inches 
broad.  The  curtains  were  then  closed.  In  about  ten  minutes  they 
were  opened  again,  and  a  white  disk,  about  the  size  of  a  head,  with  no 
motion  of  its  own,  was  shown  by  rolling  up  the  curtain  into  the  medium's 
left  hand.  It  looked  fiat,  white,  and  rectangular.  The  curtain  was 
released  and  fell  back.  During  the  next  opening  Dr  A.  found  on  the 
same  structure  a  crumpled  corner  projecting  into  the  stance  room, 
and  finally  the  sitters  recognised  the  features  of  the  image.  It  was  then 
suggested  to  the  medium  to  bring  about  distinct,  and,  if  possible,  freely 
suspended  materialisations,  and  not  again  to  withdraw  the  hands  which 
held  the  curtain. 

Undei  these  conditions,  while  the  hands  were  visible  and  quiet,  the 
next  opening  showed  a  mass  of  the  size  of  a  head,  some  20  inches  above 
Eva's  hair,  between  the  curtains,  and  this  mass  glided  downwards  and 
backwards  and  disappeared  with  a  turn  towards  the  back.  During 
the  next  opening  of  the  curtain  the  left  curtain  was  rolled  up,  and,  at 
the  same  place  as  before,  a  white,  fiat  face  profile  became  visible,  with 
its  hinder  part  (neck,  etc.)  covered  by  the  curtain.  A  flash-light  photo- 
graph was  taken,  and  the  sitting  closed.  Mme.  Bisson  did  not  enter 
the  cabinet  during  the  sitting,  and  while  the  photograph  was  being 
taken  she  was  held  by  Dr  A. 

The  white  electric  light  was  switched  on.  Mme.  Bisson  did  not 
leave  her  place.  The  medium  was  undressed  by  Dr  A.  and  the  author, 
with  the  exception  of  the  tunic,  which  opened  down  the  back.  They 
examined  her  mouth,  nose,  ears,  toes,  hands,  arm-pits,  and  the  whole 
skin,  with  a  negative  result.  The  author  also  conducted  a  thorough 
gynaecological  examination,  in  the  course  of  which  Eva  was  much 
affected,  and  broke  into  tears.  Nothing  suspicious  was  found.  After 
the  medium  had  been  examined,  Mme.  Bisson  removed  her  outer  dress, 
and  was  searched  by  the  author  in  the  presence  of  Dr  A.  without  the 
slightest  thing  being  found  which  gave  rise  to  suspicion.  The  subse- 
quent examination  of  the  cabinet  and  the  seance  room  was  also  negative. 

Fig.  112.     Author's  flashlight  photogr.\ph  of  15  August,   191 2. 
(a)   Front  view.       {h)   Enl.\rgement  of  (a).       (c)  View  from  the  left. 

Fig.    113.      Enlargement  of  a  stereoscopic  side  view, 

TAKEN     outside     THE     CABINET,      I5     AUGUST,     I912. 

SITTINGS  OF  JULY,  AUGUST  AND  SEPTEMBER  1912      187 

The  picture  (Fig.  112)  obtained  on  15th  August  is  interesting  in 
many  ways.  An  artistically  complete  female  face  and  profile  looks 
out  of  the  left  ^curtain,  which  is  held  up  by  Eva's  left  hand.  Its  gaze 
is  directed  upwards,  and  the  curtain  cuts  off  the  whole  back  of  the 
head,  from  a  line  in  front  of  the  left  ear.  Again  we  have  not  to  deal 
with  an  object  reproduced  from  nature,  but  with  an  artistic  impression. 
The  features  are  extremely  sharp  in  all  their  details,  and  finely  drawn. 
There  is  something  Madonna-like  about  the  facial  expression,  and  the 
whole  conventional  interpretation  and  treatment  of  the  subject  recalls 
the  Directoire  period.  In  consideration  of  the  softness  of  the  outer 
margins  of  the  face,  the  clearness  of  the  modelling,  and  the  clever  dis- 
tribution of  light  and  shade,  we  might  consider  the  face  as  plastically 
formed,  and  the  stereoscopic  negative  taken  from  the  roof  also  supports 
the  idea  of  a  mask  in  low  relief  ;  but  this  might  be  due  to  the  slanting 
position  of  thejimage.  This  point  cannot  be  decided  with  absolute 
certainty  from  the  photographs.  The  impression  of  hair  is  only  pro- 
duced by  the  dark  colour  and  shading,  on  the  same  ground  substance. 

The  profile  is  continued  in  a  white  wisp,  which  is  very  clearly  repro- 
duced by  the  third  stereoscopic  camera  (Fig.  113)  placed  at  the  side. 
At  the  first  glance,  this  whit^  strip  looks  like  an  unfolded  piece  of  white 
or  grey  paper,  or  like  a  width  of  a  close  textile  fabric.  The  visible 
portion  is  some  10  to  12  inches  wide  and  some  25  inches  long,  and  is 
crossed  by  numerous  parallel  creases,  which  are  about  an  inch  apart. 
The  lower  half  appears  to  be  repaired  by  sticking  on  a  semicircular 
patch.  At  right  angles  to  these  creases,  which  also  come  out  in  the  face 
as  delicate  rents  or  lines,  there  are  two  strongly-developed  furrows 
along  the  whole  length  of  the  strip,  the  first  of  which  ends  on  the  temple 
of  the  face.  The  broad,  flat,  paper-like  strip  ends  above  in  the  female 
profile,  and  then  forms  the  stalk  or  continuation  of  the  image,  which 
touches  the  inside  of  the  left  curtain  at  its  lower  end,  where  it  may 
possibly  be  attached.  However  favourable  may  be  the  impression 
conveyed  by  this  portrait  study,  the  analysis  of  its  material  composition 
has  a  sobering  effect.  Anyone  who  does  not  realise  the  rigorous  pre- 
cautions taken,  must  necessarily  assume  that  a  packet,  folded  together 
in  numerous  rectangular  folds,  was  fraudulently  introduced  into  the 
seance  room,  and  subsequently  unfolded.  This  stiff  broad  sheet,  partly 
repaired  by  a  supplementary  piece,  might  then  be  supposed  to  have 
been  fixed  on  the  inside  of  the  left  curtain,  in  such  a  manner  that  the 
face  profile,  cut  out  on  the  upper  end,  would  just  enter  the  light  to 
show  the  profile.  In  that  case,  the  second  stereoscopic  apparatus 
mounted  near  the  right-hand  curtain  must  be  taken  to  have  revealed 
the  mechanism  used  in  mounting  the  picture. 

We  have  here  one  of  those  cases  where  the  appearances  are  against 
the  medium,  but  only  because  this  piece  of  material  forming  the  support 
bears  an  extraordinary  resemblance  to  a  paper  unfolded  and  fixed. 
But  this  single  argument  does  not  suffice  for  establishing  a  serious 
hypothesis  of  fraud.  The  technical  process  yielding  a  product  which 
happens  to  produce  the  optical  impression  of  a  folded  and  crumpled 
paper,  might  very  well  be  due  to  the  character  of  the  mediumistic 
production.  For  we  see  the  same  process  in  nearly  all  the  images. 
Everywhere  we  see  rents  and  creases,  and,  in  the  majority  of  them,  a 

188  PHENOMENA    OF    MATERIALISATION 

flat  structure,  and  a  predominance  of  the  purely  pictorial  character, 
though  occasionally  there  is  low  relief.  We  must  bow  before  the  facts, 
however  strange,  so  long  as  we  have  not  found  the  explanation. 

Sittings  of  the  18th  and  20th  August. 

Negative. 

On  the  21st  August,  Dr  A.  drew  my  attention  to  a  number  of  fresh 
holes  which  he  had  observed  in  the  left-hand  curtain.  These  holes,  in 
his  opinion,  were  made  by  pins  used  for  fixing  the  images.  In  fact,  we 
found,  at  a  height  of  40  to  50  inches,  and  at  a  distance  of  12  to  16  inches 
from  the  hem  of  the  curtain,  a  group  of  pin-holes  in  pairs.  I  had, 
indeed,  on  several  occasions  pinned  the  curtain  flaps  together.  But 
this  group  of  pin-holes  was  at  a  height  of  67  inches,  and  near  the  hem 
of  the  curtain,  and,  therefore,  had  no  connection  with  the  supposed 
suspensions.  The  corroboration  of  Dr  A.'s  observation  led  us  to  shift 
the  whole  cabinet  structure  and  to  search  the  back  wall  with  a  thirty 
candle-power  lamp,  as  several  images  had  been  observed  apparently 
fixed  to  it.  Here,  also,  we  found  about  sixteen  pin-holes  in  pairs,  which 
roughly  corresponded  to  the  position  of  the  images.  The  place  in  which 
these  were  found  was  at  a  height  of  43  inches,  and  3  feet  from  the  corner 
of  the  cabinet.  It  should  be  mentioned  that  in  that  neighbourhood 
(about  8  inches  away)  a  light -coloured  spot  was  found  resembling  the 
spots  sometimes  left  behind  on  Eva's  dress  as  a  residue  of  the  materialised 
mass.  On  one  occasion,  on  5th  August,  an  image  had  appeared  on  the 
right  (the  third  photograph  of  that  sitting),  and  this  was  fairly  low,  at 
the  level  of  the  back  of  the  chair.  A  strict  search  revealed  in  this 
position  three  very  small  holes,  40  inches  above  the  floor  and  5  inches 
away  from  the  hem  of  the  curtain,  which  might  be  due  to  pins. 

It  goes  without  saying  that  the  use  of  pins  for  fixing  the  images 
would  be  a  negative  factor  of  considerable  importance.  For,  in  this 
case,  a  pin  would  have  escaped  our  strict  examination,  which  is  quite 
possible,  since  the  combs  and  hair-pins  were  not  taken  out  of  the 
medium's  hair,  and  since  a  pin  might  very  well  have  been  hidden  in 
the  cabinet,  in  spite  of  the  most  painstaking  precautions. 

On  the  basis  of  this  fact  many  readers  will  certainly  come  to  the 
conclusion  that  the  images  were  fixed  with  pins.  If  we  adopt  this  view, 
we  encounter  the  question  of  where  the  pin  came  from.  If  these  images, 
in  spite  of  our  precautions,  were  introduced  by  fraudulent  manipula- 
tions, the  pin  is  quite  a  natural  addition,  and  we  might  assume  that 
Eva  had  secured  and  hidden  the  pin  in  the  waking  state  with  a  fraudulent 
intention. 

There  is  no  trace  of  any  evidence  for  such  fraudulent  preparations. 
The  observations,  extending  over  three  and  a  half  years,  speak  to  the 
contrary.  The  conditions  under  which  the  sittings  took  place  exclude 
the  introduction  of  pictures  and  other  objects.  Besides,  as  we  had 
occasion  to  observe  later,  other  methods  of  fixation  were  used,  such  as 
adhesion  by  means  of  the  material  itself.  The  spot  on  the  back  wall  is 
possibly  a  residue  of  this  kind  of  fixation.     That  there  is  a  fixation  of 

SITTINGS  OF  JULY,  AUGUST  AND  SEPTEMBER  1912      189 

the  materialised  products  on  the  curtains,  is  amply  proved  by  the 
series  of  experiments  already  described. 

In  any  case,  we  are  obliged  to  distinguish  between  the  question  of 
suspension  or  location,  and  tihe  mediumistic  creation  itself.  I  observed, 
in  a  later  sitting,  that  the  medium  was  capable  of  producing  a  picture, 
but  could  not  place  it  in  a  position  favourable  to  the  observer.  During 
the  whole  sitting  the  hands  were  outside  the  curtain,  and,  therefore, 
not  in  operation.  In  these  circumstances  manual  help  would  be 
intelligible,  and  would  not  argue  against  the  genuineness  of  the  pheno- 
mena. In  view  of  the  careful  control  and  the  convincing  positive 
results,  too  much  importance  should  not  be  attached  to  this  matter, 
even  though  we  may  not  completely  understand  the  negative  indications, 
whose  existence  cannot  be  denied.  Besides,  in  spite  of  the  very  sus- 
picious coincidence  of  the  position  of  the  images  with  that  of  the  pin- 
holes, we  have  no  complete  proof,  but  only  circumstantial  evidence, 
that  pins  were  used  at  all,  and  that  the  pin-holes  were  connected  with 
the  suspension  of  the  images.  For,  when  the  cameras  were  being 
focused  upon  the  places  at  which  phenomena  had  previously  appeared, 
sheets  of  newspapers  had  been  pinned  on  in  order  to  get  the  focus. 
This  applies  particularly  to  the  kinematograph.  We  have  the  proofs 
in  the  test  photographs,  and  in  the  testimony  of  the  photographer 
concerned  in  the  adjustment  of  the  cameras.  Thus  my  photographer 
writes  as  follows  : — 

"  Dear  Sir, 

"  In  answer  to  your  inquiry,  I  beg  to  say  that  I  perfectly  remember 
in  one  case,  when  I  had  no  assistant,  pinning  a  piece  of  newspaper  to 
the  black  curtain  of  the  cabinet  in  order  to  focus  the  cameras.  It  is 
quite  probable  that  I  fixed  the  same  sheet,  with  the  same  pin,  also  on 
the  back  wall  or  on  the  chair,  but  this  I  cannot  remember  after  all  this 
time. 

"  Yours,  etc., 

"  Dr  Georg  Hauberrisser." 

Much  later,  after  the  Munich  sittings  had  been  ended,  a  pin  was  found 
in  the  covering  of  the  left  arm-rest  of  the  chair  used  by  the  medium. 
It  was  stuck  in  from  below,  so  that  only  the  head  could  be  felt  in  the 
seam.  Possibly  the  upholsterer  who  covered  the  chair  had  left  the  pin 
in  the  seam,  so  that  there  was  a  possibility  of  using  it  during  the  sittings. 

We  may  regard  this  point  as  unsettled.  We  may  ignore  it,  or  we 
may  see  in  it  some  negative  evidence,  but  whatever  our  view  of  the 
matter,  it  cannot  alter  the  positive  results  already  obtained. 

Finally,  we  must  not  forget  that  the  phenomena  continued  just  as 
before  without  any  new  pin-holes  in  the  curtain,  and  without  pins,  in 
spite  of  more  rigorous  precautions  for  controlling  the  hands,  and  that 
the  images  were  again  fixed  to  the  curtain  without  leaving  pin-holes 
behind.  We  must  conclude  that  in  exploring  the  unknown  country  of 
mediumism  we  must  count  upon  numerous  surprises  and  contradictions, 
and  that  we  have  no  right  to  admit  one  apparently  inexplicable  fact, 
and  then  to  reject  another  fact,  simply  because  it  does  not  fit  in  with 
our  suppositions. 

190  PHENOMENA    OF    MATERIALISATION 

Sitting  of  the  23rd  August  1912. 
Negative. 

Sitting  of  the  24th  August  1912. 

Present. — Mme.  Bisson,  Dr  Kafka  (Privatdozent  of  Psychology),  M.  S., 

and  the  author. 

I  quote  the  following  from  M.  S.'s  report  of  this  sitting  : — 

"  There  were  three  cameras  in  front  of  the  cabinet  and  tM'o  in  the 
cabinet.  There  was  a  red  light  of  medium  intensity.  Mme.  Bisson 
put  the  medium  into  a  trance,  while  Dr  Kafka  and  I  strictly  controlled 
her  hands.  After  a  short  time  the  medium's  breathing  became  ster- 
torous, and  after  half  an  hour  changed  into  strong  gasping.  The 
curtain  was  opened.  The  medium  was  greatly  disturbed,  moaned,  and 
shook  convulsively.  Some  grey  mass  appeared  near  her  head.  But 
I  attributed  this  appearance  to  my  fixed  gaze  in  the  red  light,  which 
came  from  the  left.  After  a  short  time  I  saw  near  the  medium's  left 
ear  a  sharply-defined  strip,  about  6  inches  long  and  \  inch  wide,  which 
was  brought  into  the  light  and  somehow  disappeared  suddenly  from  my 
view.  The  curtain  was  then  closed,  and  the  medium's  stertorous 
breathing  increased.  The  curtain  then  opened  again,  and  the  hands 
did  not  leave  the  curtains.  Suddenly  a  large  white  mass  appeared  in 
front  of  the  medium's  head,  as  if  emerging  from  behind  the  curtain. 
It  was  not  quite  so  brightly  illuminated  as  the  strip  had  been,  but  had 
the  distinct  shape  of  a  head  in  front  view,  somewhat  like  a  roughly 
modelled  and  softened  mask  of  white  plaster,  but  of  a  softer  consistency. 
It  was  observed  for  two  or  three  seconds.  The  medium  closed  the  cur- 
tain with  a  strong  convulsive  movement.  The  clenched  hands  did  not 
apparently  leave  the  curtains.  After  some  time  the  breathing  became 
quiet.  Mme.  Bisson  went  up  to  the  medium  and  awakened  her,  while 
we  carefully  controlled  her  hands.  The  medium  was  then  searched, 
in  the  bright  light  of  the  adjoining  room,  by  Dr  von  Schrenck  and 
Dr  Kafka,  but  nothing  was  found." 

The  author  must  add  the  following  comments  : — The  phenomena 
only  set  in  after  an  hour's  waiting.  The  final  searching  did  not  take 
place  in  the  adjoining  room,  but  in  the  seance  room  itself.  The  medium 
was  greatly  frightened  by  the  falling  of  an  object  into  the  flash-light 
box,  and  the  phenomena  ceased.  Mme.  Bisson  had  to  enter  the  cabinet 
in  order  to  calm  Eva.  The  latter  suffered  from  cough  and  general 
indisposition,  and  coughed  some  blood.  The  final  examination  was 
negative. 

Sittings  of  the  26th,  27th,  28th  and  29th  August  1912. 
Negative. 

SITTINGS  OF  JULY,  AUGUST  AND  SEPTEMBER  1912       191 

Sitting  of  the  30th  August  1912. 

Present. — Mme.  Bisson,  Dr  Kafka,  the  author  and  his  wife. 
Although  Eva  did  not  feel  well  this  day,  she  had  eaten  heartily  at 
7  o'clock,  and  was  constantly  under  the  supervision  of  Mme.  Bisson, 
who  would  have  noticed  if  she  had  concealed  any  object  about  her 
person.  At  the  author's  request,  Mme.  Bisson  searched  Eva's  luggage 
do^vn  to  the  last  thread,  without  finding  anything  in  the  least  suspicious. 
The  medium  was  examined  as  detailed  by  Dr  Kafka  in  his  report, 
appended  to  the  record  of  the  sitting  of  11th  September  {see  below). 

The  sitting  commenced  at  9.15  p.m.  The  medium  went  into  a  deep 
trance  after  hypnosis.  She  made  loud  gasping  expirations,  and  whim- 
pered as  if  in  pain,  so  that  positive  results  were  to  be  expected. 

The  hands  lay  in  the  first  instance  on  her  knees,  and  the  author, 
who  sat  on  the  right,  could  see  her  left  hand  through  the  gap  in  the 
curtain,  and  made  sure  that  it  remained  immovable. 

Then  followed  about  fifteen  minutes,  during  which  the  curtain 
remained  quite  closed,  and  after  this  we  saw  on  the  medium's  left 
shoulder  a  grey  or  brown  strip  resembling  a  veil,  and  falling  over  her 
upper  arm  into  her  lap.  "  The  exposure  was  very  short  and  the 
impression  indistinct "  (Dr  Kafka's  report).  The  curtain  was  then  closed. 
Then  we  saw,  while  the  medium's  hands  held  the  curtain,  a  white 
mass  on  her  lap,  which  Dr  Kafka  describes  as  "  a  whitish  indefinite  mass 
about  the  size  of  a  hand." 

From  my  place  I  could  see  an  obviously  flat  finger,  while  Mme.  Bisson 
saw  the  shape  of  a  hand,  and  Kafka  only  saw  an  indefinite  mass.  While 
before  this  the  curtain  had  been  repeatedly  opened  and  closed,  "  the 
medium's  hands  now  remained  constantly  visible  at  the  curtain  " 
(Dr  Kafka's  report). 

Dr  Kafka  proceeds  :  "A  change  in  the  mass  could  not  at  first  be 
seen  during  the  exposures,  which  lasted  only  one  or  two  seconds.  But, 
later,  two  finger-shaped  projections  seem  to  have  formed.  After  a 
considerable  pause,  during  which  the  hands  always  remained  at  the 
curtains,  the  flat  white  mass  in  the  medium's  lap  changed  into  a  brownish 
structure  resembling  the  shape  of  a  scorpion."  The  author  perceived 
irregular  projections,  which  gave  the  impression  of  being  soft  and 
semi-liquid.  The  medium  again  closed  the  curtains  without  with- 
drawing her  hands.  After  this  the  ladies  and  the  author  saw  a  white 
mass  extending  from  the  medium's  head  to  her  shoulder,  but  this  was 
not  seen  by  Dr  Kafka. 

At  a  signal  the  author  seized  Eva's  hands,  while  first  Mme.  Bisson 
and  then  the  author's  wife  illuminated  the  cabinet  with  a  white  electric 
torch.  Much  terrified,  Eva  screamed,  struggled,  and  gave  cries  of  pain. 
The  white  mass  disappeared  instantly.  But  I  saw  on  her  right 
shoulder,  where  the  throat  joined  the  dress,  a  transparent  fabric  of 
mouse-grey  colour,  about  2J  inches  long  and  a  little  over  an  inch  wide. 
I  asked  Dr  Kafka  to  seize  the  piece.  The  medium  screamed,  struggled 
in  my  grasp,  and  made  violent  movements.  Although  Dr  Kafka 
snatched  at  the  piece  as  quickly  as  he  could,  he  only  succeeded  in 
touching  Eva's  dress  and  the  skin  of  her  throat.  The  piece  of  fabric 
liad  disappeared.     It  was  only  after  we  had  made  sure  that  what  we 

192  PHENOMENA    OF   MATERIALISATION 

had  seen  had  disappeared  that  we  withdrew  the  torch.     According  to 
Dr  Kafka's  report,  the  strip  had  a  brownish  colour,  but  the  effect  of 
the  red  hght  on  the  apparent  colour  has  to  be  taken  into  account. 
Dr  Kafka  writes  as  follows  concerning  this  attempted  exposure  : — 

"  At  Dr  von  Schrenck's  request  I  snatched  at  the  substance,  but  the 
medium,  moaning  pitifully,  made  strong  motions  with  her  whole  body, 
and  especially  with  her  neck,  so  that  I  could  not  seize  anything.  I  felt 
no  moisture  on  my  hand.  The  lamp  was  extinguished  and  the  medium 
retired  behind  the  closed  curtain,  trembling,  breathing  heavily,  moaning, 
and  complaining  of  pains.  Mme.  Bisson  also  was  greatly  excited  and 
incensed  at  this  interference.  Since  the  medium's  condition  did  not 
improve,  Mme.  Bisson  entered  the  cabinet  and  embraced  her."  Gradually 
the  two  ladies  regained  their  composure.  The  forcible  procedure  had 
naturally  produced  a  profound  emotional  disturbance  in  the  medium. 

Yet  she  wished  to  continue  the  sitting  and  produce  new  phenomena 
for  the  flash-light  photograph.  She  rose  several  times  from  her  seat, 
stood  in  front  of  the  curtain,  and  requested  to  be  searched,  but  we 
declined  and  asked  her  to  resume  her  seat. 

The  author  was  convinced  that  nothing  more  would  be  seen,  when 
suddenly  the  curtain  was  opened  and  the  image  of  the  type  "  Bisson  " 
appeared  in  front  of  her  face  on  a  disk -like  surface.  It  was  immediately 
recognisable,  and  also  showed  the  broad  black  strip  over  the  forehead, 
as  shown  in  Mme.  Bisson's  third  series  of  photographs  (Fig.  97). 

It  must  be  said  that,  from  this  moment  until  the  complete  cessation 
of  the  phenomena,  the  medium's  hands  did  not  leave  the  curtain,  and 
remained  visible  to  all  of  us. 

The  two  ladies  claimed  to  have  seen  that  the  image  fell  from  above 
downwards  and  forwards  over  the  medium's  face.  At  the  next  opening 
the  disk  appeared  on  her  right  shoulder  (without  help  of  her  hands). 
These  occurrences  followed  very  rapidly  in  one  or  two  seconds,  or  just  as 
much  time  as  was  required  for  the  successive  opening  and  closing  of 
the  curtains.  After  the  last  exposure  she  barely  closed  the  curtain 
and  opened  it  during  the  same  second.  She  rose,  stood  in  front  of  the 
cabinet,  bent  her  head  forward  so  that  we  could  see  the  neck,  and 
shook  her  head.  The  object  we  had  seen  had  disappeared  with  lightning 
rapidity,  like  the  switching  off  of  an  electric  light. 

On  this  incident,  Dr  Kafka  reports  as  follows  : — 

"  During  a  new  exposure,  a  disk  was  seen  more  clearly  on  the  right, 
lust  by  the  head  of  the  medium.  She  then  quickly  closed  the  curtain, 
lumped  up,  took  a  step  outside  the  cabinet,  requested  to  be  searched, 
but  was  pushed  back  into  her  chair  by  Mme.  Bisson.  The  medium  had 
bent  her  head  and  trunk  forward  right  out  of  the  cabinet,  so  that  we 
could  see  her  neck,  but  we  could  see  no  trace  of  the  phenomenon.  After 
a  pause  the  medium  was  seized  with  a  violent  cough  and  vomiting, 
and  something  was  caught  in  her  handkerchief.  This  turned  out  to 
be  a  grey  crumb." 

We  have  above  the  report  of  two  occurrences — first,  an  unsuccessful 
attempt  at  an  exposure  ;   second,  the  subsequent  appearance  and  dis- 

Fig.    114.     Photograph    of    a 

LONG     PATCH     OX    'EVAS     DRESS 

The    parallel    lines 

MARKED    A    show    THE    LINE    OF    THE    WAIST. 

Fig.  115.     Author's  flashlight  photograph  of  10  September,   1912. 
On   the   left  :     Full   picture.     On   the   right  :     Enlargement.     At  top  :     Lateral 

VIEWS     FROM     WITHIN     THE     CABINET      (c)      AND     FROM     WITHOUT      (d) . 

SITTINGS  OF  JULY,  AUGUST  AND  SEPTEMBER  1912      193 

appearance  of  a  disk -like  image,  with  a  male  portrait  within,  a  j  few 
seconds,  while  the  co-operation  of  the  hands  was  excluded, 
f  •^The  sitting  was  closed  at  11  o'clock,  owing  to  Eva's  exhaustion. 
The  subsequent  search  in  a  white  light,  although  conducted  with  the 
greatest  care,  remained  without  any  result.  During  this  process  the 
medium  fainted  away.  She  had  to  be  taken  in  the  hypnotic  condition 
to  a  couch  in  another  room.  She  then  recovered,  but  fell  into  another 
deep  fainting  fit,  from  which  she  was  restored  with  the  help  of  alcoholic 
stimulants. 

The  medium  was  still  in  a  state  of  trance  when  we  conveyed  her 
in  a  motor-car  to  her  lodgings,  where  she  was  at  once  put  to  bed.  The 
fainting  fits  were  repeated  three  times  in  the  night,  and  Mme.  Bisson, 
who  watched  by  her  bed  till  4  o'clock  in  the  morning,  took  half  an  hour 
to  bring  her  to,  out  of  one  of  the  fainting  fits. 

When  I  visited  Eva  at  11  o'clock  next  morning,  she  was  still  in  a 
dreamy  state,  complained  of  pains  in  her  breasts,  coughed  and  vomited 
about  a  wine-glass  full  of  blood. 

The  disturbance  in  the  medium's  condition  lasted  four  days.  We 
arranged  a  several  days'  excursion  into  the  mountains.  The  fresh  air 
and  the  excitement  of  the  change  of  landscape  gradually  obliterated 
the  traces  of  Eva's  indisposition,  so  that  we  could  resume  the  sittings 
on  6th  September. 

During  the  subsequent  examination  of  the  cabinet,  on  30th  August, 
we  found  on  the  floor  some  small  white  particles,  the  largest  of  which 
was  the  size  of  a  pea,  and  was  flattened.  They  gave  the  impression 
of  small  balls  of  paper  crushed  with  a  shoe.  The  seance  costume, 
especially  the  inside  of  the  tights,  showed  a  large  number  of  particles 
resembling  a  fine  dust. 

A  microscopic  examination  of  the  white  particles  showed  wood 
fibre,  such  as  is  used  for  the  manufacture  of  paper  and  cardboard.  We 
therefore  probably  have  to  deal  with  paper  or  a  product  resembling 
paper.  The  fine  dust  also  consisted  of  wood  fibre.  This  discovery 
might  be  explained  by  some  paper  adhering  to  the  shoes  of  the  person 
entering  the  cabinet,  which  was  then  detached  in  the  cabinet,  and  that 
the  tights  had  been  thrown  on  the  parquet  floor  and  gathered  some  dust. 
The  circumstances  do  not  seem  to  have  any  connection  with  the  pheno- 
mena. 

The  small  crumb,  the  size  of  a  pin-head,  which  had  been  ejected 
from  the  mouth  during  the  sitting,  when  microscopically  examined, 
turned  out  to  be  a  small  piece  of  wood.  Eva  had  visited  a  Somali 
village  at  the  Munich  Exhibition,  and  had  there  bought  from  a  nigger 
one  of  the  wooden  rods  they  use  for  cleaning  their  teeth,  such  as  they 
offer  to  every  visitor,  and  had  used  it  for  the  same  purpose.  A  small 
piece  of  wood  had  stuck  between  her  teeth,  and  had  then  been  found,  so 
that  this  circumstance  also  is  explained  in  a  natural  manner. 

SiTTINGb   OF  THE   6TH   AND   7TH   SEPTEMBER    1912. 

Negative. 

N 

194  PHENOMENA    OF    MATERIALISATION 

Sitting  of  the  8th  September  1912. 

Present. — Mme.  Bisson  and  the  author. 

Control. — As  in  previous  sittings.  Time,  9  to  11  p.m.  Tlie  medium's 
hands  were  visible  during  the  whole  sitting. 

After  about  three-quarters  of  an  hour  the  first  phenomenon  appeared 
in  the  shape  of  a  fragment  of  fabric  hanging  from  Eva's  mouth.  At 
the  next  opening  of  the  curtain  we  saw  wisps  of  material  on  the  breast 
of  the  dress  and  in  Eva's  lap.  Suddenly  there  appeared  a  grey  cord, 
resembling  twine,  which  appeared  to  consist  of  very  fine  twisted  skin. 
It  started  between  forefinger  and  thumb  of  the  left  hand,  which  was  in 
front  of  the  curtain,  and  continued  in  a  straight  line  towards  the 
medium's  head,  disappearing  in  the  darkness  of  the  cabinet.  The 
curtains  were  opened  only  1  or  2  inches,  so  that  only  the  6-inch  piece 
outside  the  curtain  was  clearly  visible.  This  stretched  string  then 
suddenly  disappeared  behind  the  curtain,  reappearing  immediately  in 
the  medium's  lap.  At  least,  I  saw  there  a  long  line,  faintly  luminous, 
as  if  phosphorescent,  which  disappeared  under  my  gaze. 

During  this  whole  experiment  Eva's  hands  had  not  left  the  curtain. 
Her  body  was  quite  steady,  so  that  the  phenomenon  could  be  observed 
quietly  for  ten  to  fifteen  seconds. 

On  touching  the  medium's  dress  several  times,  it  was  noticed  that 
the  places  where  the  material  had  appeared  were  moistened  as  with  a 
sticky  substance.     Sitting  closed.     Final  examination  negative. 

An  inspection  of  the  dress  showed  on  the  breast,  and  in  the  lap,  a 
number  of  irregular  whitish-grey  spots.  The  most  conspicuous  of  these 
was  a  strip  9  inches  long  and  2  or  3  inches  broad  below  the  waist,  which 
was  placed  just  where  I  had  seen  the  luminous  cord  disappear.  We 
may  therefore  conclude  that  this  strip  remained  on  the  dress  as  the 
residue  of  the  cord-like  substance. 

The  author  considered  this  connected  observation  so  important 
that  he  caused  the  patch  to  be  photographed  (Fig.  114)  and  some 
microscopic  preparations  to  be  made  of  the  residue  and  of  the  other 
spots.  The  analj'sis  will  be  given  in  a  special  chapter  in  connection  with 
similar  later  discoveries. 

Sitting  of  the  9th  September  1912. 

Present. — Mme.  Bisson,  Dr  Kafka,  M.  S.,  and  the  author. 

Duration,  9  to  11.15  p.m.     Control  as  on  30th  August  1912. 

It  was  only  at  10.30  p.m.  that  a  bright  wisp  became  visible  on  the 
dress,  which  moved  over  to  the  left  at  the  level  of  Eva's  upper  arm, 
while  her  hands  and  body  were  motionless.  It  was  about  half  an  inch 
wide,  and  over  2  inches  long. 

Sitting  closed.     Final  examination  negative. 

When  Eva,  on  the  evening  of  the  9th  September,  had  returned  to 
her  lodgings,  she  suddenly  cried  in  her  room,  "  Quelquechose  sort  de 
moi !  "  and  could  hardly  be  pacified.  Mme.  Bisson  put  her  to  bed  at 
once,  and  on  examining  her,  she  found  a  mass,  4  inches  long  and  1  \  inches 

SITTINGS  OF  JULY,  AUGUST  AND  SEPTEMBER  1912      195 

thick,  projecting  from  Eva's  vagina.     But  when  she  tried  to  seize  it, 
it  was  drawn  in  with  a  sudden  jerk  (Mme.  Bisson's  report). 

Sitting  of  10th  September  1912. 

Present. — Mme.  Bisson,  Dr  Kafka,  M,  S.,  the  author  and  his  wife. 

Control  and  hypnotism  as  on  30th  August  1912. 

In  spite  of  the  medium's  strong  exertions  (deep  expirations),  it  was 
only  after  three-quarters  of  an  hour  that  the  curtain  was  opened  (the 
medium's  hands  were  partly  invisible),  and  a  white  mass  appeared  on 
her  left  at  the  level  of  her  shoulder.  This  process  is  described  by 
Dr  Kafka  as  follows  : — 

"  It  was  only  at  a  later  exposure  that  I  could  observe  that  a  white 
head-shaped  disk  moved  past  the  medium's  head  from  the  left.  During 
this  phenomenon  the  medium's  hands  were  visible  at  the  curtain.  The 
medium  then  completely  closed  the  curtain,  in  order,  as  she  said,  to 
gather  force,  and  during  this  pause  she  on  one  occasion  closed  the  curtain 
particularly  tightly  from  within.  During  the  next  exposure  two  white 
structures,  resembling  arms,  appeared  twice,  which  both  appeared  to 
proceed  from  the  medium's  mouth." 

M.  S.  perceived  a  fairly  large  grey  mass  coming  from  the  left  at 
the  level  of  the  medium's  shoulder,  and  compared  it  in  appearance  to 
extremely  fine  muslin,  having  the  colour  of  smoke,  which,  however, 
did  not  give  the  impression  of  lightness,  but  fell  by  gravitation,  and  might 
have  been  a  moist  textile  fabric.  The  phenomenon  disappeared  while 
the  curtain  remained  open,  and  Eva's  hands  remained  at  the  curtain. 

The  author  had  the  impression  as  if  another  personality,  standing' 
behind  the  curtain,  had  suddenly  moved  a  white  disk  towards  the 
medium's  head  and  withdrawn  it,  while  the  curtains  were  steadily 
open,  and  were  held  by  both  the  medium's  visible  hands.  The  successive 
exposures  occurred  at  such  a  rate  that  the  visual  impression  was  too 
fugitive  to  perceive  any  detail  concerning  the  shape  and  appearance. 
On  my  questioning  them,  the  two  men  both  said  that  the  structure 
resembled  an  arm.  Although  the  author  feared  to  be  too  late  with 
the  ignition  of  the  flash-light,  he  still  decided  to  switch  it  on  as  quickly 
as  possible  during  the  next  exposure.  This  was  done,  the  plates  were 
changed,  and  I  was  quite  in  the  dark  as  to  what  had  been  photographed. 
But  of  one  thing  I  was  certain,  and  that  was  that  this  white  object  had 
been  photographed  at  the  moment  of  its  quickest  motion,  and  its 
greatest  independence  of  the  medium's  body. 

Mme.  Bisson  declared  that  she  had  seen  the  shape  of  a  head  in  the 
flash-light.  The  ignition  of  the  flash-light  produced  a  crisis  in  Eva, 
which  was  dealt  with  by  Mme.  Bisson. 

The  sitting  was  closed,  and  the  final  examination  gave  a  negative 
result. 

The  development  of  the  plates  (Fig.  115)  showed  as  a  result  the 
profile  of  a  female  head  nearly  normal  in  size,  but  slightly  smaller  than 
Eva's  head.     We  have  here  to  deal  with  a  flat,  sharply  defined  portrait, 

196  PHENOMENA   OF   MATERIALISATION 

with  a  neck-piece  which  appears  comparativelyj^broad.  It^^is  freely 
suspended  in  a  direction  at  right  angles  to  the  medium's  temple.  The 
lace,  with  its  regular  features,  Just  covers^Eva's  left  ear,  and  it  looks 
as  if  the  nose  and  forehead  touched  the  medium,  but  that  is  only  a 
guess,  since  the  photographs  do  not  decide  this  point.  All  the  rest  of 
the  silhouette  of  the  head  hangs  free,  the  back  of  it  standing  higher 
than  the  front. 

The  structure  gives  the  impression  of  an  unfolded  paper,  as  is 
suggested  by  the  many  parallel  creases.  The  hinder  portion  of  the 
head  appears  entirely  enveloped  in  a  dark  grey  cloth,  or  perhaps  the 
dark  covering  is  intended  to  produce  the  impression  of  hair.  The 
forehead  is  strongly  arched  and  low.  The  nose  is  short,  the  lips  small 
and  curved,  with  a  projecting  upper  lip  and  dimples,  the  chin  is  strong 
and  middle-sized.  The  deep-set  eyes  are  directed  upwards.  The  ear 
is  indicated,  but  by  a  fault  of  drawing  it  is  placed  too  far  backwards. 
The  neck  is  broad.  The  two  last  points  tell  against  a  portrait  from 
natm-e.  A  transparent  veil,  with  its  hem  commg  from  chin  to  ear, 
covers  the  face. 

We  certainly  have  not  to  do  with  the  same  picture  as  was  produced 
on  the  15th  August.  For  on  the  latter  we  find  a  higher  and  less  pro- 
jecting forehead,  and  much  longer  nose  of  different  shape,  as  well  as 
other  small  deviations. 

The  stereoscopic  view  from  the  top  of  the  cabinet  corroborates  this 
description,  and  shows,  apart  from  the  fiat  and  pictorial  character, 
two  strong-marked  vertical  folds,  like  those  of  a  concertina,  as  if  the 
paper  had  been  mifolded  towards  the  right  and  left.  From  the  stand- 
pomt  of  a  purely  objective  judgment  of  the  photograph,  without  any 
consideration  of  the  expeiimental  conditions,  we  should  have  to 
conclude  that  we  have  to  deal  with  a  profile  of  a  head,  drawn  on  a 
foundation  of  textile  fabric  or  paper,  and  afterwards  cut  out,  folded 
up,  and  then  again  unfolded,  retaining  traces  of  the  folds. 

As  regards  the  artistic  treatment,  we  miss  the  naturalistic  character. 
Like  many  of  the  previous  ones,  it  appears  conventional  and  stereo- 
typed in  expression.  Yet  the  features  themselves  are  well  modelled. 
Again  we  see  the  great  contrast :  on  the  one  hand,  the  mediumistic 
phenomenon  photographed  under  the  best  conditions  while  in  rapid 
motion  ;  and,  on  the  other  hand,  the  disappointing  negatives :  the 
shape  of  a  head,  apparently  cut  out  of  paper  or  some  textile  fabric, 
and  provided  with  pictorial  detail. 

A  one-sided  scepticism  will  surely  arrive  at  an  unfavourable  con- 
clusion. But,  even  after  taking  into  accomit  all  the  actual  circum- 
stances, the  question  remains  unsolved  :  How  can  such  a  picture  be 
produced,  and  disappear,  and  move  freely  without  the  co-operation  of 
the  medium's  hands  V 

Sitting  of  the  11th  September  1912. 

Present. — Mme.  Bisson,  Dr  Kafka,  M.  S.,  the  author  and  his  wife. 

Control,  illumination,  and  hypnotisation  as  on  30th  August  1912. 
Time,  9  to  11.30  p.m. 

SITTINGS  OF  JULY,  AUGUST  AND  SEPTEMBER  1912      197 

Hardly  had  the  curtain  been  closed  when  long  stertorous  expirations 
were  heard,  accompanied  by  deep  tones,  recpllin^  the  "  belling  "  of 
stags.  A  single  expiration  lasted  for  from  five  to  twenty  seconds. 
Eva's  whole  behaviour  indicated  a  deep  degree  of  trance  (in  the 
mediumistic  language,  "  Elle  etait  prise  ").  The  moaning  and  pressing 
wa"^  interrupted  by  whimpering  ciies  of  pain. 

The  phenomena  commenced  at  once  after  hypnosis.  I  may  remark 
here  that  the  whole  sitting  was  devoted  to  the  root  phenomenon  of 
materialisation,  i.e.,  the  generation,  motion,  and  disappearance  of  the 
plastic  substance,  and  that  during  the  several  hours  of  the  sitting  the 
curtains  remained  uninterruptedly  open.  The  process  of  materialisa- 
tion began  on  the  medium's  left  breast,  about  the  level  of  her  shoulder. 
Later,  the  phenomenon  was  seen  at  various  places — on  the  front  of  her 
dress  and  in  her  lap.  The  visible  material  took  the  shape  of  wisps, 
cords,  shreds,  and  projections,  and  especially  of  a  very  fine  mouse- 
coloured  skin,  of  a  transparent  texture,  resembling  spider's  web.  The 
colour  often  appeared  a  reddish-violet,  or  resembled  dull  red  rubber  on 
a  base  of  black  velvet.  On  one  occasion  a  long  strip  developed  before 
the  eyes  of  those  present  out  of  an  apparently  phosphorescent,  reddish, 
and  seemingly  liquid  patch,  but  it  grew  pale  and  disappeared  as  quickly 
as  it  had  come. 

With  Eva's  consent,  the  fairly  wide  strips  on  her  breast,  three  or 
four  in  number,  were  illuminated  by  white  electric  light  and  touched 
with  the  fingers.  Under  the  influence  of  the  light  they  lost  their  red 
colour  and  their  visibility.  The  touch  showed  a  sticky  colourless 
substance.  In  the  author's  opinion,  this  ver}^  fine  fabric  is  liquefied 
by  the  influence  of  light. 

Dr  Kafka  believes  that  the  wisp  reflects  the  light,  and  thus  acquires 
the  appearance  of  a  solid  substance  of  definite  shape. 

Dr  Kafka  says  about  this  : — "  During  the  next  opening  a  wisp 
appeared  near  the  medium's  shoulder  and  left  breast,  which,  though 
partly  reflecting  the  light,  actually  consisted  of  drops  of  liquid,  as 
could  be  proved  by  illumination  and  touch.  The  liquid  moistened  the 
hand,  and  when  rubbed  off  with  a  handkerchief,  left  distinct  traces. 
Then  suddenly,  while  the  medium  held  the  curtain  open,  a  ragged  strip 
of  a  broTVTiish  colour  appeared  on  the  medium's  left  hand.  The  medium's 
hands  and  chest  were  clearly  visible  during  these  phenomena,  since  the 
curtain  was  always  held  open.  The  lower  arm  and  elbows  were,  however, 
in  the  dark.  After  some  time  the  strip  disappeared,  as  if  suddenly 
jerked  upwards." 

On  this  the  author  remarks  as  follows  : — "  The  impression  of  this 
phenomenon  was  as  if,  from  the  sleeve,  a  rather  voluminous  brown 
earthworm,  about  3  or  4  inches  long,  had  crept  on  to  the  back  of  the 
left  hand,  nearly  down  to  the  knuckles.  The  front  portion  of  this  self- 
moving  shape  turned  in  the  form  of  a  hook,  as  if  it  wanted  to  return. 
But  suddenly  the  whole  structure  was  jerked  back,  and  disappeared  as 
it  had  come." 

— '  M.  S,  describes^^his  impressions  as  follows  : — "  Suddenly  there 
appeared  in  front  of  the  curtain,  on  the  medium's  left  hand  as  it  lay 
on  her  left  knee,  a  dark  strip,  or  ribbon,  ending  in  a  strongly  indented, 
leaf-shaped,  terminal  about  the  size  of  half-a-crown,  which  moved  in 

198  PHENOMENA    OF   MATERIALISATION 

the  direction  of  the  knuckles,  and  jerked  several  times  backwards  and 
forwards." 

All  the  three  observers  agree  in  having  seen  on  the  medium's  left 
hand  a  rather  long  ribbon -shaped  substance,  having  a  motion  of  its 
own.  To  the  same  class  of  phenomena  belongs  the  following,  described 
by  Dr  Kafka  : — "  The  medium  requested  me  to  give  her  my  hand,  so 
that  the  material  might  be  laid  upon  it.  Three  times  in  succession  a 
strip  of  material  appeared,  which  seemed  to  emerge  from  the  darkness 
above,  and  was  drawn  over  the  palm  of  my  hand,  giving  me  the  impres- 
sion as  if  somebody  had  drawn  the  end  of  a  rope  lightly  across  it." 

M.  S.  gives  the  following  graphic  description  of  his  impressions  of 
these  phenomena  : — "  Suddenly  we  saw,  proceeding  from  the  left 
shoulder  towards  the  medium's  heart  and  lap,  some  clouds  of  thick, 
greyish-red  masses,  which  laid  themselves  over  the  hands  of  Dr  Kafka 
and  the  Baroness  von  Schrenck,  filled  the  latter's  hand,  and  flowed 
over  it,  in  the  shape  of  a  twisted  band,  having  the  thickness  of  the 
cord  of  a  dressing-gown,  into  the  medium's  lap,  where  they  deposited 
themselves  like  heavy  cigarette  smoke  in  the  folds  of  the  dress,  and 
subsequently  withdrew  themselves.  Dr  Kafka  and  Baroness  von 
Schrenck  emptied  their  hands  into  a  porcelain  dish,  and  a  small  residue 
of  a  dark  liquid  remained  behind  in  the  white  dish.  During  this  process 
I  did  not  observe  the  medium.  Mme.  Bisson  requested  the  medium 
to  place  some  material  in  the  dish  herself.  The  small  dish  was  held  in 
the  medium's  lap.  The  mass  advanced  and  retired,  laid  itself  like  a 
smoke  ring  into  the  small  dish,  withdrew  again  from  it,  entered  it  again, 
and  finally  about  1  c.  cm.  of  the  dark  liquid  remained  in  the  dish, 
which  was  then  covered  and  put  away.  At  about  the  same  time  the 
head  of  the  medium — who  was  greatly  excited,  and  who  shook  con- 
vulsively and  groaned  deeply  at  each  touching  of  the  mass— was  bent 
forward,  and  appeared  covered  with  large  curved  masses  resembling 
curls." 

The  same  phenomenon  is  described  by  Dr  Kafka  in  the  following 
words  : — "  During  the  pause  the  curtains  this  time  remained  open. 
The  medium's  hands  were  distinctly  visible,  and  I  held  her  right  hand 
with  my  left.  The  medium's  hands  lay  on  her  knees,  and  I  suddenly 
felt  my  hands  moistened  with  liquid.  Mme.  Bisson  took  the  porcelain 
dish,  in  order  to  catch  the  mateiial.  Then  we  saw  several  times  pieces 
of  brownish  material,  which  at  first  remained  suspended  over  the  dish, 
at  a  certain  distance,  then  lightly  touched  it,  until  finally  a  distinctly 
visible  brown  strip  of  a  textile  appearance,  seeming  to  come  from  the 
medium's  head,  entered  the  dish  and  remained  in  it  about  four  seconds, 
then  disappeared  at  once,  appearing  to  leave  behind  a  liquid  precipitate. 
Immediately  after  this  the  medium  put  my  hand  into  her  mouth,  so 
that  I  might  examine  it,  but  I  could  only  feel  the  teeth  and  the  tip  of 
the  tongue,  and  nothing  else.  The  medium  then  expressed  a  wish  to 
take  off  the  tights,  and  did  this,  against  the  advice  of  Mme.  Bisson, 
who,  however,  finally  helped  her  to  do  so.  The  medium  took  my  hand 
several  times  and  guided  it  to  her  breast  or  her  lap,  so  that  I  could 
always  make  sure  that  the  outside  of  the  dress  was  moistened  with  liquid. 
Once  she  put  my  hand  on  her  breast,  and  I  suddenly  noticed  that  a 
smooth  and  quite  soft  piece  of  material  moved  upwards  under  my  hand. 

SITTINGS  OF  JULY,  AUGUST  AND  SEPTEMBER  1912      199 

then  returned  and  placed  itself  on  the  back  of  my  hand,  whence  it 
finally  disappeared  upwards.  At  the  level  of  her  navel  a  piece  of  the 
same  material,  a  few  inches  long,  seemed  to  emerge  from  the  dress  and 
then  to  withdraw  itself.  At  the  level  of  her  breast  some  liquid  matter, 
in  the  form  of  drops,  emerged  twice  from  the  dress,  and,  on  one  occasion, 
spurted  with  considerable  pressure  into  my  hand.  The  material,  on 
its  emergence,  appeared  warm,  darker  than  my  hand,  and  had  no 
recognisable  taste  or  smell,  although  the  medium's  hands  are  strongly 
perfumed,  and  this  perfume  was  transferred  to  my  hand.  I  wiped  off 
the  liquid  with  my  handkerchief,  but  Mme.  Bisson  had  already  got 
some  of  the  liquid  in  her  hand,  and  let  it  drop  into  the  porcelain  dish, 
.  even  before  a  strip  of  the  material  had  entered  it. 

"  After  a  pause  for  rest,  during  which  the  curtains  were  entirely 
closed,  the  medium  tried,  at  Mme.  Bisson's  request,  to  produce  a 
phenomenon  in  her  lap.  After  some  exposures  giving  no  result,  some 
browiiish  material  appeared  in  her  lap,  and  some  white  substance  on 
her  head,  and  after  a  further  pause  a  white  substance,  the  size  of  her 
hand,  appeared  in  her  lap.  During  an  attempt  to  make  a  kinemato- 
graph  record  of  this  substance,  the  medium,  screaming  loudly,  fell  into 
a  fit,  and  was  pacified  by  Mme.  Bisson  in  the  usual  way  in  the  cabinet. 
After  this  the  liquid  phenomenon  showed  itself  a  few  more  times,  and 
during  the  subsequent  examination  Dr  von  Schrenck  found  the  medium's 
skin  to  be  dry." 

In  the  above  reports  the  author  quotes  from  the  observers  present, 
because  they  sat  in  front  of  him,  and  therefore  stood  in  direct  relation 
with  the  medium.  As  a  supplement  to  Kafka's  report,  I  may  say  that 
the  colour  of  the  material  can  vary.  Sometimes  it  looks  quite  white, 
then  reddish,  by  reflection  of  the  red  light,  resembling  red  rubber, 
which  Kafka  probably  expresses  by  the  word  "  brownish."  The 
bits  and  strips  are  sometimes  dark  mouse-grey,  and  grow  brighter  the 
thinner  and  more  transparent  the  structure.  The  liquid  in  the  porcelain 
dish  gave  a  viscous  impression,  but  a  fine  grey  film  seemed  to  cover 
its  surface,  and  the  chemist  who  examined  the  liquid  could  give  no 
information  about  this  film.  "" 

That  it  is  not  a  case  of  dust,  but  of  a  special  substance,  is  clear  from 
similar  later  observations,  with  the  same  medium,  in  Paris,  where  a 
grey  film  was  also  observed  to  lie  over  the  liquid.  This  observation 
corresponds  with  that  of  the  colour  of  the  veil-like  fabric.  It  was  only 
after  two  hours  of  observation  through  the  continually  opened  curtains 
that  we  regarded  the  sitting  as  practically  closed  for  that  day,  and  gave 
our  consent  to  the  complete  closing  of  the  curtains,  so  that  Eva  might 
rest  undisturbed  and  collect  power  for  the  kinematograph  experiment. 

M.  S.  and  the  author  went  up  to  the  kinematograph,  which  stood 
10  feet  from  the  curtain.  Even  at  that  distance  we  observed  the 
materialisation  process  between  the  medium's  knees,  where,  at  Mme. 
Bisson's  request,  the  mass  was  to  appear.  M.  S.  and  the  aulJior 
saw  a  ribbon-shaped  white  mass  about  the  size  of  a  hand.  The  electric 
arc  Avas  turned  on  and  M.  S.  worked  the  apparatus.  The  medium  fell 
into  a  screaming  fit  and  immediately  closed  the  curtains.  This  ended 
the  sitting. 

Final  control   negative,   but  the  dress  was  full   of  whitish  spots 

200  PHENOMENA    OF    MATERIALISATION 

which  remained  moist  after  the  sitting,  just  in  the  places  where  the 
structures  had  been  observed.  The  tights  showed  nothing  unusual. 
The  kinematograph  experiment  was  a  total  failure.  It  appears  that 
the  film  was  spoilt  by  a  mistake  in  the  subsequent  treatment. 

REPORT  OF  PRIVATDOZENT  DR  KAFKA 

CONCERNING   THE 
SITTINGS  OF  30th  AUGUST  AND    IOTH  AND    llTH  SEPTEMBER  1912. 

The  initial  examination  is  the  same  for  all  the  sittings.  I  examined  the  cabinet  with 
the  electric  torch,  felt  the  walls,  floor  and  curtains,  to  make  sure  that  nothing  was  hidden 
behind  them.  A  similar  examination  was  made  of  the  wickerwork  chair  covered  with  black 
cloth  and  placed  in  the  cabinet.  I  also  examined  the  medium's  black  dress,  outside  and 
inside,  by  incident  and  transmitted  light.  This  costume  was  handed  to  the  medium,  who  put 
it  on  in  a  neighbouring  room.  When  she  returned,  she  was  examined  by  Dr  von  Schrenck, 
who  passed  his  hand  over  the  bare  trunk  and  legs,  as  well  as  outside  over  the  feet  and  toes. 
After  this  examination,  the  medium  was  sewn  into  the  costume  by  Mme.  Bisson  in  the 
presence  of  the  sitters,  the  tights  being  sewn  to  the  waist  of  the  dress,  the  sleeves  being 
sewn  round  the  wrist.  After  this,  Dr  von  Schrenck  made  the  medium  open  her  mouth 
and  blow,  and  examined  her  nose,  hair  and  ears.  The  medium  was  allowed  to  retain  her 
hairpins.  She  then  entered  the  brightly  lighted  seance  room  and  sat  on  the  chair  inside 
the  cabinet,  the  curtains  of  which  were  open.  While  I  stood  by  and  observed  the  motions 
of  the  medium  and  Mme.  Bisson,  Mme.  Bisson  took  the  medium's  hands,  and  put  her  into 
a  trance,  by  fixing  her  gaze.  The  medium  lay  back  in  her  chair.  Mme.  Bisson  withdrew 
in  the  full  light,  and  I  closed  the  curtains.  Then  the  white  light  was  switched  ofi",  and 
the  illumination  consisted  of  five  electric  lamps  (total  candle-power  100,  according  to  von 
Schrenck),  enclosed  in  ruby  glass  globes.  After  the  eye  had  got  adapted  to  the  light,  one 
could  read  large  print,  at  a  distance  of  2  or  3  yards  from  the  lamps. 

SITTING  OF  THE  30th  AUGUST  1912. 

Present. — Mme.  Bisson,  Dr  von  Schrenck,  his  ■wife,  and  myself. 

Initial  control  and  hypnotisation  as  described. 

After  some  time  the  medium  opened  the  curtain,  and  a  strip  of  greyish-brown  matter 
seemed  to  lie  on  her  left  shoulder.  The  exposure  was,  however,  very  short  and  the  im- 
pression was  indistinct.  The  medium  then  closed  the  curtains  completely,  so  that  the 
hands  were  not  \'isible,  but  soon  the  curtain  opened  slightly,  so  that  one  could  observe  the 
medium's  hands  through  the  gap,  and  see  that  they  were  describing  grinding  motions  on 
her  knees.  The  medium  then  opened  the  curtain  completely,  and  we  saw,  in  her  lap,  a 
whitish,  indistinct  mass  about  the  size  of  a  hand.  Several  times  the  curtain  was  opened 
and  closed,  but  from  this  moment  the  hands  always  remained  visible  at  the  curtain. 
During  the  various  exposures,  which  lasted  one  or  two  seconds,  no  change  in  the  mass 
could  at  first  be  discerned,  but  afterwards  two  finger-shaped  projections  seemed  to  have 
formed.  After  a  lengthy  pause,  during  which  the  hands  remained  visible,  the  white  flat 
mass  in  the  medium's  lap  was  replaced  by  a  brownish  structure,  approximately  of  the 
shape  of  a  scorpion.  After  a  short  exjjosure  of  the  phenomenon  the  medium  again  closed 
the  curtain.  At  the  next  opening  of  the  curtain  Dr  von  'Schrenck  and  Mme.  Bisson 
declared  they  saw  a  white  mass  on  the  left  shoulder  which,  however,  I  could  not  confirm. 
This  mass  was  then  illuminated  by  Mme.  Bisson  with  a  torch,  while  Dr  von  Schrenck  held 
the  medium's  hands.  The  medium  made  convulsive  movements,  and  the  white  mass  on 
the  left  shoulder  disappeared,  according  to  the  other  observers.  On  the  right  side  of  the 
neck  there  now  appeared  a  thin  brownish  strip,  emerging  from  the  dress  by  a  few  inches, 

REPORT  OF  PRIVATDOZENT  DR  KAFKA  201 

which  in  structure  resembled  a  coarse,  porous,  textile  fabric.  This  strip  did  not  alter  it« 
appearance  during  the  three  or  four  seconds  that  it  remained  visinle.  At  Dr  von 
Schrenck's  request,  I  snatched  at  the  substance,  but  the  medium,  whining  pitifully,  made 
violent  motions  with  the  whole  body,  and  especially  the  neck,  so  that  I  got  nothing,  nor 
did  I  feel  any  moisture  on  my  hand.  The  lamp  was  switched  off  and  the  medium  retired 
behind  completely  closed  curtains,  trembling  and  breathing  deeply,  moaning  and  com- 
plaining of  pains.  Mme.  Bisson  also  appeared  very  excited  and  incensed  at  this  interfer- 
ence. As  the  medium's  state  did  not  improve,  Mme.  Bisson  entered  the  cabinet  and 
embraced  her.     She  was  then  pacified,  and  Mme.  Bisson's  excitement  subsided. 

The  medium  then  opened  the  curtains  several  times,  though  nothing  was  to  be 
seen.  After  several  such  unsuccessful  exposures,  a  disk,  resembling  a  head,  appeared 
in  front  of  the  medium's  face.  The  medium  closed  the  curtain  again,  but  in  such  a 
way  that,  during  the  whole  phenomenon,  the  hands  remained  visible.  During  the 
next  exposure  the  disk  was  seen  more  distinctly  on  the  right,  quite  near  the  head  of 
the  medium,  who  then  quickly  closed  the  curtain,  jumped  up,  took  a  step  outside  the 
cabinet,  and  expressed  a  wish  to  be  searched,  but  was  pushed  back  into  her  chair  by 
Mme.  Bisson.  The  medium  had  bent  her  head  and  shoulders  forward  quite  outside 
the  cabinet,  so  that  we  could  see  her  neck,  but  we  could  not  see  a  trace  of  the  phenomenon. 
After  a  pause,  the  medium  had  a  violent  cough  and  vomited.  The  vomit  was  caught 
in  a  handkerchief,  and  the  sitting  was  closed.  The  medium  emerged  from  the  cabinet, 
and  was  examined  by  Dr  von  Schrenck  in  the  same  way  as  at  the  beginning.  The 
result  of  the  search  was  negative.  During  the  examination  the  medium  fainted,  and 
had  to  be  taken  away  in  a  state  of  hyjanosis.  During  the  subsequent  examination  of 
the  cabinet,  a  pellet,  the  size  of  a  finger-nail,  resembling  paper,  was  found  on  the  floor 
of  the  cabinet.  A  further  test  proved  it  to  be  paper  of  unknown  origin.  In  the 
vomit,  we  found  a  grey  crumb,  about  the  size  of  a  pin-head,  which,  on  analysis,  was 
found  to  be  chewed  wood.  According  to  Mme.  Bisson,  the  medium  had,  on  that 
afternoon,  chewed  some  wood.  Nothing  else  was  found  in  the  handkerchief  or  in 
the  cabinet. 

SITTING  OF   THE   10th  SEPTEMBER   1912. 

Present. — Mme.  Bisson,  Dr  von  Schrenck  and  his  wife,  M.  S.,  and  myself. 

Initial  control  and  hypnotisation  as  usual. 

The  curtain  was  completely  closed  so  that  the  hands  of  the  medium  were  also 
invisible.  After  waiting  three-quarters  of  an  hour,  the  curtain  opened  several  times 
without  result,  and,  after  that,  the  other  observers  claimed  to  see  a  white  strip  over 
the  left  shoulder.  I  could  only  observe  during  the  later  exposure,  that  a  white  disk, 
resembling  a  head,  moved  across  the  medium's  head  from  the  left,  while  the  medium's 
hands  were  visible  at  the  curtain.  The  medium  then  closed  the  curtain  completely 
in  order,  as  she  said,  to  collect  power,  and  during  this  pause  she  once  closed  the 
curtain  from  within  particularly  tightly. 

During  the  next  exposures,  two  white  structures  resembling  arms  appeared  twice. 
I  had  the  impression  that  they  jiroceeded  from  the  medium's  mouth.  The  ])henomenon 
looked  as  if  a  rolled-up  rubber  tube  (like  that  used  in  a  well-known  toy)  was  unrolled 
by  blowing  into  it.  The  phenomena  disappeared  while  the  curtain  remained  open, 
and  the  manner  of  disappearance  could  not  be  accurately  observed.  For  the  third 
time  an  elongated  structure  appeared,  which,  to  M.  S.  and  myself,  resembled  an  arm 
reaching  down  from  the  medium's  left  shoulder.  This  phenomenon  was  photographed 
while  the  medium's  hands  grasped  the  curtain.  The  ignition  of  the  flash-light  produced 
a  crisis  in  the  medium,  and  to  pacify  her,  Mme.  Bisson  bent  over  her  and  embraced  her. 
The  curtain  was  again  closed,  but,  in  spite  of  all  the  medium's  eflbrts,  no  furtlier  phenomena 
were  seen. 

The  medium  again  has  a  violent  fit  of  sickness,  vomiting  mucus  and  blood,  and 
in  the  mucus  there  are  again  small  crumbs,  which,  however,  this  time,  according  to  a 
microsco])ic  examination  made  at  Dr  von  Schrenck's  request,  consisted  of  food  fragments. 
During  the  final  control  Mme.  Bisson  objected  to  Dr  von  Schrenck  opening  the  seam  by 
which  the  tights  are  fastened  to  the  medium's  dress,  and  performed  that  service  herself. 
The  searching  of  the  medium  and  the  cabinet  was  carried  out  as  before,  and  gave  a 
negative  result. 

202  PHENOMENA    OF    MATERIALISATION 

SITTING  OF  THE  11th  SEPTEMBER  1912. 

Present. — Mme.  Bisson,  Dr  von  Schrenck  and  his  wife,  M.  S.  and  myself. 

Initial  examination  and  hypnotisation  as  usual. 

The  medium's  hands  were  not  at  first  visible.  The  phenomena  commenced  very  soon, 
and,  in  the  first  instance,  some  white  beckoning  forms  appeared  above  the  medium's  head, 
rather  resembling  those  tube-like  structures  which,  in  the  last  sitting,  appeared  to  proceed 
from  her  mouth.  Mme.  Bisson  then  asked  the  medium  whether  she  would  permit  any 
illumination  of  the  plienomena,  and  received  an  answer  in  the  affirmative.  During  the 
next  exposure,  a  strip  appeared  on  the  left  breast  which,  in  part,  reflected  the  light,  and 
actually  consisted  of  drops  of  liquid,  as  could  be  proved  by  illumination  and  touch.  The 
liquid  moistened  the  hand,  and  when  wiped  off  with  a  handkerchief  left  distinct  traces. 
Suddenly  there  appeared,  on  the  medium's  left  hand  which  held  the  curtain  open,  a  ragged 
strip  of  brownish  colour.  The  medium's  hands  and  chest  were  steadily  visible  during  these 
phenomena,  as  the  curtain  was  open,  but  the  lower  arms  and  elbows  were  in  the  dark. 
After  some  time  the  strip  disappeared,  as  if  it  were  suddenly  jerked  upwards.  Then  Mme. 
Bisson  laid  her  hand,  which  I  lield  in  my  own,  on  that  of  the  medium,  and  requested  that 
the  materia]  should  appear  on  her  head  in  front  of  the  curtain.  That  did  not  happen,  but 
the  medium  requested  me  to  give  her  my  hand  so  that  the  material  might  be  laid  upon  it. 
Then,  three  times  in  succession,  a  strip  of  material  appeared,  as  if  emerging  out  of  the  dark- 
ness above,  and  it  crossed  the  palm  of  my  hand,  giving  the  impression  as  if  somebody 
lightly  drew  the  end  of  a  rope  across  my  hand.  During  the  pause,  the  curtains  remained 
opened  all  the  time.  The  medium's  hands  were  distinctly  visible,  and  I  held  her  right 
hand  with  my  left.  The  medium's  hands  lay  on  her  knees,  and  I  suddenly  felt  my  hands 
moistened  with  liquid.  Mme.  Bisson  took  the  porcelain  dish,  in  order  to  catch  the 
material.  Then  we  saw,  several  times,  pieces  of  the  brownish  material,  which,  at  first, 
remained  suspended  over  the  porcelain  dish  at  a  certain  distance,  then  lightly  touched  it, 
until,  finally,  a  distinctly  visible  brown  strip  of  a  textile  appearance,  seeming  to  come  from 
the  medium's  head,  entered  the  dish,  and  remained  in  it  about  four  seconds.  It  then  dis- 
appeared upwards,  appearing  to  leave  behind  a  liquid  precipitate.  Immediately  after  this, 
the  medium  put  my  hand  into  her  mouth,  so  that  I  might  examine  it,  but  I  could  only 
feel  the  teeth  and  the  tip  of  the  tongue,  and  nothing  else.  The  medium  then  expressed 
a  wish  to  take  off  the  tights,  and  did  this  against  the  advice  of  Mme.  Bisson  who,  however, 
finally  helped  her  to  do  so.  The  medium  took  my  hand  several  times  and  guided  it  to  her 
breast  or  her  lap,  so  that  I  could  make  sure  that  the  outside  of  the  dress  was  moistened 
with  liquid.  Once  she  put  my  hand  on  her  breast,  and  I  suddenly  noticed  that  a  smooth, 
and  quite  soft  piece  of  material  moved  upwards  under  my  hand,  then  returned  and  placed 
itself  on  the  back  of  my  hand,  whence  it  finally  disappeared  upwards.  At  the  level  of  her 
navel  a  piece  of  the  same  material,  a  few  inches  long,  seemed  to  emerge  from  the  dress,  and 
then  to  withdraw  itself.  At  the  level  of  her  breast  some  liqi;id  matter,  in  the  form  of 
drops,  emerged  twice  through  the  dress,  and  on  one  occasion  spurted  with  considerable 
pressure  into  my  hand.  The  material  on  its  emergence  appeared  warm,  darker  than  my 
hand,  and  had  no  recognisable  taste  or  smell,  although  the  medium's  hands  are  strongly 
perfumed,  and  this  perfume  was  transferred  to  my  hand.  I  wiped  off  the  liquid  with  my 
handkerchief,  but  Mme.  Bisson  had  already  got  some  of  the  liquid  in  her  hand,  and  let  it 
drop  into  the  porcelain  dish,  even  before  a  strip  of  the  material  had  entered. 

After  a  pause  for  rest,  during  which  the  curtains  were  entirely  closed,  the  medium 
tried,  at  Mme.  Bisson's  request,  to  produce  a  phenomenon  in  her  lap. 

After  some  exposures  giving  no  result,  some  brownish  material  appeared  in 
her  lap,  and  some  white  substance  on  her  head,  and,  after  a  further  pause,  a  white 
substance,  the  size  of  her  hand,  appeared  in  her  lap.  During  an  attempt  to  make  a  kine- 
matograph  record  of  this  substance,  the  medium,  screaming  loudly,  fell  into  a  fit,  and  was 
pacified  by  Mme.  Bisson  in  the  usual  way,  in  the  cabinet.  After  this,  the  liquid  pheno- 
menon showed  a  few  more  times.  During  the  subsequent  examination,  Dr  von  Schrenck 
found  the  medium's  skin  to  be  dry.  An  examination  of  her  genitals  was  resisted  by  Mme. 
Bisson.  Various  white  spots  remained  on  the  dress  where  the  teleplasm  had  appeared. 
Nothing  remarkable  in  the  cabinet. 

The  result  of  the  observations  I  should  summarise  as  follows  : 

The  sittings  did  not  appear  absolutely  convincing,  either  in  the  negative  or  in  the 
positive  sense.  One  cannot  maintain  that  in  the  first  sitting  the  substance  emerging 
from  the  neck  had  disappeared  in  my  hands,  since  the  possibility  is  not  excluded  that  a 
substance  of  slight  consistency  might  have  been  rubbed  into  the  skin  by  the  medium's 

REPORT  OF  PRIVATDOZENT  DR  KAFKA  203 

raovem«nLs.  Mine.  Bisson's  entrance  into  the  cabinet  during  the  crises  of  the  medium 
supplies,  of  course,  a  source  of  error  which  Crinnot  be  neglected,  although  the  sitters  did 
not  protest  against  it,  in  order  to  avoid  any  possible  injury  to  the  medium's  health  by  the 
long-continued  crisis,  and  also  in  order  not  to  produce  an  unfavourable  impression  on  the 
disposition  of  the  two  ladies,  who  are  in  close  "rapport,"  and  thus  interfere  with  the  success 
of  the  sittings.  The  initial  and  final  examinations  only  prove  that  no  bulky  ol)ject  is 
concealed  anywhere,  but  are  hardly  sufficient  absolutely  to  exclude  the  possibility  that  an 
artificial  product,  packed  into  an  infinitesimal  volume,  was  smuggled  in,  and  afterwards 
disposed  of  by  some  trick,  such  as  swallowing  or  rubbing  out.  The  folds  visible  in  the 
photographs  of  lieads  are  suspicious  in  any  case.  Any  experience  gained  at  these  sittings 
only  seems  to  prove  that  the  medium's  hands  take  no  part  in  the  modifications  and  dis- 
appeai'ances  of  the  substance  before  the  crisis,  nor  in  the  change  of  place  of  the  head-like 
disk  after  the  crisis.  But  I  must  remark  that  in  two  photographs,  which  Dr  von  Schrenck 
kindly  sliowed  me,  the  medium's  right  hand  is  oVwiously  concerned  in  the  motion  of  the 
phenomenon,  while  on  the  right  knee  there  is,  in  one  case,  an  amorphous  mass,  and  in 
another  case  a  mass  resembling  a  hand,  which  might  be  intended  to  simidate  the  presence 
of  a  real  hand.  I  cannot  indeed  confirm  this  hypothesis  by  my  own  experience,  but  the 
repeated  request,  made  by  the  medium  to  the  sitters,  to  fill  up  the  pauses  between  the 
phenomena  with  conversation,  might  indicate  an  attempt  to  divert  attention.  The  photo- 
graph of  the  phenomenon  occurring  in  the  second  sitting  furnishes  a  very  remarkable  proof 
of  the  unreliable  character  of  visual  perceptions,  showing,  as  it  does,  that  a  phenomenon 
described  by  two  observers  as  resembling  an  arm  was,  in  reality,  a  well- developed  head. 
On  the  other  hand,  it  is  remarkable  that  the  stereoscopic  photograph  gives  the  impression 
that  the  medium's  head,  the  phenomenon,  and  the  curtain  Avere  only  a  short  distance 
apart  from  each  other,  while  in  reality  the  phenomenon  was  about  20  inches  from  the 
curtain,  and  its  distance  from  the  medium's  head  cannot  be  accurately  determined.  The 
great  uncertainty  of  the  sense  organs  seems  also  indicated  by  the  fact  that  the  other  observers 
sometimes  claimed  to  see  cloud-like  phenomena,  dotted  with  luminous  points,  while  these 
appearances  were  obviously  really  produced  by  subjective  excitation  of  the  retina. 

In  the  third  sitting  we  find  that  the  liquid  which  appeared  to  come  from  the  dress 
moistened  it  in  several  places.  The  responsibility  as  to  whether  Eva  had  concealed 
under  the  dress  some  bladder  filled  with  liquid  mixst  l)e  laid  upon  the  initial  examination. 
Dr  von  Schrenck  and  M.  S.  also  maintain  that  the  liqviid  did  not  come  out  of  the  medium's 
mouth,  a  point  to  which  I  paid  no  attention.  I  could  not  observe  that  the  brownish 
ragged  material  was  converted  into  liquid,  for  I  saw  either  a  material  liquid  from  the 
beginning  in  the  form  of  drops,  or  I  saw  ragged  fragments  of  it  executing  gliding  motions 
and  disappearing  into  the  dark.  On  the  other  hand,  the  amount  of  liquid  collected  in 
the  sitters'  hands,  and  dropped  into  the  porcelain  dish,  seems  to  have  increased  after 
the  material  had  laid  itself  into  the  dish,  and  had  again  disappeared  from  it.  But  I 
should  not  care  to  assert  definitely  that  the  ragged  material  had  converted  itsejf  into 
li(iuid,  or  vice  versa.  I  cannot  also  say  whether  the  medium's  head  was  always  motionless 
during  the  jerking  motions  of  the  ragged  material,  as  Dr  von  Schrenck  and  M.  S. 
maintain,  but  these  motions  did  indeed  appear  to  take  place  without  the  co-operation 
of  the  medium's  hands,  trunk,  or  feet. 

The  microscopic  investigation  gives  the  typical  structure  of  an  albuminous  liquid 
filled  with  cells,  with  or  without  nuclei  (epithelium).  In  my  own  preparation  there  are 
also  fat  globules.  Although  Dr  von  Schrenck  did  not  detect  the  presence  of  fat  in  his 
preparations,  the  question  as  to  whether  the  liquid  is  to  be  described  as  colostrum  should 
be  more  closely  investigated,  and  the  medium  should  be  examined  for  accessory  milk 
glands.  Also  the  possibility  of  a  profuse  perspiration,  or  the  secretion  of  lymph,  is  not 
to  be  discarded  a  priori.  As  regards  the  time  distribution  of  the  phenomena,  it  should 
be  said  that  the  sitting  of  30th  August  was  the  first  positive  sitting  after  five  nestatire 
ones  at  which  I  had  been  present,  also  that,  after  the  crisis  of  the  30th  August,  on 
account  of  the  medium's  exhaustion,  no  sittings  took  place  for  a  week,  and  that  the 
sitting  of  9th  Septemlier  (the  fourth  after  tlie  crisis,  but  tlie  first  at  which  I  again 
assisted)  was  also  without  result. 

Final  Remarks  on  the  Munich  Sittings. 

The  exposure  scene  at  the  sitting  of  30th  August  had  really  a  negative 
result,  yet  Dr  Kafka  does  not  perhaps  consider  this  evidential,  since 

204  PHENOMENA    OF    MATERIALISATION 

he  had  not  seen  the  manifestation  on  the  left,  which  disappeared  before 
our  eyes.  On  the  other  hand,  he  admits  that  the  veil-like  piece  observed 
by  him  on  the  right  shoulder  was  withdrawn  from  his  gaze.  It  is  not 
clear  whether  it  disappeared  from  our  observation  by  an  unknown 
process,  or  whether  the  veil-like  fragment  was  removed  by  movements 
of  the  neck  and  shoulders.  The  process  is  still  mysterious  if,  as  Dr  Kafka 
assumes,  the  piece  had  been  rubbed  away,  for  it  would  surely  have  left 
traces  on  the  dress  or  on  the  body,  whereas  no  such  traces  were  found. 

That  Mme.  Bisson's  presence  could  not  explain  a  sinf?le  one  of  the 
phenomena  was  already  proved  finally  in  previous  sittings.  The  experi- 
menter cannot  be  expected  to  go  through  this  unpleasant  part  of  the 
proof  from  the  beginning  at  the  entry  of  every  new  savant  into  the 
sittings.  Besides,  there  is  no  reasonable  justification  for  throwing 
suspicion  on  Mme.  Bisson,  simply  because  the  phenomena  cannot  be 
explained  through  the  medium  alone,  and  because  it  so  happens  that, 
in  this  case,  an  experimenter  of  the  female  sex  trained  the  medium 
with  indefatigable  patience  and  self-sacrifice,  and  demonstrates  the 
result.  Even  with  all  the  precautions  taken  on  the  15th  August,  which 
have  almost  the  effect  of  vivisection  in  the  case  of  a  sensitive  person, 
every  unprejudiced  observer  of  good  will,  open  eyes,  and  clear  intellect 
can  easily  recognise  that  the  occurrence  of  phenomena  is  not,  in  any 
case,  bound  up  with  Mme.  Bisson's  personality,  but  Mme.  Bisson  does 
know  how  to  foster  the  phenomena  by  her  great  educative  and  suggestive 
influence.  Furthermore,  her  entrance  into  the  cabinet,  during  the  two 
sittings  described  by  Dr  Kafka,  was  necessitated  by  the  strong  nervous 
crises  produced  on  the  medium  in  the  first  sitting  by  our  attempted 
exposure  ;  and  in  the  second,  by  the  author's  unexpected  switching-on 
of  the  electric  light,  i.e.,  solely  by  our  own  conduct.  And  when  all  is 
said,  there  is  surely  a  legal  and  moral  responsibility  resting  on  those 
immediately  concerned  as  to  the  medium's  health.  Our  own  procedure 
alone  (and  the  author  does  not  exclude  himself)  produced  on  30th  August 
several  profound  and  genuine  fainting  fits  of  the  medium. 

In  these  investigations  we  are  face  to  face  with  unknown  quantities 
which  must  be  respected  ;  with  a  subject  which  has  its  own  conditions, 
and  cannot  be  treated  like  a  mathematical  formula,  or  like  a  piece  of 
mechanical  clockwork. 

Occurrences  which  depend  to  such  a  great  extent  upon  the  psychical 
adjustment,  not  only  of  the  medium  but  of  all  those  present,  cannot, 
in  spite  of  their  real  existence,  as  yet  aspire  to  the  objective  force  of 
demonstration  that  is  insisted  upon  in  a  physical,  or  even  a  physiological, 
experiment. 

The  possibility  of  an  adjustment  of  these  phenomena  to  conditions 
prescribed  by  us,  and  by  our  habitual  mode  of  thought,  has  distinct 
limits.  When  these  are  reached,  it  is  the  business  of  the  investigator 
to  accept  the  laws  peculiar  to  the  new  region  in  the  light  of  previous 
experience,  and  to  alter  the  experimental  conditions  accordingly.         1^^ 

If  a  small  artificial  product  could  be  smuggled  in,  in  a  small  compass, 
as  Dr  Kafka  believes,  in  spite  of  the  control,  the  initial  control  would 
have  entirely  failed  in  its  object.  If  the  possibility  of  an  exact  initial 
examination  is  denied  in  principle,  and  conjuring  thus  declared  to  be 
almighty,  that  means  the  abandonment  of  all  evidential  determinations. 

FINAL   REMARKS   ON  THE   MUNICH  SITTINGS        205 

So  long  as  no  details^are  given^^as  to  how  and  where  such  artificial 
products  are  hidden,  a  general  assertion  of  this  kind  can  only  be  taken 
as  a  confession  that  the  critic  is  baffled,  or  that^he  is  dissatisfied  as  to 
the  accuracy  of  the  control.  But  these  two  assumptions  must  be 
rejected,  since  the  initial  control  was  carried  out  with  every  care,  and 
we  can  say,  quite  definitely,  that  such  packets  are  not  hidden  either  on 
the  body  of  the  medium  or  in  her  dress.  So  long  as  the  control  is  not 
proved  inaccurate,  the  assumption  lacks  all  justification  ;  or,  to  put  it 
legally,  it  is  not  the  accused  who  has  to  prove  his  innocence,  but  his 
accusers  alone  who  are  bound  to  produce  proof  of  his  guilt.  The  right 
to  an  assertion  of  guilt  does  not  exist  in  law  so  long  as  the  proof  is  not 
brought. 

A  special  discussion  is  required  of  the  question  of  hysterical  rumina- 
tion, brought  forward  by  Dr  Kafka.  The  fact  that  hysterical  patients 
can  sometimes  bring  up  into  their  mouths  objects  they  have  swallowed, 
by  an  antiperistaltic  motion,  after  the  fashion  of  ruminating  animals, 
cannot  be  doubted,  although  the  cases  are  rare,  and  require  special 
pathological  conditions.  By  numerous  observations,  and  even  by 
photography,  the  part  played  by  the  mouth  in  the  phenomena  is  well 
defined.  This  objection,  already  considered  by  the  author  on  a  previous 
occasion,  is  in  any  case  worthy  of  discussion.  A  number  of  circumstances 
could  be  adduced  in  favour  of  this  hypothesis  :  the  emergence  of  the 
substance  from  the  mouth,  the  repeated  appearance  of  shreds  hanging 
out  of  it,  the  frequent  vomiting  of  blood  after  the  sittings  (where  the 
gullet  was  proved  to  be  the  origin  by  microscopic  examination),  the 
repeated  disappearance  of  the  substance  into  the  mouth,  and  the 
mixture  of  saliva  with  the  material,  as  proved  in  Biarritz,  all  these  are 
weighty  arguments  for  the  theory. 

It  cannot,  and  must  not,  be  denied  that  the  ^organs  of  respiration 
and  nutrition  appear  to  be  concerned  in  many  cases  in  the  production 
of  the  substance,  even  if  we  assume  a  special  possibility  of  mediumistic 
production  of  this  transitory  matter.  But,  in  the  first  place,  a  proof  is 
required  that  hysterical  rumination  occurs  at  all  in  Eva's  case,  for  after 
two  years  of  observation  no  indication  of  this  has  been  noted  by  her 
daily  companions. 

Hysterical  rumination  is  a  pathological  act  of  vomiting  which  is 
voluntary  on  the  part  of  the  person  concerned.  But  such  a  person 
cannot  make  any  selection  among  the  contents  of  his  stomach.  He 
must  vomit  whatever  is  there  at  the  time,  i.e.,  food  diluted  with  liquids 
and  gastric  juice.  In  bringing  up  a  swallowed  object,  traces  of  the  con- 
tents of  the  stomach  and  of  gastric  juice  would  certainly  be  brought  up  as 
well,  which  would  leave  spots  on  the  dress,  and  thus  betray  their  origin. 

In  the  case  of  the  present  investigations,  we  have  only  to  consider 
products  consisting  of  paper,  or  of  some  textile  fabric  (wool,  cotton, 
thread,  silk),  i.e.,  soft  materials  capable  of  being  folded  up.  But  such 
soft,  fibrous  preparations,  in  the  form  of  small  packets,  would  in  any 
case  be  attacked,  decomposed,  softened,  and  impregnated  by  the  gastric 
juice  and  the  liquid  contents  of  the  stomach.  They  would  show  distinct 
traces  of  where  they  had  been.  They  could  hardly  have  that  clearness, 
firmness,  and  diversity  of  form  found  in  the  materialisation  products, 
but  would  show  a  defective  and  softened  condition. 

206  PHENOMENA    OF    MATERIALISATION 

The  process  would  be  still  more  difficult  if  these  products  were 
packed  in  a  solid  case,  which  would  at  least  have  to  be  the  size  of  a 
walnut,  and  were  then  swallowed  and  brought  up  again.  The  voluntary 
bringing-up  of  solid  objects  is  much  more  difficult,  and  very  painful, 
and  does  not  always  succeed  at  the  first  attempt.  Since  the  contents 
of  the  stomach  are  three  or  four  pints  in  bulk,  and  very  variable,  the 
further  question  arises  as  to  how  many  antiperistaltic  motions  are 
necessary  to  bring  the  object  into  the  mouth.  What  then  becomes  of 
the  matter  brought  up  during  the  first  motions  ?  And  how  could  a 
fiat  drawing,  the  size  of  a  head,  be  disengaged  from  its  case,  unfolded, 
smoothed  out,  placed  in  position,  folded  up,  and  pressed  into  the  same 
volume  so  as  to  fit  into  the  case  and  be  swallowed  again — all  this  in  the 
dark  and  without  the  help  of  the  hands  ?  And,  finally,  what  about 
the  packing  up  of  the  plastic  forms,  the  mask-like  products  ?  Could 
these  also  be  concealed  in  the  stomach  ? 

As  soon  as  we  follow  this  process  in  detail  and  try  to  translate  it 
into  practice,  the  answer  is  obvious. 

In  any  case,  Eva,  as  a  rule,  took  her  dinner  two  hours  before  the 
sitting,  and  was  sometimes  observed  during  the  five,  or  even  seven, 
preceding  hours,  so  that  the  swallowing  of  artificial  products  would 
have  been  noticed. 

Since  food-remnants  or  gastric  juice  were  never  found,  since  such 
manipulations  could  not  have  been  concealed  for  four  years,  and  since 
at  the  sittings  themselves,  even  with  an  open  curtain,  nothing  was  ever 
found  which  could  be  interpreted  in  this  sense,  there  is  no  justification 
for  such  a  theory.  And,  finally,  in  many  cases  the  phenomena  were 
observed  to  commence  in  the  medium's  lap  or  some  other  place,  quite 
unconnected  with  the  mouth  or  the  digestive  organs. 

During  his  experiments  with  Eva  C,  in  December  1912,  the  Paris 
physician,  Dr  R.,  a  specialist  for  digestive  troubles,  made  Eva  eat 
bilberry  jam  half  an  hour  before  the  sittings.  Yet  the  material  emerging 
from  the  mouth  during  the  subsequent  sittings  was  white.  If  it  had 
come  out  of  the  stomach  it  would  have  been  red,  since  bilberries  colour 
the  whole  contents  of  the  stomach.  The  medium  did  not  know  the 
object  of  the  experiment. 

Yet  the  fact  remains  that  the  mouth  plays  an  important  part  during 
the  generation  and  disappearance  of  the  products. 

Dr  Kafka  is  right  in  calling  attention  to  the  uncertainty  of  sense 
perceptions,  and  the  occurrence  of  optical  illusions.  Here  the  author 
agrees  with  him  entirely,  and  it  was  for  the  very  reason  that  he  has 
made  the  freest  possible  use  of  photography.  As  regards  his  experience 
of  the  10th  September — in  which  he  thought  he  saw  an  arm-like  appear- 
ance, while  the  photograph  showed  a  head — the  main  point  seems  to 
have  escaped  attention.  If  the  object  seen  had  remained  at  rest,  we 
should  all,  no  doubt,  have  gained  a  distinct  impression.  But  the  object 
moved  at  a  distance  of  20  to  30  inches  behind  the  curtain,  from  the 
dark  region  of  the  cabinet  on  the  left  several  times,  towards  Eva's  head 
with  a  great  speed  (her  hands  being  visible).  Also,  it  remained  in  the 
circle  of  light  for  barely  a  fraction  of  a  second,  and  disappeared  suddenly 
into  the  darkness.  The  optical  impression  was  therefore  too  fugitive, 
too  rapid  to  be  discerned  clearly.     In  this  sitting  the  curtain  remained 

SITTINGS   IN   OCTOBER   AND   NOVEMBER    1912        207 

open  both  before  and  after  the  phenomenon,  since  the  same  process  of 
appearance  and  disappearance  was  repeated  several  times.  The  photo- 
graphic record  confirms  this,  and  shows  a  freely  floating  head.  The 
situation  is  particularly  clear  in  the  stereoscopic  transparency,  which, 
contrary  to  Dr  Kafka's  opinion,  shows  the  distances  practically  right. 

On  the  other  hand,  there  is  justification  for  Dr  Kafka's  remarks 
concerning  the  appearance  of  face  and  head-forms,  so  very  contrary  to 
our  expectations.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  we  have  to  deal  in  some  of  these 
phenomena  with  objects  of  an  artistic  character,  such  as  drawings  on 
a  white  base,  sharply  cut  out  and  showing  creases,  as  the  author  has 
already  explained  in  connection  with  previous  sittings.  But  the  improb- 
ability of  the  appearance  is  not  in  itself  a  sufficient  argument  against 
the  genuineness,  or  the  metaphysical  origin,  of  the  products.  The 
objections  raised  on  this  point  are  the  more  easily  understood,  since  a 
head-form  was  only  once  photographed  in  Dr  Kafka's  presence.  Surely 
a  final  judgment  on  this  matter  requires  more  numerous  experiments 
than  could  be  carried  out  in  Munich. 

Sittings  in  October  and  November  1912  (Paris). 

The  experimental  room  forf  the  sittings  now  to^  be  described  was 
the  same  as  in  June  1912.  But  the  observations  at  Munich  had  led 
Mme.  Bisson  to  construct  an  entirely  new  cabinet.  The  skeleton  of  this 
cabinet  was  a  wooden  framework  covered  with  new  black  lining  material. 
The  size  was  determined  by  the  position  of  the  stove,  and  was  the  same 
as  before,  except  that  the  roof  was  higher,  being  9  feet.  The  broad 
wooden  cross-beam,  to  which  the  curtain-rod  was  attached,  allowed  of 
the  attachment  of  the  stereoscopic  camera  used  in  Munich. 

As  regards  all  the  remaining  details,  the  position  of  cameras,  etc., 
nothing  was  changed  from  the  arrangements  at  the  sittings  in  June, 
so  that  no  new  description  need  be  given. 

The  author  examined  the  curtains  and  walls  carefully,  but  nowhere 
did  he  find  pin-holes  or  any  other  defects  in  the  lining  material. 

The  pendant  was  strengthened  by  a  twenty-five  candle-power  lamp, 
and  there  was  also  a  red  electric  lamp  suspended  in  the  cabinet  in  such 
a  manner  that  it  could  be  switched  on  and  raised  or  lowered  from  the 
outside. 

Sittings  of  the  25th,  26th,  and  28th  October  1912. 
Negative. 

Sitting  of  the  30th  October  1912. 

Present. — Mme.  Bisson  and  the  author. 

Control. — Dress  of  the  medium  as  in  the  Mmiich  sittings. 

Eva's  disposition  during  the  whole  week  was  unfavourable,  and 
was  probably  the  cause  of  the  negative  sittings.  On  this  evening 
Mme.  Bisson  asked  the  medium  to  hurry  a  little  with  her  change  of 

208  PHENOMENA    OF   MATERIALISATION  J 

dress,  whereupon  Eva  refused  to  have  a  sitting,  and  locked  herself  into 
her  room.     The  next  day  she  wrote  a  letter  of  apology  to  the  author. 

Sitting  of  the  2nd  November  1912. 

Present, — Mme.  Bisson  and  the  author. 

Control  and  illumination  as  on  30th  October  1912. 

Eva  held  the  curtain  open  with  her  hands,  and  endeavoured  to  adapt 
herself  psychically  to  the  occurrence  of  phenomena.  We  heard  long 
and  short  expirations.  Without  a  change  in  the  disposition  of  the 
hands,  a  patch  of  a  dark  grey  colour,  changing  into  white,  became 
visible  on  her  left  shoulder.  Then,  while  the  curtain  remained  open, 
a  white  strip,  like  a  chalk  mark,  appeared  in  the  same  place.  Suddenly 
a  disk -like  structure  emerged  out  of  the  dark,  with  a  motion  forward 
over  Eva's  left  shoulder.  I  recognised  a  female  face,  obviously  on  a 
fiat  surface.  The  hands  had  not  left  the  curtain  during  the  whole 
development  of  the  picture,  and  the  curtain  had  remained  open.  I 
took  a  flash-light  photograph. 

After  the  image  had  shown  itself  several  times,  while  the  plates 
were  being  changed,  the  sitting  was  closed.     Final  examination  negative. 

The  photographs  of  this  sitting  (Figs.  116  and  117)  are  not  among 
the  best,  owing  to  faulty  focusing  of  the  cameras.  On  the  left  side  of 
Eva's  head  we  see  an  oval  female  face  in  front  view  and  natural  size, 
but  it  is  narrower  than  the  medium's  face,  and  turns  round  towards  her, 
with  a  strong  bending  of  the  head  towards  the  right.  The  right  temple 
touches  Eva's  hair.  Otherwise,  it  seems  to  float  freely,  and  touches 
neither  Eva's  shoulder  nor  the  back  of  the  chair.  The  gaze  is  directed 
upwards  in  accordance  with  the  position  of  the  head.  Both  eyes 
look  slightly  distorted.  Mouth,  nose,  and  chin  are  regular  and  nicely 
drawn.  The  whole  structure  is  probably  fiat  rather  than  plastic, 
although  this  cannot  be  decided  from  the  photographs.  From  the 
point  of  view  of  criticism,  it  is  interesting  to  note  that  the  picture 
occurred  with  open  curtains  and  hands  always  visible. 

Nine  Sittings  from  the  4th  to  17th  November  1912, 

Negative. 

Unpleasant  family  news  had  an  unfavourable  influence  upon  Eva's 
disposition.  She  was  ill  for  several  days  and  vomited  blood.  According 
to  the  microscopic  analysis  made  in  the  Antoine  Hospital,  the  blood  is 
drawn  from  the  gullet,  a  symptom  which  is  frequently  combined  with 
hysterical  rumination. 

Sitting  of  the  18th  November  1912. 

Present. — Mme.  Bisson  and  the  author. 

Control. — Although  it  had  been  often  proved  that  the  medium's 
hands  took  no  part  in  the  development  and  disappearance  of  the  pheno- 

Fig.  ii6.     Author's  flashlight  i^hotograph  of  2  Xonkmber, 

1.J12. 

<  " 

O   S 

D    O 

SITTINGS   IN   OCTOBER   AND   NOVEMBER   1912  209 

mena  and  remained  visible,  yet  we  had  noticed  in  most  of  the  sittings, 
and  especially  during  the  total  closing  of  the  curtains,  a  temporary 
drawing  back  of  the  hands  which,  with  new  observers,  always  gave 
rise  to  the  suspicion  that  Eva's  hands  participated  in  the  production 
of  the  phenomena.  For  this  reason  Mme.  Bisson  accepted  the  author's 
proposal  to  change  the  control  in  such  a  manner  that  Eva's  hands 
should  not  leave  the  curtain  during  the  whole  sitting,  or,  at  least,  until 
the  complete  development  of  the  head  forms.  They  should  be  constantly 
illuminated  and  visible  to  us. 

In  order  to  increase  the  accuracy  of  the  record,  the  author  wrote 
his  report,  from  the  18th  November  onward,  during  the  sitting  itself. 

The  remaining  conditions  were  as  on  2nd  November.  When  I 
extinguished  the  light,  Mme.  Bisson  held  Eva's  hands,  which  grasped 
the  curtain,  and  were  placed  outside  the  curtain  on  her  knees.  From 
this  moment  the  five  fingers  of  both  hands  were  illuminated  before  our 
eyes.  The  author  also  touched  these  from  time  to  time,  to  make  sure 
that  they  were  really  Eva's  hands. 

9.1  P.M.  Commencement  of  sitting.  Hypnotisation  complete  in 
thirty  seconds. 

10.40  P.M.  In  spite  of  nearly  two  hours  of  waiting,  no  pheno- 
mena. New  control  seems  to  present  a  difficulty.  Strong  suggestion  to 
encourage  the  medium. 

10.45  P.M.  Whimpering  and  stertorous  breathing.  Eva  says  she 
feels  the  impending  occurrence  of  phenomena.  Her  trance  seems  to 
deepen.     Her  hands  are  motionless  in  the  same  place. 

10.55  P.M.  Curtain  opens.  On  the  medium's  left  thigh  there 
appears  a  mass,  nearly  an  inch  wide  and  6  inches  long,  so  that,  in  spite 
of  the  long  waiting,  the  proof  of  the  occurrence,  and  a  positive  result 
under  the  more  rigid  conditions,  is  obtained. 

11.4  P.M.  The  material  has  altered  its  place,  passing  on  to  the  left 
shoulder,  and  looks  like  a  white  cloth.  Hands  visible  all  the  time  on 
the  knees,  holding  the  curtains. 

11.9  P.M.  A  veil-like  fabric  on  Eva's  face.  The  gasping  becomes 
harder,  she  says :  "  Oh,  Juliette,  c'est  dur,  aide-moi  !  " 

11.22  P.M.  Control  unchanged.  I  observed  a  flat  white  disk,  the 
size  of  a  head,  lying  horizontally  on  the  left  shoulder  like  a  sheet  of 
paper. 

11.25  P.M.  I  distinctly  recognise  the  female  face  photographed  on 
2nd  November,  but  reversed,  the  forehead  being  directed  forward.  The 
whole  gives  the  impression  of  a  chalk  drawing  on  the  white  ground. 
The  narrow  oval  face  is  very  noticeable.  Hands  constantly  visible  in 
their  place. 

11.28  P.M.  On  the  shoulder  there  is  now  nothing  but  a  white  mass, 
resembling  a  folded  handkerchief. 

The  former  form  has  disappeared.     I  took  up  a  white  electric  torch. 

11.50  P.M.  Hands  still  visible.  Suddenly  I  illuminate  her  lap 
with  the  lamp.  In  the  black  folds  of  the  dress  there  are  several  white 
fragments  or  white  pieces  resembling  lint.  These  do  not  seem  to 
withstand  the  light,  and  disappear. 

11.55  P.M.  Mme.  Bisson  illuminates  the  medium's  lap.  Instead 
of  the  white  mass,  some  apparently  viscous,  light  grey  drops  and  some 

0 

210  *"  PHENOMENA    OF    MATERIALISATION 

liquid  material  are  seen.  With  a  glass  rod  I  took  up  some  of  these 
drops  and  placed  them  on  a  microscopic  slide,  for  a  subsequent  micro- 
scopic examination. 

12.4  A.M.  With  my  permission,  Eva  released  the  curtain,  which, 
however,  remained  open,  and  sat  beside  the  chair  on  the  floor.  Again 
a  sudden  illumination  with  a  red  electric  torch.  White  patches  and 
fragments  lie  on  the  seat  of  the  chair  beside  the  medium.  She  screams 
and  clutches  with  her  left  hand  at  the  chair,  whereupon  everything 
disappears,  as  if  by  magic.  Medium's  hands  empty.  No  further 
phenomena. 

12.30  A.M.     End  of  the  sitting.     Final  examination  negative. 

We  may  say  with  certainty  that  the  picture  on  the  left  shoulder 
was  produced  without  participation  of  the  hands.  That  it  remained 
there,  and  could  not  be  put  upright  nor  fixed,  may  be  due  to  the  exclusion 
of  manual  help. 

Sittings  of  the  20th  and  22nd  November  1912. 
Negative. 

Sitting  of  the  23rd  November  1912. 

Present. — Mme.  Bisson  and  the  author. 

Control. — As  in  previous  sittings. 

This  day  Eva,  as  a  preparation  for  the  sitting,  remained  in  a  state 
of  hypnotisation  from  3.30  to  6.30,  under  Mme.  Bisson's  supervision, 
in  her  study. 

Immediately  after  hypnotisation,  and  before  the  white  light  was 
switched  off,  both  Eva's  hands,  holding  the  curtains,  were  laid  on  her 
knees  in  front  of  the  curtain,  and  during  the  three  hours'  sitting  they 
remained  illuminated  by  the  red  light,  and  clearly  visible.  On  the 
extinction  of  the  white  light,  Mme.  Bisson  held  Eva's  hands.  The 
record  was  kept  during  the  sitting. 

8.45  P.M.    Hypnotisation  and  beginning  of  the  sitting.    Hands  visible. 

9  P.M.  Groaning  and  whimpering.  Mme.  Bisson  is  requested  to 
help  in  the  production  of  phenomena  by  an  effort  of  will  :  "  Demande 
bien,  ma  petite  Juliette." 

9.5  P.M.  Groaning  and  gasping,  accompanied  by  an  effort  of  the 
ventral  muscles. 

9.6  P.M.  Eva  crosses  her  hands  at  the  curtain,  holding  the  right 
curtain  with  her  left  hand  and  vice  versa.  •• 

9.10  P.M.  Increase  of  the  painful  efforts.  Eva  feels  the  coming  of 
mediumistic  phenomena.     She  says,  "  Cela  va  venir." 

9.11  P.M.  Stertorous  breathing  and  long  expirations.  "  Cela 
vient,  je  le  sens." 

9.16  P.M.  She  brought  her  hands  again  into  the  original  position, 
and  they  remained  visible,  holding  the  curtain.  Without  altering  this 
position,  Eva  stretches  her  head  out  of  the  cabinet  and  asks  Mme.  Bisson 
to  place  her  hands  on  her  forehead  and  neck,  which  was  done,  but  under 
the  strict  supervision  of  the  author. 

SITTINGS    IN   OCTOBER   AND   NOVEMBER   1912         211 

9.25  P.M.     Crossing  of  the  hands  in  the  light  as  at  9.6  p.m. 

9.31  P.M.  Eva  puts  her  head  out  of  the  cabinet  and  asks,  "  JuHette, 
tu  vois  ?  " 

9.36  P.M.  Restoration  of  the  original  position  of  the  hands  as  at 
9.16.  Eva  talks  a  lot  and  is  very  restless.  "  Cela  vient,  je  le  sens. 
Oh,  e'est  dur  !  " 

9.45  P.M.  Renewed  painful  gasping  and  moaning.  In  consequence 
of  the  manipulations  of  the  curtain,  the  curtain  rings  are  separated  so 
far  on  the  curtain-rod  that  light  falls  into  the  cabinet  from  above.  At 
Eva's  request,  Mme.  Bisson  mounts  on  a  chair  and  closes  the  curtain. 
No  change  in  the  position  of  the  hands. 

9.50  P.M.  Eva  again  puts  her  head  out  of  the  cabinet,  and 
Mme.  Bisson  pacifies  her  by  laying  her  hand  on  it. 

9.59  P.M.     More  pains.     "  Cela  vient." 

10.3  P.M.  Mme.  Bisson  holds  Eva's  hands  in  hers  in  front  of  the 
curtain,  so  that  they  remain  always  visible. 

10.21  P.M.     Stronger  efforts  and  motions. 

10.22  P.M.  Curtain  opened.  "  Tu  vois,  Juliette,"  she  says.  Deep 
long-drawn  respiration. 

10.28  P.M.  In  spite  of  several  changes  of  position,  made  during  the 
hour  and  a  half  of  the  sitting,  the  hands  had  not  been  withdrawn  within 
the  curtain  for  one  moment,  but  were  always  visible  in  the  red  light, 
only  now  I  had  the  impression  of  a  vague  vaporous  form  above  her 
head,  though  this  might  have  been  an  optical  illusion. 

10.29  P.M.     Hands  still  visible  in  the  same  place. 

10.30  P.M.  Curtain  opened.  An  illuminated  patch  about  the  size 
of  half  a  crown,  and  apparently  of  the  consistency  of  skin,  becomes 
visible  about  midway  between  the  medium's  thighs,  but  only  for  an 
instant,  for  it  is  withdrawTi  with  a  rapid  motion  towards  her  body,  and 
disappears.     The  curtain  is  closed  while  the  hands  remain  visible, 

10.32  P.M.  The  muscular  efforts  are  accompanied  by  a  chewing 
action,  as  if  Eva  had  something  in  her  mouth.  She  shows  some  feeling 
of  animal  satisfaction,  interwoven  with  states  of  tension  and  painful 
sensations. 

10.45  P.M.  The  hands  hold  the  curtains  closed,  thumbs  touching, 
and  all  ten  fingers  being  visible.  She  draws  the  thumbs  about  an  inch 
apart,  and,  between  them,  a  piece  of  material  is  seen,  exactly  the  colour 
of  Eva's  skin.  This  lies  in  front  of  the  curtain,  and  becomes  larger, 
thicker,  and  longer  under  my  gaze.  It  is  prolonged  backward,while 
in  front  it  takes  the  form  of  a  small  clenched  doll's  hand  of  ivory.  This 
miniature  structure,  of  about  the  size  of  a  small  plum,  ends  in  a  ribbon 
about  an  inch  wide,  running  back  towards  the  body  of  the  medium, 
and,  while  the  body  remains  steady,  it  is  suddenly  withdrawn,  and 
apparently  reabsorbed. 

10.48  P.M.     Deep  groaning  noises  and  slight  cramp  in  the  arms. 

10.50  P.M.  A  larger  piece  of  veil-like  material  is  seen  on  the  breast 
and  left  upper  arm,  like  torn,  ragged,  and  transparent  material.  Length 
about  12  to  15  inches. 

10.59  P.M.  Hands  still  visible  at  the  curtain.  Eva  is  quieter, 
having  passed  the  climax. 

11.10  P.M.     A  white  mass  of  material  on  her  left  shoulder. 

212  PHENOMENA    OF    MATERIALISATION 

11.14  P.M.  The  curtain  being  opened  again,  the  author  bends  his 
head  forward  behind  the  curtain,  so  that  he  can  observe  the  white  stuff 
on  the  shoulder.  Again  I  see  a  fiat,  white  disk,  larger  than  a  head,  of 
oval,  irregular  form,  lying  horizontally  on  the  left  shoulder.  On  the 
light  background  there  is  a  male  face  resembling  a  charcoal  drawing, 
with  chin  towards  the  back  wall.  It  is  remarkable  that  on  the  upper 
lip  a  moustache  emerges  plastically,  as  if  at  the  position  of  the  upper 
lip,  on  a  larger  drawing  on  cardboard,  a  real  moustache  had  been  stuck 
on.  During  the  closing  of  the  curtain  a  rustling  is  heard,  as  if  soft 
paper  were  being  rubbed. 

11.18  P.M.  Hands  unchanged.  Curtain  opens.  The  disk  is  still  in 
the  same  place,  and  makes  a  motion  upwards  and  forwards,  the  back 
portion  raising  itself.  This  motion  was  apparently  aided  by  a  simul- 
taneous motion  of  Eva's  head. 

11.25  P.M.  During  the  next  opening  I  saw  the  picture  rolled  up 
like  a  paper-bag,  with  its  point  touching  Eva's  mouth,  while  the  broad 
opening  pointed  upward. 

11.27  P.M.  Everything  has  disappeared  without  a  trace.  Eva 
opens  the  curtains  very  wide  and  stretches  forth  her  head.  I  looked 
at  the  back  of  the  chair,  and  the  sides  of  the  cabinet,  and  illuminated 
everything  with  a  white  torch.  From  the  beginning  to  the  end  of  the 
sitting  the  hands  had  not  left  their  place  for  an  instant,  and  so  could 
have  had  no  connection  with  the  genesis,  motion,  and  disappearance 
of  the  phenomena.  The  sitting  was  continued,  but  without  any  further 
result,  and  was  closed  at  12.10  a.m.     Final  examination  negative. 

Sittings  of  the  25th  and  26th  November  1912. 
Negative. 

Sitting  of  the  27th  November  1912. 

Present. — Mme.  Bisson  and  the  author. 

Control. — As  at  the  sitting  on  23rd  November. 

Several  hours  of  hypnotisation  during  the  afternoon  as  a  preparation. 

9.1  P.M.  Hypnotisation  in  thirty  seconds.  The  hands  to-day  also 
remained  visible  in  the  light,  in  front  of  the  curtain,  until  the  pheno- 
menon was  well  developed. 

9.15  P.M.  Great  restlessness  and  groaning,  as  well  as  the  usual 
respiratory  symptoms. 

9.22  P.M.  An  irregular  wisp  appears  on  the  medium's  breast, 
reaching  down  to  the  belt. 

9.30  P.M.  A  long  grey  fragment  hangs  out  of  the  mouth.  No 
details  can  be  given,  as  the  exposure  was  too  short.  Mme.  Bisson 
holds  my  porcelain  dish  under  the  fragment,  and  also  catches  in  her 
hand  some  drops  of  a  liquid  material,  which  she  also  puts  into  the  dish. 
The  latter  finally  contained  1  c.  cm.  of  liquid. 

9.35  P.M.  Strong  muscular  efforts.  Eva  lays  her  feet  in 
Mme.  Bisson's  lap. 

9.40  P.M.     Painful  whimpering  amd  moaning. 

Fig.  119.     Side  view  (enlarged)  of  Fig.  118 
taken  within  the  cabinet. 

Fig.  1 20.     Author's  flashlight  photograph  of  30  November,   1912. 
Fig.  121    (Inset).     Side  view  of  Fig.  120. 

SITTINGS   IN   OCTOBER   AND   NOVEMBER   1912  213 

9.45  P.M.  Opening  of  the  cameras,  while  keeping  an  eye  on  the 
position  of  the  hands  at  the  curtain. 

9,55  P.M.     "  C'est  dur  !    je  vois  une  tete." 

10.15  P.M.     Pause,  without  change  in  the  position  of  the  hands. 

10.20  P.M.  The  whimpering  grows  stronger,  and  more  laborious. 
No  change  in  the  position  of  the  hands. 

10.30  P.M.  Exposure  of  a  head  image,  first  on  Eva's  breast  and 
then  on  her  shoulder.  Possibly  a  small  portrait,  but  it  cannot  be  dis- 
tinctly recognised.  Up  to  now  the  hands  have  not  been  withdrawn 
behind  the  curtain  for  an  instant. 

10.42  P.M.  Flash-light.  As  the  curtain  opened  I  seem  to  see  a 
white  disk  with  a  fragment  depending  from  it.  The  phenomenon  dis- 
appears totally. 

10.50  P.M.     End  of  the  sitting.     Final  examination  negative. 

The  liquid  caught  in  the  porcelain  dish  looks  viscous  and  colourless. 
It  has  no  smell,  and  a  grey  film  seems  to  lie  over  it.  Microscopical  pre- 
parations were  made. 

Development  of  the  negatives  produced  a  surprise,  inasmuch  as 
they  showed  only  a  veil-like  disk,  without  the  drawing  of  a  head.  At 
the  moment  of  the  flash-light  Eva  had  turned  her  head  to  the  left,  so 
that  she  covered  the  structure  attached  to  her  hair  on  the  left.  We 
therefore  see  the  outer  semicircular  edge  of  a  wisp  falling  down  on  her 
left  shoulder,  with  a  form  resembling  that  of  previous  pictures  (Fig.  118). 
The  camera,  in  the  roof  of  the  cabinet,  shows  that  a  flat  white  disk, 
about  the  size  of  a  head,  lies  on  the  medium's  hair. 

Of  much  greater  interest  is  the  result  of  the  photograph  taken  with 
the  camera  inside  the  cabinet  (Fig.  119),  giving  pictures  3|  by  5|  inches. 
Here  the  flat  object,  which  projects  behind  the  medium's  head  towards 
the  back,  appears  with  four  distinct  parallel  vertical  creases,  which  are 
also  shown  in  the  stereoscopic  photograph.  There  is  a  narrow  horizontal 
strip,  also  interrupted  by  creases,  on  which  we  can  recognise  the  words 
"  Le  "  (small  type)  "  Miro  "  (large  type).  That  is  evidently  meant  to  be 
"  Le  Miroir."  We  can  just  recognise  the  top  of  an  "  I  "  following  the 
"  O,"  but  the  next  "  R  "  is  covered.  I  cannot  form  any  opinion  on 
this  curious  result. 

Sitting  of  the  29th  November  1912 

Present. — Mme.  Bisson  and  the  author. 

Conditions  as  on  27th  November. 

Mme.  Bisson  only  saw  the  proofs  of  the  photograph  of  the 
27th  November  immediately  before  this  sitting,  and  was  as  much 
puzzled  by  the  result  as  was  the  author,  Eva  did  not  notice  anything, 
but  thought  that  the  photographs  had  been  failures,  through  an  unfor- 
tunate turning  of  the  head  towards  the  left.  She  did  not  see  the  proofs 
before  the  sitting,  nor  were  they  discussed  with  her.  Eva  did,  indeed, 
say  to  Mme.  Bisson  at  midday  on  the  29th,  during  the  preparatory 
hypnotisation,  "  Berthe  wanted  to  show  you  something  special." 
Mme.  Bisson  hypnotised  her  at  9.30  p.m.  Hardly  had  she  gone  into 
hypnosis   when   she   said   the   word    "  Miroir."     She   then   continued. 

214  PHENOMENA    OF    MATERIALISATION 

"  Elle  (Berthe)  voulait  vous  ecrire  autrefois,  elle  voulait  vous  envoyer 
sa  pens6e  ecrite.  Vous  etes  pour  elle  son  miroir.  Elle  se  revolt  ici. 
Vous  avez  une  photographie  d'une  pens6e  de  Berthe.  Elle  a  la  joie  de 
se  creer  un  autre  image."  ("  She  (Berthe)  wanted  to  write  to  you  the 
other  day.  She  wanted  to  send  you  her  written  thought.  You  are 
her  mirror.  She  sees  herself  here.  You  have  a  photograph  of  the 
thought  of  Berthe.    She  has  the  joy  of  creating  another  image  for  herself.") 

On  questioning  her  further,  Eva  said  that  the  matter  attached  to 
her  head  had  not  been  a  picture,  but  had  only  been  intended  to  materia- 
lise that  word  for  us. 

To-day's  sitting  was  negative.     It  ended  at  11  p.m. 

Sitting  of  the  30th  November  1912. 

Present. — Mme.  Bisson  and  the  author. 

Eva  was  hypnotised  in  the  afternoon  as  a  preparation  for  the 
evening  sitting. 

Control. — As  on  23rd  November  1912.  Eva's  hands  were  brought 
in  front  of  the  curtain,  in  the  white  electric  light,  immediately  after 
hypnotisation,  and  remained  visible  till  after  the  appearance  of  the 
materialised  picture. 

9.10  P.M.  Moaning  and  bleating  noises.  She  says,  "  Juliette, 
demande  bien,"  which  means  that  Mme.  Bisson  is  to  support  the 
medium's  efforts  by  an  effort  of  will. 

9.20  to  9.25  P.M.  Mme.  Bisson  sees,  on  the  medium's  breast  and 
shoulder,  initial  materialisations  in  the  form  of  fine  misty  structures. 

9.28  P.M.  Eva  is  restless,  puts  in  remarks,  but  takes  care  that  her 
hands  are  always  visible  at  the  curtain.  Her  feet  are  stretched  for- 
wards, and  lie  between  those  of  Mme.  Bisson,  who  sits  facing  her. 

9.30  P.M.  She  draws  the  curtain  to  and  fro,  possibly  to  allow  light 
to  fall  upon  some  product. 

9.35  P.M.  The  well-known  respiration  becomes  more  active,  there  are 
plenty  of  sounds  and  indistinct  words,  giving  the  impression  that  Eva 
had  something  in  her  mouth  which  hindered  speech.  We  hear  whining, 
gasping,  and  pressing,  and  the  hands  grip  the  curtain  convulsively. 

9.37  P.M.  For  the  first  time  to-day  the  author  sees  a  long  strip  of 
white  material  falling  from  the  left  shoulder  down  to  the  breast.  The 
hands  are  constantly  controlled.  During  repeated  exposures,  the 
material  appears  to  become  more  compact,  and  to  assume  the  shape  of 
a  white  disk  the  size  of  a  head. 

9.55  P.M.  On  the  disk  lying  on  her  breast,  I  notice  features  as  if 
drawn  with  charcoal,  but  cannot  say  whether  the  face  is  male  or  female. 

10  P.M.     Moaning  and  whining. 

10.6  P.M.  We  hear  a  rustling  as  if  paper  were  being  rubbed  together, 
while  Eva's  hands  are  steadily  visible. 

10.11  P.M.  Eva  asked  us  to  postpone  the  photograph,  as  the  face 
was  not  yet  sufficiently  clearly  developed.  With  my  permission,  she 
then  drew  back  her  hands.  I  assumed  that  she  would  use  them  to  fix 
up  the  picture,  but  had  no  objection  to  that,  as  I  had  already  seen  the 
picture  partly  developed. 

m^^m. 

'A" 

Fig.  122.     Enlargement  of  Fig.  120. 

■ 

■ 

^^H^^^^^l 

1 

1 

Fig.  123.     Author's  second  photograph   of  30  Xovcmber,   1912. 

c 

w 

t. 

y. 

r.5 

< 

u 

>. 

w 

t; 

K 

H 

K     - 
O  2 

3  « 
^    CO 

.^  i 

:^  u 

o  w 

in  Q 
I/)  "^ 

(2  o 

"  to 

s 

o 

5  o  w 

"  «  z 

^  < 

Fig.  127     Mme.  Bisson's  flashlight  photograph  of  5  January,  1913,  with  enlargement. 

(Retouched.) 

SITTINGS   IN   OCTOBER   AND   NOVEMBER   1912         215 

10.46  P.M.  After  several  exposures,  I  see  a  structure  on  her  head, 
and  ignite  the  flash-light.  I  change  the  plates  at  once.  Then  I  stand 
behind  Mme.  Bisson,  and  see  on  Eva's  head,  in  a  half-inclined  position, 
a  female  face  on  a  sort  of  disk.  It  resembles  a  coloured  drawing  on 
Japanese  paper. 

10.55  P.M.  The  image  is  now  seen  on  her  left  arm,  and  seems  to 
stand  at  right  angles  to  the  curtain  at  the  level  of  Eva's  head. 

10.59  P.M.     Second  photograph. 

11.5  to  8  P.M.  She  shows  the  product  in  several  exposures  to 
Mme.  Bisson,  who  sits  opposite,  holding  both  flaps  of  the  curtain  at 
the  bottom  with  her  left  hand,  and  obviously  manipulating  the  picture 
with  her  right,  moving  it  up  and  down,  or  trying  to  detach  it  from  its 
position  (Fig.  123). 

11.11  P.M.  Mme.  Bisson  claims  to  have  seen  the  image  on  the  back  wall. 

11.13  P.M.  The  author  illuminated  the  cabinet  unexpectedly  with 
a  white  electric  torch.  Everything  had  disappeared  without  a  trace. 
The  sitting  was  closed.  Final  examination  of  the  medium  and  cabinet 
negative. 

The  successful  photographs  (Figs.  120,  121,  and  122)  of  this  sitting 
show  us,  on  Eva's  head,  a  life-sized  female  head,  in  the  form  of  a  drawing 
on  a  disk  cut  out.  The  eyes  are  very  far  apart,  and  the  forehead  and 
the  left  ear  are  invisible,  being  entirely  covered  by  hair.  The  nose  is 
broad  and  curved,  and  the  open  mouth  shows  the  teeth.  The  hair 
surrounds  the  face  like  a  wreath,  and  over  the  back  of  the  head  and 
part  of  the  neck  a  white  cloth  is  draped. 

From  the  artistic  point  of  view  the  portrait  may  be  considered  as 
extremely  finely  drawn  and  interesting.  The  vivid  expression,  especi- 
ally that  of  the  eyes,  has  something  animal  and  bloodthirsty  about  it, 
full  of  spirit.  The  half -open  mouth  and  the  lips,  which  appear  to  be 
reddened,  indicate  sensuality. 

The  outer  circle  of  cloth  gives  a  remarkable  yielding  and  rough 
impression,  as  if  the  mass  were  some  soft  material  product,  and  it  shows 
no  resemblance  to  the  sharp  margins  of  cardboard.  In  general,  the 
whole  veil-drapery  of  the  hair,  especially  as  seen  in  the  stereoscopic 
photograph,  looks  extraordinarily  delicate  and  realistic,  like  a  real  veil. 
We  cannot  escape  the  impression  that  in  this  case  a  sketch,  commenced 
by  drawing,  had  been  finished  by  modelling. 

In  the  second  picture  (Figs.  123  and  124)  of  30th  November  the 
same  image  hangs  by  a  black  wiry  cord,  with  some  branches  attached, 
which  joins  the  left  curtain  with  Eva's  hair.  A  small  piece  of  whitish 
substance  is  attached  to  it.  A  veil-like  fabric,  of  extraordinarily  loose 
composition,  is  also  suspended  by  it,  and  covers  the  whole  face,  so  that 
only  the  left  side  can  be  seen.  Here,  as  well  as  in  the  side  view  of  the 
image  (Fig,  124),  we  distinctly  see  a  slanting  parallel  fold,  which  cannot 
be  seen  in  the  first  picture.  The  portions  of  the  face  lying  under  the 
veil  in  the  shadow,  especially  nose  and  mouth,  are  distorted  and  no 
longer  recognisable  as  such.  The  decomposition  process  seems  to  have 
already  begun,  and  is  perhaps  the  cause  of  the  fold.  Since  Eva  had 
been  allowed  to  withdraw  her  hands  before  the  first  photograph,  there 
is  nothing  against  the  assumption  of  a  manual  arrangement  of  this 
remarkable  picture.     An  inspection  of  the  curtain  did  not,  as  one  might 

216  PHENOMENA    OF    MATERIALISATION 

expect,  show  a  pin-hole  at  the  point  where  the  cord  had  been  fastened, 
but  a  whitish  spot,  resembling  the  spots  which  sometimes  remain  as 
a  residue  of  the  substance  on  the  dress.  The  fastening,  therefore,  might 
have  been  accomplished  by  sticking  on  the  chain. 

The  whole  circumstances  here  described  are  very  peculiar,  especially 
since  there  were  no  aids  towards  the  production  of  such  a  complicated 
collection  of  things,  either  on  Eva's  body  or  in  the  cabinet.  If,  therefore, 
we  admit,  in  principle,  the  materialisation  process,  we  may  make  up 
our  minds  to  assume  that  the  means  of  fastening  the  artistic  products 
are  generated  and  disappear  in  the  same  way  as  the  products  them- 
selves. 

Observations  in  December  1912  and  January 
and  February  1913  (Paris). 

After  the  author's  departure,  Dr  R.,  the  specialist  for  digestive  troubles 
already  referred  to,  in  connection  with  Dr  Bourbon,  continued  the 
observations  under  the  same  conditions  as  the  author. 

In  the  first  positive  sitting  of  9th  December,  phenomena  of  moving 
materiel  began  similar  to  those  of  the  last  Munich  sitting  of  11th  Sep- 
tember 1912.  During  the  final  control  of  the  cabinet,  Dr  R.  found  on 
the  floor  a  piece  of  soft,  grey,  half-liquid  material,  which  was  preserved 
for  chemical  and  microscopic  examination. 

As  shown  by  Mme.  Bisson's  communications,  the  further  sittings 
up  to  20th  December  1912  were  negative,  but  for  some  minor  phenomena. 

It  was  only  on  23rd  December  that  phenomena  began  again  to 
appear,  and  in  the  first  instance  in  presence  of  Mme.  Bisson  only,  who 
on  that  evening  operated  with  the  medium  in  a  naked  condition.  About 
this  she  writes  as  follows  in  a  letter,  dated  24th  December  1912  : — 

"  At  first  the  material  emerged  from  the  vagina  in  the  shape  of  a 
ribbon  split  at  its  lower  end.  Then  it  jumped  on  to  Eva's  shoulder. 
Finally  the  female  image  '  Berthe  '  appeared  under  Eva's  chin,  as  if 
stuck  to  her  breast,  with  its  face  turned  sideways.  The  medium's 
mouth  remained  inactive  in  this  case.  Then  the  head  appeared  on 
Eva's  shoulder,  following  the  motions  she  made  with  her  chin.  I 
insisted  that  Eva's  hands  should  never  leave  the  curtain,  in  order  to 
get  her  accustomed  to  that  requirement,  although  I  was  operating  with 
her  alone.  The  phenomenon  could  be  followed  without  interruption. 
During  the  process  of  the  formation  of  the  face  I  heard,  without  seeing 
anything,  the  curious  noise  resembling  the  rustling  of  paper  rubbed 
together,  the  curtain  being  open.  Eva's  hands  either  grasped  the 
curtain  or  lay  in  mine.  During  the  noise  I  held  her  hands.  The  sitting 
lasted  one  hour." 

Sitting  of  the  30th  December  1912. 

Present. — Mme.  Bisson. 

A  further  photographic  record  (Figs.  125  and  126)  of  a  perfectly  flat 
face-fragment,  closely  resembling  in  design  and  composition  the  head 

Fig.    12S. 

Mme.    Bisson's    flashlight    photograph    of 
5  January,   1913.     (Ke touched.) 

^  O 

Si    ■< 

t/)  ^ 

O  vO 

u< 

OBSERVATIONS  IN  DECEMBER  1912  TO  FEBRUARY  1913     217 

photographed  at  Munich  on  10th  September  1912,  was  made  on  30th 
December.  The  image,  resembhng  a  crumpled  and  then  smoothed-out 
sheet  of  paper,  is  fastened  to  the  medium's  hair  at  her  left  temple,  and 
casts  a  shadow  on  her  face,  which  is  turned  to  the  right.  Under  the 
mouth  a  piece  seems  to  be  torn  out  at  right  angles.  The  dark-shaded 
portion  corresponding  to  the  hair  is  prolonged  downward  dispropor- 
tionately, and  shows  a  number  of  deep  creases  and  rectangular  super- 
positions of  the  same  thin,  paper-like  substance,  giving  the  impression 
as  if  thej^  were  laid  or  stuck  on.  The  design  of  the  face  leaves  no  doubt 
that  this  portrait  is  intended  to  represent  the  woman  photographed 
at  Munich  on  10th  September.  The  outer  margins  of  the  profile  are 
torn,  especially  at  the  nose,  and  in  other  ways  the  outside  of  this  object 
is  too  defective  and  crumpled  to  permit  a  detailed  comparison.  As 
regards  the  experimental  conditions,  the  medium's  hands  were  not 
once  withdrawn  during  the  sitting,  being  at  the  curtain  under  Mme. 
Bisson's  eyes,  so  that  the  medium  could  not  use  them. 

The  appearance  of  the  same  image,  or  type,  of  face  or  artistic 
production  during  sittings,  separated  by  considerable  intervals,  has  been 
observed  on  several  occasions.  ^ 

Sitting  or  the  5th  January  1913. 

Present. — Mme.  Bisson. 

The  sitting  of  5th  January  1913,  in  which  Mme.  Bisson  operated 
with  the  naked  medium  alone,  shows  a  great  step  in  advance,  inasmuch 
as  she  succeeded  for  the  first  time  in  photographing  the  teleplasm  en 
the  medium's  naked  body.  The  illumination  was  the  same  as  in  all 
the  sittings.  During  this  sitting  also  the  hands  did  not  leave  the 
curtain,  and  were  therefore  controlled  from  beginning  to  end  in  such 
a  way  that  the  medium  could  not  use  them. 

The  first  photograph  of  5th  January  (Fig.  127)  shows  the  hypnotised 
medium  with  open  eyes  holding  the  curtains  open. 

According  to  Mme.  Bisson's  report,  the  photographed  material  came 
from  the  region  of  the  navel  (as  if  emerging  from  it),  and  moved  like 
a  living  reptile  in  serpentine  windings  or  jumps,  upwards  over  the  skin. 
Suddenly  a  thread-like  connection  was  formed  between  the  medium's 
mouth  and  the  material.  At  that  moment  the  flash-light  was  ignited. 
The  material  resembles  a  collection  of  skinny  substance  of  intestinal 
origin,  and  is  obviously  composed  of  numerous  loops,  shreds,  and  strips. 
In  spite  of  the  disturbance  by  the  flash-light,  this  packet  of  teleplastic 
matter  did  not  disappear,  but  fastened  itself  with  two  loops  formed 
out  of  the  substance  to  the  medium's  teats,  joining  them  tc  the  navel 
in  the  shape  of  a  three-cornered  net,  as  shown  in  the  second  flash-light 
photograph  (Figs.  128  and  129)  of  this  sitting.  The  very  remarkable 
product  shows  on  the  left  a  broad  coherent  strip,  consisting  of  an 
irregular  tangle  of  meshes  of  different  sizes.  The  middle  piece  is 
stretched  and  transparent,  so  that  the  net -like  character  of  the  structure, 
and  the  medium's  skin  under  it,  are  distinctly  seen.  The  whole  is 
traversed  by  irregular  branches  of  varying  thickness,  which  in  turn  are 
joined  by  a  fine  threadwork,  in  parallel  lines,  or  in  numerous  small 
polygons,   like   a   delicate   stretched  animal   membrane.     The   lengths 

218  PHENOMENA    OF    MATERIALISATION 

joining  on  to  the  teats  and  the  navel  consist  of  quite  irregular  thick 
cords  of  the  same  ground  substance.  Some  black  knotted  threads,  one 
of  which  cuts  across  the  net,  and  is  even  woven  into  the  meshes,  do  not 
differ  in  any  way  in  appearance  from  textile  fabrics  (black  yarn  ?),  and 
offer  a  striking  contrast  to  the  irregular  structure  closely  resembling  a 
natural  product  (mesentery),  which  forms  the  dominant  characteristic 
of  the  phenomenon  and  shows  itself  in  the  projections,  cords,  and 
attachments. 

Immediately  after  the  second  photograph,  Mme.  Bisson  stood  back 
in  order  to  close  the  cameras.  At  that  moment  Eva  arose,  frightened 
by  this  disturbance,  and  still  covered  by  the  material,  emerged  from 
the  cabinet,  and  sank  fainting  into  Mme.  Bisson's  arms.  At  the  same 
moment  the  mass  disappeared.  The  medium  recovered  slowly  under 
the  care  of  her  protectress. 

Sitting  of  the  6th  January  1913. 

Present. — Mme.  Bisson. 

The  first  photograph  (Fig.  130)  of  this  day's  sitting  shows  the  hypno- 
tised medium,  whose  hands  remained  under  observation  from  beginning 
to  end,  with  open  eyes,  head  bent  forward,  and  crossed  hands,  which 
hold  the  curtains.  On  her  left  wrist  there  lies  a  compact  piece  of  white 
substance,  with  two  finger-shaped  attachments  pointing  forwards, 
while  behind  the  left  curtain  a  shred  hangs  down.  The  piece  of  material 
is  joined  to  the  mouth  by  an  irregular  cord. 

Second  photograph  (Figs.  131,  132,  and  133).  Eva's  left  shoulder, 
from  the  left  forearm  to  the  ear,  is  covered  by  an  obviously  fiat,  deformed, 
and  distorted  face  portrait,  prepared  on  a  soft  base.  The  left  curtain 
passes  over  the  nose  slantingly  downwards.  The  right  eye  and  the 
upper  bridge  of  the  nose  are  clearly  drawn.  There  are  several  deep 
clefts  at  right  angles  to  each  other,  as  if  the  picture  had  been  made 
by  combining  and  superimposing  several  pieces.  The  substance  itself 
has  the  same  irregular  character  as  before,  and  does  not  resemble  the 
structure  of  textile  fabrics  or  paper. 

Of  greater  interest  than  this  image  are  perhaps  the  two  fragments 
of  fingers  lying  on  the  hair  over  Eva's  right  temple,  and  consisting  of 
three  joints  in  a  flexed  position.  Only  about  half  of  the  third  phalanx 
is  visible.  The  position  of  the  nail  is  clearly  marked,  especially  in  the 
front  finger,  and  the  whole  drawing  is  finely  executed.  Not  much  can 
be  said  about  its  plastic  development,  since  there  are  no  stereoscopic 
photographs.  The  foundation  substance  does  not  show  the  histological 
structure  of  epidermis,  but  that  of  our  teleplasm.  The  soft  flowing 
lines  of  the  drawing,  and  the  covering  of  part  of  the  lower  line  by  the 
hair,  are  notable.  A  shred-like  piece  of  material  also  hangs  down  on 
the  right  from  Eva's  hair  on  to  her  shoulder. 

Sitting  of  the  9th  January  1913. 

Present. — Mme.  Bisson. 
Medium  half  naked,  dressed  only  in  the  tights.     The  hands  were 

Fig.    132.      First   enlargement   from   Fig.    131. 

CQ 

Fig.  135.     Mme.  Bisson's  flashlight  photograph  of  9  January,   1913, 
with  enlargement  from  fig.  i34. 

Fig.  136.     Mme.  Bisson's  flashlight  photograph  of  19  January,   1913. 

OBSERVATIONS  IN  DECEMBER  1912  TO  FEBRUARY  1913     219 

visible  at  the  curtain  during  the  whole  sitting,  and  took  no  part  in  the 
production  of  the  phenomena. 

This  day  the  material  formed  itself  at  the  teats  and  the  navel, 
fastened  itself  with  a  cord  on  the  left  teat  by  an  automatic  motion,  and 
joined  itself  below  with  tlie  navel,  which  forms  the  centre  of  the  end 
piece,  and  is  clearly  seen  on  the  photograph  (Figs.  134  and  135).  As 
in  the  picture  of  the  5th  January,  the  teleplastic  substance  is  composed 
of  cords,  shreds,  and  strips  in  a  free  arrangement.  In  the  sitting  of 
6th  March  Eva  demonstrated  the  same  phenomenon  to  the  author 
on  her  bare  skin  in  such  a  manner  that  he  could,  by  his  own  eyes,  confirm 
the  accuracy  of  the  photograph  of  9th  January.  After  the  ignition  of 
the  magnesium  powder  on  9th  January,  Mme.  Bisson  endeavoured  to 
withdraw  carefully  and  slowly  from  the  cabinet,  in  order  to  close  the 
cameras.  At  that  moment  the  teleplasm  crept  like  a  living  thing  with 
a  rapid  independent  motion  down  the  black  tights  on  to  the  carpet, 
and,  detached  from  the  body  of  the  medium,  it  crept  outside  the  cabinet 
towards  Mme.  Bisson.  When  it  had  advanced  about  a  yard  in  front 
of  the  curtain,  Eva  suddenly  rose  and  fell  forward  on  to  the  floor, 
covering  the  material  with  her  body,  and  lay  there  in  a  faint.  When 
she  was  lifted  up  nothing  was  to  be  seen,  the  substance  having  been 
apparently  reabsorbed  by  her  body. 

Sitting  of  the  19th  January  1913. 

Present. — Mme.  Bisson. 

Conditions. — Medium  nude,  except  for  a  black  cloth  over  abdomen 
and  feet.  Hands  visible  at  the  curtain  during  the  whole  sitting.  The 
photograph  taken  at  this  day's  sitting  (Fig.  136)  marks  an  advance, 
inasmuch  as  the  investigator  succeeded  in  photographing,  besides  some 
teleplastic  material,  a  male  portrait  on  Eva's  naked  body. 

We  see  the  medium  with  head  bent  forward,  holding  the  right 
curtain  wide  open,  while  the  left  curtain  is  tightly  stretched,  and  cuts 
off  the  left  side  of  the  image. 

Over  the  medium's  navel  there  lies  a  packet  of  material  of  the  same 
description  as  in  the  last  sittings.  The  broad  life-sized  portrait,  joined 
to  it  by  a  short  ribbon,  covers  nearly  the  whole  body,  from  the  navel 
to  the  neck,  and  from  one  hip  to  the  other,  and  is  obviously  a  pictorial 
product  on  a  thin  or  paper-like  base,  which  seems  to  be  cut  out.  It 
has  several  square  folds,  which  clearly  indicate  a  sheet  regularly  folded 
at  right  angles,  and  subsequently  opened  out. 

We  have  here  an  artistically  successful  male  face  with  a  lively 
expression.  The  whole  plan,  the  drawing  and  shading  of  the  head, 
and  especially  the  way  in  which  the  moustache  is  placed  over  the 
straight  fold,  are  remarkable.  The  opening  of  the  waistcoat,  the  tie, 
and  the  shape  of  the  collar  correspond  to  the  modern  fashion,  and 
impart  an  up-to-date  character  to  the  picture. 

The  left  forehead,  the  cheek,  and  the  left  eye  are  covered  by  a  black 
sheet.  A  detailed  observation  shows  that  the  middle  of  one  eye  is 
seen  near  the  left  temple  displaced  towards  the  outside,  as  if  this  dis- 
placement were  due  to  a  fault  in  the  act  of  artistic  creation. 

220  PHENOMENA    OF    MATERIALISATION 

The  contemplation  of  this  mediumistic  product  will  no  doubt  give 
rise  to  the  greatest  misgivings  on  account  of  its  paper-like,  sharply  cut, 
fiat  appearance,  and  the  regular  square  creasing  in  the  drawing  itself. 
An  unfolded  picture  smuggled  in  could  hardly  look  different,  unless  we 
consider  that  the  combination  of  fine  detail,  as  in  the  drawing  of  eyes 
and  forehead  with  coarse  angular  sketchiness  (moustache)  speaks  for  the 
originality  of  the  design,  and  therefore  against  a  stereotyped  picture 
executed  according  to  a  definite  artistic  principle.  Yet  the  creases  and 
furrows  of  the  picture  fit  together  so  accurately  that  the  author  was 
led  to  cut  out  the  outlines  of  the  head  in  paper  after  an  enlargement  and 
to  fold  it  up  according  to  the  creases  shown  in  the  photograph,  with 
the  result  that  the  various  creases  fitted  accurately. 

Sitting  of  the  13th  February  1913. 

Present. — Mme.  Bisson. 

Conditions. — Medium  nude.  The  feet,  resting  on  Mme.  Bisson's 
knees,  are  covered  with  a  black  cloth  reaching  up  towards  the  hips. 
Eva's  hands  do  not  leave  the  curtain  during  the  whole  sitting. 

This  day's  flash-light  photograph  (Fig.  137),  which  only  succeeded 
in  the  stereoscopic  camera,  shows  again  a  face  portrait  on  the  bare  skin. 

Eva  sits  on  the  chair  in  the  cabinet  with  her  head  bent  forward, 
and  opens  the  curtain  with  her  right  hand,  while  with  the  left  she  tries 
to  draw  it  as  a  protection  in  front  of  the  head,  which  covers  the  whole 
abdomen  up  to  the  breast.  The  flat  male  face  shown  in  low  relief  gives  a 
front  view  with  the  gaze  directed  towards  the  right.  The  nose  is  dis- 
torted and  a  failure.  The  right  eye  is  distinctly  recognisable,  while  the 
left  eye  is  covered  by  Eva's  left  hand.  The  ground  substance  on  which 
the  form  is  developed  seems  to  be  soft,  for  it  adapts  itself  to  the  contour 
of  the  body.  The  lower  part  of  the  face  stands  out  in  accordance  with 
the  convexity  of  the  abdomen,  while  the  region  of  the  eye  has  sunk 
into  Eva's  waist.  The  forehead  again  bends  upwards,  corresponding 
to  the  position  of  the  thorax  while  sitting. 

Perhaps  the  most  striking  point  about  the  face  is  the  fully  developed 
pointed  beard,  which  emerges  plastically  from  the  basis,  and  seems  to 
consist  of  a  curly-haired  or  felt-like  mass,  unless  we  have  to  do  with 
real  hair,  a  point  which  cannot  be  decided  from  the  photographs  {see 
the  stereoscopic  photograph).  The  face  is  framed,  very  curiously,  on 
the  right  side  by  a  strip  of  white  material,  having  the  thickness  of  a 
finger,  while  the  left  side  is  hidden  from  observation  by  the  medium's 
hand.  On  the  second  photograph  of  the  13th  February  Eva's  right 
hand  covers  the  forehead. 

We  may  certainly  conclude  from  the  above  details  that  the  object 
is  not  a  portrait  drawn  on  paper,  but  is  a  fiat  mask  in  low  relief,  with 
a  soft  and  fairly  cohesive  basis,  but  with  quite  a  realistic  development 
of  the  hairy  portions.  The  shortened  view  of  the  half-concealed 
structure  in  the  enlargement  does  not  allow  us  to  form  an  opinion  as 
to  the  faciei  expression.  But  on  the  second  (smaller)  photograph  the 
left  eye  is  remarkably  lively,  whereas  only  a  straight  line  of  the  thickness 
of  a  finger  is  there  to  indicate  the  moustache.     Here  also  a  rough, 

Fig.   137. 

Two      FLASHLIGHT      PHOTOGRAPHS      TAKEN      BY      .MMB. 

BissoN,   13  February,   1913. 

Fig.   138.       Mme.     Bisson's     flashlight     photograph     of 
23    February,     1913.     First    photograph    of    an    entire 

PHANTOM,      together      WITH       NUDE      MEDIUM       (ReTOUCHED). 

Fig.   139.     Simultaneous  view  of  Fig.   138  from  above 
(roof  stereoscope). 

Fig.   140.     Mme.  Bisson's  flashlight  photograph,  simultaneous  with  Fig.   138.     Whole 

PHANTOM,    with    NUDE    MEDIUM.        (RETOUCHED.) 

OBSERVATIONS  IN  DECEMBER  1912  TO  FEBRUARY  1913     221 

wooden,  sketchy  scheme  is  combined  with  a  lifelike  expression  as  on 
the  negative  of  19th  January. 

Sitting  of  the  23rd  February  1913. 

Present. — Mme.  Bisson. 

Since  4  p.m.  Eva  complained  of  pains  and  swelling  of  the  breasts. 
After  dinner  she  suffered  from  palpitation.  A  sitting  had  not  been 
planned  for  this  Sunday  evening.  Still,  Mme.  Bisson  was  led  by  the 
medium's  curious  behaviour  to  hypnotise  her  in  her  day  dress  in  the 
cabinet  after  supper.  Hardly  had  Eva  entered  the  trance  condition 
when  she  asked  to  be  undressed,  threw  off  all  her  clothes,  and  discarded 
even  the  black  cloth  with  which  she  had  been  covered  during  previous 
sittings. 

A  deep  trance  followed,  but  of  a  character  different  from  that  of 
previous  sittings.  Curiously  enough,  no  material  appeared  on  her 
body  to-day.  Suddenly,  after  about  thirty  minutes,  on  opening  the 
curtain,  a  life-sized  phantom  with  male  features  appeared  behind  Eva's 
chair  in  the  corner  of  the  cabinet,  fully  developed  already  at  the  first 
exposure.  Eva  rose,  stepped  aside,  and  opened  the  curtain  with  her 
right  hand,  in  order  not  to  cover  the  phantom  with  her  body.  Flash- 
light photograph.  In  spite  of  the  shock  the  figure,  which  moved  freely 
without  feet,  ending  at  the  lower  hem  of  its  cloak,  remained  where  it 
was,  and  allowed  itself  to  be  illuminated  by  Eva's  electric  torch  six 
times  in  succession.  In  addition,  Mme.  Bisson  switched  on  the  red 
lamp  in  the  background  of  the  cabinet.  A  second  photograph  failed, 
because  the  phantom  had  withdrawn  sideways  out  of  the  field  of  the 
camera.     It  disappeared  without  a  trace  in  the  direction  of  the  back  wall. 

In  the  successful  photographs  (Figs.  138,  139  and  140)  the  nude 
medium  stands  at  the  left  curtain,  holding  it  with  her  left  hand,  while 
with  her  right  hand  she  has  opened  the  other  curtain  far  enough  to 
allow  the  phantom  to  be  plainly  seen.  Her  features  express  a  strong, 
painful  effort  of  will.  On  the  photographs  intended  for  publication, 
Eva's  naked  body  was,  for  obvious  reasons,  retouched  in  such  a  way 
that  the  sex  characteristics  (breasts,  etc.)  are  not  seen. 

The  phantom,  clad  in  a  long  white  mantle,  stands  at  the  right-hand 
back  wall  of  the  cabinet,  with  crossed  arms,  and  upward  gaze,  and,  by 
its  height  and  attitude,  gives  an  impression  of  solemnity.  The  face  is 
complete,  without  fragments,  shreds,  etc.,  as  seen  so  often  on  former 
heads.  The  face  is  long  and  oval,  the  forehead  high  and  narrow,  the 
nose  long,  broad,  and  well  developed,  there  is  a  long  pointed  beard 
and  a  well-arranged  moustache,  and  the  left  ear  is  clearly  outlined. 
A  broad  coat  collar  covers  the  throat,  which  is  wrapped  up.  In  the 
triangular  opening  two  buttons  are  visible,  as  of  a  waistcoat.  The  left 
hand  disappears  in  the  white  mantle,  resembling  a  bathing  wrap.  We 
only  see  a  triangular  black  patch,  while,  on  the  right  hand,  fingers  are 
indicated.  The  regular  features  express  earnestness  and  dignity,  as  in 
a  conventional  Christ-head. 

While  the  face  of  the  phantom  appears  entirely  pictorial  and  flat, 
like  a  drawing  (this  is  corroborated  by  the  foreshortened  stereoscopic 

222  PHENOMENA    OF    MATERIALISATION 

picture  taken  from  the  roof  of  the  cabinet),  the  cloak,  on  comparing 
the  various  photographs,  seems  to  show  a  certain  reality  in  its  material 
composition.  Yet  the  figure  as  a  whole  gives  a  unified  and  harmonious 
impression.  A  detailed  study  of  the  stereoscopic  transparency,  with 
its  strongly  foreshortened  image  taken  from  the  roof  of  the  cabinet, 
leaves  no  doubt  that  two  parallel  folds  or  rents  traverse  the  whole 
mantle  vertically,  as  if  it  had  three  divisions,  and  opened  to  both 
sides. 

On  the  negative  of  Fig.  138,  and  in  the  stereoscopic  photographs 
(from  the  front  and  from  above),  a  sickle-shaped,  cloud-like  structure 
is  seen  above  the  medium's  right  hand.  This  is  not  due  to  a  fault  in 
the  plate,  but  had  a  real  existence,  though  it  cannot  be  explained. 
Perhaps  we  have  here  a  physical  accompaniment  of  the  materialisation 
process. 

By  the  success  of  the  sitting  of  23rd  February,  the  four  years  of 
Mme.  Bisson's  self-sacrificing  activity  were  deservedly  rewarded.  For 
her,  and  for  every  impartial  observer  in  her  position,  the  actuality  of 
the  production  of  phantoms  by  mediumistic  power  must  be  considered 
as  proved,  especially  as  more  rigorous  experimental  conditions  could 
hardly  be  imagined.  Indeed,  in  the  whole  literature  of  occultism,  in 
so  far  as  it  is  to  be  taken  seriously,  there  is  no  proof  of  observations  of 
teleplastic  projections  simultaneously  visible  with  a  nude  medium. 
Photographs  of  phantom  and  medium  on  the  same  plate  are  a  great 
rarity.  But  a  naked  medium,  deprived  of  every  chance  of  concealing 
materials  for  the  artificial  production  of  the  phenomena,  photographed 
on  the  same  plate  with  the  phantom,  is  unprecedented. 

Sittings  during  February  and  March  1913. 

Sitting  of  the  26th  February  1913. 

Present. — Mme.  Bisson  and  the  author. 

Conditions  as  in  November  1912,  but  the  medium,  at  the  request  of 
the  two  physicians,  Dr  Bourbon  and  Dr  R.,  who  attended  several 
sittings,  undresses  in  her  room  and  enters  the  seance  room  dressed  only 
in  a  blue  dressing-goAvn.  Here  she  receives  the  seance  costume  from 
the  physicians  (in  this  sitting  from  me),  puts  it  on  behind  the  screen, 
and  is  then  sewn  into  it  in  the  presence  of  the  sitters,  after  an  examina- 
tion of  her  body  surface.  She  had  therefore  neither  time,  nor  oppor- 
tunity, to  hide  any  object  on  her  person.  Then  the  sitting  commences 
as  usual  after  the  hypnotisation  of  the  medium. 

The  illumination  is  still  brighter,  as  now  six  red  lamps  are  used. 
No  result. 

Sitting  of  the  27th  February  1913. 

Present. — Mme.  Bisson  and  the  author. 

Conditions  as  on  the  26th.     Nose,  mouth,  arm-pits,  hair,  and  body 
surface  examined  by  the  author  as  before. 

SITTINGS  DURING  FEBRUARY  AND  MARCH  1913        223 

Mme.  Bisson  hypnotises  the  medium  more  deeply,  with  urgent 
suggestions  to  show  a  phantom. 

The  hands  were  laid  on  the  medium's  knees  in  front  of  the  curtain 
before  the  white  light  was  switched  off,  and  were  held  by  Mme.  Bisson, 
and  remained  in  that  position,  or  in  a  crosswise  position,  or  visibly 
held  by  Mme.  Bisson 's  hands,  until  the  end  of  the  sitting,  without  ever 
withdrawing  themselves  from  control  by  a  withdrawal  into  the  cabinet. 

The  curtain  was  also  open  during  the  whole  sitting,  in  the  sense  that 
there  was  always  a  narrow  gap  through  which  one  could  see  Eva's 
head.  Her  feet  were  stretched  out  in  front  of  the  curtain,  and  were 
held  by  those  of  Mme.  Bisson.  The  record  was  kept  by  the  author 
during  the  sitting, 

9.5  P.M.  Beginning  of  the  sitting.  Immediate  deep  stertorous 
breathing  and  expirations.     Hands  continually  visible  at  the  curtain. 

9.10  P.M.  A  white  shred-like,  rather  broad,  flat  mass  emerges  from 
her  mouth  and  falls  over  her  left  shoulder  and  left  breast. 

9.15  P.M.  Continual  whimpering.  A  flat  mask-like  structure  is 
seen  on  the  left  shoulder. 

9.20  P.M.  Suggestion  by  Mme.  Bisson.  "  Detache-toi  bien.'* 
Hands  still  visible. 

9.21  P.M.  During  the  next  exposure  I  distinctly  saw  the  male  face 
already  photographed  by  Mme.  Bisson  on  the  naked  body  of  the  medium. 
It  gives  the  impression  of  a  flat,  somewhat  diagrammatic,  bearded  mask. 
The  face  is  framed  in  a  kind  of  ring-shaped  wall,  and  the  face  photo- 
graphed on  the  13th  February  is  distinctly  recognised. 

9.22  P.M.  Eva  takes  Mme.  Bisson's  hands,  as  if  she  wanted  to 
strengthen  herself  by  the  touch.  The  structure  is  now  visible  in  Eva's 
lap,  and  disappears  from  my  eyes  while  the  curtain  is  open. 

9.23  P.M.     No  trace  left. 

9.25  P.M.  Neither  on  her  breast,  nor  in  her  lap,  nor  on  her  head, 
is  there  a  trace  of  the  structure.  She  sometimes  puts  her  head  into 
the  curtain  gap,  when  she  wishes  to  touch  it  with  her  finger,  to  push  her 
hair  from  her  face. 

9.26  P.M.  She  now  holds  the  curtain  with  crossed  hands,  moans, 
and  appears  to  make  great  muscular  efforts  in  order  that  the  form  may 
be  seen  again. 

9.30  P.M.  She  puts  out  her  head,  without  altering  the  position  of 
the  hands,  to  ask  if  we  see  anything,  to  which  we  say  "  No." 

9.36  P.M.  She  asks  Mme.  Bisson  to  hold  her  hands,  in  order  to  gain 
power. 

9.40  P.M.  Strong  whimpering,  with  a  distinct  sensation  that  the 
face  will  be  seen  again. 

9.44  P.M.  At  her  request,  Mme.  Bisson  enters  the  cabinet,  opening 
the  left  curtain  widely  so  that  she  can  be  seen.  She  holds  Eva's  head 
in  her  hands,  encourages  her,  and  emerges  again. 

9.46  P.M.  The  structure  is  again  seen  on  the  left  breast,  but  appears 
less  developed  and  less  solid  than  in  the  first  impression.  It  looks  like 
a  transparent  white  mask.  We  abstain  from  photographing  it,  hoping 
that  the  form  will  become  more  distinct. 

9.48  P.M.  Eva  lays  her  head  on  the  hands  which  still  visibly  hold  the 
curtain.     The  gap  becomes  very  narrow,  since  the  hands  touch  each  other. 

224  PHENOMENA    OF    MATERIALISATION 

9.50  P.M.  Nothing  more  is  seen,  and  everything  seems  to  have 
disappeared.     Hands  still  at  the  curtain. 

9.56  P.M.     New  efforts  by  Eva. 

10.1  P.M.     Mme.  Bisson  again  takes  Eva's  hands. 

10.10  to  10.15  P.M.  The  medium  rests,  and  no  further  sounds  are 
heard. 

10.16  P.M.  Eva  has  the  impression  that  she  cannot  produce  any- 
thing more.  Close  of  the  sitting.  Final  examination  of  the  medium 
and  the  cabinet  negative. 

Result  of  the  Sitting. — Appearance,  disappearance,  and  change  of 
position  of  a  mask-like  male  face,  without  the  co-operation  of  the 
medium's  hands. 

Sitting  of  the  4th  March  1913. 

Present. — Mme.  Bisson,  Dr  R,,  Dr  Bourbon,  and  the  author. 
The  medium,  completely  undressed  and  clad  only  in  a  blue  dressing- 
gown,  enters  the  room  and  puts  on  the  carefully  examined  seance 
costume  in  our  presence.  While  Dr  R.  examines  the  arm-pits  and  the 
mouth,  with  the  help  of  a  silver  spoon,  Dr  Bourbon  undoes  the  medium's 
hair  and  puts  it  up  again,  having  found  nothing  remarkable,  and  also 
examines  her  ears.  Blowing  through  each  nostril  shows  that  the  nose 
is  free. 

9.14  P.M.  After  examination  of  the  cabinet,  Mme.  Bisson  hypnotises 
the  medium  in  the  white  electric  light.  The  medium's  hands  are  on 
her  knees,  and  are  held  by  Mme.  Bisson. 

9.15  P.M.  Extinction  of  the  white  light.  Illumination  by  six  red 
lamps. 

9.17  P.M.     Hands  still  held  by  Mme.  Bisson. 

9.18  P.M.     Hands  released,  but  rest  on  medium's  knees,  visible  to  us. 
9.35  P.M.     Some  efforts  to  produce  phenomena. 

9.43  P.M.  Mme.  Bisson  again  takes  Eva's  hands  and  makes  energetic 
suggestions  towards  production. 

9.50  P.M.     Eva  crosses  her  hands. 

9.57  P.M.  The  trance  seems  to  have  deepened,  and  we  hear  plaintive 
whispering  and  long  forced  expirations.  Apparently  the  process  of 
materialisation  is  commencing,  although  it  encounters  great  resistance. 

10.1  P.M.     An  object  appears  on  the  medium's  breast. 

10.5  P.M.  Dr  R.  holds  Eva's  left  hand,  Dr  Bourbon  the  right.  The 
curtain  is  half  opened. 

10.10  P.M.  On  the  left  shoulder  there  is  a  shred,  clearly  produced 
from  the  mouth. 

10.15  P.M.  Emanation  process  from  the  mouth  continues.  Since 
the  head  is  exposed  to  the  light,  we  clearly  see  a  ribbon-shaped  piece 
hanging  from  the  mouth.  As  Dr  R.  finds  by  touch,  the  dress  has  become 
moist  and  sticky  in  some  places  on  the  chest. 

10.21  P.M.  Mme.  Bisson  opens  the  seams  and  takes  off  Eva's  tunic, 
so  that  she  sat  dressed  only  in  the  tights. 

10.22  P.M.  The  medium's  hands  are  held  by  the  physicians  as 
before.  Eva  is  embarrassed,  crosses  her  arms,  and  tries  to  conceal  her 
breast  from  the  two  men. 

SITTINGS  DURING  FEBRUARY  AND  MARCH  1913         225 

10.25  P.M.  Some  dark  grey  patches,  the  size  of  a  florin,  appear  on 
the  skin,  especially  on  the  left  breast,  but  the  appearances  are  too  fugitive 
to  form  a  definite  opinion. 

10.40  P.M.  The  emotion  of  the  medium  at  being  unclothed  in  the 
presence  of  men  is  obviously  very  strong,  and  produces  inhibitions 
which  do  not  allow  of  the  development  of  the  phenomena,  which  on 
this  day  are  weak  in  any  case. 

11.10  P.M.  Closing  of  the  sitting.  Final  control  negative.  While, 
on  the  one  hand,  the  method  of  this  day  presents  a  step  in  advance, 
inasmuch  as  the  medium  was  made  to  produce  her  remarkable  power 
in  a  nude  condition,  we  see,  on  the  other  hand,  that  the  process  of 
emanation  is  exceedingly  easily  hindered,  and  brought  to  a  stop,  by 
psychological  conditions,  since  the  medium  feels  herself  hemmed  in  by 
the  too  rigorous  procedure  of  the  experimenters,  or  by  the  premature 
exposure  to  the  light  of  the  phenomenon  in  a  nascent  state,  followed  by 
critical  analysis  from  every  side.  This  possibly  explains  the  fact  that 
the  intensity  of  the  phenomena  diminishes,  as  the  methods  of  observation 
become  more  exact. 

Sitting  of  the  6th  March  1913. 

Present. — Mme.  Bisson  and  the  author. 

Eva  enters  the  seance  room  at  8.30  p.m.  dressed  only  in  the  drsssing- 
gown.  In  my  presence,  she  takes  it  off  and  puts  on  the  carefully 
examined  seance  costume.  She  opens  her  mouth,  sounds  vowels,  and 
blows  through  her  nostrils.     Arm-pits,  hair,  and  ears  are  examined 

When  it  is  proved  that  she  has  nothing  concealed  anywhere  by 
which  she  could  produce  the  phenomena,  she  takes  her  seat  in  the 
cabinet,  which  has  also  been  previously  examined,  and  is  hypnotised 
by  Mme.  Bisson  in  my  presence.  During  the  whole  sitting  the  hands 
are  visible,  either  lying  on  her  knees  or  holding  the  curtain. 

8.45  P.M.  Mme.  Bisson  holds  Eva's  hands.  The  white  light  is 
switched  off. 

8.49  P.M.  Mme.  Bisson  releases  the  hands  which  now  hold  the 
curtain.  The  curtain  itself  remains  more  or  less  open  during  the  whole 
sitting. 

8.50  P.M.  The  medium  is  obviously  resisting.  Her  whole  expression 
shows  the  absence  of  the  deeper  trance. 

8.55  P.M.  "  Demande  bien,  ma  petite  Juliette."  Groans  and 
exertions  of  the  ventral  muscles. 

9  P.M.  More  violent  efforts.  Condition  of  "  mediumistic  labour," 
deep  long-drawn  expirations. 

9.3  P.M.     "  Cela  me  prend,  Juliette." 

9.5  P.M.  Hands  still  visible,  lying  on  her  knees,  and  holding  the 
curtain.  As  soon  as  she  opens  her  knees,  I  see  between  them,  in  a  fold 
of  the  dress,  a  strip  about  3  or  4  inches  long  and  about  the  thickness  of 
a  pencil,  of  a  pink  colour,  the  first  sign  of  a  positive  sitting. 

9.8  P.M.  At  various  parts  of  her  dress,  and  in  her  lap,  small  pink 
lines  and  points  become  visible,  obviously  material  emanating  from  her 
body  through  the  dress,  and  now  forming  a  sort  of  precipitate.     This 

p 

226  PHENOMENA    OF    MATERIALISATION 

substance  seems  to  be  partly  liquid,  and  partly  solid,  its  density  com- 
parable with  that  of  a  very  delicate  web.     On  touching  the  luminous 
portions,  they  feel  moist  and  sticky. 
9.11  P.M.     Hands  still  visible. 

9.15  P.M.     Greater  exertions. 

9.16  P.M.     "  Je  le  sens,  Juliette." 

9.20  P.M.     Hands  crossed  at  the  curtain. 

9.22  P.M.  Plaintive  whimpering.  Mme.  Bisson  holds  her  hands  to 
encourage  her,  and  then  releases  them  again. 

9.30  P.M.     Pause  for  rest.     Hands  visible. 

9.35  P.M.     "  Cela  vient,  je  le  sens." 

9.38  P.M.  We  now  see  the  distinctly  formed  bearded  face,  in  front 
of  her  head,  like  a  mask.  As  her  head  moves,  the  lower  part  of  this 
picture  swings  to  and  fro,  and  gives  the  impression  that  it  consists  of 
a  soft,  skinny  substance. 

9.40  P.M.  During  the  next  exposure  a  ribbon  nearly  an  inch  wide, 
with  ragged,  irregular  edges,  becomes  visible  between  her  hands.  On 
opening  her  knees  and  then  separating  her  hands,  this  band  stretches 
to  a  length  of  8  to  10  inches.  Suddenly,  while  her  hands  are  at  rest, 
this  band  is  jerked  upwards  towards  her  head,  as  if  drawn  from  above, 
the  middle  of  the  band  going  first,  and  then  disappearing  in  the  region 
of  her  mouth.  One  cannot  say  whether  this  material  was  reabsorbed 
by  Eva's  organism,  or  simply  served  to  build  up  the  materialised  face. 
In  any  case,  the  appearance  was  remarkable. 

9.41  P.M.  I  took  a  photograph  at  the  next  exposure.  Unfortunately, 
Eva  just  then  closed  the  curtain,  so  that  the  first  series  was  not  successfiil. 

9.47  P.M.  After  the  plates  were  changed,  the  second  exposure  was 
made,  Mme.  Bisson,  sitting  in  front  of  the  curtain,  pressing  the 
electric  button. 

9.50  to  9.55  P.M.  The  image  was  seen  a  few  more  times  and  dis- 
appeared, although  the  hands,  from  the  beginning  of  the  sitting  until 
now,  had  never  been  withdrawn  from  our  gaze.  Eva,  being  anxious 
to  show  the  automatic  mobility  of  the  substance,  herself  proposes  to 
take  off  the  tunic. 

10  P.M.  Mme.  Bisson  opens  the  seams,  takes  off  the  tunic,  and  Eva 
is  only  dressed  in  the  tights,  her  upper  body  being  nude. 

10.3  P.M.  She  opens  and  closes  the  curtains  alternately,  to  allow 
of  the  development  of  the  material  on  her  body  in  the  dark,  and  then 
to  expose  the  products  for  a  short  time  to  the  red  light. 

10.5  P.M.  During  several  exposures  I  saw  distinctly  a  self-moving, 
net-like,  skinny  mass,  about  the  size  of  a  plate,  and  in  the  form  of  a 
shred  with  a  long  strip  attached,  depending  from  her  left  breast. 
Before  my  eyes,  this  mass  detached  itself  and  disappeared  in  the  region 
of  the  navel.  The  optical  impression  corresponds  approximately  to 
the  pictures  taken  by  Mme.  Bisson  on  9th  Januaiy  1913.  My  subse- 
quent observation,  therefore,  confirmed  the  correctness  of  the  photo- 
graph. Since  such  a  photograph  is  already  in  our  possession,  no  new 
photograph  was  attempted  to-day. 

:  "f  10.10  P.M.  Eva  demonstrates  a  few  times  more,  with  portions  of 
substance  in  the  form  of  knots  the  size  of  walnuts,  as  well  as  j^ackets 
and  veils,  on  her  neck  and  upper  body.     These  structures  did  not 

Fig.    141.     Author's    first    flashlight    photograph    of    6    March,    1913. 
(From  above,  inside  cabinet.) 

Fig.  142.     Author's  second  photograph.  6  March,  1913. 

SITTINGS  DURING  FEBRUARY  AND  MARCH  1913         227 

withstand  the  light,  they  always  disappeared,  even  after  a  few  seconds 
of  exposure  to  light. 

10.20  P.M.  Close  of  the  sitting.  Eva's  skin  is  covered  by  a  viscous 
moisture,  on  her  left  breast  and  in  the  places  where  we  saw  the  material. 
The  tunic  itself  is  quite  permeated  with  moisture  near  the  left  breast, 
and  shows  several  moist  patches  on  the  inside  and  outside. 

Final  control  of  medium  and  cabinet  negative. 

While  the  first  flash-light  photograph,  taken  by  the  cameras  in 
front  of  the  cabinet,  was  a  failure,  the  negative  of  the  stereoscope 
mounted  inside  the  cabinet  above  the  medium's  head  shows  a  curious 
result,  which  is  the  same  in  both  pictures  (Fig.  141). 

We  look  down  from  above  on  to  the  seat  of  the  chair,  which  stands 
outside  the  curtain,  and  both  the  medium's  hands  holding  the  curtain 
are  visible.  With  a  magnifying  glass  we  can  even  recognise  the  sleeve 
of  the  left  forearm.  To  the  right  of  it,  in  a  corner  of  the  cabinet,  i.e.,  at 
an  approximate  distance  of  43  inches  from  Eva's  body,  we  see  a  white 
structure  consisting  of  a  compact,  irregularly  shaped  head-piece,  the 
size  of  an  adult  female  fist,  to  which  is  attached  a  curved  tail-piece, 
about  half  an  inch  thick  and  about  12  inches  long.  The  shape  resembles 
that  of  a  spermatozoon  or  neuroblast.  The  material  of  which  it  is 
composed  must  be  strongly  self-luminous,  and  shows  a  feeble  aura, 
otherwise  the  camera  would  not  have  made  so  clear  an  image  of  it. 
Since  the  dark  cabinet  contains  no  self-luminous  objects,  and  since 
white  textile  products  or  white  paper  possess  no  luminosity  in  the 
dark,  it  can  only  be  a  case  of  a  materialisation  product  which  corresponds 
to  observations  in  other  sittings.  Repeatedly  we  saw  white  luminous 
strips,  with  the  head-like  attachment,  apparently  of  a  textile  nature, 
and  more  or  less  long,  which  altered  in  shape  and  size,  and  were  detached 
from  the  medium's  body.  We  have,  therefore,  here  probably  a  primitive 
materialisation  in  an  embryonic  state,  the  appearance  of  which  corre- 
sponds to  organic  structures  known  in  nature.  It  appears  to  float 
freely.  This  phenomenon  also  belongs  to  those  which  can  hardly  be 
imitated  artificially. 

As  regards  technique,  flatness,  and  artistic  design,  the  author's 
second  flash-light  photograph  (Figs.  142,  143,  and  144)  of  6th  March 
closely  resembles  the  photograph  taken  by  Mme.  Bisson  on  19th  January. 
As  in  previous  observations,  the  male  portrait  drawn  on  paper  or  thin 
fabric,  and  cut  out  sharply,  is  fastened  to  the  right  side  of  Eva's  head, 
covering  it  almost  completely.  The  folds  of  the  foundation  material 
cut  across  the  image  in  sharp  parallel  lines,  and  even,  to  some  extent, 
interfere  with  the  artistic  impression,  as  at  the  point  of  the  beard. 
The  whole  nose  is  covered  by  shreds  of  material  folded  several  times. 
The  manner  in  which  the  hair  of  the  beard  is  treated  (by  short  strokes), 
as  well  as  the  collar  and  eyeglasses,  allows  of  no  doubt  that  we  have 
here  a  pictorial  sketch.  The  treatment  of  the  eyebrows  and  eyeglasses 
resembles  the  picture  of  M.  Bisson  obtained  on  1st  June  1912. 
tit  As  the  portrait  of  19th  January,  so  also  the  present  one  shows  the 
shirt  front  and  tie.  The  expression  of  the  eyes  is  peculiarly  life-like, 
and  the  image  appears  to  be  fastened  to  Eva's  hair  by  threads  or  a  pin. 
The  conception,  composition,  artistic  execution,  and  technical  treatment 
of  the  material,  as  well  as  the  impressionistic  rendering  of  the  theme, 

228  PHENOMENA    OF    MATERIALISATION 

indicate  the  same  artistic  individual  as  that  indicated  by  the  authorship 
of  numerous  previous  portraits.  Born  of  the  same  artistic  intuition, 
they  prove  themselves  to  be  different  works  of  the  same  hand. 

Observations  in  March,  April  and  May  1913  (Paris). 

Sitting  of  the  24th  March  1913. 

Present. — Mme.  Bisson. 

In  a  letter,  dated  26th  March  1913,  Mme.  Bisson  writes  : — "  On  Monday 
evening  I  hypnotised  Eva  in  the  cabinet  in  the  red  light  as  usual. 
She  wore  her  day  dress,  since,  owing  to  her  unfavourable  psychic  dis- 
position, I  did  not  expect  any  phenomena  this  day. 

"  I  took  her  hands  and  suggested  to  her  '  Go  to  sleep  quickly.'  She 
at  once  fell  back  into  her  chair,  and  immediately  afterwards  arose, 
already  in  the  trance  condition,  and  said,  '  He  is  there,  he  is  there  ! 
Undress  me  quickly  !  '  She  almost  tore  her  dress  off,  and  I  helped  her 
until  she  was  quite  undressed.  Then  she  seized  my  hands  and  pressed 
them  violently,  with  the  words,  '  Look,  look  !  He  forms  himself  ! 
He  is  there  !  '  I  thought  I  saw  something  large  on  the  back  wall  of  the 
cabinet,  to  my  left.  Eva  remained  standing,  leaning  against  me,  then 
pressed  my  hands,  stood  back  a  pace  and  screamed  with  pain,  while  her 
whole  body  was  shaken  with  convulsions.  She  cried  out,  '  Touch  the 
cord  on  my  back.'  I  stretched  out  my  hand  and  felt  under  her  waist 
a  moist  cord-like  structure  which  joined  Eva  with  the  phantom.  The 
cord  detached  itself  while  Eva  leant  against  me.  I  saw  the  phantom 
illuminated.  It  consisted  of  a  long,  broad  strip  standing  vertically  on 
the  floor,  at  the  top  of  which  I  recognised  a  face.  Eva  stretched  back 
her  arm,  and  the  broad  strip  wound  itself  once  round  it,  while  the 
head-piece  pointed  vertically  upward. 

"  After  the  structure  had  detached  itself  again,  Eva  called  out, 
'  See  how  he  forms  himself  !  Press  my  hand  hard  to  give  me  power.' 
I  now  saw  with  my  owa.  eyes  how  the  phantom  broadened  out,  how  the 
shoulders  took  shape,  and  I  used  this  moment  to  take  a  flash-light 
photograph,  fearing  that  the  vision  might  disappear.  It  is  probably 
the  same  form  as  that  of  23rd  February.  Unfortunately,  I  had  no 
time  to  prepare  all  the  cameras,  and  only  the  two  large  ones  were  in 
action. 

"  With  the  ignition  of  the  magnesium  powder,  everything  disappeared. 
The  whole  occurrence  happened  in  a  few  minutes,  and  already  at  9.30 
I  could  put  the  girl  to  bed.  The  subsequent  examination  of  the  cabinet 
was  also  negative  to-day.  On  the  following  day  Eva  had  no  recollection 
of  what  had  happened,  and  did  not  know  that  the  phantom  had  returned. 

"  For  me  the  proof  is  complete.  The  recollection  of  the  sitting  of 
Monday  can  never  be  effaced." 

At  the  first  sight  one  recognises  the  apparition  of  23rd  February. 
There  is  the  same  head,  the  same  broad,  long  white  cloak,  and  the  arms 
crossed  over  the  breast,  but  the  head  is  less  distinct  this  time.  The 
whole  appearance  resembles  an   old  portrait,  painted  on  wood,   and 

Fig.    143.     Side  view,   enlarged,   of   Fig.    142. 

In  X 

«  IN 

r< 

M 

'i-  W 

i-t 

Z 

»-( 

0 

d. 

u 

b 

w 

O 

K 

H 

^ 

U 

W 

Q 

> 

u 

2 

Q 

" 

t/J 

S 

O 

« 

^ 

h 

-^ 

M 

2 

U 

t1 

« 

-<: 

fe   H 

OBSERVATIONS  IN  MARCH,  APRIL  AND  MAY  1913       229 

rather  badly  preserved.  While  the  apparition  of  the  23rd  February 
showed  eyes  turned  upwards  and  towards  the  right,  so  that  the  whites 
were  distinctly  visible,  the  look  of  the  phantom  of  24th  March  is  straight- 
forward, without  the  sideways  position  of  the  eyes.  The  lids  are 
smaller  and  less  open.  The  left  ear  of  the  23rd  February  gives  the 
impression  of  a  completely  modelled  shape.  Over  the  outer  temple, 
on  the  right,  there  is  a  vertical,  straight,  and  deep  cleft,  with  irregular 
margins.  A  narrow  piece  ending  it  hangs  outside  on  the  head,  as  if 
torn  off,  or  perhaps  the  process  of  composition  is  not  quite  complete. 
On  the  left  part  of  the  forehead  there  is  a  long,  black  patch.  The  out- 
lines of  the  rather  vague,  full  beard  are  on  the  whole  the  same  as  before. 
The  buttons  closing  the  cloak  at  the  top  are  also  the  same  in  both 
pictures  ;  while  the  coat  collar  in  the  picture  of  23rd  February  ends  in 
a  rectangular  cut  crossing  the  larynx  on  the  right,  that  same  ending  is 
now  on  the  left  side.  The  opposite  side,  on  both  negatives,  is  lower 
and  more  open.  The  upper  edge  of  the  cloak  on  24th  March,  which 
looks  as  if  drawn  by  hand,  shows  a  torn  hem,  in  contrast  with  the  soft 
regular  lines  shown  in  the  negative  of  23rd  February. 

Four  fingers  of  the  left  hand,  in  two  of  which  the  nails  are  indicated 
by  white  patches,  are  clearly  seen  in  the  photograph  of  24th  March. 
The  outer  lines  are  very  rough  and  sketchy,  like  a  painter's  sketch  of  a 
hand  lor  a  picture,  and  seem  to  lose  themselves  in  the  background. 
The  cloak  itself  occupies  a  much  wider  space  in  this  new  photograph 
than  it  did  on  23rd  February,  with  the  left  sleeve  passing  at  right  angles 
across  the  cloak,  thus  enlarging  the  upper  outline  of  the  figure,  in 
contrast  with  the  lower  part.  In  consequence  of  the  folds  which  broaden 
out  downwards,  the  left  marginal  line  of  to-day's  phantom  is  straight, 
without  allowing  the  sleeve  to  project,  as  on  23rd  February.  The 
phantom  appears  to  end  at  the  lower  hem  of  the  mantle. 

The  photograph  of  24th  March  (Figs.  145  and  146),  as  a  whole,  gives 
the  impression  of  a  flat  drawing,  on  a  foundation  having  a  pattern  like 
linen.  While  on  both  pictures  the  heads  appear  flat  (which  is  confirmed 
by  the  cleft  in  the  second  picture),  the  mantle  in  the  first  picture  shows 
soft,  deep  creases,  and,  looking  stereoscopically  from  above,  the  observer 
does  not  get  the  impression  of  a  flat  drawing.  Unfortunately,  there  are 
no  plates  available  for  24th  March  other  than  the  picture  here  repro- 
duced. The  arrangement  of  the  folds  is  different  from  that  of 
23rd  February,  being  less  developed,  flatter,  and  more  like  an  outline 
drawn  with  a  pencil.  Yet  the  outer  margin,  when  magnified,  shows 
fibres  and  threads  which  suggest  a  fibrous  material. 

Of  the  medium  herself,  the  only  thing  visible  this  time  is  the  head, 
half  cut  off  by  the  curtain.  From  a  comparison  of  the  two  pictures, 
it  is  therefore  quite  clear  that  on  23rd  February  and  on  24th  March  we 
have  two  different  representations  of  the  same  object,  of  the  same  per- 
sonification. The  differences  between  the  pictures  taken  of  the  same 
type,  but  on  different  evenings,  may  be  compared  with  the  different 
poses  of  a  person  at  a  photographer's,  and  are  mainly  due  to  different 
positions  of  the  body,  owing  to  displacement  and  changes  in  the  external 
lines  and  the  folds  of  the  dress  thus  produced.  If  we  had  to  deal  with 
an  object  smuggled  in  for  the  sake  of  a  ghost  apparition,  i.e.,  with  a 
finished  product  on  a  rigid  foundation,  there  would  have  to  be  at  least 

230  PHENOMENA    OF    MATERIALISATION 

two  representations  of  the  same  head,  with  different  positions  of  the 
eyes,  for  in  this  case  the  medium  would  certainly  have  had  to  exhibit 
a  different  face  on  24th  March  from  that  shown  on  23rd  February. 
Although  this  assumption  appears  very  improbable  on  comparing  the 
two  pictures  of  the  same  type,  the  smuggling  in  of  a  whole  phantom  is 
already  excluded  by  the  experimental  conditions  of  the  two  sittings. 

From  the  point  of  view  of  teleplastic  projection,  the  differences  of 
the  two  representations  of  the  same  phantom  are  very  interesting. 
The  same  optical  conception  of  a  portrait  endeavours  to  realise  itself 
on  two  evenings  by  means  of  the  psycho-physical  energy  at  the  medium's 
disposal,  with  the  result  that  the  identity  of  the  type  twice  represented 
is  proved,  while  the  numerous  changes  and  differences  of  the  two  pictures 
indicate  mobility  and  variability  of  the  artistic  will  behind  the  scenes 
in  the  details  and  shades  of  the  conception,  as  well  as  the  incompleteness 
in  the  material  process  of  creation. 

As  in  nearly  all  the  teleplastic  formations  observed  by  us,  the  elemen- 
tary formative  principle  never  produces  rigid  and  unchangeable  products, 
but  the  photographed  emanations  always  indicate  a  mobile,  soft  material 
basis,  which  is  highly  changeable  and  rapidly  perishable. 

Sitting  of  the  1st  April  1913. 

On  1st  April  1913,  in  the  author's  absence,  but  under  the  usual 
experimental  conditions  (strict  initial  examination,  searching  of  the 
mouth  and  hair,  etc.,  and  hands  visible  at  the  curtain  during  the  whole 
sitting),  in  the  presence  of  Dr  Bourbon  and  M.  Bourdet  (an  author), 
a  long  cord-like  structure  was  photographed  (Figs.  147  and  148),  con- 
sistmg  of  two  ribbons,  one  of  which  hung  down  in  the  form  of  a  long 
torn  shred  as  far  as  the  waist,  while  the  other  was  looped  round  an 
anatomically  well-developed  finger,  consisting  of  three  joints,  so  that 
the  flexed  finger  appeared  to  be  held  by  a  loop  passing  round  the  second 
joint.  The  nail  position  was  distinctly  developed,  and  under  the  first 
joint  a  crease  is  visible,  produced  by  the  bending  of  the  first  and  second 
joints.  Although  we  have  here  quite  a  plastically  developed  finger  in 
the  natural  size  of  an  adult  female  hand,  one  cannot  make  out,  in  the 
enlargement  of  the  picture,  whether  the  surface  of  the  fragment  has 
the  characteristic  appearance  of  human  skin.  The  material  of  the  strip 
by  which  the  finger  is  suspended  is  fixed  at  its  upper  end  to  the  breast 
of  the  tunic,  and  resembles  in  form  and  composition  the  other  teleplastic 
products. 

Sitting  of  the  2nd  May  1913. 

Before  the  sitting  of  2nd  May  (also  in  the  author's  absence),  Dr 
Bourbon  arranged  experimental  conditions  of  increased  rigidity,  by 
proposing  that  Eva's  entire  head,  after  she  had  been  sewn  into  the 
seance  costume,  should  be  surrounded  by  a  veil,  fastened  to  the  neck 
all  round  by  sewing.  In  addition,  Eva's  hands  at  this  sitting  also 
remained  constantly  at  the  curtain.  Under  the  conditions  named,  a 
male  head  picture  developed  in  Eva's  lap,  its  lower  part  separated  by 
a  neck-piece,  while  the  upper  pointed  freely  upwards,  and  was  not 

Fig.  14O.     Enlargement  of  Fig.  145. 

Fig.  147.    Mme.  Bisson's  flashlight  photo- 
graph or  I  April,   1913. 

1 

1 

^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^H 

^B^ 

1 

^m^^^'^^^l 

''  ^H 

■ 

H^^l 

H 

^^v^ ' '^^?^1^^^^^H 

^^^1 

^H  Hm'^  ''^^^^^H 

^^1 

^M 

^^^^^^^1 

Fig.  148.     Enlargement  of  Fig    14.7. 

SITTINGS  IN  MAY  AND  JUNE  1913  231 

leaning  against  the  dress.     This  product  (Fig.  149)  shows  all  the  charac- 
teristics already  seen  in  previous  creations. 

Upon  the  forehead  cf  the  portrait  (which  looks  as  if  cut  out  of  paper, 
with  a  sharp  margin  and  rents  at  the  top),  we  clearly  see  a  square  piece 
of  the  same  structure  as  the  rest  of  the  picture,  stuck  on.  Numerous 
creases,  some  of  which  are  parallel,  traverse  the  face — one  of  the  most 
noticeable  of  these  being  a  crease  passing  in  a  straight  line  from  the 
mouth  to  the  ear,  this  rent  being  in  turn  traversed  at  right  angles  by 
another  passing  over  the  upper  jaw.  Numerous  smaller  bunches  of 
creases  suggest  a  folded  paper  subsequently  smoothed  out.  The  right 
eye,  which  is  somewhat  deformed,  appears  pressed  slantingly  inwards, 
in  contrast  to  the  correctly  placed  left  eye.  The  lower  jaw  is  remarkably 
short.  The  broad  correctly  shaped  nose,  the  compressed  mouth,  the 
lively  expression  of  the  eyes,  and  the  look  towards  the  left,  give  the 
impression  of  a  great  liveliness  in  the  whole  artistic  treatment,  which  is 
shown  by  the  eyeglasses  and  the  beard,  as  obviously  that  of  a  charcoal 
or  pencil  drawing.  The  whole  design,  the  technical  treatment  and 
composition,  admit  of  no  doubt  that  this  creation  is  from  the  hand  of 
the  same  unknown  author  as  the  rest  of  the  male  pictures  of  the  last 
series. 

Sittings  in  May  and  June  1913  (Paris). 

Sittings  of  the  6th  and  7th  May  1913. 

Negative. 

Sitting  of  the  9th  May  1913. 

Present. — Mme.  Bisson,  Dr  Bourbon,  and  the  author. 

Control. — This  day,  for  the  first  time,  a  black  woollen  knitted  gar- 
ment was  used  for  the  medium's  whole  figure,  only  leaving  the  hands 
and  head  free.  This  garment,  prepared  at  the  suggestion  of  the  Paris 
physicians,  consisted  of  one  piece,  and  had  only  one  opening  at  the  back, 
from  the  waist  to  the  neck.  The  medium  entered  the  seance  room 
dressed  only  in  the  blue  dressing-go^vn,  which  had  been  previously 
searched,  and,  in  our  presence,  she  changed  into  the  woollen  garment 
after  it  had  been  carefully  examined,  whereupon  Mme.  Bisson  closed  it 
along  the  back  with  close  stitches.  She  also  sewed  up  the  sleeves  so 
that  they  fitted  tightly  round  the  wrists. 

During  these  operations  Dr  Bourbon  examined  her  mouth  with  a 
spoon,  asked  Eva  to  blow  her  nose  into  a  handkerchief,  undid  her  hair, 
and  examined  hair  and  ears.  Finally,  the  medium's  head  was  enveloped 
in  a  black  veil  of  strong  tulle,  which  was  sewn  all  round  to  the  neck  of 
the  dress  as  on  2nd  May.  A  final  examination  of  the  seam  round  the 
neck  showed  that  the  stitches  were  too  close  to  allow  a  finger  to  pass. 
Only  Eva's  hands  remained  free,  and  she  was  allowed  to  retain  the  ring 
on  her  right  hand.  The  examination  of  the  cabinet  gave  a  negative 
result. 

Illumination  as  in  March  1913. 

232  PHENOMENA    OF    MATERIALISATION 

Eva  took  her  place  in  the  cabinet.  Mme.  Bisson  took  her  hands 
and  hypnotised  her  by  fixation  as  usual. 

9.23  P.M.  Hypnotisation.  The  white  light  is  switched  off  by  the 
author,  while  the  medium's  hands  lie  still  in  those  of  Mme.  Bisson. 

9.25  P.M.  Mme.  Bisson  releases  Eva's  hands.  These  grasp  the 
curtain  and  remain  visible  at  the  curtains  during  the  whole  sitting, 
though  now  and  then  the  arms  are  crossed.  They  are  sometimes 
touched  by  the  author. 

9.40  P.M.  In  spite  of  long-continued  expirations,  and  obvious  efforts 
by  the  medium,  no  results.     Her  hands  are  warm. 

10.10  P.M.  Suddenly  Eva  commences  to  whimper,  makes  muscular 
efforts,  and  gives  cries  of  pain. 

10.12  P.M.  The  hands  become  cool.  Efforts  continue.  Mediumistic 
labour. 

10.14  P.M.  A  white  wisp,  about  half  a  yard  long,  penetrates  the 
veil,  before  our  eyes,  and  places  itself  upon  her  left  upper  arm.  Those 
present  claim  to  have  seen  a  finger  in  it.  The  author  only  sees  the  wisp, 
and  opens  the  cameras. 

10.17  P.M.  The  wisp  lies  over  the  left  arm  and  the  medium's  thighs. 
The  author  ignites  the  flash-light  and  changes  the  plates  at  once. 

10.25  P.M.     The  wisp  is  again  visible. 

10.28  P.M.  Eva  feels  the  disappearance  of  the  phenomenon.  Her 
hands  have  not  left  the  curtain  for  a  moment. 

10.30  P.M.  Close  of  sitting.  The  medium  steps  in  front  of  the 
cabinet,  gets  the  seams  undone,  and  takes  off  the  whole  seance  costume 
in  our  presence,  opens  her  mouth,  and  is  again  searched,  with  no  result. 
She  retires  to  rest  while  in  the  somnambulic  condition. 

Nothing  is  found  in  the  dress.  Neither  veil  nor  tricot  are  moistened. 
The  cabinet  is  also  examined  without  result. 

The  photograph  (Figs.  150  and  151)  taken  shows  the  medium  sitting 
on  the  chair  clothed  in  the  tricot  and  veil,  with  a  white,  broad  strip 
hanging  from  the  left  wrist  down  to  the  right  thigh.  As  shown  by  the 
enlargement  of  this  strip,  its  structure,  like  that  of  the  material  pre- 
viously described,  shows  meshes,  thick  parallel  threads  being  held 
together  by  short  cross  filaments,  so  that  the  whole  gives  a  net-like 
impression  and  a  polygonal  pattern.  The  material  is  soft  and  fibrous, 
like  the  finest  cashmere  wool. 

Sittings  of  the  13th  and  14th  May  1913. 
Negative. 

Sitting  of  the  16th  May  1913. 

Present. — Mme.  Bisson,  Dr  Bourbon,  M.  de  Vesme,  and  the  author. 

Conditions  as  on  9th  May.  Woollen  garment,  head  sewn  into  the 
veil,  which  was  sewn  on  to  the  tunic  round  the  neck.  Hair,  mouth,  and 
nose  examined  by  the  author. 

Three  cameras  were  in  the  cabinet  and  four  outside,  also  a  stereo- 
scopic apparatus  furnished  by  Dr  Bourbon  and  a  camera  of  Mme.  Bisson's 

Fig.  149.     :\Ime.  Bisson's  flashlight   photograph  of  2  .May,    1913. 

Fig.  150.     Author's  flashlight  photograph  of  9  May,   1913. 

SITTINGS   IN   MAY   AND    JUNE    1913  233 

(4f  by  7  inches) — nine  cameras  altogether.  The  record  was  taken  during 
the  sitting,  as  usual. 

9.5  P.M.  Commencement  of  sitting.  Hypnotisation  and  extinction 
of  white  light  as  on  9th  May.  The  hands  remain  visible  at  the  curtain 
during  the  whole  sitting,  and  never  disappear  behind  it.  They  move 
during  the  convulsive  efforts  accompanying  the  productions.  The 
curtain  is  grasped  with  the  vola  manus,  the  smaller  fingers  being  upper- 
most. Then  the  fists  grasping  the  curtain  are  turned  so  that  the  thumbs 
are  uppermost.  During  mediumistic  labour  there  are  strong  stretchings 
of  the  arms,  the  curtain  being  gripped,  and  used  as  a  support  for  the 
hands. 

9.9  P.M.  Strong  moaning,  expiration,  and  pressing.  The  forearms 
are  crossed,  the  right  hand  holding  the  left  curtain  and  the  left  the 
right.     Then  the  normal  position  is  resumed. 

9.11  P.M.  "  Demande  bien,  ma  Juliette !  "  which  means  that 
Mme.  Bisson  is  to  support  the  medium  by  effort  of  will  and  words. 
Since  at  present,  after  the  farewell  of  the  controlling  "  Berthe,"  no  other 
"  personification  "  has  taken  her  place,  the  suggestions  of  the  sitters 
only  had  reference  to  the  medium,  in  order  to  induce  her  to  make 
greater  efforts. 

9.15  P.M.     Stertorous  gaspmg. 

9.17  P.M.     Complaints  of  pain.     "  On  me  fait  mal,  Juliette." 

9.25  P.M.  A  white  substance  becomes  visible  hanging  out  of  her 
mouth  like  a  large  tongue,  and  appears  to  penetrate  the  meshes  of  the 
veil.     The  author  opens  the  cameras. 

9.32  P.M.  After  those  present  had  seen  not  only  a  veil-like  substance, 
but  at  its  end  a  finger,  the  author  ignites  the  flash-light  during  the  next 
exposure,  and  immediately  changes  the  plates. 

9.33  to  9.38  P.M.  Dr  Bourbon  and  M.  de  Vesme  observe  the  white 
material  on  the  breast,  and  a  fragment  of  a  finger,  which  in  size  and 
shape  might  belong  to  an  adult  female.  Dr  Bourbon  and  Mme.  Bisson 
ascertain  that  this  finger  is  quite  plastically  developed,  can  move  its 
joints,  and  that  it  bends  and  stretches.  Then  the  strip  lengthens, 
changing  into  a  sort  of  cord,  and  jumps  on  to  the  right  arm,  finally 
remaining  in  the  lap.  Here  the  author  saw  the  finger  lying  between 
the  medium's  knees  quite  closely.  The  bed  of  the  nail  is  distinctly 
visible.  While  I  changed  the  plates,  this  jointed  fragment  of  a  finger 
was  laid  in  the  right  hand  of  Dr  Bourbon,  and  there  performed  a  rotating 
motion  about  its  axis,  so  that  there  can  be  no  doubt  as  to  its  plastic 
development.  The  sensation  caused  by  the  contact  was  that  of  a  solid, 
cool,  moist  object.  Lying  in  the  medium's  lap,  the  stretched  finger 
rose  freely  with  its  tip  upwards,  and  fell  back.  Then  the  whole  thing 
was  withdrawn  and  disappeared  as  if  reabsorbed  by  the  medium. 

9.40  P.M.  Still  the  characteristic  efforts  of  the  medium  continued, 
so  that  further  phenomena  might  be  expected. 

9.44  P.M.  She  takes  Mme.  Bisson's  hands.  Continued  psycho- 
physical efforts. 

9.46  P.M.  In  spite  of  convulsive  movements  in  the  arms,  no  further 
phenomenon  occurs.  With  the  words  "  Cela  me  quitte,  le  fantdme 
viendra  dcmain,"  the  sitting  closes. 

9.47  P.M.     Eva  rises  and  emerges  from  the  curtain.     In  the  white 

234  PHENOMENA    OF    MATERIALISATION 

electric  light  a  careful  final  examination  is  made.  The  veil  shows  no 
holes,  and  the  seam  connecting  it  with  the  dress  is  nowhere  defective. 
The  single  stitches  are  so  close  together  that  a  finger  cannot  penetrate. 
Inside  the  net  there  is  one  large  tortoiseshell  hair-pin,  which  had  fallen 
out  of  the  hair.  The  front  lower  portion  of  the  veil  is  thoroughly 
moistened.  The  seam  along  the  back  is  also  intact.  This  is  now  undone. 
Eva  handed  the  whole  tricot  to  Dr  Bourbon,  put  on  the  blue  dressing- 
gown,  and  went  to  bed  while  in  the  somnambulic  state.  Final  examina- 
tion of  the  seance  costume  and  the  cabinet  negative. 

Dr  Bourbon  (physician)  put  his  impressions  of  the  sitting  of  16th  May 
into  the  following  words,  addressed  to  the  author  : — 

"  Dear  Colleague, 

"  In  accordance  with  your  wishes,  I  am  quite  prepared  to 
communicate  to  you  briefly  my  impressions  of  the  sitting  which  we 
attended,  together  with  Mme.  Bisson  and  M.  de  Vesme,  on  16th  May. 

"  The  medium's  head  was  completely  enclosed  in  a  black  tulle  veil, 
firmly  sewn  to  the  neck-piece  of  the  tricot,  as  has  been  the  practice 
lately. 

"  Very  soon  the  medium  commenced  to  breathe  stertorously.  In 
this  sitting  the  hands  remained  always  visible  on  her  knees,  unless  they 
were  holding  the  curtain.  During  the  whole  sitting  the  curtains  were 
not  completely  closed  for  an  instant.  All  the  phenomena  observed  by 
us  were,  therefore,  always  under  our  eyes,  and  at  a  distance  of  not 
more  than  half  a  yard. 

"  At  9.20  P.M.  Eva  bends  forward  towards  us,  and  we  see  the 
substance  emerging  from  her  mouth  while  within  the  veil. 

"  Very  soon  afterwards  I  perceive  that  something  is  hanging  out  of 
her  mouth  and  moving  up  and  down  over  her  breast.  It  was  a  finger 
suspended  by  a  cord  of  the  well-known  substance.  The  finger  touches 
me,  and  in  answer  to  an  observer  I  say  that  it  feels  dry.  Again  the 
medium  takes  my  hands  and  places  them  under  the  structure.  I  then 
felt,  and  saw  distinctly  and  clearly,  a  finger  which  was  moist  and  cool, 
and  which  fell  into  the  hollow  of  my  hand,  where  it  turned  to  and  fro 
for  some  moments.  Its  weight  appeared  to  be  the  weight  of  a  full-sized 
finger.  The  phenomenon  then  disappeared.  Eva  then  let  me  feel  the 
veil  which,  near  the  mouth,  was  soaked  with  mucus.  Soon  afterwards, 
without  much  change  in  the  position  of  the  curtains,  the  phenomenon 
was  repeated  while  the  hands  remained  always  in  the  full  illumination. 
I  could  now  clearly  recognise  the  finger,  which  was  suspended  by  a  grey 
substance  consisting  of  two  or  three  portions,  and  which  moved  up  and 
down  across  the  medium's  breast.  This  finger  executed  distinct  bend- 
ings  two  or  three  times,  and  then  disappeared  from  view,  as  if  it  had 
ceased  to  be  illuminated. 

"  This  manner  of  disappearance  is  often  observed. 

"  Eva  then  rested  with  her  hands  in  her  lap,  which  held  the  curtain 
open  in  the  same  way  as  before.  Suddenly  I  see  something  white 
between  her  hands,  which  are  about  4  inches  apart.  I  draw  the  atten- 
tion of  the  sitters  to  this,  and  we  ascertain  that  it  is  again  a  small  finger 
parallel  to  the  medium's  fingers.  This  finger  then  stretches  out  slowly, 
and  we  find  that  it  lies  on  a  mass  of  the  same  substance  joined  by  a 

Fig.  151.     ENLARr.EMENT  OF  Fig.  150. 

Fig.  152.     Author's  flashlight  photograph  of  16  May,   1913. 

SITTINGS   IN   MAY   AND   JUNE    1913  235 

cord  to  the  medium's  body.  Some  moments  afterwards  the  whole 
phenomenon  disappeared  in  the  gap  of  the  curtain,  whereupon,  in  spite 
of  our  wishes,  nothing  more  was  shown. 

"  In  the  course  of  the  sitting  a  flash-hght  photograph  was  taken  of 
one  of  the  most  important  phenomena  which  we  have  yet  observed — 
that  is  to  say,  the  penetration  of  the  substance  emerging  from  the 
medium's  mouth  through  the  veil.  With  an  expression  of  happiness 
at  being  able  to  place  my  testimony  at  your  disposal, 
"  I  remain,  dear  Colleague, 
"  Yours  sincerely, 

"  Dr  Henri  Bourbon." 

In  a  letter  of  19th  May,  addressed  to  the  author,  M.  de  Vesme  gives 
his  impressions  of  this  sitting  as  follows  : — 

"...  Although  I  did  not  myself  examine  the  medium,  thinking 
that  an  examination  by  two  physicians  would  suffice,  I  can  say  this, 
that  I  saw  that  hair,  nose,  and  mouth  of  the  medium  were  examined, 
that  Dr  Bourbon's  examination  of  the  mouth  took  a  long  time,  and  that 
the  seams  were  also  carefully  examined. 

"  During  the  sitting  I  was  interested  to  see  whether  the  attention 
of  the  experimenters  would  be  constantly  concentrated  on  the  control 
of  Eva's  hands,  so  that  we  could  say,  with  a  clear  conscience,  that  the 
hands  never  disappeared  from  the  eyes  of  the  observers.  My  place 
was  to  the  right,  and  a  little  further  from  the  curtains  than  the  other 
chairs.  It  is  true  that  under  these  conditions  I  several  times  saw  the 
left  hand  disappear  from  view,  but  as  soon  as  I  altered  my  position 
and  approached  the  curtam,  I  always  found  that  the  observers  sitting 
in  front  of  me,  and  therefore  better  placed,  could  see  the  hands  all  the 
time. 

"  As  regards  the  phenomena,  I  first  saw  a  white  mass  in  the  form 
of  a  long  tongue  hanging  out  of  the  mouth  of  the  medium  outside  the 
veil.  After  an  interval  of  some  minutes,  while  the  curtain  hid  the 
medium's  body  from  me,  I  again  saw  the  tongue-like  white  structure, 
to  which  a  thread  was  now  attached,  which  hung  down  to  Eva's  knees. 
This  thread,  which  gave  an  impression  of  a  navicular  cord,  held  a  finger 
suspended.  When  I  saw  it,  it  was  in  a  flexed  position,  but  I  could  not, 
like  the  other  observers,  myself  ascertam  any  motion  m  it.  But  I  can 
bear  witness  that  this  finger  raised  itself  upwards  from  the  medium's 
dress.  My  position  rendered  observation  difficult.  Thus  I  could  not 
see  the  nail-bed  on  the  finger.  Also,  I  did  not  touch  it,  as  did  Mme. 
Bisson  and  Dr  Bourbon.  On  the  other  hand,  I  see  no  possibility  that 
this  whole  phenomenon  could  have  been  brought  about  in  a  frau- 
dulent manner. 

"  Yours  sincerely, 

"De  Vesme." 

A  close  examination  of  the  veil  after  the  sitting  gave  the  following 
result : — A  tulle  veil  is  attached  to  the  neck  of  the  tricot  by  a  double  or 
treble  row  of  close  stitching,  in  the  form  of  a  thick  ruche,  about  an  inch 
across  and  having  a  length  of  11  inches.  An  attempt  to  penetrate  the 
fastening  at  any  point  with  a  pencil,  without  injuring  the  seam,  was 

236  PHENOMENA    OF    MATERIALISATION 

unsuccessful.  The  mesh  of  the  veil  itself  is  one-twelfth  of  an  inch  wide. 
On  putting  on  the  tricot,  the  veil  has  only  to  be  sewn  on  to  the  back  of 
the  neck  in  order  to  isolate  Eva's  head  completely.  In  reality,  Eva's 
body  is  under  these  conditions  as  if  it  were  enclosed  in  a  cage,  which 
only  leaves  the  hands  free. 

The  photograph  (Figs.  152,  153,  and  154)  of  16th  May  completely 
corroborates  the  observations  as  stated.  Eva's  mouth  is  wide  open. 
A  part  of  the  veil  is  slightly  drawn  into  the  mouth.  We  see  distinctly 
that,  over  the  whole  under  lip,  a  broad,  striped,  and  fibrous  mass, 
recalling  a  leafy  vegetable  structure  or  tangled  felt,  hangs  out  of  the 
medium's  mouth,  emerging,  apparently,  between  the  tip  of  the  tongue 
and  the  lip.  At  the  end  of  this  tangle  of  fibres  there  hangs  a  plastically 
developed  finger  of  natural  size,  cut  off  at  the  middle  of  the  first  joint. 
The  second  joint  is  grasped  by  the  fibrous  cord,  and  is  only  connected 
with  the  rest  of  the  mass  by  this  cord. 

These  details  are  corroborated  by  the  side  view  from  the  right,  and 
by  the  negative  taken  from  above  on  the  left,  inside  the  cabinet,  especi- 
ally as  regards  the  distinct  plastic  development  of  the  finger.  The 
excellent  photograph  obtained  with  Mme.  Bisson's  camera  shows,  in  its 
enlargement,  the  nail-bed  as  observed  by  the  author  in  the  further  course 
of  the  sitting.  A  second  photograph  (Fig.  155)  shows  that  the  veil  after 
the  sitting  was  quite  intact.  A  piece  of  white  paper  was  placed  inside 
the  veil  in  order  to  let  the  pattern  appear  more  clearly. 

The  photographic  documents  from  the  sitting  of  16th  May,  in  con- 
junction with  the  agreement  of  the  observations  made  by  the  sitters, 
and  the  fact  that  Eva  was  completely  enclosed  in  the  tricot  and  veil, 
as  in  a  cage,  while  her  hands  throughout  the  sitting  were  observed  by 
four  people,  and  never  escaped  visible  control,  bring  us  a  proof  of  the 
penetration  of  the  teleplastic  substance  through  a  closely  meshed  tulle 
veil,  which  was  found  intact  both  before  and  after  the  sitting.  From 
this  we  may  conclude  that  the  material  has  a  loose,  half  soft,  variable 
structure,  which  only  forms,  as  shown  in  the  negatives,  after  it  has 
emerged  from  the  mouth  and  veil.  It  is  also  probable  that  the  finger 
fragment  only  developed  to  its  natural  size  after  penetrating  the  tulle, 
finally  assuming  the  sharply  marked  and  anatomically  correct  form  of 
an  adult  finger,  with  nail-bed,  as  observed  by  Dr  Bourbon,  Mme.  Bisson, 
and  myself.  The  subjective  and  objective  determinations  were  made 
on  16th  May  1913,  under  the  most  careful  conditions,  so  that  it  wiil 
not  be  easy  to  raise  well-founded  objections  against  the  completeness 
and  accuracy  of  the  demonstration. 

Sitting  of  the  17th  May  1913. 

Present. — Mme.  Bisson  and  the  author. 

Conditions. — To  facilitate  the  production  of  a  whole  phantom,  Eva 
this  time  put  on  the  former  seance  costume  (tights  and  tunic).  It  was 
sewn  up  only  at  the  sleeves  and  neck.  The  back  remained  open  by 
leaving  the  back  seam  unsewn,  as  this  phenomenon  is  usually  joined 
to  the  medium  on  her  back.     No  veil  was  put  over  the  head. 

On  the  afternoon  of  the  17th  May  the  male  personification  "  Dors- 

Fig.  153.     Side  view  of  Fig.  152. 

Fig.  155. 

Photograph   showing   the   veil   intact   after   the   phenomenon   shown   in 
Figs.  150  and  151. 

SITTINGS   IN   MAY   AND    JUNE    1913  237 

mica  "  had  announced,  by  automatic  writing  through  the  medium,  its 
appearance  for  8.30  p.m.  Before  the  sitting  Eva's  pulse  was  accelerated. 
Other  conditions  and  illumination  as  in  previous  sittings. 

8.15  P.M.  Hypnosis.  Hands  always  visible.  Distinct  signs  of 
trance. 

8.17  P.M.  Medium  asks  leave  to  remove  the  tights,  and  is  only  clad 
in  the  tunic,  open  behind. 

8.20  P.M.  Sounds  of  painful  exertion  and  groans.  Exclamations 
like  "  Oh,  ma  Juliette  !     Ah  !  " 

8.21  P.M.     Strips  of  white  material  on  the  left  arm. 

8.24  P.M.  Great  excitement  and  restlessness.  Hands  always  at  the 
curtain,  but  move  to  and  fro  with  the  curtain,  sometimes  crossed,  and 
subsequently  restored  to  the  normal  position. 

8.28  P.M.  Eva  rises  and  steps  into  the  left  corner  of  the  cabinet,  her 
head  bent  forward,  but  keeping  hold  of  the  curtains.  A  white  mass 
about  the  size  of  a  head  emerges  from  her  mouth  and  is  visible  on  the 
inner  side  of  the  curtain.  Since  to-day  we  wanted  to  see  a  phantom, 
we  agreed  not  to  take  any  notice  of  other  phenomena,  so  as  not  to  inter- 
fere with  the  process  of  development.     Eva  sat  down  and  rested. 

8.31  P.M.     She  says  "  Cela  travaille." 

8.35  P.M.     Hands  always  visible.     Pause  continues. 

8.40  P.M.     A  renewed  whimpering  and  loud  deep  sounds. 

8.45  P.M.  The  medium  rises,  steps  back  to  the  right,  and  cries  out, 
"  Oh  !  mon  Dieu,  Juliette,  il  me  tire."  This  may  be  taken  to  mjean  that 
the  point  of  attachment  for  the  expected  phantom  was  on  Eva's  back, 
as  observed  previously  by  Mme.  Bisson.  The  medium  therefore  feels 
drawn  backwards,  and  yields  to  the  sensation, 

8.47  P.M.     The  medium  sits  down  and  rests, 

8.50  P.M.  Renewed  long  expirations.  Eva  expresses  a  wish  that 
we  should  not  take  any  notice  of  the  phenomenon  now  occurring,  so  as 
not  to  interrupt  the  process  of  development.  I  therefore  turned  my 
head  sideways  towards  Mme.  Bisson,  but  still  kept  my  eye  on  the 
happenings  behind  the  left  curtain,  facing  me  as  I  sat  in  front  of  the 
opened  curtains.  Then  I  saw,  while  both  Eva's  hands  held  the  curtains 
open,  over  her  left  forearm  the  distinct  appearance  of  a  male  face,  on 
which  the  contrast  between  the  black  hair  and  the  white  ground  was 
distinctly  marked. 

9.1  P.M.  Whimpering  and  pressing.  Eva  rises,  holds  one  curtain 
with  both  hands,  and — 

9.5  P.M.  Passes  into  the  right  corner  of  the  cabinet,  sits  down,  and 
asks  Mme.  Bisson  to  hold  her  hands. 

9.10  P.M.  Louder  cries  of  pain,  mediumistic  labour,  accelerated 
respiration,  hands  cool. 

9.15  P.M.  We  rise  and  look  behind  the  curtain.  Mme.  Bisson 
maintains  that  she  recognises  in  the  dark  corner  the  head  of  the  phantom, 
photographed  by  her  behind  the  medium's  head.  The  author  can  only 
vouch  for  seeing  a  broad  white  band,  with  its  upper  end  higher  than 
Eva's  head,  on  the  back  wall  in  the  corner  of  the  cabinet.  We  take  our 
seats  again  in  order  to  induce  the  phantom  to  advance  more  into  the 
middle  of  the  cabinet 

9.18  P.M.     Eva  sits  down. 

238  PHENOMENA    OF    IvIATERIALISATION 

9.20  P.M.  Further  great  efforts.  We  close  the  curtam  above  her 
hands,  so  that  they  are  no  longer  visible. 

9.30  P.M.  The  medium  suddenly  feels  her  power  vanishing,  or  the 
connection  can  no  longer  be  made.  In  short,  the  sitting  had  to  be 
closed  without  our  being  able  to  perceive  the  structure  generated  in  the 
darkness.  Final  examination  negative.  Eva  was  very  much  exhausted, 
went  to  bed  in  the  somnambulic  state,  slept  restlessly,  rose  at  one  o'clock 
to  cool  her  head  with  cold  water,  then  went  to  sleep  properly.  ; 

Negative. 

Sitting  of  the  18th  May  1913. 

Sitting  of  the  19th  May  1913. 

Present. — Mme.  Bisson  and  the  author. 

Initial  examination,  seance  costume,  and  programme  as  on  17th  May 
1913. 

Eva,  dressed  only  in  the  blue  dressing-gown,  enters  the  seance 
room,  and  takes  from  the  author's  hands  the  tunic  and  tights,  which 
she  puts  on,  but  she  is  only  sewn  up  at  the  wrists  and  neck.  The  dress 
covers  her  like  a  wide  full  shirt  slit  down  the  back. 

After  her  hair,  mouth,  ears,  and  hands  had  been  examined,  as  in 
previous  sittings,  while  she  sat  on  the  chair  in  the  cabinet  (which  had 
also  been  carefully  searched)  she  is  hypnotised  by  Mme.  Bisson. 
Illumination  as  on  17th  May. 

8.21  P.M.  Extinction  of  the  white  light.  Eva's  hands  are  well  in 
front  of  the  curtain,  and  remain  uninterruptedly  visible  during  the  whole 
sitting,  even  when  she  stands  up. 

8.25  P.M.     Long-drawn  expirations  and  mediumistic  efforts. 

8.35  P.M.  IMme.  Bisson  holds  her  hands,  while  the  moans  and  mus- 
cular efforts  increase. 

8.37  P.M.  Mme.  Bisson  releases  her  hands,  which,  however,  remain 
visible.  Whimpering  and  cries  of  pain,  trembling  voice,  and  great 
excitement.  Hands  and  feet  are  cold.  She  takes  off  the  tights  and 
sits  on  the  chair,  only  clad  in  the  tunic. 

8.40  P.M.  The  whimpering  and  groaning  become  more  vehement, 
and  continue  as  in  the  case  of  a  person  undergoing  a  lengthy  and  painful 
operation. 

8.41  P.M.     Gasping  and  accelerated  respiration,  with  open  mouth. 

8.50  P.M.     The  pains  seem  to  diminish  and  Eva  appears  to  rest. 

8.51  P.M.  Renewal  of  strong  mediumistic  pains.  "  Cela  me  prend 
au  cou." 

8.55  P.M.  On  the  right,  beside  the  medium's  head,  the  author  sees 
a  white  mass.  The  curtain  is  intentionally  kept  closed  above  the 
medium's  visible  hands,  so  that  the  materialisation  process  can  develop 
completely  and  is  not  interrupted  by  premature  illumination. 

8.59  P.M.  Mme.  Bisson  continues  to  encourage  the  medium.  With 
urgent  suggestions  that  a  whole  phantom  may  show  itself,  she  takes 
Eva's  hands  and  supports  her  effort  of  will. 

Fig.  156.     Author's  flashlighi  photograph  of  19  May,   1913.  , 

Fig.    157.     Simultaneous    photograph    by 
Mme.  Bisson,  19  May,   1913. 

SITTINGS   IN   MAY   AND   JUNE    1913  239 

9  P.M.  Eva  rises,  still  holding  the  curtain  so  that  her  hands  remain 
visible,  but  so  that  the  materialisation  process  can  take  place  in  the  dark. 

9.3  P.M.  Convulsions  shake  the  medium's  body.  Whining  with 
pain  she  throws  herself  into  the  chair.  While  her  hands  are  being  held, 
a  broad  white  mass  becomes  visible  on  her  left  forearm,  and  is  drawn 
upwards. 

9.15  P.M.  Stertorous  and  accelerated  breathing.  Long-drawn  mus- 
cular efforts.     She  cries  out,  "  Oh  !  ma  Juliette,  il  me  fait  mal,  il  me  tire." 

9.20  P.M.  Eva  again  rises,  quickly  steps  towards  the  right,  and 
remains  standing  in  the  corner  of  the  cabinet. 

9.25  P.M.  The  medium  takes  Mme.  Bisson's  hands  and  follows  the 
motions  of  her  arms,  and  moves  them  up  and  down  several  times  at  the 
back  wall  of  the  cabinet,  as  if  one  were  to  pull  a  bell-rope. 

9.30  P.M.  She  releases  Mme.  Bisson's  hands,  grasps  the  right 
curtain,  and  says,  "  Juliette,  appelle-le,  je  le  vois." 

9.35  P.M.  She  starts  opening  the  right  curtain  while  standing. 
Mme.  Bisson  recognises  the  male  personification  "  Dorsmica,"  already 
twice  photographed. 

9.38  P.M.  As  Eva  opened  the  curtam  wide  I  saw  behind  her,  as  if 
protected  by  her  body,  what  appeared  to  be  a  white  male  figure  taller 
than  the  medium.  In  order  not  to  miss  the  opportunity,  I  immediately 
ignited  the  flash-light,  although  the  apparition  stood  too  far  sideways 
beyond  the  field  of  view  of  the  lenses  to  be  photographed  by  all  the 
cameras. 

Immediately  after  changing  the  plates  I  entered  the  cabinet,  the 
curtains  having  remained  open.  The  apparition  had  disappeared  like 
lightning  at  the  ignition  of  the  flash-light.  Eva  sank  exhausted  into 
Mme.  Bisson's  arms,  who  placed  her  carefully  in  her  chair.  Imme- 
diately afterwards  the  author  searched  the  cabinet  and  the  medium, 
but  nowhere  could  a  trace  of  the  apparition  be  found.  The  medium 
changed  from  the  seance  costume  into  the  dressing-gown,  and  \7as 
immediately  put  to  bed.  The  space  of  time  between  the  changing  of 
the  plates  and  the  final  examination  of  the  medium  and  the  cabinet  was 
only  a  few  seconds.     Close  of  the  sitting,  9.40  p.m. 

On  the  tightly  stretched  black  cloth  lining  of  the  cabinet,  under  the 
wooden  cross  beams,  there  were  two  white  spots  about  the  size  of  a 
five-shilling  piece,  corresponding  approximately  to  the  middle  of  the 
back  of  the  phantom,  as  it  showed  itself  at  first.  But,  as  proved  later, 
these  patches  were  on  the  left  of  the  photographed  phantom.  If  there 
is  any  relation  between  the  patches  and  the  phantom,  we  must  assume 
that  the  apparition  made  a  lateral  movement  towards  the  corner  of  the 
cabinet,  as,  indeed,  Mme.  Bisson  claims  to  have  noticed.  In  any  case, 
it  is  remarkable  that  other  whitish  patches  are  found  on  the  back  wall, 
corresponding  to  the  position  of  the  phantom  previously  photographed. 
These  have  the  same  appearance  as  the  patches  on  the  dress  when 
subjected  to  microscopic  analysis,  and  probably  also  contain  cell  detritus. 

The  stereoscopic  camera,  mounted  on  one  side,  gave  a  front  view  of 
the  medium  and  phantom,  which  is  unfortunately  not  very  well  defined 
(Fig.  156). 

A  second  stereoscopic  apparatus,  placed  in  front  of  the  cabinet,  only 
shows  the  left  side  of  the  phantom,  while  Mme.  Bisson's  camera,  being 

240  PHENOMENA    OF    MATERIALISATION 

slightly  turned  to  the  left,  gives  a  better  result,  which,  however,  only- 
shows  half  the  phantom  (Fig.  157). 

At  first  sight,  one  recognises  the  male  figure  with  white  mantle 
photographed  on  23rd  February  and  24th  March,  and  this  time  it  closely 
resembles  the  first  photograph.  Again  the  apparition  is  half  a  head 
taUer  than  the  medium,  and  the  lower  edge  of  the  mantle,  as  shown  by 
the  photograph  taken  from  above,  is  from  4  to  8  inches  above  the  floor. 
Again  the  whole  structure  is  flat,  like  a  picture  on  linen,  or  something 
resembling  leather  ;    in  any  case,  some  coherent  material. 

On  the  author's  negative  the  head  is  bent  slightly  to  the  left,  in 
contrast  to  the  upright  position  of  the  two  previous  pictures.  The 
eyes  are  open,  the  gaze  is  directed  half  upwards  as  in  the  photograph 
of  23rd  February  1913.  But  the  eyelids  are  less  open,  so  that,  especially 
on  the  right  side,  the  eyeball  is  not  so  prominent  as  in  the  first  photo- 
graph. The  pupils  are  also  somewhat  further  to  the  right.  In  a  word, 
the  opening  of  the  eyelids  is  flatter  in  our  picture  than  in  the  first 
phptograph.  The  high  light,  corresponding  to  the  incident  illumination, 
is  remarkable,  and  so  is  the  distinct  marking  of  the  unusually  black 
pupil  of  the  left  eye  in  Mme.  Bisson's  photograph.  Over  the  forehead, 
upwards  from  the  nose  and  in  prolongation  of  the  latter,  there  is  a  fold 
resembling  a  ridge,  which  is  pointed  where  it  joins  the  hair. 

As  we  see  from  a  comparative  study  of  the  two  stereoscopic  trans- 
parencies, the  nose  and  supra-orbital  region  are  clearly  marked  out  in 
low  relief,  as  in  a  mask,  and  the  beard  gives  the  impression  of  rough 
hair,  and  therefore  of  reality.  The  prominent  bridge  of  the  nose 
continues,  as  already  mentioned,  in  a  ridge  up  to  the  hair.  Another 
cross  fold  runs  from  the  end  of  this  ridge  to  the  right,  across  the  hair  of 
the  forehead.  A  part  of  the  ridge  is  crossed  by  a  crease  in  the  forehead 
on  the  right.  The  whole  head  portrait  lies  flat  on  the  broad  beam  of 
the  cabinet  frame  as  if  fastened  to  it.  Towards  the  right  of  it  we  also 
see  two  nails,  which  were  hammered  in  by  the  author  for  suspending 
the  photographic  apparatus. 

The  further  development  of  the  features  appears  to  have  been  done 
by  drawing  or  painting  materials,  and  does  not  show  any  essential 
changes  in  comparison  with  the  first  picture. 

The  distance  between  the  medium  and  the  materialised  image  is 
indicated  by  the  broad  shadow  throAvn  by  her  body  on  the  phantom 
standing  behind  her.  The  shoulder  of  the  phantom  is  less  sloping  in 
the  last  photograph  than  in  the  two  previous  ones,  so  that  the  shoulders 
appear  broader  and  squarer.  With  the  aid  of  the  roof  stereoscope  we 
recognise  at  the  left  shoulder,  which  is  bent  forward  at  the  top  and 
sharply  cut  off,  that  the  whole  character  of  the  structure  consists  of  a 
white  plate,  of  fair  consistency,  finished  by  pictorial  means.  Besides 
some  remarkable  parallel  creases  at  the  level  of  the  knees,  which  on 
Mme.  Bisson's  photograph  are  hardly  visible,  the  photograph  shows 
distinctly  projecting  folds,  which  are  plastically  developed  on  the 
obviously  soft  ground  substance,  especially  in  the  lower  portion  of  the 
mantle.  The  outer  line  of  the  mantle  also  runs  more  irregularly  than 
in  the  first  pictures,  and  shows  certain  separate  pieces,  as  well  as  fibres 
or  threads.  On  the  enlargement  the  drawing  of  the  mantle  is  clearly 
seen  to  consist  of  strokes. 

SITTINGS    IN  MAY   AND   JUNE    1913  241 

Various  lines  are  thick  and  soft,  and  as  if  running  into  the  foundation. 
They  are  of  varying  depth,  and  are  again  and  again  broken  by  gaps, 
and  contain  thick  points  of  a  deeper  colour.  Generally  speaking,  we 
cannot  escape  the  impression  that  the  strokes  consist  of  more  or  less 
closely  united  points,  grains,  or  particles  of  different  sizes  and  colourings, 
like  the  "  organic  rays  "  observed  by  Ochorowicz.  On  the  larger  scale 
the  strokes,  consisting  of  separate  pieces  or  joints,  recall  the  anatomical 
structure  of  certain  kinds  of  reeds  built  up  of  regular  joints  or  layers. 
As  in  the  previous  pictures,  the  arms  are  folded  and  the  hands  are 
invisible.  But,  in  place  of  the  left  hand,  we  see  a  fairly  large  triangular 
piece  of  substance,  with  a  broad  dark  rim,  the  character  and  significance 
of  which  cannot  be  explained.  The  covering  of  the  throat  is  the  same 
as  in  the  first  picture. 

We  have  here,  for  the  third  time,  a  representation  of  the  same  male 
type,  but  the  differences  in  the  three  separate  pictures  of  23rd  February, 
24th  March,  and  19th  May,  and  in  various  photographic  poses  of  this 
individuality,  are  so  great  that  they  could  not  be  produced  by  any 
fraudulent  use  of  one  and  the  same  image.  It  would  at  least  have  been 
necessary  to  smuggle  in  three  life-size  pictures  of  different  appearance. 
Besides,  on  the  last  negative,  we  find  an  advance  from  the  flat  to  the 
plastic  in  the  design  of  the  head.  It  must  be  remembered  that  the 
pictures  of  24th  March  had  the  precise  character  of  painted  canvas, 
which  is  partly  seen  in  the  negatives  of  the  last  series  also.  Unless  we 
doubt  the  reality  of  this  remarkable  materialisation  process,  we  might 
expect  that,  in  the  course  of  time,  a  further  plastic  development  of  the 
phantom  would  take  place.  In  this  case  the  flat  pictorial  development 
of  the  psychic  composition,  or  individuality,  which  is  to  be  realised, 
would  only  be  a  necessary  transition  stage  in  the  materialisation  process 
towards  those  creations  and  figures  which,  in  appearance  and  in  motion, 
resemble  real  life,  so  that  finally,  as  in  Crookes's  phantom  "  Katie  King," 
we  cannot  distinguish  them  from  real  living  organisms. 

The  author's  result  of  19th  May  1913  confirms  the  observations  and 
photographic  records  of  Mme.  Bisson  on  23rd  February  and  24th  March, 
and  for  this  reason  alone  it  is  of  definite  value  in  deciding  the  question 
of  phantoms. 

Negative. 

Sittings  of  the  20th  and  27th  May  1913. 

Sitting  of  the  31st  May  1913. 

Present. — Mme.  Bisson. 

The  medium  this  day  wore  the  tunic  with  tights.  Immediately 
after  the  beginning  of  the  sitting  the  phenomena  began,  with  the  usual 
physiological  accompaniments,  in  the  form  of  materials  streaming  out 
of  the  mouth.  Mme.  Bisson  observed  that  a  small  complete  finger,  tied 
up  with  this  material,  emerged  from  the  mouth.  This  shows  that  the 
attachment  is  not  made  outside  the  mouth.  The  finger  then  grew  to 
the  normal  adult  size  of  a  female  finger.  During  the  next  exposure 
two  further  fingers  were  formed,  which  were  joined  by  cords  to  the  mouth 

<2 

242  PHENOMENA    OF    MATERIALISATION 

and  the  rest  of  the  material.  The  medium,  in  this  case,  had  the  sensation 
of  having  produced  a  whole  hand,  and  she  asked  her  protectress  if  she 
did  not  perceive  it.  Finally,  Mme.  Bisson  carefully  caught  the  finger 
stump  in  her  own  hand,  touched  it  on  both  sides,  and  pressed  it  so  that 
the  medium  cried  with  pain.  In  this  case  she  observed  that  the  finger 
felt  like  a  real  finger,  like  a  consistent  firm  body,  with  a  cool  and  skin- 
like exterior. 

In  the  further  course  of  the  sitting  a  piece  of  material  emerged  from 
Eva's  mouth  and  laid  itself  across  the  medium's  hands,  which  were  held 
by  Mme.  Bisson,  and  of  this  a  photographic  record  was  made.  It  was 
all  dra^vn  into  the  medium's  mouth  as  the  light  flashed  up.  During  the 
sittmg  Eva's  hands  were  continually  visible  and  under  control. 

The  enlarged  photograph  (Fig.  158)  shows  the  medium's  hands 
separated  from  below  by  Mme.  Bisson's  hands.  A  cord-like  piece  of 
material  hangs  from  Eva's  mouth  over  her  right  hand  and  down  to  the 
end  of  her  first  finger.  To  this  band  a  round  white  structure  is  attached 
which,  however,  can  hardly  be  called  a  finger  fragment.  A  broad 
triangular  attachment  is  seen  on  the  upper  part  of  this  white  fragment, 
and  appears  to  coalesce  with  its  surface.  The  manner  of  attachment  on 
this  day  is  quite  different  from  that  in  the  case  of  the  finger  of  16th  May. 

Negative. 

Sitting  of  the  2nd  June  1913. 

Sitting  of  the  3rd  June  1913. 

Present. — Dr  Bourbon,  M.  Bourdet,  Mme.  Bisson,  and  the  author. 

Conditions. — Eva  puts  on  tights  and  tunic,  and  is  se\vn  up  from  the 
neck  to  the  waist  and  at  the  wrists.  The  tights  were  not  sewn  on  to 
the  tunic,  because  the  medium  often  wishes  to  take  them  off  during 
the  sittings.     Control  as  in  previous  sittings. 

8.50  P.M.  Hypnotisation  in  thirty  seconds.  The  hands  remained 
in  visible  control  during  the  whole  sitting.  The  trance  condition  on 
this  day  was  much  quieter. 

9.30  P.M.  A  rather  bulky  material  streams  out  of  the  mouth  in  the 
form  of  thick  strips  and  threads,  corresponding  approximately  to  those 
photographed  in  the  case  of  the  veil  phenomenon. 

9.35  P.M.  Material  becomes  visible  on  her  lap  in  the  shape  of  a  long 
strip,  to  which  a  small  structure,  resembling  a  finger,  appears  to  be 
attached. 

9.45  P.M.  New  exposure.  The  miniature  finger  attached  to  the 
substance  becomes  visible — below  the  medium's  hands,  and  as  if  protected 
by  them  while  they  grasp  the  curtain—and  touches  Mme.  Bisson's  hand. 
The  impression  is^  conveyed  as  if  a  long  elastic  rubber  band  emerged 
from  the  mouth  and  connected  it  with  the  finger.  As  soon  as  this  is 
touched  it  is  drawn  back  into  the  mouth  with  an  elastic  jerk,  and  dis- 
appears. 

10.15  P.M.  At  the  next  opening  of  the  curtain  the  substance  hangs 
in  broad  strips  out  of  the  mouth,  and  at  the  lower  end  a  finger  seems  to 
be  attached  to  it.     Mme.  Bisson  illuminates  the  phenomenon  with  a 

Fig.  158.     Mme.  Bisson's  flashlight  photograph,  31   .May,   1913. 

Fig.     159.      Mme.     Bisson's     flashlight     photograph     of 
8  June,   1913. 

OBSERVATIONS  IN   JUNE   AND    JULY   1913  243 

red  torch.  It  is  about  3  or  4  inches  thick.  Beside  it,  the  dress  of  the 
medium  is  moistened  m  strips  on  her  breast,  and  shines  pink  in  the 
light.  While  the  material  itself  looks  grey,  the  more  compact  portions, 
like  this  finger,  appear  white. 

10.20  P.M.  The  form  changes  its  shape.  Sometimes  it  looks  like  a 
long  narrow  band,  sometimes  like  a  bulky  packet.  The  phenomenon 
shows  at  various  parts  of  the  medium's  upper  body,  once  on  her  hair, 
and  then  on  her  right,  or  left,  shoulder,  but  only  remains  visible  for 
about  a  second.  Eva  is  extremely  timid,  and  protects  the  structure 
from  the  light  and  the  sitters'  gaze,  like  an  anxious  mother  protecting 
her  child.  On  the  whole,  the  mediumistic  efforts  on  this  day  are  less 
violent  and  painful,  but,  on  the  other  hand,  the  phenomena  are  feebler 
and  more  fugitive. 

The  phenomena  only  occur  after  energetic  suggestive  words  by 
Mme.  Bisson,  as  if  the  medium's  own  will  power  was  not  able  to  over- 
come the  impediments. 

10.28  P.M.    Close  of  sitting.     Negative  result  of  the  final  examination. 

Observations  in  June  and  July  1913 
(Paris  and  La  Baule). 

On  8th  June  Mme.  Bisson  hypnotised  the  medium  at  8  p.m.  without  the 
intention  of  producing  phenomena,  but  hardly  had  Eva  entered  the 
trance  condition  when,  with  whining  expressions,  she  appeared  to  be 
defending  herself  against  some  intrusion.  Then  she  undressed,  and 
remained  in  a  suffering  condition  for  about  thirty  minutes.  She  rose, 
became  restless,  and  moved  to  and  fro  in  the  cabinet.  Mme.  Bisson 
herself  then  entered  the  cabinet,  sat  down  on  Eva's  chair,  while  Eva 
stood  beside  her,  and  left  the  curtain  sufficiently  widely  open  to  observe 
the  materialisation  process.  She  held  Eva's  hands,  but  released  them 
from  time  to  time,  in  order  to  allow  her  to  put  her  arms  right  up.  Then 
Eva  bent  down  and  complained  of  pains  in  the  back.  Mme.  Bisson  saw 
a  packet  of  material  emerging  from  Eva's  body  at  her  waist,  in  the  form 
of  smoke  taking  the  aspect  of  rays,  and  surrounded  by  a  clearly  visible 
"  aura,"  or  ring  of  light.  This  whole  appearance  then  vanished,  but 
now  she  saw,  at  the  back  of  the  cabinet,  behind  the  medium,  the  outlines 
of  the  phantom  against  the  back  wall.  Eva  then  clasped  her  back  with 
both  hands  and  complained  of  pains  in  the  lumbar  region.  The  phantom 
formed  a  head  with  a  white  strip  hanging  down  from  it.  It  followed 
Eva's  movements,  and  became  longer  and  broader,  as  if  Eva  were  going 
to  duplicate  herself.  As  soon  as  the  undeveloped  phantom  was  suffi- 
ciently clearly  seen,  Mme.  Bisson  pressed  the  electric  button.  With  the 
flash  of  the  light  everything  vanished  without  a  trace.  At  9.15  p.m.  Eva 
was  able  to  retire  to  her  bedroom.  (Letter  of  Mme.  Bisson,  dated  9th 
June.) 

The  plan  to  photograph  the  phantom  in  the  nascent  state  had 
succeeded,  for  instead  of  a  figure  the  negative  (Fig.  159)  gives  only  a 
white  strip  with  a  finished  head.  The  length  of  the  whole  thing  corre- 
sponds to  the  size  of  the  phantom,  as  seen  in  previous  pictures,  while  its 
width  amounts  to  about  one-third  of  the  former  distance  between  the 

244  PHENOMENA    OF    MATERIALISATION 

shoulders.  The  whole  phantom  is  traversed  vertically  by  five  long 
parallel  rents  or  depressions,  the  most  noticeable  of  which  cuts  the  face 
quite  sharply  into  two  portions  at  the  corner  of  the  left  eye.  These  two 
portions  are  not  even  correctly  joined,  so  that  the  left  eye  is  too  high 
in  proportion,  and  the  left  nostril  appears  to  be  cut  off.  The  observer 
gets  the  impression  as  if  the  drawing  of  the  face  consisted  of  two  pieces, 
and  was  to  have  been  developed  by  separating  these  two  pieces  and 
filling  up  the  gaps.  This  unfinished  process  taking  place  on  a  flat 
surface  without  plastic  development  is  also  indicated  in  the  clothing 
by  the  long  parallel  rents,  which  are  lost  below  in  the  folds  of  the  mantle. 
The  position  of  the  hands  is  quite  different  from  that  in  the  previous 
phantoms.  The  expression  of  the  face  and  the  position  of  the  eyes  are 
similar  to  the  previous  photographs,  except  that  the  left  side  of  the  face, 
being  undeveloped,  appears  too  narrow.  Both  eyes  show  high  lights 
corresponding  to  the  incident  light,  and  exhibit  an  essential  difference 
in  the  drawing  from  the  previous  phantoms,  especially  as  regards  the 
opening  of  the  eyelids  and  the  direction  of  the  gaze.  This  is  particularly 
remarkable  in  the  eyeball  and  the  inner  corner  of  the  right  eye,  A 
close  comparison  between  the  four  phantom  pictures  proves  that,  if  we 
assume  fraud,  it  is  impossible  that  the  same  image  could  have  been 
shown  all  the  four  times.  On  this  assumption  four  different  models 
must  have  been  used.  The  presence  of  real  high  lights  also  is  not 
explained,  nor  the  tendency  shown  in  the  pictures  to  widen  out  in  the 
same  plane.  The  textile  character  of  the  mantle  is  shown  by  small 
threads,  which  project  from  the  margin  of  the  picture,  which  otherwise 
is  flat  ^nd  disk-like.  Although  this  photograph  looks  suspicious  at  the 
first  glance,  and  was  also  produced  after  the  close  of  our  experiments, 
the  author  still  considers  it  desirable  to  publish  it  in  the  collection,  since 
it  may  be  of  interest  for  the  study  of  folds  and  rents,  such  as  were 
characteristic  of  the  former  photographic  records. 

In  describing  the  first  phantom  photograph,  attention  was  drawn 
to  some  rents  observed  by  means  of  the  roof  stereoscope,  which  traversed 
the  figure  from  top  to  bottom.  They  are  most  likely  the  residues  of 
the  same  process  of  development,  which  is  now  seen  in  its  incomplete 
stage.  In  describing  the  negatives  of  a  female  head  (30th  November 
1912),  it  has  already  been  pointed  out  that  folds  occurred  in  the  material- 
ised forms  undergoing  observation.  Now  we  observe  the  same  process 
of  folding  during  the  development  of  the  phantom.  Whatever  may  be 
our  point  of  view  on  this  matter,  the  negatives  mentioned  seem  to  show 
that  the  process  of  folding  occurs  not  only  during  the  origin  of  the 
structures,  i.e.,  before  the  complete  materialisation,  but  also  during 
their  recession,  i.e.,  their  de-materiahsation.  The  criticism,  which  takes 
no  account  of  the  experimental  conditions,  will  hardly  forgo  this 
opportunity  for  an  unfavourable  decision,  and  will  use  these  folds  as  an 
argument  to  show  that  these  structures  are  unfolded  from  a  packet 
previously  folded  up.  But  this  assumption  is  hardly  supported  by  the 
peculiar  character  of  these  folds,  which  resemble  parallel  rents,  and  one 
cannot  understand  how  the  whole  phantom  can  be  fraudulently  pro- 
duced in  this  manner.  Besides,  the  whole  controversy  becomes  mean- 
ingless if  we  consider  the  experimental  conditions,  since  we  must  not 
forget  that  these  experiments  took  place  with  a  nude  medium,  and  that 

OBSERVATIONS   IN   JUNE   AND   JULY   1913  245 

Mme.  Bisson  would  have  been  the  person  to  be  deceived,  although  she 
sat  on  the  medium's  chair  and  followed  the  whole  process  on  Eva's 
naked  body.  The  problem  is  therefore  a  deeper  one,  and  cannot  be 
disposed  of  by  such  superficial  criticism. 

For  the  last  time  before  the  close  of  this  work  the  same  phantom 
was  observed  by  Mme.  Bisson  on  4th  Auf^ust  1913,  in  their  country  house 
on  the  Loire  (La  Baule).  This  time  it  occurred  outside  the  curtain, 
while  the  medium  lay  behind  it  in  a  deep  trance,  in  the  easy-chair, 
without  any  sign  of  life.  The  face  of  the  phantom  was  perfectly 
modelled,  and  resembled  that  of  a  living  person,  Avhile  the  lower  part 
of  the  mantle,  formed  of  soft  material,  lay  on  the  knees  of  the  observer 
sitting  in  front  of  the  curtain.  And  yet  the  surface  of  the  mantle  gave 
the  impression  of  a  drawing. 

A  further  letter  of  Mme.  Bisson' s  relates  that  in  the  sitting  of 
13th  June,  which  was  attended  by  Dr  Bourbon,  she  observed  the  tip  of 
a  small  finger  with  a  nail,  which  penetrated  Eva's  dress,  grew  in  size, 
and  also  changed  its  shape.  It  remained  visible  for  several  minutes 
between  the  medium's  knees,  was  quite  independent  of  the  substance 
hanging  out  of  the  mouth,  and  finally  appeared  within  the  veil  which 
enclosed  Eva's  head.  One  of  the  observers  also  succeeded  in  touching 
it  inside  the  veil,  and  subsequently  outside.  This  material  had  a  grey 
colour,  and  felt  like  a  mass  having  a  fair  consistency  and  thickness. 

On  17th  June  Mme.  Bisson  was  able  to  touch  a  completely  formed 
finger  which  emerged  from  Eva's  mouth,  again  in  Dr  Bourbon's  presence. 
She  followed  up  this  finger  while  it  penetrated  through  the  veil,  without 
tearing  it,  and  without  altering  its  own  consistency. 

On  21st  June  the  experiments  were  continued.  Eva  guided  one  of 
Mme.  Bisson's  fingers  into  her  mouth.  On  this  occasion  she  felt  a 
materialised  finger,  wrapped  in  material,  on  the  tip  of  Eva's  tongue. 
It  appeared  to  adhere  to  the  skin  of  the  tongue  and  the  gums,  and  to 
emerge  from  them.  On  feeling  the  back  part  of  the  tongue  and  the 
mouth,  these  turned  out  to  be  quite  free  and  intact,  thus  indicating 
that  only  the  front  half  of  the  tongue  was  concerned  in  the  materialisation 
process.  She  felt  a  nail  on  the  same  finger,  and  raised  it  with  the  nail 
of  her  own  finger,  whereupon  the  medium  gave  a  cry  of  pain.  This 
interference  stopped  the  materialisation  process.  Everything  was 
reabsorbed,  and  did  not  appear  again  that  evening. 

On  29th  June  Mme.  Bisson  and  Dr  Bourbon  again  observed  two 
fingers  attached  to  the  material.  These  fingers  advanced  in  front  of 
the  curtain  and  laid  themselves  in  the  hands  of  the  two  observers.  In 
this  case  the  fingers  and  the  substance  were  black  instead  of  the  usual 
grey  or  white  colour. 

On  23rd  July  1913  (in  La  Baule),  at  3  p.m.,  several  completely  formed 
fingers  wrapped  in  material,  three  of  which  showed  nails,  emerged  from 
the  vagina  of  the  hypnotised  medium,  moved  upwards  over  her  skin, 
and  disappeared  without  a  trace  at  the  moment  when  Eva  awoke 
spontaneously  with  a  cry  of  terror. 

The  above  communications,  received  by  letter,  arc  not  without 
value  as  a  supplement  to  the  previous  observations  already  related.^ 

'  Cp.    Juliette    Alexaudre-Bissou,    " Les   I'hrnonn'ne.s-  dit.s   dt   Mati-riaH.tfition."     Felix 
AlcHii,  Paris,  1914. 

246  PHENOMENA    OF    MATERIALISATION 

RESULT  OF  THE  MICROSCOPIC   EXAMINATIONS. 

During  the  sitting  held  in  Munich  on  the  8th  September  1912,  a  cord-like 
structure  was  seen  on  the  medium's  dress.  As  already  reported,  it  left 
behind  on  the  dress  a  patch  9  inches  long  and  2  or  3  inches  broad, 
which  is  reproduced  in  the  illustration  accompanying  the  report  of  the 
sitting  (Fig.  114).  In  addition,  the  breast  portion  of  the  dress,  which 
had  been  quite  clean  before  the  sitting,  was  found  to  have  some  smaller 
white  spots  on  it.  The  material  so  obtained  was  handed  over  to  the 
chemical  laboratory  of  Messrs  Schwalm,  Munich,  for  examination. 
The  expert  opinion  on  this  material  is  as  follows  : — 

On  the  9th  iust.  you  handed  to  me  for  examination  a  black  dress  having  some  matter 
deposited  on  the  outside  in  various  places. 

Physical  Structure  of  Deposit. — The  deposit  consisted  of  long-drawn,  narrow,  twisted 
threads,  and  spots  of  a  greyish-white  colour. 

Under  a  magnifying  glass  it  was  found  to  be  a  dried  mass  resembling  a  secretion. 

Man7ier  of  Preparation. — At  suitable  places  the  substance  was  separated  from  the 
dress,  and  observed  partly  in  watei',  and  partly  after  colouring  with  iodine  solution,  dilute 
solution  of  methylene  Ijlue,  hsenialum,  and  dilute  carbolic  fuchsine  and  embedding  it  in 
glycerined  gelatine. 

Microscopic  Structure. — Preparation  I.  in  water.  The  microscopic  image  shows  con- 
glomerates of  colourless,  lamellar,  cohesive  bodies,  without  a  definite  structure.  There  are 
also  single  laminre  of  various  forms,  polygonal,  oval,  etc.  These  resemble  human  epithe- 
lium, but  exhibit  no  nuclei. 

Preparation  II.  coloured  with  Lugol's  iodine  solution  and  embedded  in  glycerined 
gelatine.     Same  microscopic  appearance  as  No.  I. 

Preparation  III.  coloured  with  hgemalum.  The  microscopic  image  shows  the 
finest  veil-like  lamellae,  some  of  them  broken  up  into  fibres,  but  otherwise  without  a 
definite  structure.     No  nuclei  are  to  be  seen  (Figs.  160,  161,  162). 

Preparation  IV.  coloured  with  methylene  blue  and  embedded  in  glycerined  gelatine. 
The  microscopic  image  consists  partly  of  conglomerates,  partly  of  difl'used  bodies  of  various 
forms  re.sembliug  epithelium  (polygonal,  round,  spindle-shaped),  with  nuclei  in  some 
places.  Also  conglomerates  of  structures  showing  a  cellular  constitution,  and  resembling 
vegetable  cells.  Those  admixtures  which  do  not  occur  in  the  human  body  might  be 
derived  from  the  air  or  from  the  black  stuff  of  the  dress. 

In  the  sitting  of  11th  September  1912  I  succeeded  in  catching  a 
small  amount  of  the  liquid  matter  in  a  porcelain  dish. 

The  analysis,  agam  carried  out  in  the  Schwalm  laboratory,  is  as 
follows  : — 

On  the  I2th  inst.  you  handed  to  me  some  material  for  examination  which  was  at  the 
bottom  of  a  porcelain  dish. 

One  portion  of  the  material  was  examined  physico-microscopicallj,  and  another 
physico-chemically. 

I.  PHYSICO-MICROSCOPIC  EXAMINATION. 

Physical  Observation. — The  material  forms  a  grey,  veil-like,  moist  film. 

Alode  of  Preparation. — Transfer  prejiarations  were  made  of  the  ground  deposit  em- 
bedded in  glycerined  gelatine,  some  of  the  preparations  being  previously  stained  with 
iodine  solution,  hsemalum,  dilute  methylene  blue  solution,  or  dilute  carbolic  fuchsine. 

Result  of  Microscopic  Examination  (Figs.  163,  164,  165). 

Preparation  I.  embedded  in  glycerined  gelatine.  The  microscope  shows  colourless, 
diffused  bodies  resembling  epithelium,  some  of  which  show  nuclei,  and  can  then  be  iden- 
tified with  human  epithelium.  There  are  numerous  bacterial  threads.  Also  small  groups 
of  bacterial  spores  and  fibrous  regetable  remains. 

MICROPHOTOGRAPHS 
ENLARGED    i6o   TIMES 

(Made  by  Dr.  Stein). 

Fig.  i6o.     Preparation  3A.     Veil-like  lamella  broken  up  into 

FIBRES,    NONDESCRIPT    STRUCTURE. 

W 

Z 

V. 

'r-^ 

M 

o 

o 

Q 

H 

z 

u 

< 

o 

K 

n 

<; 

< 

< 

Oh 

w 

w 

> 

U 

K 

w 

0! 

(^ 

K 

< 

On  W 
03    O 

w  >; 

00 

^1    W 

(a  w 

S    PS 

W  H 

w  c 

!_, 

>• 

u 

" 

U 

H 

K 

a 

fcl 

g; 

a 

< 

M 

H 

(/J 

Q 

H 

w 

U 

o 

o 

's.  q 

,-  « 

Fig.  163.     Sitting  OF  II  September,  1912.     Numerous  epithelioid 

BODIES    WITHOUT    NUCLEI.       AlSO    GROWING    BACTERIAL    SPORES. 

RESULT  OF  THE  MICROSCOPIC  EXAMINATIONS         247 

Preparation  II.  stained  with  hiematoxylin  (nuclear  staining)  and  embedded  in  glycer- 
ined  gelatine.  Same  result  as  No.  1,  except  that  the  epithelium  Itodies,  bacterial  fibres, 
and  vegetable  remains  occui'  in  greater  numljers. 

Preparation  III.  stained  with  methylene  blue  and  em])edded  in  glycerined  gelatine. 
Same  as  II. 

Preparation  IV.  stained  with  carl)olic  fuchsine  and  embedded  in  glycerined  gelatine. 
Same  as  III. 

II.  PHYSICO-CHEMICAL  EXAMINATION. 

A  portion  of  the  material  was  collected  on  platinum  foil,  dried,  and  weighed. 

Physical  Condition  of  the  Material  and  its  Ashes. — The  material  is  of  a  brownish-black 
colour,  and  weighs  0'002  gramme.  On  ignition,  the  substance  carbonises  and  smells  dis- 
tinctly of  burnt  horn.     A  pure  white  ash  remained,  which  weighed  O'OOOG  gramme. 

Chemical  Compositioyi  of  the  Ashes. — In  the  ashes  are  found  :  sodium  chloride  and 
calcium  phosphate.  The  dark  colovir  of  the  material  is  evidently  due  to  dust  (or  to  a 
pigment  ?). 

The  process  of  comlnxstion  indicates  the  presence  of  nitrogen,  as  in  albuminous  I)odies. 

In  the  same  sitting  (11th  September)  spots  remained  on  the  medium's 
dress  after  contact  with  the  teleplastic  substance,  which  also  was 
analysed  in  the  Schwalm  laboratory.     The  report  on  this  is  as  follows : — 

Physical  Condition  of  the  Deposit. — Part  of  the  deposit  consisted  of  a  patch  the  size  of  a 
hand,  and  another  part  of  long-drawn,  curved  streaks  and  spots  of  a  whitish-grey  colour. 
Examination  with  a  magnifying  glass  showed  a  dried  mass  resembling  a  secretion.  There 
were  also  white  conglomerate  specks  embedded  in  the  mass. 

Preparation. — At  suitable  places  the  deposit  was  detached  from  the  dress  and  embedded 
in  glycerined  gelatine,  some  of  it  after  staining  with  iodine  solution,  hsematoxylin,  dilute 
methylene  blue,  and  dilute  carbolic  fuchsine. 

In  the  folds  of  the  dress,  inside,  minute  transparent  scales  were  found. 

MICROSCOPIC  RESULT. 

Preparation  {a).    Shows  conglomerates  containing  starch  granules. 

Preparation  (6).  Shows  a  tangle  of  colourless  (with  a  few  dark  blue)  cotton  threads  and 
wood-fibre  jjroducts.  Among  them  there  are  numerous  colourless  lamellar  bodies  without 
definite  structure,  some  of  them  showing  forms  characteristic  of  human  epithelium.  No 
nuclei  can  be  found.     (Fig.  166.) 

Preparation  (c),  from  inside  of  dress.  The  microscope  shows  small  groups  and  isolated 
colourless,  epithelioid,  cohei-ent,  unnucleated  bodies  without  definite  structure.  Also 
starch  grains  here  and  there. 

Preparation  (</).  Shows  colourless  filmy  conglomerates  with  fine  unsymmetrical 
cross-hatching. 

Preparation  (c).  Shows  colourless  conglomerates  of  epithelioid  coherent  bodies  of 
indefinite  form.  At  their  rims  polygonal  shapes  are  found  in  some  places.  No  definite 
structure  recognisable.     No  nuclei. 

The  starch  granules  mentioned  in  the  above  report  may  be  derived  from  face-jxiwder 
used  by  Eva  C.  In  the  dressing-room  there  was  .i  powder-box  on  the  washhand  stand. 
The  question  has  also  been  raised  whether  the  cell  detritus  might  be  derived  from  a 
secretion  of  the  mammary  glands.  This  must  be  answered  in  the  negative.  In  colostrum 
we  find  fatty  cells  having  the  appearance  of  alveolar  epithelium  with  fatty  degeneratioo. 
They  occur  in  the  company  of  small  round  fat  globules. 

Four  further  microscopic  preparations  were  obtained  by  the  author 
in  the  Paris  sitting  of  18th  November  1912,  and  were  examined  in 
the  Antoine  Hospital  in  Paris.     The  result  is  as  follows  : — 

(1)  Large  quantities  of  cell  detritus  and  cell  nuclei. 

(2)  Large,  clear,  and  well-isolated  plate  epithelium  cells  in  conjunc- 

tion with  various  microbes. 

248  PHENOMENA    OF    MATERIALISATION 

(3)  Mucus-like  substance  with  cell  detritus  and  numerous  microbes. 

(4)  Some  wool  threads  (from  dress). 

The  origin  of  the  cells,  whether  from  the  mouth  or  the  vagina, 
cannot  be  determined. 

Preparations  (1)  and  (2)  were  sent  later  (4th  December)  to  the 
Schwalm  laboratory  for  a  further  examination,  with  the  following 
result  (Figs.  167  and  168)  :— 

Preparation  (1),  coloured  red.  The  microscope  shows  conglomerates  of  epithelioid 
bodies  of  irregular  shape,  probably  embedded  in  mucus-like  substance.  Nuclear  structures 
are  recognisable  in  a  few  cases.  The  epithelioid  bodies  are  mostly  decomposing,  though 
a  few  are  intact. 

Preparation  (2),  stained  blue.  Tlie  microscope  shows  mucoid,  formless  masses,  and 
dispersed  among  them  numerous  unnucleated,  polygonal,  epithelioid  structures,  with 
many  nucleated  ones  ;  the  latter  are  sometimes  so  well  defined  that  they  can  be  termed 
epithelium  cells.     There  are  also  isolated  cotton  threads  and  fungoid  threads. 

The  liquids  obtained  on  27th  November  1912  could  not  be  preserved, 
owing  to  incorrect  treatment.  The  preparations  made  eight  days  later 
from  this  evaporated  residue  showed  nothing  remarkable. 

Only  one  of  them  showed  coarsely  made,  formless  structures  with 
irregular  markings,  consisting  of  roundish  elongated  meshes.  This 
shows  some  haemorrhagic  staining,  and  gives  the  impression  of  a 
thickened  fragment  of  epidermis.  Perhaps  there  is  here  an  epidermis 
scale  removed  by  scratching. 

In  judging  the  above  material  we  must  first  eliminate  the  accidental 
admixtures  derived  from  the  air  and  from  the  cotton  dress,  like  fibrous 
vegetable  remains,  bacterial  spores,  starch  grains,  dust  particles,  and 
other  impurities.  Only  those  elements  which  occur  in  all  the  prepara- 
tions are  significant.  These  include  cell  detritus  and  epithelium  cells, 
with  or  without  nuclei,  finest  veils,  lamellae,  either  intact  or  dissolving 
into  fibres,  filmy  aggregates,  isolated  fat  grains  and  mucus. 

The  combustion  process  shows  the  organic  origin  of  the  residues, 
but,  in  addition,  the  microscopic  results  obtained  in  Paris  and  Munich 
do  not  permit  the  slightest  doubt  that  we  have  to  do  with  organic, 
i.e.,  originally  living  matter. 

Without  wishing  to  draw  far-reaching  conclusions  from  this  fact,  it 
does  speak  against  the  supposed  use  of  textile  products,  of  paper, 
rubber  objects,  etc.,  for  the  artificial  presentation  of  the  phenomena 
and  of  the  automobile  substance  observed. 

As  regards  the  probable  origin  of  the  material,  such  epithelial  bodies 
and  their  products  of  disintegration  would  be  normally  looked  for  in 
the  female  genital  system  and  in  the  mouth  and  gullet. 

The  genital  origin  would  in  this  case  presuppose  the  penetration  of 
the  organic  material  through  the  black  tricot  and  the  black  cotton 
dress,  i.e.,  through  a  double  layer  of  textile  fabric.  In  the  cases  dealt 
with  the  tights  were  free  from  spots.  That  the  genitals  can  give  rise  to 
the  phenomena  in  question  is  already  prov^ed  by  observations.  But 
the  microscopic  observations  do  not  show  a  single  leucocyte,  such  as 
always  accompanies  vaginal  epithelia,  nor  Doderlein's  vagmal  bacillus 
and  other  characteristic  bodies.  The  lamellar  veils  shown  in  the  micro- 
photographs  do  not  occur  in  vaginal  secretions,  so ,  that  the  vaginal 
origin  is  very  improbable. 

Fig.    i66.     Preparation    (b).     Siiiing   of    ii    September,    191  i- 

RESULT  OF  THE  MICROSCOPIC  EXAMINATIONS        249 

PP  As  regards  the  mouth  and  pharynx,  we  may  recollect  that  in  one 
case,  in  Bayonne,  sputum  was  traced,  in  conjunction  with  other  cell 
products.  Human  saliva,  as  secreted  by  the  three  large  glands,  the 
parotid,  submaxillary,  and  sublingual,  as  well  as  the  smaller  glands 
in  the  mouth  epithelium,  is  a  light  blue,  odourless,  viscid,  "  stringy  " 
liquid,  which,  when  allowed  to  stand,  separates  into  a  transparent  upper 
layer  and  a  dull  whitish-yellow  layer,  the  latter  consisting  of  mucus 
flocculi,  salivary  corpuscles,  and  buccal  epithelium.  The  latter  are 
mostly  polygonal,  and  have  a  considerable  size.  There  are  also  red 
blood  corpuscles,  leucocytes,  fat  droplets,  common  bacilli,  and  other 
micro-organisms  and  bacteria.  The  most  important  and  ever-present 
constituent  are  the  saliva  corpuscles,  which  resemble  leucocytes,  but 
are  larger  and  show  a  granulated  protoplasm. 

Now,  the  material  collected  by  us  has  a  certain  resemblance  to  saliva, 
while  liquid.  It  is  colourless,  covered  by  a  mouse-grey  film,  "  stringy," 
viscid,  and  odourless.  The  light  blue  colour  is  absent ;  on  standing 
the  liquid  evaporates,  leaving  a  dry  residue  (cell  detritus)  instead  of 
separating  into  a  yellowish  layer,  like  saliva. 

This  shows  already  that  our  liquid  matter  is  not  saliva. 

Out  of  all  the  microscopic  preparations  there  is  no  case  in  which 
saliva  corpuscles  were  shown  to  be  present.  White  and  red  corpuscles 
were  also  absent,  and  so  were  the  micro-organisms  and  bacteria  charac- 
teristic of  the  mouth,  like  leptothrix  and  sarcina. 

The  supposition  that  the  cellular  tissues  and  filmy  veils  of  the 
material  examined  originate  in  the  mucous  membrane  and  pharynx  is 
contradicted  by  the  total  absence  of  the  blood  corpuscles,  bacteria,  and 
saliva  corpuscles  characteristic  of  that  origin. 

We  must  also  take  into  account  that  even  in  air  breathed  out  from 
the  mouth  we  find  such  admixtures,  and  can  nearly  always  detect  their 
presence,  as  is  shown  by  the  microscopic  preparations  of  precipitates  on 
telephone  diaphragms. 

Thus  the  absence  in  our  microscopic  preparations  of  products 
characteristic  of  the  mucous  membrane  of  the  mouth  and  pharynx 
tells  against  regarding  these  membranes  as  the  origin  of  the  teleplastic 
tissues.  If  these  were  only  detritus  of  the  mouth  they  would  certainly 
contain  salivary  corpuscles  ;  we  can,  therefore,  exclude  this  possibility 
with  some  certainty.  All  the  same,  the  material  can  originate  in  the 
mouth,  as  has  often  been  observed  and  photographed,  but  its  develop- 
ment must  be  independent  of  the  mucous  membrane,  and  the  building 
up  of  the  tissue  cannot  depend  on  the  mouth  itself.  During  expulsion 
from  the  mouth  it  might  easily  take  some  secretion  from  the  mouth 
with  it,  so  that  a  microscopic  proof  of  such  an  admixture  would  have  no 
connection  with  the  real  process  of  development.  This  may  explain  the 
results  obtained  in  the  Bayonne  laboratory. 

Very  probably  the  formation  of  the  substance,  which  appears  in 
the  sittings  as  liquid  material,  and  also  as  amorphous  material,  or  filmy 
net-like  and  veil-like  material  in  the  form  of  shreds,  wisps,  threads,  and 
cords,  in  large  or  small  packets,  is  an  organised  tissue  which  easily 
decomposes — a  sort  of  transitory  matter  which  originates  in  the  organism 
in  a  manner  unknown  to  us,  possesses  unknown  biological  functions,  and 
formative  possibilities,  and  is  evidently  peculiarly  dependent  on  the 

250  PHENOMENA   OF   MATERIALISATION 

psychic  influence  of  the  medium.  Thus  the  appearance  shown  in  Figs. 
127,  129,  and  135  corresponds  to  organic  bodies  both  in  its  structure 
and  its  grouping,  and  recalls  placental  and  mesenteric  structures. 
Complicated  functions  of  motion  (growth  and  involution)  and  sensation 
(reaction  to  touch)  were  observed  in  them.  The  constituents  of  the 
veil-like  and  tissue-like  creations  also  resemble  fundamental  shapes  of 
the  organic  world  in  the  branching  and  in  the  joining  of  their  fibres 
(Fig.  154). 

But  the  investigations  hitherto  made  do  not  suffice  for  any  definite 
indications  concerning  the  structure,  composition,  or  function  of  this 
substance. 

At  present  we  can  only  assert  that  such  a  self-moving,  formative 
material  can  develop  outside  the  body,  and  that  during  its  disappearance 
it  often  leaves  behind  cell  detritus,  which  permits  us  in  conjunction 
with  other  observations  to  draw  conclusions  regarding  its  morphological 
composition.  On  account  of  its  body -forming  property  we  can  compare 
the  fundamental  substance  with  structureless  plasma.  By  plasma  we 
mean  the  formative  substance,  or  organic  material,  which  is  the  vehicle 
of  vital  processes.  Now,  since  all  the  changes  of  the  substance  observed 
by  us  take  place  outside  the  medium's  organism,  first  on  her  skin,  then 
on  the  clothed  body,  and  finally  separated  from  it,  the  name  teleplasm 
is  appropriate,  once  we  admit  the  actuality  of  the  substance. 

The  cell  detritus  which  remained  behind  and  was  collected  by  us 
is  not  an  accidental  admixture  with  the  teleplasm.  This  is  shown  by 
the  manner  in  which  it  was  obtained  and  the  absence  of  the  characteristic 
elements  of  the  bodily  orifices  from  which  such  products  might  be  derived. 

As  regards  the  structure  of  the  teleplasm,  we  only  know  this  :  that 
within  it,  or  about  it,  we  find  conglomerates  of  bodies  resembling 
epithelium,  real  plate  epithelium  with  nuclei,  veil-like  filmy  structures, 
coherent  lamellar  bodies  without  structure,  as  well  as  fat  globules  and 
mucus.  If  we  abstain  from  any  detailed  indications  concerning  the 
composition  and  function  of  teleplasma,  we  may  yet  assert  two  definite 
facts  : — 

(1)  In  teleplasm,  or  associated  with  it,  we  find  substances  of  organic 

origin,  various  cell  forms,  which  leave  behind  cell  detritus. 

(2)  The  mobile  material  observed,   which  seems  to  represent  the 

fundamental  substance  of  the  phenomena,  does  not  consist  of 
india  rubber  or  any  other  artificial  product  by  which  its  existence 
could  be  fraudulently  represented. 

For  substances  of  this  kind  can  never  decompose  into  cell  detritus, 
or  leave  a  residue  of  such. 

PHENOMENA   WITH    STANISLAVA  P.  251 

PHENOMENA   WITH   STANISLAVA   P. 

INTRODUCTION. 

The  Polish  medium,  Stanislava  P.,  at  the  author's  invitation,  placed 
hersslf  at  his  disposal  in  Munich  for  a  series  of  sittings  extendino-  from 
29th  September  1912  to  21st  February  1913.  The  mediumship  of  this 
nineteen-year-old  girl,  who  was  employed  as  a  cashier  in  a  business  at 
Warsaw,  was  discovered  a  year  before  and  developed  by  Mr  S.  at  Warsaw 
in  a  series  of  sittings. 

In  her  eighteenth  year  Stanislava  P.  experienced  in  her  room  a 
telepathic  hallucination  by  the  optical  appearance  of  her  friend  Sophie, 
of  the  same  age,  who,  as  it  was  afterwards  found,  had  unexpectedly  died 
at  that  moment.  This  experience  directed  attention  to  her  mediumistic 
faculty,  and  suggested  experiments  with  Stanislava  in  conformity  with 
the  spiritistic  tradition.  After  this,  the  personification  "  Sophie " 
played  the  leading  part  in  the  manifestations. 

Stanislava  P.  came  of  a  good  family,  but  lost  her  parents  at  an  early 
age,  and  was  adopted  by  a  gardener.  Up  to  her  tenth  year  she  remained 
illiterate,  and  when,  at  eighteen  years,  she  took  part  in  the  sittings  for 
the  first  time,  she  could  not  yet  read  or  write  perfectly.  She  showed, 
in  accordance  with  her  degree  of  education,  a  very  limited  comprehension 
of  the  necessary  conditions  of  these  experiments,  only  consenting  to 
them  with  reluctance,  to  oblige  her  benefactor,  and  in  order  to  earn  her 
living.  In  her  case,  there  is  a  great  aesthetic  awkwardness  and  a  lack 
of  disposition  towards  plastic  art,  and  this  is  clearly  seen  in  her  material- 
ised products.  "  Spiritism  "  she  did  not  know  even  by  name,  when  the 
first  experiments  were  made  with  her,  thus  any  assumption  relating  to 
a  possible  training  in  conjuring  are  devoid  of  every  foundation. 

On  the  other  hand,  it  should  be  mentioned  that  Stanislava  P.  created 
the  most  favourable  impression  on  the  persons  whom  she  met  in  Warsaw 
and  Munich  by  her  modest,  simple,  and  amiable  character.  But  her 
excessively  developed  modesty,  her  great  timidity,  and  emotional  dis- 
position rendered  the  application  of  rigid  experimental  conditions  diffi- 
cult. Any  new  method  of  control  she  regarded  as  an  aspersion  upon 
her  honesty,  and  this  was  often  followed  by  emotional  excitement,  tears, 
sleepless  nights,  and  negative  sittings.  She  did  not  permit  an  examina- 
tion of  her  naked  body  by  the  author  or  any  other  male  person,  whereas 
she  had  no  objection  to  the  presence  of  ladies  while  she  undressed  and 
put  on  the  seance  costume  (tights  and  apron  dress,  as  in  the  case  of 
Eva  C).  For  this  reason  ladies  had  to  be  admitted  to  the  sittings. 
After  her  return,  a  lady  physician  sent  the  author  a  virginity  certificate 
concerning  the  medium. 

The  arrangement  of  the  experiments  required,  from  the  beginning, 
a  delicate  adaptation  to  the  peculiarities  of  her  character,  but  especially 
a  discreet  consideration  for  her  well-developed  sense  of  female  honour 
and  modesty,  if  positive  results  were  to  be  achieved  at  all.  Finally,  we 
must  not  forget  that  in  Stanislava  P.  we  have  a  young  novice  whose 

252  PHENOMENA    OF    MATERIALISATION 

mediumistic  career,  hardly  a  year  old,  cannot  be  compared  with  the 
experience  and  education  of  Eva  C,  extending  over  nearly  ten  years. 
For  that  reason,  conditions  which  could  be  applied,  after  four  years,  to 
Eva  C,  as  the  result  of  long  and  laborious  training,  could  not  be  imme- 
diately applied  to  Stanislava.  Under  these  circumstances,  some  of  the 
phenomena  presented  by  this  mediumistic  debutante  are  less  evidential 
and  convincing  than  the  manifestations  of  Eva  C.  Yet  there  has  never 
been  any  indication  justifying  the  suspicion  that  she  had  introduced 
fabrics,  veils,  hands,  gloves,  etc.,  into  the  cabinet  in  any  form.  Before 
every  sitting  Stanislava  usually  undressed  completely  in  the  presence 
of  a  lady,  and  put  on  the  seance  costume  which  was  prescribed  by  the 
author,  consisting  of  tights  with  a  black  apron  tunic.  The  two  articles 
of  apparel  were  not  sewn  together,  as  even  if  that  had  been  done  it 
might  have  been  maintained  that  the  medium  could  touch  her  skin,  so 
long  as  she  had  the  use  of  her  hands.  The  medium's  condition  and 
history  exclude  the  use  of  the  vagina  as  a  hiding  place,  but  so  long  as 
the  character  of  the  phenomena  is  such  that  they  cannot  be  imitated 
under  the  same  conditions,  such  objections  may  be  disregarded  in  any 
case. 

During  the  second  series  of  experiments  in  Munich,  June  to  August 
1913,  we  often  used  a  black  tricot  for  the  whole  body  which  had  only 
to  be  closed  down  the  back.  A  veil  securely  sewn  to  the  neck  of  the 
garment  covered  the  whole  head,  and  was  closed  with  ribbons  at  the 
neck  (Fig.  169).  Along  the  slit  on  the  back,  and  on  the  veil,  there  were 
a  large  number  of  black  rings  through  which  a  string  was  drawn.  The 
knot  was  sealed  with  a  lead  seal.  If  we  also  take  into  account  that  the 
hands  were  contained  in  white  or  black  sacks  of  veiling  sewn  to  the 
sleeves,  one  must  admit  that  it  is  altogether  impossible  to  smuggle 
objects  for  a  fraudulent  purpose  out  of  this  prison  enclosing  the  whole 
body.  Besides,  the  material  of  the  tricot  is  sufficiently  transparent  to 
show  the  whole  surface  anatomy  and  the  main  shades  of  the  epidermis. 
Since  the  cabinet  was  also  strictly  searched  beforehand,  we  may  assume 
that  under  these  conditions  it  would  be  an  absolute  impossibility  to 
produce  previously  hidden  objects,  and  to  manipulate  them  through 
the  delicate  veils  with  the  hands.  The  practical  results  achieved  by  this 
method  may  be  considered  as  of  equal  value  to  those  obtained  by  Eva  C 
Of  the  whole  photographic  results  obtained  with  Stanislava  P.,  only 
those  are  here  communicated  which  are  of  interest  for  the  present  work 
on  account  of  their  agreement  with  those  of  the  Paris  meetings. 

Sittings  in  January  and  February  1913  (Munich). 

Sitting  with  Stanislava  P.  on  the  25th  January  1913. 

Present. — Privatdozent  Dr  E,,  Freiherr  von  Gleichen-Russwurm 
(author)  with  his  wife,  Herr  von  Kaiser  (painter),  a  Pole  who  acted  as 
interpreter,  the  author  and  his  wife. 

Seance  Room. — Cabinet  and  cameras  as  during  the  Munich  sittings 
with  Eva  C. 

Illumination. — As  in  August  1912,  but  the  illumination  of  a  hundred 

Fig.    169.      Fastening  of  the  costume  worn   by 
Stanislava    p.    in    the    sittings    from    23    June 
TO  I   July,   1915- 

PHENOMENA   WITH   STANISLA^^A   P.  253 

candle-power  was  too  bright,  and,  as  a  rule,  we  had  to  switch  off  four 
lamps,  so  that  only  a  thirty-five  candle-power  red  bulb  gave  light,  yet 
the  room  was  sufficiently  bright.  The  sitters  sat  5  to  7  feet  in  front  of 
the  curtain. 

Initial  Control  and  Dress. — Before  every  sitting  the  young  girl  went 
into  a  separate  room  accompanied  by  the  author's  wife  or  some  other 
lady.  Here  she  undressed  completely  and  put  on  the  seance  costume 
(exactly  like  Eva  C),  so  that,  under  the  tricot  and  the  dress,  there  was 
only  her  naked  body  (no  shoes).  Her  own  dress  remained  in  the  room 
referred  to,  and  was  sometimes  examined  without  the  medium's  know- 
ledge by  the  author.  On  account  of  the  fine  transparent  material  of  the 
seance  costume,  an  external  examination  sufficed  to  tell  whether  packets 
or  veils  were  hidden  anywhere.  There  was  also  an  examination  of  the 
hair,  done  up  in  a  braid,  and  of  the  ears,  mouth,  etc.  This  examination 
was  carried  out  by  Dr  E.  and  the  author. 

It  has  been  stated  that  hysterical  persons,  who  have  no  reflex  action 
of  the  soft  palate,  are  able  to  use  the  inner  nose  passage  as  a  hiding  place. 
Apart  from  the  pros  and  cons  of  such  a  far-fetched  hypothesis,  we  must 
not  lose  sight  of  the  fact  that  an  obstruction  of  this  passage  renders  the 
drawing  of  air  into  the  nose  impossible,  and  the  author  made  the  medium 
close  her  mouth  and  blow  through  each  of  her  nostrils  in  turn.  This 
regular  test  always  gave  a  negative  result.  The  access  of  air  to  the 
lungs  through  the  nose  was  never  stopped.  After  careful  examination 
of  the  cabinet  by  Dr  E.,  Stanislava  entered  the  seance  room  (which  she 
had  not  entered  before),  guided  by  Dr  E.  and  the  author,  and  took  her 
place  on  the  easy-chair  in  the  cabinet. 

Hypnotisation  by  the  author  :  fixation,  suggestion,  and  mesmeric 
passes.  It  should  be  mentioned  that  Stanislava,  during  this  period,  was 
hypnotised  daily  by  the  author,  including  the  days  when  there  were  no 
sittings,  so  as  to  achieve  by  suggestion  her  favourable  psychic  adjust- 
ment. After  barely  half  a  minute,  the  medium  fell  into  somnambulism, 
and  remained  in  a  state  of  passive  hypnosis  during  the  whole  sitting. 
In  contrast  with  Eva  C,  she  hardly  ever  spoke  during  hypnosis,  although 
she  sometimes  opened  her  eyes. 

Course  of  the  Sitting. — Commencement,  9  p.m.  Only  after  the  curtain 
had  been  closed  did  the  other  sitters  enter  the  seance  room  and  take 
their  seats  in  the  appointed  places.  Herr  von  Kaiser  sat  beside  a 
musical  box,  which  was  kept  going  durmg  the  whole  sitting,  and  attended 
to  it,  the  medium  having  been  accustomed  to  this  by  the  Warsaw 
sittings. 

Extinction  of  the  white  light.  The  sitters  passed  the  time  in  con- 
versation while  the  medium's  hands  were  behind  the  curtain.  A 
correspondence  with  the  mediumistic  forces  was  carried  on  by  raps, 
which  came  from  behind  the  curtain.  These  were  not  the  subject  of  the 
investigation,  so  that  it  appears  irrelevant  whether  they  were  produced 
automatically  by  the  medium  or  telekinetically. 

Of  the  occurrences  observed  during  this  sitting,  it  need  only  be 
mentioned  that  when  the  medium's  hands  opened  the  curtain  a  white 
wisp  coming  from  her  mouth  was  observed  on  her  breast  by  all  those 
present.     The  flash-light  was  turned  on  at  the  next  exposure. 

At  the  close  of  the  sitting  the  author  awakened  the  medium  from 

254  PHENOMENA    OF    MATERIALISATION 

a  fairly  deep  hypnosis.  Stanislava  only  recovered  slowly.  While  she 
was  still  hypnotised,  Dr  E.  and  the  author  passed  their  hands  over  her 
whole  body,  and  this  was  repeated  when  she  awoke,  but  the  examination 
of  the  medium  and  the  cabinet  was  negative.  On  the  breast  of  the  dress, 
however,  quite  corresponding  to  the  place  at  which  the  materialised 
structure  had  touched  it,  there  was  a  white  patch,  about  the  size  of 
half  a  crown,  which  on  examination  under  the  microscope  in  the  form 
of  ten  preparations  gave  the  following  composition  :— 

111  the  first  nine  preparations  examined  tliere  are  cellular  granulated  structures, 
about  the  size  and  shape  of  white  blood  corpuscles,  or  mucus  corpuscles,^  and  also  bodies 
resembling  epithelium  without  nuclei,  and  true  epithelium.  In  Preparation  No.  10 
there  were  sharply  defined  nuclear  aggregates  of  leucocytes  and  clearly  marked  epithelium. 

The  result  of  the  examination  of  Preparation  10  justifies  the  assumption  tl^at  the 
cellular  granulated  structures  found  in  otlier  preparations  also  represent  leucocytes 
whose  nuclei  are  concealed  by  the  granulation,  and  that  the  unnucleated  epithelioid 
bodies  represent  epithelium  with  its  nuclei  already  decomposed. 

As  regards  the  origin  of  the  material  examined,  its  whole  arrangement  and  com- 
position, especially  in  Preparations  1  and  2,  indicate  sputum  rather  than  anything  else, 
since  there  are  not  only  abundant  leucocytes  and  mucus  corpuscles,  but  also  scale  epithelia 
(squamous  epithelium)  as  well  as  round  epithelia  with  fatty  degeneration  (alveolar 
epithelia),  as  in  Preparatitm  7,  which  fit  into  the  scheme. 

The  elongated  form  of  the  leucocytes,  which  frequently  occur  in  the  viscous  material, 
are  characteristic  of  sputum. 

On  the  other  hand,  the  appearance  of  the  spots  on  the  black  dress  does  not  indicate  dried 
sputum  since  the  latter  forms  whitisli,  shiny  pellicles,  composed  of  innumerable  small  islets 
due  to  the  air  bubbles  mixed  with  the  sputum.  The  whitish  spots  examined  were  without 
lustre  and  showed  no  admixture  of  air  bubbles. 

Other  origins  (nose  secretions  would  show  characteristic  epithelia)  are  excluded,  since 
the  spots  were  found  on  the  breast  of  the  tunic. 

The  successful  photographic  records  (Fig,  170)  show  a  broad  compact 
irregularly  formed  mass  about  20  to  22  inches  long  emerging  from  the 
open  mouth  of  the  medium  and  filling  up  its  whole  opening.  This  mass 
remains  suspended  ;  it  does  not  lie  on  the  front  of  the  dress.  It  seems 
composed  along  its  whole  length  of  two  strips,  which  coalesce  below, 
or  are  woven  together.  The  longitudinal  furrow  on  both  pictures  must 
be  interpreted  in  that  sense.  The  surface  appears  rough,  irregularly 
formed,  and  somewhat  resembling  a  wool  product. 

The  great  lightness  of  the  substance  is  suggested  by  the  fact  that 
it  does  not  sink  but  is  suspended  in  the  air,  unless,  indeed,  it  has  a 
sufficiently  rigid  character,  determined  in  its  situation  by  the  position 
of  the  mouth.  Such  a  rough,  shred-like  character  in  materialised 
phenomena  proceeding  from  the  mouth  is  also  seen  in  a  number  of 
photographs  taken  with  Eva  C,  and  the  parallelism  between  the  two 
mediums  is  worthy  of  notice. 

Sitting  of  the  31st  January  1913. 

Present. — Mr  and  Mrs  Schott,  Miss  Kolb,  Colonel  Pfiilff,  Dr  E.,  von 

Kaiser,  and  the  author. 

The  medium  put  on  her  seance  costume  in  the  presence  of  Mrs  Schott 
and  was  examined  by  Dr  E.  and  the  author,  and  hypnotised  as  on 

^  These  are  often  difficult  to  distinguish^  especially  in  dried  objects. 

PHENOMENA   WITH   STANISLAVA   P.  255 

25th  January.  Illumination  and  experimental  arrangements  were  the 
same  as  in  that  sitting. 

After  several  occurrences  of  phenomena,  not  to  be  described  here> 
the  same  long  white  materialisation  proceeding  from  the  mouth  was 
observed  as  on  25th  January.  Some  of  the  observers  claimed  to  see, 
at  the  end  of  the  strip,  a  hand  with  a  stretched  index  finger.  My  wish 
to  touch  the  structure  and  illuminate  it  with  white  electric  light  was 
refused.  A  flash-light  photograph  was  taken,  the  curtain  was  closed, 
the  phenomenon  disappeared,  and  the  sitting  was  continued.  There 
were  some  further  manifestations  which  have  no  connection  with  the 
mouth  phenomena.  The  sitting  was  closed  after  lasting  about  an  hour 
and  a  half.     The  final  examination,  as  on  25th  January,  was  negative. 

As  this  day's  photographs  (Fig.  171)  show,  the  structure  developed 
from  the  mouth  is  essentially  the  same  as  that  observed  on  the 
25th  January.  There  is  a  broad,  thick,  rough,  and  consistent  white 
strand,  resembling  an  arm,  the  fundamental  structure  of  which,  as 
shown  by  the  enlargement,  appears  to  be  granular.  No  pattern  of  any 
organic  or  technical  fabric  is  to  be  seen.  The  exterior  surface  is  partly 
striped,  irregular,  and  rough.  At  the  end  of  the  mass,  which  broadens 
below,  there  are  three  quite  coarsely  designed  fingers,  one  of  which,  the 
index,  is  stretched,  while  the  two  others  are  bent.  A  fine  and  nearly 
transparent  strip  lies  under  the  right  external  margin  of  the  ribbon-like 
structure,  as  shown  by  the  side  view.  This  shape  is  also  suspended, 
and  does  not  touch  the  dress.  Here,  then,  we  find  another  parallel  to 
the  performances  of  Eva  C.  The  product  developed  from  the  mouth, 
which  is  not  veil-like,  shows  in  both  cases  a  tendency  to  form  shapes 
such  as  hands  and  fingers. 

Sitting  of  the  15th  February  1913. 

Present. — Mrs  von  S.,  who  superintended  the  medium's  dressing. 
Countess  K.,  Dr  E.,  von  Kaiser,  and  the  author. 

Beginning,  5  p.m.  Conditions,  control,  and  plan  of  the  sitting  as 
before. 

When  a  white  surface  became  visible  on  her  head,  the  author,  with 
the  medium's  permission,  turned  on  the  flash-light.  The  sitting  was 
closed  after  an  hour's  duration.     Final  examination  negative. 

On  the  photograph  (Fig.  172)  secured  on  15th  February  the  observer 
sees  on  the  forehead  of  the  somnambulist  a  white  flat  shape,  with  four 
projections,  resembling  a  claw  or  a  sketch  of  a  hand  of  the  most  primitive 
form.  The  back  of  the  hand  ends  pointedly  in  a  stalk  projecting  into 
the  dark  space.  The  fourth  member  appears  somewhat  twisted  about 
its  own  axis.  On  the  enlarged  side  view  one  can  see  that  the  substance 
composing  this  structure  has  the  same  rough  woolly  character  as  the 
strip  emerging  from  the  mouth  and  described  above.  No  sort  of 
pattern  is  to  be  recognised,  as  there  would  be  in  the  case  of  a  woven 
fabric  or  wood-fibre  product.  The  finger-shaped  projections,  corre- 
sponding to  the  size  of  an  adult's  fingers,  follow  the  curvature  of  the 
forehead,  curving  round  the  temples,  but  stand  off  from  the  skin  and 

256  PHENOMENA    OF    MATERIALISATION 

cast  shadows  upon  it.  The  projection  corresponding  to  the  left  thumb 
is  wanting,  but  a  portion  of  the  structure  is  held  by  a  second  triangular 
piece  of  dark  material,  which  is  also  flat  and  emerges  from  the  medium's 
mouth.  The  lowest  pointed  corner  bends  round  and  vanishes  between 
the  lips,  filling  up  the  half-open  mouth.  This  dark  substance  also 
appears  rough  and  fibrous. 

The  mediumistic  products  of  the  25th  and  31st  January  and  of 
15th  February  exhibit  throughout  a  woolly  character.  With  the  help 
of  wadding,  one  might  perhaps  produce  similar  pictures,  but  on  further 
examination  of  the  enlargements  one  does  not  anywhere  find  the 
characteristic  fibrous  composition  of  wadding.  Besides,  in  manipulating 
wadding  some  fibres  almost  always  adhere  to  the  clothing,  which  could 
not  be  removed  in  the  dark,  and  would  have  been  found.  Automatic 
motion  is  not  found  in  any  of  the  forms. 

Considered  objectively,  the  pictures  make  an  unfavourable  impres- 
sion. Manipulation  with  the  mouth  might  have  been  seen  by  Stanislava 
in  the  photographs  of  Eva  C,  and  might  have  then  been  imitated.  We 
must  add  that  during  the  production  of  the  phenomena  the  curtain 
was  closed.  If  no  other  proofs  were  available  for  the  mediumistic  power 
of  Stanislava  P.  we  should  have  to  arrive  at  an  unfavourable  judgment, 
in  spite  of  the  control  being  as  strict  as  possible.  We  must  not  overlook 
the  remarkable  agreement  of  many  details  of  observation  of  Stanislava  P. 
with  the  phenomena  produced  by  Eva  C.  Thus,  the  shred-like  fibres 
and  irregular  fundamental  character  of  the  substance  are  similar  with 
both  mediums,  so  is  the  flat  sketch-like  impressionistic  form  of  the 
structures,  and,  finally,  the  mode  of  occurrence  by  generation  in  an 
orifice  of  the  body — in  this  case,  the  mouth.  In  any  case,  there  seems 
to  be  an  independent  agreement  in  the  results  of  both  mediums,  though 
the  whole  of  the  creations  of  Stanislava  P.  appear  less  perfect  and  could 
be  more  easily  imitated. 

The  Polish  medium,  on  her  return  journey,  remained  several  days  in 
Vienna,  and  in  March  1913  she  gave  several  sittings  in  a  private  house 
without  the  author's  knowledge,  who  only  learnt  of  this  several  months 
afterwards.  The  following  extract  is  taken  from  a  letter  of  a  well-known 
Vienna  physician,  Dr  Harter,  with  his  permission  : — 

"  Now  I  may  tell  you  that  at  the  first  sitting  I  laughed  !  I  sat 
mostly  at  the  back.  But  during  the  second  sitting  I  was  puzzled,  and 
since  that  time  the  Saul  is  become  a  Paul.  This  second  sitting  with 
Stanislava  has  had  the  result  of  totally  reversing  my  former  conception 
of  life.  All  nature  and  all  life  for  me  has  assumed  a  new  aspect.  I 
immediately  threw  myself  with  fiery  zeal  into  the  study  of  the  literature 
of  the  subject,  which  at  that  time  I  had  to  pick  up  wherever  I  could  get 
it.  On  one  occasion  I  addressed  my  doubts  to  you  by  letter,  and  you 
were  so  kind  as  to  give  me  really  valuable  hints,  for  which  I  am  very 
grateful.  Even  to-day  I  thank  the  fate  which  by  chance  allowed  me 
to  see  the  little  Polish  girl,  for  I  know  to-day  that  I  was  an  ignorant  fool, 
and  considered  official  science  the  beginning  and  end  of  wisdom.  Now 
I  am  cured  of  that,  although  many  scruples  and  doubts  still  assail  me. 
In  my  occupation  with  this  subject  I  found  that  which  one  loses  in  the 
exact  sciences,  namely,  a  belief  in  the  soul." 

Fig.  173.     Author's  flashlight  photograph,   ^3  June,   1913. 

'                   ■                                                                    ft 

\Tt    ^'\, 

.  « 

Fig.  174. 

Author's  flashlight  photograph,   i   July,   1913. 
Front  view. 

Fig.   175.     Condition   of  the  head  veil  after  the  phenomenon  of  Fig.   174. 

^ 

^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^ 

^^^^HffiK^ 

Kjfc^^Jjg^ 

^|H^^^^HH| 

1 

Fig.  176.     Enlargement  of  Fig.  174. 

PHENOMENA   WITH   STANISLAVA   P.  257 

Sittings  of  June  and  July  1913  (Munich). 

Sitting  of  the  23rd  June  1913. 

Present. — Herr  von  Kaiser,  Herr  Sch.,  Princess  R.,  and  the  author. 

Stanislava  put  on  the  whole  tricot,  with  wide  full  bags  for  the  hands, 
and  a  white  veil  covering  over  the  head.  The  fastening  of  the  head 
veil  and  the  tricot  were  lead-sealed.  All  other  conditions  and  control 
were  as  in  the  sittings  of  January  and  February  1913. 

8.30  P.M.  Hypnotisation  by  the  author.  Red  light  switched  on, 
curtain  closed.  After  about  half  an  hour  a  long  veil-like  strip  was 
shown,  which  came  out  of  the  medium's  mouth  and  appeared  to  pene- 
trate the  veil.  A  flash-light  photograph  was  taken.  Sitting  closed  at 
10  P.M.  Final  examination  of  the  medium  and  cabinet  negative.  All 
the  veils  and  lead  seals  intact. 

The  enlarged  photograph  (Fig.  173),  taken  from  the  left  within  the 
cabinet,  shows  the  medium's  head  in  a  black  veil,  and  her  hands  in 
white  veils.  From  the  mouth  down  to  the  left  hand  there  extends  a 
broad  fibrous  material  passing  through  the  veil,  which  at  its  upper  end 
shows  a  thick  bulge,  and  is  marked  by  a  transparent  pattern  which,  in 
its  branchings,  recalls  vegetable  fibres  rather  than  textiles.  It  is 
interesting  to  note  the  difference  between  the  regular  square  thread 
structure  of  the  white  veil,  covering  the  hands,  and  the  marking  of  the 
mediumistic  product.  A  piece  of  the  black  veil  seems  to  be  drawn  back 
into  the  mouth  by  Stanislava,  so  that  the  process  of  the  penetration  of 
the  veil  is  not  clearly  shown.  For  this  reason  the  experiment  was 
repeated  under  the  same  conditions,  with  the  head  veil  drawn  more 
tightly,  and  the  suggestion  was  made  not  to  draw  it  into  the  mouth. 
But  the  experiment,  in  any  case,  is  evidential,  since  the  medium  had 
no  materials  at  her  disposal  with  which  she  could  have  brought  about 
such  a  result,  outside  her  dress. 

Sitting  of  the  1st  July  1913. 

Present. — Herr  von  Kaiser,  Herr  Sch.,  the  author  and  his  wife. 

The  sitters  sat  immediately  in  front  of  the  curtain.  Conditions, 
illumination,  and  hypnosis  as  on  23rd  June  1913.  The  author's  wife 
superintended  the  medium's  toilet.  She  wore  the  whole  tricot  as  on 
23rd  June.  The  white  veil  bags  for  the  hands  were  replaced  by  black 
ones.     The  fastening  of  the  head  veil  and  tricot  was  lead-sealed. 

After  hypnosis  had  set  in,  it  was  suggested  to  the  medium  that  she 
should  repeat  the  experiment  of  23rd  June,  so  that  we  might  be  able  to 
see  the  material  both  inside  and  outside  the  veil.  The  curtain  was 
closed  and  a  correspondence  by  raps  took  place. 

After  thirty  minutes  we  again  saw,  extending  from  the  mouth  to  the 
waist,  a  strip  with  a  length  of  about  20  inches,  and  a  width  of  6  or  8 
inches.  A  flash-light  photograph  was  taken  and  the  curtain  was  closed. 
The  sitting  came  to  an  end,  and  the  final  examination  was  negative. 

On  the  photograph,  taken  from  the  front  (Figs.  174  and  175),  the 
forms  of  the  body  are  clearly  marked  out  through  the  tricot.  In  this 
case,  the  veil  was  drawTi  more  tightly  over  the  face  and  showed  fewer 

K 

258  PHENOMENA    OF    MATERIALISATION 

folds.  The  upper  lip  is  covered  by  a  white  substance,  which  appears 
to  penetrate  the  veil,  broadening  out  on  the  outside.  There  is  a  remark- 
able difference  from  the  drawing  of  the  structure  of  23rd  June,  While 
the  former  recalls  vegetable  fibres,  the  present  photograph  shows  a 
structure  of  lace-work,  of  woollen  threads  of  various  sizes,  with  thickened 
edges  (Fig.  176). 

The  views  from  the  right  and  from  the  left  (Figs.  177  and  178) 
corroborate  these  details,  and  hardly  leave  a  doubt  that  the  materialised 
substance,  in  a  veil-like  form,  has  penetrated  the  veil  mask. 

Fig.  175  shows  the  condition  of  the  veil  after  the  experiment,  and 
particularly  in  the  place  where  the  penetration  occurred.  The  con- 
ditions of  attachment  in  the  experiment  of  the  1st  July  did  not  allow 
any  further  possibility  of  a  fraudulent  production  of  these  phenomena. 
They  form  an  interesting  analogy  with  the  experiments  of  Eva  C.  on 
16th  May  1913. 

Sittings  of  the  25th  June  and  13th  July  1913. 

Conditions,  illumination,  and  plan  of  the  sitting  as  before.  Pro- 
fessor B.  and  the  author  undertook  the  initial  and  final  examinations  of 
the  medium  and  the  cabinet  on  25th  June,  and  Dr  C.  (physician)  and 
the  author  on  13th  July. 

In  these  sittings  the  veil  phenomenon  already  mentioned  was  again 
produced.  The  curtain  was  only  opened  after  the  material  had  been 
formed. 

On  both  evenings  we  succeeded  in  working  the  kinematograph  for 
several  minutes.  These  were  the  first  occasions  on  which  this  had  been 
done.  The  film  taken  on  the  first  evening  comprises  about  360  pictures, 
and  that  on  13th  July  over  400.  The  two  films  in  Figs.  179  and  180 
show  the  recession  of  the  material  into  the  mouth,  and  the  second  film 
also  shows  the  broadening  and  narrowing  of  the  substance.  On  30th 
July  some  photographs  were  taken  with  a  portion  of  the  matter  still 
attached  to  the  mouth,  and  finally  the  mouth  was  shoA\Ti  after  the  material 
had  disappeared.  The  changes,  visible  on  Fig.  180,  might  not  suffice 
for  the  proof  of  an  independent  inner  motion  of  the  substance,  however 
remarkable  they  may  be.  That  the  changes  in  the  volume  are  produced 
by  motions  of  the  head  is  hardly  suggested  by  the  kinematograph.  The 
objection  will  no  doubt  be  raised  that  Stanislava  probably  drew  the 
veil-like  substance  with  her  tongue  into  her  mouth,  and  then  swallowed  it. 

It  is  not  denied  that  this  is  physiologically  possible,  but  such  an 
explanation  would,  in  any  case,  assume  an  occurrence  experienced  only 
in  a  few  rare  cases  by  specialists  in  digestive  diseases.  The  mere  proof 
by  photography  of  such  a  fact  in  the  case  of  the  medium  would  be  a 
novel  achievement  worthy  of  mention  for  this  reason  alone.  In  any 
case,  in  both  sittings  the  mouth  was  examined  after  the  phenomenon 
had  disappeared,  without  any  remnants  being  found.  Although  this 
occurrence  is  not,  by  itself,  evidential,  as  regards  the  disappearance  and 
chance  in  volume  of  the  substance,  the  success  of  the  kinematographic 
record  of  a  mediumistic  materialisation  phenomenon  represents  such  a 
considerable  progress  in  method  that,  for  this  reason  alone,  the  publica- 
tion of  some  selected  pictures  of  the  series  in  both  films  should  not  be 

Fig.  177.     Side  view   from   within  the  cabinet.      (Right.) 

O 

Fig.  178.     Side  view  from  within  the  cabinet.     {Left.) 

Fig.  179.     Selected  cinematograph  pictures  of  25  June,  1913,  showing  absokptk 
OF  the  substance  into  the  mouth. 

Fig.  i8o.     Selected  cinematograph  pictures  of  13  July,   1913,  showing  widening 

AND     narrowing     OF    THE    SUBSTANCE,     AND    ITS    RECESSION    INTO     THE    MOUTH. 

PHENOMENA   WITH   STANISLAVA   P.  259 

omitted.  The  investigator  must  in  all  his  work  state  the  truth,  without 
considering  whether  it  corresponds  to  his  expectations  or  not. 

RESULTS  OF   THE   OBSERVATIONS. 

The  proof  of  the  mediumistic  faculty  in  Stanislava  P.  is  not  only  found 
in  her  materialisation  phenomena,  but  also  in  certain  telekinetic  actions 
spontaneously  occurring,  in  her  case,  in  daylight,  as  the  author  has 
several  times  had  occasion  to  observe.  If  one  only  Judged  by  the 
appearance  of  the  products  exposed  in  the  sittings,  which  partly 
resembled  large  flat  men's  leather  gloves,  or  compact  woolly  masses  up 
to  the  size  of  a  forearm,  or  veil  materials  of  fairly  coarse  structure,  the 
decision  would  not  be  in  her  favour.  Besides,  the  structures  produced 
by  her  are  all  coarse  and  imperfect  in  their  form. 

Now,  it  has  already  been  pointed  out  by  Colonel  Peter  ^  that,  during 
materialisation  phenomena,  the  apparel,  i.e.,  the  dress  materials,  pro- 
duced and  partly  used  for  clothing  the  phantoms,  give  the  strongest 
handle  for  the  criticism  advanced  by  sceptics,  as  soon  as  it  is  shown  that 
they  resemble  terrestrial  materials,  or  are  composed  of  them.  Peter 
has  shown,  by  careful  examination  of  such  cloth  samples  as  the  finest 
crepe,  which  were  obtained  from  phantoms  of  different  mediums  under 
conditions  excluding  fraud,  that  they  do  not  differ  in  any  way  from 
materials  produced  by  the  weaving  loom.  The  creation  of  such  materials 
is  not  more  wonderful  than  the  materialisation  of  living  members,  so 
that,  in  judging  this  point,  we  always  come  back  to  the  conditions  of 
production. 

The  initial  and  final  examination  of  the  bodily  surface  regularly 
carried  out  with  Stanislava  P.,  the  wearing  of  a  special  seance  costume, 
and  the  large  volume  of  the  material  represented  by  the  photographs, 
speak  against  the  possibility  of  hiding  them  on  or  about  her  body.  This 
also  disposes  of  the  objection  of  a  scientific  witness  whose  only  reason 
for  refusmg  to  vouch  for  the  genuineness  of  the  phenomena  was  that 
the  medium  did  not  give  him  permission  for  a  gynaecological  examination. 

Quite  apart  from  this  question,  the  genuineness  of  the  mediumistic 
performances  can  be  vouched  for  by  the  character  of  the  phenomena 
themselves. 

Thus,  with  Stanislava  P.  the  author  could,  on  several  occasions, 
and  under  conditions  excluding  such  manipulations  as  are  referred  to 
by  Ochorowicz,  in  his  essay  on  "  Involuntary  Production  of  Unconscious 
Fraud,"  observe  a  structure  resembling  a  hand,  which  carried  out 
movements,  and  grasped  and  threw  away  objects  held  out  to  it.  In  this 
case,  the  medium's  hands  are  visible,  holding  the  curtain,  her  feet  and 
knees  were  in  their  place,  as  was  proved  by  the  author  during  the  pheno- 
menon, by  touching  her  knees  several  times,  and  her  head  was  also 
visible  m  the  red  light.  The  author  sat  immediately  in  front  of  the 
curtain,  and  again  and  again  verified  the  entire  inactivity  of  the  medium's 
limbs  during  the  investigation.  Under  the  same  evidential  conditions 
(immobile,  visible  body  of  the  medium)  a  handkerchief  held  out  by  the 
author  into  the  back  of  the  cabinet  was  grasped  and  drawn  away  with 

1  Josepli  Peter^  Vie  Gewundung  der  I'hantome  (the  dress  of  pliantoms),  Zeritralblatt 
fur  Okkultismua,  July  1002. 

260  PHENOMENA    OF    MATERIALISATION 

considerable  force,  as  was  a  handkerchief  laid  on  the  hands  in  the 
medium's  lap  in  another  sitting,  while  her  head  was  visible.  These 
examples  suffice  to  show  the  evidential  character  of  certain  phenomena 
in  themselves. 

In  the  suspicions  cast  upon  all  mediums,  even  now,  and  in  the 
attempts  at  negative  explanations,  we  find  performances  assumed  which 
have  not  been  successfully  accomplished  under  the  same  conditions 
even  by  the  cleverest  conjurors,  and  which  in  themselves  require  a 
proof  of  their  possibility  as  manual  tricks.  That  many  phenomena, 
especially  among  those  presented  by  mediumistic  beginners  of  unde- 
veloped power,  can  be  imitated,  is  not  to  be  denied,  especially  if  the  experi- 
mental conditions  are  not  carefully  chosen.  But  does  this  circumstance 
alone  suffice  to  support  a  serious  imputation  of  fraud  ?     Surely  not. 

The  objections  should  be  further  tested  in  other  sittings,  and  proved 
facts  should  take  the  place  of  mere  suspicions  and  vague  possibilities. 

In  the  photographs  of  the  sittings  of  Stanislava  P.  we  may  distinguish 
two  groups,  those  of  January  and  February  1913  and  those  of  June  and 
July  1913,  The  former  shows,  in  four  pictures,  a  fairly  long  white 
substance  emerging  from  the  mouth,  and  in  two  other  pictures  flat, 
badly-drawn  hand-shapes.  The  substance  used  for  these  seems  to  be 
the  same  in  all  three  cases.  In  the  second  group,  including  the  kine- 
matograph  reproductions,  the  mouth  is  again  the  origin  of  the  long 
veil-like  substance  which  hangs  down  her  breast  and  penetrates  the 
tulle  veil  covering  her  head. 

In  the  first  veil  photograph  the  material  shows  the  structure  of 
unravelled  vegetable  fibres,  while  the  fundamental  structure  in  the 
second  experiment  shows  a  resemblance  to  irregular  distorted  crochet 
work  in  wool  threads.  Although  this  point  cannot  be  decided  from  the 
kinematograph  pictures,  on  account  of  their  smallness  and  indistinct- 
ness, we  appear  to  have  to  deal  with  a  structure  resembling  vegetable 
fibre.  In  neither  case  do  we  find  the  characteristic  marking  of  the 
squarely  arranged  threads  of  purchasable  silk  veils.  The  conditions  of 
the  veil  phenomenon  excluded  the  possibility  of  fraudulent  production. 
Like  Eva  C,  Stanislava  P.  produces  flat  forms  resembling  sketchy  hands. 
The  emergence  of  the  material  from  the  mouth,  and  its  disappearance 
into  it,  which  was  also  observed  in  the  case  of  Eva  C.  under  evidential 
conditions,  was  found  again  with  Stanislava  P.,  and  even  recorded  by 
the  kinematograph.  We  also  find  remarkable  analogies  between  the 
two  mediums  in  the  bizarre  and  irregular  formation  of  the  structures, 
and  in  the  veil-like,  fibrous  condition  of  the  material  produced. 

RETROSPECT. 

NEGATIVE    POINTS   AND    THE    HYPOTHESIS    OF    FRAUD. 

The  study  and  comparison  of  the  illustrations  published  in  this  work 
will  no  doubt  give  rise  to  objections  of  all  sorts,  especially  if  the  experi- 
mental arrangements  described  in  the  records  of  the  sittings  are  not 
taken  into  account,  i.e.,  if  it  is  assumed  that,  in  spite  of  four  years  of 

RETROSPECT  261 

effort,  and  in  spite  of  every  care,  the  observers  were  the  victims  of  elabor- 
ate fraudulent  manipulations.  It  is  true  that  the  consistent  execution 
of  such  manipulations  for  so  long  a  time  would  be  from  the  conjuring 
point  of  view  a  most  formidable  and  astounding  performance,  which 
would  offer  new  psychological  points  of  view  concerning  possibilities  of 
deception  and  errors  of  observation,  which  have  not  been  hitherto 
known  to  the  same  extent. 

Even  from  this  point  of  view,  the  publication  of  all  the  experiments 
is  justified,  as  it  would  contribute  an  informing  chapter  to  the  subject 
of  superstition  and  magic. 

What  is  first  noticed,  during  a  superficial  examination  of  the  pictures, 
is  their  extraordinarily  improbable  appearance.  Most  of  the  products 
and  objects  photographed  recall  well-known  objects  familiar  from  our 
o^^^l  observations.  Thus  the  amorphous  substance  often  resembles 
bunches  and  fibres  of  unravelled  wool  or  cotton,  as,  for  instance,  in  the 
photograph  of  13th  March  1911.  The  fingers,  resembling  pseudopods, 
or  ribbons,  as  well  as  the  hand-shapes  seen  in  the  years  1911-12,  are 
mostly  flat,  and  have  the  appearance  of  stencils  cut  out  of  paper  in  the 
semblance  of  gloves,  as,  e.g.,  the  hand  lying  on  Eva's  shoulder  taken  in 
the  same  sitting.  The  finished  products  visible  on  Eva's  body,  which 
clothe  her  head  and  breast,  cover  her  face,  or  later  are  used  for  the 
decoration  of  the  mediumistically  produced  faces  and  heads,  resemble 
fabrics  of  silk  or  cotton,  or  handkerchiefs  and  napkins.  To  this  we  must 
add  that  the  margins  are  often  turned  in  and  apparently  hemmed,  and 
that  the  fundamental  design  appears  to  correspond  to  the  pattern  of 
fine  hand  embroidery  in  lace  and  linen.  Also,  we  even  notice  the  use 
of  threads,  recalling  linen  threads,  of  twine  and  ribbon-like  shreds, 
which  may  even  be  looped  and  tied  round  the  objects  and  used  for 
suspending  them  (Figs.  58,  123,  130,  148,  and  158). 

Some  of  the  materials  have  even  a  skin-like,  hairy  quality,  and  give 
the  optical  impression  of  tanned  leather,  with  spotted  shading.  On  the 
17th  and  20th  May  1912,  solid  bodies,  in  the  shape  of  a  slipper,  appeared, 
and  in  another  sitting  a  structure  appeared  which  resembled  a  long, 
empty,  woman's  white  glove. 

It  is  certainly  asking  a  great  deal  of  common  sense  to  believe  that 
all  these  things,  familiar  in  our  daily  life,  owe  their  existence  to  a 
mediumistic  creative  process  of  a  totally  unknown  nature  ;  that  they 
are  generated  from  an  invisible  substance  derived  from  the  medium's 
organism,  and  that,  after  a  fugitive  earthly  existence,  they  again  dissolve 
and  are  reabsorbed  by  that  same  organism.  It  is  surely  simpler  and 
more  natural  to  assume  that  these  objects  are  somehow  at  the  medium's 
disposal,  and  were  smuggled  in,  in  spite  of  our  control,  than  that  they 
are  fugitive  forms  of  transitory  matter  of  psycho-physical  emanation. 

The  problem  becomes  more  complicated  if  we  study  the  face  and 
head  pictures,  which  come  in  fragments  or  isolated,  flat,  or  mask-like 
forms,  mostly  in  a  drapery  of  veiling  or  cloth.  In  spite  of  an  extra- 
ordinary vivacity  of  expression  in  many  portraits,  neither  the  observer 
nor  the  student  of  the  picture  ever  get  the  impression  that  we  have  to  do 
with  real,  living,  though  incomplete  forms.  The  pictorial,  mask-like, 
diagrammatic  character  predominates.  In  contrast  with  other  observers, 
the  author  has  never  been  able  to  perceive  separate  motions  of  the  mouth 

262  PHENOMENA    OF    MATERIALISATION 

or  the  eyes  in  these  faces.  Mme.  Bisson  claims  sometimes  to  have 
observed  motions  of  the  eyes.  On  the  other  hand,  the  flat  and  plastic 
hand-shapes  often  proved  their  mobility  by  the  grasping  of  objects  and 
by  various  touchings  of  the  sitters.  The  flat,  pictorial,  sketch-like 
appearance  of  the  heads,  which  often  appear  as  if  cut  out,  and  therefore 
with  sharp  edges,  must,  on  a  superficial  examination,  give  rise  to 
suspicion.  Among  possible  foundations  we  might  consider,  in  this 
connection,  the  finest  sorts  of  paper,  as  well  as  fabrics  of  silk  and  linen. 
Thus  we  find,  in  the  face  profiles  photographed  by  the  author  on 
15th  August  1912,  that  the  portrait  ends  backwards  in  a  broad,  flat, 
and  obviously  stiff  band,  which,  by  its  consistency,  gives  an  obvious 
impression  of  paper.  This  seems  to  have  been  repaired  in  one  place  by 
laying,  or  sticking  on,  a  semicircular  sheet  (Fig.  113).  Such  a  com- 
position is  also  indicated  by  the  ridges  and  furrows  of  the  folds,  which 
are  clearly  recognised  and  fit  into  each  other.  On  the  other  hand,  the 
face  of  a  young  woman,  reproduced  in  Fig.  103,  is  surely  drawii  on  a 
soft  textile  foundation,  as  is  sho^vn  bv  the  side  and  back  views  (Figs.  104 
and  105). 

The  pictorial  character  is  also  clearly  seen  in  the  portrait  of 
M.  Bisson  (Fig.  92),  which  looks  like  a  blown  charcoal  or  tone  drawing. 
The  sketchiness,  hastiness,  inaccuracy,  and  imperfection  of  particular 
portions  prove,  apart  from  the  clearly  recognisable  strokes,  that  we 
have  to  do  with  a  product  of  draughtsmanship,  or  something  similar. 
A  photographic  reproduction  from  life  would  not  show  distortions,  such 
as  we  see  here.  Male  portraits  in  Figs.  136,  143,  and  149  show  the 
draughtsman's  technique  at  the  first  glance,  and  corroborate  the  obser- 
vations made  on  the  "  Bisson  "  portrait.  Only  in  one  of  the  pictures 
(the  phantom  reproduced  on  Fig.  146)  does  the  ground  show  a  regular 
pattern  resembling  a  textile  fabric  or  linen.  It  is  remarkable  that  this 
kind  of  artistic  technique  is  much  less  marked  in  the  female  portraits 
than  in  the  male  portraits.  If  one  were  still  inclined  to  doubt  that 
these  pictures  were  produced  by  some  (mysterious  ?)  graphic  method, 
we  need  only  refer  to  the  photograph  in  Fig.  119,  where  we  find,  on  a 
horizontal  strip,  the  printed  words  "  Le  Miroir."  This  example  shows 
that  both  the  letters  and  the  features  are  produced  by  a  hitherto  unknown 
graphic  technique. 

Criticism  directed  especially  towards  the  consideration  of  the 
negative  points  could  bring  forward  even  more  formidable  objections, 
by  pointing  out  the  folded,  furrowed,  torn,  and  crumpled  appearance 
of  many  of  the  products.  This  quality  may  be  consistently  traced 
through  the  majority  of  mediumistic  creations.  It  is  found  not  only 
in  the  flat  pictorial  representations,  but  also  in  the  plastically  developed 
fragments  and  masks,  in  the  flat  hand-shapes,  and  even  in  the  unformed 
material  emanations.  That  this  peculiarity  is  not  quite  so  regular  as 
one  might  expect,  is  due  to  the  frequent  lack  of  definition  in  the  photo- 
graphs themselves.  Even  if  the  cameras  are  focused  on  a  particular 
point,  the  objects,  during  their  short  exposure  and  rapid  motion,  are 
often  photographed  at  another  place,  which  accounts  for  the  lack  of 
distinctness  of  many  pictures.  It  is  mostly  in  the  faces  that  the  torn 
and  furrowed  appearance  is  presented.  That  such  furrows  can  traverse 
the  length  of  the  whole  phantom  is  shown  by  an  analysis  of  the  photo- 

RETROSPECT  263 

graphic  results  of  the  23rd  February  and  8th  June  1913.  In  this  con- 
nection one  should  examine  the  following  illustrations  :  Figs.  64,  81,  88, 
89,  95,  97,  100,  101,  108,  109,  111,  113,  115,  123,  124,  125,  131,  136, 
138,  143,  149,  and  159. 

The  flat  hand,  lying  on  the  medium's  lap,  photographed  on  the 
11th  August  1911,  shows  round  folds,  while  the  finger  projections,  on 
other  pictures,  appear  twisted  and  bent  in. 

The  creases  are  the  more  clearly  marked  the  more  the  basis  (paper  ?) 
is  consistent  and  flat.  But  the  rents,  fissures,  and  furrows  occur  even 
in  the  semi-soft,  compact  patches,  resembling  sculpture.  The  optical 
impression  of  a  furrow  or  fold  is  sometimes  produced  by  regularly 
shaped  pieces  stuck  on  (clearly  seen  in  Fig.  149),  and  we  even  sometimes 
get  the  impression  as  if  some  faces  had  been  composed  like  a  mosaic  of 
several  pieces  (Fig.  132).  The  strokes  of  the  drawing  are  sometimes 
indistinguishable  from  fissures,  and  produce  the  same  optical  impression. 
The  furrows  and  creases  are  almost  always  in  geometrical  form, 
usually  parallel,  crossed,  and  rectangular.  Some  pictures  seem  to  be 
unfolded  from  a  regularly  folded  packet.  Out  of  the  two  pictures 
quoted  as  examples,  we  find  on  one  side  prominent  creases,  with  partly- 
bent  corners,  which  when  produced  in  a  straight  line  correspond  to  the 
furrows. 

These  positive  and  negative  parts,  which  fit  together,  are  separated 
by  a  third  furrow,  crossing  them  at  right  angles  in  a  vertical  direction, 
as  in  the  case  of  a  sheet  of  paper  folded  double  and  square,  and  subse- 
quently unfolded.  In  Fig.  113  the  same  process  is  evident,  so  that  a 
fold  towards  the  outside  and  top  is  always  matched  by  another  towards 
the  inside  and  downwards.  Nothing  can  be  said  against  the  conclusion 
that  we  have  here  to  deal  with  unfolded  sheets  showing  traces  of  a 
geometrically  arranged  folding. 

In  some  portraits  as,  for  instance,  that  in  Fig.  149,  we  have  lines  at 
considerable  distances,  and  we  also  find  by  suitable  magnification  of 
sorrie  head  pictures  numerous  small  crumplings,  proceeding  like  rays 
from  a  point,  or  irregularly,  i.e.,  fine  folds  going  outward  and  inward, 
as  would  be  seen  during  the  smoothing  out  of  fabrics  or  papers,  which 
have  been  crumpled  into  balls.  It  is  all  the  more  remarkable  that  such 
traces  cannot  be  found  on  other  portrait  photographs  by  examining 
their  enlargements  with  a  high  magnifying  power  or  by  studying  the 
stereoscopic  transparencies,  i.e.,  in  the  female  face  of  Fig.  122. 

In  view  of  these  observations,  it  may  be  taken  for  granted  that 
portraits  folded  up  and  unfolded  in  the  sittings,  and  consisting  of  a  basis 
resembling  cardboard  or  paper,  are  showTi  in  some  of  the  sittings.  The 
author  was  able  to  prepare  a  paper  model  from  Fig.  136  and  to  fold  it, 
in  the  folds  shown  in  the  photograph,  in  such  a  manner  that  the  various 
folded  portions  fitted  accurately  together. 

To  the  negative  character  of  facts  of  this  kind  we  must  add  the 
proof  that,  in  some  of  the  sittings,  images  were  attached  to  the  curtain 
with  pins,  as  described  in  detail  in  the  reports  of  the  Munich  sittings. 

As  early  as  21st  May  1912  fragments  of  faces  and  head  images 
appeared  at  the  left  curtain,  and  at  first  were  higher  than  Eva's  head. 
A  whole  series  of  pictures,  from  May  till  August  1912,  were  exposed  in 
Paris  and  Munich  at  about  the  same  part  of  the  curtain.     Since  in 

264  PHENOMENA    OF    MATERIALISATION 

Munich  we  operated  with  a  newly-prepared  cabinet,  it  was  easy  to 
discover  pin-holes,  and  they  were  regularly  found  at  the  places  where 
the  pictures  were  exposed  by  rolling  up  the  curtain.  A  pin  was  found 
after  the  departure  of  the  medium  on  the  under  side  of  the  left  arm-rest. 
Stanislava  P.  also,  in  one  case,  attached  the  end  of  a  materialised  veil  sub- 
stance coming  from  her  mouth  very  awkwardly  to  the  curtain  with  a  pin. 

The  co-operation  of  the  hands  of  the  medium  Eva  C.  was  proved  by  the 
photographic  record  of  0th  August  1912.  The  medium  holds  the  mask- 
like head  fragment  with  the  left  hand  (to  which  she  had,  indeed,  drawn 
attention  herself  in  the  sitting),  and,  in  the  place  of  her  left  hand,  there 
is  a  mass  of  white  substance  on  her  lap.  It  is  quite  conceivable  that, 
in  the  red  light,  this  mass  might  have  been  misinterpreted  and  taken 
for  the  medium's  left  hand.  Already,  in  the  experiments  at  St  Jean 
de  Luz,  on  one  occasion  it  had  been  proved  photographically  that  a  fiat 
white  hand  structure  lay  on  her  knee  in  the  place  of  her  right  hand, 
while  the  latter  held  a  piece  of  substance  out  of  the  curtain,  but  without 
any  recognisable  resemblance  of  the  material  with  the  medium's  hand. 
Finally,  at  several  sittings,  the  author  observed  the  co-operation  of  the 
medium's  hands,  and  noted  this  on  each  occasion  in  his  records. 

As  a  result  of  this  observation,  a  change  in  the  experimental  arrange-  * 
ment  was  made  in  October  1912,  so  that  from  this  time  forward  the 
medium's  hands  remained  for  the  whole  sitting  outside  the  curtain,  or 
at  the  curtain,  visible  and  tangible.  Yet  the  phenomena  occurred  as 
before,  but  the  fixation  of  structures  at  the  curtain  was  no  longer 
observed.  In  some  cases  the  pictures  were  attached  to  the  medium's 
hair  (Fig.  142),  as  when  the  female  picture  appeared  at  the  sitting  of 
30th  November  1912  (with  the  exclusion  of  any  manual  co-operation 
by  Eva's  hands)  on  the  medium's  head.  After  it  had  been  photographed; 
the  author  permitted  the  withdrawal  of  the  hands  behind  the  curtain 
for  the  rest  of  the  sitting.  Thereupon  (Fig.  123)  the  same  image  appeared 
at  the  level  of  Eva's  head,  and  suspended  by  a  thread  which  itself  was 
attached  to  a  horizontal  cord  connecting  the  medium's  hair  with  the 
curtain.  A  similar  mode  of  fastening  is  shown  in  the  picture  of 
25th  November  1911,  in  which  a  fairly  broad,  twisted  band  passes  from 
Eva's  head  to  the  curtain.  To  this  is  suspended  a  cloth,  showing  several 
parallel  creases,  like  a  handkerchief  folded  and  pressed  and  then  unfolded. 
In  both  cases  the  fixation  is  obviously  done  with  the  help  of  the  hands. 

Besides  the  leaning  of  the  pictures  against  the  head,  other  modes  of 
attachment  were  observed.  Thus,  in  some  cases,  the  threads  which 
hold  the  object  seem  to  be  stuck  to  the  black  satin  of  the  curtain,  or  the 
back  wall,  with  the  help  of  the  mysterious  material.  In  any  case,  some 
white  and  fairly  wide  spots  were  found  in  these  places,  and  show  the 
same  structure  as  those  microscopically  examined. 

It  has  also  been  suggested  that  some  suspension  arrangements, 
attached  to  the  roof  of  the  cabinet,  might  have  been  used  for  moving  the 
images  up  and  down,  by  means  of  fine  threads  attached  to  them.  This 
would  presuppose  the  attachment  of  nails,  rings,  and  other  apparatus 
to  the  roof  of  the  cabinet,  in  the  Paris  and  Munich  seance  rooms, 
i.e.,  some  preparations  before  the  sitting,  but  neither  in  Paris  nor  in 
Munich  did  Eva  C.  enter  the  seance  room  except  during  the  sitting  itself. 
The  height  of  the  cabinet  in  Paris  was  9  feet,  and  in  Munich  8|  feet. 

RETROSPECT  265 

The  medium  would  then  have  to  get  up  on  the  chair  (without  attracting 
the  attention  of  the  sitters,  sitting  within  a  couple  of  feet  of  her),  in 
order  to  attach  some  fitting  to  the  roof  of  the  cabinet  during  the  sitting 
itself.  In  the  first  place,  such  a  complicated  manipulation  could  not  be 
carried  out  at  all  without  attracting  attention.  Secondly,  some  traces 
would  remain  in  the  cabinet ;  and,  thirdly,  she  would  have  to  have  the 
necessary  tools  about  her,  as  well  as  the  objects  serving  for  the  repre- 
sentations of  the  phenomena,  in  spite  of  the  initial  and  final  examination  ; 
and,  finally,  the  two  or  three  cameras  in  the  cabinet,  and  perhaps  also 
those  in  front  of  the  curtain,  would  show  on  the  negatives  such  threads 
connected  with  the  images.  Even  if  they  could  not  be  seen  on  simple 
prints,  the  sharply  defined  stereoscopic  images  on  glass,  and  the  enlarge- 
ment of  the  original  negatives,  must  have  revealed  this  mechanism  of 
fraud.  The  author  maintains  that  in  the  arrangement  adopted  in  the 
sittings  such  coarse  manceuvres  could  not  possibly  have  escaped  discovery. 

As  regards  the  activity  of  the  medium's  hands  during  production  of 
the  phenomena,  it  is  proved,  by  the  author's  repeated  observations,  and 
also  objectively  by  photography,  that  Eva  C.  used  her  hands  in  various 
cases  to  expose  the  objects  already  produced  in  a  manner  most  favourable 
to  the  observer,  to  fix  them  to  her  head,  to  the  curtain  or  to  the  back  wall ; 
in  short,  to  improve  the  materialisation  phenomena.  The  use  of  a  pin, 
or  of  the  medium's  own  hand,  in  place  of  which  a  flat  hand-formation 
or  a  white  strip  of  substance  was  laid  down,  may  be  interpreted  as 
attempts  at  the  fraudulent  representation  of  non-existent  things, 
although  we  must  also  take  into  account  the  medium's  undoubted 
hypnotic  condition,  and  her  wish  to  intensify  the  optical  impressions  on 
the  observers.  Under  such  circumstances  we  cannot  be  surprised  that 
the  disappearance  of  the  medium's  hands  behind  the  curtain  was  often 
objected  to  by  the  observers,  and  we  are  probably  not  wrong  in  assuming 
that,  in  many  cases,  the  hands  played  a  part  in  the  arrangement  of 
heads,  in  their  distribution  and  position,  without  being  discovered.  On 
the  other  hand,  the  suggestion  that  the  artistic  products,  such  as  hands, 
face  forms,  masks,  and  drawings  had  been  formed,  during  the  sitting 
itself,  Avith  the  help  of  the  hands,  is  excluded  by  the  extremely  com- 
plicated character  of  the  artistic  representations. 

It  has  also  been  repeatedly  alleged  that  objects  concealed  in  the 
orifices  of  the  body  (small  packets,  etc.),  had  been  brought  out  by  hand 
in  the  dark,  unfolded,  and  then  exposed  as  phenomena. 

A  very  natural  suggestion  which,  however,  cannot  be  maintained  on 
account  of  the  careful  initial,  and  final,  examination  of  the  medium,  the 
variability,  size,  and  character  of  the  objects  in  question,  and  also 
because  when  the  help  of  the  hands  was  excluded  by  new  experimental 
arrangements  (hands  held  by  the  observers,  or  visibility  of  the  hands  in 
front  of  the  curtain  during  the  whole  sitting),  the  same  phenomena 
occurred  as  before.  Finally,  the  disposal,  packing  up,  and  concealment 
of  the  objects  used  would  meet  with  unsurmountable  difficulties,  especi- 
ally if  we  take  into  account  the  time  and  circumstances  in  which  these 
manipulations  would  have  to  take  place,  i.e.,  sometimes  in  one  second. 

The  four  years'  observations  give  no  support  whatever  to  the 
suggestion  that  the  hands  played  any  part  at  all  in  the  real  genesis  and 
disappearance  of  the  phenomena,  though  they  may  have  had  a  part 

266  PHENOMENA    OF    MATERIALISATION 

in  the  arrangement  and  the  disposal  of  the  objects  and  images,  once 
they  were  mediumistically  produced. 

As  is  shown  by  several  photographic  records,  and  by  several  observa- 
tions, especially  during  the  first  part  of  the  sittings,  Eva  C.  exposed  her 
head  and  body,  clad  in  materials  and  veils,  to  the  red  light  on  several 
occasions,  apparently  with  the  object  of  producing  on  the  observers  the 
impression  of  a  phantom.  The  somnambulist,  in  this  case,  used 
materials  mediumistically  produced,  and  acted  in  good  faith,  in  this 
sense,  that  the  genesis  and  disappearance  of  these  materials  in  these 
sittings  constituted  the  phenomenon  in  question,  as  may  be  clearly  seen 
from  the  records. 

She  never  spoke  during  these  representations,  nor  did  she  show  any 
action  pointing  towards  dramatic  representation  of  any  type  of  person- 
ality. If,  therefore,  we  assume  and  admit  that  nothing  but  mediumis- 
tically produced  materials  were  exhibited  on  the  medium's  body,  we 
can  hardly  speak  of  a  fraudulent  intention  in  the  hypnotic  condition, 
but  simply  of  a  wish  of  the  medium  to  drape  herself,  and  to  produce, 
in  the  form  of  a  "  transfiguration,"  an  impressive  demonstration  of  her 
power.  But  whatever  we  may  think  of  this,  the  consciousness  of  fraud 
was  absent  in  her  state  of  deep  trance.  If,  in  this  case,  observers  with 
spiritistic  tendencies  had  regarded  the  masked  medium  as  a  "  spirit," 
the  sitters  alone  were  responsible  for  this  error,  and  not  the  instinctively 
acting  medium  herself.  That  this  transition  stage  of  transfiguration  is 
observed  in  nearly  all  materialisations  has  already  been  mentioned  in 
the  introduction. 

After  a  study  of  the  pictures  and  the  records,  one  might  also  raise 
the  objection  that  on  several  occasions  the  same  images,  types  and 
objects  were  exhibited  by  the  medium  in  various  sittings,  and  one  might 
conclude  that  such  objects  were  permanently  in  existence.  But  a 
detailed  examination  of  the  material  points  to  other  conclusions,  for  in 
no  case  could  the  identity  of  type  be  proved  in  the  case  of  several 
appearances,  separated  by  intervals  of  time.  This  we  recognised  in  the 
male  face  photographed  by  Bourdet  on  11th  September  1911,  the  struc- 
ture resembling  a  death-mask,  which  was  photographed  by  the  author  on 
5th  November  1911.  But  while  Bourdet's  negative  shows  a  flat  develop- 
ment, the  author's  photographs  show  an  incomplete,  distinctly  modelled, 
and  therefore  plastically  formed,  face,  although  there  could  be  no  doubt 
that  the  same  model  was  used  for  the  two  kinds  of  artistic  representation. 

The  same  observation  applies  to  that  group  of  female  heads  desig- 
nated by  the  medium  as  "  Berthe."  In  this  connection  one  should 
examine  the  pictures  of  30th  December  1911  and  7th  June  1912  (Figs.  60 
and  64).  In  spite  of  their  great  similarity,  which  again  suggests  different 
works  after  the  same  model,  or  after  the  same  memory  image,  the 
photographed  objects  are  really  different,  as  is  shown  by  a  comparative 
study.  Even  the  head  pictures,  taken  at  the  same  sitting,  at  an  interval 
of  from  five  to  seven  minutes,  show  distinct  differences  in  development, 
in  the  opening  of  the  eyes  and  in  the  facial  expression,  quite  apart  from 
the  change  in  the  decorative  arrangements.  In  the  portraits  of  the 
type  "  Bisson  "  at  various  ages,  we  have  on  the  1st  June  quite  a  different 
front  view  from  that  of  the  21st  June  1912,  in  which  the  left  supraorbital 
region  appears  modelled,  whereas  the  Munich  negatives  (Figs.  100  and 

'      RETROSPECT  267 

101),  in  half  profile,  only  show  a  faint  resemblance  to  the  original.  In 
the  portrait  produced  on  the  6th  March  1913  one  finds  certain  features 
in  the  build  of  the  forehead,  in  the  eyes,  and  in  the  cut  of  the  full  beard, 
which  make  it  a  matter  for  discussion  whether  this  creation  was  inspired 
by  the  original  model  or  not.  It  appears  impossible  to  attain  such 
different  effects  with  a  single  picture  model,  made  for  fraudulent 
purposes. 

In  the  torn  female  profile,  photographed  by  Mme.  Bisson  on  30th 
December  1912  (Fig.  125),  we  undoubtedly  find  the  same  features  as  in 
the  author's  photograph  of  10th  September  1912  (Fig.  115).  The  lines 
of  the  forehead  and  mouth  are  the  same  in  both  cases,  though  the 
projection  of  the  nose  appears  somewhat  longer  on  the  30th  December 
1912 ;  but  in  Fig.  125  the  limit  of  the  hair  is  quite  different,  quite  apart 
from  the  doubling  or  the  unjustifiable  prolongation  of  the  whole  structure 
downwards,  which  is  absent  in  Fig.  115.  We  have  again  the  same  pro- 
cess. The  similarities  in  the  profile,  in  the  gaze,  and  in  the  whole 
arrangement,  point  back  towards  the  same  origmal,  but  surely  one 
could  not,  by  using  the  objects  shown  in  Fig.  115,  produce  a  picture 
looking  like  Fig.  125. 

The  differences  in  the  four  photographs  of  the  phantom  have  already 
been  sufficiently  pointed  out  in  the  records  of  the  sittings.  The  greatest 
resemblance  is  between  the  two  appearances  photographed  on  23rd 
February  and  19th  May  1913.  But  the  mere  comparison  of  the 
left  eye  in  the  two  pictures  shows  considerable  differences  in  the  more 
oval  form,  the  high  light  and  the  appearance  of  the  pupil  on  Fig.  157. 
Besides,  the  face  (the  upper  part  of  which  stands  out  in  relief)  and  the 
whole  build  of  the  body  seem  to  be  broader  in  the  phantom  photo- 
graphed by  the  author  in  May  1913  than  in  that  photographed  by 
Mme.  Bisson  in  February.  With  the  same  model  one  could  not  have 
produced  four  such  different  pictures,  whereas  in  four  different  sittings 
the  same  personification  was  always  produced,  with  differences  resem- 
bling differences  of  memory. 

From  these  examples,  which  could  easily  be  multiplied,  it  is  evident 
that  the  repeated  use  of  the  same  originals  for  the  production  of  the 
phenomena,  as  far  as  we  can  judge  from  the  photographs,  is  out  of  the 
question. 

A  further  ground  for  suspicion  might  be  found  in  the  repeatedly 
observed  noises  (like  the  rustling  of  silk  or  rubbed  paper),  and  also  the 
diversion  of  the  attention  from  the  activity  of  the  medium,  by  the 
conversation  of  the  sitters  desired  by  Eva. 

The  first-named  occurrence  was  often  observed,  while  the  medium's 
hands  were  excluded  from  participation,  by  the  experimental  arrange- 
ment. It  is  therefore  independent  of  Eva's  manual  assistance,  and  must 
be  regarded  as  a  subsidiary  accompaniment  of  the  phenomena. 

As  regards  the  diversion  of  the  attention,  one  must  remember  the 
common  experience  that  a  too  intense  concentration  of  attention  on 
the  medium  herself  may  hinder  her  activity.  Possibly  there  is  here  a 
remnant  of  spiritistic  tradition  which  should  be  eliminated.  As 
against  this  objection,  the  author  may  point  out  a  large  number  of 
phenomena  set  dowTi  in  the  records,  which  took  place,  from  beginning 
to  end,  before  the  eyes  of  the  sitters,  i.e.,  under  rigid  control.     In  any 

268  PHENOMENA    OF    MATERIALISATION 

case,  talking  does  not  hinder  the  concentration  of  the  attention  upon 
the  mediumistic  processes,  but  might  contribute  to  exercise  a  soothing 
influence  upon  the  excited  nervous  system  of  the  producing  medium. 

Among  the  most  frequent  objections  to  materiahsation  phenomena, 
such  as  those  described  in  the  present  work,  we  have  the  assertion  that 
the  medium  fraudulently  uses  prepared  artificial  sheets  covered  with 
pictorial  representations  and  pressed  into  an  infinitesimal  volume,  these 
sheets  consisting  of  the  finest  veiling  or  of  shagreened  Japanese  paper. 
Such  products,  according  to  this  view,  can  be  compressed  to  the  size  of 
a  pea,  and  can  be  so  hidden  about  the  body  that  even  a  rigorous  initial 
and  final  examination  is  unable  to  discover  them. 

In  order  to  examine  the  technical  possibility  of  such  a  trick,  the 
author  procured  from  the  largest  Berlin  firm  for  this  branch  of  industry 
a  yard  of  the  finest  obtainable  chiffon  veiling  and  a  yard  of  the  finest 
silk  veiling,  and  through  another  big  firm  samples  of  the  thinnest  existing 
sorts  of  paper  {e.g.,  grey  Japanese  paper  prepared  from  rags  without 
chlorine,  etc.),  and  made  several  test  experiments  with  these. 

As  regards  the  compression  of  such  veiling  having  an  area  of  one 
square  yard,  the  smallest  circumference  within  which  such  a  packet  can 
be  compressed  is  6  inches.  That  corresponds  to  about  the  size  of  a 
small  apple.  But  even  by  using  smaller  quantities,  we  should,  in  any 
case,  get  the  size  of  a  walnut.  Pellets  the  size  of  a  pea,  on  the  other 
hand,  are  much  too  small  to  yield  sufficient  material  for  the  average 
size  of  the  phenomena. 

Now,  packets  of  this  size,  and  of  even  smaller  volume,  would 
certainly  have  been  discovered  during  the  initial  or  final  control.  And, 
further,  none  of  these  substances  are  sufficiently  consistent  to  allow 
themselves  to  be  sufficiently  smoothed  out  and  put  up  like  disks,  as,  for 
instance,  the  head  image  (Fig.  120).  Finally  the  traces  of  crumpling  are, 
as  a  rule,  different  from  the  traces  shown  on  Fig.  149.  In  particular,  a 
fairly  thick  paper  would  have  been  required  for  the  image  shown  on 
Fig.  120.  While  some  of  the  pictures  show  an  extremely  fine  basis, 
which  suggests  the  use  of  fine  material,  others,  as  sho^\Ti  by  the  photo- 
graphs from  behind  and  above,  arc  very  voluminous,  and  have  a 
distinct  thickness  {see  Fig.  93).  The  materials  used  for  a  portion  of 
the  drapery  of  the  Bisson  portrait  have  a  thickness  of  4  or  5  inches. 
Fine  paper  and  veiling  materials  are  so  transparent  that  this  quality 
would  immediately  be  evident  on  the  negative.  One  may  compare  the 
veil  photographs  of  the  Polish  medium  Stanislava  P.  in  this  connection. 
Finally,  it  may  be  doubted  whether  graphic  sketches  of  heads,  on  such 
material,  are  even  approximately  similar  to  the  appearance  of  the 
portraits  reproduced.  And  there  is  no  doubt  that  the  enlarged  negatives 
of  the  veiling  would  show  the  regular  structure  of  the  woven,  or  hand- 
worked, pattern.  In  silk  veils  this  pattern  is  square.  The  direction  of 
the  threads  would  have  been  apparent,  in  any  case.  In  the  same  way 
the  characteristic  structure  of  the  wood  fibre  would  be  evident  in  the 
case  of  paper.  The  appearance  of  a  whole  series  of  phantoms,  the 
sculptural  modelling  of  mask-like  heads,  and  of  more  massive  com- 
positions, could  not  be  explained  by  this  hypothesis,  which  only  applies 
to  a  small  number  of  photographs.  Only  in  a  single  case,  viz.,  in  the 
second  phantom  photograph  by  Mme.  Bisson,  of  24th  March  1913,  does 

RETROSPECT  269 

the  fabric  show  a  regular  pattern  comparable  with  fairly  coarse  canvas. 
It  is  certain  that  the  substance  was  neither  silk  nor  paper. 

Concerning  the  suggested  swallowing  and  bringing  up  of  such 
packets  by  a  sort  of  rumination,  all  that  is  necessary  has  already  been  said 
at  the  end  of  the  report  of  the  Munich  sittings.  The  enclosing  of  the 
head  in  a  veil,  as  practised  later,  also  refutes  this  assumption  (Fig.  154). 

The  hypothesis  of  the  fraudulent  use  of  paper,  or  veiling,  cannot  be 
maintained,  if  we  take  into  account  the  whole  of  the  photographic 
material  reproduced  in  this  work.  But  the  fact  remains  that  in  some 
of  the  pictures  there  is  a  distinct  similarity  of  the  material  basis  of  the 
production  to  veiling  materials,  paper  and  canvas. 

Even  if  there  is  an  appearance  of  fraud,  the  assumption  of  its  actual 
existence  is  not  necessarily  justified.  The  author  may  here  refer  to  his 
arguments  used  in  discussing  the  phenomena  of  Linda  Gazerra,  in  which 
he  said  :  "If  we  see  before  us  some  materialisation  product  like  the 
shape  of  a  white  flat  hand,  the  picture  of  a  head,  or  white  materials, 
we  are  obliged,  by  instinctive  association,  to  think  of  analogous  pictures 
from  the  world  of  our  o\\^i  experience.  The  white  hand  shows  an 
unmistakable  similarity  with  a  shape  cut  out  of  paper,  the  portrait-like 
character  of  the  head  reminds  us  of  an  enlarged  photograph,  and  the 
material  fabric  recalls  the  idea  of  veiling  or  finest  Indian  silk. 

"No  doubt  one  could  produce  similar  impressions  with  the  help  of 
such  objects.  But,  on  the  other  hand,  the  mysterious  character  of  the 
psycho-dynamic  phenomena  consists  just  in  the  variety  of  possibilities 
and  causal  actions,  so  that  they  can  produce  upon  us  visual  impressions, 
which  have  the  greatest  similarity  with  things  from  the  world  as  we 
know  it.  The  unknown  force,  of  a  possibly  psychic  origin,  as  soon  as 
it  wishes  to  present  or  materialise  things  for  our  senses,  uses  a  picture 
language  known  to  us  in  order  to  be  at  all  intelligible.  Any  one  who 
has  had  the  opportunity,  as  the  author  had  with  Eva  C,  to  observe  with 
what  unheard-of  facility,  in  contrast  with  ordinary  physics  and  biolog}', 
materialised  fabrics  and  structures  alter  their  condition,  form  and 
character,  when  the  mediumistic  power  is  at  all  great ;  how  they 
disappear  in  the  fraction  of  a  second,  i.e.,  cease  to  be  optically  percep- 
tible to  us,  will  sureh*  not  be  surprised  to  find,  in  the  photographic 
rendering  of  teleplastic  products,  many  similarities  to  kno^Mi  forms, 
besides  some  really  surprising  and  apparently  novel  products. 

•'  The  suspicious  appearance  of  a  medium.istic  photograph  is  not  suffi- 
cient proof  of  production  by  fraudulent  manoeuvres,  and,  generally  speak- 
ing, the  whole  use  of  the  photographic  art  has  no  significance  except  in 
conjunction  with  an  accurate  record  of  the  experimental  conditions." 

If  the  play  of  a  natural  law,  unknown  to  us,  consisted  in  presenting 
to  us  optical  images  which  are  sometimes  flat,  sometimes  plastic,  some- 
times coarse,  and  sometimes  equipped  with  the  finest  detail ;  having 
all  the  appearances  of  life  on  one  occasion,  and  none  of  these  on  another 
occasion,  we  should  have  to  accommodate  ourselves  to  the  fact,  however 
strange  it  might  appear  in  a  given  case.  So  long  as  the  effective  forces 
are  entirely  unknown  to  us,  as  they  are  to-day,  we  have  no  right  to 
reject  any  phenomenon  simply  because  its  flat  appearance,  or  its 
similarity  with  veiling,  paper,  or  canvas  does  not  agree  with  the  assump- 
tions of  our  usual  thought,  that  is  to  say,  with  our  preconceived  opinion. 

270  PHENOMENA    OF    MATERIALISATION 

If  we  disregard  these  considerations,  as  well  as  the  contents  of  the 
records,  and  the  most  careful  control,  we  must  admit  that  the  purely 
objective  consideration  of  a  number  of  the  pictures  reproduced  indicates 
fraud,  particularly  the  flat  appearance  of  many  of  the  photographs 
which  appear  cut  out,  the  canvas  or  paper-like  consistency  of  the  basis 
in  some  cases,  the  hand-shapes  looking  as  if  they  were  cut  out,  the 
regular  foldings  and  creases  on  numerous  images,  the  occurrence  of 
cords,  loops  and  threads  or  shreds  of  material,  recalling  spread  hand- 
kerchiefs, the  pictorial,  or  graphic,  character  of  the  documents  (such  as 
the  printing  on  Fig.  119),  and  the  amateurish  and  sketchy  treatment 
of  some  of  them. 

The  counter  proof  to  these  considerations  is  given  by  the  mode  of 
production  of  the  photographs  (simultaneous  exposures  on  five  to  seven 
cameras,  within  and  without  the  cabinet),  by  the  rigorous  initial  and 
final  examinations,  by  the  dress  of  the  medium,  by  the  sittings  with 
the  nude  medium,  by  the  occurrence  of  curious  forms  and  fragments 
which  cannot  easily  be  produced  by  commercially  obtainable  figures,  by 
the  numerous  plastic  products,  by  the  artistic  character  of  certain 
portraits,  which  cannot  be  imitated  in  this  way,  by  the  repeated  photo- 
graphy of  features  of  deceased  persons  recognised  by  their  families,  by 
the  growth  and  recession  of  the  teleplastic  phenomena,  by  their  move- 
ments, proved  evidentially  through  the  sense  organs  {e.g.,  materialised 
hands  which  make  touches  or  grasp  objects,  etc.),  by  the  lightning-like 
appearance  and  disappearance  of  the  phenomena,  while  the  medium's 
body  is  visible  and  motionless,  and,  finally,  by  a  class  of  phenomena 
which  cannot  at  all  be  imitated  artificially,  as,  for  instance,  the  creation 
of  an  amorphous,  living  and  moving  substance,  leaving  a  residue  of 
decomposition  products  of  organised  matter,  and  the  penetration  of 
the  substance  produced  through  textile  fabrics  and  veils  {see  Figs.  152 
and  153).  To  this  we  must  add  the  progressive  development,  advancing 
from  simple  to  complex  performances,  the  elementary  character  of  the 
forms  and  phenomena,  and  the  consideration  that  a  fraud,  which  would 
require  at  least  a  laboratory  for  producing  the  most  varied  assortment 
of  pictures  and  utensils,  and  would  presuppose  the  use  of  considerable 
sums  of  money  for  procuring  them,  could  hardly  have  been  practised 
for  four  years,  in  spite  of  the  constantly  varying  and  continuously 
intensified  precautions  and  photographic  methods,  and  could  not  have 
been  carried  out  without  the  slightest  failure,  in  the  face  of  the  acumen 
of  numerous  learned  observers.  Also,  the  improvised  character  of  the 
momentary  teleplastic  creations  speaks  against  a  prepared  manipulation 
of  artistic  illustrations,  masks  and  similar  objects,  whose  exposure  on 
the  negatives  would  have  produced  quite  different  pictures,  and  would 
have  been  easily  recognised. 

Finally,  we  must  take  exception  to  the  comparison  of  our  obser- 
vations with  the  results  of  conjuring.  Neither  the  twenty-six-year-old 
Eva  C,  nor  the  twenty-year-old  Stanislava  P.,  have  any  relation  to 
that  art,  which  surely  requires  thorough  instruction  and  practice.  The 
whole  life  of  these  two  girls,  their  course  of  education,  and  their  interests 
are  known,  and  are  clearly  accessible  to  the  observer.  Every  conjuror 
requires  the  use  of  his  hands,  but  a  very  large  number  of  phenomena, 
especially  with  Eva  C,  occurred  after  the  use  of  her  hands  had  been 

ARTISTIC   AND    TECHNICAL    OPINIONS.  271 

eliminated,  as  they  were  either  held  by  the  observers  during  the  pheno- 
mena, or  remained  visible  grasping  the  curtain. 

Such  objections  are  madmissible  so  long  as  nobody  has  succeeded 
in  producing  the  same  performances,  under  strictly  equal  experimental 
conditions,  by  conjuring,  for  which  one  would  have  to  offer  very  high 
remuneration. 

When,  in  the  end,  all  the  objections  applying  to  the  medium's 
person  are  exhausted,  so  that  the  appearances  cannot  be  explained  by 
reference  to  the  medium  alone,  common  sense,  driven  into  a  comer, 
always  has  recourse  to  the  theory  of  accomplices.  Servants  and  persons 
not  taking  part  in  the  sittings  are  excluded  at  once  by  the  conditions 
(repeated  change  of  abode  and  locality).  In  the  sittings  with  Eva  C, 
as  already  mentioned,  suspicion  used  to  centre  on  her  protectress, 
Mme.  Bisson.  Now,  as  already  pointed  out,  the  phenomena  are  not 
conditioned  by  her  presence  ;  they  had  already  occurred  for  four  years 
with  Eva,  before  INIme.  Bisson  made  her  acquaintance.  Besides,  this 
question  has  been  examined,  in  Munich  and  Paris,  by  critical  savants, 
during  the  sittings  themselves,  and  they  decided  that  there  was  no 
justification  for  any  suspicion  directed  against  the  lady  in  question. 
Finally,  in  the  case  of  the  Polish  medium  Stanislava  P.,  some  of  the 
phenomena  were  produced,  as  in  the  case  of  Eva  C,  although  the  two 
mediums  were  not  acquainted  with  each  other,  and  have  nothing  in 
common.  Therefore  the  hypothesis  of  accomplices  is  also  untenable. 
Whether  the  counter  arguments  enumerated  in  this  chapter  are  strong 
enough  to  exclude  the  possibility  of  fraud,  as  the  author  considers  they 
are,  the  reader  must  decide  for  himself. 

Undoubtedly;  in  a  question  of  such  importance  as  is  represented  by 
the  problem  of  mediumistic  materialisation,  all  objections  are  justifiable, 
and  every  conceivable  precaution  is  necessary  to  exclude  every  possi- 
bility of  production,  except  that  by  mediumistic  power. 

ARTISTIC   AND  TECHNICAL   OPINIONS. 

Professor  Albert  von  Keller,  several  of  whose  works  relate  to 
occult  and  mediumistic  problems  {e.g..  The  Awakening  of  Jairus' 
Daughter,  The  SomnambulUt,  The  Witch's  Sleej),  A  Portrait  of  Eusapia 
Paladino,  Studies  of  the  Dream  Dancer,  Madeleine  G.,  and  other  pic- 
tures), kindly  placed  the  following  expert  opinion  on  the  artistic 
significance  of  the  photographs  published  in  this  book,  at  the  author's 
disposal  : — 

"  The  pictures  comprised  in  the  first  group  (Figs.  27,  31,  45,  72,  74, 
75,  77,  and  78),  which  all  show  a  white  material  about  the  body  of  the 
medium,  sketchy,  flat  hand-forms,  or  more  or  less  developed  finger 
fragments,  seem  to  me  to  give  some  information  concerning  the  entirely 
elementary  character  of  the  formative  material.  The  substance  itself 
gives  the  impression  of  a  fluctuating  natural  creation  of  an  entirely 
organic  character,  but,  in  spite  of  this,  it  is  not  without  a  certain  grandeur 
of  design. 

"  Aju  interesting  example  of  this  fact  is  shown  by  Fig.  148,  for, 
apart  from  the  plastic  development  of  the  finely-drawn  finger,  it 
shows  a  character  in  the  ribbon  of  material  holding  it,  such  as  it  would 

272  PHENOMENA    OF    MATERIALISATION 

be  impossible  to  produce  on  the  loom.  The  remarkable  lines  of  this 
shred-like  substance  remind  me  of  the  play  of  forms  in  cast  lead.  On 
Fig.  133  the  two  finger  fragments  on  the  hair  surprise  us  by  their  fine 
plastic  anatomy. 

"  In  the  face  and  head  fragments  (Group  II.)  I  see  a  strong  develop- 
ment of  the  artistic  impulse  towards  the  production  of  the  forms  in 
question.  The  front  view  of  the  image  produced  on  1st  November  1911 
(Figs.  47  and  48)  resembles  the  head  of  an  ape,  but  the  full  profile 
already  assumes  the  aspect  of  a  human  face  and  is  plastically  developed. 

"  The  same  plastic  development  in  low  relief  is  shown  by  all  the 
photographs  of  this  group  (Figs.  49,  50,  51,  73,  76,  79  and  80).  In 
Figs.  82  and  83  the  formative  process,  evidently  in  the  course  of  forming 
a  head,  seems  to  have  been  interrupted  by  the  photographic  exposure. 

"  The  condition  of  the  material  in  this  group  is  yielding,  soft,  and 
fluctuating.  It  never  shows  a  paper-like  character,  and  shows  that  the 
veil  materials  are  formed  from  it,  as  are  the  face  forms.  This  transition 
is  clearly  seen  in  Figs.  82  and  83. 

"  The  climax  of  artistic  completion  is  shown  in  some  female  heads  of 
the  next  group.  Thus  the  creation  shown  in  Fig.  56  is  of  unsurpassed 
beauty  in  form,  drawing  and  composition,  such  as  only  the  work  of  a 
,master  can  show.  We  have,  in  these  remarkable  performances  (especi- 
ally in  Figs.  55,  56,  60,  61,  62  and  63),  the  direct  impression  of  life, 
seen  through  the  temperament  of  a  great  artist.  Fig.  62  is  remarkable 
for  its  classic  profile  and  for  the  admirably  successful  expression. 

"  The  plastic  modelling  is  proved  by  the  differences  in  the  photo- 
graphs from  various  points  of  view.  This  applies  particularly  to  the 
photographs  in  Figs.  55  and  56.  The  fluctuating  condition  of  the 
ground  substance,  and  its  capacity  for  development,  are  shown  by  the 
remarkable  change  in  expression,  and  in  the  position  of  the  head,  on 
comparing  several  photographs  taken  of  the  same  object  within  a  few 
minutes  of  each  other. 

"  In  my  opinion,  we  have  to  deal  with  several  stages  of  development. 
The  impression  of  perfect  plastic  development  is  also  made  by  the 
charming  female  face  of  Fig.  94,  which  reaches  the  same  level  of  beauty. 
The  unity  of  style  in  this  group  of  heads  (particularly  those  in  Figs.  55, 
56,  and  94,  and  the  female  head  photographed  by  Mme,  Bisson,  Figs.  90 
and  91)  indicates  that  the  same  artistic  individuality  has  created  all 
these  products.  Sometimes  the  same  type  seems  to  be  intended, 
although  the  differences  are  too  great  for  identification. 

"  Perhaps  we  have  to  deal  with  several  attempts  to  render  the  same 
model,  which  each  time  is  interpreted  differently.  As  the  terrestrial 
artist  is  constantly  engaged  in  struggling  with  his  material,  so  in  this 
case  there  are  many  indications  of  great  difficulties  in  the  treatment  of 
the  teleplastic  material. 

"  The  reproductions  in  Figs.  103  to  108, 115, 116,  and  120  to  123,  do  not 
attain  the  same  artistic  level  as  those  above  mentioned.  They  are  flat  and 
pictorial,  and  evidently  the  products  of  reminiscences  of  pictures.  But, 
even  in  these,  the  intensity  of  expression  is  well  marked,  and  governs 
the  design.     Great  artistic  force  is  shown  by  Figs.  115  and  122. 

"  The  male  portraits  in  Figs.  95,  136,  140,  142  and  143  indicate  an 
unusual  artistic  intelligence,  and  show  technical  refuiements  of  drawing 

ARTISTIC   AND   TECHNICAL   OPINIONS  273 

such  as  can  only  be  executed  by  great  artists.  This  is  specially  notice- 
able in  Fig.  149.  As  regards  the  extraordinarily  remarkable  appear- 
ances on  the  naked  body  of  the  medium  (Figs.  127,  129  and  135), 
these  are  evidently  elementary  chance  products  of  nature  having  an 
organic  character.  I  do  not  know  of  any  substance,  produced  mechanic- 
ally, or  manually,  with  which  similar  forms  could  be  made.  They  give 
a  convincing  impression  of  natural  creations,  generated  in  a  mysterious 
manner. 

"  On  comparing  Figs.  135  and  148,  the  equality  and  agreement  in  the 
elementary  form,  which  is  also  found  in  other  pictures,  is  very  evident. 
It  shows  that,  again  and  again,  the  same  mysterious  creative  process  is  in 
operation,  which  follows  its  own  laws,  and  is  indicated  by  a  distinct  style. 

"  The  forms  of  this  group  are  otherwise  only  found  in  the  vegetable  or 
mineral  kingdoms,  in  sea-weed,  in  trees,  in  lava,  in  molten  metal,  and  in 
living  organisms.  Such  lines  do  not  occur  in  artificial  or  artistic  products. 
They  are  the  peculiarities  of  the  spontaneous  creations  of  nature. 

"  To  say  another  word  about  the  four  phantom  pictures,  I  can  only 
corroborate  that  the  four  representations  of  the  same  type  show  quite 
notable  differences,  and  cannot,  therefore,  be  produced  from  the  same 
model.  The  high  lights  on  the  eyes  in  Figs.  157  and  159  do  not  look 
drawn,  but  look  like  real  high  lights,  although,  otherwise,  these  whole 
figures  do  look  like  drawings. 

"  To  sum  up  my  own  judgment,  it  appears  to  me  that  the  uniform 
elementary  character  of  the  material,  as  seen  in  so  many  pictures,  both 
formed  and  unformed,  seems  to  indicate  that  creations  of  such  a  remark- 
able kind  cannot  be  produced  artificially  by  fraud.  In  this  case,  the 
fluctuating  condition  of  the  fundamental  substance,  its  stages  of  develop- 
ment, and  the  soft  rounding  of  the  portraits,  which  is  also  seen  in 
several  sketches,  can  hardly  be  imitated.  The  artistic  performances, 
seen  in  Eva's  productions,  are  of  very  various  levels,  from  the  highest 
artistic  power  dowm  to  an  amateurish  awkwardness.  Certain  head 
formations  are  so  convincing,  by  their  originality  and  their  mysterious 
composition,  that  they  cannot  be  compared  with  the  works  of  human 
technique,  and  seem  to  be  elementary  natural  creations  of  chance." 

Herr  Fritz  Miiller,  INIanager  of  the  Graphic  Art  Works  of  Hambock; 
by  whom  the  whole  of  the  reproductions  for  this  work  were  carried  out, 
is  well  qualified  to  express  a  technical  opinion,  by  his  long  experience 
in  the  subject  of  photo-chemistry  and  methods  of  reproduction,  as  well 
as  his  preparation  of  the  photographic  originals  in  this  book  for  auto- 
type.    His  opinion  is  as  follows  : — 

"  According  to  your  wish,  I  certify  with  pleasure  that  the  photo- 
graphic negatives  of  the  present  work  were  obtained  in  a  manner 
technically  free  from  objection,  that  is  to  say,  the  negatives  were  taken 
at  one  exposure,  without  subsequent  illumination,  or  any  kind  of 
manipulation.  The  photographic  copies  have  not  been  retouched  or 
subjected  to  any  other  manual  treatment,  as  I  have  had  occasion  to 
observe  in  preparing  the  blocks  for  the  photographs. 

"  The  appearance  presented  by  the  photographs  lacks  all  charac- 
teristics denoting  paper  or  fabrics  prepared  manually  or  mechanically. 
The  masses  rather  resemble  vegetable  and  animal  forms.  That  some 
of  the  appearances  are  plastically  developed  is  clearly  seen  from  the 
^"'  s 

274  PHENOMENA    OF    MATERIALISATION 

photographs,  taken  from  the  right,  or  left,  and  from  in  front.  The 
mass  itself  seems  fluctuating  and  easily  changeable  in  its  form,  for  photo- 
graphs taken  in  short  succession  show  differences  of  outline.  What  the 
mass  consists  of,  I  cannot  say,  since  I  have  not  come  across  similar 
materials  in  my  practice. 

"  A  peculiarity  lies  also  in  the  transition  between  the  material  and 
the  plastic  forms.  The  latter  must  be  in  relief  because,  when  the  light 
falls  from  the  left,  the  shadows,  both  of  the  medium's  head  and  of  the 
phenomena,  are  on  the  right,  but  another  portion  of  the  forms  repre- 
sented gives  an  impression  of  flat  drawn  sketches.  If  these  were  art 
publications  previously  existmg,  and  arranged  in  the  sitting  for  photo- 
graphic exposure,  there  would  be  some  indications  of  the  direction  of 
the  illumination  in  which  the  originals  were  produced,  and  these  would 
probably  be  in  contradiction  to  the  direction  of  the  illumination  in  the 
sitting  ;  but  in  the  material  submitted  no  such  contradiction  can  be 
traced.  Besides,  the  remarkable  softness  and  roundmg  of  a  large 
portion  of  the  products  speaks  against  the  use  of  sketches  or  enlarged 
photographs,  which  would  come  out  much  harder  on  negatives,  and  are 
easily  recognised  in  other  ways. 

"  I  should  also  like  to  point  out  that  the  basis  of  one  of  the  phantom 
pictures  shows  the  characteristics  of  canvas,  and  that  the  high  lights 
in  the  eyes  are,  in  some  of  the  photographs,  real — that  is  to  say,  not 
drawn.  I  do  not  consider  myself  competent  to  judge  of  the  artistic 
technique  expressed  in  the  pictures  or  the  frequent  fissures  and  folds." 

METHOD  OF  OBSERVATION  AND  DEVELOPMENT 
OF   TELEPLASTIC    STRUCTURES. 

The  occurrences  observed  with  Eva  C.  during  a  period  of  four  years 
all  belong  to  the  same  class. 

They  always  consisted  of  the  appearance  of  definite  material  aggre- 
gates, substances,  forms  and  objects,  under  various  experimental  con- 
ditions which  were  arranged  with  the  object  of  excluding  conscious,  or 
unconscious,  fraudulent  co-operation  by  the  medium,  and  also  designed 
to  assist  the  production  of  the  phenomena  by  providing  the  milieu 
found  by  experience  to  be  required  (cabinet  and  red  light).  In  order  to 
record  the  extremely  fugitive,  visible  effects  of  the  psycho-dynamic 
processes,  whose  nature  is  still  quite  unknown,  in  a  manner  independent 
of  the  testimony  of  the  senses,  photography  was  used  as  freely  as 
possible.  In  the  first  year,  1909,  the  arrangements  for  flash-light 
photographs  were  so  imperfect  that  only  a  small  number  of  exposures 
were  successful.  In  order  to  fill  up  this  gap  several  situations  observed 
were  drawn  by  the  painter  Gampenrieder.  At  the  end  of  the  fourth 
year  seven  to  nine  cameras,  inside  and  outside  the  cabinet,  were  ready 
to  record  the  results  of  the  materialisation  process  from  all  sides.  This 
procedure  itself  excluded  any  manipulation  with  prepared  plates.  The 
author  himself  inserted  the  plates,  selected  the  moment  for  igniting  the 
flash-light,  and  usually  only  photographed  that  which  had  been  pre- 
viously seen.  The  development  of  the  negatives  was  carried  out  in  his 
presence.     No  retouchings,  corrections,  or  changes  have  been  made. 

DEVELOPMENT  OF  TELEPLASTIC  STRUCTURES        275 

with  the  exception  of  the  photographs  taken  with  the  naked  medium, 
where  the  sex  characteristics  were  obhterated,  as  the  medium  had 
made  this  a  condition  for  her  permission  to  pubhsh  them.  The  assump- 
tion of  hallucination  is  entirely  disposed  of  by  the  photographic  plates, 
and  the  latter  afford  a  valuable  corroboration  of  visual  impressions. 
During  the  whole  period  not  a  single  sitting  was  held  in  the  dark,  and 
the  red  light  was  strengthened  more  and  more  until,  in  July  1912,  six 
lamps,  totalling  one  hundred  candle-power,  illuminated  the  room. 

The  greatest  care  was  taken  throughout  to  have  a  thorough  initial  and 
final  examination  of  the  medium.  This  included  a  search  extending  over 
the  whole  skin,  and  sometimes  into  all  the  bodily  orifices.  Eva's  cos- 
tume in  the  sittings  consisted  of  knitted  tights,  with  an  apron  tunic 
closed  down  the  back.  Before  each  sitting  Mme.  Bisson  sewed  up  the 
back,  the  wrists,  and  the  junction  of  the  tights  with  the  dress.  In 
May  1913  Eva,  at  the  desire  of  the  Paris  physicians,  put  on  a  tricot  in 
one  piece,  closing  only  down  the  back,  and  her  head  was  also  covered 
M'ith  a  veil,  sewn  on  to  the  neck. 

Not  one  of  the  observers,  during  these  four  years,  has  ever  found  on 
the  medium's  body,  or  in  the  seance  costume,  anything  which  could 
have  been  used  for  the  fraudulent  production  of  the  phenomena.  The 
importance  of  this  negative  result  can  hardly  be  emphasised  too  strongly. 
The  author  was  a  witness  to  the  thorough  performance  of  this  task  on 
no  less  than  180  occasions.  The  honesty  of  the  medium  is  therefore  not 
a  'probability,  but  a  certainty  placed  beyond  all  question.  She  has  never 
introduced  any  objects  into  the  cabinet  with  which  she  could  have 
fraudulently  represented  the  teleplastic  products. 

The  various  seance  rooms,  in  different  houses,  had  no  secret  passages 
or  trap-doors,  and  were  regularly  examined,  both  before  and  after 
every  sitting,  by  the  savants  who  took  part  in  the  sittings.  The  seance 
room  was  locked  so  that  no  servants  had  access  to  it.  The  number  of 
sitters,  at  first  rather  large,  was  reduced  more  and  more,  so  that  during 
the  last  years  it  was  only  rarely  that  more  than  four  persons  were 
present.  Many  important  sittings  took  place  in  the  presence  of 
Mme.  Bisson  and  the  author  only. 

During  the  last  years  the  phenomena  could  often  be  illuminated  by 
the  sitters  with  red  or  white  electric  torches.  In  some  sittings  the 
curtains  were  not  closed  at  all,  and  the  phenomena  were  often  observed 
from  beginning  to  end,  while  the  medium's  body  was  motionless  and 
visible.  There  were  also  a  large  number  of  sittings  with  the  naked 
medium,  only  attended  by  Mme.  Bisson,  and  two  attended  by  the 
author. 

On  reviewing  the  experimental  arrangements  and  records,  one  must 
admit  that  everything  was  done,  that  was  within  the  power  of  the 
observers,  to  exclude  fraud  and  self-deception.  But  it  may  be  objected 
that  nobody  made  an  attempt  to  grasp  the  material  and  solve  the 
question  by  force.  In  answer  to  this,  it  must  be  stated  that  such  an 
attempted  exposure,  made  at  Munich,  was  a  failure.  The  phantom  on 
the  left  of  the  medium  disappeared  entirely.  Dr  Kafka  did  not  succeed 
in  grasping  the  brown  or  grey  piece  of  substance  on  the  left  of  the 
medium's  neck.  The  only  consequences  were  some  profound  fainting 
fits,  several  days  of  illness,  and  an  instinctive  timidity  of  the  medium, 

276  PHENOMENA    OF    MATERIALISATION 

which  lasted  for  six  months,  and  had  a  very  unfavourable  effect  on  the 
sittings.  On  a  few  occasions  Mme.  Bisson  did  grasp  some  of  the 
materialisation,  but  it  dissolved  in  her  hand,  while  the  attempt  to  grasp 
it  produced  violent  pains  in  the  medium.  In  the  sitting  of  15th  Novem- 
ber 1910,  the  author  grasped  a  piece  of  material  which  had  given  a  blow 
on  his  right  hand,  but  the  mass  wriggled  out  of  his  hand  like  a  snake, 
while  Eva  screamed  with  pain.  If  we  also  take  into  account  that  the 
phenomena  often  appeared  with  lightning-like  rapidity,  and  might 
disappear  in  the  fraction  of  a  second,  we  must  reckon  with  the  fact 
that  these  transitory  structures  do  not  hold  out  under  our  physical 
contact,  and  that  the  suggested  procedure,  while  yielding  no  success  to 
the  observer,  has  grave  consequences  for  the  medium.  In  any  case, 
the  material  does  not  seem  to  withstand  the  light,  but  appears  to  liquefy 
very  easily,  or  even  to  evaporate.  Many  experiments  in  this  direction 
gave  material  in  a  liquid  state  or  in  the  form  of  residues  on  the  medium's 
dress,  which  contained  cell  detritus.  The  few  cases  in  which  more 
permanent  material  was  obtained  (hair,  etc.)  are  too  isolated  to  affect 
the  general  conclusion. 

Assuming  the  actuality  of  the  phenomena,  we  may  next  endeavour 
to  describe  their  evolution.  The  first  stage  is  the  appearance  of  a 
mobile  substance,  near  the  body  of  the  medium.  We  may  call  it  the 
stage  of  teleplastic  evolution.  The  substance  appears  diffuse  and  cloudy, 
like  a  fine  smoke  of  white  or  grey  colour.  On  further  condensation  it 
becomes  Avhite,  and  transforms  itself  into  amorphous  coagulated  masses 
or  packets,  or  assumes  the  structure  of  the  finest  web-like  filmy  veils, 
which  may  develop  into  compact  organic  fabrics  or  conglomerates. 
Sometimes  the  veil-like  forms  are  doubled  at  the  margin,  so  that  the 
first  impression  is  that  of  a  stitched  hem.  The  veils  never  show  the 
characteristic  square  thread-work  of  real  veils.  There  is  something 
inconstant  and  irregular  in  all  these  formations,  and  sometimes  the 
morphological  structure  is  different  in  the  centre  and  at  the  rims. 
All  observers,  who  have  touched  this  filmy  grey  substance  with  their 
hands,  agree  in  describing  it  as  cool,  sticky,  and  rather  heavy,  as  well 
as  endowed  with  a  motion  of  its  own.  The  sensation  may  be  compared 
with  that  produced  on  the  skin  by  a  living  reptile. 

The  existence  of  this  material  with  the  properties  described  has 
lately  been  proved  to  be  the  primordial  phenomenon  for  telekinetic 
processes  (raps,  levitations,  etc.)  by  the  British  investigator,  Dr  W.  J. 
Crawford,  of  Belfast,  who  felt  the  substance  on  the  occasion  of  the 
levitation  of  a  table,  which  he  traced  to  an  invisible  lever  proceeding 
from  a  point  near  the  medium's  feet  towards  the  under  surface  of  the 
table.  He  says  that  the  material  felt  cold,  sticky,  and  like  the  skin  of 
a  reptile.  This  indicates  that  the  material  foundation  of  the  telekinetic 
phenomena  is  the  same  as  that  of  the  teleplastic  phenomena,  only  with 
the  difference  that  in  telekinetics  it  is  not  yet  condensed  into  visibility, 
and  therefore  represents  a  preliminary  grade  of  the  aggregate  used  in 
teleplastics.  Crawford  finds,  in  this  organic  matter,  a  thread-like 
structure,  which  is  usually  invisible,  but  is  capable  of  carrying  out 
motions  of  its  own  and  of  becoming  the  conductor  of  psychic  impulses. 
I  have  also  succeeded,  in  the  case  of  the  free  levitation  of  a  small  object, 
by  the  approach  of  the  hands  (with  the  Polish  medium  Stanislava 

DEVELOPMENT   OF   TELEPLASTIC   STRUCTURES      277 

Toniczyk),  in  photographing  such  invisible  threads  on  stereoscopic 
pictures,  an  experiment  which  was  first  performed  in  Warsaw  by 
Ochorowicz.  The  magnification  of  the  thread  images  shows  an  organic 
structure,  and  the  absence  of  all  marks  of  the  loom. 

The  teleplastic  substances  condensed  into  the  filmy  veil  show 
elasticity,  like  that  of  rubber,  and  change  their  volume,  length,  and 
shape  while  the  medium  is  motionless.  The  pieces  look  like  torn  shreds 
of  fabrics,  or  like  ribbons,  strings,  or  long  fibres,  or  again  like  low 
organisms.  They  are  usually  connected  with  the  medium's  head  by  a 
long  extensible  cord.  The  mass  seems  to  pass  freely  through  the  lighter 
materials  of  the  dress,  penetrating  them,  perhaps,  in  a  vaporous  form, 
and  subsequent!}^  condensing  in  the  form  of  grey  flakes. 

In  the  next  stage,  that  of  development  or  evolution,  the  teleplastic 
substance  grows  before  the  eyes  of  the  sitters,  and  sometimes  in  a  very 
short  time  (ten  to  forty  seconds).  We  could  even  watch  the  process  of 
growth.  At  first  a  reddish  spot,  the  size  of  a  pea,  was  seen  on  the  dress, 
which  grew  into  a  strip  about  46  inches  long,  or  into  some  other  more 
compact  form,  while  the  medium's  body  remained  at  rest.  When  this 
growth  took  place  on  the  dress,  no  visible  connection  with  the  body 
could  be  perceived.  We  also  succeeded  on  various  occasions  in  watching 
the  evolution  from  the  mouth.  It  was  always  accompanied  by  a  very 
intensive  co-operation  of  the  respiratory  organs  of  the  medium.  The 
substance  has  first  the  appearance  of  smoke,  and  streams  from  the  mouth 
with  strong  expirations,  afterwards  assuming  a  vaporous,  or  veil-like, 
appearance.  The  impression  would  be  the  same  if  the  medium  were  to 
blow  the  finest  muslin  veiling  out  of  her  mouth.  On  17th  May  1910 
the  author  observed  this  process  fairly  accurately  while  kneeling  beside 
the  medium  in  the  cabinet.  The  exhaled  mass  is  very  light.  It  seems 
at  first  to  float  in  the  air,  and  only  sinks  gradually  while  it  condenses. 
On  touching  it  the  finger  has  the  impression  of  destroying  a  spider's 
web.  Similar  observations  were  made  in  the  case  of  Stanislava  P.  {see 
Fig.  170). 

The  material  produced  by  Eva  C.  shows  movements  of  various 
kinds.  After  separation  from  the  body,  these  movements  may  become 
independent.  Such  independent  motion  was  observed  by  two 
observers  on  the  medium's  naked  body.  The  movements  are  slowly 
undulating,  sometimes  in  zigzag,  or  in  wavy  lines,  comparable  with  the 
creeping  of  a  snake,  or  the  progress  of  a  jelly-like  material,  over  a  flat 
surface. 

The  stage  of  recession,  or  involution,  often  takes  the  form  of  a  sudden 
jerk  towards  the  body  of  the  medium,  which  reabsorbs  the  substance. 
This  could  never  be  observed  in  detail,  on  account  of  its  rapidity. 

The  recession  can  also  take  the  form  of  a  simple  optical  disappear- 
ance. This  may  happen  in  the  fraction  of  a  second,  and  leaves  no 
trace  anywhere  about  the  medium  or  the  cabinet.  Such  disappearances 
often  took  place  when  the  medium  was  frightened,  when  the  flash-light 
was  turned  on,  or  after  unexpected  noises,  like  the  fire-alarm  of  25th 
November  1909. 

The  reappearances  of  such  objects  were  often  as  sudden  as  the 
disappearances,  as  was  shoAvn  by  numerous  examples.  The  stage  of 
teleplastic  metamorphosis  is  just  as  mysterious  as  the  simple  move- 

278  PHENOMENA    OF    MATERIALISATION 

merits.  We  have  here  the  production  of  distinct  parts,  from  a  uniform 
formative  substance.  The  flat  white  viscous  material,  visible  to  the 
eye,  puts  forth  excrescences  and  projections  of  an  elementary  character, 
resembling  leaves.  This  process  is  not,  indeed,  more  wonderful  than 
the  replacement  of  the  head  of  an  annelid  worm,  after  it  has  been 
twelve  times  cut  off,  or  the  new  formations  in  planarians,  crustaceans, 
and  salamanders.  In  order  to  indicate  their  peculiar  character,  they 
are  called  "  pseudopods  "  in  the  records.  Besides  these  projections,  we 
also  find  more  differentiated  forms,  like  sketchy  fingers  and  hands. 
Finally,  there  are  quite  a  number  of  hand-shapes,  shown  in  the  collection 
of  photographs,  which  seem  white  and  flat,  as  if  cut  out  of  paper.  But 
the  examination  of  enlarged  photographs  of  these  very  suspicious-looking 
forms  has  never  revealed  the  characteristic  structure  of  paper,  or  of 
wood-fibre  products,  but  show  a  granular  ground  substance.  The  use 
of  paper  for  these  forms  is  therefore  excluded.  Besides,  in  some  of  the 
negatives,  this  substance  gives  the  impression  of  being  semi-liquid  and 
soft,  as  it  sinks  in  and  adapts  itself  to  its  support.  {See  Photograph, 
11th  August  1911.) 

These  sketchy  hands,  lacking  all  external  detail,  also  grow  without 
any  connection  with  the  primitive  teleplasm,  lie  on  the  medium's 
shoulder,  on  her  head,  under  a  heap  of  veiling,  etc.,  and  disappear  as 
spontaneously  as  they  are  formed.  In  one  case,  the  author  watched 
such  a  formation  on  the  medium's  shoulder  quite  closely,  and  timed  it. 
It  disappeared  after  exactly  forty  seconds. 

The  results  recorded  in  this  work  concerning  teleplastic  hand-shapes 
are  corroborated  by  the  experience  of  other  authors.  Thus,  Crookes 
speaks  of  hand-forms  condensed  from  clouds.  With  the  medium 
Carancini  a  whole  flat  hand  was  photographed.  We  also  find  in  the 
work  of  Imoda,  among  very  convincing  hand-shapes,  a  number  of 
flat,  glove-like,  and  undeveloped  formations  of  this  kind.  Finally, 
Delanne,  who  has  much  experience  in  this  subject,  mentions  that  these 
fluidic  hands  often  give  the  impression  of  inflated  gloves  :  "  The  hands 
and  fingers  do  not  always  appear  solid  as  in  living  people,  sometimes 
they  resemble  a  cloud,  which  has  been  partly  condensed  into  a  hand." 

The  same  white  sketchy  hand-forms  were  seen  with  the  Polish 
medium  Stanislava  P.  (Fig.  172).  The  author  endeavoured  to  imitate 
this  class  of  phenomena  with  the  help  of  white  gloves,  but  the  pictures 
looked  quite  different,  and  do  not  contribute  anything  to  the  elucidation 
of  this  problem. 

But  not  only  rough  forms  of  hands,  lacking  all  elements  of  life,  were 
seen,  but  sometimes  the  external  contours  of  arms  and  human  limbs, 
these  sometimes  having  all  the  plastic  characteristics  of  human  organs. 
On  a  few  occasions,  organs  true  to  life — one  could  almost  say  living — 
especially  hands  (fingers  with  nails),  could  be  perceived  simultaneously 
by  sight,  touch,  and  hearing,  while  the  medium's  hands  Avere  kept 
motionless.  These  organs  showed  their  living  character  by  grasping 
objects  held  out  to  them,  by  various  movements,  by  digging  their  nails 
into  the  skin  of  our  hands,  while  they  could  not  possibly  be  mistaken 
for  the  hands  of  the  medium  {see  Sitting  of  18th  November  1910,  where 
a  hand  provided  with  three  finger-stumps  pressed  its  nails  irrto  the  back 
of  the  author's  hand).     The  same  imperfections  in  the  development  of 

HEAD  FRAGMENTS,  FACES  AND  PHANTOMS  279 

materialised  forms  were  shown  by  the  medium  Eusapia  Paladino.  Thus 
the  author  recollects  having  seen  an  arm  stump  with  three  fingers 
during  the  Munich  sittings  with  that  medium.  In  other  ways,  also, 
the  experiences  with  Eva  C.  show  many  correspondences  with  the 
phenomena  of  Eusapia.  The  symptoms  of  mediumistic  labour  and  its 
muscular  accompaniments  were  found  in  both  persons.  The  same 
utterances  of  pain,  the  same  moaning  and  pressing,  the  same  effort  of 
will,  when,  for  instance,  the  materialised  limb  is  to  touch  one  of  those 
present,  or  to  carry  out  definite  actions.  Perhaps,  even  when  the 
teleplastic  organ,  or  fragment,  is  apparently  separated  from  the  medium's 
body,  there  may  be  a  connection  with  it  by  invisible  threads,  which 
transmit  nerve  impulses  outward  or  inward.  We  must,  at  least,  assume, 
in  view  of  the  results  of  16th  May  1913,  that  the  movement  of  the 
suspended  finger  observed  by  Dr  Bourbon  was  transmitted  by  the  cord- 
like  connection  with  the  medium,  which  apparently  consisted  of  organised 
matter.  In  general,  the  completely  developed  vital  aggregates  seem  to 
have  an  animal  nature.  They  are  the  bearers  of  kinetic  energies,  they 
sometimes,  by  means  of  an  entirely  unknown  mechanism,  produce  motor 
effects,  which  resemble  the  effects  of  human  limbs,  and  they  are  subject 
to  the  influence  of  the  unconscious  psychic  activity  of  the  medium. 
Perhaps,  also,  the  mental  activity  of  the  sitters  has  some  effect. 

HEAD  FRAGMENTS,  FACES  AND  PHANTOMS. 

The  last,  and  perhaps  most  interesting  series  of  observations  and 
photographic  records  in  this  work  concerns  the  appearance  and  repro- 
duction of  distinctly  marked  faces,  heads  and  whole  figures  in  the 
form  of  fragments,  mask-like  forms,  and  pictorially  and  artistically 
produced  portraits.  These  objects  are  sometimes  sketchy  and  incom- 
plete, as  if  surprised  by  the  light  during  development,  sometimes 
plastically  developed  ;  or,  again,  drawings  on  a  soft,  flat  basis,  and  are 
fastened  either  to  some  part  of  the  medium's  body,  to  the  curtains,  or 
to  the  back  of  the  cabinet  (excepting  the  freely  suspended  picture  of 
10th  September  1912).  The  majority  of  them  are  picturesquely  draped 
with  grey  or  black  veils,  or  with  some  solid  fabrics  which,  in  some  cases, 
conceal  portions  of  the  face. 

In  none  of  these  forms  have  the  independent  movements  of  living 
organisms  been  observed  or  clearly  proved  to  take  place,  although  some 
heads  give  the  impression  of  being  taken  from  nature,  while  others 
appear  to  be  images  representing  objects  seen  and  retained  by  the 
memory.  The  general  impression  made  by  the  comparative  study  of 
these  mediumistic  products  is  that  there  is  a  distinct  tendency  to 
represent,  with  the  most  varied  artistic  means,  the  essential  features  of 
certain  types  of  faces  in  the  teleplastic  material  provided,  i.».,  to 
materialise  them.  In  a  considerable  number  of  these  representations 
(Figs.  62,  63,  68,  92,  108,  116,  122,  and  149)  the  vivacity  of  the  expres- 
sion, their  impressionistic  and  elementary  character,  and  the  softness  of 
the  outlines,  are  noted  with  some  surprise,  while  others  look  more 
conventional  and  wooden  {see  Figs.  63, 112,  and  115).  While  the  former 
presuppose  certain  artistic  talents,  some  of  the  latter  appear  amateurish. 

280  PHENOMENA    OF    MATERIALISATION 

Possibly  the  many  disproportions  of  parts  in  the  faces,  the  remarkable 
distortions,  displacements,  and  bendings,  as  well  as  the  imperfections 
and  faults  of  execution,  may  be  due  to  the  manner  of  production  and 
to  the  quality  of  the  basis,  which  is  sometimes  soft  and  pulpy,  and 
sometimes  flat  and  resistant.  The  decorative  veil-like  ornaments, 
sometimes  very  cleverly  arranged,  appear  to  coalesce  with  the  heads  as 
if  originating  in  the  same  primitive  ground  substance,  thus  increasing 
the  peculiar  softness  of  the  structure  and  composition.  According  to 
the  opinion  of  artistic  and  technical  experts,  the  same  impression  cannot 
be  obtained  with  purchasable  masks,  or  pictures  provided  with  veiling, 
since  these  would  always  look  hard,  and,  on  an  enlarged  picture  of  this 
kind,  the  origin  of  the  preparations  could  easily  be  recognised. 

The  homogeneous  character  of  the  creations  also  appears  in  the 
flowing  transition  from  the  flat  to  the  plastic,  as  seen  in  Figs.  65,  95, 
106,  122,  137,  and  157.  Faces  drawn  on  a  flat  surface  show  real  hair  of 
beard,  or  head,  in  the  shape  of  a  short-haired  substance,  apparently 
laid  on,  of  which  Fig.  137  gives  an  interesting  example,  on  studying  this 
stereoscopic  transparency  in  a  bright  light.  Or  a  twisted  piece  of 
fabric,  laid  over  the  forehead,  represents  the  bridge  of  the  nose,  and, 
at  its  lower  end,  assumes  the  real  form  of  a  nose. 

The  question  of  the  plastic  development  of  the  images  shown  is 
best  judged  by  the  distribution  of  shadows,  the  comparison  of  front 
views  and  side  views,  and  the  study  of  the  parallax  effects  presented  by 
stereoscopic  photographs.  That  the  material  is  not  only  plastic,  but 
capable  of  change  and  development,  is  proved  by  the  differences  observed 
in  photographs  of  the  same  object  taken  in  rapid  succession.  Thus,  on 
30th  December  1911,  and  on  7th  June  1912,  we  succeeded  in  photo- 
graphing the  same  female  face  twice,  at  intervals  of  a  few  minutes.  In 
both  cases  we  find  not  only  a  considerable  advance  in  the  poise  of  the 
head,  in  outline  and  in  expression,  but  the  second  picture  also  shows  a 
higher  grade  of  development,  thus  indicating  progress  in  the  process  of 
materialisation.  The  use  of  prepared  sheets  of  drawings,  or  enlarged 
photographs,  is  also  rendered  very  improbable  by  the  distribution  of 
the  light  and  shade,  which  would  have  to  correspond  with  the  direction 
of  the  light  at  the  sitting  itself.  But  on  none  of  the  photographs 
obtained  are  there  any  shadows  inconsistent  with  the  actual  direction 
of  the  magnesium  light.  Nor  could  the  medium  prepare  for  this  par- 
ticular incidence.  In  Paris,  two  flash-light  apparatus  were  placed  on 
different  sides  of  the  room,  and  she  could  not  know  which  was  about  to 
be  used.  It  may  be  regarded,  as  a  general  rule,  that  the  exposure  of 
a  completed  head  image  is  preceded  by  a  state  of  development.  During 
this  stage  there  are  exhibitions  of  white  conglomerates,  films,  and  veils, 
which  begin  at  the  mouth,  or  in  the  medium's  lap,  and  change  their 
place,  while  the  medium's  hands  are  controlled.  The  mysterious 
intelligence,  which  appears  to  be  concerned  in  this  preparatory  work, 
evidently  wishes  to  make  face  and  head  types  optically  visible,  but 
requires  a  certain  time  for  doing  so,  which  may  amount  to  as  much  as 
an  hour.  Sometimes  several  heads  are  shown  simultaneously,  the  maxi- 
mum number  observed  by  the  author  being  three.  The  single  exhibition 
of  a  finished  image  is  usually  very  short,  and  never  longer  than  several 
seconds.     In  the  meantime  the  images  retire  into  the  dark,  to  emerge 

HEAD  FRAGMENTS,  FACES  AND  PHANTOjMS  281 

again  shortly  afterwards,  as  if  by  magic.  On  several  occasions  the 
cabinet  and  the  medium  were  searched  after  such  a  disappearance, 
without  finding  anything. 

The  personal  impression  of  the  rapid  appearances  and  disappearances 
is  as  if  the  light  illuminating  the  object  were  suddenly  switched  on  or 
switched  off.  As  a  rule,  the  later  exposures  show  a  higher  development 
and  a  greater  finish  in  the  objects  than  the  earlier  ones.  This  is  especi- 
ally the  case  as  regards  the  plastic  development  of  the  objects. 

The  stages  in  the  development  of  head  forms  may  be  divided  into 
three  : — 

No.  1.  Production  of  elementary  material  in  the  form  of  white 

conglomerates,  wisps,  and  shreds. 
No.  2.  Development  of  flat  pictorial  portraits  on  a  soft  and  flat 

basis. 
No.  3.  Formation  of  a  plastic  relief  of  certain  portions  of  the 

face,  and,  in  the  hairy  portions,  up  to  complete  sculptural 

modelling. 
The  material  is  sometimes  self-luminous,  as  is  shown  by  the  photo- 
graphs of  7th  June  1911  and  21st  August  1911,  as  well  as  by  the  cloud 
seen  on  23rd  February  1913.    Mme.  Bisson  observed  this  luminosity  as  the 
preliminary  stage  in  the  development  of  the  phantom  on  8th  June  1913. 

The  question  as  to  what  is  preserved,  during  the  disappearance  and 
reappearance  of  a  given  image,  is  not  easily  answered.  The  differences 
observed,  for  instance,  in  the  four  portraits  of  M.  Bisson  indicate  a 
process  something  like  that  by  which  an  artist  makes  four  independent 
pictures  from  the  same  model.  It  is  remarkable  that  practice  apjjears 
to  make  such  reproductions  easier,  the  medium  being  less  exhausted  by 
the  later  productions  than  by  the  earlier  ones.  It  sometimes  happens 
that  the  later  exhibitions  of  a  given  image  show  less  clearness  and  detail 
than  earlier  ones.  This  may  be  at  the  end  of  a  sitting,  when  the  medium 
is  exhausted.  The  process  of  disintegration  may  be  instantaneous,  or 
it  may,  like  the  process  of  formation,  take  place  in  stages.  The  author's 
observations  of  30th  November  1912  (Figs.  123  and  124)  show  that  an 
intact  and  completely  developed  female  face  may  shrivel  up  and  show 
parallel  fissures,  such  as  are  also  shoAvn  in  earlier  stages  of  development. 
Such  a  process  of  involution  was  once  observed  by  Mme.  Bisson  on 
the  naked  body  of  the  medium.  The  process  of  indentation  and  fusion 
plays  a  great  part  in  embryonic  development,  and,  as  Hseckel  pointed 
out,  in  his  General  Morphology  of  Organisms,  there  is  no  hard  and  fast 
separation  between  the  building  of  regular  crystals  and  that  of  organic 
structures,  so  that  geometrical  forms  are  ultimately  the  foundation  of 
both. 

A  frequent  accompaniment  of  the  more  elaborate  materialisation 
processes  is  found  in  the  small  particles,  or  aggregates,  of  teleplastic 
matter  which  are  found  on  the  skin,  the  clothing,  or  in  the  neighbour- 
hood of  the  medium,  having  no  apparent  connection  with  the  main 
materialisation.  Thus,  on  15th  November  1910,  the  tips  of  the  left 
index  and  middle  fingers  are  enveloped  in  an  extremely  fine  veil-like 
fabric.  Smaller  subsidiary  materialisations  occurred  on  5th  November 
1911,  20th  April  1912,  and  30th  August  1912.  If  Eva's  performances 
consisted  of  fraudulent  manoeuvres,  with  objects  smuggled  in,  in  spite 

282  PHENOMENA    OF    MATERIALISATION 

of  the  control,  the  production  of  these  smaller  things,  which  can  only  be 
made  visible  by  enlargement,  or  by  special  photographic  processes,  is 
quite  unexplained,  whereas,  if  we  have  to  deal  with  an  unknown  for- 
mative process,  such  by-products  may  very  well  arise.  The  fact  that 
the  teleplastic  matter  leaves  behind  traces  mostly  of  a  liquid  or  semi- 
liquid  character  eliminates  many  hypotheses  based  upon  fraud  or 
hallucination,  and  must  also  profoundly  influence  our  ideas  of  its 
fundamental  character. 

It  is  too  early  to  formulate  hypotheses,  but  whatever  may  be  the 
laws  and  forces  governing  materialisations,  the  medium's  psyche  must  be 
brought  in  as  a  determining,  or,  at  least,  as  a  contributing,  factor.  Eva 
herself  has  no  artistic  talent  or  education  ;  nor  does  she  show  any  desire 
to  visit  Art  Collections,  or  otherwise  develop  her  own  artistic  sense. 
Mme  Bisson,  on  the  other  hand,  being  a  practical  artist,  must  have 
exerted  a  profound  influence  on  the  medium  by  her  authoritative 
suggestions.  Without  knowing  it,  Mme.  Bisson  must  have  played  a 
very  important  part  in  the  genesis  of  the  psycho-physical  images 
recorded.  Mme.  Bisson  was  often  able  to  obtain  materialisations  .of 
a  special  character  by  suggestion,  and  sometimes,  at  the  end  of  a  seance, 
when  the  medium  was  tired  and  wished  to  close  the  sitting,  she  secured 
the  repetition  of  a  phenomenon  by  energetic  suggestions. 

Eva  knew  M.  Bisson  when  he  was  about  sixty.  The  portrait  shown 
on  the  1st  June  1912  corresponds  to  his  appearance  at  thirty-eight. 
This  suggests  the  materialisation  of  a  memory  image  of  Mme.  Bisson, 
and  so  does  the  production  of  the  portrait  of  her  nephew.  The  produc- 
tion was  facilitated  by  Eva  having  seen  both  these  persons.  It  would 
be  quite  out  of  place  to  conclude,  from  the  materialisation  of  the  features 
of  these  persons,  that  the  spiritistic  view  should  be  adopted.  The 
spiritistic  view  is  also  weakened  by  the  undoubted  influence  of  the 
ideas  prevailing  among  the  sitters  upon  the  products  of  materialisation. 
The  phenomena  obtained  with  Eva  C.  may  be  considered  as  the  products 
of  a  still  unexplained  ideoplastic  capacity  of  the  mediumistic  con- 
stitution. 

The  materialisation  process  consists  of  two  factors,  one  of  which  is 
the  simple  spontaneous  secretion  and  formation  of  a  material  of  a  tran- 
sitory character,  while  the  other  is  the  utilisation  of  this  material  for 
the  production  of  forms,  images,  and  living  organs.  The  emanation  of 
the  teleplastic  ground  substance  is  the  first  requisite  for  the  ideoplastic 
process. 

The  foregoing  purely  hypothetical  hints  are  only  made  for  the 
purpose  of  taking  the  facts  observed  and  recorded  in  this  book  out  of 
the  region  of  the  marvellous,  and  of  spiritistic  faith,  into  the  region  of 
natural  law,  and  to  indicate  the  direction  in  which,  perhaps,  a  possible 
explanation  may  be  found. 

Thus,  for  the  unprejudiced  investigator,  the  medium  is  not  only 
the  unconscious  producer  of  phantasms,  but  is  the  physiological  source 
of  material  for  making  them  visible,  as  well  as  the  formative  power  in 
the  phenomena.  While  the  inspiration  and  the  genesis  of  the  medium- 
istic processes  appear  to  proceed  in  many  cases  from  the  somnambulic 
or  subliminal  consciousness,  suggestively  influenced  by  the  memory 
images  of  the  persons  taking  part  in  the  sittings. 

CONCLUSION  283 

CONCLUSION. 

In  a  comparative  survey  of  the  whole  of  the  teleplastic  productions  of 
the  medium  Eva  C,  we, are  struck  by  their  variety  and  the  wealth  of 
forms  which  mark  these  creations.  This  is  not  only  shown  in  the 
fantastic  lines  and  in  the  extraordinary  appearance  of  the  simple 
products  and  fragments  of  organs  which,  as  already  pointed  out  by 
Professor  von  Keller,  resemble  the  play  of  natural  forces  found  among 
creatures  which  are  half  animal  and  half  vegetable,  as  well  as  among 
corals  and  stalactites  ;  but  is  also  seen  in  the  tendency  towards  har- 
monious completeness,  artistic  composition,  and  vivacity  of  expression 
in  the  faces  and  phantom  forms. 

This  aesthetic  impulse  towards  formation  and  spatial  expression 
corresponds  to  the  fundamental  tendency  of  nature,  which  ever  pro- 
duces new  forms  and  shapes,  while  bearing  within  itself  its  own  laws 
and  conditions. 

The  observation  of  the  phenomena  in  the  photographic  records  from 
various  sides  leaves  no  doubt  of  the  fragmentary  character  of  that 
which  is  represented,  especially  where  we  see  the  reproduction  of  human 
creatures  and  members.  The  materialisation  usually  ends  in  the 
optically  perceptible  portion  of  that  which  is  exposed  to  the  light. 
Thus,  in  the  profile  images,  the  half  of  the  face  not  visible  to  the  observer 
is  usually  lacking.  Never  was  a  back  of  a  head  attached  to  a  face 
modelled  in  relief.  The  stereoscopic  transparencies,  when  carefully 
studied,  show  holes  and  black  spots  where,  perhaps,  a  right  eye  ought 
to  be.  On  the  full  phantoms  the  feet  are  wanting,  and  the  position  of 
a  hand  is  only  very  roughly  indicated.  We  can,  therefore,  with  the 
material  at  our  disposal,  lay  down  a  general  law  that  a  continuation  oj 
the  materialisation  of  organic  parts,  beyond  the  field  of  vision  of  the  observers, 
is  non-existent. 

While  in  a  real  living  being  the  plastic  anatomy  is  developed  in  all 
directions,  in  the  observations  here  described  only  the  visible  portions 
are  finished  and  brought  into  view,  and  these  are  limited  to  the  most 
necessary  means  of  expression.  It  is  true  that  in  the  shadow  of  the 
curtains  we  find  stalk-like  projections  and  connections  for  the  forms  and 
faces,  but  we  never  find  such  organs  and  parts  as  would  be  found  in 
living  organisms  as  necessary  supplements.  Here  we  have  undoubtedly 
an  intention  of  the  creative  force,  working  with  limited  means  and 
possibilities,  so  that  there  is  only  the  production  of  fugitive  material, 
a  more  or  less  well-developed  impression  of  form  fragments,  with  the 
object  of  producing  a  definite  impression  on  the  eye  of  the  beholder. 
This  raises  the  important  question  whether  the  whole  materialisation 
process  has  not  hitherto  been  misunderstood  and  falsely  interpreted 
by  exaggerating  the  analogy  of  these  teleplastic  productions  of  medium- 
ship  with  living  organisms  under  the  influence  of  the  "  spirit  "  hypo- 
thesis. In  discussing  this  question,  it  should  be  mentioned  that  the 
scanty  material  hitherto  published,  in  the  way  of  photographs  of  this 
kind,  contains  no  contradiction  of  the  experiences  gained  through 
Eva  C.  The  elucidation  of  this  important  point  must  be  reserved  for 
future  research. 

284  PHENOMENA    OF    MATERIALISATION 

If  we  attempt  to  analyse  the  simplest  teleplastic  processes,  there  are 
numerous  questions  which  we  cannot  answer  at  present. 

Are  the  changes  in  the  living  substance,  called  teleplasm,  produced 
by  known  mechanical  or  physical  forces  ? 

Does  the  teleplastic  material  resemble  the  most  primitive  living 
substance  by  consisting  of  a  colloidal  and  a  crystalloidal  solution,  such 
as  is  described  by  Thomas  Graham,  as  the  fundamental  property  of 
living  matter  ? 

Do  active  mechanical  agents,  with  the  help  of  fine  membranes, 
produce  assimilation  and  dissimilation  in  teleplasm  as  in  protoplasm, 
thus  accounting  for  the  phenomenon  of  growth  ? 

Are  its  spontaneous  movements  and  changes  of  form  comparable 
with  the  movements  of  the  amceba,  which  projects  pseudopods  through 
its  structureless  mass,  and  thus  creeps  across  the  field  of  the  microscope  ? 

Do  the  processes  of  materialisation  mean  the  transitory  formation, 
the  fugitive  and  evanescent  building-up,  of  multicellular  organs  and 
organisms,  whose  existence,  as  in  all  higher  creatures,  is  conditioned  by 
motion,  nutrition,  growth  and  reproduction  ? 

Does  the  rational,  positivist  point  of  view  apply  to  the  materialisation 
problem  at  all  ? 

Even  the  conception  of  vitalism,  or  biological  energy,  gives  no  real 
explanation.  A  description  is  no  explanation.  Science  reveals  causal 
connections,  and  shows  changes  to  be  the  effects  of  definite  causes,  but 
the  way  in  which  the  effect  results  from  the  cause  remains  unknown. 
"  The  falling  stone  in  this  sense  is  a  miracle  to  us,  for  we  do  not  know 
how  the  earth  manages  to  attract  the  stone.  Neither  do  we  know 
what  are  the  energies  whose  effects  we  perceive."^ 

But  all  the  daily  miracles  around  us  fulfil  definite  laws  within  a 
distinct  region  of  nature,  while  the  phenomena  described  in  this  book 
seem  to  lie  outside  them,  since,  at  present,  we  are  unable  to  find  any 
connecting  link  with  known  laws.  They  therefore  offer  a  large  field  to 
the  craze  for  the  marvellous  and  to  mystical  fancy. 

Considering  the  abysmal  contradiction  between  the  physical  pro- 
cesses of  mediumship  and  the  results  of  the  exact  sciences,  it  is  natural 
for  serious  investigators  to  assume  that  the  mediums  conjure  up  a  world 
of  spirits  by  means  of  painted  sheets  of  paper,  rather  than  that  we  have 
to  do  with  a  definite  region  of  fact.  For  science  is  not  yet  sufficiently 
advanced  to  assimilate,  without  an  effort,  these  new,  improbable,  and  yet 
authentic  results  of  observation.  But  that  is  no  reason  to  consider  this 
region  of  fact  as  devoid  of  interest.  Perhaps  some  investigator  will 
arise,  sooner  or  later,  who  will  find  it  worth  while  to  concern  himself 
seriously  with  the  mediumistic  problem,  and  to  re-examine  the  contents 
of  this  book. 

Let  us  hope  he  may  find  many  valuable  hints  for  his  own  studies. 

But  will  he  succeed  in  bringing  these  strange  riddles  nearer  solution 
and  satisfy  our  thirst  for  knowledge  ?  Or  will  he,  like  all  investigators 
who  have  hitherto  tried  to  raise  the  veil,  have  to  conclude  his  work 
with  the  words  "  We  do  not  know,"  and  perhaps  ask  again  the  old 
question  raised  by  Kepler :  "  Is  it  possible  that  the  whole  visible  world 
is  but  the  outer  shell  of  an  invisible  world  of  forces  ?  " 

^  Carl  Jentsch,  Odwald  und  die  Myatik.     Der  Tag,  1911. 

Part  II. 
OBSERVATIONS    1913-1919. 

INTRODUCTION. 

"Conflict  is  the  J  at  her  of  all  things.'' — Heraclitus. 

When  Du  Moncel,  on  11th  March  1878,  first  exhibited  to  the  French 
Academy  of  Sciences  the  phonograph,  a  savant,  named  Bouillaud,  took 
him  by  the  throat  and  called  him  a  swindler  and  a  ventriloquist.  This 
happened  in  the  presence  of  Camille  Flammarion.  According  to  some 
savants,  the  medium  Eva  C.  produced  some  of  the  materialisation 
phenomena  described  in  Part  I.  fraudulently  with  the  muscles  of  the 
stomach  and  oesophagus. 

But  since  the  rumination  hypothesis  would  only  apply  to  a  few  of 
the  phenomena,  the  medium  would  have  to  be  a  snake-charmer  and 
first-rate  conjuror  as  well,  and  would  be  wiser  to  exhibit  her  art  on  the 
stage  instead  of  leading  a  simple  and  retired  life. 

Even  should  the  medium  possess  all  these  talents,  they  would  not 
suffice  to  explain  the  facts  observed  by  the  author. 

Yet  the  criticism  advanced  in  the  daily  and  scientific  press  prefers 
to  deny  these  facts  and  to  regard  the  author  as  the  victim  of  a  deception 
extending  over  four  years. 

The  objections  put  forward  in  the  press  and  in  pamphlets  could  not 
be  answered  as  they  came,  since  it  was  often  necessary  to  deal  with 
some  of  them,  such  as  those  concerning  the  use  of  illustrations  from 
Le  Miroir,  by  means  of  new  experiments,  and  to  obtain  expert  opinions. 

The  world  war  which  broke  out  in  1914  interrupted  the  investigations 
and  discussions  for  several  years.  Yet  even  during  the  war  a  few  stray 
accounts  of  further  tests  appeared,  till,  in  1918,  Dr  Geley  published  his 
comprehensive  and  favourable  observations. 

The  material  published  after  the  issue  of  the  first  German  edition, 
with  some  chapters  from  the  author's  Kampf  um  die  Materialisations 
Phcenomene  ("  Controversy  concerning  Materialisation  Phenomena  "), 
is  comprised  in  the  present  Part  II.,  and  forms  an  important  supplement 
to  the  original  volume. 

In  addition,  some  analogous  experiences  with  other  mediums  are 
briefly  cited,  so  that  the  reader  now  not  only  gets  a  survey  of  the  ten 

285 

286  PHENOMENA    OF    MATERIALISATION 

years'  work  with  Eva  C,  but  is  shown  that  such  phenomena  are  not  so 
rare  as  one  might  expect,  and  that  they  show  great  similarities  in  their 
occurrence  and  development. 

The  illustrations  in  this  Part  II.,  in  so  far  as  they  are  not  repeated 
from  Part  I.,  are  made  by  Messrs  Hambock  at  Munich.  For  the  repro- 
ductions from  Le  Miroir  the  original  pages  have  been  used. 

Finally,  the  author  takes  much  pleasure  in  thanking  Colonel  Peter 
and  Prof.  Urban  for  their  co-operation  in  this  work. 

THE   RUMINATION   HYPOTHESIS. 

The  special  gift  of  Eva  C.  lies,  as  already  mentioned,  in  the  region  of 
teleplastics  or  materialisation.  The  only  possible  objection  which  can 
be  made  is  that  the  materialisation  products  are,  in  some  way,  fraudu- 
lently smuggled  into  the  stance  room.  The  business  of  the  control  is, 
therefore,  the  comparatively  simple  one  of  preventmg  the  medium 
from  bringing  in  objects  for  exhibition,  or  having  them  passed  to  her 
by  an  accomplice.  The  result  of  the  control  has  been  consistently 
negative,  and  therefore  favourable  to  the  medium. 

This  must  be  specially  emphasised  since  the  Munich  observers,  who 
doubted  the  genuineness  of  the  phenomena,  had  to  admit  that  "  nobody 
can  find  any  material  which  might  be  used  in  these  materialisations, 
either  before  or  after  the  sitting." 

Being  thus  driven  into  a  corner,  the  need  for  an  explanation  takes 
refuge  in  the  rumination  hypothesis,  which  asserts  that  the  stomach, 
or  the  gullet,  may  be  used  as  hiding-places  for  the  images  and  objects 
produced,  and  assumes  that  the  medium  is  an  expert  in  the  rumination 
process. 

One  of  the  supporters  of  this  theory,  now  advanced  for  the  first  time 
in  the  history  of  mediumistic  phenomena,  describes  the  process  as 
follows:  "  It  is  quite  simply  (!)  done  like  this:  Pictures  are  drawn, 
painted,  or  photographically  reproduced  on  chiffon  gauze,  after  the 
dressing  has  been  removed  in  hot  water.  These  pictures  are  then  cut 
out  along  their  contours.  The  same  can  be  done  with  gold-beaters'  skin, 
which  has  the  advantage  of  being  unaffected  by  moisture  (saliva  and 
gastric  juices).  It  is  also  very  thin,  and  therefore  occupies  a  small 
space  when  folded.  It  is  soft,  noiseless,  and  shows  no  traces  of  folding, 
crumpling,  or  rolling.  Such  things  are  swallowed  before  the  experi- 
ment. Among  other  things  there  are  rubber  gloves,  such  as  are  used 
for  operations,  objects  cut  out  in  the  shape  of  hands,  formless  shreds  of 
animal  mesentery,  as  well  as  catgut,  and  the  like,  which  can  be  inflated. 
All  these  can  be  swallowed  into  the  same  human  stomach. 

"  The  investigator,  of  course,  cannot  find  these  things  by  inspection, 
nor  even  by  means  of  X-rays.  They  can  only  be  discovered  by  the 
stomach-pump.  The  medium,  either  tied  up  or  held  by  the  hands  during 
the  sitting,  brings  up  these  things  noiselessly  behind  the  curtain  and 
unfolds  them  with  the  hands,  or  her  mouth,  on  her  knees,  which  are 
drawn  up  for  this  purpose  under  her  chin.  The  medium  then  suspends 
these  things  with  her  hands  or  her  mouth  at  the  curtain  by  means  of 

THE   RUMINATION   HYPOTHESIS  287 

small  hooks  attached  to  the  preparations  (twisted  pins).  These  hooks 
are  turned  inwards  before  swallowing,  so  as  to  produce  no  injury.  The 
suspensions  of  these  hooks  can  be  traced  by  pin-holes  actually  found  in 
the  curtain.  The  removal  of  the  materialisations  is  also  affected  by 
the  hands  or  the  mouth.  When  the  flash-light  is  turned  on  the  medium 
regularly  simulates  a  strong  nervous  shock,  makes  convulsive  defensive 
movements,  frees  her  hands  from  control,  and  closes  the  curtain  as  if 
for  defence.  Then,  behind  the  closed  curtain,  the  medium  swallows 
the  objects,  after  hastily  crumpling  them  up  into  a  small  compass. 
Agility  is  not  witchcraft,  but  a  matter  of  practice." 

The  final  stage  in  this  fraudulent  manipulation  is  imagined  by  the 
critic  to  be  as  follows  :  "  The  materialisations  are  then  vomited  at 
home,  or  if  they  keep  lying  in  the  stomach,  because  they  have  perhaps 
unfolded  themselves,  they  are  removed,  in  a  natural  way,  by  means  of 
mashed  potatoes  or  stewed  plums." 

The  process  here  described  therefore  presupposes  :  Painted  or 
drawn  images  on  gold-beaters'  skin,  chiffon  gauze,  paper,  or  some 
textile  fabric,  to  which  twisted  pins  or  small  hooks  are  attached,  and 
for  the  other  experiments  the  smuggling  of  shreds  of  mesentery,  or  the 
guts  of  cats  or  lambs,  the  repeated  closing  of  the  curtain,  and  rising 
from  the  chair  for  the  purpose  of  fastening  these  things  to  the  curtain, 
which  is  supposed  to  be  done  exclusively  with  the  mouth,  and  finally — 
"  mashed  potatoes  and  stewed  plums  !  " 

The  presence  of  prepared  images  is  contradicted  by  the  technical 
opinion  given  by  the  Manager  of  the  Hambock  Institute  of  Graphic  Art. 
The  structures  resemble  animal  and  vegetable  forms,  and  show  no 
marks  indicating  manual  work  or  manufactured  fabrics.  For  this  and 
other  reasons  stated  in  the  report,  we  cannot  be  dealing  with  prepared 
images.     {See  also  the  discussion  at  the  end  of  Munich  Sittings.) 

The  production  by  rumination  cannot  be  assumed  in  the  case  of  a 
whole  extensive  group  of  phenomena,  in  which  odd  forms  and  fragments 
of  members  and  faces  are  generated  before  the  eyes  of  the  observers, 
without  the  participation  of  the  medium's  mouth  or  respiratory  organs, 
while  her  body  is  motionless  (knees  immobile,  hands  under  visible 
control,  or  held  by  the  observers,  and  head  visible  in  a  red  light  of 
about  one  hundred  candle-power).  In  these  conditions  the  materialisa- 
tions have  been  observed  to  execute  automatic  movements  (changes  of 
shape  and  of  place).  Nor  can  the  instantaneous  appearance  and  dis- 
appearance of  the  structures  be  explained  in  this  way.  The  develop- 
ment of  a  forearm  and  hand  out  of  a  white  patch  in  front  of  the  medium's 
feet  (Fig.  26),  the  pressing  of  fingers  provided  with  nails  into  the  back 
of  the  author's  hand,  three  times  in  succession,  while  the  medium's 
hands  were  held  and  her  body  was  visible  and  motionless  (Fig.  22),  the 
luminosity  of  the  material  in  the  dark  (Fig.  141),  are  all  examples  which 
tell  against  this  theory.  More  than  half  the  observations  are  excluded 
from  discussion  in  connection  with  the  rumination  hypothesis  by  the 
fact  that  they  had  no  connection  with  the  mouth. 

It  has,  indeed,  been  proved,  partly  by  photography,  in  another  large 
class  of  experiments,  that  the  substance  often  emerges  from  the  mouth 
and  disappears  in  the  same  way,  and  that,  therefore,  the  organs  of 
respiration  and  digestion  may  be  concerned  in  the  production  of  the 

288  PHENOMENA    OF    MATERIALISATION 

transitory  material,  but  one  cannot  see  how  solid  and  plastic  objects, 
the  size  of  human  faces,  could  be  swallowed  and  brought  up  again,  out 
of  the  stomach,  without  attracting  attention.  The  help  of  the  knees 
and  hands  is  eliminated  by  the  new  control  introduced  in  November  1912 
(hands  held,  or  visible,  during  the  whole  sitting),  and  also  by  a  large 
number  of  previous  experiments. 

That  flat  substances  can  be  withdrawn  from  their  envelopes,  spread 
out,  smoothed,  set  up,  folded  up  again,  and  compressed  into  a  given 
small  volume,  and  all  in  one  or  two  seconds,  is  an  assertion  which,  in 
itself,  requires  proof. 

In  the  sitting  of  9th  May  1913  the  medium  Eva  C.  was  completely 
sewn  into  a  tricot  garment  in  one  piece,  which  only  left  her  hands  free. 
Her  head  was  enveloped  in  a  veil,  sewn  on  to  the  neck  of  the  garment 
all  round,  and  her  hands  remained  visible  in  the  light  during  the  whole 
sitting,  and  took  no  part.  The  materialisation  phenomenon,  as  shown 
by  the  photograph.  Fig.  150,  developed  outside  this  cage,  which  enclosed 
her  whole  body,  and  could  not,  therefore,  have  been  produced  by 
rumination,  unless  we  assume  that  the  substance  penetrated  the  veil. 
Such  a  penetration  could  be  photographically  proved  under  the  same 
rigid  conditions  in  the  case  of  two  different  mediums.  The  process  by 
which  the  material  penetrated  through  the  meshes  of  the  veil  has  no 
connection  with  the  act  of  rumination,  and  in  this,  as'well  as  in  previous 
occurrences,  other  hypotheses  must  bebrought  forward  for  an  explanation. 

Finally,  rumination  presupposes  an  abnormal  functioning  of  the 
stomach  and  gullet,  as  well  as  the  dilatation  of  the  walls  of  the  stomach. 
In  the  two  mediums  with  whom  the  author  experimented  (girls  of 
twenty-six  and  nineteen  respectively)  such  pathological  peculiarities  are 
not  found,  nor  could  they  have  been  hidden  from  observation  for  four 
years.     There  are  no  indications  pointing  in  that  direction. 

It  has  also  been  objected  that  the  medium  can  always  prepare 
herself  behind  the  closed  curtain,  so  that  there  is  always  a  possibility 
of  making  materialisations  appear  without  any  apparent  participation 
by  the  mouth. 

This  objection  also  does  not  apply.  Hands  and  feet  remained 
visible  even  when  the  curtain  was  closed.  In  a  number  of  sittings  the 
materialisation  process  even  commenced  during  hypnotisation,  and  the 
author  had  hardly  time  to  open  the  cameras.  In  the  sitting  of  17th  May 
1910,  which  also  began  with  an  open  curtain,  the  author  sat  by  the 
medium  in  the  cabinet  and  observed  the  evolution  out  of  Eva's  mouth 
of  a  flocculent  substance,  which  in  no  way  corresponded  to  the  supposed 
scheme  of  rumination.  The  production  of  complete  head  images  often 
took  place  so  quickly  after  hypnosis  (e.g.,  1st  June  1912)  that  the 
fraudulent  technique  required  for  rumination  was  rendered  impossible 
owing  to  the  shortness  of  the  time  available. 

On  1st  June  1910  the  phenomena  were  observed  with  an  open 
curtain.  At  the  sitting  of  28th  October  1910  the  curtain  was  open 
from  the  beginning.  Further  records  of  curtains  being  open  will  be 
found  in  the  reports  of  3rd  November  and  28tli  December  1910,  7th  June 
and  16th  August  1911,  and  11th  September  1912. 

Although  the  above  arguments,  which  could  easily  be  multiplied, 
dispose  of  the  hypothesir  of  the  rumination  of  swallowed  objects,  that 

THE:  RUMINATION   HYPOTHESIS  289 

hypothesis  was  further  investigated  in  a  sitthig  on  26th  November  1913 
in  Paris.  The  initial  and  final  examination  of  the  medium  (mouth, 
nose,  and  hair,  as  well  as  a  gynsecological  examination),  of  the  seance 
costume  and  the  cabinet,  conducted  by  the  Paris  physician,  Dr  Bourbon, 
and  the  author,  were  negative.  M.  Bourdet  and  Mme.  Bisson  were  also 
present.  Eva  C.  dined  at  seven  o'clock.  The  sitting  commenced  at 
8.45  P.M.  in  a  feeble  white  light.  Hands  and  knees  were  visibly  inactive 
during  the  whole  sitting.  The  medium  did  not  leave  her  chair  in  the 
cabinet  for  a  moment.  The  curtains  were  open  while  the  phenomenon 
took  place. 

Between  9  p.m.  and  9.10  p.m.,  without  the  help  of  the  hands  or  knees, 
a  flowing  white  substance  emerged  from  the  medium's  mouth,  which 
was  inclined  towards  the  left.  It  was  about  20  inches  long  and  8  mches 
broad.  It  lay  on  the  breast  of  the  dress,  spread  out,  and  formed  a 
white  head-like  disk,  with  a  face  profile  turned  to  the  right,  and  of  life 
size.  Even  after  the  flash-light  was  ignited  the  curtain  remained  wide 
open.  At  the  same  moment  the  author  illuminated  the  structure  with 
an  electric  torch,  and  found  that  it  formed  a  folded  strip,  which  receded 
slowly  into  the  medium's  mouth,  and  remained  visible  until  the  sittmg 
closed  at  9.20  p.m. 

While  m  the  state  of  hypnosis,  the  medium  rose  from  her  chair  and 
took  an  emetic  tendered  to  her  by  the  author.^ (1  gramme  ipecacuanha 
and  I  gramme  tartar  emetic),  was  completely  undressed  while  standing 
half  in  and  half  out  of  the  cabinet,  and  examined  m  detail  by  the  author 
and  Dr  Bourbon,  who  took  charge  of  the  seance  costume,  and  also 
examined  it  carefully.  The  final  examination  of  the  cabinet  and  chair 
gave  no  result.  Dressed  in  a  dressing-gown,  Eva  C.  was  then  laid  on 
a  couch  in  the  room,  and  was  not  left  unobserved  for  a  moment.  , 

^:  After  two  further  doses  of  the  same  strength,  vomiting  set  in  at 
9.30  p.m.,  which  brought  up  the  contents  of  the  stomach.  The  quantity 
was  about  a  pint,  and  was  taken  charge  of  by  the  author,  who  did  not 
give  it  out  of  his  hands  until  he  handed  it  over  to  the  Masselin  Laboratory 
in  Paris  for  analysis.  The  vomit  was  brown  in  colour,  and  besides  the 
wafers  taken  with  the  powders  there  was  no  trace  of  any  white  substance 
such  as  observed  by  us.  The  detailed  report  of  the  Laboratory  m  ques- 
tion, dated  29th  November  1913,  closes  with  the  words  :  "  The  final 
result  of  the  examination  shows  that  the  vomit  consisted  exclusively 
of  food  products  and  the  emetics,  and  contained  fragments  of  meat, 
fruit,  and  vegetables,  probably  mushrooms,  which  were  found  in  pieces 
of  considerable  size.  The  rest  of  the  contents  consisted  of  food  in  an 
advanced  state  of  digestion.  There  was  not  the  slightest  trace  of  a 
body  whose  appearance  or  histological  structure  gave  the  impression 
of  a  foreign  body,  or  of  a  substance  not  used  for  nutrition,  and,  in 
particular,  there  was  no  trace  of  paper  or  chiffon."  Although  this 
experiment  is  a  sufficient  refutation  of  the  rumination  hypothesis, 
Eva  C.  announced  her  readiness  to  submit  on  another  occasion  to  the 
process  of  stomach  rinsing.  A  record  was  made  of  the  sitting,  and  was 
signed  by  all  those  present.  The  above  procedure  may  be  taken  as  a 
defuiite  proof  of  the  inadequacy  of  the  rumination  hypothesis  to  explain 
the  phenomena  observed  to  develop  from  Eva's  mouth.  So  long  as 
images  like  those  published  in  this  book  have  not  been  brought  up  by 

290  PHENOMENA    OF   MATERIALISATION 

rumination,  correctly  exposed,  and  disposed  of  in  the  same  way,  without 
the  use  of  the  hands  or  knees,  and  so  long  as  a  technique  assumed  by 
the  critics  is  not  proved  to  be  possible  by  evidential  experiments,  this 
attempted  explanation  must  be  considered  as  an  hypothesis  itself 
requiring  proof. 

EXPERT  OPINION   ON  THE   FRAUDULENT   USE  OF  CERTAIN 
MATERIALS   FOR  PRODUCING  TELEPLASTIC  IMAGES. 

Although  the  proper  movements  of  the  formations  and  their  shapes 
tell  against  the  rumination  hypothesis,  Colonel  Peter  has  made  experi- 
ments on  the  use  of  delicate  fabrics  for  deceptive  purposes. 
His  opinion  is  as  follows  : — 

"No.  I.  'Crumpled  and  folded  papers.' — I  drew  some  heads  with 
chalk  and  charcoal  on  the  finest  tissue  papers,  fixed  them  and  folded 
them  up  in  small  pellets  or  rolls,  which  could  easily  be  concealed  in 
the  mouth.  I  then  went  into  a  dark  room,  in  order  to  fix  the  paper 
head  to  a  black  curtain.  At  once  I  came  up  against  a  great  difficulty. 
It  was  not  at  all  easy  to  unfold  the  moist  pellet  in  the  dark.  The  paper 
tore  in  several  places,  although  I  used  every  care.  Then  I  did  not  know 
which  was  the  right  side  for  exposure.  When  I  had  succeeded,  after 
patient  labour,  in  stickmg  up  the  head,  I  was  faced  with  new  difficulties. 
The  paper  always  collapsed  and  folded  up  again.  Finally,  I  had  to  use 
four  or  five  pins.  At  last  the  '  phenomenon  '  stuck.  Then  I  turned 
on  the  light  and  found  that  I  had  pinned  the  head  upside  down  !  It  is 
quite  unthinkable  that  all  this  delicate  and  difficult  work  should  be 
done  in  a  short  time  in  the  dark  by  any  person.  The  assertion  that  the 
medium  does  it  when  her  hands  are  free  for  a  moment,  or  even  with  her 
mouth,  is  absurd.  The  images  show  their  mode  of  production  ;  the 
thousands  of  small  folds  or  rents  do  not  allow  of  the  production  of  a 
single  smooth  surface,  as  shown  in  nearly  all  the  pictures  in  Dr  von 
Schrenck's  book.  The  first  comparison  shows  that  the  phenomena 
cannot  be  produced  in  this  way. 

"  No.  2.  '  Gold-beaters'  skin.' — I  doubt  if  any  one  who  considers  this 
a  suitable  material  for  the  fraud  in  question  has  ever  seen  gold-beaters' 
skin,  for  when  I  had  acquired  a  piece  the  size  of  a  human  head,  I  saw 
at  once  that,  on  account  of  its  yellowish-grey  colour  and  its  transparency, 
it  was  quite  unsuitable.  A  drawing  in  charcoal  or  the  like  is  hardly 
visible  when  the  skin  is  put  on  a  dark  curtain.  I  had  to  put  it  on  top 
of  a  white  tissue  paper.  In  spite  of  the  double  layer  the  head  could  be 
folded  into  a  very  small  compass.  The  unfolding  and  attachment  of  the 
picture  in  the  dark  room  was  attended  by  the  same  difficulties  as^before. 
"  The  flash-light  photograph  (Fig.  181)  inmiediately  betrays  the 
origin  of  the  '  phenomenon.'  One  sees  at  once  that  there  is  no  plastic 
development.  The  thin  white  foundation  is  recognisable  throughout. 
Shadows  are  lacking,  or  are  wrongly  distributed.  The  crumpling  and 
folding  into  a  small  compass  distorted  the  face,  especially  the  eyes, 
nose  and  mouth.  It  is  evident  that  the  phenomena  described  cannot 
be  reproduced  with  gold-beaters'  skin. 

Fig.    iSi.     Imitation   on   gold    beaters     skin. 

Fig.   182.     Imitation  on  chiffon. 

MATERIALS  FOR  PRODUCING  TELEPLASTIC  IMAGES      291 

"  No.  3.  '  Pieces  of  Chiffon,'  even  strongly  compressed,  occupy  more 
space.  The  drawing  of  a  Hfe-sized  human  head  on  this  material  could 
not  be  concealed  in  the  mouth.  If  one  has  got  hold  of  the  packet  in 
the  dark,  the  difficulty  is  here  not  the  unfolding,  but  the  sticking  up. 
It  requires  several  pins. 

"  The  picture  (Fig.  182)  shows  the  work  of  the  loom,  especially  at 
the  margins,  and  the  folds  distort  the  features.  The  conclusion  is  that 
the  fraud  cannot  be  carried  out  with  chiffon. 

"  For  the  methods  Nos  .  1  to  3,  it  must  be  assumed  that  the  medium 
herself  can  draw,  which  is  known  not  to  be  the  case  ;  or  that  she  has  an 
able  assistant  who  provides  the  images  for  the  phenomena.  If  the 
critic  says  that  '  artists  have  given  the  private  opinion  that  the  images 
are  at  no  higher  artistic  level  than  typical  heads  on  cigar  boxes,  or  in 
fashion  journals,'  we  can  only  reply  that  their  judgment  must  be 
subordinated|to  that  of  an  authority  like  Professor  von  Keller. 

"  No.  4.  '  Images  are  taken  from  the  illustrated  journal  Le  Miroir 
and  gone  over  with  charcoal,  chalk,  etc.,  in  such  a  way  that  the  origin 
is  no  longer  recognisable.' 

"A  simple  practical  experiment  shows  that  this  assertion  cannot  be 
substantiated.  The  picture  in  the  flash-light  shows  a  lack  of  contrast. 
The  folds  of  the  paper  are  easily  recognised. 

"  General  Conclusion. — The  pictures  and  fragments  obtained  by 
Dr  von  Schrenck  in  the  sittings  with  Eva  C.  cannot  be  produced  with 
paper  or  by  masks  of  the  materials  suggested." 

Besides  the  rumination  hypothesis,  our  opponents  have  advanced 
a  number  of  unverifiable  assertions,  consisting  largely  of  gossip  and 
slander,  against  the  medium  and  her  protectress.  These  assertions  are 
composed  of  alleged  facts  which  on  close  examination  turn  out  to  be 
quite  unfounded,  unjustified  assumptions  or  allegations  due  to  the 
negative,  subjective  predisposition  of  the  critic. 

It  is  fairly  well  known  that  every  publication  about  mediumistic 
phenomena  is  followed,  after  a  brief  interval,  by  a  sensational  report  of 
an  exposure.  In  view  of  the  extreme  readiness  of  many  people  to 
credit  newspaper  reports,  it  is  not  surprising  that  they  are  accepted  in 
preference  to  observations  which  conflict  with  popular  opinion  and 
scientific  orthodoxy.  Such  a  typical  development  took  place  after  the 
appearance  of  Richet's  report,  and  also  after  the  first  publication  of  my 
work.  A  serious  critic  should  take  as  the  basis  of  his  arguments,  not 
the  sensational  reports  of  a  newspaper,  or  second-  or  third-hand  accounts, 
but  only  the  authentic  originals  with  their  appended  documents.  In 
some  cases  a  single  encounter  with  the  subject  of  our  investigations  is 
claimed  as  a  qualification  superior  to  years  of  study  and  experimental 
work.  This  is  really  to  submit  knowledge  to  the  arbitrament  of  ignor- 
ance. The  expert  is  to  acknowledge  the  layman  as  his  judge  !  In 
spite  of  the  general  experience  that  the  mediumistic  phenomena  "  depend 
upon  distinct  physical  and  very  delicate  psychic  conditions,  that  the 
experimental  investigation  requires  much  patience,  knowledge  and 
care,  the  lay  mind  retains  the  characteristic  point  of  view  that  the 
phenomena  must  occur  without  a  fulfilment  of  their  natural  conditions. 

292  PHENOMENA    OF    MATERIALISATION 

on  paiii'of  denying  them  recognition."  It  is  unfortunate  that  learned 
men,  who  see  the  phenomena  for  the  first  time,  commit  the  error  of 
supposing  that  their  entry  into  the  arena  marks  the  beginning  of  the 
proper  investigation  of  mediumistic  phenomena.  They  disregard  the 
copious  hterature  and  the  many  strictly  scientific  reports  of  their  col- 
leagues, such  as  the  numerous  unrefuted  results  obtained  by  eminent 
investigators  with  the  medium  Eusapia  Paladino  (the  Italian  savants, 
Morselli,  Porro,  Foa,  Botazzi,  and  Luciani,  as  well  as  the  report  of  the 
French  Commission,  edited  by  Professor  Courtier).  Nor  do  they  take 
into  consideration  the  many  years  of  observation  devoted  by  the  author 
to  the  same  medium.  They  demand  thai  a  judgment  should  be  based 
upon  the  few  positive  sittings  which  they  have  themselves  attended. 
Even  if  the  author's  results  with  the  two  mediums  (which  do  not  necessi- 
tate the  spiritistic  hypothesis)  could  be  reduced  to  faulty  observation 
and  deception,  such  a  considerable  remnant  of  facts  vouched  for  by 
other  observers  would  remain,  that,  as  Ostwald  says,  we  should  have 
to  try  to  assimilate  them. 

FRONT  PAGE  ILLUSTRATIONS  FROM  THE 
JOURNAL  LE   MIROIR. 

It  was  to  be  expected  that  the  face  and  head  images  published  in  the 
works  of  the  author  and  Mme.  Bisson,  appearing,  as  they  do,  in  the 
form  of  isolated  flat  or  mask-like  forms,  with  or  without  a  drapery  of 
veils,  should  meet  with  severe  criticism.  As  already  discussed  in  detail 
in  the  chapter  on  negative  points,  a  superficial  examination  of  these 
photographs  must,  on  account  of  their  pictorial  character  and  other 
resemblances  to  drawings  sharply  cut  out,  suggest  fraud,  unless  the 
experimental  conditions  are  taken  into  account,  and  this  is,  apparently, 
confirmed  by  the  folded,  crossed,  torn  and  crumpled  appearance  of 
many  of  these  productions. 

This  circumstance  has  been  exploited  by  the  Brothers  Durville  of 
Paris,  owners  of  an  institute  for  animal  magnetism  and  massage,  and 
proprietors  of  a  book-selling  and  publishing  busmess  for  the  literature 
of  the  subject.  In  the  journal  The  Psychic  Magazine,  founded  by  them 
on  1st  January  1914,  they  published  a  series  of  articles  directed  against 
Mme.  Bisson's  book. 

Their  collaborator.  Miss  B.  Barkley,  claims  to  have  identified  a 
nmnber  of  the  head  images  produced  by  Eva  C,  and  pubhshed  in  our 
works.  She  says,  in  No.  I.  of  the  magazine  mentioned :  "  In 
Mme.  Bisson's  book  there  are  no  real  materialisations,  but  only  pictorial 
representations  of  faces.  All  these  belong  to  well-known  personages. 
The  medium  took  her  choice  among  the  celebrities  of  the  moment, 
contenting  herself,  in  a  childish  manner,  with  defacing  certain  pictures 
by  a  few  ridiculous  and  badly-placed  retouchmgs."  She  continues  : 
"  Take,  for  instance.  Figs.  119  to  121  "  (in  the  author's  work.  Figs.  118 
to  120),  "  which  show  the  features  of  a  woman.  The  inner  camera 
registered  on  Fig.  112  "  (the  author's  Fig.  119)  "  the  word  '  Miroir.' 
The  medium  therefore  used  the  journal  Le  Miroir  for  her  images.  .  .  . 
Now,  it  is  remarkable  that  the  heads  are  nearly  always  the  same  size 

ILLUSTRATIONS  FROM  THE  JOURNAL  LE  MIROIR       293 

as  that  of  the  medium  "  (incorrect — author).     "  We  have  therefore  to 
deal  with  fraud  by  the  latter." 

The  lack  of  clearness  in  the  above  expressions  concerning  Figs.  118 
to  120  produced,  in  the  translation  into  German,  the  wrong  impression 
that  these  belong  to  a  single  series  of  images  produced  at  the  same 
sitting,  so  that  some  critics  have  erroneously  supposed  that  on  one  side 
of  the  exposed  phenomenon  the  word  '  Miroir  '  was  to  be  read,  and, 
on  the  other,  a  female  face  was  to  be  seen.  This  supposition  is  not 
supported  by  the  photographic  data.  For  the  picture  representing  the 
side  view  from  within  the  cabinet  (Fig.  119),  and  containing  the  word 
'  Miroir,'  was  produced  in  the  sitting  of  27th  November  1912,  and 
this  isolated  phenomenon  had  nothing  to  do  with  the  head  image 
(Fig.  120).  The  sitting  of  29th  November  was  negative  as  regards 
materialisations.  It  was  only  at  the  next  experiment  on  30th  November 
1912  that  a  well-developed  female  face  (Fig.  120)  could  be  photographed, 
standing  on  the  medium's  head  The  photographic  results  obtained 
on  27th|  and  30th  November  1912  (Figs.  118,  119  and  120)  are 
therefore  quite  independent  of  each  other. 

The  heads  of  celebrities  reproduced  on  the  front  pages  of  the  journal 
Le  Miroir  are  a  little  below  life-size,  and  are  all  in  black  and  white 
autotype. 

Miss  Barkley's  allegations  were  taken  up  by  the  Neue  Wiener 
Tagehlatt,  and  elaborated  as  follows  :  "  Miss  Eva  prepared  the  heads 
before  every  seance,  and  endeavoured  to  make  them  unrecognisable. 
A  clean-shaven  face  was  decorated  with  a  beard.  Grey  hairs  became 
black  curls,  a  broad  forehead  was  made  into  a  narrow  one.  But,  in 
spite  of  all  her  endeavours,  she  could  not  obliterate  certain  characteristic 
lines.  I  (Miss  Barkley)  eliminated  the  disguises  and  reproduced  the 
originals  from  the  ghost  pictures.  There  is,  first  of  all,  a  picture  of 
M.  Poincare.  The  hair  of  the  President  of  the  Republic  has  been 
altered  and  blackened,  and  his  face  has  been  lengthened,  but  all  the 
other  characteristic  lines  of  his  face  remained.  In  a  similar  manner  I 
have  established  the  identity  of  all  the  other  ghosts.  I  find  among 
them  the  heads  of  President  Wilson,  of  Paul  Deschanel,  the  King  of 
Bulgaria,  and  several  eminent  actresses  of  the  Comedie  Fran^aise." 

According  to  the  same  journal,  on  30th  December  1913  the  medium 
is  supposed  to  have  photographed  every  picture  after  these  retouching 
operations.  The  journal  then  adds  :  "  A  tall  ghost  in  white  drapery 
was  Ferdinand  of  Bulgaria,  only  thinner.  And  another  ghost  is  the 
beautiful  actress  Mona  Delza,  only  deprived  of  her  beautiful  hair  and  of 
her  eyebrows." 

The  Parisian  daily  Le  Matin  did  not  allow  such  an  opportunity  for 
a  sensation  to  escape,  and  published  a  whole  series  of  articles  (15th,  26th, 
27th  and  29th  December  1913  and  2nd,  3rd,  5th  and  8th  January  1913) 
centring  round  Miss  Barklej'^'s  alleged  discovery. 

Before  proceeding  to  a  strict  examination  of  the  material  brought 
forward  by  Miss  Barkley  to  support  her  serious  accusation,  I  may  refer 
to  some  explanatory  remarks  regarding  these  pictures  published  in 
Part  I.  It  seems,  in  the  first  instance,  to  be  faulty  logic  to  derive  a 
proof  of  fraud  from  the  constitution  of  the  materialised  object,  since 
there  is  always  the  possibility  that  such  apparently  suspicious  sub- 

294  PHENOMENA    OF    MATERIALISATION 

stances  may  be  produced  by  the  medium  under  conditions  excluding 
all  fraud.  In  this  connection  I  may  refer  to  the  discussion  in  the 
section  on  negative  points  and  the  hypothesis  of  fraud.  The  further 
question  as  to  whether,  in  the  sittings  referred  to,  the  conditions  were 
so  arranged  that  fraudulent  manoeuvres,  enabling  the  medium  to  hide 
and  smuggle  in  such  pictures,  were  impossible,  must  be  answered  in 
the  affirmative.  In  the  sitting  of  27th  November  1912,  in  which  the 
word  "  Miroir  "  was  produced,  both  the  cabinet  (chair,  walls,  floor  and 
curtains)  and  the  medium's  body  (dressed  only  in  tights  and  a  black 
apron  dress)  were  examined  before  and  after  the  sitting.  Eva  C.  was 
sewn  into  the  dress  at  the  waist,  the  back,  the  neck  and  the  sleeves. 

Still  in  the  white  light,  and  just  before  hypnosis,  Eva's  hands, 
being  in  front  of  the  curtain,  and  holding  both  flaps,  were  laid  on  her 
knees,  and  remained  there  illuminated  with  the  red  light  during  the 
two  hours  of  the  sitting.  At  the  extinction  of  the  Avhite  light, 
Mme.  Bisson  held  Eva's  hands.  The  record  was  kept  during  the  sitting, 
the  times  being  correctly  stated. 

In  this  sitting  also  the  medium's  hands  remained  outside  the  curtain, 
visible  in  the  red  light  (one  hundred  candle-power)  until  the  close  of 
the  sitting,  and  could  not  have  been  used  for  the  alleged  unpacking  and 
fastening  of  a  disk-like  structure  on  her  hair,  on  the  interior  of  which 
the  word  "  Miroir  "  was  printed. 

Immediately  on  the  ignition  of  the  magnesium  light  at  10,42  p.m., 
the  phenomenon  disappeared  without  a  trace.  The  final  examination 
of  the  medium  and  the  cabinet  was  negative.  How  could  this  absolute 
disappearance  take  place  in  the  fraction  of  a  second  ?  The  author,  by 
the  way,  closes  the  account  of  this  sitting  with  the  words :  "  1  can  at 
present  form  no  opinion  concerning  this  curious  result." 

The  picture  which  Miss  Barkley  describes  as  resembling  President 
Poincar6  was  taken  by  the  author  at  the  sitting  of  6th  March  1913. 
Before  this,  as  before  every  other  sitting,  the  cabinet  and  the  chair  were 
examined.     {See  report  of  the  Sitting  of  6th  March  1913.) 

The  second  photograph  taken  during  this  sitting  is  reproduced  in 
Figs.  142  and  143,  and  is  supposed  to  resemble  President  Poincare,  as 
regards  the  shape  of  the  tie  !  The  first  picture  during  the  same  sitting 
shows  a  self-luminous  materialisation. 

Let  us  assume  for  the  moment  that  Miss  Barkley  is  right.  How 
would  the  medium  have  been  able  to  hide  the  Miroir  reproduction,  to 
unravel  it,  to  expose  it  on  her  head,  and  to  make  it  disappear  without 
a  trace  ?  The  movements  observed  in  the  head  when  first  seen  gave 
the  impression  of  a  filmy  substance  and  not  of  paper,  and  whence  the 
accompanying  phenomena  ?  and  what  is  the  connection  between  the 
self-luminous  neuroblastic  structure  and  the  picture  from  Le  Miroir  ? 
Is  it  rationally  thinkable  that,  amidst  the  most  puzzling  phenomena 
which  are  sometimes  exhibited  even  on  the  medium's  naked  body, 
suddenly  a  Miroir  reproduction  should  appear?  That  is  not  only 
improbable,  considering  the  course  of  the  sitting,  but  is  impossible  on 
account  of  the  experimental  conditions  observed  during  this  sitting. 

The  materialisation  identified  with  President  Wilson  (Fig.  136)  was 
taken  by  Mme.  Bisson  alone,  whereas  the  one  provided  with  the  three 
warts,  also  identified  with  President  Poincare  (Fig.  149),  was  obtained 

Fig.    183.     Author's    photograph    of    27    November,    1912,    enlarged. 

repeated.) 

(Fig.    119 

•    •                      \ 

J 

bJ^     . 

i 

Wf^ 

■    ■'— ^, 

Fig.  184.  Top  left:  See  fig.  1S3.  Bottom  left:  Author's  attempt  to  imitate 
Fig.  183  BY  exposing  the  title  page  of  "Miroir"  against  Eva  C.  Top  and 
bottom  right:  Imitation  experiments  with  title  of  "Miroir"  and  portrait 
of  President  Poincare,  by  Dr.   Hauberrisser.     Photographic   conditions  the 

same  as  at  the  sittings. 

ILLUSTRATIONS  FROM  THE  JOURNAL  LE  MIROIR       295 

in  the  presence  of  the  Paris  physician  Dr  Bourbon,  while  the  medium's 
head  was  entirely  sewn  up  in  a  veil,  and  while  her  hands  remained 
visible  outside  the  curtain  during  the  Avhole  sitting. 

Miss  Barkley  now  owes  us  a  proof  that  under  such  conditions  a 
Miroir  picture  could  be  exposed. 

Miss  Barkley's  assertion  that  our  books  contain  no  true  materialisa- 
tions, but  only  pictorial  representations  of  heads  and  faces,  can  surely 
only  mean  portraits  reproduced  on  a  flat  surface.  But  in  answer  to 
this  we  may  refer  to  the  arguments  brought  forward  on  page  280, 
Part  I. 

All  these  careful  individual  observations,  the  regular  recurrence  of 
the  same  process  of  development  and  disappearance,  and  especially  the 
plasticity  of  many  faces,  as  proved  by  mathematical  and  stereoscopic 
considerations,  cannot  be  brought  into  harmony  with  Miss  Barkley's 
hypothesis,  which,  in  any  case,  is  based  only  on  very  few  appearances. 
Although  the  conditions  of  the  control  at  the  sitting  of  27th  November 
1912,  in  which  the  word  Miroir  was  produced,  excluded  fraudulent 
manipulation,  so  that  the  phenomena  obtained  must  be  declared  to  be 
genuine,  I  shall  yet  examine  the  objections  of  the  critics  who  utter  the 
suspicion  that  the  heading  of  the  journal  Le  Miroir  might  have  been 
exposed  in  this  case  (Fig.  183). 

In  order  to  examine  this  question  independently,  the  author  made 
test  experiments  with  two  title-pages  of  Le  Miroir  of  the  year  1912, 
reconstructing  the  photographic  conditions  of  the  sittings  (Fig.  184). 

In  all  cases,  as  shown  by  the  expert  opinion  of  Dr  Hauberrisser,  the 
type  comes  out  much  too  weak  in  comparison  with  the  strong  develop- 
ment of  the  original  letters  on  our  negative.  Now,  we  could  hardly 
assume  that  the  colour  and  shape  of  the  letters  could  be  increased 
by  any  transfer  process,  especially  when  the  original  is  printed.  On 
the  contrary,  such  a  reproduction  always  shows  a  diminution  of  the 
colour  contrast  in  comparison  with  the  original.  Now,  if  we  wished  to 
assume  that  Eva  had  strengthened  the  letters  by  hand,  she  would  have 
been  wiser  to  draw  the  letters  herself  to  begin  with.  That  would  have 
been  much  simpler  than  the  very  lengthy  process  described  by  the 
critics.  Besides,  any  manual  retouching  would  be  easily  traced  in  the 
considerable  enlargement  of  a  transparency.  We  may  therefore  assert, 
on  the  basis  of  the  expert  tests,  that  in  print  both  the  original  Miroir 
title-page  and  a  reduced  reproduction  thereof,  when  photographed  under 
the  original  conditions,  yield  other  and  very  much  weaker  pictures  than 
those  shown  by  the  strongly  marked  letters  of  the  phenomenon  itself. 

Neither  the  original  print  of  the  Miroir,  nor  any  copy  of  the  same, 
technically  produced,  can,  therefore,  have  been  exposed  on  that  occasion. 
Hence  the  genesis  of  these  letters  is  none  other  than  the  process  by  which 
pictorial  materialisations  products  are  generated.  We  have,  therefore, 
the  two  following  facts  :  (1)  With  an  exposure  of  headings  of  the 
journal  Le  Miroir  we  cannot  produce  a  negative  such  as  is  shown  in 
Fig.  119  ;  (2)  the  shade  and  form  of  the  letters  does  not  differ  materially 
from  the  productions  of  the  printers'  press. 

The  jDresence  of  the  article  "  Le  "  indicates  some  connection  with 
the  journal  Le  Miroir,  and  it  is  not  probable  that  there  is  some  other 
connection,  such  as  an  advertisement  in  another  paper. 

296  PHENOMENA    OF   MATERIALISATION 

As  regards  the  similarities  described  by  Miss  Barkley  (Fig.  95, 
Deschanel ;  Fig.  108,  Mme.  Leconte  ;  Fig.  116,  Mme.  Faber  ;  Fig.  120, 
Mona  Delza ;  Fig.  136,  President  Wilson  ;  Fig.  138,  Ferdinand  of 
Bulgaria ;  Figs.  143  and  149,  President  Poincare),  these  so-called 
identifications,  by  their  grotesque  exaggeration,  constitute  a  first-class 
journalistic  bluff,  which  reduces  itself  to  the  correspondence  of  certain 
details  in  only  three  pictures,  i.e.,  Figs.  136,  143  and  149.  All  the  rest 
belong  to  the  region  of  arbitrary  guesswork.  Correspondences  in 
certain  features,  lines  and  directions  of  gaze  can,  in  any  case,  be  easily 
discovered.  One  need  only  examine  illustrated  journals  from  this 
point  of  view,  and  one  will  find  astonishing  similarities  where  there  is 
no  connection  between  the  two  objects  compared.  Besides,  a  chance 
similarity  of  type  is  very  frequently  found  in  external  form,  pose  and 
expression.  That  is  easily  explained,  since  organisms,  such  as  human 
beings,  have  developed  according  to  the  same  morphological  principles, 
and  have  a  certain  sameness  in  that  development.  Nothing  is  easier, 
for  instance,  than  to  discover  two  entirely  similar  noses  in  two  people 
not  related  to  each  other  ;  or  to  find  similar  collars  and  ties  on  different 
men.  But  if  we  go  as  far  as  Miss  Barkley,  then,  finally,  every  comparison 
can  be  permitted,  for  every  human  being  has  two  legs,  one  nose,  two 
eyes,  and  two  ears.  He  moves  according  to  definite  rules  ;  he  is  dressed 
according  to  the  fashion  of  the  day,  which  suppresses  all  individuality. 
Thus,  between  any  two  male  individuals,  certain  qualities  and  corre- 
spondences can  always  be  found. 

An  interesting  example  is  furnished  by  Fig.  108,  obtained  as  a  third 
flash-light  photograph  at  the  sitting  of  5th  August  1912  in  Munich. 
Now,  the  alleged  Miroir  original  of  this  photograph  (Figs.  185  and  186), 
the  portrait  of  the  actress  Mme.  Leconte,  appeared  on  4th  August  1912 
in  Paris. 

We  may  regard  it  as  impossible  that  Eva  C.  could  have  seen  this 
journal  only  twenty-four  hours  afterwards,  on  the  5th  August,  in 
Munich,  and  could  have  altered  it  and  used  it  for  fraudulent  purposes. 
In  judging  of  this  point,  we  must  take  into  account  the  fact  that  this 
photograph  shows,  in  itself,  a  transformation,  since  Fig.  103,  the  first 
photograph  of  5th  August  1912,  shows  the  same  type  of  face  with  less 
elaboration.  In  both  cases  we  have  to  do  with  the  same  model.  This 
is  shown  by  a  comparative  study  of  the  expression,  the  build  of  the 
nose,  forehead  and  eye-sockets,  and  the  fabric  ornamentation.  The 
flash-light  photographs  are  not  rigid  drawings  on  an  unchanging  surface, 
but  show  a  flowing  variation,  with  a  change  of  numerous  details. 
Besides,  the  dissimilarity  of  all  details  in  the  Miroir  picture  (Fig.  185) 
is  almost  as  great  as  it  can  be,  compared  with  Fig.  186,  although  we  may 
recognise  a  distant  similarity  in  the  formation  of  the  head. 

The  picture  which  is  supposed  to  represent  Mona  Delza  (Figs.  122 
and  188)  did  not  appear  in  the  Miroir  at  all,  but  in  the  Journal  Femina 
of  April  1912,  below  life-size,  and  could  be  obtained  commercially  only 
in  a  small  size  through  Felix  &  Cie,  Paris  (Fig.  187).  How  this  picture, 
redrawn  life-size,  could  be  exposed  as  Fig.  120  of  this  work,  has  not  been 
indicated  by  Miss  Barkley.  She  contented  herself  with  adopting  the 
fraud  hypothesis,  without  a  shade  of  similarity  or  a  particle  of'evidence. 
The  comparison  of  Fig.  140  with  the  King  of  Bulgaria,  Vhose  portrait 

Fig.  185.     Portrait  of  Mme.  Leconte. 

Title      page      of      "  Miroir,"      Paris 

4  August,    191 2. 

Fig.     i86.       Author's       third       photograph, 
Munich,    5    August,   1912.     (Fig.    ioS   above.) 

Fig.    187.     Portrait   of   the    actress    Monna    Delza,   pubi-ished    in    ''  Femina 

April.   1912. 

Fig.  i88.     Author's  flashlight  photograph  of  30  November,  1912.     (Reproduc- 
tion OF  Fig.   122.) 

Fig    189      Left  •    Phantom  photographed  ix  the  sitting  of  13  February,   1913  (Fig. 
140  above! .     Right  :    Portrait  of  the  King  of  Bulgaria  from  "Miroir"'  with  white 

MANTLE    to    RESEMBLE    PHANTOM.       BeLOW  :     KiNG'S    HEAD    ENLARGED. 

Fig.    190.     Portrait    of    M.    Deschanel 

FROM    TITLE    PAGE    OF    "MiROIR"' 

Fig.    191.     Photograph    of    24    June,    1912. 

95    ABOVE.) 

(Fig. 

Fig.   192.     Photograph  of  2  May,    1912.     (Fig.    149.) 

Fig.    193.     President   Poincare's   portrait   cut   from   "Miroir"   and   photographed 

BY    author    with    EvA,    UNDER    PHOTOGRAPHIC    CONDITIONS,    AS    AT    THE    SITTINQS. 

ILLUSTRATIONS  FROM  THE  JOURNAL  LE  MIROIR       297 

was  made  as  similar  to  the  phantom  as  possible  by  means  of  a  bathing 
wrap  (Fig.  189),  is  also  entirely  devoid  of  foundation.  It  appears  from 
a  letter  from  an  Italian  correspondent,  that  he  finds  the  greatest  resem- 
blance between  the  phantom  and  a  deceased  relative  of  his.  While 
Dr  von  Gulat,  in  Fran  von  Kemnitz'  pamphlet,  asserts  that  it  resembles 
the  author.     Perhaps  there  will  be  a  few  more  identifications  ! 

In  comparing  Fig.  191  with  the  head  of  the  politician  Deschanel 
(Fig.  190),  there  is  only  the  direction  of  the  gaze  to  go  upon.  All  the 
other  lines  and  features  are  entirely  different. 

The  examples  quoted  suffice  to  reduce  Miss  Barkley's  arbitrary 
constructions  ad  absurdum. 

In  another  picture,  Fig,  192  (Fig.  149),  the  comparison  with  the 
face  of  President  Poincare,  Fig.  193,  reduces  itself  to  a  similarity  of 
the  three  pimples  on  the  left  fold  of  the  cheek.  The  development  of 
the  left  nostril  is  similar  in  both,  but  not  the  same,  since  it  forms  a 
greater  elevation  on  the  phenomenon  picture.  All  the  other  lines — the 
whole  build  of  the  face,  the  eyes,  and  the  gaze — are  quite  different  in 
the  two  pictures.  Furthermore,  the  expression,  in  the  phenomenon 
pictures,  is  particularly  lively,  and  much  more  marked  than  in  the 
Miroir  original,  which  could  hardly  be  expected  in  a  secondary  repro- 
duction. In  addition,  the  stereoscopic  photographs  show  distinctly 
that  the  hair  on  the  phenomenon  consists  of  actual  hair.  Also,  the  size 
of  the  two  pictures,  compared  by  taking  one  part — say  the  nose — as  a 
unit,  is  so  different  that  no  amount  of  redrawing  could  have  enabled 
any  one  to  use  the  Miroir  picture  as  the  foundation  for  the  alleged 
transformation. 

As  regards  the  three  pimples,  the  fold  joining  the  nose  and  cheek 
are  specially  favoured  positions  for  such  growths.  Thus,  the  late 
M.  Alex.  Bisson  had  three  pimples  exactly  in  the  same  spots.  We  might, 
therefore,  assert  with  the  same  show  of  reason  that  his  portrait  had 
been  used  as  a  model. 

When  the  publications  in  the  Matin  gave  rise  to  the  suspicion  that 
for  the  above-named  mediumistic  picture  portraits  from  the  journal 
Miroir  had  been  redrawn  and  fraudulently  used,  the  author  went  to 
Paris,  cut  the  heads  in  question  out  of  the  numbers  of  the  Miroir,  and 
photographed  these  on  the  medium's  body,  with  the  help  of  the  photo- 
grapher Barenne,  in  the  seance  room,  under  photographic  conditions 
precisely  the  same  as  those  of  the  sittings,  in  order  to  decide  whether 
autotype  prints  could  have  been  exposed  by  the  medium  at  all.  But, 
as  shown  by  the  agreement  of  the  expert  opinions  of  the  Paris  and 
Munich  photographers,  in  all  these  tests  the  Miroir  pictures  came  out 
uniformly  so  feeble,  and  so  devoid  of  vivacity  and  relief,  and  markedly 
less  defined  than  the  reproductions  shown  in  this  work,  that,  for  this 
reason  alone.  Miss  Barkley's  hypothesis  is  untenable. 

In  particular,  the  photograph  of  the  head  of  President  Wilson,  as 
seen  in  the  reproduction  of  our  test  experiment,  is  immediately  recog- 
nised as  a  reproduction,  since  on  the  left  shoulder  and  the  breast  of  the 
coat,  as  well  as  on  the  lip,  eyelid,  and  moustache,  the  marks  of  the 
process  plate  can  be  seen  with  a  magnifying  glass,  and  betray  the 
process  of  reproduction.  It  is  altogether  an  impossibility  entirely  to 
eliminate  these  marks  of  the  process  plate  by  manual  treatment ;   nor 

298  PHENOMENA    OF    MATERIALISATION 

can  the  grain  of  the  photographic  plate  be  rehed  upon  to  obHterate  the 
dots  of  the  Meisenbach  screen.  Considering  the  large  number  of  illus- 
trations, the  origin  would  be  betrayed  somewhere.  In  some  places  the 
autotype  tonings  would  be  retraced,  as  in  Fig.  19,  where  even  the 
structure  of  the  medium's  skin  is  seen,  that  being  a  proof  of  the  sharpness 
of  the  photography.  The  screen  used  for  the  figures  in  the  Miroir 
shows  four  points  per  millimetre,  and  is  therefore  fairly  coarse  and  easily 
recognised.  We  must,  indeed,  in  judging  of  the  phenomenon  photo- 
graphs, take  into  account  that  the  simple  exposures  do  not  show  the 
plastic  character  of  the  fabrics  and  veils  added  to  the  portraits,  and  may 
thus  give  rise  to  errors,  since  these  veilings  almost  always  show  some 
kind  of  pattern  (moire  structure),  which  could  easily  be  mistaken  for 
the  screen  pattern.  As  regards  the  composition  of  the  draped  mcdium- 
istic  heads,  the  stereoscopic  photographs  are  decisive.  By  manual 
treatment  the  screen  pattern,  particularly  the  half-tones,  cannot  be 
entirely  obliterated,  while  any  painting  over  the  pattern  would  be 
immediately  recognised  with  the  naked  eye.  The  phenomenon  pictures 
reproduced,  if  obtained  from  art  publications,  would  have  to  show  a 
moire  structure  in  the  photographs  as  reproduced,  owing  to  the  inter- 
ference of  the  double  pattern,  but  that  is  not  the  case. 

This  is  another  reason  for  saying  that  prepared  Miroir  reproductions 
cannot  have  been  exposed  as  materialisation  phenomena. 

Of  particular  interest  is  a  comparison  of  Fig.  143  with  the  same 
Miroir  portrait  of  President  Poincare.  One  remarks  the  same  cross 
striping  and  the  same  distribution  of  light  and  shade  on  the  long  ends 
of  the  two  ties  ;  while  the  upper  loop  of  the  phenomenon  is  short  and 
broad,  and  only  shows  one  cross  fold.  Poincare's  tie  is  provided  with 
a  longer  knot  and  several  cross  folds.  There  are  other  distinct  and 
obvious  differences,  especially  in  the  narrower  end  of  the  tie,  which,  in 
the  phenomenon,  appears  torn  off,  and  ends  a  few  millimetres  below  the 
knot.  There  are  also  distinct  differences  in  the  opening  of  the  waistcoat 
and  coat,  as  well  as  the  length  of  the  beard.  It  is  certain  that  no 
exposure  of  the  Poincare  original,  in  spite  of  the  similarity  of  some 
details,  would  give  an  image  of  the  neck  portion  equal  to  that  of  the 
phenomenon. 

Careful  measurement  also  shows  that  the  phenomenon  head  is  large 
in  proportion  to  the  dimensions  of  the  tie,  and  that  no  exposure,  even 
after  working  up  details,  will  give  the  phenomenon  picture  of  6th  March 
1913.  Such  difficulties  may  also  have  occurred  to  the  person  who  wrote 
the  attack  in  the  Matin  of  26th  December  1913,  in  which  great  emphasis 
is  laid  on  the  similarities  in  the  two  ties,  for  in  presenting  the  two 
portraits  the  phenomenon  picture  was  changed  almost  beyond  recog- 
nition. The  lines  of  the  eye  were  strengthened,  the  tie  was  darkened 
and  redrawn,  so  that  now  both  the  ends  run  into  the  knot.  Also,  a 
wing  of  the  collar,  which  is  not  in  the  original,  was  added.  The  collar 
of  the  coat  was  changed,  the  tie  was  lengthened,  and  the  folds  of  the 
coat  collar  were  modified.  In  this  way,  of  course,  any  degree  of  simi- 
larity can  be  artificially  produced. 

The  illustrations  Figs.  194  and  195  show  the  accuracy  of  these 
observations.  It  was  unfortunate  that  the  whole  attack  on  the  illus- 
trations in  the  works  of  Mme.  Bisson  and  the  author  was  based  upon 

Fig.  194.     Photograph  taken  6  March,  1913.     (Fig.  143  above.) 

Fig.  195.     Top  :   President  Poincare,  as  published  by  "^[iroir."     Bottom  left  : 

Manipulated  tie  and  shirt-front  from  the  phantom   (Fig.   194)   published  by 

"Matin"    26   December,    1913.     Bottom    right:     Collar   and   tie   from    above 

portrait,  published  by  "Matin"   of  26  December,   1913. 

OPINION  OF  THE  PHOTOGRAPHER,  BARENNE  299 

this  picture,  which  had  been  worked  up  in  favour  of  the  hypothesis  of 
fraud,  and  was  largely  quoted  in  the  German  and  foreign  press.  None 
of  the  critics  seem  to  have  considered  it  worth  while  to  verify  the  asser- 
tions in  the  Matin  by  comparison  with  the  originals  in  our  books. 

Another  important  point  in  comparing  the  autotype  pictures  of  the 
materialisations  is  that  the  medium,  in  our  photographs,  always  shows 
the  same  photographic  exposure  as  the  products,  even  when  the  latter 
are  pictorial,  and  this  is  not  the  case  with  prepared  illustrations  or 
drawings,  as  is  shown  by  the  following  opinions  : — 

Opinion  of  the  Photographer,  Barenne  (Paris). 

"  I,  the  undersigned,  hereby  declare  that  for  four  years  I  developed  the 
photographic  plates  handed  to  me  by  Dr  von  Schrenck  Notzing,  and 
derived  from  the  sittings  with  Eva  C,  at  the  residence  of  Mme.  Bisson. 
Dr  von  Schrenck  has  always  been  present  at  the  development  of  the 
negatives. 

"  It  has  been  asserted  that  the  medium  used  portrait  heads  published 
in  the  journal  Le  Miroir. 

"  In  order  to  refute  this  accusation,  Dr  von  Schrenck  called  on  me, 
and  on  Friday,  9th  January  1914,  we  made  test  experiments  in 
Mme.  Bisson's  fiat,  by  attaching  the  portrait  heads  in  question  to  the 
medium,  seated  in  the  cabinet,  or  asking  her  to  hold  them.  For  this 
purpose  we  had  cut  out  first  the  portrait  of  President  Poincare 
(Fig.  193)  ;  secondly,  that  of  President  Wilson  ;  thirdly,  that  of  the 
King  of  Bulgaria  (Fig.  189,  right)  ;  and  fourthly,  that  of  Mme.  Lecomte. 
All  these  portraits  had  appeared  in  the  Miroir.  Besides  these,  a  test 
photograph  of  the  heading  of  the  journal  Le  Miroir  was  made,  when 
held  against  Eva's  hair  (Fig.  184). 

"  We  endeavoured  to  take  these  photographs  under  precisely  the 
same  conditions  as  the  photographs  of  the  original  sittings.  Immedi- 
ately on  developing  the  plates  I  found  that  the  development  met  with 
extraordinary  difficulties,  which  had  never  been  encountered  in  the 
negatives  obtained  with  Eva  C.  The  impression  made  by  the  photo- 
graphed pictures  is  feeble  and  lifeless.  The  pictures  came  out  too  light 
in  tone,  and  were  veiled  on  the  negative. 

"  I  had  to  employ  a  special  process  to  obtain  detail  on  the  cut-out 
heads,  while  preserving  the  life-like  character  of  the  medium's  head. 
Such  an  expedient  had  not  been  necessary  during  the  four  years  of  work 
with  the  mediumistic  plates.  On  the  contrary,  the  expressiveness  of 
the  materialisation  on  the  plate  was  always  in  right  relation  with  the 
clearness  of  the  medium's  features.  I  must  also  remark  that  the 
slightest  correction  with  the  retouching  pencil  of  the  faces  reproduced 
would  have  been  recognised  immediately  on  development.  Every 
photographer  would  say  the  same,  just  as  every  photographer  can 
confirm  that  the  fundamental  substance  of  the  materialisations  of  Eva  C. 
gives  no  impression  of  paper. 

"  We  may,  therefore,  assert  with  absolute  certainty  that  the  medium 
cannot  have  used  the  reproductions  in  question. 

"  (Signed)     Barenne,  Photographer, 
"  Paris,  l\th  January  1914.  "  Rue  Duret,  27  bis" 

300  PHENOMENA  OF  MATERIALISATION 

Opinion  of  the  Photographer,  Albert  Halse  (Paris). 

"  For  the  last  two  years  Mme.  Bisson  has  handed  me  photographic 
plates  for  development  without  any  further  details.  The  negatives 
excited  my  interest  to  a  great  extent.  Anxious  to  obtain  an  explana- 
tion, I  enlarged  the  pictures  on  the  negatives  until  the  medium  had  the 
dimensions  of  a  giantess.  Whenever  I  had  any  doubts  with  regard  to 
the  objects  represented,  I  employed  this  means  of  satisfying  my  thirst 
for  knowledge.  A  very  strict  examination  of  the  materialisations, 
thus  enlarged,  always  brought  me  back  to  the  conviction  that  it  was  not 
a  case  of  deception.  Later,  Mme.  Bisson  also  asked  me  to  produce 
enlargements  of  various  pictures.  Now  it  has  been  maintained  that 
these  photographs  were  produced  with  cuttings  from  journals.  Such  an 
assumption  is  only  consistent  with  a  very  superficial  examination.  No 
photographer,  familiar  with  photographic  technique,  would  make  such 
an  assertion,  since  he  has  at  his  disposal  more  scientific  methods  of 
control  than  a  simple  examination  with  a  magnifying  glass.  As  regards 
the  supposition  that  the  negatives  themselves  were  fraudulently  pro- 
duced, one  may  assert  the  absolute  contrary  with  a  clear  conscience. 
Since  the  photographic  methods,  now  generally  known,  are  practised 
even  by  amateur  photographers,  any  one  can  recognise,  with  ease  and 
certainty,  whether  or  not  these  negatives  have  been  retouched.  The 
repairing  of  small  unexpected  injuries  to  the  pictures  was  abstained 
from  in  order  to  be  able  to  say  quite  definitely  that  even  the  slightest 
correction  had  never  been  applied.  At  Mme.  Bisson's  request,  I  photo- 
graphed some  of  these  illustrations  for  comparison.  The  pictures  look 
different  from  the  photographed  phenomena  of  materialisation,  for  the 
latter  appear  on  the  negative  quite  distinctly  and  clearly  during  develop- 
ment as  if  they  were  objects  in  relief,  while  the  former,  under  the  same 
conditions,  appear  grey,  flat  and  indistinct. 

"  (Signed)     Albert  Halse. 
*'  Paris,  January  1914." 

Opinion  of  Dr  Georg  Hauberrisser  (Munich). 

"  Munich,  \5th  January  1914. 
"  I  WAS  commissioned  by  Dr  Freiherr  von  Schrenck  Notzing  to  ascertain 
whether  pictures,  cut  out  of  the  journal  Le  Miroir,  and  worked  upon 
by  hand,  could  have  been  used  for  representing  the  materialisation 
phenomena,  I  am  convinced  that,  in  spite  of  several  agreements  in 
detail  (tie,  eye-glass,  pimples),  cut-out  pictures  could  not  have  been 
used  in  their  original  condition.  As  every  photographer  knows,  the 
time  required  for  a  black  and  white  picture  is  only  from  one  quarter  to 
one-eighth  of  the  time  required  for  persons  and  other  things.  If,  there- 
fore, the  head  of  the  medium  is  correctly  exposed,  a  picture  from  the 
Miroir  would  be  nearly  white,  owing  to  over-exposure,  and  would  only 
appear  very  feebly  drawn. 

"  By  a  practical  experiment,  in  which  all  conditions  were,  as  far  as 
possible,  the  same  as  at  the  sittings  (same  flash-light,  powder  in  same 

Fig.    196.     Mme.    Bisson's   photocraph   of    iq   Jantakv,   1913.     il'io.    136   above.) 

Fig.     iqj.     Right     corner  :      President     Wilson's     portrait     from 
"MiRoiR   '   Xo.   34,   1912.     Below  :  The  same,  artistically  treated 
to  resemble  Fig.   196. 

OPINION  OF  PROFESSOR  HERMANN  URBAN  301 

quantity,  same  distance,  black  background,  same  opening  of  diaphragm, 
same  plates  and  sensitiveness,  similar  development,  and  other  treatment 
of  the  negatives),  a  head  cut  out  of  the  Miroir  was,  indeed,  obtained, 
nearly  white,  with  only  very  slight  definition,  something  like  a  relief  in 
plaster  of  Paris,  while  the  phenomena,  in  Dr  von  Schrenck's  originals, 
show  strong  definition,  and  about  the  same  brightness  as  the  medium's 
head.  The  title  of  the  journal  Le  Miroir,  when  photographed  under 
the  same  conditions,  also  only  appears  feeble,  while,  in  Dr  von  Schrenck's 
photograph,  the  letters  are  clearly  marked. 

"  Heads  cut  out  of  the  Miroir  can,  under  the  same  conditions,  only 
have  been  used  by  colouring  the  paper  with  a  non-actinic  colour  (brown, 
red,  or  yellow)  and  strengthening  the  drawing  by  hand  in  nearly  all  its 
parts.  The  cut-out  heads  could  be  obtained  with  the  same  clearness 
as  the  materialisation  phenomena,  if  the  exposure  were  reduced  some 
sixteen  to  thirty  times,  but  in  this  case  the  experimental  photographic 
conditions  would  be    quite  different  from  those  applied  by  Dr  von 

Schrenck  Notzing. 

(Signed)     Dr  Georg  Hauberrisser, 

"  Photo-Chemist: 

Opinion  of  Professor  Hermann  Urban  (Municli). 

"  Dr  von  Schrenck  Notzing  handed  to  me,  on  12th  January  1914, 
No.  34  of  the  French  journal  Le  Miroir,  on  the  front  page  of  which  was 
found  a  portrait  of  President  Wilson.  He  also  gave  me  a  greatly 
enlarged  photograph  of  a  male  portrait  reproduced  as  Fig.  136  of  the 
Phenoincna  of  Materialisatio7i.  The  problem  was  to  ascertain  whether 
this  portrait  could  have  been  produced  by  changing,  or  working-up. 
President  Wilson's  head,  as  was  maintained  in  the  Psychic  Magazine 
of  1st  January  1914.  On  a  superficial  examination  of  the  two  pictures, 
there  certainly  appear  to  be  some  correspondences  or  similarities  of 
detail,  which  suggest  a  discussion  of  the  assumption,  and  giving  rise  to 
some  suspicion. 

"  Both  pictures  (Figs.  196  and  197)  show  the  same  form,  the  same 
shading,  and  the  same  lines  of  collar  and  tie.  But  exact  measurements, 
with  a  scale,  show  that  the  lines  in  the  materialisation  photograph  run 
differently  from  those  in  the  Wilson  portrait,  especially  on  the  right- 
hand  edge  of  the  tie.  In  the  picture  of  the  phenomenon,  the  tie  on  the 
right  is  more  round  and  bunchy.  The  coat  collar  of  the  phenomenon 
is  also  more  vertical  and  stretched  than  in  the  Wilson  portrait.  The 
tie  itself  shows  an  agreement  in  both  pictures,  as  regards  drawing, 
especially  in  the  shading  and  folds.  The  right-hand  portion  of  the  shirt 
and  coat  collar  also  corresponds  to  the  Miroir  reproduction. 

"  While  Wilson's  head  is  bent  to  the  right  and  is  pomted  below,  the 
head  of  Fig.  196  is  placed  quite  straight  on  the  shoulders  and  does  not 
taper  below,  having  a  broader  jaw  down  from  the  cheek-bone.  The 
middle  of  the  lips  is  also  displaced  towards  the  right,  which  is  not  the 
case  in  the  Wilson  portrait.  That  this  displacement,  which  only  affects 
the  head  and  not  the  basis,  could  have  been  produced  by  the  method 
of  photography,  seems  to  me  impossible,  for  the  whole  picture  would 

302  PHENOMENA    OF    MATERIALISATION 

have  to  give  a  distorted  impression,  which  is  not  the  case,  as  is  particu- 
larly evident  from  the  regular  forehead  and  eye  portion.  In  painting, 
there  is  usually  a  numerical  proportion,  the  line  passing  vertically 
through  the  centre  of  the  face,  being  divided  into  three  approximately 
equal  parts,  which  are — first,  forehead  down  to  the  root  of  the  nose  ; 
second,  root  to  tip  of  nose  ;  third,  tip  of  the  nose  to  the  point  of  the 
chin.  Now,  if  the  Wilson  portrait  had  been  changed  by  drawing  and 
then  exposed,  these  constant  proportions  would  also  have  to  agree, 
both  in  the  phantom  reproduction  and  in  the  Miroir  original. 

"  The  height  of  the  forehead  fits  nearly  three  times  in  the  vertical 
middle  line  in  Wilson's  portrait,  while,  in  the  phantom  photograph, 
the  same  ratio  is  over  three  and  a  half,  the  forehead  being  too  low  in 
comparison  with  the  lower  portion  of  the  head,  the  chin  being  rather 
short.  If  the  Wilson  portrait  had  been  used,  it  is  difficult  to  say  why, 
in  Fig.  196,  the  head  stands  vertically  on  the  neck,  or  perhaps  somewhat 
bent  backwards,  which  makes  the  chin  project,  while  in  the  Miroir 
picture  the  head  is  bent  forward,  with  a  slight  turn  towards  the  right. 
The  result  is  that,  in  the  Miroir  picture,  the  forehead  is  nearer  the 
camera  and  the  chin  seems  to  recede,  while  in  the  phenomenon  picture 
the  lower  half  of  the  head  projects,  and  the  forehead  is  slightly  further 
away  from  the  camera,  which  may  account  for  the  short  forehead.  If 
a  horizontal  line  is  drawn  over  President  Wilson's  eyebrows  and  touching 
them,  the  ear  is  a  trifle  below  this  line,  on  account  of  the  head  being 
bent  forward.  If  the  same  is  done  in  the  phenomenon  portrait,  the  ear 
is  rather  lower,  which  indicates  either  a  bending  backwards  or  an 
entirely  upright  position.  That  is  a  point  determined  by  the  propor- 
tions of  the  lines,  and  cannot  be  affected  by  redrawing,  without  entirely 
displacing  the  axis  of  the  phenomenon  head.  The  objection  that  the 
forehead  had  been  cut  short  is  disposed  of  by  the  fact  that  the  typical 
position  of  the  head  would  not  be  affected,  even  if  the  forehead  were  raised. 
"  At  first  sight  the  right  eye  is  apparently  the  same  in  both  pictures, 
and  the  upper  line  of  the  eye-glass  passes  in  the  same  direction,  but  a 
further  examination  shows  that  the  eye  m  the  Miroir  picture  is  straight 
when  a  diameter  is  drawn  through  the  corner  of  the  eye,  while  the 
same  ratio,  applied  to  the  phenomenon  head,  shows  a  slight  inclination 
to  this  line,  the  outer  corner  being  higher  (Mongolian  eye). 

"  Furthermore,  the  drawing  of  the  eye-glass,  in  the  phenomenon 
picture,  is  a  displaced  oval,  while  in  Wilson's  case  the  outline  of  the 
eye-glass  shows  the  regularity  and  accuracy  of  a  photograph.  The 
differences  in  the  eyebrows,  and  the  line  of  the  hair,  need  not  be  dealt 
with  in  detail,  since  such  changes  could  be  produced  with  a  chalk  pencil, 
as  Miss  Barkley  suggests. 

"  I  have  tried  to  convert  the  Wilson  portrait  mto  a  copy  of  the 
phenomenon  picture  with  a  charcoal  pencil,  but  it  was  impossible  to 
alter  the  position  of  the  head,  which  shows  at  once  that  this  picture 
cannot  have  been  used  fraudulently  for  the  phenomenon  picture.  It 
also  appears  to  be  impossible  to  hide  the  marking  of  the  half-tone  screen 
by  drawing,  especially  in  the  light  and  middle  tones,  while,  in  the 
enlargement  of  the  phenomenon  head,  I  discovered  no  indications  of 
the  half-tone  screen,  as  would  have  been  the  case  if  the  Wilson  portrait 
had  been  drawn  over  and  thereafter  exposed. 

OPINION  OF  PROFESSOR  HERMANN  URBAN  303 

"  Neither  could  I  transform  the  chin  into  the  characteristic  shape 
of  the  phenomenon  image,  because  one  could  only  obliterate  the  line 
of  the  chin  by  erasure,  a  process  which  is  not  onlyJatal  to  thin  paper, 
but  which  would  also  dispose  of  the  half-tone  marks,  and  that  would 
be  immediately  discovered  in  a  photograph.  Such  significant  marks  of 
the  half-tone  screen  are  not  found  in  the  original,  although,  in  the 
reproductions  of  the  phantom  picture  in  the  book,  they  are  easily 
recognised.  It  follows  that  the  marks  of  the  half-tone  screen  cannot  be 
hidden  at  all,  and  betray  themselves  with  absolute  certainty. 

"  To  this  must  be  added  that  the  enlargement  of  the  original  negative 
handed  over  to  me  is  nearly  double  the  size  of  the  reproduction  of  this 
negative  in  the  book  itself  (with  visible  screen  marks).  Screen  marks 
would,  therefore,  have  to  be  more  characteristic  and  visible  with  the 
naked  eye,  while  they  are  actually  not  even  seen  with  a  magnifying 
glass. 

"  The  phenomenon  image  recalls  a  typical  soft  charcoal  or  chalk 
drawing,  and  therefore  suggested  a  charcoal  drawing.  The  latter 
cannot  show  the  screen  structure  throughout.  That  could  only  be 
obtained  by  liquid  painting,  superimposed  gouache  or  water-colour. 
This  is  contradicted  by  the  characteristic  appearance  of  the  pheno- 
menon picture,  which  recalls  pencil  drawing,  or  stump  teclmique,  and 
not  painting,  which,  indeed,  would  present  extraordinary  difficulties 
on  bad  paper.  It  would  also  show  the  marks  of  the  brush,  which  would 
have  to  be  used  with  thick  paint,  in  order  to  produce  a  complete  covering 
up  of  the  half-tone  screen  pattern. 

"  If  the  Wilson  portrait  from  the  Miroir,  modified  by  drawing,  had 
been  used  for  the  phenomenon  picture  shown  in  Fig.  136,  it  would 
show  screen  marks,  while  the  technique  used  for  producing  the  changes 
would  betray  itself  by  a  dozen  characteristics. 

"  It  would  also  be  impossible  to  obliterate  the  differences  between 
the  two  heads,  as  to  their  position,  their  proportions,  and  the  several 
details  of  the  face. 

"  It  follows,  with  absolute  certainty,  from  these  considerations, 
that  the  portrait  of  President  Wilson,  shown  in  the  Miroir,  No.  34, 
1912,  could  not  have  been  made  into  the  phenomenon  picture,  Fig.  136, 
by  any  artistic  manipulation,  in  spite  of  some  striking  similarities. 

"  (Signed)     Hermann  Urban. 

"  Munich,  14>th  January  1914." 

In  connection  with  Professor  Urban's  Opinion,  it  should  be  pointed 
out  that,  in  President  Wilson's  portrait,  the  tie  is  tied  with  a  pin,  the 
head  of  which  is  evidently  engraved  with  a  coat  of  arms.  This  is  absent 
in  Fig.  196,  and  although  Miss  Barkley  indicates  a  slight  shading  on 
the  latter,  which  might  represent  that  object,  it  is  too  far  on  the  right- 
hand  side. 

The  whole  of  the  similarities  with  the  Miroir  pictures,  of  which  so 
much  has  been  made  in  the  Press,  reduce  themselves  to  the  followmg 
four  points: — 

1.  The  agreement  of  certain  details  of  Fig.  196  with  the  Wilson 

portrait. 

2.  A  partial  resemblance  of  the  tie  marks  of  Fig.  194  with  the 

portrait  of  President  Poincare. 

304  PHENOMENA    OF    MATERIALISATION 

3.  In  the  three  pimples  characteristic  of  that  face,  shown  in  the 

head  of  Fig.  192  ;    and 

4.  In  the  occurrence  of  the  letters  Miroir. 

As  no  explanation  is  forthcoming  based  upon  fraudulent  manipula- 
tion by  the  medium,  and  as  it  is  impossible  that  either  the  originals  of 
the  Miroir  pictures,  or  manually  altered  copies  of  them,  could  have 
been  exposed  to  produce  the  photographs  in  question,  we  must  look 
for  some  other  explanation,  based  upon  the  origin  of  the  teleplastic 
creations. 

The  teieplastic  creations  are  so  closely  connected  with  the  psychic 
condition  of  the  medium  that  Morselli  compared  them  with  materialised 
dream  images.  This  view  regards  the  products  as  ephemeral,  externa- 
lised precipitates  of  the  medium's  psychic  impressions  and  reminis- 
cences. That  the  phenomena  m  many  cases  realise  the  thoughts  of 
the  medium  may  be  considered  as  established.  I  need  only  recall  the 
repeated  occurrences  of  hands  as  suggested  by  the  sitters,  and  other 
fulfilments  of  their  wishes.  Such  a  process  may  also  account  for  the 
projection  of  memory  images  of  deceased  persons,  such  as  M.  Alexandre 
Bisson  and  Mme.  Bisson's  nephew  ;  also  the  production  of  an  image 
resemblmg  Leonardo  da  Vmci's  "  Mona  Lisa,"  which  was  so  greatly 
talked  about  when  it  was  stolen  from  the  Louvre.  Here,  again,  we 
have  no  slavish  replica,  but  an  impressionistic  representation  of  the 
style  in  which  the  picture  was  painted.  The  results  of  this  process, 
which  may  be  called  ideo-plastics,  are  closely  connected  with  the 
psychic  life  of  the  medium,  with  her  storage  of  memories,  and  with  the 
intensity  of  dommant  ideas. 

Optical,  or  visual,  images  appear  to  play  the  chief  part  in  the  case 
of  Eva  C.  Now,  it  is  well  known  that  the  clearness  of  memory ^may  rise 
to  an  abnormal  level  m  the  case  of  hysterical  persons  (hypermnesia). 
Thus,  some  slight  event  of  youth,  or  an  entirely  lost  language,  can  be 
revived  mider  abnormal  conditions,  such  as  somnambulism  or  some 
diseases. 

As  Offner  points  out,^  pamters  like  Vernet,  Dore,  and  Makart  were 
able  to  pamt  accurate  representations  of  objects  and  persons  after 
seeing  them  once.  Of  the  philosopher  Seneca,  it  is  said  that  he  could 
recite  three  thousand  words  accurately  after  hearing  them  once,  and 
that  he  could  repeat  two  hmidred  verses  m  the  reverse  order.  A 
deceased  relative  of  the  author  was  able  to  reproduce  a  speech  verbatim 
which  he  had  once  heard  ten  years  before.  The  sharpness  of  memory, 
m  such  abnormal  cases,  is  sufficiently  illustrated  by  these  examples, 
and  may  be  compared  to  the  sharp  definition  of  a  photographic  plate. 

The  occurrence  of  cryptonmesia,  or  the  recalling  of  a  former  memory 
image  which  had  never  entered  the  normal  consciousness,  is  quite  an 
ordmary  occurrence  with  hypnotised  persons  and  somnambuhsts. 
Thus,  the  important  nucleus  of  a  thing,  or  the  chief  points  of  a  picture, 
can  be  completely  forgotten,  while  some  unessential  detail  (in  our  case, 
the  form  and  markmg  of  a  tie,  the  position  of  three  pimples,  the  shape 
of  a  prominent  prmt,  and  certam  hues  and  types  of  face)  may  be  repro- 
duced most  accurately,  and  may  occur  in  a  new  connection  as  an  inde- 
pendent psychic  performance.  This  may  explain  the  speaking  in 
^  OHuer,  Gediiclitnis,  Mandbuch  der  JVaturwmmnchaftenf  ^'ol,  -i. 

OPINION  OF  PROFESSOR  HERMANN  URBAN  805 

foreign  languages  (glossolalia).  That  the  eryptomnesic  pictures  may 
lead  to  the  most  remarkable  and  complicated  combinations  in  the  trance 
condition  is  shown  by  Flournoy's  studies  on  the  "  Martian  "  language 
of  Helene  Smith. 

Cases  have  been  known,  both  among  painters  and  musicians,  in 
which  eryptomnesic  performances  were  regarded  by  the  artists  as  their 
own  independent  creations,  although  they  could  be  shown  to  be  identical 
with  works  of  old  masters.  In  mediumistic  phenomena  we  may  have 
a  combination  of  ideoplastics  with  cryptomnesia,  and  such  a  combina- 
tion may  account  for  the  observed  coincidences  in  the  case  of  the 
Miroir  portraits,  which  were  exhibited  in  nearly  all  the  newspaper 
shops  in  Paris.  If  we  suppose  that  the  medium  saw  the  Miroir  number 
of  17th  November  1912  with  Wilson's  portrait,  within  a  few  days  of  its 
publication,  and  had  received  a  strong  optical  impression  of  the  title- 
page,  with  the  word  "  Miroir  "  at  the  head,  and  of  the  features  of 
President  Wilson,  it  is  easily  understood  that  on  the  27th  November 
she  produced  the  word  "  Miroir,"  and  later,  on  the  9th  January,  the 
type  which  contained  eryptomnesic  reminiscences  of  the  tie  markings 
and  collar,  and  some  facial  lines  from  this  visual  memory.  For  the 
production  of  a  word  by  the  ideoplastic  process  and  that  of  a  picture  is 
the  same  process  of  creation,  and  the  former  is  only  remarkable  because 
it  was  observed  only  once  in  the  course  of  four  years. 

In  the  case  of  other  details,  like  the  three  pimples  (Fig.  149),  it  is 
possible  that  an  independent  teleplastic  creation  may  contain  eryptom- 
nesic elements,  which  are  embodied  in  it.  Such  intermixtures  are 
already  well  known  in  the  purely  psychic  region,  and  have  ceased  to  be 
wondered  at.  The  literature  of  occultism  contains  a  number  of  parallel 
cases.  Thus,  in  a  sitting  held  by  Richet  with  Linda  Gazerra,  an  angel 
head,  by  Rubens,  was  apparently  the  model  for  an  ideo-plastic  repro- 
duction. 

Morselli  draws  attention  to  the  fact  that  such  forms,  in  the  first 
instance,  are  developed  in  two  dimensions,  and  therefore  show  a  flat 
appearance.  He  says  :  "  Sometimes  they  even  give  the  impression  of 
being  cut  out  of  cardboard,  while  in  other  cases  their  margins  are 
undefined."  It  is  only  on  further  development  that  stereoplastic 
forms  are  produced,  consisting  of  fragments  of  limbs,  hands,  arms, 
faces,  heads,  up  to  the  formation  of  a  whole  identity.  The  above 
considerations  dispose  of  the  objections  raised  by  Miss  Barkley,  as  far 
as  they  are  concerned  with  the  possible  fraudulent  use  of  the  Miroir 
portraits. 

The  result  of  the  examination  of  these  objections  may  be  sum- 
marised as  follows  : — 

1.  Even  if  the  alleged  agreement  between  certain  portrait  heads, 

reproduced  on  the  title-pages  of  the  journal  Le  Miroir,  and 
certain  phantom  pictures  were  greater  than  it  is,  yet,  in  con- 
sideration of  the  experimental  conditions  of  the  sittings, 
a  deception  due  to  the  smuggling  in  of  prepared  art  journals, 
and  their  exposure  in  the  places  of  the  ideo-plastic  images,  is 
quite  excluded. 

2.  The  alleged  similarity  of  the  portraits  produced  by  autotype  in 

the  journal  Le  Miroir  is  confined  to  the  single  occurrence  of 

u 

306  PHENOMENA    OF    MATERIALISATION 

the  title  heading  "  Miroir  "  and  the  similarity  of  a  few  details 
in  the  portraits  of  Presidents  Wilson  and  Poincare  to  those  in 
the  phantom  pictures  of  19th  January,  6th  March,  and  2nd  May 
1913. 

3.  The  journal  Le  Matin  published,   as  a  basis  of  its  attack  of 

26th  December  1913,  an  illustration  from  the  work  of 
Mme.  Bisson,  which  had  been  manipulated  and  retouched  by 
hand,  in  order  to  make  it  resemble  President  Poincare. 

4.  Expert  opinions  are  unanimous  in  saying  that,  if  the  author's 

photographic  conditions  are  strictly  observed,  neither  the 
original  pictures  from  the  Miroir,  nor  any  worked-up  copies 
thereof,  could  have  been  exposed  at  the  sittings  so  as  to  produce 
the  author's  published  photographs. 

5.  The  occurrence  of  certain  details  derived  from  the  title-pages  of 

Le  Miroir  in  the  phenomenon  of  the  sittings  of  2nd  November 
1912  and  of  19th  January,  6th  March,  and  2nd  May  1913,  is 
explained  by  the  cryptomnesic  function  of  memory,  such  as 
is  often  observed  in  the  somnambulistic  condition.  Reminis- 
cences of  former  visual  impressions  and  fragments  of  dream 
images  coalesce  unconsciously  with  the  ideoplastic  creations 
to  form  an  unified  presentation,  which  may  be  so  misinter- 
preted as  to  give  rise  to  suspicion. 

Sittings   with    Eva  C.    in    November  and 
December  1913  and  January  1914  (Paris). 

The  criticisms  and  attacks  following  upon  the  publication  of  the  German 
and  French  editions  of  our  records  induced  us  to  make  new  experiments 
with  Eva  C.  as  a  further  test  of  the  objections  raised.  Some  records  of 
the  observational  material  thus  obtained  will  be  communicated  here. 

The  sittings  took  place  in  the  room  described  at  No.  33  Rue  Georges 
Sand,  which  was  used  in  May  and  June  1912.  Since,  for  the  first, 
photography  was  not  to  be  used,  a  dim  white  light  was  employed.  On 
the  right,  beside  the  cabinet,  a  screen  was  placed,  and  behind  this  there 
hung  a  fifty  candle-power  electric  lamp,  attached  to  the  pendent,  and 
draped  with  a  dark  blue  rather  transparent  cloth,  which  did  not  per- 
ceptibly alter  the  colour  of  the  light.  The  degree  of  brightness  obtained 
in  this  manner  enabled  us  to  make  more  accurate  observations  than 
with  the  red  light.  Print  of  a  medium  size  could  be  easily  read,  and  the 
record  could  be  kept  during  the  sitting.  The  eye  was  less  easily  fatigued, 
and  the  objects,  upon  which  it  was  concentrated,  appeared  brighter. 

The  cloth  covering  of  the  chair  was  removed  at  the  end  of  December, 
and  also  the  red  electric  lamp  in  the  cabinet,  for  the  suspicion  had  been 
uttered  that  the  electric  lamp,  hanging  at  the  back  of  the  cabinet  7  feet 
above  the  floor,  and  possibly  the  cloth  covering  of  the  arm-rests,  might 
be  used  by  the  medium  as  hiding-places.  During  the  sittings  about  to 
be  described,  the  medium  regularly  wore  a  tricot  covering  her  whole 
body,  closing  down  the  back,  and  provided  with  sleeves  and  stockings, 
all  in  one  piece.  Over  this  she  put  on  the  apron  dress  already  used  in 
previous  sittings,  and  was  then  sewn  up  at  the  neck  and  sleeves,  before 

SITTINGS  IN  NOV.  AND  DEC.  1913  AND  JAN.  1914      307 

every  sitting.  The  initial  and  final  examination  of  the  medium,  cabinet, 
and  chair  took  place  in  the  same  way  as  in  May  and  June  1913.  A 
gynaecological  examination  was  unnecessary,  partly  on  account  of  the 
manner  of  dressing,  and  also  because  the  medium  could  never  use  her 
hands  during  the  sitting.  The  hands  were  always  at  the  curtain,  holding 
the  two  flaps,  and  resting  on  her  knees.  Eva  crossed  her  arms  from 
time  to  time  to  avoid  fatigue,  but  the  forearms  were  never  withdrawn, 
so  that  every  objection,  based  on  the  supposed  participation  of  her 
hands,  is  eliminated.  Her  feet  and  knees  remain  in  the  same  position, 
corresponding  to  her  sitting  posture.  Eva  C.  did  not  rise  from  her 
chair  once,  but  remained  in  a  sitting  position  during  the  whole  of  the 
observations.  The  records  were  kept  (as  they  have  been  since  1912) 
with  an  exact  indication  of  the  time,  and  are  here  quoted  in  an  abridged 
form. 

Sitting  of  the  7th  November  1913. 

Present. — Dr  Bourbon,  Mme,  Bisson,  and  the  author. 

Condition. — As  above  described. 

9  P.M.  Hypnotisation  by  Mme.  Bisson  in  thirty  seconds.  Hands 
visible  during  the  whole  sitting,  sometimes  held  by  Mme,  Bisson,  sitting 
in  front.  The  curtain  was  hardly  ever  closed.  This  enabled  us  to  be 
sure  that  at — 

9.45  P.M.,  the  white  patch,  visible  in  the  medium's  lap,  did  not  come 
out  of  her  mouth.  The  substance  grew  before  our  eyes  to  the  size  of 
a  human  forearm. 

9.50  P.M.  The  strip  becomes  wider,  appears  to  have  mobility  of 
its  own,  takes  up  a  position  on  the  right  shoulder  in  the  shape  of  a  flat 
white  disk,  the  size  of  a  head,  and  disappears  upwards  towards  the  right 
before  our  eyes  (not  into  the  medium's  mouth), 

10.10  P.M.     Further  efforts,  without  result. 

10.45  P.M.  Close  of  the  sitting.  Final  examination  negative.  The 
movements  took  place  without  movement  of  the  hands,  and  while  the 
medium's  head  was  motionless  and  visible. 

Sitting  of  the  13th  November  1913. 

Present. — Mme.  Bisson  and  the  author. 

All  conditions  as  on  7th  November. 

8.55  P.M.  Hypnotisation  of  the  medium  by  Mme.  Bisson.  The 
opening  of  the  curtain  was  about  12  or  14  inches  half  way  up,  from  the 
beginning  of  the  sitting,  so  that  one  could  look  into  the  cabinet  to  the 
right  and  to  the  left.  The  hands  were  under  constant  control  visibly 
holding  the  curtains,  and  I  touched  them  from  time  to  time.  We  sat 
immediately  in  front  of  the  curtain.  The  medium  never  rose  from  her 
chair. 

9.5  P.M.  Eva  suddenly  opened  the  curtain  at  her  right  hand,  and 
I  saw,  on  the  left  against  the  back  wall,  about  4  feet  above  the  floor, 
a  flat  life-sized  male  portrait,  with  neck  and  face  turned  forwards.  It 
had  a  sharp  outline,  but  did  not  seem  sufficiently  clearly  developed  in 
its  details.     The  curtain  was  opened  wider  (without  being  ever  com- 

308  PHENOMENA    OF    MATERIALISATION 

pletely  closed),  and  the  formation  showed  itself  several  times,  giving 
the  impression  of  a  white  marble  relief. 

9.7  P.M.  With  an  open  curtain,  and  the  medium's  body  motionless, 
the  portrait,  quite  separate  from  her  body,  and  about  28  inches  away 
from  her  head,  disappeared  before  our  eyes  into  the  black  background, 
as  if  it  had  lost  its  own  luminosity.  An  accurate  observation  showed 
that  it  had  not  fallen  down,  nor  was  it  in  any  way  withdrawn  by  the 
medium. 

9,10  P.M.  On  the  medium's  breast  we  saw  a  broad  mass,  about 
16  inches  long,  hanging  from  her  mouth.  The  medium  turned  her 
head  to  the  left.  The  mass  disappeared  from  our  eyes,  and  was  not 
seen  again. 

9.35  P.M.  Close  of  the  sitting.  Final  examination  negative.  The 
appearance  of  the  white  portrait  might  be  regarded  as  a  hallucination, 
if  it  were  not  for  the  fact  that  for  four  years  we  always  corroborated, 
by  photography,  the  reality  of  the  objects  seen,  so  that  such  an  objection 
cannot  be  maintained.  In  any  case,  the  accurate  observation  of  the 
disappearance  of  a  portrait,  the  size  of  a  medallion,  in  a  few  seconds, 
corroborates  numerous  observations  of  this  kind,  and  similar  kinds, 
described  before. 

Sitting  of  the  26th  November  1913. 
This  was  described  in  the  chapter  on  the  rumination  hypothesis. 

Sitting  of  the  8th  December  1913, 

Present. — Dr  Bourbon,  Mme.  Bisson,  and  the  author. 

All  conditions  as  in  previous  sittings. 

6.5  p.m.  Hypnotisation.  The  curtain  remained  open  from  the 
beginning  of  the  sitting.  The  hands  were  constantly  visible  and  under 
control,  and  were  not  withdrawn  for  an  instant. 

6.45  p.m.  The  medium  takes  off  the  tricot  because  it  is  uncomfort- 
able, and  is  only  clothed  in  the  apron  dress.  During  the  change  the 
medium's  hands  were  strictly  watched. 

6.48  P.M.  Loud  whimpering.  The  medium  opens  and  closes  the 
curtain  with  her  constantly  visible  hands.  On  the  left  upper  arm  and 
breast  we  see  a  bulky  white  mass. 

6.55  P.M.  We  see  a  life-sized  male  head  on  her  breast,  covering  it 
entirely.  It  gives  the  impression  of  a  strong  pictorial  representation 
on  a  skin-like  basis.  The  full  beard  is  especially  clear.  The  head 
resembles  that  of  the  whole  phantom.  It  disappears  before  our  eyes 
while  the  curtain  is  open,  without  being  absorbed  by  the  mouth,  and 
again  as  if  its  luminosity  had  ceased.  The  hands  did  not  move  during 
the  occurrence,  and  Eva's  head  also  remained  motionless.  The  drawing 
of  the  face  was  black  on  a  white  ground. 

7.5  P.M.     Close  of  the  sitting.     Final  examination  negative. 

A  few  days  before  the  author's  return,  on  the  7th  January, 
Mme.  Bisson,  in  a  sitting  alone  with  Eva,  again  observed  the  phantom 
seen  by  the  author  on  8th  December.      She  turned  on  the  red  light  and 

Fig.   19S.     ^[ME.   E^isson's  photograph  of  7  Janlarv,   1914. 

SITTINGS  IN  NOV.  AND  DEC.  1913  AND  JAN.  1914      809 

then  ignited  the  magnesium  apparatus.  In  this  experiment,  also,  the 
medium's  hands  were  always  visible  and  excluded  from  participation. 
The  photographic  result  (Fig.  198)  completely  corroborates  the  author's 
observation  of  the  8th  December  1913. 

We  see  the  same  phantom  head  as  was  photographed  four  times 
previously  (23rd  February,  24th  March,  19th  May,  and  8th  June  1913), 
so  that  this  is  the  fifth  independent  representafion  of  the  same  kind  of 
face.  While  the  position  of  the  eyes  recalls  the  photograph  of  19th  May, 
the  drawing  of  the  moustache  is  more  stretched  out,  as  in  the  earlier 
photographs.  The  proportions  of  the  face  make  it  shorter  and  broader. 
The  forehead  especially  is  lower,  the  line  of  the  hair  being  specially 
drawn  down  on  the  left  side.  The  full  beard  is  shorter  and  differently 
shaped  from  that  in  the  previous  photographs.  A  foreshortening  of 
the  whole  face  is  also  quite  possible,  owing  to  the  somewhat  inclined 
position  of  the  structure  in  the  medium's  lap.  The  head  is  supported 
on  the  left  by  Eva's  hand,  and  is  evidently  pressed  down  by  the  chin. 
The  product  does  not  show  any  rents  or  folds  anywhere,  the  base  pre- 
senting a  homogeneous  textile  character.  The  impression  itself  is  so 
vivacious,  plastic,  and  sharp  that  the  use  of  a  black  and  white  drawing 
is  immediately  excluded.  Paper  is  also  excluded,  owing  to  the  soft 
fibrous  margins  of  the  picture. 

A  comparison  with  the  Miroir  portrait  of  the  King  of  Bulgaria 
shows  a  totally  different  structure  of  face  in  the  two  objects.  The  eyes 
in  the  Miroir  reproduction  give  quite  a  dead  impression  compared  with 
the  phenomenon,  quite  apart  from  the  different  position  of  the  eyeballs, 
and  other  deviations.  The  photograph  of  this  head  was  obtained  af tee- 
the chief  attacks  had  already  been  published. 

Sitting  of  the  9th  January  1914. 
Present. — Mme.  Bisson  and  the  author. 

Conditions  as  in  November  1913.  Chair  without  covering,  no  red 
lamp  m  the  cabinet,  reduced  white  illumination.  Medium's  hands 
visibly  controlled  during  the  whole  sitting,  so  that  their  co-operation  in 
the  phenomena  was  excluded.  Sometimes  they  were  held  by  me — for 
instance,  at  the  moment  when  Mme.  Bisson  opened  the  camera  and 
switched  on  the  red  light.     Clothing — whole  tricot  and  dress. 

9.11  P.M.  Hypnotisation  by  Mme.  Bisson.  Curtains  nearly  always 
open.  Only^at  a  few  moments  were  the  flaps  drawn  together  more 
tightly,  while  the  hands  always  remained  outside  the  curtains.  There 
was  no  change  of  hands,  which  would  enable  one  hand  to  hold  the  cur- 
tain while  the  other  was  withdrawn  into  the  dark. 

10.3  P.M.  A  greyish-white  patch  appears  on  Eva's  breast.  Again, 
we  have  the  impression  of  a  skin-like  substance  on  which  a  profile  was 
drawn.  I  approached  my  hand  carefully  to  the  structure  and  touched 
the  head  image  with  my  right  forefinger.  It  gave  the  sensation  of 
a  very  fine  slimy  skin,  and  through  it  I  could  feel  the  stuff  of  the  dress. 

10.5  P.M.     Red  light  switched  on. 

10.6  P.M.  Curtain  v.ide  open,  flash-light  ignited.  Eva's  hands  at 
the  moment  of  the  flash-light  remained  at  the  open  curtain,  and,  at  the 

310  PHENOMENA    OF    MATERIALISATION 

same  riioment,  I  quickly  touched  her  breast  with  my  right  hand,  but 
only  felt  the  dress.     Everything  disappeared  without  a  trace,  and  with- 
out the  participation  of  the  hands  or  the  head,  nor  could  anything  be 
found  of  the  picture  in  the  cabinet. 
10.8  P.M.     Another  plate  is  inserted. 

10.10  P.M.  The  same  image  appears  on  the  breast,  the  medium's 
hands  being  in  the  same  position  as  before,  but  the  image  is  less  distinct 
and  paler.  As  during  the  first  appearance,  the  substance  this  time  also 
shows  a  striped  structure. 

10.11  P.M.  A  second  photograph.  Probably  less  distinct  than 
before,  owing  to  the  magnesium  smoke  in  the  room.  The  image  imme- 
diately disappeared  with  the  flash-light,  and  without  any  change  in  the 
position  of  the  medium's  hands,  head,  or  body. 

10.28  P.M.  Close  of  the  sitting.  Final  examination  of  medium, 
cabinet  and  chair  negative. 

When  Eva  rose  from  her  chair  the  author  put  a  question  to  her  as 
to  whence  the  materialisation  had  come,  since,  on  this  day,  the  mouth 
had  been  out  of  action.  She  replied,  "  The  neck."  I  then  found  that 
the  neck,  under  the  hair-line,  was  covered  Avith  a  thin  layer  of  a  viscous 
substance.  I  immediately  took  two  glass  slides  and  obtained  some  of 
this  substance  for  microscopic  examination.  Eva  undressed  completely 
in  the  author's  presence,  put  on  her  dressing-gown,  and  went  to  bed  in 
the  somnambulistic  condition.  No  residues  of  the  phenomenon  were 
found  on  the  dress.  The  microscopic  examination  of  the  preparations, 
treated  with  iodine,  showed  numerous  plate  epithelia,  with  distinct 
nuclei  embedded  in  a  viscous  substance.  The  second  preparation  showed 
numerous  bacteria  in  the  form  of  rods  and  diplococcus.  The  epithelia 
in  question  resembled  those  found  in  a  mucous  membrane,  and  did  not 
give  a  horny  impression.  This  result  agrees  with  the  findings  pre- 
viously enumerated,  but  we  must  not  exclude  the  possibility  that  in 
scraping  the  neck  some  cells  of  the  epidermis  may  have  got  on  to  the 
glass  slide. 

The  photographs  (Figs.  199  and  200)  of  the  sitting  of  9th  January 
1914  completely  corroborate  the  visual  observations.  The  first  photo- 
graph shows  a  male  face,  rather  over  life-size,  on  an  apparently  compact 
fabric,  with  vertical  stripes,  the  quality  of  which  gives  no  impression  of 
paper.  All  the  margins  are  torn,  and  the  structure  resembles  a  coarse, 
but  strongly  characterised,  sketch  on  a  flat  ground.  We  remark  the 
strongly  curved  form  of  the  nose,  the  slanting  nostrils,  and  the  peculiar 
form  of  the  eye.  Several  deep  creases,  at  the  neck  and  on  the  forehead, 
prove  a  soft  basis.  The  position  of  the  mouth  is  only  marked  by  a 
shadow.     The  moustache  is  broad,  short  and  drooping. 

The  second  photograph,  taken  five  minutes  after  the  first,  shows  the 
whole  silhouette  of  the  head,  which,  m  comparison  with  the  head  of  the 
medium  (who,  in  both  cases,  appears  to  press  the  formation  with  her 
chin  against  her  breast),  is  over  life-size.  At  the  forehead  the  head  is 
bent  round,  and  this  reveals  the  soft  thin  fabric.  In  this  case  the  ear 
is  distinctly  drawn.  The  most  remarkable  change,  in  comparison  with 
the  first  photograph,  is  in  the  shape  of  the  moustache,  which  is  no  longer 
short  and  drooping,  but  reaches  to  the  middle  of  the  cheek  m  a  broad 
wavy  line.     The  deep  black  vertical  shadow,  which  in  Fig.  199  cuts  off 

1-u:.    199.     Author's   first   flashlight   photograph   of  9   January,    1914. 

Fig.  200.     Author's  second  flashlight  photograph,  five  minutes  after  Fig.  199. 

SITTINGS  WITH  EVA  C.  IN  MAY  AND  JUNE  1914        311 

the  moustache  at  the  corner  of  the  mouth,  has  disappeared.  The 
outline  of  the  chin  is  rounder,  and  distinctly  changed  in  comparison 
with  Fig.  199.  The  vertical  folds  and  irregularities  of  the  first  photo- 
graph have  remained,  and  serve  to  identify  the  two  pictures. 

That  we  have  here  no  previously  arranged  art  journal  sheet  goes 
without  saying,  but  the  changes  in  the  outline,  and  in  the  drawing  of 
the  moustache,  betray  again  the  fluctuating  and  variable  character  of 
these  teleplastic  products,  a  point  which  weighs  heavily  against  the 
hypothesis  of  fraud,  for  how  is  it  possible  to  transform  the  drawing  and 
shape  of  the  same  product  in  this  manner  in  five  minutes  ?  The  trans- 
formation process  of  materialised  products,  as  already  pointed  out,  is 
one  of  the  strongest  proofs  for  their  authenticity.  To  this  we  must  add 
the  extinction  of  the  phantom  pictures,  which  has  frequently  been 
observed,  while  the  medium  was  motionless  in  a  reduced  white  light, 
and  could  not  have  used  her  hands  or  her  mouth.  These  new  observa- 
tions by  the  author,  together  with  those  of  other  witnesses,  confirm  the 
facts  observed  in  other  sittings,  and  eliminate  the  hypothesis  of  fraudu- 
lent manipulation. 

Sittings  with  Eva  C.  in  May  and  June  1914  (Paris). 

Experimental  Conditions. 

In  April  1914  Mme.  Bisson  moved  to  No.  l^Rue  de  La  Muette  (fifth 
floor).  Here  she  arranged  the  seance  room.) in  the  manner  described 
before,  so  that  the  cabinet  stood  detached,  and  could  be  inspected  from 
both  sides.  The  wall  of  the  room  forming  the  back  of  the  cabinet  was 
part  of  the  lift  well.  The  frame  of  the  cabinet  was  made  of  simple 
smooth  laths,  to  which  the  black  lining  was  attached  by  nails. 

The  medium's  chair  consisted  of  simple  black  bamboo  and  wood 
laths.  A  white  electric  lamp  of  thirty-two  candle-power  hung  behind 
a  screen,  and  its  brightness  was  reduced  by  some  dark  cloth.  The 
illumination  was  bright  enough  to  read  print  easily. 

The  observers  took  their  places  immediately  in  front  of  the  cabinet, 
Mme.  Bisson,  as  a  rule,  on  Seat  2  {see  Diagram). 

Red  light  was  arranged  for,  but  was  not  used,  since  there  was  no 
intention  of  continuing  the  photographic  records.  The  seance  room 
was  always  locked.  It  was  unlocked  regularly  by  one  of  the  observers 
before  the  sitting,  and  during  the  sitting  it  was  kept  locked  from  the 
inside. 

The  roof  of  the  cabinet  was  8|  feet  high.  The  author  could  not 
touch  it  without  mounting  on  a  chair.  Before  and  after  each  sitting 
the  cabinet  was  closely  examined,  as  was  the  chair,  but  always  with  a 
negative  result. 

Initial  Control  of  the  Medium. 

The  seance  costume  worn  by  Eva  C.  consisted  of  a  black  cotton  tricot 
of  one  piece,  laced  up  the  back  from  the  waist  to  the  neck,  so  that 
the  whole  body  was  covered  by  it  except  the  hands  and  the  head.     Over 

312 

PHENOMENA    OF    MATERIALISATION 

this  tricot  she  put  on  the  black  apron  dress  described  on  several  previous 
occasions,  which  was  sewn  up  at  the  neck  and  the  sleeves  while  it 
remained  open  behind.  In  all  the  sittings  these  two  articles  of  clothing 
were  closely  examined  in  Eva's  absence  by  the  sitters,  sometimes  with 
the  help  of  an  electric  lamp.  The  costume  remained  in  the  hands  of  one 
of  the  observers  until  it  was  put  on  by  the  medium. 

Sea /ice  ffoo/?7 

k 

O 

CaS/nef 

a 

o 

D 

/V/nts/ou^ 

1 

»^ 

a  _  Ayea^/c/mji  cha/r 

S.  -  Scree/? 

C  -  /^//^/^/ 

<:y^.-Afafg/7ej/u/77  ap/?ara/-uj 

e  _  Cesr/?7era 

DiAGRAJI    VIII. 

> 

Eva  enteredVthe  seance  room  wearing  nothing  but  a  blue  dressing- 
gown,  and  accompanied  by  Mme.  Bisson.  She  then  put  on  the  tricot 
and  dress  in  the  presence  of  the  sitters,  who  closely  watched  all  her 
movements.  Then  Mme.  Bisson  closed  and  sewed  up  the  dress  as 
described.     The  medium's  mouth  was  then  closely  examined  by  means 

SITTINGS  WITH  EVA  C.  IN  MAY  AND  JUNE  1914        313 

of  a  spatula,  to  which  an  electric  lamp  was  attached.  The  ears  were 
examined,  and  she  was  made  to  blow  through  each  nostril  in  turn.  The 
medium's  hair  was  taken  down,  and  after  the  combs  had  been  removed, 
nothing  suspicious  was  found.  The  neck  and  wrist  fastenings  were 
then  examined  once  more.  Only  after  the  observers  had  declared  that 
Eva  C.  had  nothing  suspicious  about  her  body  was  she  allowed  to  enter 
the  cabinet,  and  take  her  seat. 

Hypnotisation. 

Two  of  the  observers  present  then  took  their  seats  in  places  1  and^3, 
Mme.  Bisson  sitting  between  them  in  place  2.  She  takes  the  medium's 
thumbs  and  hypnotises  her  by  fixation  in  about  thirty  seconds,  where- 
upon the  medium  subsides  into  the  chair.  The  main  illumination  over 
the  chimney  is  then  extinguished,  the  lamp  behind  the  screen  being  left 
on.     The  difference  of  illumination  does  not  dazzle  the  eyes. 

The  medium's  hands  were  not  withdrawn  for  an  instant  behind  the 
curtains  in  the  sittings  about  to  be  described.  They  remained  the 
whole  time  visible  to  the  gaze  of  those  present  outside  the  curtain,  and 
either  lying  on  the  medium's  knees,  holding  the  curtain  themselves,  or 
grasped  by  the  sitters  in  places  1  and  3.  This  excludes  all  attempts  at 
explanations  which  presuppose  the  participation  of  Eva's  hands. 

During  the  productions  the  curtains  above  the  visible  hands  were 
occasionally  closed  by  one  of  those  present  with  a  simple  clip,  in  order 
to  cut  off  the  light.  During  the  demonstration  itself  Eva  C.  opens  and 
closes  the  curtains  with  her  hands,  which  remain  always  visible. 

Other  Conditions  of  Control. 

Mme.  Bisson  never  entered  the  cabinet  during  the  sittings  about  to 
be  described,  but,  in  a  few  cases,  one  of  the  men  present  (a  savant  or 
journalist),  entered  the  cabinet  in  order  to  lay  his  hands  on  Eva's  head 
and  neck.  There  was  no  smging  or  formation  of  chains.  Quiet  con- 
versation was  carried  on,  but  attention  was  not  diverted  from  the  control 
for  an  instant. 

The  persons  sitting  next  to  the  curtain  could,  at  any  time,  touch 
Eva's  hands,  so  as  to  satisfy  themselves  that  they  were  the  warm  living 
hands  of  a  human  bemg,  and  not  wax  imitations.  When  they  wished 
to  do  so,  they  could  also  take  hold  of  the  medium's  hands  and  hold  them, 
so  that  some  of  the  phenomena  took  place  while  the  medium's  hands 
were  being  held.  Sometimes  the  medium  seized  Mme.  Bisson's  hands 
ostensibly  to  gather  force. 

Illumination  of  the  Teleplastic  Products  with  Electric  Lamps. 

On  account  of  the  fugitive  character  of  the  materialisation  pheno- 
mena, the  visual  impression  is  often  not  sufficiently  precise  to  discern 
any  details.  In  order  to  remedy  this  defect  an  electric  hand-lamp  was 
connected  to  the  supply  circuit  by  means  of  a  flexible  cord.  It  could 
be  made  to  shme  with  a  red,  green,  or  white  light.  On  such  occasions 
one  of  those  present  undertook  the  duty  of  illuminating  the  phenomenon 
for  a  few  seconds,  which  enabled  those  sitting  behind  to  see  it  distinctly. 

314  PHENOMENA    OF    MATERIALISATION 

Final  Control. 

At  the  close  of  every  sitting  Eva  C,  still  in  the  somnambulic  con- 
dition, rose  from  the  arm-chair,  stepped  in  front  of  the  curtain,  and  was 
again  examined  as  during  the  initial  control,  but  in  the  reverse  order. 
Her  mouth  was  illuminated,  and  her  hair,  ears  and  hands  examined. 
Then,  in  our  presence,  the  seams  were  undone,  the  tricot  and  dress  were 
taken  off,  and  remained  in  the  hands  of  the  observers.  The  medium 
was  then  dressed  in  her  dressing-gown  and  went  to  bed,  still  in  the 
somnambulic  condition.  The  cabmet,  chair  and  seance  costume  were 
then  finally  examined,  always  with  a  negative  result.  All  the  records 
quoted  below  were  made  by  the  author,  during  the  sittings. 

Sitting  of  the  15th  May  1914. 

Present. — Henriques  Philippe  (contributor  to  the  Monde  Illusire), 
Mr  Crawford  (British  savant).  Van  Eck,  Dumoir  van  Twick  (Secre- 
tary of  the  Society  for  Psychical  Studies,  The  Hague),  also  two 
ladies,  Mme.  Bisson  and  the  author. 

Arrangements  and  control  as  described.  Van  Twick  took  the  place 
to  Mme.  Bisson's  right,  IMr  Crawford  the  place  on  her  left,  while  the 
author  sat  behind  in  the  third  row. 

9.14  P.M.     Hypnotisation  of  the  medium  by  Mme.  Bisson. 

9.30  P.M.     Pains  and  muscular  efforts.     Hands  always  visible. 

9.55  P.M.  Mediumistic  labour.  Mme.  Bisson  closes  the  curtain 
above  the  medium's  hands. 

10.9  P.M.     Strong  suggestions  towards  materialisation. 

10.25  P.M.  Eva  opens  the  curtain.  A  triangular  grey  mass,  about 
10  inches  long,  lies  on  her  left  shoulder.  The  product  was  illuminated 
by  a  red  torch,  and  disappeared  under  the  eyes  of  those  present.  The 
author,  from  his  seat,  could  not  observe  any  details,  but  the  men  sitting 
in  front  declared  that  they  observed  the  transformation  of  the  piece 
into  stripes,  which  had  a  motion  of  their  own. 

10.45  P.M.  The  skin-like  substance  becomes  visible  on  Eva's  breast. 
I  distinctly  recognise,  on  this  surface,  the  profile  of  a  male  portrait,  life- 
size.  The  hair  appeared  to  be  genuine  and  the  ear  was  clearly  shown, 
though  the  picture  appeared  distorted.  Illuminated  with  a  red  torch, 
the  phenomenon  disappeared  before  the  eyes  of  those  present,  in  a 
fraction  of  a  second,  while  the  medium's  body  remained  motionless. 
Eva  immediately  bent  forward  out  of  the  cabinet  and  allowed  us  to 
touch  her  head  and  breast.  Her  hands  had  not  changed  their  position. 
The  sitting  closed.  The  final  examination  was  negative,  but  the  dress 
showed  traces  of  viscous  moisture  at  the  neck. 

Sitting  of  the  19th  May  1914. 

Present. — Mr  W.  B.  Yeats  (London),  Dr  G.  Montalescot  (physician), 
M.  NicoUe  (of  the  Annales),  Countess  W.,  Mme.  Bisson,  and  the  author. 

Yeats  sits  on  the  left,  Montalescot  to  the  right  of  Mme.  Bisson,  and 
the  author  in  the  third  row. 

9.4  P.M.    Hypnotisation.    Eva's  hands  visible  during  the  whole  sitting. 

9.32  P.M.  Mediumistic  labour.  Accelerated  respiration.  Whim- 
permg  and  gasping. 

SITTINGS  WITH  EVA  C.  IN  MAY  AND  JUNE  1914        315 

9.45  P.M.  On  Eva's  left  shoulder  a  white  luminous  material  becomes 
visible. 

9.55  P.M.  The  teleplastic  mass  changes  its  position.  It  assumes 
a  square  form,  10  inches  long  and  8  inches  wide,  lies  on  the  medium's 
breast,  and  resembles  a  serviette.  Repeated  illumination  with  the 
electric  torch  clearly  shows  a  picture  in  the  state  of  development. 

10.5  P.M.  During  the  next  illumination  the  author  has  the  distinct 
impression  of  a  stiff  white  lace  fabric,  closely  resembling  the  fabric 
materialised  from  the  mouth  of  the  Polish  medium  Stanislava  P.,  on 
the  occasion  of  the  kinematograph  record. 

10.8  P.M.  A  new  exposure  of  a  few  seconds  shows  a  skin-like  surface, 
with  the  front  view  of  the  face  of  an  old  woman.  All  those  present 
confirmed  this  observation.  Those  sitting  closer  maintain  that  the 
nose  was  plastically  developed. 

10.30  P.M.     Close  of  the  sitting.     Final  control  negative. 

The  next  morning  Mme.  Bisson  communicated  the  following  by 
letter  :  "  After  you  had  left,  I  went  into  Eva's  bedroom,  and  found  her 
still  in  the  critical  condition.  I  took  her  back  into  the  seance  room, 
and  had  most  interesting  manifestations.  The  image  of  an  old  woman 
showed  itself  about  twenty  times,  and  I  believe  I  recognised  in  her  my 
deceased  mother.  I  succeeded  on  this  occasion  in  photographing  two 
heads,  one  of  a  man  and  one  of  the  woman.  Eva  fainted  away,  and  I 
took  her  to  bed. 

Sitting  of  the  22nd  May  1914. 

Present. — Mr  E.  N.  Bennett  (formerly  Fellow  of  Hertford  College, 
Oxford,  and  M.P.  ;  a  member  of  the  Council  of  the  Society  for 
Psychical  Research,  London),  W.  B.  Yeats,  Commandant  Romain, 
Mme.  Bisson,  and  the  author. 

Bennett  sat  to  the  right,  Yeats  to  the  left,  of  Mme.  Bisson.  The 
author  in  the  second  row. 

Eva's  disposition  was  rather  unfavourable. 

9.10  P.M.     Hypnotisation. 

9.55  P.M.  Bennett  holds  both  Eva's  hands,  and  seems  to  notice  on 
her  left  shoulder  a  piece  of  white  material. 

9.59  P.M.  Bennett  observed  a  materialisation  process  in  the 
medium's  lap. 

10.5  P.M.  On  the  medium's  thighs,  in  various  places,  small  luminous 
strips  and  pomts  appear  for  a  few  seconds,  and  disappear  before  the  eyes 
of  the  sitters. 

10.9  P.M.     Strong  crisis. 

10.25  P.M.  Cessation  of  the  phenomena.  Close  of  the  sitting. 
Final  examination  negative. 

Sitting  of  the  26th  May  1914. 

Present. — Mr  Yeats,  Professor  Courtier  (Director  of  the  Physiological 
Laboratory  of  the  Sorbonne),  M.  and  Mme.  Faral,  Mme.  D., 
Mme.  Bisson,  and  the  author. 

Initial  control  by  Courtier  and  Yeats,  as  described  in  the  introduc- 

316  PHENOMENA    OF    MATERIALISATION 

tion.     Courtier  sits  at  the  curtain,  on  Mme.  Bisson's  right,  Yeats  on  the 
left,  and  the  author  in  the  second  row. 

9.5  P.M.  Hypnotisation.  Eva's  hands  were  always  visible,  and 
often  held  by  Courtier. 

9.40  P.M.  Increased  muscular  efforts.  "  Cela  vient."  Eva  is  first 
comparatively  quiet,  then  she  screams  with  pain,  as  if  under  an  operation. 

9.42  P.M.  Whitish  luminous  patches,  and  points  of  variable  size,  on 
the  upper  arm  and  dress.  In  order  not  to  disturb  the  development,  the 
curtains  are  closed  with  a  clip  above  the  hands,  which  are  always  visible 
in  front  of  the  curtain. 

9.46  P.M.     Increased  excitement. 

9.50  P.M.  A  phosphorescent  strongly  luminous  mass  in  the  shape 
of  a  pear-shaped  pearl,  about  an  inch  long,  forms  on  the  medium's  chest. 

9.55  P.M.  Eva's  hands  held  by  Courtier  and  Yeats.  Courtier  also 
takes  the  medium's  feet  between  his  own,  while  his  left  hand  lies  on  the 
medium's  knees.  The  curtain  is  quickly  opened,  and  a  white  substance 
emerges  from  the  medium's  nose  and  mouth. 

10.1  P.M.  The  mass  assumes  a  flat,  leaf-like  shape,  8  or  10  inches 
square,  and  is  now  observed  on  the  left  breast  and  shoulder.  The  sub- 
stance develops  while  hands  and  feet  are  held. 

10.5  P.M.  On  opening  the  curtain,  everything  disappears.  When 
the  observers  had  satisfied  themselves  of  the  total  disappearance, 
without  movement  of  the  medium,  they  release  her  hands 
^i^;10.6  P.M.  The  hands  are  still  at  the  curtain,  and  the  white  substance 
again  becomes  visible  on  the  medium's  breast,  resembling,  to  the 
uninitiated,  a  handkerchief. 

10.12  P.M.     A  pause. 

10.15  P.M.     At  the  next  opening  nothing  is  seen. 

10.19  P.M.  Renewed  convulsive  efforts,  especially  of  the  arms  and 
the  hands,  which  clutch  the  curtains.  Eva  pulls  at  the  right-hand 
curtain,  so  that  the  curtam-rod  hangs  loose.  The  sitting  is  continued, 
while  the  medium  utters  cries  of  pain. 

10.21  P.M.  Renewed  appearance  of  the  white  mass  on  the  medium's 
chest.  On  Mme.  Bisson  illuminating  it  with  a  blue  electric  light,  it 
immediately  disappears.  The  blue  lamp  was  then  replaced  by  a  red 
lamp. 

10.29  P.M.  The  substance  has  the  form  of  a  long  acute-angled 
triangle,  about  10  inches  in  length,  and  lies  on  the  medium's  left  breast. 
This  mass  also  disappears  on  illuminating  it  with  a  red  lamp. 

10.30  P.M.  Strong  suggestion  by  those  present  in  order  to  increase 
the  phenomena.     "  AUez  done,  donne  bien,"  etc. 

10.31  P.M.  Courtier  enters  the  cabinet  and  holds  the  medium's 
head  with  his  hands,  in  order  to  soothe  her.  Eva's  hands  are  constantly 
visible  at  the  curtain. 

10.32  P.M.  While  Courtier  is  still  in  the  cabinet,  the  white  substance 
appears  on  the  medium's  knees,  and  then  disappears. 

10.35  P.M.     Courtier  returns  to  his  place. 

10.37  P.M.     Close  of  the  sitting. 

During  the  final  control  Courtier  holds  the  medium's  hands  from  the 
beginning.  The  result  was  negative.  The  dress  at  the  left  shoulder 
was  moist,  and  showed  numerous  white  spots. 

SITTINGS  WITH  EVA  C.  IN  MAY  AND  JUNE  1914        817 

Courtier  declared  to  the  author  at  the  close  of  the  sitting  that  after 
the  series  of  ten  sittings,  at  which  he  had  been  present,  he  had  no  doubt 
of  the  authenticity  of  the  phenomena,  and  that  there  was  no  question 
of  fraudulent  manipulations  or  rumination. 

Sitting  of  the  29th  May  1914. 

Present. — M.  Divoire  (on  the  staff  of  the  Intransigeant),  Louis  Ginies 
and  R.  Guasco  (on  the  staff  of  the  journal  Opinion),  Henriques 
Philippe  (on  the  staff  of  the  Monde  Illustre),  Mme.  D.,  Mme.  Bisson, 
and  the  author. 

9.7  P.M.     Hypnotisation  in  thirty  seconds. 
9.30  P.M.     Whimpering. 
9.34  P.M.     The  medium  says  "  Cela  vient." 
10.40  P.M.     Nothing, 

10.45  P.M.  Divoire  enters  the  cabinet  and  puts  his  hands  on  the 
medium's  forehead  and  neck. 

10.50  P.M.  After  Divoire  has  left  the  cabinet,  small  wisps  of  white 
material  appear  on  the  left  shoulder. 

10.51  P.M.  Whimpering  and  mediumistic  labour.  A  thread  about 
5  inches  long,  and  apparently  luminous,  emerges  from  the  mouth,  and 
lies  on  her  left  breast. 

10.55  P.M.     Gasping  respirations. 

11  P.M.  A  piece  of  substance  about  an  inch  long  appears  on  the  left 
upper  arm. 

11.2  P.M.  Everything  has  disappeared,  though  the  hands  were  con- 
stantly visible. 

11.10  P.M.  Though  Divoire  enters  the  cabinet  again,  and  tries  to 
encourage  the  medium,  the  power  to-day  does  not  seem  to  suffice  for 
strong  materialisation. 

11.55  P.M.     Close  of  the  sitting.     Final  examination  negative. 

Sitting  of  the  2nd  June  1914. 

Present. — M.  Philippe,  M.  and  Mme.  Grullu,  Engineer  Fauconnet  and 
his  wife,  Comte  Roger  de  Fontenay,  Marquise  de  D.,  Mme.  Bisson, 
and  the  author. 

M.  Fauconnet  sat  at  Mme.  Bisson's  right,  M.  Grullu  at  the  left,  and 
the  author  in  the  second  row  near  the  fireplace. 

9.5  P.M.     Hypnotisation. 

9.10  P.M.     Moaning.     Hands  held  by  Grullu  and  Fauconnet. 

9.15  P.M.     "  Cela  vient."     Strong  whimpering. 

9.22  P.M.     A  white  substance  becomes  visible  on  the  left  shoulder. 

9.25  to  9.30  P.M.  Hands  still  held  by  the  two  men.  The  white  mass, 
as  shown  at  the  next  exposure,  has  formed  into  a  broad  surface  extending 
across  Eva's  breast.     The  medium's  hands  hold  the  curtain. 

9.32  P.M.  Features  are  distinctly  seen  on  the  material,  being  a  front 
view  of  a  bearded  male  face,  life-size,  extending  from  the  right  shoulder 
to  the  left  hip.  It  was  illuminated  twice  with  the  red  torch  by 
Mme.  Bisson,  and  once  by  Philippe.  Repeated  appearance  and  dis- 
appearance of  the  picture.     The  eyes  are  clearly  directed  upwards,  and 

318  PHENOMENA    OF   MATERIALISATION 

the  moustache  is  clearly  visible.  The  flat  portrait  recalls  the  whole 
phantom  previously  described. 

9.45  P.M.     Philippe  illuminates  the  product  again. 

9.50  P.M.  Everything  has  disappeared.  Close  of  the  sitting.  Final 
examination  negative. 

In  a  letter  of  4th  June,  addressed  to  Mme.  Bisson,  Mme.  Fauconnet 
confirms  her  own  and  her  husband's  impressions  of  the  sitting  of  2nd  June 
as  follows  : — "  In  a  good  light  I  could  see  the  following  quite  clearly  : 
At  first,  on  the  left  shoulder,  and  then  on  the  breast  and  on  the  medium's 
right  shoulder,  a  male  face,  on  a  flat  surface,  with  beard  and  moustache. 
At  the  second  illumination  the  eyes  were  distinctly  seen.  I  observed, 
with  special  interest,  the  rapidity  with  which  the  whitish  material 
disappeared  and  changed  its  place.  Immediately  after  I  had  seen  the 
face  the  medium  again  opened  the  curtains,  and  everything  had  dis- 
appeared without  the  slightest  change  in  the  control  of  the  hands.  The 
appearance  of  these  materialisations  is  certainly  most  remarkable,  and 
still  disappointing.  Why  ?  During  the  whole  sitting  the  medium's 
hands  never  disappeared,  and  certainly  not  during  the  materialisations. 
The  experimental  arrangement  of  these  sittings  is  beyond  all  criticism, 
even  that  of  the  most  malignant  opponents.  I  greatly  appreciate  the 
courage  and  energy  which  you  devote  to  this  thorny  subject.  But  the 
present  result  should  give  you  complete  satisfaction  by  rewarding  you 
for  all  your  efforts,  and  give  you  the  necessary  enthusiasm  to  continue 
your  studies." 

Sitting  of  the  5th  June  1914. 

Present. — Ginies,   Henriques   Philippe,   Professor    Courtier,   Mme.   G., 
M.  Gandara,  Mme.  Bisson,  and  the  author. 

Conditions  and  control  as  in  previous  sittings.  Ginies  sits  on 
Mme.  Bisson' s  left,  and  Courtier  on  the  right. 

9.15  P.M.     Hypnosis. 

10.12  P.M.  First  signs  of  a  positive  sitting.  Hands  always  outside 
the  curtain. 

10.15  P.M.     Whimpering  and  screaming. 

10.17  P.M.     Eva's  hands  held  by  Ginies  and  Courtier. 

10.18  P.M.  Large  white  flakes  on  the  medium's  left  shoulder,  which 
disappear  again. 

10.20  P.M.  Courtier  enters  the  cabinet  and  holds  Eva's  head,  while 
Ginies  holds  both  Eva's  hands.  Medium's  pulse,  110.  Strong  convul- 
sive muscular  contractions  in  both  arms.  The  author  takes  Courtier's 
place,  and  the  medium  grasps  his  hand,  closing  upon  it  like  an  iron 
clamp.     Courtier  touches  the  medium's  neck  and  forehead* 

10.28  P.M.  Courtier  resumes  his  seat.  Eva  holds  the  curtains  with 
her  hands. 

10.40  P.M.     Mediumistic  labour. 

10.42  to  10.45  P.M.  A  white  mass  is  visible  on  Eva's  face,  giving  the 
impression  of  a  large  white  cloth,  which  appears  to  emerge  from  her 
mouth,  cover  the  left  half  of  her  face,  and  hang  down  over  her  hair  on 
to  the  left  shoulder. 

SITTINGS  WITH  EVA  C.  IN  MAY  AND  JUNE  1914        319 

10.46  P.M.  The  substance,  resembling  a  large  white  skin,  has  laid 
itself  on  Eva's  breast. 

10.50  to  10.55  P.M.  Philippe  twice  shines  the  red  electric  light  into 
the  cabinet.  The  skin -like  fabric  hanging  down  from  the  left  shoulder 
on  to  the  medium's  breast  shows  irregular  shadings  on  its  surface,  but 
no  recognisable  features. 

11  to  11.5  P.M.  I  twice  illuminated  the  skin-like  surface  from  above 
with  a  red  torch,  whereupon  Courtier,  the  other  observers  and  I  agree 
in  recognising  a  male  portrait,  again  recalling  the  head  of  the  whole 
phantom.  It  is  the  same  as  the  head  in  the  last  sitting,  but  now 
resembles  a  crumpled  mask.  On  illuminating  the  cabinet  for  the  third 
time,  the  product  has  disappeared. 

11.5  P.M.  Courtier  enters  the  cabinet,  holds  Eva's  head,  while  her 
hands  are  held  outside  the  curtain  by  Ginies,  and  in  that  position  he 
sees  a  white  piece  of  material  on  the  medium's  left  shoulder,  which  falls 
into  the  medium's  lap,  before  his  eyes,  and  disappears.  Courtier  dic- 
tated these  observations  to  the  author. 

11.10  P.M.  Eva  rose,  stood  in  front  of  the  cabinet,  and  was  evi- 
dently under  the  impression  that  the  end  of  her  performances  had  come  ; 
but  suddenly  she  called  out  "  Cela  revient,"  and  returned  to  her  seat. 
Her  efforts  were,  however,  fruitless,  and  at  11.12  the  sitting  closed,  with 
a  negative  final  examination.  The  left  shoulder  of  dress  and  tricot,  and 
some  parts  of  the  upper  sleeve,  showed  a  viscous  moisture.  During  the 
inspection  of  the  mouth  I  scraped  the  tongue  with  a  spoon,  and  collected 
the  product  on  a  glass  slide,  for  microscopic  examination. 

Sitting  of  the  9th  June  1914. 

Present. — Camille  Flammarion  (astronomer),  whose  lady  secretary  noted 
all  his  observations  during  the  sitting ;  Dr  L.,  M.  de  Vesme, 
Henriques  Philippe,  three  ladies,  Mme.  Bisson,  and  the  author. 

Initial  control  by  Flammarion  and  Dr  L.  (including  an  examination 
of  the  back  of  the  cabinet  from  the  outside).  Dr  L.  sat  on  Mme.  Bisson's 
left,  Flammarion  on  the  right,  author  in  the  second  row. 

9.9  P.M.  Hypnotisation.  Eva's  hands  remained  visible  during  the 
whole  sitting  outside  the  curtain. 

9.21  P.M.     Eva  :    "  Je  sens  quelque  chose." 

9.25  P.M.  The  materialisation  process  begins  in  the  shape  of  small 
greyish- white  flakes  on  Eva's  breast. 

9.40  P.M.  On  the  left  upper  arm  a  piece  of  grey  material  appears 
about  one-third  of  an  inch  broad  and  one  inch  long.  Dr  L.  and  the 
author  now  hold  the  medium's  hands.  The  material  grows  and 
shrinks,  and  seems  to  phosphoresce.  At  Eva's  request,  Dr  L.  enters 
the  cabinet  and  holds  her  forehead  and  neck.  Under  these  conditions 
(with  Eva's  hands  outside  the  curtain)  the  substance  is  visible  on  her 
left  shoulder  as  a  greyish-white  patch. 

10.6  P.M.     Dr  L.  leaves  the  cabinet. 

10.16  P.M.  Eva's  hands  held  by  Dr  L.  and  Flammarion.  Medium- 
istic  labour. 

10.20  P.M.  Under  the  same  conditions,  a  fairly  broad  white  band 
becomes  visible  on  the  left  shoulder  and  hangs  down  over  the  upper 

320  PHENOMENA    OF   MATERIALISATION 

arm.  It  may  have  been  8  inches  long  and  3  inches  broad,  and  looked 
like  a  striped  skin  of  whitish-grey  colour. 

10.21  P.M.  The  band  falls  into  Eva's  lap,  while  Dr  L.  and  Flam- 
marion  still  hold  Eva's  hands.  Dr  L.  again  enters  the  cabinet  and  sees 
a  shred  on  her  left  shoulder,  while  Flammarion  is  holding  both  her  hands. 

10.25  P.M.     L.  resumes  his  seat. 

10.30  P.M.  A  piece  of  white  material  again  appears  on  the  left 
shoulder,  resembling  a  handkerchief  spread  out.  It  is  about  8  inches 
wide  and  12  inches  long.  Eva's  hands  are  again  held  by  L.  and 
Flammarion. 

10.35  P.M.  The  same  control,  while  Mme.  Bisson  closes  the  curtain 
above  Eva's  hands. 

10.40  P.M.  The  phenomenon  shows  again  on  the  left  upper  arm,  in 
the  shape  of  a  flake  2  or  3  inches  long. 

10.41  P.M.  The  same  appearance  is  visible  on  the  right  upper  arm, 
without  any  change  in  the  control. 

10.42  P.M.  A  packet  of  white  material,  half  the  size  of  a  hand,  lies 
on  the  right  shoulder. 

10.45  P.M.  Close  of  the  sitting.  Final  examination  negative. 
Tricot  and  dress  are  moistened  in  the  places  where  we  saw  the  material, 
and  some  of  the  patches  are  already  dry,  leaving  a  grey  crust.  One  has 
the  impression  that  the  material  penetrates  the  tricot  and  dress  in  a 
liquid  state. 

Flammarion  considers  the  phenomena  evidential,  and  regards 
fraudulent  manipulations  as  excluded  by  the  method  of  control. 

The  following  elements  appeared  remarkable  to  various  observers  : 
The  change  in  the  forms  of  the  substance,  which  was  sometimes  leaf- 
shaped  and  sometimes  kidney-shaped  ;  the  visible  growth  and  displace- 
ment of  the  phenomena  ;  the  penetration  through  the  medium's  dress  ; 
and  the  liquid  precipitate  of  the  matter. 

Result  of  the  Observations. 

C.  de  Vesme,  Editor  of  the  Annales  des  Sciences  PsycMques,  an 
observer  well  known  for  his  critical  acumen,  published  in  those  Annales 
in  May,  No.  14,  his  observations  and  impressions  of  his  sittings  with 
Mme.  Bisson.  They  fully  corroborate  those  of  the  author.  We  may 
quote  some  passages  : — 

"  We  know  that  nearly  all  persons  who  attended  these  sittings  in 
Paris  share  my  positive  verdict  on  the  phenomena.  That  was  not  the 
case  in  Munich,  and  that  is  not  surprising.  Similar  experiences  were 
had  with  Eusapia  and  other  excellent  mediums.  The  sittings  succeed 
better  in  one  milieu  than  in  another,  and  since  we  have  become 
acquainted  with  the  mental  disposition  of  the  Munich'gentlemen,  from 
their  publications  in  Germany  and  in  Paris,  we  are  prepared  for  anything. 

"  The  impression"  produced  on  those  who  do  not' attend  the  sittings 
is  mostly  unfavourable.  Why  ?  Because  they  have  no  opportunity 
of  convincing  themselves  of  the  reality  of  the  phenomena  ;  because  they 
have  only  read  the  reviews  and  seen  the  photographs.  Their  attention 
concentrates  itself  chiefly  upon  those  photographs,  which  create  some 

RESULT   OF   THE   OBSERVATIONS  321 

suspicion,  and  it  is  just  the  latter  which  have  been  mostly  published  in 
the  journals  and  discussed  and  interpreted  in  every  possible  way,  while 
no  attention  has  been  paid  to  the  good  photographs. 

"  Mme.  Bisson  and  Dr  von  Schrcnek  Notzing  were  quite  aware  of 
that,  and  they  would,  no  doubt,  have  omitted  these  pictures  from  their 
books,  if  that  had  been  an  honourable  proceeding.  Just  as  it  is  expedient 
not  to  utter  every  truth,  it  might  also  have  been  expedient  not  to  publish 
every  photograph  of  genuine  phenomena.  But  the  authors  were  not 
guided  by  such  considerations,  for  they  knew,  as  all  those  who  are  really 
experienced  in  this  subject  know,  that  the  admixture  of  apparent  fraud 
(and  sometimes  of  real  fraud)  is  a  mysterious  and  unpleasant  accompani- 
ment of  mediumistic  phenomena.  The  public  at  large  is  quite  ignorant 
regarding  these  questions.  It  behaves  just  as  it  did  seventy  years  aoo, 
with  regard  to  the  phenomena  of  somnambulism.  Some  of  the  medium- 
istic photographs  resemble  certain  faces  in  an  illustrated  journal,  and 
a  judgment  is  at  once  arrived  at.  That  is  the  general  rule.  Simplicity 
itself  becomes  a  detective." 

Gabriel  Delanne  and  L.  Chevreuil,  who  had  been  present  at  a  number 
of  sittmgs,  vouch  for  the  genuineness  of  Eva's  phenomena,  in  a  series 
of  articles  in  the  Revue  du  Spiritisme,  March  to  June  1914,  waging  a 
successful  controversy  against  the  Barkley-Durville  attacks. 

Dr  Bourbon,  who  attended  many  of  the  sittings  previously  reported, 
publishes  his  testimony,  based  on  eighteen  months  of  personal  observa- 
tions at  the  Bissons'  residence,  in  the  Annales  for  1914,  and  fully  corro- 
borates the  genuineness  of  the  phenomena.  He  fully  describes  the  whole 
experimental  arrangements,  and  shows  the  absurdity  of  the  hypothesis 
of  fraud,  or  of  rumination.  I  shall  confine  myself  to  one  of  his  observa- 
tions, made  in  my  absence  : — 

"  In  a  sitting  in  July  1913,  a  grey  substance  appeared  on  the  medium's 
shoulder  and  underwent  various  changes,  sliding  down  on  to  her  upper 
arm  and  breast,  and  carrying  out  a  series  of  lively  movements.  At  the 
same  time  a  finger  gradually  formed  in  the  region  of  the  left  groin,  and 
showed  some  movement.  Suddenly  the  substance  mentioned  fell  upon 
the  finger,  quickly  folded  itself  about  it,  and  laid  itself  into  the  medium's 
lap,  covermg  her  thighs.  The  observation  of  the  whole  process  was 
facilitated  by  the  fact  that  Eva  held  the  curtains  wide  open,  and  never 
attempted  to  close  them,  allowing  her  hands  to  rest  outside  the  curtains 
on  her  knees."  Dr  Bourbon  concludes  as  follows  : — "  At  present  we 
lack  the  means  of  classifying  this  kind  of  phenomena,  which  cannot  be 
included  in  any  class  of  known  experiences.  Photography  can  only 
prove  the  absence  of  collective  hallucination.  It  tells  us  nothing  about 
the  changes,  the  development,  the  causation,  or  the  essence,  of  these 
phenomena.  It  would  be  quite  impossible  to  record  much  of  what  I 
have  seen  on  the  photographic  plate ;  still  less  on  the  kinema- 
tograph." 

If  we  consider  that  this  testimony  is  that  of  an  eminent  French 
physician  who  has  grown  grey  in  his  science,  and  is  based  upon  a  year 
and  a  half  of  observation,  it  should  have  greater  weight  than  that  of 
observers  who  only  attended  four  or  five  sittings,  modified  their  judg- 
ment subsequently,  and  finally  appeared  iii  public  as  opponents. 

322  PHENOMENA    OF    MATERIALISATION 

The  peculiar  origin  and  development  of  the  teleplasm  which  precedes 
the  final  materialisation  structure,  and  was  also  observed  by  Dr  Bourbon 
as  above,  has  recently  been  found  in  the  case  of  other  mediums, 
who  gave  results  agreeing  with  the  author's  and  Mme.  Bisson's 
observations. 

Thus  two  reliable  experimenters,  who  compiled  their  records  inde- 
pendently of  each  other,  but  whose  investigations  are  still  pending, 
inform  the  author  that  a  young  man  of  twenty-two,  who  is  a  medium, 
also  exhibits  materialisation  phenomena  resembling  those  of  Eva  C.  : 
formation  of  an  independently  moving  substance,  which  changes  into 
shreds,  cords,  and  patches,  forms  large  disk-like  surfaces,  separates  from 
the  medium,  and  disappears  without  a  trace  or  is  reabsorbed.  The 
materialisations  become  more  distinct  on  forming  a  chain,  as  if  the 
material  were  thus  increased  in  quantity.  The  movements  and  changes 
of  the  formless  material  into  a  kind  of  shakmg  jelly,  simple  Imiips,  or 
veils  and  cords,  agree  closely  with  the  changes  of  teleplasm  in  the  case 
of  Eva  C.  They  observed  in  one  sittmg  that  a  piece  of  material  crept 
up  the  medium's  body  and  disappeared  in  his  mouth.  The  physiological 
accompaniments,  such  as  moaning,  are  the  same. 

The  experimental  conditions  seem  to  be  even  better  than  in  the  case 
of  Eva  C,  for  the  young  man  is  only  clad  in  a  black  tricot,  sits  in  front 
of  the  curtain  during  the  whole  sitting,  and  his  hands  are  held  by  the 
experimenters.  The  illumination  was  partly  by  red  light ;  but  in  the 
sitting  of  4th  August,  which  jjarticularly  showed  the  development  of 
the  teleplasm,  the  medium  permitted  the  use  of  white  lamp-light.  In 
one  case,  the  portrait  of  a  young  woman  developed  on  the  white  material. 
The  flash-light  photograph  in  the  author's  possession  closely  resembles 
that  obtained  by  Dr  Imoda  with  the  medium  Linda  Gazerra. 

This  is  not  the  only  confirmation.  The  Vienna  physician,  Dr  Harter, 
who  is  knoAvn  as  an  able  and  critical  observer,  reports  that  in  the  case 
of  the  medium  Frau  Fischer,  he  observed  the  formation  of  a  flat  face 
image,  beside  other  materialised  forms,  while  sitting  8  feet  from  the 
medium.  If  we  add  that  another  private  circle  of  investigators  suc- 
ceeded in  photographing  a  whole  phantom  with  the  same  characteristics 
as  observed  by  the  author,  one  must  admit  that  the  probability  that  we 
have  to  deal  with  definite  physical  events,  obeying  laws  of  their  own,  at 
present  unknown,  is  very  great.  And  one  can  only  hope  that  other 
experiments,  impartially  made  with  other  mediums,  may  further  confirm 
the  accuracy  of  our  observations  with  Eva. 

The  Editors  of  the  journal  Opinion,  Ginies  and  Guasco,  attended 
a  series  of  sittings,  and  dealt  with  the  whole  of  occultism  in  a  series  of 
articles.  These  observers  also  confirm  the  genumeness  of  Eva  C.'s 
phenomena.  Fmally,  M.  Faral,  a  well-known  author,  in  an  article 
entitled  "  My  Testunony  Concerning  Mme.  Bisson's  Experiments " 
{Echo  du  Merveilleux),  13th  June  1914,  gives  his  judgment  in  favour 
of  the  phenomena  on  the  basis  of  six  sittings.  I  may  here  quote  a  few 
passages  from  his  report : — 

"  These  experuiients  are  conducted  in  a  truly  scientific  spuit.  Every- 
thing is  done  in  a  good  light  without  chains,  without  songs,  and  without 
darkness.  There  is  nothing  suspicious,  nothing  mystical,  such  as  we 
often  see  in  the  meetings  of  occultists.     One  gets  the  impression  of 

RESULT   OF  THE   OBSERVATIONS  323 

serious  scientific  experiments.  Participation  in  the  sittings  is  an  impor- 
tant supplement  to  the  reading  of  the  book  on  Maierialisations  Phcbno- 
menc.  It  is  easily  understood  that  this  book  leaves  some  doubts 
behind  {e.g.,  as  regards  the  flat,  paper-like,  folded  appearance  of  some  of 
the  images),  but  as  soon  as  one  has  seen  with  one's  own  eyes  how  such 
materialisations  are  formed,  no  further  doubt  is  possible.  I  myself 
noted  the  transparency  of  a  phenomenon  by  observing  through  it  details 
of  the  black  dress  worn  by  Eva.  In  the  third  sitting  I  could  see  the 
remarkable  material  called  teleplasm  for  the  first  time.  It  appeared  in 
the  medium's  lap  in  the  shape  of  a  small  luminous  sphere,  the  size  of  a 
nut,  which  grew  visibly,  disappeared  in  a  few  minutes,  and  then 
reappeared. 

"  This  phenomenon  took  place  at  20  inches  from  my  eyes,  and  we 
could  simultaneously  observe  the  medium's  feet  and  head.  Her  hands 
were  motionless,  and  so  were  her  feet.  The  control  was  as  exact  and 
perfect  as  possible.  In  the  sitting  of  5th  May,  after  about  forty-five 
minutes,  a  materialisation,  the  size  of  a  human  head,  appeared  on  the 
medium's  left  breast  and  shoulder,  showing  a  vague,  flat,  human  profile 
of  a  dull  white  colour.  This  also  appeared  to  be  transparent.  The 
phenomenon  suddenly  appeared,  disappeared,  and  reappeared.  When 
Mme.  Bisson  illuminated  this  face  unexpectedly  with  an  electric  torch, 
the  medium  gave  a  little  cry,  and  the  materialisation  immediately  dis- 
appeared. During  the  phenomenon  Eva  remained  quite  motionless, 
only  her  sighs  indicated  that  she  suffered.  Her  hands  were  constantly 
visible  from  beginning  to  end. 

"  After  the  doubts  which  the  reading  of  the  book  left  in  my  mind,  I  have 
acquired  a  definite  conviction  on  the  basis  of  my  own  observations." 

Faral  also  mentions  the  favourable  impression  made  upon  him  by 
the  medium,  and  concludes  :  "  To  the  detractors  of  Mme.  Bisson,  I  say, 
with  the  fullest  conviction,  '  You  are  on  the  wrong  track.'  I  say  it 
without  any  hope  of  convincing  them,  for  people  do  not  like  to  change 
an  opmion  once  formed.  But  one  must  vividly  regret  that  the  first 
serious  investigations  of  materialisation  phenomena  have  been  attacked 
— and  with  much  vehemence  and  passion — by  the  very  people  whose 
duty  it  was  to  receive  them  with  justice  and  sympathy." 

It  is  not  without  mterest  to  give  a  short  list  of  the  more  imiDortant 
witnesses,  drawn  from  every  walk  in  life,  who  have  taken  part  in  the 
sittings,  since  the  first  publication  of  the  Materialisations  Phamomene. 
During  May  and  June  1914,  thirty-three  persons  altogether  took  part  in 
sittings  at  which  the  author  was  present.  To  these  must  be  added 
observers  from  January  to  May  1914,  so  that  since  November  1913  there 
have  been  at  least  fifty  or  sixty.  The  witnesses  already  mentioned — Dr 
Bourbon  (physician).  Professor  Charles  Richet  (physiologist),  de  Fontenay 
— as  well  as  the  authors,  de  Vesme,  Delanne,  and  Chevreuil,  have  borne 
public  testimony  in  favour  of  the  genuineness  of  the  phenomena  in 
special  articles  and  declarations.  To  these  must  be  added  the  tests 
conducted  by  men  of  science,  such  as  Professor  Boirac  (Rector  of  Dijon 
University),  Professor  Claparede  (Zoologist  of  Geneva),  Professor  Courtier 
(Director  of  the  Physiological  Laboratory  at  the  Sorbonne),  Professor 
Bennett  (formerly  Professor  of  Philosophy  at  Cambridge),  Professor  Flam- 
marion  (Astronomer,  of  Paris),  and  the  physicians  Dr  Potheau  and  Dr 

324  PHENOMENA    OF    MATERIALISATION 

Montalescot  (who  confirmed  the  genuineness  of  the  phenomena  in  letters 
addressed  to  Mme.  Bisson),  Mr  W.  B.  Yeats,  Dr  Kortsen  (Psychologist  of 
Copenhagen),  and  Van  Twick  of  The  Hague.  Of  representatives  of  the 
Press,  the  following  have  expressed  themselves  in  favour  of  the  reality 
of  the  phenomena  :  MM.  Henriques  Philippe,  Divoire,  Ginies,  Guasco, 
R.  Faral  and  Nicolle. 

There  is,  therefore,  a  total  of  sixteen  savants  and  six  journalists  who 
take  the  part  of  Mme.  Bisson  and  her  medium  Eva  C,  as  well  as 
numerous  responsible  private  persons,  whereas  the  opponents  consist 
of  a  few  persons,  some  of  whom  did  not  attend  a  single  sitting,  while 
others,  after  a  very  few  sittings  (two  to  five)  converted  their  origmally 
favourable  judgment  afterwards  into  an  unfavourable  one. 

It  should  be  added  that,  at  present,  Eva  C.  is  not  the  only  person 
showing  these  peculiar  materialisation  phenomena.  Independent  obser- 
vations by  other  investigators  with  new  mediums  will  probably  lead  to 
a  final  solution  of  the  teleplastic  problem. 

Reports  of  French  Investigators  1916  (Paris). 

Sitting  of  the  12tii  February  1916. 

Present. — Commandant  Darget,  R.  de  Fleuriere,  and  Mme.  Bisson. 

Commandant  Darget  reports  as  follows  : — 

"  I  will  say  a  few  words  about  the  precautions  usually  adopted  by 
Mme.  Bisson  during  the  sittings.  Close  inspection  of  the  seance  room 
and  the  cabinet,  and  of  the  dress  to  be  worn  by  the  medium  (black  tricot, 
tights,  and  overall),  as  well  as  Eva's  mouth  and  hair.  Overall  and 
tights  were  se\vn.  together  as  to  form  one  article  of  apparel  without  gaps. 
The  medium  then  sits  on  an  easy  chair  m  the  cabmet,  with  her  hands 
resting  on  her  knees.  I  hold  her  right  hand,  while  M.  de  Fleuriere  holds 
her  left. 

"  An  electric  lamp  with  a  strong  white  light  is  behind  a  screen  during 
the  whole  sitting.  The  light  is  sufficient  to  see  the  medium  and  the 
hands  of  a  watch  clearly. 

"  After  about  twenty  minutes  small  whitish  flakes  appear  on  the 
medium's  black  overall,  and  then  disappear.  Then,  on  the  left  shoulder, 
some  material  appears,  very  distmctly,  against  the  black  background  on 
account  of  its  lummous  white  colour.  This  material  exhibits  the  outline 
of  a  human  hand.  This  hand  becomes  more  and  more  distinct,  and 
moves  the  fingers.  Then  this  well-developed  hand  moves  over  the 
medium's  breast  downwards,  and  remains  for  a  moment  on  her  lap. 
The  size  of  the  hand  is  that  of  a  child  of  ten.  At  the  urgent  request  of 
Mme.  Bisson  the  small  hand  approaches  the  hands  of  the  observers, 
touches  them,  and  withdraws  again.  At  Mme.  Bisson's  renewed  request, 
the  hand  comes  forward  again  and  lays  itself,  without  reserve,  in  my 
left  hand.  I  was  then  invited  to  touch  the  phantom  hand  with  my  free 
right  hand,  and  this  gave  me  an  opportunity  of  holding  the  materialised 
hand  in  both  my  own.  I  had  the  impression  of  a  hand  moistened  by 
cold  perspiration. 

REPORTS  OF  FRENCH  INVESTIGATORS  1916  (PARIS)      325 

"  Finally  the  hand  withdrew  gradually,  though  I  did  not  particularly 
perceive  the  cessation  of  the  contact.  The  hand  melted  away  and  dis- 
appeared, and  I  could  not  say  at  what  precise  moment  it  disappeared. 

"  At  one  instant  my  left  hand,  with  the  phantom  hand  in  it,  lay  on 
the  medium's  right  hand,  and  my  own  right  was  placed  over  the  phantom 
hand,  so  that  the  four  hands  lay  one  over  the  other.  During  this  time 
M.  de  Fleuriere  held  the  medium's  left  hand,  and  all  this  was  perfectly 
visilile.  During  the  occurrence  of  these  phenomena  the  medium  was  in 
the  trance  condition,  and  subsequently  did  not  produce  anything  for 
a  long  time. 

"  Then  a  new  and  interesting  manifestation  occurred.  The  medium 
released  her  hands  from  those  of  the  observers,  and  made  the  finger-tips 
of  her  two  hands  approach  each  other,  and  recede  slowly  several  times. 
Gradually  some  white  threads  a]3peared  before  our  eyes,  joining  the 
fingers  of  the  two  hands.  Wliile  she  continued  these  motions  the 
threads  became  thicker  and  increased  in  number. 

"  Mme.  Bisson  asked  Eva,  next  time  the  hands  were  rather  far  apart, 
to  hold  them  steady,  and  she  took  a  bundle  of  these  threads  into  her 
right  hand.  I  touched  the  substance  with  my  right  index  finger,  and 
had  the  impression  of  cool  and  damp  material. 

"  When,  at  Mme.  Bisson's  request,  I  touched  the  threads  extended 
between  the  fingers,  I  felt  a  slight  resistance.  The  threads  then  gradu- 
all}?^  got  thinner  and  thinner,  and  less  numerous,  until  they  entirely 
disappeared. 

"  As  a  last  phenomenon,  we  observed  the  emergence  of  a  white 
substance  from  her  mouth.  It  hung  down  over  her  lower  lip,  and  its 
colour  contrasted  with  the  red  of  the  lips. 

"  The  sitting  began  at  nine  and  ended  at  ten.  After  the  medium 
had  undressed  the  final  examination  was  carried  out.  On  the  dress 
a  few  places  were  moist.  They  corresponded  with  the  points  at  which 
the  substance  had  first  appeared  (chiefly  at  the  left  shoulder,  where  the 
hand  had  first  formed  itself). 

"  This  kind  of  mediumship  was  unknown  to  me  up  to  now,  although 
I  have  been  engaged  in  mediumistic  research  for  forty-five  years.  I  was 
all  the  more  pleased  to  become  acquainted  with  it.  The  productions  of 
Eva  C.  are  undoubtedly  genuine,  and  only  a  malicious  prejudice  could 
doubt  the  reality  of  the  occurrences.  They  enrich  science  as  regards 
the  physiological  functions  of  the  human  body,  a  science  which  quarrels 
about  hypotheses  and  theories,  and  has  no  knowledge  of  the  forces  in 
our  bodies  which  transform  organic  material.  It  seems  to  me  to  be  the 
duty  of  science  to  tackle  this  problem  also.  Claude  Bernard  wrote  with 
justice  :  '  That  which  dominates  life  is  neither  chemistry,  nor  physics, 
nor  anything  of  the  kind,  but  the  ideal  principle  of  the  life 
process.' 

"  The  development  of  the  materialised  hand,  the  movement  of  its 
fingers,  its  approach  and  touch,  in  accordance  with  an  expressed  wish, 
give  a  stronger  guarantee  than  the  creeds  of  the  various  religions  for 
the  fact  that  we  possess  a  soul,  that  it  continues  after  death,  and  that 
it  can  manifest  after  death,  by  reassuming  corporeal,  visible,  and 
palpable  forms. 

"  It  was  not  doubt  as  to  the  existence  of  such  phenomena  which 

326  PHENOMENA    OF    MATERIALISATION 

took  me  to  Mme.  Bisson's  sittings,  for  previously  I  had  seen  whole 
materialisations  of  deceased  persons,  as  had  also  the  great  savants 
Crookes,  Lombroso,  and  others,  who  had  the  courage  to  describe  their 
experiences  in  public. 

"  The  special  characteristic  of  Eva  C.'s  phenomena  is  that,  not  only 
does  she  produce  complete  materialisations,  but  that  she  produces,  step 
by  step,  the  necessary  teleplastic  material,  and  forms  it  in  successive 
stages." 

The  other  witness  of  these  occurrences,  M.  de  Fleuriere,  a  highly- 
placed  French  ecclesiastic,  testifies  as  follows  in  a  letter  to  the  Editor  of 
the  Annates  des  Sciences  Psychiques  : — 

"  You  ask  for  my  testimony  for,  or  against,  the  report  communicated 
to  me  (Darget's).  Very  well.  My  conscience,  my  respect  for  the  truth 
and  the  most  elementary  sense  of  honour,  render  it  my  duty  to  confirm, 
point  by  point,  the  report  communicated  to  you.  I  had  an  opportunity 
of  attending  numerous  sittings  at  Mme.  Bisson's,  and  of  observing  really 
astounding  phenomena,  the  genuineness  of  which  is  beyond  all  doubt. 
I  intend  shortly  to  publish  the  facts  which  I  have  myself  seen,  observed 
and  controlled,  with  all  the  means  of  moral  and  material  certainty,  at 
the  disposal  of  human  investigation.  Perhaps  it  is  of  interest  to  com- 
pare my  report  of  the  sitting  of  12th  February  1916  with  that  of  Com- 
mandant Darget.  For  the  agreement  of  both  reports  would  enhance 
the  interest,  especially  as  they  are  the  reports  of  two  men  who  do  not 
know  each  other,  for  I  saw  Commandant  Darget  for  the  first  time  at 
Mme.  Bisson's,  and  have  not  seen  him  since  the  sitting,  so  that  I  had  no 
opportunity  to  discuss  my  impressions  with  him.  I  append  a  short  and 
hurried  report : — 

"  '  After  a  relatively  short  period  of  waiting,  some  white  patches, 
like  drops  of  milk,  appeared  on  the  medium's  breast,  disappearing  and 
reappearing.  Shortly  afterwards  a  white  substance  appeared  on  her 
left  shoulder,  and  seemed  to  detach  itself  from  her  chin.  It  gradually 
assimied  the  shape  of  a  hand,  the  outlines  becoming  more  and  more 
distinct.  It  was  quite  white  and  very  fine,  like  the  delicate  hand  of  a 
child.  It  remained  for  a  fairly  long  time,  and  we  had  sufficient  time  to 
study  it,  first  on  the  medium's  breast,  and  then  on  her  knees.  At 
Mme.  Bisson's  request,  the  small  hand  came  nearer  and  stroked  the 
hands  of  the  observers,  who  held  the  medium's  hands  (Darget  the  right 
and  I  the  left).  After  it  had  withdraA\Ti  a  little,  it  appeared  again,  and 
laid  itself  in  the  hand  of  Commandant  Darget,  after  which  it  allowed 
itself  to  be  touched  by  Mme.  Bisson  and  by  me. 

"  '  After  this  Eva  gave  us  an  opportunity  of  observing  further  extra- 
ordinarily interesting  phenomena.  The  medium,  still  in  the  trance 
condition,  held  her  hands  straight  in  front  of  our  eyes,  showed  us  trans- 
parent threads  of  substance  emerging  from  her  finger-tips,  and  connecting 
them,  and  drew  them  out,  like  a  spinner  draws  a  woollen  thread,  by 
increasing  and  diminishing  the  distance  between  her  hands.  We  could 
touch  this  material,  and  it  gave  the  impression  of  a  moist,  cool  and 
somewhat  resistant  substance  No  doubt  the  materialised  products  are 
made  of  this  elementary  stuff.  Slowly  the  threads  became  thinner  and 
less  numerous,  and  shortly  afterwards  we  found  that  the  medium's  hands 
were  again  in  their  normal  condition,  and  were  as  dry  as  our  own.'  " 

DR  V.   GUSTAVE   GELEY'S   OBSERVATIONS  827 

Dr  V.  Qustave  Geley  (Paris)  on  his  Observations 
with  Eva  C,  1918. 

In  a  Lecture  1  on  "  Supra-normal  Physiology  and  the  Phenomena  of  Ideo- 
plastics,"  the  well-known  psychologist  and  physician,  Dr  Gustave  Geley 
(Paris),  deals  with  metapsychical  phenomena,  and  especially  their 
physiological  aspects.  In  his  view,  our  ignorance  concerning  this  subject 
is  due  to  our  lack  of  knowledge  of  the  original  and  essential  laws  of  nature. 
Even  normal  physiology  is  full  of  riddles.  Thus  the  whole  mechanism 
of  life,  and  the  activity  of  the  so-called  functions,  are  still  far  from  being 
clear.  The  constitution  of  the  organism  itself  and  everything  connected 
with  it — birth,  growth,  embryonic  and  post-embryonic  development,  the 
maintenance  of  the  personality  during  life,  and  organic  restitutions  (in 
some  animals  this  extends  to  the  regeneration  of  limbs,  and  even  of 
entrails) — are  as  many  insoluble  riddles,  if  we  accept  the  scientific  view 
of  individuality,  and  regard  these  forms  of  activity  as  a  complex  of  single 
elements  and  their  functions.  Why  a  complex  of  cells,  by  the  fact  of 
the  association  of  its  elements,  should  have  this  vital  and  individualising 
force,  is  an  insoluble  mystery.  Equally  unexplained  is  the  repetition, 
in  embryonic  life,  of  stages  traversed  in  the  previous  development  of 
the  race,  of  the  series  of  metamorphoses  which  finally  lead  to  complete 
forms,  and  therefore  tend  towards  a  definite  end. 

Among  the  mysterious  processes  of  this  kind  we  have,  among  certain 
insects,  the  stage  of  the  chrysalis.  Within  the  protective  covering  of 
the  chrysalis  (which  shields  the  animal  from  light  and  other  disturbing 
influences),  the  body  of  the  insect  is  dematerialised.  It  dissolves  into 
its  constituents  and  forms  a  uniform  mass,  a  homogeneous  amorphous 
substance,  in  which  the  organic  and  specific  differences  more  or  less 
disappear.  The  muscles,  the  greater  part  of  the  viscera,  and  the  nerves 
are  reduced  to  the  original  primary  substance — the  basis  of  life.  Then 
suddenly  this  substance  organises  itself,  and  a  new  materialisation  takes 
place  at  its  expense.  The  adult  animal  is  quite  different  from  the 
primitive  larva.  Facts  are  presented  by  supra -normal  physiology  analo- 
gous to  the  teleplastic  structures  produced  by  certain  persons.  Only 
here  the  physiological  organisation  transcends  the  limits  of  the  organism, 
separates  from  it,  and  acts  outside  it  (ecto -plastically).  In  this  process 
also  organic  forms  (or  new  representatives)  are  reconstituted  from  the 
ground  substance. 

Dr  Geley  studied  materialisations  in  several  mediums,  but  in  his 
lecture  he  only  refers  to  those  observed  in  the  case  of  Eva  C,  These 
results  were  obtained  under  control  conditions,'  which  were  completely 
satisfactory.  They  are  less  valuable  for  their  transcendental  character 
than  for  the  accurate  indications  which  they  offer  concerning  the  genesis 
and  priinordial  character  of  materialisation.     Geley  continues  as  follows  : 

"  Eva  C.  was  educated  and  prepared  for  the  investigations  by 
Mme.  Bisson.  In  the  works  published  by  this  lady  and  Dr  von  Schrenck 
Notzing  we  find  numerous  particulars  concerning  the  nature  of  material- 
isation. 

^  Lecture,  on  28th  January  1918,  ^iven  in  the  large  Medical  Lecture  Theatre  of  the 
College  de  France  to  the  Meml)ers  of  the  Psvchological  Institute. 

328  PHENOMENA    OF   MATERIALISATION 

"  While  Mme.  Bisson's  book  represents  a  conscientious  collection  of 
facts,  Dr  von  Schrenck  Notzing's  full  treatise  represents  a  scientific  and 
complete  investigation  of  the  phenomena  obtained  with  Eva  C,  carried 
out  with  great  clearness  and  accuracy,  and  with  an  artistic  understand- 
ing. It  also  contains  experiments  with  another  medium,  whose  gifts 
were  quite  similar  to  those  of  Eva  C.  Now  I  had  the  privilege  of  con- 
tinuing these  investigations,  in  conjunction  with  Mme.  Bisson,  for  twelve 
months,  with  two  sittings  per  week,  which  took  place  partly  in  her  flat 
and  partly  (for  three  months)  in  m\''  own  laboratory." 

Besides  Dr  Geley,  more  than  a  hundred  scientific  men,  and  especially 
physicians,  had  an  opportunity  of  observing  the  same  phenomena  with 
Eva  C,  and  he  could  only  add  his  testimony  to  theirs.  Finally,  he 
succeeded  in  obtaining  materialisation  phenomena  with  new  subjects, 
though  they  were  more  primitive  than  those  presented  by  Eva  C. 

Dr  Geley  could  see  and  touch  the  materialisations  in  question.  The 
testimony  of  his  senses  was  corroborated  by  registering  instruments  and 
by  photography.  He  often  followed  the  phenomenon  from  its  origin  to 
its  end,  for  it  formed  and  disappeared  before  his  eyes. 

"  However  unexpected,"  he  continues,  "  however  strange  and  impos- 
sible such  manifestations  seem  to  be,  I  have  no  longer  the  right  to  express 
any  doubt  as  to  their  reality.  Before  I  continue.  I  must  testify  that  the 
medium,  in  my  presence,  always  gave  proofs  of  absolute  honesty  during 
the  experiments.  The  intelligent  resignation  with  which  she  submits 
to  all  conditions,  and  undergoes  the  really  painful  tests  of  her  medium- 
ship,  deserves  sincere  recognition  and  gratitude  on  the  part  of  all  men 
of  science  worthy  of  the  name." 

Eva  is  brought,  in  the  hypnotic  state,  to  the  stage  in  which  she  forgets 
her  normal  personality.  Then  she  is  made  to  sit  in  a  black  cabinet. 
The  use  of  a  black  cabinet  for  materialisation  has  no  other  object  than 
to  withdraw  the  sleeping  medium  from  the  disturbing  influences  of  her 
surroundings,  and  especially  from  the  action  of  light.  It  thus  becomes 
possible  to  maintain  sufficient  illumination  in  the  seance  room  to  observe 
the  phenomena  clearly. 

Eva  always  remained  partly  outside  the  cabinet.  Both  her  hands 
were  outside  the  curtains,  and  a  great  security  of  observation  was  given 
by  this  control  over  her  hands. 

The  phenomena  set  in  after  various  intervals,  sometimes  very  soon, 
sometimes  very  slowly,  after  an  hour  or  more.  They  are  always  accom- 
panied by  painful  sensations  on  the  part  of  the  medium.  She  sighs  and 
groans,  and  recalls  the  condition  of  a  woman  in  the  act  of  parturition. 
These  plaintive  expressions  attain  a  paroxysm  at  the  moment  when  the 
phenomenon  appears  ;  they  diminish,  or  cease,  as  soon  as  the  materiali- 
sation is  finished. 

The  phenomenon  can  be  summarised  as  follows :  A  substance 
emanates  from  the  body  of  the  medium,  it  externalises  itself,  and  is 
amorphous,  or  polymorphous,  in  the  first  instance.  This  substance  takes 
various  forms,  but,  in  general,  it  shows  more  or  less  composite  organs. 
We  may  distinguish  (1)  the  substance  as  a  substratum  of  materialisation  ; 
(2)  its  organised  development.  Its  appearance  is  generally  announced 
by  the  presence  of  fluid,  white  and  luminous  flakes  of  a  size  ranging  from 

DR  V.   GUSTAVE   GELEY'S   OBSERVATIONS  329 

that  of  a  pea  to  that  of  a  five-franc  piece,  and  distributed  here  and  there 
over  the  medium's  black  dress,  principally  on  the  left  side. 

This  manifestation  is  a  premonitory  phenomenon,  which  sometimes 
precedes  the  other  phenomena  by  three-quarters  of  an  hour,  or  an  hour. 
Sometimes  it  is  wanting,  and  it  occasionally  happens  that  no  other 
manifestation  follows. 

The  substance  itself  emanates  from  the  whole  body  of  the  medium, 
but  especially  from  the  natural  orifices  and  the  extremities,  from  the  top 
of  the  head,  from  the  breasts,  and  the  tips  of  the  fingers.  The  most 
usual  origin,  which  is  most  easily  observed,  is  that  from  the  mouth. 
We  then  see  the  substance  externalising  itself  from  the  inner  surface  of 
the  cheeks,  from  the  gums,  and  from  the  roof  of  the  mouth. 

The  substance  occurs  in  various  forms,  sometimes  as  ductile  douffh, 
sometnnes  as  a  true  protoplastic  mass,  sometimes  in  the  form  of  numerous 
thin  threads,  sometimes  as  cords  of  various  thicknesses,  or  in  the  form 
of  narrow  rigid  rays,  or  as  a  broad  band,  as  a  membrane,  as  a  fabric,  or 
as  a  woven  material,  with  indefinite  and  irregular  outlines.  The  most 
curious  appearance  is  presented  by  a  widely  expanded  membrane,  pro- 
vided with  fringes  and  rucks,  and  resembling  in  appearance  a  net. 

The  amount  of  externalised  matter  varies  within  wide  limits.  In 
some  cases  it  completely  envelops  the  medium  as  in  a  mantle.  It  may 
have  three  different  colours— white,  black,  or  grey.  The  white  colour 
is  the  most  frequent,  perhaps,  because  it  is  the  most  easily  observed. 
Sometimes  the  three  colours  appear  simultaneously.  The  visibility  of 
the  substance  varies  a  great  deal,  and  it  may  slowly  increase  or  decrease 
in  succession.  To  the  touch  it  gives  various  impressions.  Sometimes 
it  is  moist  and  cold,  sometimes  viscous  and  sticky,  more  rarely  dry  and 
hard.  The  impression  created  depends  on  the  shape.  It  appears  soft 
and  slightly  elastic  when  it  is  expanded,  and  hard,  knotty,  or  fibrous 
when  it  forms  cords.  Sometimes  it  produces  the  feeling  of  a  spider's  web 
passing  over  the  observer's  hand.     The  threads  are  both  rigid  and  elastic. 

The  substance  is  mobile.  Sometimes  it  moves  slowly  up  or  down, 
across  the  medium,  on  her  shoulders,  on  her  breast,  or  on  her  knees,  with 
a  creeping  motion  resembling  a  reptile. 

Sometimes  the  movements  are  sudden  and  quick.  The  substance 
appears  and  disappears  like  lightning  and  is  extraordinarily  sensitive. 
Its  sensitiveness  is  mixed  up  with  the  hyperaesthetic  sensibility  of  the 
medium.  Every  touch  produces  a  painful  reaction  in  the  medium. 
When  the  touch  is  moderately  strong,  or  prolonged,  the  medium  com- 
plains of  a  pain  comparable  with  the  pain  produced  by  a  shock  to  the 
normal  body. 

The  substance  is  sensitive  to  light.  Strong  light,  especially  when 
sudden  and  unexpected,  produces  a  painful  disturbance  in  the  subject. 
Yet  nothing  is  more  variable  than  the  action  of  light.  In  some  cases, 
the  phenomena  withstand  full  daylight.  The  magnesium  flash-light 
acts  like  a  sudden  blow  on  the  medium,  but  it  is  withstood,  and  flash-light 
photographs  can  be  taken. 

The  substance  has  an  intrinsic  and  irresistible  tendency  towards 
organisation.  It  does  not  remain  long  in  the  primitive  condition.  It 
often  happens  that  the  organisation  is  so  rapid  that  the  primordial 
substance  does  not  appear  at  all.     At  other  times  one  sees  at  the  same 

330  PHENOMENA    OF   MATERIALISATION 

time  the  amorphous  substance,  and  some  forms  or  structures,  more  or 
less  completely  embedded  in  it,  e.0^.,  a  thumb  suspended  in  a  fringe  of 
the  substance.     One  even  sees  heads  and  faces  embedded  in  the  material. 

Dr  Geley  then  proceeds  to  describe  the  structures  formed.  They  are 
very  various.  Sometimes  they  are  indefinite,  non-organised  structures, 
but  most  frequently  they  are  organic  formations,  varying  in  their  com- 
position and  completion.  When  the  materialised  organ  is  complete,  it 
has  the  perfect  appearance,  and  all  the  biological  qualities,  of  a  living 
organ.  Fingers  have  been  seen  which  were  wonderfully  modelled, 
including  the  nails  :  also  complete  hands,  with  bones  and  joints  ;  a  living 
brain-case,  in  which  Dr  Geley  could  touch  the  bones  under  thick  ?iair. 
He  also  saw  well-developed  living  human  faces. 

In  many  cases  these  structures  were  completely  created  and  de- 
veloped before  his  eyes  from  beginning  to  end.  Thus  Dr  Geley  was 
sometimes  able  to  see  fingers,  projecting  from  the  substance,  which 
joined  the  fingers  of  the  medium's  hand.  When  Eva  took  away  her 
hand  the  substance  was  pulled  out,  formed  strong  cords,  and  expanded, 
forming  fringes  resembling  network.  Finally,  he  saw  in  this  network, 
in  succession,  the  formation  of  some  fingers,  a  hand,  or  a  completely 
organised  face.  Sometimes  such  an  organisation  took  place  out  of 
substance  emerging  from  the  mouth.  Dr  Geley  gives  the  following  case 
out  of  his  note-book  : — "  A  cord  of  white  substance  proceeds  slowly  from 
the  mouth  do\\Ti  to  Eva's  knees,  having  the  thickness  of  about  two 
fingers.  This  band  assumes  the  most  varied  forms  before  our  eyes. 
Sometimes  it  expands  in  the  form  of  a  membraneous  fabric,  with  gaps 
and  bulges.  Sometimes  it  contracts  and  folds  up,  subsequently  expand- 
ing and  stretching  out  again.  Here  and  there  projections  issue  from 
the  mass,  a  sort  of  pseudopods.  and  these  sometimes  take,  for  a  few 
seconds,  the  form  of  fingers,  or  the  elementary  outline  of  a  hand,  subse- 
quently returning  back  into  the  mass.  Finally,  the  cord  contracts  into 
itself,  extending  again  on  Eva's  knees.  Its  end  rises  in  the  air,  leaves 
the  medium,  and  approaches  me.  I  then  see  that  the  end  condenses 
itself  in  the  form  of  a  knot  or  terminal  bud,  and  this  again  expands  into 
a  perfectly  modelled  hand.  I  touch  this  hand  ;  it  feels  quite  normal. 
I  feel  the  bones  and  the  fingers  with  the  nails.  This  hand  is  then  drawn 
back,  becomes  smaller,  and  vanishes  at  the  end  of  the  cord.  The  latter 
makes  a  few  further  motions,  contracts,  and  then  returns  into  the 
medium's  mouth." 

Often  the  substance  proceeds  from  the  surface  of  the  medium's  body, 
in  an  invisible  and  an  impalpable  state,  no  doubt  through  the  meshes  of 
the  dress,  and  subsequently  condenses.  It  is  then  found  that  a  white 
patch  has  formed  on  the  black  tunic  at  the  level  of  the  shoulders,  the 
breast,  or  the  knee.  This  patch  extends  and  assumes  the  outlines  and 
moulding  of  a  hand  or  a  face.  Whatever  the  formation  may  be,  the 
phenomenon  does  not  always  remain  in  contact  with  the  medium.  It 
is  often  observed  quite  separated  from  her. 

The  following  example  is  typical  in  this  connection  :  "  A  head 
suddenly  appears  about  30  inches  from  the  head  of  the  medium,  above 
her  and  on  her  right  side.  It  is  a  human  head  of  normal  dimensions, 
well  developed,  and  with  the  usual  relief.  The  top  of  the  skull  and  the 
forehead  are  completely  materialised.     The  forehead  is  broad  and  high. 

DR  V.    GUSTAVE   GELEY'S    OBSERVATIONS  331 

The  hair  is  short  and  thick,  and  of  a  chestnut  or  black  colour.  Below 
the  line  of  the  eyebrows  the  design  is  vague,  only  the  forehead  and  skull 
appearing  clearly.  The  head  disappears  for  a  moment  behind  the  cur- 
tain, and  then  reappears  in  the  same  condition,  but  the  face,  imperfectly 
materialised,  is  covered  with  a  white  mask,  I  extend  my  hand,  and  pass 
my  fingers  through  the  bushy  hair,  and  touch  the  bones  of  the  skull. 
The  next  moment  everything  has  disappeared." 

The  structures,  therefore,  show  a  certain  independence.  The  material- 
ised organs  are  not  without  vitality,  and  are  alive,  in  the  biological  sense. 
Thus  a  well-developed  hand  has  the  functional  capacities  of  a  normal 
hand.     I  have  often  been  touched  by  a  hand,  or  grasped  by  fingers. 

Well-developed  organic  formations,  having  the  full  appearance  of 
life,  are  rather  rare  with  Eva.  Often  there  are  imperfect  formations, 
flat  and  without  relief,  or  sometimes  partly  flat  and  partly  in  relief. 
Geley,  in  some  cases,  saw  a  hand  or  face  which  was  fiat,  but  which  subse- 
quently assumed  a  third  dimension  before  his  eyes.  The  dimensions  of 
the  imperfect  formations  are  sometimes  smaller  than  in  nature,  and  the 
structures  are  really  miniatures. 

"  Dr  von  Schrenck  Notzing,"  continues  Geley,  "  observed,  with  the 
help  of  stereoscopic  cameras  and  by  means  of  cameras  mounted  in  the 
cabinet  on  one  side,  that  the  back  of  the  materialisations  consisted  of 
a  mass  of  amorphous  substance,  that  the  organic  form  was  lacking,  and 
sometimes  showed  empty  spaces.  I  was  able  to  confirm  this  fact.  The 
phantom  formations  often  show  defects,  faults  and  gaps  in  their  newly- 
formed  organs." 

There  are  all  kinds  of  transitions  between  the  perfect  and  imperfect 
organic  structures,  and  the  change  from  one  to  the  other,  as  already 
mentioned,  often  occurs  under  the  eyes  of  the  observer.  Besides  these 
formations,  a  curious  species  of  structures  must,  according  to  Geley,  be 
considered.  They  are  not  organs,  but  rather  imitations  thereof,  more 
or  less  successful,  and  more  or  less  magnified.  They  are  true  phantoms. 
Thus  we  may  observe  :  Phantoms  of  fingers  having  nothing  of  such  an 
organ,  except  the  general  form,  no  warmth,  no  flexibility,  no  joints  ; 
phantoms  of  faces,  which  seem  to  be  pictures  cut  out,  or  masks  ;  bundles 
of  hair,  attached  to  indefinite  shapes,  etc.,  etc.  Such  phantoms,  pro- 
perly so-called,  whose  metapsychic  reality  is  undeniable  (a  very  impor- 
tant point),  have  confused  and  bewildered  many  observers.  "...  One 
might  say,"  exclaimed  M.  de  Fontenay,  "  that  a  sort  of  malignant  demon 
was  making  fun  of  the  observers  !  "  In  reality,  according  to  Geley, 
these  phantoms  are  easily  (?)  explained.  They  are  produced,  in  his  view, 
by  a  power  of  but  slight  metapsychic  subtlety,  which  has  inadequate 
means  at  its  disposal,  but  does  its  best.  It  does  not  succeed,  because  its 
activity,  taken  out  of  the  beaten  track,  does  not  possess  the  certainty, 
imparted  to  ordinary  physiological  acts,  by  the  normal  flow  of  biological 
processes.  In  order  to  understand  what  is  here  happening,  it  should  be 
remarked  that  normal  physiology  often  shows  such  false  formations. 
Besides  successful  organic  structures,  there  are  monstrosities  and  irregu- 
lar formations.  In  this  respect,  there  is  nothing  more  remarkable  than 
the  bizarre  neoplasms  and  dermoid  cysts,  in  which  one  finds  hair,  teeth, 
various  organs,  and  more  or  less  perfect  embryonic  structures.  Just 
like  normal  physiology,  super-normal  physiology  has  both  its  successful 

332  PHENOMENA    OF    MATERIALISATION 

products  and  its  failures,  its  monstrosities,  and  its  dermoid  formations. 
A  phenomenon,  which  is  at  least  as  remarkable  as  the  appearance  of  the 
materialised  forms,  is  their  disappearance.  This  is  sometimes  instan- 
taneous, or  nearly  so.  In  less  than  a  second  the  structure  disappears, 
although  its  presence  has  been  previously  verified  by  sight  and  touch. 

In  other  cases  the  disappearance  is  gradual.  We  observe  the  return 
of  the  primitive  substance  and  its  absorption  into  the  body  of  the  medium 
in  the  reverse  order  in  which  it  came.  In  other  cases  we  observe  that 
the  disappearance  takes  place  gradually,  not  by  the  absorption  of  the 
substance,  but  by  a  progressive  diminution  of  its  perceptible  properties. 
Thus  the  visibility  of  the  structure  slowly  decreases,  its  outlines  become 
fainter,  and  are  finally  extinguished. 

During  the  whole  time  of  the  materialisation  phenomenon  the  product 
formed  is  in  obvious  physiological  and  psychical  connection  with  the 
medium.  The  physiological  connection  is  sometimes  perceptible  in  the 
form  of  a  thin  cord  joining  the  structure  Avith  the  medium,  which  might 
be  compared  with  the  umbilical  cord  joining  the  embryo  to  its  parent. 
Even  if  this  cord  is  not  visible  the  physiological  rapport  is  always  close. 
Every  impression  received  through  the  teleplasm  reacts  upon  the 
medium  and  vice  versa.  The  sensation  reflex  of  the  structure  coalesces 
with  that  of  the  medium  ;  in  a  word,  everything  proves  that  the  tele- 
plasm  is  the  partly  externalised  medium  herself. 

Dr  Geley  here  only  speaks  from  the  physiological  point  of  view, 
without  considering  the  psychological  side,  and  continues  :  "  Both  normal 
and  super-normal  physiology  tend  to  establish  the  unity  of  the  organic 
substance.  In  our  experiments  we  have  observed,  above  all,  that  a 
uniform  amorphous  substance  externalises  itself  from  the  medium's 
body,  and  gives  rise  to  the  various  ideo})lastic  forms.  We  have  seen 
how  this  uniform  substance  organised  and  transformed  itself  under  our 
eyes.  We  have  seen  a  hand  emerging  from  the  mass  of  the  substance  ; 
a  white  mass  developed  into  a  face.  We  have  seen  how,  in  a  few 
moments,  the  form  of  a  head  was  replaced  by  the  shape  of  a  hand.  By 
the  concurrent  testimony  of  sight  and  touch  we  have  followed  the 
transition  of  the  amorphous  unorganised  substance  into  an  organically 
developed  structure  which  had  temporarily  all  the  attributes  of  life— a 
complete  formation,  so  to  speak,  in  flesh  and  blood. 

*'  We  have  watched  the  disappearance  of  these  formations  as  they 
sank  back  into  primitive  substance,  and  have  even  observed  how,  in  an 
instant,  they  were  absorbed  into  the  body  of  the  medium.  In  supra- 
normal  physiology  there  are  no  different  organic  substrata  for  the 
various  substances  as,  e.g.,  a  bone  substance,  a  muscular,  visceral,  or 
nervous  substance  ;  it  is  simply,  then,  a  single  substance,  the  basis  and 
substratum  of  organic  life. 

"  In  normal  physiology  it  is  exactly  the  same,  but  it  is  not  so  obvious. 
In  some  cases  it  appears  quite  clear  that  the  phenomenon  which  takes 
place  in  the  black  seance  cabinet,  takes  place  also,  as  already  mentioned, 
in  the  chrysalis  of  the  insect.  The  dissolution  of  tissues  reduces  a  large 
proportion  of  the  organs,  and  their  various  parts,  to  a  single  substance, 
that  substance  which  is  destined  to  materialise  the  organs  and  the 
various  parts  of  the  adult  form.  We,  therefore,  have  the  same  mani- 
festation in  both  physiologies." 

DR  V.   GUSTAVE   GELEY'S  OBSERVATIONS  333 

Geley  discusses  the  completion  of  the  unit  of  the  organic  substance, 
which  appHes  to  supra-normal  as  well  as  to  normal  physiology.  It 
appears  to  Geley  to  be  the  most  important  point  in  the  biological  problem. 
He  also  assumes  a  dynamism  which  organises,  centralises,  and  directs. 

Hyslop,  in  his  article  on  "  Super-normal  Physiology  and  the  Pheno- 
mena of  Idcoi3lastics  "  {Jour.  Am.  Soc.  for  Psych.  Res.,  May  1919), 
recognises  Geley's  method  as  truly  scientific,  but  questions  the  justifica- 
tion of  his  somewhat  arbitrary  division. 

A  classification  is  not  an  explanation.  A  one-sided  biological  con- 
ception of  the  materialisation  phenomena  is  insufficient,  for  the  process 
not  only  includes  formations  of  an  organic  character,  but  textile  products 
(veils,  etc.),  with  the  external  signs  of  manufacture  by  machinery,  as 
well  as  certain  unorganic  materials.  We  must  also  consider  the  action 
of  entirely  unknown  physiological  laws,  in  such  things  as  the  appearance 
and  disappearance  of  objects  and  pictures,  and  the  telekinetic  pheno- 
mena. Whether  the  ideoplastic  hypothesis  will  turn  out  to  be  fruitful 
and  sufficient  cannot  as  yet  be  decided.  But  all  authors  who  recognise 
the  reality  of  the  materialisation  phenomena  agree  with  Geley  that,  as 
Hegel  says,  the  idea,  the  spirit,  must  be  regarded  as  the  ultimate  source 
from  which  all  the  phenomena  flow. 

To  illustrate  his  argument,  Dr  Geley  reproduces  a  number  of  photo- 
graphs of  materialisation  phenomena  with  Eva  C,  obtained  in  1918. 
These  interesting  photographs  were  obtained  with  the  co-operation  of 
Mme.  Bisson,  M.  Calmette  (General  Inspector  of  Paris  Hospitals),  and 
Jules  Courtier  (Professor  of  Physiological  Psychology  at  the  Sorbonne). 
The  first  two  pictures  demonstrate  the  amorphous  substance  which 
developed  under  Geley's  eyes.  The  other  pictures  give  representations 
of  faces  and  heads  developing  out  of  this  substance.  Their  production 
was  accurately  observed  from  the  beginning  to  the  end  while  the  curtain 
was  fully  opened.  Some  of  them  were  formed  from  a  solid  cord  of  matter 
emerging  from  the  medium,  or  from  a  nebulous  substance,  the  condensa- 
tion of  which  could  be  observed.  Considerable  amounts  of  the  original 
cord,  and  the  primary  matter,  remained  on  the  fully  materialised  struc- 
tures. Geley  convinced  himself  by  the  eye,  by  the  touch,  and  by  stereo- 
scopic photographs,  of  the  three-dimensional  character  of  these  forma- 
tions. 

Various  faces  show,  in  their  size  and  in  their  physiognomy,  great 
analogies,  as  well  as  differences,  from  one  sitting  to  the  next,  or  even  in 
the  same  sitting.  The  degree  of  completion  varies  probably  on  account 
of  imperfect  materialisation.  The  rudiments  of  the  substance,  accordmg 
to  Geley,  indicate  a  metapsychic  embryology  of  considerable  importance 
for  the  genesis  of  the  product.  The  better  the  forms  are  materialised, 
the  greater  is  their  independence.  They  move  about  Eva  C,  or  show 
themselves  in  natural  size,  giving  an  impression  of  remarkable  vivacity, 
and  sometimes  of  great  beauty,  as  they  appear  at  the  opening  of  the 
curtain.  The  usual  precautions  were  carried  out  in  Dr  Geley's  labora- 
tory in  a  very  strict  manner.  Eva  C.  was  undressed  on  entering  the 
seance  room  in  the  presence  of  Dr  Geley  and  Mme.  Bisson.  She  then 
put  on  the  seance  costume,  which  was  sewn  up  the  back.  Her  hair  and 
mouth  were  examined  by  Dr  Geley,  or  one  of  his  collaborators.  Eva  C. 
then  took  her  seat  on  the  wicker  chair  in  the  cabinet.     Her  hands  were 

334  PHENOMENA    OF    MATERIALISATION 

always  visible,  and  were  held  outside  the  curtains.  There  was  always 
sufficient  light  in  the  seance  room. 

Geley  concludes  his  lecture  with  the  words,  "  I  do  not  say,  '  there 
was  no  fraud  during  these  sittings  '  ;  but  I  say,  '  the  possibility  of  fraud 
was  altogether  excluded.'  I  cannot  repeat  it  too  often  :  the  materialisa- 
tions were  always  produced  before  my  eyes,  and  I  observed  the  whole 
genesis  and  development  with  my  own  eyes." 

With  Dr  Gcley's  permission,  the  author  here  reproduces  ten  photo- 
graphs (Figs.  201-210)  from  his  collection,  which  show  the  complete 
agreement  of  the  author's  results  with  these  further  results,  obtained  five 
years  afterwards,  in  different  circumstances,  and  under  probably  even 
more  rigid  conditions.  The  creative  and  formative  power  is  the  same 
in  both  series  of  observations,  and  exhibits  the  peculiarities  characteristic 
of  the  productions  of  Eva  C.  There  are  expressive  female  faces,  draped 
with  veil-like  fabrics,  and  fragments  of  teleplasm.  The  cleverly  arranged 
decorative  elements  combine  to  form  an  artistic  total  impression  intended 
for  the  observer.  The  faults  of  proportion  in  the  faces,  the  indentations, 
the  sketchiness  and  incompletion  of  the  execution  ;  in  short,  the  tech- 
nique of  production,  has  remained  the  same  in  every  point  as  in  the  case 
of  the  author's  results.  Rents,  breaks  and  cracks,  such  as  have  been 
alleged  by  critics  as  evidence  of  fraud,  are  also  present  in  Geley's  pictures, 
and  are  particularly  well  shown  in  the  enlarged  reproduction  of  the 
teleplastic  female  face  (Fig.  210),  in  the  cross  lines  of  the  lower  portion, 
which  also  shows  the  character  of  a  material  resembling  paper.  We 
have  here,  both  in  the  positive  and  negative  sense,  identical  results 
forming  an  extremely  valuable  corroboration  of  the  accuracy  of  the 
author's  own  investigations. 

The  biological  significance  of  the  "  primordial  "  substance,  the  ideo- 
plastic  development  of  organic  and  organised  forms,  of  human  limbs, 
heads,  and  imitations  of  these,  are  sufficiently  dealt  with  in  the  first 
part  of  this  work.  The  same  may  be  said  of  their  teleplastic  evolution 
and  involution,  and  the  chemical  and  microscopic  investigations  in 
connection  with  them.  But  this  is  not  intended  to  detract  from  the 
great  progress  represented  by  Dr  Geley's  investigations. 

We  must  also  pomt  out  that  the  observations  with  Eva  C.  are  not 
unique,  in  spite  of  the  sporadic  occurrence  of  mediumship.  Thus 
Professor  Enrique  Morselli,  in  his  work  Psychology  and  Spiritism,  gives 
some  clear  representations  of  phantom  formations  obtained  with  Eusapia 
Paladino,  which  also  give  the  impression  of  being  incomplete  and  imper- 
fect, some  showing  nebulosity  and  vague  outlines,  while  others  are  flat 
without  any  density,  wrapped  in  veils,  and  very  luminous.  In  his  book 
Morselli  warns  against  admitting  intruders  with  their  "  impertinent  and 
arrogant  judgment  unsupported  by  any  previous  study." 

Similar  experiences  are  reported  by  Madeleine  Lacombe  {Ann.  Sc. 
Psychiques,  1918  and  1919)  in  her  letters  to  Camille  Flammarion  in 
connection  with  the  private  medium,  the  Countess  Castelvicz,  in  Lisbon. 
Here  again  the  phantoms  began  as  luminous,  transparent,  and  subse- 
quently condensing  clouds.  They  were  only  partly  materialised  at 
first,  and,  in  addition  to  formations  true  to  life,  they  show  also  mask-like 
and  sketchy  types.  The  phantom  of  a  nun  (Fig.  211)  is  flat,  in  spite  of 
the  very  vivid  expression  of  the  face.     The  face  is  veiled,  and  the  upper 

Fig.  20I , 

Teleplasm  emerging  from 
the  hands. 

Fig.  202.     Emergence    of    the    sub- 
stance  FROM  MOUTH   AND   NOSE. 

Fig.  203.     Face   developed   from   a  neb- 
ulous     MASS       AT       THE       MEDIUM'S        RIGHT 

shoulder.    Lips   modelled  in   an   other- 
wise   FLAT    FACE. 

Fig.  204.     Face  and  veil  seen  to  develop 
from  a  cloud. 

Fig.  205.      Head    same   as    Fig.    204,    more 

HIGHLY      materialised. 

Fig. 206. 

The  same  face,  on  the  medium's 
right. 

Fig.    207.      The    same     face     in    another 

position,  partly  covered  by  the  head  of 

an  observer. 

Fig.  20S.     The    same,    dematerialising. 

DR   V.   GUSTAVE   GELEY'S   OBSERVATIONS  335 

body  is  draped  with  a  white  fabric.  It  is  remarkable,  in  this  figure  that 
the  whole  right  side,  including  the  right  ear,  shoulder,  and  arm,  is 
entirely  wanting,  as  if  this  part  had  been  torn  off  a  life-sized  portrait. 
The  margin  of  the  phantom  on  the  right  side  shows  an  irregular  structure, 
tears,  fragments,  and  threads,  somewhat  resembling  a  torn  piece  of 
paper.  This  recalls  the  structure  of  the  phantom  (Fig.  157),  which 
shows  a  pencilled  character  in  the  design  of  the  mantle,  and  also  fibres 
and  threads  m  its  outer  margin.  In  spite  of  the  entirely  independent 
genesis  of  these  two  phantoms,  the  creative  agency  seems  to  have 
worked  accordmg  to  the  same  scheme.  Similar  analogies  are  obtained 
in  pictures  of  mediums  of  widely  different  nationalities.  Thus,  the 
author  observed  in  the  case  of  a  boy  of  sixteen,  the  son  of  a  workman 
living  near  the  frontier  of  Upper  Bavaria,  in  a  sitting  on  16th  October 
1919,  that  the  substance  emerged  from  his  mouth  in  the  form  of  a  self- 
luminous  cloudy  ribbon,  and  this  ribbon  expanded  near  the  shoulders 
and  enveloped  the  upper  body  in  a  white  mass.  With  the  same  medium, 
the  representative  of  the  author,  who  was  himself  prevented  from 
attending  the  seance,  observed,  on  the  8th  November  1919,  at  a  distance 
of  about  18  inches,  a  sort  of  thick  fog  rising  behind  the  medium  in  the 
cabmet.  The  fog  descended  on  to  the  boy's  head,  and  finally  extended, 
like  a  cloth,  over  his  whole  face.  After  some  six  or  eight  seconds  the 
apparition  changed  itself  altogether  and  disappeared  at  the  medium's 
neck.  Later,  the  author  also  observed  the  genesis  of  a  finely-drawn 
left  female  hand  out  of  a  strongly  luminous  white,  cloud-like  substance, 
emanating  from  the  same  medium.  These  analogies,  with  previous 
observations,  might  be  carried  much  further,  from  the  author's  own 
experience,  but  for  the  present  he  wishes  to  confuie  himself  to  a  hasty 
glance  at  the  photographic  material  which  has  been  placed  in  his  hands 
during  the  last  few  years  by  various  private  circles.  Stricter  conditions 
than  those  covering  the  sittings  with  Eva  C.  could  hardly  be  expected, 
but  their  absence  need  not  reduce  the  accuracy  of  the  observations,  in 
spite  of  the  possibility  of  errors,  since  the  persons  furnishing  the  accounts 
are  reliable  investigators,  whose  only  interest  is  the  service  of  truth. 

Fig.  212  shows  a  materialisation  m  its  initial  stage  in  the  case  of  a 
Dutch  landed  proprietress,  who  acted  as  a  medium  in  a  private  circle, 
and  who  placed  some  photographs  at  the  author's  disposal.  This  photo- 
graph recalls  that  published  by  Aksakof  in  his  work  Animism  and 
Spiritism,  Vol.  II.,  I'late  1.  The  next  two  pictures  (Figs.  213  and  214) 
concern  a  young  Pole  from  Galicia,  with  whom  the  author  held  a  sitting 
under  unfavourable  conditions,  with  a  negative  result.  A  Galician  I\lining 
Director  was  a  witness  of  numerous  mediumistic  phenomena  obtained 
with  him,  and  took  some  photographs  of  the  teleplastic  substance,  which 
developed  about  the  body  of  the  young  man  m  the  form  of  amorphous 
material,  or  white  fabrics,  and  lay  on  the  back  of  the  chair,  or  on  his 
head.  Although  the  author  must  leave  the  responsibility  for  the 
genuineness  of  the  phenomena  on  the  shoulders  of  his  correspondent, 
whom  he  knows  to  be  trustworthy,  the  analogy  with  Eva's  earlier  pheno- 
mena is  so  strikuig  as  to  give  a  considerable  interest  to  this  photograph, 
which  was  obtained  before  the  results  with  Eva  C.  were  known.  The 
next  four  photographs  are  furnished  by  the  same  person,  and  concern  a 
Polish  girl  in  the  service  of  a  land  agent  (Figs.  215,  216, 217  and  218).     In 

336  PHENOMENA    OF    MATERIALISATION 

this  case  the  substance  Hes  on  the  face  hke  a  grey  rag,  or  projects  irregu- 
larly from  the  neck  opening,  or  the  mouth.  Here  again  we  have  striking 
analogies  with  Eva  C.  and  Stanislava  P.  (Figs.  32, 158, 170,  172  and  176). 
The  next  photograph  (Fig.  219)  shows  a  large  mass  of  flocculent 
substance,  behind  which  the  head  of  a  phantom  is  visible.  Some  stereo- 
scopic pictures  of  the  sittings  with  Eva  C.  show  the  same  kind  of  material, 
resembling  torn  cotton,  as  does  an  additional  photograph  of  Stanislava  P. 
(Fig.  220),  taken  by  Mr.  L.,  of  Warsaw.  On  the  two  photographs 
obtained  by  the  author  on  26th  October  1919  we  see  the  sixteen-year-old 
Willy  S.  opening  the  curtain  with  one  hand  and  holding  a  planchette  in 
the  other  (Fig.  221),  supported  by  a  drawing-board  on  the  boy's  knees. 
A  large  mass  of  white  substance  covers  the  right  shoulder  and  upper 
arm,  like  a  white  napkin,  and  is  fastened  at  the  neck.  The  second 
picture  (Fig.  222)  shows  a  white  substance  on  the  head  covered  with 
large  solid  strips  of  a  dark  colour.  The  third  and  fourth  photographs 
(Figs.  223  and  224)  show  various  formations  of  teleplasm,  and  the  fifth 
(Fig.  225)  shows  a  primitive  face,  like  that  of  a  snow-man.  A  com- 
parative survey  of  the  observational  material  of  the  last  ten  years  with 
Eva  C,  and  similar  experiences  with  the  medium  Stanislava  P.,  as  well 
as  with  subjects  of  quite  different  nationalities  (Portugal,  Galicia,  Italy, 
Poland  and  Germany),  when  clearly  examined,  does  not  admit  of  any 
doubt  concerning  the  actual,  though  sporadic,  occurrence  of  the  tele- 
plastic  faculty  in  a  number  of  individuals  who,  quite  independently  of 
each  other  (both  in  time  and  space),  are  capable  of  producing  the  same 
class  of  phenomena.  It  is  obvious  that  the  teleplastic  appearances 
follow  a  distinct  (biological?)  sequence,  which  covers  not  only  the 
simpler  formations  as  illustrated,  but  also  more  complicated  organic 
and  organised  bodies,  fragments,  types,  and  diagrammatic  imitations. 
However  wonderful  these  phenomena  may  appear  to  be,  they  depend 
upon  a  biological  mechanism  hitherto  unexplored  ;  upon  a  system  of 
forces  working  with  a  certain,  almost  monotonous,  uniformity,  which  is 
again  clearly  connected  with  the  most  elementary  facts  of  the  problem 
of  life. 

CONCLUSION. 

If  we  have  a  right  to  expect  from  every  investigator,  who  takes  responsi- 
bility for  the  observations  he  describes,  the  qualities  of  veracity  and 
conscientiousness,  as  well  as  a  strict  objectivity,  this  requirement 
applies  in  an  even  higher  degree  to  the  critic  who  undertakes  publicly 
to  deny  the  facts  stated,  and  to  represent  them  as  the  products  of  error, 
of  inaccurate  observation,  and  of  fraud. 

It  goes  without  saying  that,  in  the  first  instance,  only  such  investi- 
gators come  into  the  question  as  have  made  a  special  study  of  the 
subject,  and  who  possess  sufficient  experience  of  their  own,  and  a 
knowledge  of  the  literature  of  the  subject. 

Judgments  of  savants  who  are  only  familiar  with  other  regions  of 
knowledge,  and  who  are  not  familiar  with  the  matter  to  be  criticised, 
have  no  weight,  not  to  speak  of  laymen.  Thus,  a  botanist  will  not 
presume  to  judge  concerning  astronomy.  "  According  to  the  principles 
of  unprejudiced  investigation,  nobody  has  the  right  to  doubt  the  reality 

Fig.  209.  Head,  same  as  Fig.  208, 
before  dematerialisation,  in 
another    position,    and    enlarged. 

Fig.    2IO.     This   head    (exlarged)    was   seen   to   form   from   a   mass   emerging 
FROM  Eva's  mouth.     The  upper  half  of  the  face  is  more  materialised  than 
the  lower.     Numerous  rents  and  folds. 

Fig.     211.     Phantom     of     a     nun, 

TAKEN    BY    MME.    LACOMBE. 

Fig.   212.     Initial  stage  of  materialisation 
IN    the    form    of    a    cloud.     Dutch    medium. 

Fig.    213.     Teleplastic    substance    on 
the  head  of  a  young  Pole  in  a  trance. 

Fig.  214.     Teleplasm  on  the  left  breast  of  the  young 
Pole.     Pained  expression  on  face. 

Fig.  215.     Teleplasm  at  the  neck  of  a  C'.alician 

GIRL. 

Fig.     216.     Teleplasm     emerging     from     the 
mouth  of  the  same  medium. 

Fig.    2ig.     Phantom    head 

FROM    THE    SITTING    OF    MmE. 

Lacombe.     Lower  part  of 
the  face    as  well  as  the 
neck,  covered  with  tele- 
plastic  matter 

Fig.   217.     Another   case  resembling   Fig.   214 

Fig.     218.     Teleplasm     covering     the 
face  OF  the  Galician  medium. 

Fig.  220.  Teleplastic  matter 
in  form  of  a  veil  on  the 
breast  of  the  polish  medium, 
Stanislava  p.  (Warsaw 
photograph.) 

Fig.   22  1.     Teleplastic  f.^bric  on   the 

right   shoulder   and   arm   of   the    l6 

YEAR  OLD  Austrian  medium,  Willy   S. 

(Author's  photograph.) 

l^IG.       222.        (jREY      AND      WHITE 

frag.ments    on    the    head    of 
Willy     S.      (Author's    photo- 
graph.) 

Fig.    223.     Teleplastic   material   on   the   chest   of 
Willy  S.     (Author's  photograph.) 

Img.  224.  Primitive  hand  at 
ear  of  Wii  ly  S.,  with  tele- 
plastic     KATTER      on      RIGHT 

shoulder.  (Photograph  of 
author's  collaborator   K.. 

Fig.  225.     Primitive  face,  with  holes,  rents, 
and  folds  on  the  teleplastic  foundation. 
Willy    S.       (Photograph      taken      by      the 
author's  collaborator  K.) 

CONCLUSION  337 

of  conscientiously  observed  facts,  or  to  deny  them,  until  he  has  himself 
repeated  the  experiments  in  question  "  (Logothetti). 

The  unbridled  criticism  which  has  been  let  loose  upon  t?hc  work 
Materialisations  Phcenomene  shows  the  very  opposite  to  the  obvious 
postulate  mentioned  above,  and  it  outrages  the  right  of  free  investigation. 
Thus  the  medium  was  simply  denounced  as  a  conjurer,  and  the  author's 
investigations  as  a  comedy  of  fraud.  Although  nobody  was  obliged  to 
believe  the  facts  related,  or  to  occupy  himself  with  them,  the  Kemnitz 
pamphlet,  written  by  two  medical  authors,  offered  a  welcome  means,  at 
the  right  moment,  to  fight  and  condemn  the  author's  unwelcome  observa- 
tions, which  contradict  the  dominant  mechanistic  view  of  the  universe. 

Detailed  investigation  of  our  opponents'  assertions,  or  even  a  com- 
parison of  their  contents  with  the  records  of  the  sittings,  has  hardly  been 
carried  out  in  a  single  case. 

A  careful  examination  of  the  objections  and  arguments  brought 
forward  by  our  opponents  has  shown  their  baselessness.  The  first 
objection  was  the  rumination  hypothesis.  To  put  the  ruminant  Wittig, 
without  further  ado,  on  the  same  level  as  the  medium,  is  a  logical 
somersault.  It  is  only  when  the  ruminator  has  produced  the  same 
phenomena  under  the  same  conditions  that  he  can  be  discussed  at  all. 
But,  up  to  now,  the  connection  between  the  two  is  entirely  lacking. 

To  this  must  be  added  the  circumstance  that  these  assertions  have 
been  carefully  tested  by  us,  by  means  of  pictorial  experiments  on  gold- 
beaters' skin,  chiffon,  tissue  paper,  etc.  But  the  results  are  not  at  all 
to  be  compared  with  the  phantom  pictures,  quite  apart  from  the  absolute 
impossibility  of  carrying  out,  without  the  use  of  the  hands,  the  unfolding 
of  the  pictures,  their  fixation,  folding  up,  and  the  other  manipulations 
required.  If,  therefore,  our  opponents  wish  to  establish  this  objection, 
they  must  first  of  all  procure  pictures,  some  of  them  mask-like,  i.e., 
plastically  formed  faces  with  hair,  which  approach  those  published  in 
the  book,  in  artistic  quality  and  general  appearance,  and  which,  with 
the  same  photographic  exposure,  appear  as  clearly  on  the  negative  as 
the  medium's  head  itself.  That  is  the  first  supposition.  The  second 
requirement  would  be  the  packing  and  hiding  of  such  packets  in  the 
stomach  or  the  gullet.  That  there  must  also  be  small  hooks  or  bent 
pins,  our  opponents  admit  themselves.  But  then  the  medium  would 
always  risk  bodily  injury  in  swallowing  such  things,  for  such  packets 
might  accidentally  release  themselves  from  the  packing,  under  the 
influence  of  the  liquid  contents  of  the  stomach  or  the  intestine,  and 
could  involve  very  dangerous,  or  even  fatal,  consequences. 

During  the  process  of  emergence  the  knees  and  hands  are  quite 
excluded,  and  the  medium  must  not  rise  from  the  chair.  All  the 
manipulations,  like  folding,  fixing  to  the  curtain,  folding  up,  have  to  be 
carried  out  exclusively  with  the  mouth  and  the  tongue.  As  soon  as  our 
opponents  are  in  a  position  to  bring  forward  a  ruminator  who  can 
perform  all  these  things,  exactly  in  the  manner  described,  and  with  the 
same  speed  as  Eva  C,  and  lead  to  the  production  of  photographs  showing 
the  same  appearance  as  those  published  in  this  book,  only  then  can  the 
discussion  of  rumination  be  continued.  Until  then,  we  must  claim  the 
liberty  of  denying  the  so-called  possibility  advanced  by  our  opponents, 
for  only  in  a  purely  experimental  way,  and  not  by  a  fight  about  words 

Y 

338  PHENOMENA    OF    MATERIALISATION 

on  quite  wrong  premises,  or  by  pure  assumptions  and  hypotheses,  can 
the  trutli  be  determined. 

The  author  and  his  friends  have  carefully  gone  over  the  objections 
raised,  both  that  of  rumination  and  that  of  the  copying  of  the  Miroir 
reproductions,  by  conducting  further  experiments  with  the  medium. 
They  have  a  right  to  expect  the  same  painstaking  accuracy  from  their 
opponents,  and  it  goes  without  saying  that  the  existing  records  of  the 
sittings  must  serve  as  a  model  of  the  experimental  conditions.  For  we 
must  not  take  details  out  of  the  context  of  the  sitting  and  use  them  for 
an  attack,  or  for  assertions  which  cannot  be  substantiated  by  the 
records,  e.g. ,  the  withdrawal  of  the  hands,  the  domination  of  the  medium, 
the  hiding  of  objects  in  the  seat  of  the  chair,  or  the  regular  closing  of  the 
curtains  before  the  occurrence  of  the  phenomena. 

We  must  also  protest  against  entirely  baseless  rumours,  reports  of 
detective  bureaus,  or  low  gossip  (Richet  case,  Algiers)  being  presented 
to  the  reader  as  proved  facts.  Such  a  procedure,  as  well  as  the  intro- 
duction of  personal  bias  into  the  discussion,  is  inconsistent  with  the  duty 
of  both  parties  in  a  purely  scientific  discussion,  and  diverts  the  attention 
to  minor  matters  which  only  have  a  remote  connection,  or  no  connection 
at  all,  with  the  main  question  of  the  genuineness  and  the  origin  of  the 
mediumistic  phenomena. 

After  the  numerous  diversions  of  the  Kemnitz-Gulat  pamphlet,  the 
author  declines,  for  the  future,  any  such  pointless  word-battles  as  have, 
for  instance,  been  carried  on  in  the  daily  press,  though  he  is  ready,  at 
any  time,  to  examine  any  facts  obtained  by  his  opponents  under  the 
conditions  of  his  own  experiments,  and  communicated  without  ani- 
mosity. For  along  the  path  of  theoretical  and  polemical  discussion, 
which  is  not  bound  by  the  rules  of  parliamentary  politeness,  and  in  which 
we  miss  the  personal  esteem  of  the  opponent,  we  can  hardly  expect  to 
obtain  a  solution  of  the  mediumistic  riddle.  Only  new  series  of  unpre- 
judiced experiments  from  both  points  of  view  can  clear  the  situation. 
It  goes  without  saying  that  the  right  of  criticism  is  not  to  be  limited  in 
any  way,  for  it  is  a  necessary  condition  of  the  acquisition  of  knowledge. 

As  regards  the  result  of  the  tests,  whether  Miroir  pictures,  artistically 
manipulated,  were  exposed  as  phantom  pictures,  it  has  been  shown  that 
the  agreements  in  certain  details  cannot  be  explained  by  fraud.  The 
dissimilarity  between  the  phantom  pictures  and  all  the  supposed  models, 
as  regards  the  build  of  the  face,  the  expression,  and  the  whole  form  of 
the  heads,  is  so  great  that  one  is  not  justified  in  making  the  new  objection 
that  these  models  had  been  copied  to  produce  the  mediumistic  images. 
For,  ill  this  case,  there  should  be  similarities,  above  all  in  the  expression, 
and  in  the  proportions  of  the  faces,  but  these  are  entirely  absent. 

Finally,  the  more  recent  observations  made  by  the  author  and  other 
savants  with  the  medium  Eva  C.  have  yielded  nothing  that  could 
justify  the  opponents'  objections,  and  the  independent  determinations 
of  one  of  Italy's  greatest  savants  show  that  similar  materialisation 
phenomena  were  observed  in  another  medium  (Eusapia  Paladino). 

After  the  appearance  of  the  first  German  edition  of  the  Materialisations 
Phanomene  (end  of  1913),  the  author  had  an  opportunity,  during  Novem- 
ber and  December  1913,  and  January,  May  and  June  1914,  of  mmutely 
dealing  with  critical  objections  by  means  of  the  series  of  sittings  already 

CONCLUSION  339 

reported.     None  of  the  objections  turned  out  to  be  valid  ;    nor  could 
any  of  them  even  suggest  an  improvement  in  the  method  of  observation. 

Other  observers  belonging  to  the  first  period  (1909  to  1913)  gradually 
emerged  into  publicity  with  observations  of  their  own.  Among  them 
Guillaume  de  Fontenay  {Ann.  Sc.  Psych.,  March  1914),  who  deals  with 
the  experimental  arrangement,  with  the  objections  raised,  with  the 
hypothesis  of  conjuring,  and  the  ideoplastic  theory,  and  who,  finally, 
fully  corroborates  the  accuracy  of  the  author's  observations.  In  the 
course  of  a  lecture  he  also  demonstrated  his  measurements  of  relative 
proportions  in  the  photographed  materialisation  images,  as  compared  with 
certain  portrait  heads  from  the  journal  Le  Miroir.  This  re-examination, 
made  quite  independently  of  the  author,  arrives  at  the  same  result,  viz. , 
that  reproductions  from  the  Miroir  could  not  have  been  fraudulently 
used  by  Eva  C,  since  the  relative  proportions  of  the  features  do 
not  correspond  to  the  alleged  models,  as  well  as  for  other  reasons. 

Since  the  same  savant  took  a  number  of  photographs  during  the 
sittings  with  Mme.  Bisson,  he  placed  the  following  letter  at  our  disposal 
for  publication  : — 

"  Paris,  ISth  January  1914. 

"  Dear  Herr  von  Schrenck  Notzing, 

"  In  reply  to  your  letter  of  16th  Januar}'^  1914,  I  can  repeat  and 
emphasise  my  former  declaration.  Neither  you  nor  I  are  infallible, 
and  no  physicist  or  any  other  observer  is  free  from  error.  It  would, 
therefore,  be  childish  to  assert  that  we  could  not  have  been  deceived. 
But,  as  far  as  I  am  concerned,  I  feel  justified  in  stating  that  I  cannot 
understand  how  it  would  have  been  possible  to  deceive  us. 

"  The  various  ideas  which  were  instinctively  suggested  (hidden 
papers,  hands  of  leather,  rubber,  or  gold-beaters'  skin,  as  well  as  other 
means  of  deception),  cannot  be  fitted  into  the  phenomena  observed. 
Even  if  we  assume  the  rumination  hypothesis,  it  could  only  be  applied 
to  a  limited  class  of  phenomena,  and  would  therefore  be  insufficient. 
Both  you  and  Mme.  Bisson  have  given  your  testimony.  I  gladly  add 
mine  as  requested,  and  I  consider  that  it  is  now  the  duty  of  your  oppo- 
nents to  prove  by  deeds,  and  not  by  words,  that  we  have  been  deceived, 
and  how  we  have  been  deceived.  I  await  the  result  of  this  counter-proof 
with  interest  and  curiosity. 

"  Yours,  etc., 

"  G.  DE  Fontenay." 

Opponents  have  sought  to  find  matter  for  suspicion  in  the  sense  of  a 
disavowal  of  the  author,  and  of  metapsychic  matters,  in  the  lack  of  any 
testimony  of  the  Paris  physiologist  Charles  Richet  (discoverer  of  Anaphy- 
laxis), who  took  part  in  several  sittings,  and  had  already  published  a 
report  on  his  o\vn  experiences  in  Algiers.  Professor  Richet  has  kindly 
explained  his  attitude  in  the  following  letter,  addressed  to  the  author : — 

"  My  Dear  Friend, 
"  I  am  surprised  and  annoyed  that  any  one  should  have  attributed  to 
me  any  sort  of  contempt,  indifference,  or  opposition  with  regard  to  the  ex- 
periments conducted  by  you  with  so  much  zeal,  sincerity,  intelligence,  and 
tireless  energy,  and  with  results  which  have  not  disappointed  your  four 
years'  work.     Occupied  as  I  was  with  work  of  a  different  kind,  I  could  not 

340  PHENOMENA    OF    MATERIALISATION 

take  part  in  these  experiments  as  I  should  have  wished.     Butthehttlelhave 
seen  suffices  to  enable  me  to  say  that  every  possible  precaution  was  taken. 

"  As  regards  my  former  experiments  in  Algiers  with  Eva  C,  I 
do  not  withdraw  a  single  word.  Here  I  follow  the  example  of  the 
great  and  noble  savant  William  Crookes,  who,  a  short  time  ago,  said, 
'  I  do  not  withdraw  anything  of  what  I  have  said.' 

"  Criticism  there  must  be  ;  it  is  a  condition  of  science  itself.  The 
truth  must  appear  in  its  full  beauty,  but  that  will  not  happen  through 
the  agency  of  incompetent  and  ignorant  persons,  who  have  seen  nothing, 
controlled  nothing,  examined  nothing  ;  who  have  not  even  carefully 
read  the  accounts  of  the  sittings.  But  it  must  come  through  savants 
who  have  really  worked,  who  have  experimented  without  cessation, 
and  who  prefer  truth  to  probability.  Man  is  so  made  that  he  does  not 
want  to  accept  truth  if  it  does  not  appear  probable,  and  it  is  certainly 
not  our  fault  if  the  metapsj^chic  region  shows  so  many  improbabilities 
and  contradictions. 

"  Therefore,  courage,  my  dear  friend  !     Labor  emus  ! 

"  Yours  sincerely, 
"  Paris,  10^^  June  1914.  "  Charles  Richet." 

Towards  the  end  of  the  first  ten  years  of  observations  the  well-known 
Paris  psj^chologist,  Dr  Gustave  Geley,  published  his  essay  on  "  La  Physio- 
logic dite  Supra-Normale  et  les  Phenomenes  d'Ideo-Plastie"  which  not 
only  acknowledged  the  correctness  of  all  our  previous  determinations  in 
every  detail,  on  the  basis  of  his  own  observations,  but  also  attempted  to 
link  materialisation  phenomena  with  physiological,  biological,  and  philo- 
sophical considerations. 

The  importance  of  Geley' s  work  consists  not  only  in  the  continuation 
of  the  methodical  observation  of  these  phenomena,  as  first  elaborated 
by  the  author  and  Mme.  Bisson,  for  the  region  of  materialisation,  not 
only  in  the  systematic  treatment  of  the  collection  of  facts,  but  especially 
in  the  attempt  to  find  its  place  in  the  circle  of  natural  phenomena,  and 
in  the  proof  that  the  reality  of  such  phenomena  is  one  of  the  strongest 
arguments  against  a  materialistic  and  mechanical  view  of  the  universe. 
Even  though  in  discussing  details  of  this  work,  especially  the  theoretical 
deductions,  one  cannot  always  agree  with  the  author,  one  cannot  deny 
the  great  merit  of  Geley  in  applying  a  new  stimulus  to  these  researches. 
His  reports  produce  an  impression  that  the  long  years  of  schooling 
undergone  by  the  medium  have  made  the  phenomena  more  capable  of 
resistance,  and  more  accessible  to  scientific  treatment,  than  they  were 
before  the  war.  Thus  Geley  was  able  to  observe  some  manifestations 
uninterruptedly  from  their  genesis  to  their  disappearance.  This  alone 
involves  an  enormous  progress  in  method,  which  disposes  of  all  suspicion 
directed  against  the  medium,  and  eliminates  explanations  based  upon 
the  fraud  hypothesis.  The  perceptions,  by  sight  and  touch,  were  made 
more  objective  by  registering  apparatus  and  photography. 

It  is  true  that,  concerning  the  phenomena  themselves,  we  get  nothing 
new.  All  that  he  brings  forward  had  been  described  and  observed  by 
the  author  and  Mme.  Bisson  many  years  earlier.  Much,  indeed,  had 
been  examined  by  us  in  greater  detail,  though,  as  regards  theoretical 
interpretations  of  this  extraordinarily  difficult  subject,  we  imposed  upon 
ourselves  much  greater  reserve. 

PRINTED    BV   THE   EDINBURGH   PRESS,    Q   AND    II    YOUNG   STREJST 

BOSTON  PUBLIC  LIBRARY 

3  9999  05676  940  7
