THE MAMMALS OF MADAGASCAR.


By P. L. Scuarsr, M.A., Ph.D., F.R.S., Secretary of the Zoological
Society of London.


OreGanio beings are not scattered broadcast over the earth’s surface
without regularity or arrangement, as the casual observer might sup-
pose, nor are they distributed according to the variations of climate
or of any other physical external agent, although the latter have, un-
questionably, much influence in modifying their forms. But each
species (or assemblage of similar individuals), whether of the animal
or vegetable kingdom, is found to occupy a certain definite and con-
tinuous geographical area on the earth. In like manner, each genus,
or assemblage of species, each family, or assemblage of genera, and
each order, or assemblage of families, may be said to be subject to
similar laws, as regards its geographical distribution,—although, as
might have been supposed, the areas occupied by the higher groups
are usually larger, and in some cases co-extensive with the earth’s
surface.

It thus happens that the various parts of the world are charac-
terized by possessing special groups of animals and vegetables, and
that, as a general rule, such tracts of land as are most nearly con-
tiguous have their Faune and Flore most nearly resembling one
another ; while, vice versa, those that are farthest asunder are inhabited
by most different forms of animal and vegetable life. When any
exception to this rule occurs, and two adjacent lands possess dis-
similar forms, or two regions far apart exhibit similar forms, it is the
task of the student of geographical distribution to give some reason
why this has come about, and so to make the “exception prove the
rule.”

In the present paper I propose to devote a short space to the
examination of one of the best known and strangest of these anomalies

VOL. I. Q


214 Original Articles. | April,


in geographical distribution—namely, that presented to us by the
Fauna of the Island of Madagascar. Madagascar being immediately
‘contiguous to the eastern coast of Africa, and separated from it by a
channel in one place only some 200 miles across, in which, moreover,
there are several intermediate islands, while it is very far removed
from India and America, ought, according to generally-received rules,
to exhibit a Fauna of a purely African type. But this, as is well
known to naturalists, is not the case. The numerous Mammals of the
orders Ruminantia, Pachydermata, and Proboscidea, so characteristic
of the Aithiopian Fauna, are entirely absent from Madagascar. The
same is the case with the larger species of Carnivora, which are found
throughout the African continent, but do not extend into Madagascar.
Again, the highly-organized types of Quadrumana, which prevail in
the forests of the mainland, are utterly wanting in the neighbouring
island, their place being there occupied by several genera of the inferior
family of Lemurs. In the like manner, I shall be able to show that
similar irregularities prevail to a greater or lesser extent in every other
part of the series of Mammals, and that, in short, the anomalies pre-
sented to us by the forms of life prevalent in this island are so striking,
that claims have been put forward in its favour to be considered as a
distinct primary geographical region of the earth.*

But let us take the Orders pf Mammalia as they are generally
recognized, one by one, in order that we may examine more carefully
the affinities of each genus of them included in the list of Madagascarian
Mammals. To do this, it will be most convenient to refer to the cata-
logue of the Vertebrates of Madagascar lately published by M. Frangois
Pollen, in the ‘ Nederlandsch Tijdschrift voor de Dierkunde;’f this
being the only general article bearing upon the subject that has yet
appeared. M. Pollen’s list is a compilation for his own use, as
being about to visit Madagascar, of what has been recorded by previous
authorities on the subject. Amongst such authorities, the most im-
portant, as regards Mammals, is certainly an article by M. Victor
Seganzin, in the third volume of the ‘Memoirs of the Society of the
Museum of Natural History of Strasburg.’ M. Sganzin was the com-
mandant of the French settlement of Sainte-Marie, on the north-east
coast of Madagascar, in 1831 and 1832, and obtained on that island
and on the adjoining coast of Madagascar proofs of the existence of
about a hundred Vertebrate animals, concerning which he gives us
notes, without, however, in many cases, any precise determination of the
species. Long before his time, it is true, De Flacourt and Sonnerat


* The most natural primary divisions of the earth as regards Zoology are, as
has been shown in the ‘ Journal of Proceedings of the Linnean Society’ (Zoology),
ii. p. 130, and elsewhere, (1) The Neotropical region, comprising South America,
Mexico, and the West Indies; (2) The Nearctic, including the rest ef America ;
(3) The Palwarctic, composed of Europe, Africa north of the Sahara, and
Northern Asia; (4) The A?thiopian, which contains the rest of Africa, Arabia,
and Madagascar; (5) The Indian, consisting of Southern Asia and the western
half of the Malay Archipelago; and (6) The Australian, which comprises the
eastern portion of the Malay Archipelago, Australia, and the Pacific Islands.

t+ ‘Nederlandsch Tijdschrift voor de Dierkunde,’ Amsterdam, 1863, vol. i.
p. 277.


1864. |} Sonarmr on the Mammals of Madagascar. 215


had published narratives of their voyages to Madagascar, and the
latter had made known to science several of the most remarkable types
of the island ;* but neither of these explorers has furnished any general
indications as to the character of its Mammalian Fauna. In 1833,
three French naturalists — Bernier, Goudot, and Rousseau — visited
Madagascar, and it is to the labours of these energetic collectors on the
eastern coast, and to those of Dr. W. Peters, of Berlin, on the western
coast, that science is chiefly indebted for the progress that has lately
been made towards the compilation of a list of the Mammals of this
island, which, however, as far as our present knowledge extends, only
embraces some 49 species—namely, Quadrumana 28, Carnivora 5,
Chiroptera 5, Rodentia 1, Insectivora 9, Pachydermata 1.

To begin then with the order Quadrumana, the most remarkable and
most characteristic type of Madagascarian Mammals here presents itself
at once at the head of the list. The Lemurs are universally recog-
nized among naturalists as forming a separate and distinct group of
Quadrumanous Mammals. And of the Lemurs nearly thirty different
species, embracing eight generic forms, are found in Madagascar,
whilst all Africa only contains some eleven or twelve species of these
animals, and the Indian region not more than three. This will be
better seen by the subjoined table, in which the distribution of the
genera of the family of Lemurs and the approximate number of the
known species of each genus are given—


Table of the Distribution of the Lemuride.


aoe ena: AFRICA. MADAGASCAR, ASIA,
1. Indris (2) +
Tndrisinze 2, Propithecus (1)
3. Avahis (1)
4. Lemur (16)
5. Hapalemur (2)
6. Lepilemur (1)
Lemurine 7. Chirogaleus (2)
8. Perodicticus (2)
9. Nycticebus (2)
10. Loris (1)
11. Microcebus (2
Galaginz { 12. Galago (9) -
Tarsiinee | 13. Tarsius (1)


Moreover, as the whole number of Mammals at present known to
exist in Madagascar does not amount to fifty, we have this very remark-


* De Flacourt’s ‘Histoire de la Grande Ile de Madagascar,’ and Sonnerat’s
‘ Voyage aux Indes Orientales.’

+ N.B.—The numbers in figures placed after the generic names in the table
give the (in some cases approximate) number of species of the genus. Until very
recently but one species of Indris was known to science ; but M. Vinson has lately
discovered, and described in the ‘Annales des Sciences Naturelles’ (Zool. xix.
p. 253), a second from the forest of Alanamazoatrao—which he has proposed to
eall Indris albus.

Q 2


216 Original Articles. | April,


able fact—quite unparalleled, as far as is hitherto known, in any other
Fauna—that nearly two-thirds of the whole number of known species
of the Mammals of this island are members of one peculiar group of
Quadrumana.

Again, when we come to examine the Lemuride of Madagascar, and
to compare them with their brethren in Africa and India, we find that
they present us with no less than eight different generic types—all
distinct from those found in the two latter countries.

The genera Indris, Propithecus, and Avahis constitute a section of
Lemuride per se, easily distinguished from the rest of the family by
having only five molar teeth on each side of the jaw, and only two (in-
stead of four) inferior incisors. No genus with this form of dentition is
found either in Africa or Asia. The true Lemurine are also most fully
developed in Madagascar, the typical genus Lemur being numerous in
species, and, as is stated by travellers, likewise in individuals. In Africa
this sub-family is represented by the abnormal form Perodicticus—a
recently-discovered second species of which is likewise considered by
Dr. Gray* as entitled to generic rank. In India two allied genera of
Lemurine are found—Nycticebus and Loris—likewise difficult to con-
nect satisfactorily with the more typical members of the group, but
presenting many indications of alliance to Perodicticus.

The third sub-family of the Lemuride is essentialiy African —con-
sisting of the genus Galago, with eight or nine species dispersed over
various parts of that continent, while Microcebus, with two or three
imperfectly-known species, takes its place in Madagascar.

The next form we meet with as we descend the series of Madagascar
Mammals, is the celebrated Aye-aye (Chiromys Madagascariensis), an
animal so anomalous in its structure, that although it has been now
conclusively proved that its nearest allies are amongst the Lemurs,t
even the illustrious Cuvier referred it to the widely-distant order of
Rodents. The Aye-aye is pronounced by Professor Owen to be more
nearly allied to some of the African Galagos than to any other living
form. It may be, however, remarked that the Tarsier of the Indian
Archipelago (Tarsius spectrum) presents certain points in its structure
which likewise show a remote affinity to this extraordinary type.

The second order of Mammals—the Bats or Chiroptera, have, as
far as our present knowledge goes, only five representatives in Ma-
dagascar. ‘T'wo of these belong to the Frugivorous family Pteropodide
—and curiously enough to the Indian, not to the African section of the
group. One of them indeed (P. Edwardsiz) is so clearly allied to the
common Pt. medius of continental India, as to have been very con-
stantly confounded with it. t

The three known species of insectivorous Bats of Madagascar
(Rhinolophus Commersonii, Vespertilio Madagascariensis and Emballonura


* See Dr. Gray’s ‘Revision of the Species of Lemurian Animals.’ Proce.
Zool. Soc. 1863, p. 129. :

+ See Prof. Owen’s Memoir ‘On the Aye-aye.” Trans. Zool. Soe. v. pt. 2
(1863).

t As to the real distinctness of these species, see Peters, ‘Zool. Reise n,
Mossambique,’ vol. i. p. 22.


1864. | Scnater on the Mammals of Madagascar. 217


Madagascariensis) supply us with no very precise indications as to their
geographical affinities.

In the next order of Mammals the Insectivora, of which nine species
are known to inhabit Madagascar, we again find a very peculiar group of
types, consisting of the genera Centetes, Hriculus, and Echinogale.
These little animals, though generally associated with the Hedge-hogs
(Erinaceus), to which in their external appearance they present much
resemblance, have been recently declared by Dr. Peters—who has
devoted much attention to the /nsectivora—to be most nearly allied to
the American genus Solenodon!* So to find their nearest affines we
have to cross the whole (present) continent of Africa and the At-
lantic Ocean to the West Indian Islands, where the only two known
species of Solenodon occur.

Besides the Centetine the Insectivora of Madagascar consist of two
species of Shrew (Sorex)—a form widely distributed in the Old, and
northern portion of the New World, and a singular little animal, at
present very imperfectly known, which was described by M. Doyére
in 1835 under the name of Hupleres Goudoti. The Eupleres Goudoti
is stated to agree in its dentition with the moles (Talpa), to which
genus also it would likewise seem to present some resemblance in its
habits ; but its general external conformation is much more like that
of a small vermiform Carnivore, and its describer considers it to con-
stitute the type of a new family of Insectivora, leading off towards the
Carnivora.

The order Carnivora again presents us with three types peculiar to
the island—Cryptoprocta, Galidia and Galidictis. These, however, all
belong to the family Viverrine—a group peculiar to the Old World, and
of which several allied genera inhabit the adjoming parts of Africa. It
is not, therefore, necessary to look “across the Atlantic” for the
nearest relatives to the Madagascarian Carnivora. Strangely enough,
the nearly universally distributed types Felis and Canis seem utterly
unrepresented in this Fauna.

Of Rodents only one species, I believe, has yet been registered as
found in Madagascar. This is a squirrel of the genus Sciuwrus—
which, as far as it is known, exhibits African affinities. Rats and mice,
indeed, there are in Madagascar, as in nearly every other habitable
portion of the globe where man has penetrated, but these are of the
well-known European species, and must be put into the same category
as the cats, dogs, and oxen which have been introduced into and flourish
in the island.

The important order of Ruminants, which is so greatly developed on
the opposite coast of Africa, appear to be wholly wanting in the indi-
genous Fauna of Madagascar. While Antelopes of numerous species
abound in every part, whether plain or forest, of the adjoining conti-
nent, and the Giraffe and Buffalo are likewise everywhere characteristic
features of the Althiopian Mammal-fauna, not one of those creatures is ©
known to occur in Madagascar, and this fact alone would serve to


* Cf. Peters, ‘ Ueber die Saiigethier-gattung, Solenodon. Abh. Acad.
Berlin, 1868.


218 Original Articles. | April,


mark out the wide difference between these two creations as they stand
at present. The same is nearly the case as regards the next order—that
of Pachyderms. The Hippopotamus, so abundant on the opposite coast of
Mozambique, is not found in Madagascar. Had Madagascar ever formed
part of Africa this would hardly have been the case. The genus Equus,
well represented in Southern Africa by the Zebras and Quaggas, the
Hyrax and the Rhinoceros, is likewise wanting; and of the Artio-
dactyles only a single species—namely, the South African Riverhog
(Potamocherus Africanus)—is stated to inhabit Madagascar. But
although M. Sganzin has positively identified this species as a Mada-
gascarian animal, I cannot but think it rather doubtful ; in the first
place, because this is the only exception to the general rule of
specific (and almost generic) difference between the Mammals of
Madagascar and Africa; and secondly, because Dr. Peters tells us he
could obtain no indications of the existence of this Pig upon the oppo-
site coast of Mozambique. However, until the contrary is proved, it is
only fair to assume M. Sganzin’s statement to be correct, and to include
this Riverhog in the list of Madagascarian Mammals.

Having thus given a cursory view of some of the more salient
features of the Mammal-creation of Madagascar let us see what deduc-
tions we can gather from them as to its origin—taking, of course, for
granted, the derivative hypothesis of the origin of species—at present,
the only theory by which the otherwise inexplicable facts of geographical
distribution can be explained. Of course it would be more satis-
factory in a case like the present to have before us a summary of
the knowledge we possess concerning every part of the Fauna and Flora
of Madagascar, but as space does not permit this, let us see what we
can make out from the Mammals alone.

The following deductions may, perhaps, be arrived at from what we
have before us :—

1. Madagascar has never been connected with Africa, as it at present
exists. ‘This would seem probable from the absence of certain all-per-
vading Aithiopian types in Madagascar, such as Antilope, Hippopotamus,
Felis, &c. But, on the other hand, the presence of Lemurs in Africa
renders it certain that Africa, as it at present exists, contains land that
once formed part of Madagascar.

2. Madagascar and the Mascarene Islands (which are universally
acknowledged to belong to the same category) must have remained
for a long epoch separated from every other part of the globe, in order
to have acquired the many peculiarities now exhibited in their Mammal-
fauna—e.g. Lemur, Chiromys, Eupleres, Centetes, &e.—-to be elaborated
by the gradual modification of pre-existing forms.

3. Some land-connection must have existed in former ages be-
tween Madagascar and India, whereon the original stock, whence the
present Lemuride of Africa, Madagascar, and India are descended,
flourished.

4, It must be likewise allowed that some sort of connection must
also have existed between Madagascar and land which now forms part
of the New World—in order to permit the derivation of the Cente-


1864. | Herscugn on the Solar Spots. 219


tine from a common stock with the Solenodon,* and to account for
the fact that the Lemuride, as a body, are certainly more nearly allied
to the weaker forms of American monkeys than to any of the Simiide
of the Old World.

To conclude, therefore, granted the hypothesis of the derivative
origin of species, the anomalies of the Mammal-fauna of Madagascar
can best be explained by supposing that, anterior to the existence of
Africa in its present shape, a large continent occupied parts of the
Atlantic and Indian Ocean stretching out towards (what is now) America
on the west, and to India and its islands on the east; that this con-
tinent was broken up into islands, of which some became amalgamated
with the present continent of Africa, and some possibly with what is
now Asia—and that in Madagascar and the Mascarene Islands we have
existing relics of this great continent, for which as the original focus of
the “ Stirps Lemurum,” I should propose the name Lemuria !


EXPLANATION OF THE PLATE.


The accompanying sketch by Mr. Wolf will serve to illustrate the more
remarkable types of the Mammal-kind of Madagascar. On the summit of the
trees are Lemurs of different species (Lemur leucomystax, L. varius, L. catta, and
L. xanthomystaz). In the centre is the Aye-aye ; on the ground to the right is
one of the remarkable Carnivores of the island (Galidictis vittata) staring at
it; on the left is the little Hchinogale telfairi, endeavouring to make its escape
from such an extraordinary assemblage. In the background may be seen the
celebrated Traveller’s-tree (Urania speciosa), and other marked forms of Mada-
gascarian vegetation.


ON THE SOLAR SPOTS.
By Siz Joun F. W. Herscuet, Bart., K.H., D.C.L., F.R.S.
