HERMETICA 


THE ANCIENT GREEK AND LATIN 
WRITINGS WHICH CONTAIN RELIGIOUS 
OR PHILOSOPHIC TEACHINGS ASCRIBED TO 


HERMES TRISMEGISTUS 
EDITED 


WITH ENGLISH TRANSLATION AND NOTES 


BY 


WALTER SCOTT 


VOLUME III 


Notes on the Latin Asclepius 
and the Hermetic Excerpts of 
Stobaeus 


OXFORD 
AT THE CLARENDON PRESS 
_ 1926 











PREFACE 


HE manuscript of this volume was revised, 

and some of the proofs read, by Mr. Scott 
before he died. I have endeavoured to carry out 
his intentions. Some additional notes have been 
inserted, though sparingly ; these are distinguished 
by square brackets. 

Mr. F. Ll. Griffith allowed me to draw freely 
upon his knowledge of Egyptian antiquities. The 
officials of the Clarendon Press met, or anticipated, 
my needs. The task of picking up the threads 
in so large a work was lightened by one of the 
readers of the Press, Mr. S. Dixon, who has given 
me invaluable help. I wish to thank them and 
others who have advised me. 


A. S. Fercuson. 
ARMSTRONG COLLEGE, 
NEWCASTLE-ON-TYNE, 
ist March, 1926. 


Jo rettntcncworwatintensrmstonteotateas 
3 £ 
; HERMETICA : 
3 e i 
; Plan of the Work i 
3 Vor. I. Introduction, Texts § 
; and Translation, i 
; Vots. II & III. Commentary, i 
; Vo. IV. Testimonia, Appen- : 
; dices and Indices, i 


TABLE 





Sections of Asclepius III referred to their respective pages in Vols, I and III 


Number of Vol.i, Vol. iii, Number of Vol. i, Vol. iii, 
section page page Section page page 
31 92 27e-2908 — 256 
31 94 27e 304 257 
326 124 2! 366 259 
316 96 29a 368 266 
[z8a] [316] = 29b 370 276 
320 100 29¢ 348 194 
322 103 30 348 200 
322 107,115 31 350 204 
326 123 32a 352 207 
208-328 — 132 32b 354 209 
330 132 33a 316 
332 135 33b 368 99, 267 
533 143 33¢ 31 99 
22a-23b _ 14, 34a 320 100 
334 14 34b 322 105 
33 147 34c 326 123 
33 — 35 328 127 
338 151, 156 3 339: 127, 131 
338 151, 157 37-38b = 219 
24b-26a a 159 37 358 220 
I 38a 360 243 
342 169 38b 362 = 
344 177 39 362-246, 248 
b-32a,40b — 185 40a 364 246, 253 
346 191 40b - 364 185,207,254 
346 193 4oc 364 455 
324 123 4od 372 279 
324 107,122,123 41a 372 280 


| 360 235 41b 374 284 





THE LATIN ASCLEPIUS 


Title. The éncipit and explicit of the MSS. of the Latin Asclepius 
show that the title which the translator found at the head of his 
Greek text was “Epyod tpupeyictov BiBdos tepi mpos *Aokdnmov 
mpooduvnGeica. But the Greek document was known to Lactantius 
and Lydus by the title ‘Epnod tprpeyiorov Adyos réAeos.’ Lactantius 
_ quotes under this title both from Asc/. I and from Asc/, III; and one 
of his quotations is taken from the Epilogue (i.e. the narrative 
passage appended at the end of Asc¢/. III), which is connected with 
and presupposes the Prologue prefixed to Ascd. I. It appears 
therefore that the Adyos réetos as known to Lactantius included all 
that is contained in our Latin Asclepius; and the title Adyos 
téAeos may have been given to the document by the redactor who 
joined together Asc/. I, Asc/. II, and Asc. III. 

Stobaeus, 4. 52. 47, quotes the Greek of Asc/. III. 27 (vol. i, 
p- 364) under the heading ‘Eppod é« ray mpos “AokAnmy. It is 
possible therefore that the Greek original of As¢/. III, as a separate 
document, was included in the Hermes to Asclepius collection, and 
that Stobaeus knew it in that form, and not as a part of the larger 
whole to which the title Adyos réAews was applied. Cyril (c. Julian. 
4. 130) quotes from Hermes Trismegistus év "r7 mpds *AckAnmidv 
a passage which appears to be a lengthened form of Asc/, III. 29b 
init. ; it is possible that the original of Asc/. III was known to him 
also as a separate document. 

The full title of the composite document was probably ‘Eppoi 
tpirpeyicrou BiBAos iepd, zpos "AckAnmov Tporpovnbeica, i érixadovpéevy 
Adyos ré\ewos.? The title Adyos réXevos means ‘a discourse in which 
the teaching is brought to completion’, i.e. one which follows on 























} Lact. Div. inst. 4. 6. 4 (Ascl. 1.8). Tb, 7-18. 3 (Ascd, INT. 26a). 76. 6, 25. 11 
(Asel. TIL. 41). Lydus De mensibus 4. 7 (Ase?. UI. 19b and 39). 2d. 4. 32 
summary of a lost passage of the Asclepius; see Ascl. III. 33 b, vol. i, p. 368). 
40. 4. 148 (a sentence from the same lost passage). 
* Compare the heading of the Kore Kosmu (Axe. XXIII) in Stobaeus : ‘Epyod 
Tpicpeyiarov éx ris lepas BiBAou (ris) émadovpévns Kdpns xéapov. Title of a book 
of magic, Dieterich Adraxas, P. 169: BiBAos iepd émnadrovpévn Movds 4} ’O-y8dn 
Mavotws, rept roo évéyaros rod aylov. 1b, p. 170: ‘Eppijs ... lepa BUBAw émxadov- 
Bévy Trépvys, 

5 Reitzenstein (Hellenist, Mysterienrel. pp- 96 and 166) assumes that the word 
TéAeios is intended to suggest TeAer#; and he takes the title to mean ‘a discourse 
2806-3 B 


2 ASCLEPIUS 


and completes the instruction given in earlier discourses. It may 
be translated ‘the crowning discourse’. It implies that this document 
is to be regarded as containing the most advanced teaching of 
Hermes, and as representing the final stage of the pupil’s religious 
education. The discourse reported in it is ‘omnium antea a nobis 
factorum divinior’, says Hermes, ch. ra; and he who has grasped 
its meaning will be ‘omnium bonorum tota mente plenissimus’. In 
other words, he will have attained to complete gnosis; he will ‘see 
God’, or be united with God. 

Below the Greek title stands the short title Asclepius; and this 
is followed in the MSS. by the words ‘Asclepius iste pro sole 
mihi est’,—a note written by some admiring reader. The man 
who wrote it meant ‘This dialogue is a source of light and life 
to me’. 

Prologue 


1a,1b. Deus, deus...orsus dicere. The narrative passage 
tb, Zu vero... orsus dicere, has almost certainly been added by 
a redactor, and probably by the person who joined the three docu- 
ments together. The similar narrative passage 41a, at the end of 
Ascl., refers back to x b, and was presumably written by the same 
hand. In most of the extant Hermetica, the text consists wholly 
of speeches in oratio recta, and contains no narrative ; and in nearly 
all of them, Hermes speaks to a single hearer alone In Asc/. x b, 


concerned with initiation’. But I do not think that this interpretation can be 
accepted. The Asclepius has nothing to do with initiation ; it contains no trace of 
theurgy or sacramentalism (except so far as the defence of the established temple- 
cults in Asc?, IIT may be taken to imply approval of the use of such methods in the 
worship of the di fervenz). The relation of Hermes to Asclepius in this dialogue 
is not that of a hierophant to the mystes whom he initiates, but that of a teacher to 
the pupil whom he instructs, It is true that in Asc/, ITI. 19a Hermes says ‘ divina 
(tibi) nudo mysteria’; but this merely means ‘I reveal holy truths to you’; and it 
no more implies that a sacramental operation is taking place, than do the words of 
Paul in 1 Cor. 15. 51, i800 pvorhpoy bpiv Aéyou’ ndvres ob KounOnodpeba, mévres be 
GdAaynodpeba #.7.A. Moreover, the proper word for ‘concerned with initiation ’ is 
not rédetos, but reAeorixds. The adjective réAeos is indeed sometimes used with 
reference to initiations; e. g. Plato (Symifos. 210 A) describes the ‘ greater mysteries’ 
of Eros as rd réAca xal éwomzixd; and Hippolytus (Ref. haer. prooem., Duncker 
and Schn., p. 4), speaking of the mysteries of heretical sects, says pvotar, 7d réAccov 
Tay Kaxéw napabidévres, ... 5 yap bmopuelvas.. . mapadaBeiy ra ré\ea atrov 
HvoTypa x.7.A. But such instances do not suffice to prove that the word could be 
used in this sense as an epithet of Adyos, ‘a discourse’; and it is difficult to believe 
that the title can have been understood by Greek readers to imply that the discourse 
is, or has to do with, a reAery. 

Eusebius (/7#st. eccl. 10. 1. 3) calls the tenth and last book of his history (i. e. the 
book in which he celebrates the final triumph of the Christian Church over its 
Pagan opponents) rdv réAeiov ... Kat wavy yupikoy tis tev exkdnody dvavedoews 
Ad-ryor, 


1 The plural ‘you’ occurs however in Hermes ap, Cyril. ¢. Julian. i, 556; and 


PROLOGUE 3 







































two other pupils besides Asclepius are introduced ; andin Asc. 41 a, 
the presence of one of these two is mentioned, ssit that of the other 
is to be presumed. But in the greater part of the dialogue, Hermes 
addresses Asclepius alone, and shows no sign of consciousness that 
others are present. Hence it may be inferred that Asc. I, Ase/. II, 
and Asc/. III, in their original form, mentioned no pupil except 
Asclepius, and that the passages in which the presence of other 
listeners is mentioned or implied have been added or altered by the 
_ person who put the separate documents together to make a larger 
whole. The redactor intended the composite document to be 
regarded as a Adyos 7éAetos,—the consummation of Hermes’ teaching ; 
and he may have thought it fitting that the privilege of receiving 
the crowning revelation of the inspired teacher should not be 
restricted to a single disciple, but should be shared by the three 
men who were known by tradition as pupils of Hermes. 

The passages in which the presence of other hearers besides Asclepius 
is implied are the following. Prologue, 1b. Asc/. 1.6 c: ‘vobis expo- 
nam.’—‘ vobis expediam.’—7 a: ‘ vobis praestabo rationem.’ Asc/, II. 
6a: ‘Ne ergo dix(er)i(tis), o Asclepi et Hammon.’—‘ vestri tamen 
causa.’ Asc/. III. 24b: ‘istud vos ignorare fas non est.’ 25: ‘mihi 
credite.’ 32b: ‘et vos, o Tat et Asclepi et Hammon, ... mysteria 
silentio tegite’ 34b: ‘o Asclepi et vos qui adestis, scitote.’ 
Epilogue, 40d: ‘Dictum est vobis de singulis.’ 41a. In the 
case of some of these passages, there are grounds for suspect- 
ing interpolation, apart from the question of the number of 
listeners. 

In the following passages, Asclepius appears to be the only 
hearer :—Asc/. I. 2a: ‘O Asclepi’ (é%s),—‘Curato meminisse.’ 
2b: gs 3b: ‘Nunc mihi adesto totus,’ &c. 6a: ‘O 
Asclepi.’ ‘O Asclepi.’ 8 imi#.: ‘ Audi ergo, Asclepi.’ 9 init. : 
‘O laesleyi, 5 et a ut... festines audire. ... Audi itaque, O 
Asclepi.’ 10 init: * Retonedi . .. 0 Asclepi ... cupio te... 
percipere.’ rxzb: ‘Talem quo munere credis esse munerandum?’ 
12b: ‘Tibi quasi praedivinans dixero,’ 13 ini#.: ‘O Asclepi.’— 
Asci. Ill. 19 a: ‘Magna tibi pando . . . mysteria.’—‘ tu, si intendas, 
poteris pervidere.’ 20a ini/.: ‘o Asclepi’ 20b: ‘Haec ergo 
atio, o Asclepi, tibi sit reddita.’ 21: ‘Asclepi.’—‘recte poteris 
nuncupare.’ 22b: ‘Audi itaque.’ 23b:‘o Asclepi, . . . cognosce.’ 
in the introductory sentence of Corp. X it is assumed that Asclepius is present as 
well as Tat, to whom the discourse of Hermes is addressed. 

B2 


4 ASCLEPIUS 


—‘ Miraris, o Asclepi, an .. . et tu difidis?’ 24a: ‘0 Asclepi. 
Videsne quatenus tu ipse diffidas?’ 24b: ‘An ignoras, o Asclepi ?? 
25: ‘Quid fles, o Asclepi?’ 26a: ¢o Asclepi”’ 26b: ‘o Asclepi.’ 
274: ‘o Asclepi, ut ego te docebo, 28: ‘Audi ergo, o Asclepi.’ 
—‘cavendumque esse cognosce,’—* Asclepi.’ 29c: ‘crede, o 
Asclepi.’ 32b: ‘Vides ergo, o Asclepi.” 33c: ‘ Asclepi, inane 
nihil dixeris” 34c: § Quae si intellexeris, 0 Asclepi, gratias acturus 
es deo.” 35: ‘o Asclepi.’ 36: * Vides ergo, 0 Asclepi, tibi’ &c. 
—‘hoc vis dicere.’ 37: ‘Avus enim tuus, Asclepi,’—‘ 0 Asclepi.’ 
38a: ‘o Asclepi.’ 38b: ‘ne putassis . . . o Asclepi’ 39: “o 
Asclepi.’ Some of these passages prove little ; but there are some 
of them which could hardly have been written by one who assumed 
that other pupils besides Asclepius were present. E, g. Hermes 
could hardly have said ‘I reveal great mysteries to shee’ (19 a), if 
he was revealing them to two other persons at the same time. It 
seems more likely that in the original documents Asclepius alone 
was addressed, and that the redactor changed a singular into a plural 
here and there, but did not think it worth while to alter the words of 
address throughout. 

It is more difficult to decide whether the words of Hermes (za, 
“Deus . . . cognosces ’) which precede the narrative of 1b were 
also added by the redactor, or whether they formed the beginning 
of the original Asc/. I. But Iam inclined to think it more probable 
that the whole of ch. 1 is the redactor’s work, and that the original 
Asc. I began with the words *O Asclepi, omnis . . . anima’ in 
ch. 2a; for these words open a fresh topic, and are not in any way 
connected with ra. Besides, the inflated language in which the 
superiority of this discourse to all earlier Hermetica is asserted in 


the writer of Asc. 1; whereas it agrees better with the attitude of 
the redactor, who appears to have thought that, by stitching together 
different documents, he could produce a complete and final 


teacher. Hermes adds that the discourse he is about to utter will 
be ‘more divine’ than any that he has uttered before; that is, he 






























PROLOGUE: 1a 5 


feels himself to be more completely or more intensely possessed 
by the deity. (This is the writer’s way of saying that the Asclepius 
js superior to all Hermetic treatises that have been written before 
it. Cf. Corp. XVI. 1a: péyav cor (rotrov) rov Adyov. . . Stewed ny, 
gdvrev Tov G\Awy dorep Kopypyy Kat jrduvnua. Herm. ap. Stob. 
Exc. V1.1: 6 xupubraros mavrwv dAdyos Kat xopupadratos ofros av 
ém). And Hermes infers from the opportuneness of his pupil's 
arrival that God wills Asclepius to hear the impending revelation, 
‘and has therefore prompted him to come at this time. Cf. Hermes 
‘in Cyril ¢. Judian. i. 5568: ei ph mpdvod mis Fv Tod wévtwv Kupiov 
Gore pe Tov MOyov Tovrov droKahiyat, K.T.A. 

omnium ... divinior. This is one of several instances in 
which the translator has rendered a Greek genitive by a Latin 
genitive, though Latin usage requires an ablative. For the genitive 
after a comparative, cf. Asc/. III. 22 b /in., ‘meliorem et diis .. . et 
omnium mortalium.’ (The same construction occurs in Apuleius 
De FPlatone i. 9 init.: ‘Animam ... omnium gignentium esse 
seniorem.’) Genitive absolute, Asc/. III. 27 e, ‘numeri conpleti’: 
29 C, ‘viventis . . . partis’. See also Asc. I. 5, ‘accedit ... 
daemonum ’. 

 yel nobis divino numine inspiratorum. Hermes corrects 
the phrase a xobis factorum; for his discourses are not composed 
by him, but by God, who speaks through him. He is &eos. 

On the subject of inspiration, Egyptians, Hebrews, and Greeks 
thought much alike, from the earliest times to which we can trace 
ack their thoughts ; and in the time of the Roman Empire, Pagans, 
Jews, and Christians spoke of it in similar terms. See Philo Quis 
rer. div. heres 52. 259 sgq., quoted in note on Corp. XVIII. 3. 

The Hermetists, when they ascribe their own compositions to the 
ired teacher Hermes, are employing a literary artifice; but it 
not follow from this that there is no serious meaning in their 
ions that the teaching comes from God. There can be little 
bt that some of them at least felt themselves to be évOeo1, and 
sincerely convinced that both in their oral teaching, and in the 
ings in which they reproduced that teaching, God spoke through 
A similar belief in his own inspiration was held by Philo; 
De Cher. 9. 27, Cohn I, p. 176: fovea 8é more kat eecnmegra 
mapa Wuxis euis, ewOvias ra woANA Oeolnrreicbae Kai mept ov 
vs pavreierOar’ dv, dav divwpat, dropyypovedoas épd. De somn. 
38. 252, Wendland III, p. 298: Sapyet 3¢ por wédu Td clwds 


6 ASCLEPIUS 


adpavds évowretv mvedpuo. ddpatov, kal dyow «td. In a similar sense 
Christian writers spoke of themselves as inspired by the mvetpa Geod 
or dyov rvedpa. 

religiosa pietate. I Suppose these words to be dependent on 
videatur ; it is the fervent piety of Hermes’ utterance that proves it 
to be divinior. If this is the meaning, the words are awkwardly 
placed ; but perhaps they have been shifted. 

Quem (sc. sermonem) si intellegens (deum) videris. It seems 
necessary to insert an accusative, in order to provide videris with 
an object ; for sermonem videre is hardly a possible phrase. 

eris omnium bonorum tota mente plenissimus, Cf. Corp, 
IX. 4a: & (roy Geov) exeyvors, wapys yevduevos rdvrwy Tov éyabiy, 
Tas vores Oelas toye. It is assumed that the gnosis of God involves 
the actual presence of God in the soul. And God is 73 ayabdy ; in 


Alterum enim alterius consentaneum esse dinoscitur, 
What are the two things which are inseparably joined together ? 
Are they deum videre and bonorum plenissimum esse? Or omnia 


unum, cf. Corp. XVI, 3- i 

{omnia unius esse, aut unum esse omnia.] These words may 
be a misplaced duplicate of omnia unum esse et unum omnia in 
ch. 2a; or possibly the remains of a marginal note on unum in guo 
sunt oninia, 

Ib. ad eius nomen multe meminimus a nobis esse con- 
seripta. The writer of this passage knew a large body of Hermetic 
writings. Among those known to him were a large number of 
documents entitled Hermes to Ammon; a large number entitled 
Hermes to Tat and described as dvoid ; and a very large number 
entitled Hermes to Tat and described as Scefoducd. ‘The puoixd are 


to Asclepius in 1a, it may be inferred that the writer also knew 
numerous documents entitled Hermes to Asclepius, Thus it appears 
that, at the time when the Prologue was written, the greater part of 
the body of religious Hermetica known in the fourth century A. p, 
and later was already in existence. We have found reason to con- 
clude that the original of Ase/, III, as a separate document, was 
written in or about a. p, 270; and the composite Adyos réXeos was 
known to Lactantius about A.D. 310, The redactor who joined the 


PROLOGUE: 1b . 












































‘several documents together must therefore have done his work at 
‘some time between a. D. 270 and A.D. 310; the Prologue, if written 
by him, must have Leen written between those dates; and by that 
time the collection of Hermetica must have been nearly completed. 
Hermes is here made to speak of himself as the writer of the 
documents in which his conversations with his pupils are recorded 
(‘a nobis esse conscripta.’—‘ Tractatum hunc autem tuo inscribam 
nomine’). Are we intended to suppose that Hermes, after dis- 
coursing to his pupils, sat down and wrote out a verbal report of the 
discussion? It looks as if the writer wished to take advantage of 
the veneration with which the ancient books supposed to have been 
‘written by Thoth were regarded in Egypt, and sought to represent 
the document which he was writing as one of the same class, aban- 
doning for the moment the fiction of a spoken dialogue. 
inreligiosae mentis est multorum conscientia publicare. 
The doctrine revealed by Hermes to his chosen disciples must be 
kept secret from others. Cf. Asc/, III. 32 b (inserted by the 
redactor ?): ‘intra secreta pectoris divina mysteria ... celate.’ Corp. 
XIII. 22 band 13b. Herm. a. Stob. Zxe. XI. 4, 5. 
On the other hand, the writer of Asc/. I (12 b) speaks bitterly of 
the nvidia and malignitas of teachers who exclude men from ‘the 
true philosophy’. In Corp.I, the prophet is bidden to preach to 
all who will listen ; and in Corp, VII we have a specimen of preaching 
addressed to the many. 
adytum. What sort of place is the ‘ sanctuary’ (dSvrov) in which 
Hermes instructs his disciples? It cannot be the ‘ Holy of Holies’ 
_ of a public temple ; for it does not appear that the teacher is specially 
concerned with the cult of any particular ‘ terrestrial god’, If the 
writer had wished to connect him with some temple-worship, he 
_ might have represented him as a priest occupied in the service of his 
grandfather, the god Thoth-Hermes (Asc/. III. 37); but he has not 
done so. Probably therefore we are meant to understand by the 
adytum a private cell or chamber set apart for solitary prayer and 
‘contemplation, to which the teacher now and then admitted a few 
select companions for religious conferences. It is possible that the 
‘Hermetists of the writer’s circle made a practice of thus reserving a 
chamber for private adoration of the supreme God. Such a chamber 
would correspond to that which is described by Philo in his account 


_? This is as if, in Plato’s Phaedo, Socrates were made to say ‘I will write your 
name, Phaedo, at the head of this dialogue as its title’. 


8 ASCLEPIUS 


of the Therapeutae, De vita contempl. 3. 23, Cohn VI, p. 52: otKnpa. 
lepdv, 8 Kadetrar ceuvetoy Kal Hovarripioy, év § fovodpevor Te Tod Teuvod 
Biov prvoripra reAodvras, 

sanctoque illo quattuor virorum religione et divina [dei] 
conpleto praesentia, Diving and dei are probably alternative 
translations of rod Geod. Sanctum might be used as a substantive, in 
the sense of iepdv, ‘a holy place’ ; (it is thus used in the Vulgate 3) 
but if this were the meaning, we should have to take conpleto with it, 
and translate ‘ that holy place being ji//ed with the pious awe of the 
four men’. As conpleto is hardly an appropriate word in this con- 
nexion, it seems better to take sancfo as a Participle, in the sense 
“having been consecrated’ (dyrarbévros rod advrov), 

((ex ore Hermu)) divinus Cupido sic est orsus dicere. The 
Phrase divinus Cupido (6 Ocios épws) is a reminiscence of Plato’s 
Phaedrus and Symposium. ‘The épws of God’ means man’s yearning 
for union with God. But this desire is implanted in man by God ; 
it is regarded as a manifestation of the deit A d¥vams of God, 
indwelling and operative in the human soul 3 and as such, it is here 
Personified. (See Plotinus 3+ 5 mepi épwros, wérepa beds Tis 7) Satu 
} wébos vr THS Wuxiis, Kr. d.) . It is not the merely human teacher that 


obvious phrase ‘ Hermes spoke thus’. But the Statement would be 
incomplete without an express mention of Hermes; I have therefore 
transposed the words ex ore Hermu to this place. 


Asclepius I 


24. omnis humana inmortalis est anima: sed non uni- 
formiter cunctae...; non enim if ] omnis uniugs qualitatis 
est anima, The meaning of this obscure Passage appears to be 
that the souls of men are immortal, and differ in that respect from 
the souls of the lower animals, which are mortal. (Cf. Herm. ap. 
Stob. Zxc, IV A, 5: ida 88 Yoyav, Gcia, dvopurtyy, @oyos.) The 
merely animal life or soul (the anima of ch. 2b Jin. and 3a) is spoken 
of as a thing distinct from the four corporeal elements; but it is 
included, together with them, under the Sway of divas (‘anima et 
mundus a natura comprehensa agitantur ”); it. is conveyed into or 
generated in the individual organism by the entrance of the two 
finer elements, fire and air, into a body composed of the two grosser 
elements, earth and water ; and at the dissolution of the materia] 

























ASCLEPIUS I: 2a 9 


srganism, the individual animal ceases to live. Man also, as long 
‘as he is embodied on earth, possesses a quasi-material and perishable 
sc al. of the same nature as that of the beasts (the @vyrév eldos Yuyijs 
‘sp oken of in Pl. Zimaeus) ; but to this mortal soul is added, in man, 
© vols, which is imperishable ; (see ch. 6 b, ‘ quae quinta pars soli 
‘a omini concessa est’, and ch. 7 b, ‘solum enim animal homo duplex 
F est’, &c. ;) and the Sicaecibis soul, in virtue of its possession of vois, is 
im Feil, (Cf. Herm. af. Stob. Lxc. XI. 2. (8): Wuxis 70 pev aicOy- 
rlix)ov Ovardv, 76 St Aoyixdy dOdvarov.) If this is the writer’s view, his 
doctrine of the soul must have been arrived at by a blending of 
Platonic and Stoic theories. 

‘The inappropriate words ‘vel tempore’ may have arisen out of a 
yariant reading xpdvw for tpérw (more). 

In the MSS., the words ‘non enim, o Trismegiste, omnis unius 
‘qualitatis est anima’ are given as a question asked by Asclepius. ‘Is 
not all soul of one quality?’ ‘No; for all things have been created 
God.’ But that is nonsense; the answer has nothing to do with 
e question. The reproachful reply of Hermes (‘O Asclepi, ut 
eleriter’, &c.) must have been called forth by some remark of 
Asclepius which has fallen out of the text. The point on which 
Hermes insists in his reply is that all things without exception have 
created by God; Asclepius then must have suggested that 
there is something which has not been created by God, but exists 
indep endently of him. And as the thing of which Hermes has been 

eaking is anima, it may be conjectured that Asclepius said ‘Is not 

va uncreated (dyévvyros) ?’ or something to that effect. But if 
epius asked this question, there must have been something in 
preceding speech of Hermes to suggest it; and the needed 
estion might be supplied by inserting the words creatae sunt 
e after aliae alio more, where there appears to bea lacuna in 


fico dizi, omnia unum esse et unum omnia. In ch. ra, 
Something is said about wnwm and omnia; but that passage contains 
nothing to the effect that all things have been created by God, which 
is ; the point here emphasized. The words in ch. 2a therefore cannot 
y well be explained as a reference to ch. 1a; and we must con- 
ude that Hermes is here referring to serious dialogues in which 
has taught this doctrine to Asclepius. The writer, no doubt, 
ound it repeatedly expounded in the Hermes to Asclepius documents 
his possession. If the Prologue was added by the redactor, he 


10 ASCLEPIUS 


must have had ch. 2a before him when he wrote it, and his state- 
ments about omnia and unum in ch. 1 a may have been suggested to 
him by what he read in ch. 2, 

The Hermetists who repeat the old saying that ‘all things are 
one’, or assert that ‘ the One (i.e. God) is all things’, mean thereby 
that all things in the Kosmos derive their being from the one supra- 
cosmic God, or are manifestations of his energy. Thus the writer 
here makes use of the statement omnia unum esse et unum omnia as 
implying that all things have been created by God, and consequently, 
as excluding the hypothesis that anima exists independently of God. 
Cf. Asc. I. 9: ‘qui solus omnia aut pater est omnium.’ Asc/, III. 
19c: ‘ex uno etenim cuncta pendentia ex eoque defluentia, cum 
distantia videntur, creduntur esse quam plurima, adunata vero, 
unum.’ Corp. V. 9. Corp. IX, 9: avrds dravrd éorwy, Corp. X. 2, 
Corp. XI. ii. 14a: abtds dv 3 moet. Corp. XIII. 2 59g. (God is 75 & 
kal 76 w&v ; and accordingly, he who is ‘ born again’, and thereby 
identified with God, becomes, like God himself, 73 wav, év mravri.) 
Corp. XVI. 3 and IQ. 


identify God with the Kosmos in the sense in which the Stoics did ; 
they still hold fast to the Platonic doctrine that the supreme God is 


, there are 
Some among them who insist rather on the distinction between God 
and the Kosmos ; see e, g- Corp. VI (God alone is good, and all else 
is devoid of good), But the Strongest contrast to & 7a mdyra is to 
be found in As¢/, II, where eds and tAy are spoken of as co-existent 
and almost co-equal apxaé of the universe, 

The saying ‘ All things are one’ occurs first in Heraclitus, Diels 
fr. 50: otk guod dAXL Tod A6you dxotcayras oporoyeiy coddv éorw ty 
wavra eva. As used by him, it might be taken to mean either that 
all things are formed by the changes of one living material substance, 
viz. fire, (Heracl. fr, 10, €k zavrev ty xa} €€ évos mavra,) or that all 
changes are determined by one unchanging law (Heracl. fr. 30, 
koopov révde tov abrby drdvrwv). The same words were employed 
by Plato to summarize the Eleatic doctrine of changeless being. 
Pl. Theaet. 180 8: bea Médtocol re xal Tlappevidar. .. SucxupiLovrar, ds 
& te dvra éort Kat éornxev ard évaird. 16.183 E: Mé\ocov pay Kat 
tos dAXous of ty éorbs A€youow 75 wav. Pl. Parmen, 128 A: od py 


ASCLEPIUS I: 2a,2b II 










(Parmenides) év rots roujpacw ev dys elvar To way. The nearest 
approach to this in the extant fragments of Parmenides is fr. 8. 5 
Diels : 088 wor’ fv 088 eorar (sc. 7d edv), eet viv ear opod way, Ev, 
owexes. Cf. Aetius, Diels Doxogr. p. 303: Médwooos xat Zxjvov 70 
ty xai wav (sc. Oedv etvar). Cic. Acad. 2.118: * Xenophanes.. . unum 
esse omnia, neque id esse mutabile, et id esse deum.’ 
The saying of Heraclitus and Parmenides, év wdvra eivar, became 
widely current,' chiefly through the mediation of the Stoics ; and it 
was adopted by the Hermetists, in a sense modified to suit their 
doctrine. 
-_ utpote quae in creatore fuerint omnia, antequam creasset 
omnia. Since all things which exist have been brought into being 
by God’s will, they must have existed in his thought and purpose 
before they came into being in the world of sense, Similarly, it 
might be said that things which do not yet exist in the world of 
sense, but will come into being in the future, exist already in God’s 
thought ; and that the universe as a whole, before it came into being 
as a xéopos alcOyrés, already existed, as a xdcpos voyrds, in God’s 
mind. Thus Philo, De opif. mundi 4. 17 ff, compares the voyros 
xéopos to the plan of a city, which exists in the architect's mind 
before he builds the city. Cf. Corp. V. 9 and Corf. XI. ii. 20. 

A similar thought was expressed in mythical form in the Orphic 
Theogonia (Ptolemaic period ?), where it was said that Zeus prepared 
himself for his task of generating the sensible universe by ‘ swallowing’ 
all that pre-existed. Abel, Orphica, §§ 119-124. 

2b. De caelo cuncta (.. .) in terram et in aquam, et in 
aera ignis. Hermes begins his exposition by explaining how all 
living things are brought into being. The life of all organisms on 
earth results from movements and interactions of the four corporeal 
elements. 

The meaning of De caelo cuncta . . . may perhaps be inferred 


1 See the section headed El év rd may in Aetius, Diels Doxogr. p. 291, where it 
is said that this question was answered in the affirmative by the Stoics and Plato. 
Cf. Philo Leg. alleg. 1. 14. 44, Cohn I, p, 72: wal ixavds abrds éav7@ 6 Oeds, 7a 
piv ddda, émbed al Epnya nat xevd dvra, mAnpay Kal wepiexa, adtds 5& bm’ oddevds 
GAdov Trepexopevos, Gre els eal 7d wav adros dv. Sen. Nat, quaest. 1. Prolog. 13: 
* Quid est deus? Mens universi. Quid est deus? Quod vides (7d dparév) totum 
et quod non vides (rd dépavov) totum. Sic demum magnitudo sua illi redditur, . . 
si solus est omnia, opus suum et extra et intra tenet.’ 

Reitzenstein (A/ys¢. p. 91) compares with the Hermetic use of the phrase Corp. 
Inser, Lat, X. 3800: ‘tibi, quae una es omnia, dea Isis’; and Martial 5. 24. 15: 
‘Hermes, omnia solus et ter unus.’ A book of magic, entitled *Ev [«al?] 7d may, 
is mentioned in the ‘ Eighth Book of Moses’, Dieterich Adraxas, p. 203. 


12 ASCLEPIUS 


from the words caelum . . - administrator est omnium corporum in 
ch. 3c. The interactions of the elements, through which living 
Organisms are brought into being and maintained in existence, 


The beginning of the Sentence iz ferram &c, is lost ; but the 
Writer’s meaning seems to have been that fire, the vivifying element 
bar excellence, enters into and vivifies air, and air vivified by fire 
enters into and vivifies the two grosser elements, earth and 


derived it directly from a Stoic Source, or taken it from some 
syncretic Platonist who had borrowed from the Stoics. 

Solum quod sursum versus fertur Vivificum ; quod deorsum, 
ei deserviens, Quod sursum versus Jertur is rd avaepés ; and 
quod deorsum ( Jertur) is rb katwpepés. The terms dvadepys and 
katwdepys, as applied to the elements, are of Stoic origin; they are 
not employed by Aristotle, who uses in 4 Corresponding sense the 
words xovdds” and Bapis. Chrysippus (Plut, De Stoic. repugn. 42, 
To$3e€: Arnim Svoic. ver, II, p. 143) 7d Te wip, aBapes dy, dvapepts 
elvar d€kyer, Kat Tovry TaparAncios roy dépa. The dvodepy! then 
are the two light elements, fire and air 3 the katwpepy are the two 
heavy elements, earth and water. Cf. Corp. XIII. 6: +3 Hey avudepis 
[ds zip] Kat Karodepes [ds yi]. 

We are here told that fire and air alone are vvifica ; in ch, 6b, 
we are told (in a clause which I have bracketed) that ‘spiritus 
(7vetpua), permixtus cunctis, cuncta vivificat’. It appears then that 
mvedya must be identical with fire and air 3 it must be air into which 
fire has entered, or in other words, it must be a mixture of fire and 
air, And this is precisely the Stoic doctrine. Alexander Aphrod. 
De mixtione p. 224 Bruns: rb rip... xadé anp,... é dy peyvupévev 
TO Tvet pa yilyvera (according to the Stoics),? 

? Arius -Didymus Sogn Doxogr, P» 459), reporting Zeno, uses dtwporra in the 
Same sense: dBaph evar dépa Kai mp... pice yap avioporra rair’ eva bid 7d 
pndevds peréyew Bépous, 

*: Ch AY, Gas, an, 736a 1: 7d 58 mvedud are Bepyds anp. 

With regard to the Portion of mvedpa which is contained in an individual livine 
body, the Stoics seem to have held that the fire in it (7d Sepudv) is that in which 
the power of self-movement (the essence of life) resides, and the air in it (7d Yuyxpér) 
is that by which 7d Gepydy is detained within the organism, and prevented from 
flying up to its natural place above. (See Galen De tremore, palpit., convuls. 6, 


vol. vii, p. 616k, Arnim Tl, p. 147.) And in this way the statement of se 
quoted in Plut. De Stoie, TEPUgI. 43, D. 1053 F, (obdty dAAo rds eLeus mAh dépas eivai 































ASCLEPIUS I: 2b 13 


quicquid de alto descendit generans est; quod sursum 
sysus emanat, nutriens. The things which ‘descend from on 
high’ are fire and air. They are avwdep by their own nature ; 
put by the operation of the heavenly bodies they are sent down 
from their natural place above to enter bodies composed of earth 
“and water, and generate life in them. (An obvious instance of these 
generantia may be seen in the light and heat radiated by the sun.) 
arth and water are the mutrientia; they ‘issue from below’ (e.g. 
in the form of plants which grow up from the soil, and water-springs 
which rise out of the earth), and serve as food and drink to build 
up the bodies of men and beasts. Cf. 6b: ‘corpora ex aqua et 
terra, inferiori(bu)s mundi elementis, augescunt.’ 

The words dvwdepys and Karwdepys are differently applied in 
Herm. af. Stob. Zxc. XI. 2. (40): ai évépyea otk ciciv dvwdepeis, 
@\Aad xarwdepels. The évépye there spoken of are the life-giving 
operations of the heavenly bodies, or of the fire and air which are 
sent down to earth by the action of the heavenly bodies ; and 
_xatwepeis, as applied to them, corresponds, not to guod deorsum 
(fertur) in Ascl. 1. 2b, but to guicquid de alto descendit. 

Terra, sola in se ipsa consistens, omnium est ((gener(anti)- 
um)) receptrix, omniumque |/generum]| quae accepit restitu- 
trix. The contradiction between guod sursum versus emanat (as 
applied to earth) and in se ipsa consistens is merely verbal. Portions 
of earth are taken up into the bodies of plants, beasts, and men ; 
but the solid mass of the earth stands fast at the centre of the 
universe, and receives on its surface the generantia (i.e. portions of 
air and fire, or wvetua, from above,) by which these bodies are 
_yitalized. At the dissolution of the individual organism, the 
_ generantia which had entered into its composition return to their 
natural place above ; and this is what is meant by saying that the 
earth ‘ renders them back’, 

_ Hoe ergo totum, ... quod est omnium vel omnia, (constat 
ex anima et mundo). It is necessary to complete the sentence 


wv tnd rodrwv yap ovvéxera: Ta owpara) may be reconciled with the numerous 
ges in which 7d cuvéxov is said to be the mvedua, i.e. air and fire mixed 
her. 
For the contrast between the pair of light elements (wivifica) and the pair of 
wy elements (e7's deservientia), cf. Nemesius De naz. hom. 5, p. 126: the Stoics 
y TOY oTorxelor 7a pv elvar Spactina, Ta 52 madnTind Spaatixa piv dépa Kal Top, 
mabnrixd bt yay nai Bdwp. Cic. Acad. Post. 1. 7. 26 (from the Stoicizing Platonist 
Antiochus): ‘aer et ignis movendi vim habent et efficiendi, reliquae partes 
accipiendi et quasi patiendi, aquam dico et terram.’ 


14 ASCLEPIUS 


thus, in order to make it agree with what follows, The universe 
is made up of mundus (®Ay, i. e. the sum of the four elements,—see 
ch. 3a,—) and anima (oxy, ‘life ’). In the Stoic system, Yuyy 
is merely rvedud rws éxov (Plotinus 4, 7-4), i.e. a mixture of fire 
and air in a certain special condition ; and in the Stoic authority 
whence the Hermetist’s theory is derived, the universe must have 
been described as consisting of the four corporeal elements and 
nothing else. But the Hermetist adheres to the Platonic view 


The Greek word here rendered by mundus must have been dAn, 
and not xécpos. Cf. ch. 7b: ‘quod Sruxéy Graeci, nos mundanum 
dicimus.”  4scZ, IIT, 17: ‘bdy autem (vel mundus),’ 

sicut meministi : again a reference to previous dialogues. 


Separate entity distinct from God; it is merely the sum of God's 
evépyerar Operating in the material world; it is God’s will, working 
through the agency of the heavenly bodies, and thereby directing 
the movements and interactions of the elements to the production 
of living organisms, But for the moment, he personifies this force, 
and speaks of it as though it were a living and rational agent, 
distinct from God, but subordinate to him,—a servant who knows 
her Master’s will, and works with a view to his good pleasure (3 ¢ fiz, ; 


“natura... producit cuncta dei visibus placitura “y 


1 Cf. Arist. De GH. 2. 2, 4148 19: Karas btokapuBdvovow ols Sone? unr’ dvev 
omparos eva HITE cBpa r a Yuxn copa Bev ydp ov €ort, o@paros 3é m™ The 
Hermetist’s conzeption of Yux7 (i. e. of the merely animal life, apart from vous,) 
somewhat resembles that of Aristotle, 


ASCLEPIUS I: 2b 15 











































itinfinitae qualitatum ex intervallo species [esse] nascantur. 
ure so varies her operations, that no two of the individual living 
ngs which she produces are alike. Cf. Asci. Ill. 35: ‘in- 
ssibile est formam unamquamque alteri simillimam nasci.’ 
; Qualitas, here and elsewhere in Asc/., must be a translation of 
mourns or wodv. Plato, Theaet. 182 A, says that zovdrys is a strange 
word (icws otv 7 rowdrns aAddKorov pulverat dvopa). In Aristotle, 
‘roby is one of the categories ; and he uses mowrns more freely than 
Plato, but not very frequently. In the writings of the Stoics, rovdv 
and vrowrns are terms in constant use. 
Species (<l80s), as used here and in chs. 3c and 4, means (1) the 
group of qualities by which the individual is characterized, and 
(2) the individual, regarded as characterized by those qualities. 
(It must be taken in the first of these two senses in ‘mundus (tAy) 
,.. praeparatus est... receptaculum omniformium specierum’ ; 
‘and in the second sense, in ‘species enim pars est generis, ut homo 
_ humanitatis’.) 

Plato? frequently uses the word efSos (or its equivalent idéa) in 
“the general sense of ‘form’; but he also employs it in a special 
sense, to signify eternal and changeless types or patterns (wapadety- 
para) substantively existing in separation from sensible things. In 
Tim. 52 a, he distinguishes two different kinds of eldos, viz. (r) the 
_ yonrdv el8os, which is changeless and eternal, and (2) the aicGyrov 
| Bos, which is dudvupov dpouy te éxeivy (sc. TO voyTo elder), but is 
_ ever in motion, yeyvopevdv re fy run Témy Kal mdAw éxeiGev azroAdv- 
 pevov? The eidy of Ascl. I correspond to the aicOyriv «dos of 
Tim, 52 A. 

Aristotie’s <l80s is not xwpurrév (i.e. has no substantive existence 
apart from the individual things in which it manifests itself), but 
in other respects resembles Plato’s voyrév eldos. In Aristotle’s 
system, the term ¢f80s, as used in logical classification, means (1) the 
group of essential qualities common to all individuals of a class 
which is included in a larger class (the yévos), and (2) the class 
characterized by those qualities; and in his physics, the group 
‘of essential qualities to which the word ¢8os applies is regarded 
as the type of the kind,—a type which vos aims at realizing, by 
mi? The neice of the words dos and iSéa before the time of Plato is very fully 
discussed by Prof. A. E. Taylor, Varia Socratica, 1911, pp. 178-267. 

\ Tim, 50.C, the alc@n7a eidn are described as tae (els Ti broSoxiy) swat 
‘tidvra, Tay ovrow del (i.e. Tv vonTav eldaiv) pipqpara, Tunwdévtadn’ abray rpdmov 
Twa dtoppacroy Kal Gavpacréy. 


16 ASCLEPIUS 


the processes of birth and growth, in each individual of the kind, 
The injima species of Aristotle is still a class, and not an individual. 
E. g. ‘man’ is an infima species. A man differs ede. from a horse $ 
but a black man does not differ eiSe from a white man, nor a man 
from a woman (Metaph. 9, 9, 1058a). That which constitutes the 
individuality of this or that man is not the? elS0s, but the BA 
(Aletaph. 6. 8, 10344 7); Callias and Socrates are identical elder, 
but differ 84 riy tAyy, i.e. owing to the fact that the eos ig 
imposed on two different portions of Ay. Aristotle was of course 
aware that the individuals of a class or kind differ among themselves 
in form or quality ; but he dismisses these individual differences 
as mere ovpPeByxdra, which cannot be made a subject of ‘know- 
ledge’; for émtoryun is concerned solely with universals,1 

Seneca, Zp. 58, giving an account of Platonic doctrine, dis- 
tinguishes (t) the cogitabize (vonrdv in the sense of general concept 
of a class or kind) ; (2) the idéa, which is ‘ eorum quae natura fiunt 
exemplar (rapddevyna) aeternum? (i.e. the voyrév eos of PI, Lim. 
524); and (3) the eidos, which is ‘forma ab exemplari sumpta 
(copied from the id€a) et operi imposita’ (i. e, the aia @nrov eldos of PI. 
Zim. 524). Jb. § 16: ‘quod generaliter est, tanquam homo gene- 
ralis (5 yevexds dv@pwros), sub oculos non venit ; sed specialis (6 cidtxds 
avOpuros, i. e. the individual man) venit, ut Cicero et Cato.’ 

The Platonist Albinus, in his Lpitome* of Plato’s doctrines, 
distinguishes ra <idn Ta ext ris Ans from the idfa. In c, 4, he 
Says érel rév vonrav rd pev mpora trdpyet, ds al idéar, ra 88 devrepa, 
Os 7a. ein ra ext THs DAys, Kai vénois Zora Surry, h wey ray Tpuruv, 

1 See Zeller, Aristotle, Eng. tr. vol, i, p. 369. Zeller does indeed note a few 
passages of Aristotle in which ‘ that which constitutes the difference between 
individuals of the same Species seems to be included in the conception of their 
<5os’; and to these may be added Mep? MaxpoB. 1. 4654: A€ya BE xard yévos pry 
dtadépew olor dvOpumov mpds trmov,... xat’ Bos 8 dvOparov mpds avOparov. But 
Bonitz remarks on this passage ‘non videtur concinere cum reliquo usu Aristotelico? A 
and Zeller's conclusion is ‘that ‘ Aristotle’s system leaves no room for individual 
Forms of sensible things’, 

The Aristotelian commentator Asclepius (Brandis, Scholia in 4r., ed, Boruss, IV. 
626a 4) speaks of the individual form, and distinguishes it from the universal 
orm: nyels 3€ dayev bry mp@rov pev add avOpmror obStv GAjAwy diapépover, mpds 
8é TrovTas 7d warareraypevoy elSos 70 Kar’ apiOpdv indpyov Sidpopev gar: drAO yap 
el80s Tod Sampérous kat dAdo Tod TAdrwvos. 7) 5 dwaratagroy ds tinpnuévor ey 
éort «at Hovoadés, Kat dad rhv yovtpoy abrod divapu Kal povoed?s bmapyov didpopa 
wal moka dmoyevva. The karareraypévoy eldos and dxaréraxroy eiéos of that 
Passage correspond respectively to the Sos and yévos of Ascl.1; and the statement 
that the one ‘ generates’ the other may serve to illustrate the Hermetist’s statement, 
“genus deorum ex se deorum facit species ’, 


* Printed in vol. vi of Hermann’s edition of Plato, but there wrongly ascribed to 
‘ Alcinons ’, 


































ASCLEPIUS I: 2b 17 


‘$8 rav Sevrépor. Jd. c. 10: wav cpa owdiacpd tr elvar ek re 
al 10d ow airy elSous, Srep eLopowitrar rais idéas Kal peréxer 
Sedpacrov 5 Tpérov. The last phrase shows that he was 
ine of the elowvra wal ééidvra in Pl. Zim. 50; but since he 
cribes the ely ri émt rijs HAys of which he speaks as devrepa vonrd, 
y must be universals (the cogitadilia of Sen. Zp. 58), and must, 
is such, correspond to Aristotle’s «iy, and not to the individual 
iby of Asc. I. 

The Stoics, having freed themselves more completely than 
stotle from the influence of Plato’s doctrine of the substantive 
existence of vonra «t8y, gave fuller recognition to the differences by 
which individuals of the same kind are distinguished. In opposition 
to the Academics, they asserted with emphasis that no two in- 
dividuals are exactly alike; (see note on Asc/. III. 35;) and they 
extended the meaning of the term ¢idos so as to make it include 
those qualities of the individual in which it differs from others of 
its kind, as well as those which it possesses in common with them. 
‘The Stoics’ in Diog. Laert. 7. 61: eos dé (in extension or de- 
notation) éort 7d bd rod yévous wepiexdpevor, ds bd rod Lwov 6 dvOpwros 
mrepiexerat, yevxdraroy 8é éotw 6, yévos dv, yevos od exer (i.e. is 
not contained in any wider yévos), ofov 7d dv" cidikwrarov d¢ éorw 
, elSos dv, <idos ov« exe (i.e. contains no narrower clos), aomep 
6 Soxpdrns. The cidixdéraroy eldos of this passage is not the infima 
species of Aristotle, but the individual. And this use of the word 
eldos was adopted from the Stoics by men of other schools. In 
Philo De aeternit. mundi 8.69, Cohn VI, p. 94, ra év elder is used 
in the sense of ‘individuals’: ris 58 dicews, . . . drep ode trxuce 
haBety jpav Exactos, TovP dravre TO yéver Swpyoaperys, To aOdvarov. 
pever yap eis det (7d yevos), POctpopevwv trav & cide. (Cf. Asc. I. 
4 fin.) Philo De mut. nom. 11. 78, Wendland III, p. 170: 76 pév 
yap eldos Kai Bpayd kat POaprov, 7d 82 yévos woMN Te ab Kal ddOapror. 
An exact parallel to the Hermetist’s use of efos occurs in Philo 
Vita Mos, 2. 11. 61, Cohn IV, p. 214: fda yap (Noah). . . xdv 
i <idy (i. e. the individuals of each race of animals) #6«fpovro, dAXd 
Thy év Tois yéveow apOapoiav . . . Siapevovocay. . . . pera dé 
eicodov dmdvrwv (into the ark) e& tis edcaro 7d wAjpwpa, odk 
Sujpaprey cimiv dvrippov evar yis dadoys, év éavrd pépov ra 
fgov yévn, dv xal } ovpraca yh [ra]! aptOnra eidy (individuals) 
_,' 7a seclusi, The article would imply that the individuals produced after the 
Flood are identical with those produced before it, which is absurd. 








18 ASCLEPIUS 


wal mpérepov iwveyke Kat lows abbis ofeer Contrast with this the 
Aristotelian use of eos in Ar. Gen. an. 2.1, 731b 31; eet yap 
advvaros 4 ptots rod roLovTou yévous (sc. of animals) éiS.os evay Kae? 
dv évdéxerax tpdmov, Kata todrdy éorw didiov 7d yuwdpevor. apb ud 
Hev obv (i.e. in the case of the individual) dSvvarov, . . . Sex 
& evdéxerar. 81d yevos dei dvOpdrwv Kat fgwv éorl Kal purdv, Here 
Aristotle’s ¢i8os corresponds to the yévos of Philo and Asc?, I, and 
Aristotle’s dpilusd corresponds to their f3os. 

The writer of Asc?, I makes no mention of vonr& eid in the 
Platonic sense, i. e. substantively existing and ‘separate’ rapaSefy- 
vara of things. The writer of AseZ. III (t7 b and 35, vol. i, p. 328) 
differs from him in recognizing a species incorporalis, quae divina 
est (Plato’s voyrév <idos), but discriminates from it the Jorma visibilis 
(aicOnrdv 80s, the sensible and transitory form of the individual), 
which corresponds to the Species (el8os) of Asc, I, 

3a. elementa sunt Quattuor ... : mundus unus. Here 
again, mundus stands for BAy. Cf. Philo Quaest. et solut. in Lixodum 
2. 88 (p. 527 Aucher) : ‘quamvis terra ab aqua distincta sit et aqua 
ab aere et aer ab igne et ignis ab istis singulis, nihilo minus 
tamen omnia sunt concinnata ad unam formam determinatam. 
Quae enim ex tot et tantis perfectum fuit materia, una conyenit 
esse, maxime quod et elementorum mutua inter se commutatio 
communionem eorum evidenter arguit.’” The Hermetist does not 
here speak of the ‘elementorum mutua inter se commutatio’, but 
perhaps assumes it to be known. The doctrine that all the four 
elements change into one another was taught by Aristotle and the 
Stoics, and by Plato in Zim, 49B; but in Zim, 54, earth is 
excepted, 

mundus unus, anima una, etdeusunus. Cf Corp. XI. ii. g: 
mas obons Tis TAs Kal was TAS Yryxjjs. All individual souls or lives 
are, no doubt, one in the sense that all things are one’, as having 
been created by the one God, or existing only as dependent on 
him ; but something more than this must be meant, It seems to be 
implied that there is one stock or reservoir of life, from which the 
life of every individual living being is drawn. Cf. Corp. X. 7: ams 
Bias Yuyis THs rod mavrds macat ai Wuyal eiow ... ((dorep darovev eun- 
Hévat)). In the Stoic system, the pia yuy7 is the living fire which 
pervades the universe, and is identified with God. The writer of 
Asct. I diverges from the Stoic doctrine in distinguishing Yuyn 
both from God and from the material elements; but his conception 









































ASCLEPIUS I: 3a-3c 19 


f its relation to the elements is somewhat obscure. If life is 
eparately generated in each individual organism by the entrance 
o it of portions of fire and air, what can be meant by saying that 
soul is one? Perhaps he might have said that there is ‘one 
sul’ residing in (though not -identical with) the whole body of 
sand air, or rvedua, and that the avifica in the individual, which 
re temporarily separated portions of mvetpa, serve as vehicles for 
portions of that one soul or life; but the point is not clearly 
ined. 
The words ¢/ deus unus somewhat awkwardly anticipate the contents 
‘the next paragraph ; and it is possible that they have been added 
by a later hand. 
gb. Nunc mihi adesto totus. In the preceding passage, 
‘Hermes has been speaking of dAy and yvyy7, i.e. of the material 
e and the living beings which it contains ; and his mentions 
of God have been merely incidental. But at this point, he passes 
on to speak of God, as the ultimate source of all life in the universe. 
‘Here then begins his teaching about God (diwnttatis ratio, = Oeo- 
Aoyia); and he introduces it with a solemn preface. Compare 
Ascl. Ul. 19a, ‘sublimis etenim ratio’ &c. 
_ divina sensus intentione noscenda. Man cannot apprehend 
‘God except by God’s aid; it is only by virtue of the divine vots 
implanted in him that he can attain to knowledge of God. Some 
degree of inspiration or divine possession in the hearer as well 
as in the teacher is needed to make the teaching of the gnosis 
effective. 
ut intentionem nostram... velocitate praetereat. The 
teacher is the instrument through whom the divine vots speaks. His 
uman faculties may be inadequate to keep pace with the rush of 
inspiration ; and he himself, as well as his hearers, may fail to attain 
to a full comprehension of the truths which the power of God impels 
him to utter. 
gc. Caelum ergo, sensibilis deus. The oipavds is called Geos 
aigOyrés, in contrast to the supracosmic God («ds vonrds or ddparos). 
Elsewhere, the term Oeds aicfyrés is applied to the Kosmos; e.g. 
1. 8 init. : érel tov Sevrepov éroinae, Ocdv épardv Kal aicOyrdv. 
phrase is derived from Pl. Zim. fin.: cixdv rod vontod Geds 
yTos... cls otpavds ode. In that passage, otpavds means ‘the 
here of heaven zith all that it encloses’, and is equivalent to 
Koopos. Cf. Ar. De caelo 1. 9, 278b 11: eva pev ov tporov ovpavov 
ca 


20 ASCLEPIUS 


Aéyomev thy obclay Thy Tis é€oxdrns Tod mavrds meptpopas (i.e. the 
Outermost sphere) . . .* d\Aov 8 af tpdroy 76 Twvexes Gdpua TH éoxdry 
Tepipopé roi wavrds, ev  veAzjvy Kal FAuos Kal 2a roy dorpwv'...éru 8 
dAAws A€youev odpaver 75 TEplexouevov Copa trd ris eoxarys wepipopas 
(i, €. the whole Kosmos): 7} yap GAov Kal 75 way cidOapev Aéyew otpaver. 
The Hermetist here uses the term in the first or second of Aristotle's 
three senses ; the otpayds of which he speaks is either the sphere of 
the fixed stars, or the whole body of the heavens from the fixed stars 
down to the lunar sphere. He regards it as a living being,—a 
‘second God’, who works in subordination to the supreme God, and 
employs Sun and Moon as his subordinates in the administration of 
the sublunar world. 

In the growth and decay of all living organisms on earth,—i.e. in 
those movements and interactions of the elements by which living 
bodies are composed and decomposed,—the immediate agents are 
here said to be the Sun and the Moon. (The fixed stars and the 
remaining planets, which in some of the other Hermetica are spoken 
of as sharing in the administration of the lower world, are not here 
expressly mentioned.) In Cor. XI. ii, 7, the chief functions in the 
administration of 74 ériyea are assigned to the Sun and the Moon. 
Cf. Seneca Benef. 4. 23: ‘num dubium est quin hoc humani generis 
domicilium circuitus solis ac lunae vicibus suis temperet ? quin 
alterius calore alantur corpora, ... alterius tepore efficaci et pene- 
trabili rigetur maturitas frugum? quin ad huius cursum fecunditas 
humana respondeat?’ As to the Sun, cf. Cic. Wat. deor. 2, 19. 49 
(probably from Posidonius) : ‘Sol, qui astrorum tenet principatum, 
» » « Ita ex quattuor temporum mutationibus (i.e. the changes of 
Season caused by the oblique movement of the sun) omnium, quae 
terra marique gignuntur, initia causaeque ducuntur.’ Cic. Som, Scip. 
4.2: (sol) dux et princeps et moderator luminum reliquorum, mens 
mundi et temperatio.’ In Corp. XVI, the Sun is (in subordination 
to the supracosmic God) the supreme administrator of the Kosmos, 
As to the function of the Moon, cf. Ar. Gen. an, 4- 10, 777 b 26: (4 
cedzvy) crpBadrcrat els rdoas Tas yevéres Kal reheoers. Cic. Vaz. 
deor, 2. 19. 50: ‘multaque ab ea (se. luna) manant et fluunt, quibus 
et animantes alantur augescantque, et pubescant maturitatemque asse- 
quantur quae oriuntur e terra.’ Plut, Zy. e¢ OS. 41, 367 D: THY pey 
yap ceryvyv, yévipov 7d Pads Kat dyporody €xovear, eiuer Kal yovats 
{gov Kal durdv va Praorjceo. Plut. Fac. in orbe lunae 25. 18, 
939 F. Catal. Codd. Astrolog. Graec. IV, p. 82, ex Heliodori (about 






































ASCLEPIUS I: 3c ar 


). 500) commentario in Paulum Alexandrinum ; (4 vdajvn) paddov 
 dddwv dorépov eyyvrépw otoa ris is aver Kal pelot Ta ev yeveores 
pOopa mpdypara® 8¢ 8 Kal ravry Tov KAjpov Ths Téxys mporwKetwoev 
Gergraros éxeivos drip, Néyw 88 tov Tpiopeyerrov “‘Epphv. Heliodorus 
here referring to an astrological treatise entitled ‘the Panaretos of 

ermes Trismegistus’; see Bouché-Leclercq, L’Astrologie grecque, 


p. 307: 
j « belief that the growth and decay of living things on earth are 
influenced by the moon was based in part on a fancied connexion of 
se processes with the waxing and waning of the moon itself. 
Gell. 20. 8: ‘De iis quae habere ovprafaav videntur cum luna 
gescente et senescente.’ Sext. Emp. Mark. 9.79: kata yap tas 
ceanvys avéjres Kat pbices roAN Trav Te emvyciwv Ldwv Kal Padac- 
plow pbiver Te Kal abferat." 

Caeli vero...per rerum naturam. A badly corrupted passage. 
T have tried to express what I suppose to have been the writer’s 
meaning, by a rearrangement of the words. /7equentatio needs a 
dependent genitive; and a suitable genitive may be supplied by 
transposing animae. A genitive seems to be wanted with efector 
; Ihave therefore placed with it the words omnium generum et 
nium specierum per rerum naturam, which are unintelligible where 
y stand in the MSS. Cf. Asc? III. 27 a: ‘deus omnibus specie- 
s vel generibus, quae in mundo sunt, dispensator distributorque 
... sensus, animae, et vitae.’ 
With ((animae)) frequentatio fertur influens per mundum, compare 
ch. 6b, ‘spiritus .. . permixtus cunctis cuncta vivificat.’ veda is 


dpa, and that a ceaseless stream of this zvedya descends to the 
face of the earth, and vitalizes the bodies into which it enters 
e. The cidy are the organic forms of these vitalized bodies, or 
the alternative use of the word) the bodies themselves, regarded 
is portions of matter endued with organic forms, and vitalized by 
What are the supradicta omnia? They ought to be the heavenly 
bodies, if it is by the operation of the heavenly bodies that organisms 


1 Eyen to this day, some people in Devonshire believe that ‘apples picked at 
wane of moon do shrivel and scrump up cruel’ (Eden Phillpotts). 


22 ASCLEPIUS 


On earth are vitalized. But in the text of the MSS., only three such 
things have been recently mentioned, viz, caelum, sol, and duna; and 
the word ‘all’ could hardly be applied to these three alone. The 
meaning required may, however, be obtained by striking out mundo 
in the sentence ‘Caeli vero et ipsius et omnium quae [mundo] insunt 
ipse gubernator est deus’, and taking this to stand for rod 82 ovpavod 
abrod te Kal mdvrwy Trav evévtwy Kt.d. The Supradicta are wévra rh 
évovra (év 76 otpava), i.e. the heavenly bodies ; and it is of them that 
the writer repeats what he has already said above, viz. that their 
operations are governed by God (‘quorum idem gubernator deus 
omnium’). 

Mundus autem praepuratus est a deo receptaculum omni- 
formium specierum. %\y has been made ready by Godasa brodoyy 
for all manner of <idy.—tAn dpopdos or érowos is first clothed with the 
qualities of the four elements ; and then the elements (which in their 
turn are dz relatively to the <i5y imposed upon them) are worked up 
into living organisms. 

The word trodoxy comes from Pl. Zim, 49 4, where it is used to 
signify the substrate of forms. The word Ay was not used in this 
sense by Plato, but was introduced by Aristotle, and adopted from 
him by the Platonists and Stoics, 

The Hermetist seems here to assert that Ay has been created by 
God. (Cf. Corp, III init, where it is said that God is &pxy TAx(s). 
Abammonis Responsum 8. 3. &+ Ayv 8 rapiyayev 5 eds. Tamblichus 
ap. Procl. in Tim. 116 ¥-117 D, Lestim.) In this respect, he departs 
from the doctrine of the Zimaeus and the Platonists in general, 
according to which the brodoxy, or Ay, existed independently of the 
Demiurgus, who reduced it to order, or imposed forms on it, but did 
not create it. See Ase. IIj; also Corp. VIII. 3 and XII, ii. 22, 
and Herm, ag. Stob. Exc. IX. We are told however that Eudorus, 
a syncretic Platonist of Alexandria in the time of Augustus, held 
that Ay is derived from ‘the One ’, i.e. from God (Zeller, EZetectics, 
Eng. tr. p. ro3n. 7) In the Roman period, the doctrine that vAy 
was created by God or derived from God tended to supersede the 


* Aristotle (Metaph, 1, 6,988 a 10), summarizing Plato’s view, says rd yap clin rod 
th torw atria Trois GAXots, Trois 8 econ 75 &. But Alex. Aphrod. ad Joc, (Brandis, 
Schelia in Ar., ed, Boruss. IV, p. 552 b) says that in some copies the words xa} 7H 
Ap were added after rors 8’ Seo 73 é, and that Aspasius said that this alteration 
of the text had been made by Endorus and Euarmostus. This appears to imply 
nies Eudorus held the One to be the cause of the existence of Ax as well as of that 
of the ety. 


































ASCLEPIUS I: gc 23 


lier Platonic doctrine of its pre-existence.' Seneca, Wat. quaes?. 
og. 16, states the question ‘materiam (deus) ipse sibi formet an 
utatur’; and Numenius, as reported by Chalcidius, Comm. in 
293, Mullach 7. Ph. Gr. Ul, p. 244, said that some Pytha- 
sans held that the ‘indefinite dyad ’ is generated by the ‘ monad’ 
(that is to say, that matter is derived from God),—an opinion which 
Numenius himself rejected. 

natura... ad caelum usque preducit cuncta dei visibus 
itura. The words ad caelum usque appear to imply that every 
part of the sublunar world is occupied by living beings, and that 
each stratum of the universe has its appropriate inhabitants. Cf. 
ch. 4: ‘supradicta autem genera inhabitant usque ad loca (deorum).’ 
“Men, beasts, and plants are produced on the earth, and fishes in the 
‘water ; but what kind of living beings are produced in the air? 
‘Compare Apuleius De deo Socr. 8. 137: ‘Nam cum quattuor sint 
elementa, . - . sintque propria animalia terrarum, (aquarum,) flam- 
‘marum,—siquidem Aristoteles (Hist. an. 5. 19, 552b) auctor est in 
fornacibus flagrantibus quaedem parvula animalia pennulis apta 
litare,2. . . cur hoc solum quartum elementum aeris. . . desertum 
‘a cultoribus suis natura pateretur?’ Apuleius dissents from those 


1 Possibly Jewish influence may have contributed to the acceptance of this new 
doctrine. The writer of Genesis 1 znit., no doubt, meant by his words, not that 
God created the world out of nothing, but that God fashioned the world out of a 

pre-existing chaos (Gunkel ad /oc.); and Hellenizing Jews sometimes identified 
this chaos with the Greek duoppos ian. ‘This was the view held by the writer of Sap. 
‘Sal. 11. 18: 4 mayrodvvapés cov xelp Kal ericaca Tov xbaopov ef dpoppou vans. It 
was also held by Philo; De opif. mundi 2.8, Cohn I, p, 2: 70 pay elvat Spacryptov 
airiov, 75 Bt rabnrév.... 7d de randy dpuxov nat dxivyrov éf éavtod, eunOev 5 Kat 
oxnpartabey Kal YuxwOey ind Tod vod, peréBadev cis . . . Tdvbe Tov kdcpov. Lb. 
5. 21, Cohn I, p. 6: dyaddy elvat Tov marépa kal wounray’ ob Xap Tis dpiarys 
aired picews adic epOdvycer odcig pndev ef abrijs éxotan Kaddy, Svvauévy 58 mayTa 
wivectar, Fv pry ydp 2 abrijs draxros Grows duos x.7.2. Philo De plant. Noe \. 3, 
endland II, p. 133: éwei) yap tiv obsiay, draxrov Kal cuykexupévny ovcav ef 
airijs, els radu ef dragias xal ee cvyxucews els dideprow dyar 5 kogponddarys poppoiy 
qptaro. The Christian Justin also adhered to the Platonic view ; Apo/.i. 10. 2: 
“mévra tiv dpyfv, @ya0dv dvra (Pl. Tim. 29 E), Inprovpyjoat (rov Bedv) ef dpdppou 
DAns Gt dvOpdmous Sedibaypeba, Lb. 59. 1: Plato learnt from Moses tAnv dpoppoy 
odaay orpépavra Tov Gedy Kécpov najoa. Jb. 67.8: 6 Geds 7d oxdros Kal ri bAQV 
“rpivas xécpov énoince, But on the other hand, a creation ex nihilo is asserted in 
(2 Macc. 7. 28 (on tf bvraw emoinge abra 6 Geds); and this view was generally 
adopted by the Christians. e.g. Lactant. Div. inst. 2. 8. 8: Nemo quaerat ex 
-quibus ista materiis ... deus fecerit : omnia enim ille fecit ex nihilo.” Jb. 27 sgg.: 
‘Deus vero facit sibi ipse materiam. . . . Facturus mundum deus prius materiam de 
os faceret praeparavit, et praeparavit ex eo quod non erat. (Lactantius had read 
Hermetic Aéyos 7éAetos, and may have borrowed from it the phrase materiam 




















‘raeparavit.) 
2 On the other hand, Aristotle Meteor. 4. 4, 38246 says that év yp nal év b5art 
pbvoy éariv, tv dépe 5€ Kal mupt ode Eat. 


' 


24 ASCLEPIUS 


who assign birds to the air 3? and his conclusion is that the air is 
inhabited by daemons. Cf, Pseudo-P], LEpinomis, where the aid 
and the dip (i.e. the upper and lower atmosphere) are said to be 
occupied by different orders of daemons 3 and Philo De gigant. 2. 6 ff, 
Wendland II, p. 43. 

Does the writer of Asc, I include the daemons among the beings 
produced by the natural processes which he is here describing ? 
Such a view would not be quite impossible ; for according to Apuleius 
and other Platonists, they have bodies composed of air; and in Plut, 
Defect. orac. 11. 415 ¢ ff., they are described as mortal, But perhaps 
he is not thinking of daemons here ; and the words ad caelum usque 
might be applied to birds. 

4. Omnia autem (. . -) desuper pendentia in species dividun- 
turhoc...(modo). The vivifica or generantia are sent down into 
the sublunar world by the operation of the astral gods, and are in that 
sense ‘dependent on the powers above’. Cf. « quicquid de alto 
descendit generans est’ in ch.2b. The meaning might be made 
clearer by reading omnia autem (vivifica), desuper pendentia, &c, ; but 
it is possible to make sense of the words as they stand, if we take 
omnia desuper pendentia to represent mdvra ri dvwbey eénprnéva, 

The vivifica are so distributed in the sublunar world, that each 
individual organism receives life only for a time, but the permanence 


In contrast to the individually mortal beings of our world below, the 
writer speaks also of the gods, who are individually immortal, (By 
‘the gods’ we must understand the astral gods ; the anthropomorphic 
gods of Greek and Egyptian cults and myths are either ignored, or 
identified with daemons.) It must be presumed that the individual 
gods have been created once for all by the supreme God, and thence- 
forward continue to exist for ever. They cannot be said to be 
produced by the operations of ¢¥ois which have been described in 
the preceding sentences (‘natura per species imaginans mundum ’ 
&c.). Their bodies Presumably consist of unmixed fire, and cannot 
be vitalized by avetua, which is a mixture of fire and air 5 and yévos, 
which, in its application to mortal beings, means a race maintained 
by reproduction, must be taken in the sense of ‘class’ or ‘order’ 
when applied to the astral gods, among whom there is neither birth 
nor death. . 


1 Philo (De Plantatione 4. 14, Wendland II, P. 136) locates in the air both birds 
and unembodied ‘ souls’ of three different ranks, 












































ASCLEPIUS I: se4 25 


senus ergo deorum ex se deorum facile}t species, The writer 
cannot have meant that astral gods are generated by others of their 
kind ; he must mean merely that there is a common type, or group of 
‘qualities, which manifests itself (with individual differences) in all 
jiyidual gods,—or perhaps, that the individual form may be 
nerated in thought from the generic form, by adding other qualities 
to it. He does not seem to have held that the yévos is an entity 
‘existing apart from the individuals (an dea in the Platonic sense), 
‘and that the individuals are generated by this entity ; for there is no 
eace of such a notion elsewhere in Asc/. 1. His position in this 
spect rather resembles that of Aristotle, who regards the class-form 
as the ‘formal cause’ of the individuals, though not as actually 
exis ing in separation from them. 

Est et aliud animalis genus, sine anima quidem, et tamen 
‘non carens sensibus. This genus is the vegetable order. In 
‘ch. 6b, animals are called animalia (éyxvvxa or Ga), and vegetables 
are called inanimalia (dfvxa). But animalis here, (if it is not a 

mistake for *nanimadium, ‘ another race, viz. a race of soulless things ’,) 
tands for the wider term rot Cavros or Cwijv éxovros, which includes 
both animals and vegetables. Cf. Asc/. III. 35 enti. : ‘ Unumquod- 
que enim animal (wiv éxov), . . . sive sit animans (éyyvxor, animal) 
sive sine anima (dyvyov, vegetable). 2. 27 c: ‘animantium (fgor) 
‘mortalium et fructiferarum (ar)dorum omnium.’ Jé. 29c: ‘omnia 
gubernantem ... animalia (ri {@vra), sive animantia (éuyvxa) sive 
jnanimantia (dyvxa).’ 

On the question whether the life in plants is to be called yuxy, 
‘opinions differed. Plato (Zim, 778) and Aristotle* (De an. 2. 5, 
413b 7 and elsewhere) said yes; the Stoics said no. Aetius 
(Diels Doxogr. p. 438): WAdrov ... Kat ra pura Empuxa Coa... « 
*ApurroréAns Eulvyxa pév, ob phy Coat ra yop CGa dpynricd elvar Kai 
aloOyrixd. . . . of Srwuxot 8¢ Kat Excxovpeor otk eufrxa’. . . Ta de 
gutii atropdrws rus kiveiobat, od dd Yoxijs” Sext. Emp, AZath. 9. 81 : 


1 Plato id. says that vegetables may with perfect fitness be called (Ga. 

2 Seneca Zp. 58. 10 follows Aristotle: ‘sunt quaedam quae animam habent 
(&afvxa) nec sunt animalia ((Ga). Placet enim satis et arbustis animam inesse : 
itaque et vivere ille et mori dicimus. Ergo animantia superiorem tenebunt locum, 
quia et animalia in hac forma sunt et sata.’ I.e. both animals and plants are 
included under the wider genus animantia ((@vra). 

_ * Cf. the so-called ‘Pythagorean’ document quoted from Alex. Polyhistor in 
‘Diog. Laert. 8. 28, which contains a large ingredient of Stoicism: «at Civ py ndvra 
pees herexe Tod Oepuod* id Kat TA pura (Ga (fava?) elvarr Puxty pévror pr) Exew 

fy 


26 ASCLEPIUS 


According to the Stoics, rév jvwperwy copdrov ta piv bad WidAjs 
eLews ovvéxerar, 7a 88 bxd pvoews, re 82 Sxd Yryxis’ Kat ews pv ds 
Alor kai Ea, picews SE xabdrep ri hurd, Wuxis 88 ra EGa. Thus 
in saying that plants are sine anima (avya), the writer of Ascd, I 
follows the authority of the Stoics against that of Plato. Yet at the 
same time, he says that plants have alo @nots 3} and in this, he agrees 
with Plato, and differs from the Stoics. 

Sensation was attributed to plants by Anaxagoras, Empedocles, 
and Democritus. Pseudo-Arist. De Plantis 1, 815a14: 7OTEpov 
exovew 7) ody) ra hurd Yoxnv Kal Stvapew eriBoplas édtvns re Kad 
Hovis Kal d:axpicews. "Avagaydpas piv ofy cal "EpredoxAjjs érOupia, 
Tatra KweioOar Aeyouow, aicbéverbal re Kai AvreioGar kal Hera 


diaBeBaotvra. Sv § Bev *Avataydpas Kal {ga lvae (ro pura)? Kat 
poerOar Kat AvreiocGax elre, TH Te droppoy tav tdAwv Kal TH adéjoe 
Totro éxAauBdvov. . . . § Se "Avagaydpas kal 6 Anpoxpitos Kat 6 
"Epmedoxdfjs al votv cat yaow® etrov éxew ri hurd. Plato expresses 
a similar view, Zimaeus 778 ff.: the plant Meréxet » . . rod tpirov 
Yoxijs «idous, . . . § ddens Bev Noyopod re Kad vod Héreore 75 pn dev, 
aicOjoews 82 Adelas Kal GAyewis pera émOyudv.s On the other 


' The writer of Herm. ap. Stob. Zxc. III, 17 attributes atc@yais to awuyxa, but 
apparently only a sort of atcOnois in which feelings of pleasure and pain are not 
included, 

* Plut. Quaest. Nat. 1: (@ov yap eyyeov 7d gurov elvat of wept TAdrwva Kad 
*Avatayépay xa} Anpékptrov ociovrat, 

* The early philosophers did not clearly distinguish vénots from aioPnots, and 
applied the same words to both Processes. Cf. Sext. Empir. Math. 8. 286:'4 6e 
*Euredordijs ... ndvra Hgtov Aoyuxd Tuyxdvew, Kat ob (Za Hévoy, dAAA Kal pura, 
putas ypapov © Tdvra Yop tak ppdvnaw exew wad véoparos algay” (fr. 110. 10 Diels), 
Sextus is wrong in taking this verse to mean that plants are ‘rational’; Empedocles 
probably meant merely that they have some sort of consciousness of their condition, 


6, p. 
holding that in them also there was a certain portion of life, i.e. of the Deity ; 


ciditur, cum teritur, cum coquitur, cum manditur.’ August. Confess, 2. To: * per- 
q ? ig 3 P 


cum plorare cum 
decerpitur, et matrem eius arborem, lacrimis lacteis, Quam tamen ficum si 


bus, et anhelaret de illa angelos, imo vero particulas Dei , ++? quae particulae 
summi et veri Dei ligatae fuissent in illo pomo, nisi electi sancti dente ac ventre 
solverentur,’ They abhorred agriculture, because those who practise it must wound 
living plants, Those who committed this sin might, however, obtain pardon for it 
by presenting a portion of the Produce to the elect ; for when the fruit was eaten 
by the elect, the divine life imprisoned in it was liberated, and to liberate the divine 
life from the gross elements with which it is intermixed is a meritorious act 
(August. De hagres, 49, Confess. 4. 1), 

Cf. Tylor, Primitive Cuiture I, p. 475: The Buddhist books show that in the 
early days of their religion, it was matter of controversy whether trees had souls, 














































ASCLEPIUS I: 4 27 


d, Diogenes of Apollonia (Theophrast. De sensu 44), in the 
of Pericles, said ra purd, did 7d py elvar xorha pd dvadéxerOat 
dgoa, mavreAGs adypnrGa 7d gpoveiv (in which sensation is 
btless included); and Aristotle’ and the Stoics? denied that 
slants have alcOnous.* 

" Tpsud caelum .. . quarum omnium rerum [in mortales 
sunt species. There is little doubt about the writer’s meaning 
here, though the exact wording is uncertain. Sfecterwm appears to 
ve been written instead of deorum by a copyist’s blunder ; and 
yin the preceding line may have arisen out of deo(rum) written 
above specierum as a correction. 

 gupradicta genera ought to mean all genera other than that 
the gods ; viz. plants, beasts, men, azd daemons, But did the 
iter intend to assert that daemons are mortal? Such a statement 


it seems more likely that for the moment he ignores the daemons, 
and is thinking only of plants, beasts, and men. Similarly below, 
‘reliquorum genera (i.e. all except the gods) nascendi fecunditate 
vantur’; this cannot have been meant to apply to the 
aemons. 
quam (sc, speciem) necesse est sequi qualitatem generis 
gui. This is verbally inconsistent with the following statement 
that immortality is a quality possessed by the genus, but not by 
‘the species; but the meaning is clear. ‘The human race is 
immortal’; that is, the succession of individual men never fails. 
Yet ‘mortality is a quality of the human race’; that is, every 
individual man must die. 


‘and therefore whether they might lawfully be injured. Orthodox Buddhism decided 
against the tree-souls, and consequently against the scruple to harm them, declaring 
‘trees to have no mind nor sentient principle. . . . Buddhists also relate that a 
heterodox sect kept up the early doctrine of the actual animate’ (and sentient ?) 
‘life of trees.’ ‘here may possibly be a historical connexion between this Indian 
doctrine and that of Mani. 
Porphyry, De adst. 1, 18 and 21, ascribes a similar view to ‘the Egyptians’: el 
Bé, ds pact, nal ra pura Puxiy Exet, wots dv ein 6 Bios, wre (pov ente puTdy Hpav 
Gnorepvévrav ; .. . kat Tov Tay Alyumrlew Adyor Geatynxa, Gr wal Tay guTay 
Giodpev datépevor. Does this refer to Egyptian Manichaeans, or to indigenous 
Egyptian taboos by which the eating of certain plants was prohibited ? 
‘Ar. Tepi veor. xat yypws, 467 b 23: TA yap urd Cn pév, ode Exe 5° aladnoww, 

74 8 alcGavecbar 7d (Gov mpds Td ph (Gov Sropi{oper. 

2 Philo, Quod deus sit immut. 9. 41, Wendland II, p. 65 (from a Stoic source) : 
7d piv ydp puta dépynta, dpavracta, alcdjaews dpétoxa. 

§ Wordsworth agreed with the author of Asc/. 1: ‘’Tis my faith that every flower 
enjoys the air it breathes.’ 





Sr 


28 ASCLEPIUS 


genera, .. . quamvis per species occida(n)t, nascendi 
fecunditate servantur, This thought occurs in Pl, Sympos. 206 &: 
deryevés gore Kal GOdvarov és Oyrd i yévyos. Jb. 2088: Taviry 
TH pnxav.. . Ovyrdv dbavactas peréxet. Aristotle speaks to the same 
effect, e.g. Gen. an. 2 émt., 731 b 31; and the Statement frequently 
recurs in writings of the Roman period. To the instances given 
above in the note on ef30s (ch. 2 b) may be added Ocellus Lucanus 
4. 2 (Mullach Fr, Ph. Gr, I, p. 402); ered yap appxavov Fv 
Ovyrov divra Gelov Biov xowwvioa, THY Tod yévous davaciay petpo- 
pany xa? eagrov dvetAjpocey 5 eds, dkardAnkrov moujoras Kal 
owexh tatryy riv yéveow. Apuleius De deo Socr. 4: *homines 
- + + Singillatim mortales, cunctim tamen universo genere perpetui.,’ 
Aelius Aristides (Keil) Or. 43. 21: Ovyrov dv jpdv rd yévos Kara. 
Pépos aOdvaroy yar 7H Siadoyp. Lactantius Div, inst 7 Ss Ese 
The Stoics, however, could not assert the immortality of the 
race without qualification, as according to their system all in- 
dividual beings are absorbed in God (= ip voepdv) at the 
ecpyrosis. 

ut homo mortalis sit. Man, regarded as a living organism on 
earth, is mortal. He dies, in the sense that the organism is broken 
up, and the elements of which it was composed, including the 
portions of fire and air by which life was generated and maintained 
in the organism, are dispersed. In another sense, man is immortal 
(ch. 2a, ‘omnis humana inmortalis est anima’); i.e. there is a part 
of him which is imperishable, and survives the dissolution of the 
body ; and it is in this part that his personality resides. According 
to the writer of Asc/. I, the immortal part of man is the vois, or the 
Yux7n as endowed with vods 3 and this part must be distinguished 
from the merely natural or animal life (the Oyyrév eos puxijs), 
which perishes with the body. But in this paragraph, man is regarded 
merely as a product of cosmic nature ; only the body and the 
Ovyrév eldos Yuyfs are taken into account; and accordingly, he 
is spoken of as a perishable being. His imperishable pots is dealt 
with later, in ch. 6b ff. 3; and in ch, 9, we are told that man is only 
‘ex parte mortalis’, 

5. (Sunt omnes simillimae generibus suis species ;)) omni- 
bus tamen &c. The meaning of this chapter appears to be as 
follows. Every individual man possesses the qualities which 
characterize the genus man 3 but in addition to these, he possesses 
other qualities also, by which he is differentiated from his fellow 































ASCLEPIUS I: 4, 5 29 


(Cf. Ascl. III. 35.) And these distinctive qualities of the 
idual are determined, in part at least, by his association or 
stercourse with individuals of other gevera. Thus, by communion 
ith gods,—i. e. by worship and contemplation,—a man may come 
to possess (in addition to the qualities of the genus man, which 
possessed from the first and still retains,) the qualities of the 
bes god. 
_ But seeing that the qualities of a genws are precisely those by 
‘which its individuals are distinguished from those of other genera, 
how is it possible for the qualities of two different genera to be 
ent together in the same individual? How can a man become 
god, or ‘like a god’, without ceasing to bea man? This question 
the writer leaves unanswered. 
(Sunt res) quaedam quae ante factae sunt, . . non possunt. 
“This passage has nothing to do with the topic discussed in the rest 
of the chapter, and is evidently a detached fragment. The meaning 
the first sentence may be inferred from a similar passage in 
‘Cic. Acad. Poster, 1. 7. 26 (taken from Antiochus): ‘earum igitur 
‘qualitatum ' sunt aliae principes, aliae ex his ortae. Principes sunt 
‘unius modi et simplices; ex his autem ortae variae sunt et quasi 
‘multiformes. Itaque aer .. . et ignis et aqua et terra prima sunt: 
ex his autem ortae animantium formae earumque rerum quae 
nuntur e terra.’ The res guae ante factae sunt of Ascl. I. 5 
must be the prima or gualitates princifes of Antiochus, i.e. the 
four elements; and the guae de his fiunt of Ascl. 1. 5 must corre- 
‘spond to the ex /us orfae of Antiochus, which are animals and 
vegetables. The operation of creative force is divided into two 
distinct stages. First, the four elements are formed, by the im- 
position of the primary physical qualities (heat and cold, fluidity 
and dryness) on dows tAy; and then, portions of the elements 
thus constituted are worked up into living organisms. Compare 
e account of the Creation which is given by Hippolytus, Ref 
Aaeres. 10. 32: diapdpous S€ trois écopévors dpyas rpdrepov edyp.rovpyer 
(6 cds), wip kal mvedua (i.e. air), wp Kal yyv, @& dv Sdiaddpwv 
Tiv éavtod xricw érolet. The notion may be traced back to the 
TLimaeus; but the form of expression seems to be derived from 
Antiochus. 
» The word gualitas is here used inaccurately, in the sense of guale, i.e. modv 
m1, ‘a thing possessing qualities’. Thus we are told (7d. § 24) that gualétas is 


ec ivalent to corpus. The wody 7 is constituted by the imposition of qualities on 
Gmoios tAy. See Reid’s note ad loc, 


a 


eee 


3° ASCLEPIUS 


Corpora enim inpossibile est (ad genus) conformari sine 
nutu divino. The function of making living organisms is assigned 
partly to the gods (i.e. to the heavenly bodies), and partly to the 
daemons, who may be regarded as personifications of the physical 
forces at work in the sublunar world. Similarly, in Corp. XVI, 
the operations of nature are carried on by troops of daemons, 
working in obedience to the several planet-gods, who are them- 
selves commanded by the Sun-god. But how is the work divided 
between the gods and the daemons? The word species suggests that 
the contrasted phrase corpora conformart has reference to genus ; 
probably therefore the meaning is that, in the formation of the 
individual organism, the generic form (i.e. the group of qualities 
common to all individuals of the genus) is imposed by the direct 
influence of the heavenly bodies, and the distinctive qualities of 
the individual are added by the more minute and detailed work 
of the daemons, An analogous division of functions occurs in 
Ascl. III. 38b: ‘caelestes dii catholicorum dominantur, terreni 
(god of a lower order, who correspond in some respects to the 
daemons of Ascé. I) incolunt singula, 

inanimalia institui et coli sine hominibus non possunt, 
The zxanimatia are the things made by human hands, e.g. a 
Statue, or a house. The things made by the gods and daemons, 
i.e. the works of nature, are living organisms; the things made 
by human art are lifeless, 

If this fragment formed part of the original text, the most suitable 
place for it would be somewhere in the preceding passage which 
deals with the elements, e. §. at the end of ch. 3c. But as it is at 
variance with that passage in assigning to the gods and daemons 
the function which is there assigned to ‘nature’, it seems more likely 
that it is a marginal note inserted by a later hand. 

Quicunque ergo daemonum &c. As the text stands in the 
MSS., daemons are divided into two classes only, viz. (1) those who 
have attached themselves to some god, and are called GeoeSets, and 
(2) those who retain the qualities of their own genus unaltered, and 
are called ¢iidvOpwro.. But it is evident from the context that the 
character of ‘ man-loving daemons’ must be altered by their associa- 
tion with men, and consequently that they cannot be identical 
with those who ‘in qualitate generis sui perseverant’, The writer 
must therefore have distinguished shree classes of daemons, viz, 
(x) those who associate with gods, (2) those who keep to themselves, 





ASCLEPIUS I: 5 31 































and (3) those who associate with men. What special name he 
ed to the daemons of the second class, we do not know. 
is to be presumed that they dwell apart in the upper atmosphere, 
‘and neither descend to earth nor ascend to heaven. The daemons 
‘of the third class probably correspond to the di /errent of Asc/. III. 
38 b, i.e. the gods of the temple-cults, who take up their abode 
‘on earth, and assist mankind by giving oracular responses, healing 
‘sickness, &c. (The writer makes no mention of madleficent daemons, 
such as are spoken of elsewhere in the Hermetica, e.g. Corp. IX. 3; 
: also Ascl. III. 25, mocentes angel.) As to the first class, 
tonists may perhaps have assumed the existence of ‘godlike 
emons’, in order to reconcile with their own daemonology 
sages in early Greek literature, where daiuuv s used as a 
‘synonym for 6eéds. But we are here told that daemons of this class 
attach themselves to some one particular (astral) god. I do not 
know how this statement is to be explained; and I have met with 
no exact parallel elsewhere. In Corp. XVI, the daemons are 
‘divided into troops or regiments, each of which is under the orders 
of one of the planet-gods ; but they are employed in the administra- 
tion of the sublunar world, whereas it seems to be implied in 
Asci. 1 that the ‘ god-like daemons’ are remote from men, and dwell 
with the astral gods in heaven. Possibly the writer had in mind 
the myth in Pl. Phaedrus 2468 ff., where it is said that ‘Zeus, 
driving a winged car, leads the way in heaven, and there follows 
him an array of gods and daemons, marshalled in eleven bands’, 
each of which bands is led by one of the chief gods. Jd. 250 B, 
‘When we (philosophers) following in the train of Zeus, and others 
in the train of other gods’, saw the beatific vision. In the latter 
sentence, ‘we’ and ‘others’ are human souls; but a reader might 
apply the words to daemons also, 
_ @ genere suo defluentes. The meaning of this is indicated 
by the clause zz gualitate generis sui perseverant, which stands in 
contrast to it. These daemons separate themselves from their own 
kind. For dmoppety in the sense ‘to dissociate oneself from’, 
ef. Pl. Legg. 776A, Kataxopys 6& ovvovoia . . . daoppeivy dAAjAwy 
qrovet. 

et ipsa "a praedictae! desuper veniens. Cf. ch. 6a, ‘ utpote 
qui isdem se ortum esse cognoscat.’ Men are sprung from the 
Same source as daemons; and that source is above. The meaning 
of this seems to be that daemons and men resemble one another, 


32 ASCLEPIUS 


and differ from the lower genera, in possessing vois,! and that the 
vots in them comes directly from the supracosmic God. If this 
is what is meant, the writer in this phrase identifies the man 
with the voids in him, or assumes that the vods is that in which his 
personality resides ; whereas in the preceding chapters the man is 
identified with the living organism formed by the operations of 
nature,—i. e. with that part of him which is xof yois, and does not 
in the same sense ‘come from above’. We have indeed been told 
that the portion of zvedya (fire and air) by which physical life is 
generated in the organism ‘de alto descendit ’, i.e. comes down 
to earth from the higher regions of the Kosmos 3 but neither this 
portion of zvefwa nor the physical life which it generates in the 
organism is a pre-existent individual soul. From what has hitherto 
been said, it would appear that the life of the individual man 
begins only when he is born on earth ; and the generation of life 
in the individual could hardly be described by saying that the 
man himself ‘comes from above’. Moreover, the words desuper 
ventens must be applicable to daemons as well as men 3 and there 
is no reason to suppose that the preceding description of the process 
by which living organisms are generated on earth is applicable to 
daemons. On the other hand, it zs applicable to beasts and plants 
as well as men; that process therefore could not be spoken of as 
a thing by which daemons and men in common are distinguished 
from the lower genera. 

I cannot account for the words a praedictae (al. a praedicto); 
perhaps they have been wrongly placed here, and belong to some 
other sentence, 

consortio [omnium] aliarum specierum. E, g. the man in 
question worships a god, or a daemon 3 he marries a wife; he keeps 
a herd of cattle; he grows a crop of wheat. But he cannot be 
said to connect himself with @// the individuals of the several genera ; 
therefore omnium must be struck out. 

qui se mente, qua diis iunctus est,...diis iunxerit. The 
clumsiness of iunctus .. . iunxerit must be ascribed to the translator. 
He ought to have written gua dis cognatus est. Cf.ch. 6a: ‘diis 
cognata divinitate coniunctus est. Asc/. III, 22b: ‘homo diis 
cognatione coniunctus,’ 


1 Of course the di caelestes also possess voids, and possess it in a higher degree, 
It is in virtue of his vods that man is ‘akin’ to them; cf. ‘ mente, qua diis iunctus 
est’, and ‘ diis cognata divinitate coniunctus est’, 





ASCLEPIUS I: 5 33 


Th e religion of ‘ those who attach themselves to the gods ’ is called 
ma; perhaps the epithet is intended to distinguish it from the 
er religion of ‘ those who attach themselves to daemons’. 
On the communion or association of men with gods, cf. Iambl. 
“De anima, Stob. 1. 49. 42, vol. i, p. 382 W.: epi rijs Kowwvias Tis 
rods Geods Tav Yuxav yéyove Tis StappicByryots, Tov pev LeydvTwv 
arov plyvveba Gods Tats Karexopevais Yuxais év TO odpart, Tov de 
wopévov play elvar Kowiy wodtreiav Tov Kabapav * Yuxdv wpds Tovs 
, kat et Ore pdduora év Tois cdpacr SiarpiBovow' of dé povors 
(poow 4 xat qpwow iroréaow abras cis kownv cwovoiav. Corp. X. 
: xowovia 5€é éort Yuxav' Kal Kowwvotor pév ai tov Gedy Tais TOV 
yOpwrer, al 8¢ rév évOparev tals Tv ddOywr. 
daemonum is an unintelligent translation of a Greek genitive, 
ependent on éyyile (accedit). See note on ch. ra, omnium ... 
winior. The ‘approximation’ to gods or daemons (prope deos 
dit) is distinguished from ‘attachment’ to them (gud se dits 
veri), and follows upon it as a result; it must therefore mean 
oximation in character, or assimilation. 
‘The daemons to whom men attach themselves must be those of 
the third class, called diAdvOpwror. They seem to be the ‘gods’ of 
popular religion, i,e. the beings who are worshipped in the 
smple-cults and mysteries ; and the men who attach themselves to 
them are those who devote themselves to a cult of this kind, but 
no religion of a higher sort. The writer of Ascd. I probably 
msiders these ‘daemons friendly to man’ to differ from the astral 
s (whom alone he calls ‘ gods’) in much the same way that in 
. Ill. 37-38b the di ¢erreni are represented as differing from 
the di caelestes. If so, the difference may be described thus. The 
‘sods’ are daaels ; they operate by invariable law ; they cannot be 
moyed by prayers or offerings; their worship does not admit of 
sacrificial rites, but consists solely of reverent contemplation and 
hymns of praise ;? and their worshipper, so far as he becomes like 
n, will attain to dade, and will live a life as steadfast and 
ntroubled as are the movements of the heavenly spheres. On the 




























' This position is similar to that of the writer of Asc/, I, who implies that the 
ious alone ‘se diis iungunt’. The Stoics did not thus limit the xowovia; they 
that a/7 men, as rational beings, are included in one community with the gods. 
Cf. ch. 9: ‘hominum enim admirationibus, adorationibus, landibus, obsequiis 
um caelestesque delectantur.’ The word de/ectantur, if taken in its literal sense, 
d, no doubt, imply that they are subject to 748); but this incidental phrase 
not be interpreted too strictly. 


. 2806-3 D — 
} ecaliy- 


34 ASCLEPIUS 


other hand, the ‘ daemons friendly to man ’, i. e. the beings worshipped 
in the temples, are guraGeis ; their favour can be won, and their 
anger averted, by sacrificial rites and initiations ; and their worshipper, 
if he becomes like them, will indeed rise above the average level of 
humanity, but will not be wholly freed from disturbing passions, 

humani vero, qui medietate generis sui contenti sunt. This 
class of men corresponds to the class of daemons who ‘ in qualitate 
sui generis perseverant’. Those who do not aspire to rise above 
their earthly condition, or in whom the divine voids is dormant, and 
the Ovyrév eldos Yuyijs alone is operative, are called Aumant. Such 
are the men who have no religion, (not even that lower religion 
which consists in pious worship of daemons’,) to raise them above 
their natural selves. For Aumanus in this sense, cf. ch. 6 a, ‘ humanae 
naturae partem in se ipse despicit.’. Ch. 11a: ‘homo hactenus esse 
debuit’ &c. 

his similes erunt, quorum se generis speciebus adiunxerint. 
A man who is wholly occupied with things of a lower order than 
himself will be degraded to the level of the things he deals with, 
whether his occupation with them is practical, as in agriculture (see 
ch. 9), or theoretical, as in physical science (11a jim. and 13). But 
perhaps the form of ‘attachment’ to these things which is specially 
in the writer’s thought is that of private ownership (ch. 11a). He 
who takes these things into his own exclusive Possession will be 
dragged down by them; e. g. the owner of cattle will grow like the — 
beasts he owns.’ At the present stage of his argument, however, 
the writer merely touches on man’s lower connexions for a moment, 
and passes on to emphasize the higher. 

6a, magnum miraculum est homo. Cf, Asc/, III, 2 3b: 
‘miraculo dignus est (homo).’ Corp. X. 24b: 6 yap avOpwros Lodv 
éore Oetov, K.t.d. 

daemonum genus novit. ‘He is acquainted with the daemons - 
—especially with the ¢iAdvOpwror Saipoves, i.e. the gods of the 
temple-cults. The word novit (2yvwxe) implies social intimacy, or 
friendship, as well as intellectual knowledge. Similarly, yrdous (bc03) 
is not merely intellectual knowledge of God, but involves union with 
God. 

hominum quanto est natura temperata felicius. With what 
other beings is man here contrasted ? Especially, I think, with the 


} Cf Ecclestasticus 38. 25: ‘How can he get wisdom . . . that driveth oxen, and 
is occupied in their labours, and whose talk is of bullocks ?? 





ASCLEPIUS I: 5, 6a 35 










laemons. Cf. eo amplior in ch. 5, and jeliciore loco below. The 
writer is unwilling to accept the Pythagorean and Platonic view that 
man’s embodiment on earth is a calamity, and seeks to represent it 
as a positive advantage to him (provided that he adapts himself 
ac htly to his ‘ intermediate position’). _Man’s embodiment does not 
cut him off from connexion with the higher world ; and it gives him, 
in addition, connexions with the things of the world below. These 
Jatter connexions are here spoken of as things to be glad of (‘cetera 
...nexu secum caritatis astringit’; and ‘ut quae infra se sunt 
diligat’). On the other hand, we were told in ch. 5 fiz. that he who 
ches himself’ to earthly things ‘becomes like them’, i.e. is 
degraded to their level, But the two passages may be reconciled, if 
we take the ‘attachment’ there spoken of to mean an exclusive 
devotion to these things, such as would sever him from the higher 
EaiC 1d, and foster that ‘earthly part of his own being’ which he ought 
to scorn. The man whose heart is set on that which is above may 
none the less find objects of interest and affection here below ; 
the occupations of his daily life on earth are part of his 
service to God (ch. 8 ff.), and in his case ‘laborare est orare’, 
 quibus se necessarium esse caclesti dispositione cognoscit. 
An anticipation of the doctrine set forth in ch. 8. 

Suspicit caelum. Cf. ch. 9: ‘sortiti sunt caeli suspiciendi 
yenerabilem curam.’ Asc¢/. III. 25: ‘nemo suspiciet coelum’. 
Omnia illi licent. Possibly we ought to read omnia illi (adire) 
lice nj. At any rate, the context shows that this must be the 
meaning. There is no question here of moral freedom; and the 
emblance to Paul’s wavra pou eeorw (1 Cor. 6, 12 and ro. 23) 
is merely verbal. 

- Man is embodied on earth; yet he is not imprisoned in his 
earthly body, for his thought (i.e. his vots, the immortal part of 
him,) is free to traverse the whole universe. Cf. the description 
of the philosopher in Pl. Zheae?. 173E: 1o cpa povov & tH wihe 
frat airod xa émidypet, 7) St Siavo . . . wavtaxyy péperat, x.7.A, 
sudo-Aristot. De mundo 1, 391a 8: éeidy yap ovx oldv Te Tv 
7G odporr els tov odpdviov adixéobar torov, Kal rHv yav éxhurdvra 
oipdviov éxeivoy x@pov Kxatowtedoat, . . . yoo Wuxy da 
piloropias, haBotca syeydva tov voiv, émepaudOy Kai e&edyuyoer, 
dxoriacrév twa ddév eipotca, Kal ta mAciotoy GdAjAwy ddeotdra 
Tois Térois TH Savoia cuveppdvyce, padiws olpat Ta ovyyevy yvupicaca, 
kal Gciw Yyijs dppore ra Oia xataaBodoa. Lactant. De opif. det 
D2 







































36 ASCLEPIUS 


16. of. (quoted in note on Corp. XI. ii. 19). Compare also the 
Hermippus, 1. 6. 40: & dvOpwros , . . DAnv pev ovoracews tiv 
airiv (rots éri yas feos) éoxnxas, exwv Sé te voepas ovicias ey 
ait mdéov, kal? iv yov te wepirodct Kal ovpavod euBarever Kal 
Oararrys typ réuver KehevOa Kat tovrwv tu peyeOn perpet, ere Te 
(ras) rév dorépwv KaTd pijKos Kal wAdros wopeias éxiotarar Kat Tobs 
mepidous adrav dpiOpet. See Corp. X. 25; XI. ii. 19. 

6b. quae sunt animalia desuper deorsum radices per- 
venientes habent. The ‘roots’ of animals are the streams 
of rveta (= fire and air intermingled) which descend from above, 
and maintain life in the animal bodies into which they enter. The 
notion that animals are ‘rooted’ above may have been suggested 
by Pl. Zim. 90 A, where it is said that man is durdv ot eyyeov dAN’ 
otpdviov.' But the simile is differently applied by the Hermetist, 
Plato, in that passage of the Zimaeus, is speaking of ‘the supreme 
form of soul’ (7d kupdrarov rap’ jpiv Yvyijs eidos), which corresponds 
to the voids of Asc. I, and exists on earth in man alone, and not 
in the lower animals. He says that this divine part of the soul 
resides in the human head, and ‘attaches the head or root of us to 
heaven, whence was the birth of our souls from the beginning’; 
and he adds that this is the reason why man alone of all the animals 
stands erect. Plato’s meaning then is that that which is highest and 
most godlike in man draws its sustenance from God. The Hermetist, 
on the other hand, is speaking of the animal life which exists in 
men and beasts alike; and his meaning is that this animal life is 
sustained by fire and air, which are sent down to earth from their 
natural place above by the operation of the heavenly bodies. Aristotle, 
De an. 2. 4, 416 4, says that ds # xepadry tov Luv, otros af pila 
tév puréy’ but he is speaking merely with regard to the nutrition 
of the body. Jb. 2. 1, 412b3: af 8 fiLar tO ordpare dvddoyov" 
dppw yap Axe tiv tpodyv. Ar. Iept paxpoB., 467b 2: 7d yap 

1 This saying of Plato was often quoted. Corp. XVIII. 11 as emended: 7a rav 
puxay odpdua purd. Philo De plantatione 4. 16, Wendland II, p. 137: 7a piv 
quTd Katwxipa drepyatero, Tas Kepadds abray éy Trois Babvyeoraros is pépect 
mas, (gav 5 ray Grdyav ras Kepadds dvedntoas dad yijs K.7.A... eLatpérou 5é 
Ths KaracKevfjs Ekaxey dvOpwmos: Tov piv yap dddov rds dbeas mepinyaye Kate 
kapnpas,.. . dvOp@mou 5% Eunadw dviopOwoer, va Tov ovpavdy Karabedrat, puTdv obit 
Emtyetov GAA’ obpdvioy, ds 6 madaids Adyos, indpxav. Plut. De Pyth. o7'ac. 12, 400B : 
5 pev ydp TAdrwy Kal rov dvOpamov obpivioy dvéuace purdy, arep bx pins ave ris 
separns bpPotpevov. Mas‘udi ( Zestim.), who saw the clapper of a Sabian chapel 
at Harran inscribed with ‘a Syrian saying of Plato’, comments: Now Plato had 


said, ‘Man is a plant of heaven; .. . he is like an inverted tree, the roots of which 
are turned towards heaven, and its top towards earth.’ 









































ASCLEPIUS I: 6a, 6b 37 


rod putod Kat Kepad) 7 pila éori. Tlept veor. xai yjpws, 468 a 1: 
cal’ & pév yap eirépxerar popiov % tpopy}, dvw Kadovpev. 
 Gnanimalia autem de imo in superna ‘viva’ radice sil- 
‘yescunt. There is no point in the epithet o/va; and to make this 
use correspond to the preceding, we require something equivalent 
de imo in superna perveniente radice. 
 Quaedam autem duplicibus aluntur alimentis, quaedam 
mplicibus. There are two kinds of nutriment, viz. nutriment 
the cSpa, and nutriment of the (animal) yyy. The first kind 
sists of earth and water; the second kind then must consist of 
he two other elements, fire and air; igs e¢ aeris must therefore 
inserted after amma. And this is confirmed by the phrase 
nta pars below, which implies that all the four elements have 
been mentioned immediately before. 
DA plant has no yx7 (ch. 4); it is cdpa and nothing more,—a 
livi ng and sentient body indeed, but still a body without ‘soul’; 
its nutriment is therefore of one kind only, viz. earth and water, 
which its roots absorb from below. An animal consists of body 
‘soul’, and therefore needs two kinds of nutriment, viz. earth 
water (in the form of solid and liquid food) for its body, and 
fire and air for its ‘soul ’. 

This theory must have been taken over with little alteration from 
some Stoic source. It is hardly consistent with the view expressed 
above (ch. 2 b) that Ywx7 is a thing distinct from the four elements ; 
for the statement that fire and air are the food of the soul implies 
the soul consists of fire and air. From his own point of view, 
e writer ought rather to have said that fire and air are the vehicle 
of the immaterial Yvy7j, and convey it into the body, or generate 
it in the body. 

The author doubtless held that it is by the process of breathing 
that animals take into their bodies ‘the food of the soul’, viz. fire 
air (= wvetpa) ; and he might have justified his statement that 
plants have no yxy by saying that they do not breathe. Cf. Ar. 
De an. t. 5, 410b 27: rovro 8 rérovbe Kal 6 vy tois Opduixois erect 
spevors Adyos’ pyol yap THy Wuxi ex Tod dAov cicrévar avarvedvTuv, 

évnv id tov dvéuwv. ovx oldv te by Tols gurois Totro cup- 
cv, ovde Tov Lowy eviows, eimep py mdvta dvarvéovow. The 
mvedua originally meant ‘breath’. It came to be used to 
signify the ‘life-breath’ or ‘vital spirit’, i.e. the material vehicle 
of life in an individual living body; and it is thus used in some 


38 ASCLEPIUS 


passages of Aristotle. The Stoics extended its meaning, and used 
it to signify also the vehicle of life in the Kosmos as a whole, 
which they regarded as a single living organism. But the zvedya 
(‘ vital spirit ’) of the Kosmos, as well as that portion of the cosmic 
mvetya by which an individual organism is vivified, was still thought 
of as a sort of breath; and the Stoics held it to be the very 
substance which we breathe, viz. warmed air. Cf. Hippocr. De 
flatu 4: ‘The body is sustained by three kinds of nutriment, gira, 
word, wvetuara, of which the last is by far the most important,’ Ar, 
esp. 6 mentions the view that respiration takes place Tpopis xdpu, 
+ + + @ tpehopévov TS mvevpat. rod évrds wvpds, but does not 
himself accept it. Cic. Wat. deor. 2. 54. 134 (from Posidonius ?) : 
“cum tribus rebus animantium vita teneatur, cibo, potione, spiritu.’ 
Lb. 2. 55.136: ‘In pulmonibus autem inest raritas quaedam et 
assimilis spongiis mollitudo, ad hauriendum spiritum aptissima, 
qui tum se contrahunt aspirantes, tum in respiratu dilatant, ut 
frequenter ducatur spiritus animalis, quo maxime aluntur animantes,’ 
Galen, Us. part. 7. 9, considers that the function of respiration 
is firstly to keep up the vital heat, and secondly to feed ro Wuyixdy 
rvedua. 

[Spiritus, quo plena sunt omnia, permixtus cunctis cuncta 
vivificat.] The statement that a// things (in the sublunar world) 
are filled with wvetya and vivified by it implies that vegetables as 
well as animals are vivified by rveipa (= fire and air). But that 
is inconsistent with the rest of the paragraph. It seems necessary 
therefore to bracket sfiritus . . . vivificat. These words were 
probably inserted by some one who was accustomed to the Stoic 
use of the term aveipa to denote the vehicle of life, but mistakenly 
supposed that term to mean something distinct from the ‘fire and 
air’ here spoken of by the author of Asc/, I. The interpolator 
may have been the same person who inserted some irrelevant 
mentions of spirttus in Ascd. II. 

Sensus (sensu addito ad hominis intellegentiam MSS.), 
quae quinta pars soli homini concessa est ex aethere. At 
this point Hermes begins to speak of the divine and immortal part 
of man. We know from Ase. III. 41 b, where the Greek original is 
preserved, that the translator sometimes rendered vods by sensus 
(see also Ascd. II. 16a, Ascd. III. 18 b, 32b); and it is evident 
from the context that the Greek word here represented by sensus 
must have been vois. But a subordinate phrase (sensu addito MSS.) 








ASCLEPIUS I: 6b 39 


js inadequate for the first mention of vots; and there can be little 
doubt that sensus stood at the beginning of a fresh sentence, in 
correspondence to the nominatives anima, corpora, |spiritus,| with 
which the preceding sentences begin, The words addito ad hominis 
- intellegentiam may be the remains of a marginal note. 

yods is here called guénta pars, ‘the fifth part of man’, in contrast 
to the four material elements. Similarly, in ch. 7b, the vois is 
called pars simplex, in contrast to pars guadruplex. The phrase 
 guinia pars Was probably suggested by a reminiscence of the 
Aristotelian ‘fifth substance’ ;* but if so, the suggestion must have 
come, not from Aristotle himself, but from some later writer, by 
whom the doctrine of Aristotle was presented in an altered form. 
The Hermetist’s vois has little in common with the circularly moving 
and immutable element of which, according to Aristotle’s theory, 
heaven and the heavenly bodies consist. The vots of Asc/. I is 
immaterial (otawdys, ch. 7b); the ‘fifth substance’ of Aristotle is 
material. The vois of AscZ. I is implanted in man on earth; 
but Aristotle’s ‘fifth substance’ exists only in the heavens, and no 
portion of it ever descends into the sublunar world. 
In Gen. an. 2. 3, 736b (a passage which Zeller Avis¢. II, p. 8 


1See Zeller, Aristotle, Eng. tr. I, pp. 471-477. Aristotle says (De cae/o 270 b 20, 
Meteor. 339 b 14) that men had recognized from ancient times that heaven consists 
of a different substance from all things below, and that they called this substance 
algfp; but he does not himself use the word al@jp to denote it. He calls it 7d 
windy pepspevoy apa (as opposed to the four sublunar elements, the natural 
movement of which is in a straight line upward or downward)-—7d mporov tev 
copdrov'—rd mparov aroxeiov'—r0 Tay dotpwv ororxetov' and he describes it as 
ms obala okparos GAAn mapa tds évraiba cuotdces, Oevorépa Kal mporépa rovTav 
dndyrov'—dyévyrov Kal dpPaprov wat dvavgis kal dvaddolwrov. Later writers call it 
79 Kuxdopopixdy (or kueAopopyTixoy) o&pa,—nréunry obaia,—and sometimes aidnp. 
Ps.-Aristot. De mundo 392. §: ovpavod 58 Kal dotpav odciay pew alPépa xadodpey, 
.. . bid 7d del Geiv Kuxdopopounérny, ororxelov ovcay Erepov T&v Terrdpav, dxhparov 
re xal Getov. Plut. Ai apud Delph. 11,389 F: The Kosmos is in a sense composed 
of five eéapor; one of these consists of earth, another of water, a third of fire, a 
fourth of air; Tov 8t méumrov ovpavdy, of SF pis, of 3 aldépa Kadodow, of 8 abro 
rotro méunrny ovolar, f To KiKry mepipepeaOa povy THY GwpdTow KaTa plot EorL. 
(Plutarch 74, attributes the doctrine of the ‘fifth substance’ to Plato as well as 
Aristotle; in this he follows the authority of Xenocrates, who interpreted as a 
recognition of the ‘fifth substance’ the obscure sentence in Pl. Zim. 55 C, rt be 
otiens fvordcews pias méumrns (viz. the fifth regular solid, the dodecahedron), éwi 
70 way 6 Geds abrh Katexpyoato éxeivo bialwypapdv. See Simplicius, in Scholia 
in Ar., ed. Berol. IV, pp. 427a and 470a.) Aetius, Diels Doxogr. p. 288: 
*ApiororéAns .. . oToxeia 58 Técoapa, wéumrov bE Tt oHpa 7d alO€pov, dpeTaBAnror. 
Diog. Laert. 5. 32: evar 5¢ wapd ra récoapa arorxeia Kat dAdo néumrov, éf ob Ta 
al@épia ovveordvat- dddolav 8 abrod ri klynow elvar KuKdopopytixiy yap. Sext. 
Emp. Math. 10. 316: cupmapédaBov yap (Ocellus Lucanus and Aristotle) ois 


a atoxelos 7d méunrov wal KveAopopntixdy apa, éf ob A€yovow elvae 7a 
7 1a. 


40 ASCLEPIUS 


describes as ‘ standing rather isolated’), Aristotle says that there is 
a certain material substance in which the life of the organism resides f 
he calls this substance 73 Geppov (‘the vital heat ’), 76 mvedpa (‘the 
vital breath ’), and ‘the ious (i.e. substance) in the rvetya’;? and 
he says that it is distinct from and more ‘divine’ than the four 
elements, and that it is analogous to the element of which the 
heavenly bodies consist (dvédoyov ofca 76 rv dotpwv otorxeiw), 
Aristotle. did not himself identify this material vehicle of life in 
earthly bodies with the ‘ circularly moving’ substance of the heavens, 
and could not have done so without self-contradiction. But in 
some later accounts of Peripatetic doctrine, the Yux7 (which Aristotle 
had distinguished from the material vehicle of organic life) was 
spoken of as a material thing, and was said to consist of the same 
“fifth substance’ as the heavenly bodies. Iambl. De anima (Stob. 
T. 49. 32, vol. i, p. 366W.): rues piv rov “Aptororehixdv aibéprov 
copa riv Yrxv rier. This view seems to have been first 
expressed by the Peripatetic Critolaus (about 156 8.c.), who must 
have been influenced in this respect by the materialistic teaching 
of the Stoics. Tertull. De anima s: ‘illos .. , qui (animam) de 
manifestis corporalibus effingunt, . . . ut Critolaus et Peripatetici 
eius ex quinta nescio qua substantia.’ Macrobius Somn. Scip. 
I. 14.19: ‘Critolaus Peripateticus, constare (animam) de quinta 
essentia.’ Cf. Aetius, Diels Doxogr. P- 303 : Kpirddaos cai Awdwpos 
6 TYpios (a pupil of Critolaus), votv dz’ aibépos dmabots (rov Oedv 
eva). In Cicero’s writings, a similar view is repeatedly spoken of, 
and is erroneously attributed to Aristotle himself. Cic. Acad. post. 
1. 7. 26 (from Antiochus): ‘ quintum genus, € quo essent astra 
mentesque, singulare eorumque quattuor . . . dissimile Aristoteles 
quoddam esse rebatur.’ Acad. post, I. 11. 39. TZusc. 1. 10. 22: 
‘ Aristoteles, . . . quom quattuor nota illa genera principiorum esset 
complexus, € quibus omnia orerentur, quintam quandam naturam 
Censet esse, e qua sit mens.’ Zuse.1. 17. 41. Zusc. 1, 26. 65: 
‘sin autem est quinta quaedam natura, ab Aristotele inducta 
primum, haec et deorum est et animorum.’ De fin. 4.5. 12: ‘num 
quinta quaedam natura videretur esse, ex qua ratio et intellegentia 
oriretur.’ (In these passages of Cicero, it appears to be vods rather 
than Yvyxy that is said to consist of the guinta natura.) Cicero's 


? Elsewhere, he speaks of the material vehicle of life in the organism as otypuros 


Beppirns proh,—i apy? rijs Gepudrnros,—dpxi} Ocpyod pvorkeh,—rd puowwdv rip,— 
70 Oepudv 7d Kowwavooy THs (wis,—71d odupuroy mvetpa,—nvedua Eucvrov, 





ASCLEPIUS I: 6b 41 



































authority for this version of the Peripatetic doctrine of the ‘fifth 
substance’ was probably the syncretic Platonist Antiochus ; (see 
Madvig’s note on De jin. 4. 5. 12, and Reid's note on Acad. i. 11% 
39 ;) and Antiochus must have got it from Critolaus. The same 
modification of the Aristotelian doctrine occurs in Philo, Quis rer. 
div. heres 57. 283, III, p. 64 Wendland: ra pév cwparixd radra 
(viz. earth, water, air, and fire)’ 1d 8 voepdy Kat otpdvov tis 
Yrxis yéevos wpos aifépa tov kabapwratov as rarépa apigerat, méparry 
yap, os 6 Tov dpyaiwy Adyos, éorw tis odcia KuxopopyTiKy, TOV 
rerrépwy Kati 7d Kpeirrov Siadépovoa, e Hs of te dorépes Kal 6 
cipmas oipavds Boke yeyevjrbu, fis kar’ axddovbov Oeréov Kal tijy 
evOpurivyy Yuxiv axéomacpa.' Compare also Philostratus Vita 
Apollon. 3. 34: Apollonius asked the Indian sages ex tivwv Evyxeio Pau 
giv Kéopov iyoivro’ of 8% epacay “ex ororxeiov”. “ pdv”, ey, 
“rerrépuv” ; “od terrdpwy”, said the spokesman of the Indians, 
ada wévre”. “Kal ri dv”, eby, “wéprrov yévorto rapa 1d vdwp 
re kal Tov dépa Kal riv yav Kal ro wip;” “6 aiOyp”, eirev, “dv 
jrycto Oar xpty yéveow Oedv elvan’ Ta pev yap Tod dépos EAxovta OvyTa 
mivra, Ta 8& Tod albépos aOdvard te Kat Geta.” The doctrine which 
Philostratus ascribes to his ‘Indian philosopher’ was probably 
‘derived from Critolaus. 

The Hermetist’s statement that the vots is guinfa pars, and has 
been bestowed on man ex aethere, doubtless comes ultimately from 
Critolaus ; but it is probable that, as in the case of Cicero, the 
notion was derived from Critolaus through Antiochus, since a 
Hermetic writer is more likely to have borrowed from a Platonist 
than from a Peripatetic. But in what sense did the writer of 
Asc?, I adopt it? He could not, consistently with his own 
principles, admit that vots consists of a material substance ;* we 
1 Cf. Philo Leg, alleg. 3. 55. 161, Cohn I, p. 148: Sto éorly é¢ dv ovvécrapev, 
yx Te Kal capa, 7d pey oby cpa ex yas Bednpovpyyrat, 4 58 Puy? aidépos éariv 
 drécnacpa Getoy (leg. Gciov?), ... 1 5& aldepiov gucews poipa ovca Wuxi (Tpopas 
€xet) aldepious nai Ocias. The al@jp of which Philo here speaks, (and which he 
identifies with the mvedua (wis mentioned in Genesis 2.7,) is probably the ‘ fifth 
substance’ of the Peripatetics ; though it would be possible to take the word in 
this Passage as signifying the celestial fire of the Stoics. 

2 Cf. Philo De plantatione 5. 18, Wendland II, p. 137: GAA of wey GAAoL, Tis 
aldepiou giicews rdv juérepov voiv potpay eimdyres eival, cuyyéverav dvOpimy mpds 
aldépa cuviibays 6 5% péyas Movofjs ovdert ray yeyovétay Tis AoyiKhs uxis 7d 
-eldos dpolwoev, The ‘ others’ of whom Philo speaks may be Stoics, who used the 
word aiéjp as a name either for the fire of which the heavens consist, or for the 
ig atmosphere (with which Posidonius held the soul to be consubstantial) ; or 
; may be men who held the doctrine of Critolaus. Philo’s Moses here speaks 


asa Platonist, and maintains the incorporeality of God and vois, in opposition to 
the materialism of the Stoics, or of Stoicizing Peripatetics and Academics. 





ee 


42 ASCLEPIUS 


must therefore suppose either that he took over the phrase from 
his authority without noticing what it implied, or that he intended 
ex aethere to be here understood in a metaphorical sense, as 
signifying ‘from the incorporeal and eternal’, 

soli homini concessa est. On God’s gift of intellect or reason 
to man, see Asc/. III. 22b, Compare also Corp. IV. $y ‘VII. es 
XII, i. 2. 

ad divinae rationis intellegentiam exornat. What is meant 
here by dtvina ratio (6 Ocios Xéyos)? In ch. 3b, Hermes spoke 
of the drvinitatis ratio (6 rod Geot Aéyos, in the sense of } Oeodroyia, 
‘the teaching about God’); but 6 Géios Adyos cannot mean that, 
Compare Asc/. III. 22a: ‘ex intellectu enim rationis divinae, qua 
constituta sunt omnia, . .. medela nascitur vitiorum.’ In that 
passage, 6 Getos Adyos apparently means the design or ordinance of 
God, and is nearly equivalent to ‘God’s will ’, or *God’s law’; 
and perhaps the phrase is to be taken in the same sense here 
(cf. ‘quibus se necessarium esse caelesti dispositione cognoscit’ 
in ch. 6a). For ratio (Xdyos) in the sense of ‘ purpose’, see ch, 9, 
‘aptius . . . conpositus ad certam rationem.’ By the gift of vois, 
man is enabled to recognize God’s purpose with regard to him, 
that is, to know the place and function which God has assigned to 
him; and that is the very knowledge which it is the special aim 
of Asc/, 1 to teach. There is no trace here of a hypostatized or 
personified Adyos. 

Lntellegentia stands for yveors in Ascl, II 41b; and it may very 
well represent the same Greek word here. 

6c,7a. Sed quoniam de sensu... tune totam vobis 
praestabo rationem. This paragraph interrupts the argument. 
If we remove it, Solum enim animal homo &c. follows naturally 
on Sensus (vos) . . . humanos tantum sensus (aicOjoes) . . 
sustolit; but as the text stands, enim is meaningless. There is 
therefore strong reason to suspect that the intervening paragraph 
did not exist in the original Asc/. I. It may have been inserted 
by the redactor who made up the composite Adyos rédewos. 

The digression begins with a promise to discuss sensus (vois) 
later on. This promise is not fulfilled in AscZ, I 3 but in Asc? III, 
32, 6 Getos voids, & Kooptxds vos, and & dvOpdrewos voids are dealt 
with.’ At the end of the digression, the promise is repeated, 


* In Asc. III. 18 b also, something is said about sensus (voids), but hardly enough 
to amount to a fulfilment of the promise in Asci. I. 6c, 7a. 





ASCLEPIUS I: 6b-7a 43 





with the addition that the teacher means to speak of vots ‘when 
he speaks of zveipa also’, Now there is nothing about zveipa 
in Asc, III. 32b; and there is no continuous and systematic 
treatment of avetpa in any part of the Asclepius,—nor indeed in 
any of the extant Hermetica. But Asc, II (in its present form) 
begins with the words ‘De spiritu autem et de his similibus hinc 
sumatur exordium’ (r4b); it is possible therefore that guando et 
de spirite means ‘in that part of the composite dialogue which 
begins at ch. 14b’, and that the redactor, in putting this promise 
into the mouth of Hermes, meant to say ‘a discussion of vods 
will be found in ch, 32 b’.* 

It is to be noted that the plural a0dis, which may be taken 
as a sign of the redactor’s hand, occurs three times in this 
paragraph. 

7a. Dicebam enim [in ipso initio rerum] de coniunctione 
deorum. I cannot account for the words in ipso initio rerum. 
Man’s coniunctio with the gods was first spoken of in the latter 
part of ch. 5. 

illum intellegentiae divinae (divinum MSS.) . . . sensum, 
qui sensus est divinior in solo deo et in humana intelle- 
gentia. The meaning seems to be that the vois here spoken of 
is not the faculty of reason or intelligence which all men alike 
possess, but a ‘diviner sort of voids’, which exists only in God 
and in the elect among men. The distinction may have been 
suggested to the redactor by Ascé. III. 32 b, where 6 Geios vois is 
discriminated from two lower kinds or grades of vovs. But the 
words are obscure. Jw/ellegentiae can hardly stand for yvdcews 
here ; for it is impossible to make sense either of rév @ciov votv 
tis ydoews, or Of tov voty ris Olas yvwoews. Perhaps the trans- 
lator may have here rendered the single word votv by intedlegen- 
tiae sensum. 

The words in humana intellegentia also are difficult to explain. 


1 J was at first inclined to think that this promise was meant to point forward to 
Corp. IX, the opening words of which (x0és, & "AowAnmé, rov Tédciov dn[od]édwxa 
déyov) imply that it was written as a sequel to the Adyos réAcios. But Corp. IX 
does not deal especially with vods. It isa short treatise mept alcOjcews wat von oews ; 
it begins by asserting that alo@jow and vénois are, in man at least, inseparably 
connected, and it couples them together throughout. Besides, it contains nothing 
that could be called a discussion of sfzréfus, though mvon (§ 7) and meta (§ 9) 
are incidentally mentioned in it. I think therefore that the promise in Asc/. I, 6c, 
7 a cannot have been meant to refer to Corp. IX. On the other hand, the similar 
promise in ch, 8 init. (‘de hoc... alio dicemus tempore’) apparently refers to 
Corp. IX; see note ad foc. 





44 ASCLEPIUS 


The ‘diviner vots’ might be said to exist ‘in the human soul’ 
(cf. Asc?, III. 18b, ‘sensus autem cum semel fuerit animae com- 
mixtus humanae’), but not ‘in the human gyosis’, Besides, the 
following question of Asclepius implies that Hermes has spoken 
of this sort of vots as present in some men only, and not in all 
men. Possibly the original may have been something like é& To 
Ged pdvy Kat Trois ev yrdoe ofor (Corp. IX. 4b) rav avOpairwr, 
and the latter phrase may have been corrupted into kal & rq 
yooe tov avOparur. 

It is to be presumed that the higher sort of vots is present in the 
astral gods, and in the daemons, as well as in God and in men ; but 
here, that fact is ignored. 

Won enim omnium hominum ... uniformis est sensus P 
Cf. Corp. I. 21 fin.: ob révres yap dvOpwro voiv txovow ; Corp. X, 
23: ol. . . dtu mica Yuxy votv gy; Ascl, III. 18b: ‘ Sensus 
(vots) . . . quo dono caelesti sola felix sit humanitas 3 Neque enim 
omnes, sed pauci’ &c, Pl. Zim. 51 £: vow 88 Oeods (ueréxew paréov), 
vOpdruv 8 yévos Bpaxd rt. 

Non omnes ... intellegentiam veram adepti sunt. Jn- 
tellegentia vera (4 édnOys yvoors ?) is here equivalent to ‘the diviner 
sort of vots’, Cf. Asc/. III. arb: Xaprduevos wpiv voiv, Adyor, 
yvaow (‘condonans nos sensu, ratione, intellegentia’ Lat. transl.), 
vow pev, iva oe vonowpe, .. . yoow d¢, iva ce émvyvovTes . . 
Xaipwyev.—yviors there appears to be a higher degree of vots, Or a 
faculty superior to voids. 

7b. Solum enim animal homo duplex est. Cf. Corp. I. 15: 
mapa wdvra Ta ext yijs <Ga Surdots éeorw 6 GvOpwros, «t.d.  Ascl, 
III. 22 b: ‘hominem . . . ex utraque natura conposuit, divina atque 
mortali,’ 

una pars simplex: viz. the vois. 

quae... odcdSys. The word oicudys is here used in the 
Platonic sense. In Platonic usage, ota means ‘true being’ or 
‘reality’, as opposed to the unreal appearances of the sensible world ; 
thus otowdsdys, ‘of the nature of true being’, implies ‘ incorporeal’, 
and is accordingly contrasted with trun. Cf. Corp. IX. 1 b and e, 
On the other hand, in Stoic usage, ota means ‘ corporeal substance’, 
and material things are called ovewddy, ‘substantial’. Plutarch 
(Comm. not. 49. 2, 1085 D), in an account of Stoic doctrine, speaks 
of 75 pdvipov Kat ovcrddes of earth and water, as compared with the 
two lighter elements. 





ASCLEPIUS I: 9a, 7b 45 


quam vocamus divinae similitudinis formam. Cf. ch. 10, 
‘se etiam secundam esse imaginem dei’; and see Corp. I. 12. It 
is possible that this phrase was derived from a Jewish source. The 
words of Gen. 1, 26 (xal edrev 6 eds Moujowpev dvyOpwrov Kar? 
exéva Sperépav Kal xal’ Spoiwow) gave rise to much speculation. 
See Philo’s comments on Gen. 1. 26 and Gen. 2. 7, in De opif. 
mundi 23. 69, Cohn I, p. 23; Leg. alleg. 1. 12. 31 ff, Cohn I, p. 69 ; 
De plantatione 5. 18, Wendland Il, p. 137. Cf. Lactant. Div. inst. 
2. 10. 3 and 14, and 7d. 7. 4. 3 (Zestim.), The Mosaic Téveots kocpov 
was, no doubt, known to many Pagans in Egypt under the Roman 
empire ; and the Hermetist may have borrowed from it, or from 
some predecessor who had been influenced by it, the phrase d/vinae 
similitudinis formam. But on the other hand, the notion might 
have been derived from Plato, independently of Jewish influence. 
In Pl. Piaedo 95 ©, for instance, the soul is called Gcoeudés Tu. 

Celsus denied that man is ‘an image of God’, Orig. ¢. Ceés. 6. 63: 
dré. byow 5 Kédoos . . . “Oi8 dvOpwrov eroinoey (5 Geds) cixdva 
“airos’ ob yap rowade 5 Oeds, ots GAAw elder obSevi dpouos.” To 
this Origen replies that Celsus is mistaken in supposing that it is the 
human ody that is said to be made in the likeness of God; «i yip 
7d kar’ cixova Tod Geod év 7 oupari éort povy, éorépyTat TO KpEiTTov, 
Hh Wx, TOD Kar’ cixdva’. . . Grep oddels Hav Aeyer. ei 8 ory ev 
7 owapdorépy 7d Kar’ eixéva rod Geod, dvdyxy ovvOerov elvar tov 












































Oedy, Koi oiovel cvverrdta Kat aitov é« wuxhs Kal odparos’. . 
Grep oddels Hydv yor. detwerar 5) 7d Kat” cixdva Tod Geod ev TO 
Kal’ jpas eyoutve tow dvOpirw, Kal dvaxawovpévy, Kal repvadre 
yiyvecOu Kar’ cixdva rod Krigavros, vocioba. Thus Origen agrees 
with the Hermetist in restricting the divinae similitudinis forma to 
the incorporeal part of man (the pars otowsdys). 

est autem (altera pars) quadruplex, quod dhixér , . . dicimus 
fe quo factum est corpus]. The body is fourfold, in the 
sense that it is composed of the four elements. It zs the fourfold 
‘part of man; but it cannot be said to be made of the fourfold 
part of man. The original may have been 1d 8& érepov pépos 
rerpardovv, Td iAukdv Aeyopevov, or something of the sort; and ¢ guo 
Factum est corpus may be a clumsy explanation inserted by a later 
hand. 
Man is here said to be composed of 76 oto.ddes, i.e. the vois, 
and 7d tAcxdv, i.e, the body. The mortal part of the soul, i.e. that 
‘part of it which is not vos, is not expressly mentioned; we must 


46 ASCLEPIUS 


therefore understand it to be here included under the term édtxdy, 
and regarded as corporeal, and composed of the two lighter 
elements ; though in chs. 2 b sgg. it was spoken of as a thing distinct 
from tA. 

cum cognatis suis, id est mentis purae sensibus. I 
suppose the mentis purae sensus to be the vojpara. If so, the 
thoughts which the vois thinks are metaphorically spoken of as a 
family of which the vofs is the head. A man’s thoughts might be 
said to be ‘generated’ by his mind; and the mind might in that 
sense be called their parent. Cf. Corp. IX. 3, 6 yap vots ve mdvra 
Td vorjpara x.t-A., Where the vows is spoken of as the mother of the 
thoughts it thinks. 

7¢. quae de tota summitate tractantur. We should have 
expected rather de totius summitate (rept ris tod bdov Kopudis, Or 
Tepi Tou mdvrwav Kepadaiordrov ?), 

8. 6 Kupios . . « epidnoev ds iSov téKov.—Dominus ... amavit 
eum ut divinitatis partwm suae. This passage is for the most 
part derived from the Zimaeus. Cf. Pl. Zim, g2c (the concluding 
sentence): G@vyrd yap xai ddvara {Ga AaBdv Kad fuprAnpwlbeis ode 
6 Kécpos otrw, Ldov dpariv td Spard epéxov, cixdv rod vonrou 
(aZ. rod mourod, ‘of its Maker’,) deds aicOnrés, péyotos Kal dpurros 
nékdords te Kal rehewratos yéyovey els otpavis dde, Hovoyeris dv. 


Tim. 29 E-31B: dyabds Fv. .  mdvra 8 1 pédora yevér Oat 
€BovhyjOn mapardrjowa éavtd. . . . odre Svo ott dmeipous éroinow 6 


Tov Kdcpous, add’ els 58 povoyer}s obpavds yeyovas err. te Kat 
ér gorau. Tim. 37. C: ds St KunGev ard Kat Cov evénoe tov dudiwv 
Geiv yeyovds ayadpa 5 yervijoas marip, yydcOn te Kat ebhpavbels 
kA, 

The parenthesis, aio@yrov 8¢ dyuc. . . Kad eis Spacwv, points forward 
to a subsequent answer to the question rérepov 6 kécpos aicOdvera. 
This question is answered in Corp. IX. 6: Kat yap 6 Kdcpos . . . 
aicOnow iSiay Kai vonow exe. The opening words of Corp. IX inform 
us that it was written as a sequel to the Adyos réAcos; and there 
can be little doubt that the promise in the text is connected with 
the fulfilment of the promise in Corp. IX. Hence we may conclude 
that the parenthesis which contains this promise, together with the 
resuming words éet ofv rotrov érotyee, was inserted in the Asyos 
ré\ewos after the later document, Corp. IX, had been written, and 
probably by the writer of Corp. IX. The parenthetical note is 
appended to the word aicyrév, by which it was suggested, and 





ASCLEPIUS I: 7b-8 47 





has separated the words Geov éparév Kal aicOyrdv||rpdrov Kal 
_ pévov Kai Eva, which were originally intended to be taken together. 
In insisting that there is only one sensible Kosmos, the writer of 
Asc. 1 is following the Zimaeus. 

The Latin, as punctuated in my text, agrees with the Greek (as 
given by Lactantius) in the structure of the sentence. But if the 
translator understood the Greek thus, why did he not put in ausem, 
to correspond to 8é after aic@yrév? And why did he insert the 
words eum deum secundum? Iam inclined to think that he failed 
to see the construction of the complex Greek sentence, and broke 
- it into two separate sentences, making the first of them end at «at 
eis Spacw, and taking aic@yrov d€ dypys as the beginning of the 
apodosis. If so, he must have written thus: ‘ Dominus. . . quoniam 
ase secundum fecit deum ..., eum deum secundum sensibilem 
 dixerim, non ideo . . ., sed eo, quoniam videntium sensus incurrit. 
Quoniam ergo hunc fecit’ &c. ‘Seeing that the Master . . . made 
‘a God second to himself, . . . I think fit to call that second God 
sensible’ &c. 

éwet tov Sedrepov éroince,—quo(niam) a se secundum fec{eriit, 
The Kosmos was the ‘First God’ of the Stoics, but the ‘Second 
- God’ of the Platonists, who differed from the Stoics in recognizing 
_ asupracosmic God. Cf. ch. 10, ‘aeternitatis dominus deus primus 
est, secundus est mundus, Asc/, III. 29 c, ‘secundum etenim 
deum hunc crede.’ 

émel ody todtov émoince mpatov kat pdvoy kal éva.—quoniam ergo 
hune fecit ex se primum et a se secundum. The trans- 
lator must have had before him a different reading of the 
Greek. 

kahds 8¢ adta epdvn (dy), Kal wAnpéotatos wavTevy tov dyabGv.— 
visusque ei pulcher, utpote qui sit omnium bonitate 
plenissimus. If éédvy was originally followed by dy, we can 
account for the translator’s rendering, by assuming that he divided 
the Greek words wrongly, and took dv kat wAypéoraros to mean 
utpote gui sit plenissimus. 

The thought occurs in the passages of the Zimaeus quoted above. 
But here again, there is a resemblance to the Jewish account of 
the Creation ; compare the recurring phrase xal (Sev 6 Oeds 6rt Kahdv 
(Gen, 1. 4,8, 10, 12, 18); Kat iSev 6 Oeds Gre add (ib. 21, 25); 
kat iSev & beds ra mdvra daa éroinoev, Kat iSod Kadi lav (id, 31). 
It is not unlikely that the first chapter of Genesis, as well as the 


48 ASCLEPIUS 


Timaeus, was known to the writer of Asc/. I, or to some of his 
teachers, 

hydoOn te Kat mdvu épidnoey Gs iStov tékov.—amavit eum ut 
divinitatis partum suae. The word #ydéc08y comes from PI, 
Tim. 37. The translator has omitted it. It is possible that in his 
copy #yéo@n was corrupted into jpao6y (this corruption occurs three 
times in Corg. I. 12, 13a), and that he wrote amavit et valde 
amavit, which a copyist might easily reduce to the single verb 
amavit. 

The notion that the Kosmos is son of God is borrowed from the 
Timaeus. The thought was familiar to all Platonists. Cf. Philo 
De ebrietate 8. 30, Wendland II, p. 176: God mated with his 
émorjpn, and she brought forth riv pdvoy Kal éyarnrov aio Oarov 
vidy, révde tov xdopov. In Philo Quod deus sit immut. 6. 3% 
Wendland II, p. 63, the aicOy7ds xdopos is called the younger son 
of God, the vonrds xéapos being God's elder son. In Cor. I. 12, 
the phrases which Platonists were accustomed to use in describing 
the Kosmos as the son of God are transferred to the Archanthropos ; 
6 88 wévrov marhp .. . drextnow “AvOpwrov . . «od HyacOn ds 
iSfov roxov, x.7.A. Christian theologians, reading these phrases in 
the Zimaeus or in the writings of later Platonists, took them to 
apply, not to the universe itself, but to the Adéyos by whom the 
universe was made, and regarded them as equivalent to the words 
addressed to Jesus, od ef 6 vids pov 6 dyamyrds, év col edSdxyoa 
(Mark 1. 11, Luke 3. 22). Thus Lactantius quotes the words of 
Hermes in Asc/. I. 8 as referring to the ‘Son of God’ in the 
Christian sense. Interpreted in this way, such passages may have 
contributed to the formulation of Christian dogma.’ By a similar 
misunderstanding, Pseudo-Augustine supposes that Asdyos té\etos, 
the title of the Hermetic document, means Verbum perfectum, ‘The 
perfect Word of God’, 


1 E. g. the epithet novo-yerfjs, which the Christians applied to the Second Person 
of their Trinity, was taken over by them from the 7imaeus, where it is applied to 
the Kosmos. This word meant primarily ‘the only one of his kind’ (yévos); and 
in the earlier Latin versions of the Christian Creed, it was represented by zicus, 
‘unique’, for which w«migenitus, ‘only-begotten’, was afterwards substituted. 
(Rashdall, Doctrine and development, p. 78.) 

See Philo De vita Mosis 2(3). 14. 134, Cohn IV, p. 231. Speaking ‘of the 
Jewish High Priest, Philo there says dvayxaiov yap jv roy lepwpévov TB Tov Kécpou 
marpi mapaxdnTe xphoba redeordrw Thy dperiy vid (sc. TH Kécpw) mpds Te 
Gpynotiay dyaprnparow kai xopnylav apOovwrarav dyabév. A Christian theologian 
of the early centuries, reading those words, would almost necessarily assume that 
‘the Son’ of whom Philo spoke was Christ. 





ASCLEPIUS I: 8 49 





























ut “tantus et’ bonus. If the Latin words are sound, it would 
seem that the translator read ds tocotros kat ayabos. But the 
Hermetist cannot have written that. Possibly the true reading 
was something like dv zpdrws atrés (codpés?) Kai dyads (cf. ‘et 
yationis suae imitatorem et diligentiae’ below), and -rws airés was 
corrupted into rocotros. 

qui illum .. . intueri potuisset. The translator repeatedly 
_ writes a pluperfect subjunctive where Latin usage requires an im- 
perfect. Ch. 15: ‘si locus deesset qui omnia sustinere potuisset’ 
(for passed). Ch. 22b: ‘per quae vitia . . . abalienare potuissent’ 
(for possent). Ch. 37: ‘per quasidola. . . vires habere potuissent’ 
(for possen?). Ch. 9: ‘harmoniae suavitas defuisset’ (for deesse?), 
‘Ch. 8: ‘satis esse debuisset’ (?). Cf. ch. 16 a: ‘provisum est 
quantum rationabiliter potuisset ’ (for poferat or potui?). 

Voluntas etenim dei ipsa est summa perfectio. A man 

needs time and effort to execute his purposes; but with God, ‘to 
will is to accomplish’, The same thought is expressed in other 
words below; ‘voluntatem (de/) comitatur effectus.’ Cf. Asc?, III. 
26b: ‘et habet omnia quae vult, (et ea vult quae habet)),’ The 
‘will’ of God, as here spoken of, corresponds to the ‘word’ or 
*command’ of God in the Jewish account of the Creation: cfrev 
6 Gcds TevnOyrw pads’ Kal éyévero as. 
Cum itaque eum odo.wSy (fecisset). Man is first created as 
‘an incorporeal being, and afterwards embodied. This may be 
regarded as a rudimentary form of the doctrine of the Archanthro- 
pos, which presents itself fully developed in Corp. I. But we 
“must not conclude on that account that Corp. I is necessarily of 
later date than Asc/. I. 

talesque omnes esse praecepit. These words show that the 
“preceding description of the making of man must be taken as 
referring to an individual ‘first man’, and not to men in general. 
Here then we have another point in common with the Mosaic 
account of the Creation, Cf. Philo De opif. mundi 51. 145, Cohn 
I, p. 51: rods & droyovous (of Adam), rijs éxeivou peréxovras idéas, 
Gvayxaiov, ei kal dpvdpots, GAN’ ody ere owe toils Tixovs Tis mpds 
nov mpordropa ovyyeveias. 1 O& ovyyévea tis; was dvOpwros Kara 
pay tiv Sidvoway BKetwrar doy Geiw, THS paxapias picews éxpayetov 

* The Pagan author of the Mep? iyous (ch. 9) quotes these words, and says that 
in them ‘ the lawgiver of the Jews, having formed an adequate conception of the 
Supreme Being, gave it adequate expression ’. 

2806-3 E 


50 ASCLEPIUS 


}) axéoracpa i) dravyacpa yeyovds, xara S& Tiv ToD odéparos Kata 
OKevIV, Grayte TO KOTpH’ CVYKEéKpaTat yap ex TOY avTdv, ys Kal Voaros 
kal dépos Kal aupds. 

[lex utraque natura in unum confundens miscensque 
quantum satis esse debuisset.]| These words picture the process 
of incorporation differently from the preceding phrase, ‘texit eum 
corporea domo’, and can hardly have stood in the same sentence 
with it. I have therefore transferred them to the following sentence. 
Cf. Asc/. Ill. 22b: ‘hominem . .. ex utraque natura conposuit, 
divina atque mortali.’ Lactantius Div. inst. 7. 13. 3 (Zestim.). 

Debuisset may have arisen out of guantum debuisset (doov 
e?), written as an alternative for guantum satis esset (8cov 
7npket?), 

[in]Jcolere atque gubernare terrena. Jncolere either is a 
misreading for co/ere, or is here used in the sense of colere, ‘to 
tend’, 

This sentence gives the writer’s answer to the question asked 
above, ‘What need was there that man should be embodied?’ In 
the Zimaeus, that question is answered only by saying that ‘if 
mortal beings be not created, the Kosmos will be incomplete’ 
(Zim. 418), and that the soul is implanted in the body é& dvdyxns. 
Some Platonists, following the tradition of Empedocles and the 
Pythagoreans, spoke of embodiment as a punishment which the 
soul has incurred by some sin committed in a previous stage of 
existence; and a similar doctrine is taught in the Kore Kosmu. 
Others said that the soul descends from the world above and enters 
the body of its own free will, or that it is drawn down to earth 
by morbid desire. But the writer of Asc/. I answers the question 
by saying ‘God willed that man should be embodied, in order 
that he might tend the things of earth’. Cicero, following some 
Greek authority of later date than Plato, suggests a similar answer ; 
Somn. Scip. 3. 7: ‘homines enim sunt hac lege generati, qui 
tuerentur (dvAdrrew ?) illum globum. . . quae terra dicitur.’ Cic. 
De sen. 21. 77: ‘Nam dum sumus inclusi in his compagibus corporis, 
munere quodam necessitatis et gravi opere perfungimur, Est enim 
animus caelestis, ex altissimo domicilio depressus et quasi demersus 
in terram, locum divinae naturae aeternitatique contrarium. Sed 
credo deos immortales sparsisse animos in corpora humana, ut 
essent qui terras tuerentur, quique caelestium ordinem contem- 
plantes imitarentur eum vitae modo atque constantia.’ Cic. Vat. 








ASCLEPIUS I: 8 51 


deor. 2. 39. 99 (probably from Posidonius), in a passage describing 
the beauties and splendours of the earth: ‘Quid iam de hominum 
genere dicam? qui quasi cultores terrae constituti non patiuntur 
eam nec immanitate beluarum efferari nec stirpium asperitate 
yastari, quorumque operibus agri, insulae litoraque collucent dis- 
tincta tectis et urbibus. Quae si, ut animis, sic oculis’ videre 
possemus, nemo cunctam intuens terram de divina ratione dubi- 
taret’ (No one would doubt that these things are ordained by 
God's design.) Cf. Sap. Sal. 9. 1: Océ,...5... 79 copia cov xara- 
oxevdcas avOpwrov iva Seordly trav td cod yevopévav KTicparwv, 
gat bern Tov Kéopov ev dovdryte Kal Sawctvy. Philo De opif. 

mundi 29. 88, Cohn I, p. 31: jvioxov 8) twa Kal KvBepriryv ep 
Gracw 6 roinTys eoypuovpye tov dvOpwrov, tva oxy Kal KxvBepve 
ra. replyea, CGwv cai dvtav AaBdv Thy éeryseAcav, old tis trapyxos 
rod mpwrov Kal peydrov Bacrhéws. The language of that passage 
closely resembles that of Asc/. 1; but the thought was suggested 
to Philo by Gen. 1. 26; kai dpxérwoay (oi dvOpwrot) trav ixGbwv rijs 
Gadrdcons Kal Tov werewSv Tod otpavod Kal TOv KTyvav Kal dons Tis 
yis Kal mdvtwv tov épmerdv tov éprévrwv éxt Tis ys. Some readers 
of Genesis may have found a similar meaning in Gen. 2. 15: Kal 
AaBev Kipwos 6 beds rév avOpwrov bv Exhacev wal e€ero aitov év 
7G rapadeiow, epydlerGar abrov Kal guddrrew. (For the word 
guddrrav, cf. Asc, I. 8: ‘quae pars terrena mundi artium disci- 
plinarumque . . . usu servatur.’ Ch, rra: ‘mundi inferioris 
necessitate servandi.’) Thus here again, the question of Jewish 
influence arises; and it is not impossible that the Hermetist, in 
his description of man’s earthly function, derived something from 
the Jewish Cosmogonia, as well as from Pagan writers such as 
Posidonius.? 

For a comprehensive discussion of the descent and embodiment 
of the soul, see Plotinus 4. 8. Plotinus says, zwfer adia, that the 
embodied soul xoopet re kat Stoixe? Kat apxe (rod per’ adryy, i.e. 
material things); and that it 7d xa@éxacrov pera meprotrdcews (with 
trouble) Sioixe?, eharropévy 75y Kal Oeparevovoa Ta eLwbev. 


1 We see with our eyes one little bit of the earth’s surface only. Our mental 
vision may include the whole; but if we could see it all with our bodily eyes, we 
should be more strongly impressed. 

2 It is conceivable even that Posidonius himself may have read the first two 
chapters of Gemesis, and may have been to some slight extent influenced by them. 
We know that in his time there were Jews of the Diasfora who were eager to 
communicate their sacred wisdom to their Gentile neighbours. 


E 2 





5% ASCLEPIUS 


commodationes alternae, quae est humanitatis inter se 
firmissimus nexus. An incidental recognition of human society, 
The mention of social ties between man and man is exceptional 
in the Hermetica. 

artium disciplinarumque cognitione atque ususervatur. In 
other words, the work of ¢@vcrs is incomplete until it is supplemented 
by réyv7. 

[Placitum enim dei... multo ante sciverit.] These two 
sentences are irrelevant in their present context. Voluntatem (det) 
comitatur effectus is a repetition of Voluntas det ipsa est summa 
perfectio above. The second sentence, JVegue enim .. . deo dis- 
plictturum esse &c., may be compared with natura ... producit 
cuncta det visibus plactura in ch. 3c jin. In place of guod 
placuit, something like guod jiat would have been more in- 
telligible. 

g. caeli vel quae in eo sunt dilectum ... vel cultum, 
The translator uses di/ectus as a synonym for diligentia (Oepameia). 
The Hermetist here speaks of worship of cae/um and the di cae/estes 
(sun, moon, and stars), and makes no mention of the deus summus ; 
yet below, speaking of the same sort of worship, he says that 
‘hominum cantilenis concelebratur laudibus qui solus omnia est’, 
His view seems to be that hymns addressed to the di caedestes are, 
in effect, a form of worship of the deus summus. Music such as he 
describes would probably be employed in congregational worship 
only; and it may be that, in the gatherings of the Hermetist’s 
community, hymns of this character were sung, not to God himself, 
but to his ministers, the astral gods. It was probably held that the 
supreme Deity could be directly approached only in private prayer 
and contemplation. 

In the temple-cults of Egypt, there was much singing of hymns. 
Among other forms of music employed in Egyptian worship, we 
hear of a practice of intoning the vowel-sounds in series. Demetrius 
Tlept éppyvetas 71: év Alytrrw 8% kal trois Oeois ipyvotor bia Trav 
Errd. puvnetwv ot lepeis, epets jxotvres abrd, Kal dvtt abdod xal 
Gvtl xBdpas rv ypappdrwy rovtwy 6 Hxos dxoverar im’ eiduvias. 
Many people (though not the writer of Asc/.1) attributed a theurgic 
efficacy to such vocal sounds; hence the groups of vowels which 
occur so frequently amidst the gibberish of the magic papyri, 
(Dieterich, Abraxas, p. 33.) 

Hane aliud animal non facit (fecit MSS.) nec divinorum 








ASCLEPIUS I: 9 53 


nec mortalium (animalium MSS.). Man is the only living 
being that worships ; the gods do not worship. This statement is 
contradicted elsewhere in the Hermetica. In Corp. I. 25, the 
disembodied soul hears ‘the Powers that are above the Ogdoad’ 
singing the praise of God; see also Corp. XIII. 15. In the Kore 
Kosmu (Exc. XXIII. 69) we are told that Osiris and Isis (deities 
residing for a time on earth) ‘invoked the Monarchos’ with a hymn ; 
xalpe yap tuvos 6 Oeds, In the documents of the old Egyptian 
religion, adoration of a god by gods is of frequent occurrence. 
Moreover, in Asc/, I, only a few lines below, there is mention of 
caelestes laudes, i.e. hymns sung in heaven, either by the dé caelestes, 
or by beatified human souls, or perhaps by both. It would be 
possible to get rid of the inconsistency by bracketing mec divinorum 
nec mortalium, and taking animad to refer to earthly beings only ; but 
that is hardly necessary. 

Musarum chorus. References to the deities of Hellenic 
mythology,—and indeed, to individual deities of any kind, other 
than the astral gods,—are rare in the Hermetica, with the exception 
of the Kore Kosmu. Here, the writer is using the language of Greek 
literary tradition ; the Muses are, to him, merely a personification 
of music; and it is probable that he no more regarded them as 
real living persons, than did Pope, when he wrote ‘ Descend, ye 
Nine, descend and sing’. 

ne terrenus mundus videretur incultior. Thus even the 
singing of hymns may, in a certain sense, be included in that part of 
man’s function which consists in ¢errae cudtus. 

Aliqui ... pura mente praediti. ‘Pure mind’ is vots which 
is not contaminated by the body in which it is encased, i.e. by 
the wd6y which the body generates. Cf. ch. 7b, ‘mentis purae 
sensibus’, Xen. Cyrop. 8. 7. 20: adAN Grav dxparos Kal Kafapds 6 
vows éxxpiOq7 (rod appovos odmatos), ToTe Kat ppovyywraroy adtov 
eixds elvat. 

In ch. 8, it was said of all men indifferently that God made them 
‘ex utraque natura in unum confundens miscensque’ &c. But here, 
it appears that some few men escape the confusio of the two 
substances which takes place in the many, and preserve their vots 
unmixed. 

(in) inferiorem intellegentiam mole corporis resederunt. 
The inferior sort of zéelligentia (vdnows?) here spoken of must be 
_ that which is employed in the arts and sciences by means of which 


54 ASCLEPIUS 


men ‘tend the things of earth’. In this passage, men are divided 
into two classes,—-the few, whose function is 76 ra otpdvia Ocparevewy, 
and the many, whose function is rb ra émiyeu Oeparevew. But in 
what precedes and follows, it seems to be implied that it is every 
man’s business to do both. 

curandis elementis hisque inferioribus. Does infertoribus 
mean ‘the things of the lower world’ in general, or ‘the lower 
elements’, earth and water? If the latter, perhaps -gue ought to be 
struck out. 

10. Rationem vero tractatus istius &c. At this point Hermes 
makes a fresh start (Ainc exordiar), and calls on his pupil to listen 
with exceptional attention. What is the doctrine (rajio, Aéyos,) 
which these prefatory words are intended to introduce? It must 
be something which has not yet been spoken of; and for this 
reason, it cannot be anything contained in ch. 10, which is little 
more than a recapitulation of what has gone before. It must 
therefore be the new doctrine taught in ch. rra, namely, that in 
order to discharge his function rightly, a man must renounce private 
property. The truths stated in ch. ro are set forth for the purpose 
of leading up to this conclusion. The doctrine spoken of is plurimis 
incredibilis ; i.e. it is rejected by the many, but accepted and 
acted upon by the saintly few who renounce all earthly posses- 
sions. 

Aeternitatis dominus deus primus est, secundus est 
mundus, homo est tertius. Cf. Herm. af. Stob. Zxc. XI. 2. (6): 
mparov & eds, devrepov 6 Kdcpos, tpirov 6 dvOpwmros. Corp. X. 14b: 
tpia toivw raira, 6 Oeds . . . Kal 5 xdopos kal 6 dvOpwros, For 
aeternitatis dominus, see Ascl. III. 29 c—32 . 

ut sit ipse et mundus uterque ornamento sibi. Man’s 
function is 76 tov Kécpov koopety; and the man who fulfils this 
function Koopetra:, or becomes xéopu0s. The word Kéopyos might 
mean either ‘ setting in order’ or ‘ beautifying’; the translator took 
it in the latter sense, and rendered it by ornamentum. Perhaps he 
was right ; cf. ch. 1rb: ‘(mundi) pulchritudinem qui diligentia 
servat atque auget.’ 

Conpositio perhaps stands for cvyxéopyors; if so, there is here a 
second play on the word xdécpos. 

Is novit se. He fulfils the precept yi ceavrdv. Novit et 
mundum ; he understands the Kosmos, and stands in a friendly 
relation to it; cf. ch. 6a: ‘daemonum genus novit.’ 





ASCLEPIUS I: to 55 


j 





































cuius sunt imagines duae mundus et homo. The Kosmos 
is elxdov Tod Oeod. Cf. Ascl. III. 27 a, ‘eius imago mundus’; Cor. 
“VIII. 2; XU. ii. 15b; V. 25 XI. ii, rga. In the Zimaeus, the 
sensible Kosmos is described as the son of God, but as an ‘image’, 
or visible copy, of the voyrés xdapos. Later Platonists regarded the 
yonros xécpos as constituted by God’s thought, and included in 
_ his being, and accordingly called the sensible Kosmos an ‘image 
of God’. 

Man also is an image of God. See note on divinae similitudinis 
formam, ch. 7 b. But in that passage, it was the immortal part of 
man alone that was said to be made in the likeness of God. Here, 
on the other hand, the writer is speaking of man as a composite 
being (conpago), and the notion that he is an image of God seems 
to be based on the conception of man as a microcosm.’ If man 
is an image of the Kosmos, and the Kosmos is an image of God, 
man must be ‘a second image of God’. 

The thought that man is zmago mundi is elaborated by Firmicus 
Maternus the astrologer (about a. D. 340), Math. 3 prooem.: ‘scire 
itaque nos... oportet . . . quod ad imaginem speciemque mundi 
formam hominis ac statum totamque substantiam deus ille fabricator 
hominis natura monstrante perfecerit; mam corpus hominis, ut 
mundi, ex quattuor elementorum commixtione composuit, ignis 
‘scilicet et aquae, aeris et terrae, ut omnium istorum coniunctio 
temperata animal ad formam divinae imitationis ornaret; et ita 
hominem artificio divinae fabricationis composuit, ut in parvo 
‘corpore omnem elementorum vim atque substantiam natura cogente 
conferret, ut divino illi spiritui, qui ad sustentationem mortalis 
corporis ex caelesti mente descendit, licet fragile, sed tamen simile 
‘mundo pararet hospitium. Hac ex causa hominem quasi minorem 
quendam mundum stellae quinque, sol etiam et luna, ignita ac 
‘sempiterna agitatione sustentant, ut animal quod ad imitationem 
‘mundi factum est simili divinitatis substantia gubernetur’. The 
philosophic doctrines of Firmicus are for the most part derived from 
Stoic sources. 


__ 2 The statement that man isa puxpds kéopos is attributed to Democritus (Diels 

Vorsokr. p. 398). The view that man ought to be a microcosm is expressed in 
Philo Vita Mosis 2 (3). 14. 135, Cohn IV, p. 231: mpodiBdoner tov Tod Oeod Oepa- 
nevriv, ci kad ph Tov Kooponotod buvardv, GAG Tot Ye xdapov Sinvex@s agcov elvat 
meipacba, of 7d plynua evovdpevos dpeirer, TH dravoig rd mapdderypa ebOds dyad- 
Haropopay, adtds rpdmov Twa mpds Ty Tod KdopoU prow ef dvOpdmov peOnppdabai, 
nal, et Oéus eineiv, .. . Bpaxds edopos evar. 


56 ASCLEPIUS 


(Nam ut homo , . . esse formatum)). This sentence is 
manifestly out of place in ch. 11a, where it stands in the MSS. ; 
and it supplies precisely what is needed here to lead on to what 
follows. In order to establish an analogy between the pars divina 
hominis and the pars mortalis, the writer splits up the former into 
four constituent parts, which he calls animus (Sudvova ?), senses (vods), 
Spiritus (xvetpa), and ratio (déyos). It would be useless to ask what 
precise meaning he attached to each of the four terms, and how 
he distinguished them from one another 3 it was enough to serve his 
purpose that four substantives could be found which were applicable 
to the higher part of man. 

The division of the divina pars hominis into four parts is in 
direct contradiction to the preceding statement in ch. 7 b, ‘eius una 
pars simplex’; and for this reason, it seems probable that the 
passage containing this futile conceit of four quasi-elements of which 
the mind is composed has been inserted by a later hand, and that 
the transposition of nam uf... esse JSormatum to ch. 11a was 
subsequent to the interpolation of the passage in ch. 10. The 
original text may perhaps have run thus: ‘se etiam secundam esse 
imaginem dei. Unde efficitur ut parte divina inscendere posse 
videatur in caelum, parte vero mundana mortalis resistat in terra’ 
&c. In confirmation of this hypothesis, it is to be noted that a 
new and different meaning is here given to the word Spiritus. The 
‘spirit’ spoken of, since it belongs to the pars divina, must be 
avedpa in the Jewish and Christian sense, i.e. something nearly 
equivalent to the Platonic and Hermetic vovs, and entirely different 
from the material zvetya of the Stoics, composed of the two elements 
fire and air, which was mentioned in ch. 6 b, and is spoken of in 
Ase. III inst. 

Ila. Est autem mensura eius utriusque...religio. Mensura 
(uérpov) must here be understood in the sense of cupiperpia or 
dppovia, i.e, the due proportion or right adjustment of the two parts 
to one another. In the pious man, and in him alone, the pars 
mundana is rightly subordinated to the pars divina. 

ab omnibus cognationis divinae partibus aliena. What are 
the ‘parts’ of the divine kinship? The phrase is obscure, and 
probably corrupt. Perhaps the original reading may have been 
cognitionis divinae (rijs Ocias yvicews). 

quaecunque terrena ... possidentur. See ch. rza, * qui 
capitur de possessionibus fructus’. He who would live the higher 








ASCLEPIUS I: ira 57 


life must ‘scorn earthly possessions’; i.e. he must renounce private 
property. A man who acted on this principle might maintain life 
either asa labourer employed by others and earning his keep by 
daily work, or as a mendicant living on the gifts of others, or as a 
member of a society which held property in common. It seems 
most likely that the mode of life which the writer recommends is that 
of a communistic brotherhood, and that he himself was a member 
of such a brotherhood. In Egypt, religious societies of this 
character existed in pre-Christian times; and the Christian monas- 
ticism which arose there in the fourth century was a continuation 
of habits of life which had long been established in that country. 
The Therapeutae described by Philo are a communistic brother- 
hood of Jews living near Alexandria. Philostratus (Vita Apollon. 
6. 6 ff.) describes a community of Gymni (Pagan theosophists) 
living near the southern border of Egypt. His narrative of the 
yisit of Apollonius to the Gymni, though professedly based on the 
written record of an eye-witness, cannot be accepted as historical ; 
but it is good evidence for the existence of such societies in the 
time of Philostratus, soon after A.D. 200. A member of the 
community of Gymni says (id. 6. 16) petpdxtov yevdpevos Ta pev 
rarpoa Tois Bovopévors ddijxa, yupvds 88 Tupvois érepotryca rovrors, 
2. . ue 88 véov éru . . . dvra xaréActav és 7d abrév Kowdy. Plutarch 
(Defect. orac. 21, 421 f.) describes a Pagan hermit, who lived in 
solitude on the shore of the Red Sea, and held Pythagorean or 
Platonic doctrines. But as the writer of Asc/. I, while disapproving 
of private property, at the same time speaks with approval of social 
ties, and of agriculture and other forms of wealth-producing labour, 
it may be inferred that he favoured a communistic rather than 
a solitary life ; and the manner of living which he advocates would 
seem to be something like that of the Essenes of Palestine, who 
held no property as individuals, but laboured with their hands, and 
put the proceeds into a common stock. (See Schiirer, Gesch. des 
jiid. Volkes, ed. 4, vol. ii, p. 651 ff.) 

Ut enim meum animum rationis ducit intentio. Note the 
emphasis on meum, The words are hardly appropriate in the 
mouth of the inspired and infallible teacher Hermes ; the writer is 
here speaking in his own person, and expressing an opinion 
held by him, but not shared by some of those with whom he has 
to do. 

homo hactenus esse debuit. Homo here signifies medietate 


58 ASCLEPIUS 


generis sui contentus. The men who thus acquiesce in their earthly 
condition are called Awmani in ch. 5. Cf. Ar. Eth. Nic. 10. 7: 
et 89 Oeiov 6 vods mpos Tov dvOpwrov, kal 6 Kata rotrov Bios Oetos 
mpos Tov dvOpirwov Biov' ob xp S& Kara rods mapawotvras évOpi-~ 
awa gpovely dvOpwrov dvta, ob8& Ovyta tov Ovyrdv, GAN ed’ Scoy 
evdéxerar GBavarifew. Aristotle is here in close agreement with 
Plato; see Pl. Zim. 908 f., xa? dcov peracyeiv dvOpwrivy dicts 
dbavacias évdexerat, x.7.d, 

contemplatione divinitatis. The meaning would be clearer 
if some participle such as conjisus (merous) were added, Cf. ch. 
6a, ‘humanae naturae partem in se ipse despicit, alterius partis 
divinitate confisus.’ 

[Nam ut homo .. . atque suspiciat.] This passage has 
nothing to do with the context. The first part of it (‘nam ut homo 
- + . esse formatum’) seems to have been placed here by mistake. 
The second part (‘manibus . .. suspiciat’) cannot have been 
written by the same person who wrote ‘parte ((divina)), quae ex 
animo et sensu, spiritu atque ratione est’in ch. 10. It is a second, 
and still more inappropriate, attempt to find an analogy between 
the pars divina hominis and the pars mundana. Of the four parts 
into which the gars divina is here divided, two, viz. ratio and sensus 
(if my correction is right), are the same as in ch. 10, but the two 
others are different (memoria and providentia in place of animus 
and sfiritus); and instead of enumerating the four e/ements of which 
the pars mundana is composed, the writer enumerates the four 
members with which it is equipped for its work, viz. two hands and 
two feet. The passage may be conjecturally accounted for in this 
way. The words ‘nam ut homo... esse formatum’ were acci- 
dentally shifted from ch. 10 to ch, rz a, and thus separated from the 
explanation which originally followed them ; and a redactor, reading 
them here, and rightly thinking that an enumeration of four parts 
of mind and body respectively was needed to complete the. 
statement, tried to supply what was lacking by his own invention. 

[Unde efficitur ut ... non possit.} The contents of this 
sentence are cognate with those of ch. 13 #wit., ‘in varias . . . et 
geometriam’. It may have been written by the author of Asc. I, 
but transposed from its proper place by some accident. 

11b, tali ministerio obsequioque praepositum. The mini- 
sterium is 4 tov évyewv Oepareia; the obseguium is 4 rdv obpaviwy 
Oeparreia. 








ASCLEPIUS I: 11b 59 


parentes nostri. Who are the ‘parents’ of Hermes and 
Asclepius? In Asci. III. 37, we are told that Hermes the teacher 
is a grandson of the god Thoth-Hermes, and Asclepius the pupil is 
a grandson of the god Imhotep-Asclepius. But we cannot be sure 
that the writer of Asc/. I would have given precisely the same 
account of the matter. Possibly he considered the teacher and 
pupil to be sons of the gods whose names they bore. At any rate, 
it is assumed that the parents lived on earth as men before they 
‘returned to heaven’, or became gods. The teacher and pupil are 
descended from an indefinite series of human ancestors; they are 
now men such as their parents once were; and if they earn a like 
reward, they will, after death, be gods, or beatified souls, such as 
their parents now are. In Corp. X. 5, the teacher Hermes speaks of 
Uranos and Kronos (i.e. the Egyptian gods Shu and Seb) as his 
ancestors. See Lactant. Div. inst. 1. 11. 61 (Zestim.), 

@ivinae pietati. For piefas in the sense of ‘mercy’ or ‘loving- 
kindness’, cf. Asc/. III. 22 b fiz.: ‘diique etiam pio affectu humana 
omnia respiciunt.’ Augustine C7v. dei 10. 1: ‘pietas quoque proprie 
dei cultus intellegi solet, quam Graeci eioé@eoy vocant. . . . More 
autem vulgi hoc nomen etiam in operibus misericordiae frequentatur : 
.. . ex qua loquendi consuetudine factum est ut et Deus ipse dicatur 
pius; quem sane Graeci nullo suo sermonis usu eivoe8 vocant, 
quamvis etoéBeay pro misericordia illorum etiam vulgus usurpet ie 

exutos mundana custodia. Does mundana custodia mean ‘ our 
guardianship of the material world’, or ‘our imprisonment in the 
material world’? (For the latter, cf. Lactant. Dro. inst. 2. 8. 68: 
‘corpore quasi custodia saeptum tenetur’.) The notion of ‘ guardian- 
ship’ agrees better with the prevailing thought of the treatise; and 
_ the writer has previously described the body as a shelter (domus) for 
the vods, and not asa prison, But on the other hand, the following 
word nexihus comes nearer to the notion of imprisonment. 

naturae (dative) superioris partis... restituat. We should 
have expected rather ‘in naturalem sedem superioris partis’ (i. e. to 
heayen, the native home of the vois), in contrast to ‘reditus denegatur 
in caelum’ below. Cf. Ased. III. 37, ‘reliquus (homo) . . . remeavit 
in caelum’. If the text is sound, the meaning must be ‘ restore us 
_ to the natural condition of our higher part’. For the dative after 
vestituat, in place of the more usual 7 with acc., cf. Plin. M ZH. 
20, 6, 23. 51, ‘ulcera sanitati restituens’, Thomas adopts Kroll’s 
emendation, zafwrae (gen.) superioris parti, which might be rendered 


60 ASCLEPIUS 


‘to the region of the higher substance’. For favs in this sense, 
cf. ch. 7c, ‘in ea parte, qua deus est, (hominem) in surnma beati- 
tudine degere’. The writer of Asc/. I, no doubt, held that God is 
not in space ; but even those who were convinced of this could not 
avoid using traditional phrases in which God was spoken of as 
dwelling in or above the highest heaven. 

12a. in corpora alia, indigna (neut. plur.) animo sancto, [et] 
foeda (fem. sing.) migratio. The wicked are punished after death 
by reincarnation in bestial bodies. Beasts have no vots; and those 
who have not rightly used the vots bestowed on them as men, are 
condemned to a life devoid of vots. The writer has taken over this 
doctrine from some Platonic authority, and has failed to notice its 
inconsistency with the position maintained by him in the rest of 
Ascl, I. Down to this point, we have been given to understand that 
the vois is the only part of man which is immortal, and that not only 
the body, but the lower part of the soul also, perishes at death; yet 
here it appears that there is in man something other than vods which 
survives death. The soul which is reincarnated in the body of a 
beast must be wholly deprived of vots; yet in that condition it 
continues to exist, and retains its personality. 

In Asc?. III. 28, where punishment after death is discussed, there 
is no mention of reincarnation. In Kore Kosmu, Stob. Exc. XXIII. 
39, it is said that sinners will be punished by reincarnation in bestial 
bodies. The same doctrine is asserted in Corp. X. 8a, but denied 
%. 19b-22 a, It is derived from Plato, who adopted from the 
Pythagoreans the theory of the transmigration of human souls into 
the bodies of beasts. According to Herodotus (2. 123), ‘the 
Egyptians were the first to teach the doctrine that the human soul 
is immortal, and that when the body perishes, the soul enters some 
other animal that is born at the time, and having passed through the 
whole circle of animals of land and sea and air, again enters a human 
body at birth. It traverses this cycle of births, they say, in three 
thousand years’. Herodotus adds ‘there are certain Greeks, some 
of earlier and some of later date, who adopted this doctrine, and 
announced it as their own; I know their names, but I will not 
mention them’. The Greeks of whom Herodotus is thinking, or at 
any rate the most prominent among them, must be Pythagoras and 
Empedocles. But it is not clear from his words whether he had 
himself met with Egyptians who taught this doctrine, or whether he 
was only repeating a tradition that Pythagoras had learnt his doctrine 





’ 





ASCLEPIUS I: 12a 61 


of transmigration from Egyptians. There is nothing intrinsically 
improbable in the hypothesis that in Herodotus’ time there were 
some Egyptians who held something resembling the Pythagorean 
doctrine of transmigration ; but as far as I know, there is no positive 
evidence that it was so. By the time when the Hermetica were 
written, Greek writings in which this doctrine was taught had been 
known for centuries in Egypt, and it was unquestionably from Greek 
teachers that the Hermetists learnt it.) See Pl. Phaedo 81 & ff: 
Phaedrus 249 8: Rep. 10. 620: Tim. 42 c and 91 D ff. In the 
Phaedo, it is said that the impure soul is drawn into an earthly body 
by its craving for bodily things, and thus co-operates in its own 
imprisonment ; and in the Republic and the Phaedrus, we are told 
that the soul is permitted to choose freely the form of its next 
embodiment on earth. Plutarch, in the earlier part of the Vision of 
Thespesius (De sera numinis vindicta 565%), agrees with Pl. Phaedo 
in speaking of reincarnation in an animal body as resulting from the 
soul’s own cravings. In this part of the Vision, Plutarch has probably 
been influenced by Posidonius. But later on in the same vision 
(567 Eff.), where he is following a different authority, Plutarch speaks 
of wicked souls as condemned to reincarnation in animal bodies by 
a higher Power, and forged into new shapes by daemons to fit them 
for this compulsory embodiment. 
futurae aeternitatis spe. Aeéernifas cannot here mean existence 
through endless time ; for it must be something which is granted to 
he pious alone. We have just been told that the wicked as well 
as the pious survive death; and if the soul does not perish at the 
death of the body, it may be presumed that it continues to exist for 
ever? If that is so, wicked souls, as well as pious souls, are 
everlasting; and the ‘eternity’ which is in prospect for the pious 
alone must mean a life freed from the limitations of existence in 
time. Aefernitas is the mode of God’s existence, and in this 
connexion the word is equivalent to divinifas. The pious man will 
be a god, or will live the life of a god. See Asc. III. 29 c—32 a. 
aliis incredibile, aliis fabulosum, aliis forsitan videatur esse 
deridendum. How are these three classes of men to be distin- 
1 Cf, Plut. Zs. ef Os. 31, buxds dvociow dvOpdnaw . . . els Erepa peTapoppoupevav 
atpora, Plutarch there seems to attribute the doctrine to Egyptian priests; but 
his evidence on such a matter is not of much weight. 

2 Tt is true that this does not necessarily follow ; and according to some of the 
Stoics, individual souls may survive death, but their individual existence will 


necessarily cease at the ecpyrosis, if not before. But no such doctrine as that was 
taught by Platonists. 


a 


62 ASCLEPIUS 


guished? Perhaps the first sort are those who cannot convince 
themselves that the doctrine is true; the second, those who hold it 
to be manifestly false ; the third, those who make light of it, because 
the promise of ae/ernitas has no attraction for them. These last do 
not want to live as gods; they prefer the life of beasts. 

animam obtorto... detinet collo. Cf. Corp. X. 24a: (6 voids) 
katadetre. tiv [év] 7G cdpare mpoonptypevyv Kal tx abrod dyxouéevny 
kato (Wuyi). 

ut in parte sui qua mortalis est inhaereat (sc.anima). ‘The 
part of the soul in respect of which it is mortal’ must be the 
mabyrixov pépos (which is the Ovyrév eldos Yuxns of Pl. Zim.). But 
if this part is mortal, the wicked soul must be wholly mortal, and 
could not survive to be reincarnated in the body of a beast. 
Moreover, it is awkward to say that the soul ‘sticks in a part of 
itself’. The meaning intended might have been better expressed by 
writing ‘in parte hominis qua mortalis est (homo)’, i.e. the body and 
the bodily affections. 

12b. partem divinitatis agnoscere. ars divinitatis is ‘that 
part of man which consists in dfvinifas’, i.e. the divine part, namely, 
the vots. The aim of philosophic teaching in the true sense is to 
make men aware of the existence in them of this divine part, and to 
lead them to recognize its claim to supremacy in their thoughts and 
lives. But the perverted philosophy of which the Hermetist here 
proceeds to speak, so far from helping men to attain to the higher 
life, shuts them off from it. In his indignation against the false 
philosophers, the writer charges them with deliberately aiming at the 
evil which he holds to result from their way of teaching; ‘they grudge 
men access to the divine life’ (¢nvidens inmortalitate malignitas). 
Inmortalitas here means the same as aezernitas above, viz. the life 
of agod. The meaning might be more clearly expressed by writing 
(quorumdam) malignitas. The MSS. give inmortalitati; but the 
dative hardly yields the sense required, and it seems better to read 
either inmortalitate or -tatem or -tatis. 

quasi praedivinans dixero. The philosophic teaching which 
the writer is criticizing is that of his own time; and he introduces a 
reference to his own time into the dialogue by putting a prediction 
into the mouth of the prehistoric teacher, as in the Prophecy, Ase/. 
III. 24 b-26a. In a prediction, the verbs must be in the future 
tense; we must therefore read efficient, confundent, in place of the 
presents given in the MSS. 





ASCLEPIUS I: 12b-13 63 


1g. in varias disciplinas .. . eam (sc. philosophiam) ... 
miscentes, dpOpnrichy et musicen et geometriam. Cf. Porphyr. 
De abst, 1. 29: ob torw 7 eddapovuch jpiv Oewpia Aoywv abpowors kal 
pobnpdrwv wripos, + + - otS év 7G rood tov Aéywv AapBaver ri 
éridocw" otrw yap obdev ay éxddvey robs wav pdOnpa cuvdyovtas elvau 
ebdaipovas. viv 8 odx dws ray pdOnpa ovpaxdnpot rHv Oewpiav, adr’ 
od8t 7a repl Tav dvrws dvtwv, éav pip mpory Kal 7 Kaz’ aira pvoiwors 
kal or}... . hpiv rd tuxeiv ris Tod dvtos Gewpias ro Tédos, Tijs TevEews 
rerovoys THY... otppvow TE Oewpodtvr. Kal Oewpovpévy. Euseb. 
Praep. ev. 14. 10. 10: the Pagan philosophers wepipépovew avw Kat 
xdétw Opvdrodvres Ta pabjpara, Sty é daravros pdoKovres Tois peAovTas 
& reipa ris Tod dAnOods Karadyyews yiverGar perehOciv dorpovopiar, 
dpOpyrixiy, -yewperpiav, povoikiv ... TovTwy yap dvev ph divacGat 
Aywov dvbpa Kai prdcogov droredeo Ova, GAN ovde THs Tov dvTwV 
édnOelas Yatoa, pa tovrwv év Yuxy Tis yvorews potvrwbeions® er 
eravorewdpevor TH padre tov eipnpévov éx’ abtod povovovyl rod aibépos 
| Batvew peréwpor dpbévres olovrat, ds 8% Tov Gedy adrov év Trois dp.O pois 
meppéporvres’ Has te, Ste phy Ta Spore Lyrodpev, Booxnpdrwv kar’ ovdev 
Suahepew Hyotvrat, ratry S€ hace pnd Gedv pydé te Tov Gepvay Hpas 
Bivacbat eidévar.... (6 & &ANOHS Adyos) Tods pev ody Tois eipypévors 
pabjpacw ovre Gedy otre cdppova Biov otf dhus ru rv Pedtiotev kal 
copdepsvtov éxcyvovras daodetEer, robs 8& tov pabnpdtwv éxtds wdvTwv 
cioeBeatdrous kal ditocopwrdrous yeyovévat. In support of his con- 
tention, Eusebius quotes the opinion of Socrates reported in Xen. 
Mem. 4. 7. 3, ff: 73 88 péype tov Svoéwéerwy Siaypappdrov yewperpiav 
pavOdvew dmedoxipaey x... The attitude of Augustine towards the 
physical sciences was similar ; e, g. Confess. 5. 4: ‘infelix enim homo 
qui scit illa omnia (sc, astronomy), te autem nescit; beatus autem 
qui te scit, etiamsi illa nesciat. Qui vero et te et illa novit, non 
propter illa beatior, sed propter te solum beatus est.’ 

The Hermetist’s polemic seems to be directed chiefly against the 
publicly recognized teachers of Platonism in Alexandria, whom he 
blames for their adherence to the traditional maxim of the Platonic 
school, pndeis d-yewpérpytos <icirw. Compare the saying ascribed to 
Plato, 6 Geds det yewperpe?, discussed in Plut. Quaest. conviv, 8, 2. 1, 
718 c, where Plato’s view of the value of geometry as a preparation 
for philosophy is thus summarized ; drep airs (6 [Adrwv) cipne Kat 
yéypade wodddxis, Suvdv yewperpiay, ds droorScay mpocwxopevous TH 
alcOjoe, Kal drootpéhovcay éxt tiv voyriv Kal didiov piow, js bea 
tédos éorl ditocodias, x.r.A. Diog. Laert. 4. 2. 10 says of Xenocrates, 





64 ASCLEPIUS 


mpos 88 rov pijre poverty pajre yewperpiay pire dorpovopiay pepabyKdra, 
Bovdspevov 8& wap’ adrov porrav’ Topevov, én’ AaPas yap obk exes 
¢rocopias. Theon of Smyrna, a Platonist of the time of Hadrian, 
wrote a work Tept rav cara padqpatixiy xpyoipwr eis tiv Tod TAarwvos 
dvéyvoow. The Platonist Taurus, who taught at Athens early in the 
second century A. D., spoke with approval of the strict gradation of 
studies which was said to have been insisted on by the early Pytha- 
goreans, and added (Aul. Gell. 1. 9), ‘nunc autem isti, qui repente 
pedibus inlotis ad philosophos devertunt, non est hoc satis, quod 
sunt omnino dGedpyror, duovcol, d&yewperpyro., sed legem etiam dant, 
qua philosophari discant. Alius ait “hoc me primum doce”; item 
alius “hoc volo” inquit “discere, illud nolo”.’ The attitude of 
Taurus is precisely that which the writer of Ase. I condemns. 
Justin, Dial. c. Tryph. 2, says that a Pythagorean teacher, to whom 
he applied for instruction (about a. D. 125), refused to take him as a 
pupil, because he had not learnt music, astronomy, and geometry, 
Cf. Numenius ap. Euseb. Pr. ev. 11. 22. 2, quoted in prefatory note 
on Corp. Il. 

In speaking of the cad/ida commentatio of this class of teachers, the 
Hermetist may have had in mind, in/er alia, the aberrations of those 
Pythagorizing Platonists who attached an occult significance to the 
properties of numbers and geometrical figures. Plato’s Socrates, 
when his Muses revealed the secret of the mystic number, was well 
aware that they were only joking (as zpés waidas fas walovcas Kat 
epeaxndovcas, Pl. Rep. 8. 545); but the less enlightened followers 
of Plato were apt to mistake such recondite jests for solemn truths ; 
and even leading thinkers wasted many pages in expounding the 
holy mysteries of the number ten, and similar matters. The authors 
of the religious Hermetica, as far as appears from their extant writings, 
kept themselves free from the influence of this quaint superstition. 
The writer of Asc/. I must have known it to be widely prevalent in 
the Neo-Pythagorean and Platonic schools of his time; and his 
hostility to ‘arithmetic’ may have been increased by his repugnance 
to this misapplication of it. 

Musice here means the scientific theory of music, and has nothing 
in common with the music employed in hymn-singing, which was 
spoken of in ch. 9 as a gift from heaven. 

ut apocatastasis astrorum ... numeris constare miretur. 
This is the right use of arithmetic. As to the word apocatastasis, 
see Corp, VIII. 4 and XI. i. 2. dwoxardoraois is a technical term 





ASCLEPIUS I: 13 65 


of astronomy. It signified, firstly, the return of a particular planet 
to a position which it had previously occupied relatively to the 
fixed stars or to some other planet (droxardoracis dorépos Twds). 
It occurs in this sense in Pseudo-Pl. Axtochus 370 c, and in Plut. 
Fac. in orbe lunae 24. 5,937¥. Cf Cleomedes De motu circ. corp. 
cael. 2.73 “Adpodirn 8% cis rairév droxabicrarat airg (sc. 73 Hriw) 
8¢ jpepav xd" ‘the planet Venus returns to the same position 
relatively to the sun at intervals of 584 days’. Philo De opif. mundi 
34. ror, Cohn I, p. 35: the number twenty-eight dmoxaracratixds 
éort oedjvys’ i.e. it is the number of days from one new moon to 
another. Secondly, the term was used to signify the return of ai/ 
the planets together to the same relative positions as before (droxara- 
gracis Tévtwv TOV dorépwr, OF &. Tod wavTds). The period at the 
end of which an afocafastaszs in this sense took place was called a 
‘great year’, See Pl. Zim. 39D; Cic. Wat. deor. 2. 20. 513; Cic. 
Rep. 6. 22; Cic. Hort. fr. 26; Aetius, Diels Doxogr. p. 363. The 
duration of a ‘great year’ was variously reckoned at 9,977 years 
(Sext. Emp. Asfrol. 5. 105), 12,954 years (Cicero), 300,000 years 
(Firmicus Maternus), &c. Some Stoic borrowed from the astronomers 
-the conception of an apocatastasis of all the planets together, and 
combined it with the Stoic doctrine of a periodical ecpyrosis and 
renewal of the universe ; and thus in the usage of the later Stoics 
dmwoxardéoracis came to be equivalent to wadiyyevesia (rod Kécpov). 
See note on mundi regenttura in Ascl. III. 26a, ‘The Stoics’ in 
Arius Didymus, Diels Doxogr. p. 469; Sen. Vat. guaest. 3. 29. 1; 
Nemesius De nat. hom. c. 38, p. 277 (Arnim Svo. Vet. I, p. 190). 
The phrase apt xpévwv droxararrécews rdévrwv, which occurs in the 
speech attributed to Peter in Acés 3. 21, must have been derived 
from a Stoic source. 

The Hermetist is here speaking of the droxaracrdces of the 
planets severally, which occur at short intervals, and can be observed 
within one man’s lifetime, and not of the droxardcracis Tod ravtds. 
The observer finds that the movements of the heavenly bodies agree 
with his calculations (mwmeris constare), and are thus proved to be 
determined by invariable laws. The heavenly bodies are the 
administrators by whose agency God governs the lower world; 
and to recognize the regularity of their movements is to recognize 
the immutability of the divine laws by which all corporeal things 
are governed. 

stationes praefinitas cursu(ujmque commutationes. These 

2806°3 F 





66 ASCLEPIUS 


words refer to the variations in the apparent movements of the 
planets. Cf. Cic. Wat. deor. 2. 20. 51 (from Posidonius): ‘maxime 
vero sunt admirabiles motus earum quinque stellarum quae falso 
vocantur errantes. Nihil enim errat, quod in omni aeternitate 
conservat progressus et regressus reliquosque motus constantes et 
ratos. Quod eo est admirabilius in his stellis quas dicimus, quia 
tum occultantur, tum rursus aperiuntur, tum adeunt, tum recedunt, 
tum antecedunt, tum autem subsequuntur, tum celerius moventur, 
tum tardius, tum omnino ne moventur quidem, sed ad quoddam 
tempus insistunt’ Sen. Jat. guaest. 7.25: ‘quae (sint) stationes 
(of the planets), quando in rectum ferantur, quare agantur retro, 
modo coepimus scire.’ The sfatro (ordors) of a planet is the point 
at which it remains for a time apparently stationary. 

terrae vero dimensiones, [[qualitates, quantitates, |] maris 
profunda, (aeris . . .,) ignis vim. Air must have been mentioned 
together with the three other elements. Quantitaies, in this position, 
is a superfluous repetition of dimensiones; and there is no reason 
why gualitates should be mentioned in the case of earth alone, and 
not in the case of water, air, and fire. I have therefore transposed 
qualitates, quantitates to the following clause. Hlorum omntum 
means, I think, not ‘all these four elements’, but ‘all things around 
us’. Investigation of the gwalitates, guantitates, and effectus of 
material things may be taken to mean study of natural science in 
general. 

The writer of Asc/. I is not wholly hostile to natural science. 
He recognizes the value of science in its practical applications 
(‘artium disciplinarumque cognitio’, ch. 8), as a means whereby 
man is enabled to fulfil his function of ‘tending the earth’; and 
he does not wholly reject the study of theoretic science. He 
considers it mischievous in so far as it turns men’s thoughts away 
from God to lower things, and blocks the way to the true gnosis ; 
but on the other hand, he holds that such studies, when pursued 
in the right spirit, may serve a good purpose, by evoking and 
heightening religious fervour (‘ut . . . cognoscens miretur, adoret 
atque conlaudet artem mentemque divinam_’). This use of natural 
science is suggested in Pl. Zim. 694; and a similar thought was 
expressed in a paragraph of Aristotle’s dialogue De philosophia, 
reproduced in Cic. (Vat. deor. 2. 37- 95; and summarized in 
Sext. Emp. Math. 3. 20-22. Cf. Philo Zeg. alleg. 3. 32. 97, Cohn 


I, p. 134: efjryoay ol mparor, wOs evoroapev 7d Getov. «l6’ ot 








ASCLEPIUS I: 13 67 


Soxodvres dpiota piiocodely ebacay, Sri awd TOD KoopoU Kat TOY pepo 
atrod Kat tov évurapxovodv tovras Swdyewy avn érounoducba 
rod airiov. domep yap, el ris ior Sednpwovpyypevyy oixiav éemipehds 
. sy Gwotay Ajeras Tod Texvirov, . . . ovtws Of Kal eioeAOdy Tis 
Gomep cis peyloryy oixiay i) woAW TOvde TOV KOcMOV, Kat Oeardpevos 
ovpaviv pev év Kixhw wrepirodoivra Kal wévra évtds cuvednddra, 
mravqras 8 kal drhaveis dorépas Kara. raid Kal doavrws Kvoupevos 
eupedas te Kal évappovins Kat tG ravrl dphedipws, yi 88 rv pérov 
xepov Aaxoicav, Bards re kal dépos xdoes ev pcOopiy reraypévas, 
&e St LGa Ovytd re ad Kat dGdvara, Kal purdv Kai xaprav duadopds, 
Noytetrar Syrov, ore tatra odk dvev réxvys wavrehods deSnwiodpyyrar, 
é\Aa xal jv Kal Eorw 5 rodde rod wavrds Syuwovpyds 5 Beds. of SH 
otrws érvoy:fopuevor Ok oKias Tov Ocdv xaradapBdvovor, Sia Tov 
Epywv tov texvirnv xatavootyres. Similarly, Paul, Zp. Rom. 1. 19, 
says of the Pagans, 7d yvwordy rod Geod davepdv éorw ev atrois, 6 
Geis yap atrois épavépwrey, ta yap ddpara abrod dxd xKricews 
Koopov Tois Toinpacw vootpeva Kaboparat, i Te didios abrod Sivays 
kal Oedrys. 

With this Hermetist’s attitude towards the natural sciences 
may be compared that of Clement of Alexandria, Strom. 6 
79-83. 

Musicen vero nosse nihil aliud es/ nisi cunetarum jomnium| 
rerum ordinem scire &c. Cf. Pl. Zim. 808, concerning the 
consonance of a higher and a lower note in music; the two tones 
play e& d&elas Kal Bapelas Evvexepdcavro wabyv’ Sbev Hdoviv pev ois 
ddppocw, etppootvyv S& trois eudpoor Sia tTHv Tis Oelas dppovias 
pipnow ev Ovyrais yevonévny dopais wapécyov. (Plato is there 
thinking of harmony in the human soul,—cf. Zim. 47 s—z,—rather 
than of harmony in the universe ; but he is conscious of the analogy 
between the one and the other.) Philo De opif. mundi 25. 78, 
Cohn I, p. 26: God prepared the Kosmos for man’s enjoyment by 
filling it with all manner of Gedpara, & Karardyxrixwrdtas piv exe 
Tas otcias, kararAnktikwrdras S& Tas ToldTyTas, Gavpaciwrdras S& Tas 
Kujoes Kal xopelas év tdgecw jpporpévars Kal apiOpav dvadoyias 
Kal repiddwv oupdwvias' év als drdoas tiv dpxérurov Kal ddnOR 
kal rapaderyparicny povoicyy ovK ay Guaprdvor tis elvar Aéywv, ad” 
js of pera. taira dvOpwrot ypaydpevor (év) rais éavrav Yoyais tds 
elxovas dvayxaordtyy Kal dbedywwrdryy téxvgv To Biw wapédocav. 
Corp. XVIII. 1: 6 ydp to. Kara piow povorxds Oeds K.7.A. 


. 


F 2 


68 ASCLEPIUS 


Asclepius II 


That part of the Asclepius which I have named Ase. II (viz. 
chs. 14b-16a) was written by a thoroughgoing dualist. The 
writer’s object is to account for the existence of evil without de- 
tracting from God’s goodness ; and he does so by putting matter 
side by side with God, as a co-ordinate source or cause of things, 
and attributing the evil in the world to the operation of matter. 
Metaphorically, matter is the Mother of the universe, as God is the 
Father ; (‘%Aq et conceptus et partus in se possidet vim’, and ‘ his 
omnibus ad concipiendum fecundissimos sinus praestat’;) and that 
which is evil in the offspring comes from the Mother. 

This doctrine is based on that of the Zimaeus; but the writer 
differs from Plato in ascribing to matter a generative energy, whereas 
in the Zimaeus the évdéyxn which resides in the ixodoxy operates as 
a cause of evil merely by way of passive resistance to the beneficent 
action of the Demiurgus, or hindrance to the perfect realization of 
God’s good purpose. Seneca, Jat. guaest., Prolog. 16, states the 
problem thus: ‘quanti aestimas ista cognoscere,... quantum deus 
possit ; materiam ipse sibi formet an data utatur; . . . deus quicquid 
vult efficiat, an multis rebus illum tractanda destituant, et a magno 
artifice prave multa formentur, non quia cessat ars, sed quia id in 
quo exercetur saepe inobsequens arti est?’ Seneca’s second alterna- 
tive agrees with the Zimaeus. 


One of the various ways in which this topic was dealt with by the 
Platonists of the Roman empire may be seen in Plutarch Js. e¢ Os. 
45-79 (¢ A.D. 100). Plutarch’s view is there set forth in the form 
of a commentary on the Egyptian myth of Isis and Osiris, which he 
regards as a symbolical presentation of certain fundamental truths. 
Disentangled from the myth with which he has interwoven it, the 
substance of his doctrine may be stated as follows. 

45. If all things were caused by God (as the Stoics say), nothing evil 
could come to be ; and if nothing were caused by God (as Democritus 
and Epicurus say), nothing good could come to be. But inasmuch 
as nature, here below, produces good and evil intermingled, we must 
conclude that there are two opposed first causes,—two conflicting 

1 Plutarch says that the Stoics assert dmofou Snoupydv bans eva Adyor xal play 


mpévoioy .. . wepryivouevny dnavroy Kal xparodoay" i, e. they maintain that Ay, being 
dots, is wholly subject to God’s will, and cannot thwart his design, 








ASCLEPIUS II 69 


Powers. Since nothing can come into being without a cause, and 
the Good cannot cause evil, it follows that, beside the first cause of 
good, there is a separate and distinct first cause of evil....1 48. 
Plato, in some of his dialogues, hints at this obscurely; but in the 
Zaws, which he wrote in his old age, he says clearly (Pl. Legg. 10. 
896 £) that the Universe is moved, not by one soul, but by two at 
least, one that works good,’ and one that works evil.® 

But there is also a third and intermediate entity (viz. Matter).‘ 
And this third thing is not, as some suppose, devoid of soul and 
reason and self-movement ; it is dependent on both the others, but 
ever seeks and desires and follows after the better of them. 

49. The two opposing Powers of which this Kosmos is the mingled 
product are not of equal strength. The Power of good has the upper 
hand ; yet the Power of evil cannot be utterly destroyed, for it is 
largely rooted in the body and soul of the All, and ever maintains a 
losing fight against the good. 

53. There is in nature a feminine principle (viz. Matter), receptive 
of all generation,—a ‘nurse’ and ‘recipient’, as Plato calls it,— 
which, being wrought on by the divine Reason, takes on itself all 
manner of forms. This feminine principle has an innate love of the 
sovereign Good; it yearns for and seeks after the good; it shuns 
and flees from the evil. It is the place, and the primal matter, of 
both good and evil; but of itself it ever inclines to the better, and 
yields itself to God, that he may beget in it effluences and images of 
himself; and it delights in being thereby made fruitful. For that 
which is generated is a copy, wrought in matter, of that which ever 
is. 54. God, or the principle of Good, is eternal and imperishable, 
but the shapes or images of good,—the stamps impressed by God on 
matter in the visible world,—are perishable ; and in this lower region, 
they are from time to time destroyed by the Power of disorder and 
confusion. That maleficent Power is excluded from the world above, 
but assails this sensible Kosmos, which is generated in the likeness 
of the Eternal by Matter wedded to the Good. 

There was a time when Matter, not yet wrought upon by the 
divine Reason, produced her first birth of herself alone; and that 
which then came into being was a thing incomplete,*—not a Kosmos, 

1 Here follows an account of the dualistic doctrine of Zoroaster concerning the 
good God Horomazes and the bad daemon Areimanios. 

2 Symbolized by Osiris. 8 Symbolized by Typhon. 


* Symbolized by Isis, , 
5 This first offspring of Matter corresponds to the primeval chaos described in 


70 ASCLEPIUS 


but a mere shadow of the Kosmos which was to be. 55. But in 
the Kosmos as it now is, the Power of evil is not indeed wholly 
destroyed, but its strength and vigour are impaired; for the divine 
Reason has harmonized the universe, bringing its discordant elements 
into concord, and has enfeebled, though not annihilated, the destruc- 
tive Power of evil. Here below then, the destructive Power still 
works, though but weakly and ineffectually ; for it mingles with and 
cleaves to the material elements, which are subject to change and 
disturbance. And hence arise earthquakes, and droughts, and storms, 
and pestilences, and the obscurations of the moon; for the working 
of the Power of Evil extends upwards as far as the human sphere. 

56. Under the head of good must be reckoned, firstly, the eternal 
pattern or ideal (73 voyrdv, i.e. that which is of God); secondly, 
Matter (fA,—not d:rows, but seeking the good); and thirdly, the 
issue of these two (viz. the Kosmos, so far as the good prevails in it). 
57. God, or the Good, is that which is perfect, and lacks nothing,— 
that which is the object of desire and aspiration. Matter, in herself, 
is lacking of the good; but she is ever being filled by the good,— 
ever yearning after the good, and receiving of it. And the Kosmos, 
produced by the union of God (or the Good) with Matter, is not 
indeed eternal,'—not free from change and corruption,—but is ever 
coming into being;* and by means of the cyclic recurrence of 
changes, it is enabled to continue ever young, and will never 
perish. 

58. Matter then is not a body lifeless and devoid of qualities,— 
not a thing inert and inactive. Matter is ever partaking of the 
supreme God; she ever consorts with Him, loving the good and 
beauty that are about Him. She is not opposed to Him; but as a 
good wife may be said to yearn for her husband even when she has 
him beside her, so Matter yearns for God, even while she is with Him 
and is filled with the Divine. 

59. Yet here below she needs must mourn; for in this lower 
world the Power of Evil makes his assaults, and there is slaying and 
tearing asunder. But she receives into herself all things that perish, 
and puts forth from herself again all things that come to birth. For 


the Timaeus ; it is HA subject to dvdyxn only, and not yet ordered by voids aiming 
at the good, 

1 dt5:os, This means, not that the Kosmos as a whole will ever cease to exist, 
but only that the individual things in the Kosmos (or rather in the lower part of 
it) are subject to dissolution. 

9 devyerns. 








ASCLEPIUS II 71 


the starry heavens, ruled wholly by the potencies of God, abide for 
ever; but the creatures of land and sea, in which life has been 
implanted in this lower world, decay and perish and are buried, but 
spring to life again and again in fresh generations.’ For in the 
lowest regions of matter, the Power of Destruction works most 
strongly; and here, the seeds of life sown by the Power which 
brings things to birth and maintains them in being (i.e. by God, 
or the Good) are faint and feeble, so that they would be wholly 
destroyed by the Power of Evil, but that Matter receives into herself 
that which is destroyed, and preserves and rears and builds it up 
again. 60. In short, the generative and preservative force in nature 
(i.e. the soul of Matter) moves towards God, and tends towards 
being ; while the destructive force (i. e. the soul of Evil) moves away 
from God, and tends towards not-being. 

79. God is far removed from earth ; He is pure, and undefiled by 
anything that admits of decay and death. And human souls, here 
below, while they are entangled in the body and the bodily affections, 
have no communion with God, beyond that dim and dreamlike 
apprehension of Him to which philosophy enables them to attain. 
But when they are freed from the body, and depart to the region of 
the unseen, the untroubled, and the holy, then the Soul of Good is 
their leader and their king ; and clinging to Him, they gaze on that 
unspeakable beauty with insatiate yearning. And it is by desiring 
without cease and seeking after and consorting with that supra- 
mundane beauty, that the soul of Matter fills this lower world with 
all things fair and good that come to birth. 

Plutarch’s tA then differs from the ‘recipient’ described in the 
Timaeus, in that it is not dzowos, but is qualified by the presence in it 
of a living force which strives towards the good ; and the Kosmos is 
produced and maintained in being, not by the action of God alone 
on a passive and partially intractable Matter, but by the combined 
operation of God from above and of Matter from below. The living 
force in matter which strives towards the good (and which Plutarch 
finds symbolized in the goddess Isis) is equivalent to Aristotle’s 
¢¥ors ; and Plutarch’s view of the function of God in relation to it 
might be expressed by Aristotle’s statement that the Good xwet ds 
epwpevoy (Ar. Metaph. 11. 7. 1072 b 3). 

But if the operation of Matter, as well as that of God, tends 


1 The Greek of this sentence is corrupt; but the meaning of the original was 
probably something like what I have written. 


= 


a 


92 ASCLEPIUS 


towards good, how is the existence of evil to be accounted for? 
Plutarch’s altered conception of Matter makes it impossible for him 
to accept the explanation put forward in the Zimaeus, viz. that evil 
is the result of the dvdyxn which is inherent in ‘the recipient’,— 
or in other words, that evil arises from the intractability of Matter. 
And accordingly, Plutarch prefers to adopt the suggestion thrown 
out in Plato’s Zaws; he asserts the existence of a Soul of Evil, 
distinct from and independent of God,—a living Power, which, in 
the sublunar region, works against and partially thwarts the tendency 
of Matter towards the Good. 

The evil of which Plutarch is speaking in this treatise is not 
moral evil; he regards good as equivalent to fe or existence, and 
evil as equivalent to death or non-existence. Thus the joint operation 
of God and Matter results in the production and preservation of 
living things; the operation of the Soul of Evil results in the 
destruction of living things. The sublunar region, where alone the 
Soul of Evil has power, is the region of mortality; but Matter, ever 
striving towards God (i.e. towards Good, or Life), counteracts the 
work of destruction by continual reproduction. 

In the concluding paragraph (ch. 79), Plutarch suggests that what 
he has said concerning the aspiration of Matter towards the Good 
in the universe at large may be applied also to the aspiration of the 
human soul; but he has not worked out this thought with equal 
fullness. 

Whether Plutarch’s Platonic interpretation of the myth of Isis 
and Osiris is wholly of his own invention, or whether he had heard 
of some more or less similar explanation of it that had already been 
devised by some Egyptian influenced by Hellenic thought, we do not 
know. But at least it may be said that, in his identification of Isis 
with the productive power of nature, Plutarch is giving articulate 
expression to the dim thoughts and feelings which lay at the root 
of that ancient and widespread worship of the Mother (originally 
Mother Earth) which in Egypt took the form of the Isis-cult. 


A view more nearly resembling that of Ase/. II is to be found in 
the doctrine of Numenius (a. D. 150-200), as reported by Chalcidius, 
Comm. in Tim. 294, Mullach 77. Ph. Gr. Il, p. 244: ‘Deum 
quippe esse . . . initium et causam bonorum ; silvam (fAqv) malorum.’ 

1 Numenius seems to have held that tAn is productive of evil only, and not 


of any good at all. But the author of Asc/. II does not say that; his view is that 
Aq produces both good and evil. 





ASCLEPIUS II 73 





(295)- «+ (Pythagoras) ait (rightly, according to Numenius), existente 
providentia, mala quoque necessario substitisse, propterea quod 
silva sit, et eadem sit malitia praedita. Quodsi mundus ex silva, 
certe factus est de existente olim natura maligna. . . . Platonemque 
idem Numenius laudat, quod duas mundi animas autumet, unam 
beneficentissimam, malignam alteram, scilicet silvam.’ Quae (s¢. 
silva) licet modice fluctuet,? tamen, quia intimo proprioque motu 
movetur, vivat et anima convegetetur necesse est, lege eorum omnium 
quae genuino motu moventur.* Quae quidem etiam patibilis animae 
partis (i.e. the maGyrucdy pépos of the human soul), in qua est 
aliquid corpulentum mortaleque et corporis simile, auctrix est et 
patrona,‘ sicut rationabilis animae pars auctore utitur ratione ac 
Deo. Porro ex Deo et silva factus est iste mundus. Igitur iuxta 
Platonem mundo bona sua Dei, tanquam patris, liberalitate collata 
sunt ; mala vero matris silvae vitio cohaeserunt.’ 


The problem discussed in Asc/. II was similarly dealt with by the 
heretical Christian Hermogenes, who wrote before 4. D. 200. Hippol. 
Ref. haer, 8. 17 + “Eppoyévys 8€ m5, xal atrés vouicas Te Kawov ppoveiv, 
én tov Gey e& UAys ovyxpdvou® Kal dyevnjrov mévra meroupKévat’ 
é8uvdrws yap éxew Tov Ocdv pH ob e dvTwy Ta ywopeva Toreiv.  elvar 
83 tov Gedy del xUptov Kal del roinryv, Tyv Sé TAnv del SovAnv Kal ywo- 
pévny,® ob wacay 5é. del yap" dypins kal drdxros pepopevyy exdopyoe 
rotrw TH Adyw’ Sicyv xvtplov troxawpévov Bpdlovoav iddv éxdpuce 
card pépos, Kal ro pav ék rod wavTos AaBdv iuépwoe, Td Se clacev 
Grdxtas déperOat. Kal ro Hpepwhev totro clvar Kdopov déyer, Td SE 
dypiov pévew xat® tAqv xadreiobar dxorpoy. ratryv obciav var tév 
dmdvrov déyet, Ss kawov épwv Sdypa tots airod payrais (though in 
reality, says Hippolytus, this doctrine was not new, but had been 


1 Numenius here differs from Plutarch in his interpretation of Pl. Legg. 10. 896 E. 
Plutarch’s maligna anima is not try (Isis), but Typhon, a Power hostile to #Ay. 

2 What is the meaning of /icet modice fluctuet? Ought we to read immodéce? 

8 Ifa thing ‘ moves itself’, it must have a yuxy which moves it,—or in other 
words, it must be alive. 

4 Cf, Iambl. Hep Yvxfs, Stob. 1. 49. 37, vol. i, p. 375 W-: TGv8 ab... dad ray 
fate mpoopvopévay mpooriBévray dmwcoiv TH Puxp 7d KaKdv, dmd pev tHs VAns 
Novpnviov cal Kpoviov modkadms. Herm. ap. Stob, Zxc, VIL. 3: dvOpcmaw yap yévos 
(apapratuxdy), are Ovnrov by Kat é Kaxtjs tAns cuvectés, 

5 San is cuyxpoves (* coeval’) with God; i.e. it is without beginning in time, as 
God is without beginning in time. 

6 vvopévnv here means, not ‘coming into being’, but ‘ being made into odpara’. 
It can be said that #An det yivera in this sense, though it is dyévvnros. See Herm. 
ap. Stob, Exc. IX. 

T Perhaps «al yap. 
8 Perhaps 7é 5¢ dyptov pévoy [kai], in contrast to 7d fpepwder, 


74 ASCLEPIUS 


taught by Plato). Tertullian Ado. Hermogenem* (Kroymann, Corp. 
Script. Eccl. Lat. vol. 47) c. 1: ‘Hermogenis autem doctrina tam 
novella est,... Totum quod est deus aufert (Hermogenes), nolens 
illum ex nihilo universa facere. A Christianis enim ad philosophos 
conversus, de ecclesia in Academiam et Porticum,’ inde sumpsit 
[a Stoicis] materiam cum deo ponere, quae et ipsa semper fuerit, 
neque nata neque facta, nec initium habens omnino nec finem, 
ex qua deus omnia postea fecerit.’ Jb. 2: ‘ex nihilo non potuisse 
eum facere sic contendit (Hermogenes), bonum et optimum definiens 
deum, qui bona atque optima tam velit facere quam sit: immo 
nihil non bonum atque optimum et velle eum et facere. Igitur 
omnia ab eo bona et optima oportuisse fieri secundum condicionem 
ipsius. Inveniri autem et mala ab eo facta, utique non ex arbitrio 
nec ex voluntate ; quia si ex arbitrio et voluntate, [nihil] incongruens 
et indignum® sibi faceret. Quod ergo non arbitrio suo fecerit, 
intellegi oportere ex vitio alicuius rei factum, ex materiae sine dubio.’ 
fo. 6: ‘(Hermogenes) dicit salvum deo esse ut et solus sit et primus 
et omnium auctor et omnium dominus et nemini comparandus’ ; 
but he has no right to say this (says Tertullian), because, if his 
statements about matter were true, matter would be on a par with 
God. Jd. 8: ‘Solus eam (sc. materiam non natam, coaequalem deo,) 
Hermogenes cognovit et haereticorum patriarchae, philosophi; 
prophetas enim et apostolos usque adhuc latuit’ 6.10: ‘Ergo, 
inquit (Hermogenes), ex nihilo faceret (omnia deus), ut mala quoque 
arbitrio eius imputarentur? Magna (says Tertullian) caecitas 
haereticorum pro huiusmodi argumentatione, cum ideo aut alium 
deum bonum et optimum volunt credi, quia mali auctorem existiment 
creatorem,‘ aut (as Hermogenes did) materiam cum creatore pro- 
ponunt, ut malum a materia, non a creatore deducant. .. . Audiat 
igitur et Hermogenes . . . se nihil egisse hac sua iniectione.’ Ecce 
enim, etsi non auctor, sed adsentator mali invenitur deus, qui 
malum materiae tanto sustinuit aeone ante mundi constitutionem, 
quam ut bonus et mali aemulus emendasse debuerat. aa enim 


1 Harnack puts the date of Tertull. Adv. Hermog. at A. D. 198-203. 

® Tertullian is hardly right in adding ef Porticum. The doctrine spoken of is 
Platonic, not Stoic; and if Hermogenes adopted some Stoic notions, it must have 
been in subordinate details only. 

5 et indignum secludendum ? 

* This refers to those Gnostics (e. g. Valentinus) who distinguished the Syjuovpyds 
(creator) from the supreme God, and made him a being of lower order and 
character. 

5 I.e. by his theory of Ay d-yévynros. 





ASCLEPIUS II 75 









































potuit emendare, sed noluit, aut voluit quidem, verum non potuit. 
(Si non potuit),’ infirmus deus: si potuit et noluit, malus et ipse, 
quia malo favit. Et sic iam habetur (auctor) eius quod licet non 
jnstituerit, quia tamen, si noluisset illud esse, non esset, ipse iam 
fecit esse, quod * non noluit esse. . . . Malum pro bono sustinendo 
et non potius eradicando adsertor eius inventus est (deus); male, 
si per voluntatem, turpiter, si per necessitatem. Jd. c. 13, 
Tertullian says ‘si dabimus illi (sc. materiae) aliquid etiam boni 
germinis, iam non erit uniformis naturae, id est malae in totum et 
tantum, sed duplex, id est malae et bonae naturae... . Si potuit 
. .. duplex natura fuisse materiae, amborum ferax fructuum, iam 
nec bona ipsa deo deputabuntur, ut nec mala illi imputentur, sed 
utraque species, de materiae proprietate sumpta, ad materiam 
pertinebit.’* 1d, 15: ‘ceterum si ideo malum (as Hermogenes 
says) non ex nihilo, ne dei fiat, de cuius arbitrio videbitur factum, 
sed ex materia, ut ipsius sit, de cuius substantia erit factum, et hic, 
ut dixi, auctor mali habebitur deus, qui, cum eadem virtute et 
yoluntate debuisset omnia bona ex materia protulisse aut tantum 
bona, non omnia tamen bona protulit, sed etiam mala, utique 
aut volens esse mala, si poterat efficere ne essent, aut non valens 
efficere omnia bona, si voluit et non fecit.’ /d, 15 fiz.: ‘ Hermo- 
genes expugnat quorundam argumentationes dicentium mala 
necessaria fuisse ad inluminationem bonorum ex contrariis in- 
tellegendorum.” Jd. 35: Hermogenes says that dry is ‘neque 
corporalis (cwpatixy) neque incorporalis (écaparos)’. But he also 
says (c. 36) that it is ‘ex parte corporalis’, and ‘ ex parte incorporalis’. 
‘Corporale enim materiae vult esse, de quo corpora edantur, in- 
corporale vero inconditum motum eius. “Si enim” ait “corpus 
tantummodo esset, nihil ei incorporale appareret, id est motus ; 
si vero in totum incorporalis fuisset, nullum corpus ex ea fieret.”’ 
Jb. 37: Hermogenes says that ‘materia’ is ‘nec bona nec mala.’ 
**Si enim” inquis “esset bona, quae semper hoc fuerat non 
desideraret compositionem dei: si esset natura mala, non accepisset 
translationem in melius, nec quicquam compositionis suae ad- 
plicuisset illi deus, tali natura; in vacuum enim laborasset.”’ 
Jb. 41 : Hermogenes says that ‘inconditus et confusus et turbulentus 
aa have added Sé non potuit. Kroymann proposes /njirmus deus (si voluit nec 
: Bhar (eo) quod. 


§ Cf Ascl. 2 15 fim. as emended: ‘Sicuti enim natura materiae bonitatis 
est, sic et malignitatis eadem est aeque fecunda,’ 


76 ASCLEPIUS 


fuit materiae motus’, like the movement of water boiling in a pot.! 
But elsewhere, ‘cum enim vis materiam nec bonam nec malam 
inducere, “igitur” inquis “subiacens materia, aequalis momenti 
habens motum, neque ad bonum neque ad malum plurimum vertit.”’ 
Jb. 42: ‘Non vis videri deum aequare materiae, et subicis habere 
illam cum deo communionem: “impossibile enim” inquis ‘non 
habentem illam commune aliquid cum deo ornari eam ab ipso.” 
. . . Commune autem inter illos facis, quod a semetipsis moveantur, 
et semper moveantur. . . . Sed deus composite, materia incondite 
movetur.’ J. 44: in explaining Zow God worked on matter, 
‘plane a philosophis*? recedis (says Tertullian to Hermogenes)... 
Stoici enim volunt deum sic per materiam decucurrisse, quomodo 
mel per favos. At tu “non” inquis “pertransiens illam facit 
mundum, sed solummodo apparens et adpropinquans ei, sicut facit 
(ali)quid decor* solummodo apparens, et magnes lapis solummodo 
adpropinquans ”.’ 

It appears from what Tertullian and Hippolytus say about 
Hermogenes (‘ doctrina tam novella’, xawév, &c.) that he was, as 
far as their knowledge went, the earliest Christian writer who adopted 
the Platonic doctrine of tAy, and made use of it, in the Platonic 
way, to account for the existence of evil.1| He must have transcribed 
his statement of it, with little alteration, from some treatise written 
by a Pagan Platonist ; and the Pagan author of Asc/. II, who teaches 
the same doctrine, must have got it from a closely connected source, 
if not from the very same treatise. 


A doctrine resembling that of Hermogenes, and perhaps derived 
directly or indirectly from him, is set forth and criticized in the 


1 bixnv xuTpiov broxatopévov Bpafoveay, Hermog. af. Hippol. 
¥ : = ot from the Platonists; but ‘Tertullian here ignores them, and speaks only of 

e Stoics. 

8 decor MSS.: acor coni. Kroymann. But a comparison of God to ‘a sour taste’ 
would not seem happy. Why should not decor be right? Decor means «dAdos } 
ef. dsc/, III. 34, ‘quod totum (sc. 7d may) est bonum (et) decens (d-ya0dv rat 
xadév)’. What Hermogenes meant was that God is 7d xaddv, and, in virtue of his 
beauty, awe? ds Epdpevos. In c. 42, Tertullian reports Hermogenes as saying 
: reece desiderare componi a deo’ (see c, 37 quoted above). Compare 
Plutarch Js. e¢ Os. 53 and 58. 

Tertullian, in his comment on these words of Hermogenes, speaks of decor (acor 
coni. Kroymann) wu/nerans animum. The word vu/nerans might there be taken 
in the same sense as in Ovid's ‘ amor mea vulnerat arcu pectora’. 

The comparison of God to a magnet is to the same effect ; cf. Corp. 1V fin. 

* Hermogenes was not quite the earliest ; for casi) #An, in the Platonic sense, had 
already been spoken of by Marcion, c. A.D. 139-144. (See Harnack, Marcion, 
1921, pp. 100, 140, 198.) But Marcion does not seem to have made any large use 
of this conception; he was comparatively little influenced by Pagan philosophy. 





































ASCLEPIUS II 77 


dialogue Iep} rot airegovetou (‘ Concerning God, matter, and free will’, 
as it is entitled in the Slavonic translation), written ¢. A.D. 300 by 
the Christian Methodius (ed. Bonwetsch, 1891). In that dialogue, 
an orthodox Christian states and maintains his opinion as to the 
origin of moral evil, in opposition to a ‘ Valentinian’ Gnostic’ and 
a ‘companion’ who agrees with the Valentinian in the main, but 
differs from him in holding that the primal #\y was not dotos. 
The Valentinian says (cc. 2-4): ‘ When I observed the good order 
of the natural world, I thought pndey det ovveivar 7 Ged Erepov [rr] 
map’ airov, GAN’ é abrod (udvov) Ta dvra yeyovéva. But when I saw 
cruel and wicked deeds done by men, wé@ev tatra avalyreiv ppyduny, 
ris 58 Kal 4 THS KWHoEws airdv apyy. ... Kal Tov piv Oedv TovTwr 
mori Aéyew ToAuav odx olds Te Fv’... Os piv ydp éorw dyads, 
Kal TOV Kpe”TTOveN ToLnTHs, TGV St hatwy ato mpdcerrw oddév. . .. 
S0ev ddoyov okey eclvat por radra mpoodrrew aird. .. . Sudrep 
Bokev por cwuTrdpxew tT aitG, } roivoua try, e& Hs ra Svea enpuodpyy- 
ov... & is kai 7a Kaxd elvan Soxei. azolov re yap kal doxypariorou 
oveys avrijs, pds 5& rovros Kal drdkrws Pepouevys, Seopévys te THs 
tov Oeod réxvys, ov epOovycev odros, odd? Sia wavrds Kxaradureiv 
((Oedev))* atriv otrus péperPar, dda Sypuovpyetv Hpxero, Kal ard Trav 
xeplotov adrijs ta KédNurra * diaxpivac ° [[HOeher]], [kai] ® ofrws [[yotv]] 
npuovpynoev doa (Cyoiv)) [2é]" airis jpyolev Vea Snmuovpyeivs ra 


1 In the editions, this speaker is named Valentinus. But it is strange that 
Methodius should give a personal name to one of the three disputants only, while 
_ the other two are not named, but are denoted merely by the descriptive words 
ép8d5ofos and éraipos; and the evidence for the name Valentinus is not such as to 
exclude doubt. That name nowhere occurs in the text of the dialogue; and in a 
ch addressed to this man (8. 4), the author writes & obros, and not (as we 
should have expected from his practice in other dialogues) & OdaAevrive. It may 
be added that the well-known myth of Valentinus concerning the origin of matter 
ogra } Zopla... obciav dpoppov Kat dxarackevacrov, Hippol. Ref. haer. 
. 30 fiz. ; matteris 7d yeyernuévoy id (Zodias) éxrpapa, 2d. c. 31) can hardly have 
been unknown to Methodius ; and if he knew of it, he would not be likely to put 
into the mouth of Valentinus himself the statement that tan is dyévnros. It seems 
probable therefore that Methodius did not give this speaker a name, but merely 
called him ‘a Valentinian’, and that the abbreviation OTAA. prefixed to his 
speeches was mistakenly iy ag 79 to mean Valentinus. The term ‘ Valentinian’ 
may have been loosely used by Methodius to denote a platonizing heretic, such as 
was Hermogenes ; it would not necessarily mean that the man to whom it was 
ispplied agreed with Valentinus in all respects. 
~ ? ob82 or ote or od MSS, : Sore cond. Bonwetsch : ‘neidete er nicht, noch liess 
ersie immer so schweben’ Slav. trans/. 
3 HOedhev huc transposut. 
‘4 There is an inconsistency here. If some parts of #An were better and others 
Worse, it cannot have been wholly dzoos. 
5 daxpivas scripsé : diaxpivey MSS, © wal seclusi. 
4 re huc transposud: é€ seclusi. 
® Cf. Methodius Hept ray -yernrav 6 (Bonwetsch p. 343): awd trav oroxelow 7 


78 ASCLEPIUS 


8 ba airijs, ds éroter,! rpvycdy erbyxavev, raidra (ds etxev Karrédurev,)) 
(4s)? dvdppoora dvra mpds Snuovpyiay [[ds edxev xarédurev]] xai® 
obdtv airG mpoorjovra’ e& dv doxe? por viv wapa avOpdrros éxippetv Ta 
xaxd.’ In reply to this, the orthodoxus first maintains (cc. 5, 6) 
that tmdpyew ddvvarov dyévyta Svo dua;* and then (7. 1-8. 2), 
taking as his starting-point the Valentinian’s assertion that dows 
tAn ovverdpyxe: 7G OG, and making use of the distinction between 
otciat and roiWryres, refutes him by an argument which concludes 
thus : ovxoty ci Ta Kaxd rowdryTes brdpxovow ovordy, 4 O& BAy arrows 
fv, tov 8& rovorprwv Tounriy elras tov Oedv elvat, eorar Kal Tov KaKov 
Sypuovpyds 6 Oeds. re rotvvy od8 oftws dvatriv Tav Kaxdv Svvarov 
elreiy tov Gedy, bAnY aitG rpocdmrrew wepirtov elval por Soxel. There- 
upon the Valentinian (8. 3 and 4) withdraws his previous statement 
that xaxd are roidryres, and substitutes for it the statement that xaxd 
are otofa.;® but the orthodoxus again refutes him (8. 5-14). Then 
the ‘ companion’ interposes, and says (9. 1-11. 2) ‘your argument 
holds good against the Valentinian, but not against me; for it is 
based on his assertion that tAy was dows, and I deny that. éyot 
yap } iAn rotdratas dvdpyws exew Soxel* otrus yip Kai Ta KaKa ek Tis 
drroppotas aris elvar Aéyw, iva rv Kaxdv 6 pev Geds dvairios 7}, Tovrwv 
8 drdvrwv 4% bAy aizia. Matter had certain qualities dyevyjrus, 
some of which were bad; and God changed them for the better.’ 
The orthodoxus answers (11. 3-8), wOs toivey avrov (sc. Tov Gedv) 
ras tov davthuv roirytas ds elyov xaraheAourévar déyets; moTepov 
Suvdpevov pev Kaxeivas dvedeiv, wy BovdynGevta dé, 7) rd Stvacda pH 
gyovra ; «i pev yap Suvdpevov A€~as ob BovdnPévra Fé, adrdv airiov 


Gdns h Cornprypdtav", 7 Gras abrot raira BotrAcobe dvoudey (otdty yap dapéper), 
rovTav dyevnTas mpoipectnxétav Kal mAnppedds pepopévoav, 6 Beds diaxpivas 
érexvdcaro 70 mdvra, Jb. : Tov Gedy HpxOar Tod Siomety. . , Kal Katakocmelv riv 
mpétepoy dpoppoy ovaav vAnv. 

1 Al, ds énos eimeiv, which Bonwetsch accepts. 

2 ds yev karedumev hic transposui; ws addidi. 

8 «al scrips? : kar’ MSS. 

4 The text of c. 5 d#¢. is corrupt. It might be emended thus: 671 pev tmapyew 
addvarov dyévnta vo dpa, OSE oe dyvociv vouitw, ei Kal Ta pwadtota doxeis TovTO 
mpooredecevar TH Adyy. [7d] wdvrms (ydp) ef dvaynns 7d Erepov Sei[v] A€-yew, H Src 
KT A, Fad wddw OTe KTAL 

5 Bonwetsch gives the text of 8. 4 thus: OPOOA. mapacrqaai (al. napacrhvat) 
por Soneis (al. Boxe’) wal Ta xaxd odcias imdpyew twas ob ydp éxrds odoidy abTa 
évta Brénw, eet rolvuv, & otros, eal 7a xaxd odalas elvar A€yes, dvaynn K.T.d. 
But that is unintelligible. The sense required may be got by writing §§ 3 and 4 
thus: OYTAA. ti pey mpoatpeow .. . dyvo® capas, mEpiorqvat (i.e. to change 
my position) (otv) pot Sone? (eis 7d) wal rd Kaxd oicias imapxew Tivas* od yap éxrds 
ovary atrd évra BAérw. OPQ@OA, énel roivuy, @ obTos, eal 7d Kaxd ovalas eivae 
A€yets, dvdryen #.7.A. 








ASCLEPIUS II 79 


rovruv elreiv avayKn, ore duvdpevos rovjoa pH elvar Kaka cvvexdpycer 
ara pévew Os hv. so s & ek rod pa Stvacba rov Gedv dvedetv ra 
KaKe TO [127 meradobar déyes, adivatov Tov Oedv Pyoes trdpyev. Tod 
8 Adtvarov Hro. TG pio dobeva trdpyew aitdv eora, 7 TO vixaoBar 
76 pdBw Sedovrwpévov pds twos Kpetrrovos. et pv obv Tov Bedv diver 
dobev7 dvra ToApHoes etrely, wep ris cwrnpias aitis Kwduvevew roe 
Soxeis’ «i SE 7G vixGoGar PoBw pods Tod peilovos, peiLova Nékers Tod Hod 
ra KaKd, VKOVTA THS Mpoapérews airod tHv Spyajv' Srep arowov elvai 
pot A€yew epi Geod Soxet. 81d. ré yap otxt paddov tatr’ érovra Geol, 
yikay kara Tov AMéyov Tov Gov Svvdweva Tov Oedv, eiep Oedv excivd haper, 
& rv dravrwv eLovolay exer; 

After some further discussion, the orthodoxus (cc. 16-21) states 
his own opinion (i.e. that of Methodius himself) concerning the 
origin of moral evil. Man, he says, is airefovows, having been so 
made by God. It was for man’s good that God endowed him with 
free will; for man is thereby enabled to win merit by obedience 
to God. Evil means disobedience to God ; and man, having been 
made airefovows, had power to disobey. Man disobeyed; and his 
first act of disobedience was the beginning of evil. (Evil then 
is not ayévyroy, but came into being at a definite time.) 

But how was man induced to disobey? It was the Devil that 
persuaded him; and the Devil did so because he was envious 
of man. The first dpy7 rod xaxod then was the Deyil’s envy. The 
Devil’s part in the matter does not, however, relieve man from 
responsibility ; for man was free either to accept the Devil’s advice 
or to reject it. 

But was not the Devil made by God? And if so, was it not 
God’s fault that the Devil was envious? No; for the Devil, as made 
by God, was not evil ; but (God made him airegovovov, and) it was 
of his own free choice that he disobeyed God, i.e. became 
evil. 

But did not God, when he made the Devil, know that the Devil 
would rebel against him? And if so, is not God responsible for 
the evil that resulted? God knew ; and knowing what would follow, 
he made the Devil, in order that he might more fully manifest 
his goodness by the remission of man’s sin. Good could not be 
known except by contrast with evil ;1 and man would be deprived 
of the boon of free will if the choice between good and evil were 
not set before him. 

1 Cf. Tertull. dav. Hermog. 15 fin., quoted above. 


80 ASCLEPIUS 


But when the Devil had induced the first man to disobey, why 
did not God at once destroy the Devil, and so prevent further 
mischief? Because, if he had done so, God’s goodness would 
not have been manifested in his dealings with men of all later 
generations, and men would not have learnt the meaning of good 
by seeing it in contrast with evil, As it is, ‘a man of God’? can 
and does overcome the Devil, being taught by God himself to 
struggle against him. God is like a trainer of athletes; he sends 
us into the pa/aestra to wrestle with the Devil, and the man who 
obeys his Trainer’s instructions wins the crown of victory. The 
man who neglects them, and does not struggle hard, is overcome ; 
but that is his own fault. Thus, (if we do what God bids us do,) 
‘the Devil is trodden down beneath our feet, and lies dead ’.* 

After this, the orthodoxus brings the dialogue to a close by 
speaking of #Ay once more (c. 22). If matter, he says, was not 
co-existent with God from the first, how is it that it now exists P 
(It was made by God, at the time when he began to make the 
world.) And why did God make the world? We cannot fully 
know God’s motives; but I think (says the orthodoxus) that he 
made it in order to put his skill (riv rijs réxvqs émurryjpqy) in action,’ 
and to manifest his goodness, and in order to bring into existence 
beings (viz. men) who might recognize his skill, and whom he might 
benefit by his goodness. 7d pav ofy Aourdv Tod Kdopov ovoTnpa due 
tov dvOpwrov yeyovévan dni, mpos tanpeciay tov avaykaiwy atta, 
(rv 88 dvOpwrov 8¢ abrov tov Oedy,) Srws Sogdly tov Seomdryy, (Kal) 
dxws 7d dyabdv (nom.) eis twas evepynog Tod Oeod. Moreover, 
even before God made the world, he was not idle; for he was 
occupied in designing it and rejoicing beforehand in its beauty. 

pndev roryapodv, avOpwre, atroovorarov * elvar eye (rpos)® 73 Ged. 

1 ¢Ein Mensch Gottes’, Slav. transi. (this pers, is not extant in the Greek) ; 

In. 2 


i.e, any and every good man. There is not, I th any reference to Christ here, 
nor indeed anywhere in the dialogue. 

2 What Methodius says about the Devil is a repetition, on another plane, of 
what he has already said about man, God is not responsible for the Devil's 
misdeeds, just as he is not responsible for man’s misdeeds; because, in making 
the Devil, God endowed him with free will, just as he did in the case of man. 
(Methodius asks ‘ Quis decepit hominem *, and answers ‘ Diabolus’; he might, 
with equal reason, have gone on to ask ‘ Quis decepit ipsum Diabolum?’) But he 
says that the evil produced by the Devil’s and man’s misuse of free will has resulted 
in greater good. 

3 See note on Corp. IIL. ra, copias cis deigiv. 

4 The word oteraors, as used by Methodius, means ‘constitution’ or ‘ existence 5 
without any implication that the constituted or existent thing is composite ; and 
a’rogvoraroy is equivalent to avrorolyrov or abroyévyyTov. 

5 mpds addidi: ‘mit Gott zusammen’ Slav, trans! 








ASCLEPIUS II 81 


.. + Tacw TO evar adtds Tapérxev, ovK oto mpdrEpov, Odds Tiv 
obcracw dvdpyws exovow. ti texvirny povoy Gédes elvar tov Oedv ; 
ai ri Swpedy abrod raparrp, ds téxvynv [xal]* povyv rH tAy xapurdpevor, 
byt 88 Kal THv Tod evar ovoTacw; odk AV ov J D Hed" obde 
odxt 82 Kal ri ; Vv obyxpovey tt TG Ged" ov 

hy a by é5: ’ af 2 ¢ , 
mo0ev tatra aBdv ednpuwovpynoev airds. . . . ob cxnpdrwv pdvov 
yeyover wonris, 0888 “rv ofcav airG eis obclav owvertparev”® ards 
(yép) gore Kal rdv oboviv Snmwovpyés. 


As to what Plotinus says on this subject, see B. A. G. Fuller, 
The problem of evil in Plotinus, 1912; and Inge, Zhe philosophy of 
Plotinus, vol. i, pp. 22-24, 90, 131-137, and vol. ii, p. 171 sg. 


Ascl. 11. 14b. [Et de his . .. hine sumatur exordium.] 
This must have been written by the compiler to serve as a connect- 
ing-link between Asc/. I and that which he joined on to it. But 
how are we to account for the words de spirttu et de his (or hutc?) 
similibus (rept mvebparos Kat tév tovTw Spoiwv)? We should have 
expected a phrase indicating the subject-matter of Asc/, I], But 
Asc, II is not de spirit; it ought rather to be described as zept 
épyfjs Kaxod, Or wept Ans; and in its original form it probably 
contained no mention of wvetjya. The word sgrritus occurs four 
times in the traditional text of it; but these mentions of spivitus 
are irrelevant to their context. 

It is possible that the words de sfirztu vero et de his similibus 
hinc sumatur exordium were followed, in the composite Adyos 
téheos, by a passage concerning zvetpa,® which preceded Asc. II, 
but has been completely lost. But it is also possible that those 
words were written by way of introduction, not to Asc. II, but to 
Ascl. III. The first paragraph of Asc/. III treats of certain princi 
palia mundanorum, one of which is spivi/us. That paragraph then 
might be described as ‘concerning spirit and the like’; and we 
may suppose that the words e¢ de his... hinc sumatur exordium 
were intended to stand at the beginning of Asc/. III, but were 
separated from it by the subsequent insertion of Asc/. II. The 
irrelevant mentions of sfiritus in Ascl. II may have been added 

1 gat seclust. 

2 «Nicht blos der Formen Schopfer seiend, sondern auch die bei ihm seiende 
Substanz, wie es passend war’ (= ob oxnpatwy povov dv momrhs, GAAd Kal Ti 
cwodcay air@ obciav mpocnévtTws?) Slav. transi, Perhaps, ovdé cvvotcay aire 
obaiay (sc, DAnv dyévytov) (woidrnat) cvverépacer. 


5 It appears from Fragm, 24 (Didymus and Cyril) that there was a discussion of 
nvedua in ‘ the third of the Discourses of Hermes to Asclepius’. 


2806-3 G 


82 ASCLEPIUS 


afterwards, by some one who thought that the introductory 
words made it necessary that something should be said on that subject. 

Fuit deus et dn. Fut = (& dpyp) iv. Cf. Herm. ap. Stob. 
Exc. 1X. 1: wah yéyovey . « « 4 By at (Get?) Fv. 

‘quem Graece credimus mundum", A clause inserted by the 
translator, and corrupted by the copyists. The sense required is 
quam Graeci tAnv, nos mundum dicimus. Cf. Asc. I. 7b: ‘quod 
$duxdév Graeci, nos mundanum dicimus.’ As¢l. IlI. 17a: ‘Ay 
autem (vel mundus).’ 

[Et mundo ... nec deo(,..)}. The meaning of these words 
would seem to be that zvedya ‘ was with or in’ matter in one sense, 
and ‘was with or in’ God in another sense. But the past tense of 
comitabatur and inerat is difficult to explain ; for wvetpa, if the word 
is to be understood in the sense in which it was used by the Stoics, 
cannot be one of the ‘first things’; it is warm air, i.e. matter 
endued with certain qualities, and must therefore be yervyrov. But 
this sentence is an interpolation, and there is no knowing what 
meaning the interpolator may have attached to the word veda. It 
is possible that he was thinking of Gen. 1. 2, rvedpa Oeot éreépero 
érdvw Tod tdaros. 

Haec, de quibus mundus, idcirco non erant, qu(i)a n(ayta 
non erant. AJundus, since it is said to issue from or to be made 
of other things, must here mean xécpos, and not vy, which ‘ was 
in the beginning’. The ‘things out of which the universe has 
come into being’ are, I suppose, the four elements, which have 
been formed by the imposition of qualities on dows try, The 
writer is speaking of a time when the elements had not yet been 
formed, and nothing but God and dzouos DAy was in actual existence. 

in eo iam tune erant unde nasci habuerunt. They existed 
potentially in God and matter, whence they were thereafter to be 
generated. Compare, and contrast, Ascl. 1, 2a: ‘utpote quae in 
creatore fuerint omnia, antequam creasset omnia’; i.e. all created 
things pre-existed potentially in God. Matter, as a second creative 
or generative entity distinct from God, is not admitted in Ascl. I. 
The view of the writer of Asc. II would be better expressed if zw zzs 
(sc. God and matter) were written instead of 77 eo. 

For nasci habuerunt (‘ were to be produced’) cf. Tertull. ad. mul. 
1: etiam filius Dei mori habuit’; Lactant. Div. inst. 4. 12.15: “ut 
ostenderet quod carne indui haberet.’ 

[Non enim ea sola non nata dicuntur quae necdum nata 





ASCLEPIUS II: 14b 83 


sunt, sed ea (etiam quae .. .) &c.|. The MSS. give the 
sentence thus; ‘non enim ea sola non nata dicuntur quae necdum 
nata sunt, sed ea quae carent fecunditate generandi, ita ut ex his 
nihil nasci possit.’ We want sed ea (etiam), to answer to non ea sola ; 
but even with that correction, the words would not yield a satis- 
factory meaning. The writer is apparently distinguishing different 
senses of the word dyévyyros. Now that word could be used in 
three senses, viz. (1) ‘existing without having been generated’ (i.e. 
‘ without beginning’, the most frequent sense in philosophic writings) ; 
(2) ‘not yet generated’ (i. e. not yet existing, but destined to come 
into being at some future time ; Soph. O. C. 973, 8s oire Bddoras 
mw yeveOAlous . . « elxov, GAN dyévvyros 767° }); (3) incapable of 
generating (Theophr. C. P. 6. 10, 1). God and matter (and, 
according to Asc. II. 15 init, space also) are dyévynra in the first 
of these three senses ; the material universe and its contents were, 
before the creation, éyévvyra in the second sense; and space (c. 15 
init.) is ayévvyrov in the third sense (as well as in the first sense). 
The statement given in the MSS. amounts to saying ‘the word 
dyévvyros can be used not only in the second sense, but (also) in the 
third sense’, and leaves unmentioned the first sense, i.e. the sense 
in which it is applicable to God and matter, and with which there- 
fore the writer of Asc/. II is especially concerned. This difficulty 
may be got over by assuming a lacuna after sed ea; we may suppose 
that the sentence ran thus: ‘not only those things are called 
dyévvnra Which have not yet been produced’ (second sense), ‘but 
those things (also which are without beginning)’ (first sense), That 
statement would be intelligible in itself, but is not to the point 
here; it may perhaps be a marginal note wrongly inserted in 


__ the text. 





The following words ((. . .) guae carent fecunditate generandi, tta 
ut ex his nihil nasct possi) have nothing to do with anything that 
has hitherto been mentioned. The only thing spoken of in Asc. II 
that caret fecunditate generandi is space (/ocus) ; and that is spoken of 
only inc, 15. It is possible therefore that these words occurred 
in the passage concerning space in c. rs, or in a note appended 
to that passage, and have been accidentally shifted thence. 

Quaecunque ergo ... cuncta nascuntur. The writer is 
here laying down general propositions concerning ayévvyra, (or 
airoyévyyra), with the intention of afterwards applying these propo- 
sitions to God and matter. 

G2 


84 -  ASCLEPIUS 


de quibus nasci potest (aliqnid), tametsi ea ex se nata sunt. 
The word /ame/si implies that one would at first sight be apt to 
think that atroyéwyra cannot be yeyrixd, i.e. cannot generate 
anything. And in what follows, the same thing is repeatedly 
implied concerning ayévyra. (‘UAy, + + + quamvis nata non 
videatur, a principio tamen in se nascendi procreandique vim 
possidet.’—‘ mundus (i. e. ¢Ay), quamvis natus non sit, in se tamen 
omnium naturas habet’ &c.—‘ materiae, quae creabilis est, tametsi 
creata non est.’) But why should any one be inclined to think that 
abroyévyta or dyévvyra cannot be yewytixd ? 

Lactantius, Div. inst. 2. 8. 42, arguing against the doctrine of 
uncreated matter, says ‘ Materia igitur si facta non est, nec fieri ex 
quicquam potest’. But that is not a true parallel ; for Lactan- 
tius’s fier? ex ea has a different meaning from the Hermetist’s xasct 
ex ea. The reason which Lactantius gives for his statement is that 
matter, when something else is made of it, thereby changes into the 
thing made, and ceases to exist as matter, whereas that which is 
uncreated must be imperishable. That cannot be the reasoning 
implied by our Hermetist ; for he clearly holds that both God and 
matter continue to exist after other things have been generated from 
them. It is possible however that the view hinted at by his 
‘although’ is that atroyéyra or dyévvyta must be unchangeable, 
and that consequently they cannot generate, because the act of 
generating involves a change in the generator. In that case, the 
argument implied would resemble that of Origen as reported by 
Methodius wept rav yernrv (Bonwetsch, p. 341), viz. that 7d way 
must be dvapxov xal cwvaldwv 7G GG, because if not, addovote bat Kal 
peraBddreqw tov arperrov Kal dvaddolwrov cvpBycerat Oedv' ei yap 
Uorepov merotnxe 7d wav, SHAov Ste dd rod pa) Torely eis TO ToLEelv 
peréBare. Cf. Tertull. Adv. Hermog. 12: ‘(Hermogenes) deum 
negat ex semetipso facere (= yevvav) potuisse, quia non demutetur 
quod sit aeternum (= dyévyrov).’ On the same principle, says 
Tertullian, it could be proved that God cannot have made the 
world out of dyéwyros 8An; for if he did, ‘demutationem admisit 
materia, et, si ita est, statum aeternitatis amisit’, 

Ex se nata = abroyévvyra. The word airoyévvytos, ‘ generated 
by or from himself’, was often applied to God, as an equivalent for 
dyévvyros in the sense ‘ without beginning’, or ‘ pre-existent from all 
eternity’, Cf. Corg, VIII. 2 as emended: 6 pév yap warip imo 
érépou otk éyévero’ ef 88 Kal eyévero, i? Eavrod* paddov dé ovmore 








ASCLEPIUS II: 14b 85 


éyévero, GAN’ det gor. . . . 6 88 waryp ards éavtod airs. Lactant. 
Div. inst. t. 7. 13: © quia fieri non potest quin id quod sit aliquando 
esse coeperit, consequens est ut, quoniam nihil ante illum (se. deum) 
fuit, ipse ante omnia ex se ipso sit procreatus ; ideoque ab Apolline * 
atroduyjs, a Sibylla atroyevyjs et dyévyros* et dzrofyros nominatur. 
Quod Seneca, vir acutus, in Exhortationibus vidit. ‘“ Nos” inquit 
“aliunde pendemus: itaque ad aliquem respicimus, cui quod est 
optimum in nobis debeamus. Alius nos edidit, alius instruxit : 
deus ipse se fecit.”’ Lactant. 2. 2. 8. 44: ‘Solus igitur deus est 
qui factus non est. . . . Permanebit semper in eo quod fuit, quia 
non est aliunde generatus, nec ortus ac nativitas eius ex aliqua re 
altera pendet, quae illum mutata dissolvat. Ex se ipso est.’ Aelius 
Aristides 43. 7 ff. Keil: Zebs ra awdvra éroinve’ .. . éroince 8 
Crparos! (degendum xpbrov) atros éavtév. . . . dd¢ éoti mpards Te Kal 
mpecBiraros Kal apxyyérys tov wavtwv, ards é& adrod yevopevos. 
brdre Se eyevero ovx éotw cimetv, GAN Fv te dpa e& dpyis Kat eorar 
elouci, aitomdtup te Kal peilwv 7) é& a&dAov yeyovévat. Compare the 
three following passages, quoted from Pagan oracles by Didymus 
De trinitate, Migne Patr. Gr. tom. XXXII. 788a: dbdvaros 8& Oeds, 
mavayypaos, dotudédixtos, | dppytos, “kpudiors drodjveois'*® adroyéve- 
Odos | tixrov ards éavrdv, det veds, ‘od wounrds',* | abrds dAnOeins 
yeverns, ‘codes!® airds ddnOys. 10. 790C: abris mévra pépe Beds 
dpBporos’ ards éavrod | cal yevérys xal pila wée, Kal Téppa Kad vids. 
Tb, 792 A: od yap am ddivos Geds apBporos, ot8 ard KddArwv | vydvios 
ex Aoxins pdos éSpaxev’ GANA vdoro | dppyrw TorpodddAnte!® KvKAovprevosy 
abroddxeutos | yiverat e€ Bev adrds, ev yeverns te Kal vids. Oracle 
of Apollo, quoted in Zxcerpfa e Theosophia (Buresch, Klaros) § 42 : 
airos dvaf mavrwy, abrdaropos, attoyévebdos, |... cis pdos Hye 
ézavra. (i.e, created the universe). Oracle quoted in Euseb. Pr. 
ev. g. 10 = Ps.-Justin Cohort. ad Graecos 11: potvor Xaddator 
copiny Adxov, 33 ap “EBpator, | abroyévebXov dvaxta ceBaldpevor Oedv 
dyvas. 

The notion that God is ‘self-generated’ was current in Egypt 
from early times. Cf. Book of the Dead, Turin copy, ch. xv 
(Wiedemann, fe/. of anc. Egypt, p. 45): ‘Hail to thee, Ra 


1 T.e. in a certain oracle ascribed to Apollo. 

2 Orac. Sibyll. Fragm. 1. 17 Geffcken: adroyerijs, dyévnros. 
8 Perhaps xpupio Aoyevpaow, 

* Perhaps ov rt mornrds. 

5 Perhaps pdévos. 

5 arpopadryyt cont. Mingarelli, 


86 ASCLEPIUS 


Harmakhis, Khepera who art self-begotten.’ (Jd. p. 47) ‘Thou 
bringest forth thyself without birth’, A document of the XXth 
Dynasty, ¢ 1233-1133 B.c. (é. p. 54) speaks of R& as ‘the 
divine god who created himself, maker of heaven and earth, and 
of the breath of life’. Inscription of El Khargeh, time of Darius 
(Naville, Old Zg. faith, Eng. tr. 1909, p. 146 f.): ‘He is Ra who 
exists by himself; . . . he is the good god who rests in his own 
body and gives birth to himself without coming forth from a mother’s 
womb.’ The same notion is implied in the phrase ‘the husband 
of his mother’, which is often applied to Egyptian gods (Wiedemann 
7. pp. 104, 111) ; and the use of the beetle (AZefer) as a symbol of 
R4 is explained (Naville 7. p. 131 f.) as signifying ‘that he re- 
produces himself by himself,—that he is his own son. To call him 
Kheper, therefore, is to affirm that he will have no end, since he 
can be born again unceasingly from his own substance’. The 
primary meaning of these Egyptian phrases seems to have been that 
the Sun-god daily renews himself, and is thus enabled to rise in 
fresh splendour every morning, rather than that he has had no 
beginning in the past. Did the Greeks borrow from the Egyptians 
the notion expressed by airoyévvytos as a predicate of the supreme 
God, or did they invent it independently ? 

Our Hermetist holds that tA also is adroyévvyros, in the same 
sense that God is. 

Deus ergo sempiternus, deus aeternus. The writer of 
Asc. III would have said rather that God is aeternus (aidvs), 
and the Kosmos sempiternus (didvos) ; see ch. 29 ¢ sgq. 

ohn autem .. . (et spiritus], quamvis nata non videa(nitur. 
It cannot rightly be said of rveSua (in the sense in which that word 
is used in Asc. III cnit., and in the Hermetica in general,) that 
‘it does not appear to have been generated’; for wveSya in that 
sense is a corporeal substance, and as such, must have been 
generated, whether by God alone or (as the writer of Asc/. II would 
say) by God and Ay together. Hence it may be inferred that 
et spiritus has been added by an interpolator (presumably the same 
person who inserted ef mundo comitabatur spiritus &c. above), and 
that the verbs videantur and possident have been accordingly altered 
from singular to plural. This conclusion ,is confirmed by the fact 
that in the two following sentences jAy alone is spoken of, and 
spiritus is ignored. 

nascendi procreandique vim... atque naturam. The sense 








ASCLEPIUS H: 14b 87 


required would be better expressed by omitting xascendt, -gue, and 
atgue naturam, and writing procreandi vim alone. But nascendi 
procreandique may be a faulty translation of yevvyoews ; and vim 
aique naturam, both here and in the following sentence, may be 
the translator’s rendering of the single word dvvayu. 

Fecunditatis etenim initium in qualitate materiae (naturae 
MSS.) est, quae et conceptus et partus in se possidet vim 
atque naturam (materiam MSS.). The writer attributes to tAy 
(that 3A which ‘was in the beginning’) the quality of fecundity. 
He differs in that respect from those Platonists who said that the 
primal tAy is wholly azouos. 

The meaning would have been clearer if fecundttas had been 
written in place of fecunditatis initium. Perhaps fecunditatis initium 
(apy) means ‘ original fecundity’, as opposed to fecundity resulting 
from the action on matter of some cause or agent other than 
itself. 

sine alieno conceptu est sola genorabilis. Sine alieno conceptu, 
in order to suit the context, ought to mean ‘ without being made 
capable of conceiving (i.e. of giving birth to things) by anything 
else’, in contrast to guae vim solam concipiend? habent ex altertus 
commixtione naturae inc. 15 init. But it is difficult to see how 
that sense can be got out of the words. It is possible that the 
Greek was avev ovAArilews ddXorpias, ‘without the assistance of 
anything else’, and that the translator mistakenly supposed otAdnyns 
to be here used in the sense of ‘conception’. (In the preceding 
phrase conceptus et partus, the Greek word translated by conceptus 
may have been xivyous). 

This clause, if taken alone, might seem to imply that Matter is 
capable of generating even without the co-operation of God, But 
that cannot be the writer’s meaning. He holds that in the 
generation of things God and Matter co-operate,—God as Father, 
and Matter as Mother ; and what he here means to assert is that 
(the operation of God as Father being presupposed) Matter is 
capable of discharging the function of Mother without aid from any 
other entity. In other words, Matter is not a merely passive 
‘recipient’, but possesses a generative power co-ordinate with that of 
God. And in-this respect, (as the writer procéeds to point out,) 
Matter differs from Space; for Space is barren in itself, and is 
capable of ‘conceiving’,—i.e. of being filled with yevvyra,—only 
when something else (viz. Matter) is interfused with it. In PI. 


88 ASCLEPIUS 


Tim, 52 A, the trodoy7 (i. e. matter) is identified with x#pa. Possibly 
the writer of Asc/. II had that passage in mind, and spoke of space 
here with the intention of expressing his dissent from the Zimaeus. 
Cf. Asc?, III. 17 b as emended: ddr ‘ multis loci instar qualitatemque 
habere creditur’. 

in se vim totius naturae (yew4cews?) habet. In the tradi- 
tional text, the subject of this clause is Space. But the purpose 
of the whole paragraph appears to be to deny this proposition with 
respect to Space, and affirm it with respect to Matter. I have 
therefore transposed the words. 

15. At vero ea... discernenda sunt. This statement is first 
made in general terms, and is afterwards applied to Space in 
particular. 

ut (...). The clause introduced by wf has disappeared; and 
videatur has probably been substituted for vzdetur by way of an 
attempt to patch up the mutilated passage. 

The meaning appears to be, that on the one ‘hand #Ay is both 
dyévvytos and yevvytuc}, and on the other hand rémos is dyévvytos 
but not -yevvyrixds. 

locus mundi cum his quae in se sunt. J» se must be taken 
to mean in mundo, not 7m loco. The translator ought to have 
written, not zz se, but 7 eo. The words locus mundi &c. signify 
the space in which the whole universe is contained, as opposed to 
the space in which this or that particular thing is contained. Cf. 
Ar. Phys. 4. 209 a 32: Kal té7os 6 pev Kowds, &v @ dravra Ta oopara 
éorw, 6 8 iis, &v & rpdry (exactov 7év cwpndrwv). But as the sense in 
which /ocus is here spoken of is sufficiently explained by the following 
sentence (‘locum autem dico in quo sint omnia’), the words mundz 
cum his quae in se sunt are superfluous ; and the passage would read 
better if they were omitted. 

Neque enim . . . sustinere potuisset. Space must be 
dyévvyrov, because it must have been already in existence before 
any (corporeal) thing came into being. Cf. Pl. Zim. 523: xai 
gapev dvayxatoy eval rov 76 by drav &v tun Témy Kal KaTéxov xXopav 
rivd, To Se par’ ev yh pare mov Kat’ ovpavoy ovdev elvat, Ar. Phys. 
4. 208 b 201f.: ddgee 8 dy xat ‘Hoiodos dpOds déyetv roujoas zpOrov 
Td xdos,... Os Sov mpdrov trdpfar xdpav Tols odor, did 7d vopilev, 
Gomep of moddol, wdvra elval wou kal év rémw. ei 8 éori rowiro, 
Gavpaorh Tis av ety } Tod Térov Sivapis, Kal mporépa mavtwv’ ob yap 
dvev trav ddAwv oddév dor, éxeivo § dvev rav ddNow, dvdyKi zpdrov evar. 








ASCLEPIUS II: 15-16a 89 


The translator has written fofwisse¢ in place of posset; see note on 
Asd. 1. 8, ‘qui illum . . . intueri potuisset’. 

nec qualitates ... dinosci potuissent. dinosci is hardly the 
right word ; for it is the existence of things, and not men’s knowledge 
of them, that is in question. The Greek must have been to the 
effect that things could not ave distinct qualities &c. if they were 
not in space. 

With this paragraph concerning space should be compared 
Asci. III 34a, where a different view is maintained, and the 
independent or substantive existence of space is denied. The two 
passages cannot have been written by the same person. 

Sic ergo et mundus (i.e. d\n) quamvis natus non sit. If 
there is no lacuna between this and the preceding paragraph, sic 
must be taken as qualifying natws non sit, and not omnium naturas 
habet; that is, the meaning must be ‘Matter then, though it is 
likewise (i.e. as Space is) ungenerated’ &c.; for it is in being 
dyévvnra that tAy and rémos are alike. The Latin does not lend 
itself readily to this interpretation; but the translator may have 
misunderstood the Greek. 

in se tamen omnium naturas (yevwyces?) habet. Matter 
contains in itself the power of generating all things. 

Hoe est ergo totum qualitatis (diversae, prout natura est) 
materiae. The All includes both good things and bad things; and 
this diversity in the quality of the things produced results from the 
varying operation of the productive force of matter. It seems certain 
that this was the writer’s meaning, though the exact wording is 
doubtful. Cf. Corp. XIV. 7: pi) ba rv wodley tav -yivopévev 
ovddéy K.T.A. 

16a. Ne ergo dix(er)i(tis), o Asclepi et (Tat et) Hammon. 
It may be presumed that in the original Asc/. II as an independent 
dialogue Hermes addressed his discourse to a single pupil, and 
consequently, that the earliest form of the Greek would be repro- 
_ duced by writing xe ergo dixeris here, and twa tamen causa for vestri 
tamen causa below, and retaining only one of the three names. The 
plural address was probably substituted by the compiler of the Adéyos 
téXevos ; and as he can have had no reason for omitting Tat while 
naming the two other disciples, Za¢ e¢ must have dropped out by 
accident. : 

(Non poterat deus... avertere a rerum natura malitiam.]] 
The traditional text is meaningless. By interchanging this sentence 


i SE _—E™—Oe eee eee eee a ee ee 


go ASCLEPIUS 


with dicunt enim...a malitia liberare below, we obtain the sense 
which the context requires. It is the teacher himself who holds that 
‘it was impossible for God to exclude evil from the universe’; and 
the impiety which he condemns consists in finding fault with God 
for not doing what it was not possible for God to do. Perhaps the 
two sentences may have been intentionally interchanged by a 
transcriber who shrank from applying the words zon poterat 
to God, 

Cf. Pl. Zheaet. 176A: aXN ov? drodécOar Ta kane Suvardrv, ... THV 
82 Ovyarnv piow Kal rovde tov torov wepiTode && dvdyxns. Plut. Ls. e¢ 
Os. 49: peptypevn yap % Todde ToD Koopov yeveois Kal ovoracis ef 
evavtinv ob piv icoobevav duvdpewv, GAA THs Bedtlovos 76 Kparos éoriv" 
drodéobat 88 rHv paidnv ravrdracw adivatoy, roi pev eurepuaviay 
TS copare wohd\jy S2 rH Wvyp Tod wavTds, Kal mpds Tv BeAriova del 
Svtpaxotoay, 

A different view is expressed in Corg. XIV. 7-9, where we are told 
that it is impious to say that God ot dtvara. The writer of that 
“ibellus admits, however, that evil follows on yéveows ‘as rust forms on 
metal’ ; and that amounts to the admission of an dviyxy which God 
cannot overcome. 

Quibus respondendum nihil omnino est. This phrase implies 
contempt, such as is more fully expressed by Celsus in Orig. ¢ Ce/s. 8. 
49: GAG. trois Toto weHopevors ov... dkvov [Todro] Siareyer Gar" obror 
yép <iow of Kat Ta GANG ayporxor Kal axaGapror K.7.d. 

quantum rationabiliter potuisset. Polutt or poterat would 
have been more correct. Cf. sustinere potuisset above. 

sensu, disciplina, intellegentia mentes hominum est mune- 
rare dignatus. God’s purpose in bestowing intelligence on men is 
to give them a protection against evil. Cf. Asc/. III. 22 b, where the 
same thought recurs. The topic is there introduced by these words : 
‘dignum est hunc persequi tractatum, atque expedire quare solis 
hominibus intellegentiam et disciplinam divinitas suam sit inpertire 
dignata.’ The author of that passage could not possibly have written 
thus, if he had already dealt with the same question, and given the 
same answer to it, a few pages before. Here then we have a clear 
proof that Asc/, II and Asc/. III were originally unconnected. 

In ch. 22 b, God’s gift to men is called intellegentia et discipiina, 
and ratio disciplinague. In ch. 41 b, condonans nos sensit, ratione, 
inteliegentia is the translator’s rendering of xapurdpevos jpiv vody, 
Aéyov, yv@ow. Probably therefore in ch. 16a also sezsus is vods (as 





ASCLEPIUS II: 16a 91 


frequently elsewhere in the Asclepius), and intellegentia is yoo; and 
disciplina certainly stands for érior7jpy. The three terms may be 
distinguished thus: vois is the faculty or ‘ part of the soul’, by which 
man knows ; érurrjpy is knowledge in its subordinate branches; and 
yvaors is the supreme knowledge, i.e. the knowledge of God, which 
involves also love of God, and, in its highest degree, union with God. 
Cf. Corp. X. 104: yours 5€ éorw emiorjpys 7 Tédos, eriorHpy Be... 
dodparos, épyive xpwpévyn ait 76 vot.—vods is the mental eye, and 
— émiotypy and yvéors are a lower and a higher grade of mental vision. 
est divina intellegentia prudentiaaque munitus. If 2 man 
_ shuns evil, the intellectual powers by means of which he does so have 
been bestowed on him by God; and thus it is ‘God’s wisdom and 
_ providence’ that has protected him. It would be possible also to 
translate the words thus, ‘he is protected by God-given intuition and 
wisdom’, taking znfe/egentia prudentiague to be properties of man 
_ (equivalent to sensu, disciplina, intellegentia above), instead of proper- 
ties of God. But this would be less suitable to the context ; for the 
thing to be proved is that God has done all that could be done to 
counteract evil. 

fundamentum est enim disciplinae in summa bonitate con- 
sistens. Here discipdina (éxwcrijpy) alone corresponds to sensus, 
| disciplina, intellegentia above. Summa bonitas must mean the good- 
ness of God ; knowledge is a gift bestowed on man by God’s bounty. 
If he had been speaking of human goodness, the writer would rather 
have said that goodness is founded on knowledge (of God). 

[Spiritu autem ...subiectus est]]. This sentence has nothing 
to do with the subject-matter of Asc, II. It is probably a displaced 
marginal appendage to the paragraph concerning sfirifus which 
follows at the beginning of Asc/. III. The words spiritu autem 
ministrantur omnia et vegetantur in mundo are a doublet of Asc/. III. 
17a init., spiritu vero agitantur sive gubernantur omnes in mundo 
Species. 
[Itaque (haec) hactenus a nobis intellegantur.] These words 
‘mark the end of dsci. II. They were probably added by the com- 
piler of the Adyos ré\eos, as were the corresponding words (Et de 
his... hinc sumatur exordium) at the beginning of Asc?. II. 








~ — 


92 ASCLEPIUS 


Asclepius III 


16 b. Mente sola intellegibilis &c. The interest of the writer 
of Ascl. III seems to be centred in the question ‘How ought we to 
worship the gods?’ With a view to answering that question, he sets 
forth a system of theology (ratio divinorum, 19a). The topic of 
theology is introduced in ch. 18 b,’ by the mention of vods and Geol 
vontot ; and accordingly, it is at that point (19 a) that Hermes warns 
his disciple of the sublimity of the truths which he is about to reveal. 
The words which he there uses (dvina nudo mysteria &c.) must be 
taken as applying to the whole of the discourse which follows. But 
by way of leading up to the main topic, the writer, before entering 
on the ratio divinorum, begins by giving a short account of the 
constitution of the sensible or corporeal universe,—a ratio munda- 
norum, or cosmology,—which is contained in chs. 16b, 17 a, 17¢ 
(with chs. 33a-34a added as an appendage). The discourse of 
Hermes begins abruptly with the words Mente sola intellegibilis &c., 
and it is possible that, in Asc/. III as an independent dialogue, these _ 
words were preceded by some introductory sentences, which were 
omitted by the compiler of the Adyos réAeos; but there is no reason 
to think that anything of importance to the exposition of the doctrine 
has been lost here. 

The contents of this preliminary ‘cosmology’ are summed up in 
17.c, where we are told that it deals with principalia omnium 
(mundanorum) ; and these principalia appear to be tAy, popdai, and 
Tved.a. 

Compare the very similar arrangement of the first part of Ascd. I. 
In that /bed/us also, there is a preliminary paragraph on the 
constituents of the Kosmos (chs. 2b, 3 a), ending with the sentence 
* Totus itaque quibus formatus est mundus’ &c., on which follows a 
solemn introduction of the topic of theology (divinitatis ratio, 3 b). 
This parallelism of arrangement is in itself enough to prove that 
Ascl. T and As¢/. III were originally two distinct and unconnected 
documents ; the repetition would be impossible in a single treatise 
composed as a whole by one author. 

In chs. 33 a-34.a, we have a passage treating of Void and Space. 
That passage, where it stands in the MSS., interrupts the continuity 

? It is true that the supreme God has already been spoken of in 16b and 17a; 


but what is said about him there is brought in merely because it is needed for the 
explanation of the Kosmos. 





ASCLEPIUS III: 16b 93 


of the discourse, and is manifestly out of place. There is, in fact, no 
place in Asc, III where it would be in keeping with the context, 
except immediately after ch. 17¢; and at that point, it fits on 
ectly. After speaking of the true principalia mundanorum (viz. 
Ay, poppai, and wvebpa), the writer might very well go on to speak 
of two things (viz. xevév and réros) which are erroneously supposed 
to be principalia mundanorum, and to show that the common opinion 
about them is mistaken. I conclude then that, if the passage on 
Void and Space was intended to form part of Asc/, III at all, it must 
have been meant to stand next after ch. 17.c; and I have transposed 
it accordingly. 

But how did it come to be placed in its traditional position? As 
it is complete in itself, and shows no sign of fracture at the beginning 
or end, its transference can hardly have been caused by the acci- 
dental shifting of a leaf. Possibly its writer (whether the original 
author of Asc/. III or another) may have written it as a supplement 
to chs. 16 b-17c after the bulk of the treatise was finished; he may 
have left it lying loose (perhaps appending a note, which was subse- 
quently overlooked, to indicate the position for which he intended 
it); and a transcriber may have written it in at the point where 
chance had placed it. 

summus qui dicitur. vtyoros, as a designation of God, was in 
common use among the Jews ; it frequently occurs e.g. in the Jewish 
Oracula Sibyllina, But its use is not to be taken as a proof of 
Jewish influence ; for any Greek who had occasion to speak of the 
supreme God might easily hit on the word independently. Zeus was 
called tynocros by Greeks, from the time of Pindar and Aeschylus 
downward. 
sensibilis dei: i.e. mundi. Cf. Ascl. I. 3c: ‘caelum ergo, 
sensibilis deus.’ 6,8: Gedv dparév xat aic@yrov. The term aicOyrés 
eds, as applied to the Kosmos, is ultimately derived from the 
concluding words of Pl. Zim. 
in se circumplectitur [omnem locum]. ‘The writer, who in 
ch. 34a refuses to admit the substaative existence of /ocus, would 
hardly mention it in enumerating the contents of the Kosmos. 
Moreover, space, if mentioned at all, should be said to contain 
the Kosmos rather than to be contained in it. Probably 
therefore the words omnem locum have been inserted by another 
hand. 
omnem rerum substantiam totamque (|[gignentium crean- 


















94 ASCLEPIUS 


tiumque]] materiam. Cf. 17 b as emended: ‘sunt visibiles formae 
... uniuscuiusque . . . tota substantia.’ The otcia of a thing (in the 
sense in which the term is here used) is the sum of the popdaf with 
which its 3A is endued ; so that oteio. and tAy together make up the 
whole contents of the Kosmos. The words gignentium creantiumque, 
as a qualification of maferiam, yield no satisfactory sense ; and on 
the other hand, guantumcumgue est demands a genitive; I have 
therefore transposed the words. Quantumcumque est gignentium 
creantiumgue may be taken to mean the whole number of living 
things which possess reproductive power; and in that sense, the 
phrase describes a part of the contents of the Kosmos, which have 
already been summed up by the terms otofa and Ay. The repro- 
ductive energy of every single animal and plant is included in, and is 
a constituent part of, the vital energy of the Kosmos as a whole, the 
aicGyrds Oeds; and that vital energy is diffused through the Kosmos 
by God, working with zvetyua as his instrument. 

It is possible, however, that the Greek has been inaccurately 
translated, and that guantumcumgue est gignentium creantiumque 
stands for something like wévra ra yevvytd, or waoa yéveots, in the 
sense of ‘all things that come into being’. 

17 a. Quasi organum vel machina, Cf. Cor. X. 18: dpydve 
7G mupl...xpijrat. The function here assigned to wvedpa. (i. e. warm 
air, the vehicle of life) is there assigned to fire. In 19b, we are 
told that ‘aer . .. organum est vel machina omnium, per quam 
omnia fiunt” See note ad loc. 

The writer’s conception of zvedua and its function in the Kosmos 
is derived from the Stoics. But he shows some confusion of thought 
in putting +vefya on a par with dAy and popdai, as one of the three 
principalia mundanorum ; for wvedua in the Stoic sense is itself 
tAy endued with certain poppai or woidryres. It seems as if he here 
limited the term #Ay to the matter of which gross and ponderable 
bodies are made, and assumed avetya to be differently constituted 
from such bodies. See 18 b init, 

Spiritu ... gubernantur omnes in mundo species. The 
word sfecies cannot here signify either the formae visibiles (aicOyra 
<(dy) imposed on matter, or the eternal ida (species divinae and 
incorporales, ch. 35), of which the aicOyra «Sy are copies; for of 
neither of these could it be said that ‘God has distributed to each 
one of them its special dois’. We must therefore take species 
(<iSn) to mean in this sentence either ‘kinds or classes of beings’, 





ASCLEPIUS III: 17a 95 



























(as in Ascl. I. 4 f.) ‘individuals’. Secundum naturam suam 
esponds to wt cuiusgue naturae gualitas est inalfata below; and 
yiusgue there means ‘of each individual thing’. 

 omnium est (formarum) receptaculum. /ormarum is required 
here to complete the sense, and must be understood again with the 
following omniumgque. 

omniumque agitatio atque frequentatio (spiritu efficitur (?)). 
xivnows (agitatio) is here used in the sense of peraGod7, i.e. substitu- 
tion of one form for another; and wixvwors (/requentatio) signifies 
; the unbroken succession of the different forms which a thing assumes 
: e course of its life and growth. avedua is the instrument by 
which life and growth are effected; and this may be expressed in 
other words by saying that wveta is that by means of which the 
‘matter of which the thing consists is endued with a constant 
succession of different forms. In this way the writer combines the 
‘Platonic doctrine of matter and form with the Stoic doctrine of 
VEDA. 

; spiritu vero inplet omnia, ut cuiusque naturae qualitas 
est inaltata. The writer of Asc, III agrees with the Stoics in 
saying that rvedua is present throughout the universe, and is the 
vehicle of life in all things. But he differs from them in recognizing 
‘a supracosmic God by whose ordinance the vitalizing veda is 
distributed to all things in the Kosmos; whereas the supreiie God 
_ of the Stoics is himself a part of the Kosmos, being the zip voepdy 
inherent in the zvedya by which the Kosmos is permeated. 

The Stoic doctrine of rvedya is that which is stated by Virgil,! 
Georg. 4. 221 sgg.: ‘(quidam dixere) deum . . . ire per omnes| 
terrasque tractusque maris caelumque profundum ; | hinc pecudes, 
_ armenta, viros, genus omne ferarum | quemque sibi tenues nascentem 
arcessere vitas.’ Virg. Aen. 6. 724 sgg.: ‘caelum ac terras camposque 
liquentes |. . . spiritus intus alit, totamque infusa per artus | mens 
agitat molem, et magno se corpore miscet. Inde hominum pecu- 
dumque genus, vitaeque volantum,’ &c. 

According to the Stoics, the operations of the wvedya are of 
three different grades, viz. és (cohesive force), pious (vegetable life), 
and yx} (animal and human life), See note on Asc. I. 4. Diog. 
Laert. 7. 138 sg.: rdv xéopov Gihouniebas kata voty Kat mpédvotay, 
— Kabd hyor Xpicurmos ey trois Tig epornlay; cal Toweduvuos é&v (75 
Tpit ?) Ilept Ocav, els darav abrod pépos Sijkovtos tod ‘vod! (dege 
1 Virgil probably got his statement of it from Posidonius. 


96 ASCLEPIUS 


mvetparos),! kabdmep ef’ Qpav ris wuxis’ GAN 78n dv dv pev pador, 
80 Sy 88 Frrov. 8¢ dy piv yap as eis Kexepyer, ds ba trav dordv 
Kat rov vetpwv’ dv dv 88 ds vots, ws bd rod wHyeuovixod. Nemesius 
Nat. hom, 2: Civ pav Néyovor kal ra wavra duya éxrucyy Conv, Kal? 
8 ovvéxerar trd THs Tod wavros Wuyxis «is 7d elvan pedvov Kat pH 
SiadverGar. (All force is a kind of life; and where there is life, 
there is rvedua. Thus even a lump of inorganic matter contains 
so much of life—and accordingly, of rvetua—as is needed to hold 
it together.) See Arnim Sto. Ver. Il, pp. 144-151. 

17 Cc. sunt in his aut per haec aut de his ((mundana, ut ita 
dixerim,)) omnia. J iis refers, I suppose, to tAy; per haec, to 
avedua ; and de his, to the popdai, of which the oto~a of all material 
things consists. This seems to be the best place that can be found 
for the words mundana ut ita dixerim, which occur as a detached 
fragment in 18a, It is probably the translator who, in the words wt 
ita dixerim, apologizes for here using the term mundana, which, as 
employed by him, has the two different meanings xoopuxd and iAuKcd, 

In the MSS., and in previous editions, omnia has been detached 
from this sentence, and taken as the first word of the following 
sentence, which is assigned to Asclepius. 

33 a. inane nec esse aliquid nec esse potuisse. The Pytha- 
goreans (Ar, Pays. 4. 6, 213 b 22: Archytas, as reported by Eudemus, 
Mullach 7%. £4. Gr. II. 117 b), Democritus, and Epicurus asserted 
the existence of void; Plato (Zim. 798) and Aristotle (PAys. 4) 
denied it. The Stoics denied the existence of void within the 
Kosmos, but asserted the existence of infinite void outside 
the Kosmos. The doctrine of Chrysippus on rézos and xevéy is 
reported by Arius Didymus, Diels Doxogr. p. 460. For the Stoic 
view concerning void, see also Aetius, Diels 7d. p. 316 ; Diog. Laert. 
7.140; Cleomedes 1. 2-8 (from Posidonius).?_ The Hermetist, when 

1 vod cannot be right ; if we retain it, we get the statement that vols permeates 
some things as vows, and other things, as something else than vods. For rvedparos, 
cf, Alex. Aphrod. De mixtione p. 223 Bruns: (the Stoics say) 7d wav jv@oGal re 
kat ovvéxecOat, mvedpartds Tivos did mayTds diykovTos abrod. 

® Zeller, Eclectics, Eng. tr. 1883, p. 60, says that ‘ Posidonius, deviating from 
his predecessors (of the Stoic school), would only allow so much space external to 
the world, as would be necessary for the world’s éemvpwois’, Schmekel, Phil. der 
mittleren Stoa, p. 240, expresses the same opinion; according to Posidonius, he 
says, ‘der Raum ,, . ist wzcht zenend/ich, sondern nur so gross als die Raumerfiillung 
es mit sich bringt ; doch ist seine Ausdehnung fast unendlich’. (What is meant by 
‘almost infinite’?) ‘ Wiahrend der Zeit der Weltbildung ist ein Teil desselben 
ausserhalb der Welt vollkommen leer,’ This view of Posidonius’s doctrine is based 


on Aetius, Diels Doxogr. p. 338 : of Srouot clvar ever, cis 8 kara riv éxmipwoow 
dvadvera: 6 kécpos, “dmetpos dv" (dmeipov dv Heeren), —Mocedivios épyoe 7d extds 








ASCLEPIUS III: 17¢, 33a 97 


he wrote this chapter, probably had in view the Stoic doctrine of 
-yoid as expounded by Posidonius. He agrees with the Stoics in 
denying the existence of void within the Kosmos; and it is the Stoic 
assertion of the existence of infinite void outside the Kosmos that 
suggests to him the question which he answers in his own way below, 
‘nec istud enim quod dicitur extra mundum’ &c. 

Cf. Corp, II. 10: ot82 & ray dvrwv éott Kevdv, Kt.A, The argument 
which follows in that document closely resembles that of Asc/, III. 
33a. and 33¢. 

Omnia enim mundi sunt membra plenissima . . . corpori- 
‘bus. The mundi membra (ri. rot xdcpov popia) are the four elements, 
earth, water, air, and fire, which are thought of as disposed in four 
distinct strata. Each of these four strata is wholly filled with bodies ; 
and so the Kosmos as a whole is full. Cf. Corp. II. 2: oriBapds (6 


rov kédapov ob« aretpov, GAX’ baov avrapxes els BidAvow. But this statement is 
surely a blunder of Aetius (or of some one by whom his text has been transmitted), 
caused by a misunderstanding of the passage of Posidonius which is reproduced in 
Cleomedes 1. 2-8 (ed. Ziegler, 1891). Cleomedes, at the point where he speaks of 
the ecfyrosis, is occupied in proving that xevéy exists, and not in ascertaining its 
extent. He says that those who accept the ecfyrosis (as Posidonius did) must 
admit that wevdéy exists outside our presen. Kosmos, because at the ecpyrosis the 

Kosmos will be vaporized, and will consequently expand ‘ to more than ten thousand 
times its present extent’, and there must be room for its expansion; but he then 
goes on to say that even if you deny the ecgyrosis (as Boethus and Panaetius did), 
you must still admit the existence of «evéy outside the Kosmos for another reason, 
which he proceeds to give. And he afterwards asserts emphatically and re eatedly 
that this xevdv is dreipov. E.g. dre ‘52 (lege 5)) ew rod Kdopov hie elvan 
dvaryrator, -yvipipov bd tev mpoanodederypévew* Ere 68 rovTo dnd TayTds pépous abrod 
eis detpoy dupxev dvayxadrarév tort, &d TovTay dv Karapdbomev.... ag’ av 

dpipov ds ove évdéxeral wou mepatodaa 7d ew Kevdy* dmetpov dpa éoriv.... 
evaaier toivuy dpodoyety Has, drerpov eva 7d ew Tod wdcpov Keviy. 

We are told in the note at the end of Cleomedes’ treatise that its contents ‘are 
not the opinions of the writer himself, but have been collected from various writings, 
old and recent; most of what is said in it is taken from Posidonius’, Di s, 
Doxogr. p. 21, speaks of Posidonius, ‘unde Cleomedis libellus... paene totus 
excerptus est’; and Schmekel (p. 189) says that ‘ Cleomedes dies (viz. the passage 
about the ecpyrosis) aus Posidonius abschreibt’. But if Cleomedes is here repro- 
ducing Posidonius, then Posidonins held precisely the doctrine which Aetius, in the 
words quoted above, attributes to the Stoics in general, viz. ‘that there is a yoid 
(outside the Kosmos), into which the Kosmos expands at the ecpyrosis, and that 
this void is infinite’. 

Schmekel himself, 2d. p- 188 n. 2, admits this by implication; for he there says 
‘Mit der periodischen Anflésung der Welt in Fener hangt bei den Stoikern die 

me eines wnendlichen leeren Raumes ausserhalb des Kosmos notwendig 
gusammen’, Hirzel, Users. su Cic. 1, 225 ff. (referred to by Zeller and Diels) 
considers Aetius's statement (that the xevdv of Posidonius was ove dmepov) to be an 
error. I have not read Hirzel’s argument ; but I have little doubt that he is right 
in his conclusion, 

Cleomedes 1. 4 /ix., where he is proving that xevdy does not exist within the 
Kosmos, says obre, pi) ig évds Trérov) ouvexouévo (rod Kécpov), kat rod mvedparos 
») 8 = dvros cuppuods, ofdv 7’ dv Fv ipiv épav 4 dxovar. (For rérov read 

‘Ov. 


2806-3 H 


98 ASCLEPIUS 


Kégpos) merArjpwrat yap dhAwy cwpdrov peydd\wv wokAGv, padAdov Se 
mévrwv bo4 gore cwpdTON. 

validitate et tenuitate diversa. jr, for instance, is fexuis in 
comparison with water, and water in comparison with earth. To an 
atomist, validitas and tenudtas (‘ density’ and ‘ rarity ’) would signify 
the presence of smaller and larger intervals of void between the 
particles of which the body is composed. But the writer, since he 
denies the existence of void, must understand /enuifas ina sense com- 
patible with continuity of substance ; and he probably means by it 
‘readiness to yield to pressure’. 

[Sicuti enim] is followed by no apodosis, and seems to have been 
inserted through some misunderstanding. 

istud .. . quod dicitur extra mundum, si tamen est aliquid. 
The writer cannot resist the tendency to speak to ra voyrd in terms 
of spatial relation ; he talks of them (as does Plato in the myth of the 
Phaedrus and elsewhere) as if they were located in the region beyond 
the outermost sphere of the visible and corporeal Kosmos. But he is 
aware, or half aware, that this is not true in the literal sense of the words; 
and he consequently puts in the saving clause ‘si tamen est aliquid’, 
Cf. ch. 27b: ‘deus, supra verticem summi caeli consistens’ &c, 
The ‘ fullness’ of which he is thinking is the +Ajpwpa of the Suvépes 
of God; and he doubtless knows that God is not situated in a par- 
ticular portion of space (see 34 b) ; yet he cannot help imagining that 
it is so. We have not yet left off using the word ‘heaven’ with 
a similar implication. Even Plotinus, strongly as he insists that the 
vontd are not év romp, cannot avoid the use of spatial terms (dvw, 
éxet, &c.) with reference to them ; cf. Plot. 4. 3. 17, ef yap otpavos év 
TG aichyt@ rémy dyeivwr, etn dv mpocexys tay voyrv ois éoydros. 
For si tamen est aliquid, compare Corp. XI. ii. 19: ra exrds, ef yé 
éxrds tod Kéopov. Corp. IV. 5: ra ey otpavd, Kat ef ri eorw irtp 
otpavdv. The topic may have been suggested to the writer by the 
physical question discussed by Posidonius ; but the point of view of 
the Hermetist, who believes that ri vonrd are dodpara, though he 
may fail at times to realize all that is implied in his belief, is different 
from that of the Stoics, who held that all things real, God not 
excepted, are corporeal. 

divinitati suae: contrasted with naturae suae ef qualitatt below. 
The Gewrys of the abode of God is opposed to the iAdrys of the 
aicOnrds xdopos. Maturae suae et gualitati convententium is equivalent 
to aicOnrav, as divinitati suae similium is equivalent to vonrdv. 








ASCLEPIUS III: 33b,¢ 99 


corporum et animalium. The mention of {da, as a class of 
things distinct from odpara, seems to be out of place here. Possibly, 
however, the Greek was cwpdrwv rArjpys éotl . . . Kal rovrov lwiy 
éxdvrwv, OF something of the sort ; ‘ bodies,—yes, and living bodies.’ 
In the view of the writer, all things in the universe are alive, in higher 
or lower degree ; ‘ spiritu inplet omnia.’ 

[aut quod acie sumus obtunsi]. Distance makes a thing look 
small, by the law of perspective ; but why should the dimness of our 
sight make a thing look small? It may prevent us from seeing the 
thing at all; but it cannot alter the apparent size of the thing, as long 
as the thing is visible to us. These words then are out of place ; 
their writer must have intended them to stand after propter nimiam 
brevitatem aut tenuitatem, and to be followed by non videmus. But 
if placed in that position, they impair the concinnity of the passage ; 
it therefore seems probable that they were added by a later hand. 

propter nimiam brevitatem (aut tenuitatem non videmus), 
A mention of sexwitas is clearly needed here; cf. above, minora vero 
aut tenuiora aut vix videri aut omnino non possunt. The instance of 
air, of which the writer speaks below, is an instance of tenuitas, and 
not of drevitas. 

The things with which the Kosmos are filled are all visible dmAas, 
i.e, corporeal ; but some of them are invisible jyiv. Things which 
are invisible in the latter sense only must be distinguished from 
those which are truly or absolutely éépara, viz. on the one hand ra 
voyrd, and on the other hand ty dyopdos (see ch. 17 b). 

33 b. {[Dico nune daemonas ... commotio.]] This sentence 
is irrelevant to the discussion of void, and must be excised. As- 
suming that the writer held, as most Platonists did, that daemons 
are not bodiless, but have bodies composed of air or mvevpa, he 
might possibly have mentioned them as an instance of things 
corporeal and yet invisible to us; but if this had been his meaning, 
he would not have introduced his instance with the words dico nunc, 
which imply that certain kinds of daemonic beings are the sole or 
chief subject of discussion. See chs. 28, 29a, with which I take 
this passage to be connected. 

83¢. ut inane ab igni, ab aqua. Cf. Cic. De fato rt. 24 (from 
Carneades): ‘quum vas inane dicimus, non ita loquimur ut physici, 
quibus inane esse nihil placet: sed ita ut, verbi causa, sine aqua, 
sine vino, sine oleo vas esse dicamus.’ 

(spiritu tamen et aere,))... vacuum esse non possit. Accord- 

H2 


100 ASCLEPIUS 


ing to the Stoics, rvetya permeates all things, and is continuous 
throughout the Kosmos. Cf. Corp. II. 11: tatra oty, & ob dys evar 
kevd, K.t.A. Timaeus Locr. §: tip pev dv da trav Aerropepiav Su 
mdvtwv jeev, ajp S& ba tov ddAAwv ew rupds, dup S& Sid tas yas. 
dravra § Sv wAypy evi, ovdev Kevedy dzroXcirovra, 

quamvis sit breve [vel magnum]. The words vel magnum 
must have been added by some one who misunderstood the meaning. 
There is some point in saying that not even the smallest portion of 
space can be empty; but there is no point in saying that no portion 
of space, however small or /arge, can be empty. 

84a. Similiter vero de loco dicendum est. Cf. Ase. II. 15, 
where a different and inconsistent account of space is given. 
According to Cleomedes 1. 4, xevdv is 70 ofdv te dé€acar cia, and 
Toros is Kevov id cdparos KaTexdpevov Kal TAYpovpevov. 

18 b. (...) Mundus itaque nutrit corpora, animes spiritus, 
In this paragraph the writer passes on from the principalia munda- 
norum to vots. Compare Asc/. I. 6 b as emended, where a like transi- 
tion is made in very similar language: ‘Alimenta autem sunt bina 
animae et corporis. ... Anima ignis et aeris. .. agitatione nutritur : 
corpora ex aqua et terra... augescunt. [Spiritus. . . cuncta vivificat.] 
Sensus (vots).. . de animalibus cunctis humanos tantum sensus ad 
divinae rationis intellegentiam . . . sustollit.’ 

A connecting passage has probably been lost before mundus 
ttague &c.; but one or two sentences would be enough to fill 
the gap. 

What is here meant by mundus? According to the parallel 
passage in As¢/. I, it ought to mean agua ef terra, the two tnferiora 
mundi elementa (in contrast to fire and air, or to mveduo, which is 
a mixture of fire and air). We must suppose either that the author 
of the Greek wrote iAy, and meant by it ‘gross matter’, i. e. earth 
and water (a thing different from the dows tin spoken of in 17a 
and 17b); or else, that mundus has been wrongly substituted for 
some other term denoting earth and water. 

In the Stoic system, from which the term wvetya is borrowed, 
the statement animas nutrit spiritus (rveipa Wuxds rpépe) would 
be strictly correct ; for the yx of the Stoics is corporeal, and is 
merely a special modification of the corporeal mvedua. The Her- 
metist has taken over the statement unaltered, though according 
to his view the yxy, being incorporeal, cannot be literally ‘ fed’ by 
the corporeal zveia. His meaning would be more exactly expressed 








ASCLEPIUS III: 34a, 18b 101 


by the phrase used elsewhere (e. g. Corp. X. 13), i) Wuxi) &v 3 aved- 
part (6xetrat). The corporeal zvedya brings the incorporeal yuyxi with 
it into the organism into which it enters; and during the life of the 
organism the supply of zveiya is maintained by breathing. 

But it is only the lower and earthly part of the soul,—i. e. such 
‘soul’ or life as men and beasts possess in common,—that is thus 
connected with zvedya. The vois, of which Hermes here proceeds 
to speak, has no corporeal vehicle, but comes direct from God. In 
the following sentence, where vois is called a donum caeleste, otpdviov 
must be understood in a metaphorical sense, as a synonym for 
Getov. The vois is not, like pmewma, a gaseous substance which 
streams down from the higher levels of the Kosmos; nor is it 
conveyed from God to man by any such material substance; it is 
wholly incorporeal. 

Sensus = vois: see Asc’. I. 6b, Asc/. III. 32 b, and Asc, 41 b. 

neque enim omnes, sed pauci. Here vois signifies a divine 
illumination which is not granted to all men, but to the elect alone. 
Cf. Corp. I. 22 and Corp. IV. 3; Pl. Zim. 51 =. In ch. 32b, the 
writer speaks of three different grades of vots; and that which he 
here calls vods without qualification is there distinguished from the 
two lower grades, and called 6 @etos vois. See Asc/, I. 7a, ‘non 
omnes... intellegentiam veram adepti sunt’, where it is implied 
that all men have vois of some sort, but that there is a sensus (vots) 
divinior to which only a few among men attain. Similarly, in 
Corp. IX, 5, we are told that all men have véyows, od ras 82 dvOpwros 
droAavet Tis voijoews’ and that man’s vois gives birth to bad thoughts 
as well as good thoughts. Philo habitually uses the word voids in 
the wider sense; e.g. Leg. adleg. 1. 12. 32: 6 8& vods obros -yeddys 
éori TG dv7i Kat pOaprds, ei pi) 6 Geds Eurvedoecey aid Sivayuw ddnOwis 
fujs. Jd. 2. 16, 64, there is a vots dAoyos. Jb. 3. 9. 29: the good 
man flees from his i8:os voids to God, who is 6 r&v éAwv vots’ and the 
id.os vots is yevytos Kat Ovyrds. 

terrae interiectu...eius privatur lumine. The words ef 
lunae, which followezerrae in most of the MSS., must have been 
inserted by some one who overlooked the significance of interveniente 
nocte, and supposed that the writer was speaking of eclipses. But 
eclipses of the sun do not take place at night. Cf. Cic. Waé. deor. 
2.49: ‘ipsa enim umbra terrae soli officiens (officientis conj. Gesner) 
noctem efficit.’ 

natura, ‘a thing’, The MSS. give mazeria; but the writer 


102 ASCLEPIUS 


would not apply the word %Ay, even in a metaphorical sense, to an 
incorporeal thing. Another instance of confusion between the 
words natura and materia occurs in Asc/. II. 14b. 

caliginum erroribus might possibly mean ‘through wanderings 
caused by darkness’; but it is more probably an inaccurate transla- 
tion of a Greek phrase meaning ‘ by the darkness of error ’. 

sensum (sensus MSS.) deorum animam dixerunt. Here 
again sensus stands for vots. Cf. Corp. XII. i. 8: vovr, apxovra. 
wévrwv, kal Woxiv dvra tot Oeod ; and id. 9: & vois, 7 Tod Geod Wuyi. 
(So the MSS.; but yy} Gedy is different from wuxy rod Geod, and 
that passage is probably corrupt.) Philo De opif. mundi 24. 73: 
7a 8 ab pdvys Kexowdvyxev dperjs, dpéroxa méons dvra Kalas, damep of 
dorépes’ obror yap 66d re evar Néyovrat Kat fda voepd, uaddov dé vods 
airés Exagros, 6Aos 8: éAwv orovdaios, kal mavros dveridextos KaKod, 
(The vots of which Philo here speaks is the sensus divinior, and not 
the lower sort of vots which is common to all mankind.) Sen. Jaz. 
quaest. 1, prolog. 14: ‘Quid ergo interest inter naturam dei et no- 
stram? Nostri melior pars animus est, in illo nulla pars extra 
animum est ; totus est ratio.’ 

The souls of beasts and unilluminated men are devoid of (6 @etos) 
voids ; the soul of the illuminated man is a mixture of that lower soul 
with voids ; the souls of the voyrot Geoi consist wholly of vots, unmixed 
with anything lower. In Corp. X. 19 a, we are told that the soul of 
the pious or illuminated man, when released from the body, rids 
itself of its lower part, and becomes pure vois. In Ascl. I (except 
in the passage on transmigration into the bodies of beasts, r2a), it 
seems to be implied that the voids is the only part of man which is 
immortal ; whence it might be inferred (though the writer does not 
himself draw this inference) that every human soul which survives 
the death of the body ‘becomes pure yois’. 

nee eorum dico omnium. The di ¢erreni, of whom the writer 
speaks in ch. 37 f., are not exempt from 7é6y (‘terrenis etenim diis 
..» facile est irasci’ &c.); consequently, their souls cannot consist 
of vots alone. 

But what of the d caelestes? It might be inferred from what is 
said about them elsewhere in Asc/. III that their souls, though 
incorporated in visible bodies, consist of vods and nothing else ; 
yet in this passage it seems to be implied that this can be said of 
voytoi Geoi only ; for the magui et principales di here spoken of must 
be the vonroi Geoé. 





> 





ASCLEPIUS II[: 19a 103 


1ga. [vel rerum capita vel initia primordiorum]. These 
words are out of place here; they are perhaps an alternative for 
principalia et antiguiora et guast capita vel initia omnium in ch. 17 ¢. 

Magna tibi pando, et divina nudo mysteria. Hermes 
here enters on the main subject of his discourse. The solemn 
introduction marks the transition to a more exalted theme. Hitherto 
he has been speaking of mundana, and his mentions of God in 
chs. 16 b and 17a were merely incidental ; he is now about to speak 
of divina,—that is, to expound the nature of the gods, and explain 
how they ought to be worshipped. 

The word mysteria, as here used, contains no suggestion that 
a theurgic or sacramental operation is about to take place; it 
merely signifies a doctrine which is holy, and has hitherto been 
known to few. The word in itself does not necessarily imply that 
the hearer is under any obligation to keep the doctrine secret from 
others; for it was often used (as by Paul, for instance,) when there 
was no intention of secrecy, or desire for secrecy. But in some of 
the Hermetica (e.g. Corp. XIII) the disciple is expressly forbidden 
to reveal to others what he has heard; it is therefore possible that 
the writer of Asc/. III here intended the word mysteria to suggest 
such a prohibition. See note on Asc. 1b: ‘ tractatum (hunc).. . 
inreligiosae mentis est multorum conscientia publicare.’ 

Note the word #4; Hermes is revealing these ‘mysteries’ to a 
single hearer only. I have accordingly altered sct/o¢e into scz/o below. 

The first part of the ratio divinorum,—i.e. that which (assuming 
my conjectural rearrangement of the text to be right) is contained 
in chs. 18 b, r9 a, ((34 b)), r9 b, (27 ¢, b)), 19 ¢ ((34.c)), (47 b)), (35 
and 36)),—consists of, or includes, an exposition of the Platonic 
doctrine of vonrd, and their relation to aic@yrd. The writer warns 
us, through the mouth of Hermes, that his teaching on this subject 
will not be found easy to understand; and for the modern reader, 
difficulties of a different order have been added. We have to deal 
with a text which has been cut to pieces, and shuffled like a pack 
of cards. I have tried to place the scattered passages in such an 
order that they will yield a more or less continuous sense; but 
I can hardly hope that I have been lucky enough to hit on the 
right place for every fragment. However, some points at least in 
the rearrangement seem certain; for instance, no one, I think, to 
whom it has once been suggested, will doubt that 27¢ belongs to 
the list of otovdpya, and ought to stand immediately after 19 b. 


104 ASCLEPIUS 


Deorum... pars intellegibilis, alia vero sensibilis. The 
aic6yroi Geof are primarily the Kosmos and the heavenly bodies. 
But it would be possible to apply the term also to the ‘ man-made 
gods’ spoken of in ch. 37 ff, i.e. the gods embodied in statues and 
worshipped in the temples. 

magis enim ipsos sentimus quam eos quos visibiles nun- 
cupamus. Does sentimus here stand for aicbavepeba, or for Oewpod- 
pev? Strictly speaking, the voyrot Ocof are v® Or Ady Gewpyrol ; 
but it is possible that the writer here said, by way of an intentional 
paradox, that they are in reality even more fully aic6yrof than are 
the gods commonly called aie @yrof or Sparoi. 

It may be doubted whether the meaning is that we see these 
gods with our bodily eyes, as manifested in their visible works, or 
that we see them with the ‘ eye of the mind ’, by intellectual intuition. 
For the former thought, cf. Corp. V. 2 and 5, and Corg, XI. il. 22a. 
*Onatas the Pythagorean ’ (date unknown ; perhaps so B.c.-A.D. 50?) 
in Stob. r. r. 39, p. 48 W.: 6 wav dy Geds abrds ore Spards ovire aicOnrés, 
GANG Ady pdvov Kat vdw Oewpards’ 7a. 8’ Zoya abr’ Kat ral mpagves (Kat 
Tal kard Tov ovpravra Kd pov éruotpwpdcres)) evapyées Te Kal aig@nrai 
evr rdvtecow dvOpdros. The two thoughts occur together in Philo 
Leg. alleg. 3. 32. 99f., Cohn I, p. 135: of 8 odrws ériAoyfoevor bid. 
oKias Tov Gedy karahapBdvovor, Sia Tov epywv Tov Texvirny Karavoodvres. 
€ore d€ tus TeAecirepos Kal paAdov kexabappévos voids, Ta peydha pvoripia 
pandeis, doris ob« dad tov yeyovérwv 7b atriov yropile, ds adv ard oxtas 
7 pévov, GAN’ trepxipas rd yeryrdv, Eudaow evapyy rod dyerfprov 
AapBdvet. Of which of these two ways of ‘seeing’ the gods is the 
writer of Asc. III here thinking? As he says that we can see them 
more Clearly than we see sensible things, he probably means the 
second and higher of Philo’s two ways of apprehending God. 

ratio divinorum (ratio eoque divinior MSS.). Cf. Ascd, I. 
3b: ‘divinitatis etenim ratio, divina sensus intentione noscenda’ &c. 

suique se fontis liquoribus miscebit, The ‘source’ of the 
teaching is God, or the divine vots, by whom or which the teacher 
is possessed or inspired. 

((Haee ergo ipsa (divinorum), ut dicis, (ratio) quae est, 
o Trismegiste?)) This misplaced fragment, one of the three which 
have been put together in ch. 18a, is evidently a question addressed 
to Hermes ; and such a question is appropriate here. The insertion 
of ratio is suggested by comparison with the subsequent question in 
ch. 20a; ‘ Alia haec iterum ratio quae est, o Trismegiste?’ If I have 








ASCLEPIUS III: 34b 105 


placed the fragment rightly, the rao mentioned in it must be the 
ratio divinorum of which Hermes has just spoken; and if we insert 
divinorum, the words u¢ dicis become intelligible. 

34b. [His ergo sic se habentibus! I assume these words to 
have been added by a reviser, in order to give a superficial appear- 
ance of connexion with ch. 34a, after the passage had been shifted 
from its original position. 

scito[te] intellegibilem mundum ... esse incorporalem &c, 
Hermes begins his ‘revelation of divine mysteries’ by speaking of 
the vonrot Geot (ch. 19a); and we find him speaking of them in 
ch. 19 b also, in which he explains how the world is administered 
by a hierarchy of voyrot Geo’, to whom the several orders of aia Onrot 
Geoi are subject. But the connexion between rg a and 19 b is obscured 
by the loss of an intermediate passage. 

The writer's exposition of the doctrine of voyrol Geof would 
naturally be preceded by some preliminary explanation of yonrd in 
general, or of the voyrés xéopos, in which all voyrd are included, 
and of which the voyrot God are parts. Now in ch. 34b, the voyrds 
xéoptos is spoken of, and spoken of in such a manner as to make it 
evident that, if the passage was in any way connected with a longer 
and fuller discussion of vonrd, it must have stood at the beginning 
of that discussion. An introductory paragraph such as ch. 34), in 
which no previous knowledge of the subject is assumed, is appro- 
priate at the point where voyrd are first spoken of, but would be 
out of place later on in the dialogue, after Hermes has long been 
talking about them. I have therefore transposed ch. 34b, and 
placed it in the gap between 19a and 1gb. If it stood there, it 
must have immediately followed the question asked by Asclepius 
at the end of 19a; but there still remains a lacuna between the 
end of 34 b and the beginning of 19 b. 

The ‘ mystery’, of which Hermes has just said that an intense 
effort of thought is needed to understand it, is in fact the doctrine 
of voyrd,—that is, the Platonic ‘theory of ideas’ (vonr& eiSy). The 
reality and priority of the incorporeal is a fundamental principle of 
Platonism, and is maintained by the Hermetists in general, at least 
to the extent of holding God and vois to be incorporeal ; (concerning 
Yuxn as distinguished from vots,—the lower yvyi,—there is some 
wavering ;) but the author of Asc/. III differs from some of the 
other Hermetic writers in teaching that principle in the special form 
of the Platonic theory of ideas; and he expounds this theory in 


106 ASCLEPIUS 


the first part of his ratio divinorum. The writer of Ascl. I, on the 
other hand, says nothing about ‘ideas’ in the Platonic sense ;1 and 
he would probably have regarded the study of so abstruse a subject 
as an instance of that tmportuna curiositas by which philosophy is 
too often sullied (Asc/. I. 14 a). 

The Platonist Atticus (¢. A.D. 160-180: Euseb. Pr. ev. 1 ae a 
2 ff; Mullach 4r. 4. Gr. III, p. 202) speaks of the theory of ideas 
in a tone resembling that of our Hermetist: 73 bev oty axpov re Kal 
éoxaroy rv Iddrwvos ditocodypdrwy éott 7d Tept TH vonrhy Tabrav 
kal didiov otciay, thy tov iedv. Oa 3) wévos te Kal dydv éoxaros TH 
Yrxn mpoKetra. 6 wey yip Hetarxov Kal ebuduevos airs mavrws 
cidaiuov' 5 8% drokedbels Kat ddwvarjicas Oewpds yevéobar mdvtws 
dpowpos etSarpovias Karadetrerat,. . . radra yep éeorw ols pddiora 
(6 TAdrwv) rév dAdov tmepéxet. vojoas yap? (rov) Oey mpole)orara. 
tov ardvrwv (és) rarépa*® Kat Syproupyov [kat Seordrny Kal xndepova],! 
Kal yvepilor éx ray Epywv Tov texvirny pdrepov vowoas Totro 8 pédre 
Sypuovpyjoew, 0 ofrw [[7S vonOévri]] xarémw er tov Tpaypdrov 
Tpoodyew thy (rh voybérr.))® Snodryra, (ouvedoyicaro)* r(dv) abrdv 3} 
(rpérov)? ra. rod Oeod vorjparta mpeoBirepa (elvat)* rav mpaypdrwv. (kat 
Tatra pyow elvat)® ra rdv ywopévwy mapadelypara, dodpara (dvra) 4 
kal vonrd, xara ri abrd Kal doadros exovra del, wddurra pv Kal mpdros 
atra dvra, wapacria Sé Kal rois GAXors rod eva rowdra exaora ofé 7Ep 
éorl xara riv mpds ari. 6uodryra. (ratra 89)? oumddv 6 WAdrov évra 
ov paora édOivat, od piv obd% Adyw cadds dpwPjvar Svvdueva,"® abrds 

In Ascl. I. 3.c-4, ‘generic forms’ are spoken of, but not vonrd eiéy in the 
distinctively Platonic meaning of that term. 

? Dindorf and Mullach give the whole passage from voyoas yap to Biorh mapa- 
ylverat as one long sentence, so clumsily constructed that it cannot possibly be 
what Atticus wrote, I have divided it into three sentences, and made such 
alterations as are needed to get a satisfactory meaning. 

8 roy Oedv npocotdra Tay dndvroy ds marépa scripst: Oedv mpds aita Trav dmdvroy 
marépa Dindorf : cdv adrés, ds ray dndvrov ratépa Mullach. 

* nal Beondrny nad xndendva seclusi. Tt is on the word Syyuoupydy that the 
argument is based ; the divine ‘craftsman’ works in the same way as a human 
texvirns, first planning or designing in thought the thing which he is about to 
make, and then making the thing in accordance with the plan which is already 
present in his mind. The word warépa is irrelevant; but Atticus may have taken 
it over from the 7imaeus along with dy,u0upydy. 

5 1 vonOévrt huc transposut. 

® auvedoyicato addidi. 

7 rov adrdv 5) tpémov scripsi: rabrdv 5) MSS, rabdrdy 8%) rév tpérov Mullach, 


§ elva addidi, ® «al ratra pnow elvan addidi. 
20 suvopévew scripsi : yevopéveav edd. 
1 évra addide. 12 raira ) addidi. 


18 A reminiscence of Pl. Zim. z8c: rdv pay oby monriv Kal marépa robe Tod 


tavrds ebpeiy Te Epyov Kat ebpdyra els ndvras ddtvarov A€yew. Cf. Herm. af, Stob, 
Exc. I, 





ASCLEPIUS III: 19b, 27¢ 107 





és oldv te Fv trip abréy ciety Kal dpovfca kal rapackevdca rods 

yras erakohovOncew mpayparevodpevos [ratral,’ Kal rv cipracay 
abtod dihocodiay eis todro ouvtagdpevos, wept raird pyot Kal riv Tov- 
tov vonow Thy codpiav elvat, Kal riv emoripyy St js 7d évOpdmrwov 
qéhos Kal % paxapurt Bwr} wapayivera. Atticus then considered 
that the theory of ideas is indispensable for attainment to happiness, 
but is difficult to understand ; and the writer of Asc/. III seems to 
be of the same opinion. 

Compare the opening words of Porphyry’s "Adoppat pds ri voyra : 
—Ilav piv cdpa év réry, otdty 8 trav Kal’ aida dowpdrwv % Te Tou 
otrov év Tory, Ta Kal atta dodpara, abtG & Kpetrrova mavrds eott 
gdparos kal Térov, wavraxy éorw, od Siactaras, GAN’ duepas. 

As to the voytos xéopos, cf. Timaeus Locr. (about a.D. 150?), 
Mullach 77. £4. Gr. Il, p. 39: rédevos 8 dei xara ra aicOyrd éorw 
(6 aicOyrds Kdcpos), dre Kal 7d wapdderypa tivo abd, wepéxov mdvra 
ra voara Coa év aird, oddity éxrés dméAurev dAdo, Spos dv vourav rav- 
rehys, ds 68 6 Kdopos aloGyrov. Among these voyra {Ga must be 
_ included the voyroi Geof of whom the Hermetist speaks. According 
to the view which prevailed among the later Platonists, all iSéac exist 
in God’s thought, and are constituted by God’s thinking ; (see e. g. 
Philo Opif. Mundi 4.19; and in Atticus, quoted above, the iS¢a 
are called ra rot Oeot vonpara ;) and it is to be presumed that the 
voyrot Jeoi are thus constituted. But they are none the less to be 
regarded as distinct and substantively existent persons ; for existence 
in God’s thought is equivalent to reality or substantiality. 

(nisi ei aut longitudinis... addideris... signa)). These 
words have nothing to do with the paragraph about rdos (34a), to 
which they are attached in the MSS. ; and it seems probable that they 
belonged to the discussion of ré dowparov in which I have placed 
them. But mis? does not give a satisfactory connexion; perhaps 
some intervening words have been lost. 

19b, 27¢. Sunt ergo omnium &c, A list of otcudpyau. As this 
passage deals with the higher gods by whom the material universe 
is governed, the most suitable position for it might seem to be 
between the account of the dews summus (26 b-32 b) and the account 
of di terrent (37-38 b); and I was at first inclined to put it there. 
But against this must be set the fact that in ch. ((35)), which there 
is reason to place in the earlier part of the /e//us, we find the 
phrase i//e Omniformis quem diximus deus, which appears to be 


1 raira seclust. 





108 ASCLEPIUS 


a reference to 19 b,' and therefore to imply that 19 b has preceded ; 
and I have accordingly left r9 b in its traditional position, and placed 
27 c next after it. The occurrence of such a passage at this point 
can be justified; for after stating in general terms the relation 
between the voyrdés xdopos and the aloGyrds xdopos, the writer may 
very well have gone on to describe more precisely the system of 
administration by which the government of the latter is carried on 
by vonroi Gcoi, i.e. by members of the former; and if we retain it 
here, rg c follows on appropriately. 

In this passage (19 b and 27) the government of the material 
universe is described as follows. Each region or stratum of the 
material world is presided over by a voyrds Oeds, to whom the term 
ovcidpyys is applied. Each oteudpyys governs the aicOyrot Geot who 
occupy the region over which he presides; and the aic@yrot Geol, 
under the direction of their respective otcidpyat, carry on all the 
processes of the material universe, working ‘ one through another’. 
This phrase seems to mean that the aic@yrol bod of each stratum 
operate immediately on those of the stratum next below them, and 
thus ultimately on all that lies below; the planets, for instance, 
radiate light into the air, and the air transmits it to the earth. 

The scheme may be tabulated thus :— 





Region. ala@nrot Beot. | oda udpyns (vonréds eds). 








I, Outermost sphere Odpards Zeus «Hypatos ?) 
2. Sphere of the fixed stars | The 36 Decani Pantomorphos 

3. The 7 planetary spheres | (The7 planets) Heimarmene 

4. The atmosphere ? Zeus (Neatos?) 


5. Earth and sea ? Zeus Chthonios 





The aioOyrot Oeoi are not expressly named, except in the case of 
the first and second regions; and it may be doubted what names 
the writer would have assigned to those of regions 4 and 5. 
Mother Earth at least was recognized as a ‘visible deity’ by most 
of the nations known to the Hermetist ;? is it to be inferred that 
Air and Sea also are aig@yroi Geoi? Or are the ‘visible gods’ of 


*. The reference back to 19 b might however be got rid of by altering diximus 
into dicémus ; that passage therefore does not prove with absolute certainty that 
19 b stood earlier in the /ébe//us than ((35)). 

® Cf, Plut. Fac. in orbe lunae 21. 14, 9358: 70 38 yas bvoua navel mov pido 
“EXAM Kal riptov, Kal watpGov Hiv Samwep Gddov Twa. Gedv céBeaGar. 





ASCLEPIUS III: 19b, 2a7c¢ 109 


the grosser elements rather the gods of the temple-cults, embodied 
in statues,—the di ¢errent of ch. 38b? The atmosphere was usually 
assigned to the daemons as their special abode ; but daemons are 
not aio@yrot under normal conditions, 

The functions of the several ‘Departmental Rulers’ (otcxdpxac) 
are described as follows, 

(x) The Ruler of the outermost sphere ‘bestows life on all things’, 
employing the visible otpavés as his agent or instrument. Using 
the terms of the theory of forms, as explained in ch. ((35)), we may 
say that the function of this god is to transmit to the material 
world copies of the ideal forms of the several kinds or races of 
living beings, these copies (the ‘generic forms’) being as yet un- 
modified by the differences which distinguish one individual from 
another of the same race. If so, he must transmit them, not directly 
to the world below, but to the otoidpyns next beneath him, to be 
modified by individual differences, before they can be imposed 
on the matter of which individual bodies consist; for the generic 
form never finds material embodiment until it has been thus dif- 
ferentiated. On the other hand, in terms of the Stoic doctrine of 
avedua, it might be said that the function of the first otoudpyys 
consists in the constant emission of vitalizing fire from the material 
substance of the highest heaven, and that this vitalizing element passes 
down through the lower spheres of heaven, and entering the air, 
combines with it to form wvedpa, by which life is conveyed into the 
bodies of men and beasts on earth. The writer of Asc/, III has 
found some difficulty in harmonizing the conceptions which he has 
borrowed from different schools; and perhaps in this passage, as 
elsewhere, the details of his composite system may not have been 
thought out with perfect clearness or consistency. 

(2) The Ruler of the sphere of the fixed stars, working through 
the Decani as his agents, ‘gives to the individuals of each kind 
their diverse forms’; that is, he modifies the generic form or race- 
type by adding to it individual differences. In ch. ((35)), it is 
explained how these individual modifications of the race-type are 
effected by the revolution of the sphere over which this god presides. 
No two individuals are precisely alike, because no two are born 
under precisely the same aspect of the stars. It is held then that 
the form which the individual assumes at birth is determined by 
the influence of the fixed stars,—or rather, of those thirty-six fixed 
stars or star-groups which are called Decani. 








110 ASCLEPIUS 


(3) The Ruler of the planets (including sun and moon) is 
Heimarmene, ‘who changes all things according to the law of 
gvois’; and by dvors we must here understand growth (and decay). 
The birth-form of the individual has been determined by the 
operation of the fixed stars; the continual succession of changes 
which this form undergoes in the process of life and growth is 
determined by the operation of the planets. (As an obvious instance 
of this, we may take the influence of the sun,—and, according to 
ancient belief, of the moon also,—in determining the growth of 
plants.) And since growth proceeds in accordance with fixed laws, 
and is unalterable by the human will (no man ‘by taking thought 
can add a cubit to his stature’), the power which presides over the 
process is named Heimarmene, that is, Fate or Destiny. Regarded 
as the power which determines for good or ill the series of changes 
in the life-history of the individual, sending etrvyia or dvorvyia as 
the case may be, this deity is also named T¥yy, ‘ Fortune’. 

(4) The region between the lunar sphere (the lowest of the 
planetary spheres) above, and the earth below, is filled with air; 
and so the air acts as the medium or ‘instrument’ by which the 
vitalizing influences of the heavenly bodies (of which their visible 
light is an instance) are conveyed to the earth, and to the men’ 
and beasts and plants upon the surface of the earth. Accordingly, 
the function of the Ruler of the air is to transmit and distribute 
these influences ; he is ‘the subordinate distributer of life’. 

(5) The grosser elements, earth and water, of which the lowest 
stratum or central mass of the universe consists, are the material 
of which the bodies of all living beings here below are composed. 
(Cf. Asc?. I. 6b as emended: ‘corpora ex aqua et terra, inferioribus 
mundi elementis, augescunt.’) Thus the function of the Ruler of 
earth and sea is that of ‘supplying nutriment to (the bodies of) all 
mortal beings’, men, beasts, and plants. 

Whence was this scheme derived? The writer must have obtained — 
it either directly or indirectly from a Stoic source; for it is among 
the Stoics that the nearest analogies are to be found. In particular, 
the use of the name Zeus to denote the god by whom the Kosmos 
is administered is characteristic of Stoicism. Cf. ‘The Stoics’ in 
Diog. Laert. 7. 88: 6 vémos 5 Kowds, domep early 5 bpbds Adyos Sid 
mdvrov épxdpevos, 6 aris bv 7G Aud. The name Zeus does not, 
I think, occur elsewhere in the Hermezica.’ It is used occasionally 

1 Except as the name of the planet Jupiter (Kore Hosmu 28). 





ASCLEPIUS III: 19b, 27¢ III 


































in mythical passages of Plato, as in the myth of the Phaedrus; but 
the Platonists in general employed other terms in speaking of their 
supreme God; and most of the earlier Platonists did not, as the 
Stoics did, take pains to find a place in their system for Zeus and 
the other deities of the popular cults and myths. 

It is true that some traces of a system similar to that of Asc/. III. 
1gb occur in the teaching of the Platonist Xenocrates (about 
330 B.C.). Plut. Plat. guaest. 9. 2: Revoxpérys Ala tov & pv (read 
rov pev ev) Tols Kara Ta atta doatrws éxovrw trarov Kade, véarov 8é, 
rov iro ceAjvnv. Clem. Alex. Strom, 5. 117: Hevoxpdrns 8¢.. . rov 
pev trarov Ata, roy 8% véarov Kody, Euacw awatpds drodcre Kal 
viov. Aetius, Diels Doxogr. p. 304, of Xenocrates: dpécKe 8% xal aird 
(etas evar Suvdes Zeller) at évdujxew rots bAuxols croryeious. rovTwv 
88 ri pev (80 dépos evepyodoar Svvapuv “Hpay Meineke) éedq! (“Adnv 
Diels) rporayopevet, riv 8& did 70d Sypod Moweddva, rHv St Sik rijs yas 
gutocropoy Ajpyrpa. tadra dé xopyyijras roils Srwuxois «.7.A. Thus 
we find two distinct schemes of this kind attributed to Xenocrates ; 
and in one of the two, Zeus, with distinctive epithets, acts as depart- 
mental ruler in different regions of the universe. (This notion may 
have been suggested to Xenocrates by Orphic verses such as those 
in Stob. 1. 1. 23, vol. i, p. 29 W.: Zeds mpiros yévero, Leds doratos 
dpytxépavvos, | Zebs xepadry, Zeds péooa, Aids 8 ex wdvra rérvKras. 
Cf. Aesch. fr. 295: Zevs éorw aidyp, Zeis 82 yi, Zeds 8 obpavds' | 
Leds ro. ra wdvra. Xa. Tavs tréprepov.) But the Platonisis in general, 
until after the time of Plotinus, were not interested in this method 
of dealing with the popular theology. On the other hand, the 
Stoics took the notion over from Xenocrates ((Z.) ratra xopyyijoas 
rois Zrwixois, Aetius /. ¢.), and developed it further. Chrysippus, in 
Philodemus De fietate (Diels Doxogr. p. 545f.): Xptourros... 
Aia dy(oiv clva 7d)v drravr(a dioixod)vra Adyov, K(at rHv) Tod SAov 
Yrxyi(v, xa)l ri Tovrou plerox)j wdvra (Liv)... . Ala 8 rdv aibepat 
ods dé tov “AréAAw' Kali) tiv Ajuntpa y(j)v, } 7d ev adr] wvetpa.... 
(x)ai Ata pe(v et)va(erov re)pl ray (yf)v &épa, (r)d(v) Diels 88 exo(re.)vov 
(sc, dépa) "Ard(qv), rov 82 8a rHs yH(s Kat Oaddr(r)ys Too(e83). Kat 
_ To{ds) GAov(s 5)é Geods dyriyous ds Kai rovrous cwvoixeot. (Cf. Asc. 
III. 27 c: ‘aliorum vero vires et effectus per omnia quae sunt 
distribuuntur.’) Diogenes Babylonius (Stoic, about 155 8B.c.) in 
Philodemus #4, (Diels, p. 548f.): 7(d)v K(do)yov ypddea 73 A(t r)dv 
airov imdp(xer)v, i) weprexe(wv 7d)v Ala, x(a6)dae(p) dvOpwm(ov w)uxy(v): 
+++ (el)(ai) re rod Adds 76 pev els THY Oddarray Siarera(x)ds Tocedava, 


} 





112 ASCLEPIUS 


70 8 els viv yiv Anunrpa, 76 & ets (r)dv dpa “Hpay,... 7d 8 eis 70(v) 
ati#)épa “APyvav. According to Diogenes then, Poseidon, Demeter, 
&c,, are merely different parts or aspects of the one world-soul, 
Zeus ; each of them is Zeus operating in some one particular depart- 
ment of the Kosmos. Pseudo-Galen in Diels Doxogr. p. 618 (cf. 
Aetius, #., p. 306): the Stoics rév Oedv wip evrexvov 7) mvedua vopi- 
fovow, 636 BadiLov emt xdcpov yéveow,... Kal Sujxew 8° Sdov rod 
Kdopov, Tas mpoonyopias peradapPdvov [re] kard tas ris BAys 8: Fs 
exépnxe mapadrdéeas. It would seem that these mporynyopia. might 
be either the names Poseidon, Demeter, &c., or the name Zeus 
with different epithets. See also Diog. Laert. 7, 147. 

The Hermetist then must have derived his scheme, either directly 
or indirectly, from a Stoic source. The borrowing from Stoicism 
must have taken place during the period of eclecticism or syncretism ; 
and that period began in the first century Bc. Now the most 
prominent and influential exponent of Stoicism in the period of 
syncretism was Posidonius (roo~so B.c.) ; it was from him especially 
that the later Platonists, and among them the Hermetists, took over 
as much of the Stoic physics as they had a use for; and it is very 
likely that the scheme of ovcvdpxar in Ascl. III is derived, with 
more or less alteration, from the Tlept Gedy or the Tlepit xéopouv of 
Posidonius.' But we need not suppose that the writer of Ase/. IIL 
borrowed directly from Posidonius ; it is more probable that he got 
the contents of this passage from some later writer, by whom the 
scheme of Posidonius had been adopted with some modifications. 

That the scheme, if originally Stoic, has been modified, either 
by the Hermetist himself, or by some intermediary through whom 
it was transmitted to him, is indisputable. The Stoics recognized 
no incorporeal beings; the departmental gods of a Stoic must 
therefore have been corporeal ; they must have been specialized 
forms of the all-pervading mvetpa OF rip voepov. Our Hermetist, 
on the other hand, regards his oboudpxat as voyrol Geol, and thus 
makes them differ in kind from the aicGyroi Geot over whom they 
severally preside. Moreover, the Stoics recognized no supracosmic 
or transcendent deity ; in their system, the sphere of heaven is the 

? There is evidence that in one detail at least the scheme in Asc/. ITI agrees with 
that of Posidonius, _ Aetius, Diels Doxogr. P+ 324: Mocecdévcos (Ti eipapperny evar) 
Tpirqy dnd Arés* mpBrov pév yap eva av Ala, devrepov (Seurépav Diels) 8% ry guow, 
tpitny 5 Thy cipappévny, Now in the scheme in Asci. III, Zeus (Hypatos) stands 


first, and Heimarmene third. The second is ¢ Pantomorphos’; and this name may 
haye been substituted for the word gvors used by Posidonius, 








ASCLEPIUS III: 19b,27¢ 113 


Aryepovexdv of the living Kosmos, and the wip voepév of which that 
sphere consists is itself the supreme God. It must have been this 
deity that, in the Stoic archetype of the scheme before us, was 
named Zeus Hypatos, and described as ruling in the outermost 
sphere. The Hermetist has a place in his system for the cosmic 
God of the Stoics; but he cannot accept him as supreme, for he 
knows of another God above him. The Hermetic writer then was 
bound to supplement the Stoic scheme by a mention of the 
supracosmic God ; and the misplaced fragment 27 b gives precisely 
the supplement required. 

What is the origin of the word oteidpyys? If we could answer 
that question, we might thereby get a clue to the source or sources 
of the passage. I have not met with this word elsewhere; but 
phrases which closely resemble it, and may be considered to imply 
its existence, occur in Adammonis Responsum 8. 2 (Testim.). In 
that chapter the author of the Aesponsum gives a summary of a 
system of theology which he believes to be set forth in the sacred 
books of the Egyptians, but which he must have got from some 
recent writer who interpreted the ‘Books of Thoth’ in a Neopla- 
tonic sense. He tells us (if I read the passage rightly) that the 
first God of that system (who corresponds to the & of Plotinus) 
is called voynrdpxys, because he is dpyy (source or cause) of ra voyra. ; 
and that the second God (who corresponds to the vods of Plotinus) 
is called atrdpyys, ‘cause of himself’, because he ‘ produced himself 
by shining forth’, and is also called otcvordrwp, because he is 
dpxi) rijs obcias, ‘cause of corporeal substance’ (or in other words, 
Demiurgus of the material universe). The terms voytdpxys and 
odc.ordrwp are in that passage used in contrast, and mean respec- 
tively ‘source or cause of voyrd’ and ‘source or cause of otcia’; 
and the author might just as well have written oteudpxys in place 
of oicrdrwp. (Compare Alammonis Resp. 8. 1 b, rodddv obouiv 
Smapxovcdyv, Kat tovrwr diapepovody wapahnbés, roddai mapedoOnoav 
atrav Kal dpxal, Suapdpors Exovoa rdgas. Lb. 8. 5b, eiot yap apxat 
map’ adrots (sc. trois Alyumrios) mAeloves Kal mepi wAcwvwy ovcrdy, 
which is equivalent to saying ‘ there are wAeloves otordpyau’). There 
can be little doubt that voyrdpyys, airdpyns, and otcimdtwp are 
translations of Egyptian words used in the old writings and in 
worship as titles or epithets of certain gods; and if so, otcvo7drwp 
and oteudpxys are probably alternative translations of one and the 
same Egyptian word. 

2806.3 I 








114 ASCLEPIUS 


The system summarized by Abammon in esp. 8. 2 differs, 
however, in some important respects from that given in Asce/. III. 
19b. Firstly, the author of Ase. III knows nothing of a God who 
is éréxewva vod; i.e. he ignores Abammon’s first God, and his 
supreme God corresponds to Abammon’s second God. (It follows 
from this that he has no use for the word voyrdpyys, which is used 
to denote the first God in Abammon’s system.) Secondly, instead 
of speaking, as Abammon does in esf. 8. 2, of a single otcvordrwp, 
who has to do with all ota’a, he speaks of a number of otcidpyar, 
each of whom has to do with one particular department of otcéa.' 
And thirdly, he seems to use the word otowpyys in the sense 
dpxwv otcias, ‘ruler over (a department of) otcfa’, whereas in 
Abammonis Resp. ovcwrdrwp is used in the sense dpxi otcias, 
“source or cause of otoia’. These differences make it unlikely 
that either of the two systems was derived directly from the other ; 
it seems more probable that both were based on or developed 
out of some earlier system in which the term otoidpyys was em- 
ployed. 

In the list of otovépyar in Asc/. III, both the use of the name 
Zeus and the meaning given to the word ofcfa suggest a Stoic 
source, and may be taken to point to Posidonius. But on the 
other hand, that list shows traces of Egyptian influence also. 
Besides the word otovpyys itself, there is mention of Decani and 
Horoscopi, and of the god Pantomorphos; and Posidonius would 
not be likely to make use of those exotic terms. There is therefore 
reason to assume an Egyptian intermediary between Posidonius 
and the Hermetist; and the most probable intermediary is 
Chaeremon, the Egyptian priest and Stoic philosopher, who wrote 
his book on Egyptian religion about a.D. 50. (See note on 
Abammonis Resp. 8. 4b.) 

Thus a hypothesis which would agree well with the facts before 
us may be stated as follows. Posidonius, in the first century B.c., 
gave a list of departmental gods, such as was commonly given by 
the Stoics. The Egyptian Stoic Chaeremon, about a. pD. 50, repro- 
duced that list, with some alterations, among which was the mention 
of the Egyptian star-gods called Decani,? and the use of the 


1'In Resp. 8. 1b and 8, 5b, however, Abammon also implies that there are 
mhetoves ovctapyat, 

2 In Porphyry’s letter to Anebo (Euseb. Pr. ev. 3. 4) and Abammonis Resp. 8.4, 
the Decani and Horoscopi are mentioned in connexion with Chaeremon. Owing ~ 
to corruptions in the texts, there is some doubt whether it was explicitly said there 





ASCLEPIUS III: 19b,27¢c 115 

























Egyptian term ovovdpyys. The author of Asc/. III, about A.D. 270, 
adopted Chaeremon’s list, with such changes as were needed to 
make it agree with his own Platonic tenets. An Egyptian Neo- 
platonist, perhaps about a. D. 280, also made some use of Chaere- 
mon’s book in constructing his system of theology ; and the author 
of Abammonis Resp., about A.D. 300, summarized that Neoplatonic 
system. Hence the points of resemblance between Adammonis 
Resp. and the list of otovdpya in Asc/. III. There is no proof 
that it was so; but it seems probable that something like this 
took place. 

In the usage of the Stoics in general, and of Posidonius in 
particular, otoia is equivalent to ty; the two words denote the 
same thing, and if there is any difference of meaning the difference 
is merely in the point of view from which the thing is regarded.’ 
The Stoic otcva is ‘ material substance’. The term might be used 
to signify dows ty ;? but dows tAy is a mere abstraction, and 
never occurs in concrete reality. otoia as actually existing is 
always invested with the qualities of one or other of the four 
elements. At the eapyrosis, all otata takes the form of fire; in the 
diacosmesis, portions of the total otoia change into air, water, and 
earth, while the rest retains the form of fire. Thus the term covers 
the four elements collectively. Accordingly, in a Stoic document, 
otodpyns should mean ‘one who presides over (some kind of) 
material substance’; and that appears to be the sense in which the 
word is used in Asc/, III. rgb. The first three ovcidpya preside 
over different spheres of heaven, i.e. different strata of fire; the 
fourth presides over air; the fifth presides over earth and water. 

19 b. Sunt ergo omnium ‘specierum! principes dii (in- 
tellegibiles), ((quorum est [princeps] (appellatio) odcid(pxa).)) 
It may be inferred from the following mention of diz sensibiles in 
that the Decani and Horoscopi were spoken of by Chaeremon himself; but at any 
rate it seems to be implied that they were. 

1 Cf Arius Didymus, Diels Doxogr. p. 457: Zijvevos, ovciay 52 elva thy tay 
bvrow mdvrwv mpwtny bAny, Tadryny Bt macav dikioy, kal ot're whelw yvopévny ovTeE 
éhdtro 7a 58 pépyn ravrns ob del radTa diapévery, GAG SratpetoOa Kal cvyxeiobat. 
+s Shnoe 58 5 Moceaddvios Thy T&v bAwv ovalay Kal tAnv drovov Kal dpoppoy evar, 
nad’ Bcov obbev dworeraypévoy idor Exe oxFua ovde rodtyTa Kas’ atrhy' det F & 
Tim oxhpar: Kat rodrntt elvat. Siapépew de rv ovatay Tis HAns, THY (abrhy add. 
Hirzel) ofcay xara tiv badaracw, émvoig pdvov. 

? An instance of the use of the term #A7 by Stoics is given in Plut. Sto. repugn. 
43. 4: the Stoics say ri bAnv dpyoviéé éauris xal dxtvyrov troxeioGat Tails mobry- 
ow" Tas BE wodTyTaAs, nvedpaTa ovcas xal Tdvous depwbeis (i, €, strains or pressures of 
a gaseous substance), ols dv éyyévavrar pépeot ris bans eldomoeiv Exacta Kal 
oxnparicear, 

12 





116 ASCLEPIUS 


contrast, that the gods here spoken of are voyrof; I have therefore 
added invellegibiles. 

The list of otodpyae must have been preceded by some explana- 
tion of the term otordpyys; and it is to be presumed that the 
explanation needed was given in this sentence. The word oicia 
given in the MSS, is almost certainly a remnant of oicupya; for 
if the translator had read otcia in the Greek text, he would have 
translated it into Latin, and written swdstantia, If we assume that 
princeps has come by duplication from princi~es above, and has 
ousted some such word as appellatio (rpooyyopia), we get the clause 
quorum est appellatio oioidpxa. (Cf. guorum est vocabulum Horoscopi 
below.) But it is evident from the contents of the list that the 
gods called otodpxa: are vontol, not aicOyrot; (t¥xy and ciuappevn, 
for instance, are not aic@yrd;) the antecedent of guorum must 
therefore be aii intellegibiles, and we must transpose the relative 
clause accordingly. 

But how is specierum to be dealt with? To suit ths context, 
either substantiarum (otciwyv) or something like mundi membrorum 
(rév rod Kdopov popiwy) seems to be required. We must assume 
either that specrerum has been substituted by error for some other 
word (swbslantiarum?), or that something which would have made 
Specterum intelligible has been lost. Possibly the Hermetist may 
have written rdvrwv trav (ris otctas) «iddy dpxovres, ‘rulers over all 
the several kinds of material substance’. That would, I think, 
be a correct description of the sense in which he uses the word 
ovodpyat. 

utriusque originis consimiles suae. A voyrds Oeds is soul 
without body, and that soul is pure vods, which comes direct from 
God ; a deity of that class has therefore only one origo. On the 
other hand, an aic@yrds Oeds, e.g. the Sun or Moon, consists, like 
a man, of soul and body (though, in the case of the god, both soul 
and body are of a more exalted nature); he has therefore two 
origines, His soul, if it is wholly vods,—or that part of it which is 
vots, if it is not wholly vots,—comes straight from God; his body, 
being composed of one or more of the cosmic elements, comes 
from matter,—i.e. also from God, in so far as matter is endued 
with forms by God, but not directly or immediately. 

Is the statement that the alc@yrds Geds ‘resembles both his 
sources ’ meant to imply that his soul is affected by its combination 
with a body, and includes something other and lower than vots? 





ASCLEPIUS III: 19b 117 










































This certainly holds good in the case of the dit ferreni, but hardly 
in the case of the diz caelestes, 

opus suum inluminans, The radiation of light is a typical 
instance of the influences of the di caelestes on the world below. 
But das is probably here meant to imply fw; cf. wi cal das in 
Corp. I. 9 &c. 

Caeli, vel quidquid est quod eo nomine conprehenditur. 
These words imply that oipayds here signifies something more than 
the mere material sphere of heaven. This oipavds is in fact the 
fyeuovixdv or primary seat of consciousness of the living Kosmos. 
According to the Stoic cosmology in its most usual form (see, for 
instance, Chrysippus af. Arium Didymum, Diels Doxogr. p. 466), 
the sphere of the fixed stars is the outermost sphere of the universe. 
But the odpavds here spoken of is distinguished from the region in 
which the Decani (i.e. certain fixed stars) are situated, and is 
assigned to a different otcudpyys ; i. e. the writer assumes the existence 
of an outermost sphere distinct from and beyond the sphere of the 
fixed stars,—if indeed he located all the fixed stars, as Chrysippus 
and most other people did, in the surface of a single sphere. But 
possibly his conception of the structure of the heavens may have 
more or less resembled that of the author of Herm. af. Stob. 
Exc. VI, who places the circle of the Zodiac below (i. e. nearer to 
the earth than) the outermost sphere (7d zepuextixdy TOY démdvTwv 
capa), and makes the Decani float in the space between the outer- 
most sphere and the circle of the Zodiac. 

Iuppiter (iwaros). In the MSS., two of the five odaudpyxa: are 
named Juppiter simply, and a third is named Juppiter Plutonius. 
It is evident that distinctive epithets must have been given to the 
first Zeus and the second, as well as to the third. Perhaps the 
translator retained the first two epithets in their Greek form, and 
a copyist omitted them because he could not make out the Greek 
letters. I have inserted jraros and véaros, the epithets applied to 
Zeus in a similar connexion by Xenocrates (Plut. Plat. guaest. 9. 2, 
quoted on p. rrz), and I have assumed P/ufonius to be the translator's 
rendering of x6dvios ; that epithet would agree well with the function 
of making the earth (xév) produce trees and crops, which is 
assigned to this third Zeus. As to véaros, it may be objected that 
the second Zeus cannot be ‘lowest’ if there is another below him ; 
but perhaps that objection is lessened by the fact that Zeus Chthonios 
_ was commonly regarded as a different person from the Zeus of the 


118 ASCLEPIUS 


upper world. There must have been three epithets, but we cannot 
be sure what the epithets were. 

It may be suspected that in the earliest form of the Stoic list all 
the departmental gods alike were named Zeus, with distinctive 
epithets. Tvxyy and Eivapyévy may have been substituted for the 
third by a Greek Stoic (Posidonius?), and Tavréuopdos for the 
second by an Egyptian (Chaeremon ?). 

[Solis otcrdpxys lumen est; bonum enim luminis per orbem 
nobis solis infunditur.| This sentence is irreconcilable with the 
context. We are told in it that the ovovdpyys of the sun is the 
thing conferred on us by the sun, viz. light. But this implies 
a meaning of ovo.dpyys entirely different from the sense in which 
it is used before and after. In order to make the preceding state- 
ment correspond with this, we should have to rewrite it thus, ‘The 
ovotdpxys of heaven is life ; for life is given to all through heaven’; 
and so on throughout the list. On the other hand, in order to 
make the statement about the sun correspond with the rest, we 
should have to substitute some god-name, e.g. Apollo, for demen, 
and alter the sentence into this: Sod’s ovcudpyns Apollo est ; bonum 
enim luminis (ab Apolline) per orbem nobis solis infunditur, But 
even if the text were thus altered, further difficulties would remain. 
The insertion of the sun at this point, between the outermost 
sphere on the one hand and the fixed stars called Decani on the 
other, makes confusion in the otherwise orderly arrangement of 
the system. Besides, the sun is brought in again below, where it 
is in its proper place; for one of the seven (planetary) spheres, 
which have Heimarmene for their ovcwdpyys, must be the sphere 
of the sun. It is therefore evident that the sentence Solis... 
infunditur has been inserted by another hand; and we must class 
it with the other ‘solar interpolations’ which occur in the Hermetica. 
See Asc/. Il. 29b jin. and 29c¢; Corp. X.2; Corp. XI. ii. 154; 
Herm. af, Stob. Zxc. IIA. 14. 

(Decanorum) [[ ]], id est, eodem loco semper defixorum 
siderum ((XXXVI quorum vocabulum est Horoscopi)), horum 
odotdpxns &c. We need at the beginning of the sentence a substan- 
tive to correspond to caeli, [solis], sepiem sphaerae, aer, terrae in the 
corresponding sentences ; and there is no doubt that the ‘thirty-six 
fixed stars’ spoken of are the Decani, Concerning the Decani, see 
Herm. ag. Stob. Zxc. VI. 

The number XXXVI, and the relative clause which follows it, 





ASCLEPIUS III: t9b 119 































are clearly out of place in the MSS. The traditional text implies 
that the ‘the thirty-six’ are identical with the whole number of 
fixed stars, which is absurd. The phrase eodem loco semper aefixo- 
rum siderum therefore needs qualification ; and the words XXX VI 
quorum vocabulum est Horoscopi, when placed after it, supply pre- 
cisely the qualification needed. Moreover, Aorvwm, which is otiose 
when read immediately after siderwm, serves a purpose when the 
relative clause is interposed. 

quorum vocabulum est Horoscopi. The word épockdros was 
used in several different senses. (a) It is probable that the word 
originally stood for dpooxéros dotijp, and signified a star which was 
rising at a given hour, and which consequently ‘ watched over’ that 
hour, and exerted a dominant influence over any event (e.g, the 
birth of a child) which took place at the hour in question, (4) In 
astrology, &pooxdmos was used to signify, not a star, but the point 
of the zodiacal circle which was rising at the moment of a person’s 
birth,—or in other words, the point of the zodiacal circle which 
was at that moment intersected by the eastern horizon,—whether 
that point was occupied by a star or not. In constructing the 
‘theme of geniture’ (rd O¢ua ris yevérews), i.e. the diagram drawn 
by an astrologer to indicate the positions of the stars and planets at 
the moment of a man’s birth, with a view to predicting his destiny, 
the dpocxéros in this sense was the first point determined, and the 
whole diagram was dependent on its determination. (¢) It seems 
that the word dpocxdros was sometimes used as a synonym for 
Sexavés. Thus, in an astrological papyrus,’ the probable date of 
which is A.D. 95-155, of Aapapolt AS’ épooxdro: are mentioned. The 
names of several of these ‘thirty-six bright Horoscopi’ are given, 
and appear to be identical with names which occur in the lists of 
the Egyptian Decani.? Similarly, the writer of Asc/, III. 19 b uses 


1 Brit. Mus. Cat. XCVIII, pp. 126-130; Bouché-Leclercq, L’astrol. gr. 222. 4 
and 230. 3; Wessely, Denkschr. der k. Akad. der Wissensch., phil.-hist. Cl. 
XXXVI, Wien 1888, Ad¢h..2, p. 150. 

2 Yet the writer of that document also speaks of Sexavoi, and apparently dis- 
tinguishes the Sexavol from the thirty-six Aayrpot dpooxéot. Bouche-Leclercq says 
that in this respect the document ‘ pose une énigme dont auteur a gardé le clef’. 
Possibly the same thirty-six stars or star-groups were denoted by both terms, but 
were used in two different ways for drawing astrological inferences, and were called 
Sexayol when used in one way, and Aapapot dpooxéma when used in another. 

In Porphyry’s Epistle to Anebo (Euseb, Praep. ev. 3. 4), and Adammonis Resp. 
8. 4, Sexavol and dpucxdmo are spoken of together, in connexion with Chaeremon. 

Galen Mepi dwAdv papu. 6. provem., vol. ix, p. 798 K. (Reitzenstein Poimandr. 
p-3): acertain Pamphilus of the Ptolemac period, Bordvys pépvyrat .. . wept iis 





| 


ae ee pm a ge, a a ee ae 


120 ASCLEPIUS 


GporKdo. as a synonym for Sexavoi. This use of the word appears to 
be derived from sense (a), In the view of those who regarded the 
influence of the Decani as predominant, the wpooxdzos (dorjp) who 
presided over a given person’s birth would be one of the Decani, 
viz. that Decanus who was nearest to the eastern horizon at the 
moment when the child was born. Each Decanus in turn would be 
épooéros in this sense during a space of forty minutes, and all the 
thirty-six Decani would successively become «pocxdro. in the course 
of twenty-four hours. And since the most important function of 
the Decanus was that of operating as dpooxdmos in his turn, the 
word dpooxdmos came to be used as a synonym for Sexavds.? 

quem Nayvrépopdov (vel Omniformem) vocant. The translator 
added vel Omniformem. See ch. ((35)), where the god called 
Pantomorphos is spoken of again. It seems clear that 6 wavtop,opos 
(sc. xékhos) properly meant the Zodiac; and the Zodiac was probably 
called avréuopdos by reason of the various forms of the fda 
contained in it, which were thought to determine the forms and 
shape the destinies of the men born under their influence. In the 
Stoic-Egyptian source (Chaeremon?), the Pantomorphos must have 
been the visible Zodiac itself, regarded as a god who presides over 
births, and operates through the agency of the Decani, i.e. the 
star-gods resident in the thirty-six subdivisions of the Zodiac; but 
the Hermetist has made him a voyrds eds who rules over the 
Decani. Cf. Corp. XIII. 12 as emended: the human body é« rod 
fwodédpou Kixdov (i.e. the Zodiac) ovvécry, yervGvros picews puds 
mavTopoppous ideas, xt.’ Corp. XVI. 12 as emended: 6 voynrds 
Kécpos, Tov aicOyrov Kécpov weptéxwv, wANpot Tov SyKov mouKiAas Kal 
ravropoppois ideas. Kore Kosmu (Stob. xc, XXIII) 20 as emended : 
God rév fodiaxov . . . . déragée, kal tor ravrovpyods yapirdpevos 
Sduvduers (i. €. powers of producing all manner of forms), yeryytuxdy 
éxédevoer elvar Tov eis del peAAdvTwv eveorOar ravtwv Lewy. Porphyr. De 
abst, 4. 16: 6 Te Ta AcovTiKd TapadrapPaver (in the Mithraic mysteries) 
mepiriGeran wavrodaras Lowy poppds’ Gv thy airiay drodiovs HdAXas 
év rots rept ToD MiOpa tiv xowyy pyot dopay (i.e. the general opinion) 
épodoye?.. . év rit Tay eis ‘Eppa tov Aiydrrioy dvabepopévar BiBrlov eyyeypapeat, 
mepiéxovre Tas AS’ Trav dpocednew iepds Bordvas. The wpooxdro to whom the 
thirty-six plants are assigned must be the thirty-six Decani. 

1 In Clem. Alex. Strom. 6. 4. 35, &pooxénos is used in yet another sense, as the 
title of an Egyptian priest (elsewhere called dpoAdyos) whose special function is to 
study the four Egyptian ‘Books of Hermes (Thoth)’ which treat of astronomy. 


The word there means a man who ‘ observes the hours’, i.e, notes the positions of 
the heavenly bodies at certain times. 





ASCLEPIUS III: 19b 121 
































ler Oar [ds] mpds THY TOD Lediaxod Kbxdov (évépyetav ?) daoreivew’ Thy 5E 
ddnOargy teddy Kt. 

The word avrépopdos occurs as a title of a divine person in one 
of the Coptic-Gnostic documents, C. Schmidt I, p. 344. 

In Corp. XI. ii. 16 a, the word wavrépopdos is used in a different 
connexion, being applied to the Kosmos; and it there means 
‘taking all (corporeal) forms’. (Similarly, in Plut. £7 apud Delph. 
g. 388 £, the Kosmos is described as wavrodarés & te popdais Kal 
ay rdbeor kat Suvdpeot Siaddpos yeyvopevos.) But in Asc/. III, the 
word means ‘ imposing all manner of forms on men and other living 
creatures (at their birth)’. 

The function of this god is more fully explained in ch. ((35)), and 
in order to make the following words in 19b agree with that 
explanation, I have substituted simgudis for diversis. The Panto- 
morphos speciebus singulis diversas formas facit; e.g. at the birth 
of each individual of the human kind he assigns to that individual 
a form distinct from those of all other human beings. And he 
discharges this function through his agents the Decani; or more 
precisely, he operates in each case by the agency of the particular 
Decanus who is dpockdémos (i.e. is on the eastern horizon) at the 
time when the child is born. 

ai kododpevar émrd opaipar exouow (odor)dpyny thy Kahoupéryy 
réxny 7 cipappévyy—Septem sphaerae quae vocantur habent 
otcidpxny (odcidpxas MSS.), id est sui principem (principes 
MSS.), quam Fortunam dicunt aut Eipappémy. In Lydus’s 
quotation, épyyv is evidently an error for otoudpynv. The omission 
of otiai- was caused by the preceding éy-ovew. On the other hand, 
Lydus is undoubtedly right in giving (ovov)dpynv and jms... 
é\Aov? in the singular; and the plurals otc.dpyas, principes, guibus 
in Asc/. III must have been substituted by some one who misunder- 
stood the passage. Heimarmene presides over the seven planetary 
spheres collectively, as the Pantomorphos presides over the thirty- 
six Decani ; there is not a separate odcupyns for each planet. As 
to the connexion of the planets, or the stars in general, with Heimar- 
mene, cf. Herm. af. Stob. Zxc. XII. 2 and Zxc, XIV. 2. See also 
Ascl. IIl. 39 f. 

In the Greek of Lydus, the words kat él rav atréy otk é@ pévew 
must be a later addition, because the next words in the Latin, /ege 
naturae &c., which follow appropriately on inmutantur omnia = 
wdvra ddAowwi, would not be a suitable continuation of ot« é¢ pévew. 


ee ee eS eee eee ee 


122, ASCLEPIUS 


In Lydus, the words 4 S¢ civappévy... . od8tv draxrov, extracted 
from the Greek original of Asc/, III. 39, follow immediately on é 
Hévew here, being written as if they belonged to the same passage. 
That is, Lydus extracted from the Adyos ré\eos two different 
passages concerning cipappévy, and wrote them down consecutively ; 
but either he omitted to mark where one ended and the other 
began, or the mark of division has been omitted by a transcriber. 

stabilitate firmissima sempiterna agitatione variate. Sia- 
bilitate firmissima variata is ablative absolute (genitive in the Greek) ; 
sempiterna agitationeis ablative of manner (dative in the Greek), qualify- 
ing varta’a. The meaning is, that all things in the Kosmos change, 
but the law by which they change is changeless. Cf. chs. 31, 32 a, and 
40 b. Philo, Vita Mosis 2.(3). 12. 125, Cohn IV, p. 229: Adyw yap ai 
Tporat kat éryovor Spat teraypevy Kat rayio cvvioravrat, Td Tapadossrarov, 
did Tijs Kaipiov peraBodjs érdecxvipevat Thy diawviLovoay abrav poviy. 

19 b, 27 c. secundus (vitae) || dispensator. It is evident that 
ch. 27 ¢ is a displaced piece of the list of otoidpya, and should 
follow here. We have been told that Zeus (Hypatos), the first of 
the otovépyar, ‘per caelum omnibus praebet vitam’; he then is the 
Primus vitae dispensator, We have also been told that the air is 
the instrument by means of which the influences of Zeus Hypatos 
and his subordinates in the heavens are brought to bear upon the 
world below; hence it follows that the oicudpyys who presides over 
the air is secundus vitae dispensator. 

The doctrine that air is the source or vehicle of life was asserted 
in the age of Pericles by Diogenes of Apollonia. (See Gomperz, 
Greek thinkers, Eng. tr. I, p. 371 f.)' The function assigned to air 
in the system of Diogenes was similar to that which was afterwards 
assigned to mvedua (i. e. warm air) in the system of the Stoics; and 
the Stoic doctrine of zveua must have been derived in part from 
the air-theory of Diogenes. The Stoics held that the vitalizing 
element in wveiya is rip, or heat; but the ambiguity of the word 
mvetpa, which, in one of its uses, meant wind (i.e. air in motion), 
and was sometimes used as a synonym for dp, would tend to 
conceal the difference between the two doctrines. The Hermetist 
may therefore have been unconscious of any inconsistency between 
what he here says about air and what he said about zvedya in ch. 17 a. 


? Another point of agreement between Asc/. III. 19b and the doctrine of 
Diogenes may be noted, Diogenes said that Zeus is air and nothing but air 
(Gomperz 7. p. 375); and in 4sc/. III, the obardpyns of the air is a Zeus. : 





ASCLEPIUS III: 19b, 27¢, b, 19¢, 34c 123 


27¢. animantium mortalium, The beings which are both 
- Zuvxa. and Ovyrd are men and beasts. The term does not include 
vegetables, which are here mentioned separately. See As¢/. I. 4, 
where vegetables are said to be sine anima, i.e. diuxa. 

27b, Deus, supra verticem summi caeli consistens. Cf. 
ch, 33a, ‘quod dicitur extra mundum, si tamen est aliquid.’ Ch. 30 
init.: ‘in ipsa vitali aeternitate locus est mundi.’ The Hermetist 
imagines the boundless space outside the cosmic sphere,—that 
space which the Stoics called xevév,—to be filled with the presence 
of God, who thence watches over the Kosmos from every side 
(‘ubique est, omniaque circum inspicit’). 

19 c. (Hoc modo coniuncta sunt in)mortalibus. .. adunata 
vero, unum, The text of this passage is badly damaged; but the 
writer’s meaning was probably not far from that expressed by my 
attempt at restoration. 

(in)mortalibus mortalia. A few lines below, the MSS. give 
de mortalibus mortalia, which is presumably a misplaced doublet. 
The phrase ef Ais similia, which follows mortalia here, may be 
a corruption of sezsibilia, which follows mortaiia below. 

[vel potius duo... nutu efficiuntur]. These words are out 
of keeping with the context, and cannot have been written by the 
same man who wrote aut potius unum a few lines above. They 
express a dualistic doctrine of the same kind as that which is set 
forth in Asc. II, though not quite identical with it. Both the 
author of Asc/. III and the author of Asc’. I would have regarded 
the words vel potius duo as blasphemy. 

id est, de materia qua fiunt &c. The meaning intended would 
be more clearly expressed by writing ‘vel potius duo sunt, (viz.) id 
unde fiunt omnia, et is a quo fiunt; id est, materia de qua fiunt, et 
eius voluntas cujus nutu efficiuntur’, The two dpyaé of all things 
are matter and Goa’s will. 

84¢. quae omnia sine deo vegetari non possunt. Vegelare 
means ‘to quicken’ or ‘call into life’; and this applies to all 
corporeal things; for all bodies without exception are alive, in 
higher or lower degree. God’s creative activity may be described 
either by saying that he infuses life into matter, or that he imposes 
forms on matter; for all matter, in so far as it is formed, is vitalized. 
The voyra iy, from which the forms imposed on matter are copied, 
are the archetypes of living beings, and are themselves living beings 
of a higher order (vonra {Ga, Pl. Zim.). 





i 


——— 


- ee a 


124 ASCLEPIUS 


ipsi (sc. deo) soli sensibile atque intellegibile. Why sensibile? 
We must understand ¢o/um as including both the aicOyrds Koo pos 
and the voyrds xéopos. To men, the former is only in part aicOyrés, as 
the latter is only in part vonrdés; for each one of us, sense and thought 
alike are limited to a few objects. To the consciousness of God alone 
both worlds are present in all their fullness. Cf. Corp. IX. 9: 6 8& 
Geds ox .. . dvaicOnrds éore Kat évdnros (i.e. God aic@dverar Kat voel). 

quantitates ...omnes mensuras excedentes magnitudinzs, 
The writer says that great and immeasurable magnitudes are from 
God, and not (as we might rather haye expected) a// magnitudes, 
large and small alike, because his object is to exalt the majesty of 
God. Even the greatest of corporeal things, the outermost sphere 
of heaven, is ‘from God and in God’, 

mundum ipsum sensibilem et quae in eo sunt omnia a 
superiore illo mundo quasi vestimentum esse contexta (quasi 
ex vestimento esse contecta MSS.). The superior mundus is the 
voytos xéopos. If we retain the reading of the MSS. (striking out 
ex), this must be taken as meaning that the dAy which is the 
substratum of the aic@yrds xdopos is ‘clothed’ with visible forms 
which are copies of the vonra ¢dy. But a more satisfactory sense 
may be got by reading guasi vestimentum esse contexta 3 the aicOyrds 
kéopos is ‘woven out of? the visible forms which are copies of the 
voynra <idn, i.e. is wholly made up of those forms. This agrees 
better with what is said in 17b as emended, sunt visibiles Jormae 
++. uniuscuiusque, sicuti est, tota substantia, The visible world thus 
constituted is the ‘garment’ in which God is clothed. For the 
simile of a garment, cf. Philo De Juga et inventione 20. 110, Wend- 
land III, p. 133: évdverau 8 6 piv zpecBiraros rod dvros Adyos ds 
éobijira tov Kéopov" yhv yap kal iwp Kai dépa xal wip cal ta éx rovrww 
erapymioxerat. Philo De somniis 1. 35. 203, Wendland III, p. 249: 
TO TapmoixAov ipacpa, Tovrorl Tov Kdcpov. ; 

17b. Est enim (iy)... tota substantia. I have placed this 
passage here, because the last sentence of 34¢ (Sin totum... quasi 
vestimentum esse contexta) serves as a suitable introduction to it. 
That which I conjecture to have been the original meaning of the 
paragraph has been hidden by deliberate interpolation. Some 
person through whose hands the text has passed (possibly the 
translator himself) completely failed to understand the Hermetist’s 
doctrine of matter and forms ; and finding it stated that A» (which 
he regarded as equivalent to mundus, the material world,) ‘is invisible 








ASCLEPIUS III: 17b 125 


in itself’, he took this to mean that you cannot see into the depths 
of the earth, because it is a solid globe, and inserted several clauses 
with the intention of explaining and developing that meaning. 
When the words which I have marked as interpolations are struck 
out, that which remains yields a satisfactory sense. 

[cava mundi rotunditas in modum sphaerae]. I assume 
that these words have been substituted by the interpolator for the 
one word ty (translated mundus). It is, however, not quite impos- 
sible that the Hermetist described the primary matter as shaped 
into a sphere, and in that one respect not absolutely formless, 
though devoid of all visible qualities ; see Corp. VIII. 3. 

(Hn) multis loci[s] instar qualitatemque habere creditur. 
Cf. Plotinus 2. 4. 11: dOev twes tairov 7O Kevd riv BAnv ciprjcact 
Plato, Zim, 52 A, identifies the trodoyy with yépa. 

Per formas enim solas specierum, quarum imaginibus 
videtur ((quasi)) insculpta, {[ ]] visibilis creditur. The mean- 
ing must be, ‘we (mistakenly) suppose that Ax itself is visible, 
because the forms imposed on it are visible’, But it is not clear 
how this meaning is to be got out of the words. Perhaps formas 
specierum may be taken to mean ‘corporeal forms (aic6nrd. «idy) 
derived from the voyra «tdy’. The Greek may possibly have been 


ba yap ras poppas (the visible forms) povoy ras (éx) rav cddv (the 


invisible and eternal ‘ideas’) «7.4. The aic6yri eiSy which are 
imposed on matter are zmagines («ixdves) of the voyra e’Sy. We see the 
aic@yra etdy, but we do not see the #Ay on which they are imposed. 
In the words guasi insculpta we have a different simile from that 
employed above, guasi vestimentum esse contexta. The notion con- 
veyed by izscu/pta more nearly resembles, but does not quite coincide 
with, that implied by Plato’s word éxuayeiov, which suggests that the 
shapes imposed on matter are like the impressions of a seal on wax. 
Plato (Zim. 50 c) says that these visible and transitory copies of 
the invisible and eternal «iy are stamped on matter ‘in a fashion 
hard to declare’ (8vc¢pacrov). The Hermetist has tried to explain 
the process by introducing a hierarchy of astral and cosmic gods 
by whom the demiurgic or form-imposing energy of the supreme 
God is transmitted to the lower world, and by combining with 
the Platonic doctrine of forms the Stoic doctrine of wvedya. This 
veda, as he conceives it, is a life-conveying material substance, 
the movements of which are determined by the influences of the 
heavenly bodies, and which the Powers above employ as their 


Al at ml 


126 ASCLEPIUS 


instrument? in the process of clothing matter with forms (or in 
other words, in working matter up into living organisms), and main- 
taining that constant succession of changing forms (/formarum 
agitatio atgue freguentatio) in which the life of all earthly organisms 
consists. But it must be admitted that his explanations leave much 
unexplained, and that the mode of operation by which copies of 
the voyr& <idy are impressed on or ‘carved in’ formless matter 
still remains S%o0¢pacrov. By way of an attempt to express what 
seems to be implied in his theory, perhaps it might be said that 
avedua, operating (like Aristotle’s #vcis) as a vital force within the 
organism during the process of growth, develops it, by a continuous 
succession of changes, into something more and more nearly re- 
sembling the ideal type (e. g. develops the human embryo, and the 
human child, into the likeness of the atrodvOpwios). The eidos 
remains voyrdv,—an unrealized ideal, not a thing visible in the 
world of sense; but it is the ‘final cause’ of the process. The 
efficient cause is God; and the voyror «ldos (the ‘pattern’ which is 
‘copied’, or in other words, the end or aim towards which the 
process is directed) has its existence in the mind of God. With 
this end or aim in view, God works through the heavenly bodies 
(or rather through subordinate incorporeal deities,—ovcupyar,—by 
whom the heavenly bodies are controlled) ; and the heavenly bodies 
act on the material elements of which each individual organism is 
composed, and infuse into it the avetjya by which it is vitalized. 
(Compare Asce/, I. 2 b-4.) 

If this, or something like it, is the writer’s meaning, he has not 
succeeded in expressing it very clearly,? or in harmonizing perfectly 
the Platonic and Stoic conceptions which he has brought into 
juxtaposition. But in one respect at least he is clear and consistent, 
namely, in the expression of his conviction that it is the will of God 
that works all. In the view of the writer of Asc/. III, as in that of 
the Hermetists in general, pious is a ‘part’ of God (Corf, XII. ii. 
21), and all operations of nature are évépyeo of God. 


1 In 19b, air, in place of mvedya, is said to be the organum. In some of the 
Hlermetica (e.g. Herm. af. Stob, Exc, IX), the force which operates in the im- 
position of forms on matter is called simply évépyera Geod, and no material organum 
is mentioned. Other Hermetists (e. g. the writer of Corp, XVI), instead of speaking 
of a material organum, assign to personal agents (the ‘daemons”) the function of 
executing the will of God in the lower world. As the daemons reside in the air, 
and have bodies composed of air, this latter notion is not wholly unconnected with 
the view that air is the organunt. 

* His exposition might, however, appear less inadequate if we had his text before 
us in its original and unmutilated form. 





ASCLEPIUS III: 35, 36 127 


































eius imum, ...si locus est (imus) in sphaera, ‘The inter- 
polator is speaking of the place in which Hades was commonly 
located, i.e. the interior or central part of the earth, and describes 
this, with some hesitation, as the ‘bottom’ of the globe. As he 
twice compares Greek with Latin, the interpolation must have taken 
place either at the time of or subsequently to the translation of the 
Greek text into Latin. 
quod sunt visibiles formae ...tota substantia. The inter- 
polator wrote quod sint, because he made this clause depend on the 
preceding dicuntur. But the sense of the uninterpolated original 
would have been more correctly expressed by guod sunt, dependent 
on est invisibilis. The words specierum omnium quae insunt unius- 
cuiusque sicutt est tota substantia occur in the MSS, a few lines 
below (in 18a), where they are meaningless. Transposed to this 
place, they give (with the correction guae omnibus insunt for specie- 
rum omnium quae insunt)* precisely the sense which the preceding 
context requires. The visible forms (aic@yra «idy), which are copies 
of the voyra «Sy, constitute the whole substance or reality of the 
individual things in the material universe; if you abstract them, 
there will be nothing left except unformed (and therefore invisible) 
$n, which has a merely potential existence. 
_ * (Species enim, quae divina est... incorporalia sint.)) 
This piece, where it stands in the MSS. (in ch. 35), interrupts the 
train of thought, and must be a misplaced fragment. I have 
transposed it to this place, because it seems to be connected with 
the subject dealt with in ch. 17 b as conjecturally emended. The 
species quae divina est is the voyrov eiéos, the ideal rapaderypa. 
35, 36. Unumquodque enim... splendore reddentium. 
These two chapters continue the exposition of the doctrine of forms ; 
Ihave therefore placed them here. If my rearrangement is right, 
chs. 33-36 consist wholly of passages which have been accidentally 
shifted from their right places. 
35. Unumquodque enim... sui dissimilia. With this 
chapter should be compared and contrasted Asc/. I. 3c-4, where 
the word sfecies («idy) means ‘individuals’. 
The sfecies spoken of in Asc. III. 35 are the forms or types of 
the several kinds (genera) of living beings. Types of natural genera 


} 


1 The words specterum omnium might be retained, if they could be taken in the 
sense of ‘all kinds of things’, or ‘ all individual things’; but in that case it would 
still be necessary to insert omnibus or some such word before insunt, 


128 ASCLEPIUS 


(and perhaps of the cosmic crorxeta spoken of in ch. 36) are the 
only sort of ‘Platonic ideas’ that the author recognizes.’ For 
instance,.there is a single species incorporalis (voyriv eldos, ideal 
type) of the human race; and the Pantomorphos (the god of the 
Zodiac), operating by the agency of the Decanus Horoscopus (i.e. 
the god of that subdivision of the Zodiac which is on the eastern 
horizon at the decisive moment), stamps a visible ‘copy’ of this 
ideal type upon each child at birth, But each of these visible copies 
differs from every other; for the positions of the heavenly bodies, 
by the influence of which the corporeal form of each individual is 
determined at birth, change from moment to moment. Hence no 
two men are quite alike. 

It might be objected that the same Decanus is Horoscopus for forty 
minutes in every successive space of twenty-four hours ; many men 
therefore must be born under the influence of the same Decanus ; 
and all men born under the influence of the same Decanus ought 
to be alike. But this difficulty may be avoided, if we assume that 
the Decanus Horoscopus collects and brings to bear upon the 
individual at the moment of birth the influences of all the heavenly 
bodies together. When the Decanus who is now Horoscopus 
becomes Horoscopus again to-morrow, each of the planets will 
have changed its position relatively to the fixed stars; and even 
within the same forty minutes, the aspect of the heavens is not quite 
the same at any two moments. 

sive sit animans sive sine anima sit. See note on Ase. I. 4, 
genus sine anima. 

quamvis unumquodque animallis genus] omnem generis 
sui possideat formam. It appears from these words that the 
Jorma generis is the ‘ universal’, i, e. the group of qualities which all 
individuals of the gezws possess in common. Below, the writer 
seems to use the word sfecies as equivalent to forma generis. 
(Species ergo permanet.... Sic generum formae sunt permanentes.) 
Does this imply that he regarded the forma generis (the ‘universal’ 
of a natural class) as identical with the spectes quae divina est, i. e. 


1 His theory of ideas resembles that of the Platonist Albinus, who says in his 
Epitome (ch. 9): @ iéa, ds pev mpds Tov Oedv, vénois abrod.... dpiCovrar BE Tiv 
liéay wapaderypa Tay Kata piaw aidmov. ove yap Tors rAcloras Tay dad TlAdtwvos 
dpécke ray Texvixay elvar idéas, olov domidos 7 Avpas, ovre phy Tv Tapa iow, olov 
nuperod Kal xodépas, otre TOy Kard pépos, clov Swepdrous kal TlAdrwvos, ddd’ obde 
Trav elrehdv tivds, olov pirov wal xaphous, otre trav mpés Tt, olov peifous kat 
trepéxovros* eva yap ras lSéas rons Ocod alavious kat abroredcis. 





ASCLEPIUS III: 35 129 


with the Platonic wrapadevypa (the ‘ideal type’)? If so, he must 
have failed to think the matter out clearly. The ‘universal’ cannot 
rightly be identified with the ‘ideal’; the forma generis, which ‘is 
possessed by every individual of the genus’, cannot be the same as 
the ideal type, which is never fully or adequately reproduced in any 
individual in the world of sense." A new-born child, or a man 
physically and morally deformed, possesses the forma generis, i.e. 
the group of qualities included under the general concept ‘man’, 
but is far from possessing the qualities of the.ideal man, the airody- 
Gpwros. The Platonist Albinus (quoted in note on Asc/. I. 2 b) saw 
the necessity of making this distinction, and accordingly discrimi- 
nated the xpéra voyrd (ideal types) from the Setrepa vonrd (uni- 
versals). 

In the parallel passage Asc/, I. 4, the word genus (which corre- 
sponds to forma generis in Ascl. III. 35) clearly means ‘universal’, 
and not ‘ideal type’, or zapdSevyua in the Platonic sense. 

inpossibile est formam unamquamque alteri simillimam 
_nasci. The Stoics insisted strongly on this point, in opposition to 
the Academics. Cic. Acad. 2. 26. 85: ‘Stoicum est quidem (‘nec 
admodum credibile’ in the opinion of the Academics,) nullum esse 
pilum omnibus rebus talem qualis sit pilus alius, nullum granum.’ 
Sen. Zp. 113. 15: ‘Nullum animal alteri par est. Circumspice 
omnium corpora: nulli non et color proprius est et figura sua et 
magnitudo. Inter cetera propter quae mirabile divini artificis in- 
genium est, hoc quoque existimo, quod in tanta copia rerum nun- 
quam in idem incidit: etiam quae similia videntur, cum contuleris, 
diversa sunt. Tot fecit genera foliorum: nullum non sua proprie- 
tate signatum. Tot animalia: nullius imago tota cum altero con- 
_ yenit, utique aliquid interest. Exegit a se ut quae alia erant et 
_ dissimilia essent et imparia. (Seneca attributes the differences to 
the ingenuity of the divine Artist; the Hermetist gives an astral 
explanation of them.) Plut. Comm. not. 36: dxotoa toivw éotly 
airay (sc. the Stoics). . . mpds rods "Axadypaixods Siadepopévwr, Kat 
Bodvrwy ds ‘(the Academics) rdvra mpdypara ovyyéover rais drapadda- 
€{ais (i. e. by their denial of differences between individuals), él Svoiy 
















} Aristotle uses the word ¢fSos in the sense of ‘universal’ in his logic; but he 
uses it in a sense more nearly approaching that of the Platonic wapdSevyya (‘ideal 
type’) in his physics, when he says that ‘nature’ aims at reproducing the efdes in 
the individual, but succeeds in reproducing it only by a gradual process, if at all. 
In an imperfectly developed individual, the 750s in the latter sense may be said to 
be present potentially, but is not present actually, 


2206.8 K 


130 ASCLEPIUS 


ovatdv va oud (sc. Nbyov?) elvar Braképevor’. xairor Totro pev ovK 
Zorw Saris dvOpdrwv oF Siavocirat, kat rovvavriov olera Oavpactov elvac 
kal mapddogov, & pare pdrra parry, poyre pedirry pédurra, pajre Tp 
aupds, #) od (7d Tod Adyou) cixor, év TG mavti xpovw yéyovey darapad~ 
Xaxrov. According to Plutarch, then, the Stoics went against common 
sense in denying that any two individuals of a kind could be alike, 
and the Academics agreed with common sense in maintaining the 
opposite view. 

horarum et climatum distantibus punctis. A difference in 
the place of birth («A/ua), as well as a difference in the time, implies 
a difference in the aspect of the heavens, and consequently a 
difference in the resulting form. 

inmutantur totiens, qaot hora momenta habet circuli cir- 
cumeurrentis. Cf. Corp. IX. 6, 7: (pepdpevos 82 (5 xdopos) révra 
Lworore.)) . . . 73 8 taXOs avrod THs popas Tiv moixtAiay Tov [ror] 
yevécewv épydfera, voi ydp, oboa muxvordry, zporeiver Ta TOU TOUS 
odpact, The ‘ qualities’ (rou) there spoken of are the Stoic equiva- 
lent of the formae visibiles (atoOnra ein) of Asc. III. They are 
produced in bodies by the operation of «voy (= avetpa); and the 
operation of the zvox varies with, and is determined by, the con- 
stantly changing positions of the heavenly bodies. Corp. XVI. 15: 
yevopevov yap tpav exactov . . . wapaddpBavovor Safpoves of kar’ 
exetvny tiv (o)rly)uy Tis yevérews tarnpérat K-17. 

If it is assumed that small differences in time produce appreciable 
effects, not even twins will be alike. Augustine (Civ. dei 5. 1-6), 
arguing against the astral doctrine of Posidonius, discusses the case 
of twins at some length. Jd. 5. 3: ‘frustra itaque adfertur nobile 
ilud commentum de figuli rota, quod respondisse ferunt Nigidium 
hac quaestione turbatum, unde et Figulus appellatus est. Dum 
enim rotam figuli vi quanta potuit intorsisset, currente illa bis 
numero de atramento tamquam uno eius loco summa celeritate 
percussit ; deinde inventa sunt signa quae fixerat, desistente motu, 
non parvo intervallo in rotae illius extremitate distantia. Sic, inquit, 
in tanta rapacitate caeli, etiamsi alter post alterum tanta celeritate 
nascatur, quanta rotam bis ipse percussi, in caeli spatio plurimum 
est: hine sunt, inquit, quaecumque dissimillima perhibentur in 
moribus casibusque geminorum.’ 

The ‘circulus circumcurrens in quo est ille Omniformis deus’ is 
the Zodiac in which are situated the Decani, over whom the Panto- 
morphos presides. 








ASCLEPIUS III: 36 131 


36. Et mundus speciem mutat, o Trismegiste? The word 
species cannot here signify the species aeterna et incorporalis (vonrév 
- dios), i.e, the ideal type; for the ideal type is eternal and unchang- 
ing. When the writer speaks of the sfecies of the Kosmos or its 
component parts as changing, species must signify forma visibilis (ai- 
aGnrov <ldos) ; and we must take sfeciem mutat to mean ‘exchanges 
one forma visibilis for another’, 

The case of the cosmic ororxeia differs from that of the genera 
previously discussed in this respect, that each of them is the only 
one of its kind. In dealing with the human race, the writer says 
that the forma visibilis of each individual differs from that of every 
other individual, while the forma generis (or species incorporalis) is 
common to all individuals of the genws, But it is impossible to 
speak thus of the forms when he is dealing with the caedwm; for 
there is only one cae/um. Accordingly, he says that there is a species 
(incorporalis) of the cae/um, which persists unchanged, but that vary- 
ing species (i.e. formae visibiles,—variously modified copies of the 

unchanging sfectes incorporalis,—) are assumed by the one caelum 
at different times: ‘in una caeli specie hae sunt quae saepe alter- 
nantur species.’ 

[[atque stationes aut cursus]|. It is absurd to say that earth 
‘stands or runs’; there must therefore be some error in the text. 
Since the writer speaks of the changes of cae/um (i.e. air), earth, 
and fire, he probably spoke of the changes of water also; and the 
most obvious difference in water is that between standing and 
running water. I have therefore altered a/gue to agua, and added 
mutat. 

Solis etenim et lunae. The sun and moon are made of fire; 
and since they are gods, it is rightly said that the fire of which they 
are made assumes divinas species. 

sunt enim quasi speculorum nostrorum similes. I sup- 
pose the meaning of this simile to be that the sun and moon 
‘reflect’, i.e. reproduce in visible copy, the species incorporalis or 
ideal type of fire or light. Cf. Corp. XVII: dvravaxAdoas clot rav 
pander pos TH onpare., Philo De opif. mundi 7. 29-8. 31: mparon 
oy é ToLoY éxrolnoev otpavov dodparov kat yiv adparov Kat dépos 
Weay (i.e. the species sneer pariales of heaven, earth, and air)'... 6 
Waros dowparoy obciavy, .. . kalért riow . . . durds, d allie do 
parov iv Kat vonrov jAlov mapdderypa Kal rdvtwv doa pucddpa dotpa 
kard, Tov otpavdv gued\Xe owvioracba. . . . Torovrw yap Td vonrdv (pis) 

K 2 


132 ASCLEPIUS 


rod éparod Aapmpdrepdv te Kal atyoadérrepov, dowrep 710s, olpat, 
oxdrovs. » . . Td S& ddparov Kat vontov pas éxeivo Geiov Aiyou yéeyovey 
cixdv' . . . kat orw trepovpavos éorip, myy) Tov alcOnrOv dorépwr, 
fv obk dv dad oKxorod Kadécerev dv Tis mavatyear, ad’ Hs HAtos Kal oehyvy 
kal of dAXoe wAdvyrés Te Kal davis dptrovrat, Ka Soov Exdarw divams, 
ra mpémovra héyyn, THs ducyods Kal kaOupas atryiis éxetvys duavpoupevys, 
drav dpénrar rpérecGar xara rv ék vontod mpos aicOytdy peraBodrv’ 
cluxputs yap otSty trav év aicOjca. Plotinus 3. 6. 7: dev kat ra (& 
rH try) eyyéyver Gat Soxotvra (i.e. the formae visibiles) watyvid (éorw), 
cidwda év clddAw arexvids, ds ev KaTdrtpy 7d ddAaxod Lpvpévor, dhAaXod 
davralopevor. 

aemulo splendore. The sun and moon vie with one another 
in brightness. As Philo puts it, each of them draws from the voyrov 
as as much of visible light as it is capable of receiving. And the 
apparent brightness of each of them varies from hour to hour; this 
must be what is meant by omniformes imagines sunt. 

20 a-32b. In these chapters (with the exception of the group 
of misplaced passages 27 b-2g b), the text runs on without a break. 
The writer deals with several distinct topics, viz. (1) the name of 
God (20 a) 5 (2) sexual procreation (20b-21); (3) the divine 
element in man (22a-23a); (4) god-making (23 b-24a); (5) the 
Prophecy of Hermes (24b-26a); (6) the relation between the 
eternity of God and the time-process of the Kosmos (26 b-27.a and 
29-32 b). The passages in which the several topics are treated 
are linked together by superficial transitions, but have little real 
connexion. The writer’s thoughts do not seem to be guided by any 
preconceived plan; he passes at haphazard from one subject to 
another. 

20 a. Alia haec iterum ratio quae est, o TrismegisteP In 
the lost passage which preceded these words, Trismegistus must 
have announced that he was about to set forth ‘a second doctrine’, 
Compare 19a fiz.: ‘Haec ergo ipsa (divinorum), ut dicis, (ratio) 
quae est, o Trismegiste?? The doctrine of voyrd, expounded in 
19a ff, was announced as divinorum ratio; and here follows ala 
divinorum ratio, This ‘second doctrine’ seems to be especially that 
which is contained in chs. 20b and 21. (Cf. 20b jin.: ‘haec ergo 
ratio... tibi sit reddita, quare et quomodo fiant omnia (utriusque 
sexus).’) In this passage, the creative energy of God is regarded in 
a different aspect. In the first ra¢io, God was spoken of as imposing 
forms on matter; in the second ratio, God is spoken of as generating 








ASCLEPIUS III: 20a 133 


the Kosmos and all things in it by a process of which human pro- 
creation is an ‘image’, The second ratio is quite distinct from 
and unconnected with the first, and is, no doubt, derived from 
a different source. It is introduced by a paragraph concerning the 
name of God (20 a). 

quocumgue [alio] nomine [[ |] nuncupatur [quod] inter nos 
intellectus nostri causa. If we are to speak to one another about 
‘the One who is all’, we must apply some name to him ; we there- 
fore call him Geds or raryp or xvpwos or the like ; but all such names 
are inadequate. Cf. ch. 41 b: dppacrov dvopa (. . .), Teryunpévov (82) 
TH Tod Jot tpoonyopic, . . . Kat cbAoyovmevov TH Tod marpés. 

((ab hominibus sanctius religiosiusque)) debet esse sacra- 
tum tanti [[ ]} numinis contemplatione. The grammatical 
subject of dede¢ is momen, understood from guocumgue nomine, 
There is nothing holy in the name itself; the man who speaks or 
hears the name must make it holy, by infusing into it his own 
religious emotion. 

vox hoc est, ex aere spiritu percusso sonus. ° A Stoic 
definition. Cf. the Stoic Diogenes Babyl., in Diog. Laert. 7. 55: 
cor de puri) dip werhyypévos. .. . Lgou pe éore dori} dnp b7d opis 
merdynypevos' avOpwrou b¢, [éorw] Evapbpos Kai dd Siavoias xT eputro~ 
péryn. ‘The Stoics’ in Diog. Laert. 7.158: dxovew 8% (jas), rod 
perogd tod Te huvotvros Kal tod dxovovros dépos @AnTropévov, aarpo- 
adds eira Kuparoupévov, Kal rails dxoats mpoorirrovtos, ds Kuparodrat 
76 ev 7H SeLapery Cdwp Kard Kixhovs xd Tod euBAnbevros AGov. Sen. 
Wat. guaest. 2. 6. 3: ‘Quid enim est vox nisi intentio aeris, linguae 
formata percussu?’ Cf. Pl. Zim. 678, and Ae. 4. 19. It. 

In the writer's time, the statement that a name ‘is nothing but 
a sound’ &c. was by no means a truism. In Egypt, perhaps not 
one man in a hundred would have admitted it; for in that country 
especially, the belief in the magic or theurgic potency of sacred 
hames was prevalent among Pagans, Jews, and Christians alike. 

Spiritus (xvedpa or zvo}) here means ‘breath’, and has nothing 
to do with the cosmic wveSua spoken of in ch. 17 a. 
_ utesset in homine necessarium vocis auriumque commer- 
cium. Each word must be limited to a few syllables ; for if words 
of unlimited length were admitted, speech would become impossible. 

simul... et sensus et spiritus et aeris {nomina) et omnia 
in his aut per haec aut de his nomen est totum dei. 


* Cf, dyacdqra 7d Svopd cov in the Lord’s Prayer. 





134 ASCLEPIUS 


It is necessary to read omnia (sc. nomina) in place of omnium. 
The writer might have said that the true name of God is made 
up of omnium nomina, ‘the names of all things’; but if that had 
been his meaning, he could not have added in his aut per 
haec aut de his. The word his refers to sensus ef spiritus et 
aeris; and it is not all ¢hings, but (as we have just been told) all 
names, that are connected with thought, breath, and air. Names 
are in sensu (dependent on(?) the thought which they express): 
they are per spiritum (produced by means of the breath) ; and they 
are de (or ex) aere (made of air). 

innomine(m) vel potius omninomine(m). Cf. Corp, V. toa: 
évépara exer dravra ... Kal... dvopa ovK exe. Lactant. Div. ist. 
1. 6. 4: (Zrismegistus deum) dvdvepov esse dixit &c. Compare 
Justin Afol. 1.10. 1: OO... 7H pydevi dvdpare er kadovpevo. Ld, 
2, 5 (6). 1: the daemons worshipped by the Pagans have individual 
person-names; dvona 8 7 mdvrwv warpt Gerdv, d&yevvijtw dvTl, odK 
Zorw: & yap av Kal dvoud tu mpooayopedyrat, mpeoBurepov exer Tov 
Génevov 7d Svopa, Td Se warip Kat Geds Kal ktlorys Kal Kvpios Kat 
Seordrys odk dvépard éorw, GN’ ex trav ebrotiy Kai Tov Epywv Tpoo pi 
ges. Minucius Felix (Baehrens, 1886) 18.9: ‘ Magnitudinem dei 
qui se putat nosse, minuit ; qui non vult minuere, non Tnovit!, Nec 
nomen deo quaeras: “deus nomen est! _Illic vocabulis opus est, 
cum per singulos propriis appellationum insignibus multitudo diri- 
menda est: deo, qui (dgendum quia?) solus est, ‘dei vocabulum 
totum est’. Quem si patrem dixero, carnalem opineris; si regem, 
terrenum suspiceris ; si dominum, intellegas utique mortalem. Aufer 
additamenta nominum, et perspicies eius claritatem.’ Clem. Alex. 
Strom. 5.12. 82: The One is dvwvdpacrov’ xiv dvopdlwpev ard 
mote ob xupiws Kadodvres frou bv % rayabdv 4) voy 7) adrd 7d bv 7 Tarépa 
4) Gedv } Snprovpydv 4 Kipior, otx ds dvopa. avrod mpopepdpevor Aéyouer, 
rd 88 dropias dvdpacr Kadois xporxpdpeba, tv’ Exn % diavowa, pi weph 
dAda tAavwpery, erepeiSerOar rovros, ob yup 7d Kal’ Exacrov pyvuTiKoy 
rod Oeod, GANS GOpdus dravra évdexTiKa THs TOD wavroKpdropos Suvdjews. 
The Christian writers and the Hermetists must have derived the 
thought from a common Pagan source ; and perhaps the ultimate 
source may have been Egyptian. Brugsch (Rel. und Myth. der alten 
Aegypter, p. 97) quotes from Egyptian documents: ‘No man knows 
how to name him.’—‘His name remains hidden.’—‘ His name is 
a secret for his children.—‘ His names are numberless.’—‘ Many 
are his names, no one knows their number.’ Isis txd ray today 








ASCLEPIUS III: 20b 135 


peupudvupos xécAyra (Plut. Zs. ef Os. 53); and a dedication Jsidi 
Myrionimae occurs in C. J. L. III. 882 (from Dacia). 

20b. solus omni utriusque (solus ut omnia utraque MSS.) 
sexus fecunditate plenissimus.—21. Utriusque sexus ergo 
deum dicis? God is dprevdPyAvs. Cf. Corp. 1.9: 6 88 vois... 
dppevdOprus dv. Lb. 15: dppevoOndus de dv (6 “AvOpwos) e 
dppevobijheos br(ros tov) marpés. (The ‘bisexual father’ of the 
Archanthropos is 6 ravrwv rarjp, the supreme God.) 

This notion, as well as that of the ‘deus innominis vel potius 
omninominis’ in the preceding paragraph, may have been derived 
from Egyptian sources.1 In ancient Egyptian documents, the 
progenitor of the universe is described as bisexual. Thus in the 
cosmogony of Heliopolis (Breasted, Hist. Eg. p. 56) it was told 
of Tum, the Demiurgus who emerged from the primordial waters, 
that jrom himself he begat four children, namely, Shu (the atmo- 
sphere) and Tefnut (the twin-sister and consort of Shu), Qeb or Seb 
(the earth), and Nut (the sky). Wiedemann (Rel. of Anc. Eg., 
Eng. tr., p. 32, n. 3, where references are given) says that ‘this 
account is most completely preserved in the copy of a papyrus 
dating 306-305 B.c.; but its main point is alluded to in texts of 
the Old Kingdom, and of the beginning of the New Kingdom’. 
Brugsch, Re/. und Myth. p. 423, gives a translation of a text of the 
sixth Dynasty, about 2500 B.c. (Maspero, Pyr. Unas 465 f.), in 
which the act of bisexual procreation by which the children of 
Tum were produced is explicitly described; and a similar descrip- 
tion of it occurs in the hieratic papyrus (Brit. Mus. 10188, Budge 
Pr. 1886, p. 22) quoted by Brugsch 74. pp. 740 and 756.* Ikhnaton, 
1375-1358 3.c. (Breasted, Hist. Zg. p. 376) called his sun-god 


1 The notion of a bisexual deity occurs in the religions of Asia Minor also. See 
the myth of the bisexual Agdistis, reported by Pausanias (7. 17.5) in connexion 
with the Phrygian cult of Cybele and Attis. The notion of an Aphroditos (i.e. a 
male aspect or counterpart of Aphrodite), whence the ‘ Hermaphroditos’ of Greek 
plastic art was derived, seems to have been indigenous in Cyprus and Asia Minor 
(Preller, Gr. AZythologie, p. 509). But the sources of a Hermetic document are 
more likely to have been Egyptian than Anatolian. 

2 According to this document, Tum thus generated Shu and Tafnut, and by Shu 
and Tafnut were generated Qeb and Nut (earth and sky). 

Did this primitive myth arise out of a cult-rite, or magical practice, in which an 
act resembling that which the documents attribute to the god was done (or 
simulated) by the priest? The god is said to have done the deed ‘in the city of 
On (Heliopolis)? ; the meaning of this, as of the many similar localizations of a 
divine act, must surely be that the god’s worshippers were in the habit of doing at 
his temple in that city something which was explained as a symbolical repetition 
or commemoration of a deed originally done by the god himself. 


136 ASCLEPIUS 


Aton ‘the father and the mother of all that he has made’. Brugsch 
7. p. 197 quotes from ancient Egyptian documents: ‘God is father 
and mother.’—‘ God begets and is not begotten ; he bears offspring, 
and is not born.’—‘ He begets himself (as father) and bears himself 
(as mother).’ Jd. p. 314, an inscription in the temple at Esne- 
Latopolis in Upper Egypt : ‘ Neith, the ancient, the Mother of God, 
the mistress of Esne, the father of the fathers, the mother of the 
mothers, . . . that which exists in the beginning.’ In a text from 
Philae (Brugsch 7. p. 113), Khnum, the god recognized as 
Demiurgus* in Upper Egypt, is described as ‘the mighty spirit 
(6az) who has made that which exists, who has fashioned that 
which reveals itself, the beginning of existing things, the father of 
the fathers, the mother of the mothers’. Amélineau, Gnost. ég, 
p. 291 f., quotes or refers to other Egyptian texts to the same effect, 
and remarks of some of them that ‘si du dieu pére on dit qu’il 
enfante, en joignant pour déterminatif 4 V’idée d’enfanter une femme 
en travail, on dit aussi de la déesse mére qu'elle engendre, et l’idée 
de la génération est déterminée par le phallus. Il y a donc identi- 
fication compléte des deux puissances’. 

Among the Greeks, the notion of a bisexual progenitor of the 
Kosmos makes its appearance in the Orphic Theogonia, in which 
Phanes-Erikepaios* (the Orphic equivalent of the Heliopolitan 
Tum), the Protogonos who issued from the primordial Egg, was 
described as époevd@ydvs. Apion, in Clem. Homil. 6. 4, p. 672 
(Abel Orphica 38): evdobev yap rijs repupepe(as (of the egg) Lodv 7 
Gppevdbnrv eidororetrac povoig tod evdvros ev abt Oelou rvetparos, 
dv Davyta "Opdeds xade?. Lb.: 75 ex Ths daeipov trys Kar” émityylav 
Kpacews aroxunbiy Empuxov ody, of payévros Kara twas dpoevdbydus 
efHopev Pdvys. Clem. Recogn. to. 30: ‘(Orpheus dicit) ipsum 
Chaos . . ., quasi ad ovi immanis modum per immensa tempora 
effectum, peperisse ac protulisse ex se duplicem quandam speciem, 
quam illi masculofeminam vocant;... et hoc esse principium 
omnium,’ Jé. to. 7. 316: ‘aiunt . . . quasi intra ovi testam fotum 
vivifactumque esse animal quoddam, disruptoque post haec immani 
illo globo processisse speciem quandam hominis duplicis formae, 


* Khnum is described as ‘ He who in the beginning fashioned this world with 
his hands’, Brugsch 24. 

? The name ’Hpienaios occurs, as far as I know, only in late documents. It is 
probably of Egyptian origin; and the Orphici may have borrowed it from Egyptians 
in the Ptolemaic or Roman period. There is evidence that the name Phanes was 
used by Orphici as early as the third century B.c. (Rohde, Psyche, p. 408 f.). 








. ASCLEPIUS III: 20b 137 


quam illi masculofeminam vocant. Hunc etiam Phaneta nominarunt.’ 
Proclus Jn Zim. 2. 130F (Abel Orph. 62): xal & ait rpdiry 7d 
Oijdu kal 73 dppev, ds Low mpdtw: “ @ORAvs Kal yevérwp Kparepds Geds 
"Hpixeraios,” dynolv 6 Ocoddyos (i.e. Orpheus). Proclus 7d. 2. 137 B 
(Abel 73 and 94). The same deity is named dipu7s (i. €. dporevdOndvs) 
- "Epus in Orph. Argonaut. 14. The Orphic Zeus, who swallowed 
Phanes, and generated or created all that now exists, was also 
described as bisexual. Pseudo-Aristot. De mundo 7. 401 b2 = Euseb. 
Pr. 60. 3.9 (Abel 46 and 123): Zebs dpoyy yévero, Zets duBporos 
Zrhero vipdy. Lactantius (Div. znst. 4. 8. 3 ff.) speaks of the 
agreement of ‘Orpheus’ and ‘ Hermes’ as to the bisexuality of God. 
There can, I think, be little doubt that the Orphic notion of a 
bisexual progenitor of the universe was derived from Egypt; did 
the Hermetists take over the conception from the Orphici, or did 
it pass to them from the Egyptian priests by a more direct route? 

Another instance occurs in Philostratus Vita Apollon. 3. 34: 
(Apollonius :) Z@ov jyGpar tov kéopov ; (Indian sage :) "Hv ye tyvis 
yeyvéoys’ airos yap Cwoyovel rdvra. (Apoll. :) @fAvv airov xahaper, 
i tis dpoevés Te Kal dvrixepevns pioews ; (Ind. :) “Apdotv’ airds yap 
aird Evyyryvépevos ra pytpds te Kal wazpds és riv Cwoyovlay mpdrret, 
Epwrd. te Eavrod ioyer Oepydrepov 7) erepdv te érépov, Os dpydrre. atrov 
kat gwviorgow. The doctrine which Philostratus attributes to his 
Indian philosopher is probably Graeco-Egyptian. But it is the 
Kosmos (the God of the Stoics), and not the supracosmic God of 
the Platonists and Hermetists, that is there described as bisexual. 
Something of the sort may very well have been said, for instance, by 
the Egyptian Stoic Chaeremon. 

Philo, De ebrietate 8. 30, Wendl. II, p. 176, describes the 
Creation as an act of sexual generation, and comes near to calling 
_ the Creator bisexual: rév yotv 1é3e rd wav épyacdpevov Syutoupyov 
6pod Kal rarépa elvar Tod yeyovdros . . . pyoopev, mytépa dé tiv Tod 
merowkoros érioTnnv, 7 Twvav & Geds, ovx ds avOpwros, eorepe 
yeveow" 7 5¢, rapadegapery Ta Tod Ocot oréppara, TeAerhdpois adie 
tov povov Kal d&yaryrov aicOyrov viov dmexvnoe, TOvdE TOV KOT LOY. 

The notion that God is bisexual was adopted by some of the 
Gnostic sects. Simon Magus, in Hippol. Ref haer. 6. 18: obros 
foriy & étds, otds, oTynoopevos, dv dpoevdbnAvs Sivapis .... Os 
oly aris éavrov txd éavtod rpoayayby epavépwore eavtp Tiv idiav 
érivoay, ottws kal 4 daveioa érivora .. ., idotoa airdv, évéxpupe 
tov warépa ev éavtq, . .. Kai éorw dpoevdbmrus Sivapus Kal (7) 


138 ASCLEPIUS 


éxivowa.. Monoimus, Hippol. Ref haer. 8. 12: atiry (sc. the primal 
Monas) pyryp, atirn warip, ra Sv0 dOdvara dvouata. And instances 
of it occur in the writings of orthodox Christians also; e. g. Clem. 
Alex. Quis dives saluvetur 37: Oc ra Tis aydrys pvoripia, Kal rére 
eromrevoets Tov KOAToV TOD TaTpds, bv 6 povoyeviys Heds povos enyjraro 
(Zo. Joh. 1. 18)... . wal rd pv dppyrov adrod warp, 7d 8& eis Hyas 
ovprabes yéyove piyrnp. ayaryoas 6 warhp eOndtvOn’ Kat rovrov péya 
onpetov, dv adros éyévvnoev && airod. 

The writer of Asc’. III seems to have two distinct reasons for 
asserting the bisexuality of God. In the first place, this passage 
is a polemic against dualistic doctrines such as that which is set 
forth in Asc/. II. In that document, the male and female principles 
are separate and distinct; God is the Father, and tAy is the Mother ; 
the Kosmos issues from the combined productivity of God and 
tA; and the evil in it is produced by tn. On the other hand, 
in Asc. III, 20f., God includes in himself the male and female 
principles together, so that no productive function is left for ty. 

In the second place, the writer seeks to justify and sanctify by 
the divine example the usage of human marriage and procreation, 
in opposition to the ascetic exaltation of celibacy, which was held 
to be the higher state by many people of his time, especially in 
Egypt. The disposition to regard sexual intercourse as impure 
and degrading found support in the dualistic doctrine; for if 
matter is evil, or the cause of evil, the aim of man must be to 
sever himself from everything that is connected with the body, and 
polluted by the taint of matter. The Hermetist then is contending 
both against a dualistic cosmology, and against the ascetic ideal 
to which that doctrine gave support. 

There is little evidence that abstinence from sexual intercourse 
was favoured by the official religion of Egypt. Chaeremon (Porphyr. 
De abst. 4. 6) says that the Egyptian priests abstained from it 
during the ‘ purification’ required of them before and during the 
course of their turn of temple-service, but not at other times. 
But he describes the life of the priests as in other respects a life of 
extreme austerity. That is certainly not true of the Egyptian 
priests in general; but Chaeremon’s statement may perhaps be 


1 A simpler and clearer statement of a similar doctrine occurs in an extract from 
a heretical document, Clem. Strom. 3. 4. 29: &v jv rd mdvra’ ened Bt Edogev abrod 
TH evdrnts pi) elvar porn, efprOev dx’ abrov éni[rlvoas Kal éxowdyncer abtf, wat 
énoingey tov ayamyTov. i 










ASCLEPIUS III: 20b 139 


accepted as evidence that there were among them in his time 
¢. A. D. 50) certain groups in which there prevailed an ascetic ideal 
which would naturally tend to the rejection of marriage. Philo’s 
description of the Therapeutae shows that there were in Egypt 
communities of Jews who practised extreme asceticism, including 
abstinence from sexual intercourse. Philo himself regards their 
mode of life with admiration ; and he says that Egypt is the special 
home of those who live ‘ the contemplative life’, i. e. a life resembling 
that of his Therapeutae.’ 

Among the Greeks, the Orphici and the Pythagoreans, from the 
latter part of the sixth century B.c. onwards, held views of which 
the rejection of marriage was a logical outcome. (In Euripides, 
Hippol. 952, Hippolytus, the scorner of Aphrodite, is described by 
his father as an Orphicus.) Plato adopted and formulated much 
of the doctrine which underlay the ascetic practices of these sects. 
Plato himself, however, was far from condemning sexual inter- 
course. In his writings we find, side by side with the capa-o7jpa 
doctrine of the Orphici and Pythagoreans, such a passage as 
Sympos. 206 c: ‘This procreation is the union of man and woman, 
and is a divine thing; for conception and generation are an 
immortal principle in the mortal creature.’ Cf. Pl. Zaws 6.773 E 
and 7768 concerning marriage. But some of the later Platonists 
and Pythagoreans developed the ascetic tendency of Plato’s de- 
preciation of ra aicOyrd into a contempius mundi which went far 
beyond Plato’s own position. Plotinus contended against the 
extreme views of those who maintained that the material Kosmos 
is evil ; yet he himself ‘seemed to be ashamed that he was in a 
body’ (Porphyr. Vita Plotini init.) * 


1 Philo De vita contempil. 3. 21, Cohn VI, p. 51: moAAaxod piv ody ris olxov- 
pérnséart érd yévos (sc. rev GepareuTav),— eer yap d-yabod redelov perarxeiy Kal THY 
"EAAdSa Kal rv BépBapov,—mAcovace 5e év Alyunre Kad’ Exagroy Tay émuadovpévay 
voudv, kat padtora mept tiv ’Adegdvdpeav. Philo cannot have meant to say that 
communities of men whose way of life was in all details similar to that which he 
goes on to describe were to be found in every nome of Egypt, and in Greece and 
many other countries. He mmst be here using the term @epamevrai in a more 
general sense ; and his meaning must be that groups of ascetic mystics (such as the 
Orphic fraternities, for instance,) were to be found in many lands, but nowhere in 
such abundance as in Egypt. 

2 A Pagan exaltation of virginity, similar in tone to many Christian utterances 
on the subject, occurs in a poem on marriage addressed to a young lady by an 
unknown writer named Naumachius (Stob. 4. 22. 32, vol. iv, p. 514 Hense): «addy 
pv Bénas. deyvdv Exew ddpuird te pluvew | napBevieny, Kadapotsi 7’ det pedcdn pace 
xalpev, | wire "BapurAndav (BapirAnrov Rohde) Aayévev rept péprov dyoucay, | 
Bare mévoy Tpopéovaay dyaorovoy ElAeOuins, | GAN’ Haba Bacideay dpavpay Ondrvre- 


140 ASCLEPIUS 


The Stoics, who had no feud with matter, and no aspiration to 
escape from the world we live in, steadily advocated marriage ; 
see e.g. the extracts from Antipater, Musonius, and Hierocles in 
Stobaeus 4, cap. 22, [epi ydov, Hense IV, pp. 497-512. But their 
attitude towards it differed from that of the author of Asc. III. 
They regarded marriage as a matter of social obligation —a duty 
which a man owes to his family, to his country, and to ‘the city 
of the universe’. The Stoic view is expressed in Ocellus Lucanus 
(first century B.c,?) 4. 3, Mullach 7». Zh. Gr. I, p. 402: pépos 
bmdpxwv (6 dvOpwros) olkov te kal wédews Kal, 7d péyctov, Kéopov, 
ouparAnpoty ddeiher 1d drroywépevov TovTwv exacrov, éiv wéAAy pupre 
avyyeus éorias Aeurordkrys yiveoOu, pore wodutixijs, pare piv 
Ths Oelas. of yap Kabdra€ pty did radorolav ocvvarrdépevor adixjorover 
Ta Tyudtata THs Kowwvias cvotypara. The writer of AscZ, III, on 
the other hand, is, like most of the other Hermetists, little interested 
in social relations ; he speaks of sexual intercourse as a ‘sacrament’, 
and treats it as a thing which, like all else, derives its significance 
from the relation between man and God. 

Among the Christians, from the second century onwards, if not 
earlier,* there was a strong and increasing tendency to depreciate 
marriage, and to assert the higher sanctity of a celibate life. Clement 
of Alexandria discusses marriage in Strom. 2. 23. 137—3. 18. 110. 
Clement himself holds marriage in high esteem (provided that it 
is used rightly, and with due regard for cudpoovvn or éyxpdreta),® 
and puts married life and celibacy on a par.* But in the greater 


pao, | Yuxis dupa paewdv bmép Bidtxo xéovaay, | &vOa ydpor nedvol Kal dAndées, 
évOa puryeioa | Oeomeciots éréeoor vonpata paca rixrer. The writer goes on to speak 
of marriage as a Sevrepos mAois. 

1 Hierocles, however, speaks in a tone more nearly resembling that of Ascé, III, 
when he says (Stob. IV, p. 505 Hense) that that which makes a house truly beautiful 
is (etyos dvdpds kal yuvaixds ovyeabepappévav GdARAOs Kal Kadepwpévey Bevis 
Yapnrtows yeveOd{ios Eperrios, cuupavovvraw piv GAAHAaS Kat ndvTa KoWwd menoun- 
Hévaw péxps kal Tov cwpdrov, pGdAov 62 nal abré&y Toy yuyay, K.7.A. 

* There were already Christians who forbade marriage at the time when the 
tst Epistle to Timothy was written. 1 Zim. 4. 1-3: év torépos xaupois 
droarqcovral ries Tis migrews, . . . ev bwoxpice Weudorbyov, ... KwAvdvTwy yapelv 
«.7.A. (This, though expressed in the form of a prediction, implies that the doctrine 
spoken of was taught by some at the time of writing.) 

* E.g. 3. 6. 46: ray dyacdevtay dyov olpat nai 73 oméppa. 3. 9.66: 5 ydpos 
uvepyacerai 7 7H Krice, 3.12. 84: Gyos 6 yapos, 3. 17. 103: ayia H yéveots, 
50 jv 6 Kéopos cuvéornKer, x,7.d, (with reference to human procreation), 

* 3. 9. 67: wdpios Exaaros Hydy Tvyxave Tis wepl réxvav yorijs alpéoews (i. e. each 
of us is free to marry and beget children or not, as he thinks best). 3. 12. 79: éyet 
yap, donep 4 ebvovxia (celibacy), ofrw nal 5 yapos idias AeToupyeias Kad draxovias 
7@ xuply diapepovoas, 3. 12. 86: Clement says that St. Paul's epistles ob8apod yapov 
Hoérnoay rdv adxppova, GANA ., , drodéxovrat éxdrEpov, Tév TE EvxapioTws TE OG 





ASCLEPIUS III: 20b I41 


of this discussion, Clement is occupied in contending: against 
the opposite aberrations of two different classes of heretics,—on the 
one hand, those who permitted extreme sexual licence,’ and on the 
other hand, those who regarded all procreation as evil, and called 
marriage zopvefa. Among the latter, he speaks especially of 
Marcion and Tatianus. Clem. Strom. 3, 3. £2: of piv dd 
Mapxiwvos (rij?) piow® (ireAnpacr) Kany, ex Te DANS KaKs Kal ek 
Sicatov * yevopéryy Snutoupyod" @ 8H Adye, pi) Bovdduevor tov Kdcpov 
tov tro Tov Syptovpyod yevopevov oupahnpoty, dréxerOar yduov Bovdor- 
rot, dvTitaccopevo. TO Toinr} TO ohGv, Kat oretdovres pds Tov 
— xexdyxdra dyabdv.? 3. 3. 21: dedeixOan juiv vouitw ras dpoppas trav 
févov Soypdtev toby Mapkiwva mapa WWAdrwvos dxapiorws te Kal 
- dpabas <ihypévau.® 3. 6. 45: ois 58 eis dt eyxpareias doeBodtow 
eis te Ti kriow Kal tov dywv Sypwovpydv, tov mavroKpdropa pdvov 
Gedy, kai SiddoKxover pay Setv wapadéxerGor ydpov «cal radoroav, pnde 
dyracdyew TO Kocpy Svotuyjcovras érépous, pyde emixopyyeiv TO 
Oavirw tpopyv. 3.6. 46: puapay 88 evar rijv ovvoveiay déyovtes. 
3. 6. 49: eioiv O ot mopvelav dyrixpus tov ydpov éyouoy Kat iro Tod 
SiaBdrov ravryv wapadiddcba Soyparifover.7? Some of these oppo- 
nents of marriage quoted in support of their view certain sayings 








wm KEXpNHEVOY corppdvas, Tév TE evvouxia ws 6 KUpos BovAeTat cupPiodyTa. 
3. 12. 88: dupa yap dyae ev xupiy, 7% pev ds yovy, } bt ds napbévos, 

1 We know little of the teaching of these sects except what is said about them by 
their orthodox opponents, It is probable that, if we had their own writings before 
us, we should find that some of them agreed with the author of Ase/, III in 
regarding sexual intercourse as a ‘sacrament ’,—a view which is not necessarily 
inconsistent with ow@pocdvy ; and statements in which they are accused of profligate 
excesses should be received with caution. 

2 Ci, Irenaeus Adv, haer. 1. 28. 1 Bic Hist. eccl.'4, 29) : Tov yapov Te pbopav 
kat ropveiay tapardnoiws Mapxiavt cat Zaropvivy dvayopetoas (Tavtavds), Hippol. 
\ R¢. haer. 7. 28 : Satornilus 7d yapeiv wal yewav ard rod Sarava pyow evar. 

I. e. the material world, and the human body as a part of it. 

* Marcion’s Demiurgus (the God of the Jews) was ‘just’, but not ‘ good’, 

5 I, e. to the supreme God, who is ‘ good’. 

8 That is, Clement regards the teaching of Marcion on this subject (just as 
Plotinus 2. 9 regards that of the Gnostic ‘ enemies of the Kosmos’ against whom 
he argues) as a perverted development of Platonism. 

7 An extreme repugnance to procreation was taught by Mani, whose doctrine on 
this subject was probably derived, in part at least, from followers of Marcion and 
Tatianus, or from Gnostic sects of like character. Augustine ddv. Faust. 15, 
Pp. 278, addressing a Manichaean, says ‘ didicisti inimicos deputare parentes tuos, 
quod te per concubitum in came ligaverint, et hoc modo utique deo tuo immundas 
compedes imposuerint’. J. 19, p. 331: ‘Opinantur diabolum fecisse atque 

isse masculum et feminam.’ Augustine Adv. Secundum 21: ‘ Displicet 
* crescite et multiplicamini” ; ne Dei vestri multiplicentur ergastula.’ Alexander 
Lycopol. 4: the Manichacans bade men dwéxec@ar yapov Kat dppodiciaw xal 
Texvorotlas, iva pi} 4 Svvayus (the divine life-force) évouryon 7H BAN Kara THY TO 


yévous Kiadoy jv. 


142 ASCLEPIUS 


of Jesus reported in the ‘Gospel according to the Egyptians’ 
(Strom. 3. §§ 45, 63, 66, 92) ; whence it would seem that the group 
of Egyptian Christians among whom that Gospel originated regarded 
marriage with disapproval. 

Tertullian (Zxort. cast.) said that God tolerates matrimony, but 
prefers virginity; and the general opinion of orthodox Christians 
in the third century seems to have been that expressed by Cyprian 
(De hab. virg. 21), who held that virginity cannot be made in- 
cumbent on all believers, but is a counsel of perfection. But there 
were some among the orthodox,' and many in the heretical sects, 
who went to greater lengths in their rejection of sexual intercourse. 
Probably then the assertion of the sanctity of procreation in 
Asci. III is directed especially against the Christians, whom in the 
subsequent Prophecy (ch. 25) the writer describes as ‘scorning the 
Kosmos’, and ‘preferring death to life’, 

Compare Corp, II. 17a (on waSorouta), and Corp. XI. ii, 14a. 

semper [voluntatis] (bonitatis) praegnans suae. onilas 
(d&ya6drns) might have been translated ‘bounty’. The ‘goodness’ 
of which the writer is thinking is that which is manifested in the 
production of living creatures. 

Voluntas eius ((eadem)) est bonitas omnis. Cf.ch.26b: ‘Dei 
enim natura consilium est bonita(ti)s,... vult autem omnia bona.’ 

et futuris omnibus dehine ((sicuti sunt et fuerunt)) natu- 
ra[m] ex se nascendi sufficiat. The reading is doubtful; but it 
seems clear that the words sicuti sunt et fuerunt must be closely 
connected with /uturis dehinc. I suppose natura ex se nascendi to 
mean the power of reproduction which all mortal things possess, 
and by which the race is maintained in existence, though the 
individuals perish. It is in virtue of this power that omnia (sc. 
geneva, not individuals,) fitura sunt dehinc sicuti sunt et fuerunt. 
The process by which this reproduction is effected, i. e. the process 
of sexual procreation, is an ‘image’, or temporal and cosmic mani- 
festation, of the eternal productivity of God. Compare Gen. tr. 
27 £.,2 dpoev xat Ov éxoinoe aitovs, «1.4. A Jew who had 
adopted the Egyptian notion of a bisexual God might argue from 
this text that if the human race is dpoey xat 6jAv, and is (in that 

1 Hippolytus, Ref. haer. 8. 20, speaks of men who ‘ call themselves ’Eyxpartrac’, 
and says that they ‘agree with the Church concerning God and Christ’, but profess 
to live a holier life than other Christians, éavrods bid Bpwparay dogaCew voulCovtes, 


érexdpevar Epixar, iSpororoivres, Kal yapeiv ewAvovres. 
2 See note on Corp. 1, 12, 








ASCLEPIUS III: a1 143 


respect) made kar’ eixdva Geod, God must be dpcev kai 67v. Had the 
writer of Asc/, III met with an argument of Jewish origin to this effect? 

Cyprian De habitu virgin. says that virginity is ‘Dei imago, re- 
spondens ad sanctimoniam Domini’. That is exactly the opposite 
of the Hermetist’s doctrine. 

21. omnia animalia et inanimalia. JZranimalia (évya) must 
mean vegetables; see Asc/, I. 4. The existence of the two sexes, 
or something corresponding to them, in plants was recognized by 
some ancient writers, though the mode of reproduction of plants 
was not clearly understood. Zeller, Aristotle, Eng. tr. vol. ii, p. 34, 
refers to several passages in De gen. an. and Hist. an., and sums 
up the view of Aristotle thus: ‘The sexes have not attained to 
separate existence (in plants); ... they remain in the condition of 
perpetual union of the sexes.’ The question ei eipicxerar é& toils 
gurois yévos O9Av Kal yévos dppev is discussed in Ps,-Aristot. Iepi 
grav 1. 2. Theophrastus spoke of male and female plants. 

et in naturam et sensum et naturam.! From the following 
words ef mundum &c., it may be inferred that the lost clause which 

stood here began with e¢ deum or et in deo, and contained some 
- mention of the creative energy of God. 

et mundum dico in se continere naturam. JVafura must 
here mean procreative power; i.e. it must be equivalent to natura 
ex se nascendi above. Perhaps some word or phrase by which this 
sense was more clearly indicated has dropped out. 

eius utriusque conexio aut, quod est verius, unitas. In 
God, the two procreative functions are eternally united. In mortal 
races, they are divided, each individual being either male or female ; 
but in the act of procreation, the separation ceases, and male and 
_ female become one, as God is one. Cf. the speech of Aristophanes 
in Pl. Sympos. 189 C-193D: €.g. gore Sy of... 6 pws euduros 
GAyjAwr trols avOpurors, .. . ertyeipv rorpoat ev éx dvotv. Gen. 2. 24: 
rovrat ot dvo «is cdpra piav. Philo De opif. mundi 53.152: pws & 
eruyevopevos Kabdrep evos Lwov Birra tyxjpara SueotyKdta cuvayayav 
cis ravrov dpudrrera, wobov evidpvodpevos Exarépw tis mpos Odrepov 
kowwvias eis Thy Tod Guolov yéveow. But in what follows, Philo asserts 
that ascetic doctrine against which the polemic of Asc/. III is 
directed : for he adds 6 8& dos obros Kai tiv Tov cwpdrov Adoviv 
eyevvycer, Aris eoriv adunpdtov Kal rapavoynpdtwv apyy, dv jy bmad- 
Adrrovrat tov Ovytov Kal Kaxodaipova Biov dv7’ dBavdrov Kal ebdaipovos. 


_ Elsewhere, Philo, like the writer of Asc?, III, speaks of human 


144 ASCLEPIUS 


procreation as an imitation of the creative energy of God; eg. 
De decalogo 12. 51, Cohn IV, p. 280, speaking of the first five Com- 
mandments, he says: elva: THs pias ypadis THv mev dpyiv Gedy Kal 
marépa Kal rouriv tod wavrds, rd 5 rédos yoveis, ot pipotdmevor Thy 
éxetvou diaw yevvaor rods él pépovs. Lb. 22. 107: rev yovéwv 7 
dors éavdrov Kai Ovyris ovcias eouxev elvar peOdpios, Ovaris pev..., 
aOavdrov St dd riv tod yervav mpds Oedv tov yevyytiy tov dhuv éfo- 
potwrw. Jb, 23. 111, Philo speaks of human parents as rots é« rod 
pa Ovros els 7d elvar wapayaydvras, Kal Kara todTo pmycapevous Oedv. 
Ib. 23. 120: té&v 8 eirohporépwr droceuvivovtes TO yovéwy dvoud pact 
rives, ds dpa rarip kal pyrnp eupaveis clot Geol, prpovpevor tov dyévytov 
év 79 CworAaoretv. 

Plutarch speaks of love and marriage in a tone not unlike that of 
Ascl. IIL; but he dwells on the xowwvia Biov as well as the act of 
procreation, whereas the Hermetist here confines his attention 
chiefly to the latter, and hints at the former only in a passing phrase 
summa caritas &c.) Plut. Amatorius 5.9: tov yauspdov éxelvov (Epwra) 
kat otvepyov aOavacias tO OvyTd yéver, oBevvypévyy jay tiv piow 
etOis efavdrrovra Sia tov yevérewv. Jb. 16. 3 ff: pws is a kind of 
evOovcwucpds. Lb.17. 21; Love is an initiation; éyd d& dpa rots 
pwros épyiacrais cal potas év “Aidov Bedriova poipay otcav. Lb, 
23. 6: GAAG yuvaikl ye yaperais dpxal ratra gidias, Gowep tepOy peyd- 
ov Kowworfpata. Kal 7d THs HdovAs puxpdv' | O& aro Tatrys dva- 
Bracrdvovea Kal” Fpépav trys Kat xdpis Kal dydanows d\Ajhov kal 
mors K.t.A. Lb, 24. 33 adryn yap éorw ds GAnGds 7 8 Chov Aeyouévy 
Kpacis; 4 tov épdytev’ (A 8% tov) dAAws ovpBiotytwv rais Kar’ "Eni- 
Koupov dats Kat mepurdoKais eouxe, cvykpovoes LapBdvovoa Kal dromn- 
Shoes, Evdryta 82 od rowtea rovatryv, olay Epws motel, yapuKys Kowwvias 
ériaBdpevos. Jb, 24. 5: otrw yap épav pey ouBpov yatay of rouprat 
yous, kal yijs obpavdv, épav dé Hvov ceArjvys of pvorxol, kal cvyyive- 
cba Kat xvetobar. Kal yay Sé, dvOpdrwv pyrépa Kai Lodwv, Kal durdv 
Gmdvrwv yéveow, odk dvayxaiov drodécbar more Kal oBecOivar wayrd- 
macw, Stav & devds Epws  twepos rod Geod rijv Any arodry, Kat 
matenrar robodca Kal Subkovea tiv éxeiOev dpxiy Kal Kivyow ; (Plutarch 
here agrees with the writer of Asc/. III in regarding the operation 


1 A technical term of Stoic physics, It was applied to marriage by the Stoic 
Antipater, about 1g0 B.C. (Stob. IV, p. 508 Hense): af wey yap dada qudtar H 
grdogropyiat toixact Tals av donpioy H Twa dddAwy wapawAnoion Kara Tas mapadéceis 
pigeow, al 8 dvbpds wat yuvainds rais 5: bAwy Kpaceoww, ds olvos (legendum otvov?) 
Bart... . ov yap povoy Tis obias (i.e. property) wat TOV GidATaTay Taow dvOpmmros 
réxvew Kat ris Wux7s, GdAd Kal TOY cwpaTov obra pdvor KoWwVoDat, 








ASCLEPIUS III: 22a~23a 145 


of productive force throughout the universe as analogous to human 
procreation ; but he works out the analogy differently. Instead of 
speaking of God as bisexual, he makes God the male principle, and 
iAy the female principle ; and it is the aspiration of matter towards 
union with the creative energy of God that he compares with human 
love. He expresses the same thought at greater length in Js, e¢ Os.) 
Plut. Coniug. praecepta 20 (cf. Amatorius 21.9): xat 9 Pvous piyvuot 
dd Tov Twopdrov jas, ty e€ Exarépwy ju€pos AaBotoa Kat ovyxéaca, 
xowoy épdorépos dr0dS 75 ywdpevor, Sore pnderepov Swopica: pndt 
Staxpiva 7d iioy 7 7d éAXSrpiov, 

hoc...in aeternum procreandi... mysterium. Procrea- 
tion is the means by which a race of mortal beings attains to 
‘a secondary eternity’, i.e. an everlasting existence in time. The 
word pvoryjpiov here means a. ritual act by which man is brought 
near to God. For the notion that sexual union is a ‘mystery ’ or 
sacrament in this sense, cf. Clem. Alex. Strom. 3:27: daly 8 ot rhv 
ravdnpov “Adpodiryy Kowoviay protuciy dvayopevovow. .. . of ye Tpurd= 
Ohuot TH Te capKivay (. « «.) “Kara! (leg. kat?) ry ouvovetarriKyy Kowwviay 
tepopayrotar, Kai ravryv olovra: els rv Bactdelav abrods dvdyew rod 
cod. The Valentinians, as reported by Irenaeus Ado. haer. x. 6, 4, 
said that they iSiéxrgrov dvwbev dd ris dppyrov Kal dvwvouderov ov- 
tvyias ovykarehndvOviav yew Thy xdpw' ... 8d Kad ek Tavros Tpdrou 
bciv airods det 7d rijs culuylas peherav wvoripiov. This notion of the 
Valentinians may have been derived from the iepol ydwor of Pagan 
mystery-cults. 

huius tam blandi necessariique mysterii. If the act is both 
blandum and necessarium, i.e. both desirable and unavoidable, 
why should it be concealed? The writer answers, because men in 
general are incapable of recognizing its true sanctity. 

ne... utriusque naturae divinitas ex commixtione sexus 
Cogatur erubescere. Male and female are made one with each 
other, and thereby are made one with God ; hence, if they are put 
to shame, God himself is put to shame in them. I suppose that 
ex commixtione sexus is to be connected with ulriusgue naturae 
divinitas rather than with cogatur. 

22 a-23a. God’s gift of reason to man. Compare the similar 
treatment of the same topic by a different writer in Asc/, II. 16a. 
See also Asc/. I. 6 c-7 a. 

_ The mention of inreligiosi in ch. 21 fin. enables the writer to pass 
on to what is really a new subject without breach of literary continuity. 

2806-3 Le 








146 , ASCLEPIUS 


22a. {unde contingit in multis remanere malitiam.]] The 
persistence of vice in the many is not caused by the paucity of 
religious men, but by défectus prudentiae in the many; and the 
words must be transposed accordingly. 

ex intellectu.... rationis divinae, qua constituta sunt 
omnia. Cf. Asc/.1. 6b: *(vods) humanos . . . sensus ad divinae 
rationis intellegentiam exornat.’ 

contemptus ((mundi totius)). Here contemptus mundi is good, 
and mundus must therefore be evil. Cf. v#tia mundi in22b. Yet 
in 27 a, and elsewhere in Asc¢/. III, the mundus is good. In ch. 25, 
the error of the Christians is described by the words ‘non admirandus 
videbitur mundus’ &c. Mundus in 22a must mean that which 


in 22 b is called pars corruptior mundi, as opposed to pars divina, 
If the Hermetist used the word xécpos here as well as in ch. 25, he 
must have used it in a different sense. But perhaps the Greek for 
mundi totius may have been wdvrwv trav bAucdv, OF something of the 
sort. Even monistic Platonists found themselves compelled to 
admit that Ay is in some sense a source of evil. 

perseverante autem inperitia atque inscientia, vitia omnia 
convalescunt. Cf. Corp. X. 8b: Kaxia 8 yuxijs dyvocia k.T.A. 

disciplina et intellectus. The gift of God by which man is 
enabled to escape from moral evil is in this passage alsocalled prudentia 
scientiague rerum omnium quae sunt j;—intellectus rationis divinae qua 
constituta sunt omnia ;—iniellegentia et disciplina;—ratio disciplinague ; 
—prudentia et disciplina, In ch. 41b, God confers on man vods 
(rendered by sensus), Mdyos (rendered by ratio), and yvaous (rendered 
by intellegentia and cognitio). The corresponding terms in Ase, I. 
16a are sensus, disciplina, intellegentia, which probably stand for 
vous, érirrypy, yvaors. 

Cf. Philo, Quod deus sit immutabilis, 9. 44 f., Wendland IT, p. 66: 
Bupev 8& rin tov ddov Cowv SmepBéBAnxev GvOpwrros. égaiperov 
ofros roivuy yépas #Aaxe Sidvowy, 7) Tas éxdvrov dices cwopdrov TE 
Sp0d Kal mpaypdrov elwbe xatadapBdvew. Kabdrep yap év pev TO odpart 
70 tyyenovixor dyus éoriv, . « « rov airoy tpérov Kal Tov év Hpiv TO Kpartt- 
oredoy 6 vois’ Wuxis yap dys obros. . . . TodTo Tis Woxijs To €ldos obk éx 
zov airav ororxelwv, eé Gv Ta GAa dreredciro, SietA do On, Kabapurrépas 
St Kal dpelvovos EAaxe THs odoias, 2 fs al Ociar pices ednpuoupyovvTo. 
mapd Kal pdvoy Tov év fyiv eixdTws &dOaprov Bote elvar ddvow, There 
the words Sidvora and vots correspond to disciplina et intellectus &c, 
in Asc. IIL. 22a. 











































ASCLEPIUS III: 22a,b 147 


22b. cum post deos homines efficeret. Compare Pl. Zim. 

41 D-434. The making of men is described in the Kore Kosmu. 
ex parte corruptiore mundi et ex divina pari lance con- 

ponderans. Cf. Lactantius Div. inst. 7. 13-16: ‘(Deus) hominem 


finxit ex ipsa terra, ... id est spiritum suum terreno corpore induit 
et involvit, ut compactus ex rebus diversis ac repugnantibus bonum 
ac malum caperet.... Nam quia homo ex duabus rebus constat, 


corpore atque anima, quorum alterum terrenum est, alterum caeleste, 
duae vitae homini adtributae sunt, una temporalis, quae corpori 
adsignatur, altera sempiterna, quae animae subiacet.’ 

We are told that men are made of a mixture of the corruptior pars 
mundi and the divina ( pars mundi) ; or, as it is afterwards expressed, 
that God made man ex ufrague natura (of either substance), divina 
atgue mortali, On the other hand, the gods are made wholly of 
the divina pars mundi, which is also called mundissima pars mundi, 
and inmortalis natura, And it is in virtue of the divina pars mundi 
in his composition that man possesses disciplina et intellectus, and is 
capable of attaining to immortality, or in other words, of becoming 
agod. The divina pars mundi then must be the stuff of which the 
_ rational and immortal part of the soul is made. Is this stuff corpo- 
real or incorporeal? According to the Hermetists in general (see 
for instance As¢/. I. 7 b), the rational and immortal soul is incorpo- 
real. But in this passage, the writer uses words which seem to 
imply that the higher part of man, as well as the lower, is corporeal ; 
for mundus (which probably here stands for 37) cannot be incorpo- 
teal. It seems then that, according to this chapter, there are two 
kinds of matter, the one finer, and the other coarser 3 the gods 
(i.e. the astral gods, the df caelestes) and the rational soul of man 
are composed of the finer kind of matter; the human body is 
composed of the coarser kind ; and it is the coarser kind alone that 
gives rise to evil passions. In expressing himself thus, the writer 
has probably been influenced by the language of some Stoic autho- 
tity (very likely Posidonius) ; for the Stoics denied the existence of 
incorporeal soul, and taught that gods are composed of wip voepdr, 
and human souls, of a mixture of fire and air. (Or, his divina pars 
‘mundi may be rather the ‘fifth element’ of the Peripatetics 3 see 
‘ote on Asc. I. 6b, ‘(vots) quae quinta pars soli homini concessa 
st ex aethere’.) It does not, however, necessarily follow that the 
writer of Asc/. III consciously rejected the Platonic and Hermetic 
doctrine of incorporeality ; the truth seems rather to be that he has 
L2 


os 


148 ASCLEPIUS 


here adopted phrases which were current in another school, without 
making the alterations which would be needed to bring them into 
agreement with his own principles. Perhaps, when he speaks of 
the rational soul as composed of a kind of ‘matter’ or ‘stuff’, he 
means the phrase to be understood metaphorically, Compare the 
language of Philo in Q. @. s. #. 9. 44, quoted above (ot é« trav abréy 
croixelov . . . SuewAdo On, Kabapwrépas 8%... axe ris obcias, e& Fs al 
Geta pirers eSypovpyotvro), which, taken literally, would imply that 
the vods or Sidvow. is made of a material substance. In Kore 
Kosmu (Stob. Exc, XXIII. 14), the making of souls is described in 
terms of matter (rvedpa yap... AaBdv, Kai voep@ rodro amupi pitas, 
dyvdorors Turty érépais Bras exépace, x7.) ; but it need not be 
inferred from these words that the author of the Kore Kosmu held 
the soul to be really composed of material elements. 

vitia contigit mundi, corporibus commixta, remanere, et 
alia propter cibos (intrare). Evil passions are caused by the 
matter in which the soul is entangled during its life in the body. 
They arise partly from the matter of which the body was originally 
composed, and partly from the additional matter which is absorbed 
into the body when we take food. It is apparently only the grosser — 
elements, earth and water, that give rise to evil passions ; hence the 
di caelestes, whose bodies are composed of fire alone, are free from 
them. 

Cf. Pistis Sophia cap. 111, C. Schmidt, p. 182: ‘ the child eats of 
the rpopai! of the xdcpos of the dpxovres, and... the dvriuipov 
vetpa? draws to itself the pépos of Kaxéa which is in the rpodat. 
(And as the child grows,) the éyripipov mvetpa seeks after all cantar 
and érOupéa, and all sins ;... and it seduces the soul, and compels 
it to do all its dvouia’ &c. Jb. cap. 130, p. 213: ‘Suppose that 
a man has neglected to pray the prayer which takes away the xaxia 
of the tpoéaf which he eats and drinks, and that through the xaxia 
of the rpoaé he is bound to the axle of the ciuappevy of the dp- 
xovres, and through the dvdyxy of the orouxeta he has sinned...’ 

Diis . . . nullis indigentibus rationis disciplinaeque admini- 
culis. The writer is here speaking of the alo@yrol Geoi, i.e. the di 
caelestes (astral gods), and not of the vonroi Geoi. The di caelestes, 
not being affected by the causes which produce evil passions in 


1 Schmidt's text gives tpupal ; but the right reading is evidently tpogai. 
2 The dv7ipupov mvedpa is an appendage which is attached to the soul at the time 
of its incarnation. 





ASCLEPIUS III: 22b 149 


men, have no need of ratio disciplinague (hoyiopds and érirripyy) as 
a preventive against such passions. God has therefore bestowed 
Aoyopds and émorjyy on men alone. The di caelestes have not 
received this gift, but are secured against evil in a different and 
more effectual way. In the first place, they have immortality and 
perpetual vigour, i.e. they are not liable to physical evil, and have 
no need of Aoywrpds and éxrrypy to enable them to guard against 
that ; and in the second place, their actions, (i. e. their movements 
in the heavens, by means of which they operate on the world below,) 
are determined by invariable law, so that they do not need doyurpds 
and érwr7jpn to enable them to guard against moral evil. It seems 
surprising to be told that the gods do not possess ‘reason and 
knowledge’; but the statement may be accepted, if we assume that 
Aoyop.ds (or didvora) and émrrjpy are here distinguished from and 
contrasted with vois, and that the souls of the gods are pure yois. 
Cf. ch. 18 b fiz. : ‘sensum (i. e. votvy) deorum animam dixerunt?! We 
must take the words Aoywpyds and emery to mean faculties 
adapted to the state of man on earth. The gods possess the power 
of directly and intuitively apprehending the true and good; this 
power man does not now possess ; he will acquire it only when he 
realizes his ‘hope of immortality’, i.e. when he himself becomes 
agod. By Aoyiouds and émorjun we must understand knowledge 
of good and evil, which carries with it the power to choose between 
good and evil. (Cf. Philo, Quod deus sit immutabilis, 9. 47, Wend- 
land II, p. 66, where d:dyo.a, the faculty by the possession of which 
man is distinguished from the beasts, is identified with 7b Exovotov.) 
Now the gods are secured against the possibility of evil. In place 
of the human knowledge of good and evil, they have knowledge of 
absolute and unmixed good; and they are not called upon to 
choose between good and evil, for they necessarily and inevitably 
do that which is good. Cf. Philo De opif. mundi 24. 73, Cohn I, 
P- 24: trav ovtwy Ta pev od? dperis otre xaxias peréxet, Sowep hurd 
kal (Ga GAoya, Ta pev Ste aduxd ré €or kal ddavtdorw ptoer Sioixetrar, 
7a 8 dri votv Kal Abyov exrérpyrart waxias O& Kal dperfs as av olkos 
wots xai Adyos (the ratio disciplinague of Ascl. III), @ wedvxaow 
fydiaracba. 7a 8 ad povns Kexowdvyxey dperijs, duéroxa méoys dvra 
kaxias, Gomep of dorépes* obror yap SGd re elvar Aéyovrar Kat Loa voepd, 
HGdAov 8 voids aris Exagros, Sos 8° SAwv omovdatos, Kat mavTos 


1 See Herm. ap. Stob. Exc. XI. 2. (15). The MSS. there give 6 vods év 7G 6¢8" 
Sroyicpds ty 76 dvopume. But the reading of that aphorism is doubtful. 








150 ASCLEPIUS 


dver(Sexros Kaxod" 7a St THs puxrhs ore picews, Gowep dvOpwros, ds 
émdéxerat tavavria, ppdvycw Kai dppootvay, « - » Kat cuvehovre ppdoa 
éyaba Kal Kaxd, Kadd kai aloxpd, dperiy cal caxiav, Sen. Ep. 95. 36: 
‘di immortales nullam didicere virtutem, cum omni editi, et pars 
naturae eorum est, bonosesse.’ Jd. 49: ‘errat si quis illos (sc. deos) 
putat nocere nolle: non possunt.’ 

quamvis inmortalitas ... intentionemque protendens, I 
have rewritten this corrupt passage so as to make it express what I 
suppose to have been the writer’s meaning ; but his exact words can 
hardly be restored. 

ordinem necessitatis lege conscriptum aeterna[ jconstituit. 
Cf. Ps.-Pl. Epinomis 982 aff.: there are two kinds of {6a, 70 pe 
ék wupds, . » « 7O8 ex vis, Kal rd pev yowov & dragig, 7d F ek 
mupos ev rdée macy Kwovpevov. TO piv obv ev dragia. Kwovpevov 
ddpov xpi vouilew, Smep ds rd TOAD SpE 1d mepi Hpas Gdov, 7d dé ev 
rage te Kal odpavd mdpov exov péya TeKpajptov xpi) movetobar rod 
dpévipov eva’ xara rata yap av Kal doatrws ropevdpevov del Kat 
mow Kat mdéoxov Texpnpiov ixavov Tod ppovibws Civ «in Tapexdpevov. 
H vryxis 88 dvdyxn vodv Kexrnperys aracdv dvayKav TOAD peylorn 
yiyvour dv" apxovoa yap GAN’ odk dpxopévy vopoberei. 1d St duerd- 
otpodoy, Srav ux} Td dpirov Kara Tov dpurtov BovAevantat vodv, TO 
rédcov éxBatver tO Svre Katha votv, Kal ove dddpas dv abrod xpetrrov 
ot8t dperactpopdrepov dv wore yévorro. Cic. Wat. deor, 2. 43h: 
‘sensum autem astrorum atque intellegentiam maxime declarat 
ordo eorum atque constantia’ &c. See Mayor’s note ad loc. 

The writer of Asc/. III ascribes to the devs summus, and not to 
the di caelestes themselves, the vots by which the movement or 
action of the heavenly bodies is determined. But he certainly does 
not mean that they are mere passive matter, moved by compulsion 
from without ; we must assume that they are voepoé, and that their 
vods works in perfect and unvarying accord with that of the deus 
summus. It could not do otherwise ; for it is his vods that is in them ; 
all vots is one. 

potuissent stands for fossent. See note on Asc. I. 8, intuert 
potuisset. 

et "bonum’ hominem et qui posset inmortalis esse ex 
utraque natura conposuit, divina atque mortali. The nuortalis 
natura is contrasted with the d/wina natura; and in place of bonum, 
we need some adjective which may stand in corresponding contrast 
to inmortalis. Some such word as ¢errenum would serve the purpose. 








ASCLEPIUS III: 23b, 94a 151 


Compare Herm. af. Lactant. Dro. inst. 7.13. 3: kot 7d abrs) e 
xarépwv picewy, Tis Te APavdrov Kai THs Ovarijs, piav éroia piow 
riv 100 dvOparov, Kr.. Ascl. I. 7b: ‘homo duplex est’ &c. Corp. 
I. 15: durdots éorw 6 dvOpwros K.r.A. 

((nominem)) . . . esse meliorem et diis. Cf. Corp. X. 24b: 
xal tép éxeivous (sc. trols év otpavd Oeors) éotlv 5 dvrws dvOpwros, 
} rdvtos ye ivodvvapotcw a\djAow. The reason given in that 
document is that man’s range is wider than that of the dy caelestes ; 
for he is at home both in the higher world and in the lower, while 
the di caelestes are limited to the higher. (A similar thought is 
expressed in Asc/. 1. 6a, ‘feliciore loco medietatis’ &c. See also 
Ascl. 1. 9 fin., ‘mortalitate auctus’.) Perhaps the writer of Asc/. III 
might have added that man has freedom of choice between good 
and evil, and if he chooses rightly, is on that ground ‘better’ 
than the gods, whose action is determined by necessity. He who 
might do wrong deserves more credit if he does right. 

Compare istis Sophia cap, 100, C, Schmidt, p. 162: ‘when you 
have departed from the body, and ascended to the region of the 
Archontes, all the Archontes (= the di caelestes) will feel shame 
_ before you (sc. the “saved ” or “ purified ” men), because you are the 
_ dregs of the wAy of which they are made, and yet have become 
purer light than all of them.’ 

omnium mortalium represents the Greek genitive after a com- 
parative. Cf. Ascl. Prologue, init. ‘omnium ... divinior’. 

diis cognatione coniunctus. Cf. Asc. I. 5: ‘mente, qua diis 
junctus est.’ Jb. 6a: ‘diis cognata divinitate coniunctus est! 

homo... ipsos... veneratur, diique ... humana... 
eustodiunt. Cf. Aelius Aristides 43. 22, Keil II, p. 345: Zeus, 
_ the Demiurgus, évoie Oeods pév dvOpuirov eriednrds, dvOpdimous Sé 
| Ociv Ocparevras Te Kal Sarnpéras. 

23b, 24a. Man is able to make gods. This topic is resumed 
inch. 37. Here, the mention of it leads on to the Prophecy, 
chs. 24b-26a. The ‘man-made gods’ are the gods worshipped 
in the temple-cults of Egypt, which the Christians were seeking 
to suppress at the time when 4sc/, III was written. Jews and 
Christians had long been accustomed to make it a reproach against 
the Pagans that they worshipped ‘gods made by men’s hands’; 
the writer defiantly admits the fact, and glories in it. 

The notion that a god or daemon could, by certain ritual words 
and acts, be incorporated in an image or other material object, no 


152 ASCLEPIUS 


doubt lay at the root of most of the Pagan cults. But the belief 
that a statue was a god, or was animated by an indwelling god, 
had been discarded by all educated Greeks; and in the higher 
Greek literature, from Homer down to the Christian era, few traces 
of it are to be found. Heraclitus, fr. 5 Diels, speaks with scorn 
of the ignorant people who address their prayers to statues, ‘as if 
one were to talk to house-walls’. Dio Chrysost. Ov. 12 explains 
and defends the practice of making statues of the gods from the 
point of view of an enlightened Greek, which is very different from 
that of the Egyptian writer of Asc, III: ‘Mind and wisdom 
(vodv kat @pdvyow) in their very being, no sculptor or painter can 
depict. . . . But knowing that the human body is a receptacle of 
wisdom and reason, we ascribe this form to the gods; and having 
no model to copy, we seek to represent the inimitable and in- 
visible by that which is imitable and visible, using the human form 
as a symbol. . . . It cannot be maintained that it would be better 
to have no statues or images of the gods set up among men, and 
that we ought to look to the heavenly bodies alone, All men of 
sense revere the heavenly bodies as blessed gods; but them we see 
only from afar; and our conception of the divine produces in all 
mankind a strong desire to worship the deity close at hand, drawing 
near to the gods and laying hold of them with entreaties, sacrificing 
to them, and decking them with wreaths. For just as young 
children, when they are parted from their father or mother, often in 
dreams stretch out their hands with strong desire and yearning 
towards the loved one who is far away, even so do men yearn 
toward the gods, loving them, as is but right, by reason of their 
goodness to us, and the kinship between god and man, and eager 
to meet them and hold converse with them in any way.’ 

Maximus Tyrius, Or. 2 Hobein, discusses the question «i Geois 
dydApara t8puréov; and his answer is to the same effect as that 
of Dio. ‘Those men’, he says, ‘in whom the memory (of the 
higher world from which the soul has come) is strong, and who are 
capable of uplifting their souls straight to heaven, and meeting 
the Divine there,—such men, perhaps, have no need of images. 
But men of that kind are rare; and you will never find a whole 
community that retains the memory of things divine, and does not 
need such help as images give. . . . And so the lawgivers, I think, 
dealt with their peoples as with a troop of children, and invented 
these images for mankind, as signs to direct them to the worship 








ASCLEPIUS III: 23b, 24a 153 


of the Divine, and as means of guidance on the road to the 
recollection of things above. . . . There is no race, Barbarian or 
Greek, . . . which can do without setting up some visible symbols 
of their reverence for the gods. . . . God himself, the Father and 
Maker of all that is—who was before the sun, and before the 
heavens, who is mightier than time?’ and all the world of change,— 
him no lawgiver can name, no tongue can tell of him, no eye 
behold him; and inasmuch as it is beyond our power to apprehend 
him in his true being, we seek help in sounds and names, in living 
creatures, in shapes wrought in gold and ivory and silver, in trees 
and plants, in rivers and mountain-tops and water-springs, longing 
indeed to know God,? but compelled by our weakness to give to 
things of beauty in this world the name which should denote his 
being. . . . And if the memory of God is awakened in Greeks 
by the sculpture of a Pheidias, and in Egyptians by their worship 
of beasts, in some men by a river, and in others by a fire, I find 
_no fault with their disagreement; only let them recognize the 
Divine, and yearn for it, and call to mind the God their souls 
once knew.’ 

Julian, Fragmentum epistulae 2934, Bidez and Cumont 89 b, 
p. 133 (Hertlein I, p. 376 sg.): Exaoros jpiv ... Ta tis edoeBelas 
épya wAnpotrw, . . . ra lepd TO Ocdy kal ra dydApara . . . ceBopevos 
dorep av ei wapdvtas Epa tots Geods. dyddpata yap Kat Bupots Kal 
mupos aoBéorov pvdaxiy kal wdvta dwAds ta Toiadra ctpBodra ot 
marépes EGevto THS Tapovelas TOV Gedy, odK iva éxeiva Oeors vouiowper, 
GAN iva bv abrdv rods Geots Ocparretowpuev. ered?) yap Huds, dvras 
éy caépartt, cwparixas ee woreioGar ois Geois cat ras Xatpeias, 
dodparot S¢ elow abrot* para piv ekav jyiv ayddApata 1d Sevrepov 
dxd rod mpdtov trav Oedv yévos mepl awdévta Tov otpavdv Kixlw 
tepipepopevoy. Suvapmevns d& odd€ Tovros drodidocbar rhs Oepameias 
gwpaTiKas’ drpoode yap éor. pice’ tpirov éxt ys eSevpeOn yévos 
dyohpdruv, eis 5 Tas Oepameias émiteodvres, EavTois etpevels Tods 
Oeods Karacricopev. Gorep yap ot trav Bacréwy Oeparedvovres 
eixdvas, ovOev Seopevwr, Suws eéeAxovrar THY edvotay ets EavTovs, obrws 
kal of Gedy Oeparevovres 7a. dydApara, Seopévev ovfev tdv Gedy, Suws 
meHovow airors érapive opiot kal kydecbar’ Setypa ydp éorw (ris) 
bs GAnOds ScvdryTos H wept Ta Suvard mpoOvpia, «7.5 

; kpeirtav 6& xpévou [iat rte kal mdons peovons picews, 

émOvpodvres piv adrod THs vonceas, 


3 A Christian reader of this passage expresses his scorn in an inserted note: dad’ 
ove éxpiv, & rac@y datpdvew wAnbiv dvacrnAwoas (évt) TH of WuxT, Tos Kara oe 


154 ASCLEPIUS 


In Corp. XVII we have a fragment from the end of a dialogue 
in which the same subject was discussed. The view of its writer 
seems to have resembled that of Dio Chrysost., Maximus Tyrius, 
and Julian, rather than that expressed in Asc/. III. See also 
Plotinus 4, 3. 11. 

Plutarch (Zs. e¢ Os. 71) expresses his contempt for Greeks who 
are so foolish as to suppose that a statue is a god: éomep ‘EA\ijvev 
ot Ta XaAKa Kal Ta yparra Kat AiOwa pH pabdvres pnd euoberres 
dyddpara Kal tas Oedv dhAd Oeois xadeiv, fra Todpdvres Aéyew 
ore thy “AOyvav Aaxdpys ekédvce, tov 8 "Ard\Awva xpuoois Boorptxous 
exovra Atovvotos daréxerpev, . . . NavOdvovow epeArxdpevor Kal mapadexé- 
pevor ddfas rovnpis éxopevas ois évéuacw. But in Egypt, the 
belief in the real presence of the god in the statue survived in all 
its primitive force. 

The story of The Possessed Princess of Bekhten (Budge, Egyptian 
Reading Book, p. xxviii ff.) is a good illustration of the popular 
Egyptian notion of a statue which is a god. The King of Egypt 
sent ‘ Khonsu-who-performeth-mighty-things’ in a boat, with an 
escort, from Thebes to the distant land of Bekhten; the Prince of 
Bekhten came forth to meet the god; and the god went (i.e. was 
carried) to the place where the Princess was, and drove out the 
demon of sickness which possessed her. The Prince then said 
‘The god Khonsu shall be made to abide in this country, and I 
will not allow him to depart into Egypt’; and the god tarried there 
three years and more. But the Prince was then warned by a dream, 
in which he saw the god come out of his shrine, in the form of 
a golden hawk, and fly away to Egypt; and when he woke up, 
he said ‘The god has departed from us, and has made his way 
back into Egypt; we must now send his vehicle back to Egypt’. 
Throughout this story, the god is the statue, and the statue is the 
god, except in the inference which the Prince draws from his 
dream ; the words there used imply that the divine soul hitherto 
embodied in the statue has quitted it, and flown off to Egypt, 
leaving the statue lifeless in its shrine, 

Strabo (17. 28, p. 805) says that the Egyptian temples contained 
davov odd€v, i) ox évOpumdpopdov, G\AX Tov GAdyov Cwwv tds. But 
this must be a mistake, caused by the fact that the god himself 
was never exposed to public view. On the Egyptian cult-images, 


dvedéous kal doxnpaticrous cwparomhastetaba. mids Bt od Uda kal Alous vopicwpev 
& xeipes dvOpdinay éndppwcay ; & nat ray AlGwv abrav appovéorepe, «7.2, 








ASCLEPIUS III: 23b,24a 155 


see Erman, Life in Ancient Egypt, Eng. tr. 1894, p. 275. ‘In 
the Holy of Holies was a shrine, . .. inside which was a richly 
adorned little bark, ... containing the figure of the god. The 
statue could therefore have been only about two feet high; it 
probably resembled the little bronze figures of which we possess 
such anumber. We know no more, for this sacred image of the 
god was so strictly guarded from profane eyes that as far as is 
known it is never once represented in the temple reliefs’ (with one 
possible exception of late date). ‘Even the pictures of the Holy 
of Holies show only the divine bark; in the centre is the deck 
cabin, like a little temple’, (in which the statue was hidden). ‘ This 
bark was carried round in procession on great festivals, and to the 
outside world it was itself the image of the god.’ The cult-images 
were doubtless deliberately destroyed by the Christians, and no 
specimen of them has been preserved. If they resembled the 
portraits of the gods which appear on the monuments, many of 
them must have taken the form of a human body with an animal 
head; but the writer of Asc/. III expressly says that they were in 
human shape (23 b jiz., ‘humanitas deos suos ex sui yultus simili- 
tudine figuraret’), and there is no conclusive evidence to the 
contrary. The statue of Serapis in the temple of that god at 
Alexandria was of foreign origin, and did not conform to the native 
Egyptian type. 

Wiedemann, Rel. of the Anc. Eg., Eng. tr. 1897, p. 180f, says 
it is a mistake to suppose that ‘the Egyptian temple centred round 
astatue’;... ‘generally speaking (in the case of those temples 
in which the godhead was supposed to dwell) it was not to statues 
that the temple prayers and offerings were made, but . .. to the 
sacred animal of the place’. The author of Asc/. III, however, 
differs from Wiedemann in this. It appears to be implied in ch. 37, 
that the deity who resided in a temple was in some cases embodied 
in a statue, and in other cases, in a sacred animal. The passage 
of Celsus (Orig. c. Ceés. 3. 17) quoted by Wiedemann 7.c. applies 
only to those temples in which the god was incarnated in an 
animal, and does not exclude the existence of other temples in 
which the god was incorporated in a statue. Wiedemann speaks 
of ‘the numerous statues set up in a temple . . . for the adornment 
of the building and the future welfare of the bestower’; but these 
must be distinguished from the cult-image in which the god was 
embodied. The latter was concealed in its shrine, and only 


156 ASCLEPIUS 


certain priests (of els rb dSurov eloropevdpevor zpos Tov orohur ov 
tov Geav, Decree of Canopus, 238 B.C.) had access to it. 

23 b. nobis inducitur sermo. The true reading must surely 
be inducitur, though indicitur, which is given by the MSS., was 
already read by Augustine, 

inluminat (-nant MSS.). Here, as often, dis is closely connected 
with Cw. By means of certain rites, man confers conscious life 
and intelligence on the statues which he makes. 

Nee inmerito miraculo dignus est. Cf. Ascl. I. 64 init: 
‘magnum miraculum est homo’ &c, 

It may be doubted whether the text of this sentence is sound ; 
we should rather have expected ‘nec inmerito (gratulatione ?) Genus 
est, qui est omnium ((miraculorum)) maximum ’ 

de mundissima parte materiae (ussares MSS.) esse pro- 
gnatum. The bodies of the d caelestes are made of fire (or of the 
‘fifth element’ of the Peripatetics). The words which follow (ex 
utraque natura &c.) seem to imply that the souls of the cult-images are 
corporeal, and are made of the same material substance as the bodies 
of the dz caedestes (and that those bodies are souls ?). If this is the 
meaning, the writer has here again adopted the language of Stoicism. 

signaque eorum sola quasi capita pro omnibus esse. 
Signa (cnpeia) more commonly means ‘constellations’ ; but it here 
denotes the heavenly bodies individually. 

The astral gods have no trunk or limbs ; the bodily form of each 
of them is that of a human head without appendages. The human 
head is (approximately) spherical, and is the seat of reason; and 
the sun, moon, and stars resemble it in both respects. The notion 
is derived from Plato Zim. 44 Df. Cf. Corp. X. 11: 6 xécpos 
odaipa éori, rovréote Kepady}, K.7.d. 

ex utrague natura conformatae sunt. A temple-god, like 
a man, consists of body and soul. His body is a statue carved 
by human hands; his soul is a daemon, or beatified human soul, 
incorporated in the statue by means of a prescribed ritual. 

ex ea quae infra homines est. We must read infra in place 
of ‘xtra. The wood or metal of which the statue is made is not 
‘within’ man; but it may be said to be ‘beneath’ man, in the 
sense that it stands lower in the scale of existence, and is anbjecs 
to his power. 

memor naturae et originis suae. Vatura (yéveois?) here 
means ‘birth’, Man remembers that God is the author and 








ASCLEPIUS III: 23b,24a 157 


source of his being, and he therefore imitates God. We have 
already been told that man imitates God by procreation; we are 
now told that he imitates God also by making gods in his own 
image. The thought is far-fetched and fanciful; but a writer 
who has set himself to maintain the paradox that ‘ man makes gods’ 
can hardly be expected to keep within the limits of sober reason. 

24a. futurorum praescias, ... inbecillitates hominibus fa- 
cientes easque curantes. The chief functions which the writer 
ascribes to the temple-gods of Egypt are firstly, the prediction of 
future events; and secondly, the causing and healing of disease. 
He distinguishes three methods of prediction, viz. (1) sorte, ‘ by lot’, 
(2) vate, by the utterance of a person possessed by the deity, and 
(3) somniis, by dreams. 

We hear of oracles worked by the temple-priests under the 
native dynasties; and in the times when the priesthood was most 
powerful, e.g. at the end of the XXth dynasty (1ogo B.c.), the 
oracle of Amon at Thebes ‘became part of the ordinary machinery 
of government’ (Breasted, Hist. of Egypt, p. 523). The kingdom of 
Aethiopia, which had been founded by colonists from Egypt, was 
long dominated by priests, who used the oracle of Amon at Meroe 
as their instrument. See Hdt. 2.29. Diodorus 3. 5 describes the 
method by which the Aethiopian king was appointed ; the god was 
carried round, and chose (ae) one of a group of selected candi- 
dates. This must mean that the priests who carried the statue in 
its portable shrine, and whose movements were supposed to be 
controlled by the god, stopped before the man who was to be 
appointed. This is the same procedure by which the priests of 
Amon at Thebes made Thutmésis III king of Egypt in rsor B.c. 
(Breasted, 74, p. 268), According to Lucian, Dea Syria 38, a similar 
method of working the oracle was employed in the temple at 
Bambyce ; and when a question was asked, the god answered ‘ yes’ 
by making the priests who carried him move forward, or ‘no’ by 
making them move backward. But such a method as this could 
hardly be described by the word sorfe; and when the Hermetist 
speaks of consulting the oracle ‘by lot’, he probably means drawing 
one of a number of tablets on which sentences are written. 

Diodorus 7%. adds that the Aethiopian priests were able to 
compel a king to kill himself at the command of the oracle, until 
King Ergamenes, about 280-250 8. c., defied and massacred them. 
In Egypt, under the Ptolemies and the Romans, the temple-oracles 


158 ASCLEPIUS 


had ceased to be of political importance, but were still consulted 
by many persons who sought a god’s advice about their private 
concerns; though the demand for oracular responses must have 
been diminished by the increasing competition of the astrologers. 

We hear of oracular dreams (somnia) obtained by incubation at 
the temples of Serapis. Strabo 17. 17, p. 801: KdvwBos . . . Zyovea 
70 Tod Sapdrdos iepov ToAAR éyuoreda rywdhpevov Kad Ocpareias éxpépov, 
dare cai rods é\Noymwrérous dv8pas morevew Kat éyxoacbar adtods 
trép cautdy 7) érépous. ovyypddover 3¢ tives Kal Tas Ocpameias, dot 
8 “dperas ray évratéa Aoytwv’ (dperadoyéas Wilcken), The last words 
refer to the dperaddyo,, i.e. professional story-tellers attached to 
a sanctuary, whose business was to edify the public with tales of 
wonders worked by the god. Otto Priester und Tempel I. 118, 
II. 226,"| There were professional interpreters of dreams (évurrvio- 
xpirat) and interpreters of oracles who carried on their business 
in the Serapeum at Memphis (Otto 2, r. 118). The god Imhotep- 
Asclepius likewise prescribed for his patients through dreams. For 
early instances of oracular dreams, see the story of Merneptah, 
1225-1215 B.C. (Breasted, Hist. Hy. p. 468), and that of the priest- 
king in the time of Sennacherib (Hat. 2. 141); the god who speaks 
in the dream is in both these cases Ptah. 

An oracle is delivered vave when the god speaks through the 
mouth of a priest who is possessed by him; as when the priest of 
the Libyan Ammon ‘told Alexander dy word of mouth that he was 
a son of Zeus’ (Strabo 17. 43, p. 814). At that temple, we are told, 
this method was exceptional; as a rule, the priest who ‘personated 
the god’ (rov Ala imexpivaro), and gave the response to the inquirer, 
did not speak, but merely signified his meaning by gestures. Firmicus 
Maternus, De err. prof. relig. 1 3. 4, quotes Porphyry as saying 
‘Serapis vocatus et intra corpus hominis conlatus, talia respondit’. 
In such cases, the priest becomes for the time ‘a living statue’ of 
the god (see ch. 37 below). 

The Hermetist says that the temple-gods not only heal diseases, 
but also cause them. Cf. ch. 37: ‘Isin... quantis obesse scimus 
iratam!’ No doubt the sick were sometimes told by an oracle that 


* The story of ‘The possessed Princess of Bekhten’ is an dperadoyia of pre- 
Hellenic date. Abt, Ein Bruchstiick einer Sarapis-Aretalogie, Archiv Sir 
Religionswiss. XVIII (1915), 257 599., gives the text of a papyrus-fragment in 
which is told a story of a response obtained from Sarapis by incubation, and of the 
healing &c. which followed. This papyrus was written ‘not later than the third 
century A.D,’ 








ASCLEPIUS III: 24 b-26a 159 


the disease was due to the anger of this or that temple-god, and 
were directed to appease the offended deity by offerings. 

24 b-26a. The Prophecy. See Introduction, vol. i, pp. 61-76, 
where I have given reasons for holding that this prediction must have 
been written at the time of the Palmyrene occupation of Egypt in 
A. D. 268-273. 

Elsewhere in the Hermefica we find passing references to the time 
of the writer, or times recent to him, in the form of predictions 
spoken by Trismegistus; e.g. Asci. I. 12b: men will corrupt 
philosophy by mingling it with profane science. Corp, XVI. 1b: 
Greeks will translate the books of Hermes into their own language. 
Herm. a. Stob. £xc. VI. 14: men will give names to stars which 
are now nameless. Asc. III. 27d: the city of Alexandria will be 
founded. But the extant Hermetic literature contains no other 
prophecy of the same type as that in Asc/. III. In the form of 
a prediction uttered by a prehistoric teacher, the writer expresses his 
horror and dismay at the situation of his country. He is deeply 
moved by the calamities under which Egypt is suffering; but in 
his view, these calamities are merely a symptom or accompaniment 
of a yet more terrible evil; and that which distresses him most is 
the decay of religion. He sees Christianity gaining ground among 
his countrymen ; they are accepting the new doctrine and way of 
life, and abandoning the old cults; and this, to him, means that 
religion itself is dying out, since religion, as he understands it, is 
inseparable from the established forms of worship. If men cease 
to worship the gods, all kinds of misery and disaster must inevitably 
follow; not only human society, but the universe itself must fall 
into confusion. Yet he does not utterly despair; sooner or later 
God will intervene to save his disordered world from ruin; and so 
the gloomy prophecy ends in a tone of faith and hope; the writer 
looks forward to a wadvyyeveoia, when all things shall be made new. 

Apocalyptic prophecies were known to the Egyptians from an 
early period. A document dating from the Middle Kingdom, about 
2000 B,C. (Leyden Papyrus I. 344; Lange, Si/zungsber. der Ber- 
liner Akad. XXVII. 601-610; Breasted, Hist. Eg. p. 204) contains 
the utterance of a prophet named Ipuwer, who foretells the coming 
of a time when ‘the social and political organization shall be over- 
thrown, the poor shall become rich and the rich shall suffer need, 


1 This passage is discussed by Bernays, Gesammelte Abhandlungen, 1885, vol. i, 
PP- 327-346. 








160 ASCLEPIUS 


foreign enemies shall enter, and the established order of things 
shall be completely overturned’. After predicting frightful calamities, 
the prophet announces a saviour who shall restore prosperity to the 
land. A Greek papyrus published by Wessely (Denkschr. d. Wien. 
Akad. XLII, 1893, p. 3ff.; Bouché-Leclercq, Hirst. des Lagides III, 
p. 25) contains fragments of an Egyptian document, in which it is told 
how a man of the time of Amenophis predicted the expulsion of foreign 
enemies and the restoration of the national king; the original was 
probably written in the time of the Persian rule. Manetho mentions 
a prophecy which was said to have been uttered by a lamb in the 
reign of Bocchoris (Bekneranef, 712 8.c.); and the prophecy to 
which he refers is extant in a demotic papyrus of the time of 
Augustus (Krall, Zéstgaben fiir Bidinger, Innsbruck 1898 ; Breasted, 
fiist. Zg. p. 547). The lamb foretells the invasion and conquest 
of Egypt by the Assyrians. Egyptian documents of this type may 
have been known to the Hermetist. 

He may also have been influenced by Jewish apocalyptic writings 
current in his time (see Bousset, Religion des Judenthums in Neutest. 
Zeitalter, Kap. XIII), e.g. the Oracuia Sibyliina, the greater part of 
which originated in Egypt. Orac. Sid. V (about the time of Trajan ?) 
contains several announcements of woe to Egypt, and predicts— 
but, unlike Asc. III, with exultation—the overthrow of Egyptian 
idolatry (Il. 484-500). Predictions of civil war in Egypt occur in 
Si. VII. 18-20 and XIII. 74~78; the latter passage is connected 
with an account of the reign of Philippus, a.p. 244-249. The 
concluding paragraph of the Hermetic prophecy, in which the 
writer describes the impending senectus mundi and the subsequent 
vegenitura, is also in some respects analogous to the eschatology of 
the Jewish and Christian apocalypses.' See, for instance, the short 
summary of Jewish eschatology in Sd. II. 6-14 and 21-33. The 
Sibyllists agree with the Hermetist in foretelling a time of misery 
and confusion, which will culminate in the destruction of the 
impious, and will be followed by a ‘restoration of all things’ in 
the interest of the pious. But the denotation of the words ‘ pious’ 
and ‘impious’ is reversed; for the Sibyllists are bitter opponents 
of the old cults to which the Hermetist clings. Moreover, the 
political aspirations of the Jewish Sibyllists of the first and second 


* The prevalent belief that the end of the saecu/um is at hand is expressed e. g. 
by Tertullian Apo/. 32 (A.D. 197): the Christians pray for the Roman emperor, 
because theycknow ‘ vim maximam universo orbi imminentem, ipsamque clausulam 
saeculi, acerbitates horrendas comminantem, Romani imperii commeatu retardari ’. 








ASCLEPIUS III: 24b-26a 161 


centuries A.D.—their thirst for vengeance on their enemies, their 
confident predictions of the destruction of the tyrant power of 
Rome, and their assurance that the overthrow of Rome will be 
followed by the reign of God’s chosen people,—find no analogy 
in the prophecy of the Hermetist. He deplores the invasion of 
Egypt by foreigners, partly because it involves the slaughter of 
Egyptians, and partly because it hastens the decay of the national 
religion ; but he shows no trace of a vindictive temper ; bloodshed 
is revolting to him, and the more revolting when the shedders of 
blood are his own countrymen; and his patriotism does not 
take the form of a desire for the political dominance of his own 
race. 

In the concluding paragraph of the Prophecy, the Hermetist 
seems to be following some authority which spoke of a cyclically 
recurring renovation of the universe. If that is the case, the source 
from which he is there drawing cannot be Jewish or Christian; for 
the Jews and Christians rejected the notion of a recurring cycle, 
and looked forward to a single and final renovation. (See Orig. 
c. Cels. 4.67.) It therefore seems that the writer must have been 
influenced rather by the Stoic theory of a periodically recurring 
ecpyrosis and diacosmesis; and the analogies presented by Seneca 
(see below) make it probable that his description is derived in part 
from Posidonius. The Hermetist himself, however, lays no stress on 
the cyclic recurrence of the process; his attention is fixed on the 
one senectus mundi which he sees to be already in progress, and 
the one rvegenitura which will follow it. 

The text of the Prophecy has been confused by some interpola- 
tions, and probably by some transpositions. 

Interpolations :—{a) Ch. 24b: ‘sed, quod est durius, quasi de 
legibus a religione, pietate, cultuque divino statuetur praescripta 
poena prohibitio.’ These ‘so-called laws’ are evidently laws enacted 
shortly before the words were written. But Pagan worship was not 
prohibited by law until the middle of the fourth century a.p. See 
Gibbon, ch. 21 fiz. ; Boissier, Hin de Paganisme, I, p. 7 5 ff. and 94 ff, 
Il, p. 339 ff. ; Otto, Priester und Tempel, I, p. 404. Constantine 
forbade divination, confiscated the property of many temples, and 
suppressed certain particular cults‘for special reasons ; (he is said, for 
instance, to have taken measures against certain priests of the Nile- 
god, whose practices were considered morally offensive ; see Euseb. 
Vita Constant. 4. 25 ;) but it is generally agreed that he enacted no 

2806-3 M 


162 ASCLEPIUS 


penal laws against Pagan worship as such. An edict ascribed to 
Constans, a. D. 341 (?), Cod. Theodos. 16. 10. 2, forbids sacrifices in 
general, and appears to assert (though this is explained away by 
commentators) that Constantine had forbidden them before him: 
‘Cesset superstitio, sacrificiorum aboleatur insania. Nam quicunque 
contra legem divi principis parentis nostri et hanc nostrae mansue- 
tudinis iussionem ausus fuerit sacrificia celebrare, competens in eum 
vindicta et praesens sententia exseratur.’ But Constans did not 
rule in Egypt. Firmicus Maternus, De err. prof. relig., A.D. 347; 
urges the emperors Constantius and Constans to enact penal laws 
against Pagan worship; e.g. c. 16: ‘amputanda sunt haec, sacra- 
tissimi imperatores, penitus atque delenda, et severissimis edictorum 
vestrorum legibus corrigenda, ne diutius Romanorum orbem prae- 
sumptionis istius error funestus immaculet.’ The language of Firmi- 
cus implies that no such laws were in force at the time when he 
wrote. It seems that the earliest law to which the words of the 
Hermetic text could be applied was the edict issued by Constantius, 
probably in a.p. 353, Cod. Theodos. 16. 10. 4: ‘Placuit omnibus 
locis atque urbibus universis claudi protinus templa, et accessu vetitis 
omnibus licentiam delinquendi perditis abnegari. Volumus etiam 
cunctos sacrificiis abstinere. Quod si quis aliquid forte huius modi 
perpetraverit, gladio ultore sternatur: facultates etiam perempti 
fisco decernimus vindicari: et similiter affligi rectores provinciarum, 
si facinora vindicare neglexerint.” This was followed by another 
edict, issued at Milan by Constantius in a. D. 356, Cod. Theodos. 16, 
10. 6: ‘Poena capitis subiugari praecipimus eos quos operam sacri- 
ficiis dare vel colere simulacra constiterit.’ These laws would account 
for the complaint of the Hermetist. They were, however, very 
imperfectly enforced. For some time longer, Pagan cults were still 
practised without concealment; and under the rule of Julian, 
A.D, 361-363, the old religions were once more supported by the 
favour of the government. It was not until the reign of Theodosius, 
A.D. 379-395, that a serious and systematic effort was made to 
stamp out Pagan worship throughout the eastern empire. An edict 
of A.D. 391, Cod. Theodos. 16. 10. 11, addressed to the Comes 
Aegypti and another official, runs as follows: ‘Nulli sacrificandi 
tribuatur potestas, nemo templa circumeat, nemo delubra suspiciat. 
Interclusos sibi nostrae legis obstaculo profanos aditus recognoscant 
adeo, ut si qui vel de diis aliquid contra vetitum sacrisque molietur, 
nullis exuendum se indulgentiis recognoscat.’ And this was followed 








ASCLEPIUS III: 24b-26a 163 


by a still more emphatic and comprehensive edict of Theodosius in 
A.D. 392 (Cod. Theodos. 16. 10. 12). The actual suppression of the 
open practice of Pagan worship in Alexandria may be dated from 
the destruction of the Serapeum in A. p. 390. 

The sentence in Asc/. III which speaks of penal laws against 
Paganism cannot then have been written before the middle of the 
fourth century, and therefore cannot have stood in the Adyos ré\etos 
in the time of Lactantius, who wrote the Div. inst. about a. D. 310. 
But on the other hand, the Aédyos réXewos, as known to Lactantius, 
must have contained the bulk of the Prophecy ; for he quotes part 
of the Greek text of ch. 26a, and says that the passage which he 
quotes follows ‘post enumerationem malorum’. Hence we must 
conclude that the reference to penal laws against Pagan worship did 
not form part of the original text, but was inserted by another hand, 
at a time not earlier than a. p. 353. 

The insertion of this clause seems to have caused some words 
of the original text to be omitted ; this may account for the lacuna 
after neglectum religionum. 

(4) Ch. 25: ‘Sed mihi credite, et capitale periculum constituetur 
in eum qui se mentis religioni dederit. Nova constituentur iura, 
lex nova.’ For the same reason, this passage also cannot have 
been written before a.p. 353, and must be an interpolation. The 
words capitale periculum resemble those of Constantius’s edict of 
A.D. 356, Poena capitis subiugari praecipimus &c, The inserted 
passage interrupts the continuity of the text ; for ‘nihil sanctum... 
mente credetur’, which follows it, is closely connected in sense with 
‘anima enim... putabitur vanitas’, which precedes it, 

The two references to penal laws may have been inserted at 
different times, and suggested by different enactments. The first 
speaks of a penalty, but does not tell us what the penalty is ; the 
second expressly mentions capital punishment. One of the two may 
very likely have been inserted by the translator. One of them at 
least was included in the Latin text of the Asclepius as known to 
Augustine; De civ. dei 8. 24 (A.D. 413-426): ‘Dolet (Hermes) 
venturum esse tempus, quo haec omnia. .. etiam legibus iubeantur 
auferri,’ 

() Ch. 24b: ‘Divinitas enim repetet caelum, deserti homines 
toti morientur, atque ita Aegyptus deo et homine viduata deseretur.’ 
This sentence makes nonsense of all the predictions which follow. 
We are told that, after the Egyptians have perished to a man 

M2 


164 ASCLEPIUS 


‘those of them who survive’! will be known as Egyptians by their 
tongue alone; the land of Egypt (i.e. the Egyptians) ‘will suffer 
yet worse things’,—worse, that is, than total destruction,—‘ and 
will be infected with worse plagues’; these same non-existent 
Egyptians will furnish an example of cruelty; they will cease to 
admire the universe, they will prefer death to life, and so on. 
It is true that in some of these sentences the writer speaks of 
homines, and does not mention Egyptians by name; but Egyptians 
are expressly mentioned in 24 b jim. and 25 init.; and it is evident 
that the Hermetist intends the prophecy throughout to apply 
primarily to his own country and his own countrymen. If he 
had once foretold the total destruction of the people of Egypt, - 
nothing more would have been left for him to say. We must 
therefore conclude that the words ‘divinitas enim . . . viduata 
deseretur’ were subsequently inserted by some one who sought to 
pile up the horrors higher, and disregarded the destructive effect 
of his interpolation on the prophecy as a whole. Perhaps the 
translator is responsible for the addition of these words. 

Transpositions :—When these interpolations have been struck out, 
there remains a prophecy in which three distinct things are 
predicted :— 

(a) Egypt will be invaded and occupied by foreigners ; 

(6) many Egyptians will be slaughtered ; 

(c) the Egyptians who survive will cease to worship the gods. 

But in the traditional text, these three things are intermixed, and 
the several sentences are wanting in connexion and rational sequence. 
The contents of the successive clauses, as they stand in the MSS., 
may be indicated thus :— 

Alienigenis . . . complentibus, non solum neglectum religionum—: 

(a) and (¢). 

Tune terra . . . mortuorumque plenissima : (0). 

O Aegypte . . . facta narrantibus : (Cc). 

Et inhabitabit . . . barbaria: (a). 

Te vero. . . totae corrumpentur : (6). 

Et vivis . . . videbitur ahenus: (4) and (¢). 

Quid fles . . . crudelitatis exemplum : (c) and (0). 

Et tunc taedio hominum &c. ; (¢). 

The confusion has probably been produced, or at any rate 


1 The only parallel that occurs to me is the nursery rhyme about the children 
sliding on the ice: ‘It so fell out, they all fell in; The rest, they ran away.’ 








ASCLEPIUS III: 24b-26a 165 


increased, by transpositions such as we meet with in so many 
instances throughout the text of the Asclefius; and we have to 
consider whether it is possible to restore the true order. A clue 
may be found in the words sa Aegyptus, 25 init. It is clear 
that in this phrase the Egyptians are contrasted with the foreign 
invaders, and consequently that it must have followed closely on 
some reference to the foreigners; and as it is stated in this 
sentence that the Egyptians will do cruel deeds, the preceding 
sentence should be one which describes cruel deeds done by the 
foreigners. Now if we remove 24 fiz. ‘Et vivis . . . videbitur 
alienus’, we get, as the preceding sentence, ‘Te vero . . . totae 
corrumpentur’, i.e. a description of the Nile swollen with blood. 
If we assume that this blood is shed by the foreigners, a satisfactory 
connexion is thus obtained. And the displaced words ‘Et vivis 

. videbitur alienus’ may be appropriately placed after ‘ crudeli- 
tatis exemplum’; in that position, they will supply a desirable 
amplification of the erudelitas spoken of, and at the same time 
lead on to the following description of the decay of religion. 

If the words addressed to the Nile refer to cruel deeds done by 
the foreigners, they should follow something else on the same topic. 
Now in the sentence ‘Tunc terra... mortuorumque plenissima’, 
we are told that the Zand will be polluted by slaughter; and this 
would be suitably followed by the description of a corresponding 
pollution of the water, It is probable then that ‘Te vero appello, 
sanctissimum flumen’ &c, should follow immediately on ‘Tunc 
terra. . . mortuorumque plenissima’, and that the three inter- 
yening sentences should be removed. One of these three sentences, 
‘Divinitas enim . . . viduata deseretur’, has already been excised 
as an interpolation ; but we have still to dispose of the other two, 
viz. ‘et inhabitabit . . . barbaria’, and ‘O Aegypte . . . facta 
narrantibus’. Of these, the former, ‘et inhabitabit’ &c., should 
come earlier, since the writer would naturally tell us who the 
foreigners are before he tells us of the cruel things they do; and 
I have accordingly placed it before ‘Tunc terra ista’. On the 
' other hand, the sentence ‘O Aegypte’ &c., which speaks of the 
dying out of religion, should come later, after the writer has said 
all that he has to say about the slaughter; I have therefore 
placed it immediately before ‘Et tunc taedio hominum’ &c. in 
ch. 25. 

Thus rearranged, the prophecy may be analysed as follows :— 





166 ASCLEPIUS 


(a) ‘ Alienigenis . . . neglectum religionum . . . barbaria’. (In- 
vasion by impious foreigners.) 

(41) ‘Tune terra . . . mortuorumque plenissima. Te vero 

. corrumpentur’. (Cruel deeds done by the foreigners.) 


(62) ‘Quid fles .. . crudelitatis exemplum. Et vivis . . 
sepulcrorum’. (Cruel deeds done by Egyptians.) 
(¢) ‘superstes vero .. . videbitur alienus. O Aegypte .. . 


pia facta narrantibus. Et tunc taedio hominum’ &c. (The 
Egyptians abandon their religion.) 

It may be doubted whether this rearrangement is in all respects 
correct; but I think it is indisputable that the traditional text is 
incoherent, and that by means of the three transpositions which I 
have proposed we obtain a satisfactory sense and connexion through- 
out. My conclusions as to the date of the document, however, 
are in no way dependent on the admittedly uncertain order of the 
sentences. If the author wrote the passage as it appears in the 
MSS., he must have been an extraordinarily clumsy writer; but 
even on that assumption, the things predicted would remain the 
same, and the same inferences might still be drawn from them. 

24b. quod Aegyptus imago sit caeli. As an_ individual 
deity is embodied in a cult-statue, so the di caelestes collectively are 
embodied in the land of Egypt. Philo, Vita Afosis 2 (3). 24. 192, 
Cohn IV, p. 245, speaks of the veneration of the Egyptians for 
their land: pdvor yap oxedov drdvtwy ebvav Alyémriot yay émereixurav 
otpard, Thy pev icobéwy tyndy d£udcavres, TO 8 odds yepas e&aiperov 
dmoveipavres. . . . Geordagrodat TG Adyw Tov Neilov Aiyirrin os 
dytipipov otpavod yeyovdra, Kal repl ris xdpas cepvyyopodow. 

translatio aut descensio omnium quae gubernantur atque 
exercentur in caelo. Cf. Kove Kosmu, Exc. XXIII. 65, as 
emended : Osiris and Isis xpos xdGerov (Suodoyovcus) trois év obpave 
prornplos teporouas dvéornoay ev yp. Abammonis Resp. 7.1: the 
Egyptians, rv vow tod wavrés Kal tiv Syyovpylay pupovpévor, Kat 
atrot rOv pvotikdy Kat droxexpuppevov Kat apavav vojrewy eikdvas 
Twas ba ovpBdrwr expaivover. The rites performed in the Egyptian 
temples are eixdves of the operations of the Caelestes, through whom 
the demiurgic energy of the supracosmic God is brought to bear 
upon the world below. Moreover, the Hermetist holds that the 
processes of nature which are worked by the Caelestes (‘omnia 
quae gubernantur atque exercentur in caelo’) are dependent on the 
due performance of these rites; if certain ritual acts are omitted, 








ASCLEPIUS III: 24b 167 


the Nile will not rise, and the crops will not grow; and when the 
national cults are abandoned, the universe itself will fall into 
disorder. Thus it may be said that the seat of operation of the cosmic 
powers has been transferred from heaven to the temples of Egypt. 

In the mystic language of the Egyptian priests, the word fer 
(‘heaven’) was used as a substitute for ‘temple’. E.g. in an 
inscription of the Persian period, it is stated that the high priest 
of Khnum at Heracleopolis Magna ‘has entered Aeaven (i.e. the 
temple) to see him who dwells there, namely the god Khnum’ 
(Brugsch Fel, und Myth. p. 65 f. See also Brugsch 7d. p, 201 f.) 
It is often stated in Egyptian documents that this or that cosmic 
event took place at a certain temple; e.g. the terrace of the temple 
at Hermopolis is described as ‘the place at which Ra, the god of 
light, first shone forth, rising from the lotus-flower’ (Brugsch id. 
p. 123); and Tum engendered the universe ‘in the city of On’. 
Such phrases presumably mean that some rite which was regarded 
as an ‘image’ of the cosmic operation of the god was periodically 
performed at the place spoken of. Compare the account given by 
Brugsch (7d. p. 155) of the contents of a papyrus dealing with the 
deities of the Fayum (Papyrus ég. de Boulag, 1870, I-V): ‘Alles, 
was sich der philosophirende Gedanke iiber den Ursprung der 
Welt zurecht gelegt hatte, von dem Chaos an bis zur Entstehung 
des Lichtes hin, wurde in fassbarer Gestalt auf den durch Men- 
schenhand entstandenen “See” tibertragen, und ‘‘das Seeland”, 
das heutige Fajum, gleichsam in einen Schauplatz der Schépfungs- 
geschichte verwandelt.’ 

terra nostra mundi totius est templum. The Kosmos is 
aic@nros Oeds; and in this one deity all particular ale@yrol Geof are 
comprehended. He is made up of all the gods by whom the 
several departments of the material world are administered ; 
Egypt, the land in which all these gods ‘have come down to dwell 
on earth’, may therefore be called the ‘temple’, i. e. the consecrated 
habitation, of the Kosmos; and the cults of the several gods may 
be collectively described as the cult of the Kosmos. Cf mundus 
adorandus in 25 and 26a. The notion of a god whose parts or 
‘members’ are also gods was current in Egypt from the earliest 
times. The primal God ‘creates his own members, and they are 
the gods’ (Book of the Dead) In Pl. Timaeus also, the 


1 Cf. Abammonis Resp, 8. 3 and 10. 5 sg. ( Zestim.), on the Demiurgus and his 
several duvdpes. 





168 ASCLEPIUS 


Kosmos is a god whose parts, e.g. the heavenly bodies, are like- 
wise gods. 

futurum tempus est, cum adpareat Aegyptios &c. See 
Augustine’s comments on this passage, De civ, det 8, 23 sgg. ( Testim.). 
Augustine understands the prophecy in Ase, III as referring to the 
abolition of idolatry by the Christians; and in that respect he is 
undoubtedly right. 

Aegyptios . . . pia mente divinitatem sedula religione 
servasse. This is hardly consistent with the previous statement 
(ch. 22 a) that the pious are few and far between. Here, the writer 
assumes that the Egyptians in general have hitherto been pious 
worshippers of the gods. We are not told why the gods forsake 
Egypt ; but it seems to be implied that they depart from the land 
because it is desecrated by the invasion of impious foreigners. The 
Palmyrenes and their allies, the Saraceni and the Blemmyes, 
were not likely to treat the gods of Egypt with much respect ; 
they may have plundered temples, and confiscated religious en- 
dowments ; at any rate, the temple-cults must have suffered neglect 
during the troubles caused by the invasion; and Egypt occupied 
and dominated by profane barbarians was no longer a fitting abode 
for the gods. 

in inritum casura (est, vel) frustrabitur: probably two 
alternative translations of a single Greek word or phrase. 

regionem istam terramque. What is the distinction between 
regio and terra? 

quasi de legibus: ‘by so-called laws.’ Quasi = 8i6ev (Bernays). 
The enactments against the old cults are not true laws, because 
they are contrary to right. 

Compare the complaint of the Pagan writer of Zithica 61-8r 
(Abel, Orphica, p. 111): 6 8 dpyadéos Kab arexOys avrixa racw, | b 
Kev érovupinv aol revgwor pdryow. | Kat f’ 6 piv év kovinaw tr 
dopt Kpards duepbeis | Aevyahéw Oavdrw Sios pds exrerdévvrrar' | of & 
ixehot Ojperow, aidpres 73° adiSaxror, | x%rei Sarpoviovo VONMOATOS K.T.A. 
These verses refer to the execution of penal laws against magic; 
but the Christians were apt to regard all Pagan cults as forms of magic. 

terra ista sanctissima. ‘The holy land’ (éa-ser¢) was a recog- 
nized name of Egypt under the native dynasties. In the hieroglyphic 
text of the Decree of Canopus, 238 B.c., ¢a-netert, ‘the divine land ‘i 
occurs as an equivalent for rijv Atyurrov in the Greek. Cf. Herm, 
ap. Stob. Buc. XXIV. 11: rijs tepwrdrys pov xdpas. 








ASCLEPIUS III: 25 169 


sepulcrorum erit mortuorumque plenissima. Sepulcrorum 
does not give the right meaning. Egypt was ‘full of graves’ at all 
times, and we need some phrase which implies an exceptional 
number of vecent deaths. Sepulcrorum may be a mistranslation of 
radédy (raby = funus) ; Egypt will be wAxjpys rapdv Kal vexpav, i.e. 
full of corpses on their way to burial, and corpses lying unburied. 
The word radév would imply that cries of mourning for the dead 
are heard on every hand. Cf. the letter of Dionysius, bishop of 
Alexandria, written a few years before Asc/. III (Euseb. Hist. eccl. 
7. 22. 3): ds yap él ray mpwrordéxwy Tov Aiyurriov yéyparrat, ovtws 
kal viv “‘éyerOn kpavyi) peydAn’ ob yap éorw oixia, ev otk eorw 
ev airy Tebinkds” (Exod. 12. 30). 

Augustine (Civ. dei 8, 26) mistakenly supposes that the words 
‘sepulcrorum erit mortuorumque plenissima’ refer to Christian 
worship of martyrs. (See note ad Joc. in Testim.) 

Te vero appello, sanctissimum flumen. The Nile (Hapi) 
was one of the national gods of Egypt; festivals were celebrated 
in his honour; and he had temples at Nilopolis, at Heliopolis, 
and elsewhere (Wiedemann, Rel. of Anc. Eg. pp. 145-147). 
Theologians of the Graeco-Roman period identified Osiris with 
the Nile, or called the river "Ocipidos droppoy (Plut. Zs. e¢ Os. 
32, 33; 38). 

25. vivis multo maior nuimerus erit sepulerorum. Here 
again, as above, sepulcrorum must be a mistranslation. The other 
reading, sepu/torum, which occurs only in one or two of the worse 
MSS., is equally unsatisfactory in meaning. The sense required 
is that the number of corpses awaiting burial (not the number 
of those which Aave deen buried in all past time) will be greater 
than that of the survivors; i.e. that more than half the popula- 
tion of Egypt will perish in the slaughter of which Hermes has 
just spoken. 

superstes vero qui fuerit, . . . actibus ... videbitur 
alienus. Down to this point, the Hermetist has been describing, 
under the form of prediction, events which have taken place 
before his eyes. Here, he begins to look forward into the future, 
and foresees the completion of a process, the earlier stages of 
which he has witnessed; the national religion will soon be extinct. 
The Egyptians have hitherto been pious; but those who survive 
the slaughter will be impious,—that is to say, they will turn 
Christians. 


479 ASCLEPIUS 


non admirandus videbitur mundus nec adorandus. It is 
not necessarily implied that a cult of the Kosmos ¢o xomine existed 
in Egypt. Men worshipped the Kosmos, firstly, by worshipping 
the primal God, the Father or Demiurgus (called by different 
names in different temples) who had generated or fashioned the 
Kosmos; and secondly, by worshipping the constituent parts of 
the Kosmos, e.g. the astral gods, the Nile, and Mother Earth in 
the form of Isis. The writer foresees that, when the Christians 
get the upper hand, all these cults will be suppressed, and the 
sentiment which finds expression in them will be extinguished, 
Cf. Corp. IX. 4b: enol wore épotor Pracrdypodvres that the Kosmos 
iS ywpiov THs Kaxtas. 

Some Christian Gnostics maintained that the material universe 
had been created by an evil power; and many Christians held 
that it is governed, or partly governed, by the Devil. Cf. Zp. 
Ephes. 6. 12: (dorw ipiv 4 wddy) zpds rods KoopoKpdtopas Tod 
oxdrous rovrou, mpds Ta tvEypaTUuKd THs movypias év trois éroupaviots. 
The cosmic powers which the Pagans worshipped were those 
against which the Christians wrestled. Valentinus, in Hippol, 
Ref. haer. 6. 33: duéBodos, 5 dpywy tod xéopov tovrov, Carpocrates, 
Hippol. 72.7. 32: xaradpovfoa tov Kogporoav dpxovrev is the way 
to gain supernatural power ; «? S¢ rus (rod "Ingod) wA¢ov Karappovy- 
vee tév vrata, Sivacbar Siahopdrepov abrod trdpyer, Fistis 
Sophia (A.D. 250-300?) c. 102, C. Schmidt, p. 164: ‘Renounce 
(dwordocer$a) the whole «écpos, and all the tAy in it, and all 
its cares and all its sins. .. . Renounce the love of the Kéopos’ 
&e. b,c. 100, p. 161: ‘Preach to the human race, saying, 
Renounce the whole xécpos and all the vAy in it. For he who 
in the xéopos buys and sells, and he who eats and drinks of its 
vAn, and who lives in all its cares and its dutXia, he gathers to 
himself fresh $Aac in addition to his other try ; for all this xdapos, 
and all things in it, and all its éuA/a, are hylic dregs,” (The 
Pistis Sophia teaches that man must seek to be purged from his 
vAy, and become pure Light; for thus only can he rise to the 
Realm of Light above; otherwise, he will have to endure peray- 
yicuos in successive bodies, with intervals of torture, and ultimately, 
will suffer extinction (?) in outer darkness.) See Bousset, Haupt- 
probleme der Gnosis, p. 110 ff. These Gnostics changed the ‘ Second 
God’ of the Platonists and Hermetists into a devil; and many 
orthodox Christians went a long way in the same direction. 








ASCLEPIUS III: 25 17 


Hoe totum bonum. Does this mean ‘the Kosmos’, or ‘the 
worship of the gods’? Probably the latter ; for it could hardly be 
said here that the Kosmos ‘periclitabitur’. It is true that, later on 
in the chapter, the writer describes the Kosmos as falling into 
confusion, and appearing to be in danger of utter destruction ; but 
that topic has not yet been introduced. 

machina voluntatis dei. Cf. Corp. IX. 6: the Kosmos is 
dpyavov THs TOD Geot Bovdyjoews K.7.d. 

in suo opere absque invidia (homini) suffragantis. A dative 
dependent on suffragantis is required. One MS. gives suo operi,— 
‘fortasse recte’, says Thomas,—in place of in suo opere; but the 
opus det, i.e. the Kosmos, is here described as the instrument of 
God’s beneficent action, and cannot in the same clause be spoken 
of as the odject of his beneficence. The heavenly bodies especially 
are the instruments by which God’s providence works, 

In absgue invidia, we have a reminiscence of Pl. Zim. 29 E: dyads 
TW, GyaOG de ovdels repl oddevds obdérore eyylyverar HOdvos. The same 
phrase of Plato is adopted and enlarged upon by Philo, De opif. 
mundi 5. 21 ff, Cohn I, p. 6f. 

tenebrae praeponentur lumini, et mors vita utilior iudica- 
bitur. With this description of Christianity may be compared the 
verses in which Rutilius Namatianus (1. 440 ff.), about A.D. 416, 
expresses his disgust at the Christian monks of Capraria: ‘Squalet 
lucifugis insula plena viris. | Ipsi se monachos Graeco cognomine 
_ dicunt, | quod soli nullo vivere teste volunt. | Munera fortunae 
metuunt, dum damna verentur: | quisquam sponte miser, ne miser 
esse queat. | Quaenam perversi rabies tam stulta cerebri, | dum 
mala formides, nec bona posse pati? | Sive suas repetunt ex fato 
ergastula poenas, | tristia seu nigro viscera felle tument.’ Zé. 1. 517, 
on a Christian hermit living in an island off the Italian coast: 
*Perditus hic vivo funere civis erat, | Noster enim nuper, iuyenis 
maioribus amplis, | nec censu inferior coniugiove minor, | impulsus 
furiis homines divosque reliquit, | et turpem latebram credulus exul 
agit. | Infelix putat illuvie caelestia pasci, | seque premit laesis 
saevior ipse deis. | Num, rogo, deterior Circaeis secta venenis? | 
Tunc mutabantur corpora, nunc animi.’ In the view of Namatianus, 
as in that of the Hermetist, the Christian ascetics are luctfugi, and 
their life is a vivwm funus ; they are ¢mpulsi furiis, and their state of 
mind is perverst rabies cerebri (cf. ‘ furiosus fortis .. . habebitur’ in 
Asc, III. 





172 ASCLEPIUS 


The writer of Asc/. I (see especially ch. rra) approximates in 
some respects to the Christian exaltation of asceticism which the 
writer of Asc/. III rejects with horror; but his tendency in that 
direction is counteracted by his doctrine that the cudfus terrenorum is 
included in man’s function. 

The view that mors vita utilior est may be illustrated from 
Lactantius passim; e.g. Div. inst. 7. 11. 3: ‘in ea condicione res 
posita est, ut qui beati sunt in hac vita corporali atque terrena, 
semper miseri sint futuri: ... deinde qui iustitiam sequentes in hac 
vita miseri fuerint . . . semper beati sint futuri.’ In. this life, 
Lactantius thinks, the good man is necessarily miserable. 

nemo suspiciet caelum. Cf. Asc. I. 6a: ‘(homo) suspicit 
caelum.’ Jé. 9: ‘sortiti sunt caeli suspiciendi venerabilem curam,’ 
As an instance of the feeling with which pious Pagans ‘looked up to 
the sky’, cf. Julian Or. 4 (cis #Awov) init.: ‘From my childhood I 
was possessed by an impetuous love of the rays of the divine sun. 
In early youth, I uplifted my soul towards the ethereal light ; and I 
not only desired to fix my eyes on it during the day, but even at 
night, when the sky was clear, I left all else to admire the beauties 
of heaven. Absorbed in that contemplation, I failed to hear those 
who spoke to me, and ceased to be conscious of myself,’ 

religiosus pro insano . . . putabitur. Cf. the edict of 
Constans (?), Cod. Zheodos. 16. 10. 2: ‘sacrificiorum aboleatur 
insania.’ 

furiosus fortis . . . habebitur. The Christians praised the 
fortitude of those who endured torture and death in their resistance 
to the government. To the Hermetist, the behaviour of the 
Christians during the persecutions of a.p. 250-260 must have 
seemed madness. Epictetus, Diss. 4. 7- 6, thought that the fear- 
lessness of death shown by the ‘ Galilaeans’ was due to ‘ habituation’ 
(éwd eovs); Marcus Aurelius, rr. 3, attributed it to obstinacy (xard 
Wri rapdragw), Julian Zp. 89 b (Bidez and Cumont, 288 a) said 
the Christians were driven by evil daemons, who induced them to 
seek death: éxt 8& robs 0b xpooidvras tos Geols eer. Td tay Tovypav 
daipdver reraypévoy dirov, id’ Sy of roddol Tapoorpovpevor Tov aOewy 
dvare(Govrar Oavaray, ds dvarrnodpevor zpos TOV otpavev dray dropphéwor 
TH Wey Bralws. 

Perhaps some Christians claimed credit also for their courage in 
defying the Pagan gods, whom many of them believed to be powerful 
daemons. Cf, Celsus, in Orig. ¢ Cels. 8. 38: the Christians say 





ASCLEPIUS III: 25 173 


Idov, rapaoras 7G dydApart tod Aus, # “ArdAXwvos, 4} Stov 31 wore 
Geot, BrAacgdnpd, wat parifw, kai obd& pe dptverar, 

Anima enim... putabitur vanitas. This sentence is 
awkwardly constructed; perhaps the Greek has been inaccurately 
translated. It is not the soul itself, but the Hermetic doctrine about 
the nature, origin, and destiny of the soul, and its relation to God, 
that ‘will be thought to be false’. Some will treat the subject with 
contempt (7/swi),and refuse to listen ; others will consider and reject 
the true teaching (putabitur vanitas). Compare Asel. I. 12a: ‘aliis 
incredibile, aliis fabulosum, aliis forsitan videatur esse deridendum.’ 

The Hermetist does not recognize in the teaching of the Christians 
any adequate substitute for his ‘doctrine of the soul’. He probably 
knew little of the positive side of their doctrines, and thought of 
them chiefly as men who scorned and rejected the rites and beliefs 
which he held sacred ; but if the Christian dogma of the resurrection 
of the body was known to him, he would see in that no promise of 
aGavacia. To him, the resurrection of the body would mean rather 

_the perpetual confinement of the soul in its earthly prison, from 
which he aspired to be released. Compare the contemptuous 
language of Celsus, Orig. c Cels. 5. 14: #dGtov 8 atrav Kal 7d 
vopilew, éreddv 6 Oeds domrep jactyerpos érevéyky 70 wip, Td piv dAdo 
mav e€orrnIncerGar yevos, airods 8& pdvovs Siapevetv, ob pdvov Tobs 
fovras, GhAd Kal rods wddar wore Grobavévras, adrals capély éxetvats 
dd TAS yas dvadivras. drexvis cxwAijnov 4 dais. rola yap dvOparov 
Wx?) ToOjreev ert cdya ceonmds; ... Kal wuxjs pev alsviov Bioriy 
Sivarr’ dy (6 Geds) wapacyeiv véxves S¢ dyoiv ‘HpdxActros, Komplov 
xBAyrorepor. cdpxa 8%, peor Sy obd8 ciety Kaddy, aldviov dropfvas 
mapa Adyov obre Bovdijrerar 6 eds obre Svvijoerar. Celsus, 2d. 7. 36, 

calls the Christians dAocéparov yévos, and says that they expect to 

_ see God with their bodily eyes. 24.8. 49: was otk érora buoy Tadra, 

TO pev cpa robeiv, cal édaitew bre abd todro dvacricerat, ds obdev 

jypiv rovrov xpetrrov ovS8 Tysdrepov ...; GAAX Tols TodTO meiGopevots, 
kal TO odpare owrernkdow, odk dgiov [rotro] diadéyerOar. . . . rots 
pev ye Thy Woxiy, } tov votv,... dS re Kab [6 7] xaipovow dvopd- 
fovres, rois rotro éAmiLovew Sew aldvioy abv GG, rovros diaréopae. 

It might seem indeed that the charge of ‘ loving the body’ and that 

of ‘hating the Kosmos’ could hardly be applicable to the same 
persons; but there were Christians of many kinds, and the Hermetist 
may have confused the views of different sects. Some of the Christian 

Gnostics, who held beliefs about the soul which were derived from 









ee 


174 ASCLEPIUS 


Platonism, and resembled those of the Hermetist, went to extremes 
in their hatred of the material Kosmos; other Christians regarded 
the present Kosmos as evil and doomed to destruction, but at the 
same time clung to the non-Hellenic doctrine of bodily resurrection, 
looked forward to ‘a new heaven and a new earth’ no less material 
than the present universe, and expected to enjoy therein an ever- 
lasting life in the body. 

aut inmortalitatem se consecuturam esse praesumit. Cf. 
ch, 22 b: ‘inmortalitatis spem intentionemque protendens.’ The 
word d@avacia has two distinct senses. It may mean ‘ imperisha- 
bility’; and in that sense, all human souls, good and bad alike, are 
immortal; cf. ch. 28, ‘quod (anima) sit inmortali sensw aeterno 
supplicio subiugata’; and Asc. I. 2a init, ‘omnis humana in- 
mortalis est anima.’ On the other hand, é6avacia may mean ‘the 
life of the gods’, i.e. a life freed from the limitations to which the 
soul is subjected during its embodiment on earth,—or in other 
words, ‘union with God’. In the latter sense, the soul, while in the 
body, is not yet 46dvaros; but it has before it the prospect of 
attaining to dfavacia when released from the body by death, 
provided that it has received and rightly used God's gift of vots 
during its earthly life. For the second sense, cf. Corp. X. 7: af 8 
dvOpdrevar (Yruxat), épyiv AOavacias cyotoa, x.T-A. 

The word d0dévaros might also bear a third sense, viz. ‘not liable 
to the separation of /soul from body’. In this sense, men are 
mortal, and the heavenly bodies are immortal. But this third sense 
has no application in the passage before us. 

qui se mentis religioni dederit. The term mentis religio is 
here used by the interpolator to denote the religion of the Pagans as 
understood and accepted by him, i.e. the Platonic religion of the 
Hermetists. 

Fit deorum, &c. The transition is abrupt ; and it seems probable 
that some connecting words have been lost before jit deorum. 

At this point a fresh start is made. Both the secessio deorum and 
the wars and crimes of men have been dealt with before (fe terris 
enim est ad caelum recursura divinitas’, ch. 24 b: ‘crudelitatis 
exemplum’ &c., ch. 25); but the writer here returns to these topics. 
This may be accounted for by assuming that from this point onward 
he is more or less closely following some earlier authority, in which 
the senectus and regenifura mundi were described as periodically 
recurring processes. He sees in the calamities of his time the 








ASCLEPIUS III: 25 175 


beginnings of such a senile decay of the universe as his predecessor 
had spoken of; and he adapts to his purpose the language of his 
source. The verbs jit, remanent, compellunt seem to have been in 
the present tense in the archetype, though they have been altered 
into futures in B; and there is good authority for the presents 
mutescit and languescit in the following clauses. As we find the 
aorist used in the Greek quoted by Lactantius, it may be inferred 
that the Latin presents stand for Greek aorists ; and the aorist might 
be used to describe a recurring process. 

soli nocentes angeli remanent. Cf. Lactant. Diz. inst. 2. 1 5. 
8: ‘uterque vero (sc, Hermes, in the Adyos réAcwos (?), and Asclepius, 
in Corp. XVI) daemonas esse adfirmat inimicos et vexatores homi- 
num, quos ideo Trismegistus dyyéAovs rovypov's appellat.’ Lactantius 
is probably referring to this passage ; and if so, the Hermetist here 
used dyyeAor as a synonym for daiuoves. Angeli are mentioned again 
in the Latin Asc/, III. 37, ‘evocantes animas daemonum vel ange- 
lorum’; but the words ve/ angelorum may there have been added by the 
translator. The term éyyedox occurs in Herm. ap. Stob. Zxc. XXIV. 5, 
where it is said that kingly souls, when they descend into earthly 
bodies, are accompanied by an escort of dyyeXou wal Safpoves; but 
_ the word is hardly to be found elsewhere in the extant Hermetica. 
It was frequently used by Pagan writers from the time of Porphyry 
onwards, and often occurs in the Magic Papyri. dyyehou xaraxOdve0t 
are mentioned in magic tablets found in Attica (Dieterich AZithras- 
liturgie, p. 49). In Abammonis Resp. 2. 6 £., dpydyyedou and dyyehot 
are spoken of as classes of superhuman beings distinct from daemons. 
Cf. Tertull. 4fo/. 22 (A.D. 197): ‘Angelos quoque etiam Plato non 
negavit: utriusque nominis (sc. daemonum et angelorum) testes et 
magi adsunt.’ (Plato does not use the word éyyeXo in this sense; 
but in Sympos. 202 £ he describes the daemons as intermediaries or 
messengers between gods and men.) This Pagan use of the word 
was doubtless derived chiefly from Jewish sources; but éyyedos 
may also have been sometimes employed, independently of Jewish 
influence, as a rendering of a term used by Persians or Chaldaeans. 

Evil daemons are repeatedly mentioned in the Hermetica: e.g. 
Corp. IX. 3: porxelas, pévors, ... kal dra wévra boa daypdvev Epya. Cf. 
Hermes af. Lactant. Div. inst. 2.15.6 (Asc. III. 29 b): Saiuwv xaxds. 
Plut. Def. orac. 17, p. 419: davdous .. . Saiyovas otk "Epmedoxdjs 
 povov... drédurev, GAXG wat TAdrwv Kat Eevoxparys kal Xpvourzos. 
Plut. Quaest. Rom. 51, p. 277: of wep) Xptourrov olovrar prdcodor 


176 ASCLEPIUS 


gairta Saydvia wepworrely, ols of Geot Sypulors xpavrat Kolacrals 
éxt tots dvogiovs Kat adixovs dvOpdrovs. The notion was old in 
Egypt, but was, no doubt, reinforced there by the importation of 
Persian and Babylonian beliefs from the time of the Persian 
dominion onward. 

Tune nee terra constabit &c. When men cease to worship 
the gods, the beneficent action of the gods, which was dependent 
on the due performance of the rites of worship, inevitably ceases ; 
the material universe is left ungoverned, and falls into disorder. 

Tertullian, dfol, 40, speaks of those ‘qui adversus sanguinem 
innocentium conclamant, praetexentes . . . quod existiment omnis 
publicae cladis, omnis popularis incommodi Christianos esse in 
caussa. Si Tiberis ascendit in moenia, si Nilus non ascendit in 
arva, si caelum stetit, si terra movit, si fames, si lues, statim 
“Christianos ad leonem”’. The Hermetist shares the belief that 
such calamities must necessarily result from the impiety of the 
Christians. He does not join in the cry for their blood; but he 
believes that sooner or later God himself will purge his universe 
by the destruction of the impious, and all will then be well 
again. 

Augustine speaks of the Pagans who maintained that the 
calamities of the time resulted from the abandonment of the old 
cults, Aug. Refractat. 2, 43: the first five books of the De civ. det 
‘eos refellunt, qui res humanas ita prosperari volunt, ut ad hoc 
multorum deorum cultum, quos pagani colere consueyerunt, neces- 
sarium esse arbitrentur, et quia prohibetur, mala ista exoriri atque 
abundare contendunt.’ Cf. Civ. def 2. 3: ‘vulgare proverbium; 
“Pluvia defit: causa Christiani sunt.”’ Many of the Pagan rites 
were in their origin devices for influencing the course of nature, 
and especially for promoting fertility; and a sense of their primitive 
significance still survived. 

The Christians in turn, when they got the upper hand, attributed 
bad weather to the impiety of the Pagans, Vovel/. Theodosii II, 
Tit. 3, A.D. 438: ‘Decrevimus ut quicunque pollutis contamina- 
tisque mentibus in sacrificio quolibet in loco fuerit comprehensus, 
in fortunas eius, in sanguinem ira nostra consurgat. . . . An 
diutius perferemus mutari temporum vices irata caeli temperie? 
quae paganorum exacerbata perfidia nescit naturae libramenta 
servare. Unde enim ver solitam gratiam abiuravit? Unde aestas 
messe ieiuna laboriosum agricolam in spe destituit aristarum? 








ASCLEPIUS III: 26a 177 


Unde hiemis intemperata ferocitas ubertatem terrarum penetrabili 
frigore sterilitatis laesione damnavit? nisi quod ad_ impietatis 
yindictam transit legis suae natura decretum (“nature transgresses 
the decree of her own law”). Quod ne posthac sustinere cogamur, 
pacifica ultione, ut diximus, pianda est superni numinis veneranda 
maiestas.’ ° 

The Hermetist’s description of cosmic disorder resembles 
predictions which occur in many Jewish and Christian apocalypses : 
eg. Lthiop. Enoch 80. 2-7, and Orac. Sib. passim. 

nec caelum astrorum cursibus (subsistet?), nec siderum 
cursus constabit in caelo. Compare the vision (apparently of 
Pagan origin) at the end of Orac. Sid. V, ll. 512-531: dorpa 
paxny Bdwe Oeds 8 erérpee pdxerOu. Then follows a Zheomachia, 
in which the Signs of the Zodiac are the combatants; and at the 
end, dpro peév Oitpavds atrés, éws erivage paxytds' | Ovpwbels & 
eppupe xarampyveis ext yaiav. | pipha pev ody wAnyévtes éx’ ’Oxeavoto 
hoerpa | jwov yaiay dracav’ euewe & avdorepos alfyp. But the 
disturbance of the order of nature which the Hermetist anticipates 
must be less violent than this, since a remnant of the human 
race will survive it (‘hominibus qui tunc erunt’ below). 

omnis vox divina . ..mutescet. The oracles will be dumb; 
and the voice of God will be heard no longer in the human heart. 
The present discourse of Trismegistus is itself a vox dioina; cf. 
Ascl. 1b: ‘(ex ore Hermu)) divinus Cupido sic est orsus 
dicere’. All such inspiration or possession of men by God 
will cease. 

aer ipse maesto torpore languescet, Cf. Philo De provid. 
(Aucher) 1. 18; In proof that the air is not immortal, ‘(animadverto 
aerem) varias passiones experiri . . .: unde etiam medicorum 
iudicio per commutationes eius oriri morbos statuitur, quoniam 
languescere per hunc dixere corpora in mundo exsistentia naturali 
eius participatione. Qui ergo obnoxius est morbo, tempestati 
ac corruptioni, quidni ipsa quoque vita non demum privetur ?’ 

26a. Haec et talis senectus veniet mundi. ‘This senectus 
mundi is the end of a period of the cosmic process, to be followed 
by the beginning of another period (regent/ura below). The notion 
of a cyclical recurrence of disorder in the universe occurs in 
Pl. Politicus 269 C—274D. 

In the Zimaeus, 22 8 ff., Plato puts into the mouth of an Egyptian 
priest a description of periodical destructions of the greater part 

280603 N 





178 ASCLEPIUS 


of mankind by fire and water alternately; but according to that 
authority, Egypt, owing to special causes, is exempt from the fires 
and floods by which all other lands are periodically devastated. 

On this passage of the Zimaeus is based Philo De aetern. mundi 
27. 146, Cohn VI, p. 117: bopai rdv xara yiv, obk GOpdwy aravrwv, 
GAN. Tov Trefotwv, dvot Tais peyloras airiats dvatiMevrar, wupds Kal 
tdaros GA€krois dopais. KaracKkywrev 8 éxarépay ev peper haciv ev 
wavy paxpais éviavrav mepiddos. drav piv otv eumpyots Kkaradap- 
Bévy, peda aifepiov rupos dvwbev éxyedpevov roddaxy oxedavvvcba, 
peyida KNipata Tis oikoupéevns érurpéxov' Srav 68 Karaxhuopds, K.T.d. 
The same theory occurs again in Philo Vita Mosis 2. 10, Cohn IV, 
p. 212 f.: God punishes the wicked trav rot ravris Spacrimwrdrov 
orotxelwv eribenévwv, Hdatos Kal Tupds, ds KaipOv wepiddors Tots pe 
kataxdvopois pOapyvat, tors Sé xatapdAexOevras daohécGa. K.7.r. 
(Here, Noah’s flood, and the destruction of Sodom and Gomorrah, 
serve as instances.) Cf. Cic. Somn. Scip. 7: ‘eluviones exustio- 
nesque terrarum, quas accidere tempore certo necesse est.’ Aetius, 
Diels Doxogr. p. 333: ‘Philolaus’ (Neo-Pythagorean) Sirriv elvar 
THv pOopay (rod xédcpov), To pev e& ovpavod updos frevros, 7d be ef 
Boatros ceAyviaKod. 

The Stoic ecpyrosis was a cyclically recurring process. But the 
earlier Stoics described the ecpyros?s as an absorption of all things 
into God (whom they identified with the cosmic fire), rather than 
as a calamitous destruction. Plut. Sve. repugn. 39. 2, p. 1052C; 
Chrysippus said rov Ala adfeoOou péxpis av cis abrov davrta Karava- 
Adon. Diog. Laert. 7. 137: (6 @cds) Kar& xpdvwv roas mepiddous 
dyadioxwy «is eavtov Thy Gracav ovciav, kal madw é& éavTod yevvav. 
Plut. Comm. not. 17. 3, p. 1067 A: Grav éxrupdowor tov Kdcpov 
obror, Kaxov pev od” Sriody dzrodetrerat, TO 8 GAov ppdvipov éore 
Tyvikatta Kat coddv. Some of the later Stoics however modified 
this doctrine into something more nearly resembling the Jewish 
predictions of universal ruin. Cic. Acad. 2. 37. 119: the Stoic says 
‘fore tamen aliquando ut omnis hic mundus ardore deflagret’. 
Philo De aetern. mundi 3. 9, Cohn VI, p. 75: the Stoics say 
kdopov pev eva (elvat), yevéerews 8 atrod Gedv atriov, pbopas Se 
pnkére Oedv, GAAG THY imdpyovoay év Tois oat Tupds axaparou Sivap.y 
xpovuw pakpats mepiddois dvadvoveay Tu Tavra. eis Eavryv. Seneca, Consol. 
ad Polyb, 1, 2: ‘Mundo quidam minantur interitum, et hoc universum, 
quod omnia divina humanaque conplectitur, . .. dies aliquis dissipabit 
et in confusionem veterem tenebrasque demerget.’ Sen. Consol. ad 








ASCLEPIUS III: 26a 179 


Marc. 26.6: ‘Nihil quo stat loco stabit, omnia sternet abducetque 
vetustas:* nec hominibus solum, ... sed locis, sed regionibus, 
sed mundi partibus ludet. . . . Maria sorbebit, flumina avertet, 
et commercio gentium rupto societatem generis humani coetumque 
dissolvet.? Alibi hiatibus vastis subducet urbes, tremoribus quatiet, 
et ex infimo pestilentes halitus mittet,‘ et inundationibus quicquid 
habitatur obducet, necabitque omne animal orbe submerso,’ et 
ignibus vastis torrebit incendetque mortalia.2 Et cum tempus 
advenerit quo sé mundus renovaturus exstinguat,’ viribus ista se 
suis caedent, et sidera sideribus incurrent,’ et omni flagrante 
materia, uno igne quicquid nunc ex disposito lucet ardebit’ So 
far, the writer of Asc. III is in close agreement with Seneca; 
and both may have borrowed from Posidonius, who wrote rep 
Tis yevérews Kai THs pOopas rod Kécpov in his Tlept kdopov a’ (Diog. 
Laert. 7. 142). But the Hermetist could not accept the Stoic 
doctrine with which Seneca /.c. concludes: ‘Nos quoque, felices 
animae et aeterna sortitae (i.e. disembodied and_ beatified souls), 
cum deo visum erit iterum ista moliri, labentibus cunctis et 
ipsae parva ruinae ingentis accessio in antiqua elementa verte- 
mur,’ 

Some of the later Stoics spoke of periodical destructions of the 
universe by water and fire alternately. This doctrine occurs in 
the Stoic Heraclitus (time of Augustus ?), Ad/eg. Hom.c. 25; and 
it was adopted by Seneca, who gives a graphic description of the 
impending destruction of our world by a universal deluge (Nat. 
quaest, 3. 27-30). Seneca 7, attributes these periodical crises to 
the operation of the stars, and ascribes this doctrine to the Chal- 
daean Berosus (about 300 3.c.). Sen. Mat Quaest, 3. 28. 7f.: 


' Cf. Asc?, III, ‘ senectus mundi’, 2 Ascl. III, ‘nec navigabitur mare’, 

5 Ascl, III, ‘nec terra constabit’, * Ascl. IIT, ‘aer. .. languescet’, 

5 Ascl, III, wh wey Hat. rOAAG KaraxdJ&bjoas. 

8 Asel, III, wh 8% mupl dtutdrw diaxavaas. 

7 Asc. III, ‘senectus mundi’ and ‘ regenitura’. 

® Ascl. III, ‘nec siderum cursus constabit in caclo’. 

® Yet the author of the De aeternitate mundi (i.e, Philo in his youth ?) appears 
to have known of no Stoic who asserted an exhydatosts corresponding to the 
expyrosis. He says (21, 107) there are four elements; why then do the Stoics 
single out one of the four, and say that the Kosmos will be resolved into fire alone ? 
Sov yap, cin tis dv, ... eis dépa } Bdap 7 yh"... GAX’ oddels éfacpotcba 7 
éfufarovabat 7} dwoyeotcba roy Kéapov einer, 

The early Stoics spoke of a transmutation of all (except a hidden remnant of 
fire) from fire to water as the first stage of the diacosmesis (see note on C orp. III. 2a), 
but not of a periodical exhydatosis corresponding to the ecpyrosts as winter to 
summer. 


N2 


180 ASCLEPIUS 


‘Utrumque (sc. diluvium et conflagratio) fit, cum deo visum ordiri 
meliora, vetera finiri, Aqua et ignis terrenis dominantur: ex 
his ortus et ex his interitus est. Ergo quandoque placuere res 
novae mundo, sic in nos mare emittitur desuper, ut fervor 
ignisque, cum aliud genus exitii placuit. . . . Berosus . . . ait ista 
cursu siderum fieri. Adeo quidem adfirmat, ut conflagrationi et 
diluvio tempus adsignet: arsura enim terrena contendit, quando 
omnia sidera, quae nunc diversos agunt cursus, (i.e. the seven 
planets) in Cancrum convenerint sic sub eodem posita vestigio, ut 
recta linea exire per orbes omnium possit: inundationem futuram, 
cum eadem siderum turba in Capricornum convenerit.  Illic 
solstitium, hic bruma conficitur.’ Cf. Censorinus, Dr. nat, 18. tr 
(about A.D. 238): ‘anni (magni) hiems summa est cataclysmus, 
. » + aestas autem ecpyrosis.’ In the allegory of the guadriga 
reported by Dio Chrysost., Ov. 36 jim., there is mention of a 
periodical predominance of fire and water alternately. Dio says 
that the doctrine of his allegory was taught by ‘Zoroaster and his 
disciples the Magi’; but the greater part of it is manifestly borrowed 
from Stoicism, 

Some Stoics held that the ecpyros’s would not extend to the 
whole Kosmos, and that there would be merely partial conflagrations, 
by which the world would be ‘purified’; Hippol. Ref Aaer. 1. 21: 
the Stoics mpoodéyovra: éxmipwow ever Oar Kat xabapow Tod Kdopouv 
TovTov of wey mavrds, of dé peépous,’ Kal Kara pepos b¢ abrov xabai- 
perOar A€yovow’ Kal oyeddv Thy Pbopay kal ri Erépov e& adrijs 
yeveow KdGapow dvopdfovor. This view approaches closely to that 
which the Hermetist expresses in the words tiv kaxiav éxxa@dpas, 
a) pev Batt woAAG Karaxdioas, wh be wupl déurdtw Stiaxavoas. 
Those who adopted the astral explanation of the ecfyrosis (and 
exhydatosis) must have assumed that the destruction would extend 
to the lower world only, and that the stars would remain unaffected 
by it; whereas the earlier doctrine, taught by Chrysippus, was 
that the star-gods, like all else, will be absorbed in ‘Zeus’ at the 
ecpyrosis. Thus Nemesius, De nat. hom. 38, says that the gods 
(among whom the stars must be included) are exempt from the 
general destruction: of 6&@ Xrwixol gacw droxabicrapévous Tods 
mAdvytas <is TO avTO onpelov KaTd Te paKos Kal wAdros, eva riv 


1 We are told that the Stoics Boethius and Panaetius abandoned the doctrine of 
ecpyrosis (Philo Aetern. mundi to. 76); but they probably admitted partial and 
purifying conflagrations, 








ASCLEPIUS III: 26a 181 


dpxyv éxactos fv bre TO TpHTov 6 Kdcpos owéeary, ev pyrais Xpdvev 
mepodois éxripwow Kai POopiv trav dvtwv daepydlerOa, Kat médw 
éé twapyis cis 75 airs tov Kdopov droxabictacba' (kal) rv dorépwv 
épolws wakw depopévov, Exarrov év TH mporépa mepwddy yudpevov 
dwapadddxtus doredciobar. evecOar yap wady Swxpary cat TWAdrova 
kal exaorov Tav avOpdruv KT.A. . . . yiverOau 88 Thy droKatdotaow 
rod mavtos obxy dmag, dAAG awodd\dKis* paddov S& eis dareipov Kal 
drededrntov Ta abra. droxabicracba. Tors S& Geovs, [rods] pip troxet- 
pévous TH POopa tatty, wapaxodovOjcavras pug repiddw, ywooKew 
éx tavrys mdvra Ta péAAovTa évecbar ev tals éfjs mepiddois. 

We may conclude then that in his description of the senectus 
mundi and regenitura the Hermetist has been influenced by some 
Stoic writer. 

The notion that our world is already in its old age, and shows 
signs of approaching dissolution, occurs in Lucretius 2. 1150-1174. 
It is to be found in the apocalyptic literature, e.g. 4 Lsdras 14. 
16: see Charles, Eschatology, p. 209. In the troubled times of 
the third century a. p., no doubt it was widely accepted. Cyprian ad 
Demetrianum 3 (about a. D. 251): ‘ scire debes senuisse iam mundum : 
the world has no longer the strength it once possessed. Like 
the sun at evening, it is tending to its decline; the earth is growing 
miserly ; all things languish.’ But this notion does not occur 
elsewhere in the “ermetica. ‘The Hermetists in general assume 
that the course of nature is invariable; e.g. Corp. XII. ii. 18: 
dy yap dpod odpras 6 Kéopos dueradBdyros. And the view here 
expressed by the writer of AscZ. IIT is difficult to reconcile with 
language used elsewhere in the same document; e.g. ch. 22b: 
‘ quamvis inmortalitas et unius semper aetatis vigor ipse sit eis’ &c. 
(se. diis caelestibus). Ch. 30 nz. : ‘(mundus) nec stabit aliquando 
nec conrumpetur.’ (In Pl. Zim. 33 A, a senectus mundi is expressly 
denied ; the Kosmos is there said to be éyjpws cat dvowos.) The 
ordering of the cosmic process by a ex aeterna is not however 
necessarily inconsistent with recurring variations ; for these variations 
may be ordained by an unvarying law. 

Lactantius, in constructing his eschatology, used the Greek original 
of Ascl. Il]. 24 b-26a as one of his sources, combining its dafa 
with those supplied by the Oracu/a Sibyllina and other apocalypses ; 
see especially Div. inst. 7, 14. 16; 1b. 7. 15. to; and Zit. 
66. 3 599. 

inordinatio, inrationabilitas, bonorum omnium (defectio). 


182 ASCLEPIUS 


The universe will go back to chaos ; the order established by the 
Demiurgus will be abolished, and nothing but GAy drakros Kat 
aoyos will remain. Cf. Pl. Zim. 534: Kat 7d peév 8) mpd rodtrov, 
mdvra tair’ zxew dddyws Kat Gpeérpws’ dre & erexewpetro Koo peto bat 
TO wav Kr.A. Lb. 69B: tadra drdkrws éxovra 6 Geds . . . cvpperpias 
éveroinoe. The words bonorum omnium cannot depend on inordinatio 
and inrationabilitas; good things cannot be éraxra xat dAoya. 
Some word signifying ‘cessation’ is therefore needed to complete 
the sense; and perhaps défectio, used by Lactant. (Zpi#. 66), may 
be his rendering of the missing word. Adyos signifies the design 
of the Demiurgus, by which all things have been ordered to 
good ends ; adoyia therefore necessarily involves donorum omnium 
defectio. 

& kupios kal marhp Kal Oeds Kal rod tmpdtou Kat évds Geoa! 
Snproupyss,—ille dominus et pater, deus primipotens ‘et unius 
gubernator dei'. Both the Greek and the Latin are here 
corrupt. Some phrase equivalent to rod kéopouv Syu.ovpyds is 
required ; and the Kosmos, being 5 Sevrepos Meds, cannot be called 
6 mpGros Kai els Oeds, or unus deus. The Latin has deus primt- 
poiens in the nominative, in place of the genitive tod zpdérov; hence 
it is probable that rod xpérov is a corruption of 'some such word 
as mpwrdpxys. In place of évés, some epithet applicable to the 
Kosmos is needed ; and Davis’s conjecture, rod mpwroyévous, gives 
the right sense.!| The Kosmos is not the first god absolutely ; 
but it is the first god that has come into being, or the first in 
the sphere of genesis. Cf. Asc/. I. 8: § kipwos . . . éret rdv Sevrepov 
éroinoe, Oedv Spardy Kat aioOnrév, . . . émet ofv rodrov éroinoe 
mparov Kal pdvov xai &va (‘ex se primum et a se secundum sh 
Lactantius, in both passages alike, has made the mistake of supposing 
that the devrepos Geds of whom Trismegistus speaks is the Son of 
God in the Christian sense. He seems to have taken the words 
Tov mpirov Kai évds Aco} Snpwovpyds to mean ‘He whom the first 
and one God employed as Demiurgus’, i.e. the Word by whom 
the Father made the world ; and so he assumes that in T rismegistus’ 
account of the renovation of the world the Son, and not the 
Father, is the agent (‘ missuiri a patre tunc filium dei, . . . quod 
Hermes tamen non dissimulavit ”). But this is a mistake. In 
Asc. III, the Demiurgus is the supreme God, the ‘Master and 
Father’, and not a second god subordinate to him. 


1 Or 70d mphrov Kat évds (ala6nr0d) Ge00? See Lact. Div, inst, 4. 6. 4. 








ASCLEPIUS III: 26a 183 


It is to be noted that the translator here renders dypuovpyds by 
gubernator (the equivalent of xvBepviprys or yepaiv), and not by 
fabricator. 

émPdépas Tots yevouévors.—intuens in mores factaque | volun- 
taria]. x facta corresponds to rots yevopévors. The translator 
has added zz mores; he may have read something equivalent in 
his Greek text. Voluntaria must be a duplication of the following 
voluntate. 

rq dtogia.—vitiis .. . et corruptelae omnium. Perhaps the 
translator read r7j xaxia (an error caused by rijv Kxaxéay in the follow- 
ing line) cal rq dvrwv SiapOopé. 

dvakaheodpevos Thy wAdvqvy.—errorem revocans. Does rijy rAavyv 
mean the aberrations of men, who have ceased to worship, or those 
of the cosmic gods, who have ceased to discharge their functions 
regularly? Probably the former, since the following clauses speak 
of God’s dealings with men. It is the impiety of men that has 
caused confusion in the Kosmos; and when men are recalled to 
their duty towards the gods, all will again go right. The word 
ahdyy was habitually used by Christian writers to denote the error 
of idolatry ; here it is used in a corresponding sense by the Pagan 
writer to denote the error of the Christians. 

kal Thy kaxlay éexkaOdpas.—malignitatem omnem. ‘The trans- 
lator has omitted éxxafépas; perhaps he read wacay (omnem) in 
place of it. 

wh pev Gate woMAG Kataxddcas, wh Sé mupl dguTdétw Siaxatoas.— 
vel inluvione diluens, vel igne consumens. Cf. Orig. ¢. Cels. 
4. 69: GAX’ ot8 ds dvOpwros texryvdpevds TL evde@s Kal drexvdrepov 
Syptovpyjoas 6 Geds mpocdye Swplwow 7S Kdcpm, Kalaipwy airov 
karaxhvopd 7) exrupwoe, GAL Tv xtow THs Kaxlas Kwdtwv éxt 
aetov veperOat. . . . Géder otv did Kawvorépas SiopOdcews det 5 Geds 
Ta obddpara dvadopBdvev. «i yap Kal réraxtal airG mdvra Kéddora 
kat dogpadéorata Kari 7Tyv tov dAwv Sypwovpyiay, GAN’ oddey Frrov 
iarpixns twos abt edenoey él Tols Tiy Kaxiav voroto., Kal rayti 7 
Koopy in airas domepel podvvouevy. The Hermetist is here in 
close agreement with Origen. 

wohépors Kal Aowpois ekmatcas.—morbis pestilentibus iisque 
per diversa loca dispersis finiens. The translator seems to 
have read rodvo7répect or some similar adjective in place of zod€yous 
kai, and éxraveas in place of éxraicas. 

Hyayev emt 13 dpxatoy kal droxaréotycev tov équtod Kxécpov.—ad 





184 ASCLEPIUS 


antiquam faciem mundum revocabit. The word droxaréornoey 
in this connexion is characteristic of the later Stoicism. See note 
On droxardoracis in Ascl. 1.13. ‘The Stoics’ in Arius Didymus, 
Diels Doxogr. p. 469: emi rocotrov 8& zpoc\Ody & Kowds Adyos Kat 
(i) Kou pions (i.e. the wip voepdv), petLwv Kad mrelov yevonevn, 
Tédos dvagnpdvaca wdvra Kal cis éauriv dvahaBotoa, ev rH réon 
oveia yiverat, éravehOodoa cis rov mpdrov jnbévra Adyov, Kat eis Thy 
dvdoracw éxelvyv Tiv rowtcay evnaurdy Tov péyorov, xa? by da 
airis povys eis atriy ridw yiveras } doxardéoracis, 

Haec enim mundi (re)genitura. The Greek must have been 
either radtyyeveoia or dvayéyos. The writer assumes the term 
Tod Kéopou madryyeveria to be already familiar to his readers, 
(cf. ‘haec et talis senectus veniet mundi’ above), and applies it 
to the restoration which is to follow on the ruin caused by the 
impiety of the Christians. The word madtyyevecia was used by the 
Stoics with reference to the periodical renovation of the universe ; 
e.g. Philo De aetern. mundi 3. 9, Cohn VI, P. 75: dtvarar 8 Kara 
tovrouvs (sc. the Stoics) 6 pév mis xdopos didios, & 8¢ Tus pOapros 
AeyerGar, pOaprds piv & Kard rip dtaxdopynow, aldws 8 & Kard 
Tiv éxripwow marvyyeverias Kad mepiddors aBavariLopevos ovdérore 
Anyotous. (Lb. dvayevyyois kéopov is used as an equivalent term.) 
Lb, 2%, 107: rods Tas exrupdoes Kal wadtyyeveias OpvAotyras. Mare, 
Aurel. 11, 1: riv repwodixiy waduyyeveoiav tov bdwv. 

On the Jewish notion of a ‘Welterneuerung ’ (a single and final 
renovation, not a periodically recurring process), see Bousset, 
Religion des Judenthums, pp. 321-324. The word watyyevecia 
occurs in Zv, Math, 19. 28: ev rp wahwyyevecia, Srav Kabion & vids 
Tov dvOpdrou éxt Opdvov ddEéns airod. 

The usual Latin equivalent for wadcyyeveota is regeneratio. We 
must read either (re)genitura (I have not found this word else- 

. Where, but vegigni occurs in Lucr. 5. 244), or (nova) genitura, 

per[colacta temporis cursu (dei voluntate), quae est {{ J 
sempiterna. Sempiterna is here used in the sense of aeterna, 
and perhaps stands for aidvos rather than éédios. Time appertains 
to the Kosmos, eternity to God. The writer’s object is to explain 
that the intervention of God at a particular time to bring about 
the regenitura mundi does not conflict with the truth that his will 
is invariable. He wills the good unchangeably ; but in the time- 
process of the Kosmos, his will takes effect in different ways at 
different times. 











ASCLEPIUS III: 26 b-32a, 40b 185 


26 b-32.a (and 40b). In this passage the writer treats of the 
relation between “me and edernify. He describes God as exempt 
from the conditions of the time-process to which the Kosmos is 
subject; and the timeless and changeless existence of God he 
denotes by the term aeternitas (aid). 

The earliest Greek writer by whom the conception of timeless 
and changeless existence was clearly formulated is Plato. Among 
Plato’s predecessors, those who came nearest to it were Parmenides 
(¢ 500-450 B.C.) and his followers. See Parmen., Diels Vorsokr. 
~p. 118: ds ayévqrov gv Kat dvddeOpdv éorw | obAoy powvoyevés Te Kat 
_ drpepis 73 adrédeoroy | o8€ wor’ Fv ob8° ora, eel viv éorw dpod 
may, | &, ovvexés’ . . . wis 8 dv erevra wédou 75 dv; was 8 dv Ke 
yévorro; | ei yap eyevr’, odx €or(:), ot8 ef more pédra eorerGat,! 
Melissus (72. about 444~441 B.c.), Diels 72, p. 143 ff. : (7d dv) det Fv 
6 rt qv Kai det dora. .. . tore te Kal ce Hv wat de ora. . . 
dididy éore Kal dretpov Kai tv Kal Snowv wav. Kat ott’ dy daddouro 
obre peiLov yivorro ore peraxocpéouro obre ddyel ovre dviarau .. . 
ovde Keira. Gomperz, Greek Thinkers, Eng. tr. I, p. 206, thus 
sums up the results attained by the school of Parmenides: ‘N. othing 
was left save the bare Conception of Substance, the complexus, 
that is to say, of the attributes of eternal persistence and eternal 
immutability.’ But in Parmenides, this conception was still obscure 
and confused ; for it is only to that which is incorporeal that these 
attributes can be intelligibly assigned ; and in the time of Par- 
‘menides Greek thinkers had not attained to a clear distinction 
between the corporeal and the incorporeal.* He spoke of the eternally 
existent ; but he imagined it as a globular mass of solid matter. 
Plato was, as far as we know, the first Greek who clearly dis- 
tinguished things incorporeal from things corporeal, and said that 
incorporeal things exist ; and accordingly, it is only when we come 
to Plato that we find the conception of timeless and changeless 
existence fully developed. Expressed by the term 7d év in contrast 

* Thus translated by Burnet, Zarly Greek Philosophy 1892, p. 185: ‘ What is, 
is uncreated and indestructible, alone, complete (reading podvdv 7’ obAopedés Te), 
immovable and without end. Nor was it ever, nor will it be ; for now 2¢ ¢s, all at 
once, a continuous one. ... How, then, can what zs be going to be in the future? 


Or how could it come into being? If it came into being, it is not; nor is it if it is 
going to be in the future.’ 

Burnet, 72., p. 27, says * When an early Greek philosopher speaks of 1d dv, he 
does not mean Being, but Body’, Perhaps it should rather be said that the early 
Greek philosopher means both at once ; for he has not discriminated the one from 
the other. The ‘Body’ of which he is thinking is not mere dead matter; it is 
alive ; it is at once ‘ Body’ and ‘ God’, 


—_—— 


A Se 





186 ASCLEPIUS 


to r& yyvdpeva, this conception runs through a large part of Plato’s 
writings ; but it is in the Zimaeus alone that he uses the word 
aidy to express it. It is therefore evident that the doctrine of 
eternity in Asc/. III. 26 b-32 a is derived, directly or indirectly, from 
the Zimaeus. See Pl. Zim. 37 D sgq. 

Philo uses the term aidy as it is used in the Zimaeus. Philo 
Quod deus sit immutabilis, 6. 31, Wendland II, p. 63: Syprovpyds 8é 
kal xpdvov Oeds* Kal yap Tod warpds aitod zarip—rarhip dé xpévov 
kéopos—riv kivnow abrod yéeverw drodyvas éxeivou’ Gore viwvod tagw 
zxew pds Gedy tov xpdvov. 5 pav yap Kéopos obros vedrepos vids 
Ocod, Gre aicOyros dv" tov yap mpecBirepov—voyris 8° éxeivos— 
mpecBewv afidoas wap éavtd Katapevew dievoyOn. obros obv & 
vedrepos vids & aicOyrds xuvybeis tiv xpdvov diow dvaddupat Kai 
dvacyeiv érointe’ date oddey mapa Oe@ péddov, TH Kai Ta Trav 
xpévev tanypévw wépara. Kal yap ob xpdvos, GAMA 7d dpxérurov rod 
xpdvou Kat mapddaypa aibv & Bios éorly abrod* év aidu dé ovre 
mapehprvbev odStv obre péddet, GAL pdvov Sdéoryxev. Philo De 
mutatione nominum a7. 267, Wendland III, p. 202 (on Gen. 17. 21): 
“éyavrov erepov” od (rd) rod xpdvov pyviov Sidornpa, 8 Tals cedy- 
viaxais i) fAaxals Gvaperpetrar mepiddois, GAAG Td Extowov Kal Févov 
kal Kawdv dvrws, Erepov Tov Spwpévwv Kal alcOytav, év dowpdrois 
kat vonrois é€eratéuevov, Srep Td xpdvov Tapdderyya Kal dpxérvmov 
cidnxer, aldva. aibvy S& dvaypdderat tod voyrod Bios xdcpov, as 
aicOnrod xpdvos. Philo Quis rer. div. heres 34. 165, Wendland II, 
p. 38: af ye piv xpd pdiov tpels ijpépar (i.e. the first three days of 
creation in Gen. ch. 1) rats pel fAwov iodpOpo yeydvaow, éfados 
tynbeions todryre mpos aidvos Kal xpdvov Syrlwow" aidve pv ‘yap 
Tas mpd HAlou rpeis avaréBexe, ypdvy Se ras pel prov, ds eore 
pipnpa aldvos. (I.e. the first three ‘days’ are assigned to the 
creation of the voyrds xdopos, and the creation of the aicOyros 
xéopos begins only with the fourth ‘day’.) Clem. Alex. Strom, 
I. 13.57: & yotv aidy rod xpdvov Td pédov Kal 70 éveoTds, airap 
3} Kal rd mapwxnkds, dxapuaiws cvvioryot. See also Clem. 7. 
1363128: 


1 Tt is to be noted that in that passage Plato, while drawing a clear distinction 
between aidy and xpévos, does not make a corresponding distinction between the 
adjectives alémos (‘eternal’) and didos (‘everlasting’). In the phrase rijv didioy 
obaiay, the adjective did.os corresponds to the substantive aid, and means ‘eternal’ ; 
and on the other hand, when he calls time aidvov eixéva aidvos, the word alémov 
does not mean ‘eternal’, but ‘everlasting’. 7d. 38 B, the adjective S:acmos is used 
in the sense of ‘ eternal’. 





ASCLEPIUS III: 26b-32a, 40b 187 


There seems to be no evidence that the conception of eternity, 
as distinguished from endless time, existed in Egypt before the time 
of Plato. Among the large number of Egyptian texts quoted or 
_ discussed by Brugsch in his Red und Myth. der alten Aegypter, 
I have found no trace of any such notion.’ It is true that an 
argumentum ex silentio is never quite conclusive; and there may 
have been schools of thought in Egypt of which we know nothing. 
But the extant religious documents are full of references to the 
cyclic recurrence of the cosmic processes,—the alternations of sunset 
and sunrise, winter and summer, the fall and rise of the Nile 3; and 
if the priests by whom these documents were written had recognized 
‘the existence of a supracosmic d«ivyrov in contrast to the cosmic 
xévnows With which their thoughts were so much occupied, it is hardly 
conceivable that no mention of it should have survived, Whether 
Egyptians expressly asserted the end/essness of the time-process, 
seems doubtful. There are two words of frequent occurrence in 
_ Egyptian texts, Ze and /ef, which are commonly rendered by 
‘everlasting’ or ‘for ever’; but it appears to be uncertain whether 
these words signified infinite time, or merely a very long time. At 
_ any rate, there seems to be no evidence that the notion of eternity, 

as distinguished from endless time, was known to Egyptian thinkers 
until it was taken over by them from the Greeks ; and on the other 
hand, the growth of this notion on Greek soil can be traced through 
its successive stages, from the search of the early Ionian physicists 
for ‘what was lasting and abiding in the flux of things’ (Burnet, 
£. G. P. 1892, p. 13), down to the paragraph on aldéy and xpovos 
in the Zimaeus of Plato. It may therefore be asserted with confi- 
dence that the conception of eternity in Asc/, III. 26 b-32a is 
derived wholly from Plato, and not from native Egyptian sources. 
The word aid, to which Plato was the first to assign the special 























? The nearest approach to it is the following (Brugsch, p. 226). In an inscription 
of the Casis-temple of Hibis, it is said of the Theban Amon that ‘he is the 
Permanent in all things (men em xet nib), the Living One, in whom one lives for 
ever’; and on a stele of the XVIIIth Dynasty, Amon is called ‘the Permanent of 
all things’ (men xet nib). Brugsch concludes that men xet, ‘the permanent of 
things’, was an old name of Amon, and originally referred to ‘the immortal quality 
of the several parts of the whole Kosmos’; but that shortly before the Ptolemaic 
period the term came to be specially used as a name for the earth, But if so, it 
cannot have signified timeless and changeless existence; for the earth and the other 
parts of the Kosmos possess only secunda aeternitas, i.e, the property of endless 
self-renewal by recurrent changes in time, See also Brugsch, 2. pp. 681, 690. 

db. P. 510, in a Theban hymn to Ptah: ‘men watch (or awake) and rest, but 

os 


thou dost watch in resting ’ (7 hotp). But this is too vague to prove the existence 
of a conception of eternity. 


188 ASCLEPIUS 


sense ‘eternity’ which it bears in Asc/. III, is a word of many 
meanings. In the common usage of the Greeks, it meant (1) the 
lifetime of a man, (2) a long space of time, and (3) endless time, 
Aristotle, De caelo 1.9, 279 27, says that aidy dd rod det va 
eiknpe tHv éxwyvpiav; and it seems probable that many of those 
who used the word assumed, like Aristotle, that it was derived from 
dei dv, This would help to account both for its use in the sense 
of endless time (xpéves det dv), and for its application to a god, or 
a dvvayus of God. 

As a rendering of the Hebrew ‘olam, aidv acquired the associations 
of that Semitic word (as for instance in the contrasted phrases — 
6 aidy otros and 6 péAAwy aidy, ‘this world’ and ‘the world to 
come’; cf. Zp. ad Eph. 2. 2: rov aidva rod xdcpov rovrov, opposed 
to év rois aldox rots érepxopévors) ; and in writings affected by Semitic 
influence, it might signify either a period of time, a region of space, 
or a mode of existence. : 

The word was sometimes used to mean Time personified. An 
early instance of this occurs in Heraclitus fr. 52 Diels: aidpy mais 
éore rallwy, werredwv' maidds 7 Bacryin. aidy there means Time; 
and the personification is similar to that of xpdvos in Critias, 
fifth century B.c., Diels Vorsokr. p. 618: dxduas te xpdvos . .. hora 
tixtwv abros éautév. Jb, p. 621: 76 7 dorepwrdy otpavod d€nas, xpdvou 
kahov roikiApa, tTéxrovos codoi. 

Among the deities worshipped by the Mithraists of the Roman 
empire, a prominent place was assigned to a being, sometimes 
named Kpdvos (understood as meaning Xpévos), and sometimes 
Aisy, whose statue took the shape of a lion-headed human figure 
with a snake coiled round the body. This is probably the Persian 
god Zerwan, ‘Time’.’ 

From this use of the word as the proper name of a certain god, — 
must be distinguished its use as an epithet or predicate applicable 
to various gods. When employed in the latter way, aidév appears 
to differ little in meaning from eds; and those who so used it 
probably meant by it ‘an everlasting or ever-living being’ (det dy): 
There are numerous instances of this in the Magic Papyri; e. g. Pap, 
mag. Par. i. 3168: wAovrodéta aidy, iept “Ayah Aatyoy. Wiinsch, 
Sethianische Verfluchungstafeln tox (Reitzenstein, Poim. p. 270): 

‘ In the ‘Sanchuniathon’ of Philo Byblius there was mention of a ‘ man’ (i.e. 


a euhemerized god) named Alay ; Enseb, Pr. ev, 1. 10,7: efrd nor yeyevijsOat .. « 
Ai@iva kai Upwréyovov' . . , ebpeiy 82 trav Aidva tiv dnd dévopaw rpopiv. 








ASCLEPIUS III: 26b-32a, 4ob 189 


aidv éprerd, xipie Sépam. In Pap. mag. Lond. 46. 467, the deity 
invoked is called 6 amAdvyros aidv. In Pap. mag. Leid. W, Die- 
terich, Adrvaxas, p. 176, ll, 1-13, the supreme God is thus addressed : 
éruxadodpai ve... ob obdeis Oedv divara iSeiv Hy GAnOwhy popdiy, 
6 perapoppovpevos eis mdvras év rats dpdcecw ddparos aidy aidyos.' 
Pap. mag. Berl. i, 200: (c)t emixadoipar, mpowdrwp, xa dSéopat cov, 
aidvare aidv, dxwoxpatwp, alwvorohoxpdtwp. Pap. mag. Par, i, Die- 
terich, Mithrasliturgie, p. 4, 1. 18: pédd\w Karowredew Onpepov .. . TOV 
dOdvarov aidva Kai deomdéryv tov mupivwv diadyudrwv. Epiphanius, 
Haer. 51. 22, describes a rite annually celebrated at the Koreion ? 
in Alexandria, and adds, ‘If they are asked the meaning of this 
mystery, they answer, ‘‘To-day at this hour Kore gave birth to rév 
aiéva”’.* Thus it appears that in Roman Egypt the word aidv was 
habitually applied to a god. 

This use of the word was adopted by some‘ of the Christian 
Gnostics, who employed the term to denote the hypostatized Suvdjes 
of God. In the system of Valentinus, for instance, the twenty-eight 
or thirty personal beings produced from the primal deity by succes- 
sive emissions are called aidves. Cf. the Naassene Attis-document, 
Hippol. Ref. haer. 5.8: airy yap éorw 4 rapOevos 4... rixroven. vidv, 
ob Wuxixoy, ob cwpatikdv, GANA paxdptov aidva aidvev. 

In Ascl. ITI, however, there is no trace of this use of the word. 
In chs. 26 b-32a aidy is not personified, but retains unaltered the 
special sense assigned to it by Plato. 

On the subject of eternity and time, see Plotinus 4. 4. 1 5 and 
6.5.11. Porphyry, "Adoppat rpds 7a vonrd 44: od dduordpevos obv 
roide éxl rode peraBaiver (6 vois, i.e. the divine mind)... ei 8% py 


? Probably aidw alévwn, equivalent to Geds Gedy (in a sense analogous to that of 
Baotdets Baothéaw), ‘ God supreme over all gods’, 

® The goddess worshipped in this rite was probably the Képy who was associated 
with Sarapis. Cf. Julian 2%. 111 (Bidez and Cumont), 432 D: indpyovros bpiv 
[Sapeapiegey modovxou Geo Tod Bacthéws ZapdmBos dpa TH wapédSpy ndpy. The 

ounders of this Alexandrian cult may have followed, in this part of it, the example 

of the ‘lesser mysteries’ of the Eleusinia, in which the birth of the son of Kore was 
geaeel Sarapis corresponded to Zeus Chthonios or Pluto, the father of Kore’s 
child. 

® Here, rdv aléva is used to denote the son of Kore (Iacchus or Dionysus) ; and 
rov Oedv might equally well have been written in place of rv aiawa. 

* By some of them, but not by all. In the Coptic-Gnostic documents ( Pistis 
Sophia &c.), aldw frequently signifies, not a person, but a place. The twelve 
divisions of the Zodiac are there called aidves; ‘the twelve aeons’ means the region 
of the Zodiac, and ‘the thirteenth aeon’ appears to be a sphere situated above that 
region. Ina Naassene hymn quoted by Hicgalvtas. Ref. haer. 5, 10, Jesus says 
karaBhcoper, aldvas Sdous dtodedou (‘all the worlds’; i. e. I will go down to earth 
traversing, on my way down, all the celestial spheres’.) 





190 ASCLEPIUS 


rode pera TOde ex abrod yiverat, dua wavra vo. rel obv mwdvra dpa, 
Kai od To pev viv 7o 8 adbis, wavra Gyo viv kal dei. ei ovv er adrod rd 
viv, dvypyrat 8% 75 rapedndvOds Kal 76 pédrov, év ddiactdrw ro viv Kat 
dxpévm rapacrypatt. date 7d Syod Kara te TO TAROoS Kard re 7d 
xpovuxoy Sidornpa ex adrod. 83 kal! &v wdvra, kal év évi cat ddiacrdérw 
kal dxpovw. et d& rodro, ode 75 Tobey rou TG vG, ovdE klvynors dpa, ddd 
evepyeia xa’ ev, ev &vi, abéns te apypypevy Kal peraBodfs Kali dieEddov 
maons.—ei S875 tAHO0s KaP &, Kal dua 7 evépyeia, kal axpovos, dvé-yen 
mapyroorhvat TH Toustry otcia Td del ev évi dv. toiro S€ éorw aidy, 
mapuréoty dpa vO 6 aidv. Ta 8 ph Kal &y év Gi voodvri, dAAG pera- 
Barikds, kat év kuqoet, Kal ev TO TO pev KaTadetre TO Se éridapBdvew, 
kal pepitew, kal Siefodevev, wapurérryn xpdvos’ TH yap Towadtry Kuwhoe 
rapupicrarat TO péAAew Kat rapednrvbévar. 

The Platonic notion of eternity is well stated by Boethius, Pxilo- 
soph. consol. 5.6: ‘That God is eternal, is agreed by all who possess 
reason. What then is eternity?... Eternity is the complete and 
simultaneous possession of endless life in a single whole. The 
meaning of this will be clearer if we compare the eternal with the 
temporal. Everything that lives in time moves onward through the 
present from the past to the future ; and no being that is situated in 
time can grasp all the extent of its life together. Such a being has 
not yet reached to-morrow ; it has already lost yesterday ; and even 
in your life to-day, you live only in one fleeting and transitory 
moment at a time. Thus that which is subject to the conditions 
of existence in time, even though it has never begun to be and 
never ceases to be (as Aristotle held that the universe is without 
beginning or end), yet is not on that account a thing that can be 
rightly deemed to be eternal. For though its life is endless, it does 
not grasp and embrace the whole extent of its life together ; it does 
not yet possess the future, and it has ceased to possess the past. 
That which grasps and possesses together, in a single whole, all the 
contents of endless life—that from which nothing of the future is 
absent, and nothing of the past has fled away,—that is rightly called 
eternal. Such a being must hold itself in its own grasp, must be 
ever present to itself, and must possess the endless course of fleeting 
time as a thing present to it. There are some who, when they are 
told that Plato held that this universe has had no beginning in 
time, and will never have an end, suppose that it follows from this 
that the created universe is co-eternal with its Creator. But they 
are mistaken. It is one thing to traverse the course of an endless 








ASCLEPIUS III: 26b 1g! 


life (and this is the mode of existence that Plato ascribed to the 
universe); it is another thing to hold the whole extent of endless 
life grasped together in one present; and to do this is clearly 
a peculiar property of the mind of God. It must not be supposed 
that God's priority to things created is a matter of length of time; 
he is prior to them rather in virtue of the peculiar quality of his 
indivisible nature. The unending movement of things temporal is 
an imitation of the unchanging present of the life that moves not. 
The temporal world, since it cannot adequately reproduce the model, 
falls away from immobility into movement, and declines from an 
indivisible present to an endless extent of time future and time past. 
It is unable to hold all the contents of its life in its possession 
together ; but by never coming to an end, it seems to make some 
attempt at rivalling that which it cannot fully realize in its own 
being. It binds itself to such a present as the fleeting moment 
supplies ; and that present, since it is a sort of copy of the abiding 
present, bestows on all beings which possess it an appearance of 
existence. But since that momentary present could not abide, it 
hurried forward along the endless path of time; and so it came to 
pass that it made continuous by its movement a life the whole 
contents of which it had not power to grasp together by abiding, 
If then we seek to call things by their right names, we shall use the 
words of Plato, and say that God is e#erna/, but the universe is 
everlasting. 

‘Now ' inasmuch as the way in which the judgement apprehends its 
objects must always be determined by its own nature, and God lives 
ever in an eternal present, his knowledge transcends all movement 
of time, and abides in the indivisibility of his present; he grasps 
the past and the future in all their infinite extent, and with his 
indivisible cognition he contemplates all events as if they were even 
now taking place.’ 

26b. Voluntas enim &c. The writer here passes on to a fresh 
topic by a superficial transition. (Compare the transition at ch. 22a 
nit.) The mention of God’s changeless will introduces the distinc- 
tion between the changeless and the changing, i.e. between eternity 
and time, with which the following chapters deal. 

Dei enim natura consilium est [[voluntatis]] bonita(ti)s. 
In Corp. II. 14 and elsewhere, it is asserted that God, and God 


* This paragraph of Boethius should be compared with the paragraph on the 
Geios vots in Asc. III. 32 b. 





192 ASCLEPIUS 


alone, is good. The writer of Asc/. III expresses a similar thought 
by saying that God’s nature is Bovkt) ayabot, The use of the word 
Bovdky to signify God’s purpose or design is as old as Homer 
(Zz. 1. 5, Auds & éredeiero Bovdy). In Corp. I. 8b, the creative BovAy 
Geot is momentarily personified. 

((Voluntatis)) summa consilium, o Trismegiste? Having 
used the terms BovAyois and Bovdy, the writer pauses to explain 
the relation between them. ovdAz is the design, i.e. the determina- 
tion of the end to be aimed at; (in the case of God’s BovdAy, that 
end is necessarily dya@ev ;) PBovAnois is the direction of the will 
towards the accomplishment of the design; 7d BovAccOa is the 
act of willing. Compare the distinction between BovAnots, BovdAcvoss, 
and zpoaipecrs in Ar. Lith. Mic. 3. 2-5. The Hermetist’s 7d 
BotdecOar seems to correspond to Aristotle’s mpoafpecis; but he 
differs from Aristotle in making BovAyois issue from ovA7. 
According to Aristotle’s use of the words, it would be more correct 
to say that BovAevors issues from BovAnows; for 7 pev BovAnors rod 
tédous éoti, . . . Bovdrcvdpela Se... repl tHv mpos Ta TEAy’ i.e. 
we first wish for something, and then deliberate what action we 
must take to bring about the thing we wish for. 

Neque enim ‘inpense! aliquid vult. According to common 
usage, izpense velle should mean ‘to wish eagerly’ or‘ earnestly’. 
This cannot be the meaning intended here; izfense must therefore 
be either a mistranslation of the Greek, or a false reading of the 
Latin. Possibly the Greek word may have been dxparés, in the 
sense ‘ without power to accomplish that which he wills’, and the 
translator may have taken it to mean dmpo/enter, i. e. ‘immoderately’ 
or ‘ violently’. 

est omnium plenissimus. God is oidevds évders. 

vult autem omnia bona. Cf. 20b: ‘ voluntas eius ((eadem)) est 
bonitas omnis.’ 

habet omnia quae vult. The good, which God wills, is 
present to him in complete realization. Man, whose life is a time- 
process, wills that to which he has not yet attained; but God lives 
in an eternal present, in which the distinction between aspira- 
tion and attainment. disappears. Strictly speaking, the words 
‘will’ and ‘ purpose’ are inapplicable to God ; for they imply a pro- 
cess in time. But they may serve to describe that which takes 
place in the cosmic time-process as issuing from and dependent 
on God’s eternal being. Cf. Ascd. I. 8: Voluntas etenim dei 








ASCLEPIUS III: 27a 193 


ipsa est summa perfectio.’ J, fin.: ‘voluntatem (dei) comitatur 
effectus.’ 

eius imago mundus. See note on Asc/. I. 10: ‘dei, cuius 
sunt imagines duae mundus et homo.’ In Pl. Zimaeus 300, the 
pattern, in the likeness of which the Kosmos is made, is not the 
Demiurgus himself, but the atré{woy (=the vonrds xécpos); and 
the writer of Asc/, II, in ch. 31 imi, probably adopted this 
alternative ; for it seems best to strike out de there, and read 
‘ huius (se. mundi insensibilis) imago hic effectus est mundus’. In 
the concluding sentence of the Zimaeus, according to the reading 
generally accepted, the Kosmos is called «ixdv rod vonrod (Lov). 
But there is a variant, eixdv rod rouprod, ‘the image of its maker’; 
and it is possible that the latter reading was accepted by some of 
the Egyptian Platonists. Time (which is the mode of existence 
of the Kosmos) is in the Ztmaeus called an cixév of eternity (which 
is the mode of existence of God); and it is merely another way 
of expressing the same thought to say that the Kosmos, being 
advarov Gor, or ever-living in time, is an ‘image’ of God, who 
lives in eternity. Most of the later Platonists regarded the idéa 
or wapadetypara, of which the voyrds xécpos consists, as thoughts or 
designs existing in the mind of God (see for instance Philo De 
opif. mundi 3. 17 ff.); and from saying that the Kosmos is made 
in the likeness of God’s thoughts, it is not a long step to saying that 
it is made in the likeness of God. 

27a. Bonus, o Asclepi. God gives that which is veal/y good, 
viz. life itself, which is incorporeal and imperishable. The Kosmos 
gives those things which men ¢hink to be good, viz, the corporeal 
means. of our transitory life on earth. But are men mistaken 
in thinking these things to be good? If so, it would follow that it 
is a mistake to think the Kosmos good. The writer’s meaning 
seems to be rather that the Kosmos and its corporeal gifts to men 
are good indeed, but in a lower degree,—good relatively, but not 
absolutely. But he emphasizes the affirmative proposition, ‘the 
Kosmos is (relatively) good’; and in this he differs from the writer 
of Corp. VI, who lays stress on the negative, ‘the Kosmos is not 
(absolutely) good’. See Corp. VI. 2a, 4a, and Corp. X. 10b, 12. 
In Cor. VI. 6, the writer of that /e//us speaks with contempt of 
7a avOpirea ayabd, which are the same as the ‘omnia quae 
mortalibus videntur bona’ of Asc/. III. 27, i.e. the material means 
of our earthly life, 

2800-8 re) 











194 ASCLEPIUS 


In the Prophecy, Ase. III. 25 (‘bonum multiformi imaginum 
varietate conpositum’ &c.), where the writer is contending against 
the Christians who regard the Kosmos as wholly bad, he asserts 
its goodness without any hint of the reservation suggested in 
ch. 274. 

deus . . . dispensator distributorque est .. . sensus, 
animae, et vitae. Cf. Corp. X.2; and XI. ii. rr sgg., where it 
is said that God is life, and that in giving life, he gives himself. 

29c. Secundum etenim deum hune ecrede. In the tradi- 
tional text, these words follow a passage concerning the sun, and 
hune consequently appears to mean solem. But there can be no 
doubt that in the original it was the Kosmos that was called devrepos 
Geés. When the misplaced passages 27 b-29 b have been removed, 
a satisfactory connexion is obtained; 29c fits on to 27a without 
any breach of continuity, and Aunc refers to mundus. As to 
secundum deum, cf. Asc. I. 8, eet tov devrepov éroince x.T.A, 
Ascl. I. 10, ‘secundus est mundus’. Corp. VIII. 1b, 2: yap 
devrepos Geds 6 Kéopos x7.X. The notion that the Kosmos is the 
second God is derived from the Zimaeus, where the Kosmos is called 
Gebs aioGyrds, and is described as the son of the Demiurgus. 
Numenius (quoted in prefatory note on Corg. I1) distinguished a first, 
a second, and a third God.’ His mparos Oeds is érds, i.e. eternal, 
and is zepi ra. vonra ; his Sevrepos Oeds, the Demiurgus, is xiwovpevos, 
and is wepi 7a voyra Kal rd alcOyrd; his tplros beds (who is pre- 
sumably epi ra aicOyra alone) is the Kosmos, and thus corresponds 
to the second God of some of the Hermetists, and to the supreme 
God of the Stoics. Philo, in Quod deus sit immutabilis 6. 3r 
(quoted on p. 186), sets forth a system not unlike that of Numenius: 
he there says that God has an elder son, who is voyrés, (viz. the 
intelligible Kosmos, or the Logos,) and a younger son, who. is 
aicOyrds, (viz. the sensible Kosmos). The theology of Asc/. III is 
in this respect less elaborate than that of Philo and Numenius, 
In Corp. XI. i, the hypostatized aiéy interposed between God and 
the Kosmos occupies a position analogous to that of Philo’s ‘elder 
son of God’, and the\‘ second God’ of Numenius. 

fomniaque mundana inlustrantem]. These words were 
probably inserted after the text had been dislocated; the person 
who inserted them must have assumed that func meant solem. An 


1 A suggestion of a system of three Gods occurs in Pl. Zp, 2, 312B: awepl Tov 
wavrewv Baoidéa nave’ dori, .7.A, 








ASCLEPIUS III: agc 195 


adherent of a solar cult might say that ‘sol omnia mundana inlustrat 
animalia ’, both literally and metaphorically, i.e. that the sun gives 
light and life. But it would hardly be said that ‘mundus omnia 
mundana inlustrat animalia’, 

animalia sive animantia sive inanimantia: animals and 
vegetables. See Asc/. I. 4, ‘est et aliud animalis genus, sine anima 
quidem, et tamen non carens sensibus’ (viz. vegetables). 

Si enim animal mundus vivensque semper et fuit et est 
et erit. (Vivens semper = deifwos, a term applied to the Kosmos 
in Corp. VIII. 2.) This sentence, taken by itself, would seem 
to imply that the Kosmos has always been in existence, i.e, that 
it has had no beginning, But did the writer of Asc/. III hold 
that view? His language on this point appears to vary. On the 
one hand, in 40b we find the words ‘nec coepit esse nec desinet’. 
These words have probably been shifted from their right place ; 
but there can be little doubt that their original subject was mundus, 
or the movement or time-process of the mundus 3 and if so, we 
have in them an express statement that the Kosmos has had no 
beginning. But on the other hand, the writer repeatedly says 
that God is the maker of the Kosmos; (e.g. ch. 25: ‘hic mundus, 
dei opus’; ch. 26a; ‘tanti operis effector . . . deus’; ch. 29¢ fin.: 
‘semel dispensata vita’; cf. ch. 31 init, where it is clearly implied 
that the aicOyrds xdcpos is yevvyrés;) whence it would seem to 
follow (unless the inference is expressly denied) that the Kosmos 
has had a beginning. 

Tt would be possible to reconcile the words ‘si enim animal 
mundus vivensque semper et fuit et est et erit’ with the view that 
the universe has had a beginning, by assuming their meaning 
to be merely that the Kosmos, since it first came into existence, has 
ever been, and will ever continue to be, a living being ; or in other 
words, that its life, from the time when it first began, has been 
uninterrupted, and will continue without interruption, On_ this 
assumption, the statement is a virtual denial of a periodical pbopa 
of the Kosmos. (The senectus mundi spoken of in the Prophecy, 
ch. 26 a, will be stayed before it ends in death.) 

In the Zimaeus, Plato (or more exactly, the speaker in Plato’s 
dialogue) puts the question whether the Kosmos has had a 
beginning, and answers ‘yes’. (Zim. 28B: yéyovev.) Ever since 
the time of the first readers of the Zimaeus, it has been disputed 
whether Plato meant what he wrote in that passage, or whether, 

O02 


on — 


196 ASCLEPIUS 


when he wrote ‘yes’, he meant ‘no’. (See e.g. the opinion of 
Xenocrates and Crantor on this point, as reported in Plut. De an, 
procr. in Timaeo 3, p. 1013; Arist. De caelo 1. 10, 279 b 30; Philo 
De aetern. mundi 4. 13-16, Cohn VI, p. 76 sg.) Aristotle said 
that the Kosmos has always been in existence; of later Greek 
thinkers, some agreed with Aristotle in this,t and others differed 
from him, Philo De aetern. mundi 3.7: tpirrat 8& wept tod Lyrov- 
pévov yeydvacr Sofa, trav pev aidiov tov Koopov apevwv, a&yévyrdy 
Te Kat dvwbdeOpov, trav be é& évayrias yevntov tre Kal pOaprdv' cit 8 of 
- 4 + puxriy Sdgav amréAurov, yevytov Kal adpOaprov oinbévres abroy 
etvat. The third opinion,—that the Kosmos has had a beginning, 
but will never have an end,—is that which (whether Plato held it or 
not) stands written in the Zzmaeus; and it seems to be the view 
accepted by some of the Hermetic writers who touch on the 
question ; e.g. by the writer of Asc/. I, who repeatedly says that 
the Kosmos has been made by God. See Asc/. I. 3c: ‘mundus 
= dA) praeparatus est a deo’ &c. Cf. Corp. IX. 9: 6 8& Kdopos, 
Graf daBav (alcOnow Kat vonow) dua tO yeréoba. The contrary 
opinion however is asserted in Corp. XI. i. 3: &pyov S& rod aidvos 
6 xdopos, yevduevos ovmore, kal act yudpevos td Tod aidvos. (This 
instance shows that a writer might call the Kosmos ofus def and 
yet hold it to be without beginning.) And those Hermetists who 
said that God ‘is ever at his work’ (Cor. XI. ii. 14a), and that 
God’; very being consists in his making things (Corp. XIV. 5), 
must have held that the world has always been in existence,” 


1 The Aristotelian view was held by some at least of the Neo-Pythayoreans; 
e. g, Pseudo-Philolaus, Stob. 1. 20. 2, vol. i, p. 172 W.: ds 85e 5 Kdapos ef aldivos, 
Ocellus Lucanus, Stob, 1. 20, 3, p. 174 W.: a@yévnros 6 xécpos, But in some of the 
fragments ascribed to Philolaus it is said that the Kosmos has had a beginning; 
Diels Vorsokr. p. 246: @iAodkdov Baxxat, 6 xdcpos els ari, Hpgaro Bt yiyveca 
and rot pécov, Jb, p. 242: 70 mpGrov appoobér, 7d &y, & 7G péow Tas aaipas 
éaria wadeira, Aetius in Diels Doxogr. p. 332: (S1AdAaos) 7d Fryepovundy &y 7H 
Hecarrdry nupl, dwep Tpdmews Sixny mpovweBadero TH Tov mavrds {aaipa) 5 Snpuoupyds 
Geés, (It is doubtful whether any of these fragments were written by Philolaus 
himself ;—on this question, see Burnet, Zarly Greek Philosophy ;—but the views 
expressed in them must have been held by some Pythagoreans.) Aristotle (De 
caelo 1, 10, 279 b) expressly says that none of his predecessors had held the otpavés 
to be without beginning. In this statement Philolaus must be included, if any 
writing of Philolaus was known to Aristotle ; and in any case, it must include ‘the 
Pythagoreans’ who were known to him, 

* in the last sentence of Corp. XVI, the MSS. give o¥8% 4 noinats atrod dpyiv # 
rédos éxe. This would imply that the Kosmos is without beginning. In the 
printed text, I have bracketed dpyiy #, because there is no mention of apy? in the 
parallel clause which precedes; but it would be possible to write the sentence thus : 
Gomep 6 Beds ov(re dpxiw ore) Tédos ExeL, of Tws ODSE % Tolnats abTOD dpxny + Téros 
éxet. 








ASCLEPIUS III: age 197 


nihil in mundo mortale est. Cf. Corp. VIII passim. 
Corp. XI. i. 3: 068 daodetrai m1 tov &v 7H Kdopw. Corp. XII. ii, 
15b: vexpdv yap ob8& & otre yéyovey ore early obre eora ev 
(78) xoopy Kr. Philo Leg. allegor. 1. 3. 7, Cohn I, p. 63: yéveots 
re ad POcipopévun érépwv Kat POopd yevvuevuy aAwv droreActrat, 
xd. The same doctrine had already been taught by Empedocles, 
fr. 8 Diels : dios (birth) obSevds eorw dardvrwv | Ovyrav, o88€ res 
oddopévov Oavdrow redevty, | GAL pdvov pies re SudAdakis Te pryer- 
tov | éori. Cf. Anaxagoras, /v. 17 Diels. 

Viventis etenim semper uniuscuiusque partis: a Greek 
genitive absolute. See ch. 27 e, numeri complett. 

The partes mundi (yépy ot pdpia rod xécpov) are the orouxela. ; 
and this term may include the heavenly bodies as well as the four 
elements. The heavenly bodies are of course both living and 
imperishable ; they are dé cae/estes, The four elements also are here, 
as well as in Corp. VIII, regarded as living and imperishable. In 
making them living beings, the writer is in accord with the 
‘hylozoist’ tradition of the early Ionian physicists, which was a 
survival of the primitive man’s instinctive assumption that everything 
he sees is alive like himself. Empedocles, the first Greek who 
taught that the universe is composed of four ‘roots’ or elements, 
gave to these elements the names of gods, and described them as 
moved by love and hate. The Stoics, following Heraclitus, spoke 
of wip voepov ; they called it Zeus, and identified earth, air, and 
water with other deities worshipped by the Greeks. 

The Persians, in the fifth century 8.c., worshipped (in addition 
to Heaven, Sun, and Moon) ‘Earth, Fire, Water, and the Winds 
(Hdt. r. 131); and these deities can still be recognized in the 
Mithraism of the Roman empire. ‘Le mithraicisme divinisait les 
quatres corps simples qui, suivant la physique des anciens, composent 
Punivers’ (Cumont, A/ystéres de Mithra 1902, p. 97). The 
‘ Mithrasliturgie’ edited by Dieterich (Pap. mag. Par. i. 475 sqq.) 
begins with an invocation of rveipa (i.e, air), wip, twp, and oicia 
yedns, regarded as deities. The influence of Mithraism may have 
been felt in Roman Egypt, and may have helped to maintain or 
revive there the habit of regarding the four elements as living and 
personal beings. 

Attempts have been made to find in the deities of the ancient 
Egyptian cosmogony personifications of fire, air, earth, and water ; 
and it has been inferred thence that the doctrine of the four elements 


198 ASCLEPIUS 


was known in Egypt long before the time of Empedocles. (See 
Brugsch, Rel. und Myth. der alten Aeg. p. tgo.) That inference 
can hardly be justified. But to the Egyptians, quite as much as to 
the early Greeks, it was natural to imagine life and personality in 
all things ; the notion of living parts or members of the living 
universe was familiar to them from of old; and when they had 
learnt from Greek teachers that there are four ‘ parts of the Kosmos’, 
they would be ready enough to identify each of the four with one 
or other of their native gods. Diodorus (1. rr f.) has recorded 
a Graeco-Egyptian theory of this sort:—*The Kosmos is composed 
of five elements, just as the human body is composed of members ; 
and each of these elements is a deity. The life-giving zvedya (the 
“fifth element” of the Peripatetics) is Zeus (i.e. Amon); fire is 
Hephaistos (Ptah); earth is the Mifryp (Isis ?); water is ‘OQxedvy 
(a Nile-goddess) ; and air is Athena (Neith).’ There were doubtless 
various systems of this kind. An Egyptian instance of the recog- 
nition of the elements as deities occurs in the Rhind Papyrus, 
demotic text, col. 5. 2 (Reitzenstein, Die hellenistischen Mysterienrel, 
p. 84), where the dead man is addressed thus: ‘Thou honourest 
(dost worship ?) the morning sun, and the moon, and the air and 
the water and the fire.’ (In the corresponding hieratic text, ‘ renewer 
of life’ is substituted for ‘ water’, and ‘ eye of Horus’ for ‘ fire *) 

In the Kore Kosmu, fire, air, water, and earth are persons, and 
make speeches. This is perhaps no more than a literary artifice ; 
but it is an artifice which the mental habit of the time made it easy 
to employ. 

The writer of Asc/. III says that the several elements are ‘ ever- 
living’ or immortal; but it does not necessarily follow from this 
that in his opinion they are not transmutable,—that water, for 
instance, always remains water, and air never ceases to be air. 
The common opinion of his time, at least among the Platonists, 
was that transmutations of portions of one element into portions 
of another are continually taking place, but that these transmuta- 
tions are compensated by other transmutations in the reverse 
direction, so that each element, regarded as a whole, persists unaltered. 
According to the Stoics, fire alone of the four elements could be 
properly said to be dei{wos; for the other three will be wholly 
transmuted into fire at the ecpyrosis.' 


* Cumont, Alystéres de Mithra, p. 98, says that the Mithraists also held that the 
four elements changed into one another, He refers to the ‘ Zoroastrian’ allegory 








~ 


ASCLEPIUS III: 2gc 199 


est sicuti est: i.e. it is deZwos. 

vitae aeternitatisque debet esse plenissimus. I suppose the 
meaning to be that, in order that the Kosmos may live everlastingly 
in time, it must be ‘filled with life’, or vivified throughout, by 
God, whose life is eternal (i.e. timeless and changeless). Compare 
the phrases in ch. 30, ‘in ipsa aeternitatis vivacitate mundus agitatur’, 
and ‘ (mundus) extrinsecus vivificatur ab aeternitate’. Similarly, in 
Corp. VII. 2, it is said that the Kosmos is made éeifwos, ds dBava- 
rifépevos by God, who is aids. But if this is the sense intended, 
it is obscurely expressed ; and perhaps there is some corruption in 
aeternitatisque. 

[Sol ergo . . . dispensator est.| This must be one of the 
‘solar interpolations’. (See Asc/. III. 19 b, ‘Solis ovcidpyys lumen 
est’ &c.) The sentence interrupts the context. The writer is 
speaking of the relation between God and the Kosmos as a whole, 
and has no reason to digress into a description of the special 
function of the sun. Moreover, the function here assigned to the 
sun (gibernator vitalium and eorum .. . dispensator) is the same 
as that which, in the following sentences, is assigned, in one sense, 
to the supreme God (vi/ahum ... sempiternus gubernator, and 
vitae dispensator aeternus,) and in another sense, to the Kosmos 
(vitae dispensator his omnibus) ; and there is no place for a third 
dispensalor. 

Deus ergo viventium vel vitalium, in mundo quae sunt, 
sempiternus gubernator est. We should rather have expected 
aeternus gubernator, in accordance with dispensator aeternus in the 
next line ; for sempiternus, ‘everlasting’, is properly an epithet of 
the Kosmos as opposed to the eternal God. But perhaps the 
Hermetist here used didios as an equivalent for aidvos ; compare ryv 
édiSiov ovciav in Pl. Zim. 378, and 7d didiov in Corp. VIII. 2. 
Similarly below, in ch. 30 ¢nit., sempiternitate vivendi seems to stand 
for aeternitate vivendt. 

The viventia vel vitalia (fwrxd, in the sense of fwoydva?) in 


of the guadriga in Dio Chrysost. Or. 36. 39f. But that allegory is merely Stoic 
cosmology in a Persian disguise. The supreme God drives a four-horse car; the 
horses are the elements. There is a series of cyclic changes, in the course of which 
fire and water alternately predominate. At the end of a long period, fire absorbs 
into itself the other three elements, and coalesces with the supreme deity ; then 
follows a fresh dzacosmesis, The image of the gvadriga, and the picturing of the 
four elements as horses, may have been derived from a Persian source; but most of 
the details (which, as Dio himself admits, suit very ill with the allegorical setting) 
are evidently taken from Greek Stoicism. 





200 ASCLEPIUS 


mundo quae sunt are, I suppose, the intracosmic sources of life, 
i, e. the heavenly bodies (and the four elements, regarded as con- 
centric spherical strata ?), which receive life from God, and distribute 
it to all individual things in the world below. If so, they are 
the same material ‘parts of the Kosmos’ which, in ch. 19b, 
were said to be governed by the incorporeal deity Zeus (Hypatos), 
the otcuipyys of the otpavds, and by the other ovoidpya in sub- 
ordination to him. (We were there told that ‘per caelum Iuppiter 
omnibus praebet vitam’.) It would have been possible to bring 
the two passages into connexion, by explaining in ch. 29c that 
the supreme God employs Zeus (Hypatos) as his agent in trans- 
mitting life to the véfa/ia; but the writer has not done so. In 
this instance, as in some others, the author of Asc/. IIT has made 
no attempt to work up into a single and consistent system 
the fragments of doctrine which he has taken from different 
sources. 

Semel . . . dispensata (dispensavit MS.) vita: s. at the time 
when the Kosmos was made. These words seem to imply that 
the Kosmos has had a beginning. It may be difficult to reconcile 
this with the maintenance of the Kosmos by a dex aelerna; 
but the same difficulty presents itself in the Zimaeus also. 

Cf. Corp. IX. 9: wévrev obv rév Logwv j aicOnos Kat vdyors (i.e, 
their conscious life) éfwOev éreurépyerat, ciorvéovea ixd rod aept- 
éxovros (i.e. from the Kosmos around them): 6 8& xéopos, drat * 
AaBov dua ro yevérOar, Ard tod Oeod AaBdw exer. 

30. mundus agitatur. The contrast between ordots and xivyois 
corresponds to the contrast between aldv and ypévos. God is 
ards or dxwyrds; the Kosmos is xwovpevos. The word xivnots 
means (r) movement in space (fépecOa:) ; (2) change of form, quality, 
or condition (dAAowieba). Pl. Parmen. 1388: xwovperdr ye (7d 
ev) 7 péeporro 4 dAXOwiro av" abras yop povat xwyjoes. Arist. De 
caelo 4. 3, 30a: tpeis al Kujoes, } piv Kari péyeOos, 4% 38 Kar 
eldos, (these two might be included under dAAolwots,) 4 SE Kara 
torov. The Hermetist, throughout this passage on time and 
eternity, probably has both meanings in his mind together. But 
xivnows in either sense is a process in time; if we say that a thing 
xwetrat, we imply that it is (or that parts of it are) in one place 
or state at one time, and in another place or state at another 
time. The vital energy of God is timeless, and accordingly, is 
motionless and changeless. But the derived vitality of the Kosmos 








ASCLEPIUS III: 30 201 


is extended in time, and accordingly manifests itself in movement 
and change; the Kosmos ‘ differt numeris et temporibus cuncta’. 
Cf. Corp. XI. i. 2: rod 8 aidvos, (oicia éoriv) 9 Tavrérys’ . . . TOD 
Se xpdvor, % peraBody. Corp. X. 11: H 8& vonry ordows Kwel Tv 
bducny Kivgow. 

in ipsa vitali aeternitate locus est mundi. ‘Eternity’ or 
‘the eternal’ is here figuratively pictured as occupying the outer 
space by which the spherical Kosmos is enclosed. Cf. ch. 27b, 
‘Deus, supra verticem summi caeli consistens’ &c. ; and ch. 33, 
‘quod dicitur extra mundum’ &c. The same notion is more 
fully developed in Cor. II, where rézos (i. e. the motionless space 
by which the moving Kosmos is surrounded) is substituted for 
aiév. Compare also Corp. XI. i. 2: 5 otv aidy & 7 663, 6 8 
Kdopos év 7G aid’ i.e, Aeon and Kosmos are, as it were, con- 
centric spheres; and Aeon, the larger sphere, is itself contained 
by God, who fills the boundless space without. 0. 3: rot xdopov 
bd Tod aidvos éurepiexopevov. 

Ipse mundus vitae dispensator est his omnibus quae in se 
sunt. The Kosmos includes or consists of the vifa/ia spoken 
of above, i.e. the heavenly bodies (and the elements ?) ; it might 
therefore be said with equal truth that life is received from God 
and dispensed to individuals by the Kosmos collectively, or by 
the ovfalia severally. But it would destroy the consistency of the 
passage to single out one of the véfadia, viz. the sun, and say 
that life is dispensed by that alone, as is said in the ‘solar inter- 
polation ’ above. 

Cf. Corp. IX. 6: the Kosmos 60d réros éorl Kal Snpuoupyos 
fwjs. See note on Asc/. III. 25, ‘ machina voluntatis dei’. 

et locus est omnium quae sub sole gubernantur. Perhaps 
this may be another ‘solar interpolation’. But it is also possible 
that the original writer used the phrase ‘beneath the sun’ to 
signify the lower or earthly region of the Kosmos, the place of 
yevecis and Oopd. This region is more commonly called ‘sub- 
lunar’; but the moon, being subject to apparent growth and 
diminution, was sometimes regarded as belonging rather to the 
lower world. 

vivificatur ab aeternitate. If ad stands for id, we may see 
in these words a slight tendency towards that hypostatization of 
aidv which is fully carried out in Corp. XI. i. For the moment, 
the writer speaks of aiéy as if it were a person, and capable of 


eee 


202 ASCLEPIUS 


independent action ; but he does not really so regard it. (Or, 
does aé stand for dé,—‘the Kosmos draws its life from the 
eternal’ ?) 

terrenum [{ ]] tempus... caeleste vero... . We mark off days 
and years, and thus measure the lapse of time, by noting either 
the periodic changes which take place on earth below (e.g. the 
daily alternation of light and darkness, regarded as guaditates aeris, 
and the yearly alternation of summer heat and winter cold), or the 
periodic movements of the heavenly bodies (e.g. the diurnal and 
annual revolutions of the sun). 

mundus est receptaculum temporis. Cf. Corp. XI. i, 2:6 8 
xpovos €v 7@ Koop. To us, it would seem more natural to say that 
the Kosmos is in time, than that time is in the Kosmos. But the 
Greeks, from Plato downwards, were in the habit of saying that time 
is not merely measured, but constituted or brought into being by the 
cyclic movement of the heavenly bodies; and this movement is 
a process which takes place within the Kosmos. 

ordo et tempus innovationem omnium rerum... per 
alternationem faciunt. The writer, by a figure of speech which 
is common in all periods, speaks of time as an agent ; but his mean- 
ing is rather that the dvavémms of all cosmic things is effected by 
a series of changes which take place in regular temporal succession. 
This ‘renovation’ takes one form in heaven above, and another form 
on earth below. The heavenly bodies are imperishable, but are in 
ceaseless motion ; and they are ‘renewed’ in the sense that each of 
them, after a fixed interval of time, comes back to the same place at 
which it was before. On the other hand, in the lower world, the 
process of renovation takes the form of yéveows and ¢Oopd ; that is to 
say, all composite bodies are decomposed into their elements, and 
out of these same elements other like bodies are composed ; or 
in other words, the elements are temporarily combined in composite 
bodies, and are ‘ renewed’ by the dissolution of these bodies. Thus, 
in the one way or the other, ‘all things in the Kosmos ’,—both 
things in heaven and things on earth,—‘ are renewed by alternation’. 
Cf. Corp. VILL. 4: 4 88 droxarderacis tév érvyciwv copdrov (diadu- 
detons yiveras THs) cvordcews, x... Corp. III. 4 as emended: ra 8& 
edarrovpeva dvavedOyoerar Gedy éyxuxNiwv evap Oulw Spopjpart. Plut. 
Ls. cf OS. 57: 6 88... Kdzpos, ... ot diSios ob8 drabjs 088 dbOapros 
GN’ devyevits Gv, pnxavarar rais trav wav peraBodais Kal repiddous det 
véos Kat pnderore pOapnoopevos Stapéevew. 








ASCLEPIUS III: 30 203 


nihil inmobile [nec] nascentium, nee caelestium nec 
terrenorum, The heavenly bodies may be included among 
nascentia (= 74 yryvopeva), because they have come into being in the 
past, though, having once come into being, they are imperishable. 
Moreover, according to some Greek systems, their substance is per- 
petually renewed by evaporations from the world below. 

(deus)a seest. Cf. Asc/. II. 14b: ‘haec ergo est, quae ex se tota 
est, natura dei’, and notes ad doc. 

circum se totus est (airds repi abrov ddos éori). Cf. Numenius, 
Euseb. Pr. ev. 11. 18. 20 (quoted, p. 80 of Vol. II): 6 pév otv 
mparos (Geds) wepi ra vonrd. If the voyrd are regarded as God’s 
thoughts, wepi ra. vonrd differs little from wept atrév. 

Inasmuch as God ‘is in all things’, and ‘all things are in God’,— 
or, as we are elsewhere told, ‘God is all things’ (e.g. ch. 20a, 
‘siquidem is sit unus [et] omnia’),—there is nothing beside him, 
to which he could be related. Yet, in another aspect, he is dis- 
tinguished from the Kosmos, and stands in a certain relation to it ; 
indeed, the very purpose of this passage is to explain that relation. 

nisi aliquis audeat dicere ipsius commotionem in aeterni- 
tate esse, lternity is to God as time is to the Kosmos, The word 
xivnors, since it implies a process in time, is not properly applicable 
to God, who is not in time ; but we may think fit to use it, for want of 
a better, to describe that function of God in eternity which corre- 
sponds to and produces the movement of the Kosmos in time. The 
so-called ‘movement’ of God is that timeless energy of God, the 
effect of which is seen in the ‘movement’ of the Kosmos, i. e. in the 
temporal and changing life of the Kosmos and all things in it; it is 
that function of God which, in ch. 20 b above, was described as ever- 
lasting procreation. God is dxivyros ; but when this is asserted, there 
is need to guard against the mistaken inference that God is inactive 
or inert. Similarly below, in ch. 31, ‘sic et deum agitari credibile 
est in se ipsum eadem inmobilitate’. Cf. Numenius, Euseb. Pr. ev. 
11. 18. 21: dvti yap ris mpoootons 7 devtépp (Oe) Kujoews, rv 
mpocodoay TO rpoTy oTdow pypi elvar kivyow otpdvroy, K.T.d. 

aeternitas, in quam omnium temporum agitatio remeat, et 
®x qua omnium temporum agitatio sumit exordium. The 
process of mundane things in time may be said to issue from 
‘eternity’, i.e. from the life or energy of the eternal God. But 
what is meant by saying that all temporal processes ‘return into’ 
eternity? Possibly vemeat in stands for dvacéperat eis, i. e. ‘is relative 


tg I i ti te ttt tr it 


204 ASCLEPIUS 


to’, or ‘dependent on’. Cf. ‘temporis... in aeternitatem semper 
revocatur agitatio’ in ch. 31 below. 

3I. mundum non natum, quem recte (in)sensibilem dicimus, 
intra se habens. Here aidy is brought into connexion with the 
vonros xdopos. The vonrds xdcpos ‘is in’ eternity, in the same sense 
that the aicyr7ds xéopos is in time (though, from another point of 
view, we were told above that time is in the aigOnrds xécpos). See ch. 
34b: ‘scito[te] intellegibilem mundum . . . esse incorporalem ’ &c. 

Seeing that the translator frequently renders vots by sensus, he may 
possibly have rendered voyrdv by sensibilem here; but it seems more 
likely that éz- has been accidentally omitted. 

The vonros xécpos is described as non natus (dyévvqros), in contrast 
to the aic@yrds xdcpos ; and this implies that the latter is yevvyrds. 

The writer doubtless regards the voyrés xécpos (i. e. the aggregate 
of the vonra eidy or rapade’ypara) as existing in and constituted by 
God’s thought, rather than as a self-subsistent entity distinct from 
God ; it is thus comprehended in the being of his zparos Geds, and 
accordingly, the aicOyrds xdcpos is, in his view, devrepos Oeds, not 
tpiros. 

Huius [dei] imago hic effectus est mundus. Dei must be cut 
out. The writer would hardly speak of the supreme God as huius 
dei ; and the preceding mention of the voyrés kéapos would be point- 
less if nothing further were said about it. Ais then must be taken 
as referring to the mundum insensibilem (rév vonrov xoopov) ; and hic 
mundus is the aicOyrds kéopos. 

ea ipsa in se revertendi necessitate. We are accustomed to 
picture the time-process as a rectilinear movement ; we speak of the 
‘progress’ of time. But the Greeks, connecting their conception of 
time more closely with the revolutions of the sun and moon, frequently 
pictured its movement as circular. The sun retraces the same path 
again and again ; and so they thought of the time-process as coming 
back to the same point, or ‘returning into itself’, at the termination 
of each year or other fixed period. We still retain the Greek usage 
when we speak of the ‘ recurrence’ or ‘return’ of summer or winter. 

The ‘stability’ of time (i.e. its dwyota, here understood in the 
sense of ‘changelessness’,) consists in this, that its circular move- 
ment persists unchanged, being determined by zecessitas (évd-yxn), 
i.e. by changeless law. The same thought is expressed below, in 
the words ‘efficitur ut . . . temporis mobilitas stabilis fiat fixa lege 
currendi ’. 








ASCLEPIUS III: 31 205 


temporis ... in aeternitatem semper revocatur agitatio. 
4 Tod xpdvov Kivyas eis Tov aldva del dvacéperat(?). I suppose this to 
mean that the movement of time is dependent on eternity ; i.e. that 
the movements of the heavenly bodies are worked by the will or 
energy of the eternal God. Though God himself is not in time, yet 
the cosmic processes in which his timeless energy takes effect are 
processes in time; and when we think of him as acting on the 
Kosmos, we cannot avoid speaking of him in words which seem to 
imply that his existence is extended in time. If God made the sun 
rise yesterday, and makes it rise again to-day, his action is extended 
over a space of time,—or at any rate, appears to us to be so; and 
thus ‘eternity (the mode of God’s existence), though motionless in 
itself, appears to be in motion, on account of its relation to time ; 
for eternity enters into time (lit. “is in time”, which I take to mean 
“ operates in time ”,) and it is in time that all movement takes place’. 

It must have been for the purpose of evading this difficulty that 
Numenius introduced his ‘second God’, who is wept rd voyrd Kat 
7a aioOyra (i.e. is concerned with, or in relation to, the eternal on the 
one hand, and the temporal on the other,) and thereby enabled him. 
self to say that his ‘first God’ is rept ra voyrd (i.e. is concerned with 
or related to the eternal alone). 

The statement that eternity ‘is in’ time seems to correspond to the 
statements which occur elsewere, that ‘God is in all things’ or ‘is all 
things’. God is in the Kosmos, in the sense that he operates in the 
Kosmos ; all life, all action in the Kosmos is, or is derived from, 
God’s life and action. Yet in another sense, God is above and 
distinct from the Kosmos. 

_[[eaque mobilitas ratione temporis vertitur]], I can make no 
sense of these words as they stand; and the sentence appears to be 
complete without them. TI have found a suitable place for them at 
the end of ch. 4o b. 

Sic et deum agitari credibile est in se ipsum eadem in- 
mobilitate. Since eternity is God’s life or mode of being, that 
which has just been said of eternity, (viz. that it is stable, and yet 
seems to be mobile,) may with equal truth be said of God. Agitari 
in se (abl.) ipsum probably stands for atrby év éaurd xweicba. The 
Kosmos moves ‘within God’ (i.e. enclosed in and surrounded by 
God, so to speak), or ‘within eternity’; but God, since there is 
nothing above or beyond him, must move ‘within himself’, if he 
moves at all. 


— 


206 ASCLEPIUS 


Stabilita[s] etenim ipsius [in] magnitudine est inmobilis 
agitatio; ipsius enim magnitudinis inmobili(ta)s lex est, 
This is obscure. Jpsius in magnitudine seems to be analogous to iz 
se in the preceding sentence. The principle assumed as the basis 
of the argument appears to be ‘that which is great is necessarily 
motionless’; but it is not clear on what grounds the writer considered 
himself justified in making that assumption. Perhaps the thought 
is similar to that expressed in ch. 30 above, ‘nec alicuius inpulsu 
[nec] loco moveri potest, cum in eo sunt omnia et in omnibus ipse est 
solus’; that which is all-comprehensive cannot be moved from 
without, 

‘The péyebos of God’ is a term in frequent use in the theology of 
the period. Cf. Corp. XI. ii. 20b: owvavénoov ceaurdv TH dmerpyry 
peyebet, 

sive deus, sive aeternitas, sive uterque. The writer here 
shows clearly that his aiév is not, like that of Corp. XI. i. 2, an 
entity distinct from God. 6eés and aidy alike are merely words by 
means of which we attempt to describe the supreme Being ; and all 
words applied to the supreme Being must necessarily be inadequate. 
Cf. ch. 20a. 

The words ‘sive deus ... utroque sunt’ are evidently misplaced 
in the traditional text ; and they are appropriate in the sentence to 
which I have transferred them. The only doubt is whether it is 
better to place them before or after ‘ quod est tale quod non subi- 
citur sensibus ’. 

sive alter in altero. In one sense, it may be said that eternity 
is in God ; for eternal existence is an attribute or property of God. 
Moreover, it was said above that time is in the Kosmos (‘mundus 
est receptaculum temporis’); and eternity is to God as time is to the 
Kosmos. Corp. XI. i. 2: 6 ofv aidy & 76 beg, .. . 5 8 xpdvos év 7a 
xdoz. But in another sense, it may be said that God is in eternity, 
as the Kosmos is in time. 

tempus ... per ambitionem reditus aeternum est. Time 
is endless or everlasting ; and endless time is, in common usage, 
called ‘ eternal’ (atcvios or eis aldva). 

The writer seems to regard the endlessness of time as resulting 
from or conditioned by the circularity of its movement. This may 
be accounted for as follows. He pictures the process of time as the 
movement of a body along a line; but he is not accustomed to the 
notion of a line of infinite length, and consequently assumes that 








ASCLEPIUS III: 32a, 40b 207 


a movement cannot be endless unless the line of movement re-enters 
itself, Given this condition, but not otherwise, the moving body 
may continue to move for ever; for it may retrace the same finite 
path unceasingly. Compare ‘ea ipsa in se revertendi necessitate’ 
above; and ch. 4ob, ‘sic est enim rotundita(ti)s volubilis ratio’ 
&c, See Aristotle on circular motion, Pays. 8. 7 ff.; e.g. 261b 
27, ort 8 evdéxerat elvat twa dreipov (popdv), piav obcav Kat ouveEx, 
kai airy éorly 7) Kixhy, éywpev viv. Jb. 265017: daepov pev 
yap otx korw eibeiay péperGar 75 yap obtws dareipov otk eotw. 

g2a. Mundus ... non habet principatum, The Hermetist 
rejects the Stoic doctrine that the Kosmos (or a part of the 
Kosmos) is the supreme God, This is the fundamental difference 
between the theology of the Platonists and that of the Stoics. 

stabilitatem suam in lege agitationis sempiternae. Cf. 
4ob; ‘fixa inmutabili(s) lege currendi.’ 19 b: ‘ Bivappévyy, (a) qua 
inmutantur omnia lege naturae, stabilitate firmissima sempiterna 
agitatione variata,’ 

((aeternitas quae secunda est)). This misplaced scrap, when 
inserted here, suits well with what has preceded, and at the same 
time supplies a satisfactory explanation of ‘ Haec .. . aeternitas’ 
at the beginning of 40 b, which I have placed next after it. 

40b. Haec ergo est aeternitas (in omnibus (quibus) 
mundus iste perfectus est)); [| |] qu/, fixa inmutabili(s) 
lege currendi, sempiterna commotione versatur. I have 
tried to reconstruct this badly damaged passage in accordance 
with the sense required by the context. It is evident that the 
subject of sempiterna commotione versatur cannot be aeternitas, and 
must be mundus; it is therefore necessary to alter guae into gui, 
and to insert, before gui, some phrase containing mundus. Now 
there occurs in ch. 39 the phrase iz omnibus mundus iste perfectus 
est, which is evidently out of place where it has been put, and which 
contains the word mundus needed here as an antecedent for gue ; 
and if we transpose the phrase to 4ob, and_ insert guibus, a 
satisfactory meaning can be obtained. ‘This sort of eternity’ 
(i. e. the secunda@ aeternitas, which consists in the regular and endless 
process of things in time) is to be found in all the component parts 
of the universe ; that is to say, they are all (as we were told before) 
imperishable, and all in constant movement determined by un- 
changing law. 

((quae nec coepit esse nec desinet.)) The clause is certainly 


208 ASCLEPIUS 


m.splaced in the MSS. It is doubtful where it ought to stand; 
but it seems to be appropriate where I have placed it. Whether 
the subject of the words nec coepit esse nec desinet was commotio 
mundt, or lex currendi, they seem to imply that the writer holds the 
view that the Kosmos has had no beginning; see note on 29, 
‘ vivensque semper et fuit et est et erit’. 

oriturque et occidit alternis |[saepe|] per membra. The 
writer seems to be here thinking especially of the sublunar part of 
the Kosmos, the region of yéveous and pOopa ; and the terms ‘ rising’ 
and ‘setting’, which in their literal sense refer to the movements 
of the heavenly bodies, are metaphorically applied to the changes 
which take place in this lower region. The movement (or temporal 
life) of the Kosmos ‘rises and sets’ in its several ‘members’ (the 
elements) ; that is to say, portions of the elements are combined 
to form individual bodies, and are restored to their former state by 
the dissolution of those bodies. Both processes are continually 
going on; but with regard to any given portion of earth or water, 
the two processes alternate. Individual bodies ‘rise’ and ‘set’, 
i.e. are composed and dissolved; or, to put it the other way, 
certain portions of earth and water ‘set’ or disappear when an 
animal body is formed by their combination, and ‘rise’ or reappear 
when the body is broken up. 

((saepe)) isdem quibus occiderat membris oriatur. The 
same portion of earth or water enters into the composition of 
many different bodies in succession. 

Sic est enim rotundita(ti)s volubilis ratio &c. The process 
of yéveors and ¢Oopd, (or rather, of peraBod, since the writer 
would deny the existence of #6opa in the strict sense of the word,) 
is cyclic or recurrent, and is in that respect analogous to the 
movement of the heavenly bodies, which literally travel in a circle. 
There is, so to speak, a xixAos yevéoews, in a different sense from 
the ‘circle of births’ spoken of by Orphici and Pythagoreans; for 
the process by which things change into one another may be 
described as a circular movement; A, by a series of changes, 
passes into B, and B, by a further series of changes, passes 
into A. The Hermetist goes on to explain, much as Aristotle 
had done before him, that a circular movement differs from 
other movements in this respect, that it is (or at any rate may 
be) without beginning or end. If a body is moving in a circle 
(or in any curve which re-enters itself), you cannot say that the 








ASCLEPIUS III: 32b 209 


movement begins at any one point in its path (wt initivm quod 
sit volubilitatis ignores). ‘All points in the orbit both precede 
and follow one another’; that is to say, the moving body arrives 
at the point A both before and after it arrives at the point B. 
Cf. Corp. 1. 11a: dpxerae yap ob Ajye 7 [8] rovrwr zepupopd. 
_ ((Baque mobilita(ti)s ratione tempus vertitur.)) The move- 
ment of time is circular, and accordingly, is without beginning or 
end. Cf. ch. 31, ‘tempus... per ambitionem reditus aeternum 
est’. 

g2b. Omnis ergo. . . luminasti lumine. Having spoken 
of time and eternity, the writer here proceeds to speak of the 
faculties by which things temporal and things eternal are appre- 
hended. In correspondence with the series deus, mundus, homo 
he distinguishes three kinds or grades of vois, viz. sensus' divinus 
(6 Oeios vots); sensus mundanus (6 Koopuxds vods); and sensus 
humanus (6 dvOpdrews vots). Things eternal are apprehended 
by the divine vots ; things temporal, by the two other kinds of vois. 

What is the meaning of the adjective Geos in this connexion ? 
Does & Getos vods correspond to & Geds voel, and mean (1) God's 
faculty of thought? Or does it correspond to (6 dvOpwros) tov 
Gedy voc, and mean (2) man’s faculty of apprehending God? 
Or does it correspond to (4 dvOpwros) id rod Oeod puricGeis voei, 
and mean (3) a faculty in man which comes from God? I think 
the primary meaning of the term in this passage is the third of 
these. ‘The divine, the cosmic, and the human vois’ are three 
grades of vots as it exists in man. All men have in them ‘the 
(merely) human vots’; some men have in them ‘ the cosmic vods’ ; 
a few men have in them ‘the divine vots’. The divine vois is 
a faculty possessed by the elect among men; and it is divine, in 
the sense that it comes from God. But though this seems to be 
the primary meaning, the other two meanings are not excluded, 
and may have been combined with it in the writer’s thought. 
The God-given vots is employed, by those men who possess it, 
in contemplating God and the things of God; thus it is divine 
in sense (2), as well as in sense (3). Moreover, it is ‘consub- 
stantial with God’ (consistens, ut ita dicam, cum deo); i.e. it is 
the very mind of God himself, or an dadppoa of God’s mind, 
implanted in or communicated to man, Not man as a mere thing 

1 It is evident that sensus here stands for vos, as in Ascl. I. 6c, 7.2, IL 16a, 
and III. 18 b, 41 b. 

2806-8 p 


210 ASCLEPIUS 


of earth, but God in man, ‘sees God’. And thus ‘the divine 
vots’ is divine in sense (1) also. 

The ‘cosmic voids’ should be related to the ‘second God’ as 
the divine vots is related to the supreme God; and if so, what 
has been said about the divine vois may be applied, mutatis 
mutandis, to the cosmic vows. It seems to follow then that the 
cosmic vois is primarily a faculty in man, which he derives from 
the Kosmos; that it is employed, by the man who possesses it, 
in investigating the Kosmos ; and that it is ‘consubstantial’ with 
the mind of the Kosmos. ' The writer, since he calls the Kosmos 
{Gov and @eds, must necessarily regard it as a voepov EGov, i.e. as 
possessing voids; and though in this passage the ‘cosmic voids’ 
is spoken of chiefly as a faculty implanted in man, the conception 
of ‘the mind of the Kosmos’, i.e. the faculty of thought which 
the Kosmos possesses, and from which the faculty in man is 
derived, is probably not wholly absent from the writer's thought. 

With reference to ‘the mind of the Kosmos’ and ‘the mind 
of God’ (if and so far as these conceptions are present in the 
passage before us), we may compare Corp. IX, which contains a 
discussion of the ato@yous Kai vénois (i.e. the conscious life) of 
the Kosmos, and the aleyows cal vénows of God. But the point 
of view is different; the writer of Corp. IX is speaking of will and 
action, whereas the writer of Asc/. III is speaking of thought and 
knowledge. See also Abammonis Resp. 8. 4d (Zestim.): ‘The 
Egyptians’ xadapév re vodv baép tov xdopov mporibéact, kat eva 
duenoroy év Bw rh xdopy, Kad Sigpyyévov eri adoas rads ohatpas 
érepov. The first and second of these three kinds or grades of 
vods correspond to the Octos voids and the xoopixds vods as existing 
in God and the Kosmos respectively, but not as faculties implanted 
in man. (The third, 6 yots & Sippnuévos ert wdcas ras oaipas, 
is comparable to the odoudpyat of Asc/, III. 19b.) 

How does the ‘cosmic’ yois, regarded as a faculty in man, differ 
from the ‘human’ vois? Both alike have to do with things 
corporeal and temporal, and are in that respect contrasted with 
the ‘divine’ vois, which has to do with things incorporeal and 
eternal. But the knowledge correlative to the ‘cosmic’ vos is 
larger than the knowledge correlative to the ‘human’ vovs; and 
the distinction appears to consist in this, that the knowledge 
to which the ‘human’ vovs attains is that partial and limited 
knowledge of the sensible world which the individual man con- 








ASCLEPIUS III: 32b Qt 


structs out of the memory of his own past sense-impressions ; 
while the knowledge to which the ‘cosmic’ voits attains is a knowledge 
which goes beyond the individual man’s experience, and embraces 
(or would, at its utmost extent, embrace) all the phenomena of the 
sensible world. We might perhaps construct in more modern 
terms a scheme analogous to that of the Hermetist by distinguish- 
ing a faculty or organ of merely empirical cognition (the human 
vous), a faculty or organ of science (the cosmic vows), and a faculty 
or organ of religion (the divine vods).! But it would be more in 
accordance with the Hermetic writer’s mode of thought to state 
the matter as follows. The man who possesses only the ‘human’ 
vous is incapable of passing beyond the narrow limits of his 
earthly self; he is wholly sunk in the body, and differs from 
other animals only by the fact that he retains a memory of his 
past. The man who possesses the ‘cosmic’ vois is capable of 
attaining to a yrders rot Sevrépov eot; i.e. he may come to 
‘know’ or ‘see’, and thereby be united with, the cosmic and 
temporal God. He is in some degree raised above his limited 
and separate self; he has a religion, but it is still only a lower 
sort of religion. (Compare the distinction made in Asci. I. 5 fin. 
between ‘communion with the daemons’ and ‘communion with 
the gods’.) The man who possesses the ‘divine’ vos, and that 
man alone, is capable of attaining to a yrdos rod mpdrov Geot, 
i.€, to knowledge of and union with the supracosmic and 
eternal God. 

The Hermetist’s triple division of vods may be compared with 
the triple division employed by some of the Gnostics, who dis- 
tinguished between the duds or yoixds dvOpwros, the Yuyexds 
dvOpwros, and the wvevparixds dvOpwros.? The distinction between 
the yuxixéds and the mvevyaruds was already known to Paul; 
and his use of the terms may serve to illustrate the Hermetist’s 
distinction between the ‘human’ and the ‘cosmic’ vots together 
on the one hand, and the ‘divine’ rots on the other. See 


1 The process by which a man rises from the level of the cosmic vods to the 
higher level of the divine yots may be illustrated by what is said about the right 
use of the sciences in Asc/. 1.13; see Philo Leg. alleg. 3. 32. 97, quoted in the note 
on that passage. 

® The Naassenes, according to Hippolytus Ref. Aaer. 5. 6, said that gore rovrov 
Se. TOD seb abo «+279 piv voepdy, 7d 82 yvyindv, 7d 88 yoiedy, In that state- 
Ment, voepdv takes the place of mvevzarixév, Compare the tripartition of man into 
adpe, vx}, and vods, in the doctrine set forth in the speech of Sulla in Plut. Fac. 
in orbe funae 28, where the word yuy4 denotes a ‘cosmic’ and perishable part of 
man, as opposed to the vois, which is divine and immortal. 


Pa 


212 ASCLEPIUS 


t Cor, 2. 14: Wuyexds 8% dvOpwros ob déxerae Ta Tod mvevpaTos Tod 
Geot. . . . tis yap eyvw voiv Kvpiov; . . . tpeis 8& (sc. of 
mvevpatikot) vouv Xpiorov éxouev. The Getos vois of the Her- 
metist corresponds to ro mvedpa rot Geod in the language of Paul. 

The Hermetist’s notion of the stage attainable by the man who 
possesses the cosmic vois may be illustrated by Philo Vita Mosis 
2 (3). 14. 135, Cohn IV, p. 231: mpodiSdoxe tov rod Ocot Oeparevriy, 
ci kal py Tov Kocporoov Suvardv, dAAL Tod ye Kdopov Sinverds déiov 
evar meipicbar, of 7d pipnua evdudpevos, dpeihe, rH Siavola 7d 
mapdderypa (i.e, rov Kdcpov) ebOis déyadparodopav, abrés tpdrov twa 
mpos tiv Tod Kdcpov diow é dvOpdrov peOnppdcOa, Kal . . . Bpayds 
kéopos elvat. Philo is here employing the language of Stoicism, 
and speaks for the moment as if he held that man may be content 
with assimilation to the Kosmos (the aim of the religion of the 
‘cosmic vots’ in the Hermetist’s system); but in the words e 
kal pH ToD Kooporo.ot (déov ctvar) duvardvy, he hints at the higher 
religion of the ‘ divine yots’. 

In Ase/, Ill. 18b &c., as well as in other Hermetica, (see e.g. 
Corp. IV. 3 ff.,) the word vots without qualification is used in the 
sense assigned to 6 @efos vois in Ase/. III. 32. 

in ipsa veritate consistens. d)76ea means either ‘truth’ or 
‘reality’. Here, it is ‘reality’; 7d ddnOés = 76 dvrus dv in the 
Platonic sense. The eternal alone is real. 

plenissimus omnium (in)sensibilium. It is necessary to 
write insensibilium; for we require a word which may stand in 
contrast to sewsibrlium below. The verbal inconsistency involved 
in speaking of a sensus which is full of imsensibilia is due to the 
translator, who has rendered vots by sensus. 

Sensus vero mundanus receptaculum est sensibilium 
omnium specierum et disciplinarum. The cosmic vois is rept 
Ta aig@nrd Or gwparixd, in contrast to the divine vods, which is repi 


1 The difference in the expression of a similar conception results from the 
different descent of the two doctrines. Paul’s ‘spirit’ is the Semitic zxach, 
rendered by the Greek word mveSya which Hellenizing Jews had adopted from the 
Stoics ; the Hermetist’s vods, on the other hand, has been taken over from Plato, 

Paul speaks of 76 mveDya 70d dvOpmmov and 7d mvedya Tot Kécpov (in contrast to 
76 mvedpa Tod God); these may be compared with the ‘human’ voids and the 
‘cosmic’ vots of the Hermetist ; but Paul does not seem te have made a clear and 
definite distinction between the two. 1 Cor. 2. 11: Tis ydp oldev dvOpwimav ra rod 
arOpmmov ei pr) 7d mvedpa Tod dvOpmnov 7d bv abTS; obras Kal TA TOD Oeod oddels 
eyvaney ei pi) 76 mvetpa Top God, Hpeis 52 od 7d mvedpua Tod Kéopou EAGBoper, GAAA 
pl pees 76 tx TOU Beod, iva eidGpev 7a ind Tod Oeod yapobevra Hyiv. 


Paul’s use of the term mvevparieiés is discussed by Reitzenstein, Die helen. 
Mysterienrel., 1910, p. 43 ff. and 160 fi. 








ASCLEPIUS III: 32b 213 


76 daira. (= voyrd in the Platonic sense) or dowpara. “In this 
respect the ‘cosmic vois’ differs from the wxh rod Kdopou in Pl. 
Tim. 378, which is both wept 73 aioGyrov and epi 7d Aoyurrixov. 

On sensibiles species, see ch, 34 ¢. 

Sensibilium must be understood again with discaplinarum ev 
ornpav); for a qualifying word is needed to distinguish these 
disciplinae from the disciplina of the sensus divinus. The senstbiles 
disciplinae (or sensibilium disciplinae ?) are the several branches of the 
scientific knowledge of aic@yra. 

The word omnium is to be noted; compare ‘ex omnibus. quae in 
mundo sensibilia sunt’ below. It seems to be a distinguishing mark 
of the ‘cosmic vois ’, as opposed to the ‘ human voids’, that it embraces, 
or is capable of embracing, ad/ aio@yra as its objects. 

- Humanus vero (sensus...). There is certainly a lacuna after 
vero; and it seems probable that the lost words contained an 
explanation of the distinction between the sensus humanus and the 
sensus mundanus. 

ex memoriae tenacitate, quod memor sit omnium quas 
gesserit rerum. Compare what is said below: ‘the knowledge 
which corresponds to the nature of the human vois fofa in memoria 
est praeteritorum.’ ‘The man who possesses only the lowest of the three 
grades of vois is capable of acquiring such knowledge only as can be 
constructed out of his recollection of his own experiences in the past. 
The acquisition of this sort of knowledge may qualify him for dealing 
with the practical concerns of earthly life; (‘per eam memoriae 
tenacitatem et gubernator effectus est terrae’; e.g. he has learnt by 
experience how to grow a crop ;) but he cannot even attain to a com- 
prehensive knowledge of the things of the sensible world; much less 
can he rise above the world of sense, and attain to the vision of the 
divine. On the other hand, the ‘divine vots’ sees all things sud 
specie aeternitatis. In the divine life there is neither past nor future ; 
consequently, in the divine consciousness there can be no place 
for memory. The man in whom the divine vods is implanted is 
capable of thus seeing things, at least by glimpses (fer caliginem) ; 
though, as long as he is imprisoned in an earthly body, he is com- 
pelled to employ the ‘human vois’ and the ‘cosmic voids’ also in 
dealing with the earthly things around him, 

The memoria spoken of in this passage has, of course, nothing to 
do with the Platonic doctrine of dvdpynars ; it means the man’s 
memory of his past sense-impressions in his earthly life. 


214 ASCLEPIUS 


senstiis divinitas is equivalent to sensus divinus, 

divinum sensum cunctis confundi noluit, ne erubesceret 
aliorum commixtione animantium. Cf. Asc. I. 12a: ‘in 
corpora alia, indigna animo sancto, [et] foeda migratio.’ 

Intellegentia enim sensus humani, qualis aut quanta sit, 
tota in memoria est praeteritorum. We have here a series of 
parallel phrases ;— 

(1) intellegentia sensus humani, qualis aut quanta sit. 

(2) éntellectus naturae et qualitatis sensus mundi. 

(3) éntellectus qualitatis sensus summi dei. 

It is impossible to make sense of this form of words as it stands in 
the Latin ; and its recurrence excludes the hypothesis of corruption 
of the Latin text. It must therefore be a case of mistranslation ; 
and the question is, whether we can guess the Greek which the 
translator has misrepresented. ; 

A clue to the meaning may perhaps be found in the similar 
passage below (Il. 17-20) :— 

‘intellectus noster ad (2’) gualitatem sensus mundi intellegendam et 
dinoscendam mentis pervenit intentione, 

intellectus autem mundi pervenit ad (3’) aeternitatem et deos no- 

Scendos qui supra se sunt,’ 
In (2’), we have again the same unmeaning form of words which 
occurs in (1), (2), and (3). In (3’), however, we arrive at something 
which has a meaning; the writer speaks of attaining to ‘ knowledge 
of eternity and of the supracosmic deities’. But (2’) and (3’) are 
clearly parallel; hence it may be inferred that (2’) ought to be 
equivalent to ‘knowledge of temporal and mundane things’. 

Let us assume that the Greek original of (2) was something like 
(POdver péxpr) ris ydoews THs Kara td rowdy Tod Kogpuxod vod: ‘such 
knowledge as corresponds to the character of the cosmic vots’; or in 
other words, ‘such knowledge as the cosmic vois is qualified to 
acquire’. That sort of knowledge is precisely a knowledge of tem- 
poral and mundane things ; and thus the sense we wanted is obtained. 
The translator, we may suppose, mistook the meaning of xara; he 
thought that } yvaous ) Kara 7d roy was equivalent to 4 yaots Tot 
wot, and so he rendered it by gualitatem intellegendam. (The 
Greek word for ‘knowledge’ here was probably yvaous; in ch. 41 b 
yGous is rendered by intellegentia. For the use of xard, cf. Corp, I. 
32: alroupévy 75 pi) obadjvar ris yrocews THs Kar’ oboiav Hpov.) 

Now (2’) closely resembles (1), (2), and (3) above; let us assume 








ASCLEPIUS HI: 32b 215 


then that the translator has made the same mistake in (r), (2), and 
(3)also. On that assumption, the Greek may have been somewhat as 
follows :— 

(1) 4 yvaous } xara. 76 Tod dvOpwreiov vod moby Kal rower : 

‘the knowledge which corresponds to the character and extent of 
the human vois’ ; 
mistranslated by 

‘intellegentia sensus humani, qualis aut quanta sit’. 
(The translator, besides misunderstanding xard, presumably thought 
that rd rod dvOpwretov yoo was much the same as rév avOparreov voor, 
and took zro.dv and zogov to be dependent questions.) 

(2) } yrdous } Kara 7d Tov TOU KoopLKOd voU : 

‘the knowledge which corresponds to the character of the cosmic 
yous’; 
mistranslated by 

‘intellectus naturae et qualitatis sensus mundi’. 
(For xaturae et qualitatis, cf. ch. 33 a, where it is said that the senstdzlzs 
mundus is ‘plenissimus corporum . . . naturae suae et qualitati con- 
yenientium’. Perhaps watura is dios; but it is also possible that 
natura and gualitas together stand for zotdv.) 

(3) } yroors ¥ xara 73 rowdy Tot vow rod tYiorou Geod (or possibly, 
rob tuvicrov without Geov) : 

‘the knowledge which corresponds to the character of the vois of 
God supreme’ ; 
mistranslated by 

‘intellectus qualitatis sensus summi dei’. 

On this hypothesis, a satisfactory sense may be got out of this 
paragraph, which is meaningless in the Latin. (It cannot, however, be 
considered certain that the sense thus obtained is that which the 
writer intended.) 

[[aeternitas quae secunda est]|, These words are certainly out 
of place here. It is probable, though not certain, that their original 
place was that to which I have transposed them. 

[ex sensibili mundo sensus (mundi) zatura qualitasque 
dinoscitur.] This is probably an alternative for the preceding 
sentence, ‘Intellectus . . . poterit provideri’, The translator seems 
to have made a second attempt to render the Greek sentence which 
puzzled him. The sensus datus qualitasgue of the MSS. may be 
a corruption of sensus (mundi) natura qualitasque ; and this may have 
been meant to represent To rowdy Tod KoopuKod vor. 





216 ASCLEPIUS 


Ubi. .. quid teomporum dimensione dinoscitur, ... ubi geni- 
turae: i. e. in the region of xpovos and yéveois. The things in this region 
are the objects of the ‘human vovs’ and the ‘ cosmic voids’, which are 
accordingly incapable of apprehending the real, or attaining to absolute 
truth. See the discussion of dA7jdea in Herm. ap. Stob. Zxc. II A. 

[[Vides ergo... taciturnitate celate]]. This must have been 
intended to be the conclusion of the paragraph. In the MSS., the 
passage ‘hoc autem differt . . . conscientiae’, which continues the 
discussion of the different kinds of vois, is placed after this conclusion ; 
but it must have been so placed by an error. 

Hoe autem differt intellectus a sensu. What are the Greek 
words which are here rendered by ézfe/lectus and: sensus? We 
have found reason to think that in the preceding sentences dvéedlectus 
stands for yvaous, and sensws for voids. It is not to be assumed that 
a Latin word in the translation always represents the same Greek 
term; but as the phrase guaditatem sensus mundi intellegendam 
corresponds closely with the form of words which was three times 
used above, we can hardly be wrong in deciding that in this 
place, as before, sensws mundi stands for 5 xocpuxds vows, and 
intellegendam et dinoscendam represents yvova or yroos. But what 
is intellectus noster? If we take éntedlectus to stand for yraors in 
this phrase, we get the statement that ‘Our yéors attains to a 
yvéors which corresponds to the nature of the cosmic rots’. 
But that is not satisfactory; it must be something other than 
yoous that attains to a certain kind of you. Nor again can 
intellectus nostey be ‘our vows’; for it is here said that our 
intellectus can attain to a kind of knowledge to which it was 
previously said that the human vovs can of attain (viz. the kind 
of knowledge which is correlative to the cosmic vows). ntellectus 
then must here stand for some Greek word other than yvéors, 
and other than vots; and the most likely word seems to be d:dvoua. 

On the assumption that inéed/ectus here stands for Sidvora (or 
at any rate, for some Greek word other than voids or yvdars), the 
words ‘ Hoc autem differt intellectus a sensu’ admit of a satisfactory 
explanation. ‘ dudvora differs from yods in the following way; our 
davon is capable of attaining, by mental effort, to that kind of 
yous which is correlative to the cosmic vos.’ And that kind 
of yvéous, as we were told above, is a comprehensive knowledge 
of aicOyrd,—i.e. a kind or extent of knowledge which is beyond 
the reach of ‘the human vois’, 








ASCLEPIUS III: 32b 217 


Some such statement as this was needed to complete the treatment 
of the subject, and prevent misunderstanding. If the writer, having 
described the narrow limitations of what he calls ‘the human 
yous’, had left the matter there, it might have seemed that he held 
it impossible for man to rise above those limitations. But he here 
makes it clear that the term 6 dyOpereios vows signifies only the 
lowest grade of human intellect, and is not co-extensive with all 
thought of which man is capable. The wider term, which includes 
higher grades of human thought, is ‘ our didvowe.’. 

But there is something wrong in zwéel/ectus autem mundt. As the 
words stand, it looks as if ixte/ectus mundi were parallel to énéellectus 
noster, and must consequently mean ‘the didvow. of the Kosmos’ 
(i.e. the thought which the Kosmos thinks), as opposed to ‘our 
&idvora’ (i.e. the thought which man thinks). The sentence would 
then amount to this,—that our (human) thought can attain toa 
comprehensive knowledge of aic@yrd, and ‘the thought of the 
Kosmos’ can attain to a knowledge of eternity. But this cannot 
have been the writer’s meaning ; for it is evident from what follows 
(‘sic contingit ... ut... quae in caelo sunt videamus’ &c.) that he 
meant to say that we can attain to a knowledge of eternity; and 
the question whether the Kosmos can do so or not is beside the 
point.! We are thus forced to the conclusion that é#éedectus nosier 
was intended to be the subject of the second clause ( pervenit ad 
aeternitatem &c.) as well as of the first clause. (Probably men#ts 
intentione also was meant to apply to the second clause as well as 
to the first; see Aaec autem intentio below.) Consequently, zv/fedlectus 
autem mundi must be a misreading or a mistranslation. The 
Hermetist may have written something to this effect: 7 8 bdévora tot 
vos Siadépe’ éerirabeioa yap 4 Sidvow jpov pOdver péxpt THs yvdorews 
Tis Kara TO ToLv TOU KoopLKOD voU, Ta de TOD Kdcmov On yvovca, 
POdver péxpt Tod Tov aidva yvdvar. Starting from the low level of 
‘the human vois’ (i.e. from the narrow range of personal sense- 
experience), man’s thought may rise to the higher level of ‘the 
cosmic vovs’ (i.e. to a comprehensive knowledge of the sensible 
world), and again, from this fresh starting-point, may rise to the 
vision of the eternal. 

1 If the traditional text is retained, I can see no way of escaping from this 
difficulty except to assume that the writer identifies the man at this stage with the 
vovs of the Kosmos which has entered into him, and intends us to understand that 


what the Kosmos thinks, the man thinks also. But on this interpretation, the 
meaning would be far-fetched and obscurely expressed. 


218 ASCLEPIUS 


Something like the sense required might be obtained by altering 
intellectus autem mundi into intellecto autem mundo (rov 88 dopo 
youca) ; but the exact words of the original can hardly be recovered. 

deos .. . qui supra se sunt. The ‘supracosmic gods” are 
the incorporeal and eternal Powers, the hypostatized duvd pes of 
God. In speaking here of 6covs in the plural, and not Gedy in the 
singular, the writer of Asc/. IIL suggests, by an incidental phrase, 
the possibility of a more elaborate theology than he has himself 
cared to formulate,—such a theology as is implied, for instance 
in Corp. I. 26.a, where we are told that the disembodied and purified 
soul hears the dvvdues ‘singing their hymn to God’. He is 
conscious of the futility of all attempts to describe the Absolute 
(see ‘sive deus, sive aeternitas, sive uterque’ &c, in ch. gr, and 
cf, ch. 20a) ; and whether the Supreme, ‘qui unus est omnia’, is 
imagined by men as a Trinity, or (as in some Gnostic systems) 
as an Ogdoad, or a Triacontad, would be to him a matter of 
indifference. 

The dé intellegibiles of ch. 19 a may be compared; but I do not 
think that the oteidpya of ch. 19b are here in the writer's 
thought. 

ut quasi per caliginem quae in caelo sunt videamus. 

Zn caelo here means ‘in the region of the incorporeal and eternal i 
not ‘in the corporeal sky’. It is possible that the original Greek 
was 7a trepoupdvia, 

The phrase ‘per caliginem . . . videamus’ recalls the words of 
Paul, 1 Cor. 13. 12: BAdroper yop dpre 80 éodrrpov &v alviypars, 
«7A. But there is not the slightest reason to think that the 
Hermetist has been either directly or indirectly influenced by 
Paul. Platonic parallels are to be found in abundance. 

quantum possibile est per condicionem sensus humani. 
Even in the ‘illuminated’ man, the ‘human yvods’ is still at work, 
and thwarts and hampers the divine vods which has been super- 
imposed upon it. The writer is here regarding man as a soul 
encumbered by an earthly body, and does not consider the case 
of a disembodied soul. But as the ‘human vois’ evidently apper- 
tains to man as an earthly being, it is to be presumed, though it is 
not here expressly said, that the disembodied soul may rid itself 
of this hindrance, and become wholly Getos vows. Cf. Corp. X. 19 a: 
kat % rowtry (sc. ebceB)s) Yruxy . + + An vois yivera. (The 
vous of that passage corresponds to the Ocios vows of Ased. IIT, 32 b.) 








ASCLEPIUS III: 37-38b 219 


Haec autem intentio . .. angustissima est nobis. Cf. 
Asd. 1. 3b: ‘divinitatis . . . ratio, divina sensus intentione 
noscenda.’ ‘This ééentio’ must be the mentis intentio spoken of 
above, by which our didvove attains to higher levels. But the phrase 
‘this effort is narrow’ is hardly intelligible; and there is probably 
some error of reading or translation. 

[Et vos, o Tat et Asclepi et Hammon, .. . taciturnitate 
celate.| There is reason to think that in the earliest form of 
the document Asclepius was the only pupil present, and that all 
passages in which Tat and Ammon are mentioned have been 
inserted or altered by the compiler by whom the Prologue was 
added. (See note on Prologue.) Here, the address to the 
three pupils together follows awkwardly after o Asclepf a few 
lines above. 

On the injunction of secrecy, see Asc/. 1b and Corp, XIII fix. 

divina mysteria. Cf. Asc/. III. rg a, ‘divina nudo mysteria’. 
‘Mystery’ here means ‘secret doctrine’. There is no suggestion 
that rites of initiation were employed in the writer’s circle; and 
I have found no trace of anything of that nature in the Hermetica. 
In Asc?. III. 21, sexual union is described as a mysterium, i.e. 
a ‘sacrament’. In ch. 37, the rites by which daemonic souls are 
incorporated in cult-statues are called mysteria. 

37-38 b. The Hermetist here speaks of the di terreni (oi éxiyevor 
Geo), that, is, the gods worshipped in the Egyptian temples. The 
di terreni are ‘made by men’. The writer has already touched 
on the topic of the making of gods by men, in chs. 23 b~24a; 
and he here refers back to that passage (‘iterum ad hominem 
». » redeamus’). 

The form of words with which the paragraph is introduced 
(‘sed iam de talibus sint satis dicta talia’) tells us nothing as to 
the contents of the passage which it followed in the original text. 
When the misplaced chapters 33-36 have been removed, ch. 37 
is left standing next after the passage on eternity and time, and 
the faculties by which things eternal and things temporal are 
apprehended (26 b-32b). But there is no connexion of thought 
between the contents of 37-38b and those of 26b-32b; and 
it is possible that something which has been lost or misplaced 
originally stood between these two passages. If so, the interval 
between the section which treats of the eternal being of the 
supreme God (26 b-32 b) and that which deals with the terrestrial 


- 


ee ene 


i 


220 ASCLEPIUS 


gods (37-38 b) would seem to be a suitable place for the list of 
oboudpxat (19b), i.e. for a description of the hierarchy of voyrol 
Geot by which the material universe is governed. But the author 
or compiler of Asc/. III pays little attention to systematic arrange- 
ment; and we should hardly be justified in transposing 19b to 
this position merely on the ground that a more orderly sequence 
would be obtained by so doing. 


87. rationemque . . . ex quo divino dono. The mention 
of god-making in ch. 23b followed on the mention of God’s gift 
of ratio disciplinague to men in ch. 22 b. 


Minus enim miranda... quae de homine dicta sunt 
(cetera). It is necessary to insert cefera; for without it, the 
words would imply that god-making has not been previously 
spoken of. : 


Quoniam ergo proavi nostri multum errabant, ... in- 
venerunt artem qua efficerent deos. Quoniam is a mistrans- 
lation of éreé; ‘after our ancestors had for some time been godless, 
they invented an art of making gods.’ Augustine misunderstood 
this passage, being misled by the word guoniam; see Aug. De 
civ, det 8, 23 ad fin.—24 (Testim.). 

In the writer’s view, Hermes Trismegistus the teacher is a 
mortal man, and is descended from mortal ancestors. It is true 
that he is a grandson of the god Thoth-Hermes (see below) ; 
but that personage also was once a man on earth, and became a 
god only after his death. Similarly, the god Asclepius (Imhotep), 
the goddess Isis, and apparently all the ‘terrestrial gods’ (i.e. 
the gods worshipped in the Egyptian temples) were mortals living 
on earth before they became deities. 

This doctrine was no novelty in Egypt. In the Decree of 
Memphis (Rosetta Stone), 196 z.c., it is said that Ptolemy V has 
subdued the rebels in the Busirite Nome ‘as Hermes, and Horus 
the son of Isis and Osiris, subdued those who revolted in the 
same place before’; that is, Horus is there spoken of as an early 
king of Egypt, who, with the help of his counsellor Thoth, waged 
war against the rebel Set. And not only in the time of the 
Ptolemies, but long before the Hellenistic period, one of the 
various methods of interpretation by which Egyptians explained 
their myths had been to treat them as records of historical events 
on earth, and to regard the gods who figured in them as ancient 








ASCLEPIUS III: 37 221 


rulers of the land. Re or Ptah was the first king of Egypt, 
and was succeeded by his descendants, down to Horus the son 
of Osiris; and the dates and deeds of this dynasty of god-kings 
were recorded in the annals (Brugsch, Red und Myth. der alten 
Aeg., pp. 30-32). In a country where the kings, both living 
and recently deceased, were worshipped as gods, it was natural to 
assume that the gods had once been kings.’ The theory of 
Euhemerus, which came into vogue among the Greeks soon after 
the time of Alexander, must have been derived, in part at least, 
from these Egyptian traditions ; and perhaps his book was written 
with the object of giving support to the newly instituted cult of the 
Ptolemies, or preparing the way for it (Otto, Priester und Tempel, 
II, p. 274, 0. 3). 

The temple-gods then, according to the writer of Asc/. III, are 
deified men; or more exactly, the souls of the temple-gods are 
deified souls of men. Buta disembodied soul is not yet a temple- 
god. The deus ¢errenus or temple-god is a deified human soul 
embodied in a statue, and operating on earth; and it is by the 
action of men that this combination of soul and body is brought 
into existence. When the man Imhotep died, his soul ‘went back 
to heaven’, and had no dealings with earth. But men in some 
Egyptian town made a statue of Imhotep, placed it in a sanctuary, 
and by means of appropriate rites induced the soul of Imhotep to 
migrate from heaven to earth, and enter into the statue they had 
made; and this animated statue is a deus ferrenus. This is the 
meaning of the paradox that ‘man makes gods’. 

Is Imhotep then henceforth deprived of the bliss of heaven, 
which is elsewhere promised to the souls of the pious after death? 
Must he renounce his ‘union with God’, in order to work as a 
medical practitioner in an Egyptian town? If embodiment in 
matter is a descent to a lower grade of being, as we are else- 
where told, how can the beatified soul be induced to submit to 
it? The writer of Asc/. III, in his eagerness to defend the 
established cults, seems to have overlooked this difficulty; but if 
the question had been put to him, he might perhaps have answered 
that the soul of Imhotep is still ‘in heaven’, though at the same 


1 There may have been some truth in that belief, It is known that Imhotep was 
a deified man ; and it is possible that some at least of the chief gods of Egypt— 
e.g. Osiris—were deified rulers of pre-dynastic date. See Budge, Osir7s oe the 
Egyptian resurrection, 1911. 


222 ASCLEPIUS 


time it animates a statue upon earth; for an incorporeal being 
may very well be in two or more places at once. At any rate, 
this principle must necessarily be applied in cases where two 
or more statues of the same deity are worshipped in different 
temples. 

It is here assumed that the first age of mankind was an age 
of ignorance and savagery, and that religion, with all other 
civilizing influences, was subsequently introduced. In the Kore 
Kosmu (Stob. Zxc. XXIII fix.), a similar view is expressed, and 
the civilizing of mankind, including the introduction of religious 
worship, is ascribed to Isis and Osiris, who ‘came down from heaven 
to earth’ (i.e. were incarnated as human beings) for this beneficent 
purpose. 

((de mundi natura conveniente{m))). It is clear that these words 
were intended to go with effcerent deos, and not with adiunxerunt 
wirtutem. The writer speaks first of the material body which men 
make (viz. the statue), and then of the wr/us (dper} in the sense of 
“supernatural efficacy’) which they add to it by introducing an 
anima into the statue. The statue is de mundi natura (i.e. is made 
of wood or stone or metal); the added wirtus is not de mundi natura. 
Compare Augustine’s paraphrase, ‘spiritus invisibiles . . . visibilibus 
rebus corporalis materiae copulare’ (Jd, 8. 23 init.). The words de 
mundi natura are equivalent to corporalis materiae. 


(per quam (quas MSS.) idola et bene faciendi et male 
vires habere potuissent)). Some qualification of wirtutem is 
needed ; and this clause, when transposed, precisely meets the need. 
On the other hand, where it stands in the MSS., itis an awkward 
appendage to a sentence which would end better at mysterits. 
Potutssent is used by the translator in the sense of possent. See note 
on intuert potuisset, Asci. I. 8. 


evocantes animas daemonum vel angelorum. Zvocantes 
probably stands for éxxaoivres. Cf. Plut. Quaest. Rom. 61, 278F: 
Why is it forbidden to utter the name of the tutelar deity of Rome? 
mérepov . . . éxkAijoeis cio Kat yoyreiat Gedy ; als voui€ovtes Kal abrot 
(se. the Romans) Geovs twas éxxerAfiorbar mapa Tov TroAepiov Kal pew 
KnKévat mpds aitovs, éboBotvro 1d abrd wabeiv id’ éxépwv. Thus the 
process by which Juno of Veii, for instance, was induced to migrate 
to Rome would be called an é«Ayous ; (the word evocare is used in 
the same sense by Livy, x. 55. 4 and §. 21. 5 3) and the same term 








ASCLEPIUS III: 37 223 


is here applied to the process by which a deified soul is induced to 
migrate from heaven to earth, and take up its abode in an Egyptian 
temple. 

The disembodied and beatified souls of men are here called dayo- 
vov woxat. The beings formed by the embodiment of these souls in 
cult-statues are called émiyetor Geo. 

The words vel angelorum have probably been added by the 
translator. See ch, 25, xocentes angelt. 

Avus enim tuus, Asclepi, medicinae primus inventor. The 
grandfather of Hermes’ pupil Asclepius is the god Imhotep (“IuovOys), 
whom the Greeks identified with their god Asklepios. See Herm. 
ap. Stob. Zxc, XXIII. 6 and Zxc. XXVI. 9. The Hermetist seems to 
have been right in believing this god to be a deified man. Imhotep 
was an ancient Egyptian proverb-maker, physician, and architect ; he 
is said to have lived under king Zoser, of the III" dynasty (fourth 
millennium B, Cc.) ; and he is mentioned asa well-known sage in ‘The 
Song of the Harper’, The cult of Imhotep as a god was probably first 
established in the time of the Saite dynasty (633~525 B.c.), and was 
further developed under the Ptolemies. See Sethe, Untersuchungen 1 
(fmhotep, dev Asklepios der Aegypter); Reitzenstein, Poimandres, 
p. 120; Breasted, Hist. of Egypt, 112 £., 206, and 575; Otto, Priester 
und Tempel im hellenistischen Aegypten, 1, p. 214. The god 
Tmhotep was regarded as a son of Ptah. The chief seat of his wor- 
ship was Memphis, where he hada temple near the Serapeum ; and 
in the fourth century a. p., he had almost eclipsed his father Ptah, 
and become the chief deity of Memphis (Ammian. Marcell. 22. 14. rie 
‘Memphim, urbem frequentem praesentiaque numinis Asclepiiclaram’). 
Like his Greek namesake (on whom see Aelius Aristides passim), the 
Egyptian god Imhotep-Asclepius prescribed for his patients through 
dreams obtained by incubation. The grandson, Hermes’ pupil, must 
have been evolved from the god by duplication, just as Hermes the 
teacher is a duplicate of the god Thoth-Hermes, whom the writer of 
Asc. III calls the teacher’s grandfather. 

in monte Libyae circa litus crocodillorum. The ‘ Libyan 
mountain’ is the desert table-land which bounds the Nile valley on the 
West. The only inhabited district of Egypt (apart from oases) which 
is situated ‘in the Libyan mountain’,’ and the only place in the 
Libyan mountain where a ‘shore’ and crocodiles could be found, is the 


' «In the great plateau of the Libyan Desert, which rises 300-400 feet above the 
sea-level, is situated the province of the Fayfim’ (Baedeker's Egypt). 


EEE 


224 ASCLEPIUS 


Fayum. Consequently, the place indicated must necessarily be in the 
Fayum, and is probably at or near the chief city of that district, viz. 
Crocodilopolis, also called Arsinoe. The writer says that in this 
place the.body of the man Asclepius (the elder) was buried, and that 
a temple stands there, in which the god Asclepius is worshipped. 
We should rather have expected him to name Memphis, which, 
according to other authorities, was the chief place of worship of this 
god, and presumably the place where his cult was first established ; 
but Memphis is not ‘ in the Libyan mountain’, There were temples 
of Asclepius at Thebes and at Philae as well as at Memphis (Otto, 
Priester und Tempel, Index III, s. v. Imhotep-Asklepios) ; but the 
description cannot be made to apply to either of these places. 
There seems to be no record, except in the passage before us, of 
a temple of Asclepius in the Fayum ; for no such temple is mentioned 
either by Otto, or by Bouché-Leclercq, who, in his Histoire des 
Lagides, III, p. 214, gives a list of deities worshipped in the Arsinoite 
Nome. But on this point the evidence of the writer of Asc/. III is 
sufficient ; and we may take it on his authority that in the third 
century a.p. Asclepius (i.e. Imhotep) was worshipped in a temple 
at or near Arsinoe, and that those who frequented the temple sup- 
posed him to have been buried there; though the people of 
Memphis may have been equally convinced that his burial-place was 
in their city. It is possible that one of the old pyramids of the XIIth 
dynasty near Arsinoe, the original occupant of which had been for- 
gotten, had by this time come to be regarded by the inhabitants of 
the district as the tomb of Imhotep-Asclepius. 

Sobk (Xodxos), one of the chief deities of the Fayum, was embodied 
in a crocodile, and Arsinoe-Crocodilopolis was the most famous 
place of crocodile-worship in Egypt. See Hdt. 2.69; Diodorus r. 89. 
Strabo 17. 38f., p. 821 f.: wodus éoriy "Apowedn’ xpoxodeiAwy b¢ wohis 
éxadeiro mpdrepov' opddpa yap ev 7G voud TovTw tinder Tov KpoKddedoy, 
kat éorw lepds rap’ atrois év Aiuyy kal’ atrov tpepdpevos, XetpoyOys Tois 
iepedov’ xadeira 5 Zodxos. ... The people of Arsinoe robs xpoxodeldous 
Tysoot, Kai Sia TodTo 7 Te Si@pus abrav éor. peor? TOY KpoKodeiwy Kal 
4 Tod Moépidos Aiwvy. It is true that crocodiles were held sacred at 
several place in Upper Egypt also, viz. Diospolis Parva, Chenoboscia, 
Coptus, a Crocodilopolis south of Thebes, and Ombos (Parthey on 
Plut. Zs. e# Os. p. 267), as well as at Thebes (which was almost 
depopulated in Roman times); but none of these places answer to 
the description in the text; and the words ‘in monte Libyae circa 








ASCLEPIUS III: 37 425 


« 


litus crocodillorum’ would certainly be understood by readers in the 
third century A.D, as referrring to Arsinoe beside Lake Moeris. 

reliquus enim, vel potius totus,...remeavitin caelum. The 
disembodied soul, if it has lived a pious life on earth, returns to 
heaven, whence it originally came. See Asc/. I. 11b. Sometimes 
this was asserted especially of the souls of great men and beneficent 
rulers; e.g. Cic. Somn. Scip. 3: ‘sic habeto, omnibus qui patriam 
conservaverint, adiuverint, auxerint, certum esse in caelo definitum 
locum, ubi beati aevo sempiterno fruantur: . . . (civitatium) rectores et 
conservatores hinc profecti huc revertuntur.’ With vel potius totus 
may be compared Sen. Consol. ad Mare. 24. 5 ff. : ‘Imago dumtaxat 
filii tui periit et effigies non simillima; ipse quidem aeternus melio- 
risque nunc status est, despoliatus oneribus alienis et sibi relictus. .. . 
Proinde non est quod ad sepulcrum filii tui curras: pessima eius et 
_ ipsi molestissima istic iacent, ossa cineresque, non magis illius partes 
quam vestes aliaque tegumenta corporum. Integer ille, nihilque in 
terris relinquens sui, fugit et totus excessit.’ The Hermetist has 
learnt from Greek philosophy to disregard the corpse, which the 
ancient Egyptians took so much pains to preserve. He thinks that 
the body of Imhotep lies buried at the place of which he speaks ; 
but he holds that the god is present there, not because the corpse is 
there, but because his countrymen have set up a statue at that place, 
and called down the soul of Imhotep from heaven to animate the 
statue. He must have been aware that there were cult-statues of 
the same god in other places also; but of that he says nothing. 

The notion that the soul, on its departure from the body, ‘goes 
- to heaven’, was current in Egypt (side by side with other and incon- 
sistent notions) from early times. See Erman, Life in ancient 
Lgypi, Teng. tr. 1894, p. 343 f., where the general sense of a very 
ancient passage in the Book of the Dead is given as follows: ‘The 
deceased stands at the gate of heaven, he feels that he has become 
a god, and boasts of his divine nature. He esteems himself the 
equal of each of the ancient gods... He has forsaken his earthly 
house in order to enter the heavenly one; he has cleansed himself 
from all impurities, and now enters the gate of heaven, and the 
glorified spirits reach out to him their hands, and conduct him to his 
father the Sun-god.’ Perhaps originally kings alone were thought 
to ‘go to heaven’; but the doctrine was afterwards extended to men 
in general, or at any rate to pious or righteous men, In the séele of 
Mendes (Bouché-Leclereq, ist. des Lagides 1, p. 180,) the death of 


2806.3 Q 


226 ASCLEPIUS 


Arsinoe the wife of Ptolemy II is thus described: ‘This goddess 
departed to heaven ; she rejoined the members of (Ra or Harmachis).’ 
Maspero (Bouché-Leclercq 2.) says: ‘This is the formula employed 
from the earliest times’ to indicate by a euphemism the death of 
a king. The deceased Arsinoe is treated in the same way as 
Amenemhiit I or Thoutmésis ITI, or all the other Pharaohs of whom 
it was said that they have departed or flown up to heaven, and have 
united themselves with the Sun-god, the father of their race.’ The 
soul which ‘ went to heaven’, or became a celestial god, was described 
sometimes as admitted to the company of the Sun-god, and sailing with 
him in his boat; or sometimes (at least in Ptolemaic and Roman 
Egypt), as attached to a star, or visible in the form of a star. Plut. 
Js. et Os. 21: ov pdvov 8& rovrov (sc. of Osiris) of iepets AN€youow, dAAG 
kal rav dhAwv Gedy door pry dyévvyror pnd’ dbOapro (i.e. of the gods 
who once were mortal men), 7a pév cépara rap’ abrois KeirOur 
kapdvra. Kat OeparevierOa, Tas 8% Wuxds év oipavd Adprew dotpa, Kai 
Kadeiobar xiva pev (the dog-star) tiv “Iowos x.7.A. Compare the 
Egyptian funeral prayer translated in Porphyr. De adst. 4. 10:4 
déorora te Kal Geol mdvres of THv Lui rots dvOpdmrous SdvTes, tpoo- 
dééacGe pe Kal wapddore Tois dudiois Oeois ciivorkov. 

The early Egyptians said that the soul of the deceased king goes to 
heaven; but they did not say that it vefwrns to heaven. If any such 
notion existed among them, it existed in the form of a belief that 
the king, who is a son of the Sun-god, is in some sense one with his 
divine father. The doctrine that the individual soul pre-existed in 
heaven before its sojourn on earth first makes its appearance in 
Egypt in the Hellenistic period, and must have been derived from 
Platonism. It was acclimatized in that country in the time of the 
Ptolemies ; and when Horace (Od. 1. 2. 45) says to Augustus ‘ Serus 
in caelum redeas’, he speaks of the Roman frinceps as Egyptians 
were already in the habit of speaking of their rulers. Similarly, 
Velleius (2.123), speaking of the death of Augustus, says ‘animam cae- 
lestem caelo reddidit ’; and the writer of the Vita Mare. Aurel, (about 
A. D. 300), c. 18, says that ‘tantus illus amor... claruit, ut nemo 
illum plangendum censuerit, certis omnibus quod ab diis commo- 
datus ad deos rediisset.’ A divine soul comes down from heaven to 
earth, and is incarnated in a human body ; when its work on earth 
is done, it quits the body, and returns to the place whence it came. 
Cf. Plutarch Vita Romuli 28, where the disembodied Romulus says 
Gevis Bokev . . . rorodrov Hypds yeverOar per’ dvOpaimov xpdvov, kal wodw 





ASCLEPIUS III: 37 927 


én’ dpxp wat 86& peyiory Kricavras adbis oixeiv otpavdv, exeiOev 
évras.... eyo 8é tyiv etuevys éoopar Saipwov Kupivos. The Roman 
Romulus-Quirinus, like the Egyptian Imbhotep-Asclepius, ‘has 
returned to heaven’, but none the less continues to render services 
to men on earth. 

What does the Hermetist here mean by cae/um? If he is true to 
his principles, he ought to hold that the ultimate destiny of the pious 
soul is union with the supracosmic and eternal God ; and the word 
‘heaven’ might be used metaphorically or symbolically to signify 
that consummation. But it is possible that he recognized inter- 
mediate stages on the way to the final union with God ; and he may 
have thought of the disembodied soul as resident for a time at least, 
if not permanently, among the a cae/estes in the corporeal sky, —or 
even as detained for a time at a lower level, among the daemons of 
the upper air ; this might account for his calling the souls in question 
animas daemonum. 

adiumenta praesta/ infirmis. ‘he ‘terrestrial god’ Asclepius 
(i.e. the dead man’s soul, embodied in the cult-statue at Arsinoe,) 
still carries on the medical practice with which the living man was 
occupied. Harpocration of Alexandria (second century a.p. at 
latest) tells a story of a medical revelation given by Asclepius at 
Diospolis (Magna, i.e. Thebes?): Cumont in Xo, Bd. IX, Heft 3, 
1909. Naville, Zhe old Egyptian faith, Eng. tr. p. 204, summarizes 
as follows a story which is told on a funerary sée/e of the Ptolemaic 
period. The wife of the high priest of Ptah bore no son. ‘Then 
the pair addressed their petition to the god Imhotep, son of Ptah, who 
hears prayers and grants sons to those who have none. The god 
appeared to the priest in a dream, and ordered him to do certain 
pieces of work in the god’s sanctuary, in return for which he 
(the god) would give him a son... . The work was accom- 
plished, and .. . the priestess gave birth to a son, who was called 
Imhotep.’ 

As an instance of corresponding beliefs among the Greeks, com- 
pare Maximus Tyrius (A.D. 180-200) 9. 6f. Hobein: When the soul 
has departed from the body, and has become a ‘ daemon’, éromrever piv 
avry 74 olxeia Oedpara, ... adrd xdddos adrois dpOadpois Spdoa Kal yave- 
pévn, olxre(povera piv airy tod zpooGev Biov, paxapi{ovea 8% Tod wapévTos, 
oixreipovea b¢ Kal ras cvyyevels Yuxas ai rept yiv orpépovran ert, Kal bd 
PAavOpwrias eédovea abrais cvvayehdler bai, kat éravopbotv aadaAo- 
pévas’ mpooreraxrat dé airy id Tot Oeod emuporrav Ti yqv, Kat dvapcyve- 


Q 4 





228 ASCLEPIUS 


cba mdcy piv dvdpav dice, mécy 8¢ dvOpdrwr Tixy Kai yvapy Kal TEXVY, 
kal trois pev xpnorois ewer Aap Paver, Tois 5 ddiKovpevors Tyswpeiv, Tois 8 
Gdixotow mpooribévar thy dixyv. GAN’ odxi Saydvev was mdvra Spd, 
GAN adrois Siaxéxpirar Kéxel Ta epya, dAdo GAAw. . . . ds yap elxov picews 
dre rept yav Foav, obx eédovew tavrns wavrdracw daahddrrecOat' 
éAXG Kal "AckAymids (the Greek Asklepios, not the Egyptian Imhotep,) 
lara viv, xol 6 “Hpaxdjs ioxupiverar, cat Acdvucos Baxxever, Kat 
‘Apdidoxos pavreverar, Kat of Adoxovpor vavtidovrat x.7.A. He adds, 
‘I myself have seen the Dioskuroi, in the form of bright stars, settle 
on a ship and steer it in a storm ; I have seen Asklepios, and not in 
dream ; I have seen Herakles with my waking eyes.’ Maximus’ notions 
about the disembodied human souls which have become ‘daemons’ 
differ little from early Christian beliefs about the ‘saints’.' He does not, 
like the Hermetist, suppose them to be embodied in statues or living 
animals ;? he assumes that they move about freely among men ; but 
his view of their functions agrees closely with the Hermetist’s view 
of the functions of the ‘terrestrial gods’. 

Hermes .. . in sibi cognomine patria consistens. The 
patria (i.e. native city) of the god Thoth-Hermes is presumably 
Hermupolis Magna, an important town about half-way between 
Memphis and Thebes. But there was also a Hermupolisin the Delta, 
capital of the Hermopolite Nome, which was of great religious 
importance and might well be counted the patria of Hermes equally 
with Hermupolts Magna. 

It is implied, though not expressly said, that the deities Hermes 
and Isis, as well as Asclepius, once lived on earth as mortals. 

quantis obesse ... iratam. The punishment of evil-doers, 
by disease or otherwise, may be regarded as a good to human society 
(cf. Kore Kosmu sub fin.), and may thus be included among the 
benefits obtained by god-making. 

Terrenis etenim diis . . . facile est irasci. The did cacdesies 
are émaGeis, and incapable of anger; cf. goa, ‘nec ira etenim 
commoventur nec flectuntur gratia’. And the same might be said 
of disembodied and beatified human souls. But the deus terrenus, 


1 Compare, for instance, the stories of miracles of healing worked at the tombs 
or sanctuaries of the martyrs, which are told by Augustine, Civ. ded 22. 8. 

2 The Christians who believed that a dead saint worked miracles by means of 
his own bones or other relics must have thought that the disembodied soul was in 
some sense present in the material things to which they ascribed a supernatural 
power ; and in this respect, they approximated more closely than Maximus to the 
Egyptian doctrine of Asc’ TIT. 








ASCLEPIUS III: 37 229 


like man on earth, is made ew w/rague natura, i.e. not of incorporeal 
substance alone, but of incorporeal and corporeal substance together. 
(Cf. Asd. Ul. 22b: ‘hominem . . . ex utraque natura conposuit, 
divina atque mortali’.) He has a body, viz. the statue; and in 
virtue of this body, he is liable to wd6y. It is true that the 
sun, moon, and stars, which are df cae/estes, have bodies; but their 
bodies are made of pure fire, the noblest sort of matter. It seems 
to be implied that it is only bodies composed of base and earthy 
matter that give rise to 7d6y. 

Apuleius (De deo Socr. 12.) makes a corresponding distinction 
between daemones, who are subject to rd), and di caelestes, who 
are draGeis. ‘Ex hoc ferme daemonum numero poetae solent 
haudquaquam procul a veritate osores et amatores quorundam 
hominum deos fingere: . . . igitur et misereri et indignari et 
angi et laetari omnemque humani animi faciem pati: . . . quae 
omnes turbelae tempestatesque procul a deorum caelestium tran- 
quillitate exulant. Cuncti enim caelites semper eodem statu 
mentis aeterna aequabilitate potiuntur, qui numquam illis nec ad 
dolorem versus nec ad voluptatem finibus suis pellitur. 
Quapropter debet deus nullam perpeti vel odii vel amoris tempo- 
-ralem perfunctionem, et idcirco nec indignatione nec misericordia 
contingi, . . . sed ab omnibus animi passionibus liber nec dolere 
umquam nec aliquando laetari nec aliquid repentinum velle vel 
nolle. Sed et haec cuncta et id genus caetera daemonum medio- 
critati rite congruunt. Sunt enim inter nos et deos ut loco 
regionis ita ingenio mentis intersiti, habentes communem cum 
superis inmortalitatem, cum inferis passionem. Nam proinde ut 
nos pati possunt omnia animorum placamenta vel incitamenta, ut 
et ira incitentur et misericordia flectantur et donis invitentur et 
precibus Jeniantur . . . aliisque omnibus ad similem nobis modum 
varient.’ It is these daemons, he says, that are propitiated by the 
rites of worship in the temples. But the daemones of Apuleius 
differ from the di ¢erreni of Asc/. III in two respects: they have 
bodies composed of air, whereas the body of the Hermetist’s 
deus terrenus is either a statue or a living animal; and they are 
not beatified human souls, but beings of a different order from 
mankind. 

Plut. Zs. e¢ Os. 25: BéAriov obv of 7a rept Tov Tupdva xal “Oorpw 
cal "low icropotpeva pare Gedy rabqpata pat’ avOpwruv, dAd 
Saipdvov peydduv evar vopitovres, ods Kal TAdtwv xat Tvdoydpas 

























230 ASCLEPIUS 


kai Zevoxpdrys xal Xpvourros, éxdpevor trois dAat Geodyors, ee 
Heverrépous piv avOpimwv yeyovéva A€yovor, Kal TOAD TH Suvduer 
tiv pow treppépovras Hav, ro 8 Belov obx dpeyes ob? adxpatoy 
exovras, GANG Kai Woxys dice Kal cdparos aicOjyoe "oy ¥ 
(cuvrernxds ?) HSoviv Sexonéry cai wévov, xa doa Tatras eyyeyd, 

tais peraBodais raOy rods piv paddov rods Se Wrrov érvrapd 
yvorra ydp, ds ev dvOpiros, Kat daipoow dperis Stadopat 
xaxias. See also Plut. Def orac. 12f The daemons of w 
Plutarch here speaks, like those of Apuleius, are not hum 
souls, but superhuman beings of a lower order than the 
caelestes, 

Maximus Tyrius 8,8: eds piv obv aitds Kara Xdpav Bpipevos 
olxovopel tov odpavoy Kal Thy év otpavG rdéw' <ict 8° ait ¢ 
dOdvaror "Sevrepor’ (lege -par), of kadovipevor ‘Sevrepor! (lege Batue 
év peBopig yijs Kal otpavod reraypévor, beod pev dobevérrepor, dvOp 
& ioxupérepor, Oedv piv Sanpérar, dvOpdmuv 8& érurrdran . os 
yap (sc. 76 Saydvev yévos) éoriv rd av Oparrous tporpbeyyspevov, 4 
pavralopevov, cai eiovpevov ev péon rH OvyTh dice, Kad \ drrwe)oi 
(é- Reiske) dca avdywn SetrOar Oedv rd Ovnrov yévos. . . . of p 
iatpot voonudrwy, of 8& tov dmdpuv avpBovror, of St trav ad 
dyyedor, of S& réxvys ouvepydrat, of S& bd00 ovvéuropo. Lb, 9. 
riBero Oedv piv Kari 7d dmrabes Kat dbdvarov, Saiuova 88 Kara 
G@dvarov Kal éumabés, dvOpurov St Kara rd eurabes Kal Ovnrdv. Tb. 
4: Aedrerar 3) tiv daipdsvov diow éurab re vac nal aOdvo 
fa rod piv AOavdrov Koworp To eG, rod 88 eurabois 7S dvOps 
Maximus says that daemons are souls which have put off the bod 
—i.e. the earthly and corruptible body (9. 5: elrep éorly 
Sapdviov atrd Yuxy drodvrapévy rd gpa); but as he also says that 
a soul which has become a daemon is Opéupa albépov (9. 6), 
he seems to have thought that a soul in this condition is not 
immaterial, but is composed of aifsjp, i.e. of pure bright air. If 
that is his meaning, he is probably following Posidonius in this pa cn 
of his theory. 

haec sancta animalia. In some Egyptian temples, the thing 
worshipped was a statue; in others, it was a living animal. These 
animals the writer of Asc/, III holds to be ‘terrestrial gods’; a 
beatified human soul has entered into or ‘possessed’ the beast, 
and is embodied in it, just as in the other case a beatified human — 
soul is embodied in the statue. Thus the people who worship the — 
beast are really worshipping the soul of one of their townsmen who 





ASCLEPIUS III: 37 231 


died long ago. This is the Hermetist’s explanation and defence of 
the Egyptian practice of beast-worship. 

In Philostr. Vita Afollonii 6. 19, the head of the society of 
Tvpvol at the border of Upper Egypt gives a different explanation 
of the practice: cody yap, «trep Te Atyurrior, cal rd pi) Opactver Oar 
és ra tev Gedy €idy, EvpBodrsxa. St adra woretrOar Kal trovootvpeva’ Kat 
yap av kal cepvérepa otrw paivoiro. I. e. the practice of the Egyptians, 
who employ an animal as a symdo/ of the god, is more reverential 
than that of the Greeks, who presume to represent the divine 
being by a statue intended to resemble him. But this is philosophic 
reflection. In the popular consciousness of the Egyptians, the 
god was not merely symbolized by the beast, but was incorporated 
in it. , 

Plutarch, Js. e¢ Os, 71 ff., says that the majority of the Egyptians 
‘ worship the beasts themselves, and treat them as gods’; but this 
he regards as a contemptible and mischievous superstition, He 
mentions certain ‘mythical’ and ‘historical’ explanations which 
have been put forward to account for the usage ; and he speaks 
of a theory (which he holds to be equally incredible’), that ‘ those 
human souls which continue to exist after death can be born again 
only by becoming incarnate in the sacred animals’.’ Plutarch 
mentions also the explanation based on ‘usefulness’ (i.e. the theory 
that cows, for instance, are held sacred because they are serviceable 
to men). But he himself (like the naked philosopher in Philostratus) 
prefers to regard the sacred animals as symbols of deity ; and living 
things, he says, are better symbols of deity than things without life. 
dyarytéov otv ov ratra tyovras, GAA dui rovrwv 1d Geior, as 
évapyerrépwr éxdrtpov® Kai pice yeyovérov (c. 76). Plutarch’s view 
is that of an enlightened Greek. He thinks it absurd to suppose 
that a beast is a god; but at the same time he is unwilling to 
condemn an established religious usage, and seeks to show that 
a man may reasonably continue to practise the rites, provided 
that he rejects their ostensible meaning, and interprets them in his 
own way. The position of the Hermetist is nearer to that of the 


1 7d rais Yuxais tov Oavdvtav, Goa diapévovaw, els tadra pova yiverOa Ti 
radcyyeveciay, ‘This theory agrees in part with that of the writer of Asc/. III, who 
holds that certain human souls have been reincarnated in the beasts which are 
worshipped in the temples. Similarly, Diodorus 1. 85. 4 says of the Apis-bull, 
ris 8% Too Bods TovTou TiMhs alriay éviot pépovar A€yovres Sri TeACUTHACAY’TOS ‘Oalpibus 
(Osiris is here regarded as a mortal man) els roOrov % Yu) HeTéoT?. 

2 Cf. Corp. XVII. 


232 ASCLEPIUS ; 


mass of the Egyptian worshippers of a bull or a crocodile; in 
his view, the beast, as well as the statue, is an actual god, though 
a god of lower grade than the di cae/estes. 

Diodorus 1. 84 mentions some of the beasts worshipped in Egypt 
in his time; among them are the bull Apis at Memphis, the bull 
Mnevis at Heliopolis, a he-goat at Mendes, a crocodile at Lake 
Moeris (Arsinoe), a lion at Leontopolis, cat zodd& roradd? erepa. 
See also Philo De decalogo 16, 76 ff., Cohn IV, p. 286, Orig. c Ceds, 
3-17. Parthey, in his edition of Plut. Zs. e Os. p. 261 ff, gives a 
detailed list of sacred animals. 

The early Egyptians no doubt regarded certain kinds of animals 
as ‘holy’, and abstained from certain kinds of animal food as 
‘unclean’;' and they associated certain species of animals with 
certain gods ; but the actual worship of individual beasts as gods, if 
not wholly unknown,’ at any rate occupied a comparatively small 
place among the cults of Egypt until near the end of the national 
independence. The worship of beasts, in the sense in which the 
practice implies a belief that the god is incarnated in the body of a 
particular living animal, first became prominent in the Saite period 
663-525 B.c.), and was carried to great lengths in Ptolemaic 
and Roman times. In these late times, the sanctity of the individual 
animal in which the deity was believed to be incorporated was 
extended, in greater or less degree, to other animals of the same 
species ; and if some sort of veneration for the species had existed 
before, it was now intensified. Any one who killed an animal of a 
species held sacred in an Egyptian town was liable to severe legal 
penalties, and was likely to be lynched by the mob. Cf. Diodor. 
1. 83: dmoxretvayros “Pwpalow rwds alAovpov, cai rod AijBous 
owvdpapdvros él rijv olxiay tod mpagavtos, o86 of meubOévres bxd rod 
Baovréws apxovres él riv wapairnow otf 6 Kowds dd rhs “Pdyys 
pdBos icxvoe e€edéobar rijs tywpias tov dvOpwmov, xairep dxovolus 
Totro wempaxdra, Kal rodr’ ob« e€ dxons feis ioropodpev, GAN’ adrol 
kara Thy yeyernpéeryy tyiv éridypiay Kar’ Alyurrov éopaxéres. 


* At an early stage of culture, the conceptions ‘holy’ and ‘unclean’ are hardly 
distinguishable; the common notion underlying both is that the thing in question — 
is charged with a potent force, and that precautions must therefore be taken in 
dealing with it. 

* Breasted, A7st. of Zeyh, p. 60, says that ‘the animal-worship, ... as a cult, 
is a late product, brought forward in the decline of the nation at the close of its 
history’, and that until then ‘it was unknown’. (He refers to Erman, Handbuch, 
Pp. 25.) 





ASCLEPIUS III: 37 233 
































eorum animas, quorum sunt consecrata (sc. haec animalia) 
(quasi imagines) viventes. In the text of the MSS., vivenses is 
meaningless. By inserting gwasi imagines, we get a meaning which 
exactly suits the context. The beast is a ‘living image’ of the 
deified man, in the same sense that the statue is a lifeless image of 
him; and the ‘terrestrial god’ is in this case constituted by the 
combination of a disembodied human soul with the living body of 
an animal, as, in the other case, by the combination of a disem- 
bodied human soul with a lifeless statue. Cf. Plut. Js. e¢ Os. 43: tov 
8 Amw elxdva pav 'Ocipidos euuxor eva. Hyginus Astronom. 2. 28 
says that Egyptian priests tell a story about gods who changed them- 
selves into beasts; ‘quibus de causis Aegyptios ea genera violari non 
sinere demonstrant, quod deorum imagines dicantur.’ Porphyr. De 
abst. 4.9: KdvOapoy d&... Aiytrrur. . . érépOyoay ds eixdva HAlov 
éuuxov. (The context shows that Porphyry here understands cixa 
in the sense of ‘a symbol’; but the phrase is taken from common 
usage, and the popular notion would rather be that the Sun-god, or 
a divine soul which is an daéppow of the Sun-god, is embodied in the 
beetle.) 

A man, as well as a beast, might become in this sense a ‘living 
image’ of a god. In the Decree of Memphis, 196 B.c. (Mahaffy, 
Egypt under the Ptols., p. 316), Ptolemy V is called elxdv aca tot 
Adds (i.e. of Amon). The votary in Apuleius Ale/amorph. 11. 24, at 
the end of his initiation in the mysteries of Isis at Corinth, has 
‘become an embodiment of the Sun-god Horus, the son of Isis, and 
is accordingly exhibited to the worshippers as an ‘image’ of that 
deity (‘in vicem simulacri’). Porphyry (De adst. 4. 9) mentions a 
place in Egypt where the object of worship (i.e. the thing in which 
the god-soul was embodied) was not a statue or a beast, but a living 
‘man; érel xal dvOpwrov o€Bovrat xara “AvaBw Kopqy, ev 7 Kal rotrw 
Pberat xai eri Bopady ra tepeta nderar. 6 S€ per ddlyov déyou dy ra 
Bia air ads dvOpdrw raperxevacpéva. 

ita ut et eorum legibus incolantur (sc. civitates). It is 
assumed that the man whose soul is incarnated in the beast 
worshipped in the town (e.g. Thoth-Hermes, embodied in an 
ibis at Hermopolis,) had governed the town during his human life, 
and was the founder of its local ordinances,—especially, perhaps, of 
its religious usages, and such laws as that which made it a penal 
Offence in that town to kill an animal which was freely killed and 
eaten in other places. 








eee 


234 ASCLEPIUS 


et ecorum nominibus nuncupentur. In some cases the town 
was named after the local god (e.g. Hermopolis) ; in other cases it 
was named after the beast in which the local god was embodied 
(e. g. Crocodilopolis). 

propterea bellis se lacessere Aegyptiorum solent civitates. 
This does not necessarily imply that in the writer’s own lifetime 
Egyptian towns were in the habit of waging war against one another 
on behalf of their sacred animals. The speaker is the prehistoric 
Trismegistus ; and traditions of such fighting would suffice to account 
for the statement which is put into his mouth. There may have 
been legends of actual wars waged on this ground in the past; and 
the mimic fighting which formed part of the ritual at some Egyptian 
festivals (see e. g. Hdt. 2. 63) might easily give rise to such legends. 
But there is evidence that even under Roman rule a riot or faction- 
fight was sometimes provoked or aggravated by insulting treatment 
of a sacred animal by men of a neighbouring town ; just as in India 
the slaughter of a cow by Mohammedans is now and then the cause 
of a riot, or an incident in a riot. An instance of war between 
neighbouring towns in the Ptolemaic period occurs in certain Greek 
papyri (Grenfell and Hunt, Archiv fiir Papyrusforschung, Bd. I, 
T901, p. 57 ff.) describing a bitter quarrel which broke out in 
123 B.c. between the priests of Hermonthis and those of Pathyris 
and the adjacent Crocodilopolis (a little way above Thebes) con- 
cerning the possession of an island; the dispute lasted for some 
years, and led to fierce fighting between the people of these towns. 
One of the fights described took place at the sacred island of the 
crocodile-god Sobk; and during this engagement, ‘a number of 
priests (?) who were assisting the Crocodilopolites, and were probably 
inhabitants of the island, were routed and fled to the river, where 
many of them were drowned’. There is no express mention of 
sacred animals here; but when the assailants attacked the island 
of the crocodile-god, they probably did not spare the crocodile or 
crocodiles maintained there. Diodorus 1. 89. 5: some say that one 
of the early kings, acting on the principle ‘Divide et impera’, 
introduced the practice of animal-worship, ézws éxdorwv 7d pev wap’ 
airois Timpevov oeBopevor, tov St rapa Tors alos adiepwpevwy KaTa- 
ppovotytwy, pyderote Spovoqoat Svvwvrar wares of Kar’ Atyvrroy.' 
“al rodro ex tov drorehecudrov pavepoy eva’ rdvtas yap Tovs wAnoto- 
xapovs pds GAARAos Siaheper Oa, tporKdrrovras tals eis TH mpoerpy- 

1 The same story is told in different words in Plut, /s. e¢ Os. 72. 








ASCLEPIUS III: a7d 235 


péva rapavopias. Plut. Zs. e¢ Os. 72: of B8 "Okupeyxirae Kal? pas 
(about A.D. 100), rv Kuvoroluréy rov déipvyyov ixOiv éobidvrev, 
xivas ovAAaBovtes Kai Ovoavres ds lepeiov Karépayov' éx S& rovrou 
kataotdvres eis méAeuov GAAjAous te Si€OnKav Kaxds, Kal torepov iad 
‘Popaiwy koralopevor dter€Oyoay. Juvenal (Sa¢. 15) describes a similar 
fight between two Egyptian towns; ‘Inde furor vulgo, quod numina 
vicinorum | odit uterque locus, cum solos credat habendos | esse 
deos quos ipse colit.’ The people of one of these towns, he says, 
began the quarrel by jeering at those of the other, who were holding 
a religious festival (i,e. worshipping their special beast-god). 
Juvenal’s details are not to be trusted; he names the towns Ombos 
and Tentyra, but these places are so far apart that a fight between 
them would not be possible? ; and his story of cannibalism is hardly 
credible. Some such incident as he speaks of must however have 
occurred shortly before he wrote. Dio Cass. 42. 34 (about A.D, 220) : 
‘The Egyptians make war on one another on behalf of the objects 
of their worship ; for with regard to some of these cults, they are not 
agreed among themselves, but are strongly opposed to one another, 
as well as to other races.’ 

27d. consecrabuntur (distribuentur MSS.) vero...in monte 
Libyco. This is one of the detached fragments which have been 
thrown together in ch. 27, There can be little doubt that it 
originally followed and continued the account of the di ferrent 
in ch. 37. After speaking of gods whom he holds to have been 
prehistoric chiefs and sages, the writer proceeds to speak of another 
class of gods worshipped in Egypt, viz. the present and recent rulers 
of the land. It is possible that some intervening words or sentences 
have been lost; but the gap, if there is one, is probably not 
large. 

The verb with which the fragment began must have been muti- 
lated; and its place was supplied by repeating (with a change of 
tense) distribuuntur, the last word of the preceding fragment in 
ch. 27. The sense required may be obtained by writing consecra- 
buntur. 

Celsus (Orig. c. Ce/s. 8. 63) similarly speaks of the cult of the 
rulers in conjunction with that of other ‘terrestrial gods’: rf 7d 
Bed rods He dpxovras edueviLerOai, to’s te GAdovs (sc. the ‘dae- 


1 There was an Ombos near Tentyra; but Juvenal probably had in mind the 
famous centre of crocodile-worship farther south. 





236 ASCLEPIUS 


> 


mons’ worshipped in the temples) cat robs & dvOparas durdoras Kai 
Baciréas, bs ob8% rovrous dvev Sapovias irxvos trav rAdE PEwpevors ; 

conlocabuntur in civitate in summo initio Aegypti. The 
deified rulers of Egypt, unlike the local town-gods previously spoken 
of, must have been recognized as gods throughout the land; but 
their worship was centred in a single city; and this city the writer 
indicates by a description, as he indicated Arsinoe before. It is a 
city which, in the time of Trismegistus, had not yet been founded; 
it is situated at the western extremity of Egypt; and since men of 
all races flock to it ‘by land and sea’, it must be a maritime city, 
and a great commercial port. The only city which answers to this 
description is Alexandria; and there cannot be the slightest doubt 
that Alexandria is meant. 

Alexandria was the seat of the worship of its founder Alexander ; 
it was also the chief (though not the only) seat of worship, first of 
the Ptolemies, and afterwards of the Roman emperors. See Otto, 
Priester und Tempel, Index I, s.v. Herrscherkult; and Bouché- 
Leclercq, Histoire des Lagides, III. 1-68. 

The body of Alexander was conveyed from Babylon to Memphis 
in 322-321 B.c. Ptolemy II transferred it from Memphis to 
Alexandria, and deposited it in a magnificent tomb-temple, called 
the Sa, which had been built there to receive it. The transference 
was certainly subsequent to the death of Ptolemy I in 283 8. c. ; its 
exact date is not recorded, but Otto (I. 144-153) gives reasons for 
thinking that it probably took place in 274 B.c. At the time when 
the body was placed in the Sema, an official cult of Alexander was 
instituted there. 

A cult of Ptolemy I was established, after his death in 283 B.c, 
by his son and successor, who deified him under the name of @eds 
Swryp. Ptolemy I was buried beside Alexander in the Sema (as 
were all the other Ptolemies after him), and must, from the time of 
his death, have been honoured there by rites of worship; but the 
special seat of his cult was at first not Alexandria, but Ptolemais, a 
Greek city which he had founded in Upper Egypt, and of which he 
became the town-god after his death. 

So far, divine honours had been rendered by the Greeks in Egypt 

1 The wododxos Oeds of Alexandria was Sarapis (Julian Zp. 111, Bidez and 
Cumont, 432d): but Alexander was worshipped there as the deified founder of 
the city. Cf. Julian Z%. G6oB and c, 378 (to the Alexandrians): ef pi rdv 


*Ad€tavipov roy olmoriy bpiv Kat mpd ye Todrou Tov Bedv Toy péyay TOV ayiwTaror 
Xdpamy aideiode, 












































ASCLEPIUS III: 27d 237 


to dead rulers only, and not to the living. But Ptolemy II, on the 
death of his sister and wife Arsinoe in 270 B.c., took a further step. 
He deified not only her, but himself beside her (Otto II. 273); and 
the dead queen and the living king, under the name Geol "AdeAgoi 
(afterwards PiadeAo’) were associated with Alexander at the Sema 
as ovvvaot Geot, and were worshipped there in conjunction with him. 
The successors of Ptolemy II followed his example, and went beyond 
it in making the living queen a deity as well as the living king. The 
dynastic cult was systematized in 215-210 B.C. by Ptolemy 1V, who 
completed the series of royal couples by inserting Ptolemy I and his 
wife, the Ocot Swrijpes, between Alexander and the Geot “AdeApoi; and 
from that time onward, each succeeding royal couple in turn was 
added to the list of deities worshipped at the Alexandrian Sema. 
Thus in the Rosetta Stone (196 B.c.) the chief priest of the 
Alexandrian cult of the rulers bears the title tepets “AAcgavdpou Kat 
Oeiv Swrjpwv wai Ocdv “AdeAPGv Kol Oedv Evepyerav wat Gedy Piro- 
rarépwv Kal Geod “Exupavots Eixapicrov (the last-named being the 
reigning king, Ptolemy V, who was not yet married). At Ptolemais, 
the worship of the succeeding Ptolemies was similarly added to that 
of the founder and town-god, Ptolemy I. 

The cults so far mentioned, though strongly influenced by the 
religious atmosphere of Egypt, were Greek in form; the rites were 
performed by Greek priests, who were unconnected with the corpora- 
tion of the Egyptian priesthood; and it was chiefly the Greek 
subjects of the Ptolemies, massed together in Alexandria, that took 
part in the worship, and thereby expressed their loyalty to the 
reigning dynasty, probably for the most part without any serious 
belief in the divinity of their very human kings and queens. The 
attitude of the native Egyptians towards their rulers was different. 
From the earliest times, the kings of Egypt had been regarded as 
divine ; they were sons of the Sun-god, and incarnations of Horus ; 
and at least since the time of the New Kingdom, 1500 B.c. (Otto II, 
p. 270), the living king was worshipped as a god. When he had 
died and ‘departed to heaven’, he was of course still a god. The 
people in general might be less directly concerned with a deity who 
had ceased to dwell among them in the flesh; but a temple or 
mortuary chapel was usually built in connexion with his tomb ; the 
duty of performing the customary rites there was committed to a 
body of priests endowed for the purpose; and the cult of a dead 
king sometimes lasted for many centuries. Even in Ptolemaic times, 





238 ASCLEPIUS 


some of the kings of the earliest dynasties still had priests assigned 
to them, (For details as to the worship of dead kings, see Petrie 
fist. of Egypt, passim.) The Ptolemies succeeded to the position of 
the native kings, and were regarded in the same way by their 
Egyptian subjects. In their eyes, the ruler was necessarily an 
incarnate god; and the ceremony of coronation by the Egyptian 
priests (which is called dvaxdyrnpia, i.e. ‘proclamation-ceremony ’, 
by Polybius,) did not change the man into a god, but was a formal 
recognition of the fact that he was a god already (imrdpywv Geds éx 
Ged Kai Oeas, Rosetta Stone), and a declaration that he was henceforth 
to be worshipped. The Rosetfa Stone (Mahafly, Empire of the 
Ptolemies, p. 316 ff.) is a decree enacted by the synod of the 
Egyptian priests on the occasion of the coronation of Ptolemy V 
at Memphis ; and the operative clauses of the decree are those by 
which the worship of him is instituted or augmented. It is resolved 
(1) that in every Egyptian temple shall be set up a piece of sculpture 
representing ‘the god Epiphanes Eucharistos’ (i.e. the god-king 
Ptolemy V) and the chief god of the temple side by side, and that 
the priests shall do reverence (Ocparevety) to these portraits (cixoves) 
thrice a day; (2) that in every Egyptian temple shall be placed 
a cult-image (féavov) of the god-king, enclosed in a portable shrine 
(vads); that this shrine shall be set up as an object of worship 
(xa@8piea) in the most holy place of the temple, together with the 
shrines of the other gods; and that at the great festivals, when the 
shrines of the gods are carried in procession, that of the god-king 
shall be carried with the rest ; (3) that at every Egyptian temple 
certain monthly and yearly festivals shall be celebrated in honour 
of the god-king, who shall on these days be worshipped with 
‘ sacrifices and libations and all other customary rites’; and (4) that 
the priests of the other gods shall add to their titles the fresh title 
‘priest of the god Epiphanes Eucharistos’, 

The édavov there spoken of corresponds to the ‘man-made god’ of 
Asc. II1; and the rites prescribed imply a belief, or at least the 
simulation of a belief, that one and the same divine soul is 
embodied in all the numerous ééuva, as well as in the human body 
of the living king. 

The contrast between the attitude of the Greeks in Egypt towards 
their rulers and that of the native Egyptians tended to diminish as 
time went on; and the Ptolemies deliberately sought to assimilate 
the different usages by which the two races expressed their reverence 








ASCLEPIUS III: 27d 239 


for their kings. It was no doubt chiefly with this object that the 
practice of worshipping the living king, long established in the 
Egyptian cult, was adopted in the Greek cult. On the other hand 
the Egyptian priests, who were accustomed to worship the living king 
as a cvvvaos Oeds in all their temples, took over from the Greek cult 
the practice of associating the queen with the king, and also that of 
including the deceased royal couples among the deities worshipped 
in every temple. And besides the kings and queens, some other 
members of the royal family were added to the number of the gods 
worshipped by the Egyptians. The Decree of Canopus (Mahaffy, 
Empire of the Ptolemies, p. 229 ff.) is a resolution passed by the 
synod of Egyptian priests in 238 n.c, A young daughter of the 
reigning king, Ptolemy III, has recently died (mer#AOev eis rov dévaov 
coopov,—els Geods pernAGev); and the priests announce that they 
hereby resolve ‘to pay her everlasting honours in all the temples of 
the land’, She is to be worshipped by the celebration of a yearly 
festival at every Egyptian sanctuary; a. cult-image of her (iepdy 
dyahpa,—a ‘man-made deity’,) is to be placed in each of the chief 
temples ; and in all religious processions, this image is to be carried 
in the arms of a priest, ‘in order that it may be seen and honoured 
and worshipped by all men’. The little princess was not a deity in 
her lifetime. She has become a deity at death; but this, according 
to Egyptian notions, might be said of every beatified soul, whether 
of royal race or not. She is already a deity; but by the setting up 
of the cult-images in the temples, and by the rites of worship 
instituted, she is made a ‘terrestrial’ deity. 

Some of the Ptolemies not only received divine honours in their 
own names, but identified themselves with some recognized Greek 
or Egyptian deity, and received worship in that capacity. Thus at 
Ptolemais there was a priestess of ‘Cleopatra (I), the mother of 
Amon, the resplendent Isis’ (Otto I. 159, n. 2). There is mention 
of a priest of "lows peydAn pojrnp Ocdw ; and this goddess is probably 
Cleopatra III (#. p. 158). Ptolemy XIII was officially styled véos 
Avvuos. The belief, real or feigned, which underlies this practice 
is that the deity in question is incarnated in the living man or woman. 
Similarly Horace (Od, 1. 2. 4r) hints that Augustus is perhaps an 
incarnation of the god Hermes. 

After the annexation of Egypt by Augustus, Alexander was still 
worshipped with Greek rites at the Sema as before ; and under Roman 
tule, the festival of the deified founder of the city long continued to 








240 ASCLEPIUS 


be celebrated in Alexandria. Julius Valerius 3. 35 (about A. D. 300) : 
‘obitus eius (sc. Alexandri) diem etiam nunc Alexandriae sacratissi- 
mam habent’ This cult of Alexander was probably maintained 
until the abolition of Paganism (Otto I, p. 1 54). But the cult of the 
Ptolemies, both in its Greek form at Alexandria, and in its Egyptian 
form in all the temples of the national religion, was abandoned on 
the downfall of the dynasty; and in its place was instituted the cult 
of the Roman rulers. 

On the deification of the rincipes at Rome and in the provinces, 
see Marquardt, Staatsverwaltung U1. 463 ff., and Boissier, Religion 
romaine I. 109-186. In instituting the worship of deceased rulers, 
the Roman government gave official expression to beliefs and senti- 
ments which had spread to Italy from the Greek kingdoms of the 
East, and above all from Egypt; though some foundation for the 
practice might also be found in native Italian usages, such as the family 
worship of the Di Manes and the Lares. At Rome, an official cult 
of the diving ruler was never instituted ; and of the earlier principes, 
only a few (e.g. Caligula and Domitian) demanded divine honours 
from their subjects. Aurelian (a. D. 270-27 5) was the first Roman 
emperor who styled himself des on his coins (Schiller, Gesch. der 
vim. Kaiserseit 1. 867). Towards the end of the fourth century, 
Vegetius (2. 5) writes ‘Imperatori, cum Augusti nomen accepit, 
tamquam praesenti et corporali deo fidelis est praestanda devotio’. 

‘The first man who was worshipped after death by order of the 
Roman government was Julius Caesar, who had already been 
recognized as a god ‘persuasione vulgi’ (Suet. Zi/ius 88), when in 
42 B.c. the Senate established a cult of Dious Julius, The pre- 
cedent was followed in the case of Augustus* and others ; and thus 
came into existence a new class of Roman state-gods, the Divi and 
Divae. In A.vD. 224, twenty of these deities were officially 
recognized ; in the time of Constantine, the number had risen to 
about thirty-seven. 


1 The word ‘deification® is apt to suggest a wrong notion, The process is 
correctly described in Tac. 4, 1. 10: ‘(Angusto) templum et caelestes Teligiones 
decernuntur’; and in a calendar quoted by Marquardt (ILI. 467): ‘eo die Augusto 
honores caelestes a senatu decreti.. The senators did not claim power to change a 
dead man into a god; but they professed belief that he had become a god, and 
instituted a priesthood, a temple, and an annual festival for his worship. It is true 
that Manilius (4.927) says, with reference to Divus Julius and the anticipated 
apotheosis of Augustus, ‘iam facit ipse (homo) deos, mittitque ad sidera numen Be 
and Tacitus (Aun. 1.73. 3) quotes Tiberius as writing ‘decretum patri suo caelum’; 
but such phrases are not to be taken literally. 








ASCLEPIUS III: ad 241 


But in the East, the cult of the living ruler, which was indigenous 
in Egypt and in some parts of Asia, had, since the time of Alexander, 
been adopted by the Greeks, and was almost universally accepted 
among them? long before the Roman annexation of Egypt. Even 
under the Republic, Roman proconsuls had frequently received 
divine honours in these regions ; Marcus Antonius was only accept- 
ing a part which was thrust upon him when he appeared in public in 
the character of a present god in Alexandria, Ephesus, and Athens } 
and when Augustus had established peace and prosperity, temples 
and priesthoods for his worship sprang into existence in all the eastern 
provinces. In this movement the Greeks in Egypt took part together 
with the rest of the Greek-speaking East. In the reign of Augustus, 
a Kaisareion was built in Alexandria; and it is to be presumed that 
it was first used for the worship of the Divus Julius and the living 
Augustus ;* that the successors of Augustus also were worshipped 
there during their lives; and that those of them at least who were 
added to the official list of the Roman Divi continued to be wor- 
shipped there after death.* Later on, a Hadrianeion was built in 
Alexandria, and must have served as an additional temple for the 
worship of the rulers in that city. Some members of the imperial 
family were, like some of the Ptolemies before, identified with 
particular deities ; e.g. Plotina, the wife of Trajan, was honoured as 
*Adpodiry Oecd vewrépa (Otto I. 159, n. 2). 

The example of the Alexandrian Greeks was followed by the 
Greeks settled in other parts of Egypt; we hear of Kaisareia or Sebasteia 
at Arsinoe, Oxyrhynchus, Hermopolis, and Elephantine,a Hadrianeion 
at Memphis, and perhaps a Hadrianeion at Arsinoe (Otto I. 11). At the 
same time, the native Egyptian priests transferred to the Roman rulers 
the divine honours which they had previously rendered to the Ptole- 
mies ; and it appears that both the living prézceps and the Divi were 
associated as otvvaot Oeot with the local gods in the temples under the 


1 Plutarch (Zs. e¢ Os. 24) speaks with strong disapproval of the cult of living 


rulers : el 5é ives éfapOévres ind peyadavxias, .. . dua vedryte wat dyvola preydpevor | 


Ti puxqy, EO” BBpews edéfavro Ceay enovupias nal vady idpices, Bpaxiy HvOnoev } 
dé¢a xpévov, But among the Pagan Greeks of that period, such a decided con- 
demnation of the practice is exceptional. 

2 There is direct evidence of a Greek cult of the living Augustus in the Sebasteion 
at Philae in 13-12 B.c.; and the cult of Augustus had probably been established 
earlier in Alexandria (Otto II, p. 279). 

Philo, Leg. ad Gaium 22, 151, VI, p. 183 Cohn, describes the Sedasteion at 
Alexandria as a magnificent building. Was this Sedastezon identical with the 
Kaisareion, or was it a distinct and separate temple ? 

3 There are mentions of dpyrepeis SeBacrav in Alexandria, and also in some other 
Egyptian towns. Otto I. 61, 136, II. 190. 


2806-3 R 





242 ASCLEPIUS 


control of the Egyptian priesthood throughout the land.*- But the local 
rites, whether Greek or Egyptian, with which the emperors were wor- 
shipped in the other towns of Egypt must have been of small im- 
portance compared with the central Greek cult of the Roman rulers in 
Alexandria ; and it is of the latter alone that the Hermetist speaks. 
In A. D. 270, the approximate date of Asc/. IIT, the dead ‘ rulers of the 
land’ who were officially worshipped in Alexandria must have been 
Alexander and some thirty Roman Divi. During the Palmyrene 
occupation of Egypt, the living emperor Claudius, in whose name 
Vaballathus ruled the country, may also have been worshipped there ; 
but in those troubled times the cult of the living ruler may perhaps 
have been suspended. 

Modo tamen hoc in tempore ubi isti sunt? /s/7 must mean 
qui terrae dominantur, i. e. the rulers, dead or living, whom the writer 
supposes to have been worshipped as gods in the time of Trismegistus ; 
and ui isti sun¢ must mean ‘what city in Egypt is the seat of their 
cult?’ Perhaps conlocati (xafsSpvpévor) may have dropped out before 
sunt, 

As Trismegistus lived in the time of ‘King Ammon’, it would 
seem that the rulers here spoken of must be Amon and other gods 
of the same class, whom the writer assumes to have been ancient 
kings of Egypt. It is strange that Asclepius should need to be told 
where the deified kings of his own time are worshipped ; but perhaps 
the writer has inserted this question merely because he wishes to give 
his own answer to it. 

in maxima civitate in monte Libyco. What city is this? 
Apparently, Arsinoe again; for that is the only important town in 
Egypt which is ‘in the Libyan mountain’. But if és¢¢ are national 
gods such as Amon and Osiris, how can it be said that their cult 
is established in one particular city or nome alone?? We should 
rather have expected to be told either that they are collectively 
worshipped in all parts of Egypt, or that the chief seat of the cult of 
each of them is in a different city. 


1 Otto I, 11. There is evidence of worship of the living ruler in Egyptian 
temples, in the case of Augustus, Tiberius, Claudius, Nero, and Trajan. An 
Egyptian priest at Heliopolis in A.D, 210-211 bears the title dpy:mpopyrns Tav 
xupiow Abroxparépov ZeBacray (2b. II. 278,n.6). The birthdays of the Roman 
emperors were celebrated as festivals (and this implies that the emperors were 
worshipped) at the temple of Socnopaeus in the Fayum (7d. I]. 9, n, 3). These 
birth-festivals were called jyépar oeBaorai (¢d, 10, n.1). Similar festivals were 
celebrated in the temple of Jupiter Capitolinus at Arsinoe ; and the cult in this 
temple appears to have been Egyptian, and not Greek (zd. I. 10). 

2 See vol. IV, Addenda. 








ASCLEPIUS III: 38a 243 


Perhaps we might account for this answer to Asclepius’ question 
by assuming that the writer is an inhabitant of the Arsinoite nome 
(which is also suggested by the fact that he localizes the cult of 
Imhotep-Asclepius there), and that he believes some famous sanctuary 
in his own neighbourhood to have been the chief seat of the cult of 
the rulers in ancient times, just as Alexandria is the chief seat of 
that cult in his own day. It is possible that the sanctuary of which 
he is thinking is the Labyrinth, which was situated at the entrance 
to the Fayum, about twelve miles from Arsinoe. The Labyrinth was 
still one of the famous sights of Egypt in the second century A.D. ; 
Aelius Aristides, 36. 1, speaks of it as such, and mentions it next to 
the pyramids. Herodotus (2. 148) was told that it had been built 
by the twelve kings who reigned over Egypt in the time of 
Sennacherib, and was intended as a memorial of the twelve together 
(cat 89 ode prnpdovva eoge \uréo Oa kowy). Herodotus is mistaken 
about the date, but his story indicates the existence of a tradition 
that the Labyrinth was a national memorial of ancient kings, and 
therefore a place where ancient kings were likely to have been 
worshipped. Strabo, 17. 37, p. 811, says that the number of courts in 
the Labyrinth was the same as the ancient number of the Egyptian 
nomes ; Pliny, at. Hist. 36. 13, also says that its divisions corre- 
sponded in number with the nomes, and adds that it contained 
‘temples of all the gods of Egypt’. Itis therefore not unlikely that in 
the third century a. D. the people of the district believed the Labyrinth 
to have been in ancient times the centre of the national life, and the 
common meeting-place of all Egyptians for political and religious 
purposes, among which the cult of the rulers would be included. 
Some of the kings of the XIIth dynasty had been buried in the 
neighbourhood of the Labyrinth, and must have been worshipped 
in that district after their deaths; and a tradition of this cult may 
possibly have survived down to the time when Asc/. III was written. 

38 a. Et horum ...(evocatio) cuiusmodi est [qualitas]? The 
meaning of this question is determined by the answer which follows ; 
Asclepius must have asked by what means beatified souls are 
induced to enter the bodies prepared for them in the Egyptian 
temples, viz. the cult-images. As the verb evocare was used above to 
describe this process, I have inserted evocatio. Perhaps gualitas may 
have arisen out of gua/is est, an alternative for cuiusmodi est. 

Constat . . . de herbis, de lapidibus, et de aromatibus 
divinitatis naturam in se habentibus. In Egyptian rites of 

R2 


244 ASCLEPIUS 


public worship, as well as in the private practice of magicians, muchuse 
was made of sacred plants and stones, and the burning of incense and 
other fragrant ‘substances. Compare the doctrine of the Egyptian priest 
in Abammonis Resp. 5. 23: obd8 ri bAyy obv apiarnow ide THs TOV Ba- 
ridvev perovolas’ dare don TéAeva Kal KaBapa Kat dyaboedis imdpyxet, mpos 
Ociv tro8oxyv éorww ok dvdppootos,... Taira otv kariovca % Oeoup- 
vert) TéEXVN, KoWGs Te otTwal (Kat) Kat’ oixedryra éxdorw Tov Gedy Tas 
mpooddpors trodoxas aveuploxovea, cupmdéker ToAAdKIS ous Bordvas 
Ga dpdpara dAda re rovatira tepi Kal réAeva kal Oeoed#, Kdzewra dard 
révrov tovrwv Srodoxiv édoreAf Kal Kabapav dmepydlera. ‘There is 
nothing to hinder matter from participation in the divine ; so that all 
matter which is perfect, pure, and good is not unsuited to serve as 
a receptacle of gods. In view of this, the theurgic art discovers the 
receptacles which are appropriate to the gods in general and to each 
god in particular, and often combines together stones, plants, 
animals, and spices, and other material things that are holy, 
perfect, and godlike, and out of all these, constructs a complete and 
pure receptacle (into which a god may enter).’ Origen, ¢. Ceds, 8. 61, 
describes the Pagan worshipper as tov zeprepyatépevov daiydvev dvé- 
para kat Suvdpes Kat mpages Kal ér@das, kat Bordvas oixeias daipoor, «al 
NiOovs kal tas év adrois yAudds, KaraAdipdous tais mapadedopévass etre 
FoupBodcxats! (lege -Kiis) etre SrwaSiprore poppais Saiydvwv. Plutarch, 
Ts. et Os. 52 and 80, speaks of certain fragrant substances (jyrivy, 
opvpva, and xt¢u), the burning of which forms part of the daily 
Egyptian worship of the Sun-god. 

In the process of ‘god-making’, no doubt certain sacred herbs 
and stones were attached to the image or placed near it, and 
certain fragrant substances burnt before it, in order to attract the 
divine soul which was to be embodied.' The evocatio must 
have included other rites as well, which are not here mentioned ; 
there must at any rate have been a verbal invocation of the divine 
being. 

Having spoken of the rites by which the beatified soul is induced 
to enter the image, the writer goes on to speak of the rites by which 
it is induced to remain there, and to dwell permanently in the temple. 
These are the ordinary rites of Egyptian temple-worship ; they consist 
chiefly, he says, of sacrifices and hymns. If these rites are discon- 
tinued, the divine souls embodied in the images will quit them, and 


1 See vol. IV, Addenda, 








ASCLEPIUS III: 38a 245 


depart from earth to heaven ; and thus, when the Christians abolish 
the temple-cults, ‘e terris est ad caelum recursura divinitas’, and 
‘(Aegyptus) numinum praesentia destituetur’ (ch. 24 b): there will 
no longer be ‘terrestrial gods’. 

The Hermetist’s view of the effect produced by the temple-rites 
was shared by many of the Christians of the time, with the difference 
that they believed the beings attracted and gratified by the rites to 
be devils. Origen (c. Ce/s. 8. 60) quotes Celsus as saying xpi) yap tows 
ovk dmoreiy dvdpdor cogois, ot 84 ace dibre tov pay epryetwy Sarpdvev 
70 wrelorov, yevére cuvrernkds, kal mpoonupévoy aipart kab kvicoy Kat 
perwdiats, kai ddAows rial rovovrois rpooSedep.évov, Kpetrrov obdiv Svvact* 
dy rot Oeparetoat cpa Kal péddovoay rixnv avOpdaw Kal wdder mpo-~ 
ereiv x.t.d. Commenting on this, Origen (2. 63) says KéAcos cfre 
pev ev 7G epi xvicons Kai aiparos, dv xpylover Saipoves, radyO9. Td. 
7. 64, Origen implies his agreement with the view that daemons 
rowirde mapaxabelovrat oxypacr kat xwpios (sc. altars, temples, and 
images), iro. tré twwv payyavedv KataxyAnbevres (e.g. by the use of 
herbae, lapides, and aromata), i) wai dddws Suvnbévres TpokaradaBetv 
éavrois rérovs, év ols ris TOv Ovopevwr daodopas Aiyvus peradapPdvovres 
mapdvopov 7boviv Kal rapavénos Onpdcwvrat. Firmicus Maternus De 
err. prof. rel. 13. 4 (A.D. 350): ‘Sed et in ipso simulacro (of Sarapis), 
sicut in ceteris, ex assiduis sacrificiis immundi daemonum spiritus 
colliguntur. Nihil enim operantur victimae et cruor ex assidua 
pecudum caede profusus, nisi ut daemonum substantia, qui diaboli 
procreatione generantur, ex isto sanguine nutriatur.’ 

Porphyry, De aédst. 2. 38 ff., distinguishes between beneficent and 
maleficent daemons, and agrees with the Christians in holding that 
it is the maleficent daemons alone that take pleasure in animal 
sacrifices ; oBrot of xaipovres “AorBq tre Kvion te”, 80 Sv abrav ro 
mvevpotixov? Kat cwpatixdy maiverat. Cf yap todro dtpois Kal dva- 
Ovpudceot morxilus bi THY TouxiAwy, Kat Svvapodrat tals éx Tov aipdrwv 
kal capkav Kvicas. 810 ovverds avnp Kal cddpuv cidAaByOjoerar roww'- 
ras xppoba Ovoias, dC dv eriomdcerae mpds éavrdy Tods rovovrous. 

in modum caelestis harmoniae. This may be a reference to 
the Pythagorean ‘music of the spheres’. But in the old Egyptian 
documents, there is frequent mention of gods adoring a higher god ; 
and this notion also may be in the writer’s mind. Cf. the hymn 


? Celsus however added (4, 8, 63) pGAAov olnréov rods Eaipovas pndevds xpyCew, 
HnBe Getaai twos, dAAA xalpew Tors Td edereRés Ap@or mpds adrods. 
? nvevpatixds here means ‘ gaseous’ 


246 ASCLEPIUS 


sung by the Suvdpes in Corp. Land XIII. Asc/. I. 9: God sent the 
Muses down to earth, ‘ut . . . caelestibus laudibus nec in terris 
harmoniae suavitas defuisset’. 

39-40 a: concerning Heimarmene. The functions of the d 
caelestes and the di ¢erreni, as described in ch. 38 b, together include 
the whole administration of the universe ; no separate function there- 
fore is left for Heimarmene. But the term cipapyévy was too 
prominent in the philosophy of the time to be ignored ; the writer 
therefore felt himself obliged to find a place for this power, and did 
so by identifying it with the agency of the dz cae/estes collectively, or 
with a certain part of that agency. Similarly, in ch. 19 b we were 
told that Heimarmene presides over the movements of the seven 
planetary spheres, and thereby puts in operation ‘the unchanging 
law of change’ in the sublunar world. But in ch. 19 b, Heimarmene 
was described as one of the ofovdpyai, i.e. as a personal deity, of the 
same order as Zeus Hypatos; in ch, 39, the personality disappears, 
and the word eiyappévy is used as an abstract term, on a par with 
dvdyxn and rdgis. It seems that in his two accounts of Heimarmene 
(19 b and 39) the writer was following two different authorities, and 
took no pains to harmonize them. 

 ctpappévy (sc. poipa) as a substantive occurs several times in 
Plato (e.g. Gorg. 512, where ryv cipappévny ov8 adv es expiyor is 
quoted as a proverbial saying), and once in Aristotle Poet. 1455 a 11)." 
But the Stoics were the first to bring the word into current use as a 
substantive with a definite cosmologic meaning ; and it is manifest 
that the account of eizappévy in Asc. III. 39 f. is derived from Stoic 
sources. Zeno, the founder of Stoicism, defined cipappévy as divapes 
Kuyt ris tAys xara tabra Kat @oavrws, and said that it might 
equally well be called zpévo and pics (Aetius, Diels Doxogr. 
p. 322). Chrysippus wrote a book Ilepi ciyappyévns, and spoke 
much of efyapuévn throughout his writings. (See Diels 7., and 
Arnim, Stoic, vet. fragm. 11, pp. 264-298.) He said that eiappévy 
is 6 rod kdapov Adyos (the design or plan of the universe) ; that it is 
Nbyos Trav ev 7G Kdopy povoig. Socxovpévwr ; and that it is Adyos Ka" bv 
ra pev yeyovéra yéyove Ta 58 yudpeva yiverat ra dé yernospeva yeryoerat. 
Elsewhere, in place of Adyos, he spoke of % dAjGea (meaning, 
1 The word «izappévy is used by Theophrastus, Phys. 5 1, Diels Doxogr. 
p. 476, where Theophr. is reporting an opinion of Heraclitus; and it is said to 
have been used by Heraclitus himself (Aetius, Diels Dox. p. 322). Another 


instance in Theophrastus is reported by Alex. Aphrod. De anima, jin, (Zeller 
Arist. Eng. tr. Il, p. 371) and Aetius, Diels Dox. p. 325. 








ASCLEPIUS III: 39-40a 247 


perhaps, the predetermined truth concerning future events), 4 airéa, 
4 pvors, and 7) dvdyxn as equivalent to ciappévy. He said that 7 
obota Tis eipappérys is Sivayis rvevparixy (i.e. a Power inherent in 
the material wve}ya which pervades the Kosmos), rage. rod ravrds 
Suoxytexy’ also (Theodoret, supplemented by Stobaeus, Diels 72.) 
pdtv Siadépea rod cipappévov To Karyvaykacpevov, elvar 8 Thy éi- 
pappevnv kiow aiSiov ovvexy Kal teraypérgy, || Kar’ émemoxiy pepav 
cwvnpriopernv. Aul. Gell. 7 (6). 2. 3: cpappévgy esse dicit (Chry- 
sippus) pou twa obvraéw tov ddov, é dudtov rev érépwv Tots érépors 
traxodovbotvrur, ... drapaBdrov obays THs Towatrns érurdoxys. Plut. 
Stoic. repugn. 47. 4: Chrysippus said pySev toxer Oar pdt xveto ba 
pdt tobddxiorrov dAdws } wari rov rod Ads Adyov (design), dv 77H 
ciuappéry tov abrov eva. Lb. 47.5: Tiv cimappevyy airiay dvixyrov 
kal adxddurov Kal drpertov dropaivewv. 

In his cosmology, Chrysippus postulated an unalterable destiny 
(that is, an all-including system of invariable ‘laws of nature’, or 
sequences of cause and effect, such as is assumed by modern science) ; 
but in his ethics, he asserted the free will and responsibility of man ; 
and he was much occupied with the problem of reconciling the one 
with the other. Cf. the fragment of Cic. De fafo quoted by Aul. 
Gell. 7 (6). 2. 15: ‘Chrysippus, aestuans laboransque quonam 
(pacto) explicet et fato omnia fieri et esse aliquid in nobis, intricatur 
hoc modo.’ His somewhat obscure teaching on this subject was 
vigorously attacked by Carneades ; and the substance of Carneades’ 
criticism (or rather, of the report of it transmitted by Carneades’ 
pupil Clitomachus, 129-111 B.C.) is preserved in Cic. De fato, and 
Plut. Sto. repugn. 47. (Schmekel, PAi2. der mittl. Stoa, pp. 155-1 84.) 

The later Stoics closely followed Chrysippus in their doctrine of 
destiny. Posidonius wrote a book on cipappévy. Cic. De divina- 
tione 1. 5§. 125 (based on Posidonius): ‘fieri igitur omnia fato ratio 
cogit fateri. Fatum autem id appello, quod Graeci cipappévyy, id est 
ordinem seriemque causarum, cum causa causaé nexa rem eX se 
gignat. Ea est ex omni aeternitate fluens veritas sempiterna, . . . 
Ex quo intelligitur ut fatum sit... causa aeterna rerum, cur et ea 
quae praeterierunt facta sint, et quae instant fiant, et quae sequentur 
futura sint’ Seneca, who drew largely from Posidonius, speaks of 
fatum to the same effect, and insists strongly and repeatedly on the 
immutability of destiny, but also recognizes free will in man ; Wat. 
guaest. 2. 38. 3, ‘cum de ista re agetur, dicam quemadmodum manente 
fato aliquid sit in hominis arbitrio.’ 


248 ASCLEPIUS 


The teaching of the Stoics in general on ciuappyévy is thus 
summarized :—Aetius, Diels Doxogr. p. 322: riv piv dvdyxny 
dvicnrév pacw airiav xai Boruc, rv dé cipappévqv cvprdoKhy 
airy reraypevav' év q oupahony Kal 7d wap’ Has, doe Ta pov 
FeivdpOar'’ ra Se “dverydpOar' (‘scribendum cipapria . . . dveyapra’ 
Diels). 22. p. 324: (rv cipappévgy evar) efpyov airdy, rovréore tééw 
kat emoivderw amapdéBarov. Diog. Laert. 7. 149: gore 88 cipappévy 
airla tév dvrwv eipomevn, i) AMbyos Ka’ bv 5 Kdopos dtekd-yerar. 

39. [ante] [[caelestes dii...singula]]. The sentence ‘caelestes 
. +. Singula’ is obviously out of place between the question about 
civapyévy and the answer to that question. When transposed, it 
serves as a suitable conclusion to ch. 38b, But the meaningless 
word azée remains to be accounted for. Is it possible that it is a 
corrector’s note, intended to indicate that the sentence to which it is 
prefixed ought to be placed ‘ before’ Asclepius’ question ? 

semper sibi catenatis ((necessita(ti)s)) nexibus vincta(e). 
ciypappévy can hardly be said to be ‘ bound to itself’; it is the events 
produced by ciwapuévy that are bound together in the chain of 
causation; .e. each necessarily results from another which precedes 
it. We must therefore read vincfae in place of vincta. For the 
notion of a chain of causes, cf. (in addition to the passages quoted 
above) Cic. De fato (discussion of the doctrine of Chrysippus) 20, 
‘causarum series sempiterna’: 27, ‘ex aeternitate causa causam 
serens’: 31, ‘omnia naturali conligatione conserte contexteque 
fiunt’. Seneca, Dia/. 12. 8. 3: ‘inmutabilis causarum inter se 
cohaerentium series.’ 

H ards 6 Oeds, H H per exeivov Teraypévn ((evépyera))—aut deus 
summus, aut ab ipso deo qui secundus effectus est. Destiny 
may be either identified with God, or described as that évépyea (of 
God) which ranks next to God himself, i.e. as the highest of God’s 
évépyetat. For the identification of destiny with God, cf. Chrysippus, 
in Philodemus, Diels Doxogr. p. 545: xat mpdvo.ay (?) dvopdler bat 
tov Ala, Kat THy Kowiv mévtwv diow, Kal eipappévyy, Kal dvdyxny. Sen. 
De benef. 4.7. 2: “hunc eundem (sc, deum or Iovem) et fatum si 
dixeris, non mentieris. Nam cum fatum nihil aliud sit quam series 
inplexa causarum, ille est prima omnium causa, ex qua ceterae 
pendent.’ Jd. 4. 8. 3: naturam voca, fatum, fortunam; omnia 
eiusdem dei nomina sunt varie utentis sua potestate.’ Mar. guaest. 
2. 45: ‘vis illum (se. Iovem) fatum vocare : non errabis: hic est, ex 
quo suspensa sunt omnia, causa causarum.’ ‘The Stoics’ in Arius 








ASCLEPIUS III: 39 249 


Didymus, Diels Dox. p. 465: Kal dcov dt eipopévy AGyw TavTa SioiKe? 
dmapaBarus && ddiovr, rporovopiler bar eipappévyv (sc. rév Oedv). ‘The 
Stoics’ in Diog. Laert. 7. 135: @ elvac Oedv Kal voy nal cipappevny 
Kat Aia. 

Posidonius is reported by Aetius, Diels Dox. P. 324, as saying 
(rv cipappévny iva) tpirgv aad Ards" mparov pev yap etvar tov Ala, 
Setrepov 38 rv dvow, tpirov 8% tiv eiyapyeryv. The Hermetist, in 
Asci, III. 19 b, agrees with this statement of Posidonius in making 
cipappévy ‘third from Zeus’; but in ch. 39, he assigns to it either 
the first place or the second. It is possible that Posidonius in one 
passage distinguished civapyéry from Zeus and vows, and placed it 
below them, but in other passages identified it (as Seneca does) with 
either or both of them. 

The words xai 7 eiuapr#, which follow 4 8% eiuappevy éor’ in Lydus, 
cannot be right. The rare adjective efuaprds occurs in Plut. Vit, 
Alex, 30 fin. (cipapros xpdvos); but it serves no purpose here. A 
clause inserted by a later hand must have been corrupted into this 
meaningless phrase. The original form of the interpolation may 
perhaps be inferred from Cornutus (first century a.p.) Zheologiae 
Graecae compendium (C. Lang) 13 : cipappévy dé dare Kad’ Hy pépaprra 
kal ouvethyrrat wdvra. év té&er Kar oToixw pi) ExovTt mépas Ta -yryvopeva. 
It seems probable that some one inserted this Stoic explanation of 
the word civappyévy in Lydus’ text of the Tédcos Adyos, and that 
xa? iv pépoprrat (mdvra) was subsequently altered into nal 
cipapri}. 

kaj wdvtwy odpaviwy te Kai émyelwy pera tis dvdyxns (kata Qetov 
vépov) tdé&is.—et omnium caelestium terrenarumque rerum 
firmata divinis legibus disciplina. The translator’s reading of 
the Greek seems to have differed from that of Lydus. rdéts (which 
is rendered by ordo below) is satisfactory in sense, Discpiina, 
which stands in place of 7dgis here, is used by the translator else- 
where as a rendering of érriun; but the Hermetist cannot have 
called cipapuévn an emt. It is possible that the original word 
was ovvragis, and that the translator took this to mean a system of 
science. 

There is nothing in Lydus’ Greek to correspond to divinis legibus. 
But a mention of God’s ordinance is needed ; for the writer’s object 
in this passage is to explain that civappévy is not an independent 
power, but is either identical with or immediately dependent on the 
will of God. (Cf. ch. 40a zw#.) I have therefore inserted xard Belov 


Le een en eae eee 
a 


250 ASCLEPIUS 


vépov. The superfluous words xai vépos which occur below in Lydus 
may have arisen out of a transposition of xara Ociov vopov. 

For the statement that eipappévy is a rdéis, cf. Chrysippus (quoted 
above): dvvapis . .. rdgee tod mavrds StoucytuKy -—Kivyow aiSiov ovvexi) 
kal reraypévqv:—ovorxyy twa ovvragw trav dhuv. ‘The Stoics’, 
cupmdokiy alriav reraypérny:—rdéw Kat emovvdeow drapaBarov. 
Iamblichus, Stob. 1. 5. 17, vol. i, p. 81 W.: pilav oty régw, macas 
rages dn0d meprraBodoar ev airh, Thy cipappevny apopurréov. 

Haec itaque ciyappévn et necessitas ... conexae sunt glutino, 
This clause is omitted in Lydus; but it must have been present in 
the original, because an explicit mention of eipappévy and dvdyxy 
together is needed to make the following # wav .. . #7 4¢ intelligible. 

4 pev adrds Kder tas dpxds tay mpaypdrov, H Sé KatavayxdLer kal Td 
réy ywéoOa.—quarum prior cipappémy rerum omnium initia 
parit, necessitas vero cogit ad effectum quae ex illius 
primordiis pendent. What is the meaning of dpxaf and ré\y here? 
It might be supposed that épyaé means ‘causes’, and rédn (= dzro- 
redopara) means ‘effects’. But how are ‘the causes’ and ‘the 
effects’ to be distinguished? If we regard the succession of events 
as an unbroken chain of cause and effect (‘rerum omnium quae 
geruntur semper sibi catenatis necessitatis nexibus vinctae’), every 
event is at once an effect of other events which have preceded, and 
a cause of other events which will follow; and the only dpi which 
is not also a réAos is the original creation of the Kosmos. It seems 
therefore that the writer must here be thinking, not of the cosmic 
process as a whole, but rather of the lives of individual men. The 
course of a man’s life is predetermined once for all, at the moment 
of birth, by «iyapyévy, or in other words, by the operation of the 
heavenly bodies (in ch. 19 b, eivappévy presides over the planets). 
As it is expressed below, ‘(eiyappévy) iacto velut semine futurorum 
omnium (in the individual man’s life) sufficit prolem , This pre- 
determination is the dpyy. The réA7 are the events of the man’s life, 
which result from the épyj by necessity (dvdy«n), and succeed one 
another (rdéis) in a continuous chain of causation. Cf. Sen. Dial. 
I. 5. 7: ‘quantum cuique temporis restat, prima nascentium hora 
disposuit. Causa pendet ex causa.’ JIamblichus, Stob. 1. 5. 18, 
vol. i, p. 81 W.: dpyai te ai ris pioews Kat rédy [kai moujoes?], Kal 
ai rovrwv owdéces rpos EAnAa, dx’ dpxijs Te &xpe rod tédous drefodor, 
cupmrhypotor ri cipappérny. (In Iamblichus, réhn seems rather to 
mean the conclusion of the process, i.e. the death of the individual. 








ASCLEPIUS III: 39 51 


The ovvdéces of the réAy to the dpyai/ correspond to the Hermetist’s 
dvdyxn, and the défod0 to the Hermetist’s ragis.) 

rattats Sé dxohouBet téfis [kal vdpos]|.—Has ordo consequitur. 
Above, we were told that ciuappévy is ravrwy ... rags; yet here, 
rdéus is distinguished from it as a separate entity. The two state- 
ments are probably derived from two different sources. 

In this passage, the writer distinguishes three constituent parts of 
destiny, which he names respectively ciappévyn, dviayxyn, and rdgis, 
restricting to the first member of the triad the term eiuappévy, which 
was more commonly used (as in Iamblichus above) to include all 
three together. 

The origin of this triad is probably to be found in the old notion 
of the three Motpa, who are mentioned and named in Hesiod, 
Theog. 905 f.: KAwO te Adxeciv re kal “Arpomoy, aire SiSoter | Ovytois 
évOpwiroow exew dyaOdv re xaxdv te. Plato, Rep. 10. 617, assigns a 
separate function to each of the three: tpeis . . . Ovyarépas ris 
"Avayxys, Moipas, ... tpvetv,... Adxeow pev ta yeyovdra, KAwbds dé 
7a. bra, “Arporoy dé 7a péddovra. The disembodied souls are brought 
first to Lachesis, under whose superintendence each of them chooses 
the life into which it is to be born at its next embodiment ; when the 
souls have made their choice, they are led to Clotho, and ‘ brought 
within the revolution of the spindle impelled by her hand, whereby 
the destiny (jotpa) which each has chosen is ratified’; they are then 
brought ‘to the spinning of Atropos, whereby the thread of destiny 
(7a értxAwoGévra) is made irreversible’. This passage of Plato was 
frequently quoted, and commented on in later discussions of fate 
and free will; see e.g. Porphyry epi rod éf’ jyiv, in Stob., 2. 8. 39, 
vol. li, p. 163 sgg. W. 

The Stoics followed Plato’s example in speaking of the three 
Fates. Chrysippus, in Aetius, Diels Dox. p. 323: Moitpas 8é xadetobar 
amd tod Kat atras Siapepurpod KAwb kai Adyerw Kat “Arporov’ 
Adxeow pév, ort Ov KANpov AcAdyxXaow Exagrot kara. TO SiKavoy drroveperat’ 
Arpomov 8¢, drt dwerdberos Kal dperaBAnros éorw 6 kal? Exacta diopiopos 
e€ didiwy xpovuv' Kiwbd dé, dre ) Kata Thy cipappevnv Siavéwnos Kal 
Ta yevveopeva Tois KAwOopévors taparAnciws die~dyerar. The Stoic 
Cornutus, Zheologiae Graecae compendium 13 (after speaking of 
Eivapnévy and “Avdyxyn): xat’ dddov 8 tpdrov tpeis Motpar rapeo- 
dyovrat Kara To Tpioody Tov xpovuv’ Kal KAwOd pev dvopacta pla adrv 
dad Tod KAwoe epiwy éorxevar TH ywopeva, GAAwY dAdo erurerrévTwr, 
... Adyeois § ddAn dard Tod TH Kata Tos KAYpous Ape Ta drrodiddpeva 


2.52 ASCLEPIUS 


éxdotw mpoceouxévat, “Atporos dé} tpitn Sia 7d drpérrws exew Th Kar’ 
abriv Siateraypéva. % 8 airiy Sivapus oixedws dv Sdéar trav tpudv 
mpoonyopiaw tuyxdvew. A tripartition of destiny, corresponding to 
Plato’s distribution of functions among the three Moirai, is implied 
in Chrysippus’ statement that ciyapyévy is Adyos Kal’ by Ta pay 
yeyovdra yéyove, Ta 3% ywopeva yiverar, ra S88 yernodpeva yerrerat, 
and in Cic. De div. 1. 55. 126 (from Posidonius), ‘causa aeterna 
rerum, cur et ea quae praeterierunt facta sint, et quae instant fiant, et 
quae sequentur futura sint’. Cf. Ps.-Aristot. De mundo 7.5, 401 b 14: 
Td Te wept Tas poipas Kal Tov drpaxrov (Pl. Rep. 10) eis robrS mws vever, 
Tpets piv yap ai potpar kara ods xpdvous pepepirpévat, vipa 82 drpdxrov 
TO pev éLerpyacpévoy, Td Se péhdov, 7d 52 weprorpeddsuevov' réraxrar dz 
Kara perv TO yeyoves pia Tov porpav, “Atporos, éret ra rape Odvra révta 
drperrd éorw, kata 587d péddov Adyeots, cis mdvra yap f Kara dtow 
peéver Ags (the functions assigned by Plato to Lachesis and Atropos 
are here interchanged), xara 38 7d éveords KAwOd, ovparepaivoved te 
kal k\dOovea éxdorw ra oixela.... Tatra 8% wdvra éorly odk GAXO TH 
wAiv 6 Oeds. Lactant. Drv. inst. 2. 10. 19 ff.: ‘omnia enim tribus 
temporibus contineri necesse est, praeterito praesenti futuro. Prae- 
teriti est origo, praesentis substantia, futuri dissolutio. Quae omnia 
in singulis hominibus apparent ; et incipimus enim cum nascimur, et 
sumus cum vivimus, et desinimus cum interimus. Unde etiam tres 
Parcas esse voluerunt, unam quae vitam hominis ordiatur, alteram 
quae contexat, tertiam quae rumpat ac finiat.’! 

The writer of Asc/. III has substituted abstract and impersonal 
terms for the names of the three Moirai, but has retained the 
distinction of their functions. His civappévy, which ‘generates the 
dpxai’, or ‘sows the seed’, is Lachesis, who has to do with the past, 
and has determined the course of the man’s life before or at the 
moment of birth ; his rdé:s, which ‘ arranges the events in succession % 
and ‘maintains their interconnexion’, is Clotho, who has to do with 
the present, i.e. with the events of the man’s life as they occur one 
after another, and spins the thread by which they are connected; 
his dvdéyxyn, which ‘compels the réAy to follow’, is Atropos, who has 
to do with the future, i.e. with the results which will issue from the 


1 A different application of the names of the three Moirai oceurs in Plut. Fae. in 
orbe lunae 30. 13. There, Atropos is connected with the sun, and tiv dpydv 
évbiSwor rijs yevéoews (i.e. of the birth of the individual man) by supplying the 
vovs ; Clotho is connected with the moon, and ‘combines and mixes’ vods with 
yuxi ; Lachesis is connected with the earth, and supplies the body. In Plut. Gen. 
Socr, 591 B (Vision of Timarchus) there is a different scheme again. 








ASCLEPIUS III: 4oa 253 


dpxy, and whose name (= drperos) of itself suggests necessity. He 
probably did not get the notion of the three Fates directly from Plato 
or Chrysippus, but followed the lead of some later writer who was 
influenced by them. 

The words xai véuos have been wrongly inserted in Lydus. Each 
of the three members of the triad must be represented by a single 
word, and régéis must therefore stand alone. 

id est textus et dispositio temporis rerum perficiendarum. 
This clause is omitted in Lydus; but as the terms cipappévn and 
dvdyxyn have been explained, a corresponding explanation of rdgis is 
needed. 

vel totus constat ex ordine : an allusion to the primary meaning 
of the word xécpos. 

iacto velut semine. The Stoics habitually spoke of omreppa 
(and ovepparixoi Adyor) in a similar sense. Cf. Zeno in Arius 
Didymus, Diels Dox. p. 458: 8d tavrns 88 (sc. ris Brys) diabety 
rov Tod wavtos Adyov, by evior cipappévyy Kadodow, ofdv wep kal ev rH 
yoy To oréppo. Sen. Wat. guaest. 3. 29. 2: ‘sive anima est mundus, 
sive corpus natura gubernabile ut arbores et sata, ab initio eius usque 
ad exitum quicquid facere, quicquid pati debeat, inclusum est. Ut 
in semine omnis futuri hominis ratio (= \éyos, plan or design) con- 
prehensa est, et legem barbae canorumque nondum natus infans habet, 
totius enim corporis et sequentis actus in parvo occultoque linea- 
menta sunt ; sic origo mundi (after each ecpyrosis) non minus solem 
et lunam et vices siderum et animalium ortus quam quibus mutarentur 
terrena continuit.’ 

40a. dei nutu sunt effecta. Cf. Plutarch in Stob. 1. 5. 19, 
vol. i, p. 81 W.: 70 yap cipappévov drperrov Kal drapdBarov, ' yéurep 
povov Shpicr vevoy, | Kaprepa rovrw Kéxhwor’ dvdyna” (lyr. fr. adesp. 
143° B) xat rerpwpéry. 

sua lege et ratione divina. asio stands for ddyos, which is 
here used as the Stoics habitually used it. It means the plan, 
purpose, or design of God. It is no more hypostatized or personified 
than vépos, with which it is coupled. 

In place of the véyos kai Adyos of God, the writer might equally 
well have spoken of the zpévow of God; and in some other 
Hlermetica (e.g. Stob. Exc, XII. 1) the same thought is expressed 
by saying that eizappém is subject or subordinate to God’s 7 povoua. 
Cf. Iamblichus, Zp. ad Macedonium, Stob. 2. 8. 45, vol. ti, p. 174 W.: 


~ ‘4 
7a 8 aira ra Sevrepa trois mporyoupévors airos ouvnprytat, Kat 7d év 


254 ASCLEPIUS 


yevécrer TAOS rpds Thy dpéporov oiaiar (i. e., as the writer of Asc/. IIT 
might have said, to God and eternity), cat rdvra ovrw ra Tis elpappevys 
owijrrae mpds Thy mponyoupevyv mpovoiay. Kar abryy tiv ovotay dpa 
émumdéxerar 4 eipappévy TH Tpovoig, kal 7 elvar tiv mpdvody éorw H 
cipappévy, cal dx’ abrijs kal wepl airiy ipéoryke. 

nec ira etenim commoventur nec flectuntur gratia. cijap- 
pévn, avdyxn, and rdéis are not persons; but as they are component 
parts or aspects of the operation of the dé cae/estes, the personal 
deities by whom the Kosmos is administered in subordination to the 
will of the supreme God, the writer here speaks of them in terms 
which would more properly apply to the di cae/estes themselves. 
The di ¢erren’ may be moved to anger, and propitiated by prayer 
and sacrifice ; but the dé cae/estes are dafeis. At the same time, the 
Hermetist’s language has perhaps been influenced here by the 
traditional personification of the three Moirai. The thought that 
the Fates are inexorable was a commonplace of Greek literature ; 
(cf. Eur. Ad. 962 ff.: xpetocov obdtvy "Avdyxas nipov' .. . povas 8 
ott’ éxt Bwpods torw ovre Bpéras Oeas ehOetv, ob opayiwv KAveu") but it 
was specially emphasized by the Stoics, who expressed in these terms 
their conviction that the laws of nature are immutable. Cf. Sen. 
Dial, 11. 4. 1: ‘accusare fata possumus, mutare non possumus: 
stant dura et inexorabilia. Nemo illa convicio, nemo fletu, nemo 
causa movet. Nihil umquam ulli remittunt.’ Sen. Vat. guaest. 2. 35: 
‘ Fata inrevocabiliter ius suum peragunt, nec ulla commoventur prece, 
Non misericordia flecti, non gratia sciunt.... si sacrificiis ... exorari 
iudicas, divina non nosti.’ 

serviunt necessitati rationis aeternae, quae [aeternitas] 
inaversibilis, inmobilis, insolubilis est. The writer here says 
that necessitas servit necessitat’?; but this is a not unnatural 
inadvertence. 

It is not eternity, but the eternal ordinance of God, or the destiny 
which God ordains, that is znaverstbilis &c. Aeternitas must there- 
fore be excised. Quae may be taken to refer either to xecessitati or 
to vationts ; the meaning is much the same in either case. 

40 b. [[Haec ergo est aeternitas...et sequi.]| It might be 
possible to take this passage as a digression suggested by the words 
rationis aeternae above. But its contents have no direct bearing on 
the subject of eiuappévy, the di caelestes, and the di ¢erreni; and on 
the other hand they are closely connected with the discussion of 
time and eternity in chs. 26b-32a. It seems probable therefore 








ASCLEPIUS III: 4ob,c 255 


that the passage is a misplaced fragment, and originally followed 
ch. 324. 

4oc. Hventus autem vel fors insunt omnibus permixta 
mundanis. J/undanis, whether it stands for xocpuxois or éduKois, 
must here be taken as applying to the sublunar region of the 
Kosmos alone. The heavenly bodies are both xoopixdé and tree, 
in the wider sense of those terms; but there cannot be any 
admixture of eventus vel fors in their movements. Possibly 
mundanis may be a misreading for humanis, 

In the traditional text, the teaching of Hermes ends with these 
words, and he proceeds to say (40d) ‘dictum est vobis de 
singulis’ &c., i.e, ‘I have finished’. But his discourse cannot 
have ended thus abruptly; the original conclusion must therefore 
have been lost or misplaced. 

It is also apparent that the discussion of eiyappévy is incomplete. 
The sentence ‘eventus autem . . . permixta mundanis’ must have 
been the beginning of a paragraph in which réyq was dealt with, 
and its relation to cizapyévy explained. The writer has been 
insisting on the immutability of eivapuévm, i.e. of the operation 
of the dé caelestes; and in order to find scope for the agency of 
the di fervent, to show that their eféctus are not irriti, and to 
justify the temple-cults by which men seek to influence them, 
he must necessarily have proceeded to explain that there are 
after all some things which are not immutably predetermined. 
The single sentence on fors which has survived is not sufficient 
for the purpose; it must have been followed by a passage, now 
lost, which contained the explanation needed. And in dealing 
with this subject, he can hardly have failed to touch also on the 
topic of human free will (73 éf’ jyiv, or 76 airegovcwov), which 
was inseparably connected with eiyapunévy in the discussions of 
the Stoics. His immediate business was to find room for freedom 
of action on the part of the di ¢erren’; but in this respect, the 
di terreni stand on the same footing as mankind. If all things 
without exception are determined by an immutable destiny ad- 
ministered by the df caelestes, nothing remains to be done either 
by di ¢erveni or by men. 

The existence of fors is denied by Iamblichus, Stob. 2. 8. 46, 
vol. ii, p.175 W.: i 8€ ms tabrdéparov kal rv riyyy érewrdywv 
dvatpeiy oierat ri tdéw, pabérw ds odd éorw ev 7G wavti draxroy, 
obd” ererodides, ob88 dvev airias, oddé aéporov, ove eix@ od8’ dard 


256 ASCLEPIUS 


rod pmdevds erewdv, 0888 Kare ovpBeBykds. ovKxovv dvaipeirar 7 
rdéis Kat ovvéxeta Tov airdv, Kal q Tov dpxyav evacis, Kat 7 Se 
Bdrwv Siaretvovca Tov mpdTwv emxpdrea. BéATiov obv ahopiler bat 
Cy rixy! (lege tv rixnv?) © « ). trav (8%) mradvwv tdéeo "H 
kat GAdwv 34 rwov %! (lege Kal dAAwv (év)rivov 3) (airiav)?) éorw 
Zpopos Kal cuvaywyds airia, mpecBurépa tov cuvidvTwr, qv TOTe 
piv Oedv erixadotper, [iv] (rote 88 Saipove Heeren) zrapeAypaper. 
fika piv yap dy ta Kpelrrova airia Tov owi(dvrov) %, Geds éorw 
atrov epopos, Srérav 58 Ta ev TH pice, Safuwv, del otv per’ 
airlas wévra émurehetrat, Kal ob8? Sriotv draxrov éy Tois yryvopevors 
érevoépxerar. (Cf. Ascl. III. 39: obde draxrov.) That is to say, 
nothing takes place without a cause; events which men call 
‘accidental’, as well as all other events, result from a process of 
causation which is operated by a personal agent ; and that agent 
is either a god or a daemon. The writer of Asc/. III would 
have regarded ri év rH dice (the operation of the laws of nature 
in the corporeal Kosmos) as the sphere of action of the @& 
caelestes; and perhaps he would have said that the beneficent 
working of those laws is sometimes perverted by fors vel eventus 
(=% draxros picts tis yevéoews), and that it is the function of 
the di ¢erreni to remedy the evils thence resulting. 

27 e-29 a. This passage is described in its opening words as 
a discussion of ‘the mortal and immortal (parts of man)’. Its 
central interest lies in the account which it contains of that 
which awaits man’s immortal part after its separation from the 
mortal part, i.e. in the description of the lot of the soul 
after death. 

In the MSS., this passage has been inserted into the discus- 
sion of time and eternity, 26b-32a, where it is obviously out 
of place. The subject with which it deals, viz. the life after 
death, is a suitable topic to conclude with ; (compare the position 
of the myths in which the same topic is dealt with in the 
Gorgias, Phaedo, and Republic of Plato;) and as I have failed 
to find any other place in the treatise where the passage could 
be appropriately introduced, I think that it probably stood where 
T have put it.’ 


1 Lam here assuming that chs, 27 e-29 a formed part of the dialogue which I 
call Asc/. ILL, and that the only question is, in what position in that dialogue they 
originally stood, But it is not impossible that the compiler of the Aéyos TéAetos 
got this part of it from another document, which might be called ‘ Asclepius TV’. 


































ASCLEPIUS III: 27 €-29 a 257 


27€. tois ydp moddods 6 Odvaros goBet ds Kaxdy péytotoy, — 
multos enim spes timorque mortis excruciat. The translator 
must have had before him a different reading of the Greek. The 
text of Stobaeus is to be preferred. 

Odvaros yap yiyverar Siarvoer (-o1g MSS.) xapdvros odpatos, Kal 
70d AprOyod whypwhévros ‘rv dppdv tod odparos: Gpiluss ydp éorw 
4 Gppoy to odparos.'—Mors enim efficitur dissolutione 
corporis labore defessi, et numeri conpleti ‘quo! corporis 
‘membra in unam machinam ad usus vitales aptantur. The 
genitive wmeré conpleti apparently stands for the Greek genitive 
absolute, rod dp.O.00 wAnpwhévros. Cf. ch. 29C, Uiventis. . . partis, 
The number which ‘is completed’ must be a number of units 
of time. If we read numeri conpleti (annorum ad) guo(s) corporis 
membra &c., or something to that effect, the Latin yields a ‘satis- 
factory sense. 

In the Greek of Stobaeus, rav dppdv kr.d. is meaningless. The 
words dpydv rod odyaros may have come by duplication from 
dppoy) Tod odparos; and dpiOuds ydp éorw looks like a remnant 
of an explanatory note on rod dpiOpot mdypwhévros. There is 
nothing in the Greek, except 4 ppoy? Tod odparos, to correspond 
to corporis membra in unam machinam ad usus vitales aplantur. 

There is some awkwardness in the coupling of the gen. abs. 
numeri conpleli (rod adpiOyod w\npwbévros) with the ablative dis- 
solutione (diadr¥oa). This might be avoided by punctuating differ- 
ently, and writing ‘Mors enim efficitur dissolutione corporis labore 
defessi ; et numeri conpleti (annorum ad) quo(s) corporis membra 
+ + + aptantur, moritur [enim] corpus, quando hominis vitalia 
ferre posse destiterit’—@dvaros yap ylyverae diadsoe Kapdvros 
géparos' Kal rod dpibuod mAypwhévros Tov [ ] Xerav ef? & Siapéver (?)) 
% dppoy rod oédparos, droOvjoxe [8] 73 cdpa, dSrav paywére 
BWvyrar Pépew tov avOpimw)ov (ior). 

Compare the description of death in Pl. Zim. 8r D: tédos 8é, 
érediv trav wept Tov pveddv tprydvev of Evvappooerres pnxért dyréexwoe 
Seopoi, rH movy Suctduevor, pbidor rods THs Woxns ad Seopods, F 
88 Avoeioa Kara piow pel? Hovis ékérraro. 

moritur enim corpus: it is the body that dies, and not the 
soul. Cf. Aetius, Diels Doxogr. P. 436, where opinions are collected 
on the question Torépov éoriy tarvos xal Odvaros, Wuxis it) rvsparos : 
€.g. "ApuroréAys, . . . Odvarov 88 evar povov cdparos, ob Wyijs. 


kal tofro gort Odvaros, Siddusts odpartos Kat dpavicpds alcdijcews 
9806-8 Ss 


258 ASCLEPIUS 


cupatikis.—Haec est ergo mors, corporis dissolutio et 
corporalis sensus interitus. In this definition, the emphasis 
falls on céparos and cwparixjs, as it falls on odpa in the words 
drobvioxe. To cdpa above. Perhaps the writer is thinking of Pl. 
Phaedo 105 8: obxotv 4 Wuxi) ob déxerat Gévarov ;—ov. In Pl. Gorg. 
5248, a different definition of death occurs, the Hermetist’s word 
SidAvors being used, but differently applied: 6 @dvaros rvyxdver 
dv... od8%& dAdo H dvoiv mpaypdrow duidvows, ris Yuyijs Kai 
rod céparos, dm dddjdow. Chrysippus (Nemesius De nat. hom. 
c. 2, p. 33) defined death as xwpiopds Yuxijs ard odparos ; this 
agrees with the definition in Pl. Gorg. 

cwpatich aloyors is that kind of sensation which depends on 
the use of the bodily organs of sense. When the body ‘is 
dissolved’, this kind of sensation necessarily ceases, But there 
must be another kind of sensation, which is independent of the 
bodily organs, and continues after death; for the writer says in 
the following chapter that the soul possesses an imperishable 
faculty of sensation (d0dvarov aic6yow), and is thereby rendered 
liable to suffer endless pain. The disembodied soul which is 
tortured by air-storms must be no less capable of receiving sense- 
impressions from material things than the embodied soul. 

On the question what part of the man survives death, Plato’s 
language varies. In Phaedo 66 he says that épwres, érBuyiar, 
géfor and the like (i.e. the md6y which accompany aioOyos) 
are caused by the union of the soul with the body, and speaks 
of death as a way of escape from them; but it is only he who 
has practised the separation of soul from body during his earthly 
life that is released from these wd@y by death; for (7. 81) the 
soul which has given itself up to bodily desires and pleasures is 
still, after its departure from the body, tainted and clogged by 
an intermixture of that which is bodily, and therefore cannot rise 
from the earth, but flits about it, as a troubled ghost, until it 
enters another body. Similarly, the Hermetist appears to assume 
that those souls at least which merit punishment retain after death 
something analogous to cwparixi) ato Pyors. 

In the Zimaeus (698 ff.) Plato says that man has both an 
immortal soul and ‘another kind of soul, which is mortal’ (dAdo 
<ldos Wuxis, 7 Ovyrév); and in this ‘mortal soul’ reside pleasure 
and pain, confidence and fear, anger, hope, ale@yo1s dAoyos, and 
reckless desire, (i.e. alo@yois and the zd6y which go with it). 








ASCLEPIUS III; 28 259 





See also Zim. 42 A, D,&, and 61 C (Yuxis doov Ovyrdv). It is implied 
in the Zimaeus that 76 Aoywortxdv (which corresponds to the Oeios 
vots of the Hermetist) alone is immortal, and 73 éAoyov (including 
both 7o @vpoedés and 7d érOvpyrixdv) is mortal. But if the soul 
is in part mortal, it does not necessarily follow that its mortal 
part always perishes at the moment of the separation of soul from 
body ; these passages of the Zimaeus do not therefore necessarily 
exclude the possibility of a bodily taint of passion persisting in 
some souls after death, as is asserted in the Phaedo, and with it, 
a corresponding liability to pain. In the myths of the Gorgias, 
Phaedo, and Republic, which the Hermetist would probably accept 
more literally than Plato intended, the persistence of atc@nois after 
death is necessarily assumed. 

As to the notion of a mortal part of the soul, cf. Adammonis Resp. 
8. 6 a ( Zestim.), where it is said that the doctrine that ‘man has two 
souls’ is taught in ‘ Hermetic writings ’. 

In the story told by Sulla in Plut. De facie in orbe dunae, ch. 28, the 
term wvyx7 is restricted to the lower part of the soul, and it is said 
that this part survives the dissolution of the body for some time, 
but perishes later on. 

28. summi daemonis. The ‘supreme daemon’ must be the 
chief or ruler of the daemons who dwell in the region of the air, 
Paul, Zh. 2. 2, mentions tov dpyovra ris égovaolas rod dépos (a 
notion presumably derived from Pagan sources), and identifies him 
with the Devil. Cf. Lactant. Div. ins. 2. 14. 5 (ZLestim.) : 
‘immundi spiritus, . . . quorum . . . diabolus est princeps. Unde 
illum Trismegistus daemoniarchen vocat.’ Lactantius is probably 
referring to the Adyos rédeos; and if so, the Greek term here 
translated by swmmus daemon must be Sapovidpyns. 

Porphyry De adst. 2. 41 fin. mentions a ‘president’ of the 
maleficent daemons (rv xpocordra airév), Iamblichus, as reported 
by Lydus (De mens. 4, 25, quoted in note on ch. 33b below), said 
that there is péyiords rs daiuov who is chief or commander of all 
the daemons, and that he is MAovrwy. But I have found no exact 
parallel elsewhere to the statement that ‘the chief of the daemons’ 
acts as judge of the dead. In Pl. Gorg. 524 a, souls from Asia are 
judged by Rhadamanthus, and souls from Europe by Aeacus, but 
Minos is superior to both, and acts as judge of appeal in doubtful 
cases. In Pl, Rep. 10. 614, the souls which have quitted the 
body come eis rérov rw Saipdviov (a reader might take this to mean 
$2 


260 ASCLEPIUS 


‘a place belonging to the daemons ”), where there are two openings 
hard by each other in the earth below, and two openings over against 
them in the sky above; and judges (unnamed) are seated ‘between 
these’, i.e. between earth and sky, or in other words, in the air. 
In the myth of the Phaedo (107 D, 113 p), the dead man is conducted 
by ‘his own daemon’ (i.e. his guardian Genius) to ‘a certain 
place’, where he ‘is judged *, but we are not told by whom. These 
passages of Plato were probably known to the Hermetist ; and he 
may have been thinking also of Osiris, who, according to the 
Egyptian Book of the Dead, presides over the court of forty-two 
judges by which the dead are tried (Wiedemann, Re/. anc. Lg., Eng. 
tr. p. 249 ff.). But he might have given to the swmmus daemon 
(whom he makes judge of the dead) the same name that Iamblichus 
did, and called him Pluto. In Propertius 4. 11, the deceased 
Cornelia is uncertain whether the judge by whom she is to be tried 
is pater (i. e. Dis or Pluto), or Aeacus with his brothers (Minos and 
Rhadamanthus) as assessors. 
- in sibi conpetentibus locis: i.e. in the higher and untroubled 
stratum of the atmosphere. 

sin autem delictorum inlitam maculis vitiisque oblitam 
viderit. Cf. Pl. Gorg. 524D (Jowett’s tr.): ‘When a man is 
stripped of the body, all the natural or acquired affections of the 
soul are laid open to view.’ And when there comes before the judge 
one who ‘has no soundness in him, but his soul is marked with the 
whip, and is full of the prints and scars of perjuries and crimes with 
which each action has stained him, ... him’ the judge ‘beholds, ... 
and despatches him ignominiously to his prison, and there he under- 
goes the punishment which he deserves ’, The notion that the stains 
and scars of sin are visible in the disembodied soul is adopted and 
amplified by Plutarch in his ‘ Vision of Thespesius’, De sera 
numinis Vindicla 22. 

desuper ad ima deturbans. As the judge flings the guilty 
soul downward into the region of troubled air, the place of judge- 
ment must be in the untroubled air above. All souls alike ascend to 
that level to be judged ; the pious are permitted to remain there; the 
wicked are flung down thence to the lower air. 

aeris igni et aquae saepe discordanti[bu]s. Storms are caused 
by conflicts of the air with water or fire, or with both at once. 
Cf. ch. 33 b below. It is assumed that the atmosphere consists of 
two distinct strata, an upper stratum in which the air is pure, and 








ASCLEPIUS III: 28 261 


consequently untroubled, and a lower stratum, in which it is inter- 
mingled with watery and fiery exhalations from the earth below, and 
is consequently disturbed by frequent storms. The water and fire 
manifest themselves in the form of rain and lightning. 

An early suggestion of this notion may be seen in the myth of the 
Phaedo, where the abode of the blest is situated on the ‘ true surface 
of the earth’, which rises above the air into the aether, so that the 

air is to them as the sea is to us, and the aether is to them as the air 
ig to us; for we live, not on the true surface, but ‘like frogs round 
a pond’, in hollows of the earth, ‘into which the water and the mist 
and the air have flowed together’. 

If a reader of the Phaedo took the ‘aether’ of that dialogue to 
mean ‘pure air’, and assumed the ‘ yet fairer mansions’ mentioned 
in 114 C to be situated in the region of celestial fire above the pure 
air, he would get an atmospheric system analogous to that of Ascd. III. 

Ascheme resembling that of the Hermetist somewhat more closely 
occurs in the Zprnomis, written soon after Plato’s death. We are 
there told (981 8 ff.) that there are five corporeal elements, viz. wip, 
aidxip, ayp, twp, and yj. Above the earth, the four other corporeal 
elements lie in successive strata, rtp being the highest. “Soul is in- 
corporeal ; and by the combination of soul with bodies in which one 
or other of the five elements predominates, five different orders of 
{Ga are formed. Men, beasts, and plants together constitute the 
lowest of the five orders ; they have bodies composed mainly of earth, 
and dwell on earth. The astral gods are the highest order; they 
have bodies composed mainly of wip, and dwell in the stratum 
of wip. Between these extremes are three other orders of living 
beings, corresponding to the three intermediate elements, viz. 
aidiip, dnp, and tdup. The beings who have bodies composed of 
aiéjp, and dwell in the aifjp, are called Sa/uoves." The beings whose 
bodies are composed of dyp have their abode in the dyjp, but 


1 984.D: pera 58 tovrous (sc, rods dparods Beods, the astral gods,) xal dd rovras 
éfijs Baipovas, (The comma after daipovas in Stallbaum’s edition should be altered 
to a full stop.) These words, as they stand in the traditional text, must necessarily 
be taken to mean that the ‘ aetherial’ beings alone are called daemons. but it is 
probable that there is a lacuna here, and that the passage originally ran somewhat 
as follows : ‘ Next after the astral gods come the daemons. (Of these there are 
three orders, having bodies composed respectively of aldjp, djp, and biwp, The 
aiépoy -yévos of daemons dwells in the second region of the universe ;) the dépov 
yévos, occupying the third and middle region’ &c. In support of this, it should be 
noted that Chalcidius, whose daemonology (Comment. in Timaeum 128 fi.) is based 
mainly on the Zginomis, adopts the theory of the five cosmic strata and their 
occupants unaltered (except that he substitutes Aamecta substantia quam Graect 
iypaciay appellant for twp, and says that this signifies the dense air which men 


262 ASCLEPIUS 


travel to and fro between the higher and lower strata; they act 
as ‘interpreters’ or messengers between those above and those 
below (cf. Plato’s ‘daemons’ in Sympos. 2020 ff.), and we ought 
therefore to ‘honour them with prayers’. (The writer of the Zpinomis 
assigns no distinctive name to these ‘aerial’ beings, but describes 
them as ra péoa trav Cgwv.) The beings whose bodies are composed 
of water are called jp/Oco.;' they are sometimes visible, and differ in 
this respect from the ‘aetherial’ and aerial’ beings, whose bodies are 
transparent and always invisible. 

The scheme of the elements in the Zfinomis agrees with that of 
Plato, and with the system of the Stoics, in making fire the highest 
element ; but it differs in dividing the air into two distinct substances, 
named respectively aifjp and dp, and thus making a list of five 
elements, in place of the four of which Empedocles had spoken. 
The aifrjp of the Zpinomis has no connexion with the ‘fifth sub- 
stance’ of Aristotle ; for it is not the celestial element, but is situated 
below the fire in which the heavenly bodies are placed.’ It corre- 


breathe), but includes the occupants of the three intermediate strata, aether, aer, 
and éypacia, under the common name daemones, Perhaps Chalcidius had before 
him a less damaged text of the Zpznomis. 

 Epinomis 985 b; 7d 58 bdaT0s Smépnrov! bv Hpibeov piv dnenageer av Ts 6pOds 
deed tar (@ abrod yeyovévat!, wal rodr’ elva Tore piv dpwpevov, dAdore 5e droxpu~ 
peev ddnArov ywyvdpevor, Oadpa nar’ duvdpdvy dw napexdpevov. ‘The text is corrupt. 
The watery kind ought to be called the fourth, and not the fifth ; there is nothing 
to answer to pév; and the words é atrod yeyovéva are meaningless. The abode 
of the watery beings is not clearly indicated; but they are evidently phantoms 
which appear to men on land; and the writer seems to have regarded them, not as 
inhabiting the waters, but as hovering in the moist air near the ground (the bypacia 
of Chalcidius’ paraphrase). It is the watery or misty substance of their bodies that 
makes them faintly visible. 

The word #uiGeor, in its primary use, was applied to the Homeric ‘ heroes’, who 
were called ‘ half-gods’ as being sons or near descendants of a god and a mortal 
woman. In Pl. Afol. 27 D, Socrates says that the word Saipoves, if it does not 
mean gods, must mean Ge@v maides vd0or Tues 7 be vunpay th Ex Twow GAdaw (i.e, 
beings such as the Homeric heroes whom the word 7yl@eor was commonly used to 
describe) ; but that passage was not meant to be taken seriously. The writer of 
the Zpinomis identifies juideo rather with ‘heroes’ in the post-Homeric sense, 
i.e. ghosts of dead men ; and he seems to have invented a new etymology of the 
word, connecting it with @éa and @edo8a, and assuming it to mean ‘half-seen’ 
(fu:0éaror), Perhaps the original text of the sentence was to the following effect : 
7d 88 (2) Vdaros [wéumrov] dv HpiBeov py dremdceev av Tis [dps amend Cov] 
(évopaCer@ar bea 70) & adrod -yeyovévat (or possibly, 5’ abrd 74 ef tdaros yeyovévat), 
kat robr’ elvat ToT’ pev dp@pevov x.7.A. *As to the kind of beings consisting of 
water, we may conjecture that they are called Aai/-deitées (or rather halj-‘ seettzes”) 
for this reason, that they are made of water, and that things of that sort are some- 
times visible, but at other times are hidden and disappear; for they present a 
strangely faint and shadowy appearance.’ 

2 Maximus Tyrius, A.D. 130-200, uses the word aléjp in the same sense as the 
writer of the Zpznomis ; e.g. Max. Tyr. (Hobein) 39. 4: obx épds rdv bmép eparijs 
tobrov otpavdy cat 7d &v abt@ dorpa, xat Tov bn’ adTG aldépa, nai imd TodTw dépa ; 
Tb, 11, 12: ToOro pey Kar’ odpavdy ai dorépwy pices, TobTO 5B ad Kar’ aidépa ai 












































ASCLEPIUS III: 28 263 


sponds to the upper air of the four-element scheme, as the dip of the 
Epinomis corresponds to the lower air of that scheme. 

The writer of Asc. III agrees with the Zpinomis, firstly, in 
dividing the atmosphere into two distinct strata, and secondly, in 
recognizing three distinct orders of beings intermediate between 
astral gods and men. (See Lydus below.) But he must have 
derived his notions about the atmosphere, not from the Zpinomis 
directly, but from the more elaborate physical system of Posi- 
donius. 
aeternis poenis. Aeternus here means ‘lasting through endless 
time’, and not, asin chs. 26 b-32, ‘timeless’, Some souls are 
sentenced to everlasting punishment ; and it is of these souls alone 
that the writer is here speaking. But it would be surprising if he 
said that all except ‘the pious’ will suffer everlasting punishment ; 
and Lydus, in the passage quoted below, supplies positive evidence 
that he did not say so. Besides, we are told below that there 
are various degrees of punishment (‘pro delictorum qualitatibus . . . 
reddentur poenae’); and it would seem to follow from this that 
there are some punishments which are not everlasting. The souls 
here described as ‘marked with stains of sin and defiled with vices’ 
must therefore be souls of extreme wickedness ; they must correspond 
to the dyéaror, to whom everlasting punishment is assigned in each 
of the three eschatological myths of Plato (Gorgias 525 Bff.: Phaedo 
113 &: Rep. 615 cfi.), and also in Plutarch’s ‘ Vision of Thespesius ’. 
But if this was the writer’s meaning, it is not likely that he omitted 
to express it here, and left the reader to infer it from what follows ; 
it seems probable therefore that some word equivalent to aviator has 
fallen out of the text. We might read, for instance, ‘ vitiisque 
oblitam (immedicabilibus)’. 
ut in hoc animae obsit aeternitas... Ergo ne his inplice- 
mur, verendum, timendum, cavendumque esse cognosce. 
Cf. Pl. Phaedo 107 c: etrep 4} Wuxi) 4Odvaros, . . . 6 Kivduvos viv 57) Kat 
Sdéevev dv Sewds elvat, ef tis adris dpedyoe. i pev yap jv 6 Gdvatos 


Barpdvew odaia, J. 9.6; the disembodied human soul becomes a daemon, @péupa 
al@épov, and resides in the aidip, i,e. in the upper stratum of the atmosphere. /d, 
ro. 3: the state of the seer, whose soul is r eased from the encumbrance of the 
body, gouwev . . . Yuxts mrjce petapoty, odx tnep dxpav pepopévns Tay dpi ev 
dxAvddet wal rapaTropevy TO dépe, GAN imep Todrov ipod év arabep@ aidépt, -yadryyns 
kal jpeplas abriy maparcpnovans ddvmos ént 70 dAnGés, Ent tiv Gyev. In his doctrine 
of the disembodied soul, Maximus Tyrius has been influenced by Posidonius; and 
his dip and aléqp correspond to the two atmospheric strata of which Posidonius 


spoke, 


264 ASCLEPIUS 


Tod mavrds dradayn, Epuaov dy Hv Trois Kaxols droJavotct Tob Te obparos 
diya. drnhAdxOat Kal ris abrav xaxtas perd. ris Wuyys’ viv 8é K.T.A. 

((Praescia etenim omnium rerum divinitate... reddentur 
poenae.)) This sentence, where it occurs in the MSS, is irrelevant, 
and breaks the connexion between ‘ poenis ... tanto... severioribus’ 
and the following question of Asclepius, ‘Quare sunt digni maioribus 
poenis?’ On the other hand, in the place to which I have trans- 
posed it, it serves as an amplification of the preceding passione 
poenarum, and, by its mention of God, leads on to the following 
question about punishments inflicted by man. Praescia divinttate 
implies divina lege, to which sola humana dege stands in contrast. 

Praescia is probably a mistranslation. There is no occasion for 
speaking of foreknowledge ; the meaning of the Greek must have 
been that God £nows all things. Men’s sins may be undetected by 
their fellow-men, but cannot be hidden from God; and since God 
knows all, we may be sure that the agent of God’s will, the judge of 
the dead, will suit the penalty to the offence (‘ pro delictorum quali- 
tatibus, perinde ut sunt’,) with absolute justice. 

Primo ... ((sunt mortalia)) terrena quae sunt omnia [{ ]]; 
tune ea etiam, quae &c. There are two parts of man which are 
mortal. The first of these two parts is the body ; the second is that part 
of the soul which is inseparably connected with the bodily functions, 
and perishes when the body perishes. This sentence then is a 
repetition in other words of the preceding statement rotro dort 
Gdvaros, didAvors odparos kai ddavrpos alc Oijrews cwparixys. The part 
of the soul which perishes is that in which the cwparixy aleOyots 
resides ; it corresponds to the Ovyrdv et8os Wuxiis of Pl. Zim. 

Ea omnia ... poenis obnoxia (...) tanto post mortem 
severioribus subiciuntur. It is self-contradictory to say that the 
parts of man which perish at death are subjected to punishment after 
death ; the subject of sudiciuntur therefore cannot be ea omnia ; and 
as no other subject is to be found in the text, there must be a lacuna. 
It is evident that the missing subject must be ‘the immortal part of 
man’, The offences which man commits during his earthly life are 
punished by human law (or rather, are sometimes thus punished, 
though not invariably, since the offences may escape detection) ; and 
since this kind of punishment takes the form of destruction of the 
body and the bodily senses, or hurts inflicted on them, it may be 
said that ‘the mortal parts’ are liable to such punishment (‘ea omnia 
-++poenis obnoxia’). In contrast to these punishments, the writer 








ASCLEPIUS III: 28 265 


goes on to speak of another kind of punishment, to which ‘the 
immortal part’ is subjected ‘after death’. But in order to bring out 
the contrast, he ought to say that the first kind of punishment is 
inflicted zx this life. Now the words in vita, where they stand in 
the MSS., are pleonastic, the meaning being adequately expressed 
by dum viverent; but if we transfer them to the preceding 
sentence, they supply the contrast to post mortem which the sense 
requires. 

As to the relation between the punishments inflicted in life and those 
inflicted after death, compare the ‘Vision of Thespesius ’, Plut. De 
sera numints vindicta 22, p. 564¥: ‘There are three different kinds 
of punishment, Some men are chastised in the body and by means 
of the body; these are dealt with by ‘ Swift Penalty’ (low?) raxeta) ; 
and the chastisement which she inflicts is mild, and falls far short of 
that which awaits th e who need purgatorial pains (xaappds). 
Those whose vice is more difficult to cure, their ‘daemon’, after 
death, hands over to Dike. Those who are utterly incurable (oi 
mapmav dviarot) are rejected by Dike; and the third and fiercest of 
the servants of Adrasteia, she who is named Erinys, pursues them as 
they flee hither and thither, and makes away with them and sinks 
them in unspeakable and unseen depths (jddvure xal xaréducev els 
70 dppytov Kat ddparov) in pitiable and grievous sort... . The chastise- 
ments inflicted in this life, which affect the man through his possessions 
and his body, touch the bodily senses alone, and their grip is not so 
hard ; moreover, they do not lay hold of vice itself, but for the most 
part deal only with the outward appearance of vice.2 But if a man 
departs from earthly life unchastened and unpurged, Dike receives his 
soul stripped of the body, naked and exposed to view,...and he 
suffers a long course of punishment, during which every one of his evil 
passions is extracted from him by grievous pains, These pains exceed 
in intensity those suffered through the flesh, as much as the conscious- 
ness of waking life exceeds that of dreams in vividness.’ 

4b. p. 567.4: ‘Thespesius saw ® that the shades of those whose 


' The daiyor here spoken of is the ‘ Guardian Genins’ of the individual man, as 
in Pl. Rep. 10, 

* Read, perhaps, af &d ypnpdrov rad did Twpdraw Koddoes, (pds alabnaw el 
(otca), day ode Exovar dptpetay 08° abrhs émAapBdvovrar Ths xakias, dAAG mpds 
ddgav at moddat nai (. . .) [[mpés ais@now adrivy] ciow. 

8 ero ray piv -yvwpipes Tovapay yevouévev kal Koracbévtav abtd& rv omav 
odnér’ evar xarends (mepteropévyy?) vb5' dpotws ((ém))rpBopévny, dred (exdvrav 
4 movnpiay?), mept Tu Gdoyov Kal wabytixdy [emt] rover) (dege pdvov?) odaav: boo 
8 w.7.d. 


a 


hdd 


266 ASCLEPIUS 


wickedness had been discovered on earth, and who had suffered 
chastisement there, were not afterwards severely dealt with, and were 
not so heavily afflicted ; for their wickedness was incomplete, since 
it affected only the irrational part of the soul, in which the 
passions reside (rd ddoyov al zaOyrixdv); but those who had 
made a false pretence of virtue, and had lived their lives in 
secret vice, were beset by certain other daemons, who forced them 
to turn their souls inside out with pain and anguish; ... . and 
some of them the torturers flayed and cut open, showing them to be 
inwardly unsound and discoloured ; for their wickedness was in the 
rational and ruling part of the soul.’ Ie. he who openly and 
recklessly gives way to evil impulses, and in whom reason is alto- 
gether dormant, is less guilty than the cunning rogue, who misuses 
his faculty of reason in devising schemes for the concealment of his 
wickedness. The former is usually detected and punished in life. 
The latter may escape punishment on earth, where penalties attach 
only to the 8éga xaxias ; but ‘(poenis) tanto post mortem severioribus 
subicitur’. The dAoyov xal raOyrexov in Plutarch corresponds to ‘ea 
quae sunt corporali ratione viventia’ in Asc¢/. Ill. 

Jb. p. 567 F, the punishment of Nero after death is lightened, év pév 
yap Wdiknoe deduxévar Sixas(by his downfall and untimely death on earth). 

29a. Qui(a) damnati humanis legibus vitam violenter 
amittunt. The judge of the dead takes into account, in mitigation 
of his sentence, the punishment previously inflicted by an earthly 
judge. The writer here confines his attention to the case of capital 
punishment. Death in the course of nature is no hurt (cf. ch. 27 e: 
‘ de qua sollicitudo supervacua est’) ; it is merely paying a debt which 
all men owe. But the violent death inflicted on the criminal is a true 
penalty ; and if he has already paid this penalty, there remains so 
much the less for him to pay in the other world. 

Contra iusto homini (. . .). In the traditional text, the words 
‘Contra iusto homini’ (2g a) ‘in dei religione et in summa pietate 
praesidium est’ (29 b) are read as a continuous sentence. But 
iusto does not suit what follows ; we expect to be told that piety 
protects all who possess it, and not that it protects the just. 
Moreover, Lactantius, in quoting what is probably the Greek 
original of 29 b zi#., begins the sentence with pla pvdany eto€éBera ; 
and Cyril agrees with him in this. I have therefore concluded 
that the break in the text falls between iusto homini and in dei 
religione. The words Contra iusto homini, if they belong to the 





ASCLEPIUS III: 29a, 33b 264 





























preceding passage, 29a, may be the beginning of a sentence in 
which the case of a righteous man unjustly condemned by human 
judges (e.g. Socrates) was dealt with, as in Pl. Gorg. fin. 

33b. ((Dico nunc daemonas . . . commotio)). In the Latin 
text, the everlasting punishment of the (incurably) wicked is spoken 
of (ch. 28, aefernis poenis), but there is no corresponding mention 
of “emporary and remedial chastisements. But Lydus tells us 
that the Adyos réXeos contained an account of ‘ purgatorial ’ 
suffering inflicted by daemons; and purgatorial chastisement is 
necessarily limited in time. A passage on the latter topic must 
therefore have been lost. It is clear that the right place for it 
would be after ch. 29a; and there can be little doubt that the 
passage to which Lydus refers, and which is missing in our text 
of the Latin Asc/epius, stood in this position. 
In De mens. 4. 32, Lydus does not quote verbally from the 
Adyos réAevos, but merely reports in his own words the contents 
of a passage in it. But in another place, 7, 4. 148, he quotes 
the actual words of the document ; and the sentence there quoted 
evidently formed part of the passage summarized in 4. 32: In 
his summary, he speaks of the station of each class of daemons 
in close connexion with the function discharged by that class, 
But in the text of the Adyos ré\«os, the station and the function 
must have been described in separate sentences; and it is the 
sentence describing the function of the xaOaprucol Saépoves that is 
preserved in De mens. 4. 148. As this sentence refers to the ‘ daemons 
of purgation’ alone, and not to daemons in general, it is necessary 
to insert rovrors before rois Safpoct. 
We are told by Lydus that the writer of the Adyos rédeos 
distinguished three orders of daemons, stationed respectively on 
earth, in the lower and troubled stratum of the atmosphere, and 
‘near the lunar region’ (i.e. in the higher and untroubled stratum 
of the atmosphere) ; and that each of these three orders of daemons 
discharges a distinct function with respect to human souls. ‘The 
very same doctrine is ascribed to Iamblichus in Lydus De mens. 
4.25: ore ro bd rHy ceAjvay Saupdviov pddAov Tpix Suypyrae Kara 
tov “IdpBdrxov' Kal rd pev mpdryeov abrod Tyswpov, TO Se aéprov 
kabaprixdv, TO 88 xpos rH ceAnviaxy Lévy cwripuy eorw, 5 8) Kal 
jpwikov? topev. iyetrOan 82 A€yerar wavtds rovrov péywrros Ts 
daipwv'? ofros 8 ay ety paddov & TAotrwv, ds dynow 6 aibrds 


! CE heroas in Ascl. Lat. 33d. 
2 Cf seemmi daemonis in Ascl. Lat. 28. 





\ 
' 


268 ASCLEPIUS 


‘IdpBdAtxos. The verbal resemblance between that passage and 
Lydus’ summary of the teaching of the Adyos réAcos in De mens. 
4. 32 is too close to be merely accidental; but it may be suffi- 
ciently accounted for by assuming that Iamblichus and the author 
of the Greek Asc/. III, in dealing with this subject, drew from a 
common source. 

Now the Latin fragment 336, which is clearly out of place 
where it stands in the traditional text, speaks of classes or orders 
of daemons in conjunction with atmospheric strata; it is therefore 
to be presumed that this fragment originally belonged to the 
passage summarized by Lydus, and I have accordingly inserted 
it here. 

The text of 33b is manifestly corrupt. The words ‘ quos inter 
aeris purissimam partem .. . et in terram’ are meaningless. 
Thomas accepts Koziol’s conjecture ef aethera in place of e¢ in 
terram; but that reading would not yield a satisfactory sense. 
It would imply that the beings in question inhabit a vacuum 
between the upper surface of the air and the lower surface of the 
aether ; and the notion of such a vacuum is unexampled. More- 
over, the following words ‘ubi nec nubilis locus est’ &c. clearly 
describe the upper stratum of the atmosphere, in contrast to the 
lower and stormy stratum mentioned in ch, 28 (‘ procellis turbini- 
busque aeris igni et aquae saepe discordanti[bu]s’). We are told 
that the place spoken of is above the region of clouds, and 


below the region in which the heavenly bodies move; it must 


therefore be below the lunar sphere, which is the upper limit 
of the atmosphere; and the only region which satisfies these 
conditions is that of the higher air. We must conclude then that 
the Hermetist wrote something which would be correctly rendered 
by in aeris purissima parte, and that the words ef in ¢erram have 
been wrongly inserted here. On the other hand, the abode of 
the preceding order of daemons would be more clearly described 
if in terra were placed beside xodiscum; and the phrase (im 
terra)) commorari nobiscum would then correspond to é atr@ tH 
tAy wapovras (in conjunction with 76 dvOpdreov) in the paraphrase 
of Lydus. 

The words supra nos also are out of place; for the writer 


could have no possible motive for informing his readers that a place — 


so lofty that clouds cannot rise to it is ‘above us’. But it would 
be strange if, while speaking of the habitations of the first and third 


h 








ASCLEPIUS III: 33b 269 


orders of daemons, he omitted to mention the abode of the daemons 
of the second order, namely, the lower air. It seems probable that 
he did mention it, and that supra nos is a remnant of the lost clause 
in which he spoke of it. In that context, supra nos might 
appropriately stand in contrast to modiscum in the preceding 
clause. 

The awkward guos... ef. . . guos may be accounted for as a 
mistranslation. The translator, we may suppose, read ods piv... 
ots 52 (‘some . . . others’), but failed to understand the words, 
he wrongly rendered ots by guos, and inserted credo to make 
sense. 

et heroas quos &c. To which of the classes of beings 
spoken of is the term Heroes applied? If we adopt the reading, 
‘(et quos .. .) (supra nos)), et heroas quos’ &c., the Heroes are 
inhabitants of the upper and purer air; and that is supported by 
the parallel statement of Iamblichus, as given by Lydus De mens. 
4.25: 70 88 mpos rH ceAqnaky Csivy cwrjpwv éorw, 6 3) Kal 
jpwixoy icwev. But we should rather have expected, from the use 
of the term Heroes by Posidonius &c., that, if employed at all in this 
passage, it would be used to denote the inhabitants of the /ower 
and furdid air ; and that sense might be got by reading ‘ Dico nunc 
daemonas quos credo ((in terra)) commorari nobiscum, et heroas 
quos (in aeris inferiore parte (?)) ((supra nos)), (et quos) in aeris 
purissima parte’ &c. There is, however, no good reason why a 
special name should here be given to one of the three classes; 
and it may be suspected that the Hermetist spoke merely of three 
orders of ‘daemons’, and that the word ervoas has been added 
_ by atranscriber. It is possible that in Lydus’ report of Iamblichus 
the words 6 8: kal sjpwixdy toev are out of place, and that we ought 
to read there rd 8& dépov (sc. Saydvov Pidov), ((d 8% Kal pwixdy 
tcpev,)) Kabapricdv, td 88 mpds TH cAqnaxy Lévy coripdv éorw 
(6. . . toper]}. 

ex signorum aliquorum agitatione commotio. Cf. Plut. 
De sera numinis vindicta 566%, where Thespesius, floating at or 
near the upper surface of the air, hears the Sibyl chanting her 
prophecies in the moon; ‘and he would fain have listened and 
heard more, but he was driven off by the eddies made by the moon 
as it swept along (rj piyy ris cedivyns eis totvaytiov domep ev tals 
divas é&ecsoOn), and so could hear but little.” It must be the 
air close to the lunar sphere that is thus disturbed; the region of 


270 ASCLEPIUS 


perfect calm lies somewhat lower than this, but above the region 
of clouds and storms. 

Lydus De mens. 4. 32. In his classification of daemons, the 
Hermetist seems to have been more nearly in agreement with the 
Epinomis, which distinguishes ¢hree orders of beings intermediate 
between astral gods and men, than with Posidonius, who, as far as 
we know, distinguished only ‘wo such orders, named respectively 
‘daemons’ and ‘heroes’. The cwrnptxol Sacuoves of Ascl. III, who 
are stationed ‘near the lunar sphere ’, or in the upper air, correspond 
to the ‘aetherial’ beings of the Zpinomis ; the kafaprixol Saipoves of 
Asc. III, stationed in the lower air, correspond to the ‘ aerial’ beings 
of the Zpinomis; and the ripmpod daipoves of Ase. III, who ‘ dwell 
with us on earth’, correspond, though somewhat less closely, to 
the ‘watery’ beings of the Zpinomis, whose habitation is on or close 
to the surface of the earth. 

The tipwpot dafpoves punish men in this life Similarly, 
Chalcidius Jn Timaewm 134 describes the ‘watery’ kind of daemons 
as maleficent beings, and as often employed, under God’s provi- 
dence, in the punishment of the wicked. These daemons, he 
Says, are ‘neque ita probabiles neque ita commodi’ (sc, as the 
aetherei and aerei daemones), ‘nec invisibiles semper, sed interdum 
contemplabiles, cum in diversas convertuntur figuras, exsanguium 
quoque ® simulacrorum umbraticas formas induuntur, obesi corporis 
illuviem trahentes. Saepe etiam scelerum et impietatis ultores* 
iuxta iustitiae divinae sanctionem, ultro etiam plerumque laedunt : 
tanguntur enim ex vicinia terrae terrena libidine, habentque 
nimiam cum silva communionem, quam malignam animam veteres 
vocabant.’ 

According to the summary given by Lydus, the Typo Baipmoves 
are present ev airy tH UAy. But all daemons alike reside in some 
sort of matter. The Hermetist probably meant, and perhaps said, 
that these ‘daemons of punishment’ have their abode é& airy 
Th (rot dvOpwrivov oidparos) try. They are the beings whose 
operation is seen in physical and moral disease. They are com- 

> They thus supplement the inadequate work of human judges. 

2 Read exsanguiumgue t ¢ 

* Did Chalcidius read something corresponding to ‘saepe etiam scelerum et 
impietatis ultores' &c, in his text of the Epinomis? In the extant text of that 
dialogue, there is a description of the mental and moral qualities of the aetherial 
and aerial beings, and of their attitude towards mankind, but there is no analogous 


account of the watery beings, though something of the sort seems to be needed to 
complete the scheme, 





ASCLEPIUS III: 33b 277 































parable to the axd#apra mvevpara of the synoptic Gospels; and 
if a man were wholly mastered by them, it would be a case of 
*demoniac possession.’' See Corp. XVI. 13-16, and Corp. IX. 3. 
Corp. XIII. 7b: riypwpods yap ev enarvrd exw, & wérep ;—obx ddALyous 
& réxvov, x7. (The word daiuoves is not there employed; but 
the hypostatized wa) which the writer of Corp. XIII describes 
as tiyszwpot correspond to the ripmpot datuoves of Asc?. III.) 

tods Sé kabaptixods, év 1o dépi wemnydras. The word wernydras 
cannot mean merely ‘placed’ or ‘stationed’; the meaning must 
be that these daemons have bodies composed of the air in which 
they dwell, and formed from it by a sort of coagulation. In this 
respect they resemble the ‘aerial’ beings of the Zpinomis. Cf. 
Apuleius De deo Socr. 11 : ‘daemonum corpora . . . ex illo purissimo 
aeris liquido et sereno elemento coalita.’? But this meaning is not 
clearly expressed ; and it is probable that some words haye been 
lost. The original text may have been to this effect ; év 79 (repryedw ?) 
aépe (reraypévous, kal é& abrot) weryydras. The air of which the 
bodies of these daemons are composed must be the impure and 
misty air of the lower stratum, not the serenum elementum of which 
Apuleius speaks. They are the forces of wind and storm, imagined 
as personal beings. 

peta Odvarov is Lydus’ substitute for érdv drakdayor tod odpartos 
in the original. 

dvarpéxew metpwpevas, The ‘daemons of purgation ’ detain impure 
souls in the lower air, which serves the purpose of a purgatory 
for the curable, as it also serves the purpose of a hell for the 
incurably wicked (ch. 28). There is no subterranean Hades; all 
disembodied souls, good and bad alike, ascend from the earth into 
the atmosphere above, and are there disposed of according to 
their merits, 

In the Homeric poems, and in early Greek literature in general, 
the prevailing view is that the abode of the dead is below the 
surface of the earth. There are traces of a different view, according 
to which the land of the departed is in some distant region on the 
surface of the earth, and is separated from the land of the living 
by a river, which the dead must cross ; but this notion was reconciled 
with the other by transferring the river of death from the surface 


1 Porphyry, dd Marcellam 11, speaks in similar terms of daemons residing in the 
soul (not the body): 008’ ad dAdos Kaxobdaipwv dvOpwmos 4 (3) movnpOy Saipdvaw 
evdairnpa tiv Yuya KaTackevdcas, 





292 ASCLEPIUS 


of the earth to the subterranean ‘kingdom of Hades’. Side by 
side with these conceptions, there persisted a popular belief that 
the ghosts of dead men hover in the air about their graves. This 
belief found expression in the cults of ‘heroes’; but it met with 
little recognition in literature ; and according to the literary tradition 
which maintained its supremacy down to Plato’s time, the soul, 
when it quits the body, goes dows to ‘the House of Hades’. Plato, 
in his eschatological myths, still adheres in part to this tradition, 
though he combines with it other conceptions derived from recent 
cosmology. In the Gorgias, the righteous soul goes to ‘the Isles 
of the Blessed’ (presumably on the surface of the earth); but the 
unrighteous soul goes to ‘ the prison-house of just retribution, which 
men call Tartarus’; and Tartarus, since nothing is there said to the 
contrary, must be situated where Homer placed it, in the depths 
of the earth, The place of punishment is also described as é 
“Adov; and this term likewise must be taken in its Homeric 
sense, as signifying a place beneath the earth. In Ref. 10, we 
are told that the judges, seated between earth and sky, ‘bade the 
righteous take the road which leads to the right hand and up 
through the sky; but the unrighteous they sent by the road which 
leads to the left hand and down’ (into the interior of the earth). 
In the myth of the Phaedo, the eschatological geography is more 
elaborate and more original. The abodes of the blest are situated 
on ‘the true surface of the earth’, i.e. on the summits of lofty 
table-lands which rise above the air into the aether;! but the 
wicked are plunged into Tartarus, which is a great hole or cavern, 
pierced right through the spherical earth ; and the Acherusian lake, 
‘whither come the souls of the most part of the dead’, is connected 
with Tartarus, and is situated in a cavity of the earth. The Homeric 
conception has here been modified to suit the new theory of the 


} This notion may have been suggested in part by the Homeric Olympus. But 
it is worth noting that the country where such a description of the earth as Plato 
gives in the Phaedo would most naturally present itself is Egypt. Residents in the 
Nile-valley cannot fail to be aware, by the direct evidence of their senses, that they 
are living in a watery hollow scooped out of a table-land of indefinite extent, which 
rises into the pure dry desert-air above. This table-land is uninhabited by living 
men; in ancient Egypt, it might well be imagined to be peopled by the dead, who 
were buried along its edge; and among the various incompatible notions of the 
Egyptians about the place of the departed, there was one according to which the 
kingdom of Osiris, the abode of the ‘justified’, lay to the west of the Nile-valley, 
i.e, somewhere on that ‘ true surface of the earth’, the Libyan desert-plateau, The 
myth of the Phaedo then may be reckoned among the evidences that Plato’s 
imagination at least, if not his philosophic doctrine, was affected by influences from 
Egypt. 








ASCLEPIUS III: 33b 273 


earth’s rotundity, and other advances of science; but the place of 
punishment is still subterranean. 

After Plato’s time, however, the new physics tended to prevail over 
the old literary tradition. The Stoics abandoned the notion of a sub- 
terranean Hades, and said that the soul, being a ‘pneumatic’ body (i. e. 
composed of fire and air), must rise when detached from the flesh. 
This is a necessary inference from Stoic principles, and was probably 
asserted by Chrysippus. (See Arnim Stoic. vet. fr. II, p. 224, § 815.) 
The earlier Stoics, however, concentrated their attention on the 
present life of man ; and though they said that some souls at least 
continue to exist as separate individuals until the ecpyrosis,? they took 
little interest in the state of the disembodied soul.2 But Posidonius 
followed the example of the Platonists in giving much attention to 
the life after death ;* and many of the statements of later writers on 
this topic are derived from him, or influenced by him. The writer 
of Ascd. Laz. III follows the lead of Posidonius in saying that all 
souls rise into the air on their departure from the body ; that the 
air consists of two distinct strata ; that impure souls are ‘ purged’ by 
wind, heat, and cold, in the lower stratum of the air; and that purified 
souls pass upward thence into the higher and untroubled stratum of 
the air. But he has supplemented the doctrine of Posidonius by 


1 €The Stoics’ in Arius Didymus, Diels Doxagr. p. 471: (rds Yuxds) Soa re év 
(gors clot kal Boa év rH mepéxov7i* drapévew yap éxet (i, e. in the atmosphere, and 
not beneath the earth) rds ray dmoBavévrwy Yuxds. Sext. Emp. Math. 9. 71: wat 
yap ob8t rds Yuxds Eveativ brovonoar Karw pepopévas’ Acmropuepeis yap ovcat, Kal 
ovy Hrrov mupwdas f rvevparwoas, eis rods dyw waddov Témovs Koupopopodaty. 

* Diog. Laert. 7. 157 : KAcdvOns pev otv magas (rds Puxds) émdrapévew péxpe THs 
éxmupwoews, Xpvatnmos dé Tas TY copay pdbvor, 

8 Epictetus and Marcus Aurelius adhered to the attitude of the earlier Stoics in 
this respect. Epictetus (3. 13. 14 f.) denies the existence of a subterranean abode of 
the dead (ovddeis “Ardys 00d’ "Axépov ob? Kewurds ob5e TupipAcyédwy), but does not 
substitute for it an aerial abode ; he speaks of death as the dissolution of man into 
the elements of which he is composed, and does not contemplate the survival of the 
individual personality. Marcus Aurelius (4. 21) takes it for granted that disem- 
bodied souls, if and as long as they continue to exist, are situated in the air: & 
Sapévovow ai Wuyal, mas abrds 2f dudiou xupel 5 dijp ; He answers, * In the same way 
that earth finds room for dead bodies ; room is made for the later by the dissolution 
of the earlier.’ otirws ai els Ov dépa peCiordpevar Wuxat, én moodv cuppelvaca, 
peraBeddrova: wat xéovra: xal efdrrovra (i.e. change into flame, and so cease to 
exist as separate individuals), els roy 7&v GAow orepparindoy Adyov dvadapBavopevat, 
wal rotroy tov rpdomov xwpay rais mpocomCouévars mapéxovat, Todro 8 dy tis 
dnoxplvarro ip' iwodéce Tod rds Wuyds Srapeveww, There is no trace of Posidonius 
here; the doctrine seems to have been derived rather from Chrysippus. 

* According to Rohde, Psyche, p. 610 f., Posidonius’ views on this subject were 
derived in part from Heraclides Ponticus (350-300 B.C.), whose ‘ Vision of 
Empedotimos’, an eschatological myth after the manner of those of Plato, was 
influential in shaping the notions about the state of the dead which were current in 
later times. 


2802-3 ~ 





274 ASCLEPIUS 


combining with it a theory of daemons (beings of a different order 
from the disembodied or not yet embodied human souls called 
‘daemons’ by Posidonius). Like Plutarch in the ‘Vision of 
Thespesius’, the Hermetist ascribes to the action of these personal 
beings the processes of retribution and purgation which Posidonius 
must have held to be carried on by the working of naturallaw. The 
Hermetist’s daemonology must have been derived from some 
Platonic source ; it has some resemblance to that of the Epinomis ; 
but it is impossible to trace the intermediate stages by which it 
reached him. Thus it appears that his teaching about the life after 
death is derived wholly from Greek sources; and there is no trace of 
evidence that in this portion of his treatise he was in any way in- 
fluenced by the national religion of Egypt. This is the more note- 
worthy, because when he is dealing with the subject of the temple-cults, 
his position is that of an Egyptian rather than a Greek. 

As part of the passage in Asc/. III is lost, we do not know whether 
the writer adopted the doctrine of repeated incarnation. But as this 
doctrine was taught by the Platonists, and probably by Posidonius, and 
as it appears in other Hermetica, the writer of Asc/. III also may 
perhaps have said that some souls are incarnated more than once. 

&s ot wointal.. . Mupipdeyedovra dvopdfoucr, It is unlikely that the 
Hermetist was so regardless of the mise en sedne of his dialogue as 
to make his prehistoric Egyptian prophet speak of the Greek poets ; 
it may therefore be presumed that both this clause in the paraphrase, 
and the corresponding clause in the verbal quotation from the Adyos 
tédetos (De mens. 4. 148), are notes added by Lydus. In De mens. 4. 
32, Lydus has added to his note in 4. 148 the words xat airos 6 
TlAdrwy é&y Baidu. We may be sure that the Hermetist did not 
commit the anachronism of making Trismegistus mention Plato by 
name, 

rods 8 cwrpikods . , . dmroodferw ras Wxds. “Does this refer to the 
souls which are rising from the lower air into the upper air, or to 
those which are rising from the upper air into the celestial fire? 
Presumably the former, as the word érocdtew implies a rescue from 
a painful situation. The souls spoken of must be either innocent 
souls, which rise rapidly through the lower air, and, with the aid of 
beneficent daemons, ascend at once into the upper air, or else, more 
guilty souls, at the stage when their purgation in the lower air is com- 


Reincarnation in animal bodies, Asel. I. 12a; Corp. X. 8a; Kore Ki 


osm, 
Stob, Zxe. XXIII. 39. Reincamation in human bodies only, Corp, X. 19 b-a2 a. 








ASCLEPIUS III: 33b 275 


pleted. In Lydus’ paraphrase, the rescuers are said to be stationed 
‘near the lunar region’; this must be Lydus’ way of describing the 
upper air, and the owrnpixot Safuoves must be the beings spoken of 
in 33 as residing ‘in aeris purissima parte’, They take up into 
their own abode the souls which they rescue from the torments of the 
lower air. 

Compare Plut, Gen, Socr. 593 F: ‘When men are swimming in 
the sea, the people who stand upon the beach merely watch them in 
silence as long as they are still in deep water and floating far from land ; 
but when some of them have nearly reached the shore, the watchers 
run forward, and wade in to meet them, and help them with hand and 
voice, and bring them safe to land.’ And even soit is with the help 
which daemons? give tomen. As long as we aresunk in earthly things, 
and enter body after body, shifting, so to speak, from one vehicle to an- 
other, they leave us to struggle and endure unaided, and to endeavour 
by our own virtue to escape and to reach port. But when a soul 
has striven well and earnestly in long contests through the course of 
numberless births,—when the cycle draws towards its close, and the 
soul, beset with danger, and eager to make its way out, is struggling 
upward with hard effort,—then God does not forbid the familiar 
daemon® of that soul to aid it, but permits him to give help, as he 
is eager to do; for each daemon is eager to urge on some particular 
soul, and to rescue it ;* and the soul, being already near at hand, hears 
the cheering voice, and is saved. But if the soul does not obey the 
voice it hears, the daemon abandons it, and that soul comes toa 
woeful end.’ Plutarch is here speaking of help given by daemons to 
souls which are still in the body, and are seeking to escape from the 
‘circle of births’; but his language may have been suggested by 
some authority in which souls were described as escaping, with the 
help of daemons, from the purgatory of the lower air to the beatitude 
of those who dwell in the untroubled air above. 

Lydus’ summary of the passage ceases here; but in the original 
Adyos réAetos, the account of the lot of impure souls after death was 


1 dvacw lovey. 

2 The ‘daemons’ of whom Plutarch is here speaking are ai dmnAAaypéevae 
yevéoews Yuyxai nal cxorAdCovca 7d Aoimdy amd owpaTOs—ol meravpévor TOY epi TOY 
Bloy ayavov, 6° aperiy Yuyqs yevduevor bainoves,—i, e, the disembodied souls of 
good men. 

* zév olxetov Saipova, Plutarch here assumes that the special daemon who 
watches over the individual man,—the ‘ guardian Genius’,—is one of the class of 
Saivoves in the sense assigned to the term by Posidonius, i.e. disembodied and 
beatified human souls, * dvacwlev, 


T2 


ee 


—— 


276 ASCLEPIUS 


provably followed by a corresponding account of the lot of pious 
souls after death, which is wholly lost. It may be presumed that, 
according to the writer’s view, pious souls, on quitting the body, rise 
swiftly and painlessly through the lower air into the ‘Elysium’ of 
the higher air, and that they subsequently attain to the celestial fire ; 
their lot would so far correspond to that of ‘the few’ in the system 
of Posidonius. If we might argue from other parts of the treatise, it 
would seem that the celestial fire itself must be only a stage on the 
way to that which is beyond it, and that the final destination of the 
pious must be ‘the incorporeal andeternal’. But we cannot be’sure 
that the writer applied his principles consistently. 

29 b. In dei religione . . . ceteris astris antistat. This 
paragraph deals with the advantages enjoyed by the pious during 
their life in the body. It has nothing to do with the lot of dis- 
embodied souls, which is the subject of chs. 27 e-29 a and the lost 
passage summarized by Lydus; and there is no reason to think that 
it originally formed the conclusion of the discourse of Hermes. Its 
contents are similar to those of chs, 22 a-23 a, where the distinction 
between the pious and other men is spoken of; but it does not seem 
possible to insert it there, as the text of that part of the treatise 
appears to be continuous. It may perhaps have followed the passage 
on the @eios vois, ch. 32 b, or that on Heimarmene, chs. 39-40¢; 
but there is no sufficient reason for inserting it in either of those 
places. It is necessary to remove it, together with chs. 27 e-29 a, 
from the passage on time and eternity, which it clearly interrupts; and 
Thave left it here, merely because I did not know where else to put it. 

In dei religione et in [summa] pietate praesidium est 
(unum). The passage quoted from ‘Hermes’ by Lactantius 2. r5. 6 
may possibly have been taken from some other Hermetic document 
in which identical phrases occurred ; but it seems more likely that it 
is an extract from the Adyos rédetos as the text stood in his copy. 
If so, the sentences civéBous yap... pare? and rd yap tv... edoéBaa 
must either have been added to the original in the text quoted by 
Lactantius, or accidentally omitted in the Latin Asc/epius. The latter 
seems probable, because the sense of the passage is more satisfactory 
when we read it in the form in which Lactantius gives it. An 
explanation of the evils to be guarded against, such as he supplies, 
is desirable ; and the statement that ‘ piety is the one and only good 
among men’ is appropriate, if not indispensable, as an introduction 
to the praise of piety which follows. 








ASCLEPIUS III: 29b 277 


Cyril quotes from ‘ Hermes to Asclepius’ ; and either Ase?. ITI, or 
the Adyos réAeos as a whole, might be thus described. Cyril’s 
quotation appears to be a later expansion of the text given by 
Lactantius ; the words which he adds are superfluous, and weaken 
the force of the passage. 

Summa, as an epithet of pzefaze, yields no satisfactory sense ; and 
on the other hand, the Greek parallels make it probable that praesi- 
dium was accompanied by an epithet. Swmma may have arisen out 
of unum misplaced. 

For the thought, compare Origen ¢. Cels. 8. 27: of88 ydp, kav ph 
Bow avrois edpevels of Sainoves, mdoxew dv te bx’ airdv Sivawro, 
ppovpotjpevot bd Tod edpevods adrois Oia THY edoeBevav emt mac Oeod. . .« 
68 Exwv tov ei waor Gedy bid Thy eis adrov eboréBerav eipev . . . A€yor 
dv Oappav, as ovdév reiodpevos dd TayTés TOD TOY Saipovev orparorédou, 
“ Kipios puticpds pou cat cwrjp pov riva poBnOjcopa;” (Psalm 26 
(27). 1.) 

edceBois yap dv@pdmou otre Saipwv xaxds olre eipapydvy xparel. 
Heimarmene and the maleficent daemons have power only over the 
corporeal things of the sublunar world, and can dominate a man only 
so far as he is subject to the influence of these corporeal things. 
The many, whose souls are wholly immersed in the body, are 
necessarily slaves of ‘Heimarmene and the bad daemons’; physical 
forces, operating through their bodily organs, trouble their souls with 
evil passions, and they consequently live a life of misery. But the 
‘pious ’ man,—that is, as we are told below, he who is ‘illuminated’ by 
the divine vods, and who ‘ commingles himself’ with it (‘toto se sensu 
intellegentiae divinae commiscet’),—has escaped from the bonds of 
the body (‘a parte naturae quae mortalis est liberatus’), Even 
while still physically present in the corporeal world, he is no longer 
of it; he lives in another and a higher world,’ and is in no way con- 
cerned with what Heimarmene may do to his body. Cf. Zosimus r. 7 
(Zestim.); Hermes says that det. . . é@v riv efpappérny 6 édrer{v] 
Totelv TH Ears HAG, TouTeaTL TO THpare. 

Heimarmene is here, as often, regarded as a maleficent power, 
escape from which is to be desired. This notion is hardly consistent 
with Asc/. III. 39, where we are told that Heimarmene is either God 
himself, or the highest of God’s évépyerat. The aspiration to escape 
from Heimarmene is Platonic ; the willing acceptance of Heimarmene 


* Cf. Paul, PA#l. 3. 18 ff. : moAAol yap meprmarodaw ... dv d Oeds H KowAia, . . . cf 
7d éniyera ppovotvres. yc yap 7d moAtrevpa év odpavois indpxet. 





| 
| 
| 


278 ASCLEPIUS 


as God’s ordering of the world (‘Ducunt volentem fata, nolentem 
trahunt’) is Stoic. 

As to the coupling of xaxéds Sacuwv with efyappévy, cf. Corp. XVI. 
13-16, where it is said that all corporeal things on earth are 
administered by troops of daemons who work under the orders of the 
planet-gods, and that this administration is called ciyapyévyn. (The 
star-gods were commonly regarded as instruments or agents of 
Heimarmene.) Carp. XVJ. 16 as emended: dry ody & 7G AoyixG 
axris értAdpame. dard Tot Geot, rovrw KaTapyovvrat ot Salpowes, KT. 

non ubi sit loco, nec qualis sit qualitate. Cf. ch. 31: ‘Ubienim 
et quo et unde, et quomodo aut quale sit (sc. God, or Eternity), sncer- 
tum est’. ‘Quality’ (the Stoic rouv or rowdrys) means sexsidle quality ; 
the writer would not deny that it can be known that God possesses 
certain attributes, e.g. that of goodness. Porphyry, "Adopyat mpos ra 
vontd §: 6 St vods dpépioros ovcia pévov, ra St cdpara pepiotd pdvov, 
ai St roudrytes Kal ra Evvha €ldy mepl ta odpara pepiord. 

inmortalitatis futurae concipit fiduciam. The ‘immortality’ 
to which the pious man looks forward means a life unrestricted by 
the limitations of human life on earth. He has already disengaged 
his affections from all that is corporeal; the body is, to him, merely 
an extraneous appendage ; and he is assured that, when released by 
death from the bonds by which he is bound to it, he will live wholly 
in that incorporeal and eternal world on which his heart is set. Com- 
pare ch, 22b: ‘[ad] inmortalitatis spem intentionemque protendens.’ 

quasi oculi (oculis ¢d. Rom.) vera ratione perspecta et 
fiducia credulitatis suae’. These corrupt words suggest a mean- 
ing something like that of Zp. Hed. 11. 1: gore 8& miotis edmibope- 
vow brdcracis, mpaypydruv édeyxos ov BAeropévwv. It would be possible 
to make sense by writing ‘ fiducia credulitatis suae, quasi oculis, vera 
ratione perspecta’, This might be taken as meaning ‘fiducia 
(ad/.) . . . veram rationem perspicit’; but if we take it so, we 
must assume that vera ratio stand for 4 dAjOea, ‘reality’, in the 
sense in which that term is used in Herm. af. Stob. Zxc. IT A. 

{Ipse enim sol... ceteras stellas inluminat.| This sentence 
appears to be one of the ‘solar interpolations’. (See Asc¢/. III. 19 b, 
‘Solis ovcidpyns lumen est’.) It weakens an impressive conclusion by 
introducing an irrelevant topic ; and it does not agree with the preced- 
ing words. There is no sense in saying that ‘the pious excel other men 
as much as the sun excels the stars in brilliance ; for the sun does not 
illuminate the stars with his brilliance so much as with something else’. 








ASCLEPIUS III: 4od 279 


The statement ‘sol ceteras stellas inluminat’, though inappro- 
priate to the context, is not in itself impossible ; for there were some 
who held that the sun gives light to the stars as well as to the moon. 
Aetius, Diels Doxogr. p. 346: Myrpé8wpos (of Chios) daavras robs 
dmdaveis dorépas ind rod pAlov mpocddurecbar, Stpdrwv Kal airs To 
dorpa ird rod HAiov durilecOar. Atéripos Tupws . . . ri airhy rovros 
donvéyxaro yvéuny. The writer of Corp. XVI held a similar view ; 
see XVI, 8. It may be suspected however that in/uminat has been 
substituted by error for some such word as exsuperat, which would 
agree better with magnitudine luminis. But if exsuperat were written, 
the sentence would be no less irrelevant. 


Epilogus. 

4od. Dictum est vobis . . . pabulis saturavimus. Did this 
conclusion of the discourse of Hermes form part of the original 
Asci. III, or was it added by the compiler of the Adyos rédetos? 
The words ‘restat . .. ut benedicentes deum orantesque’ &c. 
lead on to the following prayer, 41 b, and are needed to introduce 
it. The narrative passage 41a, in which Tat is spoken of as well 
as Asclepius, was probably written by the same compiler by whom 
the Prologue was added. The plural vods in 4od sit, implies 
that more than one hearer is present; but tuiy may have been 
substituted for oo. or jyiv; and apart from that, there is nothing 
to prevent us from supposing that both 40d and 4rb were 
included in the original As¢?. III, in which Hermes spoke to Asclepius 
alone. 

The narrative 41 a was present in the Adyos réAeos as known to 
Lactantius, i. e. not long after a. D. 300. 

satis enim nos . . . saturavimus. Cf. Corg. XIII. 22b: 
ixavds yap Exarros jpadv (éavrod) erewedyOn, yd re [6] Aéyuv ov re 
[6] dxovwr. 

velut animi pabulis. Cf. Philo Leg. allegor. 3. 55. 161, 
Cohn I, p. 148: cidAdyws ofy rd pv éx yns Stamrdacbev copa 
ovyyeveis exer tpopas ds avadiduow 4 yh, % St aibepion dicews potpa 
otoa Wuxi wédw aidepiouvs xal Oelas' emrrHas yap tpéperat, Kat 
ob curios i) worois, dy émdeés eore Td cOpa. Porphyr. De adst. 4. 
20: Stahopo toivw ai rpodal card 7d didhopov tov tpehouévuv' Kat 
Sci mdvra pay tpépew, crovddlew 88 matvew ta ey piv kupwrara. 
Wuxfs obv Aoytxijs tpopy 7 tTypotoa Aoyucyv. vods 8% adry’ Sore 
VG Operréov. 


CO 








280 ASCLEPIUS 


41a. De adyto vero egressi. The situation is the same as 
that described in the Prologue. We are told in the Prologue that 
Asclepius, Tat, and Ammon were present; here, Asclepius and 
Tat are mentioned, and it may be presumed that Ammon is 
present also. 

in austrum respicientes. Cf. Corp. XIII. 16: vor avéup 
amoBiéruv «1.4. Why those who pray at sunset should face 
southward, and not westward, I do not know; but the precept is 
probably based on some tradition of Egyptian ritual. Possibly the 
westward position was avoided because the region of the sunset was 
associated with darkness, death, and ghosts. Cf. Porphyr. De 
antro nymph. 29: Kata ratra tolvw 7G piv Ovy7@ Kal yeveoe 
tromrarw pidw Ta Bopea oixeia, TH S& Oeorépw Tra vdria, ds Oeois 
peév Ta avarodixd, Saipoor dé Ta SutiKd. 

in eum (se. ventum) qui subsolanus dicitur. On the east- 
ward position in prayer, cf. Clem. Alex. Strom. 7. 7. 43: émet 88 


ek 


yeveOAov jyepas eixov 4 dvarohy, xdxeOev 7d has abgerar 
oxdrous Adjupav” 7d mpdrov, GAMA Kal rois ev dyvola kvdwSovpevors 
dyéretkev ydoews GAnOeias Hugpa Kata Adyov tod yAlov, mpds Thy 
éwOwiv dvarodjv ai ebxyai, The Hermetist would perhaps have given 
similar reasons for his practice, though no doubt it was really derived 
from primitive sun-worship. Clement adds: dev xal ra raAafrara 
tav lepov mpds Siow éBdrerev, tva ot dravrimpdcwmrov trav ayadpdrov 
iordpevo. mpos dvarodnv tpérecGa Siddoxwvrar. Clement here says 
that ‘the most ancient temples’ (Egyptian, or Greek?) faced 
westward, But this was not the usual arrangement in the times 
known to us. Cf, Hyginus De agr. tim. p. 153 Goes: ‘antiqui 
architecti in occidentem templa spectare recte scripserunt: postea 
placuit omnem religionem eo convertere, ex qua parte caeli terra 
illuminatur’ (i,e, in later times temples were usually built facing 
eastward). Porphyry (De aniro nymph. 3) says that almost all 
temples face eastward: as dy cyeddv mévtwy tov tepav ra pey 
GydApara Kal ras elrddous exdvtwv mpds avarodiy rerpappévas, Tov 
8 elowdvrev pos Siow adopivrwy, Srav dvrempdcwro tay a&yadpdrwy 
éarares Tois Geois tas Auras Kat Oeparcias mpoodywau. The front of 
Greek temples is commonly towards the East. ‘The Jewish temple 
fronted eastward. The Egyptian temples varied in their orienta- 
tion; the great t-mple of Amon at Karnak, for instance, opened 
towards the North-west, and the temple at Luxor, towards the 
North-east. 








ASCLEPIUS III: 4ra 281 


iam ergo dicentibus precationem, There is an awkwardness 
in the narrative here, which confirms the suspicion that ch, 41a 
was inserted by a later hand. Hermes and his three pupils 
begin to pray simultaneously; after they have begun, Asclepius 
interrupts the prayers of his companions by his proposal; and 
Hermes, having rebuked him, proceeds to pray aloud, speaking 
for all of them together. If Hermes wished to lead his disciples 
in prayer, why did he not do so from the first? This difficulty 
disappears if we omit ch, 41a, and make the audible prayer of 
Hermes follow on his discourse without a break. 

suggeramus patri tuo, e ritu ut (patri iusserit ut MSS.) 
ture addito et pigmentis precom dicamus. The word ‘vo is 
needed ; without it, pazvz would mean ‘to my father’. 

Pigmentum means ‘a scented unguent’. Firmicus Maternus, 
De err. prof. rel. (A. D. 347) 23. 1: ‘Christi unguentum immortali 
conpositione conficitur, et spiritalibus pigmentorum odoribus tem- 
peratur.’ Firmicus Maternus AZath. 3. 6. 3: ‘odorum pigmenta,’ 
Macrobius (¢ A.D. 400) Sat. 1, Praef 8: ‘qui odora pigmenta 
conficiunt ante omnia curant ut nullius sint odoris propria quae 
condientur.’ Hence mievrdpios, ‘an apothecary’, Olympiodorus 

ad Pl. Gorg. p. 117. 

On the Egyptian usage of burning fragrant substances in the 
worship of the sun-god (Horus?), see Plut. Js. e¢ Os. 52 and 80. 
The substance burnt at sunset was called «igi, and was composed 
of sixteen ingredients. 

The Hermetist admits such offerings (sacrificiis freguentibus, 
ch, 38 a) in the worship of the ‘terrestrial gods’; but he excludes 
them from the worship of the supreme God. 

Melius, molius ominare ... a mortalibus. Lactantius’ 
translation of this passage is more trustworthy than that of 
Ast. Lat. 

tale quid de uno illo ac singulari bono in animum inducere 
(Lact.).—cum deum roges, tus ceteraquo incendere (Asc. Zat.). 
Perhaps some words have been lost in Ascl. Lat; we might 
read ‘cum [djeum roges (qui solus est bonus)’, The word z- 
cendere in Ascl. Lat. might be accounted for by some confusion 
between évOupctodar (in animum inducere) and évévpudy or émbvpudv 
(tus ceterague incendere) ; perhaps the translator read évOvyuacbau. 

Haec et his similia huic non conveniunt (Lact.): omitted 
in Ascl. Lat. 


282 ASCLEPIUS 


omnium enim quaecunque sunt plenus est (Lact.),—qui 
ipse est omnia, aut in eo sunt omnia (transposed in Asel, 
Lat). The original Greek may have been wdvtwy yap a)ijpys 
éori. We might account for the reading of Asc/. Zaz. by assuming 
that the translator had before him two alternative readings, viz. 
mdyra yap airés éort, and wavra yap év airG éor,, and rendered 
both. Cf, Asc. III, 26b: ‘(deus) est omnium plenissimus;.. . 
Et habet omnia quae vult,’ 

et omnium minime indigens (Lact.)—Nihil enim deest 
ei (Ase. Lat), Cf. Porph. De adst. 3. 26: 1o 8 &v TO avril 
kpetrrov (i. &, 7d Ociov) . . . dmpoodets ravrov. 

huius enim sacrificium sola benedictio est (Lact.). sale 
sunt enim summ/ incensiones dei, gratiae cum aguntur a 
mortalibus (Asc/. Lat.) Summae, the reading of the MSS., is 
clearly wrong; for it would imply that other kinds of zwcensiones 
also are admissible, which is the very thing that the writer is 
denying. The only doubt is whether swmmae should be corrected 
into swmmi or solae. As the offering of incense to subordinate 
gods is permitted, swzmz is appropriate. 

On the notion that words of praise and thanksgiving ought to 
take the place of material offerings in the worship of the supreme 
God, cf. Corp. 1. 31, Sé€ar Aoyuds Ouolas (i.e. sacrifices which 
consist of speech alone). Cic, Vaz. deor. 2. 71: ‘Cultus autem 
deorum est optimus idemque castissimus atque sanctissimus 
plenissimusque pietatis, ut eos semper pura, integra, incorrupta et — 
Mente et voce veneremur.’ Some went a step further, and 
regarded even verbal worship as superfluous. Sen. Z%. 95. 47 ff. : 
‘Deum colit qui novit. . . . Primus est deorum cultus deos credere ; 
deinde reddere illis maiestatem suam, reddere bonitatem. . . . 
Vis deos propitiare? Bonus esto. Satis illos coluit quisquis 
imitatus est.’ Apollonius of Tyana é 7 [epi Ovordv, in Euseb, 
Pr. e0. 4.13: otrws rolmw pddiora dv zis, olpat, thy mpoojKovcay 
eriéhecav mrowoiro tot Oeiov, Tvyydvor te abrdbev ted re Kal edpévous 
atrod. . .. ef (rG) Ged (éxeivw?) pév, bv 8% mpdrov eEdaper, évi re 
dvrt (Kal). Kexwpiopevy mévtov, pel’ bv yvupilerbar rods Aovrods 
dvarykatov, pi vor Te Thy apxyv, pare dvdwro. wip, pyre KabdAov Tt 
tov alcOyrav erovondfoi—detrar yap oddevds ofdt map& toy KpetT 
Tovev qrep Hpels, odd Eorw 8 Ti dpxiv dvinor yh purov 4} tpépe 
Gov, 7} aijp, d ph mpdcecti ye tt placpa—povy 8% xporo mpds 
airov det tT Kpelrrov Adyw, Acyw SE TO py Sia ordparos idvri, Kat 








ASCLEPIUS III: 41a 283 


mapa rod KadAicrov rav dvtwv dia rod KadXicrov Trav év Hpiv airoin 
rayabd* vods 8¢ gorw obros, dpydvou pip Sedpevos. odxotv Kara Tatra 
oddapas TO peydy Kal eri raytwv eG Guréov. Porphyry De adst, 
2. 34: Wowpe toivey Kal Hpeis® GAAG Ooupev, ds mpoojKer, Sapdpous 
rds Guoias, ds dy Siaddpas Suvdperr mpooayovres’ OG rH éxi raow, 
ds tts dvip copds (meaning Apollonius of Tyana?) é$y, pydev trav 
alcOnrdv pujre Ovpudvres pujr’ erovopdlovres' oddév yap ~rrw evvdov, 
8 py To atdw ebOts éorw axaBaprov. 81d oS Adyos TovTw & Kata 
guviv oixetos, 088 6 tvdov, Srav mabe Yuxis 7 pewodrvopevos, Sia 
8% crys Kabapis Kal trav mepi abrod Kafapav ewodv OpnoKedone 
airév. Set dpa, cuvad@évras Kal spowbdvras airs, thy atray 
dvaywyyv Gvotav tepav mpocayew rH Ged, Thy abriv [88] Kat dpuvov 
ofcay Kal yuov owrnplav. ev drabeig dpa tas Yryxis tod Se Feod 
Ocwpig. jy Ovoia abr redeira.  Tois 8& avrod éxydvois, voyrots 8& 
Geois, 45y Kal tHv ék tod Adyou tyvwdiay mpocberéov. dmapyy yap 
éxdore Gv Sé8wxev 4 Ovota, at bi dv ijpdv tpéper wal eis 1d lve 
owéxer THY obalav. ds otv yewpyds Spayydruv dardpxerar Kal rdv 
dxpodptwy, otras jyeis drapéipela atrois evo trav mepi abrdv 

xahav, ebyapiorotvres Gv nyiy Seddxacw Thy Gewpiav, Kal ore nas 
es ris aitav Oéas GhyGwas rpéhovor, cvvdvres Kal gatvdpevor Kal 
Th peTépe Twrnpig. ériAdumrovres, 

Jewish thinkers untouched by Greek influence had indepen- 
dently’ arrived at the conclusion expressed by the Hermetist in 
the words ‘huius sacrificium sola benedictio est’. Psa/. 49 (50). 
12 ff.: édv mewdow, ot py cot clrw’ pa) yap éotw 7 oikoupevn Kal 
7 wAjpwpa airis.? jy pdyouar xpéa tarpwr, 7) alpa tpaywy mlopar ; 
Gicov rd Oe@ Ovoiav aivérens, xal drddos Te tiotw tds ebxas cov. 
Psal, 50 (51). 15 f.: 76 ordpa pov avayycAdd tiv aiveriv cov. sr 
et A0€Anoas bvolav, Ewa dv’ SAokavTdpata oix ebdoxnces. Ovoia 
7 Oeg wvetpa cuvrerpyzpevov. Psal. 140 (141). 2: KarevOvvOrrw 
H mpocevyy pov ds Ovptaya evaridy cov, érapows Tov yeipav pov 
bvoia éorepw7}. 

Paul, in whom Greek and Jewish influences met, speaks in similar 
language ; Rom. 12.,1: mapaxad% ovv duds... Tapacrica: Ta cdpara 
tpov Ovoiay Lécay aylav 7G 0eO ebdperrov, rv Aoyuhvy Aatpelav ipov. 
Cf. Heb, 13. 15: 8¢ abrod obv dvapépwper Gvoiay aivérews be mavros TO 

1 The thought cannot have been transmitted from Greeks to Jewish psalmists ; 
but it may possibly have been transmitted to Greeks from Jews of the diaspora, who 
were debarred from offering sacrifices, and found in prayer and praise the only 


possible substitute. 
2 Cf. Asel, (Lact.): ‘omnium. ,, plenus est, et omnium minime indigens,’ 





























284 ASCLEPIUS 


eG, todr’ gor Kapmov xeAdwv dpodroyotvru 7 dvopart abrot. 1 Pet. 
2. 5: dvevéyxat mvevparixas Ouoias ebmpocdéxrous 66. Clem. Alex. 
Strom. 7. 6. 30 sg.: 088% évSeis (5 Beds), Kabdmep ri yevntd, bs Ovordy, 
dicyv tpodis, 516 Ayusv eribupetv. .. et 88 rysdpevov xaiper (76 Oeiov), 
duce dvevdets Sadpyov, obk dmekdrus jpets (i.e. the Christians) 8.’ 
evxRs TYydpev tov Bedv, Kal Tatryy Tiv Ovoiay dpioryy xa éywwordrny 
pera. Stxavootyns? dvaméuaoper 7G Sikauordrw Adyw (to the Word of 
God), yepatporres 8¢ of (Him through whom) rapaAauBdvomev tiv 
yaouw, 5a rovrov (St) SogdLovres By 2 Pepabiicapev.... Kad ydp éorw 
9 Quota ris exxdynoias Adyos (speech) dd ray dylwy Yoxav dvabvpud- 
Hevos, éxkadurropévys dua TH Guoia Kat ris Stavolas drdons TO bed. 
Origen ¢. Cels. 8.21: xat €oprafer ye xara dAjOeay 6 ra Sovra TparTwv, 
det edyduevos, dui mavrds Oty ras dvatpdxrous év rais mpos 76 Oeiov ebyats 
Gvoias. See Lactant. Div. inst. 6. 2 5. 1-12 ( Zestim.), 

4tb. Gratias tibi &c. The Greek text of this thanksgiving 
(or rather, an inaccurate transcript of it) has been preserved in a 
damaged state, in the magic Papyrus Mimaut, Louvre, col. X (Pap. 
mag. Par, ii, ll, 284~302), This Papyrus was probably written about 
the end of the third century A.D. The sorcerers were accustomed 
to make up their incantations partly out of passages extracted from 
books of religious ritual, or other religious writings, with little regard 
for the meaning of these passages in their original setting ;* and the 
man who composed one of the charms in the Papyrus Mimaut made 
use of the concluding hymn of the Hermetic Adyos ré\eos for his 
purpose, In the papyrus, it forms the last part of an invocation 
addressed to the Sun-god, to whom the operator says roincov mdvra 
7a THs ebx is wou.—moingov 74 Beiva mpaypa'—éPe ror, - - - 8iSods enol 
76 Seiva bycav, cwrypiay, thodrov, ebrexviav, ywoow, ciwxtay,* eduevecay, 
eiBovNav, ebdogiar, pripnv, xdpw, popdyy, «dAdos mpos mdvras avOpi- 
mous Tovs Spadvrds pe. 


1 Ps. 4.5: Oboare bvalay Sucatogryys. 

2 dy (i.e. ‘Him whom ‘) Hort: & MS. 

® The object at which the sorcerers aimed in composing their invocations was not 
to transmit a correct text of any such hymn or prayer, but merely to produce some- 
thing that would sound impressive to their customers, who must have been mostly 
ignorant and stupid people. As long as that purpose was served, it mattered little 
to them whether the words which they wrote down meant this or that, or had no 
meaning at all. They were perfectly free to alter, to omit, to add things out of 
their own heads, and to patch together scraps taken from different sources; and 
they did so without Scruple, This onght to be borne in mind in dealing with such 
documents as the Mithraic Apathanatismos (Dieterich’s Mithrasliturgie), for 
instance. 

* eumxoar Pap, (Eitrem), 





ASCLEPIUS III: 41b 285 


The Papyrus was transcribed by Wessely, and also by Reitzen- 
stein; and it has recently been again examined and transcribed 
by Prof. S. Eitrem of Kristiania (Oslo), I owe it to Prof. Eitrem’s 
kindness that I have not only been able to make use of his 
printed transcript of the papyrus-text (published in 1923),' but 
have also been much helped by letters which he has written to 
me about this difficult passage. 

(x)épw cot oiSaper, (Syuore). 

Gratias tibi (agimus), summe, exsuperantissime. 

Some word denoting God, in the vocative, is wanted here; 
and tyre (Reitz.) serves the purpose well. Lxsuperantissime 
might be a translation of brepoxdrare ; cf. 6 waons trepoyys petlov 
in Corp. I. 31. But one such word seems better here than two; 
and it is possible that swmme and exsuperantissime are alternative 
translations of a single Greek word. 

ox] mdon kal Kapdig mpds ce dvarerapévy.—puxyn aca Kat 
kapdiay mpos . . avareraueyny Pap.) Omitted in Asel, Lat. It 
would be possible also to write yuyj mdoy Kat xapdia mpds ce 
dyarerapévor, Or Yuxyv wacav Kal xapdiav mpos oe dvarerapevot 
Cf. Corp. I. 31: déau Aoyixis Pvolas [dyvas?] dd Yuyijs kal kapdias 
mpos ot dvarerauévys. Plotinus 5. 1.6: Gedy abrov emixaderasrevors, 
od Adyw yeywvG, GAAQ TH Wuyp exrelvaow Eavrods eis edyyy mpds 
éxeivov. The word dyvareiveww was used in its literal sense to 
describe the uplifting of the Aands in prayer; e.g. Ps.-Arist. 
De mundo 6, 4004 16: mdvres of dvOpwro dvareivomev tas xelpas 
eis rov ovpavdy edyas movovpevor. Thence it was transferred to the 
uplifting of the heart or soul (‘sursum corda’), of which the 
bodily gesture was regarded as a symbol. Clem. Alex. Strom. 
7. 7. 40: Tavry Kal mpocavareivomey thy Kepadyv Kal Tas yxelpas 
els otpavdy alpoyev tovs te mddas éreyeipopev? Kara tiv TeAcvratay 
Tis ebyps cwvexpuvynow, éraxoAovOotvres TH tpoOvyla tod wvedparos® 
els THY voynTiv otciav' Kat cuvadiordvew 73 Adyw* 7d cpa Tis yas 
meipdpevor, perdpoiov rorodpevor “ryv Woxyv errepwpervnv” 7G 160” 
tav Kpertévwy, emt Ta aya xwpelv Bialdpeba, rod Seopod xara- 

1 There is a gap, caused by the loss of a strip of papyrus, in the lower part of 
the column, Prof, Eitrem’s measurement of the width of this gap, and consequently, 
his estimate of the number of letters missing in each line, is more exact than 
Reitzenstein’s as given in Poimandres, p. 151 f., and his transcript is, in that respect 
at least, more trustworthy. 

* «Stand on tiptoe,’ Hort and Mayor. 


3 A Hermetist would have said rot vod or rfjs S:avotas, 
4 <The uttered words,’ H. and M. 





286 ASCLEPIUS 


peyadodppovoiyres tod capxixod. Clem, Paed. 1. 5, 16: odk dp’ én 
kudidpeba, of vipriot xapal, . . . dvarewdpevor St dyw TH evvoig, .. . 
codiay peradidxome ayiav. 

&ppacrov Svoua.—Nomen sanctum. It may be that, in the 
translator’s copy of the Greek, the letters adp had been lost, and 
acrov had been altered into dyiov. 

The term édpacrov dvoua, ‘ineffable nam , might, in some 
contexts, be used to denote God himself, the Being to whom the 
name belongs. But in this passage, there are two reasons against 
taking that to be the meaning. Firstly, the grammatical con- 
struction is not clear. Is d#pacrov dvoua vocative? If so, we 
must put a comma before it, and connect it closely with what 
precedes. But the first clause (xdpw coi oidapev x.r.A.) is already 
provided with a vocative (‘summe’, (tore)); and a second 
vocative, appended after the intervening clause (‘tua enim gratia 

. consecuti’), seems superfluous and wrongly placed. Or are 
we to take dgpacrov évoua as accusative, in apposition to the oé 
of the first clause (pds (co?) dvarerayévy)? That also is made 
difficult by the intervening clause, in which the pronoun (expressed 
or implied) must have been cov, in the genitive. And secondly, 
the following words, reriyypévoy tH tod God mpoonyopia K.7.A., 
which are appropriate if applied to God himself, are inappropriate 
f applied to the word évoua; for it could hardly be said that a 
name is honoured with an appellation, It therefore seems probable 
that some words, by which ddpactov évoua was connected with 
the context, have been lost. This passage in the hymn was 
presumably suggested by what is said about the name of God in 
Ase, Il. 20, ‘nullo ex his nominibus eum definite nuncupabimus ’ 
&c.; and the meaning must have been that God’s true name 
cannot be told (or in other words, that God is dydvupos), but 
men call him @eés and rarjp. 

TeTinpwevoy (82) (TH) Tod Geod mpocyyopia. 

et honorandum nomine divino (nomen unum MSS.). 

The translator probably wrote ‘honorandum nomine divino’, 
rendering rot Geof by divino, as he rendered rod marpds by paterna 
in the corresponding phrase which follows. Cf. Corp. IL. 16: 
Teriunpevor TH TOD Ocot xpoonyopia. 

quod solus dominus es,—(quo solus deus est MSS.). 
Omitted in Pag. A clause beginning with dru is needed after Hh 
tov Gcot mpoonyopig, to correspond to dr mpds wdyras «.7.A. after 








ASCLEPIUS III: 41b 287 


ri tov marpds ; and the words guo solus deus est in the MSS. of 
Asc. show that the translator had some such clause before him 
in the Greek. I have therefore added the words 6m od pdvos 
a xbpios. Cf. Corp. XII. 21 as emended: Océ, od 6 warnp’ xvpre, 
av 6 vous. 

Dominus (probably xvpios, though the word might stand for 
Seorérys also) and pater are repeatedly coupled together in 
Asci. Til as names of God. Ch. 20a: ‘deus etenim vel pater 
vel dominus omnium.’ /%,: ‘omniumque rerum patrem vel 
dominum.’ Ch. 22b: ‘deus pater et dominus.’ Ch. 23b: ‘do- 
minus et pater, vel, quod est summum, deus.’ Jd.: ‘pater ac 
dominus.’ Ch. 26a: ‘ille dominus et pater, deus primipotens’: 
in the Greek, as given by Lactantius, 6 «’pios Kal rarhp Kat Oeds 
«tA Ch. 29b: ‘pater enim omnium vel dominus.’ In Ase/, I, 
the words dominus and pater do not occur together ; but in ch. 8, 
God is called 6 xiptos wal ry mdvrwy oinras, dv Oedy Kadeiv 
vevopixapey (‘dominus et factor universorum, quem deum vocare 
existimavimus’ Lact.) ; and in ch. 9, ‘qui solus omnia aut pater 
est omnium’, 

Philo spoke of the Svvayis Baowdixy or Seororixy of God (cf. 
dominus) on the one hand, and his dvvayus rouprixy or edepyerixy 
(cf. pater) on the other hand, as two distinct dwdpes. E. g. 
Philo De Cher. 9. 27, Cohn I, p. 176: xara rov Ga dvrws dvra 
Gedv Sto ris dvwrdétw elvat cat mpiras Suvdpes dyabdrnta Kal 
efouciav' Kal dyaGdrnte pev rd wav yeyevvyxévar, eZovoig 8% Tod 
yerrnbevros dpxew. tpirov 8é, cvvaywydv dudoiv, pécov elvar Adyov" 
Ayo yap Kat dpxovra Kal ayabdv clvar tov Oedv. De special. lege. 
1. 8. 299, Cohn V, p. 72: What God demands of men is simple 
and easy, viz. dyarGy atrov as evepyérny, ei 8% py, poBeicba oir, 
hs apxovra kat xupiov, «tA. Philo Quaest, in Genesin 1. § 57 
Aucher: ‘duas priores quae apud divinitatem sunt virtutes (i.e. 
Suvdeis), Creativam scilicet et regiam; quarum una nomen gerit 
dei (Geds), et altera, sive regia, domini (x¥pios). Forma creativae 
pacata lenisque et benefica est virtus; regiae autem, legislatrix et 
castigatrix.’ Jb. 2, § 16 (on the words Kupios 6 Oeds in Gen, 7. 5): 
‘Utraque nomina (viz. xijpios and Oeds) usurpavit nunc, declara- 
tiva superiorum virtutum (i.e. Suvdyewv) deperdendi ac benefaci- 
endi, praemittens dominum, et postponens beneficum, deum.. . . 
Quum enim appellatio dei (éeés) benefica sit, istam frequen- 
tius usurpavit in constructione universorum (i.e. in speaking of 


_—_— 


—" 





) 





288 ASCLEPIUS 


the Creation) . . . hoc enim (xvpws) regium est nomen et 
exterminativum ; quoniam ubi actio generationis est, deus (eds) 
praemittitur in ordine, ubi vero supplicium, dominus (xdépios) 
praeponitur quam deus.’ These two duvdpes of God are simi- 
larly spoken of by Philo in Quaest. in Gen, 2. § 51, 3. § 59, 
and 4. §§ 2 and 53. Thus the two names Oeds and zarjp, as 
used in Asc/. 41 b, correspond to the two names xvpios and eds 
as explained by Philo. Similarly, in Christian writings, God’s 
Justice and God’s mercy were contrasted; and Marcion carried 
the distinction so far as to make the ‘just’ God a different 
person from the ‘good’ God. Cf. Lactantius, Div. inst. 4. 3.14: 
‘Unus igitur colendus est, qui potest vere pater nominari: idem 
etiam dominus sit necesse est, quia sicut potest indulgere, ita 
etiam cohercere. Pater ideo appellandus est, quia nobis multa 
et magna largitur; dominus ideo, quia castigandi ac puniendi 
habet maximam potestatem.’ Jd. 6. 25. 16: ‘deo, patri ac 
domino,’ 

kat edoyoupevov tH Tod (warp)dc (sc. mpoonyopig), Sr(c) K.t.A. 

{e)t benedicendum (-dus MSS.) religione paterna, quo- 
niam &c. 

It is possible that Jenedicendus is right, and that we ought to 
read honorandus instead of honorandum in the preceding line, and 
teryunpévos and evAoyovpevos in the Greek. It is God that is 
‘honoured’ and ‘blessed’; and assuming that there is a lacuna 
after ddpacrov dvona, we do not know in what construction the 
participles originally stood. They may have been altered to 
make them agree with éyoua, after some intervening words had 
fallen out. 

The translator apparently failed to see that rpoonyopfa was to be 
understood after rj rod zarpdés, and consequently inserted the 
inappropriate word redigione. 

The word warpés (= paterna) suits well with rarpixjv in the 
following phrase ; and it may be taken as certain that the Hermetist 
wrote ty Tod marpdés, Gri. But the sorcerer who borrowed the 
Hermetic hymn appears to have written something else in place 
of warpés, Sr. The Papyrus, as read by Prof. Eitrem, gives rq 
Tov..ov o7.mp..;* and Reitzenstein’s reading of Pag. does not 
differ from this in anything that matters. It may be conjectured 


1 In vol. i, p. 375, the second of the two dots after mp in Prof, Eitrem’s reading 
of Pap, has been omitted by mistake. 








ASCLEPIUS III: 41b 289 


then that the sorcerer, misled by rj rod Geod in the line above, wrote 
eod again here instead of writing warpds, and perhaps that he also 
substituted dc for ér. Assuming that he did so, the passage, as 
altered by him, ran thus: xal eddAoyovpevoy rH Tob Geod, Sow mpos 
méyras - - - edvoiav - - - évedefgw, 

mpos TdvTas kal mept mdvta.—(mp.¢ TavTas Kat Tpos TavTas 
Pap.) 

omnibus 4sc/. Lat. 

It may be that the Hermetist wrote simply zpos rdvras (= omnibus), 
and that xat mpds wévras in Pap. is a doublet, possibly written as 
an alternative for dom(?) mpds mdvras. But if not, xpds wdvras Kal 
epi wdvra seems a more probable correction than Reitzenstein’s 
conjecture, mpos wdvras kal mpds wdacas. Women are seldom spoken 
of in the Hermetic writings; and in none of them is it said or 
implied that any women (except the goddess-woman Isis) have 
attained to gnosis. Besides, if the Hermetist had thought fit to 
mention women here, he would have written zpés wavras Kat wdoas 
rather than zpés wdvras kal mpos macas. 

marpixhy (ed)voruv kal ctopyhy Kat pudiav, kai et tus yhukutépa (sz. 
rijs watptxijs), evepyelg evedeifo (kar emuyAukuta(Th)y evepy.. + 
wdigo Pap,). 

paternam pietatem et dilectionem (religionem MSS.) et 
amorem, et quaecumque est dulcior efficacia, praebere 
dignaris Asc/. Lat. 

Dilectionem (= otopyjv), proposed by Eitrem, is almost certainly 
right. This word has been altered into veligionem, which may 
have been suggested to a transcriber by ve/igione in the pre- 
ceding line, 

The sorcerer probably wrote in the Papyrus xo. emvyAvxvrargy (or 
em. yAukutaryy ?) evepyiav (or evepyeta) evdigw. The Latin translation 
can be accounted for by assuming that the Greek which the 
translator had before him was xa ev ris yAveurepa evepyeia evedergw. 
(Instances of the substitution of a superlative for a comparative, or 
vice versa, occur repeatedly in the Hermetic texts.) The translator 
apparently took evepyeua (= efficacia) to be a nominative, and 
consequently wrote e¢ guaecumgue est dulcior efficacia, ‘and whatever 
évépyeia is sweeter’; but the Hermetist most likely wrote évepyede, 
and connected this word with the verb évede(Gu. If so, his 
meaning must have been that God not only /ee/s kindly towards 
men, but shows his kindness in beneficent action, by bestowing 

2806.3 U 





290 ASCLEPIUS 









on them the gifts of vots, Adyos, and yrious. For yAvads in this 
connexion, cf, Corp, XIV. 4: éavtdv paxapica (bs) tov marépa 
yropicavra: ri yap yAuxirepov marpis yryoiou ; 

In place of évedeiéu, the translation gives pracbere dignaris, 
which would be more exactly equivalent to édelgacbar agcois. 
As the hymn is a thanksgiving for past favours (cf. ya‘powev drt 
geavrov juiv éegas below), the aorist seems more suitable than 
the present; it is therefore probable that the Hermetist wrote 
either évedeigw or evdei~acba jéiwcas. It is likewise doubtful 
whether he wrote dmreOdwoas or drobedca iéiwoas (= fueris con- 
secrare dignatus) a few lines below. He may very likely have 
written jgwoas in one of these two places, but probably not 
in both. 

Xapiodpevos Hpiv (Spiv Pap.) vodv, (Ady)ov, yrdow. 

condonans nos sensu, ratione, intellegentia. 

The translator rendered vots by sensus. For yvaois, he wrote 
intellegentia here, but cognitio further on in the same sentence. 

Adyos must here mean ‘speech’, since it is given to men ‘in 
order that they may call upon’ God; but the translator wrongly 
supposed it to mean ‘reason’, and wrote rafione. For Adyos in 
the sense of ‘speech’, cf. Aoyxdis Ovolas in Corp. I. 31, and 
Aoyixiy Ovotay in Corp. XIIL. 18. Also Corp. IX. rc: 4 88 vonows 
++ + Geddy ofoa tod Adyov. Corp. XII. i. 12: S'o ratra 7 
dvOpdaw 6 Ocds . . . éxapicaro, tév re votw Kal Tov Adyov. (The 
following sentences in Corp, XII. i make it clear that Aoyos — 
there means ‘speech’.) yvaous, which is God’s last and greatest 
gift to men, follows on or results from the right use of vods and 
Adyos, ‘mind’ and ‘speech. 

héyor (8€), (iva oé émxaddowper. 

ratione, ut te suspicionibus indagemus. 

The translator seems to have read something like ta ce dva- 
Préfeow (?) eixvedoper. emikadecwmen might easily be corrupted 
into ezZiyneywmen. It is difficult to account for suspicionibus ; but 
it may possibly be a corruption of (caelum) suspicientes or some- 
thing of the sort, or a translation of something equivalent in the — 
Greek, which we may suppose to have been added as an am plifica- 
tion of ¢e indagemus (at eéiyvelwpev). Such an addition would be 
appropriate only if Adyos were taken to mean ‘reason’ (ratio), 
and not ‘speech ’. 

yraou (84), va (a2) emyvd(vres Kal TH Gurl cou cwhdvres xat)pw- 





ASCLEPIUS III: arb 291 


pev. xatpopey Ste K.7.A.—(yroow wa emyvwlowpev? xa... .. v 
ort Pap.). 

cognitione, ut te cognoscentes [[ ]] ac lumine (numine 
MSS.) salvati tuo ((gaudeamus)). Gaudemus quod &c. The 
longer clause given by Asc/. Lat. is preferable to the curt and 
comparatively feeble iva cé 'ériyvdowper! of Pap., and leads on, by 
a suitable transition, to the yaipouey of the following sentence. The 
corruption in Pap, may have been begun by the omission of yaipwev 
before yaipouev ; or the sorcerer may have accidentally omitted a line 
of the Greek which he had before him. émvyvicwpev is hardly a 
possible form; the 1 aor. éyywoa, in the few instances in which it 
occurs, is causal, ‘to make some one know’. Ejitrem proposes 
émyvo(pi)owpev ; but I have found no instance of émvyvwpifew in the 
sense here required. 

érvyvava. differs from vojoat, as yvdors from vots. (The translator 
has obliterated the distinction, rendering both verbs by cognoscere.) 
vojnoat Oeov here means to apprehend God intellectually ; évyvavar 
edv, like the corresponding substantive yvaors (cot), means to come 
to know God as one knows a friend, and implies love as well as 
knowledge ; at its highest degree, it is to be absorbed in God. The 
Hermetist then distinguishes three stages: (1) to form a conception 
of God (vojoa) ; (2) to adore God (émixadécar) ; (3) to be united 
with God (érvyvévar). 

yvaors involves cwrnpia; those who ‘know God’ are ‘saved’ (from 
the evils which beset those who are subject to Heimarmene). Cf. 
Asc¢l. III. 29 b: pita duran} eboéBera x.7.X. And ydors brings with 
it yapa. Cf. Corp. XIII. 8 c. 

xa(ipowe)y Ste ceaurdv Hyiy €8(c)éas (Sor), 

Gaudemus quod te nobis ostenderis totum. 

It seems best to retain ¢ofwm in the Latin, and add dAov in the 
Greek. It is true that in ch. 32 b Hermes admitted a limitation of 
human vision which he here denies (‘contingit hominibus ut quasi 
per caliginem quae in caelo sunt videamus’ &c.); but in the 
enthusiasm of his adoration, all limitations are swept away. (Cf. 
érobeioat Aéiwoas in the following line.) Perhaps men in the body 
may attain to the full vision of God in rare moments of exaltation, 
though it cannot be continuously present to them. 


* Reitzenstein (od, p. 151) gives yrwow wa ce envyvo|cwpev as the reading of 
Paf.; but Prof. Eitrem, in a letter to me, says ‘My copy’ (of the papyrus) ‘has 
clearly iva émyvwowper (not ce)’. 


U2 





2.92 ASCLEPIUS 


For dAov thus used, cf. Adammonis Resp. 10. 6 (Testim.): wai rore 
37 ev dAw TO SnpopyexG Ged viv Yuxhv évrlOnor (sc. 4 Ocovpyia). 

Xaipopey (7 év 1)Adopacw tds Svras drobed(car Hélw)(c)as TH veau- 
OCD «se croc uhh 

gaudemus quod nos in corporibus sitos aeternitate (aeterni- 
tati MSS,) (tua) fueris consecrare dignatus. 

geavrov Ought to be followed by a feminine substantive of five or 
six letters, in the dative, meaning something like aefernitate or aeterna 
vita. 1 can think of no word that would exactly satisfy these condi- 
tions ; but the sense required might be expressed by writing either 
7 geavrod aidve or TH ceavTod alwviw (Cw). 

Consecrare means ‘to deify’. Cf. Cic. Wat. deor, 2.62: ‘(Liberum) 
quem nostri maiores . .. cum Cerere et Libera consecraverunt.’ 

In ch. 29 b it was said that the pious man ‘inmortalitatis futurae 
concipit fiduciam’, i.e. is assured that he will be a god in the life to 
come; but here, the Hermetist goes further, and says that those who 
are united with God by guosis are made gods even while they are still 
in the body ; for the life in them is God’s eternal life. Cf. Cor. 
XIII. ro as emended: eGew@yuev (by the madryyevecia). In some 
other Hermetica, the transformation from man to god is spoken of 
(as in Ascl. 29 b) as a process that is completed only when the soul 
has been released from the body by death. See Corp. XII. i. 12; 
Corp. X. 5 f.; Corp. I. 26a. 

Clement of Alexandria, whose conception of gvost's closely resembles 
that of the Hermetists, repeatedly says that the yrworixos becomes a 
god, not only after death, but even in the present life. Clem. Prorr, 
Ti. 114: otpaviy didacKxadrig Pcorody tov avOpwrov. aed, 3. 1. 1: 
6 88 dvOpwrros éxeivos, 6 civouxos 5 Adyos, . . . Eoporodrar Ta Hed"... 
Beds Se éxeivos 6 dvOpwrros yiverat, dr Botherat 6 Oeds.... peoirys yap 
6 AOyos, 6 Kowds ayorv. Strom. 4. 23. 149: tovtw Suvardv To Tpdrw 
Tov yvworiKoy dn yeverOar Oedv. Strom. 7. 10. 56: tiv écopévnv jpiv 
Kata Tov Oedv peta Ged Siarray.... Kat Geol riv rpooyyopiav KéxAnvrat ot 
otvOpover tov dAdwv Gedy rOv brd TO cwrhpt tpdtwy Teraypevov yevyoo- 
pevot. Strom, 7. 16. 95: 6 8... rov éavtod Biov émurrpdas rH 
GAnOeig. otov e& avOpdrov Geos droredcirar. Strom. 7. 16. 101: 6 TO 
kupiy meOdpevos Kai rH) SoOcioy 8¢ adrod Karaxohovbyoas zpopyreia 
ted€ws exredeirat Kar’ eixdva, tod Sidackdhov, ev capKi mepiroAav eds. 
For similar phrases used by other Christian writers, see Hort and 
Mayor’s note on écopevw bed, Clem. Strom. 7. 1. 3; e.g. Hippolytus 
Ref. haer, 10, 33: «i Se Oédras Kal Geis yevérOar, traxove ro 





ASCLEPIUS III: 41b 293 




































merornxért. 1b. 10. 34: yéyovas yap Geds' . . . COeorroupOns, dbavaros 
yer bels. 

In the pair of clauses beginning with xa(poyev, we have an 
amplified repetition of the two thoughts expressed by the pair of 
participles dependent on xa/pwyev in the preceding sentence. ceavrov 
jpiv ‘esas corresponds to oé émryvdvres; and spas drofeicat Agiwoas 
corresponds to owbévres. 
xdpis dvOpdmou pds o€ p(ia) 73 (ody peéyebos) yrapicar. 

Haec est enim humana sola gratulatio, cognitio maiestatis 
puae. 

A word corresponding to so/a is needed after pds o¢. Prof. Eitrem 
tells me that he saw in the papyrus, after w, traces of letters which 
. might be ca, and that he now recommends me to print mig To as his 
reading of Pag. It is therefore certain that the sorcerer wrote pia 
(not pdvy, which would have done equally well, as far as the meaning 
is concerned). For ja in the sense of soda, cf. pia pudaxi eboéBeca in 
ch. 29 b, and Opyoxeia 8& tot Oeot pia eori, wi) elvar Kaxdv in Corp. 
XII. ii. 23 b. 

As there is no doubt about the + after péa, we must conclude that 
the Hermetist wrote 75 followed by something equivalent to mazestatem 
fwam (presumably either odv péyebos or péyeOés cov),' and that the 
sorcerer omitted these two words by mistake. 

For yvupioa, cf. Corp. X. 15a: yrupiter (sc. rév dvOpwrov 6 Geds), 
rat Géder yrupiler Oar. 

dyr(wpicap)év (ce),  - - - aldvios Siapory. We have here a group 
of four classes, each of which begins with éyvwpicaev. The repeated 
éyvopicapey follows on yvwpicat, just as, in the preceding passage, the 
repeated xa/poper follows on xa‘pwyev. The four clauses fall into two 
pairs; in the first pair of clauses the relation between God and man 
_ is spoken of, and in the second pair, the relation between God and 
the Kosmos. 

In Pap. the ve which is needed as object of éyvwpfcaper, and is 
represented by / in Asc’. Lat, is omitted in the first, third, and 
ourth clauses, and was almost certainly omitted in the second clause 
also. If it was present in the Greek text which the sorcerer had 
before him, it is not likely that he would have left it out four times 
over through mere carelessness. It is almost indispensable in the 


1 It would also be possible to write 70 (a8) -ywopica: ; but an accidental omission 
of adv péye80s by the sorcerer seems more likely than an arbitrary expansion of cé 
into mazestatis tuae by the translator. 


294 ASCLEPIUS 


first of the four clauses; but the Hermetist may possibly have 
written éyvwpicapér oe there, and left the ve to be understood when 
éyvwpicapev was repeated. Perhaps it is best to assume that he wrote 
eyvwpicapév oe in the first of each pair of clauses, and éyvwpicapey 
without oe in the second of each pair, and that the sorcerer was led 
by the absence of oe in the second and fourth clauses to omit it in 
the first and third clauses also. 

eyr(wpicap)év (ae), & (Loh adn es) ris dvOpwmlyyns Lai" 

(2)yrupioape(v, & bas) (uéyrotor) “dadons yrocews!, 

Cognovimus te, [et] (oc) lumen maximum solo intellectu 
sensibili(um) ; 

cognovimus (intellegimus MSS.) te, o vitae (humanae) vera 
vita. 

One of these two clauses has to do with fw, and the other with 
gas. (Cf. Cai cat pds in Corp. I. 9 &c.) In Pap., the clause which 
deals with {a7 is placed before that which deals with d&s; in Ased. 
Lat, the clause which deals with {wy is placed after the other, — 
Which of the two the Hermetist placed first, we have no means of 
finding out. 

One might write either & (fwi dAnOés) rijs évOpwrivys Lwis (= 0 vita 
vera humanae vitae), or & ris dvOpwrivns Luis (Cw) dAnbes) (=o 
vitae humanae vita vera). The former order is perhaps to be pre- 
ferred, because it makes this clause match more exactly with the other. 

In the parallel clause, the sorcerer almost certainly wrote & gas 
drdons yviorews. (drdons yvioews stands legibly written in Paf.; 
and & és (= /vmen) would just fill the preceding gap, if we assume 
that oe was omitted here, as in the three corresponding clauses.) 
But this can hardly be what the Hermetist wrote; for there is no 
satisfactory meaning in dwdoys;' and dds ought to have an epithet 


1 If dwdons is wrong, how is that reading to be accounted for? It has occurred 
to me that dadons ywoews nigh possibly be a corruption of Aaumds (= /umen) 
Tis yrhoews, Cf. Corp. X. 4b as emended: (7 rod dyadod Oéa) éxhdumer emt 
togovroy, ép’ Scov Sivarat b Oedpevos défacOa: Thy Emevopoiy rHs vonTHs Aapmndévos. 
Anything which sheds light might be called Aaumds. Poets applied the word 
Aaymds to the sun ; and the notion that the Good, or God, is the sun of the vonrds 
«égpos is a commonplace in philosophic writings, from Pl. Rep. onward. The 
term Aaymds pet me 5 (lumen maximum) might then be meant to signify the sun, 
in contrast to the lesser lights of heaven. Cf. 4sc/, II]. 18b: ‘ut enim sole 
mundus, ita mens humana isto clarescit lumine’ (viz. the light of vovs, which is 
God?s gift to such men as are worthy to receive it). But perhaps it is more likely 
that the missing word is @s, which was frequently associated with (ov. 

The false reading émdons might be accounted for in another way, by assum 
that the Hermetist wrote & gas dmAeror (= dumen maximum) rijs ywaoews, an 
that amAe(rov 7)s was corrupted into anacys. 




































ASCLEPIUS III: 41b 295 


equivalent to maximum (cf. vera vita, i. e. Lor adqGés, in the parallel 
clause). 

The reading which the translator had before him was probably & 
dis peyeorov (or drderov?) trav voyriv. (The phrase solo intellectu 
sensibili(um) would be a good translation of rv vonrav.) This seems 
preferable to the reading of Pap.; but the Hermetist may have written 
rav vonray OF THs yvooews. 

In the MSS. of Asc, Zat., the second éyvwpicapey is represented 
by intellegimus, instead of cognovimus. But it is difficult to believe 
that the translator can have intentionally made this purposeless 
variation. It seems more likely that he wrote cognovimus, and that 
intellegimus was substituted for it by a transcriber who was misled by 
intelle(ctu) in the preceding clause. 

éyvupioapéy oe, & (eyvwptopevav Pap.) prtpa (wavrop)épe, én r(a)tpds 
dur(e)ig. (kvodoa). 

((Cognovimus te,)) o (matrix) {naturarum | (rerum) omnium 
fecunda, (per patris im P)praegnatio(nem gravida facta P). 
This clause was evidently suggested by the passage on the 
bisexuality of God, Asc/. III. 20 b sg. God is both Father and 
Mother of the universe. 

It seems almost certain that the Hermetist wrote & prjrpa mavro- 
¢ope. The translator may possibly have rendered mavropdpe by 
naturarum omnium fecunda, ‘ productive of all kinds of things’; but 
it is more likely that he wrote 0 matrix rerum omnium fecunda, The 
words matrix rerum may have been corrupted into safurarum ; or 
matrix may have been accidentally omitted in transcription, and 
rerum altered into naturarum (which may have been caused by 
naturae in the line below). 

There is more uncertainty about the words which followed in the 
Greek. eitzenstein’s reading of Pap. is «<u +. rpos puriat (with a 
doubt about the x); Eitrem’s reading of Pap. is eunrpos puriat (with 
a doubt about the 7). We should expect the mention of the mother 
(usirpa) to be followed by a mention of the father; it therefore seems 
most likely that the words written in Pag. were «ey warpos duriat 
(i.e. év warpds gureig). But if this is what the Hermetist wrote, 
some participle is needed to provide a construction for év rarpds 
dureig, which could hardly be made to depend on the adjective 
mavrodépe; I have therefore added xvotca. 

Of the corresponding phrase in the Latin translation, nothing is 
left except the one word praegnatio, which probably stands for 


\* 


296 ASCLEPIUS 


dureia. It may be conjectured that the translator wrote something 
like per patris impraegnationem gravida facta. 

& (rod 13 wav év) grd(cer Ku(«d)o)popodvros aldvios Srapovy). 

(0) totius naturae [tuo] conceptu plenissim(a)e |[ |] aeterna 
perseveratio. 

There is no doubt about the words aidvos Siapovy (= aeterna 
perseveratio); and from that phrase, combined with -opodvros, it 
may be inferred that this clause is a summary of the passage 
concerning the eternity of God and the time-process (dopd) of the 
Kosmos, Ase/, III. 29 c-32 a and 40 b. Compare the following 
phrases in that passage: ‘Solus deus (stabilis).—‘inmobilis (est) 
aeternitas, - - - ex qua omnium temporum agitatio sumit exordium., 
- - - Habet autem tempus, ((quamvis semper agitetur,)) stabilitatis 
suae vim atque naturam, ea ipsa in se revertendi necessitate.’ (This 


' would agree with xvxAodopotvros.)—‘Sic efficitur ut et aeternitatis 


stabilitas moveatur, et temporis mobilitas stabilis fiat fixa lege 
currendi.’—‘ Fertur enim (= -dopefre:) in summa stabilitate (= é& 
ordoe), et in ipso (fertur) stabilitas sua.’ 

The Greek text cannot be restored with any confidence; but the 
following hypothesis may be proposed as at least a possible way of 
accounting for the facts before us. Let us suppose that the 
Hermetist wrote & rod ro wav év ordoe Kukdodopodtyros aldytos 
diapovy. (erdove is very doubtful; there is no evidence for this 
word in Pap. except the three letters ora read by Eitrem, and he is 
uncertain about the o ; but the repeated occurrence of sfadilitas and 
stabilis in chs. 29 c—32a gives some support to this conjecture.) In 
the translator’s copy of the Greek, this had been corrupted into & rod 
mavros év waou(?) xvopopotvros! aidvios Siapov7; and he translated 
this by ‘totius naturae (= rod wayrds) conceptu plenissimae (= év 
maou kvohopotyros) aeterna perseveratio’. In our Latin text, ¢vo has 
been added by error; this mistake might easily arise out of ‘tosixs 
nafwrae concep/z’, The sorcerer by whom Fag. was written copied 
from a text in which ordoec was retained; but he omitted rot 7d 
may év (OY rod wavrés év), and wrote w crame: Kvopopovyros atwviog 
diapory. 

toute oé Ta Adyw (ouTom ov... ., Pap.) wpockuvncaytes (rév pdvov 
dyaQdv évra, wapd tis ois dyabdryTos) p(n)Seplay airyowper (nTyoapey 
Pap.) (xdpw why) (768 pdvov), 


1 xvopopodvros (in place of xusAopopotvros) may have been suggested to a tran- 
scriber by sarpa mavropdpe in the preceding clause. 








ASCLEPIUS III: 41b 297 


In omni enim ista oratione adorantes (te solum) bonum, 
ponitatis tuae hoc tantum deprecamur. 

I assume that the Hermetist wrote rovrw ct 7G Adyw (= in ista 
oratione -- - (¢e)). The words omni and enim seem to have been 
added by the translator. Assuming that Eitrem has read Pag. 
rightly,’ we must suppose that the sorcerer wrote ovros ovy Aoyw (for 
odrws oty Ady); and the reading of the text from which he copied 
may perhaps have been oirws oty cé (rG?) Adyw. 

There is a sufficient reason for using the word Adyos here ; Hermes 
has just been insisting that Adyos, ‘speech’, is the only kind of 
offering that can rightly be presented to the supreme God. 

It seems best to retain the word donwem, which leads on to donttatis 
uae ; but if we retain it, we must insert /e so/wm before it, and assume 
that the Hermetist wrote rév pdvoy dyabdy dvra or something equivalent. 
The statement that ‘God alone is good’ occurs repeatedly in 
the Hermetica. Cf. ‘de uno illo ac singulari bono’ (= zepit 
exeivoy Trav a Kal pdvov dyafv dvra) in ch. 41 a, as translated by 
Lactantius. 

The genitive donitatis tuae may be accounted for by supposing that 
the Hermetist wrote apa ris ofjs dyaldrnros, and that rapa was 
omitted in the translator's copy of the Greek. 

Pap. gives p(n)Senlav yrjcapev (xdpw or ddow); but the Hermetist 
cannot have written that. We should have expected otdeplay atrodper ; 
but how could ot- be corrupted into y-? I conjecture pydeuiay 
alrjowpev, ‘let us ask for nothing except this’. 

The translator may perhaps have written ‘(nihil praeter (or nisi)) 
hoc tantum ¢e precamur’. 

(O)€noov Hpas Sa(r)npnOjvar ev rH of yr(d)o(er Kal prdd)ryr(t). 

ut nos velis servari (servare MSS.) perseverantes in amore 
cognitionis tuae. 

The word beginning with yy, which followed «77 oy in Pap., 
must have been yvace. But what followed that? The translator 
probably read éy rH ofs yrdoews pidoryr (amore), I conjecture 
that the Hermetist wrote év rj of yvioe Kal diAdryt, and that this 
was correctly copied in Pap. Of the word which I take to have 
been diAdryrt, Reitzenstein read in Pag. only the two letters +7; 
Eitrem read ry followed by a doubtful « (which might be the lower 


1 Reitzenstein gives ovrog ov (i.e. he was not sure about the second v). Is it 
possible that the two letters which have been read as ov are really « 7, and that 
what the sorcerer wrote was ovo (for otrw) o¢ 7» Aoyu? 


298 ASCLEPIUS 


part of a zr), and marked a space of eight letters between yore 
and ry. I have inserted in this space the seven letters xa: ido. 

gudrys might very well be coupled with yvéou. Those who 
‘know God’ are both ¢iAdeou and Geodudcis; they love God and 
are loved by God. Cf. rarpixiy edvoray Kat oropynv Kai prdlav above. 
Pl. Tim. 53D: Oeds olde, al dvdpav bs dv exelvw pidos 7- Pl. Philed. 
39E: Sixasos avip Kat evoeBys Kal dyabos mévtTws dp ov Oeodrdys 
éor.; Philo Fragm., 662 M. Set yap clva (riv dvOpwrov), ci ye 
dvrws éott Aoyixds, Kowwvixdy (towards men), piAdxoopov, pAdGeov, 
iva, -yévntar Kal Peopidrxjs. Clem. Alex. Strom. 7. 1. 2: povov tov 
yruorudy doy te Kal edoe BH (elvar), Ocomperas tov TG dvte Gedy 
Opnokevovta’ td Ocomperet S& rd Oeopidts Ererar Kat PiddGeov (‘ the 
worship which beseems God includes both loving God and being 
loved by Him’, Hort and Mayor). 6. 7. 1. 3 5g.: Oeopidys 6 
Oeorpemys (‘the godly’) pdvos. . . . ravrq dpa piAdbeos 7d mpGrov 
(6 Ocomperys)' ds yap 6 tidy Tov marépa gilowdrup, ovtws 6 Tima 
tov Gedv piddbeos. Lb. 7. 3. 19: 6 Se HSq pi dua tas evrodds, Se 
airyy S& rHv yrow Kabapds rq Kapdig, piros obros rod Oecd. Lb. 
7-7. 42: 9 Tod yrworiot dodrys (éoriv) dvrictpopos ebvora Tod 
pidov tod Geod (‘a responsive feeling of loyalty on the part of the 
friend of God’ H. and M.). £p. Jac. 2. 23: Abraham diAos 
Geod exhyOn. 

(kat) [73] py(wore) opadfvat tod tovovrou (Biou), 

et numquam ab hoo vitae genore separari, 

How was this phrase joined on? In Pap., if we assume that 
the preceding word was ¢uAdryti, there remains a space of three 
letters before ro ym; and it is most likely that the missing word 
is kat (= ef in Ascd, Lat.). But if so, pyjrore cfadjvat is coupled 
to ScarypyOyvat, and dependent on Oédnoov; the ro of Pap. must 
therefore have been inserted by error. juprote (= numguam) is 
preferable to uj; Hermes prays that he and his pupils may not, 
at any future time, fall away from the happy state of life in which 
they now are. We may conclude then that the Hermetist wrote 
kat paymore (or pydérote) obadjvat x... For this petition, cf. 
Corp. 1. 32: alroupévy 5 ph opadfvar ris yvooews. Clem. Alex, 
Strom. 7.7.44: 5 yrootixis 8 dv piv xéeryrae’ mapapoviyy . .. 
alrjcerau' ra 8& dvrws dyaha ta mepi Wuxv ebyerar eval te aitd 
kal wopapeivar, tatty ovdé épéyeral twos trav dadvrwv, apKovpevos 
Tots Tapotow" ob yap éAAurys Tov oiketwy ayabdv, ixavds dv 75 
éavr@ éx ths Oelas xdpirés re Kal ywooews. 1b. 7. 7. 46: Kopudatos 








ASCLEPIUS III: 41b 299 


38 4y (yevépevos) (‘when he has reached the summit’ Hort and 
Mayor) 8 yrworxds “Bewpiav' etxerar ‘atgew re kat!’ mapapévew, 
xabdwep & Kowds avOpwros to ovvexés* tyaivew. val piv pde 
dmoreceiv more THs Gperis alrioerat, cwvepydy pdduota mpds Td 
drrwros SiayevérGar. See note on Corp. XIII. 14. 

Separart is not a good translation of opadjva. (Decidere would 
be more nearly equivalent.) Has sefarar’ been substituted for 
some other verb in the Latin text? Or did the translator read 
some other verb (e. g. xwproOivat, or droorqvar ; compare Herm, af. 
Stob. Zxc. II B. 3) in his copy of the Greek? 

The last words of the thanksgiving must have been rod rowvrov 
Biov or Biorov (= ab hoc vitae genere). In Pap., rov rowvrov stands 
at the beginning of a line, and is followed (in the same line) by 
Bee ai Hi Tov... Auoy peya wayw| (Eitrem)* and five or six 
more lines of detached scraps of words or phrases, out of which no 
meaning can be got; and at the end of this obliterated passage, 
we find ourselves among directions for working another charm, 
which appears to have nothing to do with that in which the Hermetic 
thanksgiving was employed. Assuming that Biov was written, there 
remains after it (according to Eitrem’s reading) a gap of three 
letters, followed by rov .. Avoy &c. (possibly mpds tov wAov or Aé€ye 
mpds fAvov ?); and we must suppose that the sentence which began 
with these words was either a note appended by the sorcerer at the 
end of the preceding incantation (perhaps giving some direction as 
to the place or time at which it was to be recited), or else, the 
beginning of the separate and unconnected charm which follows. 

Haec optantes (vaira edéduevo. ?) convertamus (convertimus 
MSS.) nos ad - - = cenam, The prayer or hymn serves as a 
‘grace before meat’. It is possible that, in the community of which 
the writer was a member, discourse and prayer were habitually 
followed by a meal which had something of the character of a sacred 
rite. As the prayer or hymn was a substitute for sacrifice (a Aoyxi) 
@veia), so the meal which followed may have been a survival, in 
an altered form, of the sacrificial banquet. The initiation of the 

1 age is certainly wrong; there can be no avfqas for one who is already 
kopupaios, Has ate. te arisen out of etgerar, written as an alternative for ebxerai? 
The future etgera: would perhaps be preferable to the present ; cf. altjoerat in the 
following sentence. Something like 7H Gewpig ebxera: (or edferar) mapapévery would 
give the sense required. 

2 7d auvexés = ouvexas, ‘continually’. 

‘ Reitzenstein (Pot.) gives the line thus : 

| Tov roovrov ....0... @Aioy perayaye | 


300 ASCLEPIUS 


mystes of Isis at Corinth concluded with a zentaculum rehgiosum 
(Apuleius AMe/amorph. 11. 24). Cf. Josephus Bell. Jud. 2. 129 ff., 
of the Essenes: xaOdmep cis dyiv tt répevos rapaylyvovrar 76 
Seumvyrijpiov. - - - mpoxaredxerar § 4 icpeds ris tpodijs,’ kal yevoarbai 
Twa mplv ris «dys aOgurov. And when they are eating their 
meal, rots éwhey ds prvoripiv te ppixrov 4 tov Bdov cw} 
xarabatverat, . 

puram et sine animalibus cenam. It is implied that those 
who have attained to gvos’s must abstain from eating the flesh of 
animals, This rule was observed by Orphici (Eur. Hippol. 952 59.), 
and, with more or less strictness, by Pythagoreans of all periods. 
As to the reasons commonly given for it, see Porph. De aést. 


} Porphyry (De aést. 4. 12), quoting this passage, adds dyvijs obeys nal naSapar. 
Cf. ‘ puram et sine animalibus cenam’ in Ascl. 








STOBAEUS, EXCERPTS FROM HERMETICA 


EXCERPT I 


LACTANTIUS says that this passage was (Hermae) ad filium seribentis 
exordium. It must therefore have stood at the beginning of a 
iibellus; and perhaps his words may be taken to imply that this 
iibellus was the first in the collection of ‘the Discourses of Hermes 
to Tat’. The passage seems to have been widely known; it is 
quoted by three early Christian writers, and probably referred to by 
a fourth (Fragm. 2, Cyprian(?)); and Julian* also appears to 
have been acquainted with it. This would be accounted for, if we 
suppose that it stood at the beginning of the first /ed/us of a 
collection of Hermetica, and that the words @edv vojoa pev xoAerov 
x.7.X. were consequently the first that met the eyes of readers of the 
Hermetic writings. 

It seems to be assumed by Lactantius, as it frequently was by 
others, that Hermes himself wrote the dialogues in which he appears 
as a speaker; unless indeed Lactantius means that the Jdidel//us 
which began with this passage was not a dialogue, but an efrs#/e of 
Hermes to Tat (cf. Corp. XIV and Corp, XVI). 

Exc. I is the second of the three Stobaeus-excerpts which 
Turnebus appended to Corp. I-XIV, and Flussas included in his 
‘Caput XV’. 

Wachsmuth (Stob. Anzhol. vol. ii, p. 9) says that this excerpt 
‘deest apud Patricium’, But that is a mistake. The passage 
Gedy vojoa... toto éorw 6 Oeds, taken from Stobaeus, occurs 
in Patrizzi (1593), Hermetis Trismegisti libel XX, f. 51a. But 
Patrizzi joined on to the end of it without a break, as if they formed 


1 Pseudo-Justin, Lactantius, and Cyril. Lactantius again refersto Exc. Lin De 
iva dei 11. 12 (Testim.) ; he there connects it with Pl. Zim. a8c. Cf. Lactant. 
De opif. det 1. 11 : ‘asummo illo rerum conditore atque artifice deo, cuius divinam 
providentiam perfectissimamque virtutem nec sensu conprehendere nec verbo enar- 
rare possibile est’. In this latter passage, Lactantius may have been thinking either 
of Pl. Zim. 28c, or of Herm. Zxc. I, or possibly of both. 

2 Julian Or. 4. 131 D: €ore pev ody, eb olda, xadrendv Kat 7d guveivar wept adrod 
pévoy, dwéaos tis Eariv 6 davis (sc, HAtos) éx To pavepod Aoyioapéve, fpdcat BE 
tows ddivarov, el wal rhs dglas EXarrov éGeAnoeé tis. The verbal agreement of 
ppaca dbtvaroy with Herm. Exc. I makes it probable that Julian had in mind that 
passage rather than Pl. Zine, 28 c (ddvvaroy Aéyev). 


302 STOBAEI HERMETICA 


part of the same passage, two Hermetic fragments (x2 and 11, vol. I, 
P+ 536: gorw ydp Tis .. . trep dvOpwrdv éorw, and airvov 5& rovrov... 
ordpart AadnOiver), which he got from Lactant. Dio. inst. 4. 7. 3- He 
placed these two fragments in inverse order, disregarding the state- 
ment of Lactantius that gor: ydp Tis «7A. occurred ‘a little after’ 
the other in the Hermeticum in which he found them. 


§ 1. Oedv vofjoat pev xademov, ppdoai de dduvarov. This is a 
reminiscence of Pl. Zim. 28c: rov piv obv mowTyv Kat rarépa 
rotde rod wavrés ebpey te Epyov Kal edpdvra eis mavtas ddvvarov 
Aéyew. And the whole passage is based on the Platonic contrast 
between 7b voyrdy and 7d alo@yrév, which is dealt with in the 
preceding sentences of the Zimaeus (27 D-28 B). 

& kat vofjeat Suvardy, This phrase is missing in our MSS. of 
Stobaeus; but as it occurs with slight variants in Pseudo-Justin, 
Lactantius, and Cyril, it is to be presumed that it was present in the 
original text, and was omitted in Stob. by an error of transcription. 

7d ydp [dodparov odpart onpyvar abdvaroy, Kat rd] TéAetoy K.7.A. 
On the analogy of the two following clauses, 75 yap dodpyarov ... 
ddvvarov ought to mean ‘God is éowparos, man is (or, man’s vocal 
organs are?) capa; therefore, man cannot describe or explain 
God’. But such a statement would be out of place at this stage; 
for in what follows, Hermes is still speaking of the difficulty of 
conceiving or apprehending the incorporeal (vofoo xaderdv) ; and 
it is not until later that he passes on from this to the other point, 
that it is impossible to express the thought of it im words (dpacau 
ddvvaroy, repeated in égeureiy advvarov at the end of the passage). 
This objection might perhaps be got over by adopting the reading 
of Stob. A, cvpPyvax (‘to meet with’ or ‘come to terms with’,— 
cf. ovyyevécba below—), in place of oypiva. But it seems best 
to bracket the words. They are omitted by Lactantius. 

7d yap [ | tédctoy 7G Gredet KarahaPéobar Tod Buvardv’. God is 
réActos, man is dreds; therefore, man cannot (?) apprehend God. 
For the use of the middle form xaradaBéoOa in the sense ‘to 
apprehend’ (more commonly xaradaPeiv), cf. Dion. Hal. 2. 66: 
eyo 8& rd piv eval twa... Pudarrdpeva ... ék mohAGy mdvu kaTa- 
AapBavopa. 

Even if we cut out dowparoy copare oynpavar adivarov, we still 
have, in close succession, ddvvarov—dvvardv—ot Suvarév. We 
may be sure that the author was not responsible for this clumsy 
iteration. Besides, od dvvardv does not express his view; for he 








EXCERPT ET: 2 303 


holds that it zs possible, though difficult, for man to apprehend 
God. Most likely then od dvvardv has been substituted by error 
for something equivalent to yaAerdv above and dvcxoAoy below. 

1d diSiov to SAtyoxpoviw cuyyevéobat Sicxohoy. God is everlasting, 
man (as an earthly organism) is short-lived; therefore, it is hard 
for man to enter into converse or connexion with God. This must 
be the meaning; but what is the grammatical construction? 
ovyyevéoOa requires a dative; and if the text is sound, we must 
understand rd diSiov (nom.) Svcxoddy (éo7t) 7G dAvyoxpoviy ovyyevé- 
cba (aid), ‘the everlasting is difficult for the short-lived in 
respect of associating with it’. Cf. Pl. Rep. 1. 330: xaderol ody 
kai gvyyevecOar ciciv, Herm. ap. Stob. Zxc. ILB. 5: cepvi) atry 
dds. « «, xaAer} SE Wux7 Sdedou. 

Lactantius, Div. inst. 2. 8. 68 (Zestim.), quotes from ‘ Hermes’ 
a similar passage: ‘ut Hermes ait, “ mortale inmortali, temporale 
perpetuo, corruptibile incorrupto propinquare non potest”, id est 
propius accedere et intellegentia subsequi.’ This, in Greek, would 
be 76 Ovyrov tG aBavarw Kal Td dAvyoxpoviov TO adi Kat ro POaprov 
TO apOdprw eyyilew od Stvara:, Is Lactantius there quoting Zxc. I 
from memory, and very inaccurately? Or is he quoting from 
some Hermeticum now lost, in which a similar thought was ex- 
pressed in different words ? 

7d 8é dd gavragias Tokidferar'’. cidLerGar means ‘to be over- 
shadowed’ or ‘darkened’; but that meaning is not appropriate 
here. Ocecolampadius (whose Latin translation of Cyril represents 
a better Greek text than that of Aubert) gives a satisfactory sense, 
by writing adumbratur, which might be a rendering of cxiaypadetrat. 
The writer must have meant that the world of sense is a mere 
illusion or unreal appearance, as opposed to 70 voyrdv, which alone 
is dAnOes. Cf. Exc. ILA (rept adyOeias). gavracia, as used by 
the Aristotelians and Stoics, means the process by which the mind 
presents to itself an image of something in the external world; and 
in Platonic writings, the word sometimes carries with it an implication 
that this image is illusory. See Corp, V. rb. 

[8cov ody 73 dobevéctepoy tod icxupotépov Kai Td éAatTov Tod 
Kpeitrovos Si€oTyKe,| TogodTov (SidoryKe) 7d Ovytdv tod Oefouv. This 
is Cyril’s reading. Stobaeus gives the passage thus: ro 8& doOevé- 
arepov Tod icxuporépov Kal 7d edarrov Tod Kpeirrovos SiéoryKe ToTodToV 
Scov To Ovyrov tod Geiov. In either form, the statement is absurd. 
The difference between ‘that which is stronger’ and ‘that which 


304 STOBAEI HERMETICA 


is weaker’ may be great or small; it varies through all degrees ; 
and a thing so indefinite cannot be used to measure or indicate 
the extent of the difference between the mortal and the divine. 
Possibly a marginal note containing the words ro déoGevéorepov x.7.A, 
has been worked into the text in two different ways. 

There appears to be a reminiscence of this passage in Didymus 
De trin. 3.1. 7764 (Testim.): (75 c&pa) xaraxpareiv émixerpe (ris 
Woxijs) tis pice Kpelrrovos, Kal tocolTw xpeirroves doov TO é0avarov 
Tod Ovnrov. 

For rd @Aarrov and rd xpeirrov, cf. Corp. X. 22b: mavrov yap 
otros (sc. 6 eds) xpeirrwv [xal wdvra abrod éddrroval, 

§ 2. 4 8€ péon tovrwv Sidoracs x7. After rod Geiov (Kai 
dOavdrov add, Cyril), our two authorities diverge. Stobaeus gives 
88 péon . . . Totro Zorw 6 Oeds; Cyril gives, in place of this, 
an entirely different passage, «i rw ofv dodparos . . . éavt@ dvdpovov 
(Fragm. 25). But the continuity of the text as given by Stobaeus 
is guaranteed by the word Sueracis, which refers back to diéoryKe 
in the preceding sentence. We must therefore conclude that 
Cyril has here quoted two distinct and unconnected passages, and 
that the two have been joined together by error. Very likely a 
separating phrase (e.g. xal wdAw or xal érépw6) originally stood 
after Gefov xai d@avdérou in the text of Cyril, and has fallen out by 
accident. 

thy Tod Kadod Ogav, Compare what is said in Corp. X. 4b, § 
about # rod dyad Oa and (rd) GedoarBar 7d KédAdos Tod dyabod. 

SpOarpois pev yap Ta cdpara Oeard [yddirry 82 ra dpard dexrd]: 
7d 8¢ dodparoy . .. dnd tav Aperépwy aicdjcew Katahn>Ojvar ob 
Suvatat, ‘With our eyes we can see bodies (only); the incorporeal 
cannot be apprehended by our senses.’ The 5¢ to which péy 
points forward must be that in 1d 8% dowparov; and the words 
yAdrry 58 7a bard Aexrdé break the connexion of thought, The 
contrast on which the writer is insisting is that between the things 
which we can see with our eyes, and a thing which ‘cannot be 
apprehended by our senses’; and the interposition of a statement 
about speech obscures this contrast. The tongue, as used in 
speech, is not an organ of sense-perception ; the mention of the 
tongue is therefore irrelevant. 

The emphatic jerépwv seems to imply that there is another sort — 
of ala@nors (viz. that of ‘the eye of the mind’) by which it és possible 
to ‘behold the Beautiful’. 








EXCERPT I: 2 305 


With this passage may be compared Corp. V. 2: vénows yap porn 
bpd 75 daves K.7.A. 

Févvooipar, & Tdr, évvooiuor & éfermety aSuvarov' todro gotw 6 
Qeés.!_ This cannot be right. The words convey no clear meaning ; 
and the repetition of évvootya: is pointless. The writer must have 
ended by applying to God what he had been saying about 7d 
éodéparov in general; but the words in which he made this applica- 
tion cannot be restored with certainty. 


EXCERPTS IIA AND IIB 


£xc. 11A is the first of the three Stobaeus-excerpts which 
Turnebus appended to Corg, I-XIV, and which Flussas took over 
from him and printed under the heading Zyismegisti Pimandrae 
Caput XV. Turnebus appears to have got his text of these three 
excerpts from Trincavelli’s edition of the Morilegivm of Stobaeus, 
which was published at Venice in 1535-6, 

The text of Zac. IL A is arranged in three different ways in 
the MSS. In S and A, the sections are placed in the order 1-18 ; 
in M, they are placed in the order 4-15, 1-3, 16-18; in L and 
Br, they are placed in the order 1-12, 16-18, 13-15, Of these 
three arrangements, two at least must be wrong. For reasons given 
below, it appears to me certain that all three are wrong; and I 
have placed the sections in the order 1-5, 7, 6, 8-10, 16, 18, 
II-12, 17, 13-15. That is to say, I have followed SALBr in 
placing §§ 1-5 at the beginning, and L Br in placing §§ 13-15 at 
the end; but I have shifted §§ 7, 16, and 18 without manuscript 
authority, There may be a good deal of doubt about § 7; but 
it can hardly be doubted that §§ 16 and 18 ought to stand where I 
have put them. 

When thus rearranged, II A is intelligible throughout ; and if we 
had nothing else before us, we might accept it as a finished whole, 
complete in itself. But II B, which has been preserved ina different 
part of the Anthologium of Stobaeus, fits on perfectly to the end 
of ITA, and must have been written as a continuation of it, 
In II A, the writer has been occupied in establishing the doctrine 
that nothing here below is real (rd pi) ci[Sévar pndty ddnOis eOdde, 
§8). The opening sentence of II B, in the words ei pidév éorw 
@Ay Pes évOdd_, refers back to the conclusion arrived at in II A, 

2800-3 x 


306 STOBAEI HERMETICA 


and makes it the starting-point of a discourse in which a fresh 
topic is dealt with. In ILA, dAjGea is discussed theoretically ; 
in II B, the result of that discussion is brought to bear on the 
practical question ‘How am I to live my life?’ It may be 
considered certain then that 11 B was written to follow II A. 

But was it written by the same person? It is conceivable that 
II A originally stood alone, and that it afterwards occurred to some 
one into whose hands the document came to write a sequel to it. 
But this is unlikely. The teacher’s standpoint is the same in the one 
and the other; and there are peculiarities of diction in II A which 
recur in II B. éA7Gea, which is the subject of discussion in IT A, is 
repeatedly spoken of in II B, and has the same significance there ;* 
in both, there is the same avoidance of the word eds ; and in both 
alike, zpordrwp is used to denote the supreme God.’ It is probable 
then, if not certain, that II A and IIB are the work of the same 
man, and were intended to be read as two parts of one whole; and we 
may regard them as together making up a single /de//es, which has 
been preserved in its entirety. The opening words of II A suggest 
the title Tepi dAnOecas; and not II A only, but the /de//us asa whole, 
might very well bear that title. In the first part (II A), we are told 
‘where Reality is, and what it is’; in the second part (II B), we are 
told what we must do in order to attain to it. The one might be 
described as an exposition of the writer’s metaphysic, and the other, 
as an exposition of his ethic; but in this document, as in the 
Hermetica in general, ethic is wholly subordinated to religion. 

In Stobaeus, there is joined on to the end of II B, as if it were 
a continuation of the same Hermeticum, a document which I have 
separated from it, and which I call Excerpt XI. That document 
consists of a collection of aphorisms, with some appended remarks 
on the obligation of secrecy. It has nothing to do with II B; and 
it must have had a separate heading of its own, which has been lost 
by accident. 

The doctrine of Zxc, II A and IIB is Platonic ; and not only in 
the leading thought (‘that there is nothing real here below’), but in 
the details of the argument by which this thesis is supported, there 


1 Besides ef pndév éorw dAnbés évOade in II B. 2, note II B. 3, (uab)Woerat wat 
mod éatw % GAndaa Kal rls torw éxelvy: 2b. Tiv KaTddnfav Tod dvtws ayabod Kat 
dAnOots : 5, mpds dAnGeav ddds, The word voids occurs in neither ; its correlate, 
dAnGea, is spoken of instead. 


a ? mporarwp is not thus used elsewhere in the Hermetica, except once in the Kore 
Cosmet. 








EXCERPTS IIA, IIB 307 


is fairly close resemblance between Zac. ILA and a passage in 
Plutarch’s dialogue De Zi apud Delphos (16. 17 f., 3928), in which 
a Platonist speaks as follows: 6 mév ydp Oeds Exacrov yor évradba 
mpociovra ... mpooayopever 76 “TvdG. cavtdv”.... tyets d& wédwv 
dperBopevor Tov Oedv, “EL” paper, ds dd} Kal devdh wat pdvyv pove 
mpoojxovoay Tv Tod elvar mpooaydpevow amodiddvres. yiv pev yap dv- 
ws TOU evar peter ovdér,’ GAA Taca Ovyriy diors, ev Héow yevérews 
kat pOopas yevonevy, pdopa wapéxer® Kat Sdxnow dpvdpay Kat aBéBaov 
adris’ dy 8 riv dudivoway erepeioys AaBéobar Bovddpevos, domep } opoddpa 
mepidpagis idaros 7G mélew eis tavrd kal ovvd-yew Siappéov dadddvor 7d 
rephapBavdpevov, ottw tov rabyrav Kal petaBdyrav éxdorov TH d&yav 
évdpyevav 6 Adyos Suixwy droopdddera 7H pev els TO yeyvopevov oxirod, 
ry 8 «is 70 POetpdpevor, ovdevds AaBérbar pévovros ovSe Bvros bvtws 
duvdpevos. Troraud yap ovk éorw éuBiva dis 74 avrG, Kab’ “Apdxderor, 
ovde Ovyrijs ovcias dis dyarba: kara ew. GAN’ dEdryTe Kal réxer pera- 
Bodijs ... (dua) mpdceior kat dmevor, Sev oS eis rd elvar repalver 7d 
yeyvopevoy aris (Sc. rijs Ovyrijs odcias), rd pndérore Atyew pnd toracbae 
ri yeveow, GAN’ dard orépparos del peraBddAovoay éuBpvov troveiv, etra. 
Bpédos, etra aida, ((elra)) werpdxiov, beefs veavicov, [[<tra]] dvdpa, «pec 
Birnv, yépovra,® ras mpdtas POeipovcay yevéoas Kai QAruxias* rats 
emeyryvopevais. . . . POeiperar pev dxudlwv yeyvopévov yépovros, epbdpn 
8 & véos els tov dxpdlovra, xal 6 ais els rov véov, es 88 Tov waida 
7 vipriov' 6 88 xb8s eis Tov orjuepov réOvyev, & 8% orhpepor els Tov aipiov 
droPrjoKer’ péver dé ovdeis, oS eorw els, AAA yeyvdpeba woddoi, “rept ty 
pavracpa Kal Kowdy éxpayelov tAys weptehavvopévys xa bdrcbawvov- 
ons.'*... otre yap dvev peraBodijs érepa wdoyew eixds, obre peraBdd\Awv 6 
autos éortv. ei 8 6 atrds ove éotww, od’ Zorw*® [GAN "ek rovrov adrod! 
peraBadrer yryvdpevos Erepos ef érépou']” WevSerac & 4 ale Onors, ayvoia 
Tod Gyros, elvar 7 fawvdpevov.® ri ofv dvrws dv geri; Td alSiov® Kat 


1 july .. . Tod evar péreorw obdé: cf, Exc. IL A. 11, xaddr dvOpwnos, obx tori 
Gdn Os. 

? pdopa mapéxe: cf. IT A. 3, (2) pavractas cweorara. 1b. 17: pavracias obv 
wadety Bel ((royc dvO pturoyc.)) 

* raiéa',. ., veavionov, dvOpa,.. . yépovra: cf. IL A. 17, obte... 7d wadioy 
maidiov (uéver), obre db veavionos veavicxos, obre 5 dvip dvip, ode 5 yépov -yépur. 

* Perhaps: rds mpor(ép)as pOeipovcar [yevéoets wal] HAusias. 

5 Perhaps: mept éy [pdvracya] Kat xowdy éxparyeiov Ans wepredauyduevo; Kat 
6doaivontec. The word écpayeiov, 6a plastic mass’, is taken from Pl. 7¥m. 50D, 

§ Cf. IT A. 16, 75 88 pi} (r)abrd (v) mas dv dAndes etn; 

™ The words daa’... érépou interrupts the argument, They may have come 
from an explanatory note. 

® Perhaps dyvola rod dvros (olouévn) elvar 7d spaivdpevov: cf. IL A. 4, Tov per 
Soxotvray dAnOA dpav, rav Bt dis éXnOGs SvTay Wevdar. 

8 ol oby bvrws bv €or; 7d didiov x.7.A.: cf, ILA. 1 5 as emended, ti ov ay eto 

X2 


308 STOBAEI HERMETICA 


dyévyrov Kai apbaprov, @ xpdvos peraBodiy ovde cls émdye... . DAN 
Zorw S6eds, xpy pavat, Kal Eore kar’ oddéva xpdvoy, GANG. Kara. rv aidva, 
rov axivytov Kai &xpovoy Kal avéykMurov, Kai ob mporepov ovdev éorey otd” 
Sorepov,... GAN els dv Evi rg viv 70 del mem\ipwxe’ Kal povov éotl 7d 
kata Tovrov (sé. Tov aldva) dvrws dv, ob yeyovds ov8 exdpevov, bd’ dp- 
Edpevov od88 ravedpevov. 

The writer of Corf. XIII appears to have borrowed from 
Exc, 11 A; and Lactantius, Div. inst. 2. 12. 4, quotes from it, Apart 
from that, I can find no definite indication of date. But the teacher’s 
tone and attitude are not unlike those of Porphyry in his 4d Marcel- 
Jam, and in some passages of his De adstinentia ; and this /ibellus may 
very well have been written at some date in or not long before the 
lifetime of Porphyry, i.e. in the third century a. D. 


Contents. 


Exc. YA. Reality exists only in things everlasting. The four 
cosmic elements, when unmixed, are real; but we men consist of 
those elements intermixed. Thus we are unreal, and are consequently 
incapable of seeing or describing the real. §§ 1, 2. 

On earth, there is nothing real. Of earthly things, some few are 
copies of reality ; the rest are wholly unreal appearances. §§ 3, 4. 

It is possible for us to see and declare the truth that there is 
nothing real on earth ; but the fact that we can see and declare a 
truth must not be supposed to prove that we have reality in us. 
$8 5, (as 6, 8: 

The real is the good ; it is uncontaminated by matter, and is free 
from change. All earthly things are subject to change, and to 
destruction, which is the necessary counterpart of production ; and 
all earthly things are therefore unreal. But the unreal things of this 
world are wrought by the Reality which is above. §§ 9, ro, ((16)), 
(18). 

Man, as an earthly organism, is composite, and subject to change, 
and therefore is unreal. §§ 11, 12, ((17)). 

The cosmic elements are partly real, but partly unreal. Inasmuch — 
as they are everlasting, they are real; but inasmuch as they are 
subject to change, they are unreal. § 13. 


ais GANOes 6. 03 + TOY del dvra. Jd. 1: GdnOeay civar év pdvots Tots d:diots, 
Zé, 12 as emended, ddn@es elvar pdvov 7d det dv, 








EXCERPTS IIA, IIB 309 


_ [ ]! He alone is absolutely real, who is incorporeal and change- 
less,—He that ever is. § 15, 

Exc. 11 B. That being so, what must a man do to live his life 
aright? He must be religious. And that he may be religious, he 
must pursue philosophy. He who does so will learn that there is 
One by whom all things are ordered to good ends; he will be 
thankful to Him; and being thankful to Him, he will be 
religious. § 2. 

And if he pursues philosophy further, he will learn where Reality 
is, and what it is. Having learnt this, he will be yet more religious ; 
and being filled with passionate love of the Good and Real, thence- 
forward he can never fall away. If you attain to that, all will be well 
with you, both in this life and after death. §§ 3, 4. 

(But you must begin by freeing yourself from the body.) It is 
hard to do this ; for before it can be done, there is a fight to be 
fought out within you. There is one part in you that strives to 
mount upward ; but there are two parts in you that try to drag it 
down ; and if the one is defeated by the two, your life on earth will 
be a state of penal torment. You must first win victory in this 
contest, and then mount upward. §§ 5-8. 


Lxc. ITA, §1. wepi &dnbeias. When a proposition is called éAnOjs, 
the word means ‘true’; when a /hing is called dAnOyjs, the word 
means ‘real’, In this document, déAnOyjs signifies ‘real’, and dAjOea 
‘reality ’,—except in some phrases in §§ 5-6, where d\769 voeiv Kal 
Aéyew means ‘to think ¢vve thoughts and make ¢ruve statements’. 

For dA7Gea in the sense of ‘reality’, cf. Pl. Rep. 6. 508 f., where 
dAnfeaa is the correlate of vos. (See Corp. II. 12.) Pl. Soph. 2468: 
vonra. arta Kat dowpara edn Bralopevor ryv ddyOwhv obciav evar’ ra 8’ 
exeivov Tapara Kat THv Aeyouevnv im airdv dAjOeav (= édyOwiv 
oboiav) . . . yéveow dvr’ otclas pepopévnv tui. mpocayopetover. Pl. 
Sympos. 212 A: évradda aird . . . yerjoerat, dpovre. . . Td Kaddv, 
tixrew obk cidwda dperijs, dre otk cldddov eharropévn, GAN’ GANOH, dre 
Tod dAnfods edarropévy. Corp. VII. 3: dvaBdépas Kat Oeardpevos 
70 KiAdos THs dAnOeias. The ddyOelas wediov (Pl. Phaedr. 248 8) is 
the region of reality. 

Mepit @dnOetas, & Tdr, odk gor. Suvardy (kar déiav eimeiv). As 
Hermes goes on to say that it 7s possible to speak about dd7jOea, (6 
8€ gore Suvardv, rodro dyyi,) he cannot have begun by saying that it 


1 Interpolation: [The Sun alone is real, for he alone is changeless. The Sun 
Presides over the Kosmos, and is subordinate only to the one supreme God.] 


a STOBAEI HERMETICA 


is noi possible to do so; etwety must therefore have been qualified by 
something like xar’ déiav. Cf. Pl. Phaedr. 247 C: tov 88 irepoupdviov 
rTorov ovre Tis tuvyoé Tw... ovre TOM tuyyoer Kar déiav. exer 88 De" 
Tolparéov yap ofy 75 ye dAnGes elmetv (to say what is ¢rue), dAAws Te 
kal mepi ddybeias (reality) Néyovra. Corp. XVIII. 12: Kan ef pay [79] 
mpos aklav éotw ecimely. 

Ldov dredés, 2f dredGy cuyxeipevov pepdv (nehdv MSS.). This is a 
reminiscence of Pl. Zt. 32D, where the Kosmos is described as 
Gov réXeov éx TeAwv Trav pepdv. In that passage, the réAca pépy of 
the Kosmos are ‘all the fire there is, and all the water, and all the 
air, and all the earth’, The dreAq pepy of which a man is composed 
are, as the Hermetist proceeds to explain, portions of fire, air, water, 
and earth, corrupted by intermixture. In Herm. Zz, III. 12, the 
dita copara are called réActa cwpara. 

[roApsjoavra elmetv]. roApoarra is meaningless in connexion with 
a verb dependent on 8vvardv ; and eimeiv, if meant to depend on the 
preceding otx gor Suvardy, is too far separated from it. It may be 
suspected that the words S/xawov todpycavra eimetv originally went 
together. ‘It is possible to say something about dA7jGea ; and it is 
right to make the venture.’ Cf. roApyréov in Pl. Phaedr. 247 ¢, 
quoted above. Corp. X. 24b: «i xpy toApjoavras eireiv. 1b, 25: 
ToApnréov eizeiv. 

AdHPerav elvar ev pdvors Tors dibdiors [odpacw]. The didi odpara 
may be ‘real ’,—at least in some degree ; but they are certainly not 
the only things that are real; for that which is real in the highest 
degree is incorporeal. (See §§ 13 and 15.) It is therefore necessary 
to bracket cépacw. 

§ 2. 7d (didia) odpara adtd (uev Kab?’ aird) ddnOW gor, The term 
aidia odpara is applicable both to the cosmic elements and to the 
heavenly bodies. But the writer here speaks of the cosmic elements 
alone ; and if the heavenly bodies are thought of at all, they must be 
thought of as included under the element fire, of which they are 
composed. 

The elements are ‘real’ only so far as they are pure. As they 
exist in our bodies, and in all things upon earth, they are adulterated 
by intermixture with one another, and therefore none of them is — 
‘real’, 0p adréavp means fire by itself, free from intermixture with 
anything else. The wording of this sentence may have been 
suggested in part by Pl. Zim. 51 B: Gp’ eore Te mip aird ed’ éavrod, 
kai wdvra wept Gv del A€yopev obrws atta Ka’ abra. bvra Exacta; F} 








EXCERPT IIA: 1,2 gil 


ravra dep kat Bdéropev, doa te adda dia ToD goHpatos alcOavdpeba, 
pova égti rovadrnv exovra aAjGeav, dAAa 8 otk Eore Tapa Tatra ovdapR 
oddapas, GAAS paryv éxdorrore elval ri paper eldos Exdorov vontov; But 
though the Hermetist may have had the words of that passage in his 
mind, his meaning is different. The wip atrd é¢’ éavrod of the 
Timaeus is the voyrov el8os (Platonic ‘idea’) of fire, But the wip 
airénvp of Zxc. II A cannot be the voyrdy eldos of fire; for we are 
told that it isa body. The voyrov elds is not a body. 

The source of the writer’s thought is to be found rather in Pl. 
 Philed. 29: TH TEpt Thy Tov Gopdtwv dicw arévtov tov Cowv Tip 
cal tdwp Kal mvedpa (air) xabopdpev ov Kal yi... évovra &v TH 
qvotdce.... pepe dy, wept Exdorov trav wap’ Hyiv AaBE 7d ToLwvde, « « « 
bre opuxpdv Te... veers Kal patroy, [Kal] oddap7 od8apads ciduxpwés dv, 
kal thy Sivapuv ov agiay ris picews exov.... olov wip Eort pév Tov 
rap’ hpiv, or. 8 ev 7G wravri.... odxodv opukpoy pév Tt To map Hpiv 
cat dobeves Kal dadrov, 7d § év 7G wravrl wyjOer re Oavpacrdv Kat KddA|t 
al réoy Suvdper 7H wept TO Tip ovoy.... Tavra yap épels, otpat, mepi 
re TIS ev Trois Lwous yas THs évOdde Kal ris év 7H wave, K.7.d. 

But where and how do the elements exist in their ‘purity’ and 
‘reality’? The wip atrérvp may be considered to exist in the 
heavens, which, according to the Stoic physics, consist of unmixed 
fire. But where are yj airéyn, idwp airovswp, and ayp abrodyp to be 
found? Perhaps the writer might have said that they occur nowhere 
in the universe as we know it, but that they did occur at a certain 
stage in the making of the universe. The Demiurgus first made the 
four elements (rip airémup &c.) out of formless #Ay, and then made 
all sublunar things by mixing or combining the four elements 
together. See the passages on the separation of the elements in the 
Cosmogonies of Corp. I and Corp. IIL. 

[udvov Kai odSév &Ao]. Most likely (rip) povov kai oddév ddXo was 
inserted after rtp atrorvp, as an explanation of that unfamiliar term. 
If so, the explanation is correct ; but it can hardly have been written 
by the author. 

kal ote wip dori (2v adrots ddnbes) ote yi ode TSwp oie Adjp, oure 
obey ddnés. Lactantius, Div. ust. 2. 12. 4, referring to this passage, 
writes ‘(Trismegistus) nostra corpora... dixit... et neque ignem esse 
neque aerem neque aquam neque terram’. It appears therefore that 
he read xal otre rip éorw ovre yi ovre USwp ovre dip, as in our MSS., 
and took the sentence to end at ovre dyjp. Perhaps we should 
insert év airots or something of the sort, and also add adyOés. 


312 STOBAEI HERMETICA 


ei 8¢ ph thy dpxhy 4 odoracis Hpadv eoxe thy adjPeav, was ay 
Bivaito adyPerav ¥ ifeiv # ciweiv; Like is known by like. (Cf. 
Empedocles, fr. rog Diels: yaty piv yap yatav drdmapev, toate 8 
Bwp, | aibepr 8 aiPepa dior, arap wupt rip aiSmdov.) If then nothing 
in us is real, we can apprehend nothing that is real. 

Man is here considered merely as an earthly organism; and 
the divine vots which is present in some men at least, and in virtue 
of which they are capable of seeing the Real, is left out of 
account. 

[vofjoa. 82 (Suvardv) pédvov dav 6 Beds 6y]. This breaks the 
connexion between § 2 and § 3. Cf. ols édy & Oeds Thy OcomruKyy 
dwpjonrat Sivapey (§ 6), which may have been inserted by the same 
interpolator. It should be noted that, if we cut out these two 
phrases, the word Geos does not occur in the document, The writer 
seems to have avoided the use of it deliberately. For instance, 
where he might have said ‘from God’, he prefers to say dvoOev. 

§ 3. mdvra . . . ta emi yas dAnOF (dAjOera MSS.) peév odk got tis 
Se AAnGelas piprpara [Kai] od mdvra, ddtya 8é. [Taira] (ra 8é) &Ado 
Weidos kat mAdvos. Earthly things are divided into two classes, viz, 
(1) things which, though not real, are copies of the real, and 
(2) things which are not even copies of the real. The former, 
which are the less numerous, are presumably to be identified with 
the things which ‘partake of the good’, and the latter, with the 
things which are wholly bad. 

It is necessary to insert ra 8¢ before gAXa. The reading of the 
MSS. may be accounted for by assuming that ra 8¢ was read as rade, 
and that this was altered into ratra. 

(éx) pavracias [kaddwep cixdves] ouvertara. Kabdmrep eixdves is a 
misplaced doublet of KaOdrep kal # eixey in § 4, 

davracia means ‘(unreal) appearance’, as opposed to reality. Cf. 
Pl. Soph. 260 C: Kal piv drdrns obeys, eidddwv re Kal eixdver nn Kal 
gavragias ravra avayKn pera evar. The word ddvracpa is similarly 
used by Plato; e.g. Soph. 2368; Rep. 584 A, 598 B, 599 A. 

§ 4. dtav 8 dvwev thy emipporay exn H davtacia, ris d&dnPelas 
yiyverat pinnois, This refers to the éd¢ya which were said above 
to be dAnbetas pupypara. Does rhv exippoay éyy mean ertppén ? 
Or are we to understand some genitive (e.g. rod Gefov) after 
émippovay ? 

kal dp0arpods pév Sparoar gxovea (sc. H eixiw i & 1H ypady), 
Bremer 8€ ob8ev" (kal dra,) dover 82 od8ey Sdws. This looks like a 








EXCERPT IIA: 3-6 313 


reminiscence of Ps. 113. 13 (115. 5): dpOadpors exovow Kat odx 
dyovrar’ Gra éxovow kal ox dxovcovra. (Repeated in Ps. 134 (135). 
16, with évwrieOyjoovra in place of dxovcovra.) But the resemblance 
is in the words alone, and not in the thought. The Psalmist is 
speaking of the idols worshipped by the heathen; the Hermetist is 
speaking of a painted portrait of a man. 

trav péy BSoxodvrwy GAnOi dpav, trav 8 ds adnbas dvrov Weudav. 
rav pév is masculine, and means those who look at the picture ; ray 
8¢ is neuter, and means the things seen in the picture. For the play 
on the word dAnGas, cf. Pl. Rep. 2. 382 A: 76 ye ds dAnbds Weddos, ef 
olév re rotro eimetv. Theaet. 189 C: rod ddnOas Wevdous. 

The writer assumes that the man who looks at the picture is 
deceived by it, and mistakes the painted figure for a living being. 
Plato (Rep. 598 c, Soph. 234 B, and Philed, 38 D) speaks of a similar 
mistake in the case of an image or painting seen at a distance. 

§§ 5, (7)), 6, 8. Boor pev ody... pyBev adnOes evOdde. Hermes 
says that it is possible for men to think true thoughts and speak true 
words (dA) about reality (éA7ea). Thereupon Tat, confusing 
the two meanings of the word éAn6js, argues that if there are men on 
earth who think and speak dAy6j, there is some dArjea (reality) on 
earth ; but Hermes rejects this argument. 

It is clear that this was the general meaning of the passage ; but 
the text is in confusion. I have tried to make sense of it by 
transposing § 7 (otrws édyfés . . . Ti Sai;). 

§6. [ots dav 6 Beds Thy Ocomrixhy Swphontar Suvapiv.) Geowrixyy is 
inappropriate here. If the power of thinking truly about adjOea is 
to be called  Gcorrixy Svvayis, it must be assumed that dAnOeva. is 
identical with God ; but the writer does not bring éAxGea into con- 
nexion with God until §15, and therefore could hardly presuppose 
its identity with God in §6. It is probable then that ofs gay... 
dvvayuv is an interpolation. 

For the word Georrixds, cf. Exc. VII. 3: pdduora. éxelvors cup Batver rd 
hoGaivery, ofs Geowrixi Stvapus ob pdceort. In Abammonis Resp. 8. 6a 
( Zestim.), the higher of the ‘two souls’ of man is called %) Georrixy 
oxy. An instance of Oeérrys occurs in the traditional text of Philo 
De mutatione nominum 2. 7, vol. iii, p. 157 Wendland : Movojs otv 
6 ris dadois picews Ocaris kai Oedrrys. But Wendland brackets xat 
Georrys ; and apart from this, the earliest instance of dedrrys given 
in Sophocles Zex. is about a, D. 600. Georria, as far as I know, 
occurs first in Eusebius. 


314 STOBAEI HERMETICA 


§ 8. [ra dvra. [Set] vociv kal A¢yew}. Set may have been repeated from 
adiPeav def kadeiv ; and r& dvra voeiv ai Meyew is probably a doublet 
of &AnO7 voeiv Kal A¢yew above. 

[Zon B& odSév AdnOes emt ris yijs.| These words might be com- 
bined with [favracia e’ot nat Sdfa rdvra] in §7. It would be 
possible to write Zor ovSév dAnbis ent ris ys, pavractas 58 xal dogar 
aévra, We may suppose this to have been a marginal note in which 
the teaching of the passage was summed up. 

((kat ox doxdmas)) (elroy Str) TodTo dAnOés eo, 7d ph elvar (cidevar 
MSS.) pndéy adn bes 2v0d8e. The words xal ovx doxdrws are meaning- 
less where they stand in the MSS.; and they make sense at the 
place to which I have transposed them. The statement rotro dAnOes 
éori, 7d pi) elvar pdtv ddnbes evOdde, is a repetition, ina slightly altered 
form, of the statement of Hermes as emended, dAnGés obSev elvax ev rH 
Yi voav Kat A€ywv, addy} vod wai héyw. If Hermes admitted Tat’s 
argument to be valid, he would have to admit that he had spoken 
aoxérus (i.e. without due consideration) when he made that state- 
ment. But he denies that he spoke doxérws; that is he maintains 
that his statement was correct, in spite of Tat’s objection. 

§ 9. H yap adnGed [ ] eorw adrd 1d dxparov dyaddy .... Ta BE 
evOdde . . . SSexra [ | tod dyaSod. The writer identifies ro dAnbés 
with 7d dya@év. And so, when he says that there is nothing adnbes 
on earth, his position closely resembles that of the writer of Corp. VI, 
who says that there is nothing dya#év on earth. That which is 
‘real’ is that which is really good; things which are ‘unreal’ are 
things which men mistakenly think to be good. 

7d ph Grd Dns Cododpevoy pire Grd odparos mweprBadddpevoy, ‘yupvov 
bavév, &rperov [cepvdy] dvaddotwrov. Cf. § 15: Tov pa e€ TAys, Tov pH) 
&v odpate . . . tov drperrov, Tov py dAowotpevov, Corp, XIII. 6 as 
emended: Ti ofy ddnbés éorw .. «3 Td pip Oodrovpevov, . . + TO pi 
meprop€dpevov, .. «7d yupvdv, TO pavov,...7 arpertov, TO avahdotw= 
tov, 7d dyabdv. The words 7d pi td tAns Godovpevov pare tro od 
patos mepiSadAdpevor are a description of what might be more shortly 
called 13 dowparov.—arperrov and dvahAoiwrov ought to go together 5 
cepuydv, by which they are separated in the MSS., is doubtless a cor- 
rupted duplication of yuprdv. 

§ 10. & ody pyre mpds Eourd ddnOF eon, THs Suvarto adnO4 elvars A 
thing would be zpds éavrd dAyOés (‘real in relation to itself’), if it 
continued through all time to be what it is at any given moment, 
But earthly things do not thus continue. 








EXCERPT IIA: 8-10, 16, 18 315 

§ 16. mdvra Be rd emi yrs Popa xaréhaPe . . . mas dv adnbes ety; 
The contents of this section are closely connected with those of 
§1o; and it seems clear that it ought to follow § 10, and precede 
§11r. In § ro, the writer has said that all things which are subject 
to change are unreal ; in §16, he goes on to say that all things 
which are subject to destruction are unreal. Having thus laid down 
certain tests of reality and unreality, he proceeds to apply these tests 
(x) to man (§§ rz, 12, ((r7))), and (2) to ‘the everlasting bodies ’ 
(§13); and having shown that man is unreal, and that ‘the ever- 
lasting bodies’ are only partly real, he ends by asking and answering 
the question ‘ what then in absolutely real?’ (§ 15), 

[kal Epaepréxer Kal éumepréger f] T00 GAnPods mpdvoia]. These words 
are obviously out of place here. It would be possible to put them 
in after TO Wetdds pyput ris adyGeias evépynua ava at the end of § 18, 
supplying 7d webdos as the object of égumepéyer; but they are not 
needed there, and it seems better to reject them altogether. 

ob8e yéveots Suvarar ‘ouctivar'. This phrase would be admissible 
only if yéveows were taken in the sense of ra yeyvopeva, ‘the things 
that come into being’. But in the rest of the paragraph, yéveous is 
used only to signify ‘ the process of coming into being’ (as in ta piy 
ory) yéveots) ; and that process could hardly be said to ‘ be put to- 
gether ’ (cvorjvac), though the things themselves might. Itis pro- 
bable therefore that there is some corruption here. 

[mdoy 8€ yevéoe. pOopd ewerar, iva mddw yévnrat (wdvta)]|. The 
iteration of the same thought in this section is intolerable ; and the 
only doubt is, which of the phrases it is best to cut out. 

[mpGtov todrov Syproupydv yrdpile]. This is a misplaced doublet of 
mpatov Todrov Syp.ovpyov yrwpi~w in § 14 fin. 

[ets thy yéveow tv Svtwv|. This has doubtless come by duplication 
from pi) ory 4 yéveots TOY dvrwv above. 

ds more prev AAG ote S€ GAN ytvdpeva. Plants and animals perish, 
and are replaced by others. The race persists; but the individuals 
of which it consists at one time are not the same as those of which 
it consists at another time. 

§ 18. petaPoddAdpeva Se. . . evépynpa elvar. The first sentence of 
this section (ueraBaddAdpeva 5? Wetderar[ | Ta dvra) continues the 
argument of §16, and has been wrongly separated from it in the 
MSS. by the interposition of § 17, which evidently belongs to the dis- 
cussion of the question whether man is real (§§ rz, 12). 

75 WedSds dyyt Tis GAnMelas évépynpa elvar, This implies that God 


316 STOBAEI HERMETICA 


is the author of the ¢avracia or illusions of which the sensible _ 
world consists. Cf. Corp. V. 1b: ovx abros yevveispevos ev daytacia, 
mdvta 8& pavracidv, x.7-4. The thought is similar to that of Omar 
Khayyam: ‘We are no other than a moving row | Of Magic Shadow- 
shapes that come and go | Round with the Sun-illumined Lantern 
held | In Midnight by the Master of the Show.’ But the writer is not 
yet ready to speak openly of God, and still adheres to the abstract 
term # GA7Oea. 

§ 11. Od8e dvOpwwos dAnOys éorww; Compare the discussion of the 
question whether man is éya@és, in Corp. II, Corp. VI, and Corp. X. 

Kadri &vOpwrros, odk gor ddnO}s. In so far as he is merely a man 
(i.e. an earthly organism), he is not real. The words xaéri dvOpwzos 
serve to suggest the thought that a man may become something 
more than a mere man. He who has received into himself the 
divine voids, or has got gnosis, is godlike, or a god (Corp. XIII &c.). 

(rd) [kat] é adrod pdvou thy odctacw éxov. This stands in contrast 
to é« wok\Gv ovvéornxe, and must therefore be taken as equiva- 
lent to 7d doverarov. (Cf. abroyévynros = éyévvytos.) Man is 
(1) overards, and (2) tperrds kai peraBdyrds; and for both these 
reasons, he cannot be éAn@ys. 

tpémerar Sé Kal peraPddAderat (eis) HArkiay ef Hducias. Cf. Corp, XIII. 
5: 7d yap Ovyrov eldos Kal jépay dhAdooerar’ xpdvy yap Tpémeran cis 
avénow Kat peiwow, ds Weddos (Gr). 

[kal taira ér. dv év rg oxyver|. This would imply that man is even 
more subject to peraBodai when he has quitted the body. It 
might no doubt be said that a soul, when disembodied, is still 
subject to peraPodai,—being liable, for instance, to a series of 
incarnations in different bodies (cf. Corp. X. 7, tovrwy rotvuy 
trav Yvxav modal af peraBodat) ; but the ‘man’ spoken of in this 
paragraph is man embodied upon earth, and a reference to dis- 
embodied souls would be irrelevant. It is therefore best to 
bracket kal raira . . . oKyve. 

§ 17. pavraclas ody Kadeiv Set [ | ((royc dvOpwmoyc)) . . . ovre 
5 yépwv yépwr, This passage fits on perfectly to the end of § 12 
(davracia Sé rs); and it can hardly be doubted that it originally 
stood here. 

[[rav AvOpwwov]] [avOpwadrntos gavtaciay| 7d [Be] (yer) mardiov 
maStov pavtaciay, Tov 8¢ veavicxoy x,t.  dvOpwros is the general 
term under which za:déov, veavicxos, dvip, and yépwr are included ; 
it ought not therefore to stand side by side with them as one of 








EXCERPT JIA: 11, 17,13 317 


the same series, Moreover, the addition of dv@pwros to the list 
impairs the force of the argument; for the dv@pwros remains an 
dyOpwros all the time that he is passing through the changes from 
wadiov to yépwv. It is most likely then that rdv dvOpwrov was 
inserted before 75 pév waidfov by an accidental error, and that a 
transcriber tried to make sense of it by filling out the phrase on 
the analogy of those which follow. But he blundered in doing 
so; for he ought to have written dvOpdrov ¢avraciay, and not 
dvOpwrdryros pavraciav. 

4 Bé gavracia edSos dy ein [dxpdrarov|. These words fitly end 
the paragraph by giving a direct answer to the question with 
which it began. ‘Is man real?’ ‘No; for he is a davracéa, and 
that which is a qavracia is unreal.’ But dxpdrarey can hardly 
be right; for it would imply that there are other things which 
are unreal in some degree, but less unreal than d¢ayvracia; and 
there would be no point in hinting at the existence of such 
things here. 

§ 1g. O08 raira ody . .. Ta dia cupara [[ ]] ddyOq eor(v); 
The did codpara spoken of in § 2 were the four cosmic elements ; 
and it is to be presumed that here also the four elements are 
meant. 

((émet_petaBddderar)). The writer accepts the doctrine that all 
the four elements are transmutable, and are constantly changing 
into one another, But he holds that they are none the less déé.a ; 
for though portions of fire, for instance, are continually changing 
into air, water, and earth, the mass of fire in the Kosmos is 
maintained undiminished, by the simultaneous transmutation of 
portions of the other elements into fire. Cf. Corp, XII. ii. 14 ¢ as 
emended: rai dowvOera cdpara (i.e. the cosmic elements), xal tiv 
peraBodjy cis GAAnAa Trovotpeva, del THs tTavtérytos Tiv dbOapoiav 
cite. In Corp, VIII. 4, the cosmic elements are spoken of as 
ra ddidAvTa owpara, TovTéoTe TA aOdvara. See also what is said 
of ri dfSia caépara in Lac, V. 1. Cf. Macrobius Somn. 2. 12. 14: 
‘Plotinus . . . cum de corporum absumptione dissereret, et hoc 
dissolvi posse pronuntiaret, quicquid effluit, obiecit sibi: cur ergo 
elementa, quorum fluxus in aperto est, non similiter aliquando 
solvuntur? Et breviter tantae obiectioni valideque respondit: 
ideo elementa, licet fluant, numquam tamen solvi, quia non 
foras effluunt. A ceteris enim corporibus quod effluit recedit ; 
elementorum fluxus numquam ab ipsis recedit elementis. Ergo 


318 STOBAEI HERMETICA 


in hoc mundo pars nulla mortalis secundum verae rationis 
adserta ’ 

In regarding air, water, and earth as ‘everlasting’ bodies, the 
Hermetist differs from the Stoics, who said that at each ecpyrosis 
- these three elements are wholly transmuted into fire. 

Nav pev ody 73 [yevvnrov Kal] peraByrdv odk adnOés. It is true 
that the elements are yevyyrd, both in the sense that they were 
originally made by the Demiurgus, and in the sense that they are 
continually being produced out of one another; but there is no 
occasion to mention that fact here. 

((67d 8é toG mpomdropos (dpOapta) yevdneva, tiv "Env! Sdvarar 
Gn OH eoxnxévar.)) This was probably suggested by Pl. Zim. 4x B, 
where the Demiurgus says to the gods whom he has made (i.e. 
to the parts of the Kosmos) émeirep yeyévyobe, ddavaro piv od 
éoré od8 addvto. TO maprav, ot te py dy AvOjoecHe ye, oddt 
rev&eobe Oavarov poipas. The elements are not in themselves 
indestructible ; but it is the will of God, who made them, that 
they shall never be destroyed. Consequently, they hold an inter- — 
mediate position between ‘the unreal’ and ‘the real’, They are 
unreal gua peraBAnra, but real gua didia. 

tAnv is unintelligible; it is difficult to see what could be 
meant by saying that the elements ‘have received matter’ from 
God, and that the matter which they have received from him is 
real. It seems therefore that tAyv must have been substituted 
for some other word, possibly oteiay or trapéw. 

apordtwp is here used as an appellation of the supreme God. 
Cf. rév mporaropa (ris Yuyns) in xc. I1B. 3. The only other 
Hermetic passage in which zpordrwp is thus employed is Kore 
Kosmu, Exc. XXIII. 10: ravryv Picews (6)ndpare éripnoe 6 Oeds 6 
aporarwp. See Adammonis Resp. 8. 4d (Testim.), where the 
supreme God is called zporarwp. 

The earliest known instances of this use of the word occur in 
accounts of the Valentinian doctrine (second century A. D.). 
Irenaeus 1. 1. 1: the Valentinians say twa clvar év doparos kal 
dxatovopnacros tidpact téAcov alava mpodvrat rotroy 8& Kal 
(IIpoapyiv xat) IIpordropa Kai Bufdv xaAotow. Iren. 1. 14. 2 &e 
In the Valentinian system, Nois, the first emanation from the 
BvOds, is warqp, and the Bu@ds itself is consequently aporarup. 


1 Whence did Macrobius get this? It partly agrees in meaning with Plotinus 
Enn. 2. 1. 3; but it is not a translation of that passage. 








EXCERPT ITA: 14,15 319 


The writers of the ist’s Sophia and the other ‘Coptic-Gnostic’ 
documents frequently use zporarwp as the name or title of a 
divine Person. (See C. Schmidt, Koptisch-Gnostische Schriften I, 
Index, $s. Vv. mporarwp.) They employed it as a word of vaguely 
holy import; but they had ceased to attach any definite meaning 
to it, as is shown by the fact that they sometimes speak of 
mporaropes in the plural. 

It is most likely that the Valentinians adopted the use of 
mpordrwp as a name of the supreme God from some Pagan 
Platonist, and that the writer of Zxc. II, and the ‘ Egyptians’ of 
Abammonis Resp., got it from the same Pagan source, There is 
no need to suppose that the Hermetist borrowed it from the 
Valentinians, though the earliest extant instance of this use of 
the word happens to come from Valentinian writings. Perhaps 
he regarded the Kosmos as warjp of man, and God as zpordrup. 
Cf. Corp. X. 14b, where it is said that man is son of the Kosmos, 
and ‘éryovos’ of God. The word was used by later Platonists ; 
e.g. Synesius, Hymn. 3. 47: xpomdrwp, drdrup. 

§ 14. [((Tt ody dv etme tus)) GAnOés . . . ;—Médvov tov fAtov x.7.A.] 
This section must be one of the numerous ‘solar interpolations’ 
which we find inserted in the Hermetica by devotees of the Sun- 
god. It is inconsistent with what precedes and follows. The 
statement that ‘the Sun alone is real’ is contradicted by § 15; 
and the statement that the Sun od peraPdAXera: cannot be re- 
conciled with §13, where we are told that the dia océpara 
(under which term the Sun, as a body composed of fire, must be 
included) are peraBAnrd. The interpolator borrowed the words 
which he found at the beginning of § 15 (Ti otv av ebro Tus K.7.A.), 
and employed them here to introduce a passage in praise of the 
god of his special cult. The function which he assigns to the 
Sun, viz. that of a Demiurgus supreme within the Kosmos, and 
subject only to the supracosmic God, is similar to the function 
assigned to the Sun in Corp. XVI. See also Exc. V. 2. 

§15. Ti ody &y etsror (ris GAn Ges) Thy mpdryy adjOerav ;—(Ti ody 
ay elvar thy mpdrny adyderov; MSS.). The phrase ddnbés riv 
mparnv adneay, ‘real with the supreme reality’, i.e. ‘real in the 
highest degree’, is intended to contrast the absolute reality of 
God with the partial or imperfect reality of the ‘everlasting 
bodies’, which was spoken of in § 13. 

Here at last the Hermetist passes from the neuter (7d dAn6és) 








320 STOBAEI HERMETICA 


and the abstract feminine (7 dA7jOea) to the masculine (roy... 
det dvra), and by doing so, declares openly what he has hitherto 
kept back, namely, that ‘the real’ of which he has been 
speaking is nothing else than God. Yet even here, the word 
Geds is still avoided. 

tov axpéparov, tév doxnpdriotovy. Cf. Hxc, VIII. 2: of the three 
kinds of dowpara in man, the first (sc 6 vots) is dypéparoy, 
doxnpariorov. Pl. Phaedr.247C: yap axpopards te Kat doyy- 
parieros Kal dvadijs odcia dvtws otoa, Yuyis, «.7.A. Porphyry Ad 
Marcellam 8: éys obx 6 dards otros Kat tH alcOjoe trortwrds, 6 
St ext wAcicrov ddeornkas Tod ouparos, 6 axpwparos Kal aoynpd= 
tiotos, » + . dvavoia dé pdovy Kparyrds ; 

Exc, TL B, § 1. eye [6 réxvov] .. . “mpdrov ro8e cuyypddw', 
As given in the traditional text, this section is utterly incom- 
prehensible. If we retain & réxvoy, it would seem that the author 
must have intended the words to be taken as written by Hermes, 
and addressed to Tat. But this /de//us is not an epistle or written 
treatise sent by Hermes to his son; it is ostensibly a written 
report of a spoken dialogue, in which Tat takes part (§ 2 znr?.) 
as well as Hermes; and how could the author possibly make 
Hermes say, in a conversation with his son, ‘I am composing this 
dialogue in writing’—i.e. ‘I am at this moment writing the 
Zibellus in which this my conversation with you is recorded’? 
It is impossible to believe that even the most muddle-headed 
Hermetist could have been capable of such confusion of thought 
as that would involve.’ 

But if the speaker cannot be Hermes, who is it that is speaking? 
As long as we suppose that the Hermetist wrote this section, there 
seems only one course open to us, namely, to take §1 as a pre- 
liminary note written by the author in his own person, and to 
interpret him as saying: ‘I am writing this /ide//us first, (but I intend 
to write some others afterwards)’.2 But this hypothesis does not 
work out satisfactorily. What is the meaning of kai r9s pAavOpwrias 


1 There is a somewhat similar confusion of thought in Ase?/. Lat. 1b (§ Tracta- 
tum hunc autem tuo (in)scribam nomine,’ addressed by Hermes to Asclepius) ; but 
in that instance, the use of the future tense, if it does not wholly get rid of the 
absurdity, at any rate diminishes it. Besides, the introductory passage in which 
those words occur appears to have been added by a blundering redactor. 

2 On this assumption, it might perhaps be possible to retain & réxvov, taking the 
réxvoy to be, not Tat, but a pupil of the author (not necessarily a son in the literal 
sense), to whom the author sends or dedicates the dialogue which he writes, But 
it is simpler to strike out @ réavor. 





EXCERPT IIB: 1 321 


évexa Kal Tips mpos Tov Oedv ciceBelas? Does the author mean ‘I am 

composing this dialogue in order to show my benevolence and piety’? 

That will hardly do. And what is the point of the following remark, 

oddepia yap av . .. eboéBera x.7.X.? Moreover, it seems clear that 

11 B was written as a continuation of II A. Its author was probably 

the same man who had previously written II A; and if so, IIB 

was no¢ the first thing that he wrote. And even if he was not the 
same man, he would not be likely to write xparov ré5¢ ovyypadw 
at the head of his sequel to an already existing document. 

Thus the word ovyypdédw gives rise to insuperable difficulties 
on the assumption that the Hermetist was the writer. If, in place of 
mparov 70d cvyypadu, We write mpd mdvrev Tpotipa Tdd€ TO ovyypappa 
(or rivbe iv ovyypadyv), or something to that effect, the section 
becomes intelligible as a note written by a reader to express his 
admiration for Zxc, 11 B, and inserted into the text by error. (Com- 
pare the words Asclepius iste pro sole mihi est, written by an admiring 
reader at the head of the Latin 4sclepius, and printed in the earlier 
editions as the opening words of the text.) & téxvov may have been 
inserted by a transcriber who, finding that in the following section 
Hermes was addressing his son, thought that the same form of 
address was needed in the opening sentence. 

[If ovyypdw be taken in the sense of ‘set down’, another 
hypothesis may be considered. The section is placed at the head of 

_ an excerpt, and the ‘reader’ who wrote it might be an anthologist, 
who placed this extract, @vexa rijs edceBecas, at the head of a series 
dealing with the same subject. It may be observed that this at all 
events is what Stobaeus did in chapter 41 of the first book.] 

Patrizzi singles out Zxc. IIB for special praise, and says there 
is more philosophy in it than in all the works of Aristotle ;! and the 
unknown writer of this note must have been similarly impressed by 
it. He says that he esteems it more highly than all other writings 
(or at any rate, more highly than all other Hermetica that he has 
read), on account of the ¢AavOpuria and etoéBewa expressed or 
manifested in it ; by way of justifying his opinion, he refers to certain 
phrases in § 2 (vojoa 7a dvra was suggested to him by 6 8 pabor 
old gor (ra dvra), and xdpw TO Toujoavrs brép TovTw Sporoyjoais his 
Summary of xdpw cicerat trip ravrev 7 Sypuovpyd . . . 6 S& xapw 











' It is of the undivided piece in Stobacus (i.e. Axe, IL B+ Exc. XI) that Patrizzi 
Says this; but it must have been the first part of it (£xe, I1 B), and not the 
collection of aphorisms (Zxc, XI), that he so highly valued. 


28063 Y 


322 STOBAEI HERMETICA 


Sporoyav eboeBijoer); and he ends by declaring his resolve to put in 
practice in his own life that piety which the discourse of Hermes 
describes and recommends, 

§ 2. 6 8é edoeBety fnrav dirocopijce.—(S 82 edceBav Gxpws 
gidocopyve. MSS.) The reading of the MSS. would imply that 
when a man has become completely cioe@ys, he will pursue 
philosophy; i.e. that eioéBea is the means whereby we may 
attain to ¢Aogodia. But the following words (xywpis procodias 
ciocBjoa adivarov xt...) show that the writer’s meaning 
was the reverse of this. His view is that eio¢Beu is the end 
to be aimed at, and ¢uAocodia is the means whereby we may attain 
to it. 

¢iocopia—or rather, the earlier stage of girocopia—is here 
explained to mean 15 paGeiv ofd éore (ri. dvra), Kal ws Suaréraxrat, 
kal tmd rivos, kal évexey révos (i. e. to learn that all things are ordered 
Smd rod Geod, and gvexev 70d éyaGod). Compare the definition of 
philosophy at the end of As¢/. Lat. I. 

§ g. 6 82 akpws drdocopdy pabijgerat (& 8& edoeBav eicerat MSS.) 
kal wod gor 4h AdijGera Kal tis or éxeivy’ Kal (radto?) pabdv, 
tru pGddov edceBéotepos eotat, The learner’s progress in philosophy 
is divided into two distinct stages. In the first stage, he learns 
about the corporeal world (ra évra). He comes to know that all 
things in it have been made and ordered by God ; he is grateful 
to God for his goodness ; and inasmuch as he is grateful to God, 
he is edcePijs. At this stage, he knows that God is the author 
of all corporeal things, but he still supposes these things to be © 
real. But if he pursues philosophy further, he will learn ‘ where 
reality is, and what it is’; that is, he will come to know that (as has 
been explained in Zxc, Il A) all corporeal things are unreal, and 
God alone is real; and this higher and fuller knowledge of God 
will make him still more eéoe@ys. The higher stage is described 
below as 9 xardAmis tod dvrws dyaBod Kat édnbods.—éAnOeus is 
correlative to vots; and % xardAm fs tod dAnfois corresponds to 
what Platonists commonly called apprehension of 7a voyrd. Com- 
pare Porphyr. De ads. 1. 31: date xai pedernréor, elrep dvartpépew 
mpos ta & dpxis eorovddKapev, xa? doov Sivapis, aicOyoews pay 
adiotacba Kat pavractas, Tijs te Tavraus éropevns ddoyias, kat Tov 
ar’ abriv mabav . . .* SiapOpwréov dé 7a kata Tov vouy, . . + Wa 
py povov dxovwpev rept vod Kal tov vonTay, GAG Kal, don Stvapess 
dpev dwodavovrés te abrod ris Oewpias, Kal eis ryy dowpariav 








EXCERPT IIB: 2-4 323 


xabiordpevor, Kal Lovres per’ ddyGetas di’ éxeivov, GAN od Wevdas 
peta THY Tois THpact cvpPihuv. 

The two stages of diArocodpia (and of the eicéBea which results 
from it) distinguished by the Hermetist are analogous to the two 
stages of the Christian’s progress distinguished by Clement of 
Alexandria, who calls the lower stage zioris, and the higher stage 

US. 

In place of eiceBuv, we need some phrase signifying a further 
advance in knowledge. In the MSS., dxpws occurs in connexion 
with the earlier or preliminary stage. It is inappropriate there, 
but is just what is wanted here; and it is most likely that the 
author wrote 6 6 dxpws didocodév. 

(kai odkér dmoorivar Suvycerar (Stvarac MSS.) rod yaoi.) 
As placed in the MSS., this statement is a feeble and pointless 
repetition of what has been more fully expressed in the words 
obderore yap... Wuxy . . « ddoOFvat Sivara x.7.A. On the other 
hand, something to this effect is needed defore obdérore yap K.TAdy 
to account for the yap. 

On the question whether it is possible for one who has got 
gnosis to fall away, see Corp. XIII. 14. The writer of Exc. IIB 
appears to hold that a man who has attained only to the /ower 
stage of ‘ philosophy’ and ‘ piety’ may lose what he has gained, but 
that he who has once attained to the higher stage is secure against 
backsliding. Cf. Clem. Alex. Strom. 4.22. 139: et 8 dyarav peudlyke 
tov Gedv (5 ywworixds), obx eee Ti dperiv dxdBAnrov obros ovdapas, 
nth, Lb. 6. 78: & Ke re\ewbeioa rH prot dwerdetwros bv 
dydryv péver (9 yvdors). 

[& odpate odca xai]. Probably a misplaced doublet of év owbpare 
oven, § 5 fin. 

§ 4. todro eiceBeias eott (ctw MSS.) rédos’ ef’ 8 dpekopevos 
(dprxvoduevos MSS.) kal xards Bison «7.4. With these words 
Hermes concludes his answer to Tat’s question, Ti of dy tis 
mpdrruv . . . Karas Siaydyor tov Biov; The way to live your 
life aright is to be eéveBjs; and he who learns to ‘know God’ 
attains to the height of eicéBeao. But Hermes adds to this 
a mention of the life after death, of which Tat had said nothing. 
Ifa man knows God, all will be well with him not only in this 
life, but also in the life to come 3 for his soul, when it quits the 
body, will know ‘whither to direct its upward flight’; that is, it 
will fly up to God, whom it has learnt to know on earth. Cf. Exe. 

V2 


324 STOBAEI HERMETICA 


VI. 18: tva éxet yevopery (i) Wx), Srov (Tov Oedv) eeorr OcdoacOar, 
6000 py opardj. 

§ 5. ( ..) adry yap porn eorty, & téxvor, (] mpds GAnPeray dds, 
To what does airy refer? And what is meant by ydp? The ‘way 
which leads to Reality’ (i.e. to God) must be the mode of life 
of the man who is seeking to attain to eicéBea; but in the © 
preceding section, Hermes was speaking, not of this ‘way’, but 
of the goal to which it leads (eiweBeias réAos). We must there- 
fore suppose that between § 4 and § 5 a passage has been lost, 
in which Hermes spoke of the course which must be pursued 
by the man who seeks to become cicefrjs, or of some prelimi- 
nary condition which he must fulfil before he can be ciceBys. 
What would that condition be? Judging from parallel passages 
in other Hermetica, it seems most likely that the writer said that 
the aspirant must begin by ‘freeing himself from the body’, i.e, 
ridding himself of the rd, which are produced by the debasing 
influence of the body on the soul. Cf. Corp. IV. 6b: edy pi) mpdrov 
To capa puojoys Kt.d. Corp. XI. ii, 21a: oddev yap Sivaca ray 
kahov Kat éyabdv ((vojat)), prroodparos dv Kal xaxds. Corp. VIL. 2b: 
mparov St Set oe mepppytacOa. dv opeis xirGva (i.e. the body), 
Exe. V1. 19: S00 8 dvOpwro piocdparot ciow, otro. obk dy 
more Gedcawto THY TOD KaAod Kal dyaHod dw. Now in § 8, the 
MSS, give Se? ydp oe, & réxvov, mpSrov To Tapa . . « éyxaradeiipat, 
The words zparov rd cGpa . . « éyxaradeia interrupt the sequence 
of thought there, and must be excised; but I am inclined to 
think that something like them originally stood at the beginning 
of §5. E.g. the author may have written wAjv det ce mpdrov © 
7d) copa éyxaradedar’ atry yap povyn «t.d. ‘But you must begin 
by abandoning your body’,—not in the sense of quitting it at 
death, but in the sense of alienating yourself from it during your 
life on earth ;—‘ for that is the only road that leads to Reality’. 

fv kal of jpérepor mpdyovor Sdeucay, Kal SSedcavres Eruxov Tod &yabod, 
‘Our ancestors’ were once men on earth like you and me, but now 
are gods in the world above. In Corp. X. 5, Hermes is made to 
say much the same about two of his ancestors, who are there named — 
Uranos and Kronos. 

gepvh airy 6805 Kat "hela’, crew) and Acia are not suitable words 
to couple together; and Ae‘a can hardly be reconciled with yaAer}. 
It would be possible to write ceuvi) .. . Kat Geta, . 

xadremh Bé yuxy d8eGoar €y capa: otey, Cf. Corp. IV. 9, as 








EXCERPT IIB: 5-8 325 


emended : AaBapeba ov ris dpyfs, Kal Seiowpev Tdxer dravTt. mevy 

éort SvoKodov «.7.X. Porphyr. Ad Marcellam 6: odk RV... mpos 
rav pe\dvrov voorov 5) wypvnoKer bar ek THs evravbor éévys Kataywyis 
ro 6c pdovis ... Kai paoravys roeiobar tiv exdvodov. ... did yap 
pepipvys % 680s. 

§ 6. mparov [pev] yap adthy éaur® wodepioat Set, mparov means ‘to 
begin with’, i.e. before you can set out upon the way which leads 
to God. 

évds yap (sc. wépous ris uxijs) ylyverar mpds B00 4 [sulordots. The 
Platonic psychology is taken for granted. The ‘one’ is vous, OF 7d 
doywrrixdy ; the ‘two’ are 7d byyoedés and rd erOupyrixor, the two 
_ subdivisions of the irrational part of the soul. Cf. Corp. XVI. 15: 

7a. 80 (dAoya) pépy Tis Woxis .. . 7d SE Aoyixov pépos Tis Yuyfs. The 
word ordows shows that the writer has in mind the analogy between 
the human soul and a city, which is worked out in Pl. Rep. 

[rod jev puyetv Boudouevou, trav Sé kaTaoxely orevddvtwy.| This is a 
doublet of rot pév © gvydvros', tov bé xabedxdvrov Karu. 

§ 7. Tywpodpevon ri evOd8e Siairy. ‘Impiety’ or ss. is its own 
punishment. Cf. Corg. X. 20, 21. Corp. XIII. 7b: 'ympods yap 
év euaurd ex. ..; Odx ddLyous. 

§ 8. odds eon |] 5 (epi) ris exeioe S800 dydy (&ywyds MSS.). 
It is a contest ‘concerning the journey thither ”; that is, a contest to 
decide whether the man shall enter on the upward way or not. If 
‘the one’ is defeated by ‘the two’, you cannot even start upon the 
road which leads to God. The word dydv is used differently in 
Corp. X. 19a: tov ris eboeBelas aydva dywvicapéry’ dydv 8 ebreBeias 
7) ywovat Tov Oedv Kat pndéva dvOpdruv Goujon. 


EXCERPT III 


Stob. r. 41. 6 is given in the MSS., and printed in the editions of 
Stobaeus, as a single and undivided piece, headed by the /emma 
‘Eppod x rév xpds Tér. But it is evidently made up of two distinc 
and unconnected excerpts. The first page (Op6is taira . . . Totro 
mpdrrovow, pp. 284. 4-285. 5 Wachsmuth) is a discussion of the 
instincts of animals, The rest (‘Evépyea ydp .. . ra 88 dowuara, 
Pp. 285. 6-289. 18 Wachsm.) is a dialogue epi évepyeiay, i.e. Con- 
cerning the forces, put forth by the heavenly bodies, which work on 


326 STOBAEI HERMETICA 


sublunar things ; and with that topic the first page has nothing to 
do. It is most likely that Stobaeus gave the two pieces as distinct 
extracts, and wrote a second /emma (Tot atrob, meaning “Eppoi,) at 
the head of the second piece, but that this /emma has been omitted 
by an error of transcription. 

I call the piece about évépyevar Excerptum UI, The piece about 
the instincts of animals appears to be a continuation of a passage 
given elsewhere by Stobaeus (Zxc. IV A); and I call it Zaxcerpium 
IV B. 

All parts of Zac. III alike deal with évépyeia, and therefore 
presumably belong to one and the same iibellus. But the first part 
of the text (Zxc. III. r-6) consists of a series of detached scraps, 
some of which are more or less intelligible in themselves, but have 
no connexion with their context, while others are wholly meaningless. 
It is only when we arrive at § 7 that we are able to get at what the 
author meant. From that point onward to the end of the excerpt, 
we can trace his line of thought, though the continuity of the text is 
broken by some lacunae and by some interpolations. 

Moreover, § 7 appears to be the deginning of a discussion of 
évépyeat. The writer there starts by pointing out that there are 
forces at work in soulless bodies ; he calls these forces évépyeat, and 
gives a definition of the term (§ 9 jin.); and he then goes on to 
discuss them. ‘There is therefore strong reason to think that the 
dialogue originally began at our § 7, and that it is by error that §§ 1-6 
have been placed before § 7. 

Now § 7 begins with the words iepis Adyos, & téxvor, éorly obros, 
which, in the traditional text, follow the statement at de évépyerae xupis 
rav cwpdrov ob divavrar elvar (§ 6 fin.). It is evident that there is 
something amiss here. There could be no reason for thus singling 
out, as ‘holy’, the proposition that forces cannot exist apart from 
bodies. Why should it be regarded as more ‘holy’ than the 
numerous other statements about évépyea. which are made in the 
course of the dialogue? On the other hand, the discourse of 
Hermes as a whole, or the document in which it was recorded, 
might very well be described as ‘holy’, inasmuch as Hermes was @ 
teacher inspired by God. Compare the title of Corp. IIT: “Eppod 
rod tpurpeyicrou Adyos tepds. Heading of the Kore Kosmu (Ext 
XXIII) in Stobaeus: ‘Epyod tpurpeyiorov ék ris icpas BiBdou (rijs) 
éxuxadoupévys K.K. Title of Ascd. Lat.: “Eppod tpicpeyiotrov BiBdos 
iepa pds "AokAymidv mporpuvybcioa. We may conclude then that 








EXCERPT III 327 


iepds Adyos was originally written, as a part of the title, at the head of 
the Hermetic /e//us which began with our § 7. When §§ 1-6 had 
been prefixed, the words iepds Adyos stood no longer at the beginning, 
but in the midst of the text. In that position, they were meaning- 
less; and a transcriber tried to make sense of them by adding & 
réxvov, €oTlv obTos. 

Most of the disconnected scraps which are heaped together in 
§§ 1-6 appear to be passages which have been accidentally shifted 
from their proper places in the body of the dialogue ; one or two of 
them may be marginal notes misplaced. 


Contents of Exc. ITT. 


A. §§ 7-13. The forces-at-work. 


There are forces at work in bodies from which the soul has 
departed (e.g. in a human corpse); and there are also forces at 
work in bodies that have never had soul in them (e.g, in a stone). 
A ‘force-at-work’ may be defined as ‘that by which any sort of 
process is effected’. §§ 7, 9. 

And all sorts of processes are always going on; for the Kosmos 
never ceases to generate things by the revolving movement of the 
heavens. § ro. 3 

(Consequently, the forces-at-work are everlasting.) 

The forces are incorporeal, but cannot work except in bodies ; 
and as earthly bodies are perishable, there must be an unceasing 
production of fresh bodies for them to work in. §§ rr, ((r)), ((4)). 

They come from the heavenly bodies, and enter into earthly 
bodies. Some of them act on the body ; others act cn the soul, but 
only while the soul is embodied. § ((6)). 

Of those which act on the soul, some begin to work in the man 
from the moment of his birth, but others not until his adolescence. 
The former act on the irrational parts of the soul; the latter co- 
operate with the rational part. § ((5)). 

The forces are more numerous than the bodies in the Kosmos ; 
for there are often several different forces at work in a single body. 
§ 13. 

B. §§ 14-21. The senses, considered in relation to the forces-at- 
work, 

Sensations are results produced by the working of the forces; and 
it is through the sensations produced by them that the working of 


328 STOBAEI HERMETICA 


the forces is revealed. The forces come from heaven, (and are 
incorporeal and everlasting ;) the senses are corporeal, and perish 
with the body. §§ 14, 15. 

The heavenly bodies have not sensation; for sensation is the 
apprehension of an increase or decrease of the body, and the 
heavenly bodies are exempt from increase and decrease. The 
changes (i.e. increases and decreases) that befall a body, and the 
sensations (by which these changes are apprehended), are inseparably 
connected ; and both together are produced by the forces at work in 
the body. §§ 16, ((18)). 

Sensation takes place in all bodies (that are subject to increase and 
decrease), even in those that are soulless. § 17. 

In men and beasts, these changes, and the sensations that go with 
them, are attended by pain and joy. Pain and joy are more com- 
pletely dominant in beasts than in men. In man, it is the irrational 
part of the soul that is affected by pain and joy; and they work 
mischief in his life. §§ 19, 20. 

Sensation does not belong to the soul. The soul, and the forces- 
at-work, are incorporeal things that are in a body; but sensation 
isa body. § at. 


Sources. In holding that all physical processes on earth are 
effected by the operation of forces put in action by the heavenly 
bodies, the writer is merely adopting an opinion which was generally 
prevalent in the period of the Roman empire. This opinion was 
already coming into vogue in Plato’s time; and its influence is 
manifest in the Zpinomis, written shortly after Plato’s death. It was 
almost universally accepted in the philosophic schools which derived 
their doctrines from that interfusion of Platonism with Stoicism 
which took place in the first century B.c.? 

But the writer of Zx¢. III formulates this widely current doctrine 
in a way peculiar to himself. He uses the word évépyeia as a technical 

1 When the doctrine of which I am speaking presents itself apart from religion, 
it may be called ‘astral physics’. But the heavenly bodies to whose influence all 
earthly processes were attributed were commonly regarded and worshipped as gods ; 
and when the doctrine takes this form, it may be called ‘astral religion’. See 
Cumont, Astrology and religion among the Greeks and Romans, 1912. 

Astral religion is presupposed by astrology, but is not itself astrology. The 
astrologer was a man who not only held that all events on earth result from 
the operation of the heavenly bodies, but furthermore believed (or pretended to 
believe) that he knew the laws of their operation, and that he could consequently 
infer the course of future events on earth from the observed positions of the heavenl 


bodies. The distinction between astral religion and astrology is hardly maintain 
with sufficient clearness in Cumont’s otherwise most instructive book. 








EXCERPT III: 7 329 


term to denote the action of the heavenly bodies on earthly things; 
and though he does not personify the évépyeuaz,' he so far hypostatizes 
them as to put them on a par with Yuyai. See § 21, where he says 
that évépyetac and yyai alike are incorporeal things which ‘are in 
bodies’. 

In his recognition of incorporeal entities, the writer sides with the 
Platonists against the Stoics; and he shows himself a Platonist in his 
distinction between the ‘rational part’ of the soul and the (two) 
‘jrrational parts’, and in his condemnation of the emotions which 
belong to the ‘irrational parts’ (§§ 5 and 20), as well as in his mention 
of disembodied souls (§ 6). His statement that alc@yos is copa 
(§ 21) seems to be a mark of Stoic influence. He holds the heavenly 
bodies to be immutable (§ 16), and apparently considers them to 
consist of ‘the fifth substance’ (§§16 and 8); in this respect, he 
agrees with the Aristotelians, and differs from the Stoics. 

In this excerpt, the writer says not a word about God, and abstains 
from speaking of anything supracosmic.? But we have before us only 
that part of his system which deals with the Kosmos and the things 
within it. It is probable that, either in a continuation of the same 
libellus, or in other dide//i which were meant to be read after it, he 
went on to speak of a supracosmic God, to whom the heavenly 
bodies are subordinate, and of that part of the human soul which is 
capable of escaping from the domination of the heavenly bodies and 
the physical forces which they put forth (i.e. from subjection to 
Heimarmene), and entering into immediate relation with the supra- 
cosmic God. If that part of the writer’s teaching had been preserved, 
we should very likely find the distinctive doctrines of Platonism 
no less predominant in it than they are in most of the other 
Hermetica. 

§ 7. Zuveordvar peév, ((& réxvov,)) cdpa ywpis puxijs of Sdvarat, rd Be 
e&vepyeiobat Suvardy (7d Se elvar Svarar MS.), cuveordvax means ‘to 
exist as an organized whole’. A living body ovvéornxe ; for the xy 
in it holds it together, and makes it a thing in which every part is 
correlated to every other part. But when the yuxy has quitted it, 

1 He does not call them ‘daemons’, as some of the Hermetists did. 

® The only exceptions are the use of the word mpdvoi in § 2; the mention of 
‘divine évépyeia which act on the heavenly bodies’ in § 12; and possibly, the 
mention of ‘ purer évépye.ac’ which ‘ co-operate with the rational part of the soul’ 
in § 5. But § 2 is an isolated fragment of unknown origin ; § 12 is probably an 
interpolation ; and even if the writer held that the ‘ purer évépyerar’ spoken of in 


§ 5 come from a supracosmic source (which is uncertain), at any rate he refrains 
from saying so, 


33° STOBAEI HERMETICA 


the body no longer ovvérryxev ; it is thenceforward an unorganized 
heap of matter. 

According to the MSS., the Hermetist says that the body may 
continue to exist after the soul has departed. That is true, and the 
fact is incidentally mentioned below, in the words émpéver aro 7d 
copa; but it is not the thing to be insisted on. The point to which 
the writer seeks to call attention is rather that forces are still at work 
in the corpse, as is shown by the fact that processes of decomposition 
go on init. He probably asserted this shortly in the first sentence, 
by writing évepyetoOa here, and then went on to explain his 
statement. If we read évepyeioOa, the topic of évépyea, with 
which the whole dialogue deals, is introduced in the opening 
words, 

§ 8. adry ody 4 Siahopd Abavdrou odparos Kal OvyTod . . . Boddov (bv) 
épera, This section has nothing to do with the subject spoken of 
in §§ 7 and 9. When it has been excised, the train of thought runs 
on without a break through those two sections. In § 7, the writer 
points out that there are forces at work in bodies which have once 
had soul in them, but from which the soul has departed ; in § 9, he 
adds that there are also forces at work in bodies which have never 
had soul in them, e. g. in a stone. 

Has § 8 been shifted from some other part of the dialogue? I 
have failed to find any place where it would fit into the text; but it 
may possibly be an isolated fragment of the lost passage which 
followed § ro. Geta (= dOdvara) odpara are spoken of in § ((6)) as 
things already known to the reader; it seems not unlikely therefore 
that an explanation of their nature and function, such as is given in 
§ 8, occurred somewhere before § ((6)). But it is also possible that 
§ 8 was written as a marginal note on the words 7a 3¢ éfdvara odpara 

. . ds 2 odelas (od) roadrys ovverrGra in § 16. 

73 pay dOdvarov (cSpa) &k pras ys ouvéoryke, 7d Sé (vy Tdv cdpa) of, 
An here means, not dzovos Or dpoppos Ay, but a material substance. 
Earthly bodies are composed of all four elements in combination 
(see Exc. IIA. 1 f.); and they are consequently subject to dissolu- 
tion, because the process by which the different elements have been 
combined in them is liable to be reversed. The heavenly bodies 
consist of one element only, and are consequently indissoluble. But 
what is this one element? The Stoics said that the element of which’ 
the heavenly bodies consist is fire; the Aristotelians said that it is. 
the ‘fifth’ and ‘circularly-moving’ substance. (See note on guinta 








EXCERPT III: 8,9 331 


pars in Ascl. Lat. I. 6.) The writer of Zx¢. III probably adopted 
the view of the Aristotelians on this point ; see note on § 16. 

qav yap Td évepyodv kparel, Td Sé évepyodpevoy xparetrat, These 
words imply that the évépye.a: which operate in earthly bodies are 
emitted or put in action by the heavenly bodies. This is expressly 
asserted in § ((6)): af évépyear. . . dard rév Ociwy cwpdrwv Epxovrat eis 
ri Ovnrd. ‘That is to say, all physical processes which take place on 
earth result from the operation of the heavenly bodies. That is the 
view of the Hermetists in general. Some of them give to this 
operation of the heavenly bodies the name eiwapyévy ; and some of 
them (e.g. the author of Corp. XVI) hold that the influence of the 
heavenly bodies is brought to bear on earthly bodies by personal 
agents called ‘daemons’, The writer of Zxc. VI identifies the 
‘daemons’ with the évépyea. 

7d pev ... edevbepoy .. ., 7882... Bodhov, Cf. Hxc, XI. 2 (26): 
obdev év otpavd doddov" oddev ext yijs éXcdGepor . 

§ 9. (at) evépyerar of pdvov rd Epuxa evepyodor odpara, ((add(d) )) 
kat Ta Gpuxa, The phrase ov pdvoy ra éuyvya is not quite accurate ; 
the writer ought rather to have said ‘not only bodies that have had 
souls in them’, The thing of which he has been speaking is a 
corpse; and a corpse is not an éuywvyov. But his meaning is clear 
enough. A corpse is a body which, though it has no soul in it now, 
has had a soul in it; and as such, it is contrasted with a stone, which 
has never had a soul in it. 

(évepyodar) rd dpuxa, (ra) §Uha Kal rods AiBous Kat rad [f ]] Sporn, 
aitouoat te [kat Kapropopotcat| Kal memaivourat, kai pOeipougat x.7.A, 
xaprropopotca is obviously wrong ; the évépyera: do not ‘bear fruit’. 
It might be said that there are évépyevas which make trees or plants 
bear fruit; but the writer is not here speaking of living trees or 
plants, but of ‘dyvxa, such as logs and stones’. On the question 
whether plants have ‘souls’ or not, opinions differed (see note on 
Asci. Lat. 1. 4); but even if they have not ‘souls’, they have some 
sort of life ; and a mention of anything that has life in it would be 
out of place in this sentence. xal xaprogopotoa: was probably 
inserted by some one who wrongly assumed that zeratvovea: must 
mean ‘ripening fruit’, and thought that fruit must be produced 
before it is ripened. The interpolator presumably took Aa (dead 
logs) to mean living trees. 

It is evident that there are forces at work which make logs rot, and 
stones crumble ($6e(povea xai... Optrrovea). It is not quite so 


33% STOBAEI HERMETICA 


evident what is meant by adfovea: kal reraivovea, in the case of 
lifeless things; but we may take these words to mean ‘increasing 
their bulk, and bringing them to maturity’. It was a common 
opinion that rocks ‘grow’; (some stones do in fact ‘grow’ by 
crystallization ;) and perhaps the author, when he wrote aifovoat, 
was thinking solely of rocks or stones, and overlooked the fact that 
da increase in bulk only while they are still living trees. emaé- 
voveat, in the case of stones, might mean ‘softening’, and in the case 
of timber, ‘seasoning’. 

évépyera yap KékAnrar, d téxvov, adtd TodTo, (rd Bu’ of ylyverat) 6 to 
moré éort 78 ytyvdpevov. Having shown by instances what he means 
by évépyeu, the writer now gives a definition of the term. 14 
yeyvépevov may mean either ‘the thing that comes into being’, or 
‘the process that goes on’. Which of the two is meant, must be 
determined by the context. Here, it necessarily means the latter. 
But if the Hermetist said that an évépyeta is ‘any sort of process that 
goes on’, he worded his definition very inexactly. He must have 
meant to say that an évépyea is the force by which any sort of process 
is carried on. It is most likely that he did write something to that 
effect ; and I have accordingly inserted the words rd 8c’ ob yéyveran 

§ 10, dei 82 gepdpevos (6 xdopos) (del) ev Eautd Kuloxer Ta Sra. 
depduevos refers to the circular movement of the heavens and the 
heavenly bodies. It is this movement that gives forth the évépyea 
by which all individual organisms (ré évra) upon earth are brought 
into being. The circular movement of the heavens never ceases ; 
and therefore the production of ra évra upon earth can never cease. 
In this section, the writer seems to take rd yyvdpevov in the sense of 
‘the thing that comes into being’, rather than in the sense of ‘the 
process that goes on’. 

[ouSerore drroherpOnodpeva abrod Tis $[Qjopas.] popas may be con- 
sidered a certain emendation; the word refers back to qepépevos. 
But the phrase in which it stands is awkwardly appended, and seems 
merely to repeat what has already been said, oidémore drroerpOnod- 
pevos THs hopas would be a paraphrase of del pepdpevos ; and it is 
possible that something of the sort occurred in a marginal note, and 
was inserted in the text by error. 

At the end of § 10 there is evidently a lacuna. In § 11, we find © 
the writer asserting, as an inference (oiv) from something that has 
gone before, that ‘every évépyea is dOdvaros (or dowparos ?)’. But 
this cannot be immediately inferred from the statement, with which 








EXCERPT IIT: 10, 11, 154 333 


§ 10 ends, that ‘the Kosmos is ever producing things’; and a passage 
now lost must have intervened. From what follows, it appears that 
in the missing passage the writer proved (1) that the éépyeta are 
everlasting, and (2) that they are incorporeal. 

The forces at work are everlasting ; that is, being kept in action by 
the ceaseless movement of the heavenly bodies, they go on working for 
ever without change, though the earthly bodies upon which they 
work perish, and are replaced by other bodies. The misplaced 
fragment § 3 (ddvvarov dpyd more petvar x.7..) may perhaps have 
belonged to the passage in which the everlastingness of the évépyea 

was demonstrated. 

§ 11, waco ody évépyeta voeicdw ds dowparos obca (ds del Abdvaros 
ojoa MSS.). A thing cannot be immortal (in the sense of everlasting) 
at one time and mortal at another time; the combination de é6d- 
varos, ‘immortal at all times’, is therefore meaningless; and if we 
retain one of these two words, we must strike out the other, But it 
seems more likely that the author wrote dovaros, which corresponds 
better with the following words év oiwSijrore copa. If so, we have 
in this section the conclusion of the missing proof that the évépyea 
are docparov, which was probably preceded by the missing proof that 
they are d0dvaro: (everlasting). 

($1. evépyera yap... elvar del €v cdpar.)) The thing asserted in 
§ 1 is that évépyeva ‘are always in bodies’; and if we place § 1 here, 
the words év oiwdyrore odpare in § 11 lead on to that assertion, In 
§1, it is assumed, as a thing already known, that the évépyeias are 
dowporo; that point must therefore have been previously established, 
and I suppose it to have been established in the lost passage which 
preceded § 11. 

KaQér. (nev) dowparoi eiot, kal abavdrous adrds dnymi (hs MSS.) 
elvat, The fact that the évépyea are incorporeal confirms the con- 
clusion that they are a@dvaro.. Corporeal things alone are perish- 
able. 

((§ 4. todre 1G Adyw ewerar .. . det Zor.) obros 6 Aéyos is that 
which was stated in §1, namely, that évépyeuu are everlasting, and 
‘are always in (earthly) bodies’. From this it follows that there 
Must always be (earthly) bodies in existence, to serve as ‘places and 
instruments’ for the working of the évépyevat; and since earthly 
bodies are perishable, there must be a continual production of fresh 
bodies to replace them as they perish. It seems clear that this must 
have been the meaning of § 4, though the restoration of the text is 





334+ STOBAEI HERMETICA 


doubtful. The words rérovs Kai opyava trav évepyev correspond 
to é&v cdpacty cit Kal &i tov cwpdrov evepyotor in § 1. [et ye] 
may perhaps have come from ¢i ydp at the beginning of the sentence, 

§ 6. adrat 84 (82 MSS.) ((dowparor obcat)) (ai cwparomorodcat MSS.) 
ai évépyetat Tv cwpdrwv cio Aprqapévar. In the MSS., atrai (or abrar) 
is obscure ; it becomes intelligible if we insert dowparot oteat after it, 
Compare dowparot otoat év odpaciv ior in §1; the thought expressed 
in § 1 is resumed in § 6, after the digression in § 4. Below in §6 
occurs the meaningless phrase afra: ai cwparorowtoa ; and it seems 
probable that this is a corruption of airat 8) dowparor obo, repeated 
by error. 

kal airy (yap) [[mévrot]]. 7 Yuxy ovyylyvovras, (od) ((uévror)) xwpls 
odpatos. According to the MSS., we are here told that the 
évépyevat enter into connexion with the soul ‘apart from the body’. 
But that is contradicted by the following words, af S¢ évépyeiax xwpis 
Tov cwpdrov ob Sévavrae evar, as well as by what has been said in §r 
and in § 6 int, In order to get rid of the contradiction, it is 
necessary to insert od before ywpis cduaros. 

With the corrections which I have made, the meaning of the 
passage becomes clear. évépyecar must always be ‘in bodies’; i.e. 
they can only operate in bodies. They act on the soul as well as 
on the body; but they act on the soul only when it is embodied. 
In other words, it is only while embodied that the soul is liable to be 
governed by the influences of the heavenly bodies, or to be subject 
to cipappevn. 

§ 5. at 8 xabapdrepar évépyerat (wapaylyvovrat) kata petaBoiy Tis 
Hruxlas (fouxlas MSS.), 7H AoyixG péper ris Puxis cuvepyodoat, The 
perafoAr} THs fAucdcas is the change from childhood to manhood. It 
is at adolescence that the Aoyixdy pépos THs Wuyijs first begins to act. 
Cf. Pl. Rep. 3. 402A: ere véos dy, piv Adyov Suvards elvar AaPetv* 
eA\Odvros Se Tod Adyou, K.T.A. 

What is the origin of the ‘purer forces’ that enter into the man 
at adolescence, and are connected with his soul from that age on- 
ward? Some of the Hermetists say or imply that the Aoyixdv pépos 
is exempt from the domination of the heavenly bodies, or of 
cinappévy ; (see, for instance, Corp. XII. i. 2-9 ;) and if the writer of 
Exc, II was of the same opinion, he might hold that the xaSapwrepat 
évépyeae are worked by the supracosmic God directly, and not 
through the intermediate agency of the heavenly bodies. (Cf. Corp. 
XVI. 16, where the dxris (rod Oeod), which év 7 AoyuKd ercAdparety is 








EXCERPT III: 6, 5, 12 335 


contrasted with the action of the ‘daemons’, the emissaries of the 
planets, on ra dvo (dAoya) pépy THs Woy7s-) In Lxc. III, all mention 

# God is deliberately avoided ; and if its author had occasion to 
speak ofa kind of évepyevar which come direct from God, he might very 
likely refrain from expressing his meaning fully, and merely hint at 
the higher origin of this kind of évépyewa by calling them xa0apsrepat, 

But on the other hand, in the rest of the dialogue,! the term 
évépyewat is applied only to forces put in action by the heavenly bodies 
(ax0 rev Oeiwv cwpdrwv épyovrat eis 7a. Ovyrd, § 6); and it is here im- 
plied that the xaapdrepac évépyeuu, as well as the others, act on the 
soul only while it is embodied. It seems most probable then that 
we are meant to understand that these ‘purer forces’, like the rest, 
come from the heavenly bodies, and not (or at any rate, not 
immediately) from a supracosmic source. The writer does not say 
that the ‘ purer forces’ act on the Aoyrxoy pepos, but that they work 
together with it (cvvepyotct),—whatever that may mean. Perhaps 
his notion is that there are astral influences which, without exerting 
compulsive force on the Aoy.xdy pépos, assist that part of the human 
soul in its endeavour to discharge its function rightly, and to keep the 
body and the adoya pépy ris yuyis in due subjection. 

§ 12. [rav Se évepyerdv . . . Exagrdv ((11)) 14v dvrwv.| This section is 
a classification of the different kinds of évépyea. It has no clear 
connexion either with what precedes or with what follows; and 
I think there are sufficient reasons for concluding that it is a note 
inserted in the text by error. 

at pév cio tov Belov copdtwv (évepyntixai), That évepynrixat, or 
some word of similar meaning, must either be inserted in the text, or 
supplied in thought, is proved by the equivalent phrase below, ai eis 
Ta (4)iia cépara évepyotoa. These évépyeu are forces which act 
on the heavenly bodies, and must therefore be put in action by the 
supracosmic God. But the only évépyew spoken of elsewhere in the 
dialogue are forces which work in earthly bodies, and, with the Jossible 
exception of the ‘purer forces’ mentioned in § 5, are put in action 
by the heavenly bodies. Moreover, the xaapurepar evépyerar of § 5, 
even if we take them to be of supracosmic origin, cannot be identified 
with the Ocia: and réAeuon evépyerar of § 12; for the former are forces 
which act on the embodied soul of man, and not on the heavenly 
bodies. Thus the use of the term évépyeox in § 12 differs from its 
use in the rest of Zxc. III. 


1 The apparent exception in § 12 is probably due to interpolation. 








336 STOBAEI HERMETICA 


kat (rav eis Ta pOapra evepyoucdv) ai pév Kabodixai, (at Sé yevixat,) 
ai Sé (e)ibixai. The addition of at 8& yevixaé is made necessary by 
the words ai 8’ évds Exdorov yévovs tév Lewy below. This triple 
division cannot be applied to ‘ the forces which act on the heavenly 
bodies’; we must therefore suppose that something like rév eis ra 
p0apra. évepyovody has been lost, 

For eidixés in the sense ‘limited to this or that individual’, see note 
on Asel, Lat. I. 2 fin. 

[xat ai péev rav yevar, at 8¢ [Trav pepav] évds Exdorov.| This appears 
to be a corruption of kal ai pév (rév dvrwv cuprdvtwr, ai 82) tov 
year, at d& évos éxdorov, which must have been written as an 
alternative for the preceding words xai ai pév xafodixat, (ai 82 yevixat), 
ai 8é eidixait.—rav pepdv is probably an alternative for ray yevar ; cf. 
pepixai substituted for yevuxad below. 

§ 13. odt0s 6 Adyos, & téxvov, cuvdyer mdvra peota elvar évepyerar, 
The Adyos from which it is inferred that ‘all things are full of forces- 
at-work’, is the proposition that ‘there are often several forces at 
work in a single body’. That proposition has not been expressly 
stated in the preceding text; but it is implied in what has been said 
in §§ ((6)) and ((5)) about the various évépyea: which act on a man’s 
body and soul. Thus, if we cut out § 12, and place § r3 next after 
§ ((5)), we get a satisfactory sequence of thought. 

el yap [dvdykn tas évepyetas év owpacw etvar] mod [8] cuwpara ev 
Kéopm, TAetous pypl elvar tas evepyetas Tav cwpdtwr. The statement 
that évépyea ‘are always in bodies’ has been made in §§ ((r)) and 
((6)). But the conclusion that ‘the forces-at-work are more 
numerous than the bodies’ cannot be inferred from that statement ; it 
therefore seems necessary to strike out the words dvdéy«y ras évepyetas 
év copacw elvat 

év é&i ydp mohAdkis cwpati éort pia Kal Seutépa Kal tpity (. . .), 
xXwpis tay (rH yevéoe) éwopévwy Kadohixay, The ‘first, second, 
and third’ évépyewar here spoken of must have been qualified by 
some adjectival phrase which served to contrast them with the 
kabodixai évépyea. They were doubtless called eidixa/, and probably 
«idixai of some particular kind; for the writer speaks of érepat eidtxat 
évépyevar below. 

Kaodixds yap évepyelas gypl tas Tav SyTwy cwpatwrikds (Tas 
dvtws gapatikds MSS.). We have been told that all évépyeca are 
dowparor; it is therefore impossible to say that some of them are 
copatixat. The meaning must be that the ‘universal’ évépyeoe 








EXCERPT III: 13,14 337 


are those forces by which bodies are brought into existence 
(xopis yap totrwv tiv évepyedv 1d copa ovorivar ob dvvarér). 
These forces operate wherever bodies come into being, and 
therefore are everywhere at work throughout the sublunar world. 

It is evident from the wording of this sentence that the term 
caSodixai évépyecae is here used and defined for the first time in 
the dialogue; whence it follows that § r2 cannot have preceded. 
Perhaps § 12 is a marginal note suggested by these words in 
§ 13. 

Frais wuxais tay dvOpdirwv Bid texvdv Kat émiornpav kal émry- 
Seupdtov Kat évepynpdrwv! (.. .). As the end of the sentence is 
lost, the meaning of these words cannot be discovered. Possibly 
the author may have written something like érepac d¢ clow etdixat 
évépyetat, (aitwes) rats yuxais tov avOpdrov bd texvav Kat éruary- 
piv [xal émurndevpdrwv Kai] évepy(ovcas cuvepyotow). As far as a 
man works with conscious and deliberate aim, what he does may 
be ascribed to the action of his yyy, operating &a TEXVOV Kal 
emornpav. (Cf. Exc. VB. 1: épys ydp mov tiv emoripqy Kal 
Tiw Téxvqv evepyeiac lvoe Tod Aoyixod, ‘forces put in action by 
the rational part of the soul’) But he is often aided by 
promptings which arise he knows not how or whence,—impulses 
from ‘the unconscious’, It might be said that such impulses are 
évépyevat in the sense in which the term is used in this Ade//us, i.e. 
forces of the same nature as those by which all physical processes 
are carried on, and that, like all évépyeiat, they are put in action 
by the heavenly bodies. 

$14. (Bid Be tay aicbicew [Kal tay Kijoewr] (pavepas) yuvo- 
pévas.)) évépyeae are not ‘brought into being by means of the 
senses’. We are told below that they are made manifest by means 
of the senses; I have therefore inserted gavepds. But even with 
this correction, the words are out of place where they stand in the 
MSS. ; and it is most likely that they have been shifted from the 
passage on atoAyo1s which begins in § 14. 

Tapémovtat yap tals évepyetats [klai aioOfoes. From this point to 
the end of the excerpt, the writer is discussing the relation between 
évépyccat and aic@ijoes. What does he mean by aicOjyoas? The 
word atcfyois may signify (1) an act of sensation or perception 
=10 alcOdverbo); (2) a faculty or permanent possibility of 
sensation or perception (= dvvayis 70d alcOdveoGar) ; (3) an organ 
of sense (= alcOyripiov). The writer of Exc, III appears to 

280869 zZ 


338 STOBAEI HERMETICA 


use it sometimes in one of these senses, and sometimes in another. 
In § 14, his meaning seems to be that, when a physical change is 
produced in a man’s body by the action of an évépyea, the man feels 
a corresponding sensation, and the working of the évépyea is 
manifested to him by the sensation which he feels. E.g. my body 
is warmed by the heat of the sun; I feel a sensation of warmth, and 
thereby I am informed by what the sun is doing to my body. This 
is atoOyots in sense (1). 

§ 15. (i pév yap evépyeta) dvwlev wéymera. dvwHey means ‘from 
the heavenly bodies ’. 

kaddnep aithy cwpatomojcaca, alabyors is inseparably connected 
with the body, and is dependent on the body for its existence; (in 
§ 21, we are even told that atc@yois ‘is a body’;) and so, when the 
working of the évépyeta manifests itself in aleOyo1s, the incorporeal 
force may be said to be ‘ corporealized’. 

(@mt) tocodroy ouveorGoas Scov Kal 7d capa Kat yap ovyyervGvrat 
TO cdpatt at aicOjcers Kal cuvarobvicxoucr, It is obviously untrue, 
that particular acts or processes of sensation last as long as the 
body does, and that they are born with the body and die with it. 
Thus ailcyos in sense (1) would here make nonsense; and 
the word must be taken either in sense (2) or in sense (3). 

§ 16, Ta 82 0dvara cdpara [| ]| aioOnow odk éxer, ds && odcias 
(08) tovadtns cuveotGta, The heavenly bodies consist of a substance 
which is not such (as to admit of aic@yows). This substance must 
be the wéuzry otcia of the Aristotelians. Cf. § 8. 

When the Hermetist says that the heavenly bodies atc@yow ovk 
zyet, he does not mean that they are devoid of conscious life, but 
that they possess a higher sort of consciousness. Man has both 
ale@yous and vénors ; the heavenly bodies have véqo1s alone, and not 
alc Oyots. 

Hh yap aloOyots of8’ Sdws GAdou eorl [owpariKh] (karadywrueh) 
4 100 mpocywopévou (-yevonévou MSS.) tO odpat. [kaxod # [rod] 
dyadod], 4 Tod wéAty ad droyivonevou (-yevouevou MSS.). The writer 
assumes that the changes in the body which are produced by the 
working of évépyeu, and are apprehended by atc@yoxs, always consist 
in either the addition of something to the body, or the subtraction 
of something from the body. It is not clear how this could be 
maintained in the case of all kinds of sense-perception ; but perhaps 
it might be said that, when I see an object, an image of the object 
‘is added to’ my eye. 








EXCERPT III: 15, 16, 18, 17 339 


The words xaxod # [rod] dyaGot are irrelevant. The point of 
the passage is that, in the case of the heavenly bodies, there are 
no ‘additions’ or ‘subtractions’, and there can therefore be no 
alcOnois ; and the writer could have no reason for saying here 
that, in the case of earthly bodies, the things added or subtracted 
may be bad or good. 

Tois S€ didiors odpacw ore mpocyiverar (11) obre Gmoyiverat, In 
other words, the heavenly bodies are not subject to pera Body. 
From this it appears that the writer’s cosmology is Aristotelian 
rather than Stoic. According to the Stoics, the heavenly bodies 
are constantly receiving tpo¢y, in the form of dvaGvpidpara from 
the lower elements, which are transmuted into fire as they rise ; 
and they are constantly giving off fire, which descends from them 
into the lower world, and is there transmuted into the other elements. 
Aristotle on the other hand held that the ‘ fifth substance’ of which 
the heavenly bodies consist is confined to the heavens,' and is not 
subject to transmutation. 

((§ 18. (ai yap) aicbjces .. . ind Se Tay évepyerav (daorehetrat 
auvappétepa).)) Inthe MSS., this section follows an unfinished 
sentence in which the writer is speaking of the differences of 
aia@nows in different kinds of beings. But in § 18, he is still 
speaking of atc@yois in general; and the words xara avfyow pdvov 
kai Kara pelwow yryvdpmevac have to do with the same topic as 
to mpooywouevov . . . i} . . . droyivouévov in § 16, It seems 
clear therefore that § 18 ought to follow § 16 immediately, and 
precede § 17. 

(ai yap) alcOyces [pév] ciot mayrixai [S¢], kara adgnow pdvov 
kal kara pelwou yryvdpevat, 7 Se mddos x.7.d, maGyrikal is equiva- 
lent to karadyrrixat tod mpocywopévov Kal éroywopevov. The 
writer of Zc. III uses the word wd6os (‘that which befalls a person 
or thing’) to denote the ‘additions and subtractions *, or ‘in- 
creases and diminutions’, in which he considers that all bodily 
change consists. The heavenly bodies are exempt from these 
way; they are immutable. 

dmd pds Kopupijs iptyvra. For this phrase, cf. Pl. Phaedo 
60B: dorep ex pias Kopypis cuvnppéerw dv dvre (se. 7d 8d and 
70 Avrnpov). 

§17. "Ev mavtl ody (mabyTd) odpan atednors [ato@dverac] (yiverar) ; 

* Some of the later Aristotelians, however, said that the human soul or mind 
consists of this same substance; see note on gvinfa pars in Ascl. Lat. 1. 6b. 

Z2 


340 STOBAEI HERMETICA 


—Ev mavti, We have just been told that there is no ale@yors in 
heavenly bodies ; omar. must therefore be qualified by some ad- 
jective which limits this statement to earthly bodies. @yy7d or 
fOaprS would serve the purpose ; but rayr7¢@ suits the context best. 
kav tots aiixorg (kal dpdxors MSS.). It was sometimes said 
that plants are divxa, and yet have aioOyos; see Ascl. Lat. 1. 4: 
‘sine anima quidem, et tamen non carens sensibus.’ But the 
writer of Zac. III asserts that not only plants, but a// adwya 
have aloOyo.s, though not the same kind of aic@yois as men or 
animals. It seems strange to say that a stone aic@daverat; but 
similar statements were made by some of the early Greek thinkers. 

Theophrastus, De sensibus 4, Diels Doxogr. p. 500, reports 
Parmenides as saying roy vexpov dwrds piv Kat Oepyod Kal ovis 
obk alcOdverOar Sid Tiyv exAeuw rod wupds, Wuxpod 8 Kal cwris 

. . alcbdverOa, Kal dws Se wav 7d dv cxew TWd yrdow. Cf. 
Aetius, Diels Doxogr. p. 390: 6 5& Anpoxpitos wdvra peréxew gpyot 
Yryfs molds, Kal Ta vexpa Tov copdrwv, dirt det Srapavas! (davis ?) 
“twos Oeppod Kat aicOyticod peréxet, Tod mAciovos Sramveojevov; 

ai 8é tay aAdyov ‘owparixat! cio pdvov. cwuarixai can hardly 
be right ; for all aic@joes alike are cwparikal, 

§ 19. trav 8é eubdxor [Loder] eiol So drat “evépyerat!, at wapérov- 
Tat Taig aic@jycec: Kal trois md9ect, AUTH Kat xapd. There are no 
fa that are not ¢upvya; either Cow or éuiniywy must therefore 
be struck out. 

Pain and joy may be said to vesu/t from the working of évépyea 
(as we have just been told that wd6y and aicOjoces do), but 
cannot themselves be called évépyeia, in the sense in which that 
term is used throughout Zwe, III; évépye must therefore have 
been substituted by error for some other word. The missing word 
may possibly be idea, ‘two other Arnds of things’; cf. [rav rabév 
idéas] below. 

In a stone, the évépyea (i.e. the physical forces which are 
at work in it) produce 746» (increases and diminutions) and aic6j- 
ces (perceptions of these increases and diminutions). In a man 
or animal, the évépyeua produce +déGy and aicOjces in like manner ; 
but in the man or animal, the 7é4y and aic@joeas are accompanied 
by Avan and yapa; i.e. the sense of diminution gives rise to a 
feeling of pain, and the sense of increase gives rise to a feeling of 
enjoyment. 

The word wd@os is often used by other writers to signify ‘an 








EXCERPT III: 19 341 


emotion’; and in that sense, Avy and xapd might be called wa6y. 
But the writer of Zxc, III uses wdHos only in the sense of ‘ some- 
thing that befalls one’, and applies it only to bodily increases 
and decreases. He therefore does not call pain and enjoyment 
xabn, but says that they accompany 7é6y. 

xwpis Todtwv foov [eupuxov) [kal pddcora| dAoyov (Aoyexdy MSS.) 
aicdécbar dbuvarov. According to the MSS., we are told that 
it is impossible both for beasts and for men, but ‘in the highest 
degree’ impossible for men, to perceive anything without feeling 
Avy Or xapé. But that is nonsense. In the first place, one thing 
cannot be more impossible than another; pddtora must therefore 
be rejected. In the second place, the following section clearly 
shows that in the writer’s opinion it is zo¢ impossible for men to rid 
themselves of Avy and yapa. These perturbations are pernicious 
(kaxwrixal) ; they are connected with the irrational part of the soul, 
i.e. with that part of the man in respect of which he is no better 
than a beast ; and it is to be inferred that in the man who attains 
to ‘piety ’ or ‘ gnosis’ they will be suppressed. 

In order to get the sense required by the context, we must 
write dAoyov in place of Aoyxév. With the corrections which I 
have proposed, the passage becomes consistent and intelligible. 
‘In beasts, ato@yois is necessarily accompanied by Avy and 
xapd. These emotions may therefore be called proper to beasts 
rather than to men; for beasts are more completely mastered 
by them. In man, it is the beast-like part of the soul that is 
affected by them ; and (if he allows himself to be mastered by them) 
they work mischief in his life.’ 

iBias (i8€as MSS.) radras elvai dnp |[tdv maddy iSdas] trav 
addyav (hoyixdv MSS.) p&ddov Lowr. tavras (ris) tov waday ieas 
might mean ‘ these kinds of emotions’ (sc. Avwyv Kai yapdv); but 
if the words are thus understood, wd@os is used in a sense different 
from that in which the author of Zxc. III employs it. ray raddv 
must therefore have been inserted by another hand. idéas may have 
come by duplication from the preceding idias. 

[at pév evépyerar (adavas) evepyodow, at 8¢ aicOycers tas évepyeias 
avapaivovow.| This has nothing to do with Avmy and yxapd, the 
things dealt with in § 19. It is evidently connected with the 
contents of §§ r4 and 15; and it would be possible to insert it 
in the text before rapéerovra: yap rais evepyeias af aicOyoes in 
§ 14. But it is not needed there, as the writer’s meaning is 


a 


342 STOBAEI HERMETICA 


sufficiently expressed without it; we may therefore conclude that 
it is a marginal note on that passage. 

§ 20. afro: 8, ofcor copatixal, dvaxivodvrar dd (rv aicdycewr, 
dvréxovrat 82) Tay Tis Wuxis GXdywr pepdv. The ‘ irrational parts 
of the soul’ are 1d Ovpoedis and rd éxibvyyrixdy (Pl. 2ep.), or, 
as Platonists often called them, 6upds and émOupia (Zxc. IV A. 7). 
The author cannot have said that Avwn and xapd ‘are stirred 
up by’ these parts of the soul. He may have said that they are 
stirred up by the aicOjoas, or by the wdé@y and aicbjoas, or 
by the évépyei (which produce} the wd6y and aicOjres), and 
that they take hold of, or arise in, the irrational parts of the soul. 

%d Kal duhorépas dnp kakwrixds elvot (rod dvOpdmou?). Cf, 
Corp. XIL. i. 2: Wuxi) yap wave, ev copate yevopevn, edOews bd Te 
Tis Amys Kal ths HSovis KaxiLera, The writer’s ideal is what some 
called drdOew, i.e. freedom from the perturbing emotions which 
result from the debasing influence of the body on the soul; and 
he applies the words Avry and xapd to these perturbing emotions. 
There is another surt of xapd, which is a function of vots or 13 
Aoyuxdv pepos Tis Yuyijs; (see Corp. XIIL. 8c;) but of that higher 
and better xapa the writer of Zc. III says nothing. 

§ ar. “H adth av ety aloOqois puxijs al cuparos', d mérep; From 
Hermes’ answer, it appears that Tat spoke of aic@yows Wuxijs, ie. 
implied that 4 Wuxi alcOdverar. But did he mean that all aic@nous 
is Yuxjs and not odparos? Or that there are two kinds of aicOyors, 
—an aleOnois yuxis and an aicOyows cwparos? Or that all aioOyors 
is both yx%s and odparos? Most likely, I;think, the last. Cf. 
Corp. 1X. 2 as emended: Siypyrar yap 7% aloOnors cis re TO cpa 
kal els thy Woxyv’ Kal bray dppdrepa Ta pépy Tihs alcbijoews mpos 
adAnXa oupporyoy, kar. Arist. De somno 454a 7: érel 8 ovre 
Tis voxiis idtov ro aicOdverOur obte Tod cwparos,—ovd vp H Svvapss, 
tovTov Kat 1) snlpapiey h 8& Acyoueryn atoOyors, os tipyst, kivnols 
tis dua TOD oeparos THs Wuyis éeot4—davepov ws ote Tis yroxis 
7d mdbos iSov, ott’ dbuyov capa Sivarov aicbdverOa. Arist. De 
sensu 436426: gatverar dt Ta pepota .. + Kowa THs Wuyxys ovra. 
kat Tod aéparos, olov alcOyous «td. Lb.b 6: 4% 8 aloOyors Gre dua 
owparos yiverat TH WXth dyjAov. 

ox } pev uxt) dowparos, 7 8 atofyors copa; Wachsmuth 
assigns these words to Tat; but they must surely be spoken 
by Hermes. They give a reason for rejecting the phrase yuxjs 
aia @nous. 








EXCERPT III: 20, 21 343 


We are told in this section that alc@yo is cépa. What can 
the writer have meant by this? He said in § 15 that 4 aicOyors 
ey 7G capari eat, Kai dd rovTov tiv ovciav éxea; but that is not 
quite the same as saying that alc@yos ‘is a body’. The most 
probable explanation seems to be that the Hermetist here takes 
the ambiguous word aic@yois to signify the material pxeuma by 
means of which the Stoics held that the processes of sensation 
and perception are carried on, and to which they attributed a 
function corresponding to that which, in modern physiology, is 
assigned to the sensory nerves, Cf. Diog. Laert. 7. 52: aic@nors 
8 Adyera Kara Tols Yrackods 7d 7 ad’ iyewovuxod mvedua emi 
ras alcOjoes (ra aicOyrypia?) SijKov, Kal % 8 atrav KardAyyus, 
Kat 4 wept Ta aicOyrypia KaracKxevy. Nemesius De nat. hom. 77, 
Diels Doxogr. pp. 393 and 55: xaAcirar 5€ wodAdKis aicPyois Kal 
ru aicOyrypia. ere 88 aloOyows dvridyyus tov aicOytav. doxet 
8& obros 6 Gpos ovK aiTyS civar THs aigOyoews, GAA TOV Epywv 
airys' 50 Kat otrws opiovrar tiv alcOnow rvetpa voepov amd Tod 
jyepovixod emt 7a Spyava terapévov. The 8& trav aicOyrnpiwv 
xatdAyyis could not be called a body; but the aicbyrypia 
themselves (e.g. the eyes and ears) are bodies; and the pneuma 
which extends to them from the egemonizon is also ‘a body’, 
i.e. a material thing. See note on ai aic@yoas tod cwparos in 
Corp. I. 24. 

(. . .) Tav ein, & wdtep, 4 aioyors 4 ev cdpart ofa ruyxdvet.! 
This is meaningless. It may be guessed from the context that 
Tat said something like ‘Why should not aic@yors itself be in- 
corporeal, though it is in a body?’ Cf. doiparor atral ovcar, 
év cdpaciv eo, said of the évépyem in § 1. 

*Edv dowparov (’Edv év owpart MSS.) adthy Odpev «7.4. According 
to the MSS., Hermes denies that aic@yois is ev copatt. But he 
himself has said in § 15 that 4 aic@yos is év 7 ooparc; and even 
if he had not said it, it would be impossible to deny it. The 
question here discussed must be, not whether ato@yois is év cwpare 
or not, but whether it is dowparov ev copar. (as the yvxy and 
the @vépyea are), Of cdpa év copar, a body contained in or 
forming part of another body. Tat is inclined to say that it is the 
former ; Hermes maintains that it is the latter. It is therefore 
necessary to alter év capari into dowparor. 

Spolav ri Wuxy aithy amopavotpey tats évepyeiars. The 
writer seems to regard the évépye, not as mere cvpBeByxora of 


344 STOBAEI HERMETICA 


the heavenly bodies which évepyotew, or of the earthly bodies which 
évepyodvrat, but as incorporeal substances, in the same sense that 
the soul is an incorporeal substance. 

Totre dowpardv 1. dANo wapd 1a mpoeipypeva!l. In these words, 
the very thing which Hermes is engaged in proving,—viz. that 
aig@nors is not a third kind of dodparov,—is asserted without 
proof. : 

[ray yap dvrwy Bet (dei MSS.) 7a pév owpara elvar, Ta 8€ dowipara, | 
This seems to be a clumsy attempt to say a thing must be either 
cGpa OY dodparov’. But it would be superfluous to say that. [ 
take the words to be an appended note. 


EXCERPTS IVA AND IVB 


Stobaeus gives Zac. IVA and £xc. IV B, as separate extracts, 
in different chapters of his Anthologium. But it may be considered 
certain that IV B came from the same /beldus as IV A, and 
followed it immediately or very closely in that Zded/us. A few lines 
before the end of IV A, Hermes says di0rep Kat ddoya exAjOn ra 
&Ga tabra, orepyoe rod [a]Aoy(ux)od ris Yuxqjs. In the first section 
of IV B, Tat says to Hermes viv 8 gis (‘you have just said’) 
Ta dAoya Ga orepyoe tod oyikod ddoya clvar Kal Kexd\jobar 
and it can hardly be doubted that this refers to what Hermes 
has said in IV A. ‘The repetition of the phrase orepyoe tod Aoyixod 
is conclusive. 

I was at first inclined to think that IVA (and consequently 
1V B also) might be a later part of the same 4e//us from which 
Stobaeus took Zxc, III; but I now see that it cannot be so. The 
usage of the word évépyea differs in the two documents; and the 
action of the heavenly bodies on earthly things, which is the main 
subject of III, is ignored in IV A, except in § 9, and in that section 


is regarded from a different point of view, and spoken of in different — 


terms, 


As to the relation between Zxc. 1V B and £xc. III, see intro- 


ductory note on Zxc, ITI. 


Excerpt IVA 


$1. [(are) Wuxh maca dOdvaros Kal deukivytos.) This must have 


been written as a summary of the contents of Zxc, IV A, (Ch 








EXCERPT IVA: 1 345 


Corp. III init.) The man who wrote it apparently took the phrase 
from § 4 (éori Wuxi) rica GOdvaros, Kabdrt dexivytos) after xabdr. had 
been altered into xa. 

Zpapev yap év trois yevikois, As Hermes refers to the yevexot 
Adyot, ZLxc. IV A must be an extract from one of the diegodexoi 
dovyou of Hermes to Tat. The name of Tat does not occur in IVA: 
but Tat takes part’ in the dialogue in IV B, which is a continuation 
of IV A. 

The ydép in the opening sentence shows that Zac. IVA was 
not the beginning of a Zbe//us, but was preceded by something which 
has not been preserved. 

(ras tov) ((cwpdrov)) kujgets TAS ev bwd tay (puorkdy?) évep- 
yetav, Tas 8é Grd THv [/owpdrwr]| (uxav yiverBar), 

The two classes of xwyoes spoken of in § 1 are doubtless the 
same as the dvo xwijoes spoken of in §3; and the two passages 
must be considered together. 

A Hermetist is not likely to have said that things (whether 
bodies or incorporeal things) are moved by bodies. Body is passive 
and inert; it cannot move anything; and if it is moved, it must 
be moved by something other than itself. (See Corg. Il. 8b, 9.) 
rav copdrev is therefore wrongly placed after izo ; and it probably 
stood before xwyoes. The genitive which the author wrote after 
rus 5¢ id has been lost; but there can be little doubt that it 
was tov Yuya. A cdpa Eulhuyov is moved by the yxy which 
is in it. 

But we are here told that bodies are moved td Trav évepyerv 
also. Now in Zuxc, IL], evépyecar and Wvxai are spoken of together, 
as the two kinds of incorporeal things which act on bodies. It 
seems possible then that Zc. III is that very yevixds Adyes to 
which the writer of Zac. IV A refers; and at any rate, in the 
ibellus to which he refers, évépyeta: and yvyaé must have been spoken 
of side by side, as they are in Zxc. III. 

In £xc, III however, the évépyea are the forces put in action 
by the heavenly bodies. The author of Zxc. IV A does not 
employ the term évepyea in that special and restricted sense; he 
calls the parts of the soul évépyea (§ 7), and might equally well 
have called the yvy7 as a whole an évépyea; indeed, he probably 
did so (see § 9). Hence, if he used the word évepyevév in contrast 
to yuxav, as he appears to have done in §1, we should expect 
him to restrict its meaning by some qualifying adjective; for if 


— 





ee 


ee 
= —_—_— — 


_—_ 





I I a fT 






























346 STOBAEI HERMETICA 


Woxy is an évépyera, the things contrasted with yvxai must be, not 
évépyeuat in general, but some particular kind of évépyea. Now — 
in IV B, he uses the word dvovs to denote the thing which performs 
a function that would have been ascribed to the évépyeia: by the 
writer of Zxc. III, and accordingly contrasts the working of vous 
with the working of ‘the rational part of the soul’. It therefore 
seems probable that in IVA. 1 he wrote xuyjoes tas pev ims 
tov (pvoixdy) evepyaav, tas d¢ ixd tov (yay yiverOar). At any — 
rate, his meaning must have been that which these words would — 
express. 

§ 2. [paper BE thy oxy . . . ek twos yeyeroOau.| This is 
irrelevant, and interrupts the discussion of the two kinds of move- 
ment of bodies, which has been begun in § 1, and is continued 
in § 3. It is possible that § 2 is a fragment of a lost passage 
which followed § 4 and preceded §5. We may suppose that, 
after bringing his discussion of the movements of bodies to a con- 
clusion in the missing passage which followed § 3, the writer went 
on to speak of the soul, and showed, firstly, that it is devxdvyros, and — 
consequently a@avaros (§ 4), and secondly, that it is dodparos (lost 
passage), and, being doduoros, must be made é& dowparov 
ovaias (§ 2). 

Tav yap To yevopevov dvdykyn ek Tivos yeyevjoOo, This seems 
better suited to precede dapév 58 ri Yuxyv . . . dowpdrov ovens 
than to follow it. ‘Everything that has been made is made of 
some substance ; (the soul has been made; therefore the soul is 
made of some substance.) And as the soul is incorporeal (this 
point must have been previously established), the substance of 
which it is made must also be incorporeal.’ The making of souls 
is described in mythical language in the Zimaeus, and in the 
Kore Kosmu. ; 

What is the ‘incorporeal substance’ of which the soul is made? 
The writer might perhaps have said, as the writer of Cor. XII 
init. says with respect to vows, that it is the same substance as 
that of which God consists, but that what that substance is, ‘ Goe 
only knows’. 

§ 3. Scwv pev ody (cupdrav) TH yevéoer pOopd émaxodoubet, 
xt.A. This means rois POaprois odpacw; and the shorter ph 
téiv pOaprév cwpdrwv is used as an equivalent at the end of 
section, The Kosmos and the heavenly bodies also yeyévgvrat; (im 
this respect, the writer accepts the teaching of the Zimaeus in its 




























EXCERPT IVA: 2,3 347 


literal sense ;) but in the case of the Kosmos and the heavenly 
bodies, yeveors is not followed by Oopa; having once been made, 
they will last for ever. 

Bdo Kuyoets ... , THY Te (ywouevny Sd tis) puxis, 5b” Fs Kevetrar 
(rd cpa Kare Témov), Kal Thy [Tod odparos] (bwd ris gucews), dG” fs 
adgerar Kal $0iver (sc, td cdpa). According to the MSS., the two 
xuwyoes Spoken of are 7 rhs Yuxns Kivyows and % rod caHparos Kivyots. 
But that is clearly wrong. The subject of the section, as we are told 
in its closing words, is 4 kivyows tév POaprov cwopdrwv; the two 
xunjoas therefore must both alike be xwyjoes copdérwv; and rod 
géparos, which in the MSS. is applied to the second xéivnois in con- 
trast to the first, must have been inserted by some one who misunder- 
stood the passage. 

The distinction between the two xwijoes tov POaprov cwpdror is that 
they are worked or effected by two different agents. The first of the 
two agents is Yuxy ; this appears from the words Wuyijs, ig’ Fs Kwvetrat. 
The antecedent of 7s must be Wvyjs, not xivnow; for it would be 
impossible to say cépa trd Kujorews xwetrat.) The word denoting 
the second agent has been lost, and rod cwparos has been substituted 
for it; but the second i¢’ 7s, which refers to it, shows that it must 
have been a feminine singular substantive. What feminine singular 
substantive then would best serve to denote the agent i¢’ js avgerat 
kal Giver tO copa? The two words which suggest themselves are 
evépyea (§ 1) and gos (Zxc. IV B). But évépyeo in the singular 
would not very well do; the growth, decay, and dissolution of 
a body might be said to be worked by évépyea, but hardly by 
évépyea. Thus we are led to the conclusion that the missing word 
is dios. If we read, in § 3, dvo xujoas . . ., ray te (ywoperny id 
THs )Wuxijs, bp js keveirar (7d copa... .), xat riv (ind ris dicews), id’ 
Ws avéerar cai pOive w7.A., and in § 1, xKuwjoes ras pev imd Tov 
(vou) evepyeiv, ras 88 bard ray (uyxdv yiveoOa.), the two passages 
agree with one another. 

dp’ fs Kwveiror (75 cGpa Kata témov). The subject of xivetrae is 
certainly 73 cpa or ra owpara. It would be possible to supply it 
in thought, but the meaning is more clearly expressed if we insert 7d 
copa 
Some qualification of xwveira: is indispensable, as these words 
pply to the first kind of xévyous only, in distinction from the other ; 
and as the other kind is described as that which takes the forms of 
owth, decay, and dissolution, the first kind was presumably 


348 STOBAEI HERMETICA 


described as 4 card rérov xivgows, ‘movement in space’, or ‘move- 
ment from place to place’. It is the yvy7 in me that moves my 
limbs ; it is the other agent (fvois) that makes my body grow and 
decay. Aristotle attributed processes of the latter kind to another 
sort of Yu, ‘the vegetative soul’ ; but the writer of Zc. IV A does 
not include them under the functions of yvy7; he ascribes them to 
a different agent. 

The pév at the beginning of § 3 shows that the writer intends, after 
speaking of the movement of perishable bodies, to speak of the 
movement of imperishable bodies (apOupra, dia, or d6évara cdpara), 
i.e, of the heavenly bodies. These bodies are exempt from increase, 
decay, and dissolution, the processes worked by the second agent 
(pvoxs) ; he must therefore have said, in a lost passage which followed 
§ 3, that the heavenly bodies have one sort of movement only, viz, 
that which is worked by ¢vy7. It must be either by the one soul of the 
Kosmos, or by the souls by which they are severally animated, that the 
heavenly bodies ‘are moved ’, i. e. are made to revolve in their orbits, 

§ 4. 4 8é uxt detxivntos .... Kkatd todrov ody tdv Adyov éori Woy} 
méoa aOdvaros, KaQdrt (kai MSS.) detxivytos. Having spoken of the 
movement of bodies, the writer goes on to speak of the movement 
of soul. The word deuxivyros is used by Plato in one passage only, 
Phaedrus 245 C: ux) rica abdvaros’ rd yap deucivyrov abdvaroy, 


x7A.' It is evident that the writer of Zxc. 1V A had that passage 


(or some paraphrase of it)in mind; and it can hardly be doubted 
that he, like Plato, said that soul must be dOdvaros because it is 
detxivyros. But if so, he must have written xaOdri, or some such 
word, before deiivyros. For xabér, cf. xc, IT. 1: Kaddre (yer) 
aodparot elon (sc. at evépyeuat), Kal dOavdrous atras pijs elvan 

(év €auty) €xouca [kivnow] Thy adtis évépyeray. ‘Having its motive 
force within itself.’ This is equivalent to avrokivytos otca; cf. ro 
atro xwodv in Pl. Phaedrus 1. c, 

The word évépyea has not here the special meaning which it has 
in Zx. III. 

§ 5. H per ody Bela (uxt) tod Pelou cupatos (xivntixy). What does 


this writer mean by 7d Oelov capa? xc. III. 6, ra Ocia oopata 


* Cf, Aetius, Diels Doxagr. p. 386: Oadjs dnedvato mpros tiv yuydy denivy- 
Tov ij (Kal?) abroxivyrov....’Adxualar, picw (a thing’) abroxivnrov kar’ aldiov 
nimaw' Kat 5:0. robro dBavarov abriy Kal mpoceppeph rots Oeois bwodapBdver. Lb. 
P. 392? TAdray, deutynrov pev rv yuxhy, tov Bt voby dxlvnrov THs peraBaruens 
muqjoews. 'ApistoréAns, dxivnrov tiv puxny, mdons uivnoews mponyouperny, THs BF 
ward aupBeBnrds perexey, kabarep Ta edn Toy cwpcTor, 


1 








EXCERPT IVA: 4,5 349 


means the heavenly bodies,—sun, moon, and stars. But in 
Exc, TV A, the term is used only in the singular. In §§ 7 and ((6)), 
76 Octov c&pa is the body which the human soul quits when it enters 
an earthly body, and which it enters when it quits its earthly 
body. The ‘divine body’ of which that is said might be a 
star. But the term could hardly be thus interpreted in § 9, 
where we are told that the agent by which soulless bodies upon earth 
are moved is 7} év 7@ Oelw oadpate Kvovpéevy (Wvy7). This agent can- 
not be an individual soul residing in this or that particular star ; it 
must be the world-soul ; and the ‘divine body’ spoken of must be 
the body in which the world-soul resides. Now the world-soul 
_ might be said to reside either év +6 xédco, in the universe as a whole, 
or év T@ ovpayg, in the sphere of heaven, which, according to the 
Stoics, is the seat of the cosmic jpyeporexdv, But in §§ 7 and ((6)), 73 
Geiov oGpa cannot mean the whole universe; for it would be impos- 
sible to say that a human soul quits the universe when it enters an 
earthly body, and enters the universe when it quits its earthly body. 
Tt seems then that the only way to make sense of both passages 
together is to assume that in this document 7d @eiov oda means 
éotpavéds. The agent by which soulless bodies are moved (§ 9) is 
4 &v TG otpavd Kwovpéevn Woyy, i.e. the world-soul, which resides and 
‘moves itself’ in the sphere of heaven; and an individual human 
soul, before and after its occupation of an earthly body, is é 7 ovpave, 
in the sphere of heaven. This does not necessarily exclude the view 
that each human soul, when not embodied on earth, resides in some 
particular star, and the writer may very likely have held that view ; 
but he does not expressly say so. 

Accordingly, in § 5, the words 7 Gea Wy} rod Oefov cdparos 
(xuprixy}) may be taken to mean that ‘the divine soul’ (i.e, the 
world-soul) makes the sphere of heaven revolve. 

(.. -) adrfis evépyea’ év pev yap adrd kwetrat, kal [e]adrd (82) kuvet, 
Perhaps : (SurAj 82) abrijs (ij) evépyera’ ev piv yap «.7.d. ‘Its motive 
force (i.e. the motive force which the divine soul puts in action) is 
twofold ; for on the one hand it (moves itself ?), and on the other 
hand it moves the divine body also.’ (évépyeta used as in § 4, and 
hot as in Zac. ITI.) But what is the meaning of é aird xwvetrar? 
Wachsmuth conjectures év piv yap atry xweira. That is possible, 
and might perhaps be accepted as a rather obscure equivalent for ‘it 
Moves itself’, which the context seems to require. But aire is sup- 
Ported by two similar phrases below, év arg (éavrg P) xwetrar, § ((6)), 





35° STOBAEI HERMETICA 


and 7 é& 76 Oelw cépare kwovpéry (Wvx7), § 9 ; and it is difficult to 
believe that the same form of words can have been introduced by 
corruption in all three passages. If we retain év arg, the words may 
be taken to mean ‘the divine soul resides in the divine body, and 
residing therein, moves itself’ (xivetrou = éavrijy xuvel). 

§ 7. exeu pév (re) kal [7d] rod Oetov. The human soul has in it 
‘something that is divine’, viz. ro Aoy:xdv pépos, which is called vots 
by some of the Hermetists. 

kal (yap) abrat [pev &0dvaror kabdre kat aitar at] evépyerat tuyxdvouew 
(odc)ar, évépyerar 8é Ovntay cwpdrwv. The reading of the MSS. can- 
not be right. On the question whether émGvpéa and Oupéds, the 
irrational parts of the soul, are immortal or not, opinions might differ ; 
and though in § ((6)) the writer expressly denies that a man’s 
érOupla and Ovpds live on as parts of Aim after he has quitted his 
earthly body, he may possibly have held that they live on as separate 
entities, (See note on xaraduriv thy Wuxi pire in Corp. X. 16.) 
But even if he did hold that opinion, he could have no reason for 
inserting here an oditer dictum to that effect. Moreover, if afra, 
meaning erOupéa and duds, has an adjective (d@dvaror) for predicate, 
its gender is wrong; it ought to be ratra. (Cf. xdxeiva below.) But 
if we write atra[ | évépyeua rvyyévovew obcat, the pronoun rightly 
takes its gender from the predicate substantive. Of the words which 
Ihave cut out, d@dvaro. xaor. may have found its way to this section 
from d@dvaros kadori deivytos in § 4; and kot atra. may have come 
by duplication from the preceding kai (yap) abrat. 

The aroya pépy tis Wuyijs are here called évépyecar; and it is im- 
plied that the Aoyixdy pgpos also is an évépyea. This is a different 
use of the word from that in §§ 4 and 5, but not so widely different 
that we need hesitate to ascribe both to the same writer. In §§ 4 
and 5, évépyeca means a motive force exerted by a thing upona 
thing ; in § 7, it means a thing which exerts a motive force. In none 
of these instances is it used as in Axe. IIL; and the writer of Zxe. 
III would certainly not have said that the parts of the soul are évépyecat, 

évépyerat S€ OvnTGy cupdrwv, It is to inferred from the context that 
these words mean ‘they are things which exert a motive force o7 mortal 
bodies’. They move mortal bodies only, and therefore begin to act 
only when the soul enters a mortal body, and cease to act when it 
quits that body. The meaning might be more clearly expressed by 
writing Ovyrdv copdruy (Kuvytical); but the addition of kuwyrual is 
hardly necessary. 








EXCERPT IVA: 7,6 351 


éneiSdv B& eioéXOy toro (sc. Td Oclov pépos tis Wuyxiis) eis Ovyrdv 
capa, xdxeiva (sc. Ta dhoya pépy) emupverar (@mporrgd MSS.). This 
closely resembles the teaching of the Zimaeus on this matter, 
Compare, for instance, Zim. 69c, where it is said that the created 
gods, rapaaPovres apxnv Woxis aOdvarov (= 7d AoyiKdy pépos’, Td 
pera. Toro Ovyrov cbpa airy meprerépvevoay, ... dAdo re eldos ev airG 
Ynys Tporwxoddpowv 7d Ovytiv (= rd dAoya pépy), Sew Kai dvoynaia 
ey éavtd Twabijpara éxov x.7.4. This Platonic notion was elaborated 
by Basilides and his son Isidorus in their doctrine of 74 rpocaprijpara. 
ris Woxijs, OF} rporpuys Yux7. Clem. Alex. Sfrom. 2.20. 112 f.: of & 
dpi tov Baowcidny rpocaprijpara ri dOn Kadety cisbacr, rretpard (ré) 
rwa (Aéyovres) rata Kar’ oboiay trdpyew mpoonprypeva TH oyu Wx 
KtA..+. 6 TOD BacrAcidov vids “Ioidwpos ev 7G epi tpoodvois yuyijs . . . 
ypdper..." “adv ydp tie wetopa dds re pay Eorw 7 Wuxy povopepys, TH 
82 rv wpocaprnpdrov Big ta TOV Xepdvun ylverar maby, K.t.A, Sel BE, 
7 AoyrtiKG Kpelrrovas yevopévous, Tis Ehdtrovos év Hiv Kricews (= Tov 
dddywv pepGv) pavivat kparotvras.” Sto yap di Wuxas troriBerat Kal 
obros ev Hiv. 

érporra (‘visit from time to time’) is not a suitable verb to use in 
speaking of the dAoya pépy, which attach themselves to the soul at 
the moment when it enters an earthly body, and cling to it without 
intermission until it quits that body. éipverae (‘grow on to’, or 
‘come into being as accretions on’) gives precisely the sense required ; 
cf. the zpoo¢uys yvxy of Isidorus, and zpocempveoGor used in a 
similar connexion by Clement /.¢. in his report of the teaching of 
Basilides. 

TH Tapoucia adtdy yiverat [det] (kaxh 7) puxh [dvOpwmivn], Cf. Corp. 
X. 15 b as emended: the soul, when it has been drawn down into 
the body, xaxi) yiverat. 

((§ 6. éwav yap... 74 movri.)) It is evident that the soul here 
spoken of is 7 dvOpwrivy Wuyxy, and not % Geta Yuyx7, and consequently, 
that this section is wrongly placed in the MSS. If we put it after § 7, 
it fits in perfectly. 

cise Boiicn (€fehOoica MSS.) (Se) eis 75 Oelov cGpa,... ev adtd kwveira, 
oupmeptdepopevy tH mavti. Cf. Corp. X. 16: 6 8% vods (= 7d Aoytxdv 
pépos ris Weyjs), when it quits its earthly body, cdparos rupivov 
(ém)AaBdpevos repuroel wdvra térov. But the meaning in Corp. X 
appears to be that the liberated vots becomes a daemon, and as such, 
clothes itself in a body of fire, and ‘ranges through all space’. In 
Exc. VV A, the meaning is rather that the soul, having cast off its 


352 STOBAEI HERMETICA 


‘irrational parts’, becomes an astral god, and resides in the revolving 
sphere of heaven. is 7d Qeiov cua probably means eis roy otpardy; 
if the writer had meant to say ‘it becomes embodied in a star’, he 
would have omitted rd, and written ciceAGotoa cis Ociov c&pa, as he 
writes eicé\Oy cis Ovyrov cua above. He does not clearly explain 
the situation and condition of the soul which has ‘entered into the 
divine body’; he may perhaps have held (though he does not say 
so) that each individual soul is embodied in some particular star, but 
that all souls thus embodied are in some sense parts of the one world- 
soul which resides in the sphere of heaven. 

According to this writer, the soul is never completely disembodied, 
It is always in some sort of body ; when it is not & Ovnrd cépars, it 
is év 7G Gel odatt. As to this variation of Platonic doctrine, see 
note on Corp. X. 16. 

§ 9. terdpryy B€ vde Thy rav dpixov (evépyeav), iris efwOev odca 
tay cuopdtwv évepyet Kwotca. The meaning required is ‘you must 
understand that the thing which moves soulless bodies is the fourth 
kind of thing that exerts motive force’—the other three being the 
three kinds of soul, divine, human, and irrational. But the feminine 
substantive to which rerdpryv is predicate, and which must have 
meant ‘thing that exerts motive, force’, has disappeared. I have 
assumed that it was évépyeay. If so, it is implied that the three — 
kinds of yux7 are also évépyea; and the word is here used in the 
same sense as in § 7, where the parts of the soul are called éépyeau 
The meaning might be more clearly expressed by inserting kuyrucjy 
after rév dyiywy ; Compare évépyera dé OvyTav cwpdrov in § 7, 

We have been told that the ‘divine body’ (i.e. the sphere of 
heaven), the body of a man, and the body of a beast, are moved by 
the souls which reside in them. But by what agent are soulless 
bodies moved? What is it, for instance, that makes a stone fall? 
That is the question that is answered in § 9. In this case, the agent 
does not reside in the body that is moved, but is external to it. The 
substantive by which this agent was denoted has fallen out of the 
text ; but there can be little doubt that the author wrote 4 év 76 belw 
copate Kwoupéryn (Wuxy) Cf. §§ 5 and ((6)), where it is said that 
Geta. Woy ev ait (sc. 73 Oly oopart) Kweirar. If so, we must under- 
stand that the force which makes a stone fall is exerted by the world- 
soul, the seat of which is the sphere of heaven. 

In locating the world-soul in the sphere of heaven, the writer is in 
agreement with the Stoics. He most likely differed from them, and 








EXCERPTS IVA: 9; IVB:1,2 353 


agreed with the Platonists, in holding that the world-soul (i.e. the soul 
which moves and governs the material Kosmos) is subordinate to a 
supracosmic God ; but in this excerpt, he has no occasion to speak 
of the supreme God, 

If I am right in adding yxy, the fourth agent turns out to be 
identical with 7 Ocia Wuxy, which is one of the three previously 
mentioned ; so that there are really only three kinds of agents, and 
not four. But 4 @cia wvyy, when it makes a stone fall, does a 
different kind of work from that which it does in making the heavens 
revolve, and does it in a different way (2éw6ev ofca, and card répodov) ; 
it is therefore possible to say that it is ‘a fourth évépye’ when it is 
acting in this capacity. 

dowep kata wdpodov Taita Kwoica, Kara wdpodov (‘in passing’ or 
‘by the way’) is equivalent to é zapépyw. The main work of the 
Ocia Wuxy is to make the heavens revolve; but incidentally, it also 
moves soulless things on earth. According to the writer of Zc, III, 

soulless bodies on earth are moved by forces put in action by the 
heavenly bodies ; according to the writer of Zxc. IV A, both the 
movement of the heavens and the movements of soulless bodies on 
earth are worked by the Oefa yvy7 residing in the heavens. 


Excerpt IVB 


§ 1. ens ydp mou rhy émorhpny Kol thy téxvyy évepyeias (-~yerar 
MSS.) elvat tod Aoyixod, The writer refers back to a passage (either 
in this /ibed/us or in an earlier Hermeticum) in which it was said that 
‘knowledge and skill are motive forces put forth by the rational part 
of the soul’; i.e. that when a man does something in which know- 
ledge and skill are manifested, it is the rational part of the soul that 
is in action. ‘Tat says that such things are done by beasts as well as 
men, and argues that beasts as well as men must therefore have a 
‘rational part of the soul’. 

In Zxc. III. 13, something was said about réyvou and émurrjpar in 
connexion with évépyeva and ‘the souls of men’; but as that passage 
is mutilated, we do not know whether it contained anything resembling 

_the statement quoted in IV B. 1. 

An opinion similar to that which is here ascribed to Tat is 
expressed by Porphyry, De aéds#. 3. 1-10. 

$2. rds tpopis droPncaupibopévous [rod xewpavos|. The text of the 
MSS. can only mean ‘ laying up their stores of food in winter’. But 
ants were believed to store up food in summer for use in winter. 

2806-3 Aa 


354 STOBAEI HERMETICA 


Wachsmuth proposes (ris) rod xetpdvos, ‘the food on which they are 
to live in the winter’; but it seems better to cut out rod xetpévos, 
which may be a remnant of a marginal note. 

§ 3. Taira, & réxvov, odk emorhpy ob(8e) Téxvy more, ddA hice, 
This amounts to saying that the force at work in the bird which 
builds a nest is not put in action by a ‘rational part’ of its own soul, 
but is the same force which is at work in all physical processes 
throughout the sublunar world, The bird is not acting deliberately ; 
it is not aiming at an end or good which it has conceived in thought, 
and seeks to realize by its action, as a man does when he builds a 
house ; it is impelled by a force of the same character as that which 
makes a tree grow, or a stone fall. We are told in IV A. 9 that the — 
agent to which all such processes are to be attributed is 7 Oca Wuyy, 
i.e. the world-soul (presumably working in subordination to the 
supreme God); some of the other Hermetists (e.g. the writer of 
Corp. III) would have said that the agent is God. But qvous, the 
force exerted on sublunar things by the world-soul or by God, is often 
spoken of as if it were itself an agent. 

The thing discussed in Zxc. IV B is one particular department of 
the working of this cosmic force, namely, the actions of beasts ; and 
in that connexion, dots may be translated ‘instinct’. For vous in 
the sense of instinct as opposed to reason, cf. Corg. IX. 1b, and 
Corp. XII. i. 1 fin. Arist. De part. an, 657 a 36: cxapdapiooen te 
mavra. (ra £6a), kai padwor’ avOpwros, mavra pev Grws Ta mpoomirrovra 
Tois Breddpos Kwotwor, Kal TotTo otk ex mpoaipérews, GAN 4H vars 
éroiyae. I.e. the act of blinking is instinctive, 

The writer distinguishes instinctive actions from rational actions by 
two criteria. Firstly, instinctive actions ‘are not taught’ (that is, 
the animal does the thing without having been taught to do it); and 
secondly, the thing is done by all animals of some one race or kind. 
With respect to the first of these criteria, we may compare the frequent 
use of dois in contrast to ddaxy or pedery in speaking of men. 
Epicharmus, fr. 33 Diels: & 8 pedréra picwos ayabas théova dupetran 
Democritus, fr. 242 Diels: wAdoves €& doxnovos dyabot yivovras 7 dard 
gicws. Critias, fr, 9 Diels: éx pedérys wAclous 7) divews dyaboi, Auaol 
Aédyot, Diels Vorsokr. p. 646: éore 8€ re kal picrs, & dy Tus py poor rapa 
codioray ixavos éyevero. Cf. Pl. Afol. 22 B: éyvwr obv ad Kat wept Tov 
mowntov ... TovTo, ST. ob copia, rowley & soviev, GANA dices rwi (by 
‘instinct’) cat évOovoidCovres (being possessed by a god). See Epi- 
charmus, fr. 4 Diels, on the ‘ wisdom’ or ‘cleverness’ (ro codov) which 















EXCERPT IVB: 3 355 


a hen shows in hatching her eggs: 16 de copov a icis 70d’ oldev 
és ge pova’ for the hen is ‘self-taught’ (i, e. her cleverness is not 
a réxvn didax77}). 

Cf, Seneca, Zp. 121, §§ 21-23: ‘... Naturales ad utilia inpetus, 
naturales a contrariis aspernationes sunt: sine ulla cogitatione quae 
hoc dictet, sine consilio fit quicquid natura praecepit. Non vides 
quanta sit subtilitas apibus ad fingenda domicilia? quanta dividend? 
laboris obeundique concordia? non vides quam nulli mortalium 
imitabilis illa aranei textura? quanti operis sit fila disponere, alia in 
rectum inmissa firmamenti loco, alia in orbem currentia ex denso 
rara, qu@ minora animalia, in quorum perniciem illa tenduntur, velut 
retibus inplicata teneantur? Nascitur ars ista, non discitur, itaque 
nullum est animal altero doctius : videbis araneorum pares telas, par 
in favis angulorum omnium foramen. Incertum est et inaequabile 
quicquid ars tradit: ex aequo venit quod natura distribuit. Haec 
nihil magis quam tutelam sui et eius peritiam tradidit ideoque etiam 
simul incipiunt et discere et vivere. Nec est mirum cum eo nasci illa, 
sine quo frustra nascerentur.’ This doctrine is probably drawn from 
Posidonius. Philo De animalibus adv, Alexandrum, p. 163 Aucher: 
‘Considera ... utrum apes et araneae, puta quod textrices istae sunt, 
illae favum mellis creant, iuxta artisne industriam ingeniosam (id 
faciant), an absque ratione per actionem naturalem. Siquidem 
horum omnino... admirabilis habenda diligentia, quae tamen non 
a disciplina deducta est... . volucres solent per aerem volare, 
aquatilia natare, et gradi terrestria. An id per studium doctrinae ? 
Minime ; sed suapte natura singula memorata haec agunt. Similiter 
et apes sine doctrina naturaliter favum peragunt, et araneae quasi 
per se edoctae subtilem illam elaborationem textorum moliuntur, Z, 
p. 168: ‘“ At quid quis dicere potest,” inquies, ‘cum antea collectione 
facta condit in thesauros formica, et horrea sibi prius parat?.. .” 
Ita quidem ego etiam dico. Dico tamen haec providentiae, non 
animalium ratione carentium, sed eius qui universam moderatur 
naturam esse tribuenda. Illud enim (animal) nihil agit intellectu. 
Isti vero (deo) cura est variis de rebus; ut nimirum, sicut Creator, 
impetum singularum creaturarum constringit ac corroborat ad 
id propter quod factae sunt, sive ad eam quae singulis convenit 
perfectionem.’ 

Compare also Orig. c. Ce/s. 4. 81-83. Celsus spoke of the well- 
ordered rodureiat of ants and bees, as showing that odd pupprjcev 7} 
peioody diadépe 6 dvOpuros rapa 7G Oe. To this Origen replies ; 

Aa 4 


356 STOBAEIL HERMETICA 


ob8" év rovrous édpaxe (Celsus) rive diahéper ra dad Adyou Kai Aoyurpod 
éritehovipeva Tov dm’ dAdyou pioews Kal KaTackeris YrAis ywopevor, 
dv ri airiav od8els piv éverdpxwv Trois motor Adyos dvadéxera’ ob88 
yap exovew airdv'? but the Son of God, to whom all things are 
subject, @vcw dAoyov reroinxe, Bonfoicav ds ahoyov ois (odx ?) 
dfwOetor Adyov. wdAas obv wap’ dvOpdros pera ToAAdv tréoTyoAy 
rexvov Kal Siardéews vopww" ... Gv ober év rois dddyors éoriv ebpelv..., 
ed’ ols obSapas piv rods pippyxas 7) Tas peAlooas dmodeKréov" ot yap 
oiv oyirpe rote’ Thy Geiav 8 dvow Oavpacréov, péxpt Tov adyov 
éxretvacay 7d oiovel mpos Ta NoyiKd pipnwa. 

Celsus spoke also (#4. ch. 83) of the foresight shown by ants in 
laying up stores for the winter, and added that they take precautions 
to prevent the grains which they lay up from sprouting ; to which 
Origen replies, ob Aoywrpov elvar ev pippnge tovrwv aitiov ixovoyréor, 
GANG Thy rappryropa picw, thy Kal Ta dhoya Koopnracay. 

(wal) 7a ((wev)) [82] ucer yryvdpeva évepyeta [[pér]] ylyverar kabodueg, 
The term évépyeia xaGodtxy may have been suggested to the writer 
by Zxc. III. 13, if he had read that document; but he applies it 
differently. The évépyea: which are called xafodtcai in III. 13 are 
the forces by which bodies of all kinds are brought into being ; but 
those called xaOoArxaé in IV B. 3 are forces which act alike on all 
individuals of some one Rind of animals. They are those which, in 
III. 12, are called yevixad, and from which the xa@odccai are there 
distinguished. 

7a (rq MSS.) 82 emoripy wal réxvy (Cyryrdpeva)) [elBdor] (rot) 
rapaytyverat, ob waov. In place of ciddou, we need a word meaning 
‘to some’, in contrast to wae. Wachsmuth conjectures <iducds (cf. 
cidixat evépyera in Zxe. IIL. 13 and 12); but rapayéyveran requires a 
dative. It would be possible to write ra de. . . réxvy yryvopera 
clduxh (evepyety. yiyverar’ trol yap) mapaytyverat, ob maar. 

§ 4. (rodro pév yap) ((dmd gUcews évepyetrar)), The words id 
dicews évepyeirar, which are out of place at the end of § 3, are 
wanted here, to stand in contrast to émurrijpys Kal réxvyns evepyovons 
below. 

§ 5. emorhpy adro(ds) [rodro mpdrrew] Kat réxvy cuvdyew Tas tpopds. 
otro mpdrrew has come from rotro érparrov above. 


1 T. e. the Adyos by which the actions of the ants and bees are directed is not in 
the animals themselves, but acts on them from without. That which is in them is” 
not Adyos, but an dAoyos gvats (i.e. instinct) implanted in them by the Aé-yos by 
which the universe is governed. % 





EXCERPTS IVB. 4; V: 1 357 


EXCERPT V 


§1. 6 pév [kdptos Kat mdvrav] Sypioupyds tov a8iov copdror. 
The supreme God is the Maker of ‘the everlasting bodies’, and 
as such, is distinguished from the Maker of men (6 #yérepos 
Syprovpyds, § 2), who is a subordinate god. «dvrwy cannot be 
right ; there is no reason to insist that a// the everlasting bodies, 
and not some of them only, have been made by the supreme God. 
It would be possible to write 6 pév kipios mdvrwv, Kal Sypcovpyos 
pov didiov cupdrov, But 6 pev Sypeovpyds rév a. o., without additional 
words, is better suited to stand in contrast to 6 82 jyérepos Sypuorpyds. 
Perhaps the reading of the MSS. has resulted from a mixture of 6 
kipios Kai mdvrov Syuwovpyds (a title of the supreme God) with 
6 Sypuorpyds Tay aidiov cwopdrur. 

What is here meant by ra didva odpara? In its widest application, 
the term might include (1) the four cosmic elements, (2) the 
body of the Kosmos, and (3) the heavenly bodies,—sun moon and 
stars. (Weare told in the Zimaeus that God made these things 
himself, and then committed to the gods whom he had made, 
i, e. chiefly the gods incorporated in the heavenly bodies, the task 
of making the bodies of men and other @vyra f6a.) In Axc. IDA 
(§§ 1 f. and 13), ra dédia odpara are the four cosmic elements. 
But in Zyxc. ITI, ri didia copara (§§ 16 and 12), also called ra 
aOdvara cdpara (§§ 16 and 8) and ra Geta cdpara (§§ 6 and 12), 
are the heavenly bodies. In Zxc. V, 7a didva copara perhaps 
means both the cosmic elements and the heavenly bodies. If so, 
it is equivalent to ra orovxeia in the wider sense of that term; for 
the heavenly bodies were sometimes called orotyeta. 

raita yap éautois mapasols kat évdoas addjdois adie pdpecOar, 
adixe péperOa, ‘he let them go on their course’, seems to apply 
best to the heavenly bodies (cf. ciawe orpépecbar in Corp. 1. 11 a) 
But on the other hand, itis difficult to see what could be meant 
by saying that God ‘ united’ the heavenly bodies ‘to one another’ ; 
whereas this statement is intelligible when applied to the cosmic 
elements, which, according to the prevalent opinion, were continually 
being transmuted into one another. (See note on Zxc. II A. 13.) 
And it isa be possible to say that the cosmic elements ‘go on 
their course’, in the sense that they pass through the unending 
Series of processes appointed for them. 








/ 
} 
| 


358 STOBAEI HERMETICA 


pydev(ds) evBéovra [ds aiSial, ef Be Séovrar tivdy, aA} wv 
Bnolovrar, oddepds Be ris efwbev empopas. és didia is probably 
a misplaced doublet of as d@dvara below. The point on which 
the writer is insisting is that the ‘everlasting bodies’ do not need 
nutriment from without, as our bodies do (§ 4). He admits that 
they need and get nutriment, but only from one another. They are 
‘united to one another’; and if all of them are regarded together, 
as making up a single whole, it may be said that they are 
ovdevds évdeovra. 

This applies to the cosmic elements rather than to the heavenly 
bodies. Each of the four elements is perpetually maintained 
in existence by the transmutation of portions of the other elements 
into that element. The heavenly bodies, according to the Stoic 
physics, consist of the element fire, and receive rpody from the other 
elements, in the form of exhalations which are transmuted into fire ; 
but it could not be said that the heavenly bodies receive nutriment 
from one another. 

(...) "ds! &Odvaras eer ydp 7d dm’ éxeivou cdpara yerdpeva ToLadTyy 
zxeww [kat] thy dtow. A satisfactory sense might be got by writing 
dotre tatra piv) dOdvara. ‘The bodies hitherto spoken of are 
dOdvara, and as such, are contrasted with the bodies of men, which 
are Oviyré (§ 2). Touartrny éxew riv diow means abdvara eva. Things 
made by the supreme God are necessarily immortal. Cf. Pl. Zim. 
41 c, where God says to the gods whom he has made & éyod de 
ratra yevopeva .. . Oeois iadour’ dv* iva obv Ovytd . . - ih TpéereaGe 
cara dtow tpeis emt thy tav Cowv Snpioupyiav. 

§ 2. 6 82 fpérepos Snproupyds, ev odpart dy. In the Zztmaeus, 
the bodies of men, and the ‘mortal part’ of their souls, are made, 
not by the supreme God himself, but by the gods whom he has 
made, The writer of Zxc. V substitutes for these ‘gods’ a single 
god, who is embodied (é odpari), and, like the gods of the Timaeus, 
has been made by the supreme God (riv éavrod Sypsovpydy). This 
subordinate and embodied Demiurgus must be either the Kosmos, 
or the Sun. For the Sun as subordinate Demiurgus, cf, 
Corp. XVI, Exe. XXI, and the interpolated passage Zxc. I A. 14, 

As the subordinate Demiurgus has been made by the supreme 
God, his body (whether the whole Kosmos or the Sun) must be 
regarded as one of the didia odpara. 

The notion that 74 d@dvara have been made by one Maker, and 
ra 6vyra by another, is discussed and rejected in Corp. XI. il. 9 f, 








EXCERPT V: 2 359 


yal moet del kat moijoet. This is opposed to wroujoas obkére 
eroinrey obdt rove’ in§1. In Corp. XI. ii. r2 b-14 a, it is asserted 
that God ‘is always making things’. The writer of Zac. V denies 
this with respect to the supreme God, but asserts it with respect to 
the ‘ Maker of mortal bodies’. The everlasting bodies have been 
made once for all ; but the mortal organisms of the sublunar world 
are continually being made. 

énoinvey yas .. . odpata (exovras) Siadurd Kal Ovyrd. Ac- 
cording to the MSS., the Hermetist here says that men are bodies. 
If he did say this, he expressed his meaning inexactly; for man, 
even if regarded merely as an earthly organism, is not capa, but 
a thing made up of cdya and wy}. The writer seems to speak of 
men as if they were merely bodies in the words ék ris . . 

cuparicens eroineey jas (not ra quérepa odpara) at the end of the 
section ; but on the other hand he also employs the phrase r& 
jpérepa oépara, which implies that ‘we’ are not ‘ bodies’. 

od yap Oduis jv adra pipetoOor tov éautod Syproupydy, ddAws rte 
kai (. . .) dddvarov: & pév ydp x.7.A, Wachsmuth adopts Meineke’s 
emendation, dAdws te xai ddvvaroy (ov). This would mean ‘It was 
not permitted to him, . . . especially as it was impossible’. But 
that cannot be right. ov dus and ddivarov cannot be used to- 
gether with reference to the same action; if a thing is impossible, 
the question whether it is permitted or forbidden does not arise. 
There must therefore be a lacuna before ddvvarov. Perhaps the 
author wrote something like this: ‘(And indeed) it was impossible 
(that our bodies should be of the same nature as the bodies 
made by the supreme Maker); for the supreme Maker made 
of incorporeal substance (the bodies which he made), but our 
Maker’ &c. 

& pev yap ék tis mparns oldcias eroincer, otens dowpdrou. In 
Exc. IV A, 2, it is said that 4 yvy7 has been made é dowpdrov 
ovcias. But the writer of Zxc. V is speaking, not of the making 
of soul, but of the making of the everlasting bodies. What is the 
‘first’ and ‘incorporeal’ substance of which the everlasting bodies 
aremade? In £xc. III. 8, we are told that the afdvara cdpara are 
made éx puds Ags, and 7, 16, that they consist of an otcia different 
from that of which our bodies are made; but the tAy or otoia 
there spoken of is not said to be doaparos ; it is probably the ‘ fifth 
(corporeal) substance’ of the Aristotelians. The view of the writer 
of Corp. V appears to be that originally nothing existed, except 


360 STOBAEI HERMETICA 


‘incorporeal substance’, i.e., the substance of which God, voits, and 
ra vonrd consist ; (cf. Corp. I. 4, where that substance is symbolically 
denoted by the word ¢as;) and that God transformed portions of 
that incorporeal substance into the corporeal elements, and made 
the Kosmos out of the elements thus brought into being. If so, 
he rejects the Platonic doctrine of tAy; he holds that the tA out 
of which all material things have been made is 76 vonrov. 

& 88 ek THs yevoueyns (yewapévns MSS.) cwpartdcews éeroinoey 
tas. yevouévys gives the sense required. éyewdyny is said by 
Liddell and Scott to be sometimes used in the sense of éyevéuny 
‘in late poets’; but I know of no instance of this use in 
prose. 

4 yevopérm cuopdrwois means ‘the corporeal things that had been 
made’, i.e. the four cosmic elements, which were made by the 
supreme God. 

§ 3. eixdrws ody [kara rév dpOdv Adyov] ekeva pev .. . dbdvard 
gon. xara Tov dpOdv Adyov must have been written as an alternative 
or substitute for eixdrws, 

és ris ‘ys! fpdv ek cwpdrov ouveotdoys. It is not » tAy 
pay, i.e. the material of which we are made, but our bodies, that 
are ‘made up of bodies put together’, i. e. of portions of the four 
elements. In place of ddys then, a feminine substantive equivalent 
to cdparos is wanted, 

§ 4, 818 Kal dodera gore (8d 7d doGevh elvar MSS.). It could 
not be said either that the human body is made of material 
elements ‘because it is weak and needs help’, or that it is 
dissoluble and mortal for that reason. The meaning must have 
been that our bodies need help from without because they are 
dissoluble and mortal. 

moddijs émixoupias Sedpeva. The two kinds of émixovpia of which 
the Hermetist proceeds to speak are food (§ 4) and sleep (§§ 5-7). 
The everlasting bodies need neither. 

§ 5. (. ..) bore kal mpis tas xwioets dopey dobevécrepor. There 
must be a lacuna here. dore refers to some statement which has 
disappeared ; and the xujoes could hardly be thus spoken of without 
some preceding explanation. 

The body is moved (i.e. its muscular movements are worked) 
by the yyy which resides in it; but it would soon be worn 
out by these movements, if it were not refreshed and renovated 
by sleep. 








EXCERPT V: 3-6 361 


dépovres (adrds) [xivioers] pndé yépas pids. ijépa seems here 
to mean, not day as opposed to night, but a space of twenty- 
’ four hours. 

It is necessary to write either (ras) xuyjoets or abrds; and the 
repetition of ras xurjres would be clumsy. 

dya0ss Gy & Byproupyds . . . emoinoe tov Grvov, Is this the 
‘ Maker of the everlasting bodies’, or the ‘ Maker of mortal bodies’ ? 
Probably the former. The body of this or that individual man 
has been made by the subordinate Demiurgus; but sleep is a 
force that works in all human and animal bodies alike; and in the 
language of Zxc. III it might be said that, though év cwpar, it is 
itself dowparos and d6dvatos. The ‘ making’ of sleep really means 
the making of a law that all human and animal bodies shall be 
recuperated by a certain process ; and the making of such general 
laws may very well be ascribed to the supreme God. Sleep is often 
personified ; and "Yzvos, regarded as a person, might be classed 
among the gods whom the supreme God has made. The writer 
of Zxc. V does not personify it; but he speaks of it as if it 
were a substantive thing, and puts it on a level with yuyy. 

dyabos dv 6 Sypwovpyds is a reminiscence of Pl. Zim. 29%, 
ayabos jv x.7.2. 

éx’ iodrntos éragev éxarépw xpdvoy (éxdotw xpdvy MSS.). The 
writer does not mean to say that men sleep exactly half their 
time, but merely that, night being the time appointed for sleep, 
and day for movement, the nights are on the average equal to the 
days in length. 

[paddov 8é ty dvawavAy Aelova (xpdvov erage)’, This is 
obviously untrue :—[unless dvdravAa be understood as ‘rest from 
labour’. ] 

§ 6. Kabdrep yap ¥ Wuxh Kwioeds éorw évepyntixy (évépyera MSS.), 
tov adrév tpéwov (6 dmvos . ..). In contrast to ) YryH Kunjoeus, 
the author must have written 6 tvos followed by some genitive 
(dvamravAys ?). 

dveois yap [kat &peais| eore ray ouvSérwv tay pedav!, roy ow dérwr 
peAGy (P) is meaningless; and rév cvvdéopwv would not give a 
satisfactory sense. The bonds by which the body is held together 
are not relaxed in sleep. It might perhaps be said that the bonds 
by which the soul and the body are bound to one another are 
relaxed in sleep (cf. Corp. I. 1), and that it is in consequence 
of this relaxation that the soul no longer works bodily xuwyoes 





362 STOBAEI HERMETICA 


when the man is asleep ; but if that was the meaning, the words by 
which it was expressed are lost. 

dveois occurs in connexion with sleep in Aetius, Diels Doxogr. 
p. 436: of Srwckol, tov pév vrvov yiverbau dvérer Tod alaOyriKod 
avetparos. (Cf. Arist. De somno 454 b 10: 4 tmvos rod aicOnrixod 
popiov early olov Seopds Kai dxwyota ris.) But the writer of Zxc. V 
does not speak of afo@yo1s; he describes sleep as a suspension of 
movement, not of sensation or consciousness. 

§ 7. nal owley evepyet, cwparowoidy thy éreacedoicay tdny, 
This is a second function of sleep, distinct from that of relieving 
the strain of xivyows. The two might be connected, by saying 
that «évyovs expends the material substance of the body, and that 
sleep is therefore needed to replace the matter expended ; but the 
writer has not thus connected them. 

For the notion that nutriment is distributed within the body 
and worked into its structure by (or during) sleep, cf. Arist. De 
somno 454 32: 1d epyov 7d abrod moved 7d Operrixov pdpiov ev TO 
xabevSew paddov i) év 7 eypyyopévac’ rpéderat yap Kal abferat (7d cpa) 
tore paddov. Aristotle also says (7. 456 b 24) that pddiora ylvovrat 
tarvot ard THs Tpopys. 

(rots) doréors kai puedois, There is no apparent reason why the 
marrow, rather than any other parts of the body, should be said 
to be made of earth or fed with earth ; and on the other hand, some 
mention of the flesh seems almost necessary. If the author wrote 
por (muscles), this might easily be altered into pvedois, which would 
be suggested by doréors. 

av 82 dpa ois vedpors [kal dei]. According to a theory 
originated by Erasistratus (see Corp. X. 11), the veipa are pipes 
through which flow streams of pmewma; and as pneuma consists 
of warm air, it might be thought that the air which enters the 
body passes into the veipa, and serves as nutriment to the vital 
pneuma contained in them. In place of ¢Aeyi, we might have 
expected dprypias ; for the arteries also were commonly supposed 
to contain air or pnewma. <Aetius (Diels Doxogr. p. 436) reports 
Diogenes (which Diogenes?) as saying that the $d¢Bes contain 
air as well as blood; but that is hardly enough to account for 
the mention. of them in Zxc. V. 7; and it seems best to bracket 
kat predi. 

1 8& wip TH Space. It is assumed that the eyes contain fire, — 
or consist partly of fire. Cf. the description of the process of 








EXCERPT V: 7 363 


yision in Pl. Zim, 458 ff., where it is said that the eyes contain 
fire, which emits streams of light. Arist. De sensu 437b 11: 
a ye wip iv (} dys), Kabdrep “EpredoxAjs dyot cal ev rd Tipsalw 
yeyparrat, kal ovvéBouwwe 76 Spay eéidvros dowep ek Aapwrhpos Tov 
gurtds, KT. Empedocles, fr. 84 Diels, compares the eye to a 
lighted lantern, and speaks of the pujveyéw eepypévoy arptyov wip 
which it contains, 


EXCERPT VI 


This Zide//us gives a description of the position and functions of 
the star-gods called Decdéni; to which are added some statements 
about other stars, and about meteors and comets. It is a sequel to 
an earlier dialogue, in which an account of the Zodiac and the 
planets had been given; and a knowledge of the contents of that 
earlier document is presupposed. 

In £xe. VI we have the outlines of a system according to which 
the thirty-six Decani are (under God supreme and incorporeal) the 
chief powers by which the universe is governed. They discharge 
collectively that function of ‘second God’ and ruler of the Kosmos, 
which in some Hermetica (e.g. in Corp, XV1) is assigned to the Sun. 
The system set forth in this document includes some elements of 
recent origin; the Graeco-Egyptian theory of the Zodiac and the 
planet-spheres appears in it ; and though the writer himself is not an 
astrologer, he has been influenced by astrological conceptions ;! 
but there can be little doubt that his doctrine is, in its groundwork, 
a survival of one of the many religions of Pharaonic Egypt. 

The conception of the dexavof/* was of Egyptian origin. The 
Egyptian priests, under the native dynasties, and before the importa- 
tion into Egypt of the astronomy and astral religion of Babylonia 
(which seems to have taken place for the most part during the 
Persian dominion, from 525 B.c. onward), had already been accus- 
tomed to observe the heavens, and had constructed a list of 
conspicuous stars or star-groups, each of which they regarded as 
the embodiment or domicile of a special deity. The name by 
which these deities were collectively denoted in the Egyptian 
language has not been ascertained; but we may call them ‘the 


1 E, g. the phrase cao\uxd droreAéopara (§ 16) is a technical term of astrology. 

2 On the Decani, see Bouché-Leclercq (L’astrologie grecgue pp. 215-235), who 
refers to Lepsius, Aiulettung sur Chronologie der Aegypler, 1848, and Virugsch, 
Thesaurus Inser. Aeg, I (Astron, und astrol, Inschr.) 1883, 


364 STOBAEI HERMETICA 


stellar gods’! Egyptian observers had in early ages noted the 
regularity of the variations in the relative position of the sun and the 
fixed stars; they knew (as the Greeks, in and before the time of 
Hesiod, also knew) that if you observe the eastern or western horizon 
shortly after sunset or before sunrise, you will, as the year advances, 
see different star-groups there, in a fixed order of succession ; and 
they had long recorded the results of such observations ; but they 
had not yet marked out the zodiacal circle, by which the sun’s 
annual course among the stars was represented in later times.’ 
They thought of the sun’s path rather as a broad equatorial zone, 
(the xtertropical zone, as we might call it,) within which he moves 


1 When Aeschylus (Agam. 5) made his Watchman speak of robs pépovras xeipa 
nat 0épos er | Aapnpods Svvaaras, éumperovras aldépt, his notions about the stars 
were not very different from those which had long been current in Egypt, though 
his knowledge of their movements was, no doubt, less detailed. The ‘stellar gods’ 
of the Egyptians are Aapmpot duvdorat. 

2 The ‘ zodiacal circle’, or ecliptic, is a circle described on the surface of the 
revolving star-sphere, cutting the equator obliquely at two opposite points, and 
touching both tropics. Its demarcation presupposes the resolution of the sun’s 
apparent movement into two distinct movements, viz. (1) the daily movement of 
sun and stars alike round the earth, and (2) the sun’s annual movement relatively 
to the fixed stars. The zodiacal circle represents the latter movement in separation 
from the former. This mode of representing the sun’s movement is said to have 
been known to Greek thinkers in the sixth century B.c. ; Pliny Wat. hist. 2. 31: 
‘ Obliquitatem (signiferi, i. e. of the Zodiac) intellexisse . . . Anaximander Milesius 
traditur primus, Olympiade quinquagesima octava (548-545 B.C.), signa deinde in 
eo Cleostratus (circ. 520 B.C.), et prima Arietis et Sagittarii.’ See Z: H. S. 1919. 

The Greeks must have got the conception of the zodiacal circle from Babylonian 
astronomers, either directly or through Egyptian intermediaries, Jastrow, Kédigious 
belief in Babylonia and Assyria, pp. 228-230: ‘ The ecliptic, known as the ‘ path- 
way of the sun’, was divided (by the Babylonians and Assyrians) into three 
sections... .. The stars near the ecliptic were combined into groups, and designa- 
tions more or less fanciful were given to them. In this way, twelve such groups 
were ee distinguished, corresponding to our constellations of the Zodiac; 
though , , . there are no indications that the Babylonians or the Assyrians divided 
the ecliptic into twelve equal divisions of 30° each,... It appears that up to 
¢. 1000 B.C,, only four or five constellations in the Zodiac were distinguished, and 
we must descend to the Persian period before we find the full number twelve marked 
out along the ecliptic.’ Cumont, Astronomy and religion among the Greeks and 
Romans, p. 11, mentions a Babylonian tablet, dated 523 B.c., which ‘ shows’, he 
says, ‘the astonishing advance (in astronomy) made (by the Babylonians) since the 
fall of Assyria (625 B.c.). Here for the first time we find the relative positions of 
the sun and moon calculated in advance ; we find, noted with their precise dates, 
the conjunctions of the moon with the planets and of the planets with each other, 
and their situation in the signs of the Zodiac, which here appears definitely 
established.’ 

The pictures of men, beasts, and inanimate things, which Babylonians and 
Egyptians drew on their celestial globes to represent the signs of the Zodiac and 
other constellations, were taken over, with some changes, by the Greeks. Jastrow, 
op. cit., p. 230, says ‘we have ram, twins, lion, crab, scorpion, archer, and fishes, 
in Babylonian-Assyrian astrology. In place of the virgin, we have a constellation 
designated as ‘plant-growth’; instead of the bull, a spear; the remainder (of the 
twelve Zodia) are still in doubt.’ 








EXCERPT VI 365 


in his daily journey from East to West, travelling at a pace not quite 
so fast as that of the fixed stars, and shifting his course northward or 
southward according to the season of the year. And any conspicuous 
star-group, the nightly circuit of which lies within this same zone, and 
which consequently must, on account of the difference of pace, be in 
proximity to the sun at some stage in the yearly movement, was 
qualified for enrolment in the list of stellar gods. 

Nine lists of these gods are extant in Egyptian documents, ranging 
in date from the fourteenth to the fourth century B.c.?_ They include 
twenty distinct constellations ; and as some of these constellations 
are subdivided into two or more parts, and each part is treated as a 
distinct stellar god,* the number of stellar gods whose names are 
recorded amounts to forty. 

The Egyptian doctrine of stellar gods no doubt included some 
theory as to their influence on terrestrial things. It may have been 
held that the particular stellar god who rose at sunset,—or rather, 
who was nearest to the eastern horizon when the stars first became 
visible after sunset,—was dominant for the time being ; and it seems 
that in some such way as this the year was parted out among the 
stellar gods, each of them in turn being chronocrator* for a space of 
nearly ten days on the average. Or again, it may have been thought 


1 This agrees in substance with Bouché-Leclercq’s explanation, if I understand 
him rightly. But he is surely mistaken (p. 220) in connecting the theory of stellar 
ods with the fact that ‘les Egyptiens, des le temps des Pharaons, avaient semé le 
ong de /a route diurne et nocturne du Soleil toute espéce de génies, qui lui dispu- 
taient pour ainsi dire la maitrise du temps, de qui il obtenait le passage au moyen 
de charmes magiques, et qui, lui couché, régnaient enfin 4 sa place sur le monde’. 
During a given day and night, the sun traverses a complete circle of the celestial 
sphere; and during the whole of that day and night,—and indeed, during ten 
successive days and nights, or something like that number,—he is in company with 
one and the same stellar god, who travels with him. It would be easier to imagine 
the stellar gods as successive escorts of the travelling Sun,—each of them taking 
his turn of duty for ten days and nights together, and then going on ahead and 
giving place to another who comes up from behind,--than as stationary residents 
on the Sun’s route, who dispute his ‘daily and nightly’ passage. Daemons who 
stand fast while the Sun moves in his daily circuit must be daemons of earth, and 
not of sky, 

® There are also some lists of later date. The several lists differ in some details. 

5 E. g. in the constellation called Kenmut, there is one stellar god named Point 
of Kenmut, and another named Wavel of Kenmut, as well as one named Kenmut. 
(is each of these a single star, or a small group of stars ?) 

* The notion of xpovoxparopes,—i.e. the notion that each division of time is 
presided over by its own special deity,—was indigenous in Egypt (Bouché-Leclercq, 
P. 220). One of its many applications has survived in our names of the days of the 
week, which came from Egypt (Dio Cass, 37. 18). The assignment of the days to 
the seven planets in a fixed order is due to an artificial combination; but the 
hapa of assigning divisions of time to chronocratores, of which this is one of the 

ter instances, must have arisen out of actual observation of the positions of certain 
heavenly bodies, such as the ‘stellar gods’, at certain times. 


366 STOBAEI HERMETICA 


that the issue of events was dependent on the action of the stellar 
god who rose at or near the critical moment.’ Such notions, if they 
already existed in Pharaonic times, would afford a basis on which a 
system of astrology (i.e. a method of predicting future events from 
an observed position of the stars) could easily be built up ; but there 
seems to be no evidence that astrology of any sort was practised in 
Egypt? before the time of the Persian dominion,* when it was imported 
from Babylonia. 

The development of a more precise astronomy by Greeks and 
Egyptians together, which began in the fourth century 8.c., led to 
some changes in the doctrine of the stellar gods. The list of these 
deities was revised ; their number was fixed at thirty-six, and a space 
of exactly ten days was assigned to each.‘ Moreover, the zodiacal 
circle having now been accurately determined, and divided into 
twelve ‘Signs’ or parts of equal length, corresponding to the twelve 
months of the year, the further step was taken of assigning to each of 
the thirty-six stellar gods as his domicile one-third of a sign, i.e. ten 
of the 360 degrees of the whole circle. 

To these thirty-six stellar gods the Greeks gave the name Sexavoi.” 
The origin of this word is uncertain. It was used also in the sense 


1 When the number of the stellar gods came to be fixed at thirty-six, each of 
— would in this sense preside over a space of forty minutes in every twenty-four 

ours, 

2 F, Boll, Sphaera, p. 372: ‘ Dass die Astrologic im alten Aegypten unbekannt 
war und erst in spaterer Zeit aus Babylonien dorthin kam, ist seit Letronne eine 
ausgemachte Thatsache.’ 

5In the time of Herodotus, astrology was already in existence in Egypt. Hdt. 2, 
82: ‘ The Egyptians have likewise discovered to which of the gods each month and 
day belongs,’ (this is the system of chronocratores,) ‘and what a man born on a 
given day will meet with in the course of his life, what will be his manner of death, 
and what sort of man he will be.’ I.e. in the fifth century B.C. there were people 
in Egypt who held not only that the chvonocrator in power on the day of a man’s — 
birth determines the whole course of his life, but also that this deity works accord- 
ing to fixed laws, and that the laws of his working are known to men, who can 
thereby predict the future. This is astrology; though it is still a simple and 
rudimentary kind of astrology that Herodotus describes. 

4 Thirty-six periods of ten days each make 360 days. ‘The five (or more exactly, 
51) epagomenal days which completed the year were disposed of by some makeshift. 

5 The word Sexavés was used in the astrological writings ascribed to Nechepso 
and Petosiris, and in those of the astrologer Teucer of Babylon. The date of — 
‘Nechepso and Petosiris’, the primary authority for all subsequent Graeco-Egyptian 
astrology,—or at least, the date of one of the books which passed under that name, 
—has been fixed at about 10 B.c. (Cumont, in C/o Bd, IX, Heft 3, 1909; Boll, 
in Catal. Codd, Astrolog. Graec. VII); but the original work may very likely have 
been subsequently expanded by additions, of various and undeterminable dates, 
which were ascribed to the same authors. Teucer of Babylon (who, despite his 
name, must have lived and worked in Egypt,) wrote ‘ certainly not later than the 
first century B,c.’ (Boll, Sphaera, p. 8.) y know of no earlier instance of Sexavés: 
in the astral sense, 








EXCERPT VI 367 


of ‘a commander of ten men’;' and no doubt, when applied to the 
stellar gods, it was understood to mean ‘a chief of ten’,? i.e. one 
who presides over ten days of the year, or ten degrees of the 
zodiacal circle.’ But its formation is without parallel in Greek ; 
and it seems probable that it was borrowed from some Oriental 
language, but somewhat altered to assimilate it to the Greek déxa.* 
The old Egyptian system of stellar gods did not, however, adjust 
itself easily to the new zodiacal theory ; for some of the stars or 
star-groups included in the list were situated at a considerable distance 
north or south of the zodiacal circle, so that it was necessary to 
assume that the stellar god was operative in one place (viz. in 
acertain subdivision of the Zodiac) while he was visibly present in 
another. Astronomers in general, and many astrologers, ignored the 
Decani; Ptolemy, for instance, in his work on astrology (about 
A.D. 140), pays no attention to them; and those astrologers who 
made use of them dealt with them in various ways. One school of 


' Sexaveds, signifying a man of a certain military grade, occurs in a Ptolemaic 
document of 259 B.C. (Grenfell and Hunt, Hibeh Papyri P. 1, 1906, n. 96, 
pp- 266-269). Bouché-Leclereq, Hist. des Lagides, IV, p. 48, mentions dexavés or 
dexavieds as a grade in the Egyptian cavalry, referring to Tet. Pag. n. 251, and 
Hibeh Pap. nn. 30, 81, 90-91, 96, 103. In an Alexandrian inscription of the 
Roman period, the word dexavoi is sree to naval officers (Otto, Priester und 
Fempel in-hellen, Aeg., p. 46); and in the accounts of a temple in the Fayum (7.) 
there is mention of ro dexanedv r&v TAofay, which appears to be an impost paid to 
BSexavoi who were officers of the river-police. 

® Tamblichus, as reported by Proclus in Zim. 5. 299 E, spoke of certain odpavtor 
Geoi whom he called of 2¢ wat rpidxovta dexaddpya; i.e, he used the word bexabdpyat 
as a substitute for Sexavoi. 

® It might be taken to mean ‘an officer in command of ten Liurgi’, if the 
Liturgi were reckoned to be 360 in number. The Pastis Sophia comes very near to 
that reckoning ; for it says that there are 365 Liturgi. See note on Exc. VI. 12. 

* As a mere guess, the probability of which it is for experts in Aryan philology 
to estimate, I would suggest that dexavés may perhaps be a Greek adaptation of a 
Persian word meaning ‘a chief of ten’, and used in the special sense of a sergeant 
of cavalry or mounted police. ‘Ten’ is dat in modern Persian, dasa in Avestic ; 
and there is an adjectival termination -ava-in Avestic (Brngmann, Comp. Grammar, 
Ing. tr. 1891, I], p. 152); so that an early Persian form of the word might be 
something like dasanas, A Persian military term may very well have been intro- 
duced into Egypt during the Persian occupation of the country, and may have been 
retained in use there after the Macedonian conquest ; and Alexandrian translators 
of Egyptian astral writings may have considered it a suitable word to describe 
these patrolling officers of the heavenly host, who tomep vAares axpiBeis wai 
émigkono: rod navrds mepiépxovrat TO vuxOnyuépy rd wav, and have under them 
banpéras wal orpariras to execute their orders (Zxc. VI. 6 and 12). 

The Latin decdnus is late; it occurs, in the astral sense, in Firmicus Maternus, 
A.D. 340; in the military sense, in Vegetius, A. b. 386; and in the derived sense 
“a chief of ten monks’ (whence our ‘dean’), in Jerome, c. A.D. 400. Manilius 
(c. A.D. 12) does not use the word; he erhags once used decdnia (neut. plur.), in 
the sense of ‘thirds of a zodiacal sign’ (4. 298); but the verse is hopelessly 
corrupt, Decanus is not a legitimate formation in Latin; (the words most nearly 
analogous are decumanus, septimanus, tertianus, &c., which are derived from the 
ordinals ;) it must have been taken over by the Romans from the Greeks. 


368 STOBAEI HERMETICA 


astrology, which professed to be specially ‘Egyptian’, retained the 
Decani as personal deities, each of whom is operative in a particular 
portion of the Zodiac, three being domiciled in each of the twelve 
‘Signs’.! Other astrologers allowed the personality of the Decani to 
drop out of sight, and used the term merely to signify subdivisions 
of the zodiacal circle. Some assigned the thirty-six subdivisions to 
other astral powers, in substitution for the stellar gods who had been 
their previous occupants. Manilius has a system peculiar to himself, 
by which the thirty-six portions of the Zodiac are assigned to the 
twelve Zodia in succession, as follows :— 


1. Aries, 30° 2. Taurus, 30° 
'. 


EAT LNT OTT ee AN CARER CT 
Aries, 10°| Taurus, 10° Gemini, ro Cancer, 10° | Leo, 10°| Virgo, 10°, 
and so on. ia 
Others assigned the thirty-six subdivisions of the Zodiac to the 
seven planets in succession,—or rather, as they expressed it, to the 
mpdcwra of the planets* (i.e. Decani ‘personating’ planet-gods, 
disguised as planets and operating as such, or planet-gods ‘ persona- 
ting’ Decani),° thus :— 
1. Aries, 30° 2. Taurus, 30° 
co OO 0) OOD 
Mars, 10° | Sun, ro°| Venus, ro° Mercury, 10° | Moon, ro°| Saturn, 10° 
3. Gemini, 30° 4. Cancer, 30° 


—————o ———$S=$_S_<—_—*—_——- 
Jupiter, ro° | Mars, 10° Sun, ro° Venus, r0°| Mercury, 10°| Moon, 10°, 
and so on, 


This last system, in which the decan-subdivisions of the signs 
were occupied by planetary zpécwra, had a long and prosperous 
career, and passed over into Arabic, Persian, and Indian astrology. 

But these vagaries of a pseudo-science do not directly concern us 
here ; for they were confined to professed astrologers, and the writers 
of the religious and philosophic Hermetica held astrology in slight 
esteem. In the belief of the Egyptians in general, the old national — 


1 See Bouché-Leclercq, pp. 229-235 on certain astrological systems described by 
Firmicus (A.D. 340) and Hephaestion (A. D. 379-395)- : 

2 This system also is described by Firmicus. The mpéowma seem to have been 
already known to Teucer, first century B.C. (Bouché-Leclereq, p. 224, n- 3) 

8 Catal. Astrol. Gr., Flor. p. 16: Tept rév As" Bexavéw Kai Toy mapavareAAdvTar 
abrois, nal tivos dorépos (i.e. planet) xaaros (sc. Bexavds) mpdcwmoy péepet. Tb. 
p. 18: Tept ray mpoowmow & énéxovow of ¢' darépes ev rots Tay Cydia dexavois. 

4 There were of course many astrological writings which bore the name of 
Hermes Trismegistus ; but they had little in common with the writings with which 
we are dealing. 





EXCERPT VI 369 


doctrine of stellar gods lived on into the Hellenistic age, little 
affected by the more elaborate systems of astrological experts ; and 
it is on that indigenous doctrine that the conception of the Decans 
as expounded in Zxc. VI is based. 

The notions of Egyptian priests of the Hellenistic period concern- 
ing the stellar gods whom the Greeks called Sexavo/ are illustrated by 
an inscription of Ombos, dated 145-117 B.c. (Bouché-Leclercq, 
p- 222: Brugsch Zhes, Jnscr. Aeg. 1, p. 135): ‘The stellar gods 
shine after the sun. They move ina circle, succeeding one another ; 
they appear after sunset, at their appointed times, according to the 
seasons. O ye souls of the stars of the gods, who rise to promise 
blessings, cause Ptolemy, son of the Sun, to rise, even as you rise 
yourselves.’ A similar inscription at Tentyra (Brugsch 7. p. 138) 
speaks of ‘the sublime and great and very great gods, the protecting 
stars who follow Sothis in the sky, the rising stars who rise in the 
eastern sky, who grant their protection to the deities of Tentyra, the 
messengers of her Majesty (Isis-Hathor), who exterminate all that 
act against their will, and bestow their protection on the city of 
Tentyra.’ From the stress laid on the ‘rising’ of these deities ‘after 
sunset’, it may perhaps be inferred that the stellar god who rose first 
after sunset was chronocrator for the time being, and that in this way 
each of them in turn was dominant for ten days. It is clear that 
the beings invoked in these inscriptions are not merely items in an 
astronomical system, but are personal and potent gods, who act on 
earthly things according to their will. 

The Egyptian, Coptic, and Greek names of the Decani are given 
by Brugsch, of. cit., p. 166. Transliterations of these native names 
occur in Greek and Latin astrological writings. ‘The first Decanus 
of the sign Cancer is Sopdet (the ‘star of Isis’) = 3aés, the 
dog-star. Figures of these gods in bodily form, as imagined by 
Egyptian priests in the first century 4. D., are depicted in the carvings 
of the temple at Tentyra.t Portraits of them in Graeco-Roman style 
‘may be seen in the ‘ Bianchini Planisphere’ (Boll, Sphaera, ch. 12 
and Taf. V), a marble tablet found at Rome, and assigned to 
the second century a.p. The outer ring of the circular diagram 
‘engraved on that tablet contained, when complete, figures of the 
‘thirty-six Decani in human form; and above the head of each 












1 Brugsch, Zhes.1; Boll, Sphaera, ch. 10 and Taf. I-IV. The date of these 
carvings seems to be settled beyond doubt; the circular ‘ Zodiacus’ is of the time 
of Augustus, and the rectangular ‘ Zodiacus’, of the time of Nero, 


2B06+s Bb 


379 STOBAEI HERMETICA 


Decanus is placed the corresponding planetary zpoowror, in the form 
of the bust of a planet-god. 

In the popular beliefs of Egypt in the Graeco-Roman period, 
various departments of the physical world were thought to be 
specially subject to the influences of the Decani; and the estab- 
lished method of distributing divisions of /#me among the members 
ofa class of astral deities, —Decans, Zodia, or Planets, as the case 
might be,—was imitated in other matters also. Thus, a document 
entitled Tod ‘Epyod mpos ’Aokhyiov 4 Acyopévn ‘Tepa BiBdos (Pitra, 
Anal. sacra §. 2, pp. 284-290) assigns to each of the Decans (here | 
represented by the planetary xpécwra under which the original 
stellar gods are disguised) a particular kind of precious stone, and 
a particular kind of plant; the magic properties of the stone or 
plant being supposed to be due to the operation of the astral 
deity to whom it is assigned. And again, the human body was 
parted out among the Decans, each of whom was supposed to 
preside over one particular organ or member, and to be prepared 
to heal disease in it when appealed to in due form. A system 
of this kind was known to Celsus, ¢. a. D. 180 (Origen ¢. Cels. 8, §8): 
dre pay ev rotade pexpt THV aaxiorey éoriv dry dedora é£ovaia, 
pdbor mis dv e dv Abyirrioe éyovow, dre dpa rod dvOpdrov to 
copa 8 Kal tpidxovra dieAnpores Satpoves, 7) Geot Twes aibépwor, es 
rocatra pépn veveynpevor, (oi 8& Kat word aAcious éyovow),) ados” 
GAXo Tt abrod venew eruréraxral. kal Tov Sapdvev icact 7a dvdpara 
emiywpiy pov, Gomep Xvovpijy, cal Xvaxouprjv, kat Kvdr, kat Send 
at Buv, cat "Epov, kai "Epefiov, ai ‘Papavdp, cat ‘Pevavodp,’ doa 
re dAda TH éavtdv yAdooy évopatovor’ Kal di émuxadodryres avre is 
iavrar Tév pepdv Ta wabjpura. The ‘daemons or aetherial gods” 
of whom Celsus speaks are the Egyptian Decans; though he does 
not seem to have been aware that they were stars or star-groups. 
He must have met with some book in which the human body was 
divided into thirty-six parts, and each part was assigned to Ss 
special Decan, who, when invoked by name, would heal disease 
in it. The outlandish forms of the Egyptian god-names vere 


1 ‘The ‘much more numerous’ deitics among whom some people distributed the 
parts of the body were probably the Liturgi. Cf. Pistis Sophia, cap. 132, © 
Schmidt, p. 224, where it is said of the 363 Liturgi by whom the human body ‘ 
fashioned in the womb that ‘each of them fashions one member (éAos) ’. 2 

2 ‘The corresponding Egyptian names in Bouché-Leclercq’s list of Decanl 
(p. 232 f,) are Anum, xar-knum, Smat, Si-ket, Biu, Arat, Hre-ua (according to 
Boll, Sphaera, p. 177, Hrt-tb-uia or Her-ab-ua), Remen-hare. 


































EXCERPT VI 371 


doubtless thought, by the Greeks who used them, to add a magic 
efficacy to the prayer. 

Diodorus, 2. 30. 6, in his description of the astral doctrine 
of ‘the Chaldaeans in Babylon ’, speaks of certain stellar gods called 
Bovdaior Geo/, in whom we may recognize the Egyptian Decani under 
another name. ‘I'he Chaldaeans, he says, ascribe supreme importance 
to the five planet-stars, which they call épyyveis (i. e. interpreters 
of the purposes of the gods). td 8 rij rovrwv opdv Aé€yover 
rerdxOou tpidxovra (2 add. Letronne) dorépas, ods mpocayopetoucr 
Bovdaiovs Geos’ tovrwv Sé rods pev qpyicers rods trtp yiv torovs éopar, 
rors 8 yyioeas trols tro [ri] yay, ra Kar’ dvOpirovs éxurxorodvras! 
dpa Kat Ta Kara Tov oipavov ovpBatvovrat didi 8 juepdv Séxa wep 
mecGar tdv pev dyvw mpos rods Kdtw Kabdmep dyyedov eva Trav 
dorépuv, tav 8 irs yhv mpds tovs dvw azédw épotws va. Over 
these (thirty-six) gods preside (xupéous eva’ act) twelve other gods, 
viz. the twelve Signs of the Zodiac, 

The statement that the Bovdaio. Ocoi ‘are posted Je/ow the course 
of the planets’ must be an error, either of Diodorus himself or of the 
copyists. The true account may have been that these stellar gods 
are posted in the outermost sphere, or (as in Z.vc. VI) immediately 
below it, but are sudject or subordinate to the planets. If so, the 
authority followed by Diodorus differed in this respect from the 
writer of Zxc. VI (who makes the planets subordinate to the Decani), 
and agreed more nearly with the doctrine of planetary zpdcwra 
operative in the Decan-divisions of the Zodiac. 

According to the MSS. the number of the ‘Counsellors’ is 
thirty. But we are afterwards told that ‘every ten days one of 
those above is sent as a messenger to those below’ (i.e. disappears), 
‘and one of those below the earth is sent as a messenger to those 
above’ (i.e. reappears) ; and it clearly follows from this that their 
‘number must be equal to the number of ten-day periods in the year, 
‘ive. that it must be thirty-six,? and consequently, that @ must be 
inserted after rpidxovra.? The ‘messenger sent to those below 
‘the earth’ must be the stellar god who approaches the sun so 


1 In Exc. VI, 6, the Decani are called érisxomo: Tod Tav7ds. 
__? The year may be reckoned for this purpose at 360 days, the five additional 
days being disregarded, 

Boll, Sphaera, p. 337, doubts this, and considers it at least equally probable 
that thirty (the Aapmpod dorépes) is the right number, and that dé«a is a mistake for 
bw5exa. (30X12 = 360.) But the number thirty-six is confirmed by the fact that 
the Bovdator Geo! are said to be subject to the twelve Zodia. Thirty servants could 
Rot be assigned to twelve masters by any symmetrical arrangement, 


Bb2 




































372 STOBAEI HERMETICA 


closely as to become invisible ; and if there were thirty-six of them, 
following one another along the sun’s path, and occupying equal 
spaces, one would thus disappear every ten days. The ‘ messenger 
sent from below’ is the stellar god who becomes yisible again after 
having been for a time obscured by the sun’s light. 

‘ Half of them watch over the regions above the earth, and the 
other half, the regions below the earth’; i.e. a/ any given moment 
of the night, half of the stellar gods are above the horizon, and 
the other half below it. But every forty minutes, one of them sets 
in the west, and another rises in the east; so that in the course 
of the night, all of them are at some time visible, except the 
few (some six at most) who are nearest to the sun during the 
current decad. This must have been the view of Diodorus’ in- 
formant; though it may be doubted whether Diodorus himself 
clearly understood it. 

The gods of the twelve zodiacal Signs are xipix of the thirty-six 
«Counsellors’. This agrees with the Graeco-Egyptian method of - 
distributing the Decans among the Signs, three to each; though it 
differs from the doctrine of Zxc. V1, according to which the Decani 
are masters of all other astral powers. 

On the whole, the ‘Chaldaean’ doctrine of Bovdaior Got described 
by Diodorus so closely resembles the Graeco-Egyptian doctrine of 
Decani, that the two must certainly be connected. There were 
in the time of Diodorus two schools of astrology, one called 
‘ Egyptian ’, and the other ‘Chaldaean’, Both systems were ulti- 
mately based on beliefs and practices which had originated. in 
Babylonia, but had been imported from Babylonia into Egypt ; both 
alike had been developed and elaborated in Ptolemaic Egypt, 
and were in reality Graeco-Egyptian. They agreed in their 
principles, and differed only in details,—chiefly, it seems, in the 

fact that astrologers of the ‘Chaldaean’ school attached more 
importance to the planets, whereas those of the ‘ Egyptian’ school 
attached more importance to the Zodiac and its subdivisions. Now 
Diodorus was in Egypt in 20 B.c.; and he probably got his 
account of the Chaldaean astral system from an astrologer of 
the ‘Chaldaean’ school in Egypt. But even if he got it directly 
or indirectly from Babylonia, it might none the less include 

Egyptian elements ; for by his time the Graeco-Egyptian astrology 

had spread to other countries, and the writings of ‘ Nechepso 

Petosiris’ were doubtless studied in Babylonia as well as in Eg 





























EXCERPT VI: 1,3 373 


There is no reason then to be surprised at finding the Egyptian 
Decani included, under the name of PovAaior Geoé, in a professedly 
‘Chaldaean’ system of this period; and the mention of these 
deities by Diodorus is no proof that the conception of the 
Decani was indigenous in Babylonia. On the other hand, there 
js evidence that this conception, or at least something out of 
which it could be evolved without any large alteration, had existed 
from ancient times in Egypt. 
§ 1. ev Trois eumpoobev yerikots Adyous. Either guspoobev or yerxois 
seems superfluous. If yevxots is sound, it is to be presumed that 
Exc. VI is one of the drefo8uxot Adyou. 
8 kupidraros mdvtwv Adyos kai Kopupatdraros obtos (adrds MS.) dy ein. 
Cf. Corp. XVI. 1a: péyay cor (rotrov) rév Adyov. . . Suereppdpny, 
gdvrov Tov Gov domep Kopupyy Kai trduvnua, Compare also the 
first sentence of Asc/. Lat. and the title TeAeos Adyos borne by the 
Greek original of Asc? Lat. 
od (eb MS.) 8€ ver [odrws', Cf. Corp. 1. 20: odk edyy cor voetv j—- 
otrws may have come either from the preceding ofros, or from the 
following ovrws BovAopail ce voeiv. 
§ 3. CE)papev . . . wepiextixdy tay dmrdvtwv elvar copa, This cdpua 
is the outermost sphere. 

ind S€ tov KdKdoy Tod odparos rourouls] terdx Cat tods tpidkovra ef 
Bexavods, pécous tod (rol) mwavrds xUKAou (kai) Tod LwSiaxod. The 
circle of the weptextixdy cpa could not be called 6 ras «ixAos, ‘the 
whole circle’; but it might be called 6 rod zavrés xvxdos, ‘the circle 
of the universe’. I have therefore written rod (rod) aavrds KixAov. 
According to the cosmology popularized by the Stoics, and com- 
‘monly accepted in the time of the Roman empire, all the fixed stars 
are at the same distance from the earth, and the sphere in which 
they are situated is the outermost sphere of the universe. If that 
view were adopted, it would follow that the Zodiac (a band or zone 
consisting of twelve groups of fixed stars) and the Decans (fixed 
Stars or star-groups in or near the Zodiac) are situated in that same 
‘sphere. But the writer of Zac. VI conceives the structure of the 
universe differently. According to him, there is an outermost sphere 
(70 repucxtixdy ray drdvrwv copa); there is a ‘zodiacal circle’, which 
not situated in the outermost sphere, but is at some distance 
below it (i.e. nearer to the earth); and the Decans float in aether 
below the outermost sphere and above the Zodiac, His descrip- 
tion appears tohe ba = on a diagram drawn on the flat; this may 


374 STOBAEI HERMETICA 


account for the fact that, in speaking of the outermost sphere, he 
uses the word xvxAos, and not odaipa. The diagram which he had 
before him must have represented a section of the universe in the 
plane of the zodiacal circle, and must have been something like that 
which is here appended. He does not mention the obliquity of the 
zodiac, and there is nothing to show that he distinguished the 
‘zodiacal circle’ from the equator. 


5 


A 
xB x 
Cc 
D 






DE, circles of the seven planets 
F, the earth 


In this paragraph the writer indicates the positions of two classes of 
fixed stars, viz. (r) the thirty-six Decans, and (2) the stars of which 
the Zodiac is composed, but says nothing about the position of the 
rest of the fixed stars. Where did he suppose the rest of them to be 
situated? They might conceivably be located (r) in the outermost 
sphere, or (2) in the inner sphere in which the Zodiac lies, or (3) to- 
gether with the Decans, in the space between those two spheres. In 
§ 12, we are told that those fixed stars which are called Liturgi 
épovrar év rH aidépr aiwpovpevor, i.e. doubtless in the same inter 





EXCERPT VI: 4 375 


mediate space in which the Decans are situated ; and it is probable 
that the writer would have said the same of the ‘nameless stars’ 
spoken of in § 14. His view then appears to be that the stars of 
the Zodiac (and possibly some other star-groups) are fixed in a 
certain inner sphere, and that the Decani and Liturgi, and other 
fixed stars also, float in aether in the space between that sphere and 
the outermost sphere; but that no stars are situated in the outer- 
most sphere. 

As to the position of the Great Bear (§ 13), we are told only that 
it is situated xara pévov rod wdiaxod, i.e. near the axis of heaven ; 
and as nothing is said about its distance from the earth, we do not 
know whether the writer located it in the same inner sphere as the 
Zodiac, or in the space between the two spheres. 

In § 17, it seems to be implied that the fixed stars in general are 
divided into two classes, called respectively dorépes and dorpa, and 
that the dorépes float free (év ro otpavg aiwpovpevor), presumably in 
that intermediate space in which the Decans float, whereas the aorpa 
are fixed in a celestial sphere (éyxe(yeva év 7@ oHpatt TOD otpavod), 1. €. 
presumably in that inner sphere in which the Zodiac lies. But there is 
reason to think that § r7 was not written by the author of the /ide//us. 

§ 4. ( . .) Toupdhepopévous toils mhdvnor kal icoduvapeiv 7H tod 
mavrds hopd kata 13 évaddd£ ois érrd!. In the preceding clauses, 
the writer has been speaking of the Aositions of the heavenly bodies ; 
he here goes on to speak of their movements, This distinct topic 
ought to be introduced by a fresh sentence; and it is most likely 
that something has been lost before cvpdepopévors. 

The words cvpdepopevovs . . . Trois érta are unintelligible. 
According to the MS., the writer says that the Decans move together 
with the planets (cupepopevous tots whavyor). But he cannot have 
said that. The wAdvyres (‘wanderers’) are so called just because 
their movements differ from the movement of the fixed stars, among 
which the Decans are included. Perhaps rots wAdvqo. may be 
a misplaced doublet of rots érra below. If we assume that xai 
icoduvopety, as well as rots wAdvyot, has been inserted here by error, 
we get the reading cvpepopevous TH Tot wavtds dope. This reading 
is at any rate less obviously impossible than that of the MS. But 
what is meant by 4 rod wavrés gopd? These words would most 

1 Bouché-Leclereq, Astrol. gv., p, 233, 0. 3, alters Trois wAdvnat into Tols dwAavéat. 


But as the Decans are themselves dwAaveis dorépes, we should rather have expected 
Tos GAAos GmAavéat. 





376 STOBAEI HERMETICA 


naturally mean the movement of the outermost sphere (cf. rod (rot) 
mavrds kixAov in §§ 3 and 4); but perhaps they might also be taken 
to mean the movement of the fixed stars, It might be said with 
truth that the Decans (being themselves fixed stars) move with the 
same velocity as the other fixed stars. Whether the writer held that the 
outermost sphere (which is invisible) moves with the same angular 
velocity as the fixed stars (which are situated below it), we do not 
know ; on that subject he tells us only that the outermost sphere 
moves more swiftly than the planets, and that it would move still 
more swiftly than it does, if it were not held back by the Decans. 

kal tooduvapeiv [Ty Tod mavrés opd] kard 1d évahddg Tos éntd, 
Taken in connexion with the context, these words are inexplicable ; 
but apart from the context, it is possible to make sense of them, 
if we cut out rH rod ravrds dopa, and write cal ivodwvapelv card 
7d évaddaé roils éxrd (or Kal rots rhdvynow ivodvvapely Kara 7d evadAaé), 
The Decans ‘have equal power with the planets by way of inter- 
change’; that is, they take on themselves the functions which 
primarily belong to the planets; they act on sublunar things as 
if they were planets. This may be taken as referring to the 
astrological doctrine of planetary rpécwra. 

The statement that the Decans ‘have equal power with the 
planets’ cannot however have been written by the author of 
Exc. V1; for it is contradicted in § 9, where we are told that the 
planets are subject to the Decans. Moreover, it would be out of 
place in a passage in which the writer is speaking only of the 
movements of the heavenly bodies, and not of their influence on 
terrestrial things, with which he first begins to deal in § 7. It- 
seems then that Kal icodvvapeiv xara 75 evaddaé trois érrd must be 
a marginal note written by some one who was thinking of the 
mpoowra. 

xara Td évadAdé is equivalent to car’ évakAayyv, and means either 
‘ alternately’ or ‘interchangeably ’.* f 

kal Td wey meprextixdy éwéxew odpa,... émomeddew Sé Tods era 
Gaus KUkdovs, The ‘seven other circles’ are the orbits of the 
seven planets; but the orbit of each planet is regarded as a sort 
of revolving wheel-rim in which the planet is fixed, and by which 
the planet is carried round. ‘The writer does not tell us where 


1 Liddell and Scott give ‘ crosswise’ as one of the meanings of évaAAdg, referring 
to Ar. Wud, 983, od icxew 70 705’ EvadAdg, But the word cannot mean ‘at an 
inclination to another thing’, and cannot be intended to refer to the oblique angle 
at which the ‘ zodiacal circle’ or ecliptic cuts the equator, 








EXCERPT VI: 13 377 


the planets are located ; (that must have been explained in the 
earlier dialogue to which he refers in § 2 ;) but it is to be presumed 
that they move in seven concentric circles situated between the 
‘zodiacal circle’ and the earth. 

He knows that the planets travel round the earth more slowly 
than the fixed stars do; and he assumes (on what grounds, I do 
not know,) that the outermost sphere moves more swiftly than 
the planets,—perhaps with the same angular velocity as the fixed 
stars below it. The Decans, who are (subject to the supreme 
God) the rulers of the whole universe, exert a controlling influence 
both on the movement of the outermost sphere above them and on 
the movements of the planets below them, restraining the former, 
and urging on the latter. 

Zoxatov yap av fv [ev] (rd tdxer) tis hopas (rq dopa MS.) adrd 
xa” ard dv (év MS.) [ro mdoxew], The meaning must be, ‘the 
outermost sphere would move with extreme velocity if it were left 
to itself’, i.e. if it were not retarded by the action of the Decans, 
But to express this meaning, it seems necessary to alter év rq dopa 
into 7 rdye rijs popas. The meaningless r@ racyew of the MS, 
may be a misplaced corruption of rd rdxet. 

[Somep ody dvdyxn] [adtods KweicOar kal tod wavrdés|, adrols... 
wavrés has probably come by duplication from (aérots) xuwetrba 
tod (rot) mavrds KvxAov above. I can make nothing of dozep oty 
dvayKy, 

($13. Gmd 82 Todrous gorly 4 Kahoupévy dpxtos x.7.d.)) This 
section is certainly out of place where it stands in the MSS., 
between an account of the Liturgi (§ 12) and a mention of the 
unnamed stars ($14). If it formed part of the document at all, 
the most suitable position for it seems to be that in which I have 
placed it. 

It deals with the movements of the heavenly bodies, which is the 
topic discussed in § 4, The Decans control those movements ; 
and in discharging this function, they employ the Bear as their 
instrument. 

kata pécov tod fwbiaxod, The Bear is situated near the North 
Pole, round which it revolves at a short distance; and the North 
Pole is situated ‘over against the middle of the zodiacal circle’. 
That is to say, the North Pole is at the apex of a cone, the base 
of which is the zodiacal circle. (The obliquity of the ecliptic is 
ignored; or in other words, the zodiacal circle is identified with 


378 STOBAEI HERMETICA 


the equator.) The Decans are ranged in an outer circle concentric 
with the zodiacal circle, and in the same plane with it ; the Bear is 
therefore centrally situated with respect to the Decans, though 
not in the same plane with them ; it is approximately equidistant from 
all of them. 7d rovrovs means ‘subject to the Decans’, not 
‘situated below them in space’. 

Zxouoa dvrifuyov érépay Swép Kepadijs. The érépa (dpxros) is the 
Little Bear. In the Planisphaerium reproduced ‘aus Vaticanus 
gr. 1087’ in Boll, Sphaera, Tafel I, the two Bears are depicted 
moving round the Pole on opposite sides of it, and are so placed 
that, if we assume the Great Bear to be walking on level ground, 
the Little Bear appears to be vertically above the Great Bear 
(itp xedadjjs), with back downward and feet upward. i 

tadrys [per] 4 evépyerd done naddmep dgovos, x.r.d. Cf. Corp. II. 7, 
ras ydp dpxrovs ravras «.t.\., and the passages in the Mithraic 
Apathanatismos (‘ Mithrasliturgie’) which are quoted in vol. ii, p. 97. 

In a magic incantation (Pap. mag. Par, i. 1279), the heading of 
which is dpxruc) (sc. mpagis) mdvra mowica, the Great Bear is 
invoked thus: émixadotpal oe tiv peylorny Sivapw trav & TE 
odpavd (dAdo Thy ev rH dpxrw) txd Kuplov Oeot reraypéryy ext ro 
orpébew Kparard xeupt Tov lepov wddov.' Jb. 1301: dpxre, Gea peyiory, 
dpxovra oipavot, Bacrhevovea wédov, dotépwv treprdry, KadApeyyi 
(-yis?) Ged, croixetov dpOaprov, ovornua Tod mavtds, Tavpeyyis 
dppovia (rod) trav dAwv aeniovw trivGiov,® 4 ext Tod wdAou epeotoca, 
iv 6 Kidptos Geds erakée Kparard xept orpépew tov iepdv wodov. 

évepyovons 82 thy (rod) Lw(o)pdpou KuKxdou (mepipopdy), Is the 
Bear situated in the outermost sphere, or in the inner sphere in 
which the zodiacal circle lies, or (like the Decans) in the space 
between those two spheres? In any case, the meaning is that — 
the Bear, working in subordination to the Decans, moves the frame- 
work in which the fixed stars are contained, and makes it rotate. 
The writer appears to hold that the constellations of the Zodiac, 
though not all the fixed stars, are fastened to this framework, and 
that even those stars which are not fastened to it move together with it. 

1 This appears to be based on a passage in iambic metre: aé thy peyioTny Tov 
ey ovpavG U— | Y—U =U bd 0e08 reraypévay | orpépey Kparacd xepi Tov iepdv 
tt his probably means ‘ bright-shining coadjustment of the ordered group of the 
seven planets’. ‘The seven vowels were often used to represent the seven planets; 
and the seven stars of the Bear are, I think, here identified with the seven planets, 


or assumed to be under the charge of the same star-gods; they are, so to speak, 
mpéowna of the planets, 








EXCERPT VI: 6,8 379 


(. + +) Tapab.8oGe0 rd way tolro dd pev [rijs] vuxrds Hpepa, dnd 
(8) Awépas vexri. What was the substantive to which zapadi8otca 
belonged? Wachsmuth writes rapaddodca(y), making the participle 
agree with ryv tod Cwoddpou xixdov (meprpopdy). But that is not 
quite satisfactory. The immediate cause of the change from night 
to day and from day to night is, not the movement of the Zodiac, 
but the diurnal movement of the sun. It might be said that the 
diurnal movement of the sun is caused by the movement of the 
Zodiac, which carries the sun along with it (the retardation of the 
sun, which is too slight to be perceptible from day to day, being 
neglected); but that could hardly be tacitly assumed. It is 
probable therefore that a passage dealing with the movement 
of the sun (and the other planets) has been lost before zapa- 
dSotca. 

§ 6. otre yap emexduevor tov Spduov orypifoucw ove kwudpevor 
dvarodifovcw. Planets sometimes ‘stand still’ and ‘go backward’ ; 
(see note on Asc/, Lat. I. 13, ‘stationes praefinitas cursu(u)mque 
commutationes’ ;) but none of the fixed stars are subject to these 
way. In this respect then the Decans differ from the planets alone, 
and not from ‘the other stars’ in general; and for that’ reason, 
something like (dmep mdoxovow oi rAdvyrtes) ought to follow after 
avarrobiloucw. 

GAN’ 088 piv “dws tod pwrds tod HAlou oxéwovrat!, dep mécxoucww 
ot Gdhot dotépes. The Decans ‘are not hidden (?) by the light of 
the sun, as the other stars are’. There must be some blunder here. 
No one could be so blind to obvious facts as to suppose that there 
are thirty-six stars or star-groups which remain visible in full daylight. 
The writer ought to have mentioned some rdOos from which the 
Decans are exempt, but to which other fixed stars are subject ; but 
what could that wa@os be? Possibly his view may have been that 
the stars in general act on things below only while they are visible, 
and that their operation is suspended during the daylight, but that 
the Decans, unlike the other stars, act at all times, whether they are 
visible or not, That might be expressed by writing something like 
obdé piv rd rod dwrds Tod Alou cKerdmenci (drocrepodvrar THs 
Suwvdpews), drep tdacxovow of dAdo dorépes. 

mepte(p)xovta. ta vuxOnpépw 13 wav. Each of the Decans, in the 
course of twenty-four hours, traverses a complete circle parallel to 
and not far distant from the equator. 

§ 8. trav (uev ydp) KaBodixds mdvray cupBawdvrwy i evépyera (TH 


380 STOBAEI HERMETICA 


avepyeig MSS.) amd todrav éoriy, Events which affect men in the 
mass are produced by the immediate action of the Decans. It is to 
be inferred from § 9 that the writer added that events which befall an 
individual man are produced by the action of the planets ; but the 
passage containing the latter statement, which must have followed § 8 
and preceded § 9, has disappeared. 

§ g. [Ere re mpds TovTois vdqoor). This appears to be a wrongly 
placed doublet of éri 5% mpds rovrous (Ao) vdnoov in § rr zit, 

od voeis Kal eis Hpas thy (ra MSS.) exetvon pOdvew évépyeray, ro 
in’ (vieis F) adray 4 80 exetvav (évepyoupévnv); Since the planets are 
subject to the Decans, even those events of which the planets are the 
immediate authors (viz. those which befall this or that man as an 
individual) result from the working of the Decans. In such events 
then, the Decans work on us through the planets, which they employ 
as their instruments. 

((§ 11.)) kat els thy yfv omepparifovow [| (évepyetas) twds (k. €, 7 
y. om. &s kadodot tdvas MSS.) . . . (&s) ((kadodow of moddol Saipovas)), 
ravas is not Greek. It might conceivably be a transliteration of some 
Egyptian word ; but it is more likely that the reading of the MSS. is 
a corruption of something written in good Greek. The context 
suggests that the Hermetist is here speaking of daemons; and I 
have accordingly written évepyefas twds . . . &s xadotow of moddol 
Saiuovas. The so-called ‘daemons’ are, as we are told in § 10, 
évépyetar of the Decans, We may suppose that a copyist, having 
twas ras pév before him, overlooked rwds, and began to write Tas 
pév, but having got as far as ra, noticed and corrected his mistake, 
and thus produced rawas ; and that a later transcriber retained the a 
and omitted the «. 

The words kal eis rv yjv seem intended to contrast this mode of 
action of the Decans with their action on the planets. The ‘daemons’ 
operate only in the sublunar world. 

§ 10, Tis (8 dv) adrois ein, & mdtep, 6 Tod odpatos témos; In the 
traditional text, adrois refers to the beings spoken of in § 9, viz. the 
Decans. But Tat could have no reason for asking ‘what is the bodily 
shape of the Decans?’ The Decans are stars or star-groups ; their 
bodies are visible to us, and it was commonly taken as a known fact 
that the bodies of all stars are spherical. On the other hand, the 
question ‘what is the bodily shape of the daemons?’ is one that might 
well be asked; and we find Hermes speaking of the bodies of 
daemons in his reply, It may be considered certain then that atrois 








EXCERPT VI: 9, 11, 10, 12 381 


means Tots daipoow, and consequently, that § ro was preceded by 
some mention of daemons. And as we have concluded that daemons 
were spoken of in § 11, the best way to make sense of the passage is 
to put § 11 before § ro. 

[rovrous ov] {[xahodow of modAot Saipzovas.|] I assume that the 
words xadotow of zoddol da/povas were wrongly transposed to this 
place from the end of § 11, and that, after the transposition had 
taken place, rovrous otv was inserted by way of an endeavour to make 
sense. 

[[odSé yap Tidy ti gor. yévos Td tay Saudver.|] The reply of 
Hermes to Tat’s question cannot have begun with these words. But 
if we put them after wozep jets, and write éxovo. and xwodvra in 
place of éxovres and xivovpevor, we get a perfectly satisfactory sense. 
‘What is the bodily shape of the so-called daemons?’ ‘They have 
no bodies, nor have they souls; ((for they are not a distinct race of 
living beings,)) they are merely forces put in action by the Decans.’ 
(As to évépyetal eion, cf. Corp. XVI. 13: daipovos yap otcia évépyeta.) 

The writer rejects the doctrine, taught by the author of Corp. XVI 
and some of the other Hermetists, that physical processes in the 
sublunar world are worked by personal agents called daemons. The 
only personal agents (other than men and the supreme God) that he 
recognizes are the star-gods; and he refuses to regard as persons the 
évépyeat put forth by the star-gods. His attitude in this respect 
resembles that of the writer of Z-ve, III. 

It is not clear how those évépyea ‘which men call daemons’ are 
to be distinguished from the other évépyera: which have been spoken 
of in §§ 8 and 9. We have been told that there are xafodrxai 
évépyevat, in which the Decans work on the sublunar world directly 
and immediately, and (eid:cal) évépyeva, in which they work by means 
of the planets. It would seem that the évépyesa which men call 
daemons must be another sort of cidixal evépyecor; but what sort? 
The effects of the évépyeas previously spoken of seem to be events in 
the external world, by which men are affected only from without; 
perhaps then the daemon-évépyeva: may be forces which act directly 
and immediately on the man’s own body, and through his body, on 
his soul also, thus influencing his will and actions. On the operation 
of daemons within the human soul, see Corp. IX. 3. 

§ 12. Er Kal (dAdor) ev odpavad hepdpevor dotépes ‘yevvdowv! adrois, 
(ot Kadodpevor) [S1o}Aetroupy(ot), ots Kal Sanpéras Kat orpatuitas 
éxouow. yervaow is meaningless, and must have been wrongly 


382 STOBAEI HERMETICA 


substituted for some other verb, such as dkoAovfotow or reBup- 
xotow. [See Addenda in vol. iv.] 

The word trodctrovpyoi does not occur elsewhere; and the true 
reading is doubtless Aerovpyot. (zo may have resulted from the 
blunder of a copyist who began to write tanpéra: here.) devroupyot 
was a term used to denote certain stars or star-gods subordinate to 
the Decans. On the Liturgi, see Bouché-Leclercq Asi. gr. p. 217. 
As to their number, authorities differ. According to Martianus 
Capella 2. 200, there are seven Liturgi to each Sign of the Zodiac, 
i.e. eighty-four in all,’ According to a system mentioned by 
Firmicus Maternus, there are three Liturgi to each Decan, i. e. nine 
to each Sign, and 108 in all? In the Péstis Sophia (see C. Schmidt, 
Kopt.-gnost. Schriften 1, index, s.v. Xevrovpyés), we are told that there 
are 365 Liturgi (i.e. one for each day of the year), and that they are 
the agents by whom the human body is fashioned in the womb, and 
by whom the process of incarnating human souls is carried out. 

Are the Liturgi of a given Decan identical with the rapavaréAAovres 
of that Decan? (Cf. the title Tept rav Ao’ dexavav kat roy mapava- 
teAdSvtwv abrois, Cat. Cod. Astrol. gr., Flor. p. 16.) The wapavaréd- 
Aovres are conspicuous stars, situated in any part of the celestial 
sphere north or south of the Zodiac, which rise simultaneously with 
a given star in the Zodiac, or with a given subdivision of the Zodiac. 
It would be natural to regard the stars which rise simultaneously with 
a Decan as subordinates employed in executing his commands, 

e& Gv at (kat MSS.) kara tas xdpas pOopat yivovrar tov &\dwy 
epydxov [Lgwv]. The writer's view appears to be that the Liturgi 
execute the will of the Decans by acting on beasts, and thereby 
indirectly affecting the interests of men. A cattle-plague and a swarm 
of locusts would be instances of the action of the Liturgi, These are 
dmroredéopara xafohixd, and in that respect correspond to the Axoé, 
Nowpot, &c., which are attributed to the Decans in § 8. It seems 
strange that the working of the Liturgi should be so narrowly 
limited ; but if the writer ascribed any other function to them, the 
passage in which he did so has been lost. 

It is to be noted that both the Decans and the Liturgi are thought 


1 Those who reckoned them thus can hardly have connected them closely with 
the Decans; for the seven Liturgi could not be symmetrically distributed among 
the three Decans of the Sign. The number seven suggests rather that these people 
considered them to be subordinates of the Planets. 

2 Firm. Mat. Math, 2. 4. 4: ‘Quidam... terna numina decanis singulis 
applicarunt, quos munifices appellandos esse voluerunt, id est liturgos, ita ut per 
signa singula novem possint munifices inveniri, ut ternis munificibus decani singuli 
praeferantur.’ 








EXCERPT VI: 14,15 383 


of chiefly, if not solely, as maleficent. It is true that in § 11 the 
daemon-évépyevae of the Decans are said to be in part owrr7pror, as 
well as in part 6Ac@pudrarac; but the instances given of the xkaGoduxa 
évepyjpara. of Decans and Liturgi are calamities. The stars were 
held to be instruments of civapyévy ; and it was commonly thought 
that eivappeévy is a maleficent power, and that the salvation of man 
consists in escape from civappévy, i.e. from the dominance of astral 
influences. 

‘§ 14. peta 8€ toUrous (radryy MSS.) éorlvy ddAos xopds dotépwr. 
The writer knows that in his own time the whole extent of the sky 
has been mapped out by astronomers, and that every visible star, if 
not distinguished by an individual name, has at least been included 
in. this or that constellation. But he knows that this systematic 
mapping of the stars is recent; and he assumes that, in the time 
of the prehistoric Hermes, most of the constellations were still 
nameless, 

dAAos xopos aotépwv. Cf. Ps.-Plato, Hpin, 982 E: wopeiay 82 Kai 
xopelav wavTwv xopav KadAiorynv Kal peyakorpereotarny XopevovTa Tact 
trois {dou ro d€éov doredciy. Philo frequently uses 4 twv dorépwv 
xope‘a in an astrological connexion (De Adrah. 17. 77). 

According to the MSS., these nameless stars are placed pera 
ravrny, i.e. after the Great Bear. But it seems clear that § 13, in 
which the Bear is spoken of, has been wrongly inserted here, and 
that the mention of the ‘other stars’ (§ 14) ought to follow that of 
the Liturgi (§ 12). If so, the original reading must have been pera 
rovrovs, and rovrovs must have been altered into ravryv after the 
insertion of § 13. 

§ 15. xdrobey 8€ Tis cedqyns cloly Erepor dotépes Oaprot x.T.A. 
These perishable stars are the shooting stars or meteors. Cf. Arist. 
Meteor. 1. 4, 341 b, where they are called of diaSeovres dorépes and of 
doxotvres dorépes Siarrew, and are said to result from dvabupéacis of 
dry vapour from the earth. Aristotle says that xdrw radra ceAjvys 
ytyverar (342 30). See also Sen. Wat. guaest. 1. 1 and 7. 23. 

Tapakohouljpara ovta THs picews. The writer has adopted this 
notion from the Stoics, who made use of the word rapaxodovOnurs in 
their endeavours to show that the existence of noxious things was 
not inconsistent with their belief in the beneficent providence of 
God. Gellius 7. 1. 7: ‘Chrysippus (in libro zepi zpovoias quarto) 
tractat consideratque . . . «i ai trav dvOpuruv voor kara. piow yivovrat, 
id est, (si) natura ipsa rerum, vel providentia quae compagem hanc 


384 STOBAEI HERMETICA 


mundi et genus hominum fecit, morbos quoque et debilitates et — 
aegritudines corporum, quas patiuntur homines, fecerit. Existimat — 
autem non fuisse hoc principale naturae consilium, ut faceret homines 
morbis obnoxios, nunquam enim hoc convenisse naturae auctori 
parentique omnium rerum bonarum. “Sed cum multa” inquit 
*‘atque magna gigneret pareretque aptissima et utilissima, alia 
quoque simul adgnata sunt incommoda, his ipsis, quae faciebat, 
cohaerentia ;” eaque (non) per naturam, sed per sequellas quasdam 
necessarias facta dicit, quod ipse appellat xara rapaxodovOyow.’ Cf. 
M. Aurel. 6. 44: et 88 pi) ¢Bovdevoavro (of Geol) Kar’ idiav wept éuod, 
mepi ye Tov Kowov mdvtws éBovretoayTo, ols Kat’ éraxodovOnow Kai 
tavra oupBaivovra dordlecOat kai orépyev dpetAw. The phrase kar’ 
éraxodovOnow occurs again in a similar connexion in M. Aurel. 
9. 28. 

§ 16. tdv xadoupévev kopntav. Comets are discussed by Aristotle, 
Meteor. 1. 6, 342b, and by Seneca, Wat. guaest. lib. 7. Seneca 
refers to Posidonius on this subject; and it is probable that what 
Posidonius wrote about comets had been transmitted to the writer of 
Exe. VI also. 

tov témov Exouaw bro tov KUKAOY Tov Tod HAlov, This is a vague 
statement ; but the writer’s view appears to be that the comets are 
permanently existing bodies, more or less similar to planets,’ and 
that in ordinary times they are situated a little below (i.e. nearer to 
the earth than) the orbit of the sun (which, according to the 
commonly received opinion, was the fourth of the seven ‘circles 
of the planets’), and so close to the sun itself that the sun’s light 
makes them invisible to us.2- But occasionally one of them sallies 
forth from that position, moves in some direction to a part of the sky 
more remote from the sun, and so becomes visible. After a time, it 
returns to its former position near the sun, and is thenceforth again 
invisible as before (wéAw imd tov KixAov éAOdvres Tod HAlov adavels 
pévovowv). It seems that ‘the circle of the sun’ must here mean the 
sun itself, and not the sun’s orbit; for if the comet were close to 
some part of the sun’s orbit, but distant from the sun, it would not 
be hidden. 


1 Seneca holds this opinion, and maintains it against others who thought otherwise, 

2 Cf. Sen. Nat. guaest. 7. 20. 4: ‘Multos cometas non videmus, quod obscurantur 
radiis solis, quo deficiente quondam cometen adparuisse, quem sol vicinus texerat, 
Posidonius tradit. Saepe autem cum occidit sol, sparsi ignes non procul ab ¢o 
videntur : videlicet ipsa stella (i.e. the head or nucleus of the comet) sole per- 
funditur et ideo adspici non potest, com{et]ae autem (i.e. the tail) radios solis 
effugiunt.’ 





EXCERPT VI: 16-18 385 


ev rh dmdidry avévtes (AARox), GAAou (&AAa MSS.) BE &v 7d Popped 
«td. Cf. Sen. Wat. guaest. 7. 11. 1: ‘illud inprimis praesumendum 
est, cometas non in una parte coeli adspici nec in signifero tantum 
orbe, sed tam in ortu quam in occasu, frequentissime tamen circa 
septemtrionem.’ J. 7. 12. 8: ‘Stellis (i.e. planets) intra signiferum 
cursus est, hunc premunt gyrum: at cometae ubique cernuntur.’ 

§ 17. [dorépes 82 dotpwv Siapopdy Exouow x.7.4.] Cf. Macrobius, 
Comm. in Somn, Scip., 1. 14, 21: nunc uideamus quae sint haec duo 
nomina quorum pariter meminit (Cicero) cum dicit guae sidera et 
stelias uocatis. . . . sunt ste/lae quidem singulares, ut erraticae quinque 
et ceterae quae non admixtae aliis solae feruntur, sidera uero quae 
in aliquod signum stellarum plurium conpositione formantur, ut 
Aries Taurus Andromeda Perseus vel Corona, etquaecumque uariarum 
genera formarum in caelum recepta creduntur, sic et apud Graecos 
dorjp et dorpov diuersa significant et doryjp stella una est, dorpov 
signum stellis coactum, quod nos sidus uocamus.’ Cicero appears to 
owe this distinction to Posidonius; cf. Arius Didymus in Diels, 
Doxogr. p. 466. 

The Hermetist’s words imply that, besides the stars of which 
the dopa (i.e. the known constellations) are composed, there are 
other stars which do not form part of any dorpoy, and that he limits 
the term dorépes to stars of the latter class, His meaning appears 
to be that the stars of which the dorpa consist are firmly fixed in 
a revolving sphere, but the rest of the stars (i.e. those which he calls 
dorépes) float free in aether. 

This limitation of the meaning of dorépes is peculiar to § 17, and 
disagrees with the wider extension of the term in the rest of the 
document. It is therefore probable that § 17 was not written by the 
author of the dialogue. 

§ 18. 6 taidra pi dyvorjoas dxpiBds Suvarat vojoa tiv Oedv, K.7.d, 
What is meant by ratra? If we retain § 17, we are told that he 
who understands the difference between dorépes and dopa is thereby 
enabled to ‘see God’ and attain to bliss ; which is absurd. If we 
cut out § 17, we get the hardly less absurd statement that he who 
knows certain facts about shooting stars and comets is thereby en- 
abled to attain to the same blessed condition. And even if we take 
tara to include the whole contents of the dialogue down to this 
point, the difficulty is not much diminished. It could hardly be 
said that a knowledge of the position of the Decans in the structure 
of the universe, and of their functions in its administration, is enough 
2308-5 Cc 













386 STOBAEI HERMETICA 


to enable a man to ‘see God’. It seems certain therefore that 
something has been lost before § 18. It is possible that this con- 
cluding paragraph (§§ 18, r9) was originally unconnected with §§ 1-17 ; 
it may be a fragment of another document, and may have been 
appended to Zxc. VI by mere accident. 

aSuvarov, & téxvov, Tov év owpatt ToUTOU edTUXfgaL. Cf. Corp. X. 6: 
advvarov ydp, & téxvov, Yuxty drobewOjvar (= rod ayaod 7d KédAos 
Gedoarba) é&v cdpare avOpurov (pévoveray). 

iva exet yevonévn, Smo adrdv (adthy MSS.) e€eor Gedoacbat, 6800 ph 
opody. If a man has rightly trained his soul in this life, it will, when 
released from the body by death, know how to find its way to God, 
(éxet yevouévy means ‘when it bas entered the other world’, i.e. after 
death.) Cf. Zxc. II B. 4: eddapovos reOvyney, Tis Wuxis cov pa 
dyvootans Tod abrny det dvarThvat. 

§ 19. S001 82 dvOpwror pidoowparol iow «7A. See note on Lxe, ITB, 
5 init. (p. 324 above). 

otoy yép got Kdddos, & téxvov, 7d (rod) pire oxfpo pare xpapa 
[pire cGpa] exov(ros). The meaning must have been that ‘that which 
has neither shape nor colour’ (i.e. the incorporeal, which coincides 
with, or at any rate includes, 7d xaddv kai dyaov, the object of the 
beatific vision,) is beautiful in a higher degree than all corporeal 
things.’ For ro pajre oxipa pare xpOpa zxov, cf. Lxc. ILA. 15: tov 
dxpdparoy, tov doxnpdriorov, and Exc. VIII. 2. pare cOpa must 
have been written as an alternative for prjre xpopa. 

Ein 8’ dv 1, & mdrep, xwpls ToUTwy Kaddv 5 xwpis Tovrwr Means Xwpis 
oxnparos kal xpoparos. Tat has not yet grasped the conception of, 
the incorporeal. 

Mévos 6 Geds. It is implied that 70 KoAdv Kal dyabov is identical 
with God. 

paddov 8€ 13 pethdy te dv Tro Oeod 78 Svopa', The writer must 
have meant to say that the thing in question (viz. 75 xwpis OXY pATOS 
kai xpéparos Kadéy) ‘is too great to be called God’. He is obliged 
to use the term 6 Oeds, for want of a better; but he feels that this 
name, like all others, is inadequate to describe the object of his 
aspiration. Cf. Corp. V. 1a: tod Kpetrrovos Oeot dvdparos. 









1 A suitable sense might be got, for instance, by writing (avdp)oov yap (i, @ 
dvépouv TO Tav capdrav Kaddct) éore (7d) KaAXOs TOlD) pATE TXHHA pHTE xpaya 
éxov( ros). 


EXCERPTS VI: 19; VII: 1 387 


EXCERPT VII 


§1. Saipar yép tis peylorn: viz. i Acky. The justice of God is 
already personified as a goddess in Hesiod Of. 256 ff.: 4 8¢ re 
mapbévos éort Aixn, Aus éxyeyavia |... . kat p dadr’ dv tis pv Brawrn 

oxolas dvordtuy, | airixa map Aut warpl xabeLouevn Kpoviwrt | ynpver 
 évOpdmwv ddixwv voor, bpp’ darortoy «t.d. Cf. Pl. Legg. 71 SE: 6 py 
83 Geds, « « - dpxrv Te Kat TeAevTiy Kal péoa Tov dvrov drdvtwv exur, 
eidein mepaiver, kara piow repiropevopevos’ 74 Se det uvérerar dikn, Trav 
drodemopévov Tod Oeiov vdpov tyswpds. Cf. the Orphic line: TO Oe 
Ain rodvrowos épeomero raow dpuyds (Procl. Zn remp. 2. 145. 3 Kroll), 

For da(pww cf. Parmenides, fr, 12 (Diels, Vorsokr. p. 123), ev 88 péow 
rovrwv dainwv i) rdvta KvBepve ; Empedocles, fr. 126 (iid. p. 210). 

réraxtat . . . év péow tod mavrds [ethounévy]., Cf. Parmenides, fr. 
12 above, and Simplicius, Phys. 34.14: ri év péow rdvrov iSpupevny 
. +» daipova riOnow (Tappevidys). Aet. 2. 7. 1 (Doxogr. p. 335): riv 
peoouraray ... ivrwa Kal Saipova kvBepvirw Kal KAydobxov érovopdte 
Aixyy re xal’Avdyxnv. Ancient commentators on Parmenides disputed 
whether Acxy went in the midst with the sun (Procl. Zn Zim. 1. 34. 20 
Diehl) or was stationed at the centre with the Pythagorean ‘Eoria 
(see Simplicius above). If the latter, Adc can hardly be said ‘to go 
to and fro in the centre of the universe’. It seems best therefore to 
bracket ciAovpéry. 

émi rijs Oelas tégews (i) [mpdvora kal] dvdyxy réraxtar. The phrase 
tis Oeias tdgews is explained by what follows in § 2 (as emended): 
kparel tiv Tdéw Tov dvw, ds Oeiwy dvrwv. This shows that # bela rads 
(which is equivalent to 4 rév Oedv rdgis) means the heavenly bodies 
regarded collectively. 

As the Power which watches over the actions of erring men is 
denoted by a single name (8/«y), it may be considered certain that 
the Power contrasted with it (viz. that which presides over the un- 
erring movements of the heavenly bodies) was also denoted by 
a single name, and consequently, that either rpéyo.a or dvé-yen Ought 
to be struck out. The only question is, which of these two words 
we are to retain. In support of dvdyxn may be quoted the analogous 
passage in Asc/, Lat. Ill. 22b: diis (as opposed to erring men) 
+.» ordinem (= rdgw) necessitatis (= dvdyxns) lege conscriptum aeterna 
constituit (deus). 

[raérd exeivors evepyodea.] In place of exefvous, we ought to have 

Cc2 
































388 STOBAEI HERMETICA 


either éxetvaus (se. mpovoia Kal dvdyxy) or exetvy (sc, dvdyKn OF wpe 
But the author cannot have said that the work of dé«y is the s, 
that of dvdyxy (or rpdvoia) ; for he goes on to explain the 
between the function of the one and that of the other. These y 
must therefore be bracketed. p 
§ 2. [2 of kal 13 dvapdprytov (dvapapreiv MSS.) oupBaive.] Th 
is a pointless repetition of what has been said in the preceding 
§ 8. [kat padwora exetvors... émpare? Sixy.] This passa 
rupts the sequence of thought; I therefore take it to be g 
appended by a reader. (If it is not to be rejected al 
would be best to place it after ras éy 7G Biw dpaprias, at the | 
the extract.) The words imply that even those who p 
power of seeing God’ are liable to fall, though less than a 
Geomrixh Sdvapis. Cf. Zxc. I] A. 6: ols édv 6 Oeds Thy Oeor 
Swpyoqra Sivapev. ‘ 
TH (Bev) eipappery Smdxerrar (sc. dvOpumww yévos) 81a ras THs 
evepyeias. The évépyerat rijs yevérews are the forces which 
the process by which a man is born, and which thereby d 
the course of his life,—except so far as he is able to ‘es 
ciuappévn’ in virtue of the divine vots implanted in him. 
to the view which prevailed among the Hermetists, these f 
put in action by the stars. 


EXCERPT VIII 


This extract, as transmitted in the MSS, is utterly meanir 
I have tried to make sense of it by freely altering the 
emendations in detail are open to much doubt; but I 
general meaning of what the author wrote must have been 
is given by this attempt at restoration. 

§ 1. riva eort (ray év piv dowpdrwv) 7a KaTd mpdvoray, 
spoken of throughout Zxc. VIII are neither things in general, r 
corporeal things in general, but incorporeal things ‘in u 
man. (See év jpiv in § 2 init. and § 3 init.) The words: 
dowpdrov are therefore required after réva,—unless indeed 
tion was so clearly implied by the preceding context the 
needless to express it here. 

For the same reason, I have inserted év jyiv in § 4 init. 

§ 2. 7d pév 1 eorl vonrdv (...). The first of the three ki 
corporeal things in us’ is the higher and diviner of the two 





EXCERPTS VII: 2,3; VII: 1-3 389 


which the human soul consists. It is that which, in Pl. Aep., is 
called rd Aoyrrixdv. Platonists more commonly called it the vois. 
But the writer of Zxc. VIII uses neither of these terms; his name 
for it is ) vonri oteva (§ 3 and § 5). 

We are here told that it is voyrév. But for the purpose of dis- 
tinguishing it from the two other kinds of ‘incorporeals in us’, it is 
not enough to say that it is voyrév. This word differs little in 
meaning from dowparov ; and all the three things alike are éodpara. 
The second of the three is the other part of the human soul (rd 
zayrixév); and it could hardly be denied that this also is voyrov ; 
for it is certainly not aic@yrév. It seems probable therefore that 
yoytév was accompanied by some word or phrase, in conjunction 
with which it would be applicable to the vods alone, and not to the 
zabytixdv also. Better sense might be got by writing voyrév (drAGs), 
i.e. ‘voyrév absolutely, or without qualification’. The ra@yriuxdy, 
though it is voyrév, might be said to be less absolutely voyrdv than 
the vots, inasmuch as it is more closely connected with the material 
body. voyrdr (xvpiws) is also possible. 

axpdpatoy, doxnpdnoror, [dowparov), Cf. Hac, ILA. 15: ov 
dxpdparoy, tov doxnpdriorov, and VI. 19. ‘The author cannot have 
said that one of three kinds of incorporeals ‘is incorporeal’ ; I have 
therefore bracketed dowparov. But even when this word is struck out, 
the two other adjectives still present the same sort of difficulty as 
yonrév above. We want marks by which the first kind of dowparov 
is to be distinguished from the other two; but all dowpara alike are 
devoid of colour and shape. If the text is sound, the writer must be 
charged with some confusion of thought in this respect. 

ef adrijs tis mpdrys [Kal] vonris odcias (mpoPeBAnpevoy?), The 
porn vonrh obata is God, or the divine vots, The voyr) oboia in 
man (i.e. the human vois is an emanation from the divine vots, or 
a detached portion (dméppoi or adoracpa) of it. Cf. Adammonis 
Responsum 8. 6 ( Testim.), where it is said that the higher of man’s 
‘two souls’ is ard tot zparou voyrod. 

§ 3. for Bé ev Hpiv Kal (clot 8é Kal ev piv MSS.) ((érepov elbos)) 
(acupdtov, . . .). The words in which the ‘second kind of in- 
corporeal in us’ was described have been lost ; but we can infer from 
the context that it is ro ra@yrixoy pepos Tis Wuxijs, i.e. that part of 
the soul in which the passions reside,—the Ovyrov «dos yuxijs of 
Pl. Zim. (In Pl. Rep., this part of the soul is subdivided into two 
parts, called respectively rd Ovpoedés and rd émOvpyntixov.) The 


390 STOBAEI HERMETICA 


probable sense of the missing words might be given by writing 
ddoyov piv (adrd xa’ ard), Kujoews 8% Aoyuxiis Srodextixdv. This 
part of the soul is in itself irrational, but is capable of being impelled 
or directed by the reason which resides in the vots. Cf Ar. Zzh. 
Nic. 1. 1098. 4 and r103a 1, where 7d Adyov éxov ds emumeBes doy 
(= the second dowparov of Zxc. VIII) is distinguished from 76 Adyov 
zxov kupiws Kat év abr (= the first dowparov of Lxc. VIII). 

It would be possible to get the same meaning in another way, 
and at the same time to utilize the unintelligible words rovrw 
évavria. oxnparéryres, by rewriting the passage thus: ore de &v 
piv Kat Srepov el8os dowpdrwv. (ddoyov piv) roiro, évavriac 8é 
oxnparéryros [rotro] éwodextixdx. ‘It is irrational, but is capable 
of receiving a contrary (i.e. a rational) configuration’, But it 
seems more likely that rovrw évayrias (ai cwparixal?) oxnparo- 
tyres is a fragment of a marginal note suggested by doxy- 
parrrov. 

7s yodv (doyov), Kivodpevov bd Tis vonTis otclas, mpds Tiva 
Aébyov (Kkuvetrar), Cf. 7d 58 dAoyov . . . Kweirar mpds Twa Aeyov in 
§ 6. The raOyrudv, though irrational in itself, is rationally moved 
when it is moved by the vots. But why zpds twa Adyov, and not 
simply mpds Adyov? The addition of twa is perhaps meant to 
signify that the movement of 7d aOyrixdv under the direction of 
the vods is rational i some degree, or in a certain sense, but not 
absolutely ; whereas the action of the vois itself (provided that it 
lias ‘drawn near to God’) is absolutely rational. 

ebOdws petaBddderat eis [| |] [ | [ ] etBwddv [ | 1 Tod vonparos 
tod Sypioupyoo. The Adyos of the human vois coincides with 
God's vénya (i.e. with what is purposed or willed by God); 
consequently, the a@yrixdv, when it is obedient to the vois, 
becomes ‘an image of God’s vénpa’, i.e. a thing fashioned in 
the likeness of God’s purpose, or a reflection of God’s purpose as in 
a mirror. 

§ 4. tpitov 8é éotw (év tpiv) eiS0s dowpdrwv, & mepi td ocopard 
gor cupPeBykds. (Perhaps &@ epi rd capa éore ovp.BeBnxore.?) 
The third kind of dodparov is of a different character from the 
others. The first and second, being parts of the human soul, are 
substances; but déodpara of the third kind are merely attributes 
of the human body, and have no substantive existence. Cf. 
Porphyry, "Agoppat mpos ra voyrd, 19: 9 Tav dowpdrov mpoonyopia 
od xara Kowdryta évds Kal Tabrod yevous mpooyyopertar, Kabdmep 








EXCERPT VIII: 4 391 


ra copara, kata Se Wry THY pos TA THpara orépyow' dev Ta 

airav évra (substances), 7a 5% ot« dvra (not substances) «var 
op kexodvta’. » . Kal Ta pev Kad gaurd. bpeoryxdra, ta 5% GAAwv 
eis 75 elvat Sedpeva. Incorporeal sudstances,—the class to which 
yois and Wvxy belong,—are called by Porphyry ra xa’ abra dodpara 
(i. x ff.), or at dodparot trooracers (26. 11). 

The writer of Zxc. VIII might have expressed his meaning more 
simply by saying that the human body is governed by cinapyévy. 
But instead of this, he prefers to say that the attributes or qualities 
of the human body are xa’ eivopyévny (§ 7), and to class these 
attributes or qualities, together with the two parts of the human 
soul, under the general term déowpara. 

[ré10s, Xpdvos, Kivnots, oxApa, emuddveta, peyefos, eiSos| A few 
lines below, we have a nearly identical list: 7d oxjpa, 4 xpda, 
ni elS0s, 5 Toros, 6 xpovos, 7 Kivnots. In the second list, émpdvea 
and péyeOos are omitted; but as the MSS. give xat 7 émpdvew 
kal To péyeOos a little further on, it seems probable that these 
words originally followed # xivyois in the second list, and have 
been separated from it by error. If so, the only difference between 
the two lists is that ypda is added in the second. 

This string of substantives is evidently meant for a list of 
ovpBeByxora of the human body. It is possible that the author 
gave one list only, and that the other is a misplaced doublet. 
But as he proceeds to divide the cupPeByxdra into two distinct 
classes, it would seem most natural to give instances of each class 
separately. It may therefore be suspected that there were originally 
two distinct lists; that one of them stood where the second list 
now stands, and consisted of instances of iStws wou; that the 
other consisted of instances of the other kind of ocvpP<Byxdra, but 
has been shifted from its proper place; and that the similarity 
of the two lists has been brought about by transcribers who added 
to each of them items which belonged to the other. 

romos and xpovos, as attributes of a human body, must mean the 
position of the body in space and time. Heimarmene has deter- 
mined that my body should come into being at a certain place 
and at a certain time, and should continue to exist for a certain 
time. 

The inclusion of xévyots in the list implies that the movements 
of the human body are determined by Heimarmene. It might be 
objected that some of the movements of the body are voluntary 


— ~~ 


392 STOBAEI HERMETICA 


actions, and that, according to the doctrine of this Excerpt, the 
voluntary actions of a man whose vots is joined to God, and whose 
rabnrixév is obedient to his vovs, ought to be said to be xara 
mpovoiay, and not xaG’ cipappévyy. But at any rate the involuntary 
movements of the body (e.g. the beating of the heart) are xa@’ 
elpappevny. 

What is the difference between oyjpa and cdos? oxijpa 
means ‘bodily shape’; ¢?Sos, in this connexion, perhaps means 
‘visible appearance ’. 

& pev yap adray (sc. tov wept Td copa cupBeByxdtwr) iSiws word, 
rd iSiws mowv is a term employed by the Stoics. (See Zeller, 
Stoics, Engl. tr. pp. roz-10o5; Arnim S/o. vet. Sragm. vol. ii, 
§§ 395-398; Prantl, Gesch. der Logik, vol. i, pp. 428-432.) Itis 
sometimes opposed to rd Kowds mov.’ As used by Stoics, ro idfws 
rouv appears to mean the individual thing, as characterized by 
the permanent and inseparable qualities by which it is distinguished 
from other individuals of the same species. For instance, Socrates, 
regarded as a person, is an idiws roy, and is, as such, contrasted 
with the otcéa (the material substance) of which he consists. 
Socrates gua otcia (a atvberov composed of material elements 
which are in ceaseless flux) is perpetually changing ; but Socrates 
gua idiws wowv continues to be one and the same from his birth 
to his death. 

Sometimes § iS{ws mous, masculine, is used instead of ro idiws 
rogv2 Prantl and Zeller say that in these cases the masculine 


1 Dexippus 2m Cat. 23, 25 Busse (Zeller, Svo. p. 102): éo7 TO broxeipevov 
Birrdv, .. . by wey 7d Aeyspevor mpaHTov troxelpevov, dis # drouos UAn, « « « Sevrepov BE 
imoxeipevov 7d ody (i.e. the thing as characterized by qualities), 8 kowds 7 tbls 
ipiararat’ iwoxelpevoy yap kai 5 xadnos (a kowas mov) wat b Saxpdrns (an lols 
nowy). Syrianus in Arist, Melaph. 852 a 3 (Amnim II, p. 131): the Stoics ToUs 
Kowas nods mpd Tav idiws momy droTierTat. 

2 E, g. Diog. Laert. 7. 137: the Stoics A¢youo uécpov (in one sense) abrdy rov 
bedv, Tov x THs dwdans obctas iSlws woidy, ,.. Kal éore xéapos 6 dias nods THs THY Gov 
obotas. Plut. Comm, not. 36,1077 D: the Stoics say éml puds odaias dvo idiws -yevéc@at 
moots, Kat THY a’Tiy ovciay, Eva mody ldiws Exoveay, émdvros érépov 5éxeoOat (sc. 
tov Erepov), cat Rapvratrey dpolws dpporépovs. (Compare Plut. Comm. not. 44.) 
Chrysippus, as reported in Philo De aefern. mundi 14. 48-51, VI, p. 87 Cohn: 
Bo TetBomoods" (idiws woods Arnim; idfws word Cumont, Cohn) ém ris abrhs obgias 
duhxavoy avorivat, ... do “eldonool (lias mod Cumont : idfes moot Arnim) rept 
Trob abrod broxepevou (7d ard bmoxelpevoy edd.) ob duvar’ eva... ba 7d 
Sivacbat Sto 'eldomotods? (Iie word Cumont) eivac wept 7d adrd bwoneipevor. (On 
this point Plutarch contradicts the author of the De aetern. mundi; one of the two 
must therefore have misunderstood what Chrysippus wrote in the passage to which 
they refer; and it may be suspected that both oft them failed to understand it.) 

See also Posidonius and Mnesarchus af, Stob. 1. 20, 7, vol. i, pp. 177-179 W- 
(Arius Didymus, Diels, Doxogr. p. 462). 





EXCERPT VIII: 4 393 








substantive understood is Adyos ; but in some at least of the in- 
stances given, a satisfactory sense can be got by understanding 
dyOpwros (or, where the thing spoken of is the universe as a whole, 
feds OF Kdop05). 

In most of the instances collected by Zeller 2¢., 1d idiws moidv 
appears to mean, not the quality (or complex of qualities) by 
which the individual thing is characterized,’ but the thing itself 
as characterized by that quality. In Zxc. VIII, on the other hand, 
we are told that ra idiws rout are cvpP_eByxédra belonging to bodies, 
j.e. qualities or attributes of bodies. There are two kinds of 
ovpBeByxdra ; and ra idiws woud are one of the two kinds. It may 
be inferred from the Stoic use of the term that the idtws wou of 
a given man are the qualities by which he is distinguished from all 
other men,—the peculiarities by which his acquaintances recognize 
him when they meet him. 

& 8é Tod odparos(...). The writer must have here described the 
second of the two classes into which he divides the attributes of the 
human body ; but owing to the corruption of the text, we are left in 
‘doubt what this second class was. It might consist of ra xowds roid, 
j.e. qualities possessed by all human bodies in common, e.g. the 
attribute of being situated somewhere or other in space, and that of 
having a shape of a certain type (two legs, &c.). Or on the other 
hand, it might consist of temporary and separable accidents, e. g. 
that of being situated in a certain place at a given moment, or posed 
in a certain attitude; for such accidents might equally well be con- 
trasted with the idfws mou, which persist unchanged throughout the 
man’s life, 

Ta 8€ Tod ouparos ' ibid éort x.7.A.! ‘dia in the sense of ‘ properties’ 
can hardly be right; for ‘ properties of the body’ could not stand in 
contrast to ra iSiws woud, which are themselves properties of this or 
that human body. 

7a, 8¢ Tod ooparos Corresponds to & dé rod cdparos above. In both 
places, it is strange that rod cwparos should occur in connexion with 


are attributes of the human body. 

"78 €oxnpaticpévoy cxfpa Kal Td Kexpwopevoy xpapa [gore Se] kal 7 
pepopdwpévyn popdy.' These phrases are meaningless. Perhaps it 
might be possible to make sense of them by writing 75 (kara tdmov 


1 In Posidonius af. Stob. /.¢., the guadity in this sense is called 4 éxaorov modrns. 
The words are rapapévew ri éxdorov wodryra [ta] and ris yevéoews péxpe TIS 
dvatpéceas. 





the second kind of attributes only, seeing that both kinds alike 


394 STOBAE|L HERMETICA 


kal xpdvov) éoxnparicpévov oxipa x.7.r., and taking this to mean ‘the 
particular shape and colour imposed on the body at a given place 
and time’. If we assume that the second class consists of separable 
accidents, these might serve as instances of such accidents. 

H pepoppopévn poppy may be an alternative for rd éoxypariopevoy 
TXTpOn 

laird éott toutov dpéroxa', This may perhaps be a remnant of 
something like ratra éore (ra rept 7d cOpa ovpBeByxdra’ Tu SE Tips 
Unyijs popia) rovrev apéroxa. I.e. the vots and the wayrixdv have no 
part in the attributes which belong to the body; they are axpapara, 
doynpdriora. 

§ 5. 4 pév odv vonth odcia, mpds (pev) 7 ed yevouévy, k.t.A. The 
first pév points forward to rd 8% dAoyov in § 6; the second peév is 
needed to point forward to izodepOeioa 88 [id] rod Geod. 

éauriis éfouctay éxet. The human vois, if it ‘draws near to God’ 
(who is the source from which it has sprung), is atrefovotos, ‘ self- 
determining’; i.e. in this case it acts with free will, and is not 
subject to compulsion from without. 

kal [rod] ower] (78) érepov (sc. Td madyTiKdy) adthy swlovca. It 
saves itself (from subjection to évdy«y); and in doing so, it also saves 
from that subjection the za6yrixov (which, in this case, is controlled 
and directed by the vots). Thus the soul of the man whose vois has 
drawn near to God is wholly free. 

Tére.6"!, Some connecting word or phrase is needed; but neither 
érevra. nor érei gives a satisfactory connexion. 

adrh [4] (ka®” adrhy) doa bmd dvdyxny obk éor:[y]. In itself, or when it 
is by itself, (i.e. when it is not hampered by the body and the things 
of the body,—cf. afpetra: riv cwparixiy piow below,—) the vois is not 
subject to avéyxy. 

(kai 4 atpects adrijs Kata mpdvora)) ((yivera)). It exerts its own 
will freely ; but in doing so, it acts in accordance with the will of 
God. 

droheupOcioa 82 [id] tod Oeod. If we strike out trd, this means 
literally ‘having lagged behind God’. God goes on his way; the 
human vots, which ought to keep up with him, lags behind, and so 
is separated from him. trodaOeioa id rod Geod would mean ‘ having 
been left behind by God’, and would rather imply that it is God, and 
not man, that is responsible for the separation. 

aipe(iyrar thy cwparixhy pow. The vods chooses the wrong alterna- 
tive ; it sets its affections on r& cwparixd, instead of on ri Oeia. Ch 








EXCERPT VIII: 5-7 395 


Corp. IV. 6b: 880 yep dvrwv tov dvtwv, cdparos Kal dowpdror, év ols 
ry Ovytov Kal 7d Ociov, 7 aipeors Oarépov xaradeirerar TG éXéoOar 

Aopevp. Compare also Corg. I. 14, where the fall of man is 
figuratively described by saying that Anthropos (i.e. the human yois) 
took dicts to wife. 

odrw (rodro MSS.) 8€ (rij) Tod Kécpou (dvdyky Gwominret). The 
paragraph must have ended with something to this effect. Ifa man’s 
yoos ‘chooses the corporeal world’ and rejects the incorporeal, it 
becomes subject to the dvdyxy by which the Kosmos (i.e. the 
corporeal world) is governed. 

§ 6. 7d 8€ Goyor “wav, (rij pev vonry odcia meOdpevoy (?),) xwvetrot 
mpés twa déyor, (...* ph metOdpevov 8€(?),...). The author must 
have here dealt with rd ma@yrixdy as he had previously dealt with the 
vots ; but of the section in which he did so, only a few words remain. 
He told us above that 4% voyri) otcia cdle 7d erepov abr adtovoa" 
and we may infer thence that he here said that, if the rabyrixov is 
obedient to the voids, its action is xara mpdvoay, but that if it is 
disobedient to the vois, its action is kar’ dvdyxny. 

This section must have been followed by another, now lost, in 
which the attributes of the body (ra wept 15 copa ovpBeBynxora) were 
similarly discussed, and shown to be subject to eiwappévy. 

§ 7. Kai 6 pev Adyos kara mpdvovav, Td 8é GAoyoy Kar” dvayeny, 
74 B€ mepi 73 cdpa cupPeByxdra Kab” cipappérny. In these words 
the writer sums up the contents of the three preceding paragraphs 
(§ 5, § 6, and the lost section which followed § 6), and in so doing, 
gives his answer to Tat’s question, riva éort (ray év jpiv dowpdrwv) 
ra Kard, mpdvorav K.7.A. (§ 1). 

6 Adyos Kari wpdvoay is equivalent to 7d mpds Adyov ywspevov 
kara wpdvorav yiverat, The vods acts rps Adyov when it ‘has drawn 
near to God’; and the ra@yrixdv acts xpos Adyov when it is directed 
by a vois which acts zpds \dyov. 

The voids, when it ‘has fallen away from God’, and therefore acts 
dAdyws,—and the wafyridy, when it is not directed by a vois 
which acts rpds Adyov,—are Kar’ dvéyxqv. That is, the man whose 
soul is in this condition is no longer free; having ‘chosen the 
material world’, he is driven by the forces which work in the 
material world. 

To the power which drives him other Hermetists give the name 
cipappévy. But the writer of Zxc. VIII prefers to call it dvd-yxy, 
and restricts the term ¢iyappevy to the force to which ‘the attributes 





396 STOBAEI HERMETICA 


of the human body’ are subject, i.e. that by which the human 
body is governed. As the human body is a part of the material 
world,—and indeed, is that very part of it through which compulsion 
is brought to bear upon the human soul,—it would seem that 
civappévy, in the limited sense in which the word is here used, | 
ought to be regarded as one particular branch or aspect of évdyxn; 
and we might have expected to be told that dvdy«y, when acting 
on the human body, is called ciyapuevy. Yet the writer speaks 
of dvayxn and civappévy as if they were mutually exclusive. 

A different account of the relation between dvdéy«y and cipappévy 
is given in Ase, Lav. IIL. 39: ‘eipappévy rerum omnium initia parit, 
necessitas (dvdyxy) vero cogit ad effectum quae ex illius primordiis 
pendent.’ 


EXCERPT IX 


This passage is an answer to the question (presumably asked by 
Tat in a preceding sentence) ‘has tAy begun to be (yéyovev), 
or is it without beginning (ayévyros)?’ The answer is based on 
the description of the trodoyy in Pl. Zim. 484 ff. The form 
in which the question is stated may perhaps have been suggested 
by the question asked (not about fAy, but about the Kosmos) 
in Pl. Zim. 28B: oxewréov . . . worepov Hv det (6 Kdcpos), yeverews 
apxiv exov ovdepiar, 7 yéyovev, ax dpxns twos dp&dpevos. The 
answer given by the writer of #xc. IX is to the effect that 
try, gua dpophos, Fv dei, Or is &yévynros, but gua pepophupevy yeyover. 

§ 1. kat yéyovey ... Kal (det) fv. If we accept the reading 
of the MSS., we must take jv to mean qv def or pony. Cf. 
Ascl. Lat. I. 14b: Fit (= qv) deus e¢ try.) But it seems better 
to add dei, as in Pl. Zim. 28 B. 

Syn yap dyyetov yeveceds éort, dyyeiov, if sound, is the writer’s 
substitute for Plato’s term trodoxy (Zim. 49 A: mdons eva yeverens — 
trodoxyv a’rnv). The meaning of that term is explained by the 
phrases ro & © éyyryvopeva del Exacta gavralerar (Zin. 49 £), 
4 Ta mévra Sexonern oopata dios (508), TO &y @ yiyverat 70 
yryvopevoy (50C), To Ta mavTa exdeEdpevoy ev aitS yey (50). 
[The editor considers that the metaphor of ‘vessel’ is hardly 
appropriate, and tentatively suggests éxpayetoy (Pl. Zim. 50). But 
TO o7réppa THs yevéoews below suggests the parallels of Plutarch, De Zi, 
392F: Gomep ayyelov pOopis Kai yeverews 5 xpovos; De Defect. orac. 





EXCERPT IX: 1 


Ww 
\o 
~~ 


4238: riv piow dpopev (ra) xa? Exacta yéveow Kal eiSecw olov 

efois 3) Teptxapmias o7épparos wepéxovoay, Where the word means 
the seed-capsule of a plant. Compare évayyeiooréppatos, and see 
‘Kroll, Lehren des Herm. Trism.p. 127, for other examples. See also 
note on dvrpoy in Vol. II. p. 197.] 

rod dyev[y}yrou Kal mpodvtos [rod] Geos. In most instances, we 
have no means of knowing whether a Hermetist wrote dyévvytos 
or éyevyros. But in this passage, the word is associated with yéveots 
and yéyover, not with yevvav ; and for that reason it seems better 
to write dyévqros here, and dyevyoia in § 2. 

The writer appears to have held that the world has had a 
beginning ; (that is implied by the past tenses yéyove and éyévero;) 
and for one who took that view, the statement that God is wpody 
would mean that God was in existence before the world began. 
But those who held, as the Aristotelians and some of the Plato- 
nists did, that the world is without beginning, or in other words, 
that the world-process has been going on from all eternity, 
might still say that God is zpody, meaning that he is prior to 
7a bvra, OY éréxewa Tis odalas, as being the cause or author of 
all that is. 

7d oméppa ody Tihs yeréoews (awd Too Beod) haBoica (AapBdvouca 
MSS.) yéyove. Ay is, as it were, a matrix, in which God, at 
some definite moment in the past, implanted a quickening 
germ, and thereby caused the world to come into being. Cf, Pl. 
Tim. 50D: mpocekdoa mpéret TO piv Sexdpevoy (= rHv tAnv) pytpl, 
7) 8 d0ev rarpi. 

1O oréppa THs yevérews MEANS 7d oréppa Tov -yernoopévwy, the 
germ from which all things were to spring. The writer’s meaning 
would have been more clearly expressed if, instead of saying 7 
thy yéyove, he had said 6 kéopos (or ra Gvra) yéyove, tis UAys 7d 
orépna ard tod Geot AaBovons. 

Kal tpemr) éyévero, Kat iSdas exer (etxe MSS.) (qroddds, rrokihws) 
poppotrocousévy, When Ay first ‘came into being’, (i.e. when 
the world was brought into being by the implanting of the ‘germ’ 
of it in #Ay, or in other words, by the first imposition of forms 
on formless matter,) it came into being as a thing subject to 
change; and so it has ever since been passing through an unin- 
terrupted succession of changes, forms ever fresh and different 
being ceaselessly imposed on it. 

The imperfect eZye is impossible. Meineke and Wachsmuth alter 


* 
» 





398 STOBAEI HERMETICA 


elxe into éoye. But the tense wanted is the present; for the 
process of change is continually going on. And éye is confirmed 
by the following éféoryxe, which ought to have been épeorijxer 
if éoye had preceded. 

épdornxe yap airy tpewopery H (rod bod évépyera). Some feminine 
substantive is needed ; and évépyea is suggested by évepyefas above 
and 76 évepyeio Oar below. 

In order to make sense, I have found it necessary to assume 
three lacunae, viz. (dd rod Geod), (1 woAAds, zouxidws), and (rod 
Geod évépyea). Between the first and the second, there are (in 
my emended text) 40 letters; between the second and the third, 
there are 39 letters. If the archetype was written in lines 
of about 54 letters, all three lacunae together may have been 
caused by a single blot or rent, by which three lines were 
damaged. 

Tas Tis tpomijs i8éas. This must be taken to mean ‘the (various) 
forms which tAy (successively) receives in the course of its continual 
mutation’. But possibly some words which would have made the 
meaning clearer have been lost. 

dyer[y|nota ody ((4)) tis SAys (or possibly 4. ody tH FAy 4?) 
dpoppia fv, yéverts Se Td evepyeiofar (ij Sé yéveois Td evepyeioa 
MSS.). The author might have expressed his meaning more simply 
by writing dyévyros jv % try dpopdos otoa, eyévero SF (or 
yiyveras 82) évepyoupevy (sc. ixd rod Oeot). The past tense jy is 
used, because there is now no matter without form; it was only 
before the beginning of the world that duopdos tAy existed. As 
the substantive yéveows gives no indication of time present or past, 
we are left in doubt whether the writer meant to say that matter 
‘came into being’ by ‘being worked on’ (i.e. by having forms 
imposed on it) at the beginning of the world, or that it 
continually ‘comes into being’ afresh, by having ever fresh forms 
imposed on it. 








EXCERPT X: 1 399 


EXCERPT X 


Wachsmuth thinks that the superscription “Eppod é« 7é» pds Tar, 
which stands at the head of Zxc. X in the MSS., belonged, not to 
this piece, but to a lost ec/oga which preceded it in the Anthologium 
of Stobaeus. The reason which he gives,—namely, that this extract 
‘js so different from the Hermetic writings’,—is not quite conclusive ; 
for we have Hermetica in many different styles. But as the text 
contains no & Tdr or & réxvov, and no indication that the writing 
from which the passage is taken was a dialogue, it is not unlikely 
that Wachsmuth is right, and that Zc. X is not a Hermeticum,—that 
is, that its author did not put his teaching into the mouth of Hermes, 
but spoke in his own person. 

The passage is an extract from a discussion of “me. It deals with 
two distinct questions, viz. (1) Are past time, present time, and future 
time united with one another or separate from one another? Do 
past, present, and future time exist? The first question is discussed 
in §§ 1, 2, 4, 5, and the second in § 3. It is evident therefore that 
§ 3 is out of place ; and it most likely stood where I have put it, 
after § 5. But perhaps something which followed § 5 and preceded 
§ 3 has been lost. 

See Arist. Phys. 4. 10-14, 217 b-224 a, where time is discussed at 
considerable length. Stobaeus (1. 8. 40 e-42) gives, together with 
Herm. Zxc. X, short extracts from Zeno, Apollodorus, Posidonius, 
and Chrysippus on the subject of time. (According to Diels, 
Doxogr. p. 461, Stobaeus took over this group of extracts, with the 
exception of Herm. Zxc. X, from the Epitome of Arius Didymus.) 
The influence of Chrysippus is apparent in the passages from 
Apollodorus and Posidonius; and Zxc. X, whether written by a 
‘Hermetist’ or not, is based on the same Stoic tradition. 

§ 1. odre yap Kad’ gavrovs cio ode cuvivuvraiy Kal wddwv, (Kal) 
curivevtat kal Kad’ éautods cio. Kal’ éavrovs is equivalent to xwpis 
é\\jAwy. The meaning must have been that the three times ‘are 
united’ in one sense or aspect, and ‘are separate’ in another sense 
or aspect; but it is doubtful in what words this was said, A 
satisfactory sense might be got by writing ovre yap x. & iow, d\\a 
ouvjvevrat, Kat rédwv, (od) cvvivevTat, Adda K. € lou. 

Compare Ar. Phys, 2204 4: xal cvvexys te 89 6 xpovos [7G viv? ], 
kai Seppytat kara To viv. Jb. 22210; 7d dé viv éorl ovvéxeia xpdvov 
+. ouvéxer yap Tov xpdvov Tov mapehOdvra Kal éxdpevov. Kal ddws 


400 STOBAEI HERMETICA 


mépas xpdvov éoriv' éoru yap Tod pev dpyy, Tod b& TeAcvTy. «. .  Suauped 
88 Suvdpet. Kat F pev rovotro, del Erepoy 7d viv, 7 SE ovvdel, det 73 adrd, 
5 TO von 7d pev Tod xpdvov Staipeors Kad Svvapuv, 7d 3é wépas ducoiy* 
kat évérns’ gore St raérd Kat kata rabrd H Siaipeois Kal 7) Evwors, 76 F 
elvat ov Tavro. : 

§ 2, dav (wév yap) xupis elvar... SroddBys k.7.A. In §§ 2 and 4, 
the writer deals with the hypothesis that the three times ‘are 
separate’, and gives reasons for saying that they are not separate, 
but united. We must suppose that in § 5 he similarly dealt with the 
hypothesis that the three times ‘are united’, and gave reasons for 
saying that they are not united, but separate; but of that part of his 
argument, only the last clause (ofrw .. . Sveards yiverar. . . (6) xpdvos) 
has been preserved. 

§ 4 ((odx &pa (od yap MSS.) xwpis (é)aurdy eior(y).)) These words, 
where they stand in the MSS., break the connexion between ds 
yiveran and rf ovvexeiq. If we put them here, and alter od ydép into 
otx dpa, they supply just what is wanted to conclude the argument 
which began with édy ywpis var. . . brokdBys in § 2 init. 

§ 5. & ..) obrw [kal ouvexts kat] Bteotds yiverat, els dy Kat 6 adrds, 
(8) xpévos. ‘Time, though it is ‘one and the same’ throughout (as 
has been shown in §§ 2 and 4), is nevertheless Sieords; that is to 
say, time past, time present, and time future ywpis iow (as has been 
shown in the lost part of § 5). 

eis dy kat 6 abrds is equivalent to cvvexis dv; and either kat 
owvexis xa or efs dv Kal 6 aitds must be struck out. For the latter 
phrase, cf. Ar. Phys. 22231: dfAov 8 Sri ds dy 7 Kévqous, ovrw Kat b 
xpovos’ el wav yap } adri) kal pla yiverat “rore', Errau xai xpdvos els Kal 
6 airds, ef Sé pur}, od Eorat. 

((§ g. et Be Set... otdvat Suvdpevos;)) Past time and future time 
are not in existence ; and even present time cannot properly be said 
to be in existence, because the present is a mere point of time, and | 
is no sooner come than gone. Cf. Ar. Phys. 217 b 32: dr pev ov H 
ddus obk Zorw (5 xpdvos) 7) podts Kal duvdpHs, é« TOVEE Tus Uv brorrel= 
ceev. 7d pay yap abrod yéyove Kal otk gore, 75 8 pédAet kal otrw early. 
éx 88 rovrwv Kal 6 daretpos Kal 5 det AapBavdpevos xpdvos ovyxerrac’ TO 
8 ék py dvrov ovyxeipevov ddvvarov dy elvar Skee peréxew otolas. 


1 Sc. of past time and future time. But there seems to be something wrong here, 
The meaning might be made clearer by striking ont wépas dypoiv, or by shifting it, 
One might write, for instance, 7d viv, ((mépas duoiv (dv))), 7d nev rot xpévev 
diaipeots K.&., 7d BF evdrys. 








EXCERPT X: 2,3 401 


Chrysippus (Stob. 1. 8. 42): eupavéorara 8& rotro Aéyer (5 Xp.), dre 
odes ddws éviorarat xpévos’ éret yap eis dretpov f Tomy Tov ov- 
exovrov éori, Kari. ri Sialperw tatryv Kal was xpdvos eis dmretpov exet 
rhy Topaiv, dore pybéva Kar’ drapricpov éverrdvat xpdvov, d\Ad Kara 
mddros MéyeoOar.—pévov 5 brapyew gpyoi (6 Xp.) rov eveotara*! rév 
d@ rapexnpevov Kal tov pédAovra tdeordva pév, Srdpyew 3 ob8apds* 
[ei pay] ds Kat Karnyopypara trdpyew déyerar pdva ra (ev 7 mapovtt) 
ovpBeBnkdra, olov 7d wepurareiv brdpyxe. por dre wepurara, dre d8 KaTa- 
kéxhipat 7 KdOnuar ody trdpxe..” Posidonius (Stob. 1. 8. 42): rod 
xpévov Tov pev evox rapeAnAvOdra, tov Sd péhAovra, Tov 8% wapédvra, bs 
ék twos pépous Tod wapeAnAvOdros Kal Tod péAdNovros wepl Tov Bropuopodv 
abrov ovvérrnKe’ tov 5% diopiopov onpewidy evar. 1d S88 vov Kal Ta 
Spo ev wrdret [xpdvov] Kai odyt Kar’ drapriopov voeiobar. déyeo Oat 
88 75 viv Kal [xara] rov eAdxurrov mpds alcOnow xpdvov (rv) rept tov 
dopiopov Tod pédAovros Kal rapeAnAvOdros cvvictdmevov. Apollodorus® 
(Stob. 1. 8. 42): rd pev yap éorw adrod (sc. rod xpdvov) wapednvObs, 
70 8& éveoryds, rd Se pédAov. eveordvar 58 rov wdvta xpdvov ds Tov 


1 This second statement of Chrysippus is inconsistent with the first, and must 
have occurred in a different connexion, 

2 The teaching of Chrysippus on this subject is criticized by Plutarch, Comm. 
not. 41, 1081 C: mapa tiv evvoidy éort, xpdvov evar péddovTa Kat wapwxnpévor, 
fveorara Be pi civar xpévov, GAAB 7d peev dprs Kal 7d mpeny dperrdva, 7d Se vov 
Baws pydev elvar, wat pay rodro cupBalver roils Srankois EAdXtaTov xXpdbvov ji) 
Gmodcimovat, unde 7d viv dpepes elvar Bovdopévors, dAX’ 6 tu dy Tis cos evegras olnrat 
AaBey BravoetoGat, rovrov 75 piv péddov, 7d 52 wapyxnpévov eva pdoxovaw, Ware 
piney kara 76 viv bropévey, pnde delmecOar pdprov ypdvov mapdyros, dv ds A€yerat 
mapeivat, TovTov 7a pev els Ta péhAovra, TA 8’ eis Ta Tapwxnudva aveynra. dvoly 
obv cupBaive: Oarepov: % 7d “ Hv xpdvos” Kal rd “ ~orar xpovos” TiWevras dvaipeiv 70 
“dant xpdvos”* i tres d71)) €art xpdvos everrynkds ob 7d piv tvaorhee, 7d 8 
évornoerat, «at [fA yey drt] Tov dmdpxovros 7d pe wédAov éari, 7d SF Tapwxnuévor, 

Tod viv TO pev mpdrepov 7d 5 dorepor, Ware viv eva rd pydémn viv, Kal 7d 
Hower vive ove Ear yap viv 7d mapyynpévor, Kai obSémw viv 7d péddOV.. . . TOTO 
“Apxédnuos wev ....* Xpuorrmos 5€, BovAdpevos gudroreqveiv mepi tiv dralpeaw, ev 
piv TG Tept rod wevod Kal dddros rise “7d wey mappynpévov Tod xpdvou kat 7d pwédAov 
obx imdpxaw GAN’ ipearnévar” dna, “ pdvov BE imapyew 7d everrnKbs”* ev 88 TS 
tpiry Kat rerdpr@ Kat méumrp Tept tov pepay rlOqa “ rod éverrnudros xpdvou Td 
pey pédrAoy elvat, 7d 5e mapeAnArvOds.” are cupBaiver 7d imdpxov ait® Tod xpévou 

-biapeiy eis Ta wt) bwdpxovra [rod indpxovros|, padAov BE GAws Tod xpdvou pydy 
dnokimeiv imdpxov, ei 7d everryeds obey Exet pEpos b pa) péAdOV early 4 mapwyxnuéevor. 
The view that time does not exist is expressed as follows by a Platonist in Plut. 
De Ei apud Delph, 19, 392 F: awyrov yap 7, kat xvovpévy cuppavratdspevov GAn, 
wat péov det xat pr} oTéyov, domep dyyeiov pOopas Kal yevécews, 5 ypdvos* of ye Bi) TO 
Bey erera kal 7d mpdrepov, Kal i éorat”’ Aeydpevov kai 7d “-yéyovev”, abrddev 
e€opordynats gare Tod pH bvros* 7d yap [év 7G elvat| 7d pydérw yeyouds, 7) menau- 

‘ov dn Tod elvar, A€yew cs Cari, cimMes Kal dromov. @ St padara Thy vénow 

__ émepeibovres “rod xpévou' (rov xpdvov (iva Aéyouev)?), 7d “ évéarnxe” Kal Td 

_ “mdperte”, [(3) wat 7d viv pOeyysucba,) Todro ab wadw “dvadvdpevos! |dvadud- 

Bevov ?) 6 Adyos dwéAAvow, exOAlBerar (76 viv) els 7d wédAov Kal 7d Tapyyn- 
ov, domep ‘aur! Bovdopévors ideiv, éf dvdryens Sugtdpevov. 

* Doubtless the Stoic Apollodorus who is frequently mentioned by Diog. Laert. 


2806-2 Dd 





402 STOBAEI HERMETICA 


eviavrov eveornxévae Méyopey Kara peilova. meprypapyy.' Kat trdpxew 6 
mas xpévos Aéyerat, ovderds abrot Trav pepdv tardpxovtos dmaprilévrus, 
Pseudo-Archytas (af. Simplic. in Arist. Phys. 186 a (Mullach, 7%. pA, 
Gr. Il. 118.4): 7d 8% aéKa Kat 6 xpdvos Kafddov pev iSiov exer [rd 
dpepts kai] 73 dvumécrarov. 70 yap viv, dpepts édv [kal Aeydpevov], épa 
[kat] voedpevov mapedjAve, Kal ov evr. mapapévov' yuwopevov yap 
owvexs, Twvrd [pev]* ovdéroxa ododerat kar dpiOpoy, Kara. pévrou ye 
7d eos’ 5 yap évertas viv xpdvos [Kal 6 péd\Awv] ob« evte witds 7h 
mpoyeyovort, (odd? 6 péAwy 7G éveotaru')® & pev yap (mpoyeyovis) 
dmoyéyove kai otk tre fry, 6 8 ((éveoraxis)) dpa voevpevos [kat] 
[[eveoraxads]] rapexynxe. Kal obrws del cuvdrret 70 vov,* ovvexOs ado 
kal &AXo yuwspevov Kat Pbeipspevov, Kara pévrou ye TO €ldos TWUTO. . . . 
ture dv & xpdvos owvexys’® ob yap js toa piars® drdKa xpdvos ovK Hs, 
of? xivacts SrdKo. 7d viv ob apis GAN’ del Hs kal éooeirar Kal obdéroxa 
érudeliver Td viv, GAA kal GAA ywdpevor, Kal dpiOud pev arepov, elder 
83 rwvrdv. Siadéper 82 [ypappua] (xpdvos) trav GAduwv ouvéxewy, re Tas 
pev ypappas kat r xwpiw cal 7 rorw To pépea (apa) ipéoraxe, rd de 
xpévw 7a pay yevomeva, epbapra, ra S& yevardpeva [pOapjcerar] (ovrw 
ere ?).7 

tov pev mapeAnduddra xpévov “oixecBat eis 73 pyért [otxecBar ets 7d 
pykér] elvar roGrov!, tov Sé péddovta ph indpxew, & To pydérw 
mapetvat, It would be possible to say oixerOa eis To pa ov, and 
perhaps oly. «is 76 pn elvai, but hardly ox. eis TO pyxere elvar, It 
would be an improvement to write oixerOa,, dsore pyxért var, But 
even this would not be quite satisfactory. It is superfluous to tell us 
that 6 wapeAnAvOas olyera ; and the statement that the past is not in 
existence, being the main point, ought to stand in the principal 
clause, and not merely to be brought in subordinately. It is most 
likely that the writer had in mind the passage of Chrysippus which is 
given by Stobaeus in the words pévoy imdpxew tov éveot&ra, tov Se 
rapwxnpevov kat Tov péddovra Sperrdvar pev, imdpxew 82 ofSapés, and 
by Plutarch in the words 70 piv wapwxnpévoy Tod xpdvou Kal 7d méAov 
obx trdpyew GAN’ tdeoryxévar, pdvov 8 trdpxew To éveotnkds. If so, 


1 Perhaps: éveordvat 88 dv mévra xpdvov ((Aéyouer)), ds (eal) tov évavroy 
eveornnévar [[ ]], xara pelCova meprypaphy (Acyortes). 

2 udy is out of place; we must either strike it out, or write rwurd ((war® &piOpdv)y) 
pay obdéroxa owaderar [[ ]], xara pevror ye 70 elBos (sc, TwvTd adaderat). 

8 Cf. Exc. X. 5. 

“Ch Bxc. X. 4, 6 mapedndv0ds owdarav TO eveoTdrt &.7.A, 

§ Cf, Axe. X. 4. 

6 Is péots right? And if so, what does it mean? 

7 This passage oceurs again, but written in Attic instead of Doric, in Simplicius 
Comm, ad Categ. 130 B. 





EXCERPTS X: 3; XI 403 


he may have written something like rév yév wapeAn\vOéra xpdvov ui) 
Srdpxew dpAov év TO olxer Gas Kal pyxére mapetvat, Tov dé wéAAovra (se. 
py oedpxew Sidov) ev 7G pndérw rapeivar. It seems necessary tc 
insert 5jAov, or something of the sort, before the first év r@ (cf, Xen. 
Cyr, t. 6. 2: Gre of Oeoi.. . wéwroval o,... dpdov... ev ovpaviors 
onueiois). Otherwise, we should have to translate roy 8% wé\dovra. pi) 
indpyew év 73 pndérw rapeivas ‘and that the future is not in existence 
in respect of (or on account of) its not yet being present’; but such a 
use of év would be difficult to justify. 

Ada py dE tov eveorra “oupmapeivat,! gv rH (uh) péverv. ouprapey- 
is probably a corruption of irdpyew ; and I am inclined to think 
that -ac is a remnant of dmaprifévrws, ‘ exactly’ or ‘precisely’, Cf. 
Chrysippus a. Stob.: dere pnbéva xar’ drapriopby éverrdva xpovor, 
ddAa Kara whdros AéyeoGa. Posidonius af, Stob. : 7d 88 viv cat rd Swoua 
éy wAdret [xpdvov] kat ody! Kar” araprucpdy voeieba. Apollodorus ap. 
Stob.: trdpxew 6 was xpdvos Méyerar, oddevds abrod tiv pepav trdp- 
xovtos draprilévrws. 

& pe ((Somhv)) éordvar Suvduevos. This is superfluous, being 
merely a repetition, in other words, of ds ody gornxev, Exwv ob8k 
kévrpov povyy ; but it may nevertheless have been written by the author. 
The argument sounds more effective in Greek than in English, owing 
to the connexion between éveoris and éordvar. 


EXCERPT XI 


In the MSS. of Stobaeus, the document which I have named 
£xc. X1 follows that which I have named Zxc. II B without a break, 
as if it were a part of the same extract from the ‘ Discourses of Hermes 
to Tat’. But the contents of Zxc, XI have nothing to do with 
those of Zxc. IIB; and from internal evidence it may be inferred 
with certainty that the two pieces were originally unconnected, and 
that Zac. XI was once headed by a superscription of its own. It is 
possible that the two documents had already been joined into one 
in the book of ‘Eppod zpos Tar Adyor, before that book came into 
the hands of Stobaeus. But it seems more likely that Stobaeus read 
them in it as two distinct ‘ discourses’, and copied these pieces into his 
Anthologium as two distinct excerpts ; that he wrote a emma (rod airod, 
meaning “Eppod é« r&v mpds Tar) at the head of the second; and that 
this emma was subsequently lost by an error of transcription. 

xc, XI appears to be a complete /ide//us. Its writer makes 

Dd2 





404, STOBAEI HERMETICA 


Hermes say that he has previously given instruction to his son in 
a number of discourses (8:4 wAedvov Adywv, § 3), and that he now 
sums up the teaching of those discourses in the string of brief 
sententiae or aphorisms (xepddraua, §§ r and 3; mepioxai, § 3) which 
we read in § 2, (1)-(48). This implies that the author of Zac. XI 
had in his possession a collection of written ‘Discourses of Hermes 
to Tat’, and that he wrote this /e//us with the intention of placing 
it at the end of that collection, so that readers might find in the 
series of aphorisms contained in it a short and handy summary of 
the doctrines taught in the preceding Adyo.. The senfentiae were no 
doubt meant to be learnt by heart (rovrwy trav Kehadraiwy peprnpevos 
kts, § 3), and to serve as a sort of catechism of the Hermetic 
philosophy. Compare the Epicurean Kvpva dda, in which the 
essentials of the teaching of Epicurus are briefly formulated." 

In §§ 4 and 5, the writer appends a warning with regard to the 
teaching contained in the collection of discourses (obrot oi Adyou, § 4) 
and summarized in the senfentiae. That passage is to be taken as 
meaning that those who are permitted to read this body of Hermetica 
must be on their guard against making known the truths taught in it 
to any except the few who are worthy to receive them. 

Exc. XI must certainly have been the last of a series of ‘ Discourses — 
of Hermes to Tat’; but we do not know what that series was. It 
may have consisted of the whole number of those which were after- 
wards called of yevxol Adyor, or of the earlier of them alone; or 
again, it may have included, together with the yevixoi, some or all of 
the Secfodinot Adyo. (The word 8&e&AGov in §3 is suggestive of — 
ScefoSxol; but this may be merely accidental. Cf. duegeAevoopar in 
§ 1.) If we could identify the sources from which the several 
sententiae were taken, we should have a list of the ‘Eppot mpos Tar 
Aéyor which were known to the writer. But the brevity of the 
aphorisms, and the textual corruption of some of them, make it 
difficult to do this; and while some of the Adyo in question are 
probably to be found among the extant Hermefica, it is to be pre- 
sumed that others have perished. 








EXCERPT XI 405 


By what principles was the writer guided in the arrangement of his 
aphorisms? He certainly had a preference for grouping together 
sententiae which deal with the same topic, and especially those which 
have one or more prominent words in common (é. g. (2)}-(5), SuaAurd 
and aida ccspara ; (8) and (11)-(13), yxy and its functions; (18)-(2r), 
aryabov and Kaxdv ; (25)-(29), otpards and y#). But there are also 
a good many sententiae which have no apparent connexion with those 
adjacent to them; and topics already dealt with present themselves 
again later on. (E.g. duadvrd and aida odpara are spoken of again 
in (32)-(34), and otpavds and yj again (41)-(45).) It is very likely 
that there are some displacements and some interpolations; and if 
we had the document before us in its original form, we might find 
the arrangement of the sezfenfiae somewhat more systematic ; but it 
does not seem probable that there was any continuous sequence of 
thought running through the whole series. Perhaps the author 
after reading the first of the ‘Discourses’ in his collection, wrote 
down ina more or less orderly group the sententiae which it suggested 
to him, and then went on to deal in the same way with each of the 
other ‘ Discourses’ in succession. 

It is to be noted that most of the sententiae have to do with the 
Kosmos alone, and not with the supracosmic God. They speak, for the 
most part, of things visible, not of things invisible ; and the contrast on 
which the writer most strongly insists is not the Platonic contrast be- 
tween thecorporeal (= ra aicOyrd) and the incorporeal (=ra voyrd), but 
that between the two parts of the corporeal world (odpavds and yj, aidia 
copata and duAvta cpara) The writer does not indeed wholly 
ignore the incorporeal; he shows recognition of it in (1) (rd aowpa- 
rov?), (6) and (7) (6 Oeds contrasted with 6 xdécpos), (16) (pdvov rd 
tiowparov dievdés), and (46) (zpévora. distinguished from &vdyxy) ; and 
in the doctrine that the Kosmos, the elements, and the celestial gods 
‘have come into being’ or ‘have been made’, which is implied in 
(5), (27), and (31), the existence of a supracosmic Maker is virtually 
asserted. This is enough to show that the author of the senfen/iae, like 
the Hermetists in general, believed in an incorporeal and supra- 
cosmic God, and was in that fundamental point a true Platonist ; 
but about that part of his belief, he says little. This may be 
accounted for by assuming that he wrote the sendenziae chiefly for the 
use of novices. The pupil must first be taught to understand the 
Kosmos and the things in it; he must learn to despise all that is 
earthly and perishable, and to revere the immortal gods who circle 





406 STOBAEI HERMETICA 


in the material heavens. When that part of his education has been 
completed, he will then be ready to rise above the material Kosmos, 
and draw near to the supracosmic God. See Zxc. II B. 2. 4, where 
a lower and a higher stage of philosophy are distinguished. 

§ 1. (a) Kepadalors mévra (ra Svra MSS.) Srefehedoonar. If we 
retain ri évra, we must translate: ‘I will expound in summary 
sentences the things that are’. But Sceéévac does not suit 
well with év xedadalos ; for it implies ample and detailed rather 
than concise and summary treatment. This difficulty can be 
got rid of by altering ‘ra dvra into mdvro, and taking the 
meaning to be ‘I will go through all (the things that I have 
taught you), summing them up in brief sentences’. Hermes 
intends to give only the main principles of his teaching, and to 
state them concisely (é xe¢adaéors) ; but he will give a// the main 
principles, and in that way he will cover the whole ground (wdvra 
SieeAcvoopat). 

§2(1). wévra Ta odpara (ra Syra MSS.) kwetrat pdvoy 1d 
dodparov (rd ph bv MSS.) dxivnrov, The statement wdévra 7a ovra 
kweirar agrees with (10) as emended (wav 76 dv xuwyrév); but it is 
contradicted by (rr) as emended (od wdvra xwetrac); and it is 
hardly consistent with (37) as emended (rév évrwv Ta pev oodpard 
gor, ra S& «.7.A.). It can be accepted only if we take ra dvra 
to mean corforeal things, and neither to mean nor to include the 
évrws évra of the Platonists. ra dvra is sometimes used by 
Hermetists to denote corporeal things; but what could be meant 
by saying that ‘the non-existent is immovable’? 7d i ov could 
not mean ‘things which exist but are incorporeal’; and unless we 
give it that sense, the second clause is difficult to explain. It 
seems most likely therefore that dvra and jy ov are false readings 
for cdpara and dodparov. (Cf. Corp. XII. i. (fo Tat) 11: wav 
yap 7d Kwodv dodparoy, wav 8& rd Kwovpevov coya. Corp. XI. ii. 
18, as emended: wav capa xwyrév' 70 88 dowparov axivytov.) 
And this is confirmed by the fact that odpara are spoken of in 
the next sententia. If we thus emend the text, sewé. (1), in 
which odpara are distinguished from dowpara, is naturally followed 
by (2)-(5), in which the two kinds of odpara are distinguished 
from one another. 

All bodies are in motion ; even in bodies which are apparently 
motionless for a time, invisible movement is continually going on. 
See Exc, II. (to Tat) 7-10; and cf. Corp. XII. ii. (to Tat) 18: wav 








EXCERPT XI: 1,2 407 


oe tb... 7d by &y Koopy (= av cdpa) Kwotpevov [7 Kara 
paeiwowy } avénow), 

The dodpara here spoken of are chiefly, if not solely, 6 Geds, 
pots, and yxy. Of these, God at least is dxivyros (cf. Corp. V. 
(to Tat) 5, OedoarOar tov adxivyrov (sc. Tov Gedv) bia (ray Kwyrdv) 
xwovpevov) ; it would commonly be said that vois is dxivyros; and 
in Corp. II. (to Asc.) 6b, we are told that yux7 also is dkivyros, 
though the Platonists usually preferred to say that it is deuivyros 
and airoxivyros. Compare Pseudo-Archytas Ilepi dpyav, Stob. 1. 
4t. 5, vol. i, p. 282 W.: voara pév 7a dxivyra, aicbard, 88 ra Kuwedpeva. 

(2) wav cdpa petaoBrntdv’ od wav cpa Siarurdv, This senfentia 
may have been suggested by Zxc. II (to Tat); see especially 
IIA. 13. The bodies which are peraBdAnra but not diadurd are 
ro Gidia. cwpara; i.e. the Kosmos as a whole, the four cosmic 
elements, and the heavenly bodies. Cf. Corg. XVI. (Ascl. to 
Ammon) 9: ravros yap cwparos Siapovy peraBody, Kat tot pev aOave- 
rov adutAvtos, Tod Se Ovyrod pera. diadicews. 

(3) "od wav Ldov Ovnrdvy of wav EGov A@dvarov', The author 
cannot have written such a pointless truism as od wav (Gov a6avarov. 
The first od should be struck out; the form employed was probably 
nav... o8 mav..., as in (2). Ovyrov in the first clause may 
be a corruption of yevyrév ; and we might make sense by writing 
wav Cdov yerntov’ ob wav LGov Ovyrov. (Cf. Corp. IV. (to Tat) 2: 
tov avOpurov, (eixova) Lyou aBavdrov fdov Ovyrdv.) The aida 
owpara are fGa yevnta; for they have been made and endowed 
with life by God. But they are not {ga O@vyta; they will never 
perish, and their life will never cease. 

As sent. (3) stands between and separates two senéentiae in which 
the word S:aAvrov is prominent, it may be suspected that it is out 
of place. If yeryrov is the right word in (3), this sex¢entia might 
very well be followed by (5), which deals with 7d yuvopevor ; 
we should therefore get a better order by interchanging (3) 
and (4). 

(4) povov 7d dbuddutov (7d pévov dperéBAntov MSS.) didior. For 
pévov 76, cf.(1). The writer appears to be talking about bodies, 
and we have just been told that there are no bodies which 
are dyerdBdynra; I have therefore altered dyuerdSAyrov into 
adiddutov. 

(5) Td del ywopevoy dei xai pOeiperar. All diadvTd copara, i.e. 
all earthly organisms (e.g. the human body), dei yivera. This 





408 STOBAEI HERMETICA 


might be taken to mean either that the individual body is con- 
tinually renewed by the absorption of fresh nutriment, or that the 
race is continually renewed by the birth of fresh individuals. But 
where yéveors is going on, ¢Oopd also must be going on; 
the individual body is continually perishing, and the race is 
continually dying in the successive deaths of individuals. 

The interdependence of yéveous and }Oopd is spoken of in Zxxc. I] A, 
(to Tat) 16. Cf. Exc. IV A, (to Tat) 3: dowv piv otv (cuparov) rh 
yevéres POopa eraxoAovbe? x.7.d. 

7d 8é Gmag yevdpevoy (ywépevov MSS.) ofS¢rote pOcipera. This 
is the teaching of Plato’s Zimaews,—at least if the statements of the 
speaker in that dialogue are taken literally, as they were by 
most readers, though some Platonists refused to accept them in 
that sense. The Kosmos yéyove (Zim, 28 C), Or daaé eyévero; 
it was made by God once for all ; but its Maker has decreed that, 
having once come into being, it shall never cease to be. Cf, 
Corp. VIII. (fo Tat) 2, as emended:; (6 xécpos) deifwos Gy, as 
AOovarifopevos ixb diSiov bvros tod warpés. And the same might 
be said of the cosmic elements and the heavenly bodies. Zc. V. 
(to Tat) 1,2: & pay... dypuovpyds tov didiov cwopdrov . .. drag 
Toinoas K.T.A. 

(6) mparov 6 Beds, Sedrepoy & Kdopos, tpitoy 6 advbpwrros. This 
may have been taken from Corp. VIII. (40 Zaft) 2 and 5: patos 
yap mdvrov . .. (6)... Oeds' Sevrepos 8 (6 Kdopos). «+ « 
rd 8& tpirov {[ ]] & dvOpwmros. Cf. Corp. X. (to Tat) 14b 
and 22b, 

(7) 6 xdcpos Sd rev avOpwrov, 6 Be GvOpwmos Bid tov Bedv!, 
Does this mean ‘the Kosmos (was made) for the sake of Man, 
and Man (was made) for the sake of God’? That will not do; 
for itimplies the order ‘God first, Man second, Kosmos third’, 
and is therefore inconsistent with (6). The author probably wrote 
something like & xéopos id rod Oeod (sc. yéyove Or dtomxetrar), 6 SE 
dvOpurros 54 rod Kdopov. God works on the Kosmos directly and 
immediately, but he works on man through the intermediate agency 
of the Kosmos. That would agree with the teaching of the 
Timaeus, according to which the Kosmos was made by God, but 
man (or at least the mortal part of him) was made by ‘the gods 
whom God had made’, i.e. by the cosmic forces. Cf. Corp. X. 
(to Tat) 25: 8 rovrwy ta wévra Swoixetrae trav Svo, Koopou 


agen 


xat dvOpdrrouv, twd St évds tod Oeod (bd 5é Tod évds MSS.) rd. wavra. 





EXCERPT XI: 2 409 


(g) [maea ovcia a0dvatos'] Taca otcia peraBAnty’ (ob waco obcla 
g0cpr4). The only things that are both a@dvara and peraBAnra are 
the é/S.a odpara. The reading of the MSS. could therefore be made 
intelligible only by taking oteia to mean aédov cdpa; but there 
js no authority for such a use of the word. 

If raca. otvia (= ray 76 6v) here means wav oépa, this sententia, in 
the form in which I have rewritten it, is a duplicate of (2). Compare 
also (t7)- 

(10) way 73 Sv Kumrév (Sittév MSS.): od8ev ray dvrwv Eornxev. This 
js, in part, a repetition of sen¢. (1) as given in the MSS. (rdvra ra 
évra xweira.” povov TO pay bv dxivynrov); and it is necessary either to 
alter rd bv... Tav dvrwy into copa... Tov cwpdtwv, as I have there 
altered rd ovra into cujpara, or to assume that 7d dv here means 
cpa. As the difficulty caused by 76 pa) ov in (r) does not arise in 
(10), the traditional text is less open to objection in the latter. 

(11) od mdvra Kivetrar, Tay Se Td KivodpEvoy WuxXy KivELTaL. (od mavra 
uxs Kiveirar, wav 82 by ux xwet MSS.). In the text of the 
MSS., there is an impossible antithesis between rav7a and way 76 ov. 

‘Not all things are moved.’ The Hermetist would presumably have 
said that révra 7d. copara Kwetrat, but ra dowpara, or at any rate some 
of them (e.g. 6 beds and 6 vois), are dxivata. (See (1).) But ob zavra 
xweirat is difficult to reconcile with the preceding sententia (wav 76 bv 
xunrév «.7.A.), which is, verbally at least, contradicted by it; and lam 
inclined to think that the first clause of (11) has been added with a 
yiew to assimilating the form of this sen/entia to that of most of the 
others, and that the author wrote simply wav 16 xwvovpevov Wuy7f xwetrat. 
For this statement, which is ultimately derived from Pl. Phaedrus 
245 C, D (rois dAXows doa. Kwetrat TodTo (sc. } WuxH) THY Kal dpx7 KuW7- 
ews), cf. Corp. II. (to Ascl.) 1, wav 7d Kwotpevov ... Kwetrar. . . bd 
twos, and 7d. 8b, 9. 

(((8) Woxis Td per alcdyr(ix)dv Ovynrdv, 73 S€ AoyiKdy dOdvarov.)) 
This is the doctrine of the Zimaeus. It is only the vots or 
Aoyorixdy (the part of man that has come direct from God) that is 
immortal; the alcOyrixév has come into being together with the 
body, and perishes with the body. 

If we place (8) between (11) and (12), sententia (10)-(13) 
form a connected group, in which each sententia leads on to the 
next by a natural sequence of thought. 

(12) [wav 13 wécxov alcberat'| wav Td aichar)suevov méoxer' (pdvos) 
((6 vous daOjs.)) The statement that ‘everything which is passively 











410 STOBAEI HERMETICA 


affected is sensitive’ could hardly be maintained. A stone rdcye 
when I break it; but most people would not say that a stone 
aicOavera; though it is true that something of the sort seems to be 
asserted in Zxc. III. 17. 

In (15), the MSS. give 6 vois drafys, which is there irrelevant; 
and as éza6sjs may very well stand in contrast to wacxe, and voids to 
aicbynois or 7d aicbavdpevov, it seems most likely that (uovos) 6 vods 
&ma6sjs was the latter part of (12). In Corp. XII. i. (¢o Tat) 11, the 
question whether vots is dmraGijs or maOyrés is discussed ; the con- 
clusion there arrived at appears to be that embodied vois (i. e. the vois 
of a man living upon earth) is ra6yrds, but unembodied vois is arabys. 

aicGouac sometimes occurs, in MSS. at least, as a later form of 
aicOcvopa. We have no means of knowing whether the Hermetist 
used that form or not; but as there would be an advantage in 
distinguishing the present participle (which is required here) from the 
aorist alcOdpevor, it is probable that he wrote aicGavdpevor. 

(13) wav 73 NuTodpevoy Kai WSerar [ } 08 way 73 48dpevov AuTretrar[ J, 
If we retain o8, the second clause means that some beings (e. g- God, 
or yous, or the celestial gods) feel pleasure unaccompanied by pain. 
But #Sov7 is usually limited to the lower forms of pleasure ; and in- 
asmuch as it is a wdGos, to say that vots #8era. would be inconsistent 
with saying that vods is axa6yjs. It seems probable then that the 
Hermetist, if he spoke of #Sovx and Avmy together, would put them 
on a par; and he may perhaps have said that pain is always accom- 
panied or followed by pleasure, and pleasure by pain. This meaning 
might be got by striking out od, and writing wav 7d 7ddpevov (kat) 
Auretrat. That, however, is not quite satisfactory ; for why should 
this connexion between pleasure and pain be insisted on as a leading 
principle of the Hermetic doctrine ? 

[LGov @rnrav} .. . [LGov diStov]. The person who inserted these 
words apparently took the senfentia to mean that the Ovnra. Coa. feel 
both pain and pleasure, but the did {Ga feel pleasure and do not 
fee] pain. 

(14) 08 wav cGpo vocei’ wav odpa voooiy adutdy, ‘Not all bodies 
are diseased’ implies that ri di8a odpara are not diseased. That 
is doubtless true; but was it worth while to say it? As (13) also, 
in its present form, is somewhat dubious, I am inclined to suspect 
that (r3) and (14) have been produced by the expansion of a single 


' As to the inseparable connexion between pleasure (of the lower sort) and pain, 
see Pl. Phaedo 60 C, where Socrates, speaking of 76 950 and 7d Aumnpov, says @ ay 
70 trepov rapayérnrat, emaxodovder tarepov wai 7 erepov, 






























EXCERPT XI: 2 4rt 


sententia, Which ran thus: wév ro Avrovpevov | J vooet? wav copa 

yoooiv (or wav 7d voooiv) diuadurdv. Having in us an aicOyrixov, we 

feel pain ; and every pang of pain is an intimation that (gva aicOyr- 
we are mortal. 

(15) 6 vois ev Tg Beg [8 Noytopds ev TO dvOpumw"] & Méyos ev Tey vot. 
§ Aoyiopds would mean the function 76 AoyurruKdy (= 6 dvOpdmwos 
yoos), the rational or intelligent part of the human soul. But 6 
oyops ev 7H dvOpdry is most likely a corrupted doublet of 6 Adyos 
év 76 vot (vot having been altered into dv.) 

With this senéentia should be compared Corf. XII. i. (¢o Zut) 13a: 
§ ofv Adyos (speech) éoriy cixdy (rot vod), Kai (6) voids Tod Get. Lb. 
13 b, the MSS. give Adyov dé ev 7G v9, which agrees with sent. (15); 
but the original reading there was probably @edv 8 év 7 v,’ in which 
the relation between vots and Oeds as stated in send, (15) is reversed. 
It is possible, however, that Adyov had already been substituted for 
Océv in Corp. XII. i. 13 b before these sen/entiae were written. 

‘A isin B’ probably here means ‘A is to B asa part to the whole’. 
‘The human vois is a part of God (cf. Corp. XII. i init, 6 vots e€ 
airis Tis Tov Oeod otaias éoriv) ; and the human faculty of speech (or 
reasoning) is a part of the human vois. 

(16) o882y cwparixdy ddndés (0082 ev owpare &dnOés MSS.): pévov To 
dowpatov dpeudes (év dowpdry 13 may éipeudés MSS.). It is not 7d év 
apart, ‘that which is embodied’ (e.g. the incarnated soul), that is 
unreal, but body itself, or the corporeal. And é dowydrw presents 
a similar difficulty. It therefore seems necessary to write odpa or 
owparixdy in place of év copar, and dowparov in place of év dowpdrw. 
Compare the misreadings in (37). 

This senfentia sums up the teaching of Zxe. II A (to Taz). 

(17) wav 73 yevdpevoy peraBAyrdsv' of way Td yevdpevov Pbaprov. Cf. 
(2)-(5), ra yevdpeva are ra oopara. The diadvra cdpara are both 
peroBdyrd and Oaprd; the aida oupara are peraBdyrd but not 
pOapra. 

Sent. (17) may have been suggested by Zxc. IL A. 13; and 
perhaps this may account for its being placed next to (16), which is a 
summary of Zxc. II A. 

(18) o88ev dyadv emi ris yijs" obBev Kaxdy év Th odpavg. Senientiae 
(18)-(21) deal with the contrast between éya6dv and xaxov, In Exc. 
II A, we are told that there is nothing éAn6és on earth, and (#4. 9) 
that 7 dArjOeo. is atts 7d dxparov dyaGdv ; so that this topic also may 
1 Cf. Corp. XI. i. 4b: 6 pev Oeds &y 7G vg. 








412 STOBAEI HERMETICA 


possibly have been suggested by that same /ie/dus. In Corp. X (to 
Tat) also, the words dyads and xaxés are prominent. 

‘There is nothing good on earth.’ This is strongly asserted in 
Corp. VI (to Ascl.), But in that document, as well as in Corp. II 
(40 Ascl.) sub fin., it is not the corporeal heaven, but the incorporeal 
God, that is spoken of in contrast to the lower world in which we 
live, and the leading thought is ‘God is good, man (as an earthly 
organism) is bad’, or ‘the incorporeal is good, the corporeal 
is bad’. 

The words otdtv xaxdv év otpav@ may be compared with Corp. X. 
ro b (as emended): od kaxds 6 xdopos. But the writer of Corp. X 
adds oixéru 5¢ dyads, idixos yap; whereas in the sententiae it is 
implied that 6 otpavds is dyaGds. 

(1g) & Beds d&yabds' 5 vOpwros Kaxds. This agrees verbally with 
Corp. VI, Il, and X; but there is nothing to tell us whether the 
writer meant by 4 Geds the incorporeal God, or the corporeal gods 
who circle in the heavens, and who are spoken of as of Oeoé in (21). 
6 dvOpwros means of dvOpwro.; and 6 Geds, being coupled to it, might 
here mean oi Geof. 

(20) 73 dyabdy éxodatoy, TS KaKdy dxoucror, This is based on the 
saying of Socrates, that vice is ignorance (of the good), and is 
therefore involuntary. Compare the verse quoted in Ar. Zh, Vic. 
3. 5) 1113 b 15: obdels Exdv wovypds, of3 dxwy pdxap. (Aristotle 
disputes the first clause, and maintains that 4 pox@npia éxovordv éott.) 
Some of the Hermetists expressed a similar thought by saying that 
he who has attained to yraous is free from ciyappeévy, but all other 
men are in subjection to civapyévy. Cf. (26), obdtv emi yijs 
éAevGepov. 

(21) of Geol ra dya0d aipodvrar’ (of dvOpwmor Td Kaka aipoivrar) ds 
dyad. The astral gods act by free choice (otSt év otpav} doidor, 
(26) but choose the good, and so, act always in accordance with 
God’s will. For the second clause, cf. Corp. VI. (fo Asch.) 3b: 
gkagrov trovrwy ... memiorevrat evOdde péyuorov elvan d&yaBov, To paddov 
dvurépBAyrov kaxdv. Jd, 6: 70 Kaxdv mioretoavra dyabbv elvat. 

Sententiae (18), (19), (21), and (29) should be compared with Exc, 
VIL. (40 Ta?) 2. 

(22)-(24) "H edvopia... dvOpdmou pbopd', This is one mass of 
corruption. As a guess, I propose (22) 4 edvopia pera Oeod Spdvora" 
7) dvopia (pas Oedv eps). (23) vopos Oeios dpery (or eivopia)* vopos 
dvOpdémwos kaxia (or évopia). (24) 6 xpdvos Kdopov otpodrj’ 6 xpdvos 








EXCERPT XI: 2 413 


dvOpsrov pOopd. Sententiae (22) and (23), when thus rewritten, 
have to do with the good and bad in human action, and so continue 
the topic of (r8)-(21). For vépos Ocios, cf. Porphyr. Ad Marcellam 
25 f.: tpets 82 vdpor StaxexpicOwoar oide" els pv 4 rod Geod, Erepos be 6 
ris Ovyris picews, Tpiros 3¢ & Berds Kar’ 2vn kal modes. ... 6 5€ ye 
Geios éyvoetrar piv Pox 8¢ ddpootyyv Kal dxohaciay dxabdpre, éxAdparet 
52 80 drabetas Kal ppovicens. 

In (24), tpudy may be a corruption of otpopy Or repiorpopy. Time 
is measured by the revolving movement of the heavenly bodies, and 
was often said by the Greeks to be constituted by that movement. 

The movement of the Kosmos, being cyclic, is unending ; but to 
men the lapse of time brings destruction (6 xpévos évOpsrov pOopd). 

(25) wav (7d) év odpavd dyerdBeror’ wav 15 ént yijs petaberdv. 
Human decrees and resolves may be altered or annulled; but the 
star-gods, in their movements and workings, maintain a law which is 
unalterable. 

This unalterable working of the star-gods, through which the will 
of the supreme God finds fulfilment in all physical processes in the 
sublunar world, is frequently denoted by the term ciyappévy. See 
Asel, Lat. Til. 404. 

(26) od8ev év odpavg Boidov" obSév emt yijs éXeBepov. Cf. Hac. IIT. 
(to Tat) 8: atry otv 4 Siaopa dBavdrov odparos Kat Ovyrod, Gre... TO 
pév, « . . AevHepov (Ov), dyer, 70 dé,» « « SodAorv (dv), Peper. Corp. 1. 15: 
(6 dvOpwros) (eipappévys) yéyove SodAos. All corporeal things on earth 
are subject to eiyappery, i.e. to the working of the star-gods; man 
therefore, as long as the corporeal predominates in him, is a slave of 
cipappévy. But the star-gods are not slaves ; (they act in accordance 
with God’s will, but willing accordance with God’s will is not dovA«éa ;) 
and man also, in virtue of the divine element in him, may, after 
death at least, if not in this life, ‘join the company of the celestial 
gods’ (Corp. X. 7), and be free, as they are free. 

How is ob8ty émt yijs éXeiPepov in (26) to be reconciled with wy ro 
énl yijs peraberdv in (25)? It might be objected that if the move- 
ments of the heavenly bodies (ra év odpay@) are dperdGera, and all 
corporeal things on earth are governed by the movements of the 
heavenly bodies, then ra émi ys also must be dwerdfera, How can 
that which is determined by ciuapyévn be peraberdy ? 

- To this objection a Hermetist might perhaps reply that a man’s 
will may be variable without being free, and indeed only ceases to 
be variable when it becomes free. As long as he is in subjection to 





414 STOBAEI HERMETICA 


his earthly body and the things of the body, he is driven to and fro 
by the wd@y (desires and aversions) generated in his soul by bodily 
processes ; he shifts and changes, wills one thing to-day and another 
to-morrow ; and so his aims and actions are peraferd. But when he 
escapes from this servitude, his will no longer varies ; for like that of 
the celestial gods, it is harmonized with the will of God, and un. 
alterably fixed upon the Good. 

There remains however a further difficulty. If ra éri yijs are” 
worked by ra év otpavd, and r& év oipard are good, how is it that 74 
ent yjjs are bad? (oidev d&yabdv emt yijs, (18).) If all things on earth 
(including the ray of the man who is in subjection to einappévy) are 
wrought by the dz cae/estes, who are good, it ought to follow that all 
things on earth are good. A Hermetist, if he was conscious of this 
difficulty, could evade it only by having recourse to the Platonic 
conception of draxros iAn. God and his ministers the star-gods do 
the best that can be done; but they cannot eliminate evil in the 
sublunar world, because the matter on which they have to work is, in 
part at least, irremediably evil. See Asc/. Lat. II. 16a. 

(27) od8ev dyvworor év odpavd’ ob8év yruiptpov ext ris ys. We might 
have expected rather to be told that God, or ¢he Good, cannot be 
(fully) known on earth, but only in heaven; that is, that perfect 
gnosis (of God or the Good) is possible for men only when they have 
quitted the earthly body and ascended to heaven. (That is what is 
taught in Corp. X, for instance.) But the object of the knowledge 
here spoken of is not God or the Good, but ‘anything’. For man, 
as long as he remains on earth, true knowledge (not merely know- 
ledge of God, or of all things, but even knowledge of any one thing) 
is impossible ; what he thinks to be knowledge is only a dim and 
doubtful opinion. As yvéous is correlative to d\0ea, this statement 
is connected with the thesis maintained in Zxc. II A, dAnfts od8tv ev 
TH yn (Cf. sent. (16).) Perhaps the writer may have been thinking 
of the saying of Socrates, ‘I know that I know nothing’. 

(28) 06 kowwvei (ra ev odpave toils emi yis* Kowwvet) Ta ext yis ToIs 
év odpavd. The Stoics were accustomed to say that there is xowwvia 
between God and man, or between the gods (= ra év otpars) and 
men, (See Corp, X. 22b, and Asc/. Lat. 1.5.) But the point on 
which the writer of the sev¢entiae insists is that in this xowwyvia the 
two parties are not on equal terms; men are dependent on the 
gods, but the gods (being dvevdeeis) are not dependent upon men. 
Sententiae (38), (40), and (41) are to the same effect. 




































EXCERPT XI: 2 415 


(29) mévra Ta év ddpava dpopa: mdvra 7a emi yiis émipopo. The 
imary meaning of padpos seems to have been ‘a bodily blemish’, 
yonpookoros (Philo) means ‘one who looks for blemishes’ in 
sacrificial victims. Cf. Orac. Sib. 1. 351: vooepots inoerar 70° 
emipopovs. (érpwpovs, literally ‘having blemishes upon them’, is 
there coupled with vorepovs, and stands on a par with tuddo/, xwdoi, 
and xa¢oi in the following lines. Leprosy, for instance, would be a 
papos-) If so, powpaocda. must have meant ‘to find or point out 
blemishes’ in a person ; and thence must have come the secondary 
sense Of papos, ‘blame’. 

_ (30) [78 &0dvarov of Oyntév’ 73 OvyTov odk GAdvarov.! Possibly: 76 
BOdvarov ob (rabytov" povov 7b) Ovyrov (wdoye). Cf. (12) as emended : 
way 76 alcOavduevov macxe pdvos 6 vots days. In the human soul, 
Gvyrov is 7d aicBavépevoy, and ré GOdvarov is 6 vots. (See (8).) 
From the loss (through Aomototeleuton) of the words ra@yrdv povoy 76, 
the silly statement 7d G6dvarov ot Ovyrév would result; and we may 
suppose that some one tried to complete the damaged sententia by 
ding the equally silly statement ro Ovyrdv obx a0dvarov. 

(gt) 13 omapéy of mdvrws Ovnrdv (yevntéy MSS.)° 13 8€ Ovnrdv 

(yernrov MSS.) mdvrws kal omapév, The reading of the MSS, is 
impossible; for anything that is orapéy (‘begotten’) necessarily 
éyero. If we write Ovyrdv in place of yevnrov, this sententia repeats 
hat was said in (5). The ‘everlasting bodies’ éordpy (= drag 
éyévero), but are not Ovyrd (= obdérore pOetperat). 
(32) Siadutod odparos Sto xpdvor, 6 "&wd Tis omopas péxpr Tis 
tcews! al & Tamd tis yevéoews péxpt tod Oavdrou', [rod] diS{ou 
giparos xpévos "ex ris yevéoews! pdvos. oropd, if distinguished from 
yéveois, must mean ‘begetting’ as opposed to ‘birth’; so that the 
text of the MSS. must be taken to mean ‘a dissoluble body (e.g. the 
body of a man or animal) has two times, that of its existence as an 
‘embryo, and that of its life from birth to death ; an everlasting body 
(e.g. the Kosmos, the element fire, or the sun) has one time only, 
which began when it was made by the Demiurgus’,. That amounts 
to saying that an earthly organism has, and an ‘everlasting body’ 
has not, an embryonic stage of existence. But why should any one 
want to call attention to this insignificant point of difference between 
the two kinds of bodies? (See Addenda in vol. iv.) 

I am inclined to think that the author must have written something 
like Siadvrot cdparos Svo xpdvor, 6 thc ayzicewc Kal 6 tic memcewc* 
ddiov odparos xpdvos 6 thc taytétHToc povos. (Note that aigfyou and 














416 STOBAEI HERMETICA 


pecwois are spoken of in the following senfentia (33). But (32), 
emended as I propose, would be an amplification of the thought 
expressed in (33), and ought therefore to follow (33) rather than to 
precede it.) A ‘dissoluble body’ passes through two successive 
stages, a stage of growth (which lasts from birth to maturity), and a 
stage of diminution or decay (which lasts from maturity to death), 
An ‘everlasting body’, when it has once come into being, persists, 
not indeed without change of any kind, (for it is peraBdAnrov, send, 
(2),) but without that kind of change which is called atgyows Kal 
petwos. 

Assuming that this was the original wording of the senfentia, we 
might account for the text of the MSS. by supposing that some one 
added 6 daré rijs omopas péxpt Tis TedcidtHTOc AS a note in explanation 
of 6 ris adEjoews, and 6 amd ug TedeldtHTOc Méxpt TOD Gavarou as a note 
in explanation of 6 rs peuoews; and that yevéoews, having been 
written as an alternative for oropas, was afterwards wrongly substituted 
for reAetdryros (dis) and ravrdryros. 

Cf. Corp. VIII. (40 Tat) 4, as emended: arn 8 7 —s (se. 4 
ris abéjoews Kat peudoews) wept ra exéyea Loa (the bodies of which 
are SiaAurd) yiverau. tov yap otpaviwy ta cépara (which are didia) 
pilav régwv exer, iv eAnyer ard rod rarpds Thy dpxyv. For rijs ravrdryros, 
cf. Corp. XII. ii (t0 Tat) 14, as emended : éxerou yap ris tavtérytos 
ra dotvOera cdpara (i.e. the cosmic elements), cat tiv peraBodyy eis 
dAnra. rootpeva, det THs TavtdryTos THv abBapalay cde. 

(34) "4 Scadurh Sn els 7d evavria evaddorobra [ |, 4 BE diBios[ | 
eis ra Spota', I can find no sense in 4 diadury tAy and % didvos vAy. 
It may be suspected that tAy has come by duplication from the last 
three letters of 8aAvr7, and has driven out some other substantive. 
Possibly, # SuaAvri) oycia (meaning ‘ thing’) cis ra évayria (sc. dduddvra) 
évadAowotrar, 4 58 didcos eis Ta Spore (sc. didia). An earthly organism, 
when it is broken up, ‘is changed into’ the elements (of which it — 
was composed); and the elements are ddidAvra and didia. An didvov 
cdpa. (e.g. the element water) is (part by part, though not as a whole) 
transmuted into other elements ; and each of these other elements is 
likewise (as a whole) aiécov. 

(35) yévects [dvOpdrou] popa(s), pOopd [dvOpdrrov] yevécews apy. 
There is no reason to restrict the application of this sev/entia to 
men; it is equally true of all daAvra odpara. Cf. sent. (5), and 
Exc. ITA. 16. 

(36) 1d &woytyvpevoy k.7.X. Cf. sent. (5). 





EXCERPT XI: 2 417 


(97) Tav Svrev Td pev odpard gor (Ta pev ev awpagty cio. MSS,), 
7a Be iSdar (Ta BE ev iSlars MSS.), ra S€ evépyerar (evepyeiars MSS.), 
In this classification of 7& dvra, as in most of the sententiae, cosmic 
things alone are spoken of, and supracosmic entities are disregarded. 
The idéa. are the formae visibiles of bodies, and not Plato’s voyra 
ein; for the latter could not be said to be ‘in bodies’. vois 
might possibly be called an évépyea of the supracosmic God; but 
it is not an évépyewa of the kind the writer is here speaking of; 
for vots is not (always or necessarily) ‘in a body’. And the 
supracosmic God himself is neither a odo, an idéa nor an 
évépyesa. God is not one of ra évra ; he is éréxewa THs ovcias. 

iSéa (iBia MSS.) 8€ Kal évépyera, (dowpata dvra,) év cwpari éort. 
The meaning would be better expressed by writing idea: 5 xai 
e&vépyaat, (dodparor oboa,) ev cdpaciv cio. As regards évépyeu, 
this statement agrees with Zxc, III. (to Zot) 1: evépyeam.. ., 
dodparot atral otoau, év cupaciv cic, Kat Sia trav cwopdrov evep- 
yoto. Jb. 21: rails evepyetars’ tara yap doopata dvra hopin év 
cwpacw (elvat). 

It seems that the phrase év capar. (or ev odpacw), which is 
rightly used here, caused a transcriber to write é& capacw in 
place of odpara in the preceding clause; and that gave rise 
to the false readings év ideas and évepye‘ais. A similar error 
occurs in (16). 

(38) 7 &0dvarov ob peréxer Tod Ovntod K.7.A. Cf. (28) and (41). 

(39) 73 pév Ovnrav cis AOdvarov cao odk Epxerat. The ‘im- 
mortal bodies’ (setting aside the Kosmos as a whole and the 
cosmic elements, which cannot here be meant,) are the corporeal 
heavens, and the several bodies contained in them, viz. the fixed 
stars and the planets. 70 @vyrov here means especially the mortal 
part of man, i.e. the body and 16 aig@ytixdov ris Yuxijs (see (8). 
This part of man cannot ascend to heaven. At his death, his body 
remains on earth; and his aic@yzixdv perishes or is dispersed, and 
can never be re-embodied in a star, though his vots, the immortal 
part of him, possibly may. Cf. Corp. I. 24, where we are told that 
the ascending soul casts off its aicOyces. 

73 Be dOdvarov cis Ovytdv (cHpa) wapayiverat. The immortal part 
of man, i. e. the vods, descends from above, and is, for a time, in- 
corporated in a mortal body upon earth. 

Sententia (39) would serve to remind the pupil of what is said 
at greater length in Axe. IV A. (¢o Tat) 7, ((6)). 

2806-5 Ee 





‘ 


418 STOBAEI HERMETICA 


(40) ai evépyerar odk ciciv dvwepeis, GAG Katwepeis. The 
évépyetas are the forces which are at work in all life and movement 
upon earth. (See Zxe. III, 40 Tat.) They ‘work downward from 
above, not upward from below’. That is, all life and movement 
upon earth result from the action of the heavenly bodies on the 
things below ; but the life and movement of the heavenly bodies 
do not result from any action of the things below, but are 
infused into them by the supracosmic God. Cf. Zxe. II. 6: 
(ai évépyevat) dd rav Oclov cupdrov epxovrar eis ta Ovytd, Lb. 15; 
Gh evépyeta) dvadev méumerat, 

(41) od8év dhedeirar Ta ev odpavg amd tay em yis (odSev aedei 
Ta émt yas Ta ev odpavg MSS.) wdvra dpedeirar ra emt yis awd 
rav év odpavd (mdvra dpehet Ta emi yfis 7a év odpavg MSS.), 
The celestial gods do all for us ; we can do nothing for them, They 
are dvevdects; they have no unsatisfied wants, and therefore no 
offerings or services of men can benefit them. 

It would be grammatically possible to take the text of the MSS. 
in the same sense ; but the phrases would be absurdly ambiguous. 

(42) 6 odpavds cwpdroy diBiov Sexrixds' 4 yi oopdrwvy pbaprav 
Sextixy. It is somewhat surprising to find this elementary statement 
so near the end of the string of sestentiae. It would seem more 
appropriate if it were either placed in connexion with (2)-(5), in 
which the distinction between the two kinds of bodies is first spoken 
of, or put at the beginning of the group (25)-(29), in which otpavés 
and yf are contrasted. For similar reasons, it may be suspected 
that (45) also is out of place. 

(43) 4 yi Gdoyos' 6 odpavds Noytxds (Aogds MSS.) Cf. Corp. I. 
1o and 11b, where we are told that 6 Adyos (personified), after 
doing his part in the demiurgia, flew up to heaven, and that his 
departure left the sublunar world doyor, and consequently capable 
of producing only dAoya Gga (and the éAoyov pépos of man). 

(44) "ra ev odpave Swéxetrar’ 7a ent yis TH yh éwixerrar'. I pro- 
pose ra év otpavd (mpovola) iadxerrar’ ra él yas | | (dviiyxy) brroKerrat 
That would agree with what is said in (46), and in other ermetica, 
as to the relation between xpdvoa and dvdyxy. But if rpévow and 
dvéyxn were spoken of both in (44) and in (46), that would be an 
additional reason for thinking that (45), which deals with a different 
subject, is out of place. 

(45) 5 odpavds mparov (av) otorxelwv* 4 yi Jotatov (ray) erorxeiur 
(orotxetov bis MSS.). The heavenly bodies were sometimes called 





EXCERPT XI: 4 419 





























grotxeia; but as the word croxeiov is here applied to yj also, it pre- 
sumably means ‘an element’. If so, odpavds must here be taken to 
mean 7rip, the element of which the heavens consist. Cf. Corg. XII. 
ji. (to Tat) 21: tot Kdcpov pépy cioiv odpavos Kat yi Kal Ywp Kal dxp. 

(46) mpdvora Geta tégis’ dvdyxn mpovoia wnpérns. Cf. Axc. XII. 1 
to Ammon): % St cipoppévy irnperee zpovoiy. See also Zxc. XIII 
and Exc. XIV (to Ammon), and Exc. VIII. (fo Tat) 5. God works 
on the heavenly bodies immediately ; and his will, regarded as acting 
on éhem, is called zpévow. But he works on sublunar things through 
the intermediate agency of the heavenly bodies ; and the force which 
the heavenly bodies exert on sublunar things is called dvdy«y (or 
dpappévy). Thus dvdyxy is subservient to xpdvora. 

(47) t8xn dopa (Graxros), [@rdxrou évepyeias (mpoonyopia)]. Cf, 
the anonymous definition in Stob. 1. 7. 9b, vol. i, p. 92 W. (Diels 
Doxogr. p. 326): rixy draxrov evepyeias tort rpoonyopia. It may be 
conjectured that the Hermetist wrote riyy dopa draxros; that some 
reader, having met with the similar definition which has been pre- 
served for us in Stob. 1. 7. 9b, added the words drdxrov évepyetas 
mpooryopia ; and that araxros Was omitted before ardxrov by an error 
of transcription. 

For rixy pope draxros, cf, Eurysus Pythagoreus Iepi t’xas, Stob. 1. 
6. 19, vol. i, p. go W.: Svo hiotes ev 7G GAw THbe.. . evuTapyxovTs évavriat 
“a\AdAas’ Kal ravrav a pev evr. pata Kat Terwypeva Kal Aoyov éxovea 
roti wévra, 6.8 dppytos kal dtaxtos Kal adoyos Kal ovdeniay ovvragwv 
gyovea. . . . TO pev dro tiyas Kai 7TH adroudtw ywopevov yiverat 
eumecovras Tas dAdyw Kal dtdxrw picvos és Ta Tpdypara. 

If this sexfentia was similar in form to most of the others, there 

must have been a second clause; and as réyy and réyvy are often 
contrasted, and Eurysus /4. speaks of réyva kal hpovucts tis évOpw7riva 
kal Geta, it is possible that something like réyvy évépyea evraxros 
followed. The meaningless words ci3wAov 8déa Wevdijs, which re 
appended in the MSS., may be a remnant of a lost senfentia. 
(48) ri Qeds; drpewrov, dyabdv. This might be said either of the 
‘star-gods, or of the supreme and supracosmic God. For Oeés arpe- 
mrov, avOpwros tperrov, cf. Lxc. ILA. 15 (of the supracosmic God): 
‘Tov arperrov, Tov pi GAXovovpevov. Lb. 11: tpéreras 8& Kal peraBdr-- 
‘Aerar (5 dvOpwros). For eds éyabov, dvOpwzos xaxdv, cf. sent. (19). 

§ 4. tds pévrot mpds rods mohdods SpiAtas mapattod, «7A. As to 
this injunction of silence and concealment, cf. Corp, XIII jin. 
Porphyr. Ad Marcellam 14-15: mévra pidoodparov bs dBeov Kai puapov 
Ee2 













































420 STOBAEI HERMETICA 


exrpérer Oar xpr’ Kal ob rais Sdéas dK dv xpHaato, TOUTY pajre Biou pe: 
Abyou rod mepl Ocod Kowdver, Adyov yap (epi) Geod trois td Sd&ys 
duehOappevors éyew oix dopadés’ Kal yop Kai raAnOH Aéyew ert TovTwy 
rept Geod cal r& werd) Kivdvvov ioov pépe. obre abrov twa TporiKey 
dvooiwy tpywv py kabapetovra pOeyyerOax rept Beo8, ove cis ToLovTw dKoag 
éuBdddovra Tov epi Geod Adyov ole Bac pi) praiverv* GAN’ dxpodoOar kal 
éyew rov wept Geod Adyov ts eri Oeod. mporpyeioOw obv Tod rept Oeod 
Adyou ra Ocopidh Epya, Kai crydoOw 6 wepi adrod Aoyos emt mAnGous* 
dvorxevoréry yap Oeodoyia kevodotig yuxijs. vopile aiperdrepov elvat ovyay 
}) Adyov eix® mpogabar repi Oeor. 

Ooveiv pev yép ve od BovAopat. If a man refuses to tell to others 
truths which he knows, he may seem to lay himself open to a charge 
of $6évos, i.e. malicious unwillingness to impart to one’s neighbour 
something that would be good for him. (Cf. Asc. Zaz. I. 12 b: ‘nee 
sinit partem divinitatis agnoscere invidens inmortalitate malignitas.)? 
But he who does what is here enjoined is not really open to that 
charge ; for he will speak without reserve to the few who are worthy 
to receive the true doctrine; and (as we are told in § 5) if the 
unworthy hear it, they will be the worse for it, and not the better. ~ 

paddov 88 Sri Tois WohAois Bdkers KaTayéhagtos elvat, Wachsmuth 
says ‘post padAov ¢ haud scio an haustum sit daayopevw vel 
simile quid’. But it is hardly necessary to insert a verb, The 
writer means to say ‘(I warn you against talking to the many) for 
this reason, that’ &c.; but the text of the MSS. can be understood 
to mean that, though it is defective in grammatical construction. 

The first of the two reasons given for concealment is that the un- 
worthy will Zavgh af the man who speaks of these things to them.! 
What harm would that do? It is unpleasant to be laughed at; but 
a good man does not refrain from doing what he thinks right because 
it might result in some unpleasantness to him. To speak to those 
who only laugh at what you say is, no doubt, a waste of time and 
energy ; but that is hardly an adequate reason for enjoining silen 
And though the laughers will certainly get no good from what they 
hear, it is not self-evident, and has not yet been shown, that they 1 
be positively harmed by it. The harm implied is probably that 


yedaororepa dxovopara. 


EXCERPT XI: 5 421 






























which the speaker himself is liable to suffer, not from the mere un- 
pleasantness of incurring ridicule, but from the weakening of his own 
convictions. As religious fervour is fostered and intensified by the 
companionship of others who are fervent in the faith, so it is liable to be 
lowered and deadened by the sarcastic comments of unsympathetic 
~ hearers. 
ofro: Sé of Adyou Sdiyous mavtehds Tobs dxpoatds efouw (exoucw 
MSS.) (dftous), # rdxa ofS rods ddiyous [@€ouew]. dgiovs, which is 
- needed to make sense, may easily have been omitted through its 
resemblance to éfovew. 
ovrot of Adyo, in the mouth of Hermes, means the discourses by 
which he has previously given oral instruction to Tat, and the sub- 
stance of which it is assumed that Tat will hereafter repeat to a few 
other persons. For the reader, it means a collection of written 
‘Discourses of Hermes to Tat’, at the end of which Zac, XI was 
placed as an appendix. 

Eyen the few who may rightly be permitted to read these sacred 
writings, or to hear them read, are not wholly ‘worthy’ to do so; 
and all other men are utterly unworthy. 

§ 5. dxouor 8¢ 11 Kal troy dv aurois’ Tods Kakods paANOv Trapofdvoucr 
mpos Thy Kaxiay. A second reason for silence and concealment is 
here given, namely, the harm that indiscriminate talk about holy 
things (or the indiscriminate circulation of the Hermetic writings) 
may do ¢o the hearers (or readers). 

[813 xp} tods wodAods guddrrecPat, (ds) ph voodvras tay heyoudvwr 
tiv dpertv.] This sentence is evidently out of place; for it breaks 
the connexion between what precedes (éxovo. dé. . . tiv Kaxiay) 
-and what follows (II@s efras «.7.X.). The only question is whether it 
is better to reject it altogether, or to transpose it. The most suitable 
place for it would be after ot rods dAvyous, at the end of § 4. But 
it is not needed there ; for it merely repeats what has been said before 
in that section, and repeats it in a less expressive form, pi) vootvras 
Tov Acyonevwv TH aperjv being a comparatively feeble substitute for 
dogs KatayéAacros elvar. It seems most likely then that xpy rods 
mo\Xovs . . . THY dperyy isa marginal summary of § 4, which has been 
inserted into the text, with dd prefixed to make connexion. 

[wav] 15 LGov (rd) ray dvOpdnwv émppeméctepdy éotw cis Thy kaxiav. 
Wachsmuth adopts Usener’s correction, 7d {Gov 7d dv@pumwov. That 
gives the meaning required; but perhaps the author may have 
Written rd rév dvOpi7rwy in the sense of 7rd dvOpdmwov. CE. Ps.-Pl. 





422 STOBAEI HERMETICA 


Epinomis 96D: tis wor’... émuorypy « « » pay Tapayevouery . « » drone 
rérarov dy... rapdexorto Lov 76 rv dvOperev ; 
We must not translate ‘the animal part of men’; that would be 
73 ddoyov tov dvOpdruv. A star-god, as well as a beast, is a Gov. 
3r yerntds 6 xdopos. This is implied in send. (5), (17), and (31); 
and it is expressly said in extant ‘ Discourses of Hermes to Tat’ (e. g, 
Corp. IV init.). 
kal (8n1) wévra Kkard [mpdvoray Kat] dvdykqy yiverat, eipappérns mévrwy 
dpxovens. See sent. (46) and (44), wdvra must be taken to mean 
xdvra ra ert yjs. According to the doctrine of the Hermetists in 
general, it is only earthly things that are governed by civappevn, and 
therefore determined xar’ dvdyxyv... The man who ‘has got gvosis’, 
being no longer a mere thing of earth, is freed from subjection to 
civappévn ; his actions are xar& zpévoiay (i. e. in accordance with God's 
will), but not car’ dvdy«nv. (See Zxc. VIII.) But ‘the many’ will not 
understand that. The only things they recognize or take into account 
are earthly things; and when they are told that these things are 
governed by eipappévy, they will infer that all things without exception, 
and therefore the actions of all men alike, are determined kar’ dvdyxyy, 
apévo.ay is irrelevant here, and impairs the force of the argument, 
It was doubtless inserted by some one who rightly thought that its” 
addition would be needed for a complete statement of the Hermetic 
doctrine on the subject, but failed to see that an incomplete sta 
ment of it suits the context better. To be consistent, the inter- 
polator ought also to have added mpovolas kai before civappévys. 
WoAAG Eautod Xeipov Error, Katapporyjgan pév To mayrds ds yernrod. 
It is bad to ‘despise the universe’, See Asc/. Lat. III. 25, where 
the contemptus mundi of the Christians is denounced. Even the 
most pessimistic of the Hermetists, the writer of Corp. VI, admits 
that the Kosmos is good in one respect (rotrov rév tpdrov dyads 6 
kéopos, Kaba... mdvra rove’, § 2 b), though in all other respects, he 
says, it is not good. The writer of Zc, XI holds that the higher 
part of the Kosmos is good, and the lower part of it alone is bad 
(sent. (18)). 
But why should a man ‘despise the universe’ because he is told 
that it has come into being? The writer has not given his answer 
to that question; but it might perhaps be answered in some such 
way as this. The many have no conception of an incorporeal and 


1 The writer of Zxc. VII probably said that the movements or operations of the 
heavenly bodies are determined by dva-yxn (mpévoia nai dvaynn MSS.) 5 but that 
statement is exceptional. 








EXCERPT XI: 5 423 


supracosmic God, and would fail to understand any such notion if it 
were put before them. The highest religion of which they are 
capable is a worship of cosmic and corporeal gods (i.e. of the 
material universe in its several parts), a cult of Sun, Moon, and 
Stars in heaven, Mother Earth, and the gods or daemons identified 
with material things on earth. Such a religion is better than nothing, 
and may be enough to keep them from gross wickedness. They 
probably assume that the cosmic gods, or powers of nature, that they 
worship,—the highest beings that they know or can conceive,—are 
everlasting, and without beginning. If you tell one of ‘the many’ 
that these gods have had a beginning, he will infer that they are less 
worthy of worship than he had supposed ; and as he cannot transfer 
his reverence to the supreme God who made them,—for of that God 
he knows nothing,—he will be in danger of losing such religion as 
he has, and sinking into sheer atheism. 

ras B¢ aitias Tod KaKod TH clpappévy avadépov (-pépwv MSS.). See 
Corp. XII. i. 5 as emended, where Tat asks Sia ri xoAdZerar 6 
dvayxacdons Tis cipappévys Spdcas To épyov; cipappevys yap mdvTa 
7a tpya. The doctrine of Heimarmene, when not safeguarded by 
the Hermetic theory of man’s power to escape from subjection to 
Heimarmene (which is explained in Corp. IV, for instance, but which 
the many would fail to comprehend,) appears to annul the 
responsibility of the human agent. 

mus év dyvoia dvres EXatrov dot Kaxot. Does this mean ‘in order 
that they may (continue to) be in ignorance, and so, may be less 
wicked (than they would be if they learnt the truth)’? Or does it 
mean ‘in order that, since they are (and will in any case continue to 
be) without true knowledge, they may be less wicked (than they 
would be if they were told truths which they cannot understand)’? 
Probably the latter. The many are év dyvoig, i.e. without gnosis 
(cf. of év yvdce. dvres), and will always be so, whether you talk to 
them or not. If you tell them truths, they will misunderstand them, 
and the truths will turn into pernicious falsehoods in their minds. 

[6Bw rod &84Aou!. What is ‘the uncertain thing’ that the man is 
afraid of? How does his fear of it restrain him from wicked actions ? 
And how will he be relieved of his fear if you talk to him? There 
is nothing in what has preceded to suggest an explanation, These 
words must have been added by a reader. The man who added 
them was probably thinking of some doctrine of penal suffering ; but 
it is not clear what he meant. 


424 STOBAEI HERMETICA 


EXCERPT XII 


In the passages extracted by Stobaeus from ‘The teachings of 
Hermes to Ammon’ (viz. Excerpts XII-XVII, and probably XVIII 
and XIX also), there is no trace of dialogue ; & “Ayo occurs once, 
in Zxc. XVII, but Ammon never speaks. It is possible therefore 
that the /Ze/ from which these excerpts were taken were not dia- 
logues, but epistles or treatises addressed by Hermes to Ammon. Cf. 
Corp. XIV, which is an epistle of Hermes to Asclepius, and Cor. 
XVI, which is a treatise written by Asclepius and addressed to Ammon. 

§ 1. mdvra 8é yiverar “pice. Kai cipappéry!, eivapyévy cannot have 
been mentioned here; the Hermetist must have first spoken of 
mpovoia, the supreme or sovereign power of God, and then gone on 
to speak of the two other powers, évéyxy and civapyévy, which he 
regards as subordinate to mpdvo.e. 

The words rdvra yiverar dice. would imply that there is a fourth 
power, called vows, which operates in the same sort of way as 
mpovo.a, dvéyxn, and eipapyévy, But in what follows, these three 
powers alone are recognized; nothing more is said about dvs, 
except in § 2 fix. (rf pice Kal rois dvOpiémos), and there the word 
means, not a power which operates, but the world which is operated 
on. A satisfactory sense might be got by writing dvra 8% (xara 
mpdvoiav) yiverar (ra) pice. (ywédueva). Inasmuch as dvdyxy and 
ciuappévn are subject to mpdvo., it might be said that ‘all things’, 
including those which result from dvdy«y and ciuappévy, ‘come to 
pass xar& mpdvovay’. 

mpdvora S¢ got adrotehhs Adyos tod émoupaviou God. mpdvo.a is 
called abroreAxjs (‘sovereign’) in contrast to dvdyxy and eiuappérvn, 
which are not airoreAcis. 

Adyos probably means ‘design’, ‘plan’, or ‘purpose’. God’s 
Adyos is not actually personified here; but mpdévoa, to which Adyos 
stands as predicate, is in this excerpt, as often elsewhere, on the verge 
of personification, as are dvayxy and elyapyévy also. 

érovpdvios is usually nothing more than a synonym for otpdnos. 
But the writer probably meant here, not ‘the God of heaven’ (who 
would be a cosmic god), but ‘the God who is aéove the corporeal 
heaven’, i.e. the supracosmic God of the Platonists and Hermetists. 
If so, we must suppose either that he used érovpaviov in that 
exceptional sense, or that he wrote tepovpaviov. (Cf. Lxc. XXI. 2.) 








EXCERPT XII: 1,2 425 


The word odpdvws would be more fitly applied to the subordinate 
power Heimarmene, who ‘uses the stars as her instruments’. 

Sdo Sé tovTou “adroduets! Suvduers, dvdéyxyn Kal etpappevy. Does 
rovrov mean Tod Geod, or rod Adyou (= zpovolas) ? 

aéroduys is a synonym of atroyévyros, which means ‘having no 
begetter other than itself’, and is commonly used as equivalent to 
dyav7ros, ‘without beginning’. To say that Necessity and Destiny 
are avroveis would be inconsistent with saying that they are 
subordinate to Providence. avrogveis must therefore be rejected. 
It has probably been substituted by error for some other adjective, 
such as tanpertkai. adro- may have come from avroreAys above. 

(kal 4 pev dvdyen.. .) 4 52 cipappeévm x.7.A. The Hermetist must 
have spoken of the two ‘powers’ in the order in which he had just 
named them; what he says about cipapevy must therefore have 
been preceded by a corresponding statement about dvdyxy. Sto- 
baeus, who in this chapter of his Anthologium was collecting 
passages mepi ciwappévys and not mepl dvayxys, may perhaps have 
intentionally omitted what the Hermetist here wrote about évdyxy. 

Now in the preceding chapter (Anthol, 1. 4, mepi dvdyxys), 
Stobaeus gives, as an extract from Hermes to Ammon, the detached 
sentence which I call Zxcerf¢ XIII. It seems probable that this is 
‘the very sentence which has been omitted in Zac. XII. If we write 
here («al 4 ev) (Zac. XIII, avdyxy éori xpiows BeBaia cat dperdrperros 
[Svvapus] wpovoias’) % Sé eiappévy x.7.A., we get just such a supplement 
as the context requires. The insertion of dvvayus in Axe. XIII, 
where it is clearly out of place, may, on this hypothesis, be accounted 
for by taking it to be a misplaced duplication of dvvdyes, which 
occurs in the preceding sentence of #xc. XII. 

4 3é cipappevy Swnperet mpovoia “kal dvdéyxy'. This statement, as 
given in the MSS., seems to place Necessity on a level with 
Providence ; but the author’s view was rather that both Necessity 
and Destiny are subservient to Providence, We might either strike 
out cat dvdy«y, or alter it into Kar’ dvdyxnv. 

§ 2. [ore yap cipappevny guyeiv tis Suvatat, obre puddga Eoutdv dad 
Tis todtwy Sewdrytos.| This sentence interrupts the sequence of 
thought. If we cut it out, drAovy yap «.7.A. follows rightly on 
cipappévy iwnperotow of aorépes. Its writer must have intended it to 
be read after rots av@pdros below; but it is probably a marginal 
note, and not a part of the original text. Its doctrine is Stoic, and 
differs from that which is usually taught by Hermetists when they 


426 STOBAEI HERMETICA 


speak on this subject. We are told in other Hermetica that the man 
who attains to gvosis can and does ‘escape from Heimarmene’, 


EXCERPT XIII 


See note on #xe, XII. 1. 


EXCERPT XIV 


This passage appears to be a statement of the relations between 
Tpdvoia, dvdyxy, and eiwapyévy; but the text is so corrupt that no 
continuous sense can be, made out. We are told in Zac XIL 
that avdyxy and civappévyn are subordinate to mpdvoa, which is the 
supreme power of God; and it is to be presumed that in this 
respect the writer of Zac. XIV agreed with the writer of Axc, XII, 

An exposition of the relation between zpévow and cipappévy, as 
understood by a Platonist, is given by Boethius, Philos. consol, 
4.6: ‘Omnium generatio rerum cunctusque mutabilium naturarum 
progressus et quidquid aliquo movetur modo, causas ordinem formas 
ex divinae mentis stabilitate sortitur. Haec in suae simplicitatis 
arce composita multiplicem regendis modum statuit: qui modus _ 
cum in ipsa divinae intellegentiae puritate conspicitur, providentia — 
(i.e. mpévoa) nominatur: cum vero ad ea quae movet atque 
disponit refertur, fatum (i.e. eiyapyévj) a veteribus appellatum 
est: quae diversa esse facile liquebit, si quis utriusque vim mente 
conspexerit. Nam providentia est ipsa illa divina ratio in summo 
omnium principe constituta quae cuncta disponit: fatum vero 
inhaerens rebus mobilibus dispositio per quam providentia suis 
quaeque nectit ordinibus. Providentia namque cuncta pariter 
quamvis diversa quamvis infinita complectitur, fatum vero singula 
digerit in motum locis formis ac temporibus distributa: ut haec 
temporalis ordinis explicatio, in divinae mentis adunata prospectu[m], 
providentia sit, eadem vero adunatio, digesta atque explicata tem- 
poribus, fatum vocetur. Quae licet diversa sint, alterum tamen 
pendet ex altero: ordo namque fatalis ex providentiae simplicitate 
procedit. Sicut enim artifex faciendae rei formam mente prae- 
cipiens movet operis effectum, et quod simpliciter praesentarieque 
prospexerat, per temporales ordines ducit: ita deus providentia 
quidem singulariter stabiliterque facienda disponit, fato vero haec 
ipsa quae disposuit multipliciter ac temporaliter administrat. Sive 








EXCERPT XIV: 1 427 


igitur famulantibus quibusdam providentiae divinis spiritibus fatum 
exercetur, seu anima, seu tota inserviente natura, seu caelestibus 
siderum motibus, seu angelica virtute, seu daemonum varia sollertia, 
seu aliquibus horum seu omnibus fatalis series texitur: illud 
certe manifestum est, immobilem simplicemque gerendarum formam 
rerum esse providentiam, fatum vero eorum quae divina simplicitas 
gerenda disposuit mobilem nexum atque ordinem temporalem. 
Quo fit, ut omnia quae fato subsunt providentiae quoque subiecta 
sint, cui ipsum etiam subiacet fatum, quaedam vero quae sub 
providentia locata sunt fati seriem superent: ea vero sunt quae 
primae propinqua divinitati stabiliter fixa fatalis ordinem mobilitatis 
excedunt. . . . Quod longius a prima mente discedit, maioribus 
fati nexibus implicatur ; ac tanto aliquid fato liberum est, quanto 
illum rerum cardinem vicinius petit. Quod si supernae mentis 
haeserit firmitati, motu carens, fati quoque supergreditur necessitatem. 
Igitur uti est ad intellectum ratiocinatio, ad id quod est id quod 
gignitur, ad aeternitatem tempus, ad punctum medium circulus : 
ita est fati series mobilis ad providentiae stabilem simplicitatem.’ 

It appears from what remains of Zxc. XIV that its writer, like 
Boethius, connected ciuappévy (as opposed to mpdvora) with Kéivyors ; 
and he probably said that elwappévy is the cause of two different 
kinds of movement, viz. (1) the invariable movement of the stars 
in heaven, and (2) the alternating process of birth and destruction 
upon earth. 

§ 1. 4 pév Staxpatoica tov Shov Kdopov mpdvord or" H Be 
Touvéxouca Kai mept¢xouca! dvdykn éotiv. The second clause must 
have contained something which stood in contrast to rév GAov 
xécpov (‘the Kosmos as a whole’) in the first clause. Perhaps, 7 
88 (ra Kab? Exacrov) cvvéxovea | | dvdyxy éoriv. 

cipappémm 8€ dyer Kal wepidyer mdvra, kat’ dvdykny (évepy)oica 
(karavayxdtouca MSS.). dye is equivalent to xwet; and mepi-dye 
implies that the movement caused by Heimarmene is cyclic. 
In heaven, it takes the form of circular movement in space; on 
earth, it takes the form of a cyclic succession of births and deaths. 

ducts ydp éotw abdrijs (sc. tis eipappévns) 7d dvaykdtew. Cf, ‘ fati 
necessitatem’ in Boethius /. ¢. 

[airla yevéoews Kai pOopas ‘Biov'.] The process of yéveows and 
Oop is the kind of movement which Destiny causes upon earth, 
But these words are out of place here; and it may be suspected 
that they originally stood after what is said about otpavds in § 2. 


— ee ee La_ajaaaeear aS! - 





428 STOBAEI HERMETICA 


The yéveois and ¢Oopd which take place on earth result from the 
movement of the stars in heaven, and ought to be spoken of after — 
that movement, not before it. 

Aiov is impossible. There is no need to qualify yevérews xat 
Oopas by adding a genitive. {wis would be superfluous ; and Bios 
is not used as a synonym of fu, except sometimes in early poetry. 

§ 2. & pev ody Kdopos “mpdros exer thy mpdvorav!. aparos, applied 
to the Kosmos, is unintelligible ; and it seems probable that it has 
come from the following zp&ros yap. I propose 6 pév otv Kécpos 
dos éxerau THs mpovolas (a repetition of what was said in § 1 ém#t.), 
With this reading, ‘ the Kosmos as @ whole’ would stand in contrast 
to otpavds, which is a par? of the Kosmos. 

¥) 8€ mpdvora (perhaps 4 8é (ris) mpovoia{s evépyeta)) e&jmhwrar 
év td odpavd, éardotoba. means explicari. Cf. Boethius /c.: 
‘ut haec ¢emporalis ordinis explicatio, in divinae mentis adunata 
prospectu[m], providentia sit, eadem vero adunatio, digesta atgue 
explicata temporibus, fatum vocetur.’ It is in the movement of the 
heavenly bodies that the unity of the eternal present is ‘spread out’ 
into temporal succession. 

What the author probably meant might be more fully expressed 
by writing the passage thus: 6 péy otv xédcpos dAos exerat Tijs 
mpovoias’ [| ]] % 5& THs mpovolas évépyera (xpHrov) e&prrura & 7o 
otpavg’ ((rpitos yap airy éntvyxdve)) (6 odpards). The working 
of Providence issues from God (who is thought of as located in 
the boundless space above the Kosmos), and descends into the 
Kosmos. In the course of this descent, the first thing that meets 
it is the sphere of heaven (which is the highest or outermost part 
of the Kosmos) ; and it takes effect there in causing the unvarying 
movement of the stars. But secondarily, and by means of the stars 
(which are doy cipappevys, Zxc. XII. 2), God’s Providence operates 
on terrestrial things also. 

(ot) Beot wept adrdv (sc. Tov odpavdv) otpépovrar [kal Kwvodvrat] dxd- 
Hatov Kat dmavotov Kivnow éxovtes. The circling movement of the 
star-gods is dxdparos kal dxavoeros; and as such, it is contrasted 
with the process of yéveois and #Oopd. which takes place upon earth. 

4 pév mpdvora (. . .) mpovoet. No sane writer can have thought 
his readers needed to be told that % apdvow zpovoet, If apovoet 
is sound, it must have been accompanied by some qualifying 
word or phrase; perhaps (cvprdvrwy 6uod) mpovoel (cf. roy ddov 
xéopov in § 1 zzz), 








EXCERPTS XIV: 2; XV: x 429 


cipappévn dé aitia éorl “ris taév dotpwvy Sabgcews'. It may be 
suspected that Siabécews is corrupt; either xwyoews or Sdorxjoews 
would seem more suitable. It might be said that Heimarmene is 
(in subordination to Providence) airia ris trav dotpuv Kujoeus ; 
but she is airéa of another kind of xivyows also, viz. the yéveors 
and $6opa of earthly things, and that part of her action could hardly 
be ignored here. It is therefore probable that some words have 
been lost, and that the sentence ended with a statement that 
Heimarmene (rots émvyeious) airia eoti (yevérews Kal pOopas da) rips 
rav dotpwv diabécews (or SiorKjoews). 

FoStos! vdpos aduxtos nal’ Sy mdvta téraxTat.  vdpos apuKTos 
x7.X. appears to be a definition of wpdvoa. Cf. Ascd. Lat. III. 
goa: ‘haec ergo tria, eivappévy, necessitas (= dvdyxy), ordo 
(= raéis), dei nutu sunt effecta, qué mundum gubernat sua lege 
(= vopm) et ratione divina (=Adyw Gey). The words sua dege 
et ratione divina are there equivalent to sua providentia (mpovoig). 

But such a definition of zpévo is not in its right place here. 
It may have originally stood at the beginning of the Excerpt; or 
possibly it may have been taken from some other document, and 
appended by a transcriber. 


EXCERPT XV 


The doctrine of this Excerpt is Platonic in its essentials; the 
writer recognizes the supracosmic, and speaks of pre-existent souls. 
His embryology resembles that of Aristotle; but it is probable that 
the Aristotelian ingredient was transmitted to him by Stoic inter- 
mediaries. Compare Zac. XXII (from the Aphrodite of Hermes), 
in which a problem of embryology is discussed. 

§ 1. xwetrar 5é 7d Ktvodpevoy Karla thy) évépyecay ris [Kiwhcews| 
(pdcews), THS Kivovons 7d wavy. The dé points back to something 
which has preceded. There may have been an opening passage in 
which 76 xwovpevov was distinguished from 76 dxivyrov, as in £xc, XI. 
2(1)as emended : révra ri. cdpata Kwetrar' povoy To dodparoy axivytov. 

kwyoews is evidently wrong; and as the name given to 76 xwotv 
in the following sentence and in § 2 zni#. is 4 pvous, the word wanted 
here is @¥cews. For the same reason, I have inserted @ vows in 
§ 4 fin. and in § 5. 


i eee ee ee eee eee 





430 STOBAEI HERMETICA 


4 (uer) yap ducrs [ ] To marti wapéxer Kuqoers [ } Gh 8é voepa 
oteia .. ..) As given in the MSS., this passage is meaningless, 
But a clue to the writer’s meaning is to be found in the following 
words: kat 9 pav Supcer bd rod ovpmavtos Kéopov Kal évros 
ovexer, 8 “mapixer’ (Srepéxer?) Kal exrds weprexe. Two entities 
are here distinguished and contrasted. One of them is cosmic, — 
and the other supracosmic; the one permeates the universe, and 
the other transcends it. That is a distinction familiar to all 
Platonists ;! but there was much variation in the terms used to 
express it. In the Zimaeus, the two are called 7 rod mavTos Wun 
and 6 Symovpyds; they are named by Philo 6 toi Geod Adyos 
and & 6eés, and by others, yuxi (i) rod wavrdés) and vois.” 

The name employed by the writer of xc. XV to denote the 
lower of the two,—the thing which pervades the Kosmos and 
moves all things in it,—is 4 @vovs, a term commonly used in this 
sense by Aristotelians and Stoics. But what did he call the higher 
of the two, the supracosmic entity? He must have named it here ; 
as he refers to it by a feminine pronoun (i 8 . . . éxrds meptéxet), 
the name he used must have been feminine; and as the phrase 
voepav ovciay occurs in § g, it seems most likely that his name 
for it was  voepa otaia.? The clause in which he spoke of it is 
lost; but it may be conjectured that he wrote something like 
} pav yap pvows 7h wdvre wapéxer kurpoes, (9 8 voepa obaia Ti pro 
xopnyet Ti évépyetav.) 

[play pév thy kara Sdvapiw ‘adris', érépay 8é Thy kat évépyevay, | 
I can make no sense of these words. The person who wrote 
them appears to have been thinking of the Aristotelian antithesis 
between Svvdper, ‘potentially’, and évepyefy, ‘actually’, But that 
antithesis is inapplicable here. The substantive which must be 
understood with piav and érépav is xivyow; and what could be 
meant by saying ‘Nature gives to the universe two movements, 
one of which is potential, and the other actual’? Even supposing 
that it were possible to make that distinction between two kinds of 


1 The Stoics recognized only the first of the two, and ignored the second. 

2 Some of the later Platonists (e.g. the writer of Corp. I1) superimposed on 
these two a third entity, rd éméewa vod; and to this third and highest entity 
Plotinus gave the names 7d é and 76 dyadév. Whether the author of Exc. XV 
also recognized a third beyond and above the second, we do not know; but 
there is nothing to suggest it in the fragment of his writing which we have 
before us. 

“In Exc. VIII, 4 vont? oboia is used as an equivalent for 6 vots; and in Exes 
XVII, XVILI, and XIX, 7 vonrue? odoia is used in the same sense. 








EXCERPT XV: 2 431 


cosmic movement,’ what could any such distinction have to do with 
the distinction between something cosmic and something supra- 
cosmic, which is spoken of in the following sentence? Moreover, 
the word évépyea has just been used to signify ‘a working force’, 
the sense which it usually bears in the Hermetica; and it is not 
likely that the same writer would use it in a different sense a few 
lines after. 

Perhaps the text of the MSS. might be accounted for as follows. 
The clause 7 8 voepi otoia x.7.A. was accidentally omitted; and 
the following words (kat # piv Supe. . 4. % 88... exros 
mepiéxet) thereby became unintelligible. A reader, finding nothing 
else to which 4 pev and % 8€ could refer, assumed that they must 
refer to two different kinds of xuyjoes; and trying to think of 
some way of dividing xuwyces into two classes, he chanced to 
hit on the Aristotelian distinction between ri duvdyer dvra and 
ra évepyeig. 6vra, and accordingly inserted the words piav piv riv 
xara Suvapuv, érépav S& thy Kar’ évépyeav.? 

airjs must have got in through some subsequent error. If the 
writer had wished to say ‘according to the Svvays of divas’ 
(whatever that may mean), he would have written, not xara Sivapuw 
airys, but Kara rv dvvapww airis. 

[[Kat S16 mwdvrwv meporrrKace kowvy.|| These words, as written 
in the MSS., can only mean that both the thing which pervades 
the universe (ujxec 8:4 tod ovpravros Kéopov), and the other thing 
which is contrasted with it, alike pervade the universe. But that 
is absurd. If we write reporrnxvias instead of medounjxact, the 
phrase fits in well at the place to which I have transposed it. 
Possibly -xao and xowg are two different corruptions of -xvéas. 

$2. omeipouca pév (els GAnv) ta éauris oméppora [yéveous!. Cf. 
Exc. 1X. t as emended : 76 oréppa obv ris yevérews (ard Tod Get) 
AaBotoa yéyove (sc. 4 tAy). It is possible that the author of 


1 It might perhaps be said that the movement of the element fire is xar’ 
évépyecay, and that of the element water is card Svvayuy, inasmuch as fire is active, 
and water passive (7d yey moody, rd 58 maoxov, § 2). But if the words had been 
meant to refer to that distinction, it would have been necessary for the writer to 
explain his meaning more fully; he could not expect his readers to anticipate in 
§ 1 what they are first told in § 2. 

* In the phrase which I have written to express the probable meaning of the 
lost clause, the last word happens to be évépye:ay (used in the Hermetic sense, not 
the Aristotelian). Supposing that this word remained when the rest of the clause 
was lost, and that the interpolator consequently found in the text before him a 


lacuna followed by évépyeav, that may have suggested to him the supplement 
which he inserted. 


| ail” _ pila 





432 STOBAEI HERMETICA 


Exc, XV used a similar phrase, and wrote ra oréppara THs yeverews, 
That would account for the meaningless word yéveois, which we 
must otherwise suppose to be a remnant either of a lost clause 
(e. g. (kat xvodoa abriy els) yéverwn), or of a marginal summary of the 
paragraph. 

xwvoupérn 8é Oeppaiverar (Kal oxerar %) ((GAn)), Kat ylyverar [[ j] 
wip kal SSwp. TAr is in itself duoppos or daows; but pics imposes 
on it (i.e. on different portions of it) two opposite ‘forms’ or 
qualities, that of heat and that of coldness. vA», when the quality 
of heat is imposed on it, becomes fire;' when the quality of 
coldness is imposed on it, it becomes water. The word xivyows, as 
applied to the action of dvaws on tAy by which fire and water are 
brought into being, means ‘ change’ (dAAofwors) rather than ‘ move- 
ment’ («ivyous Kata Toor). 

wip xat d8wp, 7d pév abevapdv Kal ioxupdv, (rd Be dobevés, Kal To 
peév trovody,) 1d 8 wdécxov, Fire is the active element, and water 
the passive element. See note on Corp. I. 17. 

kal éyévero (4 yi) [[dxounéen emi tod GBaros}|. It is contrary 
to common sense to say that earth ‘is carried on water’, i.e. rests 
or floats on water. If you place earth on water, it does not float, 
but sinks, The relative positions of these two elements might 
be described by saying either that water rests on earth (sea and 
sea-bottom), or that water and earth lie side by side (sea and 
land). A satisfactory sense can be got by shifting this phrase to 
the following sentence, and writing there éyévero dnp, ((dxovpevoe 
él (rijs ys Kal) rod téaros.)) Air comes into being as an ex- 
halation given off by earth and water; and having come into 
being, it rests on the two elements out of which it has arisen; 
that is, the atmosphere lies above land and sea. 

mepiénpawonevar (-pévou MSS.) 8 (rodrwv), dros éyévero ek 
[rav tprdv] Tod re aros (kat) ris yijs [kal tod qupds), Kal eyévero 
ap. Fire and water having been produced, the heat of the fire 
(which is presumably situated above the water) transforms some 
of the water into earth. At this stage, we have fire above, water 
and earth below. The heating action of the fire now takes effect 
both on the water and on the earth, and causes a vapour to rise — 
from them; this vapour is the air. 


1 Cf. Galen De elementis sec, Hippocr. 1. 6, vol. i, ps 469 K. (Arnim Sto. vet. fie 
Il, § 408): 87 re ravrns (sc. THS Gupas Ocppdrnros) eyywoperns TH vA wip 
dmoreActrat, Tos docépos GporsynTat wagw. 





EXCERPT XV: 3 433 




















The part assigned to the fire must have been that of heating 
the earth and the water, and thereby causing them to emit vapour, 
not that of emitting vapour from itself. I have therefore bracketed 
rov TpLav and xat rod zupés. The Stoics spoke of dvabupideets 
which rise from earth and water; but no one spoke of dvaOupudcets 
which issue from fire. 

In speaking of the formation of fire and water, the writer uses 
the present tense (y¢yvera), which might seem to imply that the 

ss is continually going on. But in speaking of the formation 
of earth and air, he uses the past tense (éyévero). His view 
‘therefore appears to be that the Kosmos yéyovey, and that the 
elements came into being once for all; and if so, yéyvera: must 
be taken as a historic present, i.e. as equivalent to éyévero. He 
probably held, like most men of his time, that, having once come 
into being, the elements are continually transmuted into one 
another; but in this passage he says nothing about their continual 
transmutation. 

With this cosmogonia should be compared those of Corp. 1 and 
Corp. III, in which the formation of the elements is differently 
described. The author of Hac. XV has not been influenced by 
the first chapter of Genesis, as the writers of those /ide//i were. 

§ 3. Taira (S€) ouva Oe kard tov tis dppovias Adyor, Oepudv wuxpa, 
tnpiv Sypd. 7 dpyovia apparently means ‘the structure of the 
Kosmos’. In § 5, the same term is used to signify the structure of 
the human or animal body (which is a microcosm), In Corp. I, 4 
dppovia means ‘the structure of the heavens’. 

6 Adyos ris Gppovias must be taken to mean ‘the plan or design 
according to which the universe is constructed’. If the phrase 
were used by some one who was speaking of a personal Demiurgus, 
it would mean the plan which the Builder of the universe had in his 
mind when he began to construct it. The elements combine together 
in such a way as to carry out this plan or design. 

Ocppdrns, Wuxpéorys, typérns and gypdryns are the four primary 
qualities of matter.’ The Stoics said that fire is 7d Oepydv, air rd 
Yuxpev, water 7rd typdv, and earth 7d éypdv (Diog. Laert. 7. 137). 
Aristotle connected the elements with the four primary qualities in 
1 Galen Methodi med. 1. 2, vol. x, p. 15 K. (Arnim Sto. vet. fr. IT, § 411): 7d 
yap Oepydy at 7d Wuxpdy nal rd Endy Kat 7d irypdv ‘Inmoxparns piv mpwros elonyhaaro, 
Her’ abroy 5’ ’ApiororéAns dnédafer Eromua 8’ Hin wapadaBdytes ... of mepi Tov 


Xpiowmov . . . &« rovrav 7d ciynayta xexpacPar A€éyouc, Kal Tadr’ els dAANAG 
macyxew Kal Spar. 


2806 3 Ff 








































434 STOBAEI HERMETICA 


a different and more complicated way; according to him, fire is 
Geppav Kat Enpdv, air is eppdv Kal typdv,' water is yuxpov Kal Sypdv, 
and earth is puxpov cal Enpdv (Ar. Gen. ef corr. 2. 3, 33063). It is 
to be inferred from what is said in Zxc. XV. 2 about the formation | 
of fire, water, and earth, that the author of this Hermeticum agreed. 
with the Stoics in assigning one of the primary qualities only to each 
of the four elements, and in holding fire to be 76 Gepydy, and earth: 
to be 7d ypév; but if I am right in inserting Kai yrixera: after 
Oeppaiveras, he must have made water, not air, 7o Youxpdv, and 
consequently air, not water, 7d typdv. It would be possible to write 
Ocppatverar (kal bypaiverar) instead of Oeppaiverar (kat Ydxerar); but i 
seems more likely that the two opposite qualities of heat and coldness 
were spoken of together. 

Kal ek Tis oupmvolas toUray eyévero (ra ovvOera odpata(?). . . .), 
In a lost passage which followed these words, the writer must have 
spoken of the first formation of (plants?), beasts, and men. In § 
we find him speaking of the process by which existing beasts and 
men generate others of their kind. His account of reproduction 
resembles in some respects that given by Aristotle in his De 
gen. an. 

§ 4. (... toe 8 ev te Trav Ldov owéppare (?)) mredpa [kat oméppaj 
avddoyov 7G wepidxorre tvedpari, veda is air mixed with fire, or 
warmed air? 7d repiéxov rvedua is the atmosphere, regarded as air 
permeated by the heat infused into it from the region of fire which 
lies above it, or more simply, air warmed by the heat of the sum, 
The atmospheric prewma was held to be the life-breath (i.e. 
material vehicle of life) of that great {gov, the Kosmos, and 
dpyavov by means of which life is conveyed into individual {ga upon 
earth. (See Asc. Lat. III. 17a.) This conception of the cosmic” 
pneuma was elaborated by the Stoics out of earlier physi 1 
theories. 

There is in the individual {gov a pneuma analogous to the cosmic 
pneuma, of which it is a detached portion; and this individual 
pneuma is the material vehicle of the individual's life. The semen 
genitale, being a part of the father’s living body, contains a po tion 
of his pneuma ; and that portion of prewma, in virtue of the vital 
force residing in it, is the source or germ of the life of the new 


1 Sypds, when applied to air, means ‘ fluid’, or ‘ yielding to pressure’, rather 
than ‘moist’. Air is more iypés, in that sense of the word, than water. 
2 See Arnim, Sto. vet. fr. Il, §§ 439-446 Ar. De gem. an. 2. 2,736a 12 70 
82 nvedud (sc. the pueuma in the semen) dar Beppds dip. 





EXCERPT XV: 4 435 


organism which is brought into being by procreation. The ‘ pnewma 
in the semen’ is spoken of by Aristotle, De gen. an. 2. 3, 736b 33: 
fy To omeppare évurdpxet, Orep roel yovypa elvar Ta oméppata, Td 
xadovpevov Oeppdv. roiro 8 ob rip obSé rovatry Stvapls éorw, dAAL 7d 
eureprapBavopevov ev TO orépyart... Tvedpa, Kal } ev 7S mrvedpare 
doors, dvddoyov otea TO TOV dotpwv cToixelw. 

od Hpepet [év tH owépparr]. The words év 7@ oméppare are out of 
place here, but probably occurred in the lost part of the first sentence 
of § 4. 

odk typepodr Be (7d ev TH omeppari mvedpa), peraBddder 7d "oméppal. 
If the text is sound, the writer says that the matter on which the 
pneuma works, and which it develops into a foetus, is the semen. 
But if so, there would be no point in és riv pjprpav éureody ; for the 
pneuma, being in the semen from the first, might just as well begin its 
work on it without waiting till it had entered the pzjrpa. It is there- 
fore probable that in this respect the writer agreed with Aristotle, 
who says that the dAy worked on is supplied by the female.2 If so, 
7) owéppa must have been substituted by error for something 
equivalent to 16 wepirrwpa 7d 70d Oydeos, the term used in Ar. De 
gen. ans 

ent rh peydber 8€ Emomitar cxApa (€eiSodov emonarar oxpatos 
MSS.). The insertion of <dwAov here, and the alteration of <ido- 
mouirat below into ecidwAororetrar, must have resulted from some 
misunderstanding on the part of a transcriber ; but what he supposed 
the words to mean, I cannot guess. 

elra (dxeitar MSS.) 8é éml rd oxnparr (mpooddxerat) ri efBos. 
What is the difference between 76 cxjpa and 76 eos? Probably 73 
oxja is the shape of the embryo at a time when it does not yet 

1 These last words imply that ‘the pxeuma which is in the semen’ contains 
something which is not composed of any of the four sublunar elements, but is 
analogous to the ‘fifth substance’ of which the heavens consist. But that is a 
distinctively Aristotelian notion, and no trace of it appears in Exc. XV. 4, the 
immediate sources of which must have been Stoic rather than Aristotelian. 

Zeller, Arist. Eng. tr. Il, p. 6, says that Aristotle ‘is wholly unable to give any 
clear account of the qualities’ of the thing of which he speaks in that passage, ‘ or 
to harmonize this conception with the general teaching b the Physics’. 

2 Ar. De gen. am. 2, 3, 737. 20: the semen, bray dy els riv borépay, ovvicrnat 
kai niet 70 wepitrapa 7d Tov OAdeos, Jb, 2. 4, 738 b 20: wapéxer 7 Kev O7Av TaY 
HAny, 7d 8° Eppev 7d Sqmovpyoiy. Zeller, Arist, Eng. tr. II, p. go: ‘Aristotle 
denies any participation on the part of the male seed in the material composition of 
the embryo, declaring that it only communicates the necessary impulse to the 
substance derived from the female.’ 

8 The sense required might perhaps be expressed by writing 7d onépp (7rd rod 


By) Cf, Aetius, Diels, Doxogr. p. 423: the Stoics say npotecOa xa ry yuvaika 
oréppa. 


Ffa2 


TS 


436 STOBAEI HERMETICA 


resemble any living animal, and 73 ¢l8os is the form distinctive of 
this or that particular species of animals. The writer distinguishes 
three successive stages in the development of the foetus. In the 
first stage, it increases in bulk, but remains a semi-liquid or plastic 
mass, without any fixed or definite shape (cxja). In the second — 
stage, it assumes a certain shape, but not a specific shape; at this 
stage, a human embryo and that of a sheep would be indistinguishable, 
In the third stage, it acquires the distinctive shape of a certain 
species (ef8os) ; one can see that it is a human being, or that itisa 
sheep. Cf. Ar. De gen. an. 2. 3, 736b2: od yap dpa yivera. Cov 
Kai dvOpwros, odd Ldov Kal bros, Spotws S¢ Kai emt tov dAhov Coa 
Sorepov yap yiverar 7d réAos, 70 8 iduv gore TO éxdorou Tis yevérews 
rédos. I.e. there is a stage at which it can be said that the foetus is 
a CGov, but not that it is a {gov of this or that species. That which 
Aristotle there calls 75 iScov, the Hermetist calls 7d eiSos. 

éxeirar, the reading of the MSS., is hardly possible. It may be 
conjectured that the author wrote ¢ira . . . tpoodéxerat, OF something 
of the sort, and that éye?rac has resulted from a mixture of ¢fra with 
the verb. 

(x3 8 av ry vyBuu . . . els tov Efw dépa dyet.)) If this sentence 
occurred at all in the original text, it must have stood at the end of 
§ 4. The development of the foetus is followed by the birth. The 
missing subject of the verbs must be % dvcus, which 7@ mavri mapéxet 
kumjoes (§ 1). It cannot be the prewma which has been working in 
the foetus; for the pxewma works only within the organism to which 
it belongs, and has no power to change the relations between that 
organism and other bodies. 

ApiOpots Aoxever Kal parodrar. dpOpois, ‘by numberings’, must 
mean ‘according to fixed measurements of time’, In the case of 
the human foetus, for instance, the dpifuds would be nine months. 
But possibly dpiOpots may be a corruption of some more easily 
intelligible phrase to the same effect. 

§ 5. 7d mvedpa odk elev ev TH vmdde Thy Lorixiy kivyow, Thy Be 
Bractixhy (Bpaotichy MSS.) (pévqv). BAacrixds is equivalent to | 
Operrixds, the word used by Aristotle in similar connexions. The 
only life which the foetus possesses is that of a vegetable, and its 
only movement is that of vegetable growth. wrucy xivqois is the 
movement of an animal ({Gov) as opposed to a vegetable ; and animal 
life begins at birth. 

xat [radrny] (yuxhy mpoo)jppocer (i pdors TH) dppovia, broSoxhy odcay 


> 












EXCERPT XV: 5 437 


ris [Btavontixyjs] Lo(rx)is (évepyeias), The meaning of this passage 
as originally written, if not the exact words, can be inferred with 
confidence from the context. The zveiya gives only vegetable life 
and movement to the organism to which it belongs; the yvy% gives 
animal life and movement. Animal life begins at birth; and 
accordingly, it is at birth that a wuyy is added to the organism. 
The words which I have transposed from § 7 (rapacépre yap 76 
mvevpart (7) Yuxy) Kal xuwet wrxds) supply precisely the addition 
which is wanted here to make the meaning clear, 

Svavontixfjs cannot be right; for a mention of S:dvova, which is the 
characteristic of adult men as opposed to young children and the 
lower animals, would be out of place at this stage. We may suppose 
that évepyefas or some other substantive was omitted after Corixis ; 
that Cwrixjs was then altered into fwijs; and that a transcriber, 
seeing that some qualification of {wijs was needed, but misunder- 
standing the writer’s distinctions, wrongly inserted dvavoyrixijs. 

In his view of the successive grades of life, the Hermetist agrees 
in the main with Aristotle ; but he differs from him in his application 
of the word Yux7. He says that there is no Yvxy until birth, and 
that the growth of the foetus is a function of the pneuma alone; 
whereas Aristotle says that the unborn foetus already has a Wux 
Openrixy. Ar. De gen, an. 2. 3, 736 a 31: rérepov evurdpyer (Wuyi) TO 
oréppart kal Tg kujpare 7 ot... ; obre yap ds diuyov dv Dein Ts TO Kinpa 
kara mdvra tpdrov éorepnpévov Lwijs' ovdty yap Frrov ré re oméppata 
kal 7a Kuijpara tov Cawv ff tov durdv,' Kal ydvipa péxpr twos eorw. 
drt pev obv Tv Operrixny exover Wuyi, pavepdv.... mpordvra dé Kal 
tiv aicbyrixiy (exover Wuyi), Kab’ Hv EGov... . mpOrov pev yap 
dravr’ éouxe Civ rd Toaira putot Biov, éropévws Sk SHdov Sri Kat rept 
ris aicOnrixijs Aexréov Wuxiis kal wept rips voyTiKys. 

The writer of Zxc. XV agrees with the Stoics against Aristotle in 
saying that the yx first presents itself in the organism at birth ; but 
he shows himself a Platonist, and not a Stoic, in saying that at the 
moment of birth a pre-existent (and presumably incorporeal) yvyx7j 
enters into the organism from without,’ whereas the Stoics said that 
the Wux7 {which they held to be a corporeal thing) comes into 


_ 2 § Embryos are no less alive than plants.’ The Hermetist would have expressed 
this by saying that they have BAaorieiy Kivnow. 

2 The alo@nriuey Yvxn of Aristotle corresponds to the (wruct xiynois of the 
Hermetist. 

S Aristotle, De gen. an. 2. 3, 736 b 27, says Tov voiv pdvoy Oipaber émevorévar, 
wat Oeiow elvac udvov" obOev ydp abrod 77 evepyeia nowover awparini) évépyea. 


438 STOBAEI HERMETICA 


existence at birth, being a modified form of the corporeal pueuma — 
which was already present in the foetus. 

§ 6. kat 4 éyyutétw tapodca uy mpogorkeroirai—(xal éeyyurdra 
ux} ogo oiketodta: MSS.) Ifa pre-existent yvxy enters the body 
at birth, how is it determined which of the innumerable unembodied 
Yvxai is to do so? The writer’s answer to this question appears to 
have been that the yx which enters the body is that yuvx7 which is 
nearest at hand (hovering in the adjacent air?) at the moment of 
birth ; and that it is there at the right moment, not (as some people 
mistakenly suppose) because of any kinship or resemblance between 
it and the body it is about to enter, but because it has been assigned 
to this body by Heimarmene. 

of xara ‘Thy ouyyevixhy odcidrqta (i8idrmra P)! (apayevopern), 
dda [Thy] Kab” cipappévqv. ovowryra, the reading of F, may be a 
corruption of éoudryra, or of oixedryta (cf. kara ovyyevixiy oixedryra 
in Exc. XVI. 4). It would be possible to write od xar& [ri] ovy- 
yevuchyy oixerérnra, ‘not on the ground of a relationship which has to 
do with kinship’; but it is perhaps more likely that the original 
reading was o’ xara ovyyéveay, and that oixedryra or duowdryra Was 
written as an alternative for ovyyéveav. At any rate, od Kara ovy 
yévetav would serve to express what the author probably meant. 

ob yap Epws (épdtwv MSS.) éorly adrij (rod) pera odparos elvat, 
Some Platonists said that the sou! is drawn down into the body by 
its own morbid desire for bodily things. But the writer of Zxc. XV 
rejects that view, and holds that the soul has no choice in the 
matter; its incarnation is determined for it by Heimarmene. 

§ 7. (h Se ducts Lwrixds Sy Kivoupévm(?)) mapéxer TO yevonerg 
(ytyvopéva MSS.) Stavonrixiy Kivnow. Sidvous is this writer’s name 
for what is often called Adyos, viz. the mental function by the 
possession of which man is distinguished from ra dAoya 2Ga. All 
that the Hermetist has hitherto said about the development of the 
living organism applies to men and beasts alike; but he now goes 
on to speak of the further development which is peculiar to men, 
The Savonrixt xivyors begins, not at birth, (for a new-born baby has 
no Sidvoi,) but after some years of life—perhaps at adolescence. 
(Cf. Bxc. II. 5 as emended: twés pév (rav evepyeav) dpa ro 
yevécbar tov dvOpwrov wapayiyvovrat, ... ai de xabapdrepar évepyerat 
kata. peraBodiy THs pAuxias, x.7.A.) But it is present in all adult men. 
The agent to whose operation the writer attributed its presence was 
doubtless 7 dvars. 








EXCERPTS XV: 6.7: ANT: 2 439 


(6 Be Beds Sdiyous tuot mapéxer(?)) Kal voepdv [Lwijs abrijs] odctav. 
The voep oicia is the vods (in the higher and more restricted 
sense of that term), which is conferred on a few men only. It is 
an éréoracpa or drdppoa of the divine vods (Corp. XII. i init.), 
and is bestowed, not by cosmic Nature, but by the immediate 
action of the supracosmic God. The few who receive it are thereby 
raised above the Kosmos, and become 6eior, or even Geoi. 

(gore 8€ arn dpepitys kal dperdBrytos, obSdmote eftoTapévn Tis 
dperaBAyoias.)) In the MSS., this sentence is placed in § 5; and 
in that position, avry would mean, according to the traditional text 
of § 5, # Savonrixt) wx, and according to my emendation of it, 
4 Cori évépyea or xivgors. But neither of these things is dpera- 
Bdyros. The only thing in man that is exempt from perafodx is 
6 vots; this sentence must therefore have followed the mention of 
yoepa ovgia in§ 7. It is just because 6 vois is dueraBAyros, that 
in speaking of it the writer uses the word ovtcia, and not xivyots. 
His series is BAaorixi kivnois, Corin xivyows, Siavontixy Kivyots, 
yoepa ovcia. 


EXCERPT XVI 


In § 1, the writer is speaking of yxy; in §§ 2-5, he is speaking 
of capa, and of certain things (réros, xpdvos, and vox klynots) 
which are connected with ciua. In the last sentence of § 6, Yuxy 
is spoken of again. 

§ 1. (i) Wuxh toivuy odcia éotivy dodpartos. The soul is an otoia 
(a ‘substance’, i.e. a thing which exists independently), and not 
a mere attribute of some ovcia (e. g. of the body). 

But there are otofa: of different kinds. Bodies also are ovoiat; 
but the soul is ota/a dodparos, ‘an incorporeal substance’. The 
word dodparos is here equivalent to voyry. Cf. Zxc. XXL. 1: 
4} obcrdrys, [i] Kabddov Aeyouevy, kouy (ore tov) voyrav (cat tév 
alcOnrav 2)... . (7 88) pvais (i. e. the corporeal world) oicia aicOyry, 
eyouoa ey éavti (ra) ai Onra mavra. 

kat év odpat S€ odca obk exBaiver ris i8ias odaidrytos, There 
are unembodied souls ; and even when a soul is embodied, it still 
continues to be an oteia dowparos, as it was before. 

tuyxdve. yap odca “derkivyros Kar odciay Kard vénow adtoKtyntos', 
I propose to read tuyxaver yap otoa atrokivytos, Kat’ obciay vonTiy 
xwovpéery. (If this conjecture is right, adroxivyros has been repeated 


_S 


440 STOBAEI HERMETICA 





















by error after voyrjv (véyow MSS.), and has been altered into 
daiviiros (P) and detxivyros (F) after otoa.) See § 6 fix., where J I 
read % kar’ otctay vorkriy xii )ors. Cf. Bxe, XIX. 3: ite 
clot wat Kal dvo Kunjoes, pla piv Kar otciay, érépa & A 

g¢iow. (The oiaia of Zxc. XIX is dodparos or vonr} tei 

The writer of Hxc. XVI holds that there are two different kinds 
of otcia, and in correspondence with them, two different kinds 
of xivyois. The movement of bodies is called by him 4 duoup 
kimots (§ 5) and % xara diow xivnors (§ 3); and the sort of 
movement that is appropriate to an dowdparos ovcia might ve; . 
well be called by him 4 kar’ otatay voyriv kivnors. 

Compare Aetius, Diels, Doxogr. p. 387: obroe mdvres 
dodpatov tiv Youxiv troriGevra, diow (‘a thing’) A€yovres o 
kivytov Kat obciay voytyv. Perhaps we ought to read there ¢ 
Aéyovres airoxivytov, Kar’ obciav vonriy (xwoupévyy?): ‘saying 
the soul is a thing which is self-moved, being moved in the manner 
of an ovata vonry.’ 

Both dexivnros (which is used in Pl. Phaedr. 245¢) 2 
abroxivyros (which is not used by Plato, but was suggested by the 
same passage in the Phaedrus) were habitually applied to the soul 
by Platonists. Cf. Aetius, Diels, Doxogr. p. 386 (quoted in note on 
Exc. IV A. 4). 

odk é tit "xwoupévn' (odca?), of mpds ti, od{x) evexéy Tivos, 
odx év Tue seems inconsistent with cai év cdpart 5? ofa above, which 
implies that a soul sometimes 7s ‘in something’, But the words 
might perhaps be understood as an expansion of the statement that 
the soul is an otaia. ‘It does not exist (merely) something, &c,” 

[Since the soul has been defined as airoxivyros, the writer might 
proceed to deny that it is moved ¢z something, i.e, has its motion 
from without. This is one of the senses of év discussed in Ar. Phys. 4, 
3: Kal dAws ev TS mpd KivyTiKs. | 

§ 2. rd ey tun toivuy eoriv' & tds Kal (6) xpdvos “kat dors’, 
This section appears to be meant for an explanation of the words 
év tw, mpds ty, and evexey twos in § 1; but as given in the MSS., 
it is unintelligible. 

It would be possible to make sense of the first clause of it by 
writing ro év rim, and taking this to mean ‘the answer to the 
question “in what?”’. We might then translate ‘That in which 
things are is place and time’; and xat dvovs might be a remnant of 
something like (év rovrous yap) 4 vow xivnows, ‘ physical movement 


EXCERPT XVI: 2 441 









































js in place and time » But if év ré were written here, zpos 7: in the 
following clause could hardly be retained, and we should have to 
ume that 7d 8¢ mpds 7. . . oxfpa is an interpolation,—which 
‘seems probable on other grounds also. [See Addenda in vol. iv.] 
F435 82 mpds Te eotiv ppovia Kal 80s kal oxfjpo.' Perhaps a 
‘nearer approach to the original reading might be made by writing 
“gd 88 mpds TL ofon dppovia x.r.A.: ‘by “that which exists merely 
jn relation to something” I mean, for instance, dppovia’ &c. 

“The word épyovia occurs again in § 3 and in §6; but in both 
those places, there is reason to bracket the phrase in which it 
occurs. There is no other mention of fos or oyjpa in this Excerpt. 
It may be suspected that the man who wrote these words was 
king of the doctrine that the soul is a dppovia; and the 
gument implied may perhaps have been to this effect: ‘a éppovia. 
mpés Tt (a coadjustment of things), not otcia; but the soul is 
‘oicia, not mpés rv; therefore the soul cannot be a dppovia.’ 

The doctrine that the soul is a dppovia is discussed and rejected 
in Pl. Phaedo 86 a-D and g1C-94=; and it is there presented 
in two different forms, viz. (1) that the soul is to the body as 

¢ dppovia of a lyre (i.e. the coadjustment or tuning of its strings) 
to the lyre, and (2) that the soul is a dpyovia or kpaows (i.e. a 
adjustment or ‘contemperation’) of the elements (75 Oeppdv, To 
‘yrxpsr, 73 Enpdv, 7d éypdv) of which the body is composed. In 
either form alike, it implies that the soul is not an ovcia, but 
s dependent on the body for its existence, and that it ceases to 
exist at death. 

Aristotle, De an. 1. 4, 407b 27 sgg., speaks of the doctrine 
that the soul is a dpyovfa, and says it is a d0ga miBavy zoAXois. 
This doctrine was asserted by Aristoxenus, who took the word 
Gppovia in its musical sense (Cic. Zusc, 1. 10. 20); and by Dicaear- 
chus, who took it in the other sense (Aetius, Diels, Doxogr. p. 387: 
Atxalapyos (yn THv Woyxiv vo) dppoviay Tov recodpwvzrrorxeiwv). 
‘It is discussed and rejected by Lucretius, 3. 98 sgg. Macrobius, 
Somn. Scip. 1. 14. 19, says ‘Pythagoras et Philolaus (dixerunt 
animam esse) harmoniam’; but there appears to be no earlier 
evidence that the doctrine was of Pythagorean origin; and it is 
‘inconsistent with the Pythagorean belief in the existence of dis- 
embodied souls. 

Aristotelians might say that the soul is the’jeidos of the living 
body. (Arist. Fragm. 42, 1482b 37: lids 7 7 oxy. W. D. Ross, 





442 STOBAEI HERMETICA 


Aristotle, 1923, p. 134: ‘Animate bodies . . . are individual 
independent substances concrete of matter and form. In this 
concrete unity, . . . body plays the part of matter or possessor 
of attributes, and soul that of form or essential attribute.’) That 
might possibly account for the mention of eos in this clause, 
if we assume that the writer knew the Aristotelian doctrine of the 
soul and rejected it, as he rejected the dpyovia-doctrine. But 
I do not know that it was ever said that the soul is a oxfpa. 

[rata 82 Kata ovyyenkhy oixetdrata Kowwvet Addidors.] For card 
ovyyevixny oixedryra, Cf. kari thy ovyyeviKyy obodryra (al. i8iéryra) 
in Exc. XV. 6. 

What are ‘these things’ (raira)? They appear to be the three 
things which, in the preceding clause, were said to be évexa odparos ; 
namely, xpdvos, rdmos, and dvorx(y xivyors). But the following sentence, 
dyjxavov yap x.7.\., does not fit on well to this statement; and we 
get a better connexion if we cut out ratra S58. . . Kowwvel ddAHAog 
(as well as érel rotvw 73 cdma édeiro rérov) and make dpiyavov 
yop «7d. follow immediately on évexa yap odparos Kat xpdvos 
kai Toros Kal duoixi) xivyows, which it seems intended to explain, 

[@mei roivuy 73 cpa eeiro rémou]. . . [kal peraBddrAcrar puorxy 
(xunjeet)]. These misplaced phrases may perhaps be fragments of 
a sentence which followed at the end of § 3. 

Gpyxavoy ydp [fv] overivar capa advev témov. Cf. Sext. Empir. 
Pyrrh, 3. 121: eye piv tore tu cpa, pacty, %rrar Kal & rézos* 
dvev yap tovrov otk ay ely 76 cdpa. 

&duvarov 52 peraBohhy (cdpatos) elvar dvev xpdvov. It is necessary 
to add cwparos. Soul, as well as body, is subject to pweraBody ; but 
the writer is here speaking of body only, and not of soul. Cf. ras 
ToD Twparos peraBodds in § 4. 

[otre odpatos ofdv te ovoracw elvat dvev dppovias.] This is doubt- 
less a later addition. If it was to be said at all, it could have been 
said better in two words, by adding «ai dppovias after dyjxavov yap 
overivat cia (= cdparos cvotacw evar) dvev Tdrov. 

§ 4. Evexa 'roivuv! rod cépardés gory & témos. dros, ‘ place’, means 
the space which is occupied by body. But what is meant by saying 
that place exists ‘for the sake of’ body? The word @&exa (in its 
primary sense at least) implies a purpose; and a purpose implies 
some one who purposes. This statement therefore, if we give the 
words their full significance, would seem to imply that the Creator 
first said to himself ‘I will make body’, and then added ‘in order 








EXCERPT XVI: 4,5 443 


that I may do so, I must first make a space for the body to occupy’. 
But the writer was probably not here thinking of a personal Creator ; 
and perhaps he meant merely that body could not exist if there were 
not a place for it. If so, the same thought is expressed in a different 
way by the phrase 76 cGpa éetro rérov in § 3; ‘body was in need of 
place (in order that it might exist).’ 

mapadexspevos yap (6 téwos) tds tod odparos peraBohds odk é¢ 
anddhuobar 73 peraBadddpevov, Bodies change (e.g. a lump of ice 
turns into water) ; and if the body still exists after the change, there 
must be something belonging to it which persists,—some permanent 
substrate on which different qualities (e.g. the qualities of ice and 
those of water) are successively imposed. This permanent substrate 
the writer apparently holds to be 6 rdzos, i.e. the space which the 
body occupies. Thus he assigns to réos the function which, in the 
Timaeus, is assigned to the éodox#, and which, after Plato’s time, 
was commonly assigned to ty. This notion may have been 
suggested to the Hermetist by Pl. Zim. 52 a, where the trodoyy is 
identified with xwpa. Cf. Ar. Phys. 4. 2, 209 b rr: 8d Kat DAdrov 
thy DAyv Kal Thy Xdpay raird dyow eva év rH Tywalo. 

It might be objected that one of the kinds of change to which 
bodies are subject is motion from one place to another, and that 
when a body is in motion, 6 réros does not, with respect to that 
body, persist unchanged, and therefore cannot ‘save the body from 
destruction’. The writer ignores this difficulty; he seems to be 
thinking only of a body which remains in the same place throughout 
the series of changes to which it is subjected. 

Tis pév Efews orepioxerar, tod Sé elvar cdpa odxi. The eis of a 
body is the sum of the qualities which it manifests at a given 
moment. When a body changes, it loses the és which it had 
before, and receives another és instead; but it still remains 
a body. 

(78 cdpa toivuy card SidBeow peraBddderar’)) 7d yap odpa, f cdpo, 
péver [cdpal,  8é mod Siddeors oF péver. What has just been said is 
here repeated in other words, Sides being used as a synonym for 
é&s. The repetition is superfluous ; and there is no apparent reason 
for writing xara Sidbeow and 7 8% roe Sudbeors instead of cab? Zéw and 
 O& mova és. It may therefore be suspected that 73 cpa rotvu... 
ob péver is a parallel passage appended in the margin. 

§ 5. (évex)a odparos toivuy 6 témos Kal 6 Xpdvos Kal ¥ huctKh Kivyors. 
This has already been asserted in § 3 wit. In § 4, it is shown that 


Se 


444 STOBAEI HERMETICA 


the assertion is true in respect of ré7os. It seems probable that § 4 
was followed by a passage, now lost, in which xpdévos and dvouny 
xéynows were similarly dealt with, and it was shown of each of them 
in turn that it is évexa odparos. If so, the proposition which was 
asserted in § 3, and proved in § 4 and the lost passage together, is 
repeated in § 5, when the proof has been completed. 

§ 6. iSudrys 82 [rod] réwou wapaSoxy. Wachsmuth alters rapadoyy 
(rapacxy P) into epoxy ; but rapadoyxy is confirmed and explained 
by zapadexdpevos yap Tas TOD odparos peraBords in § 4. 

xpdvou 82 (iSudrys) Sidornpa Kat dpiWpds. Cf. Arius Didymus, 
Diels Doxogr. p. 461 (Stob. 1. 8. 40 e and 42, vol. i, pp. 104 ff. W.): 
Zivev ebyoe xpdvov evar Kuvjoews Sudornpa, TovTo Se Kal pérpov Kal 
kpitnpiov Tdxous Te Kat Bpaddryros. . . . *AmodAddwpos &. . . otras 
Spilerax rov xpdvov' “ xpdvos 8 éori ris ToD KogpoU KUTEWs dudornpa.” 
. «« tov 88 xpdvor obrws Spilerar (Posidonius), dudornpa xujoews, 7 
pérpov tdxous te Kal Bpadvrytos. . . . 6 8 Xpvaumros, xpdvov elvar 
kujoews Sidornpa, “kal bv (8 Heeren) tore Aéyerax! pérpov réxovs Kat 
Bpa8irnros.! Plut. Quaest. Plat. 8. 4, 1007 A: pyréov ov rods two 
rovrwv Taparrouevors 8’ dyvowy olerOa. tov xpovov “pérpov” etvat 
 kujoews”, cat “dpOpdv Kar& pdrepov Kal torepov” ds “Apurroréhys 
cirev, .. . } “ dudornpa Kujrews” dAdo 8 ob8ev, ds Evtor TOY Srwrkdy. 
Simplicius ix Av. Phys. p. 700 Diels: rod “Apytrov Aéyovros Kabddou 
tov xpévov Sidotnpa Tis Tod wavrés gicews, 'H ds’ (ds Kal?) Twes 
Tov Srwixav Edeyov. These passages show that didorypa was the most 
prominent word in one of the Stoic definitions of time; and the 
Hermetist, when he said that the i&dérys of time is didoryua, must 
have been thinking of that definition. 

Similarly, the word épu8pés must have been suggested by Aristotle's 
definition, Phys. 4. 11, 219 b1: rodro ydp éorw 6 xpdvos, apiOpds 
Kujoews Kata Td mprepov Kal orepov. But as the idudryns of each of 
the other things spoken of is indicated by a single word, it may be 
suspected that Sidorypa alone was originally given as the ididrys 
xpovov, and that xat dpuOués has been added later. 

Thdcews 8é (iSidrys) Kivqors, [Gppovias Sé gudia,|] odparos Sé pera- 
Body’. This cannot be right. It might be expected that something 
would be here said about gvotxiy xivyows, which is coupled with réos 
and xpdves in § 5, and appears therefore to be one of the things 
referred to by the words éxacrov rovrwv. But it could not be said 


1 Cf Stob. 1. 8. 40 b, vol. i, p. 103 W: (roy xpévov) pérpov Bpaddrnros 4 Taxus 
ele Xpdaurmos. 








EXCERPTS XVI: 6; XVII: 1 445 


that x«évyois (without qualification) is idirns dicews; for Yvyy also 
xwerrat, and the xivyou of Wuxy differs from duowxy xivyots, and is 
contrasted with it in this document. Nor could it be said that 
peraBory is iiérys odparos; for Yuxq also peraBddAera. It would 
be possible to make sense by cutting out these words, and rewriting 
the following sentence thus: idérys 8? (cwparos pev 4 puorxiy Kivnots), 
yoxis (82) 9 Kar’ obclay von(riy Kivq)ots. 


EXCERPT XVII 


This piece is an extract from a discourse or epistle addressed by 
Hermes to Ammon (4 “Appov, § 1). In style and terminology, 
Exc. XVII closely resembles Zxc. XVIII and £xc, XIX. It is 
therefore probable that these three pieces were written by the same 
author ; and it is possible that all three were extracted by Stobaeus 
from the same /iJed/us. If so, Exc, XVIII and Exc. XIX, as well as 
£xc. XVII, ought to be reckoned among ‘the teachings of Hermes 
to Ammon’. All three are badly damaged by corruption of the 
text, and much of their meaning is lost beyond hope of recovery. 

§ 1. woxh .. . dotiv . . . obcla adrorehs év apy. abroredis, 
‘independent of external authority’, or ‘self-determining’, is equiva- 
lent to atrefovowos. The soul, ‘in the beginning’, i.e. before it has 
been incarnated and affected by material things, is aéroreAyjs ; for in 
that condition it is not subject to Heimarmene. 

It may be suspected that there is a lacuna after ota, and that 
avroreAijs év dpxy belongs to another clause, the beginning of which 
has been lost. 

ehopévy (5) Biov tov Kal? cipappérny, (...). Cf. Axc. XVIII. 3, 4: 
70 8 aipeioOar exopev x... Lxc. XIX. 3: 4 pv [ ] Kar’ otolay 
(fam) airefodoros, 7 52 (xara piow Lurj) dvayxacrixy. See also Lx. 
VIL. 5. For éXomevy cf. Pl. Rep. 10. 617 E-618 B. 

kal éreondoato éaury (&)Noyév (71) Sporov TH Ay. Adyov spor rH 
tAy is inexplicable ; and there can be little doubt that we ought to 
read dAoyor in place of Adyov. (Cf. ds mpds 7d ddoyov in § 6.) The 
soul, when embodied, adds to itself something which is of like 
nature with the matter of which the body consists. This thing 
which is added or appended to the soul in consequence of its 
incarnation is called 7d dAoyov (népos rijs Yuy7js). It might equally 
well be called 75 za@yrixdv ; and the wd6y by which it is affected fall 
under the two heads @upds and éxvuia. The writer has been 


446 STOBAEI HERMETICA 


influenced by Pl. £ef., in which ré dAoyov ris Yuxijs is divided into 
70 Ovpoedés and 76 émOupnricdy. 

éaurqj after éreordoaro is redundant, and may perhaps have been 
inserted by error. The verb émuexao6a probably occurs again in a 
similar connexion in § 7, and also in Zxc, XIX. 1. 

§ 2. 6 pev Oupds [ J, ddv Ef morjoy mpds Td Tis puxis vonpa, yiverar 
dv8peia. Ovyds is an irrational réos ; but when rightly directed and 
controlled by vots or rb Aoywrrusdv, it is changed into the moral 
virtue dvSpeca. And the relation between érifvpia and cwdpocivy is 
analogous to that between Guuds and avdpeia. 

mpos Td THS Wux}s vonwa appears to be identical in meaning with 
mpos Tov Tis Yux%s Aoywpdv below; and it seems probable that rdy 
. . . Aoywrpdv was the original reading in both places (cf. &yra... 
rod Tis yuxis Acywpod in § 3), and that ro. . . vénua has been 
substituted for it by a transcriber. It appears that in this excerpt 6 
Aéyos means what Plato calls 73 Aoyrorucdy (uépos ris Yuxijs), and 
5 Aoytopds signifies the function or operation of the Adyos. 

In §§ 2 and 3 as given in the MSS., ééwv roujory occurs twice, and éw 
momenta: once. The author must have used the same phrase in all three 
places; but neither éw roujoy nor €éw roujonrat is quite satisfactory," 
The meaning of ééis here seems to be that which is given to the word 
in Aristotle’s Ethics. Cf. Ar. Eth. Nic. 2. 5. 2: Aéyw SE wdOy pov 
érBuplav, dpyiy, KTA, ees 8€, wal’ as mpds ra don exopey Bd 7 
xaxas. A éfis in this sense is a Sudbeors (‘disposition’) which is 
firmly established and lasting (Ar. Cav. 8.9a8). The phrase éay 
Zéw roujoy (or -oyrar) mpds Tov THs Wuxijs Aoywpdv corresponds to 
tis... &v pecdryte obca... dpicpévy ACy in Aristotle’s definition 
of 470i} dpern, Lth. Nic. 2. 6. 15.” 

(8 Oupds) od wapdyerar ind SeAfas. The corresponding phrase with 
reference to cwhpoovvy is (i) éribupia) ob xwetrar bd Hovis. But 
deAla, being a vice (i.e. a xaxiy fs), does not rightly correspond to 
8ov7}, which is a 7dé6os and not a vice. Perhaps the author wrote 
td defuaros, or td tv Sewer. 

[Gmdpxer Thy. obros] . . . [wapéxerat. aim]. These are un- 
intelligible remnants of two parallel phrases, which may or may not 


1 One might perhaps compare Pl. Rep. 4. 443 E: dvoudCovra Sixaiav .. . mpag, 
4 dy radrny tiv ew ogy re kal cuvanepyacyrat. 

2 Prof. Stewart says that dpiopévp Ady there means ‘ determined according to 
the proper ratio or proportion’, and not ‘ determined by Reason’, But whatever 
Aristotle may have meant by the words, the Hermetist, if he had read them, might 
take them to mean ‘ determined by the rational part of the soul’, 








EXCERPT XVII: 2-4 447 


have been present in the original text. apéyerac might be a 
corruption of imdpye, or of rapdyera. 

§ 3. [dvamdnpot ydp 6 Noyiopds 75 evBdor Tis énvupias.| This appears 
to be a doublet of éravuroi 8 76 evdéov rijs émibupias at the end of 
the section. There is no corresponding clause with reference to 
Oupés. 

Srav Be dupdrepa (sc. 6 Oupds and  emBupia) dpovoroy Kat tony 
dv morjon, Kal exntar dpddtepa tod ris Wuxis Noysopod, yiverat 
Sixatoovvy. In Pl. Fep., it is not Sixavootyy, but cwdppoctvy, that is 
described as consisting in a certain ‘unanimity’. Rep. 4. 4324: 
épbdrar’ dv paipev ratiryy ri dydvoray cudpoovvnv elvat, xeipoves Te 
kal dpeivovos xara piow Evphuviav, drdrepov Set apxew, cat év rode Kat 
&y evi Exdor. Lb, 442. C: cddpova (xadoduey Ba &xacrov) TH pidia 
kat Evppwvig. (of the three parts of the soul), grav 76 re dpyov xa rd 
dpxopevw 7d AoytoTucdy Spodogdor Seiv dpyew. 

What is the meaning of icy gis? Does it mean és &v peodrgre 
otga? Or, a state in which @upés and éiBvpia are evenly balanced 
against one another? The phrase is obscure, and it may be suspected 
that the text has been altered. The passage might be made more 
intelligible by cutting out Kat tony ew roujoy, and substituting some 
other term (e. g. dudvora ?) for ion eis in the following sentence. 

h yap ton Efts abrav apaipel ev thy brepBodhy tod Gupod, émavicot 8é 
7d évddov ris émGupias. I do not understand this. The words seem 
to imply that vuds, when not governed by Aoyopds, errs by excess, 
and that ér#vpéa, when not governed by Noywpds, errs by defect ; 
that is to say, that if a man’s passions are not controlled by reason, 
he will be too much disposed to fight, and too little disposed to seek 
pleasure. But a Hermetist would be more on his guard against 
having too much émuyéa than against having too little of it. 
Moreover, it is difficult to reconcile this statement with § 2, in which 
it is implied that the man whose passions are not governed by 
reason wapdyerat tad Secdias (i.e. errs by defect of Ovpds), and xuvetrar 
trd Hdovijs (i.e. errs by excess of ériGvpia). Aristotle would have 
said that in the case of @vyds and ériuyéa alike there are both errors 
of excess and errors of defect. Cf. Zxc, XVIIL. 2: (73 dAoyov) cat 
trepBdddea Kai éddAcire. Perhaps a better sense might be got by 
striking out 70d @vuod and rijs ériOupias. 

§ 4. [apxh 8€ rodrwr 4 Siavontixh odcia.] This appears to be a 
doublet of § 5 init. 

[ka®” atthy éaurh obca év TH abrijs wepwontixd Adyw] [xpdtos Zxousa 


SSS Se ae 


448 STOBAEI HERMETICA 


tiv éauriis Mbyor], These meaningless words have a curious resem- 
blance to the two phrases atr?) éaurijs otoa ev 7G vontO Kdope, and 
vénpa exovoa tov éavriis Adyov, which occur in £xt. XIX. 313 
Assuming that Ze, XVII and £xc. XIX were parts of the same 
libellus, it is possible that doublets of phrases which belonged to one 
of them may have been inserted by error in the other. 

§ 5. dpxet 8é (rotrwv) [[ J] 4 (vontexh) odcia, ((Kal myepoveter)) 
Gomep dpxwr, & 2 Adyos (cuvaxochoubet) adry (adtis MSS.) dowep 
odpBoudos, The addition of rovrov (sc. rot Oupod Kat ris érOvplas) 
and voytu is suggested by the doublet in § 4 évit, The term 
4 vontuxh) ovcia occurs in L£xe. XIX. 4 (cf. voyrucy oto(a in 
Exe. XIX. 1 init); and I have restored it by conjecture in 
Exc. XVIL 6 and £xc. XVII. 4. It is presumably equivalent 
to & vots. (Compare the use of 4 voyr} otola—possibly 7 vonr(ux)y 
otola ?—in the sense of 6 vods in Zxc. VIII. 5, and that of # voepa 
otota, apparently in the same sense, in Zuvc. XV. 7.) In Plato, 
& vots and 73 Aoywrrixdy are two names for the same thing ; but 
the Hermetist divides the thing which Plato called by those names 
into two distinct but closely interconnected things, one of which 
is named by him 4 voyrixy otola, and the other, 5 Adyos.2 We 
are told that the former is ‘ruler’ or ‘commander’, and the latter 
‘counsellor’, This may perhaps be taken to mean that the 
function of the one is that which, in Aristotle’s Lthics, is called 
BovtAnors, and that of the other corresponds to Aristotle’s BovAevars 
and mpoatpecis; i.e. that the vonruy otcfa determines the good 
to be aimed at, and the Adyos deliberates and decides concerning 
the action to be taken with a view to realizing that good, 

§ 6. 6 [repwvontixds] Mbyos toivw Tis ((vontixiis)) odeias éort, The 
MSS. give mepwoyrixds Adyos here, vonparucg (al, vontixd) Adyw in 
Exc. XVIIL. 2, repwonuarixds (or zept vonparixds) Adyos in £xe. 
XVIII. 4, Siavoyrixdy Adyov in Lxe. XVIII. 5. The Adyos of 
which the Hermetist is speaking might possibly be called voyrixds 
(as being closely connected with the voyrixy ovata), or diavonrixds 
(as to Sidvoua, see note on Lxc. XVIII. 1); but repwonrixds (‘ shrewd’ 
or ‘subtle’) cannot be right; and neither vonpatixds NOY Tepwoy- 
parixds, as far as I know, occurs elsewhere in Greek literature. 
It may be conjectured that wep has been inserted by error, and 

1 Perhaps it is worth while to notealso the resemblance between dpx(«t) 5¢ rovraw 


in Exc. XVIL 4 init. = 5 init. (as emended) and dpxe 82 rod in Hxc. XIX. 1. 
2 Cf, Exc, XI. 2. (15) as emended: 6 vois év 7G Gg: 6 Adyos éy 7@ vol, 








EXCERPT XVII: 5-7 449 


that vonrixds has come from voyrus misplaced. Emended as I 
propose, the words mean ‘The Adyos belongs to the voyrixi ovata’. 
(As we have just been told, the relation between them is like that 
between an dpywy and his ovpBovdos.) Cf. 6 d& Adyos ris obcias 
in Exc. XIX. 5 (MSS.), and 6 dé Adyos THs ovaias éoti 75 Hpovory, 7b. 6 
(MSS.). It would be possible to add (ré povoir), or something of the 
sort, after oteias éoré in Hxc. XVIL. 6; but that is hardly necessary. 

(. « +) dweixacpa (cixacpdy MSS.) Aoyiopod [rg addy], dpudpdv 
pev ds mpds Aoytopdr, . . . (capes) ((S€ Gs mpds 7d dAoyov.)) The 
missing subject of this sentence must have been the name of some 
mental faculty or function intermediate between Aoywpds and 
7d dAoyov. It may have been dséa; and this seems the more 
probable, because yous, with which 80£a is contrasted in Zxc. XIX. 
5, has been mentioned just before in Zxc. XVII. In Pl. Rep. 5. 
478C, Sdga is said to be yrooews pev cxorwdéorepov, ayvoias 88 
gavdrepov. In Rep. 6. 509 D ff., Plato distinguishes four mental 
functions, which he arranges in series according to their respective 
degrees of ‘clearness’; he names them (1) vonaus, (2) diudvoe, (3) 
riots, (4) eixacia ; the object of voyors and Sidvoia he calls voyrev, 
and the object of iors and cixacia, dpardv or dogacrdv. The 
Hermetist may have been thinking of one of those two passages, or 
both of them. 

§ 7. [ippoorar S€ Oupds nai émBupia mpds tia Aoytopdy.] This 
must be a misplaced fragment of the passage concerning Ouyés and 
éribupia, §§ 2 and 3. Do the words mean that Ouyos and érbupia 
are ‘put in tune with’ one another (i.e. rightly adjusted with 
reference to one another)? Or, that both of them are ‘put in 
tune with’ Aoywrds? The metaphor of a musical dppovia is used 
by Plato, ep. 3. 411, in speaking of the relation between 7d 
Ovpoedés and 7d girdcopov (= 1d Aoywrixdv) ; music and gym- 
nastic, he says, have been given to men éri 7d Oupoeidés Kat TO 
irdcopor... dws dy dAAn\ois Evvappoo Oijrov éirewvopevw kal dviepeven 
Héxpt Tod mpoojKovtos. (Adam’s note ad /oc.; ‘The soul has, so to 
speak, two strings, the d:Adgodov and the @vpoades, which make a kind 
of dppovia when they are tuned to the proper pitch’.) See also 
Rep. 4. 4418. But in Rep. 4. 443 D, E, where Plato uses the 
same metaphor again, he speaks of ¢hree strings of the soul-lyre 
(€vveppscavra tpia dvta domep dpovs tpeis dppovias x.7.A.), the 
three being 7d Aoyurrixdv, TO Oupoedés, and ro émufvpytixdv, to which 
the Hermetist’s Aoywrpds, Ovuds, and éridvpia correspond, 

2806+3 Gg 


450 STOBAEI HERMETICA 


nwa is obscure, and may possibly be a misreading for rév; 
but the similar phrase pds twa Adyov occurs in Zxc. VIII. 3 and 6. 

[kal éiorara, éy éaurois xucdukhy Sidvovay]. ériorarae is very 
likely a corruption of éru7ara. Usener’s conjecture tAuyy for 
kukduxyv may be right; but the combination bAuciy didvoray is hardly 
possible, for Sudvova must surely belong to that part of the soul which 
is not duouv rH vAy (§ 1). 


EXCERPT XVII 


§ x. “Eort toivwy . . . 08 péver', It appears that the writer was 
here explaining the relations between certain ‘ things in the soul’, 
or parts of the soul; and perhaps a meaning more or less 
resembling that of the original text might be expressed by re- 
writing the passage as follows :—éor roivw (év tH Yuxt vonriki)) 
obcia cat Adyos [ ]}. (dva)péperar dé emi (uev) thy (vonticny) obciay 
(rd vénwa, emt S& rdv Adyov 7 Sidvo..) [ ] émumdékerae 88 Th 
vonpalre Kal) TH diavoig ((Sdga Kai alcOnois))’ ¢AOdvra Sé 8 dAAjAwy 
pia idea eyévovro, airy [St] éoriv THs Puxis (ctvOects). I 
assume that 4 vonrixi) obofa and 6 Adyos are used as in Lxc. XVII; 
that vénua (= védyors) is the function of the voyrixy otcia, and 
didvora (= Aoywwpds) is the function of the Adyos ;* and that dda 
and aicOyois are functions of 75 dAoyov. On these assumptions, 
the Hermetist’s series vénua, Sidvo, So, alcyors would be 
comparable to the series véyous, Sidvou, iors, eixagia in Pl. 
Rep. 6. 511 D. 

§ 2. evOev kat SwepBddder kat éAdeirer (excimer MSS.). The miss- 
ing subject of the verbs in this section is probably rd dAoyov (Epos 
rijs Vuxqs). The statement that rd ddoyov trepBddXer Kal éddecres 
may be taken to mean that when a man’s passions or impulses are 
not controlled by reason he is apt to diverge from the mean on either 
side. Compare Zxc. XVII. 3: rv trepBodiy tot Ovpot . . « 7d évdeov 
Tis erbupias. 

1 gidvora is associated with Adyos in Pl. Soph. 263 E: Sidvora pd Kal A-yos ravrév" 
mAiv 5 pe evrds ris Wuyxs mpds abriy biddoyos dvev paris yeyvopcvos Tob7’ abTd 
Hyiv émovopdcOn, didvoa,...7d 5é + da’ éxelvns pedpa dia Tov ordparos idv pera 
HOsyyou KéKAnra Aéyos. In that passage, d:avora means what the Stoics called the 
év8:dBeros Adyos, in opposition to the mpopoprxds Adyos. Cf. Pl. Theaet, 189: 7d 
Be KavoctoOa ap’ ge eya nadeis;—Th eaday ;—Ad-yor bv abri) pds abriy 4 uxt} 


duetépyera wept Gv dv oxowyj. In my translation, I have written ‘thought’ for 
vénua, and ‘discursive thought’ for davora, 








EXCERPT XVIII: 1-5 451 


xetpov pév yiverar (sc. Td ddoyov) Srav dwoomacOy Tis Siavolas: 
Srav 8é dxohoubf Kat weiOyrar, Kowwvel tH [vonpatixd (a/. vontixd)] Moyo 
(Sid roy podnpdrw', Cf. Axe, VIII. 3: 7d yotv (dAoyov), xwovpevov 
ind ris vontijs ovaias, rpds twa dédyov (xwetrar). Compare also Ar. 
Lith, Nic. . 7. 3 and 1. 13 on 7d Adyor exov ds émumerbes Ady. For 
the last clause, one might conjecture xowwver 73 byw rv Stavonpdrov, 
‘shares with the Adyos in its diavojpara’. 

This passage gives support to the assumption that dudvora, as used 
by the writer of Zxc. XVIII, means the function of the doyos. 

§ 3. 7d yap aipetobar 7d Kpeitroy eh” Apiv eoriv, Spotws 8é kal 7d xetpor. 
Cf. Corp. IV. 6 b-8a. 

( . -) dwovoiws. Cf. Lxc. XI. 2 (20): 7d dyabov éxovovov' 7d 
xaxov dxovowv. We are free to choose the higher life; whence it 
necessarily follows that we are also free to choose the lower life. 
But when we have once chosen the lower life, we are under com- 
pulsion, and thenceforth our evil actions are involuntary. The bad 
man is a slave of Heimarmene ; but it is by his own choice that he 
has become a slave. 

exopern yap [atpecrs| (i puxh) Tv kaxav whyordfer TH TopatiKy pices. 
It is not the ‘choice’, but the soul which has chosen wrongly, that 
‘draws near to bodily nature’, and is consequently governed by 
Heimarmene, as bodies are. The sense required might perhaps be 
better expressed by writing éxouevy yap 9 Wuxi) tay coparixdy (or 
ehopevy yap 7 YuxH TA TwpariKa) TAyoidLer TH dice. 

§ 4. ((dpéroxos ofca tis Tay ywopdver picews)). CF. dpéroxos otca 
tov dvoixod cdparos in xc. XIX. 4. 

§ 5. 'wapabeioa 8¢ rév mpdrov dd tod mpdrou Oeod StavontiKdy Adyov 
mpoinar kat Sdov tov Adyov', Sense might be made of this by writing 
mpocbeioa 8& ro[v] mparov dd 70d xpdrov Geod, | ] mpotnar [ ] Kat rév 
(dtavonrixdv ?) Adyov. The voyrix) odie (i.e. the vots, which is the 
divine part of the human soul,) was emitted from God in the begin- 
ning (cf. Corp. XII. i init., 6 vois... &€ adrijs rijs rod Beod obolas 
éoriv) ; and having thus come into being, it emits from itself the 
Adyos. If diavoyriuxdv Adyov is right, we may suppose that the full 
names of the two things were 4 voyrui oboia and 6 Siavonrixds 
Aéyos, but that the writer sometimes called them by the shorter 
hames 7 oveia and 6 Adyos. But it is also possible that Scavoyrixdv 
may have arisen out of didvovay written as an alternative for Néyov. 

I cannot explain xal dAov tov Adyov. Possibly é\ov may be a 
corrupted doublet of Adyov. 

Gg2 


452 STOBAEI HERMETICA 


Tovrous (Sé 4) Wux} Kowerioaca Kowwvel Kai Tis ToUTey eipappérys, 
rovrois Means Trois yryvomevors, 1.€. material or corporeal things. 
These things are governed by Heimarmene (i.e. by physical laws) ; 
and consequently the soul, when it has entered into association with 
them, is subject to Heimarmene. ris tovrwy civapperys, if that is 
the right reading, must be taken to mean ‘the destiny to which they 
are subject’. This meaning might be more clearly expressed by 
writing tis TovTwy (xparovons) eiuappevys. 


EXCERPT XIX 


§ 1. Tyuxh totvuy.. . €autijs Adyov'. The only intelligible part of 
this corrupt section is the sentence daAAayeioa Sé rod puotxod cwpa- 
ros, air) Kab’ abriv péver [ ] ev 7G vonTd xdopw. The subject of that 
sentence must be either 4 yuyx7}, or 7 vonrixi ovata, which presumably 
means 6 vods, as in Hxc, XVII and Zac. XVIII. The 8¢ implies 
a pév; and the probable sense of the preceding words might be 
expressed by writing (kal caépari piv ovvotca, GAoydv te dad) Tis 
(huorxis) dppovias émurrarat (cf. Hac. XVII. 1). daradAayeiora 8 Ke7-d. 
The word dppovia, in this connexion, might mean either the structure 
of the material universe, or the structure of the human body 
(see Exc. XV. 3 and 5). 

Soul is, no doubt, dédios; but as that fact has no connexion with 
anything that is said in the rest of this excerpt, it may be suspected 
that déios is corrupt. 

The four terms oicia, Adyos, vénja, didvora occur together here, as 
in Exc. XVIII init. ; but what was said about them, it is difficult to 
guess. In the phrases vénpa éxovea rov éaurijs Adyov and dpxet dé row 
éavrijs \dyov, the writer seems to be speaking of the relation between 
the voyrict) ofofa and the Adyos. With vénua exovea tov éaurijs Aoyov 
should be compared xpéros éxovea tiv éavrijs Adyov in Lxc, XVII. 4; 
but neither vénja nor xpdros makes sense. Weare toldin Zxc. XVII. 
5 that # (voyrixy) otofa dpye (rav wav), and has the Adyos for its 
ovpPovdos; and it would be possible to get a similar meaning here 
by writing dpye S& rod | | (a)Adyou () voyru otcia, ovpBovdov) 
((éxovea. [| }| éavris ((rov)) Adyov)). 

§ 2. (...) "épouca Spotar kivnow év 76 éauris vonpari dvépart Lwhy 
16 els Lady épxopévy'. todro yap iSiov puxijs, Td wapexew érépors Spordy 








EXCERPT XIX: 1-4 453 


(rt) 7H i8td7 HTL adrHs. It may be conjectured that this passage, in its 
original form, was to the following effect: 4 ux}, cis copa epxomern, 
péper (or rapéyer) aird Luv’ todro yap iov Yuxijs, 7d wapéxew érépors 
kivgow opotav 7H éavrijs. Cf. Zxc. XX. 3, 4 as emended : pererdydds 
8 yryijs fy (7d capa) K.r.A.—édvdyart is most likely a doublet of 
voyjwart; and both may perhaps be corruptions of odpare, 

§ 3. B00 toivuv eiol Lwal Kal 800 Kurjoers, pla pev H Kar’ otciay, érépa 
8é 4 Kara puow [odparos]. As to these ‘two kinds of xivyaxs’, compare 
£xc. XVI. rand 6. The {wi 4 «ar otctay is that of the VONTLK?) 
otoia or voids; the fw 4 cari dvow is that of 7d aoyor, which is 
added to the soul at its incarnation. The man in whom the 
vonrixy ovata has the upper hand is atregovcwos, i. e. his will is free 5 
the man in whom 76 aAoyor has the upper hand is under compulsion, 
being a slave of Heimarmene. 

§ 4. (...) dpéroxos ofa (odcia MSS.) tod ductkod odpatos. The 
subject of this sentence must have been either 4 Wuyy or 4 vonrixyy 
ovola. 

ei ydp 'éxer odpal, obre Adyov exer ob're véyow, The subject is 
probably % yux7. But if so, éyet cua is impossible. Sense might 
be made by writing « yap (xaz)éyer(ar) ((pwrt)) cdpatros), obre 
Aoyov éxet obre vinow. (Cf. Corp. I. 19 as emended: 6 8 dyamjoas 
é mdvns épwros 76 cpa, otros pever ev 73 oKdre K.t.d.) vdnows is 
the function of the voyrix otcfa; and in the man who is over- 
powered by desire for bodily things, the voyrui) oboe (and with it, the 
Aédyos, which is its ‘ counsellor’,) is absent or dormant, and 73 dAoyov 
alone is active. 

In Exc. XX. 1, the MSS. give gor roivey } wx} dodparos oteia. ei 
yop exacoua xr. In Lac. XIX. 4, the MSS. give ety yap dy 
Yruxy) dowparos. . .. et yap zx copa «7d. Is the resemblance 
between these two passages merely accidental ? 

mav yap cdpa dvéntov’ peradaBdy 8é odcias, 73 elvar Lov Eumvour 
éoxe. Bodies are incapable of véyous, but are capable of fwj. If 
a soul enters a body, the body thereby becomes a diving body. 
This applies to the bodies of all animals alike, and not to human 
bodies only. 

As to peradafsov oicias, cf. Zxc, XX. 3 as emended: pereAnis 
8¢ Yuyis Cp (70 cSpa), cal xowwvel rod vat rH Wwyp. ... 75 88 Ava viv 
Aéyw 7O peréxew fwis. Even the lower animals partake of otcta 
(i.e. ‘true being’), inasmuch as they are alive; though they do not 
partake of voyrixy otcia. 


454 STOBAEI HERMETICA 


éurvovy means ‘having wveta in it’, and thus leads on to what is 
said about zvetya in the following section. 

§ 5. kal ro pev mveipa tod odpards (€or. 1d aicOyrixdv), & Se 
héyos Tis otcias ((éo7t Td ppovody x.7.A.)). The MSS. give, in §5 
intt., xal 75 pev mvedpa rod odpatos, 6 S& Adyos Tis otcfas, and in 
§ 6 intt., rod yap cdpatds éott Kai Sextixdy ravtuv, 6 St Adyos Tis 
ovgias écrit 7d gpovoty. It seems probable that one of these two 
passages is a misplaced doublet of the other; and in my conjec- 
tural reconstruction of the text, I have assumed that the right place, 
not only for these opening words of § 6, but for what follows in that 
section, is at the beginning of § 5. 

It would be possible to write 76 pév wvedua rod cépards éore 
without any further predicate, taking the words to mean ‘the 
pneuma is a part of the body’, or ‘belongs to the body’; but if 
we read 6 8 Adyos rijs otelas éorl 75 gpovoiv in the following 
clause, a corresponding phrase is needed in connexion with 7d 
mvedpa ; and aicOyricdv, which occurs below as an epithet of rvedpa, 
is the right word to stand in contrast to ¢povotv. The words xat 
Sexrixoy mévrwv in § 6 zit. can hardly be right; (the wvedpa is 
receptive of sense-impressions, but not of ‘all things’;) and it may 
be suspected that cat dexrixdv is a corruption of alc@ytixév, and that 
mavrwy was added by a transcriber who thought that a genitive was 
needed after dexrixov. 

We must either write rijs (vontixys) ovetas, or take rijs otcfas to 
mean ris voyrikijs ovcias, i.e. rod vod. The use of the word 
¢povoty implies that in the writer’s terminology ¢pdvyats is a synonym 
for didvova Or Noyrpds, the function of the Adyos. 

The veda is the material vehicle or organ of animal life, and 
of the lower grade of human life. According to this Excerpt, its 
special function is aic@yois; but ddéa also is associated with it 
(cwvurdpxet TG mvetpart 7 S0éa). The waOy (Ovuds and éméupia, 
spoken ofin Zxc. XVII) would presumably be regarded by the writer 
as likewise connected with the puewma ; but they are not mentioned 
in £xc, XIX. 

((. . . cuvuTdpxer 8¢ 7G (uev) Adywo 4} tav “riptwv! yvdors, Ta SE 
mvetpart % Sdfa")) (6 pey yap) rod 'kahod! Oewpytixds éorr, 73 Se 
[aicOnrixdy mvedpal tOy hatvoudvwy pitty éott. aicOyrixdy vedpa 
gives the right sense, but is superfluous. ray tiulwy (meaning rod 
xadod?) is hardly satisfactory; and as there is no corresponding 
genitive after ddga, it seems best to strike it out. As to yv@ous and 








EXCERPT XIX: 5,7 455 


S8déa in contrast, see Zxc. XVII. 6. If my reconstruction of the 
passage is right, it is implied that yous is rot Kadod Gewpia, and 
Sééa is trav pawvopévey xpiors. But there seems to be something 
amiss in rod xadod; the term opposed to réy gdawopuévwv should 
rather be rod dvros. As to xpirixdy here, and xpive’ below, cf. Ar. 
Anal. post. 99b 35: (ra fga exer) Sivapw ovppuroy Kpiriciy, Hv 
xadodow atoOnow. Diog. Laert. 7.54: 6 88 Xpvourmos . . . xpirypid 
dow evar atoOnow kal xpoAnyu. 

Siyjpntat Se (1d mvedpa) eis Tas dpyannds aicPjcers (perhaps eis 
7a Spyava tis aigbycews), Kal gor. [me] pépos adtod [mveupatixh] 
dpatixdv (pacts MSS.) kai dxouotiKdv Kal dodpytixdy Kal yevotiKdy 
kot dwrixévy. Stoic influence is manifest here. Chrysippus a. 
Galen. de Hipp. et Plat. plac. 3.1: 4 Wvxy mvetpd eore otpdvrov 
piv ovvexes ‘ravrl rh cdpart! dijkov. . . . Tavrys otv Tov pepadv 
éxdorw Siateraypévov popiy, To Sijxov abris cis . . . dpOadpors 
dyw (eval paper), rd St cis Gra dxoyy, 7d de cis pivas dodpyow, 
7) 8 els yhdrrav yetow, ro 8 eis SAyv THv cépxa adyv. Diocles 
Magnes af. Diog. Laert. 7. 52: atoOyous dé dé€yerar Kara rods 
Sroods rd re dd’ fyepovixod mvedpa [kal] éxi ras aicOyoes SufKov, 
kal x... ‘The Stoics’, as reported by Aetius, Diels, Doxogr. 
p. 394: SaloOyripia! déyerar mvevpara voepa dard rod Hyepovixod ext ra 
dpyava rerapéva. Philo De fuga ef inv. 32, 182, Wendland, vol. iii, 
p. 149: wortleras otv dowep ard mys TOD Kara Yuxiy iyepovixod 
7d cdparos iyepovixoy mpdcurov, TO pev dparixdy rvedpa Tetvovros eis 
dppara, 7d 8% dkovorixdy cls ods, els 5& prerijpas 75 dopprrews, 76 
Sad yedoeus els oTdpa, kal 7d Adis eis o¥pracav Thy érupdveav. 

roito 73 mvedpa ‘avdyov (a/. dvddoyov) yerSpevoy Siavoias’ xpiver fd 
aicOytidv! (. . .), et 82 py, pavtdferar pdvov, The sense required 
might be expressed by writing, in place of dvdyov yevdpevov Siavoias, 
something like érav pev éynrat ris Stavoias (cf. Grav . . . Exnrar... 
70d THS Wux7s Aoywrpov, Lxc, XVII. 3). 

xpive. must have been followed by some qualifying word or phrase, 
e.g. ép3s or car’ édyGeay ; for without some such addition, it could 
not stand in contrast to davragerar pdvov. 

In saying that the material prevma xpive and gavrderar, the 
writer is following the usage of the Stoics, who made no clear dis- 
tinction between bodily and mental processes, and held the soul to 
be mvetya wis éyov. As a Platonist, he ought rather to have said 
that 76 aicOyrixoy Tis Wuyxis Kpiver. 

§ 7. 73 wey yap awd rod wepéxovtos [Kécpou ?| Thy évépyeray exer, 





456 STOBAEI HERMETICA 


4 8 &$° gaurijs. The connexion of this with what precedes is lost ; 
but it is probable that 76 pév means 76 zrvedpa, and that 7 5€ means 
4 uy}. The mvedpa of the individual man or animal derives its 
force from the atmosphere, which is the rvevua of the Kosmos, and 
of which the individual’s rvedpa is a detached portion. To say that 
h yrxi) ad’ Eauris tiv evépyeav exer is equivalent to saying that 
the soul is avroxivyros. 


EXCERPT XX 


The teaching of this Excerpt appears to have been to the following 
effect :— 

The bodies of men and animals are produced by Nature. In the 
composition of the bodies which she produces, Nature combines 7} 
Ocppdv and 7d Wuxpdv in varying proportions ; and the proportionate 
quantities of 73 Oeppdv and 76 Wuxpdv which she puts into this or that 
body are determined by the influences of the stars. 

But a body, as produced by Nature alone, cannot be said to be 
‘real’. In order that it may be real, it must have life; and life is 
conferred on body by soul, which is not a product of Nature, but a 
thing independent of Nature, inasmuch as it is incorporeal. 

The life conferred on bodies by the soul which enters into them 
is of two grades. Life of the lower grade (called simply £«7) is con- 
ferred on all animals; life of the higher grade (called fw voepd) is 
conferred on man alone. But the wi voepd of men varies in quality ; 
and the difference between the {or} voepd of one man and that of 
another results from the different proportions of 75 @epyov and 7d 
Yoxpdy in the composition of their bodies. 

§ 1. ore toivuy 4 ux} dodparos odcia, Cf. Lxc. XVI init.: (H) 
Wx} toivw otcia éorly dodpatos. Exc, XVII init.: Yox} toivw 
gorly . . . ovola adroredyjs Kr. Lxc. XVIII init.: gor toinw 
ciola x.t.d. Exc. XIX init.: Gh) Woy} rolvw éoriv dws vonrucy odcia, 
But there is no intelligible connexion between these words and what 
follows them in Exc. XX (e yap «.7.A.). It would seem that either 
tort. . . oboia has been wrongly inserted; or a passage which 
connected it with what follows has been lost; or it is a corruption 
of something which led on to ei yap «.7.A. (€. g. it would be possible 
to write Zor. rolvev ev TH Wux7 f TOD owparos otoia” i yap K.T.) ). 

ei yap (yi uxdy) exer (73) cGpa, odkére Error [gaurijs cwort 4). et 
yap exe (i Wuxi) oSpa is impossible. The passage seems to have 








EXCERPT XX: 1-3 457 


heen altered with a view to connecting it with the preceding words 
as given in the MSS. (gor roi 4 Yuy} dodpatos ovcia); but in 
order to do that satisfactorily, it would be necessary to write ei ydp 
(4 yuxh) hv cpa, ox dv Gv éavrijs cworux}, or something of the sort. 
Tf on the other hand it is to be connected with what follows, some 
such corrections as I have made are needed. [See Addenda, vol. iv. | 

may yap cpa mpds 7d elvar Setror Lwrvjs.— (wav yap oSpo Setrar rob 
elvar Setrat Kat Los MSS.) 7d efvac must here be taken as meaning 
‘to be an otcia’, i.e. to have real and substantive existence. The 
soul is an ovata; and a living body also is an otoia, though not an 
ovcia of the same kind as the soul. But a lifeless body is not an 
ovcia ; it is mere vAy, and as such, is jt) ov. 

These words might be taken to imply that not only men, beasts, 
and plants, but all existing bodies without exception (including 
stones, for instance) are to some extent alive; and as this writer 
makes life dependent on the presence of yvx7}, it would seem to follow 
that even stones have in them some portion of ywvx7. That, however, 
is an unusual doctrine ; and perhaps the writer meant rather that life- 
less bodies, such as stones, are not évrws dvra, but are merely pawdpeva. 

§2. mavtt yap 1a yéveow exovTe . . . perdoer (8) bOopd. This 
section breaks the connexion between § 1 and $ 3, and must have 
been inserted here by error. It may have come either from some 
other part of this 4e//us, or from another document. 

In Zxc. XI. 2 (2) and elsewhere we are told that there are bodies 
(viz. ra GiSia owpara) which are yevyrd but not Péapra. But the 
wiiter of this fragment must have thought otherwise, and held the 
Aristotelian view that the Kosmos and the heavenly bodies are éyévyra, 
ie. have had no beginning, but have always been in existence. 

§ 3. pererhydds Se [eiSous] [Lwis| (Wuxfis), fy. It looks as if etdous 
and wis were due to two different attempts to fill the gap left by the 
accidental omission of yxijs. 

7d 8é etvar viv Néyw 7d [év Aoyw yevéoOar Kat] peréxer Lwijs [voepas). 
év Adyw is probably a corruption of éAAoyov or AoyiKdy. 

In order to make sense of this sentence, it is necessary either to 
strike out év Adyw yevéoOar cai and voepas, or to write 70 52 (dvOpwzrov) 
elyac «.7.A, If the latter emendation were adopted, we should have 
to take the words in connexion with § 4, in which man is spoken of, 
But so taken, they would be out of place here. It seems probable 
that man was first spoken of in § 4 zit, where the term dvOpwos 
is defined; and if so, rd 82 elvar x.7.A. must have been connected 


458 STOBAEI HERMETICA 


with what precedes, and the insertion of the words which li 
the application of the statement to man must have resulted fro: 
a misunderstanding. 

§ 4. kadeirat 82 (6 dvOpwmos) x.7.A. This implies the definitior 
6 dvOpwrds ort Cov Aoyixdv Ovyrdv. The addition of byyrdy is needed 
to differentiate man from the Kosmos and the stars, which are fa 
Noyixd &Odvara. 

Oynrdv $2 81d 73 cpa. Man is mortal, not ‘because he has a body’ 
(for the Kosmos and the stars also have bodies, and yet are im- 
mortal), but ‘ because of Ais body’, which is @aprév. 

(A) Wuxh dpa [dodparos], dperdmtwrov Exouea thy Sévapw (rod Lahy 
mapéxe, 7 dvOpdmw) ((mapéxer [8€ Wux}| Lot voepdy)). This 
restoration of the text is very doubtful; but it gives the sense 
which the context seems to require. Soul has the power of con- 
ferring life on any sort of body into which it may enter (e. g. the body 
of a beast); and when it enters a Auman body, it retains that power 
unchanged. But the life which it confers on human bodies is life 
of a special kind ; it is not merely fax, but Lun) voepd. 


éyew Ldov [voepdv] (rdv dvOpwrov). The word voepdy may perhaps 
be a corruption of (73)v dvov, i.e. rév &vOpwrov. 

PA odons [Tis Stavontixis] odcias Tis Kal mapexoans voepav Loxy. 
Man’s ‘reason’ (Aéyos), i.e. the thing by the possession of which 
man is distinguished from the lower animals, is called in this 
document 76 voepdv, or % voepa Cay. The equivalent term in Exc. XV. 
is % dtavonrixy) xivnors. The words rijs Siavoyrixs must have been 
inserted here by some one who used the language of Exc. XV, and — 
not that of Hxc, XX. 

§ 5. édv yap Swepéxn ev rq cvotdcer 7d Beppdv, «.t.d. Ch. Exe, 
XXVI. 14: ef piv yap... weovdoete 7d wip, K.t.Ae 

(i mer) (yap) ucrs {[ J] dppdter thy 70d oudparos odoracw mpds 
Thy dppoviay. 1 gvois is the force at work in the production of 
organic bodies. Cf. Zxc. XV. 2, where we are told that 4 dow 
wévra pie Ta yryvdpeva, 

The verb dpydfew and the corresponding substantive dppovéa 
(which might be translated ‘temperament’) are used in this docu- 
ment to denote the ‘ coadjustment’ or ‘ contemperation’ of 73 Gepudv 
and 10 yuxpdv (i.e. the determination of the proportions of these 
elements relatively to one another) in the composition of the human 
body. That is what dppovia means in riv dppoviay rod odparos, § 7, 
and rijs (rod cdparos) dppovias, § 6. This use of dpyovfa occurs in 








EXCERPT XX: 4-7 459 


‘Pl. Phaedo 86 A-D and 91 C-94 F, side by side with its use to denote 
the tuning of a lyre. (See note on Zxc. XVI. 2.) 

[The phrase 4 rv dorépwv éppovid is used below as the equivalent of 
td. obyxpacts. The assumption of the astrological theory under- 
lying this passage is that the ‘coadjustment’ of the stars with one 
another influences the destiny of men on earth, through ovyrdOeta, and 
that the proportion of elements in living bodies depends upon 
a corresponding ‘coadjustment’ of stars. In practice the astrologer 
would select a group of stars in certain prominent positions at a given 
time (see note on §7) and reason from their dppovia or ovyxpacts. 
Cf. a chapter-heading in Laurentinus 27. 34: “Avdkpiois ex ris TGV 
dorépw cvyKpdcews repli of tis épwrav Bovrera: (Boll, Sphaera, p. 10). 

The dppovid-theory is criticized by such phrases as otre a\dijAows 
avvgdovow. | 

§ 6. 13 Kata 73 Oeppdy Kat 73 xard (7d) puxpdv. Of the four primary 
qualities of matter (heat, cold, dryness, and fluidity,—see Exc. XV), 
heat and cold alone are spoken of in Exc. XX. 

dppoler Se (i pvots) kata Tov émikpaticavta dotépa tis cuyKpdcews 
(cvyxparjcews MSS.). Supposing, for instance, that among the 
influences of the stars that of a ‘cold’ planet predominates at 
the time when a certain man’s body comes into being, there will 
be an excess of 7b Wuxpdv in the ‘commixture’ of that man’s body. 
But we are not told at what time the ‘ mixing’ takes place; is it at 
the moment of conception, or at that of birth, or during the interval 
between the one and the other? 

§ 7. 4 duots toivuy Sporot Thy dppoviay tod odpatos TH Tay dotépwr 
ovyxpdce. [According to Sextus Empiricus (Math. 5. 42) the 
Chaldaeans practised both a simple and a refined method of astro- 
logy, according as a single star or a combination of stars was 
observed : dxpiBéorepa St ra Kara cvvdpopi Kat ds abrol A¢éyouor 7d 
Kara otykpacw mAcidvev (sc. dorépwr), olov “ éay dd¢ pev dpockor7 dde 
88 pecovpary d8¢ Sé dvriperoupavy ot 5 dAAor ottws Exwor, cvuPjoerar 

rade.” The text may therefore stand. | 

kal évol ta mwodupry mpds Thy tay dotpwy dppoviey, (Cf. Ps.- 
Philolaos, fr. ro Diels: déppovia 8 révrws é& evavtiwy yiverar’ fore yap 
dppovia rohupryéwy evwois K.7.\. The vods of Anaxagoras is described 
by Sextus Empiricus (dZath. 9. 6) as ordering ri rav Spoopepedv 
mohupuylay bruKHV. | 

Gore exe mpds GAAnAa cupwdberav. The word cvprdbea was used 
by the Stoics to express the notion that the several parts of the 


EEE. 


460 STOBAEI HERMETICA 











Kosmos are (like the several parts of a human or animal body) so 
interconnected, that one is affected by what takes place in another F, 
and in particular, that things on earth are affected by the influence 
of the stars in heaven. Cf. Sext. Emp. Aath. 9. 79: as delxvupev ex: 
tov mepi (rov Kdcpoy) cupradedv' Kata yap Tas TAS TeAnVYS avENoES Kal 
POlces TOAAG THY Te exyctuv Lowy Kal Oadraccioy POive TE Kal avs 

. && dy rapier Ore qvwpevov TL nee kabéornxey 6 atepals a 
ert 8& rév qvwpévev oupariteut tis éotw, «tye Saxrddov a 5 
Srov cvvdariPerae cipa. Avouevoy tolvev éeott copa Kal 6 do p05. 
Sext. Emp. Math. 5. 4: 70 cuprabeiv ra ériyea rots otpaviots, Kal 
kara tas ékelvwv dzroppoias éxdorore Tatra veoxpoda bat, 

It was commonly held that the ovyrddaa between ra ériyea 
and 7a odpdavia is one-sided ; that is to say, that what takes place on 
earth is influenced by what takes place in heaven, but not vice versa, 
(See Zxc. XI. 2. (28), (38), (40), (41).) [But compare Philo’s words 
used of the Chaldaeans, De soma. I. ro. 53 (III. p. 216 Wendl.): é 
dt wept ris trav d\Awv dorépwv dicews 7) wepupopas 7) cuprabetas mpds 
re ddApjdous Kal rariyea; De Abr. 15. 69 (IV. p. 17 Cohn): xard rip 
Tov otpavioy mpos TA ertyeia cvpaadeay. | 

"os yap tis tav dotépwy dpyovias 1d yevvav cupmdderay Kad” 
cipappérny abtav', 1d yervav cvpyrdbeav is impossible ; perhaps we 
ought to read ro yervay odpara. But it could hardly be said that 
the réAos of the (system? or movement?) of the stars (i.e? the 
purpose for which it exists) is to generate bodies; that is rather the 
épyov of the stars. [See Addenda in vol. iy.] 

If a’rdy is struck out, cab’ ciwappévyy may be allowed to stand. 
The stars are (as we are told elsewhere) ‘the instrument by means 
of which Heimarmene works’; that which the stars do is therefore. 


kad cipapperny. 


EXCERPT XXI 


§ 1. €ore tolvuy 7d mpody érdcewwa (émt MSS.) wdvtwv tay dvtwv, Kab 
Tov Sytws dvTwy Tpody. Ta dvTwS OYTA ATE Ta VoNTd. 

76 mpoor, ‘the Pre-existent’, is a term applicable to God, either as 
being prior to the aio@yrds xdopos (cf. tod d&yevyrod Kal mpodvros Bed 
in £xc. IX. 1), or as being prior to ra vonra also. The writer of this 
passage uses it in the latter sense. 

The word ééxewa, which I propose in place of éwi, was in common 
use among the later Platonists ; they got it from ér éréxewa rs odotas 





EXCERPT XXI: 1 461 


in Pl. Rep. 6. 509 B. It is frequently used by Plotinus (e.g. Zz. 3. 
8, 9) in speaking of 73 & (= 76 dyaGdv), which is beyond, above, or 
‘prior to’ vots and rk vonté (= 7a dvrws dvra). See Adammonis 
Resp. 8. 2 ( Zestim.). 

fey yép eovt BV of! . . . Exouca év Eaury (rd) aicbyTd mévra. Not- 
withstanding the corruption of the text, it seems clear that in this 
passage the writer was speaking of ra vonra and ra aicOyra as two 
different kinds of dévra, and contrasting the one kind of évra with the 
other. It is possible therefore that the meaningless 6: ot is a 
corruption of d:rrod. A satisfactory sense could be got by writing 
dyros yop Tod “éore” Surrod, or Td yap “ear.” SirrGs A€yerau (‘the 
word éoru is used in two different senses’). 

4 odordrys, [4] Kabddou Neyoudvy, Kowy (2oTt Ov) vonTdy (Kal Tov 
aicdtav). The word ovodrys means ‘the attribute of being an 
otcia’; and % otodrys Kown éori Tay voyTov Kal rév aicPyrév must 
be taken to mean that both ra vonrd and ra aicOyrd are oicia 
(= bvra) Cf Bxc. XVI. 1: (i Wuyi) otk exBaiver rijs Blas obavdryros 
(i.e. does not cease to be an dowyatos otaia) when it is év odpart. 

(. + +) tay SvTws SvTwy Kal [Tay Svrwy Tay] Koo éavTd vooupévar. This 
must be the end of a sentence concerning ta vontd. The voyra are 
existent xa@’ éaura, ‘by themselves’, or ‘ of themselves’. 

ra 8é (aicOnrd), évdvtia (dvyTa) Toros, Kata 7d Erepov mddwy (EoTiv" 
od yap) adtd Kaé’ éaurd gor, As the writer has just said that the 
yontd are existent xa6’ éavrd, he must have denied this of the 
aicOyrd, which are évdvtia rots vontois. It is therefore necessary to 
insert of before atta xaf gaurd gor. The aicOyrd also are évra, but 
they are not évra of the same kind as the voyra; the existence of the 
aicGyra is derivative or secondary. 

Compare Pl. Zim. 35 4,8. Plato there speaks of two kinds of 
oicia, viz. 4 duépiotos Kal del xara. trait éxovca ovcia (= tabrod 
dics), and 4 rep ra cdpara yryvopevy pepiory odcia (= 1 Garépov 
¢icis), and also mentions a third kind of otcia (rpirov oteias ldos) 
which is intermediate (é€ péow) between the two; and as the 
writer of Zxc. XXI likewise speaks of two kinds of oteéa and of 
something intermediate (yeragv), it seems probable that he was 
thinking of that passage in the Zimaews. Perhaps he did not 
fully understand it;! but he may have taken it to mean that the 


1 The language of Zin. 35 A, B is clumsy and confused ; commentators differ in 
their construing of the words; and there can be little doubt that the text is corrupt. 
(One of the difficulties in it could be got rid of by writing peyris 5& pera rips (rpirys) 
obolas and éx Te TavTod Kal Oarépou kal rHs (rpiTys) oboias pepuypevnv in 35 B.) 


462 STOBAEI HERMETICA 


three things of which the soul is composed are vots, ddfa, and 
alcOnows, i.e. the three functions or faculties the objects of which 
are respectively ra vontd, Ta Sofacrd, and ra aic@yrd. 

What is the meaning of xara 76 érepov? I was at first inclined 
to think that in this phrase the writer used 76 érepov, as Plato used 
Odrepov, to signify that which is many and mutable, in contrast 
to rairdy, that which is one and changeless. (Cf. ris te rabrod 
dicews Kat THs Garépou in Pl. Zim. 35a.) On that hypothesis, one 
might conjecture rav évrws dvtwv, tv KaTA tairén (Kab’ éavrd MSS.) 
vooupevev. ta S& évdyria rovros, ta Kata +O Erepov wddw.. 
But seeing that the soundness of the reading xa6’ éaurd is confirmed 
by its recurrence in the phrase aira xa’ éavta éore which follows, 
and that, if we do not alter the text, there is no mention of rairéy 
in this Excerpt, it seems better to take xara 7d érepov as meaning 
simply ‘in the other way’, or ‘in the other sense (of the word éo7w)’, 

(H 82) tors odcia aicOyth, Exouga év éauT_ (Ta) aicbyTd mdvra, 
4 pvous must here mean 6 dvorxds kdopos, ‘the world in which the 
force called vers operates’, that is, the material world. 

The statement that 7 dvcts is ovcia aicPyri x.7.d., as given in the 
MSS., appears to have little connexion with the context; but that 
objection disappears if we assume that this was preceded by a 
corresponding statement about the voyra. The author may have 
written something like this: (kal 6 péy dvw xdopos éoTw otcia 
vontTn, éxwv ev éavtd Ta vonta wavta’ 7 Se) pics «A. After 
speaking of the contrast between ra vonrd and ra aicOyrd, he 
may very well have added that all the voyra are massed to- 
gether in a higher world, and all the aic@yra in a lower world. 

perags 8 tovrwy [vontot (vonpatixol MSS.) kal atcOnrot Oeot] (ra 
Sofacrd). rovrwy Means tov voyrav Kal tv aicbiyrav. The things 
which are intermediate between the voyra and the aic6yra cannot 
be two kinds of gods, and certainly cannot be aio@yroi Geo, that 
is, gods who are themselves aic6yra. The words voyrot cat aicOyrot 
cod must therefore be struck out. They may perhaps be a super- 
scription that was intended to stand at the head of the lost passage 
which preceded (rév aicOyrav) Gedy in § 2 zniz. 

vonparixo is doubtless a misreading for voyroi. There is no good 
authority for the existence of the word voyparixds; but the terms 
vonrot Ocoi and aig@yroi Oeot were in frequent use among the later 
Platonists; and dios, as spoken of in § 2, is an instance of an — 
aigOyros Oeds who is an eixav of a vonrds Beds. 








EXCERPT XXI: 2 463 


The missing subject must have been a neuter plural; (that is 
shown by the words ra pév peréyovra which follow;) and it was 
almost certainly ra dofacrd. The word dogacrd has dropped out 
here, but is given by the MSS. in the next line. 

The use of the term ré Sogacra to denote things intermediate 
between 7a vonrdé and ra aioPyrd may perhaps have been suggested 
to the writer by Pl. Rep. 5. 476-480, where dda is said to be a 
state of mind intermediate between yvdous and éyvwota, and its 
object, 75 Sogacrdv, is described as a thing intermediate between 
ro ov and 7d yp dv (peragd rod ciduxpwds dvros Kal Tov ad pda 
évros). The writer of Zxc, XXI likewise makes his Sogacrd inter- 
mediate between two other things; those two things, however, are 
not, as in Pl. Rep. 5,75 dv and 70 pi) dv, but are called by him two 
different kinds of dvra. 

(rad Sofaotd), Ta pev peréxovra tév vontav, Ta 8é (od). doa, 
‘opinion’, is sometimes true, and sometimes false. The writer 
(if I understand this sentence rightly), accordingly divides ra 
Sogacra, the ‘ things opined’ or ‘ objects of opinion’ (which appears 
to mean the context of the opining mind) into two classes, the 
objects of right or true defa and the objects of wrong or false 
Sofa, and says that the former ‘partake of’ ra voyrd, and the 
latter do not. The statement that some of the dogacra ‘ partake of’ 
the voyrd may perhaps be understood as meaning that some of the 
Sofacra (but not all of them) are ‘images’ or copies of ra voyrd, 
which are necessarily and invariably true or real. Cf. Zac. ITA. 3 
as emended: wavra . . . 1d éml yas dAnOR pev odk core ras Se 
Gdybcias pupypara od mavra, oAtya dé. Ta dé Gra Weddos Kai havos. 

Sofacrd Ta Kowwwvodvra tav vonrav (vonparikavy MSS.) This may 
possibly be a remnant of a sentence in which something more was 
said about ra dogacra ; but it seems more likely that it is merely 
a doublet of the preceding phrase ra dogacra ra pev peréxovta Tov 
voytav, the word xowwvotvra being written as an alternative for 
peréxovra. 

§2. (. . . tév aicdytay) Oedv, obror (attra MSS.) yap eixdves 
cio (rav) vontavy (vonpdtwy MSS.) (@edv), The writer has here 
passed on from speaking of voyrda and aicOyrad to speaking of vonrot 
Geoi and aicGyrot Geoi. Perhaps his classification of 74 évra was 
merely preparatory to a classification of gods. Compare the classi- 
fication of gods in Ascé, Zaz. III. 19 a, where, as here, diz zntellegibiles 
(voynroé) are contrasted with dif senstbiles (ata Oyrot). 


464, STOBAEI HERMETICA 


fdtos eixdy gore tod eroupaviou Syproupyod [Gcod]. Cf Plut. De 
defect. orac. 42, 433.D: of piv woddol trav mpoyevertépwy eva Kal Tov 
abrov jyotvro Gedy "AmddXwva, Kal HAuov" of Se Thy Kadjy Kat codiy 
émordpevor kal tipavres dvahoylay, Seep copa mpos Yux7vy, dips 
88 pds vodv, pas 88 mpds adyBedy gor, Toro Thy HAdov Siva 
eixatov evar mpos THv ’Awddwvos piaw, Exyovoy éxeivou Kal téxov! 
dvrws (dros) [del] yryvdpevoy dei* rodrov dwodaivovres. eEdrrer yap 
Kal mpodyerat kat ovvegoppad Tis aicOyrews Tiyv dparuxyy Svvayey ovTos, 
ds ris Wuxis tiv pavtixiy éxeivos. 

Julian, Or. 4 (Eis rév BacAéa jor), distinguishes two * different 
suns: above the aic@yrés Atos, who reigns over the aicOyrds Kio pos, 
is the voepds #Aos, who reigns over the voepot Geo’. And above 
the voepds HAuos is & wdvrav Bacwred’s (also called 75 éméxewa tod 
vov, isa rav évrwv, &, and réyabov, Or. 4. 132D, and 6 wavray 
éréxewa, 6, 136 D), who reigns over the voyrol Geot. Julian’s wdvrey 
Bastdev’s corresponds to the rpodv of Zxc, XXT; and his voepos 7Atos 
corresponds to the érovpdvios Syyuovpyds of whom, in Zxc, XXI, the 
visible sum is said to be an ‘image’. ' 

éroupaviow, if that is the right reading, must here mean ‘ adove the 
heavens’, i.e. supracosmic; for 6 tod dAov Syp.ovpyds, the Maker 
of the aicOnrés kéopos, must be a voyris Ocds. But trepovpdvios would 
be a more suitable word to express that meaning. Cf. #xc. XII. 1, 

kabdmep yap éxeivos 13 Shov eSyprodpynoe(v, obrw) Kal 6 F\os 
Syproupyet Ta LGa Kal [yervG] 74 guTd. For the distinction between’ 
a higher and a lower Demiurgus, cf. Zac. V.1,2: 6 wey | | dy 
puoupyds Tov ddioy cwpdrwv . . . 6 b& Hpyérepos Snprovpyds KT. 
(See also Zxc. ITA. 14.) The doctrine here taught, or one that 
resembles it, is mentioned and rejected in Corf. XI. ii. 9 f. 


1 A reminiscence of Pl. Rep. 6. 507 A, where the sun is called réwos re kal Exyovos 
of 76 ayabdv. ‘ 

2 Bernardakis gives eyovor éxelvov wal rénov byrws det yyvdpevoy del K.7.A. 
That is manifestly wrong; and by writing xyovoy éxelvou . . . . dvras dvTos yeyvs- 
pevov def we get precisely the sense wanted. Plutarch’s Apollo is év7ms av 
(= vonrdés); the sun is yeyvdpevos def (= aicdn7ds). 

8 Dr. W. C. Wright, in her introduction to Julian’s Ov. 4, speaks of a ‘hierarchy 
of three suns in the three worlds’. But as far as I can see, Julian does not any- 
where in this oration call the supreme God by the name 7Av0s, or speak of a vonri 
ij\cos; and if he does not, there are in his system only two suns, not three. 
are three worlds, and three kings who reign over them; but the name fos is given — 
by him only to the second and third of the three kings, not to the first. 
special object of Julian’s worship is the voepds jAtos, king of the second and inter- 
mediate world. ' 

4 The term voepot col, meaning a class of gods intermediate between the vonrot 
deol and the aic@nrol Poi, seems to have been first introduced by Iamblichus, whose 
teaching Julian tells us he is reproducing in Or. 4. 





EXCERPTS XXI: 2; XXII 465 





Compare Julian Or. 4. 140A: els pev 6 Trav dw dypuovpyss, 
gordo S& of Kaz’ odpavdv zepurododvres SymroupytKol Beot? peony 
dpa xat tovrwv thy ad’ HAlov KabjKoveay eis tov Kécpov Snutoup- 
lav Oeréov. 

The change of tense (édypuovpynoev . . . Sqyuovpye?) is explained 
by what is said in Zxc. V. 1,2. The universe was made once for 
all ; but animals and plants are always being made. 

[kai tv mveundtwv mputaveder|, Does rvevydrwy mean ‘ winds’, 
or ‘spirits’? (If ‘spirits’, this phrase has probably been added 
bya Christian transcriber.) In either case, these words (which are 
omitted in F) must be rejected ; zpuravevew is not Sypuovpyety, and 
this sentence has to do with dnyuovpyia alone. 


EXCERPT XXII 


The “tellus from which this extract was taken was entitled 
"Agpodiry. Compare the titles Képy xécpov (Zxc. XXIII), Mow 
pavdpys (Corp. 1), Kparip (Corp. IV), and KAels (Corp, X). For 
the contents of the extract, cf. Zxc. XV. 4. 

‘Lydus De mens. 4. 64 (Zestim.) says that Hermes & rf xooporoua 
spoke of a bisexual Aphrodite. It is possible that the /ide//us 
which Lydus there calls 4 xooporouva is the same that is called 
Aphrodite in Exc. XXII. 

mapa ri (8¢) ra Bpépy Spora Trois yoveior yivera "H ouyyevetars 
dmoBiSora1' éxOjow Adyov. It may be doubted whether zapa ri 
-+ + yiverat is a superscription, or a part of the text. In the 
latter case, it may be an indirect question, dependent on éx@jow (or 
drodécw?) Adyov. It might possibly be a direct question asked 
by the pupil, and answered by the teacher in a sentence ending 
with é@jow Adyov; but if so, we should have expected the 
answer to be marked by & réxvoy or something of the sort. 

It may be conjectured that dro8/3ora: is a corruption of droddécw 
(co.?), and that éOjow was added as a variant. ovyyevecais may 
perhaps have something to do with the resemblance of children 
to kinsmen other than the parents; cf. é6" dre 8% Kal els paxpas 
yeveds (. . .) below. 

The resemblance of child to parent is discussed by Aristotle, 
Gen. an. 4. 3, 767 36 ff. Compare also Aetius, Diels Doxogr. 
p. 422: [ober yivovrar tay yovéww ai Spousoes Kat tov mpoyovwr. 
"Epmedoxdjjs, . . .. Mappevidys, . . .. of Srucxot, dard tod owas 

2808-5 Hh 


456 STOBAEI HERMETICA 


Sdov Kat ras Wuyas’ PépeoGar ra oméppara, Kai "ras Spoidrytas!? 
dvarddrrecbon “ex trav abrav yevav'® rods rurous Kai robs Xapaxrijpas, 
a . 7 , Ke 28 - ee , CUR = 
bomep dv et “Lwypdov'* ard tOv spoiwv xpwpdrov cixdva top 
Brcropévov (roujrevev ?).—mpoler Oar 58 Kal riv yovaika oméppa™ Kay 
piv erixparjon Td THs yuvaixds, Guorov elvac 7d yevvepevov TH wyrpi, 
ay 8% rd Tod dvSpés, 7B warpi.’ Galen De /oet. format. 6, IV, 
699K: pddiora 8 dv tis Oavpdoee tiv mpos Tots yevinjoavras 
Spodrnta rv éxydvuv, Srus yiyvera. paiverar yap madwy Siarddr- 
roveu To cdpa Yuxy mapa tav yovéw els 7d Kvovpevov jKev, ds 
év 73 oméppare meptexouevy. Origen Ja ev, Joann. 20. 2: 7 pay 
oréppa [rds] exer Tods Adyous Tod omeipavros év éavTG re Hovxd- 
Lovras Kat drroxeysévous’ 7d Se téxvov, peraBaddvros tod omépyaros 
Kat épyavapévov thy mepixeipevyy aird vAyv dxd THs yuvatKds Kal 
Tov émovwvayopevev tpopay, poppwbley Kai eis yéveou etrperurbey 
idiorara. Jb, 20. 5: émel yap exe ev avtG mpoyorixovs re Kal 
‘ / +4 4 C + a“ c > a , 

avyyerxods Adyous 4 oTElpwv, OTE pev KpaTeL O auTOU Aodyos, -kal 
dmorixreran Td yevvepevoy tH omelpavt. Suowov" Gre 8 6 Adyos rod 
&dekpod rod omeipavros 4 Tod marTpds ToD omelpavros 7} TOU Belov 
rob ome(payros, éviore Kal mdmmov ToD o7etpavros, map 3 -yivovrae 
€ ia i) x ~ x . 2 2 a 
of drorurduevor Spoor toicde 4 toiede. ori Se ieiv erixparotvra 
Kol rov Adyov Tijs yuvacds,... 7 Tod adeAdod atris i) Tob mdarrou 
airijs, kara tovs év rais puééor Bpacpots dua mdvruv cevopévov tug 
eruxparnoy Tis Tov oTepparikav Adyor.® 

The teaching of Zeno the Stoic concerning the orépya is reported 
as follows by Arius Didymus, Diels Dox. p. 470 (Arnim Séo. vet. Bis 
I, § 128): 7388 oréppa dyoly 6 Zier evar 6 pebinow dvOpwros, Tvedpo. 
ped’ Sypod, Wuyis pépos Kal drdoracpa,’ Kal rod omépparos Tov Tay 
mpoydvev' xépacpa,® Kal piypa (e érdvrwv) Tov TAS WuxAs pepo 

1 Perhaps kal rs Yuyis ought to be either bracketed, or altered into «at (mdvraw 
tov) Ths Yuxijs (uep@v). Compare piypa (ef dndvrov) rev Tis Yuxis pephy cvveAnav- 
64s in the quotation from Zeno which is given below. 

2 Perhaps els duodrnra, * 


8 “yeyay vix sanum: tentabam -yévew ... vel pepdv” Diels, I have thou 
of Adyor; cf. éxov Tois Adyous TH GAw rods abrovs in Zeno, quoted below, : 
something analogous to dnd ray époiww xpapdrer is wanted ; possibly éf dno-yeviw 
4 Read (wypados. 
5 mpotesOar .. . marpl non sunt Stoicorum,” says Diels. , 
6 This is a restatement, in Stoic terms, of the theory of raromepyla spoken of by 
Aristotle, Ger. am. 4. 3, 769.0 29. The omepparucds MS-yos of the Stoics is the plan 
or design of the human or animal body which is to be formed; but it is at 
same time a corporeal thing, a mvedua, which is present in the owéppa, and by 
action of which the body is fashioned in the womb. 
7 Perhaps : (ris To omelpavros) Wuxijs pépos xal dndonagya, (“rod omépyaros” mal 
have come from toi o'refpavros misplaced.) 
£ Perhaps: «al [rod omépparos Tod] Ta&v mpoyov(ur)Dy (Adyar) wépaopa. Cf, exet 








EXCERPT XXII 467 


awedyrvbes'! Exov yap tos Adyous 7G bw rods abrods todTo, Stay? 
adebij cis riv parpav, ovAnpev “Ex” dddov wvedparos, Epos yuxis THs 
rod Ondéos Kai! cupdres yevonevor, (...)® “kpupbér re pve!* xvot- 
pevov kai dvappirifopevov br’ éxeivov, mporAduBavov del [ets]® 7d Sypov 
cat abfdpevoy é€ airod. 

Chrysippus used the resemblance of children to parents in qualities 
of soul as an argument against the Platonic doctrine of the pre- 
existence of the soul. His argument is criticized by Plutarch, St. 


rep. 41. 8, 1053 C, D: yiveo Oar pev ydp pyar (sc. Chrysippus) rv vuxdy 
drav 70 Bpépos drorexOy, kabdrep cropdce TH mepulvéer rod wvetparos 
peraBadovros.’ drrodette d& xpijrar rod yeyovévar TH Wuyhy Kal pera- 
yeveoTepav clvai, pahuora 7G Kal tov tpdrov Kal rd 700s eopovodobar rd 
réxva Tois yovedot.... ef S€ dyot tis Ore rats Kpdoect Tov TwOMEaTWY 
eyywoperns Tis Gpodryros ai Yuxal yervepevar peraBdddovor, SiabGeipet 
70 Texunplov Tod yeyovevat Ty Wuxiy' evdéxerar yap obrw Kal é&yévvyrov 
otcay, drav éreréAy, peraBdddew tH Kpdoe (rod odparos) “ris 
épodrntos! (read eis Suoudryra).” 

A passage closely resembling Zxc, XXII occurs in Lactantius 
De opif. det, 12. 4ff.: ‘Ipsum semen quidam putant ex medullis 


é&y éaurG mpoyoutnods ... Adyous 6 ometpov, x,7.A., in Origen, quoted above, and 
Tard peypor Tov Tay mpoydveav Adyou" in Diog, Laert. (see following note). 

1 This passage (7d 52 oméppa... pepdv cuvedndvOds) is repeated, with slight 
variations, in Theodoret Gr. aff. cur. 5. 25: rév yap row dvOpd@mvov Oopav, trypov 
dvra wal peréxovta mvebparos, Tis Yuxis épnoer (sc. Zivav § Kerteds) elvat Hépos [re] 
kal dndonacpa, kat “rod 7Ov npoysver onépparos’ képacya [re], al Beye ef dndvrev 
Tov Tis Yoxts Hoplwv cvvaSporcGéy, Compare also Diog. Laert. 7. 158: avOpdrov 
8 onépya (A€youow of Sraxot) & webinar b dvOparos (mveipa) ped” bypod, ‘avyxip- 
vagia Tois THs Yuxijs pépeot Kara puypov Tod Tov mpoydvay Abyou'. (‘This might be 
corrected into (xat) [ouynipyacéa ois] tHs (rod omeipavros?) Yuyhs pépos (eat 
dndomacpa), wat prypov [rot] 7» mpoyor(in)Dv Ad-yov.)—Galen "Opa tarp. 94, X X, 
Pp. 370 K: omépya coriv dvépimov b pebinow dvOpwros (nvedpa) ped? Spot, yuxiis 

Hépous Gpraypa’ (read pépos wal dwécnacua), kat odpprypa ‘rod tov mpoyover 
évovs' (perhaps [rod] r&v mpoyou(in)v Ad-yaw), “oldy re abrd Fv Kat abrd ouppey Bey 
Deucatbn'. (Is oléy re aird iv nat ai7é a corruption of something like (2xov yap 
Tois Ad-yous) TH FA Tods adrods TovTo in Arius Didymus?)—Plut. De cohid. ira 1 by 
462f.2 6 Zhvay @reye 7d oméppa odppeypa Kal népacpa tov rhs Yuyijs durdpewy 
brdapxew dreowacpévor, 2 

® Perhaps: €xew yap robs Ad-yous rH Aw Tods abrovs. roDro (SE), Grav K.7.A. 

$ Perhaps: vddnpeey [bn’ ddAdov mvedparos] ((xal)) [uépos] Wuyh 7H Tod Onrgos 
[wat] cuppues yevouevov, {..,). Possibly ind (rov) dAAou mveduaros is a mis- 
placed gloss on in’ éxelvov below, 

* Perhaps: (7d 58) xunGéy [re] pera: (or piecbar), 

® els del. Diels. 

® Chrysippus said that the mvedua of the embryo is chilled and ‘ tempered? by 
the cold of the external air, to which the child is exposed at birth, re that the 
mveSpa is thereby changed into a Yvy7. Plutarch’s meaning might be made clearer 
by writing rod mvetparos (els yuxiv) petaBaddrtos, 

” For this last clause, cf. Axe. XXVI. 13: mpocemylyvera 5%... nat erepa 
Twa Hiv ex THs TOD pupdpyaros cvaTabpias. 


Hh2 


468 STOBAEI HERMETICA 


tantum, quidam ex omni corpore ad venam genitalem confluere 
ibique concrescere. . . . Conceptum igitur Varro et Aristoteles sic 
fieri arbitrantur. Aiunt enim non tantum maribus inesse semen, 
verum etiam feminis, et inde plerumque matribus similes procreari, 
Sed earum semen sanguinem esse purgatum: quod si recte cum 
virili mixtum sit, utraque concreta et simul coagulata informari. . . , 
Similitudines autem in corporibus filiorum sic fieri putant: cum 
semina inter se permixta coalescunt, si virile superaverit, patri 
similem provenire seu marem seu feminam ; si muliebre praevaluerit, 
progeniem cuiusque sexus ad imaginem respondere maternam. Id 
autem praevalet e duobus, quod fuerit uberius; alterum enim 
quodammodo amplectitur et includit: hinc plerumque fieri ut unius 
tantum liniamenta praetendat. Si vero aequa fuerit ex pari semente 
permixtio, figuras quoque misceri,’ &c. According to Brandt ( Wiener 
Studien 13, pp. 255 ff.), the source from which Lactantius got the 
contents of that passage was a book by Varro, entitled Zwdero, de 
origine humana, ‘The Greek authority followed by Varro must have 
referred to Aristotle (Gen. az. 4. 3). The writer of Hac, XXII 
probably made use of Varro’s Greek source, or some document 
derived from it. 

Srav vooripou alpatos éadpoupevor (26aeSpounévou MSS.) "} yévers” 
drobycaupity yovov. egaheSpoupévov was probably written by some one 
who was thinking of depos, menses muliebres. But that cannot be 
right, because this clause has to do with the father; the mother is 
not spoken of till later (7d 3 adrd cai él ris yuvatds). For aiparos 
eéadpovpevor . . . droOyoavpity yovov, cf. Clem. Alex. Paed. 1. 6. 48: 
twis 88 Kal 7d oréppa tod Ldou adpov clva tod aipatos Kaz’ obciay 
troribevrar, 8 5) TH euddrw rod dppevos O€pyy [rapa ras ovparAoKas 
éxrapayiv]! expuridpevov eadpotrar, kay tals "oreppdricr waparierat'? 
drewiv’ evreiOev yap 5 "AxodAwvudrns Avoyérys Ta dppodiora Kexdijobae — 
Bovrerar, Philo De ofif. mundi 22. 67, vol. i, p. 22 Cohn: rodro 
(se. 7b oréppa tov Lewy), ds Eore (2ws éori?) pavddraror, éorxds adpd 
Oewpetrar’ GAN’ Sray eis Thy parpav KaraBAyOev orynpioy, «.7.A. Pseudo- 
Galen Hist. phil, Diels Dox. p. 640: TvOaydpas (rd oréppa elval 
dnow) appdv tot xpyorordrov aiparos. (vooripov in Lxc. XXII 
corresponds to xpyorordrov in Ps.-Galen.) 


1 wapd Tas cupmdoKds éxrapay6év appears to have been added by some one who 
misunderstood the writer's meaning, It is not at the gvpzmAomp, but before it, that 
the onépya is formed and stored up. 

2 Probably omepparixais dnoriferm, Cf. dnodnoavpi{y in Exc. XXII. 








EXCERPT XXII 469 


The subject of déroOycovpi~y cannot have been % yéveows. The 
agent is presumably nature, operating in the man’s body; and this 
may have been expressed by 4 pvous, with or without some additional 
words such as eis yéveow, 

gupPaiver mas exnveiv éx Tod odpatos bdou [pehav] odciay tid (. . .). 
An otota which éxzvet is a rvetpa; and the thing meant is the rvedpa 
spoken of in the same connexion by the Stoics. The writer’s 
meaning might be expressed by saying that the semen is wvedya per’ 
ddpot; cf Zeno’s rvetpa pel bypod. The avedya is the active 
component of the semen ; it is that in which the life resides. 

peAdv is perhaps a remnant of (kat révrov 7dr) peddv (or pepar), 
which may have been written as an alternative for é« tod owparos 
édov. But it is also possible that it may be a remnant of (kat 
révrov Tov THs Yrxis) pepov; cf. Zeno af. Arius Didymus, quoted 
above. 

For éx rod odparos GXov, cf. Aetius (Diels, p. 422, quoted above) : 
ot Srwrxoi, dard Tot cdparos Gov Kal (rdvruw rev ?) ris Wuyts (wepav ?) 
peperGar Ta oréppata. Diog. Laert. 7. 159: kat dd’ dAwy 8& Tov 
copdrov (rd orépya) paci KatapéperOa of wept tov Sdaipov' wdvrwv 
your yevvytixov elvan TOV TOD Gdparos pepav. 

( « ) Katd Oelav évépyeav, ds [tod adrod] dvOpdaou ywouevou, It is 
impossible to say that ‘¢ke same human being’ is brought into 
existence by the process of reproduction; the son may be like the 
father, but cannot be identical with him. If we strike out rod airod 
(which may have come by duplication from the following 74 8 aérd), 
we may suppose the writer’s thought to have been that the production 
of a human being is a thing that requires a special putting forth of 
divine power. The formation of a beast, or of a human body, might 
be sufficiently accounted for by the working of merely physical 
forces ; but there is something in man that comes direct from God, 
and must have been breathed into him by God at his birth. But it 
is difficult to see how anything of this kind can have been connected 
with the context ; and it may be suspected that the words xara .. . 
ywopévov have come from a marginal note. 

76 8 adtd Kal emt ris yuvotkds eixds (els 73 MSS.) ylyvecdar. Srav 
(odv) ka®umeprepyoy (-pion MSS.) 1d fuev dd Tod dvBpés . . ., 7 Tarpt 
Sporov (sporodpevov MSS.) 7d Bpépos dmoSerxOjoerat, ds 7d dvdmadu 
tiv adrév tpérov TH pytpi. This agrees closely in meaning with the 
corresponding passage in Aetius /.¢.: mpoterOar S& kal riv yuvaika 
oreppa* Kav pev emucparyoy To THs yuvaikds, K7.A. Cf. Ar. Gen. an. 


470 STOBAEI HERMETICA 


4. 3, 767 b2r: Kparovons pev (ris ToD dppevos Kwycews OF yovijs), 
dppev re roupoes Kal ob OAAv, Kal éouxds TO yervavTe GAN od TH NTPU ph 
kparnoav O€, K.T.A. 

Kal G&ryxtov (aOixrov MSS.) yévytor. dOixrov is impossible; but 
arnxrov (which, for a transcriber, would differ very little in pronuncia- 
tion from d@u«rov) gives a satisfactory sense: ‘if the vigour of the 
semen is not softened or relaxed.’ 

édy (8¢ emt) twos pépous (i) Kadumeprépnois (xabumépbecrs MSS.) 
yévntar, mpds exeivo TS pépos Goporodrar (sc, Td Bpépos TH watpl H TH 


. pytpl). Cf. Ar. Gen. an. 768b1; 6 8 abros rpdmos Kat emt tay 


popiov’ Kat yap tov poplwy Ta pev TG warpl ouxe woAAAKIS, Ta SF TH 
parpi, ta 88 rev mpoydver tusiv. Lb. 76926: cipyjxace S€ TwWes Tov 
vowddyov Kal Erepor wept tovTwv, Sa tiv’ airlay duo Kai dvdpom 
yiyverar trois yovedow. ... erioe pev yap pacw, adh’ drorépov av ery 
oréppa. TA€ov, TovTw yiyverOar paddov Eorxds, dpolws mavri Te Ta Kab 
péper pépos, ws dmivros ad’ éxdorou Tay popiwv o7épparos. 

o0” Sre Sz Kal eis paxpds yeveds (...). This may have referred to 
the case of a child’s resemblance to some zpoyovos other than the 
father and the mother (cf. ra 8& twv zpoydver tiv in Aristotle, 
quoted above). poxpas yeveds, if sound, must mean ‘remote 
generations’, 

(. « .) 'éxetvouT (rod) Sexavod (rod) Adyov €xovros mpds Thy dpav év FH 
yurh érardoroiea. As to the Decani, see Zxc. VI. The reading of 
the MSS, would appear to mean ‘since he (sc. 6 yevynoas) stands in 
the relation of a Decanus to the hour in which’ &c. But it could 
hardly be said that there is the same relation between a man and a 


certain hour as between a Decanus and that hour; and the true 


reading is probably rot Sexavod tod x.7.d., ‘of the Decanus who has 


to do with the hour’ &c. (éxetvov may be a corrupted doublet of 


dexavot.) Ata given hour, one of the thirty-six Decani—presumably 
the Decanus who is at that time rising above the eastern horizon—is 


dominant ; and the writer must have said that the child is in some 


way affected by the influence of the Decanus who is dominant at the 
hour in which the child’s existence begins. In the Pistis Sophia, it 
is the function of the 365 Liturgi (who are subordinates of the 
Decani) to fashion the body in the womb; and the writer of 


Exc. XXI\ may have assigned a similar function to the dominant 


Decanus. 
Does 7 dpa ev 4 4 yur) éradomote mean the hour of birth, or the 
hour of conception ? 








EXCERPTS XXII, XXIII 471 


EXCERPT XXIII 


(Kore Kosmv.) 


Exc. XXIII contains a narrative (§§ ((50)) ff.) preceded by two 
detached fragments of other documents (§§ ((32)), 1, 2, and §§ 3-8), 
and interrupted by the insertion of three other unconnected passages 
(§§ 27-29, § 42, and §§ 43-48), as well as by some smaller 
interpolations. 

Setting aside these extraneous additions, and confining our 
attention to the main narrative, we have in Z£xc. XXIII the greater 
part of a /idellus which must have been one of a collection of 
documents in which the teachings of the writers were presented 
in the form of instruction given by Isis to her son Horus. 
Excerpts XXIV-XXVII are extracts from other /e/l’ of the same 
collection. 

These Jsis 4o Horus documents differ in character from those 
of the Hermes to Tat, Hermes to Asclepius, and Hermes to Ammon 
~ collections, and must have originated among somewhat different sur- 
roundings. They are ‘ Hermetic’ only in the sense that the knowledge 
which Isis imparts to Horus is supposed to have been learnt by her, 
in part at least, from Hermes,—and possibly also in the sense that 
the spoken words of Isis and Horus were assumed to have been 
set down in writing by Hermes. (The headings of Zxc. XXIII, 
XXV, and XXVII in Stobaeus imply that these pieces were ex- 
tracted from books written by Hermes; but we do not know that 
the original Zde//7 bore any superscriptions to that effect.) In respect 
of the doctrines taught, however, the Js’s ¢o Horus documents 
do not differ much more widely from the other Hermetica than 
the other Aermetica differ among themselves. 

The doctrinal position of the writer of Zac. XXIII is somewhat 
obscured by the mythical form of his narrative. He employs for 
his purpose the chief figures in the mythology of the Egyptian 
Isis-cult (the deities Osiris, Isis, and Horus, and the god Thoth- 
Hermes); and he makes use of conscious and deliberate personi- 
fications (@vous, § 10; TH, § (52)); the four Elements, §§ 55-64). 
The greater part of what he says, or makes Isis say, is evidently 
not intended to be taken as literally and historically true; he 
cannot have believed, or expected his readers to believe, that 
his descriptions of the making of plants (§§ 9-((52))), the making 





472 STOBAEI HERMETICA 


of souls (§§ 14-16), and the making of beasts (§§ 18-23), were, in al] 
their details, true accounts of things that had actually taken place, 
any more than he believed, or expected it to be believed, that the 
speeches which he ascribes to God, and the words which he puts 
into the mouths of the Elements, had really been spoken by them, 
But it is difficult to draw a precise line between what he meant. 
to be accepted as true and what he meant to be understood as 
symbolic fiction. His narrative is presumably based, in its main 
outlines at least, on pre-existing traditions ; much of the detail js 
doubtless of his own invention. But how much he invented for 
himself, and how much he took over from earlier writers, we have 
no means of finding out. (It would be interesting to know, for 
instance, what authority he had for saying that the bodies of the 
beasts were made by ‘holy daemons’, § 19.) 

The writer of this document, though he can hardly be called 
a thorough-going Platonist, has been much influenced by Platonic 
teachings. He recognizes a supreme and incorporeal God, by 
whom the Kosmos has been made out of a Chaos of formless 
matter (§ ((50))). He assumes the pre-existence of human souls, 
and holds that, before their incarnation on earth, they resided in a 
higher world; he describes the body as a prison (§ 34 fim. &c.), 
and speaks of the /e¢he to which the soul is subjected during its 
earthly life (§§ 37 and 41); and he says that, when the soul departs 
from the body, it will, according to its merits or demerits, either 
return to its home above, or be reincarnated in the body of a beast — 
(§ 39). All this must have been derived, directly or indirectly, 
from Plato ; and in his description of the making of souls, as well 
as in his conception of God as Demiurgus, the influence of the 
Timaeus is manifest. 

On the other hand, the distinction between the aic6yrov and the 
voytov,—the corporeal and the incorporeal,—which is one of the 
most fundamental principles of Platonism, appears to be of but 
slight importance to the writer of the narrative. It is here and 
there implied (e.g. in the conception of the pre-cosmic God and 
a pre-cosmic group of gods, § ((50)), and in the contrast between 
seeing with bodily eyes and seeing with the eyes of the mind, § 36); 
but little stress is laid on it, and for the most part the incorporeal 
is ignored. The distinction on which the writer insists is not 
that between things cosmic and things supracosmic, but rather that 
between different parts of the Kosmos, ra dvw and ra xérw, things — 








EXCERPT XXIII 473 


celestial and things terrestrial; and the supreme reward promised 
to virtuous souls is not transference into a supracosmic world, but 
admission to heaven, or in other words, transformation into star- 
gods (§ 17). This might indeed be accounted for to some extent 
by the mythical form of the discourse of Isis ; and it might perhaps 
be said that the corporeal things spoken of are meant to be under- 
stood as symbols of incorporeal realities. But there rernains a 
fact which cannot be thus explained away. The religion which 
is said to have been introduced among mankind by Osiris and 
Isis, and which it seems to have been the writer’s main object to 
uphold or recommend, is not a Platonic mysticism such as we 
find in some of the Hermetica,—a religion the aim of which is 
the soul’s escape from the world of sense, and its union with a 
supracosmic God ; it is little more than a belief in penalties imposed 
by superhuman beings,—the sort of religion which might be described 
as a substitute for a police-force. 

Signs of Stoic influence are apparent in the terms used to describe 
the materials of which souls are made (voepov wip, and a portion of 
God’s zveta, § 14); in the writer’s conception of the mvetyara of 
beasts (§§ 18-21) ; and in the statement that the soul is situated in 
the heart (§ 36), The notion that animal births are brought about 
by the working of the Zodiac (§ 20) implies acceptance of the 
doctrine of astral influence, to which greater prominence was given 
by the later Stoics than by Chrysippus. ‘The view that unembodied 
souls reside in the atmosphere, the division of the atmosphere into 
distinct strata, and the notion that each soul is located in one par- 
ticular stratum, but is capable of rising from a lower stratum to 
a higher (§ r9), must have been derived from the system of the 
Platonizing Stoic Posidonius. 

The framework of the dialogue is Egyptian, and the writer shows 
familiarity with Egyptian traditions about Isis and Osiris (e.g. in the 
list of the benefits which they conferred on mankind, §§ 66-69). 
The statements that Osiris and Isis are an dadppou. of the supreme 
God, and that these deities came down from heaven to dwell for a time 
on earth, and then returned to heaven, may perhaps be of Egyptian 
origin; but apart from the mythology, this document contains few 
traces of native Egyptian speculation independent of Greek thought. 

There are certain expressions which appear to show that the writer 
had some knowledge of the first chapter of the Jewish Genesis (see 
notes on é« ris hwvis adtot wponAGev in § 10; etre Kal... eyevero in 


474 STOBAEI HERMETICA 


§ ((g0)), and elmer 6 Oeds, xat Hv in § ((r1)); exaype 88 6 Beds x.7.d. in 
§ ((5)); duotoyovias in § 21); and the word @povo. in § 17 may have 
come froma Jewish source. It is therefore not unlikely that through. 
out his narrative of the demiurgia the author was more or less in- 
fluenced by Genesis ch. 1, as well as by the Zimaeus. 

Ican find no evidence that anything in the teaching of Zxc, XXIII 
was derived from Christian sources. 

Date, The intermixture of Platonic and Stoic conceptions in the 
Kore Kosmu, and more especially the writer's dependence on 
Posidonius in his doctrine concerning the souls, makes any date 
earlier than 50 2. c. impossible. We may therefore begin by setting — 
down as the extreme limits 50 B.c. on the one hand, and A. D. 500 
(the approximate date of Stobaeus) on the other. But we should 
most likely be right in striking off two hundred years at either end 
of this long period, and fixing on A. D. 150 as the zerminus a quo, and 
A.D. 300 as the ferminus ante quem. 

There is one thing which seems to tell somewhat in favour of 
a more definite date. In my note on § 61, I have pointed out the 
resemblance between the petition of the Elements in this docu- — 
ment and the prophecy of Hermes in Asc/. Lat. III. 24 b-26 a, 
The writer of the Kore Kosmu, like the writer of Asc/. Zaz. III, is 
endeavouring to uphold the established worship of the gods of 
Egypt, and does so by describing, in similar language, the disastrous 
results of dOeorns, which, according to both alike, not only causes 
mutual slaughter among men, but also tends to produce disorder 
in the world of nature. (See Kore Kosmu 63, where it is im- 
plied that the Elements were on the point of abandoning their 
functions in disgust at the misdeeds of men, and compare this with 
Ascl. Lat. V1. 25, tune nec terra constabit &c.) Now a man would — 
not be likely to write thus in defence of the established cults unless 
he knew or thought that some attack on them was to be feared, 
The danger which the writer of Asc/, Zat. III had in view was the 
spread of Christianity, which he expected to result in the abolition of 
all Pagan cults. Is it not probable then that the author of the Kore 
Kosmu also wrote at a time when this same danger was already be- 
coming apparent? As I have pointed out in the introduction to Asc, 
Lat., this would indicate a date hardly before a. D. 260 at the earliest. 

There is good reason for thinking that the distress of the author — 
of Asc?. Lat. was intensified by the Palmyrene invasion of Egypt in 
A.D. 268, and that he wrote in the midst of the troubles to which 








EXCERPT XXIII 475 


that invasion gave rise. The calmer tone of the Kove Kosmu would 
agree very well with the assumption that it was written shortly before 
the Palmyrene invasion, at a time when the aggressive temper of the 
Christians was beginning to give pious Pagans cause for apprehension, 
but when Egypt was enjoying an interval of repose after preceding 
troubles. On that assumption, the calamities endured by the 
Alexandrians in a. D. 262-263, and described in the letters of bishop 
Dionysius (Euseb. H. Z. 7. 21 ff.), would be still recent, and would 
be vividly pictured in the writer’s memory; and that might account 
for the resemblance between the complaints of the Elements in the 
Kore Kosmu and the bishop’s descriptions of the state of things in 
Egypt. For this reason, a date between a.p. 263 and 268 may 
perhaps be thought a little more probable than any other ; but the 
argument is not one to which much weight ought to be attached. 

Excerpts XXIV, XXV, and XXVI were presumably written by 
members of the same group of Egyptian worshippers of Isis, and 
cannot be far separated in date from Zxe, XXIII. 

Title. The superscription in Stobaeus tells us that Zxe. XXIII 
is an extract from a book written by Hermes Trismegistus, and 
entitled Kopy xécpov. What is the meaning of this title? It has 
‘sometimes been translated ‘The virgin of the world’. But that is 
certainly wrong. «xopy means, not a virgin, but a girl or young 
woman ; and if the word is to be understood in that sense, xépy 
xogpov could only mean ‘Daughter of the Kosmos’.* But to 
whom could that term be applied? Certainly not to Isis, who, as 
described in this document, is not daughter of the Kosmos,’ and who, 
moreover, is here depicted neither as a virgin nor as a girl, but as 
a matron, wife of Osiris, and mother of a glorious son. 

Since xépy in the sense of ‘girl’ is inappropriate, we must take 
the word in its other sense, and understand the title to mean ‘The 
pupil of the eye of the Kosmos’. But who or what was denoted by 
that term, it is difficult to guess. 


1 Athena, for instance, is called Ads «épy (daughter of Zeus), Aesch. Lem. 415 ; 
and the Eumenides are called I'js re kai Sxdrou «dpa (daughters), Soph. 0. C. 40. 

2 In § 65, she is spoken of as an ‘efflux’ of the supreme God. 

8 It is possible, however, that those who used the term in this sense sometimes 
bore in mind the other meaning of «épy also. Cf. Plut. De facte in orbe lunae 24. 3, 
942 D: Kopy 88 nat depoepdvy Kéxdrnra (y év ceAnvy Ged), 7d pen (sc. Pepaepdvy) 
Gs gwopdpos otoa, Kipn 8, Gre (7d HAlov péyyos (dvTiAdprov) evopara TH 
gednyy,)) ((omepy) nai Tod Smparos (rd) év @ 7d eldwdov dvTtAdpme Tod BAénovros 
|[Gomep]] |[75 Alou péyyos evoparar th ceAnvy)| Képyv mpocaryopetopev, That 
passage shows that Plutarch could easily have found a reason for calling the Moon- 
goddess xépn xdapov ; but there is no evidence that he or any other Greek ever did 
call her by that name. 


476 STOBAEI HERMETICA 















The sun was often called ‘the eye of heaven’, both in Greek 
poetry and in Egyptian documents ;! and as Horus was one of the 
numerous deities whom the Egyptians identified with the sun, he 
might very well be called ‘the eye (ép0aApds) of the Kosmos’, and 
perhaps even ‘the eye-pupil («opy) of the Kosmos’? But the fact 
that Horus takes part in the dialogue asa disciple of his mother 
Isis is hardly a sufficient reason for using a name of Horus as the 
title of the book. 

Brugsch, Rel, und Myth. der alten Aeg. p. 81, says that the name 
Osiris * meant (or might be taken to mean) ‘the power of the eye 
pupil’, or ‘powerful is the eye-pupil ’, and that the Egyptians under 
stood ‘the eye-pupil’, in his connexion, to mean the sun. If $0, 
perhaps Osiris might be called xépy xécpov. 

Hathor of Tentyra is called in inscriptions ‘the pupil of the eye 
of the light-god Ra’, ‘the female sun, the head of the light. 
god Ra’, and ‘the right pupil of the two pupils of the holy 
eye’.* It seems therefore that the name ‘eye-pupil of the 
universe’ might be applied to Hathor; and if to Hathor, perhaps" 
to Isis also. 

It is most likely then that xépy xdopov is an appellation of some. 
particular god or goddess. But we do not know which out of. 
many possible deities was called by this name; nor do we know 
why the book was thus entitled. It must be remembered, however, 
that we have only the Excerpt given by Stobaeus; if the whole 
book were before us, both the meaning of the title and. its 

1 Cf. nepdaunh re, dpOadpol Oediv, dopa, in Kore Kosmu 34. 

* ¢ The eye of Horus’ is a term which occurs very frequently in Egyptian docu- 
ments, and was used in some cryptic sense in the ritual formulae of Egyptian 
worship. But to speak of the eye of Horus is not the same as to call Horus himself 


an eye; and to call him an eye is not quite the same as to call him the pupil of an 
eye. 

* Us-iri; in Coptic, ovespe, The second part of the word (-irz) was repre- 
sented in hieroglyphic writing by the picture of an eye. Brugsch says that in 


late times the name was sometimes written Us-ré (i.e. with a picture of the sun 
in Place of that of an eye). 


Brugsch 74. pp. 118 and 122. 

5 The possibility of a different interpretation of the term xopy xdcuov is suggested 
by the words of Plutarch, Zs, e¢ Os. 33: riv Alyumrov, év ois (rais Reitzenstein) 
padaTa pedrdyyeiov odaav, dawep 7d pedav Tod bpPadrpod, Xnpiay kadovow. (Erman, 
deg. Glossar, says that in the Egyptian language 2m, Coptic Kase, meant ‘black’, 
and £-t, Coptic RHaxe, meant ‘ Egypt ’.) Assuming that the same Egyptian word — 
meant both ‘the land of Egypt’ and ‘the black of the eye’, it is conceivable that 
Egypt might be called ‘ the eye-pupil of the universe’, Ebers (‘ Die Korpertheile 
in Altagyptischen, Abh.d.k. bayr. Akad. 1897, p. I11) quotes from an ancient text 
found at Edfu ‘ Egypt (lit. the Black), which is so called after the eye of Osiris, for 
it is his pupil’, (Mead, Thrice Greatest Hermes, U1, p- 158.) 





EXCERPT XXIII: 32 477 


connexion with the contents of the dialogue might be less obscure. 
See note on § ((50)). 
((§ 32. Mipdcexe, téxvovy “Qpe . . . od wap’ euod.)) In the MSS., 
the Excerpt begins with the words ratra ctrotoa "Iows (§ 1). A 

sage containing something said by Isis must therefore have 
preceded ; but as we are told in § 1 that Isis Zegins her discourse 
(ro Adyou dpxerar) in § 2, the missing passage cannot have amounted 
to more than a few sentences. 

Now § 32 is evidently out of place where it stands in the MSS. 
It must have stood at or near the beginning of a dialogue in which 
Isis gave instruction to Horus ; and if we put it here, ratra etmotoa 
«7A. follows quite satisfactorily. 

kpumTis yap émakovers (émaxovceis?) Oewpias, fis & pév mpomdrwp 
Kapigis (iv apxnyérns, “Eppijs 82) (mapa tod mdvtwv Tpoyevertépou 
Kaptpews)) éruxev éraxovoas, (éyy 82) mapa ‘Epyod, Kapjdes is a 
name of the Egyptian god Khnum, whom Greeks called the Agathos 
Daimon. In the sentence as given in the MSS., the words rapa 
tod mévtwv mpoyevertépov Kaunews are meaningless, and the words 
Kapipis érvxev éraxovcas rapa “Epyod yield an impossible meaning. 
If Kamephis was the ‘forefather’ of the other persons mentioned, 
and ‘older than all’ of them (révrwv mpoyevéorepos), how could he 
have been a pupil of Hermes, his junior and descendant? There 
can be little doubt that here, as elsewhere, the Agathos Daimon 
was spoken of as the teacher from whom Hermes learnt the gnosis, 
and that what Isis said was ‘Kamephis taught the doctrine to 
Hermes ; Hermes taught it to me ;? and I will now teach it to you’, 


} Dieterich, Adraxas, p. 110, n. 1, speaking of ‘the coin (Miinze) which is 
published as no. 13 by Engel in Bull. de corr. hellénigue VIII’, says that it bears 
the inscription KOPF KOC; and he takes this to mean KOPH KOCMOY. 
Dieterich's note gave me some hope of finding a portrait of the Kore Kosmu. But 
that hope was vain; for I cannot accept his reading of the inscription, The things 
dealt with in Engel’s article are not coins, but leaden ‘esserae; and the fessera in 
question is not no. 13, but no. 68, which Engel describes as follows: * KOPY—KOC, 
Némésis debout tenant un frein; 4 ses pieds une roue.—Rev. AIA (pour AlAtov) 
TTYP—bO—POY. Autel, le tout dans une conronne.—Corycus, ville de Cilicie?’ 
In Engel’s reproduction of the obverse, one sees a standing human figure, with a 
wheel beside its right foot, and something (which does not look like ‘a bridle ”) in 
its left hand ; and the letters OPY KOC (not OPF KOC) are quite plain and un- 
mistakeable. A letter which stood before OPY is almost completely obliterated ; 
and the little that is left of it is (if Engel’s copy may be trusted) more like the 
bottom of a B than the bottom of a K. The inscription on the obverse then is not 
képn xéapov. ‘The only intelligible word on the éessera is uppépov on the reverse. 

* It was commonly said that Isis learnt from Hermes. Diodorus (1. 27) gives 
an epitaph of Isis (regarded as a mortal woman) which was said to have been 
found ‘at Nysa in Arabia’; it begins thus : ‘Eyd"Io/s eiju 4 Bacikiooa maans Xw@pas, 
9 madevdeica bd ‘Eppod. 





478 STORBAEI HERMETICA 






































The text has been thrown into confusion by the shifting of apd 
. «+ Kapjdews. 

‘Eppod t00 [wdvtrwv Epywr] Sropynparoypdpou. Kamephis taught the 
doctrine orally to Hermes ; but Hermes was the first to set it down 
in writing. (Cf. § 5, and Corp. XII. i. 8.) In § 43, Hermes is calle 
Gedy tropynparoypados. 

érér épe kal “rd tehetw péhave étipyoe', ‘At the time when he 
honoured me with the perfect ink.’ That is nonsense. Wachsmuth 
supposes that the ‘ink’ is that with which Hermes wrote his books, 
But if the writer had meant to make Isis say ‘at the time when 
he permitted me to read the books which he had written’, he 
would surely have found some better way of expressing tha 
meaning. 

Reitzenstein, Potmandres, p. 139, quotes from a magic papyrus 
(Wessely, Denkschr. d. h. k. Akademie 1893, p. 37, 1. 500) the 
words értxahotpat ce, xupia “lor, 7 ovvexaipyoey 6 “Ayabds Aai 
Bacitevwv ev rp redeiw pédavt. The occurrence of the words 7@ 
reXefw péAave in the papyrus is significant, as it seems to exclude 
the hypothesis that their presence in the Kore Kosmu is due merely 
to corruption of the text.' But that passage gives little help towards 
the explanation of the phrase.? 


1 A satisfactory sense could be got by writing rots réAect rots peyddos (or 7H 
Tederh TH peyady) érédcce. (7H TéAK TO peyadrw would be nearer to the reading 
of the MSS.; but it is usually 7éAy, plural, and not réAos, singular, that is used in 
the sense of ‘ initiation’.) ? 

2 Reitzenstein 7d, begins his attempt to explain the passage by saying (if I under= 
stand him rightly) that 7d 7éAecov wéAav means the land of Egypt; and in support 
of this, he refers to Plut. Zs. e¢ Os. 33: thy Alyunroy é rais padiora peddyyeov 
ovcay Wonep TO péAay Tov 6POarpod Xnylay Kadotaw, (But it may be objected that, 
even if we assume that 7d uéAav could mean ‘ the black earth’, and that ‘ the black 
earth’ could mean ‘ the land of Egypt’, the epithet réActoy remains unexplained.) 

But to this Reitzenstein appends a different and inconsistent interpretation of the 
phrase, namely, that 76 réAecoy néAay means, not the land of Egypt, but a particular 
part of that land, viz, the district in which Syene was situated, and which was called 
the Dodekaschoinos. He refers to an inscription in which it is said that king Doser 
gave this district to the god Khnum; he mentions the known facts that in early 
times the chief seat of the cult of Khnum was in that region, and that in the time 
of the Ptolemies the cult of Khnum had been partly superseded there by that of 
Isis; he assumes the existence of a ‘ priestly tradition of Syene’ that Khnum had, 
by a definite act, transferred his rights over the district to Isis (natiirlich muss der 
Gott es ihr freiwillig tiberlassen, sich mit ihr vereinigt haben’); and he takes: 
both the words 7 cvvéxwpyoev 5 "Ayabes Aaipwr 6 Bacikeday év TS reAciw uédave in 
the magic papyrus, and the words éadr’ éué wal 7O TeAclw pédan ériunoer in the 
Kore Kosmu, to tefer to that transfer. 

Against this it may be said that in the first place Reitzenstein brings forward no 
adequate evidence to show that any such tradition existed; in the second place, 
assuming the tradition of a transfer of the Dodekaschoinos from Khnum to fais to 





EXCERPT XXIII: 1 479 


I am inclined to suspect that eripqoe is a corruption of érédece, 

and that the words refer to a reXery, i.e, a sacramental initiation, by 
which the instructor of Isis prepared her for the reception of the 
secret doctrine which he was about to impart to her. If the words 
10 redciw peAav are sound, we may suppose them to have signified 
something which had to do with the ritual of the sacrament spoken 
of; but their meaning is unknown to us. 

§ 1. éyxet mpOrov “Qpw yhukd te wordy (2yxet wordy “Qpw yduxiy To 
mparoy MSS.) dpBpocias. sordvy déuBpooias means a draught of a 
liquid which makes those who drink it immortal, Isis then makes 
Horus immortal by giving him this draught. Cf. Diodorus 1. 25: 
(gaoiS aa tiv low) cipeiv .. . 7d THs GOavacias pappaxor, de ot 
rov vidv *Qpov, trod rév Terdvwy (. e. the followers of Set) émBovhevOevra 
al vexpov etpeOevra.. ., iy povov avacrioa, Soveay tiv Wuyxyv, GAAC 
cai THs GOavacias rovjoa peradraBev. Oxyrhynchus Pap. (1915) 
no. 1380, l. 242 (addressed to Isis): ot rov péyav “Oop dOdvarov 
eroinoas, . . . potws dé Kat “Opov. 

The notion that immortality is to be got by drinking something 
existed in many different cults. It was probably derived from 
sacramental rites, in which the worshippers drank blood, wine, or 
some other liquid, and thereby received into themselves the substance 
of their god. And the mention of such a draught here makes it 
probable that a sacrament of this nature was in use in the cult of 
Isis at the time when the passage was written. We are told that Isis 
administered a draught to Horus defore she revealed the secret doctrine 
to him. Why is this said? Perhaps because it was usual for a 
teacher to give a sacramental draught to his pupil on a like occasion. 
It may have been the rule in the writer's community that those to 
whom the gvosis is to be revealed must first be made worthy of that 
high privilege by ‘receiving the sacrament’. 

If Horus needs a ‘ draught of ambrosia’ to make him immortal, it 
seems to follow that he isa mortal. And if so, it is to be presumed 
that his mother Isis also either is or has been a mortal. (See £xc. 
XXV. 1 and 9, and Lac. XXVI. 12 and 13.) We may take it then 
that in this paragraph the scene is laid on earth, and that Horus is a 


have existed, there is no reason why Khnum should have chosen the occasion of 
that transfer to reveal the gnosis to her; and in the third place, it was probably 
not from Khnum, but from Hermes, that Isis was supposed by the writer of this 
section (as by other people) to have learnt the guoszs. 

1 On this assumption, Mead’s translation, ‘when he did honour me with the 
Black [Rite] that gives perfection’, might be accepted as giving something like the 
probable meaning. 


480 STOBAEI HERMETICA 


young king of Egypt ; and we may suppose either that Isis is a living 
woman, holding the position of queen-mother and regent, or that she 
has died and gone to heaven, and now, having become a goddess, 
revisits and instructs her mortal son. (Compare what is said about 
the gods Asclepius, Hermes, and Isis in Asc/. Lat. III. 37.) 

§ ((32)) does not conflict with this view, but rather confirms it ; for 
the passing down of the gwosis from Kamephis to Hermes, from 
Hermes to Isis, and from Isis to Horus is more easily understood if 
the persons spoken of are human beings than if they are gods, 
Assuming that they are human beings, the writer must have regarded 
Kamephis, whom he calls the zpomdrwp, as the founder of the 
dynasty. 

On the other hand, in the narrative which begins at § ((50)), Isis 
neither is nor has been a mortal woman, but is a goddess, who, after 
having been sent down to earth, and having resided there for a time, 
has returned to her home in heaven, See note on § ((50)). 

3 at uxal AapBdvew os exoucw “Bedv', It would perhaps be 
better to write ofoy (sc. wordv) instead of 6. 

But who are ‘the souls’, and how and where and when do they 
‘habitually receive draughts of ambrosia’? Probably some words 
which would have made the meaning clearer have fallen out. One 
might conjecture ai (axdpiar) Wuxai, or something of the sort. That 
might be taken to mean that pious souls, when they have quitted the 
body at death, ascend to heaven, and ‘drink ambrosia’ there,—that 
is to say, dwell among the gods, and in their company enjoy the bliss 
of immortality. The notion of drinking ambrosia among the gods 
may have been suggested by Homeric descriptions of the banquets 
of the gods (e.g. Z/. 1. 596-604). 

Gedy, by itself, is meaningless ; and (dd) Oedy is not satisfactory. 
It would be easy to strike out ev ; but how did it get in? Possibly 
it is a remnant of some such phrase as (werd trav) Oedv (Suc-yovoa). 
Cf. Pl. Phaedo 81 A: évxoty otrw piv exovoa (4% Wuyy) cis 7d Spovoy 
air rd dudes darépxerat, 70 Oeidv Te Kal GOdvarov « . ., of ddixopery drdpyer 









arg edSaipov eva, .. . domwep S& A€yerar Kara TOY peprnpévor, Os 
GAnOas tov Aourdy xpdvov pera Hedy Sud-youca (Sayotoy Heindorf) ; 

§ 2. "Emxepévou . . . TH tav Solkdtw) [kepévwr] dice. méoy Tod 
mohuatépous odpavod x.t.A. In this section, the Kosmos is divided 
into two parts, viz. ‘the things above’ (i.e. heaven and its contents) 
and ‘the things below’ (i.e. the sublunar world) ; and it is asserted 
that ‘the things below’ are subject to ‘the things above’, and must 


EXCERPT XXIII: 2 481 


have been set in order by them; i.e. that, so far as chaos has been 
reduced to order in the sublunar world, that order must have 
resulted from the action of heaven, or the gods of heaven, on the 
things below. 

The contrast between ‘the things above’ and ‘the things below’ 
js similar to that between ra év otpavd and ra én) yfjs in the Periochae 
of Exe. x. 

The many erépy of heaven are the orbits of the heavenly bodies. 

Teal KaT odSéva TéTr0v orepoupévou Tivds Gy viv 6 cdpmas exer kdopos !. 
I cannot understand this. Why ovuras? And the contrast between 
‘then’ and ‘now’, which is implied by the word viv, seems in- 
appropriate. 

A better sense might be got by writing xai rod ovpmavros xéopov 
kar’ ovdéva témov orepoupevov twos Gy xpeav éye. Every part of the 
Kosmos (i.e. not only heaven, but the sublunar world also) has been 
supplied with what it needs (or in other words, ovyxexdopyrat Kat 
memAjpwra) ; and if the sublunar world has been ‘set in order, and 
filled (with living organisms)’, this must have been done by the 
agency of ‘the things above’. 

‘od yap Sirou Suvard (7a Kdtw)) Koopfoar [|  ]] ov Swepbev [Sra]- 
kdopov. Tov UmepHev Kdcpor, ‘the world above’, is a synonym for ra 
trepxeipeva. Cf. Luc. XI. 2 (41) as emended: obdtv ddeAcirau ra ev 
oipavg dd rav ext yas’ mdvra adpedeirar ta emt yis dd Tov ev 
otpave. 

dvdykn toivuy toils Kpeitrot pucrnptois elke Ta eAdooova. These 
words cannot have anything to do with the distinction between ra 
puxpa puoripi. and ra peyda puorypia, the two stages of the 
Eleusinian initiation. The word pworjpa (‘holy powers’) is 
repeatedly used in the Aore Kosmu to denote the stars or the 
star-gods (see § 3 and § 51); but what are the pvorjpua of the 
sublunar world? Perhaps pverypios ought to be bracketed. 
kpeicow Sé (8) F) ray bmoKetpevar i tav petedpwv éori [Sralrdgis. 
Compare the term oi xpelocoves, frequently used to signify ‘the 
gods’. 

4 Tov peredpwv rdés, ‘the order (i.e. rank or class) of things on 
high’, is equivalent to ra taepxe(ueva. The word duéragis (‘ arrange- 
ment’ or ‘ disposition’) is less suitable. 

kai TG wavti dopadis [re], Kal Ovnrav odx smomtrrouca Savoia. 
The connexion of thought between these words and what precedes 


is far from clear. It might perhaps be said that ‘the things above’ 
2800:3 ser 




















482 STOBAEI HERMETICA 


are incomprehensible to mortal men (though there is some in. 
consistency in saying so in a discourse the very purpose of which 
is to make men comprehend them); but even if we admit this 
to be true, there is no apparent reason for asserting it here. 

Perhaps the author wrote something like 7@ zavri dodadis 
otoa, Kal Oavdrw ody ironirtoveu. ‘The things above’ are xpetooor a, 
because they are not subject to change and death, as are the 
things below. 

§§ 3-8. Evbev dorévazon . . . (év)repeviferar Lavars, This passage 
describes the origin of the Hermetic guosis. It may be summarized 
as follows. ‘At first, men did not know God. They looked up ¢ 
the sky, and were struck with fear when they looked at it; they 
asked questions, but could not answer them. But after a time, 
God decided to make himself known to men; and so He put into 
certain men, who were of higher nature than the common sort, 
both the will to seek Him and the power to find Him. And 
these men the first and greatest was Hermes. Hermes found 
out the truth, and wrote it down in books; but he hid the books 
which he had written. When he departed to heaven, he left his 
son Tat to succeed him as a teacher upon earth; and Tat was 
followed by Asclepius and others. But Tat had learnt from his 
father only a part of the true doctrine; the rest lay hidden in the 
books of Hermes, to be discovered anew in a later age.’ 

This passage has no connexion with § 2, and cannot have been 
written to follow it. It ought rather to precede any such exposition 
of doctrine as is begun in § 2. It deals with the same subject as 
§ ((32)), which I have placed before $1; but it deals with it in a 
different way, and is inconsistent with that section. According 
to § ((32)) (as emended), the first teacher of the gvosis was 
Kamephis ; Hermes learnt it from Kamephis, and transmitted it 
to Isis; and Isis passed it on to Horus. In §§ 3-8, on the other 
hand, there is no mention of Kamephis; Hermes discovers the 
truth for himself, unaided, except by divine inspiration; part of 
the truth which he has discovered he conceals, and the rest he 
transmits to his fellow-men, not through Isis and Horus, but 
through Tat, Asclepius, ‘and others’. It is evident then that 
§ 32 and §§ 3-8 cannot have originally belonged to the same 
document, 

It seems incongruous that Isis should give her son Horus in 
formation about Tat, Asclepius, and other successors of Hermes. 









EXCERPT XXIII: 3 483 



























‘What have they to do with him, or he with them? Isis and 
‘Hermes are apparently regarded as contemporaries; if so, the 
successors of Hermes belong to later generations, and it is an 
anachronism to make her talk about them as if she were narrating 
past events. This suggests a suspicion that the passage (§§ 3-8), 
in its original form, was not put into the mouth of Isis. If we cut 
out the words & réxvov dgtoatpacrov “Ope in § 5, and & réxvoy in 
§ 8,! we have in §§ 3-8 such a narrative of the origin and early history 
of the gvosis as might have been given by a writer speaking in his 
own person, or attributed to an imaginary speaker of a later age than 
Hermes and his first successors ; and it is possible that the words by 
which Isis is made the speaker were added by the man who inserted 
the passage into the Kore Kosmu. 

§3. ( + -) evbev eorévatov (éorévage MSS.) “ra Kdtw! $dBov 
-éxovtes (€xovta MSS.). As the beginning of the paragraph is lost, 
we do not know to what &6e referred, A satisfactory sense 
might be got by inserting here (with a slight alteration) the detached 
fragment which in the MSS, stands at the beginning of § 53, and 
writing ((xal piv dyvwora jv Kar dpyas mdvra maou (rois emi yas 
(or trois dvOpdmois))))" evOev eorévatoy «rd. (CE. dyvactia Karelxe 
7a cipaavra in § 4 init.). Men did not know that all things have 
been made by God, and are subject to His will; and consequently 
they dreaded the unknown powers the working of which they saw 
around them, 

It is clear from what follows that those who ‘moaned’ and 
‘were afraid’ were the men of early times; therefore, if ra kérw 
is the subject of the verb, it must mean ‘the men who lived on 
earth’, But the use of the neuter to express that meaning would be 
Strange. See note on § 4, 

(pa 8 eadpatov?) thy mepixadh (rdéiv? or Gppoviay ?) kat 
cis del Stapoviv trav émxemmévar. Primitive man could see the 
beauty of the heavens; but he could not, by looking at the 
heavenly bodies, find out that they were destined to last for ever. 
It may therefore be suspected that xat els del diopovyv is an 
interpolation. 

"iv yap dévov Oewpias Suod Kal dywvias! épav x.t.d. The state of 
mind which the writer is describing is a mixture of admiration and 


? Indeed, it is only the two words afioPadpacroy “Ape that make it absolutely 
Necessary to take the passage to be spoken by Isis; tor any teacher might say @ 
Téxvov in speaking to his pupil. 


Tig 





—s = 


484 STOBAEI HERMETICA 


terror. But these words are puzzling. The thing seen might be 
called &&vov Oewpias, ‘ well worth looking at’ ; but could it be called 
déov é&ywvias, ‘ worth painful effort’? And the act of seeing (Spay) 
could not properly be called either the one or the other. The 
passage might be made more intelligible by cutting out jw yap 
. . . dywvias (which may perhaps be a marginal note), and altering 
dpav into dpavres. 

Spay odpavod Kdddos [[Oedl] (Ale) KatapwriLopévou (xarabavralopevoy 
MSS.) [[r én dyruory|], mapamdyotar (wAouciay MSS.) Te vunris 
cepvdryta, eddrrove pév HAiou dfet dé muphopouperys (mpooopounevyy 
MSS.) geri. The writer speaks of the sky first as seen by day, 
and then as seen by night. From the words éAdrrov . . . jAioy 
. . « gwré in the description of the night-sky, it may be inferred 
that the light of the sun was spoken of in the earlier part of the 
sentence; I have therefore written (jAiw) xaradwrifopevov in place 
of the meaningless xaragavrafopevov. A mention of ‘the yet un: 
known God’ (08. . . 79 éu dyvéor~) may very well have occu red 
somewhere in §§ 3-8, but is out of place in this sentence; and ag 
the phrase is just what is wanted to supply the missing object of 
the verbs fyreiv and etipeiv in § 4, 1 have inserted Ocov tov & 
dyvworov there. 

In place of zpoodopovpevyy, I propose ruphopouperys, ‘lit up b 
torches borne along’. The stars look like torches carried by a 
crowd of men at night. Seeing that Sopudopeiv is commonly set 
as a transitive verb, there is no reason why rupdopeiv should not 
be used in the same way, though I have not found an instance. 

Sid (ré) Ter KpuTTav dmoppordy Ta KéTw guyKospouvTay Kal OUD 
avéévrwv. Could it be assumed that men were aware of these xpuzral 
dmdppou at a time when édyvwoia xareixe Tao ovpravra? Primitiv 
man could see the stars, and might perhaps notice that their move 
ments are periodic ; (the regularity with which they sweep across th 
sky night after night is evident enough, though an exact knowle 
of their periodic changes of position could be got only by long 
careful observation ;) but the theory of their ‘secret effluences 
belongs rather to that gvosis of which Hermes was the origing 
‘There is therefore some reason to suspect that these words, as we 
as xal els det Stapovjv above, have been added by a transcriber. 

kat oltas (2yévovto) HoBor pev éwahAndor (PdBos pév éndddndos MSS, 
Lnricers Be (re MSS.) GAnxror (aZ. &Sexrot). The first results 0 
men’s observation of the heavens were ‘fears’ and ‘ questionings 





= 













































EXCERPT XXIII: 4 485 


Men feared the unknown, and sought to know it ; but, till Hermes 
‘came, they sought in vain. 

4. Epata evedvonce Gelors tiolv dvOpdrotg.—(epwras eveBouctace 
geois MSS.). Perhaps a genitive (e, g. yvécews or codias) has been 
Jost after épwra. At any rate, the ows spoken of is a passionate 
desire for knowledge of God. 

eyOovordew is an intransitive verb, meaning ‘to be éveos’, i.e. 

éto have a god inside one’, and so ‘to be inspired’. évedovoiace then 
js impossible here. The sense required could be got by writing 
either évérvevoe OF évedionoe; but the latter involves a smaller 
change. A similar correction must be made in § 18, where the MSS. 
ive xat Cworody évOovotdcas. 
If we retain Oeots, the reading of the MSS., it is implied that 
Hermes (who, as we are told in § 5 and § 8, was the first discoverer 
of the guosis,) was a god at the time when he made the discovery. 
‘But that is certainly wrong. The writer of §§ 3-8 thought of Hermes 
as a man living like other men on earth, and assumed that he 
became a god only when he departed to heaven after hiding his 
books. In this very sentence, the words airy i(s) exov ev orépvars 
giclova. tais rovrw éxapioaro Siavotas are more suitable if said of men 
than if said of gods, And there is plenty of other evidence also. 
‘The yry7) crprdBeay Zxovea rois obpavod puorypios (§ 5) must be 
a human soul; gods are themselves celestial pvorijpia. Hermes 
wrote his books on earth, and hid them on earth ; for in § 8 he says 
‘that they are to remain for a long time undiscovered by ‘ those who 
go to and fro on the plains of this land’, When his work was done, 
he ‘ascended to the stars’ (§ 6), ‘departed to heaven’ (§ 7), and 
‘entered the sanctuary of the everlasting zones’ (§ 8) ; he must there- 
fore, until then, have been living upon earth. And when he died 
and went to heaven, he left his son Tat,— evidently a man and not 
agod,—to succeed him here below. 

On the other hand, there are, besides @cots in § 4, two phrases 
which, as given in the MSS., appear to imply that Hermes was a god 
at the time spoken of. Theseare totro 8 ... odk dy emt Ovyriis omopas 
tyeydvet, 088 yep jv obéru, in § 5, and dpOdpruw . .. pov lYyelpovas! 
(yepdv 2s Meineke) in § 8. But in § 5 the traditional text is un- 
intelligible ; and in § 8 it seems to me certain that the right reading 
is daprav, and not épOdprov. We must conclude then that the 
writer of §§ 3-8 regarded Hermes as a man, and that the three 
phrases which seem to tell against that view are due either to 


486 STOBAEI HERMETICA 
































accidental corruption of the text or to intentional alteration, Jj 
is possible that a transcriber assumed that the Hermes of §§ 3 7 
must be the god Hermes who is spoken of later on in the Kore 
Kosmu (§ 26 ff.), and altered the words at these three points to make 
them agree with that mistaken assumption.’ 

I have therefore expressed what I take to have been the authors 
meaning by writing @elos tuxiv dvOpdrous in place of Oeois. Hermes 
and his successors were Oeior dvOpw7ro ; i.e. they were not gods, but 
men who ‘were in sympathy with the mysteries of heaven’ (§ 5), and 
were therefore better qualified than other men to ‘search out the 
secrets of the heavenly ¢heoria’ (§ 6). 

adyiy fs elxov (adrhy i efxev MSS.) &v orépvoig wrelova tals TodTwy 
éxapicato Siavotats. These men had some ‘light’ in their breasts 
already; but God gave them more. adyiy rats rovrwv éxapicaro 
dtavoias is equivalent to éfdrurev atrovs. Cf. Plut. De Pyth. orac, 1, 
397, concerning the inspiration of the Pythia: (6 beds) is év rp 
Yux7 Tote mpos TO pédAov' 6 yap évOovoracpos ToLotrdv éort. 

iva, ((Bedn)) (ron Ere &yvworton)) mpGrov pev Lytetv VeAjowor, eta (8e 
kal) [émbupyowor] edpelv [etra kai katopQdoar] SuvnPdar, erOvyryOwou 
cipeiy is a pointless repetition of fyretv OeAjowow ; and Karopbdcar 
dvvnGdo1, ‘be able to succeed’, is intolerably feeble. Altered a 
I propose, the words give precisely the sense required. God gave 
them both the will to seek Him, and power to find Him. {rey 
Oehjowow and ebpeiv dvvnGicx correspond respectively to gpwra (yes 
gews) and aiyjy. > 

§ 5. Tobro 8... odk dy (jv) emt Ont omopd, (ei ph) eyeydver[ ] 
Wx) [ ] cuprdderav xovea tots odpavod puornpiois—(roiro 8... obK 
av émt Ovnrijs owopas éyeydver, od8é yap Fv odSémw, Wuxiis 8¢ thy cupmd- 
Geray éxodons Tots obpavod pucrnpioig MSS.). With my corrections, 
this means ‘It would not have been possible for mortal men to dis- 
cover the truth, if there had not arisen among them a soul capable 
of being affected by heavenly influences; and such a one was 
Hermes’. 

ovdé yap jv ovdérw appears to mean ‘for as yet there was no 
Ovyri copa in existence’, i, e. ‘ men had not yet been made’, We may. 


1 Perhaps the puzzling phrase ra xdrw in § 3 énzf. may be accounted for in the 
same way. We may suppose that the author of §§ 3-8 wrote in § 3 some term: 
denoting men, and that the same person who made the other alte:ations changed 
that term into the vague neuter 7a xa7w, because he thought that ‘no men yet. 
existed’ at the time spoken of. Who were the beings, other than men, that he 
imagined to have been frightened at the sight of the sky, it is difficult to guess; 
possibly the elements, which are personified later on in the Avre Kosmu (§ 56 ft. 


EXCERPT XXIII: 5,6 487 


suppose these words to have been inserted by some one who mis- 
takenly thought §§ 3-8 to be the beginning of a continuous narrative 
which ran on through the whole of the Kore Kosmu, and in which 
the incidents followed one another throughout in chronological order. 
This person saw that the making of men comes later in the book 
(§§ 14-42), and thence inferred that, at the time when Hermes 
(whom he took to be a god) discovered the gvosis, there were no 
men in existence. 

karavonoas icxuce Syddoau [re kal Beigar]. (.. .) Kat ydp é 
avénoev exdpate, Kal xapdtas expupe(y) ((éepadas)), Ta whetota oryt- 
gas. ‘He had power to make the gnosis known; for he wrote it 
down, and hid what he had written, leaving most of the truth untold.’ 
There is a want of sequence here. What is the point of ydp? If 
the sentence had ended at éxépage, we might have supposed that it 
was his knowledge of writing (of which he was said to have been the 
inventor) that gave Hermes power to make the gnosis known ; i.e. 
that he made it known by means of his books. But as we are told 
that he hid the books, that explanation is excluded, and ydp is un- 
intelligible. In order to make sense, we must assume that some- 
thing like od pijy 088" dmrepuoxérrus ef has been lost before kai ydp. 
‘He had power to make it known; but he thought fit to make known 
only the smaller part of it (which he taught orally to Tat and 
others). 

ra theiota aryjoas [[dopadas]] [7 Aadyjoas]. This seems to be a . 
mixture of two alternative readings, viz. ri whetora ovyjoas, and mheiova 
ovynoas }) Aadijoas. 

§ 6. tods cuyyevets Deods Sopipopelv (mpoctayQeis), dvéBawey eis dopa. 
Hermes was summoned to quit the earth, and become one of the 
escort or attendants of the gods who dwell in heaven. In plainer 
language, he was warned of his approaching death; but the writer, 
holding death to be merely a change of abode and condition, prefers 
“not to say straight out that Hermes died.’ 

Hermes is a Ocios dvOpwmos, and as such, he is ‘akin’ to the gods ; 
but as long as he remains on earth, he is not one of them. If the 
writer had meant to class him as a god, he would have written ros 
&AXous Oeovs rather than robs cvyyevels Geovs. 

The imperfect évé8awer is used here, and not the aorist évéBy ; the 
tense implies that his death was imminent, but had not yet taken place. 


1 Cf. Corp. VIIL. 1b, where we are told that there is no such thing as death, and 
that @dvaros is a word without meaning, 








ee eee 


488 STOBAEI HERMETICA 


fv adra SidSoxos 6 Tét, . . . odk eis paxpdy 82 kal “AckAnmds . . , 
Gor te Sco. x.7.A. This passage shows that the writer of §§ 3-8 
knew some at least of the /ie//7 entitled “Eppot xpos Tar and ‘Eppod 
mpos “AckAnmioy. Among the ‘other men’ is probably included 
Ammon; and the writer may perhaps have had in mind more 
recent teachers also, such as Pythagoras and Plato. 

Aokhymds 6 (kat) “IpouOns, 6 M(r)avds (08) Kal “Hgatorou [Boudais], 
6 IIravds is a certain correction of ozavds, the reading of the MSS, 
*Iuovdns is Imhotep, the native name of the Egyptian god whom the 
Greeks called ’AcxAymds ; and IIrds' is Ptah, the native name of 
the Egyptian god whom the Greeks called “Hdatoros. Imhotep was 
said to be son of Ptah.* 6 xai is often used to couple together 
two different names of the same person, In illustration of its use in” 
the case of Egyptian gods, Reitzenstein (Poim. p. 122) quotes 
C. I. Gr. 4893: XvotiBea 7G cal "Appwr, Saree rH} Kal “Apa, “Avover 




























ri xal “Eorig, Hereprapevre 7 kal Awvioy, Merevorjre 7G kal Kpdve, 
Tlerevoyjver TO kal “Epp. 

The word fovAais must have slipped in through some mistake; 
possibly it may have come by duplication from BovAopévys below. 

§ 7. ‘Eppijs péev otv 'amehoyetro tO mepiéxovte ds! ob8e TG mardt 
mrapéduxev ddotedi (thy) Oewpiavy. darehoyetro TH meptexovre is impos- 
sible. Hermes was under no accusation ; he had no occasion to 
‘make his defence to the atmosphere’, or to any one else; and what 
follows is not an daro\oy/a, Most likely these words are a corruption of | 
something equivalent to dvéBawev eis dorpa. One might propose, for 
instance, “Epps pev otv, ds amrehvero Tod oxijvous, ovde TO mardi K.T.A, 

(ete 8¢ oftws), Usener was the first to point out that the words 
"Ey «7.4. are spoken by Hermes. But he made the speech of 
Hermes end at orovxetwv ovpBoda ; I have included in it the following 
words (émixarevéduevov . « . dareAGe(i)v) also. 

*Eyh 8% [ris dvarodis yevspevos] toils mdvra Béroucww dhOadpots (rod 
vod) Ta Tis “dvarodis! Gedpnoa dedi (Oewpijoal tm devdet MSS.), I 
can find no meaning in ris dvaroAys. It may be conjectured that 
THs dvarohfs yevopevos is a corruption of ris evroAjs yevouérys, which 
would be out of place here, but may perhaps have occurred in the 
missing passage which preceded zAyoiov ray «.r.A. below. 

It seems necessary to add rod voi after épOaApois. It is only with 


1 This name was sometimes written ®éds. Snidas: @0das- 6 “Hpaoros mapa 
Mexoiracs. 

Ck Oxyrhynchus Pap. (1915) no. 1381, 1. 201: Tov Tod POA ceAoera Ipovny. 
Tb.1. 228: "AokAnriov madds ‘Hpaicrov, 


EXCERPT XXIII: 7 489 


‘the eyes of the mind’ that it is possible to see ra deidy, i.e, things 
which are invisible to the bodily eyes. 

It is probable that dvaroAjs before ébedpyoa has come by repetition 
- from the preceding dvaroAjs, and has driven out some other word or 

hrase which originally stood here (e. g. tv ddwv obaias). 

I have altered Oewpioal 7. into ébedpyoa, and put a colon after 
did. +The sense wanted might be got in another way, by accepting 
Heeren’s correction “Epoi... Oewpyoavrs for “Eya ... Gewpioai tT, 
and writing "Epol 8)... Ta ris “dvarodijs! Gewpyoavte aedy [Kat 
tmoxorowri|... HAVE 4 dxprBijs yvSous. But this involves a larger 
alteration of the text. The present participle émuxorotvr: ought not 
to be coupled to the aorist Gewpjcavr:; it is therefore necessary, if 
we construct the sentence in this way, to assume that wat érurxorotyrs 
(émicxorotvrt MSS.) has been added by a blundering transcriber. It 
we take Oedpyoa to be the true reading, it is possible that this was 
altered into Gewpjoavre through the influence of the following 
émurxorotvrt, and that by a second error Jewpijcavre was altered into 
Gewppcat Tt. 

AdOev f axpBhs yrdors (Sidyvwors MSS.). didyvwors is certainly 

wrong ; yvdous is the word required. It may be suspected that d:a- 

‘js a corruption of i8q, which may very likely have occurred some- 
where in the sentence, though the place where éo stands in the 
MSS. hardly seems the right position for idi¢. 

(++ XpH pe) wAnoloy Tay *Ocipidos kpudiov arobdcOar Ta iepd Tov 
koopixdv orotxetwy odpBoka. The probable meaning of the missing 
words might be given by writing ‘and that knowledge I have written 
down in books ; (viv 8¢, dvwbéy pou ((rijs éNroAijs -yevouevis)), xpi} He) 
mAyolov «.7.\.’ Hermes has been warned that the hour appointed 
for his (death and) ‘departure to heaven’ is at hand, and has received 
command from God to hide his books before he departs. 

The writings of Hermes are here called trav xoopixdv ororxelwv 
gipBora. The word crovyeia meant ‘cosmic elements’; but it also 
meant ‘letters of the alphabet’. Democritus compared atoms to 
letters, and found in the composition of bodies out of atoms variously 
grouped and arranged an analogy to the formation of words by putting 
letters together.!. This comparison was borrowed from Democritus 

1 Arist. Metaph. t. 4, 985b 4: Aedxemmos 8 nal. . . Anudxpiros orotxeia piv 
7d wAjjpes kal 7d Kevdy elval pact... ToUTav b8 6 piv “ puopds” oxfind éorev, } 
BE KaGeyh” ragis, Hy SE“ rpomh” Oats. Frapéper yap 7O poy A Tov N oxjpart, Td 


32 AN rod NA rdget, 7d 83 i (an earlier form of Z) rou H Béoe, Cf. Ar, De gen. et 
corr. 1. 2, 315 b 6, 


























490 STOBAEI HERMETICA 


by the Epicureans,’ and occurs repeatedly in Lucretius.* Posidonius* 
arguing against the Epicureans, referred to it; his argument js 
reproduced in Cic. Wat. deor. 2. 93: ‘Hic ego non mirer egse 
quemquam qui sibi persuadeat corpora quaedam solida atque indi- 
vidua vi et gravitate ferri, mundumque effici ornatissimum 


existimat fieri potuisse, non intellego cur non idem putet, si innu~ 
merabiles unius et viginti formae litterarum vel aureae vel quales libet 


deinceps legi possint, effici.’ Stoics and Platonists rejected the ato- 
mic theory of Epicurus ; but there was no reason why they should not 
compare their own four elements to letters of an alphabet, and say 
the universe is, as it were, a book written in that script,—not indeed q 
book produced by throwing letters to ether at random, as the Epi- 
curean doctrine implied, but a book deliberately written by God. This 
thought would the more naturally present itself by reason of the 
double meaning of the word orovxeia ; and it was probably some such 
thought that was in the mind of the author of this passage when he 
called the writings of Hermes ‘symbols of the cosmic elements’, 
It is possible, however, that he was thinking more especially of the 
hieroglyphic script, which it was assumed that Hermes had used in 
his writings, and which he was reputed to have invented. Th 
hieroglyphic signs, which might be called cvovxefa (letters), are 
pictures of things; and it might be supposed, especially by th 
who could not read the writing, that each of these little pictures h 
some cryptic significance, and was a symbol of some religious or 
cosmological conception. Cf. Philo, Vita Mos, 1. 5. 23, Cohn IV, 
p. 125 (quoted by Clem. Alex. Strom. 1. 23.153): dpiOpovs pev otv . « « 
Kal povoixny Tv cvpracavy .. . Aiyurriwy of Ady.or wapedidocay (to 
Moses), cai mpocére tiv dua orp Bdrwv drrocodiar, jv év Tols Leyopevors 
iepois ypdppacw (év Tois icpoyAudixois ypdppaow Clem.) érBetxvevr 
Clement Strom. 5. 7. 41 sg. gives instances of symbolic meanings 
hieroglyphs (which he calls ri rév Aiyurriwy aiviypera); eg. & 
AvooroXet tis Aiyirrov éi rot icpod Kadoupévov mvAGvos diarerimwrat 
waidlov pev yevérews ovpBorov, POopas dt 5 yépwr, Oeod re ad & iepag, & 


1 See Diels Elementum 1-14, where the history of this comparison of atoms t 
letters is more fully set forth, 

2 Lucr, 1. 196 ff. ; 823 ff. ; 907 ff.; 2. 686 ff.; 101g ff. 6 

* Diels 2. gives sufficient reasons for holding Posidonius to have been the soure 
whence Cic. V, D. 2. 93 and similar passages in other authors were derived, TI 
same argument occurs, for instance, in Plut. De Pythiae oraculis 11, 399E. 














































EXCERPT XXIII: 7 49% 


ixdis pious, Kal kar dAAo wdAw onpawdopevov 6 Kpoxddedos dvaidelas. 
veran rolvev ovvTiBepevoy 7d wav otpPohov SyAurixov elvat Tovoe’ 
purdpevot Kat droywépevot, Oeds pure? dvai8eav”. See also Clem. Strom. 
5. 4. 20. . 

7a ‘Oaipidos Kpipua might mean either sacred writings connected 


with the cult of Osiris, or holy things of some other kind, e. g. parts 
‘of the body of Osiris. Whatever these ‘secret things’ may have 
been, they were probably kept, or believed to be kept, in some 
Egyptian temple. If any definite place is meant, it is most likely the 
temple and reputed burial-place of Osiris at Abydos. 

For the notion that the books of Hermes had long remained 
hidden or buried, and had but recently been discovered and made 
‘known, cf. Syncellus I, p. 72 Dindorf: é« trav év rH Snpuaduy yh 
kepevov orprav, ep idyor| Stadexrp kat “tepoypadicois!* ypdppace 
“KeXapaKTy pls pevov bxd O46, rod wpdrov ‘Eppyod, xat [[épyunvevdacdr]] 
pera TOV xaraxdvopor [lex ris lepas duaderov eis THy “EAAyvida puri] * 
[ypdppacw iepoyAvduxois]® [[xat droreBévrov]|* (droypaperar) év BiBdous 
“Grd rod "AyaboSaipovos viod, rod Sevrépov “Eppod,® zarpos d& rod Tar, 
nai drorebecdv)) év trois ddvros tov fepdv Aiyirrov, orepov 82) 
(ppnvevbewriv)) (éx ris lepas Siadexrov eis tiv “EAAqvida pwrviv)).® 
The meaning of the story told in that passage appears to be this, 


1 Read iepoyAugixois. 

2 Tt would be absurd to say that the writings were translated into Greek ‘ after 
the Flood’; how could any one imagine that they were translated into Greek before 
the Flood, or even shortly after it? The traditional text may be accounted for by 
assuming that the words épynvevOeody éx ris iepas diadéxrov eis Thy “EAAnviba 
v were accidentally omitted by a copyist, but were added in the margin, and 
that a later copyist put them back into the text, but placed them wrongly, 

$ A misplaced doublet of “lepoypapucots’ ypdpyaci above. 

4 dworebévrwy Dindorf: dwore@eodv Reitzenstein. I assume that «al dnoredeody 
was shifted by error, and that its insertion here caused the loss of the participle 
(probably doypapeody) with which the words pera Tov KatakAvopoy were 
originally connected. 

5 Trismegistus the teacher is here called ‘ the second Hermes’, and is distinguished 
from the Egyptian god Thoth, who is called ‘the first Hermes’. Cf. Ascl. Lat, 


i (Augustine De civ. dei 18. 8 and 39f.) spoke of a ‘second Mercurius, 
called Trismegistus’, and said that he was grandson of ‘the first Mercurius’, But 
-Varro’s ‘first Mercurius’ is the Greek god Hermes, son of Zeus and Maia; and he 
"appears to have known of only one Egyptian Hermes. 

The authority (possibly Mnaseas) followed by Cicero in his list of gods in De 
nat. deor. 3. 55 fi. distinguished two Egyptians named Hermes ; but it is doubtful 
whether they corresponded to the elder and younger Hermes spoken of by some of 
the Hermetists. 

6 ‘The connexion of this passage with its context is obscure. The text of Syncellus, 
as given by Dindorf, runsas follows: mpoxefra: 5 Nowndv Kat wepl rijs Tay Aiyurriay 
buvacrelas puxpd BadraBeiv ée Tay MavebG Tod SeBevvvrou, ds emt TroAepaiov tot 
Hrabéapou dpxiepeds tav év Alydnry eliwdelow xpnuatioas || ee T&v év TH Sypradeey 
i Kepevoy arnhav ... &y Tois GdvTas Tay iepdv Alyinrov || mporeparnce TH 


49% STOBAEI HERMETICA 


The gzoszs was inscribed on tables of stone by the first Hermes, and 
in that form escaped destruction in the Flood; after the Flood, the 
second Hermes transcribed it' from the stone tables into books 
(i.e. rolls of papyrus), which were deposited in certain Egyptian 
temples ; and at some later time, the contents of these books were 
translated from the Egyptian language into Greek. 

Another version of the same legend occurs in Joseph. Ané. 1. 71. 
Josephus there says that the primaeval wisdom? was engraved on 
two orAa, one of clay, and the other of stone, these materials being 
chosen in order that the table of clay might escape destruction in 
the coming devastation of the world by fire, and the table of stone, 
in the coming deluge of water ;* and that the ody of stone remains 
to this day xara yiv tiv Syrdda.* But Josephus attributes the 


ait@ Didaderpw Bacirel Sevrépw Troreyaiw év rH BiBAw tis ShOeos ypdpav ent 
Aéfews otrws'—'Emarodi) Mave x.7.A. Bacthel x.7.. ‘ Maveb® dpxrepeds kat 
Ypapmareds Tay Kaz’ Alyurroy lepdy abvraw .. .7@ beawéry pov TMrodepaiy yalper, 
‘Hyas def AoyilecOa, péyore Bacidred, wept advrav Gv édv Bovdn tuas eerdoa 
mpayparov. émi(nroivri co. wept Tay pedAdvTow TO Kdcuw yiyvecOat Kabds ExédXevods 
Ho wapapavyceral cor & Enabor || iepd BiBAla ypadévra ind rod mpomdropos tpicpeyi- 
arov ‘Eppov. eppwad pot, béowore pov Bacired,’—radra wepi THs Eppnveias Tov bud 
Tod Sevrépou “Epyod Aéye. At the points where I have put the mark || (i.e. at the 
beginning and end of the passage about the s¢e/ae, and near the end of Manetho’s 
letter,) there are manifest breaches of continuity. é&« trav év 7H Sypiadiey #.7,A, 
cannot be dependent on dpxtepeds .. . xpnuaricas, which means ‘having bome the 
title of Chief Priest’; nor can it be dependent on the verb apocepdvnce which 
follows. But if we cut out é« ray év rp Snpiadiey .. . bep&Sv Abydrrov, and make 
mpocepavnae follow xpnpyaricas immediately, the sentence reads smoothly, In 
Manetho’s letter, on the other hand, something is missing after & ¢ua0ov ; and the 
words of Syncellus which follow the letter (and in which a participle, e.g. ypaév- 
tov, must have been lost after id tod Sevrépov “Epyod) show that in the missing 
passage Manetho spoke of ‘ the interpretation of the writings of the second Hermes’, 
Now that very thing is spoken of in the passage about the ste/ae. It appears 
therefore that the best remedy is to transpose that passage (é« ray év 77 Snpiadiiey 
.. . epv Aiyérrov), and insert it (corrected as I have proposed) in the letter, 
after the words & €4a@ov. When this is done, there still remains a gap before fepa 
Ai BAia ; but apart from that lacuna, the whole becomes intelligible. 

On this hypothesis, the passage about the ste/ae is a part of a letter which was 
believed by Syncellus to have been written by Manetho. 

1 By a slight inaccuracy, the writer says that the s/e/ae themselves were ‘tran- 
scribed’, ‘laid up’, and afterwards ‘translated’; but what he means is that the 
writings inscribed on the s¢e/ae were transcribed &c. 

2 copia 1) wept 7A odpavia wat thy TolTav diaxdounow, 

° Cf, Ammian. Marcell. 22. 15. 30: ‘Sunt (in Egypt) et syringes subterranei 
quidam et flexuosi secessus, quos, ut fertur, periti rituum vetnstorum, adventare 
diluvinm praescii, metuentesque ne caerimomiarum oblitteraretur memoria, penitus 
operosis digestos fodinis a te diversa struxerunt, et excisis parietibus volucrum 
ferarumque genera multa sculpserunt, . . . quas hierographicas litteras appellarunt.’ 
These cvpvryyes (or onpayyes) are evidently ancient tombs, such as the tombs of the 
kings near Thebes; and the tales about writings ‘hidden’ or ‘buried’ doubtless 
resulted from the discovery of tombs containing hieroglyphic inscriptions. 

* Sipdda Naber : Setpidda Reitzenstein, The + Sips of Josephus is evidently 
the same as the Snpiadim) yj of Syncellus, What land is this? In view of mAqatoy 








EXCERPT XXIII: 7, 8 493 


inscription, not to Hermes, but to the family of Seth the son of 
Adam." 

Compare also Philo of Byblos (Euseb. Py. ev. 1. 9. 26): 6 8 
(SayxourdBav), cvp Paddy trois "dard trav dddtov? eipefeiow droxpiots 
"Appovveav ypdppact ovyKepevors', & 8) obk Fv TacL yropipa, TiV 
paOnow axdvrov adrds joxnoe. From what Philo Bybl. had said 
before (7. 1. 9. 24) it is evident that the writings here spoken of are 
writings of Thoth-Hermes.* 

§ 8. 72 iepai BiBAor, av [d|pOapray “ai reredxarat! pou xerpdy, &s (you 
xelpovas MSS,) rg rijs dpOapoias pappdky 'xopelas émixparo!. xe/pov- 
must certainly be corrected into xepav (Meineke); and it seems 
no less certain that the adjective applied to xepav was not adOdpruv, 
but #@aprav. The books were written by ‘the perishable hands’ 
of the man Hermes, but were made imperishable. erevxara: no 
doubt stands for some form of the verb revyew, ‘to make’. (The 
fact that redyos means ‘a book’ makes this verb the more appro- 
priate.) For xopefas we must read xpioas (Meineke) or some other 
form of xpéev, which is a suitable verb to go with gappdxy. The 
' phrase ‘anointed them with the drug of imperishability’ must have 
been suggested by some magical or ritual practice, but is here 
used metaphorically, and means merely ‘made them imperishable’. 
Since that could be done only by superhuman power, the person 
who did it cannot have been the man Hermes ; and if not Hermes, 
it was presumably God. 


rav ’Ootpdos xpupiov in Kore Kosmu, it seems possible that in both passages the 
land was originally called yf ’Ocipeds or ’Oorpraxh (cf, "Iowds and *Iovands), and that 
the place meant is the district of Abydos in Egypt. 

1 Seth and Encch were sometimes identified or confused with Agathodaemon . 
and Hermes; see Zestim, (Arabic), 

2 Probably ray ((‘Appoure(ijav)) ddtrwv. It is doubtful how the corrupt text 
ought to be corrected ; but the meaning must have been that Sanchuniathon found 
and read certain writings of Hermes which had been hidden in the temple of 
Ammon. 

3 Similar notions appear in a passage quoted by Reitzenstein (Poim. p. 121) 
from an unpublished MS. in the Laurentian library (Cod. Antinord 101, fol. 361 v.) : 
a medical prescription is there described as dvziSoros é« rv “Hpaicrov dévrav rob 
& Menoirids peradnpbeioa, «pice Kat prravOpwnia, paci, rod Tpicpeyiorou ‘Eppov" 
obros yap expiver éxdoOjvar tatty (ravrys MS.), THs dvOpanivns ppovritav cwrnplas. 
eiipéOn Be arn ev xpuoy OTHAD ypdupacw Alyunrios dvayeypaypern, f sveyeypanro 
gpueddys dpa, pndert BeBiAw Tods lepopvAakas ToAMay TadTHY meTadovvat’ efedd0n de 
dnd Alytnrov evraida em Bacrdéws apOpirid: nat roddypg mxpas Sioxdovpévov. ‘There 
is something wrong in the text; the meaning must have been that the prescription 
was written by Hermes on a gold tablet, which was left in charge of the priests of 
Ptah at Memphis, with a strict injunction to keep it secret ; and that this injunction 
was disobeyed only when the remedy was needed to cure a king (or Roman 
emperor) suffering from gout. A satisfactory sense might be got by mame 
a participle (e. g. cvyypapetoa) alter ‘Eppod ; shifting obros yap. . . owrnplas, an 





494 STOBAEI HERMETICA 


The sense wanted can be got by writing ’Q iepat BiBAou, as die 
tov pbaprav rerevypevas pov Xetpav 7H THs apbapoias happdxw expurev 
6 érl maou Kparav. 

doameis mdvtas aidvas (mavtds aidvos MSS.) [kat dpOapror] 
Siapeivare [xpdvous]. dpOapro. is a feeble repetition of doareis, 
and is the more objectionable because POaprav and ddbapotas 
have occurred just before. ypévovs is an alternative for aldvas. 

mavtt to td yfs (ris MSS.) tavrns mapoSedew péddorm meBia, 
[wapodevew may be retained in the sense ‘ fergere’, ‘traverse’. Cf, 
Plut. Symp. probl. 670C, pAlov Tov déovra mapodevovros, and 700A; 
De Sol.anim. 9730, xwpov dxpdapa tots cvs mapodevovet Tov Torov,] 

Gixpis ob yépwv (yevdpevos?) odpavds cvoTpata spay déia tex. 
vdoqrar. All earthly cvoryjpara (‘organisms’) are ‘children of 
heaven’; that is, they are brought into being by the action of 
‘the things above’ (cf. § 2). But the cvorjpara here spoken of 
are men ; and the meaning is ‘until, in a late age of the world’s — 
history, men shall be born who shall be worthy to read the books 
of Hermes’. There is a momentary personification of otpavéds ; 
Heaven, born when the world was made, will have grown old 
before that time comes. 

[Gs puxds 6 Sypsoupyds mpoonydpeuge], Perhaps mpocayopetoe 
ought to be written in place of poonydpevoe; but with or without 
that correction, the words are out of place here. The men who are 
to find and read the books of Hermes are not Yrxai, but cvery- 
para ; they, like all men on earth, consist of soul and body joined 
together. The person who inserted as Youxas 6 6. 7. was doubtless 
thinking of the making of souls which is described in § 14 ff. 

{tats d)8lors (iSiats MSS.) (évyrepeviterar Lavars. The dédior Covun 
are the spheres of heaven. Cf. Cor. I. 2 5; where each of the seven 
planetary spheres is called a Lévy. 

tepevicerot would mean ‘is dedicated as a Ténevos to a god’, 
That could not be said of Hermes. The word required is évree- 
viterat, ‘is placed in the réwevos’. Heaven is a tépevos, Le. a 
region assigned to the gods ; and Hermes takes up his abode in it. 

(§ 50. [wddw] 6 povapxos . . . Sidoracis eyévero" kal)). In the 
MSS., the passage which describes the origin of the gnosis (§§ 3-8) 
is followed by a fragment of a cosmogonia (§§ 9-12); and this is 


placing these words after S:o0yAoupevov (the man who ‘ ordered it to be published’? 
would then be the gouty king, and not Hermes, who had forbidden publication) ; 
and adding a participle (e.g. peradnpOciza) after év7a00a. 








EXCERPT XXIII: 50 495 


followed by a narrative which begins with the making of souls 
(§ 14 ff.), and runs on to the end of the Excerpt. But the continuity 
of that narrative is broken by §§ 50, 51, and 52, which, like §§ 9-12, 
are disconnected scraps of a cosmogonia. 

These facts may be accounted for as follows. The description 
of the making of souls was preceded by a description of the 
making and equipping of heaven and earth. Parts of this have 
been lost ; but a piece of it (§§ 9-12) remains in its right position ; 
and another piece of it (§§ 50-52) has been preserved, but misplaced. 
Roth these pieces, as given in the MSS., are incoherent ; but if we 
rearrange the fragments of which they consist, it is possible to fit 
them into their places as parts of a continuous narrative which 
leads on to $14 ff. The order which I propose is ((50)), (x 1)), 
g, 10, 12, ((52)), ((51)). When the sections are read in this order, 
the story runs thus: ‘There was a chaotic mass. God resolved 
to organize this mass. He divided it (into two parts ; the upper 
part he fashioned into heaven, and the lower part, into earth) (§ 50). 
He peopled heaven with star-gods (§ 11); then, he set about 
producing living things on earth. To this end, he created Nature, 
and bade her make seeds (§§ 9, ro, 12); these seeds he flung forth 
on earth, and bade Earth develop them into plants (§ 52). Thus 
both heaven and earth were organized and filled with living things 
(§ 51). But the space between heaven and earth still remained 
unoccupied ; and in order that this region also might have inhabitants, 
God proceeded to make souls, and assigned to them the atmosphere 
as their abode (§ 14 ff.).’ 

In the narrative which begins at § ((50)), and runs on to the end 
of the Excerpt, Isis is a goddess, who has for a time resided upon 
earth, but has returned to her home in heaven (§ 70) before the 
dialogue takes place. Some part at least of the story which she 
tells to her son Horus had been told to her by Hermes (§§ 25, 26, 
30); and Hermes, her informant, is a god, who was in existence 
before men were made, and had taken part in the events which he 
narrated to her. But what sort of being is Horus? And where is 
the scene of the dialogue laid,—in heaven, or on earth? These 
questions are not explicitly answered in the text; and it is not 
quite clear how the writer would have answered them. Horus, 
being son of a god and a goddess, must be in some sense a god ; 
but the author most likely assumed that he had been born to 
Osiris and Isis during their residence on earth ; and if so, he must 


a 


496 STOBAEI HERMETICA 


have been for a time a god incarnate, as his parents were when he 
was born. We may suppose then that, at the time when the 
dialogue took place, Horus was a god incarnate upon earth,—in 
outward semblance a human being, and presumably a young king 
of Egypt ;* and that his mother, the goddess Isis, who had already 
returned to heaven, came down thence to visit and instruct him, 
(Cf. Corg. I, in which a prophet is visited and instructed by 
Poimandres, and Corp. XI, in which the man Hermes is visited 
and instructed by Nous.) 

Neither of the two introductory passages (§§ ((32)), 1, 2, and 
§§ 3-8) which precede this narrative in the MSS. is in any way 
connected with it; and each of them contains things inconsistent 
with it. In §§ 3-8, Hermes is a man, and does not become a god 
until after his death ; in §§ ((50)) ff, Hermes is a god, and has been 
a god from the first. It may therefore be considered certain that 
§§ 3-8 did not originally form part of the “éed/us which contained 
§§ ((50)) ff. The other introductory passage (§§ ((32)), 1, 2) evidently 
stood at the beginning of one of the Adelie of the Zsis to Horus 
collection ; but the Ze//us to which it belonged can hardly have 
been that which contained §§ ((50)) ff. In § ((32)), Isis speaks of 
Kamephis as the source of the xpumri) Gewpia which she is about 
to impart to her son, and (if I have rightly reconstructed the text) 
says that she had learnt it from Hermes, and Hermes from Kamephis. 
But in the narrative of §§ ((50)) ff, there is no teaching that can 
have been derived from Kamephis; the goddess Isis has got her 
information partly from the god Hermes,—who had not received 
it from any one else, but had been an eyewitness of the events of 
which he spoke, and had himself participated in them,—and partly 
(e.g. in § 70) from her own memory of what had taken place. In 
§ 2, we have an exposition of doctrine, which appears to be the 
beginning of the @ewpia promised in § ((32)); and the word Gewpia 
applies better to an exposition of that kind than to a narrative of 
events, such as is contained in §§ ((50)) ff. 

We must conclude then that the first introductory passage 
(8§ ((32)), 1, 2) is the beginning of a /de//us of which the rest is 
lost, and that it had originally no connexion with the narrative 

1 The epithets which Isis applies to Horus (meyaddboge, §§ 33 and 59: peyadd= 
oye, § 58: peyadooGerés, § 64) are such as might be used in addressing an earthly 
king ; they may be taken as equivalent to ‘your Majesty’, Cf. @ péyore Baoired 


in Zxc, XX VII, where it is to be presumed that Isis is the speaker, and that she is 
speaking to Horus, 





EXCERPT XXIII: 50 497 


of which the bulk of Exc. XXIII consists, but has been prefixed 
to that narrative by error. The mistake might be accounted 
for by assuming that, in a book which contained a collection of 
Jsis to Horus documents, some pages, containing the end of one 
[ibellus and the beginning of another, were accidentally lost. (Compare 
the gap between Corp. I and Corp. II, and that between Corp. XVI 
and Corp. XVII.) 

This being so, it is possible that the title Kore Kosmu belonged to 
the Zidellus of which §§ ((32)), 1, 2 are the only extant fragment, 
and that the narrative which follows in §§ ((50)) ff. did not originally 
bear that title. But as a matter of convenience, it seems best, 
in any case, to continue to use the title Kore Kosmu as it is 
used in the MSS. of Stobaeus, i.e. to apply it to Axe. XXIII as 
a whole. 

The beginning of the narrative is lost; but § 50 must have stood 
‘near the beginning. At the stage with which it deals, nothing exists 
except (1) God, (2) a group of gods subordinate to God, and (3) 
an inert and undifferentiated mass of matter (dpy) oveoracis, xdos, 
évwors). 

Who are the eof whom God summons and addresses? Since 
there is as yet no Kosmos and no heaven, they cannot be star-gods ; 
they must be incorporeal and supracosmic beings,—@eoi vonroi. The 
Hermes spoken of in § 26 and § go appears to be a god of this 
kind; perhaps then the writer assumed the ‘senate of the gods’ 
(otyxdyrov tov Gedy avvédpov) of which he speaks to consist 
of the chief gods worshipped in Egypt, one of whom was 


- Thoth-Hermes. 





The notion of such a ovrédpiov may have been suggested by the 
councils of the gods described in the Ziad; but the writer may 
perhaps have had in mind also Jewish descriptions of God enthroned 
in heaven as a king surrounded by his ministers and attendants. 
He may possibly have been influenced by Jewish comments on 
the plural verb in roujowper évOpwrov, Gen. 1, 26; see, for instance, 
Philo De opif. mundi 24. 72-76, Cohn I, p. 25: yotv dre etrev 
6 beds “mroujowpe”, Srep eudaive. cuprapddyw érépwv os by 
ovvepyOv, «7A. 

We do not know how the narrative began, or what was told in the 
lost passage which preceded § 50; but it would seem that there are 
only two things which could possibly have been placed earlier in 
time than the situation presented in this section ; namely, the origin 

2896-8 Kk 
























498 STOBAEI HERMETICA 


of the gods, and the origin of the chaotic mass. It seems probable 
that the origin of the gods at least was spoken of, and that the story. 
began in some such way as this: ‘In the beginning was God; and. 
God generated, or put forth from himself, the (supracosmic) gods,” 
Cf. § 64, where it is implied that Osiris and Isis are an é-éppo. of 
the supreme God.' 

It is more doubtful whether anything was said about the origin of 
the chaotic mass. The Platonists in general assumed the pre-exis- 
tence of unformed matter, and made no attempt to account for its 
presence; but in Corp. I. 4 its beginning is described, and some- 
thing of the same kind may possibly have been said about it 
here. 

The MSS. give rdw . . . éroinoe ovvédpiov . . . kal rd. . . ebb 
vyoe. If we retain rdw, it is implied that a similar meeting of the 
gods had taken place before. But for what purpose could a previous 
meeting have been summoned and addressed? The only thing 
which could possibly be supposed to have been done by God after 
the emission of the gods, and before the time spoken of in § 50, is. 
the creation of the chaotic mass of matter; and even if we assume 
that the writer said that this mass was created by God, he is not likely 
to have said that God called on the gods to help him in creating it, 
I have therefore bracketed wa\w. When § 50 had been shifted to the 
place where it stands in the MSS., it came later in the narrative than 
the meeting of gods which is described in § 27 ; and we may suppose 
that a transcriber, reading it in that position, said to himself ‘this is 
the second meeting ’, and accordingly inserted wdAw twice in § 50. 

Sao. ‘ris Kopupatas!, Sco. al &pOdprou diicews teredxate, Perhaps 
the author’s meaning might be expressed by writing éco rijs révrwy 
Kopupis émiBeBrjxare, Kal adOdprov dicews terevxare. (Or possibly 
THs Kopupaias (dpyjjs) or the like, ‘the topmost summit of dominion’, 
with some suitable verb?). [Cf. Pl. Phaedr. 247 ff.] 

ot Tov peyav alava Bide és del KexArpwobe. The functions of the 
gods have already been determined, though they have not yet begun - 
to discharge their functions. 

Tov péyay aiéva appears to mean either ‘the course of things in 
time’, or ‘ the universe’. 

ot gautois dvtimapabiSdvtes obSérote Komidcere Ta odpmavra—(ols 
adta éautois dyrumapadiSdvra odSérore xomidce: ta oipmavra MSS.). 


? According to the old Egyptian theogony of Heliopolis, the chief gods issued 
from the primal god Tum by successive processes of generation. 





EXCERPT XXIII: 50 499 


The gods are dxoriacro: (cf. pis yAlov Kat ceAnvyns dxorlacrov, § 34) ; 
but it could not be said that the things subject to their rule are 
dxoriaoTa. 

The word dvrurapadiddvres implies the conception of chronocratores ; 
each god in turn takes charge fora certain time, and then hands 
over his charge to another (e.g., according to one system out of 
many, Helios is on duty on Sunday, and Selene on Monday). This 
notion, which seems to have been of Egyptian origin, was originally 
applicable only to astral gods, but is here assumed to apply also to 
gods who existed before the formation of the Kosmos. 

péxps more dveriyvwoto. Tatts Seomécoper THs Hyepovias ;—(péxpe 
nore THS dvemeyvdarou tattys Seomdconev tyepovias MSS.). God and 
the gods rule over the mass of matter; but the mass, being as yet 
unorganized, contains no living beings to recognize their rule. 

péxpt wore [&0edpyta yevyoerat taita Arig Kat cedyjvy] [[ékacros 
fpav eg” dautd yervdrw!] dpyhv katadelpopey thy odoraow tatrny 5-— 
(dradetpupev 74 Sivacba thy ér dpyhy odotaow tadtyy; MSS.). The 
mass is inert and lifeless ; it must no longer be left so. 

The mention of sun and moon is out of place at a stage at which 
neither sun nor moon has yet come into existence; and the words 
exaotos Hpov eb’ éav7d yervérw ought to form part of the exhor- 
tation which follows. The future -Ae/owev has been altered into 
-Nefvwpev through the influence of yevvérw. I cannot account for 
76 divacOat, 

dmatos Toig petayeveorépors pidos $i (8€ MSS.) Sofdrw (rd) xdos 
eivat. Chaos now exists; let us so completely do away with it, that 
the beings who are to be produced hereafter (i.e, men, and perhaps 
star-gods also,) will find it difficult to believe that it has ever 


existed. 

ele, kal €b0dws [Koopikds] tis ere Tpedatyys! évdoews Sidoracis 
éyévero. The é&wors is the undifferentiated mass of formless matter, 
which was called overacis above. It might perhaps be called oxoreuy 
(cf. the oxdros spoken of in Corp. 1. 4); but peAaévy is a less suitable 
word. Besides, the writer of the Kore Kosmu thinks of the 
Siaxdopnors, for the most part, not as an outpouring of light into 
darkness, but as a process by which a mass of matter hitherto inert 
and lifeless is filled with living beings. It seems probable therefore 
that peAatvns has been substituted for some other adjective. If we 
assume this adjective to have been dxoopyrov, the meaningless adverb 
koopuxGs may have come from it by corruption. 

K kug 





500 STOBAEI HERMETICA 


The dderacis is a separation of the mass into two parts, out of which 
God made heaven and earth. It corresponds to the separation of 
‘the waters above the firmament’ from ‘the waters below the firma- 
ment’ in Gen. 1. 7, and to the first stage of the separation of the. 
elements in Stoic cosmogonies. (See Corp. I. 5b and Corp. III.) 

There can be little doubt that both ete kai... éyevero here, and 
etrev 6 Geds kat Hv in § 11, were suggested by the similar phrases in — 
the first chapter of Genesis: v. 3, elrev 6 Oeds Tevnbrjrw dds* Kat 
éyévero bas. Jd. vv. 6, 9, 14, 20, 24, 29: Kal etrev & Geos . . . Kab 
eyévero otrws. Cf. Ps. 32 (33). 9: abrés elrev, al éyeriOyoar. 

§ U1. “Ect wendypopdvos 6 odpavds dotpaow (amacw MSS.) (...) 
[ayp te kat aidjp!. aerAnpwpévos here means ‘supplied with inhabi- 
tants’, The inhabitants of heaven are the astral gods; and the 
simplest way to obtain the sense required is to alter azacw into 
dozpacw, It may be doubted whether the writer said that God at 
this stage created a second order of gods (viz. the astral gods), or 
that He made the material sun, moon, and stars, and incorporated 
in them the gods of §50, who had till then been unembodied. In 
either case, § 11 corresponds to Gen. 1. 14, Tevyfjrwcay dwori- 
pes K.T.AL 

The peopling of the atmosphere is a thing distinct from the 
peopling of heaven, and the two cannot have been mixed together 
in the same clause. The inhabitants of the atmosphere are the — 
souls, the making of which is described in §§ 14 ff. The words éjp — 
te xai ai@yp must therefore have been inserted here by error. q 

The peopling of heaven (§ rr) ought to precede the filling of the 
earth with living things (§$ 9, 10);' and as the star-gods are spoken 
of as already existing in § 9 (of 8y mepuroAciy tov otpavdv Kehevobértes), 
it is certain that § 11 originally stood before §§ 9 and 1o. 

§ 9. tkavév 8€ rdv péoov Hpyer Xpdvov (ikavds 82 6 pdoos Hpyer xpdvos 
MSS.) (éxéxpunto] [[xal]] 4 (rav Smoxepévar) picis, & réxvov, ((xal)) 
érdyxave oteipa, In the text of the MSS., we have here (omitting 
the unintelligible word éxéxpur7o) two distinct statements, viz. ‘the 
intermediate time was inert’, and ‘nature was barren’. But xpovos 
is not a suitable subject for ijpye; and since the writer goes on to 
tell us how ¢he earth was made active and fruitful, it must have been 
the earth that was till then inert and barren. The sense required can 





It is true that in Ger, 1 the making of plants precedes the making of sun, 
moon, and stars; but that is a strange inversion of the natural order, 





EXCERPT XXIII: 11, 9,10 5Or 


be got by changing 6 pcos xpovos into rov pécov xpovov, and making 
giors the subject of ipye as well as of érvyxave oreipa. It would 
perhaps be possible to make 4 ¢v%cis mean the region in which 
‘nature’ operates, i.e. the earth or the sublunar world; but that 
would be awkward here, as the creation of ®vois is described a few 
lines below, and this would give rise to the objection that, at the 
time spoken of, there was no ¢vcis in existence. It is therefore 
most likely that the author wrote something like 7 rév troxepévwv 
guts (cf. picts 4 tov broxepévov in § 27). This would be merely a 
periphrasis for 74. troxeiweva, ‘the things below’, i.e. the earth ; and 
the word vous, thus used, would pass unnoticed, or would be 
forgotten by the time the reader comes to the creation of ®veus. 

thy tav (kdtw) dvrev Houxtay dmpyyethay, Kal St. doy oti cuyKoopy- 
Ojvar (kal taé)ra [cdpmavra]. Heaven has already been organized 
and peopled, as is shown by the words oi 759 zepuroAciv tov obpavov 
* xeNevoOévres ; it is only the sublunar world that remains to be dealt 
with. I have therefore written r@v xdtw évrwv and xal ratra in place 
of ray dvtwy and Ta cupravra. 

Acépedd cou, éheyor, 7& viv dvra Kal (dv) dorepov (eodpeva tivos) Exet 
xpetav Siacképac(9a). The star-gods see that it is desirable that 
living things should be produced on earth, but are unable to devise 
means of bringing this to pass; they therefore appeal to God to 
solve the problem; and he solves it by creating @vois, the force 
which makes living things spring up. This force is needed both by 
ru viv évra (earth in its present state of inertness and lifelessness), 
and by ra torepov éodpeve.; i.e. it is needed both to produce the first 
generation of living things, and to maintain an unending succession 
of them. 

rivos having been lost, ay was inserted to give the sentence a 
grammatical construction. 

§ 10. enedlacey 6 Oeds, Kal eime dow evar, As to epediacer, 
compare a Kocporoiia (extracted by Dieterich, 4éraxas, p. 182 ff, 
from a magic papyrus, Leiden W) in which God creates by /aughing ; 
€. g. éyéhacev 6 Oeds Exrdnis’ “xa xa xa Xa Xa Xa Xa.” ‘yeAdoavros OE 
Tot Oeod éyervyiOnoay Geol éxrd, otrwes Tov Kdopov TepiexovoW. « . « 
exdkxace 70 Téraptov 6 Geds, kal epdvy Tévva, wdvtwv Kparoica oropay, 
Ov as Ta wavTa éordpy.* 

Kal OAAu mdéyKadov xpApa ek THs pwris aitod mpoAOey, The notion 


& The function of this Tévva (or Teved) is the same as that of vais in the Avre 
osmtit. 


502 STOBAEI HERMETICA 


that God creates by his voice is Jewish; ‘By the word of the Lord 
were the heavens made, and all the host of them by the breath of 
his mouth’ (Ps. 33. 6). See Corp. I. 5 a. 

6 Beds 6 mpomdtwp. On zpordrwp as an appellation of the supreme 
God, see Zxc. II (A. 13 and B. 3), the only other Hermeticum in 
which the word is thus used. In § ((32)), Kamephis is called § 
mpowdtwp; but Kamephis, in that passage, does not seem to be 
regarded as the supreme God, and is possibly not even a god, but 
a man, 

((xai rH bucer 1d tv Kétw mdvtwv (Kal TH Edpéser TovTwr Td Kara 
toutwy MSS.) éxapicato ‘jyenortxdy)), In the MSS., these words 
stand at the end of § 13; but they are unintelligible there. With 
the corrections proposed, they make good sense where I have placed 
them ; ®vous is mistress of the sublunar world. After the words had 
been shifted to § 13, S¥o1s might easily be altered into Evpeous, the 
feminine personage spoken of in that section. 

kat tautny (tradtys MSS.) mpocéragey eivar (aravtoiwy (?) omeppdrav) 
yerytexyy. There must have been a genitive dependent on yevvyr- 
«qv; and what follows in § ((52)) makes it almost certain that the 
missing word is omepydruv. God bade Nature ‘generate’ or bring 
into existence certain things ; and when she had done so, God filled 
his hands with these things (which, in § ((52)), are called 7a é« rijs 
Picews trdpxovra (. . .)), and flung them forth upon the earth, saying 
that Earth was to be yevvyreipa ravrwv. The things thus spoken of 
must surely be seeds, Cf. Déwa, ravtwv xpatodoa omopdv, 80 fs ra 
wdvra. éorapy, in the Kooporoia quoted above. Corp, XIV. 10: ide 
yewpyov omepya xataBdddovta «is viv... . ovrTw wal 6 Oeds K.T.d 
£xc. IX. 1 as emended: 16 owéppa otv tis yevéoews (dd Tod Ged) 
AaBorca yéyove (sc. } An). Lxe. XV. 2 as emended: 4 divcis... 
oretpoucn. pev (els VAqv) Ta éavTas oréppara KT. 

§ 13. [xodtv Move ouvedotcaly| Ouyarépa éroincey, fv Edpeow 
éxddece], § 13 appears to consist of four unconnected fragments, of 
which this is the first. 

Some person became the wife of IIdvos (‘Hard Work’), and gave 
birth to a daughter named Etpeois (‘ Discovery’ or ‘ Invention’). 
According to the traditional text, this wife and mother is the ious 
spoken of in §§ ro and 12. But that is impossible. There is no 
place for wévos and etipeots in a cosmogonia; they belong to human 
life, It is men, not gods or cosmogonic forces, that have to ‘work 
hard’ and ‘discover things’. ‘This sentence must therefore be a — 








EXCERPT XXIII: 13, 52 503 


fragment of a passage in which the life of men on earth was spoken 
of. (Cf. 7H etpéoe ovvdy in § 29.) One might compare the saying 
‘Necessity is the mother of invention’. 

If Etpeors were said to be the daughter of ios and Tlovos, it 
would be necessary to take the word ¢vous in a sense different from 
that which it bears in §§ 10 and r2, and understand it to mean 
ingenium, ‘innate ability’ (cf. edfwjs). But as the sentence is out of 
place here, and has no connexion with what precedes it in the MSS., 
we have no reason to suppose that the mother was named ®ious. 
Her name may very likely have been Svveois. At any rate, the 
meaning of the allegory must have been this: ‘ In order that a man 
may make discoveries, two things are needed ; he must be intelligent, 
and he must take pains.’ 

[rg 8¢ 6 Oeds éxapioaro Tetvarl, kal xapodpevos|. ‘This looks like 
an alternative for kai rij. . » éxapioaro ayepovexdy, which I have 
transposed to § ro. 

[Si€kpwve 7a Hn yeyovdra, kat énAijpwoer aid puotnpiov.) What 
are ra #3n yeyovdra? Heaven and earth? If cuwvexoopyoe were 
written in place of &éxpwve, this might be a summary of the contents 
of §§ ((11)), 9, 10, 12, ((52)) 

§ 52. Kal pydevds (nderl MSS.) évredOev Aetwecar Séxer, Earth 
has hitherto remained barren and desolate, and has in that respect 
‘Jagged behind’ heaven, which has already been supplied with 
inhabitants ; but that reproach is now to be done away with. It is 
true that earth must always be inferior to heaven ; but she will have 
no cause for shame when she also is réou rols wepi abrhv ovykeKoopy- 
pévm Kadois (§ 51). 

The meaning might be more fully expressed by writing pndevds 
(rav) (ev rH TeV ovTeV ovordcet)), ‘no part of the universe’. 

What were the living things that were produced on earth at the 
time here spoken of? The inhabitants of earth as we know it are 
men, beasts, and plants. But the making of beasts comes later 
on in the story (§§ 18-23); and the making of men comes later 
still (§ 24 ff.). The process described in §§ 10, 12, ((52)), must 
therefore be the making of plants alone; and the things which 
God flings forth must be seeds of plants. These sections then 
correspond to Gen. 1. 11, elev 6 Oeds Bdaorycdrw 4 yj Bordvyv 
XOprov K.T.A. 

It follows from this that @vous, as here regarded, is a personi- 
fication of the force which manifests itself in plant-life, rather than 


504 STOBAEI HERMETICA 

















of ‘nature’ in general. ‘The action of ®vo1s might the more 
be thus restricted, because the Stoics used the word duis to signify 
the principle of life in plants (durc), as distinguished from that jy 
beasts and men, which they called yuyy.' 

It is true that in the words 79 ®vce 76 rév Kérw révrov exapion 
jyepovexdy (if that is the right reading) the writer recognizes that 
®vors has other functions also; but it is only in the making of plants 
that she is brought into action in his myth ; he gives her no part in 
the making of beasts and men. 

Tas Xeipas [oias 8H (Set MSS.) Oedv (eixds) exew]. The words 
oias . . . €xew are a reminder that xeipas is not to be taken literally, 
(God has no hands; He is incorporeal.) But such a reminder ig 
hardly in keeping with the tone of the mythical narrative; and it 
seems most likely that these words were not written by the author, 
but were added by a transcriber. Cf. [(of)oys éruxev éxovea] 
épOarpor's in § 34 as emended. 

§ 51. (drm Bh) (&padvn pev odpavds . . . 7d Epya Kivodpeva,)) This 
section must have stood after § 52; for itis a summing up and. 
conclusion of the narrative of which the making of plants in § 52 is. 
the last part. God has made heaven and earth, and filled both. 
heaven and earth with living beings; he looks upon his work, and 
sees that it is good, 

[kpadawvopery er. yh HAlou Adpyavtos éwdyy.| These words have 
to do with the formation of the earth ; and if they occurred any- 
where in the Aore Kosmu, they must be a fragment of the lost 
passage which preceded § 9. We may suppose the writer to have 
there said that, after the heavenly bodies had been made (§ ((11))), 
the lower world was still an undifferentiated watery mass; and that 
God divided this mass, and separated out the earth from the water, 
(Cf. Gen. 1.9: cvijxOn 76 Bdwp . . . Kal dpb 4% Enpd). The land 
thus formed was at first only half solid, and ‘ quivered’ like jelly; 
but the heat of the sun soon dried it up, and made it hard and 
firm. Cf. Herm. fragm. 31 (a cosmogonia): épdvy [5dn] 4 yh 
eparnos Kot tpénovaa’ jAriov dé. . . dvadapubavtos, Kat... éqpalvovros, } 
y7 eornpiero. , 

KoAG yap TH Ged Kal ra Ovqtois elvar vouildpeva adda, Stt Sh ois 
Tod Geod vdporg Soudevery eroryOy. Cf. the Hymn of Cleanthes, Stob, 
I. I. 12, Vol. i, p. 26. 1, 7 W.: GAAG od Kal ra mepurod (re) eriotacat 
dpria, Geivar | Kal koopeiv taxoopa, Kat odpira cot pira éeoriv.? 


1 See, for instance, Sext. Emp. Mavh. 9. 81, quoted in note on Asc/. Lat. I. 4s 
® Possibly the original reading there may have been od «add gol kadd torw. 





EXCERPT XXIII: 51,14 > 508 


The preceding mention of earthly xaAd might give rise to the 
objection that there is nothing xaddvy or dyafév on earth (see 
Corp. V1), or that at any rate there are many things on earth that 
are not kad; and the statement that all things are xaAd in God’s 
sight is intended to answer that objection. But this sentence is 
not needed, and rather interrupts the sequence of thought; it may 
therefore be suspected that cada yap . . . Sovdevetv erowjOy is a note 
added by a reader. 

gxarpe 82 6 Beds Spdv H8n eautoG Ta Epya Kivodpera. This 
corresponds to Ge. r. 31: Kat iev 6 beds 7a wavTa boa éxolycev, 
kai (Sob kad Alav. It also corresponds to Pl. Zim, 37¢: os de 
xunOev aird wal Cav evénoe . . « & yervijous wary, HydoOy Te Kal 
cippavOels x7. The writer may very likely have been thinking of 
both those passages. 

§ 14. odkér, Bouddpevos apydv tov Smoupdvtoy (imepdve MSS.) 
éopov elvat, GAAG "aveupdrwv' wAnpaoat doxipdoas (kal) tobtov, as 
ph Ta Katd péoov (uépos MSS.) dxivyta [Kat épyé] pévy, obrws cis 
radta Hpgaro texvitelas (-retars MSS.). God sets about making 
souls, in order that a certain region may not remain uninhabited. 
What is that region? Since heaven (§ ((11))) and earth (§§ 9, 10, 12, 
((52))) have already been provided with inhabitants, the only region 
that is still épydv and dxwyrdvy, and has not yet been ‘filled’ 
(with living beings), is the space between earth and heaven; this 
therefore must be the place assigned to the souls as their abode. 
(Cf. Zxc, XXV. g: 16 88 dxd cedsrys, & téxvor, ef’ Huds Yuxov 
éorw olxyripov. Lxc. XXIV. 1: & 8 7G dé (karoxotar) yuxal. 
The text then must be corrected accordingly. The sense required 
may be got by writing rdv troupdyov xéopov (‘the region next 
below heaven’) instead of rdv trepdve xdopoy, and 7a Kata pérov 
(‘the intermediate space’) instead of ri xard. pépos. 

The souls are beings of the same nature as the daipoves of the 
Platonists, and the Sa/poves and jpwes of Posidonius ; and like them, 
they dwell in the atmosphere, Their incarnation on earth does not 
take place till later on, § 24 ff. 

The word rvevpara was used by Jews and Christians as an 
equivalent for the Pagan Sa/uoves ; and it is probable that zvevpdrur, 
in that sense, was written here by a Christian transcriber, in sub- 
stitution for some word meaning ‘inhabitants ’. 

The description of the process of soul-making was evidently 
suggested by Pl. Zim. 348-36 D (the making of the world-soul) and 
41 D (the making of individual souls). 


SS ee 


506 STOBAEI HERMETICA 


mveipa .. . dd toi i8iou AaBuy, kai voepy (voepds MSS.) rodTo mup} 
pigas. The souls are made of a mixture of zvetya (‘ breath’ or air)? 
and fire, combined with certain ‘unknown materials’. The notion 
that the soul is a material thing, and consists of the two materia] 
elements air and fire, is Stoic ; and the writer, for the purpose of his 
myth at least, has adopted that notion, with such modification as 
his Platonic principles seemed to him to demand.’ 

The Epicureans described the composition of the soul in similar 
terms. Aetius, Diels Dowxagr. p. 388: Epicurus says that the soul is 
KpGpa. €k teTrdpwv, é€k rood wupwdous, ex mowd depwddous, ek mowd 
mverpatiKod,® ék Terdprou Twos GKarovopdaoroy ... dv TO pev TvEedpa 
kivnow, Tov 8& dépa jpepiav, 7d Se Ocppov rHv pawopevnv Oepydryra tod 
odparos, 76 8 axatovdpnacrov thy év jpiv éuroceiv atcOnow™ ev obser 
yap trav évopalouevwy orotxetwv elvar aicbyow. See also Plut. Ado, 
Coloten 20. 4, 1118 b, and Lucr. 3. 231-245. 

Even Epicurus appears to have felt the difficulty of attributing 
feeling and thought to such things as fire and air, and to have been 
thereby led to add his ‘unnamed fourth substance’ to the three 
other components of the soul. The writer of the Kore Kosmu, 
being, to some extent at least, a Platonist, would feel that difficulty 
more strongly; and it is presumably for that reason that he adds to 
the veda and zip certain ‘unknown’ ingredients (dyvacreas rulw 
érépais TAais éxépace).' We are doubtless meant to understand that 
it is in virtue of these ‘unknown’ or incomprehensible (i. e. incor- 
poreal) constituents that the soul possesses conscious life and thought, — 
and is akin to God. 

But at the same time, the writer so qualifies the wip and wvedua as 
to make it appear that he regards these material things themselves 
as conscious and intelligent; and in this respect, he is closely 
following his Stoic authorities. The fire is described as zip voepov,— 


' Cf. Axc. XXV. 11, yiis re wat obpavod nat navrds Tod péoou fiepot] mvedparos, 
where 70 iepdy mvetpa means the atmosphere. In Zac, XXVI. 13-30, mveipa 
means the element air, 

? The position which he here adopts approximates to that of Posidonius, who 
appears to have said that the soul, as long as it remains in its proper abode (viz 
the upper atmosphere), consists of air and fire alone, but that when it descends to 
lower levels, it is corrupted by an intermixture of water, 

§ Epicurus seems to have meant by mvefua ‘wind’, i.e, air in motion, and by 
dnp, air at rest ; though it is strange to speak of air in motion and air at rest as if 
they were two different substances, = 

* A man who had read the 7#maeus, and was puzzled by its obscurities, might 
well describe as dyvwora the materials which the Demiurgus is there said to have ~ 
used in the making of soul : rijs duepiorov Kal det xard tabra éxovans ovcias eal 
Tis ad wep TA owpara yyvopévys peporis tpirov ef dupoiv év péow fuvexepacato 
ovolas Eidos, Tis Te TadTOD pigews Kal THs Oaréepou, K.T.A. (35 A). 








EXCERPT XXIII: 153 507 


a phrase which the Stoics employed to denote that substance which 
is at once material fire and God; and the mvetpa is ‘a portion of 
God's own rvedpa’ (dd rod iSiov),—that is to say, the atmosphere, 
from which it is taken, is God's life-breath. This conception of 
vetpa is Stoic, and implies the Stoic view that God is immanent in 
the Kosmos. But it is possible that the writer also had in mind 
Gen. 2.7: evepioncer (5 Oeds) cis 74 mpdowroy (rod dvOpumov) mvoqv 
Lofjs, Kal éyévero 6 dvOpwros els Yuxiy Caoav. 

perd tivwy emupwricewy Kpurtav. Cf. peri Adyou tod KabajKovros, 
§ 15 fin., and xpurrods érevrov déyous in § x8. God pronounces a 
spell, just as a human magician would do on a like occasion ; 
without this, his manipulation of the materials would not produce 
the desired effect. 

émeyddacé Tis UAn TH plypate Newrotépa te Kai Kafapwrépa paddov 
[kal Siapaveorépa] # e dv eyévero Breidhs be Fv airy, jy 8% Kal pdvos 
& texvitns édpa. Siadarijs is a synonym of dvedjs, and seems 
unnecessary. 

The substance of which the souls are made is not the mixture as 
a whole, but the ‘purer’ stuff which rises to the surface of the 
mixture. This stuff is perfectly transparent,—like clear water or 
pure air,—and therefore invisible ; ‘God alone could see it’. That 
is a hint that the stuff of which souls consist is in reality dowparoy or 
voyrév, though in the mythical style of the Kore Kosmu it is spoken 
of as if it were a chemical product. 

§ 15. éweidh 82 ((reheoroupynfetoa)) od're [ds ex mupds] Katopevy Bre- 
thxeto, olre pay [ds ek mvedpatos]([ |] Uxer (2fuxev MSS.) (émfyvuto), 
@\Ad Tuva iBroyerA [Kal oixetav| elxe [thy Tod Kpdpatos| odotacww 
Suernjxero means ‘(a solid) was melted’; and in the contrasted phrase, 
we need a verb meaning ‘(a liquid) was solidified’. I have therefore 
added émjyvuro. We might have supposed the stuff spoken of to be 
gaseous, since it is the lightest and rarest part of a mixture the only 
known ingredients of which are air and fire; but it is here pictured 
as something between a solid and a liquid. The heat tends to make 
it liquid, the cold tends to make it solid; and when the hot 
component and the cold component have been thoroughly blended 
together, there results a substance neither liquid nor solid, but of an 
intermediate and jelly-like consistency. The writer calls this surface- 
layer of the mixture the émirayos ; and émérayos means a half-solid 
scum which forms on the surface of a liquid,—e. g. a layer of cream 
on the surface of a pan of milk. On the other hand, in § 16 ¢nvé. he 


Seer eS 

































508 STOBAEI HERMETICA 


calls it 7d é« ras welp)rijrews egarpi€dpevov dvOos; and the w 
ééarpuldevov seems to imply that he there thinks of it as gaseous, 

The words ds é zupés and ds ék wvevparos were intended to 
indicate that the hot ingredient in the mixture is the zip, and the 
cold ingredient is the zveta. (In the Stoic system, air is ro puxpov,) 
That is probably a correct explanation of the author’s meaning; but 
the explanation is awkwardly expressed, and it seems most likely that 
it was added by a reader. 

(radt)qv 84 [Kal dd Tod edyporépou dvdparos kat THs Ka” SpoudtyTa, 
evepyetas] puxwow 6 Oeds exddece(v). God gave a name to the émtrayos ; 
he called it yvywous. The word yxwors properly means ‘the act of 
making soul’, or ‘the act of giving soul (to a body)’; but it is here 
made to mean ‘the stuff of which souls are made’. As yWiyos, ‘cold’, 
has been spoken of just before, it is possible that the writer meant to 
suggest that yvxwors and yuxy are derived from yixos ;* and som ; 
thing of the sort seems to be implied in the words dd Tod ebehnporepow 
évoparos. But those words are unintelligible. Is yixos the etd 
porepov dvoua? And if so, what is the dvepypdrepov dvoya with 
which it is contrasted? Possibly @epuov? But why should ‘cold’ 
be thought more ev@ypoy than ‘heat’? 

The phrase rijs xa6” Spoudrnta évepyetas is equally inexplicable. 

pupiddas puxay ixavas éyeveoodpynge. The number of souls is 
large, but finite. They were all made at the same time ; and when 
once made, they are everlasting (rdoas dudéovs, § 16). { 

§ 16. édoxAnpdtepov (wAnpéotepov MSS.) fv tod Seurépou 7d mpdrov 
kal 7G Torti KaBapdrepoy, ... Kat odtws dxpt Balpay é&qxovta 6 mas 
a&miptioto dpyds. The dvOos or érirayos of which the souls are 
made is not homogeneous. The Craftsman again and again skims. 
off the scum which is continually forming, until the number of 
skimmings amounts to sixty ; and the stuff yielded by each succes- 
sive skimming is inferior in ‘integrity’ and ‘purity’ to that yielded 
by the one before. Consequently, the souls made of this soul-stuff 
are of sixty different grades. 

This graduation of souls is further elaborated in Zac. XXV. 11-13, 
where we are told that the atmosphere is divided into sixty distinct 
strata (y@por), and that each soul has its abode assigned to it in that 
particular stratum which is suited to its nature. 

radrats (rats MSS.) 82 Kai tyHpara [kal ropteta (tpeta MSS.) & 

3 Cf, Plat. Sto. rep. 41, 1052F: Chrysippus says ove dd tpemou viv yuxiy 
dvopacbat mapa riv Wty. 


EXCERPT XXIII: 16 509 


















perapote Biérage [ris dvw pdcews) [odpavod]. Cf. § 24: tay Slov 
rpnparov [xat rayuetwy] mponpxovro. The tuxjpara are the sixty sub- 
divisions of the atmosphere which are called xépox in Exe. XXV. 
rapietov, properly a storehouse or treasury, must here be taken to 
mean a chamber.' But strata of the atmosphere are not much like 
chambers; and there is no need of a second substantive beside 
rppara. It seems most likely then that rajueia was written as 
a yariant for tuqpara in § 16, and that this caused the addition of xat 
ropuetov in § 24. 

The abodes of the souls are év perapaiy, ‘up above the earth’, but 
not in heaven. otpavot must have been added by some one who 
mistakenly supposed that the souls resided in heaven before their 
incarnation ; and rijs dvw ¢vcews is an alternative for otpavod. Cf. 
ris paxapias [per& Gedv] wohiteCas in § 34, (wAqoiov) Tod otpavod in 
§ 38, and !otpavev! dis in § 39. 

- Smug Tov TE KUAWSpov TeptaTpoPaar Tdget Til Kal oixovopia KalnKodoy, 
kal tov marépa téprwow. [The xvAwdpos may be the ‘pillar’ in Pl. 
Rep. 10. 616 B els & ddrxéobar mpoedOdvres Hpepnoiav bddv Kal idety 
airdO Kara pérov Td Pas ex Tod otpavod Ta dxpa avtod Trav Seopa 
rerapéva’ elvat yap TodTo To has cvvSerpov Tov oipavod ... ovrw Tacay 
awéxov Thy mepupopdy. ., . ert dé ray KikAwy adrod (s¢. tod drpaxrov) 
dvober eb’ Exdorov BeByxévar Serpiva crpareprpepoperyy, gduviv piav 
letvav, va Tovov. 

Some commentators understood this gas to be the axis of the 
Universe, and called it the cylinder. Cf. Photius p. 501 (Porson): 
rerapevoy pas etd olov xiova* rd obpdvov héye. 7d yap cvvexes THY 
Srodopav (cuvéxov riv repupopay) 7b ixdgacpa rod Ko por, Kar dxpa o 
ad Sijxov (Sujxev) exivoetrat 4 déwv. dO BE dvri rod dpHdv. reves TOV 
dgova Tot Kdopov, of 38 KAwadpdv Twa Tupds aifepiou mepi Tov agova ovTa. 
Possibly the reference to the éAos in the soul's protest (§ 34) should 
be interpreted in this connexion. 

The natural sense of zepurrpoBdar is ‘revolve round’, The verb 
orpofecv is usually transitive. But it is not likely that the souls were 
set to turn the axis of the universe, and there seems to be no reason 
why the writer of this document should not use the word in a sense 


1 yayieiov, in the sense of a chamber or cell in which souls are imprisoned, 
occurs repeatedly in the Pistés Sophia; e.g. (C. Schmidt) p, 214, 1, 373 “the 
rasueia of the Space of the outer darkness.’ /0. p. 215, Me 20% ‘the door of the 
rayuetov in which are the yuyxai of those men is opened.’ Perhaps the person who 
wrote rayeia in the Aore Kosmu was thinking of some similar application of the 
word, 

A dvxorapias is spoken of in Zxc, XXVI. 3. 


510 STOBAEI HERMETICA 


similar to mepryopevew. Cf. Aristophenes, Vesp. 1529: otpdfe 
mapdBawe kiko kal yaorpicov ceavtdv, where orpofe is apparently 
intransitive. 

The words rafe twi Kat oixovouia xabyxovon may be interpreted of 
the regular orbit in which the souls circle about the cylinder. [¢. 
would appear as if this passage should be counted among those which | 
regard the souls as being év perapotw rijs avw dicews. The Father's 
pleasure is presumably caused by their seemly order. When the 
souls left their stations (§ 24), they aroused the Father’s anger and 
were embodied by his command. ] 

§ 17. év TH meptkaddet rod aidepos ards (ordoet MSS.) (dibs ?), kat tag 
tov Sn obcdy (SvTwy MSS.) (huxGv) peramempdpevos dudds (pices 
MSS.). The word aifjp, as used in the Kore Kosmu, probably means 
the upper part of the atmosphere. The atmosphere, which fills the: 
space between the earth and the lunar sphere, is divided (as in Pseudo- 
Pl. Zpinomis) into a lower, darker, and more turbid part called ajp, and | 
a higher, brighter, and purer part called aifjp. Cf. ai®yjp re xat dap 
in § 34, and [dnp re xat aibajp] in §((11)) ; ‘air and aether’ means the 
atmosphere as a whole. (See note on Zxc, XXIV.1.) The distine 
tion between a higher and a lower stratum of the atmosphere was 
adopted and elaborated by Posidonius, by whom the writer of the 
Kore Kosmu was doubtless influenced. 

The souls are located in the atmosphere; and when God wishes 
to address them, he descends from his abode in or above the highest 
heaven, and takes his stand in or on ‘ the (vault ?) of aether’, that is, at 
the upper boundary of the region within which the souls are confined. 

goes cannot be right; and @uAds, which I have written in place 
of it, is the more appropriate, because we have just been told that 
the souls are divided into sixty graduated classes or ¢ tribes’. 

[mvetparos éuod kat} pepinyns euijs [[yuxat]l kod tékva. avevparos 
éuod must be understood as a reference to mvedua doov apxerov ard 
roo tdiov AaBuv in § 14. But if God mentions the wvedua, why does: 
he not also mention the rip, which was the other of the two known: 
materials? Besides, the souls are not children of the zvedpa and the 
mip (the materials of which they were made) in the same sense that 
they are children of God’s pepipvy. It is therefore probable that 
avetparos éuod Kai was added by a transcriber. 

&... & 76 péow (ud MSS.) KaOiSpiw (kadtepd MSS.) xdopo. Cf 
§ 14 as emended: ds py Ta Kara pécov axivyta pévy.—kdopos here 
means, not ‘the universe’, but ‘a region of the universe’, Cf. rov 


























EXCERPT XXIII: 17 ie 


$ro(v)pavio(v) kdcpoy in § 14; Tod perapaiov Kdapov rovrov in § 36; 6 
erixGbvids cov xdopos in $60 ; and rov terepBev [dia]koopor in § 2. 

xabtepotv (dyalpa, iepéa, or the like) means to dedicate or consecrate 
something or some one toa god. ‘The word is hardly appropriate 
here ; xa0idptw better gives the sense required. 

[Adyor énav ds] vopwv todtwr éraxodoate, Adywv éudv is probably 
an alternative for vopwv rovrwr. 

témou pydevds GAdou Oiynte wy tod Staraydvtos dpiv, The souls 
are here warned against the transgression which they are afterwards 
described as committing (§ 24). If rézov is sound, the thing which 
they are forbidden to do is to trespass beyond the bounds of the 
region assigned to them. This would agree with ray (ior tunudrov 
mponpxovro in § 24. But rozov Oryydvew, ‘to lay hands on a place’, is 
a strange expression; and perhaps we ought to bracket rérov. If 
rorov were struck out, the prohibition would be expressed in less 
definite terms, and would in that respect correspond more closely to 
él Tt vewrepov Tapa Taya mpasnre Bovretpara below. 

edorafnodcais pev ofv dyiv odpavds [re Kal péver mdédw) 6 prods 
(spoiws MSS.), kat [6 Starayeis] (kat)aoreptopds, Opdvor te dperijs 
men\npwopévor. I suppose the writer's meaning to have been this. 
The souls, when first made, are placed in the atmosphere, to dwell 
there during a period of probation. If they are obedient to God’s 
commands, they will, at the expiration of that period, be permitted 
to rise to a higher level, and enter heaven; which implies that they 
will be transformed from ‘souls’ into gods. On the other hand, if 
they are disobedient, they will be punished by incarnation in human 
bodies upon earth. 

5 puoOds (if that is the right reading) may have been altered into 
époiws by accident ; but raAw must have been inserted intentionally, 
by some one who wrongly assumed that heaven was the original 
abode of the souls, and therefore that, if they went to heaven, they 
would be going ‘back’ to the place they came from. ever was pre- 
sumably added because, after 6 yuo6ds had disappeared, a verb was 
felt to be needed. But pévee ought to have an accusative object 
(épas), and does not rightly go with the dative ipiv. 


1 Posidonius seems to have said that the upper atmosphere is the proper home of 
souls in general, and the place to which most of them will sooner or later return 
after their incarnation upon earth; but that a few exceptionally noble souls will 
ultimately rise still higher, and become gods in heaven. In the system of 
Posidonius then, heaven is the highest reward for embodied souls; and the writer of 
the Kore Kosmz, when he made God promise heaven, as a reward for obedience, 
to wnembodied souls, was probably influenced by what Posidonius had said. 


i 


5I2 STOBAEI HERMETICA 



















[6 Siarayels] has come from rod Siarayévros above. 

dorepipds, the reading of the MSS., is not satisfactory. This 
word occurs in the two senses ‘a making with stars’ and ‘a constella- 
tion’; and in Plut. Plac. Phil. 2. 13 (Aetius, Diels Doxogr. p. 341), 
the verb dorepitew means ‘to make (a stone) into a star’. But the 
recognized term for ‘the making of a man into a star-god’, which is 
what we want here, is carawrepiopds. 

The word @pdvoz (‘ judgment-seats ’) expresses a conception which is 
probably of Jewish origin. Cf. Daniel 7. 9: Opdvor eBérnoay, Kat 
malas hpepav exdOnro, Ev. Matth. 19, 28: brav Kabioy & vidos rod 
dvOpdmov ent Opsvov Sdéns abrod, kabicreaGe Kal ipeis ei Sudexa Opdvors 
kpivovres tas ddSexa pvdds tod “Iopayr. Apoc. 20. 4: eldov Opdvous, 
kad éxdOcay er’ abrovs, Kal pia €660y atrois. Col, 1.16: etre Opdvor 
elre kupiérates etre Gpxal «tre ekovoia. In coupling together (xar)- 
actepurpds and Opdvor, the writer combines a Pagan and a Jewish 
mode of picturing the powers and dignities conferred on those who 
are admitted to heaven. 

dper} here means, not moral virtue, but supernatural force or 
potency. A plant or stone efficacious in magic would be said to. 
possess dpery. 

iepdv [piv] dpydw [avedpa kat] papa Tour dd’ obwep buds éyévynoa, 
Yuxorotods re tatTas pou tas xetpas. Here, as before, mvedya has” 
been added by a transcriber,—perhaps a Christian. The ‘mixture ] 
and the hands by which it was manipulated go well together ; but it 
would be superfluous to mention the ingredients of the mixture also, 
and it is still more inappropriate to mention one of them only, the 
wvetpa, and omit the wtp. 

§ 18. 7a Aowwd TH oToixelwv [ovyyerA| pigas, Giwp kai yiv. Here 
begins the making of beasts. They are made of a ‘mixture’ which 
is analogous to that out of which the (human) souls were made, 
but is composed of coarser materials ; in place of wip and rvetpa 
(fire and air), God this time uses the two grosser elements, water 
and earth. 

(kat Lworordy éuduatoas)) (ev8oucrdcas MSS.) (rvé odetav), This 
phrase corresponds to dyvicrois tioly érépaus tas éxépace in § 14, 
and ought to stand in the corresponding position ; I have therefore 
transposed it. 


1 *Avagarydpas, tov mepixeipevov aldépa... dvapmdcavra wérpous dnd Tis iis wat 
natapréfavra tovrous horepévar, But the reading is doubtful; in the same 
passage as given by Stobaeus, the verb is jarepenérau. 





EXCERPT XXIII: 18 513 


(rav) 7 Kpdport émemdéovra [Spotws] emimayov, [edBapi te kat) edayy 
(cirayi MSS.) yevépevoy. Spoiws, both here and before Kpumrous érreurav 
ovs above, seems intended to mean ‘as in the case of the first 
mixture (§14)’. But both clauses read better when époéus is struck 
out; and in both places it is probably a misplaced duplication of 
(od rois mparors 8°) opotous. 

ciBapy (well steeped or dyed) is meaningless in this connexion ; 
and ebrayh (compact or solid) is not a suitable adjective to apply to 
a thing which must be imagined as semi-liquid. It is most likely 
that the original reading was eday9, and that both etrayf and <bBadhq 
were written as substitutes or variants.’ eidyf, bright or clear, 
gives the sense wanted ; cf. xafapwrépa and dedjs, applied to the 
corresponding substance in §14. The adjective eday7js (not to be 
confused with ediyjs, from dyos,) occurs twice in Plato (Zim. 58 D, 
dépos, Toptv cbayéorrarov erixhyv alfijp Kxadovpevos, 6 de Godepa- 
raros x.t.A.; Lege. 952A, ebayéorepov opposed to oxotwdéarepa) 5 
but it is not a common word, and transcribers may have been 
puzzled by it. 

é todrou (sc. Tod émméyou) ra [dvOpwroerdq] (nvedpara) ray bgwr 
Siémdace* 7d 8 TOG plyparos AetWavoy «7.4. There is evidently some- 
thing wrong here. The word dv@pw7oady seems to be in some way 
connected with zpos rots dvOpwroeidéor trav Lydiaxdv 7a éfijs draprioas 
in§20. Perhaps the man who altered the text wrote rots dvOpurroedeor 
rav fwdiev in § 20, and 7a évOpwroeady trav fydiwy in § 18, and 
meant the words to signify ‘those Signs of the Zodiac which are 
of human form’ (Gemini, Virgo, Sagittarius, Aquarius). But it is 
clear that the author, in § 18 at any rate, was speaking, not of 
the making of Signs of the Zodiac, but of the making of beasts. 
What then is the missing word for which dvOpwroed; has been 
substituted ? 

We are told that God first makes certain things out of the 
‘scum? (érémayos) of the mixture, and then (§ rg) directs the 
souls to make certain things (which, from § 23, we know to be 
birds, fishes, quadrupeds, and reptiles) out of the ‘residuum’ (Aéé- 
Wavov) of the mixture ; and God promises (§ 21 7nit.) rois dparois 


1 Usener conjectures evagf, ‘ soft’ or ‘delicate’, for evBapy. In support of this, 
Prof. Stuart Jones has pointed out to me tbat in an anonymous medical text, 
Rheinisches Museum vol. 58, ebBapas occurs for ebapds, p, 72, and ebBagia for 
edagia, p. 87; and that in Paul of Aegina 4. 21, ebBapdy andyyav, ‘well-steeped ” 
sponges, may perhaps be an error for ebapév om, ‘soft’.) It would be possible to 
write evap Te «al evar; but it seems more likely that the anthor wrote one 
adjective only. 


28063 LI 


SS Oe 


514 STOBAEI HERMETICA 









































Epyots avrav 70 "éparéy" ia al érifedéat. If we write ra déparg 
nvevpara in place of 7d dépardv sake in § 21, all becomes clear, 
The things which the souls make are épard ; i.e. they are the visible 
and tangible dodies of the animals ; and when the bodies have been 
made, God completes the animals by adding a vedua to each body, 
That is to say, every beast, when completed, consists of two parts, 
a body and a wveiya. (Most Greeks of the period would rather 
have said either that a beast is composed of c&pa and yyy, or 
that it is composed of cdpua, wvedua, and yxy; but the writer 
of the Kore Kosmu restricts the word yyy to Auman souls,’ and 
calls the ‘invisible’ part of a beast,—the part in which its life 
resides,—zvetjia, not wvyx7.) ‘The bodies of the beasts are m 
out of the Aewavov of the mixture; the things which are made 
by God out of the érizayos must therefore be the mvejpara 
of the beasts. And so, in place of dv@pwroedyj, we must write 
the zvevpara. 

When the passage is thus understood, we see that the use made 
of the émimayos of the second mixture is analogous to the use 
made of the érirayos of the first mixture. Out of the émirayos of 
the first mixture are made the ywyxai of men ; out of the érarayos of 
the second mixture are made the wvevyara of beasts. (As to the 
question what is done with the Acéifavoy of the first mixture, see 
note on § 30.) 

§ 19. tats Hin tmpoKopdoats Wuxais eSwxe, [fuxais 8€ TadTaLs] Tals 
cis [xwpta Ocdv Kal] tots eyyds dorpwv témous (dvaBdoors), Kal 
tepois Saipoot petaxekAnuevats (tepovs Saipovas petaxexAnpevas MSS.) 
These words imply that, though each soul was originally placed in: 
and confined to one particular zyjjua of the atmosphere, it was 
permitted after a time to rise to higher tyzjuora, if it showed sufficient 
merit. (Posidonius said something not unlike this. Compare the 
promise in § 17, that obedient souls shall ultimately be permitted 
to rise above the highest limit of the atmosphere, and enter heaven.) 
Some time has now elapsed ; and some souls which were originally 
placed in lower tpjpara have risen to the highest stratum of the 
atmosphere, that stratum which is ‘near to the stars’, i. e. imme- 
diately below the sphere of heaven. When they have attained to 
that position, they are called ‘holy daemons ’,—i.e. nct gods, but 
beings of the next grade below that of a god. It is to these 


1 J.e, souls either destined to be incarnated in human bodies, or actually in- 
carnated in human bodies. 





EXCERPT XXIII: 19 515 


‘advanced’ souls, and not to the souls in general, that the task 
of making the bodies of beasts is assigned. 

In the extant text, nothing has hitherto been said about the 
advancement of souls to higher zyjara of the atmosphere, But 
the words of § 19 seem to imply that this matter has been 
previously spoken of. If so, the passage in which it was spoken of has 
been lost. 

[xwpia GeGv Kai] must have been added by some one who mis- 
understood the author’s meaning, and thought that the advanced 
souls were already in heaven. (Cf. [otpavod] in § 16, which may have 
been added by the same person.) «is ywpia edv is equivalent to «is 
otpavev, and is inconsistent with tovs éyyis dotpwy térous, which 
means places not iz heaven, but xear it. 

After a participle (probably dvaBdcas) had been lost, the phrase 
tepois Safuoor peraxexAnpevars was altered into the accusative by 
some one who supposed it to be coupled to rézovs. 

éxdoTy TH eouris ducer (werorbuia) masodrw te [wapamdrjotor]. 
There would be no sense in saying that the bodies of the various 
beasts are ‘ somewhat like’ or ‘nearly equal to’ the ‘ natures’ of the 
souls by whom they are made. If we write r@ éavrfjs dioe 
reroubvia, the meaning is that each of the souls is to do the best it 
can, ‘relying on its own ability’, i.e. without any assistance 
from God (beyond that of supplying a model). Cf. déory (6 
Oeds below, mapamdjowv is probably a corrupted doublet of 
rapabncopat. 

The words éxdery ru mAacoérw seem to imply that each of the 
souls spoken of made a different kind of »beast, or in other 
words, that each species of beasts known to us was made by a 
different soul. 

mapabjcopa 8 éyd (8€ 7 MSS.) [kal] rad0’ bpiv mapadetypara, 
raira must mean the things which God has just made, viz. the 
avevpara of the beasts. The writer imagines the veiya of a horse, 
for instance, as a sort of gaseous body, of the same shape and size 
as the gross body of the horse,’ but invisible to mortal eyes, and 


1 Perhaps a similar notion underlies the obscure term 7) dvripspov mvedpa in 
Pistis Sophia, C. Schmidt Kopt.-Gnost. Schriften 1, p. 182 ff. According to that 
passage, a man, when living on earth, consists of four parts : viz. the ‘ Power’ (i.e, 
#j Oela S¥vayus, the divine principle in the man, which corresponds to the Platonic 
vois; the yuxp; the dvripipoy mvedua; and the capa, (The pofpa, the man’s 
‘destiny’, though it is sometimes coupled with the dvrimpov mvedpa, and is reckoned 
as a fifth thing beside the other four, 26. p. 194, 1. 31, can hardly be regarded as a 
part of the man in the same sense.) The dv7ijupov mvedpa is the thing in which 


Tile 
































516 STOBAEI HERMETICA 


visible only to God and to unembodied souls (cf. tv 8) Kat povos § 
rexvirns édpa, said of the soul-stuff in § 14). God, having made 
aveipa of a horse, sets it before the soul whose business it is 
make the gross body of the horse, and says ‘take this veda for 
your model, and make a copy of it in gross matter’; and wh 
the gross body has been made, God puts the wrvedpa into it. The 
mvebya, being of the same shape and size as the gross body, 
permeates and gives life to every part of it; and thus there results 
a living horse. 

The word -apdéderywa may perhaps have been suggested 
passages in Plato where the vontov «los is spoken of as t 
rapddevypa of which material things are copies (e.g. Pl. Zim. 28 a) 
but the wvedua of a horse, as conceived by the author of the Kore 
Kosmu, bas little in common with the adrotmros, or vontov eldos of 
the horse, as conceived by the Platonists. 

§ ar, 1a ddpata mvedpara (1d dpardv mvecpa MSS.) The epithet: 
éparéy is not applicable to mvetpa in any of the various senses of 
that word. It would perhaps be possible to say 7d ddparov mvetpa, 
‘the invisible rvedya (of each of the animals which were about to 
be made)’; but as rots dparois gpyous (the gross bodies of the 
animals) is in the plural, the sense required is better expressed by 
writing either ri dépara rvetpara, or ri wveipare. without any adjective. 

(éf)ouctoy te Sporoyovias (Sodvar) éxdotw, amas [abte [adrois] érep 7 
yervG 8pora,| adtat (adrd MSS.) [re] paére dvdykny exwow (ook én 
dvdyxnv exoucw MSS.) éddo te moveiy (rap) & epOncav épydoactar, 
The production of a first specimen of every species of animals has 


the passions reside. It is bound to the ¥vx7, but is hostile to it, and causes it to 
sin. When the soul quits the body at death, the dyriypov mvetpa still clings te 
the wux7, and testifies against it before the judgement-seat. But if the vod has 
obtained forgiveness of its sins by means of sacraments, the bonds by which the 
dvrijupov mvedpa is bound to it are loosed, and the pux7, released from this 


Probably because it is thought of as a copy or ‘double’ of the c@pa,—a gaseous 
body of the same shape as the visible and tangible body. : 
Compare Tertullian De an. 9: ‘Recognita enim, cum Deus “ flasset in faciem 
hominis flatum vitae, et factus esset homo in animam vivam”, totum utique per 
faciem statim flatum illum in interiora transmissum, et per universa corporis spa 
diffusum, simulque divina aspiratione densatum, omni intus linea expressum es 
quam densatus impleverat, et velut in forma gelasse. .. . Hic erit homo interioty 
alins exterior, dupliciter unus, habens et ille oculos et aures suas, - « - habens et. 
cacteros artus.” 











EXCERPT XXIII: 21, 22 517 


now been provided for; but how is a succession of animals to be 
produced ? That is the question which is answered by the words 
eovolay spowyovias Soiva éxdory. God promised to give to each of 
the animals made by the souls and vivified by Him ‘ power to breed 
others like to itself’. 

This corresponds to Gen. 1. 12, oweipov oréppa. kara yévos kat Kal? 
jpoudryTa; » » .ob 7o oréppa abrot ev atrG Kari yévos,— except that 
the writer of Genesis is there speaking of plants, and not of animals 
The corresponding phrase with regard to animals is AiédveoOe Kat 
arybivecbe, Gen, I. 22. 

The words érws aird erepa yevva. 6pora correctly explain the mean- 
ing of dpo.oyovia ; but the explanation is superfluous, and was doubt- 
Jess added by a reader. In the words érws atrat (ai Yuxat) pnKére 
dvdyxnv Exwou 7A, we are told that God undertook to do this in 
order to save the souls the trouble of making each successive genera- 
tion of animals by a separate act, as they would otherwise have had to 
do. I have not ventured to bracket this clause; but it may be 
suspected that the sentence originally ended at éxdory, and that all 
that follows is a later addition. 

§ 22. Td xexepaopévoy ... [Tis BAns} haBovioat (AaBspevar MSS.) kare- 
ydouv Tparoy [kal 7d Too watpds mpocextvour kpapa], kal 6rd0ev H(v) cupre- 
mheypévov émeLjtour. ris tAns A\aBopevar, ‘haying taken hold of the 
material’ will not do. AaPotoa, ‘having received the mixture (from 
God, who handed it over to them) ’, gives the sense required. 

kal ro Tod matpos mpocextvovy xpapa is manifestly inappropriate, 
The souls, when they first receive the mixture, are not disposed to 
‘ worship’ it, nor even to worship God who has committed it to them ; 
on the contrary, they are tempted to irreverent curiosity. After 
a time, they fear they may have angered God by their irreverence ; 
and so they set to work. They obey God’s command ; but we are 
meant to understand that they ought to have obeyed it more 
promptly, and that their conduct on this occasion is a first indica- 
tion of that presumptuous spirit which afterwards caused their fall. 

Probably 74 tod warpos kpiua was written in the margin as an 
alternative for rd xexepacpévoy, and when the words had got into the 
text, zpooextvow was added to give them a grammatical construction. 

§ 23, éx pév THs dvarépw thys, Tis mepBods Kodpoy exodons (Ti - - - 
éxodon MSS.) tov émirayov!, 73 Tay dpvéav yévos eudphouy (edpdphouv 
MSS,). The érérayos of the mixture has already been skimmed off, 
and used up in making the wvetpara of the animals; and 7 dvwrépw 





























518 STOBAEI HERMETICA 


tAy means the upper layer of the Aciavov of the mixture. The 
words kotov éxovons tov éérayoy would imply that a fresh émémayog 
has formed on the surface of the upper layer of the Actfavov. But 
the stuff of which the birds are made is the upper layer (}) dvwrépa 
Ay) as a whole, not an érémayos of the upper layer ; and there wo 
be no use for any such éxtrayos. The word érirayov must therefore 
have been substituted by error for some other substantive. A satis. 
factory sense could be got by writing Kovdyy éxovoys Tiv ovoracw, 
‘its consistency ’. 

Four portions of the A«favov are dealt with in succession. We are 
told that the second portion is denser than the first, because it is 
situated lower down; that the third is denser than the second, 
because it is dealt with later; and that the fourth is denser than the 
third, because it is dealt with later still. It is assumed then that the 
\efavov increases in density from the surface downward, and also 
that any given part of it becomes more dense by lapse of time. 

[[év rodrw 8 Apemayods 7Sn. .. 13 ray terpanddwv yévos émhacgov]}, 
This has evidently been shifted. The order must have been birds, 
fishes, quadrupeds, reptiles. Birds fly in air; fishes swim in water; 
quadrupeds walk on earth ; reptiles creep on the ground, or live in 
holes beneath the surface of the earth, Accordingly, the birds are 
said to have been made of the lightest of the four portions of the 
Nefavov; the fishes, of the next lightest; the quadrupeds, of the 
third portion, which is heavier, and half-solid; and the reptiles, of 
the fourth portion, which is heavier still, and quite solidified. 

The phrases xatwpépous imdpxovros and orepedy tiv (rip orepedy 
MSS.) wfjéw AaBévros are wrongly placed in the traditional text ; to 
make the scheme work out rightly, we must interchange them. 

[kal érépas bypass odcias (Sypacias dciag I) Sedpevov eis Sidvn fv]. As” 
there is no corresponding phrase concerning the birds, the quadrupeds, 
or the reptiles, it is to be presumed that these words have been added 
by a reader. érépas is probably a variant for typas; and we may 
suppose that the interpolator wrote (rd typas otcias Seduevov is” 
didvnév, as an amplification of 73 rav ixOvur (sc. yévos). 

§ 20, (6 82 Beds .. .) (rv LoBiaxdy . . . Sudrage [ ], Kal (rodTw) [ras] 
mav(tyoupyods xapiodpevos (éxaptoduny MSS.) Suvdpers [ |, yervntixdy 
(éxédeuoev elvar) Tov eis del peddévtwv Eveobar) [Kabohixds] mwdvrar)) 
(téwv). This passage is obviously out of place where it stands in the 
MSS. If we put it here, it describes the fulfilment of the second 
of God’s two promises in § 21 (éovolav Spotoyovias Sotvar éxdorw), 





EXCERPT XXIII: 23, 20 519 


God has to contrive some means by which a continual succession of 
animal births may be effected; and he does so by making or 
arranging the Zodiac, and assigning to it the function of causing 
animals to be born, The writer did not think it enough to make God 
merely say that the animals were to breed ; it was generally believed 
that births were brought about by the operation of astral influences, 
and it is here assumed that the source of birth-producing influences 
is the Zodiac. The phrase ravroupyots duvdpeis, ‘ powers of bringing 
into existence all manner of creatures’, corresponds to the term 
ravrépophos (omniformis) which is applied to the Zodiac in Ase. 
Lat. Wl. 35 and elsewhere. (The MSS. give mavotpyous; but 
mavotpyos usually means ‘crafty’ or * knavish ’.) 

xaboduxGs is superfluous, as the meaning which it seems intended 
to express is adequately given by eis def and wdvrwv. Some word or 
phrase meaning ‘in succession’ would be more appropriate. 

It is most likely that this section was preceded by a passage, now lost, 
in which was described the fulfilment of the first of God’s two promises 
~ jn§2t (rois dparois epyous abrav ra ddpara mvetpara eriledfar). We may 
suppose the writer to have said in the lost passage that God put the 
rvetpara into the bodies of the animals, and thereby gave them life. 

qov Lodiaxdy ovppdves tais duorkais (uxiKats MSS.) xwqceor (rv 
tour?) Sidrage [xdcpov]. wuxixais is certainly wrong ; according to 
the Kore Kosmu, beasts have no yxai. Probably the author wrote 
duowxais. (Cf. § 29: Srav 4) emixepéry airots tov dorépwy Kivnois 
cipdovoy exn Thy eds éxdorou gvouxny evépyeav.) The notion 
implied in these words seems to be that the xpurral dmdppowu of the 
stars co-operate with pvous in producing births ; i.e, that the astral 
influences work in accord with the workings of nature in the animals 
themselves. 

Possibly the writer’s view may have been that the Jodies of the 
offspring are generated by the parent-beasts (that is, by pucus operating 
in the bodies of the parent-beasts), but that the avevpara which enter 
and animate the bodies of the offspring are generated by the Zodiac, 
or more exactly, that the zveipa of each animal that is born is 
generated by that particular Sign of the Zodiac which is rising above 
the eastern horizon at the moment of the birth. 

[pds Tots dvOpwroedéor Tov {oSiov (Lediaxdv MSS.) 74 éffjs érapti- 
gas}, The person who inserted these words apparently divided the 
twelve Zodia into two classes, the man-shaped Zodia (Gemini, Virgo, 
&c.), and the beast-shaped Zodia (Aries, Taurus, &c.). But what 









520 STOBAEI HERMETICA 


can have been his reason for speaking in this way about the Zodia 
Perhaps he misunderstood what was said about wapade‘ypara in 
§ rg fiz., and assumed that the things which God set before the souls 
as models to copy from when they were making beasts were the 
beast-shaped Zodia. 

[kal mévrexvov tvedpa}, Kal mvedua may have been added by the 
same man who inserted [rvevparos éuod xaé] and [mvedya xa] in §17; 
and wdvreyvov may perhaps have come from wayréxvovs written as an 
alternative for ravroupyous. 

§ 24. ds (uéya) te mpdgacat, #84. It was only the ‘advanced ’ souls 
that had actually taken part in the making of the beasts; but all the 
souls alike were puffed up with sinful pride when they thought of the 
great thing that had been done by some of them, and consequently 
all alike incurred the penalty of incarnation. 

aweplepyov SrXlLovro rédpav. Cf. aepiepyov dade bjoovrae (-Ojoerar 
MSS.) réApayv in § 45. 

(rots (yap) ev odpav Oeots epidovetkouy x.7.4.)) In the MSS., 
this sentence occurs in § 53. But if we read them in the context 
in which they stand there, we are told that the souls claimed equality 
with the star-gods at a time ‘when they had just been imprisoned 
(in mortal bodies), and found their degradation unendurable’ ; which 
is absurd. If the sentence was written by the author of the narrative, 
he must have written it in connexion with what is said in § 24 about 
the presumptuous behaviour by which the souls incurred the penalty 
of embodiment, 

The souls claimed equality with the celestial gods; this implies 
that they sought to rise above the atmosphere, and enter heaven, in 
which the star-gods dwell. Admission to heaven had been promised 
to them as the ultimate reward for obedience (§ 17); but they 
demanded it before they had deserved it. 

As to wepixpatotcat, see note on Lac, XXIV. 6. 

kal 73y tay iSler tpypdtav [ ] mponpxovto. This is an overt 
act of disobedience to God’s express command (§ 17). Each of the 
souls attempted to quit the particular stratum of the atmosphere 
in which God had placed it, and rise into higher strata; and this 
they did at their own pleasure, without waiting for God’s per- 
mission, That would be the first step towards the accomplishment 
of the design which seems to be ascribed to them in the pre- 
ceding sentence, viz. that of quitting the atmosphere altogether, and 
rising to heaven. 





EXCERPT XXIII: 24-29 5a 


dei 8¢ éxwvodvro. This phrase may perhaps have been suggested 
by the Platonic dictum that yuy7 is decxtvytos and atroxivyros (see 
Exc. XVI. 1). But if so, the writer here gives an unusual meaning 
to that familiar saying. 

§25. 78 tav avOpdrwv odornpa [7] rexvioac%ar, Man is a VOTHLA, 
i.e. a being composed of body and soul. The yuxai, as long 
as they remain unembodied, are not called dv@pwro. At this 
point then begins the making of ‘man’ in the proper sense of 
that term. 

§ 26. Tére Sh petaeppdpevos epé, gyolv “Eppijs, elmev x.1.d. 
Hermes, in §§ 26 and 31, is a god, and nota man; he is in existence 
before the making of men, and is entrusted with the task of 
making the bodies in which the (human) souls are to be incar- 
nated. Moreover, God calls him ‘soul of my soul and mind of 
my holy mind’, which seems to imply that he is placed above all 
the other gods, and stands next in rank to the supreme God 
himself. The Hermes thus spoken of is a being of totally differ- 
ent nature from the man Hermes of §§ 3-8; nor can he be 
identified with the Hermes of § ((32)), who learnt the gvosis from 
Kamephis. 

§§ 27-29. “Axpt od... odov 7d dvOpdmwv. This passage is 
unconnected with what precedes and follows, and describes things 
from a different point of view. In § 25, and in §§ 31 ff, the 
making of men is spoken of as the incarnation of souls hitherto 
unembodied, and this incarnation is regarded as a punishment. 
But in §§ 27-29 (with the exception of some words in the speech 
of Aphrodite, which are out of keeping with the rest of the 
paragraph, and have presumably been interpolated), nothing is said 
about punishment; there is not the slightest hint that the souls 
have offended, or are in disgrace ; indeed, there is no mention at 
all of hitherto unembodied souls ; and of the seven gods who speak 
in the council, two only (Kronos and Ares) announce intentions 
adverse to mankind, while the other five, so far from desiring to 
punish men, undertake to confer boons upon them, and we are 
expressly told that the supreme God is pleased by the benevolent 
promises of Aphrodite and Hermes. God’s reason for making men 
is here a different one ; he is not seeking to punish offenders; he 
merely observes that the earth is uninhabited, and decides to 
remedy that defect. Moreover, the gods whom God consults, and 
on whom it is assumed that the welfare of men depends, are the 





























522 STOBAEI HERMETICA 


seven planet-gods; whereas in the rest of the Kore Kosmu no 
prominence is given to planet-gods or planets. y 

We must conclude then that §§ 27-29 are an extract from 
another document, in which the making of men was differently 
dealt with. This extract may perhaps have been appended by 
a reader, as a parallel to the passage on the same subject in the 
Kore Kosmu. 

According to the traditional text, God says to Hermes, ‘ Thoy 
soul of my soul, and mind of my holy mind, . . . summon the 
gods’. But why should Hermes be thus solemnly addressed, if 
is merely to be told to deliver notices of a meeting? The ‘soy 


and we expect some more important task to be assigned to him, 
That expectation is fulfilled, and a satisfactory sequence is obtai 
if we cut out §§ 27-29, and assume that the story told by Hermes 
to Isis ran thus: (§ 26) ‘God sent for me, and said, “Thou soul 
of my soul, and mind of my holy mind, (make bodies in which 
the offending souls may be incarnated.)” And (§ 30) I lookee 
for material out of which I might make them’ &c. 
§ 27. “Axpt Tod otuyvi) pucis h Tay GroKepevav Sparta; axpr wore 
Ta Hn yeyovdra [dpya| péver [kal] dveyxwpiacta; gious # r 4 
troxeevwy, ‘the world of things below’, means the earth, Th 
earth is orvyvj (gloomy or dismal), because it is uninhabited; 
it will cease to be orvyv7 when God has peopled it with men, 
Compare § 9 as emended, where we are told that the earth was at first 
inert and barren. ‘The two passages are inconsistent. According to 
§9 ff., God supplied what was lacking by making plants, and the earth 
was thenceforth waou tots wept abriy cvyKexoopnyérvyn Kadots (§ ((51))); 
but according to § 27, the earth remained orvyv7 until the mak ng 
of men. 
7a 40n yeyovera Ought to mean, not the earth alone, but all parts 
of the Kosmos, including heaven. But heaven was not dpyds a 
the time spoken of; its inhabitants, the star-gods, were alre 1} 
in existence. It is therefore necessary to bracket dpyd. 
addition of this adjective may have been suggested by § 14 znit. 
dveyxwpiaora, On the other hand, goes rightly with ra 73 yeyovora 
Until men are made, there is no one to sing the praises of thi 
universe and its Maker. Cf. § ((50)) as emended: péype m 
dveriyvucro. tavrns Secrdcopmev THs iyepovias ; 
tols éy obpavd Geods (kédeoov) tdvtas 78y. To whom is 


EXCERPT XXIII: 27, 28 523 











































addressed? To Hermes, as messenger of the supreme God? If so, 
‘Hermes in this paragraph combines the function of messenger with 
that of planet-god. But it is possible that the command was 
addressed to no one person in particular. Would it be better to 
write (aero ts) instead of (kdiNecov) ? 

All the star-gods are summoned to the council ; but it is only 
the seven planet-gods that speak. The writer of this para- 
graph must have ranked the planets above all the other gods 
of heaven. = 
[etwev 6 Oeds, & réxvov, Ss now ‘Eppijs|. These words imply 
that the speaker is Isis, and that she is repeating to her son Horus 
a story which she has heard from Hermes. But they are awkwardly 
placed ; and &s dyow “Eppjs can hardly be reconciled with § 29, 
jn which Hermes (the planet-god) is spoken of in the third person, 
It is therefore most likely that the words eiwev . . . “Epyijs were 
added by the man who inserted the passage into the text of 
the Kore Kosmu. If we omit them, there is nothing to show 
that Isis is speaking; and we are free to suppose that, in the 
document to which this paragraph originally belonged, the story of 
the council of the star-gods was neither put into the mouth of Isis 
nor said to have been told to her by Hermes, but was narrated by 
the writer in his own person. 

“pmidere” elev “els thy yiv Kal mdvra To Xapal’ (, . .).” 
“Some description of what was to be seen on earth is wanted. The 
swords which stand at the beginning of the section (dypi rod orvyvi) 
ios 4 Tay troxepévov Spira ; dxpe wore ra 79 yeyovéra péver 
dveyxwpiaora ;) would serve the purpose well enough; and it is 
possible that these words have been shifted, and originally followed 
7a xopal. 

§ 28. Zheyey “Hdvos “Emi mAgoy! Adppo.” Tt is not clear why 
‘the Sun should undertake to shine ‘to a larger extent’; and his 
‘speech was probably not quite so curt. As the Moon promises 
other benefits besides that of giving light, we should have expected 
the Sun to do likewise. 

Beye Be (ehfvy) Kal mpoweradomonxevar [>éBov kat] oryty Kal 
Gmvov [kal thy péddoucay adrois Eceobar (m)avwdehf prypyy]. The 
Moon, inasmuch as she presides over the night, may very well be 
called the mother of Silence and Sleep; but why should she be 
called the mother of Memory ?? : 


2 The Egyptian god Thoth, the scribe and recorder (topvnuaroypapos) of the 
gods, is said to have been originally a moon-god ; but I know of no evidence that 


524 STOBAEI HERMETICA 


#éBov was probably added by some one who thought of nightly 
terrors. But terror is not a thing that can be fitly coupled with the 
boons of silence and sleep, 

Kpdvos cdamjyyethev 48y Tathp yeyovévar Sixyns kal dvdyxns. The 
influences of the planet Saturn are maleficent. dvdyxy is a force 
to which men submit with reluctance; and d/e7 means ‘penal 
justice’, as in Zac. VII. 

Zebs Eheyev “Qs ph wayrdwact wodepors amddyrat (wohepfoat 
MSS.) 16 idov 78 éodpevoy (€couevwv MSS.), 48n adrois Kal téyny 
kal éhmiSa kal eipHyny yeyévynxa.” [Fortune and Hope were thought 
to play a decisive part in war. Cf. Dion Chrysost. De Fort. I. 2f; 
airy rohepotvruv pév éore vien.. . ds bE vads ex} péperar Kal raxd 
BvOi€erat, xuBepyyrov orepopévy, ... otrw rods cls POopiv SAY wpe? 
ordver tixns ; II. 8, dvépacrat 88 } THyn Kal woAAois Tow ev avOpdrrous 
évopact, Td pev ivov abris véueots, To 52 adnAov éAmis K.7.A. Plut. De 
Sort. Rom. 5: xalrdxa rov rh téyn Thy dvipelav rapwropacer, 1} wActoroy 
els 76 vuxdy TUS péreor, and passim.] 

[ds ph xaderordrny al cuyyevets Wuxai thy KaTadlkny Smopévacw 
(étropévoucar MSS,)] [émt wAdov xoddLwvra]. eri wdéov xordlovrar 
is an alternative for xakerwrdérqy . . . Tv Karadixqy tropévwow. 
The planet Venus is here made to speak of God’s decision to punish 
the souls by incarnation (§ 25), But as there is no mention of 
punishment in the speeches of the six other planets, there can be 
little doubt that these words were added after §§ 27-29 had been 
inserted in the Kore Kosmu. 

§ 29. “Eyd 8€, elev “Epyiis, [kal] (ouverhv) woujow thy (Tov) dvOpdmav 
piow [én], Kal copiay adrois [kal cwppoodyny kal wetOd] Kai dhiGeray 
trapadjow (cvadyow MSS.). The Hermes here spoken of is neither 
the man Hermes of §§ 3-8, nor the great god Hermes of §§ 26 and 
30; he is the planet Mercury. The thing which this planet-god 
is to do for men must have been indicated by some lost adjective 
such as owerjv. He will make them intelligent, and will thereby 
enable them to attain to ‘ wisdom and (knowledge of the) truth’. 

T know of no authority for attributing cwdpoctvy to the in- 
fluence of this planet; and as the moral virtues are not elsewhere 
spoken of in §§ 27-29, it is not likely that one of them would be 
mentioned here. ei (persuasive eloquence) might be reckoned 
among the gifts of the Greek god Hermes and the planet assigned 
to him ; but it is inappropriate in this passage. 


in the third century A.D, memory was thought to be in any way connected with 
the moon. 








EXCERPT XXIII: 29 525 


gal od mwadcopar [TH cipérer cuvdy] [AMA Kal Tay dws Lydiwv tay 
épav ywopévav dvyOpdmav] cicacl tov Ovntav Blov addhedav (apehjow 
MSS.) [LySca yap [rd] enol dvébqxey 6 warhp Kai Snproupyds ((ra)) 
tuppove [ye] xal voepd], The addition of rf etpére cvvev may have 
been suggested by the mention of Eipeocs in § 13." 

The words rav ind Lwdtov rav epav ywouévor dvOperwv would 
imply that there are certain Signs of the Zodiac which are 
placed under the control of the planet-god Hermes, and that he 
limits his benefits to the men who are born under those Signs. 
And in the following clause, the Signs placed under his control 
appear to be called Codi. Ta eudpova kat voepd. Buta distinction 
between certain Signs of the Zodiac which are éudpova Kat voepd, 
and certain others which are not éu@pova xai voepd, would be 
unexampled; and there can be little doubt that there is some 
corruption, The text of the MSS. may be conjecturally accounted 
for as follows. Some one wrote {Ga yip éuol dvéOyxev 6 warnp 
kat Sypuwovpyds Ta epppova Kat voepd, using the phrase {Ga ra 
zupova Kai voepa to signify men as opposed to beasts, and meaning 
that men, gua intelligent, are under the special charge of Hermes, 
the god who confers intelligence ; and a later transcriber, whose 
thoughts were running on the Zodiac, (perhaps the same man 
who inserted the words mpds tois évOpwroadéor trav Lydifaxlov ra 
étjs dmapricas in § 20,) altered Ga into (We, and added the 
words tav trd Lodiwv rv gudv ywopnévwv dvOporwv above. But 
the clause {Ga yap . .. kal voepa cannot have been written by the 
original author of the paragraph. Hermes ought not to be made 
to speak thus of the Demiurgus in answer to a question put to him 
by the Demiurgus himself; if he said anything of the sort, he 
ought to say éyol od dvé@yxas rather than enol dvéOnxev 6 Tarnp 
Kat Snptoupyos. 

Kal téte mhéov (sc, dpeAjow), Srav [kai] (H) emxepevy aultots Tay 
dorépwv kivnors otppavov éxy Thy évds éxdorou guotkhy évépyerav. 
The influence of the stars on a man is here distinguished from the 
operation of dvos in him (cf. § 20 ziZ.).  gpvows so works in some 
men (i.e. their bodies are so composed and constructed) as to 
qualify them for attaining to a high degree of intelligence ; and 
in such men, the work of ¢voxs co-operates with the stellar influence 
which is brought to bear on them by the planet Hermes. 


1 I had thought of transposing rf ebpéoe cuvdy, and placing it before coplay 
abrois....napadjow, If it is to be retained, that is perhaps the best place for it; 
but it is not needed there. 


526 STOBAEI HERMETICA 


§ 30. 6 Be tats Puxais mpocérage tod Kpdparos Td hetavov Soiva, 
It seems hardly fitting that God should order the souls to take action 
conducive to their own punishment ;! perhaps therefore it would be. 
better to bracket rais uyais, and translate ‘God commanded that 
the residuum of the mixture should be given to me’. But whether 
we retain rats Yuyais or cut it out, the Aeavov here spoken of must 
be the residuum of the second mixture (i.e. the stuff out of which 
the bodies of the beasts had been made by the advanced souls), and 
not the residuum of the first mixture. ‘The bodies of men consist of 
the same materials as the bodies of beasts ; both alike are composed 
chiefly, if not solely, of the grosser elements ; and it was the second 
mixture, and not the first, that contained the grosser elements. 

At this point, the writer’s scheme does not work out quite 
satisfactorily. The wvevyara of beasts are made out of the érirayos 
of the second mixture, and the bodies of beasts out of the AetWavov of 
the second mixture ; the yvyxai of men are made out of the éxirayos 
of the first mixture, and symmetry would seem to require that the 
bodies of men should be made out of the Acipavoy of the first 
mixture. But the writer knew that the chief components of human 
bodies, as well as of the bodies of beasts, were earth and water ; he 
was therefore obliged to say that the bodies of men and beasts alike 
were made out of the Aeiavoy of the second mixture, and to leave 
the Acivavey of the first mixture unutilized. 

Kal AaBdv ebpoy adrd mavrehds Enpdv. evdey woAAG [Wheto Tod 
Sdovros] éxpyodpyy (eis) kardpigw Gari, ovrw (ds MSS.) (8€) thy ris 
Uys atoraciw veaporojcas (-roncaca. MSS.) [ | érhaca. We 
were told in § 23 that the portion of the Aeiavov which remained 
when the souls were finishing their work was already completely 
solidified, and was consequently not fit for making anything above — 
the grade of reptiles. If human bodies are to be made of it, it must 
first be restored to a liquid condition ; and this is what Hermes does 
by adding water to it. 

The words wAcfove rod Séovros imply that he did his work badly, 
and are inconsistent with xaAdv trfjpyé pov to épyov, Kal érepropyny 
Brérov. 

[ds ekAutov maytdmact Kat doGevés Kal dbvvatov 7d mhacodpevor eivar]. 
This must have been inserted by some one who misunderstood the 
writer’s reason for saying that Hermes added water to the mixture, 

































1 It is not till later (§ 31) that the souls become aware that they are sentenced — 
to incarnation, 








EXCERPT XXIII: 30-33 527 


The words imply that the addition of water caused the bodies made 
of the mixture to be feebler than they would otherwise have been ; 
but it follows from § 23 that this is a reversal of the author’s meaning. 
Water stands higher than earth in the scale of elements ; and an 
addition of water to the solidified mass is needed if human bodies 
are to be made from it, because human bodies, though imprisonment 
in them is a degradation to unembodied souls, stand higher in the 
scale of existence than the bodies of reptiles. 

[as ph mpds TE ouverdy elvar Ere kal Suvdpews 4 wemAnpwpevoy.| These 
words were probably added by another person in consequence of the 
same misunderstanding. 

kal Kaddv Safpxé ((wou 7d épyov)). Incarnation is a punishment ; 
but the human body is a well made thing (cf. Corp. V. 6-8 a), and 
Hermes had good reason to be proud of his workmanship. 

§ gt. [@adpaca ody), eariyaca is perhaps a corrupted doublet of 
éordyvacay. 

([§ 32. mpdcexe ... map’ époi]). This section is manifestly out of 
place. There is no reason why Isis should describe her report of 
the lamentations of the souls about to be embodied, in distinction 
from the rest of her discourse, as a kpury GOewpia ; nor is there any 
reason why she should interrupt her narrative at this particular point 
to tell her son whence she got her information. And supposing that 
she did so, she would have no occasion to mention Kamephis, seeing 
that in the preceding sections her sole informant is the god Hermes, 
who was an eyewitness and participant in the events narrated. 

The proper place for such a statement as this is at the deginning 
of a discourse of Isis to Horus; and I have accordingly transposed 
§ 32 to the beginning of the Excerpt. 

§ gg. at pev [yap] adrav adtd pdvov ddupovro kai éorévatoy, ((ai bé 
(kat dvre)réhaiov)), The clause beginning with ai pév must have 
been followed by a clause beginning with ai 6¢, in which it was said 
that others did something more than merely (aird pdvov) lament ; 
and the simile which follows (Svrep tpdrov t&v Onpiwv K.r.A.) shows 
that what these others did was to struggle against the compulsion to 
which they were subjected. It may therefore be conjectured that 
the author wrote af 8& Kal dvrerd\aov, and that the meaningless 
words ai 5% zaAadv (al. af 8 whéov), which occur at the end of the 
section, are a misplaced corruption of that phrase. 

8vmep tpdrov Tar [yeyorérwv] Onpiav ra édevOép(v)a B¢[u]Aors movnpay 
[pedjoe] (or SovAwv movnpiv pedéracs?) ris ourqPous [kai ins] 


528 STOBAEI HERMETICA 



































droomdpeva epypias (emxerpel) paxeoOar [kal oracrdhew] [Kai odx dpovoeiy} 
mpds Tods KpaTyoavtas adtav [Kal otactdLew]. The souls are compared | 
to wild beasts (e. g. lions, or possibly elephants,) entrapped and vainly 
struggling against their captors. As to rav Onpiwv ra édevbépra, cf. Arist, 
Hist. an. 1. t, 488 b 16: 7a 88 (rdv Lowy éoriv) evdepia at dvdpeta Kat 
ciyev, ofov Méwv. The word yeyovérwy may have been added by 
some one who was thinking of the making of beasts in §§ 18-23. 
oracle and odx Suovoety are feeble alternatives for pdxer Pau. 

[aAAa Kal, edv TUxn Teptyerdpeva, Oavdty mapadidwct (Tapaddcoucr 
MSS.) rods (rots MSS.) adrots émPddAovras]. This is an inappropriate 
amplification of the simile. Lions sometimes kill their assailants ; 
but the souls cannot have killed or tried to kill God’s agents 
(presumably gods of the same type as Hermes) by whom they were 
being imprisoned in bodies. 

erpilov Sixny domiSuv, [In Od. 24. Il. 5, 7, 9 Tptgew is used of the 
suitors’ souls conducted by Hermes to the abode of the dead. The 
passage was so often quoted that this seems the natural word for the 
impotent cry (‘vox exigua’) of a soul under compulsion, and not 
inconceivably the expansion of the previous simile may imitate 
Homer too. ‘Like asps’ is a local touch. It is true that rpidew 
means primarily the shrill noise of a bat or mouse or locust, and that 
ovpitew is the xripiov dvopa for a snake’s hiss. But there seems no 
reason why, by the Hermetist’s time, rpifew should not have had the 
same extension of meaning as séridere. In Ar. H. A., 5356, where 
uddos is distinguished from dur, tpryyds and ovprypds are both used 
to describe the inarticulate yodo of fish. ] 

§ 34. Todhdkis dvw te Kal xérw [[rods'] [otovs (ds MSS.) eruxey 
zxouga] peraddpouga ((rods)) dpOarpods. The distressed soul, still 
situated in the atmosphere, directs its eyes alternately upward to 
heaven, from which it is henceforward to be separated by a greater 
distance, and downward to earth, to which it is to be banished. 

For [ofous éruyev exovea], cf. xeipas [olas 81 Gedv cixos zyew] in 
§ (52)) as emended. Unembodied souls have no bodily eyes ; and 
some one (probably not the author) thought it worth while to remind 
the reader of that fact. 

((weprdapaa te [8pOadpot OeGv] dotpa, Kal [LJ] Alou Kal cedjyns 
((@s)) dxoniacrov)). In the MSS., these words are separated from 
Otpavé by the intervening mention of aifzjp, dijp, and mvetpa. But 
the stars, sun, and moon are inhabitants of heaven, and ought to be 
spoken of in connexion with it. 





EXCERPT XXIII: 34,35 529 


The writer of the Kore Kosmu regards the stars as gods, and 
therefore would hardly call them ‘eyes of gods’, though a person 
who was not thinking of them as gods might very well describe them 
by that phrase. 

aidiip te Kal dip, kal Tod povdpxou [Be0d] [xeipés Te kat] Lepov Tredpa, 
iL ]] 74 tis fperépas Fapxis' odvtpopa. aidyp re xat dnp means the 
atmosphere. Cf. [ajp te at aifjp] in § ((11)); and see note on 
aidépos in § 17. 

The tepdv rvetpa of God is also the atmosphere, regarded as God's 
life-breath ; cf. rvedpa dro rot i&iov AaBuy in § 14. The soul, after 
appealing to heaven and its inhabitants, goes on to appeal to the 
atmosphere. The addition of xeijpes may have been suggested by 
iepdv Spi [veto kat] xpapa roto... Wvxorotods Te ravras pov Tas 
xeipas in § 17; but the mention of God’s hands is irrelevant in 
§ 34- 

The phrase ri ris jperépas ‘dpyis' ovvrpopa refers to aidyp, dip: 
and zvetpa, from which it has been separated in the MSS. by the 
interposition of the misplaced words wepiopari} . . . dxomiacrov. The 
souls have hitherto dwelt in the atmosphere ; the components of the 
atmosphere are therefore called by the soul which speaks ‘the sharers 
of our home’. dpxis, which may have come from dpxi) yevérews 
above, has been substituted by error for some other substantive, 
possibly dices. 

Frdgov of8’ Sr’ dad [[peyddwv te Kal Aapmpay)] [kai] tod tepod 
meptxvparos kat (rémov) mAyotou (wAouclou MSS.) (rod) wéhou (as 90 
iepov wepfyvpa means the atmosphere. If the souls lived in the 
atmosphere, they lived not /” the sphere of heaven, but near it; 
the meaningless +Aovefov must therefore be altered into wAqciov. 
Cf. § 3, where I have corrected roveiay into waparAyoiav. 

[emi] tis paxaplas [ped Oedv] wodtrelas (ékmecoioat).« The paxapia 
woXure(a of which the souls are to be deprived is the life they have 
been living in the atmosphere. For wodirefa in this sense, cf. 
mokreveros in Exc, XXIV. 18 and Exc. XXVI. 19. The words 
pera Gey, which would imply that they have hitherto dwelt in heaven, 
may have been added by the same person who inserted otpavoit 
in § 16. 

§ 35. [[ri tats Buerqvats . . . ToUTaw agtov ;]| The question ‘ What 
have we done to deserve these punishments?’ ought to stand at the 
end of the speaker’s description of the punishments, and not in the 
middle of it ; I have therefore transposed these words to the begin- 

3806-8 Mm 


































530 STOBAEI HERMETICA 


ning of § 37. But it is possible that § 37 originally followed 
immediately on § 35 éuZ., and that all that intervenes (ofa ris 
Serdaias . .. KapSias dyxos) has been added by a later hand. 

ofa (S0aP){ | mpdgoper, tva 7G [SSapet cat} raxd Siartite odpor 
mopilopey Ta émrfSera, Embodied souls are troubled by the 
necessity of providing for the needs of the body, and are forced 
by this necessity to do things unworthy of them. Cf. Corp. VI, 
6 fin. 

SSapet implies the same notion which was expressed by the inter. 
polated words ds éxhvuroy . . . 73 whacodpevov elvat in § 30. 

§ 36. (ol) dOadpot [ | xwpyroucr édtyor (ddiyor MSS.), kat [{ ]] rg ey 
rotors Tots KUKAots Syp@ (tay év todrois bypdv Kat Kdkhow MSS.) 
((mavred&s pixpdv)) Téy Eautav mpdyovoy odpavov pacar otevdtopey det, 
The souls have hitherto seen with ‘the eyes of the mind’; they will 
henceforth have to see with bodily eyes instead, and this passage 
describes the disadvantages of the latter kind of vision. The 
bodily eyes ‘have little room to take things in’ (xwpjcovcw 
édlyov); that is, the images of things must be reduced to small 
compass if they are to enter the eyes; (this seems to be the 
writer’s way of accounting for the fact that the apparent size of 
objects is diminished by distance ;) and consequently, heaven, 
as seen by bodily eyes, will look ‘very small’. Moreover, the eyes, 
being composed of watery matter, are ill suited for seeing the fiery 
sphere of heaven, [See Addenda in vol. iv.] 

kat (Bdérovtes 8°) oF Bepoper ((dvrixpus))* [evO(ev) ‘Oppeds x.7..] 
Odors yap KarexpiOn Hpiv (oxdros) (OArat ydp KxarexpiOypey MSS.), 
The author probably wrote something to this effect, though his words 
cannot be restored with certainty. ‘ We shall not see clearly ; for 
one cannot see unless there is light, and there will be little light in 
the place to which we are to be banished.’ Light is at its maximum 
in heaven, and diminishes as one descends; so that, as compared 
with the home of the souls év perapotw, the surface of the earth, on 
which they are henceforth to dwell, is a region of darkness. 

The quotation from Orpheus must have been appended by a 
reader. It appears to mean ‘we see, not with our eyes, but with the 
light or fire contained in the eyes’. 

ray ovyyevav guclo}évrev év dépt tvevpdrwv dxotougat (dkoioat 
MSS.) tAnpdvas oicopey Stt ph oupmvdopey atrois. Next to seeing 
comes hearing. But the speaker deals with the sense of sight — 
in one way, and with that of hearing in another, We have been 





EXCERPT XXIII: 36-38 531 


told that the souls will see less fully and clearly than they did 
before ; but we are here told, not that they will hear less clearly, but 
that something which they will hear will cause them sorrow. 

7a mvevpara here means the winds. Souls and winds are ‘ akin’, be- 
cause both alike are made of the gaseous materials of which the 
atmosphere consists ; and the sound of the wind will remind them of 
their home in the atmosphere, where they were companions of the 
winds. 

otkos (yap) jpas dvtt 00 petapoiou Kécpou todrou 6 Bpaxds mepipdver 
xapdias dyKos. xdcpos is here used in the sense of ‘a region of the 
universe ’, as in §§ 14 and 17. 

Chrysippus and most of the Stoics said that the soul permeates the 
whole body, but that the iyepovexdv of the soul resides in the heart. 
(See Arnim Svo. vet. fr. vol. ii. §§ 879-911.) The writer of the Kore 
Kosmu says that the embodied soul is confined to the heart ; but the 
soul of which he is speaking corresponds to the jyeyovxdy of the 
Stoics rather than to the wvyy which, according to them, extends 
throughout the body. 

§ 37. ((Bidragov piv twas Spous (rhs KoAdoews) )) ((ei (del MSS.) 88 
(dperdbetos 4 katadixy ?), émdyoas (drohdcas MSS.) fpas dg’ otwy (dy 
MSS.) eis ofa xaréBypev dwédve tod (dwodet 7d MSS.) dutetoBat.)) 
These petitions are wrongly placed in the MSS.: they ought to stand 
at the end of the speech. ‘The spokesman of the souls prays for two 
distinct alleviations of their punishment, viz. (1) that limits may be 
set to the duration of their life in the body, and (2) that during their 
residence on earth they may be spared the sorrow of remembering 
their happier home above. We are told that both these requests 
were granted (éréruxov x.7.A., § 38 éxi?.). The first of them, however, 
is not granted unconditionally ; God's answer to it is given in § 39, 
where he promises release from the body as a reward for good con- 
duct, but at the same time announces that souls which do amiss in 
their human life on earth will incur the still severer punishment of 
reincarnation in the bodies of beasts. God’s answer to the second 
request,—the petition for dethe,—is given in § 41 (ruphwOyjcerar F 
tuav 4 ppdvnsis «.7.A.). 

§ 38. [Adyor tod Geod.] If Adyou is the right reading, the plural 
word must refer to §§ 38-39 and §§ 40-41, regarded as two different 
speeches of God. But it is possible that the man who inserted this 
superscription wrote \dyos. 

God’s speech, as given in the MSS., is incoherent; and in order 

Mm2 









432 STOBAE! HERMETICA 


to make sense, it is necessary to assume that four distinct pieces of 
it have been shifted. 

Boot thy dyhparéy pou oxnmrovxiav bepamedere. This does not 
mean that there are some souls that refuse submission to God’s rule; _ 
even those who resisted at first have now submitted, and the speech 
is addressed to all of them together. Cf. @eoi, doo ris Kopupaias 
. . « Giiwews Teredyare, in § ((50)) 

1& (mdyatov) 708 obpavod gxetre (oixyoere MSS.) xwpia. In this. 
phrase, and in the words rov tavrov ‘otpavdv' domdcecGe and 
Fobpavdv’ pty obkért oixyjoere in § 39, the text has been altered by 
some one who assumed that the souls dwelt in heaven before their 
incarnation. In each of these three places, some term denoting the 
atmosphere is needed. 

((omdéyxvors Katadikacbeisat)) Oyyrois, kal adtat (rv tovrous) 
mpoopepotpala|pévov X@pov [[ ]] evotxqoere. The souls are sentenced — 
to imprisonment in organs of the body (cf. xapdtas dykos in § 36 fin.), 
and must therefore reside in the place assigned to carnal bodies, 
i.e. on earth. 

For the dative with xaraSixacOeioa, cf. xaradixocbjvat davdrw in 
Diod. 13. ror. As there is good authority for the verb potpdw, 
and none for powpdfw, it is to be presumed that the author wrote 
a poo }LeL0Lpa,pevor. 

§ 39. (els) tda 8° ahoya pera(Bacar, xapal) mavdpevar (peta 
mravdpevar MSS.) (7d) doumdy Brarehécere. The compound pera- 
rhavacGa. does not occur elsewhere; and some such change 
as I have proposed is needed to make the clause intelligible. 

As the bodies of beasts are (according to the writer of this 
document) animated by zvedyara, and not by Wuxai, it may perhaps 
be inferred that the degraded souls which incur this punishment 
will be transformed into mere zvevpara. 

§ 40. tévas abtais Fexapioaro mvedpara'. If mvevpara is sound, 
the meaning must be that God wrapped or clothed the naked 
souls in rvevpara (cf. Corp. X. 13 and 16), as a preparation for their 
incarnation in gross bodies. This would imply that a man consists 
of capa, wveSua, and yvxq, whereas a beast consists of cpa and 
avedya alone. But as there is no mention of human zvevpara else 
where in the Kore Kosmu, it seems more likely that rvejpara is a 
misreading for cdpata or wAdcpara. 

§ 41, (. . . dpx)h tolvuv [Stadopa] [ris] wadtyyeveias Spiv cota 
4h 1Oy copdror [ds Edyv] S.adg(O)opd, [edepyeota 82] kal (ris) mpdadey 





EXCERPT XXIII: 39-41 533 


edSatporials dvavéwois) % Sidduors, The destruction of the body 
will result in the ‘rebirth’ of the soul; that is, the soul, when 
released from the body by death, will return to its home above, 
and will there begin a new and happier life. This promise must be 
understood to be conditional on the good conduct of the souls 
during their life on earth ; it does not hold good in the case of those 
who do ill, and thereby incur the penalty of reincarnation in the 
bodies of beasts (§ 39 /#7.). 

[Scadopd] is a misplaced doublet of Sdiap(A)opd 5 and [etepyerta 82] 
has come from evepyeciay in the following sentence. 

Tudhwbjcerar 8° Spdv 4 ppdvyors, [dv te dvdgtov épod BdEqTe 
mpdocew,] Gore . . . Thy pev xddacw os elepyeotay ‘ Srropevewv' 
(srrovoeiv ?), Thy Be eis Ta Bedtiova petaBoddp (as) dryplav [re] kat UBpu. 
This, like the preceding sentence, applies to those souls only who 
shall live good lives on earth ; for it is in the case of such souls 
alone that death is ‘a change for the better’. The words édy TH 
avdgiov ¢uot dééyre apdéooew must therefore be struck out. dvagiov 
guod is a strange phrase ; perhaps it is a misreading for something 
like dvdgiov ris yevérews indy, ‘unworthy of your origin’ (cf. ris 
éavrav yevéoews d£iov in § 40). 

Death is, for good men, a change for the better ; but men will be 
deluded into thinking that it is an evil for all alike, and will do all 
they can to postpone it. All men fear death,—except the few who 
have learnt that for them it is the entrance into a new and happier 
life ; and even these few must have shared the delusion of the rest 
before they were enlightened. 

ai Sixatdrepar 8 Spay Kat thy eis 7d ‘Oeiov! petaPoddy exdexdpevar 
G..). Hels 7d Octov peraBody} would mean the transformation of 
‘souls’ into gods, or in other words, admission to heaven. In § 17, 
speaking to the souls before their fall, God set before them the 
prospect of admission to heaven as the ultimate reward for obedience ; 
but as nothing appears to have been hitherto said about it in God's 
speech to them a/ver their fall (§§ 38-41), there is probably some 
error in the text, Perhaps 76 Oeiov has been substituted for 7 
Barwv. But ri eis 7d (BéATiov ?) peraBodrrjy would hardly have 
been written by the author so soon after tiv 8% eis 1d Bedriova 
peraBodjv in the preceding sentence ; it may therefore be suspected 
that cat riv . . . éxdexduevat is a later addition. In any case, the 
men spoken of in these words are the few who have attained to 
gnosis, and are no longer subject to the general delusion about death, 





: 
| 
. 


534 STOBAEI HERMETICA 


What was said about these ‘ more righteous souls’, we do not know, 
as the rest of the sentence is lost. 

§ 42. [ets pév dvOpdmous, Bactheis Sikaor . . . Tod tv evidpav 
yévous.] The meaning of this section appears to be as follows: 
‘The noblest of the souls, when they are incarnated in human bodies, — 
become righteous kings &c.; when in bird-bodies, eagles ; when 
in quadruped bodies, lions; when in reptile bodies, dragons; and 
when in fish-bodies, dolphins.” But this is inconsistent with § 39 
jin. (where it is implied that vicious souls alone will be incarnated 
in the bodies of beasts), and cannot have been written by the 
same person. 

The quaint statements about eagles, lions, dragons, and dolphins, — 
by which the writer of the passage seeks to prove that these animals 
are the noblest of their respective orders, are of the same character 
as many that are to be found in the medieval ‘ Bestiaries’, the 
contents of which are derived chiefly from the so-called Physiologus! 
ascribed to Epiphanius (A.D. 367-403). The verbs in these state- 
ments ought to be in the present tense, but have been altered into 
the future by some one who was trying to make the passage agree 
with the context, when it had been inserted in the Kore Kosmu. 

0882 [wAyolov toUTwy] Ldov érepov daevéorepdy 7 abtdv (adtod MSS.) 
GBixeiv “ddbeOhoerac’. The writer of these words seems to have 
been unaware that eagles are birds of prey. ddethjoerar and pere- 
Nedoreras are probably two different attempts to fill the gap left by the 
loss of some such verb as édéevrat. 

[kat gUcews eruxev Gxowmryrou tpdme tuwt.] If these words are 
retained, oire kousSvrae is mere iteration. 

odre yap Kdpvouow (képvwo MSS.) oltre xomavrar, Cf. Aelian 
De animalibus 5. 39: déyen Anpoxpitos tov Coov povov tov éovra 
exmerrapevors rixrerOar trois dpOalpois. . . . eptdagav b& adAXou kal 
kabedduv Ore Kuve Thy obpdy, evdexvdpevos ds Td elxds Gre py wavTy 
drpepel, pnt piv Kukhwodpevos abrdv cal mepieAGiv 6 trvos KaGeirer, 












a , a 
Somep obv kal trav Cywv ta Aowrd. Towwdrov tT. puddgavras Alyvrrious 
és 
imtp abrod xourdlew daci, A€yovras Ste xpelrrwv tmvov A€wv éoriv, 
dyputvav dei. tatty Tor Kal Hip dzoxpivew airoy abrovs mémvo pat” 


1 Christ, Gesch. der griech. Litt, p. gtt, says that the Piysiologus is a Christian 
revision of a book which ‘ originated in Alexandria in the circle of the Hellenistic 
Jews, in the first half of the second century A, D.’, and was ‘a product of Egyptian 
and Hebrew beast-symbolism’. That book may have been known to the writer of 
Exc. XXIV. 42. The Physiologus has many points of resemblance with Aelian’s 
book on animals. 





EXCERPT XXIII: 42, 43-48 535 


Kal ydp ToL Kat Tov Hor, Oedv dvra puiowovwrarov, Kara 7d 7) dvw THs YAS 
Spiicba 7 riv «dro mopelav iévat, pi) hovxdfovra. See also Cramer 
Anecdot. Oxon. Il. 235, 32+ 

(6 Spdkwr) tv ob exer (odx @§er MSS.). Cf. Plin. Wat. hist. 29.67: 
‘draco non habet venena.’ 

vedter (édoet M~S.) 82 al ynpdoav. Ie. it casts off its old skin. 
This might be said of snakes in general. Cf. Aristot. Hist. an. 8.17, 
600 b 15: Trav St PwrovvTwv enor 7d Kadodpevoy yipas éxdivovow éore 
8% roto 7) foxarov Sépya. .. . exdvver 6& 7 yhpas Sowv (se. podtdwrdv) 
7) Séppa padaxdy .. ., Kal padiorra mdvrov ot Opes. 

rods per Eumvous StaxopiLovew (rd pév Enmvoa Siaxoprodcw MSS.) els 
yiv. The story of Arion was the best known instance. 

pocuita & Qeds <imiv ddparos (&pOaptos MSS.) [vods] ylyverat. 
&pOapros vots cannot be right. Neither God nor vots can at any 
time be other than é&pGapros ; and if God is vots, he must have been 
yots during his speech as well as before and after it. If we read 
ddparos, the meaning is that God, when he addressed the souls, 
assumed a form visible to them, and put off that visible form when 
his speech was ended. 

God ‘became invisible’ to the souls at the time when they were 
embodied ; possibly this is meant to imply that for embodied souls 
(i. e. for men living on earth) God is always invisible. 

(§$ 43-48. tovrwy obras yevonévav ... %5n 73 dpyavor éxwetro], It 
is impossible to reconcile this passage with what has preceded. We 
have been told that God condemned the souls to incarnation as a 
punishment for their presumption. The condition to which the 
souls were about to be reduced by the infliction of this punishment 
(i.e. by the making of men) has been described as intensely miserable 
(§§ 31-37); and the misery which their incarnation involves is but 
slightly alleviated by God’s subsequent announcements (§§ 38-41): 
But in §§ 43-48, the making of men is differently conceived. In 
this passage, there is no suggestion that incarnation is a punishment. 
We are here told that Hermes made men ; that, if his first design 
had been carried out without alteration, the men he made would 
have been free from trouble and sorrow ; and that a device by which 
they were subjected to trouble and sorrow was added by an after- 
thought. It is evident then that §§ 43-48 cannot have been written 
by the author of the preceding, narrative ; this passage must have 
been extracted from some other document, and inserted in the Kore 
Kosmu by a transcriber. 


536 STOBAEI HERMETICA 


ioxupdtardév te Grd yas dvictarar mveipa (b dvopa Mapos?). The 
word zvetpa is here employed as equivalent to 8a/pewr or Sapdviov, — 
a use which seems to indicate Jewish influence. 

In the MSS., the name of this ‘spirit’ is not given until § 48 crit, 
where he is incidentally spoken of as Momus (Moov rotra A€éyovros), 
But the writer must surely have named him Momus when he first 
mentioned him. 

In Greek literature, Mopos is a personification of fault-finding, 
To popacba.' Pl. Rep. 6. 487A: 008 dv 6 Mopos 16 ye tovodrov 
péepouro, Lucian Hist. 33: 6 obdels av, ddA’ ovd 6 MGpos, popepoacbar 
Svvarro. Id. Dial. deor, 20, 2 (Aphrodite /og.): «i xai tov Mépov 
abrov emorioeas Hiv dixacrnv, Gappotou Badiodpor mpos thy érideéur 
ti yap dy Kat popyoard pov; Id. Zcaromen. 31: womep 6 MGpos ra 
ixd rOv GdAwv yryvopeva cvxopar7d. In two of Lucian’s dialogues, 
Deorum concilium and Zeus tragoedus, Momus takes part as fault- 
finder in debates of the gods. But a closer parallel to the part 
assigned to Momus in Kove Kosmu 43-48 is to be found in a tale 
reported by Lucian Hermotimus 20: 6 yotv Moos axyxoas, oipat, drwa 
jridcaro tot “Hdaicrov ... dyoi yap 6 pibos éploo. “APnvav xai 
Tlocedéva cat “Adaorov edrexvias répi, Kat Tov pev Tocedd raidpoy 
dvarddoat, THY “AOnvav 8& oixiay érwonoa 6 “Adacros 8¢ avOpurov 
dpa cuwvectycato. Kat érelrep eri rov MGpov Feov, dvrep Sixacriv 
apoeihovro,” ... Tov pev GAAwy atwa yYrucaro Tepirrov av ely Ayer,’ ert 
rod dvOpdrou 8& rodro guéuaro Kal tov dpyiréxrova enérAnée tov 
“Hdarov, Sidte py kai Gupidas eroinrey attd Kara To oTépvov, as 
évarreracbeurav yropipa ylyver Oat dracw & Bovrerar kai émvoet, Kal ef 
Wetderat  dAnGever. Lucian’s evidence shows then that there was 
current in the second century A.D. a tale according to which Momus 
found fault with a god engaged in making men, and pointed out to 
him how he might have done his work better. This tale was put 
into verse by Babrius,‘ Fzé/e 59 (Rutherford), who differs from 


1 ‘The name occurs in Hesiod Yheog, 214: Gevrepov ab M@por rai ‘Otto 
ddywderoay (sc. NVE évexev). It is on the authority of this Hesiodic verse that 
Momus is called ‘ son of Nvgé’ in Lucian Deor. conc. 14. 

2 Lucian was doubtless thinking of this story when he wrote Dial. deor, 20. 2, 
quoted above. 

3 What fault Momus found in the construction of the bull, we are told by Lucian 
in two other passages, which evidently refer to the same tale. Vigrinus 32: Tob 
Mapov rov Ad-yov pupnodpevos* ds yap éxelvos éuéupero Tod Tavpou Tov Snuwovpyov — 
Gedy (i.e. Poseidon) ob mpo@évta tav bpOadpav Ta Képara, obrw 5) K.7.A. Vera 
hist. 2. 3: of 5& Tatpor obror Ta Képara od ent THs KEpadts elyov, GAA’ ind ois 
épOadpois, amep 6 Mpos jéiov. 

* According to Rutherford, Babrius wrote in the reign of Alexander Severus, 
A.D, 222-235 (i.e. later than Lucian, who lived ¢ A.D. 120-180), Both Lucian 








EXCERPT XXIII: 43, 44 537 


Lucian only in substituting Zeus for Hephaistos as the god by whom 
man was made. The story may very well have been known to the 
writer of Zxc. XXIII. 43-48, and may have suggested to him his 
use of the name Momus. But his Momus manifests a malignant 
desire to thwart and harm mankind, which is not in accordance with 
the character of Momus as represented in the tale of which Lucian 
speaks, nor, as far as I know, with anything that is said about him 
elsewhere in Greek literature; and in this respect, the writer may 
perhaps have been influenced by the Jewish conception of Satan, 6 
Sut Boros, who, as a ‘ fault-finder’, had something in common with the 
Momus of the Greeks. 

§ 43. dxarddnmrov per meproxy) (meptoxijis FP") odparos. He was of 
enormous size. Cf. Corp, I. 1, where Poimandres is described as 
imeppeyeOns pérpw drepiopiory. ‘ 

7d cpa [[yev]] kard (xat MSS.) térov dvSpds mepixeipevoy, Kat Kahov 
((pev)) Kat cepvompemes dv, SmepBody 82 dyproy Kal wAfjpes péBov. To 
capa, following close on repioxi THpeTos, is awkward. Possibly 
7) copa Kata Tirov avbpds meptetyevov MAY have been added by a 
later hand. 

The words dypiov Kai whijpes PsBov would not be applicable to 
Momus as conceived by Lucian. 

mapautixa Tas puxas elorodcas eis TA mrdopata Sewpacay (ewpirat 
ay MSS.). This is the only mention of previously unembodied souls 
in §§ 43-48. Perhaps this phrase may have been added when the 
passage was inserted in the Kore Kosmu. 

§ 44. & ‘Eppa, todpnpdv Epyov movjoat tov dvOpwrov . . .. ToiTov 
duéptpvor Karahetpat Kéxpixas, & yevecroupyé...; In §§ 26 and 30, 
we were told that Hermes, acting under God’s orders, made the 
bodies in which the souls were to be incarnated, and that God 
inspected and approved the bodies which Hermes made. But in 
§§ 43-48, Hermes makes men on his own initiative; there is no 
suggestion that God either told him to do so, or approved of his 
work when it was done; and it is implied that he made a mistake 
when he began, but saw and corrected his mistake when it was 
pointed out to him. 


and Babrius say that Athena made a ‘house’ (oixia); and according to Babrius, 
Momus found fault with her for not having put the house on wheels, so that its 
owner might take it about with him when he travelled (a notion which may have 
been suggested by what Herodotus says about the Scythians). But why a house? 
Houses are made by men, and not by gods; and the story would have gone better 
if it had been said that Athena, like her two competitors, made some kind of 
animal, 


538 STOBAEI HERMETICA 


Both Momus in his advice, and Hermes in his acceptance of it, 
manifest that disposition towards mankind which some Greeks 
ascribed to the gods under the name of ¢6dvos. (Herodotus 3. 4o: 
70 Ociov eriorapevy ds ~grt pOovepov.) The gods, it was thought, 
took care that men should not be powerful or prosperous beyond 
certain fixed limits. 

Rixvov (Atxver MSS.) (yedoe, kai (tpupcpiv?)) dopyoet. As 
four of the five senses are spoken of, there can be little doubt that 
the fifth also, viz. yetous, was mentioned. 

§ 45. ((etra [od kat pexpts odpavod meplepyov émhtoOijcovrat (SmAt- 
objcerat MSS.) réhpay obrot 5] odx [dpepipvous] [exrevodow] éx[e]: [kal] 
7 oTorxeia [rds puxds adrav])) ((roAwnpds exrevodior (éxreivoucr MSS.) 
xetpas;)) The words efra . . . crovyeta are out of place in § 46; a 
general statement such as this ought to precede, and not to follow, the 
particular instances of audacious action which are given in § 45. 
But if we place the words here, xai péxpis otpavot must be rejected, 
because it unduly anticipates ra [péxpis] dvw Sudgover below. Meddling 
with heaven is the climax of men’s audacity, and ought not to be 
mentioned until their dealings with things on earth (fias, \(Owv 
goes, &c.) have been disposed of. 

As to replepyoy SrdcOjoovrat rodpav, cf. repiepyov darAiLovro 
roApav in § 24. The author of §§ 43-48 was probably not the same 
person as the author of the narrative to which § 24 belongs; and 
it is unlikely that two men would independently hit on this same 
form of words. It therefore seems probable that of kal péxpis . . . 
ToApav o8ro. was added in § 45 after §§ 43-48 had been inserted 
in the Kore Kosmu, and that the interpolator borrowed the phrase 
meplepyov érdcOyoovrat toApay from § 24. 

The sentence which began with ov éwi 74 orovxeia probably ended 
with roApypas éxrevotor xeipas (misplaced in the MSS.), whence 
[éxrevotox] by duplication. But if so, rdApav is too closely followed 
by rodpnpds; and this is an additional reason for bracketing o@ 
+. TOApaY otro. 

{auepiuvovs] has come from dyépyuvov xaradeivar in § 44, or from 
dpepinvy Biw in § 46. 

pilas gutdv dvackdipouow avOpwrot, Kat [mowdrynta(s) egerdcouer 
XvAGv,] Aidwv ices emcxomjcousr. This refers to the use of 
plants and precious stones for medicinal or magical purposes. From 
the writer’s point of view, certain kinds of magic might be hardly 
distinguishable from medicine, ; 








EXCERPT XXIII: 43 539 


The words rowrynras éferdcove. xvddv, which describe what 
men do with the roots when they have dug them up, destroy the 
symmetry of the sentence, and must have been added by a 
Jater hand. , 

Sid. pécou (pécov F) dvareplvjodor tov Lgwv Ta dhoya, ob pévov (Be 
rata), GAAd kat gavrods. Dissection of the dead bodies of men 
as well as beasts was much practised in the medical schools of 
Alexandria under the Ptolemies ;1 and dissection of dead animals 
at least must have been in general use among physicians under the 
Roman empire also.? But as there is here no mention of dead 
bodies, the writer was probably thinking rather of vivisection. 
favrovs means ‘fellow-men’* Vivisection of human beings is 
spoken of by Celsus,‘ Provem. p. 4 (Daremberg) : * (Ii qui rationalem 
medicinam profitentur,) cum in interioribus partibus et dolores et 
morborum varia genera nascantur, neminem putant his adhibere 
posse remedia, qui ipsas ignoret. Ergo necessarium esse incidere 
corpora mortuorum, eorumque viscera atque intestina scrutari : 
longeque optime fecisse Herophilum et Erasistratum, qui nocentes 
homines, a regibus ex carcere acceptos, vivos inciderint, considera- 
rintque, etiamnum spiritu remanente, ea quae natura ante clausisset. 
. . » Neque esse crudele, sicut plerique proponunt, hominum 
nocentium, et horum quoque paucorum, suppliciis remedia populis 
innocentibus saeculorum omnium quaerii—Contra ii qui se ép- 
reipixovs ... nominant . . . crudele (dicunt) vivorum hominum alvum 
atque praecordia incidi, .. . cum praesertim ex his, quae tanta violentia 
quaerantur, alia non possint omnino cognosci, alia possint etiam sine 
scelere. . . .ne mortuorum quidem ldcerationem necessariam esse, 
quae, etsi non crudelis, tamen foeda sit’ Celsus (2. p. 12) gives his 
own opinion thus: ‘Incidere autem vivorum corpora et crudele et 
supervacuum est: mortuorum, discentibus necessarium.’ Tertullian 


1 See Puschmann, Hist. of medical education, Eng. tr. 1891, pp. 70-78, on the 
anatomical investigations of Herophilus and Erasistratus (third century B. Ci). 

2 Greenhill (Smith, Dict, Biog. s.v. Galenus) says that he is not aware of any 
ane in Galen’s writings in which it is distinctly stated that he dissected human 

dies ; while ‘the numerons passages in which he recommends the dissection of 
apes, bears, goats. and other animals would seem indirectly to prove that human 
bodies were’ (sc. in Galen’s time, second century A.D.) ‘seldom or never used for 
that purpose. In one passage however (De compos. medicam, sec, Gen, 3. 2, Kithn 
vol. viii, p. 604) he mentions, as something extraordinary. that those physicians 
who attended the emperor M. Aurelius in his wars against the Germans had an 
opportunity of dissecting the bodies of the barbarians.’ 

3 Possibly ddAfAous after diaropOuetouew below may be a misplaced alternative 
for this éavrous, 

* Celsus wrote in or about the time of Tiberius. 


54° STOBAEI HERMETICA 


De an, 10; ‘Herophilus ille medicus aut lanius, qui sexcentos 
exsecuit ut naturam scrutaretur.’ f 
mas (ds MSS.) (. .-) eyévovto eerdbew Oédovres, (Kai tis erborépw. 
Tav [tepdv dSdrwv] (capkav?) ducts dmdpxe.)) It could not be said 
that the dissector is trying to find out ‘how men or animals came 
into: being’. Something must have been lost before éyévorro, 
What the author probably meant might be expressed by writing was 
(uilvxor) éyévovto, ‘how they have come to be alive’. The dissector 
is searching for the hidden cause or source of life. 
_ The question ris évdorépw trav tepdv ddtvrav dios brdpxet, ‘what 
thing exists further in than the holy sanctuaries’, is meaningless, 
If é&dov were substituted for évdorépw, it might be possible to under- 
stand these words as referring to the impious curiosity of men who 
force their way into holy places in order to find out what is concealed 
in them. (The intrusion of Pompeius into the Holy of Hollies at 
Jerusalem might serve as an instance.) But such conduct as that 
could not have anything to do with ‘sailing across the sea’, with 
which this-question is connected in the MSS. A satisfactory sense 
may be got by placing xal ris . . . irdpyer after eerdfew Oedovres, and 
assuming that some such word as capxav has been lost, and that 
a transcriber inserted iepdv dévrwv to fill the gap. The investigator 
cuts through the flesh of the body, in the hope of finding ‘ further 
in’ some ¢vors (thing) which will account for the phenomena of life. 
ras adropuets Das téuvovres [ | |[ ]] StamopOped(c}ouor[y aGddrAous] - 
(Oddaccav) ext Lytnow (tay mépav)). They will cut down the woods 
which grow in their own country (adrodveis), in order to build ships in 
which they may sail across the sea and find out what lies beyond it, 
For SseropOpetcover Gddacoav, ‘they will ferry (themselves) across 
the sea’, cf. Ps.-Pl. Axiochus 371 C: ods (Sc. roTapovs) xpi) ropOpetcay- 
ras dxOjvar éri Mivw. The mention of cutting down trees in this 
connexion may have been suggested by Eurip. Aéed. init.: i dpeX 
"Apyods pip SiarrdoGar oxddos |... yd ev vdravor TyAtou receiv wore | 
rynbeioa revxy. For the tone in which navigation is here spoken of, 
compare Hor. Od. 1. 3. 21 ff.: ‘ Nequicquam deus abscidit | prudens 
Oceano dissociabili | terras, si tamen impiae | non tangenda rates 
transiliunt vada. | Audax omnia perpeti | gens humana ruit per 
vetitum nefas. |... Nil mortalibus ardui est: | caelum ipsum petimus — 
stultitia,’ 
((éptccovtes pérodda thy éoxdtyy Tay broyelwy épeuvigoucr viKTa,— 
(GAAG kal ToUTwr Thy €oxdryy TG Oédew epeuvyover vdxra MSS.).)) In 











EXCERPT XXIII: 46 541 


the traditional text, the unintelligible words @\Aa. . . v’kra occur 
after ro dvw Sudfovork.r.A. Butit is clear that in the phrase which ends 
with épevrjoover vixra the writer must have given an instance of 
men’s audacity comparable to navigation (SaropOpevrover Oddaccar), 
and that r& dyw Susgovor (which corresponds to Horace’s cae/um 
ipsum petimus) must have been the climax with which the series 
concluded. Now it is beneath the surface of the earth that ‘the 
uttermost darkness’ is to be found; and searching for what is 
hidden under the earth may very well be put on a par with searching 
for what lies beyond the sea. I therefore conjecture that these 
words referred to mining ;' and I have accordingly altered dda into 
(éptccovres pérjadAa, and inserted rév ivoyelwy, out of which the 
meaningless 7 @é\ew may possibly have arisen by corruption. 

maparypicat Bouopevor tis odpavod (ody MSS.) xaddornxe kivyots. 
ov is a corruption of the compendium oivod. Men cannot actually 
climb up to heaven; but they can and do violate the sanctity of 
heaven, by investigating the movements of the heavenly bodies. 

[Aetrer yap ob8ev ere why yas rémos éoxatos.| This is probably 
a note appended to ryv éoxdryy (ray broyelwv) epevvyprover viKras 

§ 46. [iva zxwor cat ris dmotuxias TO xoremdv oByOivat}. This is an 
alternative for the following words, iva 7 rijs Mimns Saxvypd dapa- 
abict, trav eAmlopévov dmorvydvres. Even when one of these two 
clauses has been struck out, there is still too much iteration in this 
section. 

xpewxorretoQw [ray puxav] abray 7d meplepyov [émiBupiats Kal pdBors 
kot Adwats Kat @Amior mAdvos]. xpewKoria is equivalent to xpeov 
éxoxory, ‘cancelling of debts’. Hence xpewxoreiy comes to mean 
‘to disappoint (an expectation)’, Cf. the Mithraic Afathanatismos 
(Dieterich Mithrasliturgie) p. 4, 1. 24: ty (sc. Sivapw) eyo wadu 
perarapadrjpijopar . . . dxpeoxorytov. (The speaker will be deprived 
of a certain power for a time; but it will afterwards be restored to 
him ‘ without annulment of the debt ’; i.€. he expects to receive it 
back again, and his expectation will not be disappointed.) 

7d replepyor, ‘ their meddlesomeness ’, is hardly a suitable subject 
for xpewxorecOw ; one might propose 7d mepurady followed by some 
word in the genitive: ‘let their excessive expectations be dis- 
appointed’. But their expectations could not be disappointed ‘ by 
desires . . . and deceptive hopes’; I have therefore bracketed 
ewiBupias .. . wAdvots. 
1 CE Hor, Od. 3. 3. 49: ‘aurum irrepertum et sic melius situm, | cum terra celat. 








542 STOBAEI HERMETICA 


iva adrois kat (13) tis émeruxias 8d Bédeap 7 cis COAnow reherorépuy 
xakay. 7d Sd is subject and déAeap is predicate. d@Ayox vis hardly 
the right word; perhaps it would be better either to bracket 
aOdnow, or to strike out aérots and alter cis a6Anow into Tots aOALorg, 
Sé\eap xaxov would then mean ‘a bait to allure them into miseries’; 
cf. pSorjv, péyrorov kaxod Sércap, Pl. Zim. 69 D. 

FBapetrw mupetds adrods, tva éxkaxyjoavres KoAdowor Thy émbupioy,) 
uperds cannot be right. Possibly the author wrote something like 
kauérw abrots 7 Tip THs émbupias, iva... KoAacbGor. For desire 


fles, o Asclepi? Et his amplius multoque deterius’ &c. 

What are ‘these things’ (rdde)? In the words which follow, rdd_ 
is explained as meaning ws 6 rddas dvOpwros éBapyjOy. But in 
§§ 43-46, Horus has not been told that man ‘was weighed down’, 
but only that Momus advised Hermes to inflict trouble and sorrow 
on mankind ; and it is not until after this that Isis tells her son that 
Hermes did what Momus had advised. Moreover, the contents of 
§ 48 (éréprero Meipov tara A€yovros “Eppijs x.7.X.) cannot be described 
as ‘still more terrible’ (ru Sewérepov) than those of §§ 43-46. It is 
evident therefore that § 47 is out of place. It may possibly have 
stood at the end of a lost passage which preceded rewortt yap ai yuxat 
«tA. in § 53. In that case, the dewdrepov would be the contents of 
§ 53. 

§ 48. [adX’ odkér’ dpyh (odx evapy_ MSS.) yerfoerar [mvevpartos 
Qetou] ucrs ¥ tod wepiéxovros. ‘The nature (or substance) of the 
atmosphere’ has nothing to do with the topic of § 48, viz. the 
machinery constructed by Hermes for the purpose of frustrating — 
men's hopes. This misplaced fragment may perhaps have belonged — 
to the passage which deals with the making of souls; cf. § 14 
init. as amended: ovxére BovdAduevos dpydv tov trovpdvioy Kéopor 
elvau k.t.A, 

[etre yap elvat pe tapiay kai mpovonthy 6 tv cupmdvray Seondrys.| 
With the exception of this disconnected sentence, there is no 
mention of the supreme God in §§ 43-48. 7 

taplav and xpovonriy require dependent genitives. If we assume 
that the original reading was rap/av (avetpatos Oeiov) Kal rpovonriy 
(rav él ys), that might account for the insertion of [rvevparos Oetov} 
above, and {rotvuy Ta vis) below. 


EXCERPT XXIII: 47-49, 53 543 


{([@womrerijpa rolvuy ra yijs Cora tay Shuw dfudepKhs Oeds *Adpdorera]. 
If Adrasteia was spoken of anywhere in § 48, it must have been at 
the end of the section. Hermes constructed his ‘engine’; and 
when he had done so, Adrasteia took her stand above it to supervise 
its working. But if we put the words there, the future verb éorat 
must be altered into an aorist, and rotvuy, as well as ru ys, must be 
struck out. A satisfactory sense may be got by writing érdrreipa 8 
earn: 

The épyavoy which Hermes devises and constructs is the astral 
system, which is the instrument by means of which Heimarmene 
operates on human life and on all terrestrial things (see Zxc. XII). 
The name ‘Apéorea' is here used as a synonym for Eipoppevy. 
The working of the stars is regarded as mainly maleficent ; it is by 
their action that men’s hopes are thwarted. 

This section is incompatible with the preceding narrative of the 
Kore Kosmu. \f God made the stars (§ ((11))) before he made 
the souls, and ‘arranged the Zodiac and bestowed on it ravrovpyots 
Suvdpeis’ (§ ((20))) before the souls were incarnated, the épyavov was 
already in existence at the time spoken of in §§ 43-48, and it could 
not have been left to Hermes to construct iti 

((éxovea (éxov MSS.) thy (av) Garorehoupévay wiév.)) azorehou- 
pévoy must be taken as equivalent to droreleopdrwr, which may 
perhaps be the true reading. The results produced by the influences 
of the stars were called droreAéopara. The astral ‘engine’ produces 
droredécpara, and Adrasteia ‘makes these aroteAéopara firm’, i.e 
fixes them so that they cannot be altered. 

§ 4g. [kal éwaivou imép trav yevouévay airds éruxev (érvxov MSS.)}. 
Does this mean that Hermes was praised by God (cf. § 30, 
erexadeoduny tov pdvapxov Gewphaat’ 6 88 Kat elde Kat éxdépy), or that 
God was praised by his creatures (cf. § 27, dxpe wore vu Hon yeyovera 
péver dveyxwpiacra ;)? In either case, the words are out of place 
here. 

§ 53. [kat thy éripiav ph pépoucar], This is hardly relevant. It is 
not clear what the fact that the incarnated souls found their degrada- 
tion unendurable has to do with their fighting among themselves, 


1 Cf Ammianus Marcellinus 14. 11. 25: ‘Haec .. . aliquoties operatur 
Adrastia, . . . quam vocabulo duplici etiam Nemesin adpellamus : .. . quam theologi 
yeteres fingentes Iustitiae filiam ex abdita quadam aeternitate tradunt omnia 
despectare terrena, Hacc ut regina causarum et arbitra rerum ac disceptatrix 
urnam sortium temperat.... Eademque necessitatis insolubili retinaculo mortali- 
tatis vinciens fastus tumentes incassnm ... opprimit.’ /é, 22, 3.12: ‘humanorum 
spectatrix Adrastia,’ 








5d STOBAEI HERMETICA 

































which is the topic of this section ; and it certainly can have nothi 
to do with the misplaced fragment which follows in the MSS. (rol 
ev otpavd Oeois épAoveixovy K.7.A.). 
kal (ol kpeoaoves), Tois hemopévors dvOpdrois dpydvors xpdpevor (-vax 
MSS.), érotouv adtois éautois émriGecfar, Men in the mass do not 
themselves desire war, but are driven into it. Kings quarrel, and 
make their subjects do the fighting. 
kal [kard rav tepav] todro pev Lavras (hvBpandéilov), rodro Bé Kal 
vekpods Eppurtoy (40dmrous) [kara tay dbitwv’, Kara tov iepov is a 
doublet of xara rav advrwv. But at this stage there can have been — 
no fepd and no dura ; for men were dGeou (§§ 56 and 6r) until worship 
of the gods was introduced by Osiris and Isis (§ 65). 
§ 55. ((otx ear... 73 dbPapror’)) ((u(uyaivopar yap... dvayxdLouar 
rixew.)) In the MSS., these two statements stand (in inverse order) 
at the end of the speech (§ 56 fz.). But the speaker ought to state 
his grievance first, and then go on to ask that it may be remedied 
(dvdénezov dn ceavrov KA, § 56). When this error has been 
corrected, the speech ends suitably, with the words ta... evddes 
drpovs am éoxapas mporrepyw ToL. 
mapaxapdocorres oF Kabykévrws Td apOaprov. This is a metaphor 
from coining. Fire is the metal; the use men make of fire is the 
stamp impressed on the metal. 
§ 56. Kai rod Biou 13 dyptov Adoov. [[elpHvn xdpigo x.r.h.]]—(k. 7. B 
1. d, punoov eipiyy’ yee x.t.\, MSS.) jveiv requires a personal 
object, and rot Blov 7d dypiov is not a person. Moreover, pinoy 
cipiivy is an impossible phrase ; and even panoov cipyvyy, though it 
might be somewhat better, (cf. 7a épwrixa punbnvar, Pl. Symp. 209 E,) 
could hardly be accepted. Ato (or xardAvoov) gives the sense 
wanted, 
[@mafous dpaprypdrev prodods dv darohdBwor'y of dpaprdvres), pudd- 
fovrat of hotmot 73 dSixeiv.] This is presumably a marginal paraphrase 
of dofeloOwrav . .. duapryce, which expresses the same thought 
more concisely, of duaprévres, or something of the sort, must be . 
inserted, to give a meaning to of Aourol. 
[poBnOyoorrar SpKous, Kat ode els ert dvictov ppovyce.] oBnthj- 
govrat has probably been written by error for doBeicfwoar. If so, 
the sentence is of the same form as the preceding ¢oBeicGucay . . « 
éxduxiay, Kal ovdels dpaprice. It has most likely been added bya 
Jater hand. 
((ciphyny xaptodpevos (elpyvn" xdpivo vépous MSS.) 1d Bia [xdproat 





EXCERPT XXIII: 55-59 545 


yuxtt xpyopous] mAjpwoor Kahdy édriSev mdvra)). In the MSS., the 
petitions are arranged thus: (1) confer benefits on men; (2) let 
them be threatened with punishment ; (3) let them give thanks for 
the benefits they have received. But that is evidently wrong. The 
order ought to be (2), (r), (3); i.e. the mention of benefits to be 
conferred on men (elpyvav ... dvra) ought to precede immediately 
the mention of thanksgiving. 

‘Give oracles to night’ is meaningless. If the writer had meant 
to say ‘give oracles dy night’, he would have written vverds, not 
yeeri; but oracles are given by day as well as by night, and there is 
no reason to speak of night at all in connexion with them. 

The sense might be improved by striking out édridwv, which is 
hardly consistent with edcpyernGévres in the following clause. Men 
give thanks for benefits already received, not for hopes of benefits to 
come. 

[mapé AorBais] mapa Ouclars danperoiv eyo (GmmpeTiow MSS.) 16 wip. 
Fire renders service at sacrifices, but not at libations. 

§ 58. Mdrep [| ] adroydve (adréyeve MSS.). God is abroyévvyros, 
i.e. dyévvyros. See note on ex se nata in As¢l. Lat. Il. 14. 

kal ris 8d oe wévTa yevvdons woinTda picews. All organisms on 
earth are generated by dvcis; and dos bas been made by God. 
(Cf. § ro.) On the relation between God and ¢vcus, see Corp. III. 
Nature generates things ‘on account of’ God (84 oé),—i, e. to please 
God, or in obedience to his will; cf. Asc/. Zaz. I. 3c: ‘natura... . 
producit cuncta dei visibus placitura.’ But 5a o¢ is perhaps super- 
fluous here. 

[4] (det) yap érododoucr morapol Kal Pdhagoat toils povedcartas [4] 
(kat) Béxovrar rods govevOévras, ‘Either. . . or’ is wrong. The 
waters are polluted in two different ways; they doth wash off the 
blood with which the hands of the slayers are defiled, and receive 
the corpses of the slain that are flung into them. 

§ 59. “réfopar tis dad tév Adyov', This is probably a corruption 
of something corresponding to zp&rov yap lye riyv tod A€yew eovoiav 
in § 55, and éfjs . . . Ti Tod Adyew elyev eovoiay in § 58. 

a dy [adffoews kat perdcews] dpxty exer ta wdvra, els & Kal mad 
karadiyorta dvaykalws dethdpevoy TéAos exer, Ta mévra means all 
terrestrial organisms. 

Things do not get perdoews Bpyyjv (‘the beginning of their diminu- 
tion’) out of the elements. It might perhaps be said that they get 
out of the elements aiéjoews épyyv (‘the beginning of their growth’) ; 

1806-5 Nn 


546 STOBAEI HERMETICA 


































but even this would be somewhat obscure, and it seems best to cut 
out abgjoews as well as Kal perdoewss 

koradzpyovra réhos exer is tautologous ; and the two clauses (é& dy 
xt.A. and els & «r.A.) would match better if dvayxaiws (or dvdyry?) 
éderhpevov were struck out. The meaning might be more clea y 
and compactly expressed by writing é€ dv ovvriépeva dpxnv exer 7a 
mdvra, eis & Kal méAw Siadvopeva TéAos EXEL. 

[@déyioros, & wodutipnte, kal GOeos| [[dm’ dvOpamav én’ ee Xopds 
éreott,|| From this point onward, Earth’s speech, as given in the 
MSS,., is in great confusion. In my attempt to reconstruct it, I have 
assumed that it falls into three distinct parts. In the first part. 
(Bactred . . . ppm wdvra wai | } S¢xopar) Earth describes the functions 
of the elements, and distinguishes her own function from those 
of the others; in the second part (dripotpa. d¢ 7dy . . . cwparoy 
xvAois) she states her grievance ; in the third part (évretev, Kipie. . 
iepiy dzrépporav) she petitions for redress. 

The words ddyirros . . . dx’ dvOpuimov én’ ene xopds ereots (éréory 
Meineke) apparently refer to the misdeeds of men from which 
Earth suffers. Ifso, they are out of place in the first part of the 
speech, and ought to stand in the second part. But they could not 
be put there without alteration. ‘A band is upon me (or has 
risen up against me) from men’ is meaningless, Heeren and 
Wachsmuth strike out dr; but that is not an adequate remedy, 
for the human race as a whole could not be called dv@pdmwv xopés. 
There can be little doubt that xopds is a misreading ; perhaps it has 
been substituted for some such word as @dpuBos. Moreover, éddyurros, 
‘unreasoning’, is hardly appropriate ; and aéeos unduly anticipates: 
the contents of § 61. It seems best then to cut out ddoyiros ... 
kat dOeos, and to place dx’ évépuirwv . . . éréorn immediately before 
wdvTa yop. . . mapayopotct, § 60. 

((arorxelov typtwrépay tov GAkwv thy yay énoincas (Thy yar 
peteroinoay MSS,))). Something must have been lost before ain 
ydp «.7.A.; and these words serve very well to fill the gap. They 
deal with the same topic as the preceding clauses, in which the 
elements are spoken of ; and if we put them here, riywwrépav . . + 







éxotyoas leads on to dtypotpar dé 75. 
per- may have arisen out of éue; but éué beside riv yj would be 
superfluous. ;, 
$60. mévra yep, 8 poPnOacw odx exovtes, Tapavopotcr, The words 
6 hoBnOaaw odx éxovres hint at Earth’s most pressing reason for 


EXCERPT XXIII: 60, 61 547 


desiring to have gods sent down to her (cf. § 56, doPeicGwoav 
dvOpwro. tiv dao Gedy éxdixiav, kal oidels Amaprycer). But we 
should have expected this reason to be more plainly and directly 
stated ; and we should also have expected the statement of it to 
occur at a different place. It ought rather to come at the end 
of the second part of the speech (§ 60 jiz.), and make connexion 
between that and the third part (évred@ev «.7.d., § 61 init.). Besides, 
the order of the words in this sentence is not satisfactory; mavra 
yip is awkwardly separated from zapavopoto. by the intervening 
3...» xovres. It may be suspected therefore that 3 ¢oBybacw 
ov« éxovres has been shifted, and originally formed part of a sentence, 
now lost, which stood between § 60 and § 61. 

mdon Tovnpa téxvy (oveudpevor) KaTamtimrouct, 7. 7. Texvy Fequires 
some participle; and if the missing word is dovevéuevor, this may 
have given rise to [ra dovevOevra] above. 

kataBpéxopar 8€ maga Srapetpopevov (-pévy MSS.) copdrov 
xvdois. As to this complaint of Earth, and the similar complaints 
of the other elements, compare Asc. Lat, III. 24 b: ‘tune terra 
ista sanctissima . . . sepulcrorum erit mortuorumque plenissima : 
. . . undaeque divinae (of the Nile) non solum polluentur sanguine, 
sed totae (cor)rumpentur.” In Asc/, Lat. III, Hermes says that 
such things will take place when men cease to worship the gods ; in 
Kore Kosmu, we are told that such things did take place until men 
began to worship the gods. 

Compare also the letter written in or about A. p, 262 by Dionysius, 
bishop of Alexandria, Euseb. A. £. 7. 21: del 6@ aipate Kai povors 
Kal KaTaTovTispols Kdreo. peptacpevos (6 motapyds), «7A. The 
writer of Ascd. Lat. III had probably witnessed the calamities of 
which Dionysius speaks (see Introduction to Asc/. Zat.); and it is 
possible that the writer of Kore Kosmu also had lived in Alexandria 
during those same events, and had seen there such horrors as he 
describes. . 

§ GI, od yap cé xwpety bropévw, Cf. Corp. Il, 14: copa yap 
€or. Kal Yvyi) Torov ox exorTa Xwphcoe Suvdpevov To ayadr. 

[porn yap adxety Tay dd god mpéwer TO mévra mapexoven]. This 
is obscure. If it was intended to follow crowyelwv timwrepav tov 
rAwv riv yiv erotyouc, the meaning might perhaps be expressed 
by writing povy yap utxety trav brd cod remounpevovy mpérar TH TacL 
tpopyv mapexovoy: ‘Earth alone of all things made by thee has 
aright to boast, because it is she that supplies sustenance to all.’ 

Nn 2 





eee 





548 STOBAEI HERMETICA 


























If on the other hand it was intended to follow xapiom tH yj. . 
covrod twa fepav dmdppoay, it may be a corruption of something 
like povy yap darodavew tov aro cot wpoBhayevrev (i.e. to enjoy the 
presence of gods emitted from thee) mpére 79 «.7.X. But in eithe 
case, it is not needed. 

§ 62. dovos écrar tév mparropévey énéarys. This is inconsistent 
with § 39, where the supreme God says éyd yap [kat otris erepos] 
erdrrys attos [ | écouar; but the inconsistency is one that might 
easily escape the notice of the writer. 

Cdvtov pev KpiTis dpeOddeutos, ppuxtds 8(€) [ | tHv bwd yiv TUpavvos, 
This is Osiris, who was known to the Egyptians as ‘king of the 
dead’, but was also thought to watch over the living. 

Kpirys dpeOodevros, ‘a judge that cannot be turned aside from his 
course’, This might mean either one that cannot be turned aside 
by entreaty from the course he has decided on, i.e. ‘inexorable’; 
or one that cannot be turned aside by deception or cunning devices 
from deciding rightly (no culprit can ‘ pull his leg’), The instances 
of pefodedw and pefode(a given in Liddell and Scott tell in favour of 
the latter meaning. 

Who are of td yjv? We have been told that after death the 
souls of good men return to their home above, and the souls of 
bad men are reincarnated in the bodies of animals. If then the 
writer assumed the existence of a subterranean Hades, he must 
have thought of it as a prison in which wicked souls are confined 
in the interval between death and reincarnation. But more 
probably he took over the phrase ray id yqv tuparvos from popular 
descriptions of Osiris, and made no attempt to reconcile it with his 
own theories, 

§ 64. Mapatrodpar [f ]} [[ ]] os owopas kxataddyew dpxny, & 
peyadoobevés “Apes ((od yap Oeyitdv)) | | Oedv ((yéverw ioropeiv)), 
There is evidently some dislocation; and this rearrangement of the 
words gives the sense required. 

The sending down of ‘an efflux of God’ to earth means the 
incarnation of the deities Osiris and Isis in human bodies. The 
question asked by Horus is therefore equivalent to the question 
‘How did that incarnation take place?’ or ‘By what process was 
the birth of the deities Osiris and Isis in the form of human beings 
on earth brought to pass?’ As Horus is son of Osiris and Isis,— 
and presumably a son born to them during their residence on earth, 
-~-to answer that question would be to explain ‘the source of the 


EXCERPT XXIII: 62-65 549 


begetting of Horus’ (aijs oropas dpxyjv). But such things are holy 
secrets, and must not be revealed to the readers of this “dedlus ; 
the writer therefore makes Isis refuse to reveal them. He probably 
had in mind a tepds Adyos which had been told to him, but which 
he was forbidden to repeat to others. It may have resembled the 
myth reported by Plutarch, /s. e# Os. 12, which describes the birth 
of the gods Osiris, Arueris (i, e. Har-zwer, ‘ the elder Horus’), Typhon 
(Set), Isis, and Nephthys, and contains things at which the profanum 
vulgus would be apt to scoff. 

[ds piywore Uotepov eis cvOpdmous dOavdétuv (8r)AOy yeveors|, The 
grammatical connexion of these words with the context is faulty ; 
bs pojmore . . . &éA6y can hardly be made to depend either on ov 
yap Oeyirdv or On waparotpa. Moreover, yéveows stands too close 
to yéveowv foropeiv. It therefore seems best to assume that this 
clause has been added by a reader. It is an attempt to answer 
the question why Isis should be unwilling to reveal the truth to her 
son. But it does not answer that question satisfactorily. 

Since Osiris and Isis were gods, their son Horus also must have 
been a god (though perhaps, at the time spoken of, a god incarnate) ; 
and a god might surely be permitted to know the facts, and might 
be trusted not to reveal to men what ought to be kept hidden from 
them. The true explanation is rather that the writer was thinking 
of his own obligation not to reveal the secret to his readers, and did 
not stop to ask himself whether Isis had any good reason for not 
revealing it to Horus. 

& ray cupmdvtov [Koopowointis Kal] rexvirns. Kooporouyris could 
not stand with cuprdyrwy. It is an alternative, not for rexvirns 
alone, but for rév cupmdvtwv rexvirns. It may be a misreading 
for kdopov moyrjs; but neither the one nor the other can have been 
written by the author. 

kat thy peylotny Gedy “iow. Both in this phrase, and in the 
reiterated ofro: of §§ 65-68, Isis somewhat strangely speaks of 
herself in the third person. This might be accounted for by 
assuming that the writer of Zxc. XXIII took over the contents of 
the passage beginning at 5 pdvapyos Beds in § 64, down to the end 
of § 68, from some document in which the teaching was not put 
into the mouth of Isis. In § 69, the first person is again employed 
("Ooipis re xdyd, . . . dmyrotpeba). 

§ 65. ofro., (rod) Gefou (Biov MSS.) dv Biov wAnpdoavtes (érhy}j- 
pwcay MSS.), [oSror] 73 tis @AAnAopoviag eraveay dypiov. The 





550 STOBAE! HERMETICA 


Elements had prayed God to put an end to the mutual slaughter of 
mankind by sending gods down to earth ; and we are now told how 
God did what the Elements had asked him to do. Osiris and 
Isis, sent down by God (i.e. incarnated on earth, and reigning as 
king and queen of Egypt), introduced religion among men (who 
had till then been dGcou), and thereby put a stop to d\AnAoporia, 

Thus the climax to which the narrative of £xe. XXIII 
leads up, and with which it concludes, is ‘the institution of 
religion; and the chief lesson which the story is intended to 
teach is that religion is indispensable for the welfare of human 
society. 

What follows in §§ 65-68 ought to be merely an amplification 
of the statement otra ... éravoav dypov. But the text of 
these sections has been corrupted by the insertion of irrelevant matter, 

With this list of boons conferred on men by Osiris and Isis may 
be compared an inscription found in the island of Ios (C. Z G. xii, 
v.14; Kaibel, Zpigrammata Gr. ex lapid. cond. p. xxi) in which Isis 
says (é)yh rd Sixaov loxupov exo(in)ra. ey (y)u(v)aixa Kal dvdpa 
avvipyayat eydr yevar(xi) dexd(pn)vov Bpépos 'eveata'* eyo iad réxvow 
yovets pitooropyeirba evopobérnaa’ ey ois arrd(pyos y)ovetot 
Saerpévoli)s reyrmplav eréOnxa, ey peri rod adeApot *Ocei(p)e(os) 
ris avOpuropaylas travoa’ éyd tu(pod)s dvOpdros avédeta. ey 
dydApara (ior)av (Bakar eyo repévn Gedv €(i)Spvodpyr. (2)ya 
rupd(vv)w(v) dpyas karéduca* eye wrépyerOar (y)vv(aix)a(s) ta avd(po)v 
jvdrxaca. ey 7)d Sixaov cicxupdrepov Xpuod Kal dpyvplov exoi(qo)a’ 
ey 7d dAnbes Kaddv évomobérnoa v(o)p(iCer)Ga(:). ed cvvrypadas 
‘E(ppot?).... Compare also a hymn to Isis (C. Z G. xii. v. 739, 
Kaibel 1028, Abel Orphica p. 295 ff.) which was probably composed 
in the fourth century A.p., and was found inscribed on stone in 
Andros. Lines 26-47 of the Andros hymn are a versified paraphrase 
of the contents of the Ios inscription. Another document of similar 
character is Oxyrhynchus Pap. (1915) no. 1380, early second century 
A. D.,—an invocation of Isis, probably written by a priest of the 
goddess. Cf. a magic invocation in Pap, mag. Lond. 46. ror sqq.: 
od & 5 “Ocopdvvoppis (i.e. Osiris Wen-nofre). ... od Scéxpwas 70 
Sicatoy Kal rd dSixov. ov érofnoras OAAv Kal appev. ob Weusas omopay 
kal kaprovs. ob érolnras tovs dvOpcmrous dAndogpurciv Kal (ut) 
ddAnAopice’y. 


1 eveaga inscr.: évéraga Wilamowitz; évéoaga Kaibel, Perhaps ovveraga, 
‘ ordained’ or ‘ prescribed’. ‘ 





EXCERPT XXIII: 65 5SL 

((odrou [| mpds KdBerov (Spodoyodeas) (tas mpookabérous MSS.) tots 
év odpavd puotyplors tepomorias dvécrnoay év yy.)) The establishment 
of religious worship ought to be placed at the beginning of the list 
of benefits; and the mention of teporoua ought to be closely 
connected with that of reuévy. I have therefore transposed this 
sentence from § 68 to § 65. 

The adjective zpooxdGeros does not occur elsewhere. xdGeros 
means ‘a plumb-line’, Lat. perpendiculum ; and pos xdGerov some- 
times means ‘perpendicularly’ or ‘vertically’. Plut. ac. in orbe 
lunae 24. 7, 938A: Tod HAlov mpds Kdberov airois edurrapevov, 
‘vertically overhead’. Aetius, Diels Dowxogr. p. 353: Thales said 
ehelrew Tov HAtov THs cedivys adrov trepyopévys KaTa «aGerov, 
‘perpendicularly beneath’, If apis xdGerov is to be taken in this 
sense, some participle such as troxepévas is needed to go with it. 
But we should expect to be told, not that earthly rites ‘are situated 
perpendicularly beneath’ the mysteries of heaven, but that they 
‘correspond exactly to’ the mysteries of heaven ; and it seems best 
to take zpos xd@erov as here meaning ‘exactly’ (compare the 
metaphorical use of ad perpendiculum and ad amussim), and to 
assume that the missing participle is 5oAcyovcas or some word of 
similar sense. 

For the thought, cf. Ase?. Lat. IIL. 24b; ‘An ignoras . . . quod 
Aegyptus imago sit caeli, aut... translatio aut descensio omnium 
quae gubernantur atque exercentur in caelo P’ 

[wap ‘Eppod paOdvtes ds ta Kdrw cuptaeiy roig dyw dwd tod 
Snproupyod Berdyn}. The words wap’ ‘Eppot paGdvres occur three 
times in the traditional text of §§ 65-68; but each of these three 
mentions of Hermes was probably inserted by a transcriber. paGdvres 
bs ta kdrw... dueréyy was written to explain the following words 
apos Kaberov... ev yp; but the explanation is not needed. As to the 
cvprdbea of ta Kérw with 7a. dyw, see note on Exe, XX. 8. 

((obrou)) Tepévn (rots) mpoydvors Bevis [[adrot]] kal Oucias xadiépwoay. 
The word zpoydvois seems intended to prevent the reader from 
supposing that Osiris and Isis dedicated temples to ¢hemse/ves. 
(One of these ‘gods of earlier generations’ might be Kamephis ; 
see § ((32)).) But if the following clause is to be retained, Ovyrois 
appears to be contrasted with cots, and this contrast is impaired by 
the addition of an epithet to @cois; perhaps therefore it might be 
better to bracket wpoyévots. 

As 6votar are included under ieporoua, which (if my transposition 








552 STOBAEI HERMETICA 


of ofro:. . . év yp is accepted) have just been spoken of, kat Ovovas is 
superfluous ; and the verb KaGcépwoay, which goes well with reuévy, 
does not go so well with @votas. I am therefore inclined to think 
that xa @vcias ought to be cut out. 

otrot Kat tpog¢as Ovyrois Kal oxémny éxapicavto, As to tpody, cf, 
the epitaph of Isis, Diod. 1. 27. 4, in which she says éya eius } mpory 
kaprov avOpdmrots ebpotoa. Ios inscr.: eye rv(pod)s dvOpamois avédecta, 
Augustine Civ. dei 8. 27: ‘parentibus suis illa (se. Isis) cum sacri- 
ficaret, invenit hordei segetem, atque inde spicas marito regi (Osiris) 
et eius consiliario Mercurio (Thoth-Hermes) demonstravit; unde 
eandem et Cererem volunt.’ But in those passages, grain or vegetable 
food alone is spoken of. How did the writer of Zac. XXIII 
suppose that men had lived during the time of dAAnAodovia? They 
must at least have had some kind of tpo@y, if not oxémy (clothes and 
houses) also. Moreover, rpody and oxéry are not directly connected — 
with religion, which is the main subject of this list of benefits. It 
may therefore be suspected that xai tpopas... éxapicavro is a later 
addition. It is possible that the text originally ran thus: otro tepévy 
Geots Kabiepwcay, kal mpos KaGerov Suodoyovoas Tois év otpayd pvornplos 
icporouias dvéorycav ev yj. 

§ 66. “‘oérot ra Kpumrd”, byotv ‘Eppis, “. . . éBehioxors xapd£oucw,” 
This section is evidently out of place. In no other part of the list 
of benefits (§§ 65-68) does Isis say that she is repeating words spoken 
by Hermes ; and the verbs in § 66 are in the future tense, whereas in — 
the rest of the list they are in the aorist. ; 

As this fragment has no connexion with its present context, obro: 
does not necessarily mean Osiris and Isis. It would be possible to 
put the passage at the end of the speech of Hermes in § 8. If it 
were placed there, otro. would mean the men who were destined to 
discover in a later age the books which Hermes had written and 
hidden. 

Tattol xaracySow!' is probably a corruption of some phrase 
meaning ‘they will keep secret’. The persons spoken of will read 
the books of Hermes, and will divide their contents into two parts. 
One part they will keep to themselves; the other part they will 
inscribe on slabs of stone (exposed in public places) and on 
obelisks, so that all may read it. Cf. § 5 jim., where it is said that 
Hermes himself did something partly similar to this. 

§ 67. [otror mpGror Selgavtes Sixacriptal [[edvopias ra odpmavra kal 
Sixatocdvns érjpwoay.|] Justice and obedience to law may be 


4 





EXCERPT XXIII: 66, 67 553 


enforced on men either by fear of punishments inflicted by human 
judges, or by fear of punishments inflicted by the gods. dixarrijpra 
have to do with punishments inflicted by men; ‘the great god 
“Opxos’ has to do with punishments inflicted by the gods. But as 
Osiris and Isis are in §§ 65-68 regarded chiefly, if not solely, as the 
introducers of vedigion, it is the religious enforcement of etvopia, 
rather than the civic, that ought to be here spoken of, and the 
mention of dixaorypa seems irrelevant. (Cf. § 56: doBelrOucar 
dvOpwrot THv dd Oetv éxdixiay, Kal ovdels dmaprynce. .. . [PoByOijoovrat 
dpkovs, Kat ove els ere avédcvoy dpovnce.}) I have therefore bracketed 
otro... . dixacrypia, and placed etvopias ... érAjpwoav after “Opxov 
eicaryaydvres eis Tov Biov. 

If courts of justice were to be spoken of at all, the mention of 
them would be better placed after the sentence about vopobecia 
in § 68. 

Seftas xal miorews dpxnyérqy (cpynyérar yevdpevor wat MSS.) 
tov péysotov Oedv “Opxoy cicayaydvres (eionydyovro MSS.) eis tév 
Biov. The middle verb eicyydyovro cannot be defended. 

épxos meant primarily the thing by which a man swears, and 
thence the oath itself. ‘To swear an oath (dpxos in the latter sense) 
is to bind oneself to fulfil an engagement (S«&a Kal miors) by 
praying the gods to punish one if one breaks it. The thing sworn 
by (dpxos in the former sense) is some object in which divine force 
is believed to be inherent, and with which the swearer puts himself 
in connexion (sometimes by touching it, sometimes by invoking it 
verbally), in order to ensure that the gods will hear the prayer and 
act accordingly. In primitive times it was assumed that only when 
the gods had been brought into action by such a rite would they 
concern themselves about the fulfilment of a contract, or punish its 
violation. ‘The great god “Opxos’ is a personification of the 
divine force which is put in operation by the swearing of an 
oath; he is therefore rightly described as Sefids kal micrews 
dpxnyerns. 

The god “Opxos occurs in Hesiod, Theag. 231: “Opxoy 6 (sc. "Epis 
Téxe), Os Oi) wActorov émtyOovious avOparovs | wypaivel, Ore Kev TIS EKdY 
érfopkoy éuéoon. See also Hes. Of. 219 and 804; Soph. O. C. 1767; 
Orac. ap. Herodot. 6. 86. 

((73 pOdpipoy tay cwpdrwy émtyvdvres)), In the MSS. this is 
connected with rd... rav mpopyrav éreyvdoavro in § 68. But 
the fact that bodies decay has nothing to do with the functions 








554 STOBAEI HERMETICA 


of prophets; and the words must have been intended to go with 
what is said about the burial of the dead (rots wavoapévous . . . 
meproréddcw eiSagav). It may be suspected however that they did 
not occur at all in the original text, but were added in §67 bya 
later hand, and afterwards transposed to § 68. 

rods mavoapevous Tod Livy ds Sdov gori wepioréAhew eBidafav (ds 
Séov dotty eiSagav wepiotéd\deww MSS.). We were told in § 53 that 
one of the bad things done by men in the time of ddAyAodovia was 
the casting out of corpses without burial. The burial of the dead 
was a religious rite; its introduction is therefore rightly included 
among the boons conferred by Osiris and Isis. epurréAcuw, ‘ to 
enwrap’, is used in Greek literature, from Homer downward, to 
describe the process of preparing a corpse for burial ; but the writer 
was probably thinking of the Egyptian practice of swathing mummies 
in linen bands. 

obto. . . . Zyvwoay ds tod efwOev (leis ra tv dvOpdrwv wAdopara)) 
(etvehOdyros) mvedpatos pikurootpdpou tuyxdvovros [|| lédv dotephon 
woré, dvdxrnow od éxouoay épydlerat Ae{u|wobupias'. The meaning 
of this passage was probably somewhat as follows: ‘They (who?— 
hardly Osiris and Isis) discovered the cause of death; they found 
out that the zvetwe (life-breath or vital spirit) tends to quit the 
body and return to the atmosphere, from which it came, and that 
if it quits the body partially, the man falls into a swoon (AuroOupia), 
but if it quits the body wholly, it does not come back, and so the 
man dies” I take ¢iAvrocrpépov to mean ‘apt to return to the 
place whence it came’; and I suppose rod . . . mvevparos piivTo- 
atpdpov tTvyxdvovros to be a genitive absolute. But it is difficult 
to reconstruct the last part of the sentence. One might propose 
something of this sort: éiv (uév) borepyjoy ore (atrot 6 dvOpurros, 
xaréxerar) ((Aurobupia)), (gov d& ravrdracw drootepyhj,) dvdxrnow 
otk exwv (droOvqoxe). ‘If the man runs short of it (or fails to 
get enough of it), he swoons; but if he is wholly deprived of it, 
he cannot get it back, and dies.’ Compare Zxc, XXVI. 12, 

The insertion of this inopportune explanation of the process of 
death was doubtless suggested by rots ravoapévous rod fjv in the 
preceding sentence. The words Aurobupia, dvdxryows, and didv- 
axéatpodos occur as medical terms in the Hippocratic writings. 

oftor, TS wepi€xov Sri Baipdvwv ewAynpdby wapd “Eppod paddvtes, 
(r& dvdpara (or tas emkAsjoers) adtav (?) év) kpumrais orHAats exdpagar. 
What was it that Osiris and Isis (or possibly some other persons) 





EXCERPT XXII: 68 555 


‘engraved on hidden tablets’? It cannot have been merely a 
statement of the fact that ‘the atmosphere is full* of daemons’ ; 
for that was no secret to be concealed from the profane, but a thing 
well known to every Greek and Egyptian. There must therefore 
be a lacuna before xprmrais orjdous éydpagar. A good sense may 
be got by inserting ri dvéuara airy. Knowledge of the names by 
which daemons could be invoked was highly valued by the 
practitioners of magic and theurgy; and those who used these 
names in their invocations were sometimes unwilling to let them 
become known to the general public. But the invocation of 
daemons belongs to magic rather than religion, or at any rate has 
little to do with the kind of religion by which men are restrained 
from crime; there is therefore no occasion to speak of it in 
this list of benefits, and it seems best to regard the sentence as an 
interpolation, 

§ 68. ofror [pdvor], ras xpumras vopobecias tod Oeod [wapd ‘Eppod) 
paddvres, [rexvav kal émorqpdy Kal émirmSeundrwv damdvtwy eionyntail 
trois dvOpdmous éyevovto [kat] yowoérat, This sentence, as given in the 
MSS., implies that the arts and sciences are based on ‘the secret 
lawgivings of God’. But that cannot be right. The arts and 
sciences might be said to be based on what we call ‘the laws of 
nature’; but to a Greek, ai vopobeciac tod Geot would mean, not 
the establishment of the laws of nature, but the laying down of 
the principles of morality; and with this the arts and sciences 
have no connexion. The reading of the MSS. seems to have 
resulted from the intermixture of two distinct statements, viz. otro, 
ras KpuTTas vouobectias tod Oeot pabovtes, trois dvOpdros eyévovto 
vopobérat, and otroe rexvav Kai émuorypov [Kat exurpdeupdtov drdvrwv ?| 
ciogyytai éyévovro. The latter statement is hardly to the point; 
knowledge of arts and sciences does not prevent mutual slaughter, 
and the men who slaughtered one another before the coming of 
Osiris and Isis must at least have known something of the art of 
war. But the former statement, otro. . . . trois dvOpwras éyévovro 
vowobérat, may have formed part of the original text. The 
distinction between the law of God and human laws was 
familiar to the Greeks, from the time of Sophocles (Anz. 449 ff.) 
o ward. 

Td éy &mact Tédevov!’ tev mpopytay etexvdcavto. A mpopyrys, in 


1 We should have expected werAnpwra rather than émAnpw$n. The tense may 
have been altered when the sentence was inserted into the Kore Kosmu. 





556 STOBAEI HERMETICA 


the wider sense of the term, is a man who makes known to other 
men the will of a god, or of the gods. But zpodyrys also meant 
a member of a certain class or order of Egyptian priests;* and as 
the zpofjra: spoken of in this passage have to do with healing the 
sick as well as with philosophy, it seems clear that the word here 
means Egyptian priests, or a certain class of them. The writer 
may possibly have been himself an Egyptian priest of this class ; if 
so, he might think fit to conclude his list of the benefits which Osiris 
and Isis had conferred on mankind by saying that his own order or 
profession had been instituted by them. 

The genitive rév rpopytréy must have been dependent on some 
word (e.g. évos or yévos) which could serve as subject to tpépg 
and cdf below; and the meaningless éy daot réAecov may be a 
corruption of a phrase by which the missing substantive was 
qualified. Sense might be made by writing 76 & dracw ddéApor 
(2Ovos) (or rédeciy Euzretpov) trav tpopyTay.? 

[ds piwote & pé\Awv ects mpoodyew xXeipas mpodytys dyvof tt 
tay (8e)évtwv}]. This clause appears to have been written as an 
alternative for the following iva ... tpépy x.7.\, It evidently 
refers to those Egyptian priests whose duty it was to enter the 
innermost sanctuary of the temple in which they served, and perform 
there certain prescribed ceremonies (r& Séovra), especially that of 
clothing the image, which would necessitate ‘laying hands on the 
god’. (See Otto, of. cit. I, pp. 83-86.) The priests to whom this 
duty was assigned are described in the Canopus and Rosetta 
inscriptions as of eis 1d ddvrov eioropevdpevor pos Tov orohicpoy 
tov Oeav. They were called crodioraf (Plut. Js. ef Os. 39), tepo- 
arddor (id. 3), OF tepooroluerai (Porphyr. De adst. 4. 8), and were 
commonly distinguished from the zpodjrac; but the writer of 
this clause apparently included them under the term zpoparys. 

iva pidocopia pey [kal payeta] (rhy) wuxtv tpépy (sc. 7d Tay 
mpopytav €0vos?). It might be said of the Egyptian priests called 
xpopyra., that it was their business to study and teach ‘philosophy’, 


1 See Otto, Priester und Tempel in hellen, Aegypten, 1, pp. 75-83. Otto says 
that mpopyra: * held the most eminent position in tae Egyptian priesthood, with the 
exception of that of the presidents of temples’; and that the title borne by priests 
of this order (i.e. the Egyptian title for which mpopyrys is the Greek equivalent) 
was /n-nir, ‘servant of the god’, 

2 It has occurred to me that 7d év dnagt réAetov may possibly have arisen out of 
some phrase equivalent to Ty reAeriv, ‘ the initiatory rite’ by which the priests 
called mpopfrat were consecrated. That rite might be said to have been ‘ devised ' 
by Osiris and Isis; but % reAeTq would not be a suitable subject for rpépy and caty. 








EXCERPT XXIII: 69 557 


which, to the Hermetists, was indistinguishable from theology. 
Cf. Diog. Laert. procem. 1: Alytmrwu pev yap NetAov (pact) yevér Oar 
raida “Hdacrov (Ptah), dv dpfa pirocodias, Hs robs mpocoTaras iepéas 
elvan kat mpodyras. Clem. Alex. Strom. 1. 15. 71: pidogodia . . « 
mddon pev jxpace mapa BapBdpos . . .* mpoéornoay O abrijs Alyurriov 
re of mpopirat, utd. Lb. 6. 4. 37: (6 mpodyrys) 7a teparixd Kadov- 
peva Séxa BiBia éxpavOdver’ mepréxer 5 (ratra) epi te vomwv kat 
Gedy cat ris Gdns Tadeias Tov iepéwv. Porphyr. De adst. 4. 8: To pev 
kar’ GAjOeav prrocopoiv év te Tois mpodyrais jv Kal tepoorodurtais Kal 
iepoypapparetiow, ere 88 dpoddyous. 

oly & [{ |] tarpuxq (73) cdpa (Stay me mdoxy)). Clem. Alex., 
Strom. 6. 4. 37, includes medicine among the subjects studied by 
Egyptian priests, but says that it was studied, not by the zpopjra:, but 
by the wacrodpox (who were priests of lower rank): ras wav As’ (“Eppod 
BiBrous), Tiv wacav Alyurriwv wepiexovoas ditoropiay, of mpoeipyyévot 
(sc. & @8ds, & dpooxdmos, 5 iepoypappareis, 6 orodirrys, and 6 
mpogyrys) éxpavOdvovor, tas 8& Aouras &E of warropépor, iarpixas 
ofaas, epi te THs TOD cdparos KaracKeuy}s, Kal mepl vdowv, Kai mepl 
dpydvev, Kai (repl) papydxov, Kal mepi bpOadrpliav, kal To TeAcvTaior 
rept trav yuvox(eiov. See Zosimus i. 20 (Zestim.) concerning a 
priest called in to heal a broken bone. To heal the sick was the 
chief function of the Egyptian god Imhotep-Asclepius (see Asc/. Lat. 
III. 37); and priests must have been employed in medical work 
at his temples, and at those of other gods who were believed to 
heal diseases. This priestly art of medicine doubtless consisted 
chiefly in the administration of remedies prescribed by oracles or 
suggested by dreams, and the casting out of daemons; but in later 
times, and under Greek influence, some of the Egyptian priests may 
perhaps have adopted more scientific methods in their treatment 
of the sick. 

§ 6g. ((dmyrodpeta Novwdy)) (...). Having done all that they had 
been sent down from heaven to do, Osiris and Isis asked the 
supreme God to permit them to quit the earthly bodies in which 
they were incarnated, and return to their home above. During 
their residence on earth they must have lived as human beings, and 
reigned as king and queen of Egypt; they differed from the men 
and women among whom they lived in this respect only, that they 
were incarnate co’, whereas men and women in general are incarnate 
oxat. 

@AX’ obk Fv dvedOeiv mplv (Guvw) emxardcacGar tiv povapxor. It is 


558 STOBAEI HERMETICA 


necessary to insert fuvw here, in order to give a meaning to the 
words kéyot xdpicae rH Tod duvov ér/yvwow in the following section. 

avrot re edmapdbexror (-Sextov MSS.) [edruxyowper] (rornodpeda) thy 
évdéBaow. Either eiwapddexro. or edrvyjowpey is redundant. The 
reading of the MSS, appears to be a mixture of the two alternatives 
aitoi Te ebrapadexror Toowpea THY dvaBacw and atrot re ebruyjowpev 
thy évdBacw. 

[xa(per yap Upros 6 Geds.] This is superfluous, and makes the 
speech of Isis end feebly. It was probably added by a reader. Cf, 
Ascl. Lat. 1. 9: ‘hominum enim admirationibus, adorationibus, 
laudibus, obsequiis caelum caelestesque delectantur,’ &c. 

§ 70. Kdpot xdptoat Thy Tod dpvou émiyywow. Cf. Corp, XIII. 15, 
where Tat asks Hermes to repeat to him the hymn sung by the 
Powers. 

Npdcexe, wai. In the Kore Kosmu, the hymn must have followed. 
But it was either omitted by Stobaeus, or lost at some stage in the 
transmission of his text to us. 


The Zibedlus probably ended either with the hymn itself, or with a — 


short passage which followed it, and in which the return of Osiris 
and Isis to heaven was described. 


EXCERPT XXIV 


The superscription “Ev rairq, if strictly interpreted, would mean 
that Zxc, XXIV is a part of the same book from which Stobaeus got 
£x¢c. XXIII,—i.e. that this piece also is an extract from ‘the 
holy book of Hermes Trismegistus which is entitled Kore Kosmu’. 
But Stobaeus may have meant by his superscription merely that he 
took Zc. XXIV from the same volume of ‘ Discourses of Isis to 
Horus’ from which he took “xc, XXIII. It is also possible that 
the title Kore Kosmu, though originally belonging to one /ided/us 
alone of the Jsis fo Horus collection, had, by the time of Stobaeus, 
come to be applied to the collection as a whole (just as the heading 


Poimandres, which properly belonged only to Corp. I, came to be 


used in recent times as the title of the whole Corvgus). The super- | 
scription of Zac XXIV cannot therefore be considered to prove 


that this Excerpt was a part of the same /ibe//us as Exc. XXIII (or 


the narrative which forms the bulk of Zxc. XXIII); and the question 
whether it was so or not must be decided on other grounds. Both 








EXCERPTS XXIII: 70; XXIV: 1 559 


the difference of form and certain differences in doctrine (see 
especially the description of the four regions in Exe, XXIV. 1) make 
it probable that it was not so. 

Exc. XXIV consists of answers given by Isis to a series of 
questions asked by Horus. All the six questions asked are questions 
about human souls. The Ae//us from which the Excerpt was taken 
may have included questions and answers on other subjects also ; if 
it did, only that part of it which dealt with the soul would be suitable 
for insertion in the chapter (headed Tlepi yvyijs) in which Stobaeus 
has placed it, in his Anthologivm, and he would necessarily reject the 
rest. 

The first four of the questions are expressed in the same form 
(Ids yéyvovrat x.7-A.); the fifth is a sequel to the fourth, being a 
further question on the same subject of ovveows; and the sixth, 
though the word ovveors does not occur in it, is also concerned with 
human intelligence. It seems therefore that the document from 
which the extract was taken was at least so far continuous, that 
questions and answers on connected topics were grouped together. 
But a string of guaestiones such as this would admit of and invite 
additions ; and we can have no certainty that the several paragraphs 
were all written by the same person. 

In any case, Zac. XXIV probably originated in the same group of 
Isis-worshippers as Axe, XXIII. 

The writer of §§ 11-16 (if we assume the two answers contained in 
those sections to have been written by one man) must have been not 
only an inhabitant of Egypt, but an Egyptian by race. He had 
learnt to write Greek with ease in the literary style of his time, but 
shows ignorance of things which he would have known if his 
schooling in Greek science and philosophy had been more than 
rudimentary. In other paragraphs, we find the Platonic doctrine of 
unembodied souls assumed, and, as in Zxc, XXIII, there are traces 
(e.g. in § 3 and § 7) of the special modification of that doctrine 
which was taught by Posidonius. 

§ 1. ef m1 Oédets Erepov énepdta. ‘These words show that, in the 
Zibellus from which this piece was extracted by Stobaeus, at least one 
question and answer had preceded. 

ns yiyvovrat Baowdikal puxat. This probably means ‘how kingly 
souls come into being’, the souls of kings being assumed to be 
different in quality from those of other men. But it would be 
grammatically possible to translate ‘how souls become kingly’ ; and the 


560 STOBAEI HERMETICA 


person who inserted ai before puxai in § to init. took the adjective 
ovverai as a predicate. 

[émet yap] réwot téooapéds ciow ... Kat dvw pev .. . Deol KaToukodaup, 
The construction of this passage has been confused by some slight 
alteration of the text. Meineke hesitates between (r) putting — 
a comma after yj and bracketing xai before dvw, and (2) putting — 
a full stop after yj and writing ciot yap rémoe réocapes in place of éret 
yup témo. tércapés iow. Wachsmuth adopts the first of Meineke's 
two proposals. I have made sense in another way, by putting a full 
stop after yj and bracketing é7ei ydp. 

rémot Tésoapés elow ev 1 wavtl, oftives dwapaBdrw vény Kat (Bacr- 
Auxj) mpootacia Sroniwrovew, The thing which the writer is seeking 
to show is that the function of the human king on earth is analogous to 
that of God, who is king of the gods in heaven; to that of the Sun, 
who is king of the stars in the aether ; and to that of the Moon, who 
is queen of the unembodied souls in the air. The rpooracia spoken 
of in this preliminary statement must therefore be Aingly rule; and 
the connexion of thought is more clearly brought out if we insert 
Baciixy before rpocraci¢. 

dxapaBdrw vénw seems irrelevant; and as the laws enacted by 
earthly kings are often transgressed, it can hardly be said that they 
ate drapéBaro. It may therefore be suspected that darupaBarw vou 
xaé has been added by a later hand. 

8 te odpavds ... kai ¥ [tepwrdry] yi. There is no reason why yj 
alone of the four substantives should have an epithet; and earth 
could not be thought more holy than heaven. The addition of 
icowrdéry may have been suggested by rijs iepwrdrys qudv xXwpas in 
§ rr and 7... leperdry xdpa in § 13 (the land of Egypt as opposed 
to other lands). 

év odpavd Geol karotkodow, ... év Be rH aidepr dorépes. The writer 
of this paragraph agrees with the author of Zxc. XXIII in dividing 
the space between heaven and earth into two regions, the higher of 
which is called aifsjp, and the lower, dxjp. (See note on Zxc, XXII. 
17.) But he differs from him, and from the Hermetists in ~ 
general, as well as from most other Pagan writers of his time, 
in distinguishing the stars from the gods, and in saying that 
the stars are situated, not in heaven, but in a region below heaven. 
The prevailing opinion was that the stars were gods, and, if not the 
only gods, were at least a very important class of gods. Platonists 
might speak of an order of voyrot Aeo¢ whose abode was above the 








EXCERPT XXIV: 1 561 


stars, but placed the star-gods in heaven; and in locating the stars 
not in heaven, but below it, this writer implies a cosmology differing 
widely from that of any of the recognized Greek schools of thought. 

The peculiarity in his arrangement of the several regions and their 
inhabitants may possibly have resulted from a confusion between 
two different uses of the word ai@jp. A Greek might say that the 
stars were év 76 aiGdpi, using aifyp as a synonym for ovpavds (see for 
instance Exc. VI. 12: é&v otpave pepopevor dorépes . . . hépovrar ev 
ro aibépr aiwpovpevor) ; another Greek might say that aiéjp was below 
otpavds, meaning by aifyp the higher part of the atmosphere, cf. the 
Epinomis ; and half-educated Egyptians, putting these two statements 
together, might infer from them that the stars are not in heaven, 
but in a region below heaven. 

Of what nature are the ‘ gods’ who dwell in heaven? As the stars 
are not in heaven, the gods spoken of cannot be star-gods, We are 
told that their king is the supreme God (6 rv dAwv Sypuovpyds). They 
seem to correspond in some respects to thevoyrot Oeoé of the Platonists ; 
but it is unlikely that this writer had any clear conception of voyra. 
Perhaps he was thinking of the gods of popular Egyptian worship,— 
Isis, Osiris, &c..—and assumed that these gods lived in a place 
called otpavds which was situated above the stars." 

év 8é rd dépr uxal [Se povar}. Meineke alters 82 povas into Sadia. 
If we accept his conjecture, we must take yWvyal Saori to mean 
souls in the condition of daemons, i. e. unembodied souls, (Cf. Bx. 
XXIII. 19 as emended: rats 7dn mpoxowdoas Woxais, ... Tals... 
tepois Saiuoot peraxexAnpévais.) But as the corresponding substantives 
Geol, darépes, and dvOpwror have no epithets, the sentence reads better 
if Yuxai also stands without an epithet ; and it is more probable that 
8¢ wove has arisen out of daipoves written as a substitute or alterna- 
tive for Yvyai. 

év dpxe. cedyvy. The airy then extends from the earth up to 
a limit immediately above the moon; and the aefher, in which are 
situated the sun and the stars, begins immediately above the moon, 
and extends thence up to the lower limit of heaven. 

The view that the moon has more in common with the earth than 


1 I have assumed that derépes means ‘stars’. But the word was sometimes used 
to mean ‘planets’, and not stars in general. It is therefore possible that the writer 
located the gods and the fixed stars in heaven, and the planets alone in a region 
called ‘acther’ which is below heayen. But if so, he would still be contradicting 
om commonly received opinion that the planets are gods, and are situated in 

eaven. 


2806. Oo 


562 STOBAEI HERMETICA 


with the other heavenly bodies, and is included in the terrestrial 
atmosphere, is maintained (by a Platonist, in opposition to the Stoics,) 
in Plut. De facie in orbe Junae ; and the notion that the moon presides 
over disembodied souls, or at least has much to do with them, is to 
be found in that dialogue, and in some of Plutarch’s other writings, 

ent 8é mis yis (katorKodow) dvbpw7ror [Kal rd Nova Loa], dv apxerd.., 
Bactdeds. There would be no point in saying that the reigning king 
or emperor governs the cows and sheep. It is therefore most likely 
that kal ra Aowwa £Ga was added by some one who disregarded the 
following words dv dpye: 6 Bacrde’s, and thought fit to supplement 
the statement ‘upon earth dwell men’ by mentioning the beasts 
also, 

Gv &pxer 6 (det) [[kaTd Karpov] yerdnevos Bactheds’ yervOor yap (kara 
kaipdv)), & réxvov, [Bactheis] (cvIpwmov) of Geol éwdgvov (€agious MSS.) 
Tijs émvyelou Hyepovias (yovas MSS.). ard xoupdv, at the right time’, 
does not go well with yevéuevos Bacireds. A better sense is got by 
writing de¢ (‘at any given time’) here, and transposing xara xaxpov into 
the following clause. The rulers of the three higher regions hold office 
permanently ; but men on earth are governed by a succession of kings ; 
and in order that they may never be left without a king, the gods 
supply a man fit for the post ‘at the right time’, i.e, cause him to 
be born at such a time that he will be ready to become king when a 
vacancy occurs. (yevdmevos was inadvertently omitted from the text.) 

If Baowreis is retained, the following words éragious x.7.. become 
superfluous. What the writer meant to say was, not that kings are 
generated by the gods, but that the gods take care that there is at hand 
a man who is worthy to be made king when a new king is wanted. 
It would be possible to write évOpamovs éxagious; but as the king is” 
spoken of in the singular in the preceding clause, it is most likely 
that here also the singular was used. ‘The writer speaks as if there 
were only one king at a time on earth; that is, he is here thinking 
only of the Roman empire, and ignores all other kingdoms. 

yevvGor probably means, not ‘ beget’ or ‘ engender’ in the literal 
sense, but merely ‘cause to come into existence’. All men are 
‘sons’ of the gods, in the sense that they have been brought into 
being by the creative activity of the powers above; and the man 
who is worthy to be king is a son of the gods in that sense, but not 
in any sense peculiar to himself. It is true that the Egyptians had 
in ancient times imagined each of their native kings to have been 
begotten by a god; but the writer of Zxc. XXIV does not appear to” 















EXCERPT XXIV: 2,3 563 


have had any such notion in his mind. According to him, the souls 
of kings, like those of other men, are pre-existent (§§ 3 and 4); an 
their bodies are presumably produced by the same process as other 
human bodies. 

§ 2. Kat etoww of (dAXor) apxovres Tod (ev obpave) Bacihéws amdppouae. 
We have just been given a list of four dpxovres, the first of whom is 
the supreme God; and of dAdo dpxovres are the other three, viz. the 
Sun, the Moon, and the earthly king. The Sun and the Moon, 
being gods, might be called ‘effluxes’ of the supreme God (see 
Exc. XXIII. 64, where the word dmeppoe is used with reference to 
Osiris and Isis) ; but as the writer of xc. XXIV holds earthly kings 
to be men and not gods (§ 3), it is difficult to see what he could 
mean by saying that the earthly king is an dadppoa of the supreme 
God; for the term, if not wholly inapplicable to him, would be 
applicable only in a sense in which it might equally well be applied 
to all other men also. It may therefore be suspected that § 2 is an 
addition by another hand. If it were absent, it would not be 
missed ; for § 3 is quite as well suited to follow § 1 as to follow § z. 

[G Beurepeder 4 cedqyy Kal Kard rdév Kal Kata Sdvapw]. This is 
merely a repetition of the preceding statement, 6... jAws... THs 
cedjvns écri petlov cal duvayexdrepos. But 6 pev yap jAcos «7A. must 
have been followed by a clause beginning with # ¢ ceAjvy, in which 
it was said that the Moon is mightier than the earthly king. 

§ 3. mpdros 8é dvOpdrwv. Here the writer plainly and unmistak- 
ably says that the king is a man; and any phrases which appear to 
imply that he thought the king to be a god must be corrected 
accordingly. The preceding words (rév pév GAhov Gedv éorw 
écxaros) must therefore be altered into rév piv recodpwv dpxdvrwv 
éorly éoxaros, or something equivalent. And for the same reason I 
have written zap(& Tots aAXous) dvOpdmous below. 

This writer differs from those who believed (and those who said with- 
out believing) that the living emperor was an incarnate god ; though 
at the same time he holds that the emperor’s soul may become a god 
after death (uéAAovea dzoPeotcba, § 4), and in this respect agrees 
with the view which found expression in the state-established cult of 
the Divi. 

Tijs pev GAnOods Oc{iJérmros darhANakrat, exer Be efaiperdv tr map(d 
Tods dAdous) avOpdaous (wap’ dvOpdaois MSS), & Spody éor 7H Ged. 
The living king or emperor is not a god, but a man who has some- 
thing godlike in him. This might be expressed by saying that he is not 

O02 


564 STOBAEI HERMETICA 


6cés, but Getos dvOpwmros. (Cf. Pl. Soph. 216 B: Kai por Soxei Oeds pay 
dvip otSapds evar, Oeios prj.) We must therefore read Océryros 
dmj\Aaxrat, Which means ‘he is not eds’, and not Oedryros arna- 
Naxrat, which would mean ‘he is not Oeios’. 

dmj\Xaxrar is not a past tense ; it does not imply that he was once 
a god and has now ceased to be one, but merely that he is not a god 
as long as he remains on earth (though his soul may be destined to 
become a god when it quits the body). 

4 yap els adtdy Katamepropém Wuxyh eo ex xwplou (28 éxelvou éort 
106 xwpiou MSS.) 8 émepdvw xeirat éxetva dp’ dy eis tos GhAous Kata 
méunovrar avOpdmous. This shows that the writer of Zxc. XXIV, like 
those of XXIII, XXV, and XXVI, holds that the atmosphere is 
divided into a number of distinct strata, and that each unembodied 
soul has a residence assigned to it in that particular stratum which 
corresponds to its quality. The ‘kingly’ souls are souls which, before 
their incarnation, have been residing in the highest of these 
atmospheric strata. In that respect, they correspond to the 
‘advanced ’ souls spoken of in Zxc. XXIII. 19 (rais «is [ | robs evs 
dotpwv rérous (évaBdeaus)). 

§ 4. xaroméurovtat Sé éxeidev eis 1d Baorhedew Sid So Tadta at 
uxai, Kingly souls are divided into two classes. Those of the 
first class are souls which have lived blameless lives in a series of 
previous incarnations,’ and have thereby made such progress that, 
after one more life on earth, they will be qualified to be transmuted 
from ‘souls’ into ‘gods’. Such a soul, when it is sent down to 
earth for the last time, is made a king, in order that, by doing a king’s © 
work here below, it may get the training which it needs to enable — 
it to discharge efficiently the functions of a god when it returns to 
the world above. Before this last incarnation, it resided in the 
highest stratum of the atmosphere ; and we may infer that, when it 
quits the body and becomes a god, it ascends beyond the upper 
limit of the atmosphere, and thenceforth dwells in the abode of the — 
gods. 

But where is the abode of the gods? On this point § 4 seems 
inconsistent with § 1. According to §x, the souls dwell in the 
atmosphere, and the gods dwell in heaven, but between these two 
regions is interposed the aether, in which are the stars. We should 
therefore have expected to be told that a soul which was sufficiently 


1 This is probably what is meant by xadd@s xal dyéumrws Spapoioa tov tov 
aySva (aléva MSS.). 








EXCERPT XXIV: 4 565 


advanced to rise above the atmosphere would, to begin with, enter 
the aether, and become a star there, and that only after a further 
period of probation, if at all, would it be possible for it to rise to 
the still higher level of heaven, and become a god. But if that 
had been the writer’s meaning in § 4, he would have written péA- 
Aoveat xaracrepilerGai instead of pedAdovea droPcotoGar. If then we 
assume that § 1 and § 4 were written by the same person, we must 
conclude that he did not consistently adhere to the peculiar scheme 
of four regions which is set forth in § 1, and that in § 4 he speaks as 
if he accepted the commonly prevailing view, according to which the 
stars are gods, and the gods dwell in a heaven situated immediately 
above the atmosphere. 

Kingly souls of the second class are souls of the highest quality 
(Gia, ‘ godlike’), and have, before their incarnation, been residing 
in the highest stratum of the atmosphere. So far, there is no 
difference between the one class and the other. But those of the 
second class have, while residing in that abode, committed some 
small offence ; and they are sent down to earth and incarnated there 
by way of punishment. They are made kings, because it is fitting 
that these souls, though not wholly blameless, should still, in virtue 
of their higher quality, be exalted above the rest, and the position of 
a king, though inferior to that which the soul held above while un- 
embodied, is superior to that of other men on earth. 

We are not directly told what becomes of kingly souls of the 
second class when they depart from the body; but as it is not said 
of them, as it is of those of the first class, that they are ‘about to 
become gods’, we may infer that they remain ‘souls’, and accordingly, 
that, at the termination of their life on earth, they return to the place 
from which they came, i.e. to the highest stratum of the atmosphere. 

What was the writer’s reason for dividing kingly souls into these 
two classes? Would he have put some of the Roman emperors 
into the one class, and some of them into the other? And if so, 
on what principle would he have distinguished them? There was 
this manifest distinction among the emperors, that after their deaths 
some of them were, by order of the Roman government, worshipped 
as Divi at Alexandria and throughout the empire,’ and others were 
not ; and that might perhaps be thought to afford ground for saying 
that some kingly souls become gods when they quit the body, while 
others remain mere ‘souls’. 


1 See note on Asc/. Lat. IIL 27d, p. 236 ff, 


566 STOBAEI HERMETICA 


Gciat twes 78y odcar. 75 implies that these souls, like those of the 
first class, have attained to @ewdrys by a gradual progress upward. 

mapadepiotedcaca tov Oetov (EvGeov MSS.) yvdpova. The adjec- 
tive &Oeov, ‘inspired’, would be applicable only to a man, and is 
meaningless in this connexion. yvduwv means a carpenter’s square, 
and metaphorically, a ‘rule’ or ‘regulation’ (vorma). In the 
Egyptian civil service, a code of regulations was called yvoyov. A 
document written about a. D. 150, which is discussed by Prof. Stuart 
Jones, resh light on Roman bureaucracy, Oxford 1920, begins thus: 
ro(d y)vdpov(os), bv 6 Beds YeBacrds zy Tod idiov Adyou émitpory 
(wap)eorjoaro, .. . 7a év pe(a)w (xep)éAdara ovvreniw twrérag(d) vou 
‘I have made an abridgement of the middle chapters of the 
code of regulations drawn up by Augustus for the department of the 
i8os Adyos.” Taken in this sense, yvépova may be retained, and 
there is no need to alter it into vopov. Cf. Zac, XXVI. 2: (rapa) 

. . THY Tod Oelov vdpov wapayyelav mempaxvia, 

§ 5. at pévrou mept ra 70n Tov Bactheusvtwy yryvdpevat Bradopal 
x... Kings differ from one another in disposition and conduct ; 
one, for instance, is eager to wage war, another seeks to maintain 
peace. If all kingly souls alike are ‘godlike’, how are these 
differences to be explained? The writer answers this question by 
saying that the conduct of the king or emperor is determined, 
not by the character of his own soul, but by that of the ‘ angela 
and daemons’ by whom his soul was escorted down to earth. 

The writer does not say ‘some kings are good and others bad’, 
and the instances which he gives are not instances of moral virtue 
and vice. It would seem that he did not presume to judge or 
criticize the moral characters of the Roman emperors; for him, 
the soul of Nero and that of Marcus Aurelius alike are ‘godlike’. 
But he could not help being aware that emperors differed in their 
pursuits and aims; and he tried to devise a theory by which these | 

~ differences might be accounted for. His explanation is a strange 

one. If the activity of the king’s soul is suspended during its 
residence on earth, and he is merely a passive instrument in the 
hands of superhuman agents, a king might just as well have been 
provided without sending down a soul at all; a human body 
animated by a group of angels and daemons would have served 
the purpose, and would indeed have been, in practical effect, 
the very same thing. Moreover, a soul in a state of suspended 
activity would not get the training which is spoken of in § 4. 








EXCERPT XXIV: 5-7 567 


obk év TH THS Wuxis pice (Kpicer MSS.) xplvovrar. For dice, 
cf. ris pay Bias dicews érirafdpuevai in § 6. 

oide yap  dvw Sinn Thy dflay éxdoty vépew, Kav éx Tis ednpepodons 
xépas dmwblGvrar (&woAdvra MSS.) % dvw dicy is God’s justice, 
momentarily personified. @eiar Yuya are worthy to be conducted by 
an escort of angels and daemons, even if they have committed 
some slight offence, and have been sentenced to incarnation 
as a punishment; other souls are not worthy of that honour. 

4 e’mpepodoa xépa, ‘the Happy Land’, means the abode of 
the Getas yvyxal, which, according to this writer, is the highest 
stratum of the atmosphere. Did the ‘angels and daemons’ reside 
in that same stratum ? 

§ 6. [rovrwv yap mepixparel riis yropys if Wuxy, émdafopery TOY 
éauris épyov (évepyerdv?), povay Sé pepynpévy tév amd tijs iepas 
auvodiag mpocyeyovétay (mpocyeyovurdy ?)—(rovray mepixparely Tis 
yopns 4 wuxh exer A emAadopdvn tdv éaurijs epywv, paddoy 8é 
pepvnpérn tovtey péxpt tav tis érépas cuvodiag mpocyeyovoTwv 
MSS.)]. This appears to be a misplaced and badly corrupted 
doublet of ai yuxat ara rijs TSv Karaydvrwv Tepixparoder yvepns K.TA. 
at the end of the section, With the corrections which I propose, it 
expresses the same meaning as that passage. 

mepuxparet here means ‘keeps hold of’ or ‘clings to’. Similar 
instances occur in Exc. XXIII. 53, (24), where wepixpatodoa is 
coupled to avriAapBarduevat, and in Zxc. XXVI. 4 (drus 4 dios... 
mepikpary Tod .. . Turou). 

The meaningless ye. # may perhaps be a corruption of éxerai, 
written as a substitute for repixpare?. 

avvodia means a patty of people travelling in company. 7 ipa 
evvodia then is the troop of angels and daemons by which the kingly 
soul is escorted on its way down to earth. 

Sray 8é povorkol, tére Kat air dSe. The instance in the writer’s 
mind was probably Nero, whose musical performances were long 
remembered. (He may possibly have heard of King David 
also.) Marcus Aurelius might be his instance of a king who 
dirocodel. 

§ 7. mas 82 edyeveis yiyvovrar puxai. This section appears to have 
been written without regard to the preceding question and answer. 
A man who, after speaking of ‘kingly souls’, went on to speak of 
‘noble’ souls, might be expected to explain the relation between the 
two classes; he might say, for instance, that kingly souls are 


568 STOBAEI HERMETICA 


evyevéorarat, but that there are lower degrees of eiyévera also. But 
nothing of the sort is said here. Moreover, in the statement that 
the souls rézous éxoveww Sbev Gppdor x.7.A., we are told, as if it were 
previously unknown to us, a thing which we have already been told 
in § 3 jim. It is probable then that § 7 was originally written 
independently of §§ 1-6, but was afterwards appended to those 
sections because of the similarity of its subject-matter. 

eiol tives wodiretar Stapepouvoae GAAHAwY. twes and ddAyAwv do not 
go well together. We might either strike out vues, and translate 
‘there are woduretat which differ from one another’, or, retaining 
twes, alter d\AnAwy into rév d\Awr, and translate ‘there are certain 
moAureiat Which are superior to the rest’. 

moAureta. seems here to mean a man’s civic or social status. In 
what follows, it is implied that the status of a free man and the 
status of a slave are instances of rodurefar Siadépovear dhAjAwy. 

4 dd t00 éyBof6Tépou térou dppyxvia, This means the soul which, 
before its incarnation on earth, resided in a higher atmospheric stratum 
than the other soul with which it is compared. 

7S yap [[ J] Gmepéxov kat Bactdixdy Soudororel(rat) 1d smepexdpevov 
é§ dydyxys. The fact that the one man is a master and the other a 
slave proves that the former is superior to the latter; and he who is 
superior must be edyevéorepos. 

Baowdixéy seems to be here used as a synonym for edyevés. It 
could hardly be thus used by a man who had just written §§ 1-6. 
But perhaps it would be best to strike out cat BacidiKxdy. 

§ 8. at uxat . . . dpodpueis cio dautais, kabdmep é& évds ofcat 
xwpiov. This is inconsistent (verbally at least, if not necessarily in 
meaning,) both with éo7(w éx) [70d] ywplov 3 trepdvw xetrar éxetvov 
x.7.A. in § 3, and with 7 ard rot évdoforgpou torov cipyyxvia in § 7. 
The ywpiov spoken of in § 8 may be taken to be the atmosphere 
as a whole. 

av S adrds Sterdmwoer (Statumodrat or SiaruToGcat MSS.) 6 Syyroupyds. — 
This is a reference to some known description of the making of 
souls, which might be that in the Zi#maeus, or that in Hxc, XXIII, or 
possibly some other which is not extant. 

oltre eioly ppeves otre Oyrdevar, Cf. Mark 12. 25 (Luke 20. 35): 
Grav yap é vexpav dvacrGow, ovre yapodow obre yapilovra, GAN’ cicly 
as dyyeXou év Tols otpavois. But it is not to be supposed that the 
writer of xc. XXIV derived this statement from a Christian source. 
See note on dppevdOydvus in Corp. I. 15. 








EXCERPT XXIV: 8-10 569 


§9. 4 8é [| ]] (airla) rod tas péy (ray dppévwv) dBprpwrépas 
(BptpwSeorépas MSS.) efvar, ras 8é (rav Ondevdv) edadeis, (. . .). 
BptpwS<eorépas (‘ more grim’) cannot be right ; what is wanted is an 
adjective similar in meaning to rpaxeta: and épyarixwrepar at the end 
of the section, 

How did evadys come to mean ‘delicate’? Perhaps the notion is 
‘needing to be handled carefully’. 

TS dip eon, réxvoy “Ope, év G mévta yiyverat’ ahp BE wuyss eorw! 
(...) add 73 cSpa 8 wepiBeBAy7ar. It would be possible to make 
sense of this by cutting out the words rdvra yiyverar and dhjp 8 
Woxfs eorv, and writing 4 8 airia rod... evar... ebadeis (ody) 6 
dnp éort, téxvoy “Ope, &v S[ J] (otrw &vowpaticbeioa deer 7 Yrx7 (?), 
GAA) ard 76 cSpa 8 reprBEBAnrar (sc. } yyy). Assuming that the 
author wrote something to that effect, we might take dijp S& yuxijs 
éorw (otrw evowpaticbeions oixyriptov ?) to be a note appended to the 
preceding words. But I can make nothing of wdvra yéyverat. 

arorxetwv (ctorxetov MSS,) éott pupapa. Cf Bxc. XXVI. 13. 

7d pev tav Onderdy odyxpipa Theovdler pév te SypG Kal (7H) puxpa, 
Refrerar 8€ 7G EnpG Kal (rd) Oepud. As all the four elements have 
just been mentioned, it is to be presumed that all four of them are 

here taken into account. If so, the writer must have connected the 
terms dypdv, Yuxpdv, Enpdv, and Oepudv with the elements as in the 
Stoic system (according to which rd éypév is water, rd Yvxpdy is air, 
70 &ypév is earth, and 7d Oeppdr is fire), and not as in the more 
complicated arrangement of Aristotle (according to which 7d sypor 
kal tuxpdv is water, and rd Enpdv Kal Oeppdr is fire), And if 7d dypdy 
is a different thing from 16 yuyxpdv, and 7d Eypdv from 7d Oeppdy, it is 
better to insert rS before yvxpé and Oepyd, and rd before dypév below, 
than to bracket 76 before epudv, as Wachsmuth does. 

According to Aristotle, ‘the ultimate distinction between the two 
sexes is one of greater or less vital heat’ (Zeller, Arisfo¢/e, Eng. tr., 
vol. ii, p. 55). Ar. Gen. an. 4. 6, 77514: dobevéorepa ydp éort Kal 
yuxpdrepa 7a Oprea rv picw. 

Sivypos yiyverar kat tpupepd. We are probably meant to understand 
that the soul of the female becomes Stvypos because of the excess of 
7d éypev (water) in the composition of the body, and rpudepd because 
of the excess of 7d yvyxpér (air); and similarly, that the soul of the 
male becomes rpaxeia because of the excess of 7d éypdr (earth), and 
épyarixwrépa because of the excess of 7d Ocpydy (fire). 

§ 10. Stray odo: of xerdves muKvol dor Kal waxets, éuBAuwiet (BEvwret 


enemeeneaeel 


570 STOBAEI HERMETICA 


MSS.) 6 dp0adpds, Cf. Ar. Gen. an. 5. 1, 780225: od pdvoy 88 ra 
elpnpéva airia rod dépBAd i) dE Spay, GAAG Kal 4 rod Sépparos pious rod 
ért 79} képn Kadovpevy. Set yap aid Siaaves elvar* towdroy 8 dvayxaiov 
elvar 76 Aewrov K.T.A. 

gyer yap kal airy (sc. 4 Wuxh) ra mwepiBddrara, docpara, Kad Kai 
ait} dowpards gor. The zvedya spoken of in Corp. X is such an 
‘envelope’ of the soul; but it is here implied that there are several 
of them, one superimposed upon another. Iamblichus (Stob. 1. 49. 
43, quoted in note on Corp. X. 13,) says that some people speak 
of atbdpa cal otpdvia Kal rvevparixa wepiBrjpara (ris yx). 

These zepBdAaa cannot be doduara in the strict sense of the 
term (i.e. vonré). In the following sentence we are told (if éépos 
is the right reading) that they consist of air; and air is a oda, 
The envelopes at least must be material; and there can be little 
doubt that the writer of this passage regarded the soul itself as 
material also. If a man who held the soul to be an immaterial 
thing were to say, as it is here said, that the soul is enveloped in 
material wrappings, and that its sight is obstructed by these 
wrappings, it would be necessary to take his words as spoken 
metaphorically. But as the word doparos is here applied to the 
soul and its envelopes without distinction, it is to be presumed that 
the writer did not consider the soul itself, any more than its en- 
velopes, to be absolutely incorporeal. His meaning must be merely 
that neither the soul nor its envelopes consist of gvoss matter. Both 
alike are invisible and impalpable, and therein differ from the 
visible and palpable body. If the envelopes consist of air, the soul, 
perhaps, consists of fire, or of a mixture of fire and air. That is 
Stoic doctrine, not Platonic. 

§ 11. ‘H yi péoov tod wayrds bmtia Keita, dowep GvOpwos, xK.7., 
The earth was personified in the form of a woman by the Greeks, 
and by many other races; but the notion of picturing the earth 
as a woman lying on her back with her head to the South and her 
Jeet to the North could hardly have arisen in any other country than 
Egypt. It would be natural to speak in this way of the land of 
Egypt; for Egypt is nothing but the Nile-valley, and the Nile- 
valley is a long and narrow strip of land stretching from South to 
North. The fact that the Nile flows northward, and the caput 
fluminis lies to the South, would be a sufficient reason for placing 
the woman with her head to the South rather than in the reverse 
position. It is true that the writer of Zxc. XXIV is speaking, not 








EXCERPT XXIV: 11 571 


of Egypt, but of the surface of the earth as a whole; but the 
person who first spoke thus of the earth must have been an 
Egyptian, who thought of the ordis ferrarum as a larger Egypt, 
and applied to it what had doubtless been originally said of his 
own country. 

The Egyptians sometimes depicted their earth-god (Seb) in the 
form of a man lying on the ground, with the sky-goddess (Nut) 
arching her body above him. (See Maspero, Dawn of civilization, 
Eng. tr. 1894, p. 129, and Wiedemann, Religion of the ancient 
Egyptians, Eng. tr. 1897, p. 231.) Such pictures may perhaps 
have helped to suggest the description of the earth as a recumbent 
human figure in Zxc, XXIV. But Seb was male; and in making 
the earth female, the writer follows Greek and not Egyptian usage. 

All educated Greeks of the period held the earth to be spherical. 
That view was either unknown to the writer of this passage, or 
deliberately disregarded by him. He probably had no clear 
conception of the shape of the earth as a solid body; he was 
thinking chiefly of its upper surface, which he must have assumed 
to be approximately level. He did not think of this surface 
as circular; he imagined its length from North to South to be 
much greater than its breadth from East to West, and pictured 
it to himself as more or less resembling in its outline a recumbent 
human body. 

[€pBdérer 8 (BAéwe. 8 €v MSS.) odpavd xabdwep matpi ide, 
bras tats éxeivou peraPodais Kai adrh [rd iia] ocupperaBdddy.] 
The seasonal variations of temperature, vegetation, &c. on the 
surface of the earth result from the varying positions of the heavenly 
bodies. 

[r& i8:a] has doubtless arisen out of the preceding idiw. 

The connexion between the preceding clause (meuépiotar 88 
xa8’ doa pépy 6 adv@pwros pepiferar) and those which follow (kai 
mpos pev TO vor... exer THv Kehadjy, «.7.4.) is broken by the 
interposition of éuBdérea 8 . . . cupperaBdéddAy. If these words 
are to be retained, they must be transposed, and placed immediately 
after (pos) otpavdv BAérovea. But they are not needed there; the 
writer’s present object is simply to describe the position in which 
the woman is lying, and for that purpose, the statement that she 
is ‘facing towards the sky’ (i. e. lying face upward) ‘is to the point, 
but an explanation of her reason for choosing that position is 


1 In the Egyptian designs mentioned above, Seb is lying on his back, but turning 
his head, so that he looks away from the sky, 


i a ei 


57% STOBAEI HERMETICA 


irrelevant. It is therefore most likely that (éu)BAdéra 8... coupe 
peraBddAy is a marginal note on (mpis) otpavoy BAérovea. 

mpds Se TO Aaytory (ov) Befidv Spov, (mpds S€ te MBL tov 
eddvupoy,) Gmd (82) thy dpxrov (ras dpxrous MSS.) robs wéBas, [tov 
Be edvvupoy Swd Thy Kepadty tis apkrou]. As pera rv dpxtov 
follows very shortly, it is to be presumed that here also the writer 
spoke of the Great Bear only, and not of the two Bears. The 
following rovs might easily cause dpxrov to be altered into dpxrovs. 
The phrase {ad rijv dpxrov means merely ‘in the extreme north’; 
it does not indicate any more definite position. 

Heeren and Wachsmuth retain rov 82 eidvepov imd tiv Kepadiv 
rijs dpxrov, and insert (rov pev Seéidv iad tiv odpdy) before tov 8e 
eidévupov. But it is better to bracket rov d¢ . . . rijs dpxrov. The 
statement that the woman’s right shoulder lies to the East, and her 
left shoulder to the West, is of some use, because it helps to make 
the reader clearly understand how she is placed. But when we have 
once been told this, nothing could possibly be gained by going on to 
talk about the respective positions of the two feet. 

The addition of rév 8 . . . 7%s dpxrov may be accounted for by 
assuming that the words (rpds 5¢ 7S ABi tov eddvvpov), which must 
have occurred above, were accidentally transposed, and came to be ~ 
read, in a mutilated form, after. 4rd 8& tiv dpxrov rots wédas. We 
may suppose that a transcriber found a meaningless rév eddvvpov here, 
and tried to make sense by expanding it into rév pév eddvupov ind 
THY Kepadiy THs apKrov. 

[For the view that the East was to the right and the West to the 
left, see Aetius (Diels, Doxogr., p. 339: Tiva defi rod kéopou Kal Tiva — 
dpiorepd. IvOaydpas WAdtwv “Apiorrorédys Sekt rod kdopou Ta dvaroduKd 
pépn, ad’ Sv } épyy ris kujoews, dpurrepa SE 7a. Sutexa. Cf. Pl. Laws, 
760d, and Ar. De Caelo, 285b 16: Sedov yap éxdaotov A€yomev, bev 
h apxi) ris Kara. rérov Kujoews’ Tod 8 otpavod dpxiy Tis wepupopas, Ober 
ai dvaroXal trav dotpwy, Sore Todr’ dy ein SeEidy, od 8 ai Svcets, dpiorepor. 
ei obv dpxeral re dé trav Seéidv cal emt ra Seed wepipeperat, dvaynn 7d 
dvw evar tov ddavi wédov' ei yap ora & havepds, éx’ dpuorepd. éorrat 7 
xivnows, rep ob paper. SHAov tolvuy dt. 6 davis wédos éotl 7d dvw. 
kal ot pev éxel oixotvres év TO dvw cioly Husopapiy Kal mpds ois 
degcois, Hycis 8’ ev 73 Kdtw Kal mpds rois dpurrepois, évayriws H ds of Tvba- 
yopetor A€yover | 

[7a 8 péoa ev trois pécors]. As we already know that the woman is 
the earth, it is superfluous to tell us that the middle of the woman is 











EXCERPT XXIV: 12 573 


in the middle of the earth. The statement that Zgyf? ‘is situated 
in the middle of the earth’, to which all the rest leads up, comes, 
where it ought to come, in § 13. 

§ 12, 7d Tods pev vorialous . . . edxoptpous ((elva)) Kal Kadditprxas. 
The ‘men of the South’ must be the negroes. xopvdy? means, not 
the whole head, but the top or crown of the head; and the writer 
was doubtless thinking of the thick and woolly hair of the Soudanese 
negroes or ‘ Fuzzy-wuzzies’. [Cf. the Posidonian passage in Strabo, 2. 
-2.3: exew ydp 7 iy ras Ldvas ravras, adxpnpds Te iiws Kal dupaders 
Srapyotoas ... Spy yap pi) civat wAnaioy Gore Ta vébn mpoorinrovTa 
uBpovs wroreiv . .. . Suep obddrprxas Kal obAdKepws Kal mpoxeiAous kal 
mraréppwas yervaobar’ Ta yap akpa atrav cverpépecOar. The attempt 
to connect climate and character in these passages is Stoic. See 
Strabo passim and Addenda in vol iv.] 

rods Bé danAtwriKods mpds pdxny mpoxetpous [[etvar]] Kat TofiKxods 
(rofvavods FP"),—xpettrwv yap todrois (airia yap tovrwv MSS.) Sega 
xelp éort. The Parthians, for instance, were famous for their archery ; 
and both they and the Persians, who succeeded them, and were the 
dominant race in the East from a.D. 226, must have been known in 
Egypt, no less than elsewhere, to be formidable fighters. It is 
possible that the defeat and capture of the Roman emperor Valerian 
by the Persians in A.D. 260 was a recent event at the time when this 
passage was written. 

It is here implied that it is the greater strength of their right hands 
that makes the men of the East good bowmen. The bowstring was 
commonly drawn back with the right hand, while the left, with 
which the bow was held in position, remained motionless. When 
the bow was handled in this way, the chief part of the work was done 
by the right hand. 

rods 8° & TG APL... ds emi td Whetorov dptorepopdxous. Was this 
strange notion suggested by some peculiarity in the drill or equip- 
ment of the Roman soldiers by whom Alexandria was garrisoned ? 

[kat (év) Scots (kal Sov MSS.) dddor tH Sebi péper évepyouow, 
adrods 76 edavipw “rpooriepévous']|. This amounts to saying that the 
men of the West are left-handed in other things as well as in fighting. 
But the balance of the clauses is improved by omitting these words ; 
and it seems probable that they were added by another hand. 

mpoort- may have come from zpds twa. in the following clause, or vice 
versa. The text is corrupt in both places. It may be worth noting 
that mpos (riva) occurs again a few lines below. 


574 STOBAEI HERMETICA 


qos 8é Gwd Thy Spero [pds tiva] (Taxeis?) Tobs wéBas, Kal GAdug 
(&Xous MSS.) edxvfjpous. Perhaps the northern barbarians employed 
in the Roman armies had a reputation for good marching. There 
may have been a corps of them stationed in Egypt. 

ot (rods MSS.) 88 petd rodrous Kal pixpd wéppw [7d viv “Iradixdy 
kripa kal 7d “EAAadixdy], wdvres 8} (8¢ MSS.) odror KadAipnpol eior Kai 
edmuyérepor (<imwyovdtepor MSS.). ‘Those who come after’ the 
Northerners ‘and a little further on’ (sc. as you go from North to 
South) are, no doubt, those who live in or near the latitude of Italy 
and Greece. But there are good reasons for bracketing ro viv... 
‘EAXaduedv. As no nations or countries are mentioned by name in the 
rest of the paragraph, it is unlikely that Italy and Hellas would be 
mentioned here. The words have no grammatical construction ; 
and viv, which is meaningless if spoken by Isis, would have a mean- 
ing if we suppose the phrase to have been written by some one who 
said to himself ‘at the time when this dialogue is supposed to have 
taken place, the names of Italy and Hellas had not come into use’. 
We may conclude then that 73 viv... “E\Aaéuxor is a marginal note 
written to explain (and rightly explaining) what is meant by oi 8° 
pera. TovTous Kal puKpG méppo, 

If the writer was thinking chiefly of the Greeks, the notion that 
the people of the region spoken of are xa\Aiuypor Kal ebrvyorepot May 
perhaps haye resulted from the Greek practice of stripping for 
exercise in the gymnasia ; for it was only where some such usage 
existed that these parts of the body would be habitually seen. 

The following words dare... dpudiav were probably added by 
a nasty-minded reader. A piece of confirmatory evidence is no more 
needed in this case than in that of the feet and legs of the 
Northerners. 

It is possible, however, that the whole passage oi 62 pera tovrous 
. . « éppévov Syidéav is a later addition. This passage is connected 
with the preceding mention of the thighs in § 11 fiz. (rods 8% pnpods 
éy ois pera THv dpxrov); but perhaps both might be omitted with — 
advantage. The use of perd to describe the region meant, both 
there and here, is somewhat awkward; and the mention of an 
intermediate region, in one direction only, impairs the symmetry of 
North, South, East, and West. 

§ 1g. wdvra 82 tadra Ta pépy (wédn MSS.) (nis yiis) mpds (Twa pev 
évepyd évra, mpds 8¢) Ta GAAa dpyd. When applied to land, évepyos 
means ‘ productive’, and dpyds ‘ unproductive’. 











EXCERPT XXIV: 13 575 


| Tay mpoysvev fpdv (fpiv MSS.) tepwrdérn ydpa. These words 
seem to imply that both Isis and Horus, at the time when 
the dialogue took place, were human beings, descended from 
human ancestors,—or from ancestors who were formerly human, 
though they may have become gods after their deaths. See notes 
on £xc. XXIII. 1 and ((50)). 

THs Bé puis Spyyrypidy eori(y h) Kapdia. Cf. Kapdias oyxos in 
Zixc. XXIII. 36. This was the Stoic view. But it was doubtless 
also the view of native Egyptians who knew nothing of Greek 
philosophy or science. 

(oi) évrad@a dvOpwror . . . tv wdvtwy voepdrepol eit, The 
Egyptian writer takes it for granted, as a thing well known and 
beyond dispute, that his countrymen are more intelligent than men 
of other races ; for him, the only question is, what is the cause of 
this superiority. 

His assumption, absurd as it may seem to us, would have been 
admitted by many Greeks. Among the Greeks, from the time of 
Herodotus and Plato, and perhaps still earlier, the wisdom of the 
Egyptians was held in high esteem. Centuries before this document 
_ was written, it had come to be accepted as an undoubted fact that 
Pythagoras and Plato were pupils of Egyptian teachers ;! and in 
the writer’s time, many Pagans believed that Greek philosophy was 
derived from the teaching of the Egyptian Hermes Trismegistus, 
just as many Jews and Christians believed that it was derived from 
the teaching of the Hebrew Moses. 


émi kapdias (yijs) yevopevor kai tpaddvres. Egypt is the heart 
of the earth. Cf. Plut. Zs. e¢ Os. 33: the Egyptians ryv Alyurrov 
++ + Kapdiq, wapexdlovow’ Geppi yap éort Kal Sypd, Kal rois voriows 
Hépeot THs oikoupevys, owep 7 Kapdia Tois ebwwdpous Tod dvOpurov, 
padiora éyxéxAeoras Kal mporkexwpyxev. In Plutarch’s Egyptian 
source, 4 oixoupévy (i.e. the ordis ferrarum, the inhabited surface 


1 Cf. Diod. 1. 96: fnréoy Soot r&v map’ "EAAnot Sedogacpévay emt cuvéce kal 
maideig mapéBador eis Atyumroy év roils dpxaios xpdvas, iva tev évradéa voulyor Kat 
Ths nadelas perdoxwow. oi yap lepels rev Alyur7iav iaropodaw tx Tay dvaypapav Tav 
ev rais icpais Bifdos wapaBadgty pds éavtods 7d madady ‘Oppéa Te at Movcaioy kat 
MeAduroda kai Aaidadov, mpds 8% rovras “Ounpdy re Tov monriy, kat Avxodpyov Tov 
Erapriaryy, ért Bt Sddrwva rdv "AOyvaiov, at WAdrava rov quddcopor, édGeiv 5k wat 
Tlvbaydpay Tov Sdpiov, eal rov paOnparicdy Evbofov, ere 68 Anudxpirov 7dv "ABSypirqy, 
wai Olvoriiny tov Xiov, wavray 52 rovrew onpeta dexviover Tov piv eixdvas, Tov B 
tora t Karacnevacpétray Spoavipovs mpoonyopias, zx Te Tis éxdote Cydwbetons 
madeias dnodeigers pépovar, ouvioravres éf Alytnrou perevyvéxda mévra ot dy mapa 
Tois“EAAnotw tavudcOncavy, As to Plato and Endoxus, see Strabo 17. 29, p. 806. 
Compare also Abammonis resp. 1. 1 b (Testim.). 


ee OO OO OE eee ell la 


576 STOBAEI HERMETICA 


of the earth) was doubtless likened to a man or woman lying face 
upward, as in Hac. XXIV; but it must haye been assumed that 
the head lay to the East, and not, as in xc. XXIV, to the South. 
See also Horapollo 1. 22. Reitzenstein (Poim. p. r40) quotes 
Hephaestion, “AoreAdopara, p. 23 Eng.: Xvodmuy ds xvpiov ovta rod 
atyOovs tod Kécpov (i.e. lord of Egypt ?). 

§§ 14, 15. aAws Te, 6 prev vdros... emdidwor. This is a second 
answer to the question asked by Horus in § 11 zmi#. The two 
answers have this much in common, that in both of them the 
conception of a spherical earth is ignored or tacitly rejected, and 
Egypt is placed in the middle of the earth’s surface. But in all 
else, there is little connexion between them; and either of the 
two might very well stand alone. Whether both were written by the 
same person or not, we have no means of knowing. 

§ 14. 81a thy otrws adtdv yevondvay exeice dvaxopiShy (exet 
katakourdhy MSS.) éxeider fety Aéyoucw xal roy Aperepov tro(rapdv), 
Avopevns éxet ris ‘mdxvns (al. réxvys)'. The flow of the Nile 
is adduced as evidence in support of the view that the South is a 
cloudy region. The argument is this: since the Nile flows from 
the South, there must be a heavy rainfall in the South ; and where 
there is a heavy rainfall, there must be much cloud. The writer’s 
theory appears to be that clouds formed in the more northerly 
regions are (by some force the nature of which was probably — 
explained in the lost passage which preceded this sentence) driven 
to the South, and massed together there; that they there discharge 
themselves in rain; and that this rain supplies the water which 
flows down the Nile. He seems to have had some knowledge of 
the tropical rains of central Africa. Cf. Ammianus Marcell. 22. 5. 
5: ‘Adfirmant aliqui physicorum in subiectis septentrioni spatiis, 
cum hiemes frigidae cuncta constringunt, magnitudinem nivium — 
congelascere, easque postea vi flagrantis sideris resolutas, fluxis 
umoribus nubes efficere gravidas, quae in meridianam plagam 
etesiis flantibus pulsae,' expressaeque tepore nimio incrementa 
ubertim suggerere Nilo creduntur. Ex Aethiopicis imbribus, qui 
abundantes in tractibus illis per aestus torridos cadere memorantur, 
exundationes eius erigi anni temporibus adserunt alii praestitutis.’ 

airév means ray vedov ; and ovrws yevouerav refers back to é« tod 
mepléxovTos cuvictapévwy, or to some fuller explanation of the process 
by which the clouds which travel to the South have been produced. 


1 In ZAxc. XXIV. 14, it may very likely have been said, in the lacuna after 
oumorapévay vedwyv, that the clouds are driven to the South by the Etesian winds. 








EXCERPT XXIV: 14 577 


cataxopidyy cannot be right. xaraxouifev means (1) to bring down 
to the coast from inland, (2) to bring in to shore from the high sea, 
(3) to bring to one’s own place from elsewhere. But none of those 
three meanings is here possible. The writer appears to be speaking 
of the conveyance of clouds from North to South, which, in Egypt, 
would be conveyance from the coast to the inland parts, and from 
the mouth of the Nile towards its source; and that could not be 
called xaraxojidy. The word which means ‘to convey up stream’ 
or ‘up country’ is dvaxouilev. It therefore seems best to write 
Tv... atrav... éxeioe dvaxopidqy, ‘the conveyance of the clouds 
up country to the South’. There is some awkwardness in the com- 
bination éxei{ce) . . . éxeifev . .. exe; possibly the first éxe? (or éxeive) 
may have been substituted for some phrase meaning ‘to the South’. 

[If wéxvy is interpreted as ‘snow and ice’ on the mountains, the 
argument is that the precipitation upon the high Ethiopian hills, 
which causes the Nile floods, gives evidence of the cloudiness of 
thesouth. The reading réyvqs is explicable as a corruption of wdxvys, 
and wdyvy may easily have acquired the same range of meaning as 
pruina ; cf. Virgil Georg. 3. 368: ‘stant circumfusa pruinis | corpora 
magna boum’. On the connexion of the Etesian winds with the 

rise of the Nile see Gisinger, Die Erdbeschreiburg des Eudoxus von 
Knidos, p. 38 ff. For Avopevys cf. Procl. Jn Zim. 1. 119 Diehl: 
Tlopdiipios piv 84 pyow, ore deka hv wakad Aiyyrriwy 7d twp Kétwhev 
évaBdusbaivew ev TH dvaBdoa tot Neidov, ... odx Gre i xudv Avowevyn 
7) tARGos tov tSdrwv wove. See also Strabo, 2. 2-3, and Addenda in 
vol. iv. for Posidonius. ] 

tov yrokelpevoy Axducey dépa, Kal tTpdwov Tiva Kamvod Karémdyce 
(karexdpice MSS.). xarvdés usually means smoke, not mist; and 
clouds do not fill the air with smoke. But rpdrov twa is a hint that 
xamvés is not to be taken literally. Polybius 9. 16. 3 speaks of 
Komvadys Kal cvvvepiys aijp. 

The false reading xarexdyioe must have some connexion with the 
false reading xataxopudyy above. Possibly dvaxojudyy caused xaré- 
mAnce to be altered into xarexdpuce, and xarexdpure caused dvaxopdiv 
to be altered into xaraxopudyv. 

dxdds of pdvoy dpupdtev (évoudrwv MSS.) éotty éurddiov, GAAd kal 
voi. The notion is similar to that in § 10, where we were told that 
the embodied soul is wrapped in layers of air, and that when this 
internal air is thick and turbid, like the external air in stormy 
weather, the soul cannot see clearly. In both passages, the writer 

2806-3 Pp 


578 STOBAEI HERMETICA 


speaks as if the sight of ‘the eyes of the mind’, no less than the 
sight of the bodily eyes, could be obstructed by material things, 

& 82 damdudrys, . . . TH odveyyus (cuvexf or ovvexet MSS.) HALou 
évatohy SopuBoupevos kat exbeppatvdpevos, Spotws SE kai 6... dip 
peréxov tay abrdv xatda Suopds. If we read ovvexet, we must take it 
to mean ‘contiguous’, or ‘in close proximity’. ovveyys sometimes 
has that meaning ; but as the word occurs in a different sense a few 
lines below, where it means ‘continual’, it seems better to write 
cvveyyus here. 

These words imply that the surface of the earth is flat, and has 
a definite edge; and that the sun is close to that edge on the 
eastern side when it is rising, and on the western side when it is 
setting. A similar notion occurs in Hdt. 3. 104, where we are told 
that in India, ‘which is the farthest region of the inhabited world 
towards the East’, it is very hot in the morning, and very cold at 
sunset. But science had advanced since the age of Herodotus ; and 
aman who speaks in this way in Egypt under Roman rule shows igno- 
rance of things which were known to all educated Greeks of his time. 

§ 15. 7d 82 pécov todrwr, [etAcxpives dv Kal] drdpaxov (dv). 70 péeoov 
rovrwy is the land of Egypt. Air may be called «iAcxpunjs literally, 
and intelligence may be called ciAuxpujs metaphorically; but a 


country cant. “be called eiA:cpw7js in any sense. It is 
therefore most . eiAuxpwés has come from eiAckpwh ryy cvveow 
(<iduxpwh ériore. 23.) above, and has been inserted here by error. 


kat (adrd Kad’) c. .rd mpodxer (kal gaurd mpohéyer MSS.), kat tots ev 
aita (yevvwpdrors) [aor]. It would be going too far to say that 
Egypt mpoéxe trois év airG maou, i.e. that a7 things in Egypt are 
superior to the corresponding things in other lands. The only thing 
that the writer is here concerned with is the fact that the men born 
in Egypt (of é& air@ yevvdpevor) are superior to the men of other 
lands, and superior in one particular respect, viz. in intelligence. 

TH yop cuvexet ednpepia (dpepipvia, MSS.) (cuverods) yervG. einepia, 
‘fine weather’, gives the sense required. In Egypt, rain is rare, and 
the sky is almost always clear. According to the writer’s view, 
Egypt is exempt from the cloudiness of the South, from the extremes 
of alternate heat and cold to which the eastern and western regions 
are daily subjected by the rising and setting of the sun, and from 
the permanent cold of the North; the weather in Egypt is therefore 
always mild and serene; and it is the perpetual serenity of the 
climate that makes Egyptians more intelligent than other men. 











EXCERPT XXIV: 15 579 


kat (addopUdous 8) Koopel kal waSever. From this point to the 
end of the section there is much corruption; but it is clear that 
in what follows the writer is speaking of what Egypt does for 
foreigners, and it seems most likely that xoope? kal rodever (as 
opposed to yevvg) has to do with that topic. 

kat (yap) pdvov Scois épiter, rowodrous Kal viKG, Kai viKijoay, domep 
catpdany dyabdy toils vevixnpevois emorhuny Thy iSiav émB{Swor.—(Kal 
pdvov tots togotros épifer kal vind cal émorduevoy thy iSiay vixyy 
Gowep gatpdmns dyabds toils vevixnpévors Kal émiSi8wo. MSS.) My 
reconstruction of the passage gives what the writer probably meant, 
though it may be doubted in what words he said it. There is a play 
on the two meanings of vixay, ‘to defeat in a competition’ and ‘to 
conquer in war’. Egypt defeats all her competitors, i. e. surpasses 
all other countries, in intelligence ; but having won the prize in the 
competition, she treats her defeated rivals as a wise king treats a 
country which he has conquered. As such a king benefits his 
conquered enemies by appointing a good satrap to govern them, so 
Egypt benefits men of other lands by imparting to them, for the 
guidance of their lives, the knowledge which she has acquired. 
That is to say, Egypt has taught the Greeks philosophy, and in so 
doing, has been the educator of the human race. 

The MSS. give carpdrys éyafds; but there can be little doubt 
that we ought to read carpdéryy dyafév. The conqueror must be 
a king; a satrap is not a man who makes conquests for himself, but 
a man who is appointed by his king to rule over a conquered 
country. In the simile implied, the victorious king corresponds to 
Egypt, and the satrap, to the wisdom which Egypt teaches to foreign 
nations. 

The occurrence of the word carpdmys in this passage has been 
used as an argument to prove that Hxc. XXIV and £xc. XXIII 
were written at a time when Egypt was under Persian dominion, 
i.e. before 332 B.c.,and even that they were written before 405 B. c2 


} Flinders Petrie, Personal religion in Egypt before Christianity, 1909, p. 40: 
It would seem impossible for the allusion to the government of a satrap to be 
preferred by an Egyptian, except under the Persian dominion. And such a refer- 
ence to wise government could not occur in the very troubled years of plunder and 
confusion, 342 to 332 B.c. We must go back to the days of wise and righteous 
tule of Persia, 525~405 B.C., to reach a possible comparison with a wise satrap.’ 
Dr. Petrie thinks that the Kore Kosmu (of which he takes Axc. XXIV to bea 
part) was most likely written about 510 B.c.; ‘but in any case’, he says, ‘we 
must, by this allusion to a satrap, date it to within a century after that.’ The 
date 510 B.C., which he considers to be the most probable, is, at the very least, 
certainly as much as 460 years too early, and is probably 660 years'(if not more) 
too early, 


Pp2 





80 STOBAEI HERMETICA 






























It may therefore be worth while to mention some of the many 
instances of the use of the word safvaf in much later periods. To 
the references given by Liddell and Scott for carpdéays and carpa- 
muds in Plutarch, Pausanias, Lucian, and Alciphro, may be added — 
Philo De decalogo 13. 61, Cohn vol, iv, p. 282; Aelius Aristides 
(Keil) II, p. 343 and p. 99 ; Celsus, in Orig, c. Ce/s. 8. 35; Philo- 
stratus Vita Apollon, 1. 27; and the Gnostic Justinus @s. Hippol. 
Ref. haer, 5.26. In the reign of Diocletian, the governors of certain 
districts subject to the Roman emperor were entitled satraps.? 
§ 17, Tav tev (Ldvrwv MSS.) 7a pev Geelwrar mpds Td wip, Ta 
SE. . . [rd 8€ Kal mpds ra Sha]. As févrwy has just been used with 
reference to men, {wwy is better here. 
The point of the passage is that this or that animal has a 
preference for one or more of the four elements, and is averse to 
the others. It would be nonsense to speak of a preference for all 
four elements. If there were any animal that was equally at home 
in all the four, there would be no reason to mention it; and there 
could not be an animal that was alien or averse to all four elements, 
i.e. to the material world as a whole. Both 7a 8 xal mpds Ta dda 
here and ra 6 rév éAwy below must therefore be struck out. 
§ 18. [od py GAAa Kat tiva tay (dAdwv) Lov iret 7d wip, ofoy al 
cohapdv8par, x.7.4.] The original writer mentioned, as an instance 
of animals which love fire, the high-flying birds. His meaning was 
that eagles and other such birds show love of fire by flying so high 
that they get near the sun, or the fiery sphere of heaven. The 
words od py GAAG x.7.A, are a note added by some one who thought 
the salamander ought to be mentioned as another instance. 
According to Aristotle and Aelian, the salamander is a fire. 
extinguisher; and according to Aelian, it does not love fire, but 
hates it. Ar. Hist.an.552b 15: dre 8 evdexerat pr) xdeoOar cvordces 
twas Lgwv, } corapdvdpa rovel pavepdv’ airy ydp, ds aot, Sud rupos 
BadiLovca xaracBévvver 75 wip. Aclian De animal. 2. 31: 4 cada- 
pdvSpa to Gov ove éore pv tov zpos exydvov, . . . Oappet S& ard, 
Kal xwpel rH pdroyl dudce, kal ds dvréraddy twa. oredder karaywvicacban 
§ 19. (. . .) Téxacroy yap trav crovxeiwy meptBody gor Toy copdtoy.) 


1 Schiller, Gesch. der rim. Kaiserseit Il, p. 144: in A.D. 298, ai the end of 
Diocletian’s Persian war, ‘in dem oberen Tigris-Laufe wurden noch fiinf Satrapicen 
des linken Ufers abgetreten (i.e. surrendered to Rome by the Persians)... 
altarmenische Gebiete, die aber nicht dem Reiche einverleibt, sondern von Satrapen- 
verwaltet wurden,’ 











EXCERPT XXIV: 17-19 581 


mace oby puxy, ev TG odpart odca, Bapetrar Kal OdiBerar toIs rétrapou 
rovrots. The argument has been obscured by the loss of a passage 
at this point. What have the likings and dislikes of animals for this 
or that element to do with the state of the embodied human soul ? 
The connexion of thought was probably as follows. As some of the 
elements are alien to a fish, and some to a bird, so all the four 
material elements are alien to the human soul, the true home of 
which is in an immaterial world; and when the soul is incarnated in 
a body composed of earth, water, air, and fire, it is, so to speak, 
‘out of its element’, and is like a fish out of water. Consequently, 
an incarnated soul is never at its ease, and cannot think clearly. 

If that is what the writer meant, it seems to be implied in this 
paragraph that the soul is dodparos in the strict sense, and not 
merely, as in § 10, that it does not consist of the grosser material 
elements. Supposing that it were made of fire, for instance, a body 

of fire would suit it perfectly, and even in a body composed of all 
_ the four elements it would find something at least that was congenial 
to it. Possibly, however, the writer of this passage may have held 
that the soul is composed of the Aristotelian ‘ fifth substance’, and 
that its true home is heaven, which consists of that substance. 

[kat yap eixds gor, kal tavrqy tol pev rodrwy téptreabar, trot dé 
axeoOa.] This must have been added by some one who failed to 
understand the passage. If the soul ‘is weighed down and crushed 
by (all) the four elements’, as we were told in the preceding 
sentence, it cannot ‘find pleasure in some of them’. 

édy pévrot [kat] rodTo (radra MSS.) oddov AGBy Kal tapaxhy Aros 
dnd vécou 4 “pdBou', rére xal adth domep év Bu06 (mreodv) &vOpwirog émt- 
kupaiverat, Incarnation even in a healthy body hinders the soul 
from thinking clearly ; but when the body itself is thrown into con- 
fusion by disease, then the soul is as helpless as a man who has 
fallen overboard in a storm, and it cannot think at all. Bodily 
disease is likened to a storm at sea; and the sick person’s soul is 
compared to a man who has fallen into the sea, and is tossed about 
by the waves. 

It is only in this last sentence of the answer that the question 
asked by Horus in § 17 is directly dealt with ; down to this point, 
Isis has been speaking of incarnated souls in general, and not of the 
State of things év rais paxpats vécos. Perhaps we are meant to 
understand that incarnation even in a healthy body is a sort of 
disease for the soul ; but the connexion is not explained, and it may 


582 STOBAEI HERMETICA 


be suspected that some words which would have made it clearer have 
been lost before éay pévrot kat rodro K.7.2. 

Fear is a state of the soul, and not of the body; ¢ofov must 
therefore be a wrong reading. One might write in place of it some 
such word as Ons; but perhaps a&\Aov tus is better. 

Wachsmuth follows Meineke in altering dowep ev Bv0G dvOpwros 
into éomepet Bv0d dvOépixos. Meineke compares Callimachus 2. in 
Del. 193: wadtppoin érwyxerar dvOepixos bs. That passage may serve 
to show that ‘to float with the current like an dvOépixos’ (as we 
might say ‘like a straw’) was a phrase in use; but dv@épixos suits 
the context in Zxc. XXIV no better than avOpwros ; and if we insert 
meowy after év Bv0G, we get a quite satisfactory sense. 


EXCERPT XXV 


§ 1. Sinyjoo . . . iwép tis Oaupacris Puxorottas tod Geos. The 
making of souls by God is described in £xe. XXIII. 14-16, and 
is the central incident in the story told in that document. 


It is therefore probable that these words refer to Zxc. XXIII. + 


If so, xc. XXV was written as a sequel to £xc. XXIIL 
But it does not necessarily follow that it was written by the 
same person. 

otmw 8¢ pot dimjyyerkas mod TOv cupdrwy dmrohubelca: Xwpod- 
ow at wuxat. mod here means ‘whither’. The word is often 
thus used in late writers; there is therefore no need to alter 
it into moi. 

In £xc. XXIII. 39, Horus was told that embodied souls, if they 
behave well during their life on earth, will, when they quit the 


body, be permitted to return to their home above, but that if they — 


behave ill, they will be reincarnated on earth in the bodies of 
beasts. That is an answer to the question which is here asked ; but 
it is a short and summary answer only, and the writer of Zxc. XXV, 
supposing that he had #xc, XXIII in his hands, may have either 
overlooked it, or considered it inadequate. 

THS Ocwplas tavrys porns yevopevos. The doctrine spoken of is 
a puoryptov, i.e. a holy truth which must be kept secret from all 
except the few who are worthy to receive it, or which at any rate 
has been kept secret hitherto. 

aOdvare pajtep. Here we are plainly told that Isis was a goddess 


at the tinfe when the dialogue took place. (Cf. rijs d@avdrov picews 








EXCERPT XXV: 1,2 583 


xairy “rvyxdvovra’ in § 2.) As far as this passage is concerned, 
we are free to suppose either that she had been a goddess from the 
first, or that she had been a mortal woman, and had become a 
goddess after her death. But on the other hand, the words azo 
aedivns eb Has in § 9 seem to imply that both Isis and Horus 
are human beings living on earth. Perhaps the two passages might 
be reconciled by assuming that in this dialogue Isis is a goddess, 
but a goddess incarnate in a human body. See notes on Exe. 
XXIII. 1 and ((§0)). 

§ 2. (([pdorns}] (éyh) 8€, [omep] tis Abavdrou gdicews Kadri} 
[ruyxdvoura] (peréxouoa), . . . Siefehedoopai oor «.7.A.)) In the 
MSS., this passage stands in § 4, where it is interposed in the 
middle of an argument on the question whether the soul is dispersed 
when it quits the body. It is manifestly out of place there. As it 
contains a promise to give a detailed explanation of things 
(SueEeACdoopal vo tdv dvtwy 7d Kal’ Exacrov), and gives the hearer 
reasons for accepting as unquestionably true what Isis is about to 
say concerning them, it must have been intended to stand at the 
beginning of one of her discourses ; and if it occurred anywhere in 
Exc. XXV as originally written, it must have stood at the place 
where I have put it. 

puorys, if not deleted, should be corrected into piers. Isis 
might call herself pioris rijs Octas yvioews or something of the sort 
(cf. ris Oewplas ravrys porns above), but hardly pons ris ébavdrov 
gvoews ; and it is most likely that pvorys has been repeated here 
by error. The meaning probably was ‘I am one of the Immortals’ ; 
and that may be expressed by writing éy& 8¢, ris aOavdrov divews 
xabri) peréxovoa. There must be some mistake in domep; we might 
either strike it out, or alter it into és, or transpose it and put it 
before adevxvia. 

Aevxvia Sd tod weSlou tis aAnOeias. This phrase has come 
directly or indirectly from Pl. Phaedrus 2488, 1d dAnOeias ieiv 
wediov. In Ps.-Pl. Axiochus 371, the place in which Minos and 
Rhadamanthus sit as judges of the dead is called wediov dAnBetas. 
Cf. Plut. De defectu orac. 22, 4228 (in an account of a curious 
cosmologic system attributed to a hermit who lived on the shore 
of the Red Sea): 1 8 évrés emimedov tod tprywvou Kowiy éoriav 
dvar mavrwv, karetrbar 8 wediov adybeias, ev G To's Adyous Kal Ta 
ely Kal ra mapadecypata Tév yeyovérwv Kal Tov yevnropévoy axivyTa 
xetoOat, kal mept abra rod aidvos dvros olov dmroppony én Tous 


584. STOBAEI HERMETICA 


Koopous héperOar tov xpovov. (If the hermit said this, he must have 
read Plato.) 

"3 auveoris Kal pi ddavidpevoy xMpov exer', These meaningless 
words appear to be the remains of an axiom or fundamental proposi- 
tion which Isis stated at the beginning of her discourse, in order to 
prepare the way for her teaching about the soul. Its meaning 
may perhaps be inferred from the words cya... é& odddv 
ovyKexpyévoy and ro... é& évds cal ode ék woAdGy in §-4 (as 
emended), where this general statement seems to be applied to the 
case of body (which is é« zoA\év cvverrds) on the one hand, and 
soul (which is not é wokAGv ovveords) on the other hand. Cf.-Pl. 
Phaedo 78C: 7G pv ovvrebevee te xat cvvOérw dvr pice mpoorjKe 
Tovro macxew, StarpeOjvar ravry rep ovveréOyn’ ci 5é Tu Tvyxdver bv 
agivOerov, rovrw povy mpoojKe pi) Tdoxew Tatra. The author may 
have written something like 76 pév ovveords xal Siadverar, 7d 88 py 
ovveorés, abaviLopevov, xGpov exer els bv daépyerat (or darépyyrat). 
The soul is ‘ visible’ to us (in its effects, though not in itself,) as 
long as it animates a body; when the man dies, it disappears from 
our view, but, not being composite, it does not perish, but departs 
to some other place. For ddav{dnevov in this connexion, cf. 
Corp. XI. ii. 15 b: 7O piv copa SiadrvecOar, riv 88 wiv eis 7d 
adaves xwpeiv. 

§ 3. ANN’ GBe ydp epei (ris, ds BH) [Adyos euds] k.7.A. The words 
Ge épet Adyos éuds could only be translated ‘my discourse will 
speak thus’; but that would be superfluous and pointless. Besides, 
‘my discourse’ would be 6 éuds Adyos rather than Adyos éyds. It 
seems probable that és is a corruption of some numeral adjective, 
€. g. tpiros, wéuarros,' or éxros ; that Adyos (méumros ?),—*‘ the (fifth ?) 
discourse of Isis’,—together with the following words Tod... ai 
Woxal, was intended to stand as a superscription at the head 
of the paragraph ; and that this superscription, having been written 
in the margin, was by mistake inserted into the text after the — 
first words of the paragraph (aAX’ de yap épet) instead of before them. 

[od ydp, & Oaupacré xal peyddou marpds “Ovipews péya réxvov.]| The 
passage to which these words are prefixed in the MSS. is a state- 
ment of a view which Isis rejects; but as her rejection of it is 
sufficiently expressed by the words dX’ odx eye obras in § 4 init, 
there is no necessity for an od at the beginning. And the statement 
of the view rejected (cis dépa dvaxivovra, ... elra obxére StvacOax 

! Possibly ¢’os, an abbreviation for réumros. 








EXCERPT XXV: 3 585 


. «+ madwépopnoa, ... Kabdmep ovde.. . tdwp ... éort Suvatoy, 
x.7.A.) is too long and complicated to have been introduced merely 
by od ydp (‘it is not true that. . .”); it must have been preceded 
by something like épe? 71s és. Besides, if we assume that the whole 
depends on épet or some such verb, the infinitive dvvacfa can be 
retained ; otherwise, it would be necessary to alter it into Sdvvavrat. 
And as we find ddd’ dd yap épei standing in the text, it is most 
likely that these are the words by which the statement of the view 
against which Isis contends was introduced, and that all that 
separates them from trav cwydrwv mpoeAPodoa x.7.\. ought therefore 
to be cut out. 

Moreover, the words & . . . péya téxvov, in which the parentage 
of Horus is spoken of more fully than elsewhere, would seem more 
appropriate at the beginning of the dialogue than in the middle 
of an argument. It is possible that these words originally stood 
in § 2, where we may suppose the author to have written somewhat 
as follows: Ipdcexe, wat... . (cb (uav) ydp, & [Pavpacré cal] peyddou 


matpos "Ocipews peya téxvoy, . + .")) ((éya 8, ris dbavdrov picews 
kairy petéxoura, . . . duefeAevoopal cor x.7.d.)). 


([Gxptros]] [kot éppnSiv] rOy cwpdrwy mpoehodcot eis dépa dvaxu- 
vovrat [re] ((dxpirws)) «7.4. The adverb dxpirws, ‘ indistinguishably ’, 
or ‘so as not to be distinguishable (from the air)’, must have been 
intended to qualify dvaxvvovra, and not mpocAfodoa; it is therefore 
necessary to transpose it. 

éppyddv is unintelligible. As far as I know, the word does not 
occur elsewhere. In Liddell and Scott it is translated ‘impetuously’ ; 
but that meaning would not suit the context. 

We are here plunged i” medias res ; and it is to be presumed that 
a passage, now lost, intervened between the general statement 'ré 
cuveords. . . x&pov éxet', with which Isis began, and the section 
in which she speaks of a view that she holds to be erroneous. The 
subject ai yvxai, which must be understood in this sentence, was 
doubtless expressed in the lost passage which preceded. 

The view here stated and rejected is mentioned in Pl. Phaedo 
JOA: 7a de rept Tis Wuyis TOANWY dmoriav mapéxet Tois dvOpurrots, 127) 
... ed0s drahdarropern tod cdparos Kal éxBaivovra domep mvetpa 
) Kavos Stackedacdeica olyntor Siarropevyn. It was taught by 
Epicurus ; Sext. Emp. Math. 9. 72: xat cal airas 8: diapévover (sc. 
ai Wuxat), Kal ody, ws éAeyev 6 “Exikoupos, drodvieioat tov cwopdrwv 
xarvod Sikyv oxidvavrat, Iamblichus af. Stob. 1. 49. 43, vol. i, 


586 STOBAEI HERMETICA 


p. 384 W.: «i de... Gveorw 7 Woy?) TO cwpars Kabarepel doxG mvetpa, 
... Onddv wou . . . Oru eaow piv ard Tod cdparos, ev 8& 7 exBaivew 
Stadopetrar Kat SiacKeddvvvrar, Gowep Anpdxpiros Kat "Emixoupos 
aropatvovra, Lucr. 3. 434 ff.: ‘quoniam quassatis undique vasis | 
diffluere umorem et laticem discedere cernis, | et nebula ac fumus 
quoniam discedit in auras, | crede animam quoque diffundi 
multoque perire | ocius..., | cum semel ex hominis membris ablata 
recessit. Jd. 455: ‘ergo dissolui quoque convenit omnem animai | 
naturam, ceu fumus, in altas aeris auras.’ Cf. Plut. De sera nu- 
minis vindicta 17, 560C: Tas Yuxas Tov TeAevTdyTwY daoAdupévas 
emardpevos evs, dorep suixdas i} karvois aromveovous TOV TwudruV. 

elra obxére Suvacbar ... madtvSpoprjoar, [[GAda]] oF8€ (unde MSS.) 
els éxeivoy ere tov xSpov [etvar], d0ev HAOov 73 mpdrepov, dvacrpéperv. 
The yariant dove, given by P? marg. in place of efra, is adopted 
by Wachsmuth. But after dore, it would be necessary to write 
poxért dtvacGa in place of obxér: SivacGar. On the other hand, if 
we follow the authority of the MSS. in reading ¢fra otxér: StvacOa, 
we must alter pnd¢ into ode. 

[elvax] may have arisen out of iévac or dviéva, written as an alterna- 
tive for dvaorpédew. 

Kabdrep ob8€ 75 "hapBavduevoy éx tov Kdtw dyyeiwv' USwp cis Tods 
aitods témous S0ey ehyhOy ‘eméxew' eort Suvardy, [adN’ of8 Tadrd 
mapautika AapBavdpevoy cal xedpevoy thy iSiavy hapBdver xdpav"], 
Thiy dvapiyvutat Td waytt Tod USaros xJpart. The water corresponds 
to the soul, and the dyyeiov to the body. (Cf. ‘quassatis undique 
vasis diffluere umorem ... cernis’, in Lucr. 3. 434 ff, quoted above.) 
We have just been told that the soul, when it quits the body, is 
dispersed, and that consequently (r) it cannot afterwards enter 
another body, and (2) it cannot return to the place from which it 
came when it entered the body. [Since the two clauses ¢ira ., . (I. 9) 
and [[aAAa]] oydé (1.10) do not correspond to xaOdzep ob8e. .. dA 
ovdé here, and since the latter pair appear to repeat one another, the 
editor suggests that they are doublets and that xaOdmep... dvvardv 
represents what the Hermetist wrote. On this assumption he would 
emend the text in some such way as this: xa@dsep obd¢ ro [AapBave- 
pevov] (exxedpevor) é2 [trav xérw] d&yycioy Dwp cis ros abrods Térous 
bev eAypOy er (avarpexew ort duvaror, 

[ [GAN] 0888 [ad]rd [[wapavrixa]] [AapBavdpevov al] (éx)yeduevov 
(BSwp) riv iiav (dva)AapBdver xopay, | 

whiv (apavrixa)) évapiyvuTar 7S wavtt Tod Batos yvpare. 








EXCERPT XXV: 4 589 


An alternative interpretation may be offered. Both clauses do refer 
to the second clause above. The question is whether a soul can return 
to the place whence it came, and it is replied that it cannot, because 
it will be dispersed in air. This anology substitutes for the soul and 
the air a bucket, say, of water drawn from a body of water and then 
poured back, only to be lost in the whole mass. ra xdérw dyyeta 
answers to 1d direipov veda, and may perhaps be rendered ‘the 
reservoirs below’, that is, the masses of water on earth as compared to 
the air above. ééyew should be emended to ériyeiv. The second 
clause simply strengthens the figure: no, no matter how instan- 
taneously it is drawn out and poured back, it itself does not occupy 
it own place, &c. ] 

§ 4. €k wodddy cuyxexpipevoy (cuyxpiysdrev MSS.) mapareO\ippévor 
(-pévov MSS.) cis xUow. Water was commonly said to be an 
element, and not a compound. But water as known to us, the 
liquid with which we fill our pitchers, is not the pure element, but 
a mixture, in which the element water predominates, but in which 
portions of the other elements, or of things made of them, are also 
present. See £xc. II A. 2, where the pure element water is called 
Bdwp avrovdup. 

Our water contains portions of solid substances (e.g. of earth 
washed away from a river's banks); but they are broken up 
into minute particles, and thereby made fluid (rapareO\iupéva 
els xvo" Ww). 

4 Se oyh . . . epyor tay too cod yeipdv te Kal vod. The 
writer was probably thinking of the making of souls in Zac, XXIII. 

1d roivuy é€€ évds Kal ok ék moddy (odx é€& dAAou MSS.). Ac- 
cording to Zxc. XXIII, the soul is composed é« woAAGv; for it 
is there said that the souls were made of a mixture of zip, 
mvedua, and certain ‘unknown’ materials. But the writer of 
Exc. XXV may have regarded that passage as mythical, and declined 
to accept it literally. 

Cf, Exc. ILA. 11: 7 yap ddnbés eos (70) [xat] e abrod pdvov rijv 
atoracw exov,... 6 dt dvOpwros éx rohAGy ouvérryKe. 

Faire 0° gautd! eis vodv S8yyoUpevov. This seems to be a passing 
mention of the end towards which the soul’s course ought to be 
directed. A human soul embodied upon earth is not évvovs from 
the first, but is capable of becoming évvous, or even of becoming 
vots and nothing else, if rightly guided. (Cf. Corp. X. roa: 
Yrxy 8? évOpwrivy, ob mica per, % 52 edoeBys, ... dAn vods yiverat.) 


588 STOBAEI HERMETICA 


Sense might be made by writing atOés re ix’ adrod (i.e. two 
tod Oeod) cis vodv ddyyovpevov. The soul owes its origin to God’s 
vovs, and, if it follows God’s guidance, finds its way back to vois. 

Such a thought as this, however, is hardly in keeping with the 
rest of the piece ; we should rather have expected to be told that 
souls find their way back to this or that stratum of the atmosphere. 
It may therefore be suspected that these words have been added by 
another hand. 

SGev Set (8) MSS.) cai thy pds Td capa adris civodov [dppoviay 
Geos] Srd dvdykns yevoueryy elvar (perhaps yeyovévat). Since the 
soul has no natural affinity to the body, force or compulsion must 
have been employed to join them together. The reluctance of the 
unembodied soul to submit to this compulsion is described in 
£xc. XXIII. 33 sgg. dppoviav Oeod (a coadjustment—sc. of soul 
and body—effected by God?) may perhaps be a remnant of a 
marginal note on this sentence. 

§ 5. St S€ ore eis eva Kal tov adrdv témov (wacat) xudatws, ore 
eikq Kal ds Eruxev [[dAd]] Exdory, ((dNAQ)) emt Thy (Slav dvamepmerar 
xépav, The two things to be proved are (1) that the souls, when 
they quit the body, do not all go to the same place, and (2) that the 
particular place to which this or that soul goes is determined by 
fixed laws, and not by mere chance. (él riv idfavy, ‘to the place 
which properly belongs to it’, or ‘to which it properly belongs’, 
stands in contrast to ¢cixj «al ds érvyev.) Both these things are 
proved by the similitude which follows in § 6. 

davepdv kal é§ dv én ev 1G odpate obca [kal To mAdopati] méoxet 
(nal) [yap] wapd thy iSiav ddow memaxuppery (-xupern F), wAdopare 
is an alternative for oparu—ydép may have arisen out of apa by 
duplication ; or it may have been shifted to this place from the 
following sentence, where a ydp is wanted. 

[rerayvppévy is a reminiscence of Pl. Phaedo 81. Cf. Proclus Zz 
Remp. 1.119. 10 Kroll: kat 7a repyBAjpara ra artyoed} Kabapa pépew 
dvdykn, Kal pn erPootpeva br Tov evAwy drpov pyde rayuvépeva bird 
tis ynivns dicews.]| The souls of the men and beasts spoken of in 
§§ 6-8 are in this condition. 

§ 6. mpdo(o)xes . . . TG Aeyopévy Spordpart. Does 7 Acyomerp 
mean ‘which I am about to tell’, or ‘which is commonly told’? 
Neither is quite satisfactory ; and perhaps it would be better to 
strike out Aeyouévy, and write 7Ode 7G Spoudspare. 

derods Kal mepiorepds «.7.A. This list of animals is much longer 








EXCERPT XXV: 5,6 589 


than the argument requires; and it is probable that it has been 
lengthened by transcribers. 

If we shift d¢es in § 6 to the place that corresponds to that in 
which it stands in § 7, there is a definite plan of arrangement. 
After men, who are regarded as a class apart, come first animals 
that fly in air (ri aryvd, including flies as well as birds); then, 
quadrupeds, which walk upon the earth, and snakes, which crawl on 
it and live in holes below its surface; and lastly, animals that live 
partly on land and partly in water. The animals are classified 
according to their relations to the several elements, and the writer 
names in succession specimens of each of the chief classes, with the 
exception of the fishes. He could not include fishes in his list, 
because they would die in any place in which men, birds, flies, 
quadrupeds, and snakes could live, and for that reason one could not 
assume them to be shut up along with the rest; he therefore 
mentioned in place of them amphibious animals, i.e. beasts which 
live partly in water, though not wholly. 

[Was the notion of the ovayerjpiov suggested by the repurrepedy in 
Pl. Zheaet. 197 c?| 

kal KUkvous Kal tépaxas Kal xeAtBdvas kat otpoudous. The similitude 
would serve the writer’s purpose better if these words, and the 
corresponding clauses in § 7 (oi S& i¢paxes . . . avrois dda), were 
omitted. In that case, we should have three specimens only of 
mryvd, viz. (1) eagles, which, when released, fly up into the upper air, 
(2) doves, which fly up into the lower air, and (3) flies which keep 
near the ground. That would be an exact parallel to the behaviour 
of the souls, which, when released from the body, betake themselves 
to different strata of the atmosphere. It may therefore be suspected 
that the swans, hawks, swallows, and sparrows have been added by 
another hand. In § 7 (eagles «is rév aifépa, doves «is tov tAyolov 
éépa, hawks imwepdvw rovrwv), the mention of the hawks involves 
a departure from the natural order in respect of the atmospheric 
strata. The swans, which come first of the four in § 6, come last of 
the four in §7 ; and the description of the place to which the swans 
go (drov eeorw adrois ddew, § 7) is a poor makeshift; one would 
have supposed that a singing bird could sing in any place in which it 
could keep alive. 

In the case of the quadrupeds, snakes, and amphibious beasts, 
the similitude is not quite so appropriate, because there is no re- 
semblance between the places to which these animals go and the 


590 STOBAEI HERMETICA 


places to which the souls go. It is possible that in the earliest form 
of the document 7a wrnva alone were spoken of, and that all the rest 
of §§ 6 and 7 is a later addition. 

kat Boas Kat motwa.  ofpya, properly ‘flocks’, here means 
‘sheep’. This use of the word occurs in Longus, Daphnis and 
Chloe (second century A. D.?) 1. 8: 4 per és wotpmov (se. the ewe that 
suckled her) dvapepovea rijs owrnpias ri airiay, 6 8% pepynuevos ds 
éxxeiwevov adrov al€ dveOpepev. 

kai tia tOy "ris Kowdrnros éxopévwr' Léwv, Some phrase meaning 
‘amphibious’ is needed; and it seems most likely that rijs is a cor- 
ruption of yijs (re Kat datos). 

§ 7. Aaywoi Be (cis) Spupods, Kal Bées (els) adAtoripra [wedia]. These 
two phrases differ from the context in the omission of the article 
before the substantives, as well as in the omission of the indispensable 
els. Perhaps it would be best to bracket them, and to bracket also 
kal Naywots kal Bdas in § 6. We should then have wild animals 
(lions, leopards, wolves) mentioned first, and domestic animals (dogs 
and sheep) after them. If we retain the hares, wild and tame 
animals are intermixed. 

éxdorou eis Thy oixeiay xdpav bwd tod EvSov kprtypiou dvarpeTopevou. 
The word xpirjpiov is used twice by Plato in the sense of xpirjpuov 
GAnGelas, ‘that by which we decide whether something is true or 
not’, Rep. 582 A: rin xpi KpiverOar ra péAdovta Karas KpiOjrecOar; 
Gp’ otk éurepic. te Kal bpovice kal Ady ; } rovrwv Eyor dv tis BéATiov 
kpirnpiov; Theaet. 178 B: mdvrwv pérpov avOpwrds éorw . . * bywv 
yap airav 7d Kpurjpiov év abrG, ola wdéoxe rota oidpevos, ddnOh re 
oierat air cat dvra. (In Legg. 767 B, the only other place in Plato 
where the word occurs, its meaning is different.) It is used once 
by Aristotle, Mefaph. K. 1063.22: 76 aicOyrypiov Kal xperfpiov Tov 
AexSévrov xvpdv. But the Stoics were the first to bring «puriprov 
into common use as a philosophic term. Diog. Laert. 7. 54: xperq- 
ptov S& ris adyOelas pact rvyxdvew tiv Karadynrrixiy davraciay, 
touréott tiv dad trdpxovros, Kala pyot Xptourmos ev rH 1B’ rav 
Puouxay, cai "Avrérarpos Kat "“AmohdAddwpos. 4 pv yap BonOds xperipia 
mhelova darohetrer, vodv Kal aleOnow Kal dpetw Kai éroripny’ 6 BF 
Xpiourmos Siahepdpevos mpds airov év TS mpwrw Lepi Adyou Kpurypid 
gnow var atoOnow Kai mpddrnw. . . . ddAor 5€ twes tov épyatorépwv 
Brody tov opOby Adyov Kpirypiov darodetrovaew, as 6 Toceddvuos ev 
7@ Iepi xpernpiov dyot. Sextus Empiricus, Jazh. 7. 29, distinguishes 
two different uses of the word: rd xpurmpiov . . . Aéyerar . . . Sixds". 








EXCERPT XXV: 7,8 591 


aS éva, pev tpdrov, & mpooéxovres Th Bev wrovodpey 7a 8& obSapds* Kab? 
érepov S€, & mpocéxovres 7a pey imdpyew hayiv ra 8 pi imdpyew, 
kai raurl pev ddnOR xaBerrdvar tavri 8% yevd7. See also Sext, Emp. 
Fyrrh. 2. 14 (where 73 xpirjpwov in the latter sense is called 73 
Kpitipiov ris dAnOeias); ib. 1. 21; and Math. 7. 126-131. The 
kpirijptov spoken of in xc. XXV is not a Kpirppwov ras GAnGeias, but 
one of the other kind, 3 apocéxovres ri Mev movoduev ra Sé odSapds ; 
it is something in the animal which determines its movements, and 
impels it towards a certain place. It is a 6ppy, or (as Boethus 
would perhaps have called it) an épefis. We might call it an 
instinct ; and the writer would probably have said that it was im- 
planted in the animal by #¥ois (see Zxc. IV B). 

§ 8. éxdorn oxy, Kal avOpwmevonern Kal &Adas émyeiLouca. It is 
here implied that beasts as well as men are animated by yYuyai. 
That is inconsistent with Axe. XXIII, according to which men 
alone are animated by ywyaé, and a beast has no yux7, but only a 
mvedya (except in the case of a beast in which a human yux7 has 
been reincarnated as a punishment for a bad life on earth), 

my ei px ties tv Tudwviow ... Aéyor Kt. mAnv ei poy occurs 
again in Zxc. XXVI. 2. It would be more correct to say either 
mA ei or ed py. But Lucian (Pseudosophistes 7) mentions w\jy ei 
pa} a8 a common solecism: and the incorrect phrase may have been 
written by the author. 

ot Tupdvior are the followers of Typhon (Set). According to the 
Egyptian myth, they fought against Osiris and Horus. Isis would 
therefore hate and despise them; and the writer makes her name 
them when she wishes to give an instance of people notorious for 
perversity. If he had been speaking in his own person, he might 
perhaps have said, instead of ‘some Typhonian’, either ‘some 
Epicurean’ or ‘some Christian ’. 

és pndév mapa rdf mpdocew Kav KoddfLuvra. Those who are 
undergoing punishment might be expected to feel resentment 
against their punishers, and obey them only under compulsion, if at 
all; yet in this matter the embodied souls spontaneously obey the 
ordinance (rdgis) of God, or of Nature, who is God’s vicegerent upon 


kdhacis yap abrais f evowpdrwors. Cf. Exc. XXIII. 25-41. This 
notion had come down from the early Pythagoreans. Philolaus ap. 
Clem. Alex. Strom. 3.3. 17: paprupéovra dt xat of radatol Geodrsdyor Te 
kal pdvries ds Sid twas tiyswpias & Yuya ro cdyart orvéteverar. 


592 STOBAEI HERMETICA 


Athenaeus 4. 157 C: Evéi@eos 6 Iv@ayopixds . . ., &s pyot Kd€apyxos 
6 Tepuraryrixds ev Sevrépw Biwy, ddeyey evdedérGai TG cdpare kal Td 
Seipo Biw tas drdvrwov Yuyxds Tywpias xdpw. Cf. Emped. /. 115 
Diels: éorw dvdyxns xphya, Scdv yidiopa wadaudy, |... ebré tis 
dprdaxigor povy dira yvia purvy, | (Necxet 6?) ds x’ émdpxov duap- 
thoas éropdcon, | Saipoves ofre paxpalwvos AcAdxacr Blovwo,—rpis puv 
puplas Spas ard paxdpwv dddAnoGar, | dvopévovs wayrota Sui xpdvou 
ciSca Ovyrav | dpyadéas Bidrowo peradAdeoovta KeAcdOovs. |. . . tay 
Kat ey viv ely, puyas Ocd0er cal adsjrys, | Netxet pawopévy wiovvos.* 
Plotinus 4. 8. 1: "Eymedoxdfjs te, eimdy duapravodcais vowov elvat 
tals Wuxais meceiv évradéa, kai abros “ puyas Ocdbev” yevdpevos jeew 
“aiowos pawouevy Netxe.”, tocodroy mapeytpvou doov Kai Tvba- 
yopas, olvat, Kal of da exeivov qvirtovro mepi te tovTov mepi Te 
moAAGy Gdwr. 7G Se (5c. "Eyrredoxdct) rapiv wat dia roinow ob cadet 
elvat. 

$9. ( . .) exer 82 F (rar) ((avw)) Sidragis [1 tepwrdry] oftws. [75y 
noré [[dvw]], 3 peyadopuéctare mat, Préwe] [puxdy Srardgers}, The 
transition to a fresh topic is abrupt; some connecting words or 
sentences have probably been lost. 

Bdére Wwxav Siardées is impossible. One might say dvw Pdére, 
‘look upward’; but the dvw in the text is too far separated from 
Bdére, and has most likely come from the preceding sentence, where 
tov dvw, or something of the sort, is needed to go with didragis. 
More probably, BdAére was followed by eis with a substantive, and 
the words #3 woré . . . Bere are the beginning of an unfinished 
sentence, which is out of place here, but may perhaps have formed 
part of the lost passage that preceded ¢ya 8 «7A. It may be 
conjectured that yvxav Siardéfas is a remnant of a superscription 
(e.g. Ilept ris trav yuxay Siardééews) written at the head of the 
paragraph ; compare the superscription [Ilod rév cwpdrer drodv- 
Ccioan Starpiovow ai yvyxai] at the beginning of § 3. 


1 T.e. men and beasts are ‘daemons’ (= unembodied souls) that have been 
sentenced to a series of incarnations as a punishment for some crime, The two 
crimes mentioned by Empedocles are murder and perjury. But how could an 


unembodied soul commit murder? The nature of the offence by which the — 


Pythagoreans supposed the soul to have incurred the penalty of incarnation is left — 


unexplained. It may have been explained in some fepds Ad-yos which has not been 
transmitted to us; the words of raAqiol OeodAdyor re Kat pdvmies in Philolaus perhaps 
refer to something of the sort. (It cannot have had anything to do with the Orphic 
myth of the rending of Dionysus by the Titans; for the Titans were not unembodied 
souls, and it was not by incarnation that they were punished for their crime.) The 
author of the Kore Kosmu makes an attempt to answer the question how the souls 
had offended; see Axc. XXIII. 24. 








EXCERPT XXV: 9,10 593 


Ts dm’ odpavod Kopudis péxpr cedfjvns Oeois kal derpos Kal ty 
addy mpovoia cxohdLer. 17 dAAy mpovoca apparently means ‘ deity in 
general’. But what other form than that of gods and stars could 
deity assume? Was the writer thinking of the fiery element of 
which the heavens were held to consist, and did he identify the 
celestial fire as a whole with ‘Providence’, i.e. with the divine 
power by which the universe is governed? He could have found 
Stoic authority for doing so. 

oxoAdfe. means ‘is left vacant for’, or ‘is reserved for’; cf. Plut. 
C. Gracch. 12: ti Oewpyripia xabetrde Kat TO Sypuw cxordLorta . . 
arébeEe Tov Tdrov. 

If the words @eois and derpors are to be taken as denoting two 
different classes of celestial beings, and not merely as two names 
denoting one and the same class, we must understand that there are 
‘gods’ who are not stars, but live in the same region as the stars, 
and are closely associated with them. There is no trace here of the 
peculiar system of Zxc. XXIV. 1, according to which the ‘gods’ live 
in heaven, and the éorépes (stars in general ? or planets ?) are situated 
in another region, called aifjp, which is below heaven. The writer 
of Zxc. XXV knows nothing of this latter region ; he uses the word 
aiOjp differently, applying it to a part of the dojp, and even to a part 
of it which is much nearer to the earth than to the lunar sphere ; 
for he says that eagles fly in the ai#jp (§ 7), and that no bird can fly 
above the twelfth of the 60 ydpa into which the dip is divided (§ II). 
He does not expressly tell us where the lower limit of otpavds is 
situated ; but it is to be presumed that he would have placed that 
limit, as most people did, at the lunar sphere, and would accordingly 
have said that otpavds and damp are contiguous. 

§ 10. éxet pévror . . . €Xalou dwp. This section breaks the con- 
nexion between § 9 and § 11. If we retain it, rd 8 dudornpa rodro 
in § 11 énit. is obscure; if we cut it out, 75 8& Sudornua rodro refers 
to the closely preceding words 75 dad cehzjvys ef qpas in § 9 fin. 
Moreover, these remarks about the movement of the air and the 
movements of the souls have no connexion with the main topic of 
§§ 9-13, which is the ddragis of the atmosphere. What the writer 
had occasion to say about the wind is sufficiently said in § 11; and 
in that section there is no indication that the wind has been spoken 
of shortly before. § ro appears to be an extract from another 
document; and we may suppose that some one was led by the 
mention of dvéuwv xwjces in § 11 to copy into the margin another 


800-3 Q q 


594 STOBAEI HERMETICA 





























passage about the wind which he had found elsewhere, and that it 
subsequently got into the text. 
Zyer pévror ev eaurG [8dr] (kivnow (i8iav?)) 6 [rocotros] dp, 
dv dvepov Kadeiv eOos dotiv piv, [tSrov] [weyeDos év o] (iv) Kuvetrar mpdg 
dvdutw tay émyelov. 63dv is certainly wrong; the wind is not 
a 6dds, but a kivqows dépos, and the substantive wanted is xivnow. 
But it seems probable that the original reading was xivnow idiav, 
The word i8/av may have given rise both to ééév by corruption, and 
to the meaningless iSov below by a misplaced duplication ; and it 
would serve to emphasize the distinction between the movement 
which belongs to the air itself (cf. zpds éavréy xwvotpevos below) and 
the movement of the souls in the air. Perhaps in the original 
context of the passage something had been said about the move- 
ments of the unembodied souls in the air, and the writer then went — 
on to say éxer pévrou év éaurd Kivnow idlay 6 dap K.r.d.: ‘the air has 
a movement of its own, which we call wind; but that movement 
does not interfere with those movements of the souls of which I have 
been speaking,’ 
roootros is unintelligible, It may possibly have been explained 
by something in the lost context which preceded; but it seems 
more likely that [rocotros] and [uéyebos év @] are fragments of a 
marginal note, which may have contained the words émi rocovroy 
péyebos. 
8 (or (mept) of ?) 8 Kal dorepoy épd. If this points forward merely 
to the passing mention of the wind in § rz, it was not worth while 
to say it. But it probably refers to something that came later on in 
the document to which § ro originally belonged. i 
§ 1. 1d 8é Sidorypa Toiro . . . poipdy pév éore yerikdy Tecodpwy, 
(@idtxdv 88 xopav é&(jxovta). The words yevixds and cidixds are not 
quite accurately used here ; for the relation between a potpa and the 
xSpac contained in it is not the same as that between a genus and 
its several species. But the meaning is clear enough. The position 
of a soul might be described ‘generally’ by saying that it was in the 
second joipa of the atmosphere, and more‘ specially’ or ‘particularly? " 
by saying that it was in the third yapa of the second potpa (i. e. the 

seventh of the sixty ypa:, counting upward from below). 
The writer had in his mind, if not before his eyes, a diagram 

as is here appended. 

In the partly similar system of Posidonius (Plin. (Var. hist. 2. 23. 
85), clouds and wind extend upwards to a distance of 40 stadia (five 





EXCERPT XXV: 11 595 


miles) from the earth, and the space from the upper limit of the 
windy region up to the moon is filled with pure bright air, the 
vertical extent of which is 2,000,000 stadia (250,000 miles). Did 
the writer of Zxc, XXV mean it to be understood that all the yGpae 
are equal in vertical measurement? It seems most likely that he 
did; and if so, the vertical extent of the windless region is, in 
Lxe. XXV, four times that of the windy region. But according to 
Posidonius, who knew more about astronomy than the author of 
Lxc. XXV, and was nearer to the truth in his estimate of the distance 
from earth to moon, the vertical extent of the windless region is 









otjpavds ri 
p' 
MOON 
4th. pot 5 . 
32 ae, dip \emrétatos 
puxat 


3rd.potpa, 


16 yGpar a&hp Newrds 


2nd_potpa, 
XOpar 
ist protpa, 


aiyp nvodpevos toes 
4 x@par 


EARTH 


50,000 times that of the windy region. Supposing that the writer 
of Zxc. XXV agreed with Posidonius in putting the upper limit of 
the windy region five miles above the surface of the earth, each of 
his xpa: would be five-twelfths of a mile in height, and his estimate 
of the distance from the earth’s surface to the moon would conse- 
quently be 25 miles. He would hardly have differed so widely from 
Posidonius in this respect if he had read what Posidonius had 
written ; we must therefore suppose that a partial and imperfect 
knowledge of the system of Posidonius had been transmitted to him 
through ill-instructed intermediaries. 


Qq2z 



























596 STOBAEI HERMETICA 


The Sidragis of Lxc. XXV is a fuller and more detailed working 
out of that in Zac. XXIII. 16, where we are told that there are 
sixty classes or grades of souls, to which habitations are assigned 
in a corresponding series of divisions of the atmosphere, But in 
£x¢. XXIII the divisions of the atmosphere are called, not yapa, 
but tyjpara [kal rapueta]; and there is no mention there of the four 
potpat spoken of in Lac. XXV, 

[mpécexe, mai dppytev yap éraxovers (éraKotcers?) pucrypiwv yijs 
te kal odpavod kal maytds Tod pécou [iepod| mvedparos.| Cf. Lxc. XXIII 
((32)): Tlpdcexe, téxvov “Qpe’ xpurrijs yap éraxoves Oewplas. 

This is obviously out of place in the midst of a description of the 
second poipa of the atmosphere. It ought to stand at the deginning 
of §§ 9-13, or of some similar paragraph. It is very likely that the 
missing passage which preceded § 9 began with these words; but it 
is also possible that they have been shifted to this place from the 
beginning of Zxc. XXVI. 

éxer pévTot Tapa ris picews tatrqy thy éfouciay 6 ahp ovros, woTe 
kal éy ais iSiars éxrd ydpars Kal év tats ris yis Térrapot meprmohet(y) 
pel dv exer Lowy. 6 dijp otros must be taken to mean the air 
of the second poipa, i.e. the windy air. The writer assumes that 
the second jotpa is the proper domain of the windy air, and that the 
first potpa belongs to the earth; and he accounts for the fact that 
there is wind close to the earth by saying that the windy air is 
allowed to pass the lower boundary of its own region, and descend 
into the first potpa. If the words pel’ dy ever Sduv are to be 
retained, he also assumes that the proper home of the birds, or of 
some birds at least, is the second jotpa, and that when we see them 
in the first pofpa (i.e. near the earth) they have come down from 
the second potpa along with the wind. The latter assumption seems 
strange ; but it is not quite impossible, provided that we take the 
£Ga spoken of to be, not birds in general, but high-flying birds, such 
as eagles. It was said in § 7 that the proper home of eagles is the 
aidjp ; and perhaps the word ai@p there denotes the region which in 
§ rz is called the second poipa. 

§ 12. 4 S€ tpimm . . . Se terdpty . . .. Of the third and fourth 
poipa we are told only that the third contains ‘fine and pure air’, 
and the fourth contains ‘very fine and very clear (and transparent ?) 
air’, But there is little point in speaking of them at all, if nothing is 
to be said about the distinctive qualities of the souls or other beings | 
by whom each of these potpa: is inhabited; and we must suppose. 





EXCERPT XXV: 12-14 597 


that something of the kind followed, if not in this document itself, 
at least in the source from which the writer got these details. 

(.. .) BtopiLer "&p’ Eaurod! rods [dvw] odpayods. rods odpavovs means 
the different spheres or strata of which heaven consists. But there 
can be no reason’here for distinguishing those of them which are 
above (rots dyw) from those of them which are below; we must 
therefore strike out dvw. It may have come from dvwOev in the 
following sentence. 

The boundary of which the writer is speaking must be that be- 
tween ‘the heavens’ as a whole and the atmosphere ; and as it may 
be inferred from § 9 that he held heaven to extend downwards ‘as 
far as the moon’, there can be little doubt that the missing subject 
of the sentence is 6 KikAos tis oeAjvys. 

§ 1g. [a&koddyti] has come from dxoAAnri in § 10 fin. 

ds elvar potpas [yerixds] pev téocapas, [Sraornparinds Sé Sabexa,] 
xmpas Sé éfjxovra. What are the Siacryparixal poipar? The only 
Sidornpa that has been spoken of is the whole space between the 
moon and the earth (§ 11 zwi#.) ; and it is impossible to discover any 
method of dividing that space, or any part of it, into twelve potpa:, 
that could be combined with the writer’s division of it into four 
poipa: and sixty x@pa. Perhaps Siacrqparixds is a corruption of rot 
Siacrhparos (sc. rod dard ys péxpt ceAjvys). When diacryparids d€ 
had got into the text, yevixds (suggested by § 11 énit.) may have 
been inserted before pév to correspond to diacrnparixds, and dadexa 
(a number chosen under some misunderstanding, if not merely at 
random,) may have been added to correspond to réocapas. 

§ 14. tives pev ov eis Exdorny (Exdrepa MSS.) rodrwy (sc. tay xwpdv) 
dvadvoucr puxal, évre0dvy cor wad... KaTahéyew Epfopat, dvadvover 
means ‘depart’ from earth, or from the body; cf. Kaibel Zpigr. Gr. 
340. 7, és Geovs avedvoa. 

If this promise was fulfilled, the writer must have gone on to men- 
tion, one by one, sixty distinct classes of souls (beginning, no doubt, 
with those of kings, and ending with those of reptiles), and must 
have said that the souls of kings, when they depart from the body, 
go to the highest of the sixty xpa, and so on, until he came to the 
souls of reptiles, which presumably go to the lowest of them. That 
would be a complete answer to the question asked by Horus in § 1, 
rot Tov cwpdtwv drodvbeioa xwpotcw ai Yuxai. But Stobaeus ended 
his extract from the 4e/Z/us at this point, and omitted the details 
given in the remainder of the document. 


598 STOBAEI HERMETICA 




















EXCERPT XXVI 


This Excerpt is broken into two pieces by a lacuna between § 2 
and § 3. It is possible that §§ r-2 and §§ 3-30 were originally 
unconnected, and were taken from two distinct 4e//7; but it is also 
possible that they were parts of one and the same iJe//us, and were 
linked together by a passage which has been lost. 

In §§ 1-2, the writer speaks of the situation of souls before and 
after their life on earth, and deals both with the question whence 
souls come when they enter the body, and with the question whither 
souls go when they quit the body. (The latter question is that 
which is asked and answered in Exc, XXV.) 

In §§ 3-30, the question whither souls go when they quit the body 
is nowhere spoken of (except that it is briefly and indirectly touched 
on in § 12); and the question whence they come when they enter 
the body holds a subordinate position, being dealt with only in §§ ro 
and ir. The main subject of §§ 3-30 is the question what is the 
cause of the differences between one embodied soul and another. 
The writer’s answer is that these differences are caused (r) by the 
fact that the souls come from different strata of the atmosphere, and — 
bring with them qualities which they already possessed when they 
resided in those strata (§§ 3-12), and (2) by differences in the com- 
position of the bodies in which the souls are incarnated (§§ 1 3-30). 

In the MSS. of Stobaeus, Zxc, XXVI has no heading analogous 
to the emma of Exc. XXV (‘Eppod Adyos “IowSos rpds “Qpov) ; the only 
superscription is epi éuywxdoews Kal perempvydcews. It is posgible 
that Stobaeus marked Zxc. XXVI as a separate extract by writi 
a demma of the usual kind at the head of it, and that his emma has 
been accidentally lost. But if it was not so, it would seem to follow 
that he took Hxc. XXVI to bea continuation of Zxc. XXV, and 
regarded XXV. 1-XXVI. 30 asasingle document. He may perhaps” 
have done so; but if he did, he was probably mistaken. 

Wachsmuth treats Hac, XXVI as a continuation of xc. XXV; 
he brackets the superscription of XXVI (epi éupuxdoews Kal perepe 
Yuxdoews), and says ‘cohaerent haec (i.e. XX VI) cum priore ecloga 
(i.e. XXV)’. But it seems to me evident that XXVI does not 
‘cohere’ with XXV. The subject of Zxc. XXV is the question 
whither souls go when they quit the body; that is the only question 
dealt with in XXV, and the extract ends with a promise to answer it 





EXCERPT XXVI 599 


in fuller detail, which promise is not fulfilled in XXVI, and must 
have been fulfilled in a following part of the Zbed/us from which XXV 
was extracted by Stobaeus. In XXVI. 1-2, the same question is 
dealt with (together with the different but connected question 
whence souls come when they enter the body) ; but it is dealt with 
in language which could not have been used by a man who had just 
written XXV. The atmospheric x@pa, of which a full and detailed 
description has been given in XXV, are spoken of de xovo in 
XXVI. 1; in the latter passage, the reader is not supposed to have 
any previous knowledge of them, and is told, as if they were new to 
him, things which, if Zc, XXV had preceded, he would have read 
just before. (Compare, for instance, éxdory ... xara tiv dgiav Kat 
xopav eye xt.d. in XXVI. 1 with dow yap éxdory tov Xwpdv.. 5 
rocotry xat (ai) év abrais yuxal x.7.A. in XXV. 1 3.) Moreover, three 
synonyms for the term x@pa: are mentioned in XXVI. 1 ; but if the 
two extracts had been parts of one /ibe//us, the proper place for 
mentioning these synonyms would have been XXV. 11, where the 
xepat are first spoken of. 

It is clear then that in XXVI. 1-2 we have, not a continuation of 
XXV, but a separate and independent treatment of the subject dealt 
with in XXV. And in XXVI. 3-30, the question discussed is 
a different one from that discussed in XXV. We must therefore 
conclude that Exc. XXV and Zxc. XXVI are extracts from different 
Libelli. 

When and by whom the superscription [lept éuypuxéoews Kat perep- 
Yuxdoews was written, we have no means of knowing. It is possible 
that it is on a par with certain paragraph-headings which have got 
into the text elsewhere (see Zxc. XXV. 3 andg, and Lx. XXIV. 7, 
8, and to), and that, like them, it was not intended to mark the 
beginning of a fresh document, but merely to describe the contents 
of the passage which immediately follows it. It is not, however, 
a correct description of the contents either of Zxc, XXVI. 1-2 or 
of Exc. XXVI as a whole. éuixwous (the incarnation of souls) is 
spoken of both in §§ r-2 and throughout §§ 3-39 ; but nowhere in Zxc 
XXVI is anything said about pereyydxwors, i.e. the reincarnation of 
a soul in another body after a previous incarnation. Hither the man 
who wrote the heading blundered in adding xal pereuyuxdcews, or he 
had before him a document of which our Zac. XXVI (epi guprxdcrews) 
was the first part only, and which contained together with it another 
part, now lost, concerning perewyprixwors. 


600 STOBAEI HERMETICA 


The words most commonly used to signify incarnation and re- 
incarnation were évowpdrwows and perevowpdrwors ; epixwous and 
Herewrixwors are rarer. éuxixwors, which properly means ‘the 
process of making (a body) Zuywuyxov’, i. e. that of putting soul into 
a body, occurs in Plotinus 4. 3. 9. erepyixwors occurs in Diod. 
Sic. 10, fr. 6 (dru 5 TluOaydpas perepiixwow eSdéale, . . . mdvtwv tov 
{gov ris Yuyds pera Odvarov els erepa Ga A€ywv elorépyer Bar) 5! 
Alexander Aphrod. in Arist. de an. p, 27. 18; Porphyry De abst. 4. 
16; Sallustius De diis e¢ mundo 20; Proclus in PI. Rep. vol. ii, 
P. 340, 1. 23 Kroll; Jerome Zpist. ad Avitum p. 764; Zheol. arithm, 
p. 40 Ast (Diels Vorsokr. 1, p. 24); Schol. in Iambl. Protrept. 14; 
Suidas s.v. Depexvdys. 

§ i. ai Sé xdpar adrar bmd ray mpoydvay Kahodvras bp’ dv pév Lavan, 
dp’ dv 8 orepedpara, b4d 8 érépwy mruxat. The mpéyovor Of Isis 
would be Egyptian gods, or early rulers of Egypt who had become gods 
after death (e.g. Kamephis, who is called § mpordtwp in Lxc. XXIII, 
((32))). But the writer must have been thinking rather of Greek 
authors who had used the terms of which he speaks ; and one of 
these authors may perhaps have been Posidonius. The use of 
orepedpara to denote atmospheric strata had doubtless been suggested 
by Genesis 1. 6-8. For mrvyai, which means ‘layers’ (e.g. the 
superimposed sheets of leather or metal in a shield), cf. Eur. Or. 1636, 
év aibépos wruxais: Eur. Hed. 44, ev mruxaicw aibépos: Eur. Phoen. 84, 
& gaevvds oipavod vaiwy wruxas | Zed. For favar, cf. rats adios 
févais in Hxc, XXIII. 8 as emended, and the planetary fava: in 
Corp. I. 25. 

Tas pév Betas Kal Bacdixds (puxds) év TH Swepdvw mdévtav (xd 
karoukeiv, Cf, Lac, XXIV. 4 and 5, where Baordixal Yoxai are 
called Geta. 

§ 2. al pév ody eis 7d dpyetw koTamepmopevat. .. éx Tov bmepdve Lavav 
kataméumovrat. 7d dpxew presumably means 7d Boortteier. But if 
80, trav irepdvw Cwvéy (plural) is inconsistent with TH brepavw rdvTwv 
(singular) in § 1. 

kat hubeioa: eis tds adrds | Kal én Smepdvw avépxovrat, If the 
souls of kings come from several different xpa: or f@vac of the 
atmosphere, as is said in § 2 mit, a kingly soul which had resided, 
for instance, in the second ywdpa before its incarnation might rise to the 
first and highest x#pa after its incarnation. But ifall kingly souls come 


1 There is no proof that Diodorus used the word himself; this passage is an 
epitomator’s summary of what Diodorus wrote, 








EXCERPT XXVI: 1-4 601 


from the highest y#pa of the atmosphere, as is said in § 1 fix., to rise 
still higher would mean to rise above the atmosphere, and enter heaven. 

Gotep kai ras Srodecorépas Suvdper te kat déia (...) ex [yap] katwrépwy 
él [petLovas at] inAorépas dvdyer. A conditional clause (‘if they have 
obeyed God’s law’, or something to that effect,) must have been lost 
before ex xerwrépwv .. . dvéiyet. 

§ 3. (...) elol yap “dvabev ot! (. . .), Sopuddpor dvres tis Kabddou 
Tpovoias, Gv & pev puxorapias, 6 Bé Wuxowopmds. In §§ 3-12, the 
writer speaks of the descent of souls from their homes in the atmo- 
sphere, and their incarnation upon earth. How the paragraph began, 
we do not know; but in § 3, we find him speaking of two super- 
human beings’ in whose charge the unembodied souls are placed. 
One of these beings who is called the ywyorapias, has the souls in 
his keeping during their residence in the atmosphere ; the other, who 
is called the yYvyoroprds, sends souls down to earth (drooréAAe, 
mpotnor) when they are to be incarnated, and ‘puts them in their 
several places’ (d.ardove), i. e. takes care that each soul is placed in 
the sort of body that is suited to it. 

The function of the Ywyorapias is similar to that which is assigned 
to the Moon in Zxc. XXIV. 1; but neither of the two beings spoken 
of in XXVI. 3 can be identified with SeAzjvy, as both of them are mas- 
culine (6 pév ... 6 8€). In Diog. Laert. 8. 31 Hermes is called rapéas 
tov duxdv Kal Sa TodTo rouraios. The word Wwvxoropmds is applied to 
Charon by Euripides, A/c. 361 ; to Hermes by Diodorus, 1. 96 ; and to 
an unnamed Greek god (Apollo?) by Plutarch, Amatorius15. 6, 758 B. 
But the writer of Zxc. XXVI was probably thinking of two Egyptian 
gods. Osiris, who is BaowAets Aroyeyovdrwy (§ 9), might very well be 
called ywyorapias; and perhaps Anubis, who was worshipped by 
Egyptians under the name of ‘the Opener of the Way’ (Wiedemann, 
Rel. of Anc. Eg., Eng. tr., p. 230), might be called Uvxoropzrds. 

kal 6 pev typet, 6 8é mpotnor (mpderot MSS.) xard yropny Tod Oeod, 
The emphasis is on xara yropny Tod Gcod; in the discharge of their 
functions these two beings execute the will of the supreme God. But 
as we have already been told that the ywxorepias and the ywxoropsrds 
are Sopuddpor ris KabdXov xpovotas, this further statement contains no- 
thing but superfluous repetition ; and perhaps it ought to be bracketed. 

§ 4. "1G ofv Aéyo totTw, & mal, kal te Gvw Tov mpaypdrwv éfah- 
Aayyq Kal! emi ys éorin 4 gvois. The meaning must have been that 
the function of ¢vois and her two assistants on earth (viz. that of 


1 It is possible that dvw0ev of is a corruption of ava Geot (5vo). 


602 STOBAEI HERMETICA 


making the bodies in which the souls are to be incarnated) corre 
sponds to that of pévora and its two subordinates in the world above 
(viz. that of taking care of the unembodied souls and superintending 
their incarnation) ; and that, in discharging these functions, wpdvo. 
and ¢vo.s do their respective parts in effecting one and the same 
result (viz. the incarnation of each soul in a body suited to it). This 
meaning might be expressed by rewriting the sentence as follows. 
[7] 6moAoyoc (88) rovroc, & wai, Kal 7H dvw roy rpaypdrov (oixovoula 
kat’) énadAayi’ (dvriorpodos) [kat] éxt yhs éoriN pos, The words 
9 dvw tOv Tpaypdrey oixovopla (or diofknois or some other synonym) 
are equivalent to ‘the operation of zpévoia’ ; and kar’ éradAayyv would 
mean that the work of zpdévo and that of dios ‘fit in with one an- 
other’, each of them supplementing what the other does. For the 
literal sense of érah\ayn, cf. dd0vres éradddrrovres in Aristotle(Part.an. 
3- I, 661 b 18 &c.), meaning rows of teeth which fit into one another. 

oxnvorods obca, Kal mAdstpia (whdotpia ydp odoa Kal oxyvoTotds 
MSS.) (trav) dyyetwy eis (4 ép)Bddovrar at uxat. The combination 
okyvorrows ayyetwy is impossible. If we interchange oxyvorows and 
mAdorpia, the words mAdorpia (rv) dyyeiwy x.7.A. may be taken as 
an explanation of the meaning of oxyvorouds. 

Heeren alters wAdorpia into wAdorepa. But wAdorpia, though not 
found elsewhere, is a possible form ; cf. WaArpra. 

4 pev prjpn (yrdpmn MSS.) Epyoy exer rodro, Smws % dors [ryp_ Kal] 
mepixpary tod [te éxdorou| tumou (rod) é& dpxis KaraBeBAnpevou, 
wepixparely means ‘to keep hold of’ or ‘cling to’; cf. xc. XXIII. 
54, (24) and Zxc. XXIV. 6. rypq, which would require an object 
in the accusative, has been added to explain wepuxpar7. 

The riiros 5 ef dpyijs xataB<¢BAnpevos is the Platonic or Arittelinn 
elSos of the species. The form or type of the horse, for instance, has 
been determined once for all ; and when Nature is constructing the 
body of an individual horse, she ‘remembers’ that form or type, and 
reproduces it in the individual, 

kal rod mapaSelyparos (pupdparos MSS.) rod dvw (eixdv) ylyryras 
(ytyverat MSS.) (13 wKacodpevoy cOpa?). With these corrections, we 
have here a repetition, in other words, of what was said in the preceding 
clause. 1d rapédevypa 7d dye, ‘the pattern laid up in heaven’, is a Pla- 
tonic term equivalent to drvzos 6 é& dpyjjs xaraB<BAnpévos. The false 
reading Pupdywaros may have been suggested by rod dupdparosin § 13. 

i 8é ewretpia (Epyov exer toGT0), émws [mpds?] dvddoyov éxdorns Tov 
karaBawousdy puxav... Kal rd mhdopa [| | yévyrot. Nature’s pryyn 








EXCERPT XXVI: 5 603 


is employed in adhering to the species-type; her éwzeipia (skilled 
craftsmanship) is employed in producing individual variations. It 
results from the working of her pwn that the body of every horse 
has those qualities by which horses are distinguished from other 
animals ; it results from the working of her éuzetpia that the body of 
this or that individual horse has certain qualities in which it differs 
from other horses. And the purpose by which Nature’s work is 
guided in these variations is to make each individual body perfectly 
suitable for the particular soul which is to inhabit it. 

kal tats pev dééor tay Wuxdy da yéynrar kal Ta cwpara, Tais dé 
Bpadéor Bpadda... kal dwagamdds éxdorais kaTd 73 cixds. This is an 
explanation of éaws mpos dvddoyov exdorys ... Kal 76 whdopa yevyTaL 
The meaning of ras piv dééor.. . Bpadéea is clear enough; the body 
of a race-horse, for instance, has been made ‘quick’, in order that 
it might be suitable for a ‘ quick’ soul, and the body of a cart-horse 
has been made ‘slow’, in order that it might be suitable fora ‘slow’ 
soul. But there are difficulties in what follows. rats dé évepyéow 
évepyh Kal tais vobpats . . . vwOpd is superfluous repetition ; for évepyi 
and vw6pé are hardly distinguishable in meaning from éféa and 
Bpadéa. And what can be meant by dd\ia oopara? Deceitfulness 
is an attribute of souls alone, and not of bodies. Moreover, we 
should have expected kal rats pév evepyéow ... Tals d&..., xal tails 
pav dwvarais... rats 8 .. ., rather than rats 82 évepyéow... xairtais..., 
kal rats Suvarais... wal trais... Also, xavd.7d cixds is unsatisfactory ; 
in place of it, something equivalent to dvi Adyov is wanted. It may 
be suspected that either the whole passage «ai rais pey d&€or.. . xara 
ro eixds, Or some part of it at least, is a later addition. 

§ 5. (... .) 08 yap doxéwas mryva pev enrihwoe(y h puois), KT. 
The qualities here spoken of are such as belong to a whole species, 
not such as belong to some individuals of the species and not to 
others. (E.g. all birds are feathered.) They are therefore qualities 
that are produced by Nature’s pajpy, and not by her éyzreipia. That 
being so, of yap doxdrws x.7.A. cannot have followed immediately on 
§ 4 fim., in which the work of nature’s éuzepia was spoken of; and 
a connecting passage must have been lost. 

The contents of this section were doubtless derived from a Stoic 
source. From a similar source, if not from the very same Stoic docu- 
ment, must have come Minucius Felix 17. ro: ‘ quidve animantium 
loquar adyersus sese tutelam multiformem: alias armatas cornibus, 
alias dentibus saeptas, et fundatas ungulis et spicatas aculeis, aut 


604 STOBAEI HERMETICA 


pedum celeritate liberas aut elatione pinnarum?’ There is a still 
closer resemblance to Hac. XXVI. 5 in Lactantius De opif. dei 2. 
1-4: ‘ Dedit enim homini artifex ille noster ac parens deus sensum 
atque rationem.... Ceteris animantibus, quoniam rationalem istam 
vim non attribuit, quemadmodum tamen vita ecorum tutior esset, 
ante providit. . . . Singulis autem generibus ad propulsandos impetus 
externos sua propria munimenta constituit, ut aut naturalibus telis 
repugnent [fortioribus]' aut quae sunt inbecilliora subtrahant se 
periculis pernicitate fugiendi, aut quae simul et viribus et celeritate 
indigent, astu se protegant aut latibulis saepiant. Itaque alia eorum 
vel plumis levibus in sublime suspensa sunt vel suffulta ungulis vel 
instructa cornibus; quibusdam in ore arma sunt dentes, aut in 
pedibus adunci ungues; nulli munimentum ad tutelam sui deest.’ 
Lactantius is known to have made use of Minucius Felix. He may 
perhaps have read Herm. Zxc. XXVI also; but we have no proof 
that the JZsis to Horus documents were known to him, and the 
resemblance may be equally well accounted for by assuming a com- 
mon Stoic source. 

[[Aoytxd 82 meprooais Kal dxpiBeotépars aicOyocow exdcpyoe.]] Loa 
Aoyid are men. As men are spoken of in § 6 (eis pév dvOpd- 
mous... els 0¢ wrnva. x.t.A.), they were probably spoken of in § 5 also, 
But the author cannot have placed them between birds and 
quadrupeds in his list of animals. His mention of men must have 
stood either at the beginning of the list or at the end; and if ki be 
retained, these words must be transposed to the end of the section. 

For the statement that the senses of men are superior to those of 
beasts, cf. Cic. Wat. deor. 2. 145 f. (from Posidonius?): ‘ Omnisque 
sensus hominum multo antecellit sensibus bestiarum. Primum enim 
oculi in iis artibus, quarum iudicium est oculorum, in pictis, fictis 
caelatisque formis, in corporum etiam motione atque gestu, multa 
cernunt subtilius; colorum enim et figurarum venustatem atque 
ordinem et, ut ita dicam, decentiam oculi iudicant,’ &c. In that 
passage, it is chiefly aesthetic discrimination that is said to be peculiar 
to men. 

Cicero #4., after speaking of the human senses, goes on to speak 
of the human intellect (‘iam vero animum ipsum mentemque 
hominis, rationem, consilium, prudentiam’, &c.); and we should 

1 I have bracketed fortzoribus. If any word in the dative stood here, it must 


have been a word meaning ‘their assailants’. But perhaps we ought to read 
JSortiora (sc. genera), in contrast to guae sunt inbectiliora. 








EXCERPT XXVI: 6 605 


have expected the writer of xc. XXVI to do the same. If he did, 
what he said about it has been lost. 

dy pév 7a ordpara [kal trois] S5odow éxapdxwcer, Gv Sé ods SyKous 
avéijcaca (dévas MSS.) Suvapiw mepreOnxev, These words refer to 
reptiles, and describe the means of self-defence with which Nature 
provides them. The reptiles which are equipped with teeth must 
be the venomous snakes; the description of the other kind of 
reptiles would apply to boas and pythons, and to the semi-fabulous 
Spdxwv. The verb éxapdxwoev is hardly the right word to use in 
speaking of a pair of poison-fangs ; but perhaps the writer had never 
examined the mouth of a venomous snake, and imagined such snakes 
to be armed with a ‘ palisade’ of teeth. 

§ 6. eis pév dvOpdmous Xwpetv ras KpitiKds. xpurixds is here equiva- 
lent to Aoyuds. The souls of men are distinguished from those of 
beasts by the fact that they have in them a xpurjpiov dAnOeias, See 
note on Zxc. XXV. 7 jin. 

eis 88 wrqva Tas “&mavOpdmous', ‘The souls that hate or shun 
men’ cannot be right. It is true that wild birds shun men; but 
so do wild quadrupeds also. éavpdémrovs has probably come from 
els pv dvOpdmous above,’ and has driven out the original adjective, 
which may have been some word meaning ‘light-minded’, ‘flighty’, 
or ‘volatile’. xovdas or dvedpdorovs would serve the purpose ; 
see § 15. 

The false reading dravOpdmovs has given rise to the interpolation 
kal wryqvov Ths dravOpwrias éxreceiv in § 7. 

eis 82 tetpdwoba (ras) “dxpirous', Here, again, an inappropriate 
word has been substituted for the adjective written by the author. 
dxperos is the opposite of «perixds (= Aoyuxds), and would be equally 
applicable to all kinds of animals as opposed to men. Possibly 
dxpareis, in the sense of the Latin dmpotens (swt), ‘violent’. 

vopos yap ékelvors goriv 4 ioxds. Quadrupeds ‘know no law but 
the law of the stronger’. Does this mean that the stronger among 
them lawlessly prey on the weaker? If so, we might compare 
Pl. Gorg. 484 B, where Callicles quotes Pindar (vémos 6 mdévruv 
Bacvreds x.7.d.) in support of his thesis that ‘might is right’. But 
the words might also be taken to mean that quadrupeds are subject 
to the compulsion applied to them by beings stronger than them- 
selves, i.e. by men; (horses and oxen, for instance, are forced to 


1 Or possibly from dmavOparmifovrat, “become men *, which may have occurred in 
a note on eis pey dvO@pérous xwpely Tas xpirinds, Cf. radra dmnvOpdmorat in § 20. 


606 STOBAEI HERMETICA 


labour ;) and perhaps the latter interpretation agrees better with 
rerparoty d& riv avdyxnv wapadAdéar in § 7. 

§ 7. dvOpwrov pév. . . Td Kpitixdy OmepBivat. drepBjvar means ‘to 
transgress’. Man is a rational animal ; yet men sometimes disobey 
the dictates of reason. 

[[kal 7a peév epi ris Biabdcews tay dvw Kal THs KaTaBdoews adrav 
kat tis cwparoupyias Tocaéra.!] These words are manifestly out of 
place. They ought to stand at the evd of a discussion of the 
subjects mentioned in them; but the writer continues to speak cept 
tis diabécews TOv dvw Kal ris kataBdoews adrdv in §§ 8-12, I have 
therefore transposed xal ra pev ... rooatra to the beginning of 
§ 13, where something of the sort is desirable, if not necessary, to 
mark the transition to a fresh topic. But if we place the sentence 
there, it seems best to bracket xal rs cwparovpyias ; for the making 
of bodies has been spoken of only in §§ 4 and 5, and there is nothing 
about it in §§ 6-r2. 

§ 8. cupBaiver 8é, d réxvoy, év Exdory cider (dvOpdmav) eiploxera 
[kat yéver rv mpoxepérwr] Bacidixds twas Wuxds. In §§ 8—-1r men 
alone are dealt with, and not beasts; we must her insert 
or understand dvOpdrwy after ide. Instances of the different eS of 
men (teachers, physicians, &c.) are given in § 9. 

Baciduxat yuxai have already been spoken of in §§ 1 and 2. 
Compare Zxc. XXIV. 2-6, 

[[karaBaivew $2 kal dAdas ... Bacdevodons puxis.]] This passage 
breaks the connexion between év éxdorw cide (évOpdrwv) eipioxer bar 
Baoidtxds twas Woxds and woAdai ydp eior Bacrdela x.7.d. If we 
alter xaraBaivew dé into ovpBatve 8% (cipioxerOar), the passage fits 
in well at the end of § 10; and when it is placed there, of (ai MSS.) 
pev drs Baovsxod diaéparos is brought into connexion with of 8% 
dd émierypovixod Kat rexvixod in § rr. 

§ 9. wohhal ydp eior Baodeiar at pévy ydp elow (yap eis MSS.) 
Mpuxdv ai 8 cuopdrav', ai 88 réxvqs Kal (al 82 téxyyns al Be MSS.) 
émorpys. The meaning must have been ‘besides political kingship, 
there are also kingships of other kinds ; for instance, there are king- 
ships of art and science’. wuydv af 8 cwpdérwv must therefore be 
a corruption of some phrase describing kingship in the literal sense, 
i.e. political supremacy, as opposed to supremacy in other things. 
In what follows, we are told that Osiris was a king ioxvos cal paps, 
which appears to mean that he was supreme in political power; and — 
the sense required here might be expressed by writing icyvos kal 
pdpys in place of cis Yuxdv ai 8¢ cwudror. 








EXCERPT XXVI: 7-9 607 


droyeyovdtav [H8n Yuxdv] pev (Bacrheds) "Ocipis 6 maTip cou, Lévrav 
(owpdrwv MSS.) 8€ 6 éxdorou evous fyepdv. Osiris was commonly 
described as ‘king of the dead’. (Cf. Hae. XXIII. 62, where he is 
called dpixrés rév bd yijs TUpavvos.) 

The ‘kingships’ with which this paragraph (§§ 8-11) is concerned 
are those held by incarnate souls, i.e. by living men. But the king 
of the dead cannot be a soul incarnated on earth; the mention of 
him is therefore irrelevant to the main argument. Perhaps the 
writer put it in merely because he was unwilling to miss an oppor- 
tunity for speaking of Osiris. 

If my corrections of the text are right, the contrasted terms 
droyeyoverwy and fovrov have been altered into émryeyovérwv 7dy 
yuxav and cwydrwv by a transcriber; and it was probably the same 
man that wrote Wvydv af S& cwpudrwy above in place of some other 
phrase. 

[Boudfis 8€ 6 warhp wdvrwv], ‘The father of all’ must be the 
supreme God. If the supreme God was to be spoken of at all, he 
ought to be placed at the head of the list. But a mention of the 
supreme God is even more inappropriate in this connexion than a 
mention of the king of the dead. 

KaOnyntixis (kadnynths MSS.) 6 tpropéyvoros “Eppijs. Hermes is 
‘king of the art of teaching’; that is to say, he is the supreme 
philosopher or teacher of religion. Hermes and Asclepius are here 
regarded as men, and not as gods; their souls are ‘kingly souls’ 
which have been incarnated on earth. 

ioxuos 82 kal Adpns wad “Oorpis, ped” Sv, d téxvoy, adtds ot. This 
must be taken to mean that Osiris, during his life on earth, was king 
of Egypt, but he has departed from this life, and his son Horus now 
reigns in his stead. 

Osiris then is here spoken of as an instance of an eOvous tyepiv. 
‘But he was mentioned above as ‘king of the dead’, and as such, 
was distinguished from 6 éxdorov evous iyyeudv. If the two state- 
ments are to be taken together, we must understand that Osiris 
was formerly king of Egypt, but that his soul, having departed from 
the body, has been transformed into a god, and is now king of the 
dead. But if that is what the writer meant, it is strange that he 
has left the relation between his two statements about Osiris un- 
explained ; and if Osiris and Horus are mentioned as instances 
of eOvous Hyendves, they ought to have been mentioned as such at 
the point where 6 éxdéorov vous iyeuuv is first spoken of. There 


608 STOBAEI HERMETICA 


is therefore strong reason to think that icyvos 82. . . aérds od has 
been added by a later hand. 

pidocodias Sé “ApyeBecyfvs. Reitzenstein, Poim. p. 135, referring 
to Spiegelberg, Demotische Studien, I, pp. 28* and 41, says that 
“‘ApveBecxjvis means ‘Horus, lord of Letopolis’ (a town near the 
apex of the Delta). But the writer of these words in #xc. XXVI 
must have regarded Har-neb-eschenis as a person distinct from 
Horus the son and pupil of Isis. 

As far as I know, there is no other evidence that this obscure 
local god was believed to have been a teacher of philosophy. 
Perhaps the man who wrote these words was an inhabitant of 
Letopolis, and was referring to a local tradition, In the view of 
the Hellenized Egyptians in general, the supreme philosopher was 
Hermes Trismegistus ; and that is the view implied aboye, where 
Hermes is called Baoweds xabiyntixgs. The two ents can 
hardly be reconciled ; it is therefore probable that the mention of 
“ApveBecyjus is a later addition. 

mountixis Sé médwv [6] “Aokdymds (6 kal) “IpodOys. As to "AokAnmds 
(6 xal) "IpovOns, cf. Zxc. XXIII. 6. But if his Egyptian name 
*Ipovns (Imhotep) was to be given at all, why was it not given when 
he was mentioned above? 

Being well known as a healer of the sick, Asclepius might very 
well be called Baoivedbs iarpixjs; but it is not clear why he should 
be called BacwAeds roriefjs. According to Breasted, History of 
Egypt, 1906, pp. 83, 107, rr2 f., 575, Imhotep, who was worshipped 
as a god from the time of the Saite dynasty onwards, was vizier or 
counsellor of Zoser, one of the early kings of Egypt, and was the 
reputed author of a collection of proverbs well known in later times, 
Cf. the ‘ Lay of the Harper’ (#d. p. 206): ‘I have heard the words 
of Imhotep and Harzozef, whose utterances are of much reputation,’ 
It is possible that the proverbs of Imhotep were composed in 
poetic form ; but even if they were, that is hardly a sufficient reason 
for calling him ‘king of the art of poetry’, i.e. supreme above all 
other poets, 

As the second mention of Asclepius, as well as the second mention 
of Osiris, gives rise to difficulties, it seems best to bracket the whole 
passage ioxvos dé Kal pdyns . . . “Ipnovbns. 

§ 10, 6 pév mévrwv Kpardy, téxvoy, éx tis bwepdvw (advtwv?) xdpas 
éoriv, of (6 MSS.) 8 Trav Kata pépos (ex téev Katwrépwy?). For 
brepdvw (rdvrwv), cf. § 1 fin. 6 mdvtwv xparav probably means the 








EXCERPT XXVI: 10, 11 609 


supreme political ruler,—in the time of Isis, for instance, Osiris or 
Horus, and in the writer’s time, the Roman emperor. of rv xara 
pépos (xparotvres) may be taken to mean those who are supreme in 
this or that particular department, e.g. Hermes, who is Baow\ebs 
xa@nynrixys, and Asclepius, who is Bacieis larpixjs. If ‘kingly 
souls’ reside in more than one x«pa, as is implied in § 2 zw#Z., the 
souls of the ‘kings of art and science’ may come from places which 
are below the highest ypc of all. 

cupPatver (kataBatveww MSS.) 8@ (eipicxecOat) Kai &Adas addoias 
(&\Xolous codd.), tas pev Siamdpous «.t.A. das means souls which 
are not ‘kingly’. There are differences among souls of other kinds, 
as well as among kingly souls. 

oupBaiver 8é (kal) toto map& thy Tov Témwv Pow «7A. As some- 
thing very like this was said about kingly souls in the beginning of 
the section, it seems necessary to insert caf before rotro, which 
means the fact that there are differences among souls which are not 
kingly. 

ot (at MSS.) peév yap dad Boordtkod Siafdpatos Karamndycavtes 
(xaramnSéor ris MSS.) “épovomdbous! BactAedouow (Bacthevovons MSS.) 
[puxfjs]| It would be possible to write either ai piv . . . xaramndyj- 
gacat (sc. Wuxat) or of piv. . . Karamndjoavres. But as the subjects 
in the corresponding clauses of § r1 init. (of S& dard bypod ... of 8 
dard éruornpovixod . . . of d& dd dpyod) are masculine, it is most likely 
that the author wrote of pév and not ai pv here. 

épouordGovs is probably a corruption of some phrase by which 
Baordevover was qualified. 

didGwpa is here used as a synonym for fovy or ydpa. A Bacrduxdy 
SidLwpo. is a ywpa in which BaowAixal Ywyai reside. The absence of rod 
before Bacwduxot diaeparos implies that there are several such yapax ; 
this agrees with § 2 init, 

§ II. (ot 82 dd evepyous) ((Sialdparos karehnuddres (rereuxdtes MSS.) 
[wupds] épydra. ylyvovrar Kal tpodbets (tpopys MSS.))). épydrar Kal 
tpodeis apparently means manual labourers, who maintain the com- 
munity by their industry. But this notion is not very clearly ex- 
pressed. Possibly tpoijs may be a remnant of some such phrase as 
tpopis mopurrat. 

mupos épyéra is impossible. It is probable that avpdés was inserted 
by some one who misunderstood the author’s meaning, and supposed 
that the different d:afdpara were distinguished by the presence of 
different elements in them, and that there was a fiery di¢Zwua and 

2206.3 Rr 


610 STOBAEI HERMETICA 


a watery Sudfwpa. The same misunderstanding seems to have caused 
the insertion of [of 8: dd typod é& typots SiaLdparw (Sialdow ?)] 
above, and possibly also that of ras mév Siamvpous ras 8& Yuxpds 
in § ro. 

§ 12. kal wddw dvépxerar (wdvta éxeioe SOev) KaréBy (iva xaraBy 
MSS.). This applies in the first place to incarnate souls; e.g. a 
Bacux} Woy}, when it quits the body, returns to one of the BacwAuca 
duaépara of the atmosphere. (Cf. § 2.) But the returp of souls to 
their home above is only one instance among others of a law which 
holds good universally ; all things on earth come from above, and 
return to the place from which they came. Compare Heraclitus, 
fr. 60 Diels, 658s dvw xdérw pia Kai duty, and the quotations of 
that saying in later writers. Diog. Laert. 9. 8: xal riv peraBodnv 
Sddv dvw Kétw* tév Te Kdopov yiverOar Kar’ abriyy. muKvotpevov yap 
To mip... ylverOar Bwp, ryyvipevov 8 76 Tdwp els yhv tpérec Bau" 
kat ravryv 6ddv éml rd Kdtw eva. mwédw re [airy] ri yiv xeioPar, 
eé fis 7d Twp yiverOa, éx S& rovrov ta Aouad . . * ary SE eorw 
h eri 7d dvw 630s. Cleomedes De motu circ. corp. cael. 1. 11. 61 
Ziegler: 4 yf}... ot« fotw ddvvaros dvamwéurew tpopiy TO otpavd 
kat rois év atta, od dv edapBrwOety (al. eLavadwOein) Tovrov evexa, 
ev péper kal airy dvtiAapBdvovod twa ex te dépos Kal é& otpavod. 
683s yap dvw xérw, pyoiv 6 “Hpdwdeuros, 8’! (ris?) sdys oboias 
tpérerOar Kai peraBddrdev meduxvias. Philo De incorr. mundi 21, 
109: mepibéer Kal r& oroixeia Tod Kdapou Tais eis GAAnAG peraPorais, 
(kal) . . . Ovioxew Soxotvra, dBavarilerat, . . . tiv abryv Gddv dv 
kal kérw cuvexas dwe(Bovra. Maximus Tyr. 41. 4: peraBodyv Spgs 
cwpdtwv Kal yevérews ddAayyy, 6ddv dvw Kat Kdrw, Kar& Tov “Hpdxderov. 
Iamblichus Iept yxfjs, Stob. 1. 49. 39, vol. i, p. 378 W.: “HpdwAccros 
pev yap éporBas dvayxaias riberar éx trav évavtiwy, dddv Te dvw Kal Kdrw 
Starropever Oar tas Yuyas breihnde. 

The writer finds an illustration of the law of raAwdpopia in the 
process of respiration. We draw our breath from the atmospher 
and breathe it out again into the atmosphere. 

rére (adrol) ipets odxér GSE dopev, GAN’ dvoBeBijxapey: that is, the 
man dies. Compare the explanation of the cause of death in Exc. 
XXIII. 68. 

mets implies that the writer assumes Isis and Horus to have been 
human beings, and not gods, at the time when the dialogue took 
place. Cf. jyiv in § 13. 

§ 13. mpocemylyvera: 8¢... Kat érepd tiva piv éx Tis (éxrds MSS.) 








EXCERPT XXVI: 12,13 611 


Tod gupdparos cvotadpias. In §§ 3-12, the writer has been speaking 
of qualities which the soul brings with it from its abode in this or 
that stratum of the atmosphere. In §§ 13-30, he speaks of qualities 
produced in the soul by the influence of the body in which it resides 
onearth. The contents of these two parts of the /ide//us were probably 
derived from different sources; and the connexion between them is 
not fully worked out. The writer’s theory of unembodied souls and 
atmospheric strata (§§3-12) is based on the Platonic doctrine of 
unembodied souls, as adopted and modified by Posidonius; his 
theory of the influence of the body on the soul (§§ 13-30) may have 
been based on some Stoic treatise in which unembodied souls were 
ignored. According to one school of thought, it might be said that 
the differences between one man and another were already in 
existence, as differences between soul and soul, before the souls 
were incarnated ; according to another school of thought, it might be 
said that these differences are caused by differences in the composi- 
tion of the body. The writer of Zxc. XXVI has sought to combine 
these two views, by saying that some of the differences between soul 
and soul existed before the incarnation of the souls, and others have 
resulted from their incarnation in bodies differently composed; but 
he does not tell us which of the qualities of souls are pre-existent 
and which of them are produced by the influence of the body, or 
how the pre-existent qualities are to be distinguished from the others. 

The dvpapya is the body, regarded as a dough-like mass composed 
of portions of the four elements ‘kneaded’ or mingled together. Cf. 
Philo De sacr. Abelis et Caini 33, 107, Cohn I, p.246: “drav écOinre ard 
TOV ApToVv THS is, +.» drapxnv pupdparos tudv dprov...dedeire...” 
(Num. 15. 19). 7d roivey dvpapa Kupiws, el ypy radnbes elrety, Hyeis 
éopey atrol, cuprepopnpevwv Kal ovyKekpipévwy mAcioTwv ovcav va 
drotehcoOGpev’ Wuxpov yap Oeppd xat Enpov dypO, Suvdpes evayrias, 
dvapitas Kal dvaxepardpevos 6 LworAdorys, bv éx racav Exacrov Fpov 
dreipyalero cuppdpypa, ab’ of Kat pipapa eipnta.' Marc. Aur. 7.68: 
kay Ta Onpia Siacrd ra pedvSpia Tod qepirebpaypevov tovrou pupdmaros 
(i.e. of the body). 

ovoTafuic, means a coadjustment of weights or quantities; and 


1 Philo 26. goes on to say Tovrov Tod cuppophyaros, 5 (od?) Yuyx7 Kal o@pa Sto ra 
dvardre tTyhpata KexAjnpwrat, Tas dnapxds dvepwréov : that is, the soul and the 
body are two of the things which are mixed together in the pvpaya. But that is a 
different application of the term @vpaya ; in the preceding words, the pvpaya is the 
body, and the ingredients which are mixed together in it are ‘hot, cold, moist, and 
dry’, that is to say, the four elements. 


Rr2 


612 STOBAEI HERMETICA 


70d dupdparos cvorabpia is the proportion betwee the quantities of 
the several elements of which the ¢vpaya is composed. 

2€ fs [kpdoews Kal ouvdSou] dvabuptarat tis drpds, ds meprerdetrar pev 
TH WuxG, Statpéxer Sé év (7H) odor, The ‘vapour’ here spoken of is 
a thing in which the embodied soul is wrapped, and which acts as 
intermediary between the body and the soul. It is identical with the 
avetpa spoken of in Corp, X, 16f., where we are told that the 
wvedpa is the reprBodyn of the soul. But the writer of xc. XXVI 
uses the word zvedpa only to signify the element air, and employs 
drpoés, instead of veda, to describe the ‘envelope’ in which the 
soul is wrapped. The dzpds is a material thing of gaseous substance ; 
and the writer doubtless regarded the soul also as material, and 
thought of it as a thing consisting of more highly rarified gas. 

The Stoics called the soul itself a wvedpya.' But many people, 
while adopting the Stoic conception of the rvetua ovpduroy jpiv, 
distinguished the yvy7 from it, and interposed the zvedua between the 
gross body and the yvy7 ; and the author of this document interposes 
his dros in the same way. 

Regarding the soul as a wvedya, i.e. a sort of vapour, the Stoics 
said that it is an dva$vpéaors* given off by the watery material con- 
tained in the body, or by the blood. Arius Didymus 39. 2, Diels 
Doxogr. p. 470 f.: wept 88 Wuyjs KAcavOns... pyolv ore Zyvev tiv 
Yruyiy A€yer aicOytixtin * dvabupiacw, Kabdmrep “Apdxdertos.* Bovdduevos 

1 Chrysippus ap. Galen Hipp. e¢ Plat. 3. 1, Kithn V, p. 287: 9 puxt) mvedpa 
dort cdppurov jyuiv, owvexés, Vravtl TO ohpari’ (id wavrds TOU owparos?) dijKov. 
Diog. Laert. 7. 156: the Stoics say (rv puxiy) eva 7d cuppues Hyiv medpa. 
(mvetpa odpputov or cuppves Hiv is translated concretus corpori spiritus by 
Macrobius, Somm. 1. 14.19; less correctly, Tertull. De av. 5, consitus spiritus ; 
Chalcidius zz Tim. c. 220, naturalis spiritus,) WDiog. Laert. 7. 157: Zhvow 68 6 
Kiried’s, kal ‘Avrinarpos év rois Mept puxis, cal MocerSévos, mvetpa evPeppyov elvat 
tiv waxt todtw yap Huds eva éumvdovs. Aetius, Diels Doxogr. Bz; 388: the 
Stoics (riv puxhv Aéyouoty elvat) mveua voepdv, Oepudv. Nemesius De nat. hom. 
C. 2, p. 38: of pev yap Sraxkol mvetpa A€yovow (riv puyiy) EvGeppor Kal diamvpor, 
Alex. Aphrod. Dean, 26, 13 Bruns: of re dnd rijs Erods, mvetpa (rHv Wuxi) Aéyoures 
ely ouyxetpevdv mas ex [re] mupds wal dépos. Plotinus 4. 7. 4: according to the 
Stoics, the soul is mvefua m&s Exov. Porphyr. af. Euseb, Pr, ev. 15. 11. 4: 1s Be 
obk alcxdvns yéuow 6 mvedpa mas Exov (riy puxiv) drobi5ods (Adyos), iH wUp voepdv 
Th mepupiter wat olov Bapp Tod dépos avapbey 7} oropmbéy ; Plut. Sto, rep. 41. 2, 
p. 1052 F: Chrysippus considers the Yux7 (i.e. the animal soul) to be dpa:orepov 
mvedpa TRS pioews (i.e. than the vegetable soul) xa Aemropepéotepov. 

2 The words dvadujao0a and dvadvpulacis do not occur in Plato, but were 
frequently used by Aristotle and by the Stoics. 

3 aloéqriniy Wellmann: atoéyow } MSS. Cf. Ps.-Plut. Vit. Hom. 127: ri 
puxiy of Sroxxot dpifovra nvetpa oupprés, kal dvabupiacw alc@yrimiy dvarropévny 
(read dyadibopévny?) dnd trav év c@part bypGv. Schol. in Hom. Z/. 2. 85 (Armim 
Sto. vet. fr. 11, § 778): the Stoics define the soul thus, Yuyy éore mvedpa cuppués, 


wal dvabvpiacts aicOnrixt &e TOY TOD o&iparos bypdy dvab.bopévn. 
4 Ch Ar. Dean, 1. 2, 4054 25: wal “Hpdxdecros 52 ri dpxiy elval pn Yuyny, 








EXCERPT XXVI: 13 613 


yap eupavicas dre ai Yuxal dvabypucpevar [voepat] * det yivovrat, cikacev 
avras Tois Torapois, Aéywv ovrws' “worapoior Toiow abrotow Fé Batvov- 
cw!” (rots yap morapois) érepa Kal érepa tdata érippei’ wal Puxal &e 
dd rov typav dvabumiavrar, dvabvpiaow pv ody dpoiws TO “Hpaxdeirw 
tiv Yoxiv dropaive: Zijvev’ aloOyruciy 8 K.7.A, Lb. 39. 4% elvar 5é 
yryiy &v 7G dAw paciv, 6 Kahotow aiBépa Kai dépa, Kixry arept( €xovear ) 
[ri] yiv Kat Oddaccay, Kai é« Tovrwr dvabvpuaveto{avy * tas 52 Aouras 
Yoxds zpoomepuévar Tatry, doar Te év Coors clot kal Soar ev ro mepréxovTe 
Sapevew yap éxel ras Tov drofavdvrwv Wuxds.* Aetius, Diels 7d. p. 389: 
‘Hpdxdeuros ri pev Tod Kdopou uxt avabupiacw éx rv év atte typor, 
riv 8& & roils Ldous “ard ris exrds xal ris & abrois dvabymudcews 
Spoyev'.S Diogenes Bab. (Stoic) ag. Galen Hipp. e¢ Plat. 2. 8, 
Kiihn V, p. 282: 70 xwotv tov dvOpwrov tas Kari mpoaipeorw KWYTES 
Wnxuxr ris éorw dvabupiacs. Longinus af. Euseb. £r. ev. 15. 21. 3: 
Zrjveve prv yap Kat KredvOe vepeonoaé tis dv dixaiws, . « . Tod orepéou 
odparos® evar tiv Wuxiv dvabupiaow dicac. ti ydp, & mpds Gedy, 
xowdy bdus évabupidcer Kal wuxj; Galen Comm. 5 in Hippocr. Epid. 
6: Scot yap oiovrar TH Yuxi evar wvedpa, diacdLerbar Néyovow abrivy 
& re THs dvabypudcews Tod aiparos Kal Tod Kara Ty elomvoiy EXkopéevov 
81a ris tpaxelas dprnpias claw Tod cdparos (dépos)." 


cimep Thy dvabupiagw, ef ijs Tada ouviarnov. That sentence is obscure, and 
probably corrupt. There is no reason to think that the word dva$upiacts was used 
by Heraclitus himself; but it occurs repeatedly in reports or interpretations of his 
doctrine. 

1 Diels says ‘ similitudinis gratia érepat det exspectes’ (in place of voepat dei). 
But it seems better to bracket voepai, The point is that souls, like rivers, are not 
permanently existing things, but ‘ are ever coming into existence’ afresh, 

2 Something equivalent to ov gor: Sis EuBivar is wanted. (Cf. Heraclitus jr. 
49a Diels: worapois rois abrois CépBatvopév te Kat ove éuBalvopev’, Td. fr. QT: 
morap® yap ote éorw euBivar dis 7H aitG wad’ “Hpdwdkecrov. Pl. Cratyl. 402 A: 
Heraclitus Aéyer ds Sls és dv abrdy norapdy ove dy éuBatys, Ar. Metaph. 3. 5; 
to10 a 13: ‘HpaxAcirw .. . eindvrs bre dis TE aitd roTap@ ove eorw épBFva.) The 
words €repa kal érepa tdara émppe? are not quoted from Heraclitus; they are a part 
of the writer’s explanation of Heraclitus’ meaning ; and ros yap morapois, or 
something of the sort, must have been lost before them, 

3 nepéxovoay iv . . . dvabuuiabetoay von Arnim : rept THy Yay... dvabupdcets 
MSS. : wepiéxovras vv .. . dvadvysacdévras (misprint for -abévras t) Diels. 

4 In this last clause the doctrine of disembodied souls resident in the atmosphere 
presents itself in a simple and undeveloped form. That doctrine was further 
elaborated by Posidonius, who combined with it the Platonic notion of pre-existing 
souls; and it was adopted from Posidonius, with some variations, by the authors 
of Exc, XXIII-XXVI. 

8 Perhaps: riy 8 év Tots (dois dnd(onagpa?) THs duds" (elvar 52) kat év abrois 
dvaduplacty dpoyer7j. 

6 Tt would have been more correct to say Tar év TO oHpart bypay, or TOU alparos. 
Cf. Galen Hipp. et Plat. 2.8; ei 5€ ye Sroro (se. Atoyéevns 6 BaB,) KredvOer nat 
Xpuoimny «ai Zhvenr, tpépecda wey ef aiparos ghoac tiv YuxHy, ovolav 8 abrijs 
vas TO mvEDpa K.T.A. 

7 dépos add. Arnim. 


614 STOBAEI HERMETICA 


The writer of Zxc. XXVI has adopted the word dvaOupiaots from 
the Stoics, but employs it somewhat differently ; instead of speaking 
of an dvaGupacrs given off by the watery matter in the body, he speaks 
of an dvadupiacis given off by the ‘ mixture of the four elements’ of 
which the body consists. As used by the Stoics, évaOupiacis meant 
an exhalation of vapour formed by the transmutation of earth or 
water into air or fire; and in that sense, an dvaOvpiacis could be 
given off only by earth or water, not by fire or air. 

duhorépors petadibods [rouréert 7H odpat. Kal TH Wuxr] tis iSlas 
moidrytos’ Kat ofrws ai Siapopal tay puxiKdy Kal cupartkay ! évadhoud- 
sew! yivovrar. rovrerri... Wxi is a correct but needless explana- 
tion of dudorépors. 

The writer’s object in speaking of the érpds is to explain how the 
body acts on the soul. He says that the body produces an érpés, 
and that this dryés derives qualities from the body, and produces 
corresponding qualities in the soul. But why should he say that the 
druds imparts qualities to the body also? The statement in the 
text, as far as it concerns the body, amounts to this: ‘if there is an 
excess of fire, for instance, in the composition of the body, there 
results thence an excess of heat in the druds produced by the body, and 
from this again results an excess of heat (or a quality associated 
with an excess of heat) in the body’. That isa purposeless and 
unmeaning complication. If qualities of the body are to be spoken 
of at all in this connexion, it would surely be better to say merely 
(as is said in §§ 15-17) that they result from an excess or deficiency 
of this or that element in the composition of the body, and not to 
attribute them to the influence of the drpds. The passage, as it 
stands in the MSS., shows confusion of thought ; and I am inclined 
to think that the words in which the body is mentioned have been 
added by a blundering transcriber, and that the text originally ran 
thus: éf js (i.e. from the mixture of the four elements of which the 
body consists) dvabuyiaral tis dtpds, ds mepleiAcira TH Wx, peradiods 
airy ris iSias rodrytos' Kal otrws al diadopal rav yvydv ylvovrat. 
See § 29 fiz., where the text has been similarly altered by the addition 
of 9 rhv Tod cdparos. 

§ 14. el pév yap Kard thy cwporindy © Sida gw" (ovoqacw ?) mreovd- 
gee 75 mop kth. Cf. xe. XX. 5: adv yap trepeyy ev Ppetordce rd 
Oeppov, K.7.X. 

TS THVikaGTa H Wuxh Oepuh thy dvow imdpxouca Kal erepop Beppsy 
mpoohaBotoa 'éxnupwSerrépa yevouévn! moved 3d LGov énepydrepov. 





EXCERPT XXVI: 14-16 615 


There is something wrong here. Perhaps éxmupwSerrépa? yevopevy is 
an alternative for érepov Oepydv mporAaBotca, and ought to be 
bracketed. Omitting those two words, we might translate ‘the fact 
that the soul is hot bynature and has received an addition of heatmakes 
the animal more energetic’. But that is not satisfactory ; and it is 
most likely that there is some more extensive corruption. The mean- 
ing wanted might be better expressed by writing 76 ryvuxatira, THs Wuxs 
Oeppits riv piow trapxovons Kal dad tod arpod, [éx}rupwSearépov dvros, 
erepov Oeppdv tpochaBovorns, evepydrepov yivera 7d SGov, But perhaps 
the best remedy would be to bracket 76 ryvixatra ¥ Yuyi) . » « exmrupw- 
Seorépa yevouévy, and alter ro 73 fGov (acc.) into rovetrae 7d Cadov 
(nom.). 

[rd 8€ cdpa df) Kal edxivyrov]. If these words are to be retained, 
riv piv yoxnv or 7H pav Yuxf must be inserted before évepydrepov. 
But it would be impossible to say 4 yux}) woe? 7d odpa (Or qrovet 7 
fdov rh ocdpart) 6&8; for it is not the soul, but the cvoraOpia roy 
crotxewv in the composition of the body, that produces bodily 
qualities. It is probable then that in this section qualities of soul 
alone were originally spoken of, and that 7d 8¢ cSpa 6€b Kal edxivyrov 
is a later addition. And that being so, there is some reason to 
suspect that in the following sections also the words which have to 
do with qualities of the body (viz. mév in §16 init. and 7a pévro 
cdpora... kar’ ddéyov éxrirre in § 16 fin. ; pe in § 17 init, and ro 
88 cdpa... peraxwodpevov in § 17 fin.) have been added by a later 
hand. See § 29 jin. 

§15. Kodpoy Kal mSyrexdy Kal dvéSpacrov yiverat 73 LGov kat puxij kat 
cdpart, The writer must have been thinking of birds when he 
selected these three adjectives. Birds (and bird-like men) have an 
excess of air in the composition of their bodies ; and this makes 
them not only literally ‘ light ’ and ‘apt to hop about ’ and ‘ not apt to 
settle down’ in body, but also metaphorically ‘light’ &c. in soul. The 
words xa) yuy7 cal cdpart, supposing them to have been written by 
the original author, may be taken as equivalent to és rg odpart, otrw 
kal TH Wvx7- 

§ 16. 7d Laov tH [pev?] Wuxi ylyverar evpouv (edxpour MSS.) [kat 
edpues] kal edrepixutov, ixavéis te Tols GAAors [emmecety al ?] KohAnOij- 
vat Surdpevov. 7d CGov means the living being, which consists of body 
and soul in combination. It may be either man or beast; and in 
this sentence the writer seems to be thinking chiefly of men. 

1 Either mupwicorépa or éxmupwrépa would be better than Exnupwdecrépa. 


616 STOBAEI HERMETICA 


When there is an excess of water in the composition of the body, 
the result is that the soul, like water, ‘ flows freely’, and ‘ diffuses itself 
readily ’ ; and in that case the man is well able to ‘cleave to the others’, 
or unite with other men or things, as water unites with things into 
which it soaks, or dissolves into itself things which are soaked in it. 
Does this mean that the man is of a social disposition,—that he is ready 
to make friends with his neighbours, and is able to influence them and 
apt to be influenced by them ? Or does it refer to intellectual qualities, 
and mean that he readily brings his mind to bear on things and readily 
receives impressions from them ? ois dAAous (sc. Lesors ?) seems to agree 
better with the former interpretation ; if external objects in general were 
meant, we should have expected rather rots zpdypacw, or rots éxrds. 
But xai edpuds was probably added by some one who thought that the 
sentence had to do with intellectual ability. 

Sid 73 mpds Ta AAda [Evwrixdy kal] Kowwrixdy tod ISaros* [eprfdver] 
(évoirat) yap maou (sc. 78 D8wp). There is no sense in saying that 
water ‘sits upon’ or ‘settles down on’ all things ; édi€dver must 
therefore have been substituted by error for some other verb. If 
évorixoy is retained, it must be taken to mean ‘apt to unite itself 
with things’, from évode@a:, and not ‘apt to unite things’, from évody. 
But it is probable that the missing verb for which édigaver has 
been substituted is évotra, and that évwrixdy has arisen out of évotrat 
misplaced. 

kai wohd pév dy ((kat mepidaBdr)) eis gaurd{v] dvadver [kat mepi- 
AapBdver]}, ddiyor 8 Smdpxov Kal xatadiy (Karaddcay MSS.) ékeivo 
yiyverat @ éplyn. al wepthapPdver has probably come from oA} pev 
dv (kal meprdaBdv)), written in correspondence to ddéyov & imdpyov 
kal xaradvv. (It is possible, however, that the author wrote merely 
mody piv dv els avd dvadrver, ddlyov 8 imdpyov éxeivo ylyverar @ 
éuiyn, and that both xat wepAaBdv and kat xaradvv were added by 
some one else.) If a large-quantity of water is poured on a small 
quantity of earth, for instance, the water envelopes the earth and 
dissolves it, If a small quantity of water is poured on a large 
quantity of earth, the water sinks into the mass of earth, and 
disappears ; and in the latter case it might be thought that the water 
was transmuted into earth (éxeivo yiyverat 3 éucyn). 

{kal rod i8{ou cuvBdopou Kar” ddiyor exmiarrer], Whatis.the point 
of i8iov? Possibly the meaning is ‘the bond which holds together 
the parts of the body itself , as opposed to the bond which holds 
together the body and the soul; but the phrase is obscure. xar’ 








EXCERPT XXVI: 17 617 


értyor, ‘little by little’, is also difficult to explain ; we should rather 
have expected something equivalent to pixpd@ rar dpoppg. The 
words xat rod... . éxwirres are not needed, and may be omitted 
with advantage ; perhaps they may have come from a marginal note 
on the preceding clause. 

§ 17. dpPreta [per] rod Lou H Wuxh ylverar. jéy is out of place. 
It seems intended to point forward to 7d 8¢ cdpa «.7.A.; but if that 
was the writer’s intention, he ought to have written # pev yu? rod Leov 
duBreta ylveraz. This confirms the suspicion that the mentions of 
bodily qualities in §§ 15-17 are later additions. 

otk exouca Thy [owparixhy] (ilar) dpardrnra edAurov, [od8é . . . AAX’ 
%yBov péver rap’ Eaurq,| (GAN) bwd [Bdpous Kat] (ris) muKvdrntos (rod 
dtpod ?) we8yPeioa. There can be little doubt that the two participle- 
clauses, otk txovea tiv . . . dpadryta eddvrov and tmd . . . muxvd- 
tyros . . . mednbeioa, were meant to be contiguous, and that the 
passage oi82... éavrq, in which the verbs are in the indicative, has 
been wrongly interposed between them. If that passage occurred 
at all in the original text, it must have stood after redyOcioa; but it 
seems more probable that it is a note added by a reader. 

cwparixiv épadryra is impossible. It is not the body, but the soul, 
that is dpadv; and in the case here spoken of, the body must be 
auxvév OF orepedv even beyond the average of bodies, since it contains 
an excess of rd yeddes. If we write riv Stay dpaudryra, the words 
may be taken to mean that the soul, though itself dpaidv, cannot 
easily free itself from the zvxvéy in which it is enveloped or entangled. 

Bépovs may have come from épydv cai Bapé below. 

(ris) muxvérntos must have been followed by some substantive in 
the genitive. As the writer held that it is by means of the drpés 
that the body acts on the soul, his view would be best expressed by 
writing id tis avxvéryros (rod drpod) wedyOcioa. But in §§ 15 and 
16 he speaks of the influence of the body on the soul without 
mentioning the drpdés by which the influence is conveyed; and 
supposing that he did so here also, he may have written Tod cdparos, 
or rod pupdparos. 

[ode “rod 80? of! ex(arnSijoar) (Séva)rar (wnShcerat MSS.) wemaxu(s)- 
pévev tay aicOyTiKay (rod odpatos?) pepdv (pehdv MSS.), aX’ évBor 
péver map’ éaury.| rod d¢’ of seems to have taken the place of some 
phrase by which éxrndjoa. was qualified. It may have come from 
rod iiov in § 16 fin.; or possibly the original reading may have 
been of8t (2x) rod (i)8iou (réwou? éx)arndijoat (dvva)yrat. 


618 STOBAEI HERMETICA 


tov aicOytixdy pepSv means the bodily organs of sense; and rod 
odparos must be either inserted or understood. The sense-organs 
(especially, perhaps, the eyes) are here regarded as doorways or 
passages through which the soul issues forth from its abode (in the 
heart) to get knowledge of the external world. When there is an 
excess of earth in the body, these organs are exceptionally thick or 
dense, and the soul consequently cannot make its way through them ; 
it has to stay within and remain in ignorance. 

The writer of this statement ignores the theory of an drjds inter- 
posed between body and soul, and assumes that the activity of the 
soul is directly and immediately affected by the density of certain 
parts of the body. 

A mention of the ‘ thickening of the bodily sense-organs’ would have 
been more appropriately placed in the following passage, 7d 8? cpa 
«.7.4., supposing that passage to have been present in the original text. 

§ 18. rére 75 LGov Oeppdy (uev) eis mpagw, Kodpov 8 eis xivqow, 
Fedxparov! 8¢ eis “dg, “yevvatov! 82 cic nigiv katackeudterar. The 
adjectives are probably intended to apply both to the body and to 


the soul, as in § 15; we may supply in thought xal Wuxf Kai cdpar, 


Or ds 7G cdpari, otrw Kal rH yyy. A Satisfactory sense might be 
got by altering evxparov 8 cis ddijv into eizepiyvrov (or etiputov) 88 eis 
ovwvadyy, ‘readily diffusing itself so as to unite with things’ (cf. evpovy 
kal etrepixurov K.r.d. in § 16, and eis !ovpmrayiav! repiyvors in § ((27))). 
[yevvaiov indicates fixity or firmness : cf. Ar. H.A4. 488b 19 ; Physiogn. 
809 b ro, | 

((§ 27. 7d pev ydp (add pev yap 7d MSS.) yed@Bés dori 7 Tod odpa- 
Tos miéts «.7.A.)), This section is out of place where it stands in the 


MSS. It must have been written to follow § 18; but it may have 
been added (in that place) by a transcriber. Earth and water are 


apparently here spoken of as affecting the body alone (4 rod odparos 
més, and 7 év tovrw—i.e. TG cobpari— repixvors), and air and fire, 
as affecting the {gov as a whole (jiv), i.e. the body and soul in 


combination. That is hardly in agreement with the doctrine taught — 


elsewhere in §§ 13-30, that an excess or deficiency of any of the 
four elements in the composition of the body affects both the qualities 
of the body (immediately) and those of the soul (through the opera- 
tion of the intervening dzpdés). 

§§ 19-23. b00 ofv.. . 81a 7d cuyyeves Katoxe?. In these sections it 
is said that, if the quantities of the several elements of which the 
body is composed are proportioned to one another in a certain way, 








EXCERPT XXVI: 18, 27, 19-23 619 


the {Gov produced is a bird ; if they are proportioned in another way, 
the {Gov produced is a man ; and soon, This has little connexion 
with the preceding sections, and is hardly consistent with them. In 
§§ 13-18 we have been told that an excess of fire, for instance, in the 
composition of the body produces certain qualities in the soul (and 
body) of the {ov. That is apparently intended to apply both to 
men and to beasts, but more especially to men (jpiv, §1 3), and 
to account for the fact that one man differs from another in 
quality of soul, But in §§ 19-23, we are told that if there is a large 
proportion of fire in the composition of the body, and also a large 
proportion of air, the {Gov is a bird, but if there is a large proportion 
of fire and only a small proportion of air, the {Gov is a man. If these 
statements are to be brought into connexion with one another, we 
must assume that the soul-qualities which, according to §§ 13-18, 
are produced by an excess of fire (viz. ‘energy and spiritedness ’) 
are qualities which all birds and all men possess in common, But 
nothing of the sort is said in the text ; and no attempt is made to 
show how the contents of §§ 19-23 are to be reconciled with those 
of §§13-18. It is therefore most likely that this paragraph (§§ 19-23) 
was not written by the author of the document, but was inserted in 
it by a later hand. 

The meaning of the paragraph has been obscured by some corrup- 
tions of the phrases in which the proportions of the several elements 
are stated in each of the five cases dealt with. With the corrections 
which I propose, we get a scheme which, if we substitute definite 
numbers forthe vague mAciov, nérpov, and dAcyor of the text, and assume 
in each case a total of eight parts, may be represented in tabular 
form as follows :— 


Birps MEN QuaprRupEDs | REPTILES FIsHES 
fire, 3 | fire, 3 fire, 1 fire, o fire, o 
air, 3 air, 1 air, I air, 2 air, 0 
water, I water, 2 water, 3 water, 3 water, 6 
earth, 1 earth, 2 earth, 3 earth, 3 earth, 2 


In this table, pérpiov is taken to mean two parts out of eight, 
aAetov three parts, and éAcyov one part,’ in the case of birds, men, 
quadrupeds, and reptiles. In the case of fishes, w\cfoy is taken to 
mean six parts and édéyov two parts, so that the proportion between 
adeloy and édfyov is the same as in the other cases, though the 
quantities are doubled. 





620 STOBAEI HERMETICA 


In §§ 13-18, the point insisted on was the connexion between an 
excess or deficiency of this or that element and the presence of 
corresponding qualities of soul. In §§ 19-23, a connexion of that 
kind is mentioned in the case of men (rd wepurcdy tod Oeppod eis 
wiverw érpdarn), quadrupeds (9 8% rod Ocppod wapovota dAnypudrepa 
yéyove), reptiles (x7 rod wupds crepe drodpua yéyove), and fishes (77 
Tod Oepuod Kal dépos orepjoe Sedd éorr), but not in the case of birds, 
But in constructing his scheme of the proportions of the four ele- 
ments in the composition of the several kinds of ga, the writer seems 
(except in the case of men) to have been thinking chiefly of the 
creature’s place of abode. Birds fly aloft; they must therefore have in 
their composition much of ré dvopep? ororxeia (fire and air), of which 
the atmosphere consists, and little of ra xarwpepq (water and earth), 
Quadrupeds walk on the ground; they must therefore have in their 
composition much of ra xarwqepij, and little of 74 dvwgepy. Reptiles, 
like quadrupeds, live on the surface of the earth, and must therefore, 
like quadrupeds, consist chiefly of ri xarwpep}; but as they stand 
lower than quadrupeds in the scale of existence, the writer assigns to 
them no fire and two parts of air, as against the one part of fire and 
one of air assigned to quadrupeds. Fishes live in the water, and die 
if taken out of it and placed in air; hence it may be inferred that they 
have in them no dvwdepés at all, but consist wholly of 7a Karwoepny— 
much water, combined with a little earth to give solidity to their 
bodies, which would be fluid if composed wholly of water. The case 
of men is exceptional. Since men, like quadrupeds and reptiles, live 
on the surface of the earth, they ought, according to the principle 
which is applied in the other cases, to have in them the same pre- 
ponderance of ra xatwhep7 ; but owing to the Stoic association of 
fire with intelligence, the writer felt it necessary to assign to men 
a large proportion of fire, and consequently to cut down their 
allowance of the other elements. He tells us that the excess of fire 
in men ‘is converted into intelligence’, He assigns an excess of 
fire to birds also; but it must be supposed that in the case of birds 
the extra fire is not converted into intelligence, but takes effect in 
some other way. 

It is strange that men are placed between birds and quadrupeds. 
Possibly the paragraph originally dealt with irrational_anipials only, 
and the mention of men was inserted later. 

§ 19. 60 ody (sc. Loa) [748 7G Adyo] KeKowdynxe welovos pév Tupds 
kal mvedpartos, (ddlyou 8é BSaros Kal yijs,) tadra dmwpvéwrar. Does 








EXCERPT XXVI: 19-21 621 


rgSe 7 Ady mean ‘according to this doctrine’, i.e. according to 
the teaching of §§ 13-18? If so, the person who put §§ 19-23 into the 
document may have inserted this phrase by way of an attempt to 
connect the paragraph with the preceding passage. But there is no 
real connexion. 

The proportion of each of the four elements ought to be stated in 
each of the five cases ; and the pv after wAciovos shows that a corre- 
sponding statement about water and earth must have followed. The 
adjective might be either éA‘you or éddrrovos ; but as éd/you is the 
word used in §§ 20, 21, and 23, I have written it here also. 

§ 20. mAelovos pév mupds, ddtyou 8é mvesparos, Baros 82 (yerpiou) Kal 
yas tons. Bdaros kal yijs toys is unintelligible. datos Kal yijs iowv 
might mean ‘water and air in equal proportions’ ; but that would be 
too indefinite. If we insert perplov after t8aros 8¢, and take ions to 
mean ‘likewise perpias’, we get the proportions which the scheme 
requires. 

5 yap év tpi vous Oeppov te Xpipd eorey. This is Stoic doctrine. 
Compare the Stoic speaker's exposition in Cic. Wat. deor. 2. 23-32, 
which is probably based on Posidonius. 

Sradvver $8 [xara] (Bid) wavtev [Kat énlararar|, érioraras is probably 
a misplaced variant for the preceding olde. 

§ a1. mAelovos péy UBaros, melovos BE yijs, [perptou Be] ((Atyou 8e)) 
mvesparos Kat [[ddéyou Bel] aupés. The meaningless ¢ before amupos 
shows that there is something wrong in the text of the MSS. ; and in 
connexion with zvedparos, perpiou (the average amount) cannot be 
right. If there is more than the average of both water and earth, 
there ought to be less than the average of both air and fire. perp(ov 
has doubtless come from § 20, where it is needed; and ddLyov dé, 
which ought to stand before rvetaros, has been transposed. 

radra (dmo)reOypiwrar, By Onpia the writer means quadrupeds. 
He wanted to use a verb, and did not venture to coin such a word 
as dmoreretpardburat. 

1H 82 Tod Oeppod mapouata (meptovcig MSS.) dAxydrepa yéyove tav 
dor. 77 70d Gepyod meprovolg is inconsistent with dA¢you mupds. 
Reading zapoveig, we may take the meaning to be that quadrupeds, 
having in them some fire (though not much), are thereby made more 
pugnacious than ‘the other animals’ (viz. the reptiles and the fishes), 
which have vo fire in them.’ rév d\Awy must be understood to 


1 The writer overlooks the fact that some quadrupeds (e, g. hares) are hardly 
more pugnacious than snakes and fishes. 


622 STOBAEI HERMETICA 


mean, not ‘all animals other than quadrupeds’ (which would in- 
clude birds and men), but ‘animals other than those of which I have 
already spoken’. Birds and men have much fire in them, and there- 
fore, if the writer’s theory holds good in their case, ought to be even 
more dAxia than quadrupeds ; but about that he says nothing. 

§ 22. d00 Se yijs (uév) Kal SSaros [towv] (wAetovos) kexowdvyxe, (mvedpa- 
Tos S€ petpiou, mupds 82 odSerds,) Tada adyprérwta (dperprsoy MSS), 
The addition of zupds 8% ovdevds is made necessary by the following 
words ry Tod zupos orepyoe. But what are the proportions of 
the other three elements? Reptiles must surely have in them ag 
large a proportion of rd xarwqepy as quadrupeds ; and if so, wAcéovos 
is the word wanted in connexion with earth and water. It might 


perhaps be possible to take Yowv as referring to wAeiovos pev Sdaros 


mAciovos 5¢ yijs in § 21, and assume that it means ‘in the same pro- 
portion as in the preceding case’, That would make fowy equivalent 
to whefovos; but the meaning would be obscurely expressed, and it 
seems better to substitute wAelovos for towv. And if there is wAetov 
of earth, wAcfov of water, and no fire, the proportion of air required 
to make up the right total is wérpuov. (3+3+2+0= 8.) 

TH 8 tod GBaros [[kowwvia]] (meprovcia) dypa (fuxpd MSS.) éyévero, 
Th 82 ris yijs Bapéo Kal vwbpd, rH 82 Tod mredparos ((Kowwvia)) edxivyra 
ci mpoaipéce, rd xuwveiodar!, The right word to correspond to 
mhetovos is repioveta, and not xowwwvig, which, like kexowwvnke above, 


would be equally applicable whether the quantity of the thing were 


mieiov, pérpiov, or ddiéyov. Consequently, if we write mAeovos above, — 


we must substitute mepiovota for kowwvia in connexion with earth and 
water, and make xowwvia apply to air alone, the quantity of which is 
pérpiov. 

According to the Stoics, air is r3 Yuxpdv, and water 73 dypév. For 
this reason, we expect to be told that a surplus of water makes things 
typd, rather than yuxpd ; and it is most likely that Woxpa. is a mis- 


reading for iypd. Cf. rq tod odpatos typérqtt, said of reptiles, in §5. 


The words eixivyra et mpoapéces rd xweicOa, with some alteration, 


might be made to mean ‘able to move easily or quickly if they 


choose to move’. edxivyra seems hardly consistent with Bapéa xat 
voOpda ; but the writer may have meant that a snake usually moves 
slowly or lies motionless, and yet is capable of making a quick and 
sudden dart. 

§ 23. mhelovos ev sypoi, 8dtyou 8é Enpod, (mupds 82 Kal mvedparos 
ovBevds), mupds 8% Kai rveduaros (or Gepuod 3% Kal dépos) obdevds must 


= 








EXCERPT XXVI: 22-24 623 


be added here, because rj rod Oepyod Kai dépos otepnoe follows. 
Fishes are SeAd because of the absence of 7d Geppdv in their com- 
position, and xaraduricd (i.e. karoep? in the extreme) because of 
the absence of air and fire (ri dvwcep7). 

Tf Be Tod Sypod weprovalg Kat rH Tob yedSous mapouclg (weprovaig 
MSS.) é "Aedupévy yfi Kat! Gare Sid 7d guyyevés Koroukei. Here 
again, as in § 21, wapovoia has been wrongly altered into zepiovoig. 
The proportion of earth is dA¢yov. 

AeAvpévy yh Kat Dar. must be a corruption of some phrase meaning 
‘ water which has a little earth dissolved in it’, Fishes are composed 
of much water and a little earth; and they live in an environment 
composed of the same elements. The water of rivers, lakes, and seas 
is not the pure element water ; it always contains some earth. 

For the notion that the differences between the several kinds of 
animals result from the different proportions of the four elements in 
the composition of their bodies, cf. Schol. in Hermog. ideas, Walz 
Rhet. Gr. VII, p. 884 (Arnim Sto. II, § 789): of piv yap SrorKol 
Néyovar pi) (aodparov ?) elvar (ri) Wuxyy, GAN éx Ths Kpdoews TOV 
orotxewv droreheioban tiv yéverw (airjs) érav pay yap meovdon Td 
Oepydv, moet tov déovra, 5Oer; gyat, Kat Ovpuxds éorw*! Srav Sé Kara 
Adyov Kal oxeddv ef icov aweédOy, moet TOV dvOpwrov,? ravrys THS ddéys 
mpoorarys éyévero Kal TaAqves. 

§ 24. kal mpds pev . . . oTorxelov odatopetpias.' This passage, as 
given in the MSS., is meaningless; but it evidently dealt with the 
proportionate quantities of the several elements in the composition 
of living bodies, It is to be inferred from the words 7a Aoura Soa 
that men were spoken of in the earlier part of the section; we may 
therefore insert rv évOpdrwv in connexion with ra cdpara. It 
seems probable that éAvyoperpiay is a corruption of éAryomorpiay 
(meaning tiv édxyéryta Ths potpas), which would be a suitable term 
to stand in contrast to ris pofpas THY brepoxijy (reproxyv MSS.); and 
it is not unlikely that odc.operpias also is a corruption of dAvyopoipias 
(or possibly of icopopias). The text cannot be restored with any 
certainty; but we can see what the passage was about; and its 
writer (whether the author of the lidellus or a transcriber) may have 
intended it to follow §§ 18 and 27. 

1 Cf Exc. XXVIL 14: ef pv yap... mdeovdcete Td Top, .. . morei(rat?) 76 (Gov 
"a ie cay here reported differs in detail from that of Exc. XXVI. 19-23, 


according to which the proportions of the four elements in man are sof equal; but 
it is constructed on similar principles. 


624 STOBAEI HERMETICA 


§ 25. [f kard thy mpdrny odvobov yevoudyn xpdorg kal & ex tats 


dvaPupidwevos dtyds.]. This is a misplaced alternative for 6 é THs 


mparys cvvddov Kal Kpdoews TOV orotxeiwv yeyvomevos arpds in § 28, 

ep’ Sav (pev 73 upapa) thy Slav rmpet modryta (thy i8{av tmpodow 
i8idrmta MSS.). The missing subject must have been rb pvpape or 
some term of similar meaning, e. g. 75 o¥yxpapa (§ 29), or 4} ovoracis 
Tov owuaros. The presence of two nominatives (xpaovs and drpds) 
in the misplaced scrap which precedes has caused typi to be altered 
into rnpotow. 

The phrase rijs iSias idéryros occurs in xe. XVI. 6, and may 
perhaps be there justified by the context; but ri iSav iSvérnra is 
hardly possible here." The word i8iérys is equivalent to iS¢a TOLoTNS } 


and the sense wanted may be got by writing either thy lay rypet 


moryta OF type riv iudryra. 

In §§ 13-18, the writer has been speaking of the proportions in 
which the four elements are present in the body when it is first 
formed. In §§ 25-29, he goes on to say that these proportions may 
be altered during the life of the ¢Gov, and explains the effect of such 
alterations. Health consists in the maintenance of the original pro- 
portions, whatever they may be in the particular case ;? and when 
the original proportion of any one of the four elements is increased 
or diminished, disease results. (An increase of 73 Jepyor, for instance, 
might produce fever.) 

émdv [yap] (Se)... iro. mheovdon Tourwy T (wheovdoy Taira MSS.) (A 
edartwOf), obk 'evepyeia Néyw (evepyet aAN’ éy MSS.) thy wepioyhy', 
ob8e TH Kar’ adfnow ywoudry peraBody [ro yévous kai] ray cwopdrwr, 
AAG 7H [ | cuoTatiKy Tv cToixelwy Kpdoet, . . . (78) tHyiKadTa [odtws] 
vo(a)et 73 EGov. Disease is caused by an alteration in the overariKy 
Tv oTotxeiwv KpGors, that is, in the proportions of the several elements 
which are mixed together in the overacis of the body. Cf. Pl. Zim. 
81 E: ro bé Trav vécur bbe Evvicrarat, d4Adv ov Kat ravri. Terrapwv 
yop ovrev yevav e€ dv ouurérnye 7d copa, yns mupds Udards re Kat 
dépos, tovrwy % mapa iow mheovetlia wal Wea... ordoes Kat 
vocous mapéxet. Ld. 86 A: 7d wav ofv ex aupds vrepPodjs udduora. voonrav 
chpa Ewvexy Katara kat ruperods darepydlerat, ro 8 eé dépos K.7.A. 


* In Sag, Sal. 2. 23, 6 Oeds Exricev rdv dvOpwmoy ea? apPapcia, cat elxdva ris téfas 
ibtérnTos éxoincev aitéy (Swete), it is almost certain that the right reading is ris 
idias dibidrnros. See Goodrick’s note ad Joc. 

* It may be inferred from §§ 13-18, if I have understood that passage rightly, 
that the writer holds not only that the original proportions in the case of a man 
differ from the original proportions in the case of a bird or a fish, but also that the 
original proportions in the case of one man differ from the original proportions in 
the case of another man, 


5 








EXCERPT XXVI: 25, 26 625 


The emendation OYKENEPFEIAIAEFQ for OYKENEPFEIAAAETO 
may be’ accepted as certain. The writer guards against misunder- 
standing by mentioning two other kinds of alterations, and explain- 
ing that his statement does not apply to ¢#em. The second of these is 
described in the words 77 xar’ afyow ywopévy peraBod} Trav cwpdror, 
the meaning of which is clear. As a child grows, the quantity of 
each of the four elements of which its body is composed necessarily 
increases ; but provided that the proportions of the four elements to 
one another are maintained without change, there is no disease, and 
the healthy child grows into a healthy man. But what is the first 
of the two kinds of alteration that the writer says he does not mean? 
His description of it has been corrupted into évepye? dd rv mepwoxiy. 
A satisfactory sense might be got by writing 79 évepyeta rod mept- 
éxovros, ‘I do not mean (an increase or diminution which is effected) 
by the operation of the environment’. If a man is exposed to a hot 
sun, or stands before a fire, his body is heated ; that is, the amount 
of ro Gepudy in it is in some sense increased. But that is not the 
sort of increase that this paragraph is concerned with; you do not 
fall ill every time you warm yourself. We may suppose that in such 
cases the @epydv added from without merely penetrates the body, 
and is not organically combined with it; the additional ‘fire’ (or 
heat, regarded as a material substance,) does not enter into the 
overacts in such a way as to become a constituent part of it. If in 
some instance the heat of the sun does so enter into the bodily 
overacis as to alter its proportions, we have a case of sunstroke. 

[odrws| has come from § 26 zniz. 

§ 26. [éway yap otrws SiareOy 15 Te Oeppdy Kai Td depddes, 4 Bh 
atokyva éott tis puxis, tére ev T&NAnyopiais! Kal exordec ylyverar 
78 {gov.] If this is read in connexion with the preceding sentence, 
otrws Suaref7j must mean ‘are increased or diminished’. We should 
have expected to be told that, when the fire in the body is increased 
or diminished, the {Gov falls into certain diseases, and when the air 
is increased or diminished, the {@ov falls into certain other diseases, 
But instead of that, we are here told that when Jo/4 the fire and the 
air are increased or diminished, the {gov falls into ‘allegories and 
ec.tasies’. éxoracis might perhaps mean éxoracis pavixy, i. e. some 
form of mental disease (insanity, delirium, or loss of consciousness) ; 
but dAAnyopiat are not diseases.’ 


1 [ have thought of proposing éypyyopiats (or ypy‘yopiais), in the sense of ‘ attacks 
of insomnia’, (In the magic papyri, there are spells which are expected to pro- 


2806-8 $s 


626 STOBAEI HERMETICA 


We are also told that 76 Oepyov and ro depwés (the fire and air in 
the body? or fire and air in general?) are ovoxyva ris Yuyqs. What 
does that mean? According to the preceding sections, the four 
elements are mixed together in the body, and an embodied soul, 
if it is ovexnvos with any of them, must be ovexyvos with all four ; 
though it would be more correct to say that the oxjvos of the soul 
(i.e. the body) is composed of the four elements. An unembodied — 
soul might be said to be ovexyvos with fire and air, inasmuch as 
it resides in the atmosphere, which consists mainly of air, but 
contains also some fire diffused through the air or intermixed with 
it; but in this part of the document we are not concerned with 
unembodied souls. 

This sentence then must be a detached fragment inserted here by 
error. (See § 30.) 

[wemdxvorar yap Ta ororxeta 8’ Gy SiaOeiperar Ta oapara.| This is 
unintelligible. One might conjecture werikvwrar yap (. ..) ra 
(xatrwpep) ororxeta (. . . vero?) dv dv diapOeiperar Ta copara. 
Thus altered, the words might be a remnant of a statement con- 
nected with and parallel to the preceding sentence ; and the meaning — 
of the section as a whole might be something of this sort: ‘when 
certain changes take place in the fire and the air, the {Gor falls into 
diseases of the soul; when certain changes take place in the water 
and the earth, the {Gov falls into diseases of the body.’ 

§ 28. dowep oby 6 éx Tis mpdrys cuvddou kal Kpdoews Ty cToLXelwy 
yryvspevos dtpds [kat doavel eas Kat dvaQupiacrs], drrotos [el&v 7, K.7.A. 
In § 25, we were told that an alteration in the proportions of the ele- 
ments in the body produces (bodily) disease. In § 28, the writer 
goes on to say that such an alteration produces certain effects in the 
soul also. But as it is through the medium of the dryds that the in- 
fluence of the elements contained in the body as originally composed — 
is brought to bear upon the soul (§ 13), so it is through the medium 
of the dros that alterations in the composition of the body produce 
effects in the soul. If, for instance, the proportion of fire in the 
body is increased, the drudés becomes more fiery, and thence results 
a corresponding alteration (presumably a morbid alteration) in the 
soul. Cf. Pl. Zim. 86 B-E: kal ta pev Tepl TO CSpa voorjpara tatrp 
EvpBaiver yryvopeva, Ta SF wept Wuxnv bia odparos ew, THd. ... Grou 


duce the effect of depriving the victim of sleep; and in one of them, there is given 
a recipe for a magic operation by which a woman can be kept awake until she dies 
for want of sleep.) But I have not found any instance of the word éypyyopia or 
yeryopia, 








EXCERPT XXVI: 28, 29 629 


yap dv f ray ékéwv kal tov dAdvKav pdeyparov kat dcou miKpot Kat 
xorddes Xupot Kara TO Toya mravnbévres ... Ti ad? abrav arpida ri 
ris Wuxis pope évppigarres dvaxepacGdct, ravrodar& voojpara yuxis 
éurowdon (It may possibly have been that passage that suggested 
to the writer of Zxc. XXVI the use of dryés instead of the Stoic 
term zveipa.) 

The terms ars and dvabvpiacs are here given as equivalents 
for érpés. We were told in § 13 that the drpds dvabvpudras 5 but 
zéas (‘a kindling’ or ‘a setting on fire’) is not a suitable word to 
describe this ‘vapour’; and as its nature has been sufficiently 
explained before, the words cal... dva0upiacts are superfluous. 

[as dv Exp Gicews, etre arovdaiws (ewouSatos MSS.) etre py}, We 
must understand elre orovdaiws (exer) etre pr. But this phrase is 
redundant after érotos 4v #; and the implied statement that the 
drys produced by the original xpacvs trav ororxetwy sometimes od 
orovdaiws exer is inconsistent with § 25, where we were told that, as 
long as the original proportions are maintained, 7d Gov éyiaive. The 
phrase ézoios dv 7 is not open to this objection ; for it implies merely 
that the dros (when first formed), like the vpaya which produces it, 
is differently composed in different cases, and not that it sometimes 
has dad qualities. 

§ 29. ri (war) yap ef Apxiis (Sradecer ?) [pds adrov oixerdryte Kal cuvyTpo- 
ia] Empévouea ¥ puxn Thy rdf Siarnpet. mpds adrdv (sc. tov derpov) 
olxedrytt Kal cvvtpopig makes nonsense here ; for the oixe.drys and 
avwtpodia between the soul and the érpds never ceases; if the drpds 
is altered, the soul is altered correspondingly. The phrase may 
‘perhaps have come from the lost passage, beginning with otrw xa‘, 
which followed dozep .. . els éaurdv in § 28. 

The sentence ought to end with something equivalent to riv 
Syleav Siarype. If we retain rééw, we must take it as meaning 
eiragiay ; but perhaps it would be better to write etragiav. 

Hrot 7G SXw cuyxpdpate # Kal [pépeow %] péper (rit) adrod. pepe 
# may be a corruption of pépet twi, But why should the writer 
speak of an addition of fire, for instance, to a part of the otyxpapa ? 
Perhaps his meaning may have been that an increase of fire may 
take place, not in the body as a whole, but in some one part of it, 
e.g. in the heart or in the stomach ; and that the alteration in the 
ards and the soul caused by an increase of fire in the heart would 
be different from the alteration caused by an increase of fire in the 
stomach. 





628 STOBAEI HERMETICA 


[frou] Thy ris Wuxis Sudbeow [| thy tod cdparos|. A mention of 
changes in the dedy is out of place here. That topic was disposed 
of in § 25. In §§ 26-28, the writer has gone on to speak of changes 
in the soul; and he could have no reason for recurring to the 
subject of Jodily disease. Besides, it is wrong to say that changes 
in the éruds cause changes in the body; it is the soul, and not the 
body, that is affected by the érpés. See note on § 13. 

§ 30. [75 (ev) yap mip kat 13 tveipa x.7.\.] We are here told that 
the fire and the air (i.e. the portions of fire and. air which have 
entered into the composition of a given body ?) ‘run up to’ the soul, 
but the water and the earth ‘settle down on’ the body. This seems 
to imply that the soul is in one place and the body in another, that 
is, that the soul is unembodied. But in the preceding sections, the 
writer has been speaking only of embodied souls ; and an embodied 
soul is either diffused throughout the body or seated in some central 
organ of the body. Moreover, as long as the life of the {Gov con- 
tinues, the four elements are mixed together in the body, and it 
could not be said that two of them go to one place and the two 
others to another place. This section then is inconsistent with the 
context. It seems to have been written from the same point of 
view as § 26, which speaks of +é Te Oeppdv Kal 7d depades, & 8) ovoxnva 
éort THs Wuxys ; and it may very likely have been extracted from the 
same document, and inserted in Zxc. XXVI by the same person. 

If we read én016xwpov and suowédpy, we are told that the place of the 
soul is similar to the place of the fire and the air, and the abode of 
the body is sémilar ¢o the abode of the water and the earth. If we read 
dpoxwpov and éSuoédpw, we are told that the place of the soul is she 


same as that of the fire and the air, and the abode of the body is #he — 


same as that of the water and the earth. The latter reading seems. 
the more probable, and agrees better with what is said in §26; 
but in either case the statement is obscure. 


EXCERPT XXVIII 


Lxe. XXVIII is not a Hermeticum in the same sense as Excerpts 
I-XXVII; it is an extract from a gnomologium, i.e. a collection of 
apophthegms, each of which was ascribed to some wise man. But 
it is possible that the compiler of the gnomologium found the phrases 
6 tov dAwv Sypovpyds and coddraros vots Kat didws in Hermetic 








EXCERPTS XXVI: 30; XXVIII-XXIX 629 


Uibelli of the same type as those with which we have been dealing. 
For the former, cf. éxeivos 75 GAov edypuovpynoe in Exc, XXI, 2. 


EXCERPT XXIxX 


These verses are ascribed to Hermes in the MSS. of Stobaeus. 
But it is possible that the /emma “Eppod is wrongly placed, and 
belonged to an eclaga which has been lost; and whether that is 
so or not, there is no reason to suppose that the verses were 
attributed to Hermes by the man who composed them. They are 
given without any author’s name in the Anthologia,’ and in three 
MSS. reported in Catal. codd. astrol. Graec. III; and in two other 
MSS. reported zéidem, they are ascribed to Empedocles.” 

There is a similar instance of the attribution of hexameters to 
Hermes in the case of the Iept ceurpav (Abel, Orphica, pp. 141-143, 
dpdteo 3} Kal révde Adyov, rékos, K.7.A.), Which in some MSS. is 
ascribed to Orpheus, but in others (e.g. Catal. codd. astr. Gr. 
Venet. 5, f. 289) to Hermes Trismegistus. In Ca/a/. codd, astr. Gr. 
III. 5, f. 100, 2d. 24, f. 20, and 7d, 31, f. 24 v., the title is ‘Epyod tov 
tpirpeylorou repli ceiapav' év GAdw ’Oppéws. And a prose paraphrase 
of these verses about earthquakes, which is printed in Catal. codd. 
astr. Gr. VII, pp. 167-171, bears the title ‘Eppod rod tpurpeyicrou 
Tept wetopovd. 

The heading zept efpappévys is inappropriate. It may perhaps be, 
as Wachsmuth suggests, a misplaced repetition of the superscription 
(wept cipappévys x.t.A.) which stands at the head of the chapter of 
Stobaeus in which this ec/oga is placed. 

1 In Anthol. Gr. ed. Jacobs, 1813-1817, vol. ii, p. 768, the superscription Tod 
avrod, # ‘Eppod is printed at the head of these verses (Append. nr. 40); and rod 
avrod means @¢wvos *AAcgavSpéws, which is there printed at the head of nr, 39 (an 
encomium on Ptolemy the astronomer). But Jacobs says that nr. 40 * auctoris 
nomine caret in Append. Plan. p. 494 (i.e., I suppose, in the MS.). Quum in 
Palat. p. 442, nf. 491 versus septimus Theonis nomine inscriptus sit (see note on 
Mivy, Zeus, «.7.A. below), totum hoc poemation Theoni tribuendum censebat 
Br(unckius).’ 

As to nr. 39, Jacobs writes ‘ Theonis Alexandrini. Hoe poemation, quod in 
Append. Plan. p. 494. St. legitur, Bi(unckius) non dubitavit Zeond tribuere ei, qui 
commentarios scripsit in Ptolemaei Magnam Constructionem.’ Does this ambi- 
guous note mean that nr. 39 also is anonymous in the MS., and that its ascription 
to *Theon of Alexandria’ is merely a conjecture? Or, that @¢wvos is given in the 
MS., and Brunck added *AAefavdpews? Or, that @éwvos ’AAcfavdpéws is given in 
the MS., and’Brunck took that to mean the man who wrote the commentary on 
Ptolemy ? 


2 Perhaps some better readings of the text might be found in the MSS. mentioned 
in Catal. codd, astr. Gr. 


630 STOBAEI HERMETICA 


kar’ "Ohdumiov . . . od8dv ethedvrar. The region of the planet- 
spheres might perhaps be regarded as the ‘threshold’ of the heaven 
of the fixed stars, which is situated beyond it. But that seems a 
far-fetched interpretation ; and it is difficult to picture seven star- 
gods moving in circles along or upon a threshold. Is it possible 
that odds is here used as a synonym for 6dés? In that case, the 
‘Olympian path’ along which the planets move would be the 
Zodiac. It has been suggested (Autenrieth, Hom. Worterb.) that 
in the Homeric phrase éri yjpaos of86 the word means ‘path’, 
Cf. Apollonius, Lex. Hom. 123. 33: obdds... dmb rod 8¢ adrby 
ddevew (Ebeling, Zea. Hom. s. v.). 

peta totow det mepwiccerar aidv.i—{perd toiow del 8° émuvqoerat 
aidv MSS. Stob.: kal rotow det KavoviLerar aldy Anth.). xavovitera: 
(‘is measured’?) is hardly possible ; and zepwiccerat (conjectured 
by Jacobs) is a suitable word to describe the recurrent movement 
of the seasons and the years. Cf. dvixa Kapveiov repwiccerat dpas 
(Eur. Av. 449), and zepurehAopévwv énavrdv. Time is measured by 
the movements of the heavenly bodies, and was sometimes said by 
the Greeks to be constituted by those movements. 

‘racropépos' Nadin. macrds means a bridal chamber. In certain 
cults, the chamber in which a iepds ydwos was supposed to take 
place was called the zacrés, and small models of such a racrés 
were carried by priests, who were thence called racropdpo. It may 
be that some such usage existed in the cult of Aphrodite at Paphos 
or elsewhere ; and the epithet which properly applied to the priest 
might possibly be transferred to the deity. But in this verse, an 
adjective referring to a detail of ritual would be out of place. What 
is wanted is some word comparable to orvyvds, #dvs, and Opacvs, 
and describing broadly the most prominent characteristic of the 
goddess; and as we are told that Aphrodite is dpegis, we should 
have expected something like ‘ bringing desire’. mavropdpos, omnium 
Ferax, would be a possible epithet for alma Venus, and would at 
least be better than racroddpos. 

edmrepos “Eppijs. Hermes is not only the winged messenger of the 
gods, but also the author or patron of éea arepdevta ; cf. Adyos 
‘Eppijs below. The connexion of Hermes with Adyos (speech) * was 


1 Cf, Justin Agol. 1, a1. 2: mécovs yap ulods pdcxovcr rod Aids of map’ piv 
Tipdpevor avyypapeis, énicracbe: ‘Epi pév, Ad-yov Tov éppnveuricdy Kat mévrow 
Bibdowador, «7A, Lb, 22, 2: ef 88 Kat lias... -yeyervjoGar (rdv "Incodv) é« bcot 
A€yopev Adyov Oeod, . . . Kowvdy TodTo Eorw byiv Tos TOV ‘Eppiy Aé-yor rov mapa beod 
dyyeArinoy A€yovary, 








EXCERPT XXIX 631 


felt to be implied in the verb épyyvevew. A philosopher might 
identify Hermes with human reason, or with the Adyos of God, in 
the sense in which that term is used by Philo; but such notions 
would hardly be in keeping with the simple and popular tone of 
these verses. 

Zeds dpyryevebhos, ad’ ob ars EBAdoryoev. This is an expansion 
of Zebs yéveors. Zeus is warhp dvSpav re OeGv re, and the author of 
all life. 

Zon 8° év jpiv Min «.t.d. The planet-gods are within us; that is, 
we feel their workings or influences (évépyevae or dméppotat) within us. 
Similarly, Sdxpu pev éort Kpdvos &c, means Avan éori Kpdvou évépyae. 
or dmdppoia, &c. 

Min, Zeds, “Apns, Nadin, Kpévos, “Hdvos, ‘Epps. The almost 
identical verse Zevs, "Apys, Hadin, Myvy, Kpovos, “Hitos, “Eppijs 
occurs, with a different context, in Manetho, ’AzoreAcoparicd, 
Koechly (Teubner), 5 [6]. 34. And in Anthol, Pal. p. 442 nr. 491 
(Jacobs vol. ii, p. 175: Stadtmiiller vol. iii. i, p. 488), that same 
verse (Zevs, “A., T., Min, K., “H., “E.) is given under the super- 
scription @éwvos*’ povdarixoy «is tiv €B8opd8a, The order of the 
seven names in Manetho and the povdorixov of Anthol. Pal. seems 
preferable (ad Jove principium) ; and it is very likely that in the 
poemation of Stob. and Anthol. Append. the order was originally the 
same, and Myvy has been shifted by accident. 

There were many Theons ; (five Theons of Alexandria, as well as 
a good many other men named Theon, are mentioned in Smith’s 
D. B.;) but the man meant by @éwvos in the superscription of the 
povéorixov in Anthol. Pal. may perhaps be the Theon of Alexandria 
(c, A.D. 380) who was the father of Hypatia, and was well known 
as an astronomer and geometer; and it is not unlikely that he was 
the writer of this little poem on the planets.’ 

am aidepiou "pepepicpeda! mvedparos ehxew Sdkpu, yédwra, K.TA. 


1 Wachsmuth says ‘in Palat. p. 442 n. 491 versus septimus is Stob. 1. 5. 14, 
i.e. Mfvn ... ‘Eppijs) Theoni Alexandrino adscribitur’. But what authority has 
he for ‘ Alexandrino’? 

2 Joh, Malala 343 (Migne, Tom. 97, col. 512) says that in the reign of Gratianus 
(A.D. 367-383) O€ov 6 copdbraros Girscopos eidacKe kat rpphveve (al. -vevae) 7a, 
dorpovopixa Kat ra “Eppod rot tpispeylatou avyypappara Kal 7a ‘Oppéws, ‘This 
doubtless refers to Theon, the father of Hypatia. That Theon is known to have 
written commentaries on the astronomical writings of Ptolemy; and if he was 
interested in the Orphic poems, that makes it the more likely that he sometimes 
wrote verses himself. These verses then may possibly have been written by him. 
But even if they were, they can have had nothing to do with his commentary on 
the Hermetica, and it can hardly be supposed that he ascribed them to Hermes. 





Se 


632 STOBAEI HERMETICA: EXC, XXIX 


In place of peyepicpeba, something equivalent to eivaprar Hiv is 
wanted. Meineke conjectures peyopyueba; if we accept this, we 
must assume that pepopyuela is here used mefri gratia for }€L0Upy- 
pela, sortiti sumus, from popdo. The word Meuopnat occurs, with 
a dative, in Anth. Pal. 7. 286 (rod pepopnpeve (al. wenopappeve) 
wéovtw) ; Manetho Afotel. 6 [3]. 13 owderot re rolow exacros évOpdrrey 
pepopyrar); and Nicand. Alewiph, 229 (aupds Hewopnpévos avyais) ; 
but in all three passages the meaning is doubtful.! 

éXxew means ‘to breathe in’; the dwéppova. of the planets are 
spoken of as if they were things that we draw in with our breath, or 
like our breath. ai@¢piov zvedua is the aether of heaven, from which 
the planetary influences come down to us. The word mvedpa, is 
more usually applied to the atmosphere than to the celestial aether 
which is situated above it; but the latter also is a gaseous substance, 
and any gaseous substance might be called mvedya. Perhaps the 
writer meant to suggest that the celestial aether is the life-breath of 
the universe, and that the planetary dardéppoca: which we ‘breathe in’ 
are, so to speak, detached portions of that universal life-breath. 

Zebs "Si! yéveous (5) Anth.: 4 MSS. Stob.: 8 4 Jacobs). 84 is 
meaningless ; and 4, whether preceded by & or not, is intolerable. 
Sense can be reconciled with metre by writing yéveois 82 Zevs. 

Tout» yap Graca ‘Sixatws! Kal Ovqrh Sidvoa yeAg. ‘Every mortal 
mind laughs justly by means of the sun’ is nonsense. A phrase 
meaning ‘laughs by reason of the sunlight’ would make sense ; and 
that might be expressed by writing rovrov . . . 5? abyds. 


1 In Clem, Alex. Paed. 2. 1. 7, of mepl rds Aonddas doxorotpevor kad ras Hepopn- 
héivas TOv HSvoudrov meprepyias, it seems certain that Hepopnuévas is a misreading.
