The Voyage of the 'Discovery', Vol. I
Robert Falcon Scott, 1905
========================================================================

PROVENANCE NOTE (Tower of Babel staging): Scott's 1905 account of the British National Antarctic Expedition (1901-04), Vol. I — the Discovery expedition that founded the Heroic Age. Source: Internet Archive (https://archive.org/details/voyageofdiscover01scotuoft). This 1905 publication is in the public domain in the United States.

========================================================================

■5S 

^^= 

2634 

fA\ 

04457 

==^^  t— 

#  f  • 

_^_^_  CD 

f  fl 

'&  £  1 

t — 

=^=  co 

?'.;:•'•'.■; 

^^i 

i  t«" 'DISCOVER 


■IMMMMMM«MMNMaMMHHNMI 


;  it. 


Kokrt  f.5cott 


rf 


«*-"^ 
«•*•"■" 


MOwapHwuan 


T^resetdeb  to 

W^t  ^Etbrarg 

of  t!je 

|Mttttestiy  of  tftonmta 


Mrs  C.  Dorothy  Burns 


THE    VOYAGE 

OF 

THE     'DISCOVERY' 
VOL.  I. 


[See  p.  296. 


SHIP  AT   THE   END   OF   THE   WINTEE. 


THE 

VOYAGE    OF 
THE     DISCOVERY 


BY 

CAPTAIN    ROBERT    F.   SCOTT 

C.V.O.,    R.N. 


WITH    ILLUSTRATIONS    AND    MAP8 

IN    TWO   VOLUMES 
VOL     I. 


Toronto 

THE    COPP,    CLARK    CO.,    LIMITED 

MACMILLAN    AND    CO.,    LIMITED 
1905 

(All  rights  reserved/ 


H  Polar- 

604291 


TO 


SIR   CLEMENTS   MARKHAM,    K.C.B.,    F.R.S. 

THE   FATHER   OF  THE   EXPEDITION 
AND    ITS    MOST   CONSTANT  FRIEND 


PREFACE 


Strange  as  it  may  seem,  the  greater  part  of  this  story  had 
been  enacted  before  I  realised  that  it  would  devolve  on  me  to 
narrate  it  in  book  form. 

When  first  I  saw  vaguely  this  unwelcome  task  before  me 
there  was  fresh  in  my  mind  not  only  the  benefit  which  we  had 
derived  from  studying  the  records  of  former  Polar  voyages,  but 
the  disappointment  which  we  had  sometimes  suffered  from  the 
insufficient  detail  which  they  provided.  It  appeared  to  me  in 
consequence  that  the  first  object  in  writing  an  account  of  a 
Polar  voyage  was  the  guidance  of  future  voyagers;  the  first  duty 
of  the  writer  was  to  his  successors. 

I  have  done  my  best  to  keep  this  object  in  view,  and  I  give 
this  explanation  because  I  am  conscious  that  it  has  led  me  into 
descriptive  detail  which  will  probably  be  tiresome  to  the  ordi- 
nary reader.  As,  however,  such  matter  is  more  or  less  massed 
into  certain  portions  of  the  book,  I  take  comfort  from  reflect- 
ing that  the  interested  reader  will  have  no  difficulty  in  avoiding 
such  parts  as  he  may  consider  tedious. 

I  have  endeavoured  to  avoid  the  use  of  technicalities,  but 
in  all  cases  this  has  not  been  possible,  as  the  English  language 
is  poor  in  words  descriptive  of  conditions  of  ice  and  snow.  I 
take  the  opportunity,  therefore,  of  defining  some  technical 
words  that  I  have  used  freely. 

Nev'e — the  packed  snow  of  a  snow-field,  an  accumulation  of 
minute  ice  crystals.  This  word  is,  of  course,  well  known  to 
mountaineers. 


viii  PREFACE 

Nunatak — an  island  of  bare  land  in  a  snow-field.  Where 
an  ice-sheet  overlies  the  land,  the  summits  of  hills  thrust 
through  the  sheet  present  this  appearance. 

Sastrugus — an  irregularity  formed  by  the  wind  on  a  snow- 
plain.  'Snow-wave'  is  not  completely  descriptive,  as  the 
sastrugus  has  often  a  fantastic  shape  unlike  the  ordinary  con- 
ception of  a  wave. 

Ice-foot — properly  applied  to  the  low  fringe  of  ice  formed 
about  Polar  lands  by  the  sea-spray.  I  have  used  the  term 
much  more  widely,  and  perhaps  improperly,  in  referring  to  the 
banks  of  ice  of  varying  height  which  skirt  many  parts  of  the 
Antarctic  shores,  and  which  have  no  connection  with  sea- 
spray.  Mr.  Ferrar  gives  some  description  of  these  in  his 
remarks  on  ice  in  Appendix  I. 

Beyond  explaining  these  few  words  I  make  no  apology  for 
the  style  or  absence  of  style  of  this  book ;  I  have  tried  to  tell 
my  tale  as  simply  as  possible,  and  I  launch  it  with  the  con- 
fidence that  my  readers  will  be  sufficiently  indulgent  to  its 
faults  in  remembering  the  literary  inexperience  of  its  writer. 

For  me  the  compilation  of  these  pages  has  been  so  weighty 
a  matter  that  I  must  always  feel  the  keenest  gratitude  to  those 
who  assisted  me  in  the  task.  I  cannot  think  that  the  manu- 
script would  ever  have  been  completed  but  for  the  advice  and 
encouragement  I  received  from  its  publisher,  nor  can  I  forget 
to  thank  Sir  Clements  Markham  and  other  friends  for  hints 
and  criticisms  by  which  I  profited,  and  Mr.  Leonard  Huxley 
for  his  judicious  provision  of  the  'hooks  and  eyes'  to  many  a 
random  sentence.  How  much  I  owe  to  those  of  my  comrades 
who  are  responsible  for  the  originals  of  the  illustrations,  will  be 
evident. 

R.  F.  S. 

August  28M,  1905. 


CONTENTS 

OF 

THE      FIRST      VOLUME 


CHAPTER   I 

HISTORICAL 

Attention  first  drawn  to  Antarctic  Regions  by  Delineation  of  Map 
Makers— Earliest  References  to  Climatic  Conditions  -  Varthema— 
Vasco  da  Gama — Drake — Quiros  — Tasman — Kerguelen— Cook — 
Bellingshausen  — Weddell— Biscoe— Balleny — D'  Urville— Wilkes 
— Ross— Later  Expeditions — 'Challenger'  Expedition  and  Re- 
sult— Inception  of  National  Antarctic  Expedition — Sir  Clements 
Markham — Action  of  Societies— Mr.  Longstaff — Decision  to  build 
new  Ship — My  own  Appointment — Finance  Committee — Naval 
Crew  —  Purchase  of  Stores 


CHAPTER    II 

PREPARATION 

Ships  of  former  Polar  Voyages— Ship  Committee — Design  of  the 
•  Discovery ' — Choice  of  a  Name — Description  of  the  Ship — Mag- 
netic Observatory — Living  Spaces — Holds,  &c.  —Sails — Launch 
of  the  Ship  —The  Officers  appointed — The  Warrant  Officers — The 
Men — Division  of  the  Antarctic  Regions— Prospect  of  Victoria 
Quadrant — The  Instructions — Acknowledgment  of  Assistance  32 


x  THE   VOYAGE   OF   THE   'DISCOVERY' 

CHAPTER   III 

VOYAGE  TO  NEW  ZEALAND 

PAGE 

Arrival  at  Cowes  —Visit  of  the  King — Sailing  from  Cowes — Madeira 
— Crossing  the  Line— South  Trinidad —Arrival  at  the  Cape — 
Simon's  Bay— At  Sea  in  the  Westerlies —Alarm  of  Fire — First 
Encounter  with  the  Ice — Southern  Birds — Macquarie  Island — 
Lyttelton,  New  Zealand — Preparations  for  Final  Departure — De- 
parture from  Lyttelton — Fatal  Accident — Final  Departure  from 
Civilisation 65 

CHAPTER   IV 

SOUTHWARD   HO  ! 

Steering  to  the  South — Fog — Icebergs— Entering  Pack-ice — Life  in 
the  Pack — Nature  of  Pack— Slow  Progress — '  Watering  Ship  ' — 
Southern  Edge  of  Pack — The  Ross  Sea  —First  Sight  of  Victoria 
Land— Cape  Adare — Danger  in  the  Pack — Coulman  Island — 
Heavy  Gale — Landing  in  Lady  Newnes  Bay — Killing  Seals — 
Wood  Bay — Cape  Washington — Coasting  South— Landing  in 
Granite  Harbour — A  Well-sheltered  Spot — McMurdo  Sound — 
Stopped  by  the  Pack — Turning  to  the  East        ....       86 

CHAPTER   V 

ALONG   THE  GREAT   BARRIER 

Strange  Footprints — Landing  under  Mount  Terror — The  Last  Record 
Left — Along  the  Great  Barrier — New  Land —Foggy  Weather — 
Surrounded  by  Bergs — We  Lose  our  Bearings — Decision  to  Turn 
Back — Good  View  of  King  Edward's  Land — Landing  on  the 
Barrier — Balloon  Ascent — Return  to  Victoria  Land     .         .         .121 

CHAPTER   VI 

FINDING  WINTER  QUARTERS  :     A   FATAL  ACCIDENT 

In  McMurdo  Sound — A  Glacier  Tongue — Landing  South  of  Erebus 
— Selection  of  Winter  Quarters — Prospects — Difficulty  in  Main- 
taining our  Station — Erection  of  Huts — Amusements — A  Trip  to 
White  Island — Sledge  Party  to  the  Cape  Crozier  Record — Acci- 
dent to  Returning  Sledge  Party — Fatal  Result  to  poor  Vince — 
Results  of  Search  Parties — Frost-bites— Wonderful  Escape  of 
Hare — Visit  to  Danger  Slope 152 


CONTENTS   OF  THE    FIRST   VOLUME  xi 

CHAPTER  VII 

PREPARING   FOR  WINTER 

PAGE 

Delay  in  Freezing-up  of  the  Ship — Dog  Troubles  —Return  of  Royds — 
Local  Weather  Conditions  —Last  Sledging  Effort  of  the  Season — 
Advantage  of  Experience  —  Preparing  for  Winter — Winter  Arriving 
—Meteorological  Screen — Tidal  Observations —Magnetic  Huts — 
Capturing  Crab-eaters — Emperor  Penguin  Hunt — Departure  of 
the  Sun 188 

CHAPTER   VIII 

THE    POLAR    WINTER 

Winter  Routine — Obtaining  Water — Meals  and  Meal-hours — Pas- 
times —  Officers'  Routine  —  Debates  —  Exercise — Work  of  the 
Officers — Weather  Conditions — Heavy  Blizzard  and  its  Effects — 
Incidents  of  the  Winter — Winter  Clothing — Remarks  on  our 
Food — Sunday  Routine — Discomforts  of  the  Living-quarters  from 
Ice— Heating  and  Ventilation— Mid-winter  Day         .         .         .     216 

CHAPTER    IX 

WINTER   PASSING  AWAY 

Our  Settlement  in  Winter — The  Large  Hut— Lighting  Arrangements 
on  Board — Prevention  of  Fire— A  Night  on  Duty— Smoking 
Habits— The  'South  Polar  Times' — Aurora  Australis —Mishap 
to  our  Boats— Moonlight  Effects— Lost  in  a  Blizzard — Theatrical 
Entertainments  —  Nigger  Minstrels  —  Increase  of  Light  —  New 
Arrivals — Concerning  the  Dogs— Return  of  the  Sun — View  from 
our  Hills— Walks  in  Daylight — Preparations  for  Sledging — Ready 
to  Start .     256 

CHAPTER   X 

HISTORY  AND  DEVELOPMENT   OF  SLEDGE   TRAVELLING 

History  of  Polar  Sledge  Travelling —Early  English  Sledge  Travellers 
— Ross— McClintock — Peary — Nansen—  Visit  to  Christiania — 
Difficulties  in  Selecting  Articles  of  Equipment — Comparison  of 
Sledging  Conditions  in  the  North  and  South  Polar  Regions — 
Objects  of  the  Sledge  Traveller— Description  of  our  Equipment 
— The  Sledge — The  Tent — The  Sleeping-bag — Sledging-food — 


xii         THE  VOYAGE   OF  THE   'DISCOVERY' 

PAGE 

Calculation  of  Allowances  —  Packing  —  Cooking-apparatus  — 
Cooking-lamp —Permanent  Weights  of  a  Sledge  Party-  Spare 
Clothing  —  Medical  Bag  — Details  concerning  Clothing  and 
General  Equipment 298 

CHAPTER    XI 

TYPICAL  SLEDGING  EXPERIENCES 

Use  of  Dogs  for  Sledging — A  Discussion  of  their  Merits— History 
of  our  Dog  Team— Discomforts  of  Sledge  Travelling— Typical 
Experiences— The  Ordinary  Routine— Result  of  a  Blizzard— 
Benefit  of  Summer  Temperatures— Disadvantages  of  Summer — 
The  Fascination  of  Sledging      .......     34° 

CHAPTER   XII 

THE   SPRING  JOURNEYS   OF    1902 

Spring  Sledging  Plans— Start  of  Sledging  Season —Parties  leave  the 
Ship — Submarine  Ice— Start  on  Southern  Reconnaissance — An 
Inopportune  Blizzard— Return  to  the  Ship — Fresh  Start— Journey 
to  the  Bluff— Difficult  Travelling— Placing  the  Depot— Rapid 
Return — Report  of  Outbreak  of  Scurvy— Experiences  of  Western 
Party— Steps  taken  to  Combat  the  Disease— Some  Remarks  on 
the  Nature  of  Scurvy— Causes  which  may  have  Led  to  our  Out- 
break— Impossibility  of  Determining  its  Exact  Origin — Prospects 
of  Future  South  Polar  Expeditions  in  this  Respect      .         .         .     374 


ILLUSTRATIONS 


IN 


THE      FIRST      VOLUME 


Ship  at  the  End  of  the  Winter     ....  Frontispiece 

Winter  Quarters.     Bay  Clear  of  Ice         .        .    .  Facing  p.  164 

Exercise  while  the  Light  Lasts     ....  ,,        240 

The  Result  of  Ice  Pressure  from  the  South  .    .  „        284 


Chart  of  the  Antarctic  Ocean 


Facing  p.  410 


THE    SHIP'S    COMPANY. 

Officers. 

Albert  B.  Armitage,  Lieut.  K.N.R. 

Charles  W.  R.  Royds,  Lieut.  R.N. 

Michael  Barne,  Lieut.  R.N. 

Ernest  H.  Shackleton,  S.  Lieut.  R.N.R. 

George  F.  A.  Mulock,  S.  Lieut.  R.N. 

Reginald  W.  Skelton,  Lieut.  (E.)  R.N. 

Reginald  Koettlitz,  surgeon  and  botanist. 

Edward  A.  Wilson,  surgeon,  artist,  vertebrate  zoologist. 

Thomas  V.  Hodgson,  biologist. 

Hartley  T.  Ferrar,  geologist. 

Louis  C.  Bernacchi,  physicist. 


Warrant  Officers  (all  R.N.). 
Thomas  A.  Feather,  boatswain. 
James  H.  Dellbridge,  2nd  engineer. 
Fred.  E.  Dailey,  carpenter. 
Charles  R.  Ford,  ship's  steward. 

Petty  Officers. 
Jacob  Cross,  P.O.  i,  R.N. 
Edgar  Evans,  P.O.  2,  R.N. 
William  Smythe,  P.O.  I,  R.N. 
David  Allan,  P.O.  I,  R.N. 
Thomas  Kennar,  P.O.  2,  R.N. 

Marines. 
Gilbert  Scott,  Private  R. M.L.I. 
A.  H.  Blissett,  Private  R. M.L.I. 

Civilian. 
Chas.  Clarke,  ship's  cook. 


Seamen. 
Arthur  Pilbeam,  L.S.  R.N. 
William  L.  Heald,  A.B.  R.N. 
James  Dell,  A.B.   R.N. 
Frank  Wild,  A.B.   R.N. 
Thomas  S.  Williamson,  A.B.  R.N. 
George  B.  Croucher,  A.B.   R.N. 
Ernest  E.  Joyce,  A.B.  R.N. 
Thomas  Crean,  A.B.   R.N. 
Jesse  Handsley,  A.B.  R.N. 
William  J.  Weller,  A.B. 

Stokers. 
William  Lashly,  lg.  stoker  R.N. 
Arthur  L.  Quartley,  lg.  stoker  R.  N. 
Thomas  Whitfield,  lg.  stoker  R.N. 
Frank  Plumley,  stoker  R.N. 

R.  F.  SCOTT,  Captain. 


CHAPTER   I 

HISTORICAL 

Attention  first  drawn  to  Antarctic  Region  by  Delineation  of  Map 
Makers— Earliest  References  to  Climatic  Conditions — Varthema — 
Vasco  da  Gama — Drake — Quiros  —  Tasman — Kerguelen — Cook  — 
Bellingshausen  — Weddell  —  Biscoe— Balleny —  D'Urville  — Wilkes — 
Ross — Later  Expeditions — '  Challenger  '  Expedition  and  Result — 
Inception  of  National  Antarctic  Expedition — Sir  Clements  Markham 
— Action  of  Societies — Mr.  Longstaff — Decision  to  build  new  Ship  — 
My  own  Appointment — Finance  Committee — Naval  Crew — Purchase 
of  Stores. 

Till  then  they  had  deemed  that  the  Austral  earth 
With  a  long  unbroken  shore 
Ran  on  to  the  Pole  Antarctic, 
For  such  was  the  old  sea  lore. — ReKNELL  Rodd. 

A  bibliography  of  the  Arctic  Regions  would  occupy  a  large 
volume ;  that  of  the  Antarctic  Regions  compiled  by  Dr.  H.  R. 
Mill  in  1901  contained  878  references,  and  included  all  books, 
pamphlets,  and  maps  even  remotely  touching  the  subject  that 
had  been  published  in  any  country.  This  great  difference  in 
the  published  matter  relating  to  the  two  ends  of  our  globe 
justly  represented  the  relative  knowledge  concerning  them  in 
1 90 1,  to  whatever  extent  the  disproportion  has  been  modified 
since  that  year. 

The  history  of  the  Arctic  Regions  stretches  back  for  many 
centuries,  to  the  adventurous  voyage  of  Oht-here,  the  friend 
of  King  Alfred,  and  to  the  exploits  of  the  Norsemen  in 
Greenland  ;  the  history  of  the  Antarctic  Regions  commences 
at  a  much  later  period,  and  attention  was  drawn  to  them,  not 
vol.  1.  B 


2  THE   VOYAGE   OF  THE   'DISCOVERY' 

so  much  by  the  voyages  of  discoverers  as  by  the  persistent 
delineations  of  a  great  Southern  continent  by  the  map  makers. 
The  idea  of  this  conjectural  continent  probably  arose  at  a  very 
early  date,  and  when  there  was  much  excuse  for  such  a  view  ; 
but  it  was  retained  with  extraordinary  pertinacity  throughout 
several  centuries,  being  held  long  after  the  voyages  of  many 
navigators  had  disproved  the  existence  of  parts  and  thrown 
strong  doubt  on  the  accuracy  of  the  whole  conception. 

Ortelius,  in  his  '  Typus  orbis  terrarum,'  published  in  1570, 
boldly  draws  the  coast  of  '  Terra  aus traits  nondum  cogtiita  ' 
round  the  world  and  well  to  the  north,  even  crossing  the 
Tropic  of  Capricorn  in  two  places.  The  editions  of  Mercator 
follow  this  delineation  pretty  exactly  down  to  the  one  published 
by  Hondius  in  Amsterdam  in  1623,  and  although  the  famous 
map  of  the  world  prepared  for  Hakluyt  in  1599  has  the  merit 
of  omitting  the  Southern  continent  as  unauthenticated,  the 
fictitious  coastline  continued  to  appear  in  later  maps  and 
naturally  attracted  the  attention  of  enterprising  navigators. 

There  are  three  legends  on  the  Southern  continent  of 
Ortelius's  map  :  one  is  to  the  effect  that  it  is  named  by  some 
the  Magellanic  Region  ;  the  second  tells  us  that  the  Portuguese 
called  the  part  south  of  the  Cape  '  Psittacorum  regio'  (region 
of  parrots),  because  of  the  incredible  number  of  these  birds ; 
and  the  third,  opposite  to  Java,  refers  to  Marco  Polo  and 
Varthema  for  statements  of  very  extensive  land  to  the  south. 
At  this  time  a  fanciful  idea  prevailed  among  cartographers  that 
there  must  be  a  great  mass  of  land  to  the  south  to  balance  the 
known  land  to  the  north. 

The  earliest  references  to  the  climatic  conditions  of  the 
Antarctic  Regions  are  perhaps  to  be  found  in  the  statement 
of  Amerigo  Vespucci ;  this  famous  person  acted  as  pilot  of  a 
Portuguese  expedition  which,  after  surveying  the  coast  of  Brazil 
in  1 50 1,  is  supposed  to  have  sailed  to  the  south  and  to  have 
sighted  the  land  of  South  Georgia,  of  which  Vespucci  remarks  : 
!  A  rocky  coast  without  any  port  or  inhabitants.  I  believe  this 
was  because  the  cold  was  so  great  that  no  one  in  the  fleet 
could   endure   it.'     Another   curious  indication  of  the   same 


EARLY   IDEAS  OF  THE  SOUTH  3 

nature  is  to  be  found  in  the  conversation  which  the  Italian 
traveller  Ludovico  di  Varthema,  referred  to  by  Ortelius,  had 
with  the  Malay  captain  who  took  him  to  Java  in  1506.  The 
skipper  knew  how  to  steer  by  the  compass  and  by  a  certain  star 
of  the  Southern  hemisphere  as  well  as  by  the  pole-star.  He 
told  Varthema  of  a  region  far  beyond  Java  where  the  day  only 
lasted  for  four  hours,  and  said  that  it  was  colder  than  any  other 
part  of  the  world.  Varthema  concludes  his  account  of  the 
conversation  by  saying,  '  We  were  pleased  and  satisfied  '  ! 

The  manner  in  which  the  veil  of  mystery  was  first  lifted 
from  the  Southern  hemisphere  was  naturally  enough  by  the 
extension  of  exploration  along  the  coastlines  of  the  Northern 
land  masses,  but  it  was  long  before  the  facts  thus  ascertained 
ceased  to  be  distorted  by  cartographers.  The  circumnavigation 
of  the  Cape  by  Vasco  da  Gama  in  1497  did  not  extend 
sufficiently  far  south  to  upset  calculations  greatly,  but  when 
in  1520  Magellan  discovered  the  strait  which  bears  his  name, 
Tierra  del  Fuego,  to  the  south,  was  at  once  seized  upon  as  an 
evident  part  of  the  Terra  australis,  and  its  coasts  were  unhesi- 
tatingly joined  to  the  main  outline  of  that  continent.  And 
when  Sir  Francis  Drake  in  1577  '  came  finally  to  the  uttermost 
part  of  the  land  towards  the  South  Pole ;  the  extreme  cape  or 
cliff  lying  nearly  under  560  S.,  beyond  which  neither  continent 
nor  island  was  to  be  seen  j  indeed  the  Atlantic  and  the  Pacific 
Oceans  here  unite  in  the  free  and  unconfined  open,'  his  dis- 
covery seems  to  have  been  completely  misrepresented,  and  his 
accounts  were  garbled  in  such  a  manner  as  to  have  taken 
centuries  to  unravel. 

How  complete  was  the  ignorance  of  Southern  conditions  at 
the  commencement  of  the  seventeenth  century  can  be  gathered 
from  the  voyage  of  Quiros.  Pedro  Fernandez  de  Quiros  was 
a  Portuguese  pilot  in  the  Spanish  service ;  favoured  by  the 
Pope  Clement  VIII.,  he  obtained  an  order  from  the  King  of 
Spain,  Philip  III.,  to  prosecute  a  voyage  to  annex  the  South 
Polar  continent  and  to  convert  its  inhabitants  to  the  true  faith. 
He  sailed  from  Callao  in  1605  and  steered  to  the  W.S.W.,  but 
after  proceeding  a  month  on  this  course  his  heart  failed  him, 

B2 


4         THE  VOYAGE  OF  THE   'DISCOVERY' 

and  in  latitude  26  S.  he  turned  to  the  W.N.W.  On  this  track 
he  discovered  the  largest  of  the  New  Hebrides  group,  named 
it  f  Australia  del  Espiritu  Santo,'  and,  firmly  believing  it  to  be 
part  of  the  Southern  continent,  solemnly  annexed  it,  with  the 
South  Pole  itself,  to  the  crown  of  Spain  ! 

Of  the  early  voyages  of  the  seventeenth  century,  that  of  the 
Dutchmen  Schouten  and  Le  Maire  in  1616  went  to  establish 
Drake's  discovery  of  the  meeting  of  Atlantic  and  Pacific 
Oceans  south  of  Cape  Horn,  and  to  curtail  the  extent  of  the 
Southern  continent  in  this  direction  ;  but  more  important  was 
the  voyage  of  Tasman,  who  actually  set  forth  in  search  of  the 
continent,  and  in  1642,  after  crossing  the  Indian  Ocean 
between  the  latitudes  of  45  and  49  S.,  discovered  Tasmania 
and  the  northern  island  of  New  Zealand.  This  was  a  heavy 
blow  to  the  theory  of  a  great  Southern  continent,  because  it 
was  in  this  region  that  its  most  northerly  extension  had  been 
suggested  by  the  early  cartographers,  and  Tasman  showed  that 
it  could  not  lie  much  beyond  the  50th  parallel  either  in  the 
Indian  Ocean  or  to  the  south  of  Australia,  then  known  as  New 
Holland.  How  slowly  even  important  information  of  this 
sort  must  have  travelled  in  those  days  is  shown  by  the  fact 
that  in  i56o,  when  Wells  published  his  '  new  set  of  maps,'  he 
says :  '  New  Holland  is  esteemed  to  be  part  of  the  Southern 
unknown  continent.' 

The  result  of  these  voyages  was  to  give  a  great  impetus  to 
others  ;  especially  it  encouraged  ships  to  venture  to  make  the 
passage  about  Cape  Horn,  and  this  in  turn  led  to  a  consider- 
able increase  of  knowledge  in  this  region.  Voluntarily  or 
involuntarily  ships  attained  a  comparatively  high  latitude, 
reaching  the  62nd  or  63rd  parallel,  and,  for  the  first  time 
encountering  the  great  Southern  icebergs,  obtained  some  idea 
of  the  severity  of  the  Southern  Regions. 

But  the  idea  of  a  great  and  populous  Southern  continent, 
though  weakened,  was  by  no  means  dissipated,  and  the 
eighteenth  century  saw  several  expeditions  despatched  in 
search  of  it.  Of  these,  some  of  the  most  important  were  the 
French  yentures  under  Bouvet,  Marion  du  Frezne,  and  De 


JAMES  COOK  5 

Kerguelen-Tremarec,  which  led  to  the  discovery  of  Bouvet 
Island,  the  Crozets,  and  Kerguelen,  and  collected  much 
further  evidence  to  show  the  great  extent  of  the  Southern  Seas. 

During  the  latter  half  of  the  eighteenth  century  there  came 
a  marked  change  in  the  objects  which  were  set  before  the 
Southern  voyagers.  Hitherto  men  seemed  to  have  thought  of 
little  but  the  aggrandisement  of  themselves  or  their  State  by 
the  discovery  of  some  new  America ;  but  now  for  the  first 
time  we  find  an  eagerness  in  exploration  for  its  own  sake. 
Science  had  made  rapid  strides,  and  it  was  felt  that  its  ends 
should  be  furthered  by  a  completer  knowledge  of  the  distribu- 
tion of  land  and  water  on  our  globe,  and  by  an  investigation 
of  natural  phenomena  in  its  less-known  regions.  This  new 
view  of  exploration  was  held  most  strongly  in  France  and 
England,  and  both  Marion  and  Kerguelen  in  their  voyages  in 
1 77 1-2  were  accompanied  by  a  staff  of  learned  men  whose 
sole  object  was  to  add  to  the  scientific  knowledge  of  the 
regions  visited.  Curiously  enough,  the  last  of  these  voyagers, 
starting  as  he  did  under  these  more  favourable  conditions  for 
exploration,  succeeded  in  retarding  rather  than  in  advancing 
the  cause  of  geography,  for  he  interpreted  the  island  which 
bears  his  name  as  part  of  a  larger  land  mass,  and  boldly  con- 
cluded that  the  great  Southern  continent  had  at  last  been 
found. 

But  this  error,  with  many  another,  was  soon  to  be  rectified, 
and  the  whole  mythical  conception  of  the  Southern  continent 
to  be  swept  away  once  and  for  all,  when  the  great  English 
navigator  James  Cook  made  known  the  results  of  his  famous 
voyages.  To  give  even  a  summary  of  the  far-reaching  effects 
of  these  wonderful  voyages  is  beyond  the  scope  of  this  chapter, 
but  it  may  be  briefly  noted  how  each  bore  on  the  Antarctic 
problem  that  is  before  us. 

In  his  first  voyage,  in  1768,  Cook  circumnavigated  New 
Zealand  and  laid  down  the  eastern  coast  of  New  Holland,  thus 
definitely  cutting  off  these  lands  from  any  connection  with  the 
Southern  Regions  ;  this  alone  cleared  up  great  misconceptions, 
but  speculative  geography  continued  to  suggest  that  there  was 


6  THE   VOYAGE   OF  THE    'DISCOVERY' 

a  continent  further  to  the  south,  and  finally  Cook  undertook  to 
set  the  matter  definitely  at  rest  by  a  second  voyage.  This 
voyage  is  the  most  important  incident  in  the  history  of 
Antarctic  research,  and  may  therefore  be  given  in  outline. 

Cook  sailed  from  Deptford  in  1772  with  two  ships,  the 
'  Resolution,'  462  tons,  and  the  '  Adventure,'  336  tons.  From 
the  Cape  he  steered  due  south,  and  in  spite  of  icebergs,  fogs, 
and  stormy  weather,  boldly  pushed  on  to  the  58th  parallel, 
where  he  turned  to  the  S.E.  On  January  17,  1773,  he  suc- 
ceeded in  crossing  the  Antarctic  Circle  for  the  first  time,  in  longi- 
tude 38  E.  Finding  his  progress  blocked  by  ice,  he  turned 
again  to  the  N.E.,  but  not  without  giving  us  the  impression 
that  he  must  have  been  the  first  to  see  that  icy  barrier  which 
appears  to  fringe  the  greater  part  of  the  Antarctic  lands. 

Passing  to  the  south  of  Kerguelen,  he  showed  the  very 
limited  dimensions  of  that  island,  and  reached  the  62nd 
parallel  in  longitude  95  E.  Thence  he  continued  more  or  less 
in  the  same  high  latitude  to  the  148th  meridian,  where  he 
turned  towards  New  Zealand.  In  November  of  the  same  year 
he  again  steered  to  the  south,  and  reached  the  60th  parallel  in 
174  W.  ;  constantly  repulsed  by  the  ice,  he  fought  his  way  on 
east  and  south  ;  in  longitude  142  W.  he  crossed  the  Antarctic 
Circle  a  second  time,  but  so  arduous  had  been  the  labour  of 
working  the  ship  continuously  among  the  ice  that  he  was 
obliged  to  retreat  to  the  north  to  give  his  crew  some  rest.  It 
was  not  for  long,  however,  for  towards  the  end  of  January  he 
was  again  on  the  Antarctic  Circle  in  longitude  109  W.  This 
time  he  was  able  to  push  on  still  further  to  the  south,  and  it 
was  not  until  he  had  reached  latitude  71.10  S.  in  longitude 
107  W.  that  he  was  forced  to  turn.  What  Cook  actually  saw 
in  this  advanced  position  is  a  matter  of  great  interest;  he 
describes  a  belt  of  pack  with  an  unbroken  sheet  of  ice  beyond, 
which  appeared  to  him  to  rise  in  level  and  in  which  he  counted 
ninety-seven  ice-hills.  He  does  not  definitely  state  that  he  saw 
ice-covered  land,  but  many  authorities  have  believed  that  his 
description  could  mean  nothing  else;  with  some  experience 
of  the  deceptive  appearances  of  ice  masses,  however,  I  am 


COOK'S   VOYAGES  7 

inclined  to  think  that  the  evidences  are  by  no  means  sufficient 
to  support  this  view. 

After  turning,  Cook  retreated  to  the  north,  and  spent  the 
winter  amongst  the  Pacific  Islands ;  in  November  he  once 
more  turned  south  and  made  his  way  towards  Cape  Horn 
between  the  parallels  of  50  and  60  S.,  and  thus  for  the  first 
time  traversed  the  Pacific  in  a  high  southern  latitude.  After 
doing  much  valuable  surveying  work  in  the  region  of  Cape 
Horn  and  South  Georgia,  he  again  steered  to  the  east,  and 
now  crossing  the  Atlantic  in  a  high  latitude,  between  58  and 
60  S.,  he  finally  returned  to  the  Cape. 

The  importance  of  this  voyage  can  scarcely  be  exaggerated  ; 
once  and  for  all  the  idea  of  a  populous  fertile  Southern  conti- 
nent was  proved  to  be  a  myth,  and  it  was  clearly  shown  that 
whatever  land  might  exist  to  the  south  it  must  be  a  region  of 
desolation  hidden  beneath  a  mantle  of  ice  and  snow.  The 
vast  extent  of  the  tempestuous  Southern  Seas  was  revealed, 
and  the  limits  of  the  habitable  globe  were  made  known.  Inci- 
dentally it  may  be  remarked  that  Cook  was  the  first  to  describe 
the  peculiarities  of  the  Antarctic  icebergs  and  floe-ice. 

One  might  pause  here  to  consider  the  extent  of  human 
knowledge  as  regards  the  Antarctic  Regions  at  the  end  of  the 
eighteenth  century  after  Cook's  voyages,  because  it  can  be 
stated  with  brevity.  The  ocean  was  known  to  encircle  the 
world  completely  about  the  60th  parallel  ;  beyond  this  lay  a 
region  of  icebergs  and  intense  cold ;  attempts  to  penetrate  this 
inhospitable  region  had  seemed  to  show  that  in  many  places 
ships  might  force  their  way  to  the  Antarctic  Circle,  but  at 
about  this  latitude  they  were  stopped  by  impenetrable 
obstacles ;  if  land  lay  beyond  this,  it  was,  in  Cook's  words,  as 
1  countries  condemned  to  everlasting  rigidity  by  nature,  never 
to  yield  to  the  warmth  of  the  sun,  for  whose  wild  and  desolate 
aspect  I  find  no  words.'  Generally  speaking,  therefore,  people 
had  come  to  the  conclusion  that  if  land  existed  beyond  the 
60th  parallel,  it  was  not  of  much  account. 

After  the  return  of  Cook  no  important  expedition  was  sent 
to  the  Southern  Seas  until  181 9,  when  Bellingshausen  sailed 


8  THE  VOYAGE   OF  THE  'DISCOVERY' 

from  Kronstadt  with  two  well-equipped  vessels.  The  object 
of  this  voyage  was  to  emulate  the  achievement  of  Cook  in 
circumnavigating  the  globe  in  a  high  southern  latitude,  and 
well  was  this  mission  fulfilled.  With  wonderful  pertinacity 
the  intrepid  Bellingshausen  again  and  again  steered  his  ships  to 
the  south,  and  he  succeeded  no  fewer  than  six  times  in  cross- 
ing the  Antarctic  Circle.  Although  he  did  not  reach  such  a 
high  latitude  as  his  predecessor,  on  the  whole  his  course  lay  to 
the  southward,  and  he  still  further  narrowed  the  limits  of  the 
southern  land  which  had  been  so  greatly  reduced  by  Cook. 
Further,  Bellingshausen  was  the  first  definitely  to  discover  land 
within  the  Antarctic  Circle.  In  the  longitude  of  90  W.  he  saw 
a  small  island  which  he  named  Peter  I.  Island,  whilst  farther 
to  the  eastward  he  sighted  in  the  distance  a  more  extensive 
coast  which  he  called  Alexander  I.  Land.  Unfortunately, 
little  is  known  of  Bellingshausen's  voyage,  as  the  narrative  was 
never  translated  into  English  from  the  original  Russian. 

As  regards  the  Southern  Seas  the  early  years  of  the 
nineteenth  century  were  memorable  for  the  development  ot 
the  great  whaling  and  sealing  industries  which  flourished  for 
half  a  century,  and  passed  away  only  with  the  practical 
extermination  of  the  animals  on  which  they  depended.  It  is 
strange  to  think  that  regions  which  before  Cook's  famous 
voyage  were  utterly  unknown  to  man  should  have  so  speedily 
become  the  scenes  of  great  activity,  but  no  sooner  was  the 
existence  of  whales  and  seals  in  the  Southern  Seas  reported 
than  hundreds  of  English  and  American  adventurers  crowded 
in  pursuit  of  them,  and  as  late  as  1840  it  was  reported  that 
there  were  no  fewer  than  400  vessels  occupied  in  this  manner. 

Amongst  the  owners  of  these  vessels  were  men  of  broad 
public  spirit,  and  the  captains  who  commanded  them  in- 
cluded not  a  few  of  larger  intelligence  or  more  liberal  education, 
who  were  keenly  interested  in  the  prosecution  of  geographical 
discovery.  Conspicuous  amongst  the  former  were  the  famous 
firm  of  Enderby,  who  instructed  the  commanders  of  their 
ships  never  to  neglect  an  opportunity  for  discovery  and 
exploration,  and  who  more  than  once  sent  forth  an  expedition 


WORK   OF  THE   WHALERS  AND   SEALERS      9 

largely  for  that  purpose ;  whilst  amongst  the  more  enterprising 
commanders  may  be  named  Weddell,  Biscoe,  and  Balleny. 
The  result  of  this  enlightenment  was  to  add  considerably  to 
our  knowledge  of  the  Southern  Regions. 

The  most  important  voyage  made  in  these  circumstances 
was  that  of  James  Weddell.  After  doing  some  excellent 
surveying  work  among  the  Southern  islands  in  1823,  Weddell, 
in  his  small  brig  the  '  Jane,'  and  accompanied  by  the  cutter 
1  Beaufoy,'  crossed  the  Antarctic  Circle  in  longitude  32  W., 
and,  passing  innumerable  bergs,  found  himself  in  an  open  sea, 
through  which  he  sailed,  and  eventually  reached  a  latitude 
of  74.15  S.,  more  than  three  degrees  to  the  south  of  Cook's 
farthest  point.  In  this  position,  and  when  he  could  see 
nothing  to  the  south  but  the  clear  sea  horizon,  he  was  forced 
to  turn  on  account  of  the  state  of  his  crew  and  his  provisions. 
For  nearly  twenty  years  this  remained  the  most  southerly 
point  reached,  and  the  extraordinarily  open  condition  of  the 
sea  as  reported  by  Weddell  has  rendered  the  region  to  this  day 
one  of  the  most  fascinating  to  which  prospective  explorers  can 
turn  their  thoughts. 

Biscoe  was  one  of  Enderby's  officers,  and  had  been  a  mate 
in  the  Royal  Navy.  Like  Weddell's,  his  voyage  was  made  in 
a  small  brig,  the  'Tula,'  accompanied  by  a  tiny  cutter,  the 
1  Lively.'  He  crossed  the  Antarctic  Circle  in  longitude  2  E., 
and  succeeded  in  running  to  the  eastward  on  an  exceedingly 
high  latitude.  On  February  25,  183 1,  he  discovered  an  ice- 
barrier  which  he  likened  in  height  and  appearance  to  the 
North  Foreland.  He  added  :  '  It  then  ran  away  to  the  south- 
ward with  a  gradual  ascent,  with  a  perfectly  smooth  surface, 
and  I  could  trace  it  in  extent  to  at  least  30  or  40  miles  from 
the  foretop  with  a  good  telescope.'  His  ship  at  this  time  was 
in  latitude  66.2  S.,  longitude  43  W.,  but  apparently  he  again  saw 
this  icy  barrier  farther  to  the  eastward  and  observed  several 
indications  which  denoted  the  proximity  of  land.  It  was  this 
coast  to  which  he  gave  the  name  of  Enderby  Land.  Biscoe 
wintered  in  New  Zealand,  and  in  the  following  season  he  sailed 
to  the    south  again,   and    continuing    his   circumnavigation 


io        THE   VOYAGE   OF  THE   'DISCOVERY' 

of  the  earth  in  a  high  latitude,  discovered  Graham  Land, 
which,  although  connected  with  lands  already  known  to  the 
sealing  community,  gave  a  considerable  extension  to  them. 

Another  voyage  of  great  importance  was  made  by  John 
Balleny,  also  under  the  auspices  of  the  enterprising  firm  of 
Enderby.  Balleny  started  his  voyage  of  discovery  from  New 
Zealand,  in  1839,  sailing  in  a  schooner,  the  'Eliza  Scott,'  in 
company  with  the  cutter  '  Sabrina.'  He  crossed  the  Antarctic 
Circle  in  longitude  177  E.,  but,  unlike  former  voyagers, 
directed  his  course  to  the  west  instead  of  the  east.  On 
February  9  he  discovered  the  group  of  islands  which  bear  his 
name,  and  which  I  shall  describe  more  fully  in  the  course  of 
my  narrative.  From  this  region  Balleny  was  obliged  to  steer 
to  the  N.W.,  but  later  he  was  able  to  turn  to  the  south  again, 
and  on  March  2,  when  in  latitude  64.58  S.,  longitude  121  E., 
he  made  the  following  laconic  entry  in  his  log  :  '  Saw  land  to 
the  southward,  the  vessel  surrounded  by  drift-ice.'  On  the 
following  day  he  noted  '  every  appearance  of  land,'  and  other 
entries  tell  of  the  large  number  of  birds  seen.  On  such 
slender  evidence  rests  Sabrina  Land,  and  yet  after  personally 
demonstrating  the  accuracy  of  Balleny's  observations  with 
reference  to  his  islands,  I  should  be  sorry  to  undertake  to  sail 
over  the  spot  where  he  '  saw  land  to  the  southward.'  Balleny 
was  evidently  a  man  of  few  words,  but  of  his  ability  as  a 
navigator  there  can  be  no  doubt. 

This  ends  a  brief  retrospect  of  the  discoveries  made  in 
connection  with  the  whaling  and  sealing  industries  of  the 
south,  and  shows  that  it  is  entirely  honourable  to  the  commer- 
cial enterprise  of  our  country ;  for  to  the  disinterested  exertions 
of  Mr.  Charles  Enderby  and  to  the  zeal  of  his  officers  was  due 
the  discovery  of  Graham  Land,  Enderby  Land,  Sabrina  Land, 
Kemp  Land,  and  the  Balleny  Islands,  whilst  with  an  English 
sealer,  Weddell,  rested  the  honour  of  having  achieved  the 
highest  southern  latitude. 

The  necessarily  bald  outline  of  fact  which  it  is  alone 
possible  to  give  in  these  pages  can  convey  no  idea  of  the 
extraordinary  hardships  and  difficulties  successfully  overcome 


TERRESTRIAL   MAGNETISM  n 

by  these  men.  In  the  smallest  and  craziest  ships  they  plunged 
boldly  into  stormy  ice-strewn  seas  ;  again  and  again  they 
narrowly  missed  disaster;  their  vessels  were  wracked  and 
strained  and  leaked  badly,  their  crews  were  worn  out  with 
unceasing  toil  and  decimated  by  scurvy.  Yet  in  spite  of 
inconceivable  discomforts  they  struggled  on,  and  it  does  not 
appear  that  any  one  of  them  ever  turned  his  course  until  he 
was  driven  to  do  so  by  hard  necessity.  One  cannot  read  the 
simple,  unaffected  narratives  of  these  voyages  without  being 
assured  of  their  veracity,  and  without  being  struck  with  the 
wonderful  pertinacity  and  courage  which  they  display. 

In  the  light  of  subsequent  events,  it  is  convenient  to  pause 
again  at  the  close  of  Balleny's  voyage  to  consider  the  further 
extent  of  Antarctic  discovery.  It  must  now  have  appeared  to 
men  that,  after  all,  the  South  Polar  area  was  occupied  by  land, 
and  that  the  coast  of  this  land  clung  very  persistently  to  the 
Antarctic  Circle.  South  of  the  Pacific,  Cook  and  Bellings- 
hausen had  shown  a  dip  towards  the  Pole,  and  south  of  the 
Atlantic  Weddell  had  indicated  another  deep  bay;  but  south 
of  the  Indian  Ocean  and  of  Australia  it  must  have  seemed 
highly  probable  that  the  coastline  followed  the  Circle  with 
little  divergence.  It  can  well  be  imagined,  therefore,  that 
explorers  who  were  about  to  sail  to  the  south  in  this  direction 
must  have  been  strongly  disposed  to  expect  land  in  that 
latitude. 

At  about  this  time  there  sprang  up  a  new  motive  to 
encourage  Polar  exploration,  in  the  shape  of  terrestrial  mag- 
netism. The  development  of  this  science  had  gradually 
converted  it  into  a  subject  of  great  interest,  its  practical 
importance  in  connection  with  the  navigation  of  ships  was 
now  fully  realised,  and  it  was  known  that  no  complete  study 
could  be  made  of  its  phenomena  without  extensive  observa- 
tions in  the  Polar  Regions.  Amongst  the  scientific  men  who 
devoted  their  energies  to  achieve  a  more  general  recognition 
of  these  facts  were  Humboldt  and  Sir  Edward  Sabine,  and  as 
a  result  of  their  labours  in  1838  the  British  Association 
petitioned  the  Government  to  send  a  scientific  expedition  to 


12        THE  VOYAGE   OF  THE   'DISCOVERY' 

the  Antarctic  Regions.  The  Government  responded  nobly  to 
this  petition,  and  organised  an  undertaking  which  was  destined 
to  achieve  the  most  brilliant  results,  and  to  open  up  the 
Antarctic  Regions  in  a  manner  which  must  have  been  wholly 
unexpected  by  its  promoters. 

But  whilst  Captain  James  Ross,  the  commander  of  this 
expedition,  was  diligently  and  carefully  preparing  and  equipping 
his  ships  for  this  great  venture,  two  other  expeditions  of 
importance  had  been  despatched  by  other  countries.  One  of 
these  had  left  the  shores  of  France  in  1837.  It  consisted  of 
two  ships,  '  L' Astrolabe  and  '  La  Zel£e,'  under  the  command 
of  Dumont  D'Urville,  an  experienced  navigator.  D'Urville 
first  descended  on  the  Antarctic  area  in  the  region  of  Graham 
Land,  with  the  intent  to  follow  WeddelPs  course  and  reach  a 
higher  latitude  ;  but  in  this  he  was  frustrated  by  the  pack-ice, 
and  after  making  some  minor  discoveries  in  the  neighbourhood 
of  Louis-Philippe  Land  and  Joinville  Island  he  returned  to 
pursue  his  investigations  in  milder  climates.  In  the  end  of 
1839  D'Urville  was  at  Hobart  Town,  Tasmania,  where  for  the 
moment  we  will  leave  him  and  follow  the  fortunes  of  the  other 
and  more  imposing  expedition,  consisting  of  five  vessels,  which 
left  Chesapeake  Bay  in  1837  under  the  command  of  Commo- 
dore Wilkes. 

In  relating  the  history  ot  the  voyages  of  Wilkes  and 
D'Urville  I  touch  only  on  those  parts  which  have  a  relation  to 
the  Antarctic  Regions,  though  it  must  be  understood  that  both 
these  expeditions  pursued  scientific  investigations  in  other 
parts  of  the  world. 

On  reaching  the  Southern  waters  Wilkes  divided  his  forces, 
and  whilst  he  turned  his  attention  to  minuter  surveying  work, 
he  sent  the  '  Peacock '  and  '  Flying  Fish  '  south-west  towards 
Graham  Land  and  Alexander  Land.  These  vessels,  after 
much  struggling  with  the  ice,  reached  the  vicinity  of  Peter  I. 
Island,  but  failed  to  attain  a  higher  latitude  than  Bellingshausen 
or  Cook  had  previously  done  in  this  region.  The  close  of  the 
season  obliged  them  to  retreat  and  rejoin  the  squadron  without 
the  achievement  of  any  important  result. 


D'URVILLE  AND   WILKES  13 

Towards  the  close  of  1839  Wilkes,  like  D'Urville,  had 
found  shelter  in  Australian  waters.  By  this  time  news  of  the 
prospective  British  expedition  had  been  spread  abroad,  and  it 
was  known  that,  fully  equipped  for  magnetic  work,  it  proposed 
to  sail  directly  for  the  position  assigned  to  the  magnetic  pole 
by  the  calculations  of  the  great  German  magnetician  Gauss ; 
this  position  was  approximately  in  latitude  76  S.,  longitude 
146  E.  It  was  known  also  that  Ross  could  not  be  in  a 
position  to  attempt  to  reach  it  until  the  following  year.  How 
far  Wilkes  and  D'Urville  were  guided  by  this  information  in 
their  future  actions  it  is  impossible  to  say;  that  they  must 
have  received  it  is  certain,  and,  considering  that  neither  ex- 
pedition was  completely  equipped  for  magnetic  work,  the  fact 
that  both  immediately  set  sail  in  the  direction  of  the  magnetic 
pole  must  be  regarded  at  least  as  showing  questionable  taste 
on  the  part  of  the  commanders. 

D'Urville  left  Tasmania  early  in  January  1840,  and,  after  a 
comparatively  easy  passage,  on  January  19,  when  in  latitude 
66  S.,  longitude  140  E.,  sighted  land  to  the  south.  At  first  he 
seems  to  have  seen  nothing  but  the  long  ice-barrier  so  typical 
of  Antarctic  coasts,  but  later  he  found  beneath  the  icy  wall 
eight  or  ten  small  islets  on  which  his  people  were  able  to  land 
and  to  collect  specimens  of  rock.  He  named  this  coast  Ad£lie 
Land,  and,  continuing  his  explorations  to  the  west,  again 
sighted  the  ice-barrier  somewhat  more  to  the  north,  and 
named  it  Cote  Clarie.  Satisfied  with  the  result  of  his  voyage, 
D'Urville  then  turned  to  the  north.  Although  it  is  to  be 
deplored  that  he  did  not  take  full  advantage  of  the  season  to 
continue  his  explorations,  the  discovery  of  Adelie  Land  was  an 
extremely  important  matter,  and  possesses  a  definition  which 
is  sadly  lacking  in  other  reports. 

Wilkes  with  his  five  ships  sailed  from  Sydney  at  the  end  of 
December  1839.  His  ships  took  various  tracks,  but  he  him- 
self in  the  '  Vincennes '  reached  latitude  66  S.,  longitude 
158  E.,  on  January  16,  and  at  this  point  he  claimed  to  have 
first  seen  land  to  the  south.  Hence  he  cruised  to  the  west- 
ward, approximately  on  the  latitude  of  the  Antarctic  Circle, 


i4        THE  VOYAGE   OF  THE   'DISCOVERY' 

with  a  comparatively  open  sea  to  the  north  and  masses  of 
pack-ice  to  the  south ;  and  beyond  the  latter  he  again  and 
again  claimed  the  discovery  of  high  mountainous  land.  He 
passed  close  to  Adelie  Land  and  Cote  Clarie  only  a  few  days 
after  their  first  discovery  by  D'Urville,  and,  continuing  his 
course,  alleged  the  discovery  of  further  extensive  lands  to  the 
westward. 

On  his  return  to  civilisation  Wilkes  claimed  a  vast  dis- 
covery. The  courses  of  his  ships  had  practically  traversed  an 
arc  of  the  Antarctic  Circle  of  no  less  than  700,  and,  although 
he  did  not  assert  that  he  had  seen  land  continuously  south  of 
this  arc,  he  reported  its  existence  at  such  frequent  intervals  as 
to  leave  little  doubt  that  it  was  continuous. 

At  a  later  date  a  great  controversy  arose  as  to  the  accuracy 
of  Wilkes's  observations,  and  resulted  in  much  discredit  being 
thrown  on  work  which  in  many  respects  was  important. 
Whilst  there  can  be  no  possible  object  in  attempting  to  revive 
such  a  controversy,  it  is  evident  that  the  true  geographical 
conditions  should  be  known,  and  therefore  I  make  bold  to 
give  my  opinion  of  the  matter.  In  the  course  of  this  narrative 
I  shall  show  that  the  mountainous  lands  reported  by  Wilkes  to 
the  eastward  of  Adelie  Land  do  not  exist,  and  it  must  be 
recognised  that  those  to  the  west  may  be  equally  unsubstantial, 
but  it  is  not  clear  that  Wilkes  wilfully  perverted  the  truth; 
only  those  who  have  been  to  these  regions  can  realise  how 
constantly  a  false  appearance  of  land  is  produced,  and  no 
position  could  be  more  favourable  to  such  an  illusion  than  that 
in  which  this  expedition  was  placed  when  it  skirted  the  edge 
of  a  thick  pack  containing  innumerable  icebergs.  It  must  be 
supposed  also,  for  reasons  which  I  have  given,  that  Wilkes,  in 
common  with  other  explorers,  expected  to  find  land  about  the 
Antarctic  Circle,  and  when  after  his  return  he  learned  of 
D'Urville's  discoveries,  the  position  of  Adelie  Land  would 
naturally  have  tended  to  dispel  any  doubt  which  he  may  have 
had  as  to  what  he  or  his  people  had  seen. 

Wilkes's  ships  were  ill  adapted  for  battling  with  the  ice, 
and,  apart  from  their  discoveries,  the  fact  that  they  continued 


VOYAGE   OF   ROSS  15 

so  long  in  high  latitudes  reflects  great  credit  on  their  naviga- 
tion. Had  he  been  more  circumspect  in  his  reports  of  land, 
all  would  have  agreed  that  his  voyage  was  a  fine  performance. 

Whilst  Wilkes  and  D'Urville  were  pursuing  their  explora- 
tions, Ross  had  sailed  from  England.  James  Ross  had  taken 
part  in  the  Northern  voyages  of  Parry  and  of  his  uncle  John 
Ross  ;  in  the  course  of  these  he  had  spent  no  fewer  than  eight 
winters  in  the  Arctic  Regions,  and  he  therefore  brought  an 
unrivalled  experience  to  the  task  of  fitting  out  his  Southern 
command. 

For  the  purposes  of  the  expedition,  two  old  bomb  vessels 
were  chosen,  the  'Erebus,'  370  tons,  and  the  •  Terror,'  340 
tons ;  though  slow  sailers,  these  vessels  had  the  advantage  of 
great  structural  strength,  and  when  Ross  had  further  fortified 
their  bows  he  possessed  two  ships  capable  of  navigating 
amongst  the  pack-ice,  the  first  of  such  that  had  ever  sailed  for 
the  Southern  Regions.  Towards  the  end  of  the  year  1840, 
Ross  arrived  in  Tasmania  to  learn  that  others  had  already 
explored  the  route  which  he  proposed  to  take.  Whatever  his 
feelings  may  have  been  at  the  time,  the  incident  proved 
exceedingly  fortunate,  for  it  was  this  alone  which  decided  him 
to  proceed  south  on  a  more  easterly  meridian,  it  being  '  incon- 
sistent with  the  traditions  of  British  exploration  to  follow  in 
the  footsteps  of  other  nations.' 

Sailing  from  Hobart  in  November,  Ross  reached  the 
Antarctic  Circle  on  New  Year's  Day  in  longitude  171  E.,  and 
at  the  same  time  found  himself  opposed  by  heavy  masses  of 
pack-ice.  Here  was  the  critical  point  at  which  the  course 
taken  by  the  expedition  differed  from  that  of  its  predecessors. 
Up  to  this  time  such  an  obstacle  would  have  been  deemed 
insuperable,  and  the  older  navigators  would  have  sailed  their 
light  ships  along  its  edge ;  Ross,  with  his  heavy  ships,  plunged 
directly  into  it  and  continued  to  buffet  his  way  to  the  south. 
Making  all  allowance  for  the  fortified  condition  of  the  ships, 
it  was  a  bold  stroke,  and  it  met  with  the  most  ample  reward. 
After  pushing  onward  for  five  days  through  the  closely  packed 
floes,  the  vessels  burst  forth  to  the  south  into  an  open  sea. 


16        THE  VOYAGE   OF  THE   'DISCOVERY' 

Remembering  the  main  object  of  his  journey,  Ross  steered  to 
the  west  towards  the  magnetic  pole,  and  on  January  8,  1841, 
discovered  the  glorious  mountainous  country  of  Victoria 
Land. 

Ross's  discoveries  are  so  closely  connected  with  my 
narrative,  that  it  is  unnecessary  to  refer  to  them  in  detail 
here.  Twice  he  visited  this  great  open  sea,  and  the  results  of 
these  extraordinarily  interesting  voyages  may  be  summed  up  as 
follows  :  The  high  mountain  ranges  and  the  coastline  of 
Victoria  Land  were  laid  down  with  comparative  accuracy  from 
Cape  North  in  latitude  71  to  Wood  Bay  in  latitude  74,  and 
their  extension  was  indicated  less  definitely  to  McMurdo  Bay 
in  latitude  77^.  In  the  same  latitude,  but  slightly  to  the  east- 
ward, the  lofty  volcanoes  of  Erebus  and  Terror  were  dis- 
covered, and  the  former  was  found  to  be  active.  Stretching 
away  to  the  eastward  for  400  miles  beyond  these,  Ross  observed 
that  great  wall  of  ice  which  he  named  the  Great  Barrier.  At 
the  eastern  end  of  this  wall  he  achieved  his  highest  latitude, 
78.11  S.,  an  advance  of  nearly  four  degrees  on  his  predecessor 
Weddell.  Ross  was  not  able  to  disembark  on  this  great  mass 
of  land  which  he  had  discovered,  but  managed  to  reach  the 
shore  of  some  off-lying  islands  which  he  named  the  Possession 
Islands. 

There  are  many  reasons  why  Ross's  wonderful  voyage 
should  not  have  attracted  the  wide  popular  interest  which  it 
deserved,  but  when  the  extent  of  our  knowledge  before  and 
after  it  is  considered,  all  must  concede  that  it  deserves  to  rank 
among  the  most  brilliant  and  famous  that  have  been  made. 
After  all  the  experiences  and  adventures  in  the  Southern  Seas 
which  I  have  briefly  described,  few  things  could  have  looked 
more  hopeless  than  an  attack  upon  that  great  ice-bound  region 
which  lay  within  the  Antarctic  Circle ;  yet  out  of  this  desolate 
prospect  Ross  wrested  an  open  sea,  a  vast  mountain  region,  a 
smoking  volcano,  and  a  hundred  problems  of  great  interest  to 
the  geographer  ;  in  this  unique  region  he  carried  out  scientific 
research  in  every  possible  department,  and  by  unremitted 
labour  succeeded  in  collecting  material  which  until  quite  lately 


RETURN   OF   ROSS  17 

has  constituted  almost  the  exclusive  source  of  our  knowledge 
of  magnetic  conditions  in  the  higher  southern  latitudes.  It 
might  be  said  that  it  was  James  Cook  who  defined  the  Antarctic 
Region,  and  James  Ross  who  discovered  it. 

This  great  expedition  is  brought  curiously  close  to  our  own 
time  when  it  is  remembered  that  of  those  who  took  part  in  it 
there  is  yet  one  survivor.  The  young  assistant  surgeon  of  the 
'  Erebus  '  has  become  the  renowned  botanist  and  traveller  Sir 
Joseph  Hooker,  and  has  lived  not  only  to  take  a  share  in 
sending  forth  a  second  expedition  to  the  same  region,  but  to 
welcome  it  back  to  our  shores  nearly  sixty  years  after  his  own 
return  from  the  far  south. 

The  '  Erebus '  and  '  Terror '  reached  the  shores  of  England 
in  September  1843,  and  for  fifty  years  the  map  of  the  Antarctic 
remained  practically  unaltered,  though  during  this  period  some 
important  light  was  shed  on  the  general  conditions  of  the 
region,  and  the  advance  of  science  caused  a  gradual  awakening 
of  interest  in  it.  The  results  of  the  few  voyages  to  the  Antarctic 
area  during  this  long  period,  or  indeed  down  to  the  close  of 
the  nineteenth  century,  may  be  summed  up  in  a  very  few 
words. 

Tempted  by  Sir  James  Ross's  report  of  the  large  number  of 
whales  seen  during  his  voyage,  in  1892  a  number  of  Scotch 
whalers  set  sail  for  the  south,  and  touching  the  Antarctic  lands 
in  the  neighbourhood  of  Joinville  Island,  threw  some  further 
light  on  that  region  ;  but  as  they  found  no  sign  of  the  whales 
which  they  sought,  the  voyage  was  commercially  a  failure,  and 
the  vessels  soon  turned  to  the  north  again.  In  the  following 
year,  however,  Captain  Larsen,  of  the  whaler  '  Jason,'  bent  on 
much  the  same  errand,  managed  to  sail  down  the  east  coast  of 
Graham  Land,  and  to  reach  a  latitude  of  68.10  S.  in  longitude 
60  W.  This  voyage  has  been  very  little  noticed,  though  from 
a  geographical  point  of  view  it  is  of  great  importance,  as  with 
Biscoe's  discovery  to  the  west,  it  showed  the  attenuated  form 
which  Graham  Land  possesses,  at  any  rate  until  it  is  well  south 
of  the  Antarctic  Circle.  Looking  over  the  whole  Antarctic 
area,  I  can  scarcely  see  a  place  where  geographical  discovery 
vol.  1.  c 


18        THE   VOYAGE   OF  THE   'DISCOVERY' 

is  more  urgently  needed  than  in  the  extension  of  this  bold 
effort  of  Larsen's. 

Whilst  Larsen  pursued  his  investigations  on  the  east  coast 
of  Graham  Land,  his  compatriot  Evenson,  in  the  '  Hertha,' 
descended  on  the  west  side,  and  reached  the  high  latitude  of 
69.10  S.  in  longitude  76  W.  He  sighted  Alexander  Land,  but 
unfortunately  does  not  appear  to  have  extended  its  coasts, 
though  there  can  be  little  doubt  that  it  is  connected  with 
Graham  Land. 

A  similar  object,  the  hope  of  discovering  a  whale  fishery, 
induced  the  veteran  shipowner,  Svend  Foyn,  of  Tonsberg,  to 
send  one  of  his  ships,  the  '  Antarctic,'  to  the  Ross  Sea  area. 
This  resulted  in  the  first  landing  on  Victoria  Land,  which  was 
made  by  her  captain,  Christiansen,  at  Cape  Adare  in  1894. 
Three  years  later  Sir  George  Newnes  sent  an  expedition  to  this 
spot,  under  Mr.  Borchgrevink ;  the  party  landed  safely,  and 
spent  a  winter  in  a  hut  which  will  be  introduced  to  the  reader 
in  the  course  of  my  narrative.  Unfortunately  this  party  did 
not  travel  far  from  its  base,  and  so  was  unable  to  throw  any 
light  on  the  geographical  conditions  of  the  interior;  but  its 
scientific  observations  were  of  importance,  and  its  geological 
collection  especially  interesting.  Before  leaving  the  south 
Mr.  Borchgrevink  landed  from  his  vessel,  the  'Southern  Cross,' 
towards  the  eastern  end  of  Ross's  Great  Ice  Barrier,  and  thus 
reached  a  higher  latitude,  by  a  few  miles,  than  that  achieved 
by  the  great  explorer. 

Whilst  Sir  George  Newnes's  expedition  was  wintering  at 
Cape  Adare,  another  band  of  explorers  was  living  beyond  the 
Antarctic  Circle  in  a  widely  different  region.  The  energies  of 
M.  de  Gerlache  had  succeeded  in  equipping  a  small  vessel,  the 
1  Belgica,'  for  a  Polar  voyage,  and  this  ship,  passing  down  the 
west  coast  of  Graham  Land  through  an  unexplored  channel, 
had  become  beset  in  the  ice  to  the  south-west  of  Alexander 
Land.  Here,  the  first  vessel  to  spend  a  winter  beyond  the 
Antarctic  Circle,  she  drifted  to  and  fro  throughout  a  long  im- 
prisonment. Reaching  at  one  time  a  latitude  of  7 1.30,  she  was 
gradually  carried  to  the  westward,  and  at  length  freed  near  the 


LATER   NINETEENTH   CENTURY  VOYAGES    19 

farthest  point  reached  by  Cook  in  1773.  Equipped  with 
modern  apparatus  and  ideas,  this  expedition,  if  it  did  not  add 
greatly  to  geographical  knowledge,  contributed  much  by  its 
investigations  in  other  scientific  departments  to  the  general 
cause  of  Antarctic  discovery. 

But  by  far  the  most  important  event  in  the  history  of 
Antarctic  research,  after  the  great  voyage  of  Ross  and  before 
the  close  of  the  nineteenth  century,  remains  yet  to  be  described. 
This  was  the  crossing  of  the  Antarctic  Circle  by  the  famous 
'Challenger'  Expedition  in  1874. 

The  '  Challenger,'  under  Sir  George  Nares,  stood  to  the 
south  on  the  meridian  of  80  E.,  and  after  crossing  the  Circle 
turned  to  the  north-east,  and  later  to  the  east,  remaining 
altogether  some  three  weeks  in  the  region  of  icebergs.  During 
this  time  she  pursued  her  customary  employment  of  sounding 
and  dredging  in  the  depths  of  the  ocean,  and  here,  as  else- 
where, this  resulted  in  a  rich  harvest  of  fresh  information. 
Amongst  the  specimens  thus  secured  were  numerous  rocks  of 
continental  origin ;  there  could  be  no  doubt  that  these  had 
been  borne  by  ice  from  some  Southern  land,  and  therefore 
they  showed  that  continental  land  must  exist  within  the 
Antarctic  Circle  almost  as  conclusively  as  if  the  land  itself  had 
been  seen. 

But  the  importance  of  the  'Challenger'  expedition  as 
regards  the  Antarctic  Regions  lay  not  so  much  in  the  dis- 
coveries made  as  in  the  fact  that  they  drew  the  attention  of 
scientific  men  to  the  interest  of  the  problems  which  yet 
remained  to  be  solved  in  that  area.  From  the  return  of  this 
famous  expedition  and  the  publication  of  its  results  dates  that 
revival  of  interest  in  the  Far  South  which,  fostered  by  a  few 
eminent  men,  continued  to  spread  and  culminated  in  the 
despatch  of  the  various  expeditions  which  co-operated  with  the 
'  Discovery.' 

This  desire  for  further  Antarctic  research  arose  principally 
in  Germany  and  England,  but  in  both  countries  it  was  equally 
slow  in  arriving  at  a  practical  result.  In  Germany  the  repeated 
and  energetic  representations  of  the  great  magnetician  Georg 


20        THE   VOYAGE  OF  THE    'DISCOVERY' 

Neumayer  gradually  bore  fruit,  and  resulted  eventually  in  the 
despatch  of  our  German  colleagues  under  Professor  von 
Drygalski  in  his  good  ship  the  '  Gauss.' 

In  England,  whilst  there  were  many  Arctic  explorers  and 
others  who  were  keenly  interested  in  the  subject,  it  was  the 
written  appeals  of  Sir  John  Murray  that  first  secured  for  it  a 
wider  appreciation.  Soon  after  the  completion  of  his  labours 
on  that  monumental  work  the  '  Challenger '  publication,  Sir 
John  Murray  exerted  his  great  abilities  to  stimulate  a  fresh 
interest  in  the  Southern  Regions ;  in  1886  he  published  an 
important  treatise  in  the  '  Scottish  Geographical  Journal,' 
which  led  to  the  despatch  of  the  Dundee  whalers  to  which  I 
have  alluded  ;  this  in  turn  tended  to  direct  further  attention 
to  Southern  exploration,  and  in  1893  Sir  John  read  a  second 
paper  to  the  London  Geographical  Society  which  still  more 
clearly  and  ably  advocated  the  cause. 

Meanwhile  other  events  had  occurred  which,  although 
unproductive,  were  significant  of  the  tendency  of  public 
thought.  In  1885  an  Antarctic  Committee  was  appointed  by 
the  British  Association,  which  two  years  later  made  a  strong 
report  in  favour  of  further  exploration.  In  1887  the  Victorian 
Government,  through  its  agent  Sir  Graham  Barry,  offered  to 
join  the  Home  Government  in  sending  out  an  expedition,  but 
this  scheme  likewise  fell  through. 

The  actual  birth  of  the  '  Discovery '  Expedition  may  be 
dated  from  July  1893,  when  Sir  Clements  Markham  resolved 
that  an  expedition  should  be  sent.  The  extraordinary 
strength  and  pertinacity  of  Sir  Clements'  character  were 
already  well  known  to  his  intimates,  and  they  at  least  must 
have  known  that  this  resolve  was  momentous  and  signified 
that  by  hook  or  by  crook  an  expedition  would  go.  In  virtue 
of  his  position  as  President  of  one  of  the  greatest  and 
richest  societies  in  the  world,  Sir  Clements  was  favourably 
placed  for  carrying  out  his  determination,  but  few  could 
deny  that  in  the  years  of  struggle  and  difficulty  which  fol- 
lowed, however  ably  and  generously  he  was  supported 
by  his  colleagues  and  others,  it  was  mainly  through  his  own 


INCEPTION   OF  THE   EXPEDITION  21 

unique,  unconquerable  personality  that  the  expedition  became 
a  living  fact. 

As  a  result  of  the  discussion  on  Sir  John  Murray's  paper 
in  November  1893,  it  was  suggested  that  the  Government 
should  be  approached  with  a  view  to  sending  out  an  expedition 
consisting  of  two  ships.  This  proposal  was  supported  by 
many  eminent  men  of  science,  including  the  late  Duke  of 
Argyll,  Sir  Joseph  Hooker,  and  the  late  Sir  William  Flower, 
and  by  such  naval  officers  as  Admirals  McClintock,  Vesey 
Hamilton,  Hoskins,  Colomb,  Markham,  and  Lord  Charles 
Beresford.  It  was  on  this  occasion  that  the  Duke  of  Argyll 
remarked  on  the  incongruity  of  the  fact  that  we  knew  more 
about  the  planet  Mars  than  about  a  large  area  of  our  own 
globe. 

The  Council  of  the  Royal  Geographical  Society  therefore 
appointed  a  special  Antarctic  Committee.  In  a  lengthy 
report  the  Committee  enumerated  the  objects  to  be  gained  by 
such  an  expedition,  and  concluded  with  the  following  words  : 
'  Apart  from  the  valuable  scientific  results  of  an  Antarctic  ex- 
pedition, great  importance  must  be  attached  to  the  excellent 
effect  that  all  such  undertakings,  in  which  our  country  has 
been  prominent,  have  invariably  had  on  the  Navy  by  main- 
taining the  spirit  of  enterprise.' 

To  the  appeal  which  followed  this  report  in  1896  the 
Government  opposed  the  existing  state  of  public  affairs,  which 
made  it  inconvenient  for  the  Navy  to  undertake  such  a  task 
as  was  proposed  ;  but  in  a  later  letter  the  Lords  Commissioners 
of  the  Admiralty  expressed  their  sympathy  with  the  objects 
desired,  and  signified  their  willingness  to  assist  any  expedition 
that  might  be  despatched. 

Failing  Government  assistance,  in  May  1897,  it  was 
resolved  by  the  Council  of  the  Geographical  Society  that 
every  effort  should  be  made  to  start  an  expedition  on  a  proper 
scale  under  its  own  auspices,  but  it  was  soon  seen  that  this 
was  a  task  of  such  magnitude  that  the  assistance  of  all  who 
were  interested  in  the  scheme  would  be  required. 

During  the  early  months  of  1898  the  Royal  Society  was 


22        THE   VOYAGE   OF  THE   'DISCOVERY' 

invited  and  agreed  to  co-operate  ;  henceforth  the  undertaking 
was  to  be  considered  as  under  the  auspices  of  two  great 
Societies  instead  of  one,  and  was  demonstrably  supported  by 
the  whole  scientific  opinion  of  the  country.  An  important 
report  by  a  sub-committee  of  the  Royal  Society  clearly 
detailed  the  scientific  objects  which  were  to  be  sought,  and 
laid  particular  stress  on  the  extreme  value  of  the  magnetic 
work.  Meanwhile  Sir  Clements  Markham  commenced  and 
continued  his  indefatigable  efforts  to  raise  the  necessary  funds ; 
the  Geographical  Society  headed  the  subscription  list  with 
5,000/.,  and  circulars  were  issued  to  the  public. 

In  March  1899  this  appeal  met  with  a  noble  response, 
when  Mr.  Llewellyn  Longstaff  came  forward  with  a  munificent 
donation  of  25,000/.  When  the  'Discovery'  eventually  sailed 
it  was  to  act  on  a  concerted  plan  between  expeditions  of 
various  nationalities ;  it  is  quite  certain  that  Britain  would 
not  have  been  represented  in  this  exploring  effort  had  it  not 
been  for  Mr.  Longstaff's  public-spirited  and  patriotic  gift. 
But  whilst  our  countrymen  complacently  reflect  that  the 
British  tradition  for  exploration  has  been  maintained,  they 
appear  entirely  to  have  forgotten  the  man  who  made  it 
possible. 

The  position  of  the  promoters  of  the  enterprise  was  now 
greatly  strengthened,  and  was  made  yet  stronger  when  His 
Majesty  the  King,  then  Prince  of  Wales,  graciously  con- 
sented to  become  its  patron,  and  the  Duke  of  York  vice- 
patron.  Later  in  the  year  it  was  decided  to  make  a  further 
appeal  to  the  Government  j  a  deputation  consisting  of  some 
of  the  most  eminent  men  in  both  Societies  waited  on  Mr. 
Balfour  and  re-stated  the  objects  of  the  enterprise.  Mr. 
Balfour  expressed  strong  sympathy  with  the  objects  and  a 
lively  interest  in  the  undertaking,  and  it  was  entirely  owing 
to  his  generous  attitude  that  the  Government  eventually 
yielded  and  agreed  to  contribute  45,000/.,  provided  an  equal 
sum  could  be  raised  by  private  subscriptions. 

Again  Sir  Clements  Markham  issued  appeals  for  money, 
and  gradually  the  private  fund  crept  up.     After  Mr.  Longstaff, 


DECISION   TO  BUILD  A   NEW  VESSEL        23 

amongst  the  largest  and  most  generous  contributors  were  Sir 
Alfred  Harmsworth  with  5,000/.,  the  Misses  Dawson  Lambton 
with  1,500/.,  the  Royal  Society  with  1,000/.,  and  the  Govern- 
ment of  Queensland,  Australia,  with  1,000/  ;  many  others 
were  equally  generous  in  accordance  with  their  means,  and 
with  a  further  sum  of  3,000/  from  the  Geographical  Society 
the  private  subscriptions  were  raised  to  47,000/.,  the  Govern- 
ment grant  was  secured,  and  the  whole  available  fund  was 
carried  to  the  adequate  total  of  92,000/  Financially  all  was 
now  comparatively  plain  sailing. 

As  soon  as  Mr.  Longstaff 's  gift  had  placed  the  expedition 
within  the  bounds  of  practical  politics,  the  question  of  the 
vessel  in  which  its  members  were  to  sail  came  under  con- 
sideration, and  the  appointment  of  a  special  Ship  Committee, 
consisting  of  several  distinguished  Admirals  and  Arctic 
explorers,  was  followed  by  the  decision  to  build  a  new  ship 
for  the  purpose. 

Mr.  W.  E.  Smith,  C.B.,  Chief  Naval  Constructor,  was  in- 
vited and  consented  to  prepare  the  plans  and  supervise  the 
construction  of  this  new  vessel,  and  the  Committee,  in  consul- 
tation with  Mr.  Smith,  accepted  the  tender  of  the  Dundee 
Shipbuilding  Company  to  build  her.  In  March  1900  the  keel 
was  laid  in  the  Company's  yard. 

In  the  summer  of  this  year  the  position  of  the  National 
Antarctic  Expedition,  as  it  was  now  called,  was  briefly  as  fol- 
lows :  The  money  had  been  subscribed  for  the  venture,  the 
control  of  which  was  vested  in  the  hands  of  a  body  named  the 
Joint  Committee,  containing  sixteen  members  appointed  by 
each  of  the  two  Societies.  The  names  which  figured  on  the 
list  of  this  Committee  were  those  of  gentlemen  eminent  in 
many  branches  of  science,  and  of  distinguished  Admirals  and 
explorers — in  fact,  of  all  those  who  were  best  able  to  give 
advice  concerning  the  multifarious  details  of  a  scientific  ex- 
ploring expedition.  As,  however,  this  body,  as  a  whole,  was 
obviously  too  large  to  deal  with  matters  of  detail,  it  had  ap- 
pointed nine  sub-committees  ;  these  were  for  the  purpose  of 
considering  the  various  branches  of  science  which  were  to  be 


24        THE  VOYAGE   OF    THE   'DISCOVERY' 

investigated,  to  supervise  the  construction  of  the  ship,  &c.  ; 
whilst  one,  the  Executive  Committee,  was  to  act  for  and  report 
to  the  larger  body. 

Such  was  the  position  of  affairs  when  I  received  my 
appointment  to  command  the  expedition  on  June  10,  1900, 
and  therefore,  in  making  my  bow  to  the  public,  I  will  digress 
slightly  to  show  how  this  had  come  about.  I  may  as  well 
confess  at  once  that  I  had  no  predilection  for  Polar  explora- 
tion, and  that  my  story  is  exceedingly  tame,  but  such  as  it  is  it 
shows  how  curiously  the  course  of  one's  life  may  be  turned.  I 
suppose  the  tale  really  starts  in  1887,  when  Sir  Clements 
Markham,  then  the  guest  of  his  cousin,  the  Commodore  of  the 
Training  Squadron,  made  himself  the  personal  friend  of  every 
midshipman  in  the  four  ships  which  comprised  it,  and  when  I 
became  one  of  those  midshipmen  and  first  made  his  acquaint- 
ance. But  there  is  a  long  interregnum — until  1899,  in  fact ; 
in  that  year  I  was  serving  as  first  lieutenant  of  the  '  Majestic,' 
then  flagship  to  the  Channel  Squadron.  Early  in  June  I  was 
spending  my  short  leave  in  London,  and  chancing  one  day  to 
walk  down  the  Buckingham  Palace  Road,  I  espied  Sir  Clements 
on  the  opposite  pavement,  and  naturally  crossed,  and  as 
naturally  turned  and  accompanied  him  to  his  house.  That 
afternoon  I  learned  for  the  first  time  that  there  was  such  a 
thing  as  a  prospective  Antarctic  expedition  ;  two  days  later  I 
wrote  applying  to  command  it,  and  a  year  after  that  I  was 
officially  appointed.  On  June  30,  1900, 1  was  promoted  to  the 
rank  of  commander,  and  a  month  later  my  duties  in  the 
1  Majestic '  lapsed,  and  I  was  free  to  undertake  the  work  of  the 
expedition.  The  year  which  followed  was  in  many  respects 
the  busiest  I  have  ever  spent,  and  in  view  of  the  novelty  and 
importance  of  the  work  this  cannot  be  considered  surprising ; 
but,  great  as  my  difficulties  were,  I  have  to  acknowledge  that 
they  would  have  been  much  greater  had  it  not  been  for  the 
numerous  acts  of  kindness  and  the  invariable  courtesy  which  I 
received  from  the  many  persons  who  were  directly  or  indirectly 
connected  with  the  expedition. 

The  first  month  after  my  release  from  the  Navy  I  spent  in 


PRELIMINARY   ARRANGEMENTS  25 

endeavouring  to  collect  the  threads  of  what  was  going  forward, 
and  in  gaining  some  further  instruction  in  magnetism,  which 
was  to  form  so  important  a  part  of  our  undertaking  ;  but  early 
in  October  I  met  Sir  Clements  Markham  in  Norway,  and 
gathered  a  great  many  practical  suggestions  from  Dr.  Nansen, 
to  which  I  shall  refer  later  ;  from  Norway  I  went  to  Berlin  to 
meet  the  leader  of  the  German  expedition,  Professor  von 
Drygalski,  and  here,  again,  I  met  with  the  greatest  kindness 
and  consideration.  The  German  expedition  was  to  sail  from 
Europe  at  the  same  time  as  our  own,  but  its  preparations  were 
far  more  advanced.  In  Berlin  I  found  the  work  of  equipment 
in  full  swing  j  provisions  and  stores  had  already  been  ordered, 
clothing  had  been  tried,  special  instruments  were  being  pre- 
pared, the  staff  of  the  expedition  had  been  appointed  and  was 
already  at  work,  and  the  '  Gauss '  was  well  on  towards  comple- 
tion. I  was  forced  to  realise  that  this  was  all  in  marked 
contrast  with  the  state  of  things  in  England,  and  I  hastened 
home  in  considerable  alarm. 

I  found,  as  I  had  expected,  that  all  the  arrangements  which 
were  being  so  busily  pushed  forward  in  Germany  were  prac- 
tically at  a  standstill  in  England ;  many  of  them,  in  fact,  had 
not  yet  been  considered.  The  construction  of  the  ship  was  the 
only  task  which  showed  steady  progress,  and  here  there  were 
many  interruptions  from  the  want  of  someone  who  could 
give  immediate  decisions  on  points  of  detail.  It  was  clear 
that  no  time  must  be  wasted  if  the  lost  ground  was  to  be 
regained. 

I  have  already  outlined  the  machinery  by  which  the  expedi- 
tion was  now  being  guided.  In  spite  of  its  individual  efficiency 
it  was  necessarily  ponderous  :  the  members  of  the  various 
committees  and  sub-committees  were  busy  men  ;  each  was 
deeply  engaged  in  his  own  work ;  many  lived  out  of  London, 
and  all  found  it  impossible  to  meet  frequently  and  consistently. 
It  was  evident  that  the  prompt  and  vigorous  action  which  was 
necessary  could  not  be  expected  from  such  bodies,  and  that  in 
some  manner  I  must  obtain  the  power  to  act  on  their  behalf. 
But  here  arose  a  considerable  difficulty :  out  of  the  thirty-two 


26        THE  VOYAGE   OF    THE   'DISCOVERY5 

members  who  constituted  the  Joint  Committee  I  was  person- 
ally known  to  only  four  or  five ;  the  responsibility  vested  in 
them  was  a  large  one,  and  it  was  not  to  be  supposed  that  they 
would  immediately  place  it  in  my  hands  without  the  showing 
of  a  strong  case  and  reasonable  guarantees.  In  this  dilemma 
I  have  to  acknowledge  most  gratefully  the  advice  and  assist- 
ance of  Sir  Arthur  Riicker,  then  Secretary  of  the  Royal  Society, 
who,  seeing  my  case,  clearly  pointed  out  the  difficulties  and 
offered  to  support  me,  provided  I  could  produce  a  reasonable 
scheme  by  which  they  could  be  overcome. 

On  November  4  the  Joint  Committee  met  to  consider  such 
a  scheme,  and  after  some  discussion  passed  it. 

This  resolution  was  of  great  importance  j  it  left  me  practi- 
cally with  a  free  hand  to  push  on  the  work  in  every  department 
under  a  given  estimate  of  expenditure  in  each,  whilst  to  safe- 
guard the  interests  of  the  Societies  it  provided  that  this 
expenditure  should  be  supervised  by  a  Finance  Committee, 
which  should  control  the  business  arrangements  and  sign  the 
necessary  cheques. 

This  plan  has  worked  successfully  down  to  the  present 
time ;  that  it  has  done  so  is  mainly  due  to  the  generous 
manner  in  which  the  members  of  the  Finance  Committee  have 
given  their  services  to  the  business  of  the  expedition,  and  to 
the  complete  accord  with  which  they  have  worked  together. 
It  would  be  impossible  to  exaggerate  the  importance  of  the 
vast  amount  of  business  transacted  by  this  Committee,  and 
certainly  no  history  of  our  expedition  would  be  complete 
without  a  due  acknowledgment  of  the  individual  and  collective 
services  of  its  members. 

It  was  originally  arranged  that  it  should  consist  of  the 
Presidents  and  Treasurers  of  the  two  Societies,  but  the 
President  of  the  Royal  Society  desired  that  his  place  should 
be  taken  by  an  official  from  the  Treasury,  and  the  constitution 
eventually  became :  Sir  Clements  Markham  (Chairman) ;  Mr. 
A.  B.  Kempe,  K.C.,  Treasurer  of  the  Royal  Society;  Mr. 
Chalmers,  C.B.,  of  the  Treasury;  and  Mr.  E.  L.  Somers  Cocks, 
Treasurer  of  the  Geographical  Society ;  whilst  Mr.  Cyril  Long- 


ADMIRALTY   ASSISTANCE  27 

hurst,  the  indefatigable  Secretary  of  the  Expedition,  became 
also  the  Secretary  of  this  Committee. 

The  Joint  Committee,  after  arranging  for  this  new  order  of 
things,  proceeded  to  consider  the  instructions  which  were  to 
guide  the  movements  of  the  expedition,  and  as  there  were 
many  scientific  interests  to  be  served  there  was  naturally 
considerable  divergence  of  opinion  on  points  of  detail,  and  it 
was  many  months  before  these  were  finally  decided. 

In  the  meantime  my  first  task  was  to  collect,  as  far  as 
possible,  the  various  members  of  the  expedition.  It  was 
evident  that  there  was  far  more  work  than  I  could  hope  to  do 
single-handed,  and  the  best  assistance  I  could  have  would  be 
from  those  who  were  to  take  part  in  the  voyage.  I  shall  give 
some  account  of  the  individual  officers  and  men  in  a  future 
chapter,  confining  myself  here  to  the  part  they  played  in  the 
work  of  preparation. 

From  a  very  early  date  I  had  set  my  mind  on  obtaining  a 
naval  crew.  I  felt  sure  that  their  sense  of  discipline  would  be 
an  immense  acquisition,  and  I  had  grave  doubts  as  to  my  own 
ability  to  deal  with  any  other  class  of  men.  Mr.  Goschen  had 
originally  limited  the  Admiralty  assistance  in  this  respect  to 
two  officers,  myself  and  Mr.  Royds,  who  was  already  at  work 
in  our  service.  At  a  later  date,  however,  the  Admiralty 
extended  this  limit  to  include  Mr.  Skelton,  our  engineer,  a 
carpenter,  and  a  boatswain,  and  this  gave  us  at  any  rate  a 
small  naval  nucleus.  But  beyond  this  for  a  long  time  the 
Admiralty  hesitated  to  assist  us,  and  before  the  tide  turned  I 
was  almost  reduced  to  despair  of  a  concession  which  I  thought 
so  necessary. 

In  this  matter  and  in  many  others  I  can  never  forget  the 
assistance  which  was  given  me  by  the  late  Sir  Anthony 
Hoskins.  Sir  Anthony  loved  to  do  his  good  deeds  silently, 
and  it  was  not  until  long  after  that  I  learnt  how  frequently  he 
had  lent  a  helping  hand  to  the  expedition.  But  any  hesitation 
the  Admiralty  may  have  had  in  granting  naval  seamen  did  not 
spring  from  coldness  towards  the  enterprise.  The  Sea  Lords 
were  at  this  time  Lord  Walter  Kerr,  Sir  Archibald  Douglas, 


28        THE   VOYAGE   OF  THE   'DISCOVERY5 

and  Admiral  Durnford,  and  both  individually  and  collectively 
they  never  failed  to  evince  an  interest  in  it,  so  that  at  length 
the  active  assistance  of  Sir  Archibald  Douglas  overcame 
objections  of  principle,  and  the  men  were  granted. 

But  this  concession,  perhaps  the  most  important  which  the 
expedition  received,  did  not  come  until  the  spring  of  1901 ; 
and  as,  after  this,  steps  had  to  be  taken  to  select  the  most 
fitting  volunteers,  the  chosen  men  did  not  join  until  very 
shortly  before  the  sailing  of  the  expedition. 

Many  of  the  officers,  however,  came  on  the  scene  much 
earlier,  and  whilst  our  new  vessel  was  yet  a  skeleton  the  first 
lieutenant,  the  chief  engineer,  and  the  carpenter  were  standing 
by  her,  and  were  able  to  look  into  the  numerous  small 
difficulties  that  arose,  and  to  inform  me  of  them  during  my 
flying  visits  to  Dundee.  My  own  headquarters  I  was  obliged 
to  make  in  London,  and  I  fixed  them  in  the  University  build- 
ings of  Burlington  House,  where  rooms  were  kindly  placed  at 
my  disposal  by  Lord  Esher,  then  Secretary  to  His  Majesty's 
Office  of  Works. 

It  would  not  be  possible  for  me  to  describe  half  the  work 
that  went  on  in  this  office ;  suffice  it  to  say  that  it  kept  me 
extremely  busy  for  six  days  in  the  week.  My  room  soon 
became  a  veritable  museum  of  curiosities  :  sledges,  ski,  fur 
clothing  and  boots  were  crowded  into  the  corners,  whilst  tables 
and  shelves  were  littered  with  correspondence  and  innumerable 
samples  of  tinned  foods.  In  the  midst  of  this  confusion  I 
worked  steadily  on  with  all  the  ups  and  downs  that  such 
occasions  will  bring,  sometimes  in  high  hope  that  all  was 
going  well,  and  sometimes  with  the  dreary  feeling  that  by  no 
possibility  could  we  be  ready  to  start  at  the  required  date. 

Luckily,  throughout  this  busy,  trying  time  I  had  much 
assistance.  Our  indefatigable  Secretary,  Mr.  Longhurst,  was 
always  willing  to  take  fresh  troubles  on  his  already  over- 
burdened shoulders,  and  devoted  his  whole  energies  to  the 
work.  Of  Mr.  Armitage's  help  in  matters  of  equipment  I  shall 
speak  later  on.  At  about  this  time  also  Mr.  George  Murray, 
F.R.S.,  received  his  appointment  as  temporary  director  of  the 


WORK  OF  EQUIPMENT  29 

scientific  staff,  and  many  of  the  details  of  the  scientific  equip- 
ment passed  into  his  hands,  where  I  soon  became  conscious 
they  rested  with  safety.  Mr.  Murray  also  undertook  to  edit 
that  very  important  publication  the  '  Antarctic  Manual,'  which 
provided  us  with  a  great  deal  of  scientific  and  historical 
instruction  concerning  the  regions  we  were  about  to  visit. 

But  it  was  not  all  plain  sailing  with  those  who  were 
gathered  around  me  at  this  important  time  ;  not  all  were  such 
staunch  supporters  as  those  I  have  mentioned.  Amongst  my 
most  careful  selections  had  been  the  person  who  was  to  hold 
the  responsible  position  of  ship's  steward.  At  this  time  a  good 
ship's  steward  would  have  been  invaluable,  but  my  choice 
proved  unfortunate,  and  first  and  last  caused  us  a  great  deal 
of  trouble,  although  I  am  glad  to  say  we  were  rid  of  him 
before  the  expedition  sailed. 

In  this  manner  and  with  varying  fortune  the  work  of  equip- 
ment proceeded.  First  a  lengthy  provision  list  was  drawn  up, 
the  amounts  being  calculated  for  a  three-years'  absence  ; 
tinned  meats,  vegetables,  flour,  biscuit,  butter,  sugar,  and  every 
other  necessary  article  were  ordered  in  due  proportion,  and 
even  such  minor  requirements  as  dubbin  and  plate-powder 
were  not  forgotten.  After  this  came  a  consideration  of  the 
clothing,  and  with  what  an  assortment  of  this  we  were  provided 
will  be  gathered  from  the  pages  of  this  narrative  ;  for  it  will  be 
seen  that  we  had  need  to  be  prepared  for  every  variety  of 
climate,  from  the  sultry  heat  of  the  tropics,  through  the  storms 
of  the  Southern  Seas,  to  the  intense  cold  of  the  Far  South. 
Next  came  the  provision  of  the  travelling  equipment — sledges, 
tents,  furs,  &c,  had  to  be  thought  of  and  selected  with  a  care 
which  I  shall  explain  in  a  future  chapter. 

But  the  above  by  no  means  exhausts  the  list  of  subjects 
for  which  arrangements  had  to  be  made  in  that  small  office  in 
Burlington  House.  Few  people  can  realise  what  an  extra- 
ordinary variety  of  articles  is  required  on  such  an  expedition 
as  ours,  where  a  ship  and  its  crew  are  to  be  banished  from  all 
sources  of  supply  for  a  lengthened  period.  For,  besides  the 
provision   of   food  and  clothing  and  such    things  as  were 


30        THE  VOYAGE   OF  THE   'DISCOVERY' 

obviously  necessary,  it  is  possible  to  enumerate  a  host  of 
articles  which,  whilst  we  were  equally  forced  to  procure  them, 
will  probably  not  have  occurred  to  the  ordinary  reader. 

For  instance,  there  were  boatswain's  stores,  with  rope, 
canvas,  and  everything  necessary  for  the  refitting  of  the  top- 
hamper  of  the  ship  ;  carpenter's  stores,  with  all  requisites  for 
work  in  that  department;  engineer's  stores,  including  a  vast 
variety  of  articles ;  ice  implements  of  various  kinds,  explosives 
for  destroying  the  ice,  guns  and  ammunition,  and  fireworks 
for  signalling.  There  were  tobacco,  soap,  glass,  crockery, 
furniture,  mattresses,  and  all  such  requisites  for  personal 
comfort ;  oil-lamps  and  candles  for  lighting,  and  stoves  for 
heating ;  medicines  and  medical  comforts ;  a  photographic 
outfit;  a  library  of  many  hundreds  of  volumes  ;  also  a  balloon 
equipment  ;  canvas  boats  of  various  kinds,  huts  for  our  shore 
station,  instruments  of  many  descriptions  ;  and  so  on  almost 
ad  infinitum. 

It  may  be  imagined  that,  large  as  this  list  of  requirements 
was,  with  the  sum  of  92,000/.  there  should  have  been  no 
financial  difficulty,  nor,  indeed,  was  there ;  but  it  has  to  be 
remembered  that  of  this  large  sum  51,000/.  went  to  the 
complete  cost  of  building  the  new  vessel,  and  it  was  necessary 
to  reserve  more  than  25,000/.  for  the  wages  and  the  contingent 
expenses  of  the  voyage. 

The  sum  which  remained  was  sufficient  to  equip  the 
expedition  in  the  most  thorough  manner,  but  it  had  to  be 
administered  with  economy  ;  and  though  I  am  now  conscious 
of  many  mistakes  which  were,  made  from  lack  of  experience,  I 
think  little  money  was  wasted. 

On  the  whole  the  firms  with  which  we  dealt  treated  us  with 
great  liberality,  and  supplied  us  with  excellent  goods.  Many 
took  an  especial  interest  in  the  expedition,  and  made  a  very 
considerable  reduction  in  the  prices  of  the  articles  they 
supplied.  Whilst  it  is  impossible  to  quote  all  the  instances 
of  this  nature,  I  take  the  opportunity  of  most  gratefully 
acknowledging  three  cases  in  which  goods  were  supplied  as  an 
absolutely  free  gift,  and  in  which  the  donors  took  exceptional 


LIBERALITY  OF   BUSINESS   FIRMS  3I 

care  that  the  packing  should  be  in  exact  accordance  with  our 
requirements.  These  firms  were  Messrs.  Colman,  Limited, 
who  supplied  us  with  nine  tons  of  flour  and  a  quantity  of 
mustard;  Messrs.  Cadbury,  who  gave  3,500  lbs.  of  excellent 
cocoa  and  chocolate — all  that  we  required  of  these  articles,  in 
fact;  Messrs.  Bird  &  Sons,  who  presented  us  with  eight 
hundredweight  of  baking  and  custard  powders ;  and  Messrs. 
Evans,  Lescher  &  Webb,  to  whom  we  were  indebted  for  all 
our  lime-juice. 

During  these  busy  months  of  preparation  which  I  have 
briefly  described,  the  various  important  posts  in  the  expedition 
had  been  gradually  filled  up,  and  now  expeditionary  work  was 
being  carried  on  in  many  places.  Some  officers  were  in 
Dundee,  superintending  the  building  of  our  good  ship ;  others 
were  working  on  their  especial  subjects  at  the  British  Museum ; 
others  were  preparing  themselves  at  the  Physical  Laboratory 
at  Kew ;  and  others,  again,  were  travelling  in  various  directions, 
both  at  home  and  abroad.  Of  all  these  movements  and  doings 
the  central  office  was  obliged  to  have  cognisance,  and  there- 
fore, as  can  be  imagined,  there  were  not  many  idle  moments 
for  its  occupants. 

Long  ago  it  had  been  decided  that  the  '  Discovery '  should 
be  loaded  with  her  valuable  freight  in  London,  and  on  June  3 
she  was  brought  round  from  Dundee  and  berthed  in  the  East 
India  Docks.  The  courtesy  of  the  London  Docks  Company 
had  placed  at  our  disposal  a  large  shed  near  this  berth,  and 
soon  after  the  centre  of  interest  was  transferred  to  this  spot. 

Here,  thereforej  during  the  two  following  months,  busiest 
of  all,  were  gathered  all  those  stores  which  were  to  minister  to 
our  comfort  and  aid  our  work  throughout  our  long  voyage ; 
and  here  also  we  loaded  the  staunch  vessel  which,  with  her 
solid  wooden  walls,  was  to  form  our  home  for  more  than  three 
years. 


32        THE   VOYAGE   OF   THE   'DISCOVERY' 


CHAPTER    II 

PREPARATION 

Ships  of  former  Polar  Voyages— Ship  Committee— Design  of  the 
'Discovery' — Choice  of  a  Name — Description  of  the  Ship— Magnetic 
Observatory — Living  Spaces — Holds,  &c. — Sails — Launch  of  the  Ship 
—The  Officers  appointed— The  Warrant  Officers— The  Men— Division 
of  the  Antarctic  Regions— Prospect  of  Victoria  Quadrant — The  Instruc- 
tions—Acknowledgment of  Assistance. 

Ere  long  we  will  launch 
A  vessel  as  goodly,  strong,  and  staunch 

As  ever  weathered  a  wintry  sea. — Longfellow. 

In  deciding  to  build  a  vessel  for  the  purposes  of  the  expedi- 
tion the  Ship  Committee  made  a  new  departure,  for  the 
'  Discovery '  was  the  first  vessel  ever  built  in  England  for 
scientific  exploration. 

Few  details  in  the  great  voyages  of  the  early  adventurers 
are  more  interesting  to  a  sailor  than  those  concerning  the  ships 
in  which  such  voyages  were  accomplished.  If  one  is  inclined 
to  wonder  at  the  deeds  of  those  mariners,  wonderment  must 
be  greatly  increased  on  realising  the  extraordinary  vessels  in 
which  they  were  performed.  Space  does  not  permit  me  to 
touch  on  such  a  subject,  but  it  may  be  interesting  to  note 
some  of  the  vessels  which  have  been  used  since  the  com- 
mencement of  the  era  of  scientific  exploration  to  which  I 
referred  in  the  last  chapter. 

All  four  ships,  the  '  Endeavour,'  '  Resolution,'  '  Adventure,' 
and  '  Discovery,'  which  took  part  in  Cook's  famous  voyages, 
had  been  built  and  used  for  the  coal  trade  ;  they  ranged  from 


FAMOUS  POLAR  SHIPS  33 

300  to  462  tons,  and  Cook  expressed  himself  very  well  satisfied 
with  them,  deeming  them  well  suited  for  his  purpose. 

The  '  Erebus '  and  '  Terror,'  as  I  have  noted  before,  had 
been  bomb  vessels.  They  had  been  built  in  the  old  French 
war,  and  were  designed  to  carry  mortars  which  discharged 
shells  at  an  angle  of  450.  It  was  these  same  vessels  which, 
after  they  had  returned  from  their  famous  Southern  voyage, 
were  lost  with  the  ill-fated  Franklin  Expedition  in  1845.  The 
•  Hecla '  and  '  Fury,'  which  took  part  in  Parry's  famous  voyages 
to  the  Arctic  Regions,  were  also  bomb  vessels  of  the  same 
class,  but  many  of  the  early  Arctic  ventures  were  provided 
with  old  whalers  :  it  soon  came  to  be  recognised  what  a  useful 
type  of  vessel  this  was  for  ice-work. 

The  majority  of  ships  employed  in  the  Franklin  Search 
Expedition  were  ordinary  merchant  vessels  purchased  into  the 
navy  and  strengthened  at  considerable  expense.  Some  of 
these  which  did  good  service,  such  as  the  '  Enterprise '  and 
'  Investigator,'  were  over  530  tons.  Most  of  these  early  vessels 
were  sailing  ships ;  the  first  steamers  used  were  the '  Pioneer ' 
and  '  Intrepid ' ;  they  were  about  430  tons  burden,  and  both 
had  been  traders  under  different  names. 

In  the  latest  Government  Arctic  Expedition  of  1875  the 
two  vessels  employed  were,  as  is  well  known,  the  '  Alert '  and 
the  'Discovery.'  The  'Alert'  was  an  old  17-gun  sloop  espe- 
cially strengthened  for  the  service,  but  the  'Discovery,'  though 
also  strengthened  at  Portsmouth,  had  been  the  whaler  'Blood- 
hound,' built  at  Dundee  for  the  Greenland  whale  trade.  The 
contrast  between  these  two  ships  for  ice-work  was  remarkable. 
The  '  Alert '  had  a  bluff  straight  bow,  whilst  the  '  Discovery ' 
had  the  more  recently  designed  overhanging  stem,  and  as  a 
result  the  '  Discovery '  had  often  to  be  sent  ahead  to  force  a 
passage  in  order  that  the  '  Alert '  might  follow. 

The  lines  of  the  '  Discovery '  represented  the  experience 
gained  in  the  whaling  trade;  this  industry,  which  had  flourished 
for  so  many  years,  and  which  at  one  time  had  employed  more 
than  a  hundred  vessels  sailing  out  of  Hull,  Peterhead,  and 
Dundee,  was  slowly  dwindling,  but  then,  and  even  much  later, 
vol.  1,  D 


34        THE   VOYAGE   OF  THE   'DISCOVERY' 

fresh  ships  were  launched  from  time  to  time  to  compete  in  it. 
The  whale,  however,  was  growing  timid,  and  had  to  be  sought 
in  new  waters;  the  difficulties  with  the  pack-ice  were  ever  in- 
creasing, and  success  lay  more  and  more  with  those  ships 
which  were  capable  of  forcing  their  way  through  it. 

As  a  natural  result  of  these  conditions,  a  class  of  vessels 
was  evolved  which,  whilst  capable  of  taking  the  same  hard 
knocks  as  the  older  ships,  had  a  greatly  increased  power  for 
making  progress  through  the  pack-ice,  and  to  this  class  be- 
longed the  old  'Discovery.'  As  regards  lines,  she  probably 
reached  the  best  form  for  such  a  vessel ;  for  although  others 
have  been  launched  since,  they  have  achieved  greater  efficiency 
mainly  by  increased  engine-power.  It  was  generally  admitted 
by  those  who  witnessed  her  performances  in  1875  that  the  old 
'  Discovery'  was  the  best  ship  that  had  ever  been  employed  on 
Arctic  service. 

The  Ship  Committee  which  was  appointed  to  consider  the 
design  of  the  new  vessel  for  the  Antarctic  Expedition  had  all 
these  facts  vividly  before  it,  since  some  of  its  members  had 
occupied  the  most  important  positions  in  the  expedition  of 
1875.  Without  giving  the  names  of  all  the  members,  as  the 
Committee  was  a  large  one,  I  may  mention  that  amongst  the 
most  active  were  Sir  Leopold  McClintock,  Sir  George  Nares, 
Sir  Vesey  Hamilton,  Sir  Albert  Markham,  Sir  Anthony  Hoskins, 
and  Captain  E.  W.  Creak. 

This  Committee,  therefore,  after  due  deliberation,  decided 
that  the  new  vessel  should  be  built  more  or  less  on  the  lines  of 
the  old  'Discovery';  and  here  it  is  necessary  to  explain  more 
exactly  why  this  decision  was  made,  as  it  wholly  rejected  an- 
other and  newer  type  of  Arctic  vessel  suggested  by  the  'Fram.' 

I  have  so  often  been  asked  whether  the  '  Discovery '  was 
like  the  '  Fram,'  and  if  not,  why  not,  that  I  wish  to  make  this 
point  clear.  The  '  Fram '  was  built  for  a  specific  object,  which 
was  to  remain  in  safety  in  the  North  Polar  pack  in  spite  of  the 
terrible  pressures  which  were  to  be  expected  in  such  a  great 
extent  of  ice. 

This  object  was  achieved  in  the  simplest  manner  by  in- 


TYPE  OF  VESSEL  SELECTED  35 

dining  the  sides  of  the  vessel  until  her  shape  was  something 
like  that  of  a  saucer,  and  lateral  pressure  merely  tended  to  raise 
her  above  the  surface.  Simple  as  this  design  was,  it  fulfilled  so 
well  the  requirements  of  the  situation  that  its  conception  was 
certainly  a  stroke  of  genius.  But  what  is  generally  overlooked 
is  that  this  quality  was  only  got  by  the  sacrifice  of  others, 
which,  though  they  might  not  be  needed  on  that  expedition, 
might  be  very  much  required  on  future  ones.  In  short,  the 
safety  of  the  '  Fram '  was  achieved  at  the  expense  of  her  sea- 
worthiness and  powers  of  ice-penetration. 

Hence  it  will  be  seen  that  since  the  advent  of  the  '  Fram ' 
there  are  two  distinct  types  of  Polar  vessels,  the  one  founded 
essentially  on  the  idea  of  passive  security  in  the  ice,  the  other 
the  old  English  whaler  type,  designed  to  sail  the  high  seas  and 
push  forcefully  through  the  looser  ice-packs. 

A  very  brief  consideration  of  Southern  conditions  will 
show  which  of  these  two  types  is  better  suited  for  Antarctic 
exploration,  for  it  is  obvious  that  the  exploring  ship  must  be 
prepared  to  navigate  the  most  tempestuous  seas  in  the  world, 
and  then  to  force  her  way  through  the  ice-floes  to  the  mysteries 
beyond.  As  yet  the  Southern  Regions  have  shown  no  uses 
for  the  type  which  achieves  safety  at  the  expense  of  progress. 
It  will  be  seen,  therefore,  that  the  Committee  had  a  clear  issue 
in  deciding  to  adopt  good  and  well-tried  English  lines  for 
its  vessel,  and  certainly  in  the  excellent  qualities  which  the 
'  Discovery '  showed,  the  decision  was  justified. 

It  is  fair  to  add,  however,  that  whilst  this  view  commended 
itself  so  clearly  to  the  English  Committee,  it  was  not  adopted 
in  Germany.  Speaking  at  the  Geographical  Congress  at  Berlin 
in  1899,  Nansen  strongly  recommended  for  South  Polar  work 
a  vessel  of  the  \  Fram '  type  with,  fuller  lines  ;  this  was,  in  fact, 
an  attempt  to  produce  all  qualities  by  a  compromise,  and  those 
responsible  for  the  construction  of  the  '  Gauss '  adopted  the 
idea.  I  am  not  in  possession  of  any  detailed  information  con- 
cerning the  performance  of  the  '  Gauss '  as  a  sea-boat  or  in 
pushing  through  the  ice ;  but  with  a  knowledge  of  her  lines 
and  her  small  engine-power,  and  my  experience  in  the  Southern 


36        THE  VOYAGE   OF    THE   'DISCOVERY' 

Regions,  I  cannot  believe  she  was  so  efficient  an  exploring 
vessel  as  the  '  Discovery.' 

The  art  of  building  wooden  ships  is  now  almost  lost  to  the 
United  Kingdom ;  probably  in  twenty  or  thirty  years'  time  a 
new  '  Discovery '  will  give  more  trouble  and  cost  more  money 
than  a  moderate-sized  war-ship.  This  is  natural  enough  :  it  is 
the  day  of  steel,  of  the  puncher  and  the  riveter;  the  adze  and 
the  wood-plane  are  passing  away.  It  must  become  increasingly 
difficult  to  find  the  contractors  who  will  undertake  to  build  a 
wooden  ship,  or  the  seasoned  wood  and  the  skilled  workmen 
necessary  for  its  construction. 

The  technicalities  of  the  business  may  still  remain  in  the 
memories  of  the  older  constructors,  but  have  grown  vague 
from  disuse,  and  very  few  persons  have  cause  to  refresh  their 
memories.  And  so  it  is  all  passing  away ;  even  the  quaint  old 
Scotch  foreman,  John  Smith,  who  played  so  important  a  part 
in  the  building  of  the  '  Discovery,'  has  finished  his  work  and 
vanished  from  the  scene.  It  is  a  strange  ending  to  an  industry 
which  a  century  ago  produced  those  stout  wooden  walls  that 
were  the  main  defence  of  the  kingdom. 

In  October  1899,  when  tenders  for  the  new  ship  were 
invited,  there  were  few  replies,  and  only  one  from  a  firm  which 
had  recent  experience  of  such  a  task.  This  was  the  Dundee 
Shipbuilding  Company,  the  owners  of  a  small  yard  on  the  Tay, 
which  had  been  better  known  in  the  flourishing  days  of  the 
whale  trade  as  Stevens's  Yard.  Stevens  had  been  a  very  well- 
known  character  in  Dundee,  the  builder  and  owner  of  many  a 
fine  whaling  ship. 

Arrangements  were  therefore  entered  into  with  this  Com- 
pany to  build  the  new  vessel,  and  in  the  meanwhile  the  Com- 
mittee's architect,  Mr.  W.  E.  Smith,  had  thoroughly  overhauled 
the  plans  of  the  old  'Discovery'  and  drawn  up  a  masterly 
specification  for  the  new  one.  In  March  1900  the  keel  of  the 
new  vessel  was  laid,  and  in  a  few  months  the  massive  oak 
frames  had  been  raised  and  the  busy  scene  of  construction 
was  in  full  swing. 

I  have  spoken  of  this  new  ship  as  the  '  Discovery,'  but  it 


NAMING  THE  SHIP  37 

was  not  until  June  that  her  name  was  selected.  Many  names 
came  up  for  discussion,  and  not  a  few  of  these  had  already 
done  service  in  the  older  English  expeditions.  It  was  gene- 
rally considered  that  the  most  appropriate  plan  was  to  revive 
some  old  time-honoured  title,  and  as  it  was  seen  that  few 
names  carried  a  greater  record  than  '  Discovery,'  that  name 
was  chosen.  It  is  perhaps  interesting,  therefore,  to  give  some 
idea  of  its  history.  There  have  now  been  six  '  Discoveries.' 
The  first  made  no  fewer  than  six  Arctic  voyages  from  1602  to 
161 6  to  the  regions  of  Hudson  Bay  and  Baffin  Bay,  on  one  of 
which  she  was  commanded  by  the  famous  navigator  William 
Baffin.  The  second  also  voyaged  to  Hudson  Bay  in  17 19. 
'  Discovery'  No.  3  took  part  in  Cook's  third  voyage  in  1776. 
'  Discovery  '  No.  4  was  Vancouver's  ship  when  he  discovered 
the  insularity  of  the  land  which  is  named  after  him.  '  Dis- 
covery '  No.  5  took  part  in  the  1875  expedition  to  the  Arctic; 
she  was  commanded  by  the  present  Sir  Henry  F.  Stevenson, 
and  I  have  already  shown  her  fitness  for  the  work.  Our  own 
1  Discovery '  was  therefore  the  sixth  of  that  name  and  the  heir 
to  a  long  record  of  honourable  service,  and,  what  was  equally 
important,  of  fortunate  service,  as  the  name  '  Discovery '  seems 
never  to  have  been  associated  with  shipwreck  or  disaster. 

And  here  I  should  like  to  introduce  the  reader  to  this 
good  ship  which  was  to  carry  us  and  our  fortunes  through 
many  adventures.  I  can  do  so  without  going  into  technical 
details,  as,  thanks  to  the  interest  which  Mr.  W.  E.  Smith  took 
in  his  handiwork  and  the  enterprise  of  the  Institution  of  Naval 
Architects,  a  permanent  record  of  the  vessel  has  been  esta- 
blished. The  '  Discovery,'  alas  !  has  passed  away  from  the 
paths  of  exploration,  but  the  future  architect  of  such  a  ship 
will  find  all  the  information  he  needs  concerning  her  in  the 
'Proceedings'  of  the  Institution  I  have  named  (April  1905). 

The  displacement  of  the  '  Discovery '  was  1,620  tons,  but 
her  registered  tonnage,  by  which  her  size  can  be  compared 
with  other  ships  I  have  mentioned,  was  485.  Her  length 
between  perpendiculars  was  172  feet,  and  her  breadth  34  feet. 

By  consulting  the  profile  drawing  of  the  ship,  the  reader 


38        THE  VOYAGE   OF    THE   'DISCOVERY' 

will  get  some  idea  of  the  internal  arrangements,  but  he  will 
scarcely  realise  the  extraordinary  solidity  of  the  structure. 
Most  people  who  have  voyaged  in  modern  ships  know  that 
between  them  and  the  sea  there  has  only  interposed  a  steel 
plate  the  fraction  of  an  inch  in  thickness  ;  they  may,  therefore, 
be  interested  to  know  what  the  side  of  the  '  Discovery '  was 
like.  The  frames,  which  were  placed  very  close  together,  were 
eleven  inches  thick  and  of  solid  English  oak  ;  inside  the  frames 
came  the  inner  lining,  a  solid  planking  four  inches  thick  ;  whilst 
the  outside  was  covered  with  two  layers  of  planking,  respectively 
six  and  five  inches  thick,  so  that,  in  most  places,  to  bore  a  hole 
in  the  side  one  would  have  had  to  get  through  twenty-six 
inches  of  solid  wood. 

It  will  give  some  idea  of  the  complexity  of  the  construction 
of  such  a  ship  to  name  the  various  woods  that  were  employed 
in  the  side,  for  in  each  place  the  most  suitable  was  chosen. 
The  inner  lining  was  of  Riga  fir,  the  frames  of  English  oak,  the 
inner  skin,  according  to  its  position,  of  pitch  pine,  Honduras 
mahogany,  or  oak,  whilst  the  outer  skin  in  the  same  way  was  of 
English  elm  or  greenheart.  The  massive  side  structure  was 
stiffened  and  strengthened  by  three  tiers  of  beams  running 
from  side  to  side,  and  at  intervals  with  stout  transverse  wooden 
bulkheads ;  the  beams  in  the  lower  tiers  were  especially  solid, 
being  eleven  inches  by  eleven  inches  in  section,  and  they  were 
placed  at  intervals  of  something  less  than  three  feet. 

All  this  went  to  give  the  ship  a  frame  capable  of  resisting 
immense  side  strains,  but,  strong  as  she  was  in  this  respect, 
the  rigid  stiffness  of  the  sides  was  as  nothing  to  that  of  the 
bows.  Some  idea  of  the  fortification  of  this  part  can  be 
gathered  from  the  drawing,  which  shows  the  numerous  and 
closely  placed  girders  and  struts  that  went  to  support  the 
forefoot.  Such  a  network  of  solid  oak  stiffeners  gave  to  this 
portion  of  the  vessel  a  strength  which  almost  amounted  to 
solidity.  It  will  be  seen,  too,  how  the  keel  at  the  fore-end  of 
the  ship  gradually  grew  thicker  till  it  rose  in  the  enormous 
mass  of  solid  wood  which  constituted  the  stem.  No  single 
tree  could  provide  the  wood  for  such  a  stem,  but  the  several 


_.|l  Q 


40        THE  VOYAGE  OF  THE   'DISCOVERY5 

that  were  employed  were  cunningly  scarfed  to  provide  the 
equivalent  of  a  solid  block ;  and,  in  addition  to  the  strong 
fastenings  which  held  piece  to  piece,  long  strengthening  bolts 
were  used  which  ran  fore  and  aft  and  securely  held  all  to- 
gether. Some  of  these  bolts,  running  entirely  through  wood, 
were  as  much  as  8|  feet  in  length. 

The  bow  of  the  '  Discovery '  was,  therefore,  a  part  which 
ran  little  risk  of  damage,  and  a  knowledge  of  its  strength  was 
a  pleasing  possession  when  we  came  to  ramming  the  ice-floes. 
In  further  preparation  for  such  service  the  stem  itself  and  the 
bow  for  three  or  four  feet  on  either  side  were  protected  with 
numerous  steel  plates,  so  that  when  we  got  back  to  civilisation 
not  a  scratch  remained  to  show  the  many  hard  knocks  which 
the  bow  had  received. 

The  shape  of  the  stem  was  a  very  important  consideration. 
It  will  be  seen  how  largely  it  overhangs,  and  this  was  carried 
to  a  greater  extent  than  in  any  former  Polar  ship.  The  object 
with  which  this  was  fitted  was  often  very  prettily  fulfilled 
during  our  voyage.  Many  a  time  on  charging  a  large  ice-floe 
the  stem  of  the  ship  glided  upwards  until  the  bows  were 
raised  two  or  three  feet,  then  the  weight  of  the  ship  acting 
downwards  would  crack  the  floe  beneath,  the  bow  would  drop, 
and  the  ship  would  gradually  forge  ahead  to  meet  the  next 
obstruction.  This  is  the  principle  on  which  the  ice  is  broken 
by  all  modern  ice-breakers ;  and  here,  perhaps,  I  may  be 
allowed  to  interpolate  a  remark.  I  have  often  been  asked 
why  the  now  well-known  ice-breakers  are  not  employed  for 
such  expeditions  as  ours.  It  is  because  the  ice-breaker  is 
built  of  steel,  and,  except  when  breaking  very  thin  ice,  is  in 
constant  need  of  repair  j  nothing  but  a  wooden  structure  has 
the  elasticity  and  strength  to  grapple  with  thick  Polar  ice 
without  injury. 

The  '  Discovery's '  greatest  strength  lay  in  her  bows,  as  I 
have  just  shown ;  next  to  this,  and  as  far  aft  as  the  mainmast, 
the  structure,  supported  by  numerous  beams  and  bulkheads, 
still  remained  very  strong ;  but  further  aft  there  was  a  distinct 
weakening,  for  although  the  sides  remained  equally  thick,  the 


NEW  FEATURES  IN  THE   'DISCOVERY'      41 

position  of  the  engines  and  boilers  necessitated  the  omission 
of  many  of  the  crossbeams. 

Next  to  this  came  the  stern,  which,  with  the  rudder  and 
screw,  must  always  form  the  weakest  and  most  vulnerable  part 
of  a  Polar  ship.  Nansen  aptly  defines  it  as  the  Achilles'  heel. 
Our  screw  was  capable  of  being  detached  and  lifted  up 
through  the  deck  ;  this  is  a  common  enough  device,  though, 
as  I  shall  remark  later,  the  manner  in  which  it  was  done  in 
the  '  Discovery '  was  new. 

But  Mr.  Smith  made  an  entirely  new  departure  in  providing 
us  with  a  rudder  which  likewise  lifted  up  through  the  deck. 
This  plan  had  the  single  disadvantage  that  the  rudder  possessed 
only  one  pintle  and  brace  instead  of  the  several  that  are  cus- 
tomary ;  on  the  other  hand,  its  advantages  in  the  facilities  it 
offered  for  shifting  a  damaged  rudder  were  great  and  easily 
seen.  As  I  shall  tell,  we  had  occasion  to  be  exceedingly 
grateful  for  these  advantages. 

Protection  for  our  keel  was  afforded,  firstly,  by  making 
every  part  as  strong  as  possible ;  the  rudder-post  was  an 
enormous  piece  of  timber,  and  was  secured  to  the  keel  with 
extra  strengthening-pieces  placed  beneath  the  propeller ;  it 
would  have  taken  tremendous  forces  to  have  strained  or 
distorted  these  fixtures.  But  protection  to  this  part  was  given 
yet  more  by  the  overhanging  stern,  an  entirely  new  feature  in 
this  class  of  vessel.  As  can  be  imagined,  the  building  of  the 
'  Discovery  '  excited  the  keenest  interest  in  the  whaling  com- 
munity of  Dundee.  Few  novelties  passed  unnoticed,  and  the 
peculiar  shape  of  our  stern  gave  rise  to  the  strongest  criticism  ; 
all  sorts  of  evils  were  predicted,  the  commonest  being  that  we 
should  one  day  come  down  so  heavily  that  it  would  be  broken 
off !  As  events  showed,  this  stern  was  a  distinctly  good 
feature :  in  a  heavy  seaway,  as  long  as  we  were  travelling 
through  the  water,  it  tended  to  keep  the  ship  drier  by  causing 
her  to  lift  more  readily  to  the  waves  ;  to  a  certain  extent  it  was 
a  disadvantage  if  we  happened  to  be  becalmed  and  stationary, 
as  then  the  rounded  under-surface  would  come  down  with 
terrific   violence,    shaking    the    ship   throughout ;    but   these 


42        THE  VOYAGE  OF  THE   'DISCOVERY' 

occasions  were  rare,  and  when  we  got  amongst  the  ice  we 
reaped  great  benefit  from  it,  for  then,  as  will  be  seen,  it  formed 
a  buffer  which  prevented  the  heavier  pieces  of  ice  from  coming 
into  contact  with  the  rudder. 

On  the  whole,  therefore,  the  hull  of  the  '  Discovery '  was  a 
splendidly  strong  and  well-fortified  structure,  and  the  machinery 
was  in  all  respects  equal  to  the  hull.  The  ship  had  two 
cylindrical  boilers  arranged  to  work  at  a  pressure  of  150  lbs. 
per  square  inch,  and  a  set  of  triple  expansion  engines.  The 
latter  were  designed  to  give  450  indicated  horse  power,  but 
actually  on  trial  gave  over  500.  Whilst  there  was  nothing 
particularly  novel  in  these  engines  and  boilers,  many  details  in 
connection  with  them  had  to  be  considered  with  especial  care 
in  view  of  the  service  for  which  they  were  required ;  more 
particularly  was  this  the  case  with  regard  to  the  leads  of  steam 
pipes  and  the  position  of  sea  inlets. 

In  the  shape  of  auxiliary  machinery,  besides  that  in  con- 
nection with  the  main  engines,  the  *  Discovery '  possessed  a 
small  condenser  for  making  fresh  water,  a  small  dynamo  for 
supplying  electric  light,  a  strong  deck  winch  amidships,  and  a 
very  powerful  capstan,  engine  under  the  forecastle.  In  connec- 
tion with  the  last-named,  and  placed  close  to  it,  there  was  also 
a  small  auxiliary  boiler  which  on  one  occasion  at  least  did 
yeoman  service.  All  these  various  machines  were  supplied  by 
different  firms,  but  our  excellent  set  of  main  engines  and 
boilers  were  built  and  placed  by  Messrs.  Gourlay  Brothers,  of 
Dundee,  and  to  the  energetic  manager  of  this  firm,  Mr.  Lyon, 
we  owe  the  really  novel  feature  which  was  embodied  in  our 
arrangement  for  lifting  the  screw. 

For  the  benefit  of  those  who  are  interested  in  engineering 
details  -I  may  briefly  explain  this  device,  as  it  is  certainly 
worthy  of  record.  As  I  have  said,  a  lifting  screw  is  a  common 
fitting,  but  it  has  always  had  one  disadvantage  in  the  fact  that 
the  joint  between  the  shaft  and  the  screw  has  tended  to  get 
loose,  and  this  has  caused  a  very  uncomfortable  jarring  when 
the  engines  have  been  revolving.  The  fittings  in  the  '  Dis- 
covery '  entirely  avoided  this  in  the  following  manner  :  The 


MAGNETIC  PRECAUTIONS  43 

tail  end  of  the  shaft  was  made  hollow,  and  inside  it  was  placed 
an  inner  shaft ;  the  outer  shaft  fitted  into  the  boss  of  the 
screw  on  a  taper ;  inside  the  boss  beyond  this  taper  was  a 
large  nut  in  which  the  inner  shaft  could  engage  ;  the  outer 
shaft  and  the  screw  were  kept  in  close  connection  by  the  inner 
shaft  and  nut,  and  therefore  there  was  no  loose  connection  to 
jar.  To  disconnect  the  screw,  a  small  section  of  the  main 
shaft,  in  front  of  the  tail  shaft,  could  be  lifted  bodily,  the 
inner  tail  shaft  could  then  be  turned  and  freed  from  the  nut, 
when  both  inner  and  outer  shafts  could  be  withdrawn  together, 
and  the  screw  was  free  for  lifting.  This  fitting  was  naturally 
expensive,  but  it  is  certainly  the  most  efficient  that  has  been 
devised  for  a  lifting  propeller. 

In  the  profile  drawing  which  is  reproduced,  on  the  middle 
of  the  upper  deck  will  be  seen  a  deck-house  marked  '  Magnetic 
Observatory ' ;  this  was  an  important  place,  both  in  the 
building  and  in  the  subsequent  work  of  the  '  Discovery.'  I 
have  already  given  reason  to  show  why  the  greatest  stress  was 
laid  on  the  accuracy  of  our  magnetic  observations,  and  it  will 
be  clear  that  accurate  magnetic  observations  cannot  be  taken 
in  a  place  closely  surrounded  with  iron.  The  enthusiasm  of  the 
magnetic  experts  on  the  Ship  Committee  had  at  first  led  them 
to  request  that  there  should  be  no  iron  or  steel  at  all  in  the 
'Discovery,'  and  when  it  was  pointed  out  that  this  could 
scarcely  be,  they  demanded  the  exclusion  of  the  metals  from 
the  vicinity  of  the  magnetic  observatory.  At  last  a  compromise 
was  arrived  at,  which  stipulated  that  no  magnetic  materials 
should  be  employed  within  thirty  feet  of  the  observatory.  It 
is  difficult  to  realise  what  immense  trouble  and  expense  this 
decision  involved.  This  thirty-foot  circle  swept  round,  down 
by  the  foremast,  under  the  bottom  of  the  ship,  and  up  in 
front  of  the  mainmast ;  everything  within  this  radius  had  to 
be  made  of  brass  or  some  other  non-magnetic  material,  and 
when  all  the  fastenings  of  the  hull  and  all  the  fittings  and 
furniture  of  the  ship  are  considered,  some  idea  may  be  gathered 
of  the  difficulty ;  even  much  of  the  rigging,  which  would 
ordinarily  have  been  of  wire,  had  to  be  made  of  hemp,  of  a 


44        THE  VOYAGE  OF   THE   'DISCOVERY' 

size  which  is  rarely,  if  ever,  used  in  these  days.  And  yet 
when  all  these  elaborate  precautions  had  been  taken  we  could 
not  banish  magnetic  objects  from  the  sacred  ring,  for  as  a 
critic  might  well  have  pointed  out  in  the  first  place,  the  pro- 
vision-rooms within  it  could  not  possibly  have  their  contents 
preserved  in  brass. 

Nevertheless,  this  care  in  building  was  by  no  means  lost. 
The  magnetic  observations  taken  on  board  throughout  the 
voyage  required  astonishingly  little  correction,  and  though  the 
condition  of  perfection  looked  for  was  not  achieved,  it  was 
certainly  more  nearly  approached  than  it  would  have  been  in 
an  ordinary  wooden  steamship. 

There  were  several  curious  results  of  this  magnetic  ordi- 
nance. I  might  mention,  for  instance,  that  the  officers  outside 
the  circle  slept  on  modern  spring  mattresses,  whilst  those 
within  had  to  content  themselves  with  wooden  battens.  There 
was  quite  a  small  stir,  too,  when  the  buttons  of  some  cushions 
were  found  to  be  made  of  iron,  and  these  were  immediately 
ripped  off  and  replaced  by  leaden  ones.  Of  course,  also,  the 
magnetic  regulations  caused  some  amusement :  at  one  time 
those  who  lived  within  the  circle  were  threatened  with  the 
necessity  of  shaving  with  brass  razors.  The  careful  rounds 
made  by  the  navigator  before  he  commenced  his  observations 
were  another  subject  of  jest :  knives  and  all  sorts  of  instru- 
ments had  to  be  summarily  confiscated  and  placed  beyond  the 
pale,  much  to  the  annoyance  of  their  owners ;  and  on  our  way 
home  from  New  Zealand  I  remember  one  awful  case  where  it 
was  discovered  that  throughout  a  whole  set  of  observations  a 
parrot  had  been  hanging  on  the  mess-deck.  It  was  not  the 
inoffensive  bird  that  was  objected  to,  but  the  iron  wires  of  its 
cage. 

The  general  distribution  of  ourselves  and  our  stores  inside 
the  '  Discovery '  can  be  seen  in  the  plan.  The  wardroom  was 
a  good-sized  apartment,  about  thirty  feet  long  and  nearly 
twenty  feet  across ;  on  each  side  were  comparatively  roomy 
cabins  for  the  officers,  whilst  at  the  after-end,  between  it  and 
the  engine-room,  lay  my  own  cabin  and  that  of  the  navigating 


THE   INTERIOR  45 

officer.  This  position  was  by  no  means  a  catch,  for  in  the 
tropics  when  steam  was  up  it  had  the  doubtful  benefit  of  the 
heat  given  off  by  the  boilers,  whereas  in  the  Polar  winter,  when 
we  had  no  steam,  the  engine-room  naturally  became  the  coldest 
place  in  the  ship,  and  the  after-cabin  suffered  accordingly. 
The  crew-space  was  a  little  shorter  than  the  wardroom,  but  as 
it  extended  the  full  breadth  of  the  ship  it  was  larger ;  compared 
with  other  vessels  it  gave  ample  room  for  its  occupants.  The 
galley-space  was  narrowed  by  having  compartments  cut  off  on 
each  side ;  however,  it  was  quite  big  enough  for  our  require- 
ments. Between  the  fore-end  of  the  galley-space  and  the  after- 
end  of  my  cabin  were  comprised  the  living-spaces,  and  the  ship 
was  designed  so  that  this  part  might  be  kept  especially  warm 
in  a  Polar  climate.  Concerning  our  advantages  and  difficulties 
in  this  respect  I  shall  speak  more  fully  in  the  course  of  my 
story,  but  whilst  the  plan  of  the  ship  is  under  discussion,  it 
may  be  as  well  to  point  out  how  we  were  situated.  Naturally, 
if  one  wants  to  keep  warm  one  must  exclude  the  cold  on  every 
side.  During  our  Polar  winters,  owing  to  the  insulation  of  the 
upper  deck,  and  to  the  fact  that  we  piled  snow  on  top  of  it,  we 
had  nothing  to  fear  from  that  direction.  As  regards  the  sides, 
we  had  small  difficulties  which  I  shall  mention,  but  the  fact 
that  cold  might  creep  up  from  beneath  was  overlooked  in 
providing  for  the  comfort  of  our  living-spaces. 

It  will  be  seen  that  beneath  the  men's  quarters  were  the 
provision-rooms  and  holds  ;  these,  owing  to  the  temperature  of 
the  sea  outside  and  the  space  above,  never  fell  much  below 
freezing  point,  and  so  the  men  suffered  little  discomfort  from 
below,  but  the  coal-space  or  bunker  under  the  wardroom  was 
a  different  matter.  This  was  only  shut  off  from  the  engine- 
room  by  a  steel  bulkhead,  and  consequently  it  became 
extremely  cold  and  communicated  its  temperature  to  the 
wardroom.  This  difficulty  would  not  have  arisen  had  the 
decks  of  the.  living-spaces  been  thoroughly  well  insulated. 

Daylight  was  admitted  to  the  living-spaces  through  central 
skylights  and  small  round  decklights.  There  were  no  portholes 
or  sidelights  in  the  '  Discovery.' 


46        THE  VOYAGE   OF   THE   'DISCOVERY' 

Reference  to  the  drawing  will  show  the  reader  that  the 
space  devoted  to  our  provisions  and  stores  was  divided  into 
many  compartments.  It  was  very  much  smaller  than  the 
drawing  might  lead  one  to  suppose,  as  a  great  deal  of  the  room 
was  taken  up  by  the  beams  and  girders  provided  for  the 
strengthening  of  the  ship.  I  do  not  know  the  exact  weight  of 
provisions  and  stores  we  carried  when  fully  loaded,  but  I 
believe  it  to  have  been  about  150  tons.  And  here  I  may  add 
that  the  manner  in  which  provisions  and  other  stores  are 
packed  is  of  great  importance  in  such  an  expedition  as  ours. 
The  tinning  of  foods  has  advanced  greatly  of  late  years,  but  it 
is  still  necessary  to  exercise  great  care  in  selecting  tins ;  the 
shape,  the  thickness,  the  care  of  manufacture,  and  the  paint  or 
lacquer  employed,  are  all  points  to  be  observed,  and  as  a 
general  rule  they  give  a  good  indication  of  the  quality  of  the 
food  within.  Damp  and  rust  are  enemies  which  can  be 
resisted  successfully  only  by  a  well-made  tin.  The  same  care 
is  necessary  in  selecting  the  cases  in  which  these  tins  are 
stowed.  For  the  '  Discovery,'  we  had  them  made  to  reduce 
bulk  as  much  as  possible,  while  for  convenience  of  handling 
we  limited  the  weight  of  each  case  to  50  or  60  lbs. 

The  position  of  our  fresh-water  tanks  will  be  seen  on  the 
drawing;  the  full  stowage  of  these  tanks  was  25  tons.  As  they 
lay  within  the  magic  circle  they  also  had  to  be  subservient  to 
the  magnetic  rule,  and  were  made  of  zinc.  The  zinc  was  too 
thin,  and  the  arrangement  was  not  satisfactory ;  however,  as 
the  tanks  were  not  used  during  the  winter  we  did  not  suffer 
much  inconvenience. 

Our  coal  supply  was  amongst  our  most  precious  possessions, 
and  I  shall  show  how  things  went  for  us  in  this  respect.  The 
outline  of  the  problem  can  be  gathered  from  the  following 
figures.  The  main  bunker  held  240  tons ;  to  this  two  small 
pocket  bunkers  added  53  tons,  and  the  deck  cargo  we  took 
south  was  42  tons.  For  our  Southern  campaign  we  had  there- 
fore 335  tons  in  all.  At  sea,  steaming  economically,  we  used 
between  5  and  6  tons  a  day,  or  with  one  boiler  only,  about 
4  tons  ;  on  the  occasions  when  we  had  to  lie  with  banked  fires 


MASTS   AND   SAILS  47 

the  consumption  was  about  i\  ton.  It  will  be  seen,  there- 
fore, that  each  day  made  a  marked  difference  in  our  stock  of 
coal  when  fires  were  alight  in  the  main  boilers.  But  of  course 
throughout  our  long  imprisonment  in  the  ice  these  fires  were 
not  lighted,  and  then  our  consumption  was  only  such  as  was 
necessary  for  cooking  and  for  warming  the  ship,  and  during 
our  second  winter  we  reduced  this  to  the  very  moderate  figure 
of  15  cwt.  per  week. 

A  description  of  the  '  Discovery '  would  scarcely  be  com- 
plete without  a  word  or  two  about  the  spread  of  canvas  which 
assisted  our  voyage  so  greatly.  The  ship  was  under-masted  : 
the  mainmast  from  truck  to  keelson  was  only  112  feet,  and 
this  is  extremely  short  for  such  a  vessel,  while  comparatively 
speaking  for  this  height  of  mast  the  yards  were  square  {i.e. 
long),  the  mainyard  being  60  feet  in  length. 

The  '  Discovery '  was  extraordinarily  stiff,  and  could  have 
carried  a  much  larger  sail  area  with  advantage.  As  it  was,  the 
mainsail  and  jib  were  the  only  sails  we  took  off  for  a  gale,  and 
I  think  rarely,  if  ever,  have  top-gallant  sails  been  carried 
through  such  weather  as  ours.  For  the  non-nautical  reader  I 
may  explain  that  in  a  gale  there  comes  a  time  when  certain 
sails  cannot  be  furled  :  to  relieve  the  ship  they  must  be  either 
cut  or  blown  away.  That  we  allowed  our  top-gallant  sails  to 
remain  spread  in  such  weather  shows  our  confidence  in  the 
1  Discovery's '  stability  as  well  as  in  our  canvas  and  our 
boatswain. 

But  the  comparatively  small  spread  of  sail  was  a  great 
drawback  in  light  winds,  and  the  ship  was  an  extremely 
sluggish  sailer.  Matters  were  rendered  much  worse  also  by  the 
masts  being  placed  in  the  wrong  position.  They  should  have 
been  put  much  nearer  the  bows.  When  sailing  '  on  a 
wind '  in  the  '  Discovery '  we  had  to  trim  our  sails  so  that 
everything  forward  was  clean  full  while  the  sails  on  the  main- 
mast were  almost  shivering.  These  details  are  somewhat 
technical,  I  fear,  but  it  is  very  necessary  that  they  should  be 
noted  for  the  guidance  of  future  explorers.  Masts,  yards,  and 
sails  are  rapidly  passing  away  from  the  seas,  but  where  the 


48        THE  VOYAGE   OF  THE   'DISCOVERY' 

saving  of  coal  is  of  such  prime  importance,  as  in  the  case  of 
the  Polar  exploring  ship,  they  must  long  remain  a  useful 
auxiliary.  Although  the  •  Discovery '  was  very  slow  under 
sail  alone,  unless  running  before  a  strong  breeze,  there  were 
many  occasions  when  the  sails  proved  an  immense  assistance 
to  the  engines. 

In  the  foregoing  pages  I  have  endeavoured  to  give  some 
description  of  the  ship  which  was  built  at  Dundee,  1 900-1, 
and  which  on  March  21  of  the  latter  year  was  launched  and 
named  the  '  Discovery '  by  Lady  Markham.  When,  after 
gliding  smoothly  into  the  waters  of  the  Tay,  she  was  brought 
back  to  the  dock  side,  it  was  to  be  invaded  by  a  small  army  of 
workmen,  to  receive  her  engines  and  boilers,  to  undergo  her 
successful  trials,  and  generally  to  be  prepared  for  that  voyage 
to  the  Thames  in  June  which  I  have  already  mentioned. 

From  the  brief  manner  in  which  I  have  dealt  with  the 
1  Discovery '  it  will  be  seen  that  the  initial  labours  of  the  Ship 
Committee  and  the  high  intelligence  of  Mr.  W.  E.  Smith  had 
provided  us  with  the  finest  vessel  which  was  ever  built  for  ex- 
ploring purposes.  If  I  had  little  cause  to  complain  concerning 
the  instrument  thus  put  into  my  hands,  I  had  equally  little  con- 
cerning the  officers  and  men  who  were  to  assist  me  in  using 
it.  The  manner  in  which  they  did  their  work  and  the  loyalty 
with  which  they  supported  me  will  appear  in  these  pages  j  but 
here  I  would  wish  to  introduce  the  reader  individually  to  that 
roll  whose  members  faced  hardships  and  difficulties  with  in- 
variable cheerfulness  and  elected  to  remain  at  their  posts 
whatever  might  betide. 

Ten  officers  besides  myself  messed  together  in  the  small 
wardroom  of  the  '  Discovery.'  The  senior  of  these  was 
Lieutenant  Albert  B.  Armitage,  R.N.R.  Armitage  had  spent 
a  great  number  of  years  at  sea,  joining  the  training  ship 
'Worcester'  in  1878.  He  had  passed  through  that  ship  with 
credit,  and  after  an  excellent  practical  seamanship  training  in 
sailing  ships,  had  been  appointed  to  a  position  in  the  P.  and  O. 
Company's  service.  In  this  service  he  had  remained  nominally 
ever  since,  but  in  1894  he  had  been  granted  leave  of  absence 


*  OFFICERS  OF  THE  EXPEDITION  40 

to  join  the  Jackson-Harmsworth  Expedition  to  Franz-Josef 
Land.  The  expedition  was  absent  for  four  years,  and  on  its 
return  Armitage's  services  were  not  only  gratefully  recognised 
by  his  employer,  but  were  acknowledged  by  the  Royal  Geo- 
graphical Society,  which  presented  him  with  its  Murchison 
Award.  After  this  he  had  returned  to  his  ordinary  duties  as 
first  mate  on  one  of  the  P.  and  O.  Company's  ships  until 
January  1901,  when  his  services  were  again  lent  for  Polar  work, 
and  he  joined  our  expedition  as  navigator  and  second  in  com- 
mand. Armitage  was  an  excellent  practical  navigator,  and  of 
the  value  of  his  Polar  experience  I  shall  speak  later  on.  He 
was  thirty-seven  when  he  joined  us. 

Another  member  of  our  community  who  had  seen  Arctic 
service  was  our  senior  doctor,  Reginald  Koettlitz.  Koettlitz 
was  English  in  all  but  name,  as  his  father,  a  minister  of  the 
Reformed  Lutheran  Church,  had  married  an  English  lady  and 
settled  at  Dover  in  the  'sixties.  He  had  been  educated  at 
Dover  College,  and  thence  passed  to  Guy's  Hospital.  After 
qualifying  he  had  settled  down  in  the  quietest  of  country 
practices,  where  he  remained  for  nearly  eight  years,  and  might 
have  remained  to  the  present  time  but  for  a  sudden  impulse  to 
volunteer  his  services  as  doctor  to  the  Jackson-Harmsworth 
Expedition.  This  act  had  made  him  a  wanderer,  for  after  four 
years  in  the  Arctic  he  accompanied  expeditions  to  Abyssinia, 
Somaliland,  and  Brazil ;  and  finally,  with  experiences  gathered 
in  many  parts  of  the  globe,  he  applied  for  and  received  his 
appointment  as  medical  officer  to  the  Antarctic  Expedition. 
As  his  medical  duties  were  expected  to  be  light,  he  also  acted 
as  botanist  to  the  expedition.  As  far  as  the  land  flora 
was  concerned,  this  post  was  something  of  a  sinecure,  as  the 
Antarctic  lands  produce  only  some  poor  forms  of  mosses  and 
lichens,  but  Koettlitz  had  also  to  study  and  collect  the  various 
marine  forms  of  plant  life  which  are  known  to  science  under 
the  name  of  phyto-plankton. 

Our  biologist,  Thomas  V.  Hodgson,  was  a  native  of  Birming- 
ham. With  a  strong  desire  to  qualify  in  medicine  and  natural 
science,  he  had  been  obliged  to  spend  many  years  in  business. 
vol.  1.  e 


50        THE  VOYAGE   OF  THE   'DISCOVERY' 

His  career  shows  well  the  pertinacity  which  we  all  came  to 
recognise  in  his  character,  for  during  the  years  when  he  had 
been  tied  to  a  business  which  he  disliked,  he  had  devoted  his 
spare  hours  with  ceaseless  diligence  to  scientific  study.  At 
last  his  chance  had  come,  and  he  had  been  appointed  to  a 
small  post  in  the  Plymouth  Biological  Laboratory.  From  this 
time  until  he  joined  the  expedition  in  August  1900  his  life  had 
been  identified  with  Plymouth,  at  first  in  work  connected  with 
the  laboratory  and  with  a  science  lectureship,  and  later  as 
curator  of  the  Plymouth  Museum,  of  which,  in  one  sense,  he 
may  be  said  to  have  been  the  creator,  as  he  guided  its  first 
tottering  footsteps.  Hodgson's  task  was  to  collect  by  hook  or 
by  crook  all  the  strange  beasts  that  inhabit  our  Polar  seas,  and 
of  the  manner  in  which  he  went  about  it  these  pages  will  tell. 

Koettlitz  was  forty  years  of  age  when  he  joined  the 
expedition,  and  Hodgson  thirty-seven.  The  average  age  of 
the  remaining  members  of  our  wardroom  mess  was  little  over 
twenty-four  years,  so  that  it  may  be  said  they  had  most  of 
their  lives  before  them,  and  after  my  experience  of  their 
services  I  have  little  doubt  as  to  the  value  of  youth  for  Polar 
work. 

Charles  W.  R.  Royds  was  our  first  lieutenant,  and  had  all 
to  do  with  the  work  of  the  men  and  the  internal  economy  of 
the  ship  in  the  way  that  is  customary  with  the  first  lieutenant 
of  a  man-of-war.  He  had  passed  into  the  '  Britannia '  from 
the  'Conway'  in  1890,  and  so  joining  the  Naval  Service  had 
reached  the  rank  of  lieutenant  in  1898.  He  joined  us  from 
H.M.S.  'Crescent,'  then  serving  as  flagship  on  the  North 
America  station,  and  came  with  an  excellent  record  of  service 
for  so  young  an  officer.  Throughout  our  voyage  he  acted  as 
our  meteorologist,  and  secured  the  most  valuable  records  in 
this  important  branch  of  science  in  face  of  difficulties  which 
this  narrative  will  present. 

Our  second  naval  lieutenant  was  Michael  Barne,  who  had 
only  recently  been  promoted  to  that  rank.  He  had  been 
educated  at  Stubbington  School  in  preparation  for  the  Navy, 
and  had  joined  the  '  Britannia  'in  1891.     Later  he  had  served 


OFFICERS  OF  THE   EXPEDITION  51 

with  me  in  the  '  Majestic,'  and  I  had  thought  him,  as  he 
proved  to  be,  especially  fitted  for  a  voyage  where  there  were 
elements  of  danger  and  difficulty. 

The  original  idea  in  appointing  two  doctors  to  the  '  Dis- 
covery' was  that  one  should  be  available  for  a  detached 
landing  party;  but,  although  this  idea  was  practically  aban- 
doned, there  were  few  things  for  which  we  had  greater  cause  to 
be  thankful  than  that  it  had  originally  existed,  for  the  second 
doctor  appointed  to  the  expedition  was  Edward  A.  Wilson. 
Wilson  was  a  native  of  Cheltenham,  and  had  been  educated  at  the 
college  of  that  name  and  at  Caius  College,  Cambridge;  after 
taking  his  degree  he  had  qualified  in  medicine  at  St.  George's 
Hospital,  London,  but  on  leaving  the  hospital  ill  health  had 
obliged  him  to  spend  some  years  abroad.  His  health  was  not 
wholly  re-established  when  he  joined  the  '  Discovery,'  but  he 
was  evidently  on  the  mend,  and  his  fitness  for  the  post  in  other 
respects  was  obvious.  In  addition  to  his  medical  duties  he 
was  appointed  vertebrate  zoologist  and  artist ;  in  the  first 
capacity  he  dealt  scientifically  with  the  birds  and  seals,  and  in 
a  manner  which  his  appendix  to  this  work  indicates ;  in  the 
second  he  was  perhaps  still  more  active,  and  it  would  take  long 
even  to  number  all  the  pictures  and  sketches  he  has  produced 
of  the  wild  scenes  amongst  which  we  lived. 

I  was  still  serving  in  the  '  Majestic '  when  I  received  my 
appointment  to  the  expedition,  and  it  was  at  that  time  I  realised 
that  among  my  messmates  was  just  the  man  for  the  post  of 
chief  engineer  of  the  '  Discovery.'  This  was  Reginald  W. 
Skelton.  He  was  a  Norfolk  man,  and  had  joined  the  Navy  as 
an  engineer-student  in  1887  ;  subsequently  he  had  served  in 
various  ships  on  various  stations  until  at  last  he  had  been 
appointed  as  senior  engineer  of  the  '  Majestic,'  where  I  first  got 
to  know  him  well.  One  of  my  earliest  acts  on  behalf  of  the 
expedition  was  to  apply  for  his  services,  and  it  was  certainly  a 
very  fortunate  one  :  from  first  to  last  of  our  voyage  we  never 
had  serious  difficulty  with  our  machinery  or  with  anything 
concerning  it.  But  Skelton's  utility  extended  far  beyond  his 
primary  duties.     I  shall  have  reason  to  tell  of  the  many  ways 


52        THE  VOYAGE   OF  THE   'DISCOVERY' 

in  which  he  assisted  the  scientific  work  of  the  expedition, 
whilst,  thanks  to  his  ability  with  the  camera,  in  the  course  of 
his  work  as  photographer-in-chief  he  produced  the  most  excel- 
lent pictures  that  have  ever  been  obtained  by  a  Polar  expedition. 
Our  geologist,  Hartley  T.  Ferrar,  joined  us  only  shortly 
before  the  '  Discovery '  sailed.  Though  born  in  Ireland  he 
had  spent  the  early  years  of  his  life  in  South  Africa,  but  he 
had  returned  home  to  be  educated  at  Oundle  School  and  at 
Sidney  Sussex  College,  Cambridge.  Events  went  very  rapidly 
for  Ferrar  at  the  end  of  his  university  career;  in  June  1901  he 
took  honours  in  the  Natural  Science  Tripos,  in  July  he  was 
appointed  to  the  Antarctic  Expedition,  and  in  August  he  sailed 
for  the  Far  South.  He  had  very  little  time,  therefore,  to  pre- 
pare himself  for  his  important  work,  but  he  did  his  best  to 
make  up  this  deficiency  by  a  steady  application  to  his  books 
and  an  increased  activity  when  he  arrived  at  the  scene  of  his 
work.  As  will  be  seen  later,  the  result  of  Ferrar's  work  was  to 
throw  considerable  light  on  the  structure  of  a  vast  land  mass, 
no  inconsiderable  portion  of  the  surface  of  the  earth ;  it  was  a 
result,  therefore,  that  cannot  but  be  highly  important  to  geolo- 
gical science,  and  it  was  achieved  by  physical  labour  which 
might  not  have  been  within  the  powers  of  a  more  experienced 
geologist. 

Owing  to  the  medical  rejection  of  a  former  candidate  for 
the  post  our  physicist,  Louis  Bernacchi,  did  not  join  us  until 
we  reached  New  Zealand.  Bernacchi  had  been  born  and 
educated  in  Tasmania  ;  in  1895  he  had  joined  the  Melbourne 
Observatory  as  a  student,  and  had  there  gained  his  knowledge 
of  the  special  physical  work  which  he  has  since  steadily  pursued. 
In  July  1898  he  had  joined  Sir  George  Newnes's  Expedition 
to  Cape  Adare,  and  the  valuable  magnetic  observations  which 
he  then  made  showed  that  he  was  capable  of  undertaking  the 
more  extensive  programme  connected  with  this  science  pro- 
posed for  our  shore  station.  The  delicate  instruments  which 
he  manipulated,  and  the  difficulties  he  had  with  them,  will  be 
described  in  due  course. 

In  the  roll  of  the  '  Discovery  '  I  have  inscribed  the  names 


OFFICERS  OF  THE   EXPEDITION  53 

of  two  officers  who  did  not  serve  throughout  the  whole  term  of 
the  voyage ;  my  reason  will,  I  think,  be  clear. 

One  of  these,  Ernest  H.  Shackleton,  was  forced  to  leave  us 
by  ill  health  in  1903,  when  he  was  relieved  by  the  other, 
George  F.  A.  Mulock,  who  remained  with  us  until  the  end  of 
the  voyage.  Shackleton  was  born  in  Ireland  and  educated  at 
Dulwich  College ;  but  at  an  early  age  he  had  taken  to  the  sea, 
and  as  a  merchant-service  officer  had  drifted  about  to  various 
parts  of  the  world.  From  casual  and  irregular  voyages  he  had 
passed  to  the  more  settled  employment  of  the  Union-Castle 
Line,  and  had  already  begun  to  make  steady  progress  in  that 
service  when  he  was  appointed  to  the  '  Discovery.'  His 
experience  was  useful  to  us  in  many  ways,  and  as  he  was 
always  brimful  of  enthusiasm  and  good  fellowship,  it  was  to 
the  regret  of  all  that  he  left  us  in  1903. 

His  successor,  Mulock,  was  a  sub-lieutenant  in  the  Navy 
when  he  joined  us;  he  was  then  only  twenty-one  years  of  age, 
but  having  received  some  excellent  instruction  as  a  surveyor  in 
H.M.S.  'Triton,'  and  having  a  natural  bent  for  this  work,  his 
services  proved  invaluable.  Of  this,  however,  I  shall  speak  at 
a  later  date. 

From  what  I  have  said  of  the  individuals  of  our  wardroom 
mess,  the  reader  will  see  that,  taking  them  as  a  whole,  there 
were  two  rather  noticeable  features.  The  first  was  youth,  con- 
cerning the  advantages  of  which  for  a  Polar  expedition  I  could 
write  many  pages  j  the  second  was  diversity  of  experience :  no 
two  of  us  were  likely  to  look  at  a  matter  from  precisely  the 
same  standpoint.  This,  I  think,  was  also  an  advantage :  it 
gave  us  larger  interests,  and  generally  encouraged  that  attitude 
which  is  so  necessary  to  the  members  of  a  small  community — 
the  determination  to  live  and  let  live. 

Be  this  as  it  may,  we  certainly  had  reason  to  congratulate 
ourselves  on  the  selection  of  our  officers,  for  of  this  there 
could  be  no  clearer  proof  than  the  fact  that  we  lived  together 
in  complete  harmony  for  three  years. 

It  has  been  said  in  the  Navy  of  that  useful  class  of  in- 
dividuals the  warrant  officers  that  they  form  the  backbone  of  a 


54        THE  VOYAGE   OF  THE   <  DISCOVERY' 

ship's  company,  and  certainly  on  board  the  '  Discovery '  the 
warrant  officers  played  a  highly  important  part.  They  lived  in 
a  small  berth  occupying  one  corner  of  the  mess-deck,  and 
comprised  the  boatswain,  carpenter,  second  engineer,  and 
ship's  steward.  With  one  exception  I  had  known  nothing 
personally  of  these  men  before  they  joined  the  expedition,  but 
I  had  fully  realised  the  importance  of  their  duties  and  had 
taken  great  pains  to  select  them  from  amongst  other  men  who 
were  recommended  to  me  by  my  friends.  In  no  case  could  I 
have  made  a  happier  choice ;  it  would  be  impossible  to 
exaggerate  the  admirable  manner  in  which  they  all  did  their 
duties  throughout  the  voyage. 

Our  boatswain,  Thomas  Feather,  was  a  thorough  seaman, 
and  took  that  intense  pride  in  his  charge  which  was  so  well 
known  in  the  old  sailing  days.  A  sailor  will  understand  well 
the  merits  of  a  boatswain  who  can  make  the  proud  boast  that 
the  '  Discovery '  circumnavigated  the  world  without  losing  a 
rope  or  a  sail.  Our  boatswain,  like  the  rest  of  us,  under  new 
conditions  had  to  turn  his  talents  into  fresh  channels  ;  in  the 
Far  South  all  that  pertained  to  our  sledge  equipment  was 
placed  in  his  charge,  and  with  him  rested  the  responsibility 
that  everything  was  in  readiness  when  we  started  out  on  our 
sledge  journeys.  And  here,  as  before,  he  proved  his  excellence, 
for  I  do  not  remember  a  single  complaint  or  breakdown  that 
could  have  been  obviated  by  more  careful  preparation. 

In  his  own  department  our  carpenter,  F.  E.  Dailey,  worked 
with  the  same  zealous  care  as  the  boatswain.  He  possessed 
the  same  '  eye '  for  defects  and  the  same  determination  that 
his  charge  should  be  beyond  reproach. 

I  speak  feelingly  in  these  matters ;  anyone  who  has  been 
captain  of  a  ship  will  know  the  countless  things  that  continually 
get  out  of  order,  and  he  will  know,  on  the  one  hand,  how 
annoying  it  is  to  have  constantly  to  call  attention  to  them,  and, 
on  the  other,  how  pleasant  it  is  to  feel  that  close  supervision  is 
not  necessary.  I  speak  feelingly,  therefore,  because  I  was 
saved  all  these  minor  worries.  I  knew  that  whatever  was 
'  adrift '  with  the  rigging,  the  hull,  or  the  machinery  of  the 


PETTY   OFFICERS   AND    MEN  55 

'  Discovery,'  it  would  be  put  right  in  the  shortest  possible 
space  of  time  by  the  warrant  officer  in  whose  department 
it  lay. 

J.  H.  Dellbridge  was  our  chief  engineer's  right-hand  man. 
As  the  responsibilities  of  the  carpenter  and  boatswain  lay  with 
the  hull  and  rigging,  so  his  lay  in  the  engine-room  j  his  duties 
implied  that  the  engines  must  never  be  found  wanting,  and  in 
what  manner  they  were  carried  out  this  narrative  will  show. 

A  ship's  steward  is  a  specially  important  individual  in  an 
exploring  vessel ;  he  has  to  keep  the  most  exact  account  of  the 
stores  that  are  expended,  and  of  those  that  remain ;  he  has  to 
see  that  provisions  are  properly  examined  and  properly  served 
out,  and  that  everything  is  stowed  below  in  such  a  manner  that 
it  is  forthcoming  when  required.  I  had  difficulty  in  filling  this 
post,  to  which  I  have  referred,  but  eventually  I  decided  to  give 
it  to  C.  R.  Ford,  who,  although  a  very  young  man  without 
experience,  showed  himself  to  be  well  fitted  for  it  in  other 
respects.  He  soon  mastered  every  detail  of  our  stores,  and 
kept  his  books  with  such  accuracy  that  I  could  rely  implicitly 
on  his  statements.  This  also  was  no  small  relief  where  it  was 
impossible  to  hold  a  survey  of  the  stores  which  remained  on 
board. 

And  now  I  pass  on  to  that  long  list  of  petty  officers  and 
men  which  completes  the  roll  of  honour  of  the  '  Discovery.'  I 
would  that  space  permitted  me  to  give  to  each  that  notice 
which  his  services  deserved.  There  is  not  one  name  on  the 
list  that  does  not  recall  to  me  a  pleasant  memory  or  does  not 
add  to  the  splendid  record  of  loyalty  and  devotion  with  which 
I  was  served.  But  gladly  as  I  would  stay  my  pen  to  discuss 
individual  merits,  I  have  to  remember  that  to  tell  of  the  things 
we  did  and  the  things  we  saw  are  the  main  objects  of  this 
book,  and  reluctantly  I  leave  the  personalities  of  my  sailor 
friends  to  emerge  in  a  more  casual  manner  from  its  pages. 

Yet  I  cannot  pass  on  without  some  acknowledgment  of 
their  collective  efficiency  and  some  explanation  of  the  manner 
in  which  such  a  fine  body  of  men  was  brought  together.  It 
will   be    remembered  that   I  was   serving    in    the  Channel 


56        THE  VOYAGE   OF   THE   'DISCOVERY 

Squadron  before  joining  the  expedition ;  consequently,  when 
the  Admiralty  gave  permission  for  naval  men  to  serve  in  the 
1  Discovery,'  I  had  friends  in  each  ship  of  this  fleet  to  whom  I 
could  write  asking  them  to  select  one  or  two  men  from  those 
who  volunteered  for  the  service.  It  was  a  simple  plan,  and 
relieved  me  of  the  difficulty  of  picking  out  names  from  the  very 
long  list  which  would  have  resulted  had  volunteers  been 
generally  called  for.  I  knew  well  that  amongst  British  blue- 
jackets there  would  be  no  lack  of  good  men  to  volunteer  for  a 
voyage  that  promised  to  be  so  adventurous.  Our  men,  there- 
fore, came  to  us  singly  or  by  twos  and  threes  from  various 
ships ;  Evans,  Allan,  and  Quaitley  came  from  my  old  ship  the 
'  Majestic,'  Cross  and  Heald  from  the  '  Jupiter,'  Smythe  from 
the  '  St.  Vincent,'  and  so  on. 

All  brought  with  them  that  sense  of  naval  discipline  which 
they  displayed  so  noticeably  throughout  the  voyage.  It  must 
be  understood  that  the  '  Discovery,'  not  being  in  Government 
employment,  had  no  more  stringent  regulations  to  enforce 
discipline  than  those  which  are  contained  in  the  Merchant 
Shipping  Act,  and  however  adequate  these  may  be  for  com- 
mercial purposes,  they  fail  to  provide  that  guarantee  for  strict 
obedience  and  good  behaviour  which  I  believe  to  be  a  neces- 
sity for  such  exceptional  conditions  as  exist  in  Polar  service. 
Throughout  our  three  years'  voyage  in  the  'Discovery'  the 
routine  of  work,  the  relations  between  officers  and  men,  and 
the  general  ordering  of  matters  were,  as  far  as  circumstances 
would  permit,  precisely  such  as  are  customary  in  His  Majesty's 
ships.  We  lived  exactly  as  though  the  ship  and  all  on  board 
had  been  under  the  Naval  Discipline  Act ;  and  as  everyone 
must  have  been  aware  that  this  pleasing  state  of  affairs  was  a 
fiction,  the  men  deserve  as  much  credit  as  the  officers,  if  not 
more,  for  the  fact  that  it  continued  to  be  observed. 

Since  the  return  of  our  expedition  it  has  been  acknowledged 
that  our  labours  met  with  a  large  measure  of  success,  and  it 
has  been  recognised  that  each  officer  in  his  particular  depart- 
ment has  added  something  to  the  advancement  of  scientific 
knowledge  j  and  they,  as  well  as  I,  will  be  the  last  to  forget 


CONCERNING  OUR  MISSION  57 

how  much  they  owed  to  the  rank  and  file.  For  my  part  I  can 
but  say  that  success  in  such  an  expedition  as  ours  is  not  due  to 
a  single  individual,  or  to  a  few  individuals,  but  to  the  loyal 
co-operation  of  all  its  members,  and  therefore  I  must  ever 
hold  in  grateful  memory  that  small  company  of  petty  officers  and 
men  who  worked  so  cheerfully  and  loyally  for  the  general  good. 

I  have  now  endeavoured  to  give  the  reader  some  idea  of 
the  good  ship  '  Discovery,'  and  of  the  gallant  crew  which 
manned  her  ;  it  remains  to  give  a  clearer  account  of  the 
mission  on  which  she  was  despatched. 

It  was  Sir  Clements  Markham  who  first  suggested  that  for 
convenience  of  reference  the  Antarctic  area  should  be  divided 
into  four  quadrants,  to  be  named  respectively  the  Victoria,  the 
Ross,  the  Weddell,  and  the  Enderby.  Having  given  a  brief 
outline  of  the  history  of  Antarctic  research,  I  will  pause  here 
for  a  moment  to  point  out  the  prospects  which  each  of  these 
quadrants  offered  for  exploration. 

The  Victoria  quadrant  included  that  region  which  had 
been  investigated  by  Wilkes  and  D'Urville.  Whilst  it  offered 
an  interesting  problem  in  the  discovery  of  the  true  extension 
of  Adelie  Land,  the  prospect  of  getting  to  a  high  latitude  in  it 
did  not  seem  hopeful. 

Very  little  was  known  of  the  Enderby  quadrant,  but  much 
attention  had  been  called  to  it  by  the  scientific  voyage  of  the 
'  Challenger,' and  this,  with  certain  evidences  connected  with 
drifting  ice,  had  caused  some  people  to  believe  that  a  high 
latitude  might  be  reached  in  this  region.  This  opinion  was 
especially  held  in  Germany,  and  it  was  therefore  in  this  direc- 
tion that  the  '  Gauss '  was  steered. 

The  Weddell  quadrant  I  have  already  noticed  as  a  region 
of  exceptional  interest.  More  than  once  ships  had  attempted 
to  penetrate  to  the  open  sea  reported  by  Weddell,  but  they 
had  invariably  found  it  impossible  to  do  so.  But  these  vessels 
had  not  possessed  the  power  of  steam ;  with  a  steamer  there 
seemed  little  doubt  that  Weddell's  farthest  point  could  be 
reached,  and  an  explorer  might  determine  what  lay  in  the  clear 
sea  which  had  been  seen  beyond, 


58        THE  VOYAGE  OF  THE   'DISCOVERY' 

In  spite  of  the  undoubted  fascination  of  this  region,  how- 
ever, it  appeared  to  the  promoters  of  our  enterprise  that  in  the 
Ross  quadrant  lay  even  a  fairer  prospect  of  important  results. 
Though  this  was  the  region  of  which  most  was  known,  the 
discoveries  of  Ross,  like  those  of  all  great  explorers,  had  given 
rise  to  a  host  of  fresh  problems.  Here  it  was  certain  that  a 
high  latitude  could  be  reached,  and  that  the  work  of  the 
expedition  could  be  conducted  in  the  heart  of  the  Antarctic 
area.  Geography  saw  in  this  region  a  prospect  of  the  repro- 
duction of  those  sledging  journeys  which  had  done  so  much 
to  complete  the  mapping  of  the  Far  North ;  meteorology 
grasped  at  a  high  latitude  for  the  fixed  observation  of  climatic 
conditions  ;  magnetism  found  in  the  Ross  Sea  that  area  which 
most  nearly  approached  the  magnetic  pole ;  geology  was 
attracted  by  the  unknown  mountainous  country  which  fringed 
its  shores.  There  was  no  branch  of  science,  in  fact,  that 
did  not  see  in  the  Ross  quadrant  a  more  hopeful  chance  of 
success  than  was  promised  by  any  other  region.  When, 
therefore,  Sir  Clements  Markham  proposed  that  this  direc- 
tion should  be  taken  by  the  expedition,  the  proposition 
met  with  complete  and  unanimous  assent  from  all  who 
were  interested  in  the  venture,  and  long  before  the 
1  Discovery '  was  built  her  prospective  course  had  been  finally 
decided. 

It  might  be  thought  that  with  an  exploring  expedition  such 
as  ours,  little  more  was  necessary  than  to  indicate  the  direction 
in  which  it  should  go,  and  to  leave  the  uncertain  future  in  the 
hands  of  those  who  conducted  it.  There  is  much  in  this  view, 
and  there  is  no  doubt  as  to  the  wisdom  of  leaving  to  the 
commander  of  an  expedition  the  greatest  possible  freedom  of 
action,  so  that  at  no  time  may  his  decision  be  restricted  by 
orders  which  could  not  have  been  conceived  with  a  full 
knowledge  of  the  conditions. 

But  instructions  for  the  conduct  of  an  expedition  may 
serve  a  most  useful  purpose,  both  for  the  authorities  who  issue 
them  and  the  commander  who  receives  them,  if,  without 
hampering  conditions,  they  contain  a  clear  statement  of  the 


INSTRUCTIONS   ISSUED  59 

relative   importance   of    the   various    objects   for   which    the 
expedition  is  undertaken. 

I  need  not  recall  the  several  branches  of  science  which  it 
was  proposed  that  our  expedition  should  investigate,  but  I 
may  point  out  that  there  were  bound  to  be  innumerable 
instances  in  which  their  interests  clashed.  The  best-conducted 
expedition  cannot  serve  two  masters,  and  in  pursuance  of  one 
object  is  often  obliged  to  neglect  others.  Although  circum- 
stances will  generally  determine  the  object  which  can  be 
pursued  most  profitably  at  the  moment,  where  what  may  be 
described  as  so  many  vested  scientific  interests  are  concerned, 
it  is  obviously  of  advantage  to  the  commander  that  he  should 
know  in  what  light  these  interests  are  regarded  by  those 
responsible  for  the  expedition. 

The  value  of  instructions,  then,  is  to  place  before  the 
leader  a  general  review  of  the  situation,  a  statement  of  the 
order  in  which  the  objects  of  the  expedition  are  held,  and  as 
much  information  as  can  be  given  without  prejudice  as  to  the 
wishes  of  his  chiefs.  Of  such  a  nature  were  the  instructions 
I  received  before  sailing  for  the  South.  The  original  draft 
had  been  prepared  by  Sir  Clements  Markham  at  a  very  early 
date,  and,  as  I  have  already  mentioned,  it  came  subsequently 
under  the  consideration  of  the  Joint  Committee  of  thirty-two 
members. 

The  draft  contained  many  clauses  relating  to  matters  of 
opinion,  and  it  was  not  to  be  expected  that  so  large  a  Com- 
mittee, containing  representatives  of  so  many  interests,  should 
at  once  agree  as  to  their  relative  importance  or  as  to  the 
manner  in  which  the  expedition  should  be  conducted. 

In  consequence  of  this  there  was  much  discussion,  with 
delay  that  threatened  to  impede  the  progress  of  the  expedition ; 
but  at  this  point  the  Societies  wisely  decided  to  submit  the 
whole  question  to  a  body  of  smaller  dimensions,  and  a  Com- 
mittee of  four  was  appointed  to  decide  the  matter  finally. 

The  four  members  of  this  Committee  were  Lord  Lindley, 
Sir  George  Goldie,  Sir  Leopold  McClintock,  and  Mr.  A.  B. 
Kempe.     Thanks  to  the  practical  manner  in  which  it  dealt 


6o        THE   VOYAGE   OF  THE   'DISCOVERY' 

with  the  question,  and  perhaps  especially  to  the  great 
administrative  experiences  of  Sir  George  Goldie,  all  difficulties 
were  speedily  solved,  and  the  instructions  were  finally  drafted. 
There  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  expedition,  as  well  as  the 
Societies,  owes  much  to  this  Committee,  which,  after  piloting 
a  difficult  question  through  rough  waters,  furnished  instructions 
of  such  a  nature  as  I  have  previously  indicated.  In  quoting 
these  instructions  I  confine  myself  to  such  parts  as  relate  to 
the  conduct  of  the  expedition,  disregarding,  for  obvious 
reasons,  those  which  have  reference  to  the  conditions  of  our 
service.  I  also  omit  several  paragraphs  which,  owing  to  a 
subsequent  alteration  in  the  organisation  of  our  officers, 
became  non-effective. 

Extracts  from  the  Instructions  under  which  we  Sailed. 

.  .  .  The  objects  of  the  expedition  are  (a)  to  determine,  as  far 
as  possible,  the  nature,  condition,  and  extent  of  that  portion  of 
the  South  Polar  lands  which  is  included  in  the  scope  of  your 
expedition  ;  and  (&)  to  make  a  magnetic  survey  in  the  southern 
regions  to  the  south  of  the  40th  parallel,  and  to  carry  on  meteoro- 
logical, oceanographic,  geological,  biological,  and  physical  investi- 
gations and  researches.  Neither  of  these  objects  is  to  be  sacrificed 
to  the  other. 

.  .  .  We,  therefore,  impress  upon  you  that  the  greatest 
importance  is  attached  to  the  series  of  magnetic  observations  to 
be  taken  under  your  superintendence,  and  we  desire  that  you  will 
spare  no  pains  to  ensure  their  accuracy  and  continuity.  The  base 
station  for  your  magnetic  work  will  be  at  Melbourne  or  at  Christ- 
church,  New  Zealand.  A  secondary  base  station  is  to  be  estab- 
lished by  you,  if  possible,  in  Victoria  Land.  You  should  endeavour 
to  carry  the  magnetic  survey  from  the  Cape  to  your  primary  base 
station  south  of  the  40th  parallel,  and  from  the  same  station  across 
the  Pacific  to  the  meridian  of  Greenwich.  It  is  also  desired  that 
you  should  observe  along  the  tracks  of  Ross,  in  order  to  ascertain 
the  magnetic  changes  that  have  taken  place  in  the  interval  between 
the  two  voyages. 

...  It  is  desired  that  the  extent  of  land  should  be  ascertained 
by  following  the  coastlines  ;  that  the  depth  and  nature  of  the  ice- 


INSTRUCTIONS   ISSUED  61 

cap  should  be  investigated,  as  well  as  the  nature  of  the  volcanic 
region,  of  the  mountain  ranges,  and  especially  of  any  fossiliferous 
rocks. 

.  .  .  You  will  see  that  the  meteorological  observations  are 
regularly  taken  every  two  hours.  ...  It  is  very  desirable  that 
there  should,  if  possible,  be  a  series  of  meteorological  observations 
to  the  south  of  the  74th  parallel. 

As  regards  magnetic  work  and  meteorological  observations 
generally,  you  will  follow  the  programme  arranged  between  the 
German  and  British  Committees,  with  the  terms  of  which  you  are 
acquainted. 

Whenever  it  is  possible,  while  at  sea,  deep-sea  soundings 
should  be  taken  with  serial  temperatures,  and  samples  of  sea- water 
at  various  depths  are  to  be  obtained  for  physical  and  chemical 
analysis.  Dredging  operations  are  to  be  carried  on  as  frequently 
as  possible,  and  all  opportunities  are  to  be  taken  for  making 
biological  and  geological  collections. 

.  .  .  The  chief  points  of  geographical  interest  are  as  follows  : — 
To  explore  the  ice-barrier  of  Sir  James  Ross  to  its  eastern 
extremity ;  to  discover  the  land  which  was  believed  by  Ross  to 
flank  the  barrier  to  the  eastward,  or  to  ascertain  that  it  does  not 
exist,  and  generally  to  endeavour  to  solve  the  very  important 
physical  and  geographical  questions  connected  with  this  remark- 
able ice-formation. 

Owing  to  our  very  imperfect  knowledge  of  the  conditions  which 
prevail  in  the  Antarctic  seas,  we  cannot  pronounce  definitely 
whether  it  will  be  necessary  for  the  ship  to  make  her  way  out  of 
the  ice  before  the  winter  sets  in,  or  whether  she  should  winter  in 
the  Antarctic  Regions.  It  is  for  you  to  decide  on  this  important 
question  after  a  careful  examination  of  the  local  conditions. 

If  you  should  decide  to  winter  in  the  ice  .  .  .  your  efforts  as 
regards  geographical  exploration  should  be  directed  to  three 
objects,  namely — an  advance  into  the  western  mountains,  an 
advance  to  the  south,  and  an  exploration  of  the  volcanic  region. 

...  In  an  enterprise  of  this  nature  much  must  be  left  to  the 
discretion  and  judgment  of  the  commanding  officer,  and  we  fully 
confide  in  your  combined  energy  and  prudence  for  the  successful 
issue  of  a  voyage  which  will  command  the  attention  of  all  persons 
interested  in  navigation  and  science  throughout  the  civilised  world. 


62        THE  VOYAGE  OF  THE   'DISCOVERY' 

At  the  same  time  we  desire  you  constantly  to  bear  in  mind  our 
anxiety  for  the  health,  comfort,  and  safety  of  all  entrusted  to  your 
care. 

Such  were  the  principal  paragraphs  of  the  instructions  which 
were  signed  by  the  Presidents  of  the  Royal  and  Royal  Geo- 
graphical Societies  and  delivered  into  my  hands,  and  when 
my  tale  is  told  I  think  it  will  be  acknowledged  that  they  were 
closely  observed. 

That  part  of  my  story  which  concerns  the  preparation  of 
our  venture  is  almost  accomplished,  and  the  reader  will  now 
understand  how  and  why  in  July  1901  the  'Discovery'  lay  in 
the  East  India  Dock  equipped  for  her  long  voyage. 

Of  the  difficulties  which  threatened  to  avert  this  happy 
accomplishment,  space  has  only  permitted  me  to  give  the 
briefest  outline.  Dr.  Nansen  has  observed  that  the  hardest 
work  of  a  Polar  voyage  comes  in  its  preparation,  and  my 
remembrance  of  the  years  1 900-1  fully  corroborates  this 
dictum  ;  but  even  the  troubles  and  trials  of  this  anxious  time 
had  their  bright  side,  and  it  is  only  with  pleasure  that  I  can 
look  back  on  the  kindly  assistance  which  was  freely  given  to 
the  expedition,  and  to  one  who  like  myself  was  treading 
unaccustomed  paths  to  further  its  ends. 

Briefly  and  inadequately  I  have  already  mentioned  the 
services  of  many  eminent  men  who  bore  a  share  in  our  enter- 
prise, but  such  references  have  by  no  means  included  all  to 
whom  our  gratitude  is  due.  It  is  not  generally  understood 
that  in  undertaking  the  management  of  our  expedition  the  two 
great  Societies  concerned  assumed  an  unprecedented  responsi- 
bility. A  great  Government  department  like  the  Admiralty 
would  have  had  little  difficulty  in  preparing  a  dozen  such 
ventures,  because  it  has  all  the  machinery  necessary  for  dealing 
with  these  matters ;  but  a  learned  Society  possesses  no  such 
facilities,  because  as  a  rule  it  has  no  need  of  them.  Neither 
the  Royal  nor  the  Royal  Geographical  Society  was  organised 
for  the  equipment  of  expeditions,  and  consequently  for  them 
such  a  task  was  beset  with  difficulties.  That  all  obstacles 
were  successfully  overcome  is  to  the  lasting  credit  of  these 


THOSE  WHO  ASSISTED   THE   EXPEDITION   63 

bodies,  but  especially  is  it  to  the  honour  of  those  who  bore  the 
chief  responsibility  as  officers  of  the  Societies.  I  think  there 
is  little  doubt  that  these  gentlemen  would  acknowledge  that 
during  the  troublous  youth  of  the  Antarctic  Expedition  they 
were  more  worried  over  its  details  than  by  all  the  other 
business  of  the  Societies  which  they  guided. 

Of  those  who  were  thus  forced  to  give  much  attention  to 
the  affairs  of  the  expedition,  and  who  did  so  for  its  benefit, 
were  the  successive  Presidents  of  the  Royal  Society,  Lord 
Lister  and  Sir  William  Huggins ;  the  Honorary  Secretaries, 
Sir  Arthur  Riicker  and  Sir  Michael  Foster ;  and  the  Permanent 
Secretary,  Mr.  Harrison.  In  speaking  of  my  own  experiences, 
I  have  ever  to  remember  the  courteous  and  kindly  treatment  I 
received  from  these  gentlemen.  There  were  many  reasons 
why  my  lot  was  still  more  closely  cast  with  the  Geographical 
Society  at  this  time,  and  here,  also,  I  can  speak  in  the  warmest 
manner  of  the  treatment  I  received.  Its  Secretary,  Dr.  Scott 
Keltie,  has  always  taken  the  keenest  interest  in  the  expedition, 
and  the  services  he  has  rendered  to  it  and  to  me  might  alone 
occupy  a  chapter  of  this  book.  To  the  Honorary  Secretaries  of  • 
this  Society  also,  Major  L.  Darwin  and  Mr.  J.  F.  Hughes,  my 
thanks  are  due  for  their  continual  efforts  to  make  my  path  smooth; 
and  of  the  important  services  of  Dr.  H.  R.  Mill,  who  was  at  this 
time  Librarian  of  the  Society,  I  shall  speak  at  a  later  date. 

Though  on  the  officers  of  the  Societies  fell  the  greatest 
share  of  the  difficulties  which  beset  the  expedition,  there  were 
several  other  gentlemen  who  in  the  midst  of  busy  lives  spared 
many  an  hour  for  its  service. 

As  Hydrographer  of  the  Navy,  Sir  William  Wharton  under- 
took the  supply  of  the  greater  part  of  the  instruments  which  we 
carried,  and  in  this,  as  in  many  other  ways,  he  showed  his  deep 
sympathy  with  the  objects  of  the  expedition. 

On  Captain  E.  W.  Creak,  at  that  time  Director  of  Com- 
passes at  the  Admiralty,  fell  all  the  difficulties  of  arranging  our 
long  and  complicated  magnetic  programme,  and  of  drawing  up 
such  instructions  concerning  it  as  were  necessary  for  our 
guidance. 


64        THE  VOYAGE  OE   THE   «  DISCOVERY ' 

Amongst  those  who  gave  their  services  freely  on  various 
committees,  in  arranging  the  details  of  departmental  work,  and 
in  adding  to  the  interest  of  that  excellent  publication  the 
'  Antarctic  Manual,'  may  be  mentioned  Mr.  R.  H.  Scott,  Mr. 
Howard  Saunders,  Mr.  J.  Y.  Buchanan,  Dr.  W.  T.  Blanford, 
Mr.  P.  L.  Sclater,  Captain  T.  H.  Tizard,  Sir  Archibald  Geikie, 
Mr.  J.  Teall,  Professor  E.  B.  Poulton,  Sir  John  Evans,  and 
Dr.  A.  Buchan.  Not  less  valuable  to  me,  starting  as  I  did 
with  no  experience  of  Polar  work,  was  the  kindly  advice  and 
assistance  I  received  from  those  officers  who  had  taken  part  in 
Arctic  Expeditions ;  and  for  my  guidance  in  numerous  respects 
I  have  to  thank  many  a  conversation  with  such  eminent  travellers 
as  Sir  Vesey  Hamilton,  Sir  George  Nares,  Sir  Albert  Markham, 
Sir  Leopold  McClintock,  Admiral  Aldrich,  Admiral  Chase 
Parr,  and  perhaps  most  of  all  with  my  old  Captain,  now 
Admiral  G.  Le  C.  Egerton. 

As  will  be  seen,  there  were  many  who  had  a  share  in  the 
building  of  our  Antarctic  Expedition ;  but  even  with  all  this 
kindly  assistance  it  is  doubtful  whether  it  would  ever  have 
started  had  it  not  been  that  amongst  the  many  who  gave  to  it 
some  hours  from  their  busy  lives  was  one  who,  from  the  first, 
had  given  his  whole  and  undivided  attention. 

After  all  is  said  and  done,  it  was  Sir  Clements  Markham 
who  conceived  the  idea  of  an  Antarctic  Expedition ;  it  was  his 
masterful  personality  which  forced  it  onward  through  all 
obstruction;  and  to  him,  therefore,  is  mainly  due  the  credit 
that  at  the  end  of  July  1901  we  were  prepared  to  set  out  on 
our  long  voyage  and  eager  to  obey  the  behest  : 

Do  ye,  by  star-eyed  Science  led,  explore 
Each  lonely  ocean,  each  untrodden  shore. 


65 


CHAPTER   III 

VOYAGE   TO   NEW   ZEALAND 

Arrival  at  Cowes — Visit  of  the  King — Sailing  from  Cowes— Madeira — 
Crossing  the  Line  — South  Trinidad — Arrival  at  the  Cape— Simon's 
Bay — At  Sea  in  the  Westerlies — Alarm  of  Fire — First  Encounter 
with  the  Ice — Southern  Birds — Macquarie  Island — Lyttelton,  New 
Zealand — Preparations  for  Final  Departure — Departure  from  Lyttel- 
ton— Fatal  Accident — Final  Departure  from  Civilisation. 

They  saw  the  cables  loosened,  they  saw  the  gangways  cleared, 
They  heard  the  women  weeping,  they  heard  the  men  who  cheered. 
Far  off — far  off  the  tumult  faded  and  died  away, 
And  all  alone  the  sea  wind  came  singing  up  the  Bay. — Newbolt. 

In  spite  of  difficulties  and  delays  in  the  delivery  of  the  ship 
and  in  stocking  her  with  the  complicated  equipment  which 
had  been  provided,  the  '  Discovery '  left  the  London  Docks  on 
the  last  day  of  July  1901,  and  slowly  wended  her  way  down 
the  Thames. 

Late  on  August  1  we  arrived  at  Spithead,  here  to  carry  out 
that  most  important  matter  of  swinging  the  ship.  It  may  not 
be  generally  known  that  all  ships,  before  proceeding  on  a 
voyage,  are  '  swung ' — that  is,  are  turned  slowly  round,  whilst 
the  errors  of  their  compasses  on  each  point  are  eliminated  by 
the  application  of  correcting  magnets.  Although  the  great 
care  taken  in  building  the  '  Discovery '  to  keep  all  iron  away 
from  the  neighbourhood  of  the  compass  rendered  the  use  of 
correcting  magnets  unnecessary,  yet  it  had  been  impossible  to 
banish  the  disturbing  causes  wholly,  and  it  was  most  necessary 
to  find  out  exactly  what  influence  they  had,  not  only  on  the 
vol.  1,  f 


66         THE   VOYAGE   OF    THE    'DISCOVERY'    [Aug. 

compass,  but  on  the  position  in  which  it  was  proposed  to  work 
the  rarer  magnetic  instruments — that  is  to  say,  in  the  small 
central  magnetic  deck-house.  This  work  was  completed  during 
the  week,  and  on  Monday  morning,  August  5,  we  made  fast  to 
a  buoy  in  Cowes  Harbour,  at  this  time  crowded  with  yachts 
assembled  for  the  famous  '  Cowes  week.'  In  the  midst  of 
vessels  displaying  such  delicate  beauty  of  outline,  the  '  Dis- 
covery,' with  her  black,  solid,  sombre  hull,  her  short  masts, 
square  spars,  and  heavy  rigging,  formed  a  striking  antithesis,  a 
fit  example  to  point  the  contrast  of  'work '  and  'play.'  Shortly 
before  noon  we  were  honoured  by  a  visit  from  their  Majesties 
the  King  and  Queen.  The- visit  was  quite  informal,  but  must 
be  ever  memorable  from  the  kindly,  gracious  interest  shown  in 
the  minutest  details  of  our  equipment,  and  the  frank  expres- 
sion of  good  wishes  for  our  plans  and  welfare. 

In  those  days  we  thought  much  of  the  grim  possibilities  of 
our  voyage.  There  was  ever  present  before  us  the  unpleasant 
reflection  that  we  might  start  off  with  a  flourish  of  trumpets 
and  return  with  failure.  But  although  we  longed  to  get  away 
from  our  country  as  quietly  as  possible,  we  could  not  but  feel 
gratified  that  His  Majesty  should  have  shown  such  personal 
sympathy  with  our  enterprise,  and  it  was  a  deep  satisfaction  to 
know  that  our  efforts  would  be  followed  with  interest  by  the 
highest  in  the  land,  as  well  as  by  others  of  our  countrymen 
more  particularly  occupied  with  the  problems  before  us. 

On  the  afternoon  of  the  5th  the  ship  was  crowded  with 
visitors,  whilst  we  did  our  best  to  make  the  final  preparations 
for  sea.  At  noon  on  the  6th  we  slipped  from  our  buoy  and, 
after  receiving  a  visit  from  the  First  Lord  of  the  Admiralty, 
steered  to  the  west  ;  a  few  of  our  immediate  relatives  who 
had  remained  on  board  hastened  to  say  their  last  farewells, 
and,  descending  into  their  boats  off  the  little  town  of  Yar- 
mouth, waved  their  adieux  as  the  'Discovery'  steamed  towards 
the  Needles  Channel. 

How  willingly  would  one  dispense  with  these  farewells, 
and  how  truly  one  feels  that  the  greater  burden  of  sadness  is 
on  those  who  are  left  behind  !     Before  us  lay  new  scenes,  new 


igoi]  DEPARTURE   FROM   ENGLAND  67 

interests,  expanding  horizons  ;  but  who  at  such  times  must  not 
think  sorely  of  the  wives  and  mothers  condemned  to  think  of 
the  past,  and  hope  in  silent  patience  for  the  future,  through 
years  of  suspense  and  anxiety  ? 

Early  on  the  7th  the  Start  was  still  in  sight,  but  gradually 
it  shaded  from  green  to  blue,  till  towards  noon  it  vanished  in 
the  distance,  and  with  it  our  last  view  of  the  Old  Country. 

At  this  time  we  had  much  to  learn  about  the  '  Discovery.' 
Great  as  may  be  the  advantage  of  having  a  new  ship,  it  can 
be  readily  understood  that  there  are  also  serious  drawbacks. 
In  addition  to  our  want  of  familiarity  with  the  details  of  such 
a  vessel,  her  construction,  her  engines,  and  so  forth,  we  were 
ignorant  of  her  capacity  of  performance  under  steam  or  sail, 
and  we  could  not  predict  with  any  degree  of  certainty  the 
length  of  time  which  would  be  necessary  for  our  long  voyage 
to  New  Zealand. 

As  we  steered  our  course  across  the  Bay  of  Biscay  with 
varying  baffling  winds,  it  soon  became  evident  that  the  '  Dis- 
covery '  did  not  possess  a  turn  of  speed  under  any  conditions ; 
that  with  favourable  winds  we  could  hope  for  little  more  than 
seven  or  eight  knots,  whereas  a  very  moderate  head-wind  might 
reduce  her  to  a  fraction  of  this  speed. 

Under  these  conditions  our  voyage  to  New  Zealand  pro- 
mised to  occupy  a  very  long  time,  and  it  became  obvious  that 
we  could  not  stop  by  the  way  longer  than  was  absolutely 
necessary,  since  delay  in  the  date  of  our  arrival  was  limited 
by  the  desire  to  take  full  advantage  of  the  Southern  summer 
of  1901-2  for  our  first  exploration  in  the  ice. 

This  proved  a  most  serious  drawback,  as  I  had  confidently 
looked  for  ample  opportunities  to  make  trial  of  our  various 
devices  for  sounding  and  dredging  in  the  deep  sea  whilst  we 
remained  in  temperate  climates.  Some  of  these  devices  were 
new,  and  with  all  we  were  unfamiliar ;  and  the  fact  that  we 
were  unable  to  practise  with  them  during  our  outward  voyage 
was  severely  felt  when  they  came  to  be  used  afterwards  in 
the  Antarctic  Regions. 

On  August  14  we  sighted  the  island  of  Madeira,  and  late 


68        THE    VOYAGE   OF  THE   'DISCOVERY'    [Aug. 

that  night  anchored  off  Funchal.  The  directors  of  the 
Union-Castle  Line  had  generously  placed  a  small  quantity 
of  coal  at  our  disposal  at  this  port,  and  we  hoped  to  take  it 
in  and  to  complete  some  small  repairs  on  the  following  day ; 
but,  as  luck  would  have  it,  this  proved  a  '  Fiesta  '  (feast  day), 
and  we  were  unable  to  get  to  sea  until  the  afternoon  of  the 
1 6th,  though  our  courteous  agents,  Messrs.  Blandy,  did  their 
best  to  hasten  the  work.  On  sailing  from  Madeira  we 
reluctantly  bade  farewell  to  Dr.  H.  R.  Mill,  who,  as  an  expert 
in  oceanography  and  meteorology,  had  accompanied  us  on 
the  first  stage  of  our  journey  to  assist  us  in  arranging  the 
various  branches  of  work  in  these  departments. 

By  this  time,  however,  the  routine  of  our  scientific  ob- 
servations had  taken  form,  and  departments  had  been  allotted 
to  various  officers  who  continued  to  be  responsible  for  them 
throughout  the  voyage ;  and  now  was  commenced  that  steady, 
patient  record  of  observation  on  which  so  much  of  the  success 
of  an  expedition  must  depend. 

The  analysis  of  the  records  of  many  thousands  of  ocean 
voyages  in  all  parts  of  the  world  has  resulted  in  the  issue  of 
sailing  directions  which  give  the  best  advice  as  to  the  course 
to  be  taken  by  various  classes  of  vessels.  As  a  rule  full- 
powered  steamers  alone  can  proceed  directly  from  port  to 
port;  small-powered  steamers  and,  still  more,  sailing  ships  are 
obliged  to  shape  a  devious  course  in  order  to  take  advantage 
of  favourable  winds  and  currents.  The  progress  of  the 
'  Discovery '  was  so  wholly  dependent  on  wind  and  weather 
that  in  making  ocean  passages  she  was  obliged  to  be  con- 
sidered in  this  respect  as  a  sailing  ship,  and  to  make  long 
detours  which  involved  the  traversing  of  many  hundreds  of 
miles  more  than  would  be  required  on  the  direct  track. 

With  the  help  of  the  N.E.  trade  wind  we  made  steady 
progress  to  the  south  during  the  third  week  in  August,  but 
losing  the  trade  in  17  N.  lat,  our  daily  run  was  so  reduced  by 
baffling  winds  that  we  did  not  cross  the  line  till  August  31. 

The  traditional  customs  of  this  event  were  fully  observed. 
Father  Neptune  and  his  Tritons  held  their  court  on  a  platform 


igoi]  CROSSING  THE   LINE  69 

immediately  above  a  large  canvas  bath,  and  the  numerous 
members  of  our  company  who  had  not  yet  been  introduced  to 
His  Majesty  succeeded  one  another  in  this  rather  trying 
ordeal.  The  victim  was  blindfolded,  and  seated  on  the  bare 
edge  of  a  plank  over  the  bath;  in  front  of  him  stood  the 
barber,  with  a  huge  jagged  pantomime  razor,  and  the  barber's 
assistant,  with  a  whitewash  brush  and  a  bucket  of  soft  soap ; 
the  unfortunate  tyro  was  then  asked  questions,  and  the  barber's 
assistant  showed  his  deftness  with  the  lather  when  he  opened 
his  mouth  to  reply ;  after  a  good  deal  of  such  rude  horseplay, 
usually  prolonged  in  proportion  to  the  victim's  reluctance  as 
shown  by  his  struggles  to  escape,  a  last  push  sent  him 
floundering  into  the  bath  below. 

Immediately  on  crossing  the  line  we  fell  in  with  the  S.E. 
trade  wind,  and  stopped  our  engines  to  give  them  a  much- 
needed  refit.  Remaining  under  sail  during  the  ensuing  nine 
days,  we  had  some  opportunity  of  gauging  the  sailing 
qualities  of  the  ship,  and  found  to  our  chagrin  that  they  were 
exceedingly  poor.  Although  we  made  some  progress  through 
the  water,  the  course  laid  and  the  leeway  made  carried  us  far 
to  the  westward,  and  comparatively  close  to  the  South  American 
coast.  On  September  9  we  raised  steam  and  shaped  our  course 
for  South  Trinidad  Island.  Since  our  departure  from  Madeira 
we  had  suffered  some  trouble  from  the  leaking  of  the  '  Dis- 
covery.' Much  of  it  sprang  from  the  hopeful  prediction  of  the 
builders  that  there  would  be  no  leak,  and  in  consequence  of 
this  no  flooring  had  been  placed  in  the  holds  to  lift  the  pro- 
visions above  any  water  which  might  collect,  and  the  provision 
cases  had  been  packed  close  down  to  the  keel.  When  the 
water  began  to  enter,  therefore,  there  was  no  well  in  which  it 
could  lie,  and  it  rose  amongst  the  cases,  causing  a  good  deal  of 
damage.  In  the  old  days  it  had  always  been  expected  that  a 
wooden  ship  would  leak,  and  the  more  pleasing  hope  with 
regard  to  the  '  Discovery '  was  based  on  the  fact  that  she 
possessed  two  layers  of  planking  on  the  outside  of  her  frames 
and  one  on  the  inside.     In  this  respect,  however,  the  fact 


7o        THE   VOYAGE   OF   THE    'DISCOVERY'  [Sept. 

proved  rather  a  disadvantage  than  otherwise,  as  it  made  it  most 
difficult  to  localise  the  spot  at  which  the  water  was  entering, 
and  there  was  every  chance  that  it  passed  through  the  inner 
skin  at  quite  a  different  place  from  that  at  which  it  had  pene- 
trated the  outer.  As  soon  as  we  were  assured  of  calm  seas 
the  holds  were  unstowed  and  a  flooring  built,  but  this  was  not 
effected  before  we  had  suffered  considerable  damage  to  our 
provisions,  which  we  were  afterwards  put  to  some  expense  in 
replacing. 

Later  on  we  had  the  annoyance  of  seeing  the  report  of  our 
leak  exaggerated  and  represented  as  a  danger  to  the  ship. 
This  it  never  was,  but  of  course  the  water  that  entered  had  to 
be  pumped  out ;  and  if  the  whole  voyage  is  considered,  the 
sum  total  of  hours  spent  in  pumping  out  the  '  Discovery '  is  a 
large  one. 

The  island  of  South  Trinidad  is  an  isolated  mass  of 
volcanic  rock  lying  some  500  miles  to  the  east  of  the  continent 
of  South  America.  It  has  been  frequently  visited,  though  not 
regularly,  and  a  fascinating  description  is  given  of  it  in  '  The 
Cruise  of  the  "Falcon"'  (E.  F.  Knight).  Few  naturalists 
have  landed  on  it,  and  as  it  lay  on  our  route  I  thought  our 
time  would  not  be  wasted  in  giving  our  officers  an  opportunity 
of  a  run  ashore.  We  sighted  it  on  the  morning  of  the  13th, 
and,  approaching  the  western  side,  manned  our  boats  and 
pulled  for  the  shore.  The  ocean  swell  was  breaking  heavily 
along  the  whole  coast,  and  the  prospect  of  landing  looked 
doubtful,  but  at  length  we  found  a  small  natural  pier  which 
seemed  to  afford  some  shelter  from  the  heavy  rollers ;  even 
here,  however,  our  small  boats  were  at  one  moment  lifted  high 
above  the  rocks,  and  at  the  next  had  dropped  many  feet  below 
them.  The  attempt  to  land  seemed  hazardous,  and  on  inquir- 
ing if  all  on  board  could  swim,  I  found  that  one  at  least  could 
not ;  but  the  shore  looked  too  enticing  to  our  sea-accustomed 
eyes  to  be  abandoned  without  an  effort,  and,  handling  the  boats 
with  care,  we  eventually  succeeded  in  taking  advantage  of  the 
lift  of  each  wave  to  leap  one  by  one  on  to  the  rocks,  and  at 
length  all  except  the  boat-keepers  were  safely  landed. 


igoi]  TOWARDS  THE   CAPE  71 

On  the  rocky  shore  we  scattered  in  various  directions,  some 
of  us  climbing  to  a  line  of  tree-ferns  1,200  feet  above  the  sea  j 
and  the  day  passed  pleasantly  as  we  rambled  about  in  search 
of  specimens  of  life  peculiar  to  the  island.  Little  of  novelty 
could  be  expected  from  a  stay  of  six  hours,  but  we  had  the 
satisfaction  of  finding  a  few  species  new  to  science,  of  which 
perhaps  the  most  important  was  a  new  petrel,  afterwards 
named  '  /Estrelata  WilsonV  after  our  zoologist,  Dr.  Wilson. 
We  left  South  Trinidad  the  same  night  and  steered  to  the 
south  to  get  into  the  region  of  westerly  winds.  On  the  18th 
our  coal  supply  was  getting  so  short  that  I  decided  to  proceed 
under  sail  and  husband  what  remained  of  our  limited  stock. 
The  wind  proved  very  fitful,  but  by  keeping  well  to  the  south 
we  received  it  from  the  westward,  and  made  slow  but  sure 
progress  towards  our  destination. 

On  October  2  we  arrived  within  150  miles  of  the  Cape,  and, 
getting  up  steam,  rounded  Green  Point  and  entered  Table  Bay 
at  four  o'clock  on  the  3rd.  On  the  4th  we  refilled  our  bunkers 
with  coal,  and  that  night  put  to  sea  once  more,  to  take  up  our 
quarters  off  the  naval  station  at  Simon's  Bay.  It  was  during 
this  short  passage  that  we  first  appreciated  the  '  Discovery's ' 
ability  to  roll :  on  meeting  a  heavy  swell  off  the  Cape  Penin- 
sula during  the  night,  our  small  ship,  without  any  sail  to  steady 
her,  was  swung  from  side  to  side  through  an  angle  of  900,  and 
as  some  of  our  furniture  was  not  well  secured,  chaos  reigned 
below  and  discomfort  everywhere. 

The  main  object  of  our  stay  at  the  Cape  was  to  obtain 
comparisons  with  our  magnetic  instruments.  The  instruments 
which  are  used  in  a  ship  for  taking  observations  of  the  various 
magnetic  elements  are  unfortunately  subject  to  change,  and 
consequently  the  observations  at  sea  are  of  little  value  unless 
such  changes  are  known.  Whenever  it  is  possible,  therefore, 
the  sea  instruments  are  compared  with  absolute  values  on  land, 
and  by  this  means  the  sea  observations  are  corrected.  The 
observations  to  be  taken  on  our  voyage  to  New  Zealand  were 
an  important  part  of  our  magnetic  survey,  and  it  was  highly 
desirable  that  the  errors  of  the  instruments  to  be  used  should 


72        THE  VOYAGE   OF  THE    'DISCOVERY'    [Oct. 

be  obtained  before  and  after  the  voyage — that  is,  at  the  Cape 
and  in  New  Zealand. 

To  compare  all  our  instruments  with  suitable  care  was  a 
long  and  tedious  operation.     There  being  no  fixed  magnetic 
observatory  at  the  Cape,  the  work  was  done  in  tents,  kindly 
lent  by  the  Admiral  and  pitched  on  a  plateau  beyond  the  hills 
immediately   surrounding   the   port.     It  was  carried   out    by 
Lieutenants  Armitage  and  Barne,  with  the  kind  assistance  of 
Professors  Beatty  and  Morrison,  of  the  Cape  University ;  and 
as  it  could  only  be  continued  during  the  daylight  hours,  ten 
days  passed  before  all  the  observations  were  completed.     On 
board  the  ship  every  advantage  was  taken  of  this  spell  to  refit. 
The  rigging  was  set  up  afresh,  the  deck  and  top  sides  of  the 
ship  were  re-caulked,  the  engines  were  overhauled,  and  the 
weed  was  removed  from  the  bottom  by  the  divers  of  the  fleet. 
At  this  time  the  war  was  proceeding,  and  things  were  in  an 
unsatisfactory  state  ;  guerilla  bands  had  penetrated  so  far  into 
the  Colony  that  martial  law  had  been  proclaimed  at  Capetown ; 
the  termination  of  hostilities  seemed  very  remote  ;  officials  and 
residents  took  a  gloomy  view  of  the  outlook.     Under  these 
circumstances  it  is   additionally  pleasing  to  record  the  great 
kindness  which  we  received  at  all  hands,  the  ready  assistance 
which  was  offered  us,  both  in  our  scientific  work  and  in  the 
more  practical  requirements  of  the  ship,  and  the  kindly  hos- 
pitality which  made  our  visit  so  pleasant.     Our  peaceful  mis- 
sion was  regarded  with  sympathy  and  interest  by  all,  and  we 
remember  with  gratitude  the  entertainment  provided  for  us  by 
His  Excellency  the  Governor,  Sir  Walter  Hely-Hutchinson,  by 
Sir  David  Gill  and  the  members  of  the  Philosophical  Society, 
and  by  Mr.  Andrews,  of  the  Union-Castle  Line.     But  above 
all  we  owed  thanks  to  the  Naval  Commander-in-Chief,  Sir 
Arthur  Moore,  who  placed  at  our  disposal  the  resources  of  the 
naval  dockyard  for  our  repairs,  and  most  generously  extended 
to  our  officers  the  hospitality  of  Admiralty  House.     It  is  diffi- 
cult to  express  how  much  we  owed  to  these  attentions,  which 
smoothed  our  difficulties  and  obviated  all  chance  of  unnecessary 
delay. 


igoi]  AT  SEA  IN  THE  WESTERLIES  73 

By  October  14  our  refitting  and  the  magnetic  observations 
had  been  completed,  and  all  preparations  had  been  made  for 
sea.  In  the  morning  Mr.  George  Murray  bade  us  farewell, 
much  to  our  regret ;  he  had  originally  been  appointed  to 
accompany  the  ship  to  Melbourne,  but  owing  to  the  unex- 
pected delays  of  our  voyage,  I  had  perforce  decided  to  go 
direct  to  New  Zealand  without  calling  at  that  port.  The 
additional  length  of  the  voyage,  and  the  delay  already  ex- 
perienced, would  have  prolonged  his  absence  from  his  regular 
work  at  the  British  Museum  to  such  an  extent  that  Mr. 
Murray  thought  it  best  to  return  direct  from  the  Cape.  After  a 
last  farewell  to  all  our  naval  friends,  at  noon  we  slowly  steamed 
out  of  the  harbour,  accompanied  by  the  cheers  of  the  war- 
ships, and  proud  of  this  last  tribute  of  their  generous  sympathy. 

For  nearly  a  week  after  our  departure  from  the  Cape  we 
had  light  westerly  winds — an  unusual  experience,  especially  as 
we  were  now  well  in  that  belt  known  to  sailors  as  the  '  Roaring 
Forties ' ;  but  after  the  first  week  we  had  little  to  complain  of 
on  the  score  of  wind,  and  our  daily  run  became  a  much  more 
satisfactory  thing  to  contemplate.  Towards  the  end  of  the 
month  we  had  a  succession  of  heavy  following  gales,  and 
although  we  had  put  out  our  fires  and  were  dependent  on  sail 
power  alone,  we  frequently  exceeded  200  miles  in  the  day,  an 
exceedingly  good  run  for  a  ship  of  the  '  Discovery's '  type. 

As  time  went  on  we  became  more  and  more  satisfied  with 
the  seaworthy  qualities  of  our  small  ship  ;  she  proved  wonder- 
fully stiff,  and  as  her  sail  area  was  small,  it  was  rarely,  if  ever, 
necessary  to  shorten  sail  even  in  the  most  violent  gales ;  she 
rose  like  a  cork  to  the  mountainous  seas  that  now  followed  in 
her  wake,  and,  considering  her  size,  was  wonderfully  free  of 
water  on  the  upper  deck. 

With  a  heavy  following  sea,  however,  she  was,  owing  to  her 
buoyancy,  extremely  lively,  and  we  frequently  recorded  rolls 
of  more  than  400.  The  peculiar  rounded  shape  of  the  stern, 
to  which  I  have  referred,  and  which  had  given  rise  to  so  much 
criticism,  was  now  well  tested.  It  gave  additional  buoyancy 
to  the  after-end,  causing  the  ship  to  rise  more  quickly  to  the 


74         THE   VOYAGE   OF   THE    'DISCOVERY'    [Oct. 

seas,  but  the  same  lifting  effect  was  also  directed  to  throwing 
the  ship  off  her  course,  and  consequently  she  was  more 
difficult  to  steer.  Our  helmsmen  gradually  became  more 
expert,  but  at  first  when  some  mountainous  wave  caught  us 
up,  we  narrowly  escaped  broaching-to,  and  on  one  occasion 
we  actually  did  so.  I  happened  to  be  on  the  bridge  at  the 
time,  with  some  other  officers,  as  our  small  vessel  swerved 
round  and  was  immediately  swept  by  a  monstrous  sea,  which 
made  a  clean  breach  over  her  ;  we  clutched  instinctively  at 
the  bridge  rails,  and  for  several  moments  were  completely  sub- 
merged, whilst  the  spray  dashed  as  high  as  our  upper  topsails. 
A  great  deal  of  water  found  its  way  below,  flooding  the  ward- 
room and  many  of  the  cabins,  from  the  decks  of  which  people 
were  soon  busily  picking  up  books  and  garments  in  a  more  or 
less  sodden  condition.  Needless  to  say,  we  did  our  best  to 
avoid  '  broaching-to  '  again. 

On  October  31  we  accomplished  our  record  run  under  sail 
alone,  driving  before  a  very  heavy  gale.  This  amounted 
to  223  miles  in  the  twenty-four  hours.  We  were  now  gradually 
increasing  our  latitude,  until  on  November  12  we  were  in 
lat.  51  S.,  long.  131  E.,  when  we  arrived  in  an  extremely 
interesting  magnetic  area,  and  I  decided  to  steer  to  the  south 
to  explore  it  more  effectively. 

The  exact  reason  for  this  decision  is  somewhat  technical, 
but  T  may  briefly  recall  that  amongst  the  elements  that  came 
within  the  purview  of  our  magnetic  survey  was  that  of  mag- 
netic force  or  the  actual  pull  exercised  by  the  earth  at  various 
places.  The  only  data  previously  available  seemed  to  show 
a  curious  inconsistency  in  the  distribution  of  this  force  to  the 
northward  of  the  Magnetic  Pole,  where  we  had  now  arrived, 
and  consequently  it  was  desirable  to  make  our  survey  in  this 
region  as  extensive  as  possible.  This  new  course  took  us  well 
to  the  south,  far  out  of  the  track  of  ships  and  towards  the 
regions  of  ice. 

It  was  almost  on  arrival  in  these  lonely  waters  that  I  was 
awakened  one  night  by  a  loud  knocking  and  a  voice  shouting, 
'  Ship's  afire,  sir.'     I  sprang  up  full  of  '  Where? '  '  When  ? '  and 


i9oi]      FIRST   ENCOUNTER  WITH   THE   ICE  75 

'  How  ? '  only  to  find  that  my  informant  had  fled.  As  may  be 
imagined,  I  was  not  long  in  getting  on  the  deck,  which  was  very 
dark  and  obstructed  by  numerous  other  half-clad  people,  who 
knew  no  more  than  I.  Making  my  way  forward  I  at  length 
found,  amidst  streams  of  water  and  a  slight  smell  of  burning, 
the  officer  of  the  watch,  who  explained  that  the  fire  had  been 
under  the  forecastle,  but  had  been  easily  extinguished  when 
the  hose  had  been  brought  to  bear  on  it.  It  eventually  trans- 
pired that  the  rolling  of  the  ship  had  brought  some  oilskins 
dangerously  close  to  a  police  light,  and  that  this  had  not  been 
discovered  until  the  woodwork  round  about  was  blazing 
merrily.  In  these  days,  steel  ships  and  electric  lights  tend  to 
lessen  the  fear  of  fire,  but  in  a  wooden  vessel  the  possible 
consequences  are  too  serious  not  to  make  the  danger  a  very 
real  one,  nor  to  allow  such  a  report  as  was  made  to  me  to  be 
received  without  alarm.  The  risk  of  fire  was  one  which  was 
very  constantly  in  my  thoughts ;  it  must  always  loom  large  in 
a  wooden  ship,  and  I  am  not  at  all  sure  that  it  is  much 
lessened  in  a  polar  climate,  whereas  in  polar  regions  the  con- 
sequences may  be  vastly  increased.  It  can  be  imagined  that 
after  such  an  experience  as  this,  I  was  not  less  likely  to  realise 
the  peril,  but  as  events  turned  out,  I  am  happy  to  say,  this  was 
the  first  and  last  occasion  on  which  an  alarm  of  fire  was 
raised  :  we  were  never  again  scared  with  such  a  report. 

On  November  15  we  crossed  the  60th  parallel,  and  on  the 
following  morning  much  excitement  was  caused  by  our  first 
sight  of  the  sea-ice.  At  first  we  saw  only  small  pieces,  worn 
into  fantastic  shape  by  the  action  of  the  waves,  but  as  the 
afternoon  advanced  signs  of  a  heavier  pack  appeared  ahead, 
and  soon  the  loose  floes  were  all  about  us,  and  the  '  Discovery ' 
was  pushing  her  way  amongst  them,  receiving  her  baptism 
of  ice. 

As  night  closed  down  on  us  we  became  closely  surrounded 
by  the  pack,  which  consisted  of  comparatively  small  pieces  of 
ice  from  two  to  three  feet  in  thickness  and  much  worn  at 
their  edges  by  the  constant  movement  of  the  swell.  The 
novelty  of  our  surroundings  impressed  us  greatly.     The  wind 


76        THE  VOYAGE   OF   THE   'DISCOVERY'    [Nov. 

had  died  away;  what  light  remained  was  reflected  in  a  ghostly 
glimmer  from  the  white  surface  of  the  pack ;  now  and  again  a 
white  snow  petrel  flitted  through  the  gloom,  the  grinding  of 
the  floes  against  the  ship's  side  was  mingled  with  the  more 
subdued  hush  of  their  rise  and  fall  on  the  long  swell,  and  for 
the  first  time  we  felt  something  of  the  solemnity  of  these  great 
Southern  solitudes. 

We  had  now  reached  lat.  62.50  S.,  long.  139  E.,  and  were 
within  200  miles  of  Adelie  Land,  discovered  by  Dumont 
D'Urville.  With  steam  we  should  have  had  small  difficulty  in 
pushing  on  towards  the  land  ;  but  already  our  delays  had  been 
excessive,  and  we  knew  that  we  could  not  add  to  them  if  we 
were  to  reach  New  Zealand  betimes.  Reluctantly  the  ship's 
head  was  once  more  turned  towards  the  north  and  we  passed 
again  into  looser  ice.  On  the  following  day  we  passed  a  small 
iceberg,  the  only  one  seen  in  this  region.  Two  soundings 
taken  about  this  time  gave  depths  of  2,500  and  2,300  fathoms 
respectively,  showing  that  the  ocean  depths  must  extend 
moderately  close  to  Adelie  Land ;  but  a  third  taken  at  our 
more  southerly  position  gave  1,750  fathoms,  rather  indicating 
that  the  shoaling  of  the  greater  depths  was  commencing. 

The  tempestuous  seas  of  the  Southern  oceans  have  one 
great  feature,  lacking  in  other  oceans,  in  the  quantity  and 
variety  of  their  bird  life.  The  fact  supplies  an  interest  to  the 
voyager  which  can  scarcely  be  appreciated  by  those  who  have 
not  experienced  it,  for  not  only  are  these  roaming,  tireless 
birds  seen  in  the  distance,  but  in  the  majority  of  cases  they 
are  attracted  by  a  ship  and  gather  close  about  her  for  hours, 
and  even  days.  The  greater  number  are  of  the  petrel  tribe, 
and  vary  in  size  from  the  greater  albatrosses,  with  their  huge 
spread  of  wing  and  unwavering  flight,  to  the  small  Wilson 
stormy  petrel,  which  flits  under  the  foaming  crests  of  the  waves. 
For  centuries  these  birds  have  been  the  friends  of  sailors,  who 
designated  them  by  more  or  less  familiar  names,  some  of  which 
have  been  preserved,  whilst  others  have  been  dropped  for  more 
definite  titles.  In  the  older  accounts  of  voyages  it  is  often 
difficult  to  recognise  the  birds  referred  to;  for  instance,  the 


I9oi]  SOUTHERN   BIRDS  77 

term  '  Eglet '  seems  to  have  been  applied  to  various  species. 
But  the  '  Wanderer,'  '  Sooty,'  '.  Cape  Hen,'  '  Cape  Pigeon,' 
'Giant  Petrel,'  and  many  others  are  survivals  which  the  ordinary 
man  still  prefers  to  employ  in  preference  to  the  scientific 
designation.  It  was  the  shooting  of  a  '  Sooty '  albatross  by  one 
Simon  Hartley  in  Shelvocke's  voyage  that  supplied  the  theme 
immortalised  in  the  '  Ancient  Mariner.' 

Our  zoologist  Dr.  Wilson  was  possessed  of  the  necessary 
knowledge  to  distinguish  and  name  our  various  visitors,  and 
with  his  assistance  most  of  us  soon  became  familiar  with  even 
the  rarer  species.  This  not  only  added  greatly  to  the  interest 
of  the  voyage,  but  enabled  us  in  turn  to  assist  in  keeping  the 
record  of  such  visits. 

Various  devices  were  resorted  to  in  our  endeavours  to 
capture  birds  for  our  collection,  and  sooner  or  later  examples 
of  most  of  the  species  were  brought  on  board.  The  larger 
albatrosses  were  caught  by  towing  a  small  metal  triangle,  well 
baited;  when  a  bird  settled,  the  line  would  be  slacked,  and  as 
it  pecked  at  the  bait  a  jerk  of  the  line  would  sometimes  catch 
its  beak  in  the  sharp  angle  of  the  triangle,  when  by  keeping  a 
steady  strain  on  the  line  the  bird  could  be  landed.  The 
smaller  birds  were  usually  caught  by  becoming  entangled  in 
long  streamers  of  strong  thread  which  were  allowed  to  float 
away  in  the  wind.  A  lead  weight  on  the  end  of  a  string  was 
also  a  means  of  capturing  such  birds  as  flew  close  to  the  ship. 

The  weight  would  be  thrown  over  the  bird  so  that,  in  fall- 
ing, the  string  would  descend  across  the  wings.  All  such 
devices  required  mucn  patience  and  deftness  to  be  effective, 
and  our  most  successful  bird  catchers,  the  chief  engineer,  Mr. 
Skelton,  and  the  second  engineer,  Mr.  Dellbridge,  spent  many 
a  patient  hour  before  they  were  rewarded  with  a  capture. 

The  larger  albatrosses  rarely  go  as  far  south  as  the  ice,  but 
the  smaller  species  of  white  albatrosses,  as  well  as  the  dusky, 
sinister-looking  '  Sooty,'  accompanied  us  as  far  as  the  edge  of 
the  pack.  But  the  birds  which  live  in  the  regions  of  ice  are 
rarely  met  with  in  the  more  northerly  seas,  though  a  few  are 
widely  distributed.     It  may  be  taken  for  granted  that  all  the 


78        THE  VOYAGE   OF  THE   'DISCOVERY'    [Nov. 

birds  inhabiting  the  icy  seas  are  now  known ;  sooner  or  later 
during  our  voyage  we  saw  all,  but  we  were  not  often  in  circum- 
stances to  make  such  a  good  bag  as  during  our  short  visit  to 
the  ice  in  November.  It  was  then  that  for  the  first  time  we 
saw  and  captured  the  Southern  Fulmar,  a  beautiful  bluish-grey 
petrel ;  the  Antarctic  petrel,  a  white  bird  with  brown  barred 
wings  and  head ;  the  Snow  petrel,  with  its  pure  white  plumage  • 
and  two  species  of  the  small  blue  Prion  or  Whale-bird. 

On  November  22  we  sighted  Macquarie  Island,  which  lies 
about  600  miles  S.W.  of  New  Zealand,  and  as  we  came 
abreast  of  it  early  in  the  afternoon  I  thought  we  might  devote 
the  few  hours  of  daylight  which  remained  to  an  excursion  on 
shore.  We  accordingly  anchored  in  Fisherman's  Cove,  a 
poorly-sheltered  spot  to  the  eastward  of  the  island,  and  after 
pushing  through  thick  kelp  we  succeeded  in  landing  on  a 
sheltered  beach,  and  our  naturalists  were  soon  busily  at  work 
making  collections.  The  western  slopes  of  the  island  are 
bare,  but  on  the  eastern  side  a  coarse  tussock  grass  grows 
thickly  and  makes  walking  rather  difficult.  Our  attention  was 
principally  devoted  to  the  penguin  rookeries  on  the  beach,  of 
which  there  were  two  inhabited  by  different  species  of  birds, 
the  larger  and  more  numerous  kind  being  the  richly  coloured 
King  penguin,  and  the  other  a  small  crested  penguin 
(Schlegeli). 

It  was  the  first  time  that  any  of  us  had  seen  a  penguin 
rookery,  and  every  detail  of  their  strange  habits  proved 
absorbingly  interesting;  we  were  lucky  enough  to  have  arrived 
during  the  nesting  season,  and  were  able  to  collect  specimens 
of  eggs  and  of  the  young  in  various  stages  of  development. 
Perhaps  the  most  excited  member  of  our  party  was  my  small 
Aberdeen  terrier  '  Scamp,'  who  was  highly  delighted  with  his 
run  on  shore,  until  he  came  to  the  penguins,  when  he  was 
most  obviously  and  comically  divided  between  a  desire  to  run 
away  and  a  feeling  that  he  ought  to  appear  bold  in  such 
strange  company.  The  result  was  a  series  of  short  rushes, 
made  with  suppressed  growls  and  every  hair  bristling,  but 
ending  at  a  very  safe  distance.      I  may  add  that   '  Scamp ' 


igoi]  LYTTELTON,   NEW  ZEALAND  79 

found  a  comfortable  home  in  New  Zealand ;  it  was  felt  that 
an  Antarctic  climate  would  prove  too  much  for  him ;  and  in 
becoming  the  idol  of  a  household  he  quickly  forgot  his  former 
acquaintances. 

As  night  fell  we  weighed  our  anchor  and  proceeded  to  the 
north,  sighting  the  Auckland  Islands  on  the  25th,  and  rather 
foolishly  shaping  our  course  to  pass  to  windward  of  them. 
As  we  came  abreast  of  the  land  the  wind  became  very  fresh, 
and  with  a  strong  set  to  leeward  we  were  for  some  time 
anxious  about  our  prospect  of  weathering  it.  Eventually, 
however,  we  were  lucky  enough  to  clear  the  rocks  at  the 
northern  end  just  before  the  wind  increased  to  a  full  gale, 
which,  with  a  heavy  sea,  caused  us  to  lurch  on  one  occasion  to 
an  angle  of  550,  and  kept  us  in  considerable  discomfort  below. 
Late  on  the  29th  we  arrived  off  Lyttelton  Heads,  and  on  the 
following  day  were  berthed  alongside  a  jetty  in  the  harbour. 

It  is  most  difficult  to  speak  in  fitting  terms  of  the  kindness 
shown  to  us  in  New  Zealand,  both  at  this  time  and  on  our 
return  from  the  Antarctic  Regions.  The  general  kindness  and 
hospitality  of  New  Zealanders  are  well  known  to  every 
stranger  who  has  visited  the  country,  but  in  our  case  there  was 
added  a  keen  and  intelligent  interest  in  all  that  concerned  the 
expedition,  and  a  whole-hearted  desire  to  further  its  aims. 
Officers  and  men  were  received  with  open  arms  and  quickly 
made  friends — friends  who  hastened  to  assure  them  that 
although  already  separated  by  many  thousands  of  miles  from 
their  native  land,  here  in  this  new  land  they  would  find  a 
second  home,  and  those  who  would  equally  think  of  them  in 
their  absence  and  welcome  them  on  their  return. 

But  it  is  not  only  for  private  but  for  public  kindness  and 
sympathy  that  we  have  to  thank  the  people  of  New  Zealand : 
on  all  sides  we  received  the  most  generous  treatment.  All 
charges  for  harbour  dues,  docking,  wharfage,  &c,  were  remitted 
to  us  by  the  Lyttelton  Harbour  Board,  and  the  sum  thus  saved 
to  the  expedition  throughout  the  voyage  was  very  large.  The 
railway  authorities  gave  us  many  facilities  for  the  transport  of 
our  stores,  and  issued  free  tickets  to  officers  and  men  for  passage 


8o        THE   VOYAGE   OF  THE    'DISCOVERY'    [Dec. 

over  their  lines.  On  every  side  we  were  accorded  the  most 
generous  terms  by  the  firms  or  individuals  with  whom  we  had 
to  deal  in  business  matters.  By  the  Christchurch  Magnetic 
Observatory  and  by  the  Christchurch  Museum  we  were  offered 
numerous  facilities  in  carrying  on  our  scientific  work.  Later 
on,  to  add  to  this  noble  record  of  sympathetic  help,  the 
Government  of  New  Zealand  subscribed  1,000/.  towards  the 
expenses  of  the  relief  ship. 

In  considering  such  general  kindness  it  is  almost  invidious 
to  mention  particular  names,  but  the  following  gentlemen  are 
amongst  those  who  must  be  especially  remembered  by  us  for 
the  manner  in  which  they  were  ever  ready  to  assist  us :  His 
Excellency  the  Governor,  Lord  Ranfurly  ;  the  Premier,  Mr. 
Seddon;  the  Hon.  C.  C.  Bowen;  Captain  Hutton,  of  the 
Christchurch  Museum  ;  Mr.  Kinsey,  Mr.  Waymouth,  Mr.  A. 
Rhodes,  Mr.  Coleridge  Farr,  of  the  Christchurch  Observatory, 
and  Mr.  H.  J.  Miller,  of  Lyttelton. 

A  great  deal  of  work  lay  before  us  at  Lyttelton.  The 
rigging  had  to  be  thoroughly  overhauled  and  refitted;  this 
was  taken  in  hand  at  once,  and  the  work  was  much  expedited 
by  assistance  given  by  working  parties  sent  by  H.M.S.  •  Ringa- 
rooma.'  The  '  Ringarooma '  had  been  directed  to  lend  us  all 
possible  aid  by  the  Admiral,  Sir  Lewis  Beaumont,  who,  as  an 
old  Arctic  traveller,  took  an  especial  interest  in  our  mission, 
and  the  Admiral's  wishes  were  most  thoroughly  carried  out  by 
Captain  Rich,  of  that  vessel.  Meanwhile  our  magneticians 
were  forced  to  undertake  again  the  comparison  of  their  delicate 
instruments,  and  as  this  was  the  last  occasion  on  which  it  could 
be  done,  special  care  and  attention  were  necessary ;  but  now, 
instead  of  camping  in  tents  on  a  heathery  hill  plateau  as  they 
had  done  at  the  Cape,  they  were  able  to  carry  on  their  work 
in  an  observatory  equipped  with  every  modern  convenience, 
and  directed  by  an  official  who  was  not  only  eager  to  render 
them  every  assistance,  but  was  preparing  himself  to  take  an 
important  part  in  the  international  programme  of  observations 
which  were  to  be  taken  in  connection  with  our  magnetic  work 
in  the  Far  South.    Even  with  such  facilities  a  long  and  trouble- 


i9oi]  PREPARATIONS  FOR  FINAL  DEPARTURE      8i 

some  task  lay  before  our  observers,  but  luckily  their  comple- 
ment was  now  complete,  for  we  found  the  last  of  our  officers, 
Mr.  Bernacchi,  awaiting  us  on  our  arrival ;  so  pushed  had  we 
been  with  many  of  our  arrangements  in  England  that  this 
officer  had  been  obliged  to  remain  behind  and  to  spend  the 
weeks  which  could  be  saved  by  a  rapid  steamer  voyage  in 
getting  together  and  studying  the  delicate  recording  instru- 
ments which  were  needed  for  our  Southern  station.  And  so, 
for  the  time  being,  the  members  of  our  small  community  were 
scattered  once  more,  and  whilst  each  was  working  at  his  special 
task  in  more  than  one  place  there  was  bustle  and  hurry  to  be 
prepared  for  the  date  of  our  final  sailing. 

At  Lyttelton  we  found  awaiting  us  large  quantities  of  stores 
ready  to  be  shipped  for  our  long  voyage,  and  since,  as  I  have 
already  mentioned,  some  of  the  stores  in  the  '  Discovery  '  had 
been  damaged  by  the  leaky  state  of  the  ship,  it  was  neces- 
sary to  replace  these  by  purchases  in  New  Zealand.  It  was 
when  I  appreciated  the  excellence  of  the  goods  obtained  in 
this  manner  I  regretted  that  we  had  not  relied  on  New  Zealand 
for  the  greater  part  of  our  provisions.  Were  I  to  go  again  on 
such  an  expedition,  I  should  certainly  do  this.  Tinned  meat, 
flour,  cheese,  and,  in  fact,  every  necessary  for  a  voyage,  can  be 
obtained  at  moderate  prices  and  of  most  excellent  quality  ;  and 
the  fact  that  in  such  an  expedition  as  ours  these  provisions 
would  not  have  had  to  come  through  the  tropics,  is,  I  think,  of 
very  great  importance. 

The  case  of  butter  may  be  especially  mentioned.  The 
tinned  Danish  butter  which  we  had  brought  from  Europe  was 
as  satisfactory  as  tinned  butter  could  be,  but  in  New  Zealand 
we  were  able  to  purchase  fresh  butter  which  is  largely  exported 
in  cases  of  white  pine,  and  we  found  that  it  was  quite  possible 
to  keep  these  cases  sound  through  the  short  voyage  to  the 
Antarctic  Circle,  after  which  they  could  be  relied  on  to  keep 
for  any  length  of  time. 

Owing  to  the  damage  done  to  our  provisions,  and  wishing, 
moreover,  to  know  exactly  where  everything  was  stowed,  we 
thought  it  advisable  to  re-stow  our  holds  at  Lyttelton,  a  task 
vol.  i.  G 


82         THE   VOYAGE   OF   THE    'DISCOVERY'    [Dec. 

which  meant  a  good  deal  of  labour,  but  ensured  our  being  able 
to  take  advantage  of  every  corner  of  the  hold-space.  As  soon 
as  it  could  conveniently  be  done,  the  '  Discovery '  was  docked 
and  every  effort  was  made  to  stop  the  leak.  This,  as  I  have 
pointed  out,  was  a  difficult  matter  owing  to  the  several  layers 
of  planking.  A  thorough  examination  of  the  ship's  bottom 
revealed  not  a  few  defects  which  should  have  been  remedied 
before  the  ship  was  launched,  but  though  these  defects  were 
made  good  and  the  bottom  was  thoroughly  caulked,  we  found, 
when  the  ship  was  again  afloat,  that  the  leak  was  not  stopped. 
The  chagrin  of  our  excellent  contractor,  Mr.  H.  J.  Miller,  was 
as  deep  as  our  own,  and  for  his  own  satisfaction  he  begged 
that  the  ship  might  be  docked  again  at  his  expense  :  this  time 
he  removed  all  the  heavy  steel  plates  that  protected  the  bow  of 
the  ship,  hoping  that  the  fault  might  be  found  beneath  them ; 
but  though  more  defects  were  made  good  and  every  inch  of 
the  bottom  was  examined,  we  had  the  intense  annoyance  of 
seeing  the  water  again  entering  when  the  ship  was  once  more 
afloat.  Every  effort  had  been  made,  we  could  do  no  more ; 
and  the  result  served  to  show  the  extreme  difficulty  of  localis- 
ing such  a  fault  in  a  ship  of  this  kind.  Amongst  the  many 
skilled  workmen  whose  united  labour  had  produced  the  solid 
structure  of  the  '  Discovery's '  hull,  had  been  one  who  had 
scamped  his  task,  no  doubt  knowing  full  well  that  he  was  free 
from  all  chance  of  detection,  and  for  this  we  were  condemned  to 
suffer  throughout  our  voyage.  The  leak  never  grew  serious,  and 
when  we  were  in  the  ice  it  was  very  much  reduced;  but,  as  I  have 
said,  first  and  last  we  spent  on  the  pumps  many  a  weary  hour 
that  could  ill  be  spared  with  so  much  other  work  to  be  done. 

As  the  month  of  December  advanced  the  '  Discovery ' 
became  a  very  busy  scene;  parties  of  men  were  employed  in 
stowing  every  hole  and  corner  of  the  available  storage-space, 
the  upper  deck  was  littered  with  packing  cases  of  all  sorts, 
whilst  many  truck-loads  of  stores  still  stood  waiting  on  the 
wharf.  As  usual  in  such  cases,  the  prospect  of  getting 
everything  stowed  seemed  hopeless.  Meanwhile,  whenever 
oermitted,  flocks  of  curious  visitors  added  to  the  confusion; 


i9oi]  DEPARTURE   FROM    LYTTELTON  83 

but  as  many  of  these  had  come  from  a  long  distance,  it  was 
impossible  not  to  accede  to  their  almost  pathetic  requests  to 
be  allowed  to  see  the  ship. 

At  last  came  the  day  for  sailing  from  Lyttelton,  but  not 
for  our  final  departure  from  civilisation,  for  we  yet  proposed  to 
make  a  short  visit  to  Port  Chalmers  in  the  south  to  complete 
our  stock  of  coal.  On  Saturday,  December  21,  the  •  Discovery  ' 
lay  alongside  the  wharf  ready  for  sea  and  very  deeply  laden. 
Below,  every  hold  and  stowage-space  was  packed  to  the  brim — 
even  the  cabins  were  invaded  with  odd  cases  for  which  no 
corner  could  be  found.  But  the  scene  on  deck  was  still  more 
extraordinary.  Here,  again,  were  numerous  packing-cases  for 
which  no  more  convenient  resting-place  could  be  found ;  the 
afterpart  of  the  deck  was  occupied  by  a  terrified  flock  of  forty- 
five  sheep,  a  last  and  most  welcome  present  from  the  farmers 
of  New  Zealand.  Amidst  this  constantly  stampeding  body 
stood  the  helmsman  at  the  wheel ;  further  forward  were  sacks 
of  food,  and  what  space  remained  was  occupied  by  our  twenty- 
three  howling  dogs  in  a  wild  state  of  excitement.  Above  the 
deck,  the  skid-beams,  fitted  for  the  carriage  of  our  boats,  were 
in  addition  piled  high  with  the  woodwork  of  our  huts,  adding, 
as  we  estimated,  a  weight  of  some  thirty  tons,  and  therefore 
requiring  to  be  secured  with  many  lashings  and  much  care. 
Here  and  there  stood  little  groups  of  our  friends  waiting  for  the 
last  handshake  and  to  wish  us  Godspeed,  and  incidentally 
doing  their  best  to  separate  the  combatants  in  a  dog-fight. 

As  may  be  imagined,  the  ship  was  not  in  a  condition  in 
which  one  could  look  forward  with  pleasure  to  crossing  the 
stormiest  ocean  in  the  world.  One  could  reflect  that  it  would 
have  been  impossible  to  have  got  more  into  her,  and  that  all 
we  had  got  seemed  necessary  for  the  voyage  ;  for  the  rest  we 
could  only  trust  that  Providence  would  vouchsafe  to  us  fine 
weather  and  an  easy  passage  to  the  south. 

Before  noon  our  small  company  was  collected  on  the  mess- 
deck  and  a  short  service  of  farewell  was  held  by  the  Bishop  of 
Christchurch— a  simple,  touching  ceremony  gratifying  to  all. 
At  2  p.m.  we  cast  off  our  warps  and  steamed  slowly  out  of  the 


84        THE  VOYAGE   OF    THE   'DISCOVERY'    [Dec. 

harbour,  but  New  Zealand  was  determined  we  should  know 
how  thoroughly  it  was  interested  in  our  venture  and  how 
heartily  it  wished  us  success.  Special  trains  from  Christchurch 
had  borne  thousands  to  the  port  to  bid  us  farewell.  Wharves 
and  quays  were  packed  with  enthusiastic  figures.  It  was  indeed 
a  great  'send-off';  two  men-of-war — the  'Ringarooma'  and 
•  Lizard ' — steamed  out  slowly  ahead  of  us,  whilst  no  fewer 
than  five  gaily  dressed  steamers,  crowded  with  passengers,  and 
with  bands  playing  and  whistles  hooting,  thronged  about  us. 
Cheer  followed  cheer  as  we  steamed  out  towards  the  '  Heads ' ; 
assembled  in  the  rigging,  on  mast  or  spar,  our  small  party  of 
adventurers  did  their  best  to  respond  to  this  kindly  expression 
of  good  feeling,  until,  as  we  entered  the  open  sea,  with  a  last 
burst  of  cheering  and  a  final  flutter  of  handkerchiefs,  our  kind 
friends  turned  away,  and  slowly  we  steamed  out  between  the 
war-ships  that  seemed  to  stand  as  sentinels  to  the  bay. 

And  now,  whilst  our  hearts  were  full  of  this  leave-taking, 
whilst  with  our  glasses  we  could  still  discern  the  forms  of  our 
friends  in  the  receding  vessels,  there  happened  one  of  those 
tragedies  that  awake  one  to  the  grim  realities  of  life.  Amongst 
our  enthusiastic  ship's  company  who  had  crowded  into  the 
rigging  to  wave  their  farewells,  was  one  young  seaman,  named 
Charles  Bonner,  who,  more  venturesome  than  the  rest,  had 
climbed  above  the  crow's-nest  to  the  top  of  the  main-mast. 
There,  seated  on  the  truck,  he  had  remained  cheering  with  the 
rest,  until  in  a  moment  of  madness  he  raised  himself  into  a 
standing  position,  supported  only  by  the  slender  wind  vane 
which  capped  the  mast.  Precisely  what  happened  can  never 
be  known ;  possibly  the  first  of  the  sea  swell  caused  him  to 
lose  his  balance ;  we  below  only  know  that,  arrested  by  a  wild 
cry,  we  turned  to  see  a  figure  hurtling  through  the  air,  still 
grasping  the  wind  vane  from  the  masthead.  He  fell  head 
foremost  on  the  corner  of  an  iron  deckhouse,  and  death  was 
instantaneous.  The  body  was  borne  through  the  confused 
obstructions  on  the  deck  to  the  stern  gratings,  and  covered 
reverently  with  the  Union  Jack,  whilst  sadness  and  gloom 
descended  on  the  ship  and  damped  for  the  time  all  thought 
of  our  future  in  the  South.     Though  this  was  on  Saturday, 


igoi]  GOOD-BYE  TO   CIVILISATION  85 

it  was  not  until  Monday  that  we  arrived  at  Port  Chalmers, 
owing  to  delay  from  a  strong  head  wind.  Captain  Rich,  of 
the  '  Ringarooma '  had  kindly  promised  to  make  arrangements 
for  the  funeral  of  our  poor  shipmate,  and  though  we  only 
arrived  at  4  p.m.,  an  inquest  was  immediately  held,  and  the 
body  buried  with  naval  honours  at  6  p.m.  Bonner  was  a  smart 
young  seaman,  already  popular  on  board,  and  his  untimely 
death  was  much  felt  j  but  in  the  busy  life  we  were  now  leading 
there  was  little  time  for  sad  thought,  and  the  gloom  of  this 
unfortunate  accident  was  rapidly  dispelled  in  the  activities  of 
the  voyage. 

Of  all  the  stores  we  carried,  coal  was  perhaps  the  most 
important,  and  I  had  determined  to  wedge  in  every  ton  we 
could  carry,  more  especially  as,  through  the  generosity  of  Mr. 
John  Mill,  of  Port  Chalmers,  such  coal  as  we  received  there 
was  a  free  gift. 

Early  on  the  morning  of  the  24th  we  managed  to  increase 
our  already  crowded  deck  cargo  by  the  addition  of  45  tons  of 
coal,  which  with  285  tons  already  in  the  bunkers,  brought  our 
total  up  to  330  tons,  a  quantity  which,  although  it  may  not 
sound  great  to  those  who  know  the  consumption  of  modern 
steamers,  sufficed  for  all  our  needs  for  more  than  two  years. 

At  9.30  a.m.  we  left  the  wharf  after  saying  farewell  to  the 
few  friends  who  had  gathered  in  the  port  even  at  this  early 
hour.  The  '  Ringarooma,'  to  whose  officers  and  men  we  were 
so  deeply  indebted  for  assistance  in  the  past,  '  manned  ship  ' 
and  cheered  us  yet  once  again,  and  soon,  in  company  with  a 
tug,  we  were  wending  our  way  down  the  long,  tortuous  channel 
which  leads  to  the  sea. 

By  noon  we  were  clear  of  the  harbour  bar,  with  a  good 
offing,  and  with  a  fresh  breeze  from  the  N.E.,  we  loosed  our 
sails,  and  were  soon  briskly  bowling  along  towards  the  south 
under  steam  and  sail.  A  hoarse  shout  and  a  hoarser  whistling 
from  our  friendly  tug,  a  final  wave  from  the  signal  station  on 
the  cliff,  and  we  were  away.  The  last  view  of  civilisation,  the 
last  sight  of  fields,  and  trees,  and  flowers,  had  come  and  gone 
on  Christmas  Eve,  1901,  and  as  the  night  fell,  the  blue  outline 
of  friendly  New  Zealand  was  lost  to  us  in  the  northern  twilight. 


86        THE  VOYAGE  OF  THE   'DISCOVERY'    [Dec. 


CHAPTER   IV 

SOUTHWARD   HO  ! 

Steering  to  the  South — Fog— Icebergs— Entering  Pack-ice— Life  in  the 
Pack— Nature  of  Pack  -Slow  Progress—'  Watering  Ship  ' — Southern 
Edge  of  Pack — The  Ross  Sea— First  Sight  of  Victoria  Land— Cape 
Adare — Danger  in  the  Pack — Coulman  Island — Heavy  Gale— Landing 
in  Lady  Newnes  Bay — Killing  Seals— Wood  Bay — Cape  Washington — 
Coasting  South — Landing  in  Granite  Harbour— A  Well-sheltered 
Spot— McMurdo  Sound— Stopped  by  the  Pack—  Turning  to  the  East. 

In  fog  and  heavy  weather, 

Through  wildering  sleet  and  snow, 

We  fought  the  ice  together, 

On  a  track  where  no  ships  go. — Anon. 

Christmas  Day,  1901,  found  us  on  the  open  expanse  of  the 
Southern  Ocean,  but  after  such  a  recent  parting  from  our 
friends  we  had  none  of  us  much  heart  for  the  festivities  of  the 
season,  and  the  day  passed  quietly. 

The  wind  held  fair  for  our  voyage,  at  first  from  the  N.E., 
but  gradually  shifting  round  to  the  west.  At  noon  on  the  26th 
we  were  able  to  stop  engines,  and  our  heavily  laden  ship 
plunged  on  towards  the  south  under  all  the  canvas  that  could 
be  spread. 

Although  as  a  rule  there  are  fewer  gales  to  the  south  of 
New  Zealand  at  this  time  of  the  year  than  at  any  other,  it  is 
not  at  all  possible  to  rely  on  fine  weather,  and  in  the  fact  that 
we  escaped  a  '  blow '  whilst  traversing  these  stormy  seas  we 
had  to  congratulate  ourselves  on  exceedingly  good  fortune. 
The  '  Discovery '  had  little  to  fear  from  the  worst  gales  when 
in  good  sea  trim,  but  at  this  time  had  we  encountered  a  heavy 


i9oi]  FOG  87 

sea  the  consequences  would  have  been  exceedingly  unpleasant. 
We  must  inevitably  have  lost  much  of  our  large  deck  cargo  : 
the  masses  of  wood  on  the  superstructure  would  have  been  in 
great  danger,  whilst  all  our  sheep  and  possibly  many  of  the 
dogs  would  have  been  drowned. 

As  the  days  went  by  and  we  approached  the  Antarctic 
Circle,  we  felt  how  exceptionally  fortunate  we  were  in  the 
continuance  of  fine  weather.  Although  on  the  28th  the  wind 
failed  us  and  we  were  obliged  to  raise  steam,  on  the  29th  we 
were  again  favoured  by  a  fresh  breeze,  and  fell  back  once  more 
on  our  policy  of  using  the  sails  and  saving  the  coal. 

On  the  31st  we  were  in  lat.  61  S.,  the  temperature  of  both 
sea  and  air  had  fallen  to  390,  and  we  had  daylight  throughout 
the  twenty-four  hours  ;  but  we  now  fell  in  with  one  of  the 
commonest  evils  in  these  latitudes,  a  thick  fog,  and  as  we  did 
not  know  how  soon  we  might  come  upon  icebergs,  a  very  sharp 
'  look-out '  was  necessary. 

The  fog  remained  with  us  until  the  afternoon  of  January  2, 
occasionally  lifting  for  a  few  hours,  but  again  descending  like  a 
thick  pall,  and  giving  us  at  least  one'  reason  for  being  resigned 
to  our  very  limited  speed  of  five  knots.  A  fact  that  adds  to 
the  depressing  effect  of  a  fog  is  that  one's  friendly  companions 
the  sea  birds  disappear,  and  one  realises  a  curious  sense  of 
desertion  as  one  peers  into  the  unbroken  grey,  wondering 
when  some  monster  iceberg  will  loom  up,  and  prepared  for 
instant  action  to  avoid  collision  with  it. 

On  the  afternoon  of  the  2nd  the  weather  cleared,  and 
shortly  after  we  sighted  our  first  iceberg  in  lat.  65^  S.  Other 
bergs  soon  rose  above  our  horizon,  and  in  the  evening  we 
counted  seventeen  about  us,  none  more  than  four  or  five 
hundred  yards  in  length,  and  although  generally  of  a  tabular 
shape,  they  were  not  more  than  90  or  100  feet  in  height. 

The  nature  and  origin  of  the  southern  iceberg  have  always 
been  a  subject  of  some  mystery.  In  the  Northern  Hemi- 
sphere, where  glaciers  push  down  into  the  sea,  fragments, 
often  of  considerable  size,  become  detached  and  are  carried 
by  currents  to  decay  in  milder  climates. 


88        THE  VOYAGE   OF   THE   'DISCOVERY'     [Jan. 

Early  Southern  voyagers  had  doubtless  a  knowledge  of 
these  northern  bergs,  but  in  the  southern  oceans  they  met 
with  masses  of  ice  incomparably  larger  than  anything  known 
in  the  North,  and  to  these  they  gave  the  name  of  Ice  Islands, 
or  often  enough  went  yet  farther  and  named  them  as  new 
lands.  Even  Cook  preserves  the  name  of  Ice  Island  in 
describing  the  long  tabular  berg  so  typical  of  the  Southern 
Regions. 

Except  in  cases  where  they  have  suffered  denudation  or 
have  lost  their  stability  and  capsized,  the  shape  of  Antarctic 
icebergs  is  uniform :  they  have  all  a  flat  top  and  wall  sides, 
and  appear  to  have  broken  quietly  away  from  some  huge 
sheet  of  ice  of  which  they  formed  a  part.  In  1854  an  ice- 
berg of  this  description  was  reported  as  fifty  miles  in  length 
and  150  feet  in  height.  Several  accounts  give  thirty  or  forty 
miles  as  the  length,  and  the  height  has  been  even  stated  to  be 
as  much  as  400  feet.  The  longest  berg  reported  by  Ross  was 
four  miles  long  and  150  feet  in  height,  but  he  gives  a  greater 
height  for  many  others.  The  '  Challenger '  saw  bergs  of  at 
least  four  miles  in  length  and  200  feet  in  height.  The  largest 
berg  we  saw  was  aground  off  King  Edward's  Land,  and  we 
estimated  it  as  about  seven  miles  long  and  200  feet  high. 
Doubtless  some  of  the  larger  dimensions  here  given  are  exag- 
gerated, but  in  view  of  the  fact  that,  as  I  hope  to  show,  ice- 
bergs can  be  detached  from  a  fixed  but  floating  mass  of  ice, 
I  see  no  reason  why  their  length  should  be  limited. 

The  whole  subject  of  Antarctic  icebergs  is  of  more  than 
purely  polar  or  scientific  interest,  since  they  drift  into  more 
northerly  latitudes,  and  become  a  formidable  danger  in  the 
navigation  of  the  Southern  Seas.  In  the  southern  trade  routes, 
voyages  would  be  shortened  greatly  by  taking  a  high  latitude, 
but  the  danger  of  encountering  these  huge  masses  of  ice  has 
recommended  a  longer  but  safer  route,  and  of  late,  I  under- 
stand, the  steamships  of  the  New  Zealand  Company  have 
been  accustomed  to  take  a  yet  more  northerly  course  for  this 
reason. 

The  bergs  we  now  saw  were  comparatively  small,  and  our 


1902]  ENTERING  PACK-ICE  89 

course  did  not  take  us  close  to  any,  but  even  at  a  distance  it 
was  possible  to  realise  the  unpleasant  shock  that  would  be 
experienced  by  suddenly  encountering  them  on  a  dark  night, 
or  in  such  a  fog  as  that  from  which  we  had  just  emerged. 
Before  our  voyage  ended  we  had  ample  opportunity  of  appre- 
ciating what  unpleasant  neighbours  they  may  prove  under  such 
conditions. 

On  January  3  we  had  left  our  first  group  of  bergs  behind 
us ;  early  in  the  morning  we  crossed  the  Antarctic  Circle,  little 
thinking  how  long  a  time  would  elapse  before  we  recrossed  it. 
We  had  at  length  entered  the  Antarctic  Regions;  before  us 
lay  the  scene  of  our  work;  the  struggles  and  trials  of  pre- 
paration and  the  anxiety  of  delays  were  over,  and  the  haste  of 
our  long  voyage  was  forgotten  in  the  fact  that  we  had  reached 
the  field  of  our  labours  in  time  to  take  advantage  of  the  best 
part  of  the  short  open  season  in  these  ice-bound  regions. 
During  the  night  we  had  encountered  the  first  of  the  scattered 
fragments  of  sea-ice  which  form  the  outriders  of  the  pack,  and 
soon  we  were  passing  through  loose  streams  of  ice,  feeling 
again  the  slight  shocks  as  our  ironclad  prow  forced  a  way 
through  the  honeycombed  floes. 

Having  raised  steam  in  one  boiler,  at  2.30  we  stopped  and 
took  a  sounding,  finding  bottom  at  2,040  fathoms.  The  pack 
was  now  on  all  sides  of  us,  but  so  loose  that  there  were  many 
large  pools  of  open  water,  in  one  of  which  we  stopped  for  our 
sounding  and  to  put  over  our  dredge.  It  is  almost  impossible  to 
sound  or  dredge  in  thick  pack-ice,  owing  to  the  danger  of  en- 
tanglement of  the  lines,  and  this  was  to  us  a  very  great  drawback, 
because  in  pursuing  our  general  explorations  it  was  constantly 
necessary  to  enter  the  pack,  and  consequently  the  opportu- 
nities for  carrying  out  such  interesting  operations  as  sounding 
and  dredging  were  largely  reduced. 

The  belt  of  pack-ice  into  which  we  had  now  entered  was 
that  which  was  traversed  for  the  first  time  by  Sir  James  Ross 
in  1840.  We  had  therefore  fully  expected  to  meet  it  more  or 
less  in  the  latitude  in  which  we  actually  did  so.  In  general 
terms  it  is  the  ice  which  freezes  over  the  Ross  Sea  in  the 


oo        THE  VOYAGE   OF  THE   'DISCOVERY'     [Jan. 

winter,  and  which  is  broken  up  by  the  spring  gales  and  drifts 
to  the  north,  forming  a  band  across  the  sea  on  this  meridian. 
Later  in  the  year,  still  drifting  northward,  it  becomes  scat- 
tered, leaving  for  a  brief  season  an  open  sea  route  to  the 
south. 

During  our  long  stay  in  our  winter  quarters  we  were  able 
to  observe  to  some  extent  the  breaking-up  and  clearing  of  the 
Ross  Sea,  which  goes  to  form  this  line  of  pack,  and  I  shall 
refer  to  it  in  due  course.  In  our  passage  through  it  we  had 
usually  an  overcast  sky  ;  this  affords  the  best  condition  for  that 
noticeable  phenomenon  the  f  ice-blink,'  the  name  given  to  the 
white  reflection  thrown  on  the  clouds  by  the  snowy  surface  of 
the  pack.  The  polar  voyager,  when  cruising  in  an  open  sea, 
soon  becomes  familiar  with  the  patchy  white  sky  which  indi- 
cates the  presence  of  ice  long  before  it  is  visible  from  the 
deck  j  and  in  like  manner  when  forcing  his  way  through  the 
pack  he  looks  eagerly  for  the  dark  sky  shadows  which  surmount 
the  pools  of  open  water,  by  entering  which  he  may  hope  to 
find  his  progress  made  easier. 

And  now  for  several  days  we  were  destined  to  force  our 
way  through  grinding  floes,  making  for  the  open  pools,  and 
taking  advantage  of  every  favourable  lead  when  the  ice 
loosened.  The  pack  is  far  from  being  a  desert ;  life  abounds 
in  many  forms.  As  we  receded  from  the  open  sea  the  alba- 
trosses and  various  oceanic  petrels  silently  vanished,  but  their 
place  was  taken  by  other  and  equally  interesting  birds ;  around 
us  flew  the  blue-grey  southern  fulmar  and  the  Antarctic  petrel, 
with  brown  barred  wings  and  head,  and  a  white  breast ;  now 
and  again  a  giant  petrel  would  come  lumbering  by,  an  un- 
wholesome scavenger,  ready  to  gorge  himself  to  repletion  on 
such  carrion  as  might  catch  his  vulture  eye.  These  birds  are 
met  with  far  and  wide  ;  they  vary  much  in  colour  from  black 
to  the  lighter  shades  of  brown,  whilst  there  are  a  very  large 
proportion  of  pure  albinos.  Occasionally  a  pugnacious  skua 
gull  would  flap  past,  pausing  to  make  some  less  formidable 
bird  disgorge  his  hard-earned  dinner.  But  the  pleasantest  and 
most  constant  of  our  winged  visitors  was  the  small  snow  petrel, 


1902]  LIFE   IN  THE   PACK  91 

with  its  dainty  snow-white  plumage,  relieved  only  by  black 
beak  and  feet  and  black,  beady  eye.  These  charming  little 
birds  are  everywhere  in  the  pack-ice,  capturing  for  their  food 
the  small  crustaceans  which  the  sea  washes  over  the  surface 
and  into  the  caves  of  the  worn  floes. 

The  squawk  of  the  penguin  was  constantly  heard,  at  first 
afar  and  often  long  before  the  birds  were  seen  ;  curiosity  drew 
them  to  the  ship,  and  suddenly  their  small  figures  appeared  on 
a  floe  at  some  distance,  only  to  skurry  across  and  leap  into  the 
water  on  the  near  side,  when  with  what  seemed  extraordinary 
rapidity  they  bobbed  up  again,  shooting  out  on  to  the  surface 
of  some  floe  quite  close  to  the  ship.  Here  they  paused  and 
gazed  at  us  with  open-eyed  astonishment,  occasionally  uttering 
a  prolonged  call,  apparently  to  attract  any  of  their  fellows  that 
might  be  in  the  neighbourhood.  As  the  ship  forced  her  way 
onward,  these  merry  little  companions  would  again  and  again 
leap  into  the  water,  journeying  from  floe  to  floe  in  their  effort 
to  find  out  what  it  all  meant.  Some  of  the  sailors  grew  very 
expert  in  imitating  their  call,  and  could  not  only  attract  them 
from  a  long  distance,  but  would  visibly  add  to  their  astonish- 
ment when  they  approached. 

In  all  parts  of  the  pack  seals  are  plentiful  and  spend  long 
hours  asleep  stretched  out  on  the  floes.  The  commonest 
kind  is  the  crab-eater  or  white  seal,  but  the  shorter  species,  the 
Ross  seal,  is  not  infrequently  met  with  ;  whilst  here  and  there 
is  found  the  sea  leopard,  ranging  wide  and  preying  on  the 
penguins,  or  even  on  the  young  of  its  less  formidable  brethren. 
It  is  curious  to  observe  that  both  seals  and  penguins  regard 
themselves  as  safe  when  they  are  out  of  the  water.  In  the  sea 
they  gain  their  livelihood  as  best  they  can  with  the  chance  of 
being  snapped  up  by  each  other  or  by  the  voracious  killer 
whale,  and  in  that  element  Nature  has  made  them  swift  and 
alert  to  prey  or  to  avoid  being  preyed  on.  But  once  on  the 
ice  or  on  land  they  have  known  no  enemy,  and  can  therefore 
conceive  none.  The  seal  raises  his  head  only  on  your  near 
approach,  and  then  with  but  little  alarm,  whereas  it  is  often 
difficult  to  drive  the  penguin  into  the  water ;  even  when  chased 


92        THE  VOYAGE   OF  THE   'DISCOVERY'     [Jan. 

it  will  still  avoid  the  water  under  the  impression  that  the  sea 
is  really  the  sole  source  of  danger. 

To  add  to  our  collection,  whenever  seals  were  seen  ahead, 
the  ship's  course  was  altered  towards  them,  and  when  sufficiently 
close  a  bullet  gave  the  quietus  to  our  intended  specimen ;  the 
best  shots  were  requisitioned  for  this  purpose  in  order  that  the 
skin  and  skull  should  be  damaged  as  little  as  possible,  and  to 
avoid  unnecessary  pain.  Once  or  twice  the  animals  thus 
killed  had  to  be  secured  with  a  boat,  but  generally  it  was  pos- 
sible to  carry  a  rope  over  the  floe  and  take  a  hitch  round  the 
body,  when  willing  hands  would  soon  hoist  it  over  the  side. 

We  had  not  proceeded  far  into  the  pack  when  our  upper 
deck  became  a  busy  but  gory  scene,  for  in  one  part  men  were 
skinning  our  prizes  in  the  shape  of  seals  and  penguins,  whilst 
elsewhere  it  was  thought  advisable  to  turn  our  sheep  into 
mutton,  and  soon  we  had  an  array  of  carcases  which  made  an 
excellent  show,  but  which,  alas  !  did  not  represent  a  great 
supply  when  the  number  of  mouths  on  board  was  reckoned. 
However,  we  determined  to  consider  this  mutton  a  luxury  to 
be  kept  for  the  winter,  and  to  be  eked  out  with  the  greatest 
care.  Fresh  meat  will  generally  keep  for  a  long  time  when 
hung  in  the  rigging  of  a  ship  at  sea,  but  here  we  had  the 
advantage  of  temperature,  and  our  carcases  soon  became  to 
all  intents  and  purposes  frozen  mutton. 

The  preservation  of  seal  skins  is  not  a  light  task  :  the  skin 
is  taken  off  with  the  thick  layer  of  coarse  fat  or  blubber  which 
surrounds  the  body,  and  has  then  to  be  flensed  or  freed  from 
this  blubber,  when  it  is  placed  in  a  cask  with  brine. 

Sunday,  January  5,  we  determined  to  keep  as  a  somewhat 
belated  Christmas  day,  and  after  the  morning  service  and  a 
special  dinner,  we  tied  the  ship  up  to  the  largest  piece  of  floe- 
ice  we  could  find,  and  although  this  only  measured  100  yards 
across,  it  proved  sufficient  for  our  purpose,  which  was  to  make 
our  first  attempt  to  use  the  Norwegian  snow  shoes  or  ski. 
With  very  few  exceptions  we  had  none  of  us  used  ski  before, 
and  consequently  our  first  trial  caused  vast  amusement ;  but 
even  in  such  a  short  time  it  was  possible  to  see  signs  of  im- 


1902]  LIFE  IN  THE  PACK  93 

provement,  and  before  the  afternoon  ended  races  were  organ- 
ised and  figures  were  darting  about  in  all  directions,  with 
constant  collisions  and  falls  and  much  laughter.  In  the 
evening  we  pushed  on  once  more,  and  whilst  the  ice  crashed 
against  our  bows  and  came  grinding  along  the  side,  a  sing- 
song was  held  below  with  choruses  that  went  far  to  drown  the 
outer  tumult. 

The  position  of  officer  of  the  watch  in  the  pack  was  no 
sinecure  :  he  had  to  be  constantly  on  the  alert  to  avoid 
contact  with  the  heavier  floes  and  to  pick  out  the  easiest  path 
for  the  ship.  When  the  pack  was  open  his  best  position  was 
in  the  '  crow's-nest,'  where  he  could  first  see  the  open  patches 
of  water  and  the  heavier  streams  of  ice,  but  in  thicker  pack  he 
could  often  handle  the  ship  better  by  '  conning '  from  the 
bridge,  and  at  such  times  he  had  to  be  constantly  giving  fresh 
directions  for  the  movement  of  the  helm.  Progress  through 
the  pack  depended  very  largely  on  the  care  with  which  the 
ship  was  handled ;  often,  after  forging  slowly  ahead  for  some 
time,  an  incautious  movement  of  the  helm  would  bring  us  in 
collision  with  some  heavy  piece  of  ice,  and  the  ship  would  be 
brought  to  a  dead  stop ;  sometimes  by  pushing  on,  the 
obstruction  would  be  slowly  forced  aside,  but  oftener  it  was 
necessary  to  reverse  the  engines  and  seek  a  new  direction. 

The  floes  of  this  pack-ice  through  which  we  were  now 
passing  varied  very  greatly  in  character.  Generally  speaking, 
they  increased  in  area  as  we  advanced  to  the  south,  and  this 
might  well  be  expected,  as  we  did  not  lose  the  ocean  swell 
until  we  were  100  miles  south  of  the  northern  edge.  There 
were  very  few  signs  of  pressure  ;  only  here  and  there  a  more 
ancient  floe  could  be  seen  with  ridged  hummocks  evidently 
produced  far  from  its  present  position,  but  everything  seemed 
to  give  the  impression  that  the  ice  had  been  constantly  open- 
ing out  and  allowing  fresh  ice  to  form  in  the  channels  thus 
left  free.  This  would  produce  sheets  of  ice  of  varying  ages, 
and  when  the  sheets  broke  into  pack,  rupture  would  naturally 
take  place  along  the  joints  and  would  produce  in  close  asso- 
ciation floes  of  varied  thickness  and  character.     The  nature  of 


94        THE   VOYAGE    OF    THE    'DISCOVERY'     [Jan. 

sea-ice  depends  largely  on  the  temperature  at  which  it  is  pro- 
duced, and,  in  turn,  when  the  ice  arrives  in  warmer  water  the 
process  of  decay  seems  to  depend  on  its  nature.  All  the  ice 
we  met  with  in  the  pack  was  undergoing  decay,  but  whilst  the 
older  snow-covered  floes  were  more  or  less  completely  honey- 
combed, the  younger  ice  seemed  to  have  become  merely  very 
sodden  and  brittle.  Progress  was  not  rapid  in  the  pack  ;  on 
January  6  our  latitude  was  68.20  S.,  in  long.  175  E.,  and  we 
had  only  made  thirty-five  miles  in  the  last  twenty-four  hours. 
The  ice  was  now  so  close  that  we  could  make  no  headway 
with  the  power  of  the  single  boiler,  and  we  were  obliged  to 
light  up  both. 

Whilst  waiting  for  our  second  boiler  to  be  prepared,  we 
took  the  opportunity  of  replenishing  our  stock  of  water. 
Although  fitted  with  condensers,  to  have  produced  water  for 
the  engines  and  general  ship  purposes  with  them  would  have 
necessitated  a  large  expenditure  of  coal.  By  far  the  most 
economical  plan  was  to  obtain  water  by  melting  ice,  and  for 
this  purpose  we  had  immediately  inside  the  engine-room,  two 
long  tanks  fitted  with  steam  coils,  in  which  blocks  of  ice  or 
snow  could  very  speedily  be  converted  into  water  and  supplied 
to  the  engines,  or  wherever  else  it  might  be  required.  Our 
fresh-water  tanks  had  a  considerable  capacity,  but  every  now 
and  again  we  were  forced  to  stop  and  refill  them,  and  after 
selecting  the  most  promising  floe  the  ship  would  be  secured  to 
it,  and  all  hands  set  to  work  to  dig  out  and  pass  on  board  the 
blocks  of  snow. 

'  Watering  ship '  was  always  a  very  busy  scene,  and  since 
the  hours  spent  at  it  were  so  much  loss  to  our  exploring 
season,  it  soon  became  the  custom  for  the  officers  as  well  as 
the  men  to  share  in  the  work.  As  the  pack-ice  is  frozen  sea- 
water,  it  may  be  a  surprise  to  many  that  fresh  water  can  be 
obtained  from  it,  and  it  should  be  explained  that  for  making 
the  fresh  water  one  does  not  take  the  ice  itself  but  the  snow 
which  has  fallen  on  its  surface ;  in  many  cases  this  is  only  a 
thin  layer,  so  that  it  is  always  advisable  to  secure  a  floe  which 
has  been  hummocked,  as  about  the  pressure  ridges  the  snow 


i9o2]  'WATERING  SHIP'  95 

will  lie  deeper  than  in  other  parts.  At  first  we  were  rather 
inclined  to  scorn  floes  that  were  not  very  irregular  in  surface, 
but  we  soon  found  that  what  meant  a  great  deal  of  snow  to  us 
made  a  very  small  hole  in  their  burden,  and  that  we  could 
easily  satisfy  our  requirements  from  comparatively  insignificant 
ice-floes.  After  the  first  few  occasions,  therefore,  as  soon  as 
we  had  decided  on  '  watering  ship,'  it  took  us  very  little  time 
to  select  our  floe  and  to  run  the  ship  alongside  it,  when  ready 
men  would  leap  out  with  the  ice-anchors,  and  after  planting 
them  securely  would  attach  our  ropes ;  directly  the  ship  was 
secured  the  digging  party  would  swarm  over  the  side  with  picks 
and  shovels  and  boxes,  a  few  would  dig  away  with  the  picks 
whilst  others  bore  the  filled  boxes  or  large  blocks  across  the 
floe,  and  others  again  stood  ready  to  transport  these  over  the 
side  and  on  to  the  deck ;  the  heap  that  was  thus  made  was 
reduced  as  fast  as  the  tanks  could  be  fed,  but  generally  the 
work  was  so  vigorously  carried  on  that  the  supply  exceeded  the 
immediate  demand  and  a  large  deck-heap  had  to  be  gauged  to 
determine  the  moment  at  which  it  would  be  wise  to  say,  '  Hold, 
enough  ! '  These  words  spoken,  all  would  troop  on  board, 
the  ice-anchors  would  be  uprooted,  the  engines  revolved,  and 
we  would  push  on  through  the  pack  once  more  ;  in  this 
systematic  manner  we  could  provide  ourselves  with  many  tons 
of  water  with  a  halt  of  one  or  two  hours. 

We  made  better  progress  again  with  both  boilers,  and  as 
we  ground  through  and  overturned  broken  fragments,  it  was 
astonishing  to  see  the  extent  to  which  the  under- ice  was  honey- 
combed. Many  of  the  overturned  blocks  showed  under-strata 
of  a  reddish  yellow  colour  due  to  the  presence  of  diatoms  ;  it 
was  surprising  to  find  that  these  microscopic  plants  could  be 
caught  in  the  freezing  water  in  such  vast  quantities,  although 
our  surface  tow-nets  at  this  time  were  producing  large  hauls. 

Tow-netting  had  been  a  very  great  source  of  interest  to 
many  of  us  throughout  our  voyage  from  England  ;  our  original 
tow-nets  were  designed  for  use  only  when  the  ship  was  drifting  ; 
constructed  of  very  fine  meshed  silk,  they  were  intended  to 
capture  the  microscopic  plants  which  inhabit  the  surface  waters 


96        THE  VOYAGE  OF   THE   'DISCOVERY'    [Jan. 

of  the  sea.  By  increasing  the  length  of  the  net  and  largely 
reducing  its  aperture,  we  found  that  we  could  use  it  whilst  the 
1  Discovery '  was  travelling  through  the  water  at  her  ordinary 
speed,  and  thus  daily  explore  this  most  interesting  form  of  life. 
Although  Dr.  Koettlitz  performed  all  the  serious  work  in  this 
department,  many  of  us,  in  a  more  amateurish  fashion,  were 
interested  in  examining  the  strangely  beautiful  forms  revealed 
by  the  microscope  in  these  catches.  It  was  strange  to  have 
sailed  the  sea  for  many  years  in  entire  ignorance  that  such 
things  were.  Our  attempts  to  manufacture  a  speed-net  to  cap- 
ture the  small  crustaceans  and  other  surface  beasts  were  not  so 
successful.  Mr.  Hodgson,  our  biologist,  in  whose  department 
these  were,  reported  that  the  delicate  organisms  were  hope- 
lessly destroyed,  and  came  up  'all  heads  and  tails.'  The 
phyto-plankton,  or  plant  life  of  the  surface-waters,  changed 
greatly  on  our  advance  to  the  south,  and  many  beautiful  forms 
of  the  tropic  and  sub-tropic  seas  gave  place  to  vast  quantities  of 
diatoms.  Since  this  life  possesses  no  power  of  locomotion, 
under  certain  conditions  it  must  form  a  guide  to  the  surface 
currents  of  the  ocean,  and  when  further  exploration  has  been 
made,  as  startling  facts  will  be  obtained  from  such  data  in  the 
South  as  have  already  been  established  in  the  North. 

On  January  6  the  swell  ceased  and  floes  increased  to  four 
or  five  acres  in  extent,  and  late  at  night  they  were  almost  a 
mile  in  length,  but  very  rotten  ;  a  touch  from  our  iron  prow 
caused  long  cracks  to  fly  out  in  all  directions,  into  one  of 
which  the  ship  would  glide  and  gradually  gather  way  for  the 
next  obstruction.  By  the  7th  we  were  in  lat.  68.32  S.,  having 
only  made  thirty-two  miles  in  the  past  twenty-four  hours,  but 
in  the  evening  a  considerable  amount  of  '  open-water  sky ' 
appeared  ahead,  and  soon  after  the  ice  slackened  greatly,  and 
we  passed  through  a  number  of  large  water-holes.  A  fine 
following  breeze  in  the  evening  enabled  us  to  shut  off  steam  in 
all  but  the  thickest  places. 

Since  our  capture  of  seals  we  had  been  regularly  feeding  on 
seal-meat,  and  on  the  whole,  even  at  this  time,  we  found  it 
palatable  :   there  are  naturally  prejudices  to  be  overcome  in 


1902]  SOUTHERN  EDGE  OF  PACK  97 

taking  to  a  new  meat,  and  the  seal  being  a  very  full-blooded 
animal,  his  flesh  does  not  look  pleasing  before  it  is  cooked,  and 
afterwards  it  has  a  very  dark  mahogany  colour,  which  is  not 
attractive.  It  is  almost  impossible  to  describe  the  taste  of  a 
seal ;  it  has  a  distinctive  flavour  in  a  similar  degree  to  beef  and 
mutton,  but  it  cannot  be  called  '  fishy,'  or  like  anything  else 
that  is  generally  known.  It  is  a  very  strong  meat,  and  in  food 
value  quite  equal  to  the  best  beef.  But  the  great  drawback  to 
the  seal  is  that  there  is  no  fat  other  than  blubber,  and  blubber 
has  a  very  strong  rancid  taste  and  a  most  penetrating  smell. 
At  this  time  blubber  was  to  us  an  abomination  both  in  taste 
and  smell,  and  the  smallest  scrap  that  had  inadvertently  been 
cooked  with  the  meat  was  sufficient  to  put  us  off  our  dinner. 
Later  on  we  grew  indifferent  to  this  smell,  and  to  some  extent 
to  the  taste,  but  except  under  the  stress  of  great  hunger  we 
have  no  record  of  blubber  being  enjoyed.  Later  on,  moreover, 
we  came  thoroughly  to  enjoy  our  seal  steaks  and  to  revel  in  the 
thought  of  seal  liver  or  kidneys  ;  whereas  I  find  my  diary 
records  very  doubtful  expressions  of  pleasure  with  regard  to  all 
these  things  at  this  time. 

Early  on  the  morning  of  the  8th,  behind  the  ice-blink  to 
the  south,  could  be  seen  a  strong  water  sky,  and  soon  the 
officer  of  the  watch  hailed  from  aloft  the  glad  tidings  of  an 
open  sea  to  the  south,  the  ice-floes  became  smaller,  and  we 
soon  entered  a  belt  where  the  ice  lay  in  comparatively  small 
pieces,  closely  packed  and  grinding  together  on  the  slight 
southerly  swell.  This  extended  for  about  1^  mile,  and  pushing 
through  it  with  steam  and  sail,  we  at  length  reached  the  hard 
line  where  the  ice  abruptly  ended,  and  from  whence  to  the 
south  could  be  seen  nothing  but  a  clear  sea. 

Such  a  well-defined  limit  to  the  pack  clearly  indicates  the 
prevalence  of  southerly  winds  at  this  season  ;  it  is  obvious  that 
the  wind  will  get  better  hold  on  the  floes  in  loose  streams  of 
ice  than  on  those  in  the  main  pack,  and  hurry  them  along  until 
they  join  the  slower-moving  main  body. 

Our  pleasure  in  once  more  reaching  open  water  may  be 
imagined.     During  the  past  four  days  we  had  made  little  more 
vol.  1.  h 


98        THE  VOYAGE   OF    THE    'DISCOVERY'    [Jan. 

than  200  miles,  expending  the  precious  coal  which  would  have 
taken  us  three  times  that  distance  in  an  open  sea.  Although 
we  could  congratulate  ourselves  on  getting  through,  it  was 
evident  that  we  had  encountered  a  heavier  obstruction  than 
had  Sir  James  Ross  in  first  entering  this  sea  in  1840,  when, 
even  in  his  slow  sailing  ships,  he  had  been  able  to  penetrate 
this  pack  in  four  days. 

As  we  entered  the  open  sea  the  thick  pall  of  leaden  clouds, 
which  had  remained  persistently  over  us  in  the  pack,  rolled 
away,  and  the  sun  shone  forth  in  a  clear  sky.  Furling  our 
sails,  we  obtained  in  lat.  70.3  a  sounding  of  1,480  fathoms, 
indicating  that  we  were  on  the  verge  of  the  Antarctic  land 
plateau.  We  celebrated  our  successful  penetration  of  the  pack 
by  splicing  the  mainbrace,  and  at  our  modest  dinner  in  the 
wardroom  we  drank  to  the  future  in  champagne,  so  that  the 
shout  of  'Land  in  sight'  at  10.30  p.m.  only  added  to  an 
already  joyful  frame  of  mind.  All  who  were  not  on  deck 
quickly  gathered  there,  to  take  their  first  look  at  the  Antarctic 
Continent  ;  the  sun,  now  near  the  southern  horizon,  still  shone 
in  a  cloudless  sky,  giving  us  full  daylight.  Far  away  to  the 
south-west  could  be  seen  the  blue  outline  of  the  high  mountain 
peaks  of  Victoria  Land,  and  we  were  astonished  to  find  that 
even  at  this  great  distance  of  more  than  100  geographical 
miles  we  could  clearly  distinguish  the  peaks  of  the  Admiralty 
Range. 

The  course  was  directed  for  Robertson  Bay,  but  when 
within  forty  or  fifty  miles  we  again  fell  in  with  loose  streams  of 
pack-ice,  and  once  more  repaired  to  the  crow's  nest  to  '  con ' 
the  ship  through.  At  4  p.m.  on  the  9th,  after  much  turning 
and  twisting  to  avoid  the  heaviest  masses  of  ice,  we  arrived  off 
the  entrance  of  Robertson  Bay,  and  forcing  our  way  through  a 
heavy  band  of  pack-ice  at  the  entrance,  eventually  reached  the 
open  water  within  the  bay.  Robertson  Bay  is  formed  by  the 
long  peninsula  of  Cape  Adare,  within  which,  standing  but 
slightly  above  the  level  of  the  sea,  is  a  curious  triangular  spit, 
probably  the  niorainic  remains  of  the  vaster  ice  conditions  of 
former  ages. 


1902]  CAPE  AD  ARE  99 

It  was  on  this  spit  that  the  expedition  sent  forth  by  Sir 
George  Newnes,  and  commanded  by  Mr.  Borchgrevink,  spent 
their  winter  in  1896,  the  first  party  to  winter  on  the  shores  of 
the  Antarctic  Continent.  We  came  to  anchor  under  its  shelter 
in  154  fathoms,  and  soon  had  our  boats  ready  to  carry  us  to 
the  shore. 

We  landed  as  best  we  could  over  the  grounded  floe-ice 
which  fringed  the  shore,  and  beyond  which  lay  the  level 
plateau  or  beach  of  pebbled  basalt,  extending  for  about  three- 
quarters  of  a  mile  to  the  foot  of  the  cliffs,  which  rose  abruptly 
with  dark  frowning  aspect  to  a  height  of  over  1,000  feet;  a 
few  ponds  of  melted  snow  occupied  the  slight  depressions  in 
the  plateau,  which  elsewhere  formed  the  nesting-place  of  count- 
less thousands  of  Adelie  penguins,  and  these  small  creatures 
were  not  content  with  the  beach,  but  had  formed  their  nests 
on  the  steep  hillsides,  even  to  a  height  of  1,000  feet 

Members  of  the  extended  colonies  were  constantly  moving 
up  and  down  on  the  regular  beaten  tracks,  which  lead  from 
the  sea  to  their  elevated  nests  ;  they  walked  erect,  and  evidently 
found  it  a  most  difficult  and  laborious  task  to  climb  the  steeper 
places.  There  can  be  little  doubt  that  the  occupants  of  the 
highest  nests  must  take  considerably  over  an  hour  to  make  this 
journey,  and  when  it  is  considered  that  this  is  all  waste  time 
out  of  their  day's  fishing,  it  is  difficult  to  understand  why  they 
should  choose  these  very  elevated  positions.  But  we  found 
later  on  that  there  were  far  more  of  these  penguin  rookeries 
than  we  supposed,  and  a  little  thought  showed  that  a  rookery 
has  certain  requirements  that  are  not  often  found  in  the 
Antarctic  Regions.  It  must  have  comparatively  easy  access  to 
the  sea  at  a  spot  where  the  fast  ice  breaks  early  in  the  season, 
and  where  the  floating  ice  is  not  likely  to  pack.  As  long 
stretches  of  the  coastline  are  fringed  by  an  ice-cliff,  such  places 
are  not  too  frequently  met  with,  and  I  am  inclined  to  think 
that  in  most  cases,  if  not  in  all,  they  are  tenanted  by  colonies 
of  this  pushing,  energetic  little  penguin  ;  and  it  may  be,  there- 
fore, that  it  is  want  of  room  alone  that  causes  them  to  nest  in 
such  apparently  inconvenient  places. 

H  2 


ioo      THE  VOYAGE   OF    THE   'DISCOVERY'    [Jan. 

In  every  respect  these  small  birds  afford  a  fund  of  interest. 
Their  winter  is  spent  in  the  pack-ice  to  the  north,  but  with 
regular  migratory  habits  they  suddenly  appear  at  their  rookeries 
in  September  or  October,  and  crowding  in  every  available 
spot,  they  scrape  a  few  pebbles  together  into  the  rudest  form 
of  nest  and  lay  their  eggs.  In  due  course  the  little  brown- 
coated  chicks  are  hatched  out  and  begin  and  continue  their 
life  in  an  almost  ceaseless  clamour  for  food,  which  the  parent 
birds  provide  with  indefatigable  patience  and  zeal.  Things 
continue  thus  until  the  chicks  have  grown  to  full  stature  and 
have  shed  their  brown  coats  of  down  for  their  maturer  white- 
breasted  plumage,  when  they  are  led  to  the  water  by  the  older 
birds,  and,  in  spite  of  much  protest,  rudely  pushed  in.  Hence- 
forth, it  is  to  be  supposed,  they  must  fend  for  themselves,  and 
the  rookery  once  more  becomes  a  desert. 

On  our  arrival  at  Cape  Adare  the  young  birds  were  already 
well  grown,  and  despite  the  very  pungent  and  decided  odour 
of  penguin  which  assailed  our  nostrils,  we  continued  to  watch 
the  antics  of  these  queer  inhabitants  with  absorbing  interest. 

Round  and  about  the  clusters  of  penguins,  with  their  busy 
comings  and  goings  and  their  ceaseless  chatter,  were  gathered 
a  number  of  the  light-brown  skua  gulls.  One  could  have 
imagined  them  to  be  dwelling  on  the  greatest  terms  of 
friendship  with  the  penguins  until  one  saw  some  unfortunate 
penguin  chick  wander  from  its  immediate  company,  when  with 
a  swift  swoop  a  watchful  skua  would  descend  on  it  and  in  an 
instant  its  life  was  ended,  and  its  yet  quivering  little  form  was 
being  torn  by  its  rapacious  enemy,  whose  own  nest  and  chicks 
might  lie  but  a  few  yards  away. 

In  the  centre  of  the  Cape  Adare  beach  still  stands  the  hut 
used  by  the  members  of  the  Southern  Cross  Expedition,  and 
scattered  about  it  we  found  a  considerable  quantity  of  pro- 
visions. The  hut  is  in  very  good  condition,  and  in  such  a 
climate  might  well  remain  so  for  many  years  to  come.  Should 
some  future  explorers  traverse  this  region,  it  is  well  to  know 
that  here  they  possess  a  retreat  in  case  of  emergency,  as, 
although  they  may  not  find  all  the  provisions  in  good  condi- 


I9Q2]  CAPE   ADARE  101 

tion,  a  fair  proportion  is  likely  to  be  found  so,  and  at  this  spot 
there  would  always  be  abundance  of  food  in  the  shape  of  seals 
or  penguins. 

There  is  always  something  sad  in  contemplating  the  de- 
serted dwellings  of  mankind,  under  whatever  conditions  the 
inhabitants  may  have  left.  We  could  only  wander  about  and 
imagine  the  daily  life  of  the  party  until  our  physicist,  Mr. 
Bernacchi,  joined  us.  This  officer  had  been  one  of  this  small 
party  of  eight  souls,  and  here  on  the  spot  he  recalled  the  past 
and  told  us  of  the  unhappy  death  of  one  of  his  comrades,  the 
naturalist  Hanson,  now  lying  buried  on  the  hill-top  1,000  feet 
above  our  heads.  The  dying  man  had  requested  that  he 
should  rest  there,  and  slowly  and  laboriously  his  body  was 
borne  up  the  steep  hillside  to  the  chosen  spot.  So  there  rest 
the  remains  of  the  only  human  being  who  has  found  burial  on 
this  great  Southern  Continent,  and  above  his  body  still  stands, 
in  touching  memorial,  a  plain  wooden  cross. 

Our  energetic  magnetic  observers,  Armitage,  Bernacchi,  and 
Barne,  were  soon  at  work  with  their  instruments  amongst  the 
penguins,  whilst  the  naturalists  wandered  farther  afield  in  search 
of  specimens.  The  search  was  not  without  result,  as,  besides 
specimens  of  rock  and  moss,  several  species  of  birds  were 
collected.  Amongst  the  high  rocks  the  small  Wilson  petrel 
was  found  nesting,  and  two  eggs  were  obtained.  On  the  beach 
were  collected  some  white  giant  petrels  as  well  as  the  commoner 
brown  ones.  On  entering  the  bay  we  had  disturbed  one  of 
these  greedy  birds  taking  a  siesta  on  a  floe,  and  so  gorged  with 
food  that  it  could  barely  fly. 

The  scene  in  the  bay  after  we  had  returned  for  our  late 
evening  meal  was  very  beautiful;  the  surface  was  calm  and 
placid,  beyond  it  the  sunlight  fell  on  the  bold  peaks  and 
splendid  glaciers  of  the  Admiralty  Range,  the  sharp  summits  of 
Mounts  Minto  and  Adam  were  well  defined  against  a  clear 
sky,  whilst  the  lofty  peak  of  Sabine  was  lost  in  a  mystery  of 
fleecy  cloud.  The  placid,  deep  shadowed  sea  was  dotted  with 
streams  of  brilliantly  white  pack-ice,  whilst  here  and  there  a 
table-topped  iceberg  showed  the  sharpest  contrast  of  light  and 


io2       THE   VOYAGE   OF    THE    'DISCOVERY'    [Jan. 

shadow  as  the  sun  fell  on  its  smooth,  steep  sides.  The  tide 
was  making  out  of  the  bay  with  considerable  strength,  and 
now  and  again  it  bore  past  us  a  floe  alive  with  busy,  chattering 
penguins. 

Somewhat  later  Bernacchi  and  some  others  landed  again  to 
visit  once  more  the  grave  of  poor  Hanson,  and  to  see  that  all 
was  well  with  it.  They  took  with  them  a  tin  cylinder  contain- 
ing the  latest  information  with  regard  to  our  voyage,  with 
directions  to  place  it  in  some  conspicuous  part  of  the  hut. 
The  following  year  this  cylinder  was  found  by  the  -  Morning,' 
and  gave  the  first  information  that  the  '  Discovery '  had  suc- 
ceeded in  reaching  these  southern  regions. 

At  3  a.m.  on  January  10,  when  it  was  still  gloriously  calm 
and  bright,  we  weighed  our  anchor  and  again  stood  out  to  sea, 
steering  close  around  the  high  land  of  Cape  A  dare  in  hopes 
of  finding  a  clear  channel  close  to  the  land.  At  first  it 
appeared  as  though  we  should  do  so,  but  soon  the  tidal  stream 
began  to  make  from  the  south,  and  the  whole  aspect  of  the 
streams  of  heavy  pack-ice  rapidly  changed  ;  before  we  could 
decide  to  turn,  the  pack  was  all  about  us,  and  we  were  being 
rapidly  borne  along  with  it.  Across  the  entrance  to  the  bay 
there  was  a  chain  of  grounded  icebergs,  and  it  was  towards 
these  that  we  were  now  being  carried  ;  we  could  see  and 
almost  hear  the  heavy  floes  grinding  and  overriding  one 
another  against  these  barriers.  For  the  first  time  we  faced  the 
dangers  of  the  pack,  and  became  aware  of  its  mighty  powers. 
For  we  could  do  little  or  nothing,  the  floes  around  us  were 
heavier  than  anything  we  had  yet  met ;  twist  and  turn  as  we 
would,  we  could  make  no  appreciable  advance,  and  in  front  of 
one  monster  floe  we  were  brought  to  a  standstill  for  nearly  half 
an  hour.  Still  we  battled  on  ;  Armitage  remained  aloft  work- 
ing the  ship  with  admirable  patience,  the  engine-room,  as 
usual,  responded  nobly  to  the  call  for  more  steam,  and  soon 
the  '  Discovery '  was  exerting  all  her  powers  in  the  fray,  but 
the  progress  was  still  so  slow  that  it  looked  almost  inevitable 
that  we  should  be  carried  down  amongst  the  bergs.  It  was 
one  of  those  hours  which  impress  themselves  for  ever  on  the 


1902]  DANGER   IN  THE   PACK  103 

memory.  Above  us  the  sun  shone  in  a  cloudless  sky,  its  rays 
were  reflected  from  a  myriad  points  of  the  glistening  pack; 
behind  us  lay  the  lofty  snow-clad  mountains,  the  brown  sun- 
kissed  cliffs  of  the  cape  and  the  placid  glassy  waters  of  the 
bay;  the  air  about  us  was  almost  breathlessly  still;  crisp, 
clear  and  sun-lit,  it  seemed  an  atmosphere  in  which  all  Nature 
should  rejoice  ;  the  silence  was  broken  only  by  the  deep  pant- 
ing of  our  engines  and  the  slow,  measured  hush  of  the  grind- 
ing floes  ;  yet,  beneath  all  ran  this  mighty,  relentless  tide, 
bearing  us  on  to  possible  destruction.  It  seemed  desperately 
unreal  that  danger  could  exist  in  the  midst  of  so  fair  a  scene, 
and  as  one  paced  to  and  fro  on  the  few  feet  of  throbbing 
plank  that  constituted  our  bridge,  it  was  difficult  to  persuade 
oneself  that  we  were  so  completely  impotent.  It  is  curious 
here  to  note  that,  except  myself,  only  those  who  were  actually 
on  watch  were  on  deck.  The  hour  was  early,  and  the  majority 
were  resting  after  their  labours  of  the  previous  night,  and  so, 
asleep  in  their  bunks  below,  they  were  happily  unconscious  of 
the  uncomfortable  possibilities  before  them  ;  and  that  they 
were  not  told  bears  testimony  to  the  fact  that  a  fuss  was  rarely 
made  in  the  '  Discovery  '  unless  there  was  some  good  reason. 
Our  release  from  this  danger  was  so  gradual  that  it  would  have 
been  difficult  to  say  when  it  happened  ;  perhaps  on  these 
occasions  one  is  always  a  little  slow  to  realise  that  things  are 
getting  better.  It  came  from  the  gradual  weakening  of  the 
tide,  and  most  unexpectedly,  because  we  had  not  looked  for 
change  in  this  for  some  hours  to  come.  But  gradually  the 
tidal  stream  slackened,  the  close-locked  floes  fell  slightly  apart, 
and  under  her  full  head  of  steam  the  '  Discovery '  began  to 
forge  ahead  towards  the  open  sea  and  safety.  By  8.20  we  had 
won  through,  and  could  breathe  a  sigh  of  relief.  For  me  the 
lesson  had  been  a  sharp  and,  I  have  no  doubt,  a  salutary  one ; 
we  were  here  to  fight  the  elements  with  their  icy  weapons,  and 
once  and  for  all  this  taught  me  not  to  undervalue  the  enemy. 

During  the  forenoon  we  were,  able  to  stand  within  seven 
or  eight  miles  of  the  high  bold  coastline  to  the  south  of  Cape 
Adare,  but  later  we  were  obliged  to  turn  outwards  to  avoid  the 


104      THE   VOYAGE   OF    THE    'DISCOVERY'     [Jan. 

heavy  streams  of  pack-ice  drifting  along  the  land,  and  this 
took  us  well  outside  the  group  of  rocky  islets  on  which 
Ross  landed,  and  which  he  named  the  Possession  Islands. 
Our  navigator  took  advantage  of  fine  weather  to  swing  the 
ship  ;  this  means  that  the  ship  was  gradually  turned  round, 
and  as  her  head  pointed  in  certain  directions,  observations  of 
the  sun  were  taken  from  which  the  error  of  the  compass  could 
be  computed.  I  have  already  explained  how  highly  important 
the  finding  of  the  compass  errors  at  various  places  was,  but  it 
should  be  added  that  since  the  error  in  any  spot  might  differ 
according  to  the  direction  of  the  ship's  head,  it  was  also 
necessary  that  an  allowance  should  be  made  for  the  particular 
direction  of  the  ship's  head  when  an  observation  was  made. 
It  was  to  obtain  this  allowance  that  the  '  Discovery '  was  swung, 
and  therein  we  held  an  immense  advantage  over  Sir  James 
Ross,  who  had  been  unable  to  manoeuvre  his  sailing-ships  in 
this  manner  ;  but  although  we  realised  the  advantage  of  swing- 
ing, it  involved  not  a  few  trials  and  tribulations  :  sometimes 
when  we  had  stopped  for  this  work,  clouds  would  come  flying 
across  the  face  of  the  sun,  and  we  had  to  wait  patiently  until 
they  had  passed;  at  others,  the  wind  would  spring  up  and 
make  the  ship  so  difficult  to  handle  that  it  was  some  time 
before  we  could  get  her  steadied  on  the  various  courses  ;  and 
as  these  delays  tended  to  fritter  away  the  valuable  hours  of 
our  open  season,  it  can  be  imagined  that  we  did  not  regard 
them  with  complacency. 

Owing  to  our  being  continually  forced  to  edge  out  to 
seaward  to  avoid  streams  of  pack,  by  the  morning  of  the  nth 
we  were  well  clear  of  the  land,  which,  however,  could  be  very 
distinctly  seen  in  the  distance,  and  gave  us  much  to  think  and 
talk  about  as  we  recognised  the  various  peaks  and  headlands 
which  Sir  James  Ross  had  named. 

We  still  stood  to  the  south,  but  our  progress  was  slow 
owing  to  a  brisk  S.E.  wind,  and  to  the  fact  that  we  were  only 
using  one  boiler.  As  I  have  pointed  out,  of  all  economies 
practised  on  board,  the  most  important  was  that  of  coal,  and 
every  device  by  which  a  saving  could  be  effected  in  this  respect 


1902]  ECONOMISING  FUEL  105 

was  worthy  of  consideration.  It  is  still  doubtful,  however 
whether  my  decision  to  use  one  boiler  commonly,  instead  of 
two,  really  effected  the  saving  I  intended.  At  this  time  the 
'  Discovery,'  with  both  boilers  alight,  would  burn  from  five  to 
six  tons  of  coal  a  day,  and  for  this  she  could  maintain  a  speed 
of  six  or  seven  knots  in  calm  water ;  with  one  boiler,  she 
would  burn  from  three  and  a  half  to  four  tons,  productive  of  a 
speed  of  four  to  five  knots  in  calm  water.  So  far  the  problem, 
though  not  very  exact,  is  capable  of  solution  ;  but  the  trouble 
is  that  a  calm  sea  is  a  rarity,  and  the  '  Discovery '  was  so 
dependent  on  wind  and  sea  that  when  these  conditions  were 
included,  the  question  was  complicated  out  of  all  recognition. 
The  problem  as  to  whether  the  ground  could  more  economi- 
cally be  got  over  with  one  boiler  or  two  was  therefore  one 
that  could  only  be  decided  by  experience.  At  this  time  we 
had  no  experience  to  guide  us  ;  for  good  or  ill  I  decided  on 
using  the  single  boiler,  and  with  rare  exceptions  this  became 
our  custom  throughout  the  summer  cruise. 

On  such  occasions  as  the  present,  however,  it  meant  that 
our  progress  against  an  adverse  wind  was  exceedingly  slow. 
On  the  nth  we  only  made  fifty-five  miles,  and  on  the  12th 
only  thirty-two  miles,  on  our  southerly  course.  The  wind 
gradually  increased,  and  the  weather  became  very  unsettled. 
On  the  afternoon  of  the  nth  we  had  a  succession  of  snow- 
storms, and  the  land  was  blotted  out  in  thick  haze.  During 
the  misty  evening  we  were  surrounded  by  large  flocks  of 
Antarctic  petrel,  which  stayed  with  us  for  a  time,  and  vanished 
as  suddenly  as  they  had  come.  Almost  immediately  after  we 
were  surrounded  with  flocks  of  snow  petrel,  quaint  little 
ghostly  forms  flitting  about  in  the  mist,  and  dropping  now  and 
again  to  the  edge  of  a  floe  to  capture  the  small  euphausia  on 
which  they  feed. 

During  the  12th  we  scarcely  made  any  headway  at  all. 
The  wind  increased  from  the  S.W.,  and  occasionally  bore  down 
on  us  in  heavy  snow  squalls.  The  low  black  rock  and  bold 
capes  of  the  coastline  stood  out  distinctly ;  but  heavy,  ominous 
clouds  obscured  the  mountains,     We  could  now  distinguish 


106       THE   VOYAGE   OF    THE    'DISCOVERY'     [Jan. 

Coulman  Island  on  our  bow,  and  by  the  morning  we  had 
brought  it  almost  abeam  ;  but  by  this  time  the  weather  bore  a 
still  more  threatening  aspect.  A  heavy  swell  came  up  from 
the  south  and  the  glass  was  falling.  There  could  be  little 
doubt  that  a  gale  was  brewing,  and  in  order  that  it  should  not 
carry  us  far  to  the  north  I  thought  it  wise  to  try  to  seek  shelter 
under  Coulman  Island.  We  turned  in  and  were  soon  amongst 
the  loose  pack-ice  and  in  smoother  water,  but  the  wind  was 
momentarily  increasing,  and  we  were  obliged  to  light  up  our 
second  boiler  in  order  to  gain  the  open-water  shelter  which  we 
could  now  see  under  the  high  cliffs  of  the  island. 

Coulman  Island,  like  all  the  coastal  land,  is  a  mass  of 
volcanic  rock,  rising  about  2,000  feet  above  the  sea.  It  is 
comparatively  fiat  on  the  top,  which  is  covered  with  an  ice-cap 
of  considerable  thickness,  and  it  is  surrounded  by  steep  and 
in  some  places  almost  vertical  cliffs.  Beneath  the  heaviest 
falls  of  neve  from  the  ice-cap,  and  clinging  to  the  steep  cliffs, 
are  fan-shaped  masses  of  ice  with  vertical  faces,  rising  as  much 
as  100  feet  above  the  sea.  These  have  all  the  appearance  of 
glacier  tongues,  though  they  can  scarcely  be  called  by  that 
name,  and  they  form  an  intermittent  ice-foot  fringing  the 
coast.  The  land  as  we  approached  it  looked  illusively  near  ; 
the  sky  was  overcast,  and  the  higher  land  was  hidden  in  cloud, 
but  beneath  this  sheet  of  grey  the  black  rocks  stood  out  with 
such  distinctness  that  one  was  wholly  deceived  as  to  their 
distance.  So  strong  was  this  deception  that  the  engines  were 
eased  when  we  were  nearly  two  miles  from  the  cliffs,  under  the 
impression  that  they  were  only  a  few  hundred  yards  away ;  we 
only  discovered  our  mistake  when  we  saw  a  colony  of  pen- 
guins, and  found  that  even  with  glasses  it  was  impossible  to 
distinguish  the  individuals.  I  find  also  1  noted  in  my  diary 
that  there  was  on  our  right  '  a  curious  indentation  like  the 
crater  of  a  volcano,'  and  this  was  really  the  strait  between  the 
island  and  the  mainland,  some  ten  miles  across. 

Afterwards  in  our  winter  quarters,  and  during  our  sledge 
journeys,  we  got  to  know  very  well  how  easily  one  could  be 
deluded  in  respect  to  distance,  and  what  extraordinarily  false 


I9Q2]  HEAVY   GALE  107 

appearances  distant  objects  would  assume.  The  matter  is  of 
more  than  passing  interest,  because  it  shows  that  one  must  be 
exceedingly  cautious  in  believing  even  what  appears  to  be  the 
evidence  of  one's  own  eyes,  and  it  largely  helps  to  explain  some 
errors  which  we  found  had  been  made  by  former  explorers, 
and  which  we  knew  must  have  been  made  in  all  good  faith. 

During  the  night  of  the  13th  we  lay  under  the  shelter  of 
the  high  cliffs  on  the  N.E.  side  of  Coulman  Island,  over 
which  had  now  gathered  a  heavy  storm  cloud  ;  the  wind  had 
risen  to  a  full  gale  at  sea,  but  only  reached  us  in  occasional 
squalls  which  swept  down  from  the  high  cliffs.  To  occupy 
our  time,  a  trawl-net  was  put  over  in  about  100  fathoms  of 
water,  and  great  was  the  delight  of  Mr.  Hodgson  when  it  was 
found  to  be  well  filled  with  specimens.  At  such  times  our 
biologist  was  in  his  element ;  on  one  side  of  him  would  be 
arrayed  a  number  of  glass  jars,  before  him  would  lie  in  one 
mass  the  mud,  stones,  and  animals  which  the  net  had  pro- 
duced. And  thus,  surrounded  by  a  circle  of  eager,  curious 
faces  he  would  work  with  fingers  and  forceps,  sorting  fish, 
sponges,  crustaceans,  and  polyzoa  into  their  proper  receptacles. 
It  was  as  much  as  anyone's  life  was  worth  to  approach  without 
invitation,  but  questions  were  allowed  and  would  be  answered, 
generally  with  a  string  of  lengthy  scientific  terms  which  left 
the  questioner  about  where  he  was  before. 

By  the  morning  of  the  14th  the  wind  had  increased  to  a 
furious  gale,  and  the  squalls  now  swept  down  over  the  cliffs 
with  such  terrific  violence  that  we  were  forced  to  exert  all  our 
one-boiler  power  to  keep  the  ship  in  her  station,  and  even  thus 
we  began  to  lose  ground.  The  ship  would  not  face  the  wind 
directly,  and  we  were  obliged  to  carry  it  on  the  bow  with  the 
yards  braced  sharp  up  ;  in  this  position  she  would  gradually 
edge  away  sideways  until  it  became  necessary  to  bring  the 
wind  on  the  other  bow  and  edge  back  again.  We  had  so  little 
control  over  her  that  we  could  not  alter  our  course  by  '  tacking,' 
but  were  obliged  to  set  a  head  sail  and  so  '  wear  '  round  with 
our  stern  to  the  wind.  In  the  afternoon  the  wind  force,  as 
measured  by  the  Robertson  anemometer,  was  ninety  miles  an 


io8       THE   VOYAGE   OF    THE    'DISCOVERY'     [Jan. 

hour,  and  as  we  continued  to  lose  ground  we  got  into  a  more 
choppy  sea,  which  sent  the  spray  over  us  in  showers  to  freeze 
as  it  fell.  As  evening  approached  we  drove  down  on  a  line  of 
pack  and  amongst  several  small  bergs,  raising  clouds  of  spray 
in  the  driving  gale.  Our  situation  was  not  pleasant ;  to  avoid 
one  berg  we  were  forced  to  go  about,  and  in  doing  so  we  ran 
foul  of  another.  As  we  came  down  on  it  our  bowsprit  just 
swept  clear  of  its  pinnacled  sides,  and  we  took  the  shock  broad 
on  our  bows  ;  it  sent  us  reeling  round,  but  luckily  on  the 
right  tack  to  avoid  further  complications,  and  we  rebounded 
clear  of  our  dangerous  neighbour.  The  night  which  followed 
was  dismal  enough  ;  again  and  again  small  bergs  appeared 
through  the  blinding  spray  and  drift,  and  it  was  only  with 
great  difficulty  that  our  unmanageable  ship  could  be  brought 
to  clear  them.  Meanwhile,  in  spite  of  our  continuous  steaming 
we  were  being  driven  farther  and  farther  to  leeward.  But 
even  gales  must  have  an  end,  and  towards  morning  there  was 
a  visible  moderation  in  the  wind,  when  we  were  able  to  creep 
up  towards  the  island  once  more.  In  the  afternoon  an  arch 
of  clear  sky  appeared  in  the  south  and  the  wind  fell  rapidly. 
We  were  able  to  steam  up  close  to  the  island  once  more  ;  and 
there,  between  two  high  tongues  of  ice  off  Cape  Wadworth,  we 
landed  on  the  steep  rocks  and  erected  a  staff  bearing  a  tin 
cylinder  with  a  further  record  of  our  voyage. 

By  the  time  this  was  accomplished  the  wind  had  fallen 
completely,  and  the  sun  shone  forth  with  great  brilliancy. 
We  entered  the  strait  between  the  island  and  the  mainland 
and  found  it  to  be  considerably  narrower  than  was  expected, 
so  that  we  soon  approached  the  high  land  of  Cape  Jones  on 
the  other  side.  At  this  time,  although  there  was  a  quantity  of 
pack  in  the  southern  limits  of  the  strait,  from  our  crow's-nest  it 
looked  as  if  it  would  not  be  difficult  to  find  clear  leads  to  the 
open  sea  beyond,  and  thus  to  pass  completely  through  the 
strait,  but  when  we  attempted  this  some  hours  later  we  found 
the  pack  closely  locked  in  the  entrance. 

To  the  southward  of  Cape  Jones  the  land  recedes  abruptly 
and  sweeps  round,  forming  a  long  bay,  behind  which  we  now 


1902]  LADY  NEWNES   BAY  109 

saw  rising  in  a  clear  sky  the  magnificent  sharp  peaks  of  Mounts 
Monteagle  and  Herschel,  and  the  high  snow- covered  ranges 
between.  From  the  summits  many  vast  glaciers  sweep  down 
with  majestic  curves  to  the  sea,  and  on  these  we  looked  with  a 
keen  eye,  calculating  the  chances  of  reaching  the  interior  over 
surfaces  which  looked  so  smooth  at  this  distance.  But  the 
most  remarkable  physical  feature  of  this  neighbourhood  is  the 
fact  that  the  whole  of  this  bay,  called  by  Mr.  Borchgrevink 
1  Lady  Newnes  Bay,'  is  filled  with  a  vast  mass  of  what  we 
subsequently  came  to  call  '  barrier '  ice,  a  sheet  of  such  thick- 
ness that  its  towering  ice-cliffs  stand  in  many  places  150  feet 
above  the  water.  On  the  origin  and  nature  of  these  extra- 
ordinary ice-formations  I  shall  have  more  to  say  in  a  future 
chapter.  At  this  time,  although  few  of  us  had  much  knowledge 
of  ice-conditions  in  other  parts  of  the  world,  we  felt  that  we  were 
gazing  on  a  phenomenon  unlike  anything  reported  elsewhere. 

On  our  passage  across  the  strait  we  had  a  very  remarkable 
instance  of  the  influence  of  volcanic  rock  on  the  compass. 
Two  successive  bearings  taken  of  a  distant  cape  showed  us 
that  the  card  had  swung  8°.  At  this  time  we  were  more  than 
a  mile  from  the  cliffs  of  the  island,  and  on  sounding  found 
forty  fathoms  of  water  beneath  us.  The  directive  force  of  the 
compass  was  of  course  extremely  small,  but  such  a  large 
deflection  is  astonishing. 

In  the  evening  we  entered  a  long  inlet  between  Cape 
Jones  and  the  barrier-ice,  and  later  turned  out  of  this  into 
a  smaller  inlet  in  the  barrier-ice  itself.  After  pushing  through 
heavy  detached  floes  we  secured  to  some  sea-ice  which, 
although  cracked  in  all  directions,  had  not  yet  broken  away. 
We  were  now  in  a  remarkably  well-sheltered  spot;  on  each 
side  we  had  high  ice-cliffs,  whilst  across  the  mouth  of  the  inlet 
lay  the  high  land  of  Cape  Jones.  On  the  sea-ice  of  the  inlet, 
which  ran  for  some  distance  ahead  of  the  ship,  more  than  a 
hundred  seals  lay  basking  in  the  sun,  and  elsewhere  a  small 
colony  of  Emperor  penguins  in  process  of  moulting  exhibited  the 
most  dishevelled  appearance,  and  evidently  hated  to  be  seen  with 
their  usually  smooth  glossy  plumage  in  such  an  untidy  state. 


no      THE   VOYAGE   OF    THE   'DISCOVERY'     [Jan. 

As  so  often  in  the  Antarctic  Regions,  we  resolved  to  turn 
night  into  day,  and,  although  it  was  10  p.m.,  to  start  about  our 
work  at  once.  Our  work  was  not  a  pleasant  task,  but  one  we 
regarded  as  very  necessary — namely,  that  of  adding  to  our 
larder  sundry  joints  of  seal.  We  felt  fairly  confident  of  finding 
a  wintering  spot  before  the  season  closed,  but  we  had  no 
guarantee  that  we  should  find  seals  in  its  vicinity,  and  it 
seemed  the  wisest  plan  to  get  them  whilst  we  could. 

The  seal  possesses  the  most  astonishing  vitality,  and 
though  nothing  can  be  easier  than  to  catch  and  wound  these 
poor  creatures,  it  is  difficult  to  kill  them  outright,  and  until 
our  men  had  had  practice  and  knew  exactly  where  to  strike, 
many  a  futile  knife-thrust  was  given. 

It  seemed  a  terrible  desecration  to  come  to  this  quiet  spot 
only  to  murder  its  innocent  inhabitants  and  stain  the  white 
snow  with  blood ;  but  necessities  are  often  hideous,  and  man 
must  live.  Some  of  us  were  glad  enough  to  get  away  on  our 
ski  and  to  climb  the  steep  snow  slopes  at  the  end  of  our  creek. 
We  found  that  the  surface  of  this  '  barrier '  mass  undulated  in 
long  waves,  some  of  which  we  crossed ;  but  knowing  we  had 
no  prospect  of  reaching  the  land,  we  soon  turned  and  employed 
ourselves  in  sliding  down  the  steep  slopes  of  the  inlet  on  our 
ski,  an  amusement  which  cost  us  many  falls. 

Leaving  the  men  to  get  in  the  seal  carcases  and  some  ice 
for  our  boilers,  I  turned  in  at  two  to  get  a  few  hours'  rest 
before  we  again  put  to  sea.  On  returning  to  the  deck  at  7.30 
I  was  told  that  ail  work  was  completed,  but  that  some  five 
hours  before  a  party  consisting  of  Dr.  Wilson,  Mr.  Ferrar, 
Cross  and  Weller  had  got  adrift  on  a  floe,  and  that  no  one  had 
thought  of  picking  them  up.  Although  the  sun  had  been 
shining  brightly  all  night,  the  temperature  had  been  down  to 
1 8°,  and  afar  off  I  could  see  four  disconsolate  figures  tramping 
about  to  keep  themselves  warm  on  a  detached  floe  not  more 
than  fifteen  yards  across.  When  at  length  our  wanderers 
scrambled  over  the  side,  it  was  very  evident  they  had  a  big 
grievance,  and  it  was  only  after  some  hot  cocoa  that  they  could 
talk  of  their  experiences  with  ease.     They  had  been  obliged  to 


igo2]  WOOD   BAY  in 

keep  constantly  on  the  move,  and  when  they  thought  of 
smoking  to  relieve  the  monotony  of  the  situation,  the  smokers 
found  they  had  pipes  and  tobacco,  but  no  match.  It  was 
whilst  they  were  dismally  discussing  this  fact  that  Dr.  Wilson, 
a  non-smoker,  came  nobly  to  the  rescue  and  succeeded  in 
producing  fire  with  a  small  pocket  magnifying  glass — a  fact 
which  shows  not  only  the  resource  of  the  officer,  but  the  power 
of  the  midnight  sun  in  these  latitudes. 

As  we  turned  the  corner  of  the  barrier-ice  cliff  I  saw  to  my 
disgust  that  the  channels  of  open  water  which  I  had  observed 
to  the  south  on  the  previous  evening  had  now  closed  up,  and 
only  thick  pack  lay  in  that  direction.  There  was  nothing  for  it 
but  to  pass  again  round  the  north  side  of  Coulman  Island, 
which,  owing  to  many  buffetings  with  loose  pack,  it  took  us  the 
whole  day  to  circumnavigate. 

On  the  17th  we  had  to  stand  out  farther  and  farther  from 
the  land  to  clear  the  pack ;  on  our  return  voyage  we  also  found 
much  pack  in  this  vicinity,  and  it  is  evident  that  Coulman 
Island  forms  a  sort  of  cnl-de-sac,  delaying  the  ice  as  it  passes 
up  the  coast. 

It  was  not  easy  under  our  varying  conditions  to  arrive  at 
the  currents  along  this  coast.  We  found  that  there  was 
evidently  a  tidal  stream  setting  alternately  north  and  south. 
Whilst  we  were  delayed  under  Coulman  Island  we  had  been 
influenced  by  this  fact,  and  had  on  occasions  seen  small  bergs 
travelling  against  the  wind ;  a  change  of  direction  in  the  stream 
had  appeared  to  us  to  occur  only  once  in  twelve  hours,  and 
this  was  supported  by  subsequent  tidal  observations. 

It  is  probable  that  the  north -running  stream  is  stronger 
than  the  south,  as  undoubtedly  the  bergs  as  well  as  the  pack- 
ice  move  gradually  to  the  north.  The  pack-ice  is  of  course 
mostly  influenced  by  the  wind,  which  at  this  season  of  the  year 
appears  to  blow  pretty  constantly  from  a  southerly  direction. 

At  2.30  a.m.  on  the  18th  we  arrived  in  the  entrance  to 
Wood  Bay,  only  to  find  it  heavily  packed.  I  had  hoped  to  be 
able  to  land  here  and  leave  a  record,  but  to  have  attempted  to 
force  through  this  heavy  ice  would  have  involved  an  unjusti- 


ii2      THE   VOYAGE   OF   THE   'DISCOVERY'    (Jan. 

fiable  expenditure  of  coal.  The  ice  we  faced  was  evidently 
that  which  had  been  formed  in  the  bay ;  it  was  from  six  to 
seven  feet  thick,  and  far  more  solid  than  anything  we  had  yet 
encountered.  Very  little  snow  had  fallen  on  the  surface  of 
the  floes,  and  except  where  some  volcanic  sand  and  rubble 
had  been  carried  on  to  them  by  the  wind,  there  was  no  sign  of 
decay.  To  run  into  floes  of  this  description  was  a  very 
different  matter  to  charging  the  comparatively  rotten  ice  which 
we  had  met  in  the  pack. 

Away  to  the  N.  and  N.W.  of  us  we  could  now  see  the 
sharp  peaks  of  Monteagle  and  Murchison,  amongst  bewilder- 
ing clusters  of  lesser  summits  ;  across  the  bay  rose  the 
magnificent  bare  cliff  of  Cape  Sibbald,  rising  2,000  feet  above 
the  sea ;  to  the  west  one  could  trace  the  breaks  in  hill-outline 
suggestive  of  the  windings  of  the  arms  of  the  bay  and  the 
glacier  valleys  beyond,  but  the  eye  lingered  most  pleasantly  on 
the  uniform  outline  of  Mount  Melbourne  to  the  S.W.  This 
fine  mountain  rears  an  almost  perfect  volcanic  cone  to  a 
height  of  9,000  feet,  and,  standing  alone  with  no  competing 
height  to  take  from  its  grandeur,  it  constitutes  the  most 
magnificent  landmark  on  the  coast.  Cape  Washington, 
a  bold,  sharp  headland,  projects  from  the  foot  of  the  moun- 
tain on  its  eastern  side,  and  finding  such  heavy  pack  in 
Wood  Bay,  we  now  turned  to  the  south  to  pass  around  this 
cape. 

From  this  point  our  voyage  promised  to  be  increasingly 
interesting,  since  the  coast  to  the  south  of  Cape  Washington 
was  practically  unknown.  Ross  seems  to  have  satisfied  himself 
that  there  was  a  continuance  of  land  to  Mount  Erebus,  but  he 
saw  it  only  at  a  very  great  distance— a  fact  which  is  attested  by 
the  absence  of  names  from  individual  mountains  and  capes. 
He  probably  did  not  see  more  than  the  dim  outline  of  hills  far 
beyond  his  horizon,  and  the  only  particular  name  he  supplies — 
that  of  Cape  Gauss — was  probably  given  to  some  darker  patch 
of  bare  mountain-side,  as  at  this  spot  there  is  no  such  con- 
spicuous cape  as  he  imagined.  I  have  already  pointed  out 
how  easily  one  may  be  deceived  in  such  a  matter,  and  it  can 


1902]  CAPE   WASHINGTON  113 

be  imagined  that  we  looked  forward  eagerly  to  exploring  this 
unknown  land. 

As  we  passed  within  half  a  mile  of  the  sheer  headland  of 
Washington  we  were  surprised  to  get  shallow  soundings.  Our 
lead  gave  us  eighteen  fathoms,  then  fifteen,  then  eight,  and  in 
this  shallow  water  our  compass  was  again  largely  disturbed. 

It  should  be  understood  that  we  were  now  south  of  the 
magnetic  pole,  and  as  the  south-seeking  end  of  the  compass 
needle  continued  to  point  towards  that  spot,  our  ship's  head, 
although  directed  to  the  true  south,  appeared  by  the  compass 
to  be  travelling  in  a  northerly  direction.  To  find  out  the 
actual  amount  of  this  error  in  different  places  was,  of  course, 
one  of  our  most  important  missions,  but  throughout  our 
voyages  in  these  seas,  where  the  error  was  so  great  and  so 
constantly  changing,  the  compass  proved  a  most  confusing 
instrument,  and  in  thick  weather  much  calculation  was 
necessary  to  determine  the  true  direction  in  which  any  new 
course  would  take  one. 

On  rounding  Cape  Washington  we  were  delighted  to  find 
that  the  coast  was  comparatively  free  of  pack.  We  could  now 
see  that  the  western  slopes  of  Melbourne  merged  into  a  range 
of  comparatively  low  hills,  which  continued  to  the  south  till 
they  rose  to  the  steep  sides  of  a  long,  high  table  mountain 
beyond  which  a  snow- covered  ridge  carried  the  outline  to 
farther  mountains  of  a  less  perfect  but  distinctly  tabular  form. 
We  were  destined  to  find  this  tabular  form  of  mountain  to  be 
a  feature  of  Victoria  Land  for  many  hundreds  of  miles  to  the 
south,  and  largely  a  key  to  the  geological  formation  of  the 
whole  country  ;  but  at  this  time  the  majority  of  us  failed  to 
appreciate  the  importance  of  this  new  development,  though  we 
were  aware  of  the  novelty  of  outline. 

The  coastline  from  Cape  Washington  sweeps  back  in  a 
deep  bay,  and  then  runs  directly  to  the  south,  in  places  fringed 
by  a  steep  ice-foot,  while  in  others  bare,  rocky  slopes  descend 
to  the  water's  edge.  Curiously  enough,  there  was  but  little 
snow  on  the  higher  mountains,  but  the  foot-hills  in  front  were 
almost  covered  with  a  thick  glacial  crust. 

vol.  1.  1 


ii4      THE   VOYAGE  OF    THE   'DISCOVERY'     [Jan. 

As  we  got  to  the  southward  of  our  table  mountain  we  could 
see  that  the  high  snow  ridge  beyond  it  represented  an  immense 
overflow  of  the  ice-mass  of  the  interior.  Some  vast  store  of 
ice  beyond  seemed  to  take  advantage  of  the  break  in  the 
mountain  chain,  and  to  pour  down  in  one  great  river  of  ice  to 
the  sea. 

The  glistening  white  surface  of  this  great  overflow,  fully 
fifteen  miles  across,  rose  gradually  to  a  height  of  some 
4,000  feet  at  the  crest  of  the  ridge,  and  no  doubt  continued 
to  rise  to  greater  height  beyond.  It  was  broken  only  in  the 
centre,  where  a  huge  beehive-shaped  nunatak  thrust  its  head 
through  the  mass  and  left  deep  furrows  in  its  snowy  surface. 
The  rich  brown  of  the  bare  basaltic  rock  of  this  nunatak  is 
conspicuously  contrasted  with  the  vast  surface  of  white  snow 
about  it,  and  therefore  constitutes  one  of  the  most  striking  land- 
marks on  the  coast,  a  most  remarkable  and  distinctive  feature. 

And  now  as  we  skirted  the  ice-foot  on  our  right  we 
found  ourselves  suddenly  brought  up  in  a  curious  inlet,  with 
ice-walls  on  every  side,  and  were  obliged  to  turn  and  retrace 
our  steps  for  some  way,  when,  still  keeping  the  ice-wall  on  our 
right,  we  found  ourselves  going  due  east  directly  away  from 
the  land.  For  many  hours  we  steamed  along  this  ice-cliff, 
which  varied  in  height  from  70  to  100  feet,  until,  after  travel- 
ling more  than  twenty  miles,  we  came  where  the  cliff  rose  to 
150  feet  in  height  and  turned  abruptly  to  the  south,  and  after 
a  mile  or  more  again  abruptly  to  the  west.  We  now  per- 
ceived that  we  had  encountered  another  example  of  the  barrier- 
ice  which  we  had  seen  in  Lady  Newnes  Bay,  but  this  time  the 
ice  ran  out  in  a  long  snout  to  seaward,  and  we  could  fit  no 
theory  to  the  fact  that  the  extremity  of  the  snout  was  higher 
than  many  parts  behind  it.  Off  the  end  of  the  snout  we 
obtained  368  fathoms  of  water — another  rather  puzzling  circum- 
stance, when  the  flotation  of  ice  was  considered. 

On  turning  the  corner  to  the  south  we  were  again  brought 
in  full  view  of  our  ancient  enemy  the  pack-ice.  Here,  as 
further  north,  it  is  evidently  detained  in  its  passage  along  the 
coast.     The  extent  of  the  pack  carried  us  some  way  to  the 


1902]  COASTING   SOUTH  115 

south  before  we  could  find  a  '  lead '  towards  the  land.  It  was 
a  gloriously  bright  Sunday  morning — so  clear  that  at  midday 
we  sighted  Mount  Erebus  at  a  distance  of  120  miles,  and  in 
the  afternoon  could  even  see  the  vapour  rising  from  the 
summit  of  that  lofty  volcano.  The  day  was  so  perfectly  clear 
that  at  one  time  we  could  see  Melbourne,  Monteagle,  and  even 
Coulman  Island  to  the  north,  and  Erebus  to  the  south;  that  is 
an  included  range  of  vision  of  240  geographical  miles. 

It  is  here  that  I  find  a  note  in  my  diary  to  the  effect  that 
the  ice-cap  of  the  interior  appeared  to  rise  beyond  the  coastal 
mountains,  and  that  patches  of  rock  could  be  seen  farther 
inland,  but  that  it  was  impossible,  owing  to  the  mirage,  to 
define  the  height  or  distance  of  such  patches.  This  note  is  of 
great  importance  in  connection  with  our  subsequent  exploration 
of  the  interior  ice.  At  6  p.m.  we  were  able  to  turn  towards 
the  land,  and  later  in  the  night  made  out  a  very  conspicuous 
bluff  cliff  in  marked  contrast  to  the  white  snow  slopes  behind. 

We  were  now  in  a  latitude  where  it  was  most  desirable  that 
we  should  make  a  diligent  search  for  safe  winter  quarters  for 
the  ship.  Wood  Bay  had  been  thought  by  many  in  England 
to  be  the  most  southerly  spot  in  which  we  were  likely  to  find 
security,  but  we  had  seen  enough  of  the  coastline  to  the  south 
of  that  place  to  realise  the  impossibility  of  travelling  along  it  in 
sledges,  and  to  assure  us  that  if  we  wished  to  make  any  advance 
to  the  south  we  must  find  a  harbour  in  some  higher  latitude. 
The  sight  of  this  bluff  cliff  seemed  to  give  promise  of  finding 
an  inlet  in  its  neighbourhood,  and  I  decided  to  make  an  effort 
to  explore  the  coast.  But  to  approach  the  land  was  not  such 
easy  work,  as  we  had  constantly  to  force  our  way  through 
streams  of  pack-ice,  and  the  floes  were  more  solid  than  any  we 
had  yet  met.  If  one  charged  them  with  any  speed  the  shock 
of  meeting  was  tremendous;  the  ship  would  stop  dead  with 
masts  and  yards  quivering,  anyone  below  might  have  imagined 
an  earthquake,  and  to  be  in  the  swaying,  trembling  crow's-nest 
on  such  an  occasion  was  anything  but  a  pleasant  sensation. 
The  only  comfortable  way  was  to  push  quietly  through,  and  so 
it  was  not  until  4  p.m.  on  the  20th  that  we  could  convince  our- 


n6       THE   VOYAGE   OF    THE    'DISCOVERY'     [Jan. 

selves  that  we  had  been  right  in  expecting  an  inlet  behind  the 
conspicuous  mass  of  rock  for  which  we  had  been  steering.  An 
hour  later,  as  we  entered  it,  we  met  ice  which  had  evidently 
been  formed  inside  and  but  recently  broken  up.  It  was  per- 
fectly smooth,  showing  absolutely  no  sign  of  pressure,  and 
therefore  indicating  what  a  secure  wintering  harbour  the  inlet 
would  make.  But  what  struck  us  as  most  curious  was  that 
every  floe  was  a  rectangle  and  looked  as  though  it  had  been 
purposely  shaped  with  accuracy  and  precision ;  it  is  difficult  to 
comprehend  how  an  irregular  ice-sheet  can  be  broken  naturally 
in  this  manner;  the  swell  which  breaks  it  must  be  extremely 
regular,  and  the  ice-sheet  must  be  astonishingly  uniform.  One 
must  infer  also  that  very  placid  conditions  exist  in  this  well- 
sheltered  inlet  both  in  winter  and  spring. 

As  we  gradually  worked  our  way  into  the  inlet  we  could 
see  on  our  right  a  few  small  crevassed  glaciers  between  high 
cliffs  showing  faulted  rock  strata,  of  which  our  geologist  at  this 
time  could  make  little.  On  the  left  and  nearer  shore  the 
steep  slopes  were  formed  of  broken  angular  boulders,  with  here 
and  there  the  native  rock  peeping  through.  Two  or  three  miles 
ahead  the  inlet  took  a  sharp  turn  to  the  left.  As  no  boat 
could  be  used  in  such  an  ice-strewn  bay,  we  were  forced  to  reach 
the  shore  by  other  means,  and  a  large  party  was  soon  bounding 
from  floe  to  floe,  now  and  then  encountering  a  breach  too 
wide  to  be  leaped  and  having  to  raft  themselves  across. 

On  shore  we  found  that  the  boulders  which  had  looked  so 
dingy  from  the  ship  were  mostly  composed  of  granite,  and  a 
little  chipping  provided  us  with  such  a  variety  of  this  beautiful 
crystalline  rock  that  we  afterwards  named  the  inlet  Granite 
Harbour.  Ice  scratchings  were  visible  on  a  few  of  the  boulders, 
but  much  weathering  had  taken  place. 

Enclosed  by  so  much  bare  rock  capable  of  absorbing  the 
sun's  rays,  and  well  protected  from  the  wind,  this  inlet  is  prob- 
ably the  most  sheltered  spot  in  many  a  league  of  coastline, 
and  in  this  calm,  bright  weather  we  thoroughly  enjoyed  our 
run  on  shore,  and,  except  for  the  ice  in  the  bay,  could  have 
imagined  ourselves  in  a  far  milder  climate.     We  found  small 


igo2]  GRANITE   HARBOUR  117 

streams  of  water  meandering  over  the  stones,  and  it  was 
pleasant  to  hear  their  music  and  to  drink  the  pure  snow  water, 
and  still  pleasanter  to  find  in  their  sheltered  courses  small 
banks  of  moss  of  almost  luxuriant  growth.  We  headed  up 
the  bay  to  see  where  the  inlet  ended  after  its  sharp  turn,  and 
disturbed'  several  skuas  guarding  their  fluffy  slate-coloured 
chicks.  They  showed  their  annoyance  by  wheeling  round  and 
swooping  down  straight  at  us,  only  turning  their  course  at  the 
very  last  moment,  so  that  one  was  sometimes  brushed  by  their 
wings  as  they  swept  past  with  wild  cries.  The  skua  is  a  heavy 
bird  with  a  very  formidable  bill,  and  such  attacks  appear 
alarming,  as  doubtless  they  are  intended  to  do ;  but  though 
we  often  saw  them  under  similar  conditions,  I  do  not  think 
anyone  was  ever  actually  struck. 

After  scrambling  over  rocks  for  some  time,  we  reached  the 
corner  from  which  we  could  see  the  extremity  of  the  inlet, 
where  the  snout  of  a  glacier  of  no  great  size  dipped  into  the 
sea.  We  saw  at  once  that  the  inner  recesses  of  this  inlet  would 
have  afforded  us  excellent  shelter  for  the  winter.  In  a  week 
or  two  the  ice  would  have  pushed  out  to  sea,  leaving  a  free 
surface  on  the  placid  waters  of  the  bay.  Around  the  second 
corner  the  sea  swell  had  fallen  to  a  small  rhythmic  movement 
which  could  have  caused  little  inconvenience.  The  steep 
shores  around  were  skirted  everywhere  with  a  low  strip  of  fast 
ice  on  which  it  would  have  been  easy  for  us  to  land,  and  across 
which  we  could  have  carried  the  heavy  materials  for  construct- 
ing our  huts.  Here  and  there  on  this  ice-foot  lay  a  somnolent 
seal,  giving  assurance  of  winter  food ;  and  although  the  waters 
of  the  inlet  were  doubtless  very  deep,  as  they  are  in  most 
fiords,  it  is  probable  that  in  the  vicinity  of  the  glacier  we  should 
have  found  some  bank  of  morainic  material  on  which  we  could 
have  cast  our  anchors  ;  in  fact,  altogether  there  was  a  promise 
of  snugness  and  security  about  this  spot  which  we  met  no- 
where else. 

It  is  only  on  looking  back  on  our  experiences  that  I  can 
see  how  much  we  should  have  missed  had  we  succumbed  to  the 
allurements  of  this  tempting  spot.     Surrounded  as  we  should 


n8      THE   VOYAGE   OF  THE   'DISCOVERY'     [Jan. 

have  been  by  steep  and  lofty  hills,  we  could  have  obtained 
only  the  most  local  records  of  climatic  conditions,  and  our 
meteorological  observations  would  have  been  comparatively 
valueless ;  but  the  greatest  drawback  would  have  been  that 
we  should  be  completely  cut  off  from  travelling  over  the  sea- 
ice  beyond  the  mouth  of  our  harbour.  There  can  be  no 
doubt  that  the  sea-ice  was  constantly  broken  up  along  this 
coast  in  the  winter  of  1902,  and  an  attempt  to  travel  to  the 
south  along  the  coast  without  the  assistance  of  the  sea-ice 
would  have  been  beset  with  such  innumerable  dangers  and 
difficulties  that  it  is  possible  we  should  never  have  reached 
even  as  far  south  as  the  spot  at  which  we  eventually  wintered. 
It  is  when  one  remembers  how  naturally  a  decision  to  return 
to  this  place  might  have  been  made  that  one  sees  how  easily 
the  results  of  the  expedition  might  have  been  missed. 

When,  after  a  stiff  climb,  we  again  came  abreast  of  the 
ship,  we  found  the  swell  had  increased,  and  it  was  only  with 
some  difficulty  that  we  regained  the  ship  over  the  swaying 
floes.  Shortly  after  midnight  we  pushed  out  to  sea,  satisfied 
that  we  had  discovered  a  place  which  would  serve  us  for 
wintering  in  default  of  a  better. 

Turning  again  to  the  south,  we  found  an  open  sea,  and 
crossed  the  77th  parallel;  but  early  on  the  21st  the  inevitable 
pack  appeared  ahead,  and  we  were  forced  away  from  the 
coast  in  trying  to  pick  the  easiest  channels.  The  ice  we  met 
with  at  first  was  not  formidable,  but  in  the  afternoon  we 
entered  a  pack  of  the  hard  solid  ice  which  we  were  now 
getting  to  know  so  well  and  to  associate  with  the  inlets  on  the 
coast.  The  moment  of  entering  this  pack  could  be  detected 
exactly  from  the  astonishing  increase  in  the  shocks  sustained 
by  the  ship. 

At  this  time  I  still  cherished  a  hope  of  being  able  to  find 
more  southerly  winter  quarters  than  Granite  Harbour,  and, 
searching  the  coastline  with  powerful  glasses,  thought  I  could 
detect  the  promise  of  such  on  our  starboard  bow,  and  so 
spent  some  hours  in  trying  to  push  throagh  the  heavy  obstruc- 
tion  that   now   met   us.      By  4   p.m.,   however,   as   we   had 


1902]  McMURDO   SOUND  119 

progressed  only  a  few  hundred  yards,  we  edged  away  to  the 
eastward,  where  things  appeared  more  promising  ;  here  we 
got  into  ice  which  looked  much  heavier,  as  it  was  thickly 
covered  with  snow,  whereas  the  ice  which  we  had  been 
attacking  was  practically  bare  and  blue.  The  line  of  demar- 
cation was  well  defined,  and  the  difference  in  the  nature  of 
the  ice  was  felt  the  moment  we  crossed  it — the  heavy  shocks 
ceased  and  the  ship  was  able  to  make  gradual  though  slow 
progress. 

I  have  dwelt  somewhat  fully  on  the  nature  of  the  pack-ice 
through  which  we  passed  at  various  times,  because  the  dif- 
ferences are  so  great,  and  because  the  subject  is  not  only  of 
great  interest  but  of  vast  importance  to  the  navigator  in  these 
seas.  It  was  always  a  fascinating  study  to  observe  the  pack- 
ice,  to  infer  the  various  conditions  under  which  the  ice  had 
been  produced,  and  to  note  the  extraordinary  differences  of 
form  that  frozen  sea-water  can  assume. 

The  night  of  the  21st  was  gloriously  fine.  By  8  a.m.  we 
were  in  the  middle  of  McMurdo  Sound,  creeping  slowly,  very 
slowly,  through  the  pack-ice,  which  appeared  from  the  crow's- 
nest  to  extend  indefinitely  ahead.  But  a  few  miles  separated 
us  from  the  spot  where  we  were  ultimately  to  take  up  our 
winter  quarters,  and  as  we  got  to  know  this  scene  so  well  it  is 
interesting  to  recall  some  extracts  from  what  I  wrote  when 
first  we  gazed  on  it :  '  To  the  right  is  a  lofty  range  of  moun- 
tains with  one  very  high  peak  far  inland,  and  to  the  south  a 
peculiar  conical  mountain,  seemingly  ending  the  coastline  in 
this  direction ;  on  the  left  is  Mount  Erebus,  its  foothills,  and 
a  glimpse  of  Mount  Terror.  The  Parry  Mountains  cannot  be 
seen  ahead  of  us.  In  the  far  distance  there  is  a  small  patch 
like  a  distant  island.  Ross  could  not  have  seen  these  patches, 
and  a  remnant  of  hope  remains  that  we  are  heading  for  a  strait, 
and  not  a  bay.' 

This  was  written  shortly  after  four,  and  at  eight  I  added  : 
'.  .  .  as  we  drove  slowly  southward  the  apparent  islands  ahead 
broadened  out,  and  there  was  no  longer  a  doubt  as  to  their 
being  connected  to  form  the  end  of  the  bay.     But  it  is  highly 


120      THE  VOYAGE  OF    THE   'DISCOVERY'    [Jan. 

satisfactory  to  note  that  there  are  no  mountains  in  the  back- 
ground, and  that  so  far  as  the  eye  can  see  there  must  be  a 
plain  stretching  directly  south.  .  .  .  We  now  see  that  if  fortune 
allows  us  to  winter  in  either  of  the  two  harbours  we  have 
found,  we  shall  have  good  prospect  of  getting  to  the  south.  .  .  . 
In  this  manner  the  coastline  to  the  south  for  nearly  400  of  arc 
is  suggested  by  five  dark  rock  patches  and  their  connecting 
snow  slopes,  this  space  being  flanked  on  the  right  by  the 
conical  hill  and  on  the  left  by  a  spur  of  Erebus,  which  appears 
to  form  a  sharp  headland.'  It  was  easy  afterwards  to  recognise 
each  point  here  noticed  when,  actually  situated  at  the  •  spur  of 
Erebus,'  we  named  the  conical  mountain  after  our  ship,  and 
the  high  western  mountains  in  honour  of  the  Royal  Society ; 
but  it  is  curious  to  think  that  at  this  time  I  should  have  been 
prepared  to  affirm  that  continuous  land  ran  from  Erebus  to 
the  mainland. 

So  at  8  p.m.  on  the  21st  we  thought  we  knew  as  much  of 
this  region  as  our  heavy  expenditure  of  coal  in  the  pack-ice 
would  justify  us  in  finding  out,  and  as  before  us  lay  the  great 
unsolved  problem  of  the  barrier  and  of  what  lay  beyond  it,  we 
turned  our  course  with  the  cry  of  Eastward  ho  ! 


1902  121 


CHAPTER   V 

ALONG    THE    GREAT    BARRIER 

Strange  Footprints — Landing  under  Mount  Terror — The  Last  Record 
Left — Along  the  Great  Barrier — New  Land — Foggy  Weather — 
Surrounded  by  Bergs — We  Lose  our  Bearings — Decision  to  Turn 
Back— Good  View  of  King  Edward's  Land— Landing  on  the  Barrier 
— Balloon  Ascent — Return  to  Victoria  Land. 

She  skirts  the  icy  margin  of  the  main, 

And  where  unchanging  from  the  first  of  time 

Snows  swell  on  snows  amazing  to  the  sky, 

And  icy  mountains  high  on  mountains  pil'd 

Seem  to  the  shivering  sailor  from  afar 

Shapeless  and  white,  an  atmosphere  of  cloud. — THOMSON. 

In  our  journey  from  Cape  Washington  to  the  south  we  had 
already  done  something  to  justify  the  despatch  of  the  expedition. 

A  coastline  which  had  hitherto  been  seen  only  at  a  great 
distance,  and  reported  so  indefinitely  as  to  leave  doubts  in 
many  minds  with  regard  to  its  continuity,  had  been  resolved 
into  a  concrete  chain  of  mountains ;  the  positions  and  forms 
of  individual  heights,  with  the  curious  ice  formations  and  the 
general  line  of  the  coast,  had  been  observed.  The  lofty  peaks 
of  Northern  Victoria  Land  had  been  seen  to  be  succeeded  by 
a  comparatively  low  mountainous  country  of  peculiarly  sugges- 
tive topographical  outline,  behind  which  a  vast  interior  ice-cap 
appeared  to  rise  to  greater  heights.  Towards  the  78th  parallel 
the  flanking  ranges  of  the  continent  again  rose  to  great 
altitudes,  and  yet  farther  south  we  could  see  no  tendency  in 
them  to  turn  towards  the  east  as  had  been  supposed. 

In  all  this  we  had  been  aided  by  the  most  astonishingly 


122      THE  VOYAGE   OF   THE   'DISCOVERY'    [Jan. 

fine  weather ;  instead  of  the  gales,  thick  weather,  and  snow- 
storms which  we  had  expected,  since  the  heavy  weather  off 
Coulman  Island,  we  had  daily  enjoyed  bright  sunshine,  cloud- 
less skies,  and  calm  seas.  We  could  but  hope  such  good 
fortune  would  continue  on  our  journey  to  the  eastward. 

As  we  turned  on  the  night  of  the  21st  to  push  our  way  to 
the  open  sea  once  more,  we  had  a  rather  curious  and  exciting 
adventure.  Owing  to  some  inexplicable  wounds  found  on  the 
bodies  of  seals,  it  had  been  suggested  that  a  land  mammal 
might  exist  in  these  regions,  though  hitherto  unseen  by  man. 
Most  of  us  were  incredulous  of  this  theory,  but  on  that  night 
we  suddenly  came  on  a  floe  covered  with  soft  snow  which  bore 
the  impress  of  footprints  wide  apart  and  bearing  every  ap- 
pearance of  having  been  made  by  a  large  land  animal.  The 
excitement  was  great,  and  observers  with  cameras  were  soon 
over  the  side  and  breathlessly  examining  this  strange  spoor ; 
but,  alas  !  it  was  soon  detected  that  the  impress  was  that  of  a 
webbed  foot,  and  gradually  we  came  to  the  conclusion  that 
the  footprints  were  those  of  a  large  giant  petrel,  and  that  their 
distance  apart  was  due  to  the  fact  that  they  had  been  made 
when  the  bird,  half-flying  and  half-walking,  had  been  lazily 
rising  on  the  wing.  Even  the  most  imaginative  had  to  concede 
that  we  had  not  increased  the  prospect  of  finding  a  Polar  bear 
or  any  kindred  animal  in  these  inhospitable  regions.  Shortly 
after  midnight  we  reached  the  open  water  and  shaped  our 
course  to  pass  between  Beaufort  Island  and  the  long  snow 
capes  of  Erebus. 

In  the  morning  we  stopped  to  sound  and  dredge  in  this 
channel;  we  found  a  depth  of  470  fathoms,  but  the  fouling 
of  our  trawl  rendered  our  catch  of  sea  beasts  somewhat 
disappointing. 

The  volcanoes  of  Erebus  and  Terror  lie  west  and  east, 
united  by  a  high  humped  ridge ;  to  the  N.W.  of  Erebus 
extends  the  long  and  lofty  Cape  Bird,  whilst  to  the  N.E.  of 
Terror,  the  slopes,  blistered  with  innumerable  volcanic  cones, 
descend  to  the  splendid  basaltic  cliffs  of  Cape  Crozier. 

The  northern  face  of  this  land  is  heavily  glaciated,  masses 


i902].  MOUNT  TERROR  123 

of  crevassed  neve  descending  to  the  sea,  with  a  precipitous  ice- 
foot, except  on  the  northern  and  N.E.  slopes  of  Terror,  where 
the  snow  only  occupies  the  deeper  valleys,  and  where  there 
are  such  extensive  areas  of  bare  land  that  it  looks  quite 
possible  to  ascend  Mount  Terror  without  encountering 
snow  slopes.  In  this  region  the  land  has  therefore  a 
very  dark  appearance  from  the  water's  edge  to  the  summit  of 
Terror. 

It  was  this  northerly  view  of  Erebus  and  Terror  that  Ross 
saw  in  his  early  voyages,  and  it  is  interesting  to  note  that  the 
sketches  made  at  that  time  show  no  extent  of  bare  land  j  more- 
over, Sir  Joseph  Hooker,  the  great  survivor  of  that  expedition, 
has  told  me  he  is  almost  certain  that  the  slopes  of  Terror  were 
covered  with  snow  when  he  saw  them.  Can  it  be  possible 
that  the  sheet  of  ice  which  exists  elsewhere  can  have  dis- 
appeared from  this  region  within  the  comparatively  short  space 
of  sixty  years  ? 

At  8  p.m.  we  arrived  off  the  bare  land  to  the  westward  of 
Cape  Crozier,  where  the  dark  volcanic  hillside  reached  the  sea 
in  gentle  slopes ;  thousands  of  small  Adtllie  penguins  were 
passing  to  and  fro  on  the  shelving  beach,  hurrying  up  steep 
winding  paths  to  their  nests,  or  springing  into  the  curling 
breakers  to  seek  their  food. 

We  thought  at  first  it  might  prove  impossible  to  land,  owing 
to  the  northerly  swell  which  broke  high  on  the  rocky  promon- 
tories, but  immediately  off  the  beach  of  the  rookery  lay  a 
number  of  grounded  bergs  which  promised  to  form  some 
protection  from  the  waves.  One  of  our  staunch  whaleboats 
was  soon  lowered  into  the  water,  and,  somewhat  crowded  with 
sixteen  persons  and  a  number  of  magnetic  instruments,  we 
pulled  for  the  land.  On  nearing  the  shore  we  found  that  in 
spite  of  the  icebergs  the  surf  was  considerable,  and  as  we  did 
not  at  all  wish  to  be  upset  into  this  icy  sea,  we  approached  the 
beach  with  great  caution.  With  our  bows  pointing  to  the  shore 
we  waited  for  a  heavy  wave,  when  a  sharp  order  was  followed 
by  a  strain  on  the  oars,  and  we  were  carried  to  the  beach  on 
its  crest ;  regardless  of  wet  feet,  all  hands  had  then  to  leap  out, 


i24      THE  VOYAGE  OF    THE   'DISCOVERY'    Qan. 

and  heaving  lustily  on  the  painter  and  thwarts  we  soon  had  the 
boat  high  and  dry. 

We  proposed  at  this  place  to  complete  our  chain  of  records, 
and  had  brought  with  us  a  post,  a  tin  cylinder  containing  an 
account  of  our  doings,  and  the  necessary  implements  for  erect- 
ing them.  A  spot  was  chosen  in  the  centre  of  the  penguin 
rookery  on  a  small  cliff  overlooking  the  sea,  and  here  our  post 
was  set  up  and  firmly  anchored  with  numerous  boulders.  In 
spite  of  all  our  efforts  to  mark  the  place  at  a  few  hundred 
yards  it  was  almost  impossible  to  distinguish  it,  and  one  could 
not  help  thinking  that,  should  disaster  come  to  the  expedition, 
what  a  poor  reed  was  this  on  which  alone  we  could  trust  to 
afford  our  friends  a  clue  to  our  whereabouts.  Yet  it  was  this 
small  post  on  the  side  of  a  vast  mountain,  in  the  midst  of  the 
most  extensive  penguin  rookery  we  had  seen,  that  eventually 
brought  the  '  Morning '  to  our  side. 

Whilst  Bernacchi  and  Barne  set  up  their  magnetic  instru- 
ments and  started  on  their  chilly  task  of  taking  observations 
we  others  set  off  in  twos  and  threes  to  climb  the  hillside  in 
various  directions;  it  was  long  before  we  could  get  clear  of 
the  innumerable  penguin  colonies  and  the  all-pervading  odour 
which  they  emit ;  and  as  they  occupy  every  inch  of  available 
land  we  found  ourselves  clambering  up  steep  screes  of  loose 
stones,  and  climbing  still  steeper  friable  rock  faces,  getting 
what  hold  we  could  on  the  deeply  weathered  surface.  With 
Royds  and  Wilson  I  at  length  reached  the  summit  of  the 
highest  of  the  adjacent  volcanic  cones,  for  which  our  aneroids 
gave  a  height  of  1,350  feet ;  there  we  were  rewarded  by  a  first 
view  of  the  Great  Ice  Barrier.  Perhaps  of  all  the  problems 
which  lay  before  us  in  the  south  we  were  most  keenly  interested 
in  solving  the  mysteries  of  this  great  ice-mass.  Sixty  years 
before  Ross's  triumphant  voyage  to  the  south  had  been 
abruptly  terminated  by  a  frowning  cliff  of  ice,  which  he  traced 
nearly  400  miles  to  the  east ;  such  a  phenomenon  was  unique, 
and  for  sixty  years  it  had  been  discussed  and  rediscussed,  and 
many  a  theory  had  been  built  on  the  slender  foundation  of 
fact  which  alone  the  meagre  information  concerning  it  could 


i9o2]  ENRAGED   PENGUINS  125 

afford.  Now  for  the  first  time  this  extraordinary  ice-formation 
was  seen  from  above.  The  sea  to  the  north  lay  clear  and 
blue,  save  where  it  was  dotted  by  snowy- white  bergs;  the 
barrier  edge,  in  shadow,  looked  like  a  long  narrowing  black 
ribbon  as  it  ran  with  slight  windings  to  the  eastern  horizon. 
South  of  this  line,  to  the  S.E.  of  our  position,  a  vast  plain 
extended  indefinitely,  whilst  faint  shadows  on  its  blue-grey 
surface  seemed  to  indicate  some  slight  inequality  in  level ; 
further  yet  to  the  south  the  sun  faced  us,  and  the  plain  was 
lost  in  the  glitter  of  its  reflection.  It  was  an  impressive  sight, 
and  the  very  vastness  of  what  lay  at  our  feet  seemed  to  add  to 
our  sense  of  its  mystery. 

But  there  was  now  160  of  frost,  the  chill  air  soon  counter- 
acted the  warmth  generated  by  our  climb,  and  we  were  glad 
to  be  again  on  the  move.  As  we  stumbled  down  the  steep 
inclines  of  the  penguin  rookery  the  astonished  chicks  ran 
helter-skelter  in  all  directions  ;  following  blindly  the  direction 
in  which  their  beaks  were  pointing  they  frequently  collided 
with  each  other  and  ran  full  tilt  into  our  legs.  It  was  often 
difficult  to  avoid  treading  on  them  j  but  as  the  chicks  scattered, 
the  old  birds  raised  their  ruffs  in  anger,  and,  quite  devoid  of 
fear,  rushed  at  us  with  hoarse  cries  of  rage.  After  beating  wildly 
at  our  shins  with  their  beaks  and  flippers  they  would  fall  back 
growling  and  cursing  in  the  most  abominable  manner.  Shortly 
after  we  regained  the  beach  our  magnetic  observers  completed 
their  task,  and  when  they  had  taken  a  short  run  to  rouse  up 
their  chilled  circulation  we  all  assembled  to  launch  the  boat. 

This  did  not  prove  by  any  means  an  easy  matter.  Await- 
ing our  opportunity,  we  rushed  her  down  on  a  receding  wave, 
and  up  to  our  knees  in  water  we  endeavoured  to  launch  her 
clear  of  the  surf  and  at  the  same  time  to  spring  on  board ;  but 
the  next  wave  caught  our  stern,  and  in  a  moment  we  were 
broadside  on  and  in  imminent  risk  of  being  swamped.  It  was 
an  occasion  which  called  for  instant  action,  and  when  it  was 
good  to  have  a  boat  manned  by  sailors.  At  the  critical 
moment  Mr.  Barne  leapt  over  the  side  and  seized  the  stern  of 
the  boat,  and  his  example  was  instantly  followed  by  two  or 


126      THE   VOYAGE   OF    THE    'DISCOVERY'     [Jan. 

three  of  the  sailors ;  and  though  the  next  curling  wave  swept 
over  these  devoted  people,  the  boat  luckily  met  it  stern  on  and 
was  poled  out  to  sea  as  it  receded.  It  was  not  a  time  when 
one  would  willingly  take  a  bath,  and  our  wet  companions  were 
glad  to  seize  the  oars  and  pull  as  hard  as  they  could  towards 
the  ship ;  but  by  this  time  Mr.  Armitage,  in  swinging  the  ship, 
had  been  carried  some  way  to  the  west,  so  that  when  we  got 
on  board,  teeth  were  chattering  and  hot  cocoa  or  grog  was  felt 
to  be  very  desirable. 

From  Cape  Crozier  the  land  turns  sharply  to  the  south  in  a 
magnificent  black  volcanic  cliff  in  parts  700  or  800  feet  sheer 
above  the  sea.  The  barrier  edge  extends  at  right  angles  from 
the  southern  end  of  the  cliff,  and  at  first  has  a  very  rugged 
appearance  where  the  ice-mass  presses  past  the  land,  but  within 
a  few  miles  it  settles  down  into  its  uniform  wall-like  aspect. 

Early  on  the  23rd  we  started  to  steam  along  this  long  ice- 
face,  hoping  that  fortune  would  favour  us  in  discovering  more 
facts  concerning  it,  and  especially  in  finding  out  what  lay  at  its 
eastern  extremity.  In  order  that  nothing  important  should  be 
missed,  it  was  arranged  that  the  ship  should  continue  to  skirt 
close  to  the  ice-cliff;  that  the  officers  of  the  watch  should 
repeatedly  observe  and  record  its  height,  and  that  thrice  in  the 
twenty-four  hours  the  ship  should  be  stopped  and  a  sounding 
taken.  In  this  manner,  during  the  following  days,  we  were 
able  to  make  a  comparatively  accurate  survey  of  this 
northern  limit  of  the  barrier,  and  the  result  is  indicated  on  the 
chart. 

On  the  morning  of  the  23rd  we  found  that  the  barrier  edge 
did  not  exceed  sixty  or  seventy  feet  in  height,  and  though  the 
weather  was  slightly  overcast  we  could  see  for  a  long  distance 
over  the  ice  to  the  S.W.  from  our  crow's-nest.  It  was  on 
looking  in  this  direction,  but  from  a  greater  distance,  that  Ross 
thought  he  distinctly  saw  a  high  range  of  mountains  running  to 
the  south  from  Mount  Terror.  He  described  them  as  '  prob- 
ably higher  than  anything  we  have  yet  seen,'  and  named 
them  the  Parry  Mountains.  It  will  be  remembered  that  when 
in  McMurdo  Sound  I  had  some  doubt  as  to  these  mountains, 


igo2]  ALONG  THE   GREAT   BARRIER  127 

and  it  is  therefore  of  interest  to  note  the  entry  made  in  my 
diary  on  this  occasion  : 

'  Over  the  barrier  and  to  the  S.W.  could  be  seen  some 
small  or  apparently  small  hills,  showing  bare  rock  patches,  but 
nothing  could  be  seen  of  the  Parry  Mountains,  and  judging  by 
our  position  two  days  ago  we  seem  to  have  been  viewing  the 
hills  which  form  or  are  close  to  the  limits  of  McMurdo  Bay. 
.  .  .  The  southern  slope  of  Erebus  can  be  distinctly  seen.  .  .  . 
There  seems  every  probability  of  getting  over  this  slope  on  to 
the  ice-plain  if  we  winter  west.' 

Already  there  was  a  strong  case  against  the  Parry  Moun- 
tains, and  later  we  knew  with  absolute  certainty  that  they  did 
not  exist ;  it  is  difficult  to  understand  what  can  have  led  such 
a  cautious  and  trustworthy  observer  as  Ross  to  make  such  an 
error.  I  am  inclined  to  think  that  in  exaggerating  the  height 
of  the  barrier  in  this  region,  he  was  led  to  suppose  that  any- 
thing seen  over  it  at  a  distance  must  necessarily  be  of  very 
great  altitude  ;  but,  whatever  the  cause,  the  fact  shows  again 
how  deceptive  appearances  may  be  and  how  easily  errors  may 
arise.  In  fact,  as  I  have  said  before,  one  cannot  always  afford 
to  trust  the  evidence  of  one's  own  eyes. 

On  steaming  along  the  barrier,  we  soon  found  that  Ross 
had  exaggerated  not  only  its  height,  but  its  uniformity.  This 
was  perhaps  natural,  as  in  a  sailing  ship  he  dared  not  approach 
too  closely,  and  often  had  to  estimate  the  height  when  at  a 
great  distance ;  and  the  want  of  uniformity  can  only  be  deter- 
mined by  close  measurement.  It  can  be  readily  imagined  that 
even  if  the  height  changes  from  70  to  240  feet  in  ten  miles,  the 
change  is  so  gradual  that  it  cannot  be  detected  by  the  eye  at  a 
distance,  as  the  higher  part  will  only  appear  to  be  closer. 
The  only  way  in  which  the  inequality  can  be  detected  is  to 
follow  the  wall  closely,  when  the  change  of  height  must  be 
obvious.  Ross  had  to  judge  his  barrier  from  the  very  few 
places  in  which  he  was  able  to  approach  it  closely. 

Though  we  started  with  a  long  stretch  of  barrier  not  more 
than  70  feet  high,  by  the  evening  of  the  23rd  it  had  risen  to 
240  feet.     During  the  night  the  wind  came  off  the  barrier,  and 


128       THE   VOYAGE   OF    THE    'DISCOVERY'     [Jan. 

the  temperature  fell  to  io° ;  shortly  after,  it  again  came  from 
the  sea,  and  the  temperature  rose  to  250.  Later,  this  change 
of  temperature  with  a  shift  of  wind  became  still  more  marked, 
and  already  we  began  to  wonder  what  that  great  snow  plain 
would  be  like  in  winter  if  it  produced  this  great  fall  in  the 
warmer  summer  air.  Up  to  this  time  our  clothing  had  been 
little  out  of  the  ordinary,  but  we  now  found  that  standing 
about  on  the  bridge  or  sitting  in  the  crow's-nest  was  chilly 
work,  and  warmer  garments  were  dug  out  of  our  various  drawers 
and  lockers. 

Though  we  were  several  days  steaming  along  this  ice-wall, 
the  passage  was  by  no  means  monotonous.  Every  few 
hours  some  new  variation  showed  itself  :  now  a  sharp  inlet  or 
other  irregularity  of  outline,  now  a  more  than  ordinary  alteration 
in  height,  now  a  change  in  appearance  showing  a  difference  in 
the  length  of  time  that  the  ice-face  had  been  exposed ;  and 
throughout  we  could  watch  the  gradual  shoaling  or  deepening 
of  the  sea-floor  as  shown  by  the  sounding  machine.  My  diary 
is  principally  devoted  to  figures  giving  the  definite  data  con- 
cerning these  matters  ;  but  a  few  more  general  extracts  may 
serve  to  give  an  idea  of  our  progress  along  the  ice-wall  from 
day  to  day  : 

'  January  24. — Barrier  fell  from  240  feet  to  80,  and  later  to 
50,  but  gradually  rose  again  in  the  evening  to  90.  Soundings 
both  over  and  under  400  fathoms.  Barrier  sometimes  very 
broken  and  rugged  in  outline.  Passed  some  bergs  and  sharp 
inlets.  Noon,  long.  176.45  E.,  progress  86^  miles.  In  evening 
weather  became  overcast  with  snow.' 

' January  25. — Barrier  fell  in  night  to  30,  gradually  rose  to 
80  feet,  when  there  was  a  sudden  dip  for  200  yards  to  15  feet. 
In  afternoon  irregular  rise  to  100  feet  at  midnight.  Put  sail 
on  the  ship  in  morning  watch,  but,  wind  hauling  ahead, 
obliged  to  clew  up.  Passed  over  fifty  icebergs  in  course  of 
the  day,  the  first  we  have  seen  since  leaving  Cape  Crozier. 
They  were  mostly  irregular  in  shape,  but  two,  close  to  the 
barrier,  had  evidently  recently  calved  off  that  mass  ;  the  line  of 
separation  was  very  regular  and  even,  and  the  bergs  floated  in 


1902]  ALONG  THE   GREAT   BARRIER  129 

precisely  the  same  manner  as  they  had  when  they  formed  part 
of  the  ice-sheet.  Noon,  long.  184  E.,  progress  91  miles. 
Evening,  appear  to  be  passing  inside  a  very  large  berg  detached 
from  the  barrier.     Sounding  350  to  300  fathoms.' 

'  January  26. — The  iceberg  on  the  port  bow  turned  out  to 
be  attached  to  the  barrier  ;  we  appeared  to  be  steaming  through 
a  long  channel  until  5  a.m.,  when  we  found  ourselves  at  the 
head  of  an  inlet.  The  ice  on  our  right-hand  side  gradually 
sloped  down  from  120  feet  to  20  feet  at  the  extremity  of  the 
inlet ;  here  it  suddenly  dropped  to  8  feet,  and  on  our  left  very 
gradually  rose  again  to  90  feet.  Our  sounding  here  was  315 
fathoms,  and  our  lat.  78.36  S.,  the  highest  we  have  reached. 
The  weather  was  very  misty  and  overcast,  and  we  could  not 
see  the  ending  of  our  channel  until  we  were  close  on  it.  There 
was  nothing  to  be  done  but  to  turn  round  and  come  out  again, 
and  on  reaching  the  end  of  the  ice-cliff,  now  on  our  right,  we 
found  a  stiff  E.N.E.  breeze  blowing,  with  a  short  sea  causing 
the  ship  to  pitch  heavily.  The  temperature  had  risen  to  310. 
As  we  could  not  hope  to  make  headway  against  this  wind,  we 
made  plain  sail  on  clearing  the  inlet,  and  allowing  our  steam 
to  drop,  we  stood  to  sea  close-hauled  on  the  starboard  tack. 
Later,  the  wind,  which  never  blew  above  force  7,  backed  to 
the  S.E.,  and  not  wishing  to  run  too  far  from  the  barrier,  we 
put  about  at  8  p.m.  The  glass,  which  has  been  low,  is  again 
rising.' 

'  January  27. — During  the  night  the  glass  rose  and  the  wind 
fell,  and  as  we  approached  the  barrier  we  put  over  our 
"Agassiz"  trawl;  the  contents  were  not  plentiful,  but,  I 
understand,  contain  several  new  species.  In  the  afternoon  we 
furled  sails  and  steamed  towards  the  barrier.  When  we 
started  to  steam  along  it,  we  were  evidently  making  little  or  no 
headway  against  a  westerly  set  of  at  least  three  knots.  Our 
very  slow  progress  hitherto  has  been  to  a  great  extent  due  to 
an  adverse  current,  which  is  much  stronger  at  some  times  than 
at  others  :  it  is  not  improbable  that  there  is  a  tidal  effect 
which  alternately  accelerates  and  retards  the  current,  but  the 
net  result  is  a  strong  set  to  the  west.  The  present  excessive 
vol.  1.  k 


i3o       THE   VOYAGE   OF   THE    'DISCOVERY'     [Jan. 

force  of  the  stream  is  probably  due  to  the  recent  wind.  We 
shall  have  to  light  up  our  second  boiler.  Along  the  barrier 
there  is  a  heavy  vapour  rising  from  the  water,  and  the  water 
temperature  has  risen  half  a  degree. 

'Noon,  long.  174.22  W.  ;  negative  progress  for  the  day, 
and  only  a  very  few  miles  to  the  eastward  of  our  position  on 
the  25  th.  .  .  .  Two  whole  days  practically  wasted ;  one 
requires  a  great  deal  of  patience  for  this  sort  of  work.  Tried 
a  new  sounding  tube,  made  with  the  object  of  getting  mud 
from  below  the  surface  ;  the  tube  brought  up  a  column  of 
mud  18  inches  in  length,  but  there  appeared  to  be  no  differ- 
ence in  consistency  between  the  upper  and  lower  layers.' 

'  January  28. — Passed  abeam  of  the  ice  peninsula  inside 
which  we  steamed  on  the  night  of  the  25th.  It  rose  from 
90  to  150  feet,  and  soundings  off  its  edge  were  all  about 
300  fathoms.  About  noon  a  lot  of  loose  ice  appeared  ahead. 
It  was  found  to  consist  of  very  low  bergs  and  pieces  of  bergs, 
apparently  broken  from  the  barrier  where  it  is  quite  low, 
and  probably  some  way  to  the  east,  as  the  westerly  drift  is 
strong.  We  were  obliged  to  stand  some  way  off  the  barrier  to 
avoid  this  ice,  and  at  4  p.m.  a  thick  fog  came  down  on  us.  In 
the  evening  the  weather  cleared,  and  we  stood  in  towards  the 
barrier  again,  passing  a  prominent  ice  peninsula  with  a  cliff 
200  feet  in  height.  The  barrier  was  again  very  irregular,  and 
detached  bergs  could  be  seen  in  the  various  indents.  Noon, 
long.  167.44  W.  Progress,  80  miles.  We  are  passing  on 
slowly  but  surely  to  Ross's  most  easterly  position.' 

'■January  29. — The  barrier  became  very  rugged  and  broken 
during  the  night,  and  soon  after  twelve  it  dropped  to  a  few 
feet.  We  were  running  close  to  it  in  a  fairly  thick  fog,  but  the 
speed  was  not  great,  and  with  a  sharp  look-out,  the  ice  could 
be  seen  in  good  time.  At  2.30  we  ran  into  a  small  creek,  only 
noticing  our  position  by  finding  ice  on  both  sides  ;  that  on  the 
right  was  barely  three  or  four  feet  above  the  water,  sloping 
gradually  up  to  30  to  40  feet ;  that  on  the  left  was  from  30  to 
40  feet  and  sheer.  The  inlet  was  most  irregular  in  shape,  as, 
indeed,  was  the  ice  surface. 


1902]  AN   INTERESTING  SPOT  131 

'  This  morning  the  low  edge  continued  for  several  hours, 
and  during  the  day  we  passed  along  a  very  smooth,  straight 
cliff  of  uniform  height,  and  again  to  our  annoyance,  found  the 
current  making  to  the  west  so  strong  that  our  progress  was 
practically  stopped  until  we  could  raise  more  steam.  Sound- 
ings for  day  all  about  360  fathoms.  Noon,  long.  162.6  W.  ; 
lat.  78.18  S.  Passed  a  curious  subsidence  in  the  uniform  ice- 
wall,  where  for  some  300  yards  there  was  a  depression  filled 
with  hummocky  ice.' 

We  had  succeeded  thus  far  in  making  a  fairly  complete 
investigation  of  the  northern  face  of  the  barrier  in  spite  of  not 
a  little  thick  and  unpleasant  weather,  and,  as  will  be  gathered, 
we  had  found  not  only  that  it  differed  considerably  from  the 
rather  uniform  ice-wall  which  Ross  had  led  us  to  expect,  but 
that  there  were  many  puzzling  features  which  seemed  to  in- 
crease rather  than  diminish  as  we  approached  its  eastern 
extremity.  It  was  not  until  later,  when  our  positions  were 
plotted,  that  we  fully  realised  the  significance  of  the  fact  that 
our  course  throughout  had  been  to  the  southward  of  Ross's 
barrier,  and  that  we  had  sailed  continuously  over  ground  which 
in  his  day  had  been  covered  with  a  solid  ice-sheet. 

What  we  thought  of  it  all  I  do  not  propose  to  set  down  at 
present,  but  I  hope  that,  having  added  other  facts  which  we 
were  able  to  glean  concerning  it,  I  shall  be  able  to  throw  some 
light  at  least  on  this  very  extraordinary  ice  formation. 

By  noon  on  this  day,  January  29,  we  had  arrived  at  a 
particularly  interesting  place,  as  we  were  to  the  southward  and 
eastward  of  the  extreme  position  reached  by  Sir  James  Ross 
in  1842.  From  that  extreme  position  he  reported  a  strong 
appearance  of  land  to  the  south-east,  and  in  most  minds  there 
rested  the  conviction  that  land  had  actually  been  seen  at  that 
time.  It  was  therefore  with  great  curiosity  that  all  eyes  were 
directed  over  the  icy  cliffs  to  the  south-east.  The  afternoon 
was  bright  and  clear,  and  if  Ross  had  seen  land  it  must 
evidently  be  well  within  our  view. 

But  alike  from  below  and  from  aloft  we  could  see  nothing, 
and  were  obliged  to  conclude  that  the  report  was  based  on 


1 32       THE  VOYAGE   OF  THE   'DISCOVERY'    [Jan. 

one  of  those  strange  optical  illusions  which  are  so  common  in 
this  region,  and  against  which,  now  more  than  ever,  we  were 
determined  to  guard  ourselves. 

In  spite  of  our  disappointment  at  being  unable  to  report 
that  Ross's  •  appearance  of  land '  rested  on  a  solid  foundation, 
as  we  steamed  along  this  high  ice-wall  on  the  afternoon  of  the 
29th  we  had  an  indescribable  sense  of  impending  change. 
The  constant  differences  which  we  had  observed  in  the  barrier 
outline  during  the  past  twenty-four  hours  seemed  to  us  to 
indicate  strongly  the  proximity  of  land,  though  probably  none 
of  us  could  have  produced  a  very  tangible  argument  to  sup- 
port this  view.  We  all  felt  that  the  plot  was  thickening,  and 
we  could  not  fail  to  be  inspirited  by  the  facts  that  we  had  not 
so  far  encountered  the  heavy  pack-ice  which  Ross  reported  in 
this  region,  and  that  consequently  we  were  now  sailing  in  an 
open  sea  into  an  unknown  world. 

Many  an  eager  face  peered  over  the  side  ;  now  and  then  a 
more  imaginative  individual  would  find  some  grand  discovery 
in  the  cloud-forms  that  fringed  the  horizon,  but  even  as  he 
reported  it  in  excited  tones  his  image  would  fade  and  he  would 
be  forced  to  sink  again  into  crestfallen  silence. 

Meanwhile  we  were  making  comparatively  rapid  progress 
along  the  uniform  high  wall  on  our  right.  Perhaps  the  engines, 
as  well  as  those  in  charge  of  them,  were  eager  to  find  out  what 
lay  beyond.  Our  course  lay  well  to  the  northward  of  east, 
and  the  change  came  at  8  p.m.,  when  suddenly  the  ice-cliff 
turned  to  the  east,  and,  becoming  more  and  more  irregular, 
continued  in  that  direction  for  about  five  miles,  when  it  again 
turned  sharply  to  the  north. 

Into  the  deep  bay  thus  formed  we  ran,  and  as  we  ap- 
proached the  ice  which  lay  ahead  and  to  the  eastward  of  us 
we  saw  that  it  differed  in  character  from  anything  we  had  yet 
seen.  The  ice-foot  descended  to  varying  heights  of  ten  or 
twenty  feet  above  the  water,  and  behind  it  the  snow  surface 
rose  in  long  undulating  slopes  to  rounded  ridges  whose  height 
we  could  only  estimate.  If  any  doubt  remained  in  our  minds 
that  this  was  snow-covered  land,  a  sounding  of  100  fathoms 


i902]  NEW  LAND  133 

quickly  dispelled  it.  But  what  a  land  !  On  the  swelling 
mounds  of  snow  above  us  there  was  not  one  break,  not 
a  feature  to  give  definition  to  the  hazy  outline.  In- 
stinctively one  felt  that  such  a  scene  as  this  was  most  per- 
fectly devised  to  produce  optical  illusions  in  the  explorer,  and 
to  cause  those  errors  into  which  we  had  found  even  experienced 
persons  to  be  led.  What  could  be  the  height  of  that  misty 
summit  ?  And  what  the  distance  of  that  shadowy  undulation  ? 
Instruments  provided  no  answer — we  could  but  guess;  and 
although  guesses  gave  an  average  height  of  800  or  900  feet  to 
the  visible  horizon,  one  would  have  been  little  surprised  to 
learn  that  the  reality  was  half  or  double  that  amount. 

Around  us  were  several  icebergs  grounded  in  the  shallow 
sea ;  some  lay  on  their  sides,  and  in  these  for  the  first  time 
we  saw  discoloured  layers  caused  by  embedded  sand  and  dirt. 
Our  geologist  departed  in  a  boat  to  inspect  these  bands,  whilst 
we  lowered  a  small  net  and  delighted  the  biologist's  heart 
with  a  good  haul  from  the  sea  floor. 

It  was  late  at  night  before  all  was  ready  for  proceeding,  and 
by  this  time  the  eastern  sky  was  banking  up,  and  later  the  air 
was  thick  with  falling  snow.  A  sounding  at  2  a.m.  gave  us  the 
bottom  at  265  fathoms,  and  at  six  the  snow  ceased  and  we 
could  see  a  200-foot  ice-wall  again  with  slopes  estimated  to  rise 
to  500  feet  behind.  But  an  hour  or  more  later,  when  all  were 
once  more  astir  for  the  day's  work,  a  thick  fog  descended  on 
us,  blotting  out  for  the  time  all  hope  of  seeing  what  lay  beyond 
the  ice-foot. 

Throughout  the  morning  and  afternoon  of  the  30th  we 
continued  to  grope  our  way  along,  endeavouring  to  keep  close 
to  the  ice  masses  on  our  right,  whilst  avoiding  the  deeper  bays. 
Now  and  then  the  foggy  curtain  lifted  slightly  and  revealed 
what  lay  within  a  mile  or  two  of  us,  but  beyond  that  all  was 
tantalisingly  obscure.  Soundings  were  taken  frequently,  and, 
varying  from  90  to  100  fathoms,  showed  that  we  were  again  in 
comparatively  shallow  water. 

During  the  night  the  trend  of  the  ice-foot  had  carried  us 
due  north,  but  in  the  morning  we  turned  sharply  to  the  east, 


134      THE  VOYAGE   OF  THE   'DISCOVERY'    [Jan. 

and  throughout  the  day  seemed  to  be  passing  from  cape  to 
cape  of  a  very  indented  coastline.  When  the  fog  allowed  us 
to  see  them  more  clearly,  we  found  that  these  capes  were 
detached  masses  of  ice  of  curious  shape.  Varying  from  a 
half  to  a  mile  or  more  across,  and  surrounded  by  a  steep  but 
low  ice-cliff,  they  rose  on  all  sides  to  a  rounded  ridge  200  or 
300  feet  in  height.  Soundings  taken  close  to  these  curious 
ice-masses  showed  them  to  be  aground,  and  we  were  much 
puzzled  to  account  for  them,  as,  although  they  were  irregular 
in  outline  and  differed  in  detail,  all  had  the  same  feature  of 
gradually  rising  to  a  rounded  central  eminence.  It  was  diffi- 
cult to  imagine  that  grounded  icebergs  could  have  assumed 
this  shape,  and  almost  as  difficult  to  think  that  under  each  ice- 
cap lay  some  rocky  islet.  In  our  then  bewildered  frame  of 
mind  we  called  them  ice  islands,  and  it  was  not  until  we  had 
a  larger  experience  and  could  take  a  more  general  view  of  the 
glaciation  of  the  whole  region  that  we  arrived  at  any  plausible 
theory  to  account  for  their  formation.  In  the  fog  we  headed 
more  than  once  to  pass  between  and  inside  these  ice  islands, 
but  always  to  run  into  a  deep  bay  bounded  by  fast  sea-ice, 
which  formed  a  hummocky  junction  with  the  inner  end  of  each 
island. 

Early  in  the  day  we  became  aware  that  the  pack-ice,  which 
we  had  so  long  avoided,  lay  thick  in  our  offing.  Occasionally 
we  had  to  push  through  narrow  streams  which  opened  out  into 
broader  masses  on  our  left.  It  seemed  as  though  we  were 
threading  a  narrow  channel  left  along  the  shore  by  the  effect 
of  the  easterly  wind  on  the  moving  ice. 

At  4  p.m.  (January  30)  a  more  promising  lift  in  the  fog 
enabled  us  to  gather  information  with  regard  to  our  surround- 
ings. Beyond  the  extensive  sheet  of  fast  sea-ice  which  abutted 
on  the  ice  islands,  we  could  see  the  customary  ice-cliff  of  vary- 
ing height  which  marked  the  coastline,  but  behind  this  cliff 
there  was  now  no  doubt  that  the  snow  surface  rose  in  altitude. 
The  rise  in  places  was  gradual,  much  as  we  had  seen  it  on  the 
previous  night,  but  in  others  the  slope  must  have  been  much 
steeper,  for  here  the  ice-sheet  was  torn    and   distorted   and 


1902]  GLIMPSES   OF  LAND  r35 

descended  in  heavily  crevassed  falls.  Even  in  the  uncertain 
light  the  contrast  of  light  and  shadow  made  it  evident  that  it 
rose  to  an  altitude  of  many  hundred  feet,  and  consequently 
that  land  must  lie  beneath  it ;  but,  peer  as  we  would  into  the 
misty  distance,  amongst  the  steep  and  rugged  icy  slopes,  we 
could  see  no  sign  of  bare  land,  without  which  our  discovery 
must  remain  so  barren  to  ourselves. 

It  was  as  the  bell  sounded  for  our  evening  meal,  and  all 
save  the  officer  of  the  watch  were  preparing  to  descend,  that 
over  the  summit  of  the  ice  island  for  which  we  were  making, 
appeared  two  or  three  little  black  patches,  which  at  first  we 
took  for  detached  cloud.  We  gazed  idly  enough  at  them  till 
someone  remarked  that  he  did  not  believe  they  were  clouds  ; 
then  all  glasses  were  levelled  ;  assertions  and  contradictions 
were  numerous,  until  the  small  black  patches  gradually  assumed 
more  and  more  definite  shape,  and  all  agreed  that  at  last  we 
were  looking  at  real  live  rock,  the  actual  substance  of  our 
newly  discovered  land. 

Dinner  had  to  wait  until  on  rounding  the  ice  islands  we 
could  approach  these  fascinating  patches  as  near  as  the  fast  ice 
would  allow ;  but  this  still  separated  us  from  them  by  a  great 
distance,  and  in  the  misty,  overcast  weather  we  could  add  but 
little  to  our  knowledge,  as  the  following  extracts  from  my  diary 
will  show  : 

' .  .  .  At  a  height  of  about  2,000  feet  several  rock  patches 
could  be  seen.  The  snow  slope  from  which  they  emerged 
seemed  to  be  otherwise  gradual  and  unbroken.  One  could 
not  say  to  what  height  it  rose  beyond,  but  the  rock  alone  was 
sufficient  to  prove  that  the  tall  ice  ridges  which  we  saw  yester- 
day and  to-day  cover  solid  land  of  considerable  altitude.  .  .  . 
These  particular  patches  appeared  in  the  centre  of  a  long 
ridge,  the  outline  of  which  it  was  very  difficult  to  distinguish 
for  want  of  adequate  contrast.  The  wind  has  changed  to  the 
east,  so  that  we  may  hope  for  clearer  weather.' 

It  is  curious  to  reflect  now  on  the  steps  which  led  us  to  the 
discovery  of  King  Edward's  Land,  and  the  chain  of  evidence 
which  came  to  us  before  the  actual  land  itself  was  seen :  at 


136       THE   VOYAGE   OF  THE   'DISCOVERY'    [Jan. 

first  there  had  been  the  shallow  soundings,  and  the  sight  of 
gently  rising  snow  slopes,  of  which,  in  the  nature  of  things, 
one  is  obliged  to  retain  a  doubt ;  then  the  steeper  broken 
slopes  of  snow,  giving  a  contrast  to  convey  a  surer  evidence  to 
the  eye ;  and,  finally,  the  indubitable  land  itself,  but  even  then 
surrounded  with  such  mystery  as  to  leave  us  far  from  complete 
satisfaction  with  our  discovery. 

As  we  continued  our  course  to  the  N.E.  we  held  close 
along  the  fast  ice  which  prevented  us  from  approaching  to  the 
land.  The  weather  was  still  dull  and  overcast,  but  we  could 
see  that  the  fast  ice  on  our  right  was  no  longer  plain  sea-ice  ; 
at  the  edge  it  stood  seven  or  eight  feet  above  the  water,  and 
seemed  to  rise  to  fifteen  feet  or  more  on  the  slope  of  the 
cornice  that  overhung  the  edge,  after  which  the  surface  ran 
back  on  the  level  for  many  miles.  We  could  see  hazily  the 
extent  of  this  plateau  and  the  rocky  exposure  of  the  land 
which  lay  beyond.  It  is  difficult  to  account  for  this  ice-sheet ; 
it  was  too  thick  to  be  considered  sea-ice,  and  yet  was  far 
thinner  than  any  land-ice  or  barrier  formation  that  we  saw 
elsewhere.  Both  before  and  after  this  we  passed  at  sea  very 
low  tabular  bergs,  which  must  have  come  from  such  a  sheet  as 
this.  Our  soundings  running  along  this  edge  gradually  in- 
creased from  88  fathoms  at  8  p.m.  to  265  fathoms  at  midnight ; 
but  later  we  came  to  several  more  of  the  curious  ice  islands 
which  I  have  described,  and  close  to  these  we  again  got 
100  fathoms.  During  the  night  some  more  patches  of  exposed 
rock  had  been  sighted,  but  we  seemed  in  the  uncertain  light  to 
be  increasing  our  distance  from  them. 

On  the  morning  of  the  31st  the  weather  outlook  was  as 
dismal  as  ever,  and  all  outward  and  visible  signs  of  the  land 
had  vanished  ;  we  could  only  guess  its  proximity  by  the  con- 
tinuously shallow  soundings  as  we  circumnavigated  the  over- 
hanging capes  of  occasional  ice  islands.  As  the  fog  lifted 
slightly  in  the  forenoon  we  found  ourselves  surrounded  by 
mighty  masses  of  ice.  On  the  right  the  ice  islands  showed 
more  clearly,  and  on  the  left  were  numerous  lofty  bergs,  some 
of  very  great  extent ;  one,  indeed,  we  estimated  as  at  least  six 


i9o2]  SURROUNDED   BY   BERGS  137 

miles  in  one  direction,  and  as  probably  more  in  another.  But 
yet  more  unwelcome  to  our  eyes  than  this  formidable  array  of 
bergs  was  the  vast  amount  of  heavy  pack-ice  which  lay  scat* 
tered  in  all  directions,  and  blocking  the  channels  between  the 
bergs.  Though  our  hearts  sank  at  the  thought  of  so  much 
obstruction,  we  could  afford  to  admire  such  a  majestic  and 
impressive  ice  scene.  Under  a  dark,  threatening  sky  the  pack- 
ice  showed  intensely  white  in  an  inky  sea,  whilst  the  towering 
walls  of  the  icebergs  frowned  over  us,  shaded  from  the  palest 
to  the  most  intense  blue. 

Most  of  the  icebergs  seemed  aground,  and  as  their  height 
often  exceeded  200  feet  and  our  soundings  were  comparatively 
shallow,  I  have  little  doubt  that  the  majority  were  at  least 
temporarily  at  anchor.  For  a  few  brief  minutes  we  could  see 
the  distant  outline  of  our  snow-covered  land  as  we  threaded 
our  way  amongst  these  great  ice-masses  and  through  the 
shifting  streams  of  pack  which  lay  between  them,  then  for  the 
time  all  attention  had  to  be  devoted  to  navigation.  As  our 
water  supply  was  getting  short,  early  in  the  afternoon  we  were 
obliged  to  secure  to  a  large  floe  in  order  to  replenish  it.  We 
had  little  difficulty  in  finding  a  suitable  one,  as  the  pack-ice 
about  us  was  heavier  than  anything  we  had  yet  seen.  It  is 
evident  that  in  this  region  there  is  much  pressure  and  a  con- 
siderable snowfall,  as  the  floes  were  very  hummocky  and  their 
snow-covering  thick ;  but  the  ice  itself  was  by  no  means  so 
hard  as  that  which  we  had  met  near  the  coast  of  Victoria  Land. 

During  the  afternoon  the  weather  cleared  somewhat,  and 
for  the  first  time  for  many  days  the  sun  shone  forth.  There 
was  little  wind,  and  the  low  temperature  was  already  forming 
young  ice  over  the  calmer  patches  of  sea.  After  a  few  hours' 
delay  we  pushed  on  once  more,  and,  passing  through  a  very 
narrow  channel  between  two  bergs,  reached  a  sheet  of  open 
water  which  appeared  to  stretch  for  a  long  distance  to  the 
north,  but  this  was  bounded  on  the  right  by  a  sheet  of  fast 
sea-ice,  whose  edge  ran  almost  due  north  and  threatened  to 
carry  us  farther  from  the  land  which  we  had  last  seen  trending 
in  a  north-easterly  direction. 


138       THE   VOYAGE   OF   THE    'DISCOVERY'    [Jan. 

As  we  could  not  penetrate  this  sheet,  there  was  no  choice 
but  to  follow  its  edge,  which  we  proceeded  to  do,  hoping  that 
it  would  eventually  turn  in  a  more  promising  direction. 

During  the  last  few  days  of  fog  and  mist  we  had  seen  a  few 
seals  and  a  large  number  of  penguins  of  both  the  species  which 
inhabit  these  regions.  The  latter  appeared  to  live  on  the 
most  amicable  terms,  and  it  was  a  common  sight  to  see  a  few 
alert,  busy  little  Ad^lies  preening  themselves  amidst  a  group 
of  dignified,  ponderous  Emperors  ;  both  showed  great  curiosity 
as  we  passed,  and  leapt  into  the  water  in  our  wake  with  loud 
squawks.  What  great  speed  these  birds  must  possess  in  the 
water  is  shown  by  the  manner  in  which  they  shoot  out  of  it 
and  land  erect  on  a  floe  two  or  three  feet  above  the  surface. 
Occasionally  on  an  exceptionally  high  ice-edge  they  miss  their 
aim  and,  dashing  heavily  against  the  ice,  fall  sprawling  back 
into  the  sea  with  wild  complaints ;  but  this  does  not  appear  to 
disconcert  them,  for  with  wonderful  pertinacity  they  will  try 
again  and  again  to  reach  their  goal.  As  we  advanced,  the 
Emperors  grew  more  numerous,  until  it  was  rare  not  to  have 
two  or  three  groups  of  a  dozen  or  more  birds  in  sight  from  the 
bridge. 

In  the  comparatively  clear  weather  which  we  enjoyed  on 
the  afternoon  of  the  31st  we  could  get  a  good  view  over  the 
immense  sheet  of  sea-ice,  which  appeared  to  be  gradually 
carrying  us  farther  from  the  land.  It  was  quite  smooth  and 
showed  no  sign  of  pressure,  but  here  and  there  the  ice  was 
sunken  and  sodden,  giving  the  appearance  of  large  pools  of 
water.  At  that  time  we  could  hazard  no  guess  as  to  the  cause 
of  this  decay,  though  doubtless  it  is  the  same  effect  as  we 
afterwards  witnessed  in  the  ice-sheet  about  the  '  Discovery '  in 
places  where  the  current  ran  over  a  shallow  bottom. 

Far  in  on  the  ice-sheet  we  could  see  a  few  small  bergs 
securely  frozen  in  and  drifted  up  with  snow,  and  grouped 
about  the  base  of  one  or  two  of  these  were  many  hundreds 
of  Emperor  penguins.  The  steady  increase  in  the  groups  we 
had  met  with  and  their  final  discovery  in  such  great  numbers 
seemed  to  indicate  that  we  had  at  length  found  their  breeding- 


i9o2]  WE   LOSE   OUR   BEARINGS  139 

place,  and  as  this  had  never  yet  been  seen,  our  excellent  zoolo- 
gist was  all  eagerness  to  explore  it ;  but  in  the  circumstances 
I  thought  it  hopeless  to  attempt  to  cross  the  treacherous, 
slushy  sheet  of  ice  which  lay  between,  and  reluctantly  we 
were  forced  to  steam  past  this  interesting  spot,  hoping  that 
we  might  have  better  fortune  on  our  return  journey.  In  the 
light  of  fuller  information  which  we  were  able  to  obtain  con- 
cerning these  birds,  it  seems  doubtful  whether  this  really  was 
their  breeding- place,  but  at  any  rate  it  would  have  been  inter- 
esting to  know  what  they  were  doing  in  such  numbers. 

Our  eager  outlook  for  land  beyond  the  great  ice-sheet  was 
only  partly  rewarded ;  far  to  the  south-east  we  could  see  the 
faint  undulating  lines  of  the  high  snow  slopes,  but  in  the  dim 
expanse  of  white  no  sign  of  exposed  rock  appeared,  and  even  the 
outlines  vanished  as  the  sun  travelled  lower  towards  the  south. 

At  midnight  an  appearance  of  land  was  reported  in  the 
E.N.E. ;  a  bank  of  cloud  hung  low  upon  the  horizon,  and  its 
fixed  position  and  unchanging  form  seemed  to  indicate  that 
land  lay  beneath  it.  Though  glasses  were  constantly  directed 
towards  it,  no  more  definite  form  was  ever  revealed,  but  it  is 
curious  to  note  that  on  the  following  day  a  similar  cloudy 
indication  was  visible  in  this  direction. 

It  was  after  midnight  on  the  31st  that  we  got  lost.  Leaving 
the  ship  steaming  along  the  edge  of  the  fast  ice  in  a  northerly 
direction,  as  I  have  described,  I  went  below  to  snatch  a  few 
hours  of  the  sleep  of  which  the  late  exciting  times  had  robbed 
me,  and  have  only  a  dim  recollection  of  constant  reports  that 
the  ship  had  to  take  a  more  westerly  course  owing  to  ice 
islands,  bergs  and  pack,  and  in  obedience  to  a  general  order 
to  keep  in  the  open  water,  westerly  gradually  became  southerly, 
and  so  on  until,  as  we  were  headed  off  again  and  again,  the 
ship  must  have  worked  round  a  complete  circle.  She  was 
well  on  towards  a  repetition  of  this  manoeuvre  when  I  again 
reached  the  bridge,  and  nobody  knew  exactly  where  we  were. 
It  was  evident  that  the  stretch  of  open  water  which  we  had 
entered  through  a  very  narrow  channel  on  the  previous  even- 
ing was  surrounded  by  a  chain  of  immense  bergs,  between 


140       THE   VOYAGE   OF   THE    'DISCOVERY'    [Jan. 

which  the  channels  were  sometimes  blocked  by  fast  ice  and 
sometimes  by  heavy  pack,  and  the  latter  was  constantly 
altering  its  position  and  streaming  across  the  bay  in  the  most 
confusing  manner.  The  only  way  out  of  this  cul-de-sac  seemed 
to  be  to  take  the  same  narrow  road  by  which  we  had  entered, 
but  where  was  it?  Meanwhile  the  whole  bay  was  covered 
with  a  rapidly  thickening  coating  of  tough  young  ice,  through 
which  it  was  by  no  means  easy  to  force  a  passage,  and  it 
looked  as  though,  had  we  stopped  to  consider  matters,  we 
should  have  had  some  difficulty  in  starting  again.  Our  be- 
wilderment was,  if  anything,  increased  by  suddenly  coming 
across  the  very  floe  from  which  we  had  watered  on  the  previous 
afternoon.  What  was  it  doing  here  ?  It  was  certainly  a  long 
way  from  where  we  had  seen  it  before.  For  more  than  an 
hour  we  splintered  through  the  young  ice  in  a  very  confused 
frame  of  mind,  when  the  sharp  eye  of  Mr.  Royds  brought  to 
our  notice  a  conspicuous  feature  which  we  all  recognised  as 
belonging  to  one  of  the  bergs  between  which  we  had  entered, 
and  soon  we  skirted  round  it  and  to  our  relief  found  the 
narrow  passage  still  open. 

The  rapid  formation  of  young  ice  at  this  season  of  the  year 
was  to  some  extent  alarming.  To  be  obliged  to  winter  in  these 
regions  would  have  been  a  great  calamity,  since  we  could 
scarcely  hope  to  have  travelled  far  from  our  base.  At  a  later 
date,  when  we  knew  more  of  the  seasonal  changes  and 
appreciated  how  frequently  young  ice  is  formed  and  dissipated, 
even  in  the  height  of  the  Antarctic  summer,  we  should  not 
have  regarded  this  phenomenon  as  serious,  but  at  this  time  we 
had  very  little  to  go  upon,  and  were  exceedingly  glad  to  get 
into  a  clearer  sea  once  more. 

At  noon  on  February  i  we  were  five  miles  south  of  our 
position  on  the  previous  day,  looking  in  all  directions  for  some 
lead  which  would  take  us  through  the  thick  pack  to  the  N.W. 
and  again  allow  us  to  approach  the  coast  at  a  farther  point ; 
but  though  we  entered  several  promising  channels,  they 
speedily  ended,  where  from  the  crow's-nest  one  could  see 
nothing  but  one  vast  sea  of  ice. 


1902]   GOOD  VIEW  OF  KING  EDWARD'S  LAND     141 

It  now  became  a  question  what  to  do.  Should  we  remain 
here  and  wait  for  the  pack  to  open  ?  There  was  still  a  chance 
that  we  might  be  able  to  push  farther  to  the  eastward  with 
patience.  But  then  what  of  the  coast  of  Victoria  Land  and 
what  of  our  coal  supply  ?  With  young  ice  forming  so  rapidly 
here,  it  well  might  be  that  in  a  fortnight  the  harbours  to  the 
west  would  be  closed  and  we  could  ill  afford  the  loss  of  coal 
that  waiting  here  would  entail. 

I  decided  to  return,  but  it  is  natural  enough  that  sometimes 
vague  regrets  should  arise  that  we  did  not  attempt  to  push 
farther  to  the  east.  That  we  need  not  have  feared  the  closing 
of  the  season  is  obvious,  but  that  we  should  have  been  hard 
put  to  it  for  coal  at  a  later  date  is  equally  certain.  One  can 
never  do  quite  what  one  would  wish  in  these  matters.  In  the 
afternoon  the  wind  came  from  the  east  and  rapidly  cleared  the 
sky  as  we  steered  back  on  the  course  by  which  we  had  come, 
and,  with  wind  and  current  fair,  so  rapidly  cleared  the  ground 
that  by  night  we  were  again  abreast  of  the  icy  plateau  beyond 
which  we  had  first  seen  the  exposed  rock  of  King  Edward's 
Land. 

We  could  now  see  the  coastline  clearly  for  many  miles. 
On  the  left  was  the  low  barrier  formation  of  which  I  have 
already  spoken,  and  which  I  now  note  as  '  ten  to  twelve  feet 
high  and  sloping  up  for  a  short  distance,  when  it  runs  horizon- 
tally for  ten  or  eleven  miles  to  the  base  of  a  range  of  well- 
defined  hills.'  To  the  right  and  left  of  two  groups  of  hills 
which  lay  opposite  to  us,  a  thin  stratus  cloud  partially  hid  the 
outline  of  continuously  high  snow- covered  ridges,  and  the 
same  thin  veil  hung  in  the  broad  valley  between  the  groups  ; 
but  the  sharp  peaks  of  the  groups  were  clearly  outlined  against 
the  sky,  and  with  a  sextant  and  the  distance  given  by  four- 
point  bearing,  we  were  able  to  calculate  the  altitude  as  between 
2,000  and  3,000  feet. 

The  outline  suggested  a  volcanic  country,  but  although 
many  of  the  slopes  were  steep,  the  bare  rock  appeared  only  in 
a  very  few  places ;  and  where  some  lofty  spur  was  flanked  by  a 
sheer  precipice,  the  more  gradual  slopes  at  the  base  of  the  hills 


142       THE   VOYAGE   OF   THE    'DISCOVERY'     [Feb. 

and  the  deep-cut  valleys  presented  a  uniform  white  surface, 
save  where,  here  and  there,  it  was  broken  by  crevasses  or  ice 
cascades. 

Behind  the  broader  valley  which  separated  the  hill  groups 
the  outline  of  farther  ranges  was  strongly  indicated,  and  con- 
vinced us  that  the  high  land  extended  far  back  beyond  the 
coastal  hills,  and  that  our  new-found  land  was  not  a  group  of 
islets,  but  a  country  of  considerable  altitude  and  extent.  But 
although  we  gazed  for  hours  through  our  glasses  and  en- 
deavoured to  drink  in  every  detail  of  this  distant  view,  we  could 
not  but  long  to  traverse  the  snowy  plain  and  throw  yet  more 
light  on  our  discovery.  Had  we  then  known  our  sledge  equip- 
ment and  dogs  as  we  afterwards  came  to  know  them,  had  we 
been  as  prepared  for  such  adventures  as  we  afterwards  were,  I 
should  certainly  have  made  a  dash  towards  the  distant  hills. 
As  we  were  then  situated,  the  plan,  though  it  occurred  to  us, 
seemed  to  involve  unjustifiable  risk  and  delay.  Such  are  the 
disadvantages  of  inexperience. 

Throughout  the  night  the  bridge  was  well  occupied  until 
the  low  skimming  sun,  gradually  facing  us,  obscured  all  detail 
in  its  glaring  path,  and  the  officer  of  the  watch  was  left  to  face 
the  chill  morning  hours  alone.  By  the  morning  our  course 
had  turned  again  from  west  to  south,  and  in  bright  weather  we 
skirted  a  lofty  ice-cliff  which  before  we  had  only  seen  dimly 
through  the  fog.  Throughout  the  day  this  ice-cliff  rose  and 
fell ;  when  it  was  low,  we  could  see  high  rising  snow-slopes  in 
the  background,  and  whilst  calculating  that  they  rose  to  a  height 
of  950  feet,  had  again  to  deplore  the  want  of  definition  which 
rendered  exact  observations  impossible. 

Many  grounded  and  tilted  bergs  lay  in  the  offing,  and  here 
and  there  was  one  which,  though  detached  from  the  cliff,  had 
tilted  and  remained  at  anchor  close  to  it.  The  conditions 
were  quite  different  from  those  which  obtained  along  the 
barrier  edge,  and  we  could  not  doubt  that  the  ice  which  we  saw 
was  firmly  planted  on  the  ground  and  broke  away  as  it  became 
water-borne.  Tn  the  afternoon  for  a  brief  space  the  ice-cliff 
rose  to  a  height  of  280  feet,  and  we  passed  close  to  this  sheer 


I902]  A  HUGE   ICE-CLIFF  143 

wall  of  ice,  the  highest  that  we  were  ever  fated  to  see  in  the 
Antarctic  Regions  ;  as  we  passed  by  this  huge  stationary  object, 
we  could  see  how  strongly  the  current  was  making  with  us  :  it 
increased  our  speed  by  at  least  two  knots.  As  night  approached, 
the  wind,  which  had  been  increasing  throughout  the  day,  de- 
scended on  us  with  great  violence  from  the  high  ice-cliffs,  filled 
with  whirling  clouds  of  drifting  snowdust  swept  from  the  plains 
beyond;  the  temperature  fell  to  50,  and  soon  the  rigging  was 
festooned  with  icicles  and  the  decks  covered  with  a  thin  layer 
of  ice.  The  date  corresponded  with  August  2  in  England, 
and  we  wondered  how  flannel-clad  holiday  makers  would  enjoy 
an  Antarctic  summer,  and,  as  this  sort  of  thing  was  the  Antarctic 
summer,  what  the  Antarctic  winter  would  be  like. 

We  steered  away  from  the  ice-wall  and  escaped  from  the 
clouds  of  drift,  only  to  get  into  a  sharp  sea  where  the  wind 
raised  clouds  of  spray  which  froze  solid  as  it  fell. 

Later  in  the  night  the  wind  fell  to  a  flat  calm,  and  before 
the  temperature  rose  the  whole  sea  was  covered  with  pancake 
ice,  but  as  the  sun  gained  power  the  temperature  crept  up  to 
220,  and  with  a  slight  breeze  the  young  ice  quickly  vanished. 
In  reflecting  on  recent  experiences,  although  at  this  time  our 
ideas  were  not  thoroughly  sifted,  I  vaguely  realised  that  in- 
dications pointed  to  the  fact  that  the  Great  Barrier  did  not 
rest  on  land,  and  since  the  ice  which  we  had  seen  to  the  east 
undoubtedly  did,  there  must  be  some  place  where  the  con- 
ditions changed,  some  junction  which  we  ought  to  explore. 
Somewhere  abreast  of  us  now  should  be  one  of  those  deeper  in- 
dentations in  the  ice-mass,  where  we  might  reasonably  suppose 
the  change  took  place,  and  it  occurred  to  me  that  we  might 
glean  further  knowledge  by  re-examining  this  part.  As  we 
had  been  driven  some  way  to  the  northward,  it  was  several 
hours  before  we  were  sufficiently  close  to  recognise  the  deep 
bight  for  which  I  had  determined  to  make,  and  it  was  well  on 
in  the  afternoon  before  we  turned  into  it  and  had  the  ice  on 
each  side  of  us.  We  found  that  the  inlet  had  several  branches ; 
selecting  the  most  southerly,  we  turned  sharply  into  it  and 
entered  a  creek  facing  towards  the  east,  inside  which  we  were 


144       THE   VOYAGE   OF   THE    'DISCOVERY'     [Feb. 

completely  shut  off  from  a  view  of  the  sea.  The  ice-wall 
which  surrounded  us  rarely  rose  above  twenty  feet,  and  in 
places  descended  almost  to  the  water  level.  Selecting  a  spot 
on  a  level  with  the  ship's  bulwarks,  we  placed  the  ship  along- 
side it  and  secured  her  with  our  ice-anchors  so  closely  that  we 
were  able  to  step  from  the  rail  on  to  the  snow  surface  beyond. 
The  valley  of  the  inlet  was  continued  between  rising  snow- 
slopes  for  several  miles  to  the  west,  and  in  its  hollow  a  con- 
tinuous crack  ran  through  ice  standing  only  a  few  feet  above 
the  water  level.  Along  this  crack  were  numerous  seal  holes, 
and  quite  a  hundred  of  these  animals  lay  asleep  on  the  snow 
within  easy  reach  of  them. 

As  it  was  now  late,  and  the  light  was  poor,  and  as  we 
appeared  to  be  in  a  secure  position,  it  was  decided  that  work 
should  be  deferred  till  the  morrow,  and  the  more  energetic 
were  soon  mounted  on  ski  and  pursuing  a  very  uncertain 
course  over  the  rough  snow.  Armitage  had  asked  permission 
to  take  a  small  sledge  party  in  a  southerly  direction,  and  with 
Bernacchi  and  four  men  and  a  light  sledge  equipment  he  was 
soon  marching  up  the  valley ;  and  later  a  black  dot  on  the 
snow  showed  us  that  the  party  had  turned  to  the  south  and 
were  mounting  the  rise. 

Skiing  did  not  prove  such  good  sport  as  was  expected. 
The  wind  had  raised  quantities  of  irregular  waves  or  sastrugi 
on  the  snow  surface,  and  in  the  uncertain  light  these  could  not 
be  seen  until  one  actually  tumbled  over  them,  and  as  no  one 
progressed  more  than  a  few  yards  at  a  time  without  a  fall,  it 
was  not  long  before  all,  except  the  sledge  party,  were  on  board 
once  more,  when  we  took  a  sounding,  and  found  that  there 
was  a  depth  of  315  fathoms  under  the  ship.  On  our  arrival  in 
the  inlet  not  a  fragment  of  loose  ice  could  be  seen,  but  as  we 
were  trying  to  take  the  temperature  of  the  water  at  different 
depths  we  found  our  work  much  impeded  by  small  ice-floes, 
which  were  being  crowded  into  the  inlet  by  a  strong  surface 
current  that  now  ran  towards  and  under  the  ice  at  the  head  of 
the  inlet.  Feeling  in  some  security,  I  had  looked  forward  to  a 
quiet  night,  after  many  broken  ones,  but  the  sight  of  this  ice 


1902]  COLLISION   WITH   AN   ICEBERG  145 

was  not  reassuring,  especially  when  amongst  the  floes  there 
appeared  two  or  three  small  icebergs.  One  of  these  bore 
down  on  the  ship  before  we  had  sufficient  steam  to  move  her, 
and  by  the  few  on  deck  it  was  watched  with  very  anxious  eyes. 
As  it  approached  we  breathed  a  sigh  of  relief,  imagining  that 
it  would  just  clear  our  side  by  a  foot  or  two,  but  on  coming 
abreast  of  us  it  slowly  turned  and  a  small  projection  on  it 
caught  and  grazed  our  side.  As  far  as  the  berg  was  con- 
cerned it  was  the  merest  glancing  touch,  but,  wrenching  a 
large  piece  out  of  the  solid  oak  covering  board,  it  gave  the 
'  Discovery '  a  squeeze  which  caused  every  beam  and  frame  to 
groan,  and  brought  all  hands  on  deck  with  scared  faces.  This 
berg  was  not  more  than  twenty  yards  across,  and  its  top,  which 
was  irregular  and  pinnacled,  was  nowhere  more  than  twenty 
feet  in  height,  nor  was  it  travelling  with  any  great  speed ;  yet 
the  shock  of  a  mere  graze  from  it  was  great  enough  thoroughly 
to  alarm  everyone  below,  and  there  can  be  little  doubt  that 
had  it  met  us  fair  and  square  the  consequences  might  have 
been  most  serious.  It  is  difficult  to  realise  what  an  over- 
whelming force  even  a  small  berg  may  represent,  until 
one  remembers  that  it  is,  perhaps,  barely  one-sixth  of  its 
mass  that  is  visible,  and  that  there  must  be  always 
thousands  of  tons  submerged  to  support  the  hundreds  which 
are  seen. 

Even  with  this  knowledge,  after  beholding  the  stupendous 
masses  of  ice  which  are  borne  high  on  the  great  flat-topped 
bergs,  we  had  been  perhaps  inclined  to  pay  too  little  attention 
to  the  more  insignificant-looking  ones,  but  we  learnt  now  that 
an  iceberg  of  any  dimensions  is  not  to  be  trifled  with,  and  it 
can  be  imagined  that  whilst  we  remained  in  the  inlet  we  had 
steam  at  very  short  notice  as  well  as  a  bright  look-out.  On 
the  following  morning  our  berg,  as  well  as  the  pack-ice,  took 
its  way  out  to  sea  again,  clearly  showing  that  there  is  a  regular 
tidal  stream  in  this  region ;  and  as,  in  spite  of  this,  we  and  the 
barrier-ice  about  us  rose  and  fell  together,  there  was  no  doubt 
that  at  least  this  part  of  the  barrier  was  afloat. 

At  an  early  hour  on  this  day,  February  4,  we  commenced 
vol.  1.  L 


146       THE   VOYAGE   OF  THE    'DISCOVERY'    [Feb. 

to  make  preparations  for  a  balloon  ascent  to  extend  our  know- 
ledge of  the  surrounding  region. 

It  was  Sir  Joseph  Hooker  who  first  suggested  the  carriage 
of  a  balloon  for  obtaining  a  view  over  the  great  southern  ice- 
wall,  and  when,  after  much  difficulty,  the  necessary  funds  for 
this  equipment  had  been  raised,  we  had  decided  that  the  best 
thing  for  our  purpose  was  one  of  the  small  captive  balloons  used 
by  the  army  for  lifting  a  single  observer. 

Thanks  to  the  sympathy  of  the  War  Office  we  had  been 
enabled  to  purchase  a  complete  equipment  of  this  description, 
consisting  of  two  balloons,  which,  when  neatly  folded,  occupied 
very  little  space,  and  a  quantity  of  hydrogen  gas,  carried  in 
steel  cylinders  at  high  pressure,  which  occupied  a  great  deal. 
Indeed,  it  had  been  a  great  problem  where  in  our  small  ship 
to  stow  these  cylinders,  of  which  there  were  more  than  fifty, 
containing  something  over  three  fills  for  the  balloon,  and  it 
was  only  by  placing  them  on  top  of  the  deck-houses  and  by 
utilising  every  other  spare  space  about  the  deck  that  we  had 
managed  to  solve  it. 

And  as  it  was  of  little  use  to  carry  such  a  costly  oufit  with- 
out a  knowledge  of  how  to  employ  it,  before  leaving  England 
I  had  taken  advantage  of  the  kind  suggestion  of  the  chief  of 
the  ballooning  department  at  Aldershot,  Colonel  Templer, 
R.E.,  and  had  sent  two  officers  and  three  men  to  receive  some 
instruction  at  his  hands. 

I  now  found  that  although  officers  and  men  had 
regarded  their  short  course  as  a  most  excellent  diversion, 
they  had  picked  up  most  of  the  wrinkles  and  had  learnt 
to  proceed  about  their  work  in  the  most  business-like 
manner. 

First  a  large  sail-cloth  was  spread  on  the  snow,  and  a 
number  of  cylinders  carried  out  and  placed  near  by.  Then 
the  balloon  was  taken  out  with  tender  care,  laid  on  the  sail- 
cloth and  connected  to  the  cylinders  with  many  small  pipes. 
As  the  gas  gradually  inflated  the  empty  case  the  sticky  folds 
were  carefully  straightened  out  until  the  time  came  for  the 
process  of  '  crowning '  the  balloon,  when  the  gradually  filling 


T902]  BALLOON  ASCENT  147 

carcase  was  centralised  and  covered  with  its  net,  well  weighted 
with  sandbags. 

The  contents  of  cylinder  after  cylinder  were  added,  until 
gradually  our  balloon  became  a  thing  of  life  swaying  about  in 
the  gentle  breeze;  but  the  temperature  was  down  to  160,  and 
owing  to  the  contraction  of  the  gas  wrinkles  were  still  visible 
on  its  surface  after  it  had  absorbed  its  correct  allowance  of 
sixteen  cylinders  containing  500  cubic  feet  apiece,  and  it  was 
not  until  we  had  brought  out  and  emptied  three  additional 
ones  that  its  name  '  Eva '  could  be  read  on  a  smooth,  un- 
wrinkled  surface. 

The  honour  of  being  the  first  aeronaut  to  make  an  ascent 
in  the  Antarctic  Regions,  perhaps  somewhat  selfishly,  I  chose 
for  myself,  and  I  may  further  confess  that  in  so  doing  I  was 
contemplating  the  first  ascent  I  had  made  in  any  region,  and 
as  I  swayed  about  in  what  appeared  a  very  inadequate  basket 
and  gazed  down  on  the  rapidly  diminishing  figures  below  I 
felt  some  doubt  as  to  whether  I  had  been  wise  in  my  choice. 

Meanwhile  the  balloon  continued  to  rise  as  the  wire  rope 
attached  to  it  was  eased,  until  at  a  height  of  about  500  feet  it 
was  brought  to  rest  by  the  weight  of  the  rope  ;  I  heard  the 
word  I  sand  '  borne  up  from  below  and  remembered  the  bags 
at  my  feet ;  the  correct  way  to  obtain  greater  buoyancy  would 
have  been  gradually  to  empty  these  over  the  side  of  the  car, 
but  with  thoughtless  inexperience  I  seized  them  wholesale  and 
flung  them  out,  with  the  result  that  the  •  Eva '  shot  up  sud- 
denly, and  as  the  rope  tightened  commenced  to  oscillate  in  a 
manner  that  was  not  at  all  pleasing.  Then,  as  the  rope  was 
slackened  I  again  ascended,  but,  alas  !  only  to  be  again  checked 
by  the  weight  of  rope  at  something  under  800  feet.  Our  wire 
rope  was  evidently  too  heavy  to  allow  greater  altitude,  and  the 
only  lighter  one  we  possessed  seemed  not  quite  within  the 
bounds  of  safety  should  the  wind  increase. 

But,  as  it  was,  my  view  was  very  extended,  and  prob- 
ably afforded  as  much  information  as  would  have  been 
obtained  in  a  loftier  position.  The  following  I  take  from  my 
diary : 


148       THE   VOYAGE   OF   THE    'DISCOVERY'    [Feb. 

1  Here  the  nature  of  the  barrier  surface  towards  the  south 
could  be  seen  well.  South  of  the  rising  slope  ahead  of  the 
ship  I  had  expected  to  see  a  continuous  level  plain,  but  to  my 
surprise  found  that  the  plain  continued  in  a  series  of  long  un- 
dulations running  approximately  east  and  west,  or  parallel  to 
the  barrier  edge ;  the  first  two  undulations  could  be  distinctly 
seen,  each  wave  occupying  a  space  of  two  or  three  miles,  but 
beyond  that,  the  existence  of  further  waves  was  only  indicated 
by  alternate  light  and  shadow,  growing  fainter  in  the  distance. 
In  the  far  south  a  bank  of  cloud  had  all  the  appearance  of 
high  land,  but  such  indications  are  now  too  well  known  not  to 
be  received  with  caution,  and  even  as  I  looked  through  my 
glasses,  faint  changes  in  outline  were  perceptible.  Far  over  the 
snow  expanse  a  small  black  dot  represented  our  sledge  party  ; 
they  must  have  been  nearly  eight  miles  away,  and  their  visi- 
bility shows  how  easily  a  contrast  can  be  seen  on  the 
monotonous  grey  of  the  snow.' 

When  I  again  descended  to  the  plain,  Shackleton  took  my 
place,  armed  with  a  camera.  I  had  hoped  that  in  the  afternoon 
other  officers  and  men  would  have  been  able  to  ascend,  and 
especially  our  engineer,  Mr.  Skelton,  and  those  of  his  depart- 
ment who  had  so  successfully  inflated  the  balloon,  but  the 
wind  was  gradually  increasing,  and  our  captive  began  to  sway 
about  and  tug  so  persistently  at  its  moorings  that  it  became 
necessary  to  deflate  it. 

The  sight  of  so  many  seals  on  the  previous  evening  had 
reminded  us  that  our  winter  stock  was  to  be  thought  of,  and 
whilst  ballooning  operations  were  in  progress,  the  majority  of 
our  people  had  been  despatched  once  more  on  a  murderous 
errand.  The  work  of  killing  and  skinning  was  now  performed 
with  greater  dexterity,  but  the  labour  of  transporting  the 
carcases  to  the  ship  was  found  to  be  very  great,  and  it  was  late 
in  the  day  before  it  was  accomplished  and  all  hands  tumbled 
aboard  dead  tired. 

Meanwhile  our  sledge  party  had  returned.  Armitage 
reported  that  he  had  crossed  two  undulations  before  camping 
for  the  night,  and  in  the  morning  had  left  his  camp,   and 


i9o2]  A   NIGHT  ON   THE   BARRIER  149 

pushing  ahead  on  ski  had  crossed  two  further  ones.  Their 
temperature  during  the  night  had  fallen  to  o°,  whilst  at  the 
ship  it  was  +  4° ;  but  as  six  people  slept  in  a  tent  with  bare 
accommodation  for  three,  instead  of  suffering  from  the  cold, 
one  or  two  members  had  found  the  quarters  so  close  that 
during  the  night  they  had  extricated  themselves  from  the 
general  mass,  preferring  to  spend  the  remaining  hours  in  the 
open.  It  was  noted  for  future  guidance  that  these  members 
reported  most  unfavourably  on  the  snoring  capabilities  of  the 
others. 

Curiously  enough  this  party  was  able  to  report  that  the 
undulations  were  not  gradual  as  we  had  supposed  on  seeing 
them  from  the  balloon,  but  that  the  crest  of  each  wave  was 
flattened  into  a  long  plateau  from  which  the  descent  into  the 
succeeding  valley  was  comparatively  sharp.  Rather  than 
crossing  a  series  of  undulations,  the  party  had  appeared  to  be 
travelling  on  a  plain  intersected  by  broad  valleys,  the  general 
depth  of  which  as  measured  by  aneroid  was  120  feet.  The 
actual  distances  travelled  were  difficult  to  guess.  At  this  time 
we  were  very  prone  to  exaggerate  our  walks,  and  it  was  not 
until  we  came  actually  to  measure  them  later  on  that  we 
appreciated  how  slowly  we  travelled  on  snowy  surfaces.  One 
thing  was  certain,  however ;  the  waves  were  by  no  means 
regular  in  extent,  nor  the  slopes  regular  in  inclination.  At 
7.30  in  the  evening  we  cast  off  from  the  ice  and  put  out  to  sea, 
having  no  desire  to  spend  another  night  on  the  look-out  for 
icebergs.  During  the  night  the  wind  carried  a  heavy  drift  off 
the  barrier,  and  covered  the  rigging  with  a  thick  rime,  giving 
the  ship  a  very  wintry  appearance.  We  now  shaped  course 
directly  for  Victoria  Land,  having  no  longer  an  object  in 
following  the  irregularities  of  the  barrier.  On  the  following 
day,  February  5,  the  wind  came  fair,  and  we  were  able  to 
make  sail  and  so  effect  better  progress. 

On  the  6th  we  sighted  a  large  number  of  icebergs,  and 
suddenly  recognised  one  which  had  been  seen  and  sketched 
on  January  25  on  our  passage  to  the  eastward.  It  was  a 
curious,  dilapidated  berg,  shaped  somewhat  like  a  ship,  and 


t5o      THE   VOYAGE   OF  THE   'DISCOVERY'    [Feb. 

had  one  tall  column  in  the  centre  which  one  might  liken  to  a 
dissipated  funnel ;  we  had  consequently  called  it  the '  Belleisle 
berg,  in   recollection  of  the  woe-begone  appearance   of  the 
ironclad  of  that  name  after  she  had  served  as  target  to  a  more 
modern  battleship. 

We  were  naturally  eager  to  find  out  how  far  this  berg  had 
travelled  in  the  interval,  and  were  most  surprised  to  learn  that 
now  after  twelve  days  it  had  only  drifted  seventy  miles  to  the 
westward,  an  average  of  six  miles  a  day.  As  I  have  pointed 
out,  the  ship  experienced  a  strong  westerly  set  when  cruising 
along  the  barrier,  and  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  pack-ice 
and  smaller  bergs  are  carried  along  by  this  at  a  far  greater 
speed  than  is  represented  by  the  above  figures ;  one  can  only 
suppose  that  the  current  experienced  was  merely  a  surface 
current,  and  that  the  larger  bergs  are  influenced  by  the  deeper 
water  which  is  not  moving  so  rapidly.  Possibly  also  the 
current  in  the  surface  waters,  like  those  in  McMurdo  Sound, 
are  seasonal  and  only  follow  a  seasonal  prevalence  of  easterly 
winds.  At  this  time  easterly  winds  were  certainly  prevalent, 
but  there  seems  some  reason  to  doubt  whether  they  are  so  at 
all  seasons. 

On  our  return  along  the  barrier  we  had  experienced  much 
lower  temperature  than  on  the  outward  journey,  and  as  this 
strongly  suggested  an  early  closing  of  the  Victoria  Land  har- 
bours we  were  anxious  to  delay  our  western  journey  as  little  as 
possible.  In  some  alarm  lest  we  were  already  over-late,  we 
were  anything  but  reassured  when  on  the  morning  of  the  7th 
the  temperature  fell  to  +  20  and  we  were  enveloped  in  a  thick 
fog  of  ice-crystals.  We  could  only  console  ourselves  by  reflect- 
ing that  these  exceptionally  cold  temperatures  were  produced 
by  a  wind  from  off  the  great  snow-plains  of  the  barrier,  where 
probably  at  no  time  of  the  year  were  the  temperatures  other 
than  severe. 

Early  on  the  7  th  we  caught  glimpses  of  the  land  through 
the  patchy  fog,  and  now,  being  under  sail  alone,  we  were 
obliged  to  haul  to  the  north  to  give  it  a  wide  berth.  The  icy 
fog  had  so  stiffened  the  ropes  and  sails,  and  had  made  the 


1902]  RETURN   TO  VICTORIA   LAND  151 

decks  so  slippery,  that  it  was  only  with  difficulty  we  could 
brace  round  the  yards,  and  the  men,  who  had  frequently  to 
work  with  bare  hands,  suffered  much  from  frozen  fingers  before 
we  had  settled  down  to  the  new  course.  The  wind  dropping 
later,  we  were  obliged  to  get  up  steam,  and  soon  after  to  furl 
sails,  but  by  this  time  the  fog  had  cleared,  and  we  could  see 
clearly  the  massive  outlines  of  Terror  and  Erebus.  In  the 
evening  we  rounded  Cape  Bird,  but  in  such  repeated  and 
heavy  snowstorms  that  frequently  we  could  not  see  the  bow- 
sprit from  the  bridge,  and  were  forced  to  stop  and  wait  for  the 
clearer  intervals.  The  temperature,  however,  had  risen  nearly 
200  and  the  air  felt  mild  and  soft  in  comparison  with  that 
which  we  had  lately  experienced.  By  the  morning  of  the  8th 
we  were  once  more  in  McMurdo  Sound ;  a  south-easterly 
wind  and  a  falling  temperature  were  gradually  clearing  the 
skies  and  revealing  the  same  magnificent  scene  of  mountain 
and  glacier  on  which  we  had  so  recently  gazed. 

The  heavy  pack  which  had  obstructed  us  before  seemed 
now  to  have  vanished,  and  as  we  eagerly  scanned  the  coast  of 
the  mainland  our  hopes  rose  high  that  we  should  find  some 
sheltered  nook  in  this  far  south  region  in  which  the  '  Dis- 
covery '  might  safely  brave  the  rigours  of  the  coming  winter, 
and  remain  securely  embedded  whilst  our  sledge-parties, 
already  beyond  the  limits  of  the  known,  strove  to  solve  the 
mysteries  of  the  vast  new  world  which  would  then  lie  on  every 
side. 


152       THE   VOYAGE   OF  THE   'DISCOVERY'    [Feb. 


CHAPTER   VI 

FINDING   WINTER   QUARTERS  1   A    FATAL   ACCIDENT 

In  McMurdo  Sound — A  Glacier  Tongue — Landing  South  of  Erebus — 
Selection  of  Winter  Quarters — Prospects — Difficulty  in  Maintaining  our 
Station — Erection  of  Huts — Amusements— A  Trip  to  White  Island- 
Sledge  Party  to  the  CapeCrozier  Record —Accident  to  Returning  Sledge 
party — Fatal  Result  to  poor  Vince — Results  of  Search  Parties  —Frost- 
bites—Wonderful Escape  of  Hare— Visit  to  Danger  Slope. 

Beholde  I  see  the  haven  near  at  hand 
To  which  I  mean  my  vvearie  course  to  bend  ; 
Vere  the  main  sheet  and  bear  up  to  the  land 
The  which  afore  is  fairly  to  be  ken'd. 

Spenser  :  Faerie  Queene. 

In  remembering  the  extraordinary  distinctness  with  which  we 
had  been  able  to  see  distant  mountains  in  fine  weather,  owing 
to  the  clearness  of  the  atmosphere,  the  reader  may  have  been 
led  to  suppose  that  under  these  conditions  the  '  crow's-nest ' 
of  the  '  Discovery '  would  have  commanded  a  very  extensive 
view  of  the  sea  surface.  This  was  by  no  means  the  case  : 
unless  indicated  by  an  ice-blink,  the  presence  of  pack  could 
never  be  detected  at  more  than  four  or  five  miles  even  from 
that  elevated  position,  and  it  was  often  our  lot  to  be  steaming 
towards  an  apparently  open  sea,  and  in  less  than  an  hour  to 
find  ourselves  surrounded  by  ice-floes.  Similarly,  it  was  not 
possible  when  steering  through  the  pack  to  see  the  open-water 
leads,  or  to  extend  the  prospective  track  to  a  greater  distance 
than  two  or  three  miles. 

It  can  therefore  be  understood  that  although  on  the  morning 
of  February  8  we  were  steaming  across  McMurdo  Sound  in 


1902]  IN   McMURDO  SOUND  153 

open  water,  and  could  clearly  see  the  high  mountains  on  each 
side,  we  could  not  see  more  than  a  very  limited  portion  of  the 
extensive  surface  of  the  Sound,  nor  tell  when  we  might  again 
find  ourselves  obstructed  by  masses  of  pack-ice. 

On  January  2 1  we  had  been  foiled  in  an  attempt  to  follow 
closely  the  coast  of  Victoria  Land  to  the  south  of  Granite 
Harbour,  and  especially  we  had  been  unable  to  examine  a  spot 
where  the  configuration  of  the  rocky  cliffs  gave  promise  of 
a  second  and  more  southerly  harbour  for  our  wintering. 

We  now  headed  directly  for  this  spot,  and  my  diary  records 
the  proceedings  of  the  day  as  follows  : 

'  .  .  .  On  this  occasion  we  got  within  eight  miles  before 
meeting  with  the  same  slabs  of  pack-ice  which  caused  us  so 
much  trouble  before.  On  closer  approach,  the  deep  valley 
between  the  bluff  headlands  turned  out  to  be  partially  filled 
with  an  immense  glacier,  and  at  first  sight  it  appeared  as 
though  very  little  shelter  could  be  hoped  for.  Later,  how- 
ever, as  we  skirted  the  pack  towards  the  south,  we  found  that 
a  long  ice-tongUe  projected  partly  across  the  entrance,  and 
undoubtedly  good  shelter  could  be  found  behind  this.  .  .  . 
But  now,  the  ice  being  so  free  to  the  S.E.,  we  pushed  on  in 
that  direction,  seizing  the  opportunity  of  examining  the  bay, 
and  hoping  to  find  quarters  still  further  to  the  south. 
Gradually  the  sky  cleared,  and  shortly  after  noon  the  sun 
shone  forth  and  the  clouds  rolled  away  from  the  hills,  leaving 
us  in  possession  of  a  magnificent  scene.  To  the  left  was 
Erebus  puffing  forth  light  clouds  of  vapour,  and,  slowly 
opening  to  the  south  of  it,  the  clear  outline  of  Terror. 
The  slopes  of  Erebus  ran  gradually  down  into  the  bay, 
almost  completely  snow-covered,  but  here  and  there  an 
ink-black  rock  jutted  into  the  sea  and  gave  definition  to 
the  hazy  coastline.  The  very  high  mountain  which  had 
been  so  conspicuous  behind  our  harbour  now  passed  to  the 
left  of  it,  and  extended  itself  into  a  range  exhibiting  three 
magnificent  peaks.  .  .  .  Some  thirty  degrees  from  this  our 
former  cone  mountain '  (afterwards  Mount  Discovery)  '  stood 
out,  impressively  isolated;   many  declared   it  to  be  also  an 


154       THE   VOYAGE   OF   THE    'DISCOVERY'     [Feb. 

active  volcano.  The  western  coastline,  after  leaving  the  ice- 
foot protecting  our  new  harbour,  runs  back  into  a  deep  bay, 
the  southern  horn  of  which  touches  the  slopes  of  the  cone 
mountain  ;  ranges  of  comparatively  low  foothills  stand  behind 
the  inner  part  of  the  bay,  and  five  or  six  islets  in  the  bay  form 
a  strong  contrast  to  the  snow  behind.  Another  low  range  of 
hills  flanks  the  cone  mountain  on  the  left,  and  separated  from 
these  by  a  long  and  barely  perceptible  snow  bank  is  yet  another 
low  range.  This  snow  bank  is  due  south,  and  over  it  in  the 
dim  distance  the  faint  outline  of  very  distant  hills  can  be  seen. 
But  from  the  left  extremity  of  the  last  range  to  the  long  cape 
which  bounds  the  slopes  of  Erebus,  nothing  could  be  seen  ; 
so  with  renewed  hope  of  finding  a  strait  we  skirted  the  pack  in 
this  direction. 

1  During  the  forenoon  and  afternoon  we  passed  through 
extensive  sheets  of  young  ice  two  or  three  inches  in  thickness, 
and  all  day  a  school  of  grampus  (Orca  gladiator,  killer  whale) 
were  playing  about  the  ship,  often  coming  within  a  few  feet 
of  the  side  and  scattering  the  young  ice  as  they  rose  to  breathe. 
Early  in  the  afternoon  we  came  suddenly  on  a  low  foot  of 
fast  glacier' ice,  which  appears  to  be  the  extremity  of  a  long 
tongue  running  for  many  miles  out  of  the  bay  to  the  right 
of  the  cone  mountain.  Its  formation  is  most  peculiar.  The 
surface  is  covered  with  numerous  spiky  pinnacles  and  ridges 
many  feet  in  height ;  I  can  think  of  no  less  fanciful  resem- 
blance than  to  compare  them  to  tombstones  in  a  cemetery. 

'  A  boat  was  got  out  to  examine  it,  and  we  found  that  the 
surface  of  the  ice  between  the  pinnacles  was  covered  with 
a  thick  deposit  of  volcanic  sand,  amongst  which  were  evidences 
of  numerous  water-courses  now  dried  up  ;  evidently  the  heat 
absorbed  by  the  sand  has  melted  these  channels,  leaving  the 
pinnacles  between.  It  was  by  no  means  easy  to  clamber  over 
this  confusion  of  ice  and  rubble,  and  it  would  be  quite  out 
of  the  question  to  drag  a  sledge  through  it ;  it  is  to  be  hoped, 
therefore,  that  we  do  not  meet  many  such  obstructions  on  our 
journeys.  A  few  hundred  yards  from  the  edge,  the  winding 
of  the  water-channels  had  produced  some  very  beautiful,  as 


1902]  A   GLACIER  TONGUE  155 

well  as  curious,  effects.  In  places  the  rush  of  the  stream  had 
undercut  the  channel  till  the  bank  overhung  its  base  by  many 
feet,  leaving  a  deep  cave  beneath,  in  which  the  intensest  shades 
of  blue  could  be  observed,  whilst  from  the  overlapping  edge 
hung  a  fringe  of  sparkling  icicles  ;  in  others  a  platform  of 
stones  and  rubble  stood  poised  on  a  slender  shaft  of  ice,  high 
above  the  bed  of  the  stream  ;  here  the  water  had  run  placidly 
over  a  smooth,  polished  ice-floor,  and  there  its  surface  had 
been  broken  as  it  glided  over  a  bank  of  rounded  boulders. 
From  the  ship  it  had  seemed  that  the  disturbed  ice  would 
not  rise  more  than  breast-high  as  one  stood  amongst  it,  but 
as  one  descended  into  the  courses  of  these  streams  the  fan- 
tastically twisted  pinnacles  of  ice  rose  high  above  one's  head 
and  completely  shut  out  all  view  of  the  ship  and  the  moun- 
tainous scene  beyond. 

'  We  found  on  the  ice  the  skeleton  of  a  fish  eighteen  inches 
in  length,  probably  carried  here  by  a  seal ;  it  is  interesting  to 
find  that  fishes  of  such  size  exist  in  these  cold  seas.  Off  the 
edge  of  the  ice  we  got  a  sounding  in  ninety-five  fathoms,  and 
whilst  the  ship  was  being  swung  for  her  compasses,  a  small 
dredge  produced  a  fairly  rich  haul  of  animals  from  the  bottom. 
Our  biologist,  Hodgson,  being  on  the  sick  list  with  a  chill,  we 
proceeded  to  make  this  catch  with  all  possible  secrecy,  hoping 
to  reward  him  with  the  result ;  but,  unfortunately,  the  secret 
leaked  out,  and,  zeal  overcoming  caution,  our  sick  man  was 
soon  in  the  thick  of  it,  with  openly  expressed  scorn  for  our 
amateurish  efforts  ;  entreaties  had  to  be  extended  to  commands 
before,  for  his  own  sake,  he  could  be  driven  back  into  the 
milder  atmosphere  below. 

'  Rounding  this  tongue  of  ice  we  found  our  further  progress 
to  the  south  barred  by  a  sheet  of  fast  sea-ice,  and  skirting  along 
the  edge  of  this,  we  now  find  ourselves  steering  almost  due 
east,  and  heading  towards  the  long  ridge  of  small  uncovered 
hills  which  extends  from  the  southern  slopes  of  Erebus,  and 
ends  in  an  abrupt  and  conspicuous  cape  which  we  hope  will 
point  us  yet  further  south.' 

It  was  8  p.m.  before  we  found  that  the  ice  edge  which  we 


156       THE   VOYAGE   OF  THE   'DISCOVERY'    [Feb. 

had  been  skirting  extended  continuously  to  this  cape,  and 
hopes  of  an  open  strait  vanished ;  but  we  continued  our  course 
until  at  ten  we  were  close  to  the  black,  bare  volcanic  land  of 
the  cape.  We  made  for  a  small  rocky  promontory  without 
getting  soundings  with  our  hand  lead,  until  our  bows  gently 
grounded  on  a  bank  within  a  few  yards  of  the  shore ;  backing 
off  from  this  we  found  deep  water  alongside  the  ice-foot  in  the 
small  bay  on  its  northern  side,  and  here  we  secured  the  ship 
with  our  ice-anchors.     Later  I  write  : 

1  We  have  now  to  consider  the  possibility  of  making  this 
part  of  the  bay  our  winter  quarters.  From  the  point  of  view 
of  travelling,  no  part  could  be  more  seemingly  excellent ;  to 
the  S.S.E.  as  far  as  the  eye  can  reach,  all  is  smooth  and  even, 
and  indeed  everything  points  to  a  continuation  of  the  Great 
Barrier  in  this  direction.  We  should  be  within  easy  distance 
for  exploration  of  the  mainland,  and  apparently  should  have 
little  difficulty  in  effecting  a  land  communication  with  our  post 
office  at  Cape  Crozier.  There  are  no  signs  of  pressure  in  the 
ice  ;  on  the  other  hand,  the  shelter  from  wind  is  but  meagre, 
and  one  can  anticipate  intense  cold  and  howling  gales.  On 
the  whole  to-night  I  feel  like  staying  where  we  are.' 

It  is  interesting  to  recall  our  first  impressions  of  a  region 
which  we  were  destined  to  know  so  well,  and  to  observe  that 
in  a  general  sense  these  impressions  were  correct ;  in  the  south 
only  the  outlook  seemed  mysterious,  and  evidently  we  did  not 
realise  that  the  southern  ranges  of  hills  were  detached  islands 
surrounded  by  a  practically  level  ice-sheet,  but,  misled  by 
refraction,  still  imagined  them  to  be  connected  by  com- 
paratively high  snow-covered  ridges. 

On  the  9th,  the  day  following  our  arrival,  we  set  out  to 
explore  our  immediate  surroundings ;  the  ship,  as  I  have 
mentioned,  lay  on  the  north  side  of  a  small  promontory.  Our 
first  discovery  was  that  there  was  an  excellent  little  bay  on  the 
south  side.  The  sea-ice  had  not  yet  broken  away  in  this  bay, 
but  it  was  evident  that  it  would  only  be  a  matter  of  a  few  days 
before  it  did  so,  as  the  ice  was  cracked  in  all  directions.  Here, 
then,  was  a  promising  spot  in  which  to  establish  ourselves  for 


i902]      SELECTION   OF  WINTER  QUARTERS        157 

the  winter  ;  my  determination  to  remain  in  this  region  was 
much  strengthened,  and  I  wrote  : 

'  The  small  bay  completes  the  shelter  from  pressure  in  all 
directions  from  S.S.E.  to  W.N.W.,  and  the  remaining  space 
faces  the  main  coastline,  from  which  pressure  cannot  be 
expected  ;  the  water  is  shallow  enough  to  prevent  danger  from 
drifting  icebergs  ;  little  difficulty  will  be  found  in  securing  the 
ship  or  in  finding  sheltered  spots  for  the  huts  within  easy 
reach  of  the  ship.  .  .  .  This  afternoon  the  ship  broke  away 
from  her  ice-anchors,  leaving  a  number  of  officers  and  men  on 
shore,  but  before  we  had  drifted  far,  steam  was  raised  and  we 
secured  to  the  sea-ice  on  the  south  side  of  the  promontory. 
It  seems  very  difficult  to  get  a  good  grip  with  our  ice-anchors, 
and  we  have  now  bedded  them  well,  and  have  supplemented 
them  with  the  small  kedge  buried  in  the  snow ;  our  position  is 
not  altogether  satisfactory,  as  there  is  a  slight  swell  and  the 
ship  bumps  occasionally  against  the  ice-foot.  There  is 
apparently  only  a  small  rise  and  fall  of  tide,  I  think  not  more 
than  twelve  or  eighteen  inches.  After  tea  I  went  for  a  long 
walk  with  Skelton  ;  we  struck  out  over  the  sea-ice  to  round 
the  cape,  starting  on  ski,  but  quickly  abandoning  them  as  the 
snow  was  hard  enough  to  walk  on  and  too  smooth  for  the  ski 
to  grip  properly.  We  found  a  curious  water-hole  off  the  cape, 
surrounded  for  a  long  distance  by  thin  ice  which  we  only 
discovered  when  it  began  to  bend  ominously  under  us  and  we 
were  obliged  to  separate  very  rapidly  and  retire  in  different 
directions.'  This  thin  sheet  and  the  open  water  in  the  midst 
of  solid  sea-ice  puzzled  us  greatly,  and  it  was  not  until  the 
following  year  that  we  discovered  that  thick  winter-ice  is 
actually  melted  through  in  the  summer  where  the  current 
flows  over  a  shallow  bank.  '  We  quickly  left  this  doubtful 
spot,  and,  skirting  further  round,  headed  for  a  strait  which  we 
can  now  see  surrounds  Erebus  and  Terror,  placing  them  on  an 
island.  A  clear,  smooth  snow  plain  can  be  seen  to  the  further 
ridge  of  Terror,  the  ridge  which  lies  close  to  Cape  Crozier, 
where  the  barrier  edge  meets  the  land.  The  presence  of  an 
inky-water  sky  confirms  the  sea  beyond.     From  the  ridge  to 


158       THE   VOYAGE   OF   THE    'DISCOVERY'    [Feb. 

the  right  through  1200  of  arc  naught  can  be  seen  but  the  plain 
level  white  surface  of  the  Great  Barrier.  As  we  mounted  a 
pass  in  the  hills  on  our  return  to  the  ship,  we  could  see  these 
things  still  more  distinctly. 

'The  ice  south  of  the  cape  was  evidently  comparatively 
thin  sea-ice,  and  we  could  rejoice  in  beholding  thousands  of 
seals  scattered  over  the  white  surface — a  promising  sign  that 
we  shall  have  no  lack  of  these  animals  in  the  coming  winter. 
The  ridge  of  hills  under  which  we  shelter  is  apparently  a  spur 
extending  from  the  southern  slopes  of  Erebus. 

'  To-night  there  have  been  most  excited  arguments. 
Everybody  seems  to  have  been  in  a  different  direction,  and 
either,  as  one  would  imagine,  has  seen  quite  a  different  scene, 
or  else  prefers  to  describe  things  in  his  own  language.  At 
any  rate,  all  agree  in  the  insularity  of  Erebus  and  the  final 
decease  of  the  Parry  Mountains ;  for  the  rest,  there  is  nothing 
that  we  shall  not  be  able  to  investigate  more  definitely  at  a 
later  date.' 

As  I  have  mentioned,  in  seeking  our  winter  quarters  on  the 
coast  of  Victoria  Land  so  early  in  February  we  had  been  firmly 
under  the  impression  that  the  season  was  closing  in,  and  that 
the  harbours  and  inlets  would  shortly  be  frozen  over.  With  no 
previous  experience  to  guide  us,  our  opinion  could  only  be 
based  on  the  very  severe  and  unseasonable  conditions  which 
we  had  met  with  to  the  east.  But  now  to  our  astonishment  we 
could  see  no  sign  of  a  speedy  freezing  of  the  bay  :  the  summer 
seemed  to  have  taken  a  new  lease,  and  for  several  weeks  the 
fast  sea-ice  continued  to  break  silently  and  to  pass  quietly 
away  to  the  north  in  large  floes. 

Meanwhile  our  situation  was  surrounded  with  thorny  diffi- 
culties. Although  the  ice  broke  farther  afield,  it  refused  to 
move  out  of  the  small  bay  on  which  we  had  set  our  eyes,  and 
we  were  forced  to  cling  to  the  outskirts  of  the  bay  with  our 
ice-anchors,  in  depths  that  were  too  great  to  admit  of  the 
larger  anchors  being  dropped  to  the  bottom.  The  weather 
changed  frequently  and  rapidly,  and  often  after  the  ship  had 
lain  quietly  for  several  hours  a  sudden  squall  or  snowstorm 


1902]  A   DIFFICULT  ANCHORAGE  159 

would  fling  her  back  on  her  securing  ropes,  uprooting  the  ice- 
anchors  and  ultimately  sending  her  adrift.  Whilst  such  possi- 
bilities remained,  in  spite  of  the  most  earnest  wish  to  save 
coal  it  was  necessary  to  retain  facilities  for  getting  up  steam  at 
short  notice,  and  the  constant  work  of  securing  and  re-securing 
the  ship  was  a  most  harassing  addition  to  the  men's  work. 

At  other  times  the  tide  and  swell  would  carry  the  ship  into 
awkward  positions  with  regard  to  the  ice-foot  or  the  shallow 
bank  which  lay  immediately  off  it.  On  February  10  I  wrote: 
'  .  .  .  Later,  owing  to  current,  the  ship  forged  ahead  and 
forced  herself  into  the  fast  ice ;  this  brought  the  bow  into 
deeper  water,  but  the  stern  swung  into  the  ice-foot  and  bumped 
a  good  deal ;  in  this  position  she  has  made  a  bed  for  herself, 
and  we  cannot  haul  her  out' 

'February  n. —  .  .  .  The  ship  bumped  heavily  during  the 
night  and  worked  herself  into  a  very  uncomfortable  position, 
her  stern  obliquely  against  the  ice-foot,  and  her  bow  jammed 
into  the  thick  fast  ice.  In  the  morning  we  made  some  attempt 
to  haul  her  stern  out,  but  only  succeeded  in  carrying  away  a 
hawser.  In  the  afternoon  all  hands  were  turned  on  to  free 
her,  a  boiler  was  run  down,  balloon  cylinders  and  other  weights 
transported  forward,  and  a  party  was  set  to  free  the  ice  at  the 
fore-foot.  The  kedge  anchor  was  buried  fast  in  the  floe,  and 
a  large  hawser  brought  from  it  through  the  stern  to  the  winch. 
At  seven,  when  we  could  get  a  good  strain  on  the  hawser,  the 
ship  was  gradually  freed  from  her  awkward  position.' 

By  the  12th  we  had  managed  to  get  an  anchor  on  the 
bottom,  but  the  stern  had  been  hauled  in  to  assist  the  work  on 
shore.  'This  morning  it  blew  fresh  from  the  E.S.E.  directly 
over  the  hills,  and,  with  an  off-setting  tide  and  some  swell,  we 
began  to  drag  our  ice-anchors,  the  two  kedges.  For  an  hour 
in  heavy  snowdrift  we  were  endeavouring  to  check  the  drag  by 
backing  the  anchors,  but  to  no  avail ;  at  last  both  dragged  out, 
when  there  was  only  just  sufficient  time  to  get  all  hands  on 
board  before  the  ship  drifted  off.' 

In  spite  of  the  difficulty  of  keeping  the  ship  in  position, 
however,  steady  progress  was  made  with  the  work  on  shore, 


160       THE   VOYAGE   OF  THE   'DISCOVERY'    [Feb. 

which  consisted  mainly  in  erecting  the  various  huts  which  we 
had  brought  with  us  in  pieces.  The  main  hut  had  been 
brought  from  Australia,  and  was,  in  fact,  a  fairly  spacious 
bungalow  of  a  design  used  by  the  outlying  settlers  in  that 
country.  The  floor  occupied  a  space  of  about  thirty-six  feet 
square,  but  the  over-hanging  eaves  of  the  pyramidal  roof  rested 
on  supports  some  four  feet  beyond  the  sides,  surrounding  the 
hut  with  a  covered  verandah.  The  interior  space  was  curtailed 
by  the  complete  double  lining,  and  numerous  partitions  were 
provided  to  suit  the  requirements  of  the  occupants.  But  of 
these  partitions  only  one  was  erected,  to  cut  off  a  small  portion 
of  one  side,  and  the  larger  part  which  remained  formed  a 
really  spacious  apartment. 

It  had  been  originally  intended  that  the  '  Discovery '  should 
not  attempt  to  winter  in  the  Antarctic,  but  should  land  a  small 
party  and  turn  northward  before  the  season  closed  ;  the  hut 
had  been  provided  for  this  party  and  carried  south  under  the 
impression  that  circumstances  might  yet  force  the  adoption  of 
such  a  plan.  Having  discovered  a  spot  in  which  we  felt  con- 
fident the  '  Discovery '  could  winter  with  safety,  the  living-hut 
was  no  longer  of  vital  importance  ;  but,  even  retaining  the 
ship  as  a  home,  there  were  still  many  useful  purposes  to  which 
a  large  hut  might  be  adapted.  It  was  obvious  that  some  sort 
of  shelter  must  be  made  on  shore  before  exploring  parties 
could  be  sent  away  with  safety,  as  we  felt  that  at  any  time  a 
heavy  gale  might  drive  the  ship  off  her  station  for  several  days, 
if  not  altogether.  With  the  hut  erected  and  provisioned,  there 
need  be  no  anxiety  for  a  detached  party  in  such  circumstances. 
Later  on,  too,  we  hoped  that  the  large  room  would  come  in 
useful  as  a  workshop  or  as  a  playroom,  or  for  any  purpose 
which  might  tend  to  relieve  the  congestion  of  the  ship. 

We  found,  however,  that  its  erection  was  no  light  task,  as 
all  the  main  and  verandah  supports  were  designed  to  be  sunk 
three  or  four  feet  in  the  ground.  We  soon  found  a  convenient 
site  close  to  the  ship  on  a  small  bare  plateau  of  volcanic 
rubble,  but  an  inch  or  two  below  the  surface  the  soil  was 
frozen  hard,  and  many  an  hour  was  spent  with  pick,  shovel, 


i9o2]  ERECTION   OF  HUTS  161 

and  crowbar  before  the  solid  supports  were  erected  and  our 
able  carpenter  could  get  to  work  on  the  frame. 

In  addition  to  the  main  hut,  and  of  greater  importance, 
were  the  two  small  huts  which  we  had  brought  for  our  magnetic 
instruments.  These  consisted  of  a  light  skeleton  framework 
of  wood  covered  with  sheets  of  asbestos.  The  numerous  parts 
were  of  course  numbered,  and  there  would  have  been  no  great 
difficulty  in  putting  them  together  had  it  not  been  that  the 
wood  was  badly  warped,  so  that  none  of  the  joints  would  fit 
without  a  great  deal  of  persuasion  from  the  carpenter.  One 
of  these  huts  was  designed  to  hold  instruments  which  should 
keep  a  continuous  record  of  the  change  of  the  magnetic  ele- 
ments on  a  photographic  drum,  and  it  was  highly  desirable 
that  the  record  should  be  commenced  as  soon  as  possible. 

As  may  be  imagined,  with  so  much  work  going  on  on 
shore  and  the  frequent  necessity  of  looking  after  the  ship,  our 
time  was  well  occupied.  But  life  was  not  all  work,  and  we 
found  plenty  of  interest  and  amusement  in  our  surroundings, 
as  well  as  relaxation  of  a  more  usual  character,  as  the  following 
extracts  from  my  diary  will  show : 

'After  working  hours,  all  hands  generally  muster  on  the 
floe  for  football.  There  is  plenty  of  room  for  a  full-sized 
ground  in  the  bay,  and  the  snow  is  just  hard  enough  to  make 
a  good  surface.' 

'  February  13. — We  hauled  the  stern  into  the  ice-foot  in 
the  morning  and  carried  on  hut-building  operations.  It  was 
calm  and  clear,  and  we  made  good  progress.  We  tried  a  team 
of  dogs  to  tow  the  light  sledge  up  the  hill  with  pieces  of  the 
small  huts.  Some  pulled  well,  but  others  are  evidently  young 
and  untrained ;  some  were  extremely  timid  and  grovelled  at 
the  least  attempt  to  drive  them,  others  fought  whenever  and 
wherever  they  could.  It  was  not  rapid,  but  eventually  all  the 
pieces  were  got  up  the  hill.  .  .  .  Repeated  walks  are  taken  to 
the  hill-tops  in  the  immediate  vicinity,  and  eyes  are  turned 
towards  the  south— the  land  of  promise.  Many  are  the  argu- 
ments as  to  what  lies  in  the  misty  distance,  and  as  to  what 
obstacles  the  spring  journeys  will  bring  to  light.  .  .  .  The 
vol.  1.  m 


162        THE   VOYAGE   OF   THE    'DISCOVERY'     [Feb. 

officers  played  the  men  at  football  to-night,  and  won  by  a  goal, 
but  the  wind  rather  spoilt  the  fun.  It  is  now  blowing  fresh 
from  the  usual  E.S.E.  direction.  Two  bergs  were  seen  moving 
up  the  bay.  This  is  interesting  as  showing  that  the  bottom 
waters  must  be  moving  in. 

'■February  14. —  .  .  .  We  have  landed  all  the  dogs,  and 
their  kennels  are  ranged  over  the  hillside  below  the  huts. 
They  complain  bitterly,  but  they  are  a  good  riddance  from  the 
deck,  which  is  again  assuming  some  appearance  of  cleanliness. 
...  It  is  surprising  what  a  number  of  things  have  to  be  done, 
and  what  an  unconscionable  time  it  takes  to  do  them.  The 
hut-building  is  slow  work,  and  much  of  our  time  has  been 
taken  in  securing  the  ship  ;  an  annoyingly  large  number  of 
hours  have  to  be  devoted  to  pumping  her  out ;  the  pumps  get 
frozen  and  have  to  be  opened  up  and  thawed  out  with  a  blow- 
lamp. Much  work  is  before  us  when  the  huts  are  up :  we 
must  land  a  store  of  provisions  and  a  boat  for  emergencies  ; 
then  there  are  the  instruments  to  be  seen  to,  more  seals  to  be 
killed  for  the  winter,  arrangements  made  for  fresh-water  ice, 
sledges  and  tents  to  be  prepared,  and  a  hundred-and-one 
details  to  be  attended  to. 

'  The  sun  is  now  very  near  dipping  at  midnight,  and  will 
soon  give  us  an  appreciable  night.  In  the  morning  and 
evening  it  is  therefore  low,  and  gives  the  effect  of  sunset  or 
sunrise  for  many  hours  together.  The  scene  is  wonderfully 
beautiful  at  such  times  ;  the  most  characteristic  feature  is  a 
soft  pink  light,  that  tinges  the  snow-slopes  and  ice-foot  and 
fades  into  the  purple  outline  of  the  distant  mountains.  Here 
and  there  a  high  peak  is  radiantly  gilded  by  a  shaft  of  sun- 
light. 

•  Names  have  been  given  to  the  various  landmarks  in  our 
vicinity.  The  end  of  our  peninsula  is  to  be  called  "Cape 
Armitage,"  after  our  excellent  navigator.  The  sharp  hill 
above  it  is  to  be  "  Observation  Hill  "■;  it  is  750  feet  high,  and 
should  make  an  excellent  look-out  station  for  observing  the 
going  and  coming  sledge-parties.  Next  comes  the  "  Gap," 
through  which  we  can  cross  the  peninsula  at  a  comparatively 


i902]  NOMENCLATURE  163 

low  level.  North  of  the  "  Gap  "  are  "  Crater  Heights,"  and 
the  higher  volcanic  peak  beyond  is  to  be  "  Crater  Hill " ;  it  is 
1,050  feet  in  height.  Our  protecting  promontory  is  to  be 
"  Hut  Point,"  with  "  Arrival  Bay  "  on  the  north  and  "  Winter 
Quarter  Bay "  on  the  south  ;  above  "  Arrival  Bay  "  are  the 
u  Arrival  Heights,"  which  continue  with  breaks  for  about  three 
miles  to  a  long  snow-slope,  beyond  which  rises  the  most 
conspicuous  landmark  on  our  peninsula,  a  high  precipitous- 
sided  rock  with  a  flat  top,  which  has  been  dubbed  "  Castle 
Rock  " ;  it  is  1,350  feet  in  height. 

'  In  spite  of  the  persistent  wind,  away  up  the  bay  it  is 
possible  to  get  some  shelter,  and  here  we  take  our  ski  exercise, 
and  find  it  increases  in  interest  as  we  make  rapid  strides 
towards  maintaining  our  stability.  Now  that  we  are  able  to 
turn,  we  can  start  from  several  hundred  feet  up  the  hillside 
and  come  down  on  an  incline  for  half  a  mile  or  more  before 
we  reach  the  sea-ice.  It  is  most  exhilarating  exercise,  and 
figure  after  figure  can  be  seen  flying  down  the  hillside,  all 
struggling  hard  to  keep  their  balance,  but  generally  failing 
at  some  critical  turn,  and  coming  an  "awful  purler"  to  the 
amusement  of  the  others.' 

On  February  16  our  football  and  general  athletic  ground 
broke  away,  leaving  only  a  small  corner  of  the  bay  filled  with 
ice,  and  skiing  became  a  still  more  popular  amusement. 
Some  days  later  I  find :  '  The  party  of  officers  who  disport 
themselves  on  ski  is  getting  more  ambitious,  and  to-day  we 
started  from  a  much  higher  place.  The  course  started  with 
a  quick  slope  of  120  feet  in  height,  covered  with  soft  snow, 
on  which  a  tremendous  pace  was  acquired ;  a  sudden  lessening 
in  the  inclination  shot  one  out  on  rough  hard  snow,  which 
not  only  had  to  be  taken  at  the  same  pace,  but  involved  a 
double  turn  to  left  and  right,  then  a  slightly  milder  slope 
slackened  the  pace  to  a  sharp  corner,  where  a  turn  of  1200 
had  to  be  made  before  one  plunged  down  the  final  slope  to 
the  sea-ice.  One  or  two  of  us  got  down  safely,  but  it  was 
generally  touch-and-go  at  the  corners.  Skelton  is  by  far  the  best 
of  the  officers,  though  possibly  some  of  the  men  run  him  close. 

M  2 


1 64       THE   VOYAGE   OF   THE    'DISCOVERY'     [Feb. 

( February  17. — The  forenoon  was  gloriously  fine.  In  a 
dead  calm  the  sun  shone  in  a  cloudless  sky ;  the  western 
mountains  were  very  distinct,  but  the  foreshore  was  raised  and 
exaggerated  by  strong  mirage.  The  work  is  now  so  far  ahead 
on  our  huts  that  we  can  contemplate  some  sledge  parties. 
Barne  and  Shackleton  tossed  a  coin  as  to  who  should  take 
the  first,  and  the  latter  won.  Wilson  and  Ferrar  will  accom- 
pany him.  The  ice  has  broken  away  so  far  round  the  corner 
that  I  have  told  them  they  must  take  a  pram  until  they  get 
beyond  the  sea-ice ;  it  will  be  a  heavy  drag,  but  I  don't 
expect  they  will  have  to  drag  it  far.  All  three  are  very  busy 
making  preparations. 

'  All  that  remained  of  the  sea-ice  in  our  bay  moved  out 
very  quietly  this  morning,  nearly  taking  away  Hodgson,  who 
was  fishing  on  the  floe  with  a  tow-net,  quite  unconscious  of 
what  was  happening  until  he  looked  up  and  saw  his  retreat 
cut  off.  There  was  quite  an  excitement  in  rescuing  him. 
The  wind  sprang  up  again  suddenly  in  the  afternoon  ;  we 
seem  fated  not  to  be  long  without  it.  It  came  sweeping  down 
the  gullies  in  bitter  gusts.  I  went  up  the  hill  for  exercise, 
and  was  glad  to  turn  back  and  sail  home. 

'Late  this  evening  Walker  suddenly  appeared,  reporting 
that  Ford  had  met  with  an  accident  on  the  eastern  slope  of 
the  Gap  and  needed  assistance.  It  appeared  that  Ford, 
Buckridge,  and  Walker  had  been  "  running  "  the  slope  on  ski 
in  a  rather  bad  light,  and  that  Ford,  whose  sight  is  not  good, 
had  failed  to  see  a  steep  drop  from  the  ice-foot  and  had  fallen 
over  it,  with  the  result  that  his  leg  had  caught  in  the  tide 
crack  and  was  injured.  A  party  were  soon  away  with  a  sledge 
on  which  they  brought  back  the  invalid,  the  first  to  occupy 
our  small  sick  berth.  The  doctors  found  that  there  was  a 
simple  fracture,  which,  though  not  a  very  serious  matter,  will 
rob  us  of  our  ship's  steward  for  some  weeks.'  The  fracture 
healed  with  remarkable  rapidity,  and  in  less  than  six  weeks 
Ford  was  able  to  resume  his  duties. 

'  February  18. — It  blew  hard  from  the  S.E.  this  morning, 
but  about  eight  the  wind  dropped,  and  during  the  rest  of  the 


i902]  THE   DOGS  AND   THE   WHIP  165 

working  hours  it  was  quite  calm  and  we  were  able  to  push 
ahead  with  the  huts. 

•  As  the  ice  has  broken  away  around  the  cape,  the  sledge 
party  have  had  stiff  work  in  dragging  their  sledge  and  pram 
over  the  "  Gap  " ;  they  will  start  fair  from  that  side  to-morrow. 

'  There  have  been  arguments  lately  as  to  the  necessity  of  a 
whip  in  driving  dogs,  and  to-day  the  two  keenest  controver- 
sialists, Armitage  and  Bernacchi,  who  are  respectively  for  and 
against  coercive  methods,  had  a  competition.  They  selected 
their  own  teams,  and,  whether  by  accident  or  design, 
Armitage  selected  all  the  fighting  element,  whilst  Bernacchi's 
team  were  mostly  the  younger  and  timider  dogs.  At  first 
neither  team  could  be  got  to  start  at  all ;  there  was  a  wild 
confusion  of  twisted  traces  and  some  exciting  fights  ;  but 
eventually,  amidst  the  cheers  of  the  onlookers,  Bernacchi 
succeeded  in  coaxing  his  animals  into  a  trot,  from  which  they 
broke  into  a  gallop,  and,  heading  up  the  steep  snow-slope,  left 
the  driver  breathless  behind.  Whilst  this  was  scarcely  the 
exhibition  of  control  that  had  been  intended,  the  other  team 
had  refused  to  trot  at  all,  and  the  honours  of  the  day  were  of 
necessity  given  to  the  advocate  of  gentle  persuasion. 

'  It  is  surprising  how  suddenly  the  wind  rises  and  drops 
here.  At  6.30  to-night  it  came  on  to  blow  from  the  north, 
and,  without  warning,  in  the  space  of  a  few  minutes  a  strong 
breeze  was  blowing.  The  hawser  securing  our  stern  to  the 
ice-foot  parted,  the  ship  swung  off,  and  we  were  obliged  to 
lower  a  boat  in  haste  to  pick  up  the  men  who  had  stayed  to 
secure  the  half-built  hut.  By  the  time  they  were  on  board,  it 
was  blowing  a  gale  ;  we  had  good  shelter  from  Hut  Point,  but 
the  swell  got  up  very  quickly,  and  there  was  soon  a  consider- 
able commotion  in  our  small  bay.  ...  At  midnight  the  wind 
dropped  as  suddenly  as  it  had  risen,  and  we  have  now  to  be 
prepared  for  being  carried  against  the  ice-foot,  which  with  this 
swell  would  probably  mean  some  heavy  bumps.'  On  the 
following  day  the  wind  came  as  suddenly  from  the  south,  and 
we  bumped  so  heavily  on  the  ice-foot  that  I  thought  it 
advisable  to  get  up  steam. 


166       THE  VOYAGE   OF  THE   'DISCOVERY'    [Feb. 

I  Later  the  wind  increased  to  force  8,  and  we  had  a  scare 
with  a  mass  of  ice  bearing  straight  into  the  bay.  At  the  last 
moment  it  diverted  its  course  and  passed  harmlessly  round 
the  point.  .  .  .'  From  such  extracts  as  the  above  it  will  be 
seen  that  it  is  no  easy  matter  to  secure  a  peaceful  anchorage 
on  the  Antarctic  coastline. 

'  February  20. — We  have  had  the  first  continuous  bright 
windless  day  since  we  arrived.  The  glass  was  steady  at  29.4, 
the  sun  shone  brightly,  and  although  the  temperature  did  not 
rise  above  180  it  was  pleasant  to  loll  about  in  the  sun  during 
the  dinner  hour,  when  we  smoked  our  pipes  in  great  comfort, 
sitting  on  pieces  of  the  hut  which  are  not  yet  fixed.  The  dogs 
are  now  allowed  to  run  loose,  so  many  at  a  time  ;  there  is 
much  less  fighting  than  would  be  expected.  They  are  losing 
their  coats,  I  suppose  at  about  the  time  they  would  shed  them 
in  the  north  in  preparation  for  summer,  but  it  seems  an 
awkward  look-out  when  they  ought  to  be  preparing  for  winter. 
We  took  advantage  of  the  fine  evening  to  re-secure  the  ship. 
I  let  go  two  anchors  in  the  bay  and  middled,  then  veered  both 
cables  till  we  could  just  bring  her  stern  up  to  the  ice-foot  for 
landing  our  gear.  She  ought  to  lie  much  more  comfortably 
now.'  On  the  21st  our  energetic  first  lieutenant,  Royds, 
had  a  very  narrow  shave.  Late  at  night,  when  everyone 
else  was  below,  he  jumped  on  to  a  grating  which  had  been 
placed  over  the  side  and  carelessly  secured ;  the  lashing 
slipped,  and  the  next  moment  he  was  in  the  water  with 
nothing  to  hold  on  by  or  to  assist  him  in  climbing  out  j  with 
the  water  at  290  and  the  air  at  zero  he  realised  that  there  was 
no  time  to  be  wasted  if  he  was  to  reach  the  deck  again  safe 
and  sound,  and  that  the  chance  of  his  being  heard  was  so 
small,  he  would  only  be  wasting  his  breath  by  attempting  to 
shout.  In  this  serious  position  he  luckily  remembered  that  a 
rope  ladder  had  been  left  over  the  stern,  and  husbanding  his 
strength  he  swam  for  it.  It  could  have  been  no  light  matter 
climbing  that  ladder  under  such  freezing  conditions,  but 
fortunately  he  managed  to  do  it,  and  to  swing  himself  over  the 
side.     The   first   we   knew   of    the    accident   was    when    he 


i9o2]  A  TRIP   TO   WHITE   ISLAND  167 

appeared  in  the  wardroom  with  his  clothes  dripping  and  his 
teeth  chattering. 

On  the  22nd  our  small  reconnoitring  sledge  party  returned. 
After  leaving  on  the  19th  they  had  made  directly  south  towards 
the  White  Island,  eventually  reached  it,  and  climbed  one  of 
the  nearer  volcanic  peaks.     They  were  so  naturally  bubbling 
over  with  their  experiences  that  it  was  some  time  before  we 
could  get  answers  to  our  eager  questions.     From  the  summit 
of  their  peak,  for  which  the  aneroid  gave  a  height  of  2,700  feet, 
they  had  seen  the  great  snow  plain  of  the  barrier  still  stretch- 
ing without  limit  through  east  and  south-east  to  south,  and 
curling  a  long  white   arm  around  the  island  on  which  they 
stood.     To  the  west  the  same  level  sea  of  snow  seemed  to  run 
deep  into  the  fretted  coastline,  and   again  they  could   see  it 
beyond  the  high  cape  which  limited  our  view  from  the  ship. 
In  the  dim  distance  south  of  our  lofty  western  ranges  more 
high  snow-covered  peaks  appeared.     But  of  the  roads  it  was 
more  difficult  to  speak ;  they  had  crossed  ridges  and  hum- 
mocks and  crevasses,  and  had  come  to  see  that  these  things 
did    not    advertise   themselves   afar,    but   lay   hidden   in   un- 
expected places  under  the  deceptive  smoothness  of  the  plain. 
It  looked  as  though  the  best  road  would  lie  to  the  east  of  the 
island  and  well  clear  of  it,  but  our  travellers  shook  their  heads 
over  the  bright  prospect  of  a  smooth  highway,  in  visions  of 
which  many  had  indulged  up  to  this  time. 

Altogether  we  felt  that  our  outlook  on  affairs  was  consider- 
ably enlarged  by  this  small  journey,  and  we  stopped  up  late  as 
we  discussed  its  bearings  and  listened  for  the  first  time  to  the 
woes  of  the  inexperienced  sledger.  Although  the  temperature 
had  not  been  severe,  our  travellers  had  nearly  got  into  serious 
trouble  by  continuing  their  march  in  a  snowstorm.  They 
found  themselves  so  exhausted  when  they  did  stop  to  camp 
that  they  were  repeatedly  frost-bitten.  They  could  only  get 
their  tent  up  with  great  difficulty,  and  then  followed  all  sorts  of 
troubles  with  the  novel  cooking  apparatus.  It  is  strange  now 
to  look  back  on  these  first  essays  at  sledging,  and  to  see  how 
terribly  hampered  we  were  by  want  of  experience.     Perhaps 


168       THE  VOYAGE  OF  THE   'DISCOVERY'    [Feb. 

the  most  curious  note  I  have  of  the  report  of  these  three  is  to 
the  effect  that  in  their  opinion  our  pemmican  wouldn't  do  at 
all.  It  was  far  too  rich,  they  said,  and  when  made  into  soup 
it  was  so  greasy  that  none  of  them  could  touch  it.  Our 
pemmican  contained  60  per  cent,  of  lard,  but  after  knowing 
how  it  tasted  to  a  true  sledging  appetite  and  seeing  the 
manner  in  which  it  was  scraped  out  of  the  cooking  pots  in 
later  times,  it  needs  such  a  reminder  as  this  to  recall  that  it 
might  not  be  always  grateful  to  a  more  civilised  taste. 

This  sledge  party  did  something  to  dispel  curious  illusions 
which  existed  amongst  us  with  regard  to  distances.  On 
certain  days  every  detail  of  our  surroundings  was  so  clear  that 
it  was  impossible  to  persuade  oneself  that  much  on  which  we 
looked  was  in  the  far  distance.  Shortly  after  our  arrival,  for 
instance,  two  of  our  company  had  started  off  with  the  serious 
intention  of  taking  an  afternoon  walk  around  this  very  •  White 
Island,'  and  it  was  only  after  they  had  walked  for  some  hours 
without  noticing  any  appreciable  change  in  the  appearance  of 
the  island  that  they  were  convinced  they  had  undertaken  a 
task  beyond  their  powers.  On  another  occasion  two  officers 
discussed  the  advisability  of  making  a  day's  excursion  to  the 
top  of  Mount  Erebus  and  back. 

When  we  had  learnt  to  discount  the  deceptive  appearance 
of  nearness,  many  of  us  were  inclined  to  go  to  the  opposite 
extreme,  and  to  imagine  our  distances  much  greater  and  our 
mountains  much  more  exalted  than  they  really  were.  One 
was  led  to  this  by  an  exaggerated  conception  of  the  distance 
one  could  walk  in  a  given  time.  It  was  not  until  instruments 
and  observations  had  shed  the  cold  light  of  reason  on  our 
sledge  marches  that  we  came  to  know  that  two  miles  an  hour 
is  very  good  going  on  a  soft  snow  surface. 

Though  our  work  was  much  impeded  by  the  cutting  winds, 
we  continued  to  make  progress  as  the  month  advanced  ;  as 
yet,  however,  there  were  no  signs  of  the  sea  freezing  over,  and 
the  old  sea-ice,  still  continuing  to  break  away,  had  left  a  large 
extent  of  open  water  to  the  southward  and  eastward  of  Cape 
Armitage.     The  seals  had  no  longer  a  resting-place  within  two 


1902]      SLEDGE   PARTY   TO   CAPE   CROZIER         169 

or  three  miles  of  the  ship,  and  we  had  been  forced  to  kill  them 
at  this  distance  in  providing  for  our  winter  consumption.  Not 
wishing  to  drag  the  carcases  such  a  long  distance  until  they 
were  required,  we  had  left  them  partly  buried  in  snow,  but  on 
revisiting  the  spot  somewhat  later  we  found  to  our  dismay  that 
the  skua  gulls  had  been  at  our  cache  and  had  wrought  great 
havoc.  It  was  extraordinary  to  see  the  manner  in  which  they 
had  torn  the  frozen  flesh  from  the  bones  with  their  powerful 
bills. 

•  February  26. —  .  .  .  The  main  hut  is  roofed  and  the 
windows  placed ;  there  is  little  more  to  be  done  outside» 
though  the  whole  of  the  inner  lining  has  to  be  put  up.  The 
first  magnetic  hut  is  almost  finished  ;  a  good  quantity  of 
provisions  and  oil  has  been  landed,  with  fifteen  tons  of  coal. 
I  feel  we  can  now  leave  the  ship  without  anxiety,  and  have 
been  pushing  forward  our  arrangements  for  the  first  trip,  which 
I  hope  to  lead  myself.  The  object  will  be  to  endeavour  to 
reach  our  record  at  Cape  Crozier  over  the  barrier,  and  to  leave 
a  fresh  communication  there  with  details  of  our  winter 
quarters. 

1  The  snow  on  the  "  ski  "  slopes  has  become  very  hard  and 
rough,  and  we  can  no  longer  enjoy  that  exercise. 

'■February  27. — I  went  out  with  Barne  on  ski,  and  was 
foolish  enough  to  try  to  run  the  upper  slope,  which  is  now 
covered  with  hard  sastrugi  (wind  waves).  As  I  was  coming 
down  at  a  good  pace,  my  right  ski  was  turned  by  one  of  these, 
and  in  falling  I  brought  a  heavy  strain  on  my  right  knee,  and 
damaged  the  hamstring.  I  was  forced  to  limp  back  and  get  it 
bandaged.'  On  the  following  day  I  found  my  leg  much 
swollen,  and  could  scarcely  put  foot  to  the  ground,  and  to  my 
great  annoyance,  as  the  days  went  on,  the  improvement  was  so 
slow  that  I  had  to  abandon  all  idea  of  accompanying  the 
sledge  party  to  Cape  Crozier,  and  to  content  myself  with 
deputing  the  charge  to  Royds.  I  already  foresaw  how  much 
there  was  to  be  learnt  if  we  were  to  do  good  sledging  work  in 
the  spring,  and  to  miss  such  an  opportunity  of  gaining  experi- 
ence was  terribly  trying  ;   however,  there  was  nothing  to  be 


i|D       THE  VOYAGE  OF  THE  'DISCOVERY'    [Mar. 

done  but  to  nurse  my  wounded  limb  and  to  determine  that 
never  again  would  I  be  so  rash  as  to  run  hard  snow-slopes  on 
ski. 

By  March  4  the  preparation  of  the  sledge  party  was  com- 
pleted. The  party  consisted  of  four  officers,  Royds,  Koettlitz, 
Skelton,  and  Barne,  and  eight  men,  and  was  divided  into  two 
teams,  each  pulling  a  single  sledge  and  each  assisted  by  four 
dogs.  I  am  bound  to  confess  that  the  sledges  when  packed 
presented  an  appearance  of  which  we  should  afterwards  have 
been  wholly  ashamed,  and  much  the  same  might  be  said  of 
the  clothing  worn  by  the  sledgers.  But  at  this  time  our 
ignorance  was  deplorable  ;  we  did  not  know  how  much  or 
what  proportions  would  be  required  as  regards  the  food,  how 
to  use  our  cookers,  how  to  put  up  our  tents,  or  even  how  to 
put  on  our  clothes.  Not  a  single  article  of  the  outfit  had  been 
tested,  and  amid  the  general  ignorance  that  prevailed  the  lack 
of  system  was  painfully  apparent  in  everything.  Though  each 
requirement  might  have  been  remembered,  all  were  packed  in 
a  confused  mass,  and,  to  use  a  sailor's  expression,  '  everything 
was  on  top  and  nothing  handy.' 

Even  at  this  time  I  was  conscious  how  much  there  was  to 
be  learnt,  and  felt  that  we  must  buy  our  experience  through 
many  a  discomfort ;  and  on  looking  back  I  am  only  astonished 
that  we  bought  that  experience  so  cheaply,  for  clearly  there 
were  the  elements  of  catastrophe  as  well  as  of  discomfort  in  the 
disorganised  condition  in  which  our  first  sledge  parties  left  the 
ship. 

However,  at  the  time  few  of  those  actively  employed  had 
time  or  inclination  to  consider  their  unfitness  ;  all  was  bustle 
and  hurry  to  depart,  and  at  length  the  order  to  march  was 
given  and  the  party  stepped  out  briskly  for  the  steep  snow- 
slopes.  By  this  time  the  sea-ice  had  broken  past  the  eastern 
slope  of  the  '  Gap,'  the  peninsula  could  be  crossed  only  by 
climbing  the  higher  passes,  and  the  sledges  had  to  be  dragged 
to  an  altitude  of  nearly  800  feet  before  the  level  plain  of  the 
barrier  could  be  reached.  It  was  not  until  the  following  day, 
therefore,  that  the  retreating  figures  of  the  party  were  lost  to 


I9Q2]    WIND-DIRECTION  AND  TEMPERATURE    171 

our  watchers  on  the  hilltops,  and  we  settled  down  to  wait  for 
their  return. 

It  was  about  this  time  that  we  first  began  to  notice  the 
strange  relation  between  the  direction  of  the  wind  and  the 
temperatures  we  experienced  in  our  small  bay.  'With  the 
wind  from  north  or  south,  or  anywhere  to  the  westward  of 
these  points,  the  thermometer  rises  above  200  and  the  air  is 
soft  and  mild.  But  should  an  easterly  wind  arise — and  this  is 
the  most  constant  direction  of  our  winds — the  temperature  falls 
to  zero  or  below,  and  the  air  is  rendered  more  biting  by  fine 
particles  of  snow  blown  from  the  hill  surfaces.  Last  night 
light  airs  were  succeeded  by  a  squally  southerly  breeze  ;  the 
thermometer  showed  a  maximum  of  250 ;  I  noticed  my  bunk 
unusually  warm,  and  in  the  morning  found  water  on  the  upper 
deck.  To  the  eastward  is  the  barrier,  and  doubtless  the  cold 
weather  is  due  to  air  carried  from  its  extensive  surface.  .  .  . 
The  northerly  breeze  coming  from  the  sea  would  naturally  be 
warmed,  but  it  is  difficult  to  account  for  the  warmth  of  the 
southerly  winds,  unless  it  is  an  effect  of  descending  currents 
from  the  higher  levels.  We  should  welcome  both  northerly 
and  southerly  breezes  were  it  not  that  the  first  brings  a  swell 
and  the  last  a  continual  prospect  of  being  beset  by  drifting  ice. 
Of  the  several  evils,  the  least  is  undoubtedly  the  cold,  and 
with  a  southerly  wind  especially  one  does  not  feel  that  our  bay 
affords  a  good  protection ;  luckily,  so  far,  it  has  not  lasted  at 
any  time  for  more  than  a  few  hours,  nor  has  it  blown  with  any 
great  force.  We  have  only  experienced  the  lightest  puffs  of 
air  from  the  west,  in  which  direction  our  bay  affords  least 
protection. 

'  We  have  now  got  our  windmill  up,  and  it  revolves  merrily. 
The  mill  regulates  itself  to  a  certain  extent  by  its  large  rudder, 
which  causes  it  to  face  more  obliquely  to  the  wind  as  its  force 
increases,  but  this  is  only  partial  regulation,  and  with  changes 
in  the  wind  there  is  considerable  variation  in  the  speed  of  the 
mill.  The  dynamo  stands  on  deck  beneath  the  mill,  and  has 
an  ingenious  contrivance  with  a  sucking  magnet  to  regulate 
the  current   output   by  altering   the   resistance    in   the   field 


172       THE   VOYAGE  OF   THE  'DISCOVERY'     [Mar. 

magnets.  This  does  not  work  so  well  as  one  could  wish,  and 
though  the  cells  are  gradually  charging  I  do  not  like  the 
variations  in  the  current  which  is  effecting  this.  Dellbridge 
and  I  have  been  going  into  the  matter,  but  I  fear  the  sucking 
magnet  will  never  be  very  satisfactory.  To-night  we  had 
electric  light  below  for  a  few  hours  ;  it  made  our  quarters  look 
wonderfully  bright  and  comfortable,  and  will  be  the  greatest 
boon  if  we  can  only  keep  it  going  during  the  winter ;  but 
besides  the  dynamo,  the  cells  will  need  a  lot  of  attention ;  one 
or  two  are  already  showing  signs  of  sulphating. 

1  The  main  hut  is  now  finished  and  looks  quite  a  palatial 
residence.  The  Eschenhagen  magnetographs  have  been  in 
full  swing  since  the  term  day,  March  i,  thanks  to  Bernacchi's 
energy ;  there  will  be  much  difficulty,  he  thinks,  in  maintain- 
ing an  equable  temperature  for  these  instruments.  I  hope  it 
can  be  overcome  to  some  extent  by  banking  the  hut  with  snow. 

1  March  9. — The  young  ice  forms  quickly  when  it  is  calm, 
especially  at  night,  but  when  the  wind  springs  up  it  is  soon 
driven  out. 

'I  was  able  to  get  about  sufficiently  to  go  rounds  and 
perform  our  short  service.  Without  Royds  and  the  harmonium 
the  hymns  were  a  difficulty,  but  we  chose  the  simplest  tunes. 
A  calm  but  dull  morning  was  succeeded  by  the  most  glorious 
afternoon.  The  sun  was  warm  and  bright,  and  it  was  pleasant 
to  sit  about  in  its  rays.  I  was  sorely  tempted  to  try  to  walk 
abroad,  but  wisdom  kept  me  chained  on  board.  We  have 
now  been  here  a  month  and  a  day ;  it  is  odd  to  think  that 
we  expected  to  be  frozen  in  on  arrival,  a  miscalculation  of 
a  whole  month ;  but  what  could  one  suppose  from  the  evidence 
we  then  had  before  us  ?  In  addition  to  the  records  of  former 
expeditions  to  these  seas,  I  find  that  the  "  Belgica  "  ceased  to 
move  after  March  4  when  far  to  the  north  of  us.  The  bay  is 
full  of  young  ice  and  the  swell  has  almost  gone  ;  it  appears  as  if 
our  little  corner  was  at  last  to  be  frozen  in.  To-night  the  sun 
sinks  behind  our  western  range  in  a  sky  of  rosy  glory,  and 
deep  shadows  fall  across  the  frozen  bay. 

*  March  10. —  .  .  .  Again  a  fine  bright  day,  though  there 


i9o2]    ACCIDENT  TO   CAPE   CROZIER   PARTY     173 

was  some  wind  in  the  night.  My  leg  better,  and  was  able  to 
hobble  to  the  shore  station  on  a  tour  of  inspection.  Quite  a 
number  of  small  round  sponges  have  been  picked  up  on  the 
hillsides;  they  must  have  been  cast  up  on  the  ice-foot  and 
there  dried,  until  they  became  so  light  that  the  wind  caught 
them  up  and  whirled  them  to  the  rocky  crannies  above.  The 
men  go  out  very  regularly  for  exercise;  they  have  mostly 
given  up  their  ski  and  have  taken  to  tobogganing.  Toboggans 
are  made  of  a  pair  of  ski  and  the  end  of  a  packing  case.  As 
many  of  the  slopes  are  extremely  steep,  the  pace  is  sometimes 
terrific,  and  the  least  unevenness  of  surface  inevitably  causes 
a  capsize,  when  toboggan  and  man  come  whirling  down  in  a 
cloud  of  snow,  much  to  the  delight  of  the  onlookers. 

1  The  sun  circles  so  low  now  that  the  effects  of  sunset  are 
visible  for  many  hours,  and  the  changes  of  light  are  very 
gradual  and  very  beautiful.  As  I  returned  from  my  walk  at 
six,  the  western  sky  bore  a  saffron  tint,  deepening  to  crimson 
where  the  dark  blue  mountains  were  clearly  outlined  against 
it ;  the  fleecy  clouds  showed  dark,  with  bright  gilded  edges 
where  they  stood  against  the  sky,  and  whitish  grey  where  they 
nestled  in  the  distant  valleys.  And  yet  now,  five  hours  later, 
though  heavier  cumulus  clouds  have  spread  overhead,  the  saffron 
tint  can  still  be  seen  through  breaks  in  the  cloudy  mantle, 
whilst  the  clear  horizon  has  only  turned  to  a  richer  crimson. 
The  beauties  of  the  sky  are  reflected  in  deeper  tone  on  the 
patchy  surface  of  the  young  ice,  in  which  a  few  puffs  of  wind 
have  traced  ink-black  leads  of  open  water.  But  it  is  still  sun- 
set, as  it  was  five  hours  ago.' 

Tuesday,  March  11,  was  to  be  one  of  our  blackest  days  in 
the  Antarctic,  but  we  had  little  suspicion  of  this  as  the  day- 
light hours  passed  quietly,  and  we  remained  snugly  in  our 
comfortable  quarters  on  board  the  ship.  Since  the  departure 
of  our  sledge  party  the  weather  had  been  exceptionally  fine  ; 
but  we  awoke  on  the  nth  to  find  the  wind  blowing  from  the 
east ;  in  the  afternoon  it  increased  in  strength,  and  the  air 
was  filled  with  thick  driving  snow.  The  main  part  of  our 
outdoor  work  was  accomplished,  and  as  there  was  plenty  to 


174       THE  VOYAGE  OF  THE  'DISCOVERY'     [Mar. 

be  done  on  board  we  did  not  attempt  to  face  the  inclement 
conditions  outside,  but  sat  down  in  comfort  to  our  tasks  with 
an  occasional  thought  for  our  fellows  who  were  less  happily 
circumstanced.  On  the  previous  evening  a  report  had  been 
brought  in  from  the  hilltop  that  a  spot  had  been  seen  in  the 
distance,  which  was  thought  to  be  our  sledge  party  returning. 
Though  we  considered  it  rather  soon  for  them  to  appear,  we 
did  not  imagine  that  anything  could  be  wrong,  and  only 
lamented  for  their  sakes  that  they  should  be  obliged  to  sup- 
port this  weather  in  a  tent  rather  than  with  our  own  comfort- 
able surroundings.  At  the  worst  no  one  suspected  that  they 
could  be  anything  but  weather-bound  and  uncomfortable.  It 
was  not  until  half-past  eight,  when  it  was  quite  dusk  without, 
that  our  tranquillity  was  rudely  shaken  by  a  report  that  four 
men  were  walking  towards  the  ship.  The  sense  of  trouble 
was  immediate,  and  all  hastened  on  deck ;  we  could  scarcely 
recognise  the  newcomers  as  they  climbed  over  the  side  in  the 
thick  whirling  drift,  but  the  first  disjointed  sentences  were 
enough  to  show  that  all  was  amiss,  and  we  hurried  them  below. 
As  they  emerged  from  their  thick  coverings  we  recognised  them 
as  Wild,  Weller,  Heald,  and  Plumley,  and  it  was  evident  that 
though  thoroughly  exhausted  they  were  labouring  under  strong 
excitement.  In  such  circumstances,  and  from  so  many  mouths, 
it  was  almost  impossible  to  get  a  connected  tale,  and  it  was 
not  until  I  had  selected  Wild,  as  obviously  the  most  cool  and 
collected  of  the  party,  and  had  called  him  aside,  that  I  was 
able  to  get  an  idea  of  what  had  happened ;  and  even  then  I 
could  only  get  a  meagre  outline  such  as  follows : 

They  had  been  sent  back,  he  said,  a  party  of  nine,  in 
charge  of  Mr.  Barne,  and  early  in  the  day  had  reached  the 
crest  of  the  hills  somewhere  by  Castle  Rock  ;  besides  the 
three  with  him  now,  there  had  been  Mr.  Barne,  Quartley, 
Evans,  Hare,  and  Vince  ;  they  had  thought  they  were  quite 
close  to  the  ship,  and  when  the  blizzard  came  on  they  had 
left  their  tents  and  walked  towards  her  supposed  position. 
They  found  themselves  on  a  steep  slope  ;  couldn't  see  any- 
thing, but  tried  to  keep  close  together  ;  suddenly  Hare  had 


1902]  THE   SLEDGE   PARTY'S   STORY  175 

disappeared,  and  a  few  minutes  afterwards  Evans  went.  Mr. 
Barne  and  Quartley  had  left  them  to  try  to  find  out  what  had 
become  of  Evans,  and  neither  had  come  back,  though  they 
waited.  Afterwards  they  had  gone  on,  and  then  suddenly 
found  themselves  at  the  edge  of  a  precipice  with  the  sea 
below ;  Vince  had  shot  past  him  over  the  edge.  After  much 
trouble  they  had  climbed  back,  reached  some  rocks,  and 
groped  their  way  to  the  ship ;  he  feared  all  the  others  must 
be  lost ;  he  was  sure  Vince  had  gone.  Could  he  guide  a 
search  party  to  the  scene  of  the  accident?  He  thought  he 
could — at  any  rate,  he  would  like  to  try. 

The  information  was  little  enough  ;  at  any  rate,  it  was 
something  on  which  to  act,  and  the  details  could  be  filled  in 
later.  But  meanwhile  the  practical  common  sense  on  board 
had  outstripped  orders,  and  already  warmer  clothing  and  wind 
coverings  were  being  hurried  on  by  all,  and  a  sledge  with  a  fur 
sleeping-bag  and  medical  comforts  had  been  equipped.  But 
the  ship  could  not  be  deserted  even  for  such  an  errand  as  this, 
and  when  Mr.  Armitage  had  chosen  four  officers  and  ten  men 
to  accompany  him,  it  was  felt  that  numbers  had  already  reached 
the  limit  of  usefulness,  and  that  others  like  myself  must  wait 
in  dreary  inaction  whilst  the  few  laboured.  Though  the  first 
disastrous  tidings  had  been  brought  to  us  at  8.30,  it  was  still 
before  nine  when  the  relieving  party  tumbled  over  the  side 
and  vanished  into  the  gloom. 

It  will  be  as  well  to  relate  now  the  actual  story  of  the 
original  sledge  party,  as  we  learnt  it  in  after-times,  and  to 
trace  the  steps  which  had  led  to  the  accident. 

The  party,  after  crossing  the  hills  on  March  4  on  their 
outward  journey,  had  descended  to  the  level  ice  and  directed 
their  course  into  the  deep  bay  which  lies  on  the  eastern  side 
of  our  peninsula  and  south  of  Erebus  and  Terror.  After 
crossing  some  ice-ridges  they  found  fairly  easy  travelling  for 
ten  miles  or  more,  but  then  came  to  very  soft  snow,  where  at 
each  footstep  they  sank  to  a  depth  of  eighteen  inches  or  two 
feet.  The  labour  was  excessive,  and  the  dogs  were  of  no 
assistance,  but  they  struggled  on  in  hopes  of  coming  to  better 


176       THE   VOYAGE  OF   THE  'DISCOVERY'     [Mar. 

conditions.     After  three  days  Royds  saw  that  it  was  useless  to 
continue  as   they  were  going,  and  that  the  only  chance  of 
making   progress  was   to   use   snow-shoes,  but   unfortunately 
there  were  only  three  pairs  of  ski  with  the  party.     He  decided, 
therefore,  to  push  on  for  his  mission  at  Cape  Crozier  with  two 
officers  only,  and  to  send  the  remainder  back  in  charge  of 
Barne.     The  separation  took  place  on  the  9th,  and  the  re- 
turning party,  finding  a  somewhat  easier  road,  were  able  to 
retrace  their  steps  at  a  more  rapid  pace.     They  came  abreast 
of  Castle  Rock  on  the  morning  of  the   nth  ;  and,  although 
this  was  not  the  way  by  which  they  had  descended  from  the 
hills,  Barne  thought  that  the  incline  at  this  place  looked  more 
gradual  and  would  prove  an  easier  road  to  the  summit  than 
that  by  which  they  had  come,  and  so  decided  to  take  it.     In 
expectation  of  a  stiff  and  slippery  climb,  he  directed  his  men 
to  put  on  the  loose  leather  ski  boots  which  they  carried  instead 
of  the  softer  fur  boots.     The  ski  boots  were  frozen  hard,  and 
although  most  of  the  party  got  them  on  after  much  difficulty, 
Vince  and  Hare  had  to  give  up  the  attempt  and  were  allowed 
to  continue   in   their   fur   boots.      Barne's   report   proceeds : 
'  Neither   Primus   lamp    could   be   used   on   account   of  the 
prickers  being  broken.     At  9.45,  the  weather  being  clear,  we 
started,  particular  care  having  been  taken  to  pack  the  sledges 
securely  to  prevent  damage  in  case  of  capsize  during  the  ascent. 
The  hill  can  be  easily  ascended  by  taking  a  zig-zag  course,  the 
surface  of  the  snow  being  in  broad  natural  steps.     Finding, 
however,  that  we  could  haul  the  sledges  straight  up,  I  did  so, 
making  for  Castle  Rock.     We  stopped  twice  for  rests,  and 
reached  the  top  of  the  ridge  about  half  a  mile  south-west  of 
Castle  Rock  at  1  p.m.     We  had  scarcely  gained  the  ridge  when 
it  began  to  blow  from  the  south-east,  and  the  air  was  filled 
with  snow.     I  had  just  time  to  take  a  bearing  of  Crater  Hill 
before  it  was  obscured,  and  I  intended  to  make  for  it  along 
the  ridge,  but  as  several  of  the  crew  were  getting  frost-bitten 
and  the  sledges  were  being  blown  over,  I  thought  it  best  to 
camp,  and  made  for  the  shelter  of  some  rocks  which  I  had 
seen  before  the  wind  sprang  up.     On  finding  them  we  got  as 


I9o2]  A  FATAL   DECISION  177 

much  as  possible  under  their  lee  and  pitched  our  tents,  getting 
the  men  in  as  quickly  as  possible.' 

The  tents  being  up,  the  party  crept  into  them,  already 
exhausted  from  their  heavy  pull  up  the  long  incline,  and  more 
or  less  frost-bitten  from  their  last  efforts  in  the  driving  snow. 
At  ordinary  times  hot  tea  or  cocoa  would  have  revived  their 
spirits,  but  now  neither  cooking  apparatus  was  in  order,  and 
they  could  not  even  melt  the  snow  to  drink  with  their  icy  cold 
lunch.  We  afterwards  weathered  many  a  gale  in  our  staunch 
little  tents,  whilst  their  canvas  sides  flapped  thunderously  hour 
after  hour,  and  we,  ensconced  in  our  sleeping-bags,  passed  our 
time,  if  not  in  comfort,  at  least  without  sense  of  danger.  But 
to  this  party  the  experience  was  new ;  they  expected  each  gust 
that  swept  down  on  them  would  bear  the  tents  bodily  away, 
and  meanwhile  the  chill  air  crept  through  their  leather  boots 
and  ill-considered  clothing,  and  continually  some  frost-bitten 
limb  had  to  be  nursed  back  to  life.  It  was  small  wonder  that 
the  position  seemed  intolerable,  that  their  thoughts  turned  to  the 
comforts  of  the  ship  which  they  imagined  to  be  within  a  mile 
or  so  of  them ;  and  after  some  discussion  the  fatal  decision  was 
made  to  abandon  their  sledges  and  attempt  to  reach  her. 

We  knew  well  enough  afterwards  the  rashness  of  attempting 
to  move  in  an  Antarctic  snowstorm,  but  at  this  time  it  was 
impossible  for  us  to  have  known  fully  the  serious  nature  of 
such  an  act  and  the  utter  confusion  which  must  ensue.  It  was 
an  experience  which  had  to  be  bought,  and  this  party  were 
destined  to  pay  the  price. 

At  this  juncture  Barne's  report  proceeds  :  ' .  .  .  The  tents 
were  rolled  up  and  secured,  the  dogs  unharnessed,  and  we  left 
the  sledges.  Before  leaving  I  impressed  on  the  men,  as 
strongly  as  I  could,  the  importance  of  keeping  together,  as  it 
was  impossible  to  distinguish  any  object  at  a  greater  distance 
than  ten  yards  on  account  of  the  drifting  snow.  The  two  men 
wearing  fur  boots  had  a  man  on  either  side  to  prevent  them 
from  slipping.  Our  progress  was  very  slow,  as  we  were  greatly 
delayed  by  the  men  in  fur  boots,  who  had  difficulty  in  walking 
on  the  slippery,  uneven  surface.     As  we  proceeded  the  surface 

vol.  1.  N 


178       THE  VOYAGE  OF   THE  'DISCOVERY'    [Mar. 

inclined  to  our  right  front  until  it  was  evident  we  were  crossing 
a  steep  slope  on  which  it  was  more  and  more  difficult  to  keep 
a  foothold.  .  .  .  About  ten  minutes  after  we  had  left  the  sledges, 
Hare,  who  was  at  the  rear  of  the  party,  was  reported  to  be 
missing,  and  at  this  moment  an  unusually  violent  squall  pre- 
vented us  from  seeing  even  one  another.  I  immediately 
ordered  a  chain  to  be  formed  at  right  angles  and  extending 
across  our  track,  each  man  keeping  in  touch  with  the  next  with 
the  idea  of  intercepting  Hare  when  he  came  on.  We  shouted 
and  blew  whistles,  and  whilst  this  was  going  on,  Evans  stepped 
back  on  to  a  patch  of  bare  smooth  ice,  fell,  and  shot  out  of 
sight  immediately.' 

Thinking  the  slope  to  be  one  of  the  short  ones  so  common 
in  the  folds  of  the  hills,  Barne  cautioned  his  men  to  remain 
where  they  were ;  and  sitting  down,  deliberately  started  to  slide 
in  Evans's  tract.  In  a  moment  or  two  the  slope  grew  steeper, 
and  soon  he  was  going  at  a  pace  which  left  him  with  no  power 
to  control  his  movements  ;  he  whipped  out  his  clasp  knife  and 
dug  it  into  the  ice,  but  the  blade  snapped  off  short  and  failed 
to  check  his  wild  career.  In  the  mad  rush  he  had  time  to 
realise  the  mistake  that  had  been  made  and  to  wonder  vaguely 
what  would  come  next.  In  a  flash,  ice  changed  to  snow,  which 
grew  softer  until,  in  a  smother  of  flying  particles,  his  rapid  flight 
was  arrested,  and  he  stood  up  to  find  Evans  within  a  few  feet 
of  him.  They  had  scarcely  exchanged  greetings  when  a  third 
figure  came  hurtling  down  on  them  out  of  the  gloom  and  was 
brought  to  rest  at  their  feet.  This  was  Quartley,  who,  growing 
impatient  at  Barne's  absence,  and  of  course  ignorant  of  what 
lay  below,  had  started  to  slide  down  on  the  same  track,  and 
had  been  swept  down  the  descent  in  the  same  breathless  manner. 
Realising  the  impossibility  of  ascending  again  by  the  way  they 
had  come,  they  started  to  descend,  but  within  four  paces  of  the 
place  at  which  they  had  been  brought  to  rest  they  found  that 
the  slope  ended  suddenly  in  a  steep  precipice  beyond  which 
they  could  see  nothing  but  the  clouds  of  whirling  snow.  Even 
as  they  recoiled  from  this  new  danger  and  dimly  realised  the 
merciful  patch  of  soft  snow  which  had  saved  them  from  it,  a 


1902]  VINCE'S   TERRIBLE   END  179 

yelping  dog  flew  past  them,  clawing  madly  at  the  icy  slope,  and 
disappeared  for  ever  into  the  gloom  beyond. 

Movement  of  any  sort  seemed  impossible  in  this  whirling 
storm,  and  they  sat  for  long  huddled  together,  forlornly  hoping 
for  some  respite  from  the  blinding  drift.  At  last,  chilled  to  the 
bone,  they  felt  that  whatever  happened  they  must  be  again  on 
the  move,  and  in  a  dazed  fashion  they  gathered  themselves 
together  and  slowly  moved  along  the  cliff  to  the  right ;  they 
found  that  it  gradually  fell,  and  then  suddenly  they  caught  a 
glimpse  of  the  sea  at  their  feet,  and  for  the  first  time  realised 
that  it  was  from  this  they  had  been  saved  by  the  patch  of  snow 
almost  on  the  cornice  of  the  cliff. 

In  a  short  break  in  the  storm  they  now  saw  Castle  Rock 
towering  over  their  heads,  and  close  ahead  of  them  a  rocky 
ridge  which  ran  from  its  foot.  Slowly  and  painfully  they  made 
their  way  up  the  stony  incline  until  they  stood  beneath  the  high 
rock  cliffs,  and  here  again  they  crouched  together,  seeking  what 
shelter  they  could  behind  a  huge  boulder,  and  thus  they  must 
have  remained  for  some  hours. 

Meanwhile  the  party  which  had  been  left  at  the  head  of  the 
slope,  in  obedience  to  orders,  waited  long  for  their  absent 
leader,  shouting  again  and  again  in  the  lulls  of  the  whirling 
storm.  At  length  they  felt  that  something  must  be  amiss,  and 
that  it  was  hopeless  and  dangerous  to  remain  where  they  were. 
As  usual  on  such  occasions,  the  leading  spirit  came  to  the 
front,  and  the  five  who  now  remained  submitted  themselves  to 
the  guidance  of  Wild  and  followed  him  in  single  file  as  he 
again  struck  out  for  the  direction  in  which  they  supposed  the 
ship  to  lie.  As  they  proceeded  they  found  the  slope  growing 
steeper  and  the  difficulty  of  foothold  increased,  especially  for 
Vince,  who  was  wearing  fur  boots,  but  they  never  doubted  they 
would  soon  come  to  the  bottom  and  find  themselves  in  one  of 
the  valleys  which  would  guide  them  to  our  winter  quarters.  In 
this  manner  they  must  have  proceeded  for  about  500  yards, 
when  their  leader  suddenly  saw  the  precipice  beneath  his  feet, 
and  far  below,  through  the  wreathing  snow,  the  sea.  Another 
step  would  have  taken  him  over  the  edge ;  he  sprang  back  with 

K  2 


180       THE  VOYAGE   OF 'THE  'DISCOVERY'    [Mak. 

a  cry  of  warning,  and  those  behind  him,  hearing  it,  dug  their 
heels  instinctively  into  the  slippery  surface,  and  with  one 
exception  all  succeeded  in  stopping.  What  followed  was  over 
in  an  instant.  Before  his  horror-stricken  companions  had  time 
to  think,  poor  Vince,  unable  to  check  himself  with  his  soft  fur 
boots,  had  shot  from  amongst  them,  flashed  past  the  leader, 
and  disappeared.  It  was  difficult  to  discover  from  the  men's 
account  exactly  what  happened  after  this  catastrophe.  In 
some  sort  of  hazy  way  they  seem  to  have  realised  that  they 
must  make  upwards  and  away  from  the  danger,  and  they 
started  to  ascend  the  slope. 

All  spoke  of  that  ascent  with  horror,  and  wondered  how  it 
was  ever  accomplished.  They  could  only  hold  themselves  by 
the  soles  of  their  boots,  and  to  fall  or  even  to  slip  to  their 
knees  meant  inevitably  to  slide  backwards  towards  the  certain 
fate  below.  Literally  their  lives  depended  on  each  foothold, 
and  they  possessed  no  implement  to  make  these  more  secure. 
Of  the  party,  Wild  alone  had  previously  armed  the  soles  of  his 
boots  with  a  few  light  nails  ;  this  gave  him  a  great  advantage, 
and,  to  his  great  credit,  he  used  it  to  go  from  one  to  another  of 
his  companions  with  a  helping  hand.  As  they  crept  laboriously 
upwards,  the  slope  became  steeper  and  more  icy,  but  now, 
here  and  there,  they  found  a  stone  which  had  rolled  from  the 
heights  above  and  become  firmly  frozen  in  the  icy  surface. 
These  afforded  some  anchorage  and  rest  to  the  weary  climbers. 
The  storm  still  whirled  the  snow  about  them  with  unabated 
fury,  but  they  pushed  upwards  in  its  teeth  from  stone  to  stone, 
until  to  their  joy  the  stones  grew  thicker,  and  close  above  them 
they  saw  the  black  outline  of  the  rocky  summit.  A  final 
scramble,  and  they  were  once  more  on  safe  ground,  with  the 
nightmare  of  the  climb  behind  them. 

But  their  troubles  were  far  from  over,  as  they  were  still 
ignorant  of  the  position  of  the  ship.  Wild  again  took  the  lead ; 
the  sea  behind  them  must  be  north  of  the  ship,  he  argued,  and 
therefore  they  must  keep  the  wind  on  their  left  front,  and  if 
possible  keep  always  to  the  rocks.  It  is  difficult  in  such  cir- 
cumstances to  gauge  time,  and  none  of  the  party  knew  how 


i9o2]  RESULTS   OF   SEARCH   PARTIES  181 

long  they  walked  on  in  dogged  silence  before  their  eyes  fell  on 
a  well-remembered  landmark,  and  cautiously  descending  a 
steep  rocky  incline,  they  saw  the  ship  looming  through  the  grey 
whirl  of  snow  ;  but  between  the  breaking-up  of  their  camp  and 
the  moment  when  they  clambered  over  the  side  to  make  their 
report  to  me,  six  hours  had  elapsed.  It  is  little  wonder  that 
after  such  an  experience  they  should  have  been,  as  I  have  men- 
tioned, both  excited  and  tired. 

The  hours  which  followed  the  departure  of  Armitage  and 
his  search  party  on  this  fatal  night  were  such  as  one  could 
scarcely  forget ;  exhausted  as  our  returned  wanderers  were,  we 
questioned  them  again  and  again  to  get  greater  light  on  the 
accident,  but  nothing  could  alter  the  fact  that  five  of  our  small 
company  were  lost  or  wandering  helplessly  about  in  this  dread- 
ful storm.  Hatefully  conscious  of  my  inability  to  help  on 
account  of  my  injured  leg,  my  own  mind  seemed  barren  of  all 
suggestion  of  further  help  which  we  might  render ;  but,  as  was 
always  my  experience  in  the  c  Discovery,'  my  companions  were 
never  wanting  in  resource.  Dellbridge  thought  he  could  soon 
raise  steam  enough  to  blow  the  syren,  and  before  long  its  shrill 
screams  were  echoing  amongst  the  hills.  Then,  as  we  recon- 
structed the  story  of  Vince's  loss  and  pictured  the  cliff  over 
which  he  had  fallen,  the  bare  possibility  of  some  remaining 
fragment  of  sea-ice  clinging  below  was  suggested.  Was  it 
possible  that  we  could  reach  it  ?  The  only  possibility  was  by 
boat.  Who  would  volunteer?  Of  course  everyone.  In  ten 
minutes  a  whaler  was  swinging  alongside  and  being  rapidly 
loaded  with  provisions,  cooking  apparatus,  and  fur  clothing; 
in  ten  more,  with  a  picked  crew  of  six  men  in  charge  of 
Shackleton,  she  disappeared  around  Hut  Point. 

Then  we  could  do  nothing  but  peer  through  the  driving 
snow  and  wait.  It  was  a  trying  time,  and  a  full  three  hours 
elapsed  before  there  was  a  hail  from  without,  and  through  the 
drift  appeared  Ferrar  leading  three  of  the  lost — Barne,  Evans 
and  Quartley.  Ferrar's  tale  was  soon  told.  He  had  accom- 
panied Armitage's  party,  and,  guided  by  Wild,  they  had  made 
for  Castle  Rock  and  eventually  found  the  abandoned  sledges, 


182        THE  VOYAGE   OF   THE  'DISCOVERY'     [Mar. 

and,  at  first,  nothing  near  them  but  two  dogs  cosily  coiled  up 
beneath  the  snow  ;  but  later,  as  they  circled  round  on  their 
ropes,  they  had  providentially  come  on  the  three  with  whom 
he  had  returned.  Armitage  had  picked  him  to  return  because 
his  geological  work  had  given  him  an  exceptional  knowledge  of 
the  locality. 

An  hour  later  the  main  search  party  returned;  they  had 
done  all  that  men  could  do  in  such  weather.  A  completer 
search  was  impossible,  but  it  had  to  be  admitted  that  the 
chance  of  seeing  Hare  or  Vince  again  was  very  small.  Soon 
after  our  whaler  reappeared  with  her  crew  thoroughly  ex- 
hausted ;  they  had  pulled  easily  whilst  under  the  shelter  of 
the  nearer  hills,  but  as  they  proceeded  to  the  north  they  had 
come  under  the  influence  of  heavy  squalls  which  had  driven 
them  away  from  the  land.  It  was  only  with  the  most 
strenuous  exertion,  and  after  hours  of  arduous  struggling,  that 
inch  by  inch  they  had  gradually  been  able  to  regain  the 
shelter  of  Hut  Point,  and  so  reach  the  ship. 

As  we  prepared  to  snatch  some  few  hours  of  rest  after  the 
anxieties  of  the  night,  we  had  sadly  to  realise  the  calamity  that 
had  befallen  us  in  what  appeared  to  be  the  certain  loss  of  two 
of  our  comrades  ;  but  as  the  details  of  the  story  were  un- 
folded, we  could  well  appreciate  that  we  had  been  almost 
miraculously  preserved  from  a  far  greater  tragedy.  It  seemed 
almost  wonderful  that  the  whole  party  had  not  disappeared,  to 
leave  us  only  the  terrible  discovery  of  the  abandoned  sledges 
or  perhaps  a  frozen  silent  figure  in  the  snow.  Even  now  we 
could  not  clearly  understand  how  the  officer  of  the  party  and 
his  two  companions  had  been  rescued ;  all  were  too  dazed  to 
complete  their  story  on  this  woeful  night.  Later  we  learnt 
that  after  hours  of  crouching  beneath  the  boulder  under  Castle 
Rock,  they  had  heard  the  faint  shriek  of  the  syren.  It  had 
revived  their  waning  faculties,  and  they  staggered  once  more 
to  their  feet  to  make  towards  the  welcome  sound,  and  thus  it 
was  that  as  they  dragged  themselves  along  they  mercifully  fell 
into  the  arms  of  our  sledge  party.  All  three  were  badly 
frost-bitten,  and  on  the  following  day  their  ears,  cheeks,  and 


t9o2]  FROST-BITES  183 

noses  were  swollen  to  a  prodigious  size ;  but  as  this  meant  a 
return  of  circulation,  there  was  nothing  worse  for  them  in  this 
respect  than  a  great  deal  of  pain  and  discomfort.  But  one  of 
Barne's  hands  was  in  a  much  more  serious  condition ;  the 
blood  obstinately  refused  to  return  to  the  dead  white  fingers, 
and,  whilst  he  swathed  them  in  well-greased  bandages,  the 
doctor  informed  me  that  there  was  little  hope  of  saving  them. 
For  many  days  the  prospect  of  amputation  seemed  imminent, 
and  it  was  not  until  a  week  after  the  accident  that  the  blood 
began  to  extend  slowly  and  painfully  towards  the  tips  of  the 
fingers.  Although  the  hand  was  left  in  a  shockingly  mangled 
and  painful  condition,  the  fingers  were  saved. 

It  may  be  of  interest  to  those  whose  fortune  has  not  taken 
them  to  the  colder  regions  of  the  earth  to  say  a  word  or  two 
concerning  frost-bites. 

Even  in  the  coldest  places  it  is  necessary  to  keep  one's 
face  and  sometimes  one's  fingers  uncovered  ;  consequently  it 
is  these  parts  of  the  body  that  are  most  likely  to  suffer,  and  in 
the  Antarctic  Regions  we  were  all  so  frequently  frost-bitten  in 
them  that  we  learnt  to  regard  such  an  evil  as  part  of  the 
ordinary  course  of  events  :  and  indeed  there  was  very  little  to 
fear  as  long  as  the  frost-bite  was  noticed  and  the  remedy  taken 
in  time.  Under  ordinary  conditions  one  has  a  distinct  sensa- 
tion on  being  frost-bitten  ;  the  blood  seems  to  recede  from  the 
veins  in  the  exposed  part  with  a  suddenness  that  almost  con- 
veys the  sound  of  a  '  click '  and  the  feeling  of  a  prick  with  a 
sharp  instrument.  At  such  times  all  that  is  necessary  is  to 
apply  gentle  warmth  to  the  frost-bitten  member.  For  instance, 
if  one's  cheek  or  nose  is  gone,  one  simply  covers  it  for  a  minute 
or  two  with  the  palm  of  one's  hand.  There  is  a  fiction  that 
the  best  remedy  is  to  seize  a  handful  of  snow  and  rub  the 
offending  member,  but  as  the  snow  in  the  polar  regions  has  the 
consistency  of  sharp  sand  or  emery  powder,  the  application  of 
such  a  remedy  would  speedily  remove  the  skin,  with  anything 
but  a  pleasant  result. 

Frost-bites  such  as  I  have  described  are  merely  superficial, 
and,  as  I  have  said,  they  were  of  such  frequent  occurrence  that 


1 84       THE   VOYAGE  OF  THE  'DISCOVERY'     [Mar. 

under  ordinary  conditions  we  learnt  to  regard  them  very  little, 
and  often,  if  one  found  it  inconvenient  to  nurse  one's  own  limb 
back  to  life,  one  called  on  the  kindly  offices  of  a  neighbour. 

But  the  frost-bites  that  come  when  people  are  doing  hard 
work  are  more  serious,  as  the  first  prick  may  pass  unnoticed 
and  the  superficial  freezing  continues  to  take  deeper  hold  with- 
out any  further  sensation.  Should  the  frost-bitten  person  be 
exhausted,  the  evil  may  spread  with  alarming  rapidity,  and 
then,  too,  limbs  which  are  well  covered  and  protected  may  be 
attacked,  and  the  seriousness  of  such  a  condition  needs  no 
comment.  Hence  in  our  subsequent  hard  sledging  work, 
whilst  we  treated  the  superficial  frost-bite  with  scant  respect, 
we  learnt  to  be  cautious  to  prevent  the  evil  from  becoming 
deep-seated.  On  long,  tiring  marches  in  a  wind,  frost-bites 
were  bound  to  come  frequently,  and  in  nine  cases  out  of  ten 
were  unfelt,  so  that  our  custom  at  such  times  was  to  pause 
occasionally  and  peer  into  each  other's  faces  in  search  of  white 
patches.  More  important  still,  we  learnt  not  to  continue  ex- 
hausting marches  too  long  in  heavy  weather,  but  to  reserve  a 
margin  of  energy  for  the  chill  work  of  making  the  camp,  during 
which  any  unduly  tired  person  was  bound  to  be  in  great 
danger  of  serious  freezing. 

A  frost-bite  must  be  very  superficial  and  very  quickly  dealt 
with  not  to  leave  an  after-effect.  This  effect  is  a  blister,  more 
or  less  painful  in  proportion  to  the  seriousness  of  the  frost- 
bite. To  all  intents  and  purposes  the  effect  is  precisely  the 
same  as  that  of  a  burn.  In  anything  but  a  very  superficial 
frost-bite,  moreover,  the  actual  sensation  of  returning  circula- 
tion is  very  distinctly  painful. 

Places  which  have  been  frost-bitten  become  extraordinarily 
susceptible  to  a  recurrence  of  the  evil.  In  our  second  winter  in 
the  Antarctic  there  were  few  of  us  whose  fingers  had  not  '  gone  ' 
at  one  time  or  another,  and  consequently  it  was  much  rarer  to  see 
people  working  with  bare  hands  than  it  was  in  the  first  winter, 
when  many  delighted  to  show  their  scorn  of  cold  fingers.  So 
for  a  long  while  after  Barne  had  recovered  the  use  of  his  hand 
he  had  to  nurse  it  with  far  greater  care  than  the  uninjured  one. 


i902]  WONDERFUL   ESCAPE   OF   HARE  185 

For  the  events  which  succeeded  the  distressing  night  of 
March  1 1  I  draw  on  my  diary  : 

''March  12. — Though  the  glass  has  risen  continuously  and 
uniformly,  the  wind  has  only  grown  steadier  without  diminish- 
ing, but  there  is  very  little  of  the  driving  snow  which  made 
last  night  so  hideous.  Another  search  party  were  out  early 
under  Wilson  ;  they  went  well  provided  with  ice-axes,  rope, 
and  crampons,  and  even  thus  had  to  use  great  care  in  venturing 
on  the  fatal  slope  where  so  much  happened  yesterday.  They 
brought  back  the  sledges  and  two  more  dogs,  but  could  see  no 
sign  of  the  missing  men.  But  indeed  it  would  be  beyond 
hope  to  find  them  alive  after  such  a  night ;  at  least,  we  now 
know  the  worst.  Some  of  the  men  are  overwrought ;  twice  to- 
day it  has  been  reported  that  someone  thought  he  saw  a  figure 
crawling  down  the  hillside,  and  on  one  occasion  the  illusion 
was  so  strong  that  two  or  three  ran  to  the  other  side  of  the 
bay,  only  to  find  a  boulder  over  which  the  drift  was  sweeping 
in  fantastic  curls.' 

'  March  13. — It  is  still  blowing,  and  the  temperature  is 
—  6°  ;  but  the  air  is  clear,  and,  the  glass  having  reached  a 
maximum,  there  are  hopes  of  a  change  for  the  better.  We  are 
raising  steam,  as  I  want  to  view  the  scene  of  the  accident  from 
the  sea,  and  to  make  certain  as  to  Vince's  fate  at  least.' 

Later  I  write  :  t  A  very  extraordinary  thing  has  happened. 
At  10  a.m.  a  figure  was  seen  descending  the  hillside.  At  first 
we  thought  it  must  be  someone  who  had  been  for  an  early 
walk  ;  but  it  was  very  soon  seen  that  the  figure  was  walking 
weakly,  and,  immediately  after,  the  men  who  were  working  in 
the  hut  were  seen  streaming  out  towards  it.  In  a  minute  or 
two  we  recognised  the  figure  as  that  of  young  Hare,  and  in 
less  than  five  he  was  on  board.  He  was  taken  into  the 
magnetic  house,  as  it  was  thought  unwise  to  take  him  into  the 
full  warmth  of  the  living-quarters  at  once.  We  soon  discovered 
that,  though  exhausted,  weak,  and  hungry,  he  was  in  full 
possession  of  his  faculties  and  quite  free  from  frost-bites.  He 
went  placidly  off  to  sleep  whilst  objecting  to  the  inadequacy 
of  a  milk  diet. 


i86       THE  VOYAGE   OF  THE  'DISCOVERY'    [Mar. 

It  was  much  later  that  we  learnt  his  story.  It  appears  that 
he  had  left  his  companions  intentionally,  on  finding  that  it  was 
impossible  to  stand  alone  in  his  fur  boots.  He  had  shouted 
to  the  others  that  he  meant  to  return  to  the  sledges  and 
change  into  leather  boots,  and  he  was  under  the  impression 
that  they  had  heard  him  and  had  quite  understood  the 
reason.  He  made  the  best  of  his  way  in  the  direction  in 
which  he  supposed  the  sledges  to  be,  but,  as  was  natural,  in 
the  thick  snowdrift  he  could  see  no  sign  of  them.  For  long 
he  wandered  forward  and  backward,  intent  on  his  search  j  but 
gradually  he  got  exhausted,  and  then  he  was  conscious  that 
his  footsteps  were  aimless.  The  last  thing  he  remembered 
was  making  towards  a  patch  of  rock,  where  he  hoped  to  find 
some  shelter  from  the  raging  wind.  When  he  awoke  this 
morning  he  found  himself  covered  with  snow,  but,  on  raising 
himself  on  his  elbow,  he  saw  that  he  was  on  a  slope  under 
Castle  Rock,  and,  glancing  about  him,  recognised  Crater  Hill 
and  other  known  eminences,  and  realised  exactly  where  he 
was  and  the  direction  in  which  the  ship  lay.  He  started 
towards  her,  but  found  himself  so  stiff  that  for  a  long  way  he 
was  obliged  to  crawl  on  hands  and  knees.  But  the  stiffness 
wore  off,  and  he  was  able  to  raise  himself  at  length,  and,  with 
some  rests,  to  reach  the  slope  where  we  had  first  seen  him. 

'He  must  have  lain  under  the  snow  for  thirty-six  hours, 
but  it  took  a  long  time  to  persuade  him  of  this ;  he  found 
it  hard  to  believe  that  this  was  the  second  day  after  the 
accident.  I  cannot  but  believe  that  his  preservation  is  unique, 
and  almost  miraculous.  The  boy,  who  is  only  eighteen,  has 
been  forty  hours  without  food,  and  sixty  without  warm  food  ; 
he  must  possess  great  stamina  to  have  come  through  without 
hurt.  The  incident  is  also  a  tribute  to  our  clothing.  He  was 
luckily  wearing  a  heavy  woollen  blouse  and  complete  gaberdine 
wind-covering  over  his  warm  underclothing.  Unconsciously 
he  withdrew  his  arms  inside  the  blouse,  and  covered  the 
opening  in  his  thick  helmet,  and  so  saved  his  hands  and  face 
from  freezing.  The  fur  boots  alone  saved  his  feet  from  the 
same  fate,  and  the  snow,  which  rapidly  covered  him,  must 


I962]  R.I.P.  187 

have  done  the  rest.  To-night  his  temperature  has  gone  up  to 
ioo°,  but  he  is  otherwise  quite  well. 

'  In  the  afternoon  we  weighed  our  anchors  and  steamed 
round  to  the  scene  of  the  accident,  when  every  detail  of  what 
we  now  called  "  Danger  Slope  "  could  be  clearly  seen.  It  is 
very  steep  for  about  400  or  500  yards,  and  ends  in  a  sheer 
drop  into  the  sea.  Though  partly  covered  with  hard  white 
snow,  it  has  extensive  patches  of  smooth  bare  ice ;  and,  as  the 
tracks  of  the  various  parties  were  worked  out,  it  seemed  more 
wonderful  than  ever  that  any  should  have  escaped  to  tell  the 
tale. 

'  Every  incident  could  now  be  closely  followed,  and  all 
shadow  of  doubt  as  to  Vince's  fate  is  gone.  At  least,  we  have 
the  satisfaction  of  knowing  that  nothing  could  have  been 
done  either  by  his  own  party  or  by  those  on  board  to  have 
averted  it.' 

We  had  now  finally  and  sadly  to  resign  ourselves  to  the 
loss  of  our  shipmate,  and  the  thought  was  grievous  to  all. 
From  the  moment  when  he  joined  us  at  the  Cape  of  Good 
Hope,  Vince  had  been  popular  with  all ;  always  obliging  and 
always  cheerful,  I  learnt  that  he  had  never  shown  these  qualities 
more  markedly  than  during  the  short  sledge  journey  which 
brought  him  to  his  untimely  end.  His  pleasant  face  and  ready 
wit  served  to  dispel  the  thought  of  hardship  and  difficulty  to 
the  end.  Life  was  a  bright  thing  to  him,  and  it  is  something 
to  think  that  death  must  have  come  quickly  in  the  grip  of  that 
icy  sea. 


1 88       THE   VOYAGE  OF   THE  'DISCOVERY'     [Mar. 


CHAPTER    VII 

PREPARING     FOR     WINTER 

Delay  in  Freezing-up  of  the  Ship — Dog  Troubles— Return  of  Royds— 
Local  Weather  Conditions — Last  Sledging  Effort  of  the  Season — 
Advantage  of  Experience — Preparing  for  Winter — Winter  Arriving — 
Meteorological  Screen  —  Tidal  Observations  —  Magnetic  Huts  — 
Capturing  Crab-eaters — Emperor  Penguin  Hunt — Departure  of  the 
Sun. 

Experience  be  a  jewel  that  we  have 
Purchased  at  an  infinite  rate. — Shakespeare. 

Of  late  the  temperature  had  crept  steadily  down  and  the 
young  ice  seemed  more  and  more  reluctant  to  yield  to  the 
blustering  winds  and  quit  the  surface  of  the  strait.  Our  short 
voyage  to  '  Danger  Slope '  was  made  through  patches  of 
sludgy,  sodden  ice  which  were  even  then  increasing  in  thick- 
ness. As  we  dropped  our  anchors  again  in  our  small  bay  we 
felt  that  it  was  for  the  last  time  before  the  winter  closed  in  on 
us,  and  that  soon  further  movement  would  be  impossible; 
indeed,  the  only  wonder  was  that  such  conditions  had  not 
come  long  before.  But  now  the  wind  alone  kept  the  water 
open,  and  in  the  short  intervals  of  calm  the  icy  crust  formed 
with  great  rapidity.  I  was  anxious  to  be  frozen  in  with  our 
bow  pointing  out  to  sea,  and  with  the  ship  at  such  a  distance 
from  the  ice-foot  that  she  should  run  no  chance  of  being 
pressed  against  it ;  but  as  the  wind  always  blew  out  of  the 
bay,  this  was  not  easily  accomplished,  and  we  had  to  content 
ourselves  with  being  ready  to  turn  her  at  the  critical  moment. 
For  this  purpose  anchors  were  bedded  on  the  ice-foot,  and 


i9o2]  DOG   TROUBLES  189 

wire  hawsers  attached  to  them  ready  to  haul  the  stern  round 
when  the  wind  permitted  it.  In  the  meantime  we  could  only 
get  to  the  shore  by  means  of  boats,  and  when  the  wind  grew 
very  strong  our  communication  was  interrupted  altogether, 
since  under  such  circumstances  we  scarcely  liked  to  send  a 
boat  away,  for  fear  it  should  be  carried  out  to  sea  by  some 
more  than  usually  fierce  gust. 

It  was  for  this  reason  that  we  were  impotent  to  prevent  the 
murder  of  two  of  our  dog  team,  though  we  actually  witnessed 
it,  and  bitterly  regretted  the  incautious  but  kindly  policy  which 
had  allowed  these  animals  to  run  free,  when  they  should  have 
been  chained  up. 

Here,  again,  we  erred  from  want  of  experience.  The  dogs 
had  been  particularly  quiet  of  late ;  each  had  his  own  kennel, 
and  his  own  bountiful  supply  of  food ;  they  had  been  given 
plenty  of  exercise  and  were  allowed  to  run  about  at  their  own 
sweet  will ;  there  seemed  to  be  absolutely  nothing  that  they 
could  quarrel  about,  and  for  days  they  had  lulled  us  into  false 
security  by  appearing  to  be  quite  contented  and  to  be  living 
on  the  most  amicable  terms.  But  alas  for  dog  morals  !  As 
we  well  understood  when  we  knew  them  better,  they  were  only 
biding  their  time.  Some  of  their  number  had  been  away 
sledging;  why  should  they  have  been  chosen?  What  treats 
and  petting  had  they  been  receiving  from  the  hands  of  man 
that  by  right  belonged  to  the  whole  community? 

They  were  objects  of  suspicion.  Nothing  they  could  do 
was  quite  right ;  it  was  no  use  their  wagging  their  tails  and 
pretending  to  be  friendly  when  they  had  played  a  low-down 
game  like  that  !  it  was  all  mere  impertinent  deception !  One 
can  only  suppose  that  such  thoughts  pass  through  the  doggish 
mind,  because  the  result  is  always  the  same.  Let  a  dog  be 
unduly  petted  or  receive  more  than  his  share  of  food,  or  be 
taken  away  sledging :  he  inevitably  becomes  an  object  of 
suspicion  to  the  rest.  The  first  growl,  the  first  step  beyond 
the  rigid  limits  of  propriety,  and  not  one,  but  the  whole  pack 
are  upon  him,  and  even  the  thickest  coat  is  a  poor  protection 
against  those  bloodthirsty  fangs.     Of  course  there  are  excep- 


i9o      THE  VOYAGE   OF  THE  'DISCOVERY'    [Mar. 

tions ;  here  and  there  is  a  dog  of  such  commanding  temper  or 
such  truculent  demeanour  that  he  can  afford  to  be  treated 
differently  from  the  rest ;  but  even  he  seems  to  have  to  silence 
criticism  by  being  more  than  usually  aggressive,  if  he  should 
have  been  absent  for  any  length  of  time.  Such  a  dog  becomes 
the  natural  leader  of  the  pack  ;  he  is  unceasingly  watchful ;  he 
never  pauses  to  parley,  but  attacks  at  the  first  sign  of  insolence, 
for  he  knows  well  that  the  sharpest  and  quickest  fang  commands 
the  situation. 

These  revelations  of  dog  nature  came  to  us  gradually.  It 
was  on  March  15,  whilst  we  were  cut  off  from  the  shore,  and 
were  casually  watching  the  dogs  as  they  idly  trotted  about  on 
the  snow,  that  we  witnessed  the  first  attack.  There  was  a 
growl,  a  wild  rush  to  a  central  spot,  a  heap  of  heaving,  snarling 
forms,  and  the  horrid  deed  was  done,  almost  before  we  realised 
that  the  peace  had  been  disturbed.  We  shouted  and  whistled, 
but  might  just  as  well  have  held  our  breath.  The  deed  done, 
peace  once  more  prevailed,  and  one  would  scarcely  have 
imagined  that  anything  had  happened  but  for  the  stiff,  lifeless 
form  on  the  snow. 

On  the  following  day  the  wind  still  blew  hard.  We  had 
determined,  however,  that  we  must  risk  the  passage  to  get 
these  bloodthirsty  wretches  chained  up ;  but  even  whilst  the 
boat  was  being  manned  the  last  night's  tragedy  was  re-enacted, 
and  another  poor  beast  lay  mangled  on  the  ice-foot.  As  the 
boat's  crew  landed,  the  murderers  welcomed  them  as  though 
nothing  out  of  the  ordinary  had  happened,  and  with  a  few 
exceptions  they  were  easily  caught  and  chained  up.  Then, 
one  by  one,  they  were  led  out  and  severely  chastised  in  front 
of  their  victims.  The  punishment  helped  to  relieve  our 
righteous  indignation,  but  otherwise,  I  think,  we  might  have 
spared  our  energy  again,  for  the  dogs  evidently  didn't  know 
what  it  was  all  about.     You  cannot  change  dog  nature. 

Meanwhile,  however,  we  had  lost  two  good  sledge  dogs, 
which  we  could  ill  afford,  and  we  decided  that,  however  trying 
it  might  be  to  their  feelings,  the  remaining  animals  must  be 
kept  on  their  chains.     As  we  expected,  the  victims  proved  to 


i9o2]  RETURN   OF   ROYDS  191 

be  two  harmless,  quiet  animals  which  had  recently  returned 
from  sledging. 

The  fatal  mishap  which  had  attended  the  main  portion  of 
our  first  sledge  party  left  us  in  some  anxiety  for  the  remaining 
members  who  were  still  absent.  We  knew  them  to  be  ill 
provided  for  very  severe  conditions,  and  saw  already  that 
sledging  in  the  Antarctic  was  not  a  thing  to  be  approached  in 
a  light-hearted,  irresponsible  spirit,  but  was  one  which  called 
for  great  care,  attention,  and  forethought.  Our  anxiety  for  the 
absentees  was  not  lessened  when  we  saw  Skelton  descending 
the  hills  alone  on  the  19th.  However,  when  he  was  safely  on 
board  we  learnt  that  he  was  only  a  forerunner,  and  that  the 
others  were  close  behind  ;  and  soon  they  appeared,  and  in  turn 
were  ferried  off  to  the  ship.  There  was  much  to  be  learnt  on 
both  sides :  it  was  for  us  to  tell  the  sad  tale  of  the  recent 
disaster,  and  for  them  to  set  forth  the  incidents  and  difficulties 
of  their  attempt  to  reach  the  Record  cairn.  Royds'  report  was 
so  laconic  that  extracts  from  it  may  well  convey  an  idea  of  the 
troubles  which  beset  the  inexperienced  sledge  traveller : 

'  March  4.—  ...  On  the  summit  "  Nigger  "  bit  f  Gus  " 
so  badly  through  the  mouth  that  I  had  to  send  the  latter 
back.  .  .  .  6.0.  Stopped  for  tea,  erected  two  tents;  Barne's 
ear  frost-bitten,  several  men  had  cramp  in  left  leg,  myself  very 
bad.  ...  On  starting  again  Vince  and  I  had  frost-bites  under 
the  nose.  Dogs  pulled  well ;  some  fights  and  a  little  trouble  ; 
"Boss"  ran  away.  8.15.  Camped.  Dogs  wouldn't  eat  any- 
thing ;  one  sledging  lamp  broken — a  great  nuisance,  as  now  one 
lamp  has  to  cook  for  six  men.  Cramp  prevalent  amongst  all 
hands. 

'  March  5. — Very  heavy  going.  Quartley's  foot  giving  much 
pain.  Got  up  tent  and  had  it  examined.  Not  frost-bitten,  but 
intensely  cold ;  made  him  wear  fur  boots.  .  .  .  Several  dogs 
got  bleeding  feet ;  snow  getting  heavier ;  all  hands  perspiring 
very  much,  feet  sinking  9  inches  to  1  foot  at  every  step.  .  .  . 
5.45.  Men  completely  "  cooked,"  dogs  tired  out ;  so  camped. 

'  March  6. —  .  .  .  Snow  getting  thicker  and  softer,  and 
steered  towards  the  land  hoping  for  better  conditions.  .  . 


192       THE   VOYAGE  OF  THE  'DISCOVERY'    [Mar. 

Barne's  dogs  lying  down  and  refusing  work.  .  .  .  Find  it  best 
for  sledges  to  run  on  fresh  snow,  and  not  over  footmarks.  .  .  . 
6.50.  Forced  to  call  a  halt;  men  and  dogs  completely  done. 
The  dogs'  feet  give  them  a  lot  of  trouble ;  they  lick  them  hard 
at  every  halt.  Several  men  have  cramp  ;  we  feel  back  muscles 
and  legs  awfully.  Weller  was  so  done  when  we  stopped  that 
he  flopped  across  the  sledge  and  broke  the  sling  thermometer. 
.  .  .  Made  good  only  four  miles.  .  .  .' 

This,  with  more  to  the  same  effect,  goes  to  show  that  the 
party  were  doing  a  great  deal  of  hard  work  without  much 
result.  By  steering  towards  the  land  they  only  got  into  softer 
and  deeper  snow,  and  therefore  it  was  little  to  be  wondered  at 
that  on  the  8th  Royds  decided  to  divide  the  party  and  to 
attempt  a  further  advance  with  Mr.  Skelton  and  Dr.  Koettlitz, 
who,  besides  himself,  were  alone  provided  with  ski.  By  this 
time  they  were  almost  beneath  the  steep  cliffs  which  fringe  the 
southern  snow-slopes  of  Mount  Terror.  The  level  plain  had 
given  place  to  long,  steep  undulations  formed  by  the  pressure 
of  the  land-ice,  and  the  silence  about  them  was  repeatedly 
broken  by  the  thunderous  roar  of  an  avalanche.  On  the  9th 
the  three  officers  set  out  on  their  ski,  and  with  only  one  light 
sledge  behind  them  made  much  better  progress  until,  getting 
towards  the  eastern  slopes  of  Terror,  they  again  found  them- 
selves on  a  hard,  wind-swept  snow  surface.  They  had  still 
some  miles  to  go  before  they  came  to  the  junction  of  the 
barrier  edge  with  the  land,  and  the  calm  weather  which  they 
had  hitherto  enjoyed  now  deserted  them,  making  it  most 
difficult  in  the  drifting  snow  to  see  their  exact  whereabouts  or 
the  nature  of  the  snow  conditions  about  them.  Skirting  the 
slopes  of  the  mountain,  however,  they  pushed  on  until  they 
were  forced  to  rise  on  a  snow  incline  which  came  abruptly  to 
an  end  and  was  succeeded  by  long  stretches  of  bare  land  over 
which  it  was  impossible  to  take  the  sledge.  Here  they  made 
their  camp,  and  from  it  they  could  see  the  open  Ross  Sea  and 
the  confused  hummocked  ice  of  the  barrier  where  it  forces  its 
way  around  the  land.  The  penguin  rookery  in  which  our 
record  had  been  placed  was  still  some  distance  from  them,  as 


i9o2]      FAILURE  TO  REACH  THE  RECORD       193 

they  knew,  and  they  remembered  that  the  north-eastern  side 
of  the  mountain  was  so  free  from  snow  that  there  could  be 
nothing  now  but  bare  land  between  them  and  it. 

But  this  bare  mountain-side  was  extensive,  and  covered  so 
thickly  with  small  volcanic  craters  that  it  was  difficult  to  select 
the  best  path  for  their  walk  to  the  rookery,  or,  within  limits,  to 
estimate  their  distance  from  it.  There  was  risk  also,  in  a 
country  where  one  landmark  was  so  much  like  another,  that 
on  their  return  they  might  have  great  difficulty  in  finding 
their  camp  ;  and  if  the  wind  should  rise  during  their  absence 
this  risk  would  be  greatly  increased,  so  that  they  ran  the  chance 
of  being  landed  in  a  very  sorry  plight.  In  fact,  at  their  first 
attempt  on  March  13,  they  had  barely  gone  half  a  mile  from 
the  camp  when  a  thick  blizzard  came  on,  and  they  only  regained 
their  tent  by  luckily  falling  across  their  ski,  which  had  been 
planted  at  some  distance  from  the  camp  as  a  possible  guide. 

On  the  following  day,  however,  they  again  sallied  out  and 
succeeded  in  getting  some  miles  towards  their  goal,  if  not 
actually  above  it,  before  the  wind  came  on  and,  blotting  out  all 
features  of  the  landscape  with  snowdrift,  obliged  them  to  turn 
back  and  seek  shelter  with  all  possible  speed. 

It  was  now  evident  that  the  Record  post  could  be  reached, 
but  a  fine  day  was  essential,  and  here,  as  elsewhere,  small 
matters  of  detail  connected  with  the  special  circumstances 
must  be  attended  to.  One  could  not  conveniently  climb  over 
sharp,  jagged  rocks  in  the  foot-gear  which  was  worn  with 
comfort  on  the  snow  plains,  as  the  bruised,  sore  feet  of  the 
party  witnessed ;  another  time  it  would  be  necessary  to  come 
properly  prepared  with  some  arrangement  for  protecting  the 
sole  of  the  foot. 

The  attempt  to  reach  the  Record  was  finally  abandoned  on 
the  15th;  but  not  until  it  was  evident  that  a  better-equipped 
party  with  more  favourable  weather  would  have  no  difficulty  in 
getting  to  it.  It  will  be  understood  that  it  presented  itself  to 
me  as  a  most  important  matter  that  this  record  should  be 
reached,  as  here  lay  the  only  chance  of  communicating  our 
position  to  any  who  should  follow  in  our  footsteps,  but  it  was 
vol.  1.  o 


i94       THE  VOYAGE  OF  THE  'DISCOVERY'    [Mar. 

immaterial  whether  it  was  reached  now  or  after  the  coming 
winter ;  the  assurance  that  it  could  be  reached  was  the  com- 
forting fact  that  this  party  discovered,  and  in  any  case  a  spring 
expedition  would  have  been  necessary  to  bring  the  news  up  to 
date. 

No  sooner  had  the  party  turned  towards  the  ship  than  the 
wind  fell,  and  with  it  the  temperature.  It  was  something  to 
know  that  the  wind  which  had  swept  past  this  corner  through- 
out their  stay  was  not  perpetual,  but  the  rapid  fall  of  the 
thermometer  found  them  ill  prepared.  It  had  not  occurred  to 
anyone  that  within  such  a  short  distance  of  the  ship  there 
might  be  any  large  difference  of  temperature,  and  as  the 
summer  was  barely  over,  the  officers  had  provided  themselves 
with  a  light  wolf-skin  fur  suit  only,  for  night  wear.  They  had 
found  this  clothing  all  too  meagre  when  the  thermometer 
stood  at  —  io°  or  — 150,  but  on  the  night  of  the  16th  sleep 
proved  impossible,  and  for  the  first  time  they  found  themselves 
subjected  to  uncontrollable  paroxysms  of  shivering.  Huddle 
together  as  they  might,  they  could  get  no  warmth,  and  on 
creeping  out  to  consult  the  thermometer  they  found  it  had 
fallen  to  — 420.  They  were  luckily  able  to  boil  some  cocoa, 
and  thus  to  get  some  warmth  into  their  chilled  bodies,  but  as 
the  long  sleepless  hours  crept  by  they  had  ample  opportunities 
of  learning  the  value  of  adequate  clothing,  and  the  wisdom  of 
being  prepared  for  the  unexpected  rigours  of  a  fickle  climate. 

With  the  morning  the  cold  snap  ended,  and  three  days 
later  they  reached  the  ship  without  further  adventure. 

On  comparing  notes  with  this  party  we  realised  for  the  first 
time  what  a  difference  there  might  be  in  the  weather  conditions 
of  places  within  easy  reach  of  the  ship.  It  was  not  only  in 
the  matter  of  temperatures,  as  I  have  already  described,  but 
also  in  the  force  and  direction  of  the  wind.  On  the  17  th  at 
the  ship  we  had  had  a  very  strong  blow  from  the  south,  at  one 
time  rising  in  force  to  a  full  gale,  but  the  party  only  some 
twelve  miles  to  the  eastward  had  felt  nothing  of  this ;  with 
them  the  day  had  been  calm,  though  overcast.  This  difference 
of   weather  conditions  could  be  observed   throughout    the 


1902]  LOCAL  WEATHER  CONDITIONS  195 

journey ;  neither  those  on  board  nor  those  away  could  have 
told  from  their  own  meteorological  conditions  what  the  weather 
might  be  with  the  others,  and  this  fact  was  again  and  again 
impressed  on  us  throughout  our  stay  in  this  region.  Already 
we  had  learnt  that  the  prevalent  wind  at  our  winter  quarters 
blew  from  the  S.E.  through  the  '  Gap,'  and  that  this  wind  was 
usually  local  and  frequently  ceased  within  a  mile  or  two  of  the 
ship.  To  this  we  could  now  add  some  further  conclusions. 
It  was  evident  that  the  eastern  slopes  of  Terror  were  terribly 
wind-swept,  and  that  there  the  prevalent  direction  was  from 
the  south,  whilst  the  deep  bay  immediately  to  the  eastward  of 
our  peninsula  was  a  particularly  windless  area  where  the 
snow  lay  thick  and  soft,  and  was  only  occasionally  stirred  by 
whirling  squalls. 

Meanwhile  the  position  of  the  ship  towards  the  latter  end 
of  March  was  anything  but  satisfactory ;  that  the  temperature 
should  have  fallen  to  —  400  to  the  eastward  was  a  clear  sign 
that  the  winter  conditions  were  upon  us,  but  although  the  ice 
forming  about  us  sometimes  reached  a  thickness  of  two  or 
three  inches  the  sheet  never  held  for  any  length  of  time,  but 
broke  up  rapidly  when  the  wind  grew  strong.  Under  these 
conditions  it  became  increasingly  difficult  to  keep  up  com- 
munication with  the  shore ;  when  it  was  not  blowing  a  stiff 
gale  our  boats  had  to  force  their  way  through  a  tough  elastic 
sheet  of  young  ice  which  clung  to  the  sides  in  the  most 
exasperating  fashion,  and  sometimes  the  short  passage  could 
only  be  made  after  much  hauling  on  ropes  and  the  systematic 
use  of  poles  to  break  up  and  thrust  aside  the  sheet.  On  one 
occasion  our  light  skiff  was  brought  to  a  stop  half-way  across 
in  such  a  manner  that  the  crew  could  neither  advance  nor 
retreat,  and  it  was  quite  an  hour  before,  by  manning  a  heavier 
boat,  we  were  able  to  break  a  way  through  and  free  her. 

In  this  wholly  unexpected  state  of  affairs  at  such  an 
advanced  date  there  were  many  drawbacks.  Until  we  were 
solidly  frozen  in,  the  security  of  our  position  must  be  doubtful ; 
economy  of  coal  had  long  ago  necessitated  the  extinction  of 
fires  in  the  boilers,  and  should  a  heavy  gale  drive  us  from  our 

02 


196       THE  VOYAGE  OF  THE  'DISCOVERY'    [Mar, 

shelter  we  could  only  have  raised  steam  with  difficulty  and 
after  the  lapse  of  many  hours.  If  driven  off  by  such  a  gale, 
should  we  be  able  to  get  back?  It  seemed  doubtful,  and 
meanwhile  it  would  certainly  be  unsafe  to  send  a  large  party 
away  from  the  ship,  because  with  the  ship  adrift  it  was  obvious 
that  most  of  them  would  be  needed.  If,  on  the  other  hand, 
the  fates  were  going  to  allow  us  to  remain  in  this  spot,  there 
was  much  to  be  done  in  preparing  for  the  winter  ;  especially 
it  was  desirable  that  the  engines  should  be  taken  to  pieces  and 
the  steam  joints  be  broken  before  the  severer  cold  came  upon 
us ;  but  in  our  present  position  we  dared  not  attempt  such 
work.  One  of  the  most  annoying  circumstances  was  that  until 
we  had  a  solid  sheet  of  ice  about  us  we  could  not  set  up  our 
meteorological  screen,  nor  communicate  regularly  with  the 
magnetic  huts,  nor,  in  fact,  properly  carry  out  any  of  the 
routine  scientific  work  which  was  such  an  important  object  of 
the  expedition. 

Our  proposed  winter  station  was  so  far  beyond  that  of  any 
former  expedition  that,  as  I  have  already  pointed  out,  we  had 
nothing  to  guide  us  as  to  what  the  winter  climate  might  be, 
and  our  astonishment  at  the  prolonged  open  conditions  left  us 
almost  in  doubt  as  to  whether  the  sea  was  ever  going  to  freeze 
over  satisfactorily.  The  breaking  away  of  the  old  ice  had 
ceased,  and  the  open  water  was  now  at  its  maximum  for  the 
season  ;  as  will  be  seen  from  the  chart,  it  jan  from  the  decayed 
glacier  tongue,  which  we  had  visited  on  February  8,  to  the 
S.E.,  circling  about  Cape  Armitage  with  a  radius  of  four  or  five 
miles,  and  forming  a  deep  bay  to  the  eastward  of  the  peninsula. 
The  ice-edge  which  limited  the  open  water  could  be  seen  very 
distinctly  from  the  hills  in  the  vicinity  of  the  ship— a  long, 
irregular  ribbon  of  white,  gradually  circling  round,  the  edge 
itself  standing  in  some  places  two  or  three  feet  and  in  others 
ten  or  fifteen  feet  above  the  sea  level,  and  showing  that  what 
remained  was  ice  of  a  different  character  from  that  which  had 
broken  away,  and  constituted  the  limit  of  a  more  ancient 
ice-sheet. 

At  this  time  I  was  anxious  to  make  one  more  sledging 


i9o2]  FROZEN   IN  197 

effort  before  the  winter  set  in.  The  ostensible  reason  was  to 
lay  out  a  depot  of  provisions  to  the  south  in  preparation  for 
the  following  spring,  but  a  more  serious  purpose  was  to  give 
myself  and  others  a  practical  insight  into  the  difficulties  of 
sledge  travelling.  One  saw  already  that  a  great  deal  of  our 
sledging  outfit  was  unsuitable  and  would  have  to  be  rearranged; 
one  saw,  too,  that  in  the  minor  details  of  clothing  and  so  forth 
there  were  points  on  which  there  was  much  difference  of 
opinion,  and  with  regard  to  which,  therefore,  it  was  desirable 
that  every  man  should  fend  for  himself,  providing  for  things  as 
best  suited  his  own  ideas ;  above  all,  it  was  evident  that  in  a 
sledging  campaign,  as  in  any  other,  the  best  work  would  be 
done  by  the  trained  man.  Before  us  lay  the  long  winter 
with  ample  time  to  organise  our  parties  and  to  make  the  most 
detailed  preparations,  but  one  could  not  hope  to  do  this  with- 
out a  full  knowledge  of  the  conditions  to  be  met  and  a  ready 
and  intelligent  co-operation  amongst  all  who  were  engaged  in 
the  work.  My  wish,  therefore,  was  to  make  a  final  autumnal 
expedition  which  should  include  all  those  who  had  not  been 
away  already ;  but  as  this  included  the  majority  on  board,  we 
were  forced  to  await  the  greater  security  of  the  ship,  not  only 
for  reasons  which  I  have  already  mentioned,  but  also  because 
until  the  deep  bay  to  the  south  became  re-frozen  we  could 
only  travel  in  that  direction  by  the  most  circuitous  and 
difficult  route.  When  the  ice  became  safe,  the  simplest  way 
lay  around  the  cape;  failing  this,  we  could  manage  without 
much  difficulty  to  get  through  the  '  Gap ' ;  but  if  the  sea-ice 
opposite  that  was  unsound,  we  should  have  been  forced  to 
climb  to  a  height  of  nearly  1,000  feet,  and  after  descending  on 
the  other  side  to  traverse  a  number  of  high,  broken  ridges. 

The  freezing-in  of  the  'Discovery'  was  a  very  gradual 
process.  The  ship,  secured  by  her  stern  hawsers,  had  held  in 
place  a  small  wedge  of  ice  which  had  formed  in  the  corner  of 
the  bay.  On  March  24  this  small  patch  was  strong  enough  to 
bear,  and,  whilst  the  bow  of  the  ship  was  in  open  water,  for 
the  first  time  we  were  able  to  walk  on  shore  from  the  stern  ; 
and  this  wedge  of  ice  held,  and  gradually  increased  in  thicks 


198       THE  VOYAGE  OF  THE  'DISCOVERY'    [Mar. 

ness,  in  spite  of  the  strong  breezes  of  the  week  which 
followed. 

For    instance,   on    March    27    I   write:     'Blowing    with 

—  io°  temperature  during  forenoon,  but  quite  fine  in  afternoon 
and  evening.  Our  ice,  having  held  during  the  late  wind,  may 
fairly  be  considered  to  have  come  to  stay.  At  4.30  a  party  of 
us  went  over  the  hill  through  the  "Gap"  to  investigate  the 
chance  of  getting  sledges  down  by  that  route.  We  found  the 
sea  frozen  over,  and  evidently,  from  the  snowfall  on  it,  the  ice 
has  been  formed  for  several  days.  It  looks  firm  and  hard,  but 
there  is  a  drop  of  eleven  feet  from  the  ice-foot,  which  will  be  a 
difficulty  for  the  sledges,  but  will  save  the  necessity  of  going 
round  by  the  seal  crack.  Nothing  could  exceed  the  beauty  of 
the  scene  this  afternoon ;  the  snow  was  bathed  in  rosy  light, 
gorgeous  shafts  of  gold  sprang  up  from  the  sun,  and  the  sky 
was  blood-red  behind  the  hills  in  its  wake.  The  moon  was 
up,  a  vast  yellow  disc  to  the  east.  It  will  be  a  companion  for 
at  least  the  first  part  of  our  journey.  Now  and  again,  as  we 
trod  on  the  snow-covered  slopes  of  the  hillsides,  the  icy  crust 
cracked  with  a  sharp  report  like  a  pistol-shot.  Evidently  it 
is  in  high  tension  from  the  recent  cold.' 

'  March  28  {Good  Friday). — The  day  has  been  beautifully 
calm  and  bright,  though  the  temperature  has  not  risen  above 

—  40.  After  service  our  people  spent  the  day  wandering  over 
the  hills;  it  was  quite  pleasant  to  see  little  parties  dotted  about 
here  and  there,  with  a  dog  or  two  for  company.  The  sea  is  at 
last  frozen  over,  and  if  this  weather  lasts  the  ice  should  become 
firm  enough  to  withstand  future  gales.  We  have  completed 
the  packing  of  our  sledges,  though  I  cannot  say  I  am  pleased 
with  their  appearance  ;  the  packing  is  not  neat  enough,  and  we 
haven't  yet  got  anything  like  a  system.  To-morrow,  if  the 
weather  holds,  we  take  our  sledges  across  to  the  other  side,  so 
as  to  make  a  fair  start  on  Monday.' 

'  March  30  {Easter  Sunday). — Like  yesterday,  a  fine  day, 
with  a  light  northerly  breeze.  This  is  a  season  of  flowers,  and 
behold  !  they  have  sprung  up  about  us  as  by  magic :  very 
beautiful  ice-flowers,  waxen  white  in  the  shadow,  but  radiant 


igo2]  ICE-FLOWERS  199 

with  prismatic  colours  where  the  sunrays  light  on  their  delicate 
petals.  It  was  a  phenomenon  to  be  expected  in  the  newly 
frozen  sea,  but  it  is  curious  that  they  should  come  to  their 
greatest  perfection  on  this  particular  day.  The  ice  is  about 
five  inches  thick  and  free  from  snow;  consequently  the  ice- 
flowers  stand  up  clear-cut  and  perfect  in  form.  In  some  places 
they  occur  thickly,  with  broad,  delicate,  feathery  leaves;  in 
others  the  dark,  clear  ice  surface  is  visible  with  only  an  oc- 
casional plant  on  it;  in  others,  again,  the  plants  assume  a 
spiky  appearance,  being  formed  of  innumerable  small  spicules. 
The  more  nearly  one  examines  these  beautiful  formations,  the 
more  wonderful  they  appear,  as  it  is  only  by  close  inspection 
that  the  mathematical  precision  of  the  delicate  tracery  can  be 
observed.  It  is  now  established  that  on  the  freezing  of  salt 
water  much  of  the  brine  is  mechanically  excluded.  Sea-ice  is 
much  less  salt  than  the  sea  itself,  and  what  salt  remains  is  sup- 
posed only  to  be  entangled  in  the  frozen  water.  The  amount 
of  salt  excluded  seems  to  depend  on  the  rate  at  which  the  ice 
is  formed,  and  whilst  some  is  excluded  below  the  ice-surface, 
some  is  also  pushed  out  above,  and  it  is  this  that  forms  the  ice- 
flowers.  The  subject  is  very  fascinating,  and  we  have  already 
started  to  measure  the  salinity  of  ice  taken  from  different 
depths  and  formed  under  various  conditions :  the  ice-flowers 
themselves  do  not  seem  to  constitute  a  saturated  solution  of 
brine,  and  why  they  should  differ  in  form  in  various  places 
seems  beyond  explanation. 

1  To-day  we  saw  a  group  of  penguins  far  over  the  ice,  and 
after  church  Hodgson,  Shackleton,  and  I  walked  out  towards 
them.  They  turned  out  to  be  Emperors,  and  were  all  standing 
about  very  contentedly  near  a  crack  much  too  narrow  to  allow 
them  to  get  through.  It  is  difficult  to  see  how  these  birds  can 
now  get  north,  and  it  looks  as  though  they  winter  more  or  less 
in  these  regions,  probably  close  to  spots  where  the  ice  is  certain 
to  open  from  the  effect  of  tide  or  wind.  If  so,  this  would 
throw  a  new  and  interesting  light  on  their  habits,  and  one  can 
only  hope  that  ihey  will  give  us  the  pleasure  of  their  company 
in  our  immediate  vicinity.  1 


200       THE  VOYAGE  OF  THE  'DISCOVERY'    [Mar. 

'  To-night  as  I  was  walking  back  from  the  hills  I  was  frost- 
bitten in  the  lobe  of  the  ear.  I  describe  it  because  it  was  a 
typical  example.  There  was  very  little  wind,  and  as  I  came 
down  the  slope  I  distinctly  heard  or  felt  a  sort  of  snap  in  my 
ear,  but,  feeling  nothing,  I  paid  no  heed  until  when  I  got  on 
board  I  realised  that  I  had  no  feeling  in  the  ear.  It  very 
quickly  thawed  out — much  too  quickly,  in  fact ;  for  now  it  is 
swelled  up  to  a  great  size,  and  there  will  be  no  escaping  the 
coming  blister.' 

On  the  following  day  we  made  our  start,  a  party  of  twelve, 
divided  into  two  teams,  each  with  a  string  of  sledges  and 
nine  dogs.  A  strong  south-easterly  wind  with  snow-drift  was 
pouring  through  the  '  Gap,'  but  a  mile  or  two  to  the  south  we 
got  clear  of  this  and  plodded  on  in  comparative  calm.  Our 
loads  were  arranged  theoretically,  200  lbs.  to  each  man  and 
100  lbs.  to  each  dog,  and  the  first  discovery  we  made  was  that 
the  dogs  entirely  refused  to  work  on  our  theory ;  the  best  of 
them  only  exerted  a  pull  of  about  50  lbs.,  and  this  with  very 
dispirited  and  downcast  mien ;  the  rest  hung  disconsolately 
back  on  the  traces  and  had  to  be  half  led,  half  dragged  over 
the  frozen  surface.  The  whole  thing  was  extremely  trouble- 
some, and,  what  with  the  heavy  pulling  and  the  constant 
necessity  of  clearing  the  traces,  as  may  be  imagined,  our 
progress  was  extremely  slow,  and  we  heartily  wished  we  had 
left  the  whole  dog  team  safely  chained  up.  It  was  a  curious 
reversal  of  our  expectations.  I  don't  know  that  we  had  any 
very  good  reason,  but  we  had  never  thought  but  that  our  dogs, 
when  they  got  the  chance,  would  be  found  straining  at  their 
traces  with  heads  and  tails  held  high.  To  see  them  now  with 
both  ends  at  the  maximum  depression  was  a  severe  shock  to 
our  inexperience. 

We  learnt  later  on  that  it  was  a  bad  plan  to  combine  dogs 
and  men  on  a  sledge ;  the  dogs  have  a  pace  and  a  manner  of 
pulling  of  their  own,  and  neither  of  these  is  adapted  to  the 
unequal  movement  caused  by  the  swing  of  marching  men. 
Both  men  and  dogs  like  a  light  load,  but  the  former  are  much 
less  easily  dispirited  by  a  heavy  one, 


i902]  LAST  SLEDGE  JOURNEY  OF  THE  SEASON  201 

But  on  this  occasion  there  was  a  stronger  reason  for  the 
inefficiency  of  the  dogs.  They  were  losing  their  coats  ;  the 
thick  fur  was  coming  out  in  handfuls,  and  the  young  downy 
coat  underneath  formed  a  wretched  protection  against  the 
bitterly  cold  winds  that  headed  us.  The  habits  of  the  animals 
were  of  course  adapted  to  their  northern  home,  where  at  this 
time  the  warm  summer  would  be  just  commencing  and  where 
no  doubt  they  would  have  been  glad  enough  to  be  free  of 
their  thick  winter  garment ;  but  that  Nature  should  oblige 
them  to  discard  it  at  the  same  season  in  this  hemisphere  was 
obviously  ill-timed.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  our  poor  dogs 
suffered  a  great  deal  from  their  poorly  clothed  condition  during 
the  next  week  or  two,  and  we  could  do  little  to  help  them ; 
but  Nature  seemed  to  realise  the  mistake,  and  came  quickly 
to  the  rescue :  the  new  coats  grew  surprisingly  fast,  and  before 
the  winter  had  really  settled  down  on  us  all  the  animals  were 
again  enveloped  in  their  normally  thick  woolly  covering.  It 
may  here  be  remarked  that  they  moulted  again  in  the  spring ; 
what  would  have  happened  in  the  following  autumn  cannot  be 
said,  for  by  that  time,  alas !  all  our  team  had  ceased  to  be ; 
but  it  seems  as  though  they  were  already  adapted  to  their  new 
environment. 

The  fact  that  the  dogs  refused  to  do  their  share  of  the 
work  on  this  trip  meant  of  course  that  we  had  to  do  a  good 
deal  more  than  ours,  and  the  resultant  load  per  man  was  a 
great  deal  more  than  we  ever  afterwards  sought  to  inflict  on 
a  party.  We  were  practically  doomed  to  failure,  but  each 
hour  was  an  invaluable  experience.  On  the  first  day  we  had 
already  travelled  some  way  over  the  new  sea-ice  when  we 
realised  that  we  must  cross  it  before  camping,  as  on  it  we 
could  get  no  snow,  either  to  fill  our  cookers  or  to  secure  our 
tents.  This  meant  a  long  pull,  and  the  night  fell  on  us  as  we 
struggled  with  all  the  unaccustomed  details  of  pitching  camp. 
The  thermometer  fell  to  — 400  before  we  could  climb  into  our 
ill-made  fur  clothing,  and  the  hours  which  followed  were 
comfortless  enough  to  have  discouraged  the  most  ardent 
sledger.     For  two  more  days  we  pushed  on  in  the  same  dis- 


202       THE  VOYAGE  OF  THE  'DISCOVERY'  [April 

organised  fashion,  the  men  straining  hard  at  a  heart-breaking 
load,  the  dogs  at  each  step  flinching  more  determinedly  from 
the  cutting  wind  and  the  light  pricking  drift  which  it  carried 
to  the  level  of  their  noses ;  the  thermometer  never  rose  above 
—  300,  and  the  third  night  it  fell  to  —  470.  The  daylight 
hours  were  now  very  short,  and  all  too  many  were  wasted  in 
the  unavoidable  delays  of  inexperienced  camp  work,  and  from 
the  want  of  facility  in  the  details  of  our  arrangements.  After 
three  days'  labour  we  were  only  nine  miles  from  the  ship,  and 
it  was  quite  evident  that  under  present  conditions  we  could 
not  expect  a  better  speed.  On  April  3  I  decided  to  turn,  and 
'caching'  our  heavy  loads  we  reached  the  ship  that  night, 
and  could  then  fully  realise  what  an  extraordinarily  sheltered 
position  she  occupied,  for  I  find  in  my  diary  :  '  The  tempera- 
ture on  board  has  never  fallen  below  —  230,  so  that  it  appears 
we  can  count  on  about  200  better  in  our  snug  winter  quarters 
than  occurs  on  the  open  barrier.  But  if  one  can  get  nearly 
— 500  on  the  barrier  before  the  sun  has  set,  what  is  it  going  to 
be  like  in  mid-winter  ?  and  what  also  in  the  early  spring,  when 
our  sledging  begins  again  ?  ' 

Our  autumn  sledging  was  at  an  end,  and  left  me  with 
much  food  for  thought.  In  one  way  or  another  each  journey 
had  been  a  failure ;  we  had  little  or  nothing  to  show  for  our 
labours.  The  errors  were  patent ;  food,  clothing,  everything 
was  wrong,  the  whole  system  was  bad.  It  was  clear  that  there 
would  have  to  be  a  thorough  reorganisation  before  the  spring, 
and  it  was  well  to  think  that  before  us  lay  a  long  winter  in 
which  this  might  be  effected. 

I  have  described  these  early  troubles  in  some  detail,  partly 
because  they  show  how  much  we  learnt  by  our  failures  and 
partly  because  it  is  necessary  to  realise  that  sledging  is  not 
such  an  easy  matter  as  might  be  imagined. 

That  we  were  eventually  able  to  make  long  and  successful 
sledge  journeys  is  no  doubt  due  to  the  mistakes  which  we 
made  and  to  the  experience  which  we  gained  during  the  first 
barren  attempts  of  this  autumn,  and  yet  more  to  the  fact  that 
we  resolved  to  profit  by  them,  and  thoroughly  took  our  lesson 


I9o2]  METEOROLOGICAL  SCREEN  203 

to  heart.  I  do  not  mean  to  imply  that  our  education  was 
complete — as  a  matter  of  fact,  we  never  ceased  to  learn  new 
tips  or  to  adopt  new  devices,  and  the  general  sledging  work 
of  the  second  summer  was  vastly  superior  to  that  of  the  first 
— but  it  was  the  crushing  ineffectiveness  of  our  early  efforts 
which  taught  us  the  first  great  lesson. 

The  daylight  hours  were  now  getting  rapidly  shorter,  and 
we  knew  that  before  the  end  of  the  month  we  should  lose  the 
sun.  We  were  left  with  little  time  to  complete  all  our  outside 
arrangements,  which  had  been  necessarily  delayed  until  the 
formation  of  the  ice-sheet ;  although  we  felt  anything  but 
certain  that  the  ice  had  come  to  stay,  the  losses  which  its 
break-up  would  entail  must  now  be  risked. 

One  of  our  first  cares  was  to  get  up  the  meteorological 
screen ;  this  erection,  made  under  the  superintendence  of  our 
meteorologist,  Mr.  Royds,  consisted  of  a  framework  supported 
by  four  stout  poles ;  special  louvred  box- screens  were  placed 
high  on  this,  and  inside  them  were  fitted  the  various  ther- 
mometric  and  hygrometric  instruments,  whilst  the  corner  poles 
were  utilised  for  anemometers  and  wind  vane.  The  whole  of 
this  somewhat  elaborate  erection  was  placed  about  100  yards 
astern  of  the  ship,  and  consequently  in  a  direction  which 
would  be  to  windward  of  her  with  the  prevalent  south-easterly 
winds.  At  first  the  actual  screens  were  some  eight  feet  above 
the  surface  of  the  ice,  but  we  soon  found  that  our  small  bay 
was  a  focus  for  driving  snow,  and  after  each  storm  the  surface 
was  raised  a  foot  or  more  and  the  comparative  height  of  the 
screens  proportionately  reduced  ;  once  the  whole  structure  had 
to  be  dug  up  and  moved  for  this  reason,  but  this  could  not 
be  repeated  often,  and  the  net  result  was  that  the  screens  were 
reduced  to  an  average  height  of  five  or  six  feet  above  the 
surface.  We  found  it  was  quite  time  that  these  screens  were 
placed,  as  we  were  getting  very  inaccurate  temperature  readings 
on  board  ;  for  instance,  I  find  a  note  of  one  comparison  made 
about  this  time  :  '  The  thermometer  on  the  gunwale  shows 
—  200,  that  in  the  screen  on  board  40  higher,  and  that  in  the 
screen  on  the  ice  some  50  or  6°  lower.' 


204       THE  VOYAGE  OF  THE  'DISCOVERY'   [April 

We  possessed  one  recording  anemometer  of  the  '  Dyne ' 
type.  The  instrument  itself  had  to  be  placed  in  shelter,  and 
we  allotted  one  of  our  small  deck-houses  to  it.  The  funnel 
vane  was  secured  in  the  mizen  cross-trees,  some  forty  or  fifty 
feet  above  the  deck,  and  two  small  lead  pipes  connected  it  to 
the  recording  instrument.  Finally,  the  barometer  was  placed 
in  the  magnetic  deck-house  and  the  barographs  in  suitable 
positions  close  by. 

To  obtain  a  complete  record  of  meteorological  observations 
was  one  of  the  most  important  scientific  objects  of  the  expe- 
dition, and  it  had  been  decided  that  the  instruments  should  be 
read  and  recorded  every  two  hours.  And  so  in  calm  or  storm, 
night  and  day,  some  member  of  our  community  had  to  be  on 
the  alert  and  every  other  hour  to  make  the  rounds  of  the 
various  instruments.  First  the  barometer  would  be  visited,  its 
reading  and  that  of  the  attached  thermometer  registered;  then 
at  the  screen  the  readings  of  the  wet  and  dry  bulb  thermo- 
meters and  of  the  minimum  thermometer  would  be  noted  ; 
then  the  anemometers  and  the  wind  direction  had  to  be 
observed  ;  then  an  estimate  made  of  the  force  of  the  wind 
and  notes  added  concerning  the  nature,  amount,  and  direction 
of  movement  of  the  clouds  ;  and,  finally,  the  various  recording 
instruments  must  be  visited  to  see  that  they  continued  in  good 
order.  On  a  fine  night  this  was  no  great  hardship,  but  in 
stormy  weather  the  task  was  not  coveted  by  anyone.  On  such 
occasions  it  was  necessary  before  going  out  to  prepare  oneself 
carefully  to  resist  the  wind  and  snowdrift,  and  the  round  itself 
was  often  attended  with  exasperating  annoyances.  During  the 
winter  it  was  always  necessary  to  carry  a  lantern,  but  it  is  not 
easy  to  construct  a  lantern  which  will  remain  alight  in  all  con- 
ditions of  weather.  At  first  we  tried  a  small  electric  glow- 
lamp,  but  batteries  and  leads  so  easily  got  out  of  order  that 
this  was  abandoned.  Finally  a  candle  lantern  was  evolved 
which  was  fairly  satisfactory,  but  in  the  meanwhile  many  a 
time  was  the  hapless  observer  forced  to  desist  in  the  middle  of 
his  work  to  return  and  obtain  a  fresh  light.  The  necessity  of 
writing  up  the  record  sheet  in  the  open  was  also  trying  in 


1902]  TRIALS   AND  TRIBULATIONS  flb$ 

windy,  cold  weather ;  not  only  would  one's  fingers  freeze  very 
rapidly,  but  one's  breath  would  form  an  icy  film  on  the  paper 
through  which  it  was  difficult  to  make  the  pencil-mark.  The 
most  annoying  instrument  with  which  we  had  to  deal  was 
called  the  Ashmann's  aspirator  ;  it  consisted  of  a  wet  and  dry 
bulb  thermometer,  but  the  air  was  circulated  around  the  bulbs 
by  a  clockwork  fan.  At  each  observation  it  was  necessary  to 
wind  up  the  clockwork,  to  wait  for  the  fan  to  have  full  time  for 
action,  and  then  to  read  the  result  on  two  distressingly  thin 
threads  of  mercury.  As  all  these  operations  had  to  be  done 
with  bare  fingers,  a  more  angering  cold-weather  instrument  can 
hardly  be  imagined. 

The  trials  and  tribulations  of  the  meteorological  observer 
were,  in  fact,  numerous,  and  it  was  arranged  that  throughout 
the  winter  each  officer  should  take  it  in  turn  to  make  the  night 
observations  from  10  p.m.  to  6  a.m.  Dr.  Wilson  nobly  offered 
to  take  the  8  a.m.  observation  regularly,  but  the  lion's  share  of 
the  work  fell  on  the  meteorologist  himself,  who,  besides  taking 
his  share  of  the  night  work,  throughout  the  first  winter  and  a 
great  part  of  the  second,  took  all  the  observations  between 
io  a.m.  and  io  p.m. 

The  most  dreaded  day  for  Mr.  Royds,  however,  was 
Monday,  as  on  that  day  it  became  necessary  to  change  the 
papers  on  the  recording  instruments.  Anyone  who  is  familiar 
with  the  ordinary  barograph  or  thermograph  can  imagine  that 
when  the  temperature  was  below  —  200,  with  a  brisk  wind,  this 
task  could  appear  attractive  to  no  one. 

I  may  remark  generally  that  it  is  quite  a  mistake  to  suppose 
that  one  grows  hardened  or  more  callous  to  the  cold,  either  in 
one's  fingers  or  in  any  other  part  of  the  body  ;  what  does 
happen,  however,  is  that  one  becomes  more  expert  in  keeping 
oneself  warm.  For  instance,  in  handling  cold  metal  one  learns 
when  to  stop  and  to  plunge  one's  fingers  back  into  a  warm  mit, 
and  how  best  to  restore  one's  circulation ;  and  so  in  the  long 
run,  when  a  cold  job  has  to  be  done,  it  is  done  more  expedi- 
tiously and  with  less  suffering  after  experience  has  been  gained. 

Before  quitting  the  subject  of  meteorology  I  may  say  that 


2o6       THE  VOYAGE  OF  THE  'DISCOVERY'  [April 

other  observations  were  added  as  we  gradually  came  to  see  our 
way  more  clearly  and  took  our  winter  walks  abroad.  One  had 
only  to  walk  a  few  hundred  yards  from  the  ship  to  get  sight  of 
the  smoking  summit  of  Erebus,  and  we  soon  saw  that  the 
direction  of  movement  of  its  vapour  afforded  us  the  most 
excellent  indication  of  the  upper  air  currents,  and  few  days 
passed  without  some  recorded  observation  of  this  fine  beacon. 

Later,  too,  our  energetic  walkers  established  subsidiary 
observatories  where  the  temperatures  could  be  taken  and  com- 
pared with  those  read  near  the  ship.  We  were  thus  able  to 
get  interesting  comparisons  with  observations  taken  on  the  top 
of  the  highest  hill  in  our  neighbourhood,  1,080  feet  above  us, 
and  with  a  spot  on  the  other  side  of  Cape  Armitage,  and 
therefore  more  directly  affected  by  the  barrier  conditions. 

Another  routine  observation  I  was  anxious  to  get  into 
working  order  was  that  of  the  tide,  and  here  we  were  faced 
with  a  good  deal  of  difficulty  in  attempting  to  make  a  gauge 
which  would  work  successfully  through  the  ice.  We  had 
endeavoured  to  get  some  observations  before  the  sea  froze 
over,  but  the  long  pole  which  we  placed  against  the  ice-foot 
soon  became  so  crusted  with  ice  that  the  markings  were 
obscured,  and  as  it  was  impossible  to  clear  this  ice  except  from 
a  boat,  we  were  not  able  to  get  continuous  readings.  But  later 
on  we  succeeded  in  getting  a  continuous  record  over  a  long 
period ;  and  as  the  arrangement  was  only  arrived  at  after  some 
thought  and  numerous  trials,  the  method  is  worth  description 
for  the  benefit  of  future  explorers  who  may  be  similarly 
situated. 

Our  first  essay  was  to  take  a  length  of  the  single  pianoforte 
sounding-wire,  of  which  we  carried  a  great  quantity.  One  end 
of  this  was  attached  to  a  heavy  weight  resting  on  the  bottom ; 
the  wire  was  then  taken  through  a  block  held  up  by  means  of 
a  tripod  firmly  planted  on  the  ice,  and  to  its  other  end  was 
attached  a  second  weight  having  about  half  the  mass  of  the 
first.  It  is  evident  that  with  such  an  arrangement,  as  the 
tripod  rose  and  fell  with  the  tide,  the  upper  weight  would 
record  its  movement,  always  providing  that  the  wire  did  not 


1902]  TIDAL  OBSERVATIONS  207 

become  too  firmly  gripped  by  the  ice.  As  the  wire  was  strong 
enough  to  admit  of  comparatively  heavy  weights,  I  had  hopes 
that  the  pull  would  always  be  sufficient  to  overcome  the  fric- 
tion of  the  ice,  and  for  a  long  time  this  was  so  ;  but  at  length 
the  ice  became  thick  enough  to  hold  the  wire,  and  then  of 
course  the  arrangement  failed. 

We  had  already  improved  on  the  tripod,  by  fixing  up  a 
second  gauge  working  over  the  ship's  side,  with  the  second 
weight  inside,  when  this  difficulty  arose.  The  problem  now 
was,  how  to  get  the  wire  to  work  freely  through  the  ice,  and  it 
was  solved  in  a  very  simple  manner.  Someone — I  think  it  was 
Wilson — conceived  the  brilliant  idea  of  surrounding  the  wire 
with  paraffin,  which  does  not  freeze,  and  our  excellent  engi- 
neers had  soon  turned  out  a  small  copper  tube  more  than  eight 
feet  in  length.  The  new  tide-gauge  was  quickly  completed ; 
the  wire  was  now  brought  up  through  a  small  wooden  plug  at 
the  bottom  of  the  tube,  then  through  the  tube  and  up  over  a 
freely  working  pulley  which  hung  from  the  forecastle,  through 
another  pulley  on  the  deck,  and  down  to  the  inside  weight, 
which  hung  opposite  a  well-marked  scale.  When  the  copper 
tube,  filled  with  paraffin,  was  firmly  frozen  in  the  ice,  we  had 
the  satisfaction  of  seeing  the  wire  working  through  it  practically 
without  friction,  and  this  it  continued  to  do  throughout  the 
winter  and  spring.  In  searching  for  possible  causes  of  error, 
we  had,  of  course,  to  assure  ourselves  that  the  ship  rose  and 
fell  regularly  with  the  surface  of  the  water,  and  to  make  allow- 
ance for  any  alteration  in  trim  which  might  take  place  from 
time  to  time ;  but,  with  all  its  advantages  and  disadvantages, 
the  arrangement  must  be  considered  about  as  satisfactory  a  one 
as  could  well  be  arrived  at  in  the  circumstances. 

I  have  given  some  account  of  the  erection  of  our  magnetic 
huts.  It  would  perhaps  be  as  well  to  give  here  an  idea  of  the 
purpose  for  which  they  were  used.  They  and  all  that  apper- 
tained to  them  were  Mr.  Bernacchi's  special  business,  and 
many  times  a  day  this  officer  could  be  seen  journeying  to  and 
fro  in  attendance  on  his  precious  charge.  Within  the  larger 
of  the  huts,  mounted  on  a  solidly  bedded  oak  plank,  could  be 


208       THE  VOYAGE  OF  THE  '  DISCOVERY '  [April 

seen  three  small  instruments,  set  at  different  angles,  but  each 
containing  a  delicately  suspended  magnetic  needle  to  which 
was  attached  a  tiny  mirror ;  a  shaded  lamp  and  a  roll  of 
sensitised  photographic  paper  were  so  arranged  that  the  light 
reflected  from  each  small  mirror  was  thrown  on  to  the  roll, 
and  the  latter  was  slowly  but  continuously  revolved  by  clock- 
work. The  sensitised  paper  came  off  the  roll  in  long  strips, 
and  after  being  developed  exhibited  fine  wavy  lines  drawn  by 
the  points  of  light  focussed  from  the  mirrors.  The  three 
small  instruments  recorded  respectively  the  declination,  hori- 
zontal force,  and  vertical  force,  or  the  elements  of  the  earth's 
magnetic  pull  from  which  its  nature  could  be  calculated  at  any 
moment. 

The  general  reader  may  well  wonder  why  so  much  trouble 
should  be  taken  to  ascertain  small  differences  in  the  earth's 
magnetism,  and  he  could  scarcely  be  answered  in  a  few  words. 
Broadly  speaking,  the  earth  is  a  magnet,  and  its  magnetism  is 
constantly  changing ;  but  why  it  is  a  magnet,  or  why  it 
changes,  or  indeed  what  magnetism  may  be,  is  unknown,  and 
obviously  the  most  hopeful  road  to  the  explanation  of  a  phe- 
nomenon is  to  study  it.  For  many  reasons  the  phenomenon  of 
magnetism  could  be  recorded  in  few  more  useful  places  than 
our  winter  station  in  the  Antarctic. 

These  record  strips  were  a  source  of  great  interest  to  us  all 
when  Bernacchi  showed  them  from  time  to  time.  They  varied 
much  in  character  ;  sometimes  the  lines  would  run  with  long 
gradual  waves,  at  others  they  were  distinctly  jerky  and  un- 
settled, and  occasionally,  there  were  magnetic  storms  when 
they  would  fly  off  the  paper  altogether.  There  was  a  fourth 
line,  which  I  have  not  yet  mentioned  ;  this  was  the  line  of  tem- 
perature, and  was  necessary  for  the  correction  of  the  others. 
It  was  this  that  gave  Bernacchi  most  of  his  trouble  and  drew 
to  an  alarming  extent  on  our  oil  supply.  The  desire  was  to 
keep  a  constant  temperature  inside  the  hut,  but  with  the 
frequent  change  outside  this  was  most  difficult  to  do,  and 
although  attempts  were  made  to  regulate  the  burning  of  a 
heating  lamp  within,  the  variations  were  at  first  very  great, 


1902]  MAGNETIC   HUTS  209 

though  they  were  lessened  when  we  could  get  a  sufficient 
supply  of  soft  snow  to  bank  the  house  up  thoroughly  outside. 

Besides  the  magnetic  variometers  the  larger  hut  contained 
another  instrument  of  importance  in  the  seismograph,  which 
also  kept  a  continuous  record  on  a  long  roll  of  sensitised  paper. 
I  do  not  know  that  we  had  any  good  reason  for  so  thinking, 
but,  situated  so  close  to  an  active  volcano,  we  had  expected 
this  instrument  to  show  much  activity ;  contrary  to  our  expec- 
tation, however,  our  region  proved  a  particularly  quiet  one, 
and  throughout  our  stay  we  were  singularly  free  from  earth 
tremors. 

It  should  be  understood  that  the  magnetic  instruments 
which  I  have  briefly  mentioned  above  were  purely  differential 
instruments.  Whilst  they  would  faithfully  record  the  changes 
from  hour  to  hour  and  day  to  day  they  were  liable  to  small 
derangements  which  might  prevent  the  comparison  of  one 
month  with  another.  To  obviate  this  difficulty,  from  time  to 
time  check  observations  were  taken  with  absolute  instruments, 
and  for  this  purpose  the  second  and  smaller  hut  had  been 
provided.  In  this  small,  dark  cabin  Bernacchi  would  occa- 
sionally be  forced  to  shut  himself,  with  only  the  magnetometer 
and  the  cold  for  company. 

In  addition  to  the  establishment  of  the  routine  of  regular 
scientific  work,  there  was  a  great  deal  of  work  to  be  done  for 
the  comfort  and  well-being  of  the  ship  before  the  winter  set  in, 
and  this,  together  with  many  unexpected  tasks,  kept  all  hands 
busy  and  amused.  The  incidents  of  this  time  are  perhaps 
best  given  in  extracts  from  my  diary  : 

'  April  5. — Some  seals  were  observed  close  to  the  cape  this 
afternoon  j  a  killing  party  managed  to  get  six.  The  skua  gulls 
have  gone,  so  that  the  carcases  can  now  be  left  about  with 
safety.  Except  for  this  reason,  we  rather  miss  the  skuas ;  the 
absence  of  bird  life  adds  to  the  deserted  appearance  of  our 
outlook.  There  is  still  a  slight  swell,  most  noticeable  at  the 
crack  beyond  Hut  Point;  from  the  Point  and  from  Cape 
Armitage  there  are  numerous  radial  cracks,  gradually  widening 
and  extending  in  length.  Two  "  crab-eater  "  seals  were  found 
vol.  I.  p 


210       THE  VOYAGE  OF  THE  'DISCOVERY'   [April 

on  the  ice  close  to  the  ship  to-night ;  we  have  very  rarely  seen 
these  seals  since  our  arrival  in  winter  quarters ;  they  seem  to 
live  mostly  in  the  open  sea.  These  animals  must  have  come 
up  through  one  of  the  holes,  and  then,  possibly  attracted  by 
the  ship,  they  appeared  to  have  lost  their  bearings,  as  they 
crawled  in  any  direction  rather  than  towards  an  opening  in 
the  ice. 

'  We  were  still  desirous  of  increasing  our  stock  of  seal-meat, 
but  had  we  killed  these  animals  at  once  we  should  have  had 
great  difficulty  in  skinning  them  in  the  dark,  and  by  morning 
we  knew  the  carcases  would  be  hard  frozen.     In  this  dilemma 
orders  were  given  to  tie  them  up,  and  this  resulted  in  quite  an 
amusing  scene.     This  species  of  seal  is  much  more  lithe  and 
agile  than  the  Weddell,  and  no  sooner  had   a  noose  been 
cunningly  drawn  around  the  neck  of  one  of  these  animals  than 
he  whipped  round  with  such  a  ferocious  snapping  of  the  jaws 
that  the  holder  of  the  rope  incontinently  fled  ;  at  length  double 
nooses  were  drawn  tight  under  the  flippers  of  each  animal,  and 
with  a  precautionary  extra  rope  around  the  tail  we  had  them, 
as  we  thought,  securely  tied  to  the  ship's  chain  cables ;  but  ten 
minutes  later  we  heard  that  both  had  freed  themselves  by 
slipping  through  their  lashings.     By  this  time  everyone  was 
turning  in,  but  the  matter  was  now  growing  into  a  serious 
reflection  on  our  ability ;  that  a  party  of  sailors  should  confess 
themselves  unable  to  tie  any  animal  up  securely  was  not  to  be 
thought  of,  so  out  we  all  sallied  again.     This  time,  after  much 
struggling,  each   seal   was   lashed   up   like  a  hammock  with 
frequent  turns  of  rope  round  the  body  from  the  nose  to  the 
tail    and  finally  they  were  once  more  secured  to  the  cable.' 
In  spite  of  all  our  efforts,  however,  in  the  morning  we  found 
that  one  of  these  animals  had  slipped  through  everything  and 
disappeared. 

i  April  7. — To-day  we  found  the  sea  open  northward  of  a 
line  from  Hut  Point,  evidently  the  result  of  the  late  gale.  The 
temperature  to-day  has  risen  to  +io°,  and,  possibly  in  conse- 
quence, to-night  furious  squalls  come  from  the  E.S.E.  towards 
the  open  water.     I  think  our  bay-ice  is  safe  enough,  but  one 


i902]   PROGRESS  OF  WINTER  PREPARATIONS     211 

can  never  tell.  If  it  breaks  now,  we  shall  be  in  a  very  uncom- 
fortable position,  as  both  our  boilers  are  run  out  and  the 
engines  are  in  pieces.  A  party  with  two  large  sledges  and  the 
dogs  brought  back  eleven  seals  to-day,  and  will  bring  in  some 
more  to-morrow,  so  that  we  are  now  getting  pretty  secure  for 
our  winter  stock. 

'The  work  of  getting  comfortably  settled  is  progressing. 
The  winter  awning  is  spread ;  it  did  not  fit  at  all  well,  and  we 
were  obliged  to  make  several  alterations.  It  is  made  of  a 
thick,  rough,  flaxen  material,  called,  I  think,  "  waggon  cloth," 
which  I  was  at  great  pains  to  get,  on  advice.  I  believe  we 
should  have  done  better  to  have  had  it  made  of  ordinary  stout 
canvas.  The  winter  awning  ends  at  the  mainmast,  but  we  pro- 
pose to  construct  a  further  covered  way  aft  to  the  engine-room 
with  our  summer  awnings  and  odd  pieces  of  canvas.  There 
will  probably  be  a  good  deal  of  work  in  the  engine-room  during 
the  winter,  and  it  is  well  to  have  complete  shelter  to  and  from 
it.  With  the  awning  spread  over  the  living  spaces,  we  are 
obliged  to  use  artificial  light  all  day ;  but  we  should  get  little 
enough  natural  light  even  if  the  awning  were  not  there. 

'  The  men  are  building  a  snow-bank  for  our  gangway,  and 
another  at  the  ice-foot  to  make  a  road  to  the  hut;  but  the 
difficulty  at  present  is  to  get  snow.  None  has  fallen  recently, 
and  that  on  the  land  is  hard  and  icy.  As  our  awning  would 
not  spread  well  over  the  boats,  we  have  got  them  out,  and 
hauled  them  over  towards  the  ice-foot.  They  are  now  ranged 
in  a  line  close  to  it,  and  there,  it  is  to  be  hoped,  they  will 
remain  safely  during  the  winter.' 

This  latter  step  with  regard  to  the  boats  was  a  fatal  error, 
and  afterwards  gave  us  a  vast  amount  of  labour  and  trouble. 
It  was  yet  another  case  in  which  we  had  to  buy  our  experience 
sadly.  Our  principal  anxiety  had  been  to  find  a  place  where 
they  would  not  be  exposed  to  the  full  force  of  the  winter  gales, 
and  we  never  thought  of  the  danger  which  actually  overtook 
them.  It  was  not  until  the  middle  of  the  winter  that  we 
realised  that  what  had  been  the  surface  of  the  ice  was,  under 
the  weight  of  newly  fallen  snow,  gradually  sinking  below  the 


212        THE  VOYAGE  OF  THE  'DISCOVERY'   [April 

water-level,  carrying  the  boats  with  it;  and  then,  as  it  was 
impossible  to  commence  rescuing  operations  till  the  daylight 
returned,  we  were  forced  helplessly  to  watch  them  getting  into 
a  worse  and  worse  plight. 

On  the  night  of  the  8th  there  was  a  great  Emperor  penguin 
hunt.  '  It  was  blowing  half  a  gale  of  wind,  and  the  snow  was 
driving  rapidly  past  when  someone  espied  a  company  of  digni- 
fied "  Emperors  "  advancing  towards  the  ship.  Our  zoologist 
pointed  out  that  here  was  the  chance  to  complete  our  collection 
of  skins,  as  the  birds  would  now  be  in  their  finest  plumage  j 
and  in  spite  of  the  weather  a  large  party  had  soon  surrounded 
the  unfortunate  birds.  I  was  not  present  myself,  but  I  hear 
there  was  much  excitement.  It  is  no  easy  matter  to  hold  an 
Emperor ;  they  are  extraordinarly  strong  both  in  their  legs  and 
flippers,  and  are  capable  of  moving  even  with  a  man  on  top  of 
them.  They  could  of  course  have  been  clubbed,  but  this 
would  have  damaged  them  as  specimens.  The  proper  method 
was  to  get  hold  of  them  firmly  and  give  the  coup  de  grace  in  a 
scientific  manner  by  inserting  the  blade  of  a  penknife  at  the 
base  of  the  skull.  The  confusion  in  the  dark,  when  everyone 
was  trying  to  capture  a  bird  and  these  powerful  creatures  were 
dashing  in  every  direction,  can  better  be  imagined  than 
described.  Report  says  that  frequently  one  man  was  trying  to 
capture  another  under  the  impression  that  he  was  a  penguin, 
and  more  than  one  of  the  party  seem  to  have  been  temporarily 
floored  by  the  wild  dashes  of  the  intended  victims.  It  was 
late  at  night  before  sufficient  specimens  had  been  slain,  and 
then  the  party  returned  with  a  plentiful  supply  of  frost-bites, 
of  which  they  had  been  quite  oblivious  in  the  excitement  of 
the  chase.'  The  above  scene  may  sound  somewhat  blood- 
thirsty, but  it  is  just  to  remark  that  we  never  slew  animals 
except  for  the  practical  object  of  obtaining  food  or  specimens 
or  both  ;  and,  indeed,  the  more  we  came  to  see  the  extra- 
ordinary, unsuspicious  tameness  of  the  animal  life  about  us, 
the  more  compunction  we  were  forced  to  feel  at  the  necessity 
of  killing  at  all.  It  was  difficult  to  realise  at  first  the  full 
extent  of  this  tameness — ope  is  so  little  accustomed  to  total 


i902]  EMPEROR  PENGUIN  HUNT  213 

ignorance  of  man  as  an  enemy — yet  the  attitude  of  both  seals 
and  penguins  towards  life  is  a  very  simple  one.  In  the  sea 
they  prey  and  are  preyed  upon,  and  are  adapted  to  such  a  con- 
dition ;  in  that  element  they  are  swift,  agile,  and  doubtless 
suspicious.  But  on  the  ice  or  on  land  they  have  never  known 
an  enemy — from  all  time  it  has  been  sanctuary,  where  they  can 
mate,  sleep,  and  rest  without  fear  ;  and  so  the  presence  of  an 
utterly  unknown  danger  produces  at  first  only  consuming 
curiosity,  and  even  when  a  vague  feeling  of  alarm  steals  on 
their  dull  senses,  they  instinctively  recoil  from  seeking  safety  in 
the  sea,  where  alone  safety  is.  It  is  interesting  to  think  how 
different  are  the  corresponding  conditions  in  the  far  North, 
where  for  countless  years  the  bear  and  the  Esquimaux  have 
ranged  the  floes,  and  the  seal  has  become  so  timid  that  it  is 
often  difficult  for  the  traveller  to  get  within  rifle-shot. 

We  found  later  on  that  the  care  which  was  taken  on  this 
night  to  shepherd  the  flock  of  penguins  together  before  the 
victims  were  slain  was  quite  unnecessary.  So  unsuspecting 
are  these  birds  that  they  will  stand  stupidly  by,  without  thought 
of  flight,  whilst  individuals  are  cut  out  one  by  one  from  the  group 
and  killed.  Even  the  last  surviving  member  of  such  a  group 
seems  to  remain  unalarmed. 

•  April  9. — We  found  that  the  Emperor  penguins  killed  last 
night  are  in  splendid  plumage.  Many  of  them  weighed  over 
80  lbs.,  and  the  largest  turned  the  scale  at  90  lbs. — quite  a 
record  weight.  Rather  a  touching  scene  occurred  when  four 
or  five  stragglers  from  last  night  came  boldly  up  to  their  dead 
companions,  evidently  at  a  loss  to  understand  what  it  all 
meant. 

•  The  sea  is  again  open  up  to  Hut  Point,  and  possibly  the 
inrush  of  cold  air  to  the  open  water  causes  the  extraordinary 
difference  of  weather  conditions  which  exist  in  different 
localities  within  our  view.  Some  of  the  hills  are  clear  and 
bright  with  sunshine,  whilst  others  are  dark  with  hovering 
clouds ;  at  certain  places  it  is  undoubtedly  calm,  but  at  others 
the  drift  snow  can  be  seen  rising  in  clouds  and  sweeping 
furiously  along.    Towards   Cape  Bird  there  are  heavy,  low 


2i4       THE  VOYAGE  OF  THE  'DISCOVERY'   [April 

cumulus  clouds  with  black  under-shadows ;  there  must  be  a 
great  deal  of  open  water  in  this  direction.  The  various  sky 
effects  are  very  beautiful. 

'■April  13. — The  ice  has  broken  away  enough  to  show  open 
water  around  Hut  Point  ahead  of  the  ship  ;  it  has  been  snowing 
all  day,  the  snow  falling  in  large,  soft  flakes,  with  a  temperature 
of  +170.  This  afternoon  we  had  several  strong  gusts  from 
the  south,  and  later  the  wind  became  more  constant  from  the 
same  direction  and  gradually  increased  to  a  full  gale,  when  it 
shifted  slowly  to  the  S.E.  with  a  rapidly  falling  temperature. 
Unfortunately,  the  windmill  was  left  running  after  dinner,  when 
it  should  have  been  feathered  to  the  wind.  The  result  is  that 
some  of  the  fans  are  badly  twisted.  I  am  rapidly  losing  faith 
in  this  unfortunate  device,  but  I  don't  think  that  it  had  a  fair 
chance  to-day,  and  I  shall  suggest  to  the  engine-room  staff  that 
it  ought  to  be  repaired  if  it  is  not  too  far  gone.'  For  days 
after  this  the  windmill  was  under  repair,  all  the  bent  fans  were 
taken  down  and  carefully  straightened  below,  but  the  task  of 
replacing  them  was  anything  but  pleasant,  and  hour  after  hour 
our  excellent  engine-room  people  spent  aloft  in  the  bitter  wind, 
seated  on  cold  metal,  clinging  to  cold  metal,  and  often  obliged 
to  handle  their  cold  metal  tools  with  bared  fingers.  Nothing 
would  persuade  them  to  give  up,  however,  until  the  work  was 
completed  and  the  windmill  once  more  revolving  merrily. 

' April  17. — All  our  former  ski  runs  are  now  impossibles- 
most  of  the  snow-slopes  are  covered  with  hard  high  sastrugi 
raised  by  the  late  winds.  Everywhere  the  snow  is  packed  by 
the  same  cause,  and  the  surface  is  so  hard  that  it  is  impossible 
to  climb  the  steeper  inclines  even  in  boots.  Some  of  the  men 
are  out  occasionally  with  a  football,  but  the  wind  interferes 
sadly  with  all  forms  of  sport,  and  in  anything  like  calm  weather 
most  of  us  prefer  to  take  walks  to  spy  out  the  land.  There 
are  such  a  number  of  old  volcanic  craters  close  about  us  that 
it  will  be  long  before  we  become  thoroughly  acquainted  with 
all  the  folds  and  valleys  between,  and  for  many  a  month  yet 
we  may  hope  to  find  new  features  in  our  neighbourhood  and 
some  fresh  interest  in  our  daily  exercise. 


1902]  DEPARTURE  OF  THE  SUN  215 

'  The  sun  does  not  now  rise  sufficiently  high  to  shine  on 
the  ship,  but  about  noon  one  can  see  it  from  the  eminence  of 
Hut  Point.  .  .  .' 

1 April  20. — A  bright  day  with  moderate  northerly  wind. 
The  young  ice  just  formed  over  the  open  strait  crowded  down 
on  the  old  and  rode  over  it  in  many  places.  The  sun  is  very 
near  its  departure ;  to-day  it  appeared  a  highly  refracted 
elliptical  ball  of  red,  giving  little  light  and  no  appreciable  heat. 
For  a  few  minutes  it  bathed  the  top  of  Observation  Hill  in  soft 
pink  light,  then  vanished  beneath  a  blood-red  horizon.' 

This  was  the  last  we  saw  of  the  sun  till  it  returned  to  us 
more  than  four  months  later.  Its  actual  date  of  disappearance 
was  the  23rd,  but  after  the  20th  we  had  a  return  to  what,  at 
this  time,  appeared  the  normal  weather  conditions,  and  for  the 
three  following  days  my  daily  journal  opens  with  the  same 
remark  :  '  Wind  still  blowing  hard  with  an  overcast  sky.'  It 
was  not  a  very  enlivening  prelude  to  the  coming  darkness,  but 
it  would  have  taken  far  more  than  this  to  depress  us  in  our 
novel  surroundings,  and  all  felt  the  propriety  of  the  celebrations 
on  the  night  of  the  23rd,  when  hilarity  reigned  supreme,  and 
with  a  liberal  allowance  of  extra  grog  we  drank  to  a  speedy 
passage  of  the  long  night. 

The  winter  was  now  upon  us.  The  ice  about  the  ship  had 
been  firmly  fixed  for  nearly  a  month,  and  there  seemed  little 
reason  to  suppose  that  the  heaviest  gale  could  move  it  before 
the  following  summer.  For  good  or  ill  we  were  now  a  fixture, 
destined  to  spend  our  winter  nearly  500  miles  beyond  the 
point  at  which  any  other  human  beings  had  wintered,  and 
therefore  about  to  face  conditions  at  which  we  could  only 
guess. 

Before  us  lay  a  weary  spell  of  darkness,  but  we  came  to  it 
in  full  health  and  vigour,  and  all  that  skill  could  devise  to  pro- 
vide for  our  comfort  and  lighten  its  monotony  seemed  within 
our  grasp.  Each  day  would  bring  us  nearer  to  the  longed-for 
spring,  and  to  the  day  when,  with  high  hopes,  we  should  step 
forth  on  those  new  trails  which  met  at  our  door  and  vanished 
in  the  unknown. 


216       THE   VOYAGE   OF   THE    'DISCOVERY'  [April 


CHAPTER   VIII 

THE   POLAR   WINTER 

Winter  Routine— Obtaining  Water— Meals  and  Meal-hours— Pastimes- 
Officers'  Routine— Debates— Exercise— Work  of  the  Officers— Weather 
Conditions— Heavy  Blizzard  and  its  Effects— Incidents  of  the  Winter — 
Winter  Clothing— Remarks  on  our  Food— Sunday  Routine— Discomforts 
of  the  Living-quarters  from  Ice — Heating  and  Ventilation— Mid-winter 
Day. 

The  cold  ice  slept  below, 
Above  the  cold  sky  shone, 
And  all  around 
With  a  chilling  sound 
From  caves  of  ice  and  fields  of  snow 
The  breath  of  night  like  death  did  flow 

Beneath  the  sinking  moon. — Shelley. 

Long  before  the  sun  left  us  we  had  settled  down  into  a 
regular  routine  of  daily  life,  and  although  when  it  was  above 
the  horizon  the  hours  of  work  were  modified  and  generally 
increased,  our  meal-hours  remained  unaltered  during  the  two 
years  which  saw  us  in  the  grip  of  the  ice. 

The  following  description  of  our  daily  life  on  board  is 
contained  in  my  diary  of  the  early  months  of  our  first  winter  : 

1  The  first  task  of  the  day  is  to  fetch  the  ice  for  the  daily 
consumption  of  water  for  cooking,  drinking,  and  washing.  In 
the  latter  respect  we  begin  to  realise  that  many  circumstances 
are  against  habits  of  excessive  cleanliness,  but  although  we  use 
water  very  sparingly,  an  astonishing  amount  of  washing  is  done 
with  it,  and  at  present  the  fashion  is  for  all  to  have  a  bath  once 
a  week.  To  fetch  the  ice  in  the  morning  a  party  of  men  are 
roused  out  somewhat  earlier  than  their  comrades,  and  dressing 


igoa]  OBTAINING   WATER  217 

themselves  according  to  the  weather,  they  proceed  to  the  ice- 
quarry  with  a  heavy  sledge  specially  fitted  for  the  work.  The 
harder  and  bluer  the  ice,  the  better  it  is  adapted  for  melting 
and  the  less  fuel  is  required  to  melt  it ;  had  we  been  obliged 
to  use  snow,  either  hard  or  soft,  the  daily  task  would  have 
been  much  heavier ;  but  by  good  fortune  we  have  a  very  solid 
icy  slope  on  the  land  not  more  than  200  yards  from  the  ship, 
and  here  we  have  made  our  quarry.'  For  two  years  we  dug 
in  an  area  no  greater  than  twenty  yards  across,  and  yet  at  the 
end  of  that  time,  when  we  must  have  removed  many  tons  of 
ice,  we  scarcely  seemed  to  have  scratched  the  surface  of  the 
slope  :  such  are  the  puny  efforts  of  man  ! 

'  A  quarter  of  an  hour  of  hard  delving  with  pick  and  shovel 
each  morning  is  sufficient  to  supply  our  daily  needs  ;  the 
sledge,  loaded  with  ice-blocks,  is  towed  back  to  the  ship,  and 
the  blocks  are  then  carried  on  board  and  placed  in  a  convenient 
storage  close  to  the  main  hatchway.  The  pile  thus  made  is 
kept  well  in  advance  of  our  needs  in  preparation  for  spells  of 
bad  weather  when  digging  may  be  impossible.  Long  before 
the  departure  of  the  ice-diggers  the  cook's  mate  has  been  astir 
with  the  galley  fire  alight  and  the  coppers  and  ice-melters  filled 
so  that  by  8.30  the  men's  breakfast  is  prepared.  By  this  time 
all  hammocks  except  those  of  the  night  watchmen  are  lashed 
up  and  stowed  away,  and  the  linoleum-covered  mess-deck  has 
been  washed  and  cleared  up.  Breakfast  is  a  very  simple  meal, 
and  consists  always  of  a  large  bowl  of  porridge  with  bread  and 
butter  and  marmalade  or  jam.  For  a  long  time  a  hash  or  stew 
was  prepared,  but  as  appetites  fell  off  with  our  comparatively 
confined  life  this  was  rarely  touched,  and  is  now  practically 
discontinued  ;  on  the  two  mornings  of  the  week  when  seal's 
liver  replaces  the  more  ordinary  meat,  however,  there  is  no 
such  abstinence  ;  everyone  partakes  of  this  excellent  dish  and 
wishes  heartily  that  the  seal  was  possessed  of  more  than  one 
liver.' 

I  may  here  mention  that  when  we  came  to  slaughter  seals 
for  our  second  winter  there  was  a  strong  temptation  to  kill 
them  for  their  livers  only,  and  I  think  it  is  a  creditable  fact 


218       THE  VOYAGE   OF  THE   'DISCOVERY'  [April 

that  we  refrained  from  obtaining  this  luxury  at  a  rate  so 
expensive  to  life,  but  confined  ourselves  to  the  due  proportions 
which  fell  to  our  share  in  treating  the  whole  animal  as  food. 

It  is  extraordinary  how  our  liking  for  porridge  grew  upon 
us ;  we  none  of  us  cared  much  for  it  at  first ;  naval  sailors 
rarely  do,  and  I  believe  it  has  lately  been  struck  off  the  list 
of  food  supplied  to  the  naval  service ;  but  with  us  the  taste  for 
this  excellent  food  grew  ever  stronger  both  with  officers  and 
men,  until  we  not  only  made  our  breakfast  exclusively  from  it, 
but  decided  to  include  the  more  easily  cooked  variety  in  our 
sledge  rations. 

'After  breakfast  the  mess-deck  is  again  cleared  up  in 
preparation  for  prayers  at  9.15,  after  which  the  men  are 
assembled  and  told  off  for  the  work  of  the  day,  which  is 
arranged  as  far  as  possible  so  that  each  man  gets  his  fair  share 
of  the  outside  tasks.'  I  do  not  remember  a  time  when  there 
was  not  a  great  amount  of  work  to  be  done.  During  the  latter 
part  of  the  first  winter,  and  throughout  the  whole  of  the  second 
a  large  party  were  constantly  employed  on  our  sledging  outfit, 
making  or  repairing  sleeping-bags,  sledges,  tents,  cookers  or 
other  details  of  equipment.  Out  of  doors  there  was  generally 
some  work  in  the  digging  line,  either  piling  snow  around  the 
ship  or  the  huts,  or  digging  out  various  objects  which  had 
become  buried,  or  making  holes  in  the  sea-ice  for  fish  traps, 
or  freeing  the  entrances  and  the  paths  to  and  from  the 
huts,  or  many  other  lighter  tasks.  Then,  again,  the  awning, 
the  chimneys  of  the  stove,  and  many  outdoor  instruments 
needed  attention  and  repair,  and  few  of  our  heavy  winter 
gales  passed  without  creating  some  havoc  which  had  to  be 
rectified. 

'  Dinner  for  the  men  is  at  one.  This  varies  with  the  day, 
but  consists  always  of  soup,  seal  or  tinned  meat,  and  either  a 
jam  or  a  fruit  tart.  After  dinner  the  rum  is  served  out  in 
accordance  with  naval  custom.  I  am  not  at  all  sure  the  men 
would  not  be  better  without  it,  but  perhaps  some  would  feel 
aggrieved  if  it  was  stopped,  and  the  small  daily  allowance  can 
do  little  harm  ;  of  course  it  will  be  stopped  when  the  sledging 


i902]  MEALS   AND   PASTIMES  219 

comes  on.  Smoking  has  been  allowed  on  the  mess- deck  and 
at  all  times  since  we  entered  winter  quarters ;  there  are  few 
non-smokers,  and  no  one  who  dislikes  the  smell  of  tobacco. 
After  two  in  the  afternoon  the  men  return  to  work  until  five ; 
up  to  the  present  there  has  been  enough  to  keep  them  going, 
but  if,  as  is  probable,  it  falls  off,  I  propose  to  leave  their  after- 
noon free ;  there  is  no  object  in  making  work.  Supper  is  at 
five  j  a  few  with  good  appetites  make  up  dishes  out  of  what 
remains  of  the  tinned  meats  or  seal  left  over  from  dinner,  but 
many  confine  themselves  to  bread  and  butter  and  tea,  with 
perhaps  some  jam  or  cheese.  Those  men  who  have  not  been 
employed  outside  during  the  day  take  their  exercise  after 
supper ;  there  is  no  constraint,  but  luckily  the  men  are  in- 
telligent enough  to  appreciate  the  advantage  of  good  health 
and  the  benefit  of  a  daily  walk.  There  has  been  a  difficulty 
in  this  respect  with  regard  to  the  cooks  and  stewards,  whose 
duties  lie  naturally  inside  the  ship ;  with  a  little  thought,  how- 
ever, we  have  been  able  to  arrange  a  routine  by  which  each 
has  some  spare  time  daily  to  devote  to  a  walk  abroad.  In  the 
evening  all  the  men  are  free,  and  a  glimpse  at  the  mess-deck 
at  such  a  time  leaves  the  impression  that  the  greatest  comfort 
and  contentment  reigns  throughout.  Many  have  some  special 
work  in  hand,  such  as  wood-carving,  netting,  mat- making,  &c, 
which  serves  to  fill  in  the  spare  hours  ;  others  play  games  or 
read  ;  whist,  draughts,  and  even  chess  are  popular,  and  much 
time  is  beguiled  by  a  peculiar  but  simple  game  called  "  shove- 
ha'penny."  This  pastime  needs  only  a  long  board  with  num- 
bers marked  in  squares  at  one  end  and  a  halfpenny,  which  is 
placed  on  the  edge  at  the  other ;  the  coin  is  jerked  along  the 
smooth  board  towards  the  numbers  by  striking  the  palm  of 
the  hand  against  the  edge  of  the  board,  and  the  player  of 
course  scores  the  number  at  which  the  coin  stops;  whence 
this  game  came  I  know  not,  but  I  think  it  must  bear  a  strong 
resemblance  to  the  older  pastime  called  "  shovel-board."  At 
any  rate  at  present  it  affords  much  amusement  and  produces 
shouts  of  laughter  ;  tournaments  are  constantly  held  in  this, 
as  well  as  in  draughts  and  whist.     At  ten  o'clock  hammocks 


220       THE  VOYAGE   OF  THE   '  DISCOVERY »  [April 

are  slung,  and  soon  all  are  in  bed  and  asleep ;  only  one  or  two 
sleep  in  the  daytime,  and  perhaps  in  consequence  all  sleep  well 
at  night.  There  is  no  doubt  that  hammocks  are  far  prefer- 
able to  the  bunks  at  one  time  suggested  for  the  men  ;  the 
large  clear  space  which  is  left  when  the  hammocks  are  stowed 
for  the  day  is  alone  sufficient  to  prove  this,  but  it  is  also  certain 
that  a  hammock  is  drier  and  more  snug  than  a  bunk  would  be 
under  our  present  conditions  of  life.' 

Later  in  the  year,  on  July  18,  I  note  :  '  During  the  darkest 
days,  when  work  was  slack,  nothing  was  done  by  the  men  after 
their  dinner,  and  I  do  not  think  anything  is  gained  by  making 
work  ;  now  that  preparation  for  sledging  has  commenced,  how- 
ever, there  is  plenty  to  be  done  and  perhaps  it  is  better  to  have 
such  employment.  Entertainments  have  been  few  and  far 
between,  but  have  counted  for  something,  and  Hodgson, 
Ferrar,  and  others  have  given  little  scientific  expositions  on 
their  special  subjects  which  have  proved  very  popular.  It 
was  a  very  usual  thing  in  the  old  Northern  expeditions  to  hold 
classes  for  school  amongst  the  men,  but  in  those  days  many 
could  not  read  or  write  ;  with  these  accomplishments  men  are 
able  to  amuse  themselves,  as  we  have  proved,  and  the  officers 
have  had  the  more  time  for  their  own  in  consequence.  I  have 
endeavoured  to  suit  everything  to  the  requirement  of  the 
moment,  and  was  prepared  if  monotony  and  dulness  crept  in 
to  attempt  to  dispel  them,  but  there  has  been  no  necessity ; 
laughter  and  good  cheer  accompany  warmth  and  comfort  in 
the  crew  space  as  well  as  aft  in  the  wardroom,  and  all  in  all  a 
brighter  or  more  contented  company  than  ours  it  would  be 
difficult  to  conceive.' 

'  Reading  on  the  mess-deck  is  of  a  very  desultory  character ; 
Arctic  books  of  travel  are  of  course  much  sought  after,  simple 
and  popular  histories  are  frequently  read  ;  especially  in  request 
are  such  books  as  "  Fights  for  the  Flag,"  "  Deeds  that  Won  the 
Empire,"  and  stories  of  the  sea  are  much  appreciated  also. 
Novels  are  not  very  popular,  though  Dickens  and  Marryat 
find  readers  ;  old  magazines  seem  to  go  the  round  many  times 
and  become  much  thumbed.      Books  of  a   quite  different 


i902]  OFFICERS'   ROUTINE  221 

character  from  the  above  are  often  asked  for,  however  3  last 
week  one  man  was  deeply  immersed  in  the  "  Origin  of  Species," 
another  is  studying  navigation,  and  not  a  few  have  the  evident 
intention  of  improving  themselves.  There  is  a  good  deal  of 
writing  as  well  as  reading  on  the  mess-deck,  and  the  excellent 
articles  that  have  been  contributed  to  the  "  South  Polar  Times," 
show  that  much  that  is  written  would  be  well  worth  perusal. 
A  goodly  number  of  diaries  are  kept,  some  as  personal  records, 
but  others  for  transmission  home  to  the  most-thought-of  in- 
dividual. It  is  difficult  to  say  for  certain,  but  as  one  looks  on 
the  cheerful,  contented  scene  on  the  mess-deck  at  night,  one 
rather  gathers  the  impression  that  the  regular  organisation  of 
lectures  and  entertainments  would  disturb  rather  than  add  to 
the  comfort  of  the  community.  Perhaps,  however,  a  second 
winter  would  necessitate  more  effort  on  the  part  of  the  officers 
to  amuse  the  men;  without  doubt  the  novelty  of  the  first 
season  counts  for  much.' 

The  contentment  of  the  men  was  no  transient  condition 
dependent  on  novelty  such  as  at  this  time  I  surmised  that  it 
might  be.  We  afterwards  settled  down  to  our  second  winter 
with  even  greater  cheerfulness,  and,  far  from  finding  such  a  life 
monotonous  and  dreary,  the  men  with  the  officers  adapted 
themselves  with  ease  to  its  placid  course. 

'  The  officers'  routine  is  somewhat  different  from  that  of  the 
men.  Breakfast  aft  starts  at  nine  and  is  concluded  at  ten ; 
few  are  exactly  punctual,  but  all  have  finished  by  the  latter 
hour.  The  breakfast  meal  itself  is  precisely  the  same  as  that 
served  to  the  men,  as  are  all  our  other  meals.  I  made  this 
rule  at  the  start  of  the  expedition,  and  it  has  been  observed 
ever  since  and  will  be  observed  throughout ;  without  subvert- 
ing discipline,  it  silences  complaint.  Two  or  three  months  ago, 
for  instance,  one  of  the  few  troublesome  men  in  the  ship,  a 
merchant  seaman,  asked  to  see  me  to  complain  of  some  cake. 
When  I  appeared  on  deck  he  held  a  slice  of  cake  in  his  hand 
and  plaintively  informed  me  that  it  was  not  fit  for  human  food. 
I  immediately  sent  down  for  a  slice  from  a  cake  in  the  ward- 
room which  we  had  been  eating  with  pleasure,  and  of  course 


222       THE   VOYAGE   OF   THE    'DISCOVERY'  [April 

found  that  the  slices  were  precisely  similar.  As  a  consequence 
I  could  express  my  opinion  of  the  complaint  and  its  maker 
with  the  utmost  freedom,  and  proceeded  to  do  so.  That 
officers  and  men  should  mess  apart,  and  that  the  officers 
should  have  the  privacy  of  their  cabins  for  their  work,  &c,  is 
all  very  right  and  proper,  and  marks  a  distinction  which  is  in 
the  best  interests  of  discipline ;  but  in  other  respects  it  is  an 
advantage  on  such  an  expedition  as  ours  that  all  should  share 
the  same  hardships,  and,  as  far  as  possible,  live  the  same  lives. 
My  rule  does  not  of  course  apply  to  luxuries  sent  by  officers' 
friends,  to  wines,  or  to  a  few  delicate  but  indigestible  trifles 
by  which  we  increase  the  wardroom  fare  on  the  rare 
occasions  when  we  have  a  special  dinner  ;  it  is  only  a  rule  for 
ordinary  circumstances,  and  one  which  will  receive  great 
extensions  when  we  come  to  the  hard  sledging  work  that  is 
before  us,  for  then  officers  and  men  must  live  and  work  alike  in 
every  respect. 

•  -From  ten  to  two  the  officers  have  a  good  round  interval 
for  the  routine  work  of  the  day ;  at  two  we  have  tea,  the  actual 
beverage  being  accompanied  with  jam,  cakes,  and  toast.  The 
latter  is  made  at  our  own  fire ;  the  bread  is  cut  off  in  huge 
chunks,  and  numerous  patent  toasting  forks  are  brought  into 
action.  The  toast  made,  it  is  spread  thickly  with  butter  until 
it  is  a  sopping,  dripping  mass,  suitable  to  nothing  but  a  robust 
appetite  ;  then  the  meal  and  the  arguments  begin,  the  latter 
being  pursued  to  such  lengths  that  the  clock  usually  shows 
three  before  we  break  up.  On  the  whole  I  think  we  all  find 
this  the  most  enjoyable  meal  of  the  day.  In  the  afternoon 
those  who  have  not  been  out  already,  start  on  their  daily 
exercise  ;  the  rest  melt  away  to  their  various  tasks,  self-imposed 
or  otherwise,  and  it  is  not  until  6  p.m.  that  we  all  meet  again 
for  dinner. 

•  This  is  the  biggest  and  most  formal  meal  of  the  day  ; 
each  officer  takes  it  in  turn  to  be  president  for  a  week  at  a 
time,  and  during  his  term  of  office  sits  at  the  head  of  the 
table.  Although  we  do  not  dress,  we  come  as  near  to  it  as  we 
can  with  a  general  tidy- up  of  costume ;  all  are  supposed  to  be 


I9o2j  THE  WARDROOM   MESS  223 

seated  before  grace  is  said,  and  those  who  are  not  must  duly 
apologise  to  the  president  for  their  absence. 

'The  dinner  which  follows  is  the  same  as  that  which  is 
served  to  the  men  earlier  in  the  day,  though  with  us  it  is 
served  in  courses  on  a  comparatively  clean,  if  not  a  white,  table- 
cloth. Few  of  us  drink  any  alcohol,  except  possibly  an  occasional 
glass  of  wine  after  dinner,  or  a  small  bottle  of  beer  on  Sunday 
with  our  mutton.  We  have  a  supply  of  "  sparklets  "  that 
make  excellent  ginger-beer  or  lemonade,  and  some  cider, 
which  is  sometimes  drunk;  but  the  total  consumption  of 
alcoholic  drink  is  ridiculously  small,  and  that  not  from  any 
rule  of  living  or  example,  but  simply  because  no  one  seems  to 
have  any  appetite  for  it.  The  consequence  is  we  have  a  great 
deal  of  whisky  and  wine  on  board  which  will  certainly  never 
be  touched. 

'After  dinner  the  table  is  cleared,  grace  said,  the  wine 
passed  round,  and  the  King's  health  formally  drunk,  when  the 
functions  of  the  president  cease.     Whilst  the  latter  is  in  office 
the  proprieties  have  to  be  observed  on  pain  of  a  fine.     No  one  is 
allowed  to  contradict  the  president,  no  bets  can  be  made,  and 
no  reference-books  can  be  consulted  ;  these  limitations,  with  a 
few  others  which  are  more  rarely  transgressed,  cause  a  good 
deal  of  amusement.     Arguments  are  started  on  every  imagin- 
able subject  under  the  sun,  and  the  flattest  contradictions  are 
given  and  returned  ;  as  the  president  joins  in  the  conversation, 
the  chances  are  that  in  the  heat  of  debate  someone  will  directly 
traverse  his  statements  or  back  his  own  opinion  by  saying,  "  I 
bet  you  so  and  so  "  ;  in  either  case  his  eager  messmates  call  im- 
mediate attention  to  his  breach  of  etiquette,  and  he  is  promptly 
fined  "  wine  all  round  " ;  no  appeal  is  possible,  and  complaint  is 
met  by  an  increase  of  the  penalty.     "  Wine  all  round  "  doesn't 
mean  much  in  our  abstemious  community,  but  sometimes  even 
those  who  are'practically  teetotalers  will  relax  to  drink  the  health 
of  a  hardened  offender.  After  "  The  King  "  has  been  drunk  there 
is  generally  a  rush  for  reference-books,  and  then  a  good  deal  of 
twisting  of  position  to  suit  the  reference.     Our  reference- books 
are  fairly  numerous,   but  (though   we  feel  the  lack  of  the 


224       THE   VOYAGE   OF   THE    'DISCOVERY'  [April 

"  Encyclopaedia  Britannica  ")  the  "  Century  Dictionary,"  the 
Atlas,  Haydn's  "  Dictionary  of  Dates,"  "  Whitaker's  Almanack," 
"  Hazell's  Annual,"  the  "  Statesman's  Year  Book,"  and  some 
others,  provide  an  ample  field  for  supporting  one's  own  opinion, 
refuting  one's  opponent,  or  at  least  for  confusing  the  issue.  I 
am  not  sure  we  get  much  "  forrader  "  by  our  heated  discussions, 
but  it  is  a  great  deal  better  than  being  dull  and  silent ;  we  have 
never  yet  sat  through  a  meal  without  continual  conversation, 
and  I  hope  we  never  may. 

1  Dinner  is  followed  by  an  hour  or  two  of  recreation,  dis- 
cussion, or  work,  a  go-as-you-please  arrangement ;  some  finish 
off  their  daily  work,  some  write,  some  read,  and  some  play 
games.  For  some  time  now  a  game  of  "  bridge  "  has  been  the 
evening  amusement ;  five  or  six  play,  "  cutting  in  "  in  the  usual 
manner.  No  doubt  the  popularity  of  "  bridge  "  will  wane  as 
has  that  of  other  games ;  chess  was  played  for  a  long  while,  and 
will  probably  come  to  the  front  again.  Most  of  us  straggle  off 
to  bed  between  eleven  and  twelve,  but  some,  myself  amongst 
others,  often  stay  up  later.  A  few  find  that  sleep  does  not 
come  at  all  uniformly,  but  for  my  own  part  I  sleep  like  a  top. 

'  Every  Tuesday  after  dinner  we  have  a  debate  in  the  wardroom. 
I  think  Bernacchi  first  suggested  this,  and  it  was  decided  to 
have  a  technical  subject  one  week  and  a  lay  one  the  next. 
The  proceedings  have  always  been  very  orderly,  and  throughout 
the  winter  nearly  everyone  has  attended,  though  now  their  popu- 
larity is  waning.  On  technical  evenings  we  have  discussed  the 
barrier,  the  climatic  conditions,  the  prospects  of  getting  east  and 
west,  the  seals,  and  the  penguins,  with  results  that  have  been 
both  instructive  and  amusing.  There  is  so  much  in  these  sub- 
jects that  remains  unexplained  and  mysterious  that  everyone 
must  gain  fresh  ideas  from  their  free  discussion  ;  of  the  barrier 
we  still  seem  to  know  all  too  little,  but  that  little  is  contrary  to 
preconceived  notions,  and  the  ideas  it  suggests  are  confused 
enough  to  need  sorting,  if  we  are  to  continue  our  exploration 
systematically  in  the  spring.  In  the  climatic  conditions  we 
have  yet  to  explain  the  astonishing  differences  of  temperature 
in  different  localities  and  with  different  winds,  and  to  discuss 


i902]  DEBATES  225 

methods  by  which  we  can  get  some  notion  of  the  snowfall  and 
evaporation  in  our  region ;  while  with  regard  to  seals  and  pen- 
guins, we  feel  there  is  yet  much  to  be  learned  as  to  their  winter 
habits,  their  breeding,  and  their  migrations.  In  fact,  our  dis- 
cussions, whilst  helping  to  elucidate  minor  points  in  the 
problems  in  debate,  have  served  to  set  those  problems  more 
clearly  before  us,  and  to  indicate  the  manner  in  which  we  may 
hope  to  arrive  at  their  solution.  People  are  so  very  genuinely 
interested  in  all  this  that  I  think  the  lapse  of  enthusiasm  in  the 
debates  arises  merely  from  the  knowledge  that  we  can  only 
hope  to  throw  more  light  on  the  subjects  by  further  exploration 
and  observation. 

1  The  non-technical  nights  are  of  course  devoted  entirely  to 
amusement,  and  the  subjects  selected  accordingly  are  such  as 
to  encourage  the  most  startling  statements  and  lines  of  argu- 
ment; thus  we  have  had  "The  Trade  of  the  Empire," 
"  Conscription,"  &c,  subjects  on  which,  without  knowing  any- 
thing, everyone  can  talk.  Needless  to  say,  such  debates 
generally  end  in  more  or  less  of  an  uproar. 

'The  day's  routine  for  the  officers  gives  four  clear  hours 
before  tea  and  three  after;  during  these  hours  all  without 
exception  are  busily  employed  except  for  the  hour  or  more 
devoted  to  exercise ;  the  best  time  for  this  is  now  about  noon, 
but  during  the  very  dark  days  the  moon  was  a  potent  influence 
in  fixing  the  time.  In  this,  as  in  other  matters,  I  have  endea- 
voured to  avoid  all  irksome  rules  and  regulations.  The  officers 
are  only  too  eager  to  go  out  for  a  breath  of  fresh  air  ;  the  men 
have  outside  employment  in  fetching  ice,  tending  their  dogs, 
taking  observations,  &c,  and  in  fine  weather  need  no  spur  to 
be  out  and  about  with  a  football  or  on  ski ;  the  only  class  for 
which  it  has  been  necessary  to  make  special  arrangements  are 
the  cooks  and  domestics,  whose  duties  are  apt  to  tie  them  to 
the  ship. 

'  My  own  time  is  taken  up  in  organising  the  spring  sledging, 

drafting  instructions,  calculating  weights,  searching  up  references, 

&c.  ;  it  would  be  difficult  for  an  outsider  to  understand  what  a 

mass  of  detail  this  lands  one  in.     I  try  also  to  keep  touch  with 

vol.  1.  Q 


226      THE   VOYAGE   OF  THE   'DISCOVERY'    [April 

the  work  which  is  going  on  in  the  various  departments,  and  am 
endeavouring  to  do  some  physical  work  in  connection  with  the 
ice  and  snow  which  would  otherwise  be  neglected ;  but  such 
matters  are  attended  with  great  difficulty  to  an  untrained 
observer,  and  it  is  only  when  one  comes  to  make  the  attempt 
that  one  finds  that  a  simple  experiment  is  almost  an 
impossibility;  every  condition  is  complicated  by  outside 
variable  causes.' 

To  give  an  instance  of  what  was  evidently  meant  by  this 
paragraph  I  may  mention  that  it  was  suggested  in  our 
'Antarctic  Manual  of  Instructions'  that  a  block  of  ice  should 
be  suspended  in  the  sea  and  its  rate  of  increase  in  winter  and 
decrease  in  summer  should  be  measured.  Had  we  attempted 
to  do  this,  probably  we  should  have  arrived  at  an  utterly  false 
conclusion,  because  in  no  two  places  would  the  result  be  the 
same  ;  in  one  place,  for  example,  the  block  would  most  cer- 
tainly have  disappeared  early  in  the  summer,  whereas  in 
another  it  would  have  been  diminished  by  little  throughout  that 
season.  This  difference  was  dependent  on  the  movement  of 
the  sea-water,  but  it  shows  the  impossibility  of  carrying  out 
experiments  of  this  sort,  however  easily  they  may  be  conceived 
in  the  quiet  of  an  English  study. 

'  I  find  time  also  to  read  up  Arctic  literature,  of  which  I  am 
woefully  ignorant ;  most  unfortunately,  our  library  is  deficient 
in  this  respect,  as  owing  to  the  hurry  of  our  departure  many 
important  books  were  omitted.  We  have  Greely,  Payer,  Nares, 
Markham,  McClintock,  McDougall,  Scoresby,  Nansen's 
"  Greenland,"  and  a  few  others  of  less  importance ;  but,  sad  to 
relate,  Nordenskjold,  Nansen  ("Farthest  North"),  and  Peary 
are  absent,  and  two  of  these  at  least  would  have  been  amongst 
our  most  valuable  books  of  reference.  Yesterday  I  was 
pleasantly  astonished  to  find  that  Wilson  had  some  notes  on 
Nansen's  "Farthest  North,"  giving  extracts  of  his  sledge 
weights,  &c,  and  these  may  be  of  great  use  in  calculating  our 
own  weights. 

'  The  work  of  the  various  officers  is  so  distinct,  and  keeps 
them  so  busily  employed,  that  we  rarely  meet  except  at  meal- 


igo2]  WORK   OF  THE   OFFICERS  227 

hours  and  in  the  evenings.  Armitage  is  reworking  the 
observations  for  position  taken  during  the  summer  cruise,  and 
correcting  his  magnetic  data.  This  is  a  very  sedentary  employ- 
ment, but  occasionally  he  is  to  be  seen  out  on  the  floe  with 
the  large  theodolite  taking  star  observations  for  the  rating  of 
the  chronometers — a  very  cold  job,  both  for  the  observer  and 
for  the  timekeeper,  in  which  capacity  I  sometimes  attend. 

'  It  is  satisfactory  to  find  that  all  four  chronometers  are 
keeping  a  steady  rate,  notwithstanding  that  the  temperature 
in  the  chronometer-box  frequently  falls  below  freezing-point. 
Every  morning  the  clocks  are  set  by  the  chronometer,  so  that 
our  daily  routine  is  timed  to  the  minute. 

'  Luckily  Koettlitz  has  not  much  to  do  in  connection  with 
his  medical  duties,  as  there  is  little  sickness,  but  occasionally 
there  are  wounds  and  cuts  to  be  dressed  and  small  ailments 
to  be  doctored.  In  his  daily  walk  he  has  undertaken  the 
important  duty  of  reading  the  thermometer  off  Cape  Armitage. 
It  is  an  instrument  with  a  minimum  indicator,  and  is  attached 
to  a  post  about  1^  mile  from  the  ship.  As  I  have  before 
remarked,  even  at  this  very  short  distance  the  common 
difference  of  temperature  between  it  and  the  ship's  screen 
is  from  io°  to  15°.  There  are  regular  duties  in  the  medical 
line  which  are  of  great  importance,  and  which  are  shared  by 
the  two  doctors.  Every  tin  of  food  has  to  be  examined  by 
them  after  it  is  opened  and  before  it  is  served  out.  This  is  no 
light  task  when  hours  are  considered  ;  for  instance,  Wilson  has 
to  be  out  early  to  examine  the  milk  for  the  day.  Another  self- 
imposed  duty  of  the  doctors  is  to  take  weights  and  measure- 
ments and  examine  the  blood  of  everyone,  fore  and  aft,  once 
during  the  month  ;  all  the  information  thus  obtained  is  tabu- 
lated by  Koettlitz,  forming  a  very  interesting  record  of  the 
changes  in  different  individuals  living  more  or  less  under 
similar  conditions. 

'  Soon  after  the  first  of  each  month  in  the  evening  we  all 
gather  in  the  wardroom  clad  in  pyjamas,  and  are  put  through 
our  paces  as  follows :  Our  weight  is  taken,  and  then  the 
measurement  of  chest,  filled  and  empty,  waist,  calf,  forearm 

Q2 


228      THE   VOYAGE   OF   THE    'DISCOVERY'    [April 

and  upper  arm ;  then,  by  means  of  a  small  spring  instrument, 
our  power  of  grip  with  right  and  left  hand  is  recorded,  and 
finally  the  capacity  of  our  lungs  is  measured  as  we  discharge 
one  long  breath  into  the  spirometer. 

'This  performance  is  an  entertainment  in  itself,  and  bets 
are  freely  offered  and  taken  on  the  results,  especially  by  those 
who  fondly  hope  for  a  smaller  waist  or  a  stronger  grip. 

'  Generally  on  the  following  night  the  same  scene  is  enacted 
on  the  mess-deck,  with  the  same  display  of  chaff  and  good- 
humour.  One  has  but  to  cast  one's  eye  over  the  records  that 
come  from  this  quarter  to  realise  what  a  splendid  set  of  men 
we  have  from  the  point  of  view  of  physique.  Some  turn  the 
scale  at  over  190  lbs.,  and  several  at  over  180  lbs.,  without  an 
ounce  of  superfluous  fat;  and  though  in  some  cases  we  can 
equal  the  blowing  powers  of  these  individuals,  we  cannot 
compete  with  their  grips  ;  in  fact,  a  specially  strong  instrument 
is  usually  employed  to  prevent  all  chance  of  the  ordinary  one 
being  wrecked. 

1  The  further  monthly  examination  of  our  physical  condition 
consists  in  an  examination  of  our  blood.  Our  senior  surgeon 
goes  to  each  individual  in  turn  with  a  special  needle  and  a 
small  test-tube ;  the  former  is  plunged  into  the  finger  of  the 
victim,  and  as  the  blood  oozes  out,  it  is  drawn  up  and  trans- 
ferred to  the  test-tube.  The  first  test  is  to  dilute  a  given 
quantity  with  water  and  to  compare  the  resultant  colour  with 
a  standard ;  water  is  added  until  the  colours  are  equalised  in 
shade,  and  the  richness  of  the  blood  is  of  course  in  proportion 
to  the  quantity  of  water  added.  The  next  test  is  carried  out 
by  putting  a  drop  of  blood  on  a  graduated  slide  under  the 
microscope  and  counting  the  numbers  of  red  and  white  cor- 
puscles which  lie  in  one  square  millimetre.  To  obtain  samples 
of  blood  from  forty-five  people  and  to  examine  them  in  this 
manner  takes  a  considerable  time,  and  Koettlitz  is  kept  ex- 
tremely busy  for  some  days.  So  far  we  have  always  published 
the  results  of  the  examination  as  well  as  the  weights  and 
measurements,  principally  because  they  display  no  sign  of  any 
change  in  the  general  condition ;  there  has  been  a  falling-off 


1902]  WORK   OF  THE   OFFICERS  229 

in  weight  in  a  few  cases,  but  others  have  put  on  more  than 
the  number  of  pounds  lost ;  measurements  and  strength  have 
shown  merely  slight  fluctuations,  but  with  few  exceptions  the 
blood  has  grown  richer.  I  have  no  clear  idea  as  to  what  the 
meaning  of  this  may  be,  and  I  do  not  think  that  the  doctor 
has  either,  but  we  are  inclined  to  look  upon  it  as  a  hopeful 
sign  of  our  well-being. 

'But  to  return  to  the  manner  in  which  our  officers 
pass  their  days.  It  would  be  difficult  to  say  who  is  the 
most  diligent,  but  perhaps  the  palm  would  be  given  to 
Wilson,  who  is  always  at  work;  every  rough  sketch  made 
since  we  started  is  reproduced  in  an  enlarged  and  detailed 
form  until  we  now  possess  a  splendid  pictorial  repre- 
sentation of  the  whole  coastline  of  Victoria  Land.  Wilson 
starts  .his  day  early  by  an  examination  of  the  breakfast 
food  ;  his  next  business  is  to  see  to  the  ventilation  of  the 
living-spaces,  which  he  does  so  thoroughly  that  when  we 
come  to  breakfast  there  is  no  complaint  about  the  freshness  of 
the  air,  though  occasionally  people  appear  in  fur  mits  as  a 
mute  protest  against  the  temperature.  He  next  takes  the 
eight  o'clock  meteorological  observations,  and  after  the  men 
are  told  off  for  the  work  of  the  day  his  business  takes  him 
to  the  superintendence  of  those  who  are  detailed  for  bird- 
skinning  and  who  carry  on  this  work  in  the  main  hut.  Under 
his  direction  a  few  of  the  men,  and  especially  Cross,  have 
become  quite  expert  taxidermists,  and  the  collection  of  pre- 
pared skins  is  gradually  growing. 

'  The  rest  of  his  day  is  devoted  to  working  up  sketches  and 
zoological  notes,  making  those  delightful  drawings  for  the 
"  South  Polar  Times,"  without  which  that  publication  would 
lose  its  excellence,  and  performing  a  hundred  and  one  kindly 
offices  for  all  on  board.  He  and  Shackleton  generally  journey 
together  to  the  top  of  Crater  Hill,  a  height  of  950  feet,  each 
day,  and  return  with  a  record  of  the  temperature  at  our  second 
outlying  station.  It  is  curious  that  although  this  temperature 
is  generally  lower  than  that  in  the  ship's  screen,  it  is  rarely  as 
low  as  that  off  Cape  Armitage,  and  the  fact  almost  seems  to 


23o      THE   VOYAGE    OF   THE    'DISCOVERY'    [April 

point  to  an  inverted  temperature  gradient  over  the  great 
ice-plain. 

f  The  day  starts  early  with  Royds,  our  first  lieutenant,  also, 
for  he  must  be  up  to  see  the  men  started  at  their  various  jobs. 
His  special  care  is  the  meteorology,  and  the  manner  in  which 
he  sticks  to  what  might  well  be  considered  a  monotonous  task 
is  beyond  praise.  Rough  or  fine,  every  two  hours  from  10  a.m. 
to  8  p.m.  he  journeys  forth  on  his  round  of  observations. 
Regularly  each  morning  the  fair  record  books  are  produced 
on  the  wardroom  table,  and  the  rough  observations  of  the 
previous  day  neatly  entered  in  their  columns.  With  the  care 
of  the  ship's  work,  the  maintenance  of  the  various  instruments 
in  good  working  order,  and  many  a  stray  task,  it  can  be 
imagined  that  he  has  few  idle  hours.  But  one  at  least  he 
finds — that  immediately  before  dinner,  when  he  goes  to  the 
piano  and  plays  it,  sometimes  with  and  sometimes  without 
the  aid  of  the  pianola ;  in  either  case  we  others  in  our  various 
cabins  have  the  pleasure  of  listening  to  excellent  music  and 
feel  that  the  debt  of  gratitude  we  owe  to  our  only  musician 
is  no  light  one.  This  hour  of  music  has  become  an  institution 
which  none  of  us  would  willingly  forego.  I  don't  know  what 
thoughts  it  brings  to  others,  though  I  can  readily  guess ;  but 
of  such  things  one  does  not  care  to  write.  I  can  well  believe, 
however,  that  our  music  smooths  over  many  a  ruffle  and 
brings  us  to  dinner  each  night  in  that  excellent  humour,  when 
all  seem  good-tempered,  though  "cleared  for  action"  and 
ready  for  fresh  argument. 

•  Shackleton  is  editor  of  our  monthly  journal,  the  "  South 
Polar  Times  " ;  he  is  also  printer,  manager,  typesetter,  and 
office  boy,  and  consequently  a  week  before  that  publication 
appears  he  is  kept  pretty  busy.  At  slacker  seasons  he  con- 
ducts experiments  to  determine  the  salinity  of  the  sea-ice  and 
the  sea-water  about  the  ship,  sees  that  the  dogs  are  properly 
cared  for,  besides  many  other  odd  jobs,  and  at  all  seasons  he 
is  responsible  for  the  serving-out  of  provisions  and  for  the 
proper  regulation  of  the  cooking  and  general  galley  arrange- 
ments. 


igo2]  WORK  OF  THE  OFFICERS  231 

1  Hodgson,  our  biologist,  goes  steadily  on  with  his  outdoor 
work,  and  I  think  this  is  the  first  instance  of  dredging  being 
carried  on  throughout  a  polar  winter.  He  is  rather  inclined 
to  scorn  assistance,  and  seems  almost  to  prefer  to  do  everything 
himself — the  manual  as  well  as  the  expert  work  connected 
with  his  task.  Lately  he  has  accepted  the  assistance  of  a 
single  man,  but  it  is  currently  reported  that  this  individual  is 
required  to  look  on  whilst  Hodgson  digs,  and  much  digging 
and  a  great  deal  of  preparation  is  necessary  before  the  nets 
can  be  actually  used,  so  that  it  is  only  occasionally  that  a 
frozen  mass  is  borne  into  the  wardroom,  which,  on  being 
thawed  out,  discloses  the  queer  creatures  that  crawl  and  swim 
on  the  floor  of  our  polar  sea.  Hodgson  tells  me  he  had 
expected  to  be  obliged  to  devote  the  winter  to  working  out 
his  summer  catches,  and  that  it  was  a  pleasant  surprise  to 
find  that  he  could  continue  his  collecting  work  during  the 
dark  season.  No  doubt  it  is  also  an  excellent  thing  for  his 
health,  and  he  certainly  remains  surprisingly  fit. 

1  Bernacchi  up  to  the  present  has  found  plenty  of  employ- 
ment in  the  care  of  his  magnetic  instruments ;  in  addition  to 
taking  and  developing  the  records,  he  has  spent  much  time 
in  tending  the  heating  lamps  in  the  huts  and  in  endeavouring 
to  render  them  more  efficient.  By  banking  up  the  principal 
hut  with  snow  he  has  been  able  to  keep  it  at  a  more  equable 
temperature,  but  he  tells  me  that  even  yet  it  is  by  no  means 
satisfactory,  which  I  very  much  regret  to  hear,  as  we  are 
making  very  great  sacrifices  of  oil  in  order  that  his  lamps 
should  be  kept  going — sacrifices  which  would  land  us  in  an 
uncomfortable  predicament  were  we  obliged  to  remain  a 
second  winter.  In  Bernacchi's  department  are  also  included 
electrometer,  auroral,  seismic,  and  gravity  observations  ;  the 
which  leave  him  no  time  for  other  physical  work.  As  far  as 
I  can  see  at  present,  this  is  the  point  at  which  we  are  most 
lacking;  with  such  curious  formations  of  land  and  sea  ice 
around  us,  we  should  possess  a  physicist  and  chemist  who 
could  devote  his  time  principally  to  the  many  curious 
phenomena  which  they  present. 


232      THE   VOYAGE   OF  THE    'DISCOVERY'   [April 

'  Of  the  lovers  of  fresh  air,  Barne  is  pre-eminent ;  it  seems 
to  bore  him  much  to  be  cooped  up  on  board  ;  at  any  rate,  in 
nearly  all  weathers  he  is  out  and  about.  He  generally  leaves 
the  ship  early  in  the  day  with  his  own  special  sledge,  on  which 
are  mounted  a  sounding  machine  and  a  box  containing  re- 
versible sea  thermometers.  With  these  he  vanishes  into  the 
darkness  and  rarely  reappears  much  before  dinner.  It  is 
a  curious  sort  of  picnic  life,  and  one  which  I  imagine  would 
be  appreciated  by  very  few.  With  a  few  sticks  of  chocolate 
in  his  pocket  he  journeys  away  to  some  distant  crack  or  seal- 
hole,  and  there  with  the  assistance  of  a  flickering  lantern  he 
spends  long  hours,  often  in  the  intensest  cold,  letting  down 
a  string  of  thermometers,  laboriously  winding  them  to  the 
surface,  and  recording  the  temperatures  shown  at  the  various 
depths.  Could  a  more  uninviting  task  be  imagined  ?  Indeed, 
it  is  doubtful  if  it  even  possesses  the  advantage  of  being 
useful.  He  sounds  in  depths  of  200  to  400  fathoms,  and 
rarely  gets  differences  of  much  more  than  a  tenth  of  a  degree 
in  the  various  layers,  as  naturally  all  the  water  in  the  strait  is 
close  on  the  freezing-point  or  something  under  290  F.  There 
will  be  interest,  however,  if  we  can  continue  the  series  when 
the  summer  approaches. 

'  Unlike  the  other  officers,  our  geologist,  Ferrar,  inhabits 
a  cabin  at  the  fore-end  of  the  ship,  and  there  also  is  situated 
his  small  laboratory,  the  only  one  that  is  habitable  under 
present  conditions.  Between  meals  Ferrar  is  rarely  to  be 
seen,  for  his  tasks  are  numerous.  Out  on  the  hillsides  and  on 
the  floes  signs  of  him  can  be  observed — here  a  line  of  sticks, 
and  there  a  few  stones  so  weirdly  disposed  that  one  might 
almost  imagine  they  served  some  fetish  or  enchantment  rather 
than  the  object  of  discovering  the  physical  conditions  of  our 
surroundings.  On  board  one  may  see  a  shaft  of  ice  bending 
under  a  weight  with  a  notice,  "  Do  not  touch. — H.  T.  Ferrar." 
Below  one  may  find  the  officer  himself,  sorting  a  box  of 
geological  specimens  or  polishing  a  section  on  his  lapidary's 
wheel,  but  always  busy  in  some  way  or  another.  It  is  a 
curious  fact  that  I  rarely  meet  Ferrar  in  my  walks,  and  yet 


1902]  WORK  OF  THE  OFFICERS  233 

cannot  speak  of  any  feature  of  the  numerous  hill-slopes  and 
valleys  about  our  winter  quarters  without  finding  out  that  he 
knows  it  well. 

1  Skelton,  our  invaluable  engineer,  is  also  our  photographer 
in  chief,  and  has  had  a  great  deal  of  work  in  sorting  and 
arranging  the  large  numbers  of  photographs  taken  by  various 
members  of  the  expedition  ;  the  prints  which  he  has  already 
managed  to  get  together  are  extraordinarily  interesting,  and 
if  we  can  get  good  photographic  results  on  our  sledge  journeys 
our  collection  should  be  quite  unique.  But  photography  is 
now  the  smallest  part  of  Skelton's  duties  ;  every  officer  in 
every  department  has  had  need  sooner  or  later  to  solicit  his 
services.  The  amount  of  mechanical  work  that  is  needed  to 
make  good  every  defect  in  such  an  expedition  as  this  is  truly 
surprising,  and  the  work  varies  from  the  roughest  to  the  most 
delicate  task ;  without  mechanical  skill  we  should  have  been 
hopelessly  at  sea,  and  it  is  not  too  much  to  say  that  the 
majority  of  our  scientific  observations  would  have  been 
brought  to  a  standstill.  To  give  only  a  few  instances  of  the 
jobs  which  have  been  done  of  late  sufficiently  illustrates  this 
statement :  a  short  while  ago  the  clockwork  of  the  Dyne's 
recording  anemometer  refused  to  act,  and  it  was  found  that 
the  hair-spring  was  rusted  through  ;  the  only  spare  escape- 
ments were  of  a  different  pattern,  but  by  drilling  new  holes 
one  was  eventually  fitted  to  the  instrument,  which  has  been 
going  continually  since,  though  not  of  course  at  precisely  the 
same  speed  as  it  maintained  before. 

1  Last  week,  again,  Hodgson  found  that  his  implements 
were  unsuited  to  digging  the  slushy  ice  in  his  fishing  holes. 
The  only  possible  remedy  was  to  forge  new  ones  on  a  fresh 
design,  and  of  course  this  was  done.  Quite  lately  our 
engineering  skill  has  been  called  on  for  an  extraordinarily 
delicate  task  connected  with  the  cover  of  the  gravity  apparatus. 
This  cover  is  placed  over  the  pendulums,  and  its  metal  flange 
is  supposed  to  rest  so  truly  on  the  base  that  it  forms  an  air. 
tight  joint  when  the  space  beneath  the  cover  is  exhausted ; 
on  trial  of  our  instrument,  however,  it  was  found  that  the 


234      THE  VOYAGE   OF  THE   'DISCOVERY'   [April 

joint  was  not  true,  and  there  was  considerable  leakage.  How 
the  flange  became  strained  is  not  known,  but  the  delicacy  of 
bringing  it  into  perfect  truth  again  can  be  easily  imagined. 
Yet  this  has  now  been  done,  and  the  pendulums  are  being 
swung  as  they  should  be  in  a  good  vacuum,  which  would 
certainly  not  have  been  the  case  had  we  not  possessed 
engineering  skill  competent  to  deal  with  the  situation.  These 
instances  are  only  some  of  many ;  all  day  long  repairs,  great 
and  small,  pour  in  upon  the  engine-room  department,  and 
one  cannot  exaggerate  the  importance  of  possessing  a  staff 
which  is  capable  of  undertaking  them. 

1 1  have  written  much  to-day  concerning  our  daily  life,  but 
as  I  proceeded  it  occurred  to  me  to  think  of  the  view  which 
those  at  home  would  take  of  a  party  of  their  fellow  men  con- 
demned to  four  months  of  darkness,  and  I  have  thought  that 
they  would  probably  imagine  a  life  in  which  there  was  a 
maximum  amount  of  sleep  and  little  more  activity  than  was 
necessary  for  the  preparation  and  consumption  of  food.  How 
far  otherwise  is  the  reality  can  be  gathered  herein,  and  to 
explain  this  must  be  my  excuse  for  carrying  description  to 
such  detail.  Also,  at  home  many  no  doubt  will  remember  the 
horrible  depression  of  spirit  that  has  sometimes  been  pictured 
as  a  pendant  to  the  long  polar  night.  We  cannot  even  claim 
to  be  martyrs  in  this  respect  :  our  life  seems  in  every  way 
normal  ;  with  plenty  of  work  the  days  pass  placidly  and  cheer- 
fully.' 

Life  throughout  our  polar  winters  ran  so  smoothly  that 
there  was  little  to  record  from  day  to  day  but  the  changes  of 
weather  and  those  trifling  adventures  and  incidents  which 
loom  so  large  at  the  moment,  but  diminish  in  importance  as 
they  recede  into  the  past.  My  diary  presents  a  running 
record  of  such  circumstances  and  events,  with  here  and  there 
some  lengthy  digression  explanatory  of  the  general  conditions 
under  which  we  lived.  It  is  difficult  to  extract  from  these 
memoirs  in  connected  fashion,  and  at  the  same  time  to 
observe  a  chronological  sequence  of  events,  without  falling  to 
some   extent  under  the  influence  of  the  diary  form,   but  in 


1902]  WEATHER  CONDITIONS  235 

adopting  this  form  I  shall  suppress  as  far  as  possible  the 
repetition  of  entries  which  might  weary  the  reader. 

It  can  be  readily  understood,  however,  that  what  is  usually 
conceded  to  be  an  easily  exhausted  conversational  topic,  the 
weather,  was  to  us  at  this  time  a  matter  of  extraordinary 
importance.  In  this  respect  it  has  rarely,  if  ever,  been  the  lot 
of  a  polar  expedition  to  be  so  unfortunately  circumstanced  as 
we  were,  and  consequently  we  had  much  that  was  novel  in  our 
situation,  even  when  the  experiences  of  former  expeditions  are 
considered.  Almost  without  exception  the  North  Polar  winter 
has  been  recorded  as  a  period  of  quiescence,  when,  although 
the  thermometer  has  fallen  to  low  limits,  the  atmosphere  has 
remained  comparatively  undisturbed  ;  but  with  us  calm 
weather  was  the  exception,  and  we  eagerly  looked  to  take  full 
advantage  of  such  breaks  as  occurred  in  the  monotonous  round 
of  windy  days. 

1  April  30. —  .  .  .  Wind  still  blowing  from  the  old  quarter, 
with  temperature  fallen  to  — 270.' 

''May  2. —  ...  A  moderate  breeze  in  the  forenoon 
developed  into  a  southerly  gale  during  the  afternoon,  and  in 
the  evening  it  was  blowing  in  furious  squalls.  Word  was 
brought  down  that  the  windmill  was  straining  badly,  although 
it  was  feathered  to  the  storm — a  precaution  which  the  engine- 
room  staff  have  been  careful  to  take  in  good  time  since  the 
last  breakdown  ;  at  about  8  p.m.  it  snapped  off  short,  and  now 
lies  a  wreck  on  the  forecastle.  So  this  is  the  last  of  our  electric 
light,  though  for  some  time  it  has  seemed  hopeless  to  expect 
the  system  to  work  satisfactorily.  It  is  some  comfort  to  know 
that  this  last  breakdown  could  not  have  been  prevented  ;  it 
reveals  a  radical  weakness  in  the  windmill  itself,  and  entirely 
supports  an  opinion  expressed  to  the  expert  who  fitted  it. 

'  Outside  the  snowdrift  is  so  thick  that  one  cannot  see  a 
yard  in  front  of  one's  face  ;  it  is  whirling  and  eddying  about 
the  ship  in  such  a  manner  that  were  one  to  lose  touch  of  a 
guide-rope  he  would  be  immediately  lost.  No  one  has  been 
outside  for  more  than  a  few  minutes,  except  the  observers,  and 
to-night  even   they  are   not    going  beyond  the  ship.     Five 


236      THE  VOYAGE   OF  THE   'DISCOVERY'      [May 

minutes  in  the  open  is  sufficient  to  powder  one  from  head  to 
foot,  and  though  the  temperature  is  comparatively  high,  the 
snow  crystals  lash  so  sharply  in  one's  face  that  it  is  necessary 
to  protect  it  with  a  mit,  and  even  thus  there  is  imminent 
danger  of  frost-bites.  The  awning  is  swaying  about  in  the 
most  alarming  manner — it  seems  a  great  question  if  it  will  last 
the  night ;  the  drift  is  almost  as  thick  beneath  it  as  outside. 
The  tops  of  the  chimney-funnels  have  come  off  and  gone 
heaven  knows  where  ;  the  result  is  a  down-draught  in  the 
chimneys  which  at  first  filled  the  living-spaces  with  choking 
smoke  until  the  fires  were  put  out  and  skylights  and  doors 
opened.  The  latter  have  now  been  closed  again,  and  as  we 
sit  in  rather  chilly  comfort  below  we  can  hear  the  wind  howl- 
ing through  the  rigging  and  the  awning  flapping  noisily  in  its 
wild  efforts  to  escape. 

'  Notwithstanding  her  icy  surroundings  one  can  actually 
feel  the  ship  give  to  the  more  furious  squalls,  and  the  tide- 
gauge  is  moving  up  and  down  as  much  as  five  or  six  inches  at 
irregular  intervals ;  it  looks  as  though  the  ice-crust  of  the  strait 
is  depressed  as  the  heavier  gusts  sweep  over  it.  In  spite  of 
the  din  without,  the  fireless  condition  within,  and  some  anxiety 
as  to  what  wre  shall  find  missing  after  the  gale,  we  have  had 
quite  an  interesting  debate  in  the  wardroom  on  "  Women's 
Rights " ;  each  man  was  allowed  a  period  of  twelve  minutes 
in  which  to  set  forth  his  views,  and  managed  to  cram  into  it 
as  much  nonsense  as  he  could  think  of  in  that  space  of  time ; 
even  the  married  men  felt  that  it  was  an  occasion  on  which 
they  could  speak  with  the  utmost  freedom.' 

The  gale  continued  throughout  the  whole  of  the  3rd.  In 
the  short  lulls  we  could  see  that  the  snow  was  drifting  high 
about  the  ship  ;  all  our  instruments  had  long  been  choked  up ; 
the  temperature  in  the  fireless  living-spaces  fell  to  35  °,  outside 
the  thermometer  stood  at  -  50,  but  we  had  some  comfort  on 
seeing  the  gradual  accumulation  of  snow  weigh  down  the 
awning  into  a  more  secure  position. 

1  May  4. — The  wind  has  gone  to  the  S.E.,  and  though 
there  is  still  some  drift,  we  have  been  able  to  get  out  and 


i902]  EFFECTS   OF   A   BLIZZARD  237 

observe  the  results  of  the  gale.  The  first  discovery  was  that 
the  strait  was  clear  of  ice  within  150  yards  of  the  ship,  and 
here,  almost  in  the  middle  of  winter,  we  find  open  water  little 
more  than  a  couple  of  ships'  lengths  ahead  of  us.  Not  only 
has  all  the  ten-days-old  ice  gone,  but  a  considerable  portion  of 
that  which  was  formed  five  weeks  ago  has  broken  away.  I 
once  thought  of  the  possibility  of  wintering  in  Arrival  Bay; 
that  place  is  now  quite  free  of  ice,  and  where  we  should  now 
be  had  we  adopted  that  plan  is  beyond  the  power  of  guessing. 
The  snow  lies  in  mountainous  drifts  around  the  ship  ;  from  a 
few  hundred  yards'  distance  she  looks  to  be  buried.  On  the 
starboard  and  lee  side  the  drift  slopes  down  from  the  gunwale 
itself,  and  on  the  port  side  it  stands  higher,  but  between  it 
and  the  ship  there  is  a  deep  trench  almost  free  of  snow  ;  this 
is  always  the  manner  in  which  snow  drifts  about  an  object. 

'  The  meteorological  screen  has  drifted  up  to  six  feet,  and 
somewhere  far  beneath  the  present  surface  lies  the  snow-gauge 
— a  fact  that  makes  comment  on  the  utility  of  that  instrument 
unnecessary.  The  Dyne's  anemometers  have  been  drifted  up 
since  the  earlier  hours  of  the  storm,  and  thus  fail  to  record  the 
wind  at  exactly  the  time  when  such  a  record  would  have  been 
most  valuable.  On  such  occasions  even  the  Robertson  ane- 
mometer seems  unreliable,  as  the  caps  get  partially  filled  with 
the  clinging  snow-crystals.  The  awning  is  heavily  weighted 
with  snow  and  sadly  torn  :  the  boats'  crutches  and  other  pro- 
jections have  made  clean  breaches  in  it.  The  windmill  lies 
an  ugly  wreck  on  the  forecastle,  and  the  shaft  and  standards 
which  still  remain  up  look  particularly  forlorn.  We  cannot 
yet  get  at  the  chimneys  to  repair  them,  and  though  the  fires 
have  been  restarted  we  get  a  plentiful  supply  of  smoke  in  our 
quarters. 

'The  dogs,  or  rather  their  kennels,  were  dug  out  this 
morning  and  found  none  the  worse ;  we  have  lately  brought 
them  from  the  shore  and  disposed  them  near  the  bows  of  the 
ship,  and  luckily  none  were  placed  where  the  worst  drifting 
took  place.  It  is  evident,  however,  that  the  dogs  do  not  like 
the  idea  of  being  drifted  up  ;  very  few  had  used  their  kennels 


238      THE  VOYAGE   OF  THE   'DISCOVERY'      [May 

during  the  storm,  preferring  to  coil  themselves  down  outside, 
where  they  could  break  out  when  the  weight  of  snow  got  too 
great. 

'  May  5. — We  still  have  some  wind  from  the  eastward,  but 
curiously  the  temperature  has  gone  up  to  +50,  so  that  it  is 
positively  enjoyable  to  walk  about  outside.  The  storm  has 
buried  the  ice  in  the  bay  by  about  three  feet  on  an  average, 
though  the  snow  is  very  much  deeper  about  the  ship  and  close 
to  the  ice-foot.  It  is  strange  that  we  had  little  or  no  warning 
of  this  gale  from  the  barometer,  though  the  pressure  fell  during 
the  blow.  Bernacchi  found  exceptionally  high  electrometer 
readings  as  much  as  twelve  hours  before  the  wind  came  on  ; 
one  wonders  whether  this  instrument  can  be  relied  on  to  give 
warning  of  a  blow — it  would  seem  not  altogether  improbable. 
The  dogs  have  now  got  over  their  recent  unclothed  state  and 
have  grown  very  thick,  shaggy  coats.' 

Except  when  we  said  farewell  to  our  winter  quarters,  I  do 
not  think  we  ever  had  quite  so  heavy  or  so  prolonged  a  gale 
as  that  which  has  just  been  described.  The  wind  swung 
round  also  in  a  manner  which  gave  all  the  indication  of  a  re- 
volving storm  whose  centre  had  narrowly  missed  us,  and  the 
gale  was  followed  by  a  result  which  we  did  not  experience 
again,  or  at  least  only  to  a  much  smaller  extent.  The  tem- 
perature remained  extraordinarily  high  for  several  days  after 
the  storm  ;  on  one  occasion  it  rose  to  +170,  and  it  was  not 
until  the  9th  that  it  fell  again  below  zero,  and  then  it  fell 
rapidly.  On  other  occasions  the  temperature  rose  regularly 
with  a  southerly  wind,  but  fell  when  the  wind  dropped  or 
changed  direction.  The  whole  subject  of  this  astonishing  and 
inexplicable  wave  of  warm  air  is  so  interesting  that  it  is  well  to 
remember  that  the  conditions  under  which  it  occurred  were 
not  always  precisely  the  same.  With  the  warm  air  on  this 
occasion  came  a  comparatively  high  degree  of  evaporation ; 
the  drifts  about  the  ship  diminished  rapidly  as  the  snow  settled 
down  and  packed,  and  we  could  observe  for  the  first  time 
some  of  the  extraordinary  conditions  under  which  packed  snow- 
crystals  adhere. 


I9o2]  A  FASCINATING   STUDY  239 

1  The  snow  has  drifted  and  hardened  against  the  side  of 
the  magnetic  hut,  forming  a  coating  from  three  inches  thick  at 
the  bottom  to  about  one  and  a  half  inch  at  the  top.  For 
some  reason,  possibly  change  of  temperature,  the  inner  surface 
has  been  severed  from  the  side  of  the  hut,  and  the  sheet  has 
gradually  bent  back  until  it  described  a  complete  semicircle. 
A  similar  sheet  curled  back  from  the  ship's  stern  shows  her 
name  clearly  impressed  on  its  surface.' 

Around  the  cape  the  gale  had  produced  high  under-cut 
snow-waves  or  sastrugi,  whose  thin  overhanging  edges  would 
reverberate  with  a  deep  note  when  struck  with  a  ski  pole. 
Again  from  the  summit  of  each  perpendicular  ice-face  there 
were  now  single,  double,  and  even  triple  cornices  hanging  in 
graceful  festoons,  actually  formed  by  the  adhesion  of  the 
whirling  snow  particles,  but  appearing  to  be  formed  by  the 
overflow  of  the  white  sheet  on  the  slopes  above.  This  ever- 
changing  condition  of  the  snow  was  to  many  of  us  a  fascinating 
study  ;  it  was  not  only  that  it  lent  to  our  walks  a  delightful 
variety,  but  we  realised  that  it  had  a  highly  practical  bearing 
on  our  sledge  travelling.  From  start  to  finish  of  our  journeys 
we  must  haul  our  sledges  over  this  fickle  substance,  and 
according  as  its  surface  was  hard  or  soft,  sticky  or  clean,  waved 
or  smooth,  so  must  our  progress  be  measured.  Those  who 
have  only  seen  snow  under  the  soft,  flaky  guise  which  it 
assumes  in  a  temperate  climate  must  find  it  difficult  to  ap- 
preciate its  infinite  variety  and  bewildering  changes  under 
more  rigorous  conditions,  which  even  the  sledge  traveller, 
whilst  he  is  forced  to  appreciate,  finds  it  impossible  wholly  to 
explain. 

' May  12. — Fine,  calm  day;  quite  pleasant  to  be  out  in 
the  morning.  In  the  afternoon  the  temperature  fell  to  —  370; 
as  it  fell  the  calm  stillness  on  deck  was  interrupted  by  the 
continuous  crackling  of  the  contracting  rigging,  a  succession 
of  sharp,  clear  reports  like  muffled  rifle-shots.  In  such  calm 
weather,  too,  there  are  similar  but  intermittent  reports  at  the 
tide-crack ;  as  the  water  rises  or  falls  with  the  tide  the  ice  at 
the  edge  appears  to  hang  for  several  minutes  and  then  to  break 


24o      THE  VOYAGE  OF  THE   'DISCOVERY'      [May 

up  or  down  suddenly,  starting  from  one  end  of  the  bay  and 
running  quickly  through  to  the  other  with  the  sound  of  a 
miniature  cannonading.  The  western  sky  was  very  beautiful 
this  afternoon  when  I  went  for  my  walk  after  tea  ;  the  hills  in 
deep  shadow  were  sharply  outlined  against  a  background  of 
crimson,  fading  through  saffron  to  pale  green,  which  merged 
into  the  slaty  blue  of  a  greater  altitude.  As  the  light  failed 
the  stars  shone  forth  wonderfully  bright  and  clear.  .  .  . 

•  May  13. — For  a  wonder  another  fine  day,  temperature 
down  to  —430,  the  lowest  we  have  had  in  winter  quarters.  It 
is  not  the  low  temperatures  that  annoy,  but  the  wind  and  foul 
weather,  and  we  should  suffer  few  inconveniences  if  we  had 
not  the  latter  to  face  so  constantly.  A  party  of  four  of  us 
went  round  to  Seal  Bay  to  examine  the  ice-ridges,  where  the 
temperature  was  evidently  much  lower,  though  we  had  no 
thermometer.  Beyond  the  necessity  of  occasionally  warming 
our  noses  and  cheeks,  however,  we  were  quite  warm  and 
comfortable.  We  passed  a  seal  blow-hole  at  which  the  owner 
remained  placidly  breathing  under  a  dome-shaped  covering  of 
snow,  even  when  the  dogs  barked  and  scratched  the  snow 
down  on  his  nose.  There  is  not  much  light  now,  even  at 
noon,  and  by  two  it  is  quite  dark.  Can  one  hope  that  the  last 
few  days  of  calmer  weather  are  an  earnest  of  better  conditions 
to  come  ? ' 

'May  16. — Wind  blowing  harder  than  yesterday — in  fact, 
over  forty  miles  an  hour — with  temperature  down  to  —35°. 
There  is  happily  no  sign  of  the  ice  breaking  up  again,  but  this 
is  scarcely  in  keeping  with  the  more  settled  conditions  hoped 
for.  Nobody  is  very  anxious  to  be  out :  the  wind  cuts  like 
a  knife  at  this  temperature.  Poor  Bernacchi  had  a  very  bad 
night,  as  it  was  his  term-day,  and  he  had  to  make  several  visits 
to  the  hut,  and  got  frost-bitten  in  consequence. 

'May  17. —  .  .  .  Had  an  alarming  evening.  The  wind 
having  lulled  this  afternoon,  the  boatswain  and  second  engineer 
started  off  at  2.30  for  a  walk  round  Castle  Rock,  without  giving 
warning  of  their  intention  except  by  a  few  casual  remarks 
dropped  in  their  mess.     Later  it  came  on  to  blow  hard  with 


\ 


-«e; 


I 


«  53 


1902]  AN   ALARMING   EVENING  241 

heavy  drift,  but  I  was  not  informed  of  the  absence  of  the  men 
till  eight  o'clock,  some  hours  after  their  messmates  had  begun 
to  grow  anxious.  We  immediately  organised  two  search  parties, 
and  having  made  elaborate  plans  and  fully  dressed  ourselves 
to  face  the  elements,  we  stepped  forth — to  meet  the  absentees 
returning  over  the  gangway.  It  appears  they  had  an  idea  that 
our  peninsula  was  an  island,  and  started  to  walk  round  it. 
Not  finding  the  other  end,  they  got  farther  from  the  ship  than 
they  had  intended,  and  then  the  drift  coming  on,  they  had  to 
feel  their  way  along  the  land  to  get  back,  and  so  reached  the 
ship  in  a  very  exhausted  and  frost-bitten  condition.  There 
must  be  no  more  of  this  casual  wandering  about.' 

'  May  1 9. — Still  the  never-ceasing  easterly  wind ;  the 
barometer  has  risen  very  high,  but,  high  or  low,  the  wind 
persists,  lulling  and  rising,  and  again  lulling  and  rising,  till  one 
grows  heartily  sick  of  it.' 

1  May  21. —  .  .  .  Wind  from  the  eastward,  increasing 
during  the  day  to  a  howling  gale  between  five  and  nine.  It 
is  curious  how  clearly  I  can  hear  the  wind  in  my  bunk  at  night. 
Each  gust  is  distinct  as  it  shrieks  through  the  rigging,  and  it 
is  not  inspiriting  to  lay  awake  and  think  to  this  weird  and 
rather  dismal  accompaniment ;  one  begins  to  wonder  whether 
it  ever  will  be  calm  again.  On  the  other  hand,  as  the  sound 
is  precisely  that  of  a  storm  at  sea,  one  cannot  but  take  great 
comfort  in  reflecting  how  infinitely  pleasanter  it  is  to  listen  to 
it  under  such  restful  conditions  rather  than  when  tossed  about 
on  the  mountainous  seas  of  the  Southern  Oceans.  Overhead 
to-day  it  is  calm  and  bright,  with  peculiar  luminous  cirro-stratus 
cloud  towards  the  south,  but  for  some  feet  from  the  surface 
the  air  is  thick  with  driving  snow.  How  used  we  are  getting 
to  the  sound  of  this  driving  snow  !  I  seem  to  have  heard  the 
same  as  the  dust  was  swept  along  a  hard,  sandy  road ;  it  is 
almost  like  the  patter  of  hail  ;  to  all  intents  and  purposes  our 
snow  is  fine  sand.' 

'  May  22. — A  day  of  hard  wind,  ending  in  a  beautifully 
fine  calm  moonlight  night.     We  all  went  out  in  the  evening, 
and  in  the  clear  silvery  light  were  able  to  see  about  us  for  the 
vol.  1.  R 


242       THE   VOYAGE   OF  THE   'DISCOVERY'    [May 

first  time  for  many  days.  The  scene  was  perfect  in  the  pale 
white  light  and  silence.  Later  there  was  a  curious  effect  of 
frozen  fog ;  the  nimbus  cloud  seemed  to  descend  on  the  hills 
and  roll  over  us,  leaving  the  ship  free,  but  though  all  around 
us  was  clear,  there  was  a  heavy  deposit  of  ice-crystals  on  masts 
and  ropes  which  shone  and  sparkled  in  the  moonlight.  Now 
the  ship  looks  spectral  in  her  white  shimmering  robe,  the  mist- 
clouds  are  rolling  down  the  hillsides  into  the  snow-covered 
hollows,  and  a  strong  wind  can  be  heard  high  above  us,  though 
all  below  is  calm.  The  whole  scene  is  so  weird  that  it  gives 
one  a  positively  eerie  feeling.' 

The  foregoing  extracts  show  how  persistently  the  wind 
annoyed  us  about  this  time,  and,  indeed,  so  matters  continued, 
with  occasional  calms,  when  we  could  enjoy  our  outdoor 
strolls,  and  occasional  gales  from  the  south,  when,  though  the 
temperature  rose  comparatively  high,  it  was  unsafe  to  venture 
far  from  the  ship. 

1  May  31. — Temperature  abnormally  high  (  +  8°).  Went 
well  out  over  the  ice  to  the  westward,  where  the  recent  snow- 
fall has  improved  the  surface  for  ski ;  found  three  seals  up  on 
the  ice,  the  first  that  have  ventured  up  for  a  long  time.  In  the 
cold  weather  they  never  seem  to  quit  the  water  ;  evidently 
they  know  when  the  thermometer  rises.  It  is  now  pretty  dark, 
even  at  noon,  and  dismal  enough  when  the  fine  snow  is 
driving  past  and  the  sky  overcast.  Regret  to  say  one  of  the 
dogs,  "Paddy,"  was  found  dead  this  morning.  A  post-mortem 
revealed  a  deep  wound  in  his  side,  and  when  "Nigger," 
acknowledged  king  of  the  pack,  approached  with  the  most 
innocent  air  and  wagging  tail,  and  it  was  found  that  he  must 
have  slipped  his  collar  in  the  night,  there  was  little  difficulty 
in  guessing  the  cause  of  the  disaster  and  fixing  the  guilt.  The 
curious  thing  is  that  "  Paddy  "  appeared  to  be  "  Nigger's  "  sole 
and  only  friend  ;  their  kennels  were  adjacent,  and  as  "  Paddy  " 
was  always  content  to  play  second  fiddle,  there  seemed  no 
chance  of  a  rupture.  The  deed  must  have  been  done  in  the 
silent  hours  of  the  night,  and  alas  !  we  shall  never  know  the 
cause.     There  is  nothing  to  be  done  but  to  bore  an  extra  hole 


1902]  WINTER   CLOTHING  243 

in  "  Nigger's  "  collar.  I  trust  we  are  not  to  lose  more  of  our 
dog  team :  this  is  the  second  loss  since  the  winter  set  in,  as 
poor  "  David  "  died  last  Sunday  from  causes  unknown. 

1 1  do  not  think  it  would  be  possible  to  take  more  care  of 
the  dogs  than  we  do.  Each  dog  has  his  own  particular  master 
among  the  men,  and  each  master  seems  to  take  a  particular 
delight  in  seeing  that  his  animal  is  well  cared  for.  The  most 
thoughtful  are  constantly  out  building  extra  shelters,  covering 
the  kennels  with  sacking,  and  generally  endeavouring  to  make 
their  charges  comfortable.' 

'June  2. —  ...  As  far  as  winter  conditions  are  concerned, 
our  clothing  arrangements  are  satisfactory,  and  although  the 
outlay  in  this  direction  was  heavy,  the  excellent  quality  of  our 
garments  fully  justifies  it.  Practically  men  and  officers 
are  clothed  alike,  such  minor  differences  as  exist  serving 
only  as  a  useful  distinction  of  costume  on  board  the  ship,  and 
not  signifying  any  difference  in  the  quality  or  comfort  of  the 
garments  worn  by  either. 

1  Everyone  wears  the  thick  warm  woollen  drawers  and  vests 
supplied  by  the  expedition,  and  over  these  a  flannel  or  woollen 
shirt  and  pilot-cloth  trousers.  On  board  the  ship  the  outer 
upper  garment  of  the  men  is  a  dark  woollen  jersey,  but  that  of 
the  officers  a  brown  "  cardigan  "  jacket.  Some  of  the  more 
chilly  individuals  put  on  an  extra  waistcoat,  but  few  wear  the 
thick  jacket  which  is  supplied  with  the  pilot-cloth  trousers, 
the  jersey  or  cardigan  giving  excellent  freedom  to  the  limbs 
and  movements.  The  men's  jerseys  come  well  up  around  the 
throat,  and  they  need  no  additional  neck  protection  j  but  the 
officers  wear  a  variety  of  comforters  or  scarves,  or  sometimes  a 
flannel  collar.  Dressing  for  dinner  is  a  more  or  less  punctilious 
performance,  and  generally  means  the  donning  of  the  Sunday 
cardigan  and  neck-scarf. 

'  For  ship  wear  there  are  some  warm,  comfortable  slippers 
provided  for  both  officers  and  men,  but  many  prefer  to  remain 
in  their  Russian  felt  boots.  These  were  especially  obtained 
from  Russia  at  a  very  small  cost,  and  are  perhaps  the  most 
satisfactory  foot-wear  we  possess  for  general  purposes,  now 

M 


244       THE   VOYAGE   OF   THE    'DISCOVERY'    [June 

that  we  have  modified  them  to  suit  our  requirements.  The 
modification  consists  in  adding  a  sennet  sole  made  from 
ordinary  spun  yarn  and  secured  to  canvas  which  is  closely 
fitted  and  sewn  to  the  boot  ;  by  this  device  the  felt  of  the  boot 
is  protected  from  wear,  and  our  people  are  able  to  do  a  great 
deal  of  work  both  inside  and  outside  the  ship  in  this  comfort- 
able foot-gear.  The  only  drawback  is  that  when  it  is  snowing 
or  drifting  the  fine  powdery  snow  clings  to  the  felt,  and  on 
being  brought  into  the  living-spaces  melts  and  wets  the  boots. 
Even  in  fine  weather  this  happens  to  the  sole,  and  for  the  sake 
of  the  boot  it  is  really  wiser  to  change  before  going  out  of 
doors.  For  walking  abroad  or  climbing  over  rocks  these  boots 
are  not  well  adapted,  though  there  are  individuals  who  from 
perversity  or  laziness  continue  to  wear  them  for  the  purpose ; 
the  majority,  however,  change  their  foot-gear  when  they  leave 
the  immediate  neighbourhood  of  the  ship. 

1  English  leather  boots  were  soon  found  to  be  far  too 
chilling  to  wear  on  such  excursions,  though  better  adapted  to 
climbing  over  the  sharp,  jagged  rocks  than  anything  we 
possess ;  but  for  a  long  time  we  clung  to  the  Norwegian 
leather  ski  boot,  which  is  a  looser  and  easier  fit,  and  therefore 
allows  a  much  freer  circulation  in  the  foot ;  in  fact,  ski  boots 
are  still  worn,  and  in  some  cases  have  been  fitted  with  a 
stouter  sole  by  the  cobbling  abilities  of  that  excellent  man-of- 
all -trades,  Lashly.  But  most  of  us  have  by  this  time  taken  to 
wearing  fur  boots  on  our  walks  abroad,  and  now  that  we  can 
always  dry  them  on  our  return  they  are  the  most  warm  and 
comfortable  foot-gear  imaginable  ;  the  only  trouble  is  that  they 
wear  out  rapidly,  especially  on  the  sharp,  stony,  hillsides,  and 
as  we  may  need  many  pairs  for  our  sledge  journeys  we  cannot 
afford  to  be  too  lavish  in  serving  them  out  during  the  winter. 

1  These  fur  boots  are  made  of  selected  reindeer  skin  and 
sewn  with  gut ;  the  sole  is  made  from  the  covering  of  the  fore- 
head both  on  account  of  the  thickness  of  the  pelt  in  this  par., 
and  also  to  obtain  the  twist  in  the  growth  of  the  hair  which 
gives  the  boot  a  better  chance  of  gripping  on  a  slippery  surface  ; 
the  upper  part  of  the  boot  is  made  from  neck-pieces  and  is  soft 


1902]  FOOT-GEAR  245 

and  pliable.  Already  we  see  that  our  stock  varies  greatly  in 
quality,  and  that  for  our  sledge  journeys  we  shall  have  to  make 
a  most  careful  selection  j  but  by  wearing  them  now  we  are 
gaining  experience  of  what  constitutes  a  good  boot,  which  is 
not  at  all  the  sort  of  fact  that  can  be  discovered  at  the  first 
glance.  Some  officers  and  men  have  already  resoled  their 
"  finneskoes,"  as  these  fur  boots  are  called,  with  sealskin,  but 
it  is  doubtful  if  there  is  much  wear  in  the  latter,  though  it  is 
thick  and  hard ;  however,  it  is  interesting  to  try  the  purposes 
to  which  the  natural  productions  of  our  desolate  region  can  be 
put,  and  it  is  to  be  hoped  that  our  sealskin  will  be  available 
for  something  more  useful  than  the  leggings,  tobacco  pouches, 
and  knife  sheaths  which  have  so  far  been  made  from  it.' 

I  may  add  that  we  never  found  this  sealskin  of  much  use  : 
it  was  far  too  weak  and  brittle.  Though  possibly  we  were  not 
very  expert  in  preparing  it,  it  may  be  added  that  similar  skins 
landed  in  Dundee  some  years  ago  were  found  to  be  practically 
valueless  for  the  purposes  for  which  the  skin  of  the  Northern 
hair-seal  is  employed.  I  do  not  know  the  reason  for  this  fact, 
but  it  is  evident  that  it  should  go  far  to  ensure  a  peaceful  exist- 
ence to  the  Southern  seal. 

'  Everyone  is  provided  with  a  complete  suit  of  wind  cover- 
ing for  outdoor  wear,  and  a  second  suit  is  held  in  readiness  for 
sledging.  This  is  made  of  a  thin  waterproof  gaberdine  material 
supplied  by  Messrs.  Burberry,  and  will  doubtless  be  excellent 
for  our  sledging,  but  for  constant  winter  wear  it  is  not  adequate, 
and  already  we  have  strong  regrets  that  we  do  not  also  possess 
suits  of  a  thicker,  tougher  material.  A  light  canvas  would  be 
just  the  thing  for  this  rough  winter  wear,  though  it  might 
become  too  stiff  and  icy  on  a  sledge  journey.  It  would  have 
been  better  also  and  cheaper  had  we  brought  the  material 
only,  instead  of  the  made-up  garments,  for  our  wind  clothing ; 
both  officers  and  men  can  ply  a  needle  more  or  less  handily, 
and  although  everyone  conforms  to  the  same  general  cut  of 
trousers  and  blouse,  each  has  his  own  ideas  in  matters  of 
detail,  concerning  the  collars  and  cuffs,  &c.  It  is  doubtful  if 
the  original  making  of  garments  would  have  taken  much  more 


246       THE   VOYAGE  OF  THE   'DISCOVERY'    Qune 

time  than  the  very  numerous  alterations  that  have  been  made 
to  suit  individual  taste,  and  even  if  it  had,  there  is  now  ample 
opportunity  for  such  work. 

'The  necessity  of  continually  facing  a  blighting  wind  is 
calling  forth  original  genius  and  inventive  talent  in  devising 
a  headgear  which  shall  protect  one's  necessarily  exposed 
features.  Our  helmets  are  made  of  a  thick  fleecy  material 
woven  of  camel's  hair,  which  is  satisfactory  enough  for  winter 
wear,  though  many  of  us  are  not  in  favour  of  it  for  sledging. 
When  buttoned  across,  this  helmet  comes  low  on  the  forehead 
and  circles  round  over  the  chin  and  close  under  the  mouth, 
leaving  only  the  cheeks  and  nose  exposed  ;  but  in  a  cold  wind 
it  takes  all  one's  time  to  keep  even  these  members  from  being 
frost-bitten.  At  first  talent  was  devoted  to  finding  some 
practicable  form  of  '  nose-nip,'  a  semi-attached  piece  which  can 
be  disposed  to  cover  the  nose  and  cheeks  in  windy  weather, 
but  in  spite  of  all  efforts  the  same  difficulty  always  arises  :  one's 
breath  is  caught  as  it  ascends  and  freezes  on  it,  gradually 
accumulating  until  one's  face  is  covered  with  a  mass  of  ice. 
The  same  drawback  is  found  to  occur  to  a  greater  degree  with 
any  form  of  face-mask.  A  new  departure  is  now  being  devel- 
oped by  which  a  sort  of  blinker  is  placed  on  each  side  of 
the  helmet,  and  each  blinker  is  capable  of  being  pushed  for- 
ward according  to  the  direction  of  the  wind.' 

The  development  of  this  new  idea  finally  put  us  in  posses- 
sion of  a  device  which  proved  really  admirable,  and  which  I 
can  confidently  recommend  to  expeditions  that  may  be  called 
on  to  face  equally  windy  conditions.  A  light  peak  about  two 
or  two  and  a  quarter  inches  deep,  constructed  of  gaberdine 
stiffened  with  canvas,  was  carried  across  the  forehead  and  down 
on  each  side  of  the  face  well  below  the  chin,  and  attached  to 
the  edge  of  the  helmet  aperture ;  in  its  ordinary  position,  it  lay 
flat  back  against  the  helmet,  but  either  side  could  be  thrust 
forward  separately,  or  both  together.  The  beauty  of  this 
device  was  that  with  the  wind  on  either  side  one  had  but  to 
push  forward  the  guard  on  that  side  to  obtain  shelter,  whereas 
if  the  wind  was  ahead  one  pushed  forward  both  sides  and, 


1902]  JACK  AND   HIS   KIT  247 

securing  the  lower  edges  together,  obtained  a  funnel-shaped 
protection  which  held  the  air  immediately  in  front  of  the  face 
in  comparative  rest.  With  a  very  strong  wind  and  a  low 
temperature,  no  possible  device  can  prevent  frequent  frost- 
bites, but  this  one  went  a  long  way  towards  mitigating  the 
evil,  and  it  had  also  the  advantage  that  by  peering  beneath  the 
guard  of  a  companion,  one  could  readily  tell  if  the  frost  had 
attacked  him. 

'  We  find  not  only  that  furs  are  unnecessary  for  winter 
wear,  but  cannot  imagine  that  they  would  be  otherwise  than 
positively  objectionable.  It  is  reported  that  some  of  the  old 
Arctic  expeditions  wore  furs ;  the  mess-deck  under  such  con- 
ditions cannot  have  been  very  attractive.  We  wear  furs  only 
on  our  feet  and  hands,  the  latter  are  also  protected  by  excellent 
woollen  half-mits,  which  extend  from  the  knuckles  nearly  to  the 
elbow;  armed  with  these  and  with  one's  fists  thrust  into  a 
lined  fur  mit,  one's  hands  may  be  comfortable  in  any  weather. 
We  have  also  excellent  felt  and  woollen  mits,  which  the  men 
use  for  outdoor  work.  Should  the  wind  get  through  these,  the 
best  plan  is  to  wet  them,  as  the  ice  forms  the  best  possible 
protection. 

'  I  regret  to  say  that  the  clothing  issue  displays  the  fact 
that  the  sailors  are  extremely  careless  of  their  clothes ;  they 
seem  to  have  an  idea  that  there  is  an  unlimited  stock  of  socks, 
mits  and  such  like,  and  have  an  obvious  contempt  for  the 
"  stitch  in  time."  Of  course  there  are  the  few  careful  ones  by 
whom  the  others  can  be  judged.  More  than  once  I  have  had 
to  speak  seriously  about  the  wasteful  use  of  food,  clothes,  and 
various  articles  of  our  equipment,  but  I  am  bound  to  confess 
that  my  words  have  not  had  any  great  result ;  in  fact,  even  the 
cutting  off  of  supplies  does  not  seem  to  have  any  lasting  effect. 
One  may  well  wonder  whether,  in  any  circumstances,  it  would 
be  possible  to  alter  their  happy-go-lucky-nature.  On  the  other 
hand,  such  a  nature  has  its  obvious  advantages.  One  knows 
with  these  men  that  their  resource  will  always  be  equal  to  the 
occasion,  and  even  if  they  run  short  of  clothing,  one  has  a 
feeling  that  they  will  manage   somehow.' 


248       THE   VOYAGE   OF  THE   'DISCOVERY'    [June 

lJune  10. — -  ...  In  considering  the  excellent  manner  in 
which  we  are  getting  through  the  long  winter  and  the  good 
health  enjoyed  by  all,  the  share  which  our  material  comforts 
have  had  in  the  result  must  not  be  forgotten.     We  have  fresh 
well-baked  bread  continuously,  seal-meat  three  times  a  week, 
pies  and  other  dishes  of  tinned  meat  three  times,  and  fresh 
mutton  once.     To  this  is  added  a  good  supply  of  butter,  milk, 
cheese,  jam,  and   bottled  fruits,  whilst  cakes  are  constantly 
made  for  all.     There  is,  of  course,  a  certain  amount  of  same- 
ness in  the  diet,  and  preserved  foods  are  more  likely  to  become 
wearisome  than  fresh,  and  of  course,  also,  appetites  are  tending 
to  grow  fastidious  from  the  inactive  life  ;  but,  taking  it  all  in 
all,  the  food  is  quite  good  enough  to  tempt  us  to  eat  a  sufficiency, 
whilst,   as   may   perhaps   be   equally  fortunate,   it   is   not   so 
attractive  as  to  leave  us  with  any  desire  to  take  more  than  that 
sufficiency.     The  main  point  is  that  we  all  seem  to  thrive  well 
on  it.     Perhaps  the  articles  we  miss  most  are  fresh  vegetables  ; 
tinned  vegetables  are  always  a  poor  substitute,  and  with  the 
exception  of  the  potatoes  ours  are  unfit  for  food.     Our  preserved 
potatoes  are  as  good  as  such  things  can  be,  but  the  best  pre- 
served potatoes  are  dull  and  uninteresting.      The  greatest 
drawback  to   the   galley   productions,  however,    is  the   cook. 
We  shipped  him  at  the  last  moment  in  New  Zealand,  when  our 
trained  cook  became  too  big  for  his  boots,  and  the  exchange 
was  greatly  for  the  worse  ;  I  am  afraid  he  is  a  thorough  knave, 
but  what  is  even  worse,  he  is  dirty — an  unforgivable  crime  in  a 
cook.     I  think  if  the  men  were  free  to  deal  with  him  it  would 
be  "  something  slow  with  boiling  oil  "  ;  but,  alas  !  one  cannot 
be   rid  of  the  most  undesirable  in  this  far-off  land  :   one  is 
forced  to  make  the  best  of  a  bad  job.     Luckily,  he  is  a  com- 
paratively isolated  blemish.     Luckily,  also,  our  cook's  mate  is 
a  good  man  and  an  excellent  baker ;  it  is  he  who  provides  us 
with  our  good  bread  and  toothsome  cakes.' 

*June  12. —  .  .  .  We  keep  a  very  regular  weekly  routine ; 
each  day  has  its  special  food  and  its  special  tasks,  and  as  far  as 
possible  we  stick  to  what  the  sailor  calls  "  man-of-war  fashion." 
The  week's  work  ends  on  Friday ;  Saturday  is  devoted  to  "  clean 


1902]  SUNDAY   ROUTINE  249 

ship,"  and  though  we  don't  polish  bright  work,  we  do  our  share 
of  scrubbing.  In  the  forenoon  the  living-spaces  are  thoroughly 
cleaned,  lockers  and  other  articles  of  furniture  are  moved,  holes 
and  corners  are  searched,  and  whilst  the  tub  and  scrubber 
hold  sway,  the  deck  becomes  a  "  snipe  marsh."  At  this  time 
also  the  holds  are  cleared  up,  the  bilges  pumped  out,  the  upper 
deck  is  "  squared  up,"  and  a  fresh  layer  of  clean  snow  is 
sprinkled  over  that  which  has  been  soiled  by  the  traffic  of  the 
week.  On  this  follows  a  free  afternoon  for  all  hands,  and  after 
dinner  in  the  wardroom  the  toast  is  the  time-honoured  one  of 
"  Sweethearts  and  Wives." 

•  On  Sunday  we  don  a  different  garment ;  it  need  not 
necessarily  be  a  newer  or  cleaner  one — the  thing  is  for  it  to  be 
different  from  that  which  has  been  worn  during  the  week.  By 
9.30  the  decks  have  been  cleared  up,  the  tables  and  shelves 
tidied,  and  the  first  lieutenant  reports  "  All  ready  for  rounds." 
Then  follows  a  humble  imitation  of  the  usual  man-of-war  walk- 
round  Sunday  inspection,  and  in  solemn  procession  we  pass 
through  the  now  empty  mess-deck  and  on  to  the  other  in- 
habited parts  of  the  ship.  I  am  more  than  ever  convinced 
that  this  routine  is  an  excellent  thing ;  not  only  has  it  the  best 
effect  on  the  general  discipline  and  cleanliness  of  the  ship,  but 
it  gives  an  opportunity  of  raising  and  discussing  each  new 
arrangement  that  is  made  for  the  better  comfort  of  all  on 
board. 

'  After  the  inspection  of  the  ship  comes  that  of  the  men, 
who  are  fallen  in  under  the  awning  on  deck.  Though  it  is 
only  possible  to  see  them  in  the  rays  of  the  flickering  lan- 
tern which  the  boatswain  bears  ahead  of  me,  I  see  enough 
to  assure  me  of  the  general  good  health  and  cheerfulness 
of  the  company.  Then  come  the  only  military  orders  of 
the  week.  The  firstpieutenant  says,  "  Front  rank,  one  pace 
forward — march."  We  pass  between  the  ranks,  and  the  men 
are  dismissed. 

'  After  this  the  mess-deck  is  prepared  for  church ;  har- 
monium, reading-desk,  and  chairs  are  all  placed  according  to 
routine,  and  the  bell  is  tolled.     The  service  is  read  by  me, 


250       THE   VOYAGE   OF   THE   'DISCOVERY'    [June 

the  lessons  by  Koettlitz,  and  Royds  plays  the  harmonium. 
As  he  plays  it  extremely  well,  the  responses  are  chanted  and 
the  three  hymns  are  so  heartily  sung  that  I  have  no  doubt 
they  could  be  heard  far  over  the  floe.  Service  over,  all  stand 
off  for  the  day,  and  look  forward  to  the  feast  of  "  mutton," 
which  is  also  limited  to  Sunday  ;  by  using  it  thus  sparingly  the 
handsome  gift  of  the  New  Zealand  farmers  should  last  us  till 
the  early  spring.  But  it  is  little  use  to  think  of  the  sad  day 
when  it  will  fail ;  for  the  present  I  must  confess  that  we  always 
take  an  extra  walk  to  make  quite  sure  of  our  appetites  on 
Sunday.' 

'June  15. —  ...  It  would  be  idle  to  say  that  we  live  in 
complete  comfort  below;  perhaps  it  is  as  well  that  there 
should  be  difficulties  to  overcome.  We  have  several  weak 
places  as  regards  damp  and  cold ;  the  mess-deck  is  the  best 
part  of  the  ship ;  except  for  a  little  damp  on  the  side  there  is 
not  much  to  complain  of;  but  the  wardroom  in  general,  and 
the  after  cabins  in  particular,  are  not  so  happily  situated.  We 
can  now  see  that  our  insulation  scheme  is  very  imperfect. 
The  upper  deck  is  lined  with  asbestos,  and  is  satisfactory ;  but 
the  ship's  side  is  not  lined,  and  wherever  the  bolts  come 
through  the  region  inside  is  covered  with  a  hard,  spiky  mass 
of  ice.  This  ice  accumulates  in  time,  especially  in  the  region 
of  the  bunks,  and  lately  several  people  have  had  literally  to 
chip  out  their  mattresses,  which  were  solidly  frozen  to  the 
ship's  side.  At  the  after-end  of  my  cabin  there  is  an  iron 
bulkhead ;  it  is  lined  with  asbestos,  but  I  imagine  the  latter 
must  have  slipped  down,  as  the  whole  bulkhead  inside  is  a 
solid  mass  of  ice.  Another  very  stupid  arrangement  is  the 
plan  of  the  small  cabin  deck-lights  ;  these  are  made  in  a  single 
metal  casting,  with  double  glasses  ;  of  course  the  metal  forms 
a  free  conductor  between  the  outside  and  in,  and  the  fitting  is 
consequently  a  natural  ice-trap. 

•  But  the  worst  feature  of  the  wardroom  is  the  deck  below 
it,  which  has  no  lining,  and  out  of  which  the  caulking  has 
fallen  into  the  bunker.  Except  for  the  linoleum  on  top  there 
is  little  in  this  floor  to  protect  us  from  the  temperature  of  the 


igoa]  DEFECTIVE   INSULATION  251 

bunker,  and  the  latter,  being  in  direct  communication  with  the 
engine-room  and  thence  with  the  open  air,  is  always  consider- 
ably below  freezing-point.  As  a  consequence  of  this  we  get 
very  cold  draughts  in  the  wardroom,  and  a  thermometer  placed 
on  the  deck  anywhere  but  near  the  stove  falls  to  320  or  340. 
A  week  or  two  ago  it  was  so  bad  that  I  was  obliged  to  sit  in 
my  cabin  with  my  feet  in  a  box  of  hay,  an  efficient  but  incon- 
venient foot  warmer. 

1  Before  the  gale  in  May,  when  we  had  no  snow  about  us, 
the  ship  was  getting  very  badly  iced  up  inside,  but  after  that 
gale  we  were  able  to  improve  matters,  and  now  they  are  a  good 
deal  better.  At  the  end  of  April  the  temperature  in  my  cabin 
averaged  about  400  during  the  daytime  and  330  during  the 
night,  a  condition  under  which  one  was  not  tempted  to  dawdle 
over  the  processes  of  dressing  and  undressing ;  now  the  tem- 
perature keeps  up  to  nearly  500,  except  near  the  floor,  where  it 
is  much  colder.  The  course  of  improvement  was  accompanied 
by  much  thawing,  and  for  some  time  we  had  a  general  dripping, 
which  was  much  worse  than  the  ice  and  infinitely  more  ruinous 
to  our  effects,  amongst  which  mildew  is  already  making  rapid 
strides.  In  this  way,  as  in  others,  we  have  had  to  buy  our 
experience,  and  since  May  we  have  been  fighting  the  evil  by 
banking  up  snow  without  and  by  nailing  up  quantities  of  felt 
within. 

1  The  most  difficult  place  to  fight  is  the  galley-space,  because 
here  it  is  impossible  to  avoid  the  volumes  of  steam  given  off  by 
the  cooking  ;  directly  this  steam  strikes  against  the  cold  sides 
of  the  compartment  it  condenses,  and  during  cooking-hours  this 
space  is  very  much  like  a  shower  bath.  We  have  improved 
matters  a  little  by  trying  to  guide  the  steam  up  through  the 
skylight,  but  the  place  is  still  very  bad. 

'  Our  stoves  have  also  been  a  source  of  trouble  to  us,  and 
are  likely  to  continue  to  be  so.  They  are  of  the  slow-combus- 
tion type,  designed  to  burn  anthracite  coal,  and  though  it  was 
claimed  that  they  would  be  equally  efficient  with  our  steaming- 
coal,  we  find  that  to  burn  it  at  all  we  must  greatly  increase  the 
draught,  and  consequently  we  do  not  achieve  the  economy  of 


252       THE   VOYAGE   OF  THE   'DISCOVERY'    [June 

fuel  we  expected.  Under  the  impression  that  we  should 
require  them  whilst  magnetic  observations  were  being  taken  on 
board,  they  were  made  of  phosphor  bronze  (a  non-magnetic 
material),  and  we  now  find  that  this  metal  burns  so  easily  that 
one  stove  is  already  practically  destroyed,  and  the  other  is  in  a 
bad  way ;  luckily  we  have  spare  ones  which  are  made  of  iron. 
But  the  worst  trouble  in  this  connection  is  perhaps  not  so  much 
the  fault  of  the  stove  itself  as  of  the  chimney ;  we  find  that 
with  certain  directions  of  wind  it  is  impossible  to  avoid  a  down- 
draught,  and  directly  the  wind  turns  to  this  quarter  we  have  to 
draw  fires  with  all  speed  and  remain  fireless  till  the  weather 
becomes  more  favourable. 

'  But  the  stove  arrangement  has  its  good  points  as  well  as 
its  bad :  it  is  satisfactory  to  find  that  we  can  do  well  with  a 
single  stove  in  each  compartment  instead  of  the  two  that  were 
originally  fitted,  and  the  flat  stove  itself,  with  its  broad  grate 
and  transparent  talc  windows  not  only  forms  a  very  cheerful 
object,  but  affords  an  excellent  toasting  surface,  and  as  we 
gather  round  it  before  our  cheerful  midday  tea  we  are  not 
inclined  to  quarrel  with  its  shape. 

'  It  is  laid  down  by  Parry,  I  think,  that  no  artificial  ventila- 
tion is  necessary  in  a  ship  wintering  in  polar  regions,  as  the 
difference  in  temperature  without  and  within  is  sufficient  to 
cause  a  speedy  interchange  of  air  through  the  cracks  or  on  the 
opening  of  doors.  Such  a  dictum  would  hold  at  a  time  when 
it  was  exceedingly  difficult  to  make  a  ship  tight,  and  no  doubt 
it  would  hold  also  in  the  present  condition  of  the  "  Discovery" ; 
but  if  our  decks  had  been  thoroughly  caulked  some  form  of 
air  inlet  would  have  been  necessary,  and  an  ideal  living-space 
for  polar  regions  should  certainly  possess  a  ventilating  system 
capable  of  regulation  and  an  entire  freedom  from  casual 
draughts.  An  efficient  ventilating  system,  however,  is  a  difficult 
thing  to  provide  in  a  ship  at  the  best  of  times,  and  under  polar 
conditions  there  are  many  circumstances  which  tend  to  increase 
the  difficulty.' 

As  ventilation  must  always  be  a  subject  of  serious  con- 
sideration to  polar  explorers,  it  may  be  of  interest  to  describe 


1902]  HEATING   AND   VENTILATION  253 

the  somewhat  ingenious  system  which  was  fitted  in  the 
'  Discovery,'  and  to  point  out  in  what  respects  it  failed. 

The  idea  was  that  fresh  air  entering  should  pass  into  a 
chamber  and  there  become  warmed  by  a  small  stove  before 
entering  the  compartment ;  the  vitiated  air  was  to  be  drawn 
up  through  the  exhaust  which  surrounded  the  funnel  of  the 
ordinary  heating  stove,  the  heat  of  the  funnel  being  expected 
to  cause  an  up-draught.  Of  course,  in  addition  to  the  air 
passing  out  at  the  exhaust  under  this  system,  a  large  volume  of 
air  would  have  to  enter  to  supply  the  combustion  of  the  stoves, 
but  as  long  as  there  was  an  up-draught  through  the  exhaust 
the  heated  vitiated  air  in  the  upper  part  of  the  compartment 
would  be  drawn  off.  When  we  found  that  we  obtained  suffi- 
cient heat  from  the  ordinary  stove  alone,  much  of  the  theoretical 
benefit  of  this  scheme  vanished.  With  changes  of  wind  we 
had  often  to  contend  with  practical  difficulties,  and  there  were 
times  when  the  system  was  the  object  of  universal  contumely. 

The  question  of  fresh  air  and  ventilation  was  one  which 
afforded  us  a  constant  field  for  argument,  and  even  our 
medical  officers  were  divided  in  opinion,  one  making  a  bold 
stand  for  equable  warmth,  whilst  the  other  contended  that  at 
all  costs  the  purity  of  the  air  we  breathed  should  be  assured. 
In  consequence  of  this,  the  community  was  divided  into  two 
camps,  for  and  against  the  opening  of  the  skylights ;  and  as 
the  members  of  each  camp  were  desirous  of  arranging  matters 
to  suit  themselves,  the  skylights  were  constantly  flying  up  and 
down  until  a  compromise  was  effected.  It  was  decided  that 
the  skylight  and  the  door  of  the  companion  should  be  opened 
every  morning  at  7.30,  and  not  closed  until  the  air  in  the 
compartment  was  thoroughly  renewed,  and  that  after  that  hour 
it  should  only  be  opened  by  general  consent,  and  should  the 
temperature  rise  above  6o°. 

'  June  23. — We  kept  our  mid-winter  festival  to-day,  as 
yesterday  was  Sunday,  and  the  ship  has  been  en  fete.  The 
mess-deck  was  gaily  decorated  with  designs  in  coloured  papers 
and  festooned  with  chains  and  ropes  of  the  same  material, 
the  tables  were  loaded  with  plum  puddings,  mince  pies,  and 


254       THE  VOYAGE   OF  THE    'DISCOVERY'    [June 

cakes,  mostly  of  home  manufacture,  but  none  the  less 
"  Christmasy  "  in  appearance.  It  seems  that  there  has  been 
quite  a  rivalry  amongst  the  messes  with  respect  to  their  adorn- 
ment, and  the  results  which  have  been  achieved  with  little 
more  than  brightly  coloured  papers,  a  pair  of  scissors,  and  a 
paste  pot  are  really  quite  astonishing.  On  each  table  stands 
some  grotesque  figure  or  fanciful  erection  of  ice,  cunningly 
lighted  up  with  candles  from  within  and  sending  forth  shafts  of 
sparkling  light. 

'At  12.30,  when  all  was  ready,  I  went  round  in  procession 
with  the  officers,  exchanging  greetings  for  the  season  and 
accumulating  sweetmeats,  cakes,  and  such  dainties,  offered 
by  each  mess  as  a  tribute  of  good  will,  and  incidentally  an 
evidence  that  we  possess  no  inconsiderable  amount  of  con- 
fectionery talent.  Next  came  the  unpacking  of  a  large  box 
of  presents  provided  by  the  kindly  thought  of  Mrs.  Royds,  the 
mother  of  our  first  lieutenant,  and  the  distribution  of  these 
and  other  Christmas  gifts  sent  by  friends  in  the  Old  Country 
to  gladden  our  winter  season.  Everyone  was  remembered, 
and  with  all  in  high  spirits  the  distribution  occupied  the  time 
with  jest  and  laughter,  until  we  left  the  men  to  enjoy  their 
Christmas  fare  with  an  extra  tot  of  grog. 

'  At  six  we  had  our  dinner  in  the  wardroom,  with  the  table 
decorated  and  the  display  of  all  our  plate.  Starting  with  turtle 
soup,  we  passed  on  to  a  generous  helping  of  mutton,  and  from 
that  to  plum  pudding,  mince  pies,  and  jellies,  all  washed  down 
with  an  excellent  dry  champagne.  With  a  largely  assorted 
dessert  of  crystallised  fruits,  almonds  and  raisins,  nuts,  &c, 
came  the  port  and  liqueurs,  which  brought  us  into  good  form 
for  the  enthusiastic  speeches  that  followed.  With  such  a 
dinner  we  agreed  that  life  in  the  Antarctic  Regions  was  worth 
living,  and  those  who  didn't  make  speeches  felt  that  they  must 
sing  ;  and  starting  with  "  For  he's  a  jolly  good  fellow,"  twice 
repeated,  the  evening  continued  with  a  regular  "  sing-song," 
when  everyone,  regardless  of  talent,  had  to  contribute  some- 
thing for  the  common  entertainment.  One  could  not  help 
wondering    what    would    have    been    the  feelings    of  those 


1902]  MID-WINTER   DAY  255 

sympathetic  friends  who  imagined  the  polar  night  to  be  filled 
with  gruesome  horror,  had  they  been  permitted  a  glimpse  of 
this  scene  of  revelry. 

'  In  the  early  hours  we  went  out  to  cool  our  heated  brows. 
It  was  calm  and  clear,  and  the  full  moon,  high  in  the  heavens, 
flooded  the  snow  with  its  white,  pure  light ;  overhead  a  myriad 
stars  irradiated  the  heavens,  whilst  the  pale  shafts  of  the 
aurora  australis  grew  and  waned  in  the  southern  sky.  It  was 
sacrilege  to  disturb  a  scene  of  such  placid  beauty,  but  for  man 
it  was  a  night  of  frolic,  and  as  the  dogs  quickly  caught  the 
infection,  the  silence  was  soon  broken  by  a  chorus  of  shouts 
and  barking  which  was  continued  long  after  the  bare  ears  and 
fingers  should  have  warned  their  possessors  that  the  tempera- 
ture was  nearly  into  the  minus  thirties.  Eventually  even 
exuberance  of  spirit  was  forced  to  give  way  to  rapidly  growing 
frost-bites,  and  we  retired  within  to  contemplate,  rather  sadly, 
our  extremities  swelling  as  they  thawed.  Clearly  under  no 
conditions  can  one  play  tricks  with  our  climate. 

1  We  are  half-way  through  our  long  winter.  The  sun  is 
circling  at  its  lowest ;  each  day  will  bring  it  nearer  our  horizon. 
The  night  is  at  its  blackest ;  each  day  will  lengthen  the  pale 
noon  twilight.  Until  now  the  black  shadow  has  been 
descending  on  us  ;  after  this,  day  by  day,  it  will  rise  until  the 
great  orb  looms  above  our  northern  horizon  to  guide  our 
footsteps  over  the  great  trackless  wastes  of  snow.  If  the 
light-hearted  scenes  of  to-day  can  end  the  first  period  of 
our  captivity,  what  room  for  doubt  is  there  that  we  shall 
triumphantly  weather  the  whole  term  with  the  same  general 
happiness  and  contentment  ? ' 


256      THE  VOYAGE  OF    THE   'DISCOVERY'    [July 


CHAPTER    IX 

WINTER   PASSING   AWAY 

Our  Settlement  in  Winter — The  Large  Hut — Lighting  Arrangements  on 
Board — Prevention  of  Fire — A  Night  on  Duty — Smoking  Habits — 
The  '  South  Polar  Times  ' — Aurora  Australis — Mishap  to  our  Boats 
— Moonlight  Effects — Lost  in  a  Blizzard — Theatrical  Entertainments 
— Nigger  Minstrels — Increase  of  Light — New  Arrivals — Concerning 
the  Dogs — Return  of  the  Sun — View  from  our  Hills — Walks  in  Day- 
light— Preparations  for  Sledging — Ready  to  Start. 

Here  Winter  holds  his  unrejoicing  court, 

And  through  his  airy  hall,  the  loud  misrule 

Of  driving  tempests  is  for  ever  heard. — Thomson. 

Morn 
Dawns  on  this  mournful  scene,  the  sulphurous  smoke 
Before  the  icy  wind  slow  rolls  away, 
And  the  bright  beams  of  frosty  morning  dance 
Along  the  spangling  snow. — Shelley. 

'  July  18. —  .  ~  .  The  moon  has  greatly  favoured  us  this  winter 
by  achieving  its  full  dimensions  during  its  monthly  stay  above 
our  horizon  ;  or,  in  other  words,  the  full  moon  has  approxi- 
mated with  its  most  southerly  declination.  The  clear  outline 
of  the  hills,  the  cold  blue  of  the  sky  crowded  with  brilliant 
stars,  and  the  luminous  sparkle  of  the  snow  make  our  moonlit 
days  more  beautiful  than  can  be  easily  imagined.  I  have  just 
returned  from  a  walk  around  the  settlement,  when  the  moon 
to  the  south  was  yellowed  by  the  mysterious  noon  twilight  and 
the  northern  sky  was  a  flame  of  crimson.  One  dresses  with 
care  even  on  these  calm  days,  knowing  that  the  thermometer 


i9o2]  OUR  SETTLEMENT   IN  WINTER  257 

stands  low  and  that  there  will  be  a  keen  bite  in  the  lightest 
flickering  puffs  of  air.  Well  protected,  therefore,  one  closes 
the  wardroom  door  on  the  bright  yellow  light  and  com- 
fortable warmth  within,  and  climbs  the  steep  ladder  to  the 
entrance  porch.  These  porches,  with  their  double  doors  and 
insulated  sides,  are  eminently  satisfactory,  and  although  they 
are  thickly  crusted  with  ice  inside,  and  have  occasionally  to  be 
chipped  out,  they  save  us  from  the  keenest  draughts  and  give 
space  in  which  the  snow  of  the  outer  world  can  be  shaken  off 
by  those  who  enter.  On  arriving  on  deck  one  treads  carefully 
over  its  soft  snow  covering,  for  here,  beneath  the  winter 
awning,  the  gloom  is  deep,  obstacles  are  numerous,  and 
although  fur  boots  may  be  an  excellent  protection  against  the 
cold,  they  are  but  a  poor  one  against  the  sharp  corner  of  a 
hatchway  or  the  business  end  of  a  pick-axe ;  and  indeed  one 
is  lucky  if  one  reaches  the  flap-door  of  the  awning  without 
coming  into  violent  collision  with  some  obstacle,  and  feeling 
tempted  to  use  equally  violent  language  concerning  the  person 
or  persons  unknown  who  have  unwittingly  prepared  the  trap. 
From  the  ship's  starboard  or  inshore  side  a  gangway  of  stout 
poles  and  planks  slopes  to  a  snow  platform,  and  is  fitted  with 
battens  and  guard  rails,  from  the  ends  of  which  one  guide  rope 
supported  on  poles  leads  sharply  to  the  right  towards  the 
meteorological  screen,  whilst  the  other  shows  the  way  to  a 
cutting  on  the  ice-foot,  whence  an  easy  path  leads  to  the  rocky 
patches  on  which  stand  our  little  group  of  huts.  The  main 
hut  is  of  most  imposing  dimensions  and  would  accommodate 
a  very  large  party,  but  on  account  of  its  size  and  the  necessity 
of  economising  coal  it  is  very  difficult  to  keep  a  working 
temperature  inside ;  consequently  it  has  not  been  available  for 
some  of  the  purposes  for  which  we  had  hoped  to  use  it.  One 
of  the  most  important  of  these  was  the  drying  of  clothes ;  for 
a  long  time  the  interior  was  hung  with  undergarments  which 
had  been  washed  on  board,  out  all  these  water-sodden  articles 
became  sheets  of  ice,  which  only  dried  as  the  ice  slowly 
evaporated.  When  it  was  found  that  this  process  took  a 
fortnight  or  three  weeks  the  idea  was  abandoned,  and  the 
vol.  1  s 


258       THE   VOYAGE   OF    THE   'DISCOVERY'    [July 

drying  of  clothes  is  now  done  in  the  living-spaces  on  board. 
A  drying-room  would  be  an  excellent  thing  to  have  on  a  polar 
expedition,  and  had  the  space  under  our  forecastle  been 
properly  insulated  and  fitted  with  a  stove  it  might  well  have 
served  the  purpose.  As  it  is,  with  the  present  system,  the 
dampness  of  the  living-spaces  must  be  increased,  though, 
curiously  enough,  we  do  not  notice  it.  We  have  erected  long 
clothes-lines  on  each  side  of  the  wardroom,  which  carry  a  full 
exposi  of  our  clothing  economy,  but  whatever  is  ludicrous  in 
this  Arcadian  simplicity,  whatever  is  incongruous  with  the 
more  artistic  background,  we  have  long  ceased  to  notice.  We 
find  that  we  can  eat  our  dinner  with  the  usual  regard  to  the 
forms  of  social  politeness  even  when  seated  beneath  our  socks 
and  nether  garments. 

1  But  although  the  hut  has  not  fulfilled  expectation  in  this 
respect,  it  is  in  constant  use  for  other  purposes.  After  the 
sledging  it  came  in  handy  for  drying  the  furs,  tents,  &c. ;  then 
it  was  devoted  to  the  skinning  of  birds  for  a  month  or  more,  a 
canvas  screen  being  placed  close  around  the  stove,  whereby  a 
reasonable  temperature  was  maintained  in  a  small  space  ;  then 
various  sailorising  jobs,  such  as  the  refitting  of  the  awnings  and 
the  making  of  sword  matting,  were  carried  on  in  it ;  and  finally 
it  has  been  used  both  for  the  rehearsal  and  performance  of 
such  entertainments  as  have  served  to  lighten  the  monotony  of 
our  routine,  and  in  this  capacity,  when  fitted  with  a  stage  and 
decked  with  scenery,  footlights,  &c,  it  probably  forms  the 
most  pretentious  theatre  that  has  ever  been  seen  in  polar 
regions.  Of  late  a  solid  pedestal  of  firebricks  has  been  built 
in  the  small  compartment  and  on  this  Bernacchi  will  shortly 
be  swinging  his  pendulums  for  gravity  observations  ;  while  in 
the  spring  I  hope  that  we  may  be  able  to  use  the  larger  com- 
partment as  a  centre  for  collecting,  weighing,  and  distributing 
the  food  and  equipment  of  the  various  sledge  parties. 

'  On  the  whole,  therefore,  our  large  hut  has  been  and  will 
be  of  use  to  us,  but  its  uses  are  never  likely  to  be  of  such 
importance  as  to  render  it  indispensable,  nor  cause  it  to  be 
said  that  circumstances  have  justified  the  outlay  made  on  it  or 


igo2]  LIGHTING  ARRANGEMENTS   ON   BOARD    259 

the  expenditure  of  space  and  trouble  in  bringing  it  to  its  final 
home.  It  is  here  now,  however,  and  here  it  will  stand  for 
many  a  long  year  with  such  supplies  as  will  afford  the  neces- 
saries of  life  to  any  less  fortunate  party  who  may  follow  in  our 
footsteps  and  be  forced  to  search  for  food  and  shelter. 

'  Beyond  the  large  hut  stand  the  smaller  magnetic  huts,  and 
from  the  eminence  on  that  point  the  little  cluster  of  buildings 
looks  quite  imposing.  In  the  midst  of  these  vast  ice-solitudes 
and  under  the  frowning  desolation  of  the  hills,  the  ship,  the 
huts,  the  busy  figures  passing  to  and  fro,  and  the  various  other 
evidences  of  human  activity  are  extraordinarily  impressive. 
How  strange  it  all  seems  !  For  countless  ages  the  great 
sombre  mountains  about  us  have  loomed  through  the  gloomy 
polar  night  with  never  an  eye  to  mark  their  grandeur,  and  for 
countless  ages  the  wind-swept  snow  has  drifted  over  these 
great  deserts  with  never  a  footprint  to  break  its  white  surface ; 
for  one  brief  moment  the  eternal  solitude  is  broken  by  a  hive 
of  human  insects ;  for  one  brief  moment  they  settle,  eat,  sleep, 
trample,  and  gaze,  then  they  must  be  gone,  and  all  must  be 
surrendered  again  to  the  desolation  of  the  ages.' 

'July  19. —  .  .  .  One  of  the  most  important  considerations 
for  our  comfort  during  the  polar  night  is  the  manner  of  lighting 
the  ship.  The  breakdown  of  the  windmill  was  a  blow,  as  a 
supply  of  electric  light  would  have  been  the  greatest  boon  ; 
but,  luckily,  we  never  over-estimated  the  possibility  of  success 
in  this  respect,  and  the  breakdown  found  us  amply  supplied 
with  alternative  means.  From  the  first,  paraffin  suggested 
itself  as  the  most  suitable  illuminant  for  our  purpose,  and  from 
the  first  also  it  had  been  decided  to  use  this  oil  as  fuel  during 
our  sledge  journeys.  On  the  other  hand,  paraffin  is  not  a 
desirable  oil  to  carry  in  a  ship  in  any  quantity,  and  in  our  case 
it  was  rendered  less  desirable  by  the  fact  that  we  had  to  take 
it  at  a  low  flash-point  in  order  that  it  might  remain  liquid  at 
the  lowest  temperatures.  The  flash-point  of  our  oil  is  1050,  it 
begins  to  turn  milky  when  the  thermometer  falls  below  —  400, 
and  we  have  not  yet  experienced  a  temperature  in  which  it  will 
not  flow  freely. 

s  2 


26o      THE  VOYAGE   OF    THE   'DISCOVERY'    Quly 

'  We  decided  in  London  that  the  best  position  to  carry  the 
large  quantity  which  we  required  was  on  the  upper  deck,  and 
consequently  we  had  a  number  of  tanks  of  considerable 
capacity  constructed  to  fit  into  odd  spaces  where  they  would 
be  least  likely  to  obstruct  the  working  of  the  ship.  In  this 
manner  we  managed  to  find  room  for  over  1,500  gallons,  which  is 
now  served  out  under  the  care  of  the  engine-room  department. 

'  Our  luckiest  find  was  perhaps  the  right  sort  of  lamp  in 
which  to  burn  this  oil.  Fortunately  an  old  Arctic  explorer, 
Captain  Egerton,  presented  me  with  a  patent  lamp  in  which 
the  draught  is  produced  by  a  fan  worked  by  clockwork 
mechanism,  and  no  chimney  is  needed.  One  could  imagine 
the  great  mortality  there  would  be  in  chimneys  if  we  were 
obliged  to  employ  them,  so  that  when,  on  trial,  this  lamp  was 
found  to  give  an  excellent  light,  others  of  the  same  sort  were 
purchased,  and  we  now  use  them  exclusively  in  all  parts  of  the 
ship  with  extremely  satisfactory  results.  We  also  have  on 
board  a  goodly  number  of  candles,  which  are  served  out  as 
occasion  requires  ;  but  over  both  oil  and  candles  it  is  necessary 
to  keep  a  very  tight  hold,  as  people  are  inclined  to  be  extra- 
ordinarily wasteful. 

1  The  necessity  of  heating  the  magnetic  huts  was  not 
included  in  our  estimate,  and  is  therefore  an  unexpected 
drain  on  our  resources ;  but  apart  from  this  our  expenditure 
of  both  oil  and  candles  is  a  great  deal  too  large  at  present,  and 
everyone  has  been  warned  that  in  case  of  a  second  winter  the 
allowance  will  be  largely  curtailed.  Although  I  realise  that 
we  are  going  too  strong  in  this  respect,  I  have  not  the  heart  to 
cut  things  down  at  present ;  the  probability  is  we  shall  only  do 
one  winter  ;  why  not  let  it  be  as  comfortable  as  possible  ?  It 
is  in  the  nature  of  a  gamble,  but  if  the  worst  comes  to  the 
worst,  we  can  always  fall  back  on  blubber.' 

It  was  perhaps  a  fortunate  oversight  that  in  the  general 
comfort  of  our  situation  with  regard  to  light  we  gave  no 
thought  to  the  adaptation  of  a  still  brighter  illuminant  which  lay 
within  our  reach  in  the  shape  of  acetylene.  For  when  it  became 
evident  that  we  should  have  to  spend  a  second  winter  in  the 


i902]  ACETYLENE  261 

same  spot  and  there  was  no  guarantee  that  this  might  not  be 
prolonged  to  a  third  or  even  a  fourth,  the  question  of  lighting 
the  ship  became  a  much  more  serious  problem,  and  our 
thoughts  flew  at  once  to  the  calcium  carbide  which  had  been 
provided  for  the  hut  and  which  we  had  not  previously  thought 
of  using.  Once  brought  into  working  order,  this  illuminant 
proved  to  be  the  most  delightful  and  the  most  easily  worked 
that  it  would  be  possible  to  imagine.  All  that  was  necessary 
was  to  arrange  a  system  of  piping  which  led  to  the  entrance 
porch  ;  here  the  generator  which  regulated  the  mixture  of  the 
carbide  with  water,  and  so  the  production  of  gas,  was  placed, 
and  here  it  continued  to  work  in  spite  of  the  temperature,  as 
the  chemical  action  by  which  the  gas  was  produced  gave  off 
sufficient  heat  to  prevent  the  water  from  freezing  on  the 
coldest  days.  In  this  manner  the  darkness  of  our  second 
winter  was  relieved  by  a  light  of  such  brilliancy  that  all  could 
pursue  their  occupations  by  the  single  burner  placed  in  each 
compartment.  I  lay  great  stress  on  this,  because  I  am  con- 
fident that  this  is  in  every  way  the  best  illuminant  that  can  be 
taken  for  a  polar  winter,  and  no  future  expedition  should  fail 
to  supply  themselves  with  it.  The  single  drawback  is  the 
danger  of  carrying  the  carbide  on  shipboard.  It  must  of 
necessity  be  kept  in  a  dry  place,  but  the  danger  can  be 
greatly  diminished  by  careful  packing,  and  there  is  no  reason 
why  the  sealed  tins  containing  it  should  not  be  stowed  in 
boxes,  which  are  likewise  made  water-tight,  and  so  assurance 
be  made  doubly  sure. 

I  may  mention  that  our  stock  of  candles  had  also  to  be  care- 
fully considered  in  the  second  winter,  and  we  thought  it  good 
policy  to  exaggerate  our  destitution  to  encourage  greater  care. 
As  the  result  of  a  limited  allowance  it  was  possible  to  see 
widely  different  methods  of  consumption,  and  each  person 
preserved  with  care  a  box  in  which  he  kept  the  grease  which 
had  guttered  over  from  his  own  candles  or  from  any  others 
that  he  could  lay  his  hands  on.  As  soon  as  sufficient  was 
collected  he  would  set  about  casting  fresh  candles,  and  so  eke 
out  his  own  scanty  supply  j  later  it  was  found  that  by  mixing 


262       THE   VOYAGE   OF    THE    'DISCOVERY'    [July 

this  surplus  grease  with  blubber  still  greater  economy  could  be 
achieved,  and  in  the  end  comparatively  firm  candles  were 
made  containing  two  parts  of  blubber  to  one  of  the  original 
composition.     Such  are  the  teachings  of  adversity  ! 

'  The  subjects  of  illumination  and  paraffin  lead  me  naturally 
enough  to  consider  the  question  of  fire,  which  at  first  gave  me 
some  anxiety,  and  the  adequacy  of  our  pumps  to  meet  this 
important  contingency.  During  the  summer  cruise  the  ship 
continued  to  leak,  the  main  hold  slightly,  the  fore  peak  rapidly ; 
this  leakage  continued  for  some  time  after  we  were  frozen  in, 
but  gradually,  as  the  ice  thickened  around  the  ship,  it  dimin- 
ished until  finally  it  practically  ceased.  But  our  experience 
with  the  pumps  in  relieving  the  leak  was  sufficient  to  show  their 
defects.  Whilst  the  temperature  was  high  they  acted  well,  but 
when  it  fell  they  froze  solid  immediately  after  use,  and  to  be 
brought  into  action  again  they  had  to  be  opened  up  and 
thawed  out  with  a  blow-lamp,  a  task  which  occupied  from 
twenty  minutes  to  half-an-hour.  Obviously  it  would  be  futile 
to  rely  on  such  pumps  for  coping  with  a  fire  during  the  winter, 
and  I  could  see  no  possible  object  in  keeping  open  a  firehole 
in  the  ice  on  the  vain  supposition  that  we  should  then  have 
water  at  our  disposal.  Consequently,  I  had  to  consider  the 
possibility  of  fighting  a  fire  without  water.  Some  reflection 
showed  me  that  with  a  few  precautions  the  risk  of  fire  would 
be  reduced  to  a  minimum,  and  that  if  in  spite  of  these  it  should 
break  out,  the  strong  probability  was  that  it  would  be  dis- 
covered at  once. 

'  In  the  living-spaces  safety  lies  in  the  fact  that  they  are 
always  occupied;  with  the  additional  safeguard  of  a  box  of 
earth  it  may  be  granted  that  a  fire  could  not  make  any  headway 
in  these  parts.  On  the  rare  occasions  when  people  work  in  the 
holds  or  other  parts  there  is  always  a  responsible  officer  in 
charge,  as  well  as  the  most  stringent  regulations  with  regard  to 
lights.  In  the  engine-room  it  would  be  very  difficult  to  start  a 
fire,  and  an  officer  goes  round  after  working-hours  to  see  that 
all  is  in  order.  Should  fire  occur  despite  such  precautions  our 
best  means  of  coping  with  it  would  be  to  stifle  it  with  fur  and 


icjo2]  A    NIGHT   ON    DUTY  263 

woollen  clothing,  of  which  there  is  always  an  abundance  to 
hand.  On  the  whole,  one  feels  that  there  is  much  less  risk  of 
fire  whilst  the  ship  is  steady  than  when  she  is  knocking  about 
at  sea,  but  the  grave  consequences  keep  one  always  alive  to 
the  risk.' 

' July  20. —  ...  A  southerly  gale  blew  all  yesterday  and 
through  the  night,  bringing  quantities  of  snow,  as  in  May  ;  the 
temperature  rose  as  high  as  + 1 20,  and  all  the  out-stations 
show  a  corresponding  increase.  The  fore-end  of  the  awning 
was  split,  the  boats  entirely  covered,  and  the  drifts  about  the 
ship  again  raised  to  a  height  of  ten  or  twelve  feet.  The  fine 
snow  penetrated  everywhere  ;  it  raised  our  deck  layer  several 
inches  under  the  awning,  crowded  in  through  a  small  ventilation 
hole  in  the  magnetic  observatory,  completely  covering  the 
instruments,  and  snowed-up  the  kennels,  the  occupants  of 
which  have  had  to  be  temporarily  housed  on  board.  More 
than  once  our  efforts  to  light  the  stove  filled  the  wardroom  with 
thick  smoke,  until  we  were  glad  to  fly  on  deck  for  fresh  air, 
and  subsequently  to  go  fireless.  Luckily,  the  high  temperature 
made  this  no  great  inconvenience.  To-day  the  wind  has  gone 
back  to  the  eastward,  from  which  direction  it  sweeps  along  the 
loose  snow  with  a  rapidly  falling  temperature  and  a  most 
comfortless  outlook.' 

'■July  21. —  ...  It  was  my  "night  on"  last  night.  As  I 
have  said,  we  take  it  in  turn  to  make  all  the  two-hourly  obser- 
vations from  10  p.m.  to  6  a.m.  Each  of  us  has  his  own  way 
of  passing  the  long,  silent  hours.  My  own  custom  is  to  devote 
some  of  it  to  laundry-work,  and  I  must  confess  I  make  a  very 
poor  fist  of  it.  However,  with  a  bath  full  of  hot  water  I  com- 
mence pretty  regularly  after  the  ten  o'clock  observation,  and 
labour  away  until  my  back  aches.  There  is  little  difficulty 
with  the  handkerchiefs,  socks,  and  such-like  articles,  but  when 
it  comes  to  thick  woollen  vests  and  pyjamas,  I  feel  ready  to 
own  my  incapacity  ;  one  always  seems  to  be  soaping  and  rub- 
bing at  the  same  place,  and  one  is  forced  to  wonder  at  the 
area  of  stuff  which  it  takes  to  cover  a  comparatively  small 
body.     My  work  is  never  finished  by  midnight,  but  I  generally 


264      THE   VOYAGE   OF   THE   'DISCOVERY'    [July 

pretend  that  it  is,  and  after  taking  the  observations  for  that 
hour,  return  to  wring  everything  out.  I  am  astonished  to  find 
that  even  this  is  no  light  task  :  as  one  wrings  out  one  end  the 
water  seems  to  fly  to  the  other ;  then  I  hang  some  heavy 
garment  on  a  hook  and  wring  until  I  can  wring  no  more  ;  but 
even  so,  after  it  has  been  hung  for  a  few  minutes  on  the  ward- 
room clothes-line,  it  will  begin  to  drip  merrily  on  the  floor, 
and  I  have  to  tackle  it  afresh.  I  shall  always  have  a 
high  respect  for  laundry-work  in  future,  but  I  do  not  think 
it  can  often  have  to  cope  with  such  thick  garments  as  we 
wear. 

'  Washing  over,  one  can  devote  oneself  to  pleasanter  occu- 
pations. The  night  watchman  is  always  allowed  a  box  of 
sardines,  which  are  scarce  enough  to  be  a  great  luxury,  and  is 
provided  with  tea  or  cocoa  and  a  spirit-lamp.  Everyone  has 
his  own  ideas  as  to  how  sardines  should  be  prepared,  and  of 
course  puts  them  into  practice  when  his  turn  of  night  duty 
comes,  but  the  majority  like  them  cooked  in  some  form,  so 
that  nearly  every  night  the  sizzling  of  the  frying-pan  can  be 
heard  in  the  early  hours  and  the  odour  of  cooking  is  wafted 
into  the  adjacent  cabins.  I  scarcely  like  to  record  that  there 
is  a  small  company  of  gourmets  who  actually  wake  one  another 
up  in  order  that  the  night  watchman  may  present  his  fellow 
epicures  with  a  small  finger  of  buttered  toast  on  which  are 
poised  two  sardines  "  done  to  a  turn."  The  awakened  sleeper 
devours  the  dainty  morsel,  grunts  his  satisfaction,  and  goes 
placidly  off  into  dreamland  again. 

'  I  find  that  after  my  labours  at  the  wash-tub  and  the  pleas- 
ing supper  that  follows,  I  can  safely  stretch  myself  out  in  a 
chair  without  fear  of  being  overcome  by  sleep,  and  so,  with  the 
ever-soothing  pipe  and  one's  latest  demand  on  the  library 
bookshelves,  one  settles  down  in  great  peace  and  contentment 
whilst  keeping  an  eye  on  the  flying  hours,  ready  to  sally  forth 
into  the  outer  darkness  at  the  appointed  time.  The  pleasure 
or  pain  of  that  periodic  journey  is  of  course  entirely  dependent 
on  the  weather.  On  a  fine  night  it  may  be  quite  a  pleasure, 
but  when,  as  is  more  common,  the  wind  is  sweeping  past  the 


igoa]  SMOKING   HABITS  265 

ship,  the  observer  is  often  subjected  to  exasperating  difficulties, 
and  to  conditions  when  his  conscience  must  be  at  variance 
with  his  inclination.  Sometimes  the  lantern  will  go  out  at  the 
screen,  and  he  is  forced  to  return  on  board  to  light  it ;  some- 
times it  will  refuse  to  shine  on  the  thin  threads  of  mercury  of 
the  thermometer  until  it  is  obvious  that  his  proximity  has 
affected  the  reading,  and  he  is  forced  to  stand  off  until  it  has 
again  fallen  to  the  air  temperature.  He  will  climb  to  the 
indicator  of  the  Robinson  anemometer,  and  find  it  so  difficult 
to  see  that  the  glass  has  frosted  over  before  he  has  accom- 
plished the  reading,  and  he  is  obliged  to  scrape  away  the  film 
of  ice  that  covers  it  with  his  bare  hand.  Occasionally  he  has 
to  cherish  water  with  tender  care  against  its  freezing  until  he 
can  re-wet  the  wet-bulb  thermometer  ;  and,  again,  he  may 
have  to  remain  stationary  with  upturned  face  for  several 
minutes  to  determine  the  direction  of  motion  of  some  elusive 
upper  cloud.  All  these  and  many  other  difficulties  in  taking 
observations  which  may  be  in  themselves  valueless  are  met  in 
the  right  spirit.  I  think  we  all  appreciate  that  they  are  part 
of  a  greater  whole  whose  value  must  stand  or  fall  by  attention 
to  detail.' 

'July  24. —  ..."  Pipe,  money,  baccy,  matches."  I  have 
forgotten  the  origin  of  this  formula,  but  it  is  one  which  I  have 
used  for  many  years  to  remind  myself  of  the  indispensable 
contents  of  my  pockets  for  a  run  on  shore.  I  thought  of  it 
as  I  went  out  to-day,  and,  wondering  what  formula  would 
replace  it  under  present  conditions,  decided  that  there  was 
none,  as  one  has  no  requirement  out  of  doors  here  but  suit- 
able apparel.  Few,  if  any,  smoke  outside — in  fact,  it  would 
be  an  impossible  performance  when  the  wind  is  blowing  ;  and 
as  for  money,  I  look  with  mixed  feelings  at  a  sovereign  which 
is  gradually  growing  tarnished  in  the  drawer  of  my  desk ;  few 
coins  have  had  such  a  restful  time  as  this  sovereign — and  for 
the  matter  of  that,  few  persons  such  a  restful  time  as  its 
owner — but  I  expect  for  neither  of  us  will  there  be  much 
repose  when  we  get  back  to  civilisation.  Meanwhile  it  is 
rather    fascinating  to  consider  the  moneyless   condition   in 


266       THE   VOYAGE   OF   THE   « DISCOVERY '    [July 

which  we  live.  With  absence  of  wealth,  community  of 
interest,  and  a  free  sharing  of  comforts  and  hardships,  we 
must  realise  much  that  is  socialistically  ideal,  yet  in  recogni- 
tion of  rank  and  supremacy  of  command  the  government 
must  be  considered  an  autocracy ;  and,  indeed,  just  at  present 
I  can  the  more  fully  realise  my  position  as  autocrat  when  I 
see  how  eagerly  everyone  is  awaiting  the  sledging  programme 
which  is  to  foreshadow  their  lives  for  the  coming  season. 

'Although  no  one  smokes  out  of  doors,  many  smoke 
within,  and  a  few,  amongst  whom  I  must  number  myself,  are 
inveterate  victims  of  the  habit.  And  yet,  speaking  generally, 
the  consumption  of  tobacco  is  not  so  great  as  might  be 
expected  in  the  circumstances.  Of  eleven  officers  in  the 
wardroom  three  are  pretty  constant  smokers,  four  indulge 
moderately,  and  four  are  practically  non-smokers.  The  first 
three  may  possibly  consume  about  i^  lb.  each  month,  the 
moderate  men  may  account  for  something  over  ^  lb.  apiece, 
whilst  the  amount  used  by  the  remainder  is  practically 
negligible,  so  that  the  whole  consumption  for  the  eleven 
officers  does  not  exceed  6  or  7  lbs.  per  month,  at  which  rate 
our  stock  will  last  for  many  a  year.  On  the  mess-deck  also 
there  are  a  few  who  do  not  smoke  at  all,  and  many  who  are 
extremely  moderate.  The  allowance  is  1  lb.  per  month,  and 
there  has  never  been  any  request  for  an  increase.  No  doubt 
the  moderate  smokers  help  those  who  are  more  addicted  to 
the  habit,  but  I  should  doubt  whether  any  consume  much 
more  than  their  allowance,  though  from  force  of  habit  they 
prefer  a  very  much  stronger  tobacco  than  that  smoked  aft, 
and  in  readiness  for  this  preference  we  shipped  a  quantity  of 
tobacco  in  the  leaf  which  has  proved  very  popular ;  the  men 
like  rolling  it  up  for  themselves  in  the  good  old  naval  fashion. 
There  is  now  little  or  no  restriction  as  to  time  or  place  of 
smoking,  and  apart  from  the  sympathy  that  I  should  naturally 
have  with  freedom  in  this  respect  as  a  great  smoker  myself,  I 
cannot  see  that  anything  would  be  gained  by  limiting  the 
practice  as  long  as  there  is  no  one  who  is  inconvenienced  by 
it — and,  luckily,  we  are  in  the  happy  position  of  possessing 


1902]  THE    'SOUTH   POLAR  TIMES'  267 

non-smokers   who    have   not    the   least    objection   to   sitting 
amongst  many  pipes. 

'There  is  another  habit  indulged  in  by  a  few  of  the  men  which 
I  thought  had  almost  universally  died  out  of  fashion — namely, 
that  of  chewing.  The  objection  to  this,  in  my  mind,  is  that  it 
is  carried  on  during  the  outdoor  work,  and  it  will,  therefore,  be 
a  temptation  for  them  to  continue  it  during  the  sledging,  and 
I  feel  sure  that  such  a  habit  will  detract  from  their  marching 
powers.  I  have  said  nothing  at  present,  but  I  propose  that 
both  smoking  and  chewing  shall  be  forbidden  on  the  march, 
and  though  a  small  allowance  of  tobacco  will  be  permitted  for 
smoking  in  camp,  I  hope  to  discourage  chewing  altogether.' 

' July  25. —  .  .  .  The  fourth  number  of  our  excellent  monthly 
publication,  the  "  South  Polar  Times,"  has  recently  appeared, 
and  maintains  the  same  excellence  as  former  issues.  The  scheme 
for  this  publication  was  discussed  long  before  the  sun  left  us, 
and  by  general  consent  Shackleton  was  appointed  editor.  It 
was  decided  that  each  number  should  contain,  besides  the 
editorial,  a  summary  of  the  events  and  meteorological  condi- 
tions of  the  past  month,  certain  scientifically  instructive  articles 
dealing  with  our  work  and  our  surroundings,  and  certain  others 
written  in  a  lighter  vein.  As  the  scheme  developed  it  was 
found  that  other  features,  such  as  full-page  caricatures,  acrostics, 
and  puzzles,  could  be  added ;  and  now  each  month  sees  the 
production  of  a  stout  volume  which  is  read  with  much  interest 
and  amusement  by  everyone.  One  of  the  pleasantest  points 
with  regard  to  it  is  that  the  men  contribute  as  well  as  the 
officers  ;  in  fact,  some  of  the  best  and  quite  the  most  amusing 
articles  are  written  by  the  occupants  of  the  mess-deck,  of  whom 
one  or  two  show  extraordinary  ability  with  the  pen.  But 
beyond  all  else  the  journal  owes  its  excellence  to  the  principal 
artist,  Wilson,  who  carries  out  the  greater  part  of  the  illustra- 
tion and  produces  drawings  whose  charm  would  be  appreciated 
anywhere. 

4  Once  or  twice  lately  we  have  discussed  the  possibility  of 
these  volumes  being  interesting  to  a  larger  public,  though 
there  was  no  such  idea  in  anyone's  mind  at  the  start.     It  is 


268       THE   VOYAGE   OF    THE   'DISCOVERY'    [July 

certain,  however,  that  the  journal  is  more  ambitious  in  inten- 
tion, and  far  more  effective  in  its  realisation,  than  any  of  its 
predecessors  of  the  North  Polar  regions.  On  the  one  hand, 
we  have  some  reading  matter  and  many  delightful  sketches 
that  would  be  appreciated  by  all ;  on  the  other,  it  has  to  be 
remembered  that  the  humour  and  many  of  the  references  are 
local  and  would  convey  little  or  nothing  to  the  uninformed 
reader,  however  much  they  may  appeal  to  us  "  who  are  in  the 
know."  It  is  obvious  that  we  cannot  decide  this  matter  for 
ourselves,  but  must  take  the  opinion  of  outsiders  more  capable 
of  judging. 

•  Before  the  appearance  of  the  first  number  of  the  "  S.  P.  T.," 
which  came  out  with  the  departure  of  the  sun,  the  editor  had 
to  face  a  rather  delicate  situation  :  it  was  announced  that  con- 
tributions need  not  be  signed,  but  must  be  dropped  into  the 
editor's  box  by  a  certain  date.  When  the  date  arrived  it  was 
found  that  the  novelty  of  the  venture  had  aroused  such  wide- 
spread interest  that  the  box  was  crammed  with  manuscripts, 
and  though  there  was  not  much  difficulty  in  making  a  selection, 
there  was  some  danger  of  wounding  the  feelings  of  those  lite- 
rary aspirants  whose  contributions  were  rejected.  In  this 
dilemma  the  editor  decided  to  issue  a  supplementary  journal, 
to  be  named  the  "  Blizzard,"  and  one  number  of  this  redoubt- 
able publication  was  produced,  but  fell  so  lamentably  short  of 
the  "  S.  P.  T."  that  the  contributors  realised  that  their  mission 
in  life  did  not  lie  in  the  paths  of  literary  composition,  and 
thereafter  the  editor's  box  contained  only  what  that  astute 
individual  required  for  the  original  periodical. 

'  The  anonymity  of  articles  could  not  long  be  observed  in 
such  a  small  community,  and  after  the  appearance  of  the  first 
numbers  the  style  of  different  individuals  was  more  or  less 
easily  recognised  ;  but  even  the  later  numbers  have  contained 
some  articles  concerning  the  authorship  of  which  there  has 
been  much  erratic  guessing.  In  mentioning  the  "  Blizzard  " 
I  ought  to  remark  that  it  has  redeeming  features  in  some 
capital  line  caricatures  and  a  distinctly  humorous  frontispiece 
by  Barne.' 


i902]  AURORA  AUSTRALIS  269 

'■July  26. —  .  .  .  On  the  whole,  the  displays  of  the  aurora 
australis  have  been  disappointing ;  we  had  expected  them  to 
be  more  brilliant.  When  the  sky  is  clear  there  is  generally 
some  auroral  light,  but  it  is  rarely  vivid,  and  never  bright 
enough  to  be  photographed.  In  hopes  of  obtaining  the  spec- 
trum of  this  light,  a  rapid  plate  has  been  exposed  to  it  for 
hours,  and  even  days  together,  but  as  yet  there  has  not  been 
the  least  impression  on  it.  In  general  the  light  is  so  faint 
that  stars  of  even  a  small  magnitude  can  be  seen  distinctly 
through  it ;  but  of  late  there  has  been  an  improvement,  and 
the  contrast  on  the  dark  nights  has  given  us  a  very  beautiful,  if 
not  a  very  brilliant,  effect  to  the  southward.  Lately  it  has 
commenced  about  three  by  a  bright  but  low  curtain  to  the 
E.N.E.,  where  unfortunately  the  hills  partly  hide  the  view  ;  but 
later  it  seems  to  spread  up  and  towards  the  south,  so  that 
usually  in  the  evening  there  are  shafts  and  patches  of  light 
scattered  about  in  full  view  of  the  ship  with  sometimes  a  well- 
formed  corona  to  the  south. 

1  Often  when  the  weather  has  been  calm  and  clear  I  have 
been  up  and  over  the  hills  in  the  afternoon  to  see  the  easterly 
display.  There  is  something  very  weird  and  awe-inspiring  in 
a  phenomenon  so  fleeting,  so  intangible  and  so  difficult  to 
describe.  The  light  grows  and  wanes,  but  one  cannot  mark 
the  moment  of  its  coming  or  its  going.  It  distinctly  moves, 
but  one  cannot  say  how  ;  sometimes  it  appears  to  roll  forward 
or  to  the  side,  sometimes  it  seems  to  spread  itself  as  though 
anxious  for  greater  space.  For  no  two  instants  is  it  the  same, 
and  yet  the  change  is  so  subtle  that  one  cannot  grasp  it  until 
some  new  development  has  robbed  one  of  the  picture. 

'  As  I  arrived  on  the  hill  summit  to-day  the  sky  was  clear 
and  dark,  but  as  I  walked  forward  a  narrow  arched  band  of 
light  appeared  across  the  east ;  it  seemed  to  rise,  to  halt. 
Little  fibrous  shafts  spread  out  above  and  below ;  a  moment 
more,  and  the  fibres  became  luminous  cloud  masses  rolling 
towards  the  south  ;  in  the  next  they  had  ceased  to  move  ;  the 
light  was  spreading  and  waning,  was  gone.  Then  shafts  of 
light  flashed  up  like  mighty  search-light  beams  cast  to  the 


270       THE   VOYAGE   OF    THE    'DISCOVERY'    [July 

zenith  ;  but  before  I  could  well  note  them,  they  were  bent  in 
fantastic  convolutions,  some  curling  to  spiral  columns.  In  a 
few  moments  all  this  had  come  and  gone,  and  the  broad  clean 
arch  of  a  corona  seemed  to  be  rushing  towards  me  from  the 
south.  As  it  rose,  a  second  arch  flashed  up  beneath  j  then,  as 
though  some  giant  hand  had  swept  across  the  skies,  the  whole 
scene  was  changed,  and  only  some  vague  luminous  patches 
remained. 

1  It  appears  to  me  that  the  sharpest  contrasts  are  formed  by 
the  vertical  shafts,  or  at  the  lower  edge  of  the  arches  where  the 
light  is  brightest  and  is  clearly  outlined  against  the  vaulted  blue 
of  the  sky ;  elsewhere  the  light  merges  indefinitely  into  shade. 

1  Since  the  phenomenon  of  the  aurora  has  been  reproduced 
artificially,  its  study  has  advanced  to  a  stage  rather  beyond  the 
comprehension  of  the  ordinary  man,  and  after  the  countless 
observations  which  have  been  made  in  the  North  it  does  not 
seem  likely  that  our  observations  or  any  observations  of  the 
actual  phenomenon  itself  can  add  greatly  to  our  knowledge; 
but  considering  that  the  luminosity  of  the  aurora  must  be  an 
electrical  effect  closely  connected  with  the  magnetism  of  the 
earth,  it  may  be  of  some  interest  that  in  our  observation  it 
always  appears  to  the  south-east  or  away  from  the  magnetic 
pole.  The  auroral  light  is  usually  a  pure  white,  but  we  have 
observed  it  with  a  distinct  green  tinge,  and  on  rare  occasions 
with  a  reddish  shade.  Last  night  there  were  large  patches  of 
light  in  the  zenith,  and,  what  is  also  rare,  several  shafts  in  the 
west.' 

•  July  28. —  .  .  .  The  latest  southerly  gale  has  awakened 
us  to  a  most  unpleasant  fact,  though  at  present  it  is  impossible 
to  gauge  the  exact  extent  of  our  difficulty.  The  question  of 
the  moment  is,  What  has  become  of  our  boats  ?  Early  in  the 
winter  they  were  hoisted  out  to  give  more  room  for  the  awning, 
and  were  placed  in  a  line  about  100  yards  from  the  ice-foot  on 
the  sea-ice.  The  earliest  gale  drifted  them  up  nearly  gunwale 
high,  and  thus  for  two  months  they  remained  in  sight  whilst 
we  congratulated  ourselves  on  their  security.  The  last  gale 
brought  more  snow,  and,  piling  it  in  drifts  at  various  places  in 


i9o2]  MISHAP   TO   OUR   BOATS  271 

the  bay,  chose  to  be  specially  generous  with  it  in  the  neigh- 
bourhood of  our  boats,  so  that  afterwards  they  were  found  to 
be  buried  three  or  four  feet  beneath  the  new  surface.  Although 
we  had  noted  with  interest  the  manner  in  which  the  extra 
weight  of  snow  in  other  places  was  pressing  down  the  surface 
of  the  original  ice,  and  were  even  taking  measurements  of  the 
effects  thus  produced,  we  remained  fatuously  blind  to  the  risks 
our  boats  ran  under  such  conditions.  It  was  from  no  feeling 
of  anxiety,  but  rather  to  provide  occupation,  that  I  directed 
that  the  snow  on  top  of  them  should  be  removed,  and  it  was 
not  until  we  had  dug  down  to  the  first  boat  that  the  true  state 
of  affairs  dawned  on  us.  She  was  found  lying  in  a  mass  of 
slushy  ice,  with  which  also  she  was  nearly  filled.  For  the 
moment  we  had  a  wild  hope  that  she  could  be  pulled  up,  but 
by  the  time  we  could  rig  shears  the  air  temperature  had  con- 
verted the  slush  into  hardened  ice,  and  she  was  found  to  be 
stuck  fast.  At  present  there  is  no  hope  of  recovering  any  of 
the  boats  :  as  fast  as  one  could  dig  out  the  sodden  ice,  more 
sea-water  would  flow  in  and  freeze.  The  only  hope  is  to 
prevent  bad  going  to  worse  before  the  summer  brings  more 
hopeful  conditions.  The  danger  is  that  fresh  gales  bringing 
more  snow  will  sink  them  so  far  beneath  the  surface  that  we 
shall  be  unable  to  recover  them  at  all.  Stuck  solid  in  the  floe 
they  must  go  down  with  it,  and  every  effort  must  be  devoted 
to  preventing  the  floe  from  sinking.  At  present  all  hands  are 
removing  the  snow  on  top  of  the  boats  and  for  a  distance  of 
ten  yards  around,  and  are  forming  a  snow-wall  on  the  outskirts 
of  this  area.  It  is  a  long  job,  and  will  probably  have  to  be 
repeated  after  every  gale.  Meanwhile  our  stupidity  has  landed 
us  in  a  pretty  bad  hole,  for  we  may  have  to  leave  this  spot 
without  a  single  boat  in  the  ship.' 

From  this  time  we  had  a  hard  fight  for  our  boats.  Day 
after  day  parties  were  digging  away  at  their  snow  covering,  and 
in  the  course  of  months  many  tons  must  have  been  removed. 
After  each  gale  our  hearts  sank,  as  to  all  appearance  we  were 
forced  to  begin  all  over  again ;  but  we  knew  that,  although 
there  was  so  little  to  show  for  our  labours,  our  work  must  tell 


272      THE  VOYAGE  OF    THE   '  DISCOVERY  '    [Aug. 

in  the  long  run,  and  that  in  it  lay  the  only  hope  of  keeping  the 
boats  within  our  grasp  until  the  climate  should  be  more  favour- 
able. So,  however  deeply  the  snow  fell  after  each  new 
southerly  blow,  the  work  was  renewed  with  vigour,  and  we 
bowed  to  the  inevitable  whilst  we  heartily  cursed  the  folly 
which  had  landed  us  in  such  a  predicament.  It  was  not  until 
December,  five  months  later,  that  Mr.  Royds  and  our  excellent 
boatswain  were  able  to  attack  the  question  of  release  with  any 
chance  of  success,  and  it  was  in  this  month  that,  after  much 
sawing  and  blasting,  the  boats  were  finally  liberated,  though  by 
no  means  without  injury. 

1  August  i. — There  can  be  few  scenes  more  beautiful  than 
that  which  is  about  us  on  a  calm  moonlight  night.  During 
the  noon  hours  the  silver  rays  are  lost,  and  the  moon  itself  is 
changed  to  a  deep  orange  yellow  in  the  diffused  twilight  cast 
by  the  gleaming  crimson  band  to  the  north ;  but  as  the  red 
glow  slowly  travels  around  and  is  lost  behind  the  western  hills, 
our  white  world  is  left  alone  with  the  moon  and  the  stars. 
The  cold,  white  light  falls  on  the  colder,  whiter  snow  against 
which  the  dark  rock  and  intricate  outline  of  the  ship  stand  out 
in  blackest  contrast.  Each  sharp  peak  and  every  object  about 
us  casts  a  deep  shadow,  and  is  clearly  outlined  against  the  sky, 
but  beyond  our  immediate  surroundings. is  fairyland.  The  eye 
travels  on  and  on  over  the  gleaming  plain  till  it  meets  the 
misty  white  horizon,  and  above  and  beyond,  the  soft,  silvery 
outlines  of  the  mountains.  Did  one  not  know  them  of  old,  it 
would  sometimes  be  difficult  to  think  them  real,  so  deep  a  spell 
of  enchantment  seems  to  rest  on  the  scene.  And  indeed  it  is 
not  a  spell  that  rests  on  man  alone,  for  it  is  on  such  nights  that 
the  dogs  lift  up  their  voices  and  join  in  a  chant  which  disturbs 
the  most  restful  sleepers. 

'  What  lingering  instinct  of  bygone  ages  can  impel  them  to 
this  extraordinary  custom  is  beyond  guessing ;  but  on  these 
calm,  clear  moonlit  nights,  when  all  are  coiled  down  placidly 
sleeping,  one  will  suddenly  raise  his  head  and  from  the  depths 
of  his  throat  send  forth  a  prolonged,  dismal  wail,  utterly  unlike 
any  sound  he  can  produce  on  ordinary  occasions.     As  the  note 


1902]  CURIOUS  PHENOMENA  273 

dies  away  another  animal  takes  it  up,  and  then  another  and 
another,  until  the  hills  re-echo  with  the  same  unutterably 
dreary  plaint.  There  is  no  undue  haste  and  no  snapping  or 
snarling,  which  makes  it  very  evident  that  this  is  a  solemn 
function,  some  sacred  rite  which  must  be  performed  in  these 
circumstances.  If  one  is  sentimentally  inclined,  as  may  be 
forgiven  on  such  a  night,  this  chorus  almost  seems  to  possess 
the  woes  of  the  ages ;  as  an  accompaniment  to  the  vast 
desolation  without,  it  touches  the  lowest  depths  of  sadness. 

1  But  if  one  is  not  sentimentally  inclined,  and  rather  bent 
on  refreshing  sleep,  it  possesses  so  little  charm  that  one 
endeavours  to  correct  matters  by  shouts  and  pieces  of  ice.  As 
a  rule  the  animals  are  so  absorbed  in  their  occupation  and  so 
lost  to  their  surroundings  that  even  these  monitions  have  no 
power  to  disturb  them,  and  one  has  at  length  to  bribe  them 
basely  with  a  biscuit  or  a  piece  of  seal-meat. 

1  Generally  in  calm,  bright  weather,  the  temperature  is  low, 
and  to  night,  when  the  thermometer  stood  below  — 400,  we 
observed  a  curious  fact  which  I  do  not  remember  to  have  seen 
mentioned  before.  If  one  is  standing  still  and  bareheaded, 
and  exhales  a  deep  breath,  one  can  actually  hear  one's  breath 
freezing  a  moment  or  two  after  it  has  left  the  mouth.  What 
one  hears  I  do  not  precisely  know,  unless  the  actual  formation 
of  ice-crystals  produces  a  sound,  as  appears  to  be  the  case. 
The  sound  itself  is  not  easy  to  describe  ;  it  is  rather  like  that 
produced  by  the  movement  of  sand  on  a  beach  when  a  wave 
washes  up.  Koettlitz  says  it  is  like  the  minutest  crepitations, 
and  though  few  of  us  knew  what  the  word  meant  till  we  con- 
sulted the  dictionary,  we  have  adopted  his  description. 

1  A  curious  effect  of  the  cold  snaps  is  a  mist  which  arises 
off  the  land,  very  thin  and  very  white,  and  in  the  silvery  moon- 
light beautiful  beyond  description.  It  spreads  like  the  finest 
gauze- web  over  the  sharp  outlines  of  the  near  hills ;  the  white 
snow-slopes  and  dark  shadows  of  the  rocks  are  softened  in  its 
shimmering  folds,  and  seem  to  rest  on  the  lightest  foundations 
of  silvery  cloud.' 

1  August  4. —  .  .  .     The  driving  snow  has  again  enveloped 

VOL.    I.  T 


274       THE   VOYAGE   OF   THE    'DISCOVERY'    [Aug. 

everything.  The  boat  clearance  is  covered.  The  only  thing 
is  to  go  on  steadily  digging  away  at  it ;  but  if  the  snowfall 
continues  in  the  spring  it  will  mean  a  lot  of  work.  Still,  by 
hook  or  by  crook  the  boats  must  be  kept  above  water.  We 
now  feel  a  great  drawback  in  the  scarcity  of  picks  and  shovels. 
It  is  wonderful  what  has  been  done  already  with  the  mere 
dozen  which  were  supplied,  considering  that  they  have  been  in 
use  every  day  and  all  day ;  but  a  good  many  are  now  hope- 
lessly broken,  and  the  remainder  are  not  very  efficient.  We 
shall  have  to  rely  on  the  engine-room  department  once  more, 
but  although  they  can  make  shovels,  I  doubt  if  they  will  be 
able  to  cope  with  the  picks  for  want  of  materials.  The 
temperature  since  the  gale  has  been  extraordinarily  high. 
To-day  it  has  been  above  zero,  and  light  snow  is  falling.  The 
daylight  is  coming  on  apace ;  at  noon,  when  it  is  cloudless,  the 
details  of  the  land  can  be  seen  very  clearly  on  all  sides,  and  it 
is  pleasant  to  be  out  when  the  snow  is  not  driving. 

1  Bernacchi  and  Skelton  are  just  completing  a  set  of  pen- 
dulum observations  in  the  main  hut,  and  last  night  when  the 
gale  was  rising  with  blinding  drift  they  had  an  adventure  from 
which  they  were  extremely  lucky  to  escape  unscathed.  In  the 
evening  the  hut  was  fully  occupied,  Bernacchi  and  Skelton 
being  at  work  in  the  smaller  compartment,  whilst  Royds  was 
busily  rehearsing  his  nigger  minstrel  troupe  in  the  larger  one  ; 
but  shortly  after  the  rehearsal  began,  either  because  it  proved 
a  somewhat  disturbing  element  or  because  their  work  was 
finished,  the  two  scientific  workers  left  to  return  to  the  ship. 
It  was  fully  an  hour  and  a  half  after  this  that,  the  rehearsal 
being  finished,  Royds  and  his  party,  numbering  more  than 
a  dozen,  started  back.  They  found  that  the  gale  had  increased, 
and  that  in  the  whirling  snow  they  could  see  nothing ;  but, 
being  in  such  numbers,  they  were  able  to  join  hands  and 
sweep  along  until  they  caught  the  guide  rope  leading  to  the 
gangway.  As  they  travelled  along  it,  they  heard  feeble  shouts 
wafted  on  the  storm,  and  again  extending  their  line  they  swept 
on  in  a  chain  and  suddenly  fell  on  Bernacchi  and  Skelton,  who, 
although  they  had  left  the  hut  an  hour  and  a  half  before,  had 


1902]  LOST    IN   A   BLIZZARD  275 

entirely  lost  their  bearings  and  were  reduced  to  shouting  on 
the  poor  chance  of  being  heard  and  rescued. 

'Meanwhile  on  board  the  ship  we  had  not  the  smallest 
suspicion  that  anything  unusual  had  taken  place,  and  remained 
in  ignorance  until  the  rescuers  and  the  rescued  burst  in  upon 
us ;  the  latter  were  severely  frost-bitten  about  the  face  and  also 
in  the  legs,  as  they  had  not  been  prepared  for  such  a  long  stay 
in  the  open  ;  and  as  they  had  not  been  provided  with  wind 
covering,  their  garments  inside  and  out  were  thickly  coated  with 
ice  and  snow.  As  soon  as  we  had  revived  them  we  learnt 
what  little  tale  they  had  to  tell. 

'  On  leaving  the  hut  they  had  started  for  the  ship,  steering 
through  the  blinding  drift  as  best  they  could.  After  walking 
for  some  distance  they  came  to  the  conclusion  they  must  have 
missed  her,  and  proceeded  to  grope  their  way  back  to  the 
land.  When  they  reached  the  tide  crack  they  found  some 
difficulty  in  deciding  which  way  they  should  go,  but  finally 
they  reached  a  spot  which  they  recognised,  and,  calculating  the 
position  of  the  ship,  they  again  made  tracks  for  her,  and  again 
found  that  they  had  missed  the  mark.  They  then  decided  to 
try  to  search  around  in  circles,  and  so  the  time  passed  whilst 
they  wandered  more  or  less  aimlessly  about  until  they  became 
alarmed,  and  tried  to  attract  attention  by  shouting.  In  the 
nick  of  time  they  were  rescued  within  thirty  yards  of  their 
goal,  but  without  any  knowledge  of  the  fact. 

'  The  hut  is  certainly  not  more  than  200  yards  from  the 
ship,  and  the  ship  is  not  only  a  comparatively  big  object,  but 
is  surrounded  by  guide  ropes  and  other  objects  which  if 
encountered  would  have  informed  the  wanderers  of  their 
position.  These  officers  were  neither  of  them  likely  to  have 
lost  their  heads,  and  both  might  be  trusted  to  take  the  most 
practical  course  in  such  a  difficulty.  In  these  circumstances 
the  fact  that  they  should  have  been  lost  for  two  hours  would 
have  been  incredible  had  it  not  actually  occurred.  It  is  the 
most  convincing  lesson  on  the  blinding,  bewildering  effect 
of  a  blizzard  that  we  have  had,  and  shows  clearly  what  care 
will   be   necessary   with   our   sledge  parties   if   such    weather 


276      THE  VOYAGE  OF  THE  'DISCOVERY'    [Aug. 

continues  in  the  spring.  Throughout  the  greater  part  of  the 
winter  we  have  had  a  guide  rope  which  continued  as  far  as 
the  hut,  and  had  this  been  in  order  last  night  all  trouble  would 
have  been  avoided ;  but  recently  it  has  sagged  between  the 
poles  and  become  buried  beneath  the  snow,  and  it  was  not 
available,  therefore,  for  parties  leaving  the  hut.' 

Throughout  our  stay  in  these  regions   I  had  constantly 
a  lurking  anxiety   that  disaster   might  attend   the   overbold 
habits  of  some  of  our  officers  in  making  long  excursions  from 
the  ship,  especially  during  the  winter  months.     The  trouble 
lay  chiefly  in  the  impossibility  of  predicting  the  weather  con- 
ditions ;  the  barometer  told  nothing,  and   such  other   signs 
of    bad   weather   as    came   under   our   observation   were    so 
uncertain  that  it  was  impossible  to  legislate  on  them.     Threats 
of  a  storm  were  so  constantly  unfulfilled  that  to  have  kept 
all  hands  within  bounds  on  their  account  would  have  been 
irksome  to  individual  feeling  and  discouraging  to  individual 
work.     The  only  satisfactory  course  was  to  rely  on  the  dis- 
cretion of  distant  workers  to  hasten  home  directly  the  weather 
looked  ugly,  and  to  trust  that  the  coming  storm  would  not 
develop  before  they  had  reached  a  position  of  safety ;  but, 
needless  to  remark,  this  happy  result  was  not  always  realised, 
and  my  diary  throughout  the  two  years  records  many  hours 
of  anxiety  caused  by  the  prolonged  absence  of  some  person,  and 
some  occasions  on  which  search  parties  were  rapidly  organised 
to  find  such  a  belated  worker.     In  the  course  of  time  this 
naturally  became  an  easier  task,   as  we  all   became  better 
acquainted  with  the  features  of  the  tide  crack  and  the  various 
patches  of  rock  and  with  their  relative  bearings.     In  course 
of  time  also  our  system  of  relief  became  better  organised  ;  and 
although  we  did  not  put  it  in  practice,  it  may  be  well  to  record 
our  final  arrangement  in  this  respect  as  a  hint  to  those  who 
may  live  under  like  conditions  in  the  future.     In  outline  our 
ultimate  plan  for  searching  was  to  spread  out  the  search  party 
in  a  very  extended  order,  connecting  them  by  a  fine  strong 
line,  and  so  to  sweep  round  the  floe  systematically  until  the 
object  of  our  search  was  recovered. 


igo2]  THE   ROYAL  TERROR  THEATRE  277 

Experiences  of  this  sort  taught  us  the  valuable  lesson 
of  never  leaving  our  sledges  on  our  long  sledge  journeys 
except  under  the  most  favourable  conditions.  It  can  be 
imagined  that  one  was  often  tempted  to  do  this  to  get  a  better 
knowledge  of  some  object  which  lay  off  the  line  of  march, 
but  when  such  a  ditour  became  necessary,  wisdom  suggested 
that  the  sledges  should  be  taken  as  far  as  possible  towards  the 
object,  even  if  the  ground  were  rough  ;  and  although  we  often 
marched  in  threatening  and  stormy  weather,  [it  was  always 
with  our  temporary  home  behind  us. 

The  idea  of  requisitioning  our  large  hut  as  a  place  of 
entertainment  had  occurred  to  us  early  in  the  winter,  and  in 
this  connection  it  was  first  used  for  a  concert  given  during  the 
first  week  in  May.  Royds,  who  took  much  pains  in  getting 
up  this  function,  arranged  a  long  programme  in  order  to  bring 
forth  all  the  available  talent ;  but  although  we  were  not 
inclined  to  be  critical  of  our  amusements,  one  was  fain  to 
confess  that  our  company  had  not  been  chosen  for  their 
musical  attainments.  However,  there  were  exceptions  to  the 
mediocrity,  and  some  exhibition  of  dramatic  talent,  which 
prompted  the  conception  of  a  modified  entertainment  for 
a  future  occasion ;  so  Barne  was  entrusted  with  the  task 
of  producing  a  play,  and  after  much  casting  about  succeeded 
in  getting  his  company  together.  All  became  very  diligent 
with  rehearsals,  and  as  these  were  conducted  in  the  hut  with 
all  due  secrecy,  the  audience  remained  in  ignorance  of 
even  the  name  of  the  play  until  the  night  of  its  production. 
It  was  decided  that  this  should  be  immediately  after  our  mid- 
winter celebrations,  and  my  diary  for  June  25  gives  some 
account  of  this  great  night : 

'  At  seven  to-night  we  all  journey  across  to  the  hut,  forcing 
our  way  through  a  rather  keen  wind  and  light  snowdrift. 
The  theatre  within  looks  bright  and  cheerful,  but  as  there  are 
no  heating  arrangements  other  than  the  lamps,  one  conquers 
the  natural  instinct  to  take  off  one's  overcoat  and  head 
covering,  and  decides  that  it  will  be  wise  to  retain  these  gar- 
ments throughout  the  performance.     On  one  side  of  the  large 


278       THE   VOYAGE   OF  THE    'DISCOVERY'    [Aug. 

compartment  a  fair-sized  stage  has  been  erected,  raised  some  two 
feet  above  the  floor ;  the  edge  is  decorated  with  a  goodly  row 
of  footlights,  immediately  behind  which  hangs  a  drop-curtain 
depicting  the  ship  and  Mount  Erebus  in  glowing  colours,  and 
boldly  informing  one  that  this  is  the  "  Royal  Terror  Theatre." 
The  remainder  of  the  compartment  forms  an  auditorium  of 
ample  size  to  accommodate  all  who  are  not  performing,  with 
a  stray  dog  or  two  brought  in  to  enliven  the  proceedings. 

'  In  front  stands  a  row  of  chairs  for  the  officers,  and  behind 
several  rows  of  benches  for  the  men  ;  the  apartment  is  lighted 
by  a  large  oil  lamp,  and  when  all  are  seated  one  must  own 
to  having  seen  theatricals  under  far  less  realistic  conditions. 
When  all  are  seated  also,  and  when  pipes  are  lit,  there  is  a 
perceptible  improvement  in  the  temperature,  a  condition  that 
one  feels  will  be  very  welcome  to  the  lightly  clad  actors. 

'  In  due  course  programmes  are  passed  round,  informing  us 
that  Part  I.  will  consist  of  several  songs  rendered  by  popular 
singers,  and  that  for  Part  II.  we  shall  have  the  "Ticket  of 
Leave,"  "  a  screaming  comedy  in  one  act."  These  programmes, 
I  may  remark,  are  correct  at  least  in  one  respect,  in  that  there  is 
some  difficulty  in  picking  out  the  information  from  amongst 
the  mass  of  advertisements.  Presently  the  curtain  rolls  up  and 
discloses  Royds  at  the  piano  and  the  first  singers  in  true  con- 
cert attitude.  We  have  a  duet,  followed  by  several  solos,  and 
occasionally  a  rousing  chorus,  when  one  rather  fears  that  the 
roof  of  the  Royal  Terror  Theatre  will  rise.  On  the  whole  the 
first  part  passes  decorously,  and  we  come  to  the  interval,  when 
the  wags  advertise  oranges  and  nuts. 

'  Then  we  have  Part  II.,  which  is  what  we  are  here  for  :  the 
"  screaming  comedy  "  commences  and  proves  to  be  fully  up  to 
its  title.  There  is  no  need  for  the  actors  to  speak — their 
appearance  is  quite  enough  to  secure  the  applause  of  the 
audience  ;  and  when  the  representatives  of  the  lady  parts  step 
on  to  the  stage  it  is  useless  for  them  to  attempt  speech  for 
several  minutes,  the  audience  is  so  hugely  delighted.  Thanks 
to  Mr.  Clarkson  and  his  make-up  box,  the  disguises  are  excel- 
lent, and  it  soon  becomes  evident  that  the  actors  have  regarded 


i902]  A   'SCREAMING   COMEDY'  279 

them  as  by  far  the  most  important  part  of  the  proceedings,  and 
hold  the  view  that  it  is  rather  a  waste  of  time  to  learn  a  part 
when  one  has  a  good  loud-voiced  prompter.  As  the  play  pro- 
gresses one  supposes  there  is  a  plot,  but  it  is  a  little  difficult  to 
unravel.  Presently,  however,  we  are  obviously  working  up  to 
a  situation ;  the  hero,  or  perhaps  I  should  say  one  of  the 
heroes  (for  each  actor  at  least  attacks  his  part  with  heroism), 
unexpectedly  sees  through  the  window  the  lady  on  whom  he 
has  fixed  his  affections,  and  whom,  I  gather,  he  has  not  seen 
for  a  long  and  weary  time.  He  is  evidently  a  little  uncertain 
as  to  her  identity,  and  at  this  stirring  moment  he  sits  very  care- 
fully on  a  chair — he  almost  dusts  the  seat  before  he  does  so. 
Seated  and  barely  glancing  at  the  window,  he  says  with  great 
deliberation  and  in  the  most  matter-of-fact  tones,  "  It  is — no, 
it  isn't — yes,  it  is — it  is  my  long-lost  Mary  Jane."  The  senti- 
ment— or  the  rendering  of  it — is  greeted  with  shouts  of 
applause.  Later  on  we  work  up  to  a  climax,  when  it  is 
evident  that  the  services  of  the  police  force  will  be  required. 
This  part  is  much  more  to  the  taste  of  the  players ;  somebody 
has  to  be  chucked  out ;  both  he  and  the  "  chuckers-out " 
determine  to  make  their  parts  quite  realistic,  and  for  several 
minutes  there  is  practically  a  free  fight  with  imminent  risk  to 
the  furniture.  And  so  at  last  the  curtain  falls  amidst  vociferous 
cheering,  and  I  for  one  have  to  acknowledge  that  I  have  rarely 
been  so  gorgeously  entertained.  With  renewed  cheers  we 
break  up  and  wander  back  to  the  ship,  after  having  witnessed 
what  the  "  S.  P.  T."  may  veraciously  describe  as  "  one  of  the 
most  successful  entertainments  ever  given  within  the  Polar 
Circle" — and  indeed  they  might  with  some  truth  add  "  or  any- 
where else." ' 

From  the  above  it  will  be  seen  that  our  first  essay  at  acting 
met  with  very  hearty  approval,  if  it  did  not  show  us  to  be 
possessed  of  great  histrionic  talent.  We  had  always  intended 
to  call  again  on  our  dramatic  company,  but  owing  to  the  work 
of  several  of  its  members  and  other  circumstances  our  plans 
slipped  through;  later  on,  however,  Royds  undertook  to  or- 
ganise a  nigger  minstrel  troupe,  and  towards  the  end  of  the 


23o      THE   VOYAGE   OF  THE   'DISCOVERY'    [Aug. 

winter  succeeded  in  getting  them  together  and  in  rehearsing 
their  various  parts  through  many  a  cold  hour  spent  in  the 
freezing  theatre. 

On  August  6,  the  date  fixed  for  this  performance,  we  were 
in  the  midst  of  a  cold  snap,  but  although  the  temperature  had 
fallen  below  —  400,  it  was  decided  that  the  programme  should 
be  carried  out  as  intended. 

1  To-night  the  doors  of  the  Royal  Terror  Theatre  opened  at 
7.30,  and  as  the  temperature  was  —  400  and  there  was  a  strong 
wind,  everybody  did  his  best  to  make  a  record  in  reaching  it. 
Even  inside  the  temperature  must  have  been  well  below  zero ; 
I  wonder  how  the  ordinary  theatre-goer  would  appreciate 
sitting  in  stalls  under  such  conditions. 

'  One  was  not  sorry  when  the  curtain  rolled  up  and  disclosed 
our  twelve  minstrels  with  blackened  faces  sitting  in  a  row  with 
"  Massa  Johnson  "  in  the  centre.  A  programme  with  an  illus- 
trated cover  informed  us  that  this  was  the  "  Dishcover  Minstrel 
Troupe."  There  is  no  doubt  the  sailors  dearly  love  to  make 
up ;  on  this  occasion  they  had  taken  an  infinity  of  trouble  to 
prepare  themselves ;  calicoes  of  all  sorts  had  been  cut  up  and 
sewn  together  to  make  suits  of  the  most  vivid  colours  and 
grotesque  form ;  shirt  fronts  and  enormous  collars  of  elaborate 
design  had  been  made  from  paper  ;  wigs  had  been  manu- 
factured from  tow,  in  some  cases  dipped  in  red  ink,  and  an  equal 
ingenuity  had  been  displayed  in  producing  the  enormous  boots 
and  buttons  which  constitute  an  important  part  of  the  nigger 
minstrel's  costume.  "  Bones  "  and  "  Skins  "  had  even  gone  so 
far  as  to  provide  themselves  with  movable  top-knots  which 
could  be  worked  at  effective  moments  by  pulling  a  string  below. 
•  As  everyone  knows,  a  nigger  minstrel  performance  consists 
of  a  number  of  songs  and  choruses,  between  which  the  ball  of 
conversation  is  kept  rolling  amongst  the  various  minstrels  in 
the  form  of  weighty  conundrums,  which,  after  numerous  futile 
attempts  from  others,  are  usually  answered  by  the  propounder 
himself.  I  don't  know  why  a  joke  should  sound  better  in 
nigger  language,  but  I  rather  think  the  class  of  joke  made  on 
these  occasions  does  so. 


i902]  NIGGER   MINSTRELS  281 

•  To-night  the  choruses  and  plantation  songs  led  by  Royds 
were  really  well  sung,  and  they  repay  him  for  the  very  great 
pains  that  he  has  taken  in  the  rehearsals.  Of  course  in  the 
choruses  of  "  Marching  through  Georgia,"  "  Golden  Slippers," 
"  Suwanee  River,"  and  such  songs,  the  audience  felt  that  they 
must  also  "  lend  a  hand,"  and  did  so  with  such  a  will  that  the 
rafters  shook.  The  jokes  were  nearly  all  home-made  and 
topical,  but  amused  us  none  the  less  for  that ;  everyone  had 
some  sly  shaft  of  wit  aimed  at  him,  but  all  in  the  best  of  good 
humour,  and  so  the  merry  jests  went  round  until  something 
had  been  said  about  the  ship,  the  dogs,  the  windmill,  the 
people,  and  every  imaginable  or  unimaginable  thing  about  us, 
and  on  the  whole  they  afforded  us  a  good  deal  of  hearty 
laughter. 

'  I  can  remember  but  few  of  these  jocular  efforts ;  I  recollect 
that  the  cook  was  likened  to  a  cooper  round  a  cask — because 
he  was  always  going  round  "  doing  a  tap."  Another  question 
which  puzzled  me  for  some  time  was,  "Can  you  told  me, 
Massa  Bones,  what  am  de  best  way  to  clear  lower-deck  in  de 
Dishcubry?"  Bones  suggested  that  it  was  to  turn  on  a 
southerly  wind  (when  the  stoves  begin  to  smoke  badly),  but 
the  correct  answer  was  much  truer  :  "  You  tak'  an'  open  a  tin 

of 's  Brussels  sprouts."      Another,  and  perhaps  better, 

question  was,  "Can  you  told  me  what  am  de  worst  vegetable 
as  we  took  from  Englan'  ?  "  One  naturally  thought  that  some 
such  answer  as  the  above  might  have  fitted  here,  but  the  proper 
reply  was  stated  to  be  "  The  Dundee  leak."  When  we  got 
back  to  the  ship  after  the  performance  we  decided  that  in  spite 
of  the  cold  we  had  spent  an  extremely  pleasant  evening.' 

'August  7. — The  cold  snap  continues,  and  to-day  is  calm. 
Barne  is  far  out  with  a  small  sledge  and  sounding  machine ; 
Shackleton  and  Hodgson  still  further,  digging  up  a  fish  trap. 
Many  others  are  scattered  about  in  various  directions,  and  all 
rejoicing  in  the  absence  of  wind.  The  sky  is  clear  overhead 
and  the  light  fairly  good,  but  to  the  north  hangs  a  yellowish 
brown  haze,  now  rather  common.  It  seemed  to  grow  colder 
as  I  went  outwards  over  the  floe,  and  a  light  wind  persistently 


282       THE   VOYAGE   OF  THE   'DISCOVERY'    [Aug. 

attacked  my  most  vulnerable  feature,  my  nostrils.  I  could 
feel  them  pricking  and  tingling  on  the  road  to  frost-bite,  but  as 
I  was  talking  to  Barne  on  my  way  back  this  feeling  suddenly 
ceased,  the  air  seemed  to  grow  much  warmer,  and  on  going  to 
the  screen  I  found  the  temperature  was  — 360,  whereas  a  short 
time  before  I  had  left  it  at  —515°.  It  was  a  striking  example 
of  the  waves  of  temperature  that  occur  in  this  comparatively 
calm,  clear  weather.  Koettlitz,  who  has  been  to  his  thermo- 
meter off  the  cape,  reports  a  minimum  of  — 620  and  a  present 
temperature  of  —  5  7  "5°,  which  is  probably  the  degree  of  cold 
in  which  Shackleton  and  Hodgson  are  now  labouring  to  clear 
the  latter's  fish  trap,  a  task  in  which  they  are  consequently 
not  much  to  be  envied.  The  cold  is  pushing  through  the 
weak  spots  in  our  defences  below,  and  makes  itself  known  as 
usual  by  an  increase  of  ice  on  the  bulkheads  and  over  the 
bolts,  but  we  have  not  much  difficulty  in  keeping  the  air  in  the 
wardroom  up  to  500.' 

1  August  9. — Preparations  for  sledging  are  being  pushed  on 
apace  j  it  is  astonishing  what  a  lot  of  time  and  attention  it  all 
takes. 

'  There  is  now  a  bright  orange  light  to  the  northward  at 
noon,  and  each  day  brings  a  nearer  approach  of  the  sun;  in 
a  week  we  shall  have  good  light  for  several  hours,  and  in  a 
fortnight  we  shall  be  welcoming  back  the  sun. 

1  The  result  of  the  snowless  wind  which  we  have  had  of 
late  has  been  to  harden  and  polish  the  surfaces  of  the  floes 
and  the  hill  slopes.  I  find  it  impossible  to  maintain  footing 
on  slopes  which  I  could  climb  easily  a  fortnight  ago.  Seals 
have  ceased  to  appear  on  the  ice  for  a  long  time,  but  they  are 
still  about  beneath  it,  and  can  be  heard  at  the  tide  cracks  and 
at  their  snow-covered  breathing-holes  ;  occasionally  they  come 
under  the  ship  and  give  a  prolonged  whining  snort,  unlike  any 
sound  one  can  recall,  but  which  can  be  distinctly  heard  within. 
In  the  early  winter  we  were  much  puzzled  by  this  noise,  and 
many  declared  that  it  was  caused  by  the  ice,  but  we  have  since 
traced  it  without  doubt  to  the  seals. 

'Many  times  lately  we  have  heard  mysterious  noises  on 


i902]  PUZZLING   ICE-FORMATIONS  283 

deck  when  the  temperature  is  falling.  Amidst  the  sharp 
crackling  of  the  rigging  which  always  accompanies  this 
condition,  there  is  occasionally  a  loud  report  like  the  fall  of 
some  heavy  weight.  In  whatever  cabin  one  may  be,  it  seems 
to  be  immediately  overhead.  Again  and  again  we  have  dashed 
on  deck  to  discover  the  cause,  but  always  without  result.  It  is 
so  uncanny  that  we  now  feel  confident  that  it  is  the  manifesta- 
tion of  our  own  particular  ghost.' 

'  August  12. — Another  blizzard,  so  thick  that  one  cannot 
see  one's  hand  before  one's  face.  Two  days  ago  we  had 
almost  cleared  the  snow  from  off  the  boats  j  now  they  will  be 
completely  covered  again.  No  one  goes  out  on  these  occasions  ; 
the  drifting  snow  has  very  much  the  effect  of  a  sandblast — it 
positively  pricks  the  skin  and  brings  frost-bites  with  alarming 
rapidity.  Though  it  is  now  moderately  light  at  noon,  we  could 
see  nothing  to-day  but  a  whitening  of  the  whirling  cloud  about 
us.  The  dogs,  whose  kennels  were  likely  to  be  drifted  up, 
were  brought  on  board  early  in  the  storm ;  they  are  generally 
rather  sad  and  subdued  on  such  occasions,  and  can  be  safely 
huddled  together  without  fear  of  a  fight,  always  excepting  the 
redoubtable  "  Nigger,"  who  is  given  a  corner  to  himself.  With 
him  action  follows  so  quickly  on  thought,  and  is  so  im- 
mediately effective,  that  it  is  considered  advisable  to  take  no 
risks.' 

'August  13. —  .  .  .  Walked  to-day  round  the  cape  to 
Pram  Point ;  it  is  between  three  and  four  miles  from  the  ship, 
and  is  a  spot  that  has  been  visited  by  us  often  throughout  the 
winter.  A  little  beyond  this  point  lies  the  limiting  line  up  to 
which  the  sea-ice  broke  away  in  the  autumn,  and  consequently 
on  the  farther  side  of  this  line  lies  ice  of  an  unknown  age 
whose  surface  gradually  rises  to  the  level  of  the  barrier, 
whereas  on  the  near  side  the  ice  is  all  of  recent  formation. 
The  centre  of  interest  lies  in  the  ridges  which  have  formed  and 
are  continuing  to  form  in  this  region.  The  coastline  beyond 
the  point  runs  towards  Erebus,  only  slightly  curving,  and 
fringed  with  steep  ice-cliffs  and  crevassed  slopes. 

1  The  ridges  in  the  ice  are  parallel  to  each  other  and  to  the 


284       THE   VOYAGE   OF  THE    'DISCOVERY'    [Aug. 

coastline,  and  extend  for  a  considerable  distance  along  it. 
From  the  heights  above  they  look  like  heavy,  round-crested 
rollers  of  the  sea  that  are  preparing  to  fling  themselves  on  the 
shore,  so  smooth  and  regular  do  their  undulations  appear,  and 
so  gradually  are  they  lost  in  the  plain  beyond ;  and  from  the 
same  heights  also  they  have  frequently  been  counted,  and 
I  think  most  of  us  have  made  their  number  to  be  seventeen. 
But  amongst  the  ridges  it  is  possible  to  see  that  their  summits 
are  cracked  in  an  irregular  fashion,  and  that  they  are  by  no 
means  regular  in  height.  This  may  well  be  accounted  for  by  the 
varying  amount  of  snow  which  has  fallen  in  the  hollows.  To- 
day I  measured  two  of  these  ridges  from  crest  to  hollow,  and 
found  one  to  be  18  feet,  whilst  another  nearer  the  shore  was 
14  feet.  There  can  be  little  doubt  that  this  formation  is  due 
to  the  ice-sheet  pressing  up  from  the  south ;  and,  large  as  the 
disturbance  is,  when  the  mighty  nature  of  the  cause  is  con- 
sidered, it  vanishes  into  insignificance. 

'  Whatever  the  cause  may  be,  it  is  still  active,  for  the 
freshly  formed  ice  to  the  southward  is  gradually  being  waved 
up  in  the  same  fashion.  The  whole  thing  is  puzzling,  because 
one  is  at  a  loss  to  account  for  the  absence  of  ridges  further  to 
the  north,  and  because,  if  this  is  a  measure  of  the  movement 
of  the  great  ice-sheet,  that  movement  must  be  extremely  small, 
as  the  whole  extent  of  the  pressing-up  of  the  new  sea-ice  cannot 
be  more  than  a  collapse  of  twenty  or  thirty  yards  at  the  outside. 
In  any  case  it  will  be  an  interesting  thing  to  watch  for  further 
developments  in  this  movement,  and  to  see  whether  there  is 
any  difference  in  its  rate  in  summer.' 

What  was  at  this  time  comparatively  new  sea-ice  remained 
fast  throughout  the  following  winter,  and  we  saw  the  ridges  in 
it  gradually  rising  in  a  slow,  silent,  uncanny  fashion,  until  they 
presented  a  huge  confusion  of  upreared  ice-blocks. 

'  August  16. —  .  .  .  We  have  now  three  litters  of  puppies  in 
various  stages  of  development.  "  Vincka,"  Armitage's  pet 
Samoyede,  has  four  which  were  born  a  month  ago  and  are 
now  capable  of  snarling  and  snapping  on  their  own  account. 
"  Blanco  "  produced  five  on  the  nth.     She  has  since  succeeded 


i9o2]  CONCERNING  THE  DOGS  285 

in  killing  two,  but  the  remainder  of  her  family  are  just  opening 
their  eyes  on  this  strange  new  world  and  rolling  about  their 
warm  nest  with  shrill  squeals.  To-day  "Nell"  has  added 
seven  to  the  puppy  population;  they  look  like  seven  little 
blind  rats,  but  she  guards  them  very  jealously  with  ominous 
growls  when  anyone  approaches.  We  shall  probably  reduce 
this  last  litter  to  four  or  five,  and  so  remain  the  possessors  of 
about  a  dozen  in  all. 

1  Each  mother  has  her  own  comfortable  nest  under  the 
shelter  of  the  forecastle,  and  gets  sufficient  warmth  from  the 
straw  and  sacking  which  are  plentifully  distributed  about  it. 
"  Vincka "  takes  her  maternal  duties  very  lightly,  and  spends 
the  day  in  teasing  her  offspring,  apparently  under  the  impression 
that  they  exist  to  romp  with  her.  But  her  pups  don't  see  it  in 
the  same  light  :  their  small  minds  are  seriously  bent  on  explora- 
tion, and  they  become  so  annoyed  at  their  mother's  levity  that 
they  growl  and  snap  at  all  her  playful  efforts,  and  occasionally 
fly  into  paroxysms  of  rage.  "  Blanco  "  is  a  lady  possessed 
of  much  low  cunning,  which  has  made  her  very  unpopular 
with  the  men.  It  was  not  expected  that  she  would  prove  a 
good  mother,  and  she  certainly  is  not ;  her  three  small  mites 
would  find  it  hard  to  get  a  living  without  human  assistance. 
But  "  Nell "  promises  to  be  in  all  respects  a  model  parent. 
She  has  always  possessed  a  very  uncertain  temper,  and  the 
responsibilities  of  a  family  have  rendered  her  absolutely  fierce. 
One  has  to  approach  her  nest  with  great  caution  and  be 
extremely  careful  not  to  do  anything  that  she  may  consider 
suspicious ;  but  when  she  is  assured  that  one's  intentions  are 
friendly,  she  will  condescend  to  accept  ministrations  to  her 
wants. 

1  We  have  had  "  Brownie,"  another  of  the  dogs,  under 
shelter  for  some  time  ;  he  is  a  very  handsome  beast,  with  nice 
affectionate  manners  which  make  him  rather  a  pet  with  all, 
so  that  when  he  was  found  shivering  violently  in  the  cold, 
pity  was  taken  on  him  and  he  was  brought  under  the  fore- 
castle. Careful  observation,  however,  showed  that  he  is  really 
rather  a  rascal,  and  that  he  is  in  the  habit  of  putting  on  his 


286       THE   VOYAGE   OF   THE    'DISCOVERY'    [Aug. 

shivering  fits  when  anyone  appears  in  sight ;  he  is  evidently 
aware  that  if  he  is  taken  on  board  he  will  not  only  get  a 
warmer  nest,  but  certain  tit-bits  which  his  soul  desires. 
So  to-day  we  have  hardened  our  hearts  and  put  him  out 
again. 

'There  is  a  world  of  character  in  these  animals  of  ours. 
One  of  the  greatest  pities  is  that  they  cannot  be  made  to 
follow  or  to  obey  a  word  of  command  unless  they  are  in 
harness.  They  are  great  losers  by  it  in  missing  many  a  walk. 
To  lead  them  continually  about  on  a  string  is  very  trying,  as 
they  pull  hard  the  whole  time,  and  it  is  odds  that  the  dog 
rather  than  the  man  directs  the  course  of  the  walk  ;  at  other 
times  they  will  be  particularly  meek  and  ingratiating,  trotting 
alongside  and  pressing  their  noses  into  one's  mit,  all  in  the 
most  companionable  spirit,  until  one  rashly  slips  the  leash, 
when  in  a  moment  they  are  off  on  their  own  devices,  and  are 
seen  no  more  until  a  wild  hubbub  at  the  kennels  signifies 
their  return,  and  someone  has  to  rush  out  to  prevent  a  fight. 

'  The  sport  they  most  dearly  love  is  to  worry  a  seal.  The 
hunting  instinct  is  paramount  j  the  most  listless,  weary,  bored- 
looking  dog  or  team  of  dogs  has  only  to  catch  sight  of  the 
black  dots  afar  off  over  the  snow  which  signify  the  presence 
of  seals,  to  become  electrified  into  a  state  of  wild  excitement. 
If  a  person  has  a  single  animal  on  leash,  the  chances  are  that 
he  is  caught  unprepared  and  the  next  moment  finds  himself 
without  a  dog  or  being  dragged  violently  along  on  his  stomach  : 
if  he  is  with  a  team  harnessed  to  a  heavy  sledge,  a  load  which  a 
moment  before  appeared  to  be  taking  all  heart  out  of  the  animals, 
becomes  the  merest  bagatelle,  and  he  is  lucky  if  he  has  time 
to  add  his  own  weight  and  so  prevent  himself  from  being  left 
behind. 

In  the  early  part  of  the  winter,  when  the  seals  came  up 
frequently,  loose  dogs  immediately  made  for  their  haunts,  and 
the  distant  furious  barking  would  soon  tell  what  was  going 
forward.  We  did  our  best  to  capture  these  stray  animals  and 
prevent  the  slaughter  of  the  unfortunate  seals,  but  of  course 
we  were  not  always  successful,  and  more  than  one  lifeless  form 


1902]  'SHORT   COMMONS'  287 

was  found  to  tell  the  tale  of  these  ravages.  In  each  case  the 
wretched  seal  had  been  literally  worried  to  death  ;  there  were  no 
wounds  on  the  body  worth  mentioning — in  fact,  the  hide  is  far 
too  thick  and  tough  for  a  dog's  teeth  to  penetrate.  The  fiends 
must  have  danced  round  their  unfortunate  victim,  rushing  in 
and  snapping  at  him  from  every  side  and  giving  him  not  an 
instant's  peace  until  life  was  extinct.  The  tormentors  did  not 
attempt,  and  in  fact  it  is  doubtful  if  they  would  have  been 
able,  to  feed  off  their  victim.  Soon  after  he  ceased  to  show 
sport  they  must  have  quietly  trotted  away  in  search  of  fresh 
excitement.  The  fact  that  they  cannot  get  food  in  this 
manner  is  a  distinct  advantage,  as  it  means  that  they  are 
forced  eventually  to  come  back  to  the  ship.' 

Later  on  a  rather  curious  incident  occurred  in  this  connec- 
tion. A  few  days  before  the  dog  team  was  required  for  a  sledge 
trip  to  the  south,  the  masters  of  two  dogs — '  Birdie,'  a  powerful, 
timid,  nervous  beast,  and  '  Snatcher,'  a  lighter-built  animal — 
took  them  for  a  walk  on  leash,  and  after  a  time  somewhat 
stupidly  let  them  run  with  their  chains,  thinking  that  thus 
handicapped  they  could  be  caught  again  without  difficulty; 
but  the  animals,  rejoicing  in  their  freedom,  soon  disap- 
peared from  sight.  Days  went  by  and  there  was  no  sign  of 
them,  and  finally,  much  to  my  annoyance,  I  had  to  start  with- 
out them.  On  my  return  a  fortnight  later,  I  learnt  that  after 
along  absence  'Snatcher'  had  suddenly  appeared,  very  worn 
out,  thin,  and  hungry  ;  and  guessing  seals  were  at  the  bottom 
of  the  trouble,  a  search  party  had  gone  some  way  along  the 
coast  to  the  north  and  eventually  discovered  '  Birdie '  in  a 
starving  condition  and  pinned  close  down  to  the  snow  by  his 
chain,  which  was  solidly  frozen  beneath  the  body  of  a  huge 
dead  seal.  The  dogs  must  have  worried  the  seal  to  death,  and 
in  the  scrimmage  the  latter  must  have  rolled  over  '  Birdie's ' 
chain,  holding  him  a  fast  prisoner  •  but  it  is  curious  that  he 
lay  there  and  starved  within  reach  of  plenty,  and  one  wonders 
also  how  long  the  other  animal  voluntarily  submitted  to 
starvation  rather  than  desert  his  companion.  One  never  quite 
learns  what  are  the  rights  of  a  story  like  this  in  real  life. 


288       THE   VOYAGE   OF  THE   'DISCOVERY'    [Aug. 

'August  19. — From  the  hills  to-day  I  was  astonished  to  see 
that  there  was  open  water  within  nine  or  ten  miles  of  us.  It 
cuts  round  close  to  the  islets  in  Erebus  Bay,  and  sweeps  in  a 
curve  across  the  strait ;  and  although  young  ice  is  again  form- 
ing, not  a  scrap  of  the  old  can  be  seen  beyond  this  line.  I  do 
not  think  that  a  ship  was  ever  frozen  in  in  polar  regions  with 
the  sea  so  constantly  and  completely  clearing  within  view  j  and 
wholly  ignorant  as  we  were  of  these  conditions  on  our  arrival, 
it  is  certainly  providential  that  we  should  have  fallen  on  such 
a  secure  spot  for  our  winter  quarters.  Except,  perhaps,  for 
New  Harbour  on  the  opposite  side  of  the  strait,  I  doubt  if 
there  is  a  place  for  many  miles  where  we  could  have  lain  with- 
out being  subject  to  appalling  dangers  and  difficulties.  During 
the  gales  our  over-bold  members  have  had  difficulty  in  finding 
their  way  back  to  the  ship  over  the  solid  firm  floe  :  what  would 
have  been  their  case  if  these  same  gales  had  broken  up  the  floe 
and  swept  it  away  to  the  north  ? 

'  Shackleton  has  invented  a  new  sledge,  or  rather  a  vehicle 
to  answer  the  same  purpose,  much  to  the  amusement  of  his 
messmates,  who  scoff  unmercifully.  The  manufacture  of  this 
strange  machine  has  been  kept  the  profoundest  secret  between 
the  inventor  and  the  maker,  our  excellent  carpenter.  It  was  to 
burst  suddenly  on  our  awestruck  world,  to  carry  immediate 
conviction  as  it  trundled  easily  over  the  floe,  to  revolutionise 
all  ideas  of  polar  travelling,  and  once  and  for  all  to  wipe  the 
obsolete  sledge  from  off  the  surface  of  the  snow.  An  inventor 
in  our  community  can  make  certain  of  receiving  critical  atten- 
tion and  outspoken  advice,  and  in  this  case  there  was  no 
reticence  at  all.  Advice  was  most  freely  given,  but  it  was 
generally  to  the  effect  that  it  would  be  kind  to  remove  such  an 
eyesore  by  immediate  burial  and  oblivion.  But  the  inventor 
refused  to  be  drawn,  and  rolled  his  machine  with  difficulty,  but 
with  the  light  of  enthusiasm  still  burning  in  his  eye.  It  was 
the  queerest  sort  of  arrangement,  consisting  of  two  rum-barrels 
placed  one  in  front  of  the  other  and  acting  as  wheels  to  a 
framework  on  which  the  load  was  intended  to  be  placed  ;  the 
manner  in  which  the  whole  machine  wobbled  as  it  was  pushed 


1902]  RETURN   OF  THE  SUN  289 

forward  on  such  ungainly  rollers  can  be  well  imagined.  This 
new  toy  continued  to  give  pleasure  to  the  inventor,  and  inci- 
dentally to  many  others,  for  some  hours  ;  and  as  I  came  in, 
Barne  was  assisting  Shackleton  to  rig  it  with  the  dinghy's  sails — 
I  do  not  know  with  what  success,  but  I  can  very  well  imagine.' 

Of  course  this  machine  was  very  soon  neglected  and  for- 
gotten, but  in  justice  to  the  inventor  it  ought  to  be  added  that 
there  were  times  when  the  snow  surface  about  us  was  so  hard 
that  it  would  have  been  quite  possible  to  resort  to  wheeled 
traffic,  and  I  am  sure  that  for  many  purposes  a  very  light  cart 
with  broad-tyred  wheels  would  have  been  extremely  useful. 
But  I  cannot  conceive  that  a  rum-cask  would  ever  prove  a 
desirable  addition  to  a  vehicle  ! 

1  August  21. —  .  .  .  The  sun  returns  to  us  to-day,  but,  alas 
and  alack  !  we  could  get  no  sight  of  it.  A  few  hours  of  calm 
in  the  morning  were  succeeded  by  whirling  snow-squalls  from 
the  south,  and  each  lull  was  followed  by  a  wild  burst  of  wind. 
I  was  glad  enough  to  have  everyone  on  board  under  such 
unsettled  conditions,  and  at  noon  when  we  had  hoped  to 
be  far  over  the  hills,  we  could  see  only  vast  sheets  of  gleaming 
snow. 

1  August  22. —  ...  An  ideal  day  for  our  first  view  of  the 
long-absent  sun  :  the  sky  was  gloriously  clear,  and  in  its  vaulted 
arch  the  strong  returning  light  of  day  hid  all  except  the 
brightest  stars,  and  these  wore  but  a  pale  semblance  of  their 
winter  aspect.  The  air  was  mild  and  the  temperature  ranging 
up  to  50,  as,  in  high  spirits,  many  of  the  officers  started  to 
mount  the  steep  hill-slopes,  determined  to  have  a  good  look 
at  our  long-absent  friend.  I  went  myself  to  the  top  of  Crater 
Hill,  a  thousand  feet  above  the  floe,  to  watch  for  the  returning 
orb ;  at  noon,  when  it  was  due  north,  it  rested  behind  the  long 
foot-slope  of  Erebus,  but  as  it  travelled  westward  its  altitude 
decreased  far  less  rapidly  than  that  of  the  slope,  and  gradually 
the  refracted  glowing  ellipse  crept  from  behind  that  obstacle 
and  stood  clear,  dazzling  our  unaccustomed  sight  with  its 
brilliancy.  For  long  our  blinking  eyes  remained  fixed  on  that 
golden  ball  and  on  the  fiery  track  of  its  reflection  j  we  seemed 
vol.  I.  u 


290      THE   VOYAGE  OF  THE   'DISCOVERY'    [Aug. 

to  bathe  in  that  brilliant  flood  of  light,  and  from  its  flashing 
rays  to  drink  in  new  life,  new  strength,  and  new  hope.  This 
glorious  sun  was  bringing  the  light  of  day  and  some  measure 
of  warmth  to  the  bleak,  desolate  region  about  us,  and  heaven 
only  knows  how  far  prophetic  thoughts  took  us  over  its  track- 
less wastes  before  those  beneficent  rays  should  again  vanish 
and  sombre  darkness  once  more  descend.  And  so  we  gazed, 
saying  little  but  thinking  much,  until  the  chill  of  the  air 
reminded  us  that,  however  great  the  promise,  summer  itself 
was  not  yet  upon  us. 

'  With  full  daylight  each  detail  of  our  landscape  once  more 
stands  clear,  and  the  view  from  Crater  Hill  is  magnificent. 

'  From  Arrival  Bay  a  line  of  rocky  ridges  runs  towards 
Castle  Rock,  facing  the  north-west  and  gradually  rising  in 
height,  with  four  distinct  eminences,  of  which  two  are  well- 
formed  craters ;  the  fourth  is  almost  on  a  level  with  Crater 
Hill,  and  therefore  nearly  touches  the  sky-line;  behind  it 
Castle  Rock,  rising  to  1,350  feet,  shows  in  sharp  precipitous 
outline,  a  black  shadow  against  the  snowy  background  of 
Erebus.  It  is  a  high,  hilly  country,  this  foreground,  with 
many  a  black  mass  of  rock  and  many  a  slope  of  smooth 
white  snow ;  in  itself  it  might  be  called  a  fine  rugged  scene, 
but  how  dwarfed  it  all  is  by  that  mighty  mountain  behind, 
which,  in  spite  of  its  twenty  geographical  miles  of  distance, 
seems  to  frown  down  on  us.  Even  Castle  Rock,  with  its 
near  bold  eminence,  is  but  a  pigmy  to  this  giant  mass,  which 
from  its  broad  spreading  foot-slopes  rises,  with  fold  on  fold  of 
snowy  whiteness,  to  its  crater  summit,  where,  13,000  feet  above 
the  sea,  it  is  crowned  with  a  golden  cloud  of  rolling  vapour. 

'  The  eastern  slope  of  Erebus  dips  to  a  high  saddle-backed 
divide,  beyond  which  the  snowy  outline  rises  to  the  summit  of 
Terror,  whence  a  long  slope  runs  gradually  down  to  sea-level 
far  to  the  east.  From  point  to  point  these  two  huge  mountains 
fill  up  nearly  900  of  our  horizon,  and  from  this  southern 
side  offer  almost  a  complete  prospect  of  snow-covered  land. 
Beyond  Castle  Rock  commences  the  low  isthmus  which  con- 
nects our  small  peninsula  to  the  main  island,  and  as  it  bends 


1902]  VIEW   FROM   OUR   HILLS  291 

slightly  to  the  east  it  can  be  seen  from  Crater  Hill.  In  run- 
ning towards  the  right  slope  of  Erebus  and  gradually  broaden- 
ing to  its  foot-slopes,  it  sweeps  out  on  either  side  a  huge  bay. 

•  The  eastern  bay  is  filled  with  the  perpetual  level  plain  of 
the  fast  barrier-ice  ;  scarce  a  vestige  of  bare  rock  is  to  be  seen 
in  the  vast  extent  of  its  coastline,  and  it  would  appear  that 
climatic  conditions  have  rendered  it  a  focus  for  snow,  though 
an  area  little  swept  by  wind  ;  the  mere  view  in  this  direction 
suggests  the  idea,  and  the  experience  of  the  Terror  sledge 
party  goes  far  to  substantiate  it. 

\  The  western  bay  is  cleared  of  ice  in  the  summer  ;  its 
northern  limit  is  marked  by  a  bare  rocky  cape,  and  in  a  few 
other  spots  on  its  coastline  the  bare  rock  stands  boldly  out. 
Three  black  volcanic  islets  stand  well  within  its  shelter,  and  it 
is  to  these  that  the  open  water  has  extended  since  the  late 
gales.  This  open  water  is  now  again  frozen  over,  but  the  dark 
colour  of  the  young  ice  forms  a  strong  contrast  to  the  older 
snow-covered  surface,  and  this  darker  shade  stretches  to  the 
north-west  beyond  sight. 

'  Looking  to  the  eastward  from  Crater  Hill,  one  has  Pram 
Point  almost  beneath  one's  feet,  and  one  gets  a  good  view  of 
the  regular  parallel  ridges  that  fringe  the  coast ;  beyond  these 
ridges  stretches  the  immeasurable  barrier  surface,  limited  to 
the  eye  by  one  long  clear  sweep  of  perfectly  regular  horizon 
stretching  from  the  eastern  slopes  of  Terror  through  more 
than  700  of  arc  to  the  eastern  slope  of  White  Island.  Beyond 
this  long  stretch  of  uniformity  the  eye  can  follow  the  sky-line 
over  the  three  comparatively  low  craters  of  the  White  Island, 
till  it  dips  once  more  for  a  short  space  to  the  horizontal,  and 
rises  over  the  sharp  steep  end  of  the  distant  bluff.  One  is 
now  looking  south,  in  the  direction  which  involves  most  of 
our  hopes  and  fears  ;  and  as  one  gazes  on  the  light  shades  of 
the  distant  snow-fields,  one  realises  the  impotence  of  specu- 
lating on  what  may  lie  beyond,  and  grows  ever  more  impatient 
for  the  hour  when  we  shall  march  forth  with  the  high  hope  of 
solving  the  mystery. 

'Leaving  the   south  once   more,   the   eye,    following   the 


292       THE  VOYAGE   OF  THE   'DISCOVERY'  [Aug. 

sky-line,  passes  on  over  the  high  outline  of  Black  Island,  if  island 
it  is,  and  then  rises  and  traverses  the  lofty  peaked  cone  of 
Mount  Discovery,  from  which  it  falls  slightly  to  an  elevated 
saddle-back  ;  and  then  suddenly  it  travels  to  a  far  greater 
distance,  and  towards  the  south-west  it  rests  on  very  distant 
hills  in  front  of  which  a  huge  glacier  descends  to  sea-level. 
Here  one  pauses  to  consider,  for  this  also  may  be  a  direction 
of  promise.  Can  this  be  the  road  to  the  west,  the  path  by 
which  we  shall  pierce  that  rock-bound  coastline  ?  Again  one 
sees  the  futility  of  speculation  :  we  must  go  and  see. 

'  Meanwhile  the  eye  has  passed  on  to  scan  that  great 
frowning  range  of  mountains  to  the  west  which  has  looked 
down  on  us  in  such  ghostly,  weird  fashion  throughout  the 
winter  months.  Seen  now  in  the  daylight,  what  a  wild  con- 
fusion of  peaks  and  precipices,  foothills,  snow-fields,  and  glaciers 
it  presents  !  How  vast  it  all  is  !  and  how  magnificent  must 
be  those  mountains  when  one  is  close  beneath  them !  But 
what  of  our  travellers  to  the  west  ?  Here  the  sky-line  runs 
from  peak  to  peak  with  ridges  that  can  rarely  dip  below 
12,000  feet,  and  it  is  beyond  hope  that  they  can  scale  to  such 
heights. 

'  But  northward  of  west  these  lofty  ridges  fall  again,  and 
the  ranges  which  stretch  on  beyond  till  they  are  lost  in  the 
fiery  glow  of  the  sun  are  lower  than  this  monstrous  pile  to  the 
west.  Perhaps  it  is  in  this  direction  that  we  shall  conquer  the 
western  land.  It  is  to  the  west  more  than  anywhere  one 
realises  the  impossibility  of  understanding  the  conditions  until 
our  parties  have  been  forth  to  face  them ;  that  there  will  be 
immense  difficulties  there  can  be  little  doubt.  To  expect  to 
find  a  smooth  and  even  road  in  that  great  chaos  of  hills  and 
glaciers  would  be  to  expect  the  impossible,  and  I  feel  that  if 
we  ever  do  get  beyond  those  mountains  we  shall  have  deserved 
well  of  our  country. 

1  Not  more  than  fifteen  miles  away  in  this  direction  one  can 
see  the  long  shadow  marking  the  decayed  pinnacled  ice  which 
puzzled  us  so  much  as  we  approached  our  winter  quarters. 
One  cannot  trace  the  position  and  direction  of  its  origin,  but 


1902]  GORGEOUS  SUNLIGHT  EFFECTS  293 

if,  as  we  suppose,  it  is  a  discharge  of  the  inland  ice,  and  if  it 
continues  as  we  saw  it  at  the  end,  it  is  certain  to  form  a  most 
formidable  obstacle  to  our  western  exploration. 

'  Finally,  from  the  vantage  point  of  Crater  Hill  one  can 
now  obtain  an  excellent  bird's-eye  view  of  our  own  snug  winter 
quarters.  Even  from  this  distance  the  accumulation  of  snow 
which  has  caused  us  so  much  trouble  can  be  seen ;  the  ship 
looks  to  be  half-buried,  and  a  white  mantle  has  spread  over  the 
signs  of  our  autumn  labours  and  over  the  masses  of  refuse 
ahead  of  the  ship.  Hodgson's  biological  shelters  show  as  faint 
shadowed  spots,  and  numerous  sharp  black  dots  show  that  our 
people  are  abroad  and  that  work  is  being  pushed  ahead. 

1  Over  all  the  magnificent  view  the  sunlight  spreads  with 
gorgeous  effect  after  its  long  absence ;  a  soft  pink  envelops  the 
western  ranges,  a  brilliant  red  gold  covers  the  northern  sky  ; 
to  the  north  also  each  crystal  of  snow  sparkles  with  reflected 
light.  The  sky  shows  every  gradation  of  light  and  shade  ; 
little  flakes  of  golden  sunlit  cloud  float  against  the  pale  blue 
heaven,  and  seem  to  hover  in  the  middle  heights,  whilst  far 
above  them  a  feathery  white  cirrus  shades  to  grey  on  its  unlit 
sides. 

1  Returning  to  the  floes  about  one  o'clock,  inspired  by  the 
scenes  which  we  had  just  witnessed,  we  informed  the  men  that 
the  sun  could  now  be  seen  from  Hut  Point.  To  our  astonish- 
ment there  was  little  or  no  enthusiasm.  Everyone  seemed 
extremely  pleased  to  hear  it  was  there,  and  glad  to  think  that 
it  had  kept  its  appointment  so  punctually ;  but,  after  all,  they 
had  seen  the  sun  a  good  many  times  before,  and  in  the  next 
few  months  they  were  likely  to  see  it  a  good  many  times  again, 
there  was  no  object  in  getting  excited  about  it ;  so  a  few  set 
off  at  a  run  for  the  point,  some  followed  at  a  walk,  as  it  seemed 
the  right  thing  to  do,  but  a  good  number  remained  on  board 
and  had  their  dinner.  It  is  perhaps  as  well  that  we  do  not  all 
take  our  pleasures  in  the  same  way  or  rejoice  in  the  same 
sentiments,  and,  at  any  rate,  it  is  evident  that  those  who  can 
so  passively  observe  the  coming  day  cannot  have  been  deeply 
affected  by  the  vanishing  night.' 


294      THE    VOYAGE   OF  THE   'DISCOVERY'   [Aug. 

' August  23. — A  glorious  morning;  have  been  away  over 
the  hills,  clambering  along  Arrival  ridges  on  the  sharp  angular 
stones  heedless  of  the  wear  of  my  finneskoes,  and  sliding 
down  the  snow-slopes  regardless  of  the  wear  on  other  articles 
of  clothing.  This  latter  has  been  a  very  common  practice  of 
mine  during  the  winter ;  on  the  smooth  hard  snow  one  can  get 
up  a  capital  speed  without  the  assistance  of  a  toboggan,  but 
the  practice  has  meant  the  frequent  renewal  of  a  patch  behind. 

'  The  air  to-day  was  splendidly  exhilarating,  with  a  tempera- 
ture of  — io°  and  a  wind  just  sufficiently  keen  to  make  climbing 
a  pleasure.  Erebus  showed  a  column  of  golden  smoke  rising 
perpendicularly  for  about  five  hundred  feet  and  then  streaming 
horizontally  to  the  east;  to  have  had  this  splendid  beacon 
giving  throughout  our  winter  a  continuous  record  of  the  upper 
air  currents  is  luck  indeed. 

'  What  unique  and  glorious  mountains  we  have  about  us  ! 
Nowhere  else  can  there  be  such  vast  masses  snowed  to  the 
base,  and  hence  possibly  nowhere  such  great  altitudes  above 
the  snow-line.  One  wonders  when  the  mountaineer,  having 
conquered  all  the  peaks  of  the  known  world,  will  descend  on 
this  lonely  region,  for  here  indeed  lies  a  field  where  the  bold- 
ness of  man  might  have  play  for  many  a  year ;  as  parties  could 
be  left  and  relieved  in  successive  seasons  with  practical 
certainty,  the  idea  is  by  no  means  inconceivable. 

1  To-day  one  could  see  the  islets  to  the  north  looking  very 
black  and  grim ;  besides  the  group  of  three  or  four  some  ten 
miles  away,  there  is  a  curious  turtle-backed  rock  not  more  than 
three  or  four  miles  from  Castle  Rock,  and  far  across  the  strait 
I  could  count  five  distinct  islets  bearing  about  W.  by  N.  A 
low  bank  of  cloud  to  the  north  shut  out  the  sun,  whose 
position  was  only  marked  by  the  intensity  of  the  golden-red 
glow  above :  small  fleecy  intermediate  clouds  were  floating 
about  Erebus,  golden  or  grey  as  they  passed  from  light  to 
shadow. 

'  The  scene  is  so  rarely  beautiful  that  on  the  hill-tops  one 
seems  to  breathe  inspiration  from  the  keen  air,  and  one's 
thoughts  are  compelled  to  soar  out  of  the  common  groove ;  but 


1902]  THE   FEAST   OF  THE  SUN  295 

as  one  descends  to  the  ship  they  fall  back  on  the  more 
practical  details  of  our  life,  and  little  remains  in  the  memory. 
Here  below  the  broad  light  of  day  has  revealed  not  a  little  that 
is  ugly.  The  ugliness  lay  concealed  under  the  glamour  of  the 
dim  mysterious  twilight,  but  now  the  traces  of  man  are  all  too 
obvious  :  here  is  a  little  heap  of  dirty  rubbish,  there  an  empty 
tin  with  a  gaudy  label,  and  everywhere  the  soil  of  traffic  stain- 
ing the  purity  of  the  snow.  It  is  all  a  little  too  much  like 
a  Bank-holiday  picnic. 

'  It  is  a  curious  fact  that  throughout  the  winter  most  of  the 
officers  have  preferred  to  take  their  walks  alone.  Many,  no 
doubt,  would  think  that  the  fact  was  by  no  means  curious,  and 
that  one  would  naturally  wish  to  escape  from  companionship 
which  he  was  so  constantly  forced  to  endure  ;  and,  indeed, 
before  we  sailed  I  constantly  heard  the  remark,  "  How  sick 
you  will  get  of  one  another  ! "  As  a  matter  of  fact,  we  are  not 
at  all  sick  of  each  other's  company,  and  if  it  transpires  that  the 
plans  of  two  individuals  coincide  as  regards  the  day's  walk, 
they  are  only  too  delighted  to  go  together.  The  real  reason 
for  separation  is  that  plans  rarely  do  coincide.  Nearly  every- 
one likes  to  walk  with  an  object,  and  no  two  people  have 
precisely  the  same  object,  and  if  they  have,  it  is  probably  not 
convenient  to  their  work  to  leave  the  ship  at  the  same  hour. 
It  has  also  to  be  remembered  that  when  two  persons  are 
muffled  up  with  little  showing  but  their  noses,  conversation 
can  only  be  carried  on  with  difficulty,  and  an  argument  is 
impossible.' 

'  August  25. —  .  .  .  Yesterday  we  kept  the  Feast  of  the 
Sun,  and  celebrated  it  with  an  excellent  dinner.  Turtle  soup, 
tinned  fish,  seal  cutlets,  and  mutton,  washed  down  with 
"  Heidsieck,  '95."  The  warrant  officers  joined  us  at  dinner, 
and  afterwards  we  had  the  usual  small  concert,  and  proceed- 
ings were  kept  up  late  and  with  the  greatest  hilarity.  Armitage 
brewed  punch,  but  after  previous  experience  few  were  rata 
enough  to  partake  of  it,  and  the  few  are  repenting  heartily 
to-day. 

1  Everywhere  on  board  now  is  stir  and  excitement ;  sledges 


296      THE   VOYAGE   OF  THE   'DISCOVERY     [Aug. 

are  being  put  together,  provisions  weighed  out,  dog-harness 
prepared,  fur  clothing  overhauled,  and  each  item  of  equipment 
carefully  reconsidered.  Everything  is  being  pushed  forward 
for  a  start  on  Monday  next ;  the  first  party  away,  others  will 
quickly  follow,  and  soon,  it  is  to  be  hoped,  our  travelling  will 
be  in  full  swing.' 

'  August  29. —  .  .  .  For  some  time  past  it  has  been 
amusing  on  entering  the  warm,  comfortable  living-quarters, 
to  see  the  table  strewn  with  garments,  reels  of  cotton,  skeins 
of  thread,  tape,  thimbles,  packets  of  needles,  and  every  other 
necessary  of  the  tailor's  art,  and  to  see  gathered  around  the 
table  our  whole  company  plying  their  needles  as  though  they 
were  being  sweated  by  some  iron-handed  taskmaster.  Indeed, 
I  am  not  sure  that  this  is  not  the  case  :  if  we  consider  "  King 
Frost  "  as  a  taskmaster,  he  is  certainly  an  exacting  one.  This 
sort  of  thing  is  bound  to  go  on  until  we  actually  start  on  our 
journeys,  because  no  one  is  ever  quite  satisfied  with  what  he 
has  made,  and  when  a  garment  is  completed  there  is  always 
some  suggested  alteration  that  promises  to  be  a  slight  improve- 
ment ;  and  after  the  spring  journeys,  when  we  have  had  more 
experience,  the  probability  is  that  nearly  everything  will  be 
altered  again.  However,  it  is  very  cheering  to  see  so  much 
enthusiasm  displayed,  and  it  augurs  well  for  our  work  that 
everyone  should  be  taking  it  so  seriously,  and  should  be  so 
evidently  bent  on  making  it  a  success. 

'So  our  only  sewing-machine  clatters  away  all  day  long, 
whilst  bent  fingers  are  stitching  busily,  and  the  whole  ship  is 
alive  with  the  bustle  of  our  active  preparations.  I  have  issued 
orders  for  sledging  to  commence  next  week,  and  for  the  gear 
to  be  ready  for  packing  on  Monday.' 

'  Monday,  September  1. —  .  .  .  All  will  be  ready  for  a  start 
to-morrow.  The  wind  has  sprung  up  again,  but  it  is  com- 
paratively mild,  and  we  are  packing  the  sledges.  To-morrow 
at  this  hour  I  hope  we  shall  be  spinning  along  to  the  north 
with  the  dogs,  to  test  our  arrangements,  the  climatic  con- 
ditions, and  the  discipline  of  the  animals;  whilst  Armitage 
and  Barne,  with  a  party  of  ten  men,  go  forth  on  a  similar 


1902]  READY  FOR  SPRING   SLEDGING  297 

errand,  as  well  as  to  bring  back  the  depot  which  we  established 
last  year  under  such  uncomfortable  conditions.  From  this  com- 
mencement we  shall  work  up  to  our  more  ambitious  projects.' 
So  now  the  long  winter,  with  its  darkness  and  forced 
inactivity,  was  at  an  end.  Although  our  faces  looked  pale  and 
white  in  the  glare  of  the  returning  day,  beneath  the  pallor  lay 
every  evidence  of  unimpaired  vitality  ;  and  believing  ourselves 
to  be  in  the  perfection  of  health,  as  we  were  of  spirits,  all 
thoughts  turned  to  the  coming  season  and  to  prospects  which 
could  look  nothing  but  bright  and  hopeful. 


298       THE   VOYAGE   OF  THE   'DISCOVERY'  LSept. 


CHAPTER  X 

HISTORY   AND   DEVELOPMENT   OF   SLEDGE   TRAVELLING 

History  of  Polar  Sledge  travelling— Early  English  Sledge  Travellers- 
Ross—  McClintock — Peary — Nansen — Visit  to  Christiania — Difficulties 
in  Selecting  Articles  of  Equipment — Comparison  of  Sledging  Conditions 
in  the  North  and  South  Polar  Regions — Objects  of  the  Sledge  Traveller 
— Description  of  our  Equipment— The  Sledge — The  Tent — The 
Sleeping-bag — Sledging-food — Calculation  of  Allowances — Packing — 
Cooking-apparatus — Cooking-lamp — Permanent  weights  of  a  Sledge 
Party — Spare  Clothing — Medical  Bag — Details  Concerning  Clothing 
and  General  Equipment. 

Much  more  in  this  great  work  should  we  survey 

The  plot  of  situation,  and  its  model, 

Question  surveyors,  know  our  estate, 

How  able  such  a  work  to  undertake.  —Shakespeare. 

It  may  be  fairly  claimed  that  polar  sledging  is  an  English 
production ;  it  is  the  direct  outcome  of  that  feverish  energy  in 
exploration  which  has  distinguished  our  race  for  so  many 
centuries  and  has  led  them  to  the  performance  of  such  glorious 
pioneer  work  within  the  Arctic  Circle.  To  give  my  readers 
some  idea  of  the  history  of  sledge  travelling,  I  cannot  do 
better  than  quote  the  words  of  one  who  had  perhaps  the 
largest  share  in  its  making,  and  who  gave  more  care  and 
attention  to  the  subject  than  has  anyone  before  or  since.  The 
following  words  were  written  by  Sir  Leopold  McClintock  more 
than  thirty  years  ago,  and  give  a  good  idea  of  the  conditions 
under  which  this  mode  of  travelling  was  evolved,  the  objects 
it  sought  to  accomplish,  and  the  state  of  perfection  to  which 
it  had  then  been  brought : 


1902]       SIR   L.  McCLINTOCK   ON   SLEDGING        299 

'  In  early  Arctic  voyaging  the  ship  alone  was  relied  upon 
for  penetrating  into  unknown  seas;  it  was  not  until  the  second 
and  third  voyages  of  Parry  and  the  second  voyage  of  Sir  John 
Ross — that  is,  between  182 1  and  1834 — that  sledging  was 
commenced  and  a  number  of  short  journeys  were  made, 
mainly  by  the  assistance  of  the  Esquimaux,  whose  methods 
were  closely  observed  and  more  or  less  imitated. 

1  But  our  seamen  had  not  yet  familiarised  themselves  with 
the  idea  that  it  was  quite  possible  for  well-equipped  Europeans 
not  only  to  exist,  but  to  travel  in  an  Arctic  climate,  as  well  as 
the  Esquimaux  themselves;  and  it  was  not  until  the  Franklin 
Search  Expeditions  were  sent  out,  between  1848  and  1854, 
that  men  seriously  reflected  upon  the  possibility  of  any  ex- 
tensive exploration  on  foot;  and  no  more  powerful  incentive 
could  have  been  imagined  to  rouse  the  utmost  energies  of 
the  searchers  than  the  protracted  absence  of  the  missing 
expedition. 

1  The  endurance  of  the  hardiest  was  called  forth,  and  the 
talent  of  invention  evoked  and  stimulated,  until  at  length  a 
system  of  sledging  was  elaborated  such  as  I  will  now  proceed 
to  describe. 

1 .  .  .  The  late  Sir  James  Ross,  who  had  served  with  very 
great  credit  in  all  the  six  voyages  of  Parry  and  John  Ross 
from  1818  to  1834,  formed  the  connecting  link  between  them 
and  the  searching  expeditions  which  commenced  in  1848,  and 
the  first  of  which  he  commanded.  He  was  acquainted  with 
the  flat  sledges  of  the  Hudson  Bay  Territory,  which  alone  can 
be  used  in  deep  soft  snow,  gliding  as  they  do  over  its  surface ; 
he  was  also  acquainted  with  the  Greenland  dog  sledge,  with 
its  high  narrow  runners  shod  with  ivory  or  bone,  and  which 
cuts  down  through  the  usually  thin  layer  of  snow  and  runs 
upon  the  ice  beneath;  he  was  familiar  with  the  various 
modifications  of  these  typical  forms  which  had  been  used  in 
the  Arctic  expeditions  of  Parry  and  John  Ross. 

*'  He  had  moreover  made  several  journeys  with  the  natives 
of  Boothia  Felix,  culminating  in  his  discovery  of  the  Magnetic 
Pole,  and  on  one  of  these  journeys  he  was  absent  from  his  ship 


300       THE   VOYAGE   OF   THE    «  DISCOVERY  '  [Sept. 

for  the  then  unprecedented  period  of  twenty-nine  days.  It  was 
under  his  directions  that  our  sledges  and  tents  were  made  in 
1848;  and  these  designs,  with  comparatively  slight  modifica- 
tions, have  continued  in  favour  in  all  subsequent  expeditions. 

4  The  tent  requires  little  description.  It  is  a  pent-roof 
about  seven  feet  high  along  the  ridge,  supported  on  boarding 
pikes  or  poles  crossed  at  each  end,  and  covering  an  oblong 
space  sufficient  to  enclose  the  party  when  closely  packed 
together ;  its  duty  is  merely  to  afford  shelter  from  the  wind 
and  snowdrift.  .  .  .  The  sledge  is  a  more  important  article  of 
equipment.  That  which  our  experience  has  proved  to  be  the 
most  suitable  is  a  large  runner  sledge  ;  the  runners  are  rather 
broad — that  is,  three  inches — and  they  stand  high,  carrying  the 
lading  about  a  foot  above  the  ice.  An  average  sledge  is  three 
feet  wide  and  ten  feet  long,  and  is  drawn  by  seven  men.  It  is 
constructed  with  only  just  so  much  strength  as  is  absolutely 
necessary,  since  every  pound  of  weight  saved  in  wood  and  iron 
enables  so  much  more  provisions  to  be  carried.  All  our 
sledges  have  been  drawn  by  the  seamen,  and  the  labour  of 
doing  so  is  most  excessive.  The  first  sledge  expedition  in  the 
search  for  Franklin  was  led  by  Sir  James  Ross  in  person.  By 
very  great  efforts  a  distance  out  and  home  of  500  statute  miles 
was  accomplished  in  forty  days  ;  but  out  of  the  twelve  picked 
men  by  whom  the  two  sledges  were  drawn  five  were  completely 
knocked  up,  and  every  man  required  a  considerable  time  under 
medical  care  to  recruit  his  strength  after  this  lengthened  period 
of  intense  labour,  constant  exposure,  and  insufficient  food. 

'  It  is  necessary  to  apprehend  clearly  the  nature  of  the 
surface  over  which  our  sledges  had  to  travel.  People  un- 
acquainted with  the  subject  commonly  fall  into  one  or  the 
other  extreme,  and  suppose  that  we  either  skate  over  glassy  ice 
or  walk  on  snow-shoes  over  snow  of  any  conceivable  depth. 
Salt-water  ice  is  not  so  smooth  as  to  be  slippery ;  to  skate 
upon  it  is  very  possible,  though  very  fatiguing.  But  hardly  is 
the  sea  frozen  over  when  the  snow  falls  and  remains  upon  it  all 
the  winter.  When  it  first  falls  the  snow  is  soft  and  perhaps  a 
foot  or  fifteen  inches  deep ;  but  it  is  blown  about  by  every 


i902]       SIR   L.  McCLINTOCK  ON   SLEDGING        301 

wind  until,  having  become  like  the  finest  sand  and  hardened 
under  a  severe  temperature,  it  consolidates  into  a  covering  of 
a  few  inches  in  depth  and  becomes  so  compact  that  the  sledge- 
runner  does  not  sink  more  than  an  inch  or  so.  .  .  .  This 
expanse  of  snow  is  rarely  smooth ;  its  surface  is  broken  into 
ridges  or  furrows  by  the  strong  winds.  These  ridges  are  the 
sastrugi  of  Admiral  Wrangell ;  and  although  the  inequalities 
are  seldom  more  than  a  foot  high,  they  add  greatly  to  the 
labour  of  travelling,  especially  when  obliged  to  cross  them  at 
right  angles.  .  .  . 

' .  .  .  Having  accompanied  Sir  James  Ross  on  his  sledge 
journey  in  1849,  I  was  entrusted  with  the  preparations  for 
sledge-travelling  in  the  second  and  third  search  expeditions 
under  Austin  and  Belcher  ;  and  this  method  now  became 
recognised  as  an  important  feature  of  these  voyages. 

1  The  utmost  attention  was  devoted  to  the  travelling  equip- 
ments and  the  methods  adopted  by  Wrangell  and  other  distin- 
guished Arctic  travellers  ;  and  the  spring  parties  of  the  second 
expedition  set  out  in  185 1  on  April  15,  instead  of  May  15  as 
in  1849,  and  sledges  carrying  forty  days'  provisions  were  dragged 
with  less  labour  than  thirty  days'  rations  had  previously  occa- 
sioned. Moreover,  the  allowance  was  a  more  liberal  one. 
The  result  was  a  corresponding  increase  of  work  done — one 
party  remaining  absent  for  eighty  days  and  making  a  journey  of 
900  miles.  But  in  1853  and  1854  the  sledge  parties  of  the 
third  searching  expedition  did  still  better  service — one  party 
accomplished  about  1,400  miles  in  105  days.  Another  party, 
having  several  depots  along  its  line  of  route  and  favourable 
circumstances  generally,  travelled  nearly  1,350  miles  in  seventy 
days.' 

From  the  above  it  will  be  clearly  seen  that  to  the  English 
explorers  of  the  early  nineteenth  century  belong  the  honour  of 
being  the  first  to  discover  that,  again  to  quote  Sir  Leopold, 
'  the  ice  which  arrests  the  progress  of  the  ship  forms  the  high- 
way for  the  sledge ' ;  they  were  the  first  civilised  beings  to  use 
that  highway,  and  on  it  they  accomplished  work  which  has 
remained,  and  will  probably  remain,  unsurpassed.     Of  his  own 


3o2        THE   VOYAGE   OF   THE    'DISCOVERY'  [Sept. 

share  in  this  development  Sir  Leopold  speaks  most  modestly, 
but  a  comparison  of  the  periods  of  absence  and  the  distances 
covered  by  the  parties  of  the  1853  expedition  with  similar 
records  in  1849  are  sufficient  to  show  how  great  it  was,  more 
especially  when  it  is  known  that  it  was  he  himself  who  conducted 
the  longest  journey  of  the  later  expedition. 

To  realise  the  great  revolution  which  had  been  effected  in 
Arctic  exploration,  it  has  but  to  be  considered  that  in  1820  the 
fact  of  an  explorer  venturing  beyond  his  ice-bound  ship  had 
barely  been  considered,  whereas  little  more  than  thirty  years 
later  it  could  be  written  of  these  far  Northern  regions  :  •  It  is 
now  a  comparatively  easy  matter  to  start  with  six  or  eight  men 
and  six  or  seven  weeks'  provisions,  and  to  travel  some  600 
miles  across  snowy  wastes  and  frozen  seas  from  which  no 
sustenance  can  be  obtained.' 

Although  these  sledging  records  of  half  a  century  ago  have 
not  been  surpassed,  it  would  be  incorrect  to  say  that  there  has 
been  no  improvement  in  sledging  methods ;  with  the  march  of 
the  times  and  the  advance  of  mechanical  skill  many  details 
have  been  improved,  whilst  the  comfort  of  the  sledge -traveller 
has  been  increased  and  his  hardships  mitigated ;  but  that  the 
fundamental  principles  have  remained  unaltered  is  sufficiently 
proved  by  the  figures. 

Since  the  high-tide  mark  of  1853  England  has  not  main- 
tained her  reputation  in  the  sledging  world ;  one  effort  of 
importance  alone  has  been  made — when  in  1875  the  'Alert' 
and  '  Discovery '  were  sent  forth.  The  sledging  outfit  of  this 
expedition  was  again  arranged  by  Sir  Leopold  McClintock,  but 
the  margins  of  strength  and  safety  were  rather  enlarged,  so 
that  in  many  respects  the  equipment  had  retrograded.  In  spite 
of  this,  long  journeys  were  made  in  very  adverse  circumstances ; 
and  had  the  expedition  been  able  to  continue  its  work  for 
more  than  a  single  year,  improvements  in  the  outfit  would 
doubtless  have  been  tried  and  further  advancements  suggested. 
In  the  last  years  of  the  century  the  Jackson-Harmsworth  ex- 
pedition spent  three  winters  in  Franz- Josef  Land  and  carried 
out  several  sledge  expeditions  with  dogs  and  ponies  ;  but  here, 


1902]  LATER   DEVELOPMENTS  303 

again,  the  effort  was  not  sufficiently  sustained  to  add  greatly  to 
our  knowledge. 

Since  1853  whatever  improvement  has  been  made  in 
sledging  methods  has  been  developed  abroad,  and  it  is  abroad 
therefore  that  the  modern  traveller  must  look  for  all  that  is 
latest  and  best  in  this  respect.  But  here  also  he  is  met  by  a 
want  of  continuity  and  system ;  and  whilst  he  pauses  to  admire 
the  splendid  efforts  of  individual  travellers  he  cannot  but 
deplore  the  absence  of  a  more  systematic  correlation  of  their 
experiences,  enabling  each  to  benefit  more  fully  by  the  diffi- 
culties which  his  predecessor  conquered.  Notwithstanding 
this  drawback,  however,  there  is  much  to  be  learnt  from  these 
experiences  :  the  inquirer  will  at  least  have  embarked  on  a 
history  of  absorbing  interest,  and  he  cannot  but  emerge  a 
wiser  man  if  he  follows  it  through  the  wild  and  sometimes 
tragic  expeditions  of  the  latter  half  of  the  nineteenth  century 
and  studies  the  historic  journeys  of  such  great  explorers  as 
Peary  and  Fridtjof  Nansen. 

The  sledge  equipment  which  we  took  to  the  South  was  the 
result  of  much  consultation ;  in  arranging  it,  I  had  to  depend 
largely  on  the  experience  of  others,  and  especially  on  the 
experience  of  one,  Mr.  Armitage,  whose  interests  were  identi- 
fied with  the  expedition.  From  the  commencement  of  that 
busy  year  of  preparation  which  preceded  the  departure  of  the 
expedition,  when  on  my  own  inexperienced  shoulders  alone 
rested  the  responsibility  of  every  department  of  an  undertaking 
of  such  considerable  magnitude,  I  realised  the  primary  im- 
portance of  an  efficient  sledging  outfit,  and  I  strove  to  glean 
from  every  source  such  information  as  should  serve  to  see  us 
properly  provided  in  this  respect. 

The  difficulties  were  great.  In  England  a  quarter  of  a 
century  had  elapsed  since  sledging  expeditions  of  magnitude 
had  been  accomplished,  and  during  that  time  not  a  single  sledge, 
and  very  few  portions  of  a  sledge  equipment,  had  been  made 
in  this  country.  The  popular  accounts  of  former  expeditions 
were  not  written  with  a  view  to  supply  the  minute  detail  that 
was  required,  and  no  memory  could  be  expected  to   retain 


3<h       THE   VOYAGE   OF  THE    'DISCOVERY'  [Sept. 

these  details  after  the  lapse  of  such  a  time  :  the  art  was  lost. 
But,  fortunately,  the  genius  of  Nansen  had  transferred  it  or 
built  up  a  new  art  in  Norway.  Having  modernised  the 
methods  of  the  older  English  sledge-travellers,  he  had  gathered 
about  him  a  small  body  of  tradesmen  cognisant  of  his  ideas 
and  capable  of  carrying  them  out.  Christiania  had  become, 
so  to  speak,  the  centre  of  the  sledging  industry,  and  within 
easy  reach  of  the  city  lived  and  worked  the  man  who  had 
made  it  so,  always  ready  to  give  advice  and  assistance  to  all 
who  needed  it,  and  always  ready  to  help  those  who,  like 
myself,  were  embarking  on  the  field  of  exploration  in  which  he 
had  played  so  eminent  a  part. 

In  the  autumn  of  1900  I  visited  Christiania,  and  in  Nansen's 
company  interviewed  the  various  tradesmen  who  worked  under 
his  superintendence,  whilst  obtaining  many  a  practical  hint 
from  the  explorer  himself.  But  now,  as  always,  Nansen  was 
an  extremely  busy  man,  and,  kind  and  considerate  as  he  was, 
it  was  impossible  not  to  realise  that  one  was  robbing  him  of 
hours  which  he  could  ill  afford  to  spare. 

Moreover,  my  own  work  was  of  such  a  nature  as  to  necessi- 
tate haste  ;  with  so  much  to  be  done  in  England  delay  was 
not  permissible,  and  much  as  I  should  have  liked  to  linger  and 
increase  my  knowledge  in  this  province,  I  was  forced  to  curtail 
my  visit  to  the  shortest  possible  limits.  However,  I  had  learnt 
enough  to  give  me  a  practical  idea  of  the  basis  on  which  our 
equipment  should  be  collected.  It  seemed  evident  that  we 
should  have  to  purchase  in  Norway  some  important  part  of  our 
outfit,  but  I  saw  no  reason  why  the  main  portion  should  not 
be  made  under  our  own  superintendence  in  England,  provided 
we  could  supply  patterns  or  full  instructions  to  the  makers. 
Sledges,  ski,  and  furs  could  be  made  and  supplied  from 
Norway  at  a  price  and  of  a  quality  which  we  could  not  hope 
to  equal  in  England,  even  had  we  been  prepared  to  issue  the 
fullest  instructions  and  specifications,  which  we  were  not.  On 
the  other  hand,  tents,  clothing,  cooking-apparatus,  and  other 
details  could  be  obtained  in  London  if  the  necessary  superin- 
tendence were  available. 


!9o2]  DIFFICULTIES  IN  SELECTING  EQUIPMENT  305 

Having  some  ideas  and  notes  as  to  what  our  requirements 
were,  the  question  now  in  my  mind  was  how  these  ideas  should 
be  put  into  effect ;  with  such  a  vast  amount  of  work  connected 
with  other  departments,  I  could  not  possibly  devote  the 
necessary  time  to  these  details,  and  even  had  I  attempted  to 
do  so  I  should  have  been  handicapped  at  every  turn  by  my 
want  of  practical  experience.  I  was  for  some  time  in  this 
dilemma  before  Sir  Clements  Markham  forwarded  me  a  letter 
written  by  Mr.  Armitage,  who  was  at  that  time  serving  in  the 
P.  and  O.  service  in  the  Far  East.  Armitage,  as  I  knew,  had 
served  in  the  Jackson- Harms  worth  Expedition,  but  it  was  not 
until  I  read  this  letter  that  I  realised  how  invaluable  such  an 
experience  might  be  ;  the  letter  was  written  with  the  intention 
of  suggesting  the  lines  on  which  our  sledging  outfit  should  be 
prepared,  and  I  saw  at  once  that  it  contained  the  ideas  at 
which  I  had  been  so  ineffectually  attempting  to  grasp. 
Armitage  met  me  on  his  return  to  England,  and  agreed  to 
serve  as  second  in  command  of  the  expedition,  provided  the 
permission  of  his  directors  could  be  obtained.  This  was 
granted,  and  within  the  month,  after  numerous  consultations, 
Armitage  was  in  full  direction  of  that  important  part  of  our 
preparation,  the  sledging  outfit.  Time  was  all  too  short  for 
the  excessive  care  and  attention  that  were  needed,  but,  thanks 
to  untiring  efforts,  we  had  collected  all  that  was  necessary  in 
this  respect  before  the  expedition  left  the  London  Docks  in 
July  1901. 

In  describing  the  various  articles  of  this  equipment,  I  shall 
explain  in  some  detail  their  origin,  and  endeavour  to  point  out 
in  what  respects  they  suited  our  purpose,  and  in  what  respects 
they  failed.  It  must  be  remembered  that  in  making  long 
sledge  journeys  in  the  South  we  had  no  previous  experience  to 
go  on  except  that  which  had  been  gained  in  the  North  ;  we 
were  forced  to  assume  that  Southern  conditions  were  more  or 
less  similar  to  those  of  the  North,  and  in  so  far  as  they  proved 
different  our  sledging  outfit  ran  the  risk  of  failure. 

We  found,  in  fact,  that   in  many   respects  our   sledging 
conditions  differed  from  those  in  the  North,  and  it  is  just  to 
vol.  1.  x 


3o6       THE   VOYAGE   OF  THE    'DISCOVERY'  [Sept. 

consider  all  our  sledge  journeys  as  pioneer  efforts.  It  is 
perhaps  as  well  to  indicate  these  differences  here ;  they  are 
essentially  climatic  and  geographical. 

In  regard  to  climate,  the  conditions  in  the  South  are  more 
severe  than  those  in  the  North ;  the  spring  temperatures  are 
lower,  and  the  summer  temperatures  far  lower.  The  early 
spring  travellers  in  the  North  have  rarely  recorded  a  tempera- 
ture below  —  500,  whereas  with  our  early  parties  the  ther- 
mometer frequently  fell  below  —  6o°,  and  at  its  lowest  stood 
at  —68°  ;  in  the  Arctic  summer  travellers  have  experienced 
temperatures  of  +400  and  even  +500,  whilst  in  the  height  of 
our  Southern  summer  the  thermometer  rarely  rose  above 
freezing-point,  even  on  the  great  snow-plains  adjacent  to  the 
sea-level ;  and  when  we  were  forced  to  explore  at  great 
altitudes,  we  were  fortunate  if  it  showed  higher  than  —  io°  at 
this  season. 

The  effect  of  these  generally  low  temperatures  was  naturally 
to  increase  the  hardships  to  which  the  sledge-travellers  were 
exposed,  and  of  which  so  much  has  been  written,  while  it  is 
doubtful  whether  we  could  have  so  well  withstood  this  greater 
intensity  of  cold  had  we  not  been  possessed  of  those  improve- 
ments to  the  sledging  outfit  which  have  been  added  in  the 
years  that  have  elapsed  since  the  great  English  journeys  of 
1850.  But  the  low  summer  temperature  has  one  advantage, 
although  we  were  not  fated  to  gain  greatly  by  it,  in  that  the 
snowy  surface  of  the  sea-ice  never  gets  into  that  sodden,  slushy 
condition  which  obtains  in  the  latter  part  of  the  Northern 
summer,  and  which  prevents  sledging  operations  being  under- 
taken after  the  month  of  June  in  the  Arctic  Regions.  Except 
in  a  few  places  where  dust  or  grit  has  been  blown  on  to  it,  the 
surface  of  the  Southern  sea-ice  remains  hard  throughout  the 
summer  ;  and  as  there  are  many  places  where  it  does  not 
break  up  until  the  latter  part  of  February,  it  is  quite  possible 
to  conceive  sledging  being  carried  on  over  its  surface 
until  that  month,  which  corresponds  with  the  Northern 
August. 

A  circumstance,  however,  that  is  far  more  objectionable  to 


,9o2]      SLEDGING  CONDITIONS   COMPARED        307 

the  Southern  traveller  than  the  extremity  of  temperature  is  Lie 
frequency  of  wind.  It  is  perhaps  too  broad  a  generalisation 
to  say  that  Arctic  journeys  have  usually  been  made  under  fine- 
weather  conditions,  but  few,  if  any,  Arctic  travellers  have  been 
subjected  to  the  distressing  frequency  of  blizzards  and  strong 
winds  that  added  so  much  to  our  discomfort  in  the  Scuth. 
Here  again,  therefore,  the  Southern  traveller  is  at  a  disadvan- 
tage from  a  climatic  point  of  view,  and  the  effect  is  to  increase 
his  discomforts  and  reduce  the  distance  he  is  able  to  march, 
for  it  is  only  on  the  very  rare  occasions  on  which  a  sail  may 
be  used  that  wind  brings  any  compensating  advantage.  In 
general,  therefore,  from  a  climatic  point  of  view,  the  South  is 
at  a  considerable  disadvantage  as  compared  with  the  North  in 
sledge-travelling. 

The  geographical  difference  between  the  work  of  the 
Northern  and  the  Southern  sledge-traveller  is  as  great  as  the 
climatic,  if  not  greater.  With  the  exception  of  Nansen's  and 
Peary's  journeys  into  the  interior  of  Greenland,  the  sledge 
journeys  of  the  North  have  almost  invariably  been  performed 
over  level  if  not  smooth  sea-ice,  and  it  is  especially  to  be 
remembered  that  those  record  journeys  to  which  Sir  Leopold 
McClintock  refers  were  made  amongst  the  frozen  channels  of 
an  archipelago.  If  sea-ice  is  much  broken  up  and  hummocked, 
it  may  constitute  one  of  the  worst  travelling  surfaces,  but  if  it 
is  smooth  it  is  undoubtedly  the  best  that  exists.  In  very 
general  terms,  therefore,  with  the  exceptions  I  have  men- 
tioned, the  travelling  of  the  North  has  been  carried  on  over  a 
comparatively  good  surface,  and  those  travellers  who  constitute 
the  exception  in  having  ventured  on  the  inland  surfaces  have 
made  it  abundantly  clear  that  the  difficulties  are  far  more 
formidable  than  are  found  on  anything  but  the  most  hum- 
mocked  sea-ice.  Turning  now  to  the  South,  it  will  be  seen 
that  everywhere  the  explorer's  ship  is  brought  up  by  solid  land 
or  by  some  mighty  wall  resembling  that  of  the  Great  Ice 
Barrier  ;  to  pass  beyond  his  ship,  therefore,  the  explorer  must 
either  travel  over  land  or  over  great  and  ancient  snow-fields 
which  possess  a  similar  surface.     Judging  from  our  present 

x  2 


3o8       THE  VOYAGE   OF  THE   'DISCOVERY'  [Sept. 

knowledge  of  the  Antarctic  Regions,  it  is  doubtful  whether 
extensive  journeys  will  ever  be  made  over  the  sea-ice. 

We  have,  therefore,  this  great  geographical  difference 
between  the  North  and  the  South :  the  greater  part  of 
Northern  travelling  has  been  and  will  be  done  on  sea-ice, 
but  the  greater  part  of  Southern  travelling  has  been  and  will 
be  done  over  land  surfaces,  or  what  in  this  respect  are  their 
equivalents. 

The  relative  merits  of  these  surfaces,  always  excepting  the 
very  rough  hummocked  sea-ice,  is  a  matter  which  has  been 
placed  beyond  doubt  by  travellers  in  the  North,  and  hence  it 
is  of  interest  to  relate  our  own  experience  with  regard  to  it. 
On  travelling  over  the  Great  Barrier  to  the  south,  I  was  con- 
stantly impressed  by  recognising  the  difficulties  of  surface  so 
graphically  described  by  Nansen  in  his  '  First  Crossing  of 
Greenland,'  and  I  came  to  the  conclusion  that  the  conditions 
were  very  similar.  But  I  was  still  more  impressed  by  the 
obvious  impossibility  of  dragging  a  sledge  over  such  a  surface 
at  the  rate  maintained  by  the  old  English  travellers  on  the 
Northern  sea-ice.  I  was  so  exercised  on  this  score  that  I  was 
forced  to  wonder  whether  it  might  not  be  our  own  incapacity 
fcr  walking  that  caused  us  to  fall  so  far  short  of  those  old 
records,  and  the  thought  that  the  British  race  of  explorers  had 
deteriorated  so  rapidly  and  so  completely  in  stamina  was  by 
no  means  a  pleasant  one.  In  the  following  year,  in  carrying 
out  our  exploration  to  the  west,  I  made  no  fewer  than  six 
crossings  over  the  sea-ice  of  the  strait,  a  distance  of  about 
forty-five  statute  miles,  and  the  mystery  was  revealed  when  we 
found  that  we  could  cover  this  distance  with  full  weights  in 
two  and  a  half  days,  while  with  light  weights  we  actually  got 
across  in  one  and  a  half  day,  covering  over  thirty-six  miles  in 
a  single  day. 

It  was  consoling  to  be  free  from  immediate  alarm  in  regard 
to  our  racial  stamina,  but  a  flood  of  light  was  thrown  on  the 
comparatively  difficult  nature  of  the  barrier  surface ;  we  saw 
that  the  difficulties  we  had  met  in  crossing  it  were  by  no 
means  existent  only  in  our  imagination.     The  barrier  surface 


1902]  ANTARCTIC   DISADVANTAGES  309 

varied  greatly,  but,  taking  an  average  condition,  I  doubt 
whether  we  should  have  approached  twenty  miles  over  it  by 
expending  an  equal  amount  of  energy  to  that  which  gave  us 
the  thirty-six  miles  over  the  sea-ice.  This  argues  a  great 
difference,  and  it  is  one  that  cannot  be  wholly  explained. 
Of  course  the  primary  condition  of  importance  on  which 
the  excellence  of  a  surface  depends  is  its  relative  hardness. 
The  snow  surface  of  the  sea-ice,  when  we  crossed  it  so 
rapidly,  was  so  hard  that  the  sledges  left  but  a  faint  track  ;  at 
the  same  time,  it  was  not  too  hard  to  prevent  one's  fur-clad 
foot  from  getting  some  grip  at  each  step.  On  the  other  hand, 
the  sledges  always  left  a  well-marked  track  in  the  barrier 
surface,  and  at  each  step  one  sank  ankle-deep  and  sometimes 
even  deeper.  But  this  is  by  no  means  the  only  factor  that 
governs  a  surface  ;  wind,  sun,  temperature,  and  the  age  of  the 
snowfall  are  all  elements  that  affect  it,  increasing  or  decreasing 
the  friction  on  the  sledge-runners  in  a  manner  that  is  often 
inexplicable  and  sometimes  exasperating.  All  such  changes, 
however,  will  be  dealt  with  in  the  accounts  of  our  sledge 
journeys ;  for  the  present  it  is  only  necessary  to  point  out  that 
it  is  difficult  to  define  exactly  what  constitutes  a  good  or  a  bad 
sledging  surface. 

Besides  being  dependent  on  the  climatic  conditions  and 
on  the  nature  of  the  snow  over  which  he  journeys,  the  sledge- 
traveller  has  to  consider  other  obstructions  which  more 
obviously  hinder  his  progress.  On  the  sea-ice  he  may  meet 
with  those  elevated  fragments  pressed  up  by  the  movement 
and  distortion  of  the  ice-sheet,  which  are  commonly  called 
hummocks  ;  on  sea  or  on  land  he  may  encounter  regions 
where  the  wind  has  ploughed  the  snow  into  furrows,  the  waves 
between  which  are  technically  termed  sastrugi;  on  the  land- 
ice  he  may  meet  vast  ridges  and  chasms,  cracks  and  crevasses, 
mild  and  gentle  undulations,  or  any  other  resultant  of  the 
irresistible  movement  of  an  ice-sheet.  All  such  obstacles  are 
very  obvious  deterrents,  and  exist  both  in  the  North  and  in 
the  South,  but  to  a  different  degree.  Sea-ice  in  the  South, 
as  far  as  we  know  it,  is  extraordinarily  free  from  hummocks, 


310      THE   VOYAGE   OF    THE    'DISCOVERY'  [Sept. 

and  such  is  its  geographical  situation  that  the  probability  is 
there  are  few  places  in  the  Antarctic  Regions  where  the  ice 
will  be  found  much  pressed  up;  while  in  the  North  hum- 
mocks have  been  the  bane  of  many  a  sledge  journey.  In 
regard  to  sastrugi,  it  is  probable  that  such  a  wind-swept  area 
as  the  Antarctic  outvies  the  more  placid  North ;  indeed,  I 
doubt  whether  snow-waves  have  ever  been  seen  before  of  such 
giant  size  as  some  which  we  observed  abreast  of  our  windiest 
gullies  or  on  the  high  plateau  of  Victoria  Land.  In  regard 
to  the  disturbances  of  the  vast  land  ice-sheets  it  is  difficult  to 
institute  any  comparison  with  the  North,  but  these  formed  a 
sufficiently  solid  obstruction  to  many  of  our  sledging  efforts. 

A  general  comparison  of  the  sledging  conditions  met  with 
in  the  North  and  in  the  South  cannot  be  said,  therefore,  to 
be  in  favour  of  the  latter,  and  it  must  be  conceded  that  the 
Antarctic  sledge-traveller  journeys  under  considerable  relative 
disadvantages :  he  has  to  meet  severer  climatic  conditions,  he 
has  to  pull  his  sledges  over  heavier  surfaces,  and  he  is  not 
likely  to  encounter  fewer  obstacles  in  his  path.  Hence  it  is 
probable  that  the  distances  recorded  by  the  Northern  travellers 
will  never  be  exceeded  in  the  South. 

I  do  not  wish  it  to  be  inferred  from  what  I  have  written 
that  the  sledge-traveller  does  or  should  go  forth  in  order  to 
make  marching  records ;  but  whatever  his  objectives  may  be, 
it  is  obvious  that  they  are  best  achieved  by  speed  on.  the 
march ;  and  hence  where  conditions  are  equal,  speed  and 
the  distance  travelled  are  a  direct  gauge  of  the  efficiency  of 
sledging  preparations  and  of  the  spirit  of  those  who  undertake 
this  arduous  service. 

From  the  summary,  necessarily  brief,  of  the  history  of  the 
development  of  sledge-travelling  which  I  have  given,  and  the 
equally  brief  account  of  the  physical  conditions  under  which 
it  is  conducted,  the  reader  will  see  that  the  object  of  the 
traveller  is  to  journey  as  far  as  possible  beyond  the  limit  to 
which  his  ship  can  attain,  and  some  idea  of  the  problems  that 
are  encountered  in  pursuit  of  this  object  will  have  been  con- 
veyed.    The  weight  which  can  be  dragged  by  a  party  is  limited 


i9o2]      DESCRIPTION   OF   OUR   EQUIPMENT        311 

by  the  draught-power  they  possess,  but  it  is  also  dependent  on 
the  surface,  the  state  of  the  sledge-runners,  the  manner  in 
which  the  sledges  are  loaded,  and  many  other  details.  The 
greater  the  proportion  of  food  in  this  weight,  the  longer  is  the 
possibility  of  absence  ;  but  sledges  must  possess  strength,  and 
therefore  weight ;  man  must  be  sheltered  and  clothed,  and  this 
cannot  be  done  without  weight ;  and  civilised  man  requires 
hot  food,  and  must  therefore  drag  the  weight  of  his  cooking- 
apparatus  and  fuel. 

The  less  that  is  eaten  by  any  individual,  the  longer 
the  food  will  last ;  but  there  is  a  limit  where  economy 
ceases,  and  insufficient  food  produces  loss  of  strength  and 
reduction  of  marches.  The  longer  the  marches,  the  greater 
the  distance  covered ;  but  staleness  awaits  the  over-pressed 
marcher. 

Good  sledging  is  the  nicest  balance  of  all  these  conflicting 
elements,  and  it  is  clear  that  it  can  only  be  accomplished  by 
the  utmost  attention  to  detail  in  preparation,  the  complete 
exclusion  of  all  but  the  bare  necessities  of  life,  and,  above  all 
things,  by  the  display  of  an  unconquerable  determination  to 
carry  it  through  in  face  of  all  risks,  dangers,  or  hardships. 

Perhaps  the  most  important  part  of  the  sledge-traveller's 
outfit  is  the  sledge  itself.  Our  sledges  had  been  made  in  Chris- 
tiania,  to  comprise  all  those  modifications  and  improvements 
which  had  been  suggested  by  the  experience  of  Nansen,  and  on 
the  whole  it  is  doubtful  if  we  could  have  provided  ourselves  with 
sledges  more  suitable  to  our  various  purposes.  The  main  dif- 
ferences between  these  sledges  and  those  used  by  older  explorers 
were  a  decrease  in  breadth  and  an  increase  in  runner  surface. 

Such  a  sledge  as  we  used  consists  of  two  long  runners, 
slightly  rounded  beneath,  with  a  strengthening  rib  above,  and 
curved  up  at  each  end.  The  strengthening  rib  is  pierced  with 
holes  at  intervals,  into  which  are  tenoned  the  uprights,  short 
pillars  of  wood  about  four  inches  in  length  ;  adjacent  uprights 
are  joined  by  cross-bars,  and  the  heads  of  the  uprights  on  each 
side  are  connected  by  long  thin  strips  of  wood,  which  end  in 
junction  with  the  upturned  ends  of  the  runners.     There  are 


312       THE  VOYAGE   OF    THE   'DISCOVERY'  [SErr. 

four,  five,  or  six  pairs  of  uprights  and  cross-bars,  according  to 
the  length  of  the  sledge. 

In  the  numerous  joints  thus  created  only  those  which 
connect  the  uprights  to  the  cross-bars  are  rigid,  and  these  are 
strengthened  by  small  steel  stays  bound  to  the  frame  with  wire. 
It  is  of  the  utmost  importance  that  all  other  joints  should  be 
flexible,  in  order  that  the  sledge  may  have  the  fullest  play  over 
a  rough  surface,  and  therefore  all  these  joints  are  made  with 
lashings  of  either  hide  or  tarred  hemp.  Hence  the  sledge, 
when  put  together,  is  by  no  means  a  rigid  structure.  Lifted  by 
one  corner,  it  can  be  distinctly  seen  to  sag  in  the  centre  ;  and 
as  it  is  dragged  over  a  rough  snow  surface  it  is  rarely  possible 
to  see  any  portion  of  the  runner  which  is  not  in  contact  with 
the  snow — in  fact,  it  is  very  fascinating  to  watch  a  heavily  laden 
sledge  winding  its  way  over  rough  ground  in  this  snake-like 
manner.  The  load  being  distributed  over  a  great  area,  no  part 
sinks  too  deeply. 

Measured  across  from  the  centre  of  one  runner  to  the 
centre  of  the  other,  our  sledges  were  all,  with  one  exception, 
i  foot  5  inches.  The  runners  themselves  were  3!  inches  across, 
so  that  the  sledge  track  from  side  to  side  measured  about 
1  foot  8|  inches.  In  all  we  had  twenty  sledges  when  we  began, 
and  this  allowance  proved  barely  sufficient  for  our  two  years' 
work;  we  could,  indeed,  well  have  done  with  half  as  many 
again,  but  this  was  owing  to  much  of  the  travelling  being  over 
extremely  rough  country.  These  sledges  were  of  various 
lengths ;  we  had  two  of  12  feet,  six  of  n  feet,  nine  of  9  feet, 
and  three  of  7  feet;  of  these  the  n -foot  sledges  proved  by  far 
the  most  convenient  for  our  work,  though  the  9-foot  were  much 
used.  A  length  of  12  feet  seemed  to  pass  just  beyond  the 
limit  of  handiness ;  whereas  the  very  short  sledges  were  com- 
paratively stiff,  and  skidded  about  so  much  on  a  rough  surface 
that  they  were  often  more  troublesome  to  pull  than  the  heavier 
and  longer  ones. 

Taking  1 1  feet  as  about  the  best  length  for  this  type,  it  will 
be  seen  that  we  have  a  comparatively  long  and  narrow  sledge 
at  considerable  variance  with  the  old  Arctic  type,  which  was 


i9o2]  THE   SLEDGES  313 

10  feet  long  and  3  feet  broad.  The  advantages  gained  by  the 
longer  sledge  are  an  increased  strength  against  racking  strains 
and  an  easier  motion  over  inequalities  of  surface  ;  on  the  other 
hand,  the  broader  type  has  more  stability  and  a  greater  and 
more  convenient  stowage  capacity.  Our  own  sledges  had  to  be 
stowed  with  great  care  so  as  to  bring  the  weight  low,  and  even 
thus  over  rough  sastrugi  they  would  frequently  capsize  ;  in 
spite  of  such  disadvantages,  however,  I  am  inclined  to  favour 
the  longer  and  narrower  form.  The  increase  of  runner  surface 
which  was  adopted  by  Nansen  in  what  he  named  his  'ski 
runners,'  was  a  comparatively  natural  outcome  of  the  new  con- 
dition of  surface  for  which  he  prepared  on  his  inland  journey, 
and  as  our  conditions  were  very  similar,  it  is  a  fortunate  thing 
that  we  possessed  broad  runners.  There  were  many  occasions 
on  which  they  were  not  needed,  and  when  a  light  narrow 
runner  would  have  been  all  that  was  required  ;  but  there  were 
others  when  we  needed  every  inch  of  bearing  surface  we 
possessed  to  support  the  sledges  on  the  light  soft  snow. 

The  weight  of  an  11-foot  sledge  such  as  I  have  described 
may  be  anything  between  40  and  47  lbs.,  and  this  was  none 
too  light  for  some  of  our  purposes  where  the  full  strength  of 
the  structure  was  required  ;  but  on  the  level  barrier  I  think  it 
would  be  possible  to  travel  with  a  considerably  lighter  sledge. 
The  weight  which  can  be  placed  on  such  a  sledge  varies 
according  to  circumstance,  but  in  general  the  full  load  may  be 
said  to  be  about  600  lbs. 

These  sledges  are  made  of  ash,  and  it  is  of  great  importance 
that  the  wood  should  be  thoroughly  well  selected  and  seasoned. 
In  some  of  our  sledges  the  wood  was  not  above  suspicion,  and 
caused  some  inconvenience.  The  most  important  part  is  the 
runner,  in  which  the  grain  should  be  perfectly  straight  and 
even,  otherwise  it  will  splinter  even  when  running  over  snow. 
It  is  surprising  what  a  lot  of  wear  a  good  wood  runner  will 
stand  provided  it  is  only  taken  over  snow.  Some  of  our  9-foot 
sledges  must  have  travelled  over  1,000  miles,  and  there  was 
still  plenty  of  wear  left  in  the  runners. 

The  older  Northern  sledges  were  shod  with  iron  or  steel, 


314      THE   VOYAGE   OF    THE    'DISCOVERY'  [Sept. 

and  Nansen  covered  his  Greenland  sledge-runners  with  the 
same  material.  The  drawback  to  this  is  that  it  is  liable  to 
rust,  and  in  a  rusty  state  the  friction  is  of  course  much 
increased.  In  his  Northern  journey  Nansen  substituted 
German  silver,  a  non-corrosive  metal,  for  steel,  and  reported 
the  result  as  satisfactory ;  in  consequence  the  runners  of  all 
our  sledges  were  covered  with  this  metal,  which  added  con- 
siderably to  their  weight,  though  that  quoted  for  the  n-foot 
sledge  includes  this  item.  This  shoeing  gives  rise  to  a 
difficulty,  since  there  are  certain  conditions  of  surface  when 
German  silver  offers  great  friction,  whereas  it  is  impossible  to 
strip  the  runners  to  meet  these  conditions  and  then  to  replace 
the  metal.  To  get  over  this  difficulty  Nansen  devised  thin 
under-runners  of  wood  with  light  steel  attachments,  thus 
providing  for  the  condition  when  a  wooden  surface  for  the 
runner  would  be  desirable,  but  again  adding  to  the  weights 
carried.  As  far  as  our  experience  went,  both  the  German- 
silver  shoeing  and  the  wood  under-runner  proved  unsatisfac- 
tory ;  in  nine  cases  out  of  ten  on  the  snow  surfaces  over 
which  we  travelled,  wood  runners  offered  less  resistance  than 
metal,  and  though  the  idea  of  the  under-runner  is  theoretically 
good,  we  found  that  practically  the  thing  was  too  flimsy  ;  the 
snow  tended  to  pack  above  it,  and  it  was  liable  to  become 
loose  and  distorted.  Moreover,  it  introduced  a  complication 
where  simplicity  should  be  the  first  consideration.  As  far  as 
all  our  journeys  made  over  the  flat  on  snow  surfaces  were  con- 
cerned, the  plain  wood  runner  of  the  sledge  itself,  without  any 
covering,  would  have  been  amply  sufficient,  and  in  fact,  as  I 
have  pointed  out,  well-seasoned  wood  would  stand  far  more  wear 
than  could  well  be  given  it  in  the  course  of  a  single  expedition. 
But  many  of  our  journeys  lay  over  hard  rough  ice  or  places 
where  sand  and  grit  had  been  blown  over  the  snow,  and  where 
an  unprotected  wood  runner  would  soon  be  torn  to  shreds.  It 
was  here  that  the  German  silver  should  have  served  us,  and  to 
some  extent  it  did  ;  but  in  the  main  we  found  it  altogether  too 
soft — grit  was  liable  to  score  it  deeply,  and  the  metal  once 
pierced,  the  runner  gave  an  infinity  of  trouble. 


1902]  SIZE  OF  SLEDGE   PARTIES  315 

The  difficulties  we  were  put  to  on  account  of  our  sledges 
and  sledge-runners  will  be  mentioned  in  due  course,  but  it  is 
as  well  to  lay  down  here,  for  the  guidance  of  future  travellers 
in  these  regions,  such  recommendations  as  arise  out  of  our 
experience. 

It  may  be  safely  said  that  the  n-foot  ski-runner  sledge  is  a 
good  type  for  general  purposes  in  the  Antarctic  Regions, 
whether  it  is  to  be  hauled  by  men  or  dogs.  It  would  be  a 
good  plan  to  have  sledges  made  of  different  weights  to  suit 
special  circumstances.  Under  ordinary  conditions  such  sledges 
may  be  allowed  to  run  on  their  wood  runners,  but  if  it  is 
desired  to  ascend  glaciers  or  travel  over  rough  ice,  a  steel- 
protected  runner  is  necessary.  As  a  general  rule,  such  a  pro- 
tection would  only  be  required  for  a  limited  part  of  the  journey, 
and  I  do  not  think  it  would  be  difficult  to  devise  one  which 
could  be  temporarily  secured  by  clamps  and  detached  when  no 
longer  of  use.  The  importance  of  selecting  the  wood  of 
which  the  sledges  are  made  cannot  be  too  strongly  urged. 
Though  ash  has  been  mostly  used,  I  understand  the  American 
hickory  is  also  an  excellently  tough  wood  for  the  purpose. 
Sledge-runners  have  also  been  made  of  elm  and  maple,  either 
of  which  offers  little  friction  to  the  snow. 

Before  leaving  the  subject  of  sledges  it  is  well  to  mention 
the  necessity  of  providing  strong  heavy  ones  for  the  ordinary 
work  about  headquarters,  for  the  travelling  sledges  would  soon 
be  knocked  to  pieces  at  this.  Three  or  four  heavy  rough 
sledges  with  narrow  iron-bound  runners  did  all  our  heavy  work 
about  the  ship  during  her  stay  in  the  ice. 

In  point  of  numbers  the  '  Discovery's '  crew  was  far  behind 
the  old  Northern  expeditions  ;  it  was  this  fact  that  first  decided 
us,  in  arranging  a  sledge  equipment  for  a  condition  where  men, 
and  not  dogs,  would  do  most  of  the  haulage,  to  divide  our 
parties  into  the  smallest  workable  units.  The  old  Northern 
plan  had  allowed  for  parties  of  twelve,  or  at  the  least  eight, 
who  were  in  all  respects  self-contained,  but,  having  a  common 
tent  and  cooking  arrangements,  could  not  be  subdivided.  With- 
out necessarily  limiting  the  number  of  men  in  our  parties,  the 


316       THE   VOYAGE   OF    THE    'DISCOVERY'  [Sept. 

system  we  aimed  at  was  to  divide  them  into  units  of  three, 
which  should  be  self-contained,  so  that  whenever  it  was  advis- 
able a  party  could  be  split  up  into  threes,  or  three  could  be 
detached  from  it,  or,  again,  three  people  could  leave  the  ship 
without  carrying  more  than  was  necessary  for  their  require- 
ments. It  is  obvious  that  with  such  a  system  each  unit  of 
three  must  have  its  own  tent,  its  own  sleeping-bag,  cooker,  and 
so  on ;  and  herein  lies  a  disadvantage,  as  economy  of  material 
and  weight  can  be  better  carried  out  with  a  large  unit  than 
with  a  small  one.  It  has  also  to  be  remembered  that  the  risk 
of  accident  is  increased  in  a  small  party  by  the  diminishing  of 
its  capacity  for  mutual  assistance.  But  with  our  small  crew  it 
was  clearly  advisable  that  we  should  be  able  to  break  up  into 
small  numbers,  and  in  the  course  of  events  we  frequently  did 
so.  It  will  be  understood,  therefore,  why  each  article  which 
I  am  about  to  describe  was  designed  to  satisfy  the  require- 
ments of  three  men,  and  this  fact  should  be  remembered  in 
comparing  any  weights  I  may  quote  with  those  carried  by 
former  expeditions. 

The  object  of  a  tent  is  to  provide  shelter  from  the  wind  and 
drifting  snow.  Those  we  used  were  bell-shaped.  Some  were 
made  of  the  lightest  green  Willesden  canvas,  and  others  of 
thin  gaberdine  ;  we  rather  preferred  the  former,  as  they  let 
in  more  light,  and  the  green  tint  was  especially  grateful  to 
the  eye. 

Each  tent  was  spread  on  five  bamboo  poles  ;  the  poles 
were  seven  feet  in  length,  and  united  at  the  top,  and  when 
spread  the  tent  was  about  five  feet  six  inches  in  height  and 
about  six  feet  in  diameter  on  the  floor.  It  was  kept  more  or 
less  tight  down  on  the  poles  by  digging  out  and  piling  blocks 
of  snow  on  its  vallance,  or  skirting  edge — a  device  which  also 
effectually  prevented  the  wind  and  snowdrift  from  getting  in 
beneath  it.  The  entrance  was  a  hole  about  two  and  a  half 
feet  in  diameter,  and  the  funnel-shaped  door  was  sewn  around 
its  edge,  so  fitted  that  the  material  of  which  it  was  composed 
could  be  gathered  up  into  a  bunch  and  tied  from  the  inside. 
This  bunch  once    tied    up,    the    entrance    was    practically 


1902]  THE  TENT  317 

drift-proof.  There  was  one  other  hole  in  the  tent  close  to  the 
top  which  was  named  the  ventilator,  but  would  have  been 
more  correctly  called  the  chimney,  as  it  was  rarely  opened 
except  to  allow  the  steam  of  the  cooking  to  pass  away,  instead 
of  being  condensed  and  frozen  on  the  sides  of  the  tent.  This 
orifice  was  closed  in  a  similar  manner  to  the  entrance. 

On  the  floor  inside  the  tent  was  spread  a  stout  square  of 
waterproof  canvas  which  prevented  the  sleeping-bag  or  the 
occupants  from  coming  into  immediate  contact  with  the  snow 
surface.  This  floorcloth  spread  on  bamboos  likewise  made  an 
excellent  sail,  but  could  be  used  in  this  capacity  only  when 
the  wind  was  abaft  the  beam. 

Such  a  tent,  with  poles  and  floorcloth  complete,  weighed 
about  30  lbs.,  and  I  do  not  think  it  would  be  safe  to  use  a 
tent  of  less  weight  in  the  Antarctic  Regions  owing  to  the  heavy 
strains  which  are  brought  on  it  by  the  frequent  gales.  In  this 
respect  our  tents  deserve  a  high  meed  of  praise.  When  we 
first  travelled  with  them  in  windy  weather,  and  in  their  shelter 
were  forced  to  listen  to  the  thunderous  flapping  of  the  canvas 
as  gust  after  gust  swept  across  the  plain,  we  were  not  a  little 
alarmed  for  their  safety  and  our  own ;  it  seemed  impossible 
that  a  thin  shred  of  canvas  could  withstand  attacks  of  such 
violence.  We  went  so  far  as  to  fit  extra  guys  on  the  principle 
of  what  is  known  to  the  sailor  as  a  euphroe,  to  assist  in 
preserving  the  stability  of  the  erection,  and  when  it  was 
possible  we  built  snow  walls  as  a  further  protection  against  the 
extreme  force  of  the  wind.  But  with  greater  experience  we 
gained  more  confidence  in  our  tents,  till  finally  we  realised 
that  if  they  were  properly  secured  with  snow  it  would  take 
little  less  than  a  hurricane  to  uproot  them.  Before  the  second 
year,  the  constant  flapping  had  worn  the  canvas  very  thin  and 
threadbare,  and  as  far  as  appearances  went  in  the  second 
season  they  presented  the  most  dilapidated  aspect  from  the 
numerous  patches  of  various  colours  which  we  had  been  forced 
to  insert  in  the  weak  places.  It  was  when  in  this  condition 
they  still  offered  a  bold  front  to  the  wind,  and  saved  us  from 
the  rigours  of  many  a  storm,  that  we  realised  their  excellent 


3i8       THE   VOYAGE   OF   THE   'DISCOVERY'  [Sept. 

design  and  complete  suitability  for  Antarctic  purposes.  A 
tent  made  to  contain  more  persons  would  naturally  economise 
material  and  save  weight,  but  I  have  already  explained  why 
we  chose  ours  of  such  small  dimensions.  Silk  is  a  possible 
substitute  for  the  heavier  material  we  employed,  but,  strong  as 
it  is,  I  doubt  whether  it  would  have  equal  wearing  qualities, 
and  should  it  fail  in  this  respect  one  might  pay  dearly  for  the 
saving  in  weight. 

Experience  teaches  that  the  comfort  of  a  tent  depends 
largely  on  banishing  loose  snow  and  snowdrift.  People  learn 
to  take  the  most  extraordinary  precautions  in  brushing  their 
clothes  and  their  boots  before  entering,  and  in  having  the 
floorcloth  well  swept  within —precautions  which  are  a  great  aid 
in  keeping  the  equipment  free  from  ice,  and  thus  decreasing 
the  weights  carried  as  well  as  the  discomforts  of  the  journey. 
But  this  care  is  largely  a  question  of  personality ;  and  just  as 
in  a  house  it  is  generally  some  particular  person  who  deposits 
mud  on  the  carpets,  so  in  a  tent  it  is  generally  some  particular 
person  who  seems  incurably  desirous  of  adding  to  the  snow 
within.  The  qualities  of  a  sledging  companion,  however,  are 
compounded  of  too  many  elements  for  him  to  be  condemned 
on  such  a  trait  alone,  and  in  that  small  community  of  three, 
where  nothing  can  be  hidden,  and  good  and  bad  must  alike 
be  judged,  it  is  not  improbable  that  this  very  carelessness  may 
serve  to  make  the  delinquent  the  more  beloved. 

Though  it  may  not  appear  so  on  the  surface,  the  sleeping- 
bag  is  really  a  more  important  article  of  equipment  than  the 
tent.  In  the  bitter  blast  of  an  Antarctic  storm  it  would  be 
possible  to  exist  without  a  tent,  but  it  is  doubtful  if  one  could 
remain  alive  without  the  shelter  of  'the  bag,'  or  some 
additional  clothing  which  corresponded  to  it.  All  our  fur 
clothing  had  been  purchased  in  Norway ;  we  had  some  suits 
and  mits  made  of  wolf-skin,  but  the  greater  proportion  of  the 
furs  were  of  reindeer-skin.  The  pelt  of  the  reindeer  does  not 
possess  a  fur  in  the  sense  which  might  be  understood  by  ladies 
who  are  accustomed  to  dress  themselves  in  the  soft  expensive 
productions  of  a  London  furrier ;  the  reindeer  possesses  only 


X902]  THE   SLEEPING-BAG  319 

coarse  hair,  but  the  hair  is  closer  and  thicker  than  on  any 
other  animal,  and  therefore,  for  reasons  which  are  rather  too 
technical  to  be  given  here,  the  skin  is  better  suited  for  the 
polar  traveller  than  any  other.  We  had  never  contemplated 
dressing  in  furs  for  our  journeys,  but  the  many  troubles  to 
which  sleeping-bags  give  rise  had  induced  us  to  consider  the 
possibility  of  replacing  them  by  fur  suits  which  would  be 
adopted  for  night  wear  only.  Our  autumn  journeys  had  very 
soon  shown  us  the  error  of  our  ways.  The  sleeping-suits  soon 
got  into  such  a  hard,  stiff  state  that  it  was  almost  impossible  to 
get  into  them,  and,  once  in,  one  was  practically  incapable  of 
motion ;  in  fact,  we  thought  the  discomfort  of  a  night  where 
three  persons  thus  clad  were  striving  for  rest  in  a  small  tent 
would  be  difficult  to  equal. 

When  the  winter  set  in,  therefore,  our  men  were  soon  busy 
converting  the  reindeer  suits  into  sleeping-bags  ;  and  as  besides 
the  suits  we  had  a  quantity  of  unsewn  skins,  there  was  plenty 
of  material  for  the  change. 

As  can  be  imagined,  the  actual  work  of  turning  out  the 
bags,  after  a  suitable  design  had  been  fixed  upon,  gave  little 
trouble  to  men  who  were  accustomed  to  the  use  of  sail  needles; 
but  this  fact  serves  to  indicate  a  point  which  I  hope  to  make 
abundantly  clear — namely,  that  there  is  no  class  of  men  so 
eminently  adapted  by  training  to  cope  with  the  troubles  and 
trials  of  sledging  life  as  sailors. 

In  this  manner  a  few  single  sleeping-bags  were  made,  but 
the  greater  number  were  designed  as  '  three-man  bags,'  so  that 
all  the  occupants  of  a  tent  could  sleep  in  the  same  bed.  The 
single  bag  had  certain  advantages :  in  particular,  when  the 
temperature  rose  it  was  pleasant  to  have  shelter  which  was  all 
one's  own,  and  for  officers  the  single  bag  served  as  a  receptacle 
in  which  they  could  keep  their  diaries  and  note-books ;  but 
from  a  point  of  view  of  weight  the  advantage  lay  all  on  the 
side  of  the  '  three-man  bag,'  a  consideration  so  important  that 
eventually  everyone  used  these  bags  on  the  longer  journeys. 

The  '  three-man  bag '  was  made  with  the  fur  inside  and  with 
an  overlap  at  the  head  and  at  the  sides,  in  addition  to  a  large 


32o      THE  VOYAGE  OF    THE   'DISCOVERY'  [Sept. 

flap  which  could  be  drawn  up  over  the  occupants  when  they 
had  settled  themselves  within.  This  flap  completely  covered 
the  entrance,  and  could  be  secured  to  the  top  and  sides  with 
beckets  and  toggles. 

In  the  springtime  these  toggles  were  all  rigidly  secured,  and 
every  effort  was  made  to  stop  up  the  gaps  which  might  be  left 
between  the  flap  and  the  bag  ;  one  felt  and  found  that  it  was 
impossible  to  be  too  tightly  sealed  up,  and  many  a  pipe 
smoked  under  these  conditions  showed  that  the  icy  draughts 
from  without  could  not  be  wholly  banished.  The  warmest 
position  in  the  bag  was  naturally  the  middle,  but  it  was  not 
always  preferred.  As  an  offset  for  his  increased  comfort  it  was 
the  duty  of  the  centre  occupant  to  toggle  up  the  bag — a  task 
which,  with  bare  cold  fingers,  was  by  no  means  pleasant,  and 
generally  occupied  a  considerable  time. 

Our  three-man  sleeping-bags  weighed  a  little  over  40  lbs. 
on  starting  from  the  ship;  on  their  return  from  the  spring 
journeys  they  were  often  found  to  be  more  than  twice  that 
weight  from  the  accumulation  of  ice  which  they  carried. 

It  would  be  possible  to  make  such  bags  lighter  by  using 
the  skins  of  younger  animals  ;  and  here,  again,  it  is  of  im- 
portance that  great  care  should  be  taken  in  choosing  the  skins 
intended  for  use  in  an  expedition.  In  our  case,  the  haste  of 
our  preparations  prevented  sufficient  care  being  taken,  and  in 
consequence  we  found  a  good  number  of  our  skins  unsatis- 
factory. Nearly  all  had  comeTrom  older  animals,  on  which, 
whilst  the  fur  is  heavier,  it  is  not  necessarily  warmer.  To  be 
stowed  on  the  sledge  each  day  the  sleeping-bag  had  to  be 
doubled  over,  rolled  up,  and  secured  with  rope — no  easy  job 
when  it  was  stiff  and  hard  and  the  weather  was  cold.  As  may 
be  imagined,  also,  when  snow  was  drifting  in  the  air  very  great 
caution  was  needed  to  prevent  it  from  getting  inside  the  bag. 

The  most  difficult  matter  to  arrange  on  a  sledge-journey, 
and  the  matter  on  which  there  is  likely  to  be  the  greatest 
difference  of  opinion  and  the  most  controversy,  is  the  food. 

The  issue  is  clear  enough  :  one  desires  to  provide  a  man 
each  day  with  just  sufficient  food  to  keep  up  his  strength,  and 


i9o2]  SLEDGING-FOOD  321 

not  an  ounce  beyond.  It  is  certainly  suggestive  of  a  normally 
overfed  condition  in  civilised  mankind  that  when  it  is  reduced 
to  this  allowance  it  is  conscious  of  much  inconvenience  from 
the  pangs  of  hunger.  The  great  difficulty  for  the  sledge 
organiser  is  to  arrive  at  this  happy  mean,  more  especially  as  it 
can  be  regulated  by  no  food  allowance  given  in  other  parts  of 
the  world  which  enjoy  a  less  rigorous  climate.  The  sledge- 
traveller  seems  to  need  not  only  a  special  allowance,  but  also  a 
specially  proportioned  allowance.  If  one  really  goes  into  this 
matter  with  some  thoroughness,  as  I  had  the  leisure  to  do,  one 
is  involved  in  a  bewildering  array  of  facts  and  figures  which  it 
would  be  hopeless  to  attempt  to  display  with  clearness  to  the 
reader  j  but  there  are  a  few  facts  which  may  be  quoted  with 
advantage,  not  only  on  the  chance  of  their  being  of  interest, 
but  because  they  show  the  exceptional  requirements  of  the 
sledge-traveller.  And  it  must  be  remembered  that,  apart  from 
all  theoretical  conceptions  in  fixing  the  ultimate  allowance  for 
our  travellers,  I  had  the  benefit  of  a  great  deal  of  practical 
experience,  and  can  therefore  speak  with  some  knowledge  of 
the  subject. 

The  following  is  a  physiological  estimate  of  the  pro- 
portionate energy  expended  by  an  average  man  in  a  day  who 
does  eight  hours  of  hard  mechanical  labour : 

Heart  action  and  respiration  expend  .     62, 100  kilogramme  metres 
Bodily  heat  produced  expends    .  .  620,000  ,,  ,, 

Mechanical  work  for  eight  hours         .    125,000  ,,  ,, 

Total 807,100  ,,  ,, 

Assuming  these  figures  to  be  even  approximately  correct, 
the  absurd  disproportion  of  the  energy  expended  on  work  is 
noticeable,  and  hence  man  cannot  be  treated  like  a  machine 
and  fed  in  proportion  to  the  amount  of  work  he  does.  It  has 
a  very  practical  bearing  on  our  subject,  since  it  has  been 
remarked  by  even  experienced  sledge-travellers  that  if  a  party 
are  forced  to  remain  in  their  tents  for  a  day  they  ought  to  go 
on  half-food  allowance,  and  I  have  seen  some  of  our  own 
officers  rather  chagrined  to  find  that  appetites  remained  almost 
vol.  1.  Y 


322       THE   VOYAGE   OF   THE   'DISCOVERY'   [Sept. 

as  keen  during  a  period  of  forced  inaction  as  when  a  long  day's 
work  was  being  performed. 

The  above,  therefore,  shows  that  food  cannot  be  materially 
reduced  whilst  parties  remain  in  camp,  and  that  the  sooner 
they  are  on  the  march  again  the  better  it  is  for  the  distance 
they  will  eventually  be  able  to  travel.  The  figures  which  I 
have  quoted  also  tend  to  show  why  it  is  that  a  man  requires 
more  food  in  a  polar  climate  than  in  a  temperate  one,  for  it  is 
evident  that  the  expenditure  on  bodily  heat  will  be  larger. 

During  our  second  year  in  the  South  I  very  carefully 
calculated  the  food  which  was  provided  for  my  own  party,  but 
I  allowed  other  officers  to  modify  this  allowance  according  to 
their  own  ideas.  I  then  calculated  the  result  of  my  own  and 
Barne's  ideas  to  rank  in  the  following  table.  It  is  now  pretty 
generally  known  that  our  ordinary  food  can  be  placed  under 
three  headings — the  proteids,  or  nitrogenous  food,  such  as  is 
mainly  supplied  by  meats ;  the  fats ;  and  the  carbohydrates, 
or  farinaceous  foods.  It  is  known  also  that  man  ordinarily 
assimilates  a  given  proportion  of  these  various  natures  of  food. 
I  do  not  vouch  for  the  exact  accuracy  of  this  table,  more 
especially  as  I  find  authorities  differ  much  as  to  actual  require- 
ments in  this  respect ;  the  table  purports  to  give  the  number 
of  ounces  of  water-free  food  required  under  the  different 
headings,  and  I  have  neglected  salts. 


— 

Amount  required  for  Man 
in  full  Work  according 
to  different  Authorities 

Prisoner 
on  Hard 
Labour 

Army 
on  War 
Footing 

My  own 
Allow- 
ance 

Barne's 
Allow- 
ance 

Proteid 
Fats     . 
Carbohydrates 

4*5 

3-o 

14*2 

4-8 

4-1 
12-4 

4'4 

2*0 

I7-6 

4-0 
19-0 

4-8 
It) 

18-8 

8-6 

4  "4 

IS* 

7  9 
42 

17-0 

Total     . 

217 

21-3 

24-0 

24  '5 

24-6 

286 

29*1 

In  my  first  year  of  sledging  work  I  went  south  with  something 
considerably  under  the  allowance  given  above,  when  my  party 
suffered  much  from  hunger  and  grew  decidedly  weaker ;  in  the 
second  year,  with  the  allowance  shown,  our  strength  was  fairly 


1902] 


CALCULATION   OF   ALLOWANCES 


323 


well  maintained,  but  there  was  still  no  doubt  about  our  hunger. 
There  can  be  little  question,  therefore,  that  polar  sledging 
ranks  an  easy  first  as  a  hunger-producing  employment,  and 
inferentially  from  that  fact  one  can  draw  some  conclusion  as  to 
the  arduous  nature  of  the  work. 

But  from  the  foregoing  I  do  not  wish  it  to  be  thought  that 
we  were  able  to  maintain  our  daily  life  on  an  allowance  of 
twenty-nine  ounces  of  food  per  man.  This  figure  represents 
the  water-free  weight.  Whereas  absolute  freedom  from  water 
can  only  be  calculated,  it  is  never  achieved  ;  and  herein  lies 
one  of  the  greatest  difficulties  that  faces  the  sledge-traveller, 
since  it  is  obvious  that  the  water  is  a  dead  and  useless  addition 
to  his  weights.  Some  idea  of  the  difficulty  can  be  gathered 
from  the  statement  that  ordinary  cooked  meat  contains  no  less 
than  54  per  cent,  of  moisture.  Hence,  to  the  sledger,  to  reduce 
the  water  in  his  food  is  of  as  much  importance  as  to  curb  his 
appetite.  It  is  therefore  of  interest  to  quote  the  actual  nature 
and  weight  of  food  carried  on  the  occasions  which  I  have  taken 
for  examples. 


Ounces  per  Day  per  Man 

Self 

Barne 
14-5 

Biscuit    .... 

12-0 

Oatmeal 

i-5 

1  "5 

Pemmican 

7-6 

7-6 

Red  Ration 

i-i 

i-i 

Plasmon 

2-0 

i*5 

Pea  Flour 

i'5 

07 

Cheese    . 

2-0 

i-5 

Chocolate 

I-I 

i-i 

Cocoa     . 

07 

07 

Sugar 

3-8 

3-8 

33*3 

34  -o 

One  or  two  articles  in  this  list  need  explanation.  Pemmican 
was,  I  believe,  the  name  given  in  the  Hudson  Bay  Territory  to 
a  compound  of  dry  buffalo  meat  and  lard.  It  was  transferred 
to  the  dried  beef  and  lard  carried  by  the  Northern  sledgers, 


324      THE   VOYAGE  OF   THE    'DISCOVERY'   [Sept. 

and  in  that  sense  it  is  still  retained.  The  best  of  our  pemmican 
came  from  Messrs.  Beauvais,  of  Copenhagen,  and  contained 
50  per  cent,  of  lard  and,  what  was  not  so  pleasing,  20  per  cent, 
of  moisture ;  later  on  we  received  from  the  '  Morning '  some 
good  pemmican  made  by  the  Bovril  Company.  The  red  ration 
was  a  nondescript  compound  of  bacon  and  pea-flour.  I  am 
not  very  sure  as  to  its  food  value,  and  it  was  retained  because 
it  was  starchy  enough  to  thicken  our  nightly  soup  and  make  it 
a  mixture  which,  as  the  sailors  said,  '  stuck  to  your  ribs.' 

The  remaining  articles  need  no  comment,  but  I  should  not 
forget  to  add  that  the  following  were  also  carried,  though  for 
purposes  of  comparison  I  have  omitted  them  from  the  first  list. 
Each  tent  was  allowed  per  week  : 

075  lb.  of  tea. 
o#5    lb.  of  onion  powder. 
0"25  lb.  of  pepper. 
0-4    lb.  of  salt. 

The  totals  compared  with  the  figures  given  before  show  the 
amount  of  water  which  was  unavoidably  present,  and  without 
going  into  details  I  can  assure  the  reader  that  when  one  obtains 
over  twenty-nine  ounces  of  food  value  out  of  thirty-four  ounces 
of  weight  carried,  one  can  congratulate  oneself  on  having  one's 
food  in  an  exceedingly  concentrated  form. 

Including  the  smaller  matters  which  I  have  mentioned,  this 
total  would  be  brought  up  to  thirty-five  and  a  half  ounces  as 
the  daily  allowance  per  man.  It  is  interesting  to  compare  this 
with  the  allowance  given  in  Northern  expeditions.  Greeley 
allowed  thirty-six  ounces ;  McClintock,  forty-two  ounces ; 
Nares,  forty  ounces  ;  whereas  Parry,  in  the  early  days,  allowed 
only  twenty-two  ounces.  The  journeys  of  the  latter  were  not 
of  great  length,  but  one  can  imagine  how  famished  his  party 
must  have  been. 

The  trouble  taken  in  apportioning  the  different  natures  of 
food  has  an  extremely  practical  bearing.  The  object  aimed  at 
is  that,  whilst  the  traveller  develops  a  craving  for  food,  it  should 
not  be  for  any  particular  form  of  food.  I  have  heard  it  said 
by  members  of  the  older  expeditions,  'The  thing  we  craved 


i$o4]  PACKING  345 

for  was  sugar,'  or  '  The  thing  we  craved  for  was  fat,'  and  with- 
out doubt  this  argues  that  the  party  would  have  been  better 
provided  had  they  carried  a  greater  proportion  of  these  articles 
and  less  of  something  else. 

In  this  connection  I  may  point  out  that  Barne's  allowance 
contained  more  biscuit  than  mine,  and  I  am  not  sure  that  he 
was  not  right,  as  our  biscuit  was  certainly  on  the  short  side, 
and  we  had  a  distinct  craving  for  more.  On  the  whole,  how- 
ever, our  parties  went  well  in  this  respect.  Our  people  on 
getting  back  to  the  ship  wanted  food  and  plenty  of  it,  but  did 
not  especially  demand  it  in  any  particular  form. 

From  the  above  list  it  will  be  seen  that  our  variety  of  food 
was  not  a  very  large  one.  Nansen  seems  to  have  been  of 
opinion  that  variety  was  of  great  importance,  but  in  this  I 
cannot  agree.  During  our  long  absences  our  food  was  pretty 
much  the  same  day  after  day,  and  though  we  sighed  for  greater 
quantity  we  were  never  particularly  desirous  of  changing  the 
quality.  The  great  drawback  to  a  large  variety  is  the  compli- 
cation which  is  introduced  into  the  packing  arrangements ; 
that  these  should  be  as  simple  as  possible  with  a  party  of  men 
is  of  the  greatest  importance.  Our  biscuit  was  packed  on  the 
sledges  in  boxes  or  in  canvas  tanks  specially  made  on  board 
for  the  purpose,  but  although  the  boxes  were  of  the  lightest 
Venesta  packing  material,  the  additional  weight  involved  by 
either  tank  or  box  was  considerable.  The  packing  of  biscuit 
is  especially  difficult,  because  if  packed  loosely  it  will  grind 
itself  into  fine  powder  with  the  movement  of  the  sledge,  so 
that  probably  much  will  be  lost. 

All  the  remaining  provisions  were  carefully  weighed  out 
into  amounts  which  constituted  the  allowance  for  three  men 
for  one  week ;  this  amount  was  placed  in  a  small  light  bag, 
and  then  all  the  small  bags  were  placed  in  a  canvas  tank  on 
the  sledge. 

In  addition  to  this,  each  tent  party  of  three  men  possessed 
a  ready-use  bag  containing  all  the  small  bags  allowed  for  the 
week.  It  will  be  seen  that  this  was  an  extremely  simple 
arrangement ;   all  the  trouble  and  care  had  been  taken  on 


326       THE   VOYAGE   OF    THE    'DISCOVERY'   [Sept. 

board  the  ship,  and  when  once  away  the  arrangements  went 
like  clockwork.  Each  member  of  the  group  of  three  living 
together  in  a  tent  would  take  it  in  turn  to  be  cook  for  the 
week.  On  the  stated  day  he  would  go  to  the  provision  tank 
and  take  out  his  allowance  of  small  bags ;  these  he  would 
place  in  the  ready-use  bag,  which  was  always  kept  handy  on 
the  sledge.  When  camping-time  came  and  the  tent  was  up, 
the  cook  would  get  inside,  with  his  provision  bag  and  cooking- 
apparatus,  and  with  everything  under  his  hand  he  was  able  to 
prepare  supper  in  the  shortest  possible  space  of  time.  Of 
course  the  cook  was  responsible  for  the  weekly  allowance 
lasting  out  its  proper  time  ;  if  it  ran  short  before,  the  inmates 
of  the  tent  had  to  go  hungry,  and  this  made  the  cook  un- 
popular. 

I  have  said  there  was  little  variety  in  our  provisions,  but  a 
good  cook  had  some  chance  of  showing  his  abilities.  Even 
in  such  a  minage  he  could  vary  the  ingredients  of  his  hoosh 
each  night,  provided  he  did  not  outrun  the  constable,  and  a 
very  wily  cook  would  save  a  bit  here  and  there  during  his 
term  of  office  so  as  to  end  it  up  with  one  really  thick  ■  stick 
to  the  ribs '  hoosh,  which  kept  his  memory  green  for  several 
days. 

The  weekly  allowance  of  food  for  a  tent  I  called  a  pro- 
vision unit,  and  I  find  I  had  to  allow  at  least  6  lbs.  for  the 
packing  of  each  unit. 

The  habit  of  heating  his  food  is  about  the  only  one 
possessed  by  the  sledge -traveller  which  can  be  said  to  go  beyond 
the  bare  necessity  of  life.  Theoretically  I  believe  the  food  would 
be  as  nourishing  and  sustaining  were  it  swallowed  cold ;  it  would 
only  lose  its  immediate  stimulating  effect.  Hence  to  some 
extent  fuel  is  a  luxury,  but  even  from  this  point  of  view  not 
entirely,  for  it  would  always  be  necessary  to  carry  some  fuel 
and  some  vessel  in  order  to  obtain  water  for  drinking.  As 
regards  the  heating  of  food,  I  can  only  say  that  I  should 
prefer  to  be  absent  from  a  party  who  had  decided  to  forego 
it.  The  prospect  of  a  cold  supper  after  a  long  and  tiring 
inarch   through  the  snow,  with  the  thermometer  below  zero, 


I902J  COOKING- APPARATUS  327 

would  hold  out  no  allurements,  and  indeed,  from  my  small 
experience  'of  a  shortage  of  fuel  under  these  conditions,  I 
believe  that  few,  if  any,  sledge-travellers  could  continue 
long  without  hot  food. 

So,  at  any  rate  for  me,  the  sledge  cooker  is  a  matter  of 
great  importance,  and  it  is  here,  if  anywhere,  that  an  immense 
advance  has  been  made  of  late  years  in  the  sledging  equip- 
ment. The  cooking-apparatus  we  adopted  was  Nansen's, 
who,  I  consider,  in  devising  this  and  adapting  to  it  a  modern 
form  of  heating-lamp,  consuming  paraffin  in  a  vaporised  state, 
made  his  greatest  contribution  to  the  sledge-traveller's  require- 
ments. 

The  principal  requirement  of  a  good  cooking-apparatus  is 
that  it  should  allow  a  minimum  wastage  of  heat,  and  though  it 
is  difficult  to  arrive  at  an  exact  figure,  it  is  probably  stated  with 
some  reason  that  the  Nansen  cooker  expends  usefully  nearly 
90  per  cent,  of  the  heat  supplied  by  the  lamp  beneath  it.  The 
design  of  the  apparatus  provides  that  the  heated  gases  circu- 
late about  the  central  cooking-pot,  and  after  passing  up  inside 
the  annular  container,  which  we  termed  the  outer  cooker,  descend 
again  on  the  outside  and  thus  give  up  most  of  their 
heat  before  reaching  the  open  air.  The  greater  part  of  the 
apparatus  is  constructed  of  aluminium,  and  the  whole  is  made 
as  thin  as  is  compatible  with  the  necessary  strength  in  order  to 
save  weight. 

I  have  already  mentioned  how  at  camping  time  the  tent 
would  be  erected  and  the  cook  would  retire  inside  with  his 
provision  bag  and  lamp  ;  whilst  he  was  lighting  the  latter  one 
of  the  other  members  would  fill  the  inner  and  outer  cookers 
with  snow  and  pass  them  into  the  tent,  so  that  a  very  few 
minutes  after  the  tent  was  up  the  lamp  could  be  heard  giving 
forth  its  pleasant  music,  and  one  knew  that  its  heat  was  already 
acting  on  the  frozen  snow  within  the  cookers. 

Without  wishing  to  take  the  reader  into  abstruse  problems, 
I  must  here  mention  one  of  the  physical  properties  of  ice, 
which  has  a  very  practical  bearing  on  the  sledge -traveller.  It 
may  possibly  be  overlooked  that  it  requires  nearly  as  much 


328      THE  VOYAGE   OF  THE   'DISCOVERY'  [Sept. 

heat  to  turn  ice  into  water  as  it  does  to  raise  the  resultant 
water  to  boiling-point.  In  other  words,  if  the  snow  that  is  put 
into  the  cookers  is  at  a  temperature  of  -  360,  it  will  take  just 
as  much  heat  to  turn  it  into  water  as  it  does  subsequently  to 
raise  the  water  to  boiling-point. 

The  practical  bearing  is  obvious  :  it  means  that  the  sledge- 
traveller  requires  nearly  double  the  amount  of  fuel  for  cooking 
his  meals  that  would  be  necessary  if  he  could  fill  his  cookers 
with  water.  Here  again,  therefore,  he  is  handicapped  in  his 
struggle  for  existence. 

The  cook,  having  started  his  lamp  under  the  cooker,  pro- 
ceeded to  prepare  the  ingredients  of  the  hoosh,  by  which  term 
the  hot,  thick  soup  that  constituted  the  sledging  meal  was 
generally  known.  Whilst  he  ladled  out  a  spoonful  from  one 
small  bag  and  two  from  another,  and  added  a  little  pepper  and 
a  little  salt,  he  kept  a  watchful  eye  for  the  first  spurt  of  steam 
which  should  signify  that  the  water  was  on  the  boil.  Directly 
this  appeared,  off  came  the  covers  and  in  went  the  assortment 
of  food ;  in  a  very  few  minutes  there  was  a  bubbling  and 
spluttering,  and  the  tent  was  filled  with  the  savoury  odour  of 
the  coming  meal.  Not  a  moment  was  lost ;  with  the  steady 
hand  of  the  expert  handling  a  priceless  possession,  the  steaming 
contents  of  the  cooking-pot  were  soon  being  poured  into  the 
several  pannikins.  Then  came  the  cleaning  of  the  pot  by  the 
cook,  whose  perquisite  this  was;  all  that  would  not  pour  out 
in  a  fluid  state  was  rapidly  scraped  out  with  a  spoon  and  trans- 
ferred to  the  cook's  mouth.  Without  again  employing  the 
word  'cleaning,'  I  may  say  I  have  known  worse  ways  of 
emptying  a  pot.  In  the  meanwhile  the  snow  in  the  outer 
cooker  had  melted,  and  so  the  water  was  all  ready  for  trans- 
ference to  the  inner  vessel  for  the  final  brew  of  cocoa.  As 
soon  as  this  was  on  the  boil  the  lamp  was  extinguished. 

The  excellence  of  this  cooking-apparatus  can  only  be 
gleaned  from  a  citation  of  figures.  With  it,  boiling  water 
could  be  made  from  snow  in  twelve  minutes ;  a  simple  one- 
course  meal  could  be  prepared  in  less  than  twenty  minutes ; 
and  a  two-course  meal — that  is,  a  hoosh  with  hot  cocoa  to 


i$02]  THE  PRIMUS  LAMP  329 

follow — could  be  provided  with  a  lapse  of  less  than  half  an 
hour  between  the  time  the  lamp  was  lighted  and  its  extinc- 
tion. Except  for  further  economy  of  fuel,  a  more  rapid 
apparatus  would  have  given  no  advantage,  for,  as  it  was,  the 
supper  was  generally  ready  before  all  the  outside  camp  work, 
such  as  securing  the  tent  and  sledges,  &c.,  could  be  fully 
accomplished. 

The  immense  advantage  which  we  possessed  in  this  respect 
can  be  gauged  when  it  is  recalled  that  McClintock  speaks  of 
the  inevitable  wait  of  two  hours  which  his  parties  had  to 
endure,  after  a  long  day's  march,  before  they  could  hope  to  get 
warmed  food ;  or,  again,  when  it  is  stated  that  the  records  of 
the  Arctic  sledge  journeys  of  1875  show  that  the  cook  was 
always  called  two  hours  before  the  remainder  of  the  party. 
With  us,  on  more  than  one  occasion,  a  very  rapidly  prepared 
brew  of  tea  has  saved  serious  trouble  from  freezing,  and  this 
alone  made  possible  those  exceptional  efforts  of  marching  in 
which  we  occasionally  indulged. 

In  our  rapid  cooking  the  lamp  was,  of  course,  an  even 
greater  factor  than  the  cooker ;  after  some  consideration  we 
had  adopted  the  Primus  lamp  which  Nansen  had  found  so 
useful.  When  in  good  working  order  nothing  could  exceed 
the  efficiency  of  this  lamp.  The  oil,  which  is  pressed  up  into 
the  upper  tubes,  is  vaporised  by  the  heat,  and  the  vapour, 
emerging  through  a  small  pinhole,  burns  with  a  flame  of 
intense  heat,  and  effects  the  most  complete  combustion  of  the 
oil.  In  the  rapidity  and  completeness  of  the  combustion  lies 
its  great  advantage.  It  has  serious  disadvantages :  it  is  com- 
plicated and  difficult  to  repair;  it  is  likely  to  get  out  of  order 
unless  both  the  lamp  and  the  oil  used  in  it  are  kept  absolutely 
free  from  dirt  and  grit ;  and  when  out  of  order  it  is  quite 
useless.  Moreover,  the  vaporisation  has  to  be  started  by  out- 
side artificial  means,  the  correct  method  being  to  fill  a  small 
outside  cup  with  spirit.  From  these  various  defects  we  had  at 
first  much  trouble,  more  especially  as  the  sailor  is  inclined  to 
be  rather  heavy-handed  and  careless  with  delicate  mechanism. 
Later  on,  however,  the  men  realised  how  much  depended  on 


33©       THE   VOYAGE   OF  THE    'DISCOVERY'   [Sept. 

keeping  the  lamps  in  good  working  order,  and  in  consequence 
became  very  expert  in  handling  them.  Our  confidence  in  them 
grew  as  we  came  to  understand  them  better,  and  in  spite  of 
their  defects  we  ultimately  placed  such  reliance  on  them  that 
we  never  thought  of  taking  an  alternative  lamp.  On  two 
occasions,  in  fact,  my  party  were  away  on  very  extended 
journeys  with  nothing  to  fall  back  on  had  our  lamp  failed. 

As  may  have  been  gathered,  the  cooking  and  eating  utensils 
of  our  sledge  parties  were  not  numerous.  Besides  the  cooker 
and  lamp,  a  folding  pannikin  of  aluminium  was  provided  for 
each  man,  one-half  of  which  could  be  used  for  his  hoosh&nd  the 
other  for  his  cocoa.    In  addition  each  person  had  a  dessert-spoon. 

Pannikins  and  spoons  could  be  conveniently  stowed  inside 
the  cooker  for  transport,  and  the  latter  then  added  15  lbs.  to 
the  load,  beyond  which  an  extra  weight  of  2^  to  3  lbs.  had  to 
be  allowed  for  the  Primus  lamp. 

The  oil  was  carried  in  small  rectangular  tins,  which  fitted 
close  to  one  another  on  a  light  platform  on  the  sledge.  Some 
of  these  tins  had  been  made  in  England,  but  we  had  consider- 
ably to  increase  our  supply  by  others  made  on  board  the  ship. 
Each  tin  had  a  small  cork  bung,  which  was  a  decided  weakness ; 
paraffin  creeps  in  the  most  annoying  manner,  and  a  good  deal 
of  oil  was  wasted  in  this  way,  especially  when  the  sledges  were 
travelling  over  rough  ground  and  were  shaken  or,  as  frequently 
happened,  capsized.  It  was  impossible  to  make  these  bungs 
quite  tight,  however  closely  they  were  jammed  down,  so  that  in 
spite  of  a  trifling  extra  weight  a  much  better  fitting  would  have 
been  a  metallic  screwed  bung.  To  find  on  opening  a  fresh  tin 
of  oil  that  it  was  only  three-parts  full  was  very  distressing,  and 
of  course  meant  that  the  cooker  had  to  be  used  with  still 
greater  care. 

A  full  tin  of  oil  weighed  10  lbs.  and  contained  exactly  a 
gallon,  and  this  quantity,  as  a  general  rule,  was  the  allowance 
for  ten  days  for  three  persons.  With  care  this  was  amply 
sufficient,  and  on  the  southern  journey  when  our  stock  was 
somewhat  short  a  gallon  was  made  to  last  fourteen  and  even 
sixteen  days,  but  this  meant  very  short  commons. 


1902]  WEIGHTS  CARRIED  BY  SLEDGE  PARTIES  331 


The  incidental  weights  of  a  sledge  party  were  numerous, 
and  depended  greatly  on  the  direction  in  which  the  party  were 
going  and  on  the  nature  of  their  work.  Those  who  journeyed 
to  the  mountainous  regions  of  the  west  were  forced  to  go  most 
fully  equipped  in  this  respect,  and  in  planning  a  sledge  journey 
in  that  direction  it  was  especially  maddening  to  see  how  the 
weights  of  indispensable  articles  mounted  up,  and  ever  cut 
away  from  the  margin  which  remained  for  food. 

The  weights  of  a  party  naturally  divide  themselves  under 
two  headings  :  the  permanent,  which  will  not  diminish  through- 
out the  trip,  and  the  consumable,  including  food,  oil,  &c.  The 
following  is  a  list  of  permanent  weights  carried  on  my  own 
journey  to  the  west ;  it  will  give  some  idea  of  the  variety  of 
articles  which  were  taken  exclusive  of  provisions  ;  the  party 
numbered  six  : — 


lbs. 
2  Sledges  with  fittings  complete  130 

Trace 5 

2  Cookers,  pannikins,  &  spoons  30 
2  Primus  lamps,  filled  .  .10 
2  Tents  complete  .  .  .60 
2  Spades        ....       9 

2  Sleeping-bags  with  night-gear  100 
Sleeping-jackets,    crampons, 

spare  finneskoes        .  .     50 

Medical  bag         ...       6 

3  Ice-axes      ....       8 


Bamboos  and  marks 

Instruments  and  camera 

Alpine  rope 

Repair  and  tool  bags,  sound- 
ing -  line,  tape,  sledge 
brakes     .... 

Ski  boots  for  party 

Ski  for  party 

Total 


lbs. 

ix«5 

50 
9 


15 
60 

568-5 


Although  our  sledges  weighed  little  over  40  lbs.  each,  by 
the  time  they  had  been  fitted  with  tanks  for  the  provisions, 
platforms  for  the  oil,  boxes  for  the  instruments  and  for  the 
Primus  lamps,  and  straps  for  other  articles,  it  will  be  seen  by 
how  much  their  weight  had  risen. 

Some  of  the  other  items  may  need  a  word  or  two  of  explana- 
tion. The  spades  were  of  course  needed  for  digging  up  the 
snow  to  secure  the  tents.  The  night-gear  consisted  of  warm 
foot-wear  for  the  night,  and  a  small  bag  containing  one  or  two 
spare  pairs  of  socks,  a  spare  pair  of  mits,  possibly  a  small 
amount  of  tobacco,  and  some  extra  grass  for  filling  fur  boots 


332      THE  VOYAGE  OF  THE    '  DISCOVERY  »  [Sept. 

This  bag  was  always  kept  in  the  sleeping-bag,  and  was  used 
by  the  owner  as  a  pillow  as  well  as  a  receptacle  for  diaries  and 
the  few  oddments  that  constitute  private  property  on  such  an 
occasion. 

The  heavy  labour  of  marching  made  it  possible  to  under- 
take it  in  comparatively  light  clothing ;  but  on  coming  to  camp 
it  was  generally  necessary  to  put  on  something  extra.  In  this 
garment  also  we  slept,  wherefore  it  figures  as  the  sleeping- 
jacket.  It  was  usually  made  from  a  woollen  pyjama  jacket, 
and  lined  with  some  extra  woollen  material.  Of  course  all 
personal  property  was  strictly  limited  by  a  given  weight,  and  if 
a  man  chose  to  forego  a  pair  of  socks  and  take  out  the  weight 
in  tobacco,  he  was  at  liberty  to  do  so.  I  remember  gazing  at 
my  spare  mits  and  wishing  to  heaven  I'd  brought  tobacco 
instead. 

The  crampons  were  a  necessity  for  travelling  over  smooth 
ice  or  very  hard  wind-blown  snow.  For  the  second  year  we 
invented  and  made  a  particular  pattern  of  our  own,  which 
suited  us  admirably,  and  which  I  shall  describe  in  due  course. 

Our  medical  bag  contained  bandages,  sticking-plaster,  an 
emulsion  for  sprains,  a  few  phials  containing  medicines  in  the 
tabloid  form,  and  a  tube  of  hazeline  cream.  The  general 
health  of  our  sledge-travellers  was  so  good  that  I  believe,  with 
the  exception  of  two,  the  medicine  phials  were  never  required ; 
the  two  exceptions  contained  zinc  sulphate  and  cocaine,  the 
first  to  cure  and  the  second  to  deaden  the  pain  of  snow- 
blindness.  As  this  disease  was  a  constant  companion,  these 
tabloids  were  very  frequently  needed. 

The  ice-axes  mentioned  above  were  of  the  ordinary  Alpine 
type;  they  came  in  very  handy  for  various  work  on  the 
glaciers,  but  they  were  seldom  absolutely  necessary. 

The  title  '  bamboos  and  marks '  includes  sticks  and  flags 
taken  to  measure  the  movement  of  the  ice  of  the  glaciers  and 
to  mark  the  positions  at  which  we  left  our  depots  of  provisions. 

The  contents  of  our  instrument-box  were  an  extraordinarily 
heavy  item,  and  yet  there  was  nothing  which  we  could  have 
spared.     They  consisted  of  a  small  three-inch  theodolite  in  its 


i902]        INSTRUMENTS   AND   IMPLEMENTS  333 

case,  for  taking  observations  of  the  sun  and  bearings,  two  small 
aneroids,  a  compass,  two  thermometers,  a  hypsometer,  a  small 
book  containing  logarithmic  tables,  and  a  camera,  with  plates. 
On  this  journey  we  took  the  half-plate  camera  with  its  slide- 
box,  and  although  one  almost  groaned  on  seeing  the  weight  it 
added,  there  can  be  little  source  of  regret  when  one  contem- 
plates the  pictures  which  Mr.  Skelton  managed  to  produce  with 
its  assistance. 

Alpine  rope  was  a  thing  one  scarcely  liked  to  be  without 
when  travelling  in  a  country  where  crevasses  abounded ;  the 
thought  of  a  companion  possibly  hung  up  in  one  of  these  and 
his  fellow  men  unable  to  reach  him  for  lack  of  rope,  was  too 
grim  to  be  thrust  aside.  The  repair-bag  was  an  important 
item  ;  it  contained  the  housewife,  with  needles,  thread,  &c,  to 
repair  our  garments,  a  few  strips  of  material  to  patch  the  tent, 
with  sail  needles  and  a  palm,  some  hide  thongs,  some  tough 
pieces  of  reindeer-skin  for  boots,  and  some  spun  yarn  for 
lashings.  A  tool-bag  was  also  very  necessary,  and  contained 
pliers,  files,  a  bradawl,  a  gimlet,  &c.,  with  some  screws,  nails, 
and  binding  wire  for  the  repair  of  the  sledges.  The  sounding- 
line  and  lead  were  provided  for  sounding  and  taking  tempera- 
tures in  crevasses,  but  it  was  rarely  possible  to  use  them.  The 
tape  was  also  for  glacier  measurements,  whilst  the  sledge 
brakes  were  introduced  in  hopes  of  saving  the  sledges  on  the 
down  grade  over  slippery  ice.  They  were  of  hemp,  and  proved 
of  very  little  use. 

We  took  ski  boots  on  this  journey  in  hopes  of  being  able 
to  use  ski,  and  thinking  they  might  be  of  service  on  the 
glacier ;  we  used  neither  the  ski  nor  the  boots,  and  '  depoted ' 
the  latter  at  a  very  early  stage  in  the  journey.  The  ski  we  took 
on,  thinking  always  they  might  be  required,  but  never  finding 
that  they  were  so. 

And  here  I  should  like  to  explain  my  attitude  towards  ski, 
more  especially  as  since  Nansen's  journeys  it  has  been  very 
generally  thought  that  they  have  revolutionised  the  methods  of 
polar  travel.  I  have  mentioned  in  former  chapters  how 
delighted  we  were  with  our  ski  practice,  and  I  have  also  called 


334       THE   VOYAGE   OF   THE   'DISCOVERY'   [Sept. 

attention  to  an  incident  where  some  officers  were  able  to  push 
on  with  a  journey  because  they  possessed  ski.  The  latter  is 
really  an  extraordinary  exception,  and  it  is  still  more  extra- 
ordinary that  it  should  have  been  our  first  experience  of 
Antarctic  travelling.  It  naturally  biassed  us  all  in  favour  of  ski, 
so  that  although  a  few  remained  sceptical,  the  majority  thought 
them  an  unmixed  blessing.  Bit  by  bit,  however,  the  inevitable 
truth  came  to  light :  it  was  found  that  in  spite  of  all  appear- 
ance to  the  contrary,  a  party  on  foot  invariably  beat  a  party  on 
ski,  even  if  the  former  were  sinking  ankle-deep  at  each  step ; 
while,  to  add  to  this,  when  the  surface  was  hard,  ski  could  not 
be  used,  and  had  to  be  carried  as  an  extra  weight  and  a  great 
encumbrance  on  the  sledges.  The  ski  party  still  made  a  stand 
in  their  favour  by  stating  that  they  saved  labour,  but  even  this 
could  not  be  admitted  when  the  facts  were  thoroughly  known. 
It  stands  true  to  some  extent  for  a  party  out  of  condition, 
but  the  fact  we  gradually  came  to  appreciate  was  that 
after  a  week's  marching  our  legs  got  so  hard  that  it  troubled  us 
little  to  plod  on  throughout  the  day  whether  the  snow  was  soft 
or  hard. 

It  will  be  seen,  therefore,  that  our  experience  has  led  me  to 
believe  that  for  sledge  work  in  the  Antarctic  Regions  there  is 
nothing  to  equal  the  honest  and  customary  use  of  one's  own 
legs.  Progress  may  be  slow  and  dull,  but  it  is  steady  and  sure. 
On  my  western  journey,  having  no  knowledge  of  the  inland 
surface,  I  took  ski.  They  remained  on  the  sledge  from  start 
to  finish.  As  we  were  contemplating  them  just  before  our 
return  to  the  ship,  one  of  my  companions  remarked,  '  They've 
had  a  nice  cheap  ride,'  and  that  about  summed  up  the 
situation. 

In  the  list  of  permanent  weights  which  I  have  taken  as  an 
example  of  a  sledge-load  for  six  men,  the  reader  will  see  that 
the  various  articles  total  568  lbs. ;  roughly  speaking  a  man  can 
drag  from  200  to  240  lbs.,  but  we  rarely  loaded  our  sledge 
parties  much  above  200  lbs. ;  this  for  six  men  would  give  a 
total  carrying  capacity  of  1,200  lbs.,  and  hence  about  630  lbs. 
which  could  be  devoted  to  provisions.     Speaking  again  very 


I9o2]  CLOTHING  335 

roughly,  this  amounts  to  about  six  weeks'  provisions  for  the 
party,  so  that  this  party,  dragging  at  the  start  200  lbs.  per  man, 
can  go  away  for  forty-two  days  and  throughout  that  time  remain 
entirely  self-supporting.  If  the  party  is  increased  to  twelve 
men,  for  reasons  which  I  need  not  detail,  the  absence  can  be 
increased  to  seven  weeks,  or  about  fifty  days.  But  neither  of 
these  terms  is  long  enough  to  suit  the  ambitious  sledge- 
traveller,  so  that  he  is  forced  to  organise  means  by  which  he 
can  prolong  his  journey.  This  can  be  done  in  two  ways  :  he 
may  go  out  earlier  in  the  season  and  lay  out  a  depot  at  a  con- 
siderable distance  towards  his  goal,  or  he  may  arrange  to 
receive  assistance  from  a  supporting  party,  which  on  a  pre- 
arranged plan  accompanies  him  for  a  certain  distance  on  his 
road  and  helps  his  advance  party  to  drag  a  heavier  load  than 
it  is  able  to  accomplish  alone. 

Both  these  plans  were  adopted  on  our  longer  journeys,  and 
thus  some  of  us  were  able  to  be  absent  from  the  ship  for  long 
periods  and  to  travel  long  distances. 

I  have  endeavoured  to  describe  how  a  sledge  party  is 
housed  and  fed  ;  it  remains  to  conclude  this  chapter  by  giving 
some  idea  of  how  it  is  clothed,  and  this  can  be  done  very 
briefly.  The  sledge-traveller  takes  little  more  clothing  than 
that  in  which  he  stands  at  starting;  in  fact,  I  have  already 
mentioned  the  articles  of  which  his  spare  wardrobe  consists. 
They  do  not  include  a  change  of  clothing,  so  that  he  sleeps  and 
lives  in  the  one  costume  until  his  return. 

In  our  case  officers  and  men  were  clothed  in  a  similar 
manner,  save  for  such  touches  as  the  fancy  of  the  individual 
might  suggest.  Each  wore  a  warm  thick  suit  of  underclothing, 
one  or  two  flannel  shirts,  a  jersey,  or  sweater,  a  pair  of  pilot-cloth 
breeches,  and  a  pyjama  jacket.  A  pilot-cloth  coat  or  any  stiff 
garment  about  the  upper  part  of  the  body  was  unpopular,  and 
personally  I  cut  off  the  sleeves  of  my  pyjama  jacket  so  that  it 
was  practically  a  very  free-and-easy  outer  waistcoat.  Some 
wore  woollen  comforters,  but  others,  like  myself,  found  the 
collar  of  the  pyjama  jacket  sufficient  covering  for  the  neck. 

Of  great  importance  we  found  it  to  have  many  pockets,  and 


336       THE   VOYAGE   OF   THE   'DISCOVERY'   [Sept. 

a  large  breast-pocket  was  very  generally  adopted.  It  was  here 
that  in  hard  times  by  day  one  dried  one's  night  socks,  and  by 
night  those  which  one  had  worn  during  the  day.  Besides  this, 
one's  pockets  contained  a  collection  of  miscellaneous  articles  : 
a  knife,  a  match-box,  goggles,  a  whistle,  and  odds  and  ends 
such  as  string,  thongs,  and  so  forth. 

Braces  were  another  matter  on  which  there  was  difference 
of  opinion.  Some  thought  them  indispensable,  but  I,  with 
others,  found  that  a  leather  belt  served  all  needful  purposes  in 
this  respect. 

But  one  of  the  most  important  parts  of  our  sledging- 
costume  was  the  complete  outer  suit  of  thin  gaberdine,  a 
material  manufactured  by  Messrs.  Burberry  for  use  in  many 
climates.  It  purports  to  be  water-tight,  but  of  this  we  had 
little  chance  of  judging ;  we  required  it  only  to  keep  out  the 
keen  edge  of  the  wind  and  the  drifting  snow,  and  for  this  it 
was  admirably  adapted. 

We  found  it  very  desirable  that  this  suit  should  be  very 
easily  put  on  or  off.  On  fine  days  it  was  convenient  to  march 
without  it ;  but  when  the  wind  sprang  up  or  the  sky  looked 
threatening  it  was  wise  to  don  it  at  once.  But  to  construct  a 
suit  which  had  this  desirable  quality  and  at  the  same  time 
was  impervious  to  snowdrift  was  by  no  means  easy.  The 
suit  consisted  of  a  blouse,  breeches,  and  leggings,  but  whether 
the  leggings  should  be  attached  to  the  breeches,  and  how 
exactly  the  neck,  sleeves,  and  other  parts  of  the  blouse  should 
be  fitted  were  matters  of  keen  controversy,  eventually  decided 
according  to  individual  taste.  It  is  impossible,  therefore,  to 
give  any  very  definite  opinion  as  to  the  best  form  for  these 
garments ;  subject  to  their  being  easy  to  put  on  and  off,  one 
great  thing  is  that  they  should  fit  as  closely  as  possible  about 
the  neck,  wrists,  and  ankles,  and  that  there  should  be  no 
admittance  for  snowdrift  between  the  blouse  and  trousers. 
It  is  almost  equally  important  that  there  should  be  as  few 
creases  as  possible,  especially  about  the  legs,  as  the  snow 
which  lodges  in  these  is  bound  to  be  brought  into  the  tent. 

The  parts  of  the  body  which  need  the  most  careful  protec- 


i902]    PROTECTION  OF  HEAD,  HANDS,  &  FEET   337 

tion  are  the  extremities,  and  here,  again,  everyone  had  his  own 
ideas  and  his  own  patent  devices.  To  face  the  cold  of  the 
early  spring  we  had  thick  camel-wool  helmets  provided  with 
gaberdine  covers,  but  many  of  us  found  these  too  heavy,  and 
when  they  became  coated  with  ice  they  were  particularly 
unmanageble.  A  better  plan  was  to  use  one  or  two  ordinary 
woollen  Balaclava  helmets  under  the  gaberdine  cover.  Per- 
sonally, I  used  one,  provided  with  an  extra  thickness  of 
material  to  cover  those  most  sensitive  organs,  the  ears.  I 
have  already  described  the  wind-guard  which  most  of  us  wore 
to  protect  the  face. 

In  summer,  when  the  glare  was  very  great,  we  wore  broad- 
rimmed  felt  hats,  either  over  a  Balaclava  or  fitted  with  a 
special  protection  for  the  ears  and  back  of  the  neck,  which 
could  be  lowered  or  tucked  into  the  crown  according  to 
circumstances.  It  is  a  great  mistake  to  have  too  heavy  a 
head-covering ;  the  ice  which  inevitably  forms  on  it  in  cold 
weather  is  sufficient  to  make  a  light  helmet  comparatively 
warm. 

On  our  hands,  when  sledging,  we  wore  either  fur  or  felt 
mits  over  long  woollen  half-mits  which  extended  from  the 
elbows  to  the  knuckles.  These  half-mits  were  excellent 
things,  as  one  could  draw  them  forward  to  assist  one  in 
handling  the  cold  metal  cooking-utensils  or  could  curl  one's 
fingers  back  under  their  protection  when  the  tips  became 
particularly  cold.  Personally  I  swore  by  our  wolfskin  fur  mits. 
We  wore  them  with  the  fur  outside,  and  I  lined  mine  with 
light  wool  and  found  that  one  pair  lasted  me  throughout  each 
of  my  extended  sledge  journeys.  The  most  convenient  plan 
was  to  have  these  mits  slung  round  the  neck,  as  one  could 
then  withdraw  one's  hands  at  will  without  the  prospect  of 
finding  the  mits  gone  when  one  wished  to  resume  them.  For 
taking  observations  and  for  other  trying  tasks  it  was  very  con- 
venient to  have  a  pair  of  light  woollen  mits  or  gloves,  but  of 
these  there  was  a  great  scarcity  on  board. 

Of  all  parts  of  the  person  of  which  it  is  necessary  to  have 
care  the  feet  are  the  most  important,  and  for  clothing  the  feet 

VOL,    I.  Z 


338       THE   VOYAGE   OF  THE    'DISCOVERY'   [Sept. 

in  cold  weather  there  can  be  nothing  to  excel  the  reindeer-fur 
boot  or  finnesko,  which  is  made  in  Norway.  It  behoves  the 
traveller  to  be  most  careful  in  the  selection  of  these  articles,  as, 
though  many  are  made  for  wear,  many  also  are  made  for  a 
tourist  market  and  will  prove  quite  unsuitable  for  his  purpose. 
Here,  again,  a  lack  of  time  had  prevented  a  sufficient  care 
being  taken  in  selecting  the  large  supply  which  we  purchased, 
and  though  we  had  a  good  number  of  excellent  articles,  others 
were  weak  and  unsatisfactory.  The  difference  is  most  marked 
— a  good  pair  of  finneskoes  will  stand  many  weeks  of  hard 
wear  on  snow,  whereas  a  poor  pair  will  be  gone  in  a  few  days ; 
the  importance  of  selecting  good  pairs  for  a  sledge  journey  is 
therefore  obvious.  Luckily  we  soon  became  fairly  good  judges, 
and  so  never  actually  ran  out  of  foot-wear  on  our  journeys, 
though  we  came  very  close  to  it. 

The  sole  of  the  finnesko  is  made  of  the  forehead  skin  or 
the  hard  skin  of  the  legs  of  the  reindeer ;  it  is  important  that 
it  should  have  a  twist  in  the  natural  growth  of  the  hair,  as  this 
gives  a  better  foothold.  The  upper  sides  are  made  of  softer 
skin  from  the  neck  or  legs  ;  all  the  joints  are  very  carefully 
sewn  with  gut,  and  the  boot  is  worn  with  the  fur  outside. 

To  examine  a  pair  it  is  necessary  to  turn  them  inside  out, 
and  this  is  not  easy  to  do  until  they  are  made  damp.  With 
experience  it  is  then  possible  to  see  the  quality  of  the  sewing 
and  the  probable  lasting  power  of  the  sole.  The  Laps  make  a 
nest  of  grass  inside  these  boots  and  place  their  foot  in  this  nest 
without  further  covering.  There  is  an  advantage  in  this  in  the 
fact  that  the  grass  can  be  taken  out  and  the  frozen  perspiration 
shaken  clear,  but  the  custom  probably  springs  from  the  absence 
of  wool.  This  grass  is  called  sennegrces.  We  had  provided 
ourselves  with  a  good  quantity  ;  but  we  wore  two  pairs  of  socks 
inside  the  finneskoes,  and  only  used  the  grass  to  pad  out  the 
toes  and  sides.  Finneskoes  are  provided  with  a  draw-string  at 
the  top,  but  we  found  that  the  best  means  of  securing  them 
was  with  a  long  strip  of  lamp-wick,  which  was  wound  about 
the  ankle  and  covered  the  joint  between  the  legging  and  the 
boot.     Instances   of    seriously  cold   feet   in   finneskoes   were 


1902]  THE  HARNESS  339 

extremely  rare,  and  usually  after  an  hour's  marching  one's  feet 
perspired  freely  in  the  coldest  weather.  One  great  advantage 
is  that  there  is  absolutely  no  restraint  to  the  circulation. 

Before  leaving  the  subject  of  dress  one  ought  to  mention 
the  goggles,  which  were  worn  almost  as  constantly  as  many  of 
the  articles  I  have  described.  A  few  men  preferred  the 
ordinary  wire-gauze  type  with  smoked  glass,  but  a  drawback 
to  these  was  their  liability  to  become  frosted  over.  The 
alternatives  were  to  have  a  piece  of  leather  with  a  slit  in  place 
of  the  glass,  or  to  have  goggles  cut  out  from  a  slip  of  wood. 
Personally  I  much  preferred  the  latter,  and  in  the  end  invari- 
ably used  them  ;  mine  were  very  carefully  shaped  to  fit  over 
the  nose  and  eyes,  had  a  considerable  cross-shaped  aperture, 
and  were  blackened  outside  and  in. 

One  other  article  of  sledge  furniture  deserves  notice—the 
harness.  Each  man  had  a  broad  band  of  webbing  passing 
round  his  waist  and  supported  by  braces  over  the  shoulders  ; 
the  two  ends  of  the  band  joined  in  an  iron  ring,  to  which  a 
rope  was  attached  which  could  be  secured  to  the  sledge  or  the 
trace.  In  the  old  days  men  were  accustomed  to  pull  from  the 
shoulder,  and  thus  of  necessity  assumed  a  somewhat  lop-sided 
attitude ;  with  our  arrangement,  by  adjusting  the  braces  the 
weight  could  be  distributed  very  evenly  over  the  upper  part  of 
the  body,  and  this  I  believe  made  the  pulling  easier  and  gave 
greater  freedom  for  breathing. 

From  the  foregoing  the  reader  will,  I  hope,  have  gathered 
some  general  idea  of  the  objects  and  methods  of  sledge- 
travelling.  He  will  see  how  varied  is  the  assortment  of  articles 
with  which  the  traveller  provides  himself;  he  will  understand 
something  of  the  rigid  nature  of  the  sledging  routine  and  the 
simplicity  of  the  sledging  life ;  he  will  perceive  how  the  sledge 
party  are  housed,  and  fed,  and  clothed,  and  how  their  absence 
is  prolonged.  Above  all,  he  will  realise  how  dependent  is  a 
sledging  expedition  on  the  efficiency  of  its  organisation  and  the 
care  of  its  preparation. 


Z2 


340      THE   VOYAGE   OF  THE   'DISCOVERY'    [Sept. 


CHAPTER  XI 

TYPICAL   SLEDGING   EXPERIENCES 

Use  of  Dogs  for  Sledging — A  Discussion  of  their  Merits — History  of  our 
Dog  Team — Discomforts  of  Sledge-travelling — Typical  Experiences — 
The  Ordinary  Routine— Result  of  a  Blizzard — Benefit  of  Summer  Tem- 
peratures— Disadvantages  of  Summer — The  Fascination  of  Sledging. 

By  mutual  confidence  and  mutual  aid 

Great  deeds  are  done  and  great  discoveries  made. — Anon. 

'Tis  a  weary  round  to  which  we  are  bound 
The  same  thing  over  and  over  again  ; 
Much  toil  and  trouble. — Lindsay  Gordon. 

From  the  outline  of  our  sledging  arrangements  which  I  have 
given  in  the  previous  chapter,  the  reader  will  understand  the 
occupation  of  our  time  and  thoughts  throughout  the  later 
months  of  the  dark  season.  Yet  this  outline  has  been 
necessarily  of  a  fragmentary  nature,  and  I  am  conscious 
of  having  missed  many  points  of  importance.  To  one  of 
these,  at  least,  I  ought  to  refer,  since  the  chapter  has  made 
no  mention  of  our  four-footed  friends,  who  were  to  play  so 
important  and  tragic  a  part  in  our  longest  journey. 

The  use  of  dogs  for  sledging  is  a  subject  about  which  there 
has  been  much  controversy.  Broadly  speaking,  there  are  two 
ways  in  which  dogs  may  be  used — they  may  be  taken  with  the 
idea  of  bringing  them  all  back  safe  and  sound,  or  they  may  be 
treated  as  pawns  in  the  game,  from  which  the  best  value  is  to 
be  got  regardless  of  their  lives. 

In  the  first  case  their  value  is  indicated  by  a  direct  com- 
parison of  their  pulling  power  and  food  requirement  with  that 


i9o2]  DOGS  AND  THEIR  FOOD  341 

of  the  man.  McClintock,  who  had  much  experience  in  this 
matter,  has  said  :  '  Two  dogs  require  the  same  weight  of  food 
as  one  man,  and  they  will  draw  a  man's  full  load  for  about  one- 
fourth  a  greater  distance  than  the  man  would.  If  both  man 
and  dogs  are  but  lightly  loaded,  the  dogs  will  almost  double 
the  distance  which  the  man  could  do.'  To  this  may  be  added 
that  the  dog  requires  no  sleeping-bag,  tent,  or  cooking-appa- 
ratus, nor,  indeed,  any  of  those  articles  which  figured  so 
largely  as  the  permanent  weights  of  a  sledge  party.  Most 
authorities  agree  that  100  lbs.  is  about  the  maximum  load 
for  a  dog,  and  few  place  its  food  for  a  long  journey  at  less 
than  1  ^  lb.  per  diem,  or  something  over  half  the  weight  con- 
sumed by  a  man. 

So  far,  then,  it  would  appear  that  a  dog  is  a  more  efficient 
machine  than  a  man ;  but,  on  the  other  hand,  it  has  to  be 
remembered  that  the  dogs  cannot  travel  without  man,  and  they 
have  therefore,  in  addition  to  their  own  food,  to  carry  the  food 
and  impedimenta  of  their  drivers.  Moreover,  the  dog  is  fickle 
and  unstable :  its  best  performance,  which  has  sometimes 
fallen  little  short  of  the  marvellous,  has  been  on  short 
journeys,  over  beaten  tracks,  and  with  a  light  load ;  sus- 
tained effort  with  a  heavy  load  over  a  new  track  seems 
always  to  have  shown  the  dog  in  a  much  less  favourable 
light.  Difficult  as  it  is  to  ascertain  the  reason  exactly,  the 
fact  remains  that  no  very  long  journey  has  ever  been  made 
by  a  wholly  detached  dog-team  in  the  Arctic  Regions,  from 
which  the  animals  have  returned  alive.  The  subject  is  com- 
plicated, and  I  am  aware  of  treating  it  somewhat  summarily, 
but  I  am  inclined  to  state  my  belief  that  in  the  polar  regions 
properly  organised  parties  of  men  will  perform  as  extended 
journeys  as  teams  of  dogs,  provided  always  that  it  is  intended 
to  preserve  the  lives  of  the  dogs. 

But  if,  on  the  other  hand,  it  is  decided  to  sacrifice  the  dogs 
to  the  supreme  object  of  the  journey,  the  matter  is  placed  on 
a  different  footing,  and  the  dog-team  is  invested  with  a  capacity 
for  work  which  is  beyond  the  emulation  of  a  party  of  men. 
To  appreciate  this  is  a  matter  of  simple  arithmetic.    We  can 


342      THE   VOYAGE   OF   THE   'DISCOVERY'     [Sept. 

suppose  a  party  of  three  men  starting  on  a  journey  dependent 
on  their  own  labours,  and  we  can  suppose  the  same  party 
starting  with  the  assistance  of  twelve  dogs  which  they  intend 
should  feed  on  one  another.  In  the  latter  case,  although  the 
party  start  with  heavier  weights  than  in  the  former,  the  dogs 
not  only  draw  this  heavier  load  but  carry  their  own  food  on 
their  own  legs.  It  is  obvious,  therefore,  that  the  dog-assisted 
party  will  have  the  radius  of  the  simple  man  party  plus  the 
distance  added  by  the  dogs'  energy.  This  is  not  quoted  as 
a  practical  case,  but  merely  to  show  the  clear  gain  which  the 
dog  offers. 

This  method  of  using  dogs  is  one  which  can  only  be 
adopted  with  reluctance.  One  cannot  calmly  contemplate 
the  murder  of  animals  which  possess  such  intelligence  and 
individuality,  which  have  frequently  such  endearing  qualities, 
and  which  very  possibly  one  has  learnt  to  regard  as  friends  and 
companions.  On  the  other  hand,  it  may  be  pointed  out  with 
good  reason  that  to  forego  the  great  objects  which  may  be 
achieved  by  the  sacrifice  of  dog-life  is  carrying  sentiment  to 
undue  length.  It  is  a  case,  if  ever  there  was  one,  where  the 
end  justifies  the  means.  There  is  no  real  reason  why  the  life 
of  a  dog  should  be  considered  more  than  that  of  a  sheep,  and 
no  one  would  pause  to  consider  the  cruelty  of  driving  a 
diminishing  flock  of  sheep  to  supply  the  wants  and  aid  the 
movements  of  travellers  in  more  temperate  climates. 

If  one  comes  to  look  into  this  matter,  one  sees  that  the 
real  cruelty  to  a  dog  lies  in  over-working  or  under-feeding  it, 
and  it  is  in  avoiding  this  as  far  as  possible  that  the  sledge- 
traveller  most  truly  shows  his  humanity.  The  avoidance  of 
unnecessary  pain  should  be  the  aim,  and  suddenly  and  pain- 
lessly to  end  the  life  of  an  animal  which  has  been  well  fed  and 
well  cared  for  is  not  cruelty.  Unfortunately,  it  is  not  always 
possible  to  avoid  pain,  and  it  was  this  fact  more  than  the 
actual  killing  that  weighed  heavily  on  us  when,  as  I  shall 
relate,  we  had  gradually  and  completely  to  efface  the  patient 
companions  of  our  southern  sledge  journey. 

My  plan  for  utilising  our  dog-team  was  compounded  of  the 


i9o2]  OUR   SAD   EXPERIENCE  343 

two  methods  which  I  have  sketched  above.  We  faced  the 
situation  that  the  weaker  animals  must  be  sacrificed  to 
the  exigencies  of  the  work,  though  we  hoped  that  a  remnant 
of  the  larger  and  stronger  beasts  would  survive  to  enjoy  again 
a  life  of  luxury  and  ease ;  but,  as  events  turned  out,  we  saved 
none :  all  were  lost  under  the  unavoidable  pressure  of  cir- 
cumstances. 

Probably  our  experience  was  an  exceptionally  sad  one  in 
this  respect,  but  it  left  in  each  one  of  our  small  party  an  un- 
conquerable aversion  to  the  employment  of  dogs  in  this 
ruthless  fashion.  We  knew  well  that  they  had  served  their 
end,  that  they  had  carried  us  much  farther  than  we  could 
have  got  by  our  own  exertions  ;  but  we  all  felt  that  we  would 
never  willingly  face  a  repetition  of  such  incidents,  and  when 
in  the  following  year  I  stepped  forth  in  my  own  harness,  one 
of  a  party  which  was  dependent  on  human  labour  alone,  it 
would  not  be  easy  adequately  to  convey  the  sense  of  relief 
which  I  felt  in  the  knowledge  that  there  could  be  no  re- 
currence of  the  horrors  of  the  previous  season. 

I  have  endeavoured  to  give  a  just  view  of  the  use  of  dogs 
in  polar  enterprises.  To  say  that  they  do  not  greatly  increase 
the  radius  of  action  is  absurd  ;  to  pretend  that  they  can  be 
worked  to  this  end  without  pain,  suffering,  and  death  is 
equally  futile.  The  question  is  whether  the  latter  can  be 
justified  by  the  gain,  and  I  think  that  logically  it  may  be ; 
but  the  introduction  of  such  sordid  necessity  must  and  does 
rob  sledge-travelling  of  much  of  its  glory.  In  my  mind  no 
journey  ever  made  with  dogs  can  approach  the  height  of  that 
fine  conception  which  is  realised  when  a  party  of  men  go 
forth  to  face  hardships,  dangers,  and  difficulties  with  their 
own  unaided  efforts,  and  by  days  and  weeks  of  hard  physical 
labour  succeed  in  solving  some  problem  of  the  great  unknown. 
Surely  in  this  case  the  conquest  is  more  nobly  and  splendidly- 
won. 

It  must  not  be  forgotten,  however,  that  few  expeditions 
can  command  the  numerical  strength  to  perform  extended 
journeys  with  men  alone.     A  large  party  of  men  is  not  only 


344      THE   VOYAGE   OF  THE   'DISCOVERY'     [Sept. 

a  great   responsibility,  but  a  great   expense ;   the   dog  gives 
little  anxiety,  requires  no  housing,  and  draws  no  wages. 

There  is  one  other  point  which  must  not  be  omitted  in 
considering  the  relative  services  of  dogs  and  men.  There  are 
places  where  men  can  go  but  dogs  cannot.  The  greater  part 
of  polar  travelling  has  lain  over  flat  sea-ice  or  comparatively 
flat  land-ice,  and  this  is  a  condition  suitable  to  the  dog  ;  but 
on  steep  slopes  and  over  uneven  country  the  dog  is  practically 
useless.  It  will  be  seen  that  a  great  deal  of  our  travelling 
lay  over  uneven  country.  Everywhere  but  on  the  barrier 
surface  we  had  inequalities  to  contend  with,  and  in  rising  to 
the  steep  mountain  ranges  to  the  west  we  had  to  ascend  rough 
uneven  glaciers  and  to  traverse  surfaces  of  smooth  glassy  ice, 
where  dogs  would  have  been  a  hopeless  encumbrance ;  men, 
and  men  alone,  could  have  dragged  our  sledges  over  these 
rugged  tracts.  As  we  were  situated,  therefore,  the  services 
of  dogs  could  only  have  been  utilised  to  a  limited  extent,  nor 
is  it  at  all  improbable  that  a  similar  experience  awaits  future 
Antarctic  travellers. 

For  some  time  before  the  start  of  our  sledging  season 
we  had  strained  inventive  talent  in  the  hope  of  devising  the 
best  form  of  harness  for  our  dog-team,  one  which  would  give 
them  the  best  chance  of  utilising  their  strength  ;  but  in  this 
respect  a  dog  is  a  most  uncanny  animal  to  suit.  Except  after 
an  exhausting  march  he  is  never  still :  he  will  leap  about  and 
turn  and  twist  in  a  manner  calculated  to  tangle  the  simplest 
harness,  and  to  this  he  adds  an  ineradicable  habit  of  gnawing 
at  his  trace. 

The  harness,  as  regards  the  dog  itself,  we  kept  a  per- 
manency. Each  dog  was  measured  for  his  suit,  and  then  it 
was  sewn  securely  about  him.  It  consisted  of  a  broad  breast- 
band  secured  to  a  girth  about  the  fore  part  of  the  body.  The 
trace  could  be  secured  on  either  side  of  this  arrangement. 
At  first  we  tried  a  double  trace  to  equalise  the  pull,  using 
some  small  steel  rope,  impervious  to  the  animals'  teeth.  This 
promised  well,  and,  fitted  with  swivels,  it  was  a  really  ingenious 
contrivance ;  but  we  found  later  that  the  wire,  though  very 


igoa]  HISTORY  OF  OUR   DOG  TEAM  345 

flexible,  was  liable  to  chafe,  and  when  the  small,  sharp  strands 
stuck  out  at  all  angles  it  was  not  pleasant  to  handle.  Finally 
we  had  to  revert  to  the  single  trace  of  rope,  which  was  secured 
to  the  harness  with  a  hitch  and  to  the  main  trace  with  a 
toggle ;  whilst  half-way  along  it  was  a  swivel,  which  helped  to 
counteract  the  constant  restless  twisting  of  the  animal. 

We  also  had  many  trials  to  find  out  how  the  dogs  should 
be  placed  with  regard  to  the  sledge,  finally  arranging  a  long 
central  trace,  along  which  they  were  secured  in  pairs.  Thus 
arranged  our  dog-team  trailed  out  to  rather  a  long  procession. 
First  came  the  leading  dog,  led  by  one  of  the  party  ;  after 
him,  two  by  two,  the  remainder  of  the  team,  the  '  wheelers  ' 
being  close  back  on  the  sledge.  Even  with  this  simple 
arrangement  the  traces  would  sometimes  be  worked  into  a 
bad  tangle,  which  it  was  only  possible  to  unravel  with  bare 
fingers — a  task  that  was  not  looked  forward  to  with  any 
pleasure,  especially  in  the  early  morning.  In  this  respect 
there  is  a  curious  habit  in  dogs,  which  appears  to  be  some 
survival  of  a  remote  wild  age,  and  which  most  people  will 
doubtless  have  noticed :  a  dog  rarely  coils  himself  down  to 
sleep  without  turning  round  several  times,  as  though  arranging 
some  imaginary  lair.  However  pleasing  this  habit  may  be 
to  watch  on  ordinary  occasions,  one  does  not  contemplate 
it  with  delight  in  a  sledge  dog,  knowing  that  one  will  eventually 
have  to  disentangle  the  twisted  confusion  that  results. 

It  may  be  of  interest  perhaps  to  explain  briefly  how  we 
came  to  be  possessed  of  a  dog-team.  In  the  early  days  of 
preparation  which  preceded  our  departure  from  London  the 
subject  of  dogs  very  naturally  arose,  and  it  became  evident 
that  if  we  were  to  obtain  a  team  arrangements  would  have 
to  be  made  in  good  time.  The  German  expedition,  which 
was  to  start  simultaneously  with  our  own,  had  already  secured 
a  team  in  Eastern  Siberia,  where,  it  is  reported,  the  dogs  are 
both  larger  and  stronger  than  in  the  West.  It  was  too  late 
for  us  to  copy  this  example,  but  I  shortly  got  into  com- 
munication with  an  agent,  Mr.  Wilton,  who  was  then  in 
Archangel,  and  who  undertook  to  fulfil  our  requirements.     At 


346      THE   VOYAGE   OF   THE    'DISCOVERY'    [Sept. 

this  time  a  Russian  named  Trontheim  had  been  commissioned 
to  obtain  between  300  and  400  dogs  for  an  American  ex- 
pedition, then  about  to  start  for  Franz- Josef  Land.  It  was 
Trontheim  who  in  1891  had  secured  the  dogs  carried  on 
Nansen's  famous  voyage,  and,  as  he  was  in  all  respects  fitted 
for  collecting  the  animals,  our  agent  added  our  modest  re- 
quirement of  twenty  to  the  number  of  his  commission,  on 
condition  that  we,  through  our  agent,  should  be  allowed  first 
pick  of  the  crowd  collected.  The  particulars  of  Trontheim's 
wanderings  are  not  in  my  knowledge,  but  it  is  certain  that 
he  must  have  travelled  over  a  great  portion  of  the  country 
inhabited  by  the  Ostiak  and  Samoyede  tribes  of  Northern 
Russia  to  fulfil  his  contract.  On  his  return  to  Archangel 
Mr.  Wilton  selected  twenty  dogs  and  three  bitches  for  our 
expedition,  and  duly  brought  them  to  London,  where  they 
were  housed  in  the  Zoo  until  such  time  as  we  could  make 
arrangements  for  their  transport  to  New  Zealand  and  provide 
for  their  care  on  the  voyage.  I  really  do  not  think  I  ever  had 
an  opportunity  of  thoroughly  examining  the  dogs  until  we 
came  to  rest  in  our  winter  quarters,  but  then,  of  course,  one 
not  only  saw  them,  but  rapidly  grew  to  know  their  individual 
characteristics. 

Notwithstanding  the  care  with  which  they  had  been  brought 
together,  though  the  majority  were  fine,  strong  dogs,  there  was 
a  distinct  tail  to  our  team,  and  several  young  dogs  which  had 
evidently  never  been  in  harness  before.  One  of  the  most 
noticeable  points  about  the  team  was  the  difference  of  breed. 
There  were  three  distinct  types,  besides  many  modifications 
of  these  types.  The  first  was  a  big,  strong-limbed  dog  of 
nondescript  colour,  with  a  very  thick  but  comparatively  short 
coat;  these  animals  formed  the  best  pulling  element  in  the 
team.  Next  came  a  short-legged,  thick-set  dog,  with  a  long, 
shaggy  coat,  and  black-and-white  in  colour ;  it  was  one  of 
these  who  kept  up  the  traditions  of  his  race  by  pulling  to  the 
last  gasp.  The  third  type  was  in  form  and  colour  so  near  to 
the  grey  wolf  that  one  felt  confident  that  his  blood  relationship 
was  extremely  close.      These    dogs  were  by  far  the  most 


1902]    DISCOMFORTS  OF  SLEDGE-TRAVELLING  347 

unattractive  in  the  pack  •  timid,  cunning,  and  uncertain  in 
temper,  they  possessed  all  the  sneaking  distrust  of  the  wild 
animal  and  none  of  the  good  humour  and  boisterous  affection 
which  were  so  marked  a  characteristic  of  the  rest.  And  all 
this  mixed  team  had  come  to  us  unnamed  and  unknown  ;  we 
had  not  a  scrap  of  their  history,  nor  could  we  tell  within  a 
thousand  miles  whence  they  came.  But  what  mattered  that  ? 
They  had  now  good  Anglo-Saxon  names,  and  their  value  lay 
in  their  future,  and  not  in  their  past. 

One  fact  only  had  been  borne  by  word  of  mouth — the  king 
and  ruler  of  our  pack  had  held  the  same  high  office  when  he 
had  travelled  amongst  400  of  his  kind.  And  well  he  might. 
His  new  name  of  '  Nigger  '  wholly  failed  to  convey  the  grandeur 
of  his  nature.  In  peace  he  was  gentle  and  dignified,  but  in 
war,  as  we  knew  to  our  cost,  he  was  swift  and  terrible. 

When  we  opened  our  spring  campaign  with  the  dogs  in 
1902,  the  original  team  had  sadly  diminished.  One  had  been 
lost  with  poor  Vince  in  the  disaster  of  March ;  two  had  been 
murdered  under  our  very  eyes,  and  two  others  had  come  to  an 
untimely  end  during  the  winter. 

To  what  remained,  for  our  southern  journey,  were  added 
the  three  ladies  and  poor  'Joe,'  who  had  been  the  private 
property  of  Mr.  Bernacchi,  bringing  their  number  up  to  a  total 
of  nineteen,  of  which  all  but  one,  who  was  dismissed  at  an 
early  period  in  the  journey,  left  their  bones  on  the  great 
southern  plains.  This  in  brief  is  the  history  of  our  dogs,  but 
of  the  circumstances  in  which  they  met  their  end  I  shall  speak 
at  greater  length. 

A  mere  description,  such  as  I  have  given,  of  the  organisation 
of  sledge-travelling  and  the  paraphernalia  which  accompanies 
a  sledge  party  can  give  no  idea  of  the  actual  life  of  the  sledge- 
traveller  or  the  difficulties  and  hardships  which  he  has  to  face, 
so  that  it  is  necessary  to  point  out  wherein  the  latter  lie.  The 
worst  time  for  sledging  is  the  coldest  time  ;  not  so  much  on 
account  of  the  cold  itself  as  on  account  of  the  effects  produced 
by  the  cold.  The  most  troublesome  of  these  is  the  absence 
of  evaporation.     Very  cold  air  will  only  contain  the  minutest 


348      THE   VOYAGE   OF   THE    'DISCOVERY'     [Sept. 

quantities  of  moisture,  and  consequently  there  is  in  it  little  or 
no  drying  effect,  while  the  human  body  is  always  giving  off 
moisture,  much  passing  away  in  the  breath,  but  much  issuing 
through  the  pores  of  the  skin.  It  is  not  difficult  to  see  what 
will  happen  under  such  conditions,  and  how  much  the  traveller 
will  be  inconvenienced.  Though  the  greater  proportion  of  the 
moisture  will  pass  away  with  air  artificially  heated  by  the  body 
a  small  quantity  will  remain  as  ice  on  one's  garments,  and  this 
ice  will  gradually  and  surely  increase  until  one  is  completely 
enclosed  in  it.  There  is  ice  everywhere :  one's  garments  are 
covered  with  it ;  one's  helmet  is  encrusted  with  it ;  one's  boots 
are  full  of  it ;  and  all  these  things  which  on  board  the  ship 
were  so  caressingly  soft  to  the  touch  will  have  become  as  hard 
as  boards.  Worse  still,  this  ice  will  be  found  plastered  as 
thickly  on  everything  that  makes  for  comfort  at  night :  sleeping- 
bag,  night-jacket,  and  night  foot-gear  will  have  grown  equally 
hard  and  chill ;  one's  life  seems  to  be  spent  in  thawing  things 
out. 

Some  idea  of  these  discomforts  may  be  gathered  from  the 
description  of  a  day's  sledging  under  severe  conditions  of 
temperature.  We  will  imagine  ourselves  of  a  party  who  have 
been  a  week  or  more  out,  and  first  observe  ourselves  as  we  are 
plodding  along  through  the  snow  towards  our  evening  camping 
place.  The  exertion  of  the  march  has  sent  the  blood  coursing 
freely  through  our  veins,  and  each  man  inside  his  heavy  clothing 
has  a  grateful  sense  of  warmth  ;  but  the  day  has  been  a  long 
one,  in  the  last  half-hour  the  sledges  have  grown  decidedly 
heavier,  and  legs  and  back  are  already  giving  warning  that  the 
camping  hour  ought  to  be  at  hand.  Breath  is  now  coming 
gustily ;  it  has  frozen  thick  under  the  wind-guards  and  hangs 
in  long  icicles  from  the  unshaven  chins  ;  eyelashes  are  thickly 
encrusted  with  it,  and  now  and  again  a  bared  hand  has  to  thaw 
out  a  sealed  eyelid  and  restore  the  sense  of  vision  to  its  owner. 
Half  an  hour  ago  the  leader  looked  at  his  watch  and 
announced,  '  Thirty-five  minutes  to  camp ' ;  by  this  time  we 
can  gauge  shrewdly  the  passage  of  time  and  the  watch  has  not 
been  seen  again  until  now,  when  it  is  followed  by  the  caution, 


i962]  TYPICAL  EXPERIENCES  349 

1  Three  minutes  more.'  Heads  go  up ;  it  is  time  to  look  for 
the  camping  spot.  But  we  are  now  travelling  over  rough 
sastrugi;  we  cannot  camp  on  these  with  any  hope  of  comfort. 
Suddenly  the  owner  of  a  keen  eye  says,  '  There  we  are,  sir ' ; 
he  has  detected  a  smooth  patch  just  large  enough  for  our  tents, 
and  we  make  for  it.  We  march  to  the  site  and  up  goes  the 
leader's  hand.  The  sledges  stop  dead  ;  traces  and  harness 
fall  with  a  clatter  on  the  snow,  and  without  a  moment's  delay 
the  heavily  clad  figures  turn  towards  the  sledges.  There  must 
be  no  standing  about  in  this  weather ;  we  must  be  constantly 
active  until  we  can  creep  into  the  shelter  of  our  thin  tent. 
Everyone  is  soon  wrenching  at  the  straps  of  the  neatly  packed 
sledges  and  running  busily  to  and  fro  with  various  articles  of 
the  equipment.  In  each  group  of  three,  one  man  seizes  the 
tent-poles  and  after  some  struggling  succeeds  in  planting  them 
firmly  in  the  snow  over  the  smoothest  site  he  can  find  ;  his 
two  companions  advance  with  the  tent,  and  whilst  he  holds 
grimly  to  the  poles  they  whisk  it  over  his  head  and  straighten 
it  till  it  hangs  squarely  on  its  support.  One  now  pulls  out  and 
arranges  the  skirting,  whilst  the  other  has  seized  the  shovel  and 
is  cutting  out  large  slabs  of  snow  as  though  his  life  depended 
on  it. 

I  may  here  add  that  this  was  not  always  an  easy  task. 
Sometimes  the  snow  was  brittle  and  crystalline  and  difficult  to 
work ;  at  others  there  was  very  little  of  it,  especially  when  we 
camped  on  glaciers  ;  but  the  worst  condition  was  when  it  was 
excessively  hard.  It  may  seem  almost  incredible  that  we 
occasionally  found  wind-blown  snow  so  hard  that,  except  in 
the  strongest  hands,  a  solid  sharp  shovel  made  no  impression 
on  it.  To  prise  out  pieces  at  such  times  was  really  expert 
work,  and  it  was  lucky  that  we  only  came  on  this  condition 
after  we  had  had  some  experience. 

But  to  return  to  our  tent.  Whilst  the  others  are  delving 
and  securing  the  tent  without,  the  cook  has  spread  the  floor- 
cloth within,  and  is  now  seated  on  it  with  his  Primus  lamp  and 
provision  bag.  He  handles  the  first  with  care,  pours  spirit 
from  a  tiny  flask  into  the  outer  cup,  and  laying  in  it  a  small 


350      THE   VOYAGE   OF  THE    'DISCOVERY'    [Sept. 

piece  of  wick  proceeds  to  light  it.  His  matches  are  produced 
with  great  care  from  an  inner  pocket.  Herein  lies  great 
danger,  for  on  no  account  must  moisture  be  allowed  to  con- 
dense in  that  box  ;  the  contents  of  many  a  matchbox  have 
been  wasted  by  incaution.  If  he  has  been  sufficiently  careful, 
however,  the  lamp-wick  is  soon  sputtering  and  thin  blue  flame 
creeps  up  about  the  burner  of  the  lamp  ;  with  bated  breath  he 
waits  for  the  psychological  moment,  and  suddenly  gives  a 
sharp  stroke  to  the  plunger  of  the  lamp.  If  he  has  hit  it  off, 
small  shafts  of  blue  flame  shoot  out  beneath  the  caps,  and  in 
a  minute,  as  he  works  away  at  the  pump,  the  top  of  the  lamp 
is  surrounded  by  a  hissing,  roaring  flame.  If,  however,  he  has 
not  hit  it  off,  the  yellow  flame  of  free  oil  alone  shoots  up,  and 
all  has  to  be  done  over  again.  Meanwhile  the  cooker  has 
been  filled  by  those  outside  and  handed  in  through  the  door. 
Directly  the  lamp  is  lit  the  various  vessels  are  placed  on  top  of 
it  ;  the  lamp  takes  a  deeper  note  as  it  gets  to  its  work,  and 
those  without  breathe  a  sigh  of  relief  as  they  realise  that  supper 
is  now  really  in  sight. 

The  cook  now  gets  ahead  with  the  contents  of  the  provision 
bag  and  continues  to  suffer  in  comparative  silence,  for  indeed 
all  this  time  he  has  suffered ;  he  has  had  to  work  with  bared 
hands  and  to  seize  one  by  one  all  these  chilled  metal  articles, 
where  a  moment's  delay  will  convey  a  tingling,  burning  shock 
to  the  fingers.     Of  such  work  it  may  be  truly  said  : 

Ah  me  !  what  perils  do  environ 

The  man  who  meddles  with  cold  iron. 

In  our  spring  journeys  it  was  impossible  to  avoid  this  trouble 
with  cold  metal ;  our  fingers  became  to  a  certain  extent  callous, 
but  only  when  each  finger-tip  terminated  in  a  large  horny 
blister.  Except  that  they  burnt  and  tingled,  these  blisters  did 
not  give  much  trouble  during  a  short  journey,  but  were  very 
sore  when  they  burst  after  one's  return.  On  a  long  cold 
journey  one's  fingers  were  liable  to  split  and  crack  about  the 
nails,  and  this  was  both  painful  and  troublesome. 

As  soon  as  the  tent  is  well  secured  without,  those  who 


i9o2]  THE   ORDINARY   ROUTINE  351 

have  been  at  work  on  it  demand  admittance  ;  the  door  is  un- 
fastened and  they  come  tumbling  in  with  a  confused  medley  of 
night-coats  and  foot-gear.  All  now  squat  round  the  hissing 
cooker,  and  we  gain  what  comfort  we  can  from  the  heat  that 
escapes  from  it.  The  confined  space  within  is  now  filled  to 
repletion,  and  elbows  and  knees  have  to  be  managed  with 
caution  to  avoid  disaster  to  the  cooker.  By  this  time,  in  the 
spring,  the  sun  has  sunk  below  the  horizon,  and  the  gloom  of 
the  tent  is  lightened  only  by  the  flickering  rays  of  a  candle 
placed  in  a  collapsible  lantern  which  hangs  from  a  tent-pole. 
So  small  is  the  space  that  an  incautious  movement  often  sends 
this  contrivance  flying,  and  there  is  much  groping  and  impre- 
cation before  light  can  be  produced  again  on  the  scene. 

Whilst  the  cook  devotes  his  attention  to  the  all-important 
supper  we  others  make  shift  to  change  our  foot-gear ;  in  the 
narrow,  cramped  space  we  tug  and  pull  at  sodden  finneskoes 
and  ice-covered  socks,  and,  diving  into  our  warm  breast- 
pockets, hasten  to  cover  bared  feet  with  the  night-socks  which 
have  been  dried  in  that  receptacle.  Suddenly,  without  warn- 
ing, a  leg  shoots  out  whilst  the  owner  exclaims  loudly  under 
the  sharp  pain  of  violent  cramp.  The  cooking- pot  rocks 
wildly,  but  in  the  confusion  the  ever-watchful  cook  rises  to  the 
occasion  and  prevents  a  catastrophe. 

A  few  moments  more,  and  little  spurts  of  steam  rise  from 
the  centre  of  interest ;  snow  has  been  converted  into  boiling 
water,  and  the  cook's  busiest  moment  has  arrived.  Off  come 
the  lids  and  covers,  and  in  a  moment  all  is  hidden  in  a  dense 
cloud  of  steam,  through  which  one  can  dimly  perceive  that  the 
cook  has  seized  the  candle  and  with  its  aid  is  conveying  the 
frozen  ingredients  of  the  supper  into  the  boiling  pot.  Soon, 
as  he  stirs,  the  most  fragrant  odour  in  the  world  greets  our 
nostrils.  All  other  work  ceases  as  the  pot  is  lifted  and  its 
precious  contents  poured  into  the  ready  pannikins.  The  cook 
takes  his  perquisites  by  scraping  out,  with  his  spoon,  all  that 
remains ;  this  done  he  refills  the  empty  pot  from  the  outer 
cooker  and  sets  it  once  more  to  boil.  Then  follows  an  inter- 
regnum of  comparative  silence,  broken  only  by  the  crunch  of 


352      THE  VOYAGE  OF  THE   'DISCOVERY'    [Sept, 

biscuit  or  the  smack  of  lips  which  have  closed  on  a  succulent 
spoonful  of  hoosh. 

This  is  a  moment  to  be  lived  for — one  of  the  brief 
incidents  of  the  day  to  which  we  can  look  forward  with  real 
pleasure.  The  hot  food  seems  to  give  new  life,  its  grateful 
warmth  appears  to  run  out  to  every  limb,  exhaustion  vanishes, 
and  gradually  that  demon  within,  which  has  gripped  so  tightly 
for  the  past  hour  or  two,  is  appeased.  The  hoosh  is  followed 
by  an  equally  delightful  drink  of  boiling  hot  cocoa,  but  even 
as  we  gulp  it  down  we  feel  that  pleasure  is  drawing  to  an  end, 
for  the  Primus  is  now  out,  the  steam  of  cooking  that  has  not 
passed  away  through  the  ventilator  has  frozen  in  glistening 
crystals  on  the  side  of  the  tent,  and  the  chill  of  the  outer  air  is 
again  finding  its  way  through  the  thin  canvas. 

There  is  no  time  to  be  wasted  ;  the  door  is  opened,  and 
two  people  plunge  out  into  the  open  air,  the  cooker  and  pro- 
vision bag  are  hastily  packed  together,  passed  outside,  and 
made  secure  from  the  wind  by  heavy  lumps  of  snow  ;  the  floor 
is  swept,  and  the  miscellaneous  assortment  of  clothing  is 
collected  with  as  much  discrimination  as  possible  into  the 
corners  allotted  to  the  various  individuals.  Meanwhile  the 
sleeping-bag  is  dragged  to  the  door  of  the  tent,  and  by  dint  of 
much  coaxing  it  is  eventually  got  inside.  By  this  time  it  is 
quite  stiff  and  hard  ;  it  crackles  as  it  is  forced  open,  and  has 
to  be  flattened  out  with  the  full  weight  of  the  body.  What 
was  once  the  soft  covering  flap  will  now  stand  erect  and  rigid, 
so  stiffened  is  it  with  ice.  Inside,  the  hair  is  matted  together 
and  hard  frozen — so  hard  in  places  that  under  the  raps  of  one's 
knuckles  it  resounds  like  a  wooden  door.  Could  any  bed  be 
more  uninviting  ? 

Before  we  enter  it  we  must  have  a  look  round.  The  sun 
is  skimming  round  below  the  southern  horizon ;  there  is  a 
deep  red  flare  in  its  wake.  The  sky  is  clear  save  in  the  south- 
east, where  lies  a  rather  ominous  bank  of  cloud.  Are  we  in 
for  a  blizzard  ?  Now  and  again  a  puff  of  wind  sweeps  over  the 
snow  ;  as  it  passes,  the  fine  ice-crystals  of  the  surface-drift 
patter  against  the  sledges  and  our  legs  and  gather  in  little 


i9M]  THE   DIARIST'S  WOES  353 

sandy  heaps  beyond ;  the  tent,  which  has  been  flapping  idly, 
shivers  violently  as  the  blast  sweeps  by ;  a  last  look  at  the 
thermometer  shows  that  the  temperature  has  fallen  to  —  480  ; 
we  wonder  how  much  lower  it  is  going,  and  make  for  the  tent 
door. 

It  doesn't  do  to  dive  straight  in,  for  we  may  land  in  the 
centre  of  someone  else's  anatomy,  so  we  shout,  '  All  right  for 
coming  in  ?  '  There  is  a  scuffling,  then  •  Right,  oh  ! '  and  we 
dive  with  a  blind  lurch  towards  our  own  corner  ;  the  last- 
comer  gathers  up  the  loose  folds  of  the  door  and  ties  them  up 
tightly;  then  we  all  sit  round  on  the  sleeping-bag  and  com- 
plete our  costume  for  the  night.  It  is  breathless  work  this, 
dealing  with  hard  frozen  garments  in  such  a  cramped  space. 
Conversation  is  kept  up  in  gasps,  and  now  and  again  some 
struggling  figure  has  to  pause  for  a  rest ;  but  at  length  all  are 
ready,  and,  sweeping  away  the  loose  snow  as  far  as  possible, 
we  lift  the  flap  of  the  sleeping-bag  and  step  inside. 

But  the  day's  work  is  not  yet  over  :  this  is  the  time  for 
diaries,  meteorological  records,  casual  repairs,  dkd  pipes.  The 
last-named,  being  the  only  attractive  part  of  this  programme, 
is  the  first  to  be  considered,  and  each  smoker's  hand  dives 
into  the  inner  recesses  of  the  pocket  in  which  pipe,  matches, 
and  his  meagre  allowance  of  tobacco  are  cherished.  Ex- 
perience soon  teaches  that  a  pipe  must  be  kept  in  a  very  warm 
place,  otherwise  the  stem  will  be  found  choked  with  ice,  with 
which  nothing  but  a  stiff  bit  of  wire  will  cope. 

A  diary  is  a  great  nuisance  when  the  nights  are  dark :  the 
writer  is  obliged  to  secure  the  flickering  lantern  close  beside 
his  book,  and  when  the  tent  is  being  shaken  by  the  wind  the 
fitful  motion  of  the  light  can  be  imagined.  As  he  pores  over 
his  task  his  breath  forms  a  film  of  ice  over  the  paper,  on  which 
the  pencil  frequently  skids,  and  sometimes  after  writing  a  few 
lines  he  will  turn  the  page  to  the  light  and  find  half  of  it 
illegible,  so  that  he  has  to  go  painfully  over  each  word  afresh. 
Now  and  again  his  bare  fingers  will  refuse  duty,  and  he  must 
wait  awhile  until  they  are  nursed  back  to  life.  This  sort  of 
thing  does  not  help  one's  ideas  to  flow,  and  altogether  the 
vol.  1.  A  A 


354      THE  ^VOYAGE   OF   THE    '  DISCOVERY '    [Sept. 

keeping  of  diaries  and  records  is  no  joke  in  this  cold  weather. 
Sewing  is  a  still  less  pleasant  job,  and  the  garment  must  be 
badly  rent  indeed  before  its  owner  undertakes  its  repair  on  a 
spring  journey. 

As  these  tasks  are  finished,  one  by  one  the  inhabitants  of 
the  sleeping-bag  wriggle  down  into  its  horny  depths.  The 
last  to  lower  himself  is  the  centre  man,  who  has  still  some 
duties  to  perform.  When  the  others  have  reported  themselves 
fixed,  he  laboriously  wrestles  with  the  fastenings  of  the  bag 
over  their  heads ;  these  secured,  he  '  dowses  the  glim '  and 
works  himself  down  as  best  he  can  between  his  companions, 
and  finally  seals  the  opening  above  his  own  head.  Ere  this 
dreaded  night  commences,  the  leader  has  again  consulted  his 
watch  and  found  that  between  two  and  three  hours  have 
elapsed  since  the  party  halted. 

The  time  consumed  in  all  these  simple  operations  of  camp- 
ing puzzled  us  greatly  at  first.  There  was  no  particular  delay 
anywhere  ;  from  start  to  finish  one  was  busy,  and  there  was 
every  incentive  to  hurry,  yet  even  with  experience  the  interval 
was  very  little  shortened.  The  secret  lies  in  the  fact  that  the 
simplest  operation  becomes  complicated  in  intensely  cold 
weather.  Even  to  change  a  pair  of  socks  takes  nearer  five 
minutes  than  one.  The  continuous  thawing-out  is  the  real 
cause  of  delay,  but  the  difficulty  shows  that  the  sledge-traveller 
has  much  to  occupy  him  in  cold  weather  beyond  dragging  his 
sledge  over  the  snow. 

A  night  in  such  a  sleeping-bag  as  we  are  picturing,  with 
the  temperature  below  —  400,  cannot  be  said  to  be  less  than 
horribly  uncomfortable.  We  are  rarely  conscious  of  sleeping  ; 
certainly  not  oftener  than  one  night  in  three  can  we  realise  that 
several  hours  have  passed  in  oblivion,  and  these  seem  only  to 
be  bought  at  the  price  of  extreme  exhaustion.  Ordinarily  we 
sleep  in  the  fitful,  broken,  comfortless  fashion  of  which  the 
mere  recollection  is  a  nightmare,  and  even  this  poor  apology 
for  slumber  does  not  come  until  we  have  lain  broad  awake  and 
shivering  for  an  hour  or  two. 

With  the  temperature  at  — 480  we  can  make  a  shrewd  guess 


1902]        A  NIGHT   IN   THE   SLEEPING-BAG  355 

as  to  the  sort  of  night  that  is  before  us.  The  first  half-hour 
is  spent  in  constant  shifting  and  turning  as  each  inmate  of 
the  bag  tries  to  make  the  best  of  his  hard  mattress  or  to  draw 
the  equally  hard  covering  closer  about  him.  There  is  a  de- 
sultory muffled  conversation  broken  by  the  chattering  of  teeth. 
Suddenly  the  bag  begins  to  vibrate,  and  we  know  that  someone 
has  got  the  shivers.  It  is  very  contagious,  this  shivering,  and 
paroxysm  after  paroxysm  passes  through  the  whole  party.  We 
do  not  try  to  check  it :  the  violent  shaking  has  a  decidedly 
warming  effect ;  besides,  it  is  a  necessary  part  of  the  programme, 
and  must  be  got  through  before  we  can  hope  for  sleep. 
Presently  we  hear  our  neighbour  marking  time,  and  we  rather 
unnecessarily  ask  him  if  his  feet  are  cold ;  he  explains  their 
exact  state  in  the  most  forcible  language  at  his  command. 

All  this  time  we  are  mentally  surveying  our  own  recumbent 
figure  and  wondering  whether  the  parts  that  feel  so  cold  are 
really  properly  covered  or  whether  our  garments  have  got 
rucked  up  in  the  struggle  for  ease.  Our  hands  are  tucked 
away  in  some  complicated  fashion  that  experience  has  com- 
mended ;  they  are  useless  for  exploring.  Besides,  we  know  of 
old  how  far  imagination  can  lead  one.  Our  thoughts,  taking 
flying  journeys  round  the  world,  flit  past  the  tropics  to  log-wood 
firesides,  but  they  stop  nowhere  until  they  have  raced  back  to 
present  discomfort.  The  last  squirm  brought  the  wind-guard 
of  our  helmet  across  our  face.  It  is  crusted  with  the  ice  of  the 
day's  march ;  this  is  now  gently  thawing,  and  presently  a  drop 
trickles  down  our  nose.  Our  thoughts  become  fixed  on  that 
drop.  It  is  very  irritating  ;  we  long  to  wipe  it  away,  but  that 
means  taking  out  one  hand  and  disarranging  the  whole  scheme 
of  defence  against  the  cold.  We  are  debating  the  question 
when  a  second  drop  descends.  Flesh  and  blood  cannot  stand 
ihis  :  out  comes  our  hand,  and  for  the  next  quarter  of  an  hour 
we  are  pitching  and  tossing  about  to  try  to  regain  the  old 
position. 

It  is  all  very  small,  very  trivial ;  yet  there  are  probably  few 
who  have  not  passed  sufficiently  restless  nights  to  appreciate 
how  these  trivialities  weigh  on  such  an  occasion,  and  here  we 

a  a  2 


356     THE  VOYAGE  OF  THE  'DISCOVERY'    [Sept. 

have  in  their  most  concrete  form  the  greater  part  of  those 
elements  which  go  to  disturb  the  rest  of  man. 

We  start  to  count  those  imaginary  sheep  jumping  over 
their  imaginary  hurdles  for  the  hundredth  time  as  the  shivering 
lessens.  The  last  half-hour  has  brought  a  change ;  we  are  no 
longer  encased  with  ice.  There  are  signs  of  a  thaw ;  above 
and  below  the  bag  is  less  rocky  ;  it  is  becoming  damp  and 
coldly  clammy,  but  it  covers  us  better.  There  is  just  a  sus- 
picion of  somnolence,  when  suddenly  the  whole  bag  is  shaken 
violently  and  we  hear  the  most  harrowing  groans.  It  is  only 
another  attack  of  the  cramp,  an  enemy  that  is  never  far  away. 
We  try  to  sympathise  with  the  victim  as  we  start  the  sheep 
jumping  afresh. 

And  so  this  wearisome  night  passes  on,  with  its  round  of 
trivial  detail  and  its  complete  absence  of  peace  and  comfort. 
It  was  the  same  last  night,  and  it  will  be  the  same  to-morrow. 

It  is  not  an  exaggeration  to  say  that  we  dreaded  these 
nights,  yet  it  is  worthy  of  record  that  none  passed  without  a 
jest ;  the  more  cheerless  and  uncomfortable  the  conditions 
became,  the  more  light-hearted  grew  the  men. 

I  have  mentioned  only  some  of  their  ills.  Besides  cramp, 
cold  feet,  and  general  discomfort,  many  were  attacked  by 
rheumatism ;  later,  snow-blindness  intervened.  Another  great 
source  of  trouble  was  indigestion  and  heartburn.  I,  with 
several  others,  had  never  known  this  ailment  under  ordinary 
conditions,  but  during  the  earlier  sledging  days  it  attacked  us 
most  fiercely.  Also,  of  course,  frost-bites  were  common,  with 
painfully  blistered  faces  and  hands  ;  feet  were  likewise  blistered 
on  the  long,  fatiguing  marches. 

To  all  these  ills  were  our  sailors  regularly  and  constantly 
exposed  on  their  sledge  journeys,  and  not  only  did  they  hate 
to  forego  their  share,  but  never  an  evil  fell  on  them  but  they 
made  so  light  of  it  that  one  would  have  thought  they  were 
engaged  in  the  most  humorous  occupation  imaginable.  Their 
conversation  either  on  the  journey  or  after  their  return  could 
have  conveyed  only  one  impression — that  the  whole  thing  was 
a  glorified  picnic.     It  was  not  that  the  jokes  were  of  a  high 


i902]  'TIME   TO    GET   UP!'  357 

order.  The  acknowledged  humourists  were  in  the  minority,  and 
even  they  were  reduced  to  the  feeblest  witticisms  :  the  striking 
thing  was  their  capacity  for  finding  amusement,  not  only  in 
the  dull  and  prosaic,  but  in  the  physically  miserable.  There 
are  few  people,  I  take  it,  who  will  not  appreciate  the  saving 
qualities  of  this  sense  of  humour,  or  who  have  not  at  some 
time  experienced  the  advantage  of  meeting  misfortune  with  a 
smile ;  there  are  few,  therefore,  who  will  not  realise  that  one 
would  have  to  search  far  for  a  better  sledge-companion  than 
the  British  bluejacket. 

If  refreshing  sleep  comes  at  all  on  a  spring  sledge  journey 
it  will  be  in  the  early  morning  hours,  when  the  sleeping-bag 
has  thawed  down  on  its  occupants,  and  they,  though  damp, 
can  get  better  protection  from  its  folds  ;  it  is  now,  therefore, 
that  we  doze  for  brief  intervals  and  wake  in  fitful  starts.  The 
leader,  who  alone  possesses  a  watch,  is  conscious  of  his 
responsibility  for  rousing  the  party,  and  wonders  vaguely  in  his 
waking  moments  what  the  time  may  be.  To  look  at  his  watch 
is  a  thing  only  to  be  done  when  all  other  evidence  as  to  the 
passage  of  time  has  been  duly  considered,  for  it  means  that 
his  present  attitude  has  to  be  disturbed  ;  he  must  struggle  with 
his  garments  to  produce  the  watch,  and,  worse  still,  he  must 
slightly  open  the  sleeping-bag  so  that  the  grey  outer  light  may 
fall  on  its  face.  Therefore  before  he  moves  he  recalls  the 
incidents  of  the  night  and  sums  up  in  imagination  the  intervals 
of  time  which  have  elapsed  between  them  ;  he  arrives  at  the 
conclusion  that  another  half-hour  may  well  pass  before  he 
disturbs  himself. 

Then  the  deed  has  to  be  done,  and  he  shuffles  the  watch- 
face  up  to  the  light.  As  he  peers  into  it  his  breath  freezes  on 
the  face,  and  he  has  to  rub  again  before  he  can  mark  the 
position  of  the  hands,  but  finally  they  show  that  there  is  still 
a  quarter  of  an  hour  to  the  time  of  rising.  He  tucks  away  his 
timekeeper  and  lies  wakefully  counting  the  minutes.  When 
he  thinks  the  fifteen  have  elapsed  he  shouts,  'Time  to  get 
up  ! '  It  is  evident  the  others  have  been  waiting  for  the  signal. 
There  is  no  lagging ;  even  the  morning  hours  have  not  made 


353      THE   VOYAGE   OF  THE   'DISCOVERY'     [Sept. 

the  bag  sufficiently  comfortable  for  anyone  to  desire  to  linger 
in  it.  The  toggles  are  soon  undone,  and  we  all  hoist  our- 
selves into  a  sitting  position  and  search  about  us  for  mits  and 
other  articles  of  attire.  A  prolonged  howl  is  sent  forth  into 
the  dim  morning  light,  '  Rouse  out !  Rouse  out  !  Time  to  get 
up  ! '  and  presently  one  hears  the  muffled  response  from  the 
other  tents,  '  A'  right,  sir  ! '  A  moment  or  two  more,  and  all 
are  busy  again. 

The  murmur  of  conversation  in  the  other  tents  comes  to 
our  ears,  and  occasionally  some  remark  intended  for  the  whole 
camp.  Two  of  us  have  tumbled  out  through  the  door  of  the 
tent,  and  the  moist  sleeping-bag  is  dragged  through  to  be  rolled 
up  outside.  The  cook  has  already  dashed  for  his  Primus 
lamp ;  the  cooker  is  filled  and  passed  in,  and  soon  the  hissing 
sound  in  each  tent  tells  that  breakfast  preparations  have  com- 
menced. 

We  take  a  swift  run  round  to  the  other  tents  to  inquire  the 
news  of  the  night  and  make  a  rapid  survey  of  the  various 
ailments ;  then  on  to  the  thermometer  to  find  the  spirit  column 
resting  at  — 450,  though  the  indicator  shows  that  it  has  been 
colder  in  the  night ;  its  upper  end  is  resting  more  than  500 
below  zero  (in  fact,  on  spring  journeys  it  was  often  found 
below  —  6o°).  The  temperature  is  slowly  rising,  but  it  is  still 
bitter  enough  as  we  seek  again  the  shelter  of  the  tent. 

It  is  lucky  that  the  watched  pot  does  occasionally  boil,  for 
all  eyes  are  now  glued  on  the  cooker,  and,  thanks  to  its 
efficiency,  no  long  time  passes  before  the  pemmican  can  be 
thrown  in  and  the  savoury  smell  of  breakfast  arises.  With 
breakfast,  peace  and  comfort  again  reign  for  a  short  spell,  and 
whilst  its  grateful  warmth  is  still  felt  we  puff  again  at  our 
pipe  and  collect  as  best  we  can  our  boots  and  other  articles 
necessary  for  the  day's  march.  The  sun  has  just  risen 
above  the  horizon,  but  the  wind  has  come  with  it,  and  its 
golden  rays  are  reddened  by  the  low  driving  snowdrift. 
Some  of  the  worst  ordeals  of  the  day  are  before  us,  and  to 
venture  into  the  open  in  the  wind  is  not  a  pleasing  prospect. 
Faces  take  rather  a  grim  expression,  but  delay  doesn't  help 


1902]  FROZEN   FINNESKOES  359 

matters  ;  things  have  to  be  done,  and  they  are  done  somehow. 
With  the  coming  of  the  sun  the  flickering  lantern  can  be  dis- 
pensed with,  and  now  we  can  see  well  to  put  on  our  marching 
boots. 

It  is  very  trying  work.  With  a  caution  born  of  experience 
we  took  immense  care  last  night  in  freezing  them  to  conform 
as  nearly  as  possible  to  the  shape  of  our  feet.  After  the  march 
they  had  been  wet  through,  and  came  off  in  a  soft  and  flabby 
condition  ;  we  knew  that  this  would  only  last  for  a  few  minutes, 
and  as  they  froze  we  had  carefully  supported  and  kneaded 
them  into  the  required  shape.  Half  an  hour  later  they  were 
so  hard  that  we  could  throw  them  about  without  risk  of  alter- 
ing it ;  they  are  still  in  this  condition,  and  we  are  about  to 
test  the  result  of  our  labours.  They  clatter  like  wooden  sabots 
as  they  are  deposited  on  the  floorcloth. 

We  squat  down  and  withdraw  one  foot  from  its  night- 
clothing,  grope  in  our  breast  for  our  day-socks,  produce  one 
of  them  still  very  wet  but  moderately  warm,  jam  our  foot  into 
it,  and  with  many  gasps  proceed  to  wedge  it  into  a  wooden 
finnesko.  The  finnesko  has  been  prepared  by  placing  in  it  a 
sole  cut  from  reindeer-skin  and  a  little  padding  of  sennegrces. 
This  grass  is  soft,  but  the  sole  is  as  wooden  as  the  boot,  and 
has  needed  much  pushing  to  get  it  in  place.  We  are  lucky  if 
our  foot  gets  half-way  into  its  rocky  cover  at  the  first  attempt. 
We  leave  it  at  that  for  the  moment,  and  proceed  with  the 
other;  by  the  time  it  is  in  a  similar  position,  an  inch  can 
be  gained  on  the  first,  and  so  inch  by  inch  these  tiresome 
boots  are  pulled  on.  Meanwhile  our  feet  have  got  alarmingly 
cold,  and  with  a  groan  we  are  obliged  to  start  up  and  stamp 
about. 

There  is  no  exaggeration  in  the  above  picture.  The  putting 
on  of  our  finneskoes  in  very  cold  weather  was  generally  a 
matter  of  excruciating  agony  ;  it  often  brought  tears  to  the 
eyes  and  always  strong  expressions  to  the  lips,  and  all  this 
with  footwear  that  on  board  the  ship  could  be  put  on  as  easily 
as  one's  hat.  Yet  even  when  one  was  fuming  in  this  discom- 
fort, a  glance  at  one's  writhing  companions  made  it  impossible 


360      THE   VOYAGE   OF   THE   'DISCOVERY'     [Sept. 

not  to  appreciate  the  humorous  side  of  the  situation,  and  we 
have  often  paused  in  the  midst  of  our  trying  labours  to  indulge 
in  a  real  hearty  laugh. 

Heaven  help  the  man  who  had  failed  in  caution  on  the 
previous  night  !  At  first,  from  want  of  experience,  and  later 
from  carelessness  or  by  accident,  a  boot  would  be  found  in 
the  morning  squeezed  flat  and  frozen  hard  in  that  impossible 
shape.  There  was  nothing  for  the  owner  to  do  but  to  thaw 
it  into  shape  with  his  foot,  which  had  to  be  withdrawn  at 
intervals  and  rubbed  violently  to  restore  the  circulation.  The 
least  time  in  which  one  could  hope  to  cope  with  a  boot  of 
this  description  was  half  an  hour. 

By  this  time  all  have  their  foot-gear  on,  and  have  re- 
adjusted all  their  clothes  ready  for  the  march.  Considerably 
over  two  hours  have  elapsed  since  we  roused  out  of  the  sleep- 
ing-bag. When  all  is  ready  comes  the  order,  '  Pack  up.'  Out 
tumble  all  the  thickly  clad  figures  ;  lamps,  cookers,  and  sleep- 
ing-bags are  bundled  into  their  proper  places  on  the  sledges, 
the  snow  is  shovelled  off  the  tent,  and  the  latter  is  whisked  off 
its  poles,  shaken,  and  folded  up ;  the  floorcloth  is  rolled  up 
or  secured  to  a  bamboo  to  serve  as  a  sail.  All  these  articles 
are  soon  piled  on  the  sledges  and  securely  strapped  down  ; 
the  camp  has  disappeared  as  though  by  magic,  and  all  that  is 
left  to  mark  the  spot  is  the  weird  circles  of  snow-blocks  which 
held  the  tents. 

The  warming  effect  of  breakfast  has  long  since  vanished, 
and  now  all  is  eagerness  to  be  on  the  march.  The  harness  is 
soon  picked  up  from  the  snow  and  adjusted  about  the  body  ; 
then,  with  a  final  look  to  see  that  nothing  has  been  left  behind, 
we  bend  to  the  traces  and  the  leader  says,  '  Off.' 

There  is  rarely  much  conversation  on  the  march,  especially 
n  cold  weather ;  and,  starting  with  a  quick,  warming  step,  it  is 
not  long  before  we  have  fallen  into  our  regular  stride — that 
steady  rhythmic  plod  before  which  the  miles  come  slowly  but 
surely.  In  half  an  hour's  time  the  blood  is  flowing  freely, 
garments  are  hanging  more  easily,  and  our  boots  have  thawed 
sufficiently  to  give  to  the  step.     A  halt  is  called  to  tighten  up 


1902]  THE   MARCH    RESUMED  361 

our  lamp-wick  straps  and  to  readjust  the  folds  about  our  legs 
to  the  new  conditions  ;  then  we  are  off  once  more. 

And  now  hour  after  hour  creeps  on  whilst  we  seem  to  have 
turned  into  a  machine — a  machine  that  must  keep  moving 
with  that  regular  swinging  step,  and  now,  thank  heaven,  a 
machine  that  can  do  so  without  straining  its  parts.  A  week 
ago  things  were  very  different ;  we  vividly  remember  the  start 
of  the  journey,  when,  in  spite  of  the  temperature,  the  perspira- 
tion ran  off  us,  when  our  legs  seemed  uncontrollable  members, 
and  our  back  one  huge  ache.  Since  that,  day  by  day  we  have 
grown  stronger  on  the  trail,  until  now  the  early  hours  of  the 
march  are  almost  a  physical  pleasure,  and  it  is  only  towards  its 
end  that  we  feel  the  weight  of  the  sledges.  Yet  withal  progress 
is  not  rapid  ;  one  and  three-quarter  mile  an  hour  is  good  going 
Sometimes  we  come  down  to  one  and  a  half  or  less,  and  if  we 
exceed  two  we  seem  to  be  racing.  Still,  even  a  mile  and  a  half 
an  hour  produces  a  fair  total  for  the  day,  if  we  can  keep  it 
going  for  nine  hours  or  more.  So  we  plod  along  mechanically, 
each  footfall  but  little  in  advance  of  the  last,  whilst  the  sledges 
come  jerkily  in  our  wake  and  leave  the  long,  snaky  furrows 
behind. 

At  one  o'clock  there  is  a  halt  for  lunch.  Here  we  score, 
for  in  the  old  days  with  ponderous,  dilatory  cooking-apparatus 
the  sledge  traveller  could  not  afford  to  take  his  luncheon  hot ; 
but  with  us  the  cooker  is  singing  ten  minutes  after  we  halt,  and 
in  less  than  half  an  hour  we  have  hot  tea  or  cocoa  ;  and  whilst 
We  munch  our  modest  allowance  of  biscuit  and  cheese,  the  hot 
fluid  once  more  sends  the  blood  coursing  through  our  veins. 

I  think  there  can  be  no  doubt  as  to  the  benefit  of  this  hot 
meal  in  the  middle  of  the  day,  though  possibly  some  hardened 
travellers  may  consider  it  an  unnecessary  luxury  ;  it  forms  an 
oasis  in  the  long  desert  of  the  day's  march,  it  breathes  new 
vigour  and  spirit  into  a  flagging  party.  For  lack  of  fuel  I  have 
been  long  spells  without  a  hot  drink  at  midday,  and  therefore  I 
know  well  the  difference  it  makes  to  the  afternoon  march ;  and 
though  I  know  the  case  is  not  strong  scientifically,  I  am  pre- 
pared to  affirm  that  the  distance  gained    on  the    marches 


362      THE   VOYAGE   OF   THE    'DISCOVERY'    [Sept. 

more  than  compensates  for  the  extra  weight  of  fuel  required. 
Personally  I  always  preferred  cocoa  to  tea  for  this  meal,  mainly 
because  tea  is  not  a  food,  and  can  only  stimulate.  The  fact 
that  we  took  tea  on  our  sledge  journeys  was  rather  a  concession 
to  the  men,  who  from  habit  are  much  attached  to  this  beverage ; 
indeed,  there  were  one  or  two  men  who  positively  disliked 
cocoa.  The  best  marching  hours  were  always  those  which 
succeeded  the  lunch  hour. 

But  an  hour  under  these  conditions  literally  flies,  and  we 
have  barely  swallowed  our  lunch  and  drawn  a  whiff  or  two 
from  our  pipes  when  the  order  comes  to  '  pack  up '  j  tents  and 
cookers  are  again  packed  on  the  sledge,  harness  is  resumed, 
and  we  are  once  more  on  the  march. 

So  mechanically  and  evenly  go  these  marching  hours  that  I 
have  sometimes  had  to  collect  my  thoughts  to  remember 
whether  it  is  morning  or  afternoon,  or  even  where  I  am  and 
what  I  am  doing.  It  is  easy  to  go  into  reverie  and  fly  away  to 
the  ends  of  the  earth ;  nothing  disturbs  the  silence  but  the 
regular  crunch  of  the  snow-crust  and  the  swish  of  the  sledge- 
runner. 

But  now  the  wind  is  springing  up  again.  Throughout  the 
day  the  clouds  have  been  banking  up  from  the  south ;  they  are 
now  travelling  fast  overhead,  a  low  flying  scud.  The  sun  peeps 
through  at  rarer  and  rarer  intervals,  the  sky  and  the  mountains 
look  very  black  and  sombre,  and  throw  up  the  intense  white- 
ness of  the  snow;  the  surface  drift  comes  whirling  along  in 
ghostly  wreaths,  and  patters  about  our  feet.  The  outlook  is 
threatening,  but  we  don't  want  to  lose  our  miles  if  we  can  help 
it,  so  we  plod  along  as  before.  As  the  wind  grows  stronger, 
one  by  one  out  go  the  face-guards,  and  we  march  with  heads 
turned  slightly  to  the  right,  away  from  it.  We  must  keep  our 
eye  open  for  frost-bites  now  :  they  will  give  no  warning.  Pre- 
sently the  leader  calls  a  halt ;  everyone  knows  what  it  is  for, 
and  each  peers  into  the  face  of  his  next-door  neighbour. 
Apparently  all  is  well,  and  off  we  go  again  ;  a  quarter  of  an 
hour  later  there  is  another  halt  and  we  hear,  '  Your  cheek's 
gone,  Jim,'  and  Jim  immediately  extracts  his  hand  from  his 


i9o2]  CAMPING   IN   A   BLIZZARD  363 

mit  and  places  it  over  the  offending  feature.     Also  Jim  knows 
that  there  will  be  a  blister  there  to-morrow. 

Once  more  we  resume  the  march,  and  for  long  it  is  only 
interrupted  by  the  occasional  search  for  frost-bites.  To  the 
south  the  outlook  appears  still  more  gloomy,  and  presently 
some  adjacent  hill-spur  disappears  as  though  it  had  fallen 
through  the  earth,  completely  blotted  out  by  a  sheet  of  deep 
grey  which  is  rushing  towards  us.  This  is  the  threatened 
storm,  and  the  sooner  we  are  in  camp  the  better.  We  cast 
round  for  a  camping  ground  and  rush  for  the  likeliest  spot ;  we 
halt  and  dash  for  the  sledges  ;  we  think  of  nothing  but  getting 
the  tents  up  in  time.  But  alas  !  we  have  marched  just  five 
minutes  too  long,  and  we  have  scarcely  placed  the  tent-poles 
before  the  storm  is  upon  us. 

The  air  is  thick  with  driving  snow-crystals ;  they  lash  at  our 
face  like  a  sand  blast.  It  is  impossible  to  face  them  directly, 
and  we  rush  to  and  fro  with  averted  head.  So  thick  is  the  air 
that  we  can  scarcely  see  the  sledges  from  the  tent  position, 
though  only  six  or  seven  yards  lie  between.  It  is  each 
party  for  itself  now  with  a  vengeance.  One  of  our  three  hangs 
on  like  grim  death  to  the  tent-poles,  whilst  the  others  bear  the 
fluttering,  straining  canvas  to  windward  and  strive  to  envelop 
him.  Once  or  twice  they  fail,  but  at  last  the  tent  is  over,  and 
whilst  to  windward  it  is  stretched  taut  on  the  bending 
bamboos,  to  leeward  it  is  flapping  madly  in  the  rising  gale. 
One  of  us  sits  on  the  weather  skirt,  and  the  other  flies  for  the 
shovel  and  returns  to  dig  with  wild  haste.  It  is  a  long  and 
difficult  job  this,  to  set  up  a  tent  in  a  heavy  wind  whilst  the 
snow  curls  and  bites  into  our  face  and  creeps  into  our  mits 
and  into  every  hole  and  crevice  it  can  find  in  our  garments. 
That  wildly  flapping  skirting  is  only  conquered  inch  by  inch  by 
the  united  efforts  of  the  whole  party.  But  it  is  bound  to  be 
done,  and  the  sooner  the  better,  so  we  work  with  all  the 
strength  that  remains  to  us. 

We  must  have  everything  handy  now,  so  when  the  tent  is 
secured  we  fly  for  sleeping-bag,  cooker,  and  anything  else  we 
may   need,   and   bundle   them    all   indiscriminately   into   the 


364      THE  VOYAGE  OF  THE   'DISCOVERY'    [Sept. 

interior,  following  ourselves  with  all  the  haste  we  can  compass. 
Only  when  door  and  ventilator  are  tied  have  we  time  to  look 
about  us,  and  then  the  sight  is  not  pleasant.  The  powdery 
snow-dust  lies  inches  deep  everywhere ;  it  has  covered  every- 
thing we  possess,  and  lies  thick  in  every  crack  of  the  sleeping- 
bag.  We  ourselves  are  white  from  head  to  foot,  and  none  of 
us  but  is  keenly  frost-bitten  about  the  face,  whilst  one  has  two 
of  his  fingers  white  to  the  knuckles.  Something  hot  is  what 
all  need,  and  we  set  about  to  get  it  with  the  least  possible 
waste  of  time,  whilst  we  brush  the  snow  as  best  we  can  from 
our  belongings. 

Supper  makes  one  feel  better,  and  immediately  after  we 
unroll  the  sleeping-bag  and  commence  to  prepare  ourselves 
for  entering  it.  We  know  from  experience  what  all  this  snow 
will  mean  ;  we  cannot  wholly  banish  it,  and  the  icy  condition 
of  our  belongings  is  nothing  to  what  it  will  be  ;  yet  we  sweep 
and  sweep  as  diligently  as  may  be  with  our  fur  mits  to  make 
the  best  of  a  bad  job,  till  finally  we  lift  the  cover  of  the  bag 
and  settle  ourselves  with  all  possible  care  within. 

It  is  curious  to  lie  like  this  in  a  blizzard ;  luckily  the 
temperature  has  gone  up,  as  it  always  does  on  these  occasions. 
The  rise  is  apparent  in  every  way ;  we  can  handle  things  more 
easily,  our  breath  does  not  rise  in  such  steaming  clouds ;  but, 
above  all,  there  is  a  milder  and  easier  feel  in  the  air  once  one 
is  out  of  the  lash  of  the  wind.  Our  discomforts  now  come 
more  from  the  miserably  chilly  wetness  of  everything  than  from 
the  actual  cold. 

Meanwhile  the  storm  without  is  raging  unabated,  and  the 
thin  canvas  of  the  tent  is  flapping  with  a  continuous  roar  that 
drowns  all  noise  within  ;  conversation  can  only  be  carried  on 
by  shouting.  Still,  the  main  point  is  that  we  are  all  in  the 
sleeping-bag  and  safe  and  sound  if  not  very  comfortable,  so  in 
due  course  we  settle  ourselves  in  its  depths  and  draw  over  us 
the  protecting  flap.  There  will  be  no  shivering  to-night  at 
any  rate,  and  we  can  smoke  our  pipes  with  greater  ease  in 
consequence  ;  here,  in  the  depths  of  the  bag,  the  mad  flapping 
of  the  tent  has  sunk  to  distant  thunder. 


i902]  A  WEARISOME    DAY  365 

The  chances  are  that  on  the  following  day  the  blizzard  will 
not  have  gone  down  ;  our  blizzards  usually  last  for  more  than 
twenty-four  hours,  and  therefore  next  morning  one  is  not 
surprised  to  hear  the  tent  flogging  away  as  wildly  as  ever. 
Breakfast  is  deferred  for  an  hour,  but  man  must  live,  and  it 
is  better  to  keep  one's  strength  up  at  all  times,  so  at  last  we  all 
get  out  of  the  bag,  roll  it  up  carefully,  and  prepare  our  meal. 

The  meal  over,  the  bag  is  spread  again,  and  in  it  we  while 
away  the  hours  as  best  we  can.  It  is  an  admirable  lesson  of 
patience,  since  we  are  absolutely  incapable  of  bettering  matters 
till  the  clouds  roll  by.  We  only  allow  ourselves  two  hot  meals 
— a  late  breakfast,  and  then  supper  as  darkness  is  again 
descending  on  us.  During  these  meals  the  bag  is  rolled  up, 
but  lunch,  with  its  scraps  of  biscuit,  cheese,  sugar,  and 
chocolate,  is  eaten  inside  it  ;  one  keeps  all  these  luxuries  in 
a  warm  breast  pocket  and  munches  away  at  them  at  intervals. 

How  unutterably  wearisome  these  long  daylight  hours  are  ! 
The  smoker  looks  ruefully  at  his  small  stock  of  tobacco  ;  to 
smoke  now  is  to  rob  the  future,  but  the  temptation  is  great, 
and  he  argues  that  just  half  a  pipe  will  not  make  much 
difference,  so  he  lights  up,  but  in  a  quarter  of  an  hour  finds 
himself  sucking  at  an  empty  bowl.  The  inside  of  the  bag  has 
grown  moist  where  it  comes  into  contact  with  the  body,  whilst 
the  ice  is  still  hard  in  the  corners ;  the  damp  has  worked 
through  to  the  skin,  and  we  seem  to  be  swathed  in  wet 
bandages.  It  is  horribly  cold  and  clammy,  and  we  think  of 
what  joy  it  would  be  to  be  able  to  walk  into  our  comfortable 
wardroom,  to  rub  ourselves  with  a  rough  towel,  don  dry 
clothing,  and  bask  in  the  rays  of  the  glowing  fire. 

Now  and  again  conversation  breaks  out ;  someone  tells 
a  droll  legend  of  his  infancy ;  the  tale  carries  us  away  to  other 
places  and  other  times  for  a  space,  forgetful  of  our  miserable 
surroundings;  but  the  effort  flickers  and  dies,  and  gradually 
thought  creeps  back  to  the  present.  The  small  aneroid 
barometers  are  consulted  again  and  again  ;  there  has  been 
a  slight  fall  for  the  gale,  not  more  than  two  or  three  tenths  of 
an  inch,  but  we  eagerly  look  for  a  rise  ;  occasionally  a  head  is 


366      THE   VOYAGE   OF   THE   'DISCOVERY'    [Sept. 

raised  out  of  the  bag  to  contemplate  the  green  canopy  above, 
but  no  one  cares  to  look  long  at  the  shivering  canvas  and 
trembling  bamboos  ;  a  glance  is  sufficient  to  show  that  the 
conditions  without  are  unchanged.  And  as  the  long  day  goes 
by  and  the  second  night  creeps  on  we  eat  our  modest  supper 
and  once  more  resort  to  the  bag.  As  we  settle  ourselves  for 
the  night  we  are  conscious  of  the  first  sign  of  break  in  the 
gale.  The  wind  is  becoming  more  squally  ;  during  the  furious 
gusts  the  tent  flaps  more  madly  than  ever,  but  between 
whiles  there  is  a  sensible  indication  of  peace,  and  we  shut 
ourselves  in  with  hopes  that  we  are  approaching  the  end  of 
our  imprisonment. 

By  the  early  hours  of  the  morning  the  improvement  is  very 
marked ;  we  are  conscious  that  for  brief  spells  the  canvas  is 
still,  and  that  even  in  the  squalls  it  is  less  violently  agitated. 
This  is  the  beginning  of  the  end  :  the  air  is  probably  still  full 
of  flying  snow-crystals,  but  in  a  few  hours  they  will  be  settling 
and  the  nimbus  clouds  will  have  passed  us  by.  When  we  rise 
at  the  first  streaks  of  dawn  it  is  to  a  brighter  prospect ;  the  light 
which  penetrates  the  green  walls  of  the  tent  is  sufficient  to 
show  that  there  must  be  a  clear  sky.  These  walls  are  fluttering 
only  at  rare  intervals  and  in  gentle  fashion,  chiefly  because  the 
wind  has  fallen,  but  partly  also  because  they  are  banked  high 
with  drift  snow  which  has  caused  them  to  sag  in  on  every  side 
until  the  inner  space  is  narrowed  by  some  feet.  The  door  is 
completely  drifted  up  by  a  heavy  bank. 

After  rolling  up  the  sleeping-bag  the  first  thing  to  be  done 
is  to  effect  an  exit,  and  this  we  do  by  lying  on  our  backs  and  kick- 
ing for  all  we  are  worth  at  the  snow-banked  canvas.  After  a 
bit  we  can  untie  the  door,  and,  still  kicking,  force  our  way  out  ; 
then  the  shovel  is  found,  and  with  its  aid  the  drifts  are  soon 
diminished. 

We  drop  at  once  into  our  usual  camping  routine,  but  as  the 
cook  prepares  the  breakfast  we  have  time  to  look  about  us  and 
to  note  the  havoc  wrought  by  the  gale.  The  sledges  are 
almost  covered,  and  we  know  well  that  the  boxes  and  tanks  on 
them  will  be  found  partly,  if  not  wholly,  filled.     Our  tent  is 


1902]  RESULT   OF   A   BLIZZARD  367 

covered  with  ice,  the  sleeping-bag  is  filled  with  it,  and  there  is 
not  a  single  acticle  of  our  equipment  which  has  not  had  pounds 
added  to  its  weight.  It  is  a  gruesome  thought ;  the  tempera- 
ture is  falling  again,  and  we  shall  soon  have  the  normal  condition 
of  intense  cold,  with  an  accumulation  of  ice  which  will  double 
each  separate  discomfort.  We  realise  we  are  in  for  a  '  high  old 
time,'  and  that  the  effects  of  this  gale  will  be  felt  to  the  bitter 
end  of  the  journey ;  there  will  be  no  drying,  and  the  ice  which 
we  have  gathered  will  remain  with  us  throughout.  However, 
it  is  no  use  inveighing  against  the  inevitable,  and  we  start  to  dig 
out  our  sledges,  and  afterwards  books,  instruments,  and  pro- 
visions are  taken  out  and  brushed,  whilst  the  tanks  and  boxes 
in  which  they  have  reposed  are  freed  as  far  as  possible  from  the 
sandy  deposit.  Then  we  go  back  to  the  tent  for  our  well- 
earned  breakfast,  and  in  due  course  step  forth  once  more  on 
the  march. 

As  can  well  be  imagined,  the  diaries  which  record  the 
doings  of  a  sledge  party,  and  which  are  written  in  such  adverse 
circumstances  as  I  have  described,  do  not  enter  into  the  hard- 
ships and  discomforts  which  are  inevitable  to  the  day's  work, 
but  in  the  main  are  devoted  to  the  special  incidents  of  the 
particular  day.  Such  references  to  the  normal  conditions  as 
they  contain  are  rather  in  the  form  of  hasty  and  incomplete 
entries  which  would  convey  little  to  the  outsider,  though 
they  may  amply  stimulate  the  memory  of  the  writer,  who 
possesses  the  key  to  the  situation.  It  will  not  be  difficult  to 
understand,  however,  that  the  person  who  has  actually  been 
through  sledging  experiences  will  have  little  trouble  in  recalling 
their  general  nature.  The  daily  recurrence  of  discomforts  and 
hardships  leaves  an  impression  which  is  not  easily  dispelled, 
and  his  memory  affords  him  ample  material  for  drawing  a 
typical  picture  of  the  sledge-traveller's  daily  round. 

It  would  be  impossible  in  describing  the  special  incidents 
of  our  journeys  always  to  supply  the  detail  which  would  make 
the  circumstances  clear.  I  have  therefore  in  this  chapter 
endeavoured  to  describe  what  may  be  considered  the  normal 
experiences   and   environment  of  the  spring  sledging  parties, 


368      THE   VOYAGE   OF  THE   'DISCOVERY'    [Sept. 

and  thus  to  provide  a  general  background  for  the  more  varied 
adventures  of  our  individual  excursions.  I  am  not  conscious 
of  colouring  the  picture  highly — the  discomforts  are  far  too 
real  to  need  imaginative  treatment — nor  is  it  conceivable  that 
anyone  would  willingly  face  such  conditions  without  some 
sufficient  object  to  compensate  for  the  hardships  endured. 

But  it  must  be  remembered  that  all  these  conditions  which 
I  have  described  are  a  result  of  the  severe  temperatures  and 
storms  of  the  spring.  Fortunately  for  the  sledge  traveller,  as 
the  season  advances,  the  climatic  conditions  become  milder, 
and  in  summer  the  sledging  life  may  become  not  only  bearable 
but  pleasant.  It  has  always  seemed  to  me  that  scarcely 
sufficient  stress  is  laid  on  this  difference  In  Arctic  books  of 
travel.  One  is  apt  to  overlook  the  fact  that  the  conditions 
described  in  the  earlier  journeys  have  passed  away  during  the 
more  extended  efforts,  and  that  in  some  of  the  latter  the 
travellers  have  actually  suffered  more  from  the  sun  and  the 
heat  than  from  the  cold.  In  point  of  fact,  summer  sledging 
is  so  different  from  spring  sledging  that  it  might  well  be  con- 
sidered a  separate  employment,  and  therefore  the  description 
of  a  day's  travelling  in  spring  can  convey  no  impression  of  the 
summer  traveller's  experiences,  unless,  of  course,  he  is  journey- 
ing on  a  high  plateau  (such  as  the  summit  of  Victoria  Land), 
where  the  climate  is  continuously  severe. 

In  the  South,  as  compared  with  the  North,  we  were  much 
handicapped  by  the  late  advent  of  our  improved  temperature 
conditions.  There  is  generally  a  considerable  rise  in  the 
Northern  April  j  in  May  the  air  can  be  mild  and  pleasant,  and 
in  June  it  is  sometimes  disagreeably  warm.  In  the  South  we 
got  no  marked  improvement  until  the  early  part  of  November, 
which  corresponds  to  the  Northern  May.  December  was  the 
finest  and  mildest  month,  though  the  temperature  rarely  rose 
above  the  freezing-point,  but  even  then  we  had  sometimes  cause 
to  complain  of  the  heat. 

It  would  not  be  possible  to  describe  a  typical  summer  day's 
sledging,  because  two  days  were  rarely  alike,  and  so  much 
depended  on  the  direction  in  which  we  travelled  and  on  the 


i902]     IMPROVED   MARCHING   CONDITIONS        369 

object  of  the  journey ;  but  it  is  perhaps  as  well  to  point  out 
wherein  it  differed  from  such  experiences  as  I  have  already 
described.  In  summer,  of  course,  there  was  full  daylight ;  one 
lived  and  slept  and  ate  with  the  sun  circling  above  the 
horizon,  and  the  flickering  candle  formed  no  part  of  one's  equip- 
ment. During  the  night  one's  boots  had  reposed  near  the 
tent :  much  of  the  damp  had  dried  from  them,  and  although 
they  were  frozen,  there  was  little  difficulty  in  thawing  them — 
they  could  be  put  on  and  secured  neatly  whilst  the  breakfast 
was  being  prepared. 

On  a  fine  day  in  summer  the  first  task  is  to  drag  the 
sleeping-bag  out  into  the  open,  to  turn  it  inside  out  and 
support  it  facing  the  sun  ;  by  this  means  much  of  the  moisture 
is  evaporated  out  and  much  forms  in  tiny  crystals  on  the  hair 
and  can  be  brushed  away.  Sometimes  it  is  carried  on  top 
of  the  sledge  in  this  way,  so  that  the  drying  process  may  con- 
tinue, but  if  the  weather  is  unsettled  it  is  thoroughly  beaten 
and  turned  again  before  packing.  Except  during  blizzards  and 
cold  snaps,  this  sleeping-bag  has  become  a  really  pleasant 
resort.  There  may  be  a  little  ice  under  each  person's  body, 
but  the  greater  part  of  the  material  is  soft  and  pliable,  and 
after  a  hard  day's  march  one  snuggles  comfortably  into  its 
folds  and  is  soon  away  in  dreamland. 

The  cooking-things  can  be  handled  now  without  much 
difficulty,  and  the  ends  of  one's  fingers  no  longer  display  a  row 
of  horny  blisters,  though  in  many  places  they  have  dried  and 
split  and  there  are  deep  cuts  about  the  nails. 

We  start  on  the  march  without  our  wind-clothes  ;  in  fact, 
we  rarely  wear  them  now  except  when  it  is  blowing  or  snowing. 
In  place  of  our  helmets  we  now  wear  a  broad-brimmed  hat,  for 
the  glare  of  the  sun  is  great,  and  with  its  reflection  on  the 
white  snow  it  has  already  burnt  us  all  to  a  deep  chocolate 
colour ;  while  at  night  we  wear  a  simple  Balaclava.  Soon 
after  the  march  starts  we  are  perspiring  freely  ;  the  labour  is 
very  heavy,  and  we  are  not  sorry  to  be  able  to  throw  open  our 
coat.  We  scarcely  realise  that  the  air  is  chill  until  a  halt 
shows  it  is  necessary  to  button  up  again.  Mits  are  still  slung 
vol.  1.  B  B 


37o      THE   VOYAGE   OF   THE    'DISCOVERY'     [Sept. 

around  our  necks,  but  we  usually  march  with  our  hands  free 
and  yet  with  pleasantly  pink  fingers. 

On  coming  to  camp  we  can  take  things  coolly — and  as  the 
march  has  been  carried  to  its  utmost  length,  we  are  capable  of 
little  else.  Except  for  the  cook,  no  one  enters  the  tent  now 
until  supper  is  ready  ;  for  the  rest  there  is  plenty  to  be  done 
in  thoroughly  securing  the  tent,  opening  out  the  sleeping-bag, 
and  spreading  out  damp  articles  to  dry.  The  cook  calls  us 
when  supper  is  ready,  and  we  are  not  slow  in  answering  the 
call.  After  supper  we  leisurely  change  our  foot-gear  and 
spread  out  the  sleeping-bag,  but  instead  of  jumping  into  the 
latter  at  once  we  carry  our  sodden  boots  and  stockings  into  the 
open  and  distribute  them  about  the  sledges,  taking  care  to 
secure  them  with  string  or  safety  pins  that  no  unkind  gust  may 
waft  them  away  whilst  we  sleep. 

After  this,  with  the  memory  of  supper  still  fresh,  it  is 
comfortable  enough  to  sit  in  the  sleeping-bag,  smoke  our  pipes, 
write  up  our  diaries,  and  stitch  away  at  some  torn  garment ; 
then,  perhaps,  as  the  chill  of  the  air  creeps  in  or  the  fatigue  of 
the  day  overcomes  us,  we  creep  down  into  our  berths  and  are 
soon  asleep.  If  it  is  calm  and  the  sun  shines  directly  on  the 
canvas  side,  it  can  be  quite  warm  within  the  tent ;  sometimes 
we  have  to  sleep  with  our  heads  in  the  open,  and  on  rarer 
occasions  we  have  even  had  to  leave  the  bag  and  sleep  on  top 
of  it. 

But  there  are  troubles  in  the  summer  travelling  as  well 
as  in  the  spring,  though  they  are  of  a  somewhat  different 
nature. 

There  are  blizzards  and  winds  still  to  be  contended  with  ; 
either  will  cover  us  with  snow  and  put  a  stop  to  the  drying, 
and  we  have  several  days  of  damp  misery  before  we  can 
recover  from  its  effects.  We  leave  our  socks  out  to  dry  in  a 
bright  sun.  The  wind  springs  up  in  the  night,  and  they  are 
covered  with  drift ;  the  sun  melts  this  into  the  fabric,  and  in 
the  morning,  instead  of  dry  foot-wear,  we  have  to  grapple  with 
masses  of  ice.  The  same  sun  melts  the  snow  on  the  tent  and 
covers  it  with  a  sheet  of  ice.     Though  the  temperature  may  be 


i9o2]  DISADVANTAGES   OF  SUMMER  371 

below   freezing,  snow   incautiously  left  in  the  provision  tank 
will  melt  and  render  everything  soft  and  sodden. 

From  start  to  finish  of  the  march  we  have  to  wear  goggles 
for  protection  against  the  intense  glare,  but  we  grow  inexpressibly 
sick  of  these  safeguards,  and  weary  of  always  seeing  the  world 
through  a  tiny  aperture.  In  spite  of  this  protection,  too,  snow- 
blindness  is  common,  and  rarely  a  night  goes  by  but  someone 
needs  doctoring  ;  the  solution  of  zinc  sulphate  is  thawed  out, 
and  the  sufferer  lies  flat  on  his  back  whilst  a  ministering 
companion  drops  the  remedy  into  his  eyes  with  the  end  of  a 
match.  It  is  one  of  those  remedies  which  might  be  thought 
worse  than  the  disease,  for  it  gives  the  victim  what  he  calls 
'  gyP>'  anc*  generally  keeps  him  awake  for  the  next  hour  or  two 
with  throbbing  eyeballs. 

In  the  spring  journeys  the  marches  had  to  be  suited  to  the 
conditions,  but  in  the  summer  we  live  to  march  ;  there  is  no 
excuse  for  dawdling  in  the  morning  now,  and  we  are  soon  on 
the  go.  Hour  after  hour  passes  till  the  welcome  halt  for 
lunch,  and  then  again  hour  after  hour  till  the  night  camp  is 
pitched.  It  is  very  toilsome  work.  Day  after  day  we  put 
forth  our  best  efforts,  but  though  physically  fit  and  hard,  it  is 
impossible  not  to  feel  stale  at  times  and  to  long  for  the  hands 
of  the  watch  to  go  faster ;  the  number  of  miles  to  show  for  a 
long  day's  work  seems  ridiculously  inadequate  to  the  exertion 
expended.  When  camping  time  comes,  we  feel  almost 
inclined  to  drop  in  our  tracks  and  wish  to  goodness  there  was 
someone  else  to  pitch  the  tent  or  do  the  cooking.  The  march 
has  been  arranged  to  absorb  the  maximum  portion  of  our 
energy,  but  there  is  not  much  present  satisfaction  in  contem- 
plating the  limp  condition  that  results.  With  the  most 
desperate  desire  to  sit  or  lie  down,  we  remember  that  it  is  our 
duty  to  fix  the  position,  and,  with  a  groan,  plod  away  to  the 
instrument  box,  produce  theodolite,  watch,  and  notebook,  and 
endeavour  to  collect  all  our  faculties  to  start  on  the  dreary 
round  of  observations. 

But  our  most  poignant  suffering  during  the  summer  season 
comes  to  us  by  reason  of  our  hunger.     The  spring  absence  was 

BB2 


372      THE  VOYAGE   OF  THE   'DISCOVERY'    [Sei>t. 

not  long  enough  fully  to  develop  the  pangs,  but  now,  as  week 
follows  week,  we  become  more  famished  until  our  thoughts 
turn  to  little  else  but  food.  The  effects  of  breakfast  have 
passed  in  an  hour,  or  at  the  most  two,  and  we  plod  on  with 
unsatisfied  longings  during  the  morning.  Lunch  has  become 
almost  an  insult  in  its  insufficiency ;  it  is  gone  in  a  twinkling, 
and  we  gaze  at  the  provision  bag,  frown  at  the  cook,  and  wonder 
if  he  has  not  cut  our  allowance  too  fine  with  a  misplaced  ardour 
for  saving.  The  end  of  the  afternoon  is  sometimes  really  pain- 
ful ;  tired  and  worn,  we  feel  a  positive  gnawing  in  the  middle 
and  begin  to  doubt  if  supper-time  will  ever  come. 

When  at  length  the  halt  is  called  there  is  no  need  to  hurry 
the  cook,  though  the  conversation  takes  a  personal  turn  if  he 
is  clumsy  with  the  Primus.  Our  sensations  from  the  moment 
that  the  first  savoury  scent  of  cooking  issues  from  the  tent  till 
the  last  drop  of  hoosh  is  poured  down  our  craving  throats  are 
beyond  description  j  they  can  only  be  imagined,  and  not  even 
that  by  such  as  have  not  known  what  hunger  really  is. 
It  is  well  to  be  asleep  before  the  effects  of  supper  wear  off,  but 
this  is  rarely  possible,  and  it  is  always  a  wise  precaution  to 
haul  one's  belt  quite  tight  for  the  night. 

Summer  sledging  is,  in  fact,  a  grind ;  it  is  a  grind  because 
only  by  putting  forth  one's  utmost  can  one  hope  to  achieve 
success,  and  because  a  self-imposed  task  can  be  carried  to 
whatever  lengths  one  chooses.  Although  it  is  conducted 
under  far  less  severe  conditions  than  those  of  the  spring 
journeys,  it  has  drawbacks  and  difficulties  of  its  own,  which 
are  increased  in  proportion  to  the  serious  nature  of  the  effort 
which  is  being  made. 

At  perhaps  too  tedious  a  length  I  have  set  forth  the  objects 
of  sledging,  the  mannjtr  in  which  it  is  organised  and  conducted, 
and  the  difficulties  with  which  it  has  to  contend.  I  cannot 
conclude  without  calling  momentary  attention  to  it  as  an 
occupation  for  men,  apart  from  the  more  practical  results 
which  it  purports  to  achieve. 

Sledging  draws  men  into  a  closer  companionship  than  can 
any  other  mode  of  life.     In  its  light  the  fraud  must  be  quickly 


1902]        THE  FASCINATION  OF  SLEDGING         373 

exposed,  but  in  its  light  also  the  true  man  stands  out  in  all 
his  natural  strength. 

Sledging  therefore  is  a  sure  test  of  a  man's  character,  and 
daily  calls  for  the  highest  qualities  of  which  he  is  possessed. 
Throughout  my  sledging  experience  it  has  been  my  lot  to 
observe  innumerable  instances  of  self-sacrifice,  of  devotion  to 
duty,  and  of  cheerfulness  under  adversity ;  such  qualities 
appeared  naturally  in  my  comrades  because  they  were  de- 
manded by  the  life. 

It  is  in  considering  this  that  perhaps  the  reader  will  see 
that  there  is  a  charm  and  fascination  in  the  sledging  life 
despite  its  hardships  and  trials. 


374      THE   VOYAGE   OF   THE   'DISCOVERY'     [Sept. 


CHARTER  XII 

THE   SPRING   JOURNEYS   OF    1902 

Spring  Sledging  Plans — Start  of  Sledging  Season — Parties  Leave  the  Ship 
— Submarine  Ice — Start  on  Southern  Reconnaissance — An  Inopportune 
Blizzard — Return  to  the  Ship — Fresh  Start — Journey  to  the  Bluff — 
Difficult  Travelling — Placing  the  Depot — Rapid  Return — Report  of 
Outbreak  of  Scurvy — Experiences  of  Western  Party — Steps  taken  to 
Combat  the  Disease— Some  Remarks  on  the  Nature  of  Scurvy — Causes 
which  may  have  Led  to  our  Outbreak — Impossibility  of  Determining 
its  Exact  Origin — Prospects  of  Future  South  Polar  Expeditions  in  this 
Respect. 

And  the  deed  of  high  endeavour 

Was  no  more  to  the  favoured  few, 

But  brain  and  heart  were  the  measure 

Of  what  every  man  might  do Renneix  Rodd. 

Tired  of  the  long  winter's  inaction,  impatient  to  be  away 
on  our  travels,  and  anxious  to  submit  our  diligent  preparations 
to  a  practical  test,  we  waited  restlessly  during  the  latter  end 
of  August  1902  for  the  sun  to  achieve  a  sufficient  altitude  to 
give  us  light  for  a  reasonable  proportion  of  the  twenty-four 
hours.  So  ignorant  were  we  of  our  surroundings,  and  so 
formidable  appeared  many  of  the  obstacles  which  we  could 
view  from  our  neighbouring  heights,  that  it  seemed  desirable 
to  devote  our  first  efforts  principally  to  reconnaissance. 

In  accordance  with  a  plan  which  had  long  been  conceived, 
Armitage  was  to  conduct  a  party  to  the  west,  and,  travelling 
light,  was  to  explore  the  region  of  New  Harbour  and  endeavour 
to  find  some  route  whereby  the  inland  ice  might  be  reached 
to  the  northward  of  that  forbidding  range  of  mountains  which 
faced  the  ship.     It  was  realised  that  he  would  have  to  cross 


i9o2]  SPRING   SLEDGING   PLANS  375 

the  sea-ice  and  turn  slightly  to  the  north  to  avoid  the  decayed 
glacier  tongue  on  which  we  had  landed  from  the  ship.  At 
the  same  time,  with  the  sea-ice  so  constantly  being  broken 
up  by  the  heavy  gales,  the  party  would  have  to  be  extremely 
cautious  in  their  movements  in  order  to  avoid  all  risk  of  being 
carried  away  on  a  broken  floe.  Yet  as  long  as  the  sea-ice 
held  firm,  it  would  afford  a  smooth  and  easy  road,  possibly 
the  only  one  on  which  the  obstacles  would  not  prove  in- 
superable. 

Royds,  with  another  light  travelling  party,  was  to  journey 
to  the  south-west.  Here  our  lofty  mountain  range  again  fell, 
and  though  snow-covered  peaks  could  be  seen  in  the  far 
distance,  there  appeared  to  be  a  glacier  of  great  volume 
descending  into  the  strait.  Here,  then,  was  another  possibility 
of  finding  a  road  to  the  inland.  All  depended  on  what  lay 
between,  and  whilst  the  prospect  was  not  hopeful,  it  was 
quite  possible  that  by  turning  and  twisting  amongst  the 
various  obstructions  a  clear  road  could  be  found. 

To  have  laden  either  of  these  parties  with  sufficient  food 
to  make  a  depot  for  future  journeys  would  have  been  to  limit 
their  ability  for  exploration  ;  obviously  the  first  step  was  to 
find  the  road.  I  had  entrusted  the  western  exploration  to 
Armitage,  and  it  would  be  for  him,  after  the  return  of  these 
parties,  to  decide  on  the  best  route  to  be  taken. 

I  had  decided  in  the  very  early  winter  months  to  under- 
take the  southern  work  myself,  and  as  every  consideration 
seemed  to  point  to  this  being  the  best  route  for  the  dogs, 
I  had  determined  that  all  these  animals  should  be  com- 
mandeered for  it,  making  the  journey  essentially  a  dog- sledging 
trip.  For  a  long  time  I  contemplated  taking  only  one 
companion,  thinking  that  two  persons  would  be  sufficient  to 
manage  the  animals,  while  the  saving  of  weight  would  com- 
pensate for  the  extra  trouble  ;  but  in  considering  the  difficulties 
which  might  arise  from  the  unknown  nature  of  the  route  and 
the  risk  of  sickness,  I  finally  decided  on  increasing  the  number 
to  three.  Long  before  this  my  two  chosen  companions,  Barne 
and  Shackleton,  had  been  training  themselves  for  the  work. 


376      THE  VOYAGE  OF  THE   'DISCOVERY'    [Sept. 

From  our  hills  we  could  see  two  possible  roads  to  the 
south.  One  lay  outside  the  White  Island  and  promised  the 
smoother  travelling,  but  necessitated  a  considerable  detour. 
The  other  was  more  direct,  and  led  towards  the  high  black 
cape  which  we  commonly  called  the  Bluff ;  it  passed  between 
the  '  White '  and  '  Black '  Islands,  and  though  it  seemed  to 
contain  some  rough  places,  I  thought  it  worth  exploring,  on 
the  chance  of  saving  the  longer  distance. 

But  in  making  a  spring  journey  to  observe  these  routes  it 
was  obvious  that  as  one  or  the  other  must  eventually  be  taken 
by  the  main  party,  in  either  case  that  party  must  pass  around 
the  Bluff,  so  that  it  was  advisable  that  the  southern  recon- 
naissance party  should  carry  enough  food  to  be  able  to 
establish  a  depot  at  the  Bluff. 

Besides  these  early  efforts  at  clearing  the  routes  for  the 
main  journeys,  one  other  matter  claimed  our  attention  in  the 
spring  programme  :  we  had  still  to  communicate  with  the  record 
at  Cape  Crozier.  It  was  advisable  that  this  should  be  done 
before  the  longer  journeys  were  undertaken,  but  I  thought 
it  might  be  left  until  after  the  reconnaissance  parties  had 
returned. 

As  a  preliminary  to  the  commencement  of  the  spring  pro- 
gramme, I  decided  to  make  a  short  trip  to  the  north  with  the 
dogs  and  a  party  of  six  officers  and  men,  mainly  in  order  to 
test  the  various  forms  of  harness  which  we  had  on  trial,  and 
to  find  out  whether  the  dogs  pulled  best  in  large  or  small 
teams ;  but  incidentally  there  were  many  minor  topographical 
features  in  this  direction  which  we  could  not  see  clearly  from 
the  hills,  and  which  we  now  wished  to  make  sure  of. 

On  September  2  we  started  in  a  blizzard  and  camped  in 
conditions  of  some  discomfort ;  on  the  following  day  we  pushed 
on  past  the  Turtle  Rock  and  found  ourselves  brought  up  by 
the  long  tongue  of  a  glacier.  Although  this  was  but  eight 
miles  from  the  ship,  from  our  hills  we  had  only  been  able 
to  make  out  a  wavy,  indistinct  shadow,  showing  how  extra- 
ordinarily limited  is  the  distance  at  which  one  can  detect  ice 
disturbances. 


1902]  PRELIMINARY  TRIPS  377 

This  glacier  tongue  is  worthy  of  a  short  description, 
because  it  is  typical  of  other  ice  formations  in  the  Ross 
Sea,  and  has  puzzling  characteristics  for  which,  even  to  this 
day,  we  have  not  been  able  to  account.  It  consisted  of  a  thin 
tongue  of  ice,  about  five  miles  long,  which  shot  out  directly 
into  the  bay  and  thus  into  a  position  where  the  sea-ice  annually 
formed  and  broke  up  on  each  side  of  it.  It  was  little  broader 
at  its  base  than  at  its  end,  but  both  sides  of  the  tongue  were 
deeply  serrated,  so  that  a  man  walking  along  the  top  would 
find  it  might  narrow  to  a  quarter  of  a  mile,  or  broaden  out  to 
nearly  three-quarters.  Moreover,  thus  pursuing  his  way  along 
the  top  he  would  gradually  rise  and  fall  in  level  perhaps  as 
much  as  ten  or  twenty  feet,  the  outer  higher  parts  being 
separated  by  many  valleys  from  the  inner.  If  the  reader 
considers  this  shape,  he  will  see  that  it  suggests  itself  as  an 
impossible  form  for  an  active  ice-stream  to  take,  and  though 
it  led  directly  away  from  the  higher  southern  snow-slopes  of 
Mount  Erebus,  one  could  not  conceive  that  it  had  been 
actually  formed  by  those  snow-slopes  in  their  present  condition. 

Later  on  we  sounded  around  the  end  and  for  some  way  on 
each  side  of  this  glacier  ;  we  found  that  the  ice-tongue,  or  at 
least  the  end  of  it,  regularly  rose  and  fell  with  the  tide,  and 
nowhere  about  it  could  we  get  anything  but  deep  soundings. 
Now,  not  far  to  the  north  were  some  rugged  volcanic  islets, 
showing  that  the  bottom  of  the  bay  may  be  very  irregular ;  but 
if  some  irregularity  kept  this  long  fragile  tongue  in  position, 
why  should  it  rise  and  fall  with  the  tide  ?  To  all  intents  and 
purposes  we  seemed  to  have  a  peninsula  of  ice  floating  in  the 
sea,  and  yet  for  year  after  year  failing  to  break  away  from  its 
source.  For  this  phenomenon  we  could  never  find  a  reason, 
but  for  the  general  shape  of  this  ice-formation  I  shall  hope  to 
advance  an  explanation  in  a  later  chapter.  Before  we  left  our 
winter  quarters  we  spent  a  long  time  camped  in  its  vicinity, 
and  in  consequence  had  many  an  argument  concerning  it. 

On  September  5  we  crossed  this  glacier  tongue  and  ex- 
plored the  islets  beyond.  They  were  of  little  interest,  being 
merely  masses  of  volcanic  rubble,  but  as  we  crossed  we  noticed 


378      THE   VOYAGE   OF   THE    'DISCOVERY'     [Sept. 

that  the  ice  underfoot  was  of  very  recent  growth  ;  evidently  the 
sea  had  been  swept  clear  beyond  the  snout  of  the  glacier  quite 
lately.  What  we  had  seen  from  the  hilltop  latterly  was  no 
figment  of  our  imagination,  for  whilst  we  lay  snug  and  secure 
in  our  winter  quarters  the  sea  had  been  open,  and  probably 
tempestuous,  within  seven  or  eight  miles  of  us. 

On  this  journey  we  took  our  four  sledges  independently, 
with  four  dogs  harnessed  to  each.  We  found  that  if  the  first 
team  got  away  all  right,  the  others  did  pretty  well  at  '  follow 
my  leader.'  Sometimes  there  was  even  some  competition  for 
place,  and  on  one  occasion  two  competing  teams  gradually 
converged,  with  the  natural  result  that  when  they  got  close 
enough  to  see  what  was  happening  it  occurred  to  them  that 
much  the  easiest  way  to  settle  the  matter  would  be  by  a  free 
fight ;  the  teams  therefore  turned  inwards  with  one  accord  and 
met  with  a  mighty  shock.  In  a  moment  there  was  a  writhing 
mass  of  fur  and  teeth  and  an  almost  inextricable  confusion  of 
dog  traces.  Even  in  the  short  interval  that  elapsed  before  the 
drivers  were  amongst  them,  beating  right  and  left,  it  was 
possible  to  see  that  the  code  was  observed  ;  each  dog  confined 
his  attentions  to  the  '  enemy,'  and  did  not  attempt  to  attack  his 
comrades.  It  was  rather  surprising  to  find  even  this  amount 
of  honour  amongst  such  unscrupulous  creatures. 

On  the  afternoon  of  the  5th  we  turned  homewards,  and 
arrived  on  board  just  before  dusk.  Even  in  this  short  trip 
of  four  days  we  had  gained  some  experience.  There  were 
evidently  good  reasons  for  not  dividing  the  dogs  into  small 
teams.  We  had  learnt  also  to  distinguish  between  the  strong 
and  the  weak,  and,  what  was  of  more  importance,  the  willing 
and  the  lazy ;  and  we  saw  that  we  should  require  a  good  deal 
of  alteration  in  our  harness  and  in  some  of  the  fittings  of  our 
sledges. 

For  the  few  days  which  now  intervened  before  my  party 
started  for  the  south,  I  call  on  my  diary  once  again  : 

'  September  5. — Armitage  returned  to-night  with  a  party  of 
twelve.  They  have  fetched  in  the  depot  which  we  left  out  last 
year ;   it  was  no  use  having  provisions  out  at  such  a  short 


i9o2]  PARTIES   LEAVE   THE  SHIP  379 

distance,  but  it  is  rather  amusing  to  think  that  this  deliberately 
wipes  out  the  only  result  of  our  autumn  trip.  This  party 
camped  at  the  depot  last  night  and  dragged  it  right  in  to-day. 
It  is  only  about  eight  or  nine  miles,  but  I  calculate  they  must 
have  been  dragging  nearly  280  lbs.  per  man,  and  they  are  all 
terribly  out  of  condition.  As  a  result,  when  they  arrived  at 
the  ship  they  were  positively  cooked,  and  to-night  they  are 
fighting  their  battles  over  again,  and  the  conversation  is  highly 
entertaining.  They  all  agree  that  if  sledging  is  always  going 
to  be  like  this,  there  will  be  reason  deeply  to  deplore  the  fact 
that  they  ever  left  a  comfortable  home  and  came  to  sea.' 

'September  10. — Royds  and  Koettlitz  started  away  to-day 
with  Evans,  Quartley,  Lashly,  and  Wild.  The  party  looked 
very  workmanlike,  and  one  could  see  at  a  glance  the  vast  im- 
provement that  has  been  made  since  last  year.  The  sledges 
were  uniformly  packed.  Everything  was  irt  its  right  place  and 
ready  to  hand,  and  all  looked  neat  and  business-like.  One 
shudders  now  to  think  of  the  slovenly  manner  in  which  we 
conducted  things  last  autumn  ;  at  any  rate,  here  is  a  first  result 
of  the  care  and  attention  of  the  winter. 

'To-night  it  has  been  bright  and  clear,  and  we  saw  in 
more  perfect  form  a  phenomenon  which  we  have  occasionally 
witnessed  before.  High  in  the  northern  sky  were  some  light, 
wavy  cirrus  clouds,  carrying  the  most  perfect  prismatic  colour- 
ing. They  seemed  like  twisted  fragments  of  a  rainbow,  and 
were  very  beautiful  against  the  pale  blue  sky;  we  watched 
until  the  lights  paled  with  the  dying  sun.' 

'  September  11. — This  morning  Armitage  left  for  the  west. 
He  takes  one  other  officer,  Ferrar,  and  four  men,  Cross,  Scott, 
Walker,  and  Heald.  The  party  introduced  the  novelty  of 
systematically  pulling  on  ski,  at  which  they  have  been  practis- 
ing lately,  much  to  the  amusement  of  the  onlookers.  There 
is  not  much  difficulty  in  the  pulling  after  the  first  start ;  the 
great  thing  is  to  swing  together  and  keep  in  perfect  time.  I 
am  inclined  to  reserve  my  opinion  of  the  innovation.  The 
"  Terror  "  trip  may  have  proved  their  use  in  soft  snow,  but  a 
hard  surface  is  a  different  matter.     The  men  seem  rather  in 


380      THE  VOYAGE  OF  THE   'DISCOVERY'    [Sept. 

their  favour,  but  that  is  natural  with  any  novelty,  and  however 
this  party  may  have  got  on  later  in  the  day,  their  starting  pace 
was  very  slow. 

'  I  was  thinking  to-day  as  I  looked  up  at  our  masts  and 
yards  that  my  preconceived  notion  of  a  polar  winter  always 
pictured  them  covered  with  snow,  and  perhaps  with  long  icicles 
depending  ;  as  a  matter  of  fact,  they  have  been  generally  quite 
free  from  snow,  and  throughout  the  long  night  nearly  always 
looked  black  and  grim.  But,  curiously  enough,  this  afternoon, 
when  ice-crystals  were  falling,  they  became  frosted  over,  though 
a  strong  wind  was  blowing  ;  and,  oddly  too,  the  wind  seemed 
to  have  quite  a  different  note  as  it  blew  through  the  frosted 
rigging. 

'September  12. — Hodgson  has  made  quite  a  discovery  ;  he 
finds  that  his  ropes  and  nets  whilst  under  water  become  coated 
with  ice-crystals.  He  tells  me  he  noticed  this  fact  some  time 
ago,  and  that  the  effect  has  been  gradually  growing,  presumably 
as  the  water  has  become  colder.  This  morning  I  went  out  to 
see  some  lines  which  he  was  hauling  up.  It  is  certainly  a  very 
curious  phenomenon,  and  one  that  is  difficult  to  describe ; 
one  small  line  only  an  inch  in  circumference  came  up  covered 
with  a  cylinder  of  flaky  ice  nearly  a  foot  in  diameter,  and  this 
cylinder  extended  five  or  six  fathoms  below  the  surface,  after 
which  it  gradually  dwindled  away.  The  formation  is  very 
delicate,  and  in  the  flaky  structure  the  axes  of  the  leaves  are 
at  right  angles  to  the  rope,  whilst  their  planes  are  inclined  and 
intersect  at  the  angle  of  crystallisation,  6o°.  The  whole  thing 
looks  like  some  beautiful  lace  fabric,  and  held  up  to  the  light 
one  can  see  through  it  the  most  gorgeous  prismatic  colouring. 
It  falls  to  pieces  at  a  touch,  and  each  leaf  can  be  split  to  the 
thinnest  layers.  Shackleton  took  some  photographs  and 
Wilson  attempted  a  sketch,  but  I  doubt  if  either  will  produce 
a  picture  which  is  anything  like  the  delicate  original. 

'  Somewhat  similar  crystals  are  formed  on  the  tow-nets,  but 
here  each  minute  fibre  which  stands  out  from  the  fabric  has 
formed  a  nucleus  for  the  ice  to  form,  and  the  net,  with  its 
hanging  icicles,  looks  like  nothing  so  much  as  an  old-time 


1902]  START  ON  SOUTHERN  RECONNAISSANCE   381 

candelabrum  with  crystal  pendants.  We  do  not  know  quite 
how  to  account  for  these  formations ;  our  thermometers  show 
the  temperature  of  the  water  as  something  below  its  freezing- 
point,  but  I  do  not  know  that  they  are  very  reliable  for  such 
small  differences.  In  any  case,  I  do  not  know  of  this  sort  of 
thing  having  been  recorded  elsewhere.' 

It  has  been  since  explained  that  these  crystals  were  prob- 
ably due  to  the  super-cooling  of  the  sea,  and  that  with  the  sea 
in  this  condition  ice  will  only  form  about  such  nuclei  as  were 
afforded  by  the  ropes  and  the  nets,  just  as  a  supersaturated 
solution  can  be  made  to  crystallise  in  much  the  same  manner 
in  a  simple  laboratory  experiment.  In  this  light  it  would  be 
natural  enough  that  the  effect  should  increase  as  the  water 
grew  colder  towards  the  spring,  and  it  is  interesting  to  note 
that  Hodgson  found  that  at  one  time  these  crystals  formed  as 
deep  as  seventeen  fathoms  below  the  surface. 

Owing  to  some  delay  in  making  fresh  harness  for  our  dogs, 
and  in  rearranging  the  manner  of  their  pulling,  followed  by 
the  intervention  of  a  most  tantalising  blizzard,  it  was  not  until 
September  17  that  I  was  able  to  make  a  start  on  the  southern 
reconnaissance  journey.  On  the  morning  of  that  day  we  got 
away  fairly  early,  my  two  comrades  being  Barne  and  Shackleton. 
We  had  with  us  only  thirteen  dogs,  divided  into  two  teams. 
The  sledges  carried  food  for  a  fortnight  for  all  concerned, 
together  with  a  quantity  of  stores  to  form  a  depot,  the  whole 
giving  a  load  of  about  90  lbs.  per  dog.  My  diary  for  this 
journey  continues  : 

'Left  the  ship  at  9  a.m.,  dogs  at  first  pulling  well.  Bright 
clear  sky  with  sunshine,  fluctuating  temperature.  Came  to 
the  old  ice-rise  (about  fifteen  feet  in  height,  four  miles  south 
of  the  ship).  1.15,  camped  for  lunch,  having  covered  about 
ten  miles  ;  wind  turned  to  east,  very  cold,  thermometer  —  430, 
haze  near  surface  and  now  slight  wind-drift.  Land  mostly 
obscured,  but  high  points  giving  general  direction.  Dogs  find 
loads  heavy,  but  pulling  fairly  well  ;  a  few  cases  of  sore  feet ; 
made  good  evolution  of  packing  tent,  and  away  again.  Saw 
magnificent  parhelion  showing  prismatic  colours  on  each  side 


382      THE   VOYAGE   OF   THE    'DISCOVERY'     [Sept. 

from  horizon  to  about  200  of  altitude.  About  3.30  observed 
black  specks  far  over  the  snow  to  the  right  front ;  proved  to 
be  Royds'  party ;  soon  came  up  with  them.  Heard  they  had 
had  a  very  rough  time,  low  temperatures  with  much  wind. 
They  had  found  road  to  the  S.W.  quite  impossible,  strewn 
with  enormous  boulders  and  all  sorts  of  ice  obstructions ;  fail- 
ing to  pass  to  the  north  of  Black  Island,  they  had  tried  to  the 
south,  but  without  much  result.  It  was  far  too  cold  to  stop 
and  discuss  details.  One  gathers  that  there  is  no  hope  of 
making  a  long  journey  in  this  direction,  which  is  a  nuisance  ; 
the  rest  must  remain  till  we  get  back.  After  about  twenty 
minutes  we  parted,  Royds  steering  for  ship,  mist  still  obscuring 
land ;  head  wind  sprang  up,  very  biting  (temperature  —  450), 
frost-bites  coming  rather  fast,  dogs  wearying.  About  5.30 
decided  to  camp,  none  too  soon ;  excellent  supper ;  have 
turned  my  finneskoes  inside  out  for  sleeping  in,  to  make  trial  of 
this  plan.  Struggled  into  sleeping-bags  about  7.30,  where  now 
writing.  Have  travelled  12^  geographical  miles  (14 J  statute) ; 
last  temperature  reading  —  480,  keen  wind  from  S.E.' 

From  the  above  extract  it  will  be  seen  that  the  sledging 
diary  gives  a  very  laconic  record  of  the  day's  events.  It  is 
drafted  somewhat  after  the  fashion  of  a  telegram,  where  each 
word  has  to  be  considered — and,  indeed,  on  such  occasions, 
if  one  does  not  pay  in  cash,  one  pays  in  kind  for  superfluous 
verbiage.  It  is  therefore  from  such  a  daily  record  as  this  that 
the  sledge-traveller  is  able  to  reconstruct  the  history  of  his 
wanderings  in  very  severe  weather,  though  of  course  when  the 
temperatures  rise  and  his  hand  is  no  longer  paralysed  with  the 
cold,  he  is  inclined  to  amplify  his  sentences  and  enlarge  on  his 
ideas. 

But  on  this  occasion  with  the  above  entry  my  sledge  diary 
comes  to  an  abrupt  conclusion,  as,  contrary  to  expectation,  the 
next  time  I  took  up  my  pen  to  write  I  was  once  more  comfort- 
ably seated  in  my  cabin  on  board  the  ship. 

'  September  19. —  ...  I  suppose  it  was  our  want  of  condi- 
tion that  made  us  all  so  very  exhausted  on  Wednesday  night 
(17th),  and  that  it  was  in  consequence  of  this  that  we  did  not 


1902]  AN   INOPPORTUNE   BLIZZARD  383 

heap  enough  snow  on  the  skirting  of  our  tent  and  that  we 
became  so  utterly  unconscious  of  the  change  that  was  taking 
place  in  the  weather.  At  any  rate,  I  remember  nothing  until 
Thursday  morning,  when  I  woke  up  to  find  myself  in  the 
open.  At  first,  as  I  lifted  the  flap  of  my  sleeping  bag,  I  could 
not  think  what  had  happened.  I  gazed  forth  on  a  white  sheet 
of  drifting  snow,  with  no  sign  of  the  tent  or  my  companions. 
For  a  moment  I  wondered  what  in  the  world  it  could  mean, 
but  the  lashing  of  the  snow  in  my  face  very  quickly  awoke  me 
to  full  consciousness,  and  I  sat  up  to  find  that  in  some  extra- 
ordinary way  I  had  rolled  out  of  the  tent.  A  violent  gale  was 
raging  and  the  air  was  filled  with  thick,  blinding  snow.  I 
could  only  just  make  out  the  tent,  though  it  was  flapping 
wildly  across  the  foot  of  my  bag ;  it  was  evident  that  it  still 
stood  upright,  and  that  the  sooner  I  was  in  its  shelter  the 
better.  I  started  to  wriggle  in,  bag  and  all,  and  at  length  got 
beneath  it,  and  could  see  more  clearly  what  had  happened. 
The  bamboos  were  still  secure  and  the  skirting  of  the  tent  was 
still  held  down  on  the  weather  side,  but  to  leeward  the  snow 
had  been  flung  off  it,  and  on  this  side  the  canvas  was  flapping 
loosely,  leaving  an  interval  beneath  through  which  I  must  have 
rolled. 

'  I  do  not  think  this  state  of  things  can  have  obtained  for 
long,  as  Barne  and  Shackleton  had  only  just  realised  it,  but  of 
course  by  this  time  the  snow  was  whirling  as,  freely  inside  the 
tent  as  without,  our  sleeping-bags  were  covered,  and  we  our- 
selves were  powdered  with  it.  The  tent  was  straining  so 
madly  at  what  remained  of  its  securing  that  evidently  some- 
thing must  be  done  at  once  to  prevent  its  flying  away 
altogether.  With  freezing  fingers  we  gripped  the  skirting  and 
gradually  pulled  it  inwards,  and,  half  sitting  on  it,  half  grasp- 
ing it,  endeavoured  to  hold  it  against  the  wild  efforts  of  the 
storm  whilst  we  discussed  ways  and  means.  Discussion  led  us 
nowhere ;  to  have  attempted  to  secure  the  tent  properly  in 
such  weather  would  have  been  useless,  even  to  venture  outside 
would  be  dangerous,  whilst  we  felt  that  if  we  once  let  go  it 
might  be  good-bye  to  our  tent. 


384      THE  VOYAGE   OF  THE   'DISCOVERY'    [Se*t. 

'As  we  clung  on  in  this  horrid  position  the  skirt  would 
gradually  pull  out  beneath  us  and  suddenly  fly  out,  flapping 
wildly  again,  and  we  were  forced  to  get  a  fresh  hold  and  lever 
ourselves  over  it  once  more.  Without  exception  this  was  the 
most  miserable  day  I  have  ever  spent  ;  our  sleeping-bags 
became  more  and  more  snow-filled  until  we  were  lying  in 
masses  of  chilling  slush;  our  mits  were  filled  in  a  similar 
manner,  the  slippery  canvas  would  pull  through  their  grasp, 
one  was  obliged  to  bare  one's  fingers  to  haul  it  in  again,  and 
one  could  not  possibly  get  through  such  a  job  without  having 
some  of  them  frost-bitten. 

'  Thus  we  remained  for  hour  after  hour,  grimly  hanging  on 
and  warning  each  other  of  frost-bitten  features.  We  waited 
longingly  for  a  lull,  but  the  first  did  not  come  until  midday. 
Then  we  made  a  desperate  effort  to  get  to  the  sledges  ;  my 
companions  ventured  out  whilst  I  clung  to  the  canvas  ;  they 
succeeded  in  getting  hold  of  two  provision  bags,  and  returned 
with  a  rush.  Their  absence  was  certainly  not  longer  than  two 
minutes,  yet  both  faces  were  quite  white  with  frost-bite  when 
they  came  in,  and  it  was  several  moments  before  they  regained 
their  natural  colour. 

'  In  the  afternoon  we  were  beginning  to  feel  a  bit  spent, 
and  realising  that  something  more  must  be  done,  we  waited 
for  a  lull  and  again  ventured  out.  This  time  we  managed  to 
get  hold  of  two  heavy  bags  of  biscuit.  It  was  not  until  6  p.m. 
that  by  continued  exertions  we  had  so  far  conquered  matters 
as  to  have  no  further  need  to  hold  the  tent  exeept  with  the 
weight  of  our  sleeping-bags,  and  for  the  first  time  our  arms 
were  released  for  other  purposes.  An  inspection  of  hands 
showed  that  we  had  all  been  pretty  badly  frost-bitten,  but  the 
worst  was  poor  Barne,  whose  fingers  have  never  recovered 
from  the  accident  of  last  year,  when  he  so  nearly  lost  them. 
To  have  hung  on  to  the  tent  through  all  those  hours  must  have 
been  positive  agony  to  him,  yet  he  never  uttered  a  word  of 
complaint. 

'  We  were  now  able  to  wriggle  down  a  little  further  into  our 
wretchedly  wet  bags  and  to  eat  some  cold  pemmican  and 


,*,»]  RETURN  TO  THE  SHIP  385 

chocolate,  whilst  we  waited  for  the  storm  to  pass,  with  a  grow- 
ing stiffness  in  the  backs  of  our  necks  from  the  never-ceasing 
flap  of  the  canvas  against  which  we  leaned.  More  miserable 
conditions  could  scarce  be  imagined. 

'Throughout  the  day  we  had  not  been  able  to  spare  a 
thought  for  the  dogs,  but  we  imagined  that  they  would  long 
ere  this  have  been  covered  with  snow,  and  therefore  comfort- 
able enough ;  but  about  this  time  we  heard  a  sad  whimpering 
at  our  door  and  found  poor  "  Brownie,"  a  very  miserable 
shivering  object,  whining  piteously  with  cramp,  so  he  was 
allowed  to  pass  the  night  inside,  where  he  seemed  to  make 
himself  very  happy,  especially  when  he  got  some  of  our  supper. 
The  rest  never  uttered  a  sound  till  we  roused  them  out  of  their 
soft  nests  on  the  following  morning. 

'  As  darkness  descended  on  us  again  we  lay  in  our  bags 
with  the  snow  four  inches  thick  on  the  floorcloth  about  us, 
and  our  clothes  becoming  more  and  more  saturated  with 
moisture  ;  but  at  seven  o'clock  the  snow  ceased  to  fall,  at  nine 
the  wind  came  in  violent  squalls,  and  at  ten  it  was  evident  that 
the  worst  of  the  storm  was  passed.  Stiff  and  sore,  we  set 
about  making  our  position  more  comfortable,  and  then  en- 
deavoured to  snatch  a  few  hours'  sleep. 

'This  morning  we  roused  out  at  3  a.m.,  cooked  our  first 
meal  for  thirty  hours,  and  briefly  discussed  the  situation.  Our 
sleeping-bags  and  clothes  were  literally  covered  with  ice,  and 
we  could  only  push  on  under  the  most  abject  discomfort ;  by 
returning  to  the  ship  we  should  only  lose  one  day's  march  and 
everything  could  be  dried  afresh.  We  did  not  hesitate  long 
before  deciding  to  return,  and  after  a  grand  hot  meal  of  cocoa 
and  pemmican  we  gradually  collected  our  scattered  belongings 
and  packed  them  on  the  sledges. 

•  As  we  started  on  the  homeward  march,  the  sun  was  rising 
in  great  magnificence,  lighting  the  east  with  brilliant  red  and 
bathing  the  western  hills  in  the  softest  pink.  It  was  hard  to 
think  that  a  gale  had  raged  here  but  a  few  hours  before. 

1 1  think  this  must  have  been  the  coldest  blizzard  we  have 
had ;  our  minimum  thermometer  was  drifted  up  with  snow 
vol  1.  c  c 


386      THE  VOYAGE   OF  THE   'DISCOVERY'    [Sem. 

and  stood  at  —  430,  but  possibly  this  recorded  a  temperature 
prior  to  the  blizzard.  Whilst  it  was  blowing  we  could  not 
reach  the  thermometer,  but  judging  by  temperatures  taken 
elsewhere,  and  our  own  sensations,  I  do  not  think  it  could 
have  risen  above  — 300  throughout,  which  is  most  exceptional 
with  a  strong  wind.  When  we  got  up  this  morning  the  spirit 
column  stood  below  —  500,  and  Royds,  five  miles  to  the  north, 
recorded  —  530.  The  effect  of  such  a  temperature  on  our  wet 
clothing  may  be  imagined.  I  shall  remember  the  condition 
of  my  trousers  for  a  long  while  ;  they  might  have  been  cut  out 
of  sheet  iron.  It  was  some  time  before  I  could  walk  with  any 
sort  of  ease,  and  even  when  we  reached  the  ship  I  was  con- 
scious of  carrying  an  armour  plate  behind  me. 

'So  here  we  all  are,  back  again,  having  accomplished 
nothing  except  the  acquisition  of  wisdom.  It  will  certainly  be 
a  very  long  time  before  I  go  to  sleep  again  in  a  tent  which  is 
not  properly  secured. 

'  Royds  and  his  party  weathered  the  gale  five  miles  north 
of  us ;  they  had  no  trouble  at  all  with  their  tent,  thanks  to 
plenty  of  snow  on  the  skirt.  They  have  had  a  severe  trip,  but 
are  all  pretty  fit.  It  appears  they  came  to  very  rough  ground 
to  the  north  of  Black  Island,  and  advanced  for  some  distance 
by  portage,  but  finding  little  improvement  they  turned  back. 
At  one  place  a  gust  of  wind  swept  one  of  their  single  sleeping- 
bags  away ;  luckily,  there  was  a  three-man  sleeping-bag,  and 
they  managed  to  squeeze  four  people  into  that,  but  all  four 
agree  that  such  a  tight  squeeze  banished  all  chance  of  sleep. 
Two  days  later  they  found  the  missing  bag  some  four  miles 
from  the  spot  at  which  it  had  been  lost.  Koettlitz  thinks  that 
it  will  be  quite  possible  to  circumnavigate  the  Black  Island  in 
spite  of  the  rough  ground,  so  I  have  given  him  permission 
to  try. 

'  I  hear  that  the  late  gale  was  very  severely  felt  in  the  ship : 
the  temperature  fell  to  —  320,  no  work  could  be  done  outside 
on  Thursday,  the  stove  pipes  were  bent,  and  heavy  planks  were 
swept  off  the  skid  beams  by  the  wind.' 

'September  23. —  .  .  .  We  are  preparing  to  be  off  again, 


t9o2]  A   FRESH   START  387 

but  some  fatality  seems  to  ensure  bad  weather  on  the  date 
fixed  for  our  departure.  Barne's  fingers  suffered  so  severely 
in  our  recent  adventure  that  he  has  had  to  be  replaced  by  the 
boatswain,  Feather.  The  latter  has  worked  so  splendidly  all 
through,  and  has  taken  such  a  keen  interest  in  every  detail  of 
the  sledging,  that  I  am  glad  to  give  him  the  chance  of  accom- 
panying us.' 

Early  on  September  24  we  got  away  ;  travelling  with  light 
sledges,  we  reached  our  desolation  camp,  fifteen  miles  to  the 
south,  before  we  called  a  halt,  and,  increasing  our  loads  to  full 
weights,  camped  for  the  night  at  a  distance  of  twenty-three 
miles  from  the  ship.  On  the  following  day  we  were  forced  to 
face  a  bitter  southerly  wind  with  drift  and  a  temperature  of 
—  300.  After  a  few  miles  the  dogs  refused  duty,  and  we  were 
obliged  to  camp. 

Proceeding  later,  when  the  wind  had  dropped  somewhat, 
we  found  ourselves  climbing  a  stiff  incline  between  the  two 
islands,  and  we  had  risen  at  least  180  feet  before  we  reached 
the  top.  Across  the  slope  there  ran  two  or  three  well-marked 
cracks  which  I  think  can  only  have  been  tide  cracks,  and 
which  went  to  show  that  the  ice-sheet  over  which  we  had  been 
travelling  was  afloat.  On  the  other  side  of  this  crest  there  was 
a  slight  descent,  but  not  for  much  more  than  fifty  feet,  after 
which  the  surface  stretched  horizontally  ahead  of  us  and  was 
undoubtedly  at  about  the  general  level  of  the  barrier.  I  came 
to  the  conclusion  that  the  two  islands  were  joined,  at  least  by 
a  shallow  bank,  if  not  by  land  above  the  water  level,  and  that 
the  barrier  sheet  was  over-riding  this  and  pouring  slowly  into 
the  sea  to  the  north. 

On  the  26th  we  had  a  beautifully  clear  day,  and  pushed  on 
towards  the  Bluff,  which  now  loomed  high  above  us.  We  were 
much  struck  by  the  fact  that  all  the  wind-furrows  in  this  region 
lay  in  a  south-westerly  direction,  showing  that  the  prevalent 
wind  is  from  that  quarter,  although  at  the  ship  we  had  known 
little  but  south-easterly  winds.  When  we  camped  at  the  close 
of  this  day,  after  a  fifteen  mile  march,  we  were  within  a  short 
distance  of  the  north  side  of  the  Bluff,  and  already  there  were 

c  c  2 


388      THE  VOYAGE  OF  THE   'DISCOVERY'    [Sei-i. 

signs  of  obstacles  ahead.  Here  and  there  in  the  snow  surface 
rose  a  dome-shaped  mound  of  blue  ice,  and  beyond  these  we 
could  see  little  heaps  of  rubble.  It  behoved  us  to  be  cautious 
if  we  would  avoid  injury  to  our  sledge-runners. 

The  ice-mounds  deserve  notice;  they  are  a  very  typical 
form  of  disturbance  on  the  surface  of  any  glacier,  but  are 
probably  rarely  so  well  developed  as  we  saw  them.  They  are 
caused  by  surface  melting,  the  water  freezing  again  below  the 
ice,  when  the  expansion  on  regelation  gradually  lifts  the  surface. 
To  stand  amongst  a  number  of  these  domes  is  very  impressive, 
especially  when  they  are  uniformly  rounded.  They  rise  but  a 
short  distance  before  they  are  cracked  in  all  directions  on  top, 
and  the  cracks  gradually  open  into  broad,  deep  fissures.  We 
found  domes  as  high  as  seven  and  eight  feet  in  this  region, 
and  saw  mounds  which  in  attempting  to  rise  further  had  lost 
the  dome  form  and  stood  up  like  irregular- shaped  craters. 
It  was  on  the  surface  of  one  of  these,  far  from  the  land,  that 
Mr.  Ferrar  found  a  large  quantity  of  crystals  of  sodium  or 
magnesium  sulphate.  I  am  not  chemist  enough  to  suggest  a 
reason. 

■  •  '■September  27. — Started  with  promise  of  a  fine  day,  tem- 
perature — 460.  Soon  after,  the  sky  became  overcast  and  the 
temperature  rose.  The  travelling  changed  altogether  in  char- 
acter j  the  ice-mounds  grew  thicker,  and  reached  a  height  of 
eight  to  ten  feet,  with  broad,  ugly  cracks  all  over  them.  Later 
they  seemed  to  assemble  in  ridges  running  more  or  less  east 
and  west,  and  hence  right  across  our  tracks ;  the  dogs  could 
make  no  show  of  crossing  them,  so  we  had  to  turn  outwards 
in  hopes  of  getting  better  travelling.  Instead  of  this  it  got 
worse,  and  after  lunch  we  passed  into  a  turmoil  of  torn  and 
twisted  ice,  forming  ranges  of  hillocks  twenty  and  thirty  feet 
high,  sometimes  rounded  on  top  and  sometimes  rising  in  sharp 
ridges.  The  higher  parts  were  swept  clear  of  snow  and  showed 
bare  blue  ice,  whilst  in  the  hollows  the  snow  lay  in  high,  hard 
sastrugi ;  the  contrast  was  plain  even  in  a  bad  light. 

Travelling  now  became  a  regular   scramble  up  hill  and 
down   dale.     The   dogs   did   not  appreciate   it  at   all;   they 


i902l  DIFFICULT   TRAVELLING  389 

had  to  be  helped  up  the  stiff  bits,  and  when  the  sledge 
came  skidding  down  the  descents  they  almost  howled  with 
terror.  The  wind  has  increased  to  half  a  gale  from  the 
S.S.W.,  but  it  is  astonishingly  warm  ;  the  temperature  has  risen 
above  zero,  so  we  have  built  a  good  snow-wall  to  protect  our 
tents. 

'September  28. — Awoke  to  find  a  gale  with  heavy  drift,  but 
our  tent  very  snug  and  comfortable.  The  temperature  has 
gone  up  to  +7°,  and  our  sleeping-bags  are  pleasantly  warm 
and  comfortable.  The  most  extraordinary  thing  is  that  in 
spite  of  the  flying  snow  outside  our  things  are  actually  drying, 
and  for  the  first  time  in  our  experience  we  find  ourselves  in 
a  weather-bound  camp  becoming  drier  instead  of  wetter.  Not 
being  at  all  cold,  we  find  time  to  be  bored,  and,  by  ill-luck, 
no  one  thought  of  bringing  a  book  or  a  pack  of  cards ;  but 
who  could  suppose  that  it  would  be  possible  to  use  them 
during  a  spring  journey?  We  could  really  get  on  now  but 
for  the  light,  but  that  is  so  bad  that  to  move  over  this  rough 
country  would  be  a  great  risk. 

'  September  29. — Wind  dropped  in  night,  and  was  succeeded 
by  flat  calm  with  rapidly  falling  temperature.  We  were  away 
by  7  a.m.,  but  shortly  after  a  fresh  bank  of  cloud  came  up 
from  the  south,  with  more  wind  and  drift.  We  were  all  too 
impatient  to  stop  again,  so  pushed  on,  myself  leading,  with 
orders  to  the  two  teams  to  follow  rigidly  in  my  wake,  in  spite 
of  any  turns  and  twists  I  might  make. 

'Notwithstanding  the  bad  light  I  could  see  the  bridged 
crevasses  where  they  ran  across  the  bare  ice  surface  by  slight 
differences  in  shade,  and  where  they  dived  into  the  valleys, 
though  I  could  not  see  them,  I  found  that  the  bridges  were 
strong  enough  to  bear.  I  stuck  as  much  as  possible  to  the 
snowy  patches,  but  this  necessitated  a  very  irregular  course, 
and  the  dogs  invariably  tried  to  cut  corners.  In  this  manner 
we  proceeded  for  some  time,  but  suddenly  I  heard  a  shout 
behind,  and,  looking  round,  to  my  horror  saw  that  the  boat- 
swain had  disappeared;  there  stood  the  dog-team  and  sledges, 
but   no   leader.      I    hurried    back   and    saw   that   the   trace 


39Q      THE   VOYAGE   OF  THE   'DISCOVERY'     [Sept. 

disappeared  down  a  formidable  crevasse,  and  to  my  relief  the 
boatswain  was  at  the  end  of  the  trace. 

'  I  soon  hauled  him  up  and  inquired  if  he  was  hurt,  to 

which,  being  a  man  of  few  words,  his  only  reply  was,  "  D n 

the  dog  !  "  from  which  I  gathered  that  "  Nigger  "  had  tried  to 
cut  a  corner  and  so  pulled  his  leader  at  the  wrong  moment, 
and,  incidentally,  that  the  boatswain  wasn't  much  hurt.  This 
evening  the  boatswain  has  shown  me  his  harness  ;  one  strand 
was  cut  clean  through  where  it  fell  across  the  ice-edge.  Alto- 
gether he  had  a  pretty  close  call. 

'After  this  accident  we  joined  our  dog-teams,  and,  loath 
to  give  up  the  march,  pushed  on  again.  About  half  an  hour 
later  there  was  another  shout,  and,  looking  round,  I  found 
this  time  that  it  was  not  a  man,  but  a  sledge,  that  had  dis- 
appeared. It  was  the  last  of  the  four,  and  I  found  it  hanging 
vertically  up  and  down  in  an  ugly-looking  chasm.  To  the 
credit  of  our  packing,  although  it  had  fallen  with  a  jerk  into 
this  uncomfortable  position,  not  a  single  thing  had  come  off. 
It  was  too  heavy  for  us  to  haul  up  as  it  was,  so,  after  some 
consultation,  our  indefatigable  boatswain  suggested  that  he 
should  be  let  down  to  unpack  it.  He  was  therefore  slung 
with  one  end  of  our  Alpine  rope,  whilst  the  other  was  used 
for  hauling  up  the  various  packages.  It  must  have  been  a 
mighty  cold  job,  but  at  last  all  the  load  was  got  up,  and  the 
lightened  sledge  soon  followed.  After  getting  everything  in 
order  again  we  found  that  we  had  sustained  no  greater  damage 
than  a  broken  ski. 

1  After  this  incident  we  thought  it  would  be  wise  to  treat 
these  numerous  crevasses  with  more  respect,  so  on  proceed- 
ing we  roped  ourselves  together,  and  whilst  I  went  ahead 
the  boatswain  led  the  dog-team  and  Shackleton  brought 
up  the  rear  to  look  after  things  in  general.  But  we  had 
not  gone  far  like  this  when  the  light  became  thoroughly 
bad  ;  we  could  see  nothing  at  all  under  foot,  and  have 
been  obliged  to  camp  early.  The  effect  of  this  light  on  our 
surroundings  is  very  curious,  making  everything  appear  of 
gigantic  size  ;  the  smallest  wind-furrow  looms  up  like  a  heavy 


1902]  DECEPTIVE   LIGHT  391 

bank,  and   the   larger  ice-hillocks  look   like   ranges   of  high 
mountains.' 

Looking  back  on  this  day,  I  cannot  but  think  our  procedure 
was  extremely  rash.  I  have  not  the  least  doubt  now  that  this 
region  was  a  very  dangerous  one,  and  the  fact  that  we  essayed 
to  cross  it  in  this  light-hearted  fashion  can  only  be  ascribed  to 
our  ignorance.  With  us,  I  am  afraid,  there  were  not  a  few 
occasions  when  one  might  have  applied  the  proverb  that 
'  Fools  rush  in  where  angels  fear  to  tread.' 

The  bad  light  to  which  I  have  referred  was  a  very  constant 
source  of  trouble  to  us  on  our  travels.  It  came  when  the  sky — 
as  was  very  usual — was  completely  overcast  with  a  uniform  pall 
of  stratus  cloud  ;  under  such  a  sky  there  would  only  be  diffused 
light,  and  no  direct  rays  to  cast  a  shadow.  It  can  be  easily 
understood  that  on  a  snow  surface  the  only  thing  that  can 
indicate  an  inequality  is  shadow  ;  consequently  on  these  grey 
days  it  was  impossible,  within  limits,  to  see  what  was  coming 
next.  Bad  light  does  not,  therefore,  mean  insufficiency  of  light, 
because  on  such  occasions  one  could  see  dark  objects  at  a  long 
distance,  and  there  was  quite  enough  light  both  outside  and 
inside  the  tent  for  all  camping  purposes. 

'  September  29  (continued). —  .  .  .  After  lunch  the  sun 
peeped  through  the  cloudy  mantle,  and  with  some  difficulty 
we  managed  to  push  out  a  mile  or  two,  when  the  undulations 
and  upheavals  of  ice  gradually  disappeared,  though  the  crevasses 
remained.  The  broader  ones  were  safe  to  cross,  being  filled 
with  snow,  except  at  the  edges,  where  a  leg  was  likely  to 
disappear  with  a  false  step.  This  seems  to  show  that  they  are 
ever  widening.  The  dangerous  crevasses  are  those  from  three 
to  four  feet  in  width,  as  they  are  covered  only  with  light  snow- 
bridges,  which,  when  broken  away,  disclose  chasms  between 
perpendicular  blue  ice-walls  of  unknown  depth.  These  walls 
are  crusted  with  branching  growths  of  ice-crystals,  very  beautiful 
in  form,  but  which  prevent  one  from  seeing  more  than  a  few 
fathoms  down. 

'  To-night  when  we  camped  I  warmed  a  thermometer,  ran 
up  its  indicator  and  lowered  it  at  the  end  of  our  Alpine"  rope 


392      THE  VOYAGE   OF  THE  'DISCOVERY'    [Sept. 

to  a  depth  of  sixteen  fathoms ;  on  hauling  it  up  I  found  both 
spirit  and  indicator  stood  at  —  io°,  so  I  imagine  this  to  be 
about  the  mean  temperature  of  the  ice  masses  in  this  region. 

'  When  we  halted  to-night  our  dog-trace  lay  across  one  of 
these  crevasses,  and  little  "  Kid  "  promptly  coiled  himself  down 
on  the  middle  of  the  snow-bridge ;  had  he  been  allowed  to 
remain  he  would  certainly  have  melted  himself  through  in  an 
hour  or  two,  and  would  have  become  a  very  surprised  dog. 
Luckily,  we  saw  his  position,  and  rescued  him  in  time.' 

'  September  30. — Starting  at  7.15,  and  still  steering  east,  we 
soon  passed  out  of  the  region  of  crevasses  and  turned  to  the 
south.  The  weather  was  brilliant,  the  sun  shone  forth  in  a 
cloudless  sky,  and  the  temperature  was  exceptionally  high  at 
—  200.  At  lunch  we  were  about  ten  miles  east  of  the  extremity 
of  the  Bluff,  and  the  scene  was  very  impressive.  Far  to  the 
north,  clothed  in  soft  white  folds  of  snow,  lay  the  imposing 
mass  of  Erebus  and  Terror ;  to  the  north-west  towered  Mount 
Discovery  and  the  Western  Range,  whilst  behind  us  also  lay 
the  various  islands  and  foothills  on  which  we  have  gazed 
throughout  the  winter.  To  the  west  we  could  see  that  the 
Bluff  ended  abruptly,  being  but  a  long  peninsula  thrust  out 
into  the  great  ice-sheet.  Beyond  the  Bluff  our  eyes  rested 
searchingly  on  the  new  country  that  rose  above  our  snowy 
horizon.  It  seemed  to  stretch  in  isolated  masses  ever  increasing 
in  distance  ;  but  beyond  the  fact  that  the  coast  curves  sharply 
away  to  the  west  we  could  make  little  of  it. 

1  But  the  most  impressive  fact  of  all  was  that  from  this  new 
western  land  through  the  south,  through  the  east,  and  away  to 
the  slopes  of  Terror,  there  stretched  an  unbroken  horizon  line, 
and  as  the  eye  ranged  through  this  immense  arc  and  met 
nothing  but  the  level  snow-carpet  below  and  the  cloudless  sky 
above,  one  seemed  to  realise  an  almost  limitless  possibility  to 
the  extent  of  the  great  snow-plain  on  which  we  travel. 

1  Hope  of  finding  land  beyond  the  Bluff  to  which  we  could 
advance  our  depot  was  now  at  an  end,  and  this  afternoon  we 
steered  south-west  to  close  the  Bluff  and  to  look  for  landmarks. 
An  excellent  line  was  at  length  suggested  by  Shackleton,  who, 


1902]  RAPID   RETURN  393 

pointing  to  a  small  sharp  crater  on  the  end  of  the  Bluff,  proposed 
that  we  should  bring  it  in  line  with  the  sharp  cone  of  Mount 
Discovery.  This  was  done,  and  to-night  we  are  encamped  on 
the  line  and  about  five  or  six  miles  from  the  land.  One  has 
but  to  walk  a  hundred  yards  either  way  to  throw  the  alignment 
off,  so  that  there  should  be  little  difficulty  in  finding  any  stores 
we  may  leave  here  provided  the  weather  is  clear.  We  have 
just  been  gazing  with  curious  eyes  on  the  road  to  the  south. 
We  have  passed  out  of  the  region  of  high  snow-furrows,  and  it 
seems  probable  that  even  those  which  we  have  would  be  lost 
as  one  advances  to  the  south.  One  conceives  a  plain  with  the 
surface  growing  smoother  and  possibly  softer ;  but  what  will  it 
be  like  to  tramp  on,  day  after  day  and  week  after  week,  over 
such  a  plain  ? ' 

•  October  1. —  .  .  .  We  made  our  depot  this  morning,  leaving 
six  weeks'  provisions  for  our  men  and  150  lbs.  of  dog-food; 
the  whole  was  marked  with  a  large  black  flag,  and  I  took  careful 
angles  with  a  prismatic  compass  to  all  the  points  I  could  see, 
after  which  we  packed  up  our  traps  and  faced  homewards. 
The  dogs  knew  at  once  what  was  meant,  and  there  is  no  longer 
any  need  to  drive  them.  The  weather  has  been  overcast,  with 
a  heavy  deposition  of  snow-crystals  ;  but  we  have  already 
covered  several  miles  on  the  homeward  track,  steering  to  pass 
outside  the  White  Island  to  see  how  the  route  promises  in  that 
direction.' 

On  our  homeward  march  we  went  for  all  we  were  wort^i ; 
the  weather  was  persistently  overcast,  but  this  kept  the 
temperature  above  —  300  though  it  brought  a  continuous  fall 
of  very  light  powdery  snow  to  add  to  the  friction  of  the  runners. 
Underneath  this  powdery  snow  the  surface  was  in  good  condi- 
tion, having  been  swept  very  hard  with  the  wind,  but  the  loose 
crystals  seemed  to  cling  badly  to  the  metal  runners. 

'  October  3. — Got  away  at  seven  again  ;  mist  as  thick  as  a 
hedge,  so  steered  in  towards  the  island  ;  stumbled  on  rocks  at 
about  ten  and  gained  some  idea  of  position  Evidently  passing 
over  a  slope  succeeded  by  some  ridges,  a  few  crevasses,  and 
spme  c)ear  blue  ice.     Guessed  by  this  we  must  have  passed 


394      THE  VOYAGE   OF  THE  'DISCOVERY'     [Oct. 

the  corner  of  the  island  and  steered  for  the  ship.  At  12.30 
passed  clear  of  broken  surface,  and  camped  for  lunch  at  one 
o'clock.  After  tea,  cheese,  and  jam,  prepared  to  start,  and 
found  fog  had  lifted  in  rear  showing  island  at  our  back.  In 
afternoon  were  able  to  steer  by  sun,  though  still  very  thick 
ahead ;  suddenly  Erebus  appeared  above  fog,  and  ten  minutes 
later  we  found  ourselves  within  a  mile  of  Observation  Hill  and 
going  directly  for  it.  The  tired  dogs  set  up  a  yap  of  delight 
and  sprang  forward  with  fresh  energy,  and  soon  we  were  home. 

'  We  have  covered  eighty-five  statute  miles  in  less  than 
three  days,  which  is  not  bad  going,  especially  as  we  have 
almost  had  to  feel  our  way  along.  However,  there  is  no 
longer  a  doubt  that  our  road  to  the  south  should  lie  outside, 
and  not  inside,  the  White  Island. 

'  I  did  not  realise  that  the  ship  could  be  such  a  delightful 
place  as  I  have  found  it  to-night  ;  the  sense  of  having  done 
what  one  wanted  to  do,  and  the  knowledge  that  we  have 
a  far  clearer  problem  before  us  in  the  south,  have  much  to 
do  with  one's  feelings  of  satisfaction,  but  it  is  the  actual 
physical  comfort  of  everything  that  affects  one  most ;  a  bath 
and  a  change  into  warm  dry  clothing  have  worked  wonders. 
The  knowledge  that  one  can  sit  at  ease  in  warmth  and 
comfort,  without  being  swathed  to  the  chin  in  clothing,  is  an 
immense  relief,  and  the  prospect  of  creeping  into  a  bed 
without  the  usual  accompaniment  of  ice  is  an  even  greater 
one ;  but  the  greatest  delight  of  all  is  to  possess  the  sledging 
appetite  in  the  midst  of  plenty.' 

The  joy  of  this  possession  was  beyond  description,  and 
the  feats  of  food-consumption  which  were  performed  by  the 
possessors  might  well  be  beyond  ordinary  belief.  For  many 
days  after  we  returned  from  our  sledging  trips  we  retained 
a  hunger  which  it  seemed  impossible  to  satisfy.  The  ordinary 
frugal  meals  served  at  our  table  seemed  to  us  to  be  heaven- 
sent feasts  ;  at  each  meal  one  partook  ravenously  of  everything, 
and  though  one  ate  to  repletion,  half-an-hour  later  one  would 
be  searching  for  bread  and  butter  and  chocolate.  For  the 
first  few  days,  when  this  sledging j  appetite  was  keenest,  the 


i9o2]  SCURVY   REPORTED  395 

returned  traveller  would  demand  supper  to  succeed  the  more 
solid  dinner ;  he  would  wake  in  the  night  to  devour  a  stick 
of  chocolate  or  to  forage  for  better  fare  in  the  pantry  ;  and 
he  could  be  seen  glancing  anxiously  at  the  clock  a  full  hour 
before  each  meal.  It  seemed  almost  worth  going  a  sledge 
journey  to  experience  the  delight  of  satisfying  such  a  hunger. 

'  October  3  (continued). —  ...  At  dinner  to-night  I  felt 
especially  pleased  with  myself  and  the  world  in  general. 
Armitage  and  Koettlitz  had  returned  from  their  journeys,  and 
were  able  to  give  a  rough  outline  of  their  movements,  and 
altogether  our  meal  went  very  merrily ;  nor  was  it  till  towards 
the  end  that  I  had  a  suspicion  that  something  was  being 
kept  back  :  about  one  or  two  members  there  seemed  to  be 
a  sort  of  unnatural  restraint,  and  I  didn't  know  what  to  make 
of  it. 

'  So  after  dinner  I  called  Armitage  into  my  cabin  and 
asked  him  what  was  the  trouble.  He  looked  very  grave  and 
said  that  he  had  not  meant  to  worry  me  until  the  morning, 
but  the  fact  was  there  had  been  an  outbreak  of  scurvy.  This 
was  indeed  a  shock  !  At  one  blow  it  upset  all  one's  sense  of 
peace  and  comfort.  Of  course  one  could  not  allow  it  to  rest 
at  that,  so  the  whole  story  had  to  be  told.  It  is  not  a  pleasant 
thing  to  go  to  bed  on,  and  I  do  not  feel  like  writing  it 
to-night ;  possibly  also  things  may  look  brighter  in  the 
morning  when  one  is  not  so  "  done." ' 

*  October  4. —  .  .  .  The  history  of  our  outbreak  of  scurvy 
is  more  or  less  contained  in  the  history  of  Armitage's  journey, 
into  which  I  have  been  therefore  with  some  detail.  It  appears 
that  after  leaving  the  ship  on  September  n,  the  party  made 
a  pretty  straight  line  for  the  end  of  the  decayed  glacier  tongue 
in  the  middle  of  the  strait.  Their  progress  was  not  very 
rapid,  as  they  stuck  as  closely  as  possible  to  the  old  worn  ice 
for  the  sake  of  safety.  Even  as  it  was,  this  course  took  them 
within  a  mile  of  the  open  water.  They  reached  the  glacier 
snout  on  the  13th,  and  camped  securely  on  it.  The  ice 
beyond  the  snout,  and  from  thence  to  the  westward,  had 
only  recently  been  formed ;  there  was  practically  no  snow  on 


396      THE   VOYAGE   OF  THE  'DISCOVERY'     [Oct. 

it,  and  its  dark  colour  was  only  relieved  by  the  briny  ice- 
flowers. 

•  Apart  from  the  danger  of  this  ice  being  broken  up  again, 
it  was  impossible  to  camp  on  it,  as  no  snow  could  have  been 
obtained  for  cooking  or  for  securing  the  tents ;  the  party  were 
obliged,  therefore,  to  skirt  the  edge  of  older  ice  to  the  south, 
and  this  added  to  the  length  of  the  journey.  During  this  time 
the  open  water  was  never  far  from  them,  and,  besides 
numerous  seals  and  penguins,  they  constantly  saw  whales 
(probably  killer  whales)  spouting  in  the  offing.  On  the  night 
of  the  1 6th  they  camped  on  the  slope  of  the  foothills  of  the 
mainland  ;  not  far  to  the  north  of  them  was  the  New  Harbour, 
whilst  immediately  to  the  south  was  an  immense  pile  of 
morainic  material  which  they  have  called  the  "Eskers." 
This  it  is  that  looks  like  a  small  range  of  hills  from  the  heights 
above  us  and  which  we  have  often  been  puzzled  to  account 
for.' 

I  should  add  that  this  formation  was  really  an  old  lateral 
moraine,  and,  as  we  soon  discovered,  it  was  quite  wrongfully 
called  the  Eskers,  a  name  properly  given  to  deposits  formed 
by  glacial  streams ;  but  a  name  once  given  is  a  very  hard 
thing  to  change,  and  after  this  first  journey  no  one  could  be 
brought  to  refer  to  this  formation  otherwise  than  as  the 
Eskers,  and  I  have  no  doubt  this  name  crops  up  many  times 
in  my  journal  in  spite  of  my  knowledge  of  the  error. 

'On  the  17th  they  hauled  their  sledges  to  a  height  of 
500  feet  up  the  snow-slope  and  pitched  a  camp  there,  with 
the  intention  of  making  excursions  from  it.  Since  their  start 
from  the  ship  the  weather  had  been  very  changeable,  and 
they  had  experienced  a  great  deal  of  wind  with  low  tem- 
peratures. On  some  days  the  wind  had  been  so  violent  that 
they  had  been  forced  to  stop  in  their  tents ;  such  a  day  was 
the  1 8th,  but  on  the  19th  five  of  the  party  left  the  camp  and 
crossed  the  long  snow-slope  which  bounds  our  view  on  the 
south  side  of  New  Harbour.  From  this  they  could  get  a 
good  view  of  the  valley  beyond,  and  saw  that  it  cut  deeply 
jntp  the  mountain    range    and    contained,    a    huge    glacier. 


1902]      EXPERIENCES   OF  WESTERN   PARTY        397 

Looking  up  the  valley,  they  were  faced  by  a  high  single- 
peaked  mountain,  and  the  glacier  appeared  to  turn  to  the 
right  as  it  reached  its  foot.  As  far  as  the  upper  parts  of  the 
glacier  were  concerned,  there  appeared  to  be  good  travelling, 
but  from  the  foot  of  the  descent,  for  some  seven  miles 
outwards,  they  looked  down  upon  a  confusion  of  ice  which 
they  had  never  seen  equalled.  Armitage  describes  huge 
masses  broken  and  fissured  and  standing  nearly  fifty  feet 
above  the  general  level.  Interspersed  with  the  ice  are  vast 
heaps  of  morainic  material,  and  the  whole  forms  a  chaotic 
obstruction  across  which  he  thinks  it  is  impossible  that 
sledges  can  be  taken. 

•  Skirting  along  this  rough  disturbance  they  advanced  up  the 
valley,  but  it  was  now  getting  towards  midnight  and  some  of 
the  party  were  beginning  to  tire  from  the  long  exposure.  Mr. 
Ferrar  and  Heald  had  been  sent  back  some  hours  before,  and 
now  the  remaining  two  turned  also.  Armitage  says  that  on 
his  return  he  came  across  the  tracks  of  two  people,  which  he 
followed,  expecting  them  to  lead  to  the  camp,  but  later  dis- 
covering that  they  certainly  did  not  he  became  very  alarmed, 
thinking  that  Ferrar  and  Heald  had  missed  their  way.  Still 
following  these  tracks,  he  now  and  again  came  across  a  mark 
in  the  snow  as  though  one  of  the  two  had  been  obliged  to 
take  frequent  rests.  At  last,  to  his  relief,  the  tracks  suddenly 
turned  about  and  now  led  directly  towards  the  camp,  which  he 
eventually  reached  at  5  a.m.,  after  an  absence  of  twenty  hours. 

'  He  found  that  Ferrar  and  Heald  had  made  the  tracks  he 
had  seen,  and  that  by  losing  their  way  they  had  been  three 
hours  late  in  arriving  back ;  furthermore,  that  on  the  way 
Ferrar  had  collapsed  several  times  and  on  each  occasion  had 
been  overcome  by  an  irresistible  desire  to  sleep.  He  was  only 
kept  awake  by  the  persistence  of  his  companion,  Heald,  who, 
although  almost  worn  out  himself,  realised  the  danger  they 
were  running  and  showed  the  greatest  determination  in  pushing 
on.  As  the  temperature  at  the  time  was  —  450,  there  seems 
litttle  doubt  that  Ferrar  practically  owes  his  life  to  his  com- 
panion's exertions. 


398      THE  VOYAGE   OF  THE  'DISCOVERY*      [Oct. 

1  Hoping  to  find  out  more  about  the  New  Harbour  glacier, 
on  the  21st  they  dragged  their  sledges  over  a  rise  of  1,000  feet 
towards  its  entrance.  They  had  great  difficulty  with  the  steep 
descents,  but  eventually  made  their  way  down  safely.  A 
second  examination  of  this  region  did  not  give  any  more 
promising  results  than  the  first,  and  Armitage  came  to  the 
conclusion  that  to  attempt  to  reach  the  mainland  by  this  route 
was  impracticable.  On  the  22nd  they  started  their  homeward 
journey,  skirting  now  around  the  base  of  the  long  snow-slope 
on  recently  formed  sea-ice.  It  was  about  this  time  that,  in 
cogitating  over  recent  events  in  the  journey,  Armitage  began  to 
suspect  that  there  was  something  wrong  with  the  health  of  the 
party.  Several  men  had  complained  of  sprains  and  bruises 
which  seemed  to  give  pain  without  much  cause ;  he  thought, 
too,  that  they  tired  more  easily  than  strong  men  should  have 
done,  and  it  seemed  especially  curious  that  such  an  active 
officer  as  Ferrar  should  have  collapsed  under  a  hard  day's 
work.  The  thought  of  scurvy,  however,  did  not  enter  the 
leader's  head,  and  he  was  inclined  to  put  the  troubles  down  to 
the  horrible  weather  conditions  and  to  the  fact  that  so  few  of 
them  had  been  able  to  sleep. 

'  As  the  party  gradually  made  their  way  back  to  the  ship, 
things  got  worse  and  his  alarm  grew.  The  light  sledges  hung 
heavily  on  the  men,  and  though  there  were  no  complaints, 
several  seemed  only  to  keep  themselves  going  with  an  effort. 
The  evening  of  the  25th  found  them  within  a  few  miles  of  the 
ship,  and  in  such  a  crippled  state  that  Armitage  thought  it 
wiser  to  struggle  right  on  till  they  reached  her,  which  they  did 
at  6  a.m.  on  the  26th. 

'  The  result  of  Wilson's  medical  examination  of  this  party 
on  their  return  has  been  handed  to  me ;  the  gist  of  it  is  that 
Heald,  Mr.  Ferrar  and  Cross  have  very  badly  swollen  legs, 
whilst  Heald's  are  discoloured  as  well.  Heald  and  Cross  have 
also  swollen  and  spongy  gums.  The  remainder  of  the  party 
seem  fairly  well,  but  not  above  suspicion  ;  Walker's  ankles 
are  slightly  swollen. 

1  Of  course  there  is  no  good  blinking  our  eyes  to  the  fact 


igoa]  REMEDIAL   MEASURES  399 

that  this  is  neither  more  nor  less  than  scurvy,  but  whence  it 
has  come,  or  why  it  has  come  with  all  the  precautions  that 
have  been  taken,  is  beyond  our  ability  to  explain.  The  evil 
having  come,  the  great  thing  now  is  to  banish  it.  In  my 
absence,  Armitage,  in  consultation  with  the  doctors,  has 
already  taken  steps  to  remedy  matters  by  serving  out  fresh 
meat  regularly  and  by  increasing  the  allowance  of  bottled 
fruits,  and  he  has  done  an  even  greater  service  by  taking  the 
cook  in  hand.  I  don't  know  whether  he  threatened  to  hang 
him  at  the  yardarm  or  used  more  persuasive  measures,  but,- 
whatever  it  was,  there  is  a  marked  improvement  in  the 
cooking. 

'  Koettlitz  has  only  been  back  a  few  days  from  his  second 
trip,  but  has  made  an  examination  of  everyone  on  board.  He 
tells  me  there  are  signs  of  scurvy  in  a  good  many,  but  in  most 
cases  it  is  only  the  merest  indication,  and  probably  we  should 
not  have  known  anything  about  it  had  it  not  been  for  this 
searching  examination.  The  worst  cases  are  those  which  I 
have  named  above,  and  they,  as  well  as  the  rest,  are  improving 
by  leaps  and  bounds — in  fact  the  disease  is  vanishing  rapidly. 
He  confesses  himself  unable  to  suggest  any  cause  for  the 
outbreak. 

'  The  signs  of  improvement  are  hopeful,  and  there 
seems  little  doubt  that  we  shall  banish  the  disease ;  but  one 
cannot  be  too  cautious,  and  we  must  lay  ourselves  out  to  make 
arrangements  which  will  not  only  banish  it  for  the  present, 
but  will  prevent  all  chance  of  its  recurrence  in  the  future. 

1  Royds  was  to  have  started  for  the  M  Record "  at  Cape 
Crozier  on  the  2nd,  but  deferred  his  departure  till  my  return. 
I  saw  no  reason  for  delaying  further,  and  the  doctors  report 
his  party  to  be  in  first-rate  condition,  so  they  went  off  this 
morning.  With  the  leader  go  Skelton,  Lashly,  Evans, 
Quartley,  and  Wild — practically  the  same  party  that  went  to 
the  south-west,  so  they  ought  to  know  what  they  are  up  to. 
Though  there  is  not  much  else  but  scurvy  in  my  thoughts  just 
at  present,  the  great  thing  is  to  pretend  that  there  is  nothing  to 
be  alarmed  at.' 


400      THE   VOYAGE   OF   THE  'DISCOVERY'     [Oct. 

'  October  15. — The  determination  to  have  everything  above 
suspicion,  and  not  to  give  our  dread  enemy  another  chance  to 
break  out,  has  kept  all  hands  pretty  busy  of  late. 

'With  the  idea  of  giving  everyone  on  the  mess-deck  a 
change  of  air  in  turn,  we  have  built  up  a  space  in  the  main  hut 
by  packing  cases  around  the  stove.  In  this  space  each  mess 
are  to  live  for  a  week;  they  have  breakfast  and  dinner  on 
board,  but  are  allowed  to  cook  their  supper  in  the  hut.  The 
present  occupants  enjoy  this  sort  of  picnic-life  immensely. 

'  We  have  had  a  thorough  clearance  of  the  holds,  dis- 
infected the  bilges,  whitewashed  the  sides,  and  generally  made 
them  sweet  and  clean. 

'  As  a  next  step  I  tackled  the  clothes  and  hammocks.  One 
knows  how  easily  garments  collect,  and  especially  under  such 
conditions  as  ours ;  however,  they  have  all  been  cleared  out 
now,  except  those  actually  in  use.  The  hammocks  and 
bedding  I  found  quite  dry  and  comfortable,  but  we  have  had 
them  all  thoroughly  aired.  We  have  cleared  all  the  deck-lights 
so  as  to  get  more  daylight  below,  and  we  have  scrubbed  the 
decks  and  cleaned  out  all  the  holes  and  corners  until  every- 
thing is  as  clean  as  a  new  pin.  I  am  bound  to  confess  there 
was  no  very  radical  change  in  all  this ;  we  found  very  little 
dirt,  and  our  outbreak  cannot  possibly  have  come  from  in- 
sanitary conditions  of  living ;  our  men  are  far  too  much  alive 
to  their  own  comfort  for  that.  But  now  we  do  everything  for 
the  safe  side,  and  from  the  conviction  that  one  cannot  be  too 
careful. 

1  We  have  had  great  difficulties  in  trying  to  live  on  fresh 
meat  alone,  as  our  stock  of  seal-meat  had  run  short.  It  is  not 
easy  to  supply  so  large  a  company  ;  a  large  seal  barely  lasts 
two  days  at  the  present  rate  of  consumption.  Just  as  our 
stock  ran  out,  one  or  two  seals  happened  to  come  up  on  the 
ice  close  to  the  ship,  and  these  kept  us  going  until,  at  Wilson's 
suggestion,  we  organised  a  large  seal-killing  party  to  go  further 
afield.  This  party,  consisting  of  Barne,  Wilson,  and  four 
men,  girt  about  with  knives  and  other  murderous  implements, 
journeyed  away  to  the  north  with  all  the  dogs  on  Thursday  (9th)  j 


i902]        SUBSIDENCE  OF  THE   OUTBREAK  401 

they  camped  under  the  glacier  tongue,  weathered  a  blizzard  on 
the  following  day,  and  started  their  operations  on  Saturday. 
After  a  long  and  hard  day's  work,  they  started  homewards, 
and  arrived  here  on  Sunday  morning  with  over  a  thousand 
pounds  of  meat,  and  having  left  a  large  quantity  ready  to  be 
brought  in. 

'  They  report  that  the  seals  are  plentiful  near  the  glacier, 
and  that  there  is  also  a  colony  below  Castle  Rock,  not  more 
than  three  miles  from  the  ship ;  we  ought  to  have  little  trouble, 
therefore,  in  keeping  up  our  supply  in  future. 

'  On  Monday  I  was  able  to  give  the  satisfactory  order  that 
no  tinned  meat  of  any  description  should  be  issued,  and  one 
may  reasonably  hope  that  this  order  can  be  observed  through- 
out the  remainder  of  our  stay  in  these  regions. 

1  Regular  outdoor  exercise  is  the  only  other  circumstance 
that  can  affect  our  physical  well-being,  and  with  regard  to  that 
I  am  glad  to  say  there  has  been  no  need  to  issue  an  order 
There  is  a  great  deal  of  outdoor  work,  and  every  evening  after 
tea  the  men  either  go  for  long  ski  runs  or  walks,  or  play  foot- 
ball. As  for  the  spirits  of  our  party,  they  have  never  been 
cast  down  for  a  single  minute  ;  with  the  daylight  and  the  in- 
creased activity  there  has  been  more  chaff  and  laughter  than 
ever,  and  certainly  no  one  who  walked  into  the  living-quarters 
at  night  would  guess  that  we  were  in  the  act  of  dispelling  a 
very  dreaded  disease.  To  whichever  or  to  what  combination 
of  the  steps  we  have  taken  this  is  due,  it  is  impossible  to  say, 
but  the  fact  remains  that  within  a  fortnight  of  the  outbreak 
there  is  scarcely  a  sign  of  it  remaining,  and  certainly  all  cause 
for  anxiety  has  vanished.  Heald's  is  the  only  case  that  hung 
at  all,  and  since  fomentations  have  been  applied  to  his  legs  he 
also  has  made  rapid  strides  towards  recovery,  and  is  now 
able  to  get  about  once  more.  Cross's  recovery  was  so  rapid 
that  he  was  able  to  join  the  seal-killing  party  last  week. 

1  Koettlitz  has  taken  advantage  of  the  returning  daylight  to 

grow  a  crop  of  mustard  and  cress.     He  has  raised  some  on 

flannel,  and   with  chemicals,   but  the   best   result   has   been 

obtained  from  our  own  Antarctic  soil,  which  is  evidently  most 

vol.  1.  D  D 


402      THE    VOYAGE   OF   THE   'DISCOVERY'      [Oct. 

productive.  The  wardroom  skylight  does  not  make  a  very 
large  garden,  but  enough  cress  has  been  produced  for  one  good 
feed  for  all  hands.' 

'  October '19. — The  weather  conditions  have  not  been  too 
favourable  to  our  changes,  though  of  course  they  have  not 
delayed  the  return  of  full  daylight,  which  has  the  most  cheering 
effect.  On  the  12th  commenced  one  of  the  thickest  and 
longest  blizzards  we  have  yet  had.  Except  for  a  calm  interval 
of  six  hours  on  the  13th,  the  snow  was  whirling  about  us  con- 
tinually till  midday  on  the  16th.  The  wind  as  usual  commenced 
in  the  south  and  gradually  worked  round  to  the  east,  and  the 
temperature  rose  at  one  time  to  +  20.  This  blizzard  seems  to 
have  cleared  the  air  for  the  time,  as  the  weather  since  has  been 
bright  and  clear,  and  we  have  had  the  most  gorgeous  light 
effects. 

'  On  Saturday  night  between  ten  and  eleven  we  witnessed 
an  especially  curious  sight.  The  sun  was  behind  Mount 
Discovery,  and  cast  a  clear  shadow  of  its  cone  on  a  bank  of 
cirro-stratus  cloud  on  the  near  side.  This  effect  was  very 
curious  ;  there  appeared  to  be  a  clearly  denned  inverted  cone 
superimposed  on  the  top  of  the  mountain.' 

1  October  20. — I  think  it  may  safely  be  said  that  our  scurvy 
is  at  an  end,  and  unless  it  is  produced  again  in  the  sledge 
parties  we  shall  hear  no  more  of  it.  I  do  not  think  the  milder 
conditions  of  the  future  sledging  season  are  likely  to  reproduce 
it,  but  so  as  to  avoid  the  risk  I  have  been  arranging  to  replace 
the  pemmican  by  a  proportion  of  cooked  seal-meat.  The 
difficulty  here  is  to  get  it  free  from  water,  and  the  only  way  is 
to  cook  it  again  and  again,  but  with  all  our  efforts  I  doubt 
whether  we  shall  get  quite  the  same  value  for  weight  as  we  do 
in  the  pemmican.' 

It  may  be  of  interest  here  to  quote  the  result  of  some  of 
our  experiments  in  this  line,  though,  of  course,  they  rest  on 
estimation,  as  we  had  no  facilities  for  chemical  analysis. 

We  took  140  lbs.  of  seal- meat,  and  cooked  it  in  20  lbs.  of 
margarine,  producing  as  a  result  60  lbs.  of  cooked  meat ;  or, 
in  other  words,  we  evaporated  off  a   little  under  two-thirds  of 


1902]  FOOD-VALUE   OF  SEAL-MEAT  403 

the  original  weight.  Raw  meat  contains  about  75  per  cent,  of 
moisture,  and  we  estimated  our  margarine  to  contain  about  20 
per  cent. ;  so  speaking  very  roughly,  something  under  three- 
quarters  of  the  original  weight  of  our  seal  and  margarine  was 
water. 

Again  very  roughly,  therefore,  in  the  cooked  meat  which 
remained  there  was  water  equal  to  about  a  twelfth  of  its 
original  weight,  or  about  a  fourth  of  its  present  weight.  We 
estimated  that  we  eventually  reduced  this  moisture  to  20  per 
cent.,  and  in  this  state  we  calculated  that  1 2  lbs.  of  seal-meat 
was  equal  to  10  lbs.  of  pemmican. 

'  October  20  {continued). —  .  .  .  We  have  come  to  the  end 
of  our  fresh  mutton,  except  a  small  quantity  kept  for  possible 
sickness  ;  this  makes  a  difference  to  Sunday,  but  our  seal-meat 
is  now  so  well  served  that  the  loss  is  not  greatly  felt.  In  this 
matter  of  seal-meat  there  has  been  an  extraordinary  change 
throughout  the  ship.  There  is  no  getting  over  the  fact  that 
none  of  us  really  enjoyed  the  seal  in  the  winter,  and  when 
tinned  meat  was  stopped  there  were  not  a  few  downcast  faces ; 
but  within  a  fortnight  all  that  has  been  altered  :  everyone  now 
eats  the  seal  with  relish,  and  I  do  not  think  there  is  a  single 
man  who  would  go  back  to  tinned  meat,  even  if  he  had  the 
chance.  The  consumption  is  so  great  that  we  have  all  our  work 
to  keep  up  the  supply,  and  appetites  seem  to  be  increasing 
rather  than  lessening.  Somewhere  in  this,  but  not  wholly 
revealed,  lies  the  root  of  our  scurvy  trouble  ;  one  would  fain 
be  able  to  trace  it  more  clearly.' 

In  the  extracts  which  I  have  given  from  my  diary  it  is 
possible  to  trace  the  history  of  our  scurvy  from  its  outbreak  to 
the  time  when  it  vanished  from  amongst  us,  but  they  show 
also  that  we  were  in  the  unsatisfactory  state  of  being  unable  to 
trace  the  cause  of  the  evil,  and  in  that  state  we  still  remain, 
for  amongst  the  various  circumstances  of  our  daily  life  we  can 
find  none  that  definitely  contributed  to  it.  The  surprise 
which  this  unpleasant  discovery  brought  us  has  not  been 
lessened  by  time.  We  are  still  unconscious  of  any  element  in 
our  surroundings  which  might  have  fostered  the  disease,  or  of 

d  d  2 


404      THE   VOYAGE   OF  THE  'DISCOVERY'     [Oct. 

the  neglect  of  any  precaution  which  modern  medical  science 
suggests  for  its  prevention. 

It  is  well  known  that  scurvy  is  a  world-wide  disease,  and 
that,  whilst  it  has  attacked  all  sorts  and  conditions  of  men,  it 
has  proved  an  especial  scourge  to  those  who,  by  force  of 
circumstances,  have  been  deprived  of  fresh  food  for  any  length 
of  time.  This  last  has  been  so  often  the  lot  of  the  polar 
traveller  that  the  disease  has  played  a  particularly  important, 
and  often  a  tragic,  part  in  his  enterprises,  and  one  cannot  read 
the  history  of  polar  adventure  without  realising  the  gravity  of 
the  evil  and  the  urgency  of  precautionary  measures.  It  was 
natural,  therefore,  that  this  subject  should  have  been  one  of 
the  first  to  be  considered  by  one,  like  myself,  on  whom  fell  the 
responsibility  of  equipping  an  expedition  for  Antarctic  research, 
and  I  felt  at  once  that,  however  efficient  might  be  the  medical 
staff,  it  was  highly  desirable  that  I  also  should  know  some- 
thing of  it.  Needless  to  say,  I  could  only  approach  the  matter 
as  a  layman,  and  therefore  it  is  only  in  that  capacity  that  I 
offer  the  following  remarks,  though  I  had  the  advantage  of 
excellent  medical  advice  in  forming  my  opinions. 

The  symptoms  of  scurvy  do  not  necessarily  occur  in  a 
regular  order,  but  generally  the  first  sign  is  an  inflamed, 
swollen  condition  of  the  gums.  The  whitish  pink  tinge  next 
the  teeth  is  replaced  by  an  angry  red ;  as  the  disease  gains 
ground  the  gums  become  more  spongy  and  turn  to  a  purplish 
colour,  the  teeth  become  loose  and  the  gums  sore.  Spots 
appear  on  the  legs,  and  pain  is  felt  in  old  wounds  and  bruises; 
later,  from  a  slight  oedema,  the  legs,  and  then  the  arms,  swell 
to  a  great  size  and  become  blackened  behind  the  joints.  After 
this  the  patient  is  soon  incapacitated,  and  the  last  horrible 
stages  of  the  disease  set  in,  from  which  death  is  a  merciful 
release.  Curiously  enough,  I  believe  that  the  appetite  is 
rarely  lost  even  towards  the  end,  and  the  rapidity  with 
which  the  disease  spreads  is  excelled  by  the  rapidity  of 
recovery  if  circumstances  allow  the  proper  remedies  to  be 
applied. 

For  centuries,  and  until  quite  recently,  it  was  believed  that 


1902]  REMARKS  ON  THE  NATURE  OF  SCURVY  405 

the  antidote  to  scurvy  lay  in  vegetable  acids ;  scurvy  grass  was 
sought  by  the  older  voyagers,  and  finally  lime-juice  was  made, 
and  remains,  a  legal  necessity  for  ships  travelling  on  the  high 
seas.  Behind  this  belief  lies  a  vast  amount  of  evidence,  but  a 
full  consideration  of  this  evidence  is  beset  with  immense 
difficulties.  For  instance,  although  it  is  an  undoubted  fact 
that  with  the  introduction  of  lime-juice  scurvy  was  largely 
diminished,  yet  it  is  apt  to  be  forgotten  that  there  were  other 
causes  which  might  have  contributed  to  this  result  ;  for  at  the 
same  time  sea  voyages  were  being  largely  reduced  by  steam 
power,  and  owners  were  forced  to  provide  much  better  food 
for  their  men. 

It  is  beyond  the  scope  of  these  pages  to  deal  with  such 
evidence,  and  it  is  sufficient  to  remark  that  modern  medical 
thought  finds  it  inconclusive,  taking  the  view  that  the  only 
antidote  to  scurvy  is  to  banish  its  cause.  Thus  put,  it  is  easy 
to  see  that  many  cures  might  have  been  attributed  to  the 
virtues  of  a  supposed  antidote  which  were  really  due  to  a  dis- 
continuance of  the  article  of  food  that  caused  the  disease. 

I  understand  that  scurvy  is  now  believed  to  be  ptomaine 
poisoning,  caused  by  the  virus  of  the  bacterium  of  decay  in 
meat,  and,  in  plain  language,  as  long  as  a  man  continues  to 
assimilate  this  poison  he  is  bound  to  get  worse,  and  when  he 
ceases  to  add  to  the  quantity  taken  the  system  tends  to  throw 
it  off,  and  the  patient  recovers.  The  practical  point,  there- 
fore, is  to  obtain  meat  which  does  not  contain  this  poison,  and 
herein  lies  the  whole  difficulty  of  the  case,  for  danger  lurks 
everywhere.  Tainted  fresh  meat  may  be  virulent,  but  in  the 
ordinary  course  of  events  one  eats  it  rarely  and  so  is  saved 
from  any  disastrous  result.  The  risk  of  a  taint  in  tinned  meat 
is  greater  because  of  the  process  involved  in  its  manufacture, 
and  with  salt  meat  the  risk  is  greater  still  for  the  same  reason. 
To  what  extent  meat  must  be  tainted  to  produce  scurvy  is 
unknown,  but  there  is  reason  to  suppose  that  the  taint  can  be 
so  slight  as  to  escape  the  notice  of  one's  senses;  in  other 
words,  poison  may  lurk  in  a  tin  of  meat  which  to  the  sight, 
taste,  and  smell  appears  to  be  in  perfect  condition.     Such  a 


406      THE   VOYAGE   OF  THE   'DISCOVERY'      [Oct. 

supposition  alone  shows  the  difficulty  of  tracing  an  outbreak  of 
the  disease  to  its  exact  source. 

It  is  important  to  lay  stress  on  the  foregoing  remarks 
because  it  is  very  commonly  thought  that  unwholesome 
tinned  meat  can  be  detected  at  once  by  the  proportion  of 
tins  that  are  '  blown.'  Such  a  test  must,  of  course,  be  a  good 
rough  guide  as  between  good  and  bad,  but  it  does  not  achieve 
the  delicacy  necessary  to  detect  food  which  may  cause  scurvy. 
As  having  achieved  an  unsurpassed  feat  in  the  prevention  of 
scurvy,  Dr.  Nansen  may  well  be  taken  as  an  authority  in  this 
matter;  and  more  or  less  to  this  point  he  relates  a  story 
where  a  party  of  men  found  a  depot  of  provisions,  selected 
the  best  tins,  ate  of  them,  and  got  scurvy;  his  comment  is 
that  they  would  have  done  better  to  have  selected  the  worst 
tins. 

On  the  many  points  of  importance  with  regard  to  the 
selection  of  tinned  provisions  I  am  not  able  to  dwell — it  is 
sufficient  to  show  that  the  question  is  more  complicated  than 
appears  at  first  sight ;  and,  further,  it  must  be  remembered 
that  there  is  no  service  where  excellence  is  demanded  so  fully 
as  on  polar  service.  The  ordinary  traveller  may  be  obliged  to 
subsist  on  tinned  food  for  weeks  or  months,  but  the  polar 
voyager  may  be  forced  to  extend  these  periods  to  months  and 
years. 

One  great  practical  certainty  arises,  however,  out  of  this 
complicated  problem  :  one  cannot  be  too  careful ;  without 
being  able  to  ensure  perfection  in  one's  tinned  provisions, 
one  can  go  a  long  way  towards  it  by  very  careful  selection 
and  by  preparing  with  all  the  safeguards  which  modern  science 
can  suggest.  Such  a  preparation  requires  time,  and  therefore 
it  becomes  still  more  evident  that  ample  time  should  be  allowed 
for  the  equipment  of  a  polar  expedition. 

With  these  few  general  remarks  I  would  briefly  trace  the 
history  of  such  circumstances  as  may  have  led  to  the  outbreak 
of  scurvy  in  the  •  Discovery.'  I  commence  by  giving  some 
account  of  the  provisions  which  we  carried.  Owing  to  facts 
which  can  be  well  understood  from  the  shortness  of  time  at 


1902]     POSSIBLE  CAUSES  OF  OUR  OUTBREAK    407 

our  disposal,  it  was  not  until  the  spring  of  1901  that  our  pro- 
vision list  was  finally  drawn  up  and  the  necessary  orders 
given  ;  the  orders  were  distributed  over  a  large  number  of 
firms,  and  deliveries  were  directed  to  be  made  to  the  East 
India  Docks,  where  a  shed  had  been  placed  at  our  disposal. 
At  the  same  time,  by  the  courtesy  of  the  Health  Office  of  the 
City  of  London,  it  was  arranged  that  all  the  tinned  food 
collected  in  the  shed  should  be  examined  by  one  of  their 
officials  before  it  was  transmitted  to  the  '  Discovery.'  The 
examination  showed  that,  as  far  as  could  be  seen,  everything 
was  of  good  quality  with  the  exception  of  one  delivery,  and  it 
became  a  question  whether  we  should  reject  the  whole  of  this 
delivery  and  seek  a  fresh  contractor,  or  whether  we  should 
reject  only  the  portion  that  was  unsatisfactory  and  demand 
its  renewal.  Urgency  decided  in  favour  of  the  latter  alter- 
native. It  must  be  understood  that  the  food  supplied  after 
this  rejection,  and  indeed  all  the  food  that  actually  sailed  in 
the  'Discovery,'  was  examined,  but  such  an  examination  has 
obvious  limitations.  The  suspicious  circumstance  was  that 
anything  ordered  for  the  '  Discovery '  should  have  been  un- 
satisfactory, and  the  inference  was  that  if  there  were  short- 
comings in  this  delivery  which  the  examination  could  detect, 
there  would  probably  be  others  which  it  could  not. 

On  our  arrival  in  New  Zealand  we  shipped  a  large  addition 
to  our  stock  of  tinned  food,  some  on  a  consignment  from 
Australia,  and  some  on  purchase  in  the  colony  itself;  both 
deliveries  were  excellent  as  far  as  we  had  any  power  of 
judging. 

I  have  already  given  some  idea  of  our  routine  in  winter 
quarters  with  regard  to  meals.  It  will  be  recalled  that  we  had 
seal-meat  twice  a  week,  mutton  once,  and  tinned  meat  on  the 
remaining  days  ;  the  problem  is,  which  of  these  gave  us  the 
scurvy  ? 

As  regards  the  seal-meat,  I  think  we  may  at  once  reject 
the  idea.  The  animals  had  to  be  skinned  immediately  after 
they  were  killed,  and  carcases  were  thus  frozen  within  a  very 
short  space  of  time. 


4o8      THE   VOYAGE   OF   THE   'DISCOVERY'      [Oct. 

The  mutton  is  more  doubtful.  It  was  killed  inside  the 
Antarctic  circle,  but  I  am  not  sure  that  the  meat  was  wholly 
above  suspicion  of  taint ;  as  the  sun  may  have  raised  the 
darker  portions  of  the  carcases  above  the  freezing-point ;  but 
it  is  to  be  remembered  that  though  we  ate  very  heartily  of  it, 
we  only  enjoyed  this  luxury  once  a  week. 

The  grave  suspicion  naturally  rests  on  the  tinned  meats, 
and  therefore  it  becomes  necessary  to  examine  a  little  more 
closely  into  them.  In  nine  cases  out  of  ten  our  solid  food  on 
ordinary  '  tinned  meat '  days  consisted  of  plain  tinned  beef  or 
mutton  made  up  into  some  dish  on  board.  It  was  the  rarest 
thing  for  us  to  open  tins  containing  made-up  dishes,  mainly 
because  these  were  part  of  the  consignment  which  I  mentioned 
as  being  unsatisfactory.  Without  exception  the  plain  beef  and 
mutton  came  from  Australian  and  New  Zealand  firms,  and 
I  have  no  doubt  that  it  was  as  good  as  such  things  can  be ; 
the  excellent  state  of  preservation  of  that  which  we  brought 
back  is  alone  sufficient  to  prove  this.  I  cannot  think,  there- 
fore, that  we  have  a  right  to  suspect  these  tinned  meats.  In 
considering  all  facts  in  connection  with  this  elusive  disease,  it 
must  not  be  forgotten  also  that  we  regularly  opened  tins  of 
milk  and  less  regularly  other  '  kickshaws  '  in  which  it  may  have 
been  hidden ;  but  as  we  continued  this  practice  during  our 
second  winter,  without  ill  result,  it  is  reasonable  to  consider 
that  its  effect  may  be  discounted. 

The  main  fact,  however,  that  makes  it  so  difficult  to  trace 
our  scurvy  to  faulty  provisions  is  that  not  a  single  tin  of  any 
sort  or  description  was  served  out  in  the  '  Discovery '  until 
it  had  been  opened  and  examined  by  one  of  the  doctors,  and 
in  this  respect  no  risks  were  taken.  The  least  suspicion  was 
sufficient  to  ensure  rejection,  and  therefore  it  is  certain  that 
no  food  which  bore  any  outward  sign  of  being  unsafe  was  ever 
consumed  in  the  ship. 

It  has  been  pointed  out  that  scurvy  depends  largely  on 
environment,  and  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  severe  or  in- 
sanitary conditions  of  life  contribute  to  the  ravages  of  the 
disease.     Indeed,  we  saw  how  this  might  be  from  the  outbreak 


i9o2]  UNCERTAINTY  OF  ORIGIN  409 

in  our  western  party,  but  I  do  not  think  such  conditions  can 
be  regarded  as  the  prime  cause. 

In  summing  up  this  brief  survey  of  our  outbreak  of  scurvy, 
I  may  point  out  that  the  evidence  shows  it  was  caused  by 
the  food  the  discontinuance  of  which  led  to  recovery,  and 
that  this  food  consisted  of  tinned  meats  which  were  to  all 
appearances  of  the  best  quality,  and  of  apparently  fresh 
mutton  taken  in  small  quantity.  Beyond  this  it  seems  impos- 
sible to  go,  and  consequently,  as  far  as  the  investigation  of 
the  disease  is  concerned,  we  are  left  in  an  unsatisfactory 
position  of  doubt. 

Our  scurvy  came  to  us  as  a  great  surprise.  Fully  alive  to 
the  danger  of  the  disease,  we  seemed  to  have  taken  every  pre- 
caution that  the  experience  of  others  could  suggest,  and  when 
the  end  of  our  long  winter  found  everyone  in  apparently  good 
health  and  high  spirits,  we  naturally  congratulated  ourselves 
on  the  efficacy  of  our  measures.  How  rudely  we  were  awakened 
from  this  pleasing  attitude  I  have  shown,  and,  though  the 
disease  was  banished  with  astonishing  rapidity,  the  incident 
could  not  fail  to  leave  an  impression  that  in  some  manner  we 
had  been  unwittingly  culpable.  Quite  apart  from  the  benefit 
lost  to  medical  science,  therefore,  it  was  extremely  grievous 
that,  for  our  own  personal  satisfaction,  we  could  not  put 
our  finger  on  the  spot,  and  definitely  state  whence  the  evil 
sprang. 

Yet,  inconclusive  as  our  experience  was,  it  serves  to  em- 
phasise the  lessons  taught  by  former  experiences.  It  shows 
that  too  much  care  and  attention  cannot  be  paid  to  the  pro- 
visioning of  a  polar  expedition  ;  it  indicates  that  in  this  con- 
nection the  ordinary  methods  of  food  examination  are  not 
sufficiently  refined,  but  should  be  supplemented  by  chemical 
analyses  and  every  test  that  modern  science  can  suggest ;  and 
it  again  points  clearly  to  the  inestimable  advantage  of  fresh 
food. 

In  this  last  respect  there  lies  the  most  invaluable  safeguard 
for  the  welfare  of  future  Antarctic  expeditions  ;  it  seems  evi- 
dent that  the  whole  circle  of  the  Antarctic  seas  is  abundantly 


410      THE   VOYAGE   OF  THE  'DISCOVERY'      [1902 

provided  with  animal  life.  It  is  not  conceivable,  therefore, 
that  any  party  wintering  in  the  Antarctic  Regions  will  have 
great  difficulty  in  providing  themselves  with  fresh  food  ;  and, 
as  we  have  proved,  where  such  conditions  exist  there  need  be 
no  fear  of  the  dreaded  word  '  scurvy.' 


END   OF   THE   FIRST   VOLUME 


PRINTED    BY 

SPOTTISWOODE   AND  CO.    LTD.,    NEW-STRKET   SQUARE 

LONDON 


I  —  — ■,■*  —  .*o«ri*M-l, 


0^ 

8     tf 

4) 

> 
o 
o 

OQ 


O 


&4 


0) 


-P 
O 

o 

CO 


Kg 

«  to 

rH  t» 

O  CV 

PL,  -s} 

PC  CO 


University  of  Toronto 

Library 


DO  NOT 

REMOVE 

THE 

CARD 

FROM 

THIS 

POCKET 


Acme  Library  Card  Pocket 
LOWE-MARTIN  CO.  limited 


?":;.;  ■     t :     ; 

n&M 


