HERMETICA 


THE ANCIENT GREEK AND LATIN 
WRITINGS WHICH CONTAIN RELIGIOUS 
OR PHILOSOPHIC TEACHINGS ASCRIBED TO 


HERMES TRISMEGISTUS 
EDITED 
WITH ENGLISH TRANSLATION AND NOTES 


BY 


WALTER SCOTT 


VOLUME II 


Notes on the Corpus Hermeticum 


OA FORD 
AT THE CLARENDON PRESS 


1925 
















Oxford University Press 
London Edinburgh Glasgow Copenhagen 
New York Toronto Melbourne Cape Town 
Bombay Calcutta Madras Shanghai 
Humphrey Milford Publisher to the UNIVERSITY 





Printed in England 





Rae Ce Ce ed Ce Ce Cae) Ce eC είν ed 


ἢ ἢ 
3 
; HERMETICA ἑ 
pow 
; Plan of the Work ‘ 
ὃ Vor. I. Introduction, Texts ϊ 
; and Translation. ἑ 
; Vors. II & III. Commentary. ΐ 
; Vot. IV. Testimonia, Appen- ᾿ 
; dices and Indices. € 
Scour eicinsnsiteeninell 








CORPVS HERMETICVM 


LIBELLVS I 


Contents 


(i) THe RevELATION. δὲ 1-26. 

The man who speaks was visited in his sleep by the supreme 
Mind, who taught him as follows. 

The beginning of things. In the beginning was God (who is 
pictured as a boundless expanse of light), and God alone. Then, 
formless matter (pictured as a cloud of darkness) came into being. 
The formless matter first assumed form by changing into a watery 
substance. And from God came forth a Word (hypostatized, and 
called son of God), who worked upon the watery substance. 

4-6. 
᾿ In God are included innumerable Powers; and the Intelligible 
World,—the archetype of the Sensible World,—is made up of these 
Powers of God. δὲ 7-8 a. 

Formation of the Sensible World. The watery substance, by the 
operation of the Word, was differentiated into (r) fire, which rose 
aloft ; (2) air, which occupied the region next below the fire; and 
(3) gross matter (earth and water intermixed), which remained 
below. §§ 8b, 5b. (Later on, earth and water were separated, 
§ 1b.) 

The making of living beings. The supreme Mind (i.e. God) gave 
birth to a second Mind, called ‘the Demiurgus’, whose station is 
the highest sphere of the region of fire; and the Demiurgus made 
out of fire and air the seven Planets, whose function is to govern 
the sublunar world. Acting in conjunction with the Word (who 
now quitted the grosser elements below, and flew up to the region 
of fire), the Demiurgus set the Planets circling in their several 
spheres. §§ 9-11 a. 

Then, at the bidding of the Demiurgus, the earth and the water 
brought forth the irrational animals, ὃ rz Ὁ. 

The origin of man, The supreme Mind (i.e. God) gave birth to 
(incorporeal) Man, a Being like to God himself. This Man at first 
took up his abode in the highest sphere of heaven, beside his brother 
the Demiurgus, Thence he descended to the planetary region ; 

2806.2 B 


2 CORPVS HERMETICVM 


and from each of the seven Planets he received something of its 
special character. He then looked down from the lowest sphere 
of heaven into the world of gross matter, the abode of corporeal 
Nature. He saw in the material things of the world below the 
reflected image of his own God-derived beauty; and attracted 
by it, he descended into the region of gross matter, and took 
corporeal Nature to him as his bride; and the two were joined 
in one (i. 6. the human soul was incarnated), §§ 12-14. 

Hence it is that men, though incorporeal and immortal in 
respect of their true being, are yet in part corporeal and mortal. 
§ 15. 

Corporeal Nature, married to the incorporeal Man, brought forth 
seven Men, who bore the several characters of the seven Planets. 
Each of these seven Men was (like ourselves) composed of (1) a 
gross body, made of earth and water ; (2) a vital spirit, made of fire 
and air ; and (3) an incorporeal soul and mind. 

The seven Men were bisexual (as were the beasts also); and in 
that state they dwelt on earth until the end of the first age. 
δὲ τό, 17. 

Then, each of the seven bisexual Men (as well as each of the 
bisexual beasts) was divided into two separate beings, the one male, 
and the other female. God bade the seven couples breed; and 
from them is descended the existing race of men and women, 
δ 18a. 

The conditions of man’s life on earth. If men yield to carnal 
desire, and love the body, they fall under the power of death; but 
if they identify themselves with that in them which is incorporeal, 
they are immortal, and attain to the Good (i.e. to union with God). 
δὲ 18b, το. : 

The men who fail thus to ‘recognize themselves’ deserve the 
death which they incur, (because they are guilty of the sin of loving 
the body ;) for the body is composed of matter, and matter is the 
source of all evil, But those who ‘recognize themselves’ attain 
to the Good, because the incorporeal self which they recognize 
is of one substance with God, and in virtue of it they are sons of 
God. §§ 20, 21. 

But a man cannot ‘ recognize himself’ unless he has Mind in him. 
Mind enters into men that are good and pure; and its presence 
in them makes them devote themselves to loving worship of God, 
and excludes the evil promptings of the bodily senses. But when 



























LIBELLVS I 3 


men are wicked, Mind abandons them, and its place is taken by the 
Avenging Daemon, who tortures them with the fires of evil passion. 
δὲ 22, 23. 

The ascent of the disembodied soul. At death, the gross body is 
resolved into earth and water; the (vital spirit), with the bodily 
senses (of which it was the organ), is reabsorbed into {the atmo- 
sphere); and stripped of these integuments, the man rises above 
the sublunar world, and enters the region of the heavens. As he 
mounts upward through the planetary spheres, he gives back to each 
planet in succession the evil passion which had come to him from 
that planet ; and thus cleansed from all corruption, he takes up his 
abode for a time in the highest sphere of heaven. Lastly, he quits 
the material universe, and enters the incorporeal world above it, 
where dwell the Powers of God ; and himself becoming one among 
these Powers, he ‘comes to be in God’. §§ 24-26 a. 


(ii) THe THANKSGIVING. §§ 30-32. 


The man woke from his sleep, full of joy at the revelation that 
had been vouchsafed to him, and gave thanks to God in a hymn 
of praise. 


(iii) THE PreacHInc, §§ 27-29. 

Then, in obedience to the injunction of his divine visitant (δ 26 b), 
he proceeded to make known to his fellow men what had been 
made known to him, and teach them how they might be saved. 
‘Shake off your drunken sleep,’ he said; ‘repent; cease to give 
yourselves up to death ; accept immortal life.’ And some mocked " 
but others besought him to teach them, and he taught them, 


The theology of Covg. I may be summarized as follows. There 
is a supreme God, who is described as ‘Mind’ (νοῦς), and as ‘Life 
and Light’. The supreme God has three sons, viz. the Logos, the 
_ Demiurgus-Nous, and the Anthropos. The Logos and the Demiurgus- 
Nous are God’s agents in the making of the world. The Logos 
operates in the first stage of the cosmopoiia, viz. the separation of 
the elements. The Demiurgus-Nous operates in the later stage, 
viz. the making of living beings (other than man); it is he that 
makes the heavenly bodies (immortal ζῷα), and causes the lower 
_ elements to bring forth the mortal and irrational ζῷα. But the Logos 
_ and the Demiurgus-Nous are ‘of one substance’, and ultimately 
f BZ 


"4 CORPVS HERMETICVM 


coalesce into one. Anthropos, the third son of God, is a personifica- 
tion of the incorporeal part of man, which has issued from God, 
and is destined to go back into God. 

Side by side with the conception of the three Sons of God stands 
that of the ‘Powers’ (δυνάμεις) of God. According to this second 
conception, God contains or is made up of innumerable Powers ; 
and individual human souls, if they are true to themselves, will 
ultimately become Powers of God, and take their place as such 
among his other Powers. It would be possible to bring these two 
conceptions into connexion, by saying that the three Sons of God 
are his three highest Powers; but the author himself has not thus 
connected them. (Perhaps however the δύναμις μεγίστη which is 
spoken of in § 5 b may be identified with the Demiurgus-Nous.) 


Corp. I is the only Hermeticum in which the notion of a tran- 
scendental Person named Anthropos presents itself. But a more 
or less similar use of the name Anthropos occurs repeatedly in 
Christian Gnostic writings. 

There can be little doubt that "Ανθρωπος, thus employed as a 
person-name, first came into use as a translation of the Hebrew 
name Adam, which means ‘man’. Even among Jews who were 
uninfluenced by Greek philosophy, there was a tendency to magnify 
Adam into something more than a mere man. Some of their 
Rabbis said that Adam was bisexual; that his body was at first of 
such huge bulk that it filled the world from end to end 3 and that, 
before his fall, he was in possession of the ‘heavenly radiance’ or 
‘glory’, and shone with such brightness that he obscured the sun,! 
But an Adam more closely resembling the Anthropos of Corp, I 
is to be found in Philo, De ofif. mundi 23. 69—29. 88. Philo there 
explains that the ‘man’ whose making is described in Gen. τ. 26 
(ποιήσωμεν ἄνθρωπον κατ᾽ εἰκόνα ἡμετέραν kt...) is not an individual 
man, but the ἰδέα of man (in the Platonic sense of ἰδέα) or the γένος 
man. De opif. mundi 24.76: πάνυ δὲ καλῶς, τὸ γένος ἄνθρωπον 
εἰπών, διέκρινε τὰ εἴδη, φήσας ἄρρεν τε καὶ θῆλυ δεδημιουργῆσθαι, 
μήπω τῶν ἐν μέρει μορφὴν λαβόντων, ἐπειδὴ τὰ προσεχέστατα τῶν 


1 See Bousset Hauptprobleme der Gnosis, 1907, p. 198, where references to the 
Talmud are given. In Kap. IV (‘Der Urmenschi ") of that book, Bousset has 
brought together much material that is valuable as bearing on the origin and 
history of the Anthropos-doctrine ; but I find myself unable to agree with some of 
his conclusions, Bousset has dealt with the same subject more briefly in his 
Religion des Fudentums im Neutest. Zeitalter, 1906, PP. 494~407, 








LIBELLVS I 5 


εἰδῶν ἐνυπάρχει τῷ γένει, καὶ ὥσπερ ἐν κατόπτρῳ διαφαΐνεται τοῖς ὀξὺ 
καθορᾶν δυναμένοις. Afterwards, commenting on Gen. 2. 7 (ἔπλασεν 
ὃ θεὸς τὸν ἄνθρωπον χοῦν ἀπὸ τῆς γῆς κ-τ.λ.), he says that the man 
whose making is described in this latter passage is the individual 
man Adam, the ancestor of all individual men of later generations. 
Tb. 46. 134: διαφορὰ παμμεγέθης ἐστὶ rod τε viv πλασθέντος ἀνθρώπου 
καὶ τοῦ κατὰ τὴν εἰκόνα θεοῦ γεγονότος πρότερον" ὃ μὲν γὰρ διαπλασθεὶς 
αἰσθητὸς ἤδη, μετέχων ποιότητος, ἐκ σώματος καὶ ψυχῆς συνεστώς, ἀνὴρ 
ἢ γυνή, φύσει θνητός" ὁ δὲ κατὰ τὴν εἰκόνα (i.e. the ‘man’ spoken of 
in Gen. 1. 26) ἰδέα τις ἢ γένος ἢ σφραγίς," νοητός, ἀσώματος, οὔτ᾽ 
ἄρρεν οὔτε θῆλυ, ἄφθαρτος φύσει The Anthropos of Corp. I 
corresponds to the ἄνθρωπος of Gen. 1. 26 as interpreted by Philo, 
inasmuch as he is a personification of the ἰδέα or γένος of humanity ; 
but he also corresponds to the ἄνθρωπος of Gen. 2. 7 as interpreted 
by Philo, inasmuch as he is the ancestor of the human race.’ The 
author of Corp. I must have got his conception of Anthropos from 
Jewish thinkers whose speculations were closely connected with 
those of Philo. His Anthropos is not the Adam of Genesis, but 
a transcendental Adam evolved by philosophic Jews out of a 
combination of da¢a supplied by Genesis with the Platonic conception 
of the ἰδέα ἀνθρώπου or αὐτοάνθρωπος." 


1 Philo also says that ὁ κατ᾽ εἰκόνα θεοῦ ἄνθρωπος is the human νοῦς. Jb. 23. 69: 
τὴν δὲ ἐμφέρειαν (1, 6. the likeness of man to God, implied in the words κατ᾽ εἰκόνα) 
μηδεὶς εἰκαζέτω σώματος χαρακτῆρι". .. ἡ δὲ εἰκὼν λέλεκται κατὰ τὸν τῆς ψυχῆς 
ἡγεμόνα νοῦν" πρὸς γὰρ ἕνα τὸν τῶν ὅλων ἐκεῖνον ὡς ἂν ἀρχέτυπον ὁ ἐν ἑκάστῳ τῶν 
κατὰ μέρος ἀπεικονίσθη. It is not clear how this is to be reconciled with the state- 
ment that the ‘ man’ in question is the ἰδέα of man, or the γένος man. 

2 σφραγίς here means the one seal by which many similar impressions are 
stamped,—the ‘ type’, 

§ Bousset Kel, des Hud. p. 405 (see also Hauptprobleme der Gnosis, p. 195) 
says ‘ Philo hat nun diese Ausfiihrungen nicht aus Gen. 1 wu. 2 herausgesponnen, 
sondern sic an diesen Bericht herangebracht. . . . Wir haben auch gar keinen 
Grund, hier eine Anleihe Philos bei der hellenischen Philosophie anzunehmen, wo 
so mannigfache und bedeutende Parallelen auf einen Einfluss yom Orient her 
schliessen lassen’, (One of the Oriental parallels to which he refers is that of the 
Persian ‘Urmensch’ Gayomarth.) But I think that Bousset is here mistaken. It 
Seems to me that Philo’s Adam (and likewise the Anthropos of Corp. 1) can be 
adequately accounted for as a result of the interpretation of Genesis by Jews 
acquainted with Greek philosophy, and that there is no need to assume Persian or 
other Oriental influence. 

* Trenaens 1, 18. 2 says that some of the followers of the Gnostic Marcus ἄλλον 
θέλουσι τὸν κατ᾽ εἰκόνα καὶ ὁμοίωσιν Θεοῦ γεγονότα ἀρσενόθηλυν ἄνθρωπον, καὶ 
τοῦτον εἶναι τὸν πνευματικόν" ἄλλον δὲ τὸν ἐκ τῆς γῆς πλασθέντα. This explanation 
of Gen. 1, 26 and 2. 7 closely resembles that of Philo, who says defer αὐέα that 
ὁ kar’ εἰκόνα θεοῦ ἄνθρωπος is the human νοῦς (=the πνευματικὸς ἄνθρωπος of the 
followers of Marcus, and the οὐσιώδης ἄνθρωπος of Corp, 1. 15). 

5 Cf, Plotinus 6, 7. 6: ὁ ἐν νῷ ἄνθρωπος (ἔχει ἐν μιμήσει (2)) τὸν πρὸ πάντων τῶν 
ἀνθρώπων ἄνθρωπον (= the ‘idea’ of man). But it is possible that the figure 


6 CORPVS HERMETICVM 


Sources. The doctrine of Cor. I is fundamentally Platonic. The 
Platonic contrast between νοῦς and αἴσθησις, νοητά and αἰσθητά, things 
incorporeal and things corporeal, presents itself throughout ; and the 
passage about the νοητὸς κόσμος (§§ 7, 8 a) implies acceptance of the 
Platonic theory of ideal παραδείγματα. The writer speaks as a 
Platonist in his description of the twofold nature of man (§ 15); and 
he is an adherent of Platonism in his conviction that the human soul 
has descended from a higher world, and is destined to return to the 
higher world whence it came. 

In his account of the differentiation of the sexes (§ 18), he has been 
influenced by Plato’s Symposium; and reminiscences of particular 
passages in Plato’s writings may be recognized, with more or less 
probability, in § 12, of ἠγάσθη ὡς ἰδίου τόκου K.7.d. (Pl. Zim. 37 ο): 
§ 21, οὐ πάντες γὰρ ἄνθρωποι νοῦν ἔχουσιν ; κιτιλ. (Pl. Zim. 51 Ἐ): § 19, 
ἐκ πλάνης ἔρωτος (Pl. Phaedr. 2 388). The term τὸ ἀγαθόν, as used in 
δὲ το, 26 8, is of Platonic origin, 

In distinguishing a first νοῦς and a second vovs, and assigning the 
name δημιουργός to the second, the writer is in agreement with certain 
Platonists of the Roman Empire, and especially with Numenius. 

On the other hand, he ignores the Platonic doctrine of metensoma- 
Zosis or reincarnation ; and while he is in accord with the Platonists 
in regarding ὕλη as the source of evil, he appears to reject the 
Platonic view that ὕλῃ is without beginning (§ 4). 

A trace of Aristotelian influence may perhaps be seen in what is 
said in ὃ 11a concerning the eternity of circular motion. 

In his physics, the writer’s position resembles that of the Stoics. 
His account of the separation of the four cosmic elements (§ 5 b) 
agrees with Stoic descriptions of the diacosmesis; and the separated 
elements are disposed by him, as by the Stoics, in a series of concen- 
tric spheres (region of fire, divided into the sphere of the fixed stars 
and the seven planetary spheres ; atmosphere ; water and earth). 
The main lines of this system of cosmology had been laid down by 
Plato and Aristotle ; but it was by the Stoics that it was formulated 
employed by Plato in Reg. 9. 588CD also contributed. It is there said that 
the human soul is made up of three things joined together, viz, o) a many-headed 
beast (τὸ ém@uynrixdy), (2) a lion (τὸ @vpoeidés), and (3) an ἄνθρωπος (τὸ λογι- 
στικόν). Cf. Iambl. Protrept. 5: τὸν ἐν ἡμῖν θεῖον ἄνθρωπον τοῦ πολυκεφάλονυ 


θρέμματος ἐγκρατῆ ποιητέον, “This ‘ divine ἄνθρωπος in us’ is the οὐσιώδης 
ἄνθρωπος of Corp. 1. 15. 

On the Jewish side, the conception of the Anthropos may have been influenced 
by speculations based on the passage about ‘ one like unto a son of man’ in Daniel 
7-13, and on the use of ‘the son of man’ as an appellation of the Messiah in 
Jewish apocalyptic writings (Enoch &c.), 





LIBELLVS I ¥ 


and popularized in the very shape in which we find it in this docu- 
ment. And as we know that Platonism was affected by Stoic 
influence from the first century B.C. onward, it is probable that the 
writer’s immediate teachers were Platonists of the syncretic school 
which came into being at that time. 

Among the terms and conceptions of Stoic origin which occur in 
Corp. 1 may be noted κατωφερής, ὃ 4 &e.: εἱμαρμένη, ὃ 15 &c.: 
πνεῦμα (material), in the two senses air (ὃ 9) and vital spirit (δ 17): 
πρόνοια, ὃ το. In identifying εἱμαρμένη with the influence of the 
heavenly bodies (ὃ 9 iz.), the writer is in accord with the Stoics of 
the Roman Empire rather than with Chrysippus. 

So far, the doctrine of Corg. I may be described as that of a 
Stoicizing Platonist. But with this Hellenic doctrine are combined 
ingredients of Jewish origin.” From the ‘ watery substance’ onward, 
the cosmogonia of § 8b ff. is constructed on the same plan as that of 
Genesis ; and verbal reminiscences of Genesis may be seen in § 5b 
Jin, τὸν (ἐπάνω τοῦ ὕδατος ?) ἐπιφερόμενον πνευματικὸν λόγον (Gen. τ. 2): 
δα Ὁ, ἐξήνεγκεν (ἡ γῆ) ζῷα τετράποδα κιτιλ. (Gen. 1. 24f.): § 12, 
τὴν τοῦ πατρὸς εἰκόνα ἔχων (Gen. τ. 26f.): § 17, ὃ δὲ ἄνθρωπος .. . 
ἐγένετο εἰς ψυχὴν καὶ νοῦν (Gen, 2. 7): § 18, αὐξάνεσθε... καὶ πληθύνεσθε 
(Gen. 9. 17 and τ. 22, 28). The notion of the splitting of bisexual 
beings may have been connected in the writer’s mind with Gen. 
2. 21-24, as well as with Pl. Sympos. The ‘end of the first period’, 
and the following ‘speech of God’ (§ 18), correspond to the Deluge 
and the speech of God to Noah in Gex. 9. 16 ff. ; and the marriage of 
‘Man’ and ‘ Nature’ in § 14 corresponds to the story of Adam and 
Eve in Gen. 2. 

But among the Jewish ingredients of the doctrine of Corp. I are 
included things which could not have been suggested by a mere 
reading of the text of Genesis ; viz. the conception of the δυνάμεις of 
God, that of the Logos, and that of the transcendental Anthropos. 
These conceptions must have originated in a school of Jewish 
thinkers who had brought to bear on the study of their sacred books 
a knowledge of Greek philosophy. 

Now in every one of the points that I have spoken of, the writer’s 
position closely resembles that of Philo Judaeus. Philo also taught 
a form of Platonism modified by an intermixture of Stoic conceptions, 


1 The fact that the contents of Corp. I are partly derived from Jewish sources is 
<3 mia in a scholion on Corp. 1. 18, which is ascribed to Psellus. See Psellus in 
stint. 


8 CORPVS HERMETICVM 


and so interpreted the narrative of Genesis as to bring it into accor- 
dance with this Hellenic doctrine. The conceptions of the λόγος and 
the δυνάμεις of God which we find in Corp. I are similar to those 
which we find in Philo; and the Anthropos of Cog, I is in the main 
identical with the Adam of Gen. 1 and 2 as explained by Philo. The 
writer of Corp. I cannot have been himself a member of the Jewish 
community ; for there is no trace in this document of that submission 
to the Jewish Law, and that interest in the Jewish nation, which are 
conspicuous in Philo’s Writings. We must conclude then that he 
was a man of Gentile race and Hellenic education, who had accepted 
the teachings either of Philo himself, or of Jews of the same school 
as Philo. How much of his Platonism was transmitted to him by 
these same Jewish teachers, and how much of it he had learnt 
directly from Pagan authorities, it is impossible to say. 

This would suffice to account for the main body of doctrine in 
Corp. 1. But there are certain notions which seem to have been 
derived from other sources. In his use of the terms 4ight and dark- 
ness, the author may possibly have been influenced by the teaching 
of the Zoroastrians. His description of the descent and ascent of 
the soul through the planetary spheres (δὲ 13a and 2 5) may have 
been suggested by the similar doctrine of the Mithraists, 

The name Poimandres appears to be of Egyptian origin; but 
apart from this, there is little to indicate that the writer was influenced 
by the indigenous religion of Egypt. It is Possible however that his 
application of the term ἀρσενόθηλυς to God, and his use of ζωή with 
reference to God, may have been derived from Egyptian sources, 

In reading Corp. I, we are here and there reminded of passages in 
the New Testament 3 8.8. in the phrase ζωὴ καὶ φῶς (cf. Ev, Sol), 


writings of some of the Christian Gnostics ; 6. g. the description of 
the descent and ascent of the human soul ; the notion of the δημιουρ- 
γός as a subordinate Being who resides in the highest sphere of 
heaven; the conception of the Anthropos; and the use of the terms 
ἡ αὐθεντία and ἡ ὀγδοαδικὴ φύσις. But these resemblances are not to 
be taken as proofs of borrowing on either side ; they rather indicate 
the use of common sources. The Christian Gnostics, like the author 
of Corg. I, derived a part of their doctrine from a Platonism modified 
by Stoic influence, and another part of it from Jewish speculations ; 
and so far as their sources were the same, they spoke in similar lan- 





LIBELLVS I 9 























e. But if the author of Cor. I had read the writings of Christian 
Gnostics, we might expect to find in this document some traces 
of the Christian element of Gnosticism also. The most distinctive 
‘characteristic of Christian doctrine, as. compared with that of 
other religions of the time, was the conception of a ‘Saviour’, 
j.e. a divine Person who has descended from a higher world to 
rescue human souls from their fallen condition; and of this 
conception, which is prominent in the systems of the Christian 
Gnostics as well as in that of the Catholic Christians, not the slightest 
trace appears in Corp. 1. If the writer has been in any way influenced 
by his Christian neighbours, itis not in his doctrine that this influence 
is to be recognized, but rather in his view of his own function as a 
teacher. He regards himself as one on whom is laid the task of calling 
mankind to repentance, and ‘ teaching them how they may be saved’; 
and it is not impossible that in this respect the author of Corp. I was 
following the example set by the preachers of the Christian Gospel. 


Relations of Libellus I to other Hermetica. The author of Corp. I 
seeks to make known to all mankind the truth which has been 
revealed to him. In this respect, his attitude is very different from 
that of the Hermetists in general, who depict the teacher as speaking 
in private to one or two select pupils, and in some instances, 
expressly bidding his disciples keep secret what they learn from 
him. (See Corp. XIII jin.; Asci. Lat. 1b; Stob. Zxe. XI. 4, 5.) 
The writer of Asc/. Lat. I does indeed (in c. 12 b) protest against the 
φθόνος of those who would debar men from the gnosis; but even 
there, no public preaching is suggested ; and apart from Cor. I, the 
only Hermeticum in which the teacher offers himself as a guide to 
men at large is Corp. VII. That document is a fragment of a 
missionary sermon of precisely the same kind as that of which the 
heads are given in Corp. I. 27 f.; and Corp. VII so closely resembles 
Corp, 1 in thought and diction, that it seems probable that both 
were written by the same person. 

The writer of Corp. XIII refers to Corg. I as a document known 


1 Analogies to the Christian notion of a ‘Saviour’ may, no doubt, be discovered 
here and there in other religions of the Roman Empire. For instance, such an 
analogy may be seen in the Aore Kosmu, where we are told that Isis and Osiris 
came down from heaven to earth to civilize mankind. But in the main, the 
distinction holds good. The gods of the Pagan mystery-cults might be called 
“saviours’, but were not held to have ‘come down’ in the same sense as the 
Christian Saviour, 


To CORPVS HERMETICVM 


to him and his readers. In his time, it was already assumed that 
the unnamed prophet who speaks in Corp. I is Hermes Trisme- 
gistus. 

The words of Corp. XVI. 16 (ταύτην δὲ τὴν διοίκησιν Ἑρμῆς 
εἱμαρμένην ἐκάλεσεν) look like a reference to Corp. I. 9 (ἡ διοίκησις 
αὐτῶν εἱμαρμένη καλεῖται) ; and if it is so, the writer of Corp. XVI 
also must have read Corp. I, and identified the man who speaks in 
it with Hermes. But this cannot be considered certain; for it is 
possible that both authors got the phrase from some document 
unknown to us. The words ἔρως... ὁ πλανώμενος καὶ πλανῶν in 
Corp. XVI. 16 resemble ἐκ πλάνης ἔρωτος in Corp. 1. 19; but this 
resemblance counts for little, as the expression may have been 
Suggested to both writers independently by the language of 
Pl. Phaedrus 238 8, 

The cosmogonia of Corp. III resembles that of Corp. I, both alike 
being based on Genesis; and the phrase αὐξάνεσθαι ἐν αὐξήσει καὶ 
πληθύνεσθαι ἐν πλήθει, which occurs in both, must have been either 
borrowed by one of the two writers from the other, or taken by both 
from a common Jewish source. But on the other hand, these two 
documents differ widely in doctrine. The writer of Corg. III holds 
that men cease to exist at death; the writer of Corp. I asserts with 
the strongest emphasis the immortality of human souls, The 
Hellenic element in Corg, III is Stoic, and not Platonic; the 
Hellenic element in Corg, I is mainly Platonic. It is in the Jewish 
ingredient that the resemblance consists; but even in this, there is 
a difference ; for the Jewish element in Corg. III appears to be 
derived immediately from the text of Genesis (or, in the case of the 
phrase αὐξάνεσθαι κιτιλ., from a paraphrase of Genesis), whereas the 
Jewish element in Cor. I includes conceptions evolved from Genesis 
by speculation closely related to that of Philo. It may be considered 
certain then that Corp. I and Corp. III were not written by the 
same man; and notwithstanding the points of resemblance, it is 
doubtful whether either of these two documents was known to the 
writer of the other. 

Ascl. Lat. 1.7 (‘homo duplex est, et eius una pars... οὐσιώδης᾽, ἅς.) 
closely resembles Cor. I. 15; and the interpolated passage Corp. 
X. 19 b-22a has much in common with Corp. I. 22f. But in these 
cases also, it is impossible to say whether the similarity is due to 
direct borrowing, or to the use of common sources. 

We may conclude then that Corg. I was certainly known to the 








LIBELLVS I IL 


writer of Cox. XIII, and may or may not have been known to the 
writers of Corp. XVI, Corp. III, Ascl. Lat. 1, and Corp. X. 19 b-22 a. 
But there is nothing to suggest that it was known to any of the 
Hermetic writers except these ; and on the whole, Corg. I (together 
with Corp. VII, which may be regarded as an appendage to it) stands 
apart from the main body of Hermetic literature. In his open 
proclamation of the truth to all who are willing to hear it, this 
author differs from the Hermetists in general (including the writer of 
Corp. XIII). The name Poimandres occurs nowhere else in the 
extant /Yermetica, except in the passage in Corg. XIII where it is 
mentioned in connexion with Corp. I; the conception of the 
transcendental Anthropos does not occur in any of the other docu- 
ments ; and that of the hypostatized Logos is hardly to be found 
elsewhere in the Hermetic writings, except in a few sentences quoted 
by Cyril. There is reason to think that Corg. I and Corp. VII were 
not originally attributed to Hermes; and it seems probable that 
they were written in complete independence of the Hermetic 
tradition ; that their author was an Alexandrian Platonist who had 
come under the influence of Jewish teachers; and that it was not 
until most of our Hermetica were already in existence, that these two 
documents passed into the hands of a Hermetist, and were ascribed 
by him to the legendary founder of his religion. 


Date. The fact that an extract from Corf. I (viz. the edogia, 
§§ 31, 32) occurs in a Papyrus of the third century a.p. makes it 
certain that this Libellus was written before the end of that century. 
The intermixture of Stoic conceptions with its Platonism makes it 
certain that it was not written before the first century B.c. Its close 
connexion with Philo makes it almost certain that it was not written 
until after the Christian era; and the importance attributed to the 
influence of the planets points in the same direction. The affinity 
of Corp. I with the teaching of Numenius (who wrote between 150 
and 200 A.D., and is the earliest Pagan Platonist that is known to 
have been influenced by Jewish speculation) suggests the second 
century A.D, rather than the first; and its resemblances to the 
writings of the Christian Gnostics also tell in favour of the second 
century. As the writer of Corp. XIII refers to Corf. I as a known 
document, and attributes it to Hermes, it must have been in existence 
for some considerable time when Corp, XIII was written. There is 
reason to think that all our Hermetica (or at any rate almost all of 


12 CORPVS HERMETICVM 


them) were written before a.p. 300;' and if Corg. XIII is to be 
dated before a. Ὁ. 300, the date of Corp. I must be placed a good 
deal earlier. It is probable then that Corp. I was written between 
A.D. roo and 200. 


Title, The superscription Ἕρμοῦ τρισμεγίστου was probably not 
written by the author of Corp. I. In ὃ τ, the speaker says that 
Poimandres ‘called him by his name’; why is the name not given 
there? And it is again withheld in §§ 20, 21, where Poimandres says 
ὦ οὗτος. If the author had meant his readers to understand that the 
man who tells the story is Hermes Trismegistus, he would have 
written λέγειν Ὦ Ἑρμῇ «7A. in place of καλεῖν pov τὸ ὄνομα in ὃ 1, 
and ὦ Ἕρμῆ in place of ὦ οὗτος in ὃ 20f. In the text of the docu- 
ment, the writer refrains from naming the man whose vision and 
preaching he describes ; hence it seems to follow that he must have 
refrained from naming him in the title also, and consequently, that 
Ἑρμοῦ τρισμεγίστου is a later addition. 

If the author had intended to put the narrative into the mouth of 
a well-known personage, he would have named that personage. On 
the other hand, if he was speaking in his own person, and narrating 
what he had himself experienced, his withholding of the name can be 
more easily accounted for ; he may have shrunk from obtruding him- 
self, and felt that it was his message alone, and not his name, that 
mattered, There is therefore reason to think that the ἐγώ of this 
document is the author himself, and that Cor. 1 is in substance an 
autobiography, though the man who speaks has compressed the story 
of his life into the space of a single night of vision and a single day 
of preaching. We know from his own words that he was one who 
set forth to convert mankind, and teach men how they might be 
saved, In the first three centuries of the Christian era there were 
many men who took that task upon them, But no other record of 
him has come down to us; and there is nothing to tell us what 
success he met with in his enterprise, or how far his influence spread.? 


δ 1. μετεωρισθείσης μὲν (μοι MSS.) τῆς διανοίας σφόδρα, ((ὕπνῳν) (δὲ) 
κατασχεθεισῶν μου τῶν σωματικῶν αἰσθήσεων. It is necessary to insert 
ὕπνῳ here ; for as the prophet afterwards assumes it to be known that 
he was asleep when the revelation came to him (§ 30, 6 τοῦ σώματος 

1 A good many of them, if not all, were known to Lactantius, about A.D. 310. 


* Except Corf, XIII, from which it may be inferred that at some later time 
there was a small fraternity in which Corp, I was regarded as a sacred book. 





LIBELLVS I: δὲ 13 





































ὕπνος x.t.d.), he must have said so in the first section. In sleep the 
bodily senses are suppressed, and the mind is for that reason free to 
rise to loftier heights than in waking life. Cf. Pindar, fr. 131, speaking 
of prophetic dreams: τὸ γάρ (sc. the soul) ἐστι μόνον | ἐκ θεῶν᾽ εὕδει 
δὲ πρασσόντων μελέων, ἀτὰρ εὑδόντεσσιν ἐν πολλοῖς ὀνείροις | δείκνυσι 
τερπνῶν ἐφέρποισαν χαλεπῶν τε κρίσιν. Aristotle, fr. 12 : ὅταν .. 
ἐν τῷ ὑπνοῦν καθ᾽ ἑαυτὴν γένηται ἡ ψυχή, τότε τὴν ἰδίαν ἀπολαβοῦσα 
φύσιν προμαντεύεταί τε καὶ προαγορεύει τὰ μέλλοντα. Cic. Div. τ. 115: 
‘yiget enim animus in somnis, liberque est sensibus et omni impedi- 
tione curarum, iacente et mortuo paene corpore’. Philo Quis rer. 
div. heres 51. 257, Wendland III, p. 59: ὕπνος yap νοῦ ἐγρήγορσίς 
ἐστιν αἰσθήσεως" καὶ yap ἐγρήγορσις διανοίας αἰσθήσεως ἀπραξία. 

(οὐ μέντοι) καθάπερ {τ)οῖζς) [{{πνῳ]}] βεβαρημένοι(ς) ἐκ κόρου τροφῆς ἢ 
ἐκ κόπου σώματος. Cf. Aristot. ἹΠερὶ ὕπνου 456} : μάλιστα γίνονται 
ὕπνοι ἀπὸ τῆς τροφῆς"... . ἔτι δ᾽ ἐκ κόπων ἐνίων. But the prophet can- 
not have said that his condition was like that of one who has fallen 
asleep after a heavy meal. A man gorged with food would be in no 
fit state to receive a divine revelation. See Pl. Ref. 9. 571 C-572 A. 
Οἷς. Div. τ. 60 f.: in our dreams, ‘onusti cibo et vino perturbata et 
confusa cernimus’, 6. 115: ‘(Animus in somnis) omnia quae in 
natura rerum sunt videt, si modo temperatis escis modicisque potioni- 
bus ita est affectus ut sopito corpore ipse vigilet. Haec somniantis 
est divinatio’. Maximus Tyrius ro, 1, p. rrr Hobein : ἐνύπνιον γάρ τι 
ἐστὶν ἀτεχνῶς οὑτοσὶ ὁ δεῦρο Bios, καθ᾿ ὃν ἡ ψυχή, κατορωρυγμένη ἐν 
σώματι, ὑπὸ κόρου καὶ πλησμονῆς μόγις πως ὀνειρώττει τὰ ὄντα. ἔρχονται 
δὲ ταῖς μὲν τῶν πολλῶν ψυχαῖς ὄνειροι δι᾿ ἐλεφαντίνων πυλῶν (Hom. Od. 
19. 562 ff.)' εἰ δέ που τίς ἐστι καθαρὰ ψυχὴ καὶ νηφάλιος, καὶ ὀλίγα 
ὑπὸ τοῦ δεῦρο κάρου καὶ τῆς πλησμονῆς ἐπιταραττομένη, εἰκός που ταύτῃ 
.». ἀπαντᾶν ὀνείρατα σαφῆ... καὶ ἐγγύτατα τῷ ἀληθεῖ. It is possi- 
ble that the words καθάπερ... ἐκ κόπου σώματος have been inserted 
by a later hand ; but if they were written by the author, he must have 
meant to say that the sleep in which the vision came was μοῦ like 
that which results from bodily repletion or fatigue. I have therefore 
inserted οὐ μέντοι. 

Fulgentius quotes the words ἐκ κόρου τροφῆς ἢ ἐκ κόπου σώματος, 
but appears to have read κούφου in place οἵ κόπου. The passage 
occurs in a chapter entitled Fadula de novem Musis, and runs thus: 
“Septima (Musa appellata est) Terpsicore, id est delectans ‘instruc- 
tionem! (-tione ἢ). Unde et Hermes in Opimandrae libro ait “ eccuru- 
trofes et cufusomatos”, id est, absque instructione escae et vacuo 


14 CORPVS HERMETICVM 


corpore. Ergo post inventionem' oportet te etiam discernere ac 
diiudicare quod ‘invenies™ (inveneris?).’ Thus he quotes the phrase 
merely to illustrate the meaning of the second half of the name 
Terpsicore. He identifies this -core (i. 6. -chore misspelt) with κόρος, 
and translates κόρος by iustructio, But what does he mean by 
instructio? The context seems to show that he means ‘ digestion’, 
He takes κόρος τροφῆς to signify ‘digestion of food’ in the literal 
sense ; and Terpsicore is she who ‘ delights? in digestion ’ in a meta- 
phorical sense, i.e. finds pleasure in the discretio and diiudicatio of the 
material supplied by nventio. 

He seems to have felt the difficulty involved in making the prophet 
say that he was like one who has just eaten a heavy meal, and to have 
tried to evade it by writing ‘adsgue instructione escae’ as his transla- 
tion of ἐκ κόρου τροφῆς. But ἐκ cannot mean absque, 

ἔδοξά τινα ὑπερμεγέθη μέτρῳ ἀπεριορίστῳ (ἐν)τυγχάνοντα κιτιλ. The 
prophet does not describe the appearance of his visitant, and does 
not even say here that he saw him, but only that he was aware of 
a vast and undefined presence, and heard a voice. Indeed the words 
μέτρῳ ἀπεριορίστῳ imply that there was no definite form or shape to 
be seen. Cf. ὃ 4 init, ὁρῶ θέαν ἀόριστον, viz. the boundless light 
by which God, or the divine, Mind, is symbolized. ὑπερμεγέθη μέτρῳ 
ἀπεριορίστῳ is a clumsy phrase; and it may be suspected that the 
author wrote τινα μέτρῳ ἀπεριόριστον, and that ὑπερμεγέθη is a gloss, 

Ti βούλει ἀκοῦσαι καὶ θεάσασθαι, καὶ νοήσας μαθεῖν καὶ γνῶναι ; The 
writer has in mind the distinction between αἴσθησις and νόησις. 
The pupil must first hear (the teacher's words) and see (the vision 
presented to him), and then exert his thought to apprehend the 
meaning of what he has heard and seen (νοήσας μαθεῖν καὶ γνῶναι). 

§ 2. Ἐγὼ μέν, φησίν, εἰμι ὁ Ποιμάνδρης, ὁ τῆς αὐθεντίας νοῦς. The 
name Poimandres is employed in Corp. 1 as a designation of the 
divine νοῦς. It occurs again in Corp. XIII. το. It is once used by 
the alchemist Zosimus 3. 51. 8° (A. Ὁ. 300-350 ?): τῶν φυσικῶν τῆς 
ὕλης κατάπτυσον, καὶ καταδραμοῦσα ἐπὶ τὸν ΓΠοιμένανδρα] * (Corp. 1) 
καὶ βαπτισθεῖσα τῷ κρατῆρι (Corp. IV) ἀνάδραμε ἐπὶ τὸ γένος τὸ σόν. 
And Fulgentius (¢, a. Ὁ. 500), quoting Cor. I. 1, says: ‘Hermes in 


1 The preceding Muse in his list is she who presides over znventio, 

21 assume de/ectans to be used as the participle of delector, regarded as a 
deponent yerb, 

* Zosimus ii, 8 in Testim. 

* Read Ποιμάνδρην. 





ΠΕ 


LIBELLVS I: §2 15 


Opimandrae ' libro ait’ &c. These are, as far as I know, the only 
occurrences of the name elsewhere in ancient literature; and in each 
of these three passages, the writer is referring to Corp, 1. 

The name Poimandres has been commonly supposed to be a 
Greek word derived from ποιμήν and ἀνήρ, and meaning ‘shepherd 
of men’? It is possible that the author of Corp. XIII took the 
name to mean this; for in ὃ το he writes λόγον γὰρ τὸν "adv" (ἐμὸν Ὁ) 
ποιμαίνει (ποιμαίνεις ob?) ὃ νοῦς, and this phrase may have been 
suggested to him by the name Ποιμάνδρης. The man who wrote 
our text of Zosimus certainly took it to mean ‘shepherd of men’, 
and consequently altered ἸΤοιμάνδρην into TomévavSpa. But there 
is not the slightest reason to suppose that the author of Cor. I 
was thinking of a shepherd when he used the name. There is not 
a word about sheep or shepherding in the document; the prophet 
does not depict his divine instructor in the guise of a shepherd, and 
indeed ascribes to him no definite shape or appearance of any sort, 
but merely says that he was ‘very big’, Moreover, a Greek word 
derived from ποιμήν and ἀνήρ could not take the form ποιμάνδρης. 
The nearest approach to it that could occur in Greek is ro/av8pos,* 
which might be a shortened form of ποιμένανδρος. 


1 Opimandrae is the genitive of Opimandres, i. e. 6 Ποιμάνδρης taken as a single 
word, 

® Reitzenstein, Pom. pp. 11 ff., starting from the mistaken assumption that the 
Poimandres of Cor?, I is a shepherd, tries to establish a connexion between Corp. I 
and the Shepherd of Hermas. But his argument is not sp Aer Hermas, in 
one of his visions, is visited by a person in the garb of a shepherd; the prophet 
who speaks in (γῇ, Lis visited by a Being who is nof said to be like a shepherd. 
Between the contents of the two visions there is not the slightest similarity, 

Reitzenstein, ἐδ. p. 8 and p. 214 f., speaks of a ‘ Poimandres community ', and 
says that this community possessed ‘a sacred writing, ¢he Sayings of Poimandres’. 
Rut I have failed to find any evidence for the existence either of any such writing, 
or of any community named after Poimandres. The passages (Corp. XIII. 1 5 and 
eal ¢.) which he adduces in support of his statement are to be otherwise 
explained. 

O The mythical founder of Tanagra in Boeotia was named Ποίμανδρος (Pans, 
9. 20. 1). Plutarch, Quaest. Gr. 37, p. 299, names the founder of Tanagra 
Ποίμανδρος, and the town which he fortified, Ποιμανδρία. Strabo 9. 2. 10, Ρ. 404: 
ἡ Ποιμανδρὶς δ' ἐστιν ἡ αὐτὴ τῇ Ταναγρικῇ. Lycophron 326, speaking of the sacrifice 
of Iphigenia at Aulis (near Tanagra), calls her Ποιμανδρίαν στεφηφόρον βοῦν. 
(Schol. ad /oc. : ποιμανδρία δὲ πόλις Βοιωτίας, ἥτις καὶ Τάναγρα kare? ται.) There was 
at Tanagra a cult of Hermes Kriophoros; and at his festival, a youth walked 
round the city, carrying a lamb on his shoulder (Pans. 9. 22, 2), The name 
Poimandros may have been in some way connected with this cult; it may have 
been an epithet of Hermes Kriophoros, or the name of a local deity or hero who 
was identified with Hermes in later times. But the resemblance between Ποιμάν- 
δρης, the name of an Egyptian impersonation of the divine νοῦς, and Tloipavdpos, the 
name of a Boeotian city-founder, must be merely accidental. At most, it is 
conceivable that the Egyptian name may have been somewhat altered to assimilate 
it to the Greek name,—supposing that the name of the legendary founder of 


τό CORPVS HERMETICVM 


As the name Poimandres is not Greek, and as it first occurs in 
Corp. I, which was presumably written in Egypt, it is most likely 
of Egyptian origin. F. Granger (Zhe Poimandres of Hermes Tris- 
megistus, J. H. Stud. vol. ν, no. 191, p. 400) suggested that it is a 
transliteration of the Egyptian 4? mér, which means ‘the witness’. 
The pronunciation of the term thus written in Egyptian may be 
inferred from its Coptic equivalent, which, according to Granger, 
is p'm‘n‘tre, (Erman, Aeg. Glossar, gives saiitpe as the Coptic 
form of the Egyptian mr, ‘a witness’.) As far as the form of the 
name is concerned, this explanation seems fairly satisfactory ; but 
it is difficult to account for the substitution of the diphthong οἱ for 
the faint vowel-sound of the Coptic article. As to the meaning, 
it might be said that Poimandres, the divine νοῦς, is the ‘witness’ 
by whom the truth is made known to the prophet ; and we might 
compare Corp. XII. i. 8, where Hermes, speaking of the Agathos 
Daimon, says that ἐκεῖνος μόνος, ὡς πρωτόγονος θεός, τὰ πάντα κατιδών, 
θείους ἀληθῶς λόγους ἐφθέγξατο (which implies that the Agathos 
Daimon is the ‘ witness’), 

Granger’s explanation of the name might be accepted, if a better 
one could not be found. But Mr. F. Ll. Griffith, who has kindly 
allowed me to consult him on this question among others in which 
knowledge of the Egyptian language is involved, proposes another 
derivation, which seems preferable ; namely, that ἸΤοιμάνδρης is the 
Coptic n-essxe-n-pit, ‘the knowledge of the Sun-god’. (He tells 
me that px, ‘the sun’, is usually preceded by the article n, but 
that the omission of the article is not unparalleled in late times, 
and that px without the article would have a more learned and 
solemn appearance than the ordinary n-ps.) 

As to the form of the transliteration, there seems to be nothing 
against this. The ὃ would almost necessarily be inserted by Greeks 
for euphony; and the representation of the vowel-sounds of exane 


Tanagra chanced to be known to the Greek-speaking Egyptian who first spoke of 
Poimandres,—The word ποιμάνωρ occurs in Aesch. Pers. 241. 

1 Analogous uses of the words μάρτυς and μαρτυρία in the New Testament might 
be adduced. om. 8, 16: αὐτὸ τὸ πνεῦμα (the θεῖος νοῦς of the Hermetists) 
συμμαρτυρεῖ τῷ πνεύματι ἡμῶν ὅτι ἐσμὲν τέκνα θεοῦ. (Poimandres ‘ bears witness 
to’ the same truth in Corp. I.) Afoc. Joh. 1. 5: Jesus Christ, ὁ μάρτυς ὁ πιστός, 
1b, 3.14. Lv, Joh. 5, 31 sgg. and 8.18, Zp. Joh. τ. 5. 6 5gq.: τὸ πνεῦμά ἐστιν τὸ 
μαρτυροῦν. . . . καὶ αὕτη ἔστιν ἡ μαρτυρία, ὅτι ζωὴν αἰώνιον ἔδωκεν ὁ θεὸς ἡμῖν, 
(That is also the μαρτυρία of Poimandres in Corf. I.) 

The words μαρτυρία and αὐθεντία occur together in Const. Afpost. 5. ἢ. 30: 
λαβόντες ἐντολὴν... μαθητεῦσαι πάντα τὰ ἔθνῃ Kat βαπτίσαι εἰς τὸν αὐτοῦ θάνατον 
ἐπὶ αὐθεντίᾳ τοῦ θεοῦ τῶν ὅλων... καὶ μαρτυρίᾳ τοῦ πνεύματος. 































LIBELLVS I: ὃ, 17 


by οἱ and a may perhaps have been suggested by association with 
the verb ποιμαίνειν. 

The meaning given to the name by this derivation would suit 
the context. The Coptic word ease means ‘knowledge’ or ‘per- 
ception’; it corresponds to the verb ‘mj, ‘to know’, given as late 
Egyptian in Erman’s Aeg. Glossar. If we assume that it is here 
used as an equivalent for the Greek νοῦς, Poimandres would mean 
‘the νοῦς of the Sun-god’; and seeing that not only in Egypt, but 
in the Roman empire at large, the Sun was very generally regarded 
as the supreme God, or an ‘image’ or symbol of the supreme God, 
this name might very well be taken to signify that which the writer 
of Corp. I says it denotes, namely, ὁ τῆς αὐθεντίας νοῦς, ‘the Mind 
of the Sovereign Power’ (i. e. of the supreme God). 

The word αὐθέντης commonly meant (1) a man who does or has 
done something (e. g. has committed a murder) with his own hand ; 
(2) one who acts by his own authority, and not in subordination to 
another. In the latter sense, it is equivalent to αὐτοκράτωρ; and 
hence αὐθεντία may be used to signify the ‘supreme-authority’ or 
‘sovereignty’ of God. It was thus employed by Cerinthus (Hippol. 
Ref. haer. 7. 33, repeated 74. το. 21): K. ἔλεγεν οὐχ ὑπὸ τοῦ πρώτου 
θεοῦ γεγονέναι τὸν κόσμον, ἀλλ᾽ ὑπὸ δυνάμεως τινὸς κεχωρισμένης τῆς 
ὑπὲρ πάντα ἐξουσίας, καὶ ἀγνοούσης τὸν ὑπὲρ πάντα θεόν... καὶ 
μετὰ τὸ βάπτισμα κατελθεῖν εἰς (τὸν Ἰησοῦν) ἐκ τῆς ὑπὲρ τὰ ὅλα 
αὐθεντίας τὸν Χριστόν. In that passage, ἡ ὑπὲρ τὰ ὅλα αὐθεντία 
is equivalent to ἡ ὑπὲρ πάντα ἐξουσία and ὁ ὑπὲρ πάντα θεός. 
Similarly Satornilus (Hippol. 7. 7. 28): τὸν ἄνθρωπον δὲ ἀγγέλων 
εἶναι ποίημα, ἄνωθεν ἀπὸ τῆς αὐθεντίας φωτεινῆς εἰκόνος ἐπιφανείσης" 
and afterwards, οἰκτείρασα αὐτὸν ἡ ἄνω δύναμις ἔπεμψε σπινθῆρα 
ζωῆς. (ἡ αὐθεντία is there equivalent to ἡ ἄνω δύναμις.) Epiphanius, 
Haer, 38, says of a sect of Gnostics, οὗτοι φασὶ τὸν Κάιν ἐκ τῆς 
ἰσχυροτέρας δυνάμεως ὑπάρχειν καὶ τῆς ἄνωθεν αὐθεντίας. In the Latin 


translation of Irenaeus (1. 31. 1), ἐκ τῆς ἄνωθεν αὐθεντίας is rendered 
by α superiore principalitate. 


1 αὐθεντία might also be used in the sense of ‘authenticity’ or ‘genuineness ’, 
Since αὐθέντης might signify ‘ one who has written or signed a document with his 
own hand’, αὐθεντικός came to mean ‘ written or signed by the man himself’, and 
thence ‘authentic’, ‘genuine’, or ‘true’, E, g. in a magic papyrus (Dieterich 
Abraxas, p. 178) the magician says to his god (οἶδα) σου τὸ ἀληθινὸν [ὄνομα] καὶ 
αὐθεντικὸν ὄνομα. And αὐθέντης seems to have been sometimes used as a substitute 
for αὐθεντικός in this sense. Pistzs Sophia c. 126 (C. Schmidt, p, 207): ¢ Der 
erster Archon, . . , der mit seinem authentischen (αὐθεντικύς) Namen Enchthonin 
genannt wird,’ 4., of the third Archon, * Ein Hundesgesicht ist sein authentisches 
2806-2 ς 


18 CORPVS HERMETICVM 


The divine νοῦς assumes a personal form as Poimandres, and in 
that form speaks to the prophet. But is this νοῦς identical with 
the supreme God himself, or is it distinguished from the supreme 
God, and regarded as a Power which emanates from him,—the 
first and highest of his δυνάμεις ἢ On this question, the language 
of the writer appears to vary. On the one hand, Poimandres 
repeatedly speaks of God (ὁ θεός) in the third person, as a being 
distinct from himself (§8 b, ἐκ βουλῆς θεοῦ. ὃ το, ὁ τοῦ θεοῦ λόγος. 
§ 12, ὁ πατήρ. ὃ 18, ἐκ βουλῆς θεοῦ. 70., ὃ θεὸς εἶπεν. § 21, ὃ τοῦ 
θεοῦ λόγος. ὃ 22, παραγίνομαι ἐγὼ ὁ νοῦς. . . καὶ τὸν πατέρα 
ἱλάσκονται. ὃ 26 a, ὑμνεῖ τὸν πατέρα. .. . ὑμνουσῶν τὸν θεόν. ... 
ἀνέρχονται πρὸς τὸν πατέρα... . ἐν θεῷ γίνονται. § 26 Ὁ, ὑπὸ θεοῦ 
σωθῇ). But the force of this argument is diminished by the fact 
that in § 9 ἐμ, (where the MSS. give & δὲ νοῦς ὁ θεός, but the 
true reading is probably ὁ δὲ νοῦς ὁ πρῶτος,) Poimandres speaks of 
the supreme νοῦς also in the third person, though the νοῦς there 
spoken of cannot be other than ὁ τῆς αὐθεντίας νοῦς, i. 6. Poimandres 
himself. And on the other hand, the divine νοῦς is expressly identi- 
fied with the supreme God in the words ἐγώ, νοῦς, 6 πρῶτος (ὁ σὸς 
MSS.) θεός § 6, and ὁ πάντων πατὴρ [[6}] νοῦς in § 121 It seems 
therefore that in the theology of Corp. 1 ὁ τῆς αὐθεντίας νοῦς (also 
called ὁ νοῦς ὁ πρῶτος, ὃ πάντων πατήρ, and ὁ θεός) is the supreme 
Being; but the writer makes Poimandres, in the course of his 
teaching, use the forms of speech which are commonly employed 
by men, and speak of the supreme Being in the third person, although 
Poimandres is that very Being. 

(αὐθέντης) Gesicht.” 70. ς. 127: ‘Der Drache der dusseren Finsterniss hat 2wélf 
authentische (ab@évres) Namen.’ (On the other hand, αὐθέντης appears to mean 
‘supreme’ or ‘sovereign’ in Pistis Sophia c. gt: ‘ Wer das absolute (αὐθέντης) 


Mysterium des ersten Mysterinms des Unaussprechlichen empfangen hat’ 5, 
€. 97: ‘das zwGlfte Mysterium ..., d.h. das absolute (αὐθέντης) Mysterium.’) 
Orac. Sib, 7. 69 (Christian): ὃς πρὶν καὶ γαίης re καὶ οὐράνου ἀστερόεντος | αὐθέντης 
Γηένετο" (γεγένητο Alexandre) λόγος πατρί, (αὐθέντης there appears to mean 

aos.) The word αὐθεντία might therefore mean ‘ authenticity ’ or ὁ genuineness’ ; 
but it cannot very well have that meaning in the phrase ὁ τῆς αὐθεντίας νοῦς. 

1 Starting from the assumption that the νοῦς is a person distinct from 6 θεός, I 
thought at first of altering these two passages in which they are identified, by 
cutting out ἐγώ, νοῦς in § 6, and νοῦς after ὁ πάντων πατήρ in § 12, But I now see 
that these alterations of the text would not get rid of the identification; for it is 
clear that the being who is called ὁ πάντων πατήρ in § 12 is the same being who is 
called ὁ νοῦς ὁ πρῶτος in § 9. The νοῦς δημιουργός, who is son of ὁ νοῦς ὁ πρῶτος, 
is spoken of in § 13 as ‘ brother’ of Anthropos, who is son of 6 πάντων πατήρ ; from 
which it follows that the two phrases (ὁ νοῦς 6 πρῶτος and ὁ πάντων πατήρ) denote 
the same person. 

The words ὁ Ποιμάνδρης ἐμίγη ταῖς δυνάμεσιν in § 26b might be reconciled with 
either of the two views, σι 


LIBELLVS I: δὲ 2-4, 19 































[[otSa ὃ βούλει, καὶ σύνειμί σοι πανταχοῦ. If we retain the words 
οἶδα ὃ βούλει where they stand in the MSS., they serve no apparent 
purpose, and bring into undue prominence the inconsistency 
inevitably involved in making an omniscient Being ask for informa- 
tion. If we place them after φησὶν ἐμοὶ πάλιν, they follow naturally 
on the prophet’s answer to the question which Poimandres has asked. 
Reading (ὃς) καὶ σύνειμί σοι πανταχοῦ, we may take these words 
as an explanation of οἶδας The divine νοῦς knows all that is in 
man’s heart, being always present there (if not in all men, at least 
in the ἔννους ἄνθρωπος, ὃ 21 sg.) ; though it is only at rare moments that 
a man is so fully conscious of its presence as the prophet was in his 
vision. 

ὃ 3. Μαθεῖν θέλω τὰ ὄντα καὶ νοῆσαι τὴν τούτων φύσιν, καὶ γνῶναι τὸν 
θεόν. 1. 6. “I wish (1) to understand the Kosmos, and (2) to know 
the supracosmic God’, Cf. Corp. XI. ii init: σύ μοι περὶ τούτου 
(sc. τοῦ παντὸς Kat τοῦ θεοῦ) διασάφησον. 

ὃ 4. οὕτως εἰπόντος (τοῦτο εἰπὼν MSS.), ἠλλάγη ((εὐθέως πάντα μοι 
τῇ ἰδέᾳ καὶ [[Ά.] ἤνοικτο ῥοπῇ. In the text of the MSS., the subject 
of ἠλλάγη is Poimandres. But as no‘‘form’ has hitherto been 
ascribed to Poimandres, it could hardly be said here that he 
‘changed in form’. Besides, if he ‘changed in form’, we ought to 
be told what new form he assumed ; but nothing is said about that. 
(It is true that the expanse of light which the prophet now sees is 
meant to symbolize the divine Mind, and Poimandres is that Mind ; 
but the prophet does not know what the light means until he is told 
its meaning in § 6.) On the other hand, we are told in the following 
sentence that πάντα (i.e. the visible world) changed into a boundless 
expanse of light; the subject of ἠλλάγη must therefore have been 
πάντα, and not Poimandres, who remains, as before, an undefined 
presence. 

φῶς [δὲ] πάντα γεγενημένα. The material world disappears, and 
there is nothing but φῶς ἀόριστον. The prophet has been transported 
in his vision to the time before the creation of the world, when Mind 
or God alone existed ; and God is pictured as light diffused through 
boundless space. 

καὶ μετ᾽ ὀλίγον, σκότος κατωφερὲς ἦν ἐν μέρει (τινὶ) γεγενημένον. 
This is the first beginning of the Kosmos. Ina certain part of the 
expanse of light (i.c. at the place where the Kosmos is subsequently 
to come into being), there appears a cloud of darkness. This dark- 
ness is ἄμορφος ὕλῃ, the raw material out of which the visible universe 
C2 





20 CORPVS HERMETICVM 


is to be made. It is called κατωφερές, Which is an epithet applied by 
the Stoics to the grosser and heavier elements, earth and water. 
This, if the writer thought the matter out clearly, ought to mean that 
the σκότος (like the ‘watery substance’ into which it presently changes) 
tended to gravitate towards a central point, viz. the centre of the 
future Kosmos. The author rejects the Platonic doctrine that ὕλῃ is 
without beginning, and has existed side by side with God from all 
eternity ; but whether it was brought into existence by God’s will, or 
came into being of itself, he does not tell us. 

He is in agreement with the Platonists in holding ὕλη to be the 
source of evil; and he symbolizes its evil influence by picturing it as 
σκότος φοβερόν τε καὶ στυγνόν, in contrast to the φῶς ἥπιόν τε καὶ 
ἱλαρόν which stands for God. But the symbolical representation of 
the good God by light, and the evil ὕλῃ by darkness, must have been 
suggested to him by some tradition independent of Platonism, In 
Greek speculation, an early form of this notion appears in the system 
of Parmenides, who, in his account of the ‘world of illusion *, said 
that the first things were fire and earth, ‘or rather, light and dark- 
ness’! But the identification of the good principle with light, and 
the evil principle with darkness, was especially characteristic of the 
Zoroastrians ; and a Zoroastrian conception may very well have been 
transmitted to the author of Corp. 1. Hippol. Ref. haer. 1. 2. 12 
(Diels Doxogr. p. 5 57): Διόδωρος δὲ ὁ Ἐρετριεὺς (unknown) καὶ 
᾿Αριστόξενος ὃ μουσικός (¢. 300 B.C.) φασι πρὸς Ζαράταν τὸν Χαλδαῖον 
(i.e. Zoroaster) ἐληλυθέναι Πυθαγόραν" τὸν δὲ ἐκθέσθαι αὐτῷ δύο εἶναι 
ἀπ’ ἀρχῆς τοῖς οὖσιν αἴτια, πατέρα καὶ μητέρα' καὶ πατέρα μὲν φῶς, 
μητέρα δὲ σκότος" τοῦ δὲ φωτὸς μέρη θερμὸν ξηρὸν κοῦφον ταχύ, τοῦ δὲ 
σκότους ψυχρὸν ὑγρὸν βαρὺ" βραδύ' ἐκ δὲ τούτων πάντα τὸν κόσμον 
συνεστάναι, ἐκ θηλείας καὶ ἄρρενος. .... περὶ δὲ τῶν ἐκ γῆς καὶ Γκόσμου] 
(perhaps οὐρανοῦ) γινομένων τάδε φασὶ λέγειν τὸν Ζαράταν" δύο δαίμονας 
εἶναι, τὸν μὲν οὐράνιον, τὸν δὲ χθόνιον" ὃ καὶ τὸν μὲν χθόνιον Γἀνιέναι τὴν 

1 Simplicius zu phys. f. 6. vy. 14-18, following Theophrastus (Diels Doxogr, 


- 477): of μὲν δύο (τὰς ἀρχὰς ἔθεντο), ὡς Παρμενίδης ἐν τοῖς πρὸς δύξαν πῦρ καὶ γῆν, 
μᾶλλον φῶς καὶ σκύτος. Parmenides /*. 8. 56ff. Diels: τῇ μὲν φλογὸς αἰθέριον 
πῦρ, | ἤπιον ὄν, μέγ᾽ ἐλαφρόν, ἑωυτῷ πάντοσε τωὐτόν, | τῷ δ' ἑτέρῳ μὴ τωὐτόν- ἀτὰρ 
κἀκεῖνο κατ᾽ αὐτὸ | τἀντία νύκτ' ἀδαῇ, πυκινὸν δέμας ἐμβριθές τε. 70. Sr. 9: αὐτὰρ 
ἐπειδὴ πάντα φάος καὶ νὺξ ὀνόμασται,. ,.. πᾶν πλέον ἐστὶν ὁμοῦ φάεος καὶ νυκτὸς 
ἀφάντου, | ἴσων ἀμφοτέρων. Plut. adv. Col Ir14B: Parmenides, στοιχεῖα μιγνὺς 
τὸ λαμπρὸν καὶ σκοτεινόν, ἐκ τούτων τὰ φαινόμενα πάντα καὶ διὰ τούτων ἀποτελεῖ. 
(The conjecture ἤπιον for ἤδιον in Corp. 1 is supported by the phrase πῦρ ἥπιον dv 
in Parmenides.) 
® Cf. σκότος κατωφερές in Cor 


“δ. 1. 4. 
5. Le. the Power of Light ant the Power of Darkness, 

































LIBELLVS I: § 4. a1 


γένεσιν ἐκ τῆς γῆς εἶναι δὲ ὕδωρ᾽," τὸν δὲ οὐράνιον (καταπέμπειν ?) πῦρ 
μετέχον τοῦ] dépos.” The ‘Pythagorean’ doctrine here spoken of is 
clearly connected with that of Parmenides. Aristoxenus or his 
authority presumably found this doctrine taught by some Pytha- 
gorean, and having noted its resemblance to what he had heard of 
the Zoroastrian cosmology, inferred that Pythagoras had learnt it 
from Zoroaster. Cf. Eudemus (¢ 300 8, 6.) in Damascius De princ. 
p- 382 Kopp (Mullach, A. £2. Gr. ITI, p- 288 f.) : Μάγοι δὲ καὶ πᾶν τὸ 
Ἄρειον γένος .. . οἱ μὲν Τόπον, οἱ δὲ Χρόνον καλοῦσι [τὸ νοητὸν ἅπαν 
καὶ] τὸ ἡνωμένον, ἐξ οὗ διακριθῆναι ἢ θεὸν ἀγαθὸν καὶ δαίμονα κακόν, ἢ 
φῶς καὶ σκότος πρὸ τούτων, ὡς ἐνίους λέγειν. οὗτοι δ᾽ οὖν καὶ αὐτοὶ 
μετὰ τὴν ἀδιάκριτον φύσιν ἴδιακρινομένην ποιοῦσι τὴν διττὴν συστοιχὴν 
τῶν κρειττόνων "ὁ (καὶ) τῆς μὲν ἡγεῖσθαι τὸν Ὠρομάσδην, τῆς δὲ τὸν 
᾿Αρειμάνιον. 

The two principles of the Zoroastrians were adopted by Mani. 
Epiphanius Aaer. 66. 14 gives the opening words of Mani’s work on 
the ‘ Mysteries’ as follows: ἦν θεὸς καὶ ὕλη, φῶς καὶ σκότος, ἀγαθὸν καὶ 
κακόν, τοῖς πᾶσιν ἄκρως ἐναντία. Alex. Lycopol. Contra Manichaet 
opiniones 2 (Brinkmann): ἀρχὰς ἐτίθετο θεὸν καὶ ὕλην, εἶναι δὲ τὸν μὲν 
θεὸν ἀγαθόν, τὴν δὲ ὕλην κακόν. ... τὸ δὲ λαμπρὸν καὶ τὸ φῶς καὶ τὸ ἄνω, 
πάντα ταῦτα σὺν τῷ θεῷ εἶναι, τὸ ἀμυδρὸν δὲ καὶ τὸ σκότος καὶ τὸ κάτω 
σὺν τῇ ὕλῃ. As the use of the terms ‘light’ and ‘darkness’ in 
Corp. I closely resembles Mani’s use of them, it seems probable that 
it was derived from the same source, i. e. from the Zoroastrians, 
Plotinus repeatedly describes ὕλῃ as ‘darkness’; 6. δι ἃ. 8.4: (ἡ 
ψυχὴ) σκότον ὁρᾷ, καὶ ἔχει ἤδη ὕλην. Plot. 4. 3. 9 (on the formation 
of body by soul): ἐπ᾽ ἄκροις τοῖς ἐσχάτοις τοῦ πυρὸς (= φωτὸς) σκότος 
ἐγένετο" ὅπερ ἰδοῦσα ἣ ψυχή, ἐπείπερ ὑπέστη (τὸ σκότος), ἐμόρφωσεν 
αὐτό. 

3 Τ The sense required is ἀνιέναι (els) τὴν γένεσιν γῆν καὶ ὕδωρ (or γῆν μετέχουσαν 
Obie which partakes of air’ is what the Stoics called puewma. The gross 
substance of the human or animal body consists of earth and water from be OW; 
the prema, which is the vehicle of life, consists of fire and air from above. 

5 I. e. this second school of ‘ Magi’. 

* The text is corrupt here ; but the general meaning is clear. There are two 
φύσεις (‘substances’), viz. light and darkness, and in connexion with them, two 


συστοιχίαι (series) of deities ; the series of good deities is headed by Ormazd, and 
the series of evil deities by Ahriman. 

In identifying the good God with light and the evil ὕλη with darkness, the writer 
of Corp, I agrees with the second of the two schools of Magi spoken of by 
Endemus ; but he differs from them in putting light at the beginning, and making 
the darkness come into being later, instead of positing an ‘undiscriminated substance 
out of which both light and darkness came by differentiation. 





22, CORPVS HERMETICVM 


Γσκολιῶς πεπειραμένον" [ὡς εἰκάσαι με]. ὡς εἰκάσαι με is probably 
a misplaced doublet of ὡς εἰκάσαι a few lines below, πεπειραμένον 
might possibly be a corruption of ἐπαίρομενον (the darkness being 
pictured as consisting of wreaths of smoke curling upward); but 
ἐπαιρόμενον would be hardly consistent with κατωφερές above. 

εἶδον (εἰδότα MSS., ἰδόντα B®) μεταβαλλόμενον τὸ σκότος εἰς ὑγράν 
τινα φύσιν ἀφάτως τεταραγμένην. εἰδότα may be a conflation of two 
readings, εἶδον and era. The ὑγρὰ φύσις corresponds to the watery 
chaos which occurs in the Babylonian cosmogony, in Genesis T, and 
in the Stoic diacosmesis? CF. Corp. 111. 1b, ἦν γὰρ σκότος [ le 
ἀβύσσῳ, καὶ ὕδωρ ((ἀπειρον)), and see notes ad loc. The writer of 
Corp. I, instead of putting the watery chaos at the beginning, as the 
Babylonians and the author of Gen. 1 did, has prefixed a description 
of its origin. But from the watery chaos onward, his cosmogony is 
constructed on the same lines as that of Gen. zi 

kal καπνὸν ἀποδιδοῦσαν ὡς ἀπὸ πυρός. It seems Strange to say that 
smoke ‘as from fire’ is given off by a ‘watery substance’. But the 
statement may be accounted for, if we take it to be the writer’s 
interpretation of the phrase in Gen. τ, καὶ σκότος ἐπάνω τῆς ἀβύσσου. 
The darkness which ‘ was upon the face of’ the watery substance 
when this substance had already come into being must be something 
different from that darkness which had changed into the watery 
substance itself ; and the writer takes it to be a sort of murky smoke 
rising from the surface of the watery mass. 

Mani (Alex. Lycopol. 3) said that ὕλῃ, when all ‘light’ or divine 
substance has been extracted from it, becomes a πῦρ καυστικὸν μέν, 
σκοτῶδες δὲ καὶ ἀφεγγές, νυκτὶ προσόμοιον. It is possible that some 
similar statement, derived from a Zoroastrian source, may have been 
in the writer’s mind, 

καί τινα ἦχον Γἀποτελοῦσαν ἀνεκλάλητον γοώδη. ἦχον ἀποτελεῖν, 

1 Reitzenstein writes σκολιῶς ἐσπειραμένον, ὡς εἰκάσαι με (δρακόντιν, and compares 
rage Ref. faer. 5. 9 (doctrine of the Naassenes) : Ndas δὲ ἐστὶν ὁ ὄφις, «ςςς εἶναι 
δὲ τὸν ὄφιν λέγουσιν οὗτοι τὴν ὑγρὰν οὐσίαν, καθάπερ καὶ Θαλῆς ὃ Μιλήσιος" καὶ μηδὲν 
δύνασθαι τῶν ὄντων ὅλως, ἀθανάτων θνητῶν, ... συνεστάναι χωρὶς αὐτοῦ" ὑποκεῖσθαι 
δὲ αὐτῷ τὰ πάντα, καὶ εἶναι αὐτὸν ἀγαθόν, ὥστε τὸ κάλλος καὶ τὴν ὡραιότητα 
ἐπιδιδόναι πᾶσι τοῖς οὖσι, But there is little resemblance between the snake of the 


Naassenes, which is the source of all good, and the ‘ grim and terrible darkness’ of 
Corp. 1, which stands for ἄμορφος ὕλη, and is the source of all evil. It is true that 


? It might also be compared to the Egyptian wz: but the cosmogony of Corp, I 
is more ncarly related to that of Genesis than to that of the Egyptians, 












































LIBELLVS I: δὲ 4-6. 23 


‘fo accomplish a noise’, is hardly Greek; and there is probably 
some corruption. We should have expected ἤκουσα, to correspond 
to εἶδον above; and perhaps the author may have written something 
like ἦχον ἀφιείσης ἤκουσα. 

No ‘noise’ is mentioned in this connexion in Genesis ; but in de- 
scriptions of the ‘last things’ in Judaeo-Christian Apocalypses, (some 
of the details of which, according to Gunkel, Schipfung und Chaos, 
are derived from traditional descriptions of the ‘ first things ’,) we hear 
of ‘ the roaring of the sea’ (Luke 21. 25: ἐν ἀπορίᾳ ἤχους θαλάσσης 
καὶ σάλου). 

[εἶτα] βοὴ (yap) ἐξ αὐτῆς ἀσύναρθρος ἐξεπέμπετο, The writer con- 
trasts the ‘inarticulate roar’ of the watery chaos with the λόγος which 
issued from ‘the Light’, i.e. from God. λόγος means primarily 
‘speech’, i.e. significant utterance; and the author, though he 
hypostatizes the Adyos, still continues to regard it as the ‘spoken 
word’ of God. The words φωνὴν φωτός must have been applied to 
the λόγος, and not, as in the MSS., to the ‘inarticulate roar’. 

ὃ 58. λόγος ἅγιος ἐπέβη τῇ (ὑγρᾷ) φύσει. This corresponds to 
πνεῦμα θεοῦ ἐπεφέρετο ἐπάνω τοῦ ὕδατος in Gen, τ. 2 ; but it also corre- 
sponds to εἶπεν 6 θεός in Gen. 1.3 &c. The writer identifies the 
‘spirit of God’ which ‘ moved upon the face of the waters’ with ‘the 
word of God’ by which the world was made. Cf. ὃ 5b, διὰ Tov... 
ἐπιφερόμενον πνευματικὸν λόγον. Herm. Frag. 27: 6 yap λόγος αὐτοῦ 
.. + ἔγκυον τὸ ὕδωρ ἐποίησεν. (The ὕδωρ there spoken of is the ὑγρὰ 
φύσις of Corp. I.) 

ὃ 5D. [ἰκαὶ πῦρ ἄκρατον. . . πνευματικὸν λόγον.) This passage 
evidently belongs to the account of the origin of the elements, which 
is introduced by the question in ὃ 8b ἐμέ, (τὰ στοιχεῖα τῆς φύσεως 
πόθεν ὑπέστη ;). It must have followed, and not preceded, the de- 
scription of the νοητὸς κόσμος in δὲ 7, 8a. 

ὃ 6. [eis ἀκοὴν}] ὁ δὲ Ποιμάνδρης ((εἰς ἀκοὴν)) ἐμοὶ... φησί, εἰς 
ἀκοήν is meaningless where it stands in the Μ55, If we place it after 
Ποιμάνδρης, it serves to mark the distinction between what the prophet 
saw in his vision and what he Aeard Poimandres say. 

Τὸ φῶς ἐκεῖνο, ἔφη, ἐγώ, νοῦς, ὁ πρῶτος θεός (ὁ σὸς θεός MSS.). There 
is no reason why the supreme Mind should say ‘I am ἐὰν God’ ; and 
σός is probably a corruption of aos or a’os, an abbreviation for πρῶτος. 
See Corp, III init. An instance of πρῶτος written in the form a’os 
occurs in Catal. codd. astrol. Graec. ΤΊ, p. 39. 

ὁ δὲ ἐκ [νοὸς] φωτειν)ὸς λόγος υἱὸς θεοῦ. The thing to be explained 


24 CORPVS HERMETICVM 


by Poimandres is the thing which the prophet has just perceived in 
his vision, viz. ‘the Word which came forth from the light’; this 
therefore ought to be the subject of the proposition. The prophet 
saw the light, but did not see Mind, and did not perceive that the 
Word came forth ‘from Mind? ; ἐκ vods therefore can hardly be right. 
And the epithet dwrewds is not suitable ; we have been told that the 
Word came forth from the light, but not that the Word itself was 
‘bright’ or ‘shining’; it was a thing heard, not a thing seen. If we 
write ὁ δὲ ἐκ φωτὸς λόγος, all difficulties are removed. (We may sup- 
pose that vods is an accidentally misplaced doublet of the preceding 
νοῦς, and that φωτός, which had been rendered meaningless by the 
insertion of νοός before it, was altered into φωτεινός to make sense.) 
Poimandres explains to the prophet (1) that the light which he saw 
is God, and (2) that the Word which came forth from the light is son 
of God. 

The Adyos is here hypostatized, as in Philo passim; and the con- 
ception of ‘the Word of God’ as a person, and a ‘son of God’, must 
have been adopted by the writer of Corp. I from Jewish speculations 
similar to those of Philo.' On the Jewish hypostatization of God’s 
λόγος, see Bousset, Rel. des Judentums, p. 399 ; Schiirer, Gesch. des 
jiid. Volkes III, p. 708 ff. ; Zeller, Phil. der Griechen III, Abth. ii 
(1903), pp. 418-434. Philo’s notion of the divine Logos was based 
partly on the Mosaic account of the creation,* and partly on the Stoic ὃ 
use of the word λόγος to describe the God who pervades the Kosmos 
and operates in it.! Philo’s Logos may be regarded as the Stoic God 


1 Celsus (Origen ¢, Cels, 2. 31) ΣερΠ ρα a Jew as saying to the Christians εἴ 
γε ὁ λόγος ἐστὶν ὑμῖν vids τοῦ θεοῦ, καὶ ἡμεῖς ἐπαινοῦμεν. To this Origen replies that 
he has never heard a Jew admit τὸ λόγον εἶναι τὸν υἱὸν τοῦ θεοῦ. But the Ἂν Philo 
repeatedly asserts, if not recisely this, at least τὸ τὸν λόγον εἶναι υἱὸν θεοῦ. FE, g. 
Philo De agric. 12. 51, Wendland ΤΙ, p. 105: ὁ ποιμὴν καὶ βασιλεὺς beds governs 
all things in the universe, προστησάμενος τὸν ὀρθὸν αὑτοῦ χόγον καὶ πρωτόγονον υἱόν, 
ὃς τὴν ἐπιμέλειαν τῆς ἱερᾶς ταύτης ἀγέλης οἷά τις μεγάλου βασιλέως ὕπαρχος διαδέξεται. 
See also De conf. ling, 28, 146, Wendland IT, p. 257, τὸν πρωτόγονον αὐτοῦ λόγον 
KATA, 

® “By the word of the Lord were the heavens made.’ Philo Legg. alleg. 3. 31.96, 
Cohn I, p. 134: 6 λόγος αὐτοῦ... ᾧ καθάπερ ὀργάνῳ προσχρησάμενος ἐκοσμοποίει. 
De cherubim 35. 127, Cohn I, p. 200: εὑρήσεις γὰρ αἴτιον μὲν (τοῦ κόσμου) τὸν 
θεόν, ὑφ᾽ οὗ γέγονεν, ὕλην δὲ τὰ τέσσαρα στοιχεῖα, ἐξ ὧν συνεκράθη, ὄργανον δὲ λόγον 
θεοῦ, δι᾽ οὗ κατεσκευάσθη. In Corp. I, it is in connexion with the making of the 
world that the Logos is spoken of. 

5 The Stoics found (or thought they found) this use of the word in Heraclitus, 

* It has been thought by some that the influence of certain analogous doctrines 
taught by Egyptian priests also contributed more or less to the development of 
Philo’s theory of the Logos. (Specimens of such Egyptian doctrines are given by 
Reitzenstein, Poimandres, p. 59 fi., and Moret, Adystéres Lxgyptiens, 1913, pp. 108- 
189.) This is not quite impossible ; but I do not think it can be held to have been 





LIBELLVS I: § 6. 25 











































dematerialized, with a supracosmic God (the God of Platonism) set 
up above him. His distinction between God and the Logos is an 
instance of the distinction between a ‘first God’ and a ‘second God’ 
which presents itself in various forms in the teachings of the syncretic 
Platonists of the Roman empire; and this distinction, wherever it 
occurs in their writings, seems to have resulted from a combination 
of Platonic and Stoic conceptions. The transcendent God of 
Platonism being debarred from contact with matter, a second God 
was needed to operate in the world; and the immanent God of 
Stoicism was at hand to supply the need. The Platonists therefore 
adopted the God of the Stoics, but made him subordinate to their 
own transcendent God; and Philo, influenced in part by the Stoic 
use of the word λόγος, and in part by its use in the LXX to signify 
the ‘word’ or fiat by which God made the world (and the ‘word of 
the Lord’ by which He spoke to the prophets), gave the name Logos 
to the subordinate God of his system. 

God’s λόγος is already imagined as a person distinct from God in 
Sap. Sal. (time of Augustus ?) 18. 15, in a description of the slaying of 
the first-born of Egypt: 6 παντοδύναμός σου λόγος ἀπ᾽ οὐρανῶν ἐκ 
θρόνων βασιλείων ἀπότομος πολεμιστὴς εἰς μέσον τῆς ὀλεθρίας ἥλατο γῆς, 
ξίφος ὀξὺ τὴν ἀνυπόκριτον ἐπιταγήν σου φέρων,; καὶ στὰς ἐπλήρωσεν τὰ 
πάντα θανάτου" καὶ οὐρανοῦ μὲν ἥπτετο, βεβήκει δ' ἐπὶ γῆς." But this is 
an isolated instance ; and Schiirer says ‘as it seems, Philo was the 
first to posit such an intermediate being between God and the world 
under the name of Logos’. 

Οὕτω γνῶθι, τὸ ἐν col Bénav [ }* (ἐπεὶ καὶ ἐν σοὶ δ) λόγος υἱός, ὁ δὲ 
γοῦς πατήρ.---(Οὕτω γνῶθι" τὸ ἐν σοὶ βλέπον καὶ ἀκοῦον (a/. βλέπων καὶ 
ἀκούων) λόγος κυρίου, ὁ δὲ νοῦς πατὴρ θεός MSS.). This sentence is 
meaningless in the MSS. Its restoration is doubtful; but with the 
alterations which I have made, we get a satisfactory sense. ‘What 


proved, At any rate, the chzef sources of the Philonian Logos-doctrine, if not the 
only sources, were Jewish and Stoic; and it can be sufficiently accounted for as an 
outcome of Judaeo-Stoic speculation, without assuming any part of it to have been 
derived from the indigenous religion of Egypt. 
1 The λόγος is here said to ‘ bear the command of God’ as a thing distinct from 
himself; he cannot therefore be merely a figurative personification of that com- 
mand, but must be regarded as an actual person. 

2 Cf. Ps, 107. 20, ἀπέστειλεν τὸν λόγον αὐτοῦ καὶ ἰάσατο αὐτούς, where the 
language makes it at least possible for a reader to regard the λόγος as a person, 
_ Origen (c. Ceds. 2. 31) quotes that verse in support of the Christian doctrine of the 


s. 
Zeller (III, Abth. ii, p. 430) agrees in the main with Schiirer on this point, 
though he speaks somewhat more guardedly, 
























26 * CORPVS HERMETICVM 


do you mean’, the prophet asks, ‘ by saying that the divine λόγος is 
son of the divine νοῦς δ᾽ Poimandres answers: ‘The relation between 
the divine λόγος and the divine νοῦς is analogous to the relation 
between the human λόγος and the human νοῦς, Your Adyos (speech) 
may be called son of your νοῦς (mind or thought), because it issues 
from your νοῦς, and is inseparably connected with it; and in the same 
sense, the divine λόγος may be called son of the divine vovs.” Cf, 
Philo De cher. 2.7, Cohn I, p. 171 (quoted by Clem. Svrom. 5.8 ; see 
Cohn I, p. Ix): the name Abram was changed to Abraham, which 
means “πατὴρ ἐκλεκτὸς ἤχους". ἠχεῖ μὲν γὰρ ὃ γεγωνὸς λόγος, πατὴρ 
δὲ τούτου ὁ νοῦς, ἐξειλεγμένος δὲ ὁ τοῦ σπουδαίου νοῦς. Clem. Strom. 4. 
162: ὅθεν καὶ διδάσκαλος Γμόνος ὃ μόνος ὑψίστου ἅγνου πατρός (διδά-. 
σκαλος μόνος ὃ λόγος, υἱὸς τοῦ νοῦ πατρός Schwartz), 
ἄνθρωπον. 

Compare the Christian fermippus (Kroll and Viereck) 1. 13. 97: 
ὅθεν (sc. from the combination of νοῦς, λόγος, and ψυχὴ καὶ πνεῦμα in 
Ourselves) ἡμεῖς ὁρμώμενοι, καὶ ἐπὶ θεοῦ τρεῖς ὑποστάσεις κατανοήσαντες 
σέβομεν, καὶ τὸ τῆς ζωαρχικῆς τριάδος ἀνεκαλύφθη μυστήριον" ὃ γὰρ νοῦς 
ἐν ἡμῖν, τοῦτ᾽ ἐν ἐκείνοις πατήρ" ὃ δὲ λόγος, υἱός" ὃ δὲ ψυχὴ καὶ πνεῦμα, 
καὶ παρ᾽ αὐτοῖς ἄχραντον καὶ ζωοποιόν ἐστι πνεῦμα. Cf. also ἃ document 
Περὶ πατρὸς καὶ υἱοῦ, probably written by Sarapion, bishop of Thmuis 
in Egypt, about a. Ὁ. 350 (Wobbermin, Zexte und Unters. NV. F. Il. 
3b, p.22): πῶς οὖν “ἀεὶ πατὴρ" καὶ “ ἀεὶ vids” νοῆσαι ἄμεινον ; πατήρ 
εἰμι τοῦ λόγου τοῦ ἐμοῦ, καὶ ὅτε βούλομαι τὸν λόγον μου προφέρω, καὶ εἰς 
ἑτέρας ἀκοὰς φθάνων ὁ λόγος ὃ ἐμὸς οὐ διῃρέθη ἀπ᾽ ἐμοῦ. (And so it is 
in the case of the Father and the Son ἢ) θέλημα γὰρ πατρός ἐστιν ὃ 
λόγος αὐτοῦ, πανταχοῦ οὖν διακονῶν τῷ 


© , nN 
ο παιδε ὕὍὼωμ τὸν 


ἂν Sp: ee, ᾿ 
Lb. p. 23: ἡνίκα ὃ λόγος ἐν τῷ vol ἠρεμεῖ, τότε σιγή ἐστιν᾽ ὅτε δὲ βούλε- 
ται ὁ νοῦς φωτίσαι τὰ πάντα, ὁ λόγος προέρχεται πρὸς φωτισμὸν τοῦ παντός. 


§ 7. εἰπὼν τοσαῦτα (εἰπόντος ταῦτα MSS.). ‘He spoke (only) so 


much’; i.e. at this point he ceased to speak, and proceeded to 
influence me in a different way. 


LIBELLVS I: δὲ 6, 7. 27 




























ἐπὶ πλείονα χρόνον ἀντώπησέ μοι. He ‘gazed straight into my 
eyes’. Here Poimandres is for the first time spoken of as if he 
were visible in human form, and we are told that the prophet 
‘trembled at his appearance (ἰδέα). But even now, no definite 
human shape is described. What is meant is that the divine visitant 
imposes his influence on the prophet, as one man might influence 
and, so to speak, hypnotize another by a long and earnest gaze. 
Thus influenced, the prophet’s νοῦς is raised to a higher potency, 
and enabled to see the vision of the νοητὸς κόσμος. 
θεωρῶ ἐν τῷ vot pou τὸ φῶς ἐν δυνάμεσιν ἀναριθμήτοις ὄν, καὶ 
κόσμον ἀπεριόριστον γεγενημένον. The writer has adopted from 
the Platonists (or from some Platonizing Jew of the same school 
as Philo) the conception of a νοητὸς κόσμος. This ‘intelligible 
world’ is the παράδειγμα in God’s mind, after the model of which 
the ‘sensible world’ is organized. Cf. Philo De conf. ding. 34. 171 f., 
Wendland II, p. 262: εἷς ὧν & θεὸς ἀμυθήτους περὶ αὑτὸν ἔχει 
δυνάμεις. .... διὰ τούτων τῶν δυνάμεων § ἀσώματος καὶ νοητὸς 
ἐπάγη κόσμος, τὸ τοῦ φαινομένου τοῦδε ἀρχέτυπον, ἰδέαις ἀοράτοις 
συσταθείς, ὥσπερ οὗτος σώμασιν ὁρατοῖς. The παράδειγμα must be 
in existence before the organization of the sensible world begins, 
and is therefore rightly mentioned at this point. Compare Philo 
De opif. mundi 4. 16—10. 36, where the ‘first day’ of creation in 
Genesis is explained as meaning the creation of the νοητὸς κόσμος." 
The prophet now sees that the ‘Light’ is not uniform and 
homogeneous, as it at first appeared to him tobe. Itisan organized 
whole consisting of innumerable δυνάμεις, and may therefore be 
called a κόσμος ; but it is not περιόριστος, as is the αἰσθητὸς κόσμος. 
The δυνάμεις of which it consists are, in one aspect, the Platonic 
ἰδέαι, 1. 6. the παραδείγματα of the several parts of the sensible 
world ; but inasmuch as the ἰδέαι are ‘ thoughts which God thinks’, 
these same δυνάμεις are, in another aspect, parts of God himself, 
and the whole which is made up of them is the ‘Light’ which 
stands for God. ‘God thinks himself’ (ἑαυτὸν νοεῖ), as Aristotle 
said; and in the view of the writer of Corp. I, as in that of 
Plotinus, the divine νοῦς and the sum of its νοητά are identical. 
Compare the doctrine of the Docetae, in Hippol. Ref. haer. 8.9: 
κεκόσμητο μὲν ‘dvevdeys' (ἀνενδεῶς) πᾶσα ἡ νοητὴ φύσις, φῶς δὲ 
1 Philo retains the form of the Mosaic narrative, in which the creation is described 


as a series of events in time, though he is aware that in reality the νοητὸς κόσμος is 
not in time, and cannot have begun to be. 


28 CORPVS HERMETICVM 


ἦν ἅπαντα ἐκεῖνα τὰ νοητὰ καὶ αἰώνια, φῶς δὲ οὐκ ἄμορφον οὐδὲ 
ἀργόν, οὐδὲ οἱονεί τινος ἐπιποιοῦντος δεόμενον" ἀλλὰ ἔχον ἐν ἑαυτῷ... 
ἀπείρους ἰδέας ζῴων τῶν ἐκεῖ πολυποικίλων, κατέλαμψεν ἄνωθεν εἰς τὸ 
ὑποκείμενον χάος. τὸ δέ, φωτισθὲν ὁμοῦ καὶ μορφωθὲν ἐκείναις ἄνωθεν 
ταῖς πολυποικίλοις ἰδέαις, πῆξιν ἔλαβε, καὶ ἀνεδέξατο τὰς ἰδέας τὰς 
ἄνωθεν ἁπάσας. 

[καὶ περισχέσθαι τὸ ROP: wy ὦ 5 κρατούμενον.})] This has nothing 
to do with the νοητὸς κόσμος; it is evidently a misplaced fragment 
of the account of the formation of the αἰσθητὸς κόσμος, which begins 
at ὃ 8b cuit. 

ταῦτα δὲ ἐγὼ διενοήθην ὁρῶν διὰ τὸν τοῦ Ποιμάνδρου λόγον. διενοήθην 
ὁρῶν is equivalent to θεωρῶ ἐν τῷ vot pov above, The ‘intelligible 
world’ can be ‘seen “only with the eye of the mind, The λόγος 
(‘speech ’) of Poimandres, which caused the prophet to see it, is the 
preceding command, νόει τὸ φῶς καὶ γνώριζε τοῦτο. We might rather 
have expected to be told that he saw it διὰ τὴν τοῦ Ποιμάνδρου 
ἀντώπησιν. But we may understand that the λόγος and the ἀντώ- 
πησις Operated together; the command worked like a spell, and its 
power was supplemented by the gaze. 

§ 8a, Εἶδες ἐν τῷ νῷ τὸ ἀρχέτυπον εἶδος, τὸ προάρχον τῆς ἀρχῆς, τὸ 
ἀπέραντον (τῆς ἀπεράντου MSS.). The word ἀρχή is to be understood 
as in Gen. 1. 1, ἐν ἀρχῇ ἐποίησεν ὁ θεὺς τὸν οὐρανὸν καὶ τὴν γῆν. The 
intelligible world was in existence before God began to make the 
sensible world out of formless ὕλη. There is no meaning in saying 
that the ‘beginning’ of the sensible world was ἀπέραντος ; but as 
an epithet of the νοητὸς κόσμος, the word ἀπέραντος may be under- 
stood in the same sense AS ἀπεριόριστος above. Simon Magus called 
the supreme God τὴν μεγάλην δύναμιν, τὴν ἀπέραντον (Hippol. Ref. 
λαόν, 6. 9). 

§ 8b. (τὰ) στοιχεῖα τῆς φύσεως πόθεν ὑπέστη; . . Ἐκ βουλῆς 
θεοῦ, ἥτις [λαβοῦσα τὸν λόγον"]] [καὶ] ἰδοῦσα τὸν καλὸν κόσμον 
ἐμιμήσατο, The ‘physical’ (i.e, material) elements are fire, air 
water, and earth, out of which the αἰσθητὸς κόσμος is constructed, 
The first stage in its making is the formation of these four elements 
by differentiation out of the watery chaos. The writer uses the 
word φύσις to signify the material universe. The καλὸς κόσμος is 
the νοητὸς κόσμος. The βουλὴ θεοῦ, by which the αἰσθητὸς κόσμος 
is made after the model of the νοητὸς κόσμος, corresponds to the 
πρόνοια θεοῦ of the Stoics, and the βούλησις or θέλημα τοῦ θεοῦ 
spoken of in some of the Hermetica, Its function is the same as that 








LIBELLVS I: δὲ 7-8b, 5b. 29 


of the creative λόγος of God in the writer’s Jewish authorities (cf. 
Ps. 32 (33). 6, τῷ λόγῳ τοῦ κυρίου οἱ οὐρανοὶ ἐστερεώθησαν and Philo 
Legg. alleg. 3. 31. 96, quoted above); but having adopted the terms 
λόγος and βουλή from different sources, the author of Cor. I does 
not himself identify them. He here personifies the βουλὴ θεοῦ for 
the moment ; but the personification is hardly more than a literary 
figure, and God’s βουλή does not take part as a person in the mythical 
events which follow, as the λόγος does, 

It is difficult to find any meaning in the statement that God’s 
βουλή ‘took’ or ‘received’ the λόγος ; and it seems best to assume 
that in the original text the phrase λαβοῦσα τὸν λόγον was applied 
to the ὑγρὰ φύσις, and was intended to refer back to λόγος ἅγιος 
ἐπέβη τῇ (ὑγρᾷ) φύσει ἴῃ ὃ 5a. The λόγος ‘took its stand upon’ 
the watery substance; and the watery substance, having thus 
‘received the Adyos’, was developed into an ordered world. Com- 
pare ὃ τι Ὁ, οὐ yap ἔτι εἶχε τὸν λόγον (ἡ φύσις). 

ἐκοσμοποιήθη, διακριθέντων ἐξ αὐτῆς τῶν στοιχείων, ἐξ ὧν καὶ τὸ 
γέννημα τῶν ἐμψύχων.---(κοσμοποιηθεῖσα διὰ τῶν ἑαυτῆς στοιχείων καὶ 
γεννημάτων ψυχῶν Μ55.), The traditional text is mere nonsense ; and 
I have rewritten it so as to express what I suppose to have been 
the author’s meaning. It is to be presumed that he here spoke of 
the two stages of the κοσμοποιία, viz. (1) the separation of the 
elements, and (2) the production of living creatures from the separated 
elements. The second of these two stages is the process described 
in ὃ 11 Ὁ. 

ὃ 5D. καὶ (yap) πῦρ. . , κρέμασθαι αὐτὸν ἀπ᾽ αὐτοῦ, This 
passage, misplaced in the MSS., corresponds to the account of the 
separation of the elements in Corp. III 2a (ἀπεχωρίσθη τὰ ἐλαφρὰ 
κιτιλ.). Both writers alike have substituted for the Mosaic description 
of the separation of ‘the waters above the firmament’ from ‘the 
waters below the firmament’ a description of the separation of the 
elements which is based on the Stoic physics. 

κοῦφον δὲ ἦν καὶ ὀξύ, δραστικόν τε. Cf. Hermippus (Kroll and 
Viereck) 1, 6. 37: τὸ μὲν (πῦρ) λίαν δραστικόν, ὀξύ τε καὶ κοῦφον 
ὃν καὶ λεπτομερές. 

ἀναβαίνων [τοσοῦτον] (ἀναβαίνοντος αὐτοῦ MSS.) μέχρι τοῦ πυρός. 
If τοσοῦτον is the right reading, it must mean ‘only so far’; the 
air rose till it reached the fire above, but no farther. But as this 
meaning is sufficiently expressed by μέχρι τοῦ πυρός, it is probable 
that τοσοῦτον has been added by a later hand. 


3° CORPVS HERMETICVM 


ὡς δοκεῖν κρέμασθαι αὐτὸν ἀπ᾿ αὐτοῦ. In the parallel passage, Corp. 
ΠῚ. 2a, dvaxpéuacba occurs; but it is differently employed. In 
Corp. III, the fire is ‘suspended aloft’, and rests upon the air below 
it ; in Corg. I, the air ‘appears to be suspended from the fire’, being 
situated immediately below the fire. 

((kal περιεσχέθη (περισχέσϑαι MSS.) τὸ πῦρ δυνάμει μεγίστῃ, καὶ 
στάσιν ἔσχε (ἐσχηκέναι MSS.) κρατούμενον.) These words were 
probably suggested by the mention of a στερέωμα in connexion with 
the separation of the waters in Genesis. The meaning seems to be 
that the fire was (so to speak) solidified in the form of a firmly fixed 
sphere. The ‘mighty Power’ which operated as God’s agent in 
the fixing of the ‘firmament’ is probably the δημιουργὸς νοῦς spoken 
of in § 9, who resides in the outermost sphere of heaven (or in the 
space immediately beyond it ?), ‘encompassing’ that sphere, and 
holding it in place. But as we have not yet been told of the 
existence of the δημιουργὸς νοῦς, the writer cannot at this stage mention 
him by his proper name, and therefore merely refers to him vaguely 
as a δύναμις μεγίστη. 

γῆ δὲ καὶ ὕδωρ ἔμενε καθ᾽ ἑαυτὰ συμμεμιγμένα, Fire and air having 
been separated out from the ‘ watery substance’ of the primal chaos, 
what remained of it was a mixture of earth and water. Cf. Philo 
De opif. mundi τα. 38, Cohn I, p. 11: after the making of the 
firmament, ἐπειδὴ τὸ σύμπαν ὕδωρ εἰς ἅπασαν τὴν γῆν ἀνεκέχυτο καὶ 
διὰ πάντων αὐτῆς ἐπεφοιτήκει τῶν μερῶν, οἷα σπογγίας ἀναπεπωκυίας 
ἰκμάδα, ὡς εἶναι τέλμα[τα] καὶ βαθὺν πηλόν, ἀμφοτέρων τῶν στοιχεΐων 
ἀναδεδευμένων καὶ συγκεχυμένων τρόπον φυράματος εἰς play ἀδιάκριτον 
καὶ ἄμορφον φύσιν κιτιλ. In Philo, as in Genesis and in Corp. III, 
the separation of earth and water follows immediately; but in 
Corp. I, it does not take place (or at any rate is not mentioned in 
our text) until a later stage; see ὃ rrb. 

κινούμενα δὲ ἣν διὰ τὸν (ἐπάνω) ((τοῦ ὕδατος ἐπιφερόμενον 
πνευματικὸν λόγον. It seems certain that the word ἐπιφερόμενον was 
suggested by Gen, τ. 2, LXX (καὶ πνεῦμα θεοῦ ἐπεφέρετο ἐπάνω τοῦ 
ὕδατος) ; and as τοῦ ὕδατος makes confusion where it stands in the 
MSS., the simplest remedy is to transpose it to this place, and insert 
ἐπάνω before it, The ὕδωρ here spoken of must be the mass of 
mingled (or, more strictly speaking, still undifferentiated) earth and 
water; and this inaccurate use of the word ὕδατος can be most 
easily accounted for by assuming that the phrase was taken over 
unaltered from the Greek Genesis. The meaning must be that 








LIBELLVS I: δὲ 5b, 9. 31 


the Adyos, which, before the separation of the elements, ‘took its 
stand upon’ the undifferentiated ‘watery substance’, now hovers 
close above that portion of the watery substance which still remains 
below in the form of undifferentiated earth and water. It afterwards 
quits that position and flies up to heaven (ὃ το). For the epithet 
πνευματικός, Cf. Ps. 32 (33). 6, where τῷ πνεύματι τοῦ στόματος αὐτοῦ 
stands in parallelism with τῷ λόγῳ τοῦ κυρίου. The author must 
have meant that the λόγος consists of πνεῦμα, i.e. gaseous sub- 
stance, and ‘moves’ the watery mass below it, as the wind puts 
the surface of the sea in motion. From the Stoic point of view, 
there is no inconsistency in holding that the λόγος is a gaseous 
substance, and at the same time a living person. 

§ 9. ὁ δὲ νοῦς ὁ πρῶτος (νοῦς ὁ θεός MSS.), [[ἀρρενόθηλυς dy], 
(6) ζωὴ καὶ φῶς ὑπάρχων. ὃ πρῶτος is wanted, to stand in contrast 
to ἕτερον νοῦν below. Most likely πρῶτος was written aos, as before 
(see ὃ 6), and aos was corrupted into ὅς, i.e. θεός. Similarly below, 
where the MSS. give νοῦν δημιουργόν, ὃς Oeds . . . dy, it is probable 
that θεὸς is a corruption of Bos, i.e. δεύτερος. 

The phrase ἀρρενόθηλυς ὧν is out of place; it must have been 
intended to go with and explain ἀπεκύησεν, which is properly used 
of the mother, and not of the father. For the description of the 
supreme God as ἀρρενόθηλυς, compare Asc/. Lat. III. 20b, 2t. 

The phrase ζωὴ καὶ φῶς is repeatedly used in Corp. I as a known 
name or description of God. Compare the use of the words ζωή 
and φῶς in the Fourth Gospel.! The use of φῶς to denote God 
may have been partly due to Zoroastrian influence; and that of 
ζωή may possibly have been derived from phrases used in Egyptian 
cults. (See prefatory note on Corp. XI. i.) 

ἀπεκύησε(ν) [λόγῳ], The word λόγῳ is meaningless here. Perhaps 
Reitzenstein is right in striking it out; but how did it come to be 
inserted? Sense might be made in another way, by writing (πρὸς 
τῷ) λόγῳ, ‘in addition to the Word’. We were told before that 
the Logos is son of God; we are now told that God has another 
son also. 

ἕτερον νοῦν δημιουργόν, The writer distinguishes a first νοῦς, who is 
the supreme God, and a second νοῦς, who is the immediate ‘ Maker’ 
of the contents of the material universe. In this he agrees with 
Numenius. See Numen. af. Euseb. Praep. ev. 11. 18, quoted in 


? And in the Old Testament ; e. g. Ps. 35 (36). τὸ : παρὰ σοὶ πηγὴ ζωῆς, ἐν τῷ φωτί 
σου ὀψόμεθα φῶς. 





32 CORPVS HERMETICVM 


prefatory note on Corf. 11. Cf. Oracula Chaldaica (c. a.r. a ὃ), 
Kroll, p. 14: πάντα γὰρ ἐξετέλεσσε πατήρ, καὶ νῷ παρέδωκε δευτέρῳ, 
ὃν πρῶτον κληΐζετε πᾶν γένος ἀνδρῶν. In the Christian Gnostic 
systems also, the Demiurgus was distinguished from the supreme 
God ; and in most of them, he was enthroned (as in Corf. I) in 
or immediately above the highest sphere of the material heavens, 
But most of the Christian Gnostics insisted on the inferiority of 
the Demiurgus to the supreme God more strongly than the author 
of Corp. I does, and separated the one from the other by ἃ larger 
interval ; and some of them regarded the Demiurgus as a positively 
evil power, 

The Demiurgus-Nous of Corp. I begins his work only when the 
four elements have already been separated ; his function is to make 
the ζῷα, both ἀθάνατα (the heavenly bodies) and θνητά, with the 
exception of man, who is of different origin. The making of plants, 
which is placed before the making of the heavenly bodies in Gen, I; 
and is coupled with the making of mortal ἔῷα in Corp. III, is omitted 
in Cor, I. 

The conception of the Demiurgus-Nous, which the writer of 
Corp. I has adopted from the Platonists of his time, corresponds to 
the Judaeo-Stoic conception of the λόγος ; and one or the other is 
in reality superfluous. The author however sought to include both 
of them side by side in his system ; and finding in Gen. 1 a mention 
of ‘ the spirit of God moving on the face of the waters ’, he identified 
the λόγος with this ‘ spirit of God ’, and accordingly assigned to the 
λόγος the preliminary work of separating the elements, while he 
reserved for the Demiurgus-Nous the function of making fa. But 
he is conscious of their fundamental identity, and shows it by saying 
in § ro that the Adyos, after the completion of his task in the lower 
world, flew up to heaven, and ‘ was united with the Demiurgus-Nous 4 
for he was of one substance with him’. From that point onward, 
the two are one, 

ἐδημιούργησείν ex) ((mupds καὶ πνεύματος) διοικήτ(οργάς τινας 
ἑπτά, From the reference to this passage in ὃ 16 (τῶν ἑπτὰ... 
ods ἔφην σοι ἐκ πυρὸς καὶ πνεύματος (γεγονέναι), it may be inferred 
that the words ἐκ πυρὸς καὶ πνεύματος Originally stood where I have 
placed them. The ‘seven Governors’ are the planets. The Stoics 
said that the moon consists of a mixture of fire and air, and the 


1 The Demiurgus-Nous corresponds in some respects to the supreme God of the 
Stoics ; and the Stoics located their supreme God in the highest sphere of heaven, 








LIBELLVS I: δ 9, 10 33 


other six planets, of fire alone.’ But the author of Cor. I says 
that all seven are made of ‘fire and pneuma’; and this presumably 
means that they are all alike made of fire and air in combination. 
The Stoic πνεῦμα was commonly regarded as a mixture of fire and 
air; but when the word πνεῦμα is so used as to exclude an inter- 
mixture of fire, it must be taken to mean air. πνεῦμα means the 
element air in Pl Phiéed. 294. Cf. Hippol. Ref. haer. 4. 43 (quoted 
in note on ὃ 17 below) and Corp. III. 2a. 

This paragraph corresponds to Gen. 1. 14—19 (‘God said, Let there 
be lights in the firmament... to rule over the day and over the 
night’ &c.), and to Corp. III. 2 Ὁ (διηρθρώθη (ἡ πυρίνη οὐσία) σὺν 
τοῖς ἐν αὐτῇ θεοῖς κ.τ.λ.). 

ἡ διοίκησις αὐτῶν εἱμαρμένη καλεῖται. The notion that Heimar- 
mene is brought to bear on things below by the movements of the 
heavenly bodies occurs repeatedly in the Hermetica. Cf. Corp. XVI. 
16: ταύτην δὲ τὴν διοίκησιν (sc. the administration of the sublunar 
world by the planets, through the agency of their subordinates the 
daemons) Ἑρμῆς εἱμαρμένην ἐκάλεσεν. Herm. ap. Stob. Zxc. XII. 2: 
ὅπλον γὰρ εἱμαρμένης οἱ ἀστέρες κιτιλ. Corp. 111. 4: πρὸς μοῖραν 
δρομήματος (ἐγγκυκλίων θεῶν. The writer of Corp. I says nothing 
about the fixed stars, and takes into account the influence of the 
planets alone. 

εἱμαρμένη is a Stoic term. The identification of Heimarmene 
with the operation of the heavenly bodies is characteristic rather of 
the later Stoicism. 

§ 10. ἐπήδησεν εὐθὺς ἐκ τῶν κατωφερῶν στοιχείων ((τῆς φύσεως) 
[rod θεοῦ] ὁ τοῦ θεοῦ λόγος εἰς τὸ καθαρὸν [[τῆς φύσεως] δημιούρ- 
γῆμα. τὰ κατωφερῆ στοιχεῖα (a Stoic term) signifies the two heavy 
elements, earth and water. τοῦ θεοῦ has been duplicated by error, 
and τῆς φύσεως has been transposed. Cf. § 8b: τὰ στοιχεῖα τῆς 
φύσεως πόθεν ὑπέστη; The καθαρὸν δημιούργημα is the material 
heaven, which has just been organized by the Demiurgus-Nous. 
It is καθαρόν, because free from any intermixture of the grosser 
elements. The heavens apparently consist of fire alone, though 
their inhabitants, the planets, are made of a mixture of fire 
and air. 


1 Chrysippus, in Arius Didymus, Diels Doxogr. p. 458: διὰ (τῶν τεττάρων 
στοιχείων) τινὸς ἢ τινῶν ἢ καὶ πάντων τὰ λοιπὰ συνέστηκε" διὰ μὲν τῶν τεττάρων, ὡς 
-.. τὰ ἐπὶ γῆς πάντα συγκρίματα' διὰ δυοῖν δέ, ὡς ἡ σελήνη διὰ πυρὸς καὶ ἀέρος 
συνέστηκε" δι᾽ ἑνὸς δέ, ὡς ὁ ἥλιοτ' -.. ὁ γὰρ ἥλιος πῦρ ἐστιν εἰλικρινές. 


2806-2 D 4 got Ce, 





34 CORPVS HERMETICVM 


ὁμοούσιος γὰρ ἦν. The word ὁμοούσιος was in use before it was 
brought into prominence by the disputes with which the Council 
of Nicaea was concerned. Plotinus 4. 7. το: διὰ συγγένειαν καὶ τὸ 
ὁμοούσιον. It occurs repeatedly in Gnostic documents quoted by 
Hippol. Ref. haer. (A. D. 220-230), e.g. 5. 17. 

The Logos and the Demiurgus-Nous are ‘of one substance’ 3 but 
is that substance material or immaterial? If the author had been 
asked that question, he might have been puzzled how to answer 
it. The phrase τὸν πνευματικὸν λόγον in ὃ 5b fiz, seems to imply 
that the Logos is material; and in stirring the watery mass, it 
operates like a wind. But on the other hand, the Demiurgus-Nous 
is presumably of the same substance as his parent the supreme 
Nous, who is ζωὴ καὶ φῶς ; and though φῶς in the literal sense is a 
material thing, the ζωὴ καὶ φῶς of this document is clearly not 
αἰσθητόν, but νοητύν. The truth is that the author has not completely 
succeeded in harmonizing the Stoic and Platonic conceptions which 
he has adopted. When speaking of λόγος, he speaks as a Stoic, 
and therefore as one who assumes all things to be material; when 
speaking of νοῦς, he speaks as a Platonist, and regards Mind as 
incorporeal. 

§ 11a. ὁ δὲ δημιουργὸς νοῦς σὺν τῷ λόγῳ, [6] περιίσχων τοὺς 
κύκλους καὶ δινῶν ῥοίζῳ, ἔστρεψε τὰ ἑαυτοῦ δημιουργήματα. The 
δημιουργήματα of the Demiurgus-Nous are the planets (and pre- 
sumably the fixed stars also, though the latter have not been expressly 
mentioned). He ‘encompasses’ the spheres in which the planets 
are fixed; for his abode is in (or immediately beyond) the outer- 
most sphere. On the arrival of the Logos, who henceforward ‘is 
united with him’ and co-operates with him, he sets in motion the 
planets which he has fashioned, and makes them move in circular 
orbits. The mention of the λόγος in this connexion is perhaps 
intended to suggest that the movements of the heavenly bodies are 
‘rational ’, 

εἴασε στρέφεσθαὶ dn’ ἀρχῆς ἀορίστου εἰς ἀπέραντον τέλος" ἄρχεται 
γὰρ οὗ λήγει ἡ [δὲ] τούτων περιφορά. The movement is circular, 
and therefore everlasting; for a circle has no terminal point. Cf, 
Ascl, Lat. 111. 40b: ‘sic est enim rotundita(ti)s volubilis ratio, ut 
ita sibi coartata sint cuncta, ut initium quod sit volubilitatis ignores.’ 
The phrase ἄρχεται of λήγει is not quite accurate ; for there is no 
point at which the movement ‘ceases’. But the writer’s meaning 
is that any point in the orbit may be considered the end of a circuit, 








LIBELLVS I: §§ 10o-11b 35 


but that, if thus regarded, it must at the same time be regarded as 
the beginning of a fresh circuit. 

The words ἀπ᾿ ἀρχῆς ἀορίστου seem to imply that the movement 
οἵ the heavenly bodies is not only without end, but also without 
beginning ; yet we have just been told that it Aas had a beginning. 
Perhaps what is here said about circular movement was taken over 
unaltered from an Aristotelian source, in which the movement of 
the heavens was assumed to be without beginning, as well as with- 
out end. 

πὶ. (ἡ δὲ φύσις), καθὼς ἠθέλησεν ὁ νοῦς, ἐκ τῶν κατωφερῶν 
στοιχείων ζῷα ἤνεγκεν ἄλογα. This paragraph corresponds to Gen. 
τ. 20-25, and to Corp. III. 3a. Having described the making of 
the heavenly bodies (τὰ ἀθάνατα ζῷα), the writer proceeds to describe 
the making of ra θνητὰ ζῷα. 

The subject of the sentence has been lost ; but the context makes 
it almost certain that it was ἡ φύσις. ‘Nature’ (i.e. either the force 
which operates in the sublunar world, or the sublunar world itself, 
_ regarded as a living agent,) brought forth animals ‘according to the 
will of νοῦς. The νοῦς here spoken of must be the Demiurgus-Nous, 
since in § 12 éniZ. (6 δὲ πάντων πατὴρ νοῦς κιτ.λ.) the supreme Nous 
is contrasted with it ; and as ὁ νοῦς without qualification is ambiguous, 
it may be suspected that some qualifying word (δημιουργός or δεύτερος) 
has been lost before νοῦς. The Demiurgus-Nous, being stationed 
in the highest heaven, does not directly act in his own person in 
the sublunar world; but he gives orders to φύσις, and by her his 
will is executed. Thus the words (ἡ φύσις), καθὼς ἠθέλησεν ὃ 
(δημιουργὸς) νοῦς, ἐκ τῶν κατωφερῶν στοιχείων ζῷα ἤνεγκεν κιτιλ. 
correspond to ‘God said, Let the earth bring forth’ &c. in Gen. τ, 
and to ἀνῆκε δὲ ἕκαστος θεὸς (i.e. each of the lower elements) τὸ 
προσταχθὲν αὐτῷ κιτιλ. in Corp. III. In the κατωφερῇ στοιχεῖα air is 
here included as well as water and earth 3 all three are ‘downward- 
tending’ as compared with fire. 

ἄλογα" οὐ γὰρ ἔτι εἶχε (sc. ἡ φύσις) τὸν λόγον. The Logos has 
quitted the sublunar world. His departure has left the sublunar 
world devoid of ‘reason’; and the animals which φύσις produces 
there are consequently ‘irrational’. The word λόγος here means 
‘the faculty of reason’, by the absence of which beasts are dis- 
tinguished from men. In §§ 5a and 6, it rather meant God’s 
‘speech’, i, 6. his creative fa‘; but the writer may have been hardly 
conscious that he was using it in different senses. The ἄλογα ζῷα 

D2 


36 CORPVS HERMETICVM 


are ‘the animals which have not reason’; but they are also ‘the 
animals which cannot talk’. 

διεκεχώριστο (διακεχώρισται MSS.) δὲ ἀπ᾽ ἀλλήλων ἥ τε γῆ καὶ τὸ 
ὕδωρ. As we were told in § 5b that earth and water ‘remained 
intermingled’, it was necessary for the writer to mention their 
separation at the point where he speaks of the different kinds of 
animals which earth and water respectively produced, if he had not 
mentioned it before. But in this position, the clause interrupts the 
narrative of the zoogonia by an awkward parenthesis; and it is 
possible that it has been misplaced, and ought to stand earlier. 
With the substitution of διεχωρίσθη for διακεχώρισται, it might be put 
at the beginning of ὃ 11 b, before ἡ δὲ φύσις κιτιλ. 

ἱκαθὼς ἠθέλησεν ὁ νοῦς] As there is no apparent reason for 
repeating these words here, I take them to be a misplaced doublet 
of καθὼς... νοῦς above. 

καὶ ἐξήνεγκεν (ἡ γῆν [ἀπ᾽ αὐτῆς ἃ εἶχε! ζῷα τετράποδα (καὶ) ἑρπετά, 
θηρία ἄγρια καὶ ἥμερα. I can make nothing of the words ἀπ᾽ αὐτῆς ἃ 
εἶχε. (Is ἃ εἶχε a corruption of ἀνῆκε, an alternative for ἐξήνεγκεν ?) 
The rest of the sentence closely resembles Gen. τ. 24f.: καὶ εἶπεν ὃ 
θεός ᾿Εξαγαγέτω ἡ γῇ... τετράποδα καὶ ἑρπετὰ καὶ θηρία τῆς γῆς κατὰ 
γένος. . .. καὶ ἐποίησεν ὃ θεὸς τὰ θηρία... καὶ τὰ κτήνη... καὶ πάντα 
τὰ ἑρπετά, (Cf. Gen. 1. 12: καὶ ἐξήνεγκεν ἡ γῆ βοτάνην κ-τ.λ.) 

With the making of the irrational animals, the demiurgia in the 
narrower sense of the word is completed ; and it only remains to 
explain the origin of man. The genesis of man is the climax in 
which the whole process of creation culminates, just as in Gen. τ and 
in Corp. III. In his account of the origin of man, the writer is 
still influenced by the Jewish Genesis ; but this part of his doctrine, 
though partly based on that of Genesis, has been developed into 
something which differs widely from it. 

§ 12. ὁ δὲ πάντων πατὴρ [[6}} νοῦς, ((6)) ὧν ζωὴ καὶ φῶς, ἀπεκύησεν 
ἄνθρωπον αὑτῷ (ὅμγοιον (ἴσον MSS.). The rest of the ζῷα, both 
ἀθάνατα and θνητά, were made by the ‘second God’, the Demiurgus- 
Nous. But man is of a different and higher origin. He is no mere 
product of nature; he is son of the supreme God, and peer of the — 
second God. And though he has fallen from his high estate, and is 
now sunk in matter, he has before him the prospect of returning to 
his true home above, and resuming his lost glory. 

In the myth which here begins, the human race is represented by 
a person named Anthropos, who is the archetype and the ancestor of 
mankind, 








LIBELLVS I: §§ 11b, 12 37 


The author cannot have said that Man, even before his fall, was 
‘ equal’ (ἴσος) to the supreme God. ‘There cannot be two supreme 
Gods; and it is evident from the contents of Cor#. I as a whole that 
the Anthropos is ποῦ equal to ‘the Father of all’. The right word is 
ὅμοιον :' cf. Gen. τ. 26, ποιήσωμεν ἄνθρωπον κατ᾽ εἰκόνα ἡμετέραν Kal 
καθ᾽ ὁμοίωσιν. The word ὅμοιον may have lost its first two letters 
and been changed into ἴσον by mere accident ; or a Christian reader 
may have bethought him of the doctrine that God the Son is ‘ equal 
to the Father as touching his Godhead’, and tried to introduce it 
here by substituting ἴσον for ézouov,—though very inappropriately, as 
the Anthropos of Cor#. I has little resemblance to the Second Person 
of the Christian Trinity. 

The Anthropos of Corg. I is ‘like his Father’ in this respect 
among others, that he is ἀρρενόθηλυς. (ὃ 15.) It would be possible 
for one who held this doctrine to find support for it in Gen, 1. 27: 
ἐποίησεν ὃ θεὸς τὸν ἄνθρωπον" κατ᾽ εἰκόνα θεοῦ ἐποίησεν αὐτόν᾽ ἄρσεν 
καὶ θῆλυ ἐποίησεν αὐτούς. If a reader could persuade himself that 
αὐτούς is here equivalent to αὐτόν, he might take these words to mean 
that the first ἄνθρωπος was ἀρσενόθηλυς, like God who made him. 
Cf. Sir Thomas Browne, ed. Wilkin, vol. ii, p. 469: ‘Plato, and 
some of the Rabbins, . .. conceived the first man an hermaphrodite ; 
and Marcus Leo, the learned Jew, in some sense hath allowed it; 
affirming that Adam, in one suppositum, contained both male and 
female. And therefore, when it is said in the text, that “God 
created man in his own image, in the image of God created he him, 
male and female created he them”: applying the singular and plural 
unto Adam, it might denote that in one substance and in himself he 
included both sexes, which was after divided, and the female called 
woman,’ 

οὗ ἠγάσθη (ἠράσθη MSS.) ds ἰδίου τόκου" περικαλλὴς γὰρ (iv), τὴν τοῦ 
πατρὸς εἰκόνα ἔχων. A father is not ‘enamoured of’ his son; and 
ἠράσθη is undoubtedly a corruption of ἠγάσθη. (CE. ἠγάσθησαν in 
§ 13a.) It is only in the relation between “AvOpwaos and Φύσις (ὃ 14) 
that ἔρως is brought into action in the writer’s mythical narrative. 
The language of this passage is partly borrowed from Pl. Zim. 37 : 
ὡς δὲ κινηθὲν αὐτὸ (se. τὸν κόσμονῚ καὶ ζῶν ἐνόησε... ὃ γεννήσας πατήρ, 

1 If we were to retain ἴσον, it would be necessary to substitute for αὑτῷ some term 
denoting the second God. But that would involve a larger alteration of the text. 

® For the statement that ‘the first man was bisexual’, Bousset, Hauptprobleme 


der Gnosis, p. 198, refers to Bereshith Rabba cap. 8 on Gen. τ. 26; Bamidbar R. 
cap. 14; and Berachoth 61 a. 


38 CORPVS HERMETICVM 


ἠγάσθη τε καὶ εὐφρανθεὶς κιτιλ. But in the Timaeus, the son in whom 
the father ‘takes delight’ is the Kosmos.’ In Corp. I, the son 
spoken of is Man; but the writer has transferred to the relation 
between God and Man the terms used by Plato to describe the 
relation between God and the Kosmos. And there is another 
difference. In the Zimaeus, the son (viz. the αἰσθητὸς κόσμος) is 
made in the likeness, not of the Father, but of the νοητὸς κόσμος; 
but in Corp. I, the son (viz. Man) ‘bears the image’ of the Father 
himself. The words τὴν τοῦ πατρὸς εἰκόνα ἔχων were doubtless 
suggested by κατ᾽ εἰκόνα θεοῦ in Gen. τ. 26 ἢ, 

The same sentence of the Zimaeus is imitated in Asc?, Lat. 1.8: 
ἠγάσθη τε καὶ πάνυ ἐφίλησεν ὡς ἴδιον τόκον. (The son is there the 
Kosmos, as in Pl, Tim.) Another reminiscence of the Platonic 
passage occurs in Basilides, Hippol. Ref. Aaer. 7-23: the Demiurgus 
(not the supreme God) ἠξίωσε μὴ εἶναι μόνος, ἀλλὰ ἐποίησεν ἑαυτῷ καὶ 
ἐγέννησεν ἐκ τῶν ὑποκειμένων υἱὸν ἑαυτοῦ πολὺ κρείττονα καὶ σοφώτερον. 
εαν ἰδὼν οὖν τὸν υἱὸν ἐθαύμασε καὶ ἠγάπησε καὶ κατεπλάγη" τοιοῦτον γάρ 
τι κάλλος ἐφαίνετο υἱοῦ τῷ μεγάλῳ ἄρχοντι. 

καὶ παρέδωκεν αὐτῷ πάντα τὰ δημιουργήματα.---(καὶ παρέδωκε τὰ ἕαυ- 
τοῦ πάντα δημιουργήματα MSS.) The reading τὰ ἑαυτοῦ... δημιουργή- 
para, ‘the things which he himself (se. the supreme God) had made’, 
cannot be right; for it is not the supreme God, but the second God, 
that is called ὁ δημιουργός in Corp, I. 

As to the statement that God delivered over to Man ‘all things 
that had been made’, see note on ἔχων πᾶσαν ἐξουσίαν in § 14. 

§ 1g a. (6 δέ.) (γενόμενος ἐν τῇ δημιουργικῇ opaipa,)) ((κατενόησε τοῦ 
ἀδελφοῦ τὰ δημιουργήματαν) ((τοῦ ἐπικειμένου ἐπὶ τοῦ πυρός). [καὶ] 
κατανοήσας δὲ κιτιλ, This paragraph is in great confusion. I have 
rewritten it freely, by way of an attempt to make it express what the 
author presumably meant; but there is little hope of restoring his 
actual words. We should expect to be told where Anthropos was, 
before we are told what he did 3 Ihave therefore placed γενόμενος ἐν τῇ 
δημιουργικῇ σφαίρᾳ at the beginning. And κατενόησε x.t.d. ought to 
precede κατανοήσας δὲ κιτιλ. The ‘demiurgic sphere’ is the sphere in 
which the Demiurgus-Nous resides, i.e. the highest sphere of heaven ; 
and it is there that Anthropos also took up his abode when he first 
came into being. The ‘brother’ of Anthropos is the Demiurgus- 
Nous, both of them being sons of the supreme Nous; and ὁ ἐπικεί- 


? A similar thought is expressed in Gen. 1.31: ἴδεν 5 θεὸς τὰ πάντα ὅσα ἐποίησεν, 
καὶ ἰδοὺ καλὰ λίαν. 








LIBELLVS I: §§ 12, 13a 39 


ἐπὶ τοῦ πυρός, ‘he who is set over the region of fire (i.e. the 
heavens) ’, must also be the Demiurgus-Nous, who, as we were told 
before, ‘ encompasses’ the region of fire, and has made and governs 
the inhabitants of that region, viz. the planets. The word κατανοῆσαι, 
which follows rod ἐπικειμένου ἐπὶ τοῦ πυρός where that phrase stands 
jn the MSS., may perhaps be a miswriting of κατανοήσας, which 
follows τοῦ ἐπικειμένου ἐπὶ τοῦ πυρός at the place to which I have 
transposed it. 

κατανοήσας δὲ τὴν τοῦ δημιουργοῦ κτίσιν ἐν τῷ πυρί {πατρί MSS.), 
ἠβουλήθη καὶ αὐτὸς δημιουργεῖν. ‘The creation of the Demiurgus- 
Nous in the region of fire’ is the making of the planets. Anthropos 
observes that the Demiurgus-Nous has made immortal {a in the 
heavens; and he seeks to emulate his brother, and produce a race 
of {ga on his own account. He executes this design by generating 
mankind.! The design must have been innocent in itself; for it 
was permitted (συνεχωρήθη) by the supreme God. But it was 
executed amiss. Perhaps we are meant to understand that Anthropos, 
being ἀρσενόθηλυς, might and should have produced a race of living 
beings from himself alone. His descendants would then have been 
free from the contamination of ὕλη; they would have been, like 
their parent, incorporeal,—soul without body, or νοῦς without 
αἴσθησις; and as such, they would have been immortal. But he 
was misled by ἔρως, and fell into the error of uniting himself with 
φύσις. Hence his descendants have in them the ‘darkness and 
death’ which comes from their mother, φύσις (that is to say, from 
ὕλη), as well as the ‘life and light” which comes to them from their 
father, the Anthropos. They are ‘double’; and though immortal 
in respect of one part of their twofold nature, they are mortal in 
respect of the other part. This is our prophet's version of the 
Mosaic story of ‘ the fall of man’, 

( . .) ((πᾶσαν ἐνέργειαν ἐν ἑαυτῴῷ ἔχοντα τῶν διοικητόρων") 
οἱ δὲ ἠγάσθησαν αὐτοῦ. I have placed the words πᾶσαν . . 
διοικητόρων here, because they are clearly out of place where they 
stand in the MSS., and when transposed to this position, they serve 
to supply the needed antecedent to οἱ δέ, which undoubtedly means 
the planets. But something has been lost before them. In the 

1 This appears to be the writer’s meaning ; for we are not told that Anthropos 
‘made’ anything except his own descendants ; and indeed, there was nothing else 
left for him to make. The verb γεννᾶν is frequently used as an equivalent for 


ποιεῖν or δημιουργεῖν (e.g. in Pl. Zim. passinz); and here δημιουργεῖν seems to 
mean generare. Cf, Corp. 11. 17 a: πατρὸς γὰρ τὸ ποιεῖν. 





40 CORPVS HERMETICVM 


issi writer must have said that Anthropos descended 
Se sphere’, and associated with the planets in-the 
lower spheres of heaven. 

ἕκαστος δὲ μετεδίδου τῆς ἰδίας φύσεως (τάξεως MSS.). τάξεως is 
meaningless; and from the words μεταλαβὼν τῆς αὐτῶν φύσεως in 
the following sentence, it may be inferred that the author here wrote 
φύσεως, or something equivalent to it, Cf. ἔχοντος γὰρ αὐτοῦ... 
τῶν ἑπτὰ τὴν φύσιν in ὃ 16. 

This statement is explained by § 25, in which we are told that 
the human soul, in the course of its ascent to God, renders up to 
each of the planets one of the evil πάθη which cleaved to it during 
its residence on earth. The process spoken of in § 13 a must be the 
reverse of this; and the things which Anthropos receives from the 
planets in the course of his descent must be the same things which 
the soul gives back to the planets in the course of its ascent, viz, 
the evil πάθη. The planets are ἐμπαθεῖς ;* and in his association 
with the planets, Anthropos receives from each of them the special 
kind of πάθος which belongs to it. This is the first stage in the 
process of his degradation or corruption, and the cause of the 
disastrous event which follows, 

δ 18 Ὁ. καταμαθὼν τὴν τούτων οὐσίαν. What is the point of saying 
that Anthropos ‘learnt the being’ of the planets? Perhaps it is 
implied that he now came to know (and experience) the evil πάθη 
which are inherent in the substance of the planets, whereas hitherto 
he had known good alone, If 50, we might compare ‘the tree of 
the knowledge of good and evil’ in Gen. 2. 

ἠβουλήθη ἀναρρῆξαι τὴν περιφέρειαν τῶν κύκλων, The fiery firma- 
ment has been fashioned by the Demiurgus-Nous into a series of 
concentric spheres,—the sphere of the fixed stars, and the seven 
spheres of the planets; and as Anthropos has had dealings with all 
the planets in succession, we must suppose him to have arrived at 
the lowest of the celestial spheres, that of the moon. The lunar 
sphere is the barrier between the heavens and the sublunar world ; 
and he now seeks to break through this barrier, and enter into 
communication with what lies below it, We are not told that shis 


planets. 








LIBELLVS I: §§ 188-14 41 


design was approved by God ; and it seems to be at this point that 
the overt error or sin of Anthropos begins. 

§ 14. [6 τοῦ τῶν θνητῶν κόσμου Kai τῶν ἀλόγων ζῴων ἔχων πᾶσαν 
ἐξουσίαν.) This is probably a reminiscence of Gen. 1. 26-28: 
ἀρχέτωσαν (οἱ ἄνθρωποι) τῶν ἰχθύων τῆς θαλάσσης καὶ τῶν πετείνων 
τοῦ οὐρανοῦ καὶ τῶν κτηνῶν καὶ πάσης τῆς γῆς καὶ πάντων τῶν 
ἑρπετῶν τῶν ἑρπόντων ἐπὶ τῆς γῆς... . καὶ κατακυριεύσατε αὐτῆς, 
καὶ ἄρχετε x.7.4. Here, the dominion of man over τὰ ἐπίγεια alone 
is spoken of, as in Gew, τ. But elsewhere, the author says that God 
has given man dominion or authority over τὰ οὐράνια also. ὃ 12 fin. : 
παρέδωκεν αὐτῷ πάντα τὰ δημιουργήματα. ὃ 15: πάντων τὴν ἐξουσίαν 
ἔχων. 8.32 ἤη. : παρέδωκας αὐτῷ τὴν πᾶσαν ἐξουσίαν. Cf. Ascl. Lat. 
I. 6a: ‘omnia illi licent’ (= πάντων ἐξουσίαν ἔχει). The true man (i, 6. 
the νοῦς in man, or the man who has got gzosis) is superior to 
the whole material universe; or in other words, he is ‘above 
Heimarmene’. 

These phrases resemble Ma/th. 28.18: ἐδόθη μοι πᾶσα ἐξουσία 
ἐν οὐρανῷ καὶ ἐπὶ γῆς. But there is no reason to think that the 
author of Corp, I borrowed from the First Gospel, or vice versa; the 
truth is rather that each of the two writers independently adopted 
a current phrase. The words are differently applied ; in Corp. I the 
ἐξουσία is given to Man (and, by implication, to every ‘illuminated’ 
man), but in Zv, Ma?¢h. it is given to Jesus. 

It might perhaps θὲ possible to retain the words ὁ rod τῶν θνητῶν 
κατιλ, where they stand in § 14, if we wrote ὡς in place of 6; but 
they are hardly to the point in this connexion, and it seems more 
likely that they have been shifted from some other position. 

διὰ τῆς ἁρμονίας παρέκυψεν, ἀναρρήξας τὸ κύτος (κράτος MSS.). 
For κύτος in the sense of ‘the cosmic sphere’, cf. Pap. mag. Par. i. 
1119: χαῖρε τὸ πνεῦμα τὸ διῆκον ἀπὸ οὐρανοῦ ἐπὶ γῆν, καὶ ἀπὸ γῆς 
τῆς ἐν μέσῳ κύτ(ελι τοῦ κόσμου ἄχρι τῶν περάτων τῆς ἀβύσσου (ie. 
of space). Jb, 2828 (to the Moon-goddess) : ἡ πολυχώρητον "da pov 
vores! (lege κόσμου κύτος) ἀμφιέπουσα. 

Anthropos broke a hole in the lowest sphere of heaven, and looked 
down through the opening. The ἁρμονία is the structure of the 
heavens. The writer seems to have adopted the Pythagorean phrase 


1 Moffatt, Zheology of the Gospels, p. 156, says ‘the phrase in Matth, 28. 18, 
“All ἐξουσία is given to me in heaven and on earth ”, is an echo of the Danielic 
prediction that “ there was given to him (i.e. the Son of Man) dominion and glory 
and a kingdom”’, 


42 CORPVS HERMETICVM 


‘the harmony of the spheres’; but he employs it in an altered 
sense. He is thinking, not of music, but rather of carpentry ; the 
heavens are compared to the framework of a roof or dome fitted 
together by a builder. 

καὶ ἔδειξε τῇ κατωφερεῖ φύσει (τὴν κατωφερῆ φύσιν MSS.) τὴν καλὴν 
τοῦ θεοῦ μορφήν. The writer uses φύσις in the sense of the material 
universe as a whole, or the sum of the four στοιχεῖα ; and accordingly, 
ἡ κατωφερὴς φύσις Means τὰ κατωφερῇ στοιχεῖα, i.e, earth and water, 
or (if we include air also under τὰ κατωφερῇ στοιχεῖα, as in § τα b,) the 
sublunar world, But in the writer’s myth or allegory, this φύσις is 
personified, and is pictured in the form of a woman. The καλὴ τοῦ 
θεοῦ μορφή is the ‘likeness of God’ borne by the Anthropos. 

The imagery of this paragraph was probably suggested, in part at 
least, by the story of the fall of Adam. (‘The woman gave me of the 
tree, and I did eat’; and ‘in the day that thou eatest thereof thou 
shalt surely die’.) As the conception of Anthropos in Corp. I has 
been developed out of the Adam of Genesis, it may very well be that 
the part played by Φύσις in the fall of Anthropos is the writer’s 
version of the part played by Eve in the fall of Adam. It is true 
that in the Mosaic narrative itself the temptation to which Adam 
yielded is not said to be that of sexual desire ; but in interpretations 
of the story which were commonly accepted by Jews and Christians 
at the time when Οὐ. I was written, the sexual motive was brought 
to the front, and the sin of Adam was held to consist in giving way 
to sexual impulse.' Philo (De ofif. mundi 56. 157 ff.) explains the 
Mosaic story as an allegory, in which Adam stands for νοῦς, Eve for 
αἴσθησις, and the serpent for ἡδονή; " and thus interpreted, it has 
much in common with the account of the relation between” AvOpw:ros 
and Φύσις in Corp. 1. But Pagan myths of the marriage of Heaven 
and Earth under various names (Uranos and Gaia, Zeus and Hera, 
&c.) may also have been in the writer’s mind. 

The descent of the incorporeal Anthropos into the world of gross 

1 Cf. Mani, whose doctrine is given as follows in Milman, Hist. Chrést. ΤΙ, 
Ρ. 266; ‘ Eve’s beauty was the fatal tree of Paradise, for which Adam was content 
to fall. It was by this union that the sensual or concupiscent soul triumphed over 
the pure and divine spirit (De mor. Manichaeor. c, 19, Acta Archelai c, 10) ; and 
it was by marriage, by sexual union, that the darkening race was propagated,’ 

by De opif. mundi 59. 165: ἐν ἡμῖν γὰρ ἀνδρὸς μὲν ἔχει λόγον ὁ νοῦς, γυναικὸς δ᾽ 
αἴσθησις: ἡδονὴ δὲ προτέραις ἐντυγχάνει καὶ ἐνομιλεῖ ταῖς αἰσθήσεσι, δι᾽ ὧν καὶ τὸν 
ἡγεμύνα νοῦν φενακίζει"... ὃ δ᾽ αὐτίκα δελεασθεὶς ὑπήκοος ἀνθ᾽ ἡγεμόνος, καὶ δοῦλος 
ἀντὶ δεσπότου, καὶ ἀντὶ πολίτον φυγάς, καὶ θνητὸς ἀντ᾽ ἀθανάτον γίνεται. Compare 


with this Corp. I. 15, where the result of the marriage of ἔΑλνθρωπος with Φύσις is 
described in similar words: ἀθάνατος γὰρ ὧν... τὰ θνητὰ πάσχει κιτ.λ. 








LIBELLVS I: §14 43 


matter is comparable to the descent of Sophia (regarded as a symbol 
or prototype of the human soul) in some of the Gnostic systems. 
But though the thing signified is the same or similar, the symbolism 
is for the most part different ; and that of Corp. I is more closely 
connected with Genesis. 

ἐμειδίασεν ἔρωτι ((dxopéotw)) ((τοῦ dvOpdmou)), [ἅτε] τῆς καλλίστης 
μορφῆς [[τοῦ ἀνθρώπου] τὸ εἶδος ἐν τῷ ὕδατι (ἀναδ)ιδοῦσα, καὶ τὸ 
σκίασμα ἐπὶ τῆς γῆς. ἀκόρεστος is not a suitable epithet for κάλλος, 
but may very well be applied to ἔρως. The false reading ἰδοῦσα per- 
verts the meaning of the sentence. The author cannot have said that 
Φύσις sees and falls in love with the reflection of the divine form in 
earth and water,—i.e. in herself. What she sees is Anthropos (the 
εἰκών Of the supreme God) looking down on her through the hole 
which he has broken in the sky. She ‘smiles with passionate desire 
for him’; and her smile takes the form of a reflection or shadow of 
his beauty on the surface of land and sea. He sees this borrowed 
beauty of φύσις͵---ἃ reflection of his own beauty,—and Narcissus-like, 
he loves it.” It is perhaps implied that the beauty of material things 
is not inherent in the things themselves, but is projected into them 
by the man who contemplates them.* 

ἐφίλησε, καὶ ἠβουλήθη αὐτοῦ οἰκεῖν, The word ἐφίλησε does not 
signify the passionate desire expressed by ἔρωτι ἀκορέστῳ ; it is not 
until Anthropos has actually descended into the lower world that he 
is said to be overcome by ἔρως. Hitherto, he has only looked down 
from above ; he now descends into the world of gross matter, and 
takes up his abode there. 

ἅμα δὲ τῇ βουλῇ (or perhaps βουλή(σειν) ἐγένετο ἐνέργεια. ‘No 
sooner purposed than done.’ In the case of the incorporeal 
Anthropos, as in that of the supreme God himself, to purpose or to 
will is to accomplish. Cf. Asc/. Za¢. I. 8: ‘voluntas etenim dei ipsa 
est summa perfectio, utpote cum voluisse et perfecisse uno eodemque 
temporis puncto conpleat.’ 

} Compare especially the ‘ Barbelognostics’ in Irenaeus 1. 29. 4: ‘ Emissum 
dicunt Spiritum sanctum, quem et Sophiam et Prunicum vocant. Hunc igitur, 
videntem reliqua omnia coniugationem habentia, se autem sine coniugatione, 
quaesisse cui adunaretur ; et quam non inveniret,. . . prospiciebat ad inferiores 
partes, putans hic invenire coniugem.’ 

® Cf. Plotinus 4. 3.12: ἀνθρώπων δὲ ψυχαί, εἴδωλα αὑτῶν ἰδοῦσαι οἷον Διονύσου ἐν 
κατόπτρῳ (an Orphic term), ἐκεῖ (i, ε. κάτω) ἐγένοντο, ἄνωθεν ὁρμηθεῖσαι. 

5. Cf. Β. Croce, Aesthetic, Eng. tr. 1909, pp. 159-162 : ‘The beautiful is not a 
physical fact; it does not belong to things, but to the activity of man, to spiritual 


energy. ... As regards natural beanty, man is like the mythical Narcissus at the 
fountain.’ 


44 CORPVS HERMETICVM 


ᾧκησε τὴν ἄλογον Γμορφήν!. The author cannot have written Hop- 
φήν, but may have written οὐσίαν or ὕλην. At any rate, his meaning 
must have been that Anthropos is henceforward domiciled in the 
sublunar world (which, as we were told in § rrb, is ἄλογος,) and is 
‘clasped in the embrace of Φύσις and intermingled with her’; that is 
to say, the human soul is now incarnated. If the writer still adheres 
to his notion of an individual person named Anthropos, we must 
suppose him to imagine the hitherto incorporeal Anthropos as hence- 
forward living on earth in bodily shape, a bisexual Adam. But it is 
difficult to picture his mode of existence after his incarnation. Where 
and how did he live? And what became of him? Did he die in 
course of time, as other men die? As the writer leaves these questions 
unanswered, it is to be presumed that he did not put them to him- 
self, At this stage, the imagery of his myth is already fading away ; 
and when he speaks of the incarnation of Anthropos, his meaning is, 
not that the hero of his story began an earthly life at a certain 
moment, but that all human souls are thus incarnated. The Anthro- 
pos here ceases to be imagined as a particular person with a life- 
history of his own, and his name becomes merely a name for any or 
every man ; ΓΑνθρωπος passes away into ἄνθρωπος, 

ἡ δὲ φύσις λαβοῦσα τὸν ἐρώμενον περιεπλάκη. Cf. the doctrine 
attributed to Ammonius Saccas in Nemesius De nat. hom. c. 3, P- 135 
Matth. (Zeller Phil. der Gr. III. Abth. ii (1903), p. 507): τῇ σχέσει 
καὶ τῇ πρός τι ῥοπῇ καὶ διαθέσει δεδέσθαι φαμὲν ὑπὸ τοῦ σώματος τὴν 
ψυχήν, ὡς λέγομεν ὑπὸ τῆς ἐρωμένης (δεδέσθαι) τὸν ἐραστήν. As 
Ammonius Saccas left nothing in writing, Nemesius must have got 
this from some writer of the school of Plotinus. - 

ὃ 15. καὶ διὰ τοῦτο... κρατεῖται. In this paragraph, the meaning 
of the myth, or the lesson to be learnt from it, is clearly set forth. 
We men are descended on one side from the incorporeal Anthropos, 
who is son of the supreme God, and whose substance is ‘Life and 
Light’; and on the other side, from corporeal Φύσις, whose substance 
is ὕλη, which is connected with darkness and death. We are there- 
fore of twofold nature. In respect of one part (the οὐσιώδης ἄνθρωπος 
in us), we are exalted above all that is material ; in respect of the 
other part, we are subject to material things, and therefore to Heimar- 
mene, the power by which material things are governed. The higher 
part is the true self ; and before our incarnation, we were wholly of 
that higher nature. The lower part is an accretion which has resulted 
from the descent of the soul into the world of gross matter. And 








LIBELLVS I: δὲ 14,15 45 


there lies before us the alternative of salvation or perdition, ‘life’ or 
‘death’, according as in our earthly life the one part or the other gets 
the upper hand. 

This is the Platonic doctrine of the nature of man; and the writer’s 
statement of it would have been accepted, in the main at least, by 
every Platonist of his time. Cf. Asc. Lat. I. 7b: ‘solum enim 
animal homo duplex est ; et eius una pars simplex, quae, ut Graeci 
aiunt, οὐσιώδης, quam vocamus divinae similitudinis formam &c.’ 

ὑπεράνω (yap) [οὖν] ὧν τῆς ἁρμονίας, [ἐναρμόνιος] (εἱμαρμένης) γέγονε 
ϑοῦλοςς Elsewhere in this document, ἁρμονία means ‘ the structure of 
the heavens’. ἐναρμόνιος should therefore mean either ‘residing in 
the heavens’, or ‘having the heavens inside him’; but neither of 
these meanings suits the context. Moreover, δοῦλος requires a 
genitive. It is therefore probable that ἐναρμόνιος is a corruption of 
εἱμαρμένης. 

ἀρρενόθηλυς δὲ ὧν ἐξ ἀρρενοθήλεος ὄνίτος Tod) πατρός, καὶ ἄυπνος ἀπὸ 
ἀύπνου, (ὑπ᾽ ἔρωτος καὶ λήθης) κρατεῖται, God is bisexual. In «45εἰ, 
Lat. 111. 20b., where the same epithet is applied to him, the thoughts 
which it conveys are that God generates the universe from himself 
alone, and that human procreation is an antitype of God’s generative 
activity. But in Corp. I, the word connotes rather absence of sexual 
differentiation, and consequently, freedom from sexual passion. Cf. 
Gospel acc. to the Egyptians, Clem. Alex. Strom, 3. 13. 92 (see also 
Clem. ad Cor. 2. 12. 2): death shall cease ὅταν τὸ τῆς αἰσχύνης ἔνδυμα 
πατήσητε, καὶ ὅταν γένηται τὰ δύο ἕν, καὶ τὸ ἄρρεν μετὰ τῆς θηλείας 
οὔτε ἄρρεν οὔτε θῆλυ. The Naassene ‘ Attis-document’, Hippol. Ref. 
haer. 5.7: ἀπεκόπη γάρ, φησίν, 6” Arris (who in that document is iden- 
tified with Anthropos or the ‘Son of Anthropos’), τουτέστιν ἀπὸ τῶν 
χοϊκῶν τῆς κτίσεως κάτωθεν μερῶν, καὶ ἐπὶ τὴν αἰωνίαν ἄνω μετελήλυθεν 
οὐσίαν, ὅπου, φησίν, οὐκ ἔστιν οὔτε θῆλυ οὔτε ἄρσεν,; ἀλλὰ καινὴ κτίσις, 
καινὸς ἄνθρωπος, ὅς ἐστιν ἀρσενόθηλυς. 

The οὐσιώδης ἄνθρωπος (i.e. man in respect of his incorporeal and 
immortal part) is, like God, ‘ bisexual ’, in the sense that he is neither 
male nor female, and therefore not liable to ἔρως (sexual desire) ; he 
is as the angels of heaven, who οὔτε γαμοῦσιν οὔτε γαμίζονται (Mark 12. 
25). It is only the lower and earthly part of man that is concerned 
with sexual intercourse. The author of Cor. I, since he makes ἔρως 
the cause of death, must have held marriage to be evil. In this 


? Cf, Ep. Gal. 3, 28: Χριστὸν ἐνεδύσασθε" οὐκ ἔνι... ἄρσεν καὶ θῆλυ" πάντες γὰρ 
ὑμεῖς εἷς ἐστὲ ἐν Χριστῷ ᾿Ιησοῦ. 


ei . 


46 CORPVS HERMETICVM 


respect he is at the opposite extreme from the author of Ase/, Zat. III, 
who regards sexual intercourse as a ‘sacrament’. 

God is also ἄυπνος ; i.e. his νόησις is not intermittent, as is that of 
men. ‘Our birth is but a sleep and a forgetting’; and man’s earthly 
life as a whole is often described as a sleep. Cf. Corp. X. 5, where 
it is said that in this life even those who are able to catch glimpses of 
the beatific vision κατακοιμίζονται πολλάκις ὑπὸ τοῦ σώματος. 

(ὑπ᾽ ἔρωτος καὶ λήθης) κρατεῖται, The author must have said what 
it is that ‘holds’ or ‘masters’? men j and he must have used two 
distinct terms, one with reference to ἀρρενόθηλυς, and the other with 
reference to ἄυπνος. The first of the two must certainly have been 
ἔρως ; the second may very likely have been λήθη. But ὑπ᾽ ἔρωτος 
καὶ μέθης would also be possible ; cf. μέθῃ καὶ ὕπνῳ in § 27. Drunken- 
ness is associated with sleep in Corp. VII also. 

§ 16. καὶ αὐτὸς γὰρ ἐρῶ τοῦ λόγόυ. “1 too am mastered by ἔρως: I 
have a passionate desire to hear what yet remains to be told.’ The 
vetb ἐρῶ was suggested by the preceding mention of ἔρως. The 
prophet perceives that his divine teacher is now on the verge of 
revealing to him the origin of the human race; and he is eager to 
learn the truth concerning this matter above all. 

τοῦτο ἔστι τὸ {[ }] μυστήριον (τὸν μέχρι τῆσδε τῆς ἡμέρας ((κεκρυμ- 
μένον). ‘This’ appears to be the doctrine which Poimandres 
immediately proceeds to set forth, i.e. that which is contained in 
δὲ τό and 17. It is a doctrine which ‘has been kept secret until this 
day ’; this must mean that it has never been taught before. The rest 
of the teaching of Cor. I is matter of tradition, restated and no doubt 
modified by the author, but not originated by him. But the doctrine 
of ‘the seven Anthropoi’ was his own invention ; as it seemed to him, 
it had come to him from God by direct revelation ; and it had been 
revealed to none before him. 

μυστήριον here means ‘a holy truth which has not been made 
known till now’. This is the sense in which the word is commonly 
used by Paul ; see Armitage Robinson, 272. to the Ephesians, Ρ. 234 ff, 
‘on the meaning of μυστήριον in the New Testament’. (Compare 
especially Zphes. 3. 3-5.) There is no suggestion that the truth in 
question ought to be kept secret by the man to whom it is revealed; 
on the contrary, the prophet holds that he has a mission to proclaim 
to all mankind what has been revealed to him. 

ἡ φύσις... ἀπεκύησεν ἑπτὰ ἀνθρώπους πρὸς τὰς φύσεις τῶν ἑπτὰ 
διοικητόρων, ἀρρενοθήλεας καὶ μεταρσίους. These seven Anthropoi are 











LIBELLVS I: §§ 15, 16 47 


the issue of the marriage described above; their father is the first 
Anthropos, and their mother is Φύσις. They must therefore have in 
them something of the nature of either parent. It is implied that 
they have inherited ‘ Life and Light’ from their father, and the dark 
and deadly influence of ὕλη from their mother. But they have 
inherited from their father something else as well, viz. the ‘natures’ 
or distinctive characters of the seven planets, which, as we were told 
in ὃ 13a, he received into himself during his sojourn in the heavens ; 
and it may be inferred from § 25 that these planetary ‘natures’ are 
seven evil πάθη. 

It is not clear how the seven kinds of πάθη which mankind inherit 
through the seven Anthropoi from the first Anthropos are to be dis- 
tinguished from the evil influences of ὕλῃ which they inherit from 
Φύσις. It would seem that either without the other would suffice to 
account for the moral evil which exists in men. The truth is that 
the author has included in his system two different accounts of the 
origin of moral evil,—one, which attributes it to the influence of ὕλῃ, 
and has been taken over by him from the Platonists, and another, 
which attributes it to the influence of the planets, and is in part an 
innovation of his own,—and has left them standing side by side but 
unconnected. 

We are evidently meant to understand that each of the seven 
Anthropoi bears the special character of one of the seven planets. One 
of them is characterized by the deceitfulness which comes from the 
planet Mercury, another by the lust which comes from the planet 
Venus, and so on. And as these seven Anthropoi are the ancestors 
of the human race, the writer’s meaning must be that there are seven 
distinct classes or types of men, each of which is specially influenced 
by one of the seven planets, and shows an evil disposition derived 
from that planet. The men governed by the planet Mercury are 
deceitful, and the men governed by the planet Venus are lustful. 
The notion that the character of the individual man is determined by 
the influence of the heavenly bodies (or by Heimarmene, using the 
heavenly bodies as her instruments,) was commonly accepted in the 
writer’s time; and it was held by many that a man’s disposition 
depends on the planet which was dominant at the moment of his 
birth. (Our language still retains a vestige of this astrological 
doctrine, in the use of the words ‘jovial’, ‘ mercurial ’, and ‘saturnine’.) 
The author of Cor. I has adopted this belief from the society around 
him. According to his view, Heimarmene, i.e. the influence of the 


48 CORPVS HERMETICVM 


heavenly bodies as a whole, is split up into seven distinct influences, 
Corresponding to the seven planets; and mankind is divided into 
seven classes, each of which is specially subject to one of these seven 
planetary influences. When a man is ‘ illuminated ’, or has attained 
to gnosis, he is no longer subject to the baleful influence of his planet, 
and the ‘ruling passion’ derived from that planet is suppressed in 
him. But the many are ‘slaves of Heimarmene’, whose dominion 
manifests itself in the working of evil passions, and takes seven differ- 
ent forms, according as the man is subject to one or other of the 
seven planets through which Heimarmene operates onthe world below, 

The innovation introduced by the author of Corp.1 consists in 
this, that he describes the planetary influence not as brought to bear 
directly on each individual man at his birth, or throughout his life, 
but as an inheritance which has descended to him from one of a group 
of seven primal Anthropoi, who in their turn had inherited it from 
their father, the first Anthropos. He tells us that the doctrine of the 
seven Anthropoi is a novelty ; it had been ‘hidden’ till the day when 
the divine Nous revealed it to him. But though the notion as worked 
out by him and incorporated in his system is no doubt original, we 
may presume that it was suggested to him by some mythological 
tradition, and that he had in mind some well-known group of seven 
gods or superhuman persons, who might be used to serve his purpose, 
Perhaps the simplest hypothesis would be that he was thinking of the 
seven Greek deities after whom the planets were named.' The 
euhemeristic theories prevalent in his time had changed these θεοί 
into ἄνθρωποι, who were supposed to have lived at a remote time in the 
past ; and it would be an easy step to represent the seven ἄνθρωποι 
named Kronos, Zeus, &c. as the " supermen’ from whom the human 
race is descended. But there were other groups of seven superhuman 
beings, more or less closely connected with the seven planets ;? and 


1 Apollo and Artemis might stand for the sun and the moon. 

3 E, & the seven Archangels of the Jews, In the Mithrasliturgie edited by 
Dieterich, the supreme God , Who resides at the North Pole, is attended by a group 
of seven youths and a grou Ρ of seven maidens ; these two groups appear to be the 


groups were fused into one, we should have a group of seven bisexual beings, 
According to the Orphic tradition, there were fourteen Titans, seven male ani 
seven female (Proclus ix P/. Tim, 5: 295 Ὁ, Abel Orphica fr. 95 : τίκτει γὰρ ἡ Τῇ, 
λαθοῦσα τὸν Οὐρανόν, ὥς φησιν ὁ θεολόγος, “' ἑπτὰ μὲν εὐειδεῖς κού yee. ἑπτὰ δὲ 
παῖδας ἄνακτας"); and the lower or earthly part of man was derived from the 
Titans. So far, the seven bisexual Anthropoi of Corg. I correspond to the seven 
pairs of Orphic Titans, There does not seem to have been any connexion between 








LIBELLVS I: δῇ τό, 17 49 


as the writer has not given names to his Anthropoi, we have no means 
_ of knowing what particular form of mythological reminiscence sug- 
- gested the conception to him. 

In the text of the MSS., the seven Anthropoi are said to be perdp- 
owt, i.e. ‘up aloft’, or ‘raised high in air’, The word would be 
applicable, for instance, to the Platonic daemons, whose abode is the 
atmosphere. But as the seven Anthropoi have bodies composed of 
gross matter, it necessarily follows that they live upon the surface of 
the earth, like ordinary men, from whom they differ only in the fact 
that they are bisexual. The word perapoious therefore seems inap- 
propriate. If it is to be retained, we must take it to mean ‘ standing 
erect ’, as opposed to the beasts. Cf. Philo De ofif. mundi 51. 147, 
Cohn I, p. 51: ἡ δὲ (6 ἄνθρωπος) μετέωρον (kai?) ἀπὸ γῆς ἀνώφοιτον 
ἐξῆρται τὸ σῶμα (i. 6. stands erect), λέγοιτ᾽ ἂν ἐνδίκως ἀεροπόρον εἶναι. 

μὴ ἔκτρεχε. ‘Do not digress.’ The prophet thought he was about 
to be told the origin of the existing race of men and women. That 
is what he is eager to hear ; and when Poimandres interposes the 
doctrine of the seven Anthropoi, which appears to him to be less 
directly connected with his own interests, he can hardly restrain his 
impatience. 

§ 17. ((ἐξήνεγκεν ἡ φύσις τὰ σώματα)... ὁ δὲ ἄνθρωπος... ἐγένετο 
εἰς ψυχὴν καὶ νοῦν, The composition of the seven Anthropoi is here 
described. They consist, like ourselves, of a material part and an 
immaterial part.1_ The material part, in their case as in ours, is a 
_ body composed of the material elements ; and it comes to them 
from their mother Φύσις, who is a personification of the material 
elements, The immaterial part, in their case as in ours, is ψυχή and 
νοῦς; and it comes to them from their father, the first Anthropos. 
For the word ἐξήνεγκεν, cf. ἐξήνεγκεν (ἡ γῆ) ζῷα τετράποδα x.r.d.in § 11 Ὁ. 
Φύσις ‘ brought forth’ the seven Anthropoi, as Gaia brought forth the 
Titans and the Giants; and if the author formed in his own mind 
any definite picture of their birth, he probably thought of them as 


the Orphic Titans and the planets; but this may be one of the innovations made 
by the author of Cor. I. 

It is possible that the writer found support for his doctrine of the seven Anthropoi 
in Gen. 6.4: οἱ δὲ γίγαντες ἦσαν ἐπὶ τῆς γῆς ἐν ταῖς ἡμέραις ἐκείναις". ἐκεῖνοι 
ἦσαν οἱ γίγαντες οἱ ἀπ᾽ αἰῶνος, οἱ ἄνθρωποι of ὀνομαστοί. In the Hellenistic period, 
the γίγαντες of Greek mythology were often confused with the Titans, 

' The material part corresponds to the χοῦς ἀπὸ τῆς γῆς in Gen. 2. 7: the 
immaterial part corresponds to the πνοὴ ζωῆς in the same passage. The phrase 
ὁ δὲ ἄνθρωπος ἐγένετο els ψυχὴν καὶ νοῦν was probably suggested by ἐγένετο ὁ 
ἄνθρωπος εἰς ψυχὴν ζῶσαν in Gen. 2. 7. i 


2806-2 E 


δ0 CORPVS HERMETICVM 


springing up out of the earth like plants. It was thus that, according 
to a notion widely spread among the Greeks, the first men had come 
into being. Something of the sort is implied in the phrase ἄνδρες 
γηγενεῖς addressed to mankind in § 27, 

θηλυκὴ γὰρ ἦν (ἡ γῆν, Kat (78) ὕδωρ ὀχευτικόν. The visible and 
tangible body (as opposed to the invisible and intangible, but still 
material, Aneuma or ‘vital spirit’) is composed of the two grosser 
elements, earth and water. In the combination of earth and water, 
earth is relatively passive, and water is relatively active; and this 
distinction is expressed by calling the earth ‘ female ’, and the water 
‘male’. The Stoics more commonly called fire and air together 
δραστικά (= ὀχευτικά), and earth and water together παθητικά 
(= θηλυκά). Nemesius De nat. hom. c. 5, Ὁ. 126: the Stoics say 
τῶν στοιχείων τὰ μὲν εἶναι δραστικά, τὰ δὲ παθητικά" δραστικὰ μὲν ἀέρα 
καὶ πῦρ, παθητικὰ δὲ γῆν καὶ ὕδωρ. But a closer parallel occurs in 
Hippol. Ref haer. 4. 43. Hippolytus there gives a doctrine which 
he calls ‘Egyptian’; it is rather the doctrine of some Stoicizing 
Pythagorean, but its author perhaps assumed that Pythagoras had 
learnt it in Egypt. According to this doctrine, fire and πνεῦμα (air) 
are τὸ ἀγαθοποιόν τε καὶ ἀνωφερὲς καὶ ἀρσενικόν: earth and water are 
τὸ κατωφερὲς θηλυκόν τε καὶ κακοποιόν. καὶ αὐτὰ δὲ πάλιν τὰ ἄνω δύο 
στοιχεῖα, ἑαυτοῖς συγκρινόμενα ἔχουσιν ἐν ἑαυτοῖς τὸ ἄρρεν καὶ τὸ θῆλυ 
πρὸς εὐκαρπίαν καὶ αὔξησιν τῶν ὅλων" καὶ τὸ μὲν πῦρ ἄρρεν ἐστί, τὸ δὲ 
πνεῦμα θῆλυ. καὶ πάλιν τὸ ὕδωρ ἄρρεν ἐστίν, ἡ δὲ γῆ θῆλυ. καὶ οὕτως 
ἀπ᾽ ἀρχῆς συνεβίωσε τὸ πῦρ τῷ πνεύματι, τῇ δὲ γῇ τὸ ὕδωρ' ὥσπερ γὰρ 
δύναμις τοῦ πνεύματός ἐστι τὸ πῦρ, οὕτως καὶ τῆς γῆς τὸ ὕδωρ. 

[τὸ δὲ ἐκ πυρὸς πέπειρον.) ‘That part of them which was made of 
fire was ripe.’ This is nonsense ἢ and the words must have been 
inserted through some error. 

ἐκ δὲ αἰθέρος τὸ πνεῦμα ἔλαβον (ἔλαβε MSS.). The πνεῦμα is here 
the ‘vital spirit’ of a man, which belongs to the material part of him, 
and is sharply distinguished from the immaterial ψυχή and νοῦς. Cf. 
Corp. X. 13 ff., where the πνεῦμα is called the ‘ vehicle’ (ὄχημα) or 
‘vesture’ (ἔνδυμα) of the ψυχή. The ‘vital spirit’ was commonly 
thought to consist of the two finer elements, fire and air ; and this 
was presumably the view held by the author of Corp. 1. It is 
possible that αἰθέρος is a corruption of ἀέρος (καὶ πυρός); but if we 
retain αἰθέρος, we must Say that αἰθήρ here means ‘fire and air’, or 
‘air saturated with fire’. The pure bright air of the upper atmo- 
sphere was sometimes called αἰθήρ, as for instance in Pseudo-P]., 








LIBELLVS I: δ 17 51 



























Epinomis. In the Oracula Chaldaica (Kroll, p. 35, Procl. in Zim. 
ΟΠ 154€), αἴθρη is used as a synonym of ἀήρ; the Demiurgus is there 
said to have made the Kosmos ἐκ πυρὸς ἐξ ὕδατος καὶ γῆς καὶ 
παντρόφου αἴθρης. 

(. . -) πρὸς τὸ εἶδος τοῦ ἀνθρώπου. In the missing words, the author 
must have spoken of the incorporeal part, in contrast to τὰ σώματα 
above. The incorporeal part of each of the seven Anthropoi was 
derived from the first Anthropos, and resembled the first Anthropos 
as he was before his incarnation. 

ὁ δὲ ἄνθρωπος ἐκ ζωῆς καὶ φωτὸς ἐγένετο εἰς ψυχὴν καὶ νοῦν. The 
first Anthropos, before his descent into the world of matter, consisted 
wholly of the substance of the supreme God, which is ‘ Life and 
Light’, He transmitted this incorporeal substance to his seven 
sons; and in them, the ‘Life’ became ψυχή, and the ‘ Light’ 
became vois. 

Every part of their being has now been accounted for. Each of 
the seven was composed, as we ourselves are, of (1) a gross body, 
consisting of earth and water, (2) a pneuma, consisting of fire and 
air, and (3) a ψυχή and a νοῦς, consisting of the incorporeal substance 
of God. But they still differed from us, their descendants, in that 
they were bisexual. The making of men and women is completed 
by the differentiation of the sexes, which follows in the next 
paragraph. 

μέχρι περιόδου τέλους, The state of things which has just been 
described remained unaltered until the end of one ‘age’, and the 
beginning of another. 

Hesiod’s list of the five ‘ages’ (γένη), beginning with the age of 
gold, and ending with the present age of iron, was known to every 
Greek schoolboy. In Hellenistic times, the notion of a series of 
ages into which the world’s history is divided was modified by 

association with the astral and Stoic doctrine of apocatastasis, 

according to which things run in cycles, and at the end of each 

period, all things are made new. A division of history into succes- 

sive ages (γενεαί) was adopted by Hellenistic Jews, and occurs 

repeatedly in the Jewish Siéy//ine Oracles; and the mention of a 

Series of ages in Virg. Zc/. 4 (‘magnus ab integro saeclorum nascitur 

ordo’) was probably suggested in part by Jewish Siéyllina. Toa 

_ Jew, the most obvious instance of ‘the end of a period’ and the 

beginning of another would be the Deluge ;? and the author of 

1 Compare the narrative of the Flood in the Jewish Ovac, Sib. 1. 125 ff., and 

E2 


ΘῈ CORPVS HERMETICVM 


Corp. 1 was probably thinking of the Mosaic narrative of the Flood. 
In Genesis, the Giants, to whom the seven Anthropoi correspond in 
some respects, are said to have dwelt upon the earth in the period 
which the Flood ended, and are spoken of immediately before the 
story of the Flood is told. 

§ 18. πάντα γὰρ τὰ ζῷα, ἀρρενοθήλελ ὄντα, διελύετο ἅμα τῷ ἀνθρώπῳ, 
We here learn, what we were not told before, that not only the seven 
Anthropoi, but also the birds, beasts, and fishes, the production of 
which was described in ὃ rr b, were bisexual until the end of the first 
age, and therefore did not begin to breed until the beginning of the 
second age. The bisexuality of the first Anthropos (from which that 
of his sons, the seven Anthropoi, follows) might, as has already been 
pointed out, be found in Gen. τ. 27 by a reader disposed thus to 
interpret the words ; and similarly, it would be possible to interpret 
the phrase δύο δύο, ἄρσεν καὶ θῆλυ, which occurs repeatedly in the 
Mosaic narrative of the Flood, as meaning that down to that time 
the beasts also were bisexual, or in other words, that each individual 
among them was a still undivided pair. 

The notion that men and women were brought into existence by 
splitting bisexual beings into two parts was doubtless suggested by 
the speech of Aristophanes in Pl. Sympos. 189-193. Buta reader of 
Genesis might find support for it in Gen. 2. 21-24, where we are told 
that God ἔλαβεν μίαν τῶν πλευρῶν (τοῦ ᾿Αδάμ). . . καὶ ὠκοδόμησεν 
++. τὴν πλευρὰν... εἰς γυναῖκα. ... ἕνεκεν τούτου... ἔσονται 
οἱ δύο εἰς σάρκα μίαν. This amounts to saying that God divided 
the man into two parts, and made one of the two parts into 
a woman; and the resemblance might be made closer by taking 
μίαν τῶν πλευρῶν to mean ‘one of his two sides’ instead of ‘one of 
his ribs’. 

ὁ δὲ θεὸς εὐθὺς εἶπεν ἁγίῳ λόγῳ Αὐξάνεσθε ἐν αὐξήσει καὶ πληθύνεσθε 
ἐν πλήθει πάντα τὰ κτίσματα καὶ Syprodpynpata, This corresponds to 
the words spoken by God in Gen. 8. τς ff. : καὶ εἶπεν Κύριος 6 θεὸς τῷ 
Νῶε λέγων Ἔξελθε ἐκ τῆς κιβωτοῦ, σὺ καὶ ἡ γυνή σου κιτιλ., καὶ πάντα τὰ 


especially Il. 283 ff. : when Noah and his family came forth from the Ark, ἔνθ᾽ αὖτις 
βιότοιο νέη ἀνέτειλε γενέθλη | χρυσείη πρώτη, ἥτις πέλεθ᾽ ἕκτη, ἀρίστη | ἐξότε πρωτό- 
πλαστος ἀνὴρ γένετ᾽. In describing the Flood, the Sibyl speaks as an eye-witness ; 
she was the wife of one of Noah’s sons, and was herself one of the passengers in 
the Ark. 

1 Reitzenstein (Pom. p, 110) refers to Bereshith Rabba (transl. Wiinsche, p. 30), 
where a certain Rabbi is said to have taught that ‘the first man, when he was first 
made, had two faces ; but God sawed him into two halves, and formed out of him 
two backs, which were turned in opposite directions’, 





LIBELLVS I: §§ 17, 18 53 











































(ᾳ ὅσα ἐστὶν μετὰ god... καὶ αὐξάνεσθε καὶ πληθύνεσθε ἐπὶ τῆς 
“ςΔ In Genesis, the command ‘increase and multiply’ is addressed 
to fishes, birds, and men at the time of their first creation also (Gen. 
τ. 22 and 28); but the writer of Corp. I, having assumed that men 
and beasts alike were originally bisexual, and incapable of breeding, 
~ necessarily defers this injunction until the beginning of the second 
age, and makes it follow on the separation of the sexes. 

There can be no doubt that the phrase αὐξάνεσθε καὶ πληθύνεσθε 
came to him from Genesis. But he has altered it by inserting ἐν 
αὐξήσει and ἐν πλήθει. (Cf. Corp. III. 3b: εἰς τὸ αὐξάνεσθαι ἐν 
αὐξήσει καὶ πληθύνεσθαι ἐν πλήθει.) This form of words is a Hebraism ; 
put the Hebrew idiom of which it is a rendering is not employed in 
the command ‘increase and multiply’ as given in Genesis. We must 
therefore suppose that the writer's more immediate authority was not 
Genesis itself, but some document based on a Semitic original in 
which the words of Genesis were paraphrased or expanded. 

καὶ ἀναγνωρισάτω ὁ ἔννους (ἄνθρωπος) ἑαυτὸν ὄντα ἀθάνατον, Kai τὸν 
αἴτιον τοῦ θανάτου ἔρωτα [καὶ πάντα τὰ] ὄντα. It seems probable that 
πάντα τά came from πάντα τὰ κτίσματα above, and καί was inserted to 
make sense of it. 

The writer makes God supplement the command ‘increase and 
multiply’ by a statement of the conditions under which men may 
escape death and attain to immortality. This might be called his 
yersion of God’s διαθήκη with man; it takes the place of the διαθήκῃ 
in Gen. 9. 11 ff. (οὐκ ἀποθανεῖται πᾶσα σὰρξ ἔτι ἀπὸ τοῦ ὕδατος τοῦ 
κατακλυσμοῦ κιτιλ.). But he may have had in mind also the speech of 
God in Pl. Zim. 42 A, addressed to the souls about to be incarnated : 
ὁπότε δὴ σώμασιν ἐμφυτευθεῖεν .. ., πρῶτον μὲν αἴσθησιν ἀναγκαῖον εἴη 
νον πᾶσιν... ξύμφυτον γίγνεσθαι, δεύτερον δὲ ἡδονῇ καὶ λύπῃ μεμιγ- 
μένον ἔρωτα... καὶ 6 μὲν εὖ τὸν προσήκοντα χρόνον βιούς, πάλιν εἰς τὴν 
τοῦ ξυννόμου πορευθεὶς οἴκησιν ἄστρου, βίον εὐδαίμονα καὶ συνήθη ἕξοι. 
(The ‘immortality’ spoken of in Corp. I corresponds to the ‘ happy 
life’ promised in Pl. Zim.) 

Man is distinguished from the beasts by the fact that he is (at least 
potentially) ἔννους ; and νοῦς is immortal, If he recognizes the 


1 Compare the version of this speech of God which is given in Ovac. Stb. τ. 267 ff. : 
< πρὸ | θεσπεσίη μεγάλοιο θεοῦ πάλιν ἴαχε φωνὴ | τοῖον ἔπος" ‘ Νῶε, πεφυλαγ- 
μένε πιστὲ δίκαιε, | θαρσαλέως ἔξελθε σὺν υἱέσι καί τε δάμαρτι | καὶ νύμφαις τρισσαῖν, 
καὶ πλήσατε γαῖαν ἅπασαν | αὐῤόμενοι πληθυνύμενοι, τὰ δίκαια νέμοντες | ἀλλήλοις, 
Ε΄ νῶν, ἄχρις εἰς κρίσιν ἥξει | πᾶν γένος ᾿ἀνθρώπων" (ἀνθρώπειον ἴ), ἐπεὶ κρίσις 
Goer ἅπασιν. 


84 CORPVS HERMETICVM 


immortal νοῦς in him as his true self,’ or identifies himself with it, he 
has overcome ἔρως, and is freed from the power of death. If on the 
other hand he ignores the νοῦς in him, and yields to ἔρως, he is a mere 
mortal creature, like the beasts. The θάνατος from which man may 
escape cannot be the dissolution of the body ; for to this all men alike 
are liable. It is rather the condition of a soul wholly immersed in 
matter, and enslaved by the πάθη to which matter gives rise. The 
life of a man in whom the bodily affections have the upper hand is 
not life, but death. (Cf. Corp, VII 2 b, where the body is called 6 
ζῶν θάνατος κιτ.λ.) What will become of such a man when his present 
life on earth is ended, the writer of Corp. I does not expressly tell us ; 
but from § 24 it may be inferred that he will be resolved into the 
elements of which he was composed, and will cease to exist as an 
individual. νοῦς only is immortal; and in the man who fails to 
‘recognize’ his true self, there is no νοῦς to survive. 

‘The cause of death is épws.’ It was through yielding to ἔρως that 
the first Anthropos was incarnated, and so fell under the dominion 
of death ; and it is through yielding to ἔρως that men deprive them- 
selves of immortality. ἔρως is (or is inseparably connected with) love 
of the body (ὃ 19) ; and he who would be immortal must ‘hate his 
body’ (Corp. IV. 6 b). 

(ὁ δὲ ἀναγνωρίσας ἑαυτὸν εἰς τὸ ἀγαθὸν χωρεῖ) We are told in ὃ 21 
init. that these words (or something like them) occurred in ‘God’s 
speech’; they must therefore be inserted here. This clause of God's 
speech is paraphrased in ὃ 19, in the words ὁ ἀναγνωρίσας ἑαυτὸν 
ἐλήλυθεν εἰς τὸ ὑπερούσιον ἀγαθόν, and is commented on in § 21. 

819. ἡ πρόνοια διὰ τῆς εἱμαρμένης καὶ ἁρμονίας τὰς μίξεις ἐποιήσατο, 
καὶ τὰς γενέσεις κατέστησε. God's πρόνοια is momentarily personified 
here, as God’s βουλή was in ὃ 8 Ὁ. εἱμαρμένης and ἁρμονίας are probably 
alternative readings; either might stand, but hardly both together. 
It would, however, be possible to write διὰ τῆς ἁρμονίας καθ᾽ εἷμαρ- 
μένην... τὰς γενέσεις κατέστησε. The births are determined by ‘the 
Structure of the heavens’, i.e. by the influences of the heavenly 
bodies ; and the heavenly bodies are the instruments by means of 
which Heimarmene works. 


* For ὁ ἀναγνωρίσας ἑαυτόν, cf. Philo Migr. Abr. 3. 13, Wendl. II, p. 271: 
ἐπειδὰν γοῦν ὃ νοῦς ἄρξηται γνωρίζειν ἑαυτὸν καὶ τοῖς νοητοῖς ἐνομιλεῖν θεωρήμασιν, 
ἅπαν τὸ κλινόμενον τῆς ψυχῆς πρὸς τὸ αἰσθητὸν εἶδος ἀπώσεται"... συνοικεῖν γὰρ 
maida gird τὸν ἀσωμάτων καὶ ἀφθάρτων ἔρωτι κατεσχημένον τῷ πρὸς τὰ αἰσθητὰ καὶ 
θνητὰ ῥέποντι. 

3 ἜΜ to be noted that there is πὸ mention of metensomatosis or reincarnation in 
Corp, I. 





LIBELLVS I: §§ 18-21 55 


6 ἀναγνωρίσας ἑαυτὸν ἐλήλυθεν εἷς τὸ ὑπερούσιον (περιούσιον MSS.) 
ἀγαθόν. The text from this point to the end of ὃ 23 is a commentary 
on the preceding ‘speech of God’. 

No satisfactory sense can be got out of περιούσιον ; but τὸ ὑπερού- 
σιον ἀγαθόν may be taken to mean ‘the supracosmic Good’, and this 
would serve as a synonym for ἀθανασία. (Cf. τοῦτο ἔστι τὸ ἀγαθόν in 
8 268 fin.). Platonists said that the Good or God is ‘ above οὐσία᾽ ; 
the phrase was suggested to them by Pl. Rep. 6. 509 B (ἔτι ἐπέκεινα 
τῆς οὐσίας). But the writer of Corp. I probably meant that the good 
to which ὁ ἀναγνωρίσας ἑαυτόν attains is above οὐσία in the S/orc sense 
of that word, i.e. above all ‘ material substance’; it is incorporeal. 

The tense of ἐλήλυθεν is significant. He who has recognized his 
true self Aas already entered into immortality. Though in the body, 
he is no longer of the body; he belongs to another and a higher 
world. 

ὁ δὲ ἀγαπήσας [[73]] ἐκ πλάνης ἔρωτος ((τὸ)) σῶμα. For the phrase ἐκ 
πλάνης ἔρωτος, cf. Corp. XVI. 16 as emended : ὃ λόγον οὐκ ἔχων ἔρως 
.. y ὃ πλανώμενος καὶ πλανῶν. See Pl. Phaedr, 238 B. 

§ 20. ὅτι προκατάρχεται. .. τὸ σῶμα συνέστηκεν. Death results 
from the body ; and man is mortal so far as he is identified with his 
body. It must be so, because the body, being material, is derived 
from the ‘grim darkness’ spoken of in§ 4. That ‘ darkness’ is the 
substance of death, as the ‘light’ there spoken of is the substance of 
life. 

This might serve as an answer to the question ‘why ave men sub- 
ject to death?’ But it is not an answer to the question which is here 
asked, viz. ‘ why do men deserve the death to which they are subjected ?’ 
If they deserve it (ἄξιοί εἰσι τοῦ 9.), that must be because of some sin 
_ which they have committed. The sin of which death is the penalty 
_ was described in mythical language as that of the first Anthropos, who 
yielded to ἔρως, and wilfully entered into union with matter; and it 
might be said that all men who ‘love the body’ sink themselves in 
matter by their own choice, and so repeat his sin in their own persons. 
Something like this must have been the author's meaning ; and we 
must assume that some words describing the sin of which death is the 
penalty have been lost after τὸ σῶμα συνέστηκεν. 

ὃ at. ὁ ἀναγνωρίσας (ἐνόησας MSS.) ἑαυτὸν εἰς (τὸ ἀγαθὸν χωρεῖ (εἰς 
αὐτὸν χωρεῖ MSS.). The paraphrase of these words in § 19 makes it 
almost certain that the author wrote τὸ ἀγαθόν here, and probable that 
he wrote 6 dvayvwpicas. 





56 CORPVS HERMETICVM 


ἐξ οὗ γέγονεν ὁ ἄνθρωπος. ὁ ἄνθρωπος is here the true self, 1. 6, the 
incorporeal part of man (which is derived from the first Anthropos), 
as opposed to the body. ‘The Good’ is ‘ Light and Life’, the sub- 
stance of God ; the true man is of that substance, and is reabsorbed 
into it. 

Εὖ φῇς [λαλῶν (ὅτι) φῶς... ἄνθρωπος]. The words φῶς... ἄνθρωπος 
are a mere repetition of the preceding sentence. This explanation of 
the meaning of εὖ φής is correct, but superfluous ; and it was probably 
added by a later hand. 

οὐ πάντες γὰρ ἄνθρωποι γοῦν ἔχουσιν; Cf Pl. Zim, 51Ὲ: νοῦ δὲ 
(μετέχειν φατέον) θεούς, ἀνθρώπων δὲ γένος βραχύ τι. Corp. ΤΥ. 3. 
Asc, Lat. 1. 7 ἃ and 111. 18b. 

§ 22. παραγίνομαι ἐγὼ ὁ νοῦς τοῖς ὁσίοις κιτιλ, The νοῦς of the indi- 
vidual man is consubstantial with the divine νοῦς. 

With §§ 22, 23 (παραγίνομαι ἐγὼ... πῦρ ἐπὶ πλεῖον αὐξάνει) compare 
Corp. X. 19b-22a. That passage is an addition to Corp, X by 
a different hand ; and its writer may perhaps have read Corg. I. But 
he uses the word νοῦς differently ; he distinguishes two kinds of νοῦς, 
viz, ἃ good νοῦς which enters into the godly man, and a bad νοῦς which 
enters into the ungodly man. The good νοῦς and the bad νοῦς of 
Corp. X. 19b-22a correspond respectively to the νοῦς and the 
τιμωρὸς δαίμων of Corp. 1. 

The τιμωρὸς δαίμων is here spoken of as a well-known personage. 
The Jews knew him under various names (Satan &c.), Platonists 
more commonly spoke of τιμωροὶ δαίμονες in the plural ; cf. Lydus de 
mens. 4. 32 (a fragment of the Λόγος τέλειος, connected with Ascl. Lat. 
ΠῚ. 33): rods μὲν τιμωροὺς τῶν δαιμόνων, ἐν αὐτῇ τῇ ὕλῃ παρόντας, 
τιμωρεῖσθαι τὸ ἀνθρώπειον Kar’ ἀξίαν. 

§ 23. τὴν ὀξύτητα τοῦ πυρὸς προσβάλλων, The ‘fire’ is metaphorical ; 
it is the fire of evil passion. The same metaphor is employed in 
Corp. X. 20 (ποῖον πῦρ τοσαύτην φλόγα ἔχει ὅσην ἡ ἀσέβεια; The 
impious soul cries out καίομαι, φλέγομαι). The verb πυροῦσθαι is 
used in Greek poetry in the sense ‘to be inflamed with passion’, and 
especially ‘to burn with love ᾿ξ but the description of evil passion in 
Corp. I and Corp. X. 20 as a fire by which the wicked are tortured 
in this life was probably suggested by accounts of a fiery hell in which 
sinners are punished after death. The notion of a penal hell-fire 
existed among the Zoroastrians from early times, and was current 
among the Jews at the time when Corp. 1 was written ; it occurs, for 
instance, in the Jewish Stbyllina, 





LIBELLVS I: §§ 21-24 57 























καὶ μᾶλλον ἐπὶ τὰς ἀνομίας αὐτὸν ὁπλίζει, ἵνα τύχῃ μείζονος τιμωρίας. 
When a man has once fallen into the fundamental sin of ‘loving the 
body’, he already deserves punishment ; and ‘the avenging daemon’ 
punishes him by driving him into acts of crime, and thereby causing 
him to incur the penalties which follow on such acts. Cf. Corp, XII. 
i, 5-7, Where it is similarly said that the wicked are punished by 
being forced to commit crimes. But the function of making them 
commit crimes is there assigned, not to ‘the avenging daemon’, but 
to Heimarmene. 
οὐ παύεται ((oxoropaydv)). The words ἀκορέστως σκοτομαχῶν are 
manifestly wrong where they stand in the MSS. ; and I have disposed 
of σκοτομαχῶν by inserting it here. The man is struggling in the 
dark, and therefore at random, and to no good purpose. He has not 
the ‘light’ of νοῦς to direct his efforts. 
én’ ὀρέξεις ἀπλέτους (. . .), τὴν ἐπιθυμίαν ἔχων ἀκόρεστον. The 
reading of the MSS., én’ ὀρέξεις ἀπλέτους τὴν ἐπιθυμίαν ἔχων, could 
only be translated ‘aiming his desire at boundless appetites’; but 
that is a strange phrase. The object towards which ἐπιθυμία is 
directed is not ὄρεξις, but ἡδονή. It is possible that the author wrote 
ἐφ᾽ ἡδονὰς ἀπλέτους, and that ὀρέξεις has come from ras ὀρέξεις written 
as an alternative for τὴν ἐπιθυμίαν. Cf. Corp. XII. i. 4, where ἐπιθυμία, 
ὄρεξις, and ἡδονή occur together. 
§ 24, ἔτι δέ μοι εἰπὲ (περὶ) τῆς ἀνόδου τῆς γινομένης, So far, the 
author has been speaking of man’s life on earth, He now goes on 
to describe the ascent of the disembodied soul to the world above. 
((τῶς εἰς ζωὴν χωρήσω.) These words, which are evidently out of 
place in § 21, fit in satisfactorily here, and supply a reason for the 
use of the second person (εἶχες, παραδίδως) in what follows. 
Πρῶτον μὲν ἐν τῇ ἀναλύσει τοῦ σώματος τοῦ ὑλικοῦ παραδίδως[ιν] αὐτὸ 
τὸ σῶμα εἰς ἀλλοίωσιν. This is awkwardly expressed ; and it may be 
suspected that the author wrote something like πρῶτον μὲν ἐν τῇ 
ἀλλοίωσει (‘when the time comes for you to be changed’,—a 
euphemism for ‘at your death’,—) παραδίδως αὐτὸ τὸ σῶμα {τῇ φύσει 
(i.e. to the force that works in earth and water)) εἰς ἀνάλυσιν (‘ for 
dissolution ’). 

καὶ τὸ Γἦθος} τῷ 'Saipon!, .. παραδίδως. If we retain ἦθος, it must 
be taken to mean the sum of the πάθη. But we are told in ὃ 25 
that the man afterwards renders up his evil πάθη or vicious tendencies 
to the planets from which they were derived; and if he has already 
parted with his ἦθος before he reaches the heavens, how can he still 


58 CORPVS HERMETICVM 


have these πάθη in him when he comes to the planets? It is evident 
then that something is wrong. Now it appears from § 17 that the 
parts of which a man is composed are (1) the gross body, made of 
earth and water; (2) the πνεῦμα, made of fire and air; and (3) the 
ψυχή and νοῦς, made of ‘ Life and Light’. These several parts ought 
now to be disposed of in succession. We are first told what becomes 
of the gross body (τὸ σῶμα). It is ‘delivered up’ while the man is 
still on earth, and it is there resolved into the mass of earth and 
water whence it came. We should expect to be next told what 
becomes of the πνεῦμα ; and as the πνεῦμα is of gaseous substance, 
and the man apparently does not part with it till after he has quitted 
earth and water, and has already parted with it when he reaches the 
planetary spheres (i. 6. the region of fire), it seems probable that the 
author here wrote τὸ πνεῦμα τῷ ἀέρι παραδίδως, or something to that 
effect. We may suppose that a Christian reader was puzzled by the 
word πνεῦμα (which in his usage meant, not the material ‘vital spirit ’, 
but the highest and divinest part of man), and tried to improve the 
sense by altering the text, and writing ‘you deliver up your (vicious) 
character to the Devil’, 

ἀνενέργητον. The work of the πνεῦμα as a part of the individual 
man is ended. 

καὶ ai αἰσθήσεις τοῦ σώματος εἰς τὰς ἑαυτῶν πηγὰς ἐπανέρχονται, 
The writer regards the bodily senses as parts of the material πνεῦμα 
which permeates the body. This is the Stoic view. Iambl. De an, 
Stob. τ. 49. 33, vol. i, p. 368 W.: πνεύματα γὰρ ἀπὸ τοῦ ἡγεμονικοῦ 
φασιν (οἱ Στωικοὶ) διατείνειν ἄλλα κατ᾽ ἄλλα, τὰ μὲν εἰς ὀφθαλμούς, τὰ δὲ 
εἰς ὦτα, τὰ δὲ εἰς ἄλλα αἰσθητήρια. Aetius, Diels Doxogr. p. 410: 
according to the Stoics, ἀπὸ τοῦ ἡγεμονικοῦ ἑπτὰ μέρη ἐστὶ τῆς ψυχῆς 
ἐκπεφυκότα καὶ ἐκτεινόμενα εἰς τὸ σῶμα καθάπερ αἱ ἀπὸ τοῦ πολύποδος 
πλεκτάναι' τῶν δὲ ἑπτὰ μερῶν τῆς ψυχῆς πέντε μέν εἰσι τὰ αἰσθητήρια, 
ὅρασις ὄσφρησις ἀκοὴ γεῦσις καὶ ἅφη. ὧν ἡ μὲν ὅρασις ἐστὶ πνεῦμα 
διατεῖνον ἀπὸ ἡγεμονικοῦ μέχρις ὀφθαλμῶν, ἀκοὴ δὲ κ-ιτιλ. (The Stoics 
held the ψυχή to be a material thing, and called it πνεῦμα πὼς ἔχον ; 
so that the ψυχή spoken of in that passage corresponds to the πνεῦμα 
spoken of in Cor. I.) Compare the doctrine of τὸ φανταστικὸν 
πνεῦμα which is expounded by Synesius in his De insomniis ; e.g. 
1289 Cc (Migne): τὸ φανταστικὸν πνεῦμα κοινότατόν ἐστιν αἰσθητήριον, 
καὶ σῶμα πρῶτον ψυχῆς. See note on ἡ αἴσθησις σῶμα in Herm. af. 
Stob. Ζῖχε, III. 21. 

μέρη (τοῦ κόσμου) γινόμεναι, καὶ πάλιν συνιστάμεναι εἰς [τὰς] (ἑτέρας) 








LIBELLVS I: § 24 59 


ἐνεργείας. The αἰσθήσεις, being parts of the πνεῦμα of the individual 
man, go back into the mass of cosmic πνεῦμα whence they came, 
j.e. into the atmosphere. But in course of time, the same ‘pneu- 
matic’ matter enters into other organisms, and in them, again 
assumes the function of sense-perception. Cf. Iambl. De an., Stob. 
τ. 49. 43, Vol. i, p. 384 W.: ἤτοι yap λύεται ἑκάστη δύναμις ἄλογος (τῆς 
ψυχῆς) εἰς τὴν ὅλην ζωὴν τοῦ παντός, ἀφ᾽ ἧς ἀπεμερίσθη" ἢ καὶ ὅτι 
μάλιστα μένει ἀμετάβλητος, ὥσπερ ἡγεῖται ἸΤορφύριος" ἢ καὶ χωρισθεῖσα 
ἀπὸ τῆς διανοίας ἡ ὅλη ἄλογος ζωὴ μένει καὶ αὐτὴ διασωζομένη ἐν τῷ 
κόσμῳ, ὥσπερ οἱ παλαιότατοι τῶν ἱερέων ἀποφαίνονται. The ἄλογοι 
δυνάμεις are, or include, the αἰσθήσεις ; and the writer of Corp. I 
apparently holds the first of the three views spoken of by Iamblichus. 
(As to the third of these views, see Corp. X. 16.) Proclus 7 Pi. 
Tim. p. 311: of the Platonists, of μέν, τὴν λογικὴν ψυχὴν μόνην 
ἀθάνατον ἀπολείποντες, φθείρουσι τήν τε ἄλογον ζωὴν σύμπασαν καὶ τὸ 
πνευματικὸν ὄχημα τῆς ψυχῆς, κατὰ τὴν εἰς γένεσιν ῥοπὴν τῆς ψυχῆς τὴν 
ὑπόστασιν διδόντες αὐτοῖς, μόνον τε νοῦν ἀθάνατον διατηροῦντες .. .» τοὺς 
᾿Αττικοὺς λέγω καὶ ᾿Αλβίνους καὶ τοιούτους τινάς" ᾿ οἱ b&..., ὥσπερ ot 
περὶ Πορφύριον, ... παραιτοῦνται μὲν τὴν καλουμένην φθορὰν κατασκε- 
δαννύναι τοῦ τε ὀχήματος καὶ τῆς ἀλόγου ψυχῆς, ἀναστοιχειοῦσθαι δὲ αὐτά 
φασι καὶ ἀναλύεσθαί τινα τρόπον εἰς τὰς σφαίρας," ἀφ᾽ ὧν τὴν σύνθεσιν 
ἔλαχε" φυράματα δὲ εἶναι ταῦτα ἐκ τῶν οὐρανίων σφαιρῶν, καὶ κατιοῦσαν 
αὐτὰ συλλέγειν τὴν ψυχήν' ὥστε καὶ εἶναι ταῦτα καὶ μὴ εἶναι, αὐτὰ δὲ 
ἕκαστα μηκέτι εἶναι, μηδὲ διαμένειν τὴν ἰδιότητα αὐτῶν." καὶ δοκοῦσιν 
ἕπεσθαι τοῖς λογίοις (Oracula Chaldaica), ἐν τῇ καθόδῳ τὴν ψυχὴν 
λέγουσι συλλέγειν αὐτό, λαμβάνουσαν “ αἴθρης μέρος ἠελίου τε σελήνης 
τε καὶ ὅσα ἠέρι συνέχονται ᾿᾿. 


1 1, 6, the Platonists Atticus and Albinus (second century A. 1.) said that at a 
man’s death his ‘irrational part’ (the αἰσθητικόν and παθητικόν) perishes com- 
pletely, and his νοῦς alone continues to exist. 

2 Ο Corp. 1. 25. The ὄχημα τῆς ψυχῆς spoken of by Proclus corresponds to 
the πνεῦμα (‘vital spirit’) spoken of in Corp. I. 17 and 24; the ἄλογος ζωή or 
ἄλογος ψυχή spoken of by Proclus corresponds both to the αἰσθήσεις spoken of in 
Corp. 1. 24 (and there regarded as parts of the πνεῦμα), and to the planetary πάθη 
spoken of in Corp, 1. 25. 

§ T.e. at death the man's αἰσθητικόν ceases to exist as an individual and separate 
thing ; but in another sense it continues to exist, being absorbed into the cosmic 
mass. This agrees closely with the doctrine of Corg, I. 24. 

Proclus here ascribes to Porphyry the first of the three views distinguished by 
Iamblichus in the passage quoted above ; Iamblichus, on the other hand, ascribes 
to Porphyry the second of those three views. Porphyry himself (᾿ Αφορμαὲ πρὸς τὰ 
γοητά 20) says ἐξελθούσῃ (τῇ ψυχῇ) τοῦ στερεοῦ σώματος τὸ πνεῦμα συνομαρτεῖ, ὃ ἐκ 
τῶν σφαιρῶν συνελέξατο" and this seems to show that Iamblichus is right in what 
he says about him, But perhaps Porphyry spoke differently in different writings. 


όο CORPVS HERMETICVM 
{kal ὁ θυμὸς καὶ ἡ ἐπιθυμία εἰς τὴν ἄλογον φύσιν χωρεῖ] This 


statement implies that the man gets rid of θυμός and ἐπιθυμία while 
he is still in the sublunar region. But in the following section we 
are told that, when he quits that region and enters the heavens, he 
still has in him certain evil πάθη, which might be collectively 
described as θυμός and ἐπιθυμία ; and one of these πάθη is actually 
called ἡ ἐπιθυμητικὴ dary. The author can hardly have been guilty 
of so manifest an inconsistency ; and it is most likely that the words 
καὶ ὁ θυμὸς... χωρεῖ were inserted by some one else,—possibly by 
the same person who altered πνεῦμα into ἦθος above. 

Even when these words have been struck out, a difficulty still 
remains ; for a man who has got rid of his αἰσθήσεις could hardly 
continue to be liable to the πάθη enumerated in connexion with the 
planets. But the inconsistency of making the man retain the πάθη 
after he has got rid of the αἰσθήσεις is less obvious than that of 
making him retain the πάθη after he has got rid of θυμός and ἐπιθυμία, 
and the writer may have failed to notice it. 

§ 25. τῇ πρώτῃ ζώνῃ δίδωσι... καὶ τῇ ἑβδόμῃ τὸ ἐνεδρεῦον ψεῦδος. 
We were told in ὃ 138 that the first Anthropos, in the course of his 
descent into the lower world, took into himself the distinctive qualities 
(φύσεις) of the several planets. All individual men have inherited 
these qualities from their ancestor the first Anthropos ; and we are 
now told that the disembodied soul, in the course of its ascent to the 
higher world, renders them back to the planets to which they severally 
belong, and so gets rid of them. In his list of the planetary influences, 
the writer has adopted astrological notions which were current in his 
time. The αὐξητικὴ καὶ μειωτικὴ ἐνέργεια (i.e. the operation of what 
Aristotle called the θρεπτικὴ ψυχή, or τὸ θρεπτικὸν τῆς ψυχῆς μόριον,) 
comes from the Moon; fraud, from Mercury; lust, from Venus ; 
pride, from the Sun 3 audacity, from Mars; covetousness, from 
Jupiter ; and deceitfulness, from Saturn. (The distinction between 
ἡ μηχανὴ τῶν κακῶν δόλων, which is attributed to Mercury, and τὸ 
ἐνεδρεῦον ψεῦδος, which is attributed to Saturn, perhaps consists in 
a difference of motive. The ‘Mercurial’ man deceives others with 
a view to his own gain ; the ‘Saturnine’ man deceives others out of 
malice, and his object is to do them mischief.) 

The influence of the moon, as here described, is neither good nor 
bad,—except in so far as change in itself is bad, as compared with 
the immutability of the higher world ; but the influences of the six 
other planets are assumed to be morally bad. In regarding the 








LIBELLVS I: δῷ 24, 25 61 


planets as maleficent powers, the author agrees with some of the 
Christian Gnostics. 

A list of the planetary influences is given in the verses which 
Stobaeus (Zxc, XXIX) ascribes to ‘Hermes’: δάκρυ μέν ἐστι Κρόνος, 
Ζεὺς (δ. ἡ γένεσις, λόγος Ἑρμῆς, | θυμὸς “Apys, Μήνη δ᾽ dp’ ὕπνος, 
Κυθέρεια δ᾽ ὄρεξις. The writer of those verses agrees with Cor. I in 
attributing ὄρεξις to Venus, and in calling Mars θρασύς, but differs as 
to the characteristics of the other planets. Cf. Firmicus Maternus 
Math. τ. 22: ‘si Saturnus facit cautos graves tardos avaros ac tacitos, 
Iuppiter maturos bonos benignos ac modestos, Mars crudeles perfidos 
ac feroces, Sol religiosos nobiles ac superbos, Venus luxuriosos 
yenustos et honesto gratiae splendore fulgentes, Mercurius astutos 
callidos et concitati animi mobilitalibus turbulentos, Luna acutos 
splendidos elegantes et popularis splendoris gratia praevalentes.’ 

As to the notion that the soul receives certain things from the 
planets in the course of its descent, and renders them back to the 
planets in the course of its ascent, see Wendland, Hedlen-Rim. Kultur, 
pp. 165-171, and Dieterich, Alithras/tturgie, p. 180 ff. This notion, 
(in which the Stoic conception of the structure of the universe, as 
popularized by Posidonius, is presupposed,) seems to have been 
adopted by the Mithraists of the Roman Empire, and symbolically 
represented in their ritual.t. It was probably from the Mithraists that 
it passed to certain Gnostics, who substituted names of angels for 
those of the seven planet-gods (Orig. ¢. Ce/s. 6. 22-31); and it may 
very well have been transmitted from the Mithraists to the author of 
Corp. I also. : 

The notion was accepted by some of the later Platonists ; οἵ, 
Porph. Aphormai 29, quoted above. Arnobius Adz, nat. 2. 16 speaks 
of certain Platonists who say that ‘dum ad corpora labimur et pro- 
peramus humana, ex mundanis circulis sequuntur nos causae quibus 


1 We hear of a κλῖμαξ ἑπτάπυλος (i.e. a staircase barred by seven successive 
gates) in connexion with the subterranean sanctuaries of the Mithraists. Celsus, 
in Orig, c. Cels, 6. 22 : αἰνίττεται ταῦτα (viz. the descent and ascent of the soul) 
καὶ ὁ Περσῶν λόγος, καὶ ἡ τοῦ Μίθρου τελετὴ wap’ αὐτοῖς ἐστιν. ἔστι γάρ τι ἐν αὐτῇ 
σύμβολον τῶν δύο τῶν ἐν οὐρανῷ περιόδων, τῆς τε ἀπλανοῦς καὶ τῆς εἰς τοὺς πλάνητας 
αὖ "γεγενημένης" (al. veveunuévns), καὶ τῆς δι᾽ αὐτῶν τῆς ψυχῆς διεξόδου. τοιόνδε τὸ 
σύμβολον" κλῖμαξ “ὑψίπυλος" (ἑπτάπυλος Boherel), ἐπὶ δ᾽ αὐτῇ πύλη ὀγδόη, ... τὴν 
πρώτην (πύλην) τίθενται Kpdvov...* ἑβδύμην ἡλίου. (The order in which the 
esiad are arranged is that of the days of the week reversed.) The details of the 

ithraic ritual (τελετή) spoken of by Celsus are unknown; did the worshippers 
enact the descent of the soul to earth by passing down the staircase into the cave, 
and the ascent of the soul, by going up the staircase from the cave to the open air 
above? Cf, Porphyry De antro nymph. 6, quoted in note on Corp. VIII. 3. 


62 CORPVS HERMETICVM 


mali simus’. Zé, 2. 28, arguing against that doctrine, Arnobius asks 
how embodied souls can know ‘quas ex quibus circulis qualitates, 
dum in haec loca labuntur, attraxerint’. Macrobius Soman. 1. 12.68 : 
“de zodiaco et lacteo (i.e. from the outermost sphere, the ogdoas of 
Corp, I,) ad subiectas sphaeras anima delapsa, dum per illas labitur, 
in singulis singulos motus quos in exercitio est habitura producit, in 
Saturni (sphaera) ratiocinationem et intelligentiam, in Iovis vim 
agendi, in Martis animositatem, in Solis sentiendi opinandique 
naturam, desiderii vero motum in Veneris, pronuntiandi et interpre- 
tandi quae sentiat in orbe Mercurii, naturam vero plantandi et 
augendi corpora ingressu globi lunaris exercet’. Servius ad Virg. 
Aen, 11. σα: ‘dicunt physici, quum nasci coeperimus, sortimur a sole 
spiritum, a luna corpus, a Venere cupiditatem, a Saturno humorem, 
quae omnia singulis reddere videntur extincti Serv. ad V. Aen. 6. 
714: ‘mathematici fingunt quod singulorum numinum potestatibus 
corpus et anima connexa sint, quia quum descendunt animae, trahunt 
secum torporem Saturni, Martis iracundiam, Veneris libidinem, 
Mercurii lucri cupiditatem, Iovis regni desiderium.’ Cf. Porphyry 
as reported by Proclus im P/. Zim. p. 311, quoted above in note on 
§ 24. 

A somewhat less close resemblance to the doctrine of Corp. 1. 24 
and 25 may be seen in what Basilides says about the death and 
ascension of Jesus (Hippol, Ref. haer. 7. 27): γέγονε δὲ ταῦτα, φησίν, 
ἵνα ἀπαρχὴ τῆς φυλοκρινήσεως γένηται τῶν συγκεχυμένων ὃ Ἰησοῦς... 
ἀναγκαῖον ἦν τὰ συγκεχυμένα φυλοκρινηθῆναι διὰ τῆς τοῦ Ἰησοῦ διαιρέσεως. 
ἔπαθεν οὖν τοῦτο ὅπερ ἦν αὐτοῦ σωματικὸν μέρος, ὁ ἦν τῆς ἀμορφίας,; καὶ 
ἀπεκατέστη εἰς τὴν ἀμορφίαν' ἀνέστη δὲ τοῦτο ὅπερ ἦν ψυχικὸν αὐτοῦ 
μέρος, ὅπερ ἣν τῆς ἑβδομάδος," καὶ ἀπεκατέστη εἰς τὴν ἑβδομάδα" ἀνή- 
στησε] δὲ τοῦτο ὅπερ ἣν τῆς ἀκρωρείας οἰκεῖον τοῦ μεγάλου ἄρχοντος," καὶ 
ἔμεινε παρὰ τὸν ἄρχοντα τὸν μέγαν" Γἀνήνεγκεϊ (ἀνηνέχθη) δὲ μέχρις ἄνω 
τοῦτο ὅπερ ἦν τοῦ μεθορίου πνεύματος, καὶ ἔμεινεν ἐν τῷ μεθορίῳ πνεύματι." 


ἀπεκαθάρθη δὲ ἡ υἱότης ἡ τρίτη" δὶ αὐτοῦ,. .. καὶ ἀνῆλθε πρὸς τὴν 


' T.e. of gross matter. 

3. The hebdomas is the region of the seven planetary spheres. 

5 ὁ The ἀκρώρεια of the great Archon’ is the sphere af the fixed stars, the abode 
of the Demiurgus. 

* Ile. at the boundary between the material world and the immaterial world, the 
latter being thought of as filling the space outside the Kosmos, 
_ = The τρίτη υἱότης is the divine element which had been intermixed with matter 
in the lower world. (Is it merely a coincidence that the Anthropos of (ον. I is 
third son of the supreme God $3) 








LIBELLVS I: δὲ 25. 26a 63 


μακαρίαν vidrnra,! διὰ πάντων τούτων διελθοῦσα. . . . τῆς οὖν φυλοκρινή- 
σεως ἀπαρχὴ γέγονεν 6 Ἰησοῦς" . . - τούτῳ γὰρ τῷ τρόπῳ φησὶν ὅλην τὴν 
υἱότητα τὴν καταλελειμμένην εἰς τὴν ἀμορφίαν.... δεῖν φυλοκρινηθῆναι, 
ᾧ τρόπῳ καὶ ὃ Ἰησοῦς πεφυλοκρίνηται. The last sentence implies that 
in the case of every man a like ‘separation of things of diverse 
nature’ is destined to take place. Basilides has adopted and applied 
to Jesus a doctrine which in certain Pagan schools was taught con- 
cerning men in general. Compare the doctrine of a Gnostic sect in 
Irenaeus 1. 30. 12: ‘descendisse autem eum (sc. Christum) per sep- 
tem caelos, assimilatum (esse) 'filiis! (τοῖς ἄρχουσιν ἢ) eorum dicunt, 
et sensim eorum evacuasse virtutem.’ 

§ 26a. γυμνωθεὶς ἀπὸ τῶν τῆς ἁρμονίας ἐνεργημάτων. The τῆς 
ἁρμονίας ἐνεργήματα are the planetary πάθη which have just been 
enumerated. As to γυμνωθείς, cf. Plotinus τ. 6. 7: ἀναβατέον οὖν 
πάλιν ἐπὶ τὸ ἀγαθόν. . . . τεῦξις δὲ αὐτοῦ ἀναβαίνουσι πρὸς τὸ ἄνω, καὶ 
ἐπιστραφεῖσι, καὶ ἀποδυομένοις ἃ καταβαίνοντες ἠμφιέσμεθα" οἷον ἐπὶ τὰ 
ἅγια τῶν ἱερῶν τοῖς ἀνιοῦσι καθάρσεις τε καὶ ἱματίων ἀποθέσεις τῶν πρίν, 
καὶ τὸ γυμνοῖς ἀνιέναι" ἕως ἄν τις Γπαρελθὼν! (ἀποβαλὼν ?) πᾶν ὅσον 
ἀλλότριον τοῦ θεοῦ, αὑτῷ μόνῳ αὐτὸ μόνον ἴδῃ κιτιλ. I do not know what 
particular ritual Plotinus had in mind. Did the Mithraists thus strip 
themselves when they were ascending their κλῖμαξ ἑπτάπυλος ἢ 

γίνεται ἐπὶ τὴν ὀγδοαδικὴν (ὀγδοατικὴν MSS.) φύσιν. ‘The substance 
of the οράρας is the eighth and outermost sphere, that of the fixed 
stars. Thisis the δημιουργικὴ σφαῖρα spoken of in ὃ 13a, 1. 6, the seat 
of the Demiurgus-Nous ; and it was there that Anthropos was situated 
before his descent through the region of the planets. It is the sphere 
to which the ὀγδόη πύλη of the Mithraists corresponded (Orig. ¢. Ce/s. 
6. 22, quoted above). Cf. Clem. Alex. Strom. 4. 161: εἴτε ἑπτὰ 
οὐρανοὶ οὕς τινες ἀριθμοῦσι κατ᾽ éravdBacw, εἴτε καὶ ἡ ἀπλανὴς χώρα ἡ 
πλησιάζουσα τῷ νοητῷ κόσμῳ ὀγδοὰς λέγοιτο. ‘The word ὀγδοάς is 
frequently used in this sense in the writings of the Christian Gnostics ; 
e.g. Basilides, Hippol. Ref haer. 7. 27: ἔστιν ὃ κόσμος διῃρημένος εἰς 
(1) ὀγδοάδα (the sphere of the fixed stars), ἥτις ἐστὶν ἡ κεφαλὴ 
τοῦ παντὸς κόσμου, . .. καὶ εἰς (2) ἑβδομάδα (the region of the 
seven planets),? ἥτις ἐστὶν Γἣ κεφαλὴ τῆς ἑβδομάδος ὃ δημιουργὸς τῶν 

! The μακαρία υἱότης is that ‘Sonship’ which ἅμα τῷ γενέσθαι τοῦ σπέρματος τὴν 
πρώτην καταβολὴν... ἀνῆλθε καὶ ἀνέδραμε κάτωθεν ἄνω, and has ever since remained 
above, in union with God. 

? Cf, Irenaeus 1. 30. 9: the Ophites ‘sanctam hebdomadam septem stellas quas 


dicunt planetas esse yolunt’. 
Hippolytus, Ref. haer. 7. 26, apparently reports Basilides as saying that there 


64 CORPVS HERMETICVM 


ὑποκειμένων} καὶ εἰς (3) τοῦτο τὸ διάστημα τὸ καθ᾽ ἡμᾶς (the sublunar 
world), ὅπου ἐστὶν ἡ ἀμορφία. 

The Valentinians used the word ὀγδοάς in two different senses. 
Their ‘first éySods’ was the group of the eight highest Aeons. But 
they also used ὀγδοάς as Basilides used it, in the sense of ‘the eighth 
sphere’, i. e. the sphere of the fixed stars, which is above the planetary 
hebdomas, E.g. the Valentinian Theodotus, Clem. Alex. /ragm. 63 : 
ἡ μὲν οὖν τῶν πνευματικῶν ἀνάπαυσις... ἐν ὀγδοάδι. .. παρὰ 
τῇ μητρί (Sophia), Γἔχοντα! (ρὲ ἐχόντων) τὰς ψυχὰς [τὰ] ἐνδύματα " 
ἄχρι συντελείας" " αἱ δὲ ἄλλαι πισταὶ ψυχαὶ παρὰ τῷ δημιουργῷ. περὶ 
δὲ τὴν συντέλειαν ἀναχωροῦσι καὶ αὗται εἰς ὀγδοάδα. . .. τὸ δὲ 
ἐντεῦθεν, ἀποθέμενα τὰ πνευματικὰ (NOM.) τὰς ψυχὰς «7.4. enter into 
the p/eroma (which is above the material Kosmos), καὶ πρὸς τὴν τοῦ 
Γπνεύματος" ὄψιν ἔρχονται, αἰῶνες νοεροὶ γενόμενα. (This passage has 
much in common with the description of the ascent of the soul 
in Corp. 1.) 70. 80: ὃν γεννᾷ ἡ μήτηρ, εἰς θάνατον ἄγεται καὶ εἰς 
κόσμον" ὃν δὲ ἀναγεννᾷ Χριστός, εἰς ζωὴν μετατίθεται εἰς ὀγδοάδα (i. ε. 
into the ‘eighth sphere’, which is above the seat of the Valentinian 
Demiurgus, and beyond the reach of the planetary man). 


are 365 οὐρανοί in the Aeddomas, His words are these: ἐπεὶ οὖν καὶ τὰ ἐν τῇ 
ἑβδομάδι πάντα πεφώτιστο... ."--- κτίσεις γάρ εἰσι [κατ᾽ αὐτὰ τὰ διαστήματα καὶ κατ᾽ 
abrods! (lege κατὰ τοῦτο τὸ διάστημα, sc. in the planetary region) ἄπειροι καὶ ἀρχαὶ 
καὶ δυνάμεις καὶ ἐξουσίαι, .. . ἔνθα καὶ τριακοσίους ἑξήκοντα πέντε οὐρανοὺς φάσκουσι, 
καὶ τὸν μέγαν ἄρχοντα αὐτῶν εἶναι τὸν "ABpacdg . . "--ἀλλ᾽ ἐπεί, φησί, ταῦθ᾽ οὕτως 
ἐγένετο, ἔδει λοιπὸν καὶ τὴν ἀμορφίαν (τὴν) καθ' ἡμᾶς (i.e, the sublunar world) 
φωτισθῆναι. If this statement is to be accepted, the meaning may perhaps have 
been, not that there is a serics of 365 concentric spheres, but that there are 365 
different aspects of the heavens, corresponding to the 365 days of the year. Each 
of these aspects of the heavens—or in other words, each of the days of the year—is 
presided over by a different Power (a xpovoxpdrap, as Egyptian astrologers would 
have said) ; and all these 365 Powers together are subject to ‘ the great Archon’ 
Abrasax, who is lord of the whole region of the planets. Cf. Irenaeus 1, 24.7: 
‘trecentorum (possibly ¢recenfas?) autem sexaginta quinque caelorum locales 
positiones distribuunt | Basilidiani), similiter ut mathematici ; illoram (sc. mathe- 
maticorum, “ astrologers") enim theoremata accipientes, in sunm characterem 
doctrinae transtulerunt: esse autem principem illorum ᾿Αβράξας (εἶναι δὲ τὸν 
ἄρχοντα αὐτῶν φησιν ᾿Αβρασάξ Theodoret), et propter hoc CCCLXV numeros 
habere in se.’ The letters of the name ᾿Αβρασάξ or ᾿Αβράξας, taken as numbers, 
make up the number 365 when added together. (It was noted that the letters of 
the name Μείθρας also make up the number 365 ; Jerome i Amos lib. 1.) 

! Perhaps ἡ κεφαλὴ [ ] τῶν ὑποκειμένων. 

* The πνευματικόν is the highest part of the man; the ψυχή is a lower part, and 
is regarded as a ‘ vesture’ or ‘integument’ of the πνευματικόν. 

* Ie, until the final consummation of all things, 

* T.e. in the planetary Aeldomas, which is the seat of the Demiurgus in the 
Valentinian system. 

5 Basilides sometimes used ὀγδοάς and ἑβδομάς as personal names, signifying 
respectively ‘the Power that resides in the eighth sphere’ and ‘the Power that 
resides in the seven planetary spheres’; e.g. Hippol. Ref. haer. ἡ. 252 ἦν... 








LIBELLVS I: § 26a 65 


τὴν ἰδίαν δύναμιν ἔχων. The man has at this stage recovered the 
powers proper to his true nature, which he had lost through his 
descent into gross matter. 

ὑμνεῖ σὺν τοῖς (ἐκεῖ) οὖσι τὸν πατέρα. Those who are ‘there’ 
(i.e. in the sphere of the fixed stars) are (1) the star-gods, and 
(2) other human souls, which have previously mounted to that sphere. 
The notion that human souls of the highest order, after their release 
from the body, take up their abode in the sphere of the fixed stars, 
can be traced back (perhaps through Posidonius) to Heraclides 
Ponticus See Οἷα, Soman. Scip.; and cf. Corp. X. 7 fin.: αὕτη (viz. 
residence among the astral gods) ψυχῆς ἡ τελειοτάτη δόξα. The 
author of Corp. I has adopted this notion; but he regards an abode 
in this region, not as the highest to which the soul can attain, but 
as a stage on the way to something yet higher. 

ἀκούει καὶ τῶν δυνάμεων, ὑπὲρ τὴν ὀγδοαλικὴν φύσιν οὐσῶν, φωνῇ 
τινι ἰδίᾳ ὑμνουσῶν τὸν θεόν. As to the hymns sung by the δυνάμεις, 
cf. Valentinus, Hippol. 2ef haer. 6. 31 π.: ἀνέδραμεν . .. ὃ 
Χριστὸς καὶ τὸ “Aywov Πνεῦμα πρὸς τὸν Νοῦν καὶ τὴν ᾿Αλήθειαν ἐντὸς 
τοῦ ὅρου (i.e. into the pleroma with which extracosmic space is 
filled), Γἢ} (iv ἢ) μετὰ τῶν ἄλλων αἰώνων δοξάζων τὸν Πατέρα. For 
φωνῇ τινι ἰδίᾳ, cf. ταῖς γλώσσαις... τῶν ἀγγέλων in 1 Cor, 13. 1. 
Testament of Job (Reitzenstein Poim. p. 57): the first of Job’s three 
daughters ἀπεφθέγξατο τοὺς ἀγγελικοὺς ὕμνους ἐν ἀγγελικῇ φωνῇ, 
καὶ ὕμνον ἀνέμελπε τῷ θεῷ κατὰ τὴν ἀγγελικὴν ὑμνολογίαν" the second 


βασιλεὺς καὶ κύριος ὡς ἐδόκει τῶν ὅλων ὃ μέγας ἄρχων, ἡ ᾿Ογδοάς" ἣν δὲ καὶ τούτου 
τοῦ διαστήματος βασιλεὺς καὶ κύριος ἡ Ἕβδομάς, And in the same way, the 
Valentinians, holding the eighth sphere to be the abode of Achamoth-Sophia, and 
the planetary Aeddomas to be the abode of her son the Demiurgus, sometimes 
called Sophia herself ’O-ySods, and the Demiurgus Ἕβδομάς, Irenaeus 1. 5. 3: (τὴν 
᾿Αχαμὼθ) καὶ ᾿Ογδοάδα καλοῦσι καὶ Σοφίαν..." ἔχειν δὲ τὸν τῆς μεσότητος τύπον 
αὐτήν, καὶ εἶναι ὑπεράνω μὲν τοῦ δημιουργοῦ, ὑποκάτω δὲ τοῦ πληρώματος μέχρι 
συντελείας. Jb. τ. 5. 2: Ἑβδομάδα καλοῦσιν αὐτόν (sc. τὸν δημιουργόν), τὴν δὲ 
μητέρα τὴν ᾿Αχαμὼθ ᾿Ογδοάδα, ἀποσώζουσαν τὸν ἀριθμὸν Γτοῦ. (τῆς) ἀρχεγόνου καὶ 
πρώτης τοῦ πληρώματυς ὀγδοάδος, (The latter passage shows that the Valentinians, 
having adopted from their predecessors the use of ὀγδοάς in the sense of ‘the eighth 

e’, sought to connect this with their other use of it in the sense of ‘the first 
eight Aeons’.) 

‘A similar use of Ὀγδοάς as a person-name occurs in a magic papyrus (Pap. 
Leyd. W. 139. 45 Leemann: Reitzenstein Poim., p. 54): τὸ κύριον ὄνομα, 6 ἐστιν 
᾿Ογδοὰς ὄνομα, ὁ τὰ πάντα ἐπιτάσσων καὶ διοικῶν" τούτῳ γὰρ ὑπετάγησαν ἄγγελοι, 
ἀρχάγγελοι, δαίμονες, δαιμόνισσαι, καὶ πάντα τὰ ὑπὸ τὴν κτίσιν. 70. 141. 5: χρήσῃ 
τῷ μεγάλῳ ὀνόματι, ὅ ἐστιν 'Ογδοὰς ὄνομα, ὁ τὰ πάντα διοικῶν τὰ κατὰ τὴν φύσιν. 
This Being, who ‘ governs all things created’, and ‘administers all things in the 
material universe’, corresponds to the ‘ great Archon’ or Demiurgus who resides 
in ‘the eighth sphere’ in the system of Basilides. 

1 A suggestion of something like it occurs in Pl. Zim, 42 B: εἰς τὴν τοῦ 
ἐυννόμου πορευθεὶς οἴκησιν ἄστρου, βίον εὐδαίμονα καὶ συνήθη ἕξοι. 


2806-2 F 


66 CORPVS HERMETICVM 


sang hymns in ‘the language (διάλεκτος) of the Archontes’; and 
the third, in ‘the language of the Cherubim ’. 

We were told in § 7 that the ‘Light’ which stands for God is 
subdivided into innumerable δυνάμεις. That is, the supreme God 
is pictured as a Being made up of innumerable ‘Powers’, which 
fill the boundless space outside the Kosmos. In § 26a, these 
‘Powers’ are regarded as persons. The Catholic Christians spoke 
of three divine ‘ Persons’; the Valentinians, of thirty. The author 
of Corp. I recognizes innumerable Persons in a somewhat similar 
sense; and he holds that individual human souls may be added 
to the number of them (δυνάμεις καὶ αὐτοὶ γενόμενοι ἐν θεῷ γίνονται). 

His conception of the δυνάμεις of God resembles that of Philo. 
(See Bousset, Re/. des Judentums, Kap. XVIII; and Zeller, P/iz, 
der Gr. III, Abth. 2 (1903), pp. 407-418.) Philo speaks much of 
God’s δυνάμεις. He repeatedly says that the two chief δυνάμεις of 
God are ἡ ποιητικὴ δύναμις (also called ἡ εὐεργέτις δύναμις and ἡ 
τοῦ θεοῦ ἀγαθότης), and ἡ βασιλικὴ δύναμις (also called ἀρχή, ἐξου- 
σία, ἡγεμονία, τὸ κράτος, ἡ ἡγεμονικὴ καὶ δεσποτικὴ ἐξουσία, and ἡ 
κολαστήριος δύναμις). In De fuga et invent. 18. 94 ff., Wendland 
III, p. 130, he adds three others, the operation of which is limited 
to God’s dealings with erring men, viz. ἡ ἵλεως δύναμις (by which 
God pardons repentant sinners), ἡ προστακτική (by which God gives 
commands to men), and ἡ ἀπαγορευτική (by which God issues pro- 
hibitions) ; and he there says that these five δυνάμεις are subordinate 
to the θεῖος λόγος, which is the first and chief δύναμις, and the 
ἡνίοχος τῶν δυνάμεων. Cf. De cherubim 9. 27, Cohn I, p. 176: κατὰ τὸν ὦ 
ἕνα ὄντως ὄντα θεὸν δύο τὰς ἀνωτάτω εἶναι καὶ πρώτας δυνάμεις ἀγα- 
θότητα καὶ ἐξουσίαν, . .. τρίτον δὲ συνάγοντα ἀμφοῖν μέσον εἶναι 
λόγον, λόγῳ γὰρ καὶ ἄρχοντα καὶ ἀγαθὸν εἶναι τὸν θεόν. In other 
passages, he says that the two chief δυνάμεις of God are ἡ ποιητική 
and ἡ βασιλική, and does not mention the λόγος in connexion 
with them, Elsewhere, he says that the δυνάμεις of God are un- 
limited in number ;? and he identifies them (1) with the Platonic 
ἰδέαι, (2) with the (σπερματικοὶ) λόγοι of the Stoics, and (3) with 
the ‘angels’ of the Jews and the ‘daemons’ of the Platonists. At 
times, a δύναμις of God means to Philo merely a mode or depart- 
ment of God’s action. But at other times, he conceives the δυνάμεις 
as persons distinct from God; he speaks of them as God’s δορυφόροι, 


1 De conf. ling. 34. 171, Wendland I, p. 262: els ὧν ὁ θεὸς ἀμυθήτους περὶ αὑτὸν 
ἔχει δυνάμεις, ἀρωγοὺς καὶ σωτηρίους τοῦ γενομένου πάσας, 








LIBELLVS I: δὲ 26a, 26 Ὁ 67 


and even calls them ψυχαί (De conf. ling. 4,4). See also Philo 
Legat. ad Caium τ. 6, Cohn VI, p. 156. 

Philo’s hypostatization of the δυνάμεις is an instance of a mode 
of thought which was common among the Jews of his time. There 
are traces in the New Testament of a tendency to hypostatize the 
δύναμις θεοῦ ; e.g. x Cor. 1.24: Χριστὸν θεοῦ δύναμιν καὶ θεοῦ σοφίαν. 
Luke 1. 35: δύναμις “Ὑψίστου ἐπισκιάσει σοι (where δύναμις Ὑψίστου 
stands in parallelism with πνεῦμα ἅγιον). Luke 22.69: ἔσται ὃ υἱὸς 
τοῦ ἀνθρώπου καθήμενος ἐκ δεξιῶν τῆς δυνάμεως τοῦ θεοῦ. In Ep. Eph. 
1. 21 (ὑπεράνω πάσης ἀρχῆς καὶ ἐξουσίας καὶ δυνάμεως καὶ κυριότητος), 
the δυνάμεις are persons. Simon Magus called himself 4 μεγάλη 
δύναμις, probably meaning thereby that in him the divine νοῦς or 
λόγος had ‘become flesh’, Simon, as reported by Hippolytus, 
spoke also of subordinate δυνάμεις, which he distinguished from ‘the 
great Power’ (ἢ μεγάλη δύναμις, ἡ ἀπέραντος). The term δύναμις 
was similarly used by some of the Christian Gnostics, e.g. by 
Satornilus.? 

καὶ τότε τάξει ἀνέρχονται πρὸς τὸν πατέρας The souls ‘ascend to 
the Father’; i.e. they quit the material Kosmos, and enter the 
incorporeal world, which is filled with the presence of God; or, as 
some of the Gnostics would have expressed it, they enter the s/eroma. 
And they enter it in due order or succession (τάξει), as each of them 
in turn becomes fit for this supreme exaltation. 

ἰθεωθῆναι]. If we retain this word, we must take it as equivalent 
to ἐν θεῷ γενέσθαι in the sense explained above. But the sentence 
reads better without it; and it seems most likely that it has been 
added by a later hand. 

§ 26 Ὁ. καθοδηγὸς γίνῃ τοῖς ἀξίοις. The prophet is to preach to 
all mankind; but it is only ‘the worthy’ among his hearers that 
will accept him as their guide. 

ὃ Ποιμάνδρης ἐμίγη ταῖς δυνάμεσιν, The divine Mind, which has 
assumed a quasi-corporeal form for the purpose of communicating 
with the prophet, returns to the incorporeal world, and resumes its 


} Acts 8, 10: ᾧ προσεῖχον πάντες... λέγοντες Οὗτός ἐστιν ἡ Δύναμις τοῦ θεοῦ ἡ 
καλουμένη Μεγάλη. Irenaeus 1. 23. 2: ‘esse se (dixit Simon) sublimissimam 
virtutem (i.e. δύναμιν), hoc est eum qui sit super omnia Pater.’ Hippol. Ref, 
haeres. 6. 19 : ἑαυτὸν δὲ λέγων τὴν ὑπὲρ πάντα δύναμιν εἶναι. 

? Hippol. Ref. haeres. 7. 28: Satornilus said ἕνα πατέρα ἄγνωστον τοῖς πᾶσιν 
ὑπάρχειν, τὸν ποιήσαντα ἀγγέλους, ἀρχαγγέλους, δυνάμεις, ἐξουσίας. Epiphan. 
Haer. 23: Satornilus said τὸν σωτῆρα ἀπεστάλθαι ἀπὸ Πατρὺς κατὰ τὴν γνωμὴν τῶν 

Heo, 


F2 


68 CORPVS HERMETICVM 


functions as the supreme Being in whom all the δυνάμεις are 
comprehended. 

§§ 27-29. [[ἐγὼ δὲ εὐχαριστήσας... τὴν ἰδίαν κοίτην.) This 
passage is out of place. ὃ 30, in which the prophet describes his 
state of mind on waking at the conclusion of his vision, must have 
been meant to follow immediately after the account of the vision 
itself ; and his hymn of thanksgiving (δ 31 f.), which follows rightly 
on ὃ 30, must have preceded § 27, the opening words of which (ἐγὼ 
δὲ εὐχαριστήσας κιτ.λ.) refer back to it. When the text is thus re- 
arranged, the order is perfectly satisfactory. The prophet first 
speaks of his own reception of the revelation (§§ 30-32), and then 
proceeds to describe how he preached to others the gnosis which had 
been revealed to him ; and he brings his narrative to a fitting close, 
by making his hearers go to bed at the end of the day thus spent, 
§ 29 fiz. (Compare the conclusion of the First Book of the Ziad.) 
It is possible that the order of the paragraphs was deliberately 
changed by some one who intended the /e//us to be read as a 
‘lesson’ at a meeting of worshippers, and considered that it would 
serve this liturgical purpose better if the hymn (in which the 
congregation might join) were placed at the end. 

§ 30. τὴν εὐεργεσίαν τοῦ Ποιμάνδρου ἀνεγραψάμην εἰς ἐμαυτόν. The 
more usual construction would be εὐεργέτην τὸν II. ἀνεγραψάμην, ‘1 
registered his name on the tablet of my memory as that of a bene- 
factor’. Cf. Pl. Gorg. 506: εὐεργέτης παρ᾽ ἐμοὶ ἀναγεγράψει. 

πληρωθεὶς ὧν ἤθελον. These words refer back to ὃ 3, μαθεῖν θέλω 
τὰ ὄντα... καὶ γνῶναι τὸν θεόν. 

ἡ τοῦ λόγου ἀφορία (ἐκφορὰ MSS.) γέννημα[τα] Γἀγαθῶν], The 
phrase ἡ τοῦ λόγου Γἐκφορά is parallel to the preceding σιωπή ; it is 
therefore evident that ἐκφορά (‘utterance’) is wrong. In his sleep, 
the prophet uttered no words; he was only dreaming that he spoke. 
ἀφορία gives the sense required, and suits well with the following 
γέννημα and the preceding ἐγκύμων. The word ἀγαθῶν can hardly 
be right, because γέννημαϊτα] ἀγαθῶν too closely resembles ἐγκύμων 
τοῦ ἀγαθοῦ. We might get a good antithesis to λόγου (‘speech’) by 
writing ἁγίων (vonpdrwv), ‘holy thoughts’. 

λαβόντι ἀπὸ τοῦ Ποιμάνδρου, τουτέστι τοῦ τῆς αὐθεντίας (νοός, τὸν... .) 
λόγον.---(λαβόντι ἀπὸ τοῦ νοός μου, τουτέστι τοῦ Ποιμάνδρου τοῦ τῆς 
αὐθεντίας λόγου MSS.) With the correction τὸν τῆς αὐθεντίας λόγον 
for τοῦ τῆς αὐθεντίας λόγου, and the omission of μου, the reading of 
the MSS. would be intelligible, if we take αὐθεντία to mean ‘the 








LIBELLVS I: δῷ 26a~-31 69 


absolute truth’, though not if we take it to mean ‘the sovereignty’. 
But it seems more probable that Poimandres was here again called 
6 τῆς αὐθεντίας νοῦς, as in § 2. 

§§ 31, 32. ἅγιος ὁ θεὸς... τὴν πᾶσαν ἐξουσίαν. This hymn occurs 
in a collection of Christian prayers, Berlin Papyrus 9794. (Berd. 
Klass. Texte, Heft V1, Altchristliche Texte. See Reitzenstein and 
Wendland, ‘Zwei angeblich christliche Gebete’, Wachrichten von der 
hk. Geselischaft der Wissensch., Gottingen, Philol.-hist. Klasse, 1910, 
Heft 4, p. 324 ff.) We are told that the Papyrus was written in the 
third century. There is no doubt that the hymn was composed to 
form part of Cor. I, and was borrowed thence by the Christian 
compiler of the collection of prayers in the Papyrus; for some of the 
phrases in it were clearly suggested by passages in Corf. I (e.g. ζωὴν 
καὶ φῶς, and παρέδωκας αὐτῷ τὴν πᾶσαν ἐξουσίαν). It must have been 
extracted from the Pagan Potmandres-document by some Christian 
who considered it suitable for use in his own worship. The Christian 
who adopted it added a doxology at the end, and probably inserted 
the words τὸ yap πνεῦμά pov (. . .) τῷ θείῳ πνεύματι. 

ὃ 81. ἅγιος (ὁ θεός, ὁ ὑποδ)είξας por [ἀπὸ τοῦ νιος] ζωὴν καὶ φ(ῶς). 
This clause is omitted in codd. Corp.; but as the words ὁ ὑποδείξας 
μοι ζωὴν καὶ φῶς were evidently written with reference to what has 
gone before in Corpus I, it is to be presumed that it originally 
belonged to that document,’ and was taken thence, with the rest of 
the hymn, by the compiler of Pag. 

For ἀπὸ τοῦ vos, Reitzenstein writes ἀπὸ τοῦ Nods. But this is 
hardly intelligible. If διά were written in place of ἀπό, the meaning 
might be διὰ τοῦ ΠΠοιμάνδρου ; and if Poimandres could be regarded 
as a person distinct from the supreme God, it might very well be 
said that God has revealed ‘Life and Light’ to the prophet through 
the agency of Poimandres. But we have seen reason to think that 
the writer’s view is rather that Poimandres, ὁ τῆς αὐθεντίας νοῦς, is 
identical with the supreme God; and if so, this explanation cannot 
be accepted. It seems best therefore to assume that ἀπὸ rod νοός 
has been wrongly inserted here. It may possibly be a misplaced 
doublet of the words ἀπὸ τοῦ νοός which occur in the text of the 
MSS. a few lines above. 

ἅγιος ὁ θεός, ὁ πατὴρ τῶν ὅλων codd. Corp.—éyvos ὁ θεὸς κ(αὶ πατὴρ 
τῶν ὅλων [ἅγιος εἶ] (ὁ πρὸ) ἀρχῆ(ς dv) Pap. As given in codd. Corp, 
the first clause of this triplet is too short to match the second and the 

1 It ought therefore to have been printed in the text. 


70 CORPVS HERMETICVM 


third ; it is therefore probable that it originally included the phrase of 
which apyy, preserved in Paf., is a remnant. The Berlin editors of 
Pap. write ὃ dx’ ἀρχῆς dv; but perhaps ὁ πρὸ ἀρχῆς dy is preferable. 
Cf. § 8a: τὸ ἀρχέτυπον εἶδος, τὸ προάρχον τῆς ἀρχῆς. In the vision 
described in § 4, the ‘light’ which stands for God is in existence 
before the first rudiment of the future Kosmos comes into being. 

οὗ ἡ βουλὴ τελεῖται ἀπὸ τῶν 'i8iwv! δυνάμεων. ἀπό is here, as often 
in post-classical writings, used in the sense of ὑπό with a passive verb. 
For βουλή, cf. ἐκ βουλῆς θεοῦ in ὃ 8b. The δυνάμεις are the ‘ Powers 
of God’ which were spoken of in ὃ 7 and § 268 54. The epithet 
ἰδίων can hardly be right ; there is no need to emphasize the fact that 
the δυνάμεις are Powers of God, and not of some one else. It would 
be possible to write (ἀλιδίων ; but though the Powers are, no doubt, 
‘everlasting’ or ‘eternal’, there would be little point in saying so 
here. Perhaps the author wrote εἰδικῶν, ‘individual’ or ‘several’. 
(For this meaning of εἰδικός, see note on Ascl. Lat. 1. 2b fin.) The 
personified δυνάμεις correspond, in one aspect, to the ‘departmental 
gods’ of Pagan theologies. Each individual among them has some 
special function of his own in the administration of the universe; 
and by discharging their several functions, they collectively fulfil the 
all-comprehensive βουλή of God. 

ὃς γνωσθῆναι βούλεται. Cf. Corp. X. 15a: θέλει γνωρίζεσθαι. 
Corp. VIL. 2a: ἀφορῶντες τῇ καρδίᾳ εἰς τὸν (οὕτως) ὁραθῆναι θέλοντα. 
God’s will that men should know him is a part of his universal βουλή. 

6 λόγῳ συστησάμενος τὰ ὄντα. λόγος here means God’s fiaé, and is no 
more hypostatized than in Ps. 32 (33) 6, τῷ λόγῳ τοῦ κυρίου οἱ οὐρανοὶ 
ἐστερεώθησαν. But it is nevertheless possible that the phrase was sug- 
gested by what was said about the hypostatized λόγος of God in ὃ 58. 

ἅγιος εἴ, ὃν ἡ φύσις οὐκ ἡμαύρωσεν' 

ἅγιος εἴ, οὗ πᾶσα φύσις εἰκὼν ἔφυ. 
So fap.; in codd. Corp. the two clauses are interchanged. The 
order of Fag. seems preferable. In the first clause, the verb is 
ἐμαύρωσεν (no doubt a miswriting of ἠμαύρωσεν) in Pag., but ἐμόρ- 
φωσεν in codd. Corp. If we accept ἐμόρφωσεν, we must take φύσις to 
mean here the power which imposes forms on matter, God is not 
included in the sphere of operation of this power; for God, being 
incorporeal, has no μορφή. But this conception of μορφή, and of 
φύσι ς as the imposer of μορφαί, does not occur elsewhere in Corp. 1; 
and ἡμαύρωσεν seems the better reading, as being in accordance with 
the notion of φῶς and σκότος which is prominent throughout the 








LIBELLVS I: §§ 31, 32 71 


document. ‘God is light, and in him is no darkness at all’ (Zp. 
Joh. τ. τ. 5). Man also, in respect of his true being, is unmixed 
light; but in his case, the light has been obscured through his 
marriage with φύσις, that is, through his descent into the world of 
matter, and incarnation in a material body. God, on the other 
hand, remains on high, apart from all that is material, and unaffected 
by the darkening influence of ὕλη. 

οὗ πᾶσα φύσις εἰκὼν ἔφυ. ἡ πᾶσα φύσις is the material universe ; 
and the material universe is an ‘image’ of God. Cf. Asc/. Lat. 
I. το: ‘dei, cuius sunt imagines duae mundus et homo’. 
Corp. VIII. 2: 6 κατ᾽ εἰκόνα αὐτοῦ ὑπ᾽ αὐτοῦ γενόμενος (sc. ὃ 
κόσμος). 

The three clauses of this triplet deal with the relation between 
God and the Kosmos. The material world has been made by God; 
but God is not affected by the evil influence of the ὕλῃ of which it is 
made ; and whatever good there is in it is a copy or reflection of the 
Good which is in God. 

ὁ πάσης δυναστείας (δυνάστεως Pap.: δυνάμεως codd. Corp.) ἰσχυρό- 
τερος. δυνάστεως is probably a conflation of two readings, δυναστείας 
and δυνάμεως. As δυνάμεων was used a few lines above in a sense not 
applicable here, δυναστείας is the more likely reading. 

δέξαι λογικὰς θυσίας ἁγνάς, Cf. Corp. XIII. 18: δέξαι... λογικὴν 
θυσίαν. Lb. 21: πέμπω λογικὰς θυσίας. A λογικὴ θυσία is an act of 
worship which consists in verbal adoration, as opposed to a material 
offering. Tertullian On Prayer, 27: ‘ most excellent is every custom 
which. . . helps us to bring to God, as our best victim, a well-enriched 
prayer; for this is the spiritual victim which has abolished the former 
sacrifices’. The epithet dyvds implies that such worship alone is 
acceptable to God, and that θυσίαι in the literal sense (i.e. material 
offerings, and especially bloody sacrifices) are ‘impure’. See As¢/. 
Lat. 41a. But perhaps ἁγνὰς ought to be bracketed. 

ἀπὸ ψυχῆς καὶ καρδίας πρὸς σὲ ἀνατεταμένης. Cf. Ascl. Lat. 41b: 
ψυχῇ πάσῃ καὶ καρδίᾳ πρὸς σὲ ἀνατεταμένῃ. 

σιωπῇ φωνούμενε. Cf, Corp. X.5: ἡ γὰρ γνῶσις αὐτοῦ βαθεῖα σιωπή 
ἐστι. 

§ 82. αἰτουμένῳ τὸ μὴ σφαλῆναι, Cf. Ascl. Lat. 4τ Ὁ : θέλησον ἡμᾶς 
διατηρηθῆναι . . . καὶ μήποτε σφαλῆναι τοῦ τοιούτου βίου. 

τῆς γνώσεως τῆς κατ᾽ οὐσίαν ἡμῶν codd. Corp.—rijs γνώσεως τῆς κατὰ 
Fudos! (ὕψος ἢ) ἡμῶν αὐτῶν Pag. The reading of codd. Corp. might be 
understood to mean either ‘the gnosis which corresponds to our 


72 CORPVS HERMETICVM 


true and incorporeal being (i.e. to the νοῦς in us)’, or ‘such 
(imperfect) gnosis as (earthly) beings like us are capable of ac- 
quiring’, The former explanation perhaps agrees better with the 
tone of the context. But the phrase τῆς κατ᾽ οὐσίαν ἡμῶν, taken in 
either sense, seems irrelevant here; we should rather have expected 
the speaker to say ‘the gnosis to which I have attained’. The 
reading of ap. is meaningless; with the emendation ὕψος (‘ our 
exalted station’) in place of vos, the phrase might perhaps be 
taken as equivalent to τῆς κατ᾽ οὐσίαν ἡμῶν in the first of the two 
senses explained above. But I am inclined to think that both texts 
are corrupt here. Possibly the true reading may be τῆς κατζὰ τὴν 
ἐξγουσίαν ἡμῶν (the ἐξουσία which God has given to man). 

καὶ ἐνδυνάμωσόν pe, (iva) [kat] τῆς χάριτος ταύτης (τυχὼν) φωτίσω τοὺς 
ἐν ἀγνοίᾳ τοῦ γένους pov. ‘This boon’ means the revelation which 
the prophet has received. He prays that supernatural power may be 
given him, in order that he may be enabled to illuminate others as he 
himself has been illuminated, and so obey the injunction of 
Poimandres (§ 26 b: οὐχ ὡς πάντα παραλαβὼν καθοδηγὸς γίνῃ x.7.A.). 
—rovs τοῦ γένους μου means ‘my fellow-men’ ; cf. καθοδηγὸς ἐγενόμην 
τοῦ γένους in ὃ 29. 

[τὸ γὰρ πνεῦμά μου τῷ θείῳ πνεύματι] Pap.: om. codd. Corp. These 
words are meaningless as they stand in Pag. Reitzenstein inserts 
συμπνεῖ after pov, and takes the meaning to be ‘ my spirit is in accord 
with the divine spirit’, But this can hardly have been written by the 
author of the hymn. We have found πνεῦμα used in this document 
in two different senses, viz. (1) ‘the element air’ (§§ 9, 16), and (2) 
the ‘vital spirit’ of the individual man (8 17). But both these uses 
of the word belong to the same stratum of Greek thought, and are 
connected with the Stoic system ; in both of them alike, the πνεῦμα 
is a material thing of gaseous substance. If we retain the words of 
Pap., we must say that the author has here used πνεῦμα in an entirely 
different sense, to signify the divine Mind, and the highest and 
incorporeal part of man. But he elsewhere uses the Platonic term 
vovs to express this conception ; and it is difficult to see why he should 
here use πνεῦμα as a substitute for νοῦς. On the other hand, πνεῦμα 
was habitually thus used by the Christians, from Paul onward. Hence 
it may be inferred that these words were inserted by a Christian, and 
presumably by the Christian who adopted this Pagan hymn for use in 
his own worship, and included it in the collection of Christian prayers 
contained in the Papyrus. 








LIBELLVS I: § 32 3 


If this clause was added by a Christian, it is possible that the 
missing verb is συμμαρτυρεῖ. Cf. Lp. Rom. 8.16: αὐτὸ τὸ πνεῦμα 
συνμαρτυρεῖ τῷ πνεύματι ἡμῶν ὅτι ἐσμὲν τέκνα θεοῦ. A Christian reader 
of the Hermetic prayer might very well be reminded of that text by 
the words υἱοὺς δὲ σοῦ and πιστεύω καὶ μαρτυρῶ, which precede and 
follow the interpolation. 

(...) διὸ πιστεύω καὶ μαρτυρῶ (ὅτι) εἰς ζωὴν καὶ φῶς xwpd. The 
prophet ‘believes’ this himself, and ‘bears witness to it’ in his 
preaching to others. But 6 is meaningless, and there is no clear 
connexion. of thought with what precedes. It may perhaps have 
been because he felt the need of something to which διό could refer, 
that the Christian interpolator inserted before it the words τὸ yap 
πνεῦμα κιτιλ. But I am inclined to suspect that in the earliest form of 
Corp. I the greater part of this hymn or prayer was absent, and that 
the prophet’s e/ogia originally ran as follows: ἅγιος ὁ θεός, 6 ὑποδείξας 
por ζωὴν καὶ φῶς" [ | διὸ πιστεύω καὶ μαρτυρῶ ὅτι εἰς ζωὴν καὶ φῶς χωρῶ. 
εὐλόγητος εἶ, πάτερ: ὃ σὸς (vids?) συναγιάζειν σοι βούλεται, καθὼς 
παρέδωκας αὐτῷ τὴν πᾶσαν ἐξουσίαν. ‘God has set before me the 
promise of Life and Light ; therefore, I believe and testify that I enter 
into Life and Light.’ We may suppose that some one afterwards ex- 
panded this short ew/ogia by inserting the three d&y.os-triplets, and the 
petitions which follow them ; whence it resulted that διό was separated 
from the clause to which it originally referred. But if so, the addition 
had already been made when the document came into the hands of 
the Christian compiler of the collection of prayers in the Papyrus, and 
must therefore have been made in or before the third century A. Ὁ. 

ὁ σὸς ἄνθρωπος συναγιάζειν σοι βούλεται. ‘Thy man’ is the higher 
and incorporeal part of the man, i. 6. the νοῦς in him, which is derived 
from the first Anthropos, and in virtue of which he is a son of God. 
But perhaps the author may have written ὁ σὸς vids, which would suit 
better with the preceding πάτερ. The phrase 6 ods ἄνθρωπος is 
borrowed from Corp. I in Corp. XIII. 20 (ὁ σὸς ἄνθρωπος ταῦτα βοᾷ) ; 
but the text of Cozg. I may have already been altered when it was 
read by the writer of Corg, XIII. 

συναγιάζειν σοι must mean ‘to be holy as thou art holy’, with 
reference to ἅγιος 6 θεός above. But ἁγιάζειν usually means ‘to make 
holy’, and we should rather have expected συναγιάζεσθαι. 

παρέδωκας αὐτῷ τὴν πᾶσαν ἐξουσίαν. Cf. πάντων τὴν ἐξουσίαν ἔχων in 
§ το, and ἔχοντες ἐξουσίαν τῆς ἀθανασίας μεταλαβεῖν in ὃ 28. Man, as 
son of God, is αὐτεξούσιος ; he is no slave οἵ Heimarmene, but is free 


—_—— 


eee EES eee 





74 CORPVS HERMETICVM 


to unite himself with God, if he will; and the man who speaks does 
will to do so (βούλεται). Cf. £v. Joh. 1.12: ὅσοι δὲ ἔλαβον αὐτόν, 
ἔδωκεν αὐτοῖς ἐξουσίαν τέκνα θεοῦ γενέσθαι. 

ὃ 27. Ὦ λαοί, ἄνδρες γηγενεῖς, κιτιλ, Corp, VII is an expansion of 
this missionary sermon. 

Men, in respect of their lower nature, are ‘sons of earth’ (γηγενεῖς). 
As long as they remain unilluminated, the earthly nature which they 
inherit from φύσις, the mother of their race, is predominant, and 
‘Man, the son of God’, is dormant in them, 

μέθῃ... ἑαυτοὺς exSeBwxdres. Cf. Pl. Phaedo 79 C: ἡ ψυχή, ὅταν 
μὲν τῷ σώματι προσχρῆται εἰς τὸ σκοπεῖν TL. . 4 τότε μὲν . . . πλανᾶται 
καὶ ταράττεται καὶ ἰλιγγιᾷ ὥσπερ μεθύουσα. 

§ 28. οἱ συνοδεύσαντες τῇ πλάνῃ καὶ συγκοινωνήσαντες τῇ ἀγνοίᾳ. 
‘Error’ and ‘Ignorance’ are here personified by a figure of speech. 

ὃ 29. ἔσπειρα (év) αὐτοῖς τοὺς τῆς σοφίας λόγους, καὶ ἐτράφη[σαν] (τὸ 
σπαρὲν ἐκ τοῦ ἀμβροσίου ὕδατος. The notion of ‘the water of im- 
mortality’ occurs in many different regions. We meet with it in 
Babylonian myths. Cf. the ὕδωρ ζῶν spoken of in Zv. Joh. 4. 10-14 
and 7. 37f. The Orphici spoke of ‘the fount of Mnemosyne’, in 
contrast to ‘the fount of Lethe’. But as the writer of Corp. 1 has 
just spoken of sowing seed, he must have gone on to speak, not of 
water which men drink, but of water with which the seed is watered. 
If then we retain ἐτράφησαν, we must understand of λόγοι as its sub- 
ject. But a reader would more naturally take the subject of ἐτράφησαν 
to be the men to whom ἐν αὐτοῖς refers ; and as this cannot be what 
the author meant, it is more likely that he wrote ἐτράφη τὸ σπαρέν, or 
something of the sort. The thought partly resembles that of Paul in 
τ Cor. 3.6: ἐγὼ ἐφύτευσα, ᾿Απολλὼς ἐπότισεν, ἀλλὰ ὁ θεὸς ηὔξανεν. The 
preacher sows the seed of wisdom ; but it is God that supplies the 
water which makes the seed grow. 

ὅλοις (ὅλης MSS.) ἐκέλευσα αὐτοῖς εὐχαριστεῖν τῷ θεῷ. καὶ ἀναπληρώ- 
σαντες τὴν εὐχαριστίαν κιτιλ, εὐχαριστία here means ἃ liturgical thanks- 
giving. This is not far from the sense in which the word was used in 
the early Christian Church, whence our word ‘Eucharist’. Cf. 
Justin Apol. τ. 13. 1: τὸν δημιουργὸν τοῦδε τοῦ παντὸς... λόγῳ εὐχῆς 
καὶ εὐχαριστίας... αἰνοῦντες. 70. τ. 65. 3: ἔπειτα προσφέρεται τῷ 
προεστῶτι τῶν ἀδελφῶν ἄρτος καὶ ποτήριον ὕδατος καὶ κράματος, καὶ οὗτος 
λαβὼν αἶνον καὶ δόξαν τῷ πατρὶ τῶν ὅλων... ἀναπέμπει, καὶ εὐχαριστίαν 
ὑπὲρ τοῦ κατηξιῶσθαι τούτων παρ᾽ αὐτοῦ ἐπὶ πολὺ ποιεῖται: οὗ συντελέ- 
σαντος τὰς εὐχὰς καὶ τὴν εὐχαριστίαν πᾶς ὁ παρὼν λαὸς ἐπευφημεῖ λέγων 
᾿Αμήν. 





75 


LIBELLVS II 





In the MSS. of the Corpus Hermeticum, the text of Libellus II 
begins at the words ἢ θεός in §4b. The part of the text which pre- 
cedes these words has been preserved by Stobaeus.' It is possible 
that, in the original document, the passage given by Stobaeus was 
preceded by some introductory sentences ; but there is no reason to 
think that any considerable part of the dialogue is missing. 

In the Corpus, this piece is entitled Ἑρμοῦ πρὸς Tar λόγος καθο- 
λικός. But this cannot have been the title of a dialogue in which the 
pupil addressed by Hermes is Asclepius ; and there can be no doubt 
that the right explanation is that which is given by Reitzenstein 
_ (Poimandres, p. 193). The dided/us which originally stood second in 
the Corpus bore the title Ἑρμοῦ πρὸς Tar Ady. καθ. In a MS. from 
which all our MSS. are derived, this title chanced to come at the 
bottom of a page, and several following leaves were torn out and lost. 
In these lost leaves were contained both the whole of the /ibe//us to 
which the title Ἑρμοῦ πρὸς Tar oy. καθ. belonged, and the title and 
beginning of the next /de//us (our Libellus II), which originally stood 
third.2 Thus the title of the lost second 4e//us came to be im- 
mediately followed by the words ἢ θεός x.7.A. of our Libellus II, and 
was consequently taken to be the title of the /e//us beginning with 
those words. 

It appears from the headings of Stobaeus’s three extracts from this 
document that it was known to him, not as one of the pieces of our 
Corpus, but as one of a collection of ‘ Discourses of Hermes to 
Asclepius’. 

Corp. II is described in the concluding words as an inéroduction to 
a course of philosophy (προγνωσία τις τῆς πάντων φύσεως) ; hence it 
may be inferred that its writer intended it to be the first of a pro- 
gressive series of discourses of Hermes. 


Contents of Libellus 77. 


That which encompasses the Kosmos, and within which the move- 
ment of the Kosmos takes place, must be something incorporeal ; 
consequently, it must be either identical with God, or closely connected 

1 This passage was restored to its place at the beginning of Corp. II by Patrizzi, 

_ who was the first to see that Stobaens’s extract had been taken from this document. 


2 Assuming that only one /de//us has been lost. But it is of course possible that 
the missing leaves contained two or more /ibed/i. 


76 CORPVS HERMETICVM 


with God (§§ 1-4 a). But it is not identical with God ; therefore, it must 
be something closely connected with God (§§ 4 b-6a). It must also 
be motionless (§ 6 b).—But is it not void? No, for there is no such 
thing as void (§§ το, 11).— 

That by which the Kosmos as a whole, and all bodies within the 
Kosmos, are moved, is something incorporeal (viz. soul) which is 
within the body moved (§§ 8b, 9). And this thing also is motionless 
(δ 6b). 

The incorporeal thing which encompasses the Kosmos is Nous 
(§ 12a). But there is something above Nous, viz. the Good, which 
is the source of Nous and Aletheia (§ 12 b). 

What then is God? God is distinct from and above Nous ; he is 
the cause of the existence of Nous and Aletheia, and of all else (§ 13). 
God is identical with the Good ; and no other being than God can 
properly be called good (§§ 14-16). 

(A passage concerning the movement of the heavenly bodies, 
§§ 6 b-8 a, and a passage in which the duty of procreation is asserted, 
§ 17a, seem to have been subsequently added.) 


The argument starts with certain propositions concerning move- 
ment (κίνησις) ; but the treatment of this topic is merely preliminary 
to the account of God which is given in §§ 12-16; and it is in these 
latter sections that the substance of the προγνωσία imparted in this 
dialogue is to be found. The doctrine set forth may be shortly 
stated thus ; ‘God is above and distinct from Nous ; he is the source 
from which Nous issues, and is identical with τὸ ἀγαθόν". 

In the first part of the dialogue (§§ 1-11), the argument is confused 
by the intermixture of statements concerning τὸ κινοῦν (= τὸ ὑφ᾽ of 
κινεῖται τὸ κινούμενον) with others concerning τὸ ἐν 6 κινεῖται. How 
far the author is responsible for this confusion, and how far it has 
been caused by subsequent dislocation of portions of the text, it is 
difficult to guess ; but the Hermetist’s meaning would certainly have 
been more clearly expressed if the two topics (that of τὸ ἐν dand that 
of τὸ ὑφ᾽ ob) had been kept separate. 


The sources of Libellus II. 

The doctrine is mainly Platonic. The conception of τὸ ἀσώματον 
is derived from Plato ; and the source of the view that God is dvov- 
σίαστος (ὃ 4b), and of the statement that νοῦς and ἀλήθεια are ‘rays’ 
emitted by τὸ ἀγαθόν (δ 12 b), is to be found in Pl. Ref, 6. 508 Eff. 
In his identification of God with τὸ ἀγαθόν, and in his account of the 








LIBELLVS II 77 


relation between God and Nous, the writer is in agreement with many 
Platonists of the Roman Empire; and in the latter, he must have 
drawn from the same Platonic sources as the Christian Gnostics who 
spoke of Nous as an emanation from the Propator. The doctrine 
that ψυχή is ἀκίνητος (§ 6b, τὸ κινοῦν ἕστηκεν) is not Platonic, but 
Aristotelian. The discussion of τὸ κενόν (§§ ro, 11) presupposes the 
Stoic doctrine of extracosmic κενόν, against which it is directed. The 
use of the word τόπος as a name for the extracosmic Nous is probably 
of Jewish origin. There is nothing distinctively Egyptian in this 
dialogue ; and there is no trace of Christian influence. 


Date. 

This Zide//us must necessarily have been written later than the 
revival of Platonism which took place in the first century B.c.; but 
how much later, it is difficult to guess. From the word προγνωσία in 
ὃ τῇ Ὁ, it may perhaps be inferred that it was one of the earlier of the 
series of Hermes to Asclepius dialogues, the latest of which seem to 
have been written shortly before a, Ὁ. 300. (See notes on the dates of 
Ascl. Lat. 11 and Corp. IX.) It could hardly be said that any date 
between A. D. 1 and 250 is impossible ; but the affinity of the doctrine 
of Nous in Corg. II to that of Platonists such as Numenius 
(A.D. 150-200), and to that of Valentinus and other Christian Gnostics, 
affords some ground for conjecturing that it was written between 
A.D. 100 and 250, 


I append here, for comparison with Corg. II and with other 
Hermetica, the fragments of Numenius in which he speaks of ‘the 
first God’ and ‘the second God’. 

Euseb, Pr. ev. τι. 18. 1-24: 

ὁ δὲ Νουμήνιος, τὰ Πλάτωνος πρεσβεύων, ἐν τοῖς Περὶ τἀγαθοῦ τάδε 
καὶ αὐτὸς περὶ τοῦ δευτέρου αἰτίου ' λέγων διερμηνεύει" 

1. “ τὸν μέλλοντα δὲ συνήσειν θεοῦ πέρι πρώτου καὶ δευτέρου χρὴ πρό- 
τερον διελέσθαι ἕκαστα ἐν τάξει καὶ ἐν εὐθημοσύνῃ τινί. ... 3. ὁ θεὸς ὃ 
μὲν πρῶτος, ἐν ἑαυτῷ ὦν, ἐστὶν ἁπλοῦς, διὰ τὸ ἑαυτῷ συγγινόμενος διόλου 
μή ποτε εἶναι διαιρετός" ὃ θεὸς μέντοι ὃ δεύτερος ἵ καὶ τρίτος" " ἐστὶν εἷς, 
συμφερόμενος δὲ τῇ ὕλῃ, δυάδι οὔσῃ, ἑνοῖ μὲν αὐτήν, σχίζεται δὲ ὑπ᾽ αὐτῆς, 
ἐπιθυμητικὸν ἦθος ᾿ ἐχούσης καὶ ῥεούσης. 4. τῷ οὖν μὴ εἶναι πρὸς τῷ 

1 Le, the second God. 

2 In place of καὶ τρίτος (which is meaningless), something like καθ᾽ ἑαυτὸν μέν, 


or (as below) πρὸς ἑαυτῷ μὲν ὦν, is needed, 
3. ἦθος Dindorf: εἶδος Mullach, 


78 CORPVS HERMETICVM 


νοητῷ, --Ἦν γὰρ ἂν πρὸς ἑαυτῷ, ---διὰ τὸ (cis?) τὴν ὕλην βλέπειν, ταύτης 
ἐπιμελούμενος ἀπερίοπτος ἑαυτοῦ γίνεται. 5. καὶ ἅπτεται τοῦ αἰσθητοῦ 
καὶ περιέπει, ἀνάγει τε ἔτι εἰς τὸ ἴδιον ἦθος, Γἀπορεξόμενος" τῆς ὕλης." 

6. καὶ μεθ᾽ ἕτερά φησι' 

“ καὶ γὰρ οὔ τι" δημιουργεῖν Γέστι χρεὼν" ὃ τὸν πρῶτον" καὶ τοῦ δημιουρ- 
γοῦντος δὲ [περὶ πατρὸς καὶ υἱοῦ] χρὴ [εἶναι] νομίζεσθαι" πατέρα τὸν 
πρῶτον θεόν. 7. εἰ μὲν οὖν περὶ τοῦ δημιουργοῦ " ζητοῖμεν, φάσκοντες 
Γδεῖν τὸν πρότερον ὑπάρξαντα οὕτως ἂν ποιεῖν ἔχειν διαφερόντως". οἰκεία 
ἡ πρόσοδος αὕτη γεγονυῖα ἂν εἴη τοῦ λόγου" εἰ δὲ περὶ τοῦ δημιουργοῦ μή 
ἐστιν ὃ λόγος, ζητοῦμεν δὲ περὶ τοῦ πρώτου, ἀφοσιοῦμαί τε τὰ λεχθέντα, 
καὶ ἔστω μὲν ἐκεῖνα ἄρρητα, μέτειμι δὲ ἑλεῖν τὸν λόγον ἑτέρωθεν θηράσας. 

8. πρὸ μέντοι τοῦ λόγου τῆς ἁλώσεως, διομολογησώμεθα ἡμῖν αὐτοῖς 
ὁμολογίαν οὐκ ἀμφισβητήσιμον ἀκοῦσαι, τὸν μὲν πρῶτον θεὸν ἀργὸν εἶναι 
ἔργων ξυμπάντων, καὶ βασιλέα," τὸν δημιουργικὸν δὲ θεὸν ἡγεμονεῖν, δὲ 
οὐρανοῦ ἰόντα. 9. διὰ δὲ τούτου καὶ TS στόλος ἡμῖν" " ἐστι, κάτω τοῦ νοῦ 
πεμπομένου ἐν διεξόδῳ πᾶσι τοῖς (αὐτοῦ ὃ sc. τοῦ vod) κοινωνῆσαι συντεταγ: 
μένοις, το. βλέποντος μὲν οὖν καὶ ἐπεστραμμένου πρὸς ἡμῶν ἕκαστον 
τοῦ θεοῦ," συμβαίνει ζῆν τε καὶ βιώσκεσθαι τότε τὰ σώματα, Γκηδεύοντα! 1" 
τοῦ θεοῦ τοῖς ἀκροβολισμοῖς: " μεταστρέφοντος δὲ εἰς τὴν ἑαυτοῦ περιωπὴν 
τοῦ θεοῦ," ταῦτα μὲν ἀποσβέννυσθαι, τὸν δὲ νοῦν ζῆν, βίου ἐπαυρόμενον 
εὐδαίμονος." * 

1 ἀπορεξόμενος MSS,: ἐπορεξάμενος Dindorf: ἀπορεγόμενος Mullach, Possibly 
ἐπορεγομένης τῆς Gans? (( ἐπιθυμητικὸν ἦθος ἐχούσης above.) 

2 οὔ τι Maullach, Gifford: οὔτε MSS. 

5. Perhaps ἐστι χρεὼν (εἰπεῖν) } ‘We ought not to say that the first God 
δημιουργεῖ." 

* περὶ πατρὸς καὶ υἱοῦ is doubtless a marginal note inserted in the text by error, 

5 χρὴ εἶναι νομίζεσθαι MSS., Dindorf: χρὴ νομίζειν Mullach, 

© δημιουργοῦ Mullach : δημιουργικοῦ Dindorf. 

7 Possibly, ef μὲν οὖν περὶ τοῦ δημ. ζητοῦντες φάσκοιμεν δεῖν (αὐ)τόν, πρότερον 
ὑπάρξαντα (ἀγαθόν), οὕτω {π)άν(τα) ποιεῖν (Hare) ἔχειν διαφερόντως (= ὥστε 
πάντα εὖ ἔχειν). Cf. Pl. Tim. 29 E, ἀγαθὸς ἣν κιτιλ, That is Plato's πρόσοδος 
τοῦ λόγου in the Timaeus. 

8 The first God is a king or emperor, who sits untroubled in his palace; the 
second God is a viceroy or subordinate ruler (ἡγεμών), who goes forth into the 
world to execute the king’s will. Perhaps we ought to read κατὰ βασιλέα, ‘in the 
manner of a king’, 

® Perhaps, ὁ (rod év) ἡμῖν (vot) στόλος, ‘the sending forth to us of the νοῦς that 
isin us’, At any rate, that must be what is meant. 

10 Sc. the second God. 

Ὧι κῃδεύοντα MSS. : κηδευόμενα Viger : κηδεύοντος Dindorf. 

12 τοῖς ἀκροβολισμοῖς (sc. τοῦ φωτόξ) = ταῖς ἀκτῖσι, the radiations of his influence. 
Some of the Hermetists would have said ταῖς ἐνεργείαις. 

18 A reminiscence of Pl. Puliticus 272 Ἑ : τοῦ παντὺς ὃ κυβερνήτης, οἷον πηδαλίων 
οἴακος ἀφέμενος, εἰς τὴν αὑτοῦ περιωπὴν ἀπέστη, The phrase τὴν ἑαυτοῦ περιωπήν is 
here equivalent to τὸ ἑαυτὸν νοεῖν. 

14 As long as the Demiurgus (i. e. the divine νοῦς operating in the sensible world) 


directs his attention to a man, he infuses life into that man’s body, and the man 
continues to live embodied upon earth; but when the Demiurgus averts his 








LIBELLVS II 79 


11. ταῦτα μὲν 6 Νουμήνιος: σὺ δέ ye παράθες αὐτοῖς τὰ ἀπὸ τῆς τοῦ 
Δαβὶδ προφητείας (Ps. 103 (to4) 24 and 27--3ο)..... 


13. πάλιν δ᾽ αὖ... ὃ Νουμήνιος ἐπάκουσον ofa περὶ τοῦ δευτέρου αἰτίου 


θεολογεῖ" 

14. “ ὥσπερ δὲ πάλιν λόγος ἐστὶ γεωργῷ πρὸς tov φυτεύοντα ἀναφερό- 
μενος, τὸν αὐτὸν λόγον μάλιστά Γέστιν 5 6 πρῶτος θεὸς πρὸς τὸν δημιουργόν. 
ὁ μὲν “ye ὧν" " σπέρμα πάσης ψυχῆς σπείρει εἰς τὰ μεταλαγχάνοντα αὐτοῦ 
χρήματα σύμπαντα: ὃ Γνομοθέτης" " δὲ φυτεύει καὶ διανέμει καὶ μεταφυτεύει 
εἰς ἡμᾶς ἑκάστους τὰ ἐκεῖθεν προκαταβεβλημένα.᾽" 5 

τ5. καὶ ἑξῆς δὲ πάλιν περὶ τοῦ πῶς ἀπὸ τοῦ πρώτου αἰτίου τὸ δεύτερον 
ὑπέστη " τοιάδε φησίν' 

“ὁπόσα δὲ δοθέντα μέτεισι πρὸς τὸν λαμβάνοντα, ἀπελθόντα ἐκ τοῦ 


dedwxdros,—(ola δὴ) θεραπεία," χρήματα, νόμισμα κοῖλον, ἐπίσημον;,"---- 


attention from the man, then the man's boily dies (ταῦτα μὲν ἀποσβέννυσθαι), but 
the νοῦς that was in him,—the νοῦς which is his true self,—lives on, and enjoys a 
life of bliss (being re-united with the divine νοῦς, from which it was parted during 
the man’s life on earth), The divine νοῦς ἑαυτὸν νοεῖ ; and the disembodied soul, 
being made one with the divine νοῦς, shares in that beatific contemplation, 

1 τὸν Viger: τὰ MSS. 

2 μάλιστά ἐστιν MSS.: μάλιστα ἔχει Viger. 

3. Mullach translates ‘ Nam primus quidem, quum omnis animae semen sit’, &c. ; 
that is, he makes σπέρμα nominative, and takes ὧν σπέρμα to mean ‘ being seed’, 
But that is impossible; a sower does not sow himself, and is not the seed which he 
sows. σπέρμα must be accusative, and object of σπείρει. One might conjecture 
6 μὲν γὰρ ἕν σπέρμα πάσης ψυχῆς σπείρει εἰς τὰ μεταλαγχάνοντα αὐτῇς χρήματα 
σύμπαντα. “ The first God sows one seed (or one sowing) of all soul (or life), to 
serve for all things together that partake of soul.’ (εἰς is not quite satisfactory ; but 

haps a word or two that would have made the meaning clearer may have been 
Tost before eis.) 

Cf. Basilides αὐ. Hippol. Ref haer. Z; 21 (quoted in note on Corp, IX. 6) : 
(ὁ θεὸς) καταβαλόμενος . . . σπέρμα τι ἕν, ἔχον πᾶσαν ἐν ἑαυτῷ τὴν τοῦ κόσμου 
πανσπερμίαν, κιτιλ. ᾿ 

* Numenius cannot have called the second God ‘the lawgiver’. The sense 
wanted could be got by striking out νομοθέτης ; but how did the word get in? 
Perhaps we ought to read ποιητής. 

® Perhaps τὸ ἐκεῖ προκαταβεβλημένον, viz. the σπέρμα spoken of above. (mara- 
βεβλημένον is equivalent to éomappévov.) 

I suppose the γεωργός is the owner of the garden, or head-gardener, and the 
φυτεύων is the labourer who works under his direction. The head-gardener sows 
a single sowing (of some kind of vegetable) in the seed-bed, once for all; the 
labourer plants out the seedlings, and attends to them one by one. 

This extract is obscure; but pehape it may be taken to mean that the first God 
_ emits from himself, in the νοητὸς κόσμος, by one timeless operation, one undivided 
world-soul (one mass of soul-stuff, as it were); and the second God, working in the 
᾿ αἰσθητὸς κόσμος, ee portions of this one soul in all individual organisms, and 

transfers portions of it from one organism to another. 5 

5 I, 6, how the second God came into existence by issuing from the first God. 

7 ofa δὴ add. Viger. 

8 θεραπεία, ‘service’, i. 6. slaves. 

® ψόμισμα ἐπίσημον is coined money; but what is νόμισμα κοῖλον ? Perhaps we 


ought to read ζἀργύριον) κοῖλον, ἐπίσημον, ‘silver plate and coin’, and strike out 
γόμισμα as a gloss, 


80 CORPVS HERMETICVM 


ταυτὶ μὲν οὖν ἐστι θνητὰ καὶ ἀνθρώπινα' τὰ δὲ θεῖά ἐστιν οἷα μεταδοθέντα 
[ἐνθένδ᾽ ἐκεῖθι γεγενημένα] ἐνθένδε τε οὐκ ἀπελήλυθε, κακεῖθι γενόμενα τὸν 
μὲν ῖ ὥνησε, τὸν 8? οὐκ ἔβλαψε {{καὶ προσώνησε τῇ περὶ ὧν ἠπίστατο 
ἀναμνήσει)) τό. ἔστι δὲ τοῦτο τὸ καλὸν χρῆμα ἐπιστήμη ἡ καλή, ἧς 
ὄνατο μὲν ὃ λαβών, οὐκ ἀπολείπεται δ᾽ αὐτῆς ὁ δεδωκώς, ((καὶ προσώνατο * 
τῇ περὶ ὧν ἠπίστατο dvapvijoe)). οἷον ἂν ἴδοις ἐξαφθέντα ἀφ᾽ ἑτέρου 
λύχνου λύχνον, φῶς ἔχοντα ὃ μὴ τὸν πρότερον ἀφείλατο, ἀλλὰ τῆς ἐν αὐτῷ 
o s ‘ , a > , nas i ne ΗΝ 
ὕλης πρὸς τὸ ἐκείνου πῦρ ἐξαφθείσης. 17. τοιοῦτόν TI” χρημὰ ἐστι τὸ 
τῆς ἐπιστήμης, ἣ δοθεῖσα καὶ ληφθεῖσα παραμένει μὲν τῷ δεδωκότι, 
σύνεστι δὲ τῷ λαβόντι ἡ αὐτή. 18. τούτου δὲ τὸ αἴτιον, ὦ ξένε," οὐδέν 
ἐστιν ἀνθρώπινον, ἀλλ᾽ ὅτι 7 ἕξις τε καὶ οὐσία ἡ ἔχουσα τὴν ἐπιστήμην ἣ ἡ 
iP ἢ 4 ~ , Lal ‘ ‘ - > , ᾿ Ν Ν ’ 

αὐτή ἐστι παρά τε τῷ δεδωκότι θεῷ καὶ παρὰ τῷ εἰληφότι ἐμοὶ καὶ σοί. 
19. διὸ καὶ ὁ Πλάτων " τὴν σοφίαν ὑπὸ Προμηθέως ἐλθεῖν εἰς ἀνθρώπους 

‘ , κ᾿ Sop 30 
μετὰ φανοτάτου τινὸς πυρὸς ἔφη. 

20. καὶ πάλιν ὑποβὰς ἑξῆς φησιν' 

« εἰσὶ δ᾽ οὗτοι βίοι ὁ μὲν πρώτου, ὃ δὲ δευτέρου θεοῦ." 
μὲν πρῶτος θεός ἐστιν “ ἑστώς, ὁ δὲ δεύτερος ἔμπαλίν ἐστι κινούμενος. 
ὃ μὲν οὖν πρῶτος περὶ τὰ νοητά, ὁ δὲ δεύτερος περὶ τά (re) νοητὰ καὶ (τὰ) 


1 δηλονότι ὁ 


1 Sc, the recipient. 2 Sc, the giver. 

8 The words «at... ἀναμνήσει unduly anticipate the following sentence ; the 
reader has not yet been told that the thing spoken of is ἐπιστήμη. I have therefore 
transposed this clause to § 16. (It may have been added by a reader, but must in 
any case have been meant to stand where I have put it.) 

4 The teacher, when he imparts knowledge to his pupil, gets a benefit by recalling 
to mind what he already knows. 

T have altered προσώνησε into προσώνατο, as dvaro occurs in the same sentence ; 
but ὠνζήσγατο and προσωνήσατο would do equally well. 

5 τοιοῦτόν τι scrips : τοιοῦτον τὸ MSS. 

6 & ξένε seems to show that the book from which this and the adjacent extracts 
were taken was a dialogue. 

7 Ie, τούτου τὸ αἴτιόν ἐστιν ὅτι κιτιλ. 

8 The ἕξις καὶ οὐσία ἡ ἔχουσα τὴν ἐπιστήμην is νοῦς. The νοῦς in you and me is 
one with the divine νοῦς. 

® This refers to Pl. Piileb. 16: θεῶν μὲν els ἀνθρώπους δόσις... ποθὲν ἐκ θεῶν 
ἐρρίφη διά τινος Τιρομηθέως ἅμα φανοτάτῳ τινὶ πυρί. 

10 Jn this extract nothing is said about the first God and the second God; yet 
Eusebius says (§ 15 wif.) that Numenius was here speaking περὶ τοῦ πῶς ἀπὸ τοῦ 
πρώτου αἰτίου τὸ δεύτερον ὑπέστη. If Eusebius is right in this, we must suppose 
that Numenius went on to say that, as a teacher loses nothing when he imparts 
knowledge to a pupil, and as the gods lost nothing when ‘ fire’ (i.e. the light of 
wisdom) was conveyed from them to men by Prometheus, so the first God loses 
nothing of his own being when he puts forth from him the second God. 

1 The distinction might be expressed by saying that the βίος of the first God is 
αἰώνιος (in the Platonic sense of αἰών), and that of the second God is (partly at 
least) ἐν χρόνῳ. 

12 Geds ἔστιν Viger : θεὺς ἔσται MSS. The same tense must have been used in this 
and the following clause; but it would be possible to write ἔσται in both places, 
meaning ‘7¢ follows that it is 5ο᾽.--δηλόνοτι . . « κινούμενος may perhaps be a 
marginal note. 








LIBELLVS II 81 


αἰσθητά. 21. μὴ θαυμάσῃς δ᾽ εἰ τοῦτ᾽ ἔφην' πολὺ γὰρ ἔτι θαυμαστό- 
repov ἀκούσῃ. ἀντὶ γὰρ τῆς προσούσης τῷ δευτέρῳ κινήσεως, τὴν 
προσοῦσαν τῷ πρώτῳ στάσιν φημὶ εἶναι κίνησιν σύμφυτον, ἀφ᾽ ἧς 7 
τε τάξις τοῦ κόσμον καὶ ἣ μονὴ ἡ ἀίδιος " καὶ ἡ σωτηρία ἀναχεῖται εἰς 
τὰ ὅ; al 

22. ἐπὶ τούτοις καὶ ἐν τῷ exrw® προστίθησι ταῦτα" 

“ἐπειδὴ ἤδει ὁ Πλάτων παρὰ τοῖς ἀνθρώποις τὸν μὲν δημιουργὸν 
γινωσκόμενον μόνον, τὸν μέντοι πρῶτον νοῦν," ὅστις καλεῖται αὐτὸ ὄν," 
παντάπασιν ἀγνοούμενον παρ᾽ αὐτοῖς, διὰ τοῦτο οὕτως εἶπεν, ὥσπερ ἂν (εἴν 
τις [οὕτω] λέγοι, 23. “ὦ ἄνθρωποι, ὃν τοπάξετε ὑμεῖς νοῦν οὐκ ἔστι 
πρῶτος, ἀλλὰ ἕτερος πρὸ τούτου νοῦς πρεσβύτερος καὶ θειότερος. 7 

24. καὶ μεθ᾽ ἕτερα ἐπιλέγει" 

“κυβερνήτης μέν που ἐν μέσῳ πελάγει φορούμενος, ὑπὲρ πηδα- 
Mov ὑψίζυγος, τοῖς οἴαξι διιθύνει τὴν ναῦν ἐφεζόμενος: ὄμματα δ᾽ 
αὐτοῦ καὶ νοῦς εὐθὺ τοῦ αἰθέρος ξυντέταται πρὸς τὰ μετάρσια, καὶ ἡ 
ὁδὸς αὐτῷ ἄνω δι᾿ οὐρανοῦ Γἄπεισι),Σ πλέοντι κάτω κατὰ τὴν θάλατ- 
ταν. οὕτω καὶ ὃ δημιουργὸς τὴν ὕλην, τοῦ μήτε Staxpodoar® μήτε 
ἀποπλαγχθῆναι "5 αὐτήν, (ri?) ἁρμονίᾳ ξυνδησάμενος," αὐτὸς μὲν ὑπὲρ 


1 σύμφυτον probably means ‘ corresponding to his (unique) nature’ (and therefore 
differing from all other κίνησις). The first God is ἑστώς ; but his στάσις must not 
be taken to mean inertness or inactivity. The first God works as an efficient cause, 
and produces effects in the Kosmos; and his στάσις is in that sense a κίνησις. The 
unvarying order (τάξις) and everlasting duration (μονὴ ἡ ἀίδιος and σωτηρία) of the 
Kosmos are effects caused by the στάσις of the first God. 

2 μονὴ ἡ ἀίδιος Mullach, Gifford : μονὴ ἀΐδιος Dindorf. 

§ Le, this extract is taken from Book VI of Numenius Περὶ τἀγαθοῦ. 

* Numenius uses the term ὅ πρῶτος νοῦς as a synonym of ὁ πρῶτος θεός ; and 
he uses the terms ὁ δεύτερος νοῦς and ὁ δημιουργός as synonyms of 6 δεύτερος θεός. 
He here says that ὁ πρῶτος νοῦς, i.e, the first God, is αὐτὸ ὄν; and in other 

ges he identifies him with τὸ ἀγαθόν. He does not say (as Plotinus did 
later on, and as the author of Corp. Herm, II does) that the first God, called τὸ 
ἀγαθόν (or τὸ ἕν), is ἐπέκεινα νοῦ καὶ οὐσίας, i.e. distinct from and above νοῦς 
and τὸ ὄντως ὄν. 

5 αὐτὸ ὅν Dindorf: αὐτόν Mullach, 

8 ὥσπερ ἄν τις οὕτω λέγοι MSS,: ὥσπερ ἂν εἴ τις οὕτω λέγοι Mullach : οὕτω 
seclusé. 

" Cf. Oracula Chaldaica (Kroll, p. 14): πάντα γὰρ ἐξετέλεσσε πατήρ (i.e. the 
first νοῦς), καὶ νῷ παρέδωκε | δευτέρῳ, ὃν πρῶτον κληΐζετε πᾶν γένος ἀνδρῶν (* whom 
ye, O mankind, (wrongly) call first’), 

To what passage of Plato is Numenius here referring ? Probably Pl, Zp. 2. 3128, 
περὶ τὸν πάντων βασιλέα κ.τ.λ. 

® Some such verb as δείκνυται or φαίνεται would make sense. (p)awverat might 
possibly be corrupted into amet. 

® διακροῦσαι MSS, : διακρουσθῆναι Mullach, Perhaps διαιερούσζασθλαι, ‘to evade’ 
or fescape from control ", 

10 ἀποπλεχθῆναι MSS. : ἀποπλαγχθῆναι Dindorf: περιπλανηθῆναι Mullach. 

" For the notion that the Demiurgus ὁ bound ὕλη together, lest it should wander 
away’, cf. Corp. Herm. VIII. 3, where we are told that God fashioned the sphere 
of heaven out of a part of ὕλῃ, and enclosed the rest of ὕλη within this sphere, ἵνα 
μὴ ἡ ὕλη, τῆς (τοῦ παντὸς σώματος) συστάσεως θελήσασα ἀποστῆναι, διαλυθῇ εἰς τὴν 


2806-2 G 


82 CORPVS HERMETICVM 


ταύτης Ὁ ἵδρυται, οἷον ὑπὲρ νεώς ἐπὶ θαλάττης τῆς ὕλης," τὴν ἁρμονίαν 
δὲ ἰθύνει, ταῖς ἰδέαις olaxiLuv,® βλέπει τε, ἀντὶ τοῦ οὐρανοῦ, εἰς τὸν ἄνω 
θεόν, προσαγόμενον αὐτοῦ τὰ ὄμματα' “ λαμβάνει δὲ τὸ μὲν κριτικὸν 
ἀπὸ τῆς θεωρίας, τὸ δ᾽ ὁρμητικὸν ἀπὸ τῆς ἐφέσεως." " 

Euseb, Pr, ev, 11. 22. I-10: 

πάλιν δὲ καὶ ὁ Νουμήνιος ἐν τοῖς Περὶ τἀγαθοῦ, τὴν τοῦ ἸΙλάτωνος 
διάνοιαν ἑρμηνεύων, τοῦτον διέξεισι τὸν τρύπον.". 

τ. “τὰ μὲν οὖν σώματα λαβεῖν ἡμῖν ἔξεστι, σημαινομένοις ἔκ τε 
ὁμοίων, ἀπό τε τῶν ἐν τοῖς παρακειμένοις γνωρισμάτων ἐνόντων. τἀγαθὸν 
δὲ οὐδενὸς ἐκ παρακειμένου, οὐδ᾽ οὖν " ἀπὸ ὁμοίου [αἰσθητοῦ] ἐστι λαβεῖν 
μηχανὴ [τις] οὐδεμία ἀλλὰ δεήσει,---οἷον εἴ τις ἐπὶ σκοπῇ καθήμενος ναῦν 
ἁλιάδα βραχεῖάν τινα τούτων τῶν ἐπακτρίδων τῶν Γμόνων", μίαν, μόνην, 


ἑαυτῆς ἀταξίαν. But what does Numenius mean by ἁρμονίᾳ ἢ If the thought is 
similar to that in Corp. VILL, it would seem that ἁρμονίᾳ (or rather, perhaps, (77) 
ἁρμονίᾳ) ξυνδησάμενος must mean ‘having bound ὕλη together by means of the 
framework or structure of the heavens’, the word ἁρμονία being used in the same 
sense as in Corp. Herm. 1. In the phrase τὴν ἁρμονίαν δὲ ἰθύνει below, τὴν ἁρμονίαν 
appears to mean τὸν κόσμον. 

1 ταύτης probably means τῆς ὕλης. Perhaps, ὑπὲρ ταύτης ἵδρυται, οἷον ἐπὶ νεὼς 
ὑπὲρ θαλάττης [τῆς ὕλης]. 

2 The steersman is the Demiurgus, i.e. the second God; the ship which he steers 
is the Kosmos; the sky at which he gazes, and by which he directs the ship’s 
course, is the first God (that is to say, τὸ ἀγαθόν) ; and the sea on which the ship 
is sailing is ὕλη, In this last point, the simile does not seem to work out rightly ; 
for the eee is made of ὕλη, but a ship is not made of sea. Numenius probably 
meant that ὕλη is like the sea in respect of its ἄτακτος κίνησις, but was unable to 
make this comparison consistent with the rest of the simile. 

3 The Demiurgus ‘steers’ (i.e. guides or directs the world-process) ‘ by means 
of the archetypal forms’, which are the thoughts or purposes of the first God, and 
which the Demiurgus ‘sees’ in contemplating the first God. 

4 The first God ‘ attracts the eyes’ of the Demiurgus. 

5 +d κριτικόν is that in him which discerns or apprehends truth ; and this he gets 
ἀπὸ τῆς θεωρίας, ‘from his contemplation (of the first God, that is, of the Good)’, 
τὸ ὁρμητικόν is that in him which impels him to action ; and this he gets ἀπὸ τῆς 
ἐφέσεως, " from his desire (for the first God or the Good)’, The word θεωρία may 
perhaps convey the meaning required without any supplement ; but a genitive (τοῦ 
ἄνω θεοῦ, or τοῦ ἀγαθοῦ) seems to be needed with τῆς ἐφέσεως, and may very likely 
have been written there, and omitted by error. 

6 This extract (taken from Book I of Numen. Περὶ τἀγαθοῦ) appears to be the 
beginning of a passage in which Numenius dealt with the question how knowledge 
of the Good is to be got. Later on in the same work (see § 3 below) he 
demonstrated that the Good is identical with the first God. 

1 χαβεῖν = καταλαβεῖν, to apprehend or get a true notion of a thing. 

® We can get knowledge of a corporeal thing, or learn to understand it, (1) ἐξ 
ὁμοίων, i.e. by noting its resemblance to things already known to us, and thence 
inferring that it has qualities like theirs; and (2) ἀπὸ παρακειμένων, i.e. by noting 
and drawing inferences fromits relations to things adjacent to it. Butin neither of 
these ways can we get knowledge of the Good ; for there is nothing that is like the 
Good, and nothing that is adjacent to it. The Good is μόνον, ἔρημον ; it abides 
in solitude, far removed from all things perceptible by sense; and only when 
we have withdrawn ourselves from all things perceptible by sense can we draw 
near to it. 

8 οὐδ' οὖν Mullach; οὐδ᾽ αὖ Dindorf. 








LIBELLVS II 83 


ἔρημον, μετακυμίοις ' ἐχομένην, ὀξὺ δεδορκὼς μιᾷ βολῇ κατεῖδε(ν) [τὴν 
a 4 Ψ , 3 ελ θ ΄ , - » a ε AA a 
vaiv|—otrw δή τινὰ, ἀπελθόντα πόρρω τῶν αἰσθητῶν, ὁμιλῆσαι τῷ 
ἀγαθῷ μόνῳ μόνον, ἔνθα μήτε τις ἄνθρωπος μήτε τι Lov ἕτερον, μηδὲ 
σῶμα μέγα μηδὲ σμικρόν, ἀλλά τις ἄφατος καὶ ἀδιήγητος ἀτέχνως ἐρημία 
θεσπέσιος, ἔνθα τοῦ ἀγαθοῦ ἤθη (. . .) διατριβαί τε καὶ ἀγλαΐαι,) αὐτὸ δὲ 
ἐν εἰρήνῃ, ἐν εὐμενείᾳ, τὸ ἤρεμον, ‘rd ἡγεμονικόν," “ ἵλεων, ἐποχούμενον ἐπὶ 
τῇ οὐσίᾳ. 2. εἰ δέ τις, πρὸς τοῖς αἰσθητοῖς λιπαρῶν, τὸ ἀγαθὸν (τούτοις) " 
ἐφιπτάμενον φαντάζεται, κἄπειτα τρυφῶν οἴοιτο τῷ ἀγαθῷ ἐντετυχηκέναι, 
a LY < ¢ a Ν ΕΖ > ε ΄ 4 4 1 Ὸ ~ 
τοῦ παντὸς ἁμαρτάνει. τῷ yap ὄντι οὐ padias, θείας δὲ πρὸς αὐτὸ δεῖ 
μεθόδου" καί ἐστι κράτιστον, τῶν αἰσθητῶν ἀμελήσαντι, νεανιευσαμένῳ 
δ ἃ , Ye ae ‘ , “ > a ΄ 
πρὸς τὰ μαθήματα," τοὺς ἀριθμοὺς θεασαμένῳ, οὕτως ἐκμελετῆσαι μάθημα, 
τί ἐστι τὸ Γὄν"). 1 
3. ταῦτα μὲν ἐν τῷ πρώτῳ. 
ἐν δὲ τῷ πέμπτῳ " ταῦτά φησιν' 
“ εἰ δ᾽ ἐστὶ μὲν νοητὸν ἡ οὐσία καὶ ἡ ἰδέα, ταύτης δ᾽ ὡμολόγηται πρεσβύ- 
τερον καὶ αἴτιον εἶναι ὃ (πρῶτος) " νοῦς, αὐτὸς οὗτος μόνος εὕρηται ὧν τὸ 
ἀγαθόν." καὶ γὰρ [ei]" ὁ μὲν δημιουργὸς θεός "3 ἐστι γενέσεως ἀρχή," τὸ 


4 μετακυμίοις Dindorf: μετακυμίαις Mullach. The boat is almost hidden in the 
trough of the sea, or is visible only at intervals, when it emerges from the trough. 

5 The simile of the fishing-boat seen far out at sea is meant to illustrate the 
ἐρημία of the Good hs is nothing ‘ adjacent to it’), and also to suggest that the 
Good is barely visible even to the keenest (mental) eye. 

5 ‘Tn that solitude are the haunts and pastimes and. ‘Sestivities of the Good ; ὁπ 
the Good itself dwells in peace’, &c. That can hardly be right. The mention of 
διατριβαί and ἀγλαΐαι of the Good seems incongruous with the context ; and with 
what is ‘ the Good ifse//’ contrasted? It seems probable that there is a lacuna 
after ἤθη, and that the words διατριβαί τε καὶ ἀγλαίαι are part of a clause in which 
was described the bliss enjoyed by the man who seeks the Good and finds his way 
to it (ὁμιλεῖ τῷ ἀγαθῷ μόνῳ μόνος, as was said above), On this hypothesis, it is 
possible to account for ἐν εὐμενείᾳ (¢ goodwill’ or ‘ favour’) and ἵλεων (‘gracious’), 
which imply a relation between the Good and man, and would be inexplicable if 
nothing were said about man in the context, 

* τὸ ἡγεμονικόν is inappropriate here; and τὸ ἥγεμον- may be a doublet of τὸ 
ἤρεμον. Perhaps, [τὸ] ἤρεμον, [τὸ ἡγεμονικόν,] ἵλεως (or ἱλαρῶς Ὁ) ἐποχούμενον τῇ 
ay ἀν ἱλαρῶς, cf. Corp. Herm. 1. 4, where God is pictured as φῶς ἥπιόν τε 
καὶ ἱλαρόν. 

5 τούτοις addidé?. The Good is not to be found in the world of sense. 

5 veavievoapévy πρὸς τὰ μαθήματα secludendum? This and τοὺς ἀριθμοὺς θεασα- 
μένῳ appear to be alternatives : either might stand, but hardly both together; and 
the fact that μάθημα follows closely makes it preferable to cut out the first. 

* τὸ dv Dindorf: τὸ ἕν Mullach. Possibly τὸ (dawpar)ov, or τὸ (νοητ)όν ἢ It 
was as an ἀφορμὴ πρὸς τὰ νοητά that the study of mathematics was valued by the 
Platonists, 8 Book V of Numen. Περὶ τἀγαθοῦ. 

" πρῶτος addidi. Either 6 πρῶτος νοῦς, or the equivalent term 6 πρῶτος θεύς, is 
needed here, 

On this point Plotinus differed from Numenius. According to Plotinus, τὸ 
ἀγαθόν is the first God, but is distinct from νοῦς, and ἐπέκεινα νοῦς 
11 εἰ seclusi. 12 T, 6, the second νοῦς, 

8 ἀρχή Mullach: ἀρκεῖ Dindorf.—yevéoews means τῶν γιγνομένων ; οὐσίας means 

τῶν ὄντως ὄντων. 


G2 


84 CORPVS HERMETICVM 


(88)! ἀγαθὸν οὐσίας éctin® ἀρχή. ἀνάλογον δὲ τούτῳ ἡ μὲν ὃ δημιουργὸς 
θεός, ὧν αὐτοῦ μιμητής, τῇ δὲ οὐσίᾳ ἡ γένεσις, εἰκὼν αὐτῆς ofca* καὶ 
μίμημα. 4. εἰ τὰρ᾽ ὁ δημιουργὸς ὃ τῆς γενέσεώς ἐστιν ἀγαθός, ἢ που 
ἔσται [καὶ] ὁ τῆς οὐσίας δημιουργὸς " αὐτοάγαθον, σύμφυτο(ς dv" τῇ 
οὐσίᾳ. ὃ γὰρ δεύτερος διττὸς ὧν Γαὐτοποιεῖ τήν τε ἰδέαν ἑαυτοῦ καὶ τὸν 
κόσμον, δημιουργὸς ὦν" ἔπειτα θεωρητικὸς ὅλως"). 5. συλλελογισμένων 
δ᾽ ἡμῶν ὀνόματα τεττάρων πραγμάτων, τέτταρα ἔστω ταῦτα' ὃ μὲν πρῶτος 
θεός, αὐτοάγαθον' ὁ δὲ τούτου μιμητὴς δημιουργός, ἀγαθός" ἡ δ᾽ οὐσία, 
μία μὲν ἣ τοῦ πρώτου, ἑτέρα δὲ ἣ τοῦ δευτέρου. "Γῆς" " μίμημα ὃ [καλὸς] 
κόσμος,. κεκαλλωπισμένος μετουσίᾳ τοῦ καλοῦ." 
6. καὶ ἐν τῷ ἕκτῳ ᾿" δὲ ἐπιλέγει 
“ἐ μετέχει δὲ αὐτοῦ "ἢ" τὰ μετίσχοντα ἐν ἄλλῳ μὲν οὐδενί, ἐν δὲ μόνῳ τῷ 


1 δὲ addidi. 2 ἐστὶν Mullach, Gifford: εἶναι MSS. 

3 Sc. τῷ ἀγαθῷ (neuter), or in other words, τῷ πρώτῳ θεῷ, The meaning is that 
the second God is to the first God (who is τὸ ἀγαθόν) as the world of τὰ γιγνόμενα 
is to the world of τὰ ὄντως ὄντα, 

4 εἰκὼν αὐτῆς ἔστι MSS,: εἰκὼν αὐτῆς οὖσα Mullach, Gifford: εἰκὼν γὰρ αὐτῆς 
ἐστι Dindorf. 

5 εἰ γὰρ Mullach, Gifford : εἴπερ MSS. 

51,6, the first God, who is here (by exception) called a δημιουργός, as being 
maker of τὰ ὄντως ὄντα. Elsewhere, the word δημιουργός is used by Numenius only 
to denote the second God, maker of τὰ γιγνόμενα. 

7 σύμφυτος ὧν scripsi; σύμφυτον MSS, The first God is ‘ of one nature with’ 
τὰ ὄντως ὄντα which are made by him. 

8 Sic Dindorf: 6 γὰρ δεύτερος, διττὸς ὧν αὐτός, ποιεῖ τήν τε κιτιλ, Mullach. 
Perhaps: ὁ γὰρ δεύτερος, διττὸξ ὧν αὐτός, ποιεῖ τήν τε oyciay ἑαυτοῦ καὶ 
{τὴν γένεσιν), τοῦ κόσμογ δημιουργὸς ὥν' ἐπεῖϊτα] θεωρητικὸς ὅλως (ὁ πρῶτον). 
For διττὸς ὦν, cf, Numen. above (Eus, 11. 18, 3 sg. and 10), where we are told 
that the second God both ‘looks toward himself’ and ‘looks toward ὕλη ᾽. 
The second God is both θεωρητικός and πρακτικός ; the first God is θεωρητικὸς 
ὅλως. 

I can see no sense in ποιεῖ τὴν ἰδέαν ἑαυτοῦ; what could ‘the ἰδέα of the second 
God’ mean? In § 9 below, τὸ ἀγαθόν is called τοῦ δημιουργοῦ ἰδέα, i.e. the arche- 
type of which the Demiurgus is a copy ; but it would be absurd to say that the 
Demiurgus makes that. I conjecture τὴν οὐσίαν ἑαυτοῦ, the (corporeal) substance 
which the second God employs in making the material world,—that is to say, the 
cosmic elements collectively (οὐσία in the Stoic sense). This would agree with 
what is said below, οὐσία μία μὲν ἡ τοῦ πρώτου (θεοῦ), ἑτέρα δὲ ἡ τοῦ δευτέρου. The 
elements, being permanent relatively to τὰ γιγνόμενα καὶ ἀπολλύμενα which are 
made of them, may be called ὄντα (οὐσία in one sense); but the archetypal ἰδέαι 
are ὄντως ὄντα (οὐσία in another and a higher sense). 

The Demiurgus first makes the elements (τὴν οὐσίαν ἑαυτοῦ), and then makes the 
Kosmos and the organisms in it (τὴν γένεσιν) out of the elements. And that is 
just what Plato’s Demiurgus does in the 7imaeus. 

® We ought to read here (r)ijs (δὲ τοῦ πρώτου obaias) μίμημα ὁ κόσμος, or some- 
thing to that effect. The Kosmos is a μέμημα of τὰ ὄντως bre (= the archetypal 

δέαι). 

10 ἫΝ 8: 6 uae) καλὸς (δὲ 6) κόσμος, κιτ.λ. 

4 Book VI of Νυπιεη. Περὶ τἀγαθοῦ. 

12 αὐτοῦ probably stands for τοῦ πρώτου θευῦ. It might be taken to stand for rod 
ἀγαθοῦ ; but as Numenius writes καὶ τῆς (rod) ἀγαθοῦ συμβάσεως in the following 
sentence, he was probably speaking of the first God here. 





































LIBELLVS II 85 


φρονεῖν. ταύτῃ " dpa καὶ τῆς (τοῦ) ἀγαθοῦ συμβάσεως ὀνίναιτ᾽ dv, ἄλλως 
δ᾽ οὔ. καὶ μὲν δὴ “rd φρονεῖν τοῦτο δεῖν" ὃ συντετύχηκε μόνῳ τῷ πρώτῳ. 
ὑφ᾽ οὗ οὖν τὰ ἄλλα ἀποχραίνεται " καὶ ἀγαθοῦται, ἐὰν τοῦτο ἐκείνῳ μόνον 
μόνῳ προσῇ, ἀβελτέρας ἂν εἴη ψυχῆς ἔτι ἀμφιλογεῖν.Σ 7. εἰ γὰρ ἀγαθός 
ἐστιν ὃ δεύτερος οὐ παρ᾽ ἑαυτοῦ, παρὰ δὲ τοῦ πρώτου, πῶς οἷόν τε, ὑφ᾽ οὗ 
μετουσίας ἐστὶν οὗτος ἀγαθός, μὴ (τὸ) " ἀγαθὸν (elvar),” ἄλλως τε κἂν τύχῃ 
αὐτοῦ ὡς (τοῦ) ἀγαθοῦ" μεταλαχὼν ὁ δεύτερος; 8, οὕτω τοι ὁ Πλάτων 
ἐκ συλλογισμοῦ τῷ ὀξὺ βλέποντι ἀπέδωκε τὸ ἀγαθὸν ὅτι ἐστὶν ἕν ἔμ Ὁ 
9. καὶ πάλιν ἑξῆς φησι 

“ταῦτα δὲ οὕτως ἔχοντα Γἔθη μὲν} § Πλάτων ἄλλῃ καὶ ἄλλῃ 
χωρίσας. ἰδίᾳ μὲν γὰρ τὸν κυκλικὸν (λόγον) } ἐπὶ τοῦ δημιουργοῦ 
ἐγράψατο ἐν Τιμαίῳ, εἰπὼν " ἀγαθὸς qv’. ἐν δὲ τῇ ἸΤολιτείᾳ 15 τὸ ἀγαθὸν 
εἶπεν ' ἀγαθοῦ ἰδέαν᾽, ὡς δὴ τοῦ δημιουργοῦ ἰδέαν οὖσαν τὸ ἀγαθόν, ὅστις 4 
πέφανται ἡμῖν ἀγαθὸς μετουσίᾳ τοῦ πρώτου [re καὶ μόνου]. το. ὥσπερ 


1 φρονεῖν is equivalent to νοεῖν, Things (including men) partake of the first God 
if and so far as they partake of νοῦς, or have some νοῦς in them, 

* Sc. τῷ φρονεῖν. By that alone can things ‘associate’ or ‘be in agreement ’ 
(συμβαίνειν) with the Good. 

8 δεῖν (αἰ. δὲ) MSS.: δεόντως Mullach: δὴ Dindorf: ye Gifford. But the 
corruption probably extends beyond this one word, It could hardly be said that τὸ 
φρονεῖν συντετύχηκε (‘occurs together'?) with the first God alone. I have thought 
of proposing καὶ μὲν δὴ τῷ φρονεῖν τούτῳ (ἰ)δεῖν συντετύχηκε(ν ἡμῖν) μόνῳ τὸν 
πρῶτον. ‘It is by this φρονεῖν (i.e. by using our νοϑο), and by this alone, that it 
has befallen us to see the first God’ (i.e. that we have had the happiness to see 
him) 


‘ ἀποχραίνεται, if sound, must be taken to mean ‘ receive colour by transference 
from something’, Perhaps ὑποχραίνεται, which might mean ‘ave tinged with 
colour’, would be better. 
® «Tf then that from which the other things take their colour, and by which the 
other things are rendered good,—if that, and that alone, appertains to the first God, 
and to him alone, it would be foolish to doubt about this any longer.’ That is to 
say, ‘If that is so, the proposition which I have been discussing is indisputably 
true.’ That which is here said to be certainly true must be the statement that the 
first God is identical with the Good; and a statement to that effect must have been 
made by Numenius in the passage which preceded this extract. 
5 τὸ addidi, 7 εἶναι add. Viger. 
® Ought we to read here ds (τοῦ) ἀγαθοῦ, or ὡς ἀγαθός ἢ With either reading, 
_ last — (ἄλλως τε κἂν «.7.d.) seems to add nothing fresh to what has already 
n sail 

° Perhaps, ὅτι ἐστὶν ἐν (τῷ πρώτῳ θεῷν or something equivalent: ‘that the Good 
is one with the first Goa’ : . 
10 ἔθῃ μὲν MSS. : ἔθηκεν Dindorf: ἤδη ἐστὶ μὲν Mullach. Perhaps, fide: μὲν ὁ 
Πλ., ἄλλῃ (δὲ) καὶ ἄλλῃ (ἐγχώρισεν. 

1 *Vel addenda vox λόγον, vel certe supplenda’ Viger. κυκλικός means in 
circulation, in common use, current or popular. 
2 Pl. Tim. 29 E. 15. PL. Rep. 6. 507 sqq. 
M4 ὅστις Mullach, Gifford : ὅτι Dindorf. 
δ Sc. θεοῦ or vod, It is possible to call the first God μόνος, meaning that he 
dwells ἐν μονότητι or ἐρημίᾳ ; but it is confusing to do so in a sentence in which a 
second God is spoken of together with him ; and for that reason it seems best to 
bracket re καὶ μόνου. 


86 CORPVS HERMETICVM 


γὰρ ἄνθρωποι μὲν λέγονται τυπωθέντες ὑπὸ τῆς ἀνθρώπου ἰδέας, βόες δ᾽ 
ὑπὸ τῆς βοός, ἵπποι 8 ὑπὸ τῆς ἵππου ἰδέας, οὕτω καὶ εἰκότως ὁ δημιουργὸς 
(ἀγαθὸς λέγεται, τυπωθεὶς ὑπὸ τῆς τοῦ ἀγαθοῦ ἰδέας.) εἰ δέ ἡ ἐστι 
μετουσίᾳ τοῦ πρώτου [[ἀγαθοῦ]} " ἀγαθὸς (ὁ δημιουργός," ἰδέα ((ἀγαθοῦν) 
ἂν εἴη 6 πρῶτος νοῦς, ὧν αὐτοάγαθον.᾽" 

Proclus Jz Zim. 93 4 (commenting on Pl. Zim. 28 6, τὸν μὲν οὖν 
ποιητὴν Kal πατέρα τοῦδε τοῦ παντός K.T.A.) : 

Νουμήνιος μὲν γάρ, τρεῖς ἀνυμνήσας θεούς, πατέρα μὲν καλεῖ τὸν 
πρῶτον, ποιητὴν δὲ τὸν δεύτερον, ποίημα δὲ τὸν τρίτον. ὁ γὰρ κόσμος 
κατ᾽ αὐτὸν 6 τρίτος ἐστὶ θεός ὃ ὥστε ὃ κατ᾽ αὐτὸν δημιουργὸς διττός, ὅ τε 
πρῶτος θεὸς καὶ ὁ δεύτερος," τὸ δὲ δημιουργούμενον ὁ τρίτος. ἄμεινον γὰρ 
τοῦτο λέγειν, ἢ ὡς ἐκεῖνός φησιν τραγωδῶν, πάππον, ἔγγονον, ἀπόγονον ὦ 

Proclus ἦε Zim. 268 (commenting on Pl. Zim. 395, ἧπερ οὖν 
νοῦς ἐνούσας ἰδέας τῷ ὃ ἔστι ζῴον, οἷαί τε ἔνεισι καὶ ὅσαι, καθορᾷ, τοιαύτας 
καὶ τοσαύτας διενοήθη δεῖν καὶ τόδε σχεῖν) : 

Νουμήνιος δὲ τὸν μὲν πρῶτον (sc. νοῦν) κατὰ τὸ ὃ ἔστι ζῷον τάττει, 
καί φησιν ἐν προσχρήσει τοῦ δευτέρου νοεῖν᾽ τὸν δὲ δεύτερον κατὰ τὸν 
νοῦν, καὶ τοῦτον αὖ ἐν προσχρήσει τοῦ τρίτου δημιουργεῖν" τὸν δὲ τρίτον 


1 [ have added ἀγαθὺς.. . ἰδέας, which must, if not expressed, be understood, to 
make sense of the argument. 

2 εἰ δέ scripst: εἴπερ MSS. 

3 ἀγαθοῦ hinc transposui, We must understand θεοῦ or vod with τοῦ πρώτου, as 
before. 

4 6 δημιουργός addidi. 

5 When Numenius spoke of a ‘ third God’ in addition to the first and second, he 
meant thereby the Kosmos, regarded as a living being, body and soul together,— 
the (gov that is called θεὸς αἰσθητός in Pl. Zim. fin. 

5. J.e. Numenius divided the one Demiurgus of Pl. 77m. into two distinct Gods, 
whom he called ‘ the frst God’ and ‘the second God’. That agrees with Euseb. 
11. 22. 4, where Numenius calls the second God 6 τῆς γενέσεως δημιουργός, and 
the first God 6 τῆς οὐσίας δημιουργός ; but in the rest of the extracts in Euseb., 
Numenius uses the word δημιουργός only to denote the second God ( = second νοῦς), 
and adds a first God (= first νοῦς, = τὸ ἀγαθόν,) distinct from and above the 
δημιουργός. 

7 ἔγγονος, grandson; ἀπόγονος, descendant, This must mean that Numenius 
called the first God ‘ grandfather’ of the Kosmos, and that he called the Kosmos 
‘grandson’ and ‘descendant’ of the first God. It is implied that he called the 
second God son of the first God, and the Kosmos son of the second God (as in Pl. 
Tim. the Kosmos is called son of the Demiurgus). 

8 This obscure passage may perhaps be interpreted as follows: ‘ Numenius takes 
the first νοῦς (of his own system, who is τὸ ἀγαθόν.) to correspond to (i.e. to be 
signified by) Plato’s τὸ ὃ ἔστι ζῷον (the ideal archetype of the αἰσθητὸς xédcpos) ; 
and he takes the second νοῦς (of his own system, who is the Demiurgus,) to 
correspond to Plato’s vois.’ The first νοῦς νοεῖ (and does nothing else; ἑαυτὸν and 
τὰς ἐν ἑαυτῷ ἰδέας vor); the second νοῦς contemplates (καθορᾷ) the first νοῦς and 
the ἰδέαι which ‘ are in’ the first νοῦς (that is to say, the thoughts which the first 
νοῦς thinks), and δημιουργεῖ alter the pattern of those ἰδέαι, ‘That, it would seem, 
is what Numenius took Plato’s sentence to mean, But I do not know what can be 
meant by ἐν mpooxphae τοῦ δευτέρου (‘ making use of the second νοῦς in addition’ ?) 
and ἐν προσχρήσει τοῦ τρίτου. 






























LIBELLVS II: δὲ 1, 2 87 


κατὰ τὸν (ad. τὸ) dtavoovpevov.'—radra.* δὲ (says Proclus) ὅτι μὲν ἔχει 
τινὰς καθ᾽ ἑαυτὰ διαφοράς, πρόδηλον' οὐχ οὕτω δὲ διήρηται νῦν ὑπὸ 
τοῦ Πλάτωνος ὥστε ἕτερον μὲν εἶναι τὸν νοοῦντα νοῦν, ἕτερον δὲ τὸν 


διανοούμενον." 


Corp. ΤΙ, 88 τ-6 ἃ. Πᾶν τὸ κινούμενον... ὡς ἐνέργεια χωρητική. In 
1-4a, the writer shows that ὁ τόπος (i.e. τὸ ἐν ᾧ κινεῖται ὃ κόσμος) is 
(1) μέγας, and (2) ἀσώματος. From the proposition that ὁ τόπος 
is ἀσώματος, he proceeds in the following paragraph (4 b-6 a) to draw 
the inference that 6 τόπος is θεῖόν τι. Then follows a digression ; but 
in § 12a he resumes the argument at the point at which he left it in 
8 6a, and announces that ὁ τόπος is νοῦς, That is the proposition for 
which §§ 1-6 a are intended to prepare the way. 

In ὃ τ, certain general statements are made concerning κίνησις ; in 
§§ 2-4, these statements are applied to the case of the Kosmos. 

ὃ 1. [loxupérepov ἄρα τὸ κινοῦν τοῦ κινουμένου .---᾿Ισχυρότερον γάρ.---Ἶ 
This mention of τὸ κινοῦν is evidently out of place. The preceding 
and following sentences are concerned, not with τὸ κινοῦν, but with τὸ 
ἐν ᾧ κινεῖται ; and the latter alone is under consideration down to the 
end of § 6a. Moreover, dpa is meaningless, as the proposition 
cannot be inferred from anything that has preceded it. 

The statement may perhaps have been transposed to this place 
from some other part of the dialogue. It would be more appropriate 
in connexion with §§ 8 Ὁ, 9, where τὸ κινοῦν is discussed. It cannot 
be fitted into the extant text at that point ; but it may possibly be 
a remnant of a lost passage which preceded § 8 b. 

ὃ 2, πεπλήρωται yap. The Kosmos is wholly filled with bodies ; 
it contains no void. Cf. Ascd. Lat. III. 33a: ‘omnia enim mundi 
sunt membra plenissima . . . corporibus.’ 

Σῶμα δὲ ὁ κόσμος ;—ZGpa,—Kal κινούμενον ;---Μάλιστα. These words 


1 Tf my interpretation of τάττει κατά is right, this clause must mean ‘ Numenius 
takes the third (God of his system, who is the αἰσθητὸς κόσμος) to correspond to τὸ 
διανοούμενον (implied in Plato's word devonén)', i.e. the thing which is thought 
out in detail, planned, or designed by the Demiurgus, 

διανοούμενον must here be passive in meaning; though, in ἕτερον δὲ τὸν διανοού- 
μένον below, the word is in the middle voice, and active in meaning. The 
ambiguity might be avoided by writing here κατὰ τὸ δημιουργούμενον in place of 
κατὰ τὸ διανοούμενον. 

3. ταῦτα means, 1 suppose, τὸ νοεῖν and τὸ δημιουργεῖν. There is a difference 
between these two functions of the divine νοῆς ; but that, says Proclus, is not a 
sufficient reason for saying that there are two distinct νόες, 

* Numenins said that there are two νόες, one of whom νοεῖ, and the other 
διανοεῖται (med.) and δημιουργεῖ; and he thought that this was what Plato meant. 
But Proclus says that Numenius was mistaken in thus interpreting what Plato wrote. 


88 CORPVS HERMETICVM 


are awkwardly placed ; the argument would run more smoothly if they 
were cut out. Perhaps they ought to stand at the beginning of § 2. 
The original text may have been something like this : ((Ξῶμα δὲ οὗτος 
ὃ κόσμος ;—Sapa.—Kal κινούμενον ;—Mdduora.—)) Μέγας δὲ ὁ κόσ- 
μος... ;π- Οὕτως ἔχει.---ἰ 1] Πηλίκον οὖν δεῖ τὸν τόπον εἶναι K.7.A. 

§ 3. Πηλίκον.... καὶ ποταπὸν τὴν φύσιν; The second of these two 
questions anticipates Ποταπῆς δὲ φύσεως below. The answer to the 
first question is Παμμέγεθές τι χρῆμα. The answer to the second is 
᾿Ασώματον. 

τῆς φορᾶς τὴν συνέχειαν. The movement of which the writer is 
chiefly thinking is the circular movement of the outermost sphere of 
heaven. This sphere must have room to move freely; if it were 
closely enveloped and pressed upon by some (corporeal) thing out- 
side it, its movement would be checked. 

§ 48. ᾿Ασώματος οὖν ὁ τόπος. This proposition is ostensibly in- 
ferred from the axiom laid down in ὃ 1, ἐναντίαν ἔχειν φύσιν ἀνάγκη τὸ 
ἐν ᾧ κινεῖται τῇ τοῦ κινουμένου. But that axiom, in the sense in which 
it is used to draw this inference, is manifestly untrue ; for we are 
perpetually seeing instances of a body moving in another body, i.e. 
in a thing which is not ‘ of opposite nature’ in respect of corporeality. 
As a logical demonstration then, the argument is invalid. But the 
Hermetist assumes that all existing bodies are included in the 
spherical body which he calls the Kosmos (πεπλήρωται ὃ κόσμος πάντων 
ὅσα ἔστι σωμάτων) ; and on that assumption, whatever is outside the 
Kosmos must be incorporeal, though not for the reason he gives. 

§ 4b. τὸ δὲ ἀσώματον ἢ θεῖόν ἐστιν ἢ ὁ θεός. The conception of τὸ 
ἀσώματον was first clearly defined by Plato,' who asserted the exis- 
tence of an incorporeal world of νοητά, distinct and separate from the 
corporeal world of αἰσθητά. To a Platonist, τὸ ἀσώματον means 
primarily, if not solely, τὸ νοητόν ; and τὸ νοητόν is ἢ θεῖον ἢ ὁ θεός. 
See Herm. ag. Stob. χε. VIII. We are there told that there are 
in man three kinds of ἀσώματα ; the first of the three kinds is ἐξ αὐτῆς 
τῆς πρώτης καὶ νοητῆς οὐσίας, and appears to be identical with νοῦς. 

The real existence of things incorporeal, which the Platonists 
asserted, was denied by the Stoics. Hence Platonists and Stoics, 
while agreeing that all bodies are included in the Kosmos, differed 

1 The word ἀσώματος occurs only five times in Plato’s Dialogues (Phaedo 85 E, 
Soph. 2468, 247C, Polit. 286a, Philed. 648). But the conception which the 
later Platonists used this word to express is present throughout a large part of his 


writings, though he more commonly expresses it by means of other terms (ἀόρατος, 
ἀειδής, νοητός, &c.). 









































LIBELLVS II: §§ 2-4b 89 


in their answers to the question ‘what is there outside the Kosmos?’ 
The Stoics said that outside the Kosmos there is ‘infinite void’ 
(κενὸν ἄπειρον). Now according to the genuine Platonic doctrine, 
terms of spatial extension are inapplicable to the incorporeal, and the 
νοητά cannot be located in space, either inside the Kosmos or outside 
it; and men who held this doctrine might have been expected to say, 
like the Stoics, that there is nothing outside the Kosmos except empty 
space. But many Platonists found it difficult to maintain their con- 
ception of the incorporeal consistently. They were inclined to take 
the symbolical language of Plato’s myths in a literal sense ; and they 
could not refrain from imagining that the incorporeal νοητά (or in 
other words, 6 θεός and τὰ θεῖα) are situated in the boundless space 
outside the Kosmos. Cf. Asc/. Lat. 111. 33a as emended: ‘nec 
istud enim quod dicitur extra mundum, si tamen est aliquid, inane 
esse credo, sic adeo plenum (οὕτω ye πλῆρες ὄν) intellegibilium rerum, 
id est divinitati suae similium.’ 

But the writer of Cor, II is not content with saying that τὰ θεῖα are 
situated ἐν τῷ ἐκτὸς τοῦ κόσμου τόπῳ, or that they fill the extracosmic 
space with their presence ; he asserts that this τόπος és θεῖόν τι ; and 
we learn from ὃ 12 ἃ that the θεῖον of which he is thinking, and with 
which he identifies the extracosmic τόπος, is the divine νοῦς. His 
meaning is, that τὸ ἐν ᾧ κινεῖται 6 κόσμος is Nous; or in other words, 
that the space outside the Kosmos (that space which the Stoics held 
to be void) is filled with Nous. But he expresses this view in an 
unusual way. He uses the word τόπος in an altered sense, and 
employs it to denote, not the extracosmic space itself, but that 
incorporeal substance with which he holds the extracosmic space to 
be filled, namely, the divine Nous. (Cf. Corp. V. τὸ Ὁ as emended: 
σὺ γὰρ 6 τόπος τῶν ὄντων᾽ οὐ τόπος ἐστὶν ἄλλος οὐδεὶς παρὰ σέ, πάντα δὲ 
ἐν σοί) Thus used, τόπος bears a meaning not far removed from that 
of αἰών in Corp. XI. i. 2: ὃ οὖν αἰὼν ἐν τῷ θεῷ, ὁ δὲ κόσμος ἐν τῷ αἰῶνι. 
++. καὶ ὃ μὲν αἰὼν ἕστηκε περὶ τὸν θεόν, 6 δὲ κόσμος κινεῖται ἐν τῷ αἰῶνι. 
Cf. Ascl. Lat. III. 30 éni#.: ‘in ipsa vitali aeternitate locus est 
mundi’; that is to say, aefernitas (αἰών) is τὸ περιέχον, within which 
the Kosmos is located. 

This peculiar use of the word τόπος must have been suggested to 
the Hermetist by its employment as a name of God, or of a god, by 


* Tamblichus (Simplic. Ca/eg. 92a; see Zeller III. ii, p. 764) said that the word 
τόπος is applicable to things incorporeal as well as to things corporeal, and that 
the supreme Deity may be called the τόπος in which all things are contained. 


a a a ΦῸ 


go CORPVS HERMETICVM 


some of his contemporaries. There are traces of such a use of the 
word ‘ Place’ among the Persians. Eudemus af. Damasc. De princip, 
(quoted in note on Corp. I. 4): Μάγοι δὲ καὶ πᾶν τὸ “Apetov γένος . . . of 
μὲν Τόπον οἱ δὲ Χρόνον καλοῦσι τὸ νοητὸν ἅπαν καὶ τὸ ἡνωμένον, κιτιλ. Tt 
appears from this that, about 300 Β, c., some of the Zoroastrians called 
the primal Being, from whom both the Good God and the Bad God 
emanated, by a name which Greeks translated by Τόπος. This primal 
Being is Zerwan, the Persian god of time, who was worshipped by the 
Mithraists of the Roman empire under the names Αἰών and Kpévos ;! 
and it is possible that, among his other appellations, that of Τόπος 
may have been still used by some of his worshippers in Egypt under 
Roman rule. ; 

But it is of more importance that God was frequently called ‘ Place’ 
by Jews of that period. R. Eisler, Weltenmantel und Himmelzelt, 
Ρ. 471, n. 3, and 744, gives numerous references to passages in the 
Talmud, in which the word magom (place) is thus used; e. g. ‘The 
Holy One is the place of the world (i.e. ὁ τόπος ἐν ᾧ περιέχεται ὃ 
κόσμος) ; the world is not the place of the Holy One.’* ‘The ancient 
teachers applied the name mdgom to God, because he produces all, 
determines all, and bounds all.... God pervades the world; he is 
the space which supports it, the extension which upholds it.’* And 
Philo uses the word τόπος in the same way. E.g. De somn. 1. 11. 62, 
Wendland ΠῚ, p. 218: τριχῶς δὲ ἐπινοεῖται τόπος, ἅπαξ piv χώρα ὑπὸ 
σώματος πεπληρωμένη, κατὰ δεύτερον δὲ τρόπον ὃ θεῖος λόγος, ὃν ἐκπε- 
πλήρωκεν ὅλον δ ὅλων ἀσωμάτοις δυνάμεσιν ὃ θεός. ... κατὰ δὲ τρίτον 
σημαινόμένον αὐτὸς ὃ θεὸς καλεῖται τόπος, τῷ περιέχειν μὲν τὰ ὅλα, 
περιέχεσθαι δὲ πρὸς μηδενὸς ἁπλῶς, καὶ τῷ καταφυγὴν τῶν συμπάντων ᾿ 
αὐτὸν εἶναι, καὶ ἐπειδήπερ αὐτός ἐστι χώρα ἑαυτοῦ, κεχωρηκὼς ἑαυτὸν καὶ 
ἐμφερόμενος μόνῳ ἑαυτῷ. ἐγὼ μὲν οὖν οὔκ εἶμι τόπος, ἀλλ᾽ ἐν τόπῳ, καὶ 
ἕκαστον τῶν ὄντων ὁμοίως" τὸ γὰρ περιεχόμενον διαφέρει τοῦ περιέχοντος" 
τὸ δὲ θεῖον, ὑπ᾽ οὐδενὸς περιεχόμενον, ἀναγκαίως ἐστὶν αὐτὸ τόπος ἑαυτοῦ. 

1 Cumont, Alystéres de Mithra, 1902, p. 90: ‘Au sommet de la hiérarchie 
divine et ἃ lorigine des choses, la théologie mithriaque, hériti¢re de celle des mages 
zervanistes, placait le Temps infini. l'appelait parfois Αἰών ou Saecu/um, 
Κρόνος ou Saturnus, mais ces désignations étaient conventionnelles et contingentes, 
car il était regardé comme ineffable, comme sans nom aussi bien que sans sexe et 
sans passions. 

® Abelson, The immanence of God in Rabb. lit., p. 109, says that statements to 
this effect are ‘to be found assim in Rabbinic literature’; he quotes Genesis 
Rabba 68. 9 as an instance, 

8 Bousset, Rel. des Judentums, p. 363, says that the use of the word ‘place’ as 


a name of God is frequent in the Afishna, but that there is scarcely a trace of it in 
Jewish literature before the first century A.D. 











_ LIBELLVS II: § 4b οι 


Cf. Philo De Cherubim 14. 49, Cohn I, p. 182: God is ἀσωμάτων 
ἰδεῶν ἀσώματος χώρα. De fuga et invent. 14. 75, Wendland III, 
p. 125: τόπον yap καλεῖ viv (Exod. 21. 13) οὐ χώραν ἐκπεπληρωμένην 
ὑπὸ σώματος, ἀλλὰ δὲ’ ὑπονοιῶν αὐτὸν τὸν θεόν, ἐπειδὴ περιέχων οὐ περιέ- 
χεται, καὶ ὅτι καταφυγὴ τῶν ὅλων ἐστί. A similar use of τόπος occurs 
in the writings of some of the Christian Gnostics, who doubtless 
adopted it from the Jews. Hippolytus ef haeres. 6. 32 says of the 
Demiurgus of the Valentinians, (1. 6. the inferior deity who was the 
maker of the material Kosmos, and was identified with the God of 
the Jews,) καλεῖται δὲ καὶ τόπος ᾽ ὑπ᾽ αὐτῶν, καὶ ἑβδομάς, καὶ παλαιὸς τῶν 
ἡμερῶν. Cf. the Valentinian Theodotus in Clem. Alex. ἔχε. ὃ 34: 
κατελείφθησαν δὲ αἱ ἀριστεραὶ (δυνάμεις) ὑπὸ τοῦ τόπου (1. 6. τοῦ 
δημιουργοῦ) μορφωθῆναι. τῆς μητρὸς οὖν (Sc. τῆς Σοφίας)... εἰσεὰ- 
θούσης εἰς τὸ πλήρωμα, τότε ὃ τόπος (i. 6. ὁ δημιουργὸς) τὴν ἐξουσίαν τῆς 
μητρὸς καὶ τὴν τάξιν ἀπολήψεται ἣν νῦν ἔχει ἡ μήτηρ. Lb. ὃ 38: ποταμὸς 
ἐκπορεύεται πυρὸς ὑποκάτω τοῦ θρόνου τοῦ τόπου, καὶ ῥεῖ εἰς τὸ κενὸν τοῦ 
ἐκτισμένου" . - . καὶ αὐτὸς δὲ ὁ τόπος πυρινός ἐστι. (Hippol. 6. 32 says 
that the Valentinian Demiurgus is πυρώδης.) . . . καὶ 6 Ἰησοῦς παρα- 
κληθεὶς συνεκαθέσθη τῷ τόπῳ, ... ἵνα τὸν τόπον ἡμερώσῃ. The word 
τόπος is similarly used in one of the Gnostic documents published by 
C. Schmidt (Kopiisch-gnostische Schriften 1, p. 344): ‘They praise 
him, saying “... thou art Father in the Fathers, and thou art God 
in the Gods, and thou art Lord in the Lords, and thou art Place 
(τόπος) in the Places (τόποι). Jb. p. 335: ‘ This is the first Father 
of the All.... This is the αὐτοφυὴς and αὐτογέννητος τόπος. Lb. : 
«(Out of him?) has arisen the second τόπος, who will be named 
δημιουργὸς and Father and λόγος and πηγὴ and νοῦς. Compare also 
the words addressed to God by Arnobius, Adv. naz. 1. 31: ‘Prima 
enim tu causa es, locus rerum ac spatium, fundamentum cunctorum 
quaecumque sunt.’ 

The writer of Cor. II identifies the τόπος ἐν ᾧ περιέχεται ὃ κόσμος, 
not with the supreme God himself, but with the divine Nous, which, 
as he tells us in ὃ 12 bsq., issues from and is subordinate to the 
supreme God. Thus the meaning which he assigns to the word τόπος 
resembles the second of the three meanings assigned to it by Philo, 
viz. that of ὁ θεῖος λόγος. There can be little doubt that the Her- 
metist, in thus using the word, was directly or indirectly influenced 
by some Jewish authority. 


1 This is the reading of the MS. Duncker and Schneidewin insert μεσότητος 
after τόπος ; but there is no good reason for doing so. 


92 CORPVS HERMETICVM 


τὸ δὲ θεῖον λέγω viv οὐ τὸ γεννητόν, ἀλλὰ τὸ ἀγέννητον. The author 
may have written γενητόν, ἀγένητον ; the forms γενητός and γεννητός 
seem to be used without distinction of meaning in the Hermetica and 
other writings of the time. 

The adjective θεῖος might be applied, not only to τὰ ἀγέννητα (that 
is, τὰ ὄντως ὄντα, things eternal and unchanging), but also to γεννητά 
(that is, things belonging to the world of time and change) ; e. g. the 
heavenly bodies might be described as θεῖα σώματα, and the Kosmos 
itself might be called θεῖος. The writer therefore warns us that the 
term θεῖον is here used in its stricter and higher sense, and must be 
understood as connoting ἀγεννησία. That with which the space 
outside the Kosmos is filled is perhaps not 6 θεός, but only θεῖόν τι; 
but if so, it must at any rate be ἀγέννητον. 

ἐὰν μὲν οὖν ἢ θεῖον, οὐσιῶδές ἐστιν᾽ ἐὰν δὲ ἡ (6) θεός, καὶ ἀνουσίαστον 
γίνεται (kat ἀνόητον ἢ), γίνεται does not here mean ‘it becomes (some- 
thing which it was not before)’; for God cannot change. The 
meaning is ‘we must infer (from its identity with God) that it is 
dvovoiacrov’. That which is θεῖον (in the stricter sense explained 
above) is οὐσιῶδες ; ive. it is of the nature of τὸ ὄντως ὄν, as opposed 
to τὰ γιγνόμενα. But 6 θεός is ἀνουσίαστος ; that is to say, he is not 
οὐσιώδης, but is exalted above οὐσία. This statement is derived from 
the passage about the ἰδέα τοῦ ἀγαθοῦ in Pl. Rep. 6. 508 & ff., and 
especially from the words οὐκ οὐσίας ὄντος τοῦ ἀγαθοῦ, ἀλλ᾽ ἔτι ἐπέκεινα 
τῆς οὐσίας πρεσβείᾳ καὶ δυνάμει ὑπερέχοντος. The writer of Corp, II 
identifies τὸ ἀγαθόν with God (see §§ 14-16); and he here applies to 
God what Plato said about τὸ ἀγαθόν, ‘The thought that the supreme 
God is above οὐσία, or prior to οὐσία, was familiar to the later 
Platonists ; and the adjectives ὑπερούσιος and προούσιος were employed 
by them to express it. But I have not met with the word ἀνουσία- 
oros in this sense elsewhere.’ Does it mean ‘not ¢o be deemed 
οὐσία ὃ Or ought we to read ἀνούσιον ἢ 

Plato 4 ¢ couples οὐσία with γνῶσις (or ἐπιστήμη), the mental 
process by which οὐσία is known, and exalts τὸ ἀγαθόν above both 


1 The word dvougiacros occurs in the heading of a magic charm, Paf. mag. Par. 
i, 2441 (Wiinsch, Aus eznem gr. Zauberpapyrus, Leitzmann Kleine Texte 84, Ὁ. #) ὃ 
᾿Αγωγή, ... ἄγουσα ἀσχέτους, καὶ ἀνουσιάστους, μονοημέρους, That is ἴο say, ‘ This 
charm will poor ae pe to you so that nothing can hold them back; it will draw 
them to you within a single day, even though they are not worked on by means of 
an ovata’, The word οὐσία, as there used, is 2 technical term of pga the δὲ apes 
magic; it means a material thing employed by a sorcerer in the working of his 
spell, and especially a thing taken from the body of the person who is to be worked 
on,—for instance, a lock of hair, or a scrap of worn clothing. 








LIBELLVS II: §§ 4b, 5 93 


alike, saying that it is distinct from both, and is the cause or source of 
both.! If then the Hermetist had that passage or some paraphrase 
of it in his mind, he would be likely to couple with ἀνουσίαστον 
some adjective signifying a corresponding negation of know- 
ledge or thought. And as the following sentences apparently deal 
with the question whether, or in what sense, God is νοητός, there is a 
strong probability that the original reading was καὶ ἀνουσίαστον γίνεται 
(καὶ ἀνόητον). (Compare ὃ 13: ὁ οὖν θεὸς οὐ νοῦς ἐστιν, αἴτιος δὲ τοῦ 
(νοῦν) εἶναι.) By inserting καὶ ἀνόητον, we make a connexion with 
what follows, and at the same time give a meaning to the otherwise 
otiose καί which stands before ἀνουσίαστον. God is καὶ ἀνουσίαστος 
(or ἀνούσιος) καὶ ἀνόητος" that is to say, he is above οὐσία, and he is 
also above νόησις" But the statement that God is ἀνόητος is 
ambiguous. It might mean either that God οὐ νοεῖ, or that God οὐ 
νοεῖται; it might be taken to imply either that he is something other 
and higher than νοῦς, or that he cannot be apprehended by human 
thought. Some explanation of its meaning is therefore needed; and 
the following sentences were probably intended to explain it. 

§§ 5-6 8. ἄλλως δὲ... ἐνέργεια χωρητική. This passage is almost 
hopelessly corrupt; but the author’s meaning may perhaps be guessed. 
1 assume that he here said that ὁ θεός is νοητός in one sense, and ὁ 
τόπος is νοητός in another sense, and that he thence inferred that 
ὃ τόπος is something other than ὃ 6eds; and I have rewritten the 
Greek accordingly. 

§ 5. νοητὸς yap πρώτως (πρῶτος MSS.) ὁ θεός ἐστιν (ἑαυτῷ, ὁ δὲ 
τόπος) ἡμῖν, οὐχ ἑαυτῷ. According to the MSS., the Hermetist says 
that God οὐχ ἑαυτῷ νοητός ἐστι; which is equivalent to denying that 
God ἑαυτὸν νοεῖ. Aristotle said that God ἑαυτὸν νοεῖ; " and that 
statement was commonly accepted by Platonists.* On the other 
hand, Plotinus says that ro ἕν (the Supreme, which is beyond or 
prior to νοῦς and τὸ ὄν) οὐ νοεῖ, If then the author of Corp. II 


1 tots ωὠσκομένοις τοίνυν μὴ μόνον τὸ γιγνώσκεσθαι 2 ὑπὸ τοῦ ἀγαθοῦ 
παρεῖναι, ane καὶ τὸ εἶναί τε καὶ τὴν οὐσίαν ὑπ᾽ Salo Sa μηκἀμε τι ὼ 

3. Hippol. Ref. ἀαεγές. 7. 21 says that Basilides placed at the head of his system 
an οὐκ ὧν θεός, Who ἀνοήτως... κόσμον ἠθέλησε ποιῆσαι, κιτιλ. This is equivalent 
to saying that God is ἀνούσιος and ἀνόητος, The passage of Basilides in which it 
occurs is an extreme and intentionally paradoxical statement of the Platonic 
doctrine that God is ἐπέκεινα τῆς οὐσίας. 

8 Ar, Metaph. 12. 9, 1074b 33. See Zeller Aristotle I, p. 398. 

* Cf. Abammonis responsum 8. 3 ( Testim.), where it is said to be taught by 
‘Hermes? (that is, by some Egyptian Platonist) that ‘ the first voids’ is νοῦς ἑαυτὸν 
νοῶν καὶ τὰς νοήσεις εἰς ἑαυτὸν ἐπιστρέφων. 

5 See Plotinus 5. 6, περὶ τοῦ τὸ ἐπέκεινα τοῦ ὄντος μὴ νοεῖν. 5. 6, 2: τὸ ἐπέκεινα 


94 CORPVS HERMETICVM 


meant by 6 θεός what Plotinus meant by τὸ ἕν, and agreed with 
Plotinus on this point, it would be possible for him to say that 
ὁ θεὸς οὐχ ἑαυτὸν νοεῖ, and is not ἑαυτῷ νοητός. But it seems more 
likely that he agreed with Numenius, who said (Euseb. Pr. ev, 11. 
18. 3 sq.) that the first God (also called by him the first νοῦς) ἑαυτῷ 
συγγίνεται διόλου, and that the second God (also called by him the 
second νοῦς) is not πρὸς ἑαυτῷ, but τῆς ὕλης ἐπιμελούμενος ἀπερίοπτος 
ἑαυτοῦ γίνεται. This implies that, according to Numenius, the first 
God ἑαυτὸν νοεῖ, and the second God, so far at least as he is 
concerned with the material world, οὐχ ἑαυτὸν νοεῖ. If we assume 
that the θεός of Corp. II corresponds to the first God or first νοῦς of 
Numenius, and that the τόπος of Cor. II corresponds to the second 
God or second νοῦς of Numenius, a sense that agrees with that 
assumption can be got by writing νοητὸς... 6 θεός ἐστιν (ἑαυτῷ, ὁ δὲ 
τόπος) ἡμῖν, οὐχ ἑαυτῷ. 

If the meaningless πρῶτος of the MSS. is a miswriting of πρώτως, 
‘ primarily’, this word implies that 6 θεός is not only νοητὸς ἑαυτῷ, 
but is also, in some sense, νοητὸς ἡμῖν, A Platonist might say either 
that God is νοητὸς ἡμῖν or that God is not νοητὸς ἡμῖν. (Men are 
capable of apprehending God; yet no man can apprehend God 
adequately. ) 

If the word νοητός is taken merely as opposed to αἰσθητός, and 
equivalent to ἀσώματος, in that sense at least God is νοητός ; and the 
unconnected scrap (οὐ yap?) αἰσθήσει ὑποπίπτει ὁ Geos may be a part 
of a statement to that effect. The other phrases in § 5 which I have 
bracketed, [ἄλλο τι ὧν τοῦ νοουμένου] and [διὰ τοῦτο ἡμῖν νοεῖται], may 
perhaps be remnants of a marginal note on the paragraph. 

ὃ Ga. εἰ δὲ νοητὸς ὁ τόπος οὐχ (ds) ὁ θεός, [ ] ἀλλ᾽ ὡς ἐνέργεια 
χωρητική, ((ἄλλο τί ἐστιν) (τοῦ θεοῦ ὁ τόπος), The question whether ὁ 
τόπος iS ὃ θεός, or is θεῖόν τι but not 6 θεός, which was raised at the 
beginning of the paragraph, must surely have been answered before 
the writer quitted the subject. We know from §§ 12 a-13 what his 
answer would be, viz. that this τόπος is θεῖόν τι, but is not ὃ θεός. 
I have therefore added here the words ἄλλο τί ἐστι τοῦ θεοῦ ὁ τόπος. 

ἐνέργεια must be taken to mean ἐνέργεια θεοῦ. (See note on Corp. 
X. rb.) The τόπος-νοῦς is not God himself, but a certain manifesta- 


τοῦ πρώτως νοοῦντος οὐκ ἂν ἔτι voor. ... πρὸς μὲν τὸν νοῦν νοητὸς ἔσται, Kad’ ἑαυτὸν 
δὲ οὔτε νοοῦν οὔτε νοητὸν κυρίως ἔσται. ῬΙοί. 6.9. 6: οὐδὲ νόησις (ἐστι τῷ ἑνί), ἵνα 
μὴ ἑτερότης (ἢ). ... τί γὰρ καὶ νοήσει ; ἢ ἑαυτόν ;... ἐν δὲ ὄν, ουνὸν ἑαυτῷ, οὐ 
δεῖται νοήσεως ἑαυτοῦ, 








LIBELLVS II: §§ 5-6b 95 


tion of God’s activity. This ἐνέργεια is hypostatized, and is regarded 
as a ‘second God’. 

§§ 6 b-8 a. πᾶν δὲ τὸ κινούμενον... καὶ ὑπὸ στάσεως κινεῖται, It 
_ seems impossible to make sense of this paragraph; it has probably 
been ruined by unintelligent interpolation. It begins with the 
assertion that everything which is moved is moved (1) 7” something 
stationary, and (2) 4y something stationary; and it ends with the 
same assertion repeated in different words, But the instances which 
seem intended to illustrate these two propositions, or one or other of 
_ the two, have no discoverable connexion with either. 
8 6b. πᾶν δὲ τὸ κινούμενον οὐκ ἐν κινουμένῳ κινεῖται, ἀλλ᾽ ἐν ἑστῶτι. 
Taken in their obvious sense, the words οὐκ ἐν κινουμένῳ κινεῖται are 
manifestly false; there are plenty of κινούμενα which are contained 
in other κινούμενα. But the writer probably meant that there must 
be a ἑστός outside the outermost κινούμενον, and intended to suggest 
‘the inference that τὸ τὸν κόσμον περιέχον (i.e. the τόπος-νοῦς) is 
motionless. Bodies alone are subject to movement; the divine 
Nous by which the Kosmos is encompassed is ἀσώματος, and 
partakes of the eternal stability and changelessness of the supreme 
God. 

καὶ τὸ κινοῦν δὲ ἕστηκεν. We learn from ὃ 8b sq. that τὸ κινοῦν is ψυχή, 
or something analogous to ψυχή, and that it resides within the body 
which it moves. The Kosmos as a whole, or the outermost sphere 
of the Kosmos, is moved by a world-soul; individual organisms 
within the Kosmos are moved by their several ψυχαί In what 
relation the soul (τὸ κινοῦν) residing in the Kosmos stands to the 
τόπος-νοῦς (τὸ ἐν ᾧ κινεῖται) which occupies the space outside the 
Kosmos, we are not informed; but it may perhaps be inferred from 
ὃ 12a (or rather, from a conjectural restoration of § 12a,) that the 
cosmic soul and the individual souls owe their power of originating 
movement to the ‘light’ with which the rézros-vods irradiates them, 
that is to say, to the life which the divine Nous infuses into them.' 

We are here told that τὸ κινοῦν (i.e. ψυχή) is itself motionless. 
This is a point on which the Aristotelians differed from the Platonists. 
Aetius, Diels Doxogr. p. 392 : Πλάτων ἀεικίνητον μὲν τὴν ψυχήν .. . 
᾿Αριστοτέλης ἀκίνητον τὴν ψυχήν, πάσης κινήσεως προηγουμένην. On 
this question, the writer of Οὐγῴ. II sides with the Aristotelians, and 


1 Here again, we may compare Numenius (Euseb. Py. ev. 11, 18. 10): βλέποντος 
μὲν οὖν καὶ ἐπεστραμμένου πρὸς ἡμῶν ἕκαστον τοῦ θεοῦ (i.e. the ‘second God’) 
συμβαίνει ζὴν τε καὶ βιώσκεσθαι τότε τὰ σώματα, κιτιλ, 


96 CORPVS HERMETICVM 


against the Platonists, who said that the soul is ‘self-moving’. See 
Pl. Phaedr. 245 CD, and Legg. X. 894 ff.’ 

Πῶς οὖν... τὰ ἐνθάδε (κινοῦντα) συγκινεῖται τοῖς κινουμένοις ; Ought 
we to read τὰ ἐνθάδε (κινοῦντα) συγκινεῖται τοῖς κινουμένοις (codd. Corp.), 
or τὰ ἐνθάδε (κινούμενα) συγκινεῖται τοῖς κινοῦσιν (codd. Stob.)? In 
either case, Hermes and Asclepius seem to be here speaking of τὸ 
κινοῦν, and not of τὸ ἐν ᾧ κινεῖται. And it appears from the words 
κινεῖσθαι ὑπὸ τῆς ἀπλάνους σφαίρας that the sphere of the fixed stars 
is discussed as an instance of τὸ κινοῦν, and not as an instance of τὸ 
ἐν ᾧ κινεῖται. Yet that sphere is certainly not τὸ κινοῦν in the sense 
in which this term is explained in §§ 8b, 9; it is not the incorporeal 
soul of the planet-spheres. Besides, we have just been told that τὸ 
κινοῦν (as well as τὸ ἐν ᾧ κινεῖται) is motionless; and the sphere of 
the fixed stars is not motionless, What then has the instance of the 
spheres to do with the subject under discussion? I cannot answer 
that question ; and I can only conjecture that the passage about the 
spheres was inserted by some one who did not understand the 
meaning of the dialogue. 

We can dimly discern through the fog of words that the writer of 
this passage is seeking to show that, in the movement of the spheres, 
there is something which stands fast. And he seems to have thought 
that, by showing this, he would confirm the preceding statement 
(πᾶν τὸ κινούμενον ἐν ἑστῶτι κινεῖται, καὶ τὸ κινοῦν δὲ ἕστηκεν,) Or one 
of the two parts of that statement. But what is it that stands fast? 
Certainly neither. the sphere of the fixed stars, nor any of the planet- 
spheres. The movement of a planet (or of the sphere to which the 
planet was supposed to be affixed) could be described in two different 
ways. The simpler way of describing it was to say that the fixed 
stars travel daily round the earth, and the sun, for instance, also 
travels daily round the earth in the same direction, but not quite so 
fast. The other way of describing it was to say that the sun is 
carried daily round the earth with the fixed stars, but has also an 
independent and slower movement of its own in the opposite 
direction,’ and that the visible movement of the sun is a compound 
of these two different movements. The writer, since he speaks of 


1 The notion that τὸ κινοῦν is ψυχή occurs in a Cosmopoiia (second century A. Ὁ. ?) 
made use of by a sorcerer in a magic Papyrus edited by Dieterich, 4draxas, p. 184: 
when the Creator ‘langhed’ for the seventh time, ἐγένετο ψυχή. 6 δὲ θεὸς ἔφη 
“πάντα κινήσεις"... τοῦτ᾽ εἰπόντος τοῦ θεοῦ πάντα ἐκινήθη. 

3 Thus Cleomedes, De mots corp. cael. τ. 3. 16, compares the movement of the 
planets to that of ants creeping on a potter’s wheel in the opposite direction to that 
in which the wheel is revolving. 







































LIBELLVS II: § 6b 97 


-dyrixivnats, must have conceived the movement of the planets in the 
latter way. But where is the στάσις to be found? The result of 
the composition of the sun’s two different movements is, not that it 
stands still, but that it moves from East to West a little less swiftly 
- than it would if it had only that movement which belongs to it in 
common with the fixed stars. Neither the fixed stars nor the planets 
are stationary. The only things in the material universe which could 
with any show of reason be said to stand fast are, firstly, the common 
axis! of the revolving spheres, or some point in that axis (e.g. one 
_ of the Poles in which it terminates, or the centre of the earth), and 
secondly, the globular earth, massed round the central point of the 
whole system. And as the writer does not mention the earth, but 
does mention the North Pole, round which he says the Bears revolve 
(κίνησιν τὴν περὶ τὸ αὐτό), we must conclude that the thing to which 
he ascribes στάσις is the Pole.? But if so, his point of view is entirely 
different from that of the writer of the rest of the dialogue, who 
ascribes στάσις only to ἀσώματα, viz. (1) the réros-vots (τὸ ἐν ᾧ κινεῖται 
τὸ κινούμενον) outside the Kosmos, and (2) ψυχὴ (τὸ κινοῦν) within the 
Kosmos. 

But there is a further difficulty. The writer seems to assert that 
‘the στάσις of which he speaks is caused by the ἐναντιότης of the two 
movements, viz. the movement of the ἀπλανὴς σφαῖρα in the one 
direction, and the movement of the planet-spheres in the other 
direction (ἡ yap ἀντιτυπία στάσις φορᾶς). But what could be meant by 
saying that the Pole is kept fixed in its place by the combined effect 


1 The obliquity of the orbits of the planets is not mentioned in this passage, and 
seers to be left out of account. 
2 In the Mithraic cult, the North Pole seems to have been of great importance. 
In the Mithrasliturgie edited by Dieterich (pp. 12-14 and 69-78), the North Pole 
is the abode of the μέγιστος θεός (sc, Mithras), to whom Helios, the ruler of the 
planet-region, is subordinated. This ‘greatest God’ holds in his right hand μόσχου 
ὦμον χρύσεον, ὅς ἐστιν ἄρκτος ἡ κινοῦσα καὶ ἀντιστρέφουσα τὸν οὐρανόν" and he is 
attended by a group of seven gods, who are called οἱ πολοκράτορες τοῦ οὐρανοῦ, ... 
οἱ κνωδακοφύλακες,. .. οἱ στρέφοντες ὑπὸ ἐν κέλευσμα τὸν περιδίνητον τοῦ κύκλου 
ἄξονα τοῦ οὐρανοῦ, and who, no doubt, represent the seven stars of one of the two 
; (There is a corresponding group of seven maidens, who presumably stand 
the seven stars of the other Bear.) It might therefore be conjectured that the 
ge concerning the movements of the stars was inserted in Corp. II by some 
one who was influenced by Mithraism, and who was thus led to locate the ‘static’ 
νοῦς by which the moving universe is governed at the North Pole, instead of in 
extracosmic space, where the author of Cor. II places it. 
Cf, Proclus / πεῖ. (Friedlein), p. go, 1, 11 : ἄλλοι δὲ ἀπορρητότεροι λόγοι καὶ 
τὸν δημιουργὸν ἐφεστάναι τῷ κόσμῳ λέγουσι τοῖς πόλοις ἐποχούμενον, καὶ δι᾿ ἔρωτος 
θείου τὸ πᾶν ἐπιστρέφοντα πρὸς ἑαυτόν. The word ἀπορρητότεροι seems to imply 
that this doctrine was taught in connexion with some mystery-cult, which may 
perhaps have been that of Mithras. 


2806-2 H 


98 CORPVS HERMETICVM 


of these two opposite movements? To this question I can give no 
answer. 

The instance of the man swimming against a current (§ 8 a) appears 
to be given as an illustration of the principle that the combined effect 
of two contrary movements is to produce stability or immobility. But 
if so, the instance is absurdly inappropriate.’ In the case of the 
swimmer there is nothing analogous to the Pole; he could only be 
compared to one of the planets, borne from East to West together 
with the fixed stars, but at the same time moving from West to East 
with an independent movement of its own. But this comparison also 
breaks down. It is assumed that the swimmer is stationary (ἡ ἀντι- 
τυπία.... στάσις γίνεται τῷ ἀνθρώπῳ) ; and if so, the velocity with 
which he swims must be equal to the velocity of the contrary current, 
But the velocity of the planet’s independent movement is not equal 
to that of the contrary movement of the fixed stars 3 and the planet 
is not stationary. 

τὰς γὰρ σφαίρας ἔφης τὰς πλανωμένας κινεῖσθαι ὑπὸ τῆς ἀπλανοῦς 
σφαίρας. The connexion of thought would be made clearer if this 
were followed by something like καίτοι συγκινεῖται ταῖς πλανωμέναις ἡ 
ἀπλανής. It is to this latter proposition (implied, if not expressed,) 
that Hermes replies Οὐκ ἔστιν αὕτη συγκίνησις. 

The word ἔφης must be meant to refer to some earlier discourse of 
Hermes to Asclepius. Yet the doctrine taught in this dialogue is 
described in the concluding sentence as προγνωσία τις, i.e. as the 
beginning of a course of instruction. 

ἡ δὲ ἐναντίωσις ((rijs κινήσεως) τὴν ἀντέρεισιν [[1} ἔχει ἑστῶσαν. τὴν 
ἀντέρεισιν appears to be used in the sense of τὸ ἀντερεῖδον, the 
‘fulcrum ’, i.e. the common axis of the spheres which revolve in 
opposite directions. 

§ 7. ἱπερὶ δὲ τὸ αὐτὸ στρεφομένας.] This must be cut out ; for Hermes 
would not go on to ask ‘what sort of movement’ (Kinow ποίαν) if 
he had just answered that question himself. 

κίνησίς ἐστιν ὑπὸ στάσεως κατεχομένη. Here it seems clear that the 
στάσις spoken of is that of τὸ περὶ ὃ κινοῦνται ai ἄρκτοι, i.e, that of the 
Pole. But where, in this instance, is the ἐναντιότης κινήσεως, tO 
which στάσις was said to be due? Does the writer regard the move- 
ments of the two Bears, circling in the same direction, but on opposite 
sides of the Pole, as two ‘opposite’ movements ἢ 

* Galen, De muse. motu 1. 74 K. vol. iv, p. 400 (Amim, Stoic. vet. Sr. Wy 


p. 148), employs the instance of the swimmer in a rational way, to illustrate the 
case of a body held at rest by two equal and opposite pressures or tensions. 


{ 





LIBELLVS II: § 6b-8b 99 


κωλύει τὸ ὑπὲρ αὐτό, It appears from the context that this must be 
_jntended to mean ‘prevents them from diverging from their circular 
orbits’; but it is difficult to see how that sense can be got out of the 
words. 

§§ 8b-g. ἡ οὖν κίνησις κιτιλ. Here we have a discussion of τὸ 
κινοῦν, which down to this point has only been mentioned incidentally. 
But the fresh topic is introduced with strange abruptness ; and it is 
probable that the beginning of the paragraph about τὸ κινοῦν has been 

st. 

4 8 Ὁ. οὐχ ὑπὸ τῶν κατεκτὸς τοῦ σώματος συμβαίνει γίνεσθαι, ἀλλ᾽ ὑπὸ 
τῶν ἐντὸς εἰς τὸ κατεκτός, ἤτοι ψυχῆς [ἢ πνεύματος] ἢ ἄλλου τινὸς dow- 
μάτου. The Kosmos is not moved by something which pushes it 
from without, but by its ψυχή, which impels it from within. And the 
same may be said of every individual man and animal. (The writer 
is here thinking of spontaneous movement only, and leaves out of 
account the case of a man or animal pushed, dragged, or carried by 
another man or animal.) The ψυχή is incorporeal, but at the same 
time is regarded as residing ‘within’ the body of the man or animal. 
The phrase εἰς τὸ xarexrds, which is bracketed by Wachsmuth, may 
be allowed to stand. A living organism is moved ‘from within out- 
wards’, and not ‘from without inwards’; that is, the movement is 
originated by the soul, which is within the body, and passes thence 
to the bodily organs, and to material things outside the body. 

I have bracketed ἢ πνεύματος. Τῇ these words are retained, πνεῦμα 
is classed among the ἀσώματα. But the incorporeal πνεῦμα spoken of 
by orthodox and Gnostic Christians (a Semitic equivalent for the 
Platonic νοῦς) occurs rarely, if at all, in the Hermetica, When the 
Hermetists speak of πνεῦμα, they commonly use the word in the Stoic 
“sense, and mean by it a gaseous substance (σῶμα, not ἀσώματον), 
which they regard as the corporeal vehicle or envelope of the 
incorporeal soul. The words ἢ πνεύματος may have been inserted by 
‘some one who was in the habit of using πνεῦμα as the Christians used it. 
But if πνεῦμα is excluded, how are we to understand ἤτοι ψυχῆς ἢ 
ἄλλου τινὸς ἀσωμάτου What other incorporeal thing besides ψυχή 
can be included under the head of τὸ κινοῦν by which living bodies 
are moved ? Possibly φύσις ᾽ Or évépyeas, in the sense in which 
that term is used in some of the Hermes to Ammon documents ἢ 
σῶμα γὰρ ἔμψυχον οὐ(χ ὑπὸ σώματος κινεῖζται)" ἀλλ᾽ οὐδὲ τὸ σύνολον 
σῶμα. By this restoration, the sense unquestionably required is 
Clearly expressed. It would be possible to interpret in the same sense 
H 2 















100 CORPVS HERMETICVM 


the reading of codd. Corp. (σῶμα yap σῶμα ἔμψυχον οὐ κινεῖ κιτ.λ.); 
but no intelligent writer would use a form of words so ambiguous. 

§ Q. ὁρᾷς γοῦν καταβαρυνομένην τὴν ψυχήν, ὅταν μόνη δύο σώματα φέρῃ. 
The soul ‘carries’ the body. Hence, when a man carries a burden, 
his soul has to carry both his body and the burden; and it feels 
oppressed, because an extra burden is added to its usual load. 

(Gore) καὶ [ὅτι μὲν] ἐν τίνι κινεῖται τὰ κινούμενα, καὶ ὑπὸ τίνος, δῆλον. 
The reading of the MSS, (καὶ ὅτι μὲν ἔν τινι... καὶ ὑπό τινος δῆλον) is 
a mere repetition of the first sentence of the dialogue, Πᾶν τὸ κινούμε- 
vov. .. οὐκ ἔν τινι κινεῖται Kal ὑπό τινος; Neither Hermes nor Asclepius 
could have any reason for repeating at this stage the truism with 
which the argument started. But if we write the interrogative τίνι, 
τίνος, in place of the indefinite pronoun, the reference back to the 
opening of the dialogue becomes intelligible. Hermes points out 
that he has now answered the two questions which were there raised ; 
he has explained both ‘iz what τὰ κινούμενα are moved’ (δὲ 1-6 a), 
and ‘ ὧν what they are moved’ (§§ 8 Ὁ, 9). 

88 10-11, Ἐν kev... μεστά ἐστιν. Asclepius here interposes an 
objection. Does not all movement presuppose a xevév? If bodies 
were packed against one another without intervening void, would not 
movement be impossible? And if so, must not the space outside the 
Kosmos be void, to render the movement of the Kosmos possible ? 
How then can that space be ‘ full’ of θεῖόν τι, as Hermes asserts ὃ 

An argument similar to that on which Asclepius’s objection is based 
was commonly used by those who asserted the existence of void. 
Cf. Ar. Phys. 4. 6. 213b: (λέγουσιν οἱ φάσκοντες κενὸν εἶναι) ὅτι 
κίνησις ἡ κατὰ τόπον οὐκ ἂν εἴη (εἰ μὴ εἴη κενόν)" τὸ γὰρ πλῇρες ἀδύνατον 
εἶναι δέξασθαί τι. But those who argued thus meant that a body 
cannot move unless there is a void space ἐμέο which it may move. 
Asclepius goes further, and suggests that the outer sphere of the 
Kosmos could not revolve if there were not a void space within 
which it revolves. We might express his thought by saying that the 
movement would be stopped by friction. Cf. § 3, ta... μὴ θλιβό- 
μενον τὸ κινούμενον ὑπὸ τῆς στενότητος ἐπίσχῃ τὴν κίνησιν, where Hermes 
himself seemed to assume the same principle. 

The objection might have been better placed at the close of 
Hermes’ explanation of τὸ ἐν ᾧ κινεῖται, to which it refers, i. 6. im- 
mediately after § 6a; but it is not unreasonable that Asclepius 
should refrain from mentioning his doubt until both the subjects under 
discussion (τὸ κινοῦν as well as τὸ ἐν ᾧ κινεῖται) have been dealt with: 





LIBELLVS II: δὲ 8b-10 IOI 































With this passage on τὸ κενόν should be compared Ase/. Lat. III. 
332 5g. which closely resembles it. The Stoic doctrine, according to 
which τὸ ἐκτὸς τοῦ κόσμου is κενὸν ἄπειρον, is presupposed ; the writer’s 
object is to declare and justify his rejection of that doctrine. He 
points out that the apparently void spaces z#hiz the Kosmos are not 
really void, but are filled with some corporeal substance, such as air. 
Within the Kosmos then, there is no void; and, since bodies 
certainly move within the Kosmos, Asclepius’s notion that there cannot 
be movement unless the moving body has void space juxtaposed to 
it is thus shown to be untenable. It is true that this argument does 
not directly bear on the question whether void space exists outside 
the Kosmos; but the reasoning by which Asclepius was led to think 
that there #s¢ be void space outside the Kosmos is shown to be 
invalid. 

Since κενόν can mean nothing else than ‘ space which is not occu- 
pied by something corporeal’, the question whether the extracosmic 
space is κενόν or is ‘filled’ with something incorporeal is in reality 
futile. That which is ἀσώματον in the proper sense of the word is 
not extended in space, and cannot ‘fill’ space or be situated in space. 
But the Hermetist tacitly assumes that the ἀσώματον of which he is 
speaking, viz. the divine Nous, is σωματικόν to this extent at least, 
that it is capable of occupying space ; and the word κενόν appears to 
him to be inapplicable to the space which is ‘filled’ with that dod- 
ματον. He probably pictured the divine Nous to himself as a thing 
which pervades extracosmic space in the form of an impalpable 
vapour, or a diffused light. 

§ 10. μόνον δὲ τὸ μὴ ὃν κενόν ἐστι, This is a reminiscence of the 
language of Democritus, who called the empty space between the 
atoms τὸ μὴ ὄν, though at the same time he said that it exists no less 
truly than τὸ ὅν, i.e. the atoms. Ar. Mefaph. τ. 4.985 Ὁ 4: Λεύκιπ- 
mos δὲ καὶ... Δημόκριτος στοιχεῖα μὲν τὸ πλῆρες καὶ τὸ κενὸν εἶναί φασι, 
λέγοντες τὸ μὲν ὄν, τὸ δὲ μὴ ὄν. 

((τὸ γὰρ ὑπάρχον)... εἰ μὴ μεστὸν τῆς ὑπάρξεως ἦν. The text of 
the Corfus and that of Stobaeus have been differently corrupted ; 
Thave tried to make sense of the passage by combining the indi- 
‘tations of both. The argument appears to amount to this; “τὸ 
ὑπάρχον cannot be void; but τὸ ὄν is ὑπάρχον ; therefore, τὸ ὄν cannot 
be void.’ The writer feels that the term τὸ ὑπάρχον connotes absence 
of void more evidently than the synonymous term τὸ ὄν. The word 
ξένον in codd. Corp, is doubtless a corruption of κενόν. 


102 CORPVS HERMETICVM 


§ 11. οὐ διὰ πάντων διήκει τῶν ὄντων, καὶ πάντα διῆκον πληροῖ; The 
writer speaks of air in nearly the same words in which the Stoics 
spoke of the cosmic πνεῦμα (a mixture of fire and air). Cf Alex. 
Aphrod., p. 223. 25 Bruns: the Stoics say τὸ πᾶν ἡνῶσθαί re καὶ συν- 
έχεσθαι πνεύματός τινος διὰ παντὸς διήκοντος αὐτοῦ. But the Stoics, in 
accordance with their doctrine of κρᾶσις δι᾽ d\wv,! held that πνεῦμα is 
present in every part of sublunar space, even in those parts of it which 
are occupied by other bodies. The Hermetist does not adopt this 
view with respect to air; for he proceeds to say that air is excluded 
from those parts of space which are occupied by other bodies. His 
meaning therefore must be merely that all interstices between other 
bodies are filled with air. 

σῶμα δὲ οὐκ ἐκ τῶν τεσσάρων σωμάτων κεκραμένον συνέστηκε; No 
portion of any one of the four elements actually presents itself un- 
mixed with the other three. (Cf. Corp. IX. 7: πάντα δέ ἐστι σύνθετα.) 
That which we commonly call ‘air’, for instance, is really a mixture 
of all four elements, but a mixture in which the element air prepon- 
derates. It is not the element air then, but the mixed body commonly 
called air, that occupies all apparently empty spaces in the Kosmos. 

It may be doubted whether the writer would have denied that 
elemental fire exists unmixed in the heavens; but he is not here 
thinking of the heavens. 

ὑπάρξεως (ὑπάρξει codd. Stob. : ὑπάρχει codd. Corp.) yap μεστά ἐστιν 
ἀέρος καὶ πνεύματος]. The meaning of πνεῦμα here must be different 
from its meaning in [ἢ πνεύματος], §8b; for the thing here spoken of 
is σῶμα, and the thing spoken of in 8b is ἀσώματον. But καὶ πνεύ- 
ματος at least ought certainly to be cut out; for in the argument 
which this sentence ends, air alone, and not πνεῦμα, is spoken of. 
I think however that it is best to cut out ἀέρος also; for we have to 
account for the readings ὑπάρξει γάρ and ὑπάρχει γὰρ καί of the MSS. ; 
and this can best be done by assuming that the author wrote ὑπάρξεως 
γὰρ μεστά ἐστιν, ‘for they are full of something which exists’, viz, air. 
(Cf. εἰ μὴ μεστὸν τῆς ὑπάρξεως Fv in ὃ το.) When ὑπάρξεως had been 
corrupted, some one inserted ἀέρος καὶ πνεύματος to make sense. 
Perhaps the interpolator borrowed these words from the Greek 
original of Asc/. Za¢. III. 33 c: ‘spiritu tamen et aere vacuum esse 
non possit.’ 


1 Plut. Comm. not. 37. 1077: the Stoics say σῶμα χωρεῖν διὰ σώματος, κενὸν 
μηδετέρου περιέχοντος, ἀλλὰ τοῦ πλήρους εἰς τὸ πλῆρες ἐνδυομένου. They held that 
it is possible for the same portion of space to be occupied simultaneously by two or 
more different bodies, See Arnim, δή, vez. II, p. 151 ff. 





LIBELLVS II: δῷ 11-12a 103 


§ 12 a. Τὸν οὖν réwov ... τί εἴπομεν ; It is clear that εἴπομεν (codd. 
Stob.) and not εἴπωμεν (codd. Corp.) is the right reading. Having 
dealt with τὸ κινοῦν, and disposed of the objection about τὸ κενόν, 
Hermes resumes the discussion of τὸ ἐν ᾧ κινεῖται at the point at 
which he left it at the end of § 6a; and he begins by reminding 
Asclepius of one of the conclusions there arrived at, viz. that the τόπος 
- jin question is ἀσώματος. 

Τὸ οὖν ἀσώματον (roto). It seems necessary to insert τοῦτο ; for 
besides the extracosmic νοῦς here spoken of, there is at least one 
other kind of ἀσώματον, viz. the intracosmic ψυχή by which the 
_ Kosmos and the bodies contained in it are moved (§§ 8 b, 9). 

Νοῦς ὅλος. Ought we to write νοῦς ὅλος, ἐξ ὅλου ἑαυτὸν ἐμπεριέχων ? 
Or νοῦς, ὅλος ἐξ ὅλου ἑαυτὸν ἐμπ. ἢ The MSS. of Corp. give νοῦς, λόγος, 
ἐξ ὅλου κιτιλ.; but λόγος must be a corruption of ὅλος. 

ἑαυτὸν ἐμπεριέχων. This means that the rézos-vots by which the 
‘Kosmos is encompassed is not itself encompassed by anything else, 
or that there is nothing else outside it. The Hermetist might have 
said that this Nous ὑπὸ τοῦ θεοῦ ἐμπεριέχεται" but his view appears to 
be that, though the divine Nous is located in space, the supreme God, 
whom he distinguishes from it, is not in space. Yet a different view 
seems to be implied in what is said below about the μέγεθος of τὸ 
"ἀγαθόν. 
ἐλεύθερος σωματικῆς πλάνης.---(ἐλεύθερος σώματος πάντος, ἀπλανής 
Μ55.) It is superfluous to tell us that δὴ ἀσώματον is ἐλεύθερον 
σώματος παντός. I have therefore altered ἀπλανής into πλάνης, and 
taken this to be the genitive dependent on ἐλεύθερος. The unmeaning 
odpart καί which follows ἀπαθής in codd. Corp. may have resulted 
from a misplacement of σωματικῆς ; and παντός may have come from 
πλάνης by duplication. 
χωρητικὸς συμπάντων καὶ σωτήριος τῶν ὄντων. The divine Nous (gua 
τόπος) ‘contains all things’ (cf. ὡς ἐνέργεια χωρητική in ὃ 6 4). And 
it ‘preserves all things’; i.e. it is (in subordination to the supreme 
God) the agent by whom the universe and all things in it are main- 
tained in existence. In this respect it corresponds to the second and 
demiurgic God of Numenius, though the writer of Corp. II does not 
use the word δημιουργός in describing it. 

(ἀφ᾽ οὗ (Ὁ) τὸν ((τῆς ψυχῆς») (bas), Some explanation of the relation 
between the extracosmic νοῦς and the intracosmic ψυχή is wanted ; and 
the words τῆς ψυχῆς, which occur in the MSS. at the end of ὃ 12 b, 
probably formed part of such an explanation. The writer might be 





104 CORPVS HERMETICVM 


expected to say that the divine Nous (τὸ ἐν ᾧ κινεῖται ὃ κόσμος) is that 
by which the soul (τὸ κινοῦν, including both the cosmic soul and the 
souls of individual men) is ‘illuminated’ or vitalized. 

The text of r2ab is badly damaged, and my attempted restoration 
of it is open to much doubt; but it seems probable that the descrip- 
tion of νοῦς ended at the end of 12 a, and that the thing spoken of in 
12 Ὁ was τὸ ἀγαθόν. 

ὃ 12D. ((Τί οὖν φῇς) ((τὸ dyabdr)) ;---((Τὸ ἀρχέτυπον φῶς), οὗ ὥσπερ 
ἀκτῖνές εἰσι(νὴ [| 7] (8 τε νοῦς καὶ) ἡ ἀλήθεια, This passage is mani- 
festly based on the discussion of ‘the idea of the Good’ in Pl, Rep. 
508 Ε ff., where Plato’s Socrates compares the Good to the sun. 

In the traditional text, τὸ ἀγαθόν is called one of the ἀκτῖνες of 
something else. But as the writer holds that τὸ ἀγαθόν is identical 
with the supreme God, and is the primary source of all things, he 
cannot have called it an ἀκτίς emitted by something else. The words 
τὸ ἀγαθόν therefore must be out of place. The author’s meaning 
must have been that certain things are ὥσπερ ἀκτῖνες τοῦ ἀγαθοῦ, 
i.e. that these things are emitted by τὸ ἀγαθόν as rays are emitted by 
the sun. ς 

But what are these ‘rays’ or radiations of the Good? One of 
them is ἡ ἀλήθειας But as ἀκτῖνές εἰσι is in the plural, at least one 
other ‘ray’ must have been mentioned. Now Plato 2. 2. speaks of 
ἀλήθεια as a thing produced or emitted by τὸ ἀγαθόν; and he 
repeatedly couples with it another thing, viz. ἐπιστήμη or yvGors,! 
which, he says, is also produced or emitted by τὸ ἀγαθόν. The 
leading thought of that passage would be correctly expressed by 
saying that ἐπιστήμη (or its synonym γνῶσις) and ἀλήθεια are ὥσπερ 
ἀκτῖνες τοῦ ἀγαθοῦ. Hence it may be inferred that the other " ray’ 
which the Hermetist coupled with ἀλήθεια was either ἐπιστήμη, OF 
something closely connected with ἐπιστήμη ; and as the topic under 
discussion in this part of the dialogue is the relation between νοῦς 
and τὸ ἀγαθόν (= ὃ θεός), there is Strong reason to conclude that he 
wrote of ὥσπερ ἀκτῖνές εἰσιν (8 τε νοῦς καὶ ἡ ἀλήθεια" That the 

1 <a > , ᾿ ‘i 5 δὶ 
ptt Be rian ἄταν eee πὰ ἀνίας treet an 
νομίζειν ταῦτ᾽ ἀμφότερα (viz. ἐπιστήμην καὶ ἀλήθειαν) ὀρθόν, ἀγαθὸν δὲ ἡγεῖσθαι 
ὁπότερον αὐτῶν οὐκ ὀρθόν... .. ἐπιστήμην μὲν καὶ ἀλήθειαν παρέχει (τὸ ἀγαθόν). The 
word ἀλήθεια is here used by Plato in the sense of ‘reality’ rather than ‘truth we 
and a few lines further on, the phrase τὸ εἶναί re καὶ τὴν οὐσίαν (τῶν γιγνωσκομένων) 
is substituted for it as an equivalent, 


® The combination νοῦν καὶ ἀλήθειαν occurs in Pl, Rep. 6. 4908: μιγεὶς τῷ ὄντι 
ὄντως, γεννήσας νοῦν καὶ ἀλήθειαν, οὕτω λήγοι ὠδῖνος. 





LIBELLVS II: §§ 12a-13 105 


Platonists of the second century a.D. were accustomed thus to 
couple together νοῦς and ἀλήθεια, is proved by the use made of 
these terms by the Gnostic Valentinus, who gave the names Νοῦς 
and ᾿Αλήθεια to the first pair of Aeons put forth by the supreme 
God.! It may be added that the Hermetist would have no reason 
for mentioning ἀλήθεια here, unless he spoke of it as the correlate 
| (or in the language of Valentinus, the σύζυγος) of νοῦς, with which he 
is more especially concerned. For the series τὸ ἀγαθόν, νοῦς, ψυχή, 
cf, Plotinus 5. 1. 8: αἴτιον μὲν τὸν νοῦν (λέγει 6 Πλάτων)" δημιουργὸς 
γὰρ ὃ νοῦς αὐτῷ' τοῦτον δέ φησι τὴν ψυχὴν ποιεῖν... τοῦ δὲ αἰτίου, νοῦ 
ὄντος, πατέρα φησὶ τἀγαθόν, [καὶ] τὸ ἐπέκεινα νοῦ καὶ ἐπέκεινα οὐσίας" 








..« ὥστε Πλάτωνα εἰδέναι ἐκ μὲν τἀγαθοῦ τὸν νοῦν, ἐκ δὲ τοῦ νοῦ τὴν 
ψυχήν. 

The ἀρχέτυπον φῶς of which the Hermetist speaks must, I think, 
be τὸ ἀγαθόν itself. The statement that τὸ ἀγαθόν is ‘the archetypal 
light’ corresponds to Plato’s statement that ἡ ἰδέα τοῦ ἀγαθοῦ is the 
sun of the intelligible world. The phrase implies that there is 
another φῶς which is an εἰκών of the archetype; and this other and 
subordinate φῶς may be the ‘light’ which the extracosmic νοῦς gives 
forth, and by which the intracosmic ψυχή is irradiated. Cf. Philo 
De somn. τ. 13. 75, vol. iii, p. 223 Wendland: ὃ θεὸς φῶς ἐστι, . . . 
καὶ ov μόνον φῶς, ἀλλὰ καὶ παντὸς ἑτέρου φωτὸς ἀρχέτυπον, μᾶλλον δὲ 
παντὸς ἀρχετύπου πρεσβύτερον καὶ ἀνώτερον. Plotinus 5. τ. 6 sg. and 
5. 3. 12, quoted in note on Οὐγῴ. XIT i. τ. 

§1g. Ὁ οὖν θεὸς τί ἐστιν :---Ὁ μηδέτερον (μηδὲ ἕν MSS.) τούτων 
_ ὑπάρχων, ὧν δὲ καὶ ((rodrois)) τοῦ εἶναι [[ ]] αἴτιος, καὶ πᾶσι κιτιλ, Of 
the things to which τούτοις refers, ἀλήθεια is certainly one ; and if my 
explanation of the passage is right, the other is νοῦς, (We are told 
below that 6 θεὸς οὐ νοῦς ἐστιν, αἴτιος δὲ τοῦ (νοῦν) εἶναι.) The writer 
“has just said that νοῦς and ἀλήθεια are ‘rays’ emitted by τὸ ἀγαθόν ; 
he now says that the cause of their existence is God, who (as he tells 
us in ὃ 15 f.) is identical with τὸ ἀγαθόν. 

πάντα δέ ἐστι τὰ (γινόμενα) ἐκ τῶν ὄντων γινόμενα, οὐκ (οὐχὶ μὴ MSS.) 
ἐκ τῶν μὴ ὄντων. The writer apparently holds that the Kosmos is 
without beginning, and denies creation ex nihilo. God is the 
supreme cause of all things, inasmuch as he is the source of Nous, 
by whom the Kosmos is maintained in being (νοῦς is σωτήριος τῶν 

1 Cf, Irenaeus 2. 12. 2: according to the doctrine of Valentinus, stm ef idem 


Sict Nus et Aletheia, semper adhaerentes invicem. This part of the Valentinian 
system must have been derived from Pl. Rep. 1. c. 


τοῦ CORPVS HERMETICVM 


ὄντων, § 12 a); but God’s agent Nous makes each thing, not out of 
nothing, but out of something else which existed before it. 

τὰ γὰρ μὴ ὄντα οὐ φύσιν ἔχει τοῦ δύνασθαι γενέσθαι (7), That which 
is not cannot become anything, or turn into anything. This is 
merely another way of saying that ἐκ τῶν μὴ ὄντων οὐ δύναται 
γενέσθαι τι. 

[rod μηδέποτ᾽ εἶναι.) These words have, no doubt, come by 
duplication from the following τοῦ μὴ εἶναί wore. Things which 
now exist cannot at any time pass out of existence; they can only 
change into something else. Cf. Corp. VIII, Ὅτι οὐδὲν τῶν ὄντων 
ἀπόλλυται. The words Τί οὖν φής cannot have been intended to 
stand here ; I have found a possible place for them above, in § 12 b, 

ὁ οὖν θεὸς οὐ νοῦς ἐστιν, αἴτιος δὲ τοῦ (νοῦν) εἶναι. Cf. 
Abammonis Resp. 8. τ ff., where the Egyptian priest Abammon 
answers the question τί τὸ πρῶτον αἴτιον ἡγοῦνται εἶναι Αἰγύπτιοι, 
πότερον νοῦν ἢ ὑπὲρ νοῦν. The doctrine that the supreme God is 
ὑπὲρ νοῦν and αἴτιος τοῦ νοῦν εἶναι was current among the Platonists 
of the Roman empire, and was adopted from them by Valentinus 
and other Gnostics. Ps,-Archytas (first century a.p. ?), Stob. 1. 41. 2, 
vol. i, p. 280 W.: τὸ δὲ τοιοῦτον (sc. the principium which imposes 
form on formless matter) οὐ νόον μόνον εἶμεν δεῖ, ἀλλὰ καὶ vow τι 
κρέσσον' νόω δὲ κρέσσον ἐστὶν ὅπερ ὀνομάζομεν θεόν. Irenaeus τ. 24.3: 
‘ Basilides . . . ostendens Nun . . . ab innato natum Patre.’ 

[οὐδὲ πνεῦμα... .] [οὐδὲ φῶς, αἴτιος δὲ τοῦ φῶς εἶναι.] The mention of 
πνεῦμα may be ascribed to the same interpolator who inserted πνεῦμα 
ἴῃ §8b. If we take φῶς to mean τὸ τῆς ψυχῆς φῶς, ‘the light by which 
the soul is illuminated’, i.e. the secondary and derivative φῶς spoken 
of in ὃ 128, the words οὐδὲ φῶς, αἴτιος δὲ τοῦ φῶς εἶναι might be regarded 
as another way of saying that God (= τὸ ἀγαθόν) is τὸ ἀρχέτυπον φῶς. 
But as the matter under consideration is the relation between God 
and Nous, it is more likely that the paragraph ended with a state- 
ment of that relation, and that the words concerning φῶς were added 
by another hand. 

$14. τὸν θεὸν δυσὶ ταύταις ταῖς προσηγορίαις σέβεσθαι Set. What are 
the ‘two appellations*? The writer of 8 r7 a must have taken them to 
be τὸ ἀγαθόν and 6 πατήρ. ‘The Good’ has been spoken of already ; 
but the word πατήρ does not occur until ὃ 17 a, and the reader could 
not be expected to supply it out of his own head in ὃ 14. If the two 
names meant by the author of § 14 were ‘the Good’ and ‘the Father’, 
some words in which his meaning was explained (e. g. τῇ τοῦ ἀγαθοῦ 





LIBELLVS II: §§ 13-16 107 


























Mou? τῇ τοῦ πατρός, in apposition to ταύταις ταῖς προσηγορίαις,) must 


Βᾶνε fallen out. But it is more probable that the two names of 
which he is speaking are those which he has already been employing, 
viz. 6 θεός and τὸ ἀγαθόν, and that § 17, in which the second of the 
two names is taken to be ὁ πατήρ, was subsequently added by some 
‘one else. In § 15, we are told that it is impious to call God by any 
other name except ‘the Good’. This shows that the two names 
which the author recognized were 6 θεός and τὸ ἀγαθόν ; and the 
writer of ὃ 17a, in calling God ‘the Father’, is guilty of the very 
impiety which is denounced in § 15. 

In Corp. X, the phrase 6 θεὸς καὶ πατήρ, (6) καὶ τὸ ἀγαθόν, occurs 
repeatedly as a name of God ; but in that document the words ὁ καὶ 
τὸ ἀγαθόν have probably been inserted by a later hand. 
 obre yap τῶν ἄλλων... τις δύναται... ἀγαθὸς εἶναι ἢ μόνος ὁ θεός. 
Corp. ΝῚ is an expansion of this thought. Compare Mark το. 18, 
Luke 18. 19: Τί pe λέγεις ἀγαθόν ; οὐδεὶς ἀγαθὸς εἰ μὴ εἷς ὁ θεός. 
“Matt. 19. 17: τί με ἐρωτᾷς περὶ τοῦ ἀγαθοῦ ; εἷς ἐστιν ὁ ἀγαθός. The 
‘saying must have been widely current, and there is no reason to 
‘suppose that the Hermetist derived it from the Gospels. It might 
be suggested to a Platonist by the discussion of the ode of Simonides 
in Pl. Profag. 341 E. 
$15. τοσοῦτον γάρ ἐστι τοῦ ἀγαθοῦ τὸ μέγεθος. Here the Good 
(i.e. God) is described as extended in space. We are told that 
neither body nor soul is spacious enough to contain it, and that it is 
coextensive with the whole sum of things corporeal and incorporeal ; 
that is to say, it extends through all space, both cosmic and extra- 
cosmic. But perhaps the Hermetist meant these statements to be 
understood metaphorically, and not literally. 

§ 16. τετιμημένοι τῇ τοῦ θεοῦ προσηγορίᾳ. We honour the sub- 
ordinate gods by applying to them an appellation which properly 
belongs to the supreme God alone, i.e. by calling them ἀγαθοί. 

The same phrase occurs in the prayer or hymn at the end of 
Ascl. Lat.: ἄφραστον ὄνομα, τετιμημένον τῇ τοῦ θεοῦ προσηγορίᾳ, 
... kal εὐλογούμενον τῇ τοῦ πατρός. But in that passage, the words 
are used in a different sense, and it is the supreme Deity himself 
that is there said to be ‘honoured by the appellation @eos’. It 
would seem that the writer of Ascl. Zat. 41 Ὁ read the phrase in 
Corp. ΤΙ (which is probably the earlier of the two documents), but 
either misunderstood it, or intentionally employed it in a different 
way, 


108 CORPVS HERMETICVM 


[καὶ ἐν γένος ἀμφοτέρων, ἐξ οὗ τὰ γένη wdvra.| γένος is a strange 
word to use with reference to God; and when two things are said 
to ‘have the same yévos’, or belong to the same γένος, it is implied 
that they are specifically different, rather than that they are identical, 
which is the point on which the writer is here insisting. 

[6 γὰρ θεὸς ἀγαθός ἐστιν, ὡς ἅπαντα διδοὺς καὶ μηδὲν λαμβάνων.]1-- (ὁ 
γὰρ ἀγαθὸς ἅπαντά ἐστι διδοὺς καὶ μηδὲν λαμβάνων MSS.) Cf. Corp. 
V. το: πάντα δίδως καὶ οὐδὲν λαμβάνεις. Corp. X. 3: τῷ μηδὲν 
λαμβάνοντι. Corp. IX. 9: οὐκ ἔξωθεν αὐτὰ προσλαμβάνων, ἔξω δὲ 
ἐπιδιδούς. 

The reading of the MSS. is certainly wrong ; for in an independent 
statement the negative would be οὐδέν, not μηδέν. But even in the 
form into which I have altered it, the sentence is out of place here; 
for at this stage the writer is asserting, not that God is ἀγαθός, but 
that God is τὸ ἀγαθόν. If the words 6 γὰρ... μηδὲν λαμβάνων 
occurred at all in the original text, they probably followed ἢ μόνος ὁ 
θεός in ὃ 14. 

[ὁ οὖν θεὸς πάντα δίδωσι καὶ οὐδὲν λαμβάνει.) ὁ οὖν θεός is a 
duplication of the first three words of the following sentence; and 
πάντα δίδωσι καὶ οὐδὲν λαμβάνει is an alternative for ἅπαντά ἐστι διδοὺς 
καὶ μηδὲν λαμβάνων. 

ὁ οὖν θεὸς (τὸ) ἀγαθόν, καὶ τὸ ἀγαθὸν ὁ θεός. Cf. Philo De special. 
leg. 2. 53 (De septen. 5), Cohn V, p. 99: μόνος γὰρ (ὃ beds) εὐδαίμων 
καὶ μακάριος, παντὸς μὲν ἀμέτοχος κακοῦ, πλήρης δ᾽ ἀγαθῶν τελείων, 
μᾶλλον δ᾽, εἰ χρὴ τἀληθὲς εἰπεῖν, αὐτὸς ὧν τὸ ἀγαθόν," ὃς οὐρανῷ καὶ γῇ 
τὰ κατὰ μέρος ὥμβρησεν ἀγαθά. Proclus on Pl. Zim. 28 says that the 
Platonist Atticus (A.D. 160-180) identified the Demiurgus with ‘ the 
Good’ (τὸν δημιουργὸν εἰς ταὐτὸν ἄγει τἀγαθῷ). 

The statement that ‘ God is the Good, and the Good is God’ forms 
a fitting conclusion to the dialogue; and there can be little doubt 
that in the original text these words were immediately followed by 
τοσαῦτα... . λελέχθω κιτιλ. (§ τὴ Ὁ). The topic of procreation, which 
is introduced in ὃ τ ἃ, has no connexion with the preceding argu- 
ment, though the person who appended that section contrived to 
produce a superficial appearance of continuity by referring to the 
mention of two προσηγορίαι of God in ὃ 14. 


Ὁ It would be possible to avoid this difficulty without inserting θεός, by writing 
ὁ γὰρ ἀγαθός ἐστιν ὁ ἅπαντα διδοὺς καὶ μηδὲν λαμβάνων, 

* Butin Ολὲξ mund, 2. 8, Cohn I, p. 3, Philo says that God (who is there called 
ὃ τῶν ὅλων νοῦς) is κρείττων ἣ αὐτὸ τὸ ἀγαθὸν καὶ αὐτὸ τὸ καλόν. 















































LIBELLVS II: δὲ 16-17a 109 


§ 17 a. πατρὸς γὰρ τὸ ποιεῖν, ποιεῖν is here used in the sense ‘to 
beget’, as in the compound παιδοποιεῖν. 

σπουδὴ . . . εὐσεβεστάτη.... ἐστιν ἡ παιδοποιίαᾳ. The thought that 
human procreation is an imitation of the creative energy of God, 
which is implied in this passage, is more fully expressed in Corp. XI 
ji. 14a, and in Ascl. Zat. 111. 20bsg. The view that the begetting of 
offspring is incumbent on manasa sacred duty is implied in Asc/. Lad. 
ΠῚ. 20 Ὁ sg., but is more directly asserted in Corp, II. 17 a. The writer 
must have found in his environment some special reason for insisting 
nit. In saying that to die childless is ‘a great misfortune’, he is in 
accord with a sentiment which was strongly rooted among ‘Greeks; 
Jews, and Egyptians alike; and he finds religious support for it in 
his doctrine of ‘God the Father’. But in his time, there were many 
who preferred to remain childless, some from a wish to avoid trouble, 
expense, and anxiety, and others, (especially Pythagoreans, Platonists, 
and Christians) on account of the confemptus mundi, and hatred of 
the body, to which their beliefs gave support. The first of these two 
‘motives finds frequent expression in literature, from the time of 
Euripides downward; see for instance the passages collected in 
Stobaeus 4. 22. 28 sgg. Hense, Ὅτι οὐκ ἀγαθὸν τὸ γαμεῖν, and 12. 4. 24.. 
τό sgq., Ὅτι ἀσύμφορον τὸ ἔχειν τέκνα. Augustus found that the 
tendency to ‘race-suicide’ was becoming a grave public danger, and 
enacted laws to check it. The same sort of inducements to prefer 
acelibate life which were felt in Italy in the time of Augustus were 
no doubt also felt in Egypt some generations later; and as the writer 
‘of Corp. 11. 17 a bids his readers μὴ συνησθῆναι, ‘not to rejoice with’ 
childless man (as with one who is fortunate), it may be inferred 
that he is arguing chiefly against those who thought childlessness the 
‘more comfortable state. On the other hand, the writer of Asc/. 
Lat. 11 was probably thinking rather. of Christian ascetics who 
abstained from procreation on religious grounds. 
δίκην οὗτος δίδωσι μετὰ θάνατον τοῖς δαίμοσιν. The notion that the 
agents by whom sin is punished after death are daemons occurs in 
Plato’s myths. See Asc/, Lat. 111. 28. The writer of Corp, 11. 17 ἃ 
holds that the punishment inflicted by the daemons, in some cases at 
least, takes the form of a penal reincarnation ; on this, cf. Corp. X. 8 ἃ. 
Plutarch, in his ‘Vision of Thespesius’, De sera numinis vindicta 
567 F, describes the daemon-torturers reshaping guilty souls to fit 
them for reincarnation in the bodies to which they are condemned. 
σῶμα... μήτε ἀνδρὸς μήτε γυναικὸς φύσιν ἔχον. This means a body 


110 CORPVS HERMETICVM 


other than human. Those who refuse to discharge the function in- 
cumbent on them as ἄνδρες or γυναῖκες will be punished by reincarna- 
tion in beast-bodies, 

[[ὅπερ ἐστὶ κατηραμένον ὑπὸ τοῦ ἡλίου. What is it that is ‘cursed 
by the Sun’?* According to the reading of the MSS., the thing 
which is ‘ cursed’ is σῶμα οὔτε ἀνδρὸς οὔτε γυναικὸς φύσιν ἔχον. A de- 
formed or defective human body might be said to be ‘accursed *, but 
hardly the normal body of a beast. It seems more likely that the 
clause has been misplaced, and ought to stand after drexvév τινα ἐξ 
ἀνθρώπων ἀπαλλαγῆναι ; it is childlessness that is the accursed thing. 

But why does the writer add ὑπὸ τοῦ ἡλίου Perhaps the Sun-god, 
being himself the cosmic source of life and growth, might be thought 
to look with displeasure on those who refuse to co-operate with him 
by begetting children, The phrase may have been in use as 
a traditional formula in some solar cult. 


LIBELLVS III 


The text of Corp, III, as given in the MSS, is so corrupt as to be 
almost wholly meaningless ; and I have altered it with a free hand. 
It is not likely that the conjecturally emended text which is here 
printed is precisely what the author wrote 3; but I think it probable 
that, in the main at least, it correctly represents his meaning. 

There is no necessity to take this little piece to be an extract from 
a longer treatise ; it appears to be a complete whole in itself, and it 
is rounded off by a recurrence, in the concluding words, to the same 
thought with which it began. It is the concentrated essence of some 
unknown Egyptian’s reflections on the universe. 

The author of Corg. III had read the first chapter of Genesis, It 
is impossible to doubt this, when we compare the corresponding 
passages in detail. 


Genests 1 (LXX). Corp, 111. 

1, ἐν ἀρχῇ ἐποίησεν ὁ θεὸς τὸν 18. ἀρχὴ τῶν ὄντων ὁ θεός. 
οὐρανὸν καὶ τὴν γῆν. 

1 * Under the sun’ would rather be ὑπὸ τὸν ἥλιον. (Cf. Eccl, passim, e. g. 2.18: 
σύμπαντα μόχθον μου ὃν ἐγὼ κοπιῶ ὑπὸ τὸν ἥλιον.) It would be possible to write 
ὑπὸ τὸν ἥλιον, and (perhaps assuming a lacuna before ὑπό) to take this as meaning 
‘ during life on earth’, as opposed to μετὰ θάνατον ; but there is no need to reject 
the phrase ‘cursed by the Sun’. Cf. καταραθέντα ὑπὸ τοῦ ἡλίου, in a passage 
mao Hermes by the alchemist Olympiodorus (Zestim., Zosimus Adden- 

wnt (c)). 



































2. ἡ δὲ γῆ ἦν ἀόρατος καὶ ἀκατα- 
σκεύαστος, 


καὶ σκότος ἐπάνω τῆς ἀβύσσου" 


καὶ πνεῦμα θεοῦ ἐπεφέρετο ἐπάνω 
τοῦ ὕδατος. 

4. καὶ εἶπεν ὁ θεός Τενηθήτω φῶς" 
καὶ ἐγένετο PAS. +s 

7. καὶ ἐποίησεν 6 θεὸς τὸ στε- 
ρέωμα' καὶ διεχώρισεν ὁ θεὸς ἀνὰ 
ἱ μέσον τοῦ ὕδατος ὃ id ὑποκάτω τοῦ 
στερεώματος, καὶ ἀνὰ μέσον τοῦ 
ὕδατος τοῦ ἐπάνω τοῦ στερεώματος. 
8. καὶ ἐκάλεσεν ὁ θεὸς τὸ i ae 
οὐρανόν. Ἐπ ὃν καὶ συνήχθη τὸ 
ὕδωρ τὸ ὑποκάτω τοῦ οὐρανοῦ εἰς 
τὰς συναγωγὰς αὐτῶν, καὶ ὥφθη ἡ 
ξηρά. το. καὶ ἐκάλεσεν ὃ θεὸς τὴν 
ξηρὰν γῆν ... 

11. καὶ εἶπεν ὃ θεύς Βλαστησάτω 

ἡ γῆ Panto Χόρτου, σπεῖρον 
σπέρμα κατὰ γένος καὶ καθ᾽ ὁμοιό- 
τητα, καὶ ξύλον μάραιμον ποιοῦν 
καρπόν, οὗ τὸ σπέρμα αὐτοῦ ἐν 
αὐτῷ κατὰ γένος εἰς ὁμοιότητα ἐπὶ 
τῆς γῆς" καὶ ἐγένετο οὕτως. 12. 
καὶ ἐξήνεγκεν ἡ γῇ βοτάνην χόρ. 
14. καὶ εἶπεν ὃ θεός Ῥενηθήτωσαν 
φωστῆρες ἐν τῷ στερεώματι τοῦ οὐ- 
! paves εἰς φαῦσιν τῆς γῆς, καὶ ἄρχειν 
τῆς ἡμέρας καὶ τῆς νυκτός, ... καὶ 
é av εἰς σημεῖα... 15. καὶ 
ἐγένετο οὕτως. .. . 

20. καὶ εἶπεν ὃ θεός ᾿Ἐξαγαγέτω 
ὕδατα ἑρπετὰ ψυχῶν ζωσῶν καὶ 
πετεινὰ..." καὶ ἐγένετο οὕτως. 21. 
καὶ ἐποίησεν ὃ θεὸς τὰ κήτη τὰ με- 
καὶ πᾶσαν ψυχὴν ζῴων ἑρπε- 


LIBELLVS III 


LTT 


2a (differently placed) ; ἀδιορί- 
orev δὲ ὄντων ἁπάντων καὶ ἀκατα- 
σκευάστων. 

tb. ἦν γὰρ σκότος ἄπειρον ἐν 
ἀβύσσῳ, 

καὶ ὕδωρ, καὶ πνεῦμα λεπτὸν νοε- 
pov, δυνάμει θείᾳ (.. δον τὰ ἐν χάει. 

ἀνείθη δὴ φῶς ἅγιον. 


{ +) στοιχεῖα καὶ θεοὶ πάντες... 
2a. ἀποδιωρίσθη τὰ ἐλαφρὰ εἰς 
ὕψος, καὶ τὰ βαρέα ἐθεμελιώθη ὑφ᾽ 
ὑγρᾷ ἄμμῳ. ... ἀνακρεμασθέντων 
πνεύματι ὀχεῖσθαι. 

(tb. καὶ ἐπάγη ὑπ’ ἄμμῳ ἐξ 
ὑγρᾶς οὐσίας.) 


3a (differently placed): καὶ 
πᾶσα σπορὰ ἔνσπορος. καὶ (ἐγέ- 
vero) χόρτος καὶ ἄνθους παντὸς 
χλοή" τὸ σπέρμα τῆς παλιγγενεσίας 
ἐν ἑαυτοῖς. 

(rb. Γκαταδιαιροῦσι] φύσεως ἐν- 
σπόρου.) 


2b. καὶ ὥφθη ὁ οὐρανὸς ἐν κύ- 
κλοις ἑπτά, καὶ θεοὶ ἱταῖς] ἐν ἄστρων 
ἰδέαις ὀπτανόμενοι σὺν τοῖς αὐτῶν 
‘4 J ‘ tA ἧς 
σημείοις ἅπασι. καὶ διηρθρώθη σὺν 
τοῖς ἐν αὐτῇ θεοῖς. 


38. ἄνηκε δὲ ἕκαστος θεὸς διὰ 
τῆς ἰδίας δυνάμεως τὸ προσταχθὲν 
αὐτῷ" καὶ ἐγένετο. .. ἔνυδρα καὶ 
πτηνά. 








112 CORPVS HERMETICVM 


τῶν, ἃ ἐξήγαγεν τὰ ὕδατα κατὰ γένη 
αὐτῶν, καὶ πᾶν πετεινὸν πτερωτὸν 
κατὰ γένος. ... 
22. καὶ ηὐλόγησεν αὐτὰ (se. the (See § 3 b below.) 
fishes and the birds) 6 θεὸς λέγων 
Αὐξάνεσθε καὶ πληθύνεσθε... .. 
24. καὶ εἶπεν ὁ θεός ᾿Ἐξαγαγέω — (Differently placed): καὶ ἐγέ- 
ἡ γῇ ψυχὴν ζῶσαν κατὰ γένος, τε- vero θηρία τετράποδα καὶ ἑρπετά. 
τράποδα καὶ ἑρπετὰ καὶ θηρία τῆς 
γῆς κατὰ γένος" καὶ ἐγένετο οὕτως. 


26. Ποιήσωμεν ἄνθρωπον . . ." 3b. ... γενέσεις τῶν ἀνθρώπων, 
καὶ ἀρχέτωσαν τῶν ἰχθύων τῆς θα- εἰς... πάντων τῶν ὑπ᾽ οὐρανὸν δε- 
λάσσης καὶ τῶν πετεινῶν τοῦ οὖρα- σπότειαν, ... 
νοῦ καὶ τῶν κτηνῶν καὶ πάσης 
τῆς γῆς. ++ 

28. καὶ ηὐλόγησεν αὐτοὺς ὁ θεὸς εἰς τὸ αὐξάνεσθαι ἐν αὐξήσει καὶ 
λέγων Αὐξάνεσθε καὶ πληθύνεσθε, πληθύνεσθαι ἐν πλήθει. 
καὶ πληρώσατε τὴν γῆν καὶ κατα- 
κυριεύσατε αὐτῆς. 


It is evident then that the writer of Corp. III knew the Mosaic 
account of the creation. But he also knew the Stoic cosmology ; 
and in this document, he has tried to harmonize the one with the 
other, and so to ‘reconcile Genesis with science’. 

We have fragments of another cosmogony, which appears to have 
been likewise derived in part from Genesis and in part from Stoic 
science, but was said by its author to be based on writings of Thoth, 
whom the Greeks called Hermes Trismegistus,—namely, the cosmo- 
gony of Sanchuniathon, as reported by Philo Byblius ;* and it seems 
worth while to compare this with Covg. III. Philo Bybl. is quoted 
as follows by Eusebius, Pr. ev. 1. 10. 1 (33 b) sqq.? 

“Tv τῶν ὅλων ἀρχὴν ὑποτίθεται (ὁ Σαγχουνιάθων) ἀέρα ζοφώδη καὶ 
πνευματώδη, ἢ πνοὴν ἀέρος ζοφώδους," καὶ χάος θολερὸν ἐρεβῶδες," (ὃ 

1 Date of Philo Byblius, ς. A.D. 64-140 (Christ Gesch. Gr. Litt.). He may 
have written this book about A. Ὁ. 100-120. 

2 The text here given is based on that of Gifford’s edition, 1903. 

8 ἀὴρ πνευματώδης and πνοὴ ἀέρος appear to be two alternative translations of a 
Semitic term corresponding to the ‘spirit of God’ in Geneszs 1, 2, and the πνεῦμα 
λεπτὸν νοερόν in Corp. III. In what follows, this same thing is called simply τὸ 
πνεῦμα. The epithet ζοφώδης corresponds to the ‘darkness upon the face of the 


deep’ in Genesis. : 
4 The χάος θολερὸν ἐρεβῶδες, which is coupled with the πνεῦμα, and is the other 





LIBELLVS III 113 



































καλεῖται) ((μώτ᾽ τοῦτό τινές φασιν ἰλύν, οἱ δὲ ὑδατώδους μίξεως σῆψιν.))}" 
γαῦτα δὲ" εἶναι ἄπειρα, καὶ διὰ πολὺν αἰῶνα μὴ ἔχειν πέρας. ὅτε δέ, 
φησίν, ἠράσθη (τοῦ par) τὸ πνεῦμα, τῶν (ἀλιδίων ἀρχῶν [[καὶ]] ἐγένετο 
σύγκρασις." ((xat)) ἣ (συμ)πλοκὴ ἐκείνη ἐκλήθη πόθος." αὕτη δὲ ἀρχὴ 


Ὁ primal things, corresponds to ἡδάσηιε (‘the deep’) and ‘the waters’ in 
Bis, snd to ἄβυσσος, ὕδωρ, and τὰ ἐν χάει in Corp, III. 

1 [ have inserted here the words par... σῆψιν, which are evidently misplaced 
where they occur below in the text of Eusebius. They must have been meant to 
apply to the ‘ turbid chaos’ or formless watery mass ; and it is to be presumed that 
uor is a Semitic word, of which Philo Byblius, as before, gives two alternative 
lanations, viz. ἰλύς (‘mud’), and ὑδατώδους μίξεως σῆψις (‘a fermenting watery 

”), A word meaning ‘ the waters’ (Heb. mayim) would serve the purpose. 
J find it stated that the Semitic word for water occurs in the form 0z in Aramaic; 
and it is possible that pwr is a miswriting for nox. Cf. Assyrian mii, pl. mz. (The 
Egyptian for water is mw, Coptic axooy ; but the immediate source of Philo Bybl. 
‘must have been Semitic, and not Egyptian.) 
In Damascius’s account of the Babylonian cosmogony, De princip. (Kopp) c. 125, 
p. 384 (Gunkel, ng und Chaos, p. 17), there is a Being named Μωυμῖς, son 
Γ᾿ Απασῶν and Ταυθέ (i. ε. ῥεῖ and Tiamat,—'ABvooos and Tehdm) ; and mummu 
die tosende Wassertiefe’, Delitzsch,) is sometimes used in Babylonian documents 


72). But Mr. Langdon ΩΝ also says that ‘ M/semmzu is an ordinary word 


principle, water’. Is there any connexion between this M/zmu—Movpis and the 
por of Philo Bybl.? 

It has occurred to me that pwr might possibly be 24am written backwards. A 
Greek might conceivably make this mistake in transcribing a Semitic word written 
from right to left; but this is hardly probable. 

The origin of the word μώτ is doubtful, but we are not left in doubt as to its 
neaning in this passage; for the writer himself tells us that it may here be taken 
‘to mean ἰλύς. For our present purpose then, μώτ means ‘ mud’, 
᾿ς Viz, the πνεῦμα and the χάος θολερόν (also called pdr). 
8 πέρας is here used in its Pythagorean sense, as an equivalent of εἶδος or μορφή. 
Cf, Philo Special. leg. 1. 329, Cohn V, p. 79: ἀπείρου (= ἀμόρφου) καὶ πεφυρμένης 

) Fora long time, the two primal things (the πνεῦμα and the pwr) continued 
a unformed or unordered. is clause corresponds to ‘ the earth (i. 6. all that 
isted in the beginning) was waste and void (ohu wa bohw)’ in Genesis, and to 
ἀδιορίστων ὄντων ἁπάντων καὶ ἀκατασκευάστων in Corp. III. The epithet ἄπειρον 

ceurs in Corp. III. 1 Ὁ, and in the original text of that passage, was probably 
applied to ὕδωρ, i.e, the formless watery mass. 
In Eusebius, the reading is ἠράσθη τὸ πνεῦμα τῶν ἰδίων ἀρχῶν. But that is 

ense. The πνεῦμα is itself one of the two ἀρχαί, and has no ‘ ἀρχαί of its own’ 

which it might become enamoured. The writer must have meant that there 
were two ἀΐδιοι ἀρχαί (i.e. two things without beginning), viz. the preuma and the 

very mass, and that at a certain time the former became enamoured of the latter, 
d the two (which had hitherto been separate) consequently came to be inter- 
led. This.is his interpretation of the phrase in the Hebrew Gevesis, ‘the 
it of God was brooding upon the face of the waters’, His πνεῦμα corresponds 
*the spirit of God’; his μώτ corresponds to ‘the waters’; and the Hebrew 
which our translators render by ‘was brooding’ is taken by him to mean 


δ πόθος or ἔρως occurs at the beginning of many cosmogonies, from Hesiod 

wnward. Some of these were no doubt known to the writer; and by his 

ni tation of the Hebrew text, he has contrived to find this same πόθος in the 
it chapter of Genests also. 

_ Compare the ‘Sidonian ’ cosmogony reported by Eudemus (Damascius De princ. 

Ῥ. 382 Kopp: Mullach Ar. Ph. Gr. IT, p. 289): Σιδώνιοι, . . wept πάντων Χρόνον 


2806.2 I 





114 CORPVS HERMETICVM 


κτίσεως ἁπάντων' [αὐτὸ δὲ οὐκ ἐγίνωσκε τὴν αὑτοῦ Kriow'|' καὶ ἐκ τῆς 
[αὐ)τοῦ (μὼτ) συμπλοκῆς (xal) τοῦ πνεύματος ἐγένετο [[μώτ᾽ τοῦτό τινές 
φασιν ἰλύν, οἱ δὲ ὑδατώδους μίξεως σῆψιν]} [καὶ ἐκ ταύτης ἐγένετο] πᾶσα 
σπορὰ κτίσεως. καὶ (αὕτη) γένεσις τῶν ὅλων. [[ἦν δέ τινα ζῷα οὐκ 
ἔχοντα αἴσθησιν.) [[{ἐξ ὧν ἐγένετο ζῷα νοερά, καὶ ἐκλήθη ζωφασημίν, 
τοῦτ᾽ ἔστιν οὐρανοῦ κατόπται.}} " καὶ ἀνεπλάσθη (τὸν (arty) ὁμοίως God 


ὑποτίθενται καὶ Ἰπόθον καὶ “Ομίχλην' Πόθου δὲ καὶ 'Ομίχλης μιγέντων ὡς δυεῖν ἀρχαῖν 
᾿Αέρα γενέσθαι καὶ Αὔραν, . .. πάλιν δὲ ἐκ τούτων ἀμφοῖν Ὦτον γεννηθῆναι. There 
is some confusion here ; πόθος ought to be the name of the συμπλοκή itself, as in 
Sanchuniathon, or of the Power which presides over the συμπλοκή, and not the 
name of one of the two who are joined in marriage. Perhaps we ought to read 
Χρόνου δέ in place of Πόθον δέ. It is probable that Χρόνος is Κρόνος, i.e. the 
Phoenician god Z/7. There are two ἀρχαί; but they have little resemblance to the 
two dpxai of Sanchuniathon. Is Ὦτος the same as the μῴτ of Sanchuniathon? If 
so, it is differently dealt with, and is made a son of ’Ajp and Atpa (two different 
forms of πνεῦμα), instead of being married to πνεῦμα. 

Damascius ἐδ, mentions also a cosmogony of the Phoenician Mochus, in which 
the two dpxat are Aléjp and ‘Ajp. These correspond to the ’Ajp and Αὔρα of the 
* Sidonian’ cosmogony; and they probably mean either ‘the upper air’ and ‘the 
lower air’ (cf. the αἰθήρ and ἀήρ of the Zpinomis), or ‘bright air’ and ‘dark air’, 

These two Phoenician cosmogonies do not show any such resemblance to that of 
the Hebrew Genesis as is apparent in the cosmogony of Sanchuniathon. 

1 The words αὐτὸ. . . xriow are unintelligible, and have presumably been 
inserted by error, If we read αὐτὸς δὲ... τὴν αὑτοῦ κτίσιν, we might take them to 
be a note appended by a Christian, and suggested by the mention of κτίσις in the 
preceding clause: ‘The deluded heathen who wrote this did not know how he 
himself had been created.’ 

? With the alterations which I have made, we get an intelligible sentence. ‘ This 
(namely, the intermixture of the two primal things, peuma and mét,) was the 
beginning of the creation of all things; and from the marriage of mé¢ and pueuma 
came forth all the brood of things created,’ [καὶ é« ταύτης éyévero] is a doublet of 
καὶ ἐκ τῆς... συμπλοκῆς... ἔγένετο above. 

5 It is clear that the words ἣν δέ τινα... οὐρανοῦ κατόπται haye been wrongly 
inserted here. It would be absurd to talk about ζῷα at astage when the production 
of ζῷα cannot yet have taken place, and when even the cosmic sphere has not yet been 
shaped, (Its shaping is first spoken of in the following sentence.) It is to be 
presumed that these misplaced fragments have come from the paragraph which 
followed the κοσμογονία of Sanchuniathon, and which Eusebius calls his anti: 

I suppose the strange phrase (a oi ἔχοντα αἴσθησιν (which, in the terminology 
of the Greek schools, would be self-contradictory, ) is a translation of some Semitic 
equivalent of the term ἄλογα ζῷα, and means the beasts ; and the ‘animals which 
possess intelligence and contemplate heaven’ must be the human race. Cf, εἰς 
κατοπτείαν οὐρανοῦ in Corp. III. 3b, where ‘the contemplation of heaven’ is 
mentioned as one of the functions of man, or one of the purposes for which he has 
been made, It is a thought which very commonly occurs in Hellenistic writings, 
that men, in contrast to the beasts, have been so constructed as to stand erect, in 
order that they may look up to heaven. See note on Corp. XII ii. 20 a. 

The clause abont men can hardly have been intended to follow immediatel 
after the clause about beasts; for if it were, ἐὲ ὧν would refer to the beasts, and it 
would be implied that the writer held men to be descended from beasts, which is 
not likely. More probably, we have here two separate fragments, and ἐξ ὧν (if 
tightly read) refers to something which has been lost. 

ζωφασημίν is Semitic. The words of which it is a transliteration are those which 
in Hebrew would take the form ¢sapheh, ‘ one who watches’, and hash-shamayim, 
‘heaven’, Philo Byblius is therefore right in saying that it means οὐρανοῦ κατὄπται. 
He has here retained a phrase of the Semitic original, and added his translation of 








LIBELLVS III 115 


σχήματι," (+)? καὶ ἐξέλαμψε(ν) [[μὼτ]] ἥλιός τε καὶ σελήνη, ἀστέρες 
τε καὶ ἄστρα μεγάλα." " 

τοιαύτη μὲν (says Eusebius) αὐτῶν ἡ κοσμογονία, ἄντικρυς ἀθεότητα 
εἰσάγουσα" ἴδωμεν δὲ ἑξῆς ὡς καὶ τὴν ζῳογονίαν ' ὑποστῆναι λέγει. φησὶν 
οὖν (6 ΣΣαγχουνιάθων)" “[[καὶ τοῦ ἀέρος διαυγασθέντος ὅ διὰ (τὴν τοῦ ἡλίου 
πύρωσιν " καὶ τῆς θαλάσσης καὶ τῆς γῆς, ἐγένετο πνεύματα καὶ νέφη καὶ 


it. (Perhaps Philo may have written (ape ἀ(σ)σημίν, which would agree more 
closely with the Hebrew.) : 

It is evident from this and other indications that Philo Byblius is telling the 
truth when he says that his work is a translation of a Semitic text. He did not 
then invent the so-called * writings of Sanchuniathon’ out of his own head, as has 
sometimes been supposed ; he had them before him, written in Phoenician, or some 
cognate language, and translated them out of that language into Greck. But the 
Semitic original which he translated must have been of recent date. As the 
cosmogonia with which it began was constructed, like that of Corp. III, by blending 
data supplied by Geneszs t with conceptions derived from Stoic physics, it cannot 
have been written before the third century B.c.; and it is most likely that it was 
written either after the Christian era, or not long before it. 

' Something ‘ was moulded into an egg-like (i.e. spherical) form’, The subject 
of ἀνεπλάσθη has been lost. It must have been τὸ μώτ᾽; and I have accordingly 
transposed pwr to this place from the following sentence, where it interrupts the 
sense. The mass of unformed matter, under the influence of the site by which 
it was now permeated, was moulded into the shape of a spherical Kosmos. 

The world-egg occurs in Egyptian and Orphic cosmogonies, but not, as far as I 
know, in Babylonian documents. 

2 A passage describing the separation of the four elements, and corresponding to 
Corp. III. 2a, must have occurred here; but it has been lost. Something of the 
sort is presupposed in what follows (ἐπειδὴ διεκρίθη x.7.A.), 

8. This sentence corresponds to Corp. III. 2 b, 

* A soogonia must mean an account of the origin of beasts and men, such as is 

iven in Corp. III. 3 ἃ “5. Eusebius here says that he is going to give the soagonia of 
chuniathon ; and at the end of the peer: which these words introduce, he 
says that he has given it (τοιαύτη αὐτοῖς Kat ἡ ζῳογονία). Vet he does nothing of 
the sort, It is true that the disconnected fragment with which this paragraph ends 
(καὶ ἐκινήθη... ἄρρεν καὶ θῆλυ) may very well have occurred in a soogonta, But 
in the rest of the paragraph, not a word is said about the origin of beasts and men. 
It deals with an entirely different topic; it is an explanation of the origin of 
thunderstorms. And the subject of thunderstorms is apparently introduced for the 
purpose of explaining how men (τὰ νοερὰ (Ga), assumed to be already living on the 
ἐπῆν came to imagine a thunder-god, and to worship this imaginary being. The 
zoogonia then has disappeared, all except three detached scraps, two of which (viz. 
ἣν δέ τινα (Oa ov ἔχοντα αἴσθησιν and ἐξ dy .. . οὐρανοῦ κατόπται) have got into 
wrong places ; and a theory of thunderstorms has been substituted for it. This 
explanation of thunderstorms probably occurred later on in the Sanchuniathon- 
document, and has been transposed to this place through some blunder. It is based 
on the Stoic physics ; and the writer's object is to show that the phenomena of 
thunderstorms, which men mistakenly attribute to the action of a personal god, 
result from the operation of physical laws. The passage shows the same atheistic 
tendency as the other extracts from ‘Sanchuniathon ’, in which it is asserted that 
the gods of the traditional mythologies are not gods, but men who lived a long 
time ago. Ὁ 

5 διαυγάσαντος Euseb. 

§ The πύρωσις is the heat and light of the sun (cf. διὰ τὴν τοῦ ἡλίου πύρωσιν 
below). There may have been a preceding mention of φῶς (as in Genesis and 
Corp, 111) at the beginning of the lost passage on the separation of the elements ; 

but it is also possible that the writer of the Sanchuniathon-document deliberately 


12 


116 CORPVS HERMETICVM 


οὐρανίων ὑδάτων μέγισται καταφοραὶ καὶ χύσεις" καὶ (yap) ἐπειδὴ διεκρίθη 
(τὰ στοιχεῖα)" καὶ (εἰς) τοὺ(ς) ἰδίου(ς) τόπου(ς) διεχωρίσθη, [διὰ τὴν τοῦ 
ἡλίου πύρωσιν] " [καὶ] πάλιν συνήντησε πάντα ἐν ἀέρι τάδε τοῖσδε, καὶ 
συνέρραξαν, βρονταί τε ἀπετελέσθησαν καὶ ἀστραπαί. καὶ πρὸς τὸν πάτα- 
γον τῶν βροντῶν τὰ προγεγραμμένα νοερὰ ζῷα "ἐγρηγόρησεν' ἡ καὶ πρὸς 
τὸν ἦχον ἐπτύρη" (.. 1] καὶ ἐκινήθη ἔν τε γῇ καὶ θαλάσσῃ ἄρρεν καὶ 
θῆλυ." 

τοιαύτη αὐτοῖς (says Eusebius) καὶ 7 ζῳογονία. τούτοις ἑξῆς 6 αὐτὸς 
συγγραφεὺς (sc. Philo Bybl.) ἐπιφέρει λέγων" “ ταῦθ᾽ ηὑρέθη ἐν τῇ κοσμο- 
γονίᾳ γεγραμμένα Τααύτου καὶ τοῖς ἐκείνου ὑπομνήμασιν," ἔκ τε στοχασμῶν 


diverged from Genesis in this respect, because, like modern readers, he found it 
difficult to understand how there could be light before the sun had come into 
existence, 

1 When the Kosmos was first formed, the elements were separated, and arranged 
in distinct strata; but ‘after their separation’ (i.e. in the world as we know it), 
portions of them are continually quitting the regions originally assigned to them; 
fire, in the form of light and heat, descends from above, and watery exhalations rise 
from below, These detached portions of the higher and lower elements come into 
contact with one another in the atmosphere, and their conflict produces storms. 
This theory of storms resembles the meteorology of Posidonius. 

2 This is probably a doublet of διὰ (τὴν τοῦ ἡλίου) πύρωσιν above. 

3 ἐγρηγόρησεν must be either a misreading or an inexact translation of some 
Semitic verb, Something like ‘ were startled’ is wanted, to correspond to ἐπτύρη 
(were scared’). 

4 (“and they thought there must be a God who thunders, and they began to | 
worship him.’) Cf, Sext. Emp. 9. 24: εἰσι δὲ of ἀπὸ τῶν γιγνομένων κατὰ τὸν 
κόσμον παραδόξων ὑπονοήσαντες cis ἔννοιαν ἡμᾶς ἐληλυθέναι θεῶν: ἀφ᾽ ἧς φαίνεται 
εἶναι δόξης καὶ ὁ Δημόκριτος" ὁρῶντες γάρ, φησί, τὰ ἐν τοῖς μετεώροις παθήματα οἱ 
παλαιοὶ τῶν ἀνθρώπων, καθάπερ βροντὰς καὶ ἀστραπὰς κεραυνούς τε καὶ ἄστρων 
συνόδους ἡλίου τε καὶ σελήνης ἐκλείψεις, ἐδειματοῦντο, θεοὺς οἰόμενοι τούτων αἰτίους 
εἶναι. Similarly Critias, in his account of the origin of religion (Diels Vorsokr, 
p. 62 1) mentions, znter alia, ἀστραπὰς . .. δεινὰ δὲ κτυπήματα βροντῆς. 

5 Cf, Philo Bybl. in Euseb. 16, 1. 9. 24: ὁ Σαγχουνιάθων.... τὰ ἐξ ἀρχῆς, ad’ οὗ 
τὰ πάντα συνέστη, παρὰ πάντων εἰδέναι ποθῶν, πολὺ φροντιστικῶς ἐξεμάστευσε τὰ 
Τααύτου, εἰδὼς ὅτι τῶν ὑφ᾽ ἡλίῳ γεγονότων πρῶτός ἐστι [[Τάαυτος 6]] τῶν γραμμάτων 
τὴν εὕρεσιν ἐπινοήσας καὶ τῆς τῶν ὑπομνημάτων γραφῆς κατάρξας ἢ Tdavros)), [[καὶ 
ἀπὸ τοῦδε ὥσπερ κρηπῖδα βαλόμενος τοῦ λόγου ]]---ὃν Αἰγύπτιοι μὲν ἐκάλεσαν Θωύθ, 
᾿Αλεξανδρεῖς δὲ QW, Ἑρμῆν δὲ Ἕλληνες μετέφρασαν, ---[(καὶ ἀπὸ τοῦδε ὥσπερ κρηπῖδα 
βαλόμενος τοῦ Adyou)). (This sentence, as given in the MSS., is intolerably clum 
and confused ; I have made the meaning clear by transposing Τάαυτος and καὶ dm 

ες TOU λόγου.) 

‘Taautos’ is the Egyptian Thoth; and in the text above, Philo Byblius says 
that Sanchuniathon constructed his cosmmogonia out of material which he found in 
the writings of Thoth, and supplemented by his own reflections. Philo Bybl. must 
have read a statement to that effect in the Sanchuniathon-document. This might 
be thought to indicate that the author of that document had access to some of the 
Greek Hermetica; and in that case, Corp. III itself might possibly have been 
known to him. But it is more likely that his statement that he had read and made 
use of writings of Thoth was a mere figment, He certainly had no scruple about 
inventing authorities ; for in another passage (Ῥορῆγο, ap. Euseb. ἐῤ. 1. 9. 21), 
when he was speaking about his sources for early Hebrew history, he mentioned, 
as one of the most important of them, certain memoirs written by “ Ἱερόμβαλος 
(Jerubbaal), priest of the god "Iev# (Jahwe)’. He must have got the name 
Jerubbaal (which is the other name of Gideon, the Hebrew ‘ Judge’,) out of the 







































LIBELLVS III 117 


καὶ τεκμηρίων ὧν ἑώρακεν αὐτοῦ (sc τοῦ Σαγχουνιάθωνος) ἡ διάνοια καὶ 
ηὗρε καὶ ἡμῖν ἐφώτισεν." 

ΤῈ we compare the cosmogonia of ‘ Sanchuniathon’ with Cor. III, 
we find that in their theology the two writers are at opposite poles. 
The author of Corp. III makes it his object to assert the supremacy 
of God over φύσις. The author of the Sanchuniathon-document, on 
the other hand, is content with φύσις, and sees no need of a God. 
As Eusebius expresses it, ἄντικρυς ἀθέοτητα εἰσάγει" ‘his doctrine is 
sheer atheism’. He recognizes no deity at all ;—except indeed that 
he so far personifies his two physical ἀρχαί, the μώτ and the πνεῦμα, 
1. 6. the primal ‘mud’ and the primal ‘gas’, as to say that one of 
them fell in love with the other;* and even that, perhaps, is not 
much more than a figure of speech. 

But in other respects, there are close resemblances between the 
two documents. Both writers agree in saying that (leaving God out 
of account) the two things which existed in the beginning, and out of 
which the universe has been evolved, were ‘mud’ and ‘gas’; and 
the two cosmogonies seem to have been arranged in the same order, 
and constructed on similar lines, though this is less apparent, owing 
to the loss of parts of the Sanchuniathon-document. Both writers 
were acquainted with the Stoic physics ; and both of them had read 
the first chapter of Gevesis, The author of Corf, III had read that 
chapter in the Greek translation of the LXX, and the other writer 
_ probably in the Hebrew text. There is no reason to suppose that 
either of them borrowed from the other ; but both these cosmogonies 
were constructed out of the same or similar materials. 

Corp. III shows hardly a trace of Platonism;? and its writer 
definitely rejects the Platonic doctrine of the survival of the individual 
soul. It contains nothing distinctively Egyptian ; and there is not 


Book of Judges, and invented the historical writings of that ancient chief, (It may 
be remarked in passing that a man who had read the Book of Judges must almost 
necessarily have read the first chapter of Genesis, and had its contents in mind 
when he was composing a cosmogony.) He would not hesitate then, if it suited 
his purpose, to invent cosmogonic writings of Thoth, who must have been known 
to him by report as an ancient Egyptian sage, believed to have been the earliest of 
all writers upon earth, and the author of the sacred books which the Egyptian 
priests had in their keeping. And he may very likely have assumed that Moses, 
whose Book of Genesis was one of the sources which he really used, had derived his 
cosmogonic knowledge from earlier writings of Thoth. 

1 Conipare the statement that the two light elements, fire and air, are ‘ male’, 
and the two heavy elements, earth and water, are ‘ female’ (Hippol. Ref. haer. 4. 43, 
quoted in note on Corp, 1. 17). 

See note on πᾶσαν ἐνσαρκοῖ ψυχήν in § 3b. 


118 CORPVS HERMETICVM 


the slightest sign of Christian influence. The document may be 
shortly described as Judaeo-Stoic. 

I can find no clear indication of date in Corp, III, It might con- 
ceivably have been written at any time after the translation of Genesis 
into Greek, and the rise of Stoicism, in the third century B.c., and 
before the date of the latest of our Hermetic writings, which is 
probably not far from A.D. 300. If we could be sure that the heading 
in which it is ascribed to Hermes Trismegistus was written by the 
author of the document, that might be a reason for presuming that it 
was not very far separated in time from the other Hermetica, most of 
which were written almost certainly after the Christian era, and 
probably not before the second century at the earliest. But 
there is nothing in the document itself to connect it with Hermes; 
and it is quite possible that it was written in complete independence of 
the Hermetic tradition, and that the superscription which attributes 
it to Hermes was added at some later time, when it had passed into 
the hands of a Hermetist. It differs markedly in character and style 
from most of the other Hermetica. It shows traces of a connexion 
with Corg. I, which contains a similar cosmogonia, and presents simi- 
lar evidence of acquaintance with the early chapters of Genesis. But 
Corp. also differs widely from the bulk of the Hermetica ; and in 
all the rest of the Hermetic literature, signs of Jewish influence are 
few and faint.t 

But though it is conceivable that Cor. III may have been written 
in the third or second century B.c., so early a date is hardly probable. 
It seems reasonable to consider that attempts to amalgamate the 
Mosaic account of the creation with the Stoic cosmology are not 
likely to have been made until both had been long and widely known ; 
and the prominence given to astral influences in the system of Cor. III 
connects it with the later rather than the earlier Stoicism. The re- 
semblance between this document and the cosmogonia of Sanchunia- 
thon makes it likely that both belong to the same period ; and I am 
inclined to conjecture that both of them were written in the first 
century A. Ὁ. 


Title. (ὅτι) πρῶτος ἁπάντων (δόξα πάντων MSS.) ὁ θεός, The δόξα 
of God, i.e. his ‘glory’, was frequently spoken of by Jews (see 
Bousset, Kel. des Judentums, pp. 362 and 398); but I can find no 

1 The peculiar use of 6 τόπος in Corp, II is probably of Jewish origin; and some 


τ the Hermetic fragments quoted by Cyril show knowledge of the first chapter of 
emesis. 





LIBELLVS III 119 


meaning in the statement that God is the δόξα of things. God 
might be called ἀρχὴ πάντων, or πηγὴ πάντων, Or ῥίζα πάντων ; but it 
is difficult to see how any of these words could be corrupted into 
δόξα. It seems more probable that the author wrote πρῶτος ἁπάντων. 
(CE. Corp. VIII. 2 init.: πρῶτος yap πάντων... ὁ δημιουργὸς τῶν ὅλων 
θεός.) The word πρῶτος may have been written in the abbreviated 
form dos (see Corp. 1. 6). If we assume that the second word was 
ἁπάντων, that gives an a to follow; and the letters AOA might 
easily be read as ΔΟΞΑ. 

The MSS. give the words Γδόξα! πάντων ὁ θεός. . . Kat φύσις θεία 
as the beginning of the discourse. But it is more likely that these 
words were written as a heading, with ὅτι before them, and that the 
discourse itself began with the sentence which follows (ἀρχὴ τῶν 
ὄντων ὃ θεός κιτιλ). This accounts for the repetition of ὁ θεός, which 
would otherwise be purposeless. 

καὶ (i) φύσις θεία. The writer both begins and ends by asserting 
that ‘nature is divine’, that is to say, that the force by which all 
cosmic processes are carried on issues from God, and is directed 
by God’s sovereign will. He must therefore have had in mind some 
persons who denied that doctrine. His position is that of the Stoics, 
who employed the word φύσις, among other terms, to describe God’s 
working in the universe. The contrary view was held in its extreme 
form by the Epicureans. But the Aristotelians also were inclined 
to minimize the action of the Divine in the sublunar world, and to 
speak of φύσις as a power distinct from God and working inde- 
pendently of him; and some people, for that reason, denounced 
them as little better than Epicureans.' The Aristotelian Strato (who 
was called ὁ φυσικός) went so far as to ‘renounce the idea of God 
as a being separate and distinct from the world as a whole, and 
content himself with φύσις, which he regarded as ‘a necessary force 
operating without consciousness and reflection’ (Zeller, Aristotle, 
Eng. tr. II, p. 455). And the position of the sceptical Academics 
was similar. E.g. in Οἷς, Was. deor, 3. 27, the Academic speaker 
says ‘At enim (quaeritur) unde animum arripuerimus, si nullus fuerit 
1 E.g. the Platonist Atticus (c. A.D. 170), in Euseb. Pr. ev. 15. 5.7: ὁ μὲν 
Πλάτων εἰς θεὸν καὶ ἐκ θεοῦ πάντα ἀνάπτει" but Aristotle, like Epicurus, denies that 
the world is governed by God. “τί οὖν ;” φήσαι τις ἄν" “ey ταὐτῷ τάττεις 
᾿Αριστοτέλην καὶ ᾿Επίκουρον ;” πάνυ μὲν οὖν, ὥς γε πρὸς τὸ προκείμενον"... κατ᾽ 
ἴσον yap παρ᾽ ἀμφοτέροις τὸ ἐκ θεῶν ἀμελὲς εἰς τοὺς ἀνθρώπους. . . « Epicurus banishes 
the gods to a place outside the Kosmos; but Aristotle, im’ αὐτὴν τὴν ὄψιν τῶν 


θεῶν τὰ ἀνθρώπινα πράγματα ὑποθείς, εἴασεν ἀτημέλητα καὶ ἀφρόντιστα, φύσει τινὶ 
καὶ οὗ θεοῦ λογισμῷ διοικούμενα. 





120 CORPVS HERMETICVM 


in mundo. . . . Naturae ista sunt, . . . omnia cientis et agitantis 
motibus et mutationibus suis. ... Illa vero ‘cohaeret et permanet! 
(cohaerent et permanent edd.) naturae viribus, non deorum’. Jd. 2. 
81, the Stoic speaker contrasts the two views: ‘alii naturam esse 
censent vim quandam sine ratione cientem motus in corporibus 
necessarios ; alii autem (sc. the Stoics) vim participem rationis atque 
ordinis, (i.e. ‘divine’,) .. . cuius sollertiam .. . nemo opifex con- 
sequi possit imitando,.’ Lactant. Div. inst. 2. 8. 23 (criticizing the 
Academic speaker in Cic. Wad. deor.): ‘melius igitur Seneca..., 
qui vidit nihil aliud esse naturam quam deum., . . Cum igitur ortum 
rerum tribuis naturae ac detrahis deo, (you are in error).’ 

18. ἀρχὴ τῶν ὄντων ὁ θεός, καὶ νοῦ, καὶ φύσεως, καὶ ὕλης (καὶ νοῦς 
καὶ φύσις καὶ ὕλη MSS.). φύσις is the force which works on ὕλη; 
and the external world consists of ὕλη and φύσις in combination. 
νοῦς, I suppose, is here the human mind, in contrast to the external 
world ; cf. ‘quaeritur unde animum arripuerimus’ in Cic. Wat. deor., 
quoted above. 

If I have restored the words rightly, the writer says that God is 
the source (or maker) of ὕλη. Cf. Adammonis Resp. (Testim.) 8. 3: 
ὕλην δὲ παρήγαγεν ὃ θεός, κιτιλ. The statement that God is ἀρχὴ 
ὕλης contradicts the Platonic doctrine that ὕλη is without beginning, 
and exists independently of God; but it agrees with the doctrine 
taught (in later times at least) by the Jews, and adopted from 
them by the Christians, that God made the world ex nihilo, and 
not out of pre-existent ὕλη. Origen, De princip. 2. 9. 1, says that 
God τοσαύτην ὕλην κατεσκεύασεν, ὅσην ἠδύνατο κατακοσμῆσαι. Lac- 
tantius, Div. inst. 1.5.9 and 2. 8. 8ff., says that God first made 
materia (ὕλη), and then made all things out of it. The question 
whether ὕλη is or is not ἀγέννητος and σύγχρονος τῷ θεῷ (coeval 
with God) is discussed at some length in Methodius Περὶ τοῦ 
αὐτεξουσίου. 

aopia(s) εἰς δεῖξιν (ποιήσας πάντγα, Cf. Corp. XIV. 3: the Maker 
of the universe is μόνος ὄντως σοφὸς τὰ πάντας The word σοφία was 
used by Jews especially, but sometimes by Stoics also, in connexion 
with God’s making of the world. 

For the thought, cf. Methodius Iepi τοῦ αὐτεξουσίου 22. 3 (see 
prefatory note on Asc/. Lat. 11): φημὶ τοιγαροῦν πολλὰς ὑποθέσεις 
ὑπάρχειν τῷ θεῷ καθ᾽ ἃς δημιουργεῖν αὐτὸν ἔδει' πρῶτον μὲν (τὴν) τῆς 
τέχνης ἐπιστήμην, ἣν ἀργεῖν [μὲν] οὐκ ἐχρῆν... . ὥσπερ γὰρ εἴ τις ἐπι- 
στήμην ἔχων ἢ μουσικῆς ἢ αὖ πάλιν ἰατρικῆς ἢ τεκτονικῆς, εἰς ὅσον τοῦ 
































LIBELLVS III: § 1a-1b 121 


ἔργου μὴ ἔχεται μηδὲ δι’ αὐτοῦ τὴν ὑπιανήμην δείκνυσιν, μάτην (τὴν) 
τέχνην τον δοκεῖ, μήτε αὐτὸς ἀπολαύων ὧν ἐπιστάται, μήτε ἑτέροις 
γνῶσιν παρέχων τούτων τῶν ἔργων, καὶ τὸ ἐντεῦθεν ὅμοιος τῷ μηδὲ bic 
ἀρχὴν ἐπισταμένῳ γίγνεται, μὴ wera τῆς τέχνης dvapryots? ἑκάστη yap 
τῶν τεχνῶν διὰ τῆς ἐνεργείας τὴν δεῖξιν λαμβάνει καί, ὡς λόγον εἰπεῖν, 
hy τοῦ εἶναι σύστασιν. 

καὶ τοῦ θεοῦ ἐνέργεια ἡ φύσις, κατ᾽ βρόγον καὶ τέλος καὶ ἀνανέωσιν 
(ἐνεργοῦσαν. ---(τὸ θεῖον καὶ ἡ φύσις καὶ ἐνέργεια καὶ ἀνάγκη καὶ τέλος 
καὶ ἀνανέωσις MSS.) It is difficult to see what could be meant by 
ἐνέργεια coupled with φύσις and ἀνάγκη, and placed between them. 
It is true that the word ἐνέργειαι is sometimes used in the sense of αἱ 
τοῦ θεοῦ ἐνέργειαι, ‘God’s workings’ (see Corp. X. τ Ὁ and 22b); but 
there would be no reason here for inserting évépyea in that sense. It 
seems more likely that ἐνέργεια has been shifted, and that what the 
author said is that ἡ φύσις is τοῦ θεοῦ ἐ ἐέργει, ΕΣ i ΧΙ. i. 5 enizt.: 
εἴτε ἀνάγκην, εἴτε πρόνοιαν, εἴτε φύσιν, εἴτε ἄλλο τι οἴεται. . τις, τοῦτο 
ἔστιν ὃ θεὸς ἐνεργῶν. See also Ase/. Lat. 111. 39 (Lydus). 

The word ἀνάγκη is here a synonym for εἱμαρμένη ; and in the view 
of the writer of Corf. III, ‘necessity’ or ‘destiny’ is brought to bear 
on things below by the movements of the heavenly bodies. (See ὃ 4.) 
coupled with ἀνανέωσις, must mean τελευτή, i.e. extinction. 
and dvavéwors together (the ‘ extinction’ and ‘renewal’ of sub- 
lunar things) are wrought by φύσις, the action of which is determined 
by the movements of the heavenly bodies ; and these movements are 
themselves determined by God’s will. φύσις is therefore θεία. 

1b. ἣν γὰρ σκότος [[ἄπειρον]) ἐν ἀβύσσῳ, καὶ ὕδωρ ((ἄπειρονν), καὶ 
πνεῦμα λεπτὸν κιτιλ. Some epithet of ὕδωρ is wanted, to match the 
epithets applied to πνεῦμα ; and the sentence is improved by shifting 
ἄπειρον. 

The author evidently had in mind the similar words in Gen. 1 
(σκότος ἐπάνω τοῦ ἀβύσσου LXX). It would be easy to bring the 
text into still closer agreement with Genesis by writing ἐπ’ ἀβύσσῳ in 
place of ἐν ἀβύσσῳ. 

καὶ πνεῦμα λεπτὸν νοερόν, δυνάμει θείᾳ (....)ov τὰ ἐν χάει. The writer 
has taken over from Genesis the πνεῦμα θεοῦ which ‘moved upon the 
face of the waters’ (ἐπεφέρετο ἐπάνω τοῦ ὕδατος LXX) ; but he identi- 
fies it with the πνεῦμα of the Stoics, i.e. the gaseous substance 
(a mixture of air and fire) which pervades and animates the Kosmos. 
This substance is λεπτόν (‘rare’), as compared with the denser mass 
οἵ τὰ ἐν χάει ; and it is νοερόν, i. 6, living, conscious, and intelligent. 


eee 


Oe eee 


—— x 


—— ee 


a » - 


122 CORPVS HERMETICVM 


A participle agreeing with πνεῦμα, and governing τὰ ἐν χάει, has 
been lost. The Stoic word διῆκον (‘ pervading’ or ‘ permeating’) may 
be conjectured ; but the LXX would rather suggest ἐπιφερόμενον τοῖς 
ἐν χάει. 

((ἀδιορίστων δὲ ὄντων ἁπάντων καὶ ἀκατασκευάστων.)) These words 
are out of place in the MSS, ; they must have preceded the descrip- 
tion of the demiurgia, which begins with the emission of light (ἀνείθη 
δὴ φῶς ἅγιον). The word ἀκατασκευάστων shows that the writer’s 
source was the LXX, and not the Hebrew Genesis. In the LXX, 
the corresponding words are ἡ δὲ γῇ ἦν ἀόρατος καὶ ἀκατασκεύαστος ; 
and it is very unlikely that two persons would independently hit on 
ἀκατασκεύαστος as a translation of the Hebrew Johu. 

[[kat ἐπάγη ὑπ᾽ ἄμμῳ ἐξ ὑγρᾶς οὐσίας}. The author cannot have 
said that the Hight ‘was solidified out of watery substance’; light is 
not a solid body. These words doubtless belong to the following 
passage about the elements (§ 2 a), and describe the formation of the 
solid earth by separation out of the hitherto undifferentiated mud or 
slime. 

(καὶ ἐγένετο τὰν) στοιχεῖα [καὶ θεοὶ πάντες]. The results which fol- 
lowed on the emission of light are first shortly summed up in these 
words, and then more fully described in ὃ 2a. The θεοί recognized 
by the author of Corp. III are the heavenly bodies (§§ 2 b, 3 b, and 4), 
and the cosmic elements (ὃ 3a méf.). But to couple θεοί in the 
sense of cosmic elements with στοιχεῖα would be to say the same 
thing twice over; and a mention of the heavenly bodies at this stage 
would be premature. It seems best therefore to assume that καὶ θεοὶ 
πάντες has been added by a later hand. 

§ 2a, ἀπεχωρίσθη (ἀποδιωρίσθη MSS.) τὰ ἐλαφρὰ eis ὕψος κιτιλ, 
This passage corresponds to the dividing of ‘the waters under the 
firmament’ from ‘the waters above the firmament’ in Genesis. In 
the Stoic physics, which the writer of Corp, III had adopted, there 
were no ‘waters above the firmament’; he therefore took the 
‘waters’ here spoken of in Genesis to stand for matter in general. 
He substituted the lighter elements (τὰ ἀνωφερῇῆ, fire and air,) for 
‘the waters above the firmament’, and the heavier elements (τὰ 
katwpepy, Water and earth,) for ‘the waters under the firmament’, 
and proceeded to describe the separation of the four elements, in 
accordance with Stoic doctrine. The text is badly damaged, but his 
meaning seems to have been as follows. In the beginning, there 
were two distinct things, viz. ὕδωρ ἄπειρον and πνεῦμα λεπτόν. The 





LIBELLVS III: §§ 1b-2a 123 



































former was not exactly water, but the substance out of which earth 
and water were subsequently differentiated ; and similarly, the πνεῦμα 
was not air or fire, but the substance out of which fire and air were 
subsequently differentiated. We might call the one ‘mud’, and the 
other ‘gas’. The ‘gas’ was living and intelligent (νοερόν) ; the 
‘mud’ was presumably inert and lifeless.1 When light appeared, 
the separation of the elements took place. The ‘ gas’ (τὰ ἐλαφρὰ) 
rose, and was differentiated into two distinct elements, fire and air ; 
and the fire rose above the air. (This seems to be the meaning of 
ἀνακρεμασθέντος (rot πυρὸς τῷ) πνεύματι ὀχεῖσθαι.) The ‘mud’ (τὰ 
βαρέα) sank, and was differentiated into two distinct elements, water 
and earth ; and the earth settled down, partly in the form of sand? 
at the bottom of the sea, and partly in the form of dry land. (Com- 
pare what is said about the separation of the elements in Coz. I. 5 b.) 
The Stoics described the diacosmesis as follows. Zeno, in Arius 
Didymus, Diels Doxogr. p. 469: τοιαύτην δὲ δεήσει εἶναι ἐν περιόδῳ 
τὴν τοῦ ὅλου διακόσμησιν ἐκ τῆς οὐσίας" ὅταν ἐκ πυρὸς τροπὴ εἰς ὕδωρ δι᾽ 
ἀέρος γένηται, τὸ μέν τι ὑφίστασθαι καὶ γῆν συνίστασθαι, [καὶ] ἐκ τοῦ 
λοίπου δὲ τὸ μὲν διαμένειν ὕδωρ, ἐκ δὲ τοῦ ἀτμιζομένου ἀέρα γίνεσθαι, ἔκ 
τινος δὲ τοῦ ἀέρος πῦρ ἐξάπτειν." Cleanthes (id. p. 470): ἐκφλογι- 
σθέντος τοῦ παντός, συνίζειν τὸ μέσον αὐτοῦ πρῶτον, εἶτα τὰ ἐχόμενα 
ἀποσβέννυσθαι δι’ ὅλου. τοῦ δὲ παντὸς ἐξυγρανθέντος [τὸ ἔσχατον τοῦ 
πυρὸς ἀντιτυπήσαντος αὐτῷ τοῦ μέσου" " τρέπεσθαι πάλιν εἰς τοὐναντίον, 
εἶθ᾽ οὕτω τρεπόμενον ἄνω φησὶν αὔξεσθαι, καὶ ἄρχεσθαι διακοσμεῖν τὸ 
ὅλον. Chrysippus, in ῬΊαΐ, S¥o. repugn. 41, p. 1053: ἧ δὲ πυρὸς μετα- 
Body ἐστι τοιαύτη" δι᾿ ἀέρος εἰς ὕδωρ τρέπεται" κἀκ τούτου γῆς ὑφιστα- 
μένης ἀὴρ ἀναθυμιᾶται' λεπτυνομένου δὲ τοῦ ἀέρος ὃ αἰθὴρ περιχεῖται 
1 As the participle preceding τὰ ἐν χάει has been lost, we are left in doubt how 
the writer conceived the original relation between these two substances. He may 
have said that the ‘ gas’ was above (ἐπεφέρετο ἐπάνω LXX), and the ‘ mud’ below. 
But the words ἀπεχωρίσθη τὰ ἐλαφρὰ els ὕψος are more easily explained if we 
assume him to have said that the ‘ gas’ permeated the ‘mud’ (διῆκον). In the latter 
case, we must suppose that the two substances were distinct in character, but were 
‘contained in the same space. 

2 *Sand’ is mentioned in connexion with God’s creative action in Jer. 5. 22: τὸν 
τάξαντα ἄμμον ὅριον τῇ θαλάσσῃ, . .. καὶ ἠχήσουσιν τὰ κύματα αὐτῆς καὶ οὐχ 
ὑπερβήσεται αὐτό. But the ἄμμος of Corp. 111 seems to be the ‘foundation’ on 
which the water rests, i, 6. the sandy sea-bottom, and not the sandy shore. 

8 Perhaps ἐξάπτεσθαι. 

4 ‘The probable meaning is, that the last remains of the original fire begin a 
motion in the opposite direction’ (Zeller), Perhaps: τὸ δὲ πᾶν ἐξυγρανθέν, τοῦ 
ἐσχάτου Τοῦ πυρὸς ἀντιτυπήσαντος αὐτῷ τοῦ μέσου (λειφθέντος), (i. 6. ‘ when the last 
of the fire, which has remained in the midst of it, reacts upon it’,) τρέπεσθαι πάλιν 


εἰς τοὐναντίον" εἶθ᾽ οὕτω τρεπομένου (sc. τοῦ παντός), ἄνω φησὶν αὔξεσθαι (τὸ πῦρ) 
RTD, 


124 CORPVS HERMETICVM 
κύκλῳ, Chrysipp, in Plut. “2. : διόλου μὲν yap ὧν ὁ κόσμος πυρώδης, 


εὐθὺς καὶ ψυχή ἐστιν ἑαυτοῦ καὶ ἡγεμονικόν" ᾿ ὅτε δέ, μεταβαλὼν εἰς τὸ 
ὑγρὸν καὶ τὴν ἐναπολειφθεῖσαν ψυχήν," τρόπον τινὰ εἰς σῶμα καὶ ψυχὴν 
μετέβαλεν, ὥστε συνεστάναι ἐκ τούτων, ἄλλον τινὰ ἔσχε λόγον. Diog. 
Laert. 7. 135-137: ἕν τε εἶναι θεὸν καὶ νοῦν καὶ εἱμαρμένην καὶ Δία, 
πολλαῖς τε ἑτέραις ὀνομασίαις  προσονομάζεσθαι. κατ᾽ ἀρχὰς μὲν οὖν 
καθ᾽ αὑτὸν ὄντα," τρέπειν τὴν πᾶσαν οὐσίαν δι᾿ ἀέρος εἰς ὕδωρ." καὶ ὥσπερ 
ἐν τῇ γονῇ τὸ σπέρμα" περιέχεται, οὕτω καὶ τοῦτον, σπερματικὸν λόγον 
ὄντα τοῦ κόσμου, τοιόνδε ὑπολιπέσθαι ἐν τῷ ὑγρῷ,ἷ εὐεργὸν αὑτῷ ποιοῦντα 
τὴν ὕλην πρὸς τὴν τῶν ἑξῆς γένεσιν. εἶτα ἀπογεννᾶν πρῶτον τὰ τέσσαρα 
στοιχεῖα, πῦρ, ὕδωρ, ἀέρα, γῆν... . ἀνωτάτω μὲν οὖν εἶναι τὸ πῦρ, ὃ δὴ 
αἰθέρα καλεῖσθαι, ἐν ᾧ πρώτην τὴν τῶν ἀπλανῶν σφαῖραν γεννᾶσθαι, εἶτα 
τὴν τῶν πλανωμένων" μεθ᾽ ἣν τὸν ἀέρα" εἶτα τὸ ὕδωρ' ὑποστάθμην δὲ 
πάντων τὴν γῆν, μέσην ἁπάντων οὖσαν. Ib. 142: γίνεσθαι δὲ τὸν κόσμον, 
ὅταν ἐκ πυρὸς ἡ οὐσία τραπῇ δι᾽ ἀέρος εἰς ὑγρότητα, εἶτα τὸ παχυμερὲς 
αὐτοῦ συστὰν ἀποτελεσθῇ γῆ, τὸ δὲ λεπτομερὲς ἐξαραιώθῃ," καὶ τοῦτ᾽ ἐπὶ 
πλέον λεπτυνθὲν πῦρ ἀπογεννήσῃ. Clem. Alex. Strom. 5. 14. 105: 
λέγει" ὅτι πῦρ ὑπὸ τοῦ διοικοῦντος λόγου καὶ θεοῦ τὰ σύμπαντα dv ἀέρος 
εἰς ὑγρόν, Γτὸ ὡς" 5 σπέρμα τῆς διακοσμήσεως... ." ἐκ δὲ τούτου αὖθις 
γίνεται γῆ καὶ οὐρανὸς καὶ τὰ ἐμπεριεχόμενα. Dio Chrysost.” 46. 55, 
452 Μ. :"5 (at the completion of the ecpyrosis), λειφθεὶς δὴ μόνος ὃ νοῦς 
(i.e. the νοερὸν πῦρ, which is God,) ... οὐδενὸς ἐν αὐτῷ πυκνοῦ λει- 
φθέντος, ἀλλὰ πάσης ἐπικρατούσης μανότητος, ... τὴν καθαρωτάτην λαβὼν 
αὐγῆς "" ἀκηράτου φύσιν, εὐθὺς ἐπόθησε τὸν ἐξ ἀρχῆς βίον." ἔρωτα δὴ 
λαβὼν... ὥρμησεν ἐπὶ τὸ γεννᾶν καὶ διανέμειν ἕκαστα, καὶ δημιουργεῖν 


* ΤΟ 6, at the completion of the ecpyrosis, the world is all soul (= νοερὸν πῦρ). 
® Ie. when it has changed into a watery mass permeated by a fiery soul (or 
living πνεῦμα). 
8 Among these many names were φύσις and ἀνάγκη. 
; ᾿ mi the beginning of each déacosmesis there is nothing but fire, and this fire 
is 
5 The fire changes into water, having first become air at an intermediate stage of 
the process, 
8 Perhaps rather τὸ πνεῦμα, the ‘ vital spirit’ of the individual in its most 
rudimentary form. Cf. καθάπερ ἐν γονῇ πνεῦμα in Dio Chrysost., quoted below. 
7 Le. at this stage there exist (1) a watery mass, and (2) God, in the form of 
νοερὸν πνεῦμα, permeating the mass. 
® Al. ἐξαερωθῇ.; ‘fortasse ἐξαραιωθὲν (ἀέρα) κᾷτ᾽ ἐπὶ wAgov’ Arnim. 
® Sc, Heraclitus (as interpreted by the Stoics). 
10 Perhaps ἔχον ἐν ἑαυτῷ τό. 
4} Dio calls the doctrine which he is here expounding ‘ Zoroastrian *; but it is 
rg if not wholly, Stoic. 
13 The text here given is based on that of Dindorf, 1857. 
8 αὐγῆς edd.: αὐτὸς codd. 
™ Le. desired to return to the state of things before the ecpyrosts, 





LIBELLVS III: § 2a 125 





τὸν ὄντα viv κόσμον .. «. ἀστράψας ' δὲ Γὅλον οὐκ ἄτακτον οὐδὲ ῥυπαρὰν 
ἀστραπὴν . . ., ἀλλὰ καθαρὰν καὶ ἀμιγῆ παντὸς σκοτεινοῦ, μετέβαλε 
ῥᾳδίως ἅμα τῇ νοήσει. μνησθεὶς δὲ... γενέσεως, ἐπράυνε καὶ ἀνῆκεν 
αὑτόν, καὶ πολὺ τοῦ φωτὸς ἀποσβέσας, εἰς ἀέρα πυρώδη " τρέπεται Γπυρὺς 
ἠπίου"." μιχθεὶς δὲ τότε Ἥρᾳ". - - ἀφίησι τὴν πᾶσαν αὖ τοῦ παντὸς 
γονήν. . « - ὑγρὰν δὲ ποιήσας τὴν ὅλην οὐσίαν, [ὲν σπέρμα τοῦ παντός, ὃ 
αὐτὸς ἐν τούτῳ διαθέων, καθάπερ ἐν γονῇ πνεῦμα τὸ πλάττον καὶ δημιουρ- 
γοῦν, [τότε δὴ μάλιστα... . οὐκ ἀπὸ τρόπου (see below)]] τὰ λοιπὰ ἤδη 
ῥᾳδίως πλάττει καὶ τυποῖ, λείαν καὶ μαλακὴν αὑτῷ περιχέας τὴν οὐσίαν 
καὶ πᾶσαν εἴκουσαν εὐπετῶς, ((τότε δὴ μάλιστα προσεοικὼς τῇ τῶν ἄλλων 
συστάσει ζῴων, καθ᾽ ὅσον ἐκ ψυχῆς καὶ σώματος συνεστάναι λέγοιτ᾽ ἂν 
οὐκ ἀπὸ τρόπου) } ἐργασάμενος δὲ καὶ τελεώσας ἀπέδειξεν ἐξ ἀρχῆς τὸν 
ὄντα κόσμον K.T.A. 

According to the Stoic doctrine then, the first stage of the déacos- 
mesis consists in the transmutation of the greater part of the universal 
fire (‘through air’) into water ; and when this first process has been 
completed, the universe is a mass of water, having latent within 
it, and diffused throughout it, living and intelligent fire or prewma. 
Then follows a second and distinct stage, in which the latent puewma 
works on the watery substance through which it is diffused, and 
differentiates it into the four cosmic elements. 

The writer of Corp. III ignores the Stoic doctrine of a periodically 
recurrent ecpyrosis and diacosmesis, and speaks only of a genesis of the 
Kosmos which took place once for all. He also ignores the first 
stage of the diacosmesis as described by the Stoics, i.e. the transmuta- 
tion of the universal fire (all but a hidden remnant) into water. But 
the state of things which he assumes to have existed ‘in the beginning’ 


1 Le, the demiurgia or diacosmests began with a flash of light. No such flash 
of light occurs in the Stoic cosmogonia ; this detail then may have been borrowed 
by Dio from some oriental source. It is possible even that it may have been 
on to him from Genesis, in which the creation begins with ‘ Let there be 

ht’. 

? Not such lightning as we see in storms. 

* ὁ Fiery air’ is πνεῦμα. 

* Something like ἐκ πυρὸς ἀμιγοῦς is wanted here, 

5 «Hera’ means air. This allegorical interpretation of the marriage of Zeus and 
Hera was borrowed by Dio from Chrysippus; see Arnim δύο, vet. cc Il, p. 314. 

ὁ The words ἐν... παντός break the connexion here, and look like a misplaced 
explanation of τὴν πᾶσαν τοῦ παντὸς γονήν. 

I have inserted here the words τύτε 67). . . ἀπὸ τρόπου, which it seems necessary 
to remove from the place where they stand in the traditional text. It is only when 
God (the πῦρ νοερόν) has fashioned for himself a body composed of gross matter 
(αὑτῷ περιχέας fis οὐσίαν), that he can be compared to a ζῷον consisting of ψυχή 
and σῶμα. For this comparison, cf. Chrysippus, quoted above. 


ee 


ee es ee 


See Eee es ee 


126 CORPVS HERMETICVM 


is identical with that which, according to the Stoics, followed on the 
transmutation of fire into water; and from that point onward, his 
 cOsmogony agrees with theirs. 

If the founders of Stoicism had invented their system de novo, they 
would have had no motive for interposing a watery chaos between 
the primal fire and the differentiated elements of the present world ; 
and the more obvious course would have been to say that air, water, 
and earth were formed from fire by successive condensations.! But 
the conception of a waste of waters out of which the ordered universe 
has been developed was a piece of earlier tradition which they re- 
tained; and there can be little doubt that this tradition was of 
Babylonian origin. The notion must have arisen in a country where 
the land was yearly seen emerging from the floods at the end of the 
rainy season (Gunkel, Schépfung und Chaos, p. τ 5); and Babylonia is 
such a country. Long before the time of Zeno the first Stoic, there 
were ways of communication by which Babylonian notions might be 
transmitted to Greek thinkers ; and the theory of Thales, who held 
water to be the ἀρχή of all things, may perhaps have been derived 
from that region. But Zeno’s successors, if not Zeno himself, may 
also have read the writings of Berosus, by which the Babylonian 
cosmology was more directly and more fully made known to the 
Greeks. Berosus said that ‘in the beginning all was darkness and 
water’; and after giving a summary of the Babylonian creation- 
myth, he explained its meaning thus: ‘this tale is an allegorical 
description of natural occurrences. The All was once fluid gous but 
the god Bel . .. divided the darkness in the midst, and so separated 
earth and heaven from one another, and therewith established the 
order of the universe.’ (Gunkel, Schipfung und Chaos, pp. 17-19.) 
The account of the beginning of things which is given in the first 
chapter of Genesis was no doubt ultimately derived, in part at least, 
from the same Babylonian sources; but the two parted streams of 
tradition had been flowing in separate channels for many centuries, 
when they were brought together again by the writer of Corp. 111. 

ὃ 2b. διηρθρώθη (ἡ πυρίνη οὐσίαν σὺν τοῖς ἐν αὐτῇ θεοῖς, αὐτῇ refers 
to the lost subject of διηρθρώθη, and shows that it must have been 
feminine. I have inserted ἡ πυρίνη οὐσία ; but it would be equally 
possible to write ἡ πυρίνη φύσις. 


* This is what Chrysippus did say, when he was speaking, not of the first forma- 
tion of the world, but of that transmutation of the elements which is perpetually 
going on in the world in which we live. (Arius Didymus, Diels Doxogr. p. 458.) 








LIBELLVS III: δὲ 2a-3b 127 


wal θεοὶ... - σὺν τοῖς αὐτῶν σημείοις ἅπασι, These θεοί are the stars, 
The writer has taken over the word σημεῖα from the LXX (ἔστωσαν 
εἰς σημεῖα, ‘let them be for signs’); but he uses it in a different 
sense. It here means ‘constellations ’. 

καὶ περιειλίχθη τὸ αἰθέριον κυκλίῳ δρομήματι.---(καὶ περιελήγη (so A) 
τὸ περικύκλιον ἀέρι κυκλίῳ δρομήματι MSS.) I have cut out περι- 
κύκλιον, which I take to be a doublet of "dept! κυκλίῳ. 

πνεύματι θείῳ ὀχούμενον. Cf. πνεύματι ὀχεῖσθαι above. The revolving 
fiery heaven ‘rides on’ or ‘is vehicled upon’ the air, which is situated 
immediately below it. The writer here applies to the air, as an 
element distinct from fire, the same word, πνεῦμα, which he previously 
applied to the undifferentiated ‘gas’, (For πνεῦμα in the sense of 
air, cf. Corp. 1. 9.) The air is called θεῖον, as the ‘gas’ was called 
νοερόν before. It is itself a god, as are the other three elements ; 
and it is God’s instrument, by means of which the life he gives is 
conveyed into all terrestrial creatures. 

§ ga. ἀνῆκε δὲ ἕκαστος θεὸς .. . τὸ προσταχθὲν αὐτῷ κιτιλ. The 
‘ gods’ here spoken of are the several elements. Αἱ God’s bidding, 
the earth produced quadrupeds and reptiles ; the water, fishes ; the 
air, birds; and the earth again, plants. (As to the fire, we have 
already been told that the heavenly bodies were formed from it.) 
In this paragraph, the writer follows Genesis closely. But he was 
- dissatisfied with the strange order of events in Genesis, according to 
_ which the plants were created before the heavenly bodies ; he there- 
fore shifted the production of plants, and coupled it with the 
production of animals. 

[καὶ πᾶσα σπορὰ ἔνσπορος]. I take this phrase to be a misplace- 
ment of something connected with τὸ σπέρμα τῆς παλιγγενεσίας ἐν 
ἑαυτοῖς in the following line. The words are corrupt; but ἔνσπορος 
must have been intended to convey the same meaning as the phrase 
in Genesis, οὗ τὸ σπέρμα αὐτοῦ ἐν αὐτῷ, ‘whose seed is in itself’. In 
Genesis, it is the plants alone that are said to ‘have seed in them 
after their kinds’; but perhaps the writer of Cor, III meant the 
phrase to apply to animals and plants together. 

ὃ gb. (...) τε γενέσεις τῶν ἀνθρώπων. An account of the making 
of man, the event in which the whole process of creation culminated, 
must necessarily have occurred here; but it has been lost. In the 
words γενέσεις τῶν ἀνθρώπων x.7.d., the writer is speaking of the pro- 
pagation of the human race, and assumes that at least a first pair of 
human beings is already in existence. 


=> 


128 CORPVS HERMETICVM 


[eis ἔργων θείων γνῶσιν... ἀγαθῶν ἐπίγνωσιν]. This appears to be 
a doublet of εἰς xarorreiay . . . εἴς τε σημεῖα ἀγαθῶν below. Compare 
the following phrases :— 


2 , ~ oJ ’, Ν᾽ ᾿, 
εἰς ἔργων θείων γνῶσιν εἰς κατοπτείαν .. . ἔργων θείων 
καὶ φύσεως ἐνεργοῦσαν μαρτυρίαν καὶ φύσεως ἐνεργείας 
καὶ ἀγαθῶν ἐπίγνωσιν εἴς τε σημεῖα ἀγαθῶν 


The two passages cannot have been intended to stand together in 
the same paragraph; one of them must have been written as an 
alternative or substitute for the other. The first of the two contains 
the significant words καὶ (cis) πάντων τῶν ὑπ᾽ οὐρανὸν δεσποτείαν, which 
correspond to the passage in Genesis, ἀρχέτωσαν . . . πάσης τῆς γῆς 
x.1.A. It seems probable that this phrase originally stood in the 
second passage also, and followed εἰς κατοπτείαν οὐρανοῦ there. When 
κατοπτεία οὐρανοῦ and πάντων τῶν ὑπ᾽ οὐρανὸν δεσποτεία are brought 
together, the combination resembles the description of man’s twofold 
function in Asc, Lat. I. 8: ‘et mirari atque adorare caelestia, et 
[in]colere atque gubernare terrena.’ 

{kat πλῆθος ἀνθρώπων]. These words are meaningless here. Per- 
haps (εἰς) πλῆθος ἀνθρώπων may have been written as an explanation 
_ Of ἐν πλήθει below. 

εἰς τὸ αὐξάνεσθαι ἐν αὐξήσει καὶ πληθύνεσθαι ἐν πλήθει. This is 
evidently derived from αὐξάνεσθε καὶ πληθύνεσθε in Gen. τ. 22 and 
28. But how are we to account for the addition of ἐν αὐξήσει 
and ἐν πλήθειῦ This construction is a Hebraism; but the Hebrew 
idiom which it represents? is not employed in the phrase ‘ increase 
and multiply’ in Ge, τ. On the other hand, the very same form of 
words occurs in Corp. 1. 18, where we are told that God said to men 
and beasts αὐξάνεσθε ἐν αὐξήσει καὶ πληθύνεσθε ἐν πλήθει. This looks 
as if the writer of one of these two documents had borrowed from the 
other. But it is possible to account for the facts without assuming 
that either the writer of Corp. I or the writer of Corp. III had 
read what the other wrote, if we suppose that both of them alike 
got the phrase, not indeed from Genesis directly, but from some docu- 
ment based on a Semitic paraphrase of Genesis, in which the verbs 
‘increase’ and ‘multiply’ were thus emphasized. 


1 Cf. Gen. 8. 17 (after the flood): αὐῤάνεσθε καὶ πληθύνεσθε ἐπὶ τῆς γῆς. Gen. 
9. 7: αὐξάνεσθε καὶ πληθύνεσθε, καὶ πληρώσατε τὴν γῆν καὶ πληθύνεσθε ἐπὶ τῆς γῆ». 
Gen. 17. 20 (of Ishmael) : αὐξανῶ αὐτὸν καὶ πληθυνῷ αὐτὸν σφύδρα. Gen. 35. 11 (to 
Jacob): αὐξάνου καὶ πληθύνου. Gen. 48. 4 (to Jacob): ἐγώ σε αὐῤανῶ καὶ πληθυνῶ. 
Exod. τι 7 1 the children of Israel ηὐξήθησαν καὶ ἐπληθύνθησαν. 

* This Hebrew idiom is differently rendered in Gen. 16. 10 (to Hagar) and 
Gen. 22. 17 (to Abraham): πληθύνων πληθυνῶ τὸ σπέρμα σου. 








LIBELLVS III: § 3b 129 


πᾶσαν évoapk(o)i (ἐν σαρκὶ MSS.) ψυχὴν διὰ δρομήματος θεῶν ἐγκυ- 
κλίων. A verb is needed ; and as the writer is here speaking, not of 
the first creation of man, but of the births which take place in 
successive generations, the present is the right tense. I have therefore 
written ἐνσαρκοῖ. In incarnating human souls, God uses the revolutions 
of the stars as his instrument ; that is, human births are determined 
by astral influences. (See Asc/. Lat. III. 35.) The verb ἐνσαρκοῦν 
may perhaps have been adopted from some Platonist, as it would 
more naturally be employed by a person who believed in the pre- 
existence of the soul; but it does not necessarily imply this belief. 
Man is ἔμψυχος, i. 6. he consists of a body with a soul inside it; and 
the soul may be said to be ‘put into the body’, though its individual 
existence begins at the moment of birth. It is clear from what 
follows that the writer did not himself admit the existence of un- 
embodied souls, 

παρασκευάσας (τερασπορίας MSS.) εἰς κατοπτίεγίαν οὐρανοῦ κιτιλ. 
The strange word τερασπορίας (‘sowing of portents’?) is unques- 
tionably due to corruption. It seems clear that some participle 
must have stood here; and παρασκευάσας suits the context well. 
By writing ἐνσαρκοῖ for ἐν σαρκί, and παρασκευάσας for τερασπορίας, 
the chaos of words in this section can be reduced to grammatical order. 

[καὶ δρομήματος οὐρανίων θεῶν.] This is probably a misplaced 
doublet of διὰ δρομήματος θεῶν ἐγκυκλίων. 

((εἰς γνῶσιν θείας Suvdpews)) ἰἔργων θείων] καὶ φύσεως ἐνεργείας 
((waprupiav)). The words ἔργων θείων, which occur above in the 
doublet of this passage, were probably written here as an alternative 
for θείας δυνάμεως. The balance of the phrases is improved by 
inserting μαρτυρίαν, which occurs in the doublet. Compare with 
_this clause the description of ‘the purpose for which man was made’ 
in Corp. 1V.2 as emended: θεατὴς γὰρ τῶν ἔργων τοῦ θεοῦ ὁ ἄνθρωπος" 
καὶ (ἐπὶ τοῦτο ἐγένετο, τὸ τὸν κόσμον) θαυμάσαι, καὶ γνωρίσαι τὸν ποιήσαντα. 

εἴς τε σημείωσιν (σημεῖα MSS.) ἀγαθῶν. By writing σημείωσιν in 
place of σημεῖα, we get a phrase nearly equivalent to the words 
ἀγαθῶν ἐπίγνωσιν in the doublet above. . σημειοῦσθαι means either 
‘to mark or note a thing’, or ‘to infer a thing from indications’. 

μοίρας “dxdoupérys! γνῶναι ἀγαθῶν καὶ φαύλων. This is an ex- 
planation of σημείωσιν ἀγαθῶν. The meaning must be ‘to learn to 
distinguish good things from bad things’. μοῖρα (‘a division’) may 
mean ‘a class’, regarded as divided or distinguished from another 
class; and the sense required may be got either by cutting out 

2806°2 K 


130 CORPVS HERMETICVM 


ὀχλουμένης, or by writing μοίρας κεχωρισμένας γνῶναι, Cf. Pl, Philed. 
54C: ἐν τῇ τοῦ ἀγαθοῦ μοίρᾳ ἐκεῖνό ἐστι... . εἰς ἄλλην ἢ τὴν τοῦ 
ἀγαθοῦ μοῖραν (τὴν ἡδονὴν) τιθέντες. 

As the author of Corp. III had certainly read the first chapter of 
Genesis, it is probable that he had read the second and third chapters 
also; and this phrase may have been suggested to him by ‘the tree 
of the knowledge of good and evil’ in Gen. 2. But if so, he must 
have deliberately rejected the teaching of that passage in one respect. 
The God of Gen. 2 f. seeks to debar man from ‘the knowledge of 
good and evil’. The God of the Platonists and Stoics is devoid of 
φθόνος, and intends man to acquire that knowledge; and in this 
matter, the writer of Corp. III sides with the Platonists and Stoics. 

πᾶσαν [ἀγαθῶν] δαιδαλουργίαν εὑρεῖν. ἀγαθῶν is awkward ; and as 
the word has occurred twice just before, it is most likely that it has 
been repeated here by error. The thought expressed by πᾶσαν 
δαιδαλουργίαν εὑρεῖν resembles that of Soph. Ant. 332 ff. (πολλὰ τὰ 
δεινά, κοὐδὲν ἀνθρώπου δεινότερον πέλει κιτ.λ.). 

8. 4. βιῶσαί τε καὶ ἀφανισθῆναι (σοφισθῆναι MSS.) πρὸς μοῖραν 
δρομήματος (ἐγγκυκλίων θεῶν. μοῖρα here means the ‘lot’ or ‘destiny’ 
assigned to each man by the revolutions ofthe starry heavens. Not 
only the man’s birth, but the course and end of his life also, are 
determined by the movements of the stars. The writer does not 
add that men, by observing the stars, can discover beforehand what 
is destined for them. If this were added, the view expressed would 
amount to a belief in astrology. 

Each individual man, at the termination of his life on earth, 
‘disappears ’ (ἀφανίζεται), and ‘undergoes dissolution’ (ἀναλύεται εἰς 
(τὰ στοιχεῖα ?)). Not only is there no mention of a survival of the 
individual soul after the dissolution of the body, but the contrary 
is clearly implied. Nothing of a man continues to exist after his 
death, except his ‘name’ (i.e. the memory of him in the minds of 
living men) ; and even that, in most cases, fades away in a little while, 

μεγάλα ἀπομνημονεύματα τεχνουργημάτων ἐπὶ τῆς γῆς καταλιπόντες. 
Perhaps the writer was thinking of the old kings who built the 
pyramids. But ἀπομνημονεύματα τεχνουργημάτων might be taken to 
include the works of the poet and the statesman as well as those 
of the builder ; for ποιητική and πολιτική also are τέχναι. Cf. Hor. Od. 
3. 30: ‘exegi monumentum aere perennius: .. . non omnis moriar.’ 

πᾶσαν γένεσιν ἐμψύχου σαρκὸς καὶ καρποῦ σπορᾶς (διαδέξεται φθοράν, 
Men, beasts, and plants alike (must perish). The end of the sentence 








LIBELLVS III: S$ 3b-4 131 


is lost; but its meaning can be inferred with certainty from the 
context. Perhaps the author’s thought might be better expressed 
by writing (ὥσπερ) καὶ καρποῦ σπορᾶς. ‘All flesh is grass.’ οἵη περ 
φύλλων γενεή, τοίη δὲ καὶ ἀνδρῶν. 

[καὶ πάσας (πάσης MSS.) τεχνουργίας!. If we retain these words, 
we must take them in connexion with ἀπομνημονεύματα τεχνουργημάτων, 
and the thought suggested would be this: ‘not only do men perish, 
but their works perish also; and though the names of great men 
may be preserved through long ages by the memorials they have 
left behind them, yet even the greatest will be forgotten in the end.’ 
But the phrase is awkwardly interposed, and hardly suits the 
context ; it cannot be said of the works of human art that they are 
‘renewed by the operation of the stars’, in the sense in which this 
is said of human and animal births and vegetable growths. 

ἀνανεωθήσεται [ἀνάγκῃ] [καὶ ἀνανεώσει θεῶν [kal φύσεως] (ἐγγκυκλίων 
ἐναριθμίῳ (κύκλου ἐναριθμίου MSS.) δρομήματι, The reading is very 
uncertain; but this, or something like it, must have been the 
meaning. ἀνανεώσει may have come by duplication from ἀνανεωθήσε- 
rat; and ἀνάγκῃ καὶ φύσει may have been inserted as an explanatory 
note on θεῶν... δρομήματι. Sense might be made in another way, 
by shifting φύσεως, and writing ἀνάνεωθήσεται ἀνάγκῃ φύσεως, καὶ 
θεῶν ἐγκυκλίων ἐναριθμίῳ δρομήματι. 

That which decays and passes away is ‘renewed’, but only by 
substitution. The individual perishes, but the race is immortal. 
The dead do not live again, but others are born to succeed them. 
And this unceasing renewal of life on earth is caused by the unvary- 
ing movements of the heavenly bodies, through the operation of 
which fresh births are continually taking place. The force by which 
.the renewal is effected may be called φύσις ; but φύσις is dependent 
on the movements of the stars, and therefore on the sovereign power 
of God, by whom the stars themselves were made and set in motion, 


It is to be noted that, in the first part of the text, the lacunae 
which we have found it necessary to assume occur at nearly equal 
intervals. This suggests a suspicion that in the writing from which 
our MSS. are derived the lacunae came at the ends of the lines. 
In the appended transcript of the conjecturally restored text, the 
_ Greek is divided into lines in accordance with this hypothesis.’ The 

? One or more lines, in which the making of man. was described, have probably 
been lost between 1. 13 and 1. 14. 

Κῶ 


132 CORPVS HERMETICVM 


numbers of the letters in the first eight lines, not counting the 
lacunae at the ends, are 59, 67, 67, 65, 67, 70, 26, 64; and adding the 
letters of my conjectural supplements, we get the numbers 64, 
_ 78, 76, 69, 79, 80, 38, 76. In the first line, which contains the 
title, the letters may have been more widely spaced; and this might 
account for their smaller number (59 without the supplement, 64 
with it), At the end of the fourth line, the missing word may have 
been longer ; if, for instance, we wrote (ἐπιφερόμενγον τοῖς in place 
of (8ujx)ov τά, we should have a line of 75 letters instead of 69. 
We must suppose that a large part of the seventh line has been 
lost in some other way; but seven of the eight lacunae might be 
accounted for by assuming that the Greek was written in lines of 
75-80 letters, and that a piece at one side of the column was torn 
off. Lines of this length’ are exceptional; but even longer lines 
occur in some of the Oxyrhynchus papyri ; and a document of this 
kind, which may have been scribbled down by some sort of Pagan 
hermit in a hut at the edge of the desert, would not necessarily 
be written according to the rules commonly observed in libraries 
and bookshops. 

The probability that the Greek was written in lines of 75-80 
letters is somewhat increased by the positions of the lacunae in the 
last section. In the restoration of that part of the document 
especially, there is much uncertainty; but in the conjectural text 
of § 4 we find lacunae again occurring at nearly equal intervals; 
and these intervals are of about the same length as before. If we 
place the lacunae at the beginning of the lines, the last four lines 
yield the numbers «+63, 9+70 (=79), 15+70 (=85),? 10+66 
(=76); and these numbers look as if they were in some way 
connected with those of the first eight lines. Assuming that the 
Greek was divided into lines as here shown, and that it was written 
on the face of a detached piece of papyrus, the two groups of 
lacunae may have been caused by the destruction of two opposite 
corners of the leaf. But if we suppose that it was written partly 


1 In this transcript, all the words are written out in full; but it must be 
remembered that in the archetype the lines may have been somewhat shortened by 
the use of abbreviations. 

2 The total number of letters (85) in 1, 22 is rather too large; but the excess is 
due to the fact that my conjectural supplement (διαδέξεται φθορά) extends to 15 
letters, whereas the supplements of the line before and the line after contain 

ively 9 and ro letters only. If we wrote, for instance, πᾶσαν γένεσιν... 
(αἱρήσει φθοράν, or πᾶσα γένεσις... (ὑπείξει φθορᾷν (12 letters), 1. 22 would be 
reduced to 82 letters; if we wrote πᾶσα γένεσις... {(φθαρήσεταιν (το letters), the 
total would be 80, 





τὰ ᾿αϑυίμα 9 ΘῸΣ siond & yox ὧϑρ hs dok a9 .luazrlaosavan 13.00 ‘siondyda.o Lvdoon noon lk } (το ὈΥ ΟΝ “Ez 
Ξ 4050. dnh aor “z0rllirlodg crigidnar amynaxds amrg γ0.3.οἱἱρ ΩΡ ΑΌΛῸ vAsvlnoLLOY? 99 DL : de dog 1012339019) "δ 
sndou.o noudnx ἸῸΝ Soxdn.o aoXajrls 2.03424 avons ἸῸΝ 12.0MdavrIp SoagdX 9 DLvrloAO DL AM : (yyou 99. ams) *1z 
Saimouryoioy SkA sit 1439 amsorliddaosXs. vrvrlasaorlliarloun vypha “1A003 : (oLovrloag az oz 


« * 
10 ἸῸΝ npXioLo ὍΔ) $19 rwaligayoap ἸῺΝ ‘amg amryxaxdz Soxvrlliiodg andor sodu malgouvpp “δ᾽ 
. { “ 
you 94 yoomig siorgn 24 13Xdvua ards anrddaoyngrg avonz ἸῸΝ ‘amyanp yx amgodp mamadoig -gr 
sodion fampody mompsril.o 22 5)» ‘anidatdnd svirkdsaa sm3.0ab ἸῸΝ ‘smaripang 5010 στολή 5)9. yor *L1 
΄ ἰω é “ 4 ,΄ ΄ Ν ͵ ΄ » « Ν 
‘10794031.03@ AgdvdQO πὰ AML AMLADL ἸῸΝ “ΠΟΛΌΘΠΟ ΛΌΪΞΙΔΜΙΟΙῸΝ 519 SvoDASxODdDu ‘amryyands aM ὋΣ 
‘ s « | " ΄ Ν ~ « ΄ « ΄ sd « - 
sosvrliriodg 19 alXap joxdvoar avonu you “raphys a3 mporanghyx ἸῸΝ wol3an a> ὙῸβΟΞΛΌΞΑΌ 8. 
D4 2.0032"? ial hk ams. s13.039439h (+ * ssa ie 
“4. “ “ιν 5 "ὉπαολοίζουἝ 3... SioLan? 43 smoraahiryou ski vrldzn0 oL ἜΤ 
‘ndouoag amon ΛΊΘΟΙ. ὉΔῸΝ ‘hoyX soLavu snogap yor SosdoX yy “palit yx ndgaar ἸῸΝ pisud> “zc 
ΚΙ 
ἸῸΝ veoundss. oidlig ΟΙΞΑΡΑΞ ἸῸΝ ὦ Ar%gXvLo00du 02 Smarnang sng? Slt mg 5039. SoLovyz 90. axkap "1. 


-aosodnoXp omg aeons an a ee ory Aord2g70 9. lgXryi2rd3sz ἸῺΝ «ἸΘΌΜΌ δτοηϑυίίο AMLAD 510. ‘OT 


‘ 
9 Lgpm ἸῸΝ .51090 Utan az 5101 ano "6 

= (nag Ἴωσι ay lgndgdisg + ἸῸΝ -s07.090 sodka 39 μαι rm thnap yor ‘sorrip dj0n0 dda pa ligmysrlsg +g 
(ον sent . ~ ρχραϊενονν npdog) Ὁ QL DN trogoneXo wodasan +f 

(@+ sodas 202) ἢ soLasponrladnoap liek 519 vdpoy? vt Kigali ‘amsarpoidorg amyo dvk ams -~omeXr0L0 ‘9 
(ne o1aarhp ΤΌΣ ἢ «ποτ sop lig ἀρ)» “ΛΟ. ΟΌΠΞΝ ΟἿ ΟΝ Ὁ ἸΌΝ AMLADUD AMLAO 30 am1oido1gn “0X ἀν DL ao "Ὁ 
(a xlag) : B19 rrlpang ‘A9d30a aotusy vlarau ἸῸΝ ‘aodiup doga ἸῸΝ ‘hoong'p a> SoLov.0 dd ale “Ὁ 
*(o.on04d202) ἢ M.OMZAVAD TON SOY?L ἸῸΝ alurkoap ron ‘siond le wiahdoaz 2039 AOL ἸῸΝ Xd AQ AMLapu “Do “δ 
(4apx so.olir0.t') 1 ΑἸβῖϑῳ S19 soipoo ‘skya ἸῸΝ Sm3.0n ἸῸΝ ΠΟΛ ἸῸΝ ‘S039 0 amido ams LXdy “Ὅ290 Sroad k ἸῸΝ *z 
‘(ap 92) 1 aopg ἸῸΝ ‘S029 9 AMLtpun SoLodu (149,) 5005) sodoy aoLordarlonds aot aordgy, ΟἽ 


on the back began at 1. 20, both groups of lacunae may have been 


LIBELLVS III 
on the face of the leaf and partly on the back, and that the writing 
caused by the destruction oti one corner. 


5 4. 





134 CORPVS HERMETICVM 


LIBELLVS IV 


Contents 


(God is incorporeal ;) and that which is incorporeal is impercep- 
tible by sense. God is prior to all corporeal things, and has made 
them all. §1b. 

Having made the Kosmos, God sent man down to earth. And 
man was made for this purpose, that he might admire the Kosmos, 
and learn to know its Maker. § 2. 

God has ordained that those men only shall have mind who seek 
it by their own free choice. The men without mind give heed 
only to corporeal things, and ignore all that is higher. But those 
who have sought and received the gift of mind rise above earthly 
things, and see the Good ; and thenceforward they scorn all that is 
corporeal, and press on towards God. §§ 3-6a. 

If you would receive the gift of mind, you must begin by hating 
the body. You are free to choose either things corporeal and 
mortal, or things incorporeal and divine ; but you cannot have the 
one without rejecting the other. Those who choose the incorporeal 
win glory by their choice ; those who choose the corporeal exist to 
no good purpose, and are a mere encumbrance in God’s world. 
God is blameless ; if we suffer evil, it is because we ourselves have 
chosen the evil. §§ 6 b-8a. 

We have to rise above all that is corporeal, and make our way 
up to the Good. And to do this, we must put forth all our strength. 
It is not easy ; for the things that attract us here below are visible, 
and the Good is invisible. §§ 8 b, 9. 

- . » (A lacuna of unknown length.) ... 

God is the source whence all things have their being. He is to 
things as the arithmetical unit is to the numbers derived from it ; 
that is to say, he contains all things, and is contained by none; 
he generates all things, and is generated by none; he is perfect, 
and all things else are imperfect. §§ 10, 11a. 

If you meditate on God, you will find yourself led upward ; for 
when a man has once caught sight of things divine, they draw him 
tothem. ὃ τι Ὁ. 


Sources. The doctrine of Corp. IV is wholly Platonic. The 
contrast between ‘things corporeal’ and ‘things incorporeal’ which 













LIBELLVS IV: § 1a 135 


runs through the document is the Platonic contrast between αἰσθητά 
and νοητά; and the exhortation to ‘hate the body’ is in accordance 
with a side of Plato’s teaching which is prominent in the Phaedo. 
The Platonic doctrine that human souls existed in a higher 
world before their incarnation is taken for granted (§ 2, κατέπεμψε ; 
ὃ 9, ἐπὶ τὰ παλαιὰ καὶ ἀρχαῖα ἀνακάμπτειν) ; and the doctrine that 
some souls return to that higher world after death is alluded to in 
§ 4 (πιστεύουσα ὅτι ἀνελεύσῃ) ; though the state of disembodied 
souls is not directly dealt with, The comparison of God to the 
povds Was doubtless suggested by a theory of numbers which was 
adopted by Plato’s immediate successors, and must have been 
known to all Platonists. The term τὸ ἀγαθόν is employed in its 
Platonic sense, ὃ 8b. Reminiscences of the Zimaeus occur in the 
account of the demiurgia, §§ τ Ὁ, 2. The influence of particular 
passages in Plato's dialogues is to be recognized in the assertion 
of man’s freedom of choice, §§ 6 Ὁ, 8a (Pl. ep. το. 617); in the 
mention of φθόνος, ὃ 3 (Pl. Phaedrus 247 Αἴ); and probably 
in the mention of the loadstone, ὃ 11 Ὁ (Pl. Zon 533 Ὁ). 

The allegory of the crater may possibly have been suggested by 
Christian invitations to baptism ; but this is a doubtful point. The 
words οὐ χερσὶν ἀλλὰ λόγῳ in ὃ 1a may have been inserted by a 
Christian. 


Date. On the hypothesis of Christian influence in § 4, a late date 
must be assumed ; for such familiarity with a Christian rite as this 
implies would hardly have been possible for a Pagan writer before 
the latter part of the third century. Setting that hypothesis aside, 
I can find no indication of date in Corp. IV except its general 
resemblance to other Hermetica, from which we may infer that it 
was probably written in the second or third century a. Ὁ. 


Title. The title ὁ κρατήρ refers to the allegory in§ 4. We have 
no means of knowing whether this title was given to the dialogue 
by its author, or subsequently inserted by some one else. The 
second title, ἡ μονάς, which is applicable only to §§ το, τι ἃ, was 
probably added later. 

§ 18. ἐπειδὴ τὸν πάντα κιτιλ, The text of §§ 1 a, x Ὁ is in confusion, 
The beginning of the dialogue is missing ; there is no apodosis to 
the clause which stands first in the MSS. (ἐπειδὴ... ἀλλὰ λόγῳ) ; 
and there is no satisfactory connexion of thought between the 
sentence ὥστε οὕτως troddpBave .. + τὰ ὄντα and the following 


186 CORPVS HERMETICVM 


sentence, τοῦτο γάρ ἐστι τὸ σῶμα ἐκείνου κιτιλ, 1 have tried to 
express what I suppose to have been the writer’s meaning by re- 
arranging the sentences. It may be presumed that the passage ὥστε 
οὕτως ὑπολάμβανε... τὰ ὄντα stood at or near the end of a paragraph 
which dealt with the making of the Kosmos; and the words ἐπεὶ 
δὲ τὸν πάντα κόσμον ἐποίησεν ὁ δημιουργός supply a suitable transition 
from this to the following paragraph, ὃ 2, which deals with the 
‘sending down’ or embodiment of man. 

[od χερσὶν ἀλλὰ λόγῳ]! These words would evidently be out of 
place at the beginning of § 2 ; if therefore we are right in transposing 
ἐπειδὴ . . . ὃ δημιουργός to that position, it follows that οὐ χερσὶν ἀλλὰ 
λόγῳ must have been added after the clause had been shifted from 
its original place. 

The λόγος here spoken of is the creative fiat of the Demiurgus. 
It is not hypostatized or personified. The notion that God made 
the world ‘by his word’ or ‘by the breath ot his mouth’ was 
familiar to the Jews; cf. Psalm 33.6. It appears to have been 
familiar to the Egyptians also, from a time long before the beginnings 
of Hebrew literature. Moret, Rituel en Egypte, 1902, Pp. 155: 
‘lidée de la force créatrice du verbe existe déja nettement dés les 
textes des pyramides’* The thought expressed by the words οὐ 
χερσὶν ἀλλὰ λόγῳ might therefore have been derived from sources 
either Jewish or Egyptian, But if these words were added later, 
it is most likely that they were inserted by a Christian. 

δ 1b. rorjodro γάρ ἐστι τὸ (d)odpa(rov) [[exeivou]], If we retain τὸ 
σῶμα ἐκείνου, the reading of the MSS., we must say that the writer, by 
a bold paradox, ascribes a ‘body’ to God, though at the same time 
he denies that God’s ‘body’ has any of the qualities of other bodies. 
But the statement that God has a body is not only unparalleled in 
Hermetic literature,* but is also irreconcilable with what is said 
elsewhere in this document. (See especially §6b: δύο γὰρ ὄντων τῶν 
ὄντων, σώματος καὶ ἀσωμάτου, ἐν οἷς τὸ θνητὸν καὶ τὸ θεῖον.) There 
can therefore be little doubt that the text is corrupt. It would 
be possible to write εἶδος in place of σῶμα; compare the ἰδέα 

1 See also Moret, Adystéres deyptiens, 1913, ch. 2, ‘Le mystére du verbe créateur’. 
But Moret hardly distinguishes with sufficient clearness between the doctrine that 
God made or makes things by his creative jiat (which may be ascribed to the 
Egyptians without hesitation), and the doctrine of a Logos regarded as a person 
distinct from the supreme God. (See note on Corp. 1. 6.) The latter doctrine also 
may perhaps have existed in Egypt before the Hellenistic period ; but the evidence 


for its existence seems to be far less conclusive. 
® See Corp. XIV. 7: τοῦτο ἔστι τοῦ θεοῦ ὥσπερ Copa), ἡ ποίησις, 





LIBELLVS III: δὲ 1a-2 137 























ἀσώματος of God which is spoken of in Corp. XI. ii. 16b, But it 
seems most likely that the writer, having asserted that God is 
ἀσώματος in the lost passage which preceded this sentence, here 
went on to explain what sort of thing τὸ ἀσώματον is. I have ac- 
cordingly written τὸ ἀσώματον. The word ἐκείνου may have come 
from ἐκεῖνος misplaced. 

οὔτε yap πῦρ ἐστιν ((éxeivos)), οὔτε ὕδωρ, οὔτε ἀήρ, οὔτε πνεῦμα. God 
was identified with fire by Heraclitus ; with water, by Thales ; with air, 
by Anaximenes and Diogenes of Apollonia; and with fire or pueuma 
(i.e. heated air) by the Stoics. That which is common to all 
these theories is the notion that God is corporeal; and this is 
the notion against which the Hermetist is contending. 

ὡς αὐτοῦ προόντος (ὡς τοῦ παρόντος MSS.). Cf. Herm. ap. Stob, 
Exe, ΧΧΙ. τ: ἔστι τοίνυν τὸ προὸν ἐπ(έκεινα) πάντων τῶν ὄντων κιτιλ. 
In Iren. 1. 1. 1, the term προών is applied to the supreme God of 
the Valentinians (the Bythos or Propator). In the writings of 
Plotinus and his successors, τὸ προόν would mean τὸ ἕν, τὸ ἐπέκεινα 
οὐσίας (καὶ νοῦ); but the writer of Corp. IV means merely that 
the existence of God is prior to the existence of the corporeal 
universe. 

ἀγαθὸς γὰρ ὦν, Γμόνῳ ἑαυτῷ τοῦτο ἀναθεῖναι) Stob.—édyabds ὦν. 
Γμόνῳ γὰρ τούτῳ ἀνατέθεικεν! Corp. As the phrase ἀγαθὸς ὧν is here 
used in connexion with the demiurgia, it was probably suggested 
by Pl. Zim, 298: ἀγαθὸς ἦν, .. ." (φθόνου) δ᾽ ἐκτὸς dv πάντα ὅτι 
μάλιστα γενέσθαι ἐβουλήθη παραπλήσια ἑαυτῷ... .. βουληθεὶς γὰρ ὁ 
θεὸς ἀγαθὰ μὲν πάντα, φλαῦρον δὲ μηδὲν εἶναι κατὰ δύναμιν, οὕτω δὴ πᾶν 
ὅσον ἦν ὁρατὸν... εἰς τάξιν... ἤγαγεν ἐκ τῆς ἀταξίας. And if the 
writer was thinking of that passage, he may perhaps have written 
something like ἀγαθὸς yap dv, (ἐβουλήθη πάντο) ἀγαθὰ εἶναι. The 
words μόνῳ ἑαυτῷ τοῦτο (μόνῳ γὰρ τούτῳ codd. Corp.) might be a 
corruption of μόνος αὐτός (‘inasmuch as he, and he alone, was good’) ; 
or they might possibly have come by duplication from μόνου τῇ δὲ 
αὑτοῦ in the preceding sentence. 

ὃ 2. ἠθέλησε καὶ τὴν γῆν κοσμῆσαι. If my rearrangement of the 
passage is right, τὴν γῆν is contrasted with τὸν πάντα κόσμον. Having 
made the Kosmos, God bethought him that something more was 
needed to complete the order and beauty of the earthly part of it, 
and supplied what was lacking by peopling the earth with men. 
The thought is somewhat similar to that of Pl. Zim. 4t B, where 
the Demiurgus, having made the gods, says that mortal creatures 


LE EEL OR OED DLA 5 AOE IE LIOR AAA ͵ 


“-ππ{-:--:---------ῖ.“- ee a ee ee 


148 CORPVS HERMETICVM 


have not yet been made; τούτων δὲ μὴ γενομένων, οὐρανὸς (i.e. the 
universe) ἀτελὴς ἔσται τὰ γὰρ ἅπαντ᾽ ἐν αὑτῷ γένη ζῴων οὐκ ἕξει, 
δεῖ δέ, εἰ μέλλει τέλεος ἱκανῶς εἶναι. Cf. Kore Kosmu, Exc. XXIII. 9: 
after the first creation, ἡ (τῶν ὑποκειμένων) φύσις ἐτύγχανε στεῖρα, until 
the gods represented to the supreme God ὅτι δέον ἐστὶ συγκοσμηθῆναι 
{καὶ rad)ra* whereupon the supreme God proceeded to make souls. 
Perhaps the word κοσμῆσαι implies that it is a part of man’s function 
to tend and beautify the earth; ifso, we may compare Asc/, Lat. 
I. 10: ‘curam propriam diligentiae suae (suscipiens homo) efficit 
ut sit ipse et mundus uterque ornamento sibi.’ Jd. 8: ‘sine quibus 
(sc. the work of the human arts and crafts) mundum deus noluit 
esse perfectum.’ 

κόσμον δὲ θείου σώματος κατέπεμψε τὸν ἄνθρωπον, (eixdva) ζῴου 
ἀθανάτου ζῷον θνητόν, There is here a play on the two meanings 
of the word κόσμος (‘ universe’ and ‘ornament’), as in ‘ut sit ipse 
et mundus ornamento sibi’ (Asc/. Lat.) The θεῖον σῶμα is ἡ γῆ; 
the ζῷον ἀθάνατον is the Kosmos, of which man (the microcosm)? 
is an image. But the combination of the two phrases is somewhat 
awkward ; and it may be suspected that εἰκόνα ζῴου ἀθανάτου ζῷον 
θνητόν has been added by a later hand. 

The word κατέπεμψε shows that the writer holds the Platonic 
doctrine that human souls existed dvw before they were embodied 
on earth. In the Zimaeus, we are told in mythical language that 
the souls were made by the Demiurgus, and that when made, they 
were first placed in the stars, and afterwards sent down to earth, 
But the writer of Corp. IV, as he says nothing about the ‘ making’ 
of souls, may have held that individual human souls are without 
beginning. It is true that he repeatedly says that man γέγονε (‘has 
been made’) for a certain purpose ; but when he uses this expression, 
he is speaking of man as an earthly organism composed ot body 
and soul, and not of the unembodied soul. 

[[καὶ ὁ μὲν κόσμος... τὸν νοῦν. This must have been written to 
introduce the topic of the distribution of νοῦς, and must therefore 
have stood at the beginning of § 3. 

θεατὴς γὰρ [[eyévero]] τῶν ἔργων τοῦ θεοῦ ὁ ἄνθρωπος, Cf. Asce. Lat, — 
I. 8, where it is said that when God had made the Kosmos, ‘ esse 
voluit alium qui illum quem ex se fecerat intueri potuisset’, and 


1 The saying that man is a μικρὺς κύσμος was attributed to Democritus (Diels 
Fr. Vorsokr. p. 398). In Ar, Phys, 232 b 26, a (Gov of any kind is said to be a 
μικρὸς κύσμος. 





LIBELLVS IV: §§ 2-3 139 






















"therefore he made man. Corp. III 3b, as emended: παρασκευάσας 
ἄνθρωπον) εἰς κατοπτείαν οὐρανοῦ, ... καὶ εἰς γνῶσιν θείας δυνάμεως, 
καὶ φύσεως ἐνεργείας μαρτυρίαν. Lamblichus, Protrept. 9, says that 
_ Pythagoras, when he was asked what is the purpose οὗ χάριν ἡ φύσις 
ἡμᾶς ἐγέννησε καὶ ὃ θεός, answered, “ro θεάσασθαι τὸν οὐρανόν." καὶ 
ἑαυτὸν δὲ θεωρὸν ἔφασκεν εἶναι τῆς φύσεως, καὶ τούτου ἕνεκα παρεληλυθέναι 
eis τὸν βίον. 

Something to which γάρ refers, and which connected this sentence 
with what precedes, must have been lost. 

καὶ (ἐπὶ τοῦτο ((éyévero)), τὸ τὸν κόσμον) θαυμάσαι, Kal γνωρίσαι τὸν 
ποιήσαντα.---(Ἕκαὶ ἐθαύμασε καὶ ἐγνώρισε τὸν ποιήσαντα MSS.) As we 
are afterwards told that many men do not ‘come to know the 
Maker’, the indicatives ἐθαύμασε and ἐγνώρισε, which imply that 
man in general does so, can hardly be right. In the following 
sections, the writer speaks of ‘ the purpose for which man was made’ 
as a thing known to the reader; hence it may be inferred that he 
somewhere said what that purpose is. And if so, there can be 
little doubt that he said it at the end of the paragraph about the 
‘sending down’ of man, and in some such words as I have 
written. 

ὃ 3. τὸν λόγον καὶ τὸν νοῦν, It may be doubted whether λόγος 
ought here to be translated ‘speech’ or ‘reason’, But in the 
parallel passage Corp, XII 1, 12 (δύο ταῦτα τῷ ἀνθρώπῳ ὁ θεὸς... 
ἐχαρίσατο, . . . τόν τε νοῦν καὶ τὸν λόγον κ-τ.λ.), the word clearly 
‘means ‘speech’, 

τὸν δὲ νοῦν οὐκέτι (πᾶσι τοῖς ἀνθρώποις ἐμέρισε). The νοῦς of this 
dialogue is the higher sort of νοῦς, which only a few men possess ; 
and the lower sort of νοῦς, which goes along with speech, and is 
possessed by all mankind, is not expressly mentioned. Cf. Cors. I. 
21 fin.: ob πάντες yap ἄνθρωποι νοῦν ἔχουσιν ; “15εἰ. Lat. 1. 7a: ‘non 
omnes... intellegentiam veram adepti sunt.’ 

ὃ γὰρ φθόνος οὐκ οὐρανόθεν (ἔνθεν MSS.) ἄρχεται. It would be 
possible to write ἄνωθεν ; but ἔνθεν, the reading of the MSS., may 
very likely have arisen out of οὐνόθεν (i. 6, οὐρανόθεν abbreviated), 
φθόνος does not ‘start from’ heaven or ‘begin with’ heaven; 
1.¢. ob πᾶσιν ἐγγίγνεται ἀπὸ τῶν οὐρανίων ἀρχόμενος" it is not present 
in all beings from God downward. Cf. Pl. Phaedrus 247A: ἕπεται 
δὲ (τοῖς θεοῖς) ὁ ἀεὶ ἐθέλων τε καὶ δυνάμενος" φθόνος γὰρ ἔξω θείου 
ρου ἵσταται. Pl. Zim. 291: τούτου δὲ (sc. φθόνου) ἐκτὸς ὧν (6 


θεὸς) κιτ.λ. 


Se Seo 


140 CORPVS HERMETICVM 


ὥσπερ ἄθλον. ous, or the gnosis of which nous is the organ, 
is a thing to be striven for, The Hermetists speak of guosis some- 
times as a gift bestowed by God’s grace, and at other times, as a 
thing to be sought by human effort. This writer takes the latter 
view, and insists on man’s freedom to choose either the higher life 
or the lower. 

§ 4. κρατῆρα μέγαν... κατέπεμψε κιτιλ. This passage was known 
to the alchemist Zosimus; see Zosim. ii, 8 (Zéstim.), βαπτισθεῖσα 
τῷ κρατῆρι. 

Whence did the writer of Corp. IV get his notion of ‘a great basin 
filled with yots’, in which men’s ‘ hearts’ are invited to dip themselves ? 
The figure must have been suggested to him by some sacramental 
rite with which he was acquainted; but it seems clear that he 
himself attached no value and ascribed no efficacy to the sacramental 
rite of which he was thinking, and that he uses it merely as a figure 
to illustrate his doctrine of νοῦς. To what cult did the rite which 
he had in mind belong? It is not impossible that his allegory was 
suggested by the Christian sacrament of baptism, and that the 
κρατήρ corresponds to the Christian font. The use of the words 
βαπτίζειν and πιστεύειν, and the mention of a κήρυγμα by which all 
are invited to undergo the rite, agree well with this hypothesis ; 
and the language of § 4 might have been used by a Christian almost 
without alteration, except that he would have spoken of πνεῦμα instead 
of νοῦς. But on the other hand, it seems improbable that a Pagan, 
writing before the end of the third century, would have been so 
familiar with the Christian rite of baptism as to base an allegory 
on it. Dida similar practice of sacramental dipping exist in any 
Pagan cult which is likely to have been known to the writer of 
Corp. IV?  Purifications by sprinkling, washing, or bathing were 
no doubt in constant use in the indigenous cults of Egypt, and in 
almost all the other religions of the time. But the rite presupposed 
in Corp. IV. 4 is not a mere ceremonial purification, but an opera- 
tion of sacramental efficacy, by which the personality of the votary 


1 On the Jewish rites of purification by washing or dipping, see Schtirer, 
Geschichte des Jiidischen Volkes, 4th ed., II, p. i f., and III, pp. 181-185. 
Proselytes, at their admission to the Jewish community, were cleansed from the 
pollutions of their Pagan life by a ceremonial ablution. This is spoken of in the 
exhortation addressed to Pagans in the Jewish Ovac. Scby/, 4. 162 ff. (written — 
probably towards the end of the first century A.D.): ἃ μέλεοι μετάθεσθε βροτοὶ 
τάδε. ᾿ς | ἐν ποταμοῖς λούσασθε ὅλον δέμας ἀενάοισιν, | χεῖρας τ᾽ ἐκτανύσαντες ἐς 
αἰθέρα τῶν πάρος ἔργων | συγγνώμην αἰτεῖσθε. But this Jewish ‘baptism’ of 
proselytes (if it is to be called by that name) hardly amounted to a sacrament. 








LIBELLVS IV: δ 4 141 


is profoundly transformed ; and if a non-Christian ‘ baptism’ in that 
sense was anywhere in existence, it is most likely to have existed 
in Syria, or at any rate, to have been of Syrian origin,’ 

We have further to consider from what source the writer of Corp. 
IV can have got the term κρατήρ, which he uses to denote the 
tank or basin in which the votaries are dipped. In Pl. Zim. 41D, 
the vessel in which the Demiurgus ‘mixed’ or ‘blended’ the 
substances of which he made the world-soul and the individual 
souls is called a κρατήρ. Cf. Lucian Bis accusatus 34. 834 (a jesting 
reference to the Zimaews): ἐκεῖνα σμικρολογούμενος, εἰ ἀθάνατος ἡ 
ψυχή, καὶ πόσας κοτύλας ὃ θεός, ὁπότε τὸν κόσμον κατεσκευάζετο, τῆς 
πάντα ἐκεράννυτοΣ But the κρατήρ of Corp, IV, which is a receptacle 
containing a liquid in which people dip themselves, cannot have 
been derived from the ‘ mixing-bowl’ or ‘crucible’ spoken of in the 
Timaeus. 

There seem to have been two Orphic poems called Κρατήρ. 
Servius ad Aen. 6. 667 (Abel Orphica fr. 159): ‘ad (Musaeum 
Orpheus) primum carmen scripsit quod appellatur Crater,’ Joannes 
Diaconus ad Hes. Theog. 617 (Abel id, fr. 164): ἄκουε yap τοῦ Ὀρφέως 
ἐν τῷ λεγομένῳ Κρατῆρι τάδε σοι λέγοντος" Ἔστιν δὴ πάντων ἀρχὴ Ζεύς, 
ζῆν γὰρ ἔδωκε κιτιλ. Joannes Diaconus ad Hes. Theog. 950 (Abel 
ib. fr. 160): μαρτυρεῖ καὶ ἐν τῷ μικροτέρῳ Kparipu'(i.e. in the shorter 
of the two poems which bore that title) ὁ "Opdevs, τάδε λέγων" Ἑρμῆς 
δ᾽ ἑρμηνεὺς τῶν πάντων κιτιλ. The poem from which these extracts 
were taken seems to have contained a catalogue of gods, with 
explanations of their names and functions in the Stoic manner. 
We are not told the meaning of the title Kparjp which was given 


3 - ‘ ‘ : 4 é 4 δ ; ΤΩ « > ἂν a > 2 ‘ 
ἀμιγοῦς καὶ κατὰ ταὐτὰ ἐχούσης οὐσίας ἐνέχεεν ἐς τὸν κρατῆρα ἐν ᾧ τὰ 


1 See notes on Corp. XIII, and Appendix on Rebirth. 

It is no doubt possible that in some of the many Egyptian temple-cults a 
sacramental rite of dipping in a basin or tank was practised. (There seems to be 
an allusion to some such rite in the Egyptian Book of the Dead, ‘Chapter of the 
going forth by day’, Erman’s transl. 459 f., quoted by Dieterich A/#thrasiit. p. 195 
* My uncleanness is driven away, and the sin which was upon me is cast down. I 
have washed myself in those two great ponds whieh are in Heracleopolis,in which 
the offering of men is purified for that great god who dwells there. I go on the 
way where 1 wash my head in the lake of the righteous,’) But the writer of Corp. IV 
speaks of an invitation to all who will to receive this baptism ; and that is hardly 
in accordance with the spirit of the Egyptian religion. In the cults of Egypt, the 
privilege of sacramental initiation appears to have been almost entirely restricted to 

iests. 

8 picnaklin 2, 25 says that the anima (humana) was spoken of by certain 
Platonists as affuens ex crateribus vivis. This phrase was probably suggested by 

passage in the 77maeus, 


142 CORPVS HERMETICVM 


to it; but Joannes Diaconus, in the same connexion, quotes from 
‘Orpheus’ the line Ζεὺς δέ τε πάντων ἐστὶ θεὸς (πατὴρ ἢ) πάντων τε 
κεραστής (A el fr. τ61); and it seems probable that this fragment 
also belongs to ‘ the smaller Cra/er’, and that the poem was so named 
because it said that Zeus ‘ mixed all things in a bowl’ when he 
made the Kosmos. (Cf. τὸν κρατῆρα ἐν ᾧ τὰ πάντα ἐκεράννυτο in 
Lucian.) If so, the κρατήρ of Corp. IV can have nothing to do with 
‘the smaller Crazer’ of Orpheus. 

We are also told that in some Orphic poem ‘the crater of Diony- 


sus’ was spoken of. Proclus ἐπ Zim, 316 a (Abel Orph. p. 216): | 


ἥν 


καὶ ᾿Ορφεὺς οἷδε μὲν καὶ τὸν τοῦ Διονύσου κρατῆρα, πολλοὺς δὲ καὶ 
ἄλλους (κρατῆρας) ἱδρύει περὶ τὴν ἡλιακὴν τράπεζαν. Macrobius 
Somn. Scip. 1. 12. 8 identifies the constellation called the Crater 
with ‘the crater of Dionysus’, and says that unembodied souls 
drink from it, and being thereby intoxicated, are drawn down to 
earth and embodied there. To Macrobius then, ‘the crazer of 
Dionysus’ meant the vessel which contains the drink of Lethe; and 
the term “may possibly have had the same meaning in the Orphic 
passage to which Proclus refers. But it is evident that the Hermetist’s 


notion of a bath or font filled with Mind cannot be in any way — 
connected with Macrobius’s notion of a drinking-vessel filled with 


the wine of Lethe, 

It might with somewhat more show of reason be conjectured that 
the legend that Empedocles leapt into the crater of Aetna arose 
through perversion of a saying that he plunged into the κρατήρ of 
divine fire (i. 6. of νοῦς), and so became a god. Diog. Laert. 8. 69: 
Ἱππόβοτος δέ φησιν ἐξαναστάντα (τὸν ᾿Εμπεδοκλέα) ὡδευκέναι ds ἐπὶ 


τὴν Αἴτνην, εἶτα παραγενόμενον ἐπὶ τοὺς κρατῆρας τοῦ πυρὸς ἐναλέσθαι 
καὶ ἀφανισθῆναι, βουλόμενον τὴν περὶ αὐτοῦ φήμην βεβαιῶσαι ὅτι 
γεγόνοι θεός. (I do not know the date of Hippobotus; but the — 


story was commonly known in the time of Horace, Ars poet. 464.) 
On this hypothesis, the Hermetist’s allegory might possibly have 
been suggested by a conception which originated among the Orphici 
or Pythagoreans of Sicily and South Italy. But there is no evidence 


that the word κρατήρ was thus employed by any Pagan school or 


sect ; and perhaps the passage about ‘the basin filled with mind’ 
can be most satisfactorily accounted for by assuming that the author 
of Corp. IV, though himself a Pagan, had heard or read a Christian 


invitation to baptism, and adapted a few sentences of it to his own 


purpose, 





LIBELLVS IV: δ 4 143 





























ταῖς τῶν ἀνθρώπων καρδίαις. καρδία here means ‘soul’, Cf. ὃ 11 b, 
τοῖς τῆς καρδίας ὀφθαλμοῖς, The word was not thus used by Plato,? 
nor by philosophic writers in general after Plato’s time. On the 
other hand, it is habitually thus used in the Septuagint and the 
New Testament. Its employment here might therefore be considered 
to tell in favour of the hypothesis that the source of this passage was 
Christian. But the word ‘heart’ was used in the sense of ‘soul’ 
or ‘mind’ by Egyptians also, 

Βάπτισον σεαυτὴν ἧ δυναμένη, ἡ δυναμένη would seem to imply 
that there are some men who cannot ‘dip themselves’ in the bath 
of Mind. But it is difficult to reconcile this with the writer’s view 
that the choice between the higher and the lower life is open to all 
(§ 6b: ἡ αἵρεσις θατέρου καταλείπεται τῷ ἑλέσθαι βουλομένῳ). It seems 
probable therefore that the author wrote, not ἡ δυναμένη, but ἡ 
βουλομένη. 

πιστεύουσα ὅτι ἀνελεύσγ πρὸς τὸν καταπέμψαντα τὸν κρατῆρα, τὸν 
κρατῆρα is an awkward repetition of τοῦτον τὸν κρατῆρα close above ; 
and it may be suspected that the true reading is τόν (oe) καταπέμψαντα 
(cf. κατέπεμψε τὸν ἄνθρωπον in ὃ 2), and that τὸν κρατῆρα has 
been added by error. In the traditional text, τὸν καταπέμψαντα τὸν 
κρατῆρα refers to κρατῆρα... κατέπεμψε at the beginning of § 4; 
but I am inclined to think that we ought to read some such word 
88 κατέστησε there in place of κατέπεμψε. The ‘sending down’ 
of a ‘great tank’ from heaven is a process that it is not very easy 
to picture; and κατέστησε would agree better with the preceding 
yerb ἱδρύσατο. 

τέλειοι ἐγένοντο ἄνθρωποι, τὸν νοῦν δεξάμενοι. A man without νοῦς 
‘is ἀτελής ; it is only when he has received νοῦς that he becomes a 
complete or fully-developed man. The word τέλειος sometimes 
carried with it religious associations connected with τελετή and τέλος 
in the sense of ‘initiation’, But in this sentence, the common and 
Popular meaning of τέλειος gives a satisfactory sense, and there is no 
need to look for any other.? 


1 Its use in the speech of Alcibiades, Pl. ΣΌΣ 218 A (τὴν καρδίαν γὰρ ἣ ψυχὴν 
Hb τι δεῖ αὐτὸ ὀνομάσαι πληγείς τε καὶ δηχθεὶς ὑπὸ τῶν ἐν φιλοσοφίᾳ λόγων) is an 
lated instance. 
* Reitzenstein (Hellen, Mysterienrel, p- 165) says that the Hermetist associated 
the word τέλειοι with τεχετή, and meant to imply by it that the men of whom he 

ks are ‘consecrated’ (gezveiht) by a sacramental rite. But I see no reason to 

that any such meaning was intended here. 

Reitzenstein ἐδ, says ‘ein κρατὴρ wird bei der Reinigung oder Taufe in den 
§tiechischen Mysterien immer verwendet’; but he does not give any authority for 


OOOO ee lll 


——e 


eee em 


144 CORPVS HERMETICVM 


δὲ 4, 5. ὅσοι δὲ ἥμαρτον τοῦ κηρύγματος... γεγονέναι πιστεύοντες, 
There is evidently something wrong in the long string of participles 
which this passage contains ; but it is doubtful how the text ought to 
be corrected. The words τὸν νοῦν μὴ προσειληφότες correspond to 
τὸν νοῦν δεξάμενοι above ; it therefore seems probable, on the ground 
of symmetry, that the sentence ended at προσειληφότες. If so, we 
have to provide a subject and a verb for the sentence which follows. 
I have provided a subject by inserting καὶ οὗτοι μέν, which seems 
needed to match ὅσοι 8... μετέσχον, οὗτοι below ; and a verb, by 
altering ἔχοντες into συνέχονται. 

ὃ 5. [at δὲ αἰσθήσεις τούτων ταῖς τῶν ἀλόγων ζῴων παραπλήσιαι. 
The two sorts of men are sufficiently distinguished by the fact that 
the one sort possesses νοῦς and the other does not; why should 
it be said that their αἰσθήσεις also differ? And if the αἰσθήσεις of the 
ἄνους ἄνθρωπος are like those of the beasts, in what respect do the 
αἰσθήσεις of the ἔννους ἄνθρωπος differ from those of the beasts? 
We might rather have supposed that, in respect of their αἰσθήσεις, 
-all men are alike. Besides, there is some awkwardness in saying 
that the ἄνους ἄνθρωπος is like the ἄλογα ζῷα, when we have just been 
told that he possesses Adyos. It seems best therefore to bracket 
these words. 

ὀργῇ καὶ ἀκρασίᾳ συνέχονται.---(καὶ ἐν θυμῷ καὶ ἐν ὀργῇ τὴν κρᾶσιν 
ἔχοντες MSS.) There is no meaning in τὴν κρᾶσιν ἔχοντες ; and 
ἀκρασίᾳ is a probable correction. It may be considered a substitute 
for ἐπιθυμίᾳ; and some such word is needed to suit the following 
phrase ταῖς τῶν σωμάτων ἡδοναῖς καὶ ὀρέξεσι, which has nothing to 
do with θυμός or ὀργή. The words καὶ ἐν θυμῷ are probably a 
variant for καὶ ἐν ὀργῇ. In Corp. XIII. 7 Ὁ, ἀκρασία stands third, and 
ὀργή tenth, in a list of twelve evil passions. 

θαυμάζοντες τὰ οὐ θέας ἄξια.---(οὐ θαυμάζοντες οὐ τὰ θέας ἄξια MSS.) 
The reading of the MSS. seems to have resulted from a mixture 
of θαυμάζοντες τὰ οὐ θέας ἄξια and οὐ θαυμάζοντες τὰ θέας ἄξια. ἱ 

8 68. αὕτη... ἡ τοῦ νοῦ ἐστὶν ἐνέργεια, ἐπιστήμης τῶν θείων εὐπορία, 
καὶ τοῦ θεοῦ κατανοήσεως.--(αὕτη .. . ἡ τοῦ νοῦ ἐστὶν ἐπιστήμη, τῶν 
θείων ἐντορία, καὶ ἡ τοῦ θεοῦ κατανόησις MSS.) There is no such 
word as ἐντορία ; and the correction ἐπιστήμης . . - εὐπορία is confirmed 
by τὸν νοῦν ἔχων καὶ τῆς ἐπιστήμης μεταλήψῃ below. The phrase 


this statement. At Eleusis, the preliminary purification of the mystae by bathing { 
took place, not in a κρατήρ, but in the sea, as is shown by the cry ἅλαδε μύσται, 
I know of no Greek mysteries in which bathing or dipping was the central or most 
significant part of the sacramental action, as it is in the Hermetist’s allegory. 













LIBELLVS IV: ἐδ 4-6b 145 


ἐπιστήμη τῶν θείων καὶ τοῦ θεοῦ κατανόησις is equivalent to γνῶσις ; 
and γνώσεως εὐπορία might very well be said to be the ἐνέργεια of 
νοῦς. Some such word as ἐνέργεια is wanted here; and there is 
a superfluous ἐνέργεια at the beginning of § 7, which may possibly 
τ have been transposed from ὃ 6a. 

§ 6b. Κἀγὼ ((rod κρατῆρος») βαπτισθῆναι βούλομαι. A mention 
of the κρατήρ is out of place at the end of ὃ 6a, as Hermes is there 
describing the results produced by the possession of νοῦς, and has 
ceased to talk about the ‘basin’. On the other hand, τοῦ κρατῆρος 
is wanted to supplement βαπτισθῆναι in the words spoken by Tat. 
A genitive might be used with βαπτίζεσθαι, as with λούεσθαι. Cf. 
ἐβαπτίσαντο τοῦ νοός in ὃ 4. 

ἐὰν μὴ πρῶτον τὸ σῶμα μισήσῃς, . . . σεαυτὸν φιλῆσαι οὐ δύνασαι: 
φιλήσας δὲ σεαυτόν, νοῦν ἕξεις, Tat’s words, ‘I wish to be dipped 
in the basin’, mean ‘I wish to get vots’; and Hermes replies: ‘If 
you wish to get νοῦς, the way to do so is to hate your body, and 
love yourself’. τὸ σῶμα means the separate and narrowly limited 
self of the man who is sunk in matter; and σεαυτόν means ‘your 
true self’, i.e. the larger and higher self of the man who has risen 
above the limitations of the material world. Cf. Corp. XI. ii. 21a: 
ἐὰν δὲ κατακλείσῃς cou τὴν ψυχὴν ἐν τῷ σώματι κιτιλ. On the two 
_ meanings of φίλαυτος, see Ar. Z¢h. Vic. 9.8. The man whom the 
Hermetist describes as ‘loving himself’ corresponds to Aristotle’s 
σπουδαῖος, who is ready, if need be, to die for others, and by that 
yery fact, shows himself to be φίλαυτος in the sense that he seeks 
τὸ καλόν for himself. The Hermetist, however, was probably not 
thinking of the man who shows his φιλαυτία by unselfish action, 
but rather of the man who develops that which is best and highest 
‘in himself by religious meditation, and in that way seeks and finds 
his true good. 

Πῶς ταῦτα λέγεις ; ταῦτα means especially the paradoxical state- 
ment ‘if you do not first hate your body, you cannot love 
yourself’, 

ἡ αἵρεσις θατέρου καταλείπεται, The writer insists on man’s 
freedom of choice. Cf. Pl. Rep, το. 6178: οὐχ ὑμᾶς δαίμων 
λήξεται, GAN ὑμεῖς δαίμονα αἱρήσεσθε... . ἀρετὴ δὲ ἀδέσποτον᾽" ἣν 
τιμῶν καὶ ἀτιμάζων πλέον καὶ ἔλαττον αὐτῆς ἕκαστος ἕξει. αἰτία 
ἑλομένου" θεὸς ἀναίτιος. That passage was frequently referred to 
by later writers’ as a /ocus classicus on the subject of free will; and 

} See e.g. Porphyry περὶ τοῦ ἐφ᾽ ἡμῖν, Stob, τ. 8. 39, vol. ii, p. 163 W. 

2800-2 i 





146 CORPVS HERMETICVM 


the author of Corp. IV no doubt had it in mind. Cf. ὁ μὲν θεὸς 
ἀναίτιος in ὃ 8 a. 

οὐ γὰρ ἀμφότερα οἷόν τε καταλαβεῖν.---(οὐ γάρ ἐστιν ἀμφότερα ἐν 
οἷς τε ἡ ἐξαίρεσις καταλείπεται MSS.) You are free to choose either 
the one or the other (s¢, either τὰ θνητά, the illusory goods of the 
corporeal world, or τὰ θεῖα, the real goods of the incorporeal world), 
but you cannot have both. This must have been the writer's 
meaning, though it may be doubted in what words he expressed it. 
The phrase ἡ ἐξαίρεσις καταλείπεται is a doublet of ἡ αἵρεσις θατέρου 
καταλείπεται above, and has taken the place of the original ending 
of the sentence. 

τὸ δὲ ἕτερον ἐλαττωθὲν τὴν τοῦ ἑτέρου ἐφανέρωσεν ἐνέργειαν. When 
the body ‘ gets the worst of it’, and the man ceases to be influenced 
by the bodily πάθη, then τὸ θεῖον works, and the effects of its working 
become manifest in him ; and the reverse takes place when the body 
gets the upper hand. 

8 7. ((οὐ pdvov)) τὸν ἄνθρωπον ἀποσώζουσα, ἀλλὰ Kal Thy πρὸς (τὸν) 
θεὸν εὐσέβειαν ἐπιδεικνῦσα, (ἀποθεῶσαι. . . ἐπιδείκνυσιν MSS.) 
It would be a strange anticlimax to say that something ‘not only 
changes a man into a god, but also shows that he is pious’. We 
need two phrases which can stand in contrast with τὸν μὲν ἄνθρωπον 
ἀπώλεσεν, .. . εἰς (δὲ) τὸν θεὸν ἐπλημμέλησεν" and the opposite of 
ἀπολέσαι is σῶσαι. It may therefore be presumed that the author 
wrote ἀποσώζουσα. ‘The choice of the better not only ‘ brings the 
man off safe’ (from the evils which beset him who ‘loves the body’), 
but also entitles him to claim the merit of piety. If it merely saved 
him from misery, the αἵρεσις τοῦ κρείττονος might be called σύμφορος, 
but hardly καλή; but since it also shows him to be εὐσεβής, it is 
καλλίστη. 

οὐδὲν δὲ (ἧττον) εἰς τὸν θεὸν ἐπλημμέλησεν [ἢ τοῦτο μόνον]. What 
is wanted here, to match the words τὴν πρὸς τὸν θεὸν εὐσέβειαν 
ἐπιδεικνῦσα above, is a statement to the effect that the choice of the 
worse shows the man to be δυσσεβής. The meaning required may 
be obtained by writing οὐδὲν δὲ ἧττον ; and we may suppose that, 
after ἧττον had dropped out, some one tried to restore sense by adding 
ἢ τοῦτο μόνον. (οὐδὲν ἤ Occurs repeatedly in the Hermefica in the 
sense of οὐδὲν ἀλλ᾽ 7.) 

οὗτοι μόνον πομπεύουσιν ἐν τῷ κόσμῳ. If a man fails to recognize 
‘for what purpose he has been made’ (ἐπὶ τί γέγονεν, ὃ 4), and does 
not discharge the function which his Maker has assigned to him, 








LIBELLVS IV: §§ 6b-7 147 


he is offending against God. The life of such a man serves no 
good purpose; it is nothing but an unmeaning show; and his 
presence in the world is a mere hindrance to those who seek to live 
as God meant them to live. 

The writer speaks of πομπαί with evident dislike. What sort of 
‘processions’ was he thinking of? The πομπαί most frequently 
seen in the streets of Alexandria and other Egyptian towns must 
have been religious processions, more or less resembling the πομπή 
of Isis at Corinth which is described by Apuleius. The Hermetists 
in general may have taken little interest in the ceremonial of the 
established cults ; but we should hardly have expected one of them 
to speak of such things with positive contempt. The writer of 
Ascl, Lat. 111 would certainly not have spoken in this tone about 
a piece of religious ritual, and would not have said that it has no 
efficacy (οὐδὲν ἐνεργῆσαι δύναται) ; but it is possible that the writer 
of Corp. IV was more averse to the usages of the popular religion. 
At any rate, it is not the religious significance of the πομπή that he 
is here concerned with; he is thinking of it merely as a train of 
people passing through the streets ; and his point is that the persons 
who take part in the procession are led passively along (παραγόμενοι), 
and are not only doing no useful work themselves, but hindering 
other people from going about their business. To one who wanted 
only to be left in peace to live the contemplative life, the tumult 
of a city festival, culminating at the time when the procession was 
on its way, may well have been a mere annoyance. 

The word πομπή is similarly used by the alchemist Zosimus (i. 4 
Testim.; Reitzenstein Poim. p. 102): τοὺς τοιούτους δὲ ἀνθρώπους 

_ ὁ Ἑρμῆς ἐν τῷ περὶ φύσεων ἐκάλει dvoas, τῆς εἱμαρμένης μόνον ' ὄντας 
πομπάς, κιτιλ, Corp. IV was certainly known to Zosimus, since 
he speaks elsewhere of ‘dipping oneself in the Craser’; but it is 
not clear whether he is here referring to it, or to some other 
Hermetic document. In Corp. IV, Hermes does not indeed use 
the word ἄνοες, but he says that men of this sort are devoid of νοῦς, 
and also speaks of τὰ dodpara. But on the other hand he says 
nothing about εἱμαρμένη; and if Zosimus is referring to Corp. IV, 

_ he must himself have introduced the conception of εἱμαρμένη (i.e. 

the power by which τὰ σωματικά are governed) in giving his inter- 
pretation of its contents. Zosimus gives to the document of which 
' μόνους codd, : μόνον Reitz. 
? T.e. led passively along by Heimarmene. 
L 2 








148 CORPVS HERMETICVM 


he speaks the title Περὶ φύσεων (possibly Περὶ (τῶν δύο) φύσεων ὃ). 
This might be taken to mean either ‘concerning the two kinds of 
things’ (viz. σώματα and ἀσώματα), or ‘concerning the two kinds 
of men’ (viz. évvoes and dvoes); and understood in either of these 
senses, it would be a possible title for Corp. IV.’ 

Reitzenstein Poim. p. 102 says that the simile of the πομπή ‘is 
taken from Greek philosophy’; but I do not know to what philo- 
sophic writings he refers. The comparison of a πομπή is used in a 
different way by Epictetus, Diss. 4. τ. 104: οὐχὶ ἐκεῖνός (se. ὃ θεός) 
σε εἰσήγαγεν ; οὐχ ὡς θνητόν ; οὐχ ὡς μετὰ ὀλίγου σαρκιδίου ζήσοντα 
ἐπὶ γῆς, καὶ θεάσόμενον τὴν διοίκησιν αὐτοῦ, καὶ συμπομπεύσοντα αὐτῷ 
καὶ συνεορτάσοντα πρὸς ὀλίγον ; οὐ θέλεις οὖν, ἕως δέδοταί σοι θεασάμενος 
τὴν πομπὴν καὶ τὴν πανήγυριν, εἶτα, ὅταν σ᾽ ἐξάγῃ, πορεύεσθαι προσ- 
κυνήσας καὶ εὐχαριστήσας ὑπὲρ ὧν ἠκούσας καὶ εἶδες ; In that passage, 
the πομπή is a show exhibited to us for our entertainment.—Marcus 
Aurelius 7. 3 describes human life as πομπῆς xevorrovdia, This is 
a somewhat closer parallel; but the word πομπή must have had 
different associations for a Roman emperor. 

§ 8a. ὁ μὲν θεὸς ἀναίτιος, ἡμεῖς δὲ αἴτιοι τῶν κακῶν, ταῦτα προκρίνοντες 
τῶν ἀγαθῶν. The germ of this thought is as old as Homer. In Οἱ. 
1. 32 sgg., Zeus says οἷον δή νυ θεοὺς βροτοὶ αἰτιόωνται. | ἐξ ἡμέων γάρ 
φασι κάκ᾽ ἔμμεναι" οἱ δὲ καὶ αὐτοὶ | σφῇσιν ἀτασθαλίῃσιν ὑπὲρ μόρον 
ἄλγε᾽ ἔχουσιν. But there can be little doubt that the source from 
which the Hermetist got it was Pl. Rep. το. 617 E. Compare also Pl. 
Tim. 42D, where the Demiurgus explains to the new-made souls 
the laws under which they are to live ; διαθεσμοθετήσας δὲ πάντα αὐτοῖς 
ταῦτα, ἵνα τῆς ἔπειτα εἴη κακίας ἑκάστων ἀναίτιος, ἔσπειρε x... 
Rep. 2. 3196: τῶν δὲ κακῶν ἄλλ᾽ ἅττα δεῖ ζητεῖν τὰ αἴτια, ἀλλ᾽ οὐ 
τὸν θεόν. 

8.8. (.. ὃ ὁρᾷς... πόσα ἡμᾶς δεῖ σώματα... διεξελθεῖν. The 
thought expressed in this passage may be connected with that of the 
preceding paragraph in this way: ‘in order to draw near to God, 
who is incorporeal, we must reject all that is corporeal; we must 
therefore rise above the corporeal Kosmos,’ But in the traditional 
text, the connexion is not apparent; it seems necessary therefore 
to assume a lacuna before ὁρᾷς. 

When he says that ‘we must pass through many bodies in 
succession ’, the writer does not mean that we must be many times 


1 In IV. 6b (δύο γὰρ ὄντων τῶν ὄντων, σώματος Kat ἀσωμάτου), one might very 
well read οὐσῶν τῶν φύσεων in place of ὄντων τῶν ὄντων, 





























LIBELLVS IV: §§ 7-8b 149 


incarnated. He is speaking of men who are still living on earth, 
not of the destiny of the soul after death ; and his meaning is that 
we must ascend im ¢hought to the heavens, and beyond them, to reach 
‘the incorporeal’, which here, as often, is spoken of as if it were 
situated in extracosmic space. Cf. § 5: πάντα ἐμπεριλαβόντες τῷ 
ἑαυτῶν vol, ... τὰ ἐν οὐρανῷ, καὶ εἴ τί ἐστιν ὑπὲρ οὐρανόν. The many 
‘bodies’ which the mind must successively traverse in its upward 
course are, first, the atmosphere, (or perhaps a lower and a higher 
stratum of the atmosphere, as in the system of Posidonius), and 
then, the several subdivisions of the region of fire, namely, the 
seven planet-spheres, and the sphere of the fixed stars. Compare 
Corp. XI. ii. 19, where the ascent of the ψυχή (1. 6. the mind or 
thought) is similarly described. 

καὶ πόσους χοροὺς δαιμόνων [| |] καὶ δρόμους ἀστέρων. This is 
another way of describing the same ascent through successive strata 
of matter. ‘The daemons are the inhabitants of the atmosphere ; 
the planets and fixed stars are the inhabitants of the region of fire. 
(.. + ἀγδιάβατον γὰρ τὸ ἀγαθόν, καὶ ἀπέραντον. The region of τὸ 
ἀσώματον, which is above the highest heaven, and extends beyond 
it without limit, is filled with the Good. (Cf. § 5, τοσοῦτον ἑαυτοὺς 
ὑψώσαντες εἶδον τὸ ἀγαθόν.) When you have once entered that region, 
you will never come to the end of it, or reach its further boundary ; 
you may continue your ascent for ever, and there will still be more 
of the Good above you. 
Here again, the connexion of the thought with what precedes 
can be guessed without difficulty ; but the writer must have expressed 
it, and some words or sentences must therefore have been lost before 
ἀδιάβατον. 
καὶ ἀτελές, αὑτῷ δὲ καὶ ἄναρχον, ἡμῖν δὲ δοκοῦν ἀρχὴν ἔχειν τὴν γνῶσιν. 
The Good is correlative to God, if not identical with God (see Corp. 
II, Corp. V1, and Corp. X); and ‘for itself’, or in itself, it is with- 
out end and without beginning, even as God is. ‘For us’ also 
(ἡμῖν, as opposed to ἑαυτῷ or ἁπλῶς), it is without end; that is to 
say, the man who has once attained to it will continue to enjoy the 
possession of it for ever. But ‘ for us’ it is not without beginning. 
The unilluminated man is not aware of its existence. It is only when 
aman gets gnosis that the eternally existent Good presents itself to 
his consciousness ; and from his point of view, the existence of the 
Good appears to begin at the moment when he first becomes 
conscious of it. 


150 CORPVS HERMETICVM 


§ 9. πάνυ γάρ ἐστι δύσκολον (σκολιόν MSS.). For δύσκολον, cf. Zo. 
Mare. το. 24: πῶς δύσκολόν ἐστιν εἰς τὴν βασιλείαν τοῦ θεοῦ εἰσελθεῖν. 

ἐπὶ τὰ παλαιὰ καὶ ἀρχαῖα ἀνακάμπτειν. The συνήθη καὶ παρόντα are 
τὰ σωματικά (Plato’s αἰσθητά), to which we have grown accustomed 
since our incarnation ; the παλαιὰ καὶ ἀρχαῖα are τὰ ἀσώματα (Plato’s 
νοητά), i.e. the things of the higher world in which we lived before 
we were ‘sent down’ to earth. 

τὰ δὲ ἀφανῆ δυσπιστίαν ποιεῖ. The fact that these things are ἀφανῇ 
makes it difficult to believe in their existence. The words ἀφανής 
and φανερός are here employed as in Οὐ. V. 

φανερώτερα δέ ἐστι τὰ κακά, The κακά are the corporeal things 
which seem to us to be goods, but are really evils. Cf. Corp. VI. 
2b-4a and 6, 

τὸ δὲ ἀγαθὸν... πᾶσιν ἀνόμοιον. This passage is meaningless in 
the MSS. ; I have put a meaning into it by transposing ἀδύνατον... 
φανῆναι, and inserting ὅτι. If the words τὸ δὲ ἀγαθὸν ἀφανὲς τοῖς 
φανεροῖς are sound, they must be explained in accordance with the 
statement ἀδύνατον yap ἀσώματον σώματι φανῆναι, and τὰ φανερά 
must here be taken to mean our bodily organs of sense, which are 
themselves perceptible by sense. We cannot see the Good with 
our bodily eyes; for the Good is incorporeal, and that which is 
incorporeal cannot be seen by that which is corporeal. 

διὰ τοῦτο, (ὅτι) αὑτῷ μέν ἐστιν ὅμοιον, τοῖς δὲ ἄλλοις πᾶσιν ἀνόμοιον. 
Cf. § 1b, as emended: τοιοῦτο γάρ ἐστι τὸ ἀσώματον, οὐχ .. . δρατόν, 
. +. οὐδὲ ἄλλῳ τινὶ ὅμοιον.' It is to be presumed that in § 9, as well as 
in ὃ τ Ὁ, the subject is τὸ ἀσώματον. When the writer speaks of 
ὅμοιον and ἀνόμοιον, he is thinking of the saying that ‘like is known 
by like’. (Cf. Corp. XI. ii, 20b: τὸ yap ὅμοιον τῷ ὁμοίῳ νοητόν. Ar. 
De an. τ. 2, 404 Ὁ 17: γινώσκεσθαι yap τῷ ὁμοίῳ τὸ ὅμοιον. Philo- 
laus, in Sext. Emp. Math. 7. 92: ὑπὸ τοῦ ὁμοίου τὸ ὅμοιον καταλαμ- 
βάνεσθαι πέφυκεν) That which is ἀσώματον is ‘unlike’ σῶμα, and 
therefore cannot be apprehended by the σωματικαὶ αἰσθήσεις; but it 
can be apprehended by the νοῦς in man, which is itself ἀσώματος ; 
for all that is ἀσώματον is αὑτῷ ὅμοιον, or in other words, all ἀσώματα 
are ἀλλήλοις ὅμοια. 

[αὕτη διαφορὰ... πρὸς τὸ ὅμοιον.) I can make nothing of this; 
and it seems best to assume that it is a marginal note. 


ΠΑ similar phrase occurs in a sentence attributed to Philolaus in Philo De opif. 
mundi 33. 100, Cohn I, p. 34: ἐστι γὰρ ἡγεμὼν καὶ ἄρχων ἁπάντων θεὺς εἷς, ἀεὶ ὧν, 
μόνιμος, ἀκίνητος, αὐτὸς αὑτῷ ὅμοιος, ἕτερος τῶν ἄλλων. 








LIBELLVS IV: δὲ 9-10 151 


§10. (...) [{ἡ γὰρ μονὰς... καὶ pital] κιτιλ, The breach of con- 
tinuity at the beginning of § 10 can be accounted for only by 
supposing that a connecting passage has been lost.’ 

The text of ὃ ro is in confusion; and the best way of restoring 
order seems to be to assume that the writer first said that a certain 
thing is the ἀρχή of all things, and then illustrated his meaning by 
the comparison of the arithmetical unit, which is the ἀρχή of all 
numbers. If so, the words ἣ yap μονάς are out of place at the 
beginning of the paragraph. Moreover, the pointlessness of the 
repetition οὖσα ἀρχὴ καὶ pila... ds ἂν ῥίζα καὶ ἀρχή shows that 
there is something wrong in the first sentence. I have therefore 
removed the words ἡ yap μονάς, πάντων οὖσα ῥίζα καὶ ἀρχή, and 
inserted them below, where they fit in well. But what is the lost 
subject for which ἡ μονάς has been substituted? What is it that is 
here said to be the ἀρχή of all things? It might be τὸ ἀγαθόν, or 
τὸ θεῖον, or ὁ θεός. But in ὃ ττ Ὁ, we read αὕτη ca. . . ὑπογέγραπται 
τοῦ θεοῦ εἰκών' and if these words were meant to refer to §§ ro, 118, 
it would seem that the lost subject of ὃ τὸ iit, must be 6 θεός. 
Compare Hermigpus (Kroll and Viereck) τὶ 18. 135: ἡ δὲ μονὰς 
ἐν μὲν τοῖς ἀριθμοῖς ἀρχὴ καὶ ῥίζα τις ὑπόκειται, ἐν δὲ τοῖς νοητοῖς ὃ Geds, 
ἀφ᾽ οὗ καθάπερ ἐκ πηγῆς ἐρρύη τὰ ὄντα. 

ἐξ οὐδενὸς ἀλλ᾽ ἢ [ἐξ] αὑτῆς. It is difficult to see any definite 
meaning in the statement that a thing ‘has arisen out of itself’, or 
‘has been generated by itself’; but to the Hermetists, and other 
writers of their time, the phrase appeared to express an important 
truth. The epithet αὐτογέννητος, ‘generated by himself’, was fre- 
quently applied to God, and seems to have been regarded as equiva- 
lent to ἀγέννητος, ‘without beginning’. See dsc/. Lat. 11. 14b: ‘ex 
se nata sunt’. αὐτογενής occurs in the same sense in Pseudo-Philolaus 
(Diels Vorsokr. p. 249): ἀριθμὸν εἶναι τῆς τῶν κοσμικῶν αἰωνίας δια- 
μονῆς κρατιστεύοισαν καὶ αὐτογενῆ (‘ unerschaffene’ Diels) συνοχήν. 

μονάδι οὖν (ἔοικεν ὁ θεός).---(μονὰς οὖν ἀρχή (or ἡ ἀρχή), codd. Corp. : 
μονὰς οὖσα οὖν ἀρχή codd. 5100.) If my reconstruction of the 
passage is correct, this is the first mention of the monad; and we 
must suppose that the writer here wrote something to the effect that _ 
‘God (gua ἀρχή) is like the monad’. 

The use of the μονάς as an εἰκών of the ‘uncaused cause’ of all 
things was, no doubt, suggested to the writer by the arithmetical 


1 Or else, that 10-11 Ὁ is a fragment of another document, and has been appended 
to Corp, TV by error. 








184 CORPVS HERMETICVM 


speculations of Pythagoreans and Pythagorizing Platonists. But the 
Hermetist, if I have interpreted him rightly, uses the arithmetical 
unit merely as an ‘image’ or illustration, by means of which the 
learner may be helped to comprehend the nature of the ἀρχὴ πάντων ; 
he does not identify it with the ἀρχὴ πάντων itself. He does not 
say, as some Platonists did, that the μονάς ἧς God, or that God ἐς 
the μονάς, but only that the relation of God to things is axalogous to 
the relation of the unit to numbers. 

Plato spoke much of τὸ ἕν in contrast to τὰ πολλά ; but he did not, 
in his written dialogues at least, use the word μονάς with any special 
significance. But Plato’s pupils and successors, Speusippus and 
Xenocrates, adopted from Pythagorean sources a sort of arithmetical 
theology ;' and we are told that Xenocrates said that the μονάς is 
the supreme God. Aetius, Diels Doxogr. p. 304: Ἐενοκράτης ... τὴν 
μονάδα καὶ τὴν δυάδα θεούς, τὴν μὲν ὡς ἄρρενα, πατρὸς ἔχουσαν τάξιν, 
ἐν οὐρανῷ βασιλεύουσαν, ἥντινα προσαγορεύει καὶ Ζῆνα καὶ περιττὸν καὶ 
νοῦν, ὅστις ἐστὶν αὐτῷ πρῶτος θεός: τὴν δ᾽ ὡς θήλειαν, μητρὸς θεῶν δίκην, 
τῆς ὑπὸ τὸν οὐρανὸν λήξεως ἡγουμένην, ἥτις ἐστὶν αὐτῷ ψυχὴ τοῦ παντός. 
From the time of Xenocrates onward, there are frequent instances 
of this deification of the number one. ‘Pythagoras’, in Aetius 
(Doxogr. p. 281): τὴν μονάδα καὶ τὴν ἀόριστον δυάδα (τίθησιν) ἐν ταῖς 
ἀρχαῖς" σπεύδει δὲ αὐτῷ τῶν ἀρχῶν ἡ μὲν (τε. ἦ μονὰς) ἐπὶ τὸ ποιητικὸν 
αἴτιον καὶ εἰδικόν, ὅπερ ἐστι νοῦς, ὁ θεός, ἡ δὲ (sc. ἡ ἀόριστος δυὰς) ἐπὶ τὸ 
παθητικόν τε καὶ ὑλικόν, ὅπερ ἐστὶν ὃ ὁρατὸς κόσμος. .. - νοῦς μὲν οὖν 
ἡ μονάς ἐστιν κιτιλ. Aetius, Doxogr. p. 302: Πυθαγόρας τῶν ἀρχῶν 
τὴν μονάδα θεὸν καὶ τἀγαθόν, ἥτις ἐστὶν ἡ τοῦ ἑνὸς φύσις, αὐτὸς 6 νοῦς, 
καὶ τὴν ἀόριστον δυάδα καὶ τὸ κακόν, περὶ ἦν ἐστι τὸ ὑλικὸν πλῆθος, (This 
passage is evidently corrupt ; perhaps the original text was something 
like this: Tl, ἀρχὰς τὴν μονάδα, ἥτις ἐστὶν 6 νοῦς καὶ αὐτὸς 6 θεὸς Kat τά- 
γαθόν, καὶ τὴν ἀόριστον δυάδα, περὶ ἦν ἐστι τὸ ὑλικὸν πλῆθος καὶ τὸ κακόν.) 
Hippol. Ref. haer. τ. 2 (Diels Doxogr. p. 555): Pythagoras μονάδα μὲν 
εἶναι ἀπεφήνατο τὸν θεόν. Compare the ‘ Egyptian’ (i.e, Pythagorean) 
doctrine in Hippol. 2. 4. 43: ἔφασαν τὸν θεὸν εἶναι μονάδα ἀδιαίρετον καὶ 
αὐτὴν ἑαυτὴν γεννῶσαν, καὶ ἐξ αὐτῆς τὰ πάντα κατεσκευάσθαι. αὐτὴ γάρ, 
φησίν, ἀγέννητος οὖσα, τοὺς ἑξῆς ἀριθμοὺς γεννᾷ οἷον ἐφ᾽ ἑαυτὴν ἡ μονὰς 
ἐπιπροστεθεῖσα γεννᾷ τὴν δυάδα, καὶ ὁμοίως ἐπιπροστιθεμένη γεννᾷ τὴν 


1 It appears from Aristotle’s reports of Plato’s ‘ unwritten’ teaching that Plato 
himself, in his old age, went some way in this direction; and the metaphysics of 
his earlier successors contained ‘a large admixture of arithmetical mysticism’ 
(Zeller, Plato, Eng. tr. p. 565). 








LIBELLVS IV: § τὸ 153 


τριάδα καὶ τετράδα μέχρι τῆς δεκάδος. Synesius, ym. 1.52 (Migne 66. 
1589 A): ὃ μέν, αὐτόσσυτος ᾿ ἀρχά, | ταμίας πατήρ τε {πλάντων," || ἀλό- 
xevtos,® ὑψιθώκων | ὑπὲρ οὐρανοῦ καρήνων, || ἀλύτῳ κύδεϊ γαίων, | θεὸς 
ἔμπεδος θαάσσει, || ἑνοτήτων ἑνὰς ἁγνὴ | μονάδων μονάς τε πρώτη, || 
Γἁπλοτήτας ἀκροτήτων | ἑνώσασα!" " καὶ τεκοῦσα || ὑπερουσίοις λοχείαις" ὅ]} 
ὅθεν αὐτὴ προθοροῦσα | Γδιὰ πρωτόσπορον εἶδος" || μονάς, ἄρρητα χυ- 
θεῖσα, | τρικορύμβον ἔσχεν ἀλκάν" "}} ὑπερούσιος δὲ maya  στέφεται καλ- 
λεῖ παίδων || ἀπὸ κέντρου τε θορόντων | περὶ κέντρον τε ῥυέντων. Synes. 
Hymn. 2. 69: μέγα χαῖρε, ῥίζα κόσμου, | μέγα χαῖρε, κέντρον ὄντων, | 
μονὰς ἀμβρότων ἀριθμῶν. Jb. 3. τὴτ : παγὰ παγῶν, [ἀρχῶν ἀρχά,] ῥιζῶν 
ῥίζα, | μονὰς εἶ μονάδων, ἀριθμῶν Γἀριθμός.17 76. 4.60: μονὰς ὦ μονά- 
δων, πάτερ ὦ πατέρων, | ἀρχῶν ἀρχά, παγῶν παγά, κ-τ.λ. 

πάντα ἀριθμὸν ἐμπεριέχει, ὑπὸ μηδενὸς ἐμπεριεχομένη. The unit 
‘contains in itself every number, and is contained in no number’. 
In the obvious sense of the words, this is the reverse of the truth; 
the number one does not contain the number three, and is contained 
in the number three. But the writer probably meant that the unit 
contains the other numbers émplicitly, or in germ, i.e. that they can 
be developed out of it (by a series of additions), but it cannot be 
developed out of them (by the same process). 

πάντα ἀριθμὸν γεννᾷ. Cf. Corp. XIL ii. 15 a: αἱ δὲ ἑνάδες τὸν ἀριθμὸν 
γεννῶσι καὶ αὔξουσι. Pseudo-Plutarch, Stob. 1 (Procem.) 2, vol. i, 
Ρ. τό W.: ἡ μονὰς γονὴ ὑπὸ Τιμαίου τοῦ Λοκροῦ προσαγορεύεται, ὡς 
ἄρχουσα τῆς τῶν ἀριθμῶν γενέσεως. Just as we say that ‘one and one 
make two’, the Greeks were accustomed to say that the unit generates 
(γεννᾷ) the other numbers, meaning by this that each number is 
produced by adding a unit to the preceding number (1+1 = 2, 
2+1= 3, &c.). It was probably, in part at least, through this use 
of the word γεννᾶν, that some of the Pythagoreans and Platonists 
were led to hypostatize the arithmetical unit, and ascribe to it 
a demiurgic power ;* and applying to things in general the principle 


1 = αὐτογέννητος, 3. ὄντων Migne, 3 = ἀγέννητος. 

* Perhaps ἁπλοτήτος ἀκρότητας γονόωσα. 

5 Cf. 2b. 2. 63: σὺ πατήρ, σὺ δ᾽ ἐσσὶ μάτηρ. 

& The was ἢ of this ἐς it can be said to have a meaning) appears to be that 
the supreme God is a μονὰς μονάδων, or προμονάς, from which issues a μονάς which 
is also a — (i.e. the Christian — Cf. Synes. Hymn. 3. 210: byve ce, 
τριάς" μονὰς el, τριὰς dv: τριὰς εἶ, μονὰς ὦν. 

7 Perhaps ἀριθμῶν ἀρχά. 

® The earlier Pythagoreans probably meant by ‘the monas’, not the abstract 
arithmetical unit, but a point situated in space; and some of them, in their 
cosmogonic speculations, began by positing such a moras in the midst of τὸ ἄπειρον, 
and ascribing generative or Secnlerpio activity to it. 


154 CORPVS HERMETICVM 




























which they thought they had discovered in the relations of numbers ᾿ 
they identified ‘the Monad’ with God, the πάντων γεννητής. But 
from this confusion of thought the writer of Corp. IV seems to have 
kept himself free. 

δ ira. [καὶ τὸ μὲν αὐξητὸν... τὴν μονάδα χωρῆσαι.) This passage is 
omitted by Stobaeus; and it is probably a note inserted in the 
Corpus-text by some reader. The words τὸ μὲν αὐξητὸν αὐξάνεται 
ἀπὸ τῆς μονάδος mean that the numbers are produced from the unit 
by successive additions, This is merely another way of saying 
the unit πάντα ἀριθμὸν γεννᾷς But when we are told that | 
numbers ‘increase from’ the unit, it might be thought to follow 
since they are all greater than the unit, any one of them would 
more fit than the unit to serve as a symbol of God ; and the write 
object seems to have been to guard against this inference. ‘It 
true’, he says, ‘that the number three, for instance, is greater 
the unit; yet it is inferior to the unit; and its inferiority is sh 
in this, that it is incapable of containing the unit, whereas the r 
can and does contain the number three.’ The verb χωρεῖν her 
equivalent to ἐμπεριέχειν above, 

§ 1b. αὕτη oo... ὑπογέγραπται τοῦ θεοῦ εἰκών. Applying 
analogy of the numerical unit to God, we may infer from what 
been said about the unit (1) that God πάντα ἐμπεριέχει and 3 
οὐδενὸς ἐμπεριέχεται, (2) that God πάντα γεννᾷ and ὑπ᾽ οὐδενὸ i 
and (3) that God is τέλειος, ἀδιαίρετος, ἀναύξητος καὶ ἀμείωτος, Where: 
τὰ ὑπὸ τοῦ θεοῦ γεννώμενα are ἀτελῆ, διαιρετά, αὐξητὰ καὶ μειωτά. 

τοῖς τῆς καρδίας ὀφθαλμοῖς. καρδία, as here used, corresponds to 
the νοῦς of Corp, V. 2, τοῖς τοῦ νοῦ ὀφθαλμοῖς. ἥ 

αὐτή σε ἡ [εἰκὼν] (θέαν ὁδηγήσει. If we read ἡ εἰκών, it must b 
taken to mean ἡ μονάς, to which the preceding words (αὕτη σοι. 
ὑπογέγραπται τοῦ θεοῦ εἰκών) refer ; and Hermes must be unders' 
to say that the arithmetical unit, or the comparison of God to 
arithmetical unit, ‘ will guide you on your upward way’, But 
is hardly satisfactory. A better sense may be got by writing θέα 
and taking it to refer to εἰ θεάσῃ above. 

ἔχει γάρ τι ἴδιον Γὴ θέα]: τοὺς φθάσαντας θεάσασθαι κατέχει, καὶ 
ἀνέλκει καθάπερ φασὶν ἡ Μαγνῆτις λίθος τὸν σίδηρον. The sub 
οἵ ἔχει, κατέχει, and ἀνέλκει, which is the same as the object 
θεάσασθαι, can hardly have been ἡ θέα. Something like τὸ θεῖ 
would serve the purpose. 

κατέχεσθαι means ‘to be possessed’ by a deity. Compare Pl. Jon 







































LIBELLVS IV: δὲ 1o-11b 155 


533 Ὁ: ἔστι δὲ τοῦτο τέχνη μὲν οὐκ ὃν παρά σοι, . . . θεία δὲ δύναμις, 
ἥ σε κινεῖ, ὥσπερ ἐν τῇ λίθῳ ἣν Εὐριπίδης μὲν Μαγνῆτιν ὠνόμασεν. . . . 
πάντες γὰρ ol... ποιηταὶ... ἔνθεοι ὄντες καὶ κατεχόμενοι κιτιλ. 
As τὸ κατέχεσθαι and ἡ Μαγνῆτις λίθος are spoken of together both 
in the Jon and in Corp. IV, it is probable that the thought was 
suggested to the Hermetist by the passage in the Jon, For the 
comparison of the magnet, cf. Porphyr. De adst. 4. 20: προσπεφυκὼς 


τῷ θεῷ μᾶλλον ἢ σίδηρος τῷ μάγνητι. 


. ieasnai ν 


Contents 


God is unseen, and ever-existent. He brings all things into being ; 
but he himself is’not brought into being. Coming into being means 
appearing as a thing perceived by sense, and God causes all things 
thus to appear ; but he himself does not thus appear ; he is unseen, 
or hidden. § 1b. é 
Yet, inasmuch as he causes all things to appear, he can be seen 
in all things ; but he can be seen by thought alone, and not with 
the bodily eyes. Seeing the Kosmos with your eyes, you can 
apprehend by thought Him of whom the Kosmos is an image. § 2. 
The heavenly bodies observe order in their movements ; and 
air, sea, and earth are likewise ordered. Now where there is order, 
there must be one who has established the order ; there must there- 
fore be a Maker and Master of all these. (It is true that there 
are some things which are out of order; but these things also 
are subject to the Master, and will be brought to order by him.) 
δὲ 3, 4- 
If you could see all parts of the Kosmos at one view, you 
would see everywhere the hidden God manifested through his 
works. ὃ 5. 
You can also see him in all mortal organisms, For instance, 
the structure of the human body shows evident marks of design ; 
there must therefore be a Craftsman who made it. §§ 6-8. 
All things then have been made or generated by the one God. 
He could not exist if he were not always and everywhere producing 
things. He is all things that now are, and all things that are to be 
hereafter. ὃ 9. 


a oe se ας ee ee ΝΑ 


156 CORPVS HERMETICVM 


God, though hidden, is yet manifest ; for he is all things. ὃ roa. 

How can I worship Thee? Thou art everywhere; all things are 
Thine ; Thou art in all times alike; Thou art the author of all, 
I cannot do or say anything by my own power; for I am not 
other than Thou. There is nothing that Thou art not. §§ rob, rr. 

Thou art Mind, and Father, and God, and Good. ὃ 11 jin. 


Sources. The distinction between τὸ ἀφανές and τὸ φανερόν corre- 
sponds to the Platonic distinction between τὸ νοητόν and τὸ αἰσθητόν. 
But the terms ἀφανές and φανερόν are not thus used by Plato; 
the writer must therefore have got them from some other source; 
and his use of these terms may possibly be due to Egyptian 
influence. 

In the description of the human body (§ 6), the influence of the 
Timaeus may perhaps be recognized in the list of the internal organs, 
and especially in the words ὀχετεύσας and σηραγγώσας. 

In the argument that the structure of the human body shows 
design, the writer handles in a cursory and superficial way a topic 
on which the Stoics were accustomed to dilate; see e.g. Οἷς, at. 
deor. 2. 134-146 (probably from Posidonius). The remark that the 
Demiurgus has concealed the unseemly parts of the body may be 
traced back to Panaetius. 

The term φαντασία (§ 1b) has been adopted either from the 
Aristotelians or from the Stoics, but probably from the latter. 

When the writer of Corp. V says that God is the ‘maker’ and 
‘father’ of all-things, he is using the language of the Zimaeus. But 
he also says that God ‘is’ all things. The latter statement, which 
is hardly consistent with the former, must have been derived from 
a different source. It might perhaps be accounted for as a develop- 
ment of Stoic theology ; but it may also have been suggested by 
the diction of hymns used in the worship of the Egyptian gods, 
The phrases καὶ τὰ ὄντα καὶ τὰ μὴ ὄντα (ὃ 9), and τὸ γενόμενον, τὸ μὴ 
γενόμενον (§ rt), as here employed, may perhaps be of Egyptian 
origin. In the concluding hymn, the worshipper’s denial that he 
is other than God (ὡς ἄλλος ὧν ;) is in accordance with the distinctive 
character of Egyptian religion. 

A sign of Jewish influence may perhaps be seen in the statement 
that God is the τόπος of all things (§ 10 b); and possibly also in the 
use of ὃ κύριος as a name of God (§ 2). 

The document shows no trace of Christian influence. 





LIBELLVS V: §1a 157 

































Date. There is little evidence of date in Corp. V, except the 
intermixture of Stoic conceptions with Platonism, which shows that 
this document, like the Hermezica in general, cannot be earlier than the 
first century B.c. It appears from the introductory words that it was 
one of the διεξοδικοὶ λόγοι addressed to Tat ; and these were presum- 
ably later than the yevixot λόγοι. It may therefore be reasonably 
conjectured that Οὐ. V was written in the third century A. Ὁ, 


Title. ὅτι ἀφανὴς (. . . 6) θεὸς φανερώτατός ἐστι. In ὃ 1b, the 
writer asserts that God is ἀφανής ; in the rest of the document, he 
asserts that God is φανερώτατος. On the assumption that the 
heading referred to the contents of § 2 sgg. only, sense might be 
restored by striking out ἀφανής. If it referred to ὃ σ Ὁ also, the 
meaning required might be got by writing ὅτι (καὶ) ἀφανὴς (ὃ) θεὸς 
(cat) φανερώτατός ἐστι" or ὅτι (καίπερ) ἀφανὴς (ὧν (or εἶναι δοκῶν) 
ὁ) θεὸς φανερώτατός ἐστι" or ὅτι (πὴ μὲν) ἀφανὴς (6) θεός, (πὴ δὲ 
φανερώτατός ἐστι. 

§1a. καὶ τόνδε σοι τὸν λόγον, ὦ Τάτ, διεξελεύσομαι, The verb 
διεξέρχεσθαι corresponds to the substantive διέξοδος ; it is therefore 
probable that this document was one of the series known as οἱ πρὸς 
Tar διεξοδικοὶ λόγοι, and that at least one other λόγος preceded it 
in that series. 

ὅπως μὴ ἀμύητος ἧς τοῦ κρείττονος θεοῦ ὀνόματος. The pupil is to 
be ‘initiated’; that is, the ρημσσὶς which this discourse is to reveal 
to him is spoken of as a μυστήριον. But it is a ‘mystery’ only in 
a metaphorical sense. Sacramental ritual, which was the essence 
of the Greek mystery-cults, is wholly absent; and the gvosis is 
imparted to the pupil by oral instruction only. The term ἀμύητος 
may be taken as implying, firstly, that the gvosis has hitherto been 
known only to a few (and possibly, that those to whom it is known 
ought to reveal it only to the few who are worthy to receive the 
revelation) ; and secondly, that he to whom it is revealed is thereby 
brought into communion with the deity concerned,—that is, in this 
case, with the supreme God. Cf. Ascd. Laz. III 19a, ‘tibi . 
divina nudo mysteria’; and see note on Corp. I. 16. 

τοῦ κρείττονος θεοῦ ὀνόματος, if that is the right reading,’ must be 
the genitive of 6 κρείττων θεοῦ ὀνόματος, ‘He who is mightier than 
1 The phrase is obscure; the author’s meaning might be more clearly expressed 


by writing τοῦ κρείττονος πάντων ὀνομάτων here, and ὁ παντὸς ὀνόματος κρείττων in 
§ toa, 


τη8 CORPVS HERMETICVM 


the name eds’, i. 6. too great to be rightly called θεός. See ὃ toa 
and 9 iit.; and compare Asc/. Lat. III. 20a. The word θεός is 
applied to many subordinate beings; it is inadequate to describe 
the supreme and all-inclusive Being. The writer subsequently uses 
the name θεός (δ 7 yin., ὃ 11 fin.), as well as others (5 κύριος, ὁ πατήρ, 
&c.); but he holds that the supreme Being is, strictly speaking, 
either παντώνυμος ordvevepos (ὃ roa). Cf. Zac. VI. 19: ὃ θεός, 
μᾶλλον δὲ τὸ μεῖζόν τι ὃν Γτοῦ θεοῦ τὸ ὄνομα]. 

τὸ δοκοῦν τοῖς πολλοῖς ἀφανές. The ἀφανές of which this writer 
speaks is the ἀόρατον or ἀειδές (i. €. νοητόν) of Plato. God is ἀφανής — 
that is, he is not directly apprehensible by the senses. But the | 
word ἀφανής is not employed in this connexion by Plato; and it-is 
possible that the author of Corp. V was influenced in his choice 
of the term by language used in the Egyptian cults. ‘ According 
to the received explanation in the time of the New Kingdom, the 
name of the God Amen signifies “ The Hidden One”’ (Wiedemann, 
Rel. of the Ancient Egyptians, Eng. tr. p. 108). Brugsch, Rel. und — 
Myth. p. 97, quotes from Egyptian documents : ‘God is hidden, and 
his form is known to no man.” ‘No one has searched out his 
likeness.’ ‘He is hidden to gods and men,’ ‘He is a secret for 
his creatures,’ 

In the system attributed by Hippolytus to Simon Magus, the 
terms xpurrdv’ and φανερόν were used as ἀφανές and φανερόν are 
used in Corp. V. Hippol. Ref haer. 6. 9: ἔστι δὲ τοῦτο (sc. τὸ κρυπτὸν 
καὶ τὸ φανερὸν) ὅπερ... Πλάτων νοητὸν καὶ αἰσθητὸν (καλεῖ). . .. 
καθόλου δὲ [ἐστιν] εἰπεῖν, πάντων τῶν ὄντων, αἰσθητῶν τε καὶ νοητῶν, 
ὧν (6 Σίμων) κρυφίων καὶ φανερῶν προσαγορεύει, κιτιλ. 

§ Ib. πᾶν γὰρ τὸ φαινόμενον γεννητόν. . , τὸ δὲ ἀφανὲς ἀεὶ ἔστι, 
To this writer, τὸ φανῆναι and τὸ γενέσθαι are equivalents, The 
things of the sensible world have no substantive existence ; they are 
merely φαινόμενα. And they ‘appear’ only for a time; it is the 
‘hidden’ or ‘unseen’ alone that ‘ exists everlastingly’.?. The thought 
is derived from Plato, though the terms used to express it are not 
those which Plato commonly employed. As here stated, the 
doctrine resembles Berkeley’s idealism. In the world of sense, esse 
is percipi. There are no really existent ‘external objects’; there 
is nothing but perceptions (φαντασίαι), and God, who causes the 


1 Cf. ἔκρυψας, Corp. V. 11. 
? Cf, Paul, 2 Cor, 4. 18: μὴ σκοπούντων ἡμῶν τὰ βλεπύμενα, ἀλλὰ τὰ μὴ βλεπό- 
μενα" τὰ γὰρ βλεπόμενα πρύσκαιρα, τὰ δὲ μὴ βλεπόμενα αἰώνια. 








LIBELLVS V: ξξ ta,1b 159 


perceptions.’ Cf. Herm. ap. Stob. Zxc. II A. 18: τὸ ψεῦδός (i.e. 
the sensible world) φημι τῆς ἀληθείας (i. 6. τοῦ θεοῦ) ἐνέργημα εἶναι. 

αὐτὸς ἀφανὴς dv. Here we find the writer speaking no longer of 
τὸ ἀφανές in the neuter, but of 6 ἀφανής (θεός) in the masculine. 
Some words in which the transition from τὸ ἀφανές to ὁ ἀφανής was 
made have probably been lost. 

οὐκ αὐτὸς γεννώμενος ἐν φαντασίᾳ. φαντασία is a technical term of 
the Aristotelian and Stoic* theory of cognition. It signifies the 
mental image which results from the action of an object on the 
bodily sense-organs, or the process by which this mental image is 
produced. Aetius (Diels Doxogr. p. 401) gives Chrysippus’s defini- 
tion of φαντασία as follows: φαντασία... ἐστὶ πάθος ἐν τῇ ψυχῇ 
γιγνόμενον, ἐνδεικνύμενον ἐν αὑτῷ καὶ τὸ πεποιηκός" οἷον ἐπειδὰν δι᾿ ὄψεως 
θεωρῶμεν τὸ λευκόν, ἔστι πάθος τὸ ἐγγεγενημένον διὰ τῆς ὁράσεως ἐν 
τῇ ψυχῇ" καὶ (κατὰ) τοῦτο τὸ πάθος εἰπεῖν ἔχομεν ὅτι ὑπόκειται λευκὸν 
κινοῦν ἡμᾶς... . ἡ φαντασία δείκνυσιν ἑαυτὴν καὶ τὸ πεποιηκὸς αὐτήν. 
Chrysippus took for granted the reality of τὸ πεποιηκός, i.e. the 


1 Sir William Jones, writing with reference to the Indian doctrine of Maya, says: 
The inextricable difficulties attending the vulgar notion of material substances . . . 
induced many of the wisest among the ancients, and some of the most enlightened 
among the moderns, to believe that the whole creation was rather an exergy than a 
work, by which the Infinite Being, who is present at all times and in all places, 
exhibits to the minds of His creatures a set of perceptions, like a wonderful picture 
or piece of music, always varied, yet always uniform; so that all bodies and their 
. exist, indeed, to every wise and useful purpose, but exist only as far as 

ey are perceived.’ (Hargrave Jennings, Zhe Rosicructans, p. 147.) 

There was frequent communication by sea between Roman Egypt and India; and 
it is not impossible that some Indian notions may have been transmitted to Egyptian 
Greeks. Numenius, in Book I of his Περὶ τἀγαθοῦ, mentioned the Brahmans 
(together with the Jews, the Zoroastrians, and the Egyptians) as one of the peoples 
whose religious rites and philosophic doctrines he would have to adduce and com- 
pare with the teachings of Plato and Pythagoras. (The passage is given as follows 
in Euseb. Pr. ev. 9. 7: δεήσει... ἐπικαλέσασθαι τὰ ἔθνη τὰ εὐδοκιμοῦντα, προσφερύ- 
μενον αὐτῶν τὰς τελετὰς καὶ τὰ δόγματα, τάς τε Γἱδρύσεις συντελουμένας Πλάτωνι 
ὁμολογουμένως, ὁπόσας Bpaxpaves καὶ Ἰουδαῖοι καὶ Μάγοι καὶ Αἰγύπτιοι διέθεντο. 
Neither ἱδρύσεις nor συντελουμένας makes sense. I am inclined to conjecture that 
Numenius wrote τάς τε ἱερὰς (βίβλους or γραφὰς) δηλοῦντα Πλάτωνι ὁμολογοῦσας, ὅπό- 
σας Βραχμᾶνες.... διέθεντο, ‘showing that all the sacred books which the Brahmans 
&c, composed agree with Plato’, or something to that effect. He had read some 
of the sacred books of the Jews, and doubtless knew—or thought he knew—some- 
thing about those of the Zoroastrians and the Egyptians; and he may have had 
some information about Indian writings also.) Moreover, both the fictitious visit 
of Apollonius Tyaneus to India described in Philostr. ta Apollon., and the 
historical fact that Plotinus made an attempt to visit India, show that in the third 
eentnry A.D. Greek thinkers had some inkling of the significance of Indian 
Phy. But the doctrine of Corp. V can be sufficiently accounted for ss a 

evelopment of Platonism, without assuming Indian influence. 

ἢ Plato, Soph, 264, defines a φαντασίᾳ as a δύξα which πάρεστί τινι μὴ καθ᾽ 

, ἀλλὰ δι᾽ alohocen, i,e, an opinion which is formed in the mind as the result 
of an impression on the senses; but he does not habitually use the word, 





| 
᾿ 


160 CORPVS HERMETICVM 


external object ; but the writer of Corp. V here ignores τὸ πεποιηκός, 
and speaks only of ὁ πάντα φαντασιῶν (1. 6. ὁ τὰς φαντασίας ποιῶν, 
or 6 τὰ πράγματα γεννῶν ἐν φαντασίᾳ,) namely, God. 

ἡ γὰρ φαντασία μόνων τῶν γεννητῶν ἐστιν. τὰ γεννητά are presented 
to us in φαντασία ; indeed, it is only in our φαντασία that they 
exist; ‘for γένεσις is nothing but φαντασία. But ὃ ἀγέννητος 
θεός is not presented to us in φαντασία ; he is therefore ἀφανής. 

ὃ a, τὰ δὲ πάντα φαντασιῶν, διὰ πάντων φαίνεται. In the preceding 
paragraph, the writer has shown that God is ἀφανής ; he now 
proceeds to show that God is φανερός. Cf. Corp. XI. ii, 22 a: τίς 
αὐτοῦ φανερώτερος ; 

We commonly suppose that our φαντασίαι are caused by external 
objects, and we say that we see those objects. But in reality, 
our φαντασίαι are caused by God; it is really God then that 
we see. 

τῷ κυρίῳ καὶ πατρί, [καὶ] (rH) μόνῳ καὶ [οὐχ] ἑνὶ (ἀγαθῷ ?) [ἀλλ᾽ ἀφ᾽ 
οὗ ὁ εἷς). The words οὐχ ἑνὶ ἀλλ᾽ ἀφ᾽ οὗ ὁ εἷς are inconsistent with 
the rest of the /de//us. Everywhere else, this writer speaks only 
of the one God as Demiurgus, and does not recognize a distinct 
and subordinate Being called ὁ els. It might be conjectured that — 
the words which I have bracketed were written by some Platonist 
who distinguished a first and a second supracosmic God (correspond- 
ing to the ἐν and the νοῦς of Plotinus); but if so, we should have 
expected him to give the name ὁ εἷς to the first God, not to the 
second. Possibly ἀλλ᾽ ἀφ᾽ of may be a corruption of ἀγαθῷ, and 
οὐχ and ὁ εἷς may have been subsequently added to make sense, 
For τῷ μόνῳ καὶ ἑνὶ (ἀγαθῷ, cf. Corp. 11. 14: οὔτε γὰρ τῶν ἄλλων . . « 
τις δύναται... ἀγαθὸς εἶναι, ἢ μόνος ὃ θεός. But ὁ εἷς καὶ μόνος might 
be used (without ἀγαθός) as a name of the supreme God. 

ἀκτῖνά σοι κἂν μίαν αὐτοῦ. Cf. Corp. XVI. 16: (6)rw οὖν ἐν τῷ 
λογικῷ ἀκτὶς ἐπιλάμπει κιτιλ. The divine νοῦς is the light by which 
the ‘gnostic’ is illuminated ; and it is by that light alone that a man 
can ‘see’ God. 

((εἰ δὲ καὶ τὸ ἐν gol. . ., πῶς... φανήσεται Ν᾽ This sentence is 
clearly out of place at the end of the section, where it stands in the - 
MSS. Here, it suits the context perfectly, The words τὸ ἐν σοί, 


1 Cf Tennyson, Zhe Higher Pantheism : ‘The sun, the moon, the stars, the 
seas, the hills and the plains—Are not these, O Soul, the Vision of Him who 
reigns? ... And the ear of man cannot hear, and the eye of man cannot see; But 
if we could see and hear, this Vision—were it not He?’ F 








LIBELLVS V: δὲ 1b-4 161 


which are obscure when taken by themselves, are satisfactorily 
explained by the preceding νόησις... ἀφανὴς οὖσα ; and διὰ τῶν 
ὀφθαλμῶν (‘with your bodily eyes’) prepares the way for the con- 
trasted phrase, τοῖς τοῦ νοῦ ὀφθαλμοῖς, which follows. It may there- 
fore be considered certain that the sentence was intended to stand 
where I have placed it, For the thought that ἡ ἐν ἡμῖν νόησις is 
ἀφανής, and is in that respect comparable to God, cf. Corp. XI. 
ii jin.: ὃ νοῦς (the human mind) δρᾶται ἐν τῷ νοεῖν, ὁ θεὸς ἐν 
τῷ ποιεῖν. 

τὴν εἰκόνα τοῦ θεοῦ : i.e. the sensible Kosmos. Cf. Asc, Lat. I. 
το: ‘dei, cuius sunt imagines duae mundus et homo.’ You can see 
τὰ οὐράνια ; you can both see and grasp with your hands τὰ θνητά, 
e.g. a human body. 

§§ 3-5. εἰ δὲ θέλεις αὐτὸν ἰδεῖν... φαινόμενον δι᾽ ὧν ποιεῖ, Compare 
Corp. ΧΙ. ii. 6 b-11, where it is shown by a similar argument that 
there must be a ‘ Maker’ of the Kosmos. In both passages alike, 
the τάξις τοῦ παντός is insisted on; but the word ζωή, which is the 
keynote of Corp. XI. ii, is not employed in Corp. V. Cf. 
Methodius Περὶ τοῦ αὐτεξουσίου (Bonwetsch) 2. 3 ff. (a ‘ Valentinian’ 
speaks): I observed that the sea is under control, οὐκ ὑπερβαίνουσα 
τὸν οἰκεῖον τόπον, ὡς ἔπος εἰπεῖν θεῖόν τι πρόσταγμα πεφοβημένη. . . . 
ἀλλά μοι καὶ περὶ τοῦ ἡλίου ζητεῖν ἐδόκει, .. . ὅτι μηδὲ οὗτος παρέρχεται 
τὸν οἰκεῖον δρόμον, ἀλλὰ καὶ αὐτός, ὡς ἔνεστιν εἰπεῖν, ἐντολήν τινα 
φυλάττει κρείττονος. Kal... ἑώρων ... σελήνην . « .γ ὅτι τε καὶ αὐτὴ 
τηρεῖ τὸν κύκλον τῶν ἡμερῶν. καί μοι ἐδόκει τὸ ἐντεῦθεν ὡς θεία τις 
ὑπάρχει οἰκονομία καὶ δύναμις κρειττόνων (a2. κρείττονος) ἡ συνέχουσα 
τὰ ὅλα, ἣν καὶ θεὸν δικαίως ἂν εἴποιμεν. 

ὃ 8. [τάξις γὰρ πᾶσα]. This may possibly be a misplaced doublet 
of πᾶσα yap τάξις in ὃ 4. 

ὃ ἥλιος... ᾧ πάντες εἴκουσιν οἱ οὐράνιοι θεοὶ ὡσανεὶ βασιλεῖ. CF, 
Corp. XVI, and Corp, ΧΙ. ii. 7 as emended: τοῦ ἡλίου,. 
τοῦ... πάσης τάξεως ἄρχοντος, Kal ἡγεμόνος TOV ἑπτὰ κόσμων. 

ἕκαστος τούτων τῶν ἀστέρων ((περιώρισται ἀριθμῷ καὶ τόπῳ. The 
words περιώρισται. . . τόπῳ are evidently out of place where they 
stand in the MSS.; and something of the sort is needed here to 
complete the sentence. By ἀριθμῷ must be meant the ‘measure’ 
or ‘extent’ of the planet’s orbit. Thus περιώρισται ἀριθμῷ καὶ τόπῳ 
corresponds to τὸν z[pldrov καὶ τὸ μέγεθος τοῦ δρόμου dpicas below. 

8 4. (A) ἄρκτος, ((ἦν). .. τὸν πάντα κόσμον συμπεριφέρουσα. The 
two Bears, as depicted on a celestial globe or planisphere, looked 

2806.2 M 


162 CORPVS HERMETICVM 


like two animals walking in the same direction round the Pole (see 
e.g. Boll, Sphaera, Tafel I); and this, no doubt, suggested the notion 
that they worked like mill-horses, and made the whole sphere of the 
fixed stars revolve, or that one of them did so. Cf. Herm. ag. Stob. 
Exe. V1. 13: (τῆς ἄρκτου) ἡ ἐνέργειά ἐστι καθάπερ ἄξονος, . . . περὶ 
(rd) αὐτὸ στρεφομένης, ἐνεργούσης δὲ τὴν (τοῦ) ζῳοφόρου κύκλου 
(περιφοράν. The Mithraic Apathanatismos (Dieterich ‘ Mithras- 
liturgie’) p. 14: ἄρκτος ἡ κινοῦσα καὶ ἀντιστρέφουσα τὸν οὐρανόν. 

(... Ὁ τίς ὁ τοῦτο κεκτημένος τὸ ὄργανον ; According to the traditional 
text, the writer passes abruptly from the highest heaven to sea and 
earth. But it is more probable that he mentioned all the four 
elements in succession, and that after discussing the heavens (i. e. 
the region of fire) he spoke of the air before dealing with the water 
and the earth. If so, the ὄργανον is air, regarded as the ‘instrument’ 
by means of which life is conveyed into terrestrial organisms and 
maintained in them. Cf. Asel. Lat, 111. 19b jiz.: ‘aer vero 
organum est vel machina omnium, per quam omnia fiunt.’ The 
function here assigned to air corresponds to that which the Stoics 
assigned to πνεῦμα, i.e. warmed air. (Jb. 17 a: ‘spiritu. . » 
qui quasi organum vel machina summi dei voluntati subiectus est.’) 
A similar function seems to be assigned to φῶς, or illuminated 
air, in Corp. XI. ii. 7. In Corp. X. 18, the ὄργανον is fire. 

ἀλλ᾽ οὐκ ἀδέσποτος οὐδὲ αὕτη... τὸν μηδέπω αὐτῇ Thy τάξιν τάξαντα, 
Here the writer touches on the problem of evil. The evil in the 
world (τὸ ἄμετρον or τὸ ἄτακτον) is ὕλη which the Demiurgus has not 
yet brought to order; it is a survival of the primitive chaos. But 
sooner or later, order will be imposed on it; that is, the evil will be 
changed to good. The Hermetist seems to be thinking chiefly of 
physical evil; he holds that ‘plagues and earthquakes break not 
Heaven’s design’, but only show that Heaven’s design is still in 
process of execution, and has not yet been completely carried out. 
But the solution which he suggests might be applied to moral evil 
(‘a Borgia or a Catiline’) also. 

§ 5. ἀέρος τὸ ἀνειμένον. ἀνειμένος means ‘free to roam at large’. 
The wind ‘ bloweth where it listeth’. 

§ 6. εἰ (δὲν θέλεις καὶ διὰ τῶν θνητῶν κιτλ, After speaking of ra 
ἀθάνατα, i.e. the heavenly bodies and the elements, the writer passes 
on to τὰ θνητά. The Maker's skill may be seen in the bodies of all 
animals,—men and beasts on land, and fishes in the sea. As an 
instance, the Hermetist takes the human body, and speaks of its 








LIBELLVS V: § 4-6 163 


construction in detail. Some words introducing this special instance 
have probably been lost. The topic may have been suggested by 
the description of the making of the human body in Pl. Zim. 69 ff. ; 
but the writer does not, like Plato, discuss the Junctions of the bodily 
organs ; he contents himself with speaking of their shape. 

This is probably the passage to which Lactantius refers in Dyv. 
inst, 2. 10. 14 (Zestim.). 

Thy καλὴν ταύτην Kal θείαν [τοῦ ἀνθρώπου] εἰκόνα. If we retain τοῦ 
ἀνθρώπου, the meaning must be, not ‘this image of man’, but ‘this 
image, namely, man’, But the phrase is awkwardly ambiguous ; 
and it seems best to cut out rod ἀνθρώπου, which may have come 
from a repetition of τὸν ἄνθρωπον above. 

The human body is a living statue; cf. ὃ 8 init, ἀνδριάντα μὲν ἢ 
εἰκόνα The epithet θείαν may perhaps have been intended to 
suggest the thought that man is an image of God; but that thought 
is not here fully expressed. 

ὁ τὰ νεῦρα ἐκτείνας καὶ Scopetoas. The word δεσμεύσας shows that 
the writer means by τὰ νεῦρα the ‘sinews’ or ‘tendons ’, and not the 
‘nerves’. In Plato (Zim. 74 8, Ὁ) and Aristotle, νεῦρα means 
‘sinews’. Erasistratus, about 258 B.c., ‘won the highest fame by 
his discovery of the function and nature of the nerves’ (Puschmann, 
Gesch. der Medizin, p. 296). After his time, vedpa came to be used 
by medical writers in the sense of ‘nerves’; but the word continued 
to be used also in the earlier sense of ‘ sinews’. 

ὁ ὀχετεύσας τὰς φλέβας, Cf. Pl. Zim. 770: τὸ σῶμα αὐτὸ ἡμῶν 
διωχέτευσαν, τέμνοντες οἷον ἐν κήποις ὀχετούς. ... καὶ πρῶτον μὲν 
ὀχετοὺς xpupaious . . . δύο φλέβας ἔτεμον νωτιαίας κ.τιλ. 

[ris ὁ τὸν σπλῆνα exreivas;]] It is not likely that the author 
placed an organ of such subordinate importance as the spleen first 
among all the internal organs. In Pl. Zim. 720, the spleen is 
mentioned as an appendage of the liver, and we are told that it 
Serves as a sponge or napkin to cleanse the mirror-like surface of the 
liver and keep it bright. I have accordingly placed the mention of 
the spleen next after that of the liver. 

Thy καρδίαν πυραμοειδῆ ποιήσας. Ar. Hist. an. 496 a 10: τὸ ἄκρον 
(τῆς καρδίας) εἰς ὀξὺ συνῆκται. The Hermetist must have meant 
‘conical’ rather than ‘ pyramidal’. The word πυραμοειδής Means 
‘conical’ in Pseudo-Ar. Περὶ φυτῶν 2. 7, 827 Ὁ rr—16, 

* Lactantius 2c. contrasts God’s work, the making of a living man, with that of 
Prometheus, who, he says, merely made lifeless statues, 

M2 


ia 


164 CORPVS HERMETICVM 


(kat) [τίς 6] τὰ νεῦρα (αὐτῇ) συνθείς : It has been proposed to 
substitute some other word for νεῦρα. Flussas conjectured πλευρά ; 
but it would be strange to interpose ‘the ribs’ or ‘ sides’ between 
‘the heart’ and ‘the liver’. The writer mentions in succession all 
the chief internal organs,—heart, liver, spleen, lungs, and κοιλία 
(which may be taken to mean stomach and bowels together). In 
Pl. Zim, 70 aff., the same organs are spoken of, in the order 
(r) heart, (2) lungs, (3) liver, (4) spleen, (5) abdomen and bowels, 
As there is no other organ which is likely to have been mentioned 
here, it is to be presumed that the words τὰ νεῦρα συνθείς, as well as 
those which precede, have to do with the heart; and I have there- 
fore inserted αὐτῇ. As to the connexion of the νεῦρα with the heart, 
cf. Aristot. Hist. an. 3. 5, 515 ἃ 27: ἡ μὲν ἀρχὴ (τῶν νεύρων) ἐστὶν ἐκ 
τῆς καρδίας" καὶ γὰρ ἐν αὑτῇ ἡ καρδία ἔχει νεῦρα κιτιλ. Ar. Part. απ. 
3. 4, 666 b 13: ἔχει δὲ καὶ νεύρων πλῆθος ἡ καρδία, καὶ τοῦτ᾽ εὐλόγως" 
ἀπὸ ταύτης γὰρ αἱ κινήσεις. περαίνονται δὲ διὰ τοῦ ἕλκειν καὶ ἀνιέναι" 
δεῖ οὖν τοιαύτης ὑπηρεσίας καὶ ἰσχύος. The νεῦρα were regarded as 
the ‘strings’ by which the limbs are moved (cf. ἀγάλματα νευρό- 
σπαστα, ‘puppets moved by strings’); and it was thought that the 
heart is the organ which pulls the strings, and that the νεῦρα must 
therefore be connected with the heart. Cic. Wav. deor. 2. 55. 139 
(probably from Posidonius): ‘huc adde nervos, a quibus artus 
continentur, . . . qui sicut venae et arteriae a corde 'tractae et 
profectae" (tracti et profecti edd.) in corpus omne ducuntur.’ J. Β. 
Mayor ad /oc. says that mervos here ‘includes no doubt both tendons 
and nerves properly so called’. 

ὁ τὸν πνεύμονα onpayydoas. Cf. Pl. Zim. 70 6: τὴν τοῦ πλεύμονος 
ἰδέαν ἐνεφύτευσαν, . - . σήραγγας ἐντὸς ἔχουσαν οἷον σπόγγου κατατετρήη- 
μένας. 

ὃ τὰ τιμιώτατα εἰς τὸ φανερὸν ἐκτυπώσας, καὶ τὰ αἰσχρὰ κρύψας. Cf. 
Cic. De off. τ. 35. τ26 (from Panaetius): ‘natura... formam nostram 
reliquamque figuram, in qua esset species honesta, eam posuit in 
promptu, quae partes autem corporis ad naturae necessitatem datae 
aspectum essent deformem habiturae .. ., eas contexit atque abdidit.’ 
A partly similar thought occurs in 1 Cor. 12. 22-24. 

8 7. ποία μήτηρ, ποῖος πατήρ, εἰ μὴ ὁ ἀφανὴς beds; To the Greeks, 
the notion of a Mother of all that lives (Mother Earth, ἡ μεγάλη 
μήτηρ, known under many different names,—Gaia, Rhea, Cybele, 
&c.,) was as familiar as the notion of a Father of all. In Roman 
Egypt, the name by which the Mother was best known was Isis. 








LIBELLVS V: δὲ 6-10a 165 


But perhaps the writer was not thinking of gods and goddesses, but 
rather of the human parents of the child. The growing embryo is 
fashioned with consummate skill, and the work of thus fashioning it 
is certainly not done either by the mother or by the father; it must 
therefore be done by some one else; and who can that be, if not 
‘the unseen God’? Cf. Psalm 139. 13-16. 

§ 9. τοῦτο αὐτῷ τὸ ἔργον ἐστί, (rd) πατέρα εἶναι. Cf. Corp. ΧΙ. 1. 5, 
as emended: τί δὲ αὐτοῦ ἄλλο ἔργον ἢ τὸ ποιεῖν; XI. ii. 13 b-14 a: 
τὸ τοῦ θεοῦ ἔργον ἕν ὄν, ἵνα πάντα γίνηται, κιτιλ. 

τούτου ἐστιν (ἣν οὐσία τὸ κινεῖν (κύειν MSS.) πάντα καὶ ποιεῖν. The 
verb κύειν or κυεῖν is used of the mother only, not of the father. 
The writer of Asc. Zaz. III, who asserts that God is ἀρσενόθηλυς, 
might have said that 6 θεός both γεννᾷ and κύει; but in Cors. V, 
there is (apart from ποία μήτηρ, ποῖος πατήρ above, which need not 
be thus understood,) no hint of that doctrine, except in this one 
word κύειν ; and the bisexuality of God can hardly have been tacitly 
assumed here. There can therefore be little doubt that κύειν is 
corrupt ; and κινεῖν is an obvious emendation. Cf. Corp. ΧΙ. ii. 17 ¢c: 
τοῦτο yap ὥσπερ (οὐσία ἢ) ἐστι τοῦ θεοῦ, (rd) κινεῖν τὰ πάντα Kal ζωοποιεῖν. 
Corp. 1X. 9: τοῦτο ἔστιν ἡ αἴσθησις καὶ νόησις τοῦ θεοῦ, τὸ τὰ πάντα 
ἀεὶ κινεῖν. 

τοῦτον δεῖ (ἀεὶ MSS.) μὴ εἶναι, εἰ μὴ πάντα ἀεὶ ποιοῦντα. Cf. Corp. 
ΧΙ. ii. 12 b: ἀλλ᾽ οὐδὲ δυνατὸν χωρὶς τοῦ ἐκεῖνα ποιεῖν τὸν θεὸν εἶναι, 
kod. Ib. τῇ α: οὐδὲ 6 θεὸς δύναται (εἶναι) μὴ ποιῶν τὸ ἀγαθόν. 

τὰ μὲν γὰρ ὄντα ἐφανέρωσε, τὰ δὲ μὴ ὄντα ἔχει ἐν ἑαυτῷ, τὰ μὴ ὄντα 
are the things which are to be hereafter. They have not yet come 
into being ; but they exist already in God’s thought or purpose, and 
so God may be said to ‘contain them in himself’. Ased, Lat. I. 2a: 
‘omnia unum esse et unum omnia, utpote quae in creatore fuerint 
omnia, antequam creasset omnia.’ Compare the ‘ Unknown Gnostic 
document’ in C. Schmidt, Koptisch-Gnostische Schriften 1, p. 358: 
‘Thou art the Snpuovpyés' of those things which have not yet 
manifested themselves; for these Thou alone knowest, we know 
them not.’ 

The phrase ‘that which is and that which is not’ occurs frequently 
in Egyptian documents (Erman, Aeg. Grammaitth, p. 192). 

§10a, ὀνόματα ἔχει ἅπαντα. . . ὄνομα οὐκ ἔχει. Cf. Asc. Lat. 
III. 20a: ‘innominem vel potius omninominem.’ ‘Unknown Gnostic 


1 It is not clear what is meant by δημιουργός here; we might rather have 
expected ‘ Thou art the τόπος of’, &c. 


166 CORPVS HERMETICVM 


document,’ C. Schmidt, Kop4-Gnost. Schriften I, Ὁ. 366: ‘He has 
no name, and all names belong to Him.’ 

ὃ 10 b. tis οὖν σε εὐλογῆσαι κιτιλ. The Zbe//us ends with a hymn 
addressed to the supreme God. Compare the hymns in Corp. I, 
Corp. XIII, and Ascl. Lat. fin. 

σὺ yap ὃ τόπος τῶν ὄντων' οὐ τόπος ἐστὶν ἄλλος οὐδεὶς παρὰ σέ.---(οὐ 
γὰρ τρόπος οὐ τόπος ἐστὶ περὶ σέ, οὐδὲ ἄλλο οὐδὲν τῶν ὄντων MSS.) 
The words οὐ γὰρ τρόπος are meaningless, It is possible that τρόπος 
has come by duplication from the following τόπος ; but it seems 
more likely that the Hermetist wrote σὺ γὰρ 6 τόπος, ‘thou art the 
place in which all things are contained’, Compare the τόπος 
(= νοῦς) of Corp, II, and the Jewish parallels there quoted. Thus 
corrected, the sentence follows suitably on the question ποῦ βλέπων 
εὐλογήσω σε; It is impossible to choose out any one place, and say 
that God is there rather than elsewhere ; for God is himself the 
all-containing ‘ place’. The words οὐδὲ ἄλλο οὐδὲν τῶν ὄντων are 
irrelevant ; if they are not wholly spurious, they must be corrupt. 
The passage cannot be restored with certainty; but the writer’s 
meaning was probably not far from that which is expressed by my 
rewriting of the words. 

The Egyptians considered it important that the worshipper should 
face in a particular direction during prayer. Cf. Asc’. Lat. 41 a, 
‘orare ... in austrum respicientes’ &c. 

(...) πάντα ἀπὸ σοῦ πάντα δίδως, καὶ οὐδὲν λαμβάνεις. This has 
nothing to do with the question ‘in which direction am I to look?’ 
It must therefore be presumed that it followed on another question 
which has fallen out of the text ; and that question probably was, 
‘What can I offer to thee?’ (Cf. Asc/. Zat. 41 a, where Hermes 
rejects the proposal to burn incense.) The writer’s object is to show 
that, in the worship of the supreme God, all rites employed in the 
cults of subordinate deities are inadequate ; and among those rites, 
the most important were θυσίαι and ὕμνοι. A satisfactory meaning 
might therefore be obtained by inserting τίνα δὲ σοὶ πέμψω θυσίαν ; 
Cf. Corp. XIII. 21: σοὶ. . . πέμπω λογικὰς θυσίας. As to πάντα 
δίδως καὶ οὐδὲν λαμβάνεις. cf. Corp. II. 16: ὃ οὖν θεὸς πάντα δίδωσι καὶ 
οὐδὲν λαμβάνει. 

ξ αι, πότε δέ σε ὑμνήσω; Cf. Clem. Alex. Strom. 7. 35: οὔτε 
ὡρισμένον τόπον οὔτε ἐξαίρετον ἱερόν, οὐδὲ μὴν ἑορτάς τινας καὶ ἡμέρας 


! Ménard quotes an Indian parallel from the Baghavat-Gita: ‘Tues... le lieu 
du monde.’ 








LIBELLVS V: §§ 10a-11 167 


ἀποτεταγμένας, ἀλλὰ τὸν πάντα βίον ὃ γνωστικός, ἐν παντὶ τόπῳ, .... 
τιμᾷ τὸν θεόν, τουτέστιν χάριν ὁμολογεῖ τῆς γνώσεως καὶ τῆς πολιτείας. 

. . τοιοῦτος ὃ πάντη παρεῖναι τὸν θεὸν πεπεισμένος, οὐχὶ δὲ ἐν τόποις 
τισὶν ὡρισμένοις κατακεκλεισμένον ὑπολαβών... .. πάντα τοίνυν τὸν βίον 
ἑορτὴν ἄγοντες, πάντη πάντοθεν παρεῖναι τὸν θεὸν πεπεισμένοι, γεωργοῦμεν 
αἰνοῦντες, πλέομεν ὑμνοῦντες, κατὰ τὴν ἄλλην πολιτείαν ἐνθέως ἀναστρεφό- 
μεθα. 

ὑπὲρ ὧν ἐποίησας, ἢ ὑπὲρ ὧν οὐκ ἐποίησας; The things which God 
‘has not made’ are, I suppose, the things which have not yet come 
into being, but which are destined to come into being hereafter. 
Cf. τὰ ὄντα καὶ τὰ μὴ ὄντα in § 9, and τὸ γενόμενον .. . τὸ μὴ γενόμενον 
below. 

ὑπὲρ Gv ἐφανέρωσας, ἢ ὑπὲρ ὧν ἔκρυψας; The things which God 
‘has hidden’ are τὰ ἀφανῆ, 1. 6. τὰ νοητά. 

διὰ τίίνος) δὲ καὶ ὑμνήσω σε; διὰ τί (MSS,) is not satisfactory. If 
we retain it, the implied answer must be ‘there is no reason why 
I should adore thee’. The preceding clauses signify that any 
adoration limited to particular places and times is inadequate ; but 
this phrase would mean that all adoration is useless, and the 
Hermetist would not say that, A better sense may be got by 
writing διὰ τίνος, ‘wherewith shall I sing hymns to thee?’ The 
obvious answer to that question would be διὰ τῆς φωνῆς, or διὰ τοῦ 
λόγου. But the Hermetist reflects that man has no power of his 
own to speak or act (σὺ εἶ ὃ ἂν λέγω), When a man is said to ‘sing 
praise to God’, itseems to be implied that he has a power of 
utterance in himself, as a being distinct from God; but I have no 
such power, and when I praise God, it is God that speaks in me 
or through me. Cf. Corp, XIII. 18-20: ζωὴ καὶ φῶς, ἀφ᾽ ὑμῶν (not 
from me) χωρεῖ ἣ εὐλογία... .. ὃ σὸς λόγος SV ἐμοῦ ὑμνεῖ ver... 
6 σὸς ἄνθρωπος ταῦτα βοᾷ διὰ... τῶν κτισμάτων σου. 

ὡς ἐμαυτοῦ dy; ὡς ἔχων τι ἴδιον; Cf. Philo Ζερ. alleg. 3. 70. 195, 
Cohn I, p. 156: μόνῳ ἁρμόττει θεῷ λέγειν “ τὸ ἐμόν ", αὐτοῦ γὰρ ὄντως 
κτήματα μόνου τὰ πάντα. 

ὡς ἄλλος dv; σὺ γὰρ εἶ ὃ [εἸὰᾶν ὦ, This is the typical utterance of 
mysticism; ‘Iam Thou, and Thou art I.’ In the Greek mystery- 
cults, the worshipper sought some kind and degree of union with 
the particular deity to whom his worship was addressed ; but among 
the Greeks, the abolition of the boundary-walls of separate personality 
was seldom spoken of in such emphatic and uncompromising terms. 
In Egypt, on the other hand, the Pyramid-texts of the VIth Dynasty 


168 CORPVS HERMETICVM 


(2500 B.c. or earlier) are full of phrases which show that by that 
time the primitive worshipper’s sense of identification with the 
object of his worship (or at least his assurance that he would, after 
death, be identified with his god) had already been stereotyped in 
traditional formulas of unknown antiquity; and the same sort of 
language persists in Egyptian documents of all periods,’ down to 
the time when the magicians of the Roman age borrowed the phrase 
σὺ ἐγὼ καὶ ἐγὼ σύ" from reputable cults to use it for their own sordid 
purposes. The tone of this hymn is not Greek, but Egyptian. 

σὺ γὰρ πάντα el, καὶ ἄλλο οὐδὲν ἔστιν ὃ ph cy ef. Cf. Martyrium 
Petri (Lipsius-Bonnet, Acta Apost. Apocr. 1, p. 96): σὺ τὸ πᾶν, 
καὶ τὸ πᾶν ἐν σοί καὶ τὸ ὃν σύ, καὶ οὐκ ἐστιν ἄλλο ὃ ἔστιν εἰ μὴ 
μόνος σύ. 

νοῦς μὲν (et), νοούμενος, πατὴρ δέ, δημιουργῶν. God is Mind, in 
that he designs things, and Father, in that he produces or ‘ manifests’ 
the things which he has designed. We might rather have expected 
πατὴρ δέ, γεννῶν; but δημιουργεῖν, ‘to create’, is interchangeable 
with γεννᾶν. 

[ὕλης μὲν... νοῦ δέ θεός]. This passage is evidently out of place 
here. See Corp. XII. i. 14a, where the same statement occurs in 
a more suitable context. 

There is some reason to suspect that the preceding sentence also 
(νοῦς μὲν ef . . . πάντα ποιῶν) has been added by a later hand. It 
is not closely connected in thought with what comes before it; and 
it is something of an anticlimax, after the sweeping statement ‘Thou 
art all things’, to add that God makes things. Perhaps the hymn 
originally ended thus: σὺ γὰρ πάντα ef [[ ]] σὺ ef πᾶν τὸ γενόμενον, 
σὺ τὸ μὴ γενόμενον, ((καὶ ἄλλο οὐδὲν ἔστιν ὃ μὴ σὺ ef.) 


1 Cf. ἕνωσις πρὸς τοὺς θεούς in Alammonis responsum (Testin.) passim. 

2 Eg. Pap. mag. Leid. W. 17. 445q.: εἰσέλθοις τὸν ἐμὸν νοῦν καὶ τὰς ἐμὰς 
φρένας eis τὸν ἅπαντα χρόνον"... σὺ γὰρ εἶ ἐγώ, καὶ ἐγὼ σύ, Pap. mag, Lond, 122, 
37: σὺ γὰρ ἐγώ, καὶ ἐγὼ σύ" “τὴν name is mine, and mine is thine’,ete. Cf, Ophite 
Evangelium Evae (Reitzenstein Poin. p. 242), quoted in note on Corp. ΧΙ, ii, 21 b: 
‘I heard a voice as of thunder, which spoke to me and said ἐγὼ σὺ καὶ σὺ ἐγώ, 
κτλ. In that passage, the words are addressed by the god to his worshipper; 
more often, they are addressed by the worshipper to his god. 





LIBELLVS VI 169 


LIBELLVS VI 

































Corp. V1 is a discourse on τὸ ἀγαθόν and τὸ καλόν. The point on 
which the writer insists is that nothing good or beautiful is to be 
found in the world in which we live. This document is distinguished 
from most of the other Hermetica by its intensely pessimistic tone. 
The Kosmos is described in it as ‘one mass of evil’. Men may 
indeed attain to gnosis; i.e. they may come to know God, and, in 
knowing God, to know the Beautiful and the Good; but even for 
the man who has got guosis, beauty and goodness are unattainable 
as long as he is in the body ; and of the life after death, the writer 
does not speak. 

The doctrine is Platonic; and there is no trace of anything 
distinctively Egyptian, Jewish, or Christian. The conceptions of 
τὸ ἀγαθόν and τὸ καλόν are derived from Plato, and that of τὸ καλόν 
more especially from the Symposium and the Phaedrus, But in 
his sweeping condemnation of the Kosmos and all things in it, 
the writer goes beyond Plato,' and agrees rather with some of the 
Neo-Pythagoreans and some of the Christian Gnostics.2 The 
document contains no clear indication of date; but as this sort of 
contemplus mundi was more prevalent in the second and third 
centuries A.D. than in earlier times, the tone of Corp. VI affords 
some reason for thinking that it ought to be assigned to that period. 
Two or three verbal agreements with Numenius point towards the 
same conclusion, as far as any significance can be ascribed to them. 
What is the relation between Corp, VI and Corp. Il? The 
doctrine of Corp. VI. 1-4a concerning τὸ ἀγαθόν resembles that 
of Corp. II. 14-16 ; but it is not quite the same. In Corp. II, ‘the 
Good’ is completely identified with God; in Corp. VI, ‘the Good’ 
(or ‘Goodness ’) is described as a ‘part’ of God, a property of God, 
and a thing inseparably connected with him, but is not absolutely 
identified with God, except in two phrases which are hardly consistent 
with their context, and have probably been added by a later hand. 
Moreover, there is no trace in Corp. VI of the doctrine of a supra- 


1 Compare and contrast Pl. Lege. 10. 906A: συγκεχωρήκαμεν ἡμῖν αὐτοῖς εἶναι 
μὲν τὸν οὐρανὸν (i.e. the Kosmos) πολλῶν μεστὸν ἀγαθῶν, εἶναι δὲ καὶ τῶν ἐναντίων, 
πλειόνων δὲ τῶν μὴ (ἀγαθῶν). Inthe Timaens, Plato τὸν κόσμον ἐπαινεῖ καὶ θεὸν 
λέγει εἶναι εὐδαίμονα (Plotinus 4. 8. 1). 

* The doctrine that ‘ the Kosmos is evil’ is that against which Plotinus especially 
protests in his controversy with the Gnostics (Av. 2. 9, Πρὸς τοὺς κακὸν τὸν 
δημιουργὸν τοῦ κόσμου καὶ τὸν κόσμον κακὸν εἶναι λέγοντα»). 


᾿ 
} 








170 CORPVS HERMETICVM 


cosmic Nous distinct from and subordinate to the supreme God, 
which is taught in Corp, II. For these reasons, it is improbable 
that Corp. VI was written by the same person as Corp, II ; but its 
author may perhaps have known Corp. II, and may possibly have 
intended Corp. VI to be read as a sequel to it. (In both 11 and VI, 
the pupil is Asclepius.) 

The author of Corp. X probably had Corp. VI before him; and 
he seems to have made it his aim to supplement the teaching of 
Corp. VI, and to correct its pessimistic tendency. 


Contents 
A. §§ τ-4 8: περὶ τοῦ ἀγαθοῦ. 

The Good is changeless, free from wants, and exempt from 
perturbations (or evil passions). But these attributes belong to 
God alone; therefore the Good (or Goodness) is in God alone. 
(§§ τ, 2a.) 

The Good is not in the Kosmos, nor in anything contained in it, 
The Kosmos is good in this one respect, that it is productive, but 
in no other respect. It is subject to perturbation ; and where there 
is perturbation, the Good cannot be. (§§ 2b, 3a.) The Kosmos 
is one mass of evil. (ὃ 4.) 

The Good is not in man; for man’s material body subjects 
him to evil passions and delusions. And the worst of all the 
evils that beset him is the error of thinking evils to be goods. 


(8§ 3 b, 4a.) 


B. 83 4.b-6: περὶ τοῦ καλοῦ καὶ τοῦ ἀγαθοῦ. 

The Beautiful (is inseparably connected with the Good (?); and) 
the Beautiful and the Good may be described as the very essence 
of God. But the Beautiful and the Good (or Beauty and Goodness) 
are not in the Kosmos, and cannot be seen by the eye. ° They are 
parts of God, or properties of God; and man can apprehend them 
only so far as he can apprehend God. It is by piety alone that we 
can attain to knowledge of the Beautiful and the Good. (§§ 4b, 5.) 

But no man can be beautiful and good. Men are encompassed 
by evils; most men think these very evils to be goods; and no 
man can escape from them. (§ 6.) 


§ ra. τὸ ἀγαθὸν... [ἐν οὐδενί ἐστιν εἰ μὴ ἐν μόνῳ τῷ θεῷ. μᾶλλον 
δὲ τὸ ἀγαθὸν αὐτός ἐστιν ὁ θεός [ἀεί]. εἰ δὲ οὕτως,] οὐσίαν εἶναι ϑεῖ 








LIBELLVS VI: § 1a 171 


kth. The words ἐν oddevé..., εἰ δὲ οὕτως are an interruption, 
There can be little doubt that the author began by describing τὸ 
ἀγαθόν, and then, in ὃ 1b, proceeded to say that it belongs to God 
alone. ἐν οὐδενί ἐστιν εἰ μὴ ἐν μόνῳ τῷ θεῷ is merely a repetition 
of the words of the heading, ὅτι ἐν μόνῳ τῷ θεῷ τὸ ἀγαθόν ἐστιν. 
The words μᾶλλον δὲ τὸ ἀγαθὸν αὐτός ἐστιν ὃ θεός are perhaps a 
subsequent addition. Cf. [ἢ αὐτός ἐστιν ὁ θεὸς τὸ ἀγαθόν] in § 3b 
init, The statement that ‘the Good is God himself’, or ‘God 
himself is the Good’, hardly agrees with the rest of the document. 
The writer says that the Good is zz God; but except in these two 
clauses, it is nowhere said or implied that τὸ ἀγαθόν is identical with 
God ; and the language used in other parts of the discourse would 
be difficult to reconcile with that proposition, See especially § 4b, 
where we are told that τὸ καλόν and τὸ ἀγαθόν are ‘parts of God’, 
and that God is in love with them. Both μᾶλλον δὲ τὸ ἀγαθὸν αὐτός 
ἐστιν ὃ θεός in ὃ ra, and ἢ αὐτός ἐστιν 6 θεὸς τὸ ἀγαθόν in ὃ 3), 
may have been inserted by some one who had been reading Corp. II, 
the conclusion of which is ὁ οὖν θεὸς (τὸ) ἀγαθόν, καὶ τὸ ἀγαθὸν ὁ θεός. 

The meaningless [ἀεί] may have resulted either from a duplication 
of εἰ, or from a misplacement of δεῖ, 

τὸ ἀγαθὸν... οὐσίαν εἶναι (or νοεῖν) δεῖ πάσης κινήσεως καὶ 
γενέσεως ἔρημον. οὐσία here means ὄν τι, ‘a thing’. It is similarly 
used in ὃ 2a, where ἐν τῇ τοιαύτῃ οὐσίᾳ, ‘in a thing such as that’, 
is parallel to ἐν οὐδενὶ τῶν ἄλλων, ‘in no other thing’. οὐσία is 
often used by Platonists in the sense of ‘eternal and changeless 
existence’ as opposed to γένεσις (whence οὐσιώδης, as employed in 
Corp. I. 15 &c.); but it cannot bear that meaning here ; for if it 
did, the following words πάσης κινήσεως καὶ γενέσεως ἔρημον would 
be superfluous. 

[δὲ οὐδέν ἐστιν]. This may have come from ἐν οὐδενί ἐστιν above. 

αὐτὴν δὲ περὶ αὑτὴν στατικὴν ἐνέργειαν ἔχουσαν.---(αὐτῆς" περὶ δὲ 
αὐτὴν στατικὴν ἐνέργειαν ἔχουσα MSS.) The Good is active, but its 
activity does not involve movement or change ; it is éords. Cf. “τω. 
Lat, III. 30: ‘solus deus stabilis’ &c. Corp. X. 11: ἡ δὲ νοητὴ 
στάσις κινεῖ τὴν ὑλικὴν κίνησιν. Numenius αὐ. Euseb. Pr. ev. 11. 
18, 21: τὴν προσοῦσαν τῷ πρώτῳ (θεῷ) στάσιν φημὶ εἶναι κίνησιν 
σύμφυτον. ; 

ἀνενδεῆ καὶ (παθῶν) ἀπείρητον (or ἀπείρατον). ἀπείριτον, the reading 
of the MSS., cannot be right. ἀπείριτος (= ἄπειρος, ‘ endless ’,) occurs 
in Homer and Hesiod, but seldom in later literature ; and the state- 


παν. 


tt ων et περ», SS ot ας ee es, 





172 CORPVS HERMETICVM . 


ment that τὸ ἀγαθόν is ‘endless’ would here be irrelevant. The 
writer is arguing thus: “τὸ ἀγαθόν has certain properties; these 
properties are to be found in God, and in God alone; therefore τὸ 
ἀγαθόν is in God alone.’ Now in describing the properties of God, 
the point on which he dwells is that God is not subject to certain 
πάθη, viz, ἐπιθυμία, λύπη, ἔρως, ὀργή, ζῆλος ; and this would not be to 
the purpose, unless he had previously said that τὸ ἀγαθόν is free 
from such πάθη. The passage about God might be summarized by 
saying that God is ἀνενδεὴς καὶ παθῶν ἀπείρατος ; the writer must 
therefore have previously said that τὸ ἀγαθόν is ἀνενδεὲς καὶ παθῶν 
ἀπείρατον, or something to that effect. Cf. ὃ 2a: ὅπου δὲ τὸ ἀγαθόν, 
οὐδὲ ἕν πάθος. 

πᾶν γὰρ τὸ χορηγοῦν ἀγαθὸν [ὅταν] λέγεται (λέγω MSS.). The mean- 
ing might be more clearly expressed by writing τὸ (ὁτιοῦν) χορηγοῦν, 
‘everything which supplies anything at all’, and thus emphasizing the 
opposition to πάντα καὶ ἀεὶ χορηγοῦν below. And [ὅταν] might then be 
accounted for as having come from ὁτιοῦν misplaced. 

The statement ‘I call all things good which furnish a supply of 
anything’ is hardly consistent with the author’s assertion that the 
Kosmos is πλήρωμα τῆς κακίας, which implies that he would call 
nothing in the world good; it is therefore most likely that he 
wrote, not λέγω, but λέγεται ; ‘the word ἀγαθόν is commonly thus 
used,’ 

δ 1 Ὁ. [λύπη γὰρ κακίας μέρος]. Cf. Corp. XIII. 7 b, where λύπη takes 
a place among the vices or evil passions, side by side with ἀκρασία, 
ἐπιθυμία, ἀδικία, &c., and χαρά, its opposite, is ranked with ἐγκράτεια, 
καρτερία, δικαιοσύνη &c. The statement λύπῃ κακίας μέρος is un- 
objectionable in itself; but as it is not wanted here, and disturbs the 
symmetry of the passage, it is most likely a marginal note inserted in 
the text by error. 

οὔτε κρεῖττον αὐτοῦ ἐστὶν οὐδέν, ὑφ᾽ οὗ ἀδικηθεὶς πολεμήσει (ὑφ᾽ οὗ 
πολεμηθήσεται MSS,). The reading of the MSS. (‘by which he will 
have war made on him’) does not make sense; for a war might be 
begun by one who was not ‘the stronger’. Nor would sense be 
restored by writing ὑφ᾽ οὗ (καταγπολεμηθήσεται, ‘ by which he will be 
vanquished’ ; for defeat is not a πάθος in the same sense as ἐπιθυμία, 
ὀργή, &c. Now the words τὸ ἀδικηθῆναι καὶ διὰ τοῦτο are evidently 
out of place in the MSS., where they separate σύζυγον from ἐρασθή- 
σεται ; and it seems probable that they have arisen out of something 
originally connected with οὔτε κρεῖττον... οὐδέν. I have therefore 








LIBELLVS VI: §§ 1a-1b 173 


inserted ἀδικηθείς here, and altered πολεμηθήσεται into πολεμήσει to 
make sense in combination with it. It is true that τὸ πολεμεῖν is 
not, strictly speaking, a πάθος ; but it may be regarded as implying 
τὸ ἐχθαίρειν, and ἔχθρα is a πάθος. The writer may have had in 
mind the θεομαχίαι of Greek mythology, which had long been a 
scandal to pious thinkers. 

οὔτε σύζυγόν (perhaps σύζυγός) ἐστιν αὐτῷ, [ ] οὗ ἐρασθήσεται, 
Compare the system of Valentinus, in which each pair of Aeons 
consists of a male and a female σύζυγος, i.e. a husband and a wife. 
On the question whether the supreme God (called Proarche, Propator, 
and Bythos) had a σύζυγος, the Valentinians differed among them- 
selves. Irenaeus 1. ΤΙ. 15: some of the Valentinians (τὸν Βυθὸν) 
ἄζυγον λέγουσι, μήτε ἄρρενα μήτε θήλειαν . . ." ἄλλοι δὲ ἀρρενόθηλυν 
αὐτὸν λέγουσιν εἶναι, ἑρμαφροδίτου φύσιν αὐτῷ περιάπτοντες. Σιγὴν δὲ 
πάλιν ἄλλοι συνευνέτιν αὐτῷ προσάπτουσιν, ἵνα γένηται πρώτη συζυγία. 
Hippol. Ref. haer. 6. 29: οἱ μὲν γὰρ (of the Valentinians). ... 
ἄθηλυν καὶ ἄζυγον καὶ μόνον τὸν ἸΤατέρα (i.e. the Propator) νομίζουσιν 
εἶναι" οἱ δέ, ἀδύνατον νομίζοντες [δύνασθαι] ἐξ ἄρρενος μόνου γένεσιν 
ὅλως τῶν γεγενημένων γενέσθαι τινός, καὶ τῷ πατρὶ τῶν ὅλων, ἵνα γένηται 
πατήρ, Σιγὴν ἐξ ἀνάγκης συναριθμοῦσι [τὴν] σύξυγον. In the version 
of the Valentinian doctrine which is given in Iren. 1. 1. 1, the 
consort of the Propator is named “Evvow, Χάρις, and Σιγή. 72. τ. 
12. τ: the Valentinian Ptolemaeus assigned to the Bythos two 
σύξυγοι, named [Ἔννοια and Θέλημα (πρῶτον γὰρ ἐνενοήθη προβαλεῖν, 
φησίν, εἶτα ἠθέλησε). In the Pistis Sophia (C. Schmidt, pp. 2, 14, 
24, 138,) χωρισσύζυγοι, ‘without consorts’, is used as an epithet of 
a certain class of divine Persons. The writer of Corp. VI may 
perhaps have heard of the Valentinian doctrine of συζυγίαι, and must 
certainly have met with analogous doctrines.? 

In ὃ 4b, we are told that God ἐρᾷ τοῦ καλοῦ καὶ τοῦ ἀγαθοῦ. But 
as τὸ καλόν and τὸ ἀγαθόν are there called ‘ parts of God’, the state- 
ment that God ‘is in love with them’ does not imply that he has a 
σύζυγος, i.e. a consort other than himself, but rather corresponds to 
the doctrine that God is ἀρσενόθηλυς ; and the ἔρως there spoken of 
is not regarded as a πάθος. 

οὔτε ἀνήκοον, ᾧ ὀργισθήσεται, The will of God finds complete and 


instant fulfilment. Cf. Ase/. Lat. 1.8: ‘placitum enim dei necessitas 


? Arnobius Adv. nat. 3. 8 speaks of the attribution of sex to God as a Pagan 
error rejected by Christians; ‘non enim deus mas est, sed nomen eius generis 
masculini est,’ 


174 CORPVS HERMETICVM 


sequitur, voluntatem comitatur effectus.’ But if God is good, he 
must will only what is good ; and if nothing is disobedient to God’s 
will, it would seem to follow that all things must be good. How 
then can this view be reconciled with the assertion that the Kosmos 
is πλήρωμα τῆς κακίας (§ 4a), and that the highest good to which 
man can attain is only a smaller share of evil (§ 3b)? Does the 
good God will that the Kosmos shall be full of evil, and that men 
shall be wicked?* With this difficulty the writer of Corp. VI makes 
no attempt to deal. Other men of his time tried to reconcile the 
existence of evil with the goodness of God by asserting that there is 
something which is ‘disobedient’ to him, viz. either an intractable 
ὕλη (see Asci. Lat, Il), or an evil God or Daemon. The notion of 
an evil God at enmity with the good God was adopted ? by some of 
the Christian heretics, e.g. in part by Marcion, and more fully by 
Mani ; (see Bousset, Hauptprobleme der Gnosis, Pp. 91-119 ;) anda 
modified form of the same doctrine presents itself in the Satan of 
the Jews, and in the Christian conception of the Devil, who was 
commonly held to be ‘disobedient to God’, and to have power to 
thwart God’s will to some extent in the present world, though 
destined to be overcome at some future time. Moreover, Jews and 
Christians were agreed that men can disobey God, and that most 
men are disobedient to him. On the question whether God is angry 
with those who disobey him, opinions differed; Lactantius, for 
instance, (De ira det) asserts it; Arnobius (Adv. nat. τ. 17 and 23) 
denies it, adhering to the Platonic view that God is ἀπαθής. The 
writer of Asc/. Lat. III holds that not only the supreme God, but 
the astral gods also, are ἀπαθεῖς, and that the ‘ terrestrial gods’ alone 
are subject to anger; see Asc/. Lat. III. 40 a, where it is said that 
the higher Powers ‘ nec ira commoventur nec flectuntur gratia ’. 

ὃ 2a. ὥσπερ ‘yap! οὐδὲν τῶν (kaxdv) κιτιλ. If we retain γάρ, it must 
be taken as referring back to μόνῳ in ὃ 1b init. (μόνῳ τῷ θεῷ). 
But a more obvious connexion would be got if δέ were written in 
place of γάρ. 

καὶ ἐν τοῖς μικροῖς καὶ ἐν τοῖς μεγάλοις. A similar phrase occurs in 
Numenius Περὶ τἀγαθοῦ (Euseb. Pr. ev. 11, 22. 1, quoted in prefatory 


? Arnobius Ado, nat, 2. 54: ‘si cuncta (dei) voluntate conficiuntur, nec citra eins 
nutum quicquam potest in rebus vel provenire vel cadere, necessario sequitur ut 
mala etiam cuncta voluntate eius intellegantur enasci.’ 

2 In the main, from the Zoroastrians. But suggestions of this doctrine may have 
been found also in Plato's mention of a κακὴ gent (Legg. το. 896-898), and in the 
Egyptian conception of Set-Typhon (Plut. /s. εὐ Os.). 





LIBELLVS VI: §§ 1b-2b 175 


















note on Corp. II): μηδὲ σῶμα μέγα μηδὲ σμικρόν, ἀλλά τις... ἐρημία 
θεσπέσιος. The phrase πάσης κινήσεως καὶ γενέσεως ἔρημον in Corp. 
VI. 1a corresponds to Numenius’s word ἐρημία. 

αὐτῆς τῆς γενέσεως παθητῆς οὔσης. This probably means that 
all processes of birth and growth result from some sort of ὁρμή 
(emotional impulse), and therefore imply the presence of πάθος 
(emotional disturbance). The agent at work in all such processes 
(the Aristotelian φύσις) is seeking to attain to some end or ‘ good’. 
If the end were realized, the process would cease. As long as the 
process goes on, the end is still unrealized, i.e. the good is not yet 
present ; and as the cosmic process never ceases, it follows that the 
good is never present in the Kosmos. If then feeling of any kind is 
ascribed to the agent in the cosmic process, it must be the feeling of 
unsatisfied desire ; (‘the whole creation groaneth and travaileth in 
pain together’ ;) and such a feeling is a πάθος. On the other hand, 
the good, which remains ever unattained in the γένεσις of the Kosmos, 
is eternally realized in the στάσις of God. God is dvevdeys, and has 
no unsatisfied desire ; if he can be said to ‘desire’ the good, (ἐρᾷ τοῦ 
καλοῦ καὶ τοῦ ἀγαθοῦ, ὃ 4 b,) his desire is eternally fulfilled ; for the 
good which he desires is eternally present in him. Cf. Methodius 
Contra Porphyrium, Bonwetsch, p. 347: εἴτε yap τὸ ἀγαθὸν θέλει 
(6 θεός), αὐτὸς ὧν τὸ ἀγαθὸν ἐν ἑαυτῷ μένει" εἴτε τὸ καλὸν ὑπάρχει ἐραστὸν 
αὐτῷ, αὐτὸς ὧν τὸ μόνον καλὸν εἰς ἑαυτὸν βλέπει. 

§2a fin. 2b init, ἀδύνατον ἐν γενέσει... οὕτω καὶ τοῦ ἀγαθοῦ. 
Didymus, De Zrinitate 2. 3 (Zestim.), quotes this passage ; and in 
the same paragraph he uses some other phrases borrowed from 
Corp. VI (κατὰ σύγκρισιν δὲ τοῦ κακοῦ τὸ ἀγαθὸν ... τέτακται' τὸ γὰρ 
μὴ λίαν κακὸν... ἀγαθὸν ἐνθάδε προσείρηται from VI. 3 Ὁ, and ὅπου 
νύξ, οὐχ ἡμέρα from VI. 2 a). 

8 2 Ὁ. μετουσία πάντων ἐστὶν ἐν τῇ ὕλῃ (δια Ῥ)δεδομένη. ΒΥ πάντων 
we must understand πάντων τῶν νοητῶν εἰδῶν. The νοητὰ εἴδη or 
παραδείγματα are not present in material things; but material things 
‘partake of’ them. The Kosmos may in this sense ‘ partake of’ τὸ 
ἀγαθόν ; i.e. ‘copies’ (εἰκόνες or εἴδωλα) of the Good may appear in 
it, though the Good itself never enters into it. 

τοῦτον τὸν τρόπον ἀγαθὸς ὁ κόσμος. Here the writer makes a 
reluctant concession to the opinion of the majority of the Hermetists, 
who held that the Kosmos is in some sense good. Cf. Corp. IX. 4b: 


‘ Cf. Numenius (Euseb. Pr. ev, 11. 18. 3): ἐπιθυμητικὸν ἦθος ἐχούσης (τῆς ὕληΞ), 
καὶ ῥεούσης. 


176 CORPVS HERMETICVM 


χωρίον yap (τῆς κακίας) ἡ γῆ, οὐχ ὃ κόσμος, ds ἔνιοί ποτε ἐροῦσι 
βλασφημοῦντες. Ascl. Lat, 111. 25: ‘hic mundus, . . . bonum 
multiformi imaginum varietate conpositum’ &c. Jb. 27 a: ‘ (dei) 
imago mundus, boni (bonus)’, &c. Corp. X. τὸ Ὁ, as emended: οὐ 
κακὸς ὃ κόσμος, οὐκέτι δὲ ἀγαθός" ὑλικὸς γάρ, Kal παθητός. 

καθὰ καὶ αὐτὸς πάντα ποιεῖ. God is the supreme Maker of all 
things ; but the Kosmos (the ‘second God’) is the proximate maker 
of individual organisms. Thus the procreative energy of the Kosmos 
is a ‘copy’ of the creative energy of God; and as the absolute good- 
ness of God is manifested in his creative energy, so the secondary 
and derivative goodness of the Kosmos is manifested in the operation 
of the cosmic forces by which living organisms are brought into 
being. 

§ 3a. [ἐν δὲ τῷ ἀνθρώπῳ... ἐνθάδε τὸ ἀγαθόν]. The mention 
of man is out of place here; it interrupts the discussion of the 
Kosmos, which is continued in what is said in the rest of §3.a. It is 
most likely that the writer first disposed of the question whether 
the Kosmos is good, and then proceeded, in § 3b, to discuss the 
question whether man is good. I have therefore transposed the 
words about man to ὃ 3b. 

[{τὸ δὲ ἐνθάδε... ἐλάχιστον.}] ἀδύνατον οὖν... τῆς κακίας. If 
we read these words in the order in which they are given in the 
MSS., it is not clear what is meant by οὖν. A more satisfactory 
sense can be got by interchanging the two clauses, and making οὖν 
refer to καὶ yap παθητός ἐστι καὶ παθητῶν ποιητής. 

[kaxodpevoy γὰρ οὐκέτι ἀγαθὸν μένει' μὴ μεῖναν δέ, κακὸν γίνεται. 
The words κακούμενον γὰρ (τὸ ἀγαθὸν) οὐκέτι ἀγαθὸν μένει were 
probably written as an alternative for κακοῦται γὰρ ἐνθάδε τὸ ἀγαθόν ; 
and μὴ μεῖναν δὲ κακὸν γίνεται is an addition which adds nothing. 

§ 3b. ((ἐν δὲ τῷ ἀνθρώπῳ κατὰ σύγκρισιν τοῦ κακοῦ τὸ ἀγαθὸν 
λέλεκται (κατὰ σύγκρισιν τοῦ ἀγαθοῦ τὸ κακὸν τέτακται MSS.): τὸ γὰρ 
μὴ λίαν κακὸν ἐνθάδε [τὸ] dyabdv)) {προσείρηταιν. When ἐν δὲ τῷ 
ἀνθρώπῳ is placed here, it stands in contrast with ἐν μόνῳ τῷ θεῷ, 
and the δέ serves to express this contrast. 

The writer’s meaning is that the word ‘good’, when applied to 
a man, signifies only that he is not so bad as he might be, or as 
other men are. This may be a reminiscence of Pl. Protag. 339 4 f., 
where Socrates comments on the ode of Simonides, ἄνδρ᾽ ἀγαθὸν μὲν 
ἀλαθέως γενέσθαι χαλεπόν"... θεὸς ἂν μόνος τοῦτ᾽ ἔχοι γέρας. « « 
ἔμοιγ᾽ ἐξαρκεῖ ὃς ἂν μὴ κακὸς ἢ μηδ᾽ ἄγαν ἀπάλαμνος. 
































LIBELLVS VI: δὲ 2b-4a 177 


It is difficult to make sense of τέτακται ; yet it is the word used 
by Didymus in his borrowing from this passage. If the original 
reading was λέλεκται, this must have been altered into τέτακται before 
Didymus wrote, i. e. before a. Ὁ. 380-398. 
οὐ γὰρ χωρεῖ (sc. τὸ ἀγαθὸν, acc.) σῶμα ὑλικόν (nom.). Cf. Corp. I. 
14 fin.: σῶμα γάρ ἐστι καὶ ψυχὴ τόπον οὐκ ἔχοντα χωρῆσαι δυνάμενον 
τὸ ἀγαθόν. 
ἕκαστον τούτων... [ἐμ]πεπίστευται ἐνθάδε [τὸ] μέγιστον εἶναι ἀγαθόν. 
The writer cannot have meant to say that πόνοι καὶ ἀλγηδόνες &c. 
are believed by men to be great goods. Few men think that pain 
and grief are goods. The meaning must be that the things which 
the πάθη impel men to seek (e.g. the satisfaction of vicious or 
morbid desires) are believed by men to be good, whereas they are 
really evil; but this meaning is not clearly expressed. The same 
thought recurs in ὃ 6: τὸ κακὸν πιστεύσαντα ἀγαθὸν εἶναι κιτιλ. 

τὸ μᾶλλον ἀνυπέρβλητον κακόν. These words would more naturally 
be applied to one particular evil; it is strange to say that each of 
a number of evils is ‘an evil not to be surpassed ’, Perhaps the 
phrase has been inserted by a later hand. 
[ἡ γαστριμαργία] [ἡ] τῶν κακῶν πάντων χορηγὸς ἧ πλάνη (αὕτη) 
[ ] ἐστί, There is no occasion to speak of gluttony here. ἡ 
γαστριμαργία must have been inserted by some ascetic transcriber 
who misunderstood the text, and thought it necessary to supply 
a subject for ἀνυπέρβλητον κακόν, or for τῶν κακῶν πάντων χορηγός. 
§ 48. τῷ εἰς νοῦν μοι βαλόντι. .. ὅτι ἀδύνατόν ἐστιν αὐτὸ ἐν τῷ 
κόσμῳ εἶναι. The Hermetist thanks God that he has learnt that 
nothing in this world is good. He is thus secured against ‘the 
greatest evil of all’, viz. the error of believing this or that evil thing 
to be good. 
ὁ γὰρ κόσμος πλήρωμά ἐστι τῆς κακίας, ὁ δὲ θεὸς τοῦ ἀγαθοῦ. The 
meaning of πλήρωμα is well illustrated by Philo De praem. et poen, 
11. 65, Cohn V, p. 350: γενομένη δὲ πλήρωμα ἀρετῶν Hoe ἡ Wx). . ., 
οὐδὲν ἐν ἑαυτῇ καταλιποῦσα κενὸν εἰς πάροδον ἄλλων. The Kosmos 
* is completely filled with evil, so that no room is left in it for any 
good to enter; and God is completely filled with good, so that no 
room is left in him for any evil to enter. 
[ἢ τὸ ἀγαθὸν τοῦ θεοῦ]. The original writer would hardly have 
said that the Good ‘is wholly filled with God’, or ‘is one mass of 
God’. These words may be attributed to the same interpolator 
who inserted [μᾶλλον δὲ τὸ ἀγαθὸν αὐτός ἐστιν ὃ θεός] in ὃ τ, and 
2806.2 N 


178 CORPVS HERMETICVM 


[ἢ αὐτός ἐστιν ὃ θεὸς τὸ ἀγαθόν] in § 3b, and probably also [ἢ αὐτὰ τοῦ 
θεοῦ ἐρᾷ] in ὃ 4b fin. 

§ 4b. (. ..) Γαΐ γὰρ ἐξοχαὶ τῶν καλῶν καὶ The writer now 
proceeds to deal with τὸ καλόν, and to explain its relation to τὸ 
ἀγαθόν and to God. τὸ καλόν is the object of the Platonic ἔρως ; 
and in this part of. Corp. VI, the influence of Pl. Sympos. and 
Phaedrus may be recognized. The beginning of the paragraph must 
have been lost ; for the γάρ implies some preceding mention of τὸ 
καλόν. And the first lines of what follows the lacuna (αἱ γὰρ ἐξοχαὶ 
. . . οὐσίαι ἐκείνου) are hopelessly corrupt. 

καὶ καθαρώτεραι καὶ εἰλικρινέσταται (a/. -repat). ‘The author must 
have written either two superlatives or two comparatives. The 
same two adjectives occur in connexion with τὸ καλόν in Pl. Sympos. 
21rd: τί δῆτα, ἔφη, οἰόμεθα, εἴ τῳ γένοιτο αὐτὸ τὸ καλὸν ἰδεῖν εἰλικρινές, 
καθαρόν, ἄμικτον, κιτιλ, The Hermetist presumably had that passage 
in mind; and perhaps he here said something about the relation 
between τὰ καλά and αὐτὸ τὸ καλόν. 

4 οὐσία τοῦ θεοῦ, εἴ γε οὐσίαν ἔχει, τὸ καλόν ἐστι [τὸ δὲ καλὸν] 
καὶ (τὸν ἀγαθόν. It would be possible to say τὸ δὲ καλὸν καὶ ἀγαθόν, 
‘the Beautiful is also good’; but as the writer repeatedly couples 
τὸ καλόν and τὸ ἀγαθόν together in the following sentences, it is 
most likely that here also he wrote τὸ καλὸν καὶ τὸ ἀγαθόν. 

He asserts, with some hesitation, that τὸ καλόν and τὸ ἀγαθόν are 
the οὐσία of God. But he does not say that they are absolutely 
identical with God; his meaning seems to be rather that beauty 
and goodness are the most essential attributes of God. A few 
lines below, he calls τὸ καλόν and τὸ ἀγαθόν ‘ parts’ of God. 

As to εἴ ye οὐσίαν ἔχει, οἵ. Corp. XII. i init.: εἴ γέ τις ἔστιν 
οὐσία θεοῦ. This reservation was doubtless suggested by the Platonic 
doctrine that God is ἐπέκεινα τῆς οὐσίας. See Corp. 11. 4b. 

(πὸ δὲ τούτων (or τῷ δὲ τούτων φωτί ?)) οὐδὲν ἔστι καταλάμπεσθαι 
(καταλαβέσθαι MSS.) τῶν ἐν τῷ κόσμῳ. It would be possible to make 
sense by writing (τούτων δὲ) οὐδέν ἐστι καταλαβέσθαι (in the sense 
of καταλαβεῖν) [τῶν] ἐν τῷ κόσμῳ, ‘it is impossible to find aught of 
them in the world’; but it is more likely that the author wrote 
καταλάμπεσθαι. Plato described τὸ ἀγαθόν as the sun of the in- 
telligible world; and in Pl. Ref. 6. 508 D, οὗ καταλάμπει ἀλήθειά 
τε καὶ τὸ ὄν is parallel to ὧν 6 ἥλιος καταλάμπει. (Cf. τὸ ἀρχέτυπον 
φῶς in (ον. 11. 12 Ὁ.) κάλλος is associated with light, and described 
as ‘shining’, in Pl. Phaedrus 250 Ὁ: περὶ δὲ κάλλους, ὥσπερ εἴπομεν, 








LIBELLVS VI: 88 4a-6 179 


per ἐκείνων τε ἔλαμπεν ὄν, δεῦρό τε ἐλθόντες κατειλήφαμεν αὐτὸ διὰ 
τῆς ἐναργεστάτης αἰσθήσεως τῶν ἡμετέρων (sc. τῆς ὄψεως) στίλβον 
ἐναργέστατα. 

τὰ δὲ μὴ (ὀφθαλμῷ) ὑποπίπτοντα (ἀληθῆ ?), μάλιστα δὲ ἡ τοῦ καλοῦ 
καὶ τοῦ ἀγαθοῦ (ἰδέα ὃ). ἀληθῇ (‘real’) is a suitable word to stand in 
contrast to εἴδωλα and σκιαγραφίαι ; cf. Herm. ap. δῖον, ἔχε II A, 
περὶ ἀληθείας. The missing word after ἀγαθοῦ is very likely ἰδέα ; 
but it might also be οὐσία or φύσις. 

((ὁλόκληρα,)) ἐρασμιώτατα, Both these adjectives occur in Pl. 
Phaedrus 2500, Ὁ: (τὴν τελετὴν) ἣν ὠργιάζομεν (in our antenatal 
bliss) ὁλόκληροι μὲν αὐτοὶ ὄντες καὶ ἀπαθεῖς κακῶν ὅσα ἡμᾶς ἐν ὑστέρῳ 
χρόνῳ ὑπέμενεν, ὁλόκληρα δὲ καὶ ἅπλᾷ καὶ ἀτρεμῆ καὶ εὐδαίμονα 
φάσματα μυούμενοί τε καὶ ἐποπτεύοντες ἐν αὐγῇ καθαρᾷ, καθαροὶ ὄντες. 

. viv δὲ κάλλος μόνον ταύτην ἔσχε μοῖραν, ὥστ᾽ ἐκφανέστατον εἶναι 
καὶ ἐρασμιώτατον. The word ὁλόκληρος (integer) may be rendered 
‘unblemished’, In Phaedr. Δ ¢. ὁλόκληροι is coupled with ἀπαθεῖς 
κακῶν ; in Zim, 44. 6, ὁλόκληρος is coupled with ὑγιής, and means 
‘whole’ as opposed to ‘sick’, From the context in the Phaedrus, 
it may perhaps be inferred that the word was in some way asso- 
ciated with the Eleusinian mysteries, 

ὃ δ: τὸ καλὸν καὶ (τὸν ἀγαθόν, [τὸ ὑπέρλαμπρον] τὸ Γὑπερλαμπόμενον" 
ὑπὸ τοῦ θεοῦ. τὸ ὑπέρλαμπρον (al. ὑπέρλαμπον) has probably come 
by duplication from τὸ ὑπερλαμπόμενο. But what can be meant 
by τὸ ὑπερλαμπόμενον ὑπὸ τοῦ θεοῦ These words would naturally 
mean ‘which is outshone by God’; but that would not ‘suit the 
context. Possibly the original reading may have been something 
like τὸ περιλαμπόμενον ὑπὸ τοῦ θεοῦ (φῶς), ‘the light which God sheds 
round about him’. 

ἐκεῖνο τὸ ἀγαθὸν ἀμίμητον. Possibly we ought to read aA AAnrov 
in place of dMIMyrov. Cf. Corp. X. 5 as emended: τὸ κάλλος τοῦ 
ἀγαθοῦ, ἐκεῖνο τὸ ἄφθαρτον, τὸ ἀλάλητον (ἄληπτον MSS.). 

ὃ 6. τὴν [περὶ] τῆς εὐσεβείας ὁδόν. Compare what is said about 
ἡ πρὸς ἀλήθειαν ὁδός in Herm, af. Stob. Exc. II B. ΓᾺ 

καλὸν καὶ ἀγαθὸν τολμῶσι λέγειν ἄνθθρωπον. The writer is thinking 
of the common use of the term καλὸς κἀγαθός or καλοκάγαθός in 
speaking of a man whom one likes and respects. 

μηδὲ ὄναρ θεασάμενον εἴ τί ἐστιν ἀγαθόν. This description is not 
applicable to the writer himself, and those who, like him, have 
‘trodden the path of piety’; for such men know that the Good 
exists, and do not mistake the evils of human life on earth for 

N 2 


180 CORPVS HERMETICVM 


goods, What is here said about ‘a man ’ applies therefore to most 
men, but not to all men. But even the pious cannot be truly called 
καλοὶ καὶ ἀγαθοί ; for though they are free from the worst errors of 
their fellows, and know the evils to be evils, they still ‘have need of’ 
the evils, and ‘cannot live without them’. The writer may perhaps 
have hoped that the Good, though it is unattainable on earth, will 
be attainable to the pious after their release from the prison of the 
body; but in this document, he makes no mention of any such 
prospect. 

τὸ κακὸν πιστεύσαντα ἀγαθὸν εἶναι. Cf. Herm. af. Stob. XI. 2. (19) 
and (21): 6 θεὸς ἀγαθός, ὃ ἄνθρωπος κακός... . of θεοὶ τὰ ἀγαθὰ 
αἱροῦνται (of ἄνθρωποι τὰ κακὰ αἱροῦνται) ὡς ἀγαθά. This was already 
a current saying in the time of Sophocles. <Antig. 621: σοφίᾳ γὰρ 
ἐκ του κλεινὸν ἔπος πέφανται, τὸ κακὸν δοκεῖν ποτ᾽ ἐσθλὺν τῷδ᾽ ἔμμεν, ὅτῳ 
φρένας θεὸς ἄγει πρὸς drav. But the Hermetist does not, like the 
wise man quoted by Sophocles, make God the author of the delusion. 
In § 3b, he implies that such ἀπάται καὶ δόξαι ἀνόητοι result from the 
incarnation of the soul in a σῶμα ὑλικόν; but he does not explain 
how the soul has come to be incarnated. 

ἀγωνιζόμενον ἵνα μὴ μόνον ἔχῃ (τὸ κακόν), ἀλλὰ καὶ ἐπαύξῃ. What 
are the evil things which men mistake for goods, and strive to keep 
and to increase? ‘They cannot be the πάθη themselves ; they must 
be the things towards which our carnal desires are directed, that is, 
the material means of life (e.g. food, or the money needed to buy 
it). These are the things which we ‘cannot shun or hate ’, and 
‘without which we cannot live’. Cf. Philo Zeg. alleg. 3. 50. 147, 
Cohn I, p. 145: ὃ τέλειος σοφὸς ὅλον μὲν τὸν θυμὸν ἰσχύει παραιτή- 
σασθαι καὶ ἃποκόψαι, ὀργῆς κατεξαναστάς, τὴν δὲ κοιλίαν ἐκτεμεῖν 
ἀδυνατεῖ" τοῖς γὰρ ἀναγκαίοις σιτίοις καὶ ποτοῖς ἡ φύσις βιάζεται χρῆσθαι 
καὶ τὸν ὀλιγοδεέστατον καὶ καταφρονητικὸν αὐτῶν τῶν ἀναγκαίων, καὶ 
ἀσιτίαν αὐτῶν μελετῶντα. Porphyry, De abst. 3. 27, says that, man’s 
end being τὸ ὁμοιοῦσθαι θεῷ, one would come nearer to realizing that 
deal if one could abstain, not only from the flesh of animals, but 
from vegetables also; εἰ δὲ μή, GAN’ ἐντεῦθέν ye τὸ τῆς φύσεως ἡμῶν 
ἐλάττωμα, .. . ὅτι τὸ θεῖον ἀκήρατον καὶ ἐν πᾶσιν ἀβλαβὲς σώζειν οὐ 
δυνάμεθα οὐ γὰρ ἐν πᾶσιν ἦμεν ἀπροσδεεῖς. αἰτία δὲ ἡ γένεσις, καὶ τὸ 
ἐν τῇ πενίᾳ ἡμᾶς γενέσθαι." 

1 Cf Eucken, Life’s Basis and Life's Ideal, Eng. tr., p. 163: ‘ From the altitudes 


occupied by the spiritual life, submission to the impulses and the goods of sense 
seems to be something mean and base ; and yet without these man cannot possibly 








LIBELLVS VII 181 


LIBELLVS VII 


This piece should be read in connexion with Corp. I, of which it 
may be considered an appendage. It is an expansion of the 
abridged sermon given in Corp. I. 27, 28; and the attitude of 
the preacher is identical in the two documents. He does not, like 
the teacher depicted in most of the Hermetica, merely instruct a few 
select pupils in privacy ; he is a man who feels that he has a mission 
to convert his fellow men in general, and to lead them to the gnosis 
in which he himself has found salvation. This missionary spirit is 
peculiar to Corp. I and Corp. VIT, and places them in a different class 
from the rest of the Hermetic documents. Both of them are 
ascribed to Hermes Trismegistus in the headings prefixed to them 
in the MSS. ; but there is nothing in the contents of either to confirm 
this ascription ; and it is probable that in the case of both alike, the 
author himself never thought of putting his words into the mouth of 
a prehistoric prophet, but meant them to be read as spoken by 
himself in his own person. 

The view that the body is the enemy, which is the one definite 
lesson taught in Corg, VII, is the same that is taught through the 
myth of the Archanthropos in Corf. I. Almost every thought in 
Corp. VII has its parallel in the longer document; and there is 
nothing in the one which is out of keeping with the contents of the 
other. There is therefore strong reason to think that both were 
written by the same man. Compare the following :— 


Corp. VII. Corp. 1. 

Ta. μεθύοντες, τὸν τῆς ἀγνωσίας 27. οἱ μέθῃ ... ἑαυτοὺς ἐκδεδω- 
ἄκρατον éxmidvres. . . . στῆτε νή- κότες [[xat]] τῇ ἀγνωσίᾳ τοῦ θεοῦ, 
ψαντες. 28. ὅπου οὐδὲ εἷς μεθύει, νήψατε. 30. τῆς ψυχῆς νῆψις. 
ἀλλὰ πάντες νήφουσιν. 

tb. ἐνορμίζεσθαι τοῖς τῆς σω- 26b. ὅπως τὸ γένος τῆς ἀνθρωπό- 
τηρίας λιμέσι. τῆτος... σωθῇ. 20. διδάσκων πῶς 

εν σωθήσονται. 

28. ζητήσατε χειραγωγὸν τὸν 26 Ὁ. (τίοὐ) καθοδηγὸς γίνῃ τοῖς 
ὁδηγήσοντα ὑμᾶς ἐπὶ τὰς τῆς γνώ- ἀξίοις ; 29. καθοδηγὸς ἐγενόμην 
σεως θύρας. τοῦ γένους. 


preserve his life... . There is something in our life which we cannot dispense with, 
yet which, from the spiritual point of view, it is an imperative duty to shake off.’ 


182 


28. ἀφορῶντες τῇ καρδίᾳ... ." 
db γὰρ... ὁρατὸς ὀφθαλμοῖς. 

28. οὐ γάρ ἐστιν ἀκουστός, οὐδὲ 
λεκτός. 


28. τὸ λαμπρὸν φῶς, τὸ καθαρὸν 
σκότους. 


2a. τὸν (τῇ καρδίᾳ) ὁραθῆναι 
θέλοντα. 

28. νῷ καὶ καρδίᾳ. 

2b. (τὸ σῶμα,) τὸν σκοτεινὸν 
περίβολον, . .. τὸν τῆς φθορᾶς 
δεσμόν, τὸν ζῶντα θάνατον, κ-τ.λ. 


2b. τὸν ... ὧν ἐπιθυμεῖς (?) σοι 
φθονοῦντα, 


3. τὸ κάλλος τῆς ἀληθείας. 


3. μυσαρᾶς ἡδονῆς (τὰ αἰσθη- 
τήρια) ἐμπλήσας. 


CORPVS HERMETICVM 


30. (ἐγένετο) ἣ κάμμυσις τῶν 
ὀφθαλμῶν ἀληθινὴ ὅρασις. 

30, καὶ ἡ σιωπή μου ἐγκύμων 
31. ἀνεκλάλητε, ἄρ- 
pyre, σιωπῇ φωνούμενε. 

4. φῶς and σκότος. 6. τὸ φῶς 
ἐκεῖνο. 


τοῦ ἀγαθοῦ. 


εν νοῦς. 0, 12. ὃ δὲ νοῦς 
.. « ζωὴ καὶ φῶς. 21. φῶς καὶ 
ζωή ἐστιν ὁ θεὸς καὶ πατήρ. 28. 
ἀπαλλάγητε τοῦ σκοτεινοῦ. 32. εἰς 
ζωὴν καὶ φῶς χωρῶ. 

31. γνωσθῆναι βούλεται. 


31. ψυχῆς καὶ καρδίας. 

15. ὁ ἄνθρωπος θνητὸς μὲν διὰ 
τὸ σῶμα. 9. ὃ δὲ ἀγαπήσας ... 
τὸ σῶμα, οὗτος μένει ἐν τῷ σκότει 

¢ ‘ aA με 
εις πάσχων τὰ τοῦ θανάτου. 22. 
τὰ προσπίπτοντα ἐνεργήματα τοῦ 
σώματος. 

30. πληρωθεὶς ὧν ἤθελον ἐξηυ- 

4 
φράνθην. 


A -“ 3 ,’ ἣν , 
27. τὸ τῆς εὐσεβείας καὶ γνώσεως 


κάλλος. 30. (ἐπὶ τὸ πεδίον ?) τῆς 
ἀληθείας ἦλθον. 


22. μυσάττονται τὰς αἰσθήσεις. 


I have given reasons for assigning Corp. I to the period 


A.D. too-200; Corp. VII may therefore be dated between the 
same limits. 


818. Mot φέρεσθε; Men are possessed and carried away by an 
evil power, which the preacher compares to that which takes 
possession of the drunkard. (Cf. Hor. Od. 3. 25. 1: ‘Quo me, 
Bacche, rapis tui plenum?’) He afterwards compares this same 
power to the current which sweeps a boat along. The contrary of 
φέρεσθε μεθύοντες is expressed by στῆτε νήψαντες below; ‘make a 
firm stand (against the force which has hitherto swept you away) ; rid 
yourselves of this drunkenness.’ 

μεθύοντες. As Mr. Mead points out, the same metaphor is 








LIBELLVS VII: § 1a 183 


employed in one of the Zogia Jesu (Klostermann, Apocrypha II, 
Ρ- 16): ἔστην ἐν μέσῳ τοῦ κόσμου... καὶ εὗρον πάντας μεθύοντας, καὶ 
οὐδένα εὗρον διψῶντα (i.e. νήφοντα ἢ) ἐν αὐτοῖς. καὶ πονεῖ ἡ ψυχή μου 
ἐπὶ τοῖς υἱοῖς τῶν ἀνθρώπων, ὅτι τυφλοί εἰσιν τῇ καρδίᾳ αὐτῶν καὶ οὐ 
βλέπουσιν. The latter part of this Zogion resembles Corp. VII. 1a, 
ἀναβλέψαντες τοῖς τῆς καρδίας ὀφθαλμοῖς, and 2 a fin., ἀφορῶντες τῇ 
καρδίᾳ κιτιλ. In both documents alike, blindness is associated with 
drunkenness. 

The state of the soul when affected by the body is compared to 
drunkenness in Pl, Phaedo 79 c (the soul πλανᾶται καὶ ταράττεται καὶ 
ἰλιγγιᾷ ὥσπερ μεθύουσα) ; and the metaphor occurs in the writings of 
the later Platonists, 6. 5. Porphyr. De αὐτί. 4. 20 fin. ; men hate τοὺς 
ὑπομιμνήσκοντας κἀκ τῆς μέθης ἀνανῆψαι παρακαλοῦντας. 

τὸν τῆς ἀγνωσίας ἄκρατον [λόγον] ἐκπιόντες. Agnosia (which includes 
estrangement from God as well as ignorance of God) comprises all 
that is evil in human life, as its opposite, gnosis, comprises all that is 
good. Cf. Corp. X. 8b: κακία δὲ ψυχῆς ἀγνωσία" ... τοὐναντίον δὲ 
ἀρετὴ ψυχῆς γνῶσις. Corp. XI. ii. 21 Ὁ, as emended: ἡ γὰρ τελεία 
κακία τὸ ἀγνοεῖν τὸν θεόν. 

It would be possible to speak of the λόγος of γνῶσις (‘the teaching 
by which gnosis is conveyed’); but it is hardly possible to speak of 
the λόγος of ἀγνωσία ; for ἀγνωσία is not associated with any particular 
doctrine, and might rather be called ἀλογία. No substantive is 
needed with ἄκρατον (sc. οἶνον) ; but some reader may have thought 
that a substantive was wanted, and inserted an unsuitable one. 

ἀλλ᾽ ἤδη αὐτὸν καὶ ἐμεῖτε. Is ἐμεῖτε indicative or imperative? 
Probably indicative. If the writer had meant to say ‘ vomit forth the 
strong drink of ἀγνωσία᾽, i.e. ‘rid yourselves of it’, he would rather 
have written ἀλλ᾽ ἤδη αὐτὸν ἐξεμέσατε (ἐξεμεῖν, not ἐμεῖν ; and aorist, 
as in στῆτε, which follows,—not present). If the verb is indicative, 
it may be taken to signify the outpouring of foul words and deeds in 
which the ‘drunkenness’ of those who have not gwosis is manifested. 
They have reached the last and ugliest extreme of drunkenness ; that 
is what is meant by ἤδη καί 

τοῖς τῆς καρδίας ὀφθαλμοῖς. Cf. Corp. IV. 11b: τοῖς τῆς καρδίας 
ὀφθαλμοῖς. Corp. V. 2: τοῖς τοῦ νοῦ ὀφθαλμοῖς. 

There is a very close resemblance between the words of Corp. 
VII. ra and those used by Eusebius (Adversus Hieroclem, printed 
in Kayser’s edition of Philostratus, vol. i, p. 411, § 47) with reference 
to the fatalistic doctrine which he finds in Philostratus’s Zife of 


184 CORPVS HERMETICVM 


Apollonius Tyaneus: ἀλλὰ yap πρὸς ταῦτα τῆς ἀληθείας ὁ κῆρυξ 
ἀναβοήσεται λέγων. Ὦ ἄνθρωποι, θνητὸν καὶ ἐπίκηρον γένος, ποῖ δὴ 
φέρεσθε, τὸν τῆς ἀγνωσίας ἄκρατον ἐμπιόντες ; λήξατε ποτὲ καὶ διανήψατε 
τῆς μέθης, καὶ διανοίας ὀρθοῖς ὄμμασι τὸ σεμνὸν τῆς ἀληθείας ἐνοπτρίσασθε 
πρόσωπον. Either Eusebius had read Corp. VII, or he and the 
author of Corp. VII got these phrases from a common source. 

§1b. ἡ γὰρ τῆς ἀγνωσίας κακία ἐπικλύζει πᾶσαν τὴν γῆν. ἡ τῆς 
ἀγνωσίας κακία might mean either ‘this evil thing, agnosia’, or ‘the 
evil which results from agnosia’. 

The figure or parable which runs through this paragraph is not 
that of a voyage on the open sea, but that of a journey on the 
Nile. The river is in high flood (ἐπικλύζει πᾶσαν τὴν γῆν); the 
current is swift, and makes it difficult for the boat to gain the 
sheltered landing-place (λιμήν) at which the traveller is aiming. 
But the steersman takes advantage of an eddy or counter-current 
(ἀνάρροια), and brings the boat safely in. The traveller lands, and 
finds a guide, who leads him through the town ‘to the door’ of 
the temple which we must suppose to be the goal of his pilgrimage. 

καὶ συσσύρει (συμφθείρει MSS.) τὴν ἐν τῷ σώματι κατακεκλεισμένην 
ψυχήν. The soul of the godless man is ‘penned up’ in the narrow 
cell of the body. Cf. Corp. XI. ii, 21a: ἐὰν δὲ κατακλείσῃς σου 
τὴν ψυχὴν ἐν τῷ σώματι, ... τί σοι καὶ τῷ θεῷ; 

The word κατακεκλεισμένην brings in a metaphor inconsistent with 
the figure of the river-journey ; but that is unobjectionable, because 
in this phrase the writer is not developing the figure itself, but 
explaining its application. The fate of ‘the soul that is shut up 
in the body ’,—that is, the godless soul,—is like that of the traveller 
who fails to fetch up at the landing-place, and is swept along down 
stream, away from the sanctuary towards which his journey was, 
or should have been, directed. But it is difficult to defend the 
verb συμφθείρει (‘corrupts’), which is placed between and closely 
connected with two phrases referring to the river (ἐπικλύζει πᾶσαν 
τὴν γῆν and μὴ ἐῶσα ἐνορμίζεσθαι x.7.d.), and yet presents an 
entirely different picture. We are told that agnosia, like the swollen 
river, ‘floods the land, corrupts the (godless) soul, and does not 
suffer it to reach the haven’. This can hardly be right. Besides, 
there is no apparent reason for using the compound συμφθείρει 
instead of φθείρει. A satisfactory sense may be got by substituting 
συσσύρει, ‘sweeps along with it’.' 

1 For συσσύρει, cf. Numenius af, Euseb. Pr. ev. 14. 8.2: Carneades ἐξηγείρετο 








LIBELLVS VII: §§ 1a-2b 185 


§ 2a. ζητήσατε χειραγωγόν, τὸν ὁδηγήσοντα ὑμᾶς κατ᾿ He who 
seeks gnosis needs some one who has already attained to it to lead 
him on his way. The preacher probably means it to be under- 
stood that he himself is such a guide, and is ready to give his 
services to all who will accept them. 

ἐπὶ τὰς τῆς γνώσεως θύρας. For the moment, Guosis is personified. 
The preacher represents her as the deity whose temple the traveller 
in his parable is seeking; and he proceeds to depict her sanctuary, 
describing it as a place filled with unmixed light, and speaking of 
the votaries who are gathered there. His use of the plural (πάντες 
γήφουσι κιτ.λ.) may perhaps be taken to show that he has in mind 
a community of yvwori«ol,—comparable to a Jewish synagogue or 
a Christian ecclesia,—of which the convert will become a member. 

τὸ λαμπρὸν φῶς, τὸ καθαρὸν σκότους. This phrase shows that in 
the writer’s circle φῶς was a recognized name for God, or for the 
presence and power of God. (Cf. Corp. I passim.) The word is 
used as in the Fourth Gospel. Cf. Zp. Joh. τ. τ. 5: ὃ θεὸς φῶς 
ἐστιν, καὶ σκοτία οὐκ ἔστιν ἐν αὐτῷ οὐδεμία. 

ἀφορῶντες τῇ καρδίᾳ εἰς τὸν (οὕτως) ὁραθῆναι θέλοντα, Cf. Corp, I. 
gr: (δ᾽ θεὸς) γνωσθῆναι βούλετα. Corp. X. 15a: (6 θεὸς) θέλει 
γνωρίζεσθαι. It is necessary to insert οὕτως (sc. τῇ καρδίᾳ), on account 
of the following words, οὐ γάρ ἐστιν... δρατὸς ὀφθαλμοῖς, ἀλλὰ 
νῷ καὶ καρδίᾳ. If the preacher had merely said that God ὁραθῆναι 
βούλεται, there would be no meaning in the γάρ. 

οὐ γάρ ἐστιν ἀκουστός, οὐδὲ Aextds. Cf. Corp. X. 9: 6 yap θεὸς 

. οὔτε λέγεται οὔτε ἀκούεται. The teaching of the ‘ guide’ is, 
no doubt, needed; yet gwosis cannot be conveyed from one man 
to another by verbal instruction ; it must spring up spontaneously 
in the heart of him who seeks God. See Corp. IX jin. 

§ 2b. πρῶτον δὲ δεῖ σε περιρρήξασθαι ὃν φορεῖς χιτῶνα. The χιτών 
is the body; and the preacher denounces it in the most emphatic 
language. Cf. Corp, IV. 6b: ἐὰν μὴ πρῶτον τὸ σῶμα μισήσῃς 
xa... This hatred of the body was shared in various degrees by 
the later Platonists and Pythagoreans in general, and by many of 
the Catholic Christians, and was carried to extreme lengths by some 
of the Christian Gnostics, and especially by the Manichaeans. 
Compare Paul, Gad. 5.17: ἡ yap σὰρξ ἐπιθυμεῖ κατὰ τοῦ πνεύματος, 
λάβρος οἷον ποταμὸς ῥοωδής, πάντα καταπιμπλὰς τὰ τῇδε καὶ τἀκεῖθι, καὶ εἰσέπιπτε καὶ 


συνέσυρε τοὺς ἀκούοντας διὰ θορύβου. 
1 A Hermetist would have said κατὰ τοῦ νοῦ. 





186 CORPVS HERMETICVM 


τὸ δὲ πνεῦμα κατὰ τῆς σαρκός, . . . ἵνα μὴ ἃ ἐὰν θέλητε ταῦτα ποιῆτε." 
Rom. 7. 5-8.8: ὅτε γὰρ ἦμεν ἐν τῇ σαρκί, τὰ παθήματα τῶν ἁμαρτιῶν 
+ + + ἐνηργεῖτο ἐν τοῖς μέλεσιν ἡμῶν εἰς τὸ καρποφορῆσαι τῷ θανάτῳ. 

. ὃ νόμος πνευματικός ἐστιν"" ἐγὼ δὲ σάρκινός εἶμι, πεπραμένος ὑπὸ 
τὴν ἁμαρτίαν. ... οἶδα γὰρ ὅτι οὐκ οἰκεῖ... ἐν τῇ σαρκί μου ἀγαθόν. 
εὐνὴν τίς μὲ ῥύσεται ἐκ τοῦ σώματος τοῦ θανάτου τούτου ;. .. τὸ γὰρ 
φρόνημα τῆς σαρκὸς θάνατος... ." of δὲ ἐν σαρκὶ ὄντες θεῷ ἀρέσαι" 
οὐ δύνανται. Philo calls the body a παμμίαρον δεσμωτήριον (De migr. 
Abr, 2. 9, Wendland 11, p. 270) ; a εἱρκτή (Quis rer. div. her. 14.68, 
Wendl. III, p. 16). Cf Philo De migr. Abr. 3. 16, Wendl. II, 
p. 271: εἰσὶ δ᾽ οἱ μέχρι τῆς τελευτῆς. . . ὥσπερ λάρνακι ἢ σορῷ 
++ + (τῷ σώματὴ ἐνετάφησαν. Leg. alleg. 3. 22. 69, Cohn I, p. 127: 
τὸν yap δερμάτινον ὄγκον ἡμῶν, τὸ σῶμα, . . . πονηρόν τε καὶ ἐπίβουλον 
τῆς ψυχῆς οὐκ ἀγνοεῖ, καὶ νεκρὸν καὶ τεθνηκὸς αἰεί μὴ γὰρ ἄλλο τι 
νοήσῃς ἕκαστον ἡμῶν ποιεῖν ἢ νεκροφορεῖν. Leg. alleg. τ. 33. 108, 
Cohn I, p. 89: ὡς νῦν μέν, ὅτε ζῶμεν, τεθνηκυίας τῆς ψυχῆς, καὶ ὡς 
ἂν ἐν σήματι τῷ σώματι ἐντετυμβευμένης, εἰ δὲ ἀποθάνοιμεν, τῆς ψυχῆς 
ζώσης τὸν ἴδιον βίον, καὶ ἀπηλλαγμένης κακοῦ καὶ νεκροῦ συνδέτου τοῦ 
σώματος. This sort of language is derived in part from Pl. Phaedo 
64 ff., and other passages in Plato; but some of the later Platonists 
went far beyond Plato in their hatred of the body. 

((rév σκοτεινὸν περίβολον). The numerous metaphors by which 
the body is here described are mutually inconsistent; but their 
inconsistency becomes less obtrusive, and the transitions easier, if 
we shift τὸν σκοτεινὸν περίβολον, and place it next after χιτῶνα. 
The body is first compared to a garment—yurdv, περίβολος, ὕφασμα, 
(στήριγμα ?) ; it is then called a δεσμός, i. 6. a thing by which the soul 
is bound ; (a garment might act as a δεσμός ;) the mention of φθορά 
in combination with δεσμός suggests the three terms which follow, 
viz. ‘death’, ‘ corpse’, and ‘tomb’ ; and finally, the pernicious thing 
is personified as a ‘robber’ and an ‘enemy’. 

τὸ τῆς ἀγνωσίας ὕφασμα, τὸ τῆς κακίας “orjprypa.' How are the 
genitives to be understood? ἀγνωσίας ὕφασμα would most naturally 
signify ‘a web made of or consisting of ignorance’. But the writer's 
meaning must have been that the woven structure of the body 
produces or results in ignorance. The soul which is wrapped in it 
forgets its antenatal gxosis, and is sunk in /efhe. 


* Compare τὸν ὧν ἐφίεσαι μισοῦντα καὶ ὧν ἐπιθυμεῖς σοι φθονοῦντα in Corp. VII as 
emended, 

? A Hermetist would have spoken of ἡ γνῶσις in place of ὅ νύμος, 

* A Hermetist would have said θεὸν γνῶναι. 








LIBELLVS VII: §§ 2b-3 187 


It is a strange mixture of metaphors to say that a piece of woven 
stuff (ὕφασμα) is a ‘prop’ of wickedness or evil; and there can 
be little doubt that στήριγμα is a misreading. Possibly the author 
may have written τὸν... στήμονα, ‘the warp of evil’, carrying on 
the notion expressed by ὕφασμα. 

(( (rv) ἐχθρὸν)» τὸν ὧν ἐφίεσαι μισοῦντα καὶ ὧν ἐπιθυμεῖς σου φθονοῦντα. 
—(rav δι’ ὧν φιλεῖ μισοῦντα, καὶ δι᾿ ὧν μισεῖ φθονοῦντα MSS.) The 
reading of the MSS. can only be translated ‘who hates the things 
by means of which he loves, and grudges the things by means of 
which he hates’ (or, ‘and grudges by means of the things which 
he hates’.) But there is no meaning in that, Emended as above, 
the passage makes good sense. Your enemy the body ‘hates the 
things which you seek after (i.e. τὰ ἀσώματα καὶ Oefa,—in Paul’s 
language, τὰ πνευματικά), and grudges you the things which you 
desire.’ 

A substantive is needed here, to match the words with which the 
preceding phrases end. If there is no expressed substantive, we 
are forced to understand λῃστήν; and that does not make good 
sense. A man who robs you is not one who ‘hates the things 
which you seek after’; he is rather one who loves them overmuch. 
ἐχθρόν is just the word that is wanted ; and as an epithet of χιτῶνα 
in the following sentence, it is clearly out of place. I have there- 
fore transposed it. 

§ 3. ἄγχων σε κάτω πρὸς αὗτόν. Cf. Corp. X. 24a: (ψυχὴν) τῷ 
σώματι προσηρτημένην καὶ ὑπ᾽ αὐτοῦ ἀγχομένην κάτω. Ascl, Lat, 1. 
128: ‘animam obtorto, ut aiunt, detinet collo.’ 

τὸ ἐκεῖ μένον (ἐγκείμενον MSS.) ἀγαθόν, If we retain ἐγκείμενον, 
ΜῈ must take the words to mean ‘the Good which is situated 
in Reality’, or ‘situated in the beauty of Reality’, But that is 
hardly satisfactory. ἐκεῖ μένον, ‘abiding in the other and higher 

world’, is better. 

τὰ [δοκοῦντα καὶ μὴ] νομιζόμενα αἰσθητήρια ἀναίσθητα ποιῶν. (καὶ 
μὴ A: ἐμοὶ Q: μοι καὶ Turn.) Both μὴ and μοι are unmeaning ; 
and to say δοκοῦντα καὶ νομιζόμενα would be to say the same thing 
twice over. Perhaps the readings of the MSS. may have arisen 
out of δοκοῦντα καὶ μὴ (ὄντα), written as an alternative for νομιζόμενα. 

Those who live in subjection to the body cannot see or hear 
aright; and the eyes and ears of such people do not deserve the 
name ‘organs of sense’, which is commonly applied to them. “Ὁ 
foolish people, and without understanding, which have eyes, and see 


188 CORPVS HERMETICVM 


not ; which have ears, and hear not’ (Jerem. 5. 21). The preacher 
here includes under the term αἴσθησις that ‘seeing with the heart’ 
which in § 2a he distinguished from ‘seeing with the eyes’; and 
his meaning is that those who see with the bodily eyes alone, and 
not ‘with the heart’, ought to be called blind (ἀναίσθητοι), because 
they cannot ‘see the things they ought to see’ (ἃ βλέπειν δεῖ, 1. 6. 
τὰ ἀσώματα καὶ θεῖα). It is the eyes and ears of the heart, and 
not the bodily organs, that are ‘stuffed up’. 

The piece ends abruptly at the words βλέπειν σε δεῖ, and there 
is no fitting conclusion. It is probable therefore that only the 
beginning of the preacher’s discourse is given in Corp, VII, and the 
rest of it has been lost. 


LIBELLVS VIII 


Contents 


. . Nothing dies. The Kosmos is a living and immortal being ; and 
no part of such a being can die. ὃ τ Ὁ. 

The Kosmos is the second God. It has been made, and is 
maintained in being, by the first God. The first God is eternal 
(i.e. without beginning, as well as without end). The Kosmos is 
not without beginning, but it is immortal; for it has been made 
immortal by its Maker, who is eternal. ὃ 2. 

God made the Kosmos out of formless or unordered matter, 
which existed beside him from all eternity. Out of that part of 
matter which was wholly subject to his will, he fashioned the sphere 
of heaven ; and within this sphere he enclosed the rest of matter. 
On the matter enclosed within the sphere he imposed manifold 
forms, so that the cavity (i.e. the sublunar world) was filled with 
living creatures; and he made the whole structure immortal, so 
that matter might never revert to its primal disorder. Yet a vestige 
of that disorder remains in the sublunar world, and manifests itself 
in the growth and decay of terrestrial organisms. The order of 
the heavenly bodies is perfect ; their movement is cyclic or recurrent, 
(and accordingly, they are individually immortal.) Terrestrial organ- 
isms suffer dissolution ; but by this dissolution they are reabsorbed 
into the cosmic elements, which are immortal. Thus, though 
the consciousness of each terrestrial being ceases, life never 
perishes. §§ 3, 4. 








LIBELLVS VIII 189 


Man is made in the image of the Kosmos, and feels himself 
a part of it; but he differs from all other terrestrial creatures, in 
that God has given him mind. Hence he not only perceives the 
corporeal Kosmos, but also apprehends the incorporeal God. And 
from the relation of man to God and to the Kosmos, it follows that 
man is immortal. 

The Kosmos is made by God; and man is made by the Kosmos. 
Thus God is the supreme author of all. § 5. 


Sources. ‘ Nothing perishes ; there isno death.’ That is the thesis 
maintained in Corp. VIII; and it is likewise maintained in Corp. 
XII. ii. 15 b-18. Both the writer of VIII and the writer of XII. 
ii doubtless had in mind the often-quoted lines of Euripides 
Chrysippus, fr. 836 Nauck:* χωρεῖ δ᾽ ὀπίσω | τὰ μὲν ἐκ γαίας φύντ᾽ 
εἰς γαῖαν, | τὰ δ᾽ ἀπ᾽ αἰθερίου βλαστόντα γονῆς | εἰς οὐράνιον πάλιν 
ἦλθε πόλον" | θνήσκει δ᾽ οὐδὲν τῶν γιγνομένων, | διακρινόμενον δ᾽ ἄλλο 
πρὸς ἄλλο(υ)" | μορφὴν ἑτέραν ® ἀπέδειξεν." 

For the rest, the doctrine of Corp. VIII is mainly Platonic, but 
partly Stoic. In his conception of the supracosmic and incorporeal 
God, the writer is a Platonist; and in his account of the relation 
between God and the Kosmos (§ 2), and his description of the 
demiurgia (§ 3), he is dependent on the Zimaeus. His conception 
of ἄτακτος ὕλη is derived from Plato. But his division of ὕλη into 
two separate portions, one of which is ‘subject to God’s will’, and 
the other is not, does not come directly from the Zimaeus, but shows 


1 That passage of Euripides, or part of it, is quoted in Philo (1) De sncorrzupé. 
mundi three times, cc. 2, 6, 27; and by Philo, Leg. al/eg. 1. 3. 7, Cohn I, p. 65; 
Actius, Diels Doxagr. p. 430; Heraclitus Αδαρ. Hom. 22; Marcus Aurelius 7. 50; 
Clem, Alex. Strom. 6, 24, It is translated into Latin by Lucretius, 2. 991 ff., and 
by Vitruvius, 8 prae/. § 1. 

Euripides got the thought from Anaxagoras, fr. 17 Diels: τὸ δὲ γίνεσθαι καὶ 
ἀπόλλυσθαι ob ὀρθῶς νομίζουσιν of Ἕλληνες" οὐδὲν γὰρ χρῆμα γίνεται οὐδὲ ἀπόλλυται, 
ἀλλ᾽ ἀπὸ ἐόντων χρημάτων συμμίσγεταί τε καὶ διακρίνεται. καὶ οὕτως ἂν ὀρθῶς 
καλοῖεν τό τε γινέσθαι συμμίσγεσθαι καὶ τὸ ἀπόλλυσθαι διακρίνεσθαι. Compare also 
Epicharmus Gvom., fr. 9 Diels: συνειερίθη καὶ διεκρίθη κἀπῆλθεν ὅθεν ἦλθεν πάλιν, | 
γᾶ μὲν εἰς γᾶν, πνεῦμα δ᾽ ἄνω spome πνεῦμ᾽ ἄνω). τί τῶνδε χαλεπόν ; οὐδὲ Ev, 
But it was the verses of Euripides that fixed themselves in men’s memory. 

For a modern expression of the same thought, cf. Maeterlinck, Our Eternity, 
Eng. tr. 1913, ch. 2: ‘Total annihilation is impossible. We are the prisoners of 
an infinity withont outlet, wherein nothing perishes, wherein everything is dispersed, 


but nothing lost... . We can no more conceive death than we can conceive 
nothingness... . We give the name of death to anything that has a life a little 
different from ours,... “There is no room for death!” .., All that dies falls 
into life.’ 


* ἄλλο πρὸς ἄλλου Clem. Alex.(?), Nauck, Diels ; ἄλλο πρὸς ἄλλῳ Bernays, 
® Variants, μορφὰς ἑτέρας and μορφὴν ἰδίαν. 
* Variant, ἐπέδειξεν, 





19 ΟΛ᾿ CORPVS HERMETICVM 


connexion with a later form of the Platonic doctrine of ὕλη. The 
comparison of the Kosmos to a cave may have been adopted from 
Numenius or some other Platonist of the same period. The descrip- 
tion of the Kosmos as ‘ the second God’ was doubtless suggested by 
the Zimaeus (see Tim. 92 6). But the ‘second God’ of the Platonists 
is the supreme God of the Stoics ; and in his account of the Kosmos, 
and of man’s relation to it, the writer has been influenced by Stoic 
authorities. The use of the word συμπάθεια (ὃ 5) is an indication 
of this. The words ἀποκατάστασις (ὃ 4), ποιόν and ποιότης (§ 3) 
probably came from Stoic sources. The writer of Corp. VIII 
apparently does not accept the Platonic doctrine that the individual 
man continues to exist as a separate person after the dissolution of 
the body. In this respect, he has rejected one of the most important 
tenets of Platonism, and his position more nearly resembles that of 
the Stoic Epictetus, 


Date. The combination of Platonism and Stoicism which Cor, 
VIII presents cannot be earlier than the first century B.c. The 
date of this document must therefore lie somewhere between 
Too B.C, and A.D. 300, if we take the latter date as the /erminus 
ad quem of the Hermetica in general, Narrower limits cannot be 
fixed with absolute certainty ; but the probabilities are strongly in 
favour of the latter half of this period. The nearest parallels to 
§ 3 init. (καὶ ὅσον ἦν τῆς ὕλης x.7.A.) occur in the writings of Hermogenes 
and Methodits (a. Ὁ, 200-300) ; and the comparison of the Kosmos 
to a cave points towards the time of Numenius, Cronius, and 
Porphyry (A.D. 150-300), by whom the same comparison was 
employed. It is therefore most likely that Corp. VIII was written 
at some time between A.D. 150 and 300, 


§ 1a. περὶ ψυχῆς καὶ σώματος, ὦ wai, νῦν λεκτέον. This implies that 
something has preceded. If the 4e//us began with these words, its 
writer must have intended it to follow another ‘ discourse of Hermes 
to Tat’. 

Hermes says that he is about to speak ‘about the soul’, and 
explain τρόπῳ ποίῳ ἀθάνατος ἡ ψυχή; but in the discourse which 
follows, there is not a word about ψυχή. The document might be 
described as περὶ ἀθανασίας ; but no part of it can be described as 
περὶ ψυχῆς. However, there is undoubtedly a lacuna after καὶ 
διαλύσεως at the end of ὃ 1a; and it is possible that a passage of 
considerable length has disappeared there, and that these intro- 





LIBELLVS VIII: §§ τα, 1Ὁ 191 























 ductory words had more to do with the lost beginning of the dis- 
course of Hermes than with the part of it which has been preserved. 
ἐνεργείᾳ δὲ ποταπῇ (συνίσταται καὶ διαλύεται (Ὁ) τὰ σώματαν. τὰ 
σώματα or τὸ σῶμα must have stood here, in correspondence to ἡ 
ψυχή in the preceding clause. The ἐνέργεια by which the σύστασις 
and διάλυσις of (earthly) bodies are carried on might be named 
either φύσις or εἱμαρμένη. The σύστασις and διάλυσις of bodies are 
spoken of in § 4; but the document, in the form in which we have 
it, contains no explanation of the nature of the ἐνέργεια by which 
these processes are effected,— unless indeed what is said in ὃ 3 about 
God’s imposition of ποιά on ἄτακτος ὕλη can be considered such an 
explanation. 

§ ib. (...) περὶ οὐδὲν γὰρ αὐτῶν ὁ θάνατος. αὐτῶν must mean τῶν 
ἐν τῷ κόσμῳ. A passage in which ‘the things in the Kosmos’ were 
mentioned must therefore have been lost before these words. 
ἀλλὰ ὄνομά ἐστιν ἡ θανάτου προσηγορία κενὸν ἔργου.---(ἀλλὰ νόημά 
ἐστιν ἀθανάτου προσηγορίας ἢ κενὸν ἔργον MSS.) For ὄνομα contrasted 
with ἔργον (as λόγος often is), cf. Eur. Jph. Aud. τ28 : ὄνομ᾽, οὐκ ἔργον, 
παρέχων. Lb. 1115: τοῖς ὀνόμασιν μὲν εὖ λέγεις, τὰ δ᾽ ἔργα σοῦ κ-τιλ. 
For ὄνομα κενόν, cf. Corp. ΧΙ. i. 5: ἀργία γὰρ ὄνομα κενόν ἐστι. We 
may suppose that ἀλλ᾽ ὄνομα was wrongly read as αλλο νομα, and this 
was wrongly corrected into ἀλλὰ νόημα. 

There is no such thing as death. Cf. Corp. XII. ii. 18: οὐδὲν δὲ 
φθαρτὸν ἢ ἀπολλύμενον" ai δὲ προσηγορίαι τοὺς ἀνθρώπους ταράττουσιν. 
Corp. ΧΙ. ii. 15 b: τὴν δὲ μεταβολὴν θάνατόν φασιν εἶναι κιτ.λ. 
Apollonius Tyaneus 3. 58 (Kayser, Philostrati opera I, Ὁ. 359)": 
θάνατος οὐδεὶς οὐδενὸς ἢ μόνον ἐμφάσει ἡ, καθάπερ οὐδὲ γένεσις οὐδενὸς 
1 This letter is a consolatto addressed to ‘ Valerius’ on the death of his son. If 
the conclusions of Norden and Cichorius (Norden Aguostos Theos Anhang III, 
P 337 8qq.), based on a combination of ingenious ii:ferences, may be accepted, Zp. 
58 is a genuine letter of Apollonius, written by him in Α. Ὁ 81-83, and addressed 
to Valerius Festus, proconsul of Asia. The doctrine set forth in it is Stoic, not 
Platonic ; what the writer asserts is not that the individual man is immortal as an 
individual, but that at his death he is reabsorbed into the All, and the All is 
immortal. That same doctrine is taught in Corp. VIII, which may have been 
written one or two centuries later; but the author of Corp, VIII has combined with 
it Platonic ingredients which are absent in the letter of Apollonius. 

A similar thought occurs in Apollonius Zp. 55, a consolatio addressed by Ap. to 
his brother, whose wife had died: μηδέ, ἐπεὶ θάνατός τι λέγεται (‘because men 
speak of a thing which they call death’), κρεῖττον αὐτοῦ τὸ ζῆν ὑπολάμβανε, χεῖρον 
ὃν τῷ παντὶ τοῖς νοῦν ἔχουσι. But in Zp. 55 (which may also be genuine, for aught 
that I know), there is no philosophic elaboration of this thought; the bulk of the 
letter consists of advice to the widower (who was presumably not a philosopher) to 


marry again without delay. 
? ‘save only in appearance.’ 


192 CORPVS HERMETICVM 


ἢ μόνον ἐμφάσει. τὸ μὲν γὰρ ἐξ οὐσίας τραπὲν εἰς φύσιν | ἔδοξε γένεσις, 
τὸ δὲ ἐκ φύσεως εἰς οὐσίαν κατὰ ταὐτὰ θάνατος, οὔτε γιγνομένου κατ᾽ 
ἀλήθειάν τινος οὔτε φθειρομένου ποτέ, μόνον δὲ ἐμφανοῦς ὄντος (for a 
. 9 , ἧς ἃ cal Ν Ν , “ 4 Aa ΝΝ ΓΝ 
time) ἀοράτου δὲ ὕστερον, τοῦ μὲν διὰ παχύτητα τῆς ὕλης, τοῦ δὲ διὰ 
λεπτότητα τῆς οὐσίας, οὔσης μὲν αἰεὶ τῆς αὐτῆς, κινήσει δὲ διαφερούσης καὶ 
στάσει. τοῦτο γάρ που τὸ ἴδιον ἀνάγκῃ τῆς μεταβολῆς, οὐκ ἔξωθεν γινομένης 
ποθέν, ἀλλὰ τοῦ μὲν ὅλου μεταβάλλοντος εἰς τὰ μέρη, τῶν μερῶν δὲ εἰς τὸ 
ὅλον τρεπομένων ὡ κῶϑ ἑνότητι τοῦ παντός. εἰ δὲ ἐρήσεταί τις τί τοῦτο 
” 4 Ν 4 ε " Ν + of a > ~ 3 a , a 
ἐστι TO ποτὲ μὲν ὁρατὸν ποτὲ δὲ ἀόρατον ἣ (év?) τοῖς αὐτοῖς γινόμενον ἢ 
ἄλλοις, φαίη τις ἂν ὡς Eos)? ἑκάστου ἐστὶ τῶν ἐνθάδε γενῶν, ὃ πληρωθὲν 

ὲ a P) > ὔ ν ᾿ “ , 3 ’ 7 δ ,ὔ > 
μὲν (ὕλης ὃ) ἐφάνη διὰ τὴν τῆς παχύτητος ἀντιτυπίαν, ἀόρατον δέ ἐστιν, εἰ 
κενωθείη, διὰ (τὴν ὃ) λεπτότητα, τῆς ὕλης βίᾳ ἵπεριχυθείσης" " ἐκρυείσης 
τε τοῦ περιέχοντος αὐτὴν αἰωνίου μέτρου γεννητοῦ δ᾽ οὐδαμῶς " οὐδὲ 
φθαρτοῦ." 


ΕἼ, 6. ‘the change from the state of elemental matter (οὐσία in the Stoic sense) 
to the state of an organism’. The meaning would be better expressed by writing 
τὸ μὲν γὰρ ἐξ οὐσίας eee εἰς φύσιν ἔδοξε γένεσις (εἶναι). 

? A few words have probably been lost here. 

® Perhaps μέτρον (or (μέτρον) ἑνὸς 1). 

“ Conybeare translates ‘shed abroad’, which seems to suit the context. The 
word περιχυθείσης could hardly bear that meaning ; but one might read περιζεκ)χυ- 
θείσης. 

5 The writer must have meant, and may have written, τοῦ περιέχοντος αὐτὴν 
μέτρου, αἰωνίου ὄντος, γεννητοῦ δ᾽ οὐδαμῶς. 

5 This obscure sentence may perhaps be translated thus : ‘If some one asks what 
is this thing that becomes visible at times, and invisible at other times, whether in 
the same individuals or in different individuals, we may answer that each kind of 
beings upon earth has a measure, which, when filled with gross matter, becomes 
visible by reason of the solidity of its density, but if emptied of gross matter, is 
invisible by reason of its rarity, the gross matter having been shed abroad by 
violence and poured out from the measure which contained it. The measure is 
eternal, and is neither generated nor subject to destruction.’ 

The ‘thing which is now visible and now invisible’ is, if I understand the passage 
tightly, a sort of living gas (the πῦρ voepiv or πνεῦμα of the Stoics), which 
permeates the universe, and vivifies all individual organisms, It is thought of as 
corporeal, but subtle, and is contrasted with ὕλη (gross matter). It is invisible in 
itself; but when a portion of it, marked off by a definite boundary, is ‘filled’ with 
ὕλη, the thing thus composed (i. e. the living organism) is visible and tangible. 

But what is the meaning of μέτρον! The word seems to be here used to denote 
the limiting surface of any one of these portions of πνεῦμα (if ‘the thing which is 
visible at times’ may be called πνεῦμα), At the death of the organism, this limit- 
ing surface is, so to speak, shattered by a violent shock (βίᾳ), and the ὕλη with 
which it was ‘ filled’ escapes, and is dispersed. The portion of πνεῦμα which was 
delimited by this μέτρον, and in which the life of the organism consisted, then 
becomes invisible (and is presumably reabsorbed into the universal πνεῦμα). 

Thave failed to find any parallel to this use of the word μέτρον ; but it may 
possibly have been suggested by the saying of Heraclitus, fr. 30 Diels, ἦν det καὶ ἔστι 
καὶ ἔσται πῦρ ἀείζωον (= the πῦρ νοερόν of the Stoics), ἁπτόμενον μέτρα καὶ ἀποσβεν- 
νύμενον μέτρα. Be that as it may, the notion which Apollonius here expresses by 
μέτρον seems to be similar to that elsewhere expressed by the Pythagorean term 
πέρας. Of the philosophic tenets of Apollonius Tittle is known; but a Stoicizing 
Neopythagorean, such as we may suppose him to have been, might perhaps take 








LIBELLVS VIII: δι 193 


a 4 
τί δὲ καὶ τὸ τῆς πλάνης ἐπὶ τοσοῦτον ἀνέλεγκτον ;' οἴονται γάρ τινες, ὃ 
, > ‘ a , ‘ ido: ε ε θ ‘ ὃ ‘ 4 
πεπόνθασιν, αὐτοὶ τοῦτο πεποιηκέναι, μὴ εἰδότες ὡς ὁ γεννηθεὶς διὰ γονέων 
, as eee 3 sg θὰ Σ διδι δα ν᾿ “ἃ a , 
γεγέννηται, οὐχ ὑπὸ γονέων," καθάπερ τὸ διὰ γῆς φυὲν οὐκ ἐκ γῆς φύεται, 
- Ν - 
πάθος τε οὐδὲν τῶν φαινομένων περὶ ἕκαστον, ἀλλὰ μᾶλλον περὶ ev ἑκάστου." 
“- \ x a 
τοῦτο δὲ (54. τὸ ἑν) τί ἂν ἄλλο τις εἰπὼν ἢ τὴν πρώτην οὐσίαν ὄρθως ἂν 
“a ‘ , . 
ὀνομάσειεν ; ἣ δὴ μόνη ποιεῖ τε καὶ πάσχει, πᾶσι γινομένη πάντα διὰ 
, 6 ὃς ἀξ ἡ ἢ ‘ , 3 , Ly > 
πάντων, θεὸς ἀίδιος," ὀνόμασι καὶ προσώποις ἀφαιρουμένη τὸ ἴδιον ἀδικου- 


μένη τε." 
καὶ τοῦτο μὲν ἔλαττον. τὸ δὲ (μεῖζον) κλαίεταί τις, ὅταν θεὸς ἐξ 


ἀνθρώπου γένηται τόπου μεταβάσει καὶ οὐχὶ φύσεως." ὡς δὲ ἔχει τὸ 


the ἄπειρον of which Pythagoreans spoke to mean the universal πνεῦμα, and τὸ 
πέρας to mean the μέτρον by which the πνεῦμα of an individual organism is marked 
off from the universal πνεῦμα, 

But the writer goes on to say that the μέτρον is αἰώνιον, What does he mean by 
this? It seems to be an attempt to combine with the Stoic cosmology the Platonic or 
Aristotelian conception of εἶδος. The μέτρον of a horse, so far as it is regarded merely 
as belonging to this or that individual horse, is shattered at death; but regarded 
as a type or general form (εἶδος), it is present in all horses; and the race of horses is 
everlasting. (The race or ind is referred to in the words ἑκάστου τῶν ἐνθάδε γενῶν.) 

The words ἢ (ἐν τ) τοῖς αὐτοῖς γινόμενον ἣ (ἐν 1) ἄλλοις are puzzling. The πνεῦμα 
(and with it, the μέτρον by which the πνεῦμα is delimited) may be said to become 
visible and invisible by turns ἐν ἄλλοις (καὶ ἄλλοις), i.e. in a succession of different 
individuals ; but how can it be said to do so ἐν rois abrois? Does τοῖς αὐτοῖς refer 
to the heavenly bodies, which, though the life in them persists unchanged, are 
alternately visible and invisible ἐσ ws in the succession of day and night, and of the 
seasons of the year? 

1 ‘Why is it that this error (viz, the notion that men “die”, or that there is 
such a thing as “death ’’) has so long remained unrefuted ἢ" 

* Valerius thinks ‘7 have begotten a son’ (and consequently mourns when he 
loses his son), But that is a mistake; the begetting of his son, like all else that 
takes place, is an act of God (God immanent in the universe, and identical with 
gvots),—or in other words, an operation of the all-permeating πῦρ νοερόν ; and 
Valerius (who is himself merely a temporarily marked off portion of God) is in 
this, as in all else that he does (or rather, thinks that he does), a passive instrument 
of God, who does all, 

’ ‘Nothing that takes place in the visible world is a thing that befalls an 
individual ; every incident in the life of an individual (ἑκάστου) is rather a thing 
that befalls the One (wept {τὸ 1) é).’ This must, I think, have been the meaning of 
the clause; but περὶ ἐν ἑκάστου is obscure, and perhaps corrupt. 

Valerius thinks ‘the death of my son is a disaster that has befallen me’. But he 
is wrong; it is an event that has to do, not with Azm as an individual, but with the 
One who is all.—This is Stoic pantheism pushed to its extreme. 

* God (who is πῦρ νοερόν) is both the maker of the Kosmos and the πρώτη οὐσία 
i.e. the primary elemental substance) of which it is made. The other elements 
air, water, earth) have come into being by transmutation out of fire (and, accord- 

ing to the Stoics, will be wholly retransmuted into fire at the ecpyrosts, when God 
will again be ‘all in all’; but we have no evidence that Apollonius accepted the 
Stoic doctrine of ecpyrosis). 

5 © This alone is agent and patient, ... (and this,) in so far as it takes on the 
names and persons of individuals, forfeits its peculiar character to its prejudice’ 
(Conybeare). Or perhaps, ‘and when men impose on it the names and persons of 
individuals (as Valerius does when he talks about “ me” and “my son”), they 
deprive it of its proper character, and do it wrong.’ 

ἡ To weep when this takes place is μεῖζον, i.e. ‘a still greater error than that of 


2206-2 [9] 


194 CORPVS HERMETICVM 


ἀληθές, ob πενθητέον σοι θάνατον, ἀλλὰ τιμητέον καὶ σεβαστέον.. .. 
υἱὸν δὲ ἔχεις καὶ νῦν τὸν τεθνηκότα, φήσει τις τῶν νοῦν ἐχόντων. τὸ γὰρ 
ὃν οὐκ ἀπόλλυται, διὰ τοῦτο ὄν, ὅτι ἔσται διὰ παντός." ἢ καὶ τὸ μὴ ὃν 
γίνεται' πῶς δ᾽ ἂν γένοιτο [μὴ ἀπολλυμένου τοῦ ὄντος]; ᾽ 

Macrobius Somn. 2. 12. 12: ‘Quod autem ait (Cicero) “mundum 
quadam parte mortalem”, ad communem opinionem respicit, qua 
mori aliqua intra mundum videntur, ut animal exanimatum, vel ignis 
extinctus, vel siccatus humor ; haec enim omnino interisse creduntur. 
Sed constat secundum verae rationis adsertionem, quam et ipse 
(Cicero) non nescit, nec Vergilius ignorat dicendo “nec morti esse 
locum ” (Georg. 4. 226), constat, inquam, nihil intra vivum mundum 
perire, sed eorum quae interire videntur solam mutari speciem, et 


illud in originem suam atque in ipsa elementa remeare, quod tale 
quale fuit esse desierit.’ 


[ἢ κατὰ στέρησιν τοῦ πρώτου γράμματος λεγόμενος θάνατος ἀντὶ τοῦ 
ἀθάνατος.] That is, when men say θάνατος, they mean, or ought to 


which I have been speaking’, The man who has died ‘has become θεός, by a 
change of place, but not of nature’. This does not mean that he has become a 
god,—i, e, a divine individual, one among a number, with a separate a of 
his own, He was (or at least, he seemed to be, and thought he was) an individual 
person while he lived on earth, but he is such no longer; he has been reabsorbed 
into the All which is God. He has undergone ‘a change of place, but not of 
nature’, in the same sense that this might be said of a bneket-full of water which 
has been poured into the sea. His φύσις (his mode or kind of being) is unchanged ; 
i,e, he still is what he was before. He was πνεῦμα upon earth; (i.e. the man, gua 
living, was πνεῦμα ; the ὕλη with which his μέτρον of πνεῦμα was ‘filled’ to 
constitute an organism was not he;) and he is πρεῦμα still. But during his life on 
earth he was a distinct portion of πνεῦμα, marked off and divided from the Test ; 
now, that portion of πνεῦμα, which was he, is blended with the whole mass of 
πνεῦμα in which the life of the universe resides, 

That is what the writer must have meant, if he adhered to the doctrine laid down 
in the preceding part of the letter. But from this point onward, he speaks 
ambiguously, and uses phrases which, to a reader who had not fully grasped the 
meaning of his doctrine, might seem to imply a survival of the man as a distinct 
and individual person ; e.g. ὅταν ἐξ ἀνθρώπου θεὸς γένηται, and υἱὸν ἔχεις καὶ νῦν 
τὸν τεθνηκότα. 

?*That which is, ἐς for this very reason, that it will be for ever.’ This, I 
suppose, means ‘ Only that which is everlasting can rightly be said to exist’. If it 
could, at any time in the past, be truly said of your son that ‘he is’, then it follows 
that he can never cease to be. He must therefore be in existence now. (But he 
does not now exist as a separate person; he has been absorbed into God, or has 
become one with God.) 

2 The thing to be proved is that τὸ ὃν οὐκ ἀπύλλυται ; and that being so, the 
words μὴ ἀπολλυμένου τοῦ ὄντος appear to make the argument run in a circle. If 
we cut out these words, the rest may be translated thus: ‘ Otherwise,’ (i.e. if it 
were true that τὸ ὃν perishes,) ‘it would follow that τὸ μὴ ὄν comes into being; 
but how could τὸ μὴ ὄν come into being?’ (i.e. ‘but that is impossible’). τὸ μὴ 
ὃν γίνεται, ‘the non-existent comes to be’, is merely another way of saying τὸ ὃν 
ἀπόλλυται, ‘ the existent ceases to be’; but the writer seems to have thought that 


the impossibility was more manifest when the statement was put in the form τὸ μὴ 
ὃν γίνεται. 








LIBELLVS VIII: §§ 1b, 2 195 


mean, ἀθάνατος, but have omitted the first letter. The writer should 
rather have said ‘they mean afavacia’; but he invents a substantive 
ἀθάνατος equivalent in sense to ἀθανασία, in order to give plausibility 
to his suggestion that θάνατος is a corruption of a word meaning 
‘deathlessness ’. 

The grammar of this clause is faulty. The grammatical defect 
might be removed by writing λέγεται in place of λεγόμενος ; but it 
seems best to assume that 7... ἀθάνατος has been inserted by a later 
hand. 

ἀδύνατόν ἐστι τοῦ ἀθανάτου ζῴου μέρος τι ἀποθανεῖν. Cf. Corp. XII. 
ii.5b, 16, Asc? Lat, III. 20 α : ‘si enim animal mundus vivensque 
semper (ἀείζωος) et fuit et est et erit, nihil in mundo mortale est.’ 

[μάλιστα δὲ (ἀθάνατος) ὁ ἄνθρωπος, τὸ λογικὸν Ldov.] According to 
the traditional text, μάλιστα δέ would mean μάλιστα δὲ μέρος ἐστὶ 
τοῦ κόσμου. But that is nonsense. The writer’s meaning must have 
been that man is émmortal in a higher sense than other creatures. 
(Cf. Corp. XII. ii, 19: πάντων δὲ μᾶλλον (ἀθάνατος) ὁ ἄνθρωπος.) 
But the mention of man reine the sequence of thought here, 
and unduly anticipates ὃ 5, τὸ δὲ τρίτον 6 ἄνθρωπος κιτιλ. It i is best 
therefore to bracket the words as an interpolation. 

ὃ 2. δεύτερος δὲ ὁ κατ᾽ εἰκόνα αὐτοῦ... ἀθάνατος γέγονε. This 
passage, as given in the MSS., is pintiiveliiathte.- but the writer’s 
meaning was probably not far from that which is expressed by the 
Greek as I have rewritten it. God is ἀΐδιος. (The word ἀιδιος here 
means ‘without temporal beginning or end’; it does not mean 
‘eternal’ (αἰώνιος) in the Platonic sense, i.e. ‘out of time’) The 
Kosmos is not ἀΐδιος, but is ἀείζωος or ἀθάνατος, these two words 
being used as synonyms. The Kosmos has had a beginning ; it 
has been made by God (ὑπ’ αὐτοῦ γενόμενος). But having once 
been made, it is continually maintained in being, or unceasingly 
remade, by its Maker (ὑπ᾽ αὐτοῦ συνεχόμενος καὶ τρεφόμενος,-- ἀεὶ 
γίνεται. And it will be thus maintained in existence as a living 
being through all future time; that is to say, God has made or 
makes it immortal. The contents of the paragraph are summed up 
in the concluding words, 6 δὴ κόσμος ὑπὸ rod πατρὸς ἀιδίου ὄντος 
ἀθάνατος γέγονε. This doctrine is evidently based on the Zimaeus. 
See Herm. ap. Stob. Exc. XI. 2. (5), and Corp, XVIII. 14a. 

6 κατ᾽ εἰκόνα αὐτοῦ... γενόμενος, See Asc, Lat. 1. το: ‘dei, 
cuius sunt imagines duo mundus et homo,’ 

et δὲ καὶ ἐγένετο, ὑφ᾽ ἑαυτοῦ, God may be called αὐτογέννητος ; 

O02 


196 CORPVS HERMETICVM 


but that is only another way of saying that he is ἀγέννητος, See 
Ascl. Lat. Il. 14b. 

§ 3. ὅσον ἣν τῆς ὕλης ὑποκείμενον τῷ ἑαυτοῦ (θελήματι. These 
words imply that, of the total amount of ὕλη, a part only was ‘ subject 
to God’s will’, and the rest was not. This is a modification of the 
doctrine taught in the Zimaews, which is rather that αὐ matter is 
partly, but not wholly, subject to God’s will. Cf. Hermogenes αὐ. 
Hippol. Ref. haer. 8. 17 (quoted in prefatory note on Asc/. Lat. 11): 
God ἐχώρισε (τὴν ὕλην) κατὰ μέρος, καὶ τὸ μὲν ἐκ τοῦ παντὸς λαβὼν 
ἡμέρωσε, τὸ δὲ εἴασεν ἀτάκτως φέρεσθαι. The ‘Valentinian’ in 
Methodius’s dialogue Περὶ τοῦ αὐτεξουσίου c. 3 (quoted 42.) as 
emended: God ἀπὸ τῶν χειρίστων (τῆς ὕλης) τὰ κάλλιστα διακρίνας, 
οὕτως ἐδημιούργησεν ὅσα γοῦν ἥρμοζεν θεῷ δημιουργεῖν" τὰ δ᾽ ὅσα αὐτῆς 

εν τρυγώδη ἐτύγχανεν, ταῦτα ὡς εἶχεν κατέλιπεν. 

The ἀταξία of which the speaker in Methodius’ dialogue is thinking 
is wickedness, or moral evil. His view is that this ἀταξία exists in men 
alone, and that it has arisen out of that portion of ὕλη which God 
rejected as too bad to be brought to order by him, and which, we 
must suppose, has somehow entered into the composition of men,’ 
though not into that of anything else in the universe. But the 
ἀταξία of which the writer of Corp. VIII is thinking is not (or at 
least, not solely or mainly) moral evil ; it is rather αὔξησις and μείωσις 
(§ 3 fin.), i.e. the growth and decay, or composition and dissolution, 
of individual organisms,’ as opposed to the permanent and un- 
changing existence of the heavenly bodies; and this kind of 
ἀταξία presents itself, not in men alone, but throughout the sublunar 
world. 

οὖσαν Kal αὐτὴν ἀθάνατον, καὶ ἔχουσαν ἀΐδιον thy ὑλότητα. This 
is an anacoluthon. If the reading is right, the author has written 
οὖσαν &c. in agreement with ὕλην, which does not occur in the text, 
but might have stood above in place of ὅσον τῆς ὕλης. He ought 
rather to have written οὔσης τῆς ὕλης καὶ αὐτῆς ἀθανάτου, καὶ ἐχούσης 
κτλ. Matter isnot merely ἀθάνατος, as is t e Kosmos, which has 
had a beginning ; ‘the materiality of matter’ (i.e. matter as such, 
or unformed matter) is also ἀΐδιος, as God is ; that is to say, it has 
had no beginning, but has existed side by side with God from all 
eternity. Cf. Asc/. Lat. II. 


1 Compare the statement in Pstés Sophia (C. Schmidt, p. 160, 1. 28 &c.) that 
men are ‘ the dregs of ὕλη᾽. 
2 Cf. Plut. 75. εἰ Os., quoted in prefatory note on Ase/, Lat, II. 








LIBELLVS VIII: δὲ 2, 3 197 


πλέον δέ, τῶν ζῴων (τῶν ἰδεῶν MSS.) τὰ ποιὰ ὁ πατὴρ ἐγκατασπείρας 
τῇ σφαίρᾳ ὥσπερ ἐν ἄντρῳ κατέκλεισε. God fashioned ‘so much of 
ὕλη as was (wholly) subject to his will’ into a hollow sphere ; that 
is to say, Out of this portion of ὕλη he made the heavens, that part 
of the universe in which there is perfect order. Moreover, he 
enclosed within this sphere the ὕλη which was zo¢ wholly subject 
to his will, and imposed a partial and imperfect order on this more 
refractory ὕλῃ; that is, he brought into being the mutable organisms 
of the sublunar world. And he did this by ‘sowing’ or ‘planting’ 
the qualities of the various kinds of Ga in the space within the 
sphere ; that is, by imposing these qualities on the ὕλῃ with which 
that space was filled. 

This writer uses the Stoic term ποιά, and not the Platonic term 
ἰδέαι or εἴδη, to denote the thing by the addition of which ὕλη 
is changed into ζῷα, that is, into organized and living σώματα. 
The word ἰδεῶν is unmeaning here, and must have been written 
by error. 

The description of the sublunar world as a cave in which the 
refractory ὕλῃ is imprisoned, and in which the ζῷα composed of 
it (including man) are enclosed, must have been borrowed from 
writers by whom the point of the comparison was more fully ex- 
plained. Cf. Porphyry De antro nympharum § 5 sg. (Nauck) : ἄντρα 
μὲν Oy)... οἱ παλαιοὶ καὶ σπήλαια τῷ κόσμῳ καθιέρουν, .. . σύμβολον 
μὲν τῆς ὕλης ἐξ ἧς (συνέστηκεν) ὃ κόσμος τὴν γῆν παραδιδόντες,. 

_ τὸν δὲ ἐκ τῆς ὕλης γινόμενον κόσμον διὰ τῶν ἄντρων παριστάντες. .. . 


»»Ψ ὃ te: ἊΝ ᾿ ‘ 207, 2 
τὸ ἔνυδρον. . . τῶν ἄντρων. .. καὶ σκοτεινὸν. . . ἐδέξαντο εἰς 
σύμβολον τῶν προσόντων τῷ κόσμῳ διὰ τὴν ὕλην... . οὕτω καὶ Πέρσαι 


τὴν εἰς κάτω κάθοδον τῶν ψυχῶν καὶ πάλιν ἔξοδον μυσταγωγοῦντες τελοῦσι 
τὸν μύστην, ἐπονομάσαντες σπήλαιον (τὸν) τόπον᾽ . . . εἰκόνα φέροντος 
[αὐτῷ] τοῦ σπηλαίου τοῦ κόσμου, ὃν ὁ Μίθρας ἐδημιούργησε, τῶν δὲ 
ἐντὸς κατὰ συμμέτρους ἀποστάσεις σύμβολα φερόντων τῶν κοσμικῶν 
στοιχείων ᾿καὶ κλιμάτων.}} Jb. ὃ 8: οἱ Πυθαγόρειοι καὶ μετὰ τούτους 
Πλάτων (Rep. 7) ἄντρον καὶ σπήλαιον τὸν κόσμον ἀπεφήναντο... .. 
ὅτι μὲν οὖν σύμβολον κόσμου τὰ ἄντρα καὶ τῶν ἐγκοσμίων δυνάμεων 
ἐτίθεντο οἱ θεολόγοι, διὰ τούτου δεδήλωται. Porphyry in the De an/r. 
aymph. repeatedly refers to Cronius and Numenius, who had written 
on the same subject; e.g. ὃ 21: ‘Numenius and his friend Cronius 


1 Perhaps we ought to cut out καὶ κλιμάτων, which yields no satisfactory sense, 
and read τῶν δὲ ἐντὸς ((κλιμάκων)) κατὰ συμμέτρους ἀποστάσεις σύμβολα pepoycay 
τῶν κοσμικῶν στοιχείων. The word στοιχείων may be taken to mean or include the 
planets. On the κλίμαξ ἑπτάπυλος of the Mithraic cult, see note on Corp. I. 25. 


198 CORPVS HERMETICVM 


say that the cave presents an image and symbol of the Kosmos.’ 
Thus it appears that the comparison of the Kosmos to a cave was 
traditional among the Platonists of the second and third centuries 
A.D., and that this symbolism may have been suggested to them 
in part by the rites practised by the Mithraists in their subterranean 
sanctuaries, as well as by reminiscences of the allegory of the cave 
in Pl. Rep. 7. 515 sg. 

πάσῃ ποιότητι κοσμῆσαι βουλόμενος τὸ μετ᾽ αὐτοῦ (ἄγποιον. If this 
reading is right, τὸ μετ᾽ αὐτοῦ ἄποιον must be taken to mean the 
unformed matter ‘ which existed side by side with God’. 

τῇ δὲ ἀθανασίᾳ περιέβαλε (περιβαλὼν MSS.) τὸ πᾶν σῶμα. God 
conferred immortality on the universe which he had made. But the 
immortality of the Kosmos resides more especially in the enclosing 
sphere of heaven; and the word περιέβαλε seems intended to 
suggest the meaning ‘God wrapped the Kosmos round with the 
immortal heavens ’. 

τῆς τούτου συστάσεως θελήσασα ἀποστῆναι, The σύστασις is the 
‘putting together’ or systematic arrangement of matter, by which 
the Kosmos is constituted. It is nearly equivalent to τάξις ; and 
so ἀταξία is contrasted with it. τούτου might perhaps be omitted 
with advantage; but if we retain it, we must take it to mean τοῦ 
παντὸς σώματος, i. 6. τοῦ κόσμου. 

If the matter of which the Kosmos is composed were not ‘ wrapped 
in immortality’ (i.e. enclosed by the immortal heavens), it might 
break away, and all might go back to chaos. Cf. Numenius af. 
Euseb. Pr. ev, τι. 18.24 (τὴν ὕλην. . . ξυνδησάμενος κιτ.λ.), 
quoted in prefatory note on Corg. II (p. 81). 

ἔχει δὲ καὶ ἐνθάδε ἄτακτόν τι περὶ τὰ μικρὰ Loa εἱλούμενον.---(ἔχει 
δὲ καὶ ἐνθάδε τὴν περὶ τὰ ἄλλα μικρὰ ποιὰ εἱλουμένην MSS.) Some- 
thing like ἄτακτόν τι is needed to lead up to αὕτη ἡ ἀταξία in the 
following sentence. τὰ μικρὰ ποιά is meaningless; and there can be 
little doubt that the author wrote τὰ μικρὰ ζῷα" (or σώματα). ‘The 
small {oa’ are the individual organisms on earth (which are called 
τὰ ἐπίγεια ga below), as opposed to that great ζῷον the Kosmos, 
and perhaps to the heavenly bodies also. ἄλλα is probably an 
alternative reading for μικρά. 

τὸ τῆς αὐξήσεως καὶ [7d τῆς] μειώσεως (sc. ἄτακτον) [ὃν θάνατον οἵ 
ἄνθρωποι καλοῦσιν). The μεταβολή to which all sublunar things are 
subject takes the form of increase and decrease, or growth and decay. 

1 Mr, G. R. 8. Mead alters ποιά into ζῷα here. 








LIBELLVS VIII: §§ 3-5 199 


Each living organism is continually taking into itself portions of the 
elements, and casting off other portions of them. But in the earlier 
stages of its existence it takes in more than it casts off, and so 
‘increases’; in the later stages it casts off more than it takes in, 
and so ‘decreases’. Sooner or later, the advancing process of 
‘decrease’ or ‘decay’ terminates in complete dissolution, ‘ which 
men call death’. But the relation between decrease and death is 
not explained in the text. It is not the decrease itself, or ‘the 
disorderliness of the decrease’, that men call death, but the dissolu- 
tion in which the decrease terminates; and dissolution is not ex- 
pressly mentioned. There is therefore reason to think that the 
words ὃν θάνατον οἱ ἄνθρωποι καλοῦσιν have been added by another 
hand. 

The process of growth and decay to which sublunar organisms 
are subject is contrasted with the unvarying movement of the 
heavenly bodies, and is considered to be caused by the partial 
survival, in the lower part of the Kosmos, of the ἀταξία of unformed 
or chaotic matter. 

§ 4. ἡ δὲ ἀποκατάστασις τῶν ἐπιγείων σωμάτων (διαλυθείσης γίνεται 
τῇς) συστάσεως" τῇ δὲ διαλύσει ταύτῃ (ἡ δὲ διάλυσις αὐτὴ MSS.) 
ἀποκαθίσταται εἰς τὰ ἀδιάλυτα σώματα. The ‘indissoluble bodies’ 
are the cosmic elements, which are immortal. When an organism 
is broken up, the earth, water, air, and fire of which it was composed 
are reabsorbed into the mass of cosmic earth, water, air, and fire 
(cf. Corp. XII. ii. 18); and this ‘return to the former condition’ 
is here described by the term ἀποκατάστασις, which, in its stricter 
sense, was applicable only to the heavenly bodies, and meant the 
return of any one of them (or of all of them simultaneously) to the 
same position which it (or they) had occupied before. In Corp. XI. 
i. 2, the ἀποκατάστασις of terrestrial bodies is called ἀνταποκατά- 
στασις. 

καὶ οὕτω στέρησις γίνεται τῆς αἰσθήσεως, οὐκ ἀπώλεια ((Lwiic)) [τῶν 
σωμάτων]. Cf. Corp. XII. ii. 18, as emended: οὐ γὰρ ἡ γένεσίς ἐστι 
ζωῆς ἀρχή, GAN αἰσθήσεως" οὐδὲ ἡ μεταβολὴ θάνατος, ἀλλὰ λήθη. 

§ 5. τὸ δὲ τρίτον [[ζῴον}] ὁ ἄνθρωπος. If we retain ζῷον, these words 
imply that the Kosmos is τὸ δεύτερον ζῷον, and that God is τὸ πρῶτον 
Gov. But ζῷον usually means an animated body, i.e. a being 
composed of body and soul in combination ; and in that sense, it 
is applicable to the Kosmos, but not to the supreme God, who is 
incorporeal. The Hermetists never, I think, call God a ζῷον. It 





200 CORPVS HERMETICVM 


seems best therefore to bracket gov, which may have come from ζωῆς 
in the preceding sentence. 

πρὸς τὸν δεύτερον θεὸν συμπάθειαν ἔχων. This use of the term 
συμπάθεια is of Stoic origin. Alex. Aphr. De mix. 142: ἡνῶσθαι 
μὲν ὑποτίθεται Χρύσιππος τὴν σύμπασαν οὐσίαν, πνεύματός τινος διὰ 
πάσης αὐτῆς διήκοντος, ὑφ᾽ οὗ συνάγεταί τε καὶ συμμένει καὶ συμπαθές 
ἐστιν αὑτῷ τὸ πᾶν. (Οἷς, Wat. deor, 3. 28: ‘estque in (natura) iste 
quasi consensus, quam συμπάθειαν Graeci vocant.’ (Compare Jad. 
deor. 2. 19. ‘By such language the Stoics meant to express... 
the organic unity of the world as an animate body, and the cor- 
relation and mutual interdependence of all its parts,’ J. B. Mayor 
ad loc.) Cic. Div. 2. 341 ‘ex coniunctione naturae, et quasi concentu 
atque consensu, quam συμπάθειαν Graeci appellant.’ Zs. 2. 142: 
‘continuatio coniunctioque naturae, quam, ut dixi, vocant συμπάθειαν. 
Philo De opif. mundi 40. 117, Cohn I, Ρ. 40: ἐκ τῶν οὐρανίων τὰ 
ἐπίγεια ἤρτηται κατά τινα φυσικὴν συμπάθειαν. Epict. Diss. τ. 14, 
2: συμπαθεῖν τὰ ἐπίγεια τοῖς οὐρανίοις οὐ δοκεῖ cor ; Sext. Emp. 
Math. 9. 78. Synesius De providentia 7, Migne Tom. 66 col. 12774: 
τὸν κόσμον ἕν ὅλον ἡγούμεθα, τοῖς μέρεσι συμπληρούμενον. σύρρουν τε 
οὖν καὶ σύμπνουν αὐτὸν οἰησόμεθα" τὸ γὰρ ἕν οὕτως ἂν σώξοι. καὶ 
οὐκ ἀσυμπαθῇ πρὸς ἄλληλα τὰ μέρη θησόμεθα" πῶς γὰρ ἂν ἕν ὦσιν, 
εἰ μή τι φύσει συνηρτημένα ; καὶ ποιήσει δὴ καὶ πείσεται παρ᾽ ἀλλήλων 
τε καὶ εἰς ἄλληλα καὶ τὰ μὲν μόνον ποιήσει, τὰ δὲ μόνον πείσεται. 
μετὰ τῆσδε τῆς ὑποθέσεως ἐπὶ τὸ σκέμμα βαδίζοντες, κατὰ λόγον ἂν 
αἰτιασόμεθα τῶν περὶ τὰ τῇδε τὸ μακάριον σῶμα τὸ κύκλῳ κινούμενον" 
μέρη γὰρ ἄμφω, καὶ ἔστιν αὐτοῖς τι πρὸς ἄλληλα. εἰ δὴ γένεσις ἐν 
τοῖς περὶ ἡμᾶς, αἰτία γενέσεως ἐν τοῖς ὑπὲρ ἡμᾶς, κἀκεῖθεν ἐνταῦθα 
καθήκει τὰ τῶν συμβαινόντων σπέρματα. Synesius De insomniis 2, 
Migne 7. col. 1285.4: ἔδει γάρ, οἶμαι, τοῦ παντὸς τούτου συμπαθοῦς 
τε ὄντος καὶ σύμπνου, τὰ μέρη προσήκειν ἀλλήλοις, ἅτε ἑνὸς ὅλου 
μέλη τυγχάνοντα. καὶ μή ποτε αἱ μάγων ἴυγγες αὗται" καὶ γὰρ θέλγεται 
παρ᾽ ἀλλήλων (τὰ τοῦ κόσμου μέρη), ὥσπερ σημαίνεται. καὶ σοφὸς ὃ 
εἰδὼς τὴν τῶν μερῶν τοῦ κόσμου συγγένειαν. 

The Kosmos is one whole, all parts of which are συμπαθῆ, i.e, 
are interconnected and mutually affected ; man therefore, inasmuch 
as he is a part of the Kosmos, is συμπαθής with all other parts of it, 
and with the Kosmos as a whole. The Hermetist accepts this 
Stoic doctrine (cf. ὃ ἄνθρωπος ὑπὸ τοῦ κόσμου καὶ ἐν τῷ κόσμῳ 
below) ; but being, in the fundamentals of his theology, a Platonist, 
and not a Stoic, he goes on to say that man is something more 








LIBELLVS VIII: § 5 201 


than a part of the Kosmos, and that, in yirtue of his νοῦς, he is 
capable of entering into relation with the supracosmic God. 

ὡς ἀσωμάτου [kal νοῦ tod ἀγαθοῦ, God is ὁ ἀγαθὸς νοῦς. As 
ἀγαθός, he is distinguished from the human νοῦς, which might be 
called οὐ κακός, but could hardly be called ἀγαθός without undue 
presumption (cf. Corp. VI, and Corp. XII. ii jin.). Being νοῦς, 
God can be apprehended by the human νοῦς. But the words καὶ 
vod τοῦ ἀγαθοῦ are awkwardly appended, and impair the symmetry 
of the sentence ; and for this reason it seems probable that they 
have been added by another hand. 

νόησον τί θεός, τί κόσμος, τί ζῷον ἀθάνατον, τί ζῷον διάλυτον. It 
is implied that reflection on these questions (that is, on the answers 
to them which Hermes has given in this discourse) will make it 
evident that man ‘does not perish’, The {Ga ἀθάνατα are the 
Kosmos itself, the heavenly bodies, and the cosmic elements (which 
are called τὰ ἀθάνατα σώματα in § 4); the ζῷα διάλυτα are the sublunar 
organisms. Man, as a terrestrial organism, must be reckoned among 
the διάλυτα ζῷα ; and as such, he does not perish, but is resolved 
into the imperishable elements.’ It seems to be in this sense alone 
that the writer holds man to be immortal; for he does not speak 
of any other sort of human immortality. He says nothing of a 
survival of the individual ψυχή ; ἢ and he appears to hold that in 
the case of man, as in that of other animals, the individual con- 
sciousness ceases at the dissolution of the body (στέρησις γίνεται 
τῆς αἰσθήσεως, ὃ 4). If anything retains separate existence, it must 
be the νοῦς alone; but this writer gives no indication of a belief 
that the νοῦς of a particular man continues after death to exist as 
a separate person. We must conclude then that he rejected the 
Platonic doctrine of individual immortality. 

ἀρχὴ δὲ καὶ περιοχὴ καὶ σύστασις πάντων ὁ θεός. In other words, 
γεννᾶται καὶ περιέχεται καὶ συνίσταται πάντα ὑπὸ τοῦ θεοῦ. 


1 Cf. Shelley, Adonais 42: ‘He is made one with Nature; there is heard his 
voice in all her music’, &c. 

* There is nothing in the extant text to correspond to the words of the intro- 
ductory sentence, τρόπῳ μὲν ποίῳ ἀθάνατος ἡ ψυχή. If the writer had been asked 
what becomes of a man’s Ψυχή after the dissolution of the body, he might perhaps 
haye answered that it is reabsorbed into the world-soul. 


202 CORPVS HERMETICVM 


LIBELLVS IX 


Contents 


A. Man's sense and thought. §§ 1b-5 ἃ. 

In men, sense and thought are inseparably united. In beasts, 
instinct takes the place of thought. § 1b. 

Thought is the function of mind. Thought and speech are inter- 
connected. §1c. 

There cannot, in man, be thought without sense, nor sense with- 
out thought. (This holds good even in dreams.) § 2. 

When a man’s mind is impregnated by a daemon, it brings forth 
bad thoughts; when it is impregnated by God, it brings forth good 
thoughts. And to have good thoughts is to be religious, i.e. to 
know (and be devoted to) God. §§ 3, 4a. 

Those. who know God are at variance with the many, and are 
persecuted by them. But the religious man will cling to his know- 
ledge of God in spite of persecution; and for him, all things are 
good. §4b. 

All men possess thought; but the religious alone get good from 
it. All things are good to begin with, being made by God; but 
in the cosmic process, good turns to evil. The qualities of things — 
are determined by the influence of the heavenly bodies; and by 
that influence some things are made bad, and others good. ὃ 5. 


B. The sense and thought of the Kosmos. 88 6-8. 

The sense and thought of the Kosmos are occupied in making 
and unmaking living organisms, and thereby accomplishing God’s 
will. The Kosmos has received seed from God, and its function 
is to develop from this seed a perpetual succession of living 
beings. ὃ 6. 

The bodies of these beings are composed of the cosmic elements ; 
their various qualities are imposed on them by the operation of the 
heavenly bodies; and their life is breathed into them from the 
life-breath of the Kosmos. 88 7, 8. 


C. God's sense and thought. § 9. 


The sense and thought of all living beings are derived from the 
Kosmos; and the sense and thought of the Kosmos are derived 
from God. God’s sense and thought are occupied in giving move- 








LIBELLVS IX 203 


ment (i.e. life) to all things. All things owe their being to God. 
Nothing can ever cease to be; for all things are in God; or rather, 
God is all things. 
D. Teaching and belief. ὃ το. 
The teacher’s words may serve to set the pupil on the right track ; 
but only by his own thought can the pupil attain to assurance of 
the truth. 


The opening words of Corf. IX imply that it was written as 
a sequel to the Λόγος τέλειος, 1. 6. the Greek original of the Latin 
Asclepius. (See notes on Ascl. Lat. init.) The writer of Corp. IX 
then had that document before him; and it is possible that he was 
the same person who joined together the Greek Asc/. I, Asc/. II, 
and Ascé. III, and gave the title Λόγος τέλειος to the composite 
treatise. At any rate, there seems to be good reason for ascribing 
to the writer of Corp, IX the insertion, in Asc? I. 8, of the clause 
περὶ yap τούτου, πότερον αὐτὸς (ὃ κόσμος) αἰσθάνεται (ἢ μή, εἰσαῦθις 
ῥηθήσεται), which points forward to Corp. IX. 6, καὶ γὰρ ὃ κόσμος... 
αἴσθησιν ἰδίαν καὶ νόησιν ἔχει κιτιλ. 

The topic of ‘sense and thought’ is dealt with under three heads, 
viz. A. man’s sense and thought: Β, the sense and thought of 
the Kosmos: C. God’s sense and thought. It is possible that this 
arrangement was suggested to the writer by Asc/. Lat. III. 32b, 
where ὁ ἀνθρώπειος νοῦς, ὁ κοσμικὸς νοῦς, and ὁ θεῖος νοῦς are distin- 
guished. But if so, he must have understood those three terms in 
a different sense from that intended by the author of Asc/. Zaz. 111. 
The ‘cosmic’ and ‘divine’ νοῦς of Asc. Lat. III. 32 Ὁ, as well as 
the ‘human’ νοῦς there spoken of, are (if my explanation of that 
passage is right) primarily kinds or grades of νοῦς as it exists in men 
(6 ἄνθρωπος κοσμικῶς νοεῖ, 6 dvOp. θείως νοεῖ), and thus have little in 
common with the ‘sense and thought of the Kosmos’ and the 
‘sense and thought of God’ discussed in Corp. IX, where the 
meaning is that ὁ κόσμος (and ὃ θεὸς) αἰσθάνεται καὶ νοεῖ. Moreover, 
the writer of (ογῷ. IX differs from the writer of Asc/, Zaz. III in 
speaking of ‘thought’ chiefly as connected with and issuing in 
action. The νόησις which he discusses is for the most part the 
function of the νοῦς πρακτικός, and not that of the νοῦς θεωρητικός ; 
it is the operation of the will rather than of the intellect. 


Sources, The writer’s conception of the supracosmic God, and of the 
relation between God and the Kosmos, is Platonic. But in asserting 


a  ὠἥὅὄ- - --.. 


i Ὁ ς. -.- .,.,..-......0.β.... ...ὕ....-.... .. .. ... 


204 CORPVS HERMETICVM 


the inseparability of νόησις and αἴσθησις, he is opposed to the 
teaching of the Platonists ; and this part of his doctrine is probably 
derived from some Stoic authority. His conception of the cosmic 
πνοή is Stoic. 

Date. The prophecy in Ase/, Zat. II was probably written about 
A.D. 270, under the stress of the troubles caused by the Palmy- 
rene invasion of Egypt, Corp. IX then, being a sequel to Ased. 
Lat., was most likely written shortly after that date, i.e. about 
A.D. 280-300, 

The only definite indication of date in the document itself is that 
which is given in ὃ 4b, where the writer says that of ἐν γνώσει ὄντες 
(i.e, the adherents of his religion) are mocked at, hated, and de- 
spised, and that, if not actually put to death, they are at least in 
danger of being put to death by their enemies (τάχα ποὺ καὶ φονευό- 
μενοι). At what time, and under what circumstances, could this be 
said of an obscure gtoup of Egyptian Platonists? It is true that 
descriptions of the philosopher despised and jeered at by the many 
occur repeatedly in Plato and elsewhere in Greek literature (6. 5. 
Pl. Gorgias 521 Ff. 3 Theaet. 174 4 ff. ; Phaedrus 249D); and the 
instance of Socrates would suffice to prove that a man might even 
be put to death on account of his devotion to philosophy. But the 
writer of Corp. IX would have had no reason to introduce the topic 
here, if it had not been suggested to him by present circumstances, 
There can be little doubt that he and his companions felt themselves 
to be exposed to such treatment as he describes; and the words 
ὃ θεοσεβὴς πάντα ὑποστήσει κιτιλ. show that they anticipated serious 
ill usage. The attitude which he ascribes to the enemies of ‘the 
nosis’ closely resembles that which is ascribed to the enemies of 
religion in the Prophecy of Hermes, Ase/. Lat. III. 25 (compare 
μεμηνέναι δοκοῦσιν with religiosus bro insano habebitur, and γέλωτα 
ὀφλισκάνουσι with anima et omnia circa cam... risui); and it is to 
be presumed that in Corp. IX, as well as in Ascl. Lat. III, the 
enemies in question are the Christians. At the time at which we 
have found reason to think that Corp. IX was written (A. Ὁ. 280-300), 
the Palmyrene occupation of Egypt, which had given occasion for 
the prophecy in τω Zar. III, was a thing of the past; but the 
aggressive energy of the Christians, which had forced the writer of 
that prophecy to recognize that Paganism was already doomed, 
must have been increasing year by year during the interval; and 
perhaps something of the temper which showed itself in the murder 





LIBELLVS 1X: § 1b 205 


of Hypatia by a Christian mob in a.p. 415 was already visible 
among them.’ The Hermetists, as well as other Egyptians who 
adhered to the old religion, must have known themselves to be 
despised and hated by their Christian neighbours; and they must 
have seen that the Christians, if their present rate of progress was 
maintained, would soon get the upper hand. It was to be expected 
that, when this took place, the mass of the remaining Pagans would 
conform to the requirements of the new doctrine without serious 
resistance; but the few who were in earnest about their religion, 
and were resolved to cling to it at all costs, may well have felt that, 
under Christian domination, their lives would be in danger. 

Of Egyptian history during the last quarter of the third century, 
not much is known to us. The most striking event of the time is 
the rebellion which broke out in Egypt about a. Ὁ. 295, and was 
suppressed by Diocletian in 297. What part the Christians of 
Egypt took in that struggle, we are not informed But it is not 
likely that they were passive and indifferent spectators ; and it may 
reasonably be conjectured that they sided against the imperial 
government,® and that their conduct on that occasion contributed 
to convince Diocletian that the existence of Christianity was a grave 
danger to the empire, and thus to bring about the systematic 
attempt to suppress it which began in A.D. 302. The reconquest of 
Egypt by Diocletian probably gave a temporary check to the growing 
power of the Christians in that country; but it is not unlikely that 
in the confusion caused by the revolt, if not before it, their hatred 
of their Pagan countrymen may here and there have manifested 
itself in acts of open violence. 


Title. The contents of the discourse are correctly described by the 
words περὶ νοήσεως καὶ αἰσθήσεως. The words which follow (ὅτι ἐν 
μόνῳ... . οὐδαμοῦ) have been transferred to this place by error from 
the heading of Cor. VI. 

δ rb. ὅτι ἡ μὲν (αἴσθησις) ὑλική ἐστιν, ἡ δὲ (νόησις) οὐσιώδης. The 


1 Compare Julian’s accusation against the Christians, written in A.D. 362 (Jul. 
c. Christianos, Neumann, p. 199): ζηλοῦτε δὲ Ἰουδαίων τοὺς θυμοὺς καὶ τὴν πικρίαν, 
ἀνατρέποντες ἱερὰ καὶ βωμούς, καὶ ἀπεσφάξατε οὐχ ἡμῶν μόνον τοὺς τοῖς πατρῴοις 
ἐμμένοντας, ἀλλὰ καὶ τῶν ἐξ ἴσης ὑμῶν πεπλανημένων αἱρετικοὺς τοὺς μὴ τὸν αὐτὸν 
τρόπον ὑμῶν τὸν νεκρὸν θρηνοῦντας. 

2 Schiller, Gesch. der rom, Kaiserzeit ΤΠ, pp. 138 ff.; Mommsen, Provs. of Rom. 
empire, Eng. tr. Il, p. 251. Mommsen says that the revolt lasted three or four 


years. ; 

8 Schiller (II, p. 140) says that prophecies extracted from the holy Scriptures 
“a probably employed [by Christians ?] to stir up fanaticism in the interest of the 
rebellion. 


206 CORPVS HERMETICVM 


words ὑλικός and οὐσιώδης are contrasted in Asc/, Zat.1.7b. In that 
passage, the human νοῦς is called Jars hominis οὐσιώδης, which means 
that it consists of οὐσία in the Platonic sense, i. 6. of incorporeal and 
eternal substance; and the body (including the ψυχὴ atc Oru?) is 
called ὑλικόν, which means that it is composed of material elements. 
The terms here used by the writer of Corg. IX were probably 
suggested to him by Asc/, Lat. I. 7b; but he applies the words 
οὐσιώδης and ὑλικός somewhat differently. νόησις is not a pars 
hominis, but the function of a Jars hominis; and when he says 
people think νόησις to be οὐσιώδης, he must mean that they hold, 
not that νόησις consists of οὐσία, but either that the ‘part of man’ 
which operates in νόησις consists of οὐσία, or that the object of 
νόησις is οὐσία. Similarly, when he says that they think αἴσθησις to be 
ὑλική, he must mean that they hold, not that αἴσθησις is composed 
of material elements, but either that the organs of sense consist of 
matter, or that the objects of sense-perception are material things. 

ἐμοὶ δὲ δοκοῦσιν ἀμφότεραι ἡνῶσθαι. Cf. § 2: οὔτε γὰρ χωρὶς 
αἰσθήσεως δυνατὸν νοῆσαι, οὔτε αἰσθέσθαι χωρὶς νοήσεως. In man, 
αἴσθησις and νοῆσις are inseparable ; in every process of his conscious 
life, both are present together. 

In saying this, the writer deliberately rejects the doctrine com- 
monly taught by the Platonists, who held that in the higher activities 
of the human mind νόησις alone is present, and αἴσθησις is absent. 
The Platonic view of νόησις and νοητά is maintained in the Λόγος 
τέλειος (see especially Asc’, Lat. III. 17 b-19c and 34 b-36) ; and 
the writer of Corp. IX must have intended to correct in this respect 
the teaching of that document. 

But whence did he derive the doctrine of αἴσθησις and νόησις 
which he seeks to substitute for that taught by the Platonists? The 
pre-Socratics used the word νοῦς and its synonyms and derivatives to 
signify sense-perception as well as thought. The first writer who 
made a clear and sharp distinction between αἴσθησις and νόησις was 
Plato ;? and Plato’s distinction was maintained by Aristotle, with 

Δ Arist. De an. 3. 3, 427 21: of γε ἀρχαῖοι τὸ φρονεῖν καὶ τὸ αἰσθάνεσθαι 
ταὐτὸν εἶναί φασιν... πάντες γὰρ οὗτοι τὸ νοεῖν σωματικὸν ὥσπερ τὸ αἰσθάνεσθαι 


ὑπολαμβάνουσιν. For them, the conception of τὸ οὐσιῶδες did not exist, and every- 
thing was ὑλικόν, 

* Windelband, Gesch. der alten Philosophie, p. 117: according to Plato, ‘two 
worlds are to be distinguished (Pl. Zim. 27 Ὁ and 51ff.). One of these two worlds 
consists of that which is and never becomes; the other consists of that which 
becomes and never is. The one is the object of αἴσθησις ; the other is the object of 
vénars.’ That which ‘ becomes and never is’ is corporeal ; that which ‘is and never 
becomes’ is incorporeal. 








LIBELLVS IX: § 1b 207 


some modifications. Aristotle held that νόησις can take place in 
man only when the νοῦς has been called into action by preceding 
αἴσθησις ;' and he would have admitted that, in this sense, ἄνθρωπος 
οὐ δύναται νοῆσαι χωρὶς αἰσθήσεως ; but he would not have said that 
ἀνθρ. οὐ δύναται αἰσθέσθαι χωρὶς νοήσεως. The view of the Peripatetic 
Strato, 290-270 B.C., was more like that expressed in Corp, IX. 
Strato denied the existence of the incorporeal νοητά recognized by 
Plato and, in a somewhat different sense, by Aristotle; he held the 
objects of νόησις to be corporeal, and identical with those of αἴσθησις 3 
and accordingly, he regarded αἴσθησις and νόησις as inseparable.” 
Zeno, the founder of Stoicism, was a contemporary of Strato; and 
the Stoics, as they agreed with Strato in holding that only the 
material is real, agreed with him also in rejecting the Platonic and 
Aristotelian separation of αἴσθησις and νόησις. Sext. Emp. Math. 
7. 307: vat φασιν (οἱ δογματικοί, 1. 6. the Stoics), ἀλλὰ ταὐτόν ἐστι 
διάνοια καὶ αἴσθησις, οὐ κατὰ ταὐτὸ δέ, ἀλλὰ κατ᾽ ἄλλο μὲν διάνοια, κατ᾽ 
ἄλλο δὲ αἴσθησις" καὶ ὃν τρόπον τὸ αὐτὸ ποτήριον κοῖλόν τε καὶ περίκυρτον 
λέγεται, οὐ κατὰ ταὐτὸ δέ,... οὕτως ἡ αὐτὴ δύναμις κατ᾽ ἄλλο μέν ἐστι 
νοῦς, κατ᾽ ἄλλο δὲ αἴσθησις. ‘The Stoics’ in Aetius, Diels Doxogr. 
p. 400: τὸ γὰρ φάντασμα ἐπειδὰν λογικῇ προσπίπτει ψυχῇ, τότε ἐννόημα 
καλεῖται, εἰληφὸς τοὔνομα παρὰ τοῦ vod. ‘The Stoics’ in Diog. Laert. 
7. 51: τῶν φαντασιῶν ai μέν εἶσι λογικαί, ai δὲ ἄλογοι᾽ λογικαὶ μέν, ai 
τῶν λογικῶν ζῴων" ἄλογοι δέ, αἱ τῶν ἀλόγων. αἱ μὲν οὖν λογικαὶ νοήσεις 
εἰσίν" αἱ δ᾽ ἄλογοι οὐ τετύχασιν ὀνόματος. (This implies that all 
human φαντασίαι are νοήσεις; and assuming that every act of 
αἴσθησις results in a corresponding φαντασία, it would follow that ‘in 
man there is no αἴσθησις without voqots’).° 


1 Ar. De an. 3. 8, 43247: οὔτε μὴ αἰσθανόμενος μηθὲν οὐθὲν ἂν μάθοι οὐδὲ fuvein* 
ὅταν τε θεωρῇ, ἀνάγκη ἅμα φάντασμά τι θεωρεῖν. * Nihil est in intellectu quin fuerit 
in sensu. 

2 Windelband, Gesch. der alten Phil. p. 179: Strato ‘identified God with the 
world, and on the other side, thought with sense.... He regarded the soul as an 
indivisible ἡγεμονικόν, which has the senses for its organs, so that the activity of 
the senses never takes place without thought, and on the other hand all thoughé ts 
limited to a content given by sense-perception. No thought without sense; Strato 
in Simplicius Phys. 225 a (Zeller Avést. II, p. 468): ὅσα yap μὴ πρότερον ἑώρακε (ἡ 
ψυχή), ταῦτα ob δύναται νοεῖν. No sense without thought; Plut. Soélert. animal, 
3.6: Στράτωνός γε τοῦ φυσικοῦ λόγος ἐστὶν ἀποδεικνύων ws οὐδ᾽ αἰσθάνεσθαι τοπαρά- 
παν ἄνευ τοῦ νοεῖν ὑπάρχει" καὶ γὰρ γράμματα πολλάκις ἐπιπορευομένους τῇ ὄψει καὶ 
λόγοι προσπίπτοντες τῇ ἀκοῇ διαλανθάνουσιν ἡμᾶς καὶ διαφεύγουσι πρὸς ἑτέροις τὸν 
νοῦν ἔχοντας" εἶτ᾽ αὖθις ἐπανῆλθε καὶ μεταθεῖ καὶ διώκει τῶν προιεμένων ἕκαστον 
ἀναλεγόμενος. ἢ καὶ λέλεκται “νοῦς ὁρῇ καὶ νοῦς ἀκούει, τἄλλα κωφὰ καὶ τυφλά" 
(Epicharmus), ὡς τοῦ περὶ τὰ ὄμματα καὶ τὰ ὦτα πάθους, ἂν μὴ παρῇ τὸ φρονοῦν, 
αἴσθησιν οὐ ποιοῦντος. 

3 Cf. Philo Lep. alleg. 2. 18. 71, Cohn I, p. τοί : οὔτε γὰρ ὁ νοῦς δίχα αἰσθήσεως 
ἠδύνατο καταλαβεῖν ζῷον ἣ φυτὸν ἢ λίθον ἢ ξύλον ἢ συνόλως σῶμα, οὔτε ἡ αἴσθησιε 


208 CORPVS HERMETICVM 


A Hermetist of the third century a. Ὁ. is not likely to have been 
directly influenced by Strato ; and there can be little doubt that the 
writer of Corp. IX, in his doctrine of αἴσθησις and νόησις, has adopted 
a view suggested to him by some Stoic authority. 

ἐν γὰρ τοῖς ἄλλοις (perhaps ἀλόγοις) ζῴοις ἡ αἴσθησις τῇ φύσει 
ἥνωται, The lower animals differ from man in this respect, that they 
are devoid of νοῦς, i.e. incapable of νόησις. But in place of νόησις, 
they have φύσις. Cf. Corp, XII. 1. τ: ἐν δὲ τοῖς ἀλόγοις ζῴοις (ἀντὶ 
vod?) ἡ φύσις ἐστίν. See also Herm. Exc, IV B. 

The actions of men result from αἴσθησις supplemented by νόησις ; 
the actions of beasts result from αἴσθησις supplemented by φύσις. 
The word φύσις may here be translated ‘instinct’. It means an 
impulse implanted in the animal by a force which operates throughout 
the universe, and which, in the view of the Hermetists, issues from 
the will of God. When a man acts, he is consciously aiming at a 
good (real or apparent) to be realized by his action ; and his concep- 
tion of the good towards which he directs his action is called νόησις 
(ἀγαθοῦ). But a beast acts without conscious aim; it has no concep- 
tion of a good to be realized by its action ; and if its action is directed 
towards an end, the conception of that end or good must reside, not 
in the beast itself, but in the mind of God, who governs the forces 
by which the beast’s action is determined. It is not the animal 
itself, but φύσις operating in the animal (or rather, God working 
through φύσις), that in this case aims at a good. 

§ IC. νοήσεως δὲ ὁ νοῦς διαφέρει... χωρὶς λόγου. This is a digression. 
The writer here speaks of (r) the relation between νόησις and νοῦς, 
and (2) the relation between νόησις and λόγος. In § 2, he returns to 
the topic with which he began, viz. the relation between νόησις and 
αἴσθησις. 

ἡ μὲν γὰρ θειότης ὑπὸ τοῦ θεοῦ γίνεται, ἡ δὲ νόησις ὑπὸ τοῦ νοῦ, 
What is the meaning οἵ θειότης here? 6 νοῦς is the mind, i.e. the 
“part of man’ which thinks ; and νόησις is that which ‘is done by 
the mind’ (ὑπὸ τοῦ νοῦ γίνεται), or ‘the action of the mind’, i.e. the 
process of thinking. And since we are told that the relation between 
νόησις and νοῦς corresponds to that between θειότης and θεός, it 
follows that θειότης must mean ‘what is done by God’, or ‘God’s 
action’, The writer was probably thinking especially of God’s 


ξίχα τοῦ νοῦ περιποιῆσαι τὸ αἰσθάνεσθαι. ἐπειδὴ τοίνυν ἄμφω ταῦτα συνελθεῖν ἔδει 
πρὸς κατάληψιν τῶν ὑποκειμένων κιτιλ, The Stoics held that there is nothing which 
is not σῶμα ; and to one who took that view, Philo’s statement would mean that 
(in man) there can neither be νόησις without αἴσθησις, nor αἴσθησις without νόησις. 








LIBELLVS ΙΧ: δὲ 1b-2 209 


action in or on the human soul; and in that respect, it might be 
said that as νόησις is that which takes place in him who is ἔννους, so 
θειότης is that which takes place in him who is ἔνθεος. If this is the 
writer’s meaning, θειότης may be translated ‘divine inspiration’; and 
the employment of the word in this sense may have been suggested 
by the common use of θεῖος to describe a man who is inspired. 
θειότης is similarly used in Clem. Homi/. 2. 27: Simon Magus τὰ 
μαγείᾳ γινόμενα θειότητι ποιεῖν ἔλεγεν. In that passage, θειότητι means 
‘by the operation of God’, as μαγείᾳ means ‘by the operation of 
demons’. Cf. περὶ θειότητος διαλεγόμενος in Corp. XIII. τ. 

ἡ δὲ νόησις. . ., ἀδελφὴ οὖσα τοῦ λόγου. καὶ ὄργανα (radTa) 
ἀλλήλων. λόγος here means ‘speech’, See ὃ το, where λόγος is 
contrasted with νοῦς. Speech is an ὄργανον of thought; i.e. speech 
is the instrument by means of which thought is expressed. But 
what is meant by saying that thought is an ὄργανον of speech? 
Probably the meaning is that the speaker’s words can influence the 
hearer only by acting through the hearer’s thought ; they are effective 
only so far as the hearer understands them. (That is the point which 
is insisted on in § ro.) But in order to obtain this meaning, we 
ought to read, in place of οὔτε yap ὃ λόγος ἐκφωνεῖται χωρὶς νοήσεως, 
something like οὔτε yap 6 λόγος καταλαμβάνεται x. v. Perhaps ἐκφω- 
νεῖται Originally stood in the following clause (where the MSS. give 
οὔτε ἡ νόησις φαίνεται), and was thence transferred by error to this 
place, where it was substituted for the original verb. 

ὃ 2, εἰς τὸν ἄνθρωπον συνεπεισρέουσιν ἀλλήλαις. See ὃ 9, where we 
are told that the sense and thought of all ζῷα (including man) are 
derived from the sense and thought of the Kosmos, and that they 
pass into the individual ζῷον from the atmosphere in the process of 
breathing. 

[δυνατὸν δὲ νόησιν] (καίτοι λέγονται ἄνθρωποι ἐνίοτε (?)) χωρὶς αἰσθή- 
σεως νοεῖσθαι, καθάπερ οἱ διὰ τῶν ὀνείρων φανταζόμενοι ὁράματα᾽ ἐμοὶ δὲ 
δοκεῖ (μᾶλλον εὔλογον elvar(?)) τὸ γεγονέναι ἀμφοτέρας τὰς ἐνεργείας ἐν 
τῇ τῶν ὀνείρων ὄψει' ἐγρηγοροῦσι γὰρ (ἥνωται ἀεὶ ἧ νόησις τῇ (?)) 
αἰσθήσει. I suppose the meaning of this mutilated passage to have 
been that some people say that νόησις takes place without αἴσθησις 
in dreams,’ but that the writer denies this, and maintains that νόησις 


1 Compare the theory of sleep and dreams which is given in Lactant. De opif. det 
18. 4: ‘ Requiescere nullo pacto possumus, nisi mens visionum imaginibus occupata 


teneatur, . , . Avocatur ergo (mens) simulacris, donee membra sopore inrigata 
vegetentur; corpus enim vigilante sensu, licet iaceat inmobile, tamen non est 
quietum, quia flagrat in eo sensus.,.Sed postquam mens ad contemplandas 


2806-2 P 


210 CORPVS HERMETICVM 


and αἴσθησις are inseparable, not only in waking life, but in dreams 
also. I take [δυνατὸν δὲ νόησιν] to be a doublet of the preceding 
words δυνατὸν νόησαι. It is to be inferred from the phrase ἐμοὶ δὲ 
δοκεῖ that something like ‘it is said by some’ has preceded. The 
two ἐνέργειαι spoken of must be αἴσθησις and νόησις. 

διήρηται ya(p ἡ αἴσϑησιςν (διήρηταί ye MSS.) εἴς τε τὸ σῶμα καὶ εἰς 
τὴν ψυχήν. From the following words, καὶ ὅταν ἀμφότερα τὰ μέρη τῆς 
αἰσθήσεως κιτιλ., it may be inferred that the missing subject of 
διήρηται was ἡ αἴσθησις. The ‘two parts’ of αἴσθησις are probably 
the two processes which Aristotle and the Stoics distinguished under 
the names αἴσθησις and φαντασία. According to Aristotle, the 
external object, acting through the bodily organ of sense, stamps an 
image of itself on the ψυχὴ αἰσθητική; and the perception of this 
internal image (which persists after the external object has ceased to 
be present) is called φαντασίᾳ. He says that ἡ φαντασία ἐστὶν 
αἴσθησίς τις ἀσθενής (Rhet. τ. 11, 1370 28), and that τὰ φαντάσματα 
ὥσπερ αἰσθήματά ἐστι, πλὴν ἄνευ ὕλης (De an. 3. 8, 432 ἃ 9). The 
Stoics adopted Aristotle’s theory of αἴσθησις and φαντασία with little 
alteration. Cf, ‘the Stoics’ in Diog. Laert. 7. 46: τὴν δὲ φαντασίαν 
εἶναι τύπωσιν ἐν ψυχῇ, τοῦ ὀνόματος [οἰκείως] μετενηνεγμένου ἀπὸ τῶν 
τύπων (τῶν) ἐν τῷ κηρῷ ὑπὸ τοῦ δακτυλίου γινομένων. A φαντασία may 
be ἀπὸ ὑπάρχοντος, i.e. it may be an impression stamped on the soul 
by a really existing external object; in that case, it is called xara- 
ληπτικὴ φαντασία (i.e. a φαντασία which gets hold of something 
real), and its evidence is true. On the other hand, it may be οὐκ 
ἀπὸ ὑπάρχοντος, i.e, it may have originated in the soul itself ; in that 
case, there is no external object to correspond to it, and the man 
who accepts it as evidence of reality is mistaken. (See Arnim, Svore. 
vet. fragm. II, pp. 21 ff.) A dream is a series of φαντασίαι of the 
latter kind. 

The Hermetist’s doctrine of ‘the two parts of αἴσθησις᾽ is probably 
derived from the Stoic doctrine of αἴσθησις and φαντασία. The ‘part 
of αἴσθησις which he assigns to the body is the operation of the 
bodily sense-organs, and corresponds to the Stoic αἴσθησις ; the 
imagines ab intentione traducta est, tune demum corpus omne resolvitur in 
quietem. ... Sibi avocamenta invenit (mens), ne saluberrimam quictem corporis 
interrumpat. , .. Dormiendi ergo causa tributa est a deo ratio somniandi.’ This 
implies that in sleep sezszs (αἴσθησις, i.e. the activity of the bodily sense-organs) is 
suspended, and the mens (νοῦς) alone is active, being occupied in the contemplation 
of simulacra or imagines (φαντάσματα). 


1 The simile of seal and wax, by which Aristotle (De mem. 1. 350 a) illustrates 
the process, had already been employed by Plato in the 7heaeletus, 191 Ὁ σφ. 





LIBELLVS ΙΧ: §§ 2-3 a11 























































«part of αἴσθησις᾽ which he assigns to the soul a to 
the Stoic φαντασία. 

ὅταν ἀμφότερα τὰ μέρη τῆς αἰσθήσεως πρὸς ἄλληλα το 
‘When the psychic αἴσθησις agrees with the bodily αἴσθησις (?).’ 
This perhaps may mean‘ when the φαντασία is an exact reproduction 
of an image impressed on the bodily sense-organs by an external 
object’; that is, in Stoic terms, ‘when the φαντασία is ἀπὸ 
ὑπάρχοντος᾽. But the meaning of the paragraph as a whole is 
uncertain ; and that being so, there can be no certainty about the 
meaning of this or that clause of it. 

§ 3. ὁ γὰρ νοῦς κύει πάντα τὰ νοήματα. In the words κύει and 
ἔσπειρε, the writer illustrates his meaning by a metaphor taken from 
human procreation, The man’s νοῦς is the mother of his νοήματα ; 
but the father of every good νόημα is God, and the father of every 
bad νόημα is some daemon. That is to say, man’s νοῦς does not 
produce νοήματα by its own unaided operation ; each of his designs 
or purposes is suggested to him from without, either by God or by a 
daemon. 

As instances of κακὰ νοήματα, the writer mentions φόνοι, μοιχεῖαι, 
and the like; as instances of ἀγαθὰ νοήματα, he gives ἀρετή and 
σωφροσύνη. It is evident from this that the νοῦς here spoken of is 
vots πρακτικός ; the νόησις is the process of deciding on a certain end 
to be aimed at by action, and is assumed to carry with it a corre- 
sponding act of will; and the νόημα is the purpose thus formed, or 
the course of action thus decided on. 

For the notion that good νοήματα are ‘begotten’ by God, cf. Philo 
De Cherubim 13. 43, Cohn I, p. 180: ἀνὴρ μὲν yovaxt . . . τὰς ἐπὶ 
γενέσει παίδων ὁμιλίας... συνέρχεται ποιησόμενος" ἀρεταῖς δὲ πολλὰ 
καὶ τέλεια τικτούσαις θέμις οὐκ ἔστιν ἀνδρὸς ἐπιλαχεῖν θνητοῦ" μὴ 
δεξάμεναι δὲ παρά τινος ἑτέρου γονήν, ἐξ ἑαυτῶν μόνον οὐδέποτε κυήσουσι. 
τίς οὖν ὃ σπείρων ἐν αὐταῖς τὰ καλὰ πλὴν ὁ τῶν ὄντων πατήρ, ὁ ἀγένητος 
θεὸς καὶ τὰ σύμπαντα γεννῶν; The ἀρεταί are here hypostatized, and 
are spoken of as if they were persons distinct and separate from the 
virtuous man ; but Philo’s meaning appears to be that good thoughts 
and actions (the offspring of the ἀρεταί) are not originated by the 
man himself, but are implanted in him or bestowed on him by God. 
Philo expresses the same thought without metaphor in Zeg. adleg. 3. 
46. 136, Cohn I, p. 143: δεῖ τὸν ὑπὲρ ἀρετῆς πόνον μὴ ἑαυτῇ προσάγειν 
τὴν ψυχήν, ἀλλ᾽ ἀφελεῖν ad’ ἑαυτῆς καὶ θεῷ ἀνενεγκεῖν, ὁμολογοῦσαν 
ὅτι οὐχ ἡ ἰσχὺς αὐτῆς οὐδὲ ἡ δύναμις περιεποίησε τὸ καλόν, ἀλλὰ ὁ καὶ 
Pe 


212 CORPVS HERMETICVM 


τὸν ἔρωτα χαρισάμενος. Cf, Paul, Phil. 2.13: θεὸς γάρ ἐστιν ὃ ἐνεργῶν 
ἐν ὑμῖν καὶ τὸ θέλειν καὶ τὸ ἐνεργεῖν. 

[μηδενὸς μέρους τοῦ κόσμου κενοῦ ὄντος δαίμονος.) The following 
ὅστις must be taken to refer, not to δαίμονος here, but to the preceding 
τινος τῶν δαιμόνων, But that being so, the interposed words μηδενὸς 
. . » δαίμονος awkwardly interrupt the sentence, and obscure the 
construction, It seems best therefore to assume that they have been 
inserted by a later hand, 

ὃ κόσμος here means the sublunar world alone. It cannot include 
the heavens ; for no Hermetist would have said that the heavens are 
full of maleficent daemons. The writer of the clause presumably 
held the view expressed in Corg. XVI and elsewhere, that all 
physical processes in the sublunar world are carried on by the 
agency of personal beings called daemons. He considered that 
all bad thoughts and actions result from the influence on us of the 
matter of which our bodies and their environment consist ; but he 
attributed the influence of matter to the action of personal beings 
residing in it. 

((ὑπεισελθὼν)) τῷ (uh) ὑπὸ τοῦ θεοῦ πεφωτισμένῳ. If a man is 
‘illuminated’ by God, he is secured against the action of the 
daemons ; if not, they beget bad νοήματα in him. Cf. Corp. XVI. 
16: οὐδεὶς γὰρ οὐδὲν δύναται οὔτε δαιμόνων οὔτε θεῶν πρὸς μίαν ἀκτῖνα 
τοῦ θεοῦ. Hermes in Lactant. Div. inst. 2. 15. 16 (Ase. Lat. II. 
29b): εὐσεβοῦς yap ἀνθρώπου οὔτε δαίμων κακὸς οὔτε εἱμαρμένη 
κρατεῖ. 

In the word πεφωτισμένῳ, the writer employs a different and 
inconsistent metaphor. To say that God ‘pours light into’ a man 
is another way of saying that God begets good νοήματα in the 
man’s νοῦς. 

ἔσπειρε τῆς ἰδίας ἐνεργείας τὸ σπέρμα. Each individual daemon 
begets his own special kind of sin. Cf. Valentinus af. Clem. Alex, 
Strom. 2, 20. 114: πολλὰ yap ἐνοικοῦντα (τῇ καρδίᾳ) πνεύματα (= δαί- 
poves) οὐκ ἐᾷ καθαρεύειν' ἕκαστον δὲ αὐτῶν τὰ ἴδια ἐκτελεῖ ἔργα, πολλαχῶς 
ἐνυβριζόντων ἐπιθυμίαις οὐ προσηκούσαις. Origen, Hom. XV in Tesum 
JVave: ‘per singulos homines sunt spiritus aliqui, diversa in iis 
peccatorum genera molientes. Verbi causa, est aliquis fornicationis 
spiritus, est irae spiritus alius, est avaritiae spiritus, alius vero 
superbiae. Et si invenias esse aliquem hominem qui his omnibus 
malis aut etiam pluribus agitatur, omnes hos vel etiam plures in se 
habere inimicos putandus est spiritus.’ 








LIBELLVS IX: §§ 3-4b 213 


ἀσεβείας [ἀγχόνας, κατὰ κρημνῶν καταφοράς, kal ἄλλα πάντα ὅσα ϑαι- 
μόνων ἔργα]. The enumeration of κακὰ νοήματα ought to end with ἀσε- 
βείας, in which all wickednesses are summed up, as the enumeration 
of ἀγαθὰ νοήματα ends with εὐσεβεία. There is therefore reason to 
think that the words ἀγχόνας ... δαιμόνων ἔργα have been subse- 
quently added. The phrase κατὰ κρημνῶν καταφοράς recalls the words 
ὥρμησεν ἡ ἀγέλη κατὰ κρημνοῦ in the story of the Gadarene swine 
(Mark 5.13, Matth. 8. 32, Luke 8. 33); and possibly the interpolator 
may have been a Christian, and may have been thinking of the 
δαιμονίων ἔργον which is described in that story. 

8 4a. εὐσέβεια δέ ἐστι θεοῦ γνῶσις. Cf. Lactant. Div. inst. 2. 15. 
8: ‘quid sit autem εὐσέβεια, ostendit (Hermes) alio loco his verbis : 
ἡ yap εὐσέβεια γνῶσίς ἐστι τοῦ θεοῦ" The words quoted by Lactantius 
are not quite identical with those of Corp. IX ; and they may perhaps 
have occurred in some other Hermetic document known to him. 

ὃν 6 ἐπιγνούς, πλήρης γενόμενος πάντων τῶν ἀγαθῶν, τὰς νοήσεις θείας 
ἴσχει. Cf. Ascl. Lat. r a: ‘quem (sermonem) si intellegens (deum) 
videris, eris omnium bonorum tota mente plenissimus.’ It appears 
from this that the writer of Corg. IX borrowed the phrase πλήρης 
γενόμενος πάντων τῶν ἀγαθῶν from the first paragraph of the Λόγος 
τέλειος. 

8 4 Ὁ. τὴν γὰρ κακίαν ἐνθάδε δεῖν οἰκεῖν εἶπον, ἐν (εἴπομεν MSS.) τῷ 
ἑαυτῆς χωρίῳ οὖσαν' χωρίον γὰρ αὐτῆς ἡ γῆ. The word εἶπον implies 
that this statement occurred in some earlier Hermetic document 
known to the writer. But the remoter source of it is Pl. Zheaet. 
176A: οὔτ' ἀπολέσθαι τὰ κακὰ Suvardv ..., ὑπεναντίον γάρ τι τῷ ἀγαθῷ 
ἀεὶ εἶναι ἀνάγκη, οὔτ᾽ ἐν θεοῖς αὐτὰ ἱδρύσθαι' τὴν δὲ θνητὴν φύσιν καὶ 
τόνδε τὸν τόπον περιπολεῖ ἐξ ἀνάγκης. 

οὐχ ὃ κόσμος, ὡς ἔνιοί ποτε ἐροῦσι βλασφημοῦντες. The writer 
implies that some of his contemporaries assert that evil extends 
through the whole Kosmos ; but he holds that the heavens are free 
from evil, and that it exists on earth alone. Among the blasphemers 
who spoke evil of that ‘second God’, the Kosmos, were the 
Christians ; and perhaps it is of the Christians chiefly, if not solely, 
that the Hermetist is here thinking. Compare Ascé. Zat. III. 25: 
when the Christians prevail, ‘non admirandus videbitur mundus nec 
adorandus’ &c. But the writer of Corp. VI was guilty of similar 
blasphemy ; see VI. 4a, 6 yap κόσμος πλήρωμά ἐστι τῆς κακίας. 

The word κόσμος here includes the heavens; whereas in ὃ 3, in 
the clause μηδενὸς μέρους τοῦ κόσμου κενοῦ ὄντος δαίμονος, it means the 


214 CORPVS HERMETICVM 


sublunar world alone (the γῆ of § 4 Ὁ), and it is implied that the κόσμος 
(in that sense) ἐς the abode of «xaxéa, The verbal contradiction 
between the two statements confirms the suspicion that the clause in 
§ 3 has been inserted by another hand. 

ὁ μέντοι θεοσεβὴς πάντα ὑποστήσει ἀντισχόμενος (αἰσθόμενος MSS.) 
τῆς γνώσεως, He who has gvosis will endure pain and death, if need 
be, rather than abandon his religion. 

πάντα ἀναφέρει εἰς τὴν γνῶσιν. Does this mean that he ‘makes his 
sufferings contribute to the increase of his gnosis’, i.e. that they bring 
him nearer to God? Or, that he ‘finds an explanation of them in 
his gosis’, in the light of which he sees that they are blessings 
in disguise ? 

τὰ κακὰ μόνος ἀγαθοποιεῖ. He finds good in the sufferings inflicted 
on him. The Pagan writer here shows something of the spirit of 
those Christians who rejoiced in martyrdom. Cf. Paul, Rom. 8. 28: 
τοῖς ἀγαπῶσι τὸν θεὸν πάντα συνεργεῖ εἰς ἀγαθόν. Plotinus 4. 3. 16; 
εἰ δ᾽ ἀγαθὺς ὁ (ἄδικα πρὸς ἀνθρώπων) παθών, εἰς ἀγαθὸν i τελευτὴ 
τούτων. 

§ 5. οὐ πᾶς δὲ ἄνθρωπος. ,. ἀπολαύει τῆς νοήσεως. All men 
νοοῦσιν, i.e, all men possess νοῦς and use it; but some men do not 
use it rightly, and therefore get no good from their possession of it. 
This was implied in § 3, to which the words ὡς προεῖπον refer. In 
the Hermetica, νοῦς is sometimes used (as here) in a wider sense, to 
signify a faculty which all men possess, and by the possession of 
which they are distinguished from beasts; and sometimes in a 
narrower sense, to signify a higher faculty, which is bestowed by 
God on a few among men, but is not possessed by the many. In 
the latter sense, it is the faculty by which men ‘know God’, and is 
thus correlative to γνῶσις, ‘knowledge of God’. 

[ἀλλ᾽ ὁ μὲν ὑλικός, ὁ δὲ οὐσιώδης.] The men who use their νόησις 
wrongly are ὑλικοί; that is, they are dominated by material things, 
or in other words, by the daemons who reside in material things and 
operate by means of them. These men live in subjection to the 
πάθη bred by the material body, and their desires are directed to 
material objects. They are those who ‘love the body’, as some of 
the Hermetists say. On the other hand, those who use their νόησις 
rightly are οὐσιώδεις ; that is, they are freed from the domination of 
the body and its material surroundings ; it is the incorporeal and 
eternal part of them that has the upper hand, and their hearts are 
set on things incorporeal and eternal. Thus applied, the terms 








LIBELLVS IX: §§ 4b-5 215 


ὑλικός and οὐσιώδης correspond to χοϊκός and πνευματικός as used by 
some of the Christian Gnostics. 

But the words ἀλλ᾽ 6 μὲν ὑλικὸς ὁ δὲ οὐσιώδης appear to be wrongly 
placed here. Their connexion with the preceding clause is obscure ; 
and the sequence of thought becomes clearer if we cut them out, 
and read οὐ πᾶς δὲ... ἀπολαύει τῆς νοήσεως" [1 ὁ μὲν γὰρ . . ., of 
δὲ κιτιλ. 

ὁ μὲν γὰρ μετὰ κακίας [ὑλικὸς} (νοεῖν, .. . οἱ δὲ μετὰ τοῦ ἀγαθοῦ 
[οὐσιωδῶς] (sc. νοοῦσιν), ὑλικός (or ὑλικῶς }) and οὐσιωδῶς may 
perhaps have been added by the same person who inserted ἀλλ᾽ 
ὃ μὲν ὑλικὸς 6 δὲ οὐσιώδης. The text is corrupt, and cannot be 
restored with certainty ; but the writer’s meaning must have been 
that some men’s thinking produces bad results, and other men’s 
thinking produces good results. The mention of ‘evil’ and ‘good’ 
in this sentence leads on to an attempt to account for the existence 
of evil. 

ὑπὸ τοῦ θεοῦ σωζόμενοι. These men are saved by God from subjec- 
tion to ὕλη and the daemons who operate in it. 

πάντα ποιεῖ [μὲν] ἑαυτῷ ὅμοια. All things are made by God, and 
therefore all things, when first made, are ‘like God’, i.e. are good. 

ταῦτα δ᾽, ἀγαθὰ γενόμενα, ἐν τῇ χρήσει τῆς ἐνεργείας Γαφορα]. The 
sense required to suit the context is ‘all things are good when first 
made, but some things afterwards become bad’. (Some things, not 
all, become bad ; for the writer goes on to say that the κοσμικὴ φορά, 
while it makes some things bad, makes other things good). But it 
is doubtful how this sense is to be got out of the words. Perhaps 
ἐν τῇ χρήσει τῆς ἐνεργείας might be taken to mean ‘ when the operation 
of the (cosmic) forces is brought to bear on them’; but the phrase 
is obscure, and very likely corrupt. In place of agopa, we might 
write (ἐκβαίνει διδάφορα, ‘turn out various in quality’ (i.e. some of 
them bad and others good). But it is also possible that agopa has 
come by duplication from φορά, and that the original predicate is 
wholly lost. 

For the thought, cf. Οὐ». XIV. 7: ‘evil has not been made by 
God, but breaks out, like a sort of rust, on the things which God has 
made.’ 

ἡ γὰρ κοσμικὴ φορά, τρέπουσα (τρίβουσα MSS.) τὰς γενέσεις, ποιὰς 
ποιεῖ, (Possibly ποι(κίλλας ποιεῖ" cf. ποικίλην in ὃ 6, and τὴν ποικιλίαν 
τῶν γενέσεων in ὃ 7.) ‘The movement of the Kosmos’ must here 
mean the movement of the heavenly bodies. The aspect of the 





..-... .....---......... 


“τό CORPVS HERMETICVM 


stars changes from moment to moment ; and the character (whether 
good or bad) of every living creature is determined by the aspect of 
the stars at the moment of its birth. (Cf Ascé. Zaz. III. 35.) This 
statement, if its logical implications were accepted, would involve 
absolute fatalism ; it would throw all responsibility for evil on the 
heavenly bodies, and therefore ultimately on God. If God has 
made the stars and determined their movements, and the stars, by 
their movements, determine that some men shall be bad, God is the 
author of moral evil. But the writer did not draw this inference. 

§ 6. καὶ γὰρ ὅ κόσμος... αἴσθησιν ἰδίαν καὶ νόησιν ἔχει. The 
terms αἴσθησις and νόησις must be taken here in the same sense in 
which they were employed before with reference to man. αἴσθησις 
seems to be the perception that a certain state of things exists, and 
νόησις, a deliberate decision to take certain action in view of that 
state of things. Thus the statement that the Kosmos possesses 
αἴσθησις and νόησις means that the Kosmos is a conscious and 
rational agent. 

οὐχ ὁμοίαν τῇ ἀνθρωπείᾳ, οὐδὲ (οὕτγως ποικίλην. Man's νοήματα are 
ποικίλα ; that is to say, they are sometimes good, but oftener bad; 
and when bad, they are bad in manifold ways (ἐσθλοὶ μὲν γὰρ ἁπλῶς, 
παντοδαπῶς δὲ κακοί). But the νοήματα of the Kosmos are invariably 
good, and therefore ἁπλᾶ. And it may be inferred that they are 
invariably begotten by God. (Yet if the νοήματα of the Kosmos 
are invariably good, how is it that the κοσμικὴ φορά gives rise to evil 
as well as good ?) 

ἡ γὰρ αἴσθησις καὶ νόησις τοῦ κόσμου pia ἐστί, τὸ (τῷ MSS.) 
πάντα ποιεῖν, καὶ εἰς ἑαυτὸν (ἑαυτὴν MSS.) ἀποποιεῖν. The correction 
τὸ for τῷ is confirmed by the parallel in ὃ 9, τοῦτό ἐστιν ἡ a. καὶ ν. τοῦ 
θεοῦ, τὸ τὰ πάντα ἀεὶ κινεῖν. The Kosmos acts consciously and 
deliberately ; and its action consists solely in making and unmaking 
things; i.e. all physical processes are directed to this end. By 
‘things’ we must understand living organisms. When an organism 
is ‘unmade’, it is broken up into its component elements; and as 
these elements are parts of the Kosmos, the Kosmos is said to 
‘unmake things info itself’. 

ὄργανον (ὄντα) τῆς τοῦ θεοῦ βουλήσεως, It seems necessary to insert 
ὄντα, in agreement with κόσμον, the understood subject of ποιεῖν and 


* We were told in § 4b that it is ‘ blasphemy’ to say that there is evil in the 
heavens. But if a thing produces evil, how can it be denied that in that respect it 
is itself evil? 








LIBELLVS IX: δὲ 5-6 417 


ἀποποιεῖν. The word ὄντως in the following clause yields no satis- 
factory sense; it is probable therefore that ὄντα was transferred to 
that place by error, and was subsequently altered into ὄντως. The 
word ὄργανον is wrongly repeated in [ὀργανο]ποιηθέν(ταν, 

The Kosmos, in carrying on the physical processes by which living 
organisms are made and unmade, is executing the will of God, and 
therefore, though a conscious agent, may at the same time be called 
an ‘instrument’ by means of which God works. The same phrase 
occurs in Ascl. Lat. III. 25 (‘ mundus, . .. machina voluntatis dei’), 
whence the writer of Cor. IX presumably borrowed it. 

ἀπὸ τοῦ θεοῦ λαβὼν τὰ σπέρματας The Kosmos has received the 
‘seeds’ of all things from God, retains these ‘seeds’ in itself, and 
produces from them a perpetual succession of living organisms. 
In using the word σπέρματα, the writer may have had in mind the 
σπερματικοὶ λόγοι οἵ the Stoics. For its employment in this passage, 
cf. Basilides (or one of his followers) a. Hippol. Ref. Aaer. 7. 21: 

ἦν ὅτε ἦν οὐδέν. ... ἐπεὶ (οὖν) οὐδὲν Gv),—odx ὕλη, οὐκ οὐσία, οὐκ 
ἀνούσιον, οὐχ ἁπλοῦν, οὐϊκ ἀ]σύνθετον, [οὐκ ἀνοητόν, οὐκ ἀναίσθητον,] ἢ 
οὐκ ἄνθρωπος, οὐκ ἄγγελος, οὐ θεός, οὐδὲ ὅλως τι τῶν ὀνομαζομένων ἢ SL 
αἰσθήσεως λαμβανομένων ἢ νοητῶν πραγμάτων, ----. «. (ὁ) οὐκ ὧν θεὸς .... 
ἀνοήτως, ἀναισθήτως, ἀβούλως, ἀπροαιρέτως, ἀπαθῶς, ἀνεπιθυμήτως 
κόσμον ἠθέλησε ποιῆσαι. τὸ δὲ “ ἠθέλησε" λέγω, φησί, σημασίας χάριν," 
ἀθελήτως (γὰρ ἠθέλησε) καὶ ἀνοήτως καὶ ἀναισθήτως" ὁ “κόσμον " δὲ οὐ 
τὸν κατὰ πλάτος καὶ διαίρεσιν γεγενημένον ὕστερον καὶ διεστῶτα," ἀλλὰ 
γὰρ σπέρμα κόσμου. τὸ δὲ σπέρμα τοῦ κόσμου πάντα εἶχεν ἐν ἑαυτῷ, ὡς 
6 τοῦ σινάπεως κόκκος ἐν ἐλαχίστῳ συλλαβὼν ἔχει πάντα ὃ ὁμοῦ, τὰς 
ῥίζας, τὸ πρέμνον, τοὺς κλάδους, τὰ φύλλα, τὰ ἀνεξαρίθμητα [τῶν 
κόκκων] (ἀπ)ὸ τοῦ φυτοῦ γεννώμενα ἧ σπέρματα πάλιν ἄλλων καὶ ἄλλων 
πολλάκις φυτῶν Γκεχυμένα"). οὕτως (6) οὐκ ὧν θεὸς ἐποίησε κόσμον οὐκ 
ὄντα) " ἐξ οὐκ ὄντων, καταβαλ[λ]όμενος καὶ ὑποστήσας "᾽ σπέρμα τι ἕν, 


1 οὐκ... ἀναίσθητον seclusi. “οὐ νοητόν, ob« αἰσθητόν susp. Iacobius’; but this 
would be a duplication of τῶν δι᾿ αἰσθήσεως «7.4. below. 
2 As to ane, ἀναισθήτως, see note on Corp, IX, 9 below. 
4 3 Te. Ad use the word to indicate my meaning, but it is not to be understood 
terally 
. em | om καὶ ἀναισθήτως secludendum? 
ὅ Perhaps, τὸν [[ ]| κατὰ διαίρεσιν γεγενημένον ὕστερον καὶ ((κατὰ πλάτους) 
διεστῶτα. 
8 πάντα Duncker and Schn. : πάσας MS, 
7 Perhaps γενησύμενα, or γενησομένων. 
8 Perhaps (ἅπαντα (1) dL er A 
5. ὄντα Duncker and Schn,: ὧν MS. 
10 Hither καταβαλόμενος καὶ or καὶ ὑποστήσας ought, I think, to be struck out. 


-»»»" 


eee eee ae Se ee eee .ὦ 


a ae 


eee eee ee ee eee rea eee 


218 CORPVS HERMETICVM 


ἔχον πᾶσαν ἐν ἑαυτῷ τὴν τοῦ κόσμου πανσπερμίαν. ἵνα δὲ καταφανέστερον 
ποιήσω τοῦτο ὅπερ ἐκεῖνοι λέγουσι" καθάπερ ὠὸν ὄρνιθος εὐποικίλ[λ]ου " 
τινὸς καὶ πολυχρωμάτου, οἷονεὶ τοῦ ταῶνος ἢ ἄλλου τινὸς ἔτι μᾶλλον 
πολυμόρφου [καὶ πολυχρωμάτου], ἐν ὄν, [οὕτως] " ἔχει ἐν ἑαυτῷ πολλὰς 
οὐσιῶν πολυμόρφων καὶ πολυχρωμάτων καὶ πολυσυστάτων ὃ ἰδέας, οὕτως 
ἔχει ὁ τὸ καταβληθέν, φησίν, ὑπὸ τοῦ οὐκ ὄντος θεοῦ οὐκ ὃν σπέρμα τοῦ 
κόσμου Γπολύμορφον ὁμοῦ καὶ πολυούσιον 1.5 

ἵνα... πάντα ποιῇ ἐνεργῶς. The Kosmos has received from God 
the ‘seeds’ of things only, and not the things themselves; it 
produces the things ἐνεργῶς by its own action. That is to say, 
the things exist only δυνάμει (potentially) in the ‘seeds’, but are 
made to exist ἐνεργείᾳ (actually) by the action of the Kosmos. With 
the other reading, ἐναργῶς, the meaning would be that the Kosmos 
brings the individual organisms into concrete and visible existence 
by its own action. 

((φερόμενος δὲ πάντα ζωοποιεῖ.), This clause, where it stands in 
the MSS., is an awkward and pointless repetition of οὐκ ἔστιν ὃ μὴ 
ζωογονεῖ. I have therefore transposed it to this place, where some- 
thing of the sort seems needed to lead on to καὶ διαλύων πάντα 
ἀνανεοῖ. The word φερόμενος implies that it is the κοσμικὴ φορά, 
i.e. the movement of the heavenly bodies, that produces life in each 
individual organism at its birth.. 

ὥσπερ ἀγαθὸς [ζωῆς] γεωργὸς τῇ καταβολῇ ἀνανέωσιν αὐτοῖς [φερό- 
μενος] παρέχων (παρέχει MSS.). καταβολή means ‘a sowing of seed’. 
As a farmer ‘renews’ his crop (i.e. brings a fresh crop into being in 
place of that which has been reaped) by sowing seed, so the Kosmos 
renews the life of all organisms by making them produce offspring. 
Cf. Corp. III. 4 as emended: τὰ δὲ ἐλαττούμενα ἀνανεωθήσεται θεῶν 
ἐγκυκλίων ἐναριθμίῳ δρομήματι. The word φερόμενος is out of place 
here, since it has no application to the γεωργός. It has doubtless 
come by duplication from φερόμενος δὲ πάντα ζωοποιεῖ. 

For the simile of the γεωργός, cf. Numenius af. Euseb. Pr. ev. 11. 
18. 14, quoted in prefatory note on Corf. IT. 

Compare also Pap. Mag. Berlin Parthey I. 26, where the term 
ἀγαθὲ yewpyé is addressed to the Egyptian god Khnum (the Agathos 


1 εὐποικίλου Duncker and Schn.: ἐκ ποικίλλου MS, 

® οὕτως seclust. It has doubtless come from οὕτως ἔχει below. 

’ Two of these three adjectives might be struck out with advantage, 

* ἔχει is here intransitive. 
, 5 ὁμοῦ is meaningless ; and the σπέρμα, though it contains in itself πολλὰς οὐσιῶν 
πολυμύρφων ἰδέας, is not itself πολύμορφον. Legendum πολυμόρφου ὄντος καὶ 
πολυουσίου. 








LIBELLVS IX: §§ 6-7 219 


Daimon), who, as lord of the Nile, and fertilizer of Egypt, had come 
to be regarded as the giver of all life on earth. 

§ 7. τὰ δὲ σώματα ἀπὸ ὕλης. The writer distinguishes the material 
body of the organism from the life (or soul) generated in it or infused 
jnto it. His conception of ζωή resembles that of anima in Ascl. Lat, 
I. 2b, where the anima is distinguished from the mundus (ὕλη) of 
which the body is composed. 

ἐν διαφορᾷ. It would be possible to write ἐνδιάφορα, ‘having 
differences in or among them’. There seems to have been an 
adjective ἐνδιάφορος with this meaning ; cf. Corp. XII. i, 6, πῶς ἐνδιά- 
φορός ἐστιν (6 νοῦς). See also Corp, V. 7. 

[τὰ μὲν γάρ ἐστιν ἐκ γῆς, τὰ δὲ ἐξ ὕδατος, τὰ δὲ ἐξ ἀέρος, τὰ δὲ ἐκ 
πυρός.] This appears to mean that the bodies of one kind of {Ga 
are made wholly and solely of earth, those of another kind wholly 
and solely of water, and so on. But that is contradicted by the 
following statement, πάντα δέ ἐστι σύνθετα, which implies that every 
organized body is composed of different elements in combination. 
It is most likely therefore that ra μὲν... ἐκ πυρός is a note inserted 
by some reader. 

The interpolator probably assumed that the bodies of men and 
terrestrial animals are made of earth, and those of fishes, of water. 
The only ζῷα that could be said to have bodies made of fire are the 
celestial gods (sun, moon, and stars) ; and that being so, the {Ga that 
have bodies made of air are most likely the daemons. 

πάντα δέ ἐστι σύνθετα, καὶ τὰ μὲν μᾶλλον, TA δὲ ἁπλούστερα’ μᾶλλον 
μὲν τὰ βαρύτερα, ἧττον δὲ τὰ κουφότερα, ἁπλούστερα is equivalent to 
ἧττον σύνθετα, and (if the text is sound) is accordingly resumed by 
ἧττον in the phrase which follows. But what kinds of ζῷα have 
bodies that are ἧττον σύνθετα and consequently xovpdrepa? If the 
writer were speaking of men alone, one might suppose that he was 
thinking of the doctrine of Posidonius concerning life after death. 
Pos. seems to have said that men living on earth are composed of all 
four elements, and when a man dies, he becomes first a ‘hero’, 
composed of water, air, and fire, and dwelling in the lower atmo- 
sphere; then a ‘daemon’, composed of air and fire, and dwelling in 
the upper atmosphere ; and (in some few cases) finally a god, com- 
posed of fire alone, and dwelling in heaven. But that interpretation 
of the sentence would not suit the context ; for the author of Cor. 
IX is speaking of the ζῷα produced by the Kosmos, and it is clear 
that he includes among these {Ga beasts as well as men, and that he 


“ρα αν σὴν» 





220 CORPVS HERMETICVM 


is thinking of them only as born on earth and living upon earth, 
There is reason therefore to suspect that not only the preceding 
sentence, but this passage also (πάντα δέ... κουφότερα) is an 
interpolation. Perhaps the best way out of the difficulty would be 
to cut out all that is here said about τὰ σώματα, and to assume that 
the original text ran thus: (ὁ κόσμος) ὁμοῦ τόπος ἐστὶ καὶ δημιουργὸς 
ζωῆς. [τὰ δὲ σώματα... ἧττον δὲ τὰ κουφότερα.] τὸ δὲ τάχος αὐτοῦ 
τῆς φορᾶς κιτ.λ. 

τὸ δὲ τάχος αὐτοῦ τῆς φορᾶς τὴν ποικιλίαν τῶν [ποιῶν] γενέσεων 
ἐργάζεται, This is explained by Ase/. Ζαΐ. II]. 35. The qualities 
imposed on individuals at their birth are ποικίλα ; that is to say, no 
two individuals are born alike; and this is accounted for by the fact 
that, owing to the rapid movement of the heavens, no two individuals 
are born under the same aspect of the stars. ποιῶν (qualities) may 
be an alternative reading for γενέσεων. It would be possible to write 
either τὴν ποικιλίαν τῶν γενέσεων (cf. τῇ ποικιλίᾳ τῆς γενέσεως below), 
or τ, π. τῶν ποιῶν, but hardly τ. π. τῶν ποιῶν γενέσεων. 

πνοὴ γάρ, οὖσα πυκνοτάτη, προτείνει τὰ ποιὰ τοῖς σώμασιν. This 
πνοή is the Stoic πνεῦμα, i.e. the life-breath of the living Kosmos. 
(Cf. Ascd. Lat. 1. 6 Ὁ, ‘spiritus, quo plena sunt omnia, permixtus cunctis 
cuncta vivificat’; and Asc/. Lat. III. 17a.) The writer identifies 
it with the atmosphere, and holds it to be the instrument by which 
the influences of the heavenly bodies are brought to bear on all 
organisms on earth. All {Ga live by breathing, i.e. by taking into 
themselves a portion of the cosmic πνοή. (Cf. εἰσπνέουσα ἀπὸ τοῦ 
περιέχοντος below.) 

The πνοή is πυκνοτάτη ; that is to say, it operates without inter- 
mission, and so maintains a constant succession of changing qualities, 
It ‘extends the qualities forward’ (προτείνει τὰ ποιά) ; this seems to 
mean that it supplies a continuous series of them. 

μετὰ ἑνὸς πληρώματος τῆς ζωῆς. The πνοή not only imposes on all 
bodies their sensible qualities (τὰ ποιά), but also conveys life into 
them. And since all bodies in the Kosmos (inorganic bodies as well 
as organisms) possess life in some degree, their lives, regarded collec- 
tively, constitute ἐν πλήρωμα τῆς ζωῆς ; that is to say, the universe is, 
through the operation of the πνοή, wholly filled with one continuous 
mass of life. Cf. Corp. XII. ii. 15 Ὁ: ὁ δὲ σύμπας κόσμος οὗτος... 
πλήρωμά ἐστι τῆς ζωῆς. 

§ 8. [πατὴρ μὲν... τοῦ κόσμου. Placed in the midst of the 
discussion of the Kosmos, this passage is an interruption. It may 








LIBELLVS ΙΧ: §& 7-9 221 


perhaps have been a note appended to the words ἀπὸ rod θεοῦ λαβὼν 
ἔχει in § 9, where the writer is passing on from the Kosmos to God. 
As to ὃ μὲν κόσμος vids τοῦ θεοῦ K.7.A., οἵ, Corp. X. τ4 Ὁ : καὶ γίνεται 
ὁ μὲν κόσμος τοῦ θεοῦ vids, ὁ δὲ ἄνθρωπος τοῦ κόσμου (vids, καὶ τοῦ θεοῖν 
ὥσπερ ἔγγονος. 

Numenius called the first God ‘ grandfather’ of the Kosmos ; see 
Numen. af. Procl. Jz Zim. 93 a, quoted in prefatory note on Cor. II. 

ὁ αὐτὸς οὖν κόσμος Γἀναγκαίως] καὶ οἰκείως καλοῖτο. ἀναγκαίως, 
which is meaningless in this context, has probably come from 
ἀνάγκης above. The meaning must have been that the word κόσμος 
has two senses, viz. ‘ order’ and ‘universe’, and that one of these is 
its ‘proper’ or primary sense, and the other is a transferred or 
secondary sense. Perhaps the original reading may have been 
ἀναλόγως, Which, when contrasted with οἰκείως, would mean ‘ meta- 
phorically’. Cf. Ar. Rhet. 3. το. 7: τῶν δὲ peradopdv ... εὐδοκιμοῦσι 
μάλιστα ai Kar’ ἀναλογίαν. 

For the omission of ἄν, cf. ὑποσταίη in Corp. XI. ii. 16b, (In 
IX. το, the MSS. give δόξειεν without dv, but the text is corrupt.) 
Whether ἄν was omitted from the first, or has been dropped out by 
a copyist, we have no means of knowing. 

ὁ αὐτὸς... καλοῖτο ends the paragraph feebly, and is an anticlimax 
after the more impressive sentence which precedes it ; I am therefore 
inclined to suspect that it is a note inserted by a later hand. 

§ 9. πάντων οὖν τῶν ζῴων ἡ αἴσθησις καὶ νόησις ἔξωθεν ἐπεισέρχεται, 
εἰσπνέουσα ἀπὸ (ὑπὸ MSS.) τοῦ περιέχοντος. According to ὃ τ b, ‘sense 
and thought’ exist (on earth) in men alone, and in the lower animals 
their place is taken by ‘sense and instinct’, But here, the phrase 
αἴσθησις καὶ νόησις is used in a wider sense, and means ‘conscious 
life’ in general, so that it becomes almost equivalent to ζωή. We 
have just been told that ‘life’ is conveyed into all bodies by the 
cosmic πνοή ; and the same thing is expressed in other words by the 
statement that ‘sense and thought’ are breathed into them from 
the atmosphere. In adopting the Stoic doctrine of the cosmic 
πνεῦμα, the writer has not ceased to feel that πνεῦμα primarily means 
‘breath’; and his description of the process of vivification is based 
on the view that men and beasts draw into themselves, by the act of 
breathing, portions of the conscious life of the Kosmos, with which 


the atmosphere is filled. In this respect, he is still in touch with the: 


theories of Heraclitus and Diogenes of Apollonia, out of which the 
Stoic doctrine of πνεῦμα was developed. 





222 CORPVS HERMETICVM 


ὁ δὲ κόσμος, ἅπαξ λαβὼν ἅμα τῷ γενέσθαι. The writer assumes that 
the Kosmos has had a beginning. This was denied by the Aristo- 
telians, and by some of the Platonists. 

ὥσπερ ἐνίοις δόξει. Cf. ὃ 4 Ὁ, ὡς ἔνιοί wore ἐροῦσι. The writer 
refers to his own time by putting a prediction into the mouth of the 
prehistoric Hermes. His meaning is that some of his contemporaries 
deny that God αἰσθάνεται καὶ νοεῖ, Who are the persons referred to? 
They can hardly be orthodox Christians ; but some of the Christian 
Gnostics might be included among them. Cf. Basilides, quoted 
above, in note on § 6: the ‘non-existent’ God ἀνοήτως, ἀναισθήτως, 
++. κόσμον ἠθέλησε ποιῆσαι. But that is merely an extreme statement 
of a doctrine which was taught by some of the Pagan Platonists also 3 
(see note on Corp. II. 5;) and the writer of Corp IX, when he 
spoke of certain men who blasphemously say that God is ἀναίσθητος 
καὶ ἀνόητος, may have been thinking either of Pagan Platonists or of 
Platonizing Christians. 

ὑπὸ γὰρ δεισιδαιμονίας βλασφημοῦσι. It is their anxiety to exalt 
God to the utmost, and to separate him by the widest possible 
interval from the material world and the evil in it, that leads them 
into this error; and thus they may be said to ‘ blaspheme through 
excess of reverence’. 

((καὶ τοῦτο ἔστιν ἡ αἴσθησις καὶ νόησις τοῦ θεοῦ, τὸ τὰ πάντα del 
κινεῖν.) Cf. Corp. XI. ii. 17 c: τοῦτο yap ὥσπερ (οὐσία δὴ ἐστὶ rod 
θεοῦ, (τὸν κινεῖν τὰ πάντα καὶ ζωοποιεῖν. God is the primum movens ; 
it is his activity that takes effect in all subordinate activities. He 
infuses life and energy into the Kosmos, and thereby causes the 
Kosmos to infuse life and energy into all things contained τὰ it. 
And his αἴσθησις and νόησις consist in doing this; that is to say, he 
does it consciously and deliberately, and is wholly occupied in 
doing it. 

τὰ μὲν διὰ σωμάτων ἐνεργοῦντα, τὰ δὲ διὰ οὐσίας ψυχικῆς κινοῦντα, 
The writer probably adopted the view expressed in Asc/. Lat, I. 4, 
that plants, though they have ζωή, and even a kind of αἴσθησις, have 
no Ψυχή. They are living and perhaps sentient bodies, but bodies 
without ‘soul’ or ‘psychic substance’. Thus τὰ διὰ τῶν σωμάτων 
ἐνεργοῦντα may be taken to mean plants, as opposed to τὰ διὰ ψυχικῆς 
οὐσίας κινοῦντα, which means ἔμψυχα, i.e. beasts and men, ψυχή is 
‘self-moving’ or ‘selfmoved’ (Pl. Phaedrus 245 E, Laws 896 a); 
and the self-moving ψυχή of a man or animal originates movement 
in the body in which it resides, and thereby moves inanimate bodies 








LIBELLVS IX: § 9 223 


also (Corp. 11. ὃ Ὁ, 9). ἔμψυχα are therefore κινοῦντα ; but since this 
 yery power of self-movement is bestowed by God, the spontaneous 
movements of ἔμψυχα, as well as the mechanical movements of ἄψυχα, 
are caused by God. 

τὰ δὲ διὰ πνεύματος ζωοποιοῦντα, τὰ δὲ τὰ κεκμηκότα ὑποδεχόμενα. 
This is obscure ; but a comparison of As¢/, Zat.I. 2b and 6b (which 
the writer had before him in the Λόγος τέλειος) suggests that it is to 
be explained as follows. The two kinds of things here spoken of are 
the ἀνωφερῇ and κατωφερῆ of Ascl. Laz. I. 2b, that is, the pair of light 
elements, fire and air, and the pair of heavy elements, earth and 
water. The ἀνωφερῆ are ζωοποιοῦντα (vivifica, Ascl. Lat. 1); that is 
to say, portions of fire and air enter into the bodies of men and 
animals, (these bodies being composed mainly of τὰ κατωφερῆ, earth 
and water,) and convey life into them. And the fire and air do this 
διὰ πνεύματος, that is, by combining with one another to form a 
gaseous substance called πνεῦμα, which men and animals draw into 
their bodies by breathing. The κατωφερῇ ‘receive into themselves 
dead organisms’; that is to say, when an animal ‘ expires’, the 
invisible πνεῦμα by which it has hitherto been vivified passes away 
into the atmosphere, but the visible and tangible body is resolved 
into the gross elements of which it was composed, and is thus 
‘received back’ into the mass of earth and water. If this is the 
meaning, the first and second of the four kinds of things distinguished 
are organic bodies (animals and vegetables), and the third and fourth 
are inorganic bodies (the lighter and heavier elements). 

Perhaps it might also be possible to take the passage in another 
way; τὰ διὰ πνεύματος ζωοποιοῦντα might be taken to mean the 
heavenly bodies, which produce life in individual organisms by 
means of the cosmic πνεῦμα by which their influence is conveyed to 
earthly things; and τὰ τὰ κεκμηκότα ἀναδεχόμενα might be taken 
to mean the four elements, into which the organism (including the 
portion of πνεῦμα which has been infused into it, as well as the 
visible and tangible body) is decomposed at death. 

[kai εἰκότως]. This phrase is evidently out of place; for it ought 
to be followed by an explanation introduced by γάρ, and there is no 
such explanation here. It may be a misplaced doublet of καὶ εἰκότως 
in § 8. 

[μᾶλλον δὲ λέγω ὅτι οὐκ αὐτὸς αὐτὰ ἔχει, ἀλλὰ... αὐτὸς ἅπαντά 
ἐστιν.}} There can be little doubt that this was written as a correc- 
tion of τὰ yap ὄντα ὁ θεὸς ἔχει below. If we transpose it accordingly, 





224. CORPVS HERMETICVM 


the statement αὐτὸς ἅπαντά ἐστιν falls into its right place, as the climax 
with which the paragraph ends. 

[οὐκ ἔξωθεν αὐτὰ προσλαμβάνων, ἔξω δὲ ἐπιδιδούς.)] These words, in 
which God is spoken of as distinct from ‘things’, cannot have been 
meant to follow αὐτὸς ἅπαντά ἐστιν, in which he is identified with 
them. Perhaps οὐκ... ἐπιδιδούς was intended to stand after τὰ yap ὄντα 
ὃ θεὸς ἔχει below ; but if placed there, it would interrupt the sequence 
of thought ; and it seems most likely that it is a note inserted by a 
reader. 

καὶ οὐκ ἔσται ποτὲ χρόνος ὅτε ἀπολειφθήσεταί τι τῶν ὄντων, See 
Corp. VIII, where it is maintained that οὐδὲν τῶν ἐν τῷ κόσμῳ 
ἀπόλλυται. 

οὐκ... . ἀπολειφθήσεταί τι τῶν ὄντων" [1 τὰ γὰρ ὄντα ὁ θεὸς ἔχει. 
Nothing that is can cease to be, because all things are contained ' by 
God, or included in God. (Cf. ἐν τῷ θεῷ ἐστι above, and οὔτε αὐτοῦ 
οὐδὲν ἐκτός, which follows.) If things are ‘in God’, they partake of 
God’s eternity, and cannot perish. 

καὶ οὔτε αὐτοῦ οὐδὲν ἐκτὸς οὔτε αὐτὸς οὐδενός. The first of these two 
statements, ‘there is nothing which is not in God’, is a repetition of 
τὰ ὄντα 6 θεὸς ἔχει in different words, But the second, ‘there is 
nothing in which God is not’, brings in a fresh thought which is 
hardly to the point ; and it may be suspected that the author wrote 
merely καὶ οὐδὲν αὐτοῦ ἐκτός, and that this was amplified by a 
transcriber. 

§ 10. ὑπὸ τοῦ λόγον μέχρι τινὸς ὁδηγηθείς, The teacher’s words 
may guide the pupil’s thought in the right direction; but they can 
do no more than that. Unless the pupil thinks for himself, he 
cannot grasp the truth which the teacher’s words express ; (cf. Ascd. 
Lat. 1. 3b, and Ase?. Zat. 111. rg a;) and it is only when his own 
thought has confirmed what another man tells him, that he arrives at 
an assured conviction. Cf. Plotinus 6. 9. 4: διὸ οὐδὲ ῥητὸν οὐδὲ 
γραπτὸν (ro ἕν)" ἀλλὰ λέγομεν καὶ γράφομεν, πέμποντες εἰς αὐτό, καὶ 
ἀνεγείροντες ἐκ τῶν λόγων (by our teaching) ἐπὶ τὴν θέαν, ὥσπερ ὁδὸν — 
δεικνύντες τῷ τι θεάσασθαι βουλομένῳ. μέχρι μὲν γὰρ τῆς ὁδοῦ καὶ τῆς 
πορείας ἡ δίδαξις, ἡ δὲ θέα αὐτοῦ ἔργον ἤδη τοῦ ἰδεῖν βεβουλημένου. 
I. 6. a man may be led by his teacher to a standpoint from which it 
is possible to see ‘the One’ (or God) ; but he cannot see it unless he 
looks with his own eyes. 


1 Tt might be possible to translate ἔχει ‘ holds in his keeping’. But it suits the 
context better if we take it to mean ‘contains within himself’. 








LIBELLVS ΙΧ: §§ 9-10 2445 


The νόησις spoken of in this section is the operation of νοῦς 
θεωρητικός; Whereas in the rest of the document the νόησις in 
question is mainly, if not solely, the operation of νοῦς πρακτικός. 

ὁ δὲ νοῦς... φθάνει μέχρι (φθάνειν ἔχει MSS.) τῆς ἀληθείας, The 
repetition of the phrase φθάνει μέχρι τῆς ἀληθείας is clumsy; and 
perhaps it would be better to cut it out here, and write ὁ δὲ νοῦς... 
ὁδηγηθείς, [ ] καὶ περινοήσας x.7.d. 

τοιγαροῦν νοήσασι μὲν πιστὰ τὰ προειρημένα, μὴ νοήσασι δὲ ἄπιστα.--- 
(τοῖς οὖν τὰ προειρημένα ὑπὸ τοῦ θεοῦ νοήσασι μὲν πιστά, μὴ νοήσασι δὲ 
ἄπιστα MSS.) In the traditional text, the position of μέν is impossible. 
ὑπὸ τοῦ θεοῦ may perhaps be a remnant of a note to the effect that it 
is only by God’s help that a man can think rightly. 


LIBELLVS X 


Contents 
A. §§ 1b-4qa. Zhe relation between God and the Good. 


The action of God’s will is one with the action of the Good. That 
action differs from the action of the cosmic forces, in that it has to 
do with things not subject to change. § 1b. 

God wills the existence of all things; and things exist only by his 
will. The Good appertains to God alone, and not to the Kosmos ; 
for God alone is the author of life. The Kosmos may indeed be 
said to produce life, but only in a secondary sense; for the Kosmos 
is subject to God’s will. §§ 2-4. 


B. §§4b-6. he relation between man and the Good. 


Can man attain to the vision of the Good? Yes; but not until 
after death. While a man is still in the body, he can catch only 
faint and intermittent glimpses of the Good. But when released 
from the body, he may behold the Good in its full splendour ; and 
if he does, he will thereby be changed from a man into a god. 


C. §§ 6-19 a. How do souls become bad, and how do they 
become good ? 
All individual souls come into being by separation from the 
world-soul. The individual soul is incarnated on earth, first in an 
2806.2 Q 








226 CORPVS HERMETICVM 


animal body of the lowest grade, and then in animal bodies of 
higher and higher grade, until it enters a human body. At that 
stage, it may begin to be divine ; and if it does, that will be its last 
earthly incarnation ; on its release from the human body, it will be 
changed into a daemon, and subsequently into an astral god. But 
if the soul, when it has entered a human body, continues to be bad, 
it is reincarnated in the bodies of beasts. ὃ 7-8 a. 

The badness of a soul consists of lack of gnosis (i.e. knowledge 
of God, or of the Good). A soul which has not gwosts is ruled by 
the body, and is tossed about by the bodily passions. But the soul 
which has got guosts is good. Gnosis is not to be got by talk; nor 
is it to be got by sense-perception. The senses operate by means of 
the body ; but gvosis has nothing to do with the body; its organ is 
the mind, and mind is incorporeal. ὃ 8 b-roa. 

Is the Kosmos good or bad? The Kosmos is immortal, and 
therefore is not bad ; but it is material, and therefore is not good. 
It is everlasting; but its existence is a perpetual becoming; and 
becoming is movement. The Kosmos then is in ceaseless move- 
ment; and its movement is effected by something which is itself 
incorporeal and motionless (i. e. by soul), The soul of the Kosmos 
is incorporated in its body in the following way. The Kosmos 
resembles a human head ; and its outermost sphere corresponds to 
the cerebral membrane of the human head, that membrane which is 
the seat of conscious life. Life or soul then pervades the whole 
Kosmos, but is present in the highest degree in the outermost 
sphere. The stars and planets, being closely connected with the 
outermost sphere, have in them more soul than body, and are 
consequently immortal; sublunar things, being remote from the 
outermost sphere, have in them more body than soul, and are 
consequently mortal. §§ τὸ Ὁ, rr. 

Man, gua mortal, is not merely ‘not-good’, but positively bad, 
Like the Kosmos, he consists of a body with a soul in it; his soul 
has for its vehicle the vital spirit; and the vital spirit, which is 
intermingled with the blood, moves the body. When death takes 
place, the soul quits the body; the vital spirit also then quits the 
body, and the blood coagulates in the veins. §§ 12, 13. 

The Kosmos is son of God; man is son of the Kosmos, and 
grandson of God. God wills that man should know him ; and it is 
by knowledge of God (gzoszs) that a soul becomes good. §§ 14), 
15 a. 








LIBELLVS X 227 


The human soul is originally good, but necessarily becomes bad 
when incarnated. The soul of a young child is still good ; for it is 
hardly yet separated from the world-soul. But as the body grows, 
it draws the soul down into its own gross substance, and makes it 
forget the Good ; and thus the soul becomes bad. § 1 5 Ὁ. 

When death takes place, not only does the soul separate from the 
vital spirit, but the mind also separates from the soul. The mind 
takes to itself a body of fire, and ranges through all space ; and the 
soul, abandoned by the mind, suffers punishment according to its 
deserts. If a soul is pious, (i.e. if in this life it has attained to 
gnosis,) it becomes mind and nothing else; and in that case, it 
changes into a daemon when it quits the body. But the impious 
soul, after death, remains mere soul (as opposed to mind); it seeks 
another body into which it may enter, and thus suffers self-inflicted 
punishment. §§ 16-19 a. 


D. §§ 22 b-25. Zhe relations between men and beings of 
other grades. 

The Kosmos’ is subject to God; man is subject to the Kosmos 3 
and the lower animals are subject to man. God works on the 
Kosmos by the direct action of his will; the Kosmos works on man 
by its physical forces ; and man works on what is subject to him by 
his arts and crafts. Thus all things are dependent on God, and are 
administered by mind, which is in both gods and men, and joins 
gods and men together. Not indeed all men; for some men have 
no mind in them ; and such men are like the beasts. But the man 
whose soul is filled with mind (or in other words, the man who has 
got gnosis) is comparable, not to the beasts, but to the gods in 
heaven; indeed, we may even say that he is greater than a god 
in heaven. The Kosmos is an agent through whom God works; but 
not the Kosmos only ; man also is God’s agent. But it is God that 
governs all. 

(A passage in which the reincarnation of human souls in bestial 
bodies is denied (§§ 19 b-22 a), and a short passage in which τὸ ἕν is 
spoken of (δ 14 8), have been added at a later date.) 


The connexions of Libellus X with other Hermetica. Among the 


1 § The Kosmos’ seems here to mean the astral gods regarded collectively. The 
Kosmos is a God composed of numerous individual gods, who are his ‘members’. 
Compare the relation between the Demiurgus and his several δυνάμεις (identified 
with the several temple-gods), as described in 4éammonis resp. 10. 6 ( Testim.). 


Q 2 


228 CORPVS HERMETICVM 


extant Hermetica, that with which Corp. X is most closely connected 
is Corp. VI. Compare the following :— 


Corp. VI. 
1b. (τὸ ἀγαθὸν) οὐδενὶ ἄλλῳ 
πρόσεστιν εἰ μὴ μόνῳ τῷ θεῷ. 
.Φ 


Ta. τὸ ἀγαθὸν... ἐν οὐδενί 


> > δι. , - θ ~ 
ἐστιν εἰ μὴ ἐν μόνῳ τῷ θεῷ. 
= 


2a. ἐν αὐτῷ τῷ ζῴῳ τῷ πάντων 
μείζονι (Ξε. τῷ κόσμῳ). 

2h. ὥσπερ δὲ μετουσία πάντων 
ἐστὶν ἐν τῇ ὕλῃ (δια)δεδομένη, οὕτω 
καὶ τοῦ ἀγαθοῦ. τοῦτον τὸν τρόπον 
ἀγαθὸς ὃ κόσμος, καθὰ καὶ αὐτὸς 
πάντα ποιεῖ, (ὡς) ἐν τῷ μέρει τοῦ 
ποιεῖν ἀγαθὸς εἶναι. ἐν δὲ τοῖς 
ἄλλοις πᾶσιν οὐκ ἀγαθός" καὶ γὰρ 
παθητὸς ἐστι. 

5. ἐκεῖνο γὰρ τὸ κάλλος ἀσύγ- 
κριτον, καὶ ἐκεῖνο τὸ ἀγαθὸν api- 
μητον (fortasse ἀλάλητον). 


Corp. X. 

2. τούτῳ (δὲ πρόσεστι) τὸ ἀγαθόν, 
(τοιοῦτο ὃν) ὃ pnderXi) πρόσεστι τῶν 
ἄλλων. 

3. (τὸ ἀγαθὸν) οὐ δυνατὸν ἐγγε- 
νέσθαι ἄλλῳ τινὶ ἢ μόνῳ ἐκείνῳ. 

12. ὃ μὲν κόσμος πρῶτον {{τῶν 
ἄλλων ζῴωνν). 

2. ὃ μὲν γὰρ κόσμος [ 1 τῶν 
κατὰ μετουσίαν (ἀγαθῶν) καὶ αὐτὸς 
πατήρ. 

4. τὸ γὰρ ἀγαθόν ἐστι τὸ ποιη- 
τικόν. 

το Ὁ, οὐκέϊσ]τι δὲ ἀγαθὸς (ὁ 
κόσμος)" ὑλικὸς γάρ, καὶ [ev}ra- 
θητός. 

5. τὸ κάλλος τοῦ ἀγαθοῦ, ἐκεῖνο[υ] 
τὸ ἄφθαρτον, τὸ Γἄληπτον) (lege 
ἀλάλητον). 





These verbal similarities make it very probable that the writer of one 
of the two documents had the other before him ; and Corf. X, being 
the longer and more elaborate of the two, is presumably the later. 
But a still stronger proof may be seen in the relation of the argument 
of Corp. X as a whole to that of Corp. VI. The writer of Corp. VI 
asserts with emphasis that man is wholly bad, and there is no good 
in him; and if he admits for a moment that there is a way which 
leads to τὸ καλόν, viz. the way of ‘piety combined with gzosis’ 
(VI. 5 jin.), he seems to forget this admission in the bitter 
denunciation of man with which he concludes. Now Corp. X appears 
to have been written with the express purpose of giving a different 
answer to the question whether there is any good in man The — 
author of Corp, X accepts in part the statements of Corg. VI 
concerning the relations of God, Kosmos, and Man respectively to 
the Good; but he counteracts the gloomy inferences which the 
writer of Corp. VI drew from those statements, by directing attention 
to the life beyond the grave (of which not a word was said in 








LIBELLVS X 229 


Corp. V1), and pointing out that man is free to hope that after 
death he will enjoy the beatific vision, and attain to the ‘crowning 
_ glory’ of a life among the celestial gods. As regards the present life, 
he admits that the soul is necessarily made bad by its incarnation ; 
but he gives a different aspect to the matter, by insisting on the 
point (just hinted at in Corp. VI) that through gnosis the soul which 
has thus been made bad may become good again ; and he concludes 
with a glorification of ‘the man who is a man indeed’, which seems 
deliberately intended to contrast with the gloomy picture drawn in 
the concluding paragraph of Corp. VI. I think then that we may 
reasonably assume that the author of Corp, X had Corp. VI before 
him, and wrote with the object of supplying a corrective to the 
pessimism of that document. 

Some verbal resemblances to Corp. II also are to he noted in 
Corp. X. Compare the following :— 


Corp. II. Corp. X. 
4asg. σώματι δὲ ἐναντία φύσις τὸ toa. 6 δὲ νοῦς τῷ σώματι 
ἀσώματον. .. . τὸ δὲ ἀσώματον ἢ (ἐναντίος). 
θεῖόν ἐστιν (Ξε. νοῦς), ἢ ὃ θεός. 


8a, πᾶσα οὖν κίνησις. .. ὑπὸ τι. ἡ δὲ νοητὴ στάσις κινεῖ τὴν 
στάσεως κινεῖται. ὑλικὴν κίνησιν. 
16 (as emended): μία γὰρ ἡ tb. 6 μὲν οὖν θεὸς... καὶ τὸ 


φύσις τοῦ θεοῦ τῇ τοῦ ἀγαθοῦ. ... ἀγαθὸν (fortasse τῷ ἀγαθῷ) τὴν 

ὃ γὰρ θεὸς ἀγαθός ἐστιν, ὡς ἅπαντα αὐτὴν ἔχει φύσιν. 

διδοὺς καὶ μηδὲν λαμβάνων. 3. τῷ μηδὲν μὲν λαμβάνοντι, 
πάντα δὲ θέλοντι εἶναι. οὐ γὰρ 
ἐρῶ... ποιοῦντι. 


In the case of the statement about the φύσις of God (II. 16 = X. rb), 
if there was direct borrowing on either side, it must have been the 
writer of Corp. X who borrowed ; for he goes on to object to this use 
of the word φύσις. It seems probable therefore that the writer of 
Corp. X had before him Corp. II as well as Corp. VI. But if so, he 
merely took a few phrases from it; he makes no attempt to deal with 
its argument as a whole, and he does not refer to the doctrine of the 
téros-vovs, Which is peculiar to Corp. II. The phrase ὁ Geos καὶ πατήρ, 
used as a name of God in Corp. X, may possibly have been suggested 
by Corp. 11. τὴ ἃ; if so, that section must have been already appended 
to Corp. II at the time when Corp. X was written. The words καὶ 
τὸ ἀγαθόν, which occur repeatedly after 6 θεὸς καὶ πατήρ in the tradi- 





230 CORPVS HERMETICVM 


tional text of Corp. X, but were probably inserted by a later hand, 
may have been suggested to the interpolator by Corf. II. 16, 6 οὖν 
θεὸς τὸ ἀγαθόν, καὶ τὸ ἀγαθὸν ὁ θεός. 

The passage Corp. X. 22 b-25 has much in common with Asc/. 
Lat. 1; but there is no proof that the author of either of these two 
documents made use of the other ; and it is quite as likely that both 
were influenced by some common authority. 


Sources. The doctrine of Corp. X is Platonic, with an ingredient 
of Stoicism. The influence of particular passages in Plato’s dialogues 
may be recognized in ὃ 19 a fin., γήινον σῶμα ζητοῦσα εἰς ὃ εἰσέλθῃ 
(Pl. Phaedo 81 8 ff.) ;—in the comparison of the Kosmos to a human 
head, ὃ rr (Pl. Zim. 44 Ὁ ff.) ;—and in the identification of the νοῦς 
with the ἀγαθὸς δαίμων, ὃ 23 (Pl. Zim. 90 a). The doctrine of 
§§ 16-18, that the νοῦς, when it quits the earthy body, clothes itself 
in a body of fire, is characteristic of a certain sect of Platonists 
mentioned by Iamblichus, and may perhaps have been derived by 
them from Heraclides Ponticus. The statement in § 7 fiz., that an 
abode in the material heavens is the highest to which the soul can 
attain, may be attributed to the same sect of Platonists ; but it is also 
possible that it was suggested by Posidonius. 

Stoic influence is to be seen in the doctrine taught n § 7, and 
implied in ὃ 15 b, that all individual souls are ἀπὸ μιᾶς ψυχῆς τῆς τοῦ 
παντὸς ὥσπερ ἀπονενεμημέναι, which the writer tells us that he found 
in the Hermetic Τενικοὶ λόγοι ;—in the glorification of man in § 25, 
including the saying of Heraclitus (ἀθάνατοι θνητοί x...) as there 
interpreted ;—and in the use of the terms ποιότητες and ποσότητες, 
ποιά and wood, in §§ 3 and 10 Ὁ (derived from Aristotle, but probably 
through Stoic intermediaries). 

The physiological doctrine of ὃ 11 concerning the function of the 
meninx was originated by Erasistratus. In‘his view of the function 
of the arteries (§ 13), the writer follows Herophilus. His conception 
of the ζωτικὸν πνεῦμα may have been derived from the same medical 
sources as the rest of his physiology. 

The doctrine of the composition of opposites (§ το a) may be 
traced back to Heraclitus. The doctrine, mentioned in § 13, that 
‘the soul is the blood’, was commonly ascribed to Empedocles. A 
quotation from Theognis occurs in § 24 a. 

The contents of Coz. X are wholly derived from Greek sources. 
The document contains nothing Egyptian, except the names of the 








LIBELLVS X 231 


euhemerized gods Hermes, Tat, Asklepios, Uranos, and Kronos ; 
and nothing Jewish, with the possible exception of the use of the 
word δόξα in ὃ 7 fim. There is not the slightest trace of Christian 
influence. 


Date. The blending of Stoic notions with Platonism in Corp. X 
makes it certain that this document cannot have been written before 
100 B.C.; but beyond this, there is little to indicate any particular 
period, except so far as inferences can be drawn from the relations of 
Corp. X to other Hermetica, At the time when Corp. X was written, 
‘the Τενικοὶ λόγοι addressed to Tat’ were already known as a collec- 
tion of documents distinguished by that title from other Hermetic 
dialogues ; Corp. X must therefore be later than the Τενικοὶ λόγοι, 
which were probably the earliest of the Greek Hermetica. But we 
know from Corp. X. 7 (ἀπὸ μιᾶς ψυχῆς κιτ.λ.) that some of the Tevixot 
λόγοι themselves contained an infusion of Stoic doctrine, and there- 
fore cannot have been written before the first century B.c. ; whence 
it follows that Corp. X can hardly have been written before the 
Christian era. It is most likely, however, that it is much later. Its 
author seems to have known Corp. VI, and probably Corp. II also. 
I have conjecturally assigned Corp. VI to the second or third century 
A.D., and Corp. II to the second century ; Corp, X may therefore be 

_ provisionally placed in the second or third century a. D., and perhaps 
rather in the third century than the second. 

The inserted passage 19 b-22 a was probably written at some date 
not far from A.D. 300; and the short passage about ro ἕν (§ 14 8) may 
be put with it. 


Title. The title Κλείς may have been given to Corp. X by its 
author, or may have been applied to it at some later time. A key is 
the instrument by which a door is unlocked ; and in this connexion, 
the door must be either that of a treasure-house, or that of a 
sanctuary. If the former, the title must be meant to imply that this 
document is a thing which gives access to the treasury in which 
gnosis is laid up. Cf. Luke 11. 52: ἤρατε τὴν κλεῖδα τῆς γνώσεως 
x... But more probably, the meaning is that this document gives 
access to a sanctuary, in which holy secrets are revealed to those 
who are permitted to enter. Compare the use of κλειδοῦχος as 
applied to a priest or priestess. As an instance of the association of 
the word with mystery-cults, cf. Soph. O. C. ro51: ὧν καὶ χρυσέα 
κλὴς ἐπὶ γλώσσᾳ BéBaxe προσπόλων Ἑὐμολπιδᾶν" ‘on whose lips the 


232 CORPVS HERMETICVM 


ministrant Eumolpidae have laid the precious seal of silence’ (Jebb). 
In that passage, however, κλείς means a thing used to cose a door; 
as the title of Corp. X, it signifies a thing by means of which a door 
may be ofened. ‘The word occurs as the title of a ‘ Book of Moses’ 
in which secrets of magic are revealed ; Dieterich Aéraxas, pp. 171-- 
175: ἐν τῇ Κλειδὶ τῇ Μωυσέους κιτιλ. Melito bishop of Sardis (who 
died before a. Ὁ. 195) wrote a book entitled ἡ Κλείς (Euseb. Hist. 
eccl. 4. 26, 2). 

§ 1a. Τὸν χθὲς λόγον... émrouy. The writer of § τ ἃ must have 
intended Corp. X to be read next after a discourse addressed to 
Asclepius, which he describes as ‘ the discourse delivered yesterday’. 
But did these introductory words form part of the original document, 
or were they inserted by the compiler of the Corpus? In the latter 
case, they must have been intended to refer to the document which 
immediately precedes Corp. X in the Corpus, i.e. to Corp. IX, which 
is addressed to Asclepius. There is no connexion between the con- 
tents of Corp. X and those of Corp. IX, and the juxtaposition of 
these two documents in the Corfus must be due to mere accident or 
caprice; but the compiler of the Corpus may have inserted these 
words with the object of linking them together ; and if so, the phrase 
τὸν χθὲς λόγον in Corp. X init. may have been suggested to him by 
Corp. 1X intt., where the Tédevos λόγος (i. 6. Ascl. Lat.) is referred to 
as a discourse ‘delivered yesterday’. 

On the other hand, we have seen reason to think that Corp. X was 
written with the object of supplementing and correcting the teaching 
of Corp. VI, which is addressed to Asclepius ; and if the introductory 
words of Corp. X formed part of the original text, the preceding 
discourse to which they refer may perhaps be Cor, VI. 

The writer of § ra assumes that both Asclepius and Tat are 
present, though in the rest of the dialogue Tat alone is addressed by 
Hermes. Compare Ase. Lat. init, where Tat and Ammon are 
present as well as Asclepius. 

τῶν (y)evtxdv λόγων. The statement that Corp. X is ‘an abridge- 
ment of the Ῥενικοὶ λόγοι᾽ is hardly to be taken in the strict and 
literal sense of the words ; but in § 7 the writer refers to the authority 
of the Tevxoi λόγοι ; and it may be presumed that he was more or 
less influenced by the same authority in other parts of his treatise 
also. Compare Corp. XIV. 1. 

δ 1b. 6 μὲν οὖν θεὸς καὶ πατήρ, καὶ τὸ ἀγαθόν, ὦ Τάτ, τὴν αὐτὴν ἔχει 
φύσιν, μᾶλλον δὲ [καὶ] ἐνέργειαν. There can be little doubt that the 








LIBELLVS Χ: §§ 1a-2 233 


writer is here thinking of Corp. II. 16, μία yap ἡ φύσις τοῦ θεοῦ (τῇ) 
τοῦ ἀγαθοῦ (τὸ ἀγαθόν MSS.). But he rejects the word φύσις, as 
inapplicable to God, and substitutes ἐνέργεια. For the distinction 
between φύσις and ἐνέργεια, cf, § 22b: τοῦ μὲν θεοῦ καθάπερ ἀκτῖνες αἱ 
ἐνέργειαι, τοῦ δὲ κόσμου αἱ φύσεις. 

God is here called ὁ θεὸς καὶ πατήρ. In Corp. II, πατήρ, as a name 
of God, occurs only in ὃ τ ἃ, which was probably added to the dialogue 
by a later hand. But in Corp. X, καὶ πατήρ must have occurred in 
the original text, in § 2 at least, if not in other places; for it is 
presupposed there in the statement that the Kosmos is καὶ αὐτὸς 


πα ω 

Ag θεῖα [re], ((dv)) καὶ (ra) ἀνθρώπεια [[dv]] αὐτὸς βούλεται εἶναι. 
The restoration of the sentence is doubtful; but a satisfactory 
meaning can be obtained by the corrections which I have proposed. 
If a man is such as God wills or means him to be, he is exalted 
above τὰ μεταβλητὰ καὶ κινητά, and belongs to the world of eternal 
and changeless existence; he is οὐσιώδης, and in that sense θεῖος 
In ὃ 24 b we are told that ὁ ὄντως ἄνθρωπος (‘he who is a man indeed’) 
ζῷόν ἐστι θεῖον. 

ἀλλαχοῦ δὲ (wept) ἐνεργειῶν (ἐνέργειαν MSS.) [[ 1] ἐδιδάξαμεν. In 
Herm. ap. Stob. Zxc. III, ἐνέργειαι are discussed at some length. 
In that document, the term is used to denote the cosmic forces put 
jn action by the heavenly bodies. But in Corp. X, the word is 
applied only to the direct operation of God's will, as opposed to the 
operation of the cosmic forces. As τὸ ἀγαθόν is the τέλος towards 
which God’s will is directed, the operation of God’s will may be 
described either as ἡ ἐνέργεια τοῦ θεοῦ or ἡ ἐνέργεια τοῦ ἀγαθοῦ ; and 
so it may be said that ‘God and the Good have the same ἐνέργεια ᾿. 
God is the efficient cause of all; τὸ ἀγαθόν is the final cause 
of all. 

ἐνέργεια means ‘a force in action’, and especially ‘a divine force 
acting on earthly things’. (Cf. Herm. a. Stob. xc. XI. 2. (40): 
ai ἐνέργειαι οὐκ εἰσὶν ἀνωφερεῖς, ἀλλὰ κατωφερεῖς,) Perhaps it was first 
applied in this sense to the influences of the star-gods, and thence 
transferred by Platonists to the action of the supracosmic God upon 
the Kosmos and the things contained in it. As to the use of the 
word in the New Testament, see note on ἐνεργεῖν and its cognates in 
Armitage Robinson, 52. Paul's Epistle to the Ephesians, p. 241 f. 

§ 2. ἡ οὐσία αὐτοῦ τὸ θέλειν πάντα εἶναι, Cf. Corp. XI ii. 13 b: 
νοήσεις τὸ τοῦ θεοῦ ἔργον ἐν ὄν, ἵνα πάντα γένηται τὰ γινόμενα K.TA. 


et 


a ~~ 


ee ee ee ee ee ee ee 


»-----ς----------.------------------------ 


234 CORPVS HERMETICVM 


Corp. 1X. 9: τοῦτο ἔστιν ἡ αἴσθησις καὶ νόησις τοῦ θεοῦ, τὸ τὰ πάντα ἀεὶ 
κινεῖν. 

The οὐσία of God is spoken of in Corp. VI. 4b: ἡ οὐσία τοῦ θεοῦ, 
εἴ ye οὐσίαν ἔχει, τὸ καλόν ἐστι. Cf, Corp. XITi. τ. 

τί γάρ ἐστιίν 6) θεὸς καὶ πατὴρ [καὶ τὸ ἀγαθὸν] ἢ τὸ τῶν πάντων εἶναι 
οὐκέτι ὄντων : Cf. Asc’. Lat. 1. 2a: ‘dixi omnia unum esse et unum 
omnia, utpote quae in creatore fuerint omnia ante quam creasset 
omnia,’ The παράδειγμα of the Kosmos, and of all things that 
come into being within it in course of time,—the ‘ builder’s plan’, as 
Philo calls it,—exists eternally in the mind of God. Before these 
things have come into being, God’s will has already determined that 
they shall be ; and so they may be said to exist already in God, for 
whom there is no future, but all is one eternal present. 

The writer of Corp. VI says that τὸ ἀγαθόν ‘is in’ God, or ‘belongs 
to’ God ; the writer of Corp, II says that τὸ ἀγαθόν is God. The 
writer of Corp. X, who probably had both Corp. VI and Corp. II 
before him, certainly adopted the first of these two forms of 
expression ; but owing to the uncertainties of the text, we can hardly 
make sure whether he employed the second also or not. If we read 
6 θεὸς καὶ πατήρ, (5?) καὶ τὸ ἀγαθόν, these words imply that God ἐς the 
Good. But on the other hand, if we are right in reading ὃ μηδενὶ 
πρόσεστι τῶν ἄλλων below, the writer there employs the language of 
Corp. VI. 1b, (τὸ ἀγαθὸν) οὐδενὶ ἄλλῳ πρόσεστιν εἰ μὴ μόνῳ τῷ θεῷ. 
Again, in Corp. X. 3, we are told that (τὸ ἀγαθὸν) οὐ δυνατὸν ἐγγενέσθαι 
ἄλλῳ τινὶ ἢ μόνῳ (τῷ θεῷ); and this agrees with Corp. VI init., τὸ 
ἀγαθὸν ἐν οὐδενί ἐστιν εἰ μὴ ἐν μόνῳ τῷ θεῷ, but differs from Corp. IL. 
Moreover, the writer of Corp. X speaks of the ‘will’ of God, and 
thereby implies the existence of τὸ ἀγαθόν as the object towards 
which God’s will is directed, and.as a thing distinct from him who 
wills (cf. Corp. VI. 4b, ὃ θεὸς τοῦ καλοῦ καὶ τοῦ ἀγαθοῦ épa’) ; and 
this is hardly consistent with the statement that God is τὸ ἀγαθόν. 
There is therefore reason to think that the words καὶ τὸ ἀγαθόν, in 
which God and the Good are absolutely identified, have been inserted 
by a later hand, both here and elsewhere in Corp. X. The insertion 
of these words may have been suggested by a misunderstanding of 
the sentence 6 θεὸς... καὶ τὸ ἀγαθὸν (originally τῷ ἀγαθῷ Ὁ) τὴν αὐτὴν 
ἔχει φύσιν in ὃ τ Ὁ. 

ὕπαρξις αὕτη τῶν ὄντων. αὕτη refers to ἡ τοῦ θεοῦ θέλησις. All 
things owe their existence to God’s will; it is only as willed by God 
that they exist. 








LIBELLVS X: § 2 235 


ὃ μηδενὶ (@ μηδὲν MSS.) πρόσεστι τῶν ἄλλων. The Good ‘belongs 
to’ or ‘is present to’ God, and God alone ; that is to say, the Good 
which God wills is realized in his own eternal being, but is never 
realized in the world of time, where, in place of the eternal οὐσία or 
στάσις of God, there is only γένεσις or κίνησις, i.e. a process directed 
towards the Good, but a process without end and without advance. 

ὁ μὲν γὰρ κόσμος [ 1 τῶν κατὰ μετουσίαν (ἀγαθῶν) καὶ αὐτὸς πατήρ. 
Cf. Corp. VI. 2b, ὥσπερ δὲ μετουσία κιτιλ. 45εἰ. Lat. 111. 27 8: 
‘sicuti enim deus ... dispensator ... est bonorum, id est sensus, 
animae, et vitae, sic et mundus tributor est et praestitor omnium 
quae mortalibus videntur bona.’ The ‘seeming goods’ of As¢7. Lat. 
III. (i.e. the material things or processes by means of which life ir. 
the body is maintained) correspond to τὰ κατὰ μετουσίαν ἀγαθά of 
Corp. X (of which the σπορὰ καὶ τροφή mentioned below are 
instances); and the ‘true goods’ of Asc/. Lat. III (among which 
vita is included) correspond to τὸ ἀγαθόν (coupled with τὸ ζῆν) in 
this sentence of Corp, X. 

[καὶ ὁ ἥλιος]. This must be one of the ‘solar interpolations’. 
Cf. [διὰ τοῦ ἡλίου], ὃ 3; and see note on Asc. Lat. III. το Ὁ, “ solis 
οὐσιάρχης lumen est’. 

οὐκέτι δὲ τοῦ ἀγαθοῦ τοῖς ζῴοις ἴσως αἴτιός ἐστιν' οὐδὲ (yap) τοῦ ζῆν, 
τὸ ἀγαθόν cannot here mean ‘the Good’ which was dealt with above 
(1. 6. the αὐτοαγαθόν, which ‘belongs to none save God’); for ‘the 
good’ here spoken of is, or includes, τὸ ζῆν, which exists in all living 
creatures. The writer apparently regards life as a true good, and 
distinguishes it, as such, from ‘the things which are good merely by 
participation’ (τὰ κατὰ μετουσίαν ἀγαθά), but at the same time 
distinguishes it also from the absolute Good, which does not enter 
into the Kosmos. 

εἰ δέ [1], πάντως μέντοι ἀναγκαζόμενος. The Kosmos may in a 
sense be said to produce life in the creatures contained in it; for 
births are effected by the operation of the cosmic forces, and, 
according to the view which prevails among the Hermetists, more 
especially by the influence of the heavenly bodies. But life is a gift 
of God, and the Kosmos is merely God’s agent in its bestowal. It 
is not clear, however, why the Kosmos is not held to be equally 
subject to God’s compelling will in the production of τὰ κατὰ 
μετουσίαν ἀγαθά (e.g. the σπορὰ καὶ τροφή mentioned in ὃ 3 ἐμέ). 
Perhaps the author might have said that ψυχή is immortal, and, as 
such, is not affected by the operation of the cosmic forces, but is 





236 CORPVS HERMETICVM 


more directly connected with God himself; and that it is only the 
temporary incarnation of the immortal ψυχή (or of a separated 
portion of the cosmic ψυχή) in this or that particular body that can 
be ascribed to the relatively independent action of the Kosmos. 

§ 8. (παρὰ τοῦ θεοῦν τὴν [ὄρεξιν] (χορηγίαν) λαβὼν τοῦ ἀγαθοῦ. It 
might be said that the Kosmos, in its work of generating and 
maintaining living organisms, is impelled by ‘a desire for the Good’ ; 
i.e, that the Kosmos, in the production of each individual creature, 
is seeking to produce something which shall ‘ partake of the Good’, 
or in other words, something which shall be an εἰκών of the divine 
παράδειγμα. That statement would correspond to Aristotle’s asser- 
tion that φύσις, in all its operations, ‘aims at the good’; with the 
difference, however, that the Hermetist’s Kosmos, unlike Aristotle’s 
φύσις, is a conscious agent. But as there is nothing in the context 
to suggest a mention of this ‘ desire’ of the Kosmos, it seems more 
likely that the author wrote, not ὄρεξιν, but some such word as χορηγίαν. 

The word λαβών must have been accompanied by some phrase 
indicating the source from which the Kosmos gets its supply of 
‘good’, or life-producing energy ; and that source can only be God. 
I have therefore inserted παρὰ τοῦ θεοῦ. 

τὸ γὰρ ἀγαθόν ἐστι τὸ ποιητικόν. The Good is ‘the creative — 
principle’, in the sense that it is the τέλος or οὗ ἕνεκα of all ποίησις. 
But the Hermetist’s thought seems to have been influenced by the 
fact that the word ἀγαθός, in addition to the sense ‘desirable’, may 
also bear the sense ‘ beneficent’ or ‘ bountiful’, and may in the latter 
sense be applied to the agent by whom things are made. In the 
following sentence (τῷ μηδὲν μὲν λαμβάνοντι κ-τ.λ.} it is clear that the 
writer regarded τὸ ἀγαθόν as connoting ‘ beneficence’ or ‘ generosity’. 
Cf. Pl. Zim. 29 E: ἀγαθὸς ἦν (ὃ ποιητὴς καὶ πατὴρ τοῦδε τοῦ παντός), 
ἀγαθῷ δὲ οὐδεὶς περὶ οὐδενὸς οὐδέποτε ἐγγίγνεται φθόνος. . . . βουληθεὶς 
γὰρ ὃ θεὸς ἀγαθὰ μὲν πάντα, φλαῦρον δὲ μηδὲν εἶναι κιτιλ, Here 
Plato plays on the two senses of the word ἀγαθός. The Maker is 
‘bountiful’ or ‘beneficent’; the things which he makes are 
‘desirable’, and are copies of ro ἀγαθόν, the supreme object of all 
desire. Those Platonists who completely identified God with τὸ 
ἀγαθόν, (among whom the writer of Corg, X is probably not to be 
reckoned,) meant in part that God is the supreme object of desire, — 
but in part also that God is the source of infinite bounties. Cf. 
Corp. VI. 1a as emended: πᾶν yap τὸ (ὁτιοῦν ἢ) χορηγοῦν ἀγαθὸν 
λέγεται. Lb. 2b: ὡς ἐν τῷ μέρει τοῦ ποιεῖν ἀγαθὸς εἶναι. 








LIBELLVS X: δᾷ 2-4a 237 


τῷ μηδὲν μὲν λαμβάνοντι, πάντα δὲ θέλοντι εἶναι, Cf. Corp, 11. 16: 
ὁ οὖν θεὺς πάντα δίδωσι καὶ οὐδὲν λαμβάνει. 

οὐ γὰρ ἐρῶ... . ποιοῦντι. +The word ποιεῖν was applied to the action 
of the Demiurgus in Pl. Zim., and was habitually thus used by 
Platonists ; but the writer of Corp. X gives reasons for rejecting it. 
His first reason is that the action of a ποιητής is intermittent. When 
the ‘maker’ has once finished making a thing, he has, as maker, 
nothing more to do with it; he begins to act again only when he 
proceeds to make another thing. It is therefore better to say, not 
that God is the ‘maker’ of all things, but that God ‘wills the 
existence of’ all things; for this phrase implies that God’s will is 
operative, not merely in bringing each thing into existence once for 
all, but in maintaining each thing in existence as long as it continues 
to exist. His second reason is that a ‘maker’ makes only ‘ quanti- 
ties’ and ‘qualities’ (but not ‘substances’); that is to say, he deals 
with some already existing material, and merely adds to it or takes 
from it, or in some way alters it, but does not bring it into being. 
The writer holds that ‘substances’, as well as ‘quantities’ and 
‘qualities’, owe their existence to God’s will. This does not 
necessarily imply that God has at some past time created the 
_ universe out of nothing ; (see Corp, II. 13, where it is denied that 
anything can come into existence out of nothing ;) for it is possible 
to hold that the world has existed without beginning, but that it is 
God’s eternal will that has maintained it in its everlasting existence. 
And this was probably the view held by the writer of Corp. X; for 
in ὃ τὸ Ὁ he speaks of the Kosmos as ἀεὶ ὦν. 

ἐλλιπής ἐστι πολλῷ χρόνῳ, "ev ᾧ ὅτε μὲν ποιεῖ, ὅτε δὲ οὐ ποιεῖ, This 
may be a conflation of two alternative readings, viz. é. é 7. χ.» ἐν ᾧ 
οὐκέτι ποιεῖ, and é. é. π΄. x., ὅς ye ὅτε μὲν ποιεῖ, ὅτε δὲ οὐ ποιεῖ. 

ποτὲ μὲν γὰρ ποσὰ καὶ ποιὰ (ποιεῖν, ὅτε δὲ τὰ ἐναντία, The ‘maker’ 
makes something large which was small before, or makes something 
hard which was soft before, but does not, strictly speaking, ‘make’ 
the thing itself, i.e. the ὑποκείμενον, or the οὐσία in the Stoic sense. 
According to Aristotle (Caz. 5, 3 Ὁ 32, and 6, 5 Ὁ 1:1,) the term 
ἐναντία is not applicable to quantities; there is no contrary to ‘three 
feet long’. He admits that ‘many’ and ‘few’, or ‘large’ and 
‘small’, may be called ἐναντία ; but he says that these terms belong 
to the category of πρός τι, and not to that of ποσόν. The Stoics did 
not recognize ποσόν as a distinct category. 

ὃ 4a. καὶ γὰρ ταῦτα (τοῦτο MSS.) θέλει εἶναι, καὶ (ζοὕτως dpa)) ἔστι 





_ — ee 
2 eeeeEEEEEeEeEeEeEeEeEeEeEeEeEeEeEeEEEeEPPeEe=Seeeee eee eEeEeEeEeEeEeeeeeeeeEeEeEeEeEeee 


238 CORPVS HERMETICVM 


καὶ αὐτά (αὐτό MSS.). God wills things to be, and the things 
consequently exist. But they do not exist absolutely; for they are 
dependent on God. The only thing (besides God) that ‘exists in 
the highest degree’ (μάλιστα ἔστιν) is the Good, which is correlative 
to God, and is the final cause of the existence of all else (τὰ ἄλλα 
πάντα διὰ τοῦτο ἔστιν). 

ὃ. 4}. (...) ἴδιον γὰρ τοῦ ἀγαθοῦ τὸ γνωρίζεσθαι (θέλειν Ὁ. {{1] (re 
δυναμένῳ i8eiv)). Down to this point, the writer has been speaking 
of the relation between God and the Good. He now proceeds to 
speak of the relation between man and the Good ; and in doing so, 
he begins by discussing the question whether, and under what 
conditions, it is possible for man to attain to the intuition of the 
Good, and to the union with God which is implied in that intuition 
(§§ 4b-6). But the transition is abrupt, and it is probable that a 
connecting passage has been lost at the beginning of § 4b. 

The words τῷ δυναμένῳ ἰδεῖν are pointless where they stand in the 
MSS. Transposed to this place, they make good sense, and serve 
to lead on to the discussion of the θέα τοῦ ἀγαθοῦ. 

᾿Ἐπλήρωσας ἡμᾶς... τῆς... καλλίστης θέας. This passage 
(88. 4 b-6) is discussed by Reitzenstein, Dre hellen. Mysterienrel., 
pp. 115 ff. 

In his joy at the new thought which has been awakened in him 
by his father’s words, Tat imagines for a moment that he already 
‘sees the Good’. But Hermes undeceives him. In reality, he has 
caught but a faint glimpse of the beatific vision; and indeed, no 
more than a faint glimpse of it is possible for men, until they are 
released from the body by death, 

ὀλίγου δεῖν ἐπεσκιάσθη (ἐσεβάσθη MSS.) pou ὁ τοῦ νοῦ ὀφθαλμὸς ὑπὸ 
τῆς τοιαύτης ‘bas! If we retain ἐσεβάσθη, we must translate ‘my 
mental eye was almost stricken with awe’. But why ‘almost’? The 
writer must have meant to make Tat say ‘my mental eye was dazzled, 
and almost blinded’; and this might be expressed by ἐπεσκιάσθη. 
(Cf. Philo, De opif. mundi 1.6: 7a... ὑπερβάλλοντα κάλλη, καὶ ταῖς 
μαρμαρυγαῖς τὰς τῶν ἐντυγχανόντων ψυχὰς ἐπισκιάζοντα.) Hermes 
proceeds to explain that the vision of the Good never produces the 
harmful effect which Tat thought it had ‘almost’ produced in his 
own case. It is true that the man who has once seen the Good 
‘can see nothing else thereafter ’ (8 6 imi#.); but that does not mean 
that his mental eye is blinded ; it is only the things of earth that he 
can no longer see. In Pl. Rep, VII init, it is said that those who 








LIBELLVS X: δὲ 4a-5 239 


come forth from the cave are at first dazzled by the light of day, i. e. by 
the splendour of the Good. Cf. Philo, De opif. mundi 23. 71, Cohn I, 
p. 24: πρὸς τὴν ἄκραν ἁψῖδα παραπεμφθεὶς τῶν νοητῶν, ἐπ᾽ αὐτὸν ἰέναι 
δοκεῖ τὸν μέγαν βασιλέα" γλιχομένου δ᾽ ἰδεῖν, ἀθρόου φωτὸς ἄκρατοι καὶ 
ἀμιγεῖς αὐγαὶ χειμάρρου τρόπον ἐκχέονται, ὡς ταῖς μαρμαρυγαῖς τὸ τῆς 
διανοίας ὄμμα σκοτοδινιᾶν. It is not likely that the author ended two 
successive clauses with the same word θέας. The second θέας has 
probably been substituted by error for some other word, e.g. 
μαρμαρυγῆς. 

πάσης ἀθανασίας ἀνάπλεως. ἀθανασία here, as often in the Hermetica, 
means the state of the ἀθάνατοι, i.e. of the gods. In so far as a man 
sees the Good, he is a god; and a god is secured against all harm. 

ὃ 5. οἱ δυνάμενοι πλέον τι ἀρύσασθαι τῆς θέας κατακοιμίζονται 
πολλάκις δὴ (δὲ MSS.) ὑπὸ τοῦ σώματος. Even those who are able to 
‘draw somewhat larger draughts’ of the vision than others, are often 
made torpid by the body ; their mental eyes are at such times closed, 
as in sleep, and their glimpses of the Good are therefore necessarily 
intermittent. ‘Our birth is but a sleep and a forgetting ;’ and even 
those who have been awakened from the sleep or /e¢he of bodily life 
must many a time fall asleep again, as long as they are in the body. 
For the metaphor of sleep, cf. Philo, De somn. 1. 26. 165, Wend- 

land III, p. 240: ψυχαὶ δ᾽ ὅσαι θείων ἐρώτων ἐγεύσασθε, καθάπερ ἐκ 
βαθέος ὕπνου διαναστᾶσαι, καὶ τὴν ἀχλὺν ἀποσκεδάσασαι, πρὸς τὴν 
περίβλεπτον θέαν ἐπείχθητε. The same metaphor is employed in the 
words addressed to the recently deceased Plotinus in an oracle 
quoted by Porphyry, Vita Plotiné 22, |. 23 ff.:} ‘Even in your earthly 
life, πολλάκι σεῖο νόοιο βολὰς... | ὀρθοπόρους ἀνὰ κύκλα καὶ ἄμβροτον 
οἶμον ἄειραν | ἀθάνατοι, θαμινὴν φαέων ἀκτῖνα πορόντες | ὄσσοισιν 
δέρκεσθαι ἀπὸ σκοτίης λυγαίης" οὐδέ σε παμπήδην βλεφάρων ἔχε νήδυμος 
ὕπνος, | ἀλλ᾽ dp’ ἀπὸ βλεφάρων σκεδάσας κηλῖδα βαρεῖαν, | ἀχλύος ἐν 
δίνῃσι φορεύμενος, ἔδρακες ὄσσοις [ πολλά τε καὶ χαρίεντα, τά κεν ῥέα 
οὔτις ἴδοιτο | ἀνθρώπων, ὅσσοι σοφίης μαιήτορες ἔπλευν. | νῦν δ᾽, ὅτε δὴ 
σκῆνος μὲν ἐλύσαο, σῆμα δ᾽ ἔλειψας | ψυχῆς δαιμονίης, you live a blessed 
life as ἃ daemon.’ Plotinus was one of those who are able πλέον τι 
ἀρύσασθαι τῆς θέας. 

(ἀπολυθέντες δὲ τοῦ σώματος) εἰς τὴν καλλίστην ὄψιν (ἐνέτυχον), ὥσπερ 
(ὅπερ or ὅσπερ MSS.) Οὐρανὸς καὶ Κρόνος, οἱ ἡμέτεροι πρόγονοι, ἐντετυ- 


Porphyry says that these verses were the response given by Apollo to the 
question put to him by Amelius, ‘ Where has the soul of Plotinus gone?’ Perhaps 
Amelius not only asked the question, but composed the answer also. 


240 CORPVS HERMETICVM 


χήκασιν. It is clearly necessary to insert ἀπολυθέντες δὲ τοῦ σώματος, 
or something to that effect. It is only when death has freed a man 
from the encumbrance of the body, that the vision will burst upon 
his sight in its unclouded splendour. Uranos and Kronos once 
lived as men on earth; (cf. Asc, Lat. III. 37, where the gods 
Thoth-Hermes and Imhotep-Asclepius are similarly spoken of ;) but 
they have died, and become gods; and as gods they have attained 
to the vision of the Good. The human teacher Hermes and his 
son (and all devout Hermetists also) may hope that after death they 
will be as Uranos and Kronos now are. 

Uranos and Kronos are here said to be ancestors of the teacher 
Hermes. According to Asc/. Lat. 111. 37, the teacher Hermes was 
a grandson of the god Thoth-Hermes; and the writer of Corp. X 
may have held the same view. In the Greek theogonies, the list of 
gods was usually headed by Uranos and his son Kronos ; Zeus was 
a son of Kronos, and the Greek Hermes was a son of Zeus. But 
the Hermetist probably intended Uranos and Kronos for Greek 
renderings of the names of two Egyptian gods. The earth-god Seb 
or Qeb was commonly identified with the Greek Kronos ; and if 
Kronos here means Seb, Uranos ought to mean Shu (3s or Σῶσις), 
the father of Seb. In the Heliopolitan theogony, Shu and his 
consort Tafnut were generated by the Propator Tum, and stood as 
the first συζυγία in the Ennead ; and Seb and his consort Nut were 
the offspring of Shu and Tafnut. Seb and Nut were called Kronos 
and Rhea by the Greeks; (see Plut. Js. ef Os. 12 ;)* it would there- 
fore be natural to identify their parents, Shu and Tafnut, with the 
Greek Uranos and Gaia. Shu was the god of the atmosphere,* and 
was called ‘ uplifter of heaven’ and ‘lord of heaven’; so that Uranos 
might very well be regarded as his Greek equivalent. 

Thoth (Hermes) had no generally recognized place in the genealogy 
of the Egyptian gods. He was sometimes described as ungenerated, 
or self-generated (Brugsch, p. 445); he was sometimes said to be 
son of Ra (d.), and sometimes son of Ptah (Wiedemann, £e/. anc. 
£g., p. 226). But we are also told (Brugsch, p. 188) that he was 
sometimes substituted for the maleficent Set in the list of the five 
children of Seb and Nut. Perhaps the writer of Corp. X may have 
adopted this variation of the Heliopolitan genealogy, and regarded 


1 Plutarch also says (Zs. ef Os. 44) ἐνίοις δὲ δοκεῖ Κρόνος ὁ “AvouBis εἶναι. But 
the Κρόνος of Corp. X cannot be Anubis. 

2 «Sein Reich ist die Luftregion, der Wolkenhimmel’ (Brugsch, Xe’. und Myth. 
der alten Aeg. p. 431). 








LIBELLVS X: & 5-6 241 


the god Thoth-Hermes as son of Seb (Kronos), and grandson of 
Shu (Uranos). See -Lactantius, Div. inst. 1. 11. 16 ( Zestim.). 

θεάσασθαι τὸ κάλλος τοῦ ἀγαθοῦ, ἐκεῖνο[υ] τὸ ἄφθαρτον, τὸ ἀλάλητον 
(ἄληπτον MSS.). Cf. Corp, VI. 5. The words ἐκεῖνο τὸ ἄφθαρτον 
(κάλλος) serve to contrast ‘the beauty of the Good’ with the 
perishable beauty of things on earth. The epithet ἄληπτον is hardly 
appropriate ; and there can be little doubt that the original reading 
was ἀλάλητον, which leads on to the words ὅταν μηδὲν περὶ αὐτοῦ ἐχῇς 
εἰπεῖν, and βαθεῖα σιωπή, in what follows. 

ἡ yap γνῶσις αὐτοῦ βαθεῖα (καὶ θεία MSS.) σιωπή ἐστι. Ch ὃ: 
ὁ μὴ πολλὰ λαλῶν. Οὐγῥ.1. 31: ἀνεκλάλητε, ἄρρητε, σιωπῇ φωνούμενε. 
Corp. XIII. 2 as emended: σοφία ἡ μήτρα, ἐν σιγῇ (xvodca). Com- 
pare also the name Σιγή applied by some of the Valentinians to the 
consort of the Propator. The Pythagorean injunction of σιγή was 
probably in the Hermetist’s mind. 

ὃ 6. οὔτε γὰρ ἄλλο τι δύναται... θεάσασθαι ὁ τοῦτο θεασάμενος,... 
οὔτε τὸ σύνολον τὸ σῶμα κινῆσαι. If the Hermetist had written ὁ τοῦτο 
γοῶν, . .«. ὃ τοῦτο θεώμενος, we might have understood him to be 
speaking of a temporary ecstasy or trance, from which the man will 
awake to resume the occupations of everyday life. But the aorist 
participles νοήσας, θεασάμενος, make this interpretation impossible, 
We are told that he who has once seen the Good in its full beauty 
can never thereafter see earthly things, or hear of earthly things, or 
move his body. But to say this of a man is equivalent to saying 
that he is either dead or dying. It is clear therefore that, in the 
writer’s view, the θέα of which he speaks is incompatible with the 
continuance of earthly life. We may hope to see the beatific vision, 
but not until the moment of our release from the body. If a living 
man attains to it, his earthly life is then and there at an end; the 
vision ‘draws his soul up out of the body’, and transforms him into 
pure οὐσία, or in other words, changes him from a man into a god. 
The writer seems to have regarded the cessation of earthly conscious- 
ness in a dying saint as the counterpart of his absorption in the 
dawning splendour of τὸ κάλλος τοῦ ἀγαθοῦ. Thus understood, the 
sentence is in agreement with the words ἀδύνατον... ψυχὴν ἀποθεω- 
θῆναι ἐν σώματι ἀνθρώπου (uévovcav) below. Cf. Zxc. VI. 18: 
ἀδύνατον τὸν ἐν σώματι τούτου (Sc..tod τὸν θεὸν θεάσασθαι) εὐτυχῆσαι. 

πασῶν γὰρ τῶν σωματικῶν αἰσθήσεών τε καὶ κινήσεων ἐπιλαθόμενος 
(λαβόμενος MSS.) ἀτρεμεῖ. The writer of the ἡ εγρηῤῥης (see notes 
on Corp. XVI) has borrowed from this passage. Hermipp. (Kroll 


2806-2 R 





242 CORPVS HERMETICVM 


and Viereck) 2. 20. 186 f.: ποίους ἂν ἔρωτας ἴσχοι ὁ τοιοῦτον κάλλος 
κατοπτεῦσαι δεδυνημένος, ἄφθαρτον, ἄκρατον... ; οἶμαι τὴν θείαν σιωπὴν 
ὑποστήσεται, λέγειν περὶ αὐτοῦ οὐχ οἷός τε Gy, πασῶν τε τῶν σωματικῶν 
αἰσθήσεών τε καὶ κινήσεων ἐπιλαθόμενος ἀτρεμήσει. 

τὴν ὅλην ψυχὴν ἀναλαμβάνει (ἀναλάμπει Μ55.) καὶ ἀνέλκει διὰ τοῦ 
σώματος. ‘The whole soul’ is contrasted with the νοῦς, which is 
here regarded as a part of the soul. The relation between νοῦς and 
ψυχή is differently conceived in §§ 16 ff. The preposition διά must 
be taken in the sense of the Homeric διέκ ; the beauty of the Good 
draws the soul forth from the body, as from a sheath. Cf. Corg, 
XIII. 3: ἐμαυτὸν (διδεξελήλυθα εἰς ἀθάνατον σῶμα. Lb. 12: τὺ σκῆνος 
τοῦτο. -. ὃ διεξεληλύθαμεν. Both in Corp. XIII and in Corp. X. 6, 
the process described is an ἀποθέωσις ; but the writer of Corp. XIII 
speaks of this ἀποθέωσις as taking place in a man who continues to 
live on earth,' whereas the writer of Corp. X holds that it can take 
place only at or after death. 

εἰς οὐσίαν μεταβάλλει. ‘Ins Géttliche und Uebersinnliche’ 
Reitzenstein. Cf. Corp. XIII. 14, where the word οὐσιώδης is used 
in a similar connexion. The same thought is expressed in another 
way in Corp. X. 19a, where it is said that after death the pious soul _ 
ὅλη νοῦς γίνεται. [ 

ἀδύνατον... ψυχὴν ἀποθεωθῆναι ἐν σώματι ἀνθρώπου (μένουσαν" ἀλλὰ 
χρὴ μεταβληθῆναι αὐτήν, καὶ οὕτω δὴ) θεασαμένην τοῦ ἀγαθοῦ (τὸ) κάλλος 
[τῷ] ἀποθεωθῆναι. [τῷ] may have arisen out of (τό) misplaced. My 
restoration of the text differs from that of Reitzenstein (He//en. myst, 
p. 116); but he is right in saying that it is to be inferred from what 
follows that some form of the verb μεταβάλλειν occurred here. As 
to μεταβάλλειν and μεταβολή, cf. Pl, Legg. X. 904 C: μεταβάλλει μὲν 
τοίνυν πάνθ' ὅσα μέτοχά ἐστι ψυχῆς, ἐν ἑαυτοῖς κεκτημένα τὴν τῆς 
μεταβολῆς αἰτίαν: μεταβάλλοντα δὲ φέρεται κατὰ τὴν τῆς εἱμαρμένης 
τάξιν καὶ νόμον. The word μεταβολή (‘a change from one state to 
another’) is sometimes used as a euphemism for death. Cf. Philostr. 
Vita Apollon, 8. 31 : τοῦ δὲ ᾿Απολλωνίου ἐξ ἀνθρώπων μὲν ἤδη ὄντος, 
θαυμαζομένου δ᾽ ἐπὶ τῇ μεταβολῇ. Porphyry ap. Stob. τ. 49. 59, vol. i, 
Ρ. 445 W.: ἑκατέραν γὰρ εἶναι τῆς ψυχῆς μεταβολήν, τὴν μὲν εἰς σῶμα 
γένεσιν, τὴν δὲ ἀπὸ σώματος θάνατονπροσαγορευομένην. 

8 7. ἀπὸ μιᾶς ψυχῆς τῆς τοῦ παντὸς πᾶσαι αἱ ψυχαί εἰσιν αὗται ((dowep — 
ἀπονενεμημέναι. Cf. § 15 b, where the soul of a child is described as — 
ἔτι σχεδὸν ἠρτημένη τῆς τοῦ κόσμου ψυχῆς. Ascl. Lat. 1. 38: 

1 Cf, Ascl, Lat, 4τ Ὁ: ἐν πλάσμασιν ἡμᾶς ὄντας ἀπεθέωσας. 








LIBELLVS Χ: δὲ 6-7 243 


‘mundus unus, anima una,’ See also Cor. IX. gznit. The writer 
says that this doctrine was taught in the Τενικοὶ λόγοι. The concep- 
tion of a world-soul occurs in the Z¥maeus, and must have been 
familiar to all Platonists ; but the doctrine that individual souls are 
derived from the world-soul, and have been ‘parted off’ from it, is 
not Plato’s, and the Hermetists by whom the Devxol λόγοι were 
written must have got it from Stoic sources. 

τούτων τοίνυν τῶν ψυχῶν πολλαὶ αἱ μεταβολαί, The individual souls, 
having been brought into existence by separation from the world- 
soul, pass through a series of transformations, in the course of which 
they may successively occupy all stations in the scale of life, from 
that of a reptile to that of a god. The writer seems to imply that 
their career begins by incarnation in animal bodies of the lowest 
order, viz. that of ἑρπετά. (Cf. ὃ 8a: τὴν ὁδὸν ὑποστρέφει τὴν ἐπὶ τὰ 
ἑρπετά.) If this is his view, he differs from Pl. Zim. go Ε ff, where 
we are told that, ‘ according to the probable account’, the individual 
souls were first embodied as men (ἄνδρες), and that those of them 
who lived amiss in their first life on earth were afterwards rein- 
carnated in the form of women, birds, quadrupeds, many-footed 
animals, reptiles, or fishes, according to the kind and degree of their 
decline from their original state. 

τῶν μὲν ἐπὶ τὸ εὐτυχέστερον, τῶν δὲ ἐπὶ τὸ ἐναντίον, This is directly 
contradicted in ὃ 22 ἃ: εἰς μὲν οὖν τὸ κρεῖττον ψυχὴ μεταβαίνει, εἰς δὲ 
τὸ ἔλαττον ἀδύνατον. 

αἱ δὲ ἀνθρώπειαι, ἀρχὴν ἀθανασίας [ιἸσχοῦσαι. The soul which, in 
its successive transformations ἐπὶ τὸ εὐτυχέστερον, has risen to the 
condition of a man, may at that stage acquire something of ἀθανασία, 
i.e. of divinity. Such a soul is already a daemon or a god poten- 
tially (cf. § 19a: ψυχὴ ἀνθρωπίνη, οὐ πᾶσα μέν, ἡ δὲ εὐσεβής, δαιμονία 
τίς ἐστι καὶ θεία); it may therefore, at its next transformation, 
actually become a daemon, and afterwards a god. The divine 
element (τὸ ἀθάνατον) in the human soul is νοῦς, by the possession of 
which man is distinguished from the lower animals. 

In holding that the human soul must pass through an intermediate 
stage as a daemon before it becomes a god, the writer agrees with 
Posidonius ; but he does not recognize the stage of ‘hero’ which 
Posidonius interposed between ‘man’ and ‘daemon’. In § 6 above, 
the daemon-stage is not mentioned, and apotheosis is spoken of as if 
it might follow immediately on death. In the oracle quoted by 
Porphyry, Vita Plotini 22 (see p. 239), Apollo says that Plotinus, 

R22 





244 CORPVS HERMETICVM 


now that he has departed from the body, is no longer a man, but a 
daemon (δαῖμον, ἄνερ τὸ πάροιθεν κιτ.λ.), and the ‘daemonic’ life into 
which he has entered is described. 

εἶθ᾽ οὕτως εἰς τὸν τῶν θεῶν χορὸν χωροῦσι (χορεύουσι MSS.). They 
take their place among the star-gods. For the phrase ὁ τῶν θεῶν 
χορός, cf. Corp, XII. i. 12: ὁδηγηθήσεται . . « εἰς τὴν τῶν θεῶν Kai 
μακάρων χορόν. Kaibel, Zpigr. Gr, ex lapid. conl. 288 (Cyprus, 
‘recentioris aetatis’): HTIZ..(a/. HBHSEN: /egendum ἥρπασεν ὃ) 
ἀ(θγανά(των p<) χορός. 

[χοροὶ δὲ δύο θεῶν, ὁ μὲν τῶν πλανωμένων, ὁ δὲ τῶν ἀπλανῶν]. This is 
an inserted note. The following atry means τὸ εἰς τὸν τῶν θεῶν χορὸν 
χωρεῖν, and the interposed mention of two distinct χοροί (that of the 
planets and that of the fixed stars) is irrelevant. 

Q gives ἀφανῶν in place of ἀπλανῶν. This seems to indicate an 
alternative reading, ὁ μὲν τῶν φανερῶν (= αἰσθητῶν), ὁ δὲ τῶν ἀφανῶν 
(ΞΞ νοητῶν). 

αὕτη ψυχῆς ἡ τελειοτάτη δόξα. A place among the star-gods is the 
highest to which the soul can attain. This again agrees with the 
system of Posidonius. In this paragraph, there is no suggestion of 
the Platonic notion that the soul may rise above the material heavens 
into the supracosmic and incorporeal world (as is said, for instance, 
in Corp. 1). 

The use of the word δόξα in this connexion may possibly be a 
sign of Jewish influence. Cf. Paul, 1 Cor. 15. 40: ἑτέρα μὲν ἡ τῶν 
ἐπουρανίων δόξα, ἑτέρα δὲ τῶν ἐπιγείων. .. . ἀστὴρ yap ἀστέρος διαφέρει 
ἐν δόξῃ. 

8 8 8. odfre] γεύεται ἀθανασίας [οὔτε τοῦ ἀγαθοῦ μεταλαμβάνει]. A 
soul of this sort does not, in its human life on earth, acquire ἀρχὴν 
ἀθανασίας ; for it has no νοῦς in it (§ 24a), and is no better than that 
of a beast. 

It is superfluous to tell us that a soul which remains bad does not 
‘ partake of the Good’. 

παλίσσυρτος (codd. Corp.), ‘dragged back’, or ‘swept back as by 
an adverse current’, seems better than παλίσσυτος (codd. Stob.). 

((καὶ ἡ κακοδαίμων... δουλεύει σώμασιν ἀλλοκότοις Kal μοχθηροῖς.) 
These words are out of place in the MSS., where they form part of 
the description of κακία ψυχῆς. ‘Servitude to uncouth and noxious 
bodies’, i. 6. incarnation in the bodies of beasts, is not κακία, but is 
the penalty of xaxéa;-the mention of it ought therefore to precede 
the words αὕτη καταδίκη ψυχῆς κακῆς. Cf. Ascl. Lat. 1. 12a: ‘secus 








LIBELLVS X: δὲ γ--8Ὁ 245 


enim inpieque qui vixerint, . . . constituitur in corpora alia, indigna 
animo sancto, [et] foeda migratio.’ 

ἀγνοήσασα ἑαυτήν. The soul forgets, or fails to recognize, its 
kinship with the divine ; hence the νοῦς in it (if νοῦς has entered into 
it at all) becomes dormant or departs, and only the lower and merely 
animal part of the man is active. A soul thus degraded is fit only to 
animate the body of a beast, and is accordingly incorporated in a 
bestial body at its next incarnation. The Platonic /ocus classicus on 
τὸ γνῶναι ἑαυτόν is Alcid. I, in which compare especially 133 ¢: τῷ 
θείῳ dpa τοῦτ᾽ ἔοικεν αὐτῆς (‘this part of the soul’, viz. the νοῦς)" καί 
τις εἰς τοῦτο βλέπων, καὶ πᾶν τὸ θεῖον γνούς, οὕτω καὶ ἑαυτὸν ἂν γνοίη 
μάλιστα. Cf. ὁ ἀναγνωρίσας ἑαυτόν in Corp. I. 18-21. 

§ 8b. μηδὲν γνοῦσα τῶν ὄντων, μηδὲ τὴν τούτων φύσιν, μηδὲ τὸ ἀγαθόν, 
By τὰ ὄντα are here meant τὰ ὄντως ὄντα, 1. 6. τὰ νοητά or τὰ θεῖα. 
The soul which does not recognize the existence of things incorporeal 
and eternal is wholly subject to the influences of the body. μηδὲ τὴν 
τούτων φύσιν seems a pointless repetition of μηδὲν... τῶν ὄντων 
(unless indeed we take τούτων to mean τῶν γιγνομένων, as opposed to 
τῶν ὄντων) ; and the sentence would be improved by cutting out μηδὲ 
THY... τὸ ἀγαθόν. 

ἐντινάσσε(τανι τοῖς σωματικοῖς πάθεσι.... αὕτη κακία ψυχῆς. Cf. 
Plotinus 1. 2. 3: ἐπειδὴ κακὴ μέν ἐστιν ἡ ψυχὴ συμπεφυρμένη τῷ 
σώματι καὶ δμοπαθὴς γινομένη αὐτῷ καὶ πάντα συνδοξάζουσα, εἴη ἂν 
ἀγαθὴ καὶ ἀρετὴν ἔχουσα, εἰ μήτε συνδοξάζοι, ἀλλὰ μόνη ἐνεργοῖ ὅπερ 
ἐστὶ νοεῖν τε καὶ φρονεῖν" μήτε ὁμοπαθὴς εἴη" ὅπερ ἐστὶ σωφρονεῖν" μήτε 
φοβοῖτο ἀφισταμένη τοῦ σώματος" ὅπερ ἐστὶν ἀνδρίζεσθαι" ἡγοῖτο δὲ 
λόγος καὶ νοῦς, τὰ δὲ μὴ ἀντιτείνοι" δικαιοσύνη δ᾽ ἂν εἴη τοῦτο. τὴν δὴ 
τοιαύτην διάθεσιν τῆς ψυχῆς, καθ᾽ ἣν νοεῖ τε καὶ ἀπαθὴς οὕτως ἐστίν, εἴ 
τις ὁμοίωσιν λέγοι πρὸς θεόν, οὐκ ἂν ἁμαρτάνοι. (This last sentence 
corresponds to καὶ ἤδη θεῖος in Corp, X. 9 init.) 

ὥσπερ φορτίον βαστάζουσα τὸ σῶμα. In Corp. II. 9 we are told 
that in all men and animals alike the soul φέρει (i. 6. κινεῖ) τὸ σῶμα. 
But here, the meaning is different. The vicious soul is weighed 
down by the body, as by an oppressive burden ; the virtuous soul is 
not thus weighed down. Cf. ὥσπερ φύρτον τινὰ βαστάζει in § 13. 

The conception of the body as a thing by which the soul és 
weighed down does not agree well with the conception of it as a 
thing by which the soul ἧς governed (οὐκ ἄρχουσα ἀλλ᾽ ἀρχομένη) ; and 
for this reason it might perhaps be better to bracket ὥσπερ φορτίον 


es καί, 





446 CORPVS HERMETICVM 


ὃ 9. Ὁ ph πολλὰ λαλῶν, μηδὲ πολλὰ ἀκούων. The writer’s meaning 
must have been that the wordy disputations of the schools are not a 
help to the attainment of gvosis, but rather a hindrance. This 
meaning might have been more clearly expressed by writing οὐχ ὃ 
πολλὰ λέγων, οὐδὲ ὁ πολλὰ ἀκούων. Cf. Porphyry, Ad Marcellam 20: 
θεοῦ γὰρ γνῶσις ποιεῖ βραχὺν λόγον (dege βραχυλόγον). Stobaeus, vol. ν 
Hense, praef., p. vii: βραχυλόγον μάλιστα ἡ θεοῦ γνῶσις ποιεῖ. Sexti 
Sent. 430 Elter: ἄνθρωπον θεοῦ γνῶσις βραχυλόγον ποιεῖ. 

σκιαμαχεῖ. ‘He fights without any real opponent matched against 
him ;’ he is like a boxer going through the motions for practice, who 
strikes at an imaginary adversary, and beats the empty air.’ That is 
to say, the philosophizing of such men is not directed to any serious 
purpose ; it is a vain repetition of empty formulas. Cf. Pl. “οί. 
18 Ὁ: ἀνάγκη ἀτεχνῶς ὥσπερ σκιαμαχεῖν . . . καὶ ἐλέγχειν μηδενὸς 

ποκρινομένους Philo, De plantatione 42. 175, II, p. τόρ Wendland; 
οὐδεὶς καθ᾽ αὑτὸν ἀγωνιζόμενος ἀναγράφεται νικῶν, Γεἰ δὲ ἀγωνίζεται (εἰ 
δὲ ἀγωνίζοιτο Wendland: rather, εἰ δὲ (οὕτως) ἀγωνίζοιτο), σκιαμαχεῖν 
μᾶλλον ἂν εἰκότως δόξαι. Plutarch, De sanitate praecepta 130 Ἐ, 
couples together σφαιρίζειν (ball-playing) and σκιαμαχεῖν (sparring) as 
two modes of bodily exercise. Pausanias 6. 10. 3, of the statue of a 
famous boxer: σκιαμαχοῦντος δὲ ὁ ἀνδριὰς παρέχεται σχῆμα" i.e. the 
man is represented in a fighting attitude, but with no opponent — 
facing him. Numenius ap. Euseb. Pr. ev. 14. 6. 13: Zeno would 
not dispute directly with his living opponent Arcesilaus, πρὸς δὲ τὸν 
οὐκέτι ἐν ζῶσιν ὄντα ἸΙλάτωνα ἐσκιαμάχει, ... ds οὔτ᾽ ἂν τοῦ Πλάτωνος 
ἀμυνομένου κιτιλ. Lucian, Piscator 35 (of philosophers who do not 
practise what they preach): οὐκ οἶδ᾽ ὅποι ποτὲ οἴχεται πάντα ταῦτα 
ἀποπτάμενα, πτερόεντα ὡς ἀληθῶς ἔπη, μάτην πρὸς αὐτῶν ἐν ταῖς 
διατριβαῖς σκιαμαχούμενα. 

[[rovrou δὲ... χωρὶς αὐτοῦ], This passage has no meaning as it 
stands in the MSS. I have found possible places for τούτου... 
οὖσιν and διὰ τὸ... χωρὶς αὐτοῦ ; but I propose these transpositions 
with diffidence. The words ai αἰσθήσεις εἰσί may be a remnant of a 
sentence containing some mention of αἴσθησις which led on to the 
statement that gvosés is something very different from it (γνῶσις δὲ 


1 The same comparison is employed by Paul, 1 Cor. 9. 26: οὕτως πυκτεύω ὡς 
οὐκ ἀέρα δέρων (= σκιαμαχῶν)" ἀλλὰ ὑπωπιάζω pov τὸ σῶμα. The body is no σκιά; 
it is a real and solid opponent. And τὸ σῶμα is the enemy with whom the 
Hermetists also were engaged in combat. 

In Liddell and Scott, σκιαμαχεῖν is said to mean ‘to fight in the shade’; but 
that is a mistake. 








LIBELLVS X: δὲ 9-10b 247 


αἰσθήσεως πολὺ διαφέρει). Having said that ἀρετὴ ψυχῆς is γνῶσις, the 
writer proceeds to explain what γνῶσις is, by contrasting it with 
αἴσθησις. 

ὃ τὸ 8. [ἐστιν ἐπιστήμης. .. γὰρ ἐπιστήμη]. The mention of 
ἐπιστήμη is irrelevant ; and these words have probably passed into 
the text from a marginal note. 

ὀργάνῳ χρωμένη αὐτῷ τῷ vot. The νοῦς is the ‘organ’ of gnosis, 
in the same sense that the eye is the organ of sight. 

ὁ δὲ νοῦς τῷ σώματι (ἐναντίος). According to the reading of the 
MSS., the meaning would be that the νοῦς uses the body as its 
organ. But that cannot be right; for the body is not the organ of 
the mind in the same sense that the mind (or mental eye) is the 
organ of gxosis. By inserting ἐναντίος, we get a statement which 
suits well with what precedes, and leads on naturally to what follows. 
Man consists of two opposites in combination ; and this is an instance 
of a law which applies to all things alike. 

τά τε νοητὰ καὶ τὰ ὑλικά, The human soul ‘admits into itself both 
things incorporeal and things material’; or in other words, it performs 
the two contrasted operations of νόησις and αἴσθησις. This, or some- 
thing like it, must have been the writer’s meaning ; and this meaning 
can be obtained by writing εἰς σῶμα (εἰσδῦσα ψυχή). 

ἐξ ἀντιθέσεως γὰρ καὶ ἐναντιότητος δεῖ τὰ πάντα συνεστάναι, This 
must be more or less remotely derived from Heraclitus. Ar. 21. 
Wic. 9. 2, 1155 Ὁ 4: Ἡράκλειτος τὸ ἀντίξοον συμφέρον, καὶ ἐκ τῶν 
διαφερόντων καλλίστην ἁρμονίαν, καὶ πάντα κατ᾽ ἔριν γίνεσθαι. Pseudo- 
Ar. De mundo 5, 396 Ὁ 7: ἴσως δὲ τῶν ἐναντίων ἡ φύσις γλίχεται, καὶ 
ἐκ τούτων ἀποτελεῖ τὸ σύμφωνον, οὐκ ἐκ τῶν ὁμοίων. ... ταὐτὸ δὲ τοῦτο 
ἣν καὶ τὸ παρὰ τῷ σκοτεινῷ λεγόμενον ἩΗρακλείτῳ᾽ συνάψιες ὅλα καὶ οὐχ ὅλα, 
συμφερόμενον διαφερόμενον, συνᾷδον διᾷδον, καὶ ἐκ πάντων ἕν καὶ ἐξ ἑνὸς 
πάντα. Heracl. fr. 51 Diels: οὐ ξυνιᾶσιν ὅκως (τὸ ἕν or τὸ πᾶν) 
διαφερόμενον ἑωυτῷ ὁμολογέει' παλίντροπος ἁρμονίη ὅκωσπερ τόξου καὶ 
λύρης. The Hermetist says in this section that man is composed of 
νοητά and ὑλικά, just as he says in ὃ 11 that τὸ πᾶν (the universe) ἔκ 
τε ὑλικοῦ Kal νοητοῦ συνέστηκεν ; and he regards τὰ νοητά (i.e. ἀσώ- 
para) as ἐναντία to τὰ ὑλικά (i.e. σωματικά). Cf. Corp. 11. 4a: σώματι 
δὲ ἐναντία φύσις τὸ ἀσώματον... . ἀσώματος οὖν ὃ τόπος. (The τόπος 
there spoken of is identified with νοῦς.) ᾿ 

δ το Ὁ. Τί[9] οὖν ὁ ὑλικὸς θεὸς ὁδί, (6 κόσμος); In §§ 7-τὸ ἃ, the 
writer has been considering the question whether, and under what 
conditions, man (or the human soul) is good. His answer to that 





248 CORPVS HERMETICVM 


question has been given in the words κακία ψυχῆς ἀγνωσία (§ 8 b); 
ἀρετὴ ψυχῆς γνῶσις (ὃ 9); ὁ γνοὺς ἀγαθός (ἰ2.). Man is good if he has 
gnosis, and bad if he has not gvosis. And this answer was probably 
more fully explained in the lost passage at the end of §10a. E.g. it 
may have been there said that the human soul is good in so far as it 
detaches itself from the material body, and identifies itself with νοῦς 
(the ‘organ’ of gnosis), which is ‘contrary to the body’. In ὃ τοῦ, 
the writer passes on from man to the Kosmos, and considers the 
question whether the Kosmos is good. 

Οὐ κακὸς ὁ κόσμος, οὐκέτι δὲ dyabds.—(6 καλὸς κόσμος, οὐκ ἔστι δὲ 
ἀγαθός MSS.) Cf. ὃ 12: ὁ μὲν γὰρ κόσμος οὐκ ἀγαθός, ὡς κινητός, οὗ 
κακὸς δέ, ὡς ἀθάνατος. See Corp. VI. 2 Ὁ. 

[καὶ αὐτοδεὴς] καὶ αὐτὸς [ποτὲ μὲν γενόμενος] ἀεὶ [δὲ] ὦν, ὧν δὲ ἐν 
γενέσει. The meaning might be made more unmistakable by trans- 
posing καὶ αὐτός, and writing ἀεὶ (μὲν ?) dv καὶ αὐτός, dv δὲ ἐν γενέσει. 
The Kosmos καὶ αὐτός (i.e. as well as God) is ever-existent ; but it is 
not ever-existent in the same sense that God is ; for its everlasting 
existence takes the form of perpetual γένεσις. 

The word αὐτοδεής does not occur elsewhere ; and it is difficult to 
assign any meaning to it. καὶ atro- has probably come by duplica- _ 
tion from the following καὶ αὐτός. The words ποτὲ μὲν γενόμενος and 
δέ were most likely inserted by some one who held the view that the 
Kosmos has had a beginning. The author himself, on the other 
hand, seems to have held that the Kosmos has always been in 
existence. 

γινόμενος ἀεὶ (τῇ) γενέσει (γένεσις or -ow MSS.) τῶν ποιῶν καὶ τῶν 
ποσῶν. Cf. ποιότητας καὶ ποσότητας ποιεῖ (ὃ ποιῶν) in ὃ 3 as emended, 
The οὐσία (substance) of the κόσμος is everlasting; but (in the 
sublunar world at least) every part of this substance is continually 
having fresh qualities imposed on it, and every individual thing that 
is made of it is continually increasing or decreasing. 

δ 11. ἡ δὲ νοητὴ στάσις κινεῖ τὴν ὑλικὴν κίνησιν τὸν τρόπον τοῦτον. 
Cf. Corp. 11. 8a: πᾶσα οὖν κίνησις... ὑπὸ στάσεως κινεῖται. All 
changes of quality and quantity that take place in the Kosmos are 
modes of material movement (ὑλικὴ κίνησις) ; and τὸ κινοῦν must be 
something which is itself immaterial and motionless (νοητὴ στάσις). 
The writer assumes that τὸ κινοῦν is ψυχή (see Corp, II), and proceeds 
to explain how the cosmic ψυχή (i.e. the immaterial thing by which 
all material things are moved) is incorporated in the structure of the 
Kosmos, 








LIBELLVS X: §§ τορ-τὶ 249 


ὁ κόσμος σφαῖρά ἐστι, τουτέστι κεφαλή The notion that the 
spherical Kosmos is like a human head was doubtless suggested by 
Pl. Zim. 44 D ff., where the making of the human body by the 
‘created gods’ is described: τὰς μὲν δὴ θείας περιόδους (i.e. the 
movements of νοῦς) ..., τὸ τοῦ παντὸς σχῆμα ἀπομιμησάμενοι περι- 
φερὲς ὄν, εἰς σφαιροειδὲς σῶμα ἐνέδησαν, τοῦτο ὃ νῦν κεφαλὴν ἐπονομά: 
ζομεν, ὃ θειότατον τ᾽ ἐστὶ καὶ τῶν ἐν ἡμῖν πάντων δεσποτοῦν κιτιλ. In 
the Zimaeus the human head is said to resemble the spherical 
Kosmos; in Corp. X the spherical Kosmos is said to resemble a 
human head. Cf. Synesius, Ca/witii encomium 8, Migne tom. 66, 
col. 1181 B: τί δ᾽ ἂν σφαίρας γένοιτο... θεσπεσιώτερον ; .. . ὃ τρίτος 
θεός, ἡ τοῦ κόσμου ψυχή" ἣν ὁ πατὴρ μὲν αὐτῆς, τοῦ δὲ σωματικοῦ κόσμου 
δημιουργός, ἐπεισήγαγε τῷ κόσμῳ, τέλεον αὐτὸν... ἀπεργασάμενος, 
ἀποδοὺς διὰ τοῦτο καὶ σχῆμα σχημάτων τὸ περιεκτότατον (i.e. ἃ spherical 
shape)... . ἥ τε οὖν ὅλη ψυχὴ σφαῖραν ὄντα τὸν ὅλον κόσμον ψυχοῖ, αἵ 
τε ἀπὸ τῆς ὅλης ῥυεῖσαι καὶ μέρη γενόμεναι θέλουσιν ἑκάστη τοῦθ᾽ ὅπερ ἡ 
πᾶσα ψυχή, διοικεῖν σώματα καὶ κόσμων εἶναι ψυχαί, ὃ καὶ τοῦ μερισμοῦ 
γέγονεν αὐταῖς αἴτιον. οὕτως ἐδέησε τῇ φύσει σφαιρῶν μερικῶν. ἄνω 
μὲν οὖν ἀστέρες, κάτω δὲ κεφαλαὶ διεπλάσθησαν, ἵν᾽ εἶεν οἶκοι ψυχῶν, ἐν 
κόσμῳ κόσμοι μικροί" ἔδει γάρ, οἶμαι, εἶναι τὸν κόσμον ζῷον ἐκ ζῴων 
συγκείμενον. 

[κεφαλῆς δὲ οὐδὲν ὑπεράνω ὑλικόν, ὥσπερ οὐδὲ ποδῶν οὐδὲν νοητὸν 
ὑποκάτω, πᾶν δὲ ὑλικόν]. 1 can make no sense of this. The words 
must be taken to refer to man, and not to the Kosmos; for the 
Kosmos is a head without trunk or limbs, and has no feet. But 
what can be meant by saying that in a man ‘there is nothing 
material above the head, and nothing immaterial below the feet’? 
The words κεφαλῆς οὐδὲν ὑπεράνω ὑλικόν might possibly be taken to 
mean that the head is the highest part of man’s material frame, and 
therefore the part best suited to be the abode of ψυχή; but the 
mention of the feet and what lies below them seems utterly 
irrelevant. 

[[νοῦς δὲ κεφαλὴ αὕτη σφαιρικῶς κινουμένη, τοῦτο ἔστι κεφαλικῶς]. 
This also is meaningless, It is absurd to say that a head is νοῦς ; for 
a head is a material thing, and νοῦς is immaterial. Perhaps νοῦς... 
airy is a corruption of (év)vous δὲ (ἡ) κεφαλὴ αὕτη, ‘this head (viz. the 
Kosmos) has νοῦς in it’. That statement would be intelligible in 
itself, and would agree with the doctrine of the Zimaeus, according 
to which man’s νοῦς is situated in his head; but it would not be to 
the point here ; for in this paragraph the writer is speaking about the 





250 CORPVS HERMETICVM 


embodiment of ψυχή, and not that of νοῦς. The words κεφαλὴ... 
σφαιρικῶς κινουμένη, τοῦτο ἔστι κεφαλικῶς, suggest the grotesque 
notion of a man’s head spinning round like a top. If a thing moves 
σφαιρικῶς (i, 6. like a sphere revolving on its axis), then it does xof 
move κεφαλικῶς (1. 6. as a human head moves). The Kosmos (or, to 
speak more exactly, the celestial part of the Kosmos) ‘moves spheri- 
cally’; and it might be said in a metaphorical sense that νοῦς ‘ moves 
spherically’; but it is nonsense to say that the human head ‘ moves 
spherically’. The Kosmos resembles the human head in its spherical 
shape, but differs from the human head in its movement; and a 
writer who is seeking to show that these two things resemble one 
another ought to avoid mentioning their movement. 

ὅσα οὖν προσήνωται τῷ ὑμένι τῆς κεφαλῆς TadTys... ἀθάνατα πέφυκεν. 
The ὑμήν is the meninx or pia mater, i.e. the membrane in which the 
brain is enclosed.’ Ar. Hist. animal. 1. 16, 494 Ὁ 29: ὑμένες δὲ (τὸν 
ἐγκέφαλον) δύο περιέχουσιν, ὃ μὲν περὶ τὸ ὀστοῦν (the dura mater) 
ἰσχυρότερος, ὁ δὲ περὶ αὐτὸν τὸν ἐγκέφαλον (the pia mater) ἥττων ἐκείνου. 
Lb. 495 8 8: ἔστι δ᾽ ὑμὴν δερματικὸς ἡ μῆνιγξ ὃ περιέχων τὸν ἐγκέφαλον. 
The writer of Corp. X holds this membrane to be the seat or organ 
of conscious life and thought in the human body. Here, as in § 13, 
he shows some acquaintance with the physiological theories of his 
time. 

The Platonists in general, adhering to the teaching of the Zimaeus, 
held the seat of νοῦς or τὸ λογιστικόν to be the brain.’ Chrysippus 
and most of the Stoics placed the ἡγεμονικόν in the heart. The 
Aristotelian Strato, about 280 B,c., said that the seat of the 
ἡγεμονικόν is τὸ μεσόφρυον (the space between the eyebrows), or 
rather, the part of the brain which lies behind that region.’ The 
view adopted by the writer of Cor~, X is that of the physician 
Erasistratus * (about 300-250 B.c.). Aetius, Diels, Doxagr., p. 391: 

1 Snidas (Bernhardy) : Μῆνιγξ᾽ ὑμὴν τὸν ἐγκέφαλον σκέπων. ... ὅτι αἱ αἰσθήσεις 
ἀπὸ τοῦ ἐγκεφάλου ἀρχόμεναι διὰ τῶν νεύρων ἄχρι τῶν αἰσθητηρίων προΐασι.... ἔστιν 
οὖν ἀπειλημμένος τις ἀὴρ ἐν τῷ κοιλώματι. τῆς ἀκοῆς, συμφυὴς ὧν τῇ μήνιγγι καὶ τὸ 
ὑμένι, οὗτος οὖν ὁ ἀήρ, δεχόμενος ἐκ τοῦ ἔξωθεν ἀέρος τοὺς ψόφους, ... δι᾿ ἑαυτοῦ els 
τὴν μήνιγγα διαπορθμεύει τοὺς ψύφους. 


3. Alemaeon of Croton, about 500 8.C., ‘ was the first to recognize the brain as the 
oat Mr of intellectual activity’ (Gomperz, Greek Thinkers, Eng. tr. 1901, 
vol. i, p. 148). 

5 Aetius (Diels Doxogr. p. 391) says that Strato placed the Aegemonikon ἐν τῷ 
μεσοφρύῳ (in superciliorum meditullio, Tertull. De an. 15). Pollux, Onomast. 2. 
226, says that he placed it κατὰ τὸ μεσόφρυον. The latter phrase, no doubt, gives 
Strato’s meaning more exactly, ; 

4 The doctrines of Erasistratus continued to be maintained by a succession of 
followers for several centuries. A medical school of Zrasistratetot at Smyrna stood 








LIBELLVS X: § 11 251 


*Epaciotpatos (τὸ τῆς ψυχῆς ἡγεμονικὸν λέγει εἶναι) περὶ τὴν μήνιγγα 
τοῦ ἐγκεφάλου, "iv ἐπικρανίδα λέγει". The almost equally celebrated 
physician Herophilus (about 300 8. 6.) placed the ἡγεμονικόν in the 
ventricles of the brain (ἐν τῇ τοῦ ἐγκεφάλου κοιλίᾳ, ἥτις ἐστὶ καὶ βάσις, 
Aetius 2.) ; and there can be no doubt that Erasistratus was the first 
to place it in the meninx.* 

The Hermetist compares the Kosmos to a human head. The 
‘cerebral membrane’ of the Kosmos is the outermost sphere ;* and 
‘the things which are united to’ this cosmic meninx are the fixed 
stars and the planets. They, like the Kosmos itself and all living 
things within it, are composed of soul (νοητόν) and body (ὑλικόν) ; 
but being in or near the outermost sphere, in which the soul or life 
of the Kosmos is concentrated, they have in them ‘more soul than 
body’; whence it results that they are ἀθάνατα (and consequently 
‘not bad’). On the other hand, all living organisms in the sublunar 
region have in them ‘more body than soul’; whence it results that 
they are θνητά (and consequently ‘ bad’). 

Compare Plotinus 4. 3. 17 on the descent and embodiment of 
souls: ὅτι δὲ ἐκ τοῦ νοητοῦ εἰς τὴν οὐρανοῦ ἴασιν ai ψυχαὶ τὸ πρῶτον 
χώραν, λογίσαιτο ἄν τις ἐκ τῶν τοιούτων. εἰ γὰρ οὐρανὸς ἐν τῷ αἰσθητῷ 
τόπῳ ἀμείνων, εἴη ἂν προσεχὴς τῶν νοητῶν τοῖς ἐσχάτοις. ἐκεῖθεν τοίνυν 
(sc. ἐκ τῶν νοητῶν) ψυχοῦται ταῦτα (sc. τὰ οὐράνια) πρῶτα [καὶ μετα- 
λαμβάνει], ὡς ἐπιτηδειότερα μεταλαμβάνειν τὸ δὲ γεηρὸν ὕστατόν τε 
καὶ ψυχῆς ἧττον πεφυκὸς μεταλαμβάνειν, καὶ τῆς ἀσωμάτου φύσεως 
πόρρω. 
in high repute in the first century B.C. (Strabo 12. 20, 580); and ‘the school of 
Erasistratus was still flourishing at Rome in the second century A. D.’ (Puschmann, 
Gesch, der Medizin, Ὁ. 309). 

1 There must be some error here; perhaps there is a lacuna before ἣν ἐπικρανίδα 
λέγει. According to Liddell and Scott, ἐπικρανίς means ‘the membrane of the 
cerebellum’, not that of the brain, (But does it not rather mean the cerebellum 
itself?) Puschmann, of. céf., p. 300, says ‘ Das Seelencentrum, ἡγεμονικόν, verlegte 
(Erasistratos) in die Meninx wd zx das kleine, fiir sich umhautete Hirn, émupavis’ ; 
but the text of Aetius does not yield that meaning. 

* ὁ According to Rufus Ephesius,’ Erasistratus ‘ divided the nerves into those of 
sensation and those of motion; the former he considered to be hollow, and to arise 
from the membranes of the brain’ (W. A. Greenhill, in Smith’s Dzet. Biogr. 11. 
43 Ὁ). He held that these hollow nerves serve to convey puewma. ‘ He recognized 
the purpose of the larger number of cerebral convolutions in man, as compared with 
the stag and the hare’ (Puschmann, p. 300), His theory of the function of the 
meninx was founded on his own anatomical investigations. 

5 Cf, the teaching of the Naassenes, as reported by Hippolytus, Ref haer. 5. 9: 
᾿Εδὲμ (Eden) δὲ εἶναι λέγουσι τὸν ἐγκὲ ov, olovel δεδεμένον καὶ κατεσφιγμένον ἐν 
τοῖς περικειμένοις χιτῶσιν ὥσπερ οὐρανοῖς' παράδεισον δ᾽ εἶναι νομίζουσι τὸν μέχρι 
μόνης τῆς κεφαλῆς ἄνθρωπον (i,e, the human head), 

* Perhaps: τὸ δὲ γεηρὸν ὕστατον (sc. ψυχοῦται), ὡς ψυχῆς ἧττον πεφυκὸς pera- 
λαμβάνειν κιτιλι 


-- -ο»«““ας. 


eae 


—— 





Se δος 


252 CORPVS HERMETICVM 


ἐμψύχου δὲ τοῦ σώματος πεποιημένου, τὸ πᾶν δὴ ζῴον. I have 
reconstructed this sentence by mere guesswork, out of the two 
misplaced scraps ἐν ψυχῇ δὲ σώματος πεποιημένου and πᾶν δὲ ζῷον. 
But something to this effect seems wanted to lead on to what 
follows. If we assume that the words are rightly restored, the 
writer, having explained the relation between ψυχή and σῶμα in the 
case of the Kosmos, ends the paragraph by saying that the Kosmos 
is an ἔμψυχον σῶμα (‘a body with soul in it’), that is, a ζῷον ; and he 
then goes on to say that it is the first of all ζῷα, and that man is the 
second. 

8 12. ὁ δὲ ἄνθρωπος δεύτερον ζῷον. Having disposed of the Kosmos, 
the Hermetist returns to the discussion of man. The treatment of 
man in §§ 12, 13 is parallel in arrangement to the treatment of the 
Kosmos in §§ το "Ὁ, rr. The writer first gives his decision on the 
question whether man is good or bad, and then explains how 
the human soul is incorporated in the human body. 

οὐκέτι δὲ [[pdvov]] οὐκ ἀγαθὸς ((udvov)), Man is not, as the Kosmos 
is, merely not-good ; he is positively bad. The reading of the MSS. 
would rather mean ‘man is not, as the Kosmos is, almost good’; 
and that cannot be the sense intended. 

The statement that man is κακός is verbally inconsistent with 
§ 24}, ὁ γὰρ ἄνθρωπος ζῷόν ἐστι θεῖον κιτιλ. (compare also 6 γνοὺς 
ἀγαθός in ὃ 9 iniz.). These apparently conflicting statements are 
probably derived from different sources ; the language used in ὃ 12 
may have been suggested by Corp. VI, and that in § 24b, by some 
document similar in tone to Asc/, Za¢. 1. 6 a, ‘magnum miraculum est 
homo’ &c, But there is no real contradiction. In § 12 we are told 
that man ὡς θνητός (i.e. in respect of his body, and the θνητὸν εἶδος 
ψυχῆς which is inseparably connected with the body,) is κακός. In 
§ 24 Ὁ we are told that ὁ ὄντως ἄνθρωπος (i.e. man as identified with 
νοῦς, or with the higher and immortal part of the soul,) stands on a 
par with the astral gods, or perhaps above them. And ὁ γνούς (§ 9), 
‘the man who has got gnosis’, is ὁ ὄντως ἄνθρωπος. 

§ 13. ψυχὴ δὲ ἀνθρώπου ὀχεῖται τὸν τρόπον τοῦτον κιτιλ. The 
connexion of ὃ 13 with § 12 may be explained thus. Man is bad in 
so far as he is a θνητὸν ζῷον ; and he is a θνητὸν ζῷον in so far as his 
soul is enclosed in a material body. Hence arises the question how 
soul and body are connected during earthly life. 

The writer here says that the πνεῦμα is the ‘vehicle’ (ὄχημα) of the 
ψυχή, and the ψυχή is the ‘vehicle’ of the νοῦς. In ὃ 16, he describes 








LIBELLVS X: §§ 11-13 253 


the same relation by a different metaphor, speaking of the πνεῦμα as 
the ‘garment’ or ‘envelope’ (ἔνδυμα, περιβολή) of the ψυχή. Both 
these metaphors are employed together in Iambl. Περὶ ψυχῆς, Stob. 
1. 40. 43, Vol. i, p. 385 W.: οἱ μὲν γὰρ εὐθὺς αὐτὴν τὴν ψυχὴν αὐτῷ τῷ 
σώματι τῷ ὀργανικῷ συνοικίζουσιν, ὥσπερ οἱ πλεῖστοι τῶν Πλατωνικῶν᾽ οἱ 
δὲ μεταξὺ τῆς τε ἀσωμάτου ψυχῆς καὶ rod!" ἀγγελιώδους} (lege γεώδους) 
(σώματος τίθενται Ὦ αἰθέρια (τινὰ Ὁ) καὶ οὐράνια καὶ πνευματικὰ περιβλή- 
ματα, (ἃ 5 hace) περιαμπέχοντα τὴν νοερὰν ζωὴν προβεβλῆσθαι μὲν αὐτῆς 
φρουρᾶς ἕνεκεν, ὑπηρετεῖν δὲ αὐτῇ καθάπερ ὀχήματα, [συμμέτρως δ᾽ αὖ] 
καὶ πρὸς τὸ στερεὸν σῶμα συμβιβάζειν ((αὐτὴν)) μέσοις τισὲ [κοινοῖς] 
συνδέσμοις [[αὐτὴν}] συνάπτοντα. The word ὄχημα is used in ἃ similar 
connexion in Pl. Zim. 69c: the created gods, when they fashioned 
man, παραλαβόντες ἀρχὴν ψυχῆς ἀθάνατον, τὸ μετὰ τοῦτο θνητὸν σῶμα 
αὐτῇ περιετόρνευσαν, ὄχημά τε πᾶν τὸ σῶμα ἔδοσαν. In that passage, 
the σῶμα in which the immortal soul is enclosed is the human head 
(περιετόρνευσαν implies a circular shape), and the ὄχημα is the trunk 
and limbs, which were added as means of locomotion ( Zim. 44 E) ; 
but Plato’s phrase may have suggested to later writers the metaphor 
by which they described either the whole body, or the corporeal 
pneuma, as ὄχημα ψυχῆς. 

This section is copied in the Hermippus, 1. 13. 96-99: λόγος μὲν 
ὄχημα vod, τοῦ δὲ λόγου ψυχή, τὸ δὲ πνεῦμα τῆς ψυχῆς" τοῦτο δὲ διῆκον 
διὰ φλεβῶν καὶ ἀρτηριῶν καὶ αἵματος κινεῖ τὸ ζῷον καὶ πρὸς τὰς οἰκείας 
ἐνεργείας καθίστησιν... . ὥσπερ τοίνυν ἐκεῖνα ἐν τῇ συστάσει δι᾿ ἀλλήλων 
χωρεῖ καὶ τὸ ζῷον ἐμπνεῖ, οὕτω κἂν τῇ διαλύσει αὖθις πρὸς ἄλληλα 
ἐπαναχωρεῖ καὶ συστέλλεται" " αἷμα μὲν εἰς τὸ πνεῦμα, πνεῦμα δὲ εἰς 
ψυχήν, ψυχὴ δ᾽ αὖ εἰς λόγον, καὶ 6 λόγος εἰς νοῦν, καὶ οὗτος αὖ εἰς τὸ 
συγγενές. The writer of the Hermippus had before him the same 
corrupt text which presents itself in our MSS. of the Corpus. 

ὁ νοῦς [ἐν τῷ λόγῳ, ὁ λόγος] ἐν τῇ ψυχῇ. λόγος is spoken of as a 
human faculty inferior to νοῦς in Corp. IV. 3: τὸν μὲν λόγον... πᾶσι 
τοῖς ἀνθρώποις ἐμέρισε, τὸν δὲ νοῦν οὐκέτι. Seealso Corp. ΧΙ]. i, 12 sg. 
But in Corp, X, λόγος is nowhere interposed between νοῦς and ψυχή, 
except in this one sentence; and in ὃ τό, νοῦς is spoken of as 
contained in ψυχή without any intermediate ‘envelope’. It is clear 
therefore that the mention of λόγος here must be an interpolation. 


1 χοῦ P: τῆς F. 

2 *Fort ante αἰθέρια intercidit τίθενται * Wachsmuth. 

3 «Fort, post προβλήματα intercidit ἃ ᾿ Wachsmuth, 

* Cf. Corp. X. 16: συστέλλεται τὸ πνεῦμα els τὸ αἷμα, ἡ δὲ ψυχὴ els τὸ πνεῦμα. 





᾿ 


254 CORPVS HERMETICVM 


Plotinus, 2. 9. 1, says that it is an error to interpose λόγος 
(‘discursive reason’ ?), as a separate entity, between νοῦς and yxy. 
The words ἐν τῷ λόγῳ, 6 λόγος must have been inserted in Corp, X 
by some one whose doctrine of Adyos resembled that which Plotinus 
rejects, 

For the series νοῦς, ψυχή, πνεῦμα, cf. Corp. XI. i. 4b: ὁ μὲν θεὸς 
ἐν τῷ νῷ, ὁ δὲ νοῦς ἐν τῇ ψυχῇ, ἡ δὲ ψυχὴ ἐν τῇ ὕλῃ. (πνεῦμα is ὕλη 
qualified in a certain way.) Corp. ΧΙ], i. 14a (= V. 11 fon.): τῆς 
μὲν ὕλης τὸ λεπτομερέστατον ἀήρ, ἀέρος δὲ ψυχή, ψυχῆς δὲ νοῦς, vod δὲ 
θεός. (ἀήρ there takes the place οἵ πνεῦμα.) The writer of Corp. X 
holds νοῦς and ψυχή to be ἀσώματα ; yet at the same time he pictures 
each of them to himself as a material thing enclosed in another 
material thing of denser substance. 

But why should νοῦς be spoken of at all in ὃ 13? At this stage, 
the writer’s business is to explain the relation between ψυχή and 
σῶμα in man, as he has just explained the relation between ψυχή 
and σῶμα in the Kosmos ; and this mention of νοῦς unduly anticipates 
the contents of ὃ 16 f., where he passes on to a discussion of the 
relation between νοῦς and ψυχή. Moreover, the words are awkwardly 
put together ; a man composing freely would hardly write ψυχὴ . . 
ὀχεῖται τὸν τρόπον τοῦτον, ὃ νοῦς ἐν τῇ ψυχῇ. Iam therefore inclined 
to suspect that τὸν τρόπον τοῦτον, ὃ νοῦς... ἧ δὲ ψυχή is a later 
addition, and that the original text ran thus: ψυχὴ δὲ ἀνθρώπου ὀχεῖται 
[1 ἐν τῷ πνεύματι, τὸ δὲ πνεῦμα, διῆκον κιτιλ., κινεῖ τὸ σῶμα. (Perhaps 
the puzzling words νοῦς δὲ κεφαλὴ αὕτη «7A. in § ΤΙ may have been 
inserted by the same interpolator.) 

ἡ δὲ ψυχὴ ἐν τῷ πνεύματι, τὸ (δὲν πνεῦμα, διῆκον κιτιλ, Turn. 
gives ἡ ψυχὴ ἐν τῷ πνεύματι τὸ πνεῦμα ἐν τῷ σώματι. τὸ πνεῦμα 
διήκει κατιλ. But the words τὸ πνεῦμα ἐν τῷ σώματι are not wanted ; 
for the relation between the πνεῦμα and the σῶμα is sufficiently 
described by the following sentence, τὸ πνεῦμα, διῆκον . . . (μετὰ rod) 
αἵματος, κινεῖ TO cama Kal... βαστάζει. Moreover there would be a 

1 Plot. 2. 9.1 (Volkmann) : ἔστι γὰρ ὡς ἔστι νοῦς ἀεὶ ὡσαύτως ἐνεργείᾳ κείμενος 
ἑστώσῃ" κίνησις δὲ πρὸς αὐτὸν καὶ περὶ αὐτὸν ψυχῆς ἤδη ἔργον. καὶ λόγος ἀπ᾿ αὐτοῦ 
(se. τοῦ νοῦ) εἰς ψυχήν, ψυχὴν νοερὰν ποιῶν, οὐκ ἄλλην τινὰ μεταξὺ νοῦ καὶ ψυχῆς 
ψίσυ: (Perhaps οὐκ ἄλλη τις μεταξὺ ν. καὶ ψ. φύσις" “λόγος is not a thing distinct 

Tom νοῦς and ψυχή, and intermediate between them.’).. . τὸν δὲ λόγον ὅταν τις ἀπὸ 
τοῦ νοῦ ποιῇ (i. e. when a man says that the absolute or universal λόγος is derived 
irom the absolute or universal vois), εἶτα [ἀπὸ τούτου) γίνεσθαι ἐν ψυχῇ (λόγον) 
ἄλλον ἀπ᾽ αὐτοῦ τοῦ λόγου, ἵνα μεταξὺ ψυχῆς καὶ νοῦ ἢ οὗτος (sc, ὃ λόγος), ἀποστε- 
ρήσει τὴν ψυχὴν τοῦ νοεῖν, εἰ μὴ παρὰ τοῦ νοῦ κομιεῖται, ἀλλὰ παρὰ ἄλλου τοῦ μεταξύ, 


τὸν λόγον" καὶ εἴδωλον λόγου, ἀλλ᾽ οὐ λόγον ἕξει, καὶ ὅλως οὐκ εἰδήσει νοῦν οὐδ᾽ 
ὅλως νοήσει. 








LIBELLVS X: § 13 255 


verbal contradiction in saying that τὸ πνεῦμα ὀχεῖται ἐν τῷ σώματι 
(= βαστάζεται ὑπὸ τοῦ σώματος), and at the same time, that τὸ πνεῦμα 
(nom.) βαστάζει τὸ σῶμα (acc.) 

The paeuma spoken of in Cor. X is the ‘vital spirit’ (ζωτικὸν πνεῦμα) 
of the individual organism. It is a gaseous substance, which serves 
as the corporeal ‘vehicle’ or ‘integument’ of the incorporeal soul. 
Pneuma in this sense occupied a prominent place in the theories 
of the medical writers, from Erasistratus onward (i.e. from about 
300 B.C.), if not earlier (Puschmann, Gesch. Med., p. 299 ff... The 
cosmic pxeuma of the Stoics, which is the ‘vital spirit’ of the 
universe (the Kosmos being conceived by them as a ζῷον organized 
on the same plan as an individual man or animal), is not mentioned 
in Corp. X. 

τὸ (δὲ) πνεῦμα, διῆκον διὰ (τῶν) [φλεβῶν καὶ] ἀρτηριῶν [καὶ] (μετὰ τοῦν 
αἵματος. If we retain the words φλεβῶν καί, we must understand the 
writer to say that the veins and arteries alike convey both blood and 
pneuma. It is not quite impossible that he held that view ;' but it 
seems more probable that φλεβῶν καί was inserted by a later hand, 
perhaps in consequence of the corruption of κατὰ τὰς φλέβας into Kat 
τὰς φλέβας below. As to the function of the arteries, opinions 
differed among the medical writers, Praxagoras of Cos (about 
340-320 B.C.) said that the veins contain blood alone, and the 
arteries contain air alone; and his view was adopted by the Stoics 
(Puschmann, p. 276). Herophilus held that the arteries convey 
both blood and pneuma (Galen iv. 731; Puschmann, p. 288) ; 
Erasistratus held that the veins convey the blood by which the 
tissues are nourished, and the arteries serve as canals for the ζωτικὸν 
πνεῦμα alone (Puschmann, p. 300).? If my restoration of the sentence 
is right, the writer of Corp. X agrees with Herophilus and differs 
from Erasistratus on this question. 

κινεῖ τὸ σῶμα (ζῷον MSS.) καὶ ὥσπερ φόρτον (τρόπον MSS.) τινὰ 
βαστάξει. The Platonic doctrine was that ψυχή is τὸ κινοῦν (see 


1 For the opinion that the φλέβες contain air as well as blood, cf. Aetius see 
Doxogr. p. 436) : Διογένης {ρβομραίειονς εἰ (ἐὰν 1) ἐπὶ πᾶν τὸ αἷμα διαχεόμενον 
πληρώσει (-σῃ Ἰ) μὲν τὰς φλέβας, τὸν δὲ ἐν αὐταῖς περιεχόμενον ἀέρα doe (-σῃ 1) εἰς 
τὰ στέρνα καὶ τὴν ὑποκειμένην γαστέρα, ὕπνον γίγνεσθαι... " ἐὰν δὲ ἅπαν τὸ ἀερῶδες 
ἐκ τῶν φλεβῶν ἐκλίπῃ, θάνατον συντυγχάνειν. 

2 Cf, Simon Magus, as reported by Hippolytus, ΚΣ haer. 6, 14: ἑκατέρωθεν γὰρ 
τοῦ ὀμφαλοῦ δύο εἰσὶν aprnpia: παρατεταμέναι, ὀχετοὶ πνεύματος, καὶ δύο φλέβες, 
ὀχετοὶ αἵματος... . αἱ δὲ ἀρτηρίαι, ἃς ἔφημεν ὀχετοὺς εἶναι πνεύματος, ... πρὸς τὴν 
μεγάλην συνάπτουσιν ἀρτηρίαν, τὴν κατὰ ῥάχιν καλουμένην ἀορτήν" καὶ οὕτως διὰ τῶν 
παραθύρων ἐπὶ τὴν καρδίαν ὁδεῦσαν τὸ πνεῦμα κίνησιν ἐργάζεται τῶν ἐμβρύων, 


- = ——— a ai 


— 





256 CORPVS HERMETICVM 


Corp. 11. 8 Ὁ, 9); but the writer of Corp. X holds that the ψυχή acts 
on the gross matter of the body, not immediately, but through the 
interposed preuma, The function of the pxeuma, as he conceives it, 
corresponds to that of the nervous system in modern physiology. 

As to ὥσπερ φόρτον τινὰ βαστάζει, see ὥσπερ φορτίον βαστάζουσα 
τὸ σῶμα in ὃ 8b. 

διὸ καί τινες τὴν ψυχὴν αἷμα ἐνόμισαν εἶναι. This is what Empedocles 
said, or rather, what he was commonly understood to have meant. 
Emped. fr. 105, Diels Vorsokr. p. 202: (4 καρδία) αἵματος ἐν 
πελάγεσσι τεθραμμένη ἀντιθορόντος, | τῇ τε νόημα μάλιστα κικλήσκεται 
ἀνθρώποισιν" | αἷμα γὰρ ἀνθρώποις περικάρδιόν ἐστι νόημα. Pl. Phaedo 
96 Β: πότερον τὸ αἷμά ἐστιν ᾧ φρονοῦμεν (Emped.), ἢ ὁ ἀήρ (Anaxi- 
menes and Diog. Apoll.), ἢ τὸ πῦρ (Heraclitus), ἢ τούτων μὲν οὐδέν, 
ὁ δὲ ἐγκέφαλος κιτιλ. (Alemaeon). Theophrast. De sensu, Diels 20. 
Ρ. 168, 1. 43 : διὸ καὶ τῷ αἵματι μάλιστα φρονεῖν (λέγει ὁ Ἔμπεδ.)" ἐν 
τούτῳ γὰρ μάλιστα κεκρᾶσθαι [ἐστι] τὰ στοιχεῖα τῶν μερῶν. Cic. Tuse, 
1. 9.10 : ‘ Empedocles animum esse censet cordi suffusum sanguinem,’ 
Galen Dogm. Hipp. εἰ Plat. 2, V. 283 K.: Empedocles αἷμά φησιν 
εἶναι τὴν ψυχήν. In the extant fragments of Empedocles himself, 
the word ψυχή nowhere occurs; and the apparent inconsistency 
between his Περὶ φύσεως and his Καθαρμοί may be best explained 
by assuming him to have held that man has two ‘souls’, viz. (1) the — 
νοητικόν (including the αἰσθητικόν), which resides in (or is identical 
with) the blood about the heart, and comes into being and perishes 
simultaneously with the bodily organism, with which it is inseparably 
connected, and (2) the δαίμων, which existed before the body in 
which it is imprisoned, and will survive it. If this is the case, the 
view of Empedocles was an anticipation of the Platonic theory of 
the soul ; cf. the θνητὸν εἶδος ψυχῆς in Pl. Zim., and the ‘two souls’ 
of the Hermetists as reported in Adammonis resp. 8. 6 ( Testim.). 

The opinion that the soul is the blood was maintained by Critias, 
shortly before 400 B.c. (Aristot. De az. 1. 2, 405b 5); and it 
seems to have been asserted, but probably in a modified sense, by 
the Stoic Diogenes Babylonius, about 160 B.c. Galen, Dogm. Hipp. 
εἰ Plat. 2. 8, 110, quotes Diog. Bab. as saying that τὸ κινοῦν τὸν 
ἄνθρωπον τὰς κατὰ προαίρεσιν κινήσεις ψυχική tis ἐστιν ἀναθυμίασις, 
πᾶσα δὲ ἀναθυμίασις ἐκ τῆς τροφῆς ἀνάγεται" but he adds that Diogenes, 
αὐτὸς ἐπιλανθανόμενος τῶν οἰκείων δογμάτων, αἷμά φησιν εἶναι τὴν ψυχήν, 
ὡς Ἐμπεδοκλῆς καὶ Κριτίας ὑπέλαβον. εἰ δέ γε ἕποιτο Κλεάνθει καὶ 
Χρυσίππῳ καὶ Ζήνωνι, τρέφεσθαι μὲν ἐξ αἵματος φήσασι τὴν ψυχήν, 








LIBELLVS X: δι. 257 


οὐσίαν δ᾽ αὐτῆς εἶναι τὸ πνεῦμα, πῶς ἔτι ταὐτὸν ἔσται τὸ τρέφον καὶ τὸ 
κινοῦν, εἴπερ τρέφει μὲν τὸ αἷμα, κινεῖ δὲ τὸ πνεῦμα; In the Διασυρμὸς 
τῶν ἔξω φιλοσόφων of the Christian Hermias (Diels Doxogr. p. 651), 
the doctrine that the soul is the blood is mentioned as one of those 
taught by Pagan philosophers. 

The Hebrews held that ‘the life is the blood’, and gave this as 
a reason for the law which forbade them to eat flesh in which the 
blood is retained. Gen. 9. 4: κρέας ἐν αἵματι ψυχῆς ob φάγεσθε. 
Cf. Philo De special. leg. 4. 10. ττ9--τ23, Cohn V, p. 236 f.: κελεύει 
μέντοι μήτε θνησιμαῖον μήτε θηριάλωτον προσίεσθαι... . . ἔνιοι δὲ. .. 
ἄθυτα παρασκευάζουσιν, ἄγχοντες καὶ ἀποπνίγοντες, καὶ τὴν οὐσίαν τῆς 
ψυχῆς, ἣν ἐλεύθερον καὶ ἄφετον ἐχρῆν ἐᾶν, (ἐν)τυμβεύοντες τῷ σώματι, 
τὸ αἷμα" σαρκῶν γὰρ αὐτὸ μόνον ἀπολαύειν αὕταρκες ἦν, μηδενὸς ἐφαπτο- 
μένους τῶν συγγένειαν πρὸς ψυχὴν ἐχόντων. ὅθεν ἐν ἑτέροις τίθησι νόμον 
περὶ αἵματος, μήθ᾽ αἷμα μήτε στέαρ προσφέρεσθαι" τὸ μὲν αἷμα δι ἣν 
εἶπον αἰτίαν, ὅτι οὐσία ψυχῆς ἐστίν, οὐχὶ τῆς νοερᾶς καὶ λογικῆς, ἀλλὰ 
τῆς αἰσθητικῆς, καθ' ἣν ἡμῖν τε καὶ τοῖς ἀλόγοις κοινὸν τὸ ζῆν συμβέβηκεν" 
ἐκείνης γὰρ οὐσία πνεῦμα θεῖον (Gen. 2. 1). Philo must have met with 
the doctrine that the blood is οὐσία ψυχῆς in Pagan writings, as 
well as in the Books of Moses. In the time of the Roman empire, 
Jewish} influence may perhaps have helped to revive this primitive 
belief among the Pagan Greeks. 

σφαλλόμενοι τῆς φύσεως (τὴν φύσιν MSS.). It would be possible 
to say σφαλλόμενοι τὴν γνώμην, but not σφαλλόμενοι τὴν φύσιν. If 
we read τῆς φύσεως, the phrase may be taken as equivalent to 
σφαλλόμενοι τοῦ περὶ τῆς φύσεως ἀληθοῦς. 

πρῶτον δεῖ {[ |] (ἐξελθεῖν) τὴν ψυχήν, καὶ τότε, ((τοῦ πνεύματος ἀνα- 
Χωρήσαντος eis)) (τὸ περιέχον), τὸ αἷμα παγῆναι κατὰ (καὶ MSS.) τὰς 
φλέβας, καὶ τὰς ἀρτηρίας κενωθείσας [τὸ ζῷον] καταλ[ε]ιπεῖν. The 
argument appears to be that the soul cannot be identical with the 
blood, because at death the soul departs, while the blood remains 
in the corpse. But the details are obscure. We are told that at 
death the arteries (or, according to the MSS., the veins and arteries) 
‘are emptied’, It was said above that during life the [veins and | 
arteries contain both blood and pxeuma. What then becomes of 
the blood and fxewma at death? The blood ‘is coagulated’, It 
certainly remains in the body (except in the case of death by 
bleeding) ; and as the writer says that the arteries are left empty 
after death, his view must be that at the time of death that part 
of the blood which was previously contained in the arteries passes 

2806-2 9 





258 CORPVS HERMETICVM 


from them into the veins,’ so that all the blood in the body is 
collected in the veins, and is there coagulated. This meaning may 
be obtained by writing τὸ αἷμα παγῆναι κατὰ τὰς φλέβας, καὶ τὰς 
ἀρτηρίας κιτιλ. in place of τὸ αἷμα παγῆναι, καὶ τὰς φλέβας καὶ τὰς 
ἀρτηρίας κ-τ.λ. 

But what becomes of the ψηεμήμα when it quits the arteries? 
According to the text of the MSS., it passes εἰς τὴν ψυχήν ; but that 
is absurd. The ψυχή might be said to be in the πνεῦμα, which is 
its ἔνδυμα ; but the πνεῦμα cannot be said to be in the ψυχή, either 
during life or after death. We must therefore conclude that the 
Hermetist either omitted to say where the pxeuma goes, or wrote 
something like εἰς (τὸ περιέχονΛ. With the alterations which I have 
proposed, the passage yields a satisfactory sense. The ψυχή quits 
the body; and the vital pxeuma, which is the vehicle or envelope 
of the ψυχή, quits the body with it. Thereupon the blood, no longer 
conveyed along the arteries by the φησιν, coagulates in the veins; 
and the arteries are left empty of blood as well as of Axeuma. This 
physical change, which follows and results from the departure of the 
ψυχή, is ‘the death of the body’. 

A theory similar in part, but not identical with that of the 
Hermetist, is mentioned in Iambl. Περὶ ψυχῆς, Stob. τ. 49. 43, vol. i, 
Ρ. 383 W.: ἄρά ye (γίγνεται ὁ θάνατος) πνιγμῷ τῶν ἀρτηριῶν, ἀποκλειο- 
μένων τοῦ δέχεσθαι τὸ ἐκτὸς πνεῦμα; Cf. Lac. XXIII (Kore Kosmu) 67. 

§ 14a, ἐκ μιᾶς δὲ ἀρχῆς. .. οὐ κινεῖται. This passage has no 
connexion with the context, and interrupts the train of thought, 
It may have been written at the top or bottom of a page by some 
reader, and inserted into the text by a copyist’s error. 

The writer of these words introduces the Neoplatonic conception 
of ro ἕν, of which there is no mention in the rest of the document, 
‘The One’ of which he speaks is something which is prior to the 
ἀρχή. But what is this ἀρχή The writer can hardly have omitted 
to give it a name; and he most likely named it νοῦς. It is possible 
that he wrote ἐκ μιᾶς ἀρχῆς (τοῦ vod), and that the superfluous words 
καὶ μόνου have arisen out of rod νοῦ misplaced. On τὸ ἕν, as 
distinguished from νοῦς, and placed above it, see Plotinus passim. 

ἡ μὲν ἀρχὴ κινεῖται, If the ἀρχή is νοῦς, this statement can hardly 

1 Cf. Aetius (Diels Doxogr. p. 435): Πῶς ὕπνος γίνεται καὶ θάνατος, ᾿Αλκμαίων 
ἀναχωρήσει τοῦ αἵματος εἰς τὰς αἱμόρρους φλέβας ὕπνον γίνεσθαί φησι, τὴν δὲ ἐξέγερσιν 
διάχυσιν (sc, τοῦ αἵματος : perhaps διαχύσει)" τὴν δὲ παντελῇ ἀναχώρησιν (sc, εἰς τὰς 


φλέβας) θάνατον, But where did Alcmaeon suppose the blood to be during waking 
life, when it has not ‘ withdrawn into the veins} * 





LIBELLVS X: δ 13-I5a 259 


be reconciled with ὃ rx ini?., 4 δὲ νοητὴ στάσις κινεῖ τὴν ὑλικὴν κίνησιν. 
But it agrees with Plotinus 6. 7. 13: νοῦς τε κινούμενος κινεῖται μὲν 
ὡσαύτως καὶ κατὰ ταὐτὰ καὶ ὅμοια del...» ἐπὶ πάντα οὖν κινεῖσθαι δεῖ 
(νοῦν), μᾶλλον δὲ κεκινῆσθαι... εἰ δ᾽ ἕστηκεν (ὁ νοῦς), οὐ νοεῖ"... 
εἰ δὲ τοῦτο, οὐδ᾽ ἔστιν. 

τὸ δὲ ἕν. . . ἕστηκεν. This is not quite in agreement with 
Plotinus, who says (6. 9. 3) that τὸ & is οὐ κινούμενον οὐδ᾽ αὖ ἑστώς, 
but is πρὸ κινήσεως, πρὸ στάσεως. 

δ 14}. τρία τοίνυν ταῦτα, ὁ θεός [], καὶ ὁ κόσμος, καὶ ὁ ἄνθρωπος. 
Cf. Ase’. Lat. I. το: ‘deus primus est, secundus est mundus, homo 
est tertius.” Herm. af. Stob. Zxc. XI. 2. (6): πρῶτον ὃ θεός, δεύτερον 
ὃ κόσμος, τρίτον ὁ ἄνθρωπος. 

τὸν μὲν κόσμον ὁ θεὸς ἔχει, τὸν δὲ ἄνθρωπον ὁ κόσμος, ἔχει probably 
means ‘contains’ (ἐμπεριέχει). In other words, the Kosmos is ‘in 
God’, or God is the τόπος of the Kosmos. Cf. Corp. IX. 9: τὰ yap 
ὄντα ὃ θεὸς ἔχει. 

γίνεται ὁ μὲν κόσμος τοῦ θεοῦ υἱός, ὁ δὲ ἄνθρωπος τοῦ κόσμου (uids, 
καὶ τοῦ θεοῦ ὥσπερ ἔγγονος (ἔκγονος MSS.). Cf. Corp. IX. 8 : πατὴρ 
μὲν οὖν ὁ θεὸς τοῦ κόσμου, ὁ δὲ κόσμος τῶν ἐν τῷ κόσμῳ. The word 
ἔγγονος (‘grandson’) is preferable to ἔκγονος (Ἢ offspring’ or ‘de- 
scendant’), 

δ 158. οὐκ dpa (οὐ γὰρ MSS.) ἀγνοεῖ τὸν ἄνθρωπον ὁ θεός, God 
does not ignore his grandson man; he recognizes the relationship, 
Cf. Paul, τ. Cor. 13. 12: τότε δὲ ἐπιγνώσομαι καθὼς καὶ ἐπεγνώσθην. 

καὶ θέλει γνωρίζεσθαι. Cf. Corp. 1. 31: ἅγιος ὁ θεός, ὃς γνωσθῆναι 
βούλεται. Αἱ this point the writer of Corp. X recurs to the thought, 
already suggested in §§ 4b-6, that man on earth, though sunk in 
matter, is yet not wholly estranged from God (or from ‘the Good ᾿ 
which is correlative to God), and that through ργοεῖς he may rid 
himself of the evil which adheres to him in consequence of his 
incarnation, and may thus become good (τούτῳ μόνῳ ἀγαθὴ γίνεται 
ψυχή). 

αὕτη εἰς τὸν Ὄλυμπον ἀνάβασις. In the Greek poets, from the 
Odyssey downward, Olympus means heaven; and the word was 
employed by some of the Pythagoreans in the sense of the highest 
or outermost sphere of heaven. Aetius, Diels Doxogr. p. 337: 
τὸ μὲν οὖν ἀνωτάτω μέρος τοῦ περιέχοντος. . . Ολυμπον καλεῖ (6 
Φιλόλαος)" τὰ δὲ ὑπὸ τὴν τοῦ Ὀλύμπου φοράν, ἐν ᾧ τοὺς πέντε πλανήτας 
μεθ᾽ ἡλίου καὶ σελήνης τετάχθαι, κόσμον" τὸ δ᾽ ὑπὸ τούτοις ὑποσέληνόν 
τε καὶ περίγειον μέρος τοῦ περιέχοντος... οὐρανόν. ΟΥ̓, Kaibel Epigr, 

$2 





260 CORPVS HERMETICVM 


Gr. 649. 7 (Rome, third century a.D.): {des yap ἀμέμπτως | αὐγαῖς 
ἐν καθαραῖσιν ᾿Ολύμπου. Jb. 159. 2: ψυχὴ δ᾽ ἐν Ὀλύμπῳ. Jb. 261. 
11 (Corcyra, second century A. Ὁ. ἢ) : ἀθάνατος ψυχὴ τὰ μὲν οἰκία τῶν 
ἐν ᾿Ολύμπῳ | ναίω. The phrase εἰς τὸν Ὄλυμπον ἀναβαίνειν is equiva- 
lent to εἰς τὸν τῶν θεῶν χορὸν χωρεῖν in ὃ 7. 

This statement, if it stood alone, might be taken to imply that 
it is possible for a man to ‘ascend to Olympus’, i.e. to become 
a god, while he is still in the body. But that is expressly denied 
in §§ 5 and 6; and it appears from ὃ 7 that the redeordry δόξα 
is beyond man’s reach as long as he lives on earth, and that the 
soul must be released from its earthly prison, and must afterwards 
pass through an intermediate stage as a daemon, before it becomes 
a god. We must therefore take the writer’s meaning in ὃ 15a to 
be that those who, while still in the body, have attained to such 
Snosis as is possible for them on earth, will, after death, eventually 
ascend to heaven, and become astral gods. 

§ 15D. © ..) καὶ οὐδέποτε (οὐκέτι ἢ) ἀγαθὴ (μένειν, κακὴ δὲ [[ J] 
κατ᾽ ἀνάγκην γίνεται. A connecting passage must have been lost 
before these words. The sense required might be expressed by 
writing (φύσει μὲν γὰρ ἀγαθὴ ἡ ψυχή" ἐνσωματωθεῖσα δὲ poddverar,) 
καὶ οὐκέτι ἀγαθὴ (μένει). In this life, the human soul is bad, and 
can become good only by acquiring gnosis; for though it was good 
in its antenatal state, it has necessarily been made bad by its in- 
carnation. Cf. Philo, Quis rer. div. heres 55. 272, Wendland III, 
Ρ. 62: ἀνάγκη yap θνητὸν ὄντα τῷ τῶν παθῶν ἔθνει πιεσθῆναι καὶ τὰς 
οἰκείους τῷ γενομένῳ κῆρας ἀναδέξασθαι, βούλημα δὲ θεοῦ τὰ σύμφυτα 
κακὰ τοῦ γένους ἡμῶν ἐπικουφίζειν' ὥστε καὶ ἡμεῖς ἐν ἀρχῇ τὰ οἰκεῖα 
πεισόμεθα, ὠμῶν γενόμενοι δεσποτῶν δοῦλοι, καὶ & θεὸς τὸ οἰκεῖον 
ἐργάσεται ἑαυτῷ, ἄφεσιν καὶ ἐλευθερίαν ταῖς ἱκέτεσιν αὐτοῦ ψυχαῖς 
προκηρύξας. 

Ψυχὴν παιδὸς θέασαι, . . . πῶς καλὴϊν] . . ., ἔτι σχεδὸν ἠρτημένη 
τῆς τοῦ κόσμου ψυχῆς. πῶς καλή, ‘how beautiful it is!’ This use 
of πῶς is post-classical. It occurs several times in the New Testa- 
ment ; Marth. 21.20: ἐθαύμασαν λέγοντες Ids παραχρῆμα ἐξηράνθη 
ἡ συκῇ. Mark το. 23: πῶς δυσκόλως... εἰσελεύσονται. Luke 12. 
50: πῶς συνέχομαι ἕως ὅτου τελεσθῇ. John 11. 36: ἴδε πῶς ἐφίλει 
αὐτόν. 

The thought expressed in this passage closely resembles that of 


1 Similarly, the writer of Corp. X says that it is ‘the will of God’ that men 
should get gvosis, and thereby be ‘made good’, 








LIBELLVS X: ὃ 15a, 15Ὁ 261 


Wordsworth’s Ode on intimations of immortality. It contrasts with 
the Christian doctrine of ‘original sin’; but there is no reason to 
suppose that the writer knew of that doctrine and was consciously 
opposing it. 

It is here assumed that the soul of the child comes directly ἀπὸ 
τῆς TOU παντὸς ψυχῆς (δ 7 Znit.). This assumption is hardly consistent 
with the doctrine of successive incarnations which is taught in § 7, 
and from which it would seem to follow that the child’s soul must 
have been (or at any rate may have been) previously incorporated 
in a series of bestial bodies, and that traces of the connexion of the 
individual soul with the world-soul from which it was originally 
parted off ought to be more clearly visible in a ἑρπετόν than in a 
human child. On this subject, the writer of Corp. X seems to 
have set down side by side statements derived from different sources, 
without asking himself how they were to be reconciled. 

Iamblichus (Ilepi ψυχῆς, Stob. τ. 49. 40, vol. i, p. 380 W) dis- 
tinguishes the case of a soul which comes to its embodiment fresh 
from enjoyment of the beatific vision in the world above, from 
that of one which has been corrupted in a preceding incarnation: 
δεῖ δέ που καὶ rods βίους τῶν ψυχῶν κατανοεῖν πρὶν ἐλθεῖν εἰς σῶμα, 
ὡς dpa καὶ οὗτοι πολλὴν ἔχουσιν ἐν ἑαυτοῖς διάστασιν' ἀπὸ δὲ διαφόρων 
τρόπων ζωῆς διάφορον ποιοῦνται ἑαυτῶν καὶ τὴν πρώτην σύνοδον. οἵ 
τε γὰρ νεοτελεῖς " καὶ πολυθεάμονες τῶν ὄντων, οἵ τε συνοπαδοὶ καὶ 
συγγενεῖς τῶν Oedv,* οἵ τε παντελεῖς καὶ ὁλόκληρα" τὰ εἴδη τῆς ψυχῆς 
περιέχοντες, πάντες ἀπαθεῖς καὶ ἀκήρατοι ἐμφύονται πρώτως εἰς τὰ 
σώματα' οἱ δὲ ἀπὸ τῶν ἐπιθυμιῶν ἄδην ἀναπεπλησμένοι, καὶ ἄλλων 
παθῶν μεστοί, μετὰ παθῶν συνέρχονται πρώτως τοῖς σώμασι. The 
soul described by the Hermetist as ἔτι σχεδὸν ἠρτημένη τῆς τοῦ κόσμου 
ψυχῆς corresponds, in some respects at least, to the νεοτελεῖς κιτιλ. 


? Perhaps one might compare Afark 10.14 (Matth. 19. τΆ Luke 18. 16): τὰ 
madia. .., τῶν γὰρ τοιούτων ἐστὶν ἡ βασιλεία τοῦ Geod.... ὃς ἂν μὴ δέξηται τὴν 
βασιλείαν τοῦ θεοῦ ὡς παιδίον, οὐ μὴ εἰσέλθῃ εἰς αὐτήν. 

Abelson, The tmmanence of God in Rabbinicaé literature, p.281 ; ‘The Rabbins 
emphasize untiringly the spotless purity of the new-born babe. “ The good inclina- 
tion”’, say they, ‘is thirteen years older than the evil inclination ἢ (because the latter 
only begins to assert itself at the age of thirteen),’ 

3 The σύνοδος is the junction of the soul with the body. 

5 ‘Recently initiated’; i.e. fresh from the antenatal éwomrefa of the νοητὸν 
κάλλος, This is a reference to Pl. Phaedr. 250 Ef. : ὁ μὲν οὖν μὴ veoreAns, ἢ διεφθαρ- 
Μένος, obi ὀξέως ἐνθένδε ἐκεῖσε φέρεται πρὸς αὐτὸ τὸ κάλλος... ὁ δὲ ἀρτιτελής, 6 
τῶν τότε πολυθεάμων κ.τιλ. 

* Pl, Phaedr. 248 6: ἥτις ἂν ψυχὴ θεῷ ξυνοπαδὸς γενομένη κατίδῃ τι τῶν ἀληθῶν. 

δ Pl. Phaedr, 280 Ὁ : ὁλόκληροι μὲν αὐτοὶ ὄντες καὶ ἀπαθεῖς κακῶν...» ὁλόκληρα 
δὲ. φάσματα μυούμενοί τε καὶ ἐποπτεύοντες. 





262 CORPVS HERMETICVM 


of Iamblichus, who ἀκήρατοι ἐμφύονται πρώτως εἰς τὰ σώματα ; but 
those who have been polluted in previous incarnations, and who μετὰ 
παθῶν συνέρχονται πρώτως τοῖς σώμασι,' are ignored in Corp, X. 15 Ὁ. 

αὐτὴν (ἑαυτὴν MSS.) διάλυσιν αὑτῆς μηδέπω ἐπιδεχομένην. The 
διάλυσις Of the individual soul must mean its separation from the 
world-soul. The soul of the young child does not accept, or admit 
to itself, its separation ; i.e. it feels itself to be still a part of the 
world-soul from which it has only just been separated. The opposite 
of this is expressed by διαλύσασα ἑαυτήν below. 

ὅταν δὲ ὀγκωθῇ τὸ copa, ... ((ἐγγεννᾷ λήθην). If the arrangement 
of the words in the MSS. is retained, the subject of ἐγγεννᾷ λήθην is 
ἡ ψυχή; and in order to make sense of that, it would be necessary to 
write (éaurq) ἐγγεννᾷ λήθην. But the meaning required is rather τὸ 
σῶμα τῇ ψυχῇ ἐγγεννᾷ λήθην ; and I have transposed the words so as 
to obtain that meaning. 

The λήθη of which Orphici and Platonists spoke is here said to 
result inevitably from the διάλυσις of the individual soul, i.e. its 
severance from the world-soul. An incarnated soul must necessarily 
be an individual soul, and must, as such, be in some degree separated 
from the world-soul; but the writer regards this separation as a 
gradual process, which is not completed until after the first years of 
childhood. 

§ 16. ἀναδραμοῦσα yap ἡ ψυχὴ εἰς τὰ ἑαυτῆς (εἰς ἑαυτὴν MSS.) (τοῦ 
πνεύματος χωρίζεται, καὶ ὁ νοῦς τῆς ψυχῆς). The Platonists held that 
the home or natural place of the soul (τὰ ἑαυτῆς) is above; and the 
Stoics said that all souls, when they quit the body, rise into the 
atmosphere. 

A few lines below, we are told that Hermes has said that ὁ νοῦς 
τῆς ψυχῆς χωρίζεται καὶ ἡ ψυχὴ τοῦ πνεύματος. A statement to that 
effect must therefore have occurred somewhere ; and it is precisely 
what is needed here to complete the sentence. 

The separation of the ψυχή from the πνεῦμα in which it is enveloped 
is pictured in Plutarch’s ‘ Vision of Thespesius’, De sera numinis 
vindicta 22, 564A. Thespesius sees fiery bubbles rising through the 
air; the bubbles break, and little figures in human shape come forth 
from them. These human figures are newly disembodied souls ; and 
the bubble must be intended to represent the πνεῦμα in which the 
soul is enclosed. 


1 1,6, who have πάθη already adhering to them when their life on earth Ga the 
present incarnation) begins. 








LIBELLVS X: §§ 15b-16 263 





ὁ δὲ νοῦς... σώματος πυρίνου (ém)AaBduevos περιπολεῖ πάντα τόπον. 
The νοῦς, when it quits the earthy body, does not remain bodiless, 
but assumes another sort of body, which consists of fire. This 
corresponds to what is described in ὃ 7 by the words ai δὲ ἀνθρώπειαι 
(ψυχαὶ) ... εἰς δαίμονας μεταβάλλουσιν. The νοῦς incorporated in a 
fiery body, and ranging through all space, must be a daemon. But 
in ὃ 7, it is the ψυχή, and not the νοῦς, that is said to be thus trans- 
formed ; that is, the word ψυχή is there used in a wider sense, and 
the νοῦς is included under it. Cf. ὃ roa: (ἡ εὐσεβὴς ψυχὴ) ὅλη νοῦς 
γίνεται κιτιλ. 

For the notion of a ‘fiery body’, cf. Plotinus 4. 3. 4: καίτοι τινές 
φασι τόδε μὲν (τὸ σῶμα) καταλείψειν (τὴν ἡμετέραν ψυχήν), οὐ πάντη δὲ 
ἔξω σώματος ἔσεσθαι. 70. 4. 3. 9: διττὸς ὁ τρόπος τῆς εἰς τὸ σῶμα 
ψυχῆς εἰσόδου" ἡ μὲν γὰρ γίνεται ψυχῇ ἐν σώματι οὔσῃ, τῇ τε μετενσω- 
ματουμένῃ καὶ τῇ ἐκ σώματος ἀερίνου ἢ πυρίνου εἰς γήινον γινομένῃ, ἣν 
δὴ μετενσωμάτωσιν οὐ λέγουσιν εἶναι, ὅτι ἄδηλον τὸ ἀφ᾽ οὗ ἡ εἴσκρισις" 
ἡ δὲ ἐκ τοῦ ἀσωμάτου εἰς ὁτιοῦν σῶμα, ἣ δὴ καὶ πρώτη ἂν εἴη ψυχῇ 
κοινωνία σώματος. Plot. 4. 3.15: ἴασι δὲ (αἱ ψυχαὶ) ἐκκύψασαι τοῦ 
νοητοῦ εἰς οὐρανὸν μὲν πρῶτον, καὶ σῶμα ἐκεῖ προσλαβοῦσαι, δὲ αὐτοῦ 
ἤδη χωροῦσι καὶ ἐπὶ τὰ γεωδέστερα σώματα. Tambl. Περὶ ψυχῆς, Stob. 
I. 49. 39, vol. i, p. 378 W: (ἄλλη αἵρεσις τῶν Πλατωνικῶν), τιθεμένη 
τὴν ψυχὴν ἀεὶ εἶναι ἐν σώματι, ὥσπερ ἡ Ἐρατοσθένους καὶ Πτολεμαίου 
τοῦ Πλατωνικοῦ καὶ ἄλλων, ἀπὸ σωμάτων αὐτὴν λεπτοτέρων εἰς τὰ 
ὀστρεώδη " πάλιν εἰσοικίζει σώματα' διατρίβειν μὲν γὰρ αὐτὴν “eis μοῖράν 
τινα] (lege ἀεὶ ἐν μοίρᾳ τινὶ) τοῦ αἰσθητοῦ, καθήκειν γε μὴν εἰς τὸ στερεὸν 
σῶμα ἄλλοτε ἀπ᾽ ἄλλων τοῦ παντὸς τόπων. καὶ τούτους (S¢. τοὺς τόπους) 
Ἡρακλείδην μὲν τὸν Ποντικὸν ἀφορίζειν περὶ τὸν γαλαξίαν, ἄλλους δὲ 
καθ᾽ ὅλας τοῦ οὐρανοῦ τὰς σφαίρας, ἀφ᾽ ὧν δὴ δεῦρο κατιέναι τὰς ψυχάς" 
τοὺς δὲ περὶ σελήνην ἢ ἐν τῷ ὑπὸ σελήνην ἀέρι λέγειν αὐτὰς κατοικεῖν, καὶ 
ἀπ᾽ αὐτῶν κάτω χωρεῖν εἰς τὴν περίγειον γένεσιν' τοὺς δὲ ἀπὸ σωμάτων 
ἀεὶ στερεῶν πίπτειν εἰς ἕτερα (στερεὰ ἢ) σώματα διισχυρίζεσθαι. 

It appears from this passage that Iamblichus knew of certain 
Platonists who held that the soul, when not incorporated in an 
earthy body, is at all times incorporated in a material body of finer 
substance.? They may perhaps have derived this doctrine from 


1 Te. γήινα or στερεά, This use of the word ὀστρεώδης must have been suggested 
by Pl. Phaedr. 250 Ὁ: καθαροὶ ὄντες καὶ ἀσήμαντοι τούτου, ὃ νῦν σῶμα περιφέροντες 
ὀνομάζομεν, μά, 8 τρόπον δεδεσμευμένοι. 

3. This opinion was adopted by Origen, De princip. 2, 2: ‘Quaerendum primo 
videtur, si possibile est penitus incorporeas remanere rationabiles naturas, cum ad 
summum sanctitatis ac beatitudinis venerint,—quod mihi quidem difficillimum et 





264 CORPVS HERMETICVM 


Heraclides Ponticus. We are told that Heraclides φωτοειδῇ τὴν 
ψυχὴν ὡρίσατο (Aetius, Diels Doxogr., p. 388), or said that the soul 
is /umen (Tertull. De an. 9; Macrob. Somn. 1. 14); and that he 
considered the soul to be an οὐράνιον σῶμα (Philoponus De az.). If 
these statements are correct, it follows that Heraclides must have 
rejected the Platonic doctrine that the soul is incorporeal. But if 
he had done so, how could he have come to be reckoned a Platonist ? 
It seems more probable that he considered the soul itself to be 
incorporeal, but held that, when released from its earthy body, it is 
incorporated in a body of another sort ; that the τελειοτάτη δόξα of a 
soul is to be incorporated in a body consisting of light, or luminous 
fire ; and that the ζῷον formed by the combination of the incorporeal 
soul with this luminous body is of like nature with a star, and shines 
as a point of light in the Milky Way. If Heraclides held some such 
view as this, Posidonius’s theory of disembodied souls may be 
regarded as a modified version of that of Heraclides, adapted to the 
principles of the Stoic physics. The Platonist Heraclides may be 
presumed to have said that the soul, before and after its embodiment 
in gross matter upon earth, has for its ἔνδυμα either an aerial body 
(1. ε, the body of a daemon), or an aetherial body (i.e. the body of 
an astral god), and is situated in the atmosphere in the one case, 
and in the highest heaven in the other case ;' the Stoic Posidonius 
said that the soul, before and after its embodiment on earth, és 
either a mass of air and fire mingled with watery vapour and situated 
in the lower atmosphere (i.e. a ‘hero’), or a mass of air and fire 
situated in the upper atmosphere (i.e. a ‘daemon’), or a mass of 
pure fire situated in the fiery heaven (i.e. an astral god). The 
Platonists whom Iamblichus describes as holding that the soul ‘is 
always in a body’ may have been influenced by Posidonius ; but 
being Platonists and not Stoics, and therefore holding that the soul 


perme impossibile videtur,—an necesse est eas semper coniunctas esse corporibus. ... 
i vero impossibile est hoc ullo modo affirmari, id est, quod vivere praeter corpus 
possit ulla alia natura praeter Patrem et Filium et Spiritum sanctum, necessitas 
consequentiae ac rationis coarctat intelligi, principaliter quidem creatas esse 
rationabiles naturas, materialem vero substantiam opinione quidem et intellectu 
solum separari ab iis, .. . sed nunquam sine ipsa eas vel vixisse vel vivere : solius 
namque Trinitatis incorporea vita exsistere recte putabitur, Ut ergo superius dixi- 
mus, materialis ista substantia . . . cum ad inferiores quosque trahitur, in crassiorem 
corporis statum solidioremque formatur ...; cum yero perfectioribus ministrat et 
deatioribus, in fulgore caelestium corporum micat, et spiritualis corporis indumentis 
vel angelos Dei, vel filios resurrectionis exornat.’ 

1 Cf. the classification of (Ga in the Platonic Zpznomis, the writer of which must 
have been contemporary with Heraclides. 











LIBELLVS X: § 16 265 


is incorporeal, they necessarily rejected Posidonius’s way of putting 
it, and reverted to that of Heraclides. The writer of Corp. X appears 
to have belonged to this sect of Platonists, or at least to have been 
influenced by them. 

The Hermetist’s conception of the σῶμα πύρινον of the liberated 
νοῦς is to some extent similar to Paul’s conception of the σῶμα 
πνευματικόν OF ἐπούρανιον in τ Cor. 15. 35-50, 

καταλιπὼν τὴν ψυχὴν κρίσει καὶ τῇ κατ᾽ ἀξίαν δίκῃ. Here we have ἃ 
notion of which the writer has hitherto given no hint, At death, the 
man splits into two distinct persons,’ called respectively the νοῦς and 
the ψυχή. The νοῦς assumes a fiery body, becomes a daemon, and 
is employed in God’s service as a ministering spirit (§ 19a); but the 
ψυχή, after the νοῦς has quitted it, continues to exist with a separate 
personality of its own,? and is subjected to punishment, which 
presumably takes the form of reincarnation in an animal body 
(§§ 7, 8a). The man of whom this is said must be the ordinary 
man, neither very good nor very wicked; for in the case of the 
εὐσεβής, the ψυχή is wholly absorbed into the νοῦς (ὅλη νοῦς γίνεται), 
and ceases to exist as a separate entity ; and on the other hand, the 
wicked man has no νοῦς in him (§ 24 8), so that after death nothing is 
left of him except a ψυχή subject to punishment. 

A somewhat similar view of the relation between the νοῦς and the 
ψυχή is expressed in Plutarch’s ‘Tale of the stranger from the 
western continent’ (Fac. in orbe lunae 28, 943 ff.). We are there 
told that man is composed, not of two parts only (σῶμα and ψυχή), 
but of three distinct parts, viz. σῶμα, ψυχή, and νοῦς, When death 
takes place on earth, the σῶμα is cast off; and after a term of 
purgation in the atmosphere, the disembodied man, consisting of 
νοῦς and ψυχή still linked together, passes to the moon, and resides 
there. In the moon takes place a ‘second death’, by which the 

1 For a moder presentment of the same notion, see Edward Carpenter, 7he 
drama of love and death, p. 264: ‘ We have once or twice in the foregoing chapters 
alluded to the possibility of the self dividing into two personalities, or even more, 
We have supposed, for instance, that at death the psychic organism may possibly 
split up—some more terrestrial portion remaining operant and active on the earth- 
plane, and some other portion removing to a subtler and more ethereal region.’ 

® Cf, Iambl. De an., Stob. 1. 49. 43, vol. i, p. 384 W. According to one of the 
views there mentioned, χωρισθεῖσα dnd τῆς διανοίας ἡ ὕλη ἄλογος ζωὴ μένει καὶ αὐτὴ 
διασωζομένη ἐν τῷ κόσμῳ, ὥσπερ of παλαιότατοι τῶν ἱερέων ἀποφαίνονται. The διάνοια 
of Iambl. corresponds to the νοῦς of Corp. X. 16, and the ἄλογος ζωή of Iambl., to 
the ψυχή of Corp, X. 16. But who are the ‘ most ancient priests’ who taught this 
doctrine? That term might be used by Iamblichus to denote either Orpheus, 


or Egyptian priests; and among the latter he might possibly include Hermes 
Trismegistus. 


ee: ee ee a a a a Og ee ee 


266 CORPVS HERMETICVM 


νοῦς is separated from the ψυχή. The νοῦς then ascends to the sun, 
whence it originally came ; the ψυχή is left on the moon, and retains 
for a time a dreamlike life of its own, but sooner or later fades away, 
and is resolved into the substance of the moon. 

Πῶς τοῦτο λέγεις, ὦ πάτερ, (ὅτι) ὁ νοῦς τῆς ψυχῆς χωρίζεται [καὶ ἡ 
ψυχὴ τοῦ πνεύματος]; The relation between the ψυχή and the πνεῦμα 
has been sufficiently described already, and Tat has no reason to 
ask for any further explanation about that. But he may well be 
surprised and puzzled by what Hermes has just said about the 
separation of the νοῦς from the ψυχή. It is therefore ‘most likely 
that his question originally ended at χωρίζεται, and that the words 
kal 7) ψυχὴ τοῦ πνεύματος were subsequently added. The person who 
added these words must have read something like ἡ ψυχὴ τοῦ πνεύ- 
ματος χωρίζεται in the second sentence of § 16. 

[σοῦ εἰπόντος ἔνδυμα εἶναι τοῦ μὲν νοῦ τὴν ψυχήν, τῆς δὲ ψυχῆς τὸ 
πνεῦμα.1 This seems to be a clumsy attempt to account for Tat’s 
question; and it was probably inserted after the point of that 
question had been obscured by the addition of wai... πνεύματος. 
The words πῶς τοῦτο λέγεις... σοῦ εἰπόντος x.7.X. imply that Tat 
finds it difficult to reconcile the two statements of Hermes (viz. ‘the 
νοῦς is separated from the ψυχή᾽ &c. and ‘the ψυχή is a garment of 
the νοῦς ᾿ &c.) with one another. That is, the interpolation makes it 
appear that Tat thought it impossible for a thing to be separated 
from its ἔνδυμα. But no one could think that ; every one knows that 
it is possible to take one’s coat off, 

The phrase καθαρὸς γενόμενος τῶν ἐνδυμάτων occurred a few lines 
above ; but Hermes has not expressly said that the ψυχή is an ἔνδυμα 
of the νοῦς, or that the πνεῦμα is an ἔνδυμα of the ψυχή. 

§ 17. Συννοεῖν Set... τὸν ἀκούοντα τῷ λέγοντι [καὶ συμπνεῖν]. CF. 
Corp. IX fin.—ovprveiy (or συμπνέειν) is probably a variant for 
συννοεῖν. The meaning seems to be this: ‘If you have understood 
what I have told you about the relation between ψυχή and πνεῦμα, 
you ought to be able to anticipate the conclusion at which I have 
been aiming, namely, that the relation between νοῦς and ψυχή is 
analogous to that between ψυχή and πνεῦμα, and consequently, that 
νοῦς is united with ψυχή only so long as both are contained in an — 
earthy body.’ 

ἡ σύνθεσις [τῶν ἐνδυμάτων] τούτων ἐν σώματι γηίνῳ γίνεται. The 
σύνθεσις of which Hermes is speaking is that of νοῦς and ψυχή; and 
vos is not an ἔνδυμα. It is therefore necessary to bracket τῶν 
ἐνδυμάτων. 








LIBELLVS X: δὲ 16-18 267 


ἀνέχεσθαι συγχρωτιζόμενον αὑτῇ παθητὸν σῶμα. συγχρωτίζεσθαι is 
derived from χρώς, and means ‘to be in contact with another person, 
skin against skin’; hence, ‘to be in defiling contact’. Cf. Corp. XII. 
i, ro as emended: καὶ ὁ νοῦς dpa παθητός ἐστι, συγχρωτιζόμενος τοῖς 
πάθεσι. Diog. Laert. 7.1.2: Zeno was told by an oracle that he 
would live the best life εἰ συγχρωτίζοιτο rois-vexpots. He took this to 
mean that he must study the writings of dead authors.' The use of 
συγχρωτ. here might be made to agree more exactly with its use 
elsewhere by writing ἀνέχεσθαι συγχρωτιζομένην παθητῷ σώματι, ‘to 
endure being defiled by contact with’. 

ὃ 18. νοῦς δέ, ὀξύτατος ὧν πάντων τῶν [θείων] νοη[μα]τῶν. νοῦς cannot 
be called a νόημα; but it may be called‘a νοητόν. ψυχή also is ἃ 
νοητόν ; but νοῦς is ὀξύτερος ψυχῆς. The word νοητόν is here 
equivalent to ἀσώματον, and the writer is hardly conscious of its 
etymological connexion with νοῦς. θείων may be an alternative 
reading for νοητῶν. 

δημιουργὸς γὰρ ὧν [πάντων] ὁ νοῦς. Compare the corresponding 
Stoic doctrine in Arius Didymus, Diels Doxogr., p. 469: οὔτε γὰρ 
τῆς οὐσίας (material substance) ἀρχὴν κἀνάπαυσιν οἷόν re γίνεσθαι, οὔτε 
τοῦ διοικοῦντος αὐτήν. οὐσίαν τε γὰρ τοῖς γινομένοις ὑφεστάναι δεῖ, 
πεφυκυῖαν ἀναδέχεσθαι τὰς μεταβολὰς πάσας, καὶ τὸ Γδημιουργῆσαν" 
(σον Usener) ἐξ αὐτῆς" ofa [γὰρ] ἐφ᾽ ἡμῶν τίς ἐστι φύσις δημιουργοῦσα, 
τοιούτου τινὸς κατ᾽ ἀνάγκην ὄντος καὶ ἐν τῷ κόσμῳ ἀγενήτου. The Stoics 
held that τὸ ἐν τῷ κόσμῳ δημιουργοῦν is πῦρ νοερόν ; the Platonist 
writer of Corp. X holds that it is νοῦς using πῦρ as its instrument. 

ὀργάνῳ τῷ πυρὶ πρὸς τὴν δημιουργίαν χρῆται. See Asc/. Lat. 11. 
168 (111. 17 8): ‘spiritu...qui quasi organum vel machina summi dei 
voluntati subiectus est.’ The fire which the divine νοῦς uses as its 
instrument in its demiurgic activity (i.e. in the administration of the 
universe, not its ‘ creation’, for this writer appears to hold that the 
Kosmos is without beginning, ὃ τὸ b,) is primarily the light and heat 
emitted by the heavenly bodies. But perhaps the writer thought 
that the νόες incorporated in fiery bodies, and ‘ranging through all 


1 The word occurs in the anonymous fragment appended to Ζ. ad Diognetum 
(12. 8 Funk): τρυγήσεις ἀεὶ τὰ παρὰ θεῷ ποθούμενα, ὧν ὄφις οὐχ ἅπτεται, οὐδὲ πλάνη 
συγχρωτίζεται, οὐδὲ Eta φθείρεται, ἀλλὰ παρθένος πιστεύεται. I can make no sense 
either οἵ πλάνη συγχρωτίζεται or of παρθένος πιστεύεται. Perhaps the author wrote 
something like this: ὧν ὄφις οὐχ ἅπτεται, οὐδὲ πλάνῃ ((mareverat)) (cf. ὑπὸ τοῦ 
ὄφεως πλανᾶται a few lines above), οὐδὲ Εὔα (Courxperriferai)) (fis defiled’), ἀλλὰ 
παρθένος (διασώζεταιδ. Eve believed the deceptive words of the serpent; she ate, 
- was defiled, φθείρεται may have been inserted as an explanation of συγχρωτί- 

€TQl, 


a a er a  ..Ὅὕὥὦὖὕβὲῦὖῦὖῦὖ |ῸῈ(Ὦ6Ὃ0ἁ-..ἁἶζΣ ἂρ 


“68 CORPVS HERMETICVM 


space’, (i.e. the ‘daemons’,) are employed in subordination to the 
divine vots by which the whole is governed, and that the cosmic 
processes are carried on, in part at least, through their agency. 

ὁ δὲ τοῦ ἀνθρώπου (νοῦς) τῶν ἐπιγείων μόνον (δημιουργός). The writer 
probably had in mind the primary meaning of δημιουργός, ‘a skilled 
workman’, The sort of δημιουργία to which the human νοῦς is 
limited is the tendance of things upon earth (the θεραπεία τῶν 
ἐπιγείων spoken of in Asc. Lat, 1) by means of the arts and crafts, 
In the human arts and crafts, as well as in the divine administration 
of the universe, fire is an indispensable ὄργανον. The δημιουργία of 
the human νοῦς cannot mean the operation of the vital force by which 
our bodies are fashioned ; for that process is not carried on by the 
human νοῦς, i.e. by man as a conscious and rational agent, but by 
the same power which operates in all natural processes throughout 
the universe. 

§ 1908. τὸν τῆς εὐσέβειας ἀγῶνα ἀγωνισαμένη. ‘This clause refers to 
man’s life in the body ; the words μετὰ τὸ ἀπαλλαγῆναι τοῦ σώματος, 
which precede it in the MSS., ought therefore to be placed after it. 

καὶ μηδένα ἀνθρώπων ἀδικῆσαι, Cf. ὃ 21, πάντας ἀνθρώπους. . . εὖ 
ποιοῦσα. ‘This is one of the few mentions of social obligation, or of 
man’s ‘duty towards his neighbour’, which occur in the Hermetica, 
See Asc/. Lat. I. 8: ‘commodationes alternae.’ 

ἡ δὲ ἀσεβὴς ψυχὴ μένει ἐπὶ τῆς ἰδίας οὐσίας. The impious soul is 
ψυχή in the more restricted sense of the word, i.e. ψυχή as distinct 
from and opposed to νοῦς. The ordinary human soul (ψυχή in the 
wider sense), during its life on earth, is a combination of νοῦς with 
παθητόν τι; and this παθητόν is called ἡ ψυχή in the narrower sense. 
The pious soul (ψυχή in the wider sense), when it quits the body, 
throws off whatever it has hitherto retained of τὸ παθητόν, so that 
only ὃ νοῦς remains ; in other words, the ψυχή in the narrower sense, 
as a thing distinct from νοῦς, ceases to exist. But the impious soul 
(ψυχή in the wider sense), when disembodied, is abandoned by the 
vots, (if indeed there was any νοῦς in it during its life in the body), 
and thenceforth consists of τὸ παθητόν (= ψυχή in the narrower 
sense) alone. Consequently, it seeks to enter another earthy body, 
in which it may find satisfaction for its gross desires. The wicked 
soul is punished, both by the misery of unsatisfied desire in its 
disembodied state, and by reincarnation; but the punishment is 
self-inflicted. This description of the destiny of the ἀσεβὴς ψυχή is 
based on Pl. Phaedo 8rBff. With ὑφ᾽ ἑαυτῆς κολαζομένη, com- 











LIBELLVS X: §§ 18-19b 269 


pare Phaedo 828: τοῦ εἱργμοῦ τὴν δεινότητα κατιδοῦσα, ὅτι δι᾽ ἐπιθυμίας 
ἐστίν, ὡς ἂν μάλιστα αὐτὺς ὁ δεδεμένος ξυλλήπτωρ εἴη τῷ (τοῦ Schanz) 
δεδέσθαι. 

88 19 b-22 a. ἀνθρώπινον δέ... εἰς δὲ τὸ ἔλαττον ἀδύνατον. Τῇ ὃ τὸ Ὁ 
it is denied that a human soul can enter the body of a beast. This 
denial is in direct contradiction to §§ 7, 8a: it is therefore certain 
that ὃ το b cannot have been written by the author of §7f. The 
same argument applies to ὃ 20 fiz. and ὃ 22 ἃ fim., where the denial 
is repeated. The only doubt is whether we ought to assign to a 
different writer those sentences only in which the doctrine taught in 
§ 7 is denied, or the whole passage in which these sentences are 
contained. But on further examination it appears that the whole 
passage 19 b-22 a is written from a different point of view from the 
rest of Corp. X. The writer of § 20 no doubt intended that section 
for an explanation of the phrase ὑφ᾽ ἑαυτῆς κολαζομένη in ὃ 19a; but 
he has misunderstood the words on which he comments. The 
punishment spoken of in § 19a is that which the disembodied soul 
inflicts upon itself ; but the self-punishment described in ὃ 20 takes 
place while the soul is still in the body, Also, the maleficent νοῦς 
which suddenly makes its appearance in § 21 is ignored in the rest 
of the είς, and what is there said about νοῦς cannot be reconciled 
with what is said about νοῦς in other parts of Corp. X. We must 
therefore conclude that the whole passage 19 b-22 a has been inserted 
by a later hand. 

8 10 Ὁ. οὐδὲ θέμις ἐστὶν εἰς ἀλόγου ζῴου σῶμα ψυχὴν ἀνθρωπίνην 
καταπεσεῖν, The doctrine that human souls migrate into the bodies 
of beasts was adopted by Plato from the Pythagoreans.! Aristotle 


1 The Orphici agreed with the Pythagoreans in holding that the human soul is 
incarnated in a series of bodies in succession; but it may be doubted whether the 
Orphici, in earlier times at least, spoke of its reincarnation in bodies other than 
human. The only evidence for this that I have met with is an Orphic fragment 
quoted by Proclus /m vem. publ. p., 339 Kroll (Abel Orphica fr. 223): ἔπειθ᾽ ὅτι 
καὶ els τὰ ἀλλὰ ζῷα μετάβασίς ἐστι τῶν ψυχῶν τῶν ἀνθρώπων, καὶ τοῦτο διαρρήδην 
᾿Ορφεὺς ἀναδιδάσκει, ὁπηνίκα ἂν διορίζηται' Obver’ ἀμειβομένη ψυχὴ κατὰ κύκλα 

ὄνοιο | ἀνθρώπων ζῴοισι μετέρχεται ἄλλοθεν ἄλλοις" | ἄλλοτε μέν θ' ἵπποις, ... ἄλλοτε 
δ τρέβαταν, τότε δ᾽ ὄρνεον κιτιλ. But the dace of these verses is unknown; they 
may have been written in a period when the original distinction between the Orphic 
doctrine of reincarnation and that of the Pythagoreans had been obliterated. Ina 
second passage quoted from ‘ Orpheus’ by Proclus 7d, (Abel 222 = 225), reincarna- 
tion in human bodies alone is spoken of; and in a third (Abel 224), the lot of the 
disembodied souls of beasts is expressly distinguished from that of the disembodied 
souls of men ; for the Orphic poet there says that the soul of a beast, when it quits 
the body, hovers in the air εἰσόκεν αὐτὴν | ἄλλο ἀφαρπάζῃ μίγδην ἀνέμοιο πνοῇσιν" 
but human souls, when they quit the body, are led down by Hermes γαίης εἰς 
κευθμῶνα πελώριον. The fact that the destination of all disembodied human souls 


270 CORPVS HERMETICVM 


pointed out a serious difficulty in the Pythagorean and Platonic 
doctrine of metensomatosis; De an. τ. 3, 407b: of δὲ μόνον ἐπιχει- 
ροῦσι λέγειν ποῖόν τι ἡ ψυχή, περὶ δὲ τοῦ δεξομένου σώματος οὐθὲν 
ἔτι προσδιορίζουσιν, ὥσπερ ἐνδεχόμενον κατὰ τοὺς Πυθαγορικοὺς μύθους 
τὴν τυχοῦσαν ψυχὴν εἰς τὸ τυχὸν ἐνδύεσθαι σῶμα κιτιλ. Lb. 2. 2, 413d. 
The Platonists agreed with Aristotle that man is distinguished from 
the beasts by the possession of νοῦς ; and according to the Zimaeus, 
the νοῦς is the only part of the soul which is immortal.’ If then 
the body of a beast is not receptive of νοῦς, how can it be animated 
by a human soul? 

But in spite of this objection, the Platonists in general, down 
to the latter part of the third century a.p., adhered to the 
Pythagorean doctrine of transmigration into bestial bodies, which 
they found set forth in Plato’s dialogues ;* and this view was still 
maintained by Plotinus, who asserted that the human soul may 
descend so low as to take to itself not only the body of a beast, 
but even (as Empedocles had said) that of a vegetable. Plot. 3, 
4. 2: the human soul is at once λογική, αἰσθητική, and φυσική. 
ἐξελθοῦσα δὲ τοῦ σώματος, 5 τι περ ἐπλεόνασε, τοῦτο γίνεται. . os 
ὅσοι μὲν οὖν τὸν ἄνθρωπον ἐτήρησαν, πάλιν ἄνθρωποι" ὅσοι δὲ αἰσθήσει 
μόνον ἔζησαν, ζῷα' ἀλλ᾽ εἰ μὲν αἰσθήσει μετὰ θυμοῦ, τὰ ἄγρια, ὅσοι 
δὲ per’ ἐπιθυμίας ..., τὰ ἀκόλαστα τῶν ζῴων καὶ γαστρίμαργα. εἰ 
δὲ μηδὲ αἰσθήσει μετὰ τούτων, ἀλλὰ νωθείᾳ αἰσθήσεως μετ᾽ αὐτῶν, 
καὶ φυτά" μόνον γὰρ τοῦτο (ἐν αὐτοῖς) ἢ μάλιστα ἐνήργει, τὸ φυτικόν, 
is in these verses beneath the earth indicates an early date ; and it is possible 
that this may be the very passage to which Aristotle refers in De an, 1.5, 410b 27: 
τοῦτο δὲ πέπονθε καὶ ὁ ἐν τοῖς ᾿Ορφικοῖς ἔπεσι καλουμένοις λόγος" φησὶ γὰρ τὴν Pox 
ἐκ τοῦ ὅλου εἰσιέναι ἀναπνεόντων, φερομένην ὑπὸ τῶν ἀνέμων. οὐχ οἷόν τε δὴ τοῖς 
φυτοῖς τοῦτο συμβαίνειν, οὐδὲ τῶν ζῴων ἐνίοις, εἴπερ μὴ πάντα ἀναπνέουσιν. There is 
no reason to assume that the Orphic abstinence from flesh-eating (ἄψυχος βορά, Eur. 
Hippol, 952) was founded on a belief that the bodies of beasts are animated 
human souls, The Pythagoreans, who did hold that belief, alleged it as one reason 
among others for their traditional practice of abstinence from flesh-food; but the 
prohibition itself, in the case of Orphici and Pythagoreans alike, is analogous to the 
taboos or ‘ laws of holiness’ by which in many pee religions the worshippers 
are required to abstain from certain kinds of food. The Hebrews and other Semites 


abstained from pork, but did not suppose that the souls of their deceased fathers 
inhabited the bodies of pigs. 

1 In this respect the teaching of the 7imaeus approximates to that of Aristotle. 
Cf, Ar. De an. 2. 2: περὶ δὲ τοῦ νοῦ καὶ τῆς θεωρητικῆς δυνάμεως οὐδέν mw sone 
ἀλλ᾽ ἔοικε ψυχῆς γένος ἕτερον εἶναι" καὶ τοῦτο μόνον ἐνδέχεται χωρίζεσθαι, καθάπερ 
τὸ nae τοῦ φθαρτοῦ, τὰ δὲ λοιπὰ μύρια τῆς ψυχῆς φανερὸν, , . ὅτι οὐκ ἔστι 
χωριστά, 

The writer of the 7imaei Locri de anima mundi (before A.D. 200) must be 
excepted. In the last 5 yous, of the Zim, Locr. (Mullach Fr. Ph. Gr. Il, p. 46) 
it is clearly implied (though not expressly said) that the doctrine of penal reincarna- 
tion in the bodies of beasts is untrue, but may be useful as a ‘ medicinal lie’. 








LIBELLVS X: § τοῦ 271 


καὶ ἦν αὐτοῖς (ἡ ἢ) μελέτη δενδρωθῆναι. Plot. 4. 3. 12 η.: κάτεισι 
δὲ οὐκ ἀεὶ τὸ ἴσον (ἡ ψυχή) . . .«᾽ κάτεισι δὲ εἰς ἕτοιμον ἑκάστη Kal? 
ὁμοίωσιν τῆς διαθέσεως. ἐκεῖ γάρ, ᾧ ἂν ὁμοιωθεῖσα ἢ, φέρεται, ἡ μὲν 
εἰς ἄνθρωπον, ἡ δὲ εἰς ζῷον ἄλλη ἄλλο. Jb. 6. 7. Of. But the 
successors of Plotinus were more strongly impressed by the objections 
to this view. As to Porphyry, the evidence is conflicting. In a 
passage preserved in Stob. 1. 49. 60, vol. i, p. 445 W., Porphyry, like 
his teacher Plotinus, accepts the statements of Plato on this matter 
in their literal sense. Pythagoras and Plato, he says, teach that 
the soul μεταβολὴν ἴσχει καὶ μετακόσμησιν εἰς ἕτερα σωμάτων εἴδη. 
» «+ Hence πολλῆς μὲν εὐτυχίας αἱ ψυχαὶ δέονται, πολλῆς δὲ σωφρο- 
σύνης, ὅπως μὴ . .. κακοδαίμονα καὶ θηριώδη βίον ἀμείψωσιν. ἡ 
γὰρ. . « τῶν ἐν Αιδου τρίοδος ἐνταῦθά που τέτακται, περὶ τὰ τῆς 
ψυχῆς σχιζόμενα μέρη, τὸ λογιστικὸν καὶ θυμοειδὲς καὶ ἐπιθυμητικόν, 
ὧν ἕκαστον ἀρχὴν ἐξ ἑαυτοῦ καὶ ῥοπὴν ἐπὶ τὸν οἰκεῖον βίον ἐνδίδωσι. 
καὶ οὐκέτι ταῦτα μῦθος οὐδὲ ποίησις, ἀλλὰ ἀλήθεια καὶ φυσικὸς λόγος.} 
ὧν μὲν γὰρ ἐν τῇ μεταβολῇ καὶ γενέσει τὸ ἐπιθυμητικὸν ἐξανθοῦν 
ἐπικρατεῖ καὶ δυναστεύει, τούτοις εἰς νωθῆ [καὶ] σώματα... φησὶ 
(Plato) γενέσθαι τὴν μεταβολήν" ὅταν δὲ. . . ἐξηγριωμένον ἔχουσα 
παντάπασιν ἡ ψυχὴ τὸ θυμοειδὲς εἰς δευτέραν γένεσιν ἀφίκηται, . .. 
ἔρριψεν ἑαυτὴν εἰς λύκου φύσιν ἢ λέοντος. Nemesius‘* does not 
expressly say that Porphyry adhered to the doctrine of transmigration 


Ὁ It may be inferred from these words that some Platonists known to Porphyry 
thought that what Plato had written about transmigration into the bodies of beasts 
was merely ‘ myth’ or ‘ poetry’. 

2 εἰς νωθῆ καὶ F : ἰσονωθῇ καὶ P: εἰς ὀνώδη καὶ (ὑώδη) conj. Canter. 

8 In De αὐτί, 1, 19, Porphyry represents an advocate of flesh-eating as arguing 
‘if the soul of the beast ται for food is immortal, I am doing it a kindness by 
expelling it from its present lodging; it will make its way back into a human body 
all the sooner’, But Porphyry does not rca his own opinion. 

* Nemesius De nat. hom. 2: κοινῇ μὲν οὖν πάντες Ἕλληνες of τὴν ψυχὴν ἀθάνατον 
ἀποφηνάμενοι τὴν μετενσωμάτωσιν δογματίζουσι" διαφέρονται δὲ περὶ τὰ εἴδη τῶν 
ψυχῶν" οἱ μὲν γὰρ ἐν εἶδος τὸ λογικὸν εἶναι Χλέγουσι, τοῦτο δὲ καὶ εἰς φυτὰ καὶ εἰς τὰ 
τῶν ἀλόγων σώματα μεταβαΐνειν". «. ἄλλοι δὲ οὐχ ἐν εἶδος ψυχῶν, ἀλλὰ δύο, λογικόν 
τε καὶ ἄλογον" τινὲς δὲ πολλά, τοσαῦτα ὅσα τῶν ζῴων τὰ εἴδη. μάλιστα δὲ οἱ ἀπὸ 
Πλάτωνος περὶ τὸ δόγμα τοῦτο διηνέχθησαν" εἰπόντος γὰρ Πλάτωνος τὰς μὲν θυμικὰς 
καὶ ὀργίλους καὶ ἁρπακτικὰς ψυχὰς λύκων καὶ λεόντων σώματα μεταμφιέννυσθαι, τὰς 
δὲ περὶ τὴν ἀκολασίαν ἠσχολημένας ὄνων καὶ τῶν τοιούτων ἀναλαμβάνειν σώματα, οἱ 
μὲν κυρίως ἤκουσαν τοὺς λύκους καὶ τοὺς λέοντας καὶ τοὺς ὄνους, οἱ δὲ τροπικῶς αὐτὸν 
εἰρηκέναι διέγνωσαν, τὰ ἤθη διὰ τῶν ζῴων παρεμφαίνοντα, Kpdrios μὲν γὰρ ἐν τῷ 
Περὶ παλιγγεν εσίας---οὕτω δὲ καλεῖ τὴν μετενσωμάτωσιν---λογικὰς πᾶσας εἶναι βούλεται" 
ὁμοίως δὲ καὶ Θεόδωρος 6 Πλατωνικὸς (a disciple of Porphyry) ἐν τῷ Ὅτι ἡ ψυχὴ 
πάντα τὰ εἴδη ἐστί" καὶ Ἱπορφύριος ὁμοίως. ᾿Ιάμβλιχος δέ, τὴν ἐναντίαν τούτοις 
δραμών, κατ᾽ εἶδος ζῴων ψυχῆς εἶδος εἶναι λέγει, ἤγουν εἴδη διάφορα" γέγραπται γοῦν 
αὐτῷ μονόβιβλον ἐπίγραφον ὅτι οὐκ dx’ ἀνθρώπων εἰς ζῷα ἄλογα, οὐδὲ ἀπὸ ζῴων 
ἀλόγων εἰς ἀνθρώπους αἱ μετενσωματώσεις γίνονται, ἀλλὰ καὶ ἀπὸ ζῴων εἰς ζῷα, καὶ 
ἀπὸ ἀνθρώπων εἰς ἀνθρώπους, 





272 CORPVS HERMETICVM 


into the bodies of beasts; but he names him among those who 
held that all souls, including those of beasts, are (at least poten- 
tially) λογικαί;} and from this it may be inferred that Porphyry 
saw no force in the objection which prevented others from ad- 
mitting that a human soul may animate the body of a brute. But 
Augustine gives evidence on the other side; Civ. dei το. 30: 
‘Platonem animas hominum post mortem revolvi usque ad corpora 
bestiarum scripsisse certissimum est. Hanc sententiam Porphyrii 
doctor tenuit [et] Plotinus; Porphyrio tamen iure displicuit.’ Zé, 
12. 26: ‘Porphyrius . . . cum suo Platone aliisque Platonicis sentit 
eos, qui immoderate inhonesteque vixerint, propter luendas poenas 
ad corpora redire mortalia, Plato quidem etiam δα bestiarum, 
Porphyrius tantum modo ad hominum.’ Jd. 13. 19: ‘ Porphyrium 
. . . ab animis humanis removisse corpora bestiarum.’ And Aeneas 
of Gaza (quoted below) speaks of Porphyry as Augustine does, 
It seems therefore that Porphyry must have expressed different 
opinions on the question in different writings. Iamblichus then 
is (with the exception of the writer of Zim. Zocr.) the earliest 
Platonist of whom it can be said with certainty that he rejected 
the Pythagorean form of the doctrine of transmigration, and main- 
tained ὅτι οὐκ dx’ ἀνθρώπων εἰς ἄλογα ζῷα ai ἐνσωματώσεις γίνονται 
(Nemesius above), Aeneas of Gaza ‘in Theophrasto p. 16 ed. 
Barth’ (Mullach / P. G. II, p. xi): ἐπιγενόμενοι δὲ ἸΤορφύριος καὶ 
Ἰάμβλιχος, καὶ τοὺς πρὸ αὐτῶν σοφίᾳ περιφρονοῦντες, καὶ ἐρυθριῶντες 
τὸν Πλάτωνος ὄνον καὶ λύκον καὶ ἰκτῖνον, καὶ κατανοήσαντες ὡς ἄλλη 
μὲν λογικῆς ψυχῆς ἡ οὐσία, ἄλλη δὲ ἀλόγου, καὶ ὅτι οὐ μετανίστανται, 
ἀλλ᾽ ὡσαύτως ἔχουσιν αἱ οὐσίαι οἷαι τὸ πρῶτον προῆλθον" οὐ γὰρ τῇ 
ψυχῇ τὸ λογικὸν συμβεβηκός, ὡς μεταχωρεῖν, GAN οὐσίας διαφορὰ 
βεβαίως ἱδρυμένη" καὶ ὅλως ἀδύνατον τὸν λόγον εἰς ἀλογίαν μετατίθεσθαι, 
εἰ μὴ καὶ τὸ ἄλογον φήσουσιν ὑφαρπάζειν τοῦ λόγου τὴν φύσιν' 
ταῦτα ὀψέ ποτε διαλογισάμενοι, Γὑπερπηδήσαντες τὰ ἄλογα τῶν ζῴων, 
μεταβαλόντες οὐκ εἰς ὄνον φασίν (ὄνου φύσιν Wyttenbach), ἀλλ᾽ 
ὀνώδη ἄνθρωπον. 52 Thus according to Aeneas, the view which we 

4 As to the view that all souls are Aoyixal, cf. Aetius, Diels Doxogr. p. 432: 
Πυθαγόρας, ππλάτων, λογικὰς μὲν εἶναι καὶ τῶν ἀλόγων ζῴων καλουμένων τὰς ψυχάς, 
οὐ μὴν λογικῶς ἐνεργοῦσας, παρὰ τὴν δυσκρασίαν τῶν σωμάτων καὶ τὸ μὴ ἔχειν τὸ 
φραστικόν, ὥσπερ ἐπὶ τῶν πιθήκων καὶ τῶν κυνῶν" νοοῦσι μὲν γὰρ οὗτοι, οὐ φράζουσι 
δέ. Porphyry De αὐτί. 3. τ asserts the truth of the ‘Pythagorean’ doctrine that 
every Ψυχή (including the souls of beasts), 7 μέτεισιν αἰσθήσεως καὶ μνήμης, is λογική ; 
and he says it follows from this that we have duties towards the beasts. 


2 The sense required is pai engin ed τὰ ἄλογα τῶν ζῴων, μεταβάλ(λειν 
τὴν ψυχὴν λέγγοντες οὐκ εἰς ὄνου φύσιν, ἀλλ᾽ (cls) ὀνώδη ἄνθρωπον. 











LIBELLVS X: § 19b 273 


find expressed in Corg. X. 19b-22a was first put forward by 
Platonists not long before a.D. 300. It was adopted by many 
Platonists of later times, e.g. by Hierocles, Olympiodorus,? and 
Chalcidius.* Sallustius tried to find a via media; he says (De 
diis et mundo 20) αἱ δὲ μετεμψυχώσεις εἰ μὲν εἰς λογικὰ γίνοιντο, 
αὐτὸ τοῦτο ψυχαὶ γίνονται τῶν σωμάτων" εἰ δὲ εἰς ἄλογα, ἔξωθεν ἕπονται, 
ὥσπερ καὶ ἡμῖν οἱ εἰληχότες ἡμᾶς δαίμονες. οὐ γὰρ ἄν ποτε λογικὴ 
ἀλόγου ψυχὴ γένοιτο. Proclus agreed in part with the view of the 
earlier Platonists down to Plotinus, that human souls are sometimes 
reincarnated in beast-bodies, but stated that view in a modified 
form; Procl. iz Tim. 329D: 6 δὲ ἀληθὴς λόγος εἰσκρίνεσθαι μὲν 
εἰς θηρία φησὶ τὴν ἀνθρωπίνην ψυχήν, ἔχοντα δὲ τὴν οἰκείαν ζωήν," 
καὶ ἐπὶ ταύτῃ τὴν εἰσκριθεῖσαν (human) ψυχὴν οἷον ἐποχουμένην, καὶ 
τῇ πρὸς αὐτὴν (sc. τὴν τοῦ θηρίου ζωὴν) συμπαθείᾳ δεδεμένην. See 
also Procl. in Phaedrum, and in Remp. 11. 309, 28-312, 5; 315, 
18; 324, 11; 325, 11 Sgg.; 333, 2-341, 8. 

The opinion which Aeneas of Gaza thought to have originated 
with Porphyry and Iamblichus can hardly have been so complete 
a novelty in their time as he represents it. An obvious objection 
to the Pythagorean doctrine of transmigration had long before been 
pointed out by Aristotle; and a Platonist of any period might be 
driven to admit that the difficulty was insuperable. Lucretius (3. 
748 ff.), after speaking of metensomaiosis in the Pythagorean sense, 
proceeds to say ‘Sin animas hominum dicent in corpora semper | 
ire humana, tamen quaeram’ &c. He must therefore have known 
of some one who held that human souls are reincarnated, but only 


1 Hierocl. J auveum carmen 23, Mullach F, P. G. 1. 469 Ὁ: ὃ θηρίου μεταμφιά- 
σασθαι σῶμα ἐλπίζων καὶ (Gov ἄλογον γενέσθαι διὰ κακίαν, } καὶ φυτὸν δι᾽ ἀργίαν 
αἰσθήσεως, ... πρὸς τὰ κάτω (τὴν τοῦ ἀνθρώπου οὐσίαν) συνωθεῖ, πεπλανημένος καὶ μὴ 
νοῶν τὸ ἀμετάβλητον τοῦ κατ᾽ οὐσίαν ὑπάρχοντος εἴδους τῇ ἀνθρωπίνῃ ψυχῇ. ἀεὶ γὰρ 
μένουσα ἄνθρωπος, τῇ τῆς ἀρετῆς καὶ κακίας ἀνὰ μέρος κτήσει θηρίον λέγεται ἢ θεὸν 
γινέσθαι" φύσει δὲ οὐδέτερον, ἀλλὰ σχέσει τῆς πρὸς ἑκάτερον ὁμοιώσεως. 

2 Mullach II, Ὁ. xi. 

3 Chalcid. Jz Zim. 194 f., Mullach II, p, 223.4: * Porro (anima) si deterior facta 
sit deteriusque vivet, propter nimiam corporis amplexationem vitae destinabitur 
infeliciori, quoadusque ad ferae naturae perveniat immanitatem. Empedocles 
tamen, Pythagoram secutus, ait eas non naturam modo agrestem et feram sortiri, 
sed etiam formas varias (i.e. that human souls are actually reincarnated in bestial 
bodies)....Sed Plato non putat rationabilem animam vultum atque os ratione carentis 
animalis induere, sed ad vitiorum reliquias accedente corpore, incorporatione[m] 
auctis animae vitiis efferari ex instituto vitae prioris, et iracundum quidem hominem 
eundemque fortem provehi usque ad feritatem leonis, ferum vero et eundem rapacem 
ad proximam luporum similitudinem pervenire, ceterorum item, Sed... anima 
quondam hominis nequaquam transit ad bestias iuxta Platonem.’ 

41, e, the beasts into which human souls have entered retain the sort of life that 
is proper to them as beasts. 


2806-2 T 


274 CORPVS HERMETICVM 


in human bodies. But there is no reason to think that those who 
held this view in or before the time of Lucretius were Platonists, 
The Platonizing Stoic Posidonius certainly held that the human soul 
exists before its incarnation, and probably held also that the same 
soul is or may be repeatedly incarnated ; but as far as I know, there 
is no trace of evidence that he thought a human soul might be 
reincarnated in a body other than human. It is probable therefore 
that the teacher of whom Lucretius was thinking was Posidonius. 

The opinion that a human soul ‘is not permitted to sink into 
the body of a beast’ may have been held by a Platonist here and 
there ' before the time of Porphyry ; but it was not until about the 
end of the third century ἃ. Ὁ, that it was definitely adopted by the 
leaders of Platonic thought, and became, so to speak, the orthodox 
doctrine ‘of the Platonic school. It is therefore probable that the 
passage X. 19 b-22a, in which this doctrine is maintained, was 
written either after A.D. 300, or at any rate, not long before that 
date. 

ὃ 20. ποῖον wip τοσαύτην φλόγα ἔχει ὅσην ἡ ἀσέβεια ;. .. ‘ καίομαι, 
φλέγομαι ", Cf. Origen De princip. 2. 10. 4: ‘hoc videtur indicari, 
quod unusquisque peccatorum flammam sibi ipse proprii ignis 
accendat, et non in aliquem ignem qui antea iam fuerit accensus 
ab alio.. . demergatur. Cuius ignis materia atque esca nostra sunt 


1 Origen, De princip. lib. 1 fin. (Lommatzsch), discussed the question whether 
it is possible for a human soul to be reincarnated in the body of a beast, but 
apparently did not make it clear to which side his own opinion inclined. His 
words are quoted thus (Justinianus Imp. ad calcem epist. ad Mennam Patriarch. 
Constant.) : ἡ Ψυχὴ ἀπορρέουσα τοῦ καλοῦ, καὶ τῇ κακίᾳ προσκλιναμένη, καὶ ἐπὶ πλεῖον 
ἐν ταύτῃ γινομένη, εἰ μὴ ὑποστρέφοι, ὑπὸ τῆς ἀνοίας ἀποκτηνοῦται, καὶ ὑπὸ τῆς 
πονηρίας ἀποθηριοῦται. This is followed by three or four lines which are hopelessly 
corrupt, but contain the words αἱρεῖται... τὸν ἔνυδρον, iv’ οὕτως εἴπω, βίον (which 
seem to imply that, according to the view there stated,—thongh not necessarily 
according to the view of Origen himself,—a human soul may come to inhabit the 
body of a fish), and ἐνδύεται σῶμα[ τα] ... τοιοῦδε ζῴου ἀλύγου. Hieronymus Zf. 
ad Avitum Ὁ. 764: ‘Ad extremum (primi libri) sermone latissimo disputavit 
(Origenes) angelum, sive animam, aut certe daemonem, quos unius asserit esse 
naturae sed diversarum voluntatum, pro magnitudine negligentiae et stultitiae 
iumentum posse fieri; et pro dolore poenarum et ignis ardore magis eligere ut 
brutum animal sit, et in aquis habitet ct fluctibus; ac corpus assumere huius vel 
illius pecoris ; ut nobis non solum quadrupedum, sed et piscium corpora sint 
timenda, Et ad extremum, ne teneretur Pythagorici dogmatis reus, qui asserit 
μετεμψύχωσιν, post tam nefandam disputationem, qua lectoris animum vulneravit, 
‘thaec” inquit “ iuxta nostram sententiam non sint dogmata, sed quaesita tantum 
atque proiecta, ne penitus intractata yiderentur”.’ Rufinus, in his Latin version of 
Origen’s De principiis, has struck out this ‘ nefanda disputatio’, and substituted for 
it the following inoflensive statement: ‘Illa nos nequaquam recipienda censemus, 
quae et a quibusdam superfluo vel requiri vel adstrui solent, id est, quod anirnae in 
tantum sui decessum veniant, ut, naturae rationabilis ac dignitatis oblitae, etiam in 
ordinem irrationabilium animantium, vel bestiarum vel pecudum, devolvantur,’ 











LIBELLVS X: §§ 19 b-21 275 


peccata.... Anima cum multitudinem malorum operum et abun- 
dantiam in se congregaverit peccatorum, competenti tempore omnis 
illa malorum congregatio effervescit ad supplicium, atque inflammatur 
ad poenas ; cum mens ipsa... omnia in memoriam recipiens .. . 
historiam quandam scelerum suorum ante oculos suos videbit exposi- 
tam; tunc et ipsa conscientia propriis stimulis agitatur atque com- 
pungitur. . . . Ex quo intelligitur quod circa ipsam animae sub- 
stantiam tormenta quaedam ex ipsis peccatorum noxiis affectibus 
generantur.’ Origen is there speaking of penal suffering after death ; 
but he adds, with reference to the present life, ‘Et ne satis tibi 
huius rei intellectus difficilis appareat, considerari possibile est ex 
his passionum vitiis quae animabus accidere solent, id est, cum vel 
flammis amoris exuritur anima, vel zeli, vel livoris ignibus maceratur, 
aut cum ira agitatur, vel cum insaniae vel tristitiae immensitate 
consumitur, quomodo horum malorum nimietates aliquanti intolera- 
biliter ferentes, mortem subire quam huiusmodi cruciatus perpeti 
tolerabilius habuere.’ 

The early Buddhists also were accustomed to speak of the (tor- 
turing) ‘fire’ of passion. Mrs. Rhys Davids, Buddhism, Pp. 175-177, 
quotes from Buddhist documents ‘My sense with passion burns, my 
mind’s aflame’, and ‘There is no fire like unto passion’s greed’ ; 
and the word érvana is said to have primarily meant the ‘ quenching’ 
of this fire. 

ἢ οὐχ ὁρᾷς ὅσα κακὰ πάσχει κιτιλι; This is an appeal to observa- 
tion ; the punishment here spoken of must therefore be that which 
the wicked soul inflicts upon itself ‘x the present life. 

[οὔτε βλέπω οὔτε ἀκούω]. Cf. οὔτε βλέπει ἡ ψυχὴ οὔτε ἀκούει in § 24a, 
But the cry of the tortured soul cannot have been meant to end with 
these comparatively feeble words. They would perhaps be less 
objectionable if placed after οὐκ οἶδα ; but the passage would gain 
in force if the words τί εἴπω, τί ποιήσω οὐκ οἶδα (which correspond 
to οὔτε τι εἰπεῖν οὔτ᾽ ἔρξαι δύναται in ὃ 24) were also cut out. 

ὡς οἱ πολλοὶ δοκοῦσι, It appears from this that, in the society 
known to the writer, even ‘the many’ were Platonists, so far at 
least as to accept the doctrine of mefensomatosis. But it is possible 
that οἱ has been wrongly inserted. 

§ 21. ὁ γὰρ νοῦς, [ὅταν δαίμων γένηται, πυρίνου τυχεῖν σώματος 
τέτακται πρὸς τὰς τοῦ θεοῦ ὑπηρεσίας,}] [καὶ] εἰσδὺς. . . αἰκίζεται 
αὐτὴν κιτιλ, The words ὅταν... ὑπηρεσίας are manifestly out of 
place here. We were told in ὃ 18 that a νοῦς must put off its fiery 

T2 





276 CORPVS HERMETICVM 


integument in order to enter a human body. The contradiction 
of that statement in § 2t might be accounted for on the ground 
that the two passages were written by different persons; but there 
is another difficulty, which cannot be thus got over. The νοῦς 
spoken of in ὃ 21 is a bad νοῦς (cf. δεῖ εὔχεσθαι καλοῦ τοῦ νοῦ τυχεῖν 
in § 22a); it is one which drives a man to sin; therefore it could 
not be described as employed in ‘the service of God’ (τὰς τοῦ θεοῦ 
ὑπηρεσίας). There can be little doubt that the words which I have 
bracketed belong to the description of the disembodied εὐσεβὴς 
ψυχή in ὃ 19a. 

As to the bad νοῦς here spoken of, cf. Corp. IX. 3. In that 
passage, it is said that κακὰ νοήματα are begotten in the human 
νοῦς by maleficent daemons; in Corp. X. 21, the κακὰ νοήματα are 
attributed to a bad νοῦς which has entered into the soul from without, 
and is itself regarded as a maleficent daemon. 

αἰκίζεται αὐτὴν. . ." τρέπεται (yap) ἐπὶ κιτιλ. I am by no 
means confident that my restoration of this corrupt passage is right ; 
but the general meaning seems fairly clear. We must be guided 
by the analogy of the following sentence concerning the εὐσεβὴς 
ψυχή. We are told that a νοῦς of one kind enters the pious soul 
and guides it to all that is good; the writer must therefore have 
said that a νοῦς of another kind enters the impious soul and impels 
it to all that is evil, The μάστιγες τῶν ἁμαρτημάτων must be taken 
to mean the miseries which sin brings with it in the present life, 
and which have been described in ὃ 20 (ὅσα κακὰ πάσχει ψυχὴ ἡ ἀσεβής 
κιτιλ). In the view of this writer, sin is its own punishment, and 
there is no need for any doctrine of penal reincarnation. 

τρέπεται (γὰρ) ἐπὶ ((βλασφημίας, kat)) φόνους καὶ ὕβρεις καὶ [| ἢ 
βίας ποικίλας δι᾽ ὧν ἄνθρωποι ἀδικοῦνται. It is necessary to place 
βλασφημίας before φόνους κιτιλ. ; cf. (τὸν θεὸν) εὐφημοῦσα. .. (καὶ 
πάντας ἀνθρώπους. .. εὖ ποιοῦσα below. Perhaps some phrase 
corresponding to δ ὧν ἄνθρωποι ἀδικοῦνται has fallen out after 
βλασφημίας ; one might write, for instance, ἐπὶ βλασφημίας (80 ὧν 
6 θεὸς doeBeira), καὶ φόνους K.7.d. 

(τὸν θεὸν) ὑμνοῦσα εὐφημοῦσά τε, (kal) πάντας ἀνθρώπους. . . εὖ 
ποιοῦσα. Cf. Marc. Aurel. 5. 32: τί ἀρκεῖ; τί δ᾽ ἄλλο ἢ θεοὺς μὲν 
σεβεῖν καὶ εὐφημεῖν, ἀνθρώπους δὲ εὖ ποιεῖν κιτιλ. 

22a, Sei εὔχεσθαι καλοῦ τοῦ νοῦ τυχεῖν. The νοῦς dealt with in 
this passage is regarded as a personal being, distinguishable from the 
soul into which it enters; it is a δαίμων, as in § 23. But according 








LIBELLVS X: δῷ 21-22b 277 


to the writer of §§ 19 Ὁ--22 a, this guiding genius may be either good 
or bad. If it is good, it is a guardian angel by whom the man is 
led ; if it is bad, it is a devil by whom he is possessed. 

ὃ 22. κοινωνία δέ ἐστι ψυχῶν κιτιλ, From this point to the end 
of the document, the Hermetist speaks of man’s station in the 
universe, and his relations to beings of other grades; and the 
thoughts expressed have much in common with those of Asc/. Lat. I, 
De homine. On the κοινωνία between human souls and beings of 
other grades, cf. Asc?. Lat. 1. 5 f. 

ai τῶν θεῶν (ψυχαί). The word ψυχή is here used in its wider 
sense ; i. 6. it includes vows. If a pious human soul becomes unmixed 
νοῦς (§ 19a), it follows a fortiori that the soul of a god must be 
νοῦς and nothing else, 

ἄνθρωποι δὲ τῶν ἀλόγων (ἐπιμελοῦνται). Compare the doctrine of 
Ascl. Lat. 1, that one of man’s two functions is ἡ τῶν ἐπιγείων θεραπεία, 
and that in discharging this function he co-operates with the Creator 
in the administration of the universe. The words would apply 
in their most obvious sense to a man who is occupied in keeping 
cattle. The relation between gods and men is analogous to that 
between men and domestic animals; ‘we are the sheep of His 
pasture’ (Ps. 100. 3), 

τοῦ δὲ κόσμου (καθάπερ ἀκτῖνες) ai φύσεις, The influences ‘ radiated’ 
by the Kosmos (or more especially by the heavenly bodies) are 
ai φύσεις, that is to say, the forces by which individual organisms 
are brought into being and maintained in being. These forces 
operate διὰ τῶν στοιχείων ; i.e. it is through the action of the 
heavenly bodies on the elements contained in the sublunar region 
that the organisms are built up. In this process, the demiurgic 
activity of God (ai ἐνέργειαι) is the first cause ; but God acts upon 
man (who is here regarded as an earthly organism) not directly, 
but through the medium of the Kosmos, and by means of its 
φυσικαὶ ἀκτῖνες. The same view might be expressed in more personal 
terms by saying that the astral gods (who are ‘members’ of that 
‘second God’, the Kosmos,) are the intermediaries through whom 
the action of God's will is brought to bear on men. As we were told 
above, the Kosmos is the ‘son’ of God, and man is his ‘grandson’, 

2 Cf. J. Abelson, Zhe tmmanence of God in Rabbinical literature, p- 114: ‘A 
favourite Rabbinic expression is that of man, under certain circumstances, being ‘a 
co-worker with God in the work of creation”... . When man adds his quota of 


usefulness, he zfso facto becomes a co-worker with God. The sum of Divine 
blessedness is (thereby) increased.’ 


478 CORPVS HERMETICVM 


τοῦ δὲ ἀνθρώπου, αἱ τέχναι καὶ ἐπιστῆμαι. Here we have the 
familiar antithesis between φύσις and τεχνή, between ‘works of 
nature’ and ‘works of art’. It is by means of the arts and crafts 
that man fulfils his function of ‘tending earthly things’, and thereby 
supplements thé operation of the cosmic forces. Cf. Ascl. Lat. 1. 8: 
‘quae pars terrena mundi artium (τεχνῶν) disciplinarumque (ἐπι- 
ornpov) cognitione atque usu servatur, sine quibus mundum deus 
noluit esse perfectum.’ In the interpolated passage Asc/. Lat. I. 5, 
the works of nature are described as ‘things made by gods and 
daemons’, in contrast to ‘things made by men’; that is, the φύσεις 
or φυσικαὶ ἀκτῖνες spoken of in Corp, X. 22 Ὁ are there personified 
as gods and daemons. 

[ot δὲ ἄνθρωποι διὰ τῶν τεχνῶν Kal ἐπιστημῶν.] If we retain these 
words, we get the statement that οἱ ἄνθρωποι do something ἐπὶ τὸν 
ἄνθρωπον by means of the arts and crafts. But there is no sense 
in that ; and it seems clear that the clause must have been inserted 
by some one who failed to understand the passage. 

§ 23. ἐκ τῆς ἑνὸς (τοῦ θεοῦ) φύσεως. Here the writer inadvertently 
uses the word φύσις with reference to God, though in ὃ τ Ὁ he 
objected to such use of it. 

καὶ διοικουμένων (διήκουσα or διοίκουσα MSS.) δι᾿ ἑνὸς τοῦ νοῦ, 
The several ἀκτῖνες spoken of above are all of them operations or 
manifestations of νοῦς. In the ἐνέργειαι of God, the divine νοῦς 
is at work; in the cosmic φύσεις, the νοῦς of the Kosmos; in the 
arts and crafts, the human νοῦς. And in all its different manifesta- 
tions, νοῦς is one. This implies that the νοῦς of the Kosmos 
and the νόες of individual men are ἀπόρροιαι of the divine νοῦς, and 
are consubstantial with it. Cf. Corp, XII. i tnit. 

οὗτός ἐστιν ὁ ἀγαθὸς δαίμων. The word δαίμων here means 6 
ἴδιος ἑκάστου δαίμων. A man’s δαίμων is the power by which happi- 
ness or unhappiness is assigned to him,—that power being conceived 
as a person who attends on the man and watches over him. 

This use of the word δαίμων must be distinguished from that 
in which it means one of a class of beings intermediate between 
gods and men (as in Pl. Sympos. 202 ©), and located in the 
atmosphere. What is the relation between the two uses? It is 
difficult to understand how a word meaning ‘a man’s good or ill 
fortune’ could have come to mean ‘one of a class of superhuman 
beings who hover in the air’,! or vice versa ; and it may be suspected 


1 We are told, however, that the French word γέ, ‘ ἃ fairy’, is derived from the 





LIBELLVS X: §§ 22b-23 279 


that the two main senses of the word are of different and independent 
origin.' But the meaning of ὁ ἴδιος ἑκάστου δαίμων was doubtless * 
modified by the influence of the other use of the word. The 
δαίμων in the one sense was assumed to be a δαίμων in the other 
sense also; that is, the power by which a man’s fortune is determined 
was regarded as a personal being who belongs to the class of ἀέρια 
ζῷα, and has been told off to watch over that particular man; and 
so the ἴδιός τινος δαίμων came to be pictured in imagination as a 
sort of ‘familiar spirit’ or ‘ guardian angel’.* 

The ἴδιος ἑκάστου δαίμων is spoken of by Plato in Rep. το. 620D: 
(τὴν Λάχεσιν) ἑκάστῳ, ὃν εἵλετο δαίμονα, τοῦτον φύλακα ξυμπέμπειν 
τοῦ βίου καὶ ἀποπληρωτὴν τῶν αἱρεθέντων. (In that passage, ‘to 
choose one’s δαίμων means to choose the life which one is to live 
in one’s next embodiment.)* Cf. Pseudo-Pl. Axiochus 371 C: ὅσοις 
μὲν οὖν ἐν τῷ ζῆν δαίμων ἀγαθὸς ἐπέπνευσεν, εἰς τὸν τῶν εὐσεβῶν χῶρον 
οἰκίζονται. Hor. Zp. 2. 2. 183 ff.: why two brothers differ in disposi- 
tion, ‘ scit genius, natale comes qui temperat astrum, | naturae deus 


Latin fata (= Parca), which meant ‘the being who presides over our fatune’ 
(Brachet) ; and it is possible that a corresponding change of meaning may have 
taken place in the case of the word δαίμων. 

1 δαίμων in the sense of a man’s fortune’ (6 ἴδιος ἑκάστου δαίμων.) may perhaps 
be connected with δαίειν, δαΐζειν, ‘to divide’ or ‘distribute’; cf. μοῦνα. ‘The word 
may have originally meant ‘a distributor’; and a man’s δαίμων may thence have 
come to mean the power which assigns to him his share of good things or of bad 
things. On the other hand, it might be conjectured that δαίμων in the sense of a 
ζῷον ἀέριον is possibly connected with Sais, δαίνυσθαι, δαιτυμών (cf. θεοδαίσιαγ ; i. ε. 
that it may have originally meant ‘a feaster’, and may thence have come to be 
applied to the invisible guest (or host) at the sacrificial meal or funeral banquet,— 
the superhuman being with whom the worshippers enter into communion by 
partaking of the holy food. On this hypothesis, we may see a trace of the primary 
meaning of the word in the belief, still prevalent in Christian times, that the 
* daemons’ feed on the blood or reek of sacrifices. 

In the Homeric poems, as well as in later literature, two uses of the word can be 
distinguished, δαίμων in Homer sometimes means a man’s fate or fortune, as in 
the compound ὀλβιοδαίμων, I’. 182, In other Homeric passages it means a super- 
human being; but when thus used, it is a mere synonym of θεός, and does not, as 
in later times, signify a being of lower orderthan ‘the gods’. Tt does not, however, 
necessarily follow from this thatthe distinction between δαίμων (in the sense of 
ἀέριον (Gov) and θεός first originated in post-Homeric times. The Homeric poems 
are separated from the popular religion of the Greeks by a wider gulf than much 
of the later literature; and the distinction between θεός and δαίμων, though the 
Homeric poets ignored it, may have existed before their time, and may have been 
maintained throughout in other regions or in other social strata. A trace of a more 
primitive conception survives in the Homeric word δαιμόνιε, which may be rendered 
* What (spirit) has possessed you?’ There is no analogous use of the word θεῖος. 

2 See Ammian. Marcell. 21. 14 ( Zéstim.) ; Apuleius De deo Socr. 16. 155 f. 

3 In the myth of the Phaedo, 107 Ὁ, we are told that the δαίμων who has presided 
over a man’s life continues to discharge his function alter the man’s death: 
τελευτήσαντα ἕκαστον 6 ἑκάστου δαίμων, ὅσπερ ζῶντα εἰλήχει, οὗτος ἄγειν ἐπιχειρεῖ 
εἰς δή τινα τύπον κιτιλ, But this is merely an invention of the myth-maker, and not 
an ancient and traditional belief. 





280 CORPVS HERMETICVM 


humanae, mortalis in unum | quodque caput, vultu mutabilis, albus 
an ater’. (Horace’s description of the genius is based, in part at 
least, on the Greek conception of the ἴδιος ἑκάστου δαίμων.) Ifa 
man lives a happy life, his δαίμων is ἀγαθός ; if he lives an unhappy 
life, his δαίμων is κακός. Hence the adjectives εὐδαίμων and 
κακοδαίμων. Sometimes a man’s ἀγαθὸς δαίμων (the author of his 
happiness) and his κακὸς δαίμων (the author of his unhappiness) 
were spoken of as two distinct persons. Plut. De ¢vang. an. 15, 
4148: ov γάρ, ds Μένανδρός φησιν, “ ἅπαντι δαίμων ἀνδρὶ συμπαρα- 
στατεῖ | εὐθὺς γενομένῳ μυσταγωγὸς τοῦ βίου | ἀγαθός." ἀλλὰ μᾶλλον, 
ὡς ᾿μπεδοκλῆς,; διτταί τινες ἕκαστον ἡμῶν παραλαμβάνουσι καὶ κατάρ- 
χονται μοῖραι καὶ δαίμονες." 

The δαίμων of an individual man might be thought of either 
as determining his external circumstances, or as influencing his 
character and directing his actions. Where the former notion 
prevails, the word means a man’s ‘fortune’ or ‘luck’. Thus the 
σπονδὴ τοῦ ἀγαθοῦ δαίμονος at a meal (Ar, Zz. 106) perhaps meant 
little more than ‘here’s luck’, And in a similar sense people 
sometimes spoke of 6 ἀγαθὸς δαίμων τῆς οἰκίας, i.e. ‘the luck of the 
house’ personified. On the other hand, moralists expressed their 
conviction that the sources of happiness and unhappiness are within 
us by saying that a man’s character is his δαίμων. Heraclitus, fr. 119 
Diels: ἦθος ἀνθρώπῳ δαίμων. Cf. the verse attributed to Epicharmus, 


1 It does not appear that the word δαίμων was thus used by Empedocles ; in the 
verses which Plutarch here quotes from him, that word does not occur, and there 
is only a list of good and evil influences personified under various other names, 
eg. Ajjpts and ‘Apyovin, Καλλιστώ and Αἴσχρη. 

Compare the Jewish and Christian conception of a man's ‘ good angel’ and 
‘bad angel’. Hermas, Mand. 6. 2: δύο εἰσὶν ἄγγελοι μετὰ τοῦ ἀνθρώπου, εἷς τῆς 
δικαιοσύνης καὶ εἷς τῆς πονηρίας K.7.A, 

8 The building in which men who intended to descend into the cave of Trophonius 
were housed during the preparatory rites was called δαίμονος ἀγαθοῦ καὶ τύχης 
ἀγαθῆς ἱερόν (Paus. 9. 39. 4), probably with reference to the good fortune which it 
was hoped that the oracle would announce to them. In a system of astrology 
described by Bouché-Leclercq L’astrol. grecque p. 280, the phrase ἀγαθὸς δαίμων 
was employed as a technical term. In the diagram which B.-L. gives to illustrate 
that system, one of the twelve divisions of the zodiacal circle is inscribed ‘ ἀγαθὸς 
δαίμων, ὄρνις genius’; while another, diametrically opposite to it, is inscribed 
“ἀγαθὴ τύχη, bona fortuna’. Here ἀγαθὸς δαίμων differs little in meaning from ‘ good. 
fortune’. A planet situated in the division marked ἀγαθὸς δαίμων was described as 
ἀγαθοδαιμονῶν (1. p. 513). 

* Diog. Laert. 6. 74: Xeniades, having bought Diogenes the Cynic as a slave, 
said ἀγαθὸς δαίμων εἰς τὴν οἰκίαν μου εἰσελήλυθε, meaning that all went well with 
his household when Diogenes had the management of it. Timoleon dedicated his 
house in Syracuse ἀγαθῷ δαίμονι (Plut. De se ipso laud. 11. 542 E); this is under- 
stood by Plutarch as meaning that Timoleon did not take credit to himself for his 
achievements, but attributed his success τὸ μὲν els τὴν τύχην, TO δ᾽ εἰς τὸν θεόν, 








LIBELLVS X: § 23 981 


fr. 17 Diels: ὁ τρόπος ἀνθρώποισι δαίμων ἀγαθός, οἷς δὲ καὶ κακός. And 
Platonists, holding that man’s welfare consists in the supremacy 
of νοῦς over the irrational impulses, expressed this by saying that 
a man’s νοῦς is his δαίμων, or his ἀγαθὸς δαίμων. But at the same 
time, this form of expression may also have been suggested in part 
by the Orphic and Pythagorean belief that the human soul (or τὸ 
ἐν ἡμῖν θεῖον, the higher of the two parts of the soul,) is a δαίμων 
in the other sense, i.e. an immortal being, temporarily incarnated 
in a human body. The identification of 6 ἑκάστου νοῦς with 6 ἑκάστου 
δαίμων occurs in Pl. Zim. go A: τὸ δὲ περὶ τοῦ κυριωτάτου παρ᾽ ἡμῖν 
ψυχῆς εἴδους (i.e. τοῦ νοῦ) διανοεῖσθαι δεῖ τῇδε, ὡς ἄρα αὐτὸ δαίμονα 
θεὸς ἑκάστῳ δέδωκε, τοῦτο ὃ δή φαμεν οἰκεῖν μὲν ἡμῶν ἐπ’ ἄκρῳ 
τῷ σώματι κιτιλ, Jb. 90 α: ἅτε δὲ ἀεὶ θεραπεύοντα τὸ θεῖον, ἔχοντά 
τε αὐτὸν εὖ κεκοσμημένον τὸν δαίμονα ξύνοικον ἐν αὑτῷ, διαφερόντως 
εὐδαίμονα εἶναι. Cf, Plutarch’s ‘ Vision of Timarchus’, De gen. Socr. 
501 Di.: ψυχὴ πᾶσα vod μέτεσχεν .. ." ἀλλ᾽ αἱ μὲν ὅλαι κατέδυσαν 
εἰς σῶμα, . .. αἱ δὲ πῇ μὲν ἀνεκράθησαν, πῆ δ᾽ ἔλιπον ἔξω τὸ καθαρώτατον. 
εν. τὸ μὲν οὖν ὑποβρύχιον ἐν τῷ σώματι φερόμενον ψυχὴ λέγεται 
τὸ δὲ φθορᾶς λειφθὲν οἱ πολλοὶ νοῦν καλοῦντες ἐντὸς εἶναι νομίζουσιν 
αὐτῶν... ." οἱ δ᾽ ὄρθως ὑπονοοῦντες, ὡς ἐκτὸς ὄντα, δαίμονα προσαγορεύου- 
ow. In the symbolism of the Vision of Timarchus, the νοῦς or 
δαίμων is described as floating in a higher world, but connected by 
a cord with the ψυχή embodied on earth below. Dio Chrysost. 4, 
vol. i, p. 77 Dindorf; Diogenes says to Alexander, οὐ πρότερον ἔσει 
βασιλεύς, πρὶν ἂν ἱλάσῃ τὸν σαυτοῦ δαίμονα, καὶ θεραπεύσας ὡς δεῖ 
ἀποδείξῃς . .. βασιλικόν. ... οὐκ εἰσὶν ἔξωθεν τῶν ἀνθρώπων οἱ κακοὶ 
καὶ ἀγαθοὶ δαίμονες, οἱ τὰς συμφορὰς καὶ τὰς εὐτυχίας φέροντες αὐτοῖς, 
ὃ δὲ ἴδιος ἑκάστου νοῦς, οὗτός ἐστι δαίμων τοῦ ἔχοντος ἀνδρός, ἀγαθὸς 
μὲν ὃ τοῦ φρονίμου καὶ ἀγαθοῦ δαίμων, πονηρὸς δὲ ὃ τοῦ πονηροῦ. 
Marc. Aurel. 5. 27: συζῇ δὲ θεοῖς ὁ συνεχῶς δεικνὺς αὐτοῖς τὴν ἑαυτοῦ 
ψυχὴν... - ποιοῦσαν... ὅσα βούλεται ὃ δαίμων ὃν ἑκάστῳ προστάτην 
καὶ ἡγεμόνα 6 Ζεὺς ἔδωκεν, ἀπόσπασμα ἑαυτοῦ: οὗτος δέ ἐστιν 6 ἑκάστου 
νοῦς καὶ λόγος. 

The statement that ὁ (ἑκάστου) νοῦς is in this sense 6 (ἑκάστου 
ἀγαθὸς δαίμων must have been familiar to all Platonists. But among 
the Hermetists, the term 6 ἀγαθὸς δαίμων carried with it also a second 
and quite different set of associations. It was employed by the 
Greeks of Egypt in Ptolemaic and Roman times as a name of an 
Egyptian god, probably the god Khnum or Kmeph. The Egyptian 
god called ᾿Αγαθὸς Δαίμων is spoken of in Cor. XII. i and elsewhere 


SS 


τς πταε τες: 


SSS 


a 


SS ee 


282 CORPVS HERMETICVM 


as the teacher from whom Hermes learnt his wisdom. But in 
other Hermetica the teacher of Hermes is called Νοῦς. (See Corp. XI; 
and compare Corp. I. 2, ἐγώ εἶμι ὃ Ποιμάνδρης, 6 τῆς αὐθεντίας 
νοῦς.) The words ὁ νοῦς ἐστιν ὁ ἀγαθὸς δαίμων might therefore be 
taken as conveying, in addition to their more obvious meaning, a 
suggestion that the Egyptian god called Agathos Daimon is a 
personification of the divine νοῦς. 

Πῶς τοῦτο πάλιν λέγεις ; ‘This’ (τοῦτο) is the statement that some 
souls are devoid of νοῦς, which is implied in the preceding words 
of Hermes, ἡ τούτου κενή. As to the view that some men have νοῦς and 
others not, see Corp. I. 21 fin., Corp. IX. 5 init., and Ascl. Lat. 1. 7 a. 

[τὸν ἀγαθόν . . τῆς δίκης. I take these words to have been 
added to the text after §§ το b-22a had been inserted. The writer 
of the original document spoke of νοῦς as a thing bestowed on the 
elect alone. According to his view, there is no other kind of νοῦς 
to be contrasted with the ἀγαθὸς νοῦς ; the wicked are not men 
who have a κακὸς νοῦς, but men who have no νοῦς at all. But the 
writer of 19 b-22a (see especially ὃ 21) spoke of νοῦς as a thing 
which enters into all men, and which may be either good or bad. 
Hence, when 19 b-22 a had been inserted, it appeared desirable to 
point out that, in what follows, the ἀγαθὸς νοῦς alone is in question. 
The words τοῦ ὑπηρετικοῦ περὶ οὗ ἔμπροσθεν εἰρήκαμεν κ-ιτιλ. refer 
to § 21 in the corrupted form in which it appears in our Μ59., viz. 
ὁ yap νοῦς, ὅταν δαίμων γένηται, πυρίνου τυχεῖν σώματος τέτακται πρὸς 
τὰς τοῦ θεοῦ ὑπηρεσίας, καὶ εἰσδὺς εἰς τὴν ἀσεβῆ ψυχὴν αἰκίζεται αὐτὴν 
«7A. That passage then must have been already corrupted when 
the words τὸν ἀγαθόν. . . ὑπὸ τῆς δίκης were inserted in ὃ 23 by a 
still later hand. 

8 248. πολλάκις γὰρ ἐξίσταται 6 νοῦς. . .. GAN οὐδὲ νωθρᾶς 
ψυχῆς ἀνέχεται κιτιλ. In the first of these two sentences, the writer 
speaks of temporary withdrawals of νοῦς ; in the second, he speaks 
of its permanent abandonment of the ‘ torpid soul’. 

οὔτε τι εἰπεῖν οὔτ᾽ ἔρξαι δύναται. This phrase is quoted from 
Theognis 177, but is used with an altered application. In Theognis, 
the subject is ἀνὴρ πεν δεδμημένος. The Hermetist, if he remem- 
bered the context of his quotation, may have intended to imply 
that it is the man who is in want of νοῦς that is truly πένης. 

The clause ψυχὴ yap. . . ἔρξαι δύναται is out of place in the 
MSS. It most likely followed ἀλόγῳ ζῴῳ ἔοικε, and was meant to 
confirm that statement, (An ἄλογον ζῷον is a creature which ‘ cannot 








LIBELLVS X: δὲ 23-25 283 


speak’.) But it is not indispensable there; and it may perhaps 
have been added later. 

ὑπ᾽ αὐτοῦ ἀγχομένην κάτω. Cf. Corp. VIL. 3: ἄγχων σε κάτω 
πρὸς αὑτόν. Ascl. Lat. 1. 12a: ‘animam obtorto, ut aiunt, detinet 
collo.’ 

§ 24. Ὁ. ὁ γὰρ ἄνθρωπος Lady ἐστι θεῖον κιτιλ, Cf. Asc. Lat. 1. 6a: 
‘magnum miraculum est homo’ ὅζο, Cic. De degg. τ. 22 (from 
Panaetius?): ‘animal hoc providum, sagax, multiplex, acutum, 
memor, plenum rationis et consilii, quem vocamus hominem, prae- 
clara quadam condicione generatum esse a supremo deo, Solum 
est enim ex tot animantium generibus atque naturis particeps 
rationis et cogitationis, cum cetera sint omnia expertia. Quid est 
autem, non dicam in homine, sed in omni caelo atque terra, ratione 
divinius?’ Macarius Aegyptius (an Egyptian monk of the fourth 
century), Hom, 15. 22, Migne 34. 589 Ὁ: ᾿ μεγάλου γὰρ ἀξιώματός 
ἐστιν ὁ ἄνθρωπος. ἴδε πόσος ἐστὶν ὁ οὐρανὸς καὶ ἡ γῆ, ὁ ἥλιος καὶ 
ἡ σελήνη, καὶ οὐκ εὐδόκησεν ἐν αὐτοῖς ὁ Κύριος, εἰ μὴ ἐν τῷ ἀνθρώπῳ 
μόνῳ, ἐπαναπαύεσθαι. τιμιώτερος οὖν ἐστιν ὁ ἄνθρωπος ὑπὲρ πάντα τὰ 
δημιουργήματα, τάχα δὲ τολμήσω λέγειν ὅτι μηὴ μόνον τῶν ὁρατῶν δημι- 
ουργημάτων, ἀλλὰ καὶ τῶν ἀοράτων, ἤγουν τῶν λειτουργικῶν πνευμάτων. 
οὐ γὰρ περὶ Μιχαὴλ καὶ Ταβριὴλ τῶν ἀρχαγγέλων εἶπεν ὅτι “ ποιήσωμεν 
κατ᾽ εἰκόνα καὶ ὁμοίωσιν ἡμετέραν", ἀλλὰ περὶ τῆς νοερᾶς οὐσίας τοῦ 
ἀνθρώπου, τῆς ἀθανάτου λέγω ψυχῆς. 

Compare the Hermippus, 1. 6. 40: τούτων δ᾽ (sc. of beasts and 
plants) ἡγεμὼν ὃ ἄνθρωπος πέπλασται, ὕλην μὲν τῆς συστάσεως τὴν 
αὐτὴν αὐτοῖς ἐσχηκώς, ἔχων δέ τι νοερᾶς οὐσίας ἐν αὑτῷ πλέον, καθ᾽ 
ἣν γῆν τε περιπολεῖ καὶ οὐρανοῦ ἐμβατεύει καὶ θαλάττης ὑγρὰ τέμνει 
κέλευθα, καὶ τούτων τὰ μεγέθη μετρεῖ, ἔτι τε (τὰς) τῶν ἀστέρων κατὰ 
μῆκος καὶ πλάτος πορείας ἐπίσταται. 

καὶ ὑπὲρ ἐκείνους ἐστὶν ὁ ὄντως ἄνθρωπος. Cf. Asc/. Lat. III, 22 Ὁ 
jin.: ‘hominem . .. esse meliorem et diis’ &c- 

§ 25. οὐδεὶς μὲν γὰρ τῶν οὐρανίων θεῶν ἐπὶ γῆν (γῆς MSS.) κατε- 
λεύσεται. Is this directed against the Christian belief that God 
the Son ‘came down to earth’? I think not. The ‘heavenly gods’ 
of whom the writer speaks are the sun, moon, and stars; and he 
takes it to be an undisputed truth that they will never quit the 
stations which God has assigned to them, Yet there were Pagans 
who said that gods had come down from heaven to earth ; Horace, 
for instance, spoke thus of Augustus (‘serus in caelum redeas’, 
Od. τ. ἃ. 4.5). ) 


284 CORPVS HERMETICVM 


τὸν μὲν ((ἐπίγειονν) ἄνθρωπον [[ 1] εἶναι θνητὸν θεόν, τὸν δὲ οὐράνιον — 
θεὸν ἀθάνατον ἄνθρωπον. Cf. Corp. XII. i. 1: ὁ ᾿Αγαθὸς Δαίμων 
τοὺς μὲν θεοὺς εἶπεν (ἀνθρώπους) ἀθανάτους, τοὺς δὲ ἀνθρώπους θεοὺς 
θνητούς. The ultimate source of this is Heraclitus, fr. 62 Diels: 
ἀθάνατοι θνητοί, θνητοὶ ἀθάνατοι, ζῶντες τὸν ἐκείνων θάνατον, τὸν δὲ 
ἐκείνων βίον τεθνεῶτες. Whatever Heraclitus may have meant by 
these obscure words,' he certainly did not mean what the Hermetist 
takes them to mean, viz. that a man stands as high as a star-god 
in the scale of being. But the Stoics, who adopted and popularized 
the sayings of Heraclitus, often put into them meanings of which 
their author had never thought. Thus the words ἀθάνατοι θνητοί, 


κὦ 
θνητοὶ ἀθάνατοι, detached from their context, were taken to mean 


that gods are men and men are gods, or that mortal men are on 
a level with the immortal gods; and the saying was paraphrased 
and expanded in this sense.’ 

The interest of the earlier Stoics was almost entirely limited to 
man’s present life; and to them, the saying would mean that man 
(or at least the ideally wise and good man) is the equal of the gods, 
save that his life is shorter, Cic. Wat deor, 2. 61. 153 (Stoic): 
‘virtutes, e quibus vita beata exsistit* par et similis deorum, nulla 
alia re nisi immortalitate, quae nihil ad bene vivendum pertinet, 
cedens caelestibus.’ Chrysippus, in Plut. Comm. not. 33. 1076: 
ἀρετῇ οὐχ ὑπερέχειν τὸν Δία τοῦ Δίωνος"... ἀρετῇ δὲ μὴ ὑπολειπόμενον 


ἄνθρωπον οὐδὲν ἀποδεῖν εὐδαιμονίας, ἀλλ᾽ ἐπίσης εἶναι μακάριον τῷ Διὶ 
τῷ σωτῆρι τὸν ἀτυχῆ. Plut. (ϑέο. rep, 13. 1038: τοῖς ἀγαθοῖς πᾶσι 


1 Perhaps he was speaking of the living elements (fire, water, earth), regarded as 
θεοί, and therefore masculine. If so, he may have meant that each of these elements 
is ‘ mortal’, in the sense that portions of it are ceaselessly changing into another 
element; but that at the same time each of them is ‘immortal’, either in the sense 
that the thing into which it changes is still a living thing, or else, in the sense that — 
the whole mass of water, for instance, is maintained in perpetual existence by the 
ceaseless change of other elements into water, which goes on simultaneously with 
the change of water into other elements. Cf. Heraclitus fr. f° Diels: (ἕν) φησιν. 
εἶναι τὸ πᾶν, διαιρετὸν ἀδιαίρετον, γενητὸν ἀγένητον, θνητὸν ἀθάνατον, The universe 
is mortal in each several part, but immortal as a whole. 

2 Maximus Tyrius, 4. 4h, p- 45 Hobein: Heraclitus said θεοὶ θνητοί, Γθεοὶ" (al. 
ἄνθρωποι) dbdvaror.—Clem, Alex. Paed. 3. 1. 2: Heraclitus said ἄνθρωποι Geol, θεοὶ 
dvOpmmo.—Heraclitus Alleg. Hom. 24 Ὁ. 51 Mehler: Heraclitus said θεοὶ θνητοῖ 
7" ἄνθρωποι ἀθάνατοι, #.7.A.—Lucian, Βίων πρᾶσις 14: (Buyer) Τί δαὶ of ἄνθρωποι 5 
(Heraclitus) Θεοὶ θνητοί. (Buyer) Ti δαὶ οἱ θεοί ; (Heracl.) "Ανθρωποι ἀθάνατοι. --- 
Hippol, Ref. kaer. 9. 10: Heraclitus said ἀθάνατοι θνητοί, θνητοὶ ἀθάνατοι, .7.A.— 
Dio Cass. /*. 30. 3, Ρ. 40 Dind.: εἰ γὰρ δεῖ δή τι καὶ θρασυνόμενον εἰπεῖν, οὔτ᾽ 
ἄνθρωπος οὐδὲν ἄλλο ἐστὶν ἣ θεὸς σῶμα θνητὸν ἔχων, οὔτε θεὸς ἄλλο τι ἢ ἄνθρωπος 
ἀσώματος καὶ διὰ τοῦτο καὶ ἀθάνατος. 

5 Is there not a lacuna after exsistit? The subject to which par δέ similis” 
deorum is predicate ought to be homo, 








LIBELLVS X: § 25 285 


.. « κατ᾽ οὐδὲν προεχομένοις ὑπὸ τοῦ Διός, Stob, 2. 7. 11 g, vol. ii, 
p. 98 W.: τὴν (τῶν ἀγαθῶν ἀνθρώπων) εὐδαιμονίαν μη διαφέρειν τῆς 
θείας εὐδαιμονίας, μηδὲ τὴν ἀμεριαίαν ὁ Χρύσιππός φησι διαφέρειν τῆς 
τοῦ Διὸς εὐδαιμονίας, (Kal) κατὰ μηδὲν αἱρετωτέραν εἶναι μήτε καλλίω 
μήτε σεμνοτέραν τὴν τοῦ Διὸς εὐδαιμονίαν τῆς τῶν σοφῶν ἀνδρῶν. Seneca 
De prov. τ. 5: ‘bonus ipse tempore tantum a deo differt.’ Sen. Zp. 
73. 13: ‘ Iuppiter quo antecedit virum bonum? Diutius bonus est.’ 
Sen. Zp. 53. 11: ‘est aliquid quo sapiens antecedat deum: ille 
naturae beneficio, non suo sapiens est.’ Sen. De prov. 6.6: ‘hoc 
est quo deum antecedatis; ille extra patientiam malorum est, vos 
supra patientiam.’ 

The Platonists, unlike the Stoics, regarded man’s life on earth 
as a mere episode in the everlasting existence of the soul; and 
consequently, when a Platonist adopted the saying of Heraclitus, 
he would have reason to indicate that he was speaking of man upon 
earth, and not merely expressing the thought, familiar to his school, 
that a disembodied soul may become a god. Hence the insertion of 
the word ἐπίγειος in Corp. X. 25. 

Plato called the philosopher ‘divine’, but did not go so far as 
to say that a man upon earth can be a god, or the equal of a god. 
Pl. Rep. 6. 500: the philosopher θεῖος εἰς τὸ δυνατὸν ἀνθρώπῳ 
γίγνεται. Pl. Soph. 2168 (Theodorus /og.): καί μοι δοκεῖ θεὸς μὲν 
ἁνὴρ (sc. the Eleatic stranger) οὐδαμῶς elvat,' θεῖος μήν" πάντας γὰρ 
ἐγὼ τοὺς φιλοσόφους τοιούτους προσαγορεύω. (Socr.) Καὶ καλῶς ye.’ 
The instances of a glorification of man such as we find in Corp. Χ. 
24b, 25 are mostly Stoic; and there can be little doubt that the 
contents of this paragraph, including the saying of Heraclitus, were 
transmitted to the Hermetist from some Stoic source. 

ὑπὸ δὲ τοῦ ἑνὸς (θεοῦ) τὰ πάντα, In the tect of the MSS., God 
is here called either 6 εἷς or τὸ ἕν (‘the One’) instead of ὁ θεός. 
But the writer is not likely to have introduced without explanation, 


1 Perhaps Plato was here thinking of Empedocles, who spoke of himself as θεὸς 
ἄμβροτος, οὐκέτι θνητός, fr. 112 Diels. 

2 Cf. Plotinus 4. 7. 10: ὅτι δὲ τῇ θειοτέρᾳ φύσει συγγενὴς ἡ ψυχὴ καὶ τῇ didi, . . . 
ἐκ τῶνδε ἔστι δεικνύναι... λάβωμεν δὲ ψυχὴν μὴ τὴν ἐν σώματι ἐπιθυμίας ἀλόγους 
καὶ θυμοὺς προσλαβοῦσαν, .. . ἀλλὰ τὴν ταῦτα ἀποτριψαμένην. ... καθηραμένῃ δὲ 
αὐτῇ ἐνυπάρχει τὰ ἄριστα, φρόνησις καὶ ἡ ἄλλη ἀρετή, οἰκεῖα ὄντα, εἰ οὖν τοιοῦτον ἡ 
ψυχὴ ὅταν ἐφ᾽ ἑαυτὴν ἀνέλθῃ, πῶς οὐ τῆς φύσεως (ἐστὶν) ἐκείνης, οἷον φαμὲν τὴν τοῦ 

εἴον καὶ ἀιδίου παντὸς εἶναι; φρόνησις γὰρ καὶ ἀρετὴ ἀληθής, θεῖα ὄντα, οὐκ ἂν 
ἐγγένοιντο φαύλῳ τινὶ καὶ θνητῷ πράγματι, ἀλλ᾽ ἀνάγκη θεῖον τὸ τοιοῦτον εἶναι, ἅτε 
θείων μετὸν αὐτῷ διὰ συγγένειαν καὶ τὸ ὁμοούσιον. διὸ καὶ ὅστις τοιοῦτος ἡμῶν, 
ὀλίγον ἂν παραλλάττοι τῶν ἄνω τῇ ψυχῇ αὐτῇ, μόνον τοῦτο, ὅσον ἐστὶν ἐν σώματι, 
ἐλαττούμενος, This amounts to saying that a good man on earth is almost, but not 
quite, a god. 


286 CORPVS HERMETICVM 


in the last line of his treatise, a name of God which he has not 
hitherto employed. He has been speaking of the triad ὁ θεός, 6 
κόσμος, ὁ ἄνθρωπος (see ὃ 14b) ; and he doubtless here wrote either 
τοῦ ἑνὸς θεοῦ, or ἑνὸς τοῦ θεοῦ, in contrast to τῶν δύο, κόσμου καὶ 
ἀνθρώπου. ΑἹ] things are governed dy God ; but God governs them 
through his two subordinate agents, viz. the Kosmos (which works 
by means of its φυσικαὶ ἀκτῖνες), and man (who works by means 
of his arts and crafts), It is possible that ἑνὸς τοῦ θεοῦ was inten- 
tionally altered into τοῦ ἑνός by the person who inserted § 14a, in 
which τὸ ἕν is spoken of. 


LIBELLVS XI. i 


It is evident that the beginning of Cor. XI has been in some 
way tampered with. Firstly, a discourse cannot start with a sentence 
introduced by οὖν. Secondly, the words ὡς δέ μοι ἐπῆλθεν «.7.A, 
(§ 1b), which must be assigned to the pupil, are not rightly con- 
nected with ὃ ra, in which the teacher is speaking. δέ is impossible 
in this context; and if the teacher bids the pupil remember his 
instruction (§ 1a), that injunction ought to follow, and not to 
precede, the speech in which the pupil asks the teacher to instruct 
him (§1b). The words ἄκουε ὦ τέκνον κιτιλ. (§ τ Ὁ fiz.), follow 
rightly on the pupil’s request ;' but κατάσχες . . . λεγομένων (ὃ τ a) 
is clearly out of place. 

The text of the MSS. may be accounted for by the following 
hypothesis. Some collection of Hermetica contained two distinct 
discourses of Nous to Hermes, which I call XI. i and ΧΙ, ii, The 
marks of division between the two (including the title of the second) 
accidentally disappeared, and the two discourses came to be read 
as one. The introductory sentences of XI. ii now stood in the 
middle of the composite document. A redactor, noticing that they 
were unsuitable for that position, cut out these sentences, and 
inserted at the beginning of the whole document (where it now 
stands in the MSS., as ὃ 1 b,) so much of the original introduction 
of XI. ii as it seemed to him possible or desirable to retain. But 
he wrongly took the concluding sentence of XI. i (κατάσχες otv... 

1 ὃ χρόνος, inserted by error before ἄκουε in § 1 b_fiz., has come from 6 κόσμος, 
ὁ χρόνος in § 2 inst. 


2 Merely ahypothesis; but I can think of no other hypothesis that would account 
for the facts before us, 








LIBELLVS XI. i 287 


τῶν λεγομένων, ὃ 1a) to be connected with the introductory sentences 
of XI. ii, and transposed it along with them. 

At the beginning of XI. ii, something which preceded and led on 
to ὡς δέ μοι κιτιλ. (δ τ b) has disappeared ; and at the end of XI. i, 
it is possible that τὰ γινόμενα ὑπ᾽ αὐτῷ in ὃ 6 ἃ was followed by some 
sentences which are now lost. But each of the two documents 
appears to be nearly, if not quite, complete. They differ markedly 
in style, and exemplify two strongly contrasted methods of teaching. 
In XI. i, the thought is petrified in rigid formulas; in XI. ii, the 
thought is fresh and living. In XI. i, the teacher recites a sort of 
creed (§ 2), which would be utterly meaningless to a beginner; 
the explanations which he adds (§§ 3-64) are intelligible in them- 
selves, but do not throw much light on the obscurity of § 2; and he 
expects his pupil to learn the words by rote (μέμνησο τῶν λεγομένων). 
In ΧΙ. ii, on the other hand, the teacher takes nothing for granted, 
and presupposes no previous knowledge in the pupil. He does his 
utmost to make his meaning clear, and to carry the learner with 
him at every step. He appeals repeatedly to the pupil’s personal 
experience (§ 12a, σοῦ τοσαῦτα ποιοῦντος : ὃ 144, ἴδε τί σοὶ ἐγγίνεται : 
§ 19 init., τοῦτο νόησον ἀπὸ σεαυτοῦ) ; and he ends by telling him to 
think things out for himself, 

It must not be inferred from the straightforward simplicity of 
XI. ii, and the dogmatic elaboration of XI. i, that the former is 
necessarily of earlier date than the latter. The writer of XI. ii, 
though he thinks fit to conceal his learning rather than to obtrude 
it, is at home among the conceptions of Platonism and Stoicism ; 
and the apparent nazvefé of his tone may be due to a reaction 
against that sort of ματαιολογία of which the author of Corp. XIV 
speaks with contempt, and of which XI. i. 2 is a specimen. 

The two documents, while differing greatly in style and tone, 
present close resemblances in doctrine. In both alike, God is 
regarded as the author of 4/e, and his creative function is described 
as that of putting life into matter; in both alike, it is asserted with 
emphasis that God ‘is always at his work’ of generating life in the 
universe; and in both, the two modes of life, ἀθανασία in heaven 
and μεταβολή on earth, are similarly contrasted. It is therefore 
probable that the author of the later of the two documents had the 
earlier before him; and it is most likely that XI. i was the earlier. 
If so, we may suppose that the writer of XI. ii was dissatisfied with 
the cut-and-dried formulas of XI. i. 2, and wrote a second ‘ discourse 


288 CORPVS HERMETICVM 


of Nous to Hermes’ with the object of putting fresh meaning into 
so much of the doctrine of the earlier document as he held to be 
of value. He rejected the hypostatized αἰών of XI. i; but he 
accepted the conception of God as the author of all life, and made 
his exposition of it serve to lead up to that exhortation to ‘expand 
yourself’ (§§ 20 Ὁ, 21 8) which is the most significant part of his 
own treatise. 
Contents of Libellus XI. i 


§2. The relations between God, the Aeon (or Eternity), the 
Kosmos, Time, and Birth (or Coming-into-being), are set forth in 
tabular form. 

§§ 3, 4a. The universe is the work of God; and the power by 
which God works is the Aeon. The universe is ever being made 
by the Aeon, and therefore will never cease to be. The Aeon 
makes things by putting life into matter. But life is put into matter 
in one way in heaven, and in another way on earth. In heaven, the 
same beings are made to live for ever; on earth, a succession of 
mortal creatures is produced. 

§ 4 Ὁ. The universe is filled with soul. The body of the Kosmos 
is animated by a soul; the heavenly bodies are animated by souls 
which persist in them without change; each earthly organism is 
animated by a soul which stays in it only for a time. 

§§ 5, 6a. That which holds the universe together (and maintains 
life throughout it) is the Aeon; and the Aeon is God at work. 
God then is the sole author of life. His work is to make things 
live ; and he is present in all things, and is always and everywhere 
at work. 


Corp. XI. i deals only with God and the universe. Man is not 
expressly spoken of, but is implicitly included among the perishable 
organisms of earth; and there is no mention of human immortality. 
Possibly the writer may have held that man has before him the 
prospect of rising from the condition of an earthly and mortal 
ζῷον to that of a heavenly and immortal ζῷον ; but in this document 
he gives no hint of any such belief. 

Sources. The doctrine of XI. i is founded on Platonism, but 
includes some things not derived from Plato, The conception of 
the supracosmic God is Platonic. The use of the word aidy to 
express the notion of ‘eternity’ as distinguished from ‘time’ comes 
from the Zimaeus. The description of the Kosmos as a great ζῷον 











LIBELLVS XI i 289 


in which all ζῷα, both mortal and immortal, are included,—the 
statement that the Kosmos is both pervaded and encompassed by 
‘soul’,—and the assertion that ‘the Kosmos makes time’,—may 
also be traced back to the Zimaeus, The use of the phrase κοσμεῖ 
τὴν ὕλην to describe the demiurgic process is Platonic; and the 
Platonic term τὸ ἀγαθόν occurs in ὃ 2. 

But in saying that God is the author of ‘life’, and that God, or 
God's ἐνέργεια, is present in all things in the form of ‘life’ (or 
‘soul’), the writer hardly speaks as a Platonist. Something not 
unlike this may perhaps be implied in the mythical description of 
the making of the cosmic ψυχή and the individual ψυχαί which is 
given in the Zimaeus; but the language used on this subject by 
the writer of XI.i has little resemblance to that of Plato. The 
Platonists said that the Demiurgus κοσμεῖ τὴν ὕλην by imposing 
‘forms’ on matter, not by putting ‘life’ into matter; and the sub- 
stitution of ‘life’ for ‘form’ must be due to some influence inde- 
pendent of Platonism. 

The writer’s conception of ‘God at work’ as entering into all 
things, and manifesting himself in the form of life throughout the 
universe, is not very different from the Stoic notion of πνεῦμα διῆκον 
δι ὅλου τοῦ κόσμου ' (if we leave out of account the fact that the 
Stoics regarded this πνεῦμα as a material substance); but the terms 
employed by the Hermetist to express that conception are not 
those used by the Stoics. 

Parallels to the language of Corp. XI. i concerning ‘life’ are to 
be found in documents of the old religion of Egypt. The word 
ankh or onkh, the Egyptian equivalent of ζωή, was much used in 
the Egyptian cults. Take, for instance, the following phrases, 
which occur in a hymn of King Ikhnaton to the Sun-god, about 
1370 B.C. (Breasted, Hist. of Egypt, p. 371, and Religion and 
Thought in Ancient Egypt, p. 324): ‘O living Aton, Beginning of 
life (ἀρχὴ ζωῆς) !.... Thou art he who giveth life to the son in the 
body of his mother,...who giveth breath to animate every one 
that he maketh.... By thee man liveth.” In the carvings of 

1 Cf. Orig. c. Cels.6. 7: τῶν Στωικῶν φασκόντων ὅτι ὃ θεὸς πνεῦμά ἐστι διὰ πάντων 
διεληλυθὸς καὶ πάντ᾽ ἐν ἑαυτῷ περιέχον. 

Some resemblance to ΧΙ, i. 4 Ὀπό ἃ may be seen in the words οἵ Paul’s speech at 
Athens, Acts 17. 24 ff.: 6 θεὸς ὃ ποιῆσας τὸν κόσμον καὶ πάντα τὰ ἐν αὐτῷ,... 
αὐτὸς διδοὺς πᾶσι ζωὴν καὶ πνοὴν καὶ τὰ πάντα... ἐν αὐτῷ γὰρ ζῶμεν καὶ κινούμεθα 
καὶ ἐσμέν. The writer of Acts represents Paul as here using language which would 


be familiar to a Pagan audience ; and the doctrine expressed in these words is that 
of Stoicism, slightly modified by a tinge of Jewish thought. 


2806-2 U 


290 CORPVS HERMETICVM 


Ikhnaton’s reign, the sun-disk is seen sending forth rays which 
terminate in hands holding the emblem of life, and in this way 
‘God at work’ is visibly depicted as ‘putting life into’ the bodies 
of the king and queen. It is true that Ikhnaton was a heretic, in 
the sense that he sought to overthrow the ecclesiastical supremacy 
of the Theban priesthood, and to suppress the established cults of 
Amon and other local gods; but the thoughts which he expressed 
in his hymns to the Sun were in accordance with the spirit of 
Egyptian religion, and similar phrases were used by worshippers of 
the traditional deities, Brugsch, Re/. und Alyth., p. 287, quotes an 
inscription of the time of Augustus: ‘Hor-Samta, the lord of 
Tentyra, the god Anch (i.e. Life), lord of life, who causes the living 
(men) to live, in whose hand is life, and by whose look we live. 
Brugsch, #6., says that the most frequently recurring epithet of the 
god Tum of Heroopolis (Pithom) is Amch or Anchi (‘life’ or ‘the 
living one’). Thus it is possible that, when the Hermetist describes 
the function of the creative Power as that of putting 4 into matter, 
his Platonism was modified by Egyptian influence. But the concep- 
tion of God as the author or giver of life occurs in the Old Testament 
also, and is too widespread to be traced back to any one source.’ 
Another sign of Egyptian influence may perhaps be seen in the 
writer’s peculiar treatment of the Platonic αἰών. He has hypostatized 
‘the Aeon’, and interposed it between God and the Kosmos. Its 
function in his system is analogous to that of Philo’s λόγος, and the 
‘Second God’ of Numenius; and though Philo’s doctrine of the 
λόγος can be adequately accounted for as the result of a blending 
of Greek and Jewish thought, it is possible that certain Egyptian 
speculations also contributed to it. Moreover, the Hermetist’s 
personification of αἰών was probably suggested in part by the em- 
ployment of the term in Roman Egypt as a title or epithet of a god. 
(See note on Asc, Lat. III. 26b-32a.) The use of the word 


1 In the use of the word ζωή in Paul's Epistles and the Fourth Gospel, phrases 
resembling some of those used in the old cults of Egypt have been turned to a new 
purpose. (See Rom, 8. 10; 2 Cor. 4. 11 and 5, 4; Col. 3.3; Eph. 4. 18; “εἰς 
3.15; Av. Joh. 1.43 5. 20; 6. 33; 8 125 11, 25; 14.6; Ep. Joh. τ. 1, 1 ff. 
and 5.11.) The oo spoke of their Sun-god as the author of earthly life; 
Christians spoke of God or Christ as the author of spiritual and eternal life. The 
ankh of the Egyptian priests is the life which enters into men by carnal birth; the 
ζωή of the Fourth Gospel is the life which enters into men by ‘ the second birth’. 
The writer of Corp. XI, i speaks of two different forms of life, which he distinguishes 
by the words ἀθανασία and μεταβολή ; if he had gone on to say, as other Hermetists 
do, that ἀθανασία is attainable by men, this ἀθανασία might have been compared 
with the ζωή (αἰώνιος) of Paul and Zv. Joh. 








LIBELLVS XI. i 291 


αἰῶνες by some of the Christian Gnostics to signify hypostatized 
δυνάμεις Of God is to be connected with this Graeco-Egyptian habit 
of calling a god αἰών, rather than with the Platonic use of αἰών in 
the sense of ‘ eternity’. 

Marks of Stoic influence are to be seen in the words ποιότης (καὶ 
ποσότης) and ἀποκατάστασις ; and the terms ἀνάγκη, πρόνοια, and φύσις, 
mentioned in § 5 as possible substitutes for 6 αἰών or ἡ τοῦ θεοῦ 
ἐνέργεια, are characteristic of Stoicism. 

The use of the phrase δύναμις rod θεοῦ to describe the hypostatized 
αἰών may perhaps have been derived from a Jewish source. The 
document contains no trace of Christian influence. ᾽ 


Date. The occurrence of Stoic terms in a document mainly 
Platonic excludes the possibility of any date earlier than the first 
century B.c, This argument applies to nearly all the other Hermetica 
also; but the fact that Hermes here appears as a pupil, and not as 
a teacher, seems to indicate that Corp. XI. i belongs to a com- 
paratively late stage of the Hermetic literature. It may be presumed 
that the earlier Hermetists regarded Hermes as the founder of their 
religion, and that it was not until a considerable number of dialogues 
in which he took the part of teacher had been written, that the 
question whence he himself had derived his gaosis was asked and 
answered. It seems probable that the first answer given to this 
question was that Hermes had been instructed by the Agathos 
Daimon (i.e, the god Khnum), and that the substitution of Νοῦς for 
᾿Αγαθὸς Δαίμων as the name of his teacher did not take place till 
a yet later stage in the development of the Hermetic tradition. We 
may conclude then that Corp. XI. i was probably written in the 
second or third century a.pD., and that the balance of probability is 
in favour of the third century rather than the second. 


Title. The title of Corp. XI, as given in the MSS., is Nod (ad. 
Νοῦς) πρὸς Ἑρμῆν. There is no reason to doubt that this was the 
heading of XI. i from the first; and XI. ii may very well have 
borne the same heading. In XI. ii, the teacher is not expressly 
named; but Hermes uses the word δέσποτα (δ 1b), which would 
not be employed in addressing a mere man; and the phrase δι᾿ ἐμοῦ 
(§ 6 b) seems to imply that the teacher’s name is Nois. 

Cyril,’ quoting part of XI. ii, 22, says that the discourse from 


1 C, Julianum 2, 52, Migne 76. 580: ἃ verpapé more καὶ ὃ τρισμέγιστος Ἑρμῆς 
πρὸς τὸν ἑαυτοῦ νοῦν" ὀνομάζεται γὰρ ὡδὶ τὸ βιβλίον. 


U2 


292 CORPVS HERMETICVM 


which he took the words was addressed by Hermes ‘to his own 
mind’. In supposing Hermes to be the teacher and Nous the pupil, 
Cyril has blundered; but his statement shows that in his copy of 
Corp. XI the word νοῦς occurred in the title. 

In some of the Hermetica, the Egyptian god Agathos Daimon 
was represented as the teacher from whom Hermes learnt the 
gnosis ; and some of the Hermetists held the Agathos Daimon to be 
the divine νοῦς (see Abammonis Resp. 8. 3). In Corp. 1, the divine 
νοῦς manifests itself in the form of a person named Poimandres, 
and in that form gives instruction to an unnamed prophet. In 
XI. i, and probably in XI. ii also, the personal name (Agathos 
Daimon or Poimandres) is dropped, and the divine instructor is 
called simply Νοῦς, The writers of XI. i and XI. ii can hardly have 
intended their readers to suppose that the divine νοῦς had in fact 
manifested itself in personal form to the founder of their religion ; 
it is more likely that, in putting their teaching into this form, they 
merely meant to suggest that the human prophet Hermes derived 
his wisdom from the divine νοῦς which had entered into him. 

§ 2. ὁ θεὸς (τὸν) αἰῶνα ποιεῖ. In XI. i, αἰών means ‘eternity’ in 
the Platonic sense; but the writer has hypostatized eternity. He 
interposes it, as a divine person, between God and the Kosmos, 
and assigns to it a function partly analogous to that of the αὐτόζῳον 
(i.e. the νοητὸς κόσμος, the παράδειγμα of the αἰσθητὸς κόσμος) in the 
Timaeus, but more closely corresponding to that of the extracosmic 
νοῦς (also called ὃ τόπος) in Corp. II, and to that of the divine 
λόγος of Philo, and the ‘Second God’ of Numenius. I have found 
no precisely similar use of the word αἰών elsewhere ; but a partial 
analogy may be seen in Philo, Quod deus sit immutabilis 6. 31, 
Wendland II, p. 63 (quoted in note on Asci, Lat, 111. 26b ff). 
Philo there says that the νοητὸς κόσμος is God’s elder son; that the 
αἰσθητὸς κόσμος is God’s younger son; that χρόνος is son of the 
αἰσθητὸς κόσμος, and therefore grandson of God; and that αἰών, 
which is the ἀρχέτυπον and παράδειγμα of χρόνος, is the mode of life 
(ὃ βίος) of God. In that passage, Philo does not indeed personify 
αἰών; but he personifies χρόνος in the same way that the writer of 
Corp. XI. ii personifies both χρόνος and its archetype αἰών, The 
practice of using αἰών as a name or title of an individual god? must 


1 The god Κρόνος or Χρόνος (Zerwan) of the Mithraic religion was also called 
Αἰών ; and in Roman Egypt the god Khnum was sometimes called αἰών. Possibly 
those who applied the term to Khnum may have borrowed it from the Mithraists. 








LIBELLVS ΧΙ. i: §2 293 


have been known to the writer of XI. i, and no doubt made it 
easier for him to speak of αἰών (‘eternity’ or ‘eternal life’) as a 
personal being, distinct from the supreme God. 

ὁ κόσμος δὲ τὸν χρόνον (ποιεῖ). In the Zimaeus, time is spoken 
of as constituted by the movement of the heavenly bodies, and 
therefore as coming into being together with the material Kosmos. 
Tim. 37%: ἡμέρας γὰρ καὶ νύκτας καὶ μῆνας καὶ ἐνιαυτούς, οὐκ ὄντας 
πρὶν οὐρανὸν γενέσθαι, τότε ἅμα ἐκείνῳ ξυνισταμένῳ . .. μηχανᾶται" 
ταῦτα δὲ πάντα μέρη χρόνου. 70. 38B: χρόνος δ᾽ οὖν per’ οὐρανοῦ 
γέγονεν, (‘If there is to be succession, there must be things to 
succeed each other’, Archer-Hind ad Joc.) See also Aristotle, 
Phys. 8. τ, 251b 9 ff. The Greeks commonly conceived time in 
a less abstract way than we do ; they could hardly think of it except 
in connexion with something which is going through a process ; 
and the process with which they usually connected it was the 
movement of the heavenly bodies. Hence the writer of XI. i says 
that the Kosmos (by its movement) ‘makes’ time; and Philo 
expresses the same thought by saying that the Kosmos is the ‘ father’ 
of time (πατὴρ δὲ χρόνου κόσμος). 

ὁ χρόνος δὲ τὴν γένεσιν (ποιεῖ). In literature of all periods, time 
is often spoken of as producing things or causing events by its 
action, when the meaning is merely that the things come into being 
or the events take place in the course of time. The writer here 
adopts this way of speaking, in order to maintain the symmetry of 
his scheme; but his meaning is more exactly expressed by the 
subsequent phrase, 7 γένεσις γίνεται ἐν τῷ χρόνῳ. 

τοῦ δὲ θεοῦ [ὥσπερ] οὐσία ἐστὶ τὸ ἀγαθόν. Cf. Corp. VI. 4b as 
emended: ἡ οὐσία τοῦ θεοῦ, εἴ γε οὐσίαν ἔχει, τὸ καλόν ἐστι καὶ τὸ 
ἀγαθόν. See also Corp, XII. i imit, The word ὥσπερ has been 
inserted in recognition of the doctrine that God is ὑπερούσιος or 
ἐπέκεινα τῆς οὐσίας. (See notes on Corp. II. 4b and 13.) If ὥσπερ 
applied to this clause alone, there would be no objection to it. 
But if we retain it here, we must understand ὥσπερ οὐσία in the 
following clauses also ; and there would be no point in saying that 
‘sameness is, as if were, the essence of the Aeon’, and so on. It 
seems clear therefore that ὥσπερ must have been inserted by a 
later hand. 

τῆς δὲ γενέσεως (οὐσία) ἡ ζωή [kal ὁ θάνατος]. This is vaguely 
expressed. The meaning implied seems to be that ‘in birth life 
begins’, or ‘through birth ζῶντα come into being’; but the writer 


204 CORPVS HERMETICVM 


of this document attaches more importance to the neat grouping 
of words than to exactness of statement. 

The words καὶ ὁ θάνατος must be cut out. In the first place, 
they violate the law of verbal symmetry which the writer has 
imposed upon himself; and in the second place, they are inconsistent 
with the context. It would be possible in some connexions to use 
γένεσις as a term covering all processes in time, and therefore in- 
cluding φθορά; but the writer of XI. i, wherever he uses the words 
γένεσις and γίνεσθαι, is thinking of the process by which things 
are made, or come into being, and not of that by which they are 
destroyed, or cease to be. Cf. οὐδὲ ἀπολεῖταί τι τῶν ἐν τῷ κόσμῳ 
a few lines below. 

ἐνέργειαι δὲ τοῦ θεοῦ νοῦς καὶ ψυχή. For the word ἐνέργεια, see 
Corp. X. 1b. Its proper meaning is ‘a force in action’; but here, 
the things described as ἐνέργειαι seem to be rather the results 
produced by the action of God, the Aeon, &c., than the forces 
which God, the Aeon, &c., put in action. 

γοῦς and ψυχή are the results produced by God's action. They 
are a higher and a lower grade of ζωή ; and ζωή comes from God. 
Cf. Asel. Lat, 111. 27a: ‘deus... dispensator ... est bonorum, id 
est sensus (vot), animae (ψυχῆς), et vitae (ζωῆς)» 

τοῦ δὲ αἰῶνος (ἐνέργειαι) ἀθανασία καὶ διαμονή (διαμονὴ καὶ ἀθανασία 
Μ55.). Cf. ὶ 4a: ὁ αἰὼν... ἀθανασίαν καὶ διαμονὴν ἐνθεὶς τῇ ὕλῃ. 
The word διαμονή is here contrasted with ἀθανασία, and must there- 
fore be taken to mean ‘ duration for a finite time’. ἀθανασία refers 
to things celestial, and διαμονή to things terrestrial. In heaven, it 
results from the action of αἰών that the star-gods live for ever, 
On earth, it results from the action of αἰών that this or that man 
(as an earthly organism) lives on for seventy years. Perhaps the writer 
may have had in mind the fact that in common usage αἰών 
bears the two distinct senses ‘endless time’ and ‘a man’s life- 
time’, 

The Hermetist doubtless wrote the words in the order ἀθανασία 
καὶ διαμονή, as in ὃ 4a. Heaven ought to come before earth, as it 
does in the corresponding phrase of the next clause, ἀποκατάστασις 
καὶ ἀνταποκατάστασις. 

τοῦ δὲ κόσμου (ἐνέργειαι) ἀποκατάστασις καὶ ἀνταποκατάστασις. 
As to ἀποκατάστασις, see Corp. VIII. 4, Ascl. Lat. I. 13, and Ase. 
Lat. Ill. 26a. I have not met with the word ἀνταποκατάστασις 
elsewhere ; but there can be no doubt that the writer meant by it 








LIBELLVS ΧΙ. i: §2 | 295 


the guasi-apocatastasis of terrestrial organisms (Corg. VIII. 4). The 
movement of the heavenly bodies is cyclic; each of them, after 
a fixed interval of time, will again be in the same position which 
it occupies at this moment ; and after a longer interval (the ‘ Great 
Year’), all of them will simultaneously be in the same positions as 
before, relatively to one another and to the universe as a whole. 
This periodical return to the old position, or recurrence of an 
identical state of things, is what is meant by ἀποκατάστασις ; and 
it is characteristic of heaven as opposed to earth. The course 
of life on earth is not cyclic;! an old man does not ‘return to his 
former position’ and become young again. But the father lives 
again in his son; and though the individuals die, and return no 
more, the life of the race is perpetually renewed. It is this 
‘renewal of things by substitution’ that is here called ἀνταπο- 
κατάστασις. 

τοῦ δὲ χρόνου (ἐνέργειαι) αὔξησις καὶ μείωσις. Cf. Corp, XIII. 5: 
τὸ γὰρ θνητὸν εἶδος (1. 6. τὸ σῶμα) καθ᾽ ἡμέραν ἀλλάσσεται᾽ χρόνῳ γὰρ 
τρέπεται εἰς αὔξησιν κἀὶ μείωσιν. 

τῆς δὲ γενέσεως (ἐνέργειαι) ποιότης (καὶ ποσότης). Since each of 
the four other things has two ἐνέργειαι, γένεσις also must have had 
two ἐνέργειαι assigned to it; and if the writer wanted a word to 
pair with ποιότης, the first to present itself would be ποσότης. Cf. 
Corp. X. 3 as emended: (ὃ ποιῶν) ποιότητας καὶ ποσότητας ποιεῖ. 
But assuming that he wrote καὶ ποσότης, how is the production of 
ποσότητες, Which is the work of γένεσις, to be distinguished from 
αὔξησις καὶ μείωσις, the work of xpévos? Perhaps it might be said 
that γένεσις determines the weight of a baby at birth, and χρόνος 
is responsible for the child’s gains and losses of weight during life. 
But the writer probably did not ask himself this question; it was 
enough for him that the words by which he described the ἐνέργειαι 
of γένεσις had no obvious resemblance to those by which he described 
the ἐνέργειαι of χρόνος. 

ὁ οὖν αἰὼν ἐν τῷ θεῷ κιτλ. The five entities are here imagined 
in the form of five concentric spheres,—or rather, perhaps, four 
concentric spheres contained within a boundless space, which is 
God. Even χρόνος and γένεσις may be thus pictured, if we take 
χρόνος to stand for the heavenly bodies which constitute time by 


1 The Stoic doctrine that after each ecfyrosis the course of things on earth also 
will repeat itself (e. g. that the same lecturer—or a precisely similar lecturer—will 
again address the same or precisely similar pupils in the same words) is ignored by 
the writer of XI. i. 


296 CORPVS HERMETICVM 


their movement,' and γένεσις for sublunar things. But at the same 
time, we are not debarred from taking the words ἣ γένεσις ἐν τῷ 
χρόνῳ in the more obvious sense ‘the births of things take place 
in the course of time’ (cf. ἡ δὲ γένεσις γίνεται ἐν τῷ χρόνῳ below), 
The statement 6 κόσμος ἐν τῷ αἰῶνι is repeated below in the words 
τοῦ κόσμου ὑπὸ τοῦ αἰῶνος ἐμπεριεχομένου. 

ὁ μὲν αἰὼν ἕστηκε περὶ τὸν θεόν. “4ςεἰ. Lat. III. 26 Ὁ--32 ἃ would 
serve as a commentary on these words. περί does not mean ‘around’ 
in a local sense; for if thus taken, it would conflict with 6 αἰὼν ἐν τῷ 
θεῷ. It is rather comparable to πρός in Zv. Joh. τ. τ, ὃ λόγος ἦν 
πρὸς τὸν θεόν. 

ὁ δὲ κόσμος κινεῖται ἐν τῷ αἰῶνι, In this clause, ‘the Aeon’ 
corresponds exactly to the extracosmic νοῦς spoken of in Corg. II, 
and there called ὁ τόπος (ἐν ᾧ κινεῖται ὃ κόσμος). 

8 8. δύναμις δὲ τοῦ θεοῦ ὁ αἰών. As to this use of the word 
δύναμις, see note on Corp. I. 26a. The αἰών of Corp. XI. i is 
δύναμις τοῦ θεοῦ in nearly the same sense in which Philo (De fuga 
et invent. 18. 94 ff., Wendland III, p. 130) says that the θεῖος λόγος 
is the supreme δύναμις of God. 

ὃ κόσμος, γενόμενος οὔποτε, Kat det γινόμενος. We might rather 
have expected γενόμενος μὲν οὔποτε, γινόμενος δὲ ἀεί. The Kosmos 
has had no beginning. Cf. Οὐγῥ. Χ. τὸ Ὁ as emended: (6 κόσμος) 
ἀεὶ ὦν, ὧν δὲ ἐν γενέσει, καὶ γινόμενος ἀεί. 

οὐδὲ ἀπολεῖταί τι τῶν ἐν τῷ κόσμῳ: Cf. Corp, VIII, Ὅτι οὐδὲν τῶν 
ὄντων ἀπόλλυται. 

[ἡ δὲ τοῦ θεοῦ [copia] (οὐσίαν τἰ[ς] ἐστι; τὸ ἀγαθὸν καὶ τὸ καλόν), 
This is a misplaced doublet of τοῦ δὲ θεοῦ οὐσία ἐστὶ τὸ ἀγαθόν in ὃ 2. 

ὃ 4 ει. ἀθανασίαν καὶ διαμονὴν ἐνθεὶς τῇ ὕλῃ. The demiurgic power 
puts life into matter throughout the Kosmos, but does so in two 
different ways; it produces immortal ζῷα in the heavens, and ζῷα 
of finite duration on earth. 

The Platonists were accustomed to describe the function of the 
Demiurgus as that of imposing forms on matter. But to impose 
forms on matter is to make living organisms; and this writer 
conceives the demiurgic work of God (executed through his minister 
the Aeon) as that of putting 4 into lifeless matter. 

[ἡ γὰρ ἐκείνης γένεσις]. . . μεταβλητῶν καὶ φθαρτῶν (μεταβλητοὶ 
καὶ φθαρτοί MSS.). No sense can be made of this except by 


 Pseudo-Galen Hist. Phil. 37, Diels Doxagr. p. 619: τὸν χρόνον εἶναι Ιιυθαγόρας 
ὑπείληφε τὴν σφαῖραν τοῦ περιέχοντος. 








LIBELLVS ΧΙ. i: §§2-4a 297 


sweeping alteration of the text. It seems clear, firstly, that the 
sentence containing the words ἐν μὲν οὐρανῷ... ἐν δὲ γῇ must have 
been intended to explain the distinction implied in ἀθανασίαν καὶ 
διαμονήν, and consequently must have immediately followed ἀθανασίαν 
καὶ διαμονὴν ἐνθεὶς τῇ ὕλῃ ; secondly, that the words ἤρτηται ἐκ τοῦ 
αἰῶνος καθάπερ καὶ ὁ αἰὼν ἐκ τοῦ θεοῦ, which in the MSS. separate 
that explanation from the phrase explained by it, ought to stand 
immediately before καὶ rod μὲν αἰῶνος κιτιλ.; and thirdly, that the 
subject of ἤρτηται must have been ὁ κόσμος. 

I take [ἡ γὰρ ἐκείνης γένεσις] to be a doublet of the following 
ἡ γὰρ γένεσις. (ἐκείνης may perhaps have come from the preceding 
clause, where it would be possible to write ἐνθεὶς ἐκείνῃ in place of 
ἐνθεὶς τῇ ὕλῃ.) 

The MSS. give ἡ γὰρ γένεσις καὶ ὃ χρόνος ἐν οὐρανῷ καὶ ἐν γῇ 
εἰσιν, ὄντες διφυεῖς, ἐν μὲν οὐρανῷ ἀμετάβλητοι καὶ ἄφθαρτοι, ἐν δὲ 
γῇ μεταβλητοὶ καὶ φθαρτοί, This cannot be right ; there is no sense 
in saying that χρόνος is ἄφθαρτος in heaven and φθαρτός on earth. 
Moreover, it is difficult to think of any possible subject to which the 
masculine adjectives ἀμετάβλητοι &c, could be made to apply. (οἱ 
θεοί might be called ἀμετάβλητοι καὶ ἄφθαρτοι ; but the only beings 
that could be called μετάβλητοι καὶ φθαρτοί are of ἄνθρωποι, and there 
is no occasion here for speaking of men apart from other ἐπέγεια 
ζῷα.) It can hardly be doubted therefore that the termination -τοὶ 
is a misreading. I have expressed what I suppose to have been 
the author’s meaning, by writing ἡ yap γένεσις [ | διφυής, ἐν μὲν οὐρανῷ 
ἀμεταβλήτων «.t.A. This is equivalent to γίνεται ἐν μὲν οὐρανῷ 
ἀμετάβλητα κιτιλ. The οὐράνια ζῷα, like the Kosmos as a whole, 
οὔποτε ἐγένετο, but det γίνεται. 

καὶ τοῦ μὲν αἰῶνος Γὴ ψυχὴ" ὁ θεός, τοῦ δὲ κόσμου ὃ αἰών. [τῆς δὲ 
γῆς ὁ οὐρανός.) ἡ ψυχή is certainly wrong. God, working through 
the Aeon, puts ψυχή into things; but neither God nor the Aeon 
is ψυχή. A satisfactory sense might be got by substituting ἀρχή or 
πηγή for ἣ ψυχή. 

If we retained τῆς δὲ γῆς 6 οὐρανός, it would be necessary to make 
the series continuous by inserting another clause before it, and 
writing 

kal τοῦ μὲν αἰῶνος (ἀρχὴ ἢ) ὁ θεός, 
τοῦ δὲ κόσμου ὃ αἰών, 
(τοῦ δὲ οὐρανοῦ ὁ κόσμος, 
τῆς δὲ γῆς 6 οὐρανός. 


298 CORPVS HERMETICVM 


But it could hardly be said that earth is dependent on heaven, and 
heaven on the Kosmos, in the same sense that the Kosmos is 
dependent on the Aeon, and the Aeon on God; and it seems more 
likely that τῆς δὲ γῆς 6 οὐρανός is an interpolation, suggested by the 
preceding words ἐν piv οὐρανῷ . . . ἐν δὲ γῇ. 

§ 4b. [καὶ ὁ μὲν θεὸς ἐν τῷ νῷ, ὁ δὲ νοῦς ἐν τῇ ψυχῇ, ἡ δὲ ψυχὴ ἐν 
τῇ ὕλῃ. {πάντα δὲ ταῦτα διὰ τοῦ aidvos.] This is evidently out of 
place. When it is removed, the sentence τὸ δὲ πᾶν τοῦτο σῶμα κιτιλ. 
follows naturally on what has been said about the Kosmos in ὃ 4a, 
The words καὶ ὁ μὲν θεὸς... ἐν τῇ ὕλῃ are a superfluous repetition 
of τὸ δὲ πᾶν τοῦτο σῶμα ψυχῆς πληρές ἐστιν... καὶ ὁ νοῦς τοῦ θεοῦ. 
The clause πάντα δὲ ταῦτα διὰ τοῦ αἰῶνος cannot have been meant 
to follow ὁ μὲν θεὸς... ἐν τῇ ὕλῃ ; for in this position, πάντα ταῦτα 
can only mean θεός, νοῦς, ψυχή, and ὕλη ; and it would be impossible 
to say that God is ‘by means of’ something other than himself. 
If πάντα δὲ ταῦτα διὰ τοῦ αἰῶνος occurred at all in the original text, 
it may possibly have stood at the end of ὃ 6a. Placed there, it 
would form a fitting conclusion to the discourse, and would serve 
to lay stress on the novel conception of αἰών which the writer has 
been expounding. 

(ἡ 82) ψυχὴ πλήρης τοῦ νοῦ, καὶ (ὁ νοῦς) τοῦ θεοῦ. νοῦς is 
here regarded as something which resides within ψυχή. (Cf. Corp. 
X. 16f., where it is said that νοῦς, when embodied, has ψυχή for 
its integument.) But the writer adds that God in like manner resides 
within νοῦς, Hence it may be inferred that God is present through- 
out the universe ; and that is expressly asserted below (ὃ γὰρ ποιῶν 
ἐν πᾶσίν ἐστιν, ὃ 6 ἃ). It is not quite clear how this is to be recon- 
ciled with the preceding sections, in which God is set apart from 
the Kosmos, and separated from it by the interposed αἰών. Perhaps 
the writer drew his doctrine of αἰών (§§ 2-4.) from one source, and 
his doctrine of ψυχή and νοῦς (8 4b) from another, and did not 
completely succeed in harmonizing them. 

(ψυχὴ δὲν) ἐντὸς μὲν αὐτὸ (sc, τὸ πᾶν τοῦτο σῶμα) πληροῖ, ἐκτὸς δὲ 
περιλαμβάνει. A feminine subject is required by the following 
participles ζωοποιοῦσα &c.; and there can be little doubt that the 
missing subject is ψυχή. Cf Pl. Zim. 34.8: ψυχὴν δὲ ds τὸ μέσον -. 
αὐτοῦ (sc. τοῦ σώματος, the body of the Kosmos) θεὶς διὰ παντός τε 
ἔτεινε καὶ ἔτι ἔξωθεν τὸ σῶμα αὐτῇ περιεκάλυψε ταύτῃ. The writer 
divides ‘ soul’ into two parts. One part of it is the world-soul, i.e. 
the soul which animates the Kosmos as a whole (ζωοποιεῖ τοῦτο τὸ 








LIBELLVS ΧΙ. 1: §§ 4a-5 299 


μέγα καὶ τέλειον Gov); and this part is located ‘without’ (ἐκτός), 
i.e. in the outermost sphere. The other part is distributed among 
the individual organisms within the Kosmos (ζωοποιεῖ πάντα τὰ ζῷα), 
and is the sum of their several souls. Cf. Corg. X. 11 on the 
embodiment of the cosmic ψυχή. 

τοῦτο τὸ μέγα καὶ τέλειον ἕῷον. Cf. Pl. Zim. 69 C: πᾶν τόδε, ζῷον 

ἐν ζῷα ἔχον τὰ πάντα ἐν αὑτῷ θνητὰ ἀθάνατά τε. 
1 ἄνω μὲν ἐν τῷ οὐρανῷ διαμένουσα (év) τῇ ταυτότητι, κάτω δὲ ἐπὶ 
τῆς γῆς (ἅμα) τῇ γενέσει (τὴν γένεσιν MSS.) μεταβάλλουσα. The 
ζῷα within the Kosmos are of two different kinds. In the οὐράνια 
ζῷα (i.e. the heavenly bodies), which are immortal, soul or life 
‘remains in its sameness’, In the ἐπίγεια ζῷα, which are mortal, 
soul or life shifts from one body to another by successive births. 

ὃ 5. συνέχει δὲ τοῦτο (τὸ way ὁ αἰών, Cf. Philo De fuga et invent. 
20. 112, Wendland III, p. 133: 6 τε yap τοῦ ὄντος (i. 6. τοῦ θεοῦ) 
λόγος, δεσμὸς dv τῶν ἁπάντων, . . . καὶ συνέχει τὰ (τοῦ κόσμου) μέρη 
πάντα καὶ σφίγγει, κωλύων αὐτὰ διαλύεσθαι καὶ διαρτᾶσθαι, κιτιλ. It is 
through the action of the αἰών (as through that of the λόγος in Philo) 
that ‘ all things are one’. 

ὁ aidv,... τοῦτο ἔστι [πᾶ]ν ὁ θεὸς ἐνεργῶν. In the earlier sections, 
the Aeon was spoken of as an entity distinct from God. But here, 
we are told that the Aeon is a certain aspect of God’s being; it is 
God at work upon the world. God and the Aeon are two Persons, 
yet the two are one. 

εἴτε [δι] ἀνάγκην, εἴτε πρόνοιαν, εἴτε φύσιν, [καὶ] εἴζτε) τι ἄλλο 
οἴεται ἢ οἰηθήσεταί τις, ἀνάγκη, πρόνοια, and φύσις are mentioned 
as terms which some people may prefer to employ in place of αἰών 
to express the conception of ‘God at work’. These three terms 
were thus used by the Stoics. Philodemus (Diels Doxogr., p. 545) ; 
Chrysippus Δία φη(σὶν εἶναι τὸὴν ἅπαντ(α διοικοῦγντα λόγον . . ." 
καὶ (πρόνογιαν ὀν(ομάζεσ)θαι τὸν Δία, καὶ τὴν κοινὴν πάντων φύσιν, καὶ 
εἱμαρμ(έ)νην, καὶ ἀνά(γ)κην. 

But the words εἴτε ἀνάγκην . .. οἰηθήσεταί τις ate awkwardly 
interposed ; and it is possible that they were inserted later, and that 
the original text was συνέχει δὲ τοῦτο τὸ πᾶν ὁ αἰών, [ ] τοῦτο ἔστιν, ὃ 
θεὸς ἐνεργῶν. 

ἡ δὲ ἐνέργεια (rod) θεοῦ δυνάμει (δύναμις MSS.) [οὖσα] ἀνυπέρ- 
βλητος. It might be possible to call God’s ἐνέργεια ἃ δύναμις, just 
as ὃ αἰών was called δύναμις rod θεοῦ in ὃ 3 init; but δυνάμει suits 
the context better. 


350 CORPVS HERMETICVM 


οὐδὲν γὰρ ὅμοιον τῷ [ἀνομοίῳ καὶ] μόνῳ καὶ ἑνί, The meaningless 
ἀνομοίῳ may perhaps have been substituted for some word (e.g. 
ἀνωτάτω) which was written as an alternative for μόνῳ καὶ ἑνί, 

(τίς ἄλλος αἴτιος) [εἴτε] ζωῆς, καὶ ἀθανασίας καὶ μεταβολῆς ποιητής 

(ποιότητος MSS.); Cf. Corp. XII. ii. 22: ὑπὸ τίνος οὖν ζωοποιεῖται 
τὰ πάντα ζῷα ; ὑπὸ τίνος ἀθανατίζεται τὰ ἀθάνατα ; ὑπὸ τίνος μεταβάλλεται 
τὰ μεταβλητά; God is the maker of ἀθανασία in heaven, and the 
maker of μεταβολή, i.e. of the perpetual renewal of life by fresh 
births, on earth. To the question ‘Who else is the maker of 
ἀθανασία and μεταβολήν᾽ a reader of §§ 2-4a might be inclined 
to answer, ‘the Aeon’. Cf. § 2: τοῦ αἰῶνος (ἐνέργειαι) ἀθανασία καὶ 
διαμονή. § 4a: ὃ αἰὼν... ἀθανασίαν καὶ διαμονὴν ἐνθεὶς τῇ ὕχῃ. Βαϊ 
the distinction between ὁ θεός and 6 αἰών, which was insisted on 
before, is minimized in § 5. The writer at one time regards the 
Aeon as an intermediary agent δὲ οὗ ὁ θεὸς ἐνεργεῖ, and at another 
time, as ὃ θεὸς ἐνεργῶν. 
i τί δὲ αὐτοῦ ἄλλο (ἔργον ἢ) τὸ ποιεῖν ; (τί δὲ αὐτὸς ἄλλο τι ποιήσειεν 
MSS.). ‘The reading which I propose is very doubtful; but the 
author must have written something to this effect; and it may be 
inferred from the following ἀργός and ἀργία that the word ἔργον 
occurred in this sentence. 

οὐ γὰρ ἀργὸς ὁ θεός. Cf. Philo Leg. alleg. τ. 3. 5, Cohn I, p. 62 
(commenting on Gen. 2. 2, ‘God finished his work which he had 
made, and he rested on the seventh day’): παύεται yap οὐδέποτε 
ποιῶν ὃ θεός, GAN’ ὥσπερ ἴδιον τὸ καίειν πυρὸς καὶ χιόνος τὸ ψύχειν, 
οὕτως καὶ θεοῦ τὸ ποιεῖν καὶ πολύ γε μᾶλλον, ὅσῳ καὶ τοῖς ἄλλοις 
ἅπασιν ἀρχὴ τοῦ δρᾶν ἐστιν Origen De princip. 3. 5. 2: ‘Solent 
nobis obiicere, dicentes: Si coepit mundus ex tempore, quid ante 
faciebat Deus quam mundus inciperet ? Otiosam enim et immobilem 
dicere naturam Dei, impium est simul et absurdum, vel putare quod 
bonitas aliquando bene non fecerit, et omnipotentia aliquando 
non egerit potentatum.’ (Origen’s answer is, that this world has 
had a beginning and will have an end, but that God made other 
worlds before it, and will make others after it.) 

ἅπαντα yap πλήρη τοῦ θεοῦ. All things are filled with ψυχή. But 
ψυχή is filled with νοῦς, and νοῦς is filled with God (ὃ 4b) ; therefore, 
it may be said that all things are filled with God. In other words, 


1 Compare Ev. Joh. 5.17: ὁ πατήρ μου ἕως ἄρτι ἐργάζεται, κἀγὼ ἐργάζομαι (said 
in answer to a charge of sabbath-breaking). 





᾿ 


— 





LIBELLVS ΧΙ. i: δὲ 5-6a Ὁ 801 


there is life everywhere, and all life is a manifestation of God’s 
presence and working. 

These words imply that God, as the source or root of life, is ἐπ 
things; whereas in the rest of the paragraph God is spoken of 
rather as an external agent, who ‘makes’ living things, or ‘ puts 
life into’ things. These two conceptions are combined together 
in the phrase 6 yap ποιῶν ἐν πᾶσίν ἐστιν, ὃ 6a. 

οὐδὲ ἐν τῷ κόσμῳ ἐστὶν ἀργία οὐδαμοῦ. Cf. Pseudo-Galen Ast. 
philos. 24 (Diels Doxogr., p. 613): τοῖς δὲ σώμασι συνδεῖσθαι (τὰς 
ψυχὰς) νομίζουσιν οἱ μὲν Γαὐτοφυεῖς ἡκούσας ἐγκρατεῖς οὔσας Sore ταύτας 
πασχούσας, τῷ ἐπιθυμεῖν ἡδονῶν τῶν διὰ τῶν σωμάτων αὐταῖς προσ- 
γινομένων᾽ "ἢ οἱ δέ, κατὰ θεὸν ἐγγίνεσθαι τοῖς σώμασι, “Bovddpevor! ὃ 
μηδὲν τῶν στοιχείων ἀργὸν μηδὲ Γζῴου" ἄμοιρον εἶναι διὰ τέλους. The 
second of these two doctrines resembles that of Corf. ΧΙ. i. God’s 
work is to put soul or life into matter. Soul is τὸ κινοῦν ; and 
matter without soul in it would be ἀργόν. But God is always and 
everywhere at work ; there is therefore no matter without soul in it, 
i.e. no matter which is not alive and active. 

[οὐδὲ ἔν τινι ἄλλῳ) This is meaningless. There is nothing else 
beside God, the Kosmos, and the things in the Kosmos (except 
the hypostatized αἰών of §§ 2-4a, which cannot here be meant). 

ἀργία γὰρ ὄνομα κενόν ἐστι. ἀργία is a word to which nothing in 
actual existence corresponds. For this phrase, compare Corp. VIII. 
τ Ὁ as emended: ὄνομά ἐστιν ἡ θανάτου προσηγορία κενὸν ἔργου. 

§ 68. πάντα δὲ δεῖ γίνεσθαι καὶ ἀεὶ καὶ καθ᾽ ἕκαστον τόπον (καθ᾽ 
ἑκάστου τόπου ῥοπήν MSS.), The writer must have meant ‘always 
and everywhere’. ῥοπήν might be combined with χρόνου, but 
hardly with τόπου. Perhaps the reading of the MSS. has resulted 
from a conflation of καθ᾽ ἕκαστον τόπον and καθ᾽ ἑκάστην (χρόνου) 
ῥοπήν. 


LIBELLVS XI. ii 


Contents 


The Kosmos is an organized whole, each part of which discharges 
its special function, The Sun is the (proximate) source of life; for 
the fire which the Sun emits is transmuted into light, (and this light 

1 Perhaps: of μὲν ἑκούσας, αὐτοφυεῖ ἀκρατείᾳ τοῦτο πασχούσας. 
2 This opinion is based on Pl. Phaedo, 


3 Al, βουλομένων : legendum βουλόμενον, in agreement with dedy. 
* Legendum ζωῆς. 








302 CORPVS HERMETICVM 


conyeys life into all organic bodies.) The Moon fashions matter 
into a succession of organic bodies here below. The Earth supplies 
material nutriment to these bodies. And all things in the Kosmos, 
both the immortals in heaven (i.e. the heavenly bodies) and the 
mortal creatures on earth, are filled with ‘soul’ or life. §§ 6 b-8a. 

Since all things in the Kosmos are /ruing bodies, there must be 
some one who puts ‘soul’ or life into them ; that is to say, there 
must be a Maker. § 8b. 

And since all things are wrought together into one ordered whole, 
there cannot be more than one Maker. The theory that the im- 
mortals in heaven owe their life to one Maker, and the mortal 
creatures on earth to another, must be rejected. δὲ 9, Lo. . 

The one Maker of all is God. God is one; and the one life 
which runs through all things is the work of the one God. §§ 11, 
(14). 

Why should not the one God be the author of two different modes 
of life,—immortal life in heaven, and mortal life on earth,—seeing 
that you yourself are active in different ways? ὃ 124. 

God’s work then is to make living things. God could not exist 
without doing good ; and to do good is to make things live. Human 
procreation is a type of God’s life-generating energy. And God is 
ever at his work; if he were to cease from it for a moment, all things 
would perish. §§ 12 b-14a. 

(But he never ceases, and therefore life never ceases.) What 
men call ‘death’ should rather be called ‘change’. When a living 
creature ‘dies’, the life that was in it departs out of our sight, but 
does not perish. And inasmuch as life is ever shifting and changing 
in the bodies of which the Kosmos is composed, the Kosmos itself 
is ever changing, and may be said to ‘assume all forms’. §§ 15 Ὁ, 
τό ἃ. 

Does God likewise change, and ‘assume all forms’? No. God 
has one form, and one alone; but it is an incorporeal form. δὲ τό Ὁ, 
17 a. 

God contains all things. All things ‘are in God’, but not in the 
same sense in which bodies are contained in a larger body ; for 
God is incorporeal. The incorporeal (i.e. mind) is capable of 
containing everything. Is it not so in the case of your own mind? 
You can place yourself in thought at any point in the universe, and 
even beyond its outermost limits ; that is, your mind is capable of 
containing anything ; potentially, it contains everything. And God 








LIBELLVS XI. ἢ 303 


(being mind, not body,) contains things in the same sense that your 
mind contains things. But God contains all things in his thought, 
not merely potentially, or severally and successively, but actually, 
and all at once. All things are thoughts which God thinks. 
δὲ 17 b-20 ἃ. 

If you would know God, you must be as God is. You must get 
quit of everything corporeal, and expand yourself to the magnitude 
of all existence ; you must rise above all limitations of time, and 
become eternal. You must include all things in yourself, or identify 
yourself with all things. Do this, and you will know God. But if 
you shut yourself up in the body, and cower within the narrow cell 
of your separate being, a poor feeble wretch, self-centred and self- 
seeking, then you have nothing in common with God, and cannot 
know him. §§ 20b, 21a, 

Not to know God is the height of evil ; to know God is the good, 
and to seek to know him is to be on the way to the good. Seek 
him, and he will come to meet you at all times and places. God 
is not invisible ; for he is in all things, and you may see him every- 
where at work. §§ 21 Ὁ, 22a. 

The most significant passage in this document, and that which 
contains the essence of the writer’s religion, is ἐδ 20b, 21a. The 
Hermetist there states, in the special form in which he has realized 
it in his own experience, the principle that ‘he who would find 
himself must lose himself’. But how does he conceive the larger 
whole in which a man may ‘lose’ his falsely narrowed self, and 
‘find’ his true self? For this writer, the one alternative to ‘shutting 
oneself up’ in one’s separate personality is to ‘expand oneself to 
the measureless magnitude’ of the universe, and the God who fills 
the universe with life. Most people are more ready to agree with 


1 Cf. Inge, Personal idealism and mysticism, p. 102: ‘How does a man “ lose 
his soul” so as to gain it? . . . To be willing to lose our ψυχή must mean to 
forget ourselves entirely, to cease to revolve round our own selfish interests, to pass 
out freely into the great life of the world, constructing our universe on a. . . cosmo- 
centric basis, not a self-centred one. To do this is to lose and then to find our- 
selves,’ Caird, quoted by James, Varieties of religious experience, p. 451: ‘As a 
thinking being, it is possible for me to suppress and quell in my consciousness every 
movement of self-assertion, every notion and opinion that is merely mine, every 
desire that belongs to me as this particular self, and to become the pure medium of 
a thought that is universal,—in one word, to live no more my own life, but let my 
consciousness be possessed and suffused by the Infinite and Eternal life of spirit. 
And yet it is just in this renunciation of self that I truly gain myself, or realize the 
highest possibilities of my own nature, For whilst in one sense we give up self to 
live the universal and absolute life of reason, yet that to which we thus surrender 
ourselves is in reality our truer self,’ 


304 CORPVS HERMETICVM 


those who find the alternative to selfish isolation in identifying 
oneself in feeling and interest with one’s fellow men, or with some 
of them. The Auman whole in which a man ‘loses himself, and 
losing, finds himself’, may assume many different forms. For some 
Greeks, it took the form of the city-state, as in the ideal Sparta and 
Athens of the fifth century .c., and in Plato’s Republic ; by Stoics, 
it was recognized in the human race at large. The larger whole 
with which the individual identifies himself,—the ‘body’ of which 
he feels himself to be a ‘member ’,—may, in the case of one man, 
be restricted to his own household ; for another, it may be some 
larger human group, or several different groups in turn; and for 
one here and there, it may include every human being with whom 
the chances of life bring him into connexion. But the recognition 
of a human whole, larger or smaller, into which the separate self 
may expand, does not conflict with the recognition of a cosmic or 
supracosmic All ; often the two are combined, and men’s sense of 
union with the one is intensified by their sense of union with the 
other. Citizens of Sparta and Athens expressed and heightened 
their civic patriotism by their worship of the gods who watched over 
the city; in Plato’s Republic, it is because the ‘guardian’ is a 
votary of the Good on which all existence hangs, that in his social 
life he has no private use for the word ‘ mine’; and the Cosmopolis 
of the Stoics is a world-wide brotherhood of men united by the 
common fatherhood of the God who pervades the universe. Among 
the many different religions included under the vague term ‘ Chris- 
tianity’, all possible modes and forms of ‘self-expansion’ might be 
exemplified. In the language of Paul and the Fourth Gospel, 
‘Christ’ means at once the Head or common Life of the body of 
believers, and the Power ‘by whom all things were made’; and he 
who, using the name of Christ in this sense, says ‘I live, and yet 
no longer I, but Christ lives in me’, identifies himself at once with 
his human brothers and with the life of the whole universe. The 
writer of XI. ii, when he bids a man break out of his narrow cell 


1 Gal, 2. 20: ζῶ δὲ οὐκέτι ἐγώ, CH δὲ ἐν ἐμοὶ Χριστός, The ‘old man’ of whom 
Paul speaks,—the man who has died in the Christian,—corresponds to the man 
whom the Hermetist describes as ‘shutting up his soul in his body’; the ‘new 
man’ who is born in the Christian corresponds to the man whom the Hermetist 
describes as having risen above the limitations of time and space. In Corp. XIII, 
the change from the one state to the other is described by the simile of a ‘second 
birth’, just as it is in the Fourth Gospel. The old narrow self ceases to exist, and 
a new and larger self comes into being in its place. The change may be called 
either ‘self-surrender’ or ‘ self-realization’; it is at once the surrender of a smaller 
self, and the realization of a larger self. 








LIBELLVS ΧΙ. ii 305 


in space and time, and ‘ become eternal’, is at one with what may 
be called the ‘cosmic’ side of the religion of Paul and the Fourth 
Gospel, as distinguished from its ‘human’ side 3 but he has nothing 
to say about the brotherhood of men, or the ‘ love of one’s neighbour’, 
For him, as for most of the Hermetists, human society hardly exists, 
and the only human relation recognized is that between teacher and 
pupil. The individual man stands solitary, face to face with the 
universe at large; and if he would escape from his isolation, it is 
in the life which fills the universe, and the God whom he sees 
behind that universal life, that he must ‘lose himself to find 
himself’, 


Sources. The theoretic doctrine of ΧΙ. ii closely resembles that 
of XI. i, apart from the conception of αἰών which is peculiar to XI. i; 
and the mode of regarding God and the universe which is common 
to both documents seems to have resulted from a fusion of Platonic 
and Stoic theories, modified by some other influence. In § 1b, 
there is a verbal reminiscence of a sentence of Pl. Zim. The appli- 
cation of the term κόσμοι to the planets may be taken as a sign that 
the teachers by whom the Platonic tradition was transmitted to the 
writer had adopted some distinctively Pythagorean notions. In the 
discussion of the μορφή of God (§ 16 b), and the assertion that God 
is ἀσώματος, the author maintains the Platonic position against that 
of the Stoics. The conception of ‘ one soul’ or ‘ one life’ pervading 
the universe is more akin to Stoicism than to Platonism ; but in the 
form in which it is here presented, it appears to have been derived 
in part from some other source, which may possibly have been 
Egyptian. The physical theory of fire and light (with the words 
ἡ φιλία τῶν ἐναντίων) in ὃ 7, and the phrases τὰς ἀντιθέσεις τῶν 
ποιοτήτων and πράγματα, ποιότητας, ποσότητας ἴῃ ὃ 20 Ὁ, are marks 
of Stoic influence. The theory of two Makers, which is discussed 
and rejected in § 9, must be one which was held by some of the 
writer’s contemporaries; theories more or less resembling it are 
to be found in the writings of some of the Christian Gnostics, but 
it is not clear against whom the Hermetist is here contending. 

In the passage on ‘ self-expansion’ (δὲ 20 Ὁ, 21 4), the author is 
presumably describing a state of mind which was known to him by 
his own experience, and which perhaps reached its greatest intensity 
in occasional ecstasies, but also took the form of an abiding or 
frequently recurring consciousness in everyday life (§ 21b, ‘every- 

2806-2 xX 


παν "αν νὰ τὰ 


306 CORPVS HERMETICVM 


where God will come to meet you’ &c.). In this, the most original 
part of his teaching, his attitude differs from that of the earlier 
Platonists and Stoics, and more nearly approximates to that of 
Plotinus. Ifa discourse of Ammonius Saccas, the Egyptian teacher 
of Plotinus, had been preserved in writing, we might perhaps have 
found in it a close resemblance to this document. The sort of 
religion in which the limits of the man’s individual personality melt 
away, and he becomes one with the object of his worship, (‘I am 
Thou, and Thou art I’,) is restricted to no one race or country ; but 
it seems to havebeen specially prevalent in Egypt, from the earliest ages 
down to Roman times; and the writer of XI. ii, when he speaks 
in this tone, shows that, beneath his Hellenic culture, he is still 
a true Egyptian. 
I find no trace of Jewish or Christian influence in this document. 


Date. What I have said about the date of XI. i applies to XI. ii 
also. If we are right in assuming that its author had XI. i before 
him, XI. ii must be placed a little later; and its affinity to the 
teaching of Plotinus points to the same direction. I would therefore 
assign it conjecturally to the third century after Christ. 


81 Ὁ. ὡς δέ μοι ἐπῆλθεν εἰπεῖν οὐκ ὀκνήσω. Hermes feels that 
it needs some courage to speak frankly to his divine visitant. It 
is to be presumed that Nous has asked him on what subject he 
wishes to be instructed ; and he answers that he wishes to be told 
the truth περὶ rod παντὸς καὶ τοῦ θεοῦ. Cf. Corp. I init., where 
Poimandres (i.e. the divine νοῦς) asks Τί βούλει... μαθεῖν καὶ 
γνῶναι; and the prophet answers Μαθεῖν θέλω τὰ ὄντα... . καὶ γνῶναι 
τὸν θεόν. : 

πολλὰ πολλῶν καὶ ταῦτα διάφορα περὶ Tod παντὸς Kal τοῦ θεοῦ εἰπόν- 
των. This is an echo of Pl. Zim. 29 6 : πολλὰ πολλῶν εἰπόντων περὶ 
θεῶν καὶ τῆς τοῦ παντὸς γενέσεως. : 

8 6b. δι᾽ ἐμοῦ : 1, 6. διὰ τοῦ vod. Cf. ὃ 13 Ὁ : ἄν μοι σεαυτὸν ἐπίδῳς. 
It is not enough to look at the world with our bodily eyes ; we must 
also reflect on what we see. 

[τό τε κάλλος αὐτοῦ ἀκριβῶς κατανόησον.] This clause breaks the 
grammatical construction. σῶμα ought to be in apposition to 
κόσμον ; but in the text of the MSS., it can only be taken as standing 
in apposition to κάλλος ; and so taken, it does not make sense, It 
would be possible to avoid this difficulty by transposing the clause 
τά Te... κατανόησον, and placing it after ἀκμαῖον καὶ νέον ; but even — 








LIBELLVS XI. ii: δὲ 1b-7 307 


in that position it would still be superfluous, and would rather 
weaken the force of the passage. It seems most likely, therefore, 
that it has been added by a later hand. 

ὃ 7. τοὺς ὑποκειμένους ἑπτὰ κόσμους. These ‘seven worlds’ are 
the planets. In the astronomical system ascribed to the Pythagorean 
Philolaus (Aetius, Diels Doxogr. p. 337), the word κόσμος did not 
signify the universe as a whole (τὸ πᾶν), but was used to denote the 
region occupied by the seven planets, in contradistinction both to 
the outermost sphere (called "Ολυμπος) above that region, and to the 
sublunar atmosphere (called οὐρανός) below it. Heraclides Ponticus 
and some of the Pythagoreans (perhaps by a modification of the 
usage of Philolaus) called each of the planets a κόσμος. Aetius, 
Diels #2. p. 43: Ἡρακλείδης καὶ of ἸΤυθαγόρειοι, ἕκαστον τῶν ἀστέρων 
κόσμον ὑπάρχειν, γῆν περιέχοντα ' καὶ ἀέρα, ἐν τῷ ἀπείρῳ αἰθέρι. ταῦτα 
δὲ τὰ δόγματα ἐν τοῖς ᾿Ορφικοῖς φέρεσθαι' κοσμοποιοῦσι γὰρ ἕκαστον τῶν 
ἀστέρων. Some Pythagoreans said that the moon is a world like 
ours, and is inhabited; Plutarch (Fac. /unae) speaks of this theory, 
and makes the moon an abode of disembodied human souls. 
Anaxagoras also is reported to have said that the moon is inhabited 
(Diog. Laert. 1. 8). Cf. the Orphic fragment 81 Abel (Proclus, Zz 
Tim. 3.154 A): μήσατο δ᾽ ἄλλην γαῖαν ἀπείριτον, ἥν τε σελήνην | ἀθά- 
νατοι κλήζουσιν,. .. ἣ πόλλ᾽ οὔρε᾽ ἔχει, πόλλ᾽ ἄστεα, πολλὰ μέλαθρα. 
Perhaps there were Pythagoreans who held that not only the moon, 
but all the planets are inhabited worlds, and consequently called 
them κόσμοι. At any rate, this use of the word κόσμος seems to be 
ἃ mark of either Pythagorean or Orphic influence. 

κεκοσμημένους τάξει αἰωνίῳ, καὶ δρόμῳ διαφόρῳ τὸν αἰῶνα ἀναπληροῦντας. 
The planets ‘fill endless time with their movements’; i.e. their 
movements endure through endless time, The writer of XI. ii uses 
αἰών differently from the writer of XI. i; he does not hypostatize 
‘the Aeon’; and he does not here use the word in the Platonic 
sense of ‘eternity’ as distinguished from endless time. In ἃ 20b, 
however, αἰώνζιος) γενοῦ means ‘ free yourself from the limitations of 
existence in time’, 

πῦρ δὲ οὐδαμοῦ (...). It would be impossible for a Hermetist to 
say that there is no region of fire in any part of the Kosmos ; and 
the contrary is expressly asserted in ὃ 19 (rd rod ἡλίου πῦρ). The 
meaning must therefore have been that there is no (cosmic or 

1 Perhaps [mep']éxovra, Each of the planets is an earth surrounded by an 
atmosphere of its own; but all of them are situated ‘in the boundless aether’, 

Xx 2 


308 CORPVS HERMETICVM 


unmixed) fire in the sublunar world, or in the terrestrial atmosphere ; 
and some phrase expressing that limitation must have fallen 
out of the text. 

τῇ γὰρ φιλίᾳ τῶν ἐναντίων καὶ τῇ συγκράσει τῶν ἀνομοίων (ἡ γὰρ φιλία 
καὶ ἡ σύγκρασις τῶν ἐναντίων καὶ τῶν ἀνομοίων MSS.) (τὸ πῦρ) φῶς 
γέγονε, καταλαμπόμενον ὑπὸ τῆς τοῦ [θεοῦ] (ἡλίου) ἐνεργείας. A mention 
of God would be premature here. The pupil does not yet know 
that there is one supreme God ; that truth is demonstrated to him 
later on, in 88 9-11. On the other hand, since the teacher, after 
speaking of the seven planets together, describes the special function 
of the moon, he must also have described the special function of 
the sun. It may therefore be considered certain that the Hermetist 
here wrote ἡλίου, and not θεοῦ. After the mark of division between 
XI. i and XI. ii had disappeared, a person who had just been 
reading about the ἐνέργεια τοῦ θεοῦ in §§ 4 b-6a might easily be led 
to substitute that phrase for ἐνέργεια τοῦ ἡλίου in ὃ 7. 

The meaning must have been that the fiery heat emitted by the 
sun, which would be destructive to all earthly things if it reached 
them unaltered, is transmuted into mild and beneficent light in the 
course of its passage downward through the atmosphere. The fire 
there meets with ‘unlike’ and ‘opposite’ elements, viz. air and 
watery vapour, and enters into combination with them; and the 
substance produced by the combination of fire with air and water 
takes the form of light. This theory is based on the Stoic physics. 
On the Stoic doctrine as to the illumination of the atmosphere, see 
Arnim, Stoic. vet, fragm. 11, Ὁ. 142f. The phrase 9 φιλία τῶν ἐναν- 
τίων is doubtless a Stoic reminiscence of certain well-known sayings 
of Heraclitus. For the notion that the celestial fire would burn up 
all earthly things if they were not protected from it, cf. Corp. X. 18, 
γῆ yap πῦρ οὐ βαστάζει κιτιλ. 

(τοῦ) παντὸς ἀγαθοῦ γεννήτορος, καὶ πάσης τάξεως ἄρχοντος, καὶ 
ἡγεμόνος τῶν ἑπτὰ κόσμων. The Sun is the generator of every good 
thing; he is the ruler by whom order is maintained throughout 
the universe; and he is the governor to whom the other planets 
are subject. Of course the writer held that the Sun himself is 
subject to the supreme God; his view must have been similar to 
that expressed by Plutarch, Quaest. Plat. 8 fin.: (ὃ ἥλιος) τῶν peyi- 
στων καὶ κυριωτάτων τῷ ἡγεμόνι καὶ πρώτῳ θεῷ γίνεται συνεργός. In 
Corp. ΧΙ. ii, as in Corp. XVI, and in Herm. ap. Stob. χε XXI. 2, 
the Sun holds the position of ‘second God’, which in some of the 





LIBELLVS ΧΙ. ii: § 7 309 


other ermetica is assigned to the Kosmos; but in this paragraph, 
the time for speaking of the ‘first God’ has not yet come. 

What are we to understand by παντὸς ἀγαθοῦ Since we are told 
below that the function of the Moon is τὸ τὴν κάτω ὕλην μεταβάλλειν 
(i.e. to build up terrestrial matter into a succession of organic 
bodies), it may be presumed that the corresponding function of 
the Sun is to put ψυχή into the bodies fashioned by the moon, and 
thereby produce ζῷα, ‘Life’ is closely associated with ‘light’ ; 
and the writer’s view was probably that the Sun (operating as the 
highest agent or minister of the supreme God) conveys ζωή or ψυχή 
into material bodies by means of the πῦρ which he emits, and which, 
by the time it reaches the earth, has been transmuted into φῶς. 
Now all that is good in the Kosmos may be comprehended under 
the term ‘life’ (cf. Asc’, Lat, III. 27a); it is therefore possible to 
take the statement that the Sun is παντὸς ἀγαθοῦ γεννήτωρ as meaning 
that the Sun is the generator of life, or the dispenser of ψυχή. But 
if this is what the writer meant, we should have expected him to 
express it more clearly and directly ; and it may be suspected that 
παντὸς ἀγαθοῦ has been substituted for some other term (e. g. πάσης 
ζωῆς), perhaps by the same person who substituted θεοῦ for ἡλίου. 

σελήνην (ἴ)δε, ἐκείνων πρόδρομον πάντων, πρόδρομος usually means 
one who goes in advance of others travelling in the same direction. 
The moon might be called πρόδρομος in this sense, because her 
easiward movement (1, 6, her movement relatively to the fixed stars) 
is swifter than that of any of the other planets, 

ὄργανον τῆς φύσεως. φύσις means either the process of birth and 
growth, or the power which operates in that process. Taking the 
word in the former sense, we may translate ‘The Moon is the 
instrument by which birth and growth are wrought’ (by a higher 
deity, viz. either the Sun, or the Supreme God,—though the latter 
has not yet been mentioned). But if we take φύσις to mean the 
force which operates, we must understand that force to be here 
personified, and translate ‘The Moon is the instrument by means 
of which Nature works’. 

τὴν κάτω ὕλην μεταβάλλουσαν, The Moon works up terrestrial 
matter into organic bodies, and replaces them by others as they 
Successively suffer dissolution. Cf. Firmicus Maternus Math. A Τὰ 


1A different, but partly analogous, view of the respective functions of Sun, 
Moon, and Earth, occurs in Plut. Fac. /unae 28, 3: τὸ μὲν σῶμα ἡ γῆ, τὴν δὲ ψυχὴν 
ἡ σελήνη, τὸν δὲ νοῦν ὁ ἥλιος πάρεσχεν εἰς τὴν γένεσιν (of man), 


910 CORPVS HERMETICVM 


‘omnis enim substantia humani corporis ad istius pertinet numinis 
(sc. lunae) potestatem. Nam... compositi corporis formam pro 
qualitate cursus sui luna sustentat... . Quare scire debemus quod 
corpus hominis luna susceperit, et quod lunae sit potestatibus de- 
putatum ; nam et crescentis lunae augmenta in corporibus nostris 
et deficientis [luminis] damna sentimus. . . . Sic omnis substantia 
terrenae corporis istius numinis providentia gubernatur. In posterio- 
ribus enim caeli regionibus collocata, et terrae imperium ex vici- 
nitate sortita, omnia corpora, quae inspiratione divinae mentis 
animantur, cursus sui multiplici varietate sustentans, et per signa 
omnia festina celeritate ! discurrens, et omnibus stellis adsiduis se con- 
iunctionibus socians, ex contrariis mixturis et ex disparibus elementis 
integra compositi operis substantia mutuata, omnia animantium 
corpora et concepta procreat et generata dissolvit” In Ase, Lat. 
I. 3c, a similar function is assigned to Sun and Moon together: 
‘(omnium corporum) augmenta detrimentaque sol et luna sortiti 
sunt.’ 

ὑποστάθμην τοῦ καλοῦ κόσμου. Cf, ‘the Stoics’ in Diog. Laert. 
7.1373 ἀνωτάτω μὲν οὖν εἶναι τὸ πῦρ, ὃν δὴ αἰθέρα καλεῖσθαι, ἐν ᾧ 
πρώτην τὴν τῶν ἀπλανῶν σφαῖραν γεννᾶσθαι, εἶτα τὴν τῶν πλανωμένων" 
μεθ᾽ ἣν τὸν ἀέρα" εἶτα τὸ ὕδωρ' ὑποστάθμην δὲ πάντων τὴν γῆν; μέσην 
ἁπάντων οὖσαν. Plutarch, Fac. /unae 25. 28, 940 F, says that the 
earth, seen from the moon, would appear to be οἷον ὑποστάθμη καὶ 
ἰλὺς τοῦ παντός, ‘a muddy sediment at the bottom of the universe’. 
But perhaps the Hermetist took the word, as applied to the earth, 
to mean ‘foundation’ rather than ‘sediment’; cf. Diod. 3. 44. 3, 
παλαιῶν οἰκιῶν λιθίνας ὑποστάθμας, ‘stone foundations’. 

τροφὸν καὶ τιθήνην τῶν ἐπιγείων. The Earth is nurse, not mother 
The Sun gives life to terrestrial organisms ; the Moon fashions their 
material structure ; the Earth supplies them with material nutriment. 
Pl. Zim. 40B: γῆν δέ, τροφὸν μὲν ἡμετέραν κιτιλ. But in Zim. 88 p, 
the phrase is differently applied ; it is the ὑποδοχή (i. 6. ὕλη) that is 
there called τροφὸς καὶ τιθήνη τοῦ παντός. 

μέσην δὲ ἀμφοτέρων [ 1 τὴν σελήνην περιπορευομένην. The lunar 
sphere is the boundary between the abode of τὰ ἀθάνατα ζῷα above 
and that of τὰ θνητὰ ζῷα below. 

§ 8 8. πάντα δὲ πλήρη ψυχῆς, καὶ πάντα κινούμενα. ψυχή is τὸ κινοῦν ; 
see Corp. II. 

[καὶ μήτε τὰ δεξιὰ... μήτε τὰ κάτω ἄνω. This is irrelevant, and 

1 Ch. ἐκείνων πρόδρομον πάντων in Corp. ΧΙ. il. 7. 








LIBELLVS XI. ii: δὲ 7-8b 411 


interrupts the argument, which should run thus: ‘all things, whether 
mortal or immortal, are alive (πάντα δὲ πλήρη ψυχῆς . .. περὶ τὴν γῆν) ; 
and there must be some one who generates life in them (καὶ ὅτι πάντα 
ταῦτα γεννητά κιτιλ.). Also, these interposed phrases are obscure 
and awkwardly constructed. The negative μήτε (not οὔτε) shows 
that they are meant to be dependent on θέασαι ; and κινούμενα must 
be supplied; but the sense intended is clumsily expressed. It 
might be possible to defend μήτε τὰ ἄνω κάτω μήτε τὰ κάτω ἄνω, 
taking it to mean ‘the immortal ζῷα in heaven do not descend to 
earth, and the mortal ζῷα on earth do not ascend to heaven’; 
though, if the writer had wished to say this, it would have been 
better, instead of putting it here, to write (ὥστε) μήτε τὰ ἄνω κάτω 
(χωρεῖν) μήτε τὰ κάτω ἄνω after μέσην . . . τὴν σελήνην περιπορευομένην 
above, But what can be meant by ‘those on the right do not move 
to the left, nor those on the left to the right’? This cannot be said 
of the θνητὰ ζῷα, which move irregularly in all directions; it must 
be meant to apply only to the ἀθάνατα, i.e. the heavenly bodies ; 
but there is nothing in the text to limit it to them. And even if we 
assume that the heavenly bodies alone are here spoken of, the 
statement is still inaccurate. ‘Right’ and ‘left’ may be taken to 
mean ‘North’ and ‘South’;'- but the sun, for instance, moves 
northward and southward in the course of the year, as well as west- 
ward in his daily round. I conclude then that καὶ μήτε... κάτω ἄνω 
is an interpolation. 

§ 8b. πάντα ταῦτα γεννητά, Having described the universe, the 
teacher goes on to show that there must bea maker of it, and that there 
cannot be more than one maker. γεννητά is here equivalent to 
ποιητά, and therefore implies a ποιητής. The verbs γεννᾶν and 
ποιεῖν are often interchanged; in Pl. Zim., the Demiurgus is called 
πατήρ (‘ generator’) as well as ποιητής (‘ maker’) of the universe ; and 
τεκνοποιεῖν OF τεκνοποιεῖσθαι Means τέκνα γεννᾶν. The sense would 
be the same if we wrote γενητά ; for γίγνεσθαι is often used as the 
passive of ποιεῖν. Pl, Phileb. 27 A: τό ye ποιούμενον καὶ τὸ γιγνόμενον 
οὐδὲν πλὴν ὀνόματι. . . διαφέρον εὑρήσομεν. The Hermetists 
probably made no distinction of meaning between γεννητός and 
γενητός. 

When the writer of XI. ii calls God the ποιητής of the universe, 


Ὁ Aetius, Diels Doxogr. p. 339: Πυθαγόρας Πλάτων 'Αριστοτέλης δεξιὰ τοῦ κόσμου 
τὰ ἀνατολικὰ μέρη (East), ἀφ᾽ ὧν ἡ ἀρχὴ τῆς κινήσεως, ἀριστερὰ δὲ τὰ δυτικά (West). 
+++ Ἐμπεδοκλῆς δεξιὰ μὲν τὰ κατὰ τὸν θερινὸν τροπικόν (North), ἀριστερὰ δὲ τὰ 
κατὰ τὸν χειμερινόν (South). 


312 CORPVS HERMETICVM 


he is not thinking of a divine act of creation in the past, such as is 
described in the first chapter of Genesis, or in the mythical narrative 
of the Zimaeus. His God is not one who made the world in six 
days and ‘rested on the seventh day’; he holds (as does also the 
writer of XI. i. 4 b-6a) that God ‘is ever at his work’ (§ 14a), 
and that if he were to desist from it for a moment, all things would 
perish. And this ceaseless work of God consists, not in creating 
things out of nothing, but in ‘bringing ὕλη and ψυχή together’, that 
is to say, in putting life into lifeless matter, and maintaining that 
life from moment to moment. His work is τὸ κινεῖν τὰ πάντα καὶ 
ζωοποιεῖν (δ 17 ο). ὕλη not animated by ψυχή does not exist in 
actuality ; and the only ‘things’ which this writer recognizes are 
ζῶντα. To say that God is the ποιητής of all things is therefore 
merely another way of saying that God is the author of all life. 

8 9. μιᾶς δὲ κατὰ πάντων τάξεως τεταμένης (ταχύτητος τεταγμένης 
MSS.), ἀδύνατον δύο ἢ πλείους ποιητὰς εἶναι, Cf. Psellus De daemonum 
operatione, Migne P. G, 122, 828 B (Zestin.). 

el ἕτερος ἦν ὁ ποιητὴς τῶν μεταβλητῶν [ζῴων] καὶ θνητῶν. Against 
whom is this argument directed? The writer evidently knew of 
some persons who taught that ra ἀμετάβλητα καὶ ἀθάνατα have been 
made by one Demiurgus, and τὰ μεταβλητὰ καὶ θνητά have been 
made (or are ceaselessly being made) by another. That theory 
may have been first suggested by Pl. Zim. 41 c, where the Demiurgus 
says to the gods whom he has made, δι᾿ ἐμοῦ δὲ ταῦτα (sc. τὰ θνητὰ 
γένη) γενόμενα καὶ βίου μετασχόντα θεοῖς ἰσάζοιτ᾽ ἄν' ἵνα οὖν OvyTa... 
ἦ...0. τρέπεσθε κατὰ φύσιν ὑμεῖς ἐπὶ τὴν τῶν ζῴων δημιουργίαν, 
μιμούμενοι τὴν ἐμὴν δύναμιν περὶ τὴν ὑμετέραν γένεσιν. ‘I myself’, 
he adds, ‘will generate and hand over to you the immortal part 
of them ;’ τὸ δὲ λοιπὸν ὑμεῖς, ἀθανάτῳ θνητὸν προσυφαίνοντες, ἀπεργά- 
ζεσθε ζῷα καὶ γεννᾶτε, τροφήν τε διδόντες αὐξάνετε, καὶ φθίνοντα πάλιν 
δέχεσθε" (Cf. Herm. af, Stob. Zxe. V. 2, where the maker of men, 


1 «Imitating my power that was put forth in the generation of you’ (Archer- 
Hind). This meaning would be more clearly expressed if τήν were added before 


περί. 

5. Cf. Philo Opif. mundi 24.73, Cohn I, p. 24 (commenting on the plural verb in 
ποιήσωμεν ἄνθρωπον, Gen. τ. 26): τῶν ὄντων τὰ μὲν οὔτ᾽ ἀρετῆς οὔτε κακίας μετέχει, 
ὥσπερ φυτὰ καὶ (Ga ἄλογα... .." τὰ δ᾽ αὖ μόνης κεκοινώνηκεν ἀρετῆς, ἀμέτοχα πάσης 
ὄντα κακίας, ὥσπερ οἱ ἀστέρες"... τὰ δὲ τῆς μικτῆς ἐστι φύσεως, ὥσπερ ἄνθρωπον, ὃς 
ἐπιδέχεται τἀναντία, .. ἀρετὴν καὶ κακίαν. τῷ δὴ πάντων πατρὶ θεῷ τὰ μὲν σπουδαῖα 
(the heavenly bodies) δι᾽ αὑτοῦ μόνου ποιεῖν οἰκειότατον ἣν, ... τὰ δὲ ἀδιάφορα (the 
plants and beasts) οὐκ ἀλλότριον..." τὰ δὲ μικτὰ TH μὲν οἰκεῖον τῇ δ' ἀνοίκειον. .... 
διὰ τοῦτ᾽ ἐπὶ μόνης τῆς ἀνθρώπου γενέσεώς φησιν ὅτι εἶπεν ὁ θεὸς “ ποιήσωμεν ", ὅπερ 
ἐμφαίνει συμπαράληψιν ἑτέρων ὡς ἂν συνεργῶν, ἵνα ταῖς μὲν ἀνεπιλήπτοις βουλαῖς τε 





LIBELLVS XI. ii: δὲ 80-0 313 


and presumably of θνητά in general, is a single subordinate Demiur- 
gus. See also Zxc. XXI jin.) But the ‘gods’ (i.e. the cosmic 
forces) to whom the making of mortal ζῷα is assigned in the Zimaeus 
have themselves been made by the supreme God, and work under 
his orders, so that, on the principle that ‘qui facit per alium facit 
per se’, there is after all but one Maker; whereas what is said in 
Corp. XI. ii seems to imply that those against whom the writer is 
contending taught that τὰ θνητά are made by some one who works 
independently of the maker of τὰ ἀθάνατα." 

Doctrines more or less resembling this were taught by some of 
the Christian Gnostics. Compare, for instance, Basilides af. Hippol. 
Ref. haer. 7. 24: the ‘great Archon’ (not the supreme God) made 
τὰ αἰθέρια (i.e. the heavens and the heavenly bodies) ; and thereafter, 
πάλιν ἀπὸ τῆς πανσπερμίας ἄλλος ἄρχων ἀνέβη, « . . πολὺ ὑποδεέστερος 
τοῦ πρώτου ἄρχοντος"... καὶ πάντων τῶν ὑποκειμένων (sc. of all 
sublunar things) οὗτός (sc. the ἄλλος ἄρχων) ἐστι διοικητὴς καὶ 
δημιουργός. The Hermetist is not likely to have been directly 
concerned with the teachings of Christian Gnostics; but he may 
have been thinking of some Pagan theory by which Basilides and 
other Christian Gnostics were influenced. The view discussed 
and rejected in Corp. XI. ii has something in common with the 
Zoroastrian and Manichaean doctrine of two hostile Powers, the 
authors respectively of good and evil; for change and death might 
be regarded as forms of evil, though the writer of XI. ii does not 
so regard them. 

ἐπεθύμησεν ἂν καὶ ἀθανάτους ποιῆσαι, ὥσπερ καὶ ὁ τῶν ἀθανάτων 
(ποιητὴς) θνητούς. If the reading is right, we must understand 
ἀθανάτους (θεούς) and θνητοὺς (ἀνθρώπους); though we should rather 
have expected ἀθάνατα and @vyrd. The masculines ἀμετάβλητοι 
καὶ ἄφθαρτοι, μετα βλητοὶ καὶ φθαρτοί, occur (in the MSS.) ina similar 
context in XI. i 4a. 

μιᾶς οὔσης τῆς ὕλης καὶ μιᾶς τῆς ψυχῆς, παρὰ τίνι [ἂν] αὐτῶν ἡ 
Χορηγία [τῆς ποιήσεως]; The χορηγία must mean the supply of the 


καὶ πράξεσιν ἀνθρώπου κατορθοῦντος ἐπιγράφηται θεὸς ὁ πάντων ἡγεμών, ταῖς 3 
ἐναντίαις ἕτεροι τῶν ὑπηκόων" ἔδει γὰρ ἀναίτιον εἶναι κακοῦ τὸν πατέρα τοῖς ἐκγόνοις. 
Philo must have had Pl. 77m. 41 in mind when he wrote this passage. 

Amobius (2. 36) says ‘ Christ has told us that our souls were generated, not by 
the supreme God, but by another genifor, many grades below him, yet of his court, 
and of lofty birth’. Did Arnobius get this from some Gnostic Gospel ? 

1 This would mean that φύσις (in the sense of the force which works birth and 
growth in the sublunar world) is not subject to the direction or control of the God 
who governs the heavens. On the question whether φύσις is subject to God, see 
Corp, 111. 


314 CORPVS HERMETICVM 


materials (viz. ὕλη and ψυχή) needed for ποίησις. (We might either 
cut out τῆς ποιήσεως, or take it to be a corruption of something 
like eis τὴν ποίησιν.) In the view of the writer, ποίησις is the making 
of ζῶντα ; and ζῶντα are made by joining together ὕλη and ψυχή. 
This work can only be done if there is in existence a stock of ὕλη 
and a stock of ψυχή for the ποιητής to draw on. Assuming that there 
are two ποιηταί, which of the two has the stock of ὕλη and ψυχή at 
his disposal ? 

With μιᾶς οὔσης τῆς ὕλης καὶ μιᾶς τῆς ψυχῆς, compare Asc/. Lat. 1. 
3a: mundus (ὕλη) unus, anima (ψυχή) una. The writer’s notion of 
pia ψυχή may have been suggested by the Stoic conception of living 
fire or πνεῦμα pervading the universe. See Corp. X. 7: ἀπὸ μιᾶς 
ψυχῆς τῆς τοῦ παντὸς K.T.A. 

The view that ψυχή as well as ὕλη existed before the making of 
the Kosmos occurs in Plut. Quaes#. Plat. 4. 1003: 4 μὲν γὰρ ἄνους 
ψυχὴ καὶ τὸ ἄμορφον σῶμα συνύπηρχον ἀλλήλοις ἀεί, καὶ οὐδέτερον αὐτῶν 
γένεσιν ἔσχεν οὐδ᾽ ἀρχήν" ἐπεὶ δὲ ἡ ψυχὴ νοῦ μετέλαβε καὶ ἁρμονίας, καὶ 
γενομένη διὰ συμφωνίας ἔμφρων, μεταβολῆς αἰτία γέγονε τῇ ὕλῃ, . . 
οὕτω τὸ σῶμα τοῦ κόσμου γένεσιν ἔσχεν ὑπὸ τῆς ψυχῆς. And the 
same doctrine is more fully expounded in Plut. De an. procr. in 
Timaeo 5-7, 1013 F ff. Plutarch there says that, before the dem#- 
urgia, there existed, not mere empty space, but ὕλη ἀτάκτως κινουμένη, 
that is to say, ὕλῃ animated by ἄτακτος ψυχή. The Demiurgus did 
not create either σῶμα or ψυχή out of nothing ; both already existed, 
but existed in a chaotic condition. But the Demiurgus brought the 
ἄτακτος ψυχή to order by putting νοῦς into it; the ἔννους ψυχή which 
was thus brought into existence changed the disorderly moyement 
of ὕλη into an orderly movement ; and so the Kosmos came into 
being. The disorder of Chaos was not however completely abolished ; 
in the world as we know it, ἄτακτος ψυχή is still at work side by 
side with ἔννους ψυχή ; and the evil in the world is wrought by the 
ἄτακτος ψυχή. (In Plut. Js. e¢ Os., this ἄτακτος ψυχή is mythically 
symbolized by Typhon.) In this theory of Plutarch we may see 
a partial analogy to the Hermetist’s notion of a pre-existing stock 
of ψυχή. But there is an important difference ; the writer of XI. ii 
speaks of ὕλη and ψυχή as existing apart from one another until 

1 In the 7émaeus, two different and inconsistent accounts of what existed before 
the demiurgia stand side by side. In Zim. 52a, the ὑποδοχή is identified with 
χώρα, i.e, empty space; but in other passages, we are told that the Demiurgus 


found already in existence something ἀτάκτως κινούμενον, Plutarch adopts and 
amplifies the second of these two notions. 








LIBELLVS XI. ii: §§ 9-11 315 


the ‘Maker’ joins them together, whereas Plutarch’s view is that 
the chaotic ψυχή was already embodied in the chaotic ὕλη. In 
this respect then, the pre-existing ψυχή of XI. ii corresponds to the 
νοῦς which Plutarch’s Demiurgus introduced into the pre-existing 
chaos, rather than to Plutarch’s ἄτακτος ψυχή. 

§ το, τὰ δὲ ph ζῶντα ὕλη [πάλιν] καθ᾽ ἑαυτήν ἐστι. There are no 
‘things without life’ in actual existence. (Cf. §14b, πάντα ζῷά 
ἐστι.) The Maker never desists from his work of maintaining, or 
renewing from moment to moment, the union of ψυχή with ὕλῃ ; 
and ὕλη by itself never presents itself in our experience. It is 
possible, however, to form an abstract conception of τὰ μὴ ζῶντα, 
and to talk about them, as one might talk about τὸ μὴ dv; and at 
this stage of his argument, the teacher falls into the common practice 
of speaking of the activity of the Maker as if it were occasional and 
intermittent, or had taken place once for all, 

καὶ ψυχὴ ὁμοίως καθ᾽ ἑαυτήν, τῷ ποιητῇ παρακειμένη, τῆς ζωῆς 
οὐσία (αἰτία MSS.). The meaning must be that ψυχή is the substance 
of which life is made, and that, before the Maker does his work of 
making ζῶντα, this substance exists apart from ὕλη. The word 
αἰτία could hardly be used to signify ‘the substance of which a thing 
is made’; and the Hermetist probably wrote οὐσία, which was 
commonly used in that sense by the Stoics. The construction of 
this sentence is not clear; what verb is to be supplied with καὶ 
ψυχὴ «7.4. ? Perhaps there is some slight error in the text. 

Where and how does ψυχή exist ‘by itself’? It does not follow, 
because ‘ ὕλῃ by itself’ is a mere abstraction, that the same must 
be said of “ψυχή by itself’ also; and perhaps the writer held that 
there is a universal unembodied ψυχή, which exists in close con- 
nexion with God {τῷ θεῷ παρακειμένη), and of which the several 
ψυχαί of individual organisms are separated portions. (Cf. Corp. X. 7.) 
A Platonist of the usual type might have said that "ψυχή by itself’ 
exists ἐν τῷ νοητῷ; and the writer of XI. ii might accordingly have 
said that it exists ἐν τῷ ἀσωμάτῳ (that is, in God’s mind), since τὸ 
ἀσώματον is his equivalent for Plato’s νοητόν ; but it is assumed that 
the pupil is not yet acquainted with the conception of τὸ ἀσώματον, 
(See § 17.) 

πῶς οὖν... ((τῆς. .. τῶν ἀθανάτων.) My rewriting of this 
corrupt passage probably gives the author’s meaning, or something 
not far from it, though his exact words can hardly be recovered. 

ὃ τὰ, καὶ γὰρ μία ψυχή, καὶ μία ζωή, καὶ μία Ay. The order of 


316 CORPVS HERMETICVM 


the three substantives is hardly satisfactory. It would seem better 
either to omit καὶ μία ζωή, or to write μία ψυχὴ καὶ μία ὕλη, καὶ 
μία ζωή" ‘soul is one and matter is one, and life (resulting from 
the union of soul with matter throughout the universe) is one.’ 

τὸν μὲν κόσμον ὡμολόγησας ἕνα εἶναι. Neither the teacher nor the 
pupil has expressly said this before; but it may perhaps be held to 
be implied in the description of the ordered universe in § 7, to which 
the pupil gave tacit assent. 

καὶ τὸν ἥλιον ἕνα, Kat τὴν σελήνην μίαν. It might be objected that, 
if the Sun is one and the Moon is one, Sun and Moon are two; 
and that the recognition of Sun and Moon as distinct deities, if it 
has any bearing on the question at all, tells in favour of pluralism 
rather than monism. But if the text is sound, the writer’s meaning 
must have been that each of these deities discharges a certain 
function for the whole universe, and not for a part of it alone, and 
therefore @ fortiori the higher function of putting life into matter 
throughout the universe must be assigned to a single Being. Yet 
a difficulty remains; for it would seem from § 7 that the opera- 
tion of the Moon is limited to the sublunar region; and if so, 
how can the instance of the Moon be used to prove that all da, 
celestial and terrestrial alike, are made by one God? There is 
certainly some confusion of thought; but that is hardly a sufficient 
reason for concluding that the words καὶ τὸν ἥλιον. . . μίαν are an 
interpolation. 

καὶ [θειότητα] (τὴν γῆν) μίαν. θειότητα is meaningless; and as γῇ 
was spoken of in connexion with ἥλιος and σελήνη in § 7, it is to 
be presumed that τὴν γῆν is the right reading. 

ei πολλοί (ἐν πολλῷ MSS.), γελοιότατον. There are many θεοί; 
but there is only one Being to whom the name 6 θεός applies. 
γελοιότατον has been duplicated by error; it is rightly placed here, 
and wrongly above. 

8 14 Ὁ. ((εἷς dpa... γίνεται πάντα.) This passage has no con- 
nexion with the topic discussed in the latter part of § 14 8, viz. the 
ceaselessness of God’s life-giving work. On the other hand, it fits 
in well at the place where I have put it. At the beginning of 
§ 11, the writer sets out to prove that all things are made by one 
God ; and that is precisely the conclusion arrived at ἴῃ ὃ 14b. But 
the conclusion is reached by two stages; it is shown, firstly, that 
God is one (εἷς dpa καὶ ὁ θεός), and secondly (καὶ πάλιν), that all 
things are made by this one God (ὑπὸ τοῦ θεοῦ dpa γίνεται πάντα). 





LIBELLVS XI. ii: δὲ 11-12b 317 


In εἷς dpa καὶ ὃ θεός, the καί may be taken as referring back to 
κόσμον, ἥλιον, σελήνην, and γῆν. 

καὶ τὰ ἐν οὐρανῷ καὶ τὰ ἐν τῇ γῇ. Both here and in ὃ 12 ἃ init. 
(καὶ ἀθανασίαν καὶ μεταβολὴν ποιεῖν), the writer is still contending 
against the theory that ra ἀθάνατα are made by one Demiurgus, and 
τὰ θνητά by another. 

§ τῷ ἃ. [ζωὴν καὶ ψυχὴν] καὶ ἀθανασίαν καὶ μεταβολὴν ποιεῖν, 
ἀθανασίαν and μεταβολήν stand for ἀθάνατα and μεταβλητά (i.e. 
θνητά). The writer’s doctrine is not that God makes ψυχή, but 
that God puts pre-existing ψυχή into pre-existing ὕλη, and thereby 
makes ζῶντα. The words καὶ ψυχήν must therefore be struck out, 
We might either strike out ζωήν also, or write ζωῆς (αἰτίῳ ὄντι). 
Compare XI. i, 5 as emended: ris ἄλλος αἴτιος ζωῆς, καὶ ἀθανασίας 
καὶ μεταβολῆς ποιητής ; 

σοῦ τοσαῦτα ποιοῦντος. God ‘ makes’ different things, viz. immortal 
and mortal {oa ; the same man ‘does’ different things, e.g. he both 
speaks and hears. But ποιεῖν may signify either ‘to make’ or ‘to 
do’; and by the use of the same verb with reference to both God 
and man, the analogy between God’s actions and man’s actions is 
made to appear closer than it really is. The effect of the Greek 
can be more nearly reproduced in French than in English ; ‘ Quoi 
d’étonnant que Dieu fasse . . . 'immortalité (et) le changement, quand 
toi-méme tu fais tant d’actions différentes?’ (Ménard.) 

καὶ yap βλέπεις... καὶ πνεῖς. The human functions mentioned 
in this list are oddly selected and arranged. Why should ‘ speaking’ 
be put among the bodily senses? And why should ‘thinking’ be 
inserted between ‘walking’ and ‘breathing’? There can be little 
doubt that the list was originally shorter; but it is difficult to guess 
which of the verbs were included in its earliest form. Perhaps 
νοεῖς may have come by duplication from πνεῖς, and the correspond- 
ing words καὶ ἄλλος 6 νοῶν may have been subsequently added 
below. Possibly the author wrote only καὶ yap λαλεῖς καὶ ἀκούεις, καὶ 
περιπατεῖς καὶ (dva)rveis. Since the pupil is taking part in a dialogue, 
he may be said to be actually ‘speaking and hearing’; and loco- 
motion and respiration might be mentioned as functions which 
belong to him in common with all terrestrial animals. 

§12b, ἂν τούτων καταργηθῇς:, οὐκέτι ζῴον ef. A man does not 
cease to be a ζῷον if he is deprived of sight or hearing ; we must 
therefore understand τούτων to mean ‘all these functions together’, 
It might be held that some kind of αἴσθησις, some kind of spon- 





--.----..ὄ Ὁ 


318 CORPVS HERMETICVM 


taneous κίνησις (such as τὸ περιπατεῖν), and ἀναπνοή, are indispensable 
for the existence of a ζῷον. 

ἂν ἐκείνων καταργηθῇ, ὁ θεός... . οὐκέτι ἐστὶ θεός. ἐκείνων Means 
τοῦ τὰ ἀθάνατα καὶ τὰ θνητὰ ποιεῖν. Cf. ΧῚ. 1. 5: οὐ γὰρ ἀργὸς ὃ θεός 
κιατιλ. Corp. XVI. το: οὐκ ἄν ποτε παύσαιτο (ποιῶν ὃ θεός), ἐπεὶ καὶ 
αὐτὸς ἄπαυστος. 

§13b. τοῦτο δέ ἐστι τὸ ἀγαθόν, [τοῦτο ἔστιν ὁ Oeds.] The words 
τοῦτο ἔστιν ὃ θεός were probably added by some one. who wished to 
insist on the identification of the Good with God. Cf. καὶ τὸ ἀγαθόν; 
repeatedly inserted after 6 θεὸς καὶ πατήρ in Corp. X. 

8 17. (ὥσπερ yap... καὶ Lwomoreiv.)) This passage, misplaced 
in the MSS., deals with the subject discussed in §§ 13 and 14; and 
the term τὸ ἀγαθόν connects it especially with §13b jz. It seems 
clear therefore that it must have originally stood here. There is 
some obscurity in the transition from the first sentence of 17b 
(ὥσπερ yap... τὸ ἀγαθόν) to the second (τοῦτο yap... ζωοποιεῖν) ; 
and the meaning becomes clearer if we insert between them the 
words ἔστι δὲ τοῦτο, ὦ φίλτατε, ζωή, which make confusion where 
they stand in the MSS. God’s work is to produce that which is 
good; and that means, to make things live. 

ὁ ἄνθρωπος χωρὶς [ζωῆς] (πνοῆς) οὐ δύναται ζῆν. ζωῆς is certainly 
wrong; and πνοῆς is probably the right correction. We were told 
above that breathing is one of the things without doing which a man 
cannot be a ζῷον. 

τοῦτο γὰρ ὥσπερ [ζωὴ καὶ ὥσπερ κίνησις] (οὐσίαν ἐστὶ τοῦ θεοῦ, (τὸν 
κινεῖν τὰ πάντα καὶ ζωοποιεῖν. Cf. ΧΙ. 1. 2: τοῦ δὲ θεοῦ [ὥσπερ] οὐσία 
ἐστὶ τὸ ἀγαθόν. 

§ 14 a. ἴδε τί σοὶ ἐγγίνεται θέλοντι γεννῆσαι, God is ‘the Father’ 
of the universe and all things in it; and human procreation is 
a type or image of God’s creative energy. The human father 
generates life in a single child; God generates life in all things. Cf. 
Ascl. Lat. 111. 20b., and Corg. 11. τὴ ἃ. 

οὐδὲ γὰρ ἄλλο ἔχει συνεργόν. Cf. Corp. VI. 1b: οὔτε σύζυγόν ἐστιν 
αὐτῷ, [1 οὗ ἐρασθήσεται. 

αὐτὸς Sv ὃ ποιεῖ, If the text is sound, the writer here says that 
God not only makes ζωή (or ζῶντα), but is himself the ζωή (or the 
ζῶντα) which he makes. Cf. Corp. XVI. 19: πάντα οὖν ποιῶν ἑαυτὸν 
ποιεῖ. It is of course possible to say that ‘God is life’; but it seems 
strange to combine in one clause the two verbally inconsistent 
propositions ‘God makes life’ and ‘God ἧς life’, (There is the 








LIBELLVS XI. ii: §§ 12b-15a 319 


same sort of difficulty in ὃ τ4 Ὁ, in the words αὕτη (sc. ἡ ζωὴ) ἐστι 
θεός, followed by ὑπὸ τοῦ θεοῦ dpa γίνεται πάντα.) Possibly the author 
may have written αὐτὸς ὧν ἐν @ ποιεῖ; cf, XI. i, 6a, ὃ yap ποιῶν ἐν 
πᾶσίν ἐστι. 

εἰ γὰρ χωρισθείη αὐτοῦ, πάντα μὲν συμπεσεῖσθαι, πάντα δὲ τεθνήξεσθαι 
ἀνάγκη. Cf. Augustine, quoted by Inge, Fersonal idealism and 
mysticism, p. 79: ‘If God were to cease speaking the Word even 
for 2 moment, heaven and earth would vanish.’ 

εἰ δὲ πάντα Loa (Zegendum La(vr)a?), [μία δὲ καὶ ἡ ζωή,] (.. δ. The 
sentence here breaks off, and three unconnected fragments follow. 
The words μία δὲ καὶ ἡ ζωή are probably a misplaced doublet of pia 
δὲ κατὰ πάντων ζωή in § 14 Ὁ. 

814 C. [ζωὴ δέ ἐστιν ἕνωσις [νοῦ] (σώματος) καὶ ψυχῆς. θάνατος δὴ 
οὐκ ἀπώλεια τῶν συναχθέντων, διάλυσις δὲ τῆς ἑνώσεώς ἐστι.,]Ὶ In place 
of νοῦ, we must read either σώματος or ὕλης. If we read σώματος, 
the definition of θάνατος agrees with Pl. Phaedo 67D: τοῦτό ye 
θάνατος ὀνομάζεται, λύσις καὶ χωρισμὸς ψυχῆς ἀπὸ σώματος. 

But this definition of the terms ζωή and θάνατος is inconsistent 
with what precedes and follows. ζωή is spoken of elsewhere in this 
Libellus as if it were a substantive thing; but ἕνωσις σώματος καὶ 
ψυχῆς is merely a συμβεβηκός of things. We have been told in 
§ 14 Ὁ that μία κατὰ πάντων ζωὴ ὑπὸ τοῦ θεοῦ γίνεται ; but what could 
be meant by saying that there is μία κατὰ πάντων ἕνωσις σώματος καὶ 
ψυχῆς And in § 15 Ὁ, we are told that at the dissolution of the 
body ἡ ζωὴ εἰς τὸ ἀφανὲς χωρεῖ (1. 6. disappears from our view, but 
continues to exist) ; but how could this be said of the ἕνωσις σώματος 
καὶ ψυχῆςῦὺ Moreover, in ὃ 14 6 θάνατος is spoken of as something 
that really occurs; but the words τὴν μεταβολὴν θάνατόν φασιν εἶναι 
in ὃ τῷ Ὁ imply that there is in reality no such thing as θάνατος. 
And to this it may be added that the meaning of διάλυσις in ὃ 14 ς 
differs from that of διαλύεσθαι in §15b. The διάλυσις spoken of 
in § 14 c is the separation of soul and body from one another; the 
διάλυσις spoken of in ὃ 15 Ὁ is the ‘dissolution’ or ‘decomposition’ 
of the body, i.e. the separation and dispersion of the material 
elements of which the body is composed. Hence it may be inferred 
that ὃ τά c was not written by the author of the Libellus, but is 
a note appended by some one else. 

§ 15 a. [rotvuv εἰκὼν τοῦ θεοῦ ὁ aidv,... τοῦ δὲ ἡλίου ὁ ἄνθρωπος. 
This passage has nothing to do with the subject discussed in XI. ii, 
It was evidently written in imitation of the sentences in XI. i. 2; 





320 CORPVS HERMETICVM 


but it would not be in place there, as it substitutes a different series, 
viz. θεός, αἰών, κόσμος, ἥλιος, ἄνθρωπος, for the series dealt with in all 
the formulae of XI. i. 2, viz. θεός, αἰών, κόσμος, χρόνος, γένεσις. 

εἰκὼν τοῦ θεοῦ ὁ αἰών. Cf. Philo De fuga et invent. το. to1, Wend- 
land III, p. 132: αὐτὸς (6 θεῖος λόγος) εἰκὼν ὑπάρχων θεοῦ. 

τοῦ δὲ αἰῶνος (εἰκὼν) ὁ κόσμος. Cf. Pl. Zim. 92 : ὅδε ὁ κόσμος, 
νων εἰκὼν τοῦ ποιητοῦ (al. νοητοῦ) θεὸς αἰσθητός. Ascl. Lat. 1. το: 
‘(deus) cuius sunt imagines duae mundus et homo.’ Οὐγ. VIII. 2: 
πρῶτος... 6 δημιουργὸς τῶν ὅλων θεός" δεύτερος δὲ ὁ κατ᾽ εἰκόνα αὐτοῦ 
ὑπ᾽ αὐτοῦ γενόμενος (i.e. the Kosmos).1 The writer of ὃ 15a had 
some such statement as that in mind, and modified it by interposing 
the αἰών of XI.i between God and the Kosmos. Perhaps he 
identified ‘the Aeon’ with the νοητὸς κόσμος, of which the αἰσθητὸς 
κόσμος is an image or copy. 

τοῦ δὲ κόσμου (εἰκὼν) ὁ ἥλιος, τοῦ δὲ ἡλίου 6 ἄνθρωπος. The Sun, 
being the greatest of individual ζῷα, might be called an εἰκών of the 
Kosmos, which is the all-inclusive ζῷον ; and worshippers of the 
Sun-god, whether Mithraists or adherents of the old solar cults of 
Egypt and Syria, would readily accept the statement that man is 
made in the image of Helios, who was depicted in human form in 
their temples, It was a commonplace to say that man is a micro- 
cosm, i. 6. εἰκὼν τοῦ κόσμου ; and the writer of § 15a interposed the 
Sun between the Kosmos and man, just as he interposed ‘ the Aeon’ 
between God and the Kosmos. 

§15b. (. . .) thy δὲ μεταβολὴν θάνατόν φασιν εἶναι, Some con- 
necting words have been lost ; but the lacuna is probably not large. 
The words πάντα δὲ τεθνήξεσθαι ἀνάγκη in ὃ 14a suggested the 
thought of death; and the writer here proceeds to explain that 
there is really no such thing as death (cf. Corp. VIII init.), and 
that what men call death ought rather to be called μεταβολή. The 
lost beginning of ὃ τῷ Ὁ may perhaps have been to this effect: 
(ἀποθνήσκει μὲν yap οὐδέν, μεταβάλλεται δὲ τὰ ἐπίγεια πάντα") τὴν δὲ 
μεταβολὴν κ.τ.λ, 

τὴν δὲ ζωὴν εἰς τὸ ἀφανὲς χωρεῖν. ζωή is imperishable; but at 
the dissolution of an individual organism, the ζωή which was in it 


1 Compare Plut. Quaest. Plat. 8. 4. 6, 1007 Ὁ (Duebner): εἰκόνες δέ εἰσιν ἄμφω 
(sc. ὅ τε κόσμος καὶ ὁ χρόνος) τοῦ θεοῦ, τῆς μὲν οὐσίας ὁ κόσμος, τῆς δ᾽ ἀιδιότητος ὁ 
χρόνος ἐν κινήσει, "καθάπερ ἐν γενέσει θεὸς ὃ κόσμος", The pee might be emended 
thus: εἰκόνες δέ εἰσιν ἄμφω τοῦ θεοῦ, τῆς μὲν οὐσίας ὁ κόσμος ((ἐν γενέσει), τῆς δ᾽ 
ἀιδιότητος ὁ χρόνος ἐν κινήσει. The words καθάπερ [[év γενέσει i (αἰσθητὸς 1) θεὸς b 
κόσμος (cf. Pl, Zim. 92 Ο quoted above) are probably an appended note. 








LIBELLVS XI. ii: δ 15a-16a 321 


(or the ψυχή in which its ζωή resided) ‘passes away out of our 
sight’. Where does it go? The writer does not here tell us; but 
we must suppose his view to have been either that the portion of 
life which has quitted the individual goes back into the undivided 
stock of life or soul which is ‘laid up in God’s keeping’ (ψυχὴ... 
καθ᾽ ἑαυτήν, τῷ ποιητῇ παρακειμένη, ὃ 10), or else, that it passes 
immediately into other organisms which are just coming into 
existence. When we are observing the cessation of life in this 
or that particular ζῷον, we do not notice the beginnings of fresh 
life which are simultaneously taking place elsewhere; and so that 
portion of the universal life may be said to ‘pass away out of our 
sight’. If the author were speaking as a Platonist, he ought rather 
to have said that the disembodied ψυχή, with its inherent ζωή, 
retains its individual personality, and continues to exist as a distinct 
and separate being; but his conception of ψυχή and ξωή resembles 
that of the Stoics rather than that of Plato. 

ταῦτά ἐστι τὰ τοῦ κόσμου πάθη, Γδινήσεις τε Kal κρύψεις" Kal ἡ μὲν 
δίνησις στροφή, ἡ δὲ κρύψις ἀνανέωσις.1 The meaning which the 
context seems to require is that ‘the things which befall the Kosmos’ 
are not deaths, but renewals of life, which vanishes in one place 
only to reappear in another; and the ἀνανέωσις spoken of must 
be this perpetual renewal of life. But I can make nothing of the 
words given by the MSS." 

§16 a. παντόμορφος δέ ἐστιν (sc. 6 κόσμος) In Asc/, Lat. III. 19 Ὁ, 
παντόμορφος is a name or epithet of the Zodiac, regarded as the 
deity who assigns to all individuals born on earth their several 
forms. But in Corp. XI. ii, the word is used without any suggestion 
of astral influences; and the meaning is that the Kosmos, in its 
various parts, assumes (successively) all possible forms, or passes 
through all possible changes. Cf. Asc?. Lat. III. 36: ‘et mundus 
speciem mutat’ &c. Plut. Js. εὐ Os. 53: ἡ γὰρ "lois ἐστι μὲν τὸ τῆς 
φύσεως θῆλυ καὶ δεκτικὸν ἁπάσης γενέσεως, . .' ὑπὸ δὲ τῶν πολλῶν 
μυριώνυμος κέκληται, διὰ τὸ πάσας ὑπὸ τοῦ λὄγου τρεπομένη μορφὰς 
δέχεσθαι καὶ ἰδέας. 

οὐ τὰς μορφὰς ἐγκειμένας ἔχων ἐν ἑαυτῷ, [[δὲ}] αὐτὸς ((Se)) μεταβάλλων, 
The writer seems to be guarding against a possible misinterpretation 
of the word παντόμορφος. It might be supposed that the Kosmos 


ΤᾺ sense consistent with what precedes could be got by writing ταῦτά ἔστι τὰ 
τοῦ κόσμου πάθη, διλλύσεις τε καὶ κρύψεις (i.e. διαλύσεις σωμάτων and κρύψεις ζωῆς). 
καὶ τῇ μὲν διάλύσει (ἕπεται συ)γστροφή (= σύστασιΞ), τῇ δὲ κρύψει (p)avepwors, 

2806-2 Y 





322 CORPVS HERMETICVM 


is itself changeless, but contains within it things which change their 
forms. He rejects this view, and asserts that the Kosmos itself 
changes, i.e. assumes different forms in succession. But if this 
is his meaning, it is obscurely expressed; he ought rather to 
have written something like οὐ τὰ μεταμορφούμενα ἐγκείμενα ἔχων ἐν 
ἑαυτῷ. 

§ 16 Ὁ. ἐπεὶ οὖν ὁ κόσμος παντόμορφος γέγονεν, ὃ ποιήσας τί ἂν εἴη ; 
Does God himself ‘assume all forms’? It was frequently said that 
he does; as for instance in an invocation addressed to the Creator 
(Magic Papyrus, Dieterich Adraxas, p. 176, Reitzenstein Poim. 
Ρ. 22): ἐπικαλοῦμαί ce... τὸν τὰ πάντα κτίσαντα, σὲ τὸν αὐτογέννητον 
θεόν"... οὗ οὐδεὶς θεῶν δύναται ἰδεῖν τὴν ἀληθινὴν μορφήν' ὃ μετα- 
μορφούμενος εἰς πάντα[ς] ἐν ταῖς ὁράσεσιν ἀόρατος αἰὼν αἰῶνος." 
ἐπικαλοῦμαί σε, κύριε, ἵνα μοι φανῇ ἡ ἀληθινή cov μορφή. This 
implies that God has one ‘true’ form, but usually appears in other 
and ‘untrue’ forms; i.e. that he is usually seen, not as he is in 
his own being, but only as manifested in the things that he 
has made. 

Plato, Rep. 2. 380ff., criticizes the popular mythology, according 
to which the gods either ‘change their own εἶδος into many μορφαί᾽, 
or deceive men by appearing to them ἄλλοτε ἐν ἄλλαις ἰδέαις ; and 
he there asserts that ὁ θεὸς ἅπλους τέ ἐστι καὶ πάντων ἥκιστα τῆς 
ἑαυτοῦ ἰδέας ἐκβαίνει, and that ἥκιστα ἂν πολλὰς μορφὰς ἴσχοι ὁ θεός. 
The writer of Corp. XI. ii was very likely thinking of that passage. 
According to the Platonic doctrine, the Kosmos is σωματικός and 
μεταβλητός, but the supreme God is dowparas and ἀμετάβλητος ; 
it must therefore be an error to say that the supreme God assumes 
different forms in succession ; and if any μορφή or ἰδέα is attributed 
to him, it must be a μορφή or ἰδέα ἀσώματος (i. €. νοητή, as opposed 
to αἰσθητή). The Stoics, on the other hand, ignored the supra- 
cosmic God of Platonism; their supreme God corresponded to 
the Kosmos (αἰσθητὸς θεός) of the Platonists, and might be said 
to ‘assume all forms’. Orig. ¢. Cels. τ. 21: ὃ θεὸς τοῖς Στωικοῖς ἐστι 
σῶμα, οὐκ αἰδουμένοις λέγειν αὐτὸν τρεπτὸν καὶ δι’ ὅλων ἀλλοιωτὸν 
καὶ μεταβλητόν. Plut. Fac. denae 12. 926 Ὁ: ὁ δὲ Ζεὺς Γἡμῖν" (lege 
ὑμῖν, sc. τοῖς ΣΣτωικοῖς) οὗτος οὐ τῇ μὲν αὑτοῦ φύσει χρώμενος " ἕν ἐστι 
μέγα πῦρ καὶ συνεχές, νυνὶ δ᾽ ὑφεῦται καὶ κέκαμπται καὶ διεσχημάτισται, 
πᾶν χρῆμα γεγονὼς καὶ γιγνόμενος ἐν ταῖς μεταβολαῖς; The author 
of XI. ii then, in his discussion of the question whether one or many 

1 Perhaps αἰὼν αἰώνων, 5.1 ς, at the ecpyrosis, 








LIBELLVS ΧΙ. ii: δὲ 16a-17a 323 


poppai are to be attributed to God, is maintaining the Platonic 
doctrine against that of the Stoics. 

ἄμορφος μὲν γὰρ μὴ γένοιτο, ἄμορφος often means ‘ misshapen’ 
or ‘ugly’, and in that sense at least cannot be applicable to God. 
Besides, to deny that God has any μορφή would almost amount to 
denying his existence. The writer does not belong to that school 
of Platonists who refused to ascribe any qualities or attributes to 
God, and defined him only by negatives. He differs from Plotinus, 
who says (6. 9. 4) that ‘the One’ is ἄμορφον καὶ μορφῆς νοητῆς, and 
ἀνείδεον, πρὸ εἴδους ὃν παντός. 

μίαν οὖν ἔχει ἰδέαν, The words ἰδέα and μορφή are here synony- 
mous, as they are in Pl. Rep. 2, 380, referred to above. But the 
writer probably preferred to use ἰδέα in speaking of God, because 
μορφή was more commonly used in the sense of forma visibilis, and 
ἀσώματος μορφή would therefore sound more paradoxical than 
ἀσώματος ἰδέα. 

[εἴ τις ἔστιν αὐτοῦ ἰδέα (ἰδία MSS.)], This is inconsistent with 
ἄμορφος μὴ γένοιτο. It must have been added by some one who 
hesitated to ascribe ‘form’ to God. Cf. Corp, XII. ir: εἴ γέ τις 
ἔστιν οὐσία θεοῦ. 

οὐχ ὑποσταίη. For the omission of ἄν, cf. Corp. IX. 8 fin. 

[kal πάσας διὰ τῶν σωμάτων δείκνυσι,] If we retain these words, 
we must take them to mean that God, though he does not himself 
appear in visible forms, imposes such forms on bodies, and thereby 
enables us to see the forms, But this is not satisfactory. The 
phrase πάσας μορφὰς δεικνύναι ought rather to mean ‘to present all 
forms’, i.e, ‘to appear in all forms’; the subject ought therefore 
to be ὁ κόσμος rather than ὁ θεός. Perhaps the clause originally 
formed part of the missing passage before παντόμορφος δέ ἐστιν 
in §'16a, where the writer was speaking of the forms assumed by 
the Kosmos. 

§ 17a. ph θαυμάσῃς εἰ ἔστι τις ἀσώματος iSéa. The teacher 
assumes that the conception of τὸ ἀσώματον is new to his pupil. 
If so, Platonists could not have been included among the ‘many 
men’ whom the pupil had already heard speaking ‘about the All 
and God’ (§ τ ὃ). 

᾿ἔστι γάρ’ ὥσπερ [ἡ τοῦ λόγου] καὶ ἐν ταῖς γραφαῖς κιτλ, The phrase 
ἡ (ἰδέα) τοῦ λόγου might perhaps mean the rhetorical or literary style 
of a speech. Cf, Isocr. 5. 143, ἀλλὰ γὰρ εἱλόμην ἀποσχέσθαι τῆς 
τοιαύτης ἰδέας, ‘to abstain from such a style, se. τοῦ Adyov’ (A. E. 

¥3 


324 CORPVS HERMETICVM 


Taylor). Compare also σχῆμα λέξεως, ‘a figure of speech’. Literary 
style is a form, but not a ‘corporeal’ form; it is not a thing that 
we can perceive with our bodily senses. But if the writer had 
intended to mention literary style as an instance of an ἀσώματος 
ἰδέα, he would surely have expressed his meaning more fully and 
clearly. It seems best therefore to bracket ἡ rod λόγου, 

ἐν ταῖς γραφαῖς ἀκρώρειαι ὁρῶνται μὲν [γὰρ] πάνυ ἐξέχουσαι. Sup- 
pose that you are looking at a picture of an undulating tract of 
country. The ἰδέα in this case is the shape of the undulations, 
But there are no undulations in the σῶμα at which you are looking ; 
the object before you is a flat surface daubed with colours. The 
ἰδέα then is not in the σῶμα; it is an ἀσώματος ἰδέα. It exists; but 
(supposing the landscape depicted to be imaginary) it exists only in 
someone’s mind, and not in any σῶμα. 

The instance however does not seem very happily chosen. It is 
not true that there are no undulations of any sort in the picture ; for 
the vertical undulations of the mountain-ridge are represented in 
the picture on the wall by vertically undulating lines. The writer’s 
meaning would therefore have been more clearly expressed if, 
instead of speaking of the varying Aeight of the parts of the thing 
depicted, he had spoken of their varying distance from the eye, and 
said that the ἰδέα of a scene including ear and distant objects is 
presented to us, though the σῶμα at which we are looking is a flat 
board. 

According to the Platonists, the best preparation for dealing with 
νοητά or ἀσώματα is the study of geometry. The writer of XI. ii is 
precluded from using the conceptions of geometry for this purpose, 
because he has determined to assume no previous training in the 
pupil. But the instance of the picture is a geometrical instance in 
disguise ; the ἰδέα ἀσώματος in this case, viz. the shape of the moun- 
tain, is a geometrical figure in three dimensions, represented by 
a diagram in two dimensions. 

§§ 17 b-20 a. ἐννοήσας δὲ. ἑαυτόν, (τὸν ὅλον. In this passage 
the order and connexion of the sentences is very doubtful; but 
I suppose the meaning to have been as follows: ‘Grasp boldly the 
conception of an ἀσώματος ἰδέα, and realize that God is ἀσώματος ; 
then you will see the true meaning of the statement that God 
contains all things. Things are in God, not as bodies are in another 
body, but as thoughts are in the mind of the thinker.’ 

ὃ 17b. ἀληθέστερον [δὲ] ((νοήσεις τὸν περιέχοντα τὰ πάντα). The 





LIBELLVS XI. ii: §§ 17a-19 325 


words νόησον τὸν περιέχοντα τὰ πάντα are unintelligible where they 
stand in §18; and something of the sort is wanted here. The whole 
paragraph is an explanation of the statement ‘God contains all 
things’, or ‘ail things are in God’, 

§ 18, ἔνια δὲ τῶν λεγομένων ἰδίαν ἔννοιαν ἔχειν ὀφείλει, Some terms 
or phrases must (under special circumstances) be taken in a special 
sense. Thus the phrase τὸ περιέχειν (‘to contain things’), when 
used with reference to God, must be taken in a sense compatible 
with the truth that God is ἀσώματος, and not in the sense in which 
it is used when we are speaking of bodies. 

ὁ μὲν γὰρ τόπος [καὶ] σῶμά ἐστι. It seems strange to say that 
τόπος is a body. The statement is in verbal contradiction to Corp. 
11. 4a (ἀσώματος οὖν ὃ τόπος) ; but in that passage, ὃ τόπος means 
extracosmic space, or rather, the divine νοῦς with which extracosmic 
space is filled. Here, if σῶμα is the right reading, 6 τόπος must 
mean the larger body in which a smaller body is contained. But 
perhaps the author wrote σωμαάζτων περιεκτικός) ἐστι, or something to 
that effect. 

καὶ (wav) σῶμα {κινητόν' τὸ δὲ dodparov) ἀκίνητον, The preceding 
μέν requires an answering δέ; it is therefore certain that some words 
have fallen out here. 

τὰ (ἐν αὐτῷ) κείμενα κίνησιν οὐκ ἔχει, ‘Things situated in the 
incorporeal’ (i.e. thoughts in the mind) are not κινητά, if we take 
κίνησις in the literal and physical sense; they do not move from 
place to place. 

8 19. καὶ τοῦτο (οὕτω MSS.) νόησον ἀπὸ σεαυτοῦ, ‘This’ (τοῦτο) 
is the fact that τὸ ἀσώματον (i.e. mind or thought) is capable of 
containing all things (πάντων περιοριστικόν). Any man can see that 
this is true of his own mind or thought ; therefore a foréori it must 
be true of the mind or thought of God. The difference between 
man and God is this, that a man can (in thought) place himself 
anywhere, whereas God is everywhere at once, But we are afterwards 
told that it is possible for ἃ man to free himself from his limitations, 
and ‘make himself equal to Ged’ in this respect. 

Your mind ‘contains all things’, at least potentially. You can 
think of anything in the universe, and even of things beyond the 
limits of the universe; and anything of which you think is ‘ con- 
tained in’ your mind. The point of this passage is somewhat 
obscured by the use of the phrase ‘bid your soul go to’ this place 
or that, which might seem to imply that the mind does not ‘ contain’ 


| 
! 


— 


ows ee __ .- 





326 CORPVS HERMETICVM 


things, but merely travels through space from one thing to another, 
But the writer guards against this misunderstanding by adding οὐχ 
ὡς μεταβᾶσα ἀπὸ τόπου εἰς τόπον, ἀλλ᾽ ὡς ἐκεῖ οὖσα. Before you 
thought of that particular place, your mind was already there ; it is 
(potentially) everywhere, and therefore must be capable of including 
all things. The ταχυτής spoken of does not mean swiftness of 
movement through space; but the writer employs this word to 
express the instantaneousness with which the mind finds itself 
present anywhere at will. 

Compare Lactantius De ofif. dei 16. 9 f.: ‘ An potest aliquis non 
admirari quod sensus ille vivus atque caelestis, qui mens vel animus 
nuncupatur,... tantae celeritatis (est), ut uno temporis puncto 
caelum omne conlustret, si velit, maria pervolet, terras et urbes 
peragret, omnia denique quae libuerit, quamvis longe lateque sub- 
mota sint, in conspectu sibi ipse constituat? Et miratur aliquis si 
divina mens dei per universas’ mundi partes intenta discurrit et 
omnia regit, omnia moderatur, ubique praesens, ubique diffusa, cum 
tanta sit vis ac potestas mentis humanae intra mortale corpus in- 
clusae, ut ne saeptis quidem gravis huius ac pigri corporis, cum quo 
inligata est, coerceri ullo modo possit quominus sibi liberam vagandi 
facultatem quietis impatiens largiatur?’ 

κέλευσόν σου τῇ ψυχῇ εἰς ἣν δὴ (δὲ MSS.) καὶ (βούλει yfv) πορευ- 
θῆναι. By ψυχή is here meant the νοερὰ ψυχή or νοῦς. The word 
ἐκεῖσε, which is substituted for εἰς ἣν δὴ καί in Turn,, must have come 
from the following ἐκεῖ. We need γῆν to contrast with ὠκεανόν. 

The reflection that a man can send his thought, or transfer himself 
in thought, to any place at will, occurs in Homer; and the ‘swift- 
ness’ of thought was already proverbial in Homeric times. J/, 15. 80: 
ὡς δ᾽ ὅτ᾽ ἂν ἀίξῃ νόος ἀνέρος, ὅς τ᾽ ἐπὶ πολλὴν | γαῖαν ἐληλουθὼς φρεσὶ 
πευκαλίμῃσι νοήσῃ | “ἔνθ᾽ εἴην ἢ ἔνθα", .. . | ὡς κραιπνῶς μεμαυῖα 
διέπτατο ποτνία Ἥρη. Od. 1. 36: τῶν νέες ὠκεῖαι ὡσεὶ πτερὸν ἠὲ νόημα. 
Hymn, Apoll. τ86 (Pyth. 8): ἔνθεν δὲ πρὸς ᾽ολυμπον ἀπὸ χθονός, ὥς 
τε νόημα, | εἶσι Διὸς πρὸς δῶμα. Compare the saying ascribed to 
Thales in Diog. Laert. 1. 35: τάχιστον νοῦς" διὰ παντὸς γὰρ τρέχει. 
Ase. Lat. 1. 6a: ‘omnia illi licent (i. 6. omnia acumine mentis adire 
homini licet); ... omnia idem est, et ubique idem est.’ Also 
Corp. X. 25. 

οὐ τὸ τοῦ ἡλίου πῦρ, [οὐχ ὁ αἰθήρ,] οὐχ ἡ (τῶν dordpwr) δίνη. The 
solar sphere is a region of burning heat; cf. πῦρ δὲ οὐδαμοῦ κ-τιλ. in 
§ 7. Ifwe retain οὐχ 6 αἰθήρ, we must understand the αἰθήρ to be 








LIBELLVS ΧΙ. ii: δὲ 19-20a 32:7 


an element distinct from πῦρ, and situated above the region of fire ; 
and it must in that case be presumed that the writer borrowed the 
notion of αἰθήρ as a distinct element from the Aristotelians. But 
the view that αἰθήρ in that sense is limited to the region above the 
solar sphere does not, as far as I know, occur elsewhere; and it 
seems most likely that the words οὐχ 6 αἰθήρ have been inserted by 
a later hand. The δίνη cannot be the movement of the outermost 
sphere, or that of the fixed stars; for we are told that τὸ ἔσχατον 
σῶμα is not reached until the δίνη has been passed. It must 
therefore be the movement of the planet-spheres ; and τῶν ἀστέρων 
is needed to give it that meaning. 

[οὐχὶ τὰ τῶν ἄλλων ἀστέρων σώματα.] This cannot be right. σώματα 
does not correspond satisfactorily with πῦρ and δίνη; and the chance 
of colliding with ‘the body’ of one of the six ‘ other planets’ in the 
course of the imaginary ascent is too small to be worth mentioning. 
But it is necessary for the ascending mind to pass through the δίνη 
of the planets, i.e. the revolving spheres to which they are affixed. 

αὐτὸ (13) ὅλον διαρρήξασθαι" ‘to break your way out of the material 
universe’; i.e. to break through the outermost sphere, and pass 
out into extracosmic space. Cf. Lucr. 1. 73 (of Epicurus): ‘ergo 
vivida vis animi pervicit, et extra | processit longe flammantia moenia 
mundi, | atque omne immensum peragravit mente animoque.’ In 
Corp. I. 13 Ὁ, we are told that the Archanthropos ἠβουλήθη ἀναρρῆξαι 
τὴν περιφέρειαν τῶν κύκλων K.t.A.; 1. 6. he broke a passage for himself 
downward through the sky. 

τὰ ἐκτός, εἴ γέ τι ἐκτὸς τοῦ κόσμου, Cf. Corp. IV. 5: τὰ ἐν οὐρανῷ, 
καὶ εἴ τι ἐστιν ὑπὲρ οὐρανόν. «45εἰ. Lat, III. 33a: ‘quod dicitur extra 
mundum, si tamen est aliquid.’ In «45. Lat. III, we are told that 
the extracosmic space is ‘plenum intellegibilium rerum’ (πλῆρες 
νοητῶν). 

ὃ 20 a. τοῦτον οὖν τὸν τρόπον νόησον τὸν θεόν, ὥσπερ νοήματα, πάντα 
ἐν ἑαυτῷ ἔχειν. The emphasis is on τοῦτον τὸν τρόπον, ὥσπερ νοήματα. 
When it is said that ‘all things are in God’, the meaning of the 
statement is that all things are thought by God, or are God’s 
thoughts.’ 

Most of the later Platonists regarded τὰ νοητὰ εἴδη as τοῦ θεοῦ 
νοήματα (see e.g. Albinus, Epitome, 9: ἡ ἰδέα, ds μὲν πρὸς τὸν θεόν, 


1 Cf. W. James, Pragmatism, p. 145: ‘The great monistic Denkmittel for a 
hundred years past has been the notion of the one Knower, The many exist only 
as objects for his thought—exist in his dream, as it were.’ 








328 CORPVS HERMETICVM 


νόησις αὐτοῦ κιτιλ.); but the Platonists in general, whether they 
spoke of τὰ νοητά as existing independently of God or as existing 
in God’s thought, sharply distinguished τὰ νοητά from τὰ αἰσθητά, 
and did not say that the latter are τοῦ θεοῦ vorara. The position 
of the writer of XI. ii appears to be somewhat different. He seems 
here to imply that the concrete and spatially extended world in all 
its detail exists in and is constituted by God’s thought. A Platonist 
of the usual type might have said that God ‘contains in himself’, 
as his thought, a νοητὸς κόσμος which exists apart from the 
αἰσθητὸς κόσμος, and is the παράδειγμα of the latter; but this 
writer recognizes only one Kosmos, and not two; he says simply 
that God ‘contains in himself, as his thought, the universe’. It 
is not quite clear, however, how this is to be reconciled with the 
statement in ὃ 18, τὰ (ἐν τῷ ἀσωμάτῳ---ἰ, 6, ἐν τῷ νῷ) κείμενα κίνησιν 
οὐκ ἔχει. In that passage, the ‘things situated in the incorporeal’ 
seem to be νοητά in the ordinary Platonic sense, and to be distin- 
guished as such from the contents of the αἰσθητὸς κόσμος, which are 
κινητά, Perhaps the writer’s meaning might be expressed by saying 
that the Kosmos exists in God’s mind, but exists there ἄνευ ὕλης, 
and consequently without spatial extension or movement. The 
Kosmos and all things in it are composed of ὕλῃ and ψυχή ; but 
ὕλη, apart from ψυχή, has a merely potential existence. It is in 
virtue of their ψυχή (i.e. as ζῶντα) that things actually exist; and it 
is the ψυχή, i.e. the Zife of things, that God ‘contains in himself as 
his thought’. 

We were told before, in 88 8 b-14 a, that God ‘makes’ all things 
(i.e. puts life into them); we are here told that God ‘thinks’ all 
things. The writer does not bring these two propositions into 
connexion ; but they might be combined by saying that it is God’s 
νόησις that makes things live, or that God generates life in things 
by thinking them, In Οὐ. X, 2, a different term is used; we are 
there told that it is God’s ‘ will’ (θέλησις, not νόησις,) that constitutes 
the existence of all things. 

τὸν κόσμον, ἑαυτόν, (rd) ὅλον. The term τὸ ὅλον, which was used 
above to signify the material universe, has here a wider meaning, 
and includes both God and the Kosmos. God not only ‘thinks 
himself’, as Aristotle said, but ‘thinks the Kosmos’ also. 

§§ 20 b, 21 a. ἐὰν οὖν μὴ σεαυτὸν ἐξισάσῃς τῷ θεῷ, ... φιλοσώματος 
ὧν καὶ κακός. This paragraph contains the lesson which it is the 
writer’s object to impress upon his readers, and to which all that 








LIBELLVS XI. ii: § 20a, 20b 329 


has preceded is preparatory. The good of man is τὸ τὸν θεὸν νοῆσαι 
(§ 20 b), or τὸ τὸν θεὸν γνῶναι (§ 21 b), that is, to ‘know’ God, and 
in knowing him, to become one with him. How is a man to attain 
to that supreme good? ‘The writer of XI. ii here gives his answer 
to that question. Spread yourself over all space and all time; 
expand your notion of ‘ yourself’ till it includes the whole universe ; 
identify yourself in thought and feeling with all living beings in all 
times and places, and regard the life of each and all as your own 
life; then you will ‘know’ God, for you will be as God is. The 
state of consciousness described is that of the man who is ‘born 
again’ in Corp. XIII. 11 b: ἐν οὐρανῷ εἰμί, ἐν γῇ, ἐν ὕδατι, ἐν ἀέρι" ἐν 
ζῴοις εἰμί, ἐν φυτοῖς" ἐν γαστρί, πρὸ γαστρός, μετὰ γαστέρα' πανταχοῦ 
(πάρειμι). And he who can speak thus θεὸς πέφυκεν, 1. 14. In 
Corp. XIII, these phrases are perhaps traditional, and it may be 
doubted whether the writer of that document fully realized their 
meaning. But the author of XI. ii seems to be speaking of a state 
of mind known to him by personal experience. He knows that it 
is possible to ‘leap clear of all body’ and ‘expand oneself to the 
measureless magnitude’ of Him who is everywhere,—to ‘rise above 
all time’ and ‘become eternal ’,—because he himself, in some sense 
and in some degree, has done so. 

Many people in other times and countries have had a like 
experience. Numerous parallels are to be found in W. James, 
Varieties of religious experience,’ and in W. R. Inge, Christian 
mysticism, Lectures 7 and 8, ‘on Nature-mysticism’. To the in- 
stances there given may be added R. Jefferies, Zhe story of my 
heart, p. 8 ff.: ‘Having drunk deeply of the heaven above, and felt 
the most glorious beauty of the day, . . . I now became lost, and 
absorbed into the being or existence of the universe. I felt down 
deep into the earth under, and high above into the sky, and farther 
still into the sun and stars, still farther beyond the stars into the 
hollow of space, and losing thus my separateness of being, came to 
seem like a part of the whole. . . . I came to feel the long-drawn 
life of the earth back into the dimmest past. ... From all the 
ages my soul desired to take that soul-life which had flowed through 
them. ... I prayed . . . that I might take from all their energy, 
grandeur, and beauty, and gather it into me. , . . (I prayed) that 


1 See R. W. Trine, quoted by James, p. 101: Leuba, ἐδ. p. 247; Tennyson, 25. 
Pp. 384; Anon., 2. p. 394; Amiel, 2. p. 395; Malwida von Meysenberg, tb. 
Pp. 395; R. M. ‘Backer τ, p- "308; Vivekananda, 76, Ps 400. 








330 CORPVS HERMETICVM 


I might have the deepest of soul-life, the deepest of all, deeper far 
than all this greatness of the visible universe and even of the 
invisible. . . . The same prayer comes to me at this very hour. It 
is now less solely associated with (outward things), . . . It is always 
with me. Iam it.’ J. p. 38: ‘I cannot understand time. It is 
eternity now. Iam in the midst of it. . . . Nothing has to come; 
it is now. ... To the soul there is no past and no future; all is 
and will be ever, in now. . . . There may be time for the clock, 
there is none for me. . . . My soul has never been, and never can 
be, dipped in time.’ E, Carpenter, Zhe art of creation, Ὁ. 230: 
‘The true and ultimate Self therefore in each of us is universal and 
common to all beings, and yet it is also individual and specialized 
in a certain direction. When the more universal nature of the Self 
descends and becomes revealed, the consciousness of the individual 
necessarily takes certain forms corresponding.—One of these is Love 
and Sympathy. The self, hitherto deeming itself a separate atom, 
suddenly becomes aware of its inner unity with these other human 
beings, animals, plants even. It is as if a veil had been drawn 
aside. A deep understanding, knowledge, flows in. Love takes 
the place of ignorance and blindness ; and to wound another is to 
wound oneself. It is the great deliverance from the prison-life of 
the separate self,‘ and comes to the latter sometimes with the force 
and swiftness of a revelation—Another form is Faith, Courage, 
Confidence. If I have my home in these other bodies as well as 
my own, if my life is indeed so wide-reaching, so universal, if I /ee/ 
that it is so, what is there to fear, how can I fear?? All things are 
given into my hands.* My life checked here may flow on there; 
innumerable are my weapons, my resources; and rooted down, 
deep, below all accidents, is my real being.—Or again a strange 
sense of Extension* comes on me, and of presence in distant space 
and time. Mine is an endless Life, unconquerable, limitless in 
subtlety and expanse ; and strange intimations that it is so come to 
me even in my tiny earth-cell,—intimations of power inexhaustible, 
of knowledge mysterious and unbounded, and of far presence 
through all forms and ranges of being.—These are some of .. , the 
new modes of consciousness that come. . . . Let them be /é/¢ first. 


1 Cf. Corp, XI. ii. 21: ἐὰν δὲ κατακλείσῃς σου τὴν ψυχὴν ἐν τῷ σώματι. 
3. ΧΙ, ii, 21 ἃ : ἐὰν εἴπῃς “᾿ φοβοῦμαι γῆν καὶ θάλασσαν " κιτιλ. 

8 XL ii 20 Ὁ : μηδὲν ἀδύνατον σεαυτῷ ὑπόστησαι. 

4 ΧΙ. ii. 20 Ὁ : συναύξησον σεαυτὸν τῷ ἀμετρήτῳ μεγέθει κιτ.λ. 








LIBELLVS ΧΙ. ii: § 20b 331 


Do not ¢#ink too much about them. When you have merged your 
being, if it be but fora moment, in its source, then inevitably on 
emerging (if union has really been effected) will one or other of 
these feelings that I have mentioned be found occupying your mind.” 

When the teacher bids his pupil πάντα ὁμοῦ νοεῖν, he is not 
bidding him merely to ‘think of’ things, or to form concepts of 
them; the νόησις of which he speaks is rather what Bergson calls 
‘intuition’, as opposed to ‘analysis’.2 To ‘think’ things, in the 
sense in which the term is here used, is to identify oneself with 
them, or include them in one’s own being. 

The notion of ‘expanding oneself to the magnitude of the All’ 
is expressed by Plotinus in language partly similar to that of the 
Hermetist. Plot. 6.5. 7: ἀνάγεται yap καὶ τὸ ἡμέτερον καὶ ἡμεῖς εἰς 
τὸ ὄν, . . + καὶ νοοῦμεν ἐκεῖνα, οὐκ εἴδωλα αὐτῶν οὐδὲ τύπους ἔχοντες," 
εἰ δὲ μὴ τοῦτο, ὄντες ἐκεῖνα εἰ οὖν ἀληθινῆς ἐπιστήμης μετέχομεν, 
ἐκεῖνα ἐσμέν... . ὄντων δὲ καὶ τῶν ἄλλων, οὐ μόνον ἡμῶν, ἐκεῖνα," 
πάντες ἐσμὲν éxeiva’ πάντα" ἄρα ἐσμὲν ἕν. ἔξω μὲν οὖν ὁρῶντες ἢ ὅθεν 
ἐξήμμεθα, ἀγνοοῦμεν ἕν ὄντες, οἷον πρόσωπα πολλὰ εἰς τὸ ἔξω, κορυφὴν 
ἔχοντα εἰς τὸ εἴσω μίαν. εἰ δέ τις ἐπιστραφῆναι Ἷ δύναιτο, ... θεόν τε 
καὶ αὑτὸν καὶ τὸ πᾶν ὄψεται. ὄψεται δέ, τὰ μὲν πρῶτα, οὐχ ὡς (αὐτὸς 
ὧν) τὸ πᾶν" εἶτ᾽, οὐκ ἔχων ὅπῃ αὑτὸν στήσας ὁριεῖται μέχρι τίνος αὐτός 
ἐστιν, ὃ ἀφεὶς περιγράφειν ἀπὸ τοῦ ὄντος ἅπαντος αὗτόν, εἰς ἅπαν τὸ πᾶν 
ἥξει, προελθὼν οὐδαμοῦ, ἀλλ᾽ αὐτοῦ μείνας οὗ ἵδρυται τὸ πᾶν. Lb. 6. 5. 
12: (τῷ) παντὶ προσῆλθες, καὶ οὐκ ἔμεινας ἐν μέρει αὐτοῦ, οὐδ᾽ εἶπας 

1 A state of mind which has some resemblance to the " self-expansion ’ of Corp. 
ΧΙ. ii is described in a lighter tone by A. Daudet, Lettres de mon moulin: ‘]'y 
restais presque tout le jour dans cette espéce de stupeur et d’accablement délicieux 
que donne la contemplation de la mer, Vous connaissez, n'est-ce pas, cette jolie 
griserie de me? On ne pense pas, on ne réve pas non plus, Tout votre étre 
vous échappe, s’envole, s’éparpille. On est la mouette qui plonge, la poussiére 
d’écume qui flotte an soleil entre deux vagues, la fumée blanche de ce gy eae qui 
s'éloigne, ce petit corailleur ἃ voile rouge, cette perle d’eau, ce flocon de brume, 
tout excepté soi-méme.’ 

2 Bergson, Jitroduction to metaphysics, Eng, tr. 1913, p. 6: to have z#tuition of 
a thing means ‘ possessing a reality absolutely instead of knowing it relatively,— 
placing oneself within it instead of looking at it from outside points of view’. 
(When Wordsworth’s Peter Bell looked at the ‘ primrose by the river’s brim’, his 
mind presumably worked only by ‘analysis’, and not by ‘intuition ’.) 

5 Le. not merely having within us ‘images’ or ‘impressions’ of things which 
are outside of us. 

4. Aristotle said (De an. 3. 4) that ἐπὶ τῶν ἄνευ ὕλης τὸ αὐτό ἐστι τὸ νοοῦν καὶ τὸ 
νοούμενον, 

5 © Since not only I, but all others also are identical with those objects.’ 

® Perhaps πάντες ἢ 

7 This ἐπιστροφή corresponds to τὸ συναυῤῆσαι ἑαυτὸν τῷ ἀμετρήτῳ μεγέθει in 


Corp. XI. ii. 20 b, and to the παλιγγενεσία of Corp. XIII. 
5. He cannot find any fixed limit by which his personality is bounded. 








= = 


St 


a tt, et 0... a αὐ, 
ae 


= 


------.-. 


ν- 
-- 


332 CORPVS HERMETICVM 


οὐδὲ σὺ ““τοσοῦτός eyuu”*! ἀφεὶς δὲ (τὸ) τοσοῦτον, γέγονας πᾶς. καίτοι 
καὶ πρότερον ἦσθα πᾶς" ἀλλ᾽, ὅτι καὶ ἄλλο τι προσῆν σοι μετὰ τὸ 
πᾶν, ἐλάττων ἐγίνου τῇ ((ἐκ τοῦ μὴ ὄντος») προσθήκῃ" " οὐ γὰρ ἐκ τοῦ 
ὄντος ἦν 4 προσθήκη,---οὐδὲν γὰρ ἐκείνῳ προσθήσεις,---ἀλλὰ τοῦ μὴ 
ὄντος. γενόμενος δέ τις," [καὶ] [[ἐκ τοῦ μὴ ὄντος] (a man) ἐστιν οὐ πᾶς" 
ἀλλ᾽ (ἔσται πᾶς) ὅταν τὸ μὴ ὃν ἀφῇ." αὔξεις τοίνυν σεαυτὸν ἀφεὶς τὰ 
ἄλλα" καὶ πάρεστί σοι τὸ πᾶν (τὰ ἄλλα) ἀφέντι, μετὰ δὲ ἄλλων ὄντι οὐ 
φαίνεται (παρεῖναι τὸ πᾶν). The All was really present to you all 
the time, but you were unconscious of its presence. You had not 
‘departed from’ it, for that is impossible; ἀλλὰ παρὼν (τῷ παντί), 
ἐπὶ τὰ ἐναντία ἐστράφης. 

Cf. Proclus Jn Remp. 121. 32: διὸ καὶ τὰ λόγια (i.e, the Oracula 
Chaldaica) παρακελεύεται πλατύνειν ἡμῖν διὰ τῆς ἀπολύτου ζωῆς (i.e. 
by detachment from the body) ἑαυτούς, ἀλλὰ μὴ ἀποστενοῦν, “ πνιγμὸν 
ἔρωτος ἀληθοῦς " ἐφελκομένους ἀντὶ τῆς εἰς τὰ ὅλα ἀνατάσεως. 

§ 20d. τὸ γὰρ ὅμοιον τῷ ὁμοίῳ νοητόν, (I have altered τῶν ὁμοίων 
into7é ὁμοίῳ.) Cf. Sext. Emp. Marth. 7, ττό : παλαιὰ... δόξα περὶ 
τοῦ τὰ ὅμοια τῶν ὁμοίων εἶναι γνωριστικά, Philolaus, as reported 
7b. ἡ. 92: ὑπὸ τοῦ ὁμοίου τὸ ὅμοιον καταλαμβάνεσθαι πέφυκεν. Ar, 
Metaph, B. 4, τοοο Ὁ καὶ : ἡ δὲ γνῶσις τοῦ ὁμοίου τῷ ὁμοίῳ. 

πάντα χρόνον ὑπεράρας αἰών(ιος) γενοῦ, Eternity is here contrasted 
with time, as in Pl. Zi. The meaning must be ‘become eternal’, 
But to express this meaning, an adjective is needed. The substan- 
tive αἰών would hardly serve the purpose; neither the use of αἰών 
as a name or epithet of a god,* nor its use in XI. i to signify the 
hypostatized δύναμις or ἐνέργεια of God, would justify its employment 
in the sense here required. But a transcriber who was not aware 
that XI. i and XI. ii were two different documents might easily be 
led to substitute αἰών for αἰώνιος, in consequence of the prominence 
of αἰών in XI, 1. I have therefore written αἰώνιος. 

σεαυτὸν ἥγησαι ἀθάνατον, Kal πάντα δυνάμενον νοῆσαι, πᾶσαν μὲν 
τέχνην, πᾶσαν δὲ ἐπιστήμην. ‘Art is long, and life is short’, said 

2 Toe. you have not set a limit to the extent of your τ 

2 The μὴ év is ὕλη. A material body has been added to you, and you have 
become smaller by the addition. As the Hermetist expresses it, your soul has been 
‘shut up in the body’. 

3 T.e, having become a separate individual person (by the narrowing or separating 
influence of the body). 

4 Le. ὅταν τὴν ὕλην or τὸ ὑλικὸν σῶμα ἀφῇ. 

5 As αἰών (understood as meaning det dv) seems to have been sometimes used as 
a synonym for θεός (see note on Ascl. Laz. II]. 26 b-32 a), it would perhaps be 


possible to take αἰὼν γενοῦ as equivalent to θεὸς γενοῦ. But no instance of that use 
of αἰών occurs elsewhere in the Hermetica, 








LIBELLVS XI. ii: ὃ 20b 333 


Hippocrates. You must reject this limitation of man’s power to 
get knowledge. What matter if the ego whose life is bound up with 
this perishable body has but a few years to learn in? That narrowly 
restricted ego is not your true self. Realize that you are one with 
all that lives, and that all life is your life ; then you will be actually, 
what you already are potentially, ἀθάνατος and αἰώνιος." 

παντὸς {you ἤθη (ἦθος MSS.) (. . .). A verb in the imperative 
(‘find your home in’) must have been lost. The word ἤθη in the 
sense of the ‘haunts’ of animals is frequent in all periods; but 
I have found no instance of ἦθος, singular, in this sense. It must 
be remembered that {gov includes every kind of corporeal and 
animated being, from a star-god to an insect. 

[πυρός, ὕδατος,) (θερμοῦ καὶ ψυχροῦ.) ξηροῦ καὶ ὑγροῦ. Fire and 
water are not ποιότητες ; and the words πυρός, ὕδατος are probably 
a gloss, which has been substituted for θερμοῦ καὶ ψυχροῦ. The 
meaning is ‘identify yourself simultaneously with all parts of the 
universe’. 

τὰ μετὰ τὸν θάνατον. The text may be sound, though the grammar 
is confused. With this phrase we must supply νόησον alone, and 
not νοῆσον εἶναι, which the preceding words require. 

‘The things after death’ are left undescribed; this writer has 
nothing to say about the destiny of the individual soul when 
disembodied. To one who has learnt to ‘contemplate all time and 
all existence’, and to identify himself with all that he contemplates, 
the question what will become of Aim, as an individual person, 
after the dissolution of the body, would be negligible, if not 
unmeaning. 


1 The thought agrees in part with that of Browning in A Grammarian's Funeral: 
‘Let me know all! . .. Others mistrust, and say—‘ But time escapes! Live now 
or never!”? He said, “ What’s time? Leave Now for dogs and apes! Man has 
Forever.”’ And he who says this ‘throws himself on God, and unperplexed 
Seeking shall find him’. But the Hermetist is not here thinking, as Browning 
presumably was, of a continuance of the man’s individual and separate ῬΈΒΡΒΑΗΝ 
beyond the grave; and perhaps his attitude may better be compared wi 
that of Shelley in Adonais: ‘Dust to the dust! but the pure spirit shall flow 
Back to the burning fountain whence it came, A portion of the Eternal, which must 
glow Through time and change, unquenchably the same.... He lives, he wakes 
—'tis Death is dead, not he.... He is made one with Nature: there is heard His 
voice in all her music, from the moan Of thunder, to the song of night’s sweet 
bird; He is a presence to be felt and known In darkness and in light, from herb 
and stone, Spreading itself where’er that Power may move Which has withdrawn 
his being to its own : Which wields the world with never-wearied love, Sustains it 
from beneath, and kindles it above.’ Shelley is speaking of one who has ceased to 
live in the body; but the Hermetist holds that even in this life a man may, if 
he Mire become one with ‘the Power which wields the world’, and so ‘ become 
eternal’, 








334 CORPVS HERMETICVM 


πράγματα, ποιότητας, ποσότητας. Here πράγματα means οὐσίας 
or ὑποκείμενα, the ‘substances’ in which qualities and magnitudes 
inhere. The use of these terms in a document in which the 
technical language of philosophy is deliberately avoided shows that 
by this time a scheme of categories based on those of Aristotle and 
the Stoics had passed into popular usage. 

§ ata. ἐὰν δὲ κατακλείσῃς cou τὴν ψυχὴν ἐν τῷ σώματι. Cf. Philo 
Quis rer, div. heres 14. 68, Wendland III, p. 16: τίς οὖν γενήσεται 
κληρονόμος; οὐχ ὃ μένων ἐν τῇ τοῦ σώματος εἱρκτῇ [λογισμὸς] καθ᾽ 
ἑκούσιον γνώμην, ἀλλ᾽ ὁ λυθεὶς τῶν δεσμῶν καὶ ἐλευθερωθεὶς καὶ ἔξω 
τειχῶν προεληλυθώς, καὶ καταλελοιπώς, εἰ οἷόν τε τοῦτο εἰπεῖν, αὐτὸς 
ἑαυτόν. 

If you ‘shut your soul up in your body’, you have nothing in 
common with God, and cannot ‘ know’ God, or have that intuition 
of him which would make you one with him. There is no Greek 
word equivalent to ‘ person’ or ‘personality’; but σῶμα, in such a 
connexion as this, serves to express the notion of the separate and 
isolated ego. To ‘shut one’s soul up in one’s body’ means to shut 
oneself up in one’s separate personality,’ and to be concerned solely 
about one’s petty personal interests. The body (or τὸ αἰσθητικόν, 
which has its root in the body,) is that which isolates the individual 
man ; it is through embodiment that the human soul is individualized, 
and severed from ‘the soul of the All’ (Corp. X. 7). The body 
exists only at one particular place and time; and as long as a man — 
limits himself to his body, he is tethered to that one place and that 
one time. Such a man is interested in things only as they affect 
him through his body, i. e. only so far as they are or may be pro- 
ductive of pleasure or pain to him through his bodily senses. He 
is φιλοσώματος ; that is to say, he is φίλαυτος in the bad sense οὗ 
that ambiguous term ; he is ‘self-seeking’. For him, the universe 
is centred in his separate and narrowly limited ego; and his life 
is consequently filled with selfish anxieties. He is afraid of every- 
thing around him (φοβεῖται γῆν καὶ θάλασσαν), because he thinks 


1 John Smith, the ‘ Cambridge Platonist’, speaks with similar contempt of ‘a 
soul confined within the private and narrow cell of its own particular being’, (Inge, — 
Christian Mysticism, p. 292.) 

Something like this was already taught by Heraclitus, who seems to have held 
that it is the earthy element in man that separates him from the universal soul, and 
so causes delusion and moral evil (O. Gilbert, Griechische Neligionsphilosophie, 

. 77-79). Compare Apollonius Tyaneus, Zf, 58, quoted in note on Corp. 

αν, 








LIBELLVS XI. ii: §§ 20b-22a 335 


of things only as affecting his own private interests; he is always 
asking with a shudder ‘ what is going to happen to me?’ 

On the subject of separate personality, and the meaning of ‘ self- 

sion’, see Inge, Personal idealism and mysticism, ch. 4, ‘The 
problem of personality ’. 

§ arb. ἡ γὰρ τελεία κακία τὸ ἀγνοεῖν τὸν θεόν (τὸ θεῖον MSS.). 
Cf. Corp. X. 8b, 9: κακία δὲ ψυχῆς ἀγνωσία... .. ἀρετὴ ψυχῆς 

ὥσις. 

ὁδός ἐστιν εὐθὺ τοῦ ἀγαθοῦ φέρουσα ---(ὁ. é. εὐθεῖα, ἰδία τ. ἀ. φ. MSS.) 
Probably ῥᾳδία was inserted here by error from the following clause, 
and εὐθυραιδια was changed into ευθειαιδια. To know God is the 
good ; therefore, if a man is capable of knowing God, and wills and 
hopes to do so, he is on the way which leads to the good. The pupil 
has not yet attained to gvosis, but he is starting on the way to it. 

πανταχοῦ συναντήσει ((σοιν) (6 beds). In everything which meets 
your eyes, God will manifest himself to you ; for wherever there is 
life, there God is at work. Cf. Philo De fuga et invent. 25. 141, 
Wendland III, p. 140: ἡ δὲ rod... θεοῦ ζήτησις εὐφραίνει μὲν εὐθὺς 
ἰόντας ἐπὶ τὴν σκέψιν, ἀτελὴς δ᾽ οὐ γίνεται, προῦπαντῶντος (τοῦ θεοῦ) 
+++ καὶ ἐπιδεικνυμένου ἑαυτὸν τοῖς γλιχομένοις ἰδεῖν, οὐχ οἷός ἐστιν, 
ἀμήχανον yap... ἀλλ᾽ ὡς ἐνεχώρει γενητὴν φύσιν τῇ ἀπερινοήτῳ δυνάμει 
προσβαλεῖν. ‘ Ophite Zva-evangelium’ (Reitzenstein Poim. p. 242): 
1 heard a voice like thunder, which spoke to me and said ἐγὼ σὺ καὶ 
σὺ ἐγώ, καὶ ὅπου ἐὰν ἧς, ἐγὼ ἐκεῖ εἰμι, καὶ ἐν ἅπασίν εἰμι ἐσπαρμένος, 
καὶ ὅθεν ἐὰν θέλῃς συλλέγεις με, ἐμὲ δὲ συλλέγων ἑαυτὸν συλλέγεις. 

οὐδὲν γάρ ἐστιν ὃ οὐκ ἔστιν [εἰκόνι] (ἐκεῖνος), It would also be 
possible to write ἐν ᾧ οὐκ ἔστιν ἐκεῖνος, or ὃ οὐκ ἔστιν ἐν ἐκείνῳ (cf. 
8, 208, τὸν θεὸν ... πάντα ἐν ἑαυτῷ ἔχειν). Perhaps εἰκόνι may have 
come from εἰκὼν (ἐκείνου) ; the words εἰκών εἶτα φῇς might easily be 
_ altered into εἰκόνι ταφῆς, the reading of codd. Corp. 

§22a. εἶτα φὴς “ἀόρατος ὁ beds”; Platonists commonly said that 
God is ἀόρατος ; in saying that God is ὅρατος, the writer is asserting a 
paradox. Cf. Corp. V tit.: Ὅτι (πῇ piv?) ἀφανὴς (6) θεός, (πῇ δὲ Ὁ) 
φανερώτατός ἐστι. Corp. XIV. 3 as emended: ἐπεὶ δὲ τὰ γεννητὰ 
ὁρώμενά ἐστι, κἀκεῖνος δὴ ὁρατός" διὰ τοῦτο γὰρ ποιεῖ, ἵνα ὅρατος ἦ. 

A ‘ sy ἫΝ ; si 
Be cat enh. a ae 
Sea, in the bursting seed or opening flower;... in the procession of life ever 
entering afresh, and solemnly passing by and dropping off; I do not think we 


should discern him any more on the grass of Eden, or beneath the moonlight of 
Gethsemane,’ ‘The ‘ procession of life’ is the μεταβολή of Corp. ΧΙ. ii. 














336 CORPVS HERMETICVM 


ε 


(8) νοῦς ὁρᾶται ἐν τῷ νοεῖν, ὁ θεὸς ἐν τῷ ποιεῖν, ὃ νοῦς here means — 
one’s own mind’. Neither ὁ νοῦς nor 6 θεός is ‘visible’ in the 
literal sense of the word; but both are ‘visible’ in the sense that 
we can apprehend them through their working. My mind, as 
a substance, is hidden from me; but I am conscious of my thoughts, 
which are the workings of my mind, and in that way I can ‘see’ 
my mind. Similarly, God, as a substance, is hidden from me; 
but I see his workings around me, and feel them within me, and 
thereby I can ‘see’ God. In the view of this writer, God is the © 
universal νοῦς, (‘the one Knower’, as W. James expresses it,) and 
πάντα τὰ ὄντα are his νοήματα (ὃ 20 8). 

§ 22 Ὁ. ταῦτά σοι ἐπὶ τοσοῦτον πεφανέρωται, The teacher refers back 
to the words of the pupil in ὃ 1b: σοὶ γὰρ ἂν καὶ μόνῳ πιστεύσαιμι 
τὴν περὶ τούτου φανέρωσιν. 

τὰ δὲ ἄλλα πάντα ὁμοίως κατὰ σεαυτὸν νόει. Having once been 
started on the right track, the pupil will be able to think things 
out for himself. Cf. Corp. IX. 10: ὃ δὲ νοῦς (the pupil’s mind), 
. « « ὑπὸ τοῦ λόγου (the teacher’s words) μέχρι τινὸς ὁδηγηθείς, φθάνει 
μέχρι τῆς ἀληθείας. Corp, XIII. 15: ὁ Ποιμάνδρης . . . πλέον μοι 


. οὗ παρέδωκεν, εἰδὼς ὅτι ἀπ᾿ ἐμαυτοῦ δυνήσομαι πάντα νοεῖν. 


LIBELLVS XII. i 


It is evident that Corp. XII consists of two distinct documents, 
which I call XII. i and XII. ii. We may suppose that XII, ii stood — 
next after XII. i in a collection of ‘discourses of Hermes to Tat’, 
and that the two documents came to be read as one, in conse- 
quence of the disappearance of the title of the second. ὙΠῸ 
contents of XII. i, which ends at § 14a, are summed up in 86: 
‘We are now concerned with mind; and the questions we have — 
to consider are these:—what mind can do, and how it admits of 
differences; ... for not in all men does it quench angry passion 
and desire.’ This document then might be described as περὶ vod 
ἀνθρωπίνου, ‘concerning mind in man’. The beginning of ΧΙ]. ii 
is lost; but what remains of it (§§ 14 b-23 b) might be described as 
περὶ ζωῆς. It has nothing to do with νοῦς, and is in no way con- 
nected with the teaching of XII, 1, 








LIBELLVS XII. i 337 


Contents 


Mind is of the very substance of God. It is diffused by God, as 
light is diffused by the sun. It enters into men, and makes some 
of them divine ; but the souls of beasts are devoid of it. In men, 
mind works good, by counteracting their natural impulses; but in 
beasts, it ‘co-operates with’(?) the natural impulses. The human 
soul, when embodied, is depraved by the evil influence of pleasure ; 
mind heals this disease of the soul by means of medicinal pain. 
But those men in whose souls mind does not bear rule are like the 
beasts; they indulge their appetites without restraint, and thereby 
incur the worst of evils, and suffer the punishment ordained for 
- them by God. §§ 1-4. 

But are not men compelled by Fate to do evil deeds? And if 
so, how can they justly be punished for these deeds? The answer 
to this question is that it is only ‘irrational’ men (i.e, those men 
_ whose souls are not governed by mind) that are compelled by Fate 
to do wicked deeds ; (and such men deserve the punishment which 
follows, because it is their own fault that they have rejected the 
_ guidance of mind, and by doing so, have put themselves under the 
dominion of Fate.) The rational man and the irrational alike are 
subject to Fate in respect of what befalls their bodies; (e.g. both 
alike must suffer death ;) but the rational man is not subject to 
Fate in respect of his actions ; Fate cannot compel him to commit 
a crime. Mind is superior to Fate, and has power to place above 
the reach of Fate the human soul in which it resides. §§ 5-9. 

Is mind liable to ‘passive affections’ (πάθη) All things which 
enter into body are passively affected; mind therefore, when it is 
embodied (i.e. when it resides in a man’s soul during his earthly 
life), is passively affected ; but it ceases to be passively affected when 
it is freed from the body. §§ το, rr. 

Men are distinguished from beasts by the possession of mind and 
speech. If a man rightly uses these two gifts of God, he is almost an 
equal of the gods in this life, and after death he will dwell among the 
gods. The beasts do not possess speech ; and among men, though 
languages differ, speech is one and the same in all nations. Speech 
is an image of mind; and mind is an image of God. §§ 12, 13a. 

Soul is in body, mind is in soul, and God is in mind. As air is 
finer than gross matter, so soul is finer than air, mind than soul, 
and God than mind. God acts on all things; mind acts on soul, 
soul acts on air, and air acts on gross matter. §§13b, 14a. 

2806°2 vs 


Re OO ΔΗ  _ ΨΜ ΜΜΜΛΜπ 





338 CORPVS HERMETICVM 


Sources, The doctrine of XII. i is mainly Platonic ; but it shows 
signs of Stoic influence. The writer's conception of νοῦς, and of the 
function of νοῦς in the human soul, is Platonic. His account of the 
effect of embodiment on a previously unembodied human soul (§ 2, 
ψυχὴ . os ἐν σώματι γενομένη. . κακίζεται) is derived from Plato (cf, 
Pl. Zim. 42.4); and his description of vice as disease of the soul 
(§ 3) may have been suggested by Pl. Zim. 86 8. He follows Plato 
in coupling θυμός and ἐπιθυμία (§ 4 and ὃ 6). His notion of νοῦς 
παθητός (§§ Το, 11) may perhaps have been suggested by the Aristo- » 
telian doctrine of ὁ παθητικὸς νοῦς. The influence of Stoicism is to 
be seen in the discussion of εἱμαρμένη (§§ 5-9); in the sentence 
τῆς μὲν ὕλης τὸ λεπτομερέστατον . . . θεός (ὃ r4a); and perhaps in 
the meaning given to the word οὐσία (§ 1). The term ὁ προφορικὸς 
λόγος (ὃ 12) is of Stoic origin; but the clause in which it occurs is 
probably an interpolation. The ἀήρ of ὃ 14a corresponds to the 
πνεῦμα of the Stoics; but I do not know from what source the 
Hermetist derived this use of ἀήρ. 

The writer quotes three sayings from Hermetic dialogues in which 
the part of teacher was assigned to the Agathos Daimon ; and one 
of these sayings (§ 1, rods μὲν θεοὺς ἀνθρώπους εἶπεν ἀθανάτους x.7..) 
is derived from Heraclitus, presumably through Stoic intermediaries. 
He also refers to an earlier discourse of Hermes to Tat concerning 
εἱμαρμένη. 

It is possible that the writer’s use of νόμος in place of δίκη (§§ 4 fin, 
and 9) came from a Jewish source. I can find nothing else of 
Jewish origin in XII. i: and there is no trace of Christian” 
influence. 






Date. The combination of Stoic conceptions with Platonism 
excludes the possibility of any date earlier than the first century B, c, 
The discourse referred to in ὃ 5 was probably one of the διεξοδικοὶ 
λόγοι; and if so, some of the documents known by that name 
must have been in existence before XII. i was written. 

The fact that the writer quotes from dialogues in which the Agathos 
Daimon gave instruction to Hermes may be taken to indicate that 
᾿ this document is one of the later Hermetica; and we may σοηοϊᾶα. 
that it was written in the second or third century 4. D., and more 
probably in the third century than in the second. 





Title. περὶ vod Γκοινοῦ], The epithet κοινοῦ, which yields no satis 
factory sense, may be accounted for as a corruption of ajivov, i. 8. 


ἀνθρωπίνου. 








LIBELLVS ΧΙ 1: δ. 339 


ΟΠ 8. Ὁ νοῦς... ἐξ αὐτῆς τῆς τοῦ θεοῦ οὐσίας ἐστίν. What is 
meant by οὐσία here? In Plato, οὐσία is commonly contrasted 
with γένεσις, and applied to τὰ νοητά as opposed to τὰ αἰσθητά. 
Aristotle distinguishes three uses of the word οὐσία, Mefaph. Ζ. 3, 
102922: τρόπον μέν τινα ἡ ὕλη λέγεται (οὐσία), ἄλλον δὲ τρόπον ἡ μορφή 
(ἡ φ. τὸ εἶδος), τρίτον δὲ τὸ ἐκ τούτων (i. ε. τὸ σύνθετον ἐξ εἴδους καὶ ὕλης, 
the concrete individual thing). The Stoics, who did not accept 
either the Platonic doctrine of νοητά or the Aristotelian doctrine of 
εἴδη, used the word οὐσία in the first of Aristotle’s three senses, 
To them, the οὐσία of a thing meant the material substance of 
which the thing consists. The word ἐξ shows that the writer of 
XII. i, in his use of οὐσία, has been influenced by the Stoic usage. 
The meaning of his opening sentence is that vots, wherever it 
presents itself, (e.g. the νοῦς which operates in an individual human 
soul,) ‘comes out of’, or is a portion of, the very substance of 
which God consists. But he is conscious that this statement might 
seem to imply that God consists of some maverial substance, such 
as fire (cf. Corf. 1V. 1b); and in order to guard against this mis- 
understanding, he adds εἴ γέ τις ἐστιν οὐσία θεοῦ κιτιλ. The ‘sub- 
stance of which God consists’ is not material; what it is, ‘God 
only knows’. It is the ἀσώματον spoken of in Corp. IV ; but what 
that is, no man can say precisely. 

εἴ γέ τις ἔστιν οὐσία θεοῦ. Cf. Corp. VI. 4b as emended: ἡ οὐσία 
τοῦ θεοῦ, εἴ γε οὐσίαν ἔχει, τὸ καλόν ἐστι καὶ τὸ ἀγαθόν. 

οὐκ ἔστιν ἀποτετμημένος τῆς οὐσιότητος τοῦ θεοῦ. When οὐσία, 
through Aristotelian and Stoic influence, had acquired the meaning 
of ‘a concrete (material or quasi-material) substance’, it became 
necessary to coin the word οὐσιότης to express the abstract notion 
of ‘substantial existence’. The writer hesitates to attribute οὐσία 
to God, and therefore here prefers to use the abstract term. 

ὥσπερ ἡπλωμένος, καθάπερ τὸ τοῦ ἡλίου φῶς. ἡπλωμένος, ‘unfolded’, 
is here used in the sense ‘spread abroad’, ‘diffused’. (Perhaps we 
ought to read ἐξηπλωμένος,,) God radiates νοῦς, as the sun radiates 
light, Cf. Corp. 11. τ2 Ὁ. Plotinus 5. 1. 6 (speaking of the generation 
of νοῦς from the One): δεῖ οὖν, ἀκινήτου ὄντος (τοῦ ἑνός), εἴ τι δεύτερον 
per αὐτό, οὐ προσνεύσαντος οὐδὲ βουληθέντος οὐδὲ ὅλως κινηθέντος ὑπο- 
στῆναι αὐτός. πῶς οὖν; . .. (δεῖ νοῆσαι) περίλαμψιν ἐξ αὐτοῦ μέν, ἐξ 
αὐτοῦ δὲ μένοντος, οἷον ἡλίου τὸ περὶ αὐτὸν λαμπρὸν φῶς περιθέον, ἐξ 
αὐτοῦ ἀεὶ γεννώμενον μένοντος. Jb. ὃ 7: δεῖ πως εἶναι ἐκείνου τὸ γεννώ- 
μενον, καὶ ἀποσώζειν πολλὰ αὐτοῦ, [καὶ εἶναι ὁμοιότητα πρὸς αὐτόν,] 

22 








340 CORPVS HERMETICVM 


ὥσπερ καὶ τὸ φῶς τοῦ ἡλίου. Plotinus 5. 3. 12: κατὰ λόγον θησόμεθα 
τὴν μὲν ἀπ᾽ αὐτοῦ (sc. τοῦ ἑνὸς) οἷον ῥυεῖσαν ἐνέργειαν ὡς ἀπὸ ἡλίου 
(φῶς). φῶς τι οὖν θησόμεθα καὶ πᾶσαν τὴν νοητὴν φύσιν, αὐτὸν δὲ ἐπ᾽ 
ἄκρῳ τῷ νοητῷ ἑστηκότα βασιλεύειν ἐπ᾽ αὐτοῦ, οὐκ ἐξώσαντα ἀπ᾽ αὐτοῦ 
τὸ ἐκφανέν. . . . οὐδὲ γὰρ ἀποτέτμηται τὸ ἀπ᾽ αὐτοῦ, οὐδ᾽ αὖ ταὐτὸν 
αὐτῷ. Abammonis resp. 8. 2 (TZestim.): the second God (the Demi- 
urgus-vots) ἀπὸ τοῦ ἑνὸς ἑαυτὸν ἐξέλαμψε. 

οὗτος δὲ ὁ νοῦς ἐν μὲν ἀνθρώποις “Beds! ἐστι. ‘The words ἐν μὲν 
ἀνθρώποις point forward to ἐν δὲ τοῖς ἀλόγοις ζῴοις below. The 
statement that ‘in men indeed νοῦς is a god’ would imply that 
under other conditions, e.g. when it acts on beasts, νοῦς is not 
a god. But this cannot be right. Mind operates differently in the 
case of men and beasts, but must be equally divine in all its 
different operations; as we have just been told, it is of one sub- 
stance with God, and is emitted by God. The author’s meaning 
might perhaps be expressed by writing ἐν μὲν ἀνθρώποις θειότητος 
ἐνεργητικός ἐστι. ‘In men, mind produces divinity by its working’ ; 
i.e. mind makes men divine, but it does not make beasts divine: 
This would serve to lead on to the following statement, ‘therefore 
some men are divine’. 

διὸ καί τινες ἀνθρώπων θε(ϊγοί εἰσι. A Hermetist might say that 
‘some men are gods’; but if he said this, he could not go on to 
say that ‘the humanity of these men is “ear fo deity’, i.e. that 
they are nearly gods, but not quite. It is therefore necessary to 
alter θεοί into θεῖοι. 

ὁ ᾿Αγαθὸς Δαίμων. .. εἶπεν. Three utterances of the Agathos 
Daimon are quoted by Hermes in XII. 1. (See § 8 and § 130.) 
‘The Agathos Daimon’ is a name given by Greeks to the Egyptian 
god Khnum; and the writer assumes that this god was the first 
teacher of the gvosis, and had given oral instruction to Hermes. 
We know that there were written dialogues in which the Agathos 
Daimon took the part of teacher ; and the writer of XII. i probably 
found in one or more of those dialogues the three sayings which he 
attributes to the Agathos Daimon. 

τοὺς μὲν θεοὺς (ἀνθρώπους) εἶπεν ἀθανάτους, τοὺς δὲ ἀνθρώπους θεοὺς 
θνητούς. This is a Stoic adaptation of a saying of Heraclitus. See 
Corp, X. 25. 

ἐν δὲ τοῖς ἀλόγοις ζῴοις (. . .) ἡ φύσις ἐστίν. The predicate is 
lost. Perhaps the Hermetist wrote something like (ἀντὶ vot) ἡ φύσις 
ἐστίν" ‘in the irrational animals instinct takes the place of mind’, 








LIBELLVS XII. i: δ 1-2 341 


Cf. Corp. IX. 1 Ὁ as επιεπάθα : ἐν γὰρ τοῖς ἄλλοις ζῴοις ἡ αἴσθησις τῇ 
φύσει ἥνωται, ἐν δὲ ἀνθρώποις τῇ νοήσει. 

ὃ 2. ὅπου γὰρ [ψυχή, ἐκεῖ καὶ νοῦς ἐστιν, ὥσπερ ὅπου καὶ] ζωή, ἐκεῖ 
καὶ ψυχή ἐστιν. The traditional text cannot be right; for the state- 
ment ‘wherever there is soul there is mind’ is contradicted by the 
following words, ‘in the irrational animals the soul is devoid of 
mind’. If we cut out ψυχή, ἐκεῖ... ὅπου καί, what remains becomes 
intelligible. There is ψυχή wherever there is ζωή (i.e. in all ζῷα, 
whether rational or irrational); but in the irrational ζῷα, the ψυχή 
is devoid of νοῦς. It would be possible to make sense in another 
way, by writing ὅπου yap ψυχὴ (ἀνθρωπίνη), ἐκεῖ καὶ νοῦς ἐστιν, and 
cutting out ὥσπερ ὅπου καὶ ζωή, ἐκεῖ καὶ ψυχή ἐστιν. The meaning 
would then be ‘ wherever there is a human soul, there is mind; but 
the souls of irrational animals are devoid of mind’. 

ἡ ψυχή [ζωή] ἐστι κενὴ τοῦ νοῦ, ζωή seems to have been inserted 
as an alternative for ψυχή. 
᾿ς ἐργάζεται γὰρ αὐταῖς (αὐτὰς εἰς MSS.) τὸ ἀγαθόν. Beasts cannot 

attain to the good ; but men can attain to it, through the operation 
of νοῦς in them. 

τοῖς μὲν ἀλόγοις τῇ (ἐ)δί(ᾳ) ἑκάστου φύσει συνεργεῖ. Cf. ὃ 4: συν- 
εργὸς γὰρ αὐταῖς γενόμενος κιτιλ, § το; ἔλεγες γὰρ τὸν νοῦν ἐν τοῖς 
ἀλόγοις ζῴοις φύσεως δίκην ἐνεργεῖν, συνεργοῦντα αὐτῶν ταῖς ὁρμαῖς. 
What does the Hermetist mean by saying that νοῦς ‘co-operates 
with ’ the instincts or impulses of beasts? We were told above that 
‘in beasts the soul is devoid of vots’; and in § 12, it is said that 
God has given νοῦς (and λόγος) to man παρὰ πάντα τὰ ἄλλα Coa, 
which implies that νοῦς has not been given to beasts. We might 
therefore have expected the writer to say that νοῦς does not operate 
at all in beasts. But he tells us that it does operate in them, though 
not in the same way that it operates in men, or at least in ‘ rational’ 
men. (Cf. ὃ 6: ἐνδιάφορός ἐστιν (ὃ νοῦς), ἐν μὲν ἀνθρώποις τοιόσδε, ἐν 
δὲ τοῖς ἀλόγοις ζῴοις ἠλλαγμένος.) We might perhaps reconcile these 
apparently inconsistent statements by assuming the writer’s view to 
be that νοῦς acts on men from within, and on beasts from without.! 
The human soul has νοῦς within it; and the νοῦς within, if it ‘takes 
command’ of the soul, works against the natural impulses. A beast’s 
soul has no vots within it; but a beast, being a part of the universe, 

1 It would be possible so to alter § 1 as to make it express this view; e.g. one 


might write there οὗτος δὲ ὁ νοῦς ἐν μὲν ἀνθρώποις [Beds] (évdov ἔνοικός) ἐστι"... ἐν 
δὲ τοῖς ἀλόγοις Caos (ἀντὶ νοῦ ἔνοικοο) ἡ φύσις ἐστίν. 


παν δ, ee EE -΄ 











342 CORPVS HERMETICVM 


is governed by the divine νοῦς to which the whole universe is 
subject, and by which the laws of nature are determined; and thus 
its instinctive actions result from the working of νοῦς, in the same 
sense that the falling of a stone results from the working of νοῦς, 
But if this was the Hermetist’s meaning, he ought to have said that 
the instincts are implanted in the beast by νοῦς (i.e. by the mind 
which governs the universe) ; and he does not say that. He speaks 
of instinct as something which exists apart from the action of vois, 
and says, not that νοῦς produces the instincts, but that νοῦς ‘co- 
operates with’ them ; and this I am unable to explain. 

ψυχὴ γὰρ πᾶσα, ἐν σώματι γενομένη, εὐθέως ὑπό τε τῆς λύπης καὶ τῆς 
ἡδονῆς κακίζεται. Cf. Corp. Χ. το Ὁ : ψυχὴν παιδὸς θέασαι κιτιλ, PI, 
Tim. 42 A: ὅπότε δὴ σώμασιν ἐμφυτευθεῖεν (αἱ ψυχαί)... ., πρῶτον μὲν 
αἴσθησιν ἀναγκαῖον εἴη μίαν πᾶσιν ἐκ βιαίων παθημάτων ξύμφυτον γίγνε- 
σθαι, δεύτερον δὲ ἡδονῇ καὶ λύπῃ μεμιγμένον ἔρωτα κ-τιλ. 

§ 8. ἀντιπράσσων αὐτῶν τοῖς προλήμμασιν, It is to be inferred from 
the context that the προλήμματα of the soul are its animal instincts or 
natural impulses. But does the word mean ‘things which the soul 
has taken hold of’, or ‘things which have taken hold of the soul’? 
As the writer goes on to speak of σῶμα προειλημμένον ὑπὸ νόσου, it 
appears that he meant προλήμματα to be understood in the latter sense. 

ὥσπερ (yap) ἰατρὸς ἀγαθὸς λυπεῖ τὸ copa... καίων ἢ τέμνων. This 
simile may have been suggested by Pl. Gorg. 477 Ἐπ481 Β. Compare 
especially Gorg. 480 c: one ought to force oneself and one’s friends 
μὴ ἀποδειλιᾶν, ἀλλὰ παρέχειν μύσαντα καὶ ἀνδρείως ὥσπερ τέμνειν καὶ 
κάειν ἰατρῷ, τὸ ἀγαθὸν καὶ καλὸν διώκοντα, μὴ ὑπολογιζόμενον τὸ ἀλγεινόν, 
... ὅπως ay... ἀπαλλάττωνται τοῦ μεγίστου κακοῦ, ἀδικίας. 

ὁ νοῦς (τὴν) ψυχὴν λυπεῖ, ἐξυφαιρῶν αὐτῆς τὴν ἡδονήν. We were told 
above that both λύπη and ἡδονή deprave or vitiate the soul; i.e. ἃ 
man becomes vicious through seeking to escape from pain and to get 
pleasure. But here, λύπη is spoken of differently ; it is ἡδονή alone 
that vitiates the soul, and νοῦς counteracts the evil influence of 
ἡδονή by employing λύπη medicinally. The thwarting of the natural 
impulses is painful; but by enduring this pain, the man is cured of 
the moral disease which ‘ pleasure’ (i. e. indulgence of the natural 
impulse to seek pleasure and avoid pain) has produced in him. Cf, 
Synesius De insomniis 5, Migne 66, 1293D: ἀναγωγὸν 7 μετάνοια. 
++. καὶ διὰ τοῦτο τῇδέ τε κἀκεῖ χρείαν THY μεγίστην τε Kal ἀρίστην TH 
τάξει τῶν ὄντων αἱ Γκράσεις" (lege κολάσεις) παρέχονται, τὸ λυπηρὸν 
ἀντεισάγουσαι, καὶ τῆς ἐμπλήκτου χαρᾶς τὴν ψυχὴν ἐκκαθαίρουσαι" αἵ τε 





LIBELLVS ΧΙ] i: ξὲ 2-4 343 


ap’ ἀξίαν καλούμεναι συμφοραὶ μέγα μέρος συμβάλλονται πρὸς τὸ 
λῦσαι τὴν σχέσιν ἣν ἔχομεν πρὸς τὰ τῇδε... - ὡς οὐκ ἔστιν ὅπως ποτ᾽ 
ἂν ἀποστραφείη τὴν ὕλην ψυχὴ μηδενὶ κακῷ περὶ τὰ τῇδε προσκόπτουσα. 

τὴν ἡδονήν, ἀφ᾽ ἧς πᾶσα νόσος ψυχῆς γίνεται. Cf. Pl. Zim. 86 B: 
νόσον μὲν δὴ ψυχῆς ἄνοιαν ξυγχωρητέον. . . « ἡδονὰς δὲ καὶ λύπας ὑπερ- 
βαλλούσας τῶν νόσων μεγίστας θετέον τῇ ψυχῇ. 

νόσος δὲ μεγάλη ψυχῆς ἀθεότης. In the ἄθεος, ἡδονή or ἐπιθυμία 
rules unchecked ; he is governed wholly by his προλήμματα. The 
γοῦς, by which alone this disease of the soul can be cured, is the 
organ of gnosis ; it rids the man of ἀθεότης, and makes him εὐσεβής. 

§ 4. ὅσαι δὲ ψυχαὶ ἀνθρώπιναι οὐκ ἔτυχον κυβερνήτου τοῦ νοῦ. It is 
not quite clear whether the writer holds that νοῦς is present in all 
human souls, or that it is present in some only, and not in others. 
At any rate, it is in some men only that νοῦς acts as κυβερνήτης, 
ie. takes command, (Cf. ὃ 3 init.: ὅσαις ἂν οὖν ψυχαῖς 6 vous ἐπι- 
στατήσῃ. ὃ 7: of δὲ ἐλλόγιμοι, ὧν ἔφαμεν τὸν νοῦν ἡγεμονεύειν.) In 
other men, νοῦς fails to discharge its proper function of checking and 
thwarting the natural impulses ; and if the writer considers it to be 
present at all in such men, his view must be that it aids and abets 
the ὁρμαί instead of counteracting them. The words συνεργὸς yap 
αὐταῖς γενόμενος, if they were used with regard to men alone, might 
be thought to decide the question in favour of the latter alternative ; 
but the writer says that ὃ νοῦς συνεργεῖ ταῖς ὁρμαῖς in the case of 
beasts also (§ 10), and he denies that νοῦς is present in the souls 
of beasts (§ 2). 

συνεργὸς γὰρ αὐταῖς γενόμενος (ὁ νοῦς), καὶ ἀνέσας τὰς ἐπιθυμίας, 
(.. Ὁ εἰς ἃς φέρονται (αἱ ψυχαί). The verb of which ὁ νοῦς was the 
subject has been lost. According to the text of the MSS., εἰς ds 
means εἰς τὰς ἐπιθυμίας. But it would be more correct to say that 
the souls cis τὰς ἡδονὰς φέρονται τῇ ῥύμῃ τῆς ὀρέξεως (i.e. τῇ ἐπιθυμίᾳ). 
Perhaps the missing phrase contained the word ἡδονάς ; in that case, 
εἰς ds would mean εἰς ras ἡδονάς. 

ταύταις δὲ ὥσπερ τιμωρὸν Kal ἔλεγχον ὁ θεὸς ἐπέστησε τὸν νόμον. 
Does ταύταις mean ταύταις ταῖς ψυχαῖς, ΟΥ̓ ταύταις ταῖς κακίαις ὃ 
Probably the former. The νόμος is the penal law of God, It is 
elsewhere called δίκη; cf. Herm. af. Stob. xe. VIL. 2: ἡ δὲ δίκη 
τέτακται τιμωρὺς τῶν ἐπὶ γῆς ἁμαρτανόντων. In the words τιμωρὸν καὶ 
ἔλεγχον, punishment is placed before conviction, as in Virgil’s 
description of the procedure of Rhadamanthus, Aen. 6. 567: ‘casti- 
gatque auditque dolos subigitque fateri.’ 








344 CORPVS HERMETICVM 


ὃ 5. ὁ περὶ τῆς εἱμαρμένης λόγος, 8(v) ἔμπροσθέν μοι (διδεξελήλυθας 
(δ... ἐξεληλυθώς MSS.). The writer refers to a discourse of Hermes 
to Tat concerning εἱμαρμένη ; and we may perhaps infer from the 
word διεξελήλυθας that it was one of the διεξοδικοὺ λόγοι. Cf. Corp, 
V. La: καὶ τόνδε σοι τὸν λόγον, ὦ Τάτ, διεξελεύσομαι. See the extract 
from Hermes to Tat on πρόνοια, ἀνάγκη, and εἱμαρμένη, Stob, 
Ἔχε VIII. 

διὰ τί κολάζεται ὁ ἀναγκασάσης (ὁ ἐξ ἀνάγκης MSS.) τῆς εἱμαρμένης 
δράσας τὸ ἔργον; The Stoics asserted, in their physics, that all 
things without exception are determined ,by εἱμαρμένη; and from 
this it would seem to follow that men are not responsible for their 
actions. Chrysippus refused to accept that inference; but his 
endeavours to reconcile his doctrine of Fate with his belief in τὸ ἐφ’ 
ἡμῖν were not very successful. His arguments on this topic are 
criticized by Alexander Aphrod. De fafo (Arnim, Stoic. vet. fragm. 
II, pp. 295-297). Cf. Aulus Gellius 7, 2: ‘the opponents of 
Chrysippus say, “Si Chrysippus fato putat omnia moveri et regi, .. . 
peccata quoque hominum et delicta non suscensenda neque indu- 
cenda sunt ipsis voluntatibusque eorum, sed necessitati cuidam et 
instantiae quae oritur ex fato; ...et propterea nocentium poenas 
legibus inique constitutas, si homines ad maleficia non sponte 
veniunt, sed fato trahuntur.” Contra ea Chrysippus tenuiter multa 
et argute disserit.... Negat (Chrysippus) oportere ferri audirique 
homines aut nequam aut ignavos et nocentes et audaces, qui, cum 
in culpa et in maleficio revicti sunt, perfugiunt ad fati necessitatem 
tamquam in aliquod fani asylum, et quae pessime fecerunt, ea non 
suae temeritati, sed fato esse attribuenda dicunt.’ 

The Hermetists, being Platonists, had a way of escape from this 
ἀπορία which was not open to a Stoic. They accepted the Stoic 
doctrine of Heimarmene so far as things corporeal are concerned 
(χωρὶς ἐκείνης οὐδὲν τῶν σωματικῶν... γενέσθαι συμβαίνει); and 
holding that the animal impulses, in beasts and men alike, result 
from the influence of the body on the soul, they admitted that these 
impulses are determined by Fate, and that the lives and actions 
of those men in whom the ‘bodily passions’ work unchecked are 
wholly subject to that external power. Men of this class then they 
considered to be mere puppets, moved from without, like the beasts, 
by physical forces which are set in action by the movements of the 
heavenly bodies. But unlike the Stoics, they held that the corporeal 
world is not all; beside or above it is ‘the incorporeal’, and the 








LIBELLVS XII. i: §§ 5-6 345 


incorporeal is not subject to Heimarmene, νοῦς is incorporeal ; 
‘and the man in whose soul νοῦς rules lives in another world, on 
which physical forces have no bearing. (See Herm. af. Stob. Ζῖχε. 
XVIII. 3.) Such a man has ‘escaped from Heimarmene’. He is 
content to ‘let Heimarmene do what she will with her own clay, 
that is, with his body’ (Hermes in Zosimus i. 7, Zestim.); his heart 
is set on other and higher things, and nothing corporeal has power 
to influence him. (See Adammonis resp. το. αὶ (Testim.) on ‘release 
from the bonds of εἱμαρμένη.) According to the writer of Corp. IV, 
the gift of νοῦς is offered to all men; if a man wilfully rejects that 
gift, it is by his own fault that he remains a slave to Fate, and he 
deserves the punishment which follows. 

εἵμαρται δὲ καὶ (τὸν) τὸ κακὸν ποιήσαντα [τὸ] (κακὸν) παθεῖν. Cf. 
Diog. Laert. 7. 23: Zeno the Stoic δοῦλον ἐπὶ κλοπῇ, φασίν, ἐμα- 
στίγου" τοῦ δ᾽ εἰπόντος “ εἵμαρτό μοι κλέψαι", “ καὶ δαρῆναι", ἔφη. But 
the writer of XII. i says not only that both the crime and the 
punishment which follows it are ordained by Heimarmene, but also 
(if I understand the passage rightly) that the crime is ordained for 
the purpose of bringing about the punishment (διὰ τοῦτο (εἵμαρται 
αὐτὸν) δρᾶ(ν) (Ὁ), ἵνα πάθῃ) ; that is to say, Heimarmene determines 
that a man shall suffer, and compels him to commit the crime in 
order that he may incur the suffering. This in itself is no answer 
to Tat’s question, ‘Why are men punished for that which they are 
compelled todo?’ On the contrary, it would appear at first sight 
to emphasize the injustice of God’s government, and to represent 
Fate, the agent through whom God works, as a wantonly malignant 
power. But it must be interpreted in the light of what follows. 
The ἄλογος ἄνθρωπος, by the very fact that he has rejected God’s 
offered gift of νοῦς, (or rejected the guidance of the νοῦς which God has 
implanted in him,) already deserves punishment. Through his own 
fault, he is subject to Heimarmene ; and to Heimarmene is assigned 
the task of punishing him. Heimarmene discharges this task by 
compelling him to commit crimes, and thereby causing him to incur 
penal suffering. 

§ 6. νῦν δὲ περὶ vot ἐστιν ἡμῖν ὁ λόγος. The subject of Corp. XII.i 
is νοῦς, and not εἱμαρμένη ; but the doctrine of νοῦς has an important 
bearing on the problem of εἱμαρμένη, as Hermes proceeds to 
show, 

πῶς ἐνδιάφορός ἐστιν. ἐνδιάφορος must be taken to mean ‘having 
διαφοραί within it’; cf. ἔννους and ἔνθεος, See Corp. V. 7 and IX. 7, 


446 CORPVS HERMETICVM 


where the MSS. give ἐν διαφορᾷ, but perhaps we ought to read 
ἐνδιάφορα. 

ἐν δὲ τοῖς ἀλόγοις ζῴοις ἠλλαγμένος. In the case of the beasts, 
νοῦς operates differently. The writer probably means, not that 
there is νοῦς i beasts, but that the νοῦς by which the universe is 
governed acts on beasts from without, through the forces of nature, 
and the πάθη which those forces produce in the soul. In the case 
of beasts then, νοῦς operates in the form of εἱμαρμένη (the power by 
which corporeal things are governed); in the case of ‘rational’ 
men, in whose souls it works from within, νοῦς is opposed to εἷμαρ- 
μένη, and counteracts it. 

ἐν μὲν τοῖς ἀλόγοις ζῴοις οὐκ ἔστιν εὐεργετικός, (ἐν δὲ τοῖς ἀνθρώποις 
ἀγαθὸν ἐργάζεται,) ἀλλ᾽ ἀνομοίως (ἀνόμοιος MSS.). The words ἐν μὲν 
τοῖς ἀλόγοις ζῴοις κιτιλ. must have been followed by a corresponding 
statement introduced by ἐν δὲ rots ἀνθρώποις ; and as it is clear that 
in the phrase τό τε θυμικὸν καὶ τὸ ἐπιθυμητικὸν σβεννύων the writer is 
speaking of the action of νοῦς in men, and not in beasts, the words 
ἐν δὲ rots ἀνθρώποις must have stood where I have placed them, 
The conjecture ἀγαθὸν ἐργάζεται is suggested by ὃ 2: ὃ γὰρ νοῦς 
ψυχῶν ἐστιν εὐεργέτης ἀνθρώπων' ἐργάζεται yap αὐταῖς τὸ ἀγαθόν. 

τοὺς μὲν ἐλλογίμους [ἄνδρας] δεῖ νοεῖν. If the reading of the MSS. 
is sound, ἄνδρας must here mean ‘true men’, or ‘fully developed 
men’ (τέλειοι, Corp. 1V. 4), as opposed to mere ἄνθρωποι. But the 
combination of the two distinct predicates ἐλλογίμους and ἄνδρας is 
awkward ; and it seems best to cut out ἄνδρας. The word ἐλλόγιμος 
here means ἔλλογος, ‘having reason in oneself’, The ἐλλόγιμος is 
the man οὗ ὃ νοῦς ἡγεμονεύει. I have not found any instance else- 
where of the use of ἐλλόγιμος in this sense. 

πάντες δὲ of ἄνθρωποι εἱμαρμένῃ ὑπόκεινται. ‘All men are subject 
to destiny,’ sc. in respect of their bodies. As it is expressed below, 
πάντες πάσχουσι τὰ εἱμαρμένα. All men must suffer bodily pain and 
death, But the ἐλλόγιμος does not care what befalls his body, and 
does not allow himself to be influenced by πάθη which have their 
origin in the body; he is therefore, as far as his true self is con- 
cerned, free from the dominion of εἱμαρμένη. 

(ἐπεὶ) καὶ γενέσει καὶ μεταβολῇ" ἀρχὴ yap καὶ τέλος ταῦτα εἱμαρμένης. 
μεταβολή here, as often, is a euphemism for θάνατος. Since εἱμαρ- 
μένη deals only with things corporeal, it can have power over a man 
only during his embodiment ; its hold on him begins at his birth, 
and ends at his death, The unembodied soul before birth, and 














LIBELLVS XII. i: δῷ 6-7 347 


the disembodied soul after death, are beyond the reach of 
εἱμαρμένη. 

8 7. ὁ μοιχὸς οὐ κακός; . .. ᾿Αλλ᾽ ὁ ἐλλόγιμος... οὐ μοιχεύσας 
πείσεται, ἀλλ᾽ ὡς (6) μοιχεύσας. The irrational man is subject to 
εἱμαρμένη in two distinct ways; Fate first compels him to commit 
crimes, and then inflicts pain or death on him by way of punishment 
for the crimes he has committed. (Perhaps the case of which the 
writer is thinking is that in which these penalties are inflicted by 
the sentence of a human judge.) Hence Tat, having been told 
that the rational man, as well as the irrational, πάσχει τὰ εἱμαρμένα, 
infers that the rational man also is compelled by Fate to commit 
crimes; and if he commits crimes, how can it be said that he is 
not xaxés? Hermes’ answer amounts to this, that the rational 
man is subject to Heimarmene in one of the two ways spoken of, 
but not in the other. Fate inflicts pain and death on the rational 
man as well as on the irrational, but does not and cannot compel 
the rational man to do wicked deeds. The rational man then 
πείσεται ὡς (ὃ) μοιχεύσας, i. 6. will undergo pain and death even as 
the wicked man does, but οὐ μοιχεύσει, and therefore od μοιχεύσας 
πείσεται. (E.g. Fate may cause a rational man to be unjustly 
condemned by a human judge, and to suffer the same penalty as 
the guilty ; but Fate cannot make him guilty.) ‘It is impossible 
for any man to escape from death; but the man who has mind can 
escape from wickedness.’ 

It might be objected that, if this is so, Fate acts unjustly in 
inflicting on the rational and innocent man the same sufferings 
which she inflicts on the irrational and guilty. But to this objection 
the Hermetist could have given an answer. The irrational man 
undergoes death κακὸς dv; and the κακός is φιλοσώματος. (Cf. 
φιλοσώματος ὧν καὶ κακός, Corp. XI. ii. 21a.) He has identified 
himself with his body, and his interests with corporeal things; the 
destruction of his body is therefore felt by him as an evil; and this 
evil comes upon him as a punishment for the crimes he has 
committed. To the rational man, on the other hand, death is no 
evil; he ‘hates his body’ (Corp. IV. 6b), and quits it willingly, 
He has deserved no punishment; and he suffers no punishment in 
dying.’ Fate can deal only with his body; and nothing that may 
be done to his body concerns him, We may suppose that the 


1 ©You can kill me, but you cannot do me any harm,’ says Socrates, Pl. Aol, 
30 6, ἢ. : 


i 


348 CORPVS HERMETICVM 


writer would have answered to this effect if the objection had been 
raised. But the objection is an obvious one, and it seems some- 
what surprising that he did not think it worth while to give his 
answer to it. Perhaps the matter had been more fully dealt with 
in the earlier treatise on εἱμαρμένη to which he refers, and he was 
unwilling to interrupt his exposition of the doctrine of νοῦς in 
Corp. XII.i by further discussion of the problem of Fate. ΤῈ is 
possible that there is a lacuna of some length before μεταβολῆς 
ἀδύνατόν ἐστι διεκφυγεῖν, and that the passage would be less obscure 
if we had the lost words before us. 

§ 8. τοῦ ᾿Αγαθοῦ Aaipovos . . . ἤκουσα λέγοντος ἃ εἰ καὶ [εἰ] ἐγγράφως 
(ἐξγεδεδώκει κιτιλ. The MSS. give ἤκουσα λέγοντος ἀεί" καὶ εἰ κιτιλ. 
But ἀεί yields no satisfactory sense ; (if any temporal adverb were 
used, it should rather be ποτέ, as below, ἤκουσα γοῦν αὐτοῦ ποτε 
λέγοντος ;) and the object wanted for the verb (ἐξ)εδεδώκει may be 
supplied by writing ἃ εἰ in place of ἀεί. 

The tradition which the writer presupposes is that the god 
Agathos Daimon was the first teacher of the gwosts, and taught it 
orally to the man Hermes, but that Hermes was the first to set it 
down in writing, Hermes here expresses regret that the Agathos 
Daimon had not himself set down in writing, and so made 
more widely known, the saying which he proceeds to quote from 
him. 

ὡς πρωτόγονος θεός. The Agathos Daimon (Khnum) was the 
‘first-born’ god. In Kore Kosmu, Herm. af. Stob. Lxc, XXIII. 32, - 
Kamephis (i.e. Khnum) is called 6 προπάτωρ and ὃ πάντων προγενέ- 
otepos. According to the ancient theogony of Heliopolis, the epithet 
mpwréyoves should rather have been applied to Tum, who was said 
to have issued from the waters of the primal Ocean (Nu), and 
generated the other gods (Wiedemann, Xe/. of Anc. Lg., Eng. tr. 
p. 31). But Khnum seems to have held at Philae a position similar 
to that of Tum at Heliopolis; and in Hellenistic times, the primacy 
of Khnum was recognized in Lower Egypt also. The term πρωτύ- 
yovos was applied by the Orphici to their god Phanes ; the parts 
of the Orphic Theogonia in which Phanes was spoken of were 
probably composed in the Ptolemaic period, and may have been 
influenced by Egyptian doctrines concerning Tum or Khnum. 
Lactant. Div. inst. 1.5: ‘Orpheus... deum verum et magnum 
πρωτόγονον, ptimogenitum, appellat, quod ante ipsum nihil sit 
genitum, sed ab ipso sint cuncta generata. Eundem etiam Φάνητα 








LIBELLVS ΧΙ i: δὲ 7-8 349 


nominat’ Philo applies the adjectives πρωτόγονος and πρωτότοκος 
to the divine λόγος. 

τὰ πάντα κατιδών. The Agathos Daimon, being the ‘ first-born ἡ 
of the gods, (i.e. ‘second God’, and older than all except the ‘ first 
God’, who would be called, not πρωτόγονος, but ἀγέννητος,) was 
the only person who ‘had seen all things’ (i.e. had witnessed the 
creation of the universe from its first beginning ?); therefore, he 
alone knew the whole truth and could reveal it. 

Czy ἔστι τὰ πάντα... ποιεῖν ὅπερ βούλεται], This saying of the 
Agathos Daimon has lost all meaning through the corruption of 
the text; and its sense can only be guessed from what Hermes 
afterwards says about it (8 9). He sums up its contents in the words 
πάντων ἐπικρατεῖ ὃ νοῦς, . . . καὶ οὐδὲν αὐτῷ ἀδύνατον κοτ.λ. 5 and 
something like this may be recognized in the concluding words 
of the quotation (νοῦν, ἄρχοντα πάντων, . . . ποιεῖν ὅπερ βούλεται). But 
Hermes also says that Tat will find in the saying of the Agathos 
Daimon an answer to his question about Destiny, i. e. to the question 
‘Why is a man punished for his crimes, when Destiny has compelled 
him to commit them?’ (§ 5). The passage quoted contains no 
trace of the word εἱμαρμένη; but it must have included something 
which might be taken to mean what Hermes expresses in the words 
οὐδὲν (τῷ νῷ) ἀδύνατον, οὔτε εἱμαρμένης ὑπεράνω θεῖναι ψυχὴν ἀνθρωπίνην 
xt.d. We may presume then that the Agathos Daimon spoke of 
the relation between νοῦς and ψυχή in man, and asserted the 
sovereign power of vots in the soul of which it takes command. 
But there is little hope of restoring the text. It is impossible to 
discover any connexion with the subject under discussion in the 
words ἕν ἐστι τὰ πάντα; and perhaps we ought to read ἔνεστι (or 
ἔξεστι) τῷ (νῷ) πάντα, ‘all things are possible for mind ᾿ Whe 
author cannot have written νοητὰ σώματα, which would be equivalent 
to ἀσώματα σώματα. He may possibly have written (τὰ) νοητὰ 
(καὶ é)rdpara; but if so, the rest of that sentence has been lost. 
The words ζῶμεν δὲ δυνάμει καὶ ἐνεργείᾳ καὶ αἰῶνι are utterly devoid 
of meaning. It may be conjectured that οὖν δυνατόν is a corruption 
of οὐδὲν ἀδύνατον, which occurs in Hermes’ paraphrase below. The 
statement that νοῦς is the ψυχή of the supreme God (νοῦν . . . ψυχὴν 
ὄντα τοῦ θεοῦ) is unparalleled ; and it seems probable that the only 
ψυχή spoken of in this passage was the human soul. But if these 
words are corrupt, a similar, and perhaps consequent, corruption must 
be assumed in the corresponding words in ὃ 9 (ὁ νοῦς, ἡ τοῦ θεοῦ ψυχή). 





350 CORPVS HERMETICVM 


Perhaps the last part of the passage may have been something 
like this : dere) o(82)v (ἀγδύνατον νοῦν, ἄρχοντα πάντων, καὶ {ψυχὴν} 
(ἐνέργειαν ?) ὄντα τοῦ θεοῦ, ((Wuxiv)) ποιεῖν ὅπερ βούλεται. ‘It is not 
impossible for mind . . . to make what it wills of the soul (in which 
it resides)’. 

§ 9. τοὺς ἐριστικοὺς λόγους. The argument implied in Ταῖς 
question (ὃ 5, διὰ τί κολάζεται x.7.X.) is merely ‘contentious’. It 
may serve to disconcert an opponent ; but it gives no help to those 
who are seeking the truth. 

ὁ νοῦς [ἡ τοῦ θεοῦ ψυχή... It is difficult to believe that the phrase 
ἡ τοῦ θεοῦ ψυχή was written by the author. It may have been 
inserted by some one to whom it was suggested by the words ὅπερ 
ἐστὶν αὐτοῦ καὶ ψυχή and νοῦν... ψυχὴν ὄντα τοῦ θεοῦ in the corrupt 
passage which precedes ; or it may be a corruption of ἡ τοῦ θεοῦ 
(τῇ) ψυχῇ (ἐνοῦσα ἐνέργειαν, ‘ the force of God at work in the (human) 
soul’, or something to that effect. (A possible meaning could be — 
got by writing 6 νοῦς (τ)ῇ τοῦ θεζὥου (ἀνθρώπου ἐνὼνν ψυχῇ.) 

καὶ εἱμαρμένης, καὶ νόμου. In the case of the soul in which νοῦς 
rules, both the power of Destiny which impels to crime, and the 
penal law by which crime is punished, are reduced to impotence. 

οὔτε ἀμελήσασαν... ὑπὸ τὴν εἱμαρμένην (θγεῖναι. If a soul ‘is 
heedless’ of νοῦς, i. 6. declines to be ruled by it, (or, in the lan- 
guage of Corp. IV, rejects God’s offered gift of mind,) the divine 
νοῦς punishes this heedlessness by making the soul subject to 
εἱμαρμένη. 

ἱτὰ τοῦ ᾿Αγαθοῦ Δαίμονος ἄριστα.) If these words are retained, 
they must be assigned to Tat. But as his assent is sufficiently 
expressed by what follows (Kai θείως x.7.\.), it is more likely that 
Ta... ἄριστα was inserted by some admiring reader. A verb such 
as λέλεκται must be understood after θείως, ὦ πάτερ. 

§ 10. ἔλεγες γὰρ τὸν νοῦν ἐν τοῖς ἀλόγοις ζῴοις φύσεως δίκην ἐνεργεῖν, 
συνεργοῦντα αὐτῶν ταῖς ὁρμαῖς, This refers ἴο ὃ 2: τοῖς μὲν ἀλόγοις 
τῇ ἰδίᾳ ἑκάστου φύσει συνεργεῖ. In the case of beasts, the operation 
of νοῦς takes the form of instinct. In both passages alike, it is not 
clear why the (external) νοῦς is said to ‘co-operate with’ the animal's 
impulses, and not simply to produce them. 

ai δὲ ὁρμαὶ... πάθη εἰσίν, The word πάθη originally meant guae 
quis patitur, ‘things which are done to one’, or ‘things which 
befall one’. It was applied to the feelings of pleasure and pain 
(regarded as states produced by the action of external objects on 








LIBELLVS XII. i: δὲ 8-11 351 


the senses), and was thence extended to signify emotional disturb- 
ances (animi perturbationes) in general, including the impulses 
(ὁρμαί) which result from feelings of pleasure and pain. νοῦς, being 
unaffected by τὰ αἰσθητά, was usually considered to be ἀπαθής ; hence 
Tat finds a difficulty in a doctrine which brings νοῦς into close 
connexion with the πάθη. 

καὶ ὁ νοῦς dpa παθζητ)ός ἐστι, συγχρωϊμα]τίζων τοῖς πάθεσιν. It is 
hardly possible to call νοῦς ἃ πάθος ; but νοῦς might be said to be 
παθητός, i.e. to be affected by πάθη. The verb συγχρωτίζεσθαι 
means ‘to be in defiling contact with’. Cf. Corp. X. 17: οὔτε τὴν 
τοσαύτην ἀρετὴν (sc. τὸν νοῦν) ἀνέχεσθαι συγχρωτιζόμενον αὑτῇ παθητὸν 
σῶμα. The active form of this verb does not, as far as I know, 
occur elsewhere ; and the sense of mutual contact which is required 
would be better expressed by the middle form συγχρωτιζόμενος. 

§ τι, πάντα, ὦ τέκνον, τὰ ἐν σώματι... ὀνόματι χρήσασθαι οὐ λυπεῖ, 
This passage is the teacher’s answer to Tat’s objection that, if νοῦς 
co-operates with the impulses of beasts, and those impulses are 
πάθη, then νοῦς must be παθητός. Tat calls the answer lucid (σαφέ- 
grata Tov λόγον ἀποδέδωκας); but as given in the MSS., it is obscure 
in the extreme. Tat’s difficulty appears to be directly referred to 
only in the clause ἀπαλλαγεὶς δὲ τοῦ σώματος (ὃ νοῦς) ἀπηλλάγη καὶ 
τοῦ πάθους. This must have been preceded by another clause,.now 
lost, to the effect that, as long as νοῦς is in the body, or operates 
in the body, it is ra@yrds. But the writer prepares the way for 
this statement about νοῦς by first laying down some general proposi- 
tions concerning the question what things are wa6yrd. His doctrine 
appears to be that bodies are παθητὰ κυρίως (i.e. παθητά in the strict 
or primary sense of the term), but that in a wider sense ‘all things 
which are in a body’, including things which are themselves in- 
corporeal, are mafyra;' whence it follows that νοῦς is παθητός as 
long as it is in a body. But what are ‘the things which are in 
a body’? Presumably the ψυχή and the νοῦς of a man living on 
earth are included under this term; whether the writer meant to 
include under it any other things as well, Ido not know. At any 
rate, the particular ‘thing in a body’ with which he is chiefly 
concerned is embodied νοῦς, i.e. the νοῦς which resides in the soul 
of an individual man during his earthly life ; and his point is that 


1 Cf. Porphyry, Senéentiae ad intellegibilia ducentes, 18: ἄλλο τὸ πάσχειν τῶν 
σωμάτων, ἄλλο τὸ τῶν ἀσωμάτων, κιτιλ. But the ἀσώματον of which Porphyry 
' speaks in that passage is ψυχή, and not νοῦς, 








352 CORPVS HERMETICVM 
















νοῦς in this condition is παθητός. His conception of παθητὸς νοῦς, 
may perhaps have some connexion with Aristotle’s conception of 
ὁ παθητικὸς νοῦς (De an. 3. 5, 430 8), which might be understood to 
mean vois as affected by embodiment. 

[[καὶ τὰ ἀσώματα Sé]] [κινεῖται ὑπὸ τοῦ νοῦ], According to the MSS,, 
we are here told that ‘incorporeals also are moved’. But this οοῃ- 
tradicts the preceding statement, ‘everything that is moved ig 
body’. It is therefore certain that there is something wrong in the 
traditional text. I have assumed that καὶ τὰ ἀσώματα δέ has been 
shifted, and ought to preceds πᾶν yap τὸ κινοῦν ἀσώματον ; that some 
words which followed καὶ τὰ ἀσώματα δέ in its original position hay Ὗ 
been lost ; i and that some one tried to fill the gap by inserting 
κινεῖται ὑπὸ τοῦ vot. If I am right in thinking that νοῦς is one of 
the ἀσώματα spoken of, and indeed the very one with which 
Hermetist is chiefly concerned, the statement that these ἀσώματα 
‘are moved by νοῦς must have been written by some one who 
misunderstood the meaning = the paragraph. In the lost word Ἢ 


(sc. when embodied) are παϑητά. He supports this statement by 
the words πᾶν γὰρ... τὸ δὲ ἀρχόμενον, in which he brings in the 
conception of κίνησις ; and thereupon follows the conclusion at which 
he has been aiming: “(νοῦς then, as long as it is embodied, ig 
παθητός ;) but when it is freed from the body, it is freed from 
πάθος also’. 

[κίνησις δὲ πάθος. In order to make these words relevant, κίνησις, 
must be taken to mean τὸ κινεῖν, and not τὸ κινεῖσθαι. It is obvious 
that τὸ κινεῖσθαι is πάθος ; but the point on which the writer is here 
insisting is that τὸ κινεῖν also is (or involves) πάθος, and that con- 
sequently ἀσώματα (νοῦς and ψυχή), when they are ‘in bodies’ and 
are occupied in moving those bodies, are affected by πάθη. But the 
phrase κίνησις δὲ πάθος is too ambiguous and obscure to help the 
argument; and perhaps it is a fragment of a note inserted by a 
reader. 5 

Γμᾶλλον δέ ποτε, ὦ τέκνον, οὐδὲν ἀπαθές, ... διὰ τοῦτο παθητά ἐστι," 
I can make no sense of this passage. It would be possible to put 
a meaning into it (or into some of the clauses at least) by rewriting 
the text as follows: μᾶλλον δέ [ποτε], ὦ τέκνον, (.. .). οὐδὲν (γὰρ 
τῶν ἐν σώματι) ἀπαθές, πάντα δὲ (sc. τὰ ἐν σώματι) παθητά. διο 
δὲ παθητὸν παθητοῦ" τὸ μὲν γὰρ ἐνεργεῖ (τε καὶ πάσχειδ, τὸ δὲ πάσχει 
(μόνον). τὰ δὲ (ἀ)σώματα (e.g. νοῦς) καὶ καθ᾽ αὑτὰ ἐνεργεῖ (1. 6. are 


LIBELLVS ΧΙ]. τ: §§ 11-12 353 





































nable of acting by themselves, as well as of acting on the body) ; 
a@? αὑτὰ δ᾽ ἐνεργοῦντα ἀπαθῆ ἐστ). [[ J] τὰ δὲ [αἸσώματα ἀεὶ 
πργεῖται, καὶ διὰ τοῦτο (del) παθητά ἐστι. ((ἢ γὰρ ἀκίνητά ἐστιν 
a τὰ σώματα) ἢ κινεῖται" ὁπότερον δὲ ἂν ἦ, παθητὰ ἐστι.) But this 
¢ mere guesswork. 

Γῇ τε γὰρ ἐνέργεια καὶ τὸ πάθος ταὐτόν ἐστι], This can hardly be 
‘cht, What the author probably meant to say might be expressed 
y writing τὸ γὰρ ἐνεργοῦν καὶ τὸ πάσχον ταὐτόν ἐστι. The embodied 
γῆς Doth ἐνεργεῖ and πάσχει. 

εὐφημοτέρῳ δὲ τῷ ὀνόματι χρήσασθαι οὐ λυπεῖ, This seems to mean 
αἱ there are two terms which are equally applicable to embodied 
és, but there is no harm in using the ‘ better-sounding ’ of the two, 
id avoiding the use of the other. (This meaning would be more 
y expressed by writing τῷ δὲ εὐφημοτέρῳ ὀνόματι.) The two 
are probably ἐνεργητικός and παθητός ; and the former is ‘the 

sounding ’ of the two, because παθητός is commonly regarded 
s implying depreciation. 
‘The writer’s view appears to be that embodied νοῦς works actively 
ργεῖ) in checking (or, in the case of the irrational man, ‘co-oper- 
with’) the ὁρμαί of the human soul, but that, in doing this, 
itself affected or modified by that on which it works, and 
ore not only ἐνεργεῖ, but also πάσχει. When it is freed from 
ye body, it no longer πάσχει, but ἐνεργεῖ only. Tat, in putting 
srward his objection (§ 10), spoke only of beasts, and not of men ; 
ut Hermes, in his answer, seems to be speaking of men, and not 
f beasts ; for it is only in the case of men that νοῦς can be said to 
6 ἐν σώματι. ᾿ 
τῶ. δύο ταῦτα τῷ ἀνθρώπῳ ὁ θεὸς παρὰ πάντα τὰ θνητὰ ἕῴα 
aro, τόν τε νοῦν καὶ τὸν λόγον. Cf. Corp, IV. 3 as emended: 
ἄνθρωπος τῶν ἄλλων ζῴων πλεονεκτεῖ τὸν λόγον Kal τὸν νοῦν. 
4τεῖ. Lat. 41 Ὁ: χαρισάμενος ἡμῖν νοῦν, λόγον, γνῶσιν' νοῦν μέν, ἵνα 
τὲ νοήσωμεν, λόγον δέ, ἵνα σὲ ἐπικαλέσωμεν. 

ἰσότιμα τῇ ἀθανασίᾳ, ἰσότιμα means ‘equal in value’. νοῦς and λόγος 
re, so to speak, promissory notes, in exchange for which ἀθανασία 
i, e. the life or condition of a god) can be obtained on demand. 
[τὸν δὲ προφορικὸν λόγον Adyer (ἔχει MSS.).] It would be possible 
Ὁ write λέγω, and take this to be an explanation added by the 
uthor himself ; ‘the λόγος of which I am speaking is the προφορικὸς 


1 Tn vol. i, p. 230 1. 8, λόγον has been omitted by mistake, 
Aa 








354 CORPVS HERMETICVM 


λόγος, and not the ἐνδιάθετος λόγος, But it seems more likely that 
the note ‘he means the προφορικὸς Adyos’ was inserted by some 
reader. In either case, the explanation given is correct; the λόγος 
of which Hermes is speaking in this passage is ‘speech’, and not 
‘thought’. The terms 6 προφορικὸς λόγος (thought expressed by utter- 
ance, i.e. speech), and ὁ ἐνδιάθετος λόγος (thought which exists only 
ἐν τῇ διαθέσει, i. 6. unuttered thought), were first used by the Stoics, 

ὁδηγηθήσεται ὑπὸ ἀμφοτέρων εἰς tov! τῶν θεῶν... χορόν, It seems 
strange to say that speech, as well as νοῦς, will act as a guide to 
lead the disembodied soul to the abode of the gods. But the writer 
probably meant that speech (whether in the form of oral teaching 
and discussion,—cf. ὑπὸ τοῦ λόγου μέχρι τινος ὁδηγηθείς in Corp. IX, 
jin,—or in the form of verbal adoration—cf. λόγον δέ, ἵνα σὲ 
ἐπικαλέσωμεν in Asc, Lat. 41 b—) is an indispensable aid or sup- 
plement to thought, and that the right use of both together in this life 
is needed to qualify a man for attainment to the divine life after death, 

§1ga. els δὲ ὁ ἄνθρωπος" οὕτω καὶ ὁ λόγος εἷς ἐστι. λόγος Means 
speech considered with respect to its meaning, and not with respect 
to its sound. All men are of one species; and so, though men of 
different nations express their thought by different sounds, the 
thought expressed by these different sounds is the same. This is 
proved by the fact that a term or proposition can be translated 
from one language into another. E.g. the words ἄνθρωπος and 
Homo differ in sound, but are identical gua λόγος, i.e. in respect of 
their meaning. Cf. Tertullian On the witness of the soul, 6: 
‘ Throughout the world man is one, though his names are various; 
the soul is one, though its language is various; the spirit is one, 
though its voice is various, Every nation has its own proper speech ; 
but the matter of all speech is the same in all.’ Both Tertullian — 
and the Hermetist probably got the thought from some Stoic writer. 

ἐν Αἰγύπτῳ καὶ Περσίδι καὶ Ἑλλάδι. As instances of different 
languages, Hermes mentions those of Egypt, Persia, and Greece. 
To a man residing in Egypt under the Roman empire, Egyptian, 
Greek, and Zatim would have been the first languages to present 
themselves ; but as it would have been a glaring anachronism to 
make Hermes speak of Latin, the writer makes him mention the 
language spoken in Persia instead. The Persian kingdom of the 
Sassanidae was founded in a.p, 226; for some centuries before 





1 Τὴ vol. i, p. 230 1. 12, τὴν has been printed by mistake for τὸν. 





LIBELLVS ΧΙ] i: δ 12-144 355 


that date, the kingdom beyond the Euphrates was more properly 
called Parthian, and not Persian. But the earlier name Persia 
never died out in literature; (Horace, for instance, Od. 1. 2. 22, 
speaks of Persae, meaning the Parthians ;) and the Hermetist would 
probably be aware that the Parthian dominion was of recent date, 
and could not have been known to the prehistoric Hermes. 
Corp. XII. i may have been written after a, Ὁ. 226; but the use of 
the word Ilepoié: cannot be held to prove it. 

((6 οὖν λόγος ἐστὶν εἰκὼν (τοῦ vod), καὶ (δ) νοῦς rod θεοῦ) In the 
text of the MSS., the discussion of λόγος breaks off abruptly, and 
the γάρ of the following sentence (6 yap . . . ᾿Αγαθὸς Δαίμων x.7.A.) 
has no meaning. It is evident therefore that something has been 
lost here. As the subject of the whole dialogue is νοῦς, it may 
be presumed that the Hermetist concluded the paragraph on λόγος 
by explaining the relation of λόγος to νοῦς, and then went on, ina 
fresh paragraph, to explain the relation of νοῦς to God on the one 
hand, and to ψυχή and σῶμα on the other hand. A better connexion 
can be obtained by transposing to this place the words ὁ οὖν λόγος 
νιν τοῦ θεοῦ ; but it is probable that, when these words have been 
inserted, there still remains an unfilled gap. 

If my reconstruction of the passage is right, Hermes, after dis- 
posing of λόγος, proceeds to say (1) that νοῦς is an ‘image’ of God, 
and (2) that God is ‘in’ νοῦς. The relation between God and νοῦς 
is described in two different ways ; but both descriptions alike imply 
that νοῦς is connected with and subordinate to God. 

8.18 Ὁ. 6 γὰρ... ᾿Αγαθὸς Δαίμων ψυχὴν μὲν ἐν σώματι ἔφη εἶναι, 
νοῦν δὲ ἐν ψυχῇ, [λόγον] (θεὸν) δὲ ἐν τῷ νῷ, Cf. Corp. ΧΙ. i. 4 Ὁ (Νοῦς 
loquitur): ὁ μὲν θεὸς ἐν τῷ νῷ, ὁ δὲ νοῦς ἐν τῇ ψυχῇ, ἡ δὲ ψυχὴ ἐν τῇ 
ὕλῃ. It is possible that this is the passage to which the writer of 
XII. i is referring. If so, he must have assumed the Νοῦς who 
speaks in XI. i to be identical with the Agathos Daimon. 

Compare also Corp. X. 13: 6 νοῦς [1](ὀχεῖται) ἐν τῇ ψυχῇ, ἡ δὲ 
ψυχὴ ἐν τῷ πνεύματι" τὸ (δὲ) πνεῦμα .... κινεῖ τὸ (σῶμα). 

[τὸν οὖν θεὸν τούτων πατέρα. If these words are retained, τούτων 
must be taken to mean νοῦ καὶ ψυχῆς καὶ σώματος. But the writer 
can hardly have said at the same time that God is ‘in’ νοῦς and 
that God is ‘ the father of νοῦς. 

8148. [καὶ τὸ σῶμα δὲ (ἐστιν εἰκὼν) τῆς ἰδέας, ἡ δὲ ἰδέα τῆς 
ψυχῆς. 1 can see no sense in this. What is meant by ἡ ἰδέα ἢ 

ἔστιν οὖν τῆς μὲν ὕλης τὸ λεπτομερέστατον ἀήρ, ... νοῦ δὲ θεός, This 

Aa2 


Se ἐὐνϑϑ 


ας 


~~ 


356 CORPVS HERMETICVM 


statement occurs again (with λεπτομερέστερον in place of -έστατον) 
at the end of Cor. V, where it is manifestly out of place. In XII, i, 
it leads on to the mention of θεός, νοῦς, ψυχή, ἀήρ, and ὕλῃ in the 
following sentence. The word λεπτομερής is properly applicable 
only to that which is corporeal; and this sentence, taken literally, 
would imply that θεός, νοῦς, and ψυχή are material substances. It 
must therefore have been derived from some source in which Stoic 
influence was predominant. The Hermetist himself, however, did 
not hold that God, mind, and soul are corporeal; he must have 
meant rather that the relation between the incorporeals θεός and 
vous, and that between the incorporeals νοῦς and ψυχή, are analogous 
to the relation between the incorporeal ψυχή" and the corporeal 
ἀήρ, and that this relation again is analogous to that between fine 
matter (ἀήρ) and gross matter (ὕλη). ‘The ἀήρ which he interposes 
between ψυχή and ὕλη corresponds to the πνεῦμα (‘vital spirit’, the 
corporeal vehicle or integument of the incorporeal soul,) which 
is interposed between ψυχή and σῶμα in Corp. X and elsewhere. 

ὁ μὲν θεὸς περὶ πάντα καὶ διὰ πάντων. Cf. XII. ii. 20b, where 
these words are repeated ; and 7d. 23 ἃ, πᾶν γάρ ἐστι (sc. ὁ θεός), τὸ δὲ 
πᾶν διὰ πάντων καὶ περὶ πάντα. God is περὶ πάντα; i.e. God ‘is 
concerned with’ or ‘has to do with’ all things; there is nothing 
which is not included under his control. And God is διὰ πάντων ; 
i.e. God penetrates and pervades all things (διήκει πάντα, as the 
Stoics said) ; he is present everywhere, and is everywhere at work, 
Cf. Ep. ad Eph. 4. 6: εἷς θεὸς καὶ πατὴρ πάντων, ὃ ἐπὶ πάντων καὶ 
διὰ πάντων καὶ ἐν πᾶσιν. 

ὁ δὲ νοῦς περὶ τὴν ψυχήν, ἡ δὲ ψυχὴ περὶ τὸν ἀέρα, ὁ δὲ ἀὴρ περὶ 
τὴν ὅλην. νοῦς ‘has to do with’ ψυχή; that is to say, νοῦς (which — 
issues from God, and is of one substance. with God, § 1) acts on 
ψυχή, and so indirectly acts on ὕλη or σῶμα also, through the 
medium of ἀήρ, which here takes the place of πνεῦμα. This state- 
ment may be applied both to the Kosmos as a whole and to 
individual organisms. The universal νοῦς acts on the world-soul, 
and the operation of the world-soul is transmitted to gross matter 
by the universal air; the νοῦς of an individual man acts on his 
soul, and the operation of his soul is transmitted to his bodily organs — 
by the air (or prewma) contained within his body. Thus God, by 
means of νοῦς, administers all things. This description of the 
position of νοῦς in the scale of existence, and of its function in the 
administration of the universe and the individual organism, forms 





LIBELLVS XII. 1, § 14.4--Χ ]. ii 357 


a fitting conclusion to the discussion of νοῦς in Cors. XII.i; and 
the /ided/us may very well have ended at this point. 


LIBELLVS XII. ii 


Contents 


(The beginning ἐς lost.) . . . And God uses (Destiny ὃ), Necessity, 
Providence, and Nature as his instruments in the administration of 
the Kosmos. §14b.' 

The Kosmos is full of life. There is nothing in it that is not 
alive; and no part of it ever dies. It is a mistake to say that men 
oranimals die. They undergo dissolution; but dissolution is not 
death, but renewal of life. All things in the Kosmos are in motion ; 
and wherever there is motion, there is life. Life shifts from one 
organism to another; and for each several organism, there is a 
beginning and end of consciousness ; but there is no beginning or 
end of life. Every living organism is composed of gross matter, 
vital spirit,? and soul; and each of these three component parts is 
immortal. §§ 15 b-18. 

But man is immortal in a higher sense than the beasts; for (1) 
God imparts to him knowledge of the future, through divination ; 
and (2) whereas each kind of beasts is confined to one of the three 
lower elements, man not only makes use of all three, but also looks 
up to heaven.’ §§ 19, 20a. 


(Something has been lost here.) 


The life with which the Kosmos is filled is the work of God ; and 
you can see God in his work. The forces by which life is put into 
_ matter are Destiny, Necessity, Providence, and Nature; but these 
forces are parts of God. God then is everywhere at work. Matter, 
apart from God, would have no real existence; it is God that gives 
it reality, by putting life into it, Material things, with all their 
qualities, are manifestations of God’s activity. God is the All, and 
there is nothing beside him. §§ 20 b-23 a. 

ae ‘ , 
se range — concerning unity and plurality (§§ 14¢, 15 8) has 


3. Consisting of fine matter. 
5 Heaven is the region of fire, the fourth and highest element. 








358 ‘CORPVS HERMETICVM 


Worship God then. And the one way to worship God is to keep 
oneself free from evil. § 23 b. 


Sources. The doctrine of XII. ii is partly Platonic; but marks of 
Stoic influence are to be seen in the use of the terms πρόνοια (and 
εἱμαρμένη ὃ), §§ 14 Ὁ and 21; πνεῦμα, ὃ 18; and οὐσία (coupled with 
ὕλη and σῶμα), §22. The importance attached to divination (§ 19) 
is characteristic of Stoicism ; and the paragraph in which divination 
is spoken of may have been suggested by Posidonius. 

But in his employment of the conception of /ife, and his descrip- 
tion of God’s work as that of putting Ze into matter, (not that of 
imposing forms on matter,) the writer is not closely following either 
Platonic or Stoic authorities. The language of Corp. XII. ii con- 
cerning life resembles that of Corp. XI. i and XI. ii; and the resem- 
blance indicates either direct borrowing on one side or the other, or 
derivation from a common source. The doctrine that ‘ nothing dies’ 
is that which is taught in Corp, VIII also; but in XII. ii it is asserted 
in an exaggerated and paradoxical form. 

There is no sign of Jewish or Christian influence in this document, 


Date. Yor the same reason which has been repeatedly given in 
dealing with other Hermetica, Corp. XII. ii cannot have been written 
before the first century 8.c. Between this serminus a quo, and the © 
terminus ad quem given by Lactantius’s quotation (circa A. Ὁ. 310), 
I can find no definite indication of date; but on the ground of its 
resemblances to other Hermetic documents, and especially to Corp, 
XI. i, XI. ii, and VI, this δολίης may be conjecturally assigned to 
the second or third century a. Ὁ. , 


§ 14d. ἀνάγκη δὲ καὶ [ἡ] πρόνοια καὶ [ἡ] φύσις ὄργανά ἐστι (τῆς 
διοικήσεως) τοῦ κόσμου. Necessity, Providence, and Nature are 
instruments used by God in his administration of the universe. If 
we retain ἀνάγκη, we must either strike out the article before πρόνοια 
and φύσις, or write ἡ δὲ ἀνάγκη in place of ἀνάγκη δέ, Compare ὃ 21 
as emended : μέρη ἐστὶ τοῦ θεοῦ εἱμαρμένη καὶ ἀνάγκη καὶ πρόνοια καὶ 
φύσις. Possibly the same four powers were mentioned in § 14 Ὁ also; 
the original reading may have been εἱμαρμένη δὲ καὶ ἀνάγκη καὶ πρόνοια 
καὶ φύσις. But it is also possible that ἀνάγκη δέ is out of place, and 
that πρόνοια and φύσις alone were mentioned in ὃ τ4 Ὁ. The group 
ἀνάγκῃ; πρόνοια, φύσις Occurs in Corp. ΧΙ. i. 5. πρόνοια, ἀνάγκη, and 
εἱμαρμένη are grouped together in Herm. ap. Stob. Zxc. VIII and 
Exe. XIV; [φύσις ἢ], πρόνοια, ἀνάγκη, and εἱμαρμένη, in Herm. ap. 








LIBELLVS XII. ii: §§ 14b, τὰς 359 


Stob. Zxc. X11. In Asel. Lat. 111. 39 f., εἱμαρμένη, ἀνάγκη, and τάξις 
are spoken of as inseparably connected, and the three together are 
subordinated to the νόμος καὶ λόγος τοῦ θεοῦ (which is equivalent to 
πρόνοια). Cf. Herm. ap. Stob. Zac. ΧΙ, 2. (46): πρόνοια θεία τάξις" 
ἀνάγκη προνοίᾳ ὑπήρετις. 

§§ τ4 6, 158. [καὶ τῶν μὲν νοητῶν... καὶ ἡ ὕλη pia.| This passage 
deals with the topic of unity and plurality. It has no connexion 
with the rest of the dialogue ; and it is probably a misplaced frag- 
ment of some other document. The writer of XII. ii presumably 
began by giving an account of God’s government of the Kosmos, the 
concluding words of which are preserved in §14b, and then went 
onat once to speak of the life with which the Kosmos is filled(§ 15 Ὁ ff). 

814 δ. τῶν μὲν νοητῶν ἕκαστόν ἐστιν (ἕν) [οὐσία], οὐσία δὲ κιτιλ. The 
phrase τῶν νοητῶν (i.e. ἀσωμάτων) ἕκαστον is contrasted with the follow- 
ing phrase τῶν σωμάτων ἕκαστον ; and the author must have written 
ἐστιν ἕν, in contrast to πολλά ἐστιν. When ἕν had fallen out, the missing 
predicate was supplied by writing οὐσία twice. In the absence of the 
preceding context, it is uncertain what sort of νοητά the writer was 
thinking of. He may have meant by τὰ νοητά the Platonic ‘ideas’ (τὰ 
γοητὰ εἴδη); cf. Pl. Phileb, 15 a: ὅταν δέ τις ἕνα ἄνθρωπον ἐπιχειρῇ τίθε- 
σθαι, καὶ βοῦν ἕνα, καὶ τὸ καλὸν ἕν, καὶ τἀγαθὸν ἕν, περὶ τούτων τῶν ἑνάδων 
καὶ τῶν τοιούτων ἡ πολλὴ - - - ἀμφισβήτησις γίγνεται. But it is possible 
that he meant rather such incorporeal entities as ὁ θεός and ὃ νοῦς. 

οὐσία δὲ αὐτῶν ἡ ταυτότης. It is the ‘essence’ of the νοητά, (i.e. it 
is that which constitutes their existence,) that each of them is ταὐτόν. 
This means that a νοητόν is always the same with iése/f, that is to 
say, that it never changes. If the writer adopted the Platonic con- 
ception of eternity, he must have held that the νοητά are eternal (i.e. 
out of time), and therefore necessarily exempt from change ; if not, 
he must have meant that the νοητά persist unchanged through endless 
time. In the following sentence (ἔχεται yap x.7-A.), ταυτότης is con- 
trasted with μεταβολή ; cf. Corp. XI. i. 2: τοῦ δὲ αἰῶνος (οὐσία ἐστὶν) 
ἡ ταυτότης, « « « τοῦ δὲ χρόνου, ἣ μεταβολή. But ταυτότης also implies 
unity, as opposed to plurality. 

The word ravrérys is not used by Plato ; it occurs first in Aristotle. 
But its employment by the Hermetists was, no doubt, suggested by 
Plato’s use of ταὐτόν 85 a philosophic term. See Pl. Zim. 35 a, where 
ταὐτόν (‘the principle of unity and identity ’, Archer-Hind ad loe.) is 
contrasted with θάτερον (‘the principle of multiplicity and difference’) ; 
and Soph. 2548} ff. 





360 CORPVS HERMETICVM 





((καὶ ἡ ὅλη μία). These words appear to be irrelevant where they 
occur in the MSS.; and something of the kind is needed here, to 
account for the following yap. The sequence of thought might be 
more clearly indicated by writing καὶ ἡ (μὲν) ὕλη μία' (ἔχεται γὰρ τῆς 
ταυτότητος τὰ ἀσύνθετα σώματα κιτιλ.") ἐν δὲ τοῖς συνθέτοις πᾶσι σώμασιν 
ἀριθμὸς ἑκάστου ἐστί (i.e. in all composite bodies there is plurality). 
See Herm. af. Stob. Zxc. ILA. 13 on τὰ ἀΐδια σώματα. For the 
statement ‘matter is one’, compare Corp. XI. ii. 9: μιᾶς οὔσης τῆς 
ὕλης. Lb. 11: μία ψυχή, καὶ μία ζωή, καὶ μία ὕλη. 

ἔχεται γὰρ τῆς ταυτότητος τὰ ἀσύνθετα σώματα.---(ἔχοντα γὰρ τὴν 
ταυτότητα τὰ σύνθετα σώματα MSS.) It may be considered certain 
that the author wrote ἀσύνθετα. The ‘incomposite bodies’ are the 
four cosmic elements, fire, air, water, and earth; and they are con- 
trasted with the ‘composite bodies’ spoken of below (ἐν δὲ τοῖς 
συνθέτοις κιτ.λ.). The material elements do not exist for ever in 
absolute ‘sameness’; that is, they are not absolutely exempt from 
change, as the νοητά are; for they are transmuted into one another 
(τὴν μεταβολὴν εἰς ἄλληλα ποιοῦνται). Yet they ‘hold on to same- 
ness’ (ἔχεται τῆς ταυτότητος) ; that is, they maintain their identity in 
another way ; for though each of them is perpetually changing into 
the others, these transmutations compensate one another, so that the 
total amount of each of the four elements persists unaltered, and in 
this sense each of them ‘ maintains its sameness unimpaired for ever’ 
(det τῆς ταυτότητος τὴν ἀφθαρσίαν σώζει). Hence it follows that 
‘matter (i.e, the sum of the four elements regarded collectively)! is one’. 

If this explanation is right, μία must here be equivalent to ταὐτόν; 
and the words ἡ ὕλη pia must be taken to mean, not that all the 
matter in the universe forms a single whole, nor that it is all of one 
nature, but that (considered asa whole) it persists unchanged through 
all time. Cf. ὧν yap ὁμοῦ σύμπας ὁ κόσμος ἀμετάβλητός ἐστι, ὃ 18. 

§ 15 a. ἐν δὲ τοῖς [ἄλλοις] συνθέτοις πᾶσι σώμασιν ἀριθμὸς ἑκάστου ἔστι, 
What is meant by saying that a composite body ‘has number’, 
or that there is number in it? What are the things that are num- 
bered? As we are told that ‘there cannot be composition without 
number’, it seems that the things numbered must be the parts or 
elements of which the body is composed. If so, the meaning is that 
every composite body consists of a certain number of distinct parts 
or elements, and is therefore ‘many’ (cf. ray... σωμάτων ἕκαστον 
πολλά ἐστιν above). 

* ὕλῃ does not here mean ἄμορφος or ἄποιος ὕλη. 





LIBELLVS XII. ii: §§ 14c-16 361 


Perhaps, however, the words might be understood in a different 
way; they might be taken to mean that the proportional quantities of 
the different elements of which the body is composed are ‘num- 
bered ’, or measured by number, i.e. that the elements are combined 
in fixed proportions. Cf. Ar, De an. 1. 5, 409 Ὁ 32 (Emped. /r. 96 
Diels) : ὁμοίως δὲ καὶ ἄλλο ὁτιοῦν τῶν συνθέτων" οὐ γὰρ ὁπωσοῦν ἔχοντα 
χὰ στοιχεῖα τούτων ἕκαστον, ἀλλὰ λόγῳ τινὶ "Kal συνθέσει" (συντεθέντα ?), 
᾿ καθάπερ φησὶ καὶ Ἐμπεδοκλῆς τὸ ὀστοῦν" Ἢ δὲ χθὼν... | τὼ δύο τῶν 

ὀκτὼ μερέων λάχε νήστιδος αἴγλης, | τέσσαρα δ᾽ ἩΗφαίστοιο" τὰ δ᾽ ὀστέα 
λευκὰ γένοντο. These verses are thus explained by Simplicius (Diels 
ad lot.) : μίγνυσι δὲ πρὸς τὴν τῶν ὀστῶν γένεσιν τέσσαρα μὲν πυρὸς μέρη, 
δύο δὲ γῆς, καὶ ἕν μὲν ἀέρος, ἐν δὲ ὕδατος. But, taken in this sense, the 
statement that ‘each composite body has number’ would be less 
directly connected with the question whether each thing is ‘one’ or 
‘many’, which seems to be the main subject of the paragraph. 

αἱ δὲ ἑνάδες τὸν ἀριθμὸν γεννῶσι καὶ αὔξουσι. Number is ‘gener- 
ated’ and ‘increased’ by units; i.e. the number two is produced 
by adding one to one, and each larger number in succession is pro- 
duced by adding one to the preceding number. Cf. Corp. IV. το: 
4 yop povas ... πάντα ἀριθμὸν yevd. This is a general proposi- 
tion concerning number as such, and has no apparent connexion 
with the preceding statements that each νοητόν is one, and each 
composite body is many, or ‘has number’; for the writer cannot 
have held that a composite body is formed by adding νοητά together. 

§ 15D. οὐδέν ἐστιν. . . ὃ οὐχὶ ζῇ. νεκρὸν γὰρ οὐδὲ ἕν κιτιλ. Cf 
Corp. VIL #it.: Ὅτι οὐδὲν τῶν ὄντων ἀπόλλυται. Corp, ΧΙ, ii, το Ὁ: 
τὴν δὲ μεταβολὴν θάνατόν φασιν εἶναι κιτιλ, 

((ἀπὸν) τῆς πρώτης [[ἀποϊκαταστάσεως, This phrase implies that 
the universe has had a beginning. 

§ 16. ἵνα νέα γένηται. These words might mean either ‘in order 
that the same {Ga may be renewed’, or ‘in order that new ζῷα 
may come into being in the place of those which suffer dissolution’. 
The ambiguity is convenient for the writer’s argument. The state- 
ment is true in the latter sense only ; but in order to support the 
paradoxical thesis that no animal dies, it must be taken in the 
former sense. 

tis τῆς ζωῆς ἐστιν ἡ ἐνέργεια ; οὐχὶ κίνησις; The syllogism im- 
plied is this: ‘All things which are in motion are alive; all 
things in the Kosmos are in motion; therefore all things in the 
Kosmos are alive’. But instead of saying ‘All things which are 





362 CORPVS HERMETICVM 


in motion are alive’, Hermes says ‘The ἐνέργεια of life (i.e. the 
result produced by the working of life) is motion’ ; and this amounts 
to no more than ‘all things which are alive are in motion’. The 
argument therefore is not formally valid. In order to make it 
valid, we must assume that there is no motion other than that 
which results from life. 

ὃ 17. καὶ πολυκίνητος μόνη ἥδε καὶ στάσιμος, All material things 
except the earth are κινητά and not στάσιμα. The earth differs from 
all the rest in being στάσιμος ; but though στάσιμος in one respect, 
it is at the same time κινητή in other respects. It is στάσιμος, 
in that it is fixed at the centre of the universe, and does. not 
either move indefinitely, like the water and the air, or revolve, 
like the celestial spheres. But it is κινητή, in that it puts forth 
plants and animals at its surface, and that portions of its substance 
enter into the bodies of the plants and animals. 

γελοιότατον δὲ ἐπύθου, εἰ τὸ τέταρτον μέρος ἀργόν éorjal, The 
earth is one of the four μέρη of the Kosmos, the other three being 
water, air, and fire, The future ἔσται cannot stand in combina- 
tion with ἐπύθου, We must either write γελοιότατον δὲ ἐπύθου, εἰ 
1 2. ἀργόν ἐστὶ (‘it is absurd to ask, as you did, whether the 
earth is idle’); or omit ἐπύθου, and write γελοιότατον δὲ εἰ. .. 
ἀργὸν ἔσται (‘it is absurd if the earth is to be idle’, i.e. ‘it is 
absurd to try to make out that the earth is idle’). For the word 
ἀργόν in this connexion, cf. Corp. XI. i. 5: ἀλλ᾽ οὐδὲ ἐν τῷ κόσμῳ 
ἐστὶν ἀργία οὐδαμοῦ. 

8 18. πᾶν τοίνυν ἴσθι... τὸ ὃν ἐν (7?) κόσμῳ κινούμενον [ἢ κατὰ 
μείωσιν ἢ αὔξησιν]. The words ἢ xara . . . αὔξησιν must be cut 
out. If they are retained, the statement is (according to the writer’s — 
cosmology) untrue; for the heavenly bodies do not ‘increase or 
decrease’. It is true of earthly organisms; but the earth is only 
‘a fourth part of the Kosmos’. 

τὸ δὲ Laloly πᾶν οὐκ ἀνάγκη τὸ αὐτὸ (ἀεὶ) εἶναι. There is life in 
all matter at all times; but life does not through all time maintain 
itself in the same organisms. A living organism sooner or later 
ceases to exist as such; but when it suffers dissolution, its material 
substance either is absorbed into the mass of the unorganized 
elements, which are themselves alive, or enters into the composition 
of other living organisms. As the writer of Corg. XI. ii. 15 Ὁ puts 
it, life does not perish at the dissolution of an organism, but only 
departs out of our sight, to reappear elsewhere. 








LIBELLVS XII. ii: §§ 16-18 363 


od γὰρ ἡ γένεσίς ἐστι ζωῆς ἀρχή, ἀλλ᾽ αἰσθήσεως.---(οὐ γὰρ ἡ γένεσίς 
ἐστι ζωή, ἀλλ᾽ ἡ αἴσθησις MSS.) In order-to make sense of this, 
it seems necessary to take αἴσθησις to mean ‘ individual conscious- 
ness’, and λήθη ‘the cessation of individual consciousness’, The 
life which for a time resides in a particular animal has no begin- 
ning or end; it has come from elsewhere, and will depart only to 
reappear elsewhere ; but an animal’s consciousness begins when that 
animal is born, and ceases when that animal suffers dissolution. 
(Cf. Corp. VIII. 4: οὕτω στέρησις γίνεται τῆς αἰσθήσεως, οὐκ ἀπώλεια 
(Cwis).) Life (oy) may exist without consciousness (αἴσθησις) ; for 
instance, it was commonly said that plants have ζωή, but not 
αἴσθησις. The writer may have held that the unorganized elements 
have life without consciousness ; or he may have held that each of 
them has a consciousness of its own, but that this consciousness 
is distinct and separate from that of individual organisms, and 
that the former persists continuously, but the latter begins at the 
birth of the organism, and ends at its dissolution. In Corp. IX. 6, 
we are told that the Kosmos has an αἴσθησις καὶ νόησις (1. 6. ἃ 
consciousness) of its own; and it would be possible to say the 
same of the several elements, which were called ‘parts’ of the 
Kosmos, and were sometimes regarded as gods, 

ἀθάνατα πάντα ((ἐξ ὧν πᾶν ζῷον συνέστηκε(ν) δ), ἣ ὕλη [Loy], τὸ 
πνεῦμα [ὁ νοῦς], (ἡ) ψυχή. ζωή is evidently out of place here. νοῦς, 
if mentioned at all, ought to stand after ψυχή (as it does in R), 
and not before it; but as beasts have no νοῦς, it ought not to be 
spoken of here. If we cut out ζωή and ὁ νοῦς, there remain (1) ὕλη 
(gross matter, i.e. earth and water), (2) πνεῦμα (‘vital spirit’, con- 
sisting of fine matter, i. 6. air and fire), and (3) ψυχή (incorporeal) ; 
and these three are correctly described as ‘the things of which 
every (earthly) ζῷον is composed’. At the dissolution of the in- 
dividual organism, its ὕλη goes back into the mass of cosmic ὕλῃ ; 
its πνεῦμα goes back into the cosmic πνεῦμα, or the mass of cosmic 
air and fire; and it seems to be implied that its ψυχή is likewise 
reabsorbed into the cosmic ψυχή, i.e. the mass of undivided ψυχή 
whence it was parted off to enter into the individual animal. For 
the notion of an undivided mass of ψυχή, cf. Corp. ΧΙ, ii. 9, μιᾶς 
οὔσης τῆς ὕλης καὶ μιᾶς τῆς ψυχῆς. Lb. το, ψυχὴ «ἢ. . καθ᾽ ἑαυτήν, 
τῷ ποιητῇ παρακειμένη. Corp. X. 7: ἀπὸ μιᾶς ψυχῆς τῆς τοῦ παντὸς 
πᾶσαι αἱ ψυχαί εἰσιν. .. ὥσπερ ἀπονενεμημέναι. 

πᾶν ἄρα ζῷον ἀθάνατον διζὰ τὴν ἀθανασίαν) αὐτῶν, The cosmic ὕλη, 





364 CORPVS HERMETICVM 


the cosmic πνεῦμα, and the cosmic ψυχή are immortal ; and the 
portions of them which enter into the individual organism share 
the immortality of the mass from which they are temporarily parted — 
off. Thus the parts of which the organism is composed are im- 
mortal; and the writer considers this enough to justify his para. 

doxical assertion that the organism itself is immortal. 

§ 19. πάντων δὲ μᾶλλον (ἀθάνατος) ὁ ἄνθρωπος. Beasts can be 
called ἀθάνατα only by a strained and unnatural use of the term ; 
but men are ἀθάνατοι in a different and higher sense. But in 
what sense? What does the writer mean by ἀθάνατος when he applies 
the word to men? The two reasons given for holding men to be 
ἀθάνατοι are these: (1) men receive from God revelations by which 
future events are made known to them; and (2) men are superior 
to beasts in that they are not restricted to one element, and look up 
to heaven. Neither of these facts can be considered to prove 
that men survive the dissolution of the body; but both may be 
held to show that man is a being of higher order than the beasts. 
It seems therefore that ἀθάνατος here means ‘of like nature with 
the gods’, and is equivalent to θεῖος. It is possible however that 
a passage containing some further explanation of the ἀθανασία of men 
has been lost at the end of ὃ 20a. 

ὃ καὶ τοῦ θεοῦ δεκτικὸς καὶ τῷ θεῷ συνουσιαστικός, Man is 
‘receptive of God’; that is, he is capable of becoming ἔνθεος. 
And man is ‘capable of holding intercourse with God’; that is, 
God speaks to men by dreams and signs. 

For the notion that man is exalted above the beasts, and brought 
near to God, by the gift of μαντεία, cf. Synesius De insomniis 1, 
Migne Tom, 66 col. 1284 A: μαντεία δὲ ἀγαθῶν ἂν εἴη τὸ μέγιστον. 
τῷ μὲν γὰρ εἰδέναι, καὶ ὅλως τῷ γνωστικῷ τῆς δυνάμεως, θεός τε 
ἀνθρώπου καὶ ἄνθρωπος διαφέρει θηρίου. ἀλλὰ θεῷ μὲν εἰς τὸ γινώσκειν 
ἡ φύσις ἀρκεῖ ἀπὸ δὲ μαντείας ἀνθρώπῳ πολλαπλάσιον παραγίνεται 
τοῦ τῇ κοινῇ φύσει προσήκοντος. ὃ γὰρ πολὺς τὸ παρὸν μόνον οἶδε, 
περὶ δὲ τοῦ μήπω γενομένου στοχάζεται’ ὁ δὲ Κάλχας εἷς ἄρα. .. 
μόνος ἠπίστατο “τά τ᾽ ἐόντα τά T ἐσσόμενα πρό τ᾽ ἐόντα ".᾽ 
σημαίνει μὲν διὰ πάντων πάντα, ἅτε ἀδελφῶν ὄντων τῶν ἐν ἑνὶ ζῴῳ 
τῷ κόσμῳ" καὶ ἔστι ταῦτα γράμματα παντοδαπὰ καθάπερ ἐν βιβλίῳ 
τοῖς οὖσι, . . . ἀναγινώσκει δὲ ὃ σοφός, ... καὶ ἄλλος ἄλλα, καὶ ὃ 


1 Hom. 771. 1. γο, The Hermetist’s words, ἐπαγγέλλεται 6 ἄνθρωπος ἐπίστασθαι 
τὰ προγεγενημένα καὶ ἐνεστῶτα καὶ μέλλοντα, show that he had in mind the same 
TIomeric verse. 1 








LIBELLVS XII. ii: δῷ 18-19 365 


μὲν μᾶλλον, ὁ δὲ ἧττον. . . . οὕτως ὁρῶσι σοφοὶ τὸ μέλλον, οἱ μὲν 
ἄστρα εἰδότες, .᾽. . οἱ δὲ ἐν σπλάγχνοις αὐτὰ ἀναγνόντες, οἱ δὲ ἐν 


Gov κλαγγαῖς καὶ καθέδραις καὶ πτήσεσι. τοῖς δὲ καὶ τὰ καλούμενα 
σύμβολα τῶν ἐσομένων ἐστὶν ἀρίδηλα γράμματα, φωναί τε καὶ συγκύρ- 
gas ἐπ’ ἄλλῳ γενόμεναι, σημαντικῶν ὄντων ἅπασι πάντων. The 
resemblance between the Hermetist’s summary treatment of μαντεία, 
and Synesius’s fuller discussion of it, makes it probable that they 
drew from a common source; and it is not unlikely that both of 
them were directly or indirectly influenced by Posidonius. Cic. 
Div. τ. 6: ‘Chrysippus . . . totam de divinatione duobus libris 
explicavit sententiam, uno praeterea de oraculis, uno de somniis: 
quem subsequens unum librum Babylonius Diogenes edidit, eius 
auditor; duo Antipater; quinque noster Posidonius.’ Jd. τ, τ: 
‘magnifica quidem res (μαντική), et salutaris, . . . quaque proxime 
ad deorum vim natura mortalis possit accedere.’ 

Sd ὀρνέων, διὰ σπλάγχνων, διὰ πνεύματος, διὰ δρυός. Cf. Ascl. Lar. 
III. 24a: ‘statuas futurorum praescias, eaque sorte, vate, somniis, 
multisque aliis rebus praedicentes.’ Observation of the flight and 
cries of birds, and inspection of the livers of animals slaughtered in 
sacrifice, were two of the commonest forms of Greek μαντική. 
The mention of divination διὰ δρυός is perhaps a literary allusion to 
the oracle of Dodona. But there may have been tree-oracles in 
Egypt also.’ It is not likely that there were many oaks in Egypt ; 
but the Hermetist may have used δρῦς as a synonym for δένδρον. 

The word πνεῦμα was sometimes used to mean the divine ‘ breath’ 
by which a human being is inspired ;* and if διὰ δρυός is an allusion 
to the oracle of Dodona, διὰ πνεύματος might possibly be meant to 
allude to the inspiration of the Pythia at Delphi.‘ But as the word 


1 The writer of Corf. XII. ii does not mention astrology among the ways of 
getting knowledge of the future; and as it was one of those most commonly 
employed in his time, the omission is probably deliberate. 

2 In Philostratus Vita Apollon. 6. 10, the chief of the Gymmi, on the upper Nile, 
makes an elm-tree talk. “τὸ δεῖνα " ἔφη “ δένδρον ", πτελέα δὲ Fy, .. , “ προσεῖπε 
τὸν σοφὸν ᾿Απολλώνιον." καὶ προσεῖπε μὲν αὐτόν, ὡς ἐκελεύσθη, ἡ φωνὴ δὲ ἣν 
ἔναρθρός τε καὶ θῆλυς. The story is no doubt a free invention; but the man who 
invented it may perhaps have heard of talking trees in Egypt. 

3 E.g. Democritus fr. 18 Diels (Clem. Alex. Strom, 6. 18. 167): ποιητὴς δὲ 
ἅσσα μὲν ἂν γράφῃ per’ ἐνθουσιασμοῦ καὶ ἱεροῦ πνεύματος, καλὰ κάρτα ἐστίν. Ps.- 
Plato Axiochus 3706 : man could not have acquired the knowledge he possesses 
εἰ μή τι θεῖον ὄντως ἐνῆν πνεῦμα τῇ ψυχῇ, δι᾿ οὗ τὴν τῶν τηλικῶνδε mepivoray καὶ 
γνῶσιν ἔσχεν. 

4 The πνεῦμα by which the Pythia was inspired was sometimes supposed to issue 
from the chasm above which she was seated. Cic. Div. 1. 38: ‘ potest autem vis 
illa terrae, quae mentem Pythiae divino afflatu concitabat, evanuisse vetustate, ut 








366 CORPVS HERMETICVM 







πνεῦμα has been used in a different sense a few lines before, and js 
barely intelligible here without some explanation, it may be suspected 
that it has been inserted by a Christian, who wished to make the 
sentence applicable to the prophets of his own religion. 

ἐπίστασθαι τὰ προγεγενημένα καὶ ἐνεστῶτα καὶ μέλλοντα, The 
emphasis is on μέλλοντα. To know the future is a privilege of the 
gods ; and man, in so far as he knows the future, is godlike (ἀθάνατος), 

ὃ 90 ἃ. ἕκαστον τῶν ζῴων ἑνὶ μέρει ἐπιφοιτᾷ τοῦ κόσμου. This is a 
singularly futile argument. It might have been said with some show. 
of reason that man is the only animal that has to do with all four 
elements ; but the Hermetist shows a strange disregard of obvious. 
facts in saying that every other animal is restricted to one element, 
There are amphibious animals, which haunt both earth and water ᾿ 
birds haunt both air and earth, and some birds swim and dive in 
water also. Moreover, man uses air only as the beasts use it ; both 
men and beasts breathe air. A more plausible statement of the 
same argument occurs in Philo De opif. mundi 51. 147, Cohn ᾿ 
Ρ. 51: Man πᾶσι τοῖς λεχθεῖσι (se. γῇ, ὕδατι, ἀέρι, πυρὶ) ὡς οἰκειοτάτοις, 
καὶ συγγενεστάτοις χωρίοις ἐνδιαιτᾶται, τόπους ἀμείβων, καὶ ἄλλοτε 
ἄλλοις ἐπιφοιτῶν, ὡς κυριώτατα φάναι τὸν ἄνθρωπον πάντα εἶναι, χερσαῖον, 
ἔνυδρον, πτηνόν, οὐράνιον" 7 μὲν γὰρ οἰκεῖ καὶ βέβηκεν ἐπὶ γῆς, χερσαῖον. 
ζῷόν ἐστιν, 7 δὲ δύεται καὶ νήχεται καὶ πλεῖ πολλάκις, ἔνυδρον, . . . ἡ δὲ 
μετέωρον ἀπὸ γῆς ἀνώφοιτον ἐξῆρται τὸ σῶμα (i. 6. stands erect), λέγοιτ᾽ 
ἂν ἐνδίκως ἀεροπόρον εἶναι, πρὸς δὲ καὶ οὐράνιον, διὰ τῆς ἡγεμονικωτάτης 
τῶν αἰσθήσεων ὄψεως ἡλίῳ καὶ σελήνῃ καὶ ἑκάστῳ τῶν ἄλλων ἀστέρων 
πλανήτων καὶ ἀπλανῶν συνεγγίζων. The common source is probably 
Stoic. 

ὁ δὲ ἄνθρωπος τούτοις πᾶσι χρῆται, γῇ, ὕδατι, ἀέρι [πυρί] ὁρᾷ δὲ καὶ 
οὐρανόν. “ All these’ (τούτοις πᾶσι) must mean the three elements 
which have just been mentioned, viz. earth, water, and air ; πυρί 
must therefore be cut out. The fourth cosmic region, that of fire, is 
here called, not πῦρ, but οὐρανός. Cf. ὃ 21: τοῦ κόσμου μέρη εἰσὶν 
οὐρανὸς καὶ γῇ καὶ ὕδωρ καὶ ἀήρ. 

ὁρᾷ δὲ καὶ οὐρανόν, ἅπτεται δὲ καὶ τούτου αἰσθήσει. Men do 
not indeed ‘ make use of’ the celestial fire, as they make use of the 
other three elements; but they look up at it, and are in that way 
brought into connexion with it. It could hardly be denied that 
beasts and birds, as well as men, are able to ‘see the sky’ in the 


quosdam exaruisse amnes aut in alium cursum contortos et deflexos videmus,’ 
Here the prophetic πνεῦμα is regarded as a gaseous substance, 


as 





LIBELLVS XII. ii: δὲ 19-20a 367 


literal sense of the words ; but the Hermetist considers that men are, 
by their bodily form, better fitted than beasts to look upward; and 
he holds that, in consequence of the direction of our eyes towards 
the sky, our thoughts are turned towards things heavenly and divine, 
or at any rate, that the upturning of man’s eyes is symbolic of the 
elevation of his thought. As to the significance of ‘looking up to 
heaven’, cf. «45εἰ. Lat. 1. 6a; ‘suspicit caelum.’ Jd, g: ‘ caeli sus- 
piciendi venerabilem curam.’ Asc/, Lat. III. 25; ‘nemo suspiciet 
cacelum.’ Pl. Zim. 47 A: ὄψις δὲ. .. αἰτία τῆς μεγίστης ὠφελείας 
γέγονεν ἡμῖν, ὅτι τῶν νῦν λόγων περὶ τοῦ παντὸς λεγομένων οὐδεὶς dv 
ποτε ἐρρήθη μήτε ἄστρα μήτε ἥλιον μήτε οὐρανὸν ἰδόντων' νῦν δ᾽... 
ἐπορισάμεθα φιλοσοφίας γένος. Cic. Wat. deor. 2. 140, probably from 
Posidonius: ‘(di homines) humo excitatos celsos et erectos consti- 
tuerunt, ut deorum cognitionem caelum intuentes capere possent. 
Sunt enim... homines . . . quasi spectatores superarum rerum atque 
caelestium, quarum spectaculum ad nullum aliud genus animantium 
pertinet.” Cic. Zegg. τ. 26: ‘nam cum ceteras animantes abiecisset 
ad pastum, solum hominem erexit (natura), ad caelique quasi cogna- 
tionis domiciliique pristini conspectum excitavit.’ Oy. J/etam. i. 
84: ‘pronaque cum spectent animalia cetera terram, | os homini 
sublime dedit, caelumque videre | iussit, et erectos ad sidera tollere 
vultus.’ In the cosmogonia of ‘Sanchuniathon’ (quoted in intro- 
ductory note on Corp, III) men are called οὐρανοῦ κατόπται. Sen. 
£p. 94. 56: ‘(natura) vultus nostros erexit in caelum, et quicquid 
magnificum mirumque fecerat videri a suspicientibus voluit’ Lac- 
tantius Ofif. dei 8. 2: ‘cum igitur statuisset deus ex omnibus ani- 
malibus solum hominem facere caelestem, caetera universa terrena, 
hunc ad caeli contemplationem rigidum erexit bipedemque con- 
stituit, scilicet ut eodem spectaret unde illi origo est, illa vero 
depressit ad terram.’ Lactant. Div. inst. 2. τ. 14-19, and 7. 5. 6. 
This commonplace is criticized by Galen, Us. part. 3. 3 (J. B. Mayor 
ad Cic. NV. D. 2. 140): ‘Those who believe man to have been made 
erect in order that he might look up to heaven... can never have 
seen the fish called wxanoscopus, not to mention various birds, which 
are much better adapted for looking up than man. The true upward 
looking, as Plato said (Zep. 7. 529), is to fix the mental eye on that 
which really exists.’ The notion is more plausible from the point of 
view of a Stoic, who identifies the visible sky with the supreme deity, 
than from that of a Platonist ; and it may have been Posidonius that 
first expressed it in the form in which it was adopted by later writers, 





468 CORPVS HERMETICVM 


§ 20b. [6 δὲ θεὸς καὶ περὶ πάντα καὶ διὰ πάντων. These words 
occur in XII. i. τ4 8, and have probably been repeated here by error, 
Compare διὰ πάντων καὶ περὶ πάντα in ὃ 23 a. 

καὶ οὐδὲν δύσκολόν ἐστι νοῆσαι τὸν θεόν, ... εἰ δὲ θέλεις, [[αὐτὸν]] καὶ 
θεωρῆσαι ((adrév)), The writer distinguishes θεωρῆσαι, ‘to see’, from 
νοῆσαι, ‘to apprehend in thought’. Cf. Corp. XI. ii. 21 Ὁ sg.: πανταχοῦ, 
ὀφθήσεται (σοι ὁ θεὸς). ... εἶτα φῃς “ ἀόρατος ὁ θεός"; edpypnoor.. ., 
ὁ θεὺς (ὁρᾶται) ἐν τῷ ποιεῖν. 

Having shown in 88 το b-18 that the Kosmos is full of life, Hermes 
proceeds to say in this paragraph (δὲ 20 b—23 a) that all the life in the 
Kosmos is a manifestation of God’s working, and that God can 
therefore be seen in all things. But the transition is abrupt; and 
the new topic is in no way suggested by the preceding demonstration 
that man is ἀθάνατος (88 το, 20a). It is therefore probable that 
a connecting passage has been lost. ‘The unintelligible words 
Tevépyera γάρ ἐστι δύναμις" are presumably a fragment of the lost 
passage. 

§ ar. ἴδε τὴν ἀνάγκην τῶν φαινομένων, If the text is sound, the 
meaning must be ‘ see how, in the visible world, one event necessarily 
follows another’, The sequence of cause and effect is unvarying 
and ineyitable. Cf. “τω. Lat. III. 39: ‘necessitas vero cogit δά 
effectum quae ex illius (sc. εἱμαρμένης) primordiis pendent. . . . neces- 
sitas, qua ad effectum vi coguntur omnia.’ 

καὶ τὴν πρόνοιαν τῶν γεγονότων τε καὶ γινομένων. ‘ Observe the indica- 
tions of God’s providence (i.e. the proofs of design) in past and 
present events’ (or, ‘in things that have come into being in the past, 
and things that come into being in the present’). This topic was 
much dwelt on by the Stoics ; see e.g. Οἷς. Wat. deor. 2. §§ 73-167. 

(δε) τὸν τηλικοῦτον θεὸν κινούμενον μετὰ πάντων (τῶν ἐνόντων) [ἀγαθῶν 
καὶ καλῶν] [θεῶν τε καὶ δαιμόνων καὶ ἀνθρώπων]. ‘This great god’ is 
the Kosmos. The Kosmos and all things in it are ever in motion; 
and that which is in motion must be alive. These words then 
amount to a repetition of the statement that the Kosmos is πλήρωμα 
τῆς ζωῆς. 

Something like τῶν ἐνόντων is needed to complete the sense. When 
this had been lost, two different attempts were made to fill the gap; 
hence we have the two alternatives ἀγαθῶν καὶ καλῶν and θεῶν τε καὶ 
δαιμόνων καὶ ἀνθρώπων. 

"ANN αὗται, ὦ πάτερ, ἐνέργειαι ὅλως εἰσίν. What is meant by αὗται 
The things last spoken of were the Kosmos and its contents; but 













LIBELLVS XII. ii: §§ 20 b-22 369 


these cannot be called ἐνέργειαι. The word αὗται must therefore be 
taken to mean ἡ ἀνάγκη and ἡ πρόνοιαΓ Tat says that Necessity and 
Providence are ‘ energies ’, i.e. forces at work; and he assumes that 
‘energies’ are things distinct from God, and consequently, that if 
the life in the Kosmos is produced by ‘ energies’, it cannot be the 
work of God. Hermes corrects his error by explaining that the 
ἐνέργειαι οἵ which he is speaking (viz. Necessity, Providence, and 
the like) ὑπὸ τοῦ θεοῦ évepyotvra; that is, they are ἐνέργειαι τοῦ θεοῦ, 
modes of God’s activity ; they are therefore ‘ parts of God’, and not, 
as Tat imagined, entities distinct from God. Cf. Ascl. Lat. 111. 39 
as emended: ἡ δὲ εἱμαρμένη ἐστὶν ἢ αὐτὸς ὃ θεός, ἢ ἡ μετ᾽ ἐκεῖνον 
τεταγμένη ἐνέργειαι. Corp, III fine: ἐν γὰρ τῷ θεῷ καὶ ἡ φύσις 
καθέστηκεν. 

ἢ ἀγνοεῖς ὅτι... μέρη (μέλη MSS.) ἐστὶ (rod) θεοῦ [ζωὴ καὶ ἀθανασία 
καὶ] εἱμαρμένη (αἷμα MSS.) καὶ ἀνάγκη καὶ πρόνοια καὶ φύσις [ 7; 
There can be little doubt that the author gave a list of four ‘parts’ 
of God to match the four ‘ parts’ of the Kosmos. Among the ‘parts’ 
of God, ἀνάγκη and πρόνοια, the two ἐνέργειαι which have just been 
mentioned, must have been included; with these, φύσις is fittingly 
coupled ; and the first of the four, which has been corrupted into 
᾿ αἷμα, was almost certainly εἱμαρμένη. For the association of εἷμαρ- 
pen with ἀνάγκη, πρόνοια, and φύσις, see note on ὃ 14 Ὁ above. 

[καὶ ψυχὴ καὶ νοῦς] [καὶ τούτων πάντων ἡ διαμονὴ] [τὸ λεγόμενον 
ἀγαθόν]. The author cannot have coupled ψυχή and νοῦς with ἀνάγκη 
ὅς, These phrases, as well as [ζωὴ καὶ ἀθανασία καὶ] above, may be 
misplaced fragments of the lost passage which preceded ὃ 20 Ὁ. 
Perhaps it was there said that God is the author or source of νοῦς 
and ψυχή, and of life in its two different forms of ἀθανασία and 
διαμονή. Cf. Corp. XI. i. 2: ἐνέργειαι δὲ τοῦ θεοῦ νοῦς καὶ ψυχή. 
fb, 4.8. 88 emended : ὁ αἰὼν κοσμεῖ τὴν ὕλην, ἀθανασίαν καὶ διαμονὴν 
ἐνθεὶς τῇ ὕλῃ. ΧΙ. ii. 17¢ as emended: οὐδὲ ὁ θεὸς δύναται (εἶναι 
μὴ ποιῶν τὸ ἀγαθόν' ἔστι δὲ τοῦτο... . ζωή. 

οὐκ [ἔτι] ἔστι τι... ὅπου οὐκ ἔστιν ὁ θεός, Cf. Corp. ΧΙ. ἱ. 6 ἃ 
as emended: 6 γὰρ ποιῶν ἐν πᾶσίν ἐστιν, . .. πανταχοῦ dv ἐνεργής. 

§ 22. Ἡ γὰρ ὕλη... χωρὶς θεοῦ (ri) ἐστιν, ἵνα τόπον (ποιὸν MSS.) 
αὐτῇ ἀπομερίσῃς; Matter, if it were not ‘energized’ by God (i.e. if 
God did not put life into it), would have no actual existence. _Life- 
less ὕλῃ is a mere abstraction ; the writer holds it to be μὴ ὄν, as the 
Platonists said that ἄμορφος or ὄποιος ὕλη is μὴ ὄν. You cannot 
‘assign a place to it’, i.e. you cannot say that it is to be found in this 

2806.2 Bb 





270 CORPVS HERMETICVM 


or that part of the universe. All existent matter is alive ; and its 
life must have been put into it by the vivifying activity (ἐνέργεια) 
of God. 

τί δὲ [ove] ἂν ἢ σωρὸν αὐτὴν οἴει εἶναι, μὴ ἐνεργουμένην: If the 
text is right, σωρός must here mean ‘an inert and lifeless mass’, 
But I have found no instance elsewhere of the use of the word in 
this sense; and some qualification of σωρόν may have been lost, 
Perhaps the author may have written (νεκρῶν) σωρόν ; cf. Diod. r2, 
62. 5: πολλοὺς τῶν πολεμίων νεκροὺς σωρεύσας. Or possibly the 
true reading may be copov ; matter, if it were not energized by God, 
would be a σορός, i.e. a thing that contains nothing but dead bones 
or ashes. 

ὑπὸ τίνος οὖν ζωοποιεῖται τὰ πάντα Lda; ὑπὸ τίνος ἀθανατίζεται τὰ 
ἀθάνατα ; ὑπὸ τίνος μεταβάλλεται τὰ μεταβλητά; The two different 
forms which life takes, viz. immortal life (ἀθανασία) and mortal life 
(μεταβολή), are here distinguished, as in Corp. XI. i and ii. Compare 
especially XI. i. 5 as emended: τίς ἄλλος αἴτιος ζωῆς, καὶ ἀθανασίας 
καὶ μεταβολῆς ποιητής; It is to be noted that the writer has already 
forgotten his reckless assertion that a// ζῷα are ἀθάνατα (8 18 fin.) 

εἴτε δὲ ὕλην, εἴτε σῶμα, εἴτε οὐσίαν φής. ὕλη is here, not ἄποιος 
οἵ ἄμορφος ὕλη, but matter as it presents itself to our senses, i.e, 
matter formed and vivified. In this sense, ὕλη is an alternative 
for σῶμα; and that being so, οὐσία also must be taken as an 
alternative for σῶμα. The three terms ‘matter’, ‘body’, and 
‘substance’ are equally applicable to τὸ αἴσθητον, and you may 
use which of them you will in speaking of it. The word οὐσία then 
is here used as it was used by the Stoics, and not as it was used 
by Plato. 

ἴσθι καὶ ταύτας οὔσας (αὐτὰς MSS.) ἐνεργείας τοῦ θεοῦ. ἐνέργεια 
here means, not ‘a force at work’, but ‘the result produced by a 
force at work’. Cf. Corp, XI. i. 2: ἐνέργειαι δὲ τοῦ θεοῦ νοῦς καὶ 
ψυχή «7A. 

(6 γὰρ θεὸς)... ἐνεργεῖ... τῶν σωμάτων (τὴν) σωματότητα, It is 
God’s ἐνέργεια that makes body what it is. If God did not put 
life into it, it would be lifeless; and to be lifeless is to be non- 
existent. 

§ 23a, οὔτε μέγεθος οὔτε τόπος οὔτε ποιότης οὔτε σχῆμα οὔτε χρόνος 
παρὰ (περὶ MSS.) τὸν θεόν ἐστι, If this sentence stood alone, we 
might retain περί, and take the words to mean that magnitude, 
position in space, &c. cannot be attributed to God,—in short, that 








LIBELLVS XII. ii: §§ 22-23b 371 


God is ἀσώματος. (Cf. Herm. ἔχε, I] A. 15.) But that statement 
would be irrelevant here, The connecting word ὅθεν shows that 
οὔτε μέγεθος κιτιλ. is an expansion of the preceding dictum, ‘ God is 
the All, and there is nothing that is not included in the All’; the 
meaning must therefore be that no attribute of material things exists 
‘beside’ (παρά) God, i. 6. in independence of him. 

χρόνος is oddly placed; if the word were used at all here, it 
would most naturally be put next to τόπος. As σχῆμα and χρῶμα 
are often coupled together, (e.g. ἀχρώματός τε καὶ ἀσχημάτιστος in 
Pl. Phaedr. 247 Cc, copied in Herm. af. Stob. ἔχε II A. 15,) it 
seems probable that the author wrote οὔτε σχῆμα οὔτε χρῶμλ. 

τὸ δὲ πᾶν διὰ πάντων καὶ περὶ πάντα, The phrase resembles 
that in XII. i. 14 ἃ, ὃ μὲν θεὸς περὶ πάντα καὶ διὰ πάντων ; but it does 
not necessarily follow that the writer of either document borrowed 
from the other. 

8 2g Ὁ. τοῦτον [τὸν λόγον], ὦ τέκνον, προσκύνει. This sentence 
had already been corrupted in the copy used by Lactantius, who 
read τοῦτον τὸν λόγον... προσκύνει, ‘worship this Adyos’, and took 
‘this Adyos’ to mean the Second Person of the Christian Trinity. 
But Corp. XII. ii contains no trace elsewhere of a personified λόγος ; 
and that being so, the Hermetist cannot possibly have spoken of 
‘this Adyos’ as a God to be worshipped. The simplest remedy is 
to strike out τὸν λόγον (which may perhaps have been inserted by 
a Christian through whose hands the text had passed before it 
reached Lactantius), and to take τοῦτον to mean τὸν θεόν. But it 
is also possible that the author wrote (κατὰ) τοῦτον τὸν λόγον (in 
accordance with this my teaching), ὦ τέκνον, (τὸν θεὸν) προσκύνει, OF 
something to that effect. 

ph εἶναι κακόν. The Hermetist has chosen to write ‘not to be 
bad’ rather than ‘to be good’, presumably because he considers 
that God alone can properly be called good (see Corp. VI), and 
that ‘not to be bad’ is the utmost to which man, while yet in the 
body, can attain. The ‘not being bad’ of which he is thinking 
is probably not abstinence from wrong-doing towards one’s fellow 
men (the zws¢itia which Lactantius, in his comment on the passage, 
takes this phrase to imply); he would doubtless have said, like 
other Hermetists, that the chief and all-inclusive virtue is not 
δικαιοσύνη (justice towards men), but εὐσέβεια (piety towards God) ; 
and for him, μὴ εἶναι κακόν would perhaps mean first and chiefly 
μὴ εἶναι φιλοσώματον. 

ΒΡ 2 





372 CORPVS HERMETICVM 


LIBELLVS XIII 


Contents 
A. The teacher describes the Rebirth, §§ 1-8 ἃ. 


The doctrine of the Rebirth is to be taught only to those who are 
ready to be estranged from the material world. ὃ 1. 

The man whom the Rebirth brings into being is a son of God; _ 
he belongs to the world of Mind; he is composed of divine Powers, 
He who has been born again has become an incorporeal being ; 
he is no longer a thing visible to bodily eyes. §§ 2-4. 

The human body is subject to change, and is unreal, as are all 
material and sensible things. That only is real which is changeless 
and incorporeal. §§ 5, 6. 

He who would be born again must suppress the working of his 
bodily senses, and rid himself of the evil passions which spring from 
matter. That is not impossible; but it can be accomplished only 
by God's mercy. §§ 7 a-8a. 


B. The pupil experiences the Rebirth. §§ 8 b-14. 


The Powers of God enter into the man, and there is built up in | 
him an incorporeal organism, of which those Powers are the 
members. Knowledge (of God), Reality, the Good, Life and Light 
are now present in him ; no evil passion can henceforth trouble him ; 
he is changed into a god. §§ 8 b-1o. 

He sees things no longer by bodily sense; he sees with the eye 
of Mind. And thus seeing, he finds himself to be one with 
all that exists; he feels himself to be omnipresent and eternal, 
§§ rza-11b. 

The new self which has thus come into being is imperishable. He 
who has once become a god, and son of God, can never cease to be - 
that which he has become. ὃ 14. 


C. Zeacher and pupil sive thanks to God for the Rebirth. 
88 15-224. 
The Powers, who sing praise to God in their supracosmic abode, 
are present in the human teacher also (inasmuch as he has been 








LIBELLVS XIII 373 


born again), and sing within him, Thus inspired, he now sings 
a hymn of thanksgiving, in which he praises God (1) as maker of 
the material universe, and (2) as operating, through his Powers, in 
the mind of the man who has been born again. §§ 15-20. 

The pupil, further illuminated through the influence of his 
teacher’s hymn, gives thanks to God in a short hymn of his own 
devising. ὃ 21. 

Having been born again, and having thereby come to know 
himself and God, the pupil will bring forth good fruit. ὃ 22a. 

The doctrine of the Rebirth must be kept secret. ὃ 22 b. 
(13 b.) 

Relations of Libellus XILI to other Hermetica. The Tenxoi λόγοι 
of Hermes to Tat are known to the writer as a collection of docu- 
ments bearing that title (§ 1). Cog. XIII, since it explains a 
_ matter which was spoken of obscurely in one of the Τενικοὶ λόγοι, 
is presumably one of the documents entitled Διεξοδικοὶ λόγοι. 

The writer knows Corp. I as a document ascribed to Hermes. 
He expressly refers to it in § 15, and repeatedly shows acquaintance 
with it in other passages. In ὃ 11b, he appears to have copied 
from Corp. XI. ii. 20b; and in § 15 there is perhaps a reference 
to the concluding words of XI. ii. In § 6, he has probably borrowed 
from δὲ 9 and 15 of the Hermetic Περὶ ἀληθείας (Herm. ap. Stob. 
Exe. ΤΙ A). 

The term παλιγγενεσία occurred in one of the Τενικοὶ λόγοι ; but 
in the extant Afermetica, the metaphor or figure of ‘rebirth’ is 
employed in Corg, XIII alone, and the thing signified by it is 
elsewhere expressed in other ways. Εἰ g. in Cord, I, this transforma- 
tion is described by the phrases εἰς τὸ ἀγαθὸν χωρεῖν (§§ 18, το, 21); 
εἰς ζωὴν καὶ φῶς χωρεῖν (§§ 21, 32); ἡ τοῦ νοῦ παρουσία (8 22); γνῶσιν 
ἐσχηκέναι (§ 26a fin.); σωθῆναι (§§ 26 Ὁ, 29); τῆς ψυχῆς νῆψις,--- 
ἀληθινὴ ὅρασις (§ 30) ; θεύπνους γενόμενος (ἐπὶ τὸ πεδίον ὃ) τῆς ἀληθείας 
ἦλθον (ἰ2.}; τῆς ἀθανασίας μεταλαβεῖν (ὃ 28). Corp. XI. ii: ἑαυτὸν 
ἐξισάσαι τῷ θεῷ (§ 20b) ; συναυξῆσαι ἑαυτὸν τῷ ἀμετρήτῳ μεγέθει, κιτιλ. 
(%.) ; νοῆσαι τὸν θεόν (16.). Corp. X: ἡ τοῦ ἀγαθοῦ θέα (ὃ 4b); 
ἡ ἐπεισροὴ τῆς νοητῆς λαμπηδόνος (1.); ἀναπετάσαι ἡμῶν τοὺς τοῦ νοῦ 
ὀφθαλμούς, καὶ θεάσασθαι τὸ κάλλος τοῦ ἀγαθοῦ (§ 5); ἡ γνῶσις τοῦ 
ἀγαθοῦ (ἰ.}; εἰς οὐσίαν μεταβληθῆναι,----ἀποθεωθῆναι (ὃ 6) ; γεύεσθαι 
abavacias,—rod ἀγαθοῦ μεταλαμβάνειν (§ 8 4); γνῶσις (§ 9); ἡ γνῶσις 
τοῦ θεοῦ (§ 15a); τὸ τῆς γνώσεως φῶς (ὃ 21). In Corp, IV, the 
process which corresponds to the ‘rebirth’ of Corp. XIII is called 





374 CORPVS HERMETICVM 


‘dipping oneself in the basin of vois’; i.e. in that document it is 
figuratively described as a baptism. 


Sources. The doctrine of Corp. XIII is based on Platonism. The 
Platonic antitheses of αἴσθησις and νόησις, αἰσθητά and νοητά, τὸ 
ἀληθές (= τὸ ὄντως dv) and τὸ ψευδές (= τὸ φαινόμενον), the corporeal 
and the incorporeal, are present in the writer’s thought throughout 
the dialogue; and in § 2 fiz. there is a reference to the Platonic 
doctrine of ἀνάμνησις. But in describing the change which takes 
place in a man when he ‘ comes forth from the cave’, the Platonists 
in general were not accustomed to employ the metaphor of ‘re- 
birth’; and the source of the conception expressed in Corp. XIII 
by the term παλιγγενεσία must be looked for in some other quarter, 
The group of Hermetists to which the author of Corp. XIII belonged 
probably got this conception either from the Christians, who held 
that men are reborn by the sacrament of baptism, or from some 
Pagan mystery-cult in which men were held to be reborn by a 
sacramental operation. But the author of Corp. XIII rejects all 
theurgia, as did the Hermetists in general ; and accordingly, while 
adopting the notion of rebirth, he differs both from the Christians 
and from the adherents of those Pagan mystery-cults in which a 
rebirth was spoken of, in that he does not regard παλιγγενεσία as 
effected by any sacramental action. 


Date. Corp. XIII is certainly later than Corg. I, which I con- 
jecture to have been written between A.D. roo and 200; and it is 
probably later than Corp. XI. ii, which I have assigned to the third 
century. (See note on XIII. 1rb.) It also appears to be later 
than Herm. af. Stob, Zxc. II A. (See note on XIII. 6.) Moreover, 
Corp. XIII differs from almost all the other Hermetica in presenting 
indications that its writer was a member of a religious fraternity 
which already possessed established traditions and fixed forms of 
worship (see note on § 21), and which therefore had presumably 
been in existence for some considerable time. This 4e//us then 
is probably one of the latest of the extant Hermetica ; and we may 
conclude that it was written in the third century after Christ, and 
most likely towards the end of that century. 


Title. The insertion of ἐν ὄρει must have been suggested by the 
words ἐπὶ τῆς τοῦ ὄρους peraBdoews in§ 1. But those words have 
to do with the earlier dialogue of which Tat is there speaking, and 








LIBELLVS XIII. §1 375 


not with the dialogue reported in (ον. XIII. There is no reason 
to suppose that in Corp. XIII itself Hermes and Tat are situated 
‘on a mountain’. 

The words καὶ σιγῆς ἐπαγγελίας refer to ὃ 22 Ὁ, where Hermes 
says to Tat σιγὴν ἐπάγγειλαι. But Corp. XIII cannot be called 
ἐᾷ discourse adout a promise of silence’; and if the phrase occurred 
at all in the title, it must have been connected differently. 

§ 1. περὶ θειότητος (al. θεότητος) διαλεγόμενος. If περὶ θειότητος 

meant merely ‘about divinity’, or ‘about things divine’, all the 
Hermetica alike might be said to be περὶ θειότητος. But the term 
is here used to indicate the special subject of one particular 
dialogue, and must therefore bear some more definite sense. Perhaps 
the meaning is ‘concerning the state of a man who has become θεῖος 
or ἔνθεος. Cf. Corp. IX. το, where we are told that θειότης is some- 
thing done by God (to a man Ὁ), and that it is related to God as 
νόησις to vous. 

μηδένα δύνασθαι σωθῆναι mpd τῆς παλιγγενεσίας. Cf. Zu. Joh, 3. 3: 
ἐὰν μή τις γεννηθῇ ἄνωθεν, οὐ δύναται ἰδεῖν τὴν βασιλείαν τοῦ θεοῦ. 

ἐμοῦ τε σοῦ ἱκέτου γενομένου Γἐπὶ τῆς τοῦ ὄρους μεταβάσεως" μετὰ 
τὸ σὲ ἐμοὶ διαλεχθῆναι [πυθομένου] τὸν τῆς παλιγγενεσίας λόγον μαθεῖν. 
In the dialogue περὶ θειότητος, which was one of the Τενικοὶ λόγοι, 
Hermes had told Tat that ‘no man can be saved until he has been 
born again’. At the end of that dialogue, or in another which 
followed it, (μετὰ τὸ σὲ ἐμοὶ διαλεχθῆναι,) Tat had begged Hermes 
to explain what he meant by ‘being born again’, and Hermes had 
refused, on the ground that Tat was not yet ready to be ‘ estranged 
from the world’. The words ἐπὶ τῆς τοῦ ὄρους μεταβάσεως appear 
to refer to the place where the scene of the dialogue referred to 
was laid; but as that dialogue is not extant, it is impossible to 
discover their meaning. One might conjecture ἐπὶ τῆς (ἀπὸ ἢ) τοῦ 
ὄρους karaBdoews, ‘when we were coming down from the mountain ’. 
That would imply that Hermes had taken Tat up to the desert 
plateau above the Nile-valley, to talk with him there in private, 
and that it was when their talk was ended, and they were on their 
way back, that Tat made his request. 

The infinitive μαθεῖν depends on ixérov γενομένου ; ‘I besought 
you to let me learn’. 

ὅταν μέλλῃς (τοῦ) κόσμου ἀπαλλοτριοῦσθαι [[  ]] (παραδώσων (sc. τὸν 
τῆς παλιγγενεσίας λόγον). The doctrine of the Rebirth must not 
be taught to the disciple until he is ready to experience the Rebirth 


376 CORPVS HERMETICVM 


in his own person ; and the condition of experiencing it is ‘alienation 

from the (material) world’. The meaning of this alienation js 
explained in Tat’s reply, ἀπηλλότριωσα τὸ ἐν ἐμοὶ φρόνημα ἀπὸ Tips 
τοῦ κόσμου ἀπάτης. Τῇ ἃ man is to be changed into an incorporeal 

being, he must rid himself of all that binds him to the body, and 

must therefore put away from him all interest in things corporeal, 

Cf. Ep. Joh. τ. 2.15: μὴ ἀγαπᾶτε τὸν κόσμον μηδὲ τὰ ἐν τῷ κόσμῳ, 

«7.4. A similar thought is expressed in different terms elsewhere 

in the Hermetica; e.g. Corp. 1.19: ὃ δὲ ἀγαπήσας . .. τὸ σῶμα, 

οὗτος μένει ἐν τῷ σκότει κιτιλ. Corp. IV. 5: καταφρονήσαντες πάντων 

τῶν σωματικῶν. 12. 6b: ἐὰν μὴ πρῶτον τὸ σῶμα μισήσῃς Kt, 

Corp, ΧΙ. ii, 218 : οὐδὲν γὰρ δύνασαι τῶν καλῶν καὶ ἀγαθών νοῆσαι, 

φιλοσώματος ὦν. ἷ 

παλιγγενεσίαν παραδοῦναι προθέμενος. ‘You promised to transmit 

the Rebirth to me when I should be fit to receive it; I am now fit 

to receive it, and I ask you to fulfil your promise.’ It may be 
doubted whether παλιγγενεσίαν παραδοῦναι means ‘to transmit to me 

the doctrine of the Rebirth’, or ‘to cause me to be born again’, 

In this dialogue, the Rebirth takes place in Tat immediately after 

the doctrine has been expounded to him; and the two things are 

not very clearly distinguished. On the use of παραδοῦναι and 
παράδοσις in connexion with religion, see Norden, Agnostos Theos, 
pp. 288-293. 

[ἐκ φωνῆς ἢ κρυβήν]. (Perhaps κρυβῆ or κρύβδην.) The writer 
of these words must have intended to say ‘either openly or in secret’, 
But the antithesis is not correctly expressed ; Hermes must speak to 
Tat ἐκ φωνῆς (viva voce), even if he teaches him in private. Besides, 
Tat has no motive for mentioning the alternatives here. 

dyvod . .. ἐξ οἵας μήτρας ἄνθρωπος ἀναγεννηθείη dv (ἐγεννήθη MSS.). 
The aorist indicative can hardly be right; the sense required is 
ΕἼ do not know how a man cou/d δε born again’, and this might be 
expressed by the optative. ‘Tat’s perplexity resembles that of 
Nicodemus in Zv. Joh. 3. 4: πῶς δύναται ἄνθρωπος γεννηθῆναι γέρων 
ὦν; μὴ δύναται εἰς τὴν κοιλίαν τῆς μητρὸς αὐτοῦ δεύτερον εἰσελθεῖν Kal 
γεννηθῆναι ; 

§ 2. σοφία ἡ μήτρα, ἐν σιγῇ (xioven).—(copia νοερὰ ἐν σιγῇ MSS.) 
It can hardly be doubted that νοερά is a corruption of μήτρα. Tat 
has asked two parallel questions, ἐξ οἵας μήτρας and (éx) σπορᾶς 
ποίας; and since Hermes repeats the word σπορά in his reply (7 
σπορὰ τὸ ἀληθινὸν ἀγαθόν), he must have repeated the word μήτρα also. 





LIBELLVS XIII: δὲ 1-2 377 


The restoration of κύουσα is less certain ; but something of the sort 
is needed to provide a construction for ἐν σιγῇ. 

The statement that σοφία is the μήτρα is equivalent to saying that 
God’s Wisdom is the mother who gives birth to the new man : ἢ 
and Hermes goes on to say that God’s Will (θέλημα) is the father who 
begets him. (A few lines below, we are told more simply that the 
new man is θεοῦ παῖς, a son of God himself.) The σπορά (= σπέρμα), 
je. the vital germ from which the new man springs, is ‘the true 
Good’, which is regarded as a thing emitted by God’s Will. 

The new man is conceived, or his birth is prepared, ‘in silence’.* 
The New Birth cannot be brought about by verbal teaching or 
discussion. (Cf. § 2 fin.: τοῦτο τὸ γένος οὐ διδάσκεται. Corp. X. 5: ἡ 
γὰρ γνῶσις αὐτοῦ βαθεῖα σιωπή ἐστιν.) It agrees with this statement 
ΟΠ that Hermes is represented as having refused to talk to Tat about 
the παλιγγενεσία until the new man that was to be born in him 
had already been conceived, and the embryo was ripe for birth. 
((Aéye pot καὶ τοῦτο" tis ἐστι τελεσιουργὸς. . . θελήματι θεοῦ) 
(soupyav). This passage is certainly out of place in ὃ 4, where it 
interrupts the train of thought; and the question ‘who is the 
ministrant ?’ would most naturally be asked in close connexion with 
the question ‘ who is the father ?’ 

The MSS. give ris ἐστι γενεσιουργὸς τῆς παλιγγενεσίας ; ‘Who is 
the worker of the birth of the Rebirth?’ The repetition of γενεσι- 
is awkward ; and it is most likely that the author wrote τελεσιουργός, 
intending by this word to suggest an analogy * between the Rebirth 
and the process of initiation in a mystery-cult. (Cf. τέλος, τελετή, 
‘initiation’; τελεῖν, ‘to initiate’; τέλειος, ‘one whose initiation has 
been completed’.*) ‘The word τελεσιουργός was frequently employed 


























1 In the Valentinian system, Sophia (Achamoth) is the mother of the πνευματικόν 
in man (Irenaeus 1. 6). ‘ The mother of the New Man, says Boehme, is the Virgin 
Sophia, the Divine Wisdom, or Mirror of the Being of God’ (E. Underhill, 
Mysticism, 1912, p. 147). 

2 Cf. Eckhart, Pred, ii (Ε, Underhill, A/ysticism, p. 381): ‘It may be asked 
whether this Birth is best accomplished in man when he does his work, and forms 
and thinks himself into God, or when he keeps himself in silence, stillness, and 
peace, so that God may speak and work in him..,. The best and noblest way in 
which thou mayst come into this work and life is by keeping silence, and letting 
God work and speak.’ 

8 Analogy, but not identity. In the mystery-cults, the thing aimed at was 
accomplished by means of certain ritual actions of sacramental efficacy; but no 
sacramental action is mentioned or implied in Corf. XIII. 

* According to Miss J. E. Harrison, ‘The meaning of the word τελετή᾽, Class. 
Rev. March 1914, the mystery-rites were originally adolescence-rites, and τέλειος, 
in this connexion, primarily meant ‘admitted to the séafus of an adult’, It may 


; 





.---ὦ - -- -  Ἢὖὲϑ.ὄ-. > 






























378 CORPVS HERMETICVM 


with reference to religious initiation. In Adammonis Resp. 2. τ 
the performance of a sacramental action is described as ἡ τῶν ἔργων. 
τῶν ἀρρήτων καὶ ὑπὲρ πᾶσαν νόησιν θεοπρεπῶς ἐνεργουμένων τελεσιουργία,, 
The word is much used by Dionysius Areopag., in combination’ 
with other terms borrowed from the language of the Pagan mysteries, 
and doubtless transmitted to him by Pagan Neoplatonists; e.g, 
Cael. hierarch. 3.3: τοὺς δὲ τελεσιουργοὺς (χρή), ὡς ἐπιστημονικοὺς 
τὴς τελεστικῆς μεταδόσεως, τελεῖν τοὺς τελουμένους τῇ πανιέρῳ μυήσει. 
τῆς τῶν ἐποπτευθέντων ἱερῶν ἐπιστήμης. Dionysius calls the bishops. 
τελεσιουργοί, as being the agents by whom the most holy sacraments 
are administered, and through whom the supreme consecration is 
conferred; he says the deacons καθαίρουσι, the priests φωτίζουσ ; 
and the bishops τελεσιουργοῦσι. The τελεσιουργός then is the man 
through whose ministration the process of initiation is completed, 
and the mystes is made τέλειος. The New Birth of Corp. XIII is 
analogous to the achievement of that union of the worshipper with 
his god which it was the object of mystery-rites to bring about; 
and the man who does that which gives occasion for another man 
to be ‘born again ’ may accordingly be called ‘the τελεσιουργός of 
the Rebirth ’. 

In the particular case of Tat, the τελεσιουργός is Hermes. But 
answering the question in general terms, Hermes says that the 
τελεσιουργός is ‘some one man who is a son of God’. Hermes 
himself is such a man; he has been born again, and has thereby 
become a son of God. 

Ἴλλλος [ἔσται] 6 γεννώμενος. As Hermes is here speaking generally, 
and not referring to an expected παλιγγενεσία of Tat, the use of the 
future tense cannot be justified ; and we must either strike out ἔσται, 
or alter it into ἐστίν. 

The man who has been born again is ‘another man’. The 
voepos ἄνθρωπος differs so completely from the σωματικὸς ἄνθρωπος, 
that the change which takes place in a man when he passes from 
the one state to the other can be described by saying that he ceases 
to exist, and another man comes into being in his place. Something 
like this is necessarily implied when the term παλιγγενεσία is used. 
But the statement must not be insisted on in its literal sense, 
Tat becomes ‘another man’ in the course of the dialogue; yet the 


have been so in a remote past; but if so, it had ceased to be so in the times known 
tous, The Greeks of history, when they spoke of a τελετή, were not thinking of - 
adolescence, 


‘LIBELLVS XIII. § 2 379 






















‘at who ‘sees with the eyes of the mind’ after-his transformation 
js after all the same person as the Tat who previously saw only with 
his bodily eyes. 

τὸ πᾶν, ἐν παντί, The New Man ‘is the All’, and ‘is in all’. 
This is more fully expressed in ὃ τι Ὁ, where Tat says ἐν οὐρανῷ 
ἐν γῇ, «7A. The writer intentionally made the phrases by which 
Hermes here describes the new man obscure enough to invite Tat’s 
reply, ‘you are speaking in riddles’, But he had no reason to make 
the obscurity extend to the grammatical construction ; and perhaps 
some word or words by which τὸ πᾶν ἐν παντί was connected with 
the context may have fallen out. 

((ἄμοιρος γάρ (ἐστι) τῆς Γὲν ἐμοὶ} οὐσίας, καὶ τῆς vonrijs)) (μοῖραν 
ἔχει). These words have been wrongly assigned to Tat; they must 
have formed part of Hermes’ answer. 

ἐν ἐμοί is meaningless. We need some word which may stand 
in contrast to νοητῆς (e.g. αἰσθητῆς, σωματικῆς, or ὑλικῆς) ; and 
as the speaker, Hermes, is one who has been born again, the οὐσία 
‘which is in him’ (or of which he consists) is νοητή, and not 
σωματική. It is conceivable that ἐν ἐμοί might be a corruption of 
évaipou, used as an equivalent for capxivys ; cf. Hdt. 3. 29: θεοὶ .. 
ἔναιμοί τε καὶ σαρκώδεες (with reference to the bull-god Apis). 

ἐκ πασῶν δυνάμεων συνεστώς. The word δυνάμεις is used in 
Corp. XIII, as in Corp. I, to signify the hypostatized ‘ Powers of 
God’. But in Corp. I, the ‘Powers’ are spoken of as residing 
in the supracosmic region, and collectively constituting the Noetos 
Kosmos, The writer of Corp. XIII adopts this conception ; but he 
adds that the man who has been born again consists of these same 
Powers of God. Thus the man of whom he speaks τῆς νοητῆς 
οὐσίας μοῖραν ἔχει. He is consubstantial with the Noetos Kosmos, 
and is a Noetos Kosmos in himself. 

ἐκ πασῶν δυνάμεων συνέστηκε Means, not ‘he consists of all the 
Powers’ (which would be ἐκ πασῶν τῶν δυνάμεων), but ‘ the things 
of which he consists are all of them Powers’, i.e. ‘he consists 
of Powers and nothing else’. Cf. Pl. Rep. 579 B: κύκλῳ φρουρού- 
μενος ὑπὸ πάντων πολεμίων (‘those who keep watch around him. are 
all of them enemies’). 

ὑπὸ τοῦ θεοῦ, ((ὅταν θέλῃ,)) ἀναμιμνήσκεται, This is a reference 
to the Platonic doctrine of ἀνάμνησις. In its antenatal state, the 
soul was united with God and the Noetos Kosmos, and possessed 
all knowledge of things divine. Through its embodiment, it has 


380 CORPVS HERMETICVM 


been overcome by λήθη (cf. Corp. X. 15b); but, God willing, 
may be enabled to recall to memory its former knowledge. Mer 
human teaching is powerless to impart this knowledge, and cap, 
at most, only give occasion for the ‘ reminiscence ’. 

§ 8. (ἄρ᾽) ἀλλότριος [vids] πέφυκα τοῦ πατρικοῦ yévous; With these 
corrections, which improve the sense, we get an iambic senariys 
The line is presumably quoted from some play, but perhaps no 
quite exactly, πατρικοῦ may possibly have been substituted 
πατρός. 

οὐδὲ τῷ πλαστῷ τούτῳ Γστοιχείῳ!, δι᾽ οὗ (σὺ ὁρᾷς), ἔστιν 
The thing ‘by means of which you see’ is the bodily eye. Buy 
the eye cannot be called a στοιχεῖον ; and we must suppose eithey 
that στοιχείῳ has been wrongly substituted for some other word 
(8. 5. ὀργάνῳ), or that it is a remnant of some longer phrase (e. g, 
τῷ πλαστῷ τούτῳ ἐκ στοιχείων ὀργάνῳ). 

οὐκ ἔχω λέγειν πλὴν τοῦτο᾽ ὁρῶν] τι(ν ἐν ἐμοὶ κιτλ. Herme 
knows what the Rebirth is, because he has himself experienced it; 
but he cannot find words to describe it adequately. It is impossiblh 
to make one who has not experienced it understand what it is by 
means of a mere verbal statement. | 

ἄπλαστον ἰδέαν (θέαν MSS.) Cf. Corp. XI. ii. 16b on the 
ἀσώματος ἰδέα of God. 

ἐμαυτὸν (διγεξελήλυθα εἰς ἀθάνατον σῶμα. ἐμαυτόν here means 
‘myself as identified with my material body’. Hermes has passed 
forth out of this self, and has ‘entered into’ (or become) a new 
self, which he describes, by a paradoxical ‘metaphor, as an immortal 
(i.e. divine) ‘body’, This ‘body’, his new self, is incorporeal, an 
is composed of divine δυνάμεις. 

καὶ διαλέλυταί (διὸ ἠμέληταί MSS.) μοι τὸ πρῶτον [σύνβ 
εἶδος, The reading διὸ ἠμέληται may be accounted for by assuming 
that S:AAéAura: was read as δι Μέλυται, and that this was alte J 
into διὸ ἠμέληται in an attempt to make sense. 

It seems best to cut out σύνθετον. The material ‘ form ’ (εἶδος), i. 6, 
the body, is indeed composite, but there is no reason to call 
attention to that fact’; for the new man, with whom it is contre sted 





that is the right reading) must be taken to mean ‘has been put 
away (from me)’, and not ‘has been broken up’. It is not tru 
that Hermes’ material body has. been broken up ; it still exists, bul 
it is no longer identical with Zim, or a part of him; it is a thing 


































LIBELLVS XIII: δὲ 2-4 381 


to him,—a mere external object, like anything else in the 
sensible world,—and in that sense ‘it has been put away from 
him’. A reader may however have supposed διαλέλυται to mean 
‘it has been broken up into its component parts’, and may thus 
have been led to insert σύνθετον. 
' [ὁρᾷς pe ὦ τέκνον, ὀφθαλμοῖς. This is perhaps a misplaced doublet 
‘of ὀφθαλμοῖς τούτοις θεωροῦμαι viv, ὦ τέκνον below. 
οὐκ ὀφθαλμοῖς τ(οιγούτοις θεωροῦμαι, τοιούτοις Means σωματικοῖς. 
‘The new man, being incorporeal, can be seen only with ‘the eyes 
‘of the mind’. Cf. Porphyr. 4d Marcellam 8: ἐγὼ οὐχ ὁ ἁπτὸς 
οὗτος καὶ τῇ αἰσθήσει ὑποπτωτύς, 6 δὲ ἐπὶ πλεῖστον ἀφεστηκὼς τοῦ σώ- 
μάτος, ὁ ἀχρώματος καὶ ἀσχημάτιστος, καὶ χερσὶ μὲν οὐδαμῶς ἐπαφητός, 
διανοίᾳ δὲ μόνῃ κρατητός. But Porphyry’s meaning is that the ego 
js the incorporeal soul, and not the body; and that might be said 
of every man alike. In Corp. XITI, on the other hand, it is implied 
that only he who has been born again is incorporeal, and that all 
other men are identical with their bodies. 
§ 4. ἐμαυτὸν γὰρ νῦν οὐχ ὁρῶ; Taking this as a question, we may 
explain the meaning thus: ‘You tell me that I do not see you; 
you might as well tell me that I do not see myse/f. Both statements 
alike contradict the evidence of my senses’. (If this is what is 
meant, it might have been more clearly expressed by writing οὐδὲ 
‘yap ἐμαυτὸν viv ὁρῶ ;) Hermes replies, ‘Would that you too, like 
‘me, had passed forth out of yourself’, i.e. had been born again, 
‘and so had put the body away from you. ‘In that case’, it is implied, 
‘it would have been true to say that you do not see yourself’, i.e. 
that the body which you see is not yourself. ‘But as you have not 
yet been born again, it cannot be denied that you see yourself when 
you look at your body.’ 

(ἵνα εἶδες, μὴ) ὡς οἱ ἐν ὕπνῳ ὀνειροπολούμενοι, (ἀλλὰ) χωρὶς ὕπνου. 
‘It is true that you see your body (and therefore “ yourself”, since 
you are still identified with your body); but when you see your 
body, or anything else, with your bodily eyes, the thing you see 
‘is no more real than the things seen in dreams; for all sense- 
Perception is illusion. If you would see truly, you must wake from 
your present sleep (i.e. from the state of one whose soul is sunk 
in the body), and look with waking eyes (i.e. with the eyes of the 
mind), 

The same meaning might be got in another way, by writing 
Miva εἶδες ((χωρὶς ὕπνου)" νῦν δὲ ὁρᾷς) ds of ἐν ὕπνῳ ὀνειροπολούμενοι, 














482 CORPVS HERMETICVM 


ὃ 5. τὸ yap μέγεθος βλέπω τὸ σὸν τὸ αὐτό, ὦ πάτερ, σὺν τῷ Χαρακτῇ ι. 
This is clumsily expressed, and perhaps corrupt; but the meaning 
must be ‘(I certainly do see you ;) for when I look at you, I ge 
aman of the same stature as before, and the bodily features by 
which I am accustomed to recognize you are unaltered ’. 

Καὶ ἐν τούτῳ ψεύδῃ. You are mistaken in saying that what yoy 
see when you look at me now is ‘the same’ as what you have seen 
before ; for the human body is continually changing. My body 
is an illusory appearance (ψεῦδος); for all that changes is illusory 
it is only that which exists in eternal changelessness that is real 
(ἀληθές, = ὄντως ὄν). Cf. Herm. ap, Stob. Exc. XI. 2. (16): οὐδὲ 
ἐν σώματι ἀληθές μόνον τὸ ἀσώματον ἀψευδές. Lxc. ΤΙ A. passim ; 









e.g. ὃ το, πᾶν γὰρ τὸ ἀλλοιούμενον ψεῦδός ἐστι κιτιλ. 

8 6. Τί οὖν ἀληθές ἐστιν... ; Τὸ μὴ θολούμενον κιτιλ, Cf. Herm, 
ap. Stob. Ζχε. ILA. 9: ἡ γὰρ ἀλήθειά [ | ἐστι... τὸ μὴ ὑπὸ ὕλης 
θολούμενον μήτε ὑπὸ σώματος περιβαλλόμενον, γυμνόν, φανόν, arpen οὐ 
[7 ἀναλλοίωτον [ἀγαθόν]. 10. ὃ 15 as emended: Τί οὖν ἂν εἴποι 
τις ἀληθὲς τὴν πρώτην ἀλήθειαν, ὦ πάτερ; Ἕνα καὶ μόνον, ὦ Tar, 
μὴ ἐξ ὕλης, τὸν μὴ ἐν σώματι, τὸν ἀχρώματον, τὸν ἀσχημάτιστον, τὸν 
ἄτρεπτον, τὸν μὴ ἀλλοιούμενον, τὸν ἀεὶ ὄντα. Τί seems clear that the 
writer of Corp. XIII has copied from Zxc. II A. He has borrowed 
τὸ μὴ θολούμενον, γυμνόν, φανόν, ἀγαθόν, from Lxc. IL A. g ; ἀχρώματον, 
ἀσχημάτιστον, from 7. 15; and ἄτρεπτον, ἀναλλοίωτον, from both 
passages; and he has added τὸ μὴ περιοριζόμενον and τὸ αὑτῷ 
καταληπτόν. Compare the Hermippus (Kroll and Viereck) 2. 20, 
186: ποίους ἂν ἐρῶτας ἴσχοι 6 τοιοῦτον κάλλος κατοπτεῦσαι δεδυνημένος, 
ἄφθαρτον, ἄκρατον, μὴ id’ ὕλης θολούμενον, ἄτρεπτόν τε καὶ ὁ 
λοίωτον. ' 

τὸ ph περιοριζόμενον (διοριζόμενον MSS.). Cf. Corp. ΧΙ. ii, 18 
as emended ; τοῦ ἀσωμάτου οὐδέν ἐστι περιοριστικόν, αὐτὸ δὲ πάντων 
περιοριστικόν. In Corp. I. 7, the Noetos Kosmos is called κόσμος 
ἀπεριόριστος. 

τὸ γυμνόν is obscure here; but in Ze, ΠῚ A. 9, its meaning is 
explained by the preceding phrase, μήτε ὑπὸ σώματος περιβαλλόμενον. 
The writer would have said that the human soul, when unembod 
is ἀληθής, but ceases to be ἀληθής when it is incarnated, and in 
life, becomes ἀληθής only when it has put the body away from it 
by the Rebirth. 

τὸ αὑτῷ καταληπτόν. The incorporeal can be apprehended only 
by νοῦς, which is itself incorporeal ; for ‘like is known only by like’ 


~ 





LIBELLVS XIII: ἐξ 5-6 383 


Tt would be possible to write τὸ αὐτοκατάληπτον, taking it in the 
game sense. 

{{τὸ ἀσώματον). This can hardly have been written here by the 
author ; the series ought to end with ἀγαθόν, as in Exc. II A. 9 MSS. 
But some one rightly summed up the meaning of the whole sentence 
by putting τὸ ἀσώματον at the end of it, 

ἐνεφράχθησαν αἱ αἰσθήσεις. Cf. Corp, VII. 3: ra... αἰσθητήρια 
ἀναίσθητα ποιῶν, τῇ πολλῇ ὕλῃ αὐτὰ dmodpdéas. As the writer of 
Corp. XIII had certainly read Cor. I, it is probable that he had 
also read Corp. VII, which is closely connected with Corf. I. 

Tat cannot apprehend ‘the thought which has been put before 
him’, i.e. understand what Hermes has said ; he cannot grasp the 
notion of the incorporeal. And for that very reason, he makes no 
distinction between αἴσθησις and νόησις; he thinks he ought to be 
able to apprehend the thing spoken of zth his senses, i.e. to see or 
hear it,—in imagination at least, if not by actual sense-perception. 
Hermes therefore has to explain to him that it is impossible αἰσθητῶς 
νοεῖν τὸ ἀσώματον. 

τὸ μὲν ἀνωφερὲς [ὡς πῦρ] κιτιλ, The explanation that τὸ ἀνωφερές 
here means fire, τὸ κατωφερές means earth, &c., is correct ; but the 
author would hardly have thought it necessary to explain the 
terms; and ὡς is used improperly. I have therefore bracketed 
ὡς πῦρ &c. 

καὶ σύμπνοον [ὡς ἀήρ]. Does this mean the air ‘ which is breathed 
by all of us together’, i. e. the common life-breath of us all? 

τὸ ‘'dodiyywrov' (ἀσύνθετον »), τὸ μὴ διαλυόμενον. Bodies are 
σύνθετα and διάλυτα, i.e. are composed of the four elements, and 
resolved into the elements of which they were composed. 

τὸ μόνον δυνάμει [καὶ ἐνεργείᾳ] νοούμενον. δύναμις may be taken to 
mean here, as before, ἃ Power of God’, i.e. one of the ‘ Powers’ 
which are the component parts both of the divine νοῦς, and of the 
mind of the individual man into whom a portion of the divine νοῦς 
has entered. The incorporeal can be apprehended only by νοῦς, or 
by a δύναμις which is, so to speak, one of the members of νοῦς. 
But the writer was at the same time conscious of the more ordinary 
Meaning of δύναμις, ‘power’ or ‘faculty’; and this suggested to 
him the phrase which follows, τοῦ δυναμένου νοεῖν. 

The word ἐνέργεια is used by some of the Hermetists in the sense 
of ‘a power of God at work’, or ‘an operation of God’s power’; 
and in this sense it would be possible to say that the incorporeal 



































284. CORPVS HERMETICVM 


ἐνεργείᾳ νοεῖται. But the combination δυνάμει καὶ ἐνεργείᾳ 1 15 puzzling, 
and it seems best to assume that καὶ ἐνεργείᾳ was inserted by 
some one who did not understand the author's peculiar use of 
δύναμις. 
[τὴν ἐν θεῷ γένεσιν]. These words, which are equivalent to 
παλιγγενεσίαν, seem to have been inserted in order to provide 
object for νοεῖν. But the object required is not τὴν παλιγγενεσίαν, 
but τὸ μὴ σκληρὸν «7.A., 1. 6, the incorporeal; and as τὸ ἀσώματον 
seems to have been wrongly inserted above, the simplest remedy is 
to transpose it to this place. 
§ 7a. ἐπίσπασαι εἰς ἑαυτόν, Here again, the object is ‘the in. 
corporeal’, that is, in this connexion, τὸν θεῖον νοῦν, or τὰς δυνάμεις. 
Two lines below, this same thing, which is to be ‘drawn into him’, 
or ‘born within him’, is called ἡ θεότης. 
§ 7b. (... Set) καθᾶραι σεαυτὸν ἀπὸ τῶν ἀλόγων τῆς ὕλης τιμωριῶν, 
The editors print κάθαραι, imperative middle, and connect it closely 
with the preceding imperatives (ἐπίσπασαι, θέλησον, κατάργησον). 
‘But the use of the middle voice with σεαυτόν is hardly possible; 
and the description of the purification required is sufficiently distinct 
from what precedes it to make a fresh paragraph desirable. 
The purging away of evil passions would most naturally be 
regarded as preliminary to the reception of that which is divine; 
and assuming that the author took this view, we might write (πρῶτον, 
δὲ δεῖ) καθᾶραι. In the following sentences, however, we are told that 
the evil passions do not depart until after the δυνάμεις have arrived. 
But there is reason to suspect that those sentences have been 
inserted by a later hand. 
The vices or evil passions are here called τιμωρίαι. The word 
τιμωρίαι properly means ‘punishments’. In Cor, I. 23, evil passions 
are spoken of as punishments inflicted on the impious by the τιμωρὸς. 
δαίμων ; and in Corp. XII. i. 5-7, they are similarly spoken of as. 
punishments inflicted by Heimarmene. But the writer of Corp. XIIL 
does not speak of them as punishments of previous sin; and in this 
passage, τιμωρίαι must be taken to mean, not ‘punishments’, but 
‘tortures’ resembling those which are inflicted on criminals. 
Tipwpods γὰρ ἐν ἐμαυτῷ ἔχω, ὦ πάτερ; ‘The writer personifies the 
evil passions, and therefore calls them τιμωροί, ‘torturers’, as well. 
as τιμωρίαι, tortures’, He does not himself call them ‘daemons’; 
but his use of the word τιμωροί may have been suggested to him by 
writings in which the evil in men was attributed to the operation o 


LIBELLVS XIII: ἐᾷ 6-7b 385 


 χιμωροὶ δαίμονες. Cf. Lydus De mens. 4. 32 (Asel. Lat. Il. 33 b): 
τοὺς μὲν τιμωροὺς τῶν δαιμόνων K.T.A. 

δευτέρα λύπη... δωδεκάτη κακία, It seems probable that this list 
of τιμωρίαι, and the later passages in which it is presupposed (viz. 
δὲ 8c-9, ΤΙ c-r2, and a few lines in ὃ r8), were not written by the 
original author, but were inserted by some person or persons into 
whose hands the document afterwards passed. When these excre- 
scences have been removed, Cor. XIII is less unworthy to take its 
place among the other Hermetica. It is true that we have no right 
to assume that the author’s canons of good sense and taste agreed 
with ours, and to conclude that passages are spurious merely because 
we think them silly; but it will be found that several difficulties and 
inconsistencies in detail are cleared away when these parts of the 
text have been excised. 

The list of τιμωρίαι is based on no logical classification ; the writer 
was chiefly interested in making up the number to twelve, and was 
content to include in his list any word signifying a bad emotion, 
quality, or disposition. δόλος, ἐπιθυμία, ἀπάτη, and προπέτεια may 
have been suggested to him by the list of planetary πάθη in Corp. I. 

25. The twelfth and last is κακία, ‘ vice’) which does not stand on 
a par with the particular vices (πλεονεξία &c.), but includes them all ; 
and inasmuch as ‘ vice is ignorance’, the same might be said of the 
first, ἄγνοια, and perhaps of the seventh, ἀπάτη, also. The number 
twelve was fixed on because that is the number of the Signs of the 
Zodiac. See §12, where it is implied that each of the twelve 
τιμωρίαι results from the influence of one of the twelve zodiacal Signs. 
The astral theory presupposed differs from that in Corp. I, according 
to which each of the evil passions results from the influence of 
one of the seven planets. In both alike, the astral influences are 
held to be maleficent; but Corp. I takes into account the planets 
only, and ignores the zodiac, whereas Corp. XIII takes into account 
the zodiac only, and ignores the planets. 

at διὰ τῆς αἰσθήσεως (κακὰ ὃ) πάσχειν ἀναγκάζουσι τὸν ἐν τῷ δεσμω- 
τηρίῳ τοῦ σώματος δεδεμένον ἄνθρωπον. --- (διὰ τοῦτο δεσμωτηρίου τοῦ 
σώματος αἰσθητικῶς πάσχειν ἀναγκάζουσι τὸν ἐνδιάθετον ἄνθρωπον MSS.) 
There can be little doubt that this conjectural restoration expresses 
the author’s meaning, though the exact words are uncertain. When 


Ménard translates κακία ‘la méchanceté’, and Mead ‘malice’. Cf. Ep. Col. 
3.8: ὀργήν, θυμόν, κακίαν (RV. ‘ malice’), βλασφημίαν, αἰσχρολογίαν. But could 
κακία be understood in the restricted sense of ‘ malice’ where there is nothing in the 
context to suggest this limitation of its meaning? 


2806-2 Ce 
























































386 CORPVS HERMETICVM 


a man is ‘bound in the prison of the body’, the τιμωροί (who arg 
compared to the agents by whom sentence is executed on imprisoned 
criminals) have him in their power, and can inflict their torments 
on him. j 

If we retain τὸν ἐνδιάθετον ἄνθρωπον, we must translate ‘the inner 
man’, But there is no authority for this use of ἐνδιάθετος ; it could 
not be justified by the Stoic phrase ὁ ἐνδιάθετος λόγος. Besides, 
‘the inner man’ would rather mean the incorporeal man who ig 
brought into being by the Rebirth; whereas the man here spoken 
of is the natural or earthly man, who is sunk in or identified with 
the body. It seems certain therefore that ἐνδιάθετον is corrupt. 

ἀφίστανται δὲ αὗται [οὐκ] ἀθρόως. Cf. ὃ 12, as emended: τὴν ἀπό- 
στασιν ποιοῦνται, καθὼς (εἶπον, ἀθρόως). On the hypothesis that the 
list of τιμωρίαι was added by a later hand, we may suppose that ὁ 
was inserted here in order to avoid an apparent inconsistency 
the interpolated sentences, in which the expulsion of each of the 
first six τιμωρίαι is separately and successively described. 

οὕτω συνίσταται ὁ ((Adyos)). Cf. ὃ 8b, εἰς συνάρθρωσιν τοῦ λόγο 
and § 19, ὃ ods λόγος 8¢ ἐμοῦ ὑμνεῖ σέ. The λόγος is the incorpo 
organism which is composed of divine δυνάμεις, and is brought i 
being by the παλιγγενεσία. It is identical with the ἀθάνατον of 
spoken of in ὃ 3, the σῶμα τὸ ἐκ δυνάμεων συνεστός in ὃ 14, and 
νοερὰ οὐσία (2) in ὃ το. It corresponds more or less to what P 
called τὸ λογιστικόν, and Aristotle (27h. Vic. τ. 13) τὸ λόγον ἔχον ; 8 
it might equally well have been called ὁ νοῦς. It is quite distinct from 
the λόγος of Corp. 1. 5 a, &c., which is a personification of 
‘word’ or fiat by which God made the world ; and if we are to look 
for a Jewish parallel, it corresponds more nearly to the ‘word of the 
Lord’ by which he spoke to or through the prophets. f 

(οὗτος ὁ) τῆς παλιγγενεσίας τρόπος. Hermes has now answered ἵ 
Tat’s question (§ 3, διάφρασόν μοι τῆς παλιγγενεσίας τὸν τρόπον), 
far as it is possible to answer it by mere words. But Tat is alrea 
on the verge of experiencing the Rebirth in his own person; and 
what follows, it is described as actually taking place in him. 
would hardly be correct to say that the words of the teacher 
the transformation of the pupil. Hermes is indeed in this instance 
the τελεσιουργός ; but that means no more than that by his teaching 
and influence, culminating in the words which he has spoken in 
this dialogue, Tat has been brought into a fit state to be borm 
again. ‘The efficient cause of the Rebirth, as we are repeatedly 


LIBELLVS XIII: ἐᾷ 7 b-9 387 


told, is God’s will’ or ‘God’s mercy’, Hermes, however, has 
judged his time well, and has consented to talk to Tat about the 
Rebirth only when Tat is ready to experience it. 

§ 8 8. ‘kal διὰ τοῦτο οὐ καταπαύσει τὸ ἔλεος εἰς ἡμᾶς ἀπὸ τοῦ θεοῦ, 
οὐ καταπαύσει cannot be right; the meaning must be, not that 
God’s mercy will continue to operate, but that it will now begin to 
operate in Tat’s case, i.e. that it will bring the Rebirth to pass 
inhim. Besides, εἰς and ἀπό require a verb of motion. The sense 
wanted might be obtained by writing οὕτω κατελεύσεται τὸ ἔλεος 
κτλ. Hermes might rather have been expected to say something 
like εὐφήμησον, εἴ πως κατελεύσεται κιτιλ.; ‘wait in silence, and 
let us see whether it will come’. But if he is confident of its near 
approach, he may very well say positively ‘it will come’. Cf. § 7a: 
ἐπίσπασαι εἰς ἑαυτὸν (τὸ ἀσώματον), καὶ ἐλεύσεται. 

Hermes himself has been reborn already, and it is on Tat alone, 
and not on him, that ‘God’s mercy’ is now about to operate ; but 
he says εἰς ἡμᾶς instead of εἰς σέ, because he is deeply interested 
in the rebirth of his son. 

After these words, we must assume an interval of solemn and 
prayerful silence, which is ended by the exclamation χαῖρε λοιπόν, ὦ 
τέκνον, κιτιλ. At that point, Hermes, in virtue of his God-given 
insight, perceives that his expectation is fulfilled, and that Tat’s 
παλιγγενεσία has actually begun. In this dialogue, as in the 
Hermetica in general, there is no trace of any sacramental action. 
The Rebirth is wrought by God alone; and the ministrations of 
the human τελεσιουργός, by which the way is prepared for it, consist 
of nothing but teaching. 

ὃ 8c. ἦλθεν ἡμῖν [γνῶσις] xapd{s]. There is some awkwardness 
in speaking of the arrival of χαρά, when Hermes has said χαῖρε ὦ 
τέκνον just before. This tends to confirm the suspicion that the 
list of τιμωρίαι, and the corresponding list of δυνάμεις, are inter- 
_ polations. 

ἡ λύπη φεύξεται εἰς τοὺς χωροῦντας αὐτήν, ‘Grief’ is imagined 
as an evil demon, which, when expelled from one man, seeks 
another into whom it may enter. 

ὃ 9. ὁ βαθμὸς οὗτος... δικαιοσύνης ἐστὶν ἕδρασμα. ‘Justice’ is 
pictured as enthroned on her judgement-seat, like a Roman magistrate 
seated on his tribunal to administer the law. The ‘ Justice’ here 
spoken of is the justice of God, by which men are judged, rather 
than the human virtue of justice, which enters into the reborn man 
ςς2 





































288 CORPVS HERMETICVM 


and becomes part of him. But according to the doctrine of t 
document, the δυνάμεις which enter into the man are consubstantia} 
with the δυνάμεις of God, and it is therefore easy for the writer 
pass from the one to the other. 

((xupis γὰρ κρίσεως (κτίσεως MSS.))) ἐδικαιώθημεν, ὦ τέ 
ἀδικίας ἀπούσης. ‘ There is no need for our case to be tried a 
judged; we are justified without trial; for there is no injustice 
in us’ The writer takes advantage of the ambiguity of the word 
ἐδικαιώθημεν, which may mean either ‘we have been pronounced 
just (by the judge)’, or ‘we have been made just’. In the former 
sense, it agrees with the preceding picture of the law-court; but 
it is in the latter sense only that it has any direct bearing on the 
Rebirth. The reborn man ‘has been made just’; i.e. the vieg 
of injustice has gone out of him, and the virtue of justice has entered 
into him. 

Paul also would have said that the new man is ‘justified’. Cf, 
Ep. Rom, 3. 21-24% χωρὶς νόμου δικαιοσύνη θεοῦ πεφανέρωται. .., 
δικαιούμενοι δωρεὰν τῇ αὐτοῦ χάριτι. Lb, 6. 6 ff.: ὁ παλαιὸς ἡμῶν 
ἄνθρωπος συνεσταυρώθη, ἵνα καταργηϑῇ τὸ σῶμα τῆς ἁμαρτίας .. (. 
ὃ γὰρ ἀποθανὼν δεδικαίωται ἀπὸ τῆς ἁμαρτίας. Had the writer of 
this Hermetic passage read Zp. Rom.? At any rate, it is possi 
that he had talked with Christians who used phrases taken fr 
that epistle. , 

τὴν κατὰ τῆς πλεονεξίας, (τὴν) κοινωνίαν. πλεονεξία is ‘a grasping 
disposition’; it is the disposition of the man who claims m 
than his fair share, and seeks to take from others more than he 
aright to. Its opposite, κοινωνία, must therefore be the disposition 
of one who is ready to share with his neighbours, and seeks nothing 
for himself alone. 

ἰδὲ πῶς τὸ ἀγαθὸν πεπλήρωται κιτλ, The incoherence of this 
and the following paragraphs down to the end of § r2 can hardly 
be accounted for except on the hypothesis of interpolation ; d 
it seems probable that two different interpolators have been at work 
in succession. In the traditional text, Hermes gives a list of 
twelve τιμωρίαι, and a list of seven δυνάμεις, the last of which is 


and having done so, he has no course open to him but to say th ul 
the other six τιμωρίαι are expelled on the arrival of the seventh 
and last δύναμις, viz. ἀλήθεια, and that ‘the Good’ is thereby ‘com 
pleted’. He does say this; indeed, he says it twice over, first 































LIBELLVS XIII: § 9 389 


the words ἰδὲ πῶς τὸ ἀγαθὸν πεπλήρωται παραγενομένης τῆς ἀληθείας, 
and then in the words τῇ δὲ ἀληθείᾳ καὶ τὸ ἀγαθὸν ἐπεγένετο κιτιλ. 
But in § ro éwét., we are told, to our surprise, that the δυνάμεις are 
not seven, but ten in number; and in §§ τα c—rz, the fact that there 
are ten of them is discussed at some length. It seems therefore 
that the passage must have been altered. In an earlier form of it, 
the δυνάμεις were seven in number; but a redactor thought fit to 
increase their number to ten (presumably because he held ten to 
be ‘the perfect number’), and did so by counting in the three 
terms τὸ ἀγαθόν, ζωή, and φῶς, which happened to occur in § ο fix., 
but were not there used as names of distinct and individual 
δυνάμεις. 

But there is reason to suspect that even the list of seven δυνάμεις 
was not present in the earliest form of the text ; and if this suspicion 
is justified, we must distinguish three different stages. (1) The 
original author spoke of the τιμωρίαι and the δυνάμεις collectively, 
but did not enumerate them. He described the Rebirth as the 
coming of ἀλήθεια (the unique significance of which he had previously 
pointed out in §6); and he may have spoken also of γνῶσις, not 
as an entity sharply distinguished from ἀλήθεια, but rather as its 
correlate, or the subjective aspect of it. (2) A first interpolator 
inserted in the text a list of twelve τιμωρίαι, and a list of seven 
δυνάμεις, making ἀλήθεια the seventh and last- of the latter. (3) A 
second interpolator increased the number of the δυνάμεις from seven 
to ten, and inserted §§ τὶ c-r2, in which the numbers twelve and 
ten are discussed. 

The passages which I ascribe to the first interpolator are printed 
‘in small type, but not bracketed; those which I ascribe to the 
‘second interpolator are printed in small type and also bracketed. 
φθόνος γὰρ ἀφ᾽ ἡμῶν ἀπέστη (καὶ αἱ λοιπαὶ τιμωρίαιν. φθόνος is the 
eighth of the twelve τιμωρίαι in the preceding list; and the de- 
parture of the remaining four must also have been mentioned. 

τὸ ἀγαθὸν... ἅμα ζωῇ καὶ φωτί. The writer has taken over the 
phrase ζωὴ καὶ φῶς from Corp. I, where it stands for God, or the 
‘substance of which God consists. The New Man consists of that 
‘same substance. τοῦ σκότους is also a reminiscence of Cor. I. 
ἐξέπτησαν [νικηθεῖσαι] ῥοίζῳ. ῥοίζῳ must be taken with ἐξέπτησαν, 
and is wrongly separated from it by the participle. We might either 
Strike out νικηθεῖσαι, or shift it, writing ἐξέπτησαν ῥοίζῳ νικηθεῖσαι ; 
but the former seems preferable. 








390 CORPVS HERMETICVM 


§ 10. [τῆς δεκάδος παραγινομένης.] (οὕτω δή,) ὦ τέκνον, συνετέθη (ἡν 
γοερὰ [γένεσις] (οὐσία) [καὶ τὴν δωδεκάτην ἐξελαύνει. If we cut out 
the words which refer to ‘the ten’ and ‘the twelve’, what remains 
may be taken in close connexion with §9 fiz. It is impossible to 
say that a ‘ birth’ was ‘put together’; γένεσις must therefore haye 
been wrongly substituted for some other word, such as οὐσία. 

The phrase καὶ τὴν δωδεκάτην ἐξελαύνει appears to be misplaced, 
The text as altered by the interpolator may perhaps have run ag 
Reitzenstein has rewritten it; τῆς δεκάδος παραγινομένης (or rather 
παραγεν.), ὦ τέκνον, ἣ ((τὴν δωδεκάδα ἐξελαύνειν), συνετέθη κιτιλ. 
᾿ καὶ ἐθεώ[ϊρηθημεν τῇ (ταύτης) γενέσει (συνθέσει ἢ). ταύτης means 
τῆς νοερᾶς οὐσίας. For ἐθεώθημεν, cf. θεοῦ θεὸς παῖς in § 25 ἡ γένεσις. 
τῆς θεότητος in ὃ 78; θεὸς πέφυκας in ὃ 14. The new man is a god. 
The verb θεοῦσθαι is frequently used with a similar application by 
Dionysius Areop. 

ἑαυτὸν γνωρίζει ἐκ [τούτων] (δυνάμεων) συνιστάμενον (-vos MSS.), 
καὶ (γνωρίσας) εὐφραίνεται. The speech of Hermes ends, as it 
began, with a word expressing joy. Cf. Corp. I. 30: πληρωθεὶς, 
ὧν ἤθελον ἐξηυφράνθην. The phrase ἑαυτὸν γνωρίζει was suggested 
by Corp. I. 18-22 (ὃ ἀναγνωρίσας ἑαυτὸν εἰς τὸ ἀγαθὸν χωρεῖ κιτιλ.). 
As to ἐκ δυνάμεων συνιστάμενον, cf. ὃ 2, ἐκ πασῶν δυνάμεων συνεστώς, 
and ὃ 14, τὸ σῶμα τοῦτο τὸ ἐκ δυνάμεων συνεστός. 

§ 11a. (οὐσίγα καινὴ γενόμενος -- (Ἀκλινὴς γενόμενος MSS.). If the 
New Man were called ἀκλινής, that might mean either that he is not. 
(or cannot be) brought down to a lower level, or that he is not (or 
cannot be) turned from his course. But neither of these thoughts 
is suggested by the preceding context ; and the expression of either 
by a single word would be abrupt and obscure. It seems probable 
therefore that ἀκλινής is a corruption of οὐσία καινή, or something 
similar. Cf. καινὴ κτίσις in Paul, Gad. 6. 15 and 2 Cor. 5. τῇ. 

ἀλλὰ τῇ [διὰ δυνάμεων] νοητικῇ ἐνεργείᾳ. διὰ δυνάμεων was probably 
written as an alternative for τῇ νοητικῇ ἐνεργείᾳ. Either phrase might 
stand, but hardly both together. 

§ 18 8. ((Αὕτη ἐστὶν ἡ παλιγγενεσία, .., τὸ μηκέτι φαντάζεσθαι [εἰς] 
τὸ σῶμα τὸ τριχῆ διάστατον.)) This is appropriate here, as a comment 
on Tat’s statement about bodily and mental sight, in which the same 
verb φαντάζεσθαι was used. It is true that the sentence would 





1 This meaning might be illustrated by Synesius, Zymr 3, 296 : ψυχά τ' ἀκλινὴς, 
καὶ κλινομένα | ἐς μελαναυγεῖς χθονίους ὄγκους (μέλπει σεὺ" ‘both when it is not 
brought down (into an earthly body), and when it is brought down.’ 





LIBELLVS XIII: δὲ 10-11b 391 


also serve as a comment on Πάτερ, τὸ πᾶν ὁρῶ... ἐν τῷ νοΐ, which 
it follows in the MSS.; but Πάτερ, τὸ πᾶν κιτιλ, is wanted to 
introduce ἐν οὐρανῷ εἰμι κιτιλ., which, without some such intro- 
duction, is intolerably abrupt. I have therefore interchanged the 
two sentences of ὃ 13a, 

εἰς must be cut out. φαντάζεσθαι means ‘to present something 
to oneself by φαντασία, i.e. ‘to perceive’. It can be used in this 
sense either without expressed object, as in the preceding sentence, 
or with an object in the accusative, as here (φαντάζεσθαι τὸ copa); 
but φαντάζεσθαι εἰς τὸ σῶμα is impossible. 

τὸ μηκέτι φαντάζεσθαι κιτιλ. corresponds to the negative part of 
Tat’s preceding statement (φαντάζομαι οὐχ ὁράσει ὀφθαλμῶν) ; and 
something more is needed, to correspond to the positive part of it 
(ἀλλὰ τῇ νοητικῇ ἐνεργείᾳ). I have therefore added ἀλλὰ τὸ ἀσώματον. 

((Πάτερ, τὸ πᾶν ὁρῶ [καὶ] ἐμαυτὸν (ὄντα), ἐν τῷ vot)) (ὁρῶν). The 
connexion of this with what precedes might be shown more clearly 
by writing Πάτερ, ἐν τῷ νοὶ ὁρῶν, τὸ πᾶν ὁρῶ ἐμαυτὸν ὄντα. ‘Now 
that I look with my mind (and no longer with my bodily eyes), 
I see that I am the All.’ Cf. § 2, where the new man is said to 
be τὸ πᾶν, ἐν παντί. 

The statement ‘I am the All’ is expanded in the following 
clauses, ἐν οὐρανῷ εἰμι κιτιλ. By virtue of his παλιγγενεσία, Tat 
has done what the pupil is exhorted to do in Corg. XI. ii. 20b; 
he is freed from the limits of space and time; he has ‘grown to 
a like expanse with that greatness which is beyond all measure’; 
he has ‘risen above all time, and become eternal’. The phrases 
by which his self-expansion is described closely resemble those 
employed in Corp. XI. ii, and were doubtless borrowed thence. 


Corp. XI. ii. 20 Ὁ. Corp, XIII. 11 Ὁ. 
ὁμοῦ πανταχῇ (νόησον) εἶναι, ἐν ἐν οὐρανῷ εἰμι, ἐν γῇ, ἐν ὕδατι, 
γῆ, ἐν θαλάττῃ, ἐν οὐρανῷ. ἐν ἀέρι.--- πανταχοῦ (πάρειμὼ. 
παντὸς ζῴου ἤθη (.. δ. ἐν ζῴοις εἰμί, ἐν φυτοῖς. 


μηδέπω γεγεννῆσθαι, ἐν τῇ ἐν γαστρί, πρὸ γαστρός, μετὰ 
γαστρὶ εἶναι, νέος, γέρων, τεθνη- γαστέρα. 
κέναι. 

δι Ὁ. πανταχοῦ (πάρειμι). If πανταχοῦ is not provided with a verb 
of its own, it must be closely connected with the preceding words, 
ἐν γαστρί, πρὸ γαστρός, μετὰ γαστέρα. But in that case, a word 
meaning ‘at all times’, and not ‘in all places’, would be required. 











392 CORPVS HERMETICVM 


((Ἔγνωκας, ὦ τέκνον, τῆς παλιγγενεσίας τὸν τρόπον.) In ὃ το, thy 
is pointless ; and the repetition of ὦ τέκνον there, in two successiy 
sentences spoken by Hermes, is an indication that one of the ty, 
at least is out of place. But the words are appropriate when place 
at the end of ὃ 11 Ὁ, as a comment on Tat’s description of his ney 
experience. ‘ Now at last you vow what the Rebirth is.’ Herme 
had previously tried to tell Tat what the Rebirth meant, and ended 
his account of it by saying οὗτος ὁ τῆς παλιγγενεσίας τρόπος (§ 7 Ὁ sin, 
But it was impossible to make Tat understand by merely talking 
to him about it. He ow knows what it is, because he has now 
himself experienced it. 
© §§are-12. [᾿Αλλ᾽ ἔτι τοῦτο... ἡ δεκὰς τὴν évdda,] Tat has 
just passed through the most stupendous of all conceivable expe- 
riences. He has been changed from a man into a god; he feels 
himself to be omnipresent and eternal. And this new-made god 
can find no more fitting occupation than to talk about the fact that 
the Powers of which he is composed differ in number from the 
vices which they have expelled! Our respect for the original 
author of Corp. XIII is much increased when we find that there 
are sufficient reasons for thinking that he is not responsible for this 
absurdity. 

§ 12, τὸ σκῆνος τοῦτο... ἐκ τοῦ Lwopdpou κύκλου συνέστη, K.-T. 
This section has been much corrupted ; but it seems clear that the 
writer’s meaning must have been that which is expressed by my 
conjectural reconstruction of the text. It is the influence of the 
zodiac that brings to pass the birth of the individual man, ane 
determines his bodily form; and the zodiac is consequently here 
regarded as the source or cause of his bad qualities or vicious 
dispositions. 

(γεννῶντος) φύσεως μιᾶς παντομόρφου(ς) ἰδέας εἰς πλάνην τοῦ 
ἀνθρώπου. The φύσις μία is the character of the natural or corporeal 
man as a whole; the παντόμορφοι ἰδέαι of it are the several τιμωρίαι 
(i.e. vices or bad passions), which are so many different aspects or 
manifestations of that one character. The word παντόμορφος is 
specially associated with the zodiac ; see Asc/. Lat, III. 19 Ὁ and 35 

((καὶ τούτου συνεστῶτος ἐκ ζῳδίων (ἐξ ἀριθμῶν MSS.) δώδεκα & av 
τὸν ἀριθμόν,)) διαζυγζίγαι ἐν αὐταῖς εἰσιν, ὦ τέκνον, (δώδεκα). αὐταῖς 
means ταῖς τῆς μιᾶς φύσεως ἰδέαις, i.e. the evil passions. The 
twelve divisions (διαζυγίαι) into which they fall are the τιμωρία 
enumerated in § 7b; and we are meant to understand that each 






Ἑ 


LIBELLVS XIII: §§ 11 b-12 393 


‘of the τιμωρίαι is caused by one of the zodiacal Signs. Hence, the 
Signs being twelve in number, the τιμωρίαι also are necessarily twelye 
in number. 

ἀχώριστος (γάρ) ἐστιν ἡ προπέτεια τῆς ὁρμῆς (ὀργῆς MSS.). ὁρμή 
js irrational impulse in general ; and ἡ προπέτεια τῆς ὁρμῆς is merely 
another name for the μία φύσις spoken of above, 

εἰκότως οὖν [kata τὸν ὄρθον λόγον] τὴν ἀπόστασιν ποιοῦνται, καθὼς 
(εἶπον, ἀθρόως). As the several τιμωρίαι are merely subdivisions 
or different modifications of one and the same ὁρμή, there is nothing 
to be surprised at in the fact that they all depart together on the 
arrival of the Powers. καθὼς εἶπον is a reference to ὃ 7 Ὁ (ἀφίσταν- 
ται δὲ αὗται ἀθρόως). The words κατὰ τὸν ὄρθον λόγον are superfluous 
after εἰκότως ; I have therefore transferred them to the following 
sentence, where something of the sort is wanted. But the original 
reading there was probably κατὰ λόγον, which may be taken as 
equivalent to εὐλόγως. 

καὶ (κατὰ [ | Aéyov)) ἀπὸ δέκα ϑυνάμεων ἐλαύνονται (ἐλαυνόμεναι 
MSS.). Having discussed the fact that the number of the τιμωρίαι 
is twelve, the writer now proceeds to discuss the fact that the 
number of the δυνάμεις is ten. This matter is so far distinct from 
the other, that it ought to be dealt with in a fresh sentence; I have 
therefore written ἐλαύνονται. 

ἀπό has the meaning of ὑπό after a passive verb, as often in the 
traditional text of the Aermetica. Whether in these cases the 
author wrote ἀπό or ὑπό, we have no means of knowing. 

ἡ γὰρ δεκὰς, ἐστὶ uxoydvos. This notion is of Pythagorean 
origin. Philolaus, Diels Vorsokr. p. 243: μεγάλα γὰρ καὶ παντελὴς 
καὶ παντοεργὸς καὶ θείω καὶ οὐρανίω βίω καὶ ἀνθρωπίνω ἀρχὰ καὶ ἁγεμὼν 
(4 δεκάς). Speusippus, the successor of Plato, ‘raised a hymn of 
praise to the number Ten’ (Gomperz, G&. thinkers IV, Ρ. 4). 

The number ten is ‘generative of soul’. It may be doubted 
whether the writer attached any definite meaning to this obscure 
Statement ; but he accepted it on traditional authority, and inferred 
that, if the number ten is generative of ‘soul’ or life in the natural 
man, it must also be generative of the higher life which is brought 
into being at the birth of the new man, and that the δυνάμεις which 
operate in the Rebirth must consequently be ten in number. 

ζωὴ δὲ καὶ φῶς ἡνωμέναι εἰσὶν ἑνάς (εἰσὶν ἔνθα MSS.). The phrase 
ζωὴ καὶ φῶς is used in Corp. I to denote God; and Pythagorizing 
Platonists frequently said that God is the évds or povds. 




























394 CORPVS HERMETICVM 


6 (δὲ τῆς ἑνάδος ἀριθμὸς πέφυκε τοῦ [πνεύματος] (τῆς δεκάδος 
(ἀριθμοῦ) ἀρχή). A mention of πνεῦμα, in any of the various senses 
of that word, would be irrelevant here; what is wanted is some 
statement about the relation between the évds and the δεκάς. } 

ἡ ἑνὰς οὖν κατὰ λόγον τὴν δεκάδα (ἐμπεριλδέχει. Cf. Corp, IV, 
το: ἡ γὰρ μονὰς... πάντα ἀριθμὸν ἐμπεριέχει, καὶ πάντα ἀριθμὸν 
γεννᾷ. Dionys. Areop. De div. nomin. 5.6: ἐν μονάδι πᾶς ἀριθμὸς 
ἑνοειδῶς προὐφέστηκε, καὶ ἔχει πάντα ἀριθμὸν ἣ μονὰς ἐν ἑαυτῇ μοναχῶς, 
The δεκάς is connected with the μονάς by the Gnostic Monoimus 
Hippol. Ref Aaer. 8.13: ἔστιν otv . . . ἡ μονὰς. . . καὶ δεκάς, 
καιλ. ΐ 

The ἑνάς in question here is ζωὴ καὶ das; and the implied 
conclusion is that in this ‘unit’ all the ten δυνάμεις are compre- 
hended, and that the arrival of ζωὴ καὶ φῶς consequently involves 
the arrival of all the ten δυνάμεις together. The following phrase 
[καὶ ἡ δεκὰς τὴν ἑνάδα] is a meaningless addition to a futile 
argument. 

8 18 Ὁ. [Bid τὸν λόγον τοῦτον. . . ὁ θεὸς αὐτὸς θέλει. is 
note must have been intended by its writer to stand at the end 
of the document to which it refers, Assuming it to be in its right 


they are written with reference to the παλιγγενεσία described in: 
§§ 1-12, and deal with it from the same point of view. It therefore 
seems most likely that ὃ 13 Ὁ has been accidentally shifted, an 
ought to stand after § 22 b. 

§ 14. τὸ σῶμα τοῦτο. . . λύσιν ἕξει (ἴσχει MSS.) ποτέ; Havin 
been born again, Tat wishes to know whether the incorpo 


or imperishable, i.e. whether the effect of the Rebirth whim he 
has experienced will be Perna . or transient. At the present: 


will not at some future time cease to be what he is now? 

The question whether it is possible for one who has attained to 
gnosis, or union with God, to fall away from it, is touched on in” 
several of the Hermetica. In Herm. af. Stob. Zxc. II Β. 3, the 
possibility of such a fall is denied (as it is in the answer gives 
Tat’s question here): οὐδέποτε... ὀλισθῆναι δύναται ἐπὶ τὸ ἐναντίον. 
On the other hand, the possibility appears to be asserted in 


LIBELLVS XIII: §§ 12-15 395 


Corp. XII. i. 9 as emended : οὐδὲν (τῷ vot) ἀδύνατον, οὔτε εἱμαρμένης 
ὑπεράνω θεῖναι ψυχὴν ἀνθρωπίνην, οὔτε ἀμελήσασαν, ἅπερ συμβαίνει, 
ὑπὸ τὴν εἱμαρμένην θεῖναι. In Corp. 1. 32, and in «45εἰ, Lat. 41b, 
the worshipper prays that he may not fall away. Compare a 
sacramental prayer in the Mithraic Apathanatismos, Dieterich’s 
‘Mithrasliturgie’ (see Appendix on Rebirth): μένε σὺν ἐμοὶ ἐν τῇ 
ψυχῇ μου, + + + ἵνα μὴ πάλιν γενόμενος ἀπογένωμαι. 

μὴ ἀδύνατα φθέγγου, ἐπεὶ [ἁμαρτήσεις καὶ] ἀσεβήζσεις. μὴ ἐσβέσθη 
ἰσεται] σου ὃ ὀφθαλμὸς τοῦ vod; It is hardly worth while to tell a 
person that if he says impossible things he ‘ will make a mistake’; 
and ἁμαρτήσεις was most likely inserted to provide a verb after 
ἐπεί, when ἀσεβήσεις had been partly obliterated. Cf. Corp. II. 15 
as emended: μὴ οὖν εἴπῃς ἄλλο τι ἀγαθὸν ἢ μόνον τὸν θεόν, ἐπεὶ 
ἀσεβήσεις. 

τὸ αἰσθητὸν τῆς φύσεως σῶμα πόρρωθέν ἐστι [τῆς] τοῦ οὐσιώδους 
(sc. σώματος) [yevérews]. ‘You must not suppose, because the 
material body is dissoluble, that the incorporeal ‘‘ body” into which 
you have been changed is also dissoluble ; for the one differs widely 
from the other,’ 

815. Ἐβουλόμην. . . τὴν διὰ τοῦ ὕμνου εὐλογίαν (pabeiv), Tat 
wishes to give thanks to God for his παλιγγενεσία ; and since he 
is now composed of δυνάμεις, he feels that the best form which 
his act of worship could take would be to sing the hymn which is 
sung by the δυνάμεις in their supracosmic abode. He therefore 
says that he wishes he could be taught that hymn (se in order 
that he might join in it, or use it in his own worship). 

In making Tat speak of what ‘Poimandres foretold’, the writer 
is referring to Corp. I. 26 ἃ, where an unnamed person is told by 
Poimandres that, when he has departed from the body and ascended 
to the eighth sphere of heaven, he will ‘hear the δυνάμεις, who are 
above that sphere, singing praise to God with a voice (or in a 
language) that is theirs alone’. But the writer of Corp. XIII 
assumes that Hermes was the man to whom Poimandres spoke 
on that occasion. This shows that, at the time when Corp. XIII 
was written, it had come to be assumed that the anonymous 
prophet who narrates his vision and preaching in Corp. I was 
Hermes. 

ἥν, ((Kabds)) ἔφης, ἐπὶ τὴν ὀγδοάδα γενομένου σου (you MSS.) 
ἀκούσζεσθγαι (ce) τῶν δυνάμεων [| |] [ 1 ὃ Ποιμάνδρης ἐθέσπισε. 
καθὼς ἔφης means ‘as you wrote in Οὐ. 1’, which is taken to have 








396 CORPVS HERMETICVM 




















been written by Hermes. With the alterations which I haye 
proposed, the passage is a correct report of what Poimandres jg 
there said to have predicted. It is true that, in the particular 
sentence referred to, the verb is in the third person (ἀκούει, se. δ᾽ 
ἄνθρωπος) ; but the speech of Poimandres in which it occurs deals 
especially with the destiny of the person addressed; the verbs in 
the opening sentences of it are in the second person (εἶχες &c,) ; 
and if my transposition of the words πῶς eis ζωὴν χωρήσω is accepted, 
the whole speech is an answer to the question ‘by what process 
shall 7 pass into life?’ If we retained ἀκοῦσαι here, we should be 
obliged to suppose that the writer of Corp. XIII assumed ‘ 
Hermes had, at some time subsequent to the vision described in 
Corp. I, gone through the experience which Poimandres there 
foretells ; but this can be avoided by altering ἀκοῦσαι into ἀκούσεσθαι, 
which suits better with ἐθέσπισε (‘ prophesied’). 

καλῶς omedBers' κεκάθαρσαι γάρ, λυσάμενος τὸ σκῆνος.---(καλῶς 
σπεύδεις λῦσαι τὸ σκῆνος, κεκαθαρμένος γάρ MSS.) ‘ Your eagerness 
to be taught that hymn has my approval; for now that you have: 
cast off the body (through ‘your New Birth), you are purified (from 
evil passions, and are therefore worthy to hear it).’ The termina- 
tions of λυσάμενος and κεκάθαρσαι seem to have been interchanged, 
For λυσάμενος τὸ σκῆνος, cf. the oracle in Porphyr. Vita Plotiné 22: 
viv δ᾽, ὅτε δὴ τὸ σκῆνος ἐλύσαο κιτιλ. The active λῦσαι could hardly 
be used in this sense. ᾿ 

ὃ Ποιμάνδρης. . . πλέον μοι τῶν ἐγγεγραμμένων οὐ παρέδωκεν. 
τῶν ἐγγεγραμμένων means ‘what stands written in Corg. Τ᾿, It may 
be inferred from these words that the writer of Corf. XIII knew 
of no document other than Cor. in which teachings of Poimandres — 
were recorded. 

εἰδὼς ὅτι ἀπ᾽ ἐμαυτοῦ δυνήσομαι πάντα νοεῖν, καὶ ἀκούειν ὧν βούλομαι, 
καὶ ὁρᾶν τὰ πάντα. He knew that through his revelation my mental 
eyes were opened, and the power of apprehending the divine realities 
by direct intuition was conferred upon me. (Cf. Corp. 1. 30: ἐγένετο 
++ + ἀληθινὴ ὅρασις. . . . θεόπνους γενόμενος (ἐπὶ τὸ πεδίον ὃ) τῆς 
ἀληθείας ἦλθον.) There was therefore no need for him to tell me 
all particulars. It would have been superfluous to recite to me 
the hymn sung by the Powers; he knew that I could find out for 
myself how God ought to be adored. 

καὶ ἐπέτρεψέ μοι ἐκεῖνος "ποιεῖν τὰ καλά], The context requires, 
in place οἵ ποιεῖν τὰ καλά, something like νοεῖν τὰ ἄλλα (or τὰ λοιπά), 


































LIBELLVS XIII: δῷ 15-16 397 


‘to think out for myself what he did not tell me’. ‘he clause 
looks like a reference to some particular sentence in Corp. 1; but 
Corp. 1, in the form in which we have it, contains no such injunction. 
(The phrases most nearly resembling it are νοεῖ τὸ φῶς καὶ γνώριζε 
τοῦτο, I. 7, and οὐκ ἔφην σοι νοεῖν; I. 20.) On the other hand, 
Corp. ΧΙ. ii, in which Νοῦς is the teacher, ends with the very 
injunction which is here implied: τὰ δὲ ἄλλα πάντα ὁμοίως κατὰ 
σεαυτὸν νόει, καὶ οὐ διαψευσθήσῃ. Is that the passage to which the 
writer of Corp. XIII is here referring? And if so, did he, by a 
slip of memory, imagine that he had read it in Corp. 1? Or did 
he identify the Νοῦς who speaks in XI. ii with the Poimandres 
of Corp. 1? 

διὸ al ἐν πᾶσι δυνάμεις καὶ ἐν ἐμοὶ ἀδουσι.---(διὸ καὶ ἐν πᾶσιν αἱ 
ϑυνάμεις καὶ ἐν ἐμοὶ ἄδουσι MSS.) The divine δυνάμεις which pervade 
the universe are identified with those which were spoken of in 
Corp. 1 as residing in extracosmic space, and singing to God there. 
But those same δυνάμεις are also present in the ‘reborn’ man; 
indeed, he is wholly composed of them (ἐκ πασῶν δυνάμεων συνεστώς) ; 
and they sing within him, as well as ‘above the Ogdoad’. It is 
their voice then which speaks in the hymn which Hermes now 
proceeds to sing. 
Θέλω, πάτερ, ἀκοῦσαι ((tadra)), καὶ βούλομαι [7] νοῆσαι. “1 wish 
to hear the words of the hymn which the Powers sing within you, 
and to grasp its meaning’, or perhaps rather ‘to make it the ex- 
pression of my own thought’. For the distinction between ἀκοῦσαι 
and νοῆσαι, cf. Corp. 1. 1: Τί βούλει ἀκοῦσαι καὶ θεάσασθαι, καὶ 
γοήσας μαθεῖν καὶ γνῶναι ; 
816. τῆς ἁρμοζούσης ((τῇ παλιγγενεσίᾳ)) νῦν ἄκουε εὐλογίας τὸν 
ὕμνον. The hymn of Hermes is the thanksgiving of one who has 
been born again. By joining in it as Hermes sings it, Tat will 
fittingly give thanks to God for his own παλιγγενεσία. 
The word νῦν comes in awkwardly, and might perhaps be struck 
out with advantage. If we retain it, we must take it in connexion 
with the following words, ὃν οὐκ ἔκρινα οὕτως εὐκόλως ἐκφάναι ((orot)), 
‘I will let you hear it now, though I had not meant to make it 
known to you so readily.’ 
δθεν τοῦτο οὐ διδάσκεται. . . πρὸς ἀπηλιώτην.) As addressed 
by Hermes to Tat, this passage is quite out of keeping with the 
context. Why should Hermes, when ‘the Powers’ are about to 
‘sing within him’, interrupt himself or them in order to state the 


——ee 





398 CORPVS HERMETICVM 























conditions under which this hymn is to be transmitted to people 
who are not now present, and lay down regulations for its use at 
other times? ‘The passage is a liturgical rubric, and must haye 
been inserted after the hymn had come to be used in worship by 
a religious brotherhood. 7 
τοῦτο οὐ διδάσκεται, ((εἰ μὴ ἐπὶ τέλει τοῦ παντός.) The hymn 
must not be taught to catechumens; only those whose course of 
religious instruction is completed, and who have become τέλειοι 
(or in other words, have been born again), are to be permitted to 
hear it. As the hymn is a thanksgiving for παλιγγενεσία, those 
who have not themselves been born again can have no conce 
with it, and it would be a profanation to make it known to them, 
By the insertion of this rubric, the words ἡσύχασον, ὦ τέκνον were 
too widely separated from the hymn which they had been intended 
to introduce ; and they were consequently written again immediately 
before the hymn. 
ὃ 17. [Ὑμνωδία κρυπτή.)] This title must have been inserted by 
a later hand. λόγος δ΄, which is added in some of the MSS,, 
probably means ‘the fourth hymn’. In the extant Hermetica, 
hymns of more or less similar character occur in Corp. I. 31, 
Corp. V. τοῦ, and Asc/. Lat. 41 Ὁ. When the Hermetic documents 
had come to be used for liturgical purposes, special attention must 
have been given to the hymns contained in them ; and it is possible 
that these hymns and others like them were extracted and put 
together in a hymn-book, and that this one was the fourth in that 
collection. 
As given in the MSS., a large part of the hymn is unintelligible. 
I have tried to put meaning into it by freely altering the text ; but 
much remains doubtful and obscure. It falls into two distinct 
parts. In the first part, God is spoken of as the creator of the 
material universe ; in the second part, God is spoken of as present 
in the ‘reborn’ man. In other words, the first part deals with 
γένεσις, and the second, with παλιγγενεσία. The second part consists 
mainly of an amplification of the thought expressed by Hermes 
above, αἱ ἐν πᾶσι δυνάμεις καὶ ἐν ἐμοὶ ἄδουσι. When the reborn 
man praises God, it is the Powers of God that speak in him. 
((Ἀνοιγήτω μοι πᾶς μοχλὸς (μυχὸς ?))) (rod) ((Kdopou))’ 
πᾶσα φύσις [[κόσμου]] προσδεχέσθω τοῦ ὕμνου τὴν ἀκοήν. 
This mode of beginning a hymn seems to be of Jewish origin ; 
it may be traced back to the Song of Moses, Der. 32. 1: πρόσεχε 




























LIBELLVS XIII: §§ 16-17 399 


οὐρανέ, καὶ λαλήσω" καὶ ἀκουέτω ἡ γῆ ῥήματα ἐκ στόματός μου. 
(The formula recurs, with a different application, in Jsatak τ. 2: 
ἄκουε, οὐρανέ, καὶ ἐνωτίζου, γῆ, ὅτι Κύριος ἐλάλησεν.) In Philo 
Jn Flaccum τά. 123, Cohn VI, p, 142, the thanksgiving of the 
Alexandrian Jews at the downfall of their oppressor begins thus : 
γῆν καὶ θάλασσαν, ἀέρα τε καὶ οὐρανόν, τὰ μέρη τοῦ παντὸς καὶ σύμπαντα 
τὸν κόσμον, ὦ μέγιστε βασιλεῦ θνητῶν καὶ ἀθανάτων, παρακαλέσοντες 
eis εὐχαριστίαν τὴν σὴν ἥκομεν, Compare also a prayer embedded 
in the longer Paris Papyrus magicus, Wessely 1. 1168 sgg. (Dieterich, 
Abraxas, p. 25), which may be conjecturally reconstructed as 
follows : 


σὲ τὸν ἕνα καὶ μάκαρα (aida) αἰώνων ἢ 


πατέρα τε κόσμου κοσμικαῖς 
κλήζω λιταῖς. δεῦρό μοι ὃ [ἐνφυσήσας" τὸν σύμπαντα κόσμον, 
ὁ τὸ πῦρ κρεμάσας Γἐκ τοῦ ὕδατος), καὶ τὴν γῆν χωρίσας ἀπὸ τοῦ 
ὕδατος." 

((ἀνοίγηθι " οὐρανέ, δέξαι μου τὰ φθέγματα.) πρόσεχε Γμορφὴ  ἴ καὶ 
πνεῦμα καὶ γῇ καὶ θάλασσα [ῥῆμα τοῦ σοφοῦ] [θείας ἀνάγκης], καὶ 
πρόσδεξαί μου τοὺς λόγους " [ὡς βέλη πυρός)" " ὅτι ἐγώ εἰμι [ἄνθρωπος 
θεοῦ τοῦ ἐν οὐρανῷ ἴω] πλάσμα κάλλιστον, ἢ γενόμενον ἐκ {πυρὸς 
cal?) πνεύματος καὶ δρόσου καὶ γῆς. ἀνοίγητι οὐρανέ, δέξαι μου τὰ 
bbéypara. |) 

ἄκουε, |ijAte,| πάτερ κόσμου" ἐπικαλοῦμαί σε τῷ ὀνόματί σου K.7.A. 
ἀνοιγήτω is to be taken in connexion with προσδεχέσθω τὴν ἀκοήν 
(‘let every region be flung open to receive the sound of my voice’), 
and ought to precede it. κόσμου is superfluous after πᾶσα φύσις ; 


1 μάκαρα τῶν αἰώνων Pap. 
2 κοσμικαις κληζωνταις Wessely: corr. Disterich. Cf. Corg, XIII. 20: ταῦτα 
Bog .. . διὰ τῶν κτισμάτων σου, ἀπὸ τοῦ αἰῶνος κιτ.λ, 

‘Thou who didst z#/late the whole Kosmos.’ This cannot be right. Perhaps 
ὃ φυτεύσας τὸν a, κ. 

* Tt could not be said that the fire of heaven is ‘suspended from the water’. 
Perhaps ὑπὲρ rod πνεύματος (‘above the air’). This would give an exact repetition 
of accentual rhythm : 

ὁ τὸ πῦρ κρεμάσας | ὑπὲρ τοῦ πνεύματος, 

καὶ τὴν γῆν χωρίσας | ἀπὸ τοῦ ὕδατος. 
5 Ch Corp. ΧΠΙ, 17: τὸν κτίσαντα τὰ πάντα, τὸν πήξαντα τὴν γῆν καὶ οὐρανὸν 
κρεμάσαντα. The verl κρεμάσαι occurs in a similar connexion both in the cosmogonia 
of Corp, I and in that of Cor, III. 
ὁ ἀνοίγητι Pap. Perhaps a second and distinct prayer or hymn begins here. 
7 Perhaps μου τῇ φωνῇ. 
8. Cf. Corp, XIII. τῇ : ἀνοιγήτω μοι... προσδεξάσθω μου τὸν λόγον, 
* It looks as if the sentence (τὰν ῥήμαζταν τοῦ σοφοῦ ὡς βέλῃ πυρός, " the words of 
the wise are as shafts of fire’, had been cut in two, and the two parts inserted at 
different points. But any such statement would be irrelevant here, 

10 Cf. a Jewish spell πρὸς δαιμονιζομένους, in Pap. mag. Par. i. 3009 (Dieterich 
Abraxas, p. 138): ἐκκρίνετω (ὁ ἄγγελος τὸν δαίμονα) τοῦ πλάσματος τούτου, ὸ 
ἔπλασεν ὁ θεὺς ἐν τῷ ἁγίῳ ἑαυτοῦ παραδείσῳ. 





400 CORPVS HERMETICVM 

























and something of the sort is needed to complete the first line, 
seems that, after the phrase ἀνοιγήτω μοι πᾶς μοχλός had been shifteg 
some one added ὄμβρου (a poetical substitute for ὕδατος), thinking 
that, after ἀνοίγηθι γῇ, a corresponding mention of waver would ἢ ‘ 
appropriate. 4 

ἀνοίγηθι γῆ, [[ |] τὰ δένδρα μὴ σείεσθε' ὑμνεῖν μέλλω x.7.d. ; 
verb ‘open’ is obscure in this connexion, unless closely followed 
by some phrase meaning ‘receive my song’; and the earth could 
hardly ‘open’, except by splitting asunder, or forming a ch 
This difficulty might be avoided by writing σίγησον 4 γῆ in p 
of ἀνοίγηθι γῆ ; and τὰ δένδρα μὴ σείεσθε (‘hush the sound of yo 
rustling leaves’) would then follow more naturally. σιγη- m 
easily be corrupted into (ἀν)οιγη-, under the influence of the precedi 
ἀνοιγήτω. 

ὑμνεῖν μέλλω τὸν ἱτῆς κτίσεως κύριον]. This looks like a misplaced 
doublet of μέλλω γὰρ ὑμνεῖν τὸν κτίσαντα τὰ πάντα a few li 
below; and if so, its insertion here may have caused the loss of 
some words which originally preceded καὶ τὸ πᾶν καὶ τὸ ἕν. Ϊ 

& κύκλος ὁ ἀθάνατος [τοῦ θεοῦ] προσδεξάσθω μου τὸν λόγον. ὁ κύ 
6 ἀθ., ‘the immortal sphere’ (i. 6. the sphere of heaven), might νι 
well stand here without a following genitive. But if a genitive 
followed, it is most likely to have been τοῦ αἰθέρος. 

(τὸν) ΓἐπιτάξανταΊ͵ . . , τὸ γλυκὺ ὅδωρ εἰς τὴν οἰκουμένην [καὶ 
ἀοίκητον]. ἐπιτάξαντα has come from the parallel phrase below, 
and has taken the place of the original word, which may have 
been ὀχετεύσαντα, 

It is impossible to retain καὶ ἀοίκητον. In Egypt especially, 
‘inhabited land’ and ‘watered land’ are synonymous terms, and 
the desert (ἡ ἀοίκητος γῆ) is waterless. And the absurdity is in- 
creased by the following words, which, taken with ἀοίκητον, would 
imply that men are maintained in uninhabited land, 

Even when καὶ ἀοίκητον has been struck out, what remains is 
still too long to correspond to the parallel clause (καὶ ἐπιτάξαντα 
πῦρ φανῆναι); and it is probable that either some words have 
been inserted in the one clause, or some words have fallen out of 
the other. 

ἐκ τοῦ ὠκεανοῦ. In Egypt, life is maintained, not by rain, but 
by the water of the Nile; and ὁ ὠκεανός must mean an imaginary 
Ocean-stream out of which the Nile is supposed to flow. 

εἰς διατροφὴν | 1 πάντων Γἀνθρώπων", ἀνθρώπων can hardly be right, 


LIBELLVS XIII: ἐᾷ 17-18 401 































pecause (1) it too closely resembles ἀνθρώποις in the parallel phrase, 
and (2) Water maintains life in beasts and plants as well as in men. 
ζῴων or ζωὴν ἐχόντων would be more appropriate. 

εἰς πᾶσαν πρᾶξιν θεοῖς te καὶ ἀνθρώποις. Fire is used by the gods 
(i.e. by the Sun and the other astral gods) i in their administration 
of the universe; and it is used i) men in their arts and crafts. 
Cf. Corp. X. 18: δημιουργὸς γὰρ dv 5 νοῦς ὀργάνῳ τῷ πυρὶ πρὸς τὴν 
δημιουργίαν χρῆται, κιτιλ. 

δῶμεν πάντες ὁμοῦ αὐτῷ τὴν εὐλογίαν. πάντες ὁμοῦ may be taken 
a mean ‘all we on whom his bounty falls’ (θεοί τε καὶ ἄνθρωποι) ; 
r, ‘all we his creatures’, For the latter, cf. “Ὁ all ye works of the 
Ἢ bless ye the Lord’, 

§ 18, οὗτός ἐστιν ὁ τοῦ vo(ds) pou ὀφθαλμός. Hitherto, Hermes has 
‘been praising God as the creator of the material universe. In the 
second part of the hymn, which begins with this line, he praises 
God as operating, through his δυνάμεις, in the mind of the man 
who has been born again. The first part is merely preparatory 
‘to the second, in which the hymn becomes a thanksgiving for the 
Rebirth. 

He who has created the universe is also ‘the eye of my mind’: 
i.e. it is through the presence of God or his δυνάμεις within me 
that I am enabled to see ra νοητά. Cf. τὸ νοητὸν φῶς below. 
συνάσατε τῷ θελήματί pov, As we have been told that the reborn 
man consists wholly of divine δυνάμεις, there is some inconsistency 
in speaking of his ‘will’ as a thing distinct from ‘the δυνάμεις which 
are inhim’, But in dealing with such a topic as this, precise con- 
sistency of language is hardly to be expected. At this moment, the 
writer thinks of the δυνάμεις as portions of the divine Mind, which 
have entered into the man, but have not wholly absorbed him 
‘into themselves, and do not constitute his whole being; there still 
temains a human will, which is distinguishable from them, though 
wholly in accord with them. 

γνῶσις ἁγία... (χαίρετε) σὺν ἐμοί, Compare ὃ 8b: χαῖρε λοιπόν, 

. ἦλθεν ἡμῖν γνῶσις θεοῦ. The original author may very well 
ee spoken of the γνῶσις by which the reborn man is illumined, 
and of the joy which results from this illumination ; though it was 
probably an interpolator that made γνῶσις and χαρά the first and 
second in a list of named and numbered δυνάμεις. 

[kal σύ μοι, ἐγκράτεια, . . . τὴν ἀληθείαν.] The writer of these 
lines was referring to the list of δυνάμεις in § 8 bf, and must have 
2800-2 Dd 








402 CORPVS HERMETICVM 







































mentioned καρτερία among the rest, though it does not appear here 
in the traditional text. ‘ 
τὸ ἀγαθόν . . . ὕμνει" ζωὴ καὶ φῶς, ἀφ᾽ ὑμῶν (ἡμῶν MSS.) εἰν 
ὑμᾶς χωρεῖ ἡ εὐλογία. Cf. ὃ 9: τῇ δὲ ἀληθείᾳ τὸ ἀγαθὸν ἐπεγένετο ἅμα 
ζωῇ καὶ φωτί. The praise is uttered by the ‘Life and Light! 
which is in me; it is addressed to ‘ Life and Light’, i.e. to God. 
ἐνέργεια τῶν δυνάμεών (pov). ‘When my δυνάμεις operate, it ig 
God that operates in them.’ According to the Aristotelian usage 
of δύναμις and ἐνέργεια, the words might mean ‘that which e 
potentially in me is actualized in God’; but there is no reas 
to think that the writer attached this meaning to the phrase. 
It is difficult to find any sense in δύναμις τῶν ἐνεργειῶν μου ; anc 

it seems probable that the original ending of the clause was lo Ἵ 
and that some one filled the gap with words taken from the pre 
ceding line. q 
§19. ταῦτα βοῶσαι (βοῶσιν MSS.) .. . σῇ βουλῇ. It may be 
conjectured that τὸ πᾶν ὑμνοῦσαι originally stood in correspondence 
to ταῦτα βοῶσαι, and σὴ βουλή to τὸ σὸν θέλημα. 
((ὁ σὸς λόγος... δ) . . . (( - - ἐπὶ σὲ τὸ πᾶν.) T have assumed 
that the words δέξαι ἀπὸ πάντων λογικὴν θυσίαν | τὸ πᾶν are in their 
right place; and I have restored some coherence to the pas 
by transposing, and connecting with these words, two other clause 
in which λόγος is spoken of. The last phrase of § 18 (δέξαι x8 
πᾶν λόγῳ! λογικὴν θυσίαν) appears to be a misplaced doublet of 
δέξαι ἀπὸ πάντων λογικὴν θυσίαν in ὃ το ; and this makes it probable 
that the preceding clause in ὃ 18 (ὁ σὸς λόγος δι’ ἐμοῦ ὑμνεῖ ὁ ) 
is also misplaced. According to my arrangement of the pass 
Hermes first speaks about the δυνάμεις, and then proceeds to s 
about the λόγος. By the λόγος of the man is meant the sum 
the δυνάμεις which are in him, or the incorporeal organism composé 
of them; cf. § 7b Μη. as emended, οὕτω συνίσταται ὃ λόγος, and 
§ 8b, εἰς συνάρθρωσιν τοῦ λόγου. And the λόγος (‘Word’) of God 
may be similarly regarded as made up of the δυνάμεις of Gor 
whence it would follow that the λόγος of the man is consubsta 
with the λόγος of God. But the writer seems to have had it 
mind at the same time the primary meaning of Adyos, ¥ 
‘speech’. 
ὁ σὸς λόγος δι᾽ ἐμοῦ ὑμνεῖ σέ. Cf. a eucharistic prayer of Sarapion, 
bishop of Thmuis in Egypt, ¢. Δ. Ρ. 350 (Wobbermin, Zexfe und 
Unters. N. F. ΤΙ. 3b, p. 5): λαλησάτω ἐν ἡμῖν ὁ κύριος Ἰησοῦς καὶ 





LIBELLVS XIII: §§ 18-19 403 


ἅγιον πνεῦμα, καὶ ὑμνησάτω σὲ δι’ ἡμῶν. In the language of a 
Christian, Ἰησοῦς and ἅγιον πνεῦμα take the place of the λόγος 
and δυνάμεις of Corp. XIII. (In τ Cor. τ. 24, Christ is called θεοῦ 
δύναμις.) 

((λόγον γὰρ τὸν ἐμὸν (σὸν MSS.) ποιμαίνει(ς σὺ) ὁ νοῦς.) The 
word ποιμαίνεις may have been suggested by Ποιμάνδρης, the name 
by which the divine νοῦς is called in Corp. I. If so, the writer 
of Corp. XIII must have taken Ποιμάνδρης to mean ‘ Shepherd 
of men’. For the identification of God with νοῦς, οἵ, σὺ ὁ νοῦς 
in § 21. 

((80" ἐμοῦ) δέξαι ἀπὸ πάντων (or perhaps ἀπὸ (rod) παντὸς ?) λογικὴν 
θυσίαν. The man who has been born again contains all things 
within himself (cf. § 13a as emended: τὸ πᾶν ὁρῷ ἐμαυτὸν ὄντα 
x.t.d.) ; therefore, when he adores God, the universe adores God 
through him. As to λογικὴν θυσίαν, cf. δέξαι λογικὰς θυσίας in 
Corp, 1. 31. 

τὸ πᾶν (yap) ((ἀπὸ σοῦ, (kal) ἐπὶ σὲ τὸ πᾶν.) τὸ πᾶν appears 
to refer to ἀπὸ πάντων in the preceding line; and if we put 
after it the misplaced fragment ἀπὸ σοῦ ἐπὶ σὲ τὸ πᾶν, we get an 
intelligible statement. ‘The universe has come from God; and it 
is fitting that what has come from God should seek and adore 
him, as it now does through me.’ In the MSS., the subject of 
ἀπὸ σοῦ (ἐστι) is ἡ βουλή; but it would be superfluous to say a 
thing so self-evident as that ‘God's purpose issues from God’. 

The formula here employed by the Hermetist can be traced 
back to the early Ionian physicists. From them it was adopted 
by the Stoics, and through Stoic influence, became widely current 
among religious writers of the Hellenistic age. Heraclitus, /*. τὸ 
Jin. Diels: ἐκ πάντων ἕν καὶ ἐξ ἑνὸς πάντα. Xenophanes, fr. 27 
Diels: ἐκ γαίης yap πάντα, καὶ els γῆν πάντα τελευτᾷ, Arist. Jer. 
A. 3, 983 b 6: τῶν δὴ πρώτων φιλοσοφησάντων of πλεῖστοι τὰς ἐν 
ὕλης εἴδει μόνας φήθησαν ἀρχὰς εἶναι πάντων: ἐξ οὗ γὰρ ἔστιν ἅπαντα 
τὰ ὄντα, καὶ ἐξ οὗ γίγνεται πρώτου, καὶ εἰς ὃ φθείρεται τελευταῖον, 
+. . ταύτην ἀρχήν φασιν εἶναι τῶν ὄντων. (In the view of the Stoics, 
this physical dpyy,—which, in their system, is fire,—is at the same 
time the supreme God.) Paul, Rom. τι. 36: ἐξ αὐτοῦ καὶ δι᾽ αὐτοῦ 
καὶ εἰς αὐτὸν τὰ πάντα... τ Cor, 8. 6: ἐξ οὗ τὰ πάντα, καὶ ἡμεῖς εἰς 
αὐτόν. M, Aurel. 4. 23 (addressed to φύσις) : ἐκ σοῦ πάντα, ἐν σοὶ 
πάντα, εἰς σὲ 'πάντα. Oppianus (¢ A.D. 180), Had. τ. 409: Ζεῦ 
πάτερ, ἐς δὲ σὲ πάντα, καὶ ἐκ σέθεν ἐρρίζωται. In ἃ hymn to the 

Dd ἃ 


404 CORPVS HERMETICVM 


Moon, Pap. mag. Par. i. 2838 (Abel Orphica, p. 249, Dieterich 
Abraxas, p. 81): ἀρχὴ καὶ τέλος εἶ... .' ἐκ σέο γὰρ πάντ᾽ ἐστι, καὶ 


ὡς 


εἰς σὲ τὰ πάντα τελευτᾷ. See Norden, Agnostos Theos, p. 240 ff. 

(τὸν voov) τὸ(ν) ἐν ἡμῖν [| J] φώτιζε φῶς" 

(τὴν ψυχὴν .. .) ((σῶξε ζωήν. 

In Corp. I. 17, the human νοῦς is derived from the divine φῶς, and 
the human ψυχή from the divine ζωή. 

{Γπνεῦμα Océ... σὺ ef ὁ θεός".] As the series νοῦς, ψυχή, πνεῦμα 
repeatedly occurs in other Hermetica, some one may have been led by 
the mention of νοῦς and ψυχή in the preceding couplet to add a 
clause about πνεῦμα. But this clause is not likely to have been 
written by the original author ; for πνεῦμα, in the sense in which it 
is usually associated with νοῦς and ψυχή (i.e. in the sense of ‘ vital 
spirit ’), is a corporeal thing, and the reborn man has put away from 
him all things corporeal. Nor is πνεῦμα in the Christian sense (i.¢, 
that which is highest and divinest in man) likely to have been spoken 
of by the author; for he uses other terms (νοῦς, δυνάμεις, λόγος) to 
express that conception. 

§ 20. ὁ σὸς ἄνθρωπος. Cf. Corp. I. 32: ὃ σὸς ἄνθρωπος συναγιάζειν, 
σοι βούλεται. In both passages alike, we should rather have exp: ed 
5 σὸς vids Or ὁ σὸς παῖς. 

ταῦτα βοᾷ [διὰ πυρός, δι᾿ ἀέρος, διὰ γῆς, διὰ ὕδατος,] [διὰ πνεύματος 
διὰ τῶν κτισμάτων σοῦ. The meaning is undoubtedly ‘by means of 
my bodily organs, which are composed of the material elements” 
This might be expressed by naming the four elements; but as the 
clause is too long to be matched by that which follows, it is most 
likely that the author wrote merely ταῦτα Bog διὰ τῶν κτισμάτων Ὁ οὔ, 
and that some one afterwards inserted διὰ πυρός... διὰ ὕδατος to 
make the meaning clearer. The explanation is correct, but is not 









sense of ‘vital spirit’ consists of fire and air, which have alrea dy 


been mentioned ; and the prewma of the Christians ought not to be 
coupled with the material elements. 
ἀπὸ τοῦ (σοῦ MSS.) αἰῶνος τὴν εὐλογίαν εὑρών (εὗρον MSS.). ὁ αἰών 


1 A last echo of this ancient phrase occurs in Anatole France, La Kévolte les 
anges, 1914, p. 103: ‘ Votre science humaine . . . enseigne que tout sort de l'éther 
et que tout y rentre.’. The modern opinion described in that sentence is a return to 
the position of the Ionian physicists,—with this difference, however, that the modem 
9 of science does not usually, as they did, regard his material ἀρχή as a livin 

eing. 





LIBELLVS XIII: §§ 19-21 405 


here means the world of τὰ νοητά or τὰ οὐσιώδη, of things incorporeal 
and eternal, in contrast to the material world to which the body 
belongs. The worshipper gives voice to his adoration by means of 
his bodily organs; but the thoughts and feelings which he thus 
expresses come to him from another and a higher world. But 
perhaps Reitzenstein may be right in reading ἀπὸ (rot) σοῦ αἰῶνος, 
‘from thine eternity’. 

ὃ ζητῶ ((elBov)). ‘I have found what I have been seeking’; I have 
attained to that to which I aspired, 

βουλῇ τῇ σῇ ἀναπέπαυμαι [[ J 

θελήματι τῷ σῷ (ἀνεγεννήθην). 

God’s βουλή and God’s θέλημα are spoken of side by side, as in 
ὃ 19. ἀναπέπαυμαι, ‘I have found rest for my soul’, Cf. Sap. Sirach 
6.28: ἐπ᾽ ἐσχάτων γὰρ εὑρήσεις τὴν ἀνάπαυσιν αὐτῆς (54. τῆς σοφίας), 
καὶ στραφήσεταί σοι εἰς εὐφροσύνην. Lb. 51. 27 : ὀλίγον ἐκοπίασα, καὶ 
εὗρον ἐμαυτῷ πολλὴν ἀνάπαυσιν. Lo. Matth. ττ. 28 ἴ.: κἀγὼ ἀναπαύσω 
ὑμᾶς. «.. καὶ εὑρήσετε ἀνάπαυσιν ταῖς ψυχαῖς ὑμῶν. 

Since the hymn as a whole is a thanksgiving for παλιγγενεσία, it 
may be considered certain that the Rebirth was mentioned in the 
concluding words ; and from § 2, where God’s θέλημα was said to be 
the begetter of the new man, it may be inferred that the missing 
verb after θελήματι τῷ σῷ IS ἀνεγεννήθην, or some equivalent. 

The three short clauses with which the hymn ends are comparable 
to the cries by which the initiated in some of the Pagan mysteries 
declared themselves to have received the sacramental grace; e.g. 
ἔφυγον κακόν, εὗρον ἄμεινον, Dem. De cor, 323 (313) (see Dieterich, 
Mithrashiturgie, p. 213 ff.). 

§ 21. τέθεικα(ς) καὶ ἐν κόσμῳ τῷ ἐμῷ... δύναμιν (δύναμαν MSS.) ἐκ 
τοῦ σοῦ ὕμνου. ‘Tat’s sentence is interrupted by the words which his 
father interposes, but is resumed and completed after the pied 
tion. ὁ κόσμος 6 ἐμός means ‘the universe which is in me’ (τὸ πᾶν 
τὸ ἐν ἐμοῦ), ie. ‘myself, as containing the universe, or identified with 
it’. But Hermes reminds Tat that, inasmuch as he has put the body 
from him, ‘the universe which is in him’ must be an incorporeal 
universe, made up of divine δυνάμεις ; he ought therefore to have 
said ἐν τῷ νοητῷ κόσμῳ τῷ ἐμῷ. 

Tat has already been illumined by the divine Light, from the first 
moment of his παλιγγενεσία ; but the effect of the hymn sung by 
Hermes has been to produce in him a further or fuller illumination 
(ἐπι-πεφώτισταί pov ὁ νοῦς) ; and the result is that he now feels 





























406 CORPVS HERMETICVM 


capable, not merely of joining in his father’s thanksgiving, but of 
giving thanks to God in words of his own choosing. 

There is no need to infer from this passage that the writer adhered 
to the old Egyptian belief in the magical or sacramental efficacy of 
verbal formulae. He does not ascribe Tat’s παλιγγενεσία to the working 
of the hymn ; for the hymn is ἃ thanksgiving for a παλιγγενεσία which 


emotion of the pupil would be heightened when he heard his rever 
father and teacher pouring out his heart in adoration. The wri 
assumes that spiritual ‘power’ and ‘illumination’ may be conveyed 
from one man to another by such means; but in making thi 
assumption, he is not adopting an Egyptian superstition; he ἢ 
recognizing a fact of universal experience. 
ὦ τέκνον, μὴ ἀσκόπως (sc. πέμψῃς ἐξ ἰδίας φρενὸς εὐλογίαν, with the 
emphasis on ἐξ ἰδίας φρενός). Even for one who has been born 
again, it is no light matter to address the supreme God without the 
guidance of a recognized authority ; think well before you venture 
on it. A beginner might easily go wrong, and unwittingly incur the 
guilt of impiety. ‘The writer's attitude appears to be that of a 
member of a religious community which possesses a traditional 
liturgy, made up of prayers and hymns composed by inspired teachers, 
Fixed forms of worship have already been established; and a new 
hymn to the supreme God is not to be admitted without due con- 
sideration. 
ἐν τῷ νῷ, ὦ πάτερ, ἃ θεωρῶ λέγω. The more natural order of the 
words would be ἃ ἐν τῷ νῷ θεωρῶ λέγω ; but if the MSS. are right, ἐν. 
τῷ νῷ has been placed first for emphasis. ‘Do not fear that I shall 
go wrong; for the words I am about to utter are the expression of 
what I see in Mind’ (or, as a Christian might have said, ‘in the 
Spirit’). The insight into things divine which has come to him 
through the Rebirth will secure him against error. 
γενάρχα τῆς yeveotoupyias. It may be suspected that the author 
wrote τελεσιουργίας ; Cf. τελεσιουργός (MSS. yeveovovpyds) in § 2. The 
meaning might have been more simply expressed by writing τῆς 
παλιγγενεσίας. 
σοῦ γὰρ βουλομένου πάντα (por) τελεῖται, σοῦ βουλομένου refers 
back to ἃς θέλεις. ‘It is by thy will that I am born again; itis 
therefore fitting that I should do thy will by giving thanks to thee.’ 
Cf. θελήματι τῷ σῷ (ἀνεγεννήθηνν) in ὃ 20, and ἐπὶ τέλει τοῦ παντός in 





LIBELLVS XIII: §§ 21-22a 407 


§ 16. We should rather have expected πάντα μοι τετέλεσται, “1 have 
been made réAcos’, i.e. I have been born again. If the present 
tense τελεῖται is the right reading, the παλιγγενεσία must here be 
regarded as a process still continuing. 

ἀλλὰ καὶ προσϑές, ὦ τέκνον, “διὰ τοῦ (cod?) λόγου". Hermes 
amends his son’s wording, as before in ὃ 21. The meaning appears 
to be that Tat ought to have said δέξαι εὐλογίας ἀπ᾿ ἐμοῦ διὰ τοῦ 
λόγου The word λόγος cannot here mean merely ‘speech’; for 
there would be no need to insist that Tat’s ‘speech of praise’ 
(εὐλογία) was uttered ‘ by means of speech’. It must mean either 
‘the divine Logos’ or ‘the human reason’; and in the view of this 
writer, there is no essential distinction between the one and the 
other. The divine λόγος is the sum of the divine δυνάμεις ; my λόγος 
is the sum of ‘ the δυνάμεις which are in me’; and the δυνάμεις which 
are in me are identical or consubstantial with the divine δυνάμεις. 
‘ Accept {praise from me through the Adyos’ means, ‘accept praise 
offered by thy λόγος, which has entered into me’. Cf. §19: ὁ σὸς 
λόγος δι᾿ ἐμοῦ ὑμνεῖ σε. 

Εὐχαριστῶ σοι, πάτερ [(ὅτι) ταῦτά μοι αἰνεῖς (αἰνεῖν MSS.) εὐξαμένῳ]. 
‘I thank you, father, for your approval of my hymn.’ But this 
makes Tat ignore what his father has last said (ἀλλὰ καὶ πρόσθες 
xd.) It seems most likely then that ὅτι ταῦτα... εὐξαμένῳ is an 
explanation added by a later hand, and that the author wrote simply 
Εὐχαριστῶ σοι, πάτερ. ‘I thank you (for your correction). Cf. εὐχα- 
pore δὲ ἅμα in Corp. I. 20. ; 

§a2a, Xaipw, τέκνον, (ὡς ?) καρποφορήσοντός (-σαντός MSS.) 
(σου... Tat has not as yet had time to bring forth any ‘fruit’ 
since his New Birth, except his little hymn ; and that can hardly be 
meant. It seems clear therefore that Hermes must here be speaking 
of what Tat may be expected to do during the remainder of his life 
on earth. Now that he has been born again, and has thereby 
escaped from the illusions of sense, and entered into the world of 
ἀλήθεια (i.e. of eternal reality), he will bring forth the good fruits 
which belong to that world ; that is, (as the following words explain, ) 
he will live a life of virtuous action, Cf. Zp. Joh. τ. 3.9: πᾶς 6 
γεγεννημένος ἐκ τοῦ θεοῦ ἁμαρτίαν οὐ ποιεῖ, κατιλ. ‘The use οἵ καρπο- 
φορεῖν to express this notion is probably of Jewish origin; cf, Matth. 

> Or, that he ought to have said πάντα pot τελεῖται διὰ τοῦ Adyou? But since he 


has in that clause said σοῦ βουλομένου, there seems to be less reason for any further 
addition there. 





408 CORPVS HERMETICVM 





























3. 8, where John the Baptist says ποιήσατε οὖν καρπὸν ἄξιον 
μετανοίας. Paul, Gal. 5, 22: ὃ δὲ καρπὸς τοῦ πνεύματός ἐστιν dyg 
κτλ. Eph. 5.9: ὡς τέκνα φωτὸς περιπατεῖτε ὃ γὰρ καρπὸς τοῦ gw 
ἐν πάσῃ ἀγαθωσύνῃ «tA. Matth. 7. 16: ἀπὸ τῶν καρπῶν αὐτῶν 
ἐπιγνώσεσθε αὐτοὺς κιτικλ. The thought, as well as the expression, ig 
rather Jewish than Platonic; the Platonists were inclined to regard 
virtuous action as a preparation for the guosis of the θεωρητικὸς Bios, 
or a precedent condition of it, rather than as a result produced by it, 

[τὰ ἀγαθὰ] τὰ ἀθάνατα ({τῆς ἀρετῆς) γεννήματα. τὰ ἀγαθά is pro. 
bably a variant for τὰ ἀθάνατα. A genitive is required with ra γεννή- 
ματα; and τῆς ἀρετῆς, which is an obstruction where it stands in the 
MSS., is exactly what is wanted here. τὰ τῆς ἀρετῆς γεννήματα are 
virtuous actions; and they are ἀθάνατα (divine), inasmuch as they 
issue from and belong to the divine world of ἀλήθεια. 

((νοερῶς ἔγνως σεαυτὸν καὶ τὸν πατέρα τὸν ἡμέτερον.) The Rebirth 
which Tat has just experienced is what other Hermetists call ‘ attain- 
ing to gnosis’. When a man ‘knows himself’, he knows himself to 
be a son of God. Cf. ἀναγνωρισάτω.... ἑαυτὸν ὄντα ἀθάνατον in 
Corp. 1, 18. A similar thought occurs in a Zagion of Jesus, Oxy- 
rhynchus 654 (Lietzmann’s Aveine Texte, Klostermann Apocrypha II, 
Ρ. 17): ἡ βασ(ιλεία τῶν οὐρανῶν) ἐντὸς ὑμῶν (ἔ)στι' (καὶ ὅστις ay 
ἑαυτὸν) γνῷ, ταύτην εὑρή(σει. ἐὰν γὰρ ἀληθῶς 1) ἑαυτοὺς γνώσεσθε", 
(καὶ εἰδήσετε ὅτι υἱοὶ) ἐστὲ ὑμεῖς τοῦ πατρός. ; 

8 229}. μηδενὶ {[ |} ἐκφανεῖν (ἐκφαίνων MSS.) τῆς παλιγγενεσίας, 
τὴν παράδοσιν. The injunctions of secrecy in this document contrast 
strongly with the attitude of the writer of Corp. 1, who goes forth to” 
preach his gospel to all mankind. 

ἵνα μὴ ὡς διάβολοι {τοῦ παντὸς) λογισϑῶμεν. These words give a 
reason for the secrecy enjoined. But what 7s the reason given? 
διάβολοι (‘ maligners’) is unintelligible unless defined by a following 
genitive ; I therefore assume the original reading to have been 
διάβολοι τοῦ παντός, as in the writer’s note added below. This may 
be taken to mean ‘ maligners of the Kosmos’. It is implied in § 1 
that he who would be born again must be ready to ‘ be estranged 
from the Kosmos’; and the teacher speaks in the same tone 
throughout the dialogue. (The reborn man ἄμοιρός ἐστι τῆς (αἰσθητῆς) 
οὐσίας, ὃ 2; the material world is an illusion, δὲ 5, 6; we must ‘stop 
the working of our bodily senses’, ὃ 7. a; the body is a prison and a. 
torture-chamber, §7b.) ‘The ‘illuminated’ man will know how to” 


1 Swete’s restoration. 2 ηνώσεσθαι Pap, 





LIBELLVS XIII: §§ 22a, 22b, 13b 409 


reconcile such language with a belief that the material world, with 
all that it contains, has been created by God, and manifests his 
goodness (8 17); he will understand that it is not in the universe 
itself that the evil resides, but in the men who use God’s κτίσματα 
amiss, and allow themselves to be dominated by material things. 
But others might mistakenly suppose that Hermes is expressing a 
hatred of the Kosmos such as that with which the writer of Asc. 
Lat, 111 (c. 25) reproaches the Christians, or that with which Plotinus 
charges the Gnostics (Zn. 2. 9: superscription, Πρὸς τοὺς κακὸν τὸν 
δημιουργὸν τοῦ κόσμου καὶ τὸν κόσμον κακὸν εἶναι λέγοντας). Compare 
Herm. ap. Stob. Zxc. XI. 5, where the writer gives it as one of his 
reasons for enjoining secrecy, that the unworthy, if they hear his 
doctrine, καταφρονήσουσι τοῦ παντὸς ὡς γενητοῦ. 

(. ..) ἱκανῶς γὰρ ἕκαστος ἡμῶν (ἑαυτοῦ) ἐπεμελήθη, ἐγώ τε [ὁ] λέγων 
σύ τε [δ] ἀκούων. These are evidently the concluding words of 
Hermes. The meaning is ‘(I will say no more ;) for we have done 
enough to satisfy our respective wants’. ἑαυτοῦ ἐπιμέλεσθαι in the 
literal sense would mean ‘to take food’. Cf. Ase/. Zaz. 40 ἃ : ‘satis 
enim nos de divinis rebus tractantes velut animi pabulis saturavimus.’ 

§1gb. (( (i)Siq τὸν λόγον τοῦτον, .. διάβολοι τοῦ παντός), This is 
not said by Hermes. It is a note appended either by the author of 
the dialogue, or by a transcriber of it; and the writer of the note 
speaks in his own person, ὑπεμνηματισάμην means “1 have recorded 
in writing’. διά is, no doubt, a corruption of ἰδίῳ ; but ἰδίᾳ would be 
better placed if it stood immediately before εἰς ots κιτιλ. It is 
necessary to cut out εἰς ὅν, which was presumably written as a variant 
for εἰς οὕς. 


Were the two hymns in Corp. XIII (§§ 17-20 and § 21ὴ intended 
to be literally ‘sung’, and not merely ‘said’? If their author meant 
them to be sung, and composed words and tune together, traces of 
the rhythm of the music ought to be discoverable in the words, and 
we might expect to find in them some sort of metre. But there is 
nothing here that resembles the metres of classical Greek poetry ; 
and if any regularity of rhythm is to be found in the Hermetic hymns, 
we must look rather for something similar to the accentual rhythm 
of the hymns sung in the Byzantine churches.' That form of com- 


1 An account of the Byzantine hymns is given by Krumbacher Cesch. der bysant. 
Litt., 1897, pp. 655-705. See also Bardenhewer Patrologte, 1910, pp, 485 f. The 
rhythm of the Byz. hymns is discussed by W. Meyer, Ges. Abhandl, sux mittel- 





























410 CORPVS HERMETICVM 


position is known to have been already fully developed in the fifth 
century;? and there is nothing unreasonable in supposing at 
accentual rhythm of the same kind may have been used in lesg 
elaborately constructed Pagan hymns in Egypt before the end of th : 
third century. ἃ. Ὁ.» i.e. at the time at which it is probable 
Corp, XIII was written. 

The rhythm of the Byzantine hymns may be illustrated by two 
specimens taken from hymns of Romanos (Krumbacher, pp. 694, 
667). 4 

(1) ἡ παρθένος σήμερον | τὸν ὑπερούσιον τίκτει, 
καὶ ἡ γῆ τὺ σπήλαιον | τῷ ᾿ ἀπροσίτῳ προσάγει. 
~-tue4-+|[---+--4- 


ἄγγελοι | μετὰ ποιμένων | δοξολογοῦσιν, 
μάγοι δὲ | μετὰ ἀστέρος | ὁδοιποροῦσιν. 


, , ld 


(2) ψυχή pov, ψυχή μου, | ἀνάστα, τί καθεύδεις ; 
τὸ τέλος ἐγγίζει, | καὶ μέλλεις θορυβεῖσθαι. 


t , t τς 


As another instance, we may take the ἀκάθιστος ὕμνος, a hymn 
the Virgin Mary, which is generally attributed to Sergius, patriar 
of Constantinople, ἃ. Ὁ. 610-641, and is still used in the Easte 
Church. The Greek text of it has recently been republished 
Birkbeck and Woodward, London, 1917. It consists of twenty-fo 
stanzas, preceded by a prelude. I here give as a specimen a gro Ip 


lateinischer Rhythmic, 1905, vol. ii, pp. 62-94. Krumbacher, p. 649: ‘An Si 
der Quantitiit tritt hier als Hauptprinzip die Silbenzihlung und der Schlussa 
Unter sich ungleiche Verse sind zu Perioden und diese zu Strophen yereinigt.’ 
1 The greatest of the composers of Byzantine hymns was Romanos, ‘the P 
of accentual poetry’, as to whose date opinions vary between A.D. 491-518 8 
713-716. But the names of several men who composed hymns of the san 
character in the fifth century are given by Bardenhewer, p. 486. 
2 Two of the poems of Greg. Nazianz., c. A.D. 360 (viz. 1. 1. 32, ἈΜΉΝ 
zespertinus, and 1, 2. 3, Exhortatio ad virgines) are ‘ accentual’, at least in 
sense that the distinction between long and short syllablesis disregarded. A criti 
edition of those two poems is given by W. Meyer, Aittedlatein. Rhythmic Τί, 
pp. 141 ff.; and their rhythm is discussed 24. pp. 48-51. They consist of verses © 
of which, though not all, conform tothe type — —- -- -- -- -- -- | - -- 7-77 a 
e.g, σὺ φωστῆρσιν οὐρανὸν | κατηύγασας ποικίλοις. That is, the typical verse” 
composed of two co/a, each of which contains seven syllables; and in the seco 
colon, there is an accent on the last syllable but one. (There seems to be 
regularity in the positions of the other accents.) Whether the divergences Ε 
this type which occur in some of the verses were admitted by the author, or are 
(some of them at least) due to corruption of the text, it is difficult to say. 
3 τῷ apparently counts as an unstressed syllable. 
‘ “it — ἀκάθιστος, because during its recital the congregation ‘ does not sit’, 
ut stands. 





LIBELLVS XIII 411 


of six couplets, which forms part of the roth stanza. It is one of 
twelve rhythmically corresponding passages, which occur in alternate 
stanzas of the hymn (the rst, 3rd, 5th, &c.); so that the metrical 
scheme of this group of couplets is twelve times repeated, syllable 
for syllable and accent for accent. 


χαῖρε, ἡ στήλη | τῆς παρθενίας" 
χαῖρε, ἡ πύλη | τῆς σωτηρίας. 
χαῖρε, ἀρχηγὲ | νοητῆς ἀναπλάσεως" 
{ χαῖρε, χορηγὲ | θεϊκῆς ἀγαθότητος. 
χαῖρε, σὺ γὰρ ἀνεγέννησας ' | τοὺς συλληφθέντας αἰσχρῶς" 

{ χαῖρε, σὺ γὰρ ἐνουθέτησας | τοὺς συληθέντας τὸν vodv.? 

χαῖρε, ἡ τὸν φθορέα | τῶν φρενῶν καταργοῦσα" 

{ χαῖρε, ἡ τὸν σπορέα | τῆς ἁγνείας τεκοῦσα. 

χαῖρε, παστὰς | ἀσπόρου νυμφεύσεως" 
{ χαῖρε, πιστοὺς | Κυρίῳ ἁρμόζουσα. 
χαῖρε, καλὴ | κουροτρόφε παρθένων᾽ 

ies ψυχῶν | νυμφοστόλε ἁγίων. 

Now in the two hymns of Corp. XIII there is ἃ strongly marked 
parallelismus membrorum ; and the agreement between the parallel 
members, both in the number of syllables and in the positions of the 
accents, is close enough to make it appear possible that, if we had 
the text before us in its original form, we should find the accentual 
_ rhythm of the first of each pair of corresponding phrases repeated in 
the second with as much precision as in the Byzantine hymns. I here 
give a tentative reconstruction of the text, based on the assumption 
that it was metrical in the sense explained ; and it will be seen that 
the alterations required for this purpose are not very large. 

The rules whichI have provisionally assumed and applied® are these: 


(1) Corresponding phrases contain the same number of syllables. 
(2) No distinction is made between long and short syllables. 


} An allusion to the doctrine of rebirth. 
* The rhythm of the second and third couplets, for instance, might be roughly 
reproduced in English thus: 
‘Hail thou, who hast wrotight | a reshaping of mind in us; 
hail thou, who dost give | what is good and of Ged in us. 
Hail, for thou hast given birth anew | to men conceivéd in shame; 
hail, for thou hast taught to think anew | men who were réft of sane thought.’ 


5 These appear to be the rules observed in the Byzantine hymns. But I know 
too little about those hymns to be certain that my statement of the rules is wholly 
tight; and assuming it to be right with respect to the Byzantine hymns, one cannot 
be sure that precisely the same rules would be observed by a Pagan hymn-writer in 
Egypt two or three centuries earlier, 


412 CORPVS HERMETICVM 







(3) A stress falls on every syllable which is written with an acut 
or circumflex accent,' with the exception that circumflexed cases of 
the article (τοῦ, τῆς, &c.) may be treated as unstressed syllables, 

(4) Corresponding co/a invariably agree in the position of the das; 
stress (which is here indicated by a double accent), 

(5) In the positions of the other stresses, corresponding co/a ag 
for the most part, but some divergence is permitted. 

It will be noticed that instances of rhyme, and of assonane 
approximating to rhyme, present themselves here and there, just ag 
in the Byzantine hymns. [ 


Tat’s hymn. 


Σοὶ ἐγώ, | ὦ γενάρχα τῆς γενεσιουργίας, 
Tar θεῷ | πέμπω (— -- —)? λογικὰς θυσίας. 
oP. it , , ia 


δέξαι εὐλογίας | ἀπ᾿ ἐμοῦ ἃς σὺ θέλεις" 
σοῦ γὰρ βουλομένου τὰ πάντα μοι τελεῖται. 


ΞΕ 
is aa Ἶ σε = rat 
ae am os ee me 


Lymn of Hermes. 


(The first couplet is difficult to dispose of. Its rhythm somewhat 
resembles that of the two following couplets ; and the resembla' 
might be increased by rewriting it thus : 


᾿Ανοιγήτω pot | amas μυχὺς τοῦ Kocpou' 
ἡ φύσις προσδεχέσθω᾽ μου | τὴν ἀκοὴν τοῦ ὕμνον. 
But to make the correspondence perfect, there ought to be a stress. 
on pot, and one more syllable in the last colon.) 


1 What is to be said about syllables written with a grave accent? They are 
certainly stressed in some cases; e.g. in the sixth of the group of couplets qu 
above from the acathést hymn, the last syllable of καλὴ must be stressed, since 
word corresponds to ψυχῶν ; and in the case of ἀρχηγὲ and χορηγὲ in the s 
couplet, and παστὰς and πιστοὺς in the fifth couplet, it is to be inferred f 
corresponding couplets in other stanzas that the last syllable is stressed. But 
are also syllables written with a grave accent which are unstressed, and I 
formulate any general rule on this point. 

2 (ἐκ ψυχῆς) ϊ 


LIBELLVS XIII 413 


, δὲν, δ τ , xs Δ. Σ 
σίγησον ἡ γῆ, μὴ σείεσθε τὰ δένδρα 
ε , A ‘A ~ A . ” 
ὑμνήσω (- - - - - δ | τὸν τὸ πᾶν καὶ τὸ ἕν ὄντα. 
σιγᾶτ᾽ οὐρανοί, | οἱ ἄνεμοι κοιμᾶσθε' 
ὁ κύκλος 6 ἀθάνατος  προσδεξάσθω μου τὸν λόγον. 


fs 
lols 
1 
YY 
! 
| 
| 
| 
Ἢ 
| 
| 
| 
Is 
Ι 


μέλλω γὰρ ὑμνεῖν [ τὸν τὰ πάντα κτίσαντα, 
τὸν πήξαντα γῆν | κοὐρανὸν κρεμάσαντα' 


τὸν ὀχετεύσαντα | τὸ γλυκὺ ὕδωρ 

εἰς τροφὴν πάντων | {-- - - - - - Ai 
καὶ ἐπιτάξαντα | 73 πῦρ φανῆναι 

εἰς πᾶσαν πρᾶξιν | θεοῖς τε καὶ ἀνθρώποις." 


{7}. 
oi ee 


δῶμεν πάντες ὁμοῦ | αὐτῷ τὴν εὐλογίαν, 
τῷ ἐπ᾽ οὐρανῶν μετεώρῳ" 
τῷ συμπάσης φύσεως κτίστῃ 
Ω 
, 


ye 
ae af , wt 


4 {i }-+--4- 


οὗτός ἐστιν ὁ τοῦ νοός μου ὀφθαλμός" 
δέξαιτο τῶν δυνάμεών μου τὴν φωνήν. 


a μον τ ae 


αἱ δυνάμεις αἱ ἐν ἐμοί, 
ε ~ ‘ ἣν ὃ a 
ὑμνεῖτε τὸ ἕν καὶ τὸ πᾶν. 


! 

Ι 

| 

is 

i 

| 

| 
Is | 

Ὁ 
Ι 
| 


συνάσατε τῷ θελήματί pov 
ἅπασαι αἱ ἐν ἐμοὶ δυνάμεις. 


1 ὧν ζωὴν ἐχόντων) 1 
2 θεοῖς one syllable? Or @e-ofs τε κἀνθρώποις 1 Or θετοῖς καὶ ἀνθρώποις ? 








414 CORPVS HERMETICVM 
γνῶσις ayia, | φωτισθεὶς ἀπὸ σοῦ, 


διὰ σοῦ τὸ νοητὸν φῶς ὑμνῶ. 
= ΞΕ eae ) | χαίρω ἐν χαρᾷ νοῦ" 
αἱ eel xaipere σὺν ἐμοί. 


ἊΣ ταν ὡς δὰ ES = τῷ ee eps ἐδ 
τὸ ἀγαθόν, ἀγαθὸν (-- - - --, - -᾿ τ-ἰὶ - ) ὕμνει 


ζωὴ καὶ bart | ἀφ᾽ ὑμῶν els ὑμᾶς χωρεῖ ἡ εὐλογία. 
dorsum ses) opr ine sew OB me Oi ses my, ce 


εὐχαριστῶ σοι, | θεέ, (-- -------- Ν 


ταῦτα βοῶσαι | ai δυνάμεις αἱ ἐν ἐμοὶ 
4 A , “ . 
τὸ σὸν θέλημα τελοῦσι 


τὸ πᾶν ὑμνοῦσαι | (---- -- - - - -- - ) 
σῇ βουλῇ (~ - - - - ν 
+ “ , ΞΕ 


ὁ abs λόγος (— -- --| -- —) δ ἐμοῦ ὑμνεῖ σε' 
λόγον γὰρ τὸν ἐμὸν | ποιμαίνεις σὺ ὁ νοῦς, 
δὲ ἐμοῦ ἀπὸ πάντων | δέξαι λογικὴν θυσίαν' 
τὸ πᾶν γὸρ μὲ σοῦ, | καὶ ἐπὶ σὲ τὸ πᾶν. 


(2.--{2)--οὔ: 


τὸν νοῦν τὸν ἐν ἡμῖν | φώτιζε φῶς" 
τὴν ψυχὴν (= -- =)? | σῶζε ζω, 


ΓΕ “ 


οὐ μα μὴ aha οἷν 
ταῦτα βοᾷ ὃ σὸς παῖς 
διὰ τῶν σῶν κτισμάτων, 
ἀπὸ τοῦ σοῦ αἰῶνος ' 
τὴν εὐλογίαν etpave 
I καρ ως eit «ὦ So 
1 (ὑπηρετοῦσιγ} 2 (τὴν ἐμὴν} 
3. In this quatrain the lines are arranged in the orderaéda, δε might g 
the more usual order α ὁ 4 ὦ by interchanging the third and fourth lines. 








LIBELLVS XIII 415 


ὃ ζητῶ εἶδον" 
βουλῇ (— --Ξῦῇὴ τῇ σῇ | ἀναπέπαυμαι' 
θελήματι τῷ σῷ | (θεὸς γέγονα (Ῥ)). 

, Lia # 





In the hymn in Cor. 1. 31, there is a passage in which similar 
rhythmical correspondence may be seen : 
δέξαι λογικὰς θυσίας [ἁγνὰς] 
ἀπὸ ψυχῆς καὶ καρδίας 
πρός σε ἀνατεταμένης, 
ἀνεκλάλητ᾽, ἄρρητε, 
σιωπῇ φωνούμενε. 


Syllabic and accentual correspondences of the same kind present 
themselves in some of the clauses of a document entitled στήλῃ 
ἀπόκρυφος, Pap. mag. Par. i, 1115-1166, and can be got in other 
clauses of it by slight alterations of the text. This document, as 
written in the Papyrus, was intended to be recited as a magic spell ; but 
it seems to have been made up by putting together three distinct hymns, 
or parts of hymns, which were originally meant for use in religious 
worship. The sorcerer by whom the magic document was compiled 
may very likely have got all three from one and the same hymn-book. 
These hymns must have been composed before ἃ. Ὁ, 300. In respect of 
their form, they are rather like the hymns in Corp, XIII; and they give 
support to the hypothesis that accentual metre, of the same character 
as that of the Byzantine hymns, was already in use in Egypt at the 
time when Corp, XIII was written. The text may be read as follows: 

{15 ΑΔ" χαῖρε, τὸ πᾶν σύστημα 

τοῦ ἀερίου πνεύματος." "ἢ 
χαῖρε, τὸ πνεῦμα τὸ διῆκον ἀπὸ οὐρανοῦ ἐπὶ γῆν," * 


1 Possibly (οὗ ἐρῶ ἔχω), or something of the sort. 2 (σωθεὶς) 1 
5 A is a hymn to πνεῦμα, in the Stoic sense of that term, 
* Exact syllabic correspondence might be got by writing 
either | χαῖρε, τὸ πᾶν σύστημα 
᾿ τοῦ αἰθρίου πνεύματος 
or χαῖρε, τὸ ὅλον σύστημα 
τοῦ ἀερίου (αἰθερίου 1) πνεύματος. 
5 Thave substituted asterisks for the voces arcanae (i.e. bits of gibberish, supposed 
ἴο be magically potent,) which the sorcerer has inserted. 
ὁ Possibly, [χαῖρε τὸ πνεῦμα] 
τὸ διῆκον ἀπὸ οὐρανοῦ 
(== = | ) ἐπὶ γῆν. 

























416 CORPVS HERMETICVM 
{- ἀπὸ γῆς τῆς ἐν μέσῳ κύτζελι [τοῦ κόσμου] 
ἄχρι τῶν περάτων τῆς ἀβύσσου. " 


χαῖρε, 


1120 


τὸ εἰσερχόμενόν με 

καὶ ἀντισπώμενόν pov 
καὶ χωριζόμενόν μου 
κατὰ θεοῦ βούλησιν 

ἐν χρηστότητι πνεῦμα." + 
1125 Β." χαῖρε, ἀρχή (re) καὶ τέλος τῆς ἀ(ζει)κινήτου φύσεως" « 
χαῖρε, στοιχζελδίων ἀκοπιάτου λειτουργίας δ[ εἸίνησις. + 


1130 χαῖρε, ἡλιακῆς ἀκτῖνος | ὑπηρετικὸν κόσμου " καταύ: 
| yaopa' * 
Ἴ χαῖρε, νυκτιφαοῦς μήνης | ἀνισολαμπὴς κύκλος 
| Γαϊώρημα." ὅ x 


΄ 7 
χαίρετε," πάντα ἀερίων εἰδώλων πνεύματα" ' * 
Ξ 
1135 


χαίρετε, οἷς τὸ χαίρειν " ἐν εὐλογίᾳ biSora* 
ἀδελφοῖς καὶ ἀδελφαῖς, ὁσίοις καὶ ὁσίαις." 


1 The πνεῦμα (‘life-breath’) of an individual man is a detached portion of the 
cosmic πνεῦμα, It ‘enters into’ the man at his birth, ‘clings to’ him during his 
life, and ‘ departs from’ himat his death. And birth and death alike are determined 
by God's will, and take place ‘in goodness’, that is, are ordered for man’s good 
by God's beneficence. 

ἐν χρηστότητι πνεῦμα agrees with the first three phrases both in the number of 
syllables and in the position of the last stress. Perhaps κατὰ θεοῦ βούλησιν. which 
contains the same number of syllables, but differs in accentual rhythm, onght to be 
bracketed. 

2 Bis a hymn to the Kosmos. 

5. Perhaps ὑπηρετικὸν κόσμῳ, ‘ serviceable to the universe’. ’ 

4 Exact correspondence could be got by writing either νυκτιψαοῦς σελήνης or 
νυκτιφαέος μήνης, 

5 Perhaps ἀνισολαμπὲς (or ἀνισολαμποῦΞ) κύκλου αἰώρημα. 

δ χαιρε τα Pap, 

7 Spirits of airy phantoms’ may be taken to mean daemons, or disembodied 
souls, But it is a strange phrase; perhaps the original reading has been altered 
by the sorcerer. 4 

This and the following line agree in the number of syllables and the position of 
the last stress. There is no close parallelism in the sense ; but the inhabitants of 
the air appear to be paired with human worshippers on earth. ᾿ 

® χαίρειν Pap.: perhaps substituted by error for some other verb (possibly 
συμπνεῖν; The words συμπνεῖν ἐν εὐλογίᾳ might mean ‘to sing praises in accord” 
with the airy πνεύματα). ἡ ‘ 

® & Sore Pap.: perhaps δέδοται. 

10 Perhaps (ὦ) ἀδελφοὶ καὶ ἀδελφαὶ ὅσιοι καὶ Gora, which would correspo 
metrically with the two preceding lines. Or possibly | ὦ ἀδελφοὶ ὅσιοι 

: καὶ ἀδελφαὶ ὅσιαι. 

This mention of ‘ brethren and sisters’ shows that the hymn in which it occurred 
was used in ΘΟΒΕΤΟΒΑΒΟΒΕΙ worship by some religious community. But the three 
lines χαίρετε a...kat ὁσίαις have little connexion with the σχῆμα κόσμου, 
which is the thing spoken of in the rest of B; and it may be suspected that the 
sorcerer got them from another part of the hymn, or from another hymn, 


LIBELLVS XIII 417 


ὦ μέγα [μέγιστον] ἐγκύκλιον ἀπερινόητον σχῆμα κόσμου, ἷ 
οὐράνιον, ε Γοὐράνιον"," * 

1140 αἰθέριον, * Γἐναιθέριον), * 

ὑδατῶδες, * γαιῶδες," * 

πυρῶδες, * ἀνεμῶδες, * 

























φωτοειδές, * 
σκοτοειδέ(ς), * 
1145 ἀστροφεγγές," * 
ὑγρο(ξηρο)πυρινόψυχρον [πνεῦμα ]" 
GY aiv® σε, 6 θεὸς τῶν θεῶν 


τὸν κόσμον καταρτισάμενος, * 
τὴν ἄβυσσον θησαυρίσας ὃ Γἀοράτῳ θέσεως ἑδράσματι" + 
1150 ὃ διαστήσας οὐρανὸν καὶ γῆν, 
καὶ τὸν μὲν οὐρανὸν πτέρυξιν χρύσεαις᾽ Γαϊωνίαις 1" σκεπάσας," 7" 
τὴν δὲ γῆν ἑδράσμασιν αἰωνίοις στηρίσας" "ὃ * 
1155 { τὸν αἰθέρα ἀνακρεμάσας | μετεώρῳ ὑψώματι,"" * 

ὃ τὸν ἀέρα διασκεδάσας | πνοαῖς αὐτοκινήτοις" * 


On On 


1 Possibly, ὦ σχῆμα κόσμου 
μέγα ἔγκύκλιον 
ἀπερινόητον. 
2 ουρανιον ἐνρωχεσυὴλ | ν ουρανιον Pap. Perhaps, 
| οὐράνιον, ὑ(πγουράνιον, 
αἰθέριον, ἐναέριον. 
If that were written, both pairs of epithets alike would refer to the contrast between 
heaven and the sublunar world, 
5 Perhaps γαιῶδες, ὑδατῶδες, which would make a still closer correspondence. 
4 Perhaps | φωτοειδές, σπκοτοειδές, 
ἀστροφεγγές, (— — — +) (e.g. νυκτηρεφέε). 
δ πνεῦμα must be cut out. Its insertion was probably suggested by hymn A, 
after A and B had been put together. The adjectives belong to σχῆμα κόσμου ; 
they would not be applicable to πνεῦμα, The material universe is ‘moist, (dry,) 
hot, and cold’; i.e. it is composed of elements that are respectively characterized 
by these four qualities. But perhaps this odd compound is to be attributed to the 
sorcerer ; the original reading may have been | ὑγρόν, ξηρύν, 
θερμόν, ψυχρόν. 
® Cis a hymn to God as maker of the world. In that respect it resembles the 
first part of the hymn of Hermes in Corp. XIII. 
7 ev σε Pap. 
8 A reminiscence of Ps. 32 (33). 7 : τιθεὶς ἐν θησαυροῖς ἀβύσσους. 
ΟΝ θέσεως is meaningless; and ἑδράσματι has probably come from ἑδράσμασιν 
low. 
10 ypuoras Pap. 
Ἧι αἰωνίαις has come from αἰωνίοις in the following line. 
_ 2 Cf. Ps. τό (17). 8 : ἐν σκέπῃ τῶν πτερύγων σου σκεπάσεις με. Ps. 60 (61). 4: 
σκεπασθήσομαι ἐν σκέπῃ τῶν πτερύγων σου. But what is meant by saying that God 
sheltered heaven under wings? 
18 Possibly, τὸν μὲν πόλον (or τὰ μὲν ἄνω) πτέρυξιν | χρυσαυγέσι σκεπάσας, 
τὴν δὲ γῆν ἑδράσμασιν | αἰωνίοις στηρίσας. 
1 Correspondence might be got by writing ὑψώματι μετεώρῳ, and counting the 
éw as one syllable, 


2806.2 Ee 


418 CORPVS HERMETICVM 


{; τὸ ὕδωρ κυκλοτερὲς περιενέγκας, * 
ὃ τοὺς πρηστῆρας (— - - - - ν᾽ ἀνάγων" * 
1160 ὃ βροντάζων, * 
ὁ ἀστράπτων, * 
6 βρέχων, * 
ὃ ofe)iwy, * 
5 ζωογονῶν, * ὃ θεὸς τῶν αἰώνων. 
μέγας εἶ, κύριε θεέ, 
δέσποτα, τοῦ παντὸς ἀρχή. "ἢ 


LIBELLVS XIV 
















Contents 


All visible things have been made; there must therefore be a 
Maker of them. The Maker has not been made; he is prior a nd 
superior to all things made; and he can be seen in his works, 
δὲ 2, 3. 
The Maker is our Father. We may call him by three names,—_ 
God, Maker, and Father. § 4. : 

There are these two,—that which is made, and the Maker; and 
there is nothing beside. The two are correlative, and neither ca 1 
exist without the other. §§ 5, 6. 

All things are good when first made; but in course of time, evil 
grows on them, as rust forms on metal. God is not the author οἵ 
evil; and since evil results from the duration of the things made, 
he has subjected terrestrial things to change (i.e. made them 
mortal), and so provided that the evil shall be purged away. ὃ 7. 7 

It is foolish and impious to deny that all things are made by 
God. If God is not the maker of all things, it must be because 
there are things which he either disdains to make, or is unable to 
make. But God is good, and therefore cannot be either disdain al 
or incapable. §§ 8, 9. i 

God makes things of different kinds ; he makes immortal beings in 
heaven, and mortal beings on earth. There is life everywhere, and 


1 Ἐν g. (ἀπὸ τοῦ βυθοῦ). 

2 Possibly, 4. ὁ -- -- -- -- - - (e.g. ὁ τῆς ζωῆς γεννήτωρ) 
Ἷ 5 eds τῶν αἰώνων. Ὧν 

5 you παντὸς ἀρχίζω  νυονθὴν κιτιλ, Pap. 





LIBELLVS XIV 419 


all life is made by God. There are these two then,—God, and the 
world made by him,—and there is nothing beside them. ὃ το. 


Sources. God is spoken of as the Maker of the world both in 
the Zimaeus and in Genesis; and a similar conception occurs in 
native Egyptian documents also, The Platonic notion of God the 
Maker, derived from the Zimaeus, must have been known to the 
writer of Corp. XIV; whether any Jewish or Egyptian statement 
of the doctrine was also known to him, we cannot tell. But he 
aims at simplifying the teaching that has been handed down to him, 
and retaining only so much of it as he holds to be indispensable ; 
and accordingly, he omits what was said by Platonists about ὕλη 
(the raw material out of which things are made), and about the 
νοητὰ εἴδη (the patterns in the likeness of which things are made). 

We are told in ὃ τ that this 4e//us is a summary of doctrines 
more fully set forth in preceding discourses of Hermes to Tat. But 
it is at the same time a protest against the πολυλογία and ματαιολογία 
(§5) of certain teachers,—that is, against the doctrines of certain 
people who taught a more complicated theology, and recognized 
other entities besides God and the Kosmos. The writer's criticism 
would apply to some of the extant Hermetica, in which a Being 
intermediate between the supreme God and the Kosmos is spoken 
of. But doctrines such as he condemns were taught not only by 
Hermetists, but by other Platonists of the period also; and he 
may have had in mind the lectures or writings of some of these 
teachers. It is possible that some form of Christian theology, 
Catholic or Gnostic, was also known to him, and was included 
among the teachings which he contemptuously describes as ‘idle 
chattering’, In his defence of the position that all things are made 
by God, he seems, like the author of Cor. XI. ii, to be contending 
especially against some one who taught that τὰ ἀθάνατα alone have 
been made by the supreme God, and that τὰ θνητά are the work 
of another and inferior Demiurgus (see § 10). 


Date. It appears from ὃ 1 that. at the time when Corp. XIV was 
written, the διεξοδικοὺ λόγοι of Hermes to Tat were already in 
existence ; and as the διεξοδικοὶ λόγοι were probably later than the 
yevixol λόγοι, it may be inferred that this document is one of the 
later Hermetica. There is also some reason to think that the author 
knew Corp. XI. ii, which is probably one of the later documents. 
Moreover, the complications of Platonic theology increased as time 

Ee 2 














































420 CORPVS HERMETICVM 


went on; and the later we place the date, the more reason there 
would be for such a protest against them as we find in Corp, XI te 
This Zibel/us then can hardly have been written before the second 
century A.D., and is more likely to have been written in the third 
century than in the second. 


Title. The MSS. give two different headings, viz. “Eppot τοῦ 
τρισμεγίστου ᾿Ασκληπιῷ εὖ φρονεῖν, and Ἑρμοῦ πρὸς ᾿Ασκληπιόν, 
The former “is right; for this document is an epistle (ἐπιστεῖλαι, 
8 1), and not, like most of the Hermetica, a report of an oral dis- 
course or dialogue. Hermes, in accordance with his character as 
a religious teacher, substitutes εὖ φρονεῖν (‘I wish you health ὁ 
mind, or wisdom’) for the χαίρειν (‘I wish you joy ") or ἐρρῶσθαι. 
(‘I wish you health’) commonly employed in letter-writing. Cf, 
Plato Zp. 3 init.: Πλάτων Διονυσίῳ χαίρειν ἐπιστείλας ap ὀρθῶς dy 
τυγχάνοιμι τῆς βελτίστης προσρήσεως; ἢ μᾶλλον κατὰ τὴν ἐμὴν owe 
ἤθειαν γράφων εὖ πράττειν; Seneca Ep. 15 init. : ‘mos antiquis fuit, | 
usque ad meam servatus aetatem, primis epistulae verbis adicere “ si. 
vales, bene est; ego valeo”. Recte nos dicimus “ si philosopharis, 
bene est”. Valere autem hoc demum est: sine hoc aeger est animus,’ 
Synesius Zp. 138: ἔρρωσο καὶ φιλοσόφει. Synes. Zp. 139: καὶ ὡς 
πρὸς τοιοῦτόν (to such a man as you) μοι τῆς ἐπιστολῆς τὸ πρόσρημα, 
«πολλὰ φρονεῖν ", οὐ “ χαίρειν ", οὐδὲ “ εὖ πράττειν "τὸ μετριώτερον. 

Cyril, quoting from Corp. XIV (see § 6), says γράφει . - . Ἑρμῆς 
(ἐν τῷ ὃ) περὶ τῆς τοῦ παντὸς φύσεως. Cyril probably found this 
description of the contents written as a heading in his copy; and 
it may have been suggested by the words of § 1 init., τὴν Tov 
ὄντων ἠθέλησε φύσιν μαθεῖν. 

81. ἐπεὶ ὁ υἱός pou . . . ἐπιστήμονι τῆς φύσεως. The situation 
described is this. Asclepius is the elder of the two pupils of 
Hermes, and has already learnt much from him, But he has for 
some time been parted from his master. In his absence, Hermes 
has been instructing Tat ; and he wishes to confer a corresponding — 
benefit on Asclepius. But in teaching Tat, who was a beginner,” 
he found it necessary to give full and detailed explanations concern- 
ing every matter dealt with. It would be superfluous to repeat all 
this to Asclepius, who knew much that Tat did not know ; Hermes 
therefore considers it enough to send to Asclepius a short summary 
of his discourses to Tat. Asclepius will be able to fill in the 
outlines and supply the explanations for himself. 





LIBELLVS XIV: §1 421 


This implies that the author of Οὐχ. XIV had before him a series 
of discourses of Hermes to Tat, and wrote this document as an 
epitome of their contents, or rather, of those parts of their contents 
which he considered to be of primary importance (τὰ κυριώτατα 
κεφάλαια). And from the words in which he describes the discourses 
which he is summarizing (περὶ ἑνὸς ἑκάστου ἠναγκάσθην πλείονα εἰπεῖν 
x.7A.) it may be inferred that they were those entitled οἱ πρὸς Tar 
διεξοδικοὶ λόγοι. Compare Corp. X (Hermes to Tat), which is 
described in the opening words (addressed to Asclepius) as an 
epitome of οἱ πρὸς Tar γενικοὶ λόγοι. 

Apart from some slight alterations of the text, this introductory 
section presents no difficulty ; and I see no reason to doubt that it 
was written by the author of Corf. XIV. 

τὴν τῶν ὄντων.. .. φύσιν μαθεῖν, Cf. Corp, XI. (i) τ Ὁ, where Hermes 
asks Nous to instruct him περὶ τοῦ παντὸς καὶ τοῦ θεοῦ. Corp. I. 3: 
μαθεῖν θέλω τὰ ὄντα καὶ νοῆσαι τὴν τούτων φύσιν, καὶ γνῶναι τὸν 
θεόν. ‘Knowledge of nature’ (φυσική) is knowledge of the Kosmos 
(τὸ wav); and in both those passages, knowledge of this kind is 
spoken of as a thing distinct from knowledge of God, though 
connected with that higher knowledge and leading up to it. The 
same distinction is probably implied in XIV. 1. The ‘ knowledge 
of nature’ which Tat desired was knowledge of the Kosmos; and 
to get this knowledge is the first stage on the way to gnosis, 
Asclepius has already traversed this preliminary stage; there is 
therefore no need for Hermes to repeat to him the lessons in 
φυσική which he has given to Tat in the διεξοδικοὶ λόγοι ; the teacher 
is free to assume all this as known, and proceed at once to speak 
of God, the Maker of the Kosmos. Accordingly, we find that in 
this document the Kosmos is spoken of only under the collective 
term τὰ γινόμενα (or τὰ γεννητά), and is not described or explained 
in detail, as it is in some of the other Hermetica (e.g. Corp. XI. 
ii ἐμέ). 

ὡς νεωτέρῳ καὶ ἄρτι παρελθόντι ἐπὶ τὴν γνῶσιν.---(ὡς υἱὸς καὶ 
νεώτερος ἄρτι παρελθὼν ἐπὶ τὴν γνῶσιν MSS.) The youth of a pupil, 
and the fact that he is a beginner, are reasons for explaining 
things fully to him; but they are not reasons for his demanding 
to be taught without delay. These words must therefore be con- 
nected with what follows (περὶ ἑνὸς ἑκάστου ἠναγκάσθην πλείονα 
εἰπεῖν). But ἃ transcriber preferred to connect them with what 
precedes (ὑπερθέσθαι... οὐκ ἐπέτρεπεν), and consequently altered 





422 CORPVS HERMETICVM 

















the datives into nominatives. It was presumably the same pe som 
that inserted υἱός, which has no meaning except in connexion y 
οὐκ ἐπέτρεπεν; and even in that connexion, is hardly wanted after 
6 vids pov above. Its insertion was probably suggested by Copp. 
XIIL. 3 (μὴ φθόνει μοι, πάτερ' γνήσιος vids cir διάφρασόν μοι καλὴ; 
and if so, this sentence may have been altered by the compiler 
of the Corpus, in order to make the introductory section of Corg, 
XIV appear to refer to Corp. XIII, with which it originally had 
nothing to do. 

[puotixdrepoy αὐτὰ épyyvedoas|. This seems to mean ‘ expressing 
them in language which would be intelligible only to the initiated’, Ἢ 
i.e. presenting them in an obscure and esoteric form. But there 
is nothing esoteric in the language of this /e//us, which is rather 
distinguished from other Hermedica by its straightforward simplicity, 
In § 5, (if my explanation of that passage is right,) the writer declares 
himself opposed to hiding things away ἐν μυχῷ; and that phrase 
seems to mean much the same as μυστικῶς ἑρμηνεύειν. It is therefore 
probable that the words μυστικώτερον αὐτὰ ἑρμηνεύσας were not written 
by the author, but were inserted by some one else. The interpolator 
apparently failed to see that it is the omission of preliminary teach- 
ing about the Kosmos that makes the epistle suitable only for an 
advanced student, and therefore thought it necessary to allege 
another reason, namely, the obscurity of the language,—though as 
a matter of fact the language is not obscure. 

§ 2, [τὰ δὲ γεννητὰ οὐχ ὑφ᾽ ἑαυτοῦ ἀλλ᾽ Sh’ ἑτέρου γίνεται]. This 
appears to be a doublet of γίνεται δὲ ὑφ᾽ ἑτέρου τὰ γινόμενα. The 
writer cannot have intended both these clauses to stand in the same 
sentence ; and it seems best to cut out the first of them. In place © 
of ὑφ᾽ ἑαυτοῦ, we should have expected ὑφ᾽ ἑαυτῶν. 

πολλὰ δὲ [ J] τὰ φαινόμενα, καὶ πάντα [τὰ] διάφορα καὶ οὐχ ὅμοια. 
Cf. τὴν ποικιλίαν τῶν γινομένων in ὃ 7 ἐπί, The ‘differences’ with 
which the writer is chiefly concerned are the different degrees of — 
goodness or badness, and especially, the difference between τὰ θνητά 
(terrestrial creatures) and τὰ ἀθάνατα (the heavenly bodies). See ὃ 10. 

This parenthesis rather awkwardly interrupts the argument; perhaps — 
πολλὰ δὲ... οὐχ ὅμοια is wrongly placed. 

8 8. οὗτος δὲ ((els, kal)) (πάντων) κρείττων, καὶ [εἷς Kat] μόνος ὄντως 
σοφὸς τὰ πάντα. The point that there is but one Maker is emphasized 
in the parallel passage Corp. XI.ii.8b as emended : δεῖ οὖν τοιοῦτόν 
τινα εἶναι, καὶ τοῦτον πάντως ἕνα. The superiority of God in power — 


cy 





LIBELLVS XIV: δὲ 1-4 423 


and wisdom is regarded as following from the fact that he is * older’ 
(πρεσβύτερος) than all else. Cf. Synesius De insomniis 1, Migne 
Tom. 66 col. 1284: καὶ Ὁμήρῳ δὲ dpa διὰ τοῦτο τῆς τοῦ Διὸς γνώμης 
ἐξῆπται τὰ τῶν θεῶν πράγματα, ὅτι “ πρότερος γέγονεν, καὶ πλείονα 
older”, αὐτῷ δήπου τῷ πρεσβύτερος εἶναι. . .. καὶ ὅστις οὖν θεὸς by ἄρχειν 
ἀξιοῦται θεῶν, νοῦς ὦν, σοφίας περιουσίᾳ κρατεῖ. ; 

ἄρχει γὰρ Kal τοῦ πλήθους τῶν γινομένων τῷ μεγέθει, καὶ τῆς διαφορᾶς 
τῇ συνεχείᾳ τῆς ποιήσεως.--(ἄρχει γὰρ καὶ τῷ πλήθει καὶ τῷ μεγέθει 
καὶ τῇ διαφορᾷ τῶν γενομένων καὶ τῇ συνεχείᾳ τῆς ποιήσεως MSS.) It 
is clear that πλῆθος must be an attribute of τὰ γινόμενα, and μέγεθος 
an attribute of God. The words πλῆθος and διαφορά, used in con- 
τ nexion with τὰ γινόμενα, correspond to πολλὰ δὲ τὰ φαινόμενα καὶ 
πάντα διάφορα above. The ‘many things’ are subject to the one 
God, because he extends beyond them and encompasses them all 
by reason of his μέγεθος ; and their differences or variations are 
subject to him, because he is perpetually making things, that is, 
because his creative activity manifests itself afresh at every successive 
moment, and keeps pace with all variations in the things made. 
Perhaps it is implied, as in ὃ 7 iz., that when things change for the 
worse, God is always ready to replace them by other things, and so 
to ‘purge away the evil’. As to τῇ συνεχείᾳ τῆς ποιήσεως (and det 
οὖν ποιῶν below), cf. Corp. ΧΙ. ii. τ4 ἃ : ἀεί ἐστιν ἐν τῷ ἔργῳ. 

ἐπεὶϊτα] δὲ τὰ γεννητὰ ὁρώμενά ἐστι, κἀκεῖνος δὴ [αἸδρατός" διὰ τοῦτο 
γὰρ ποιεῖ, ἵνα [αἸδρατὸς ἧ. ἀεὶ οὖν ποιῶν, d(et) ὁρατός [τοιγαροῦν] ἐστιν. 
The Hermetist cannot have said that God makes the universe in 
order to render himself invisib/e (iva ἀόρατος ἢ); he must have said 
that God makes it in order to render himself visib/e, 1.6. in order to 
manifest himself in his works. It is therefore necessary to write iva 
ὁρατὸς ἦ; and from this it follows that ὁρατός, and not ἀόρατος, must be 
the right word in the other places also. Cf. Corp. ΧΙ. ii, 22a: 80 αὐτὸ 
τοῦτο πάντα πεποίηκεν; ἵνα διὰ πάντων αὐτὸν βλέπῃς. - - « 6 θεὸς (ὁρᾶται) 
ἐν τῷ ποιεῖν. It is to be presumed that some reader, puzzled by the 
paradoxical statement that God is dpards, altered the words with a 
view to making them express the orthodox doctrine of Platonism, that 
God is ἀόρατος, and so made nonsense of the passage. The word 
τοιγαροῦν, which is obviously out of place, is probably an alternative 
for the preceding οὖν. 

§ 4. οὕτως ἄξιόν ἐστι νοῆσαι, καὶ νοήσαντα θαυμάσαι, καὶ θαυμάσαντα 
ἑαυτὸν μακαρίσαι (ὧς) τὸν πατέρα γνωρίσαντα. Cf. Ev. sec. Hebracos, 
Clem. Alex. Sérom, 2. 9. 45: κἀν τῷ καθ᾽ Ἑβραίους εὐαγγελίῳ “ὃ 





424 CORPVS HERMETICVM 






























θαυμάσας βασιλεύσει" γέγρασται, © καὶ ὃ βασιλεύσας ἀνάπυεος ᾿ 
Clem, ἐφ. 5. 14. 97 : ob παύσεται ὁ ζητῶν ἕως ἂν εὕρῃ, εὑρὼν δὲ θαμβή. 
σεται, θαμβηθεὶς δὲ βασιλεύσει, βασιλεύσας δὲ ἐπαναπαύσεται. 
Jesu, Oxyrhynchus Pap. 654 (Klostermann, Apocrypha ΤΙ, p. 17): 
παυσάσθω ὃ ζη(τῶν τὸν πατέρα ἕως ἂν Swete) εὕρῃ" καὶ ὅταν εὕρῃ 
(θαμβηθήσεται, καὶ θαμ)βηθεὶς βασιλεύσει, κα(ὶ βασιλεύσας ἀναπαγήσετο i 
The better form of the saying is that which is given in the Logig: 
and the resemblance of this to the Hermetist’s words (at least if we 
accept the conjectural supplement τὸν πατέρα in the Zagion) seems 
too close to be accidental. But there is no need to assume direct 
borrowing on either side, The saying may have been widely known, 
and may have been ascribed by some to Jesus, by others to Hermes, 
and possibly to other teachers also. 

τί γὰρ γλυκύτερον πατρὸς γνησίου; Cf. Asc. Lat 4τ Ὁ ag 
emended : πατρικὴν εὔνοιαν καὶ στοργὴν καὶ φιλίαν, καὶ εἴ τις γλυκυτέρα, 
ἐνεργείᾳ ἐνεδείξω. In the Zimaeus, the word πατήρ is employed, as ἃ 
synonym for γεννητής, to describe the relation of God to the Kosmos 
which he has brought into being ; and when thus used, it did not 
carry with it any implication of fatherly affection towards men. But 
when the word had in this way come to be commonly accepted as a _ 
name of God, it was sometimes taken to connote also God’s kindly 
care of his human children.t_ This change in the meaning of the 
term ‘ Father’ as applied to God by Pagans is parallel to, but not’ 
necessarily dependent on, that by which the Jewish conception of 
God as creator, law-giver, and judge developed into the Christian® 
conception of ‘ our Father who is in heaven’. 

§ 5. τῆς πολυλογίας te καὶ ματαιολογίας ἀπαλλαγέντας χρὴ νοεῖν δύο, 
ταῦτα, τὸ γινόμενον καὶ τὸν ποιοῦντα μέσον γὰρ τούτων οὐδέν. The 

1 Instances of this occur in Epictetus ; e. g. Diss, 1, 6. 40: ὅ γεθεός,... ὃ ἣν ἀγαθοῦ, 
βασιλέως καὶ ταῖς ἀληθείαις πατρός, ἀκώλυτον τοῦτο ἔδωκεν κιτιλ. Ib. 1. . 77 τὸ δὲ 
τὸν θεὸν ποιητὴν ἴμεν καὶ πατέρα καὶ κηδεμόνα κιτιλ. 70. 3. 24. 15: aa τ a 
ἩρακλῆΞ) ὅτι οὐδείς ἐστιν ἄνθρωπος ὀρφανός, ἀλλὰ πάντων ἀεὶ καὶ sk ai ἢ 
ἐστιν ὁ κηδόμενος. οὐ γὰρ μέχρι λόγου ἠκηκόει ὅτι πατήρ ἐστιν ὁ Ζεὺς weg ον 
ra γε καὶ αὑτοῦ πατέρα ero αὐτὸν καὶ ἐκάλει, καὶ πρὸς ἐκεῖνον ἀφορῶν bao, 

πράαττεν, 

5. But in the Old Testament also, God is sometimes described as a loving pee q 
e.g. Leaiah 53. 16: ‘thon, O Lord, art our father; our redeemer from ever] 
isthyname. Jeremiah 31. 9: ΕἼ will lead them - ; for Iam a father to Israel, 
and Ephraim is my first-born.’ Ps, 103.13: ἡ like as a father pitieth his children, 
so the Lord pitieth them that fear him.’ ᾿ 

Speaking of the early Christians, Harnack (/is¢. of Dogma, Eng. tr. 1894, vol. i i, 
p. 180) says that ‘ God is named the Father’ by them ‘(1) in relation to the Son...; 
(2) as Father of the world? (as in the 7#maeus); ‘(3) as the merciful one who has 
proved his goodness, declared his will, and called Christians to be his sons,’ It is’ 


the third of these three senses that corresponds to the use of the word πατήρ in 
Corp, XIV. 4 and Asel. Lat, 41 Ὁ. 








LIBELLVS XIV: δὲ 4-6 455 


writer of Corp. XIV aims at simplifying theology by rejecting all 
superfluities. He recognizes only God and the Kosmos, and refuses 
to admit the existence of any intermediate entity. But what are the 
particular theories which he has in mind, and against which this 
polemic is directed? He would condemn, as ‘idle chattering ’, 
doctrines which are taught in several of the other Hermetica; e. g. 
he would reject the αἰών of Corp. XI.i; the réros-vois of Corp. 11; 
and the hypostatized λόγος, the ‘ second vois’, and the Archanthropos 
of Corp. I. But were those documents, or any of them, known to 
him? As he closely follows some parts of XI. ii, it is probable that 
he had read XI. i also, and was thinking, inéer a/ia, of the hyposta- 
tized αἰών of XI. i, The ‘second God’ of Numenius, and Plotinus’ 
triad (ἐν---ἀγαθόν, νοῦς, and ψυχή), would fall under the same con- 
demnation. He would also reject, supposing that he had heard of 
them, the λόγος and δυνάμεις of Philo, the Christ of Paul and the 
fourth Gospel, and still more decidedly, the complicated systems of 
αἰῶνες or δυνάμεις constructed by Valentinus and other Christian 
* Gnostics. But there is nothing to show whether it was some one 
or more of these doctrines, or others of like character, that he was 
specially opposing. 

μηδὲν ἐν ἀπορίᾳ ((ἣ ἐν puxd)) τιθέμενος, As to ἐν ἀπορίᾳ, cf. XI. ii. 
16 Ὁ: μὴ εἰς ἀπορίαν τὸν λόγον περιστήσωμεν᾽ οὐδὲν γὰρ ἄπορον περὶ τοῦ 
θεοῦ νοουμένοις, The words ἢ τῶν ἐν μυχῷ are clearly out of place 
where they stand in the MSS., and must in any case be cut out 
there ; and their presence can be best accounted for by assuming 
_ that ἢ ἐν μυχῷ was accidentally shifted from the place where I have 
inserted it, and τῶν was afterwards added. The phrase ἐν μυχῷ 
τίθεσθαι τι may be taken to mean ‘to hide a thing away in a dark 
comer’, and so ‘to make a mystery of it’. The writer objects to all 
obscure and esoteric doctrines. 

ἑκάτερον (~pos MSS.) γὰρ αὐτῶν αὐτὸ τοῦτό ἐστιν, ‘Each of them 
is just this and nothing else’; that is, the essence of the Maker 
consists in his making things, and the essence of the things made 
consists in their being made. ‘The phrase is obscure in itself, but is 
explained by what follows (ὃ ποιῶν ἄλλο οὐδέν ἐστιν ἢ τὸ ποιοῦν μόνον 
KyT.A,)s 

οὐκ ἔστι τὸ ἕτερον τοῦ ἑτέρου χωρισθῆναι. Cf. Corp. XI. ii. 12 b: 
ἂν ἐκείνων καταργηθῇ, ὁ θεὸς... οὐκέτι ἐστὶ θεός. 70. τ4 8: εἰ γὰρ 
χωρισθείη αὐτοῦ, πάντα μὲν συμπεσεῖσθαι, πάντα δὲ τεθνήξεσθαι ἀνάγκη. 

ὃ 6. [στερήσει τοῦ érépou.] This is a doublet of τοῦ ἑτέρου ἄνευ. 











426 CORPVS HERMETICVM 


































§ 7. ph διὰ τὴν ποικιλίαν τῶν γινομένων φυλάξῃ. The “ variety " of 
the things made means the fact that they are not all alike good, 
are partly good and partly bad. Cf. Ascd. Zaz. Il. 15: ‘hoc est 
totum qualitatis (diversae, prout natura est) materiae.’ pi 
means ‘do not be on your guard (against the doctrine that all things 
are made by God)’, i.e. do not hesitate to accept it. 

φοβούμενος μὴ ταπεινότητα Kal ἀδοξίαν τῷ θεῷ περιάψῃς. It is im, 
plied that there are people who consider it beneath the dignity of 
God to make things of lower grade. According to the view against 
which the writer is contending, God may perhaps be the maker ¢ of 
celestial things (τὰ ἀθάνατα), but cannot be the maker of terres ial 
things (τὰ θνητά), because all terrestrial things are more or less κακ 
and αἰσχρά. 

μία γάρ ἐστιν αὐτῷ δόξα, τὸ ποιεῖν τὰ πάντα, This use of the word 
δόξα is rather Jewish than Hellenic. 

τοῦτό ἐστι τοῦ θεοῦ ὥσπερ οὐσία (σῶμα MSS.), ἡ ποίησις. It would 
be possible to say that she world which God has made is God's bod: 
though I do not think that any such phrase occurs in the extant 
Hermetica. But it is hardly possible to say that the act of making 
things | is God’s body. See Corp. IV. 1 Ὁ, where the MSS. give τοῦ 
γάρ ἐστι τὸ σῶμα ἐκείνου. 

ὥσπερ ὁ ἰὸς τῷ χαλκῷ. Cf. Plotinus 4. 3.7: οὐ γὰρ δὴ ἔξω mov 
δραμοῦσα ἡ ψυχὴ σωφροσύνην καθορᾷ καὶ δικαιοσύνην, ἀλλ᾽ αὐτὴ 
αὑτῇ, ἐν τῇ κατανοήσει ἑαυτῆς καὶ τοῦ ὃ πρότερον ἦν, ὥσπερ ἀγάλματα ev 
αὑτῇ ἱδρυμένα ὁρῶσα, οἷον ὑπὸ χρόνου ἰοῦ πεπληρωμένα καθαρὰ. ποιήσ 
μένη. 

ἡ δὲ τῆς γενέσεως διαμονὴ καθάπερ ἐξανθεῖν ποιεῖ, Both here andin 
the following sentence, τῆς γενέσεως means τῶν γενητῶν. The subj 
of ἐξανθεῖν is τὴν κακίαν, Possibly αὐτὴν (sc. τὴν κακίαν) may ha 
fallen out after ἐξανθεῖν. The διαμονή (or ἐπιδιαμονή) of terrest 
things is the fact that each of them, when once made, continues 
exist (for a finite time). In this sense διαμονή is contrasted with 
ἀθανασία in Corp, XI. i. 2. Everything made by God is good wh 
first made ; but in course of time, evil ‘breaks out on it’, like rust 
on metal, or an eruption on the skin. Compare the description of 
the gradual depravation of the incarnated soul in Corp. X. 15 b. 

It is not clear how this attempt to explain the origin of evil is O 
be reconciled with the writer’s view that God ‘is always making 
things’, which would seem to imply that God does not make a thin n 1g 
once for all and then leave it to itself, but that it is by his action that 





LIBELLVS XIV: δὲ 7-10 427 


the thing is maintained in existence from moment to moment, and 
consequently, that its condition from first to last must be his work. 
Who, if not God, makes the ‘rust’? The Platonic answer to that 
question would be ‘it comes from the ἀταξία which is inherent in 
ὕλη, and which God cannot wholly overcome’ (see Asc/. Lat. 11); 
but the writer of Corp. XIV says nothing about ὕλη. 

διὰ τοῦτο ἐποίησε τὴν μεταβολὴν ὁ θεός, ὥσπερ ἀνακάθαρσιν τῆς 
γενέσεως. Since the evil which ‘breaks out on’ things comes by 
lapse of time, and increases with lapse of time, evil can be kept 
within bounds only by limiting the time during which each several 
thing (in the sublunar world) continues to exist. For this reason 
God has instituted μεταβολή ; that is, he has established the law by 
which every terrestrial organism sooner or later undergoes dissolution, 
and is replaced by another. The new organism starts on its career 
free from the rust of evil by which its predecessor was corrupted. 
Wicked old men die, and innocent children are born. In this way 

the total amount of evil is prevented from increasing.' 
τς 8 8. τῷ μὲν αὐτῷ ζωγράφῳ ἔξεστι καὶ οὐρανὸν ποιῆσαι καὶ Ὑῆν... »ν ὦ 
τῷ δὲ θεῷ οὐ δυνατὸν πάντα ποιεῖν; This passage was evidently 
suggested by Pl. Res, το. 596 B,C: ἀλλ᾽ ὅρα δὴ καὶ τόνδε τίνα καλεῖς 
τὸν δημιουργόν, .. . ὃς πάντα rot... 6 αὐτὸς γὰρ οὗτος χειρο- 
τέχνης οὐ μόνον πάντα οἷός τε σκεύη ποιῆσαι, ἀλλὰ καὶ τὰ ἐκ τῆς 
γῆς φυόμενα ἅπαντα ποιεῖ, καὶ ζῷα πάντα ἐργάζεται, τά τε ἄλλα καὶ 
ἑαυτόν, καὶ πρὸς τούτοις γῆν καὶ οὐρανὺν καὶ θεοὺς καὶ πάντα τὰ ἐν 
οὐρανῷ καὶ τὰ [ἐν Αἰδου] ὑπὸ γῆς ἅπαντα ἐργάζεται. . . . τῶν τοιούτων γάρ, 
᾿ οἶμαι, δημιουργῶν καὶ 6 ζωγράφος ἐστίν. But the Hermetist, while 
imitating Plato’s words, uses the instance of the painter for a different 
purpose. As employed in Corp, XIV, it takes the place of the 
comparison in Corp. XI. ii. 12a: σοῦ τοσαῦτα ποιοῦντος" καὶ γὰρ 
βλέπεις καὶ λαλεῖς κιτιλ, Below, in ὃ το, the instance of a man 
sowing different seeds is used to illustrate the same point. 

τὸν γὰρ θεὸν φάσκοντες εὐλογεῖν. . . τὰ μέγιστα εἰς αὐτὸν ἀσεβοῦσι, 
Cf. Corp. IX. 9: ὑπὸ γὰρ δεισιδαιμονίας βλασφημοῦσι. 

ὃ 10, ἴδε γεωργὸν σπέρμα καταβάλλοντα εἰς γῆν, ὅπου μὲν πυρόν, 
ὅπου δὲ κριθήν, ὅπου δὲ ἄλλο τι τῶν σπερμάτων. . . . οὕτω καὶ ὁ 
θεὸς ἐν μὲν οὐρανῷ ἀθανασίαν σπείρει, ἐν δὲ γῇ μεταβολήν. Cf Paul, 


1 Cf. Tennyson: 
‘The old order changeth, yielding place to new, 
And God fulfils Himself in many ways, 
Lest one good custom should corrupt the world’ 


428 CORPVS HERMETICVM 



















1 Cor. 15.37: ὃ σπείρεις, οὐ τὸ σῶμα τὸ γενησόμενον σπείρεις, ἀλλὰ 
γυμνὸν κόκκον εἰ τύχοι͵ σίτου ἤ τινος τῶν λοιπῶν ὃ δὲ θεὸς δίδωσι 
ννον͵ ἑκάστῳ τῶν σπερμάτων ἴδιον σώμα. . - - καὶ σώματα ἐπου 
καὶ σώματα ἐπίγεια. ‘The two passages deal with different subje 
(Paul is speaking of the resurrection of the dead, and the Hermetist, 
of the making of the Kosmos;) yet there is a real resembla nee 
between them; in both alike, we are told of a ‘sowing’ from which 
spring bodies of different kinds, and in particular, both heavenly 
(i.e. immortal) and earthly (i.e. mortal) bodies. It is possible 
therefore that the language used by the two writers is derived in part 
from a common source. 

In Corp. IX. 6, the Kosmos is described as growing successive 
crops of living creatures ὥσπερ ἀγαθὸς [ζωῆς] γεωργός. In a magi 
Papyrus (Pap. mag. Berl. i. 26), the Agathos Daimon is invoke 
with the words ἧκέ μοι, ἀγαθὲ γεωργέ. 

ἐν μὲν οὐρανῷ ἀθανασίαν σπείρει, ἐν δὲ γῇ μεταβολήν. Cf. Corp. X 
i. 5: ἀθανασίας καὶ μεταβολῆς ποιητή. ΧΙ. ii, r2a: τί μέγα τῷ 
[17 καὶ ἀθανασίαν καὶ μεταβολὴν ποιεῖν ; Corp. XIL. ii. 22 : ὑπὸ τίνος 
ἀθανατίζεται τὰ ἀθάνατα ; ὑπὸ τίνος μεταβάλλεται τὰ μεταβλητά; 

[ταῦτα δὲ οὐ πολλά ἐστιν, ἀλλ᾽ ὀλίγα καὶ εὐαρίθμητα᾽ τὰ γὰρ πάντα 
τέσσαρα) The four things appear to be ἀθανασία, μεταβολή, ζω ἡ, 
and κίνησι. But these are not four distinct things; for ἀθανασία 
and μεταβολή are different modes of ζωή, and κίνησις is merely the 
manifestation of ζωή. Nor is there any apparent motive for num 
ing them. And in what relation do these four things stand to th 
two, (viz. ‘ the Maker, and what is made ’,) in which, as we were told 
before, all that exists is comprised, and to which the Hermetist 
recurs in the following words (6 θεὸς καὶ ἡ yéveows)? It seems most 
likely then that the sentence ταῦτα... τέσσαρα is a note inserted 
by some reader. 

















LIBELLVS XVI 


Contents 


Preface, §§ 1, 2. In this treatise all the Hermetic teachings are 
summed up. The doctrine set forth in it is at variance with 
opinions of the many. , 

The meaning of the Hermetic writings is clear to those who read 
them in the right spirit ; but to others, these writings appear to be 


LIBELLVS XVI 429 

































obscure. Their apparent obscurity is increased, and their force 
impaired, when they are translated into Greek. 

God and the universe, § 3. God is all things; but at the 
same time, God is one; for all things go to make up a single 
whole. 

God, Sun, light, 8§ 4-10a and 12. The three grosser elements, 
viz. earth, water, and air, come from below, and are supplied by 
the Earth ; but light, the life-giving element, comes from above, and 
is supplied by the Sun. §§ 4, 5. 

The light of the Sun is the ‘ receptacle’ (or vehicle) of incorporeal 
substance,—if there is such a substance. But whence that in- 
corporeal substance comes, we know not. God is hidden from us; 
but the Sun we see with our eyes. He is stationed in the midst of 
the universe, and floods with his life-giving light both heaven above 
and earth below. He controls the movement of the heavens, as 
a charioteer controls his team, By the light which he sends forth 
upward, he maintains the everlasting life of the heavenly bodies ; 
by the light which he sends downward, he maintains life in a perpetual 
succession of terrestrial organisms. §§ 6-10 8.ἷ 

The Sun then supplies (the light) by which the life of all things 
is maintained; (and the Earth) supplies the matter of which 
terrestrial organisms are composed, and receives (this matter) back 
into herself at their dissolution, § 12. 

God, Sun, Planets, Daemons, δὲ 13-16. (The planet-gods are 
under the command of the Sun; and) each of the planet-gods has 
-under his command a separate corps of daemons. The daemons 
are partly beneficent, and partly maleficent. They have dominion 
over all things upon earth; and by their action are brought about 
the troubles which beset both communities and individual men. 
Daemons are seated in all parts of our bodies. At each man’s 
birth, the particular corps of daemons which is under the orders of 
the planet ruling at that moment takes possession of him. If a man 
is illuminated by the light of God, the daemons have no power 
over him. But such men are few; and all others are driven by the 
passions which the daemons set working in them by means of the 
bodily organs. 

1 Interpolated passage on daemons, §§ 10b, 11. There are numerous bands of 
daemons, They hold a position intermediate between immortals and mortals, 
Executing the commands of the gods, they superintend the affairs of men, and 


punish impiety by plagues inflicted on human communities. Impiety alone is 
punished by the gods; all other sins are pardoned. 














































430 CORPVS HERMETICVM 


Conclusion, (God, Sun, Spheres, Daemons,) 8§ 17-19. Life-giving 
energy issues from God, and is transmitted from him, through th 
intelligible Kosmos, to the Sun, The eight spheres (viz. the sph 
of fixed stars, the five spheres of the planet-stars, the moon-sphe 
and the atmosphere) are dependent on the Sun; the daemons are 
dependent on the eight spheres (or in other words, are subject to 
the gods who preside over the eight spheres); and men are 
dependent on the daemons. Thus all things are dependent on 
§§ 17-18. 

All things are made by God, and are parts of God. God then is. 
all things; and in making things, he makes himself. And he will 
never cease from making things. ὃ το. 

Sources. In his conception of the supreme and supracosmic God, 
the writer of Corp. XVI agrees with the Platonists, He has adopted 
the Platonic terms re οὐσία and νοητὸς κόσμος ; ; but he does t 


things corporeal. (See ὃ 6, εἰ δέ τις ἔστι καὶ νοητὴ οὐσία, and 
στοχασμῷ βιαζομένων.) In ὃ 15 (τὰ δύο (ἄλογα) μέρη τῆς ψυχῆς) the 
Platonic psychology is presupposed; and in ὃ 16 (ἔρως) there is a 
reference to Pl. Phaedrus 238 8B, The theory of daemons expounded 
in §§ 13-16 is partly based on the daemonology of the Platonists, 
but presents some peculiar features. I do not know from what 
source the writer got his notion of an army of daemons marshalled | 
in battalions of which the several planets are the commanders, 
(Was any such notion current among the Mithraists ?) . 

The theory of the elements in §§ 4-10a shows traces of Stoic 
influence ; but the writer has discarded πῦρ, the term used by the 
Stoics to denote the celestial and vitalizing element, and speaks of 
φῶς instead, 

The view that the planets preside over men’s births and determine 
their characters and actions (§ 15) is connected with the astrological 
beliefs commonly accepted in the time of the Roman empire. The 
use of the term εἱμαρμένη (§ 16 fix.) to denote the government of 
human life by the planets is of Stoic origin. The statement (δ 15 ἢ) 
that the ‘illuminated’ man is free from the dominion of ‘ gods and 
daemons’ (i.e. of the planets and their emissaries) is a Platonic 
modification of the Stoic doctrine of Heimarmene. 

Both in §§ 4-10 a and 12, and in §§ 13-16, the Sun is supreme 
within the Kosmos, and subordinate only to the supracosmic God. 





LIBELLVS XVI 431 


This exaltation of the Sun-god is in accordance with a tendency 
which began before the Christian era, and prevailed more and more 
as time went on. A large part of the Egyptian religion, from the 
earliest times, consisted of Sun-worship; and under the later 
dynasties, almost all the more important gods of Egypt were 
identified with the Sun-god, or regarded as aspects of the Sun. 
In the religions of Syria also, Sun-worship was prominent. Among 
the Greeks, any Platonist who was disposed to Sun-worship would 
_ find warrant for it in Pl. ep. 6. 508, where the Sun is spoken of 
as the offspring and visible image of τὸ ἀγαθόν. The Stoic Cleanthes 
(about 270 8, 0.) placed the hegemonikon of the universe in the Sun 
(Arius Didymus, Diels Doxogr. p. 465), and not, as most of the 
Stoics, in the highest sphere of heaven. The Neo-Pythagoreans, 
from the Christian era onwards, were Sun-worshippers (see e.g. 
Philostratus Vita Apollon. passim), and identified Apollo, the god 
to whom Pythagoras was said to have been specially devoted, with 
the Sun, Plutarch (about a.D. 100), in his exposition of the 
“Delphic religion (De Zi apud Delph. 21, 393 Ὁ), speaks of people 
who identify Apollo with the Sun, but himself prefers to identify 
him with the supracosmic deity of whom the Sun is the visible 
image. In the Mithraic cult, which spread to all parts of the Roman 
empire in the course of the second century a. D., the Sun-god was 
regarded sometimes as identical with Mithras, and sometimes as 
distinct from him,' but next to him in rank. The emperor Elaga- 
balus (A.D, 218-222) was a devotee of the Syrian Sun-god; and 
from his time onward, the Syrian form of Sun-worship was firmly 
established in the West. By the end of the third century, So/ 
invictus had become the chief God of the Roman empire. Thus 

1 Cumont, Les Adysiéres de Mithra, 1902, p. 102, In one of the documents out 
of which the Mithraic Apathanatismos or ‘ Mithrasliturgie’ (Pap, mag. Par. i. 
475-834) is made up, Helios is identified with Mithras, while in another of them 
he is distinguished from Mithras, and regarded as a mediator between Mithras and 
men. See Appendix on Rebirth. 

3 Cf. Firmicus Maternus (¢. A.D. 337), Math. 1. 10. 14: ‘Sol optime maxime, 
qui mediam caeli possides partem, mens mundi atque temperies, dux omnium atque 
princeps, qui ceterarnm stellarum ignes flammifera luminis tui moderatione per- 
petuas.’ 70. lib. 5 praef. 5 : ‘Sol optime maxime, qui omnia [super omnial per dies 
singulos maiestatis tuae moderatione conponis, per quem cunctis animantibus 
inmortalis anima divina dispositione dividitur, qui solus ianuas aperis sedis 
supernae, ad cuius arbitrium fatorum ordo disponitur.’ See also Julian (c¢. A.D. 360) 


Or, 4, Ad regem solem, passim: e.g. 137 C: 6 περὶ γῆν τόπος ἐν τῷ γίνεσθαι τὸ 
εἶναι ἔχει. τίς οὖν ἐστιν ὁ τὴν ἀιδιότητα δωρούμενος αὐτῷ ; dp’ οὐχ ὁ ταῦτα μέτροις 


ὑρισμένοις συνέχων ; ἄπειρον μὲν γὰρ εἶναι φύσιν σώματος οὐχ οἷόν τ᾽ ἣν. ... τὴν 
δὴ Τρίαῦτην φύσιν ὁ θεὸς ὅδε (τε. ὃ ἥλιος) μέτρῳ κινούμενος προσιὼν μὲν ὀρθοῖ καὶ 


ἐγείρει, πόρρω δὲ ἀπιὼν ἐλαττοῖ καὶ φθείρει, μᾶλλον δὲ αὐτὸς ἀεὶ ζωποιεῖ, κινῶν καὶ 





432 CORPVS HERMETICVM 





























gained more and more general acceptance among the Pagans of ὃ 
Roman empire in each successive generation, down to the final de 
of Paganism by Christianity. 


Date. The preface (§§ τ, 2) implies that a large body of Hermetic 
writings, including a collection of ‘ Discourses of Hermes to Ascle- 
pius’, was already in existence. Corp. XVI must therefore be one 
of the later Hermetica ; and it was most likely written in the third 
century A.D. 


The Hermippus. 


The writer of the dialogue entitled Hermippus (Anonymi Christiant 
Hermippus, de astrologia dialogus, ed. Kroll and Viereck, Teubner 
1895) made use of Corp. XVI. I append the passages in which he 
has borrowed from it. Words and phrases taken from Corp. X 
are here printed in distinct type. Hermippus 1. 4. 24: πρὸς de oH 
péow! τῶν τοιούτων σφαιρῶν, ὃ δὴ καρδίᾳ τὸ ἀνάλογον ἂν ἔχειν δόξειεν, 
ὅτι πλεῖστον τῆς αὐτοῦ δυνάμεως συνεμφορήσας συνέθετο," φῶς ἀνάψο ᾿ 
αἰσθητόν, καὶ Lwoydvor® ἐμβαλὼν δύναμιν. (70. τ. 13. 78: ὃ ἥλιος Ἷ 
τὸ ἐν αὐτῷ θερμὸν τὴν μέσην χώραν ἐν ἅπασιν ἔσχηκεν.) 

τ. 10. 63: τὰ ἐπὶ γῆς ἠρτῆσθαι μὲν πρῶτον τῆς φύσεως, αὐτὴν δὲ τῶν 
ἀστέρων, τούτους δὲ τοῦ δημιουργικοῦ νοῦ καὶ πρώτου." 

1. 16, 112-122 : ἐπανιτέον δέ, καὶ τὴν τοῦ ἡλίου ἐπεξεργαστέον εἰς τὰ 
γεννητὰ δύναμιν, ἐπειδὴ καὶ τὸ πᾶν σχεδὸν κῦρος οὗτος ἀνέξωσται. . 
οὗτος γὰρ (sc. ὁ ἥλιος) ἔχει μὲν ἐν ἑαυτῷ τὴν τῶν ὅλων οὐσίαν .. ." 
ἡγεμὼν δ᾽ ἐστὶ τοῦ σύμπαντος κόσμου, καὶ πάντων γεννητικός' γεννῶν δὲ 


ὀχετεύων αὐτῇ τὴν ζωήν" ἡ δὲ ἀπόλειψις αὐτοῦ καὶ ἡ πρὸς θάτερα μετάστασις αἰτία 
ίνεται φθορᾶς τοῖς φθίνουσιν. Ammianus Marcellinus (¢. A.D. 480), 21. 1. 111 
“sol, ... ut aiunt physici, mens mundi, nostras mentes ex sese velut scintillas 
diffunditans.’? Macrobins (6. A.D. 400), Saf. 1. 19. 9: ‘sol mundi mens est, 
Proclus (¢, A.D. 450), Hymn I, to Helios (Abel Orphica pp. 276-278). 
Remnants of sun-worship persisted among Christians at least as late as the fifth 
century. Ensebius of Alexandria (filth century): πολλοὺς γὰρ οἶδα τοὺς προσκυ- 
γοῦντας καὶ εὐχομένους εἰς τὸν ἥλιον" ἤδη γὰρ ἀνατείλαντος τοῦ ἡλίου προσεύχονται 
καὶ λέγουσιν © ἐλέησον ἡμᾶς". καὶ od μόνον ἡλιογνῶσται καὶ αἱρετικοὶ τοῦτο ποιοῦσιν, 
ἀλλὰ καὶ Χριστιανοί, καὶ ἀφέντες τὴν πίστιν τοῖς αἱρετικοῖς συναναμίγνυνται. (Quoted 
by Jung, Psychology of the Unconscious, Eng. tr., 1919, p. 114: he does not give 
the reference.) The author of Corp. XVI might be called a ἡλιογνώστης. : 
1 Se. the Sun. Cf. Corg. XVI. 7 (μέσος yap ἵδρυται) and 17 (wept δὲ τὸν ἥλιον al 
ὀκτώ εἶσι σφαῖραι). { 
2 Sc. the Creator. 
® Cf Corp. XVI. 10a: ἡ ζωογονία αὐτοῦ. 
* Cf. Corp, XVI. 17. The function here assigned to φύσις corresponds to th 
of the ‘daemons’ in Corp. XVI. 





LIBELLVS XVI 433 


αὖθις καὶ διαλύει καὶ πρὸς τὸν σπερματικὸν λόγον ἀναλαμβάνει, διδοὺς 
μὲν τῇ ὕλῃ οὐσίαν σχεδὸν καὶ ζωήν, ἀνταπολαμβάνων δὲ τὴν ἄνωθεν 
ὕπαρξιν.' μέσος γὰρ ἵδρυται, τὰ ἄκρα συνδέων, καὶ καθάπερ ἡνίοχος 
ἀγαθὸς τὸ τοῦ κόσμου ἅρμα ἀσφαλῶς ἐλαύνων᾽ εἰσὶ δὲ αἱ ἡνίαι ζωὴ καὶ 
ψυχὴ καὶ πνεῦμα καὶ γένεσις " κατὰ τὴν ἑκάστου φύσιν τῶν γεννητῶν, καὶ 
τῷ μὲν καταλαμβανομένῳ καὶ περιλάμποντι τὸ πᾶν ὕδατος καὶ γῆς καὶ 
ἀέρος κύτος ζωογονεῖ, γένεσιν δὲ ἀνακινεῖ καὶ μεταβολὴν τῷ παντί 8 
ἡγεμών τε καὶ τροφὸς παντὸς γένους ἐστί. καὶ ὥσπερ ὁ νοητὸς κόσμος, 
τὸν αἰσθητὸν περιέχων, πληροῖ αὐτὸν ὀγκῶν ταῖς ποικίλαις καὶ παντο- 
μόρφοις ἰδέαις, ὡς δὲ καὶ ὁ ἥλιος ἐν τῷ κόσμῳ πάντα περιέχων ὀγκοῖ 
πάντων τὰς γενέσεις καὶ ἰσχυροποιεῖ, καμόντων τε καὶ ῥυέντων ἀποδέχεται 
τὰς συστάσεις." καὶ Xopot τινων θειοτέρων οἶμαι δυνάμεων ἑστῶτες περὶ 
αὐτὸν ἐφορῶσι τὰ τῶν ἀνθρώπων, στρατιᾷ τινι ἐοικότες" © ἕτεροι δ᾽ αὖ ὑπὸ 
τὰς τῶν ἀστέρων πλινθίδας τεταγμένοι, ἑκάστῳ τούτων ἰσάριθμοι, ὅπηρε- 
τοῦσι τὰ πρόσφορα. καὶ μετὰ τούτους ἑτέρα τις δύναμις δευτέρα καὶ 
ὑφειμένη καὶ οἷον τὴν φύσιν μικτή. ὑποκάτω δὲ τούτων ἐξέπεσεν ὁ τῶν 
ἐναερίων πνευμάτων ἑσμός" πολλοὶ δὲ οὗτοι καὶ παντοδαποὶ καὶ ποικίλοι, 
οἱ δὴ δαίμονες κέκληνται, φύσιν ἔχοντες τὴν ἐνέργειαν. οὗτοι, τὴν ξηρὰν 
καὶ ὑγρὰν καὶ ἐναέριον λήξιν διαλαχόντες, κυκῶσιν αὐτὴν καὶ ταράττουσιν" 
ἑκάστου τε τῶν ἐπὶ γῆς πραγμάτων ἄρχειν ἰσχυριζόμενοι, καὶ ἄγειν of 
βούλοιντο, ποικίλους θορύβους καὶ ταραχὰς ἔν τε πόλεσι καὶ ἔθνεσιν ὅλοις 
καὶ ἰδίᾳ ἑκάστῳ τῶν ἀνθρώπων ἐργάζονται." ... τὸ μέντοι τοῦ Δημοκρίτου 
(οὐ) καλῶς ἂν ἔχοι παραλιπεῖν, ὃς εἴδωλα αὐτοὺς (sc. τοὺς δαίμονας) 
> ΄ , > Η , ΄ 78 ‘ ᾽ . 
ὀνομάζων μεστόν τε εἶναι τὸν ἀέρα τούτων φησί," καὶ (... .) νεύροις καὶ 
1 Cf. Corp, XVI. 4: ἀνταπολαμβάνει δὲ (ἡ γῆ) τὴν ἄνωθεν ὕπαρξιν, 
. * Ch. Corp. XVI. γ. In Hermippus, καὶ ἀθανασία is omitted before καὶ γένεσις. 

5. Cf, Corp. XVL. 8. 

4 Cf. Corp. XVI. 12, 

5 Cf. Cor. XVI. 10b, The writer of the Hermippus rightly makes § 12 a 
continuation of §§ 4-10a; and he places the contents of the first daemon-passage 
(§§ 1ob, 11) after § 12, so as to bring them into connexion with those of the 
second daemon-passage (§§ 13-16). It is possible that in his copy of Corp, XVI 
the sections stood in the order 4-10a, 12, 10 b-11, 13ff.; but if he had them 
before him in the order of our MSS., he found it necessary to change the order in 
writing his summary of their contents. Ie contrives to combine §§ 10 b<11 with 
§§ 13-16 by assuming that the former passage has to do with spirits of a different 
kind from those spoken of in the latter, 

The words τὴν φύσιν μικτή correspond to ἀγαθοὶ καὶ κακοὶ ὄντες τὰς φύσεις and 
εἰσὶ δέ τινες αὐτῶν κεκραμένοι ἐξ ἀγαθοῦ καὶ κακοῦ in Corp. XVI. 13; the writer of 
the Hermippus distinguishes these ‘ partly good and partly bad’ beings from the 
‘swarm of atmospheric spirits’, whom he regards as wholly bad. Being a 
Christian, he is accustomed to use the word δαίμονες in the sense of ‘ devils’, and 
consequently applies this word to the latter class alone. 

δ Cf. Corp. XVI. 13. 

7 Cf Corp. XVI. 14. 


δ Cf. Cic. Nat. εἶδον. 1. 12. 29: ‘Democrilus, qui tum imagines (i.e. εἴδωλα) 
earumque circuitus in deorum numero refert’ &c. 70. 43. 120: ‘Tum enim censet 


280602 Ff 


















































434 CORPVS HERMETICVM 


μυελοῖς ἐγκαθημένους ἀνεγείρειν καὶ ἀναπλάττειν τὰς ψυχὰς ἡμῶν ΤῊ 
αὑτούς, διά τε φλεβῶν καὶ ἀρτηριῶν καὶ αὐτοῦ τοῦ ἐγκεφάλου καὶ μέχρι. 
τῶν σπλάγχνων διήκοντας᾽ ᾿ τὴν ἀρχήν τε ἕκαστον γενόμενον καὶ ux a 
θέντα παραλαμβάνειν τοὺς κατ᾽ ἐκεῖνο τῆς γενέσεως ὑπηρέτας," κἀντεῦθεν 
τὴν ἐπίγειον ταύτην διοίκησιν δι’ ὀργάνων τῶν ἡμετέρων σωμάτων. 
ϑιοικεῖν.ὃ 
The text of Corp. XVI which the writer of the Hermippus had 
before him differed little, if at all, from that given by our MS§,; 
where our text of the passages used by him is corrupt, his borrowings 
show the same corruptions. He has borrowed not only from Co 
XVI, but also from four at least of the other documents of the: 
Corpus, He makes use of Corp. 1. 5b in Hermipp. 1. 6. 37 5 Corp, 
I. 6, in 1. 13. 91; Corp. IV. το, in τ. 18. 1355; Corp. X. 6, in 
2. 20. 187; Corp. X. 13, in 1. 13. 96; Corp. X. 24 f. (probably), in 
τ. 6. 40; Corp. XIII. 6, in 2. 20. 186. It is therefore most likely 
that he had in his hands a copy of the Corpus as a whole. The 
date of the Hermippus is unknown. Kroll (Hermipp. p. v) gives 
reasons for thinking that it cannot have been written much before 
A.D. 500. But there is no definite “erminus ad quem, except the date 
of the earliest extant MS. of the Hermippus (a. Ὁ. 1322); and since 
the text of the Corpus as known to the author of the Hermippus 
seems to have been identical with the corrupt text of our MSS. of 
the Corpus, which are very likely derived from the copy used by 
Psellus, it may be conjectured with some probability that the Her 
mippus was written by a contemporary of Psellus (¢. A.D. 1050), in 
connexion with the revival of Platonism which took place under his 
leadership (Krumbacher Byz. Litt. 1897, p. 433). 


Corp. XVI, Title. The word ὅροι must be due to some mistake. 
It might mean ‘definitions’ of philosophic terms (cf. the Platoni 


+ 
(Democritus) imagines divinitate praeditas inesse in universitate rerum, tu 
principia mentis, quae sint in eodem universo, deos esse dicit, tum animan 
imagines, quae vel prodesse nobis soleant vel nocere.’ Sext. Emp. 9. 1 
Δημόκριτος δὲ εἴδωλά τινά φησιν ἐμπελάζειν τοῖς ἀνθρώποις, καὶ τούτων τὰ μὲν εἶ! 
ἀγαθοποιά, τὰ δὲ κακοποιά. ... εἶναι δὲ ταῦτα μεγάλα τε καὶ ὑπερμεγέθη, καὶ 
φθαρτα μέν, οὐκ ἄφθαρτα δέ" προσημαίνειν τε τὰ μέλλοντα τοῖς ἀνθρώποις, θεωρού 
καὶ φωνὰς ἀφιέντα. Lb. 42: εἴδωλα εἶναι ἐν τῷ περιέχοντι ὑπερφνῆ καὶ ἀνθρωποειδ 
“ἔχοντα μορφάς. 

1 Cf. Corp. XVI. 14. The author of the Hermiggus must have known that 
was borrowing this passage (νεύροις καὶ puedois . . . διήκοντας) from Corp. XVI, 
cannot have ascribed it to Democritus; some words (such as ὁ δὲ ᾿Ασκληπιός φησι 
must therefore have been lost before νεύροις καὶ μυελοῖς. 

2 Cf. Corp, XVI. 15. 8. Cf. Corp. XVI. τό. 

4 Reitzenstein (Pom. p. 210) adds that he has copied some phrases in Co 
XVIII; but this seems more doubtful. 


LIBELLVS XVI 435 


Ὅροι, ‘ Jncerti auctoris definitiones’, printed in Stallbaum’s //ato, 
1873, Ρ. 638 ff.) ; and perhaps it might also be used in the sense of 
‘aphorisms’. But Corp. XVI is neither a collection of definitions 
nor a collection of aphorisms. 

The original heading must have been ᾿Ασκληπιοῦ πρὸς Ἄμμωνα 
βασιλέά. The document is an epistle addressed by a pupil of 
Hermes and associate of Tat (8 1 b) toa king (§§ 1a, 2); the persons 
meant are doubtless Asclepius and Ammon; and as the author 
does not name them in the body of the epistle, he must have named 
them in the title. King Ammon is the god Amun euhemerized ; it 
is assumed that he was an ancient king of Egypt, and that the 
teachers Hermes and Asclepius (similarly evolved by euhemerism 
from the gods Thoth and Imhotep) lived in his reign, 

Lactantius, Div. inst. 2. 15. 6 sq. ( Zestim.), says ‘ Asclepius quoque 
auditor eius (sc. Hermae) eandem sententiam Jatius explicavit in illo 
sermone perfecto quem scripsit ad regem.’ The passage to which 
these words refer appears to be Corp. XVI. 15 sq.; and if so, it is 

-implied that the title of Covxp. XVI as known to Lactantius was 
᾿Ασκληπιοῦ πρὸς (Αμμωνα) βασιλέα λόγος τέλειος. But λόγος τέλειος 
(sermo perfectus) is elsewhere used, by Lactantius and others, only as 
the distinctive title of Asc. Lat. ; it seems therefore that Lactantius, 
if he wrote perfecto here, must have added the word by mistake. It 
may possibly have been suggested to him by the phrase πάντων τῶν 
ἄλλων ὥσπερ κορυφήν in Corp, XVI. τ. 

[περὶ θεοῦ... κατ᾽ εἰκόνα ἀνθρώπου.] This is a very unsatisfactory 

description of the contents of the document. περὶ θεοῦ might perhaps 

__ be taken as referring to ὃ 3 ; περὶ ὕλης, to ὃ 4 ; [περὶ κακίας, to § 11 (Ὁ): 
περὶ εἱμαρμένης, to ὃ τό (?) ;] περὶ ἡλίου, to §§ 5-10 ἃ ; περὶ νοητῆς οὐσίας 
(of which περὶ θείας οὐσίας may be a variant), to § 6 ; περὶ ἀνθρώπου, 
to §§ 14-16 (Ὁ) ; [περὶ οἰκονομίας, unintelligible ;] (epi?) τοῦ πληρώ- 
ματος, to ὃ 3 ; περὶ τῶν ἑπτὰ ἀστέρων, to §§ 13 and τῇ (though, if those 
sections are meant, it ought rather to be τῶν ἐξ ἀστέρων). But the 
passages ‘concerning daemons’ (§§ τὸ b, ΤΙ, and 13-16) are ignored ; 
and on the other hand, there is nothing in the text that could possibly 
be described as περὶ τοῦ κατ᾽ εἰκόνα ἀνθρώπου, which must mean 
‘concerning the man created in the image of God’ (Gen. τ. 26). It 
seems probable therefore that this list of subjects was written as an 
index of the contents of a collection of belli (of which Corp. XVI 
may have been one), and has been inserted here by error. 

ὃ τα. (τοῦτον) τὸν λόγον, . . διεπεμψάμην. διεπεμψάμην is the 

Ff 2 











436 CORPVS HERMETICVM 























‘epistolary past’. οὗτος ὁ λόγος is Corp. XVI, which Asclepius 
writes with the intention of sending it to King Ammon. q 
πάντων τῶν ἄλλων ὥσπερ κορυφὴν καὶ ὑπόμνημα. οἱ ἄλλοι (λόγοι) are 
other Hermetic documents; and the phrase implies that a cg 
siderable number of them were already in existence when Corp, X 
was written. 4 
The writer says that this document contains the ‘crowning’ 
doctrine (κορυφή) in which the teaching of all the earlier Her 
is summed up, and that it will remind the reader (ὑπόμνημα) of the 
truths set forth in them, Cf. Herm. af. Stob. Zac. VI. τ: ὃ κυριώ-, 
τατος πάντων λόγος καὶ κορυφαιότατος οὗτος ἂν εἴη. 
Γφανήσεται γάρ σοι καὶ τοῖς ἐμοῖς ἐνίοις λόγοις ἀντίφωνος.1 This is 
unintelligible, It looks as if the writer meant to say that the doc. 
trine of Corp. XVI will be (wrongly) thought to be inconsistent with 
that of some of the earlier Hermetica. But if so, he cannot have 
said it in these words. γάρ does not rightly give the connexion with 
what precedes ; it ought to have been δέ. The word σοι is strang 
Asclepius would hardly say that the man to whom he is writing will 
mistake the meaning of what he writes, though he might very well 
say that others will. ἐνίοις is probably a variant for ἐμοῖς. As to τοῖς 
ἐμοῖς λόγοις, Cf. μου τοῖς βιβλίοις in ὃ 1 Ὁ. But if the meaning is ‘ 


λόγοι. The word ἀντίφωνος commonly means ‘sounding i 
response’, and not ‘ discordant’. 

δι. (..) Ἑρμῆς μὲν γὰρ... πολλάκις μοι διαλεγόμενος καὶ ἰδίᾳ καὶ 
Tar ἐνίοτε παρόντος, It may be inferred from this that the author 
knew numerous written dialogues in which Hermes was the teacher 
and Asclepius the pupil, and that in some of them Tat also was 
present. (In Asc. Lat. init. Tat and Ammon are present as well as 
Asclepius ; and Asclepius is present in Corp. X, in which Hermes 
addresses Tat.) But the saying of Hermes which is here quoted. 
cannot have occurred ‘ many times’ in those dialogues ; and perhaps. 
it did not occur in any of them, but was invented by the author of 
Corp. XVI. 

The gist of this passage is that the Hermetica will appear to some 
people to be obscure ; γάρ therefore implies some previous mention 
of obscurity. But in the preceding clauses, Asclepius has spoken 
only of differences of doctrine or opinion, and not of the obscurity 
of the documents; something must therefore have been lost before 


Ἑρμῆς μὲν γάρ. 





LIBELLVS XVI: ὅδ ra-2 437 


ἔλεγεν ὅτι δόξει τοῖς (εὐσεβῶς ?) ἐντυγχάνουσί pou τοῖς βιβλίοις κιτιλ. 
It may be doubted whether the saying of Hermes is reported in 
oratio recta or in oratio obligua. In the former case, pov τοῖς βιβλίοις 
would mean books written by Hermes; in the latter, it would 
mean books written by Asclepius. The books spoken of are 
presumably of Ἑρμοῦ πρὸς ᾿Ασκληπιὸν ddyor; but by whom did the 
author of Corp, XVI suppose those books to have been written? 
Did he assume that Hermes, after talking to Asclepius, had himself 
set down the talk in writing? Or did he assume that these dis- 
cussions had been written down by Asclepius, and that Hermes 
was speaking of the writings in which Asclepius had recorded 
them ? 

It is not quite clear how much of what follows is ascribed to 
Hermes, and at what point Asclepius begins to speak in his own 
person ; but it seems best to make what ‘ Hermes said’ end at λόγων 
ἔχουσα. Hermes said that some people would think the writings 
obscure ; Asclepius adds that the apparent obscurity of the writings 
will be increased when they are translated. 

τῶν Ἑλλήνων ὕστερον βουληθέντων τὴν ἡμετέραν διάλεκτον εἰς τὴν ἰδίαν 
μεθερμηνεῦσαι. The author adheres to the tradition that the Her: 
metica had been written in Egyptian in ancient times, and had but 
recently been translated from that language into Greek. He knew 
that this was not true in the case of the document which he was 
writing ; but he may possibly have believed it to be true of some of 
the earlier Hermetica. 

He must have been an Egyptian by race; and in spite of his 
Hellenic education, he is still strongly conscious of his Egyptian 
nationality, He speaks of the Greeks as foreigners, and regards 
them with contempt ; he holds them unworthy to know the holy 
secrets (μυστήρια) of the true religion. 

ὃ. τὸν λόγον διατήρησον ἀνερμήνευτον. Does τὸν λόγον mean the 
document which Asclepius is now writing, or ‘ the teaching’, i. 6. the 
whole body of Hermetica? Even if the former is meant, the argu- 
ments urged against the translation of this document would apply 
equally to all other Hermetic writings, 

There is not the slightest reason to suppose that Corp. XVI is a 
translation from an Egyptian original ; it was doubtless written in 
Greek from the first. Yet its author pretends that Asclepius wrote 
it in Egyptian, and wished to prevent its translation. What was his 
motive for making Asclepius express that wish? His assumption 





438 CORPVS HERMETICVM 




























that Asclepius wrote in Egyptian is natural enough; an an 
Egyptian teacher could not reasonably be supposed to have wri 
in any other language. But why does the author, in the act ¢ 
writing a religious treatise in Greek, make Asclepius say that G 
is an unsuitable language for that purpose? Probably he found 
necessary to write in Greek, because most of those for whos 
instruction he was writing knew Greek, and did not know Egyptian 
but he regretted this necessity, and felt that he could have expres 
himself with more effect in his native language. 

ἡ τῶν Ἑλλήνων Γὑπερήφανος] φράσις καὶ ἐκλελυμένη καὶ ὥσπερ Ker 
καλλωπισμένη. The feeble elegance (ἔκλελ. καὶ ὥσπερ κεκαλλ.) of he 
Greek style is contrasted with the rugged strength of the Egyptiz 
κεκαλλωπισμένη might perhaps be rendered ‘ meretricious’. 
thetorical devices by which Greek writers seek to embellish their 
writings detract from the force and significance of their language, 
The epithet ὑπερήφανος (‘ arrogant’ or ‘ disdainful’) is not applicable 
to the style of Greek philosophic writings; and there can be little 
doubt that the word is corrupt. It may possibly have come from a 
note written by some Greek reader who resented the contemptuous 
tone of the passage: ‘this Egyptian speaks ὑπερηφάνως." 

As to the superiority of Egyptian to Greek as the language of 
religion, and the inadequacy of translations, cf. dbammonis Responsum 
7. 4.54. (an Egyptian priest is speaking) : ἀλλὰ διὰ τί τῶν onpavriKoy 
τὰ βάρβαρα πρὸ τῶν ἑκάστῳ οἰκείων προτιμῶμεν ; ... τῶν ἱερῶν ἐθνῶν, 
ὥσπερ Αἰγυπτίων καὶ ᾿Ασσυρίων, οἱ θεοὶ τὴν ὅλην διάλεκτον ἱεροπρεπῇ 
κατέδειξαν. ... ἐκ δὴ τοῦδε καταφαίνεται ὡς εὐλόγως καὶ ἡ τῶν ἱερῶν 
ἐθνῶν προκέκριται φωνὴ πρὸ (τῆς) τῶν ἄλλων ἀνθρώπων' οὐδὲ γὰρ πάντως 
τὴν αὐτὴν διασώζει διάνοιαν μεθερμηνευόμενα τὰ ὀνόματα, ἀλλ᾽ ἔστι τινὰ 
καθ᾽ ἕκαστον ἔθνος ἰδιώματα, ἀδύνατα εἰς ἄλλο ἔθνος διὰ φωνῆς σημαίνε- 
σθαι. ἔπειτα κἂν εἰ οἷόν τε αὐτὰ μεθερμηνεύειν, ἀλλὰ τήν γε δύναμιν 
οὐκέτι φυλάττει τὴν αὐτήν. ἔχει δὲ καὶ τὰ βάρβαρα ὀνόματα πολλὴν μὲν 
ἔμφασιν πολλὴν δὲ συντομίαν, ἀμφιβολίας τε ἐλάττονος μετέσχηκε καὶ 
ποικιλίας "Kal τοῦ πλήθους! τῶν λέξεων, διὰ πάντα δὴ οὖν ταῦτα συναρ- 
μόζει τοῖς κρείττοσιν. Clem. Alex. Strom. 1.143: αἱ δὲ πρῶται καὶ. 
γενικαὶ διάλεκτοι βάρβαροι μέν, φύσει δὲ τὰ ὀνόματα ἔχουσιν" ἐπεὶ καὶ 
τὰς εὐχὰς ὁμολογοῦσιν οἱ ἄνθρωποι δυνατωτέρας εἶναι τὰς βαρβάρῳ. 
φωνῇ λεγομένας. See also Orig. ¢ Cels. 5. 45 sg. 

αὕτη ἐστὶν (ἡ) Ἑλλήνων φιλοσοφία, λόγων ψόφος. Cf. a letter οἵ 
the Indian gymnosophist Calanus to Alexander, quoted by Philo — 
Quod omn. prob. liber τά. 96, Cohn VI, p. 28: Ἑλλήνων δὲ φιλοσύφοις 





LIBELLVS XVI: §$%§ 2-4 439 


οὐκ ἐξομοιούμεθα, ὅσοι αὐτῶν εἰς πανήγυριν λόγους ἐμελέτησαν, ἀλλὰ 
λόγοις ἔργα παρ᾽ ἡμῖν ἀκόλουθα. 

φωναῖς με[γι]σταῖς [τῶν] ἔργων. Cf. Didache Apost. 2. 5: οὐκ ἔσται 
ὁ λόγος σου... κενός, ἀλλὰ μεμεστωμένος πράξει. 

§ 3. [καὶ πάντα ὄντα] τὸν [ἕνα] καὶ ἕνα ὄντα (καὶ) τὰ πάντα. The 
text of the MSS. seems to bea conflation of two alternative readings, 
τὸν καὶ πάντα ὄντα καὶ ἕνα, and τὸν καὶ ἕνα ὄντα Kal τὰ πάντα. 

οὐ "Seutepodvros! τοῦ ἑνός, ἀλλ᾽ ἀμφοτέρων ἑνὸς ὄντος. The writer 
probably meant to say that τὸ ἐν καὶ τὰ πάντα οὐ δύο εἰσίν, ἀλλ᾽ ἀμφό- 
τερα (sc. τὸ ἐν and τὰ πάντα) ἕν ἐστι. ‘The one’ and ‘all things’ are 
not two distinct and separate things; they are identical, But this 
meaning is not rightly expressed by οὐ devrepodvros (or δευτερεύοντος 
or δευτέρου ὄντος) τοῦ ἑνός, which would rather signify ‘the One does 
not take the second place’, 

ἐκδεξάμενος τὴν τῶν πάντων προσηγορίαν ἐπὶ πλήθους, οὐκ ἐπὶ πληρώ- 
ματος. τὰ πάντα must be thought of, not as ἃ πλῆθος, i. 6. a number 

of separate things, but as a πλήρωμα, i.e. as things which go to 
‘make up a whole, and without any one of which the whole would 
be incomplete. The whole which τὰ πάντα go to make up is God; 
οἵ, § 19, μόρια τοῦ θεοῦ πάντα ἐστίν. 

οὐδέποτε παύεται [ἐν] ὄντα, Cf. ὃ 19: οὐκ ἄν ποτε παύσαιτο (πάντα 
ποιῶν ὃ θεύς). 

8 4. ἴδοις ἂν (a/. ἰδὲ οὖν) ἐν τῇ γῇ πολλὰς πηγὰς ὑδάτων καὶ ἀέρος 
(πυρὸς MSS.) ἀναβρυούσας ἐν τοῖς μεσαιτάτοις μέρεσι. The opening 
is abrupt; but it is hardly necessary to assume a lacuna before 

ios ἄν. After the preliminary invocation of the supreme God, 
and the remarks on the One and the All which that invocation 
suggested, the writer begins his exposition by speaking of the ὕλη 
of which terrestrial things consist; and in doing so, he starts with 
an appeal to the evidence of the senses. Cf. Corp. XI. ii. 6b, 
where the exposition begins with the words θέασαι δὴ τὸν κόσμον 
κιτιλ. 

ὕλῃ here means gross matter, in contrast to φῶς, ὕλη is terrestrial ; 
φῶς is celestial. There are three kinds of ὕλη. Two of these are 
γῆ and ὕδωρ. The third, according to the MSS., is wp; but this 
must be a mistake. In § 8, the world of gross matter is called τὸ 
πᾶν ὕδατος καὶ γῆς Kat ἀέρος κύτος ; and there can be no doubt that 
in § 4 the same three elements were spoken of, and that in place 
of πυρός we ought to read either ἀέρος, or πνος (i. €. πνεύματος) in the 
sense of ἀέρος. In proof that these three substances are closely 








440 CORPVS HERMETICVM 

























interconnected, the writer points to the fact that springs of wat or 
and jets of air or πνεῦμα are seen to issue from the earth. (ἐν 
yi... ἐν τοῖς μεσαιτάτοις μέρεσι is apparently equivalent to 
τοῖς μεσαιτάτοις μέρεσι τῆς γῆς. The meaning intended would have 
been more exactly expressed by saying ἐκ τῶν μεσαιτάτων μερῶν τῆς 
γῆς, ‘from the depths of the earth’.) For the notion that currents 


of air are emitted by the earth, cf. Seneca Maz. guaest. 5. 4 (probably 


€ specu ventos recessuque interiore terrarum’ &c. It could not be 
said that jets of ive are seen issuing from the earth, except in the 
case of a volcanic eruption ; and the reader could hardly be told 
to observe that rare phenomenon with his own eyes. 

The combination ἴδοις ἂν. . . δὁρωμένας is awkward; but it may 
be due merely to careless writing, and not to corruption. 

ὅθεν καὶ (ἡ γῆ) πάσης Ons πεπίστευται εἶναι ταμιεῖον, ‘The 
earth’ here means the terrestrial globe, rather than the element 
earth. The writer probably held that the water and air which rise 
out of the earth are produced by transmutation from the element 
earth ; but he does not expressly say so. ; 

ἀναδίδωσι μὲν αὐτῆς (sc. τῆς ὕλης) τὴν χορηγίαν, ἀνταπολαμβάνει δὲ 
τὴν ἄνωθεν ὕπαρξιν. The terrestrial globe supplies out of itself the 
three elements (earth, water, and air) of which all earthly organisms 
are composed. But there is another substance, here called ἡ ἄνωθεν. 
ὕπαρξις, which comes down from above, and enters into the 
organisms composed of terrestrial matter; and it is the operation 
in them of this ‘substance from above’ that makes them living 
beings. This celestial and life-conveying element corresponds to 
the πῦρ of the Stoics ; but the writer of Corp. XVI calls it, not πῦρ, 
but φῶς, and identifies it with the sunlight. Cf. Corp. XI. ii. 7, 
φῶτος δὲ πάντα πλήρη κιτιλ., where it is said that the fire emitted 
by the Sun is changed into light in the course of its descent 
to earth. 

The life-conveying light descends upon the surface of the earth, 
and enters into the organisms which are produced there; the Earth 
may therefore be said to ‘receive it in exchange’ for the gross 
elements which she gives forth. 

ὃ δ. οὕτω γὰρ οὐρανὸν καὶ γῆν (our)d(y)er ὁ δημιουργός, λέγω δὴ 
ὁ ἥλιος. This writer applies the term Demiurgus not to the supreme 





LIBELLVS XVI: δὲ 4-5 441 


God (who is called ὁ θεὸς ὁ τῶν ὅλων δεσπότης Kal ποιητὴς Kal πατήρ 
in § 3), but to the Sun, who is the ‘second God’, and works as 
agent or vicegerent of the supreme God. The Sun is the ‘maker’ 
(δημιουργός) of all living beings ; that is, he puts life into them, and 
maintains life in them, by means of the light which he emits. Light, 
the vehicle of life, belongs to heaven; and in pouring it down upon 
earth, the Sun ‘ brings heaven and earth together’. 

τὴν μὲν οὐσίαν κατάγων, thy δὲ ὕλην ἀνάγων. Life, or the light 
by which life is conveyed, is here called οὐσία, ‘true being’, in 
contrast to ὕλη, ‘gross matter’. This use of οὐσία is intermediate 
between the Platonic use of the word to signify incorporeal substance, 
and the Stoic use of it to signify corporeal substance. The οὐσία 
here spoken of is light-and-life, (cf. φῶς καὶ ζωή in Corp. I,) regarded 
as a corporeal substance, but a substance of celestial origin, and 
of higher order than the terrestrial elements (earth, water, and air). 

But what is meant by saying that the Sun τὴν ὕλην dvaya? This 
phrase, taken together with the following words εἰς αὑτὸν "ra. πάντα! 
ἕλκων, seems to imply something similar to the Stoic doctrine of the 
upward and downward movement of the elements. According to 
the Stoics, portions of earth and water are constantly ascending in 
the form of exhalations (ἀναθυμιάματα) ; as they ascend, they are 
successively transmuted into air and fire; and in the form of fire, 
they serve as nutriment to the heavenly bodies. On the other hand, 
fire is constantly emitted by the heavenly bodies, and is transmuted 
into the grosser elements as it descends. Chrysippus said that the 
_ Sun in particular is fed by exhalations from the sea. (Arnim, Stoic. 

vet. fr. 11, p. τοῦ ff., §§ 650, 652, 659, 661, 662; Zeller, Svoics, Eng. 
tr. 1880, pp. 198, 205.) The language of Corp, XVI. 5 may therefore 
have been suggested in part by some Stoic authority. But the 
writer nowhere asserts that ὕλη (i.e. earth, water, and air) is trans- 
muted into φώς, or das into ὕλῃ; and when he says that the Sun 
‘raises up vAn’, perhaps he means, not that ὕλῃ rises up to heaven 
in the form of exhalations, but merely that the Sun draws forth 
from the mass of the earth the portions of ὕλῃ which are formed 
into living organisms on the earth’s surface. If so, the most obvious 
instance of the process may be seen in the growth of plants under 
the influence of the sunlight. Cf. Julian Or, 5, 172 B: ἕλκει μὲν 
(ὁ ἥλιος) ἀπὸ τῆς γῆς πάντα καὶ προ[σ]καλεῖται καὶ βλαστάνειν ποιεῖ 
τῇ ζωπυρίδι καὶ θαυμαστῇ θέρμῃ, διακρίνων οἶμαι πρὸς ἄκραν λεπτότητα 
τὰ σώματα, καὶ τὰ φύσει φερόμενα κάτω κουφίζει. 











442 CORPVS HERMETICVM 

















καὶ περὶ αὑτὸν (...). A verb in the present indicative seems to 
have been lost here. Cf. μέσος yap ἵδρυται x.7.A. in ὃ 7. 

καὶ εἰς αὑτὸν Γτὰ πάντα ! ἕλκων, καὶ ἀπὸ ἑαυτοῦ Γπάντα διδούς, 
author cannot have written this. Even if we assume that 
accepted the Stoic doctrine of ἀναθυμίασις, he could hardly say that 
the Sun draws ‘all things’ into himself; for the bulk of the ὕλῃ 
of which terrestrial organisms consist, if not the whole of it, remain; 5 
below when they are dissolved, and is not drawn up into the Sun, 
Nor could it be said that the Sun gives forth ‘all things’ from 
himself; for we were told in ὃ 4 that ὕλη issues from the Earth, and 
not from the Sun. It is possible that τὰ πάντα has been transposed, 
and originally belonged to the clause περὶ αὑτὸν (. . .).. What the 
Sun ‘gives forth from himself’ is φῶς, the vehicle of life; and if he 
‘draws’ anything ‘into himself’, it must be the φῶς which he has 
emitted. Indeed, some statement to that effect seems needed to 
complete the system; for if the φῶς which the Sun emits did not 
in some way return to him, it is difficult to see how his supply of 
it could be maintained; and on the other hand, there would be 
a constantly increasing accumulation of φῶς, and therefore of life, — 
on earth, The writer’s probable meaning might be expressed by — 
writing καὶ εἰς ἑαυτὸν τὸ φῶς (or τὴν ζωὴν) ἕλκων, Kal ἀπὸ ἑαυτοῦ, 
τὸ φῶς (or τὴ ζωὴν) διδούς. The Sun is the source and reservoir 
of φώς, or life-stuff, as the Earth is the source and reservoir of ὕλη. 
When an earthly organism is broken up, the ὕλῃ of which it consists Ἷ 
goes back into the Earth; and the writer probably held that the 
φώς or life-stuff which has entered into it goes back into the Sun. 

πᾶσι γὰρ (πᾶσι' καὶ MSS.) τὸ φῶς ἄφθονον χαρίζεται, This clause — 
comes in rather awkwardly here ; perhaps it has been misplaced. 

ἀγαθαὶ ἐνέργειαι. The markings of the Sun are dyafai, i.e. life- 
giving. Cf. τοῦ ἀγαθοῦ in ὃ 17. 

ἀλλὰ καὶ ἐπὶ γῆς (..., Kal) εἰς τὸν κατώτατον βυθὸν [καὶ ἄβυσσον) 
διήκουσιν, A verb has been lost after ἐπὶ γῆς, The workings of 
the Sun (operate) in heaven and on the surface of the earth, and 
penetrate even to the lowest depths (of earth or sea); for in all 
these regions there are living beings, and the life in all of them ἰδ 
due to the light emitted by the sun. ἄβυσσον is an alternative 
for βυθόν. 

§ 6. (...) ((ἐστιν ὁ τούτου ὄγκος") εἰ δέ τις ἔστι καὶ νοητὴ odcia, 
ταύτης [| |] ὑποδοχὴ ἂν εἴη τὸ τούτου pas.—(ei δέ τις ἔστι καὶ νοητὴ 
οὐσία, αὕτη ἐστὶν ὁ τούτου ὄγκος, ἧς ὑποδοχὴ ἂν εἴη τὸ τούτου φῶς 





LIBELLVS XVI: δὲ 5-6 443 


MSS.) According to the MSS., the ὄγκος {material mass) of the 
sun is said to be νοητὴ οὐσία (immaterial substance). But that is 
nonsense. The author’s meaning must have been that the material 
light of the sun is the ‘receptacle’ or vehicle of immaterial substance 
(i.e. of life, regarded as an immaterial thing); and that meaning 
may be got by the changes I have made. Cf. Plut. 75. e¢ Os. 51: 
ἥλιον σῶμα τῆς τἀγαθοῦ δυνάμεως ὡς δρατὸν οὐσίας νοητῆς (ἀπείκασμα ?) 
ἡγούμενοι. The clause εἰ δέ τις ἔστι καὶ νοητὴ οὐσία implies a pre- 
ceding mention of αἰσθητὴ οὐσία : and the sense required might be 
expressed by writing (τῆς yap αἰσθητῆς τοῦ φωτὺς οὐσίας πηγή) ἐστιν 
ὁ τούτου ὄγκος" εἰ δέ τις ἔστι καὶ νοητὴ κιτιλ. 

The writer is acquainted with the Platonic term νοητὴ οὐσία (cf. 
ὁ νοητὸς κόσμος in §§ 12 and 17); but he finds it difficult to attach 
any definite meaning to it. On the assumption that life is an 
immaterial thing, the visible sunlight, he says, must be considered 
its ὑποδοχή, i.e. the matter in which it inheres. But he is half 
inclined to adopt the Stoic attitude, and identify life with its material 
vehicle. 

πόθεν δὲ αὕτη (sc. ἡ νοητὴ οὐσία) συνίσταται ἢ ἐπιρρεῖ, αὐτὸς μόνος 
οἶδεν (ὁ θεός). Life, if it is an incorporeal entity distinguishable from 
the material sunlight, must come from the supreme God, and be 
by him infused into the body of the sun, and there incorporated in 
the visible light which the sun emits. But the nature of the 
incorporeal is incomprehensible to us; whence comes that incor- 
poreal life which the Sun receives and transmits, and of what it 
- consists, ‘God only knows’. Cf. § 17: 6 ἥλιος διὰ τοῦ νοητοῦ κόσμου 
τὴν ἐπιρροὴν ἀπὸ τοῦ θεοῦ χορηγεῖται τοῦ ἀγαθοῦ. The νοητὴ οὐσία 
οἵ § 6 is the ἀγαθόν of ὃ 17; and both terms, in this connexion, 
mean life, or life-giving energy. 

The subject of μόνος οἶδεν must have been the supreme God, and 
‘not the Sun. Cf. Corp. XII. i. 1 as emended: καὶ ποιά τις οὖσα 
τυγχάνει (ἡ τοῦ θεοῦ οὐσία), αὐτὸς μόνος ἀκριβῷς οἶδεν, 

(καὶ & μὲν θεὸς ἀφανής,) μὴ ὑφ᾽ ἡμῶν ὅρώμενος, στοχασμῷ δὲ βιαζο- 
μένων νοούμενος (νοεῖν MSS.) ἡ δὲ τούτου (sc. τοῦ ἡλίου) θέα οὐκ ἔστι 
στοχάζοντος, ἀλλ᾽ αὐτῇ τῇ ὄψει (αὐτὴ ἡ ὄψις MSS.) (ὁρᾶται). In spite 
of the mutilation of the text, it is clear that the writer is here 
contrasting the Sun with the supreme God. The Sun is ‘near 
to us in place’, being within the Kosmos, whereas the supreme 
God, if localized at all, must be thought of as situated in extracosmic 
space ; and the Sun is ‘near to us in nature’, being corporeal, 


ened 





444 CORPVS HERMETICVM 


















whereas the supreme God is incorporeal. The supreme God ἡ 
nvisible, and our conceptions of him are based on mere conjecture 
but we have sure knowledge of the Sun, for we see him with 
our eyes. 

§ 7. μέσος γὰρ ἵδρυται, στεφανηφορῶν τὸν κόσμον. What was the 
writer’s view as to the relative positions of the Sun and the other 
cosmic bodies? He says that the Sun ‘is stationed in the middle’, 
and ‘wears the Kosmos as a wreath’, Taken by itself, this state. 
ment might seem to imply a heliocentric system. ‘The theory that 
the Sun is at the centre of the universe, and that the earth travels 
round it, had been put forward, at least as a hypothesis, by Aris ‘ 
tarchus of Samos, ‘ the Copernicus of antiquity’, about 280 B.c., and 
maintained by Seleucus, about 200 B.c. (Plut. De fac. in orbe lunae 
6. 3, Ρ. 923; Plut. Plat. quaest. 8. 2, p. 1006). But that opinion 
was condemned as impious by Cleanthes ; it was suppressed by the 
authority of the Stoics, who adhered to the geocentric system ; and 
a Hermetist of the second or third century a. Ὁ. is not likely to have 
reverted to it. Besides, the Sun is here compared to a charioteer, 
and that comparison would be unintelligible if he were thought of as 
stationary. The words must therefore be explained in some other way, 

Among the Greeks, the number of the planet-stars was fixed, and 
their movements determined, in the fourth century Β. Ο. ;? and from” 
that time onward, it was commonly held that the earth stands fast 
at the centre, that the seven planets (i.e. Sun, Moon, and five planet- _ 
stars) travel round the earth in approximately circular orbits, and 
that the sphere of the fixed stars is more distant from earth than the 
planets. But as to the relative positions of the Sun and the other 
planets, opinions differed.* (a) Plato,* Aristotle, and Chrysippus ; 

1 Probably by Eudoxus, c. 366 8,6. Sen, Mat. guaest. 7. 3: ‘Nova haec 
caelestium observatio est, et nuper in Graeciam invecta. Democritus quoque 
ἕ 400 B.C.) .. , suspicari se ait plures esse stellas quae currant, sed nec numerum 
illaram posuit nec nomina, nondum comprehensis quinque siderum cursibus. 
Eudoxus primus ab Aegypto hos motus in Graeciam transtulit.’ The five planet- 


stars had been earlier recognized and named in Babylonia (Jastrow, Religion in 
Satyloniaand Assyria, pp. 217 ff.) ; Egyptian astronomers learnt from Babylonians, 
and Eudoxus studied astronomy in Egypt. 

Philolaus the Pythagorean, a contemporary of Democritus, is said to have spoken 
of five planet-stars (Aetius, Diels Doxagr. p. 337: according to Philolaus, there 
are ‘ten divine bodies’, viz. the sphere of fixed stars, the five planet-stars, Sun, 
Moon, Earth, Antichthon; and the ten, placed in this order, circle round the 
central fire). But there is much doubt about the authenticity and date of the 
doctrines ascribed to Philolaus, 

3. Macrob, Somn, Seip. 1. 19 f. See Οἷς, Nat. deor. 2. 52, and J. B. Mayor’s 
note ad Joc. 


5. Tim. 38, Rep. 10, 616 (cf. Lpinomis y86f.). Of the five planet-stars, Plato 





LIBELLVS XVI: δὲ 6-7 445 


placed the planets as follows in order of distance from the earth, 
beginning with the nearest :—Moon, SuN, Venus, Mercury,’ Mars, 
Jupiter, Saturn. (4) Archimedes (c. 230 B.c.), Geminus (¢. 77 B.c.), 
Cleomedes (following Posidonius), and Ptolemaeus placed them 
thus:—Moon, Venus, Mercury, Sun, Mars, Jupiter, Saturn. 
(c) Heraclides Ponticus said that Venus and Mercury revolve round 
the Sun; his order therefore was this :—Moon, Sun (with Mercury 
and Venus as satellites), Murs, Jupiter, Saturn. 

If the writer of Corp. XVI adopted order (4), he might say that 
the Sun μέσος ἵδρυται, meaning that the Sun holds the middle place 
among the planets.? Philo calls the Sun μέσος in this sense, Quis 
rer. div. heres 45. 222f., Wendland III, p. 50: ὃ μέσος τῶν ἑπτά, 
ἥλιος, μέσον δ᾽ αὐτὸν οὐ μόνον ἐπεὶ μέσην ἐπέχει χώραν, ὡς ἠξίωσάν 
τινες, καλῶ, ἀλλ᾽ ὅτι καὶ θεραπεύεσθαι καὶ δορυφορεῖσθαι πρὸς ὑπασπιζόν- 
tov ἑκατέρωθεν... δίκαιος ἄλλως ἐστί... ἄριστα δ᾽ ἐμοὶ στοχάζεσθαι 
δοκοῦσιν οἱ τὴν μέσην ἀπονενεμηκότες ἡλίῳ τάξιν, τρεῖς μὲν ὑπὲρ αὐτὸν 
καὶ μετ᾽ αὐτὸν τοὺς ἴσους εἶναι λέγοντες, ὑπὲρ αὐτὸν μὲν φαίνοντα (Saturn), 
* φαέθοντα (Jupiter), πυρόεντα (Mars), εἶθ᾽ ἥλιον, μετ᾽ αὐτὸν δὲ στίλβοντα 
(Mercury), φωσφόρον (Venus) τὴν ἀέρος γείτονα σελήνην. 

This interpretation of μέσος ἵδρυται would agree well with what is 
said in ὃ 17; but it is difficult to reconcile it with ὃ 8, where we are 
told that the Sun sends light wpzard to the heavenly bodies (τὰ 
ἀθάνατα μέρη τοῦ κόσμου), and downward to the terrestrial sphere (τὸ 
πᾶν ὕδατος καὶ γῆς καὶ ἀέρος κύτος). It can hardly be doubted that 
the moon and the planet-stars are included among ‘the immortal 
parts of the Kosmos’; and if so, it follows that the Sun is lower 
(1. 6. nearer to the earth) than the moon and the five planet-stars, and 
the meaning of μέσος ἵδρυται must be that the Sun holds a position 
intermediate between the heavens and the earth,—that is, the position 
which the Greeks in general assigned to the Moon. If this is the 
meaning of the passage, the writer of Corp. XVI rejected in this 
respect the teachings of Greek astronomy, and we must suppose that 
he was following some Oriental authority. 

As to στεφανηφορῶν τὸν κόσμον, compare a magic invocation (Pap. 
mentions by name only ‘Ewa@dpos (Venus) and ὁ ἱερὸς Ἑρμοῦ (Mercury). All five 
are named in the Zpznomzs, written soon alter Plato’s death, 

1 On the question whether Plato placed Venus or Mercury nearer to the earth, 
ἘΈΤΌΟΕΤΣΙΣΕ differ. There was much doubt about the relative positions of these two 
F Ὁ CE Proclus 77: Remp. 69. 27 P.: εἰ δὲ δὴ κρατοίη τὸν μὲν ἥλιον ἐν τῷ μέσῳ 


τάττειν τῶν ἑπτά, καθάπερ οἱ θεουργικοὶ λόγοι (i.e, Juliani Theurgi Hyphegetica) 
καὶ οἱ θεοί (i.e, the Oracula Chaldatca) φασιν. (Kroll, Orac. Chald. p. 33.) 




























446 CORPVS HERMETICVM 


mag. Lar. i. 959 sgg., Reitzenstein Poim. p. 27) in which the Sun-goq 
is addressed as 6 ἐντὸς τῶν ἑπτὰ πόλων καθήμενος, ὁ ἔχων ἐπὶ τ 
κεφαλῆς στέφανον χρύσεον. The Sun-god was commonly depi 
with a radiate wreath or crown upon his head; and the writer takes 
this στέφανος to symbolize the system of heavenly bodies disp 
above and around him. The following simile of the chariot-d 
is inconsistent with the picturing of the Kosmos as a στέφανος, a d 
cannot have formed part of the same sentence; something must 
therefore have been lost before καθάπερ ἡνίοχος, and the misplaced 
Words ἄφηκεν οὖν φέρεσθαι κιτιλ. supply what is wanted to fill the 
gap. 

τὸ τοῦ κόσμου ἅρμα... ἀναδήσας cis ἑαυτόν, μή πως ἀτάκτως φέροι ᾿ 
In the Roman chariot-races, the driver looped the reins round hi 
waist (Smith Dict, Ant. s. v. Circus); the horses might therefore be 
said to be ‘ bound to’ the man. 

κόσμος seems here to mean the heavens, or the heavenly bodies, 
rather than the universe asa whole. The earth is motionless; but 
the heavenly bodies ‘are borne along together with the Sun’ as he 
sweeps round the sky in his diurnal course ; and the writer holds 
that their movement is controlled and regulated by him. The Sun 
then is the charioteer, and the heavenly bodies are the team he 
drives. The notion that the team would run away if not held 
may have been suggested by the story of Phaethon. 

Cf. Philo De Cherubim 7. 24, Cohn I, p. 175: God made the 
sphere of the fixed stars and the seven PAREDEDneIs, καὶ καθάπερ ; 
ἔποχον ἐν ὀχήματι ἀστέρα (ἕκαστον ὃ) ἐν οἰκείῳ κύκλῳ θείς, τὰς ἡνίας, 
ἐπίστευσε τῶν ἐπόχων οὐδενί, πλημμελῆ δείσας ἐπιστασίαν, ἁπάσας δ᾽ 
ἐξήρτησεν ἑαυτοῦ, νομίσας ἐναρμόνιον τῆς κινήσεως μάλιστα οὕτως τάξιν 
γενήσεσθαι" τὸ γὰρ σὺν θεῷ πᾶν ἐπαινετόν, τὸ δ᾽ ἄνευ θεοῦ ψεκτόν. This 
is a protest against the view that the planets are themselves the 
supreme ‘ drivers’ or rulers of the Kosmos. 

εἰσὶ δὲ αἱ ἡνίαι (...) [ζωὴ καὶ ψυχὴ καὶ πνεῦμα] [καὶ ἀθανασία Kal 
γένεσις]. ‘The reins’, i.e. the things by means of which the Sun 
controls the heavenly bodies, and restrains them from disorderly 
movement, are certainly not ‘life, soul, and vital spirit’; nor are. 
they ‘immortality and birth’. They ought rather to be the rays of 
light which the Sun emits. ζωὴ καὶ ψυχή and ἀθανασία καὶ γένεσις are 
perhaps two fragments of a lost sentence which led on to what is said 
in §§ 8 and g concerning the distinction between the immortal life 
of the heavenly bodies and the mortal life of terrestrial organisms, — 





LIBELLVS XVI: §&§ 7-9 447 


The Sun, by means of his light, maintains everlasting life in immortal 
téa, and generates temporary life in mortal ζῷα, Cf. Corp. ΧΙ. i. 4a 
as emended: ὃ αἰὼν κοσμεῖ τὴν ὕλην, ἀθανασίαν καὶ διαμονὴν (i.e. 
immortal life and mortal life) ἐνθεὶς τῇ ὕλῃ. 110. 5: ἀθανασίας καὶ 
μεταβολῆς ποιητής. ΧΙ. ii, 12a: καὶ ἀθανασίαν καὶ μεταβολὴν ποιεῖν. 

8 8. ((τὰ ἐν τούτοις τοῖς μέρεσι τοῦ κόσμου) ζωοποιῶν καὶ ἀνακινῶν 
(εἰς) γένεσιν, καὶ μεταβολαῖς {[ |] (τὰ) Loa [ἕλικος τρόπον] μεταποιῶν 
καὶ μεταμορφῶν. Some such alterations as these are needed to make 
sense. μεταβολή means death, in contrast to γένεσις, birth. The 
organisms into which the Sun puts life in the terrestrial region perish, 
and are replaced by fresh organisms composed of the same matter ; 
and this is what is meant by saying that they are ‘ remade-and 
transformed ’. 

I can make nothing of éAtxos τρύπον. The Sun himself might be 
said to move ‘helically’; for as the points of sunrise and sunset shift 
from day to day, the apparent course of the Sun is not circular, but 
helical. Cf. Pl. Zim. 39 A: τοὺς κύκλους αὐτῶν στρέφουσα ἕλικα. But 

»there is no sense in saying that the Sun remakes and transforms 
living beings ‘in the manner of a helix’. 

§ 9. Γεἰς ἄλληλα γένη γενῶν... ποιεῖ δημιουργῶν. This is hope- 
lessly corrupt. εἰς ἄλληλα has probably been duplicated by error. 
The only things which could properly be said to be changed ‘into 
one another’ are the three terrestrial elements, or forms of ὕλη, viz. 
earth, water, and air (see § 4). A fairly satisfactory sense might be 
got by writing [εἰς ἄλληλα] [γένη γενῶν καὶ] εἴδη εἰδῶν ἀντικαταλλασ- 

σόμενος [ |} καθάπερ καὶ ἐπὶ τῶν μεγάλων σωμάτων ποιεῖ, ((τῇ εἰς 

᾿ ἄλληλα μεταβολῇ) (καὶ ταῦτα) δημιουργῶν. This would be intelligible, 

if we take τὰ μέγαλα σώματα to mean the three terrestrial elements, 

and assume that the writer held them to be subject to transmutation. 

The term τὰ μέγαλα σώματα might also mean the heavenly bodies ; 

but it could not be said of the heavenly bodies that they are trans- 
muted into one another. 

τοῦ μὲν ἀθανάτου ἀδιάλυτος (sc. ἡ μεταβολή). Cf. Herm. αὐ. Stob. 
Exc. ΧΙ. 2. (2): πᾶν σῶμα μεταβλητόν, οὐ πᾶν σῶμα διαλυτόν. The 
ἀθάνατα σώματα are the heavenly bodies. Though not subject to 
dissolution, they are subject to μεταβολή ; for they are maintained 
in existence by a perpetual inflow of light, which issues from the 

Sun, and replaces the light perpetually emitted by them. 

The writer probably held that the body of the Sun is perpetually 

renewed by light which returns to it after circulating through the 











448 CORPVS HERMETICVM 






























Kosmos (see note on εἰς αὑτὸν Γτὰ πάντα" ἕλκων in ὃ 5); and if 
the Sun itself, no less than the other heavenly bodies, is subject 
μεταβολή. 

88 10 b, 11, καὶ γὰρ δαιμόνων... δίκῃ ὑποπέπτωκε. Corp, 
contains two distinct and separate passages concerning daemons, viz, 
§§ τοῦ, 11, and § 13 ff. _In the second passage, the topic is intro. 
duced de novo, and in words closely resembling those used at the 
beginning of the first passage. Ϊ 

The functions assigned to the daemons are different in the two 
passages. In the first, their business is to punish sin by plagues 
inflicted on human communities collectively. In the second, they 
are the agents by whom all material processes are carried on; and 
as to that part of their operation by which men are directly affected, 
there is indeed a brief mention of ‘troubles to cities and nations’, 
but more is said about their action on individuals. It is evident that 
these two passages cannot have been written as parts of the same 
treatise ; one of the two must be an interpolation. The first of 
them (§§ τὸ Ὁ, 11) interrupts the sequence of thought ; if we cut it 
out, ὃ 12 falls into its right place as a continuation of §§ 5-10a, in 
which the function of the Sun is dealt with. It seems probable 
therefore that ro Ὁ, 11 was extracted from some other document, and 
inserted in the margin of Corp. XVI as a parallel or supplement 
to 13 ff. 

δ τὸ Ὁ. καὶ γὰρ δαιμόνων χοροὶ περὶ αὐτόν. In what follows, the 
daemons are spoken of as subject to ‘the gods’ in general (τὰ ὑπὸ 
τῶν θεῶν ἐπιταττόμενα ἐνεργοῦσι), and not to the Sun-god. It may 
therefore be suspected that, in the document from which this para- 
graph was taken, the reading was περὶ αὐτούς (sc. τοὺς θεούς), and that 
after the passage had been inserted in Corp. XVI, αὐτούς was altered 
into αὐτόν, in order to make an apparent connexion with the pre- 
ceding statements about the Sun. 

Γσύνοικοι καὶ τῶν ἀθανάτων οὐκ εἰσὶ πόρρω ἐνθένδε). This is an un-_ 
intelligible remnant of a passage which must have been to the effect 
that the daemons are intermediate between the immortal gods and 
mortal men, and are connected with both. For σύνοικοι, cf. Ase 
Lat. 111. 43 Ὁ : ‘(in terra) commorari nobiscum.’ 

μεταβολαῖς ἀέρος (πυρὸς MSS.). ‘ Changes of fire’ is meaningless, 
A satisfactory sense may be got by writing μεταβολαῖς ἀέρος, ‘ changes: 
(i.e. corruptions) of the atmosphere’, Cf. Asc, Lat. III. 25 fin: 
‘aer ipse maesto torpore languescet.’ Pestilences were thought to be 





LIBELLVS XVI: δὲ 9-12 449 


caused by corruption of the air; so that μεταβολαῖς ἀέρος would serve 
as a substitute for λοιμοῖς. 

ἀμυνόμενοι thy ((εἰς θεοὺς) ἀσέβειαν. The punishment of sin was 
commonly said to be the function of δίκῃ ; cf. Pl. Laws 7164, τῷ δὲ 
(θεῷ) ἀεὶ ξυνέπεται δίκη, τῶν ἀπολειπομένων τοῦ θείου νόμου τιμωρός, and 
Herm. ap. Stob. Zxc. VII. In Corp, XVI. 10b, the daemons are 
the agents by whom δίκη is administered. 

811. αὕτη yap (sc. ἡ ἀσέβεια) ἀνθρώποις [1] ἡ μεγίστη κακία. Cf. 
Hermes αὐ. Lactant. Div. tmst, 2. 15. 6: τὸ γὰρ ἕν καὶ μόνον ἐν 
ἀνθρώποις ἐστὶν ἀγαθὸν εὐσέβεια. 

[θεῶν μὲν γὰρ τὸ εὖ ποιεῖν, [ 7 δαιμόνων δὲ τὸ (τοῖς θεοῖς) ἐπαμύνειν. | 
This sentence is an interruption. It may have been shifted from 
some other place, possibly from the corrupt passage in ὃ 10 Ὁ ἐγ, 

τὰ yap ἄλλα τὰ ὑπ᾽ ἀνθρώπων τολμώμενα ἢ πλάνῃ τολμᾶται (ἢ πλάνῃ ἢ 
τόλμῃ MSS.) ἢ ἀνάγκῃ [ 1] ἢ ἀγνοίᾳ: (kal) ταῦτα πάντα παρὰ θεοῖς 
ἀνεύθυνα. A pious man may sometimes act amiss; but if he does, 
his wrongdoings are only such as are caused by error, compulsion, 
‘or ignorance ; and for actions thus caused, he is not held to be 
responsible, Cf. Ar. Z¢h, Nic. 3. 1, on involuntary actions: δοκεῖ 
δὲ ἀκούσια εἶναι τὰ βίᾳ (= ἀνάγκῃ) ἢ δι’ ἄγνοιαν γινόμενα, All actions 
that are truly sinful result from impiety, and therefore impiety alone 
is punished by the gods. 

§ 12. σωτὴρ δὴ (δὲ MSS.) καὶ τροφεύς ἐστι παντὸς γένους ὁ ἥλιος. 
This statement sums up the contents of §§ 8-1oa. πᾶν γένος means 
every race or kind of ζῷα, whether mortal or immortal. 

ὥσπερ ὁ νοητὸς κόσμος, τὸν αἰσθητὸν (αἰσθητικὸν MSS.) κόσμον 
περιέχων, πληροῖ τὸν ὄγκον (πληροῖ αὐτὸν ὀγκῶν MSS.) [ταῖς] ποικίλαις 
καὶ παντομόρφοις ἰδέαις. The Platonists said that all individual 
beings are constituted by the imposition of ἰδέαι on ὕλη, and that the 
source of these ἰδέαι is the νοητὸς κόσμος. The writer accepts this 
Platonic dogma, and tries to bring it into connexion with his own 
doctrine that ζῷα are constituted by the influx of sunlight into gross 
matter. He finds an analogy between the ἰδέαι which stream into 
the universe from the Noetos Kosmos and the life-conveying rays of 
light emitted by the Sun. The comparison between the Noetos 
Kosmos and the Sun may have been suggested by the comparison 
between τὸ ἀγαθόν and the Sun in Pl. ep. VI. 

τὸν ὄγκον presumably means the mass of matter on which the ἰδέαι 
are imposed. The γοητὸς κόσμος is said to ‘encompass’ the αἰσθητὸς 
κόσμος, because it is imagined to be situated in extracosmic space. 

2806.2 Gg 







































450 CORPVS HERMETICVM 


οὕτω καὶ ὁ ἥλιος πάντα (τὰν ἐν τῷ κόσμῳ [περιέχων] (...) ὀγκοῖ 
Γπάντων τὰς γενέσεις] καὶ ἰσχυροποιεῖ, The reading of the MSS, is 
meaningless. The Sun, being stationed ‘in the middle’, cannot 
said to ‘ encompass all things in the Kosmos’; and it is most 1] 
that the preceding περιέχων has been repeated here by error. πά 
τὰς γενέσεις might perhaps be taken as equivalent to πάντα τὰ γιγνό- 
μενα; but what could be meant by saying that the Sun ‘ gives bulk tm 
all things that are produced’? The Sun gives /ie to things, not 
bulk; it is the Earth that gives material bulk to them, by suppl 
ὕλη. It seems then that the verb of which ὁ ἥλιος was the su 
must have been lost, and that the subject of ὀγκοῖ and the following 
verbs (ἰσχυροποιεῖ and ὑποδέχεται) must have been ἡ γῆ. [ 

καμόντων δὲ καὶ ῥευσάντων (,. .) ὑποδέχεται, An accusative j 
wanted. The writer most likely held that, when terrestrial organis' 
are broken up, the ὕλη of which they were composed goes back in 
the Earth, and the φῶς which entered into them and made them li 
goes back into the Sun. Accordingly, if the subject of ὑποδέχε 
were ὁ ἥλιος, the object required would be τὸ φῶς ; but if, as is more 
probable, the subject is ἡ γῆ, the missing object must be τὴν ὕλην. — 

§ 1g. ὑπὸ τούτῳ δὲ ἐτάγη ὁ τῶν δαιμόνων χορός. Down to this point, 
we have been told that the Sun operates on things by means of the 
light which he emits. But in the paragraph which here begins, we 
are told that he operates on things through the agency of troops of 
daemons commanded by the planets. These two doctrines are 
independent of one another, and cannot easily be reconciled. 
seems that the author or compiler of Corp. XVI has put together two 
distinct and inconsistent theories. In both of them, the Sun is 
second God, and vicegerent of the supreme God. But according to. 
the first (§§ 4-10 a and 12), the Sun works by means of light; 
according to the second (§§ 13 ff.), the Sun works (through his 
subordinates, the planets,) by means of daemons. We must suppose 
that the writer took the contents of these two parts of the document 
from different sources ; and he has made no attempt to fuse them 
into a consistent whole. 

ἑκάστῳ τούτων ἰσάριθμοι. This appears to mean ἑκάστῳ τῶν ἀστέρων, 
ἰσάριθμοί εἰσι χοροί ; which might be taken to signify either ‘ each of 
the ἀστέρες commands an equal number of χοροί᾽, or ‘each ἀστήρ 
commands one χορός, and the several χοροί are composed of equal 
numbers of daemons’. The writer has expressed himself obscurely ; 
but he probably meant the latter. 





LIBELLVS XVI: §§ 12-13 451 


διατεταγμένοι οὖν (Kara) ({πλινθίδαςν) ὑπηρετοῦσιν ἑκάστῳ τῶν ἀστέρων. 
It must be the daemons, and not the ἀστέρες, that are arranged in 
πλινθίδες ; I have therefore shifted πλινθίδας. The word πλινθίς 
means a rectangular body. In this connexion, it must signify a body 
of troops drawn up in rectangular formation, and may be translated 
‘acolumn’, ‘a battalion’, or ‘acorps’, πλινθίον is used as a term of 
military tactics in Joseph. Ant. 13. 4.4: τάξας τὴν στρατιὰν ἐν πλινθίῳ. 

Each πλινθίς of daemons is commanded by one of the ἀστέρες ; 
and oi ἀστέρες must here mean ‘the planets’, or more exactly, the 
five planet-stars and the moon; for the Sun, being commander-in- 
chief, has no one πλινθίς specially assigned to him. It might be 
inferred from this that there are six πλινθίδες of daemons. But in 
§ 17, there appear to be eight, corresponding respectively to the 
sphere of fixed stars, the five planet-stars, the moon, and the atmo- 
sphere. It is not clear whether the χοροί are identical with the 
πλινθίδες or not ; if not, each of the six (or eight) πλινθίδες must be 
made up of a number of χοροί, as a battalion is made up of a number 
of companies, 

The planet-gods, working in subordination to the Sun, govern the 
material world; i.e. they collectively discharge the function of 
εἱμαρμένη. And each of them discharges his special part of this 
function through the agency of a particular corps of daemons subject 
to his orders. 

ἀγαθοὶ καὶ κακοὶ ὄντες... τὰς ἐνεργείας. Some daemons are bene- 
ficent, others maleficent. Did the writer hold that some of the 
planets are beneficent and others maleficent, and that each corps of 
daemons takes its character from its commander? Or did he hold 
that each planet is partly beneficent and partly maleficent, and 
accordingly, that each corps includes both beneficent and maleficent 
daemons ? 

δαίμονος yap οὐσία ἐνέργεια. The daemons are in this document 
the personal beings by whose action all physical processes in the 
terrestrial region are carried on (πάντων τῶν ἐπὶ γῆς πραγμάτων 
τὴν ἐξουσίαν κεκληρωμένοι, ὃ 14); or in other words, they are the 
forces of nature, regarded as persons. And the writer holds that all 
natural processes result from the operation of the planets. Cf. Herm. 
ap. Stob. χε VI. το, where we are told that the daemons have no 
independent existence as living beings, but are merely ἐνέργειαι of the 
Decani, who are the highest order of astral gods in the peculiar 
doctrine of that document. 

G 


ref] 


2 


































452 CORPVS HERMETICVM 


The daemons are ‘both good and bad’ ; that is, the forces which 
operate in the material world sometimes work good, and sometir es 
harm. But how does it come to pass that they sometimes work 
harm? The daemons are subject to the planet-gods, who are subje 
to the Sun, who is subject to the supreme God; hence, if the 
daemons are partly κακοὶ τὰς ἐνεργείας, it might be inferred that the 
supreme God is the author of evil as well as of good. But the wri oy 
ignores this inference. It would have been possible for him to 
evade it by saying that the evil passions wrought in a man by : 
daemons (i.e. by the physical forces which operate in his body) 


5-9), and that just punishment is in accordance with the rig 
government of the universe ; but he does not say this, and it seems 
that the difficulty did not occur to him. 

8 14, ποικίλην ταραχὴν ἐργάζονται καὶ κοινῇ ταῖς πόλεσι καὶ τοῖς ἔθνεσι, 
καὶ ἰδίᾳ ἑκάστῳ. From this point to the end of ὃ 16, the writer speaks 
only of the Zarm done to men by the daemons, and says nothing 
about the good done by them. 

ἀναπλάττονται yap καὶ ἀνθέλκουσι (ἀνεγείρουσι MSS.) τὰς ψυχὰς ἡμῶν. 
εἰς ἑαυτούς. ἀνεγείρουσι εἰς ἑαυτούς is meaningless. For ἀνθέλκουσι, 
cf. Pl. Rep. 4. 4398: εἴ ποτέ τι (τὴν ψυχὴν) ἀνθέλκει διψῶσαν. The 
daemons ‘ mould our souls into another shape’, i.e. a shape other 
than that of the unembodied soul; and they ‘drag our souls away 
(from God or from divine things) to themselves ’, i. e. to the material 
things in which they operate. Cf. στροβοῦσιν πρὸς τὴν ἰδίαν ἐνέργειαν. 
below. { 
ἐγκαθήμενοι ἡμῶν νεύροις κιτιλ. Cf. Lydus De mens. 4. 32 (Asc. 
Lat. 111. 33b): τοὺς μὲν τιμωροὺς τῶν δαιμόνων, ἐν αὐτῇ τῇ ὕλῃ 
παρόντας, τιμωρεῖσθαι τὸ ἀνθρώπειον Kar’ ἀξίαν. See Corp. IX. 3, 
where it is said that evil νοήματα are bred in men by daemons. y 

The daemons spoken of in this passage are identical with the 
defiling or corrupting influences of the body on the soul, as commonly 
described by the Platonists, except that the writer conceives these 
influences as persons, and holds them to be emissaries of the 
planets. 

[καὶ αὐτῷ τῷ ἐγκεφάλῳ] This is an alternative for μέχρι καὶ air 
τῶν σπλάγχνων. Some said that the seat of the egemonikon is the 
brain ; others said that it is the σπλάγχνα, and more especially the 
heart. The question is discussed in Galen De plac. Hippocr. 
et Plat. 


aut 





LIBELLVS XVI: §§ 13-16 453 


ὃ 15. γενόμενον yap ἡμῶν ἕκαστον... παραλαμβάνουσι δαίμονες οἱ 
κατ᾽ ἐκείνην τὴν στιγμὴν τῆς γενέσεως ὑπηρέται. Cf. Asel. Lat. III. 35 : 
‘inmutantur (formae) totiens, quot hora momenta habet circuli 
circumcurrentis.’ No two men are alike in bodily constitution, 
(and consequently, no two men are alike in the πάθη which result 
from the action of the body on the soul,) because no two are born 
under the same astral influences. In the terms of Cor. XVI, this 
may be expressed by saying that no two men are influenced by the 
same daemons. 

οὗτοι γὰρ κατὰ στιγμὴν ἐναλλάσσονται, οὐχ of αὐτοὶ ἐπιμένοντες, ἀλλ᾽ 
ἀνακυκλούμενοι, οὗτοι probably means οἱ ἀστέρες, and not οἱ δαίμονες. 
The function of presiding over the births of men passes from planet 
to planet in rapid rotation. Consequently, if A is born a moment 
before B, A’s body will throughout his life be under the control of a 
corps of daemons commanded by a certain planet, and B’s body 
will be under the control of a different corps of daemons, commanded 
by another planet. 
᾿ εἰς τὰ δύο (ἄλογα) μέρη τῆς ψυχῆς ϑύντες. ‘The two irrational 
parts of the soul’ are those distinguished by Plato, viz. τὸ θυμοειδές 
and τὸ ἐπιθυμητικόν, as opposed to τὸ λογικὸν μέρος τῆς ψυχῆς (= τὸ 
λογιστικόν in Pl, Ζ6ῤ.), which is mentioned in the following sentence. 
It seems necessary to insert ἄλογα, as τὰ δύο μέρη alone would hardly 
convey this meaning. 

τὸ δὲ λογικὸν μέρος τῆς ψυχῆς ἀδέσποτον τῶν δαιμόνων ἕστηκεν. This 
might be otherwise expressed by saying that the man in whom 
νοῦς rules (i.e. the εὐσεβής, or he who has got gnosis) is free from 
the dominion of Heimarmene. This passage is referred to by 
Lactantius, Div. inst, 2.15. 7. Cf. Ascd. Lad. III. 29 Ὁ init. (quoted 
by Lactantius 20.): εὐσεβοῦς yap ἀνθρώπου οὔτε δαίμων κακὸς οὔτε 
εἱμαρμένη κρατεῖ. Corp. XII. i. 9. as emended: οὐδὲν (τῷ νῷ) 
ἀδύνατον, οὔτε εἱμαρμένης ὑπεράνω θεῖναι ψυχὴν ἀνθρωπίνην κιτιλ. The 
εὐσεβὴς ἄνθρωπος is unaffected by the πάθη bred by the body. 

ὃ 16. (8)rw οὖν ἐν τῷ λογικῷ ἀκτὶς ἐπιλάμπει (ἀπὸ τοῦ Geo’) [διὰ 
τοῦ ἡλίου], [[ ]] τούτῳν!] καταργοῦνται of δαίμονες. The ἀκτίς is 
the ray of divine νοῦς by which the pious man is illuminated 
(φωτίζεται). It comes from the supreme and supracosmic God 
(cf. ἀκτῖνα τοῦ θεοῦ below) ; and in the phrase εἰς ὑποδοχὴν τοῦ θεοῦ, 
it is identified with God himself. The writer must have held that 
this ἀκτίς comes from God to men immediately and directly, and 
not that itis transmitted by the Sun; διὰ τοῦ ἡλίου must therefore 








a ὰὰὰνα 


454 CORPVS HERMETICVM 

























be cut out. The Sun is the source of our physical life, and conveys | 
it to us by means of his light; but his light is φῶς αἰσθητόν, whe 
the ἀκτίς here spoken of is φῶς νοητόν. ‘The soul which is illumi. 
nated by the invisible and incorporeal ‘light’ of the divine νοῦς j 
thereby freed from the corrupting influences of the body, which 
are here personified as daemons. 

οὔτε δαιμόνων οὔτε θεῶν. The θεοί are the planet-gods, whose 
commands are executed by the daemons. 

ὁ λόγον οὐκ ἔχων ἔρως (ὁ λόγος οὐκ ἔρως MSS.) (otros?) ἐστίν, § 
πλανώμενος καὶ πλανῶν. The writer is thinking of the definition of 
the lower kind of ἔρως in Pl. Phaedr. 238 B: ἡ γὰρ ἄνευ λόγου 80 
ἐπὶ τὸ ὀρθὸν ὁρμώσης κρατήσασα ἐπιθυμία, πρὸς ἡδονὴν ἀχθεῖσα κάλλ' 
καὶ ὑπ᾽ αὖ τῶν ἑαυτῆς συγγενῶν" ἐπιθυμιῶν [ἐπὶ σωμάτων xa 
ἐρρωμένως ῥωσθεῖσα ἱνικήσασα ἀγωγῇ], ἀπ᾿ αὐτῆς τῆς ῥώμης ἐπωνυμίαν 
λαβοῦσα, ἔρως ἐκλήθη. That passage is manifestly corrupt; and the 
words 6 πλανώμενος καὶ πλανῶν, used by the writer of Corp. XVI : 
referring to it, suggest a suspicion that, in the reading of it whi h 
was known to him, some form of πλανᾶσθαι occurred.’ The existence: 
of such a reading is made more probable by the fact that Maximus 
Tyrius, with the same sentence of the Phaedrus in his mind, writes 
thus (19. 2 Hobein): τοῖς μὲν γὰρ ἄλλοις (1. 6. to those who loved 
basely) ὁ ἔρως ἦν ὄνομα ἐπιθυμίας ἐν ἡδοναῖς ᾿πλανώμενον) (πλανωμένης 
Reiske). Jb. 20. 5: ἐπισπᾶται δὲ αὐτὸν (sc. τὸν ὑβριστὴν ἔρωτα) 
κάλλους Γφήμη (read ἡδονὴ) οἰστρούμενον, ὑπὸ δὲ τῆς ἀγνοίας πλανώ- 
μενον. Compare Corp. I. 19 3η.: ὃ δὲ ἀγαπήσας [[ |] ἐκ πλάνης, 
ἔρωτος ({τὸ}) σῶμα, οὗτος μένει ἐν τῷ σκότει πλανώμενος. 

ταύτην δὲ τὴν διοίκησιν Ἑρμῆς εἱμαρμένην ἐκάλεσεν. This appears 


Ὁ Socrates has just said that ἔρως (of the lower kind) is one among many kinds of 
ἐπιθυμία, and that every ἐπιθυμία is a desire for some sort of ἡδονή, and as such, is” 
to be distinguished from δύξα ἐφιεμένη τοῦ ἀρίστου (= δύξα ἐπὶ τὸ ὀρθὸν ὁρμῶσα), 
He Lert as instances of ἐπιθυμίαι the desire for food and the desire for strong 
drink. The object of this kind of ἔρως then is ἡδονὴ (σωματικοῦ) κάλλους, as th 
of γαστριμαργία is ἡδονὴ ἐδωδῆς. f 

3 The συγγενεῖς ἐπιθυμίαι must be the other desires (γαστριμαργία and the 
ἯΚΕ) which are associated with ἔρως (lust), and intensify it by their presence 

side it. 

* Perhaps in connexion with ém σώματος κάλλος (which appears to be a repetition 
of πρὸς ἡδονὴν ἀχθεῖσα nédAous). For instance, it would be possible to write (( 
σώματος κάλλος) {πλανηθεῖσα), καὶ ὑπ᾽ ad τῶν ἑαυτῆς συγγενῶν ἐπιθυμιῶν [[ ]] ἐ 
μένως ῥωσθεῖσα, 





LIBELLVS XVI: §§ 16-17 455 


writer of Corp. XIII. But ταύτην... ἐκάλεσεν may have been 
inserted by a later hand. 
δὲ 17-19. ἤρτηται οὖν. . . αὐτὸς ἄπαυστος. This concluding 


paragraph is dependent partly on the contents of δὲ 4-10a and 12, 
and partly on those of §§ 13-16, and presupposes both those 
passages. ὃ 17 (ἤρτηται οὖν ὃ νοητὸς κόσμος κιτ.λ.) contains state- 
ments suggested by ὃ 6 (πόθεν δὲ atry—se. ἡ νοητὴ οὐσία---ἐπιρρεῖ 
κιτιλ.) and by § 12 (ὥσπερ ὁ νοητὸς κόσμος κ-τ.λ.); and δημιουργὸς 
δὲ ὃ ἥλιος in ὃ 18 is a repetition of ὁ δημιουργός, λέγω δὴ ὃ ἥλιος in ὃ 5. 
But on the other hand, §§ 17 and 18 adhere to the doctrine of 
planets and daemons set forth in §§ 13-16, and ignore the doctrine 
of φῶς set forth in §§ 4-roa and 12. Moreover, ὃ 19 is closely 
related to ὃ 3. It seems then that the construction of Corp, XVI 
(apart from the preface, §§ 1a~-2,) may be best explained as 
follows. The writer took from one source a theory of φῶς, and 
from another source a theory of planets and daemons ; he set down 
these two theories side by side,—the one in §§ 4-10a and 12, and 
the other in 88 13-16,—leaving them unreconciled ; and he wrote 
§ 3 as an introduction to the whole composed of these two parts, 
and §§ 17-19 as a conclusion to it. 

ἃ 17. ἤρτηται οὖν ὁ νοητὸς κόσμος τοῦ θεοῦ [ὁ δὲ αἰσθητὸς τοῦ νοητοῦ] 
ὁ δὲ ἥλιος διὰ τοῦ νοητοῦ [καὶ αἰσθητοῦ] κόσμου κιτιλ, It is necessary 
to cut out the mentions of the αἰσθητὸς κόσμος, which must have 
been inserted by some unintelligent reader. According to the 
doctrine of Corp, XVI, the Sun, as second God, presides over the 
sensible universe ; his life-giving power must therefore come to him 
from a supracosmic source, and cannot be transmitted to him through 
the αἰσθητὸς κόσμος, which is subordinate to him. The descending 
series is ὁ θεός, ὁ νοητὸς κόσμος, ὁ ἥλιος ; and the αἰσθητὸς κόσμος, 
if spoken of at all, ought to be spoken of as the object or field of 
the Sun’s demiurgic activity, and not as the source of it. 

διὰ τοῦ vontod[ ] κόσμου τὴν ἐπιρροὴν ἀπὸ τοῦ θεοῦ χορηγεῖται 
τοῦ ἀγαθοῦ, τουτέστι τῆς δημιουργίας. This is an attempt to answer 
the question which in § 6 was said to be unanswerable. ‘The good’ 
issues from God, and is transmitted to the Sun through the Noetos 
Kosmos. As to the meaning of τὸ ἀγαθόν here, cf. Ase/. Lat, 111. 
27a: ‘deus... dispensator... est bonorum, id est sensus, animae, 
et vitae.’ We might rather have expected τῆς ζωῆς in place of τῆς 
δημιουργίας ; but perhaps δημιουργίας may be allowed to stand, if we 
take it to mean ‘life-giving energy’, 

















456 CORPVS HERMETICVM 


περὶ δὲ τὸν ἥλιον αἱ ὀκτώ εἶσι σφαῖραι, τούτου ἠρτημέναι. CF, μέσος 
ἵδρυται in § 7, We found reason to think that in §§ 4- τος the 
Sun is regarded as the nearest to earth of all the heavenly bodies, 
According to that view, the Sun would have above him seven of 
the eight spheres here enumerated, (viz. that of the fixed stars, those 
of the five planet-stars, and that of the moon,) and below him, 
one of them only (viz. ἣ περίγειος σφαῖρα, i.e. the atmosphere), 
But it is possible that the position assigned to the Sun in §§ 17-19 
is different from that assigned to him in §§ 4-roa, and that the 
arrangement here assumed is as follows :—fixed stars, Saturn, Jupiter, 
Mars, Sun, Mercury, Venus, Moon, atmosphere, In that case, 
the Sun would have four spheres above him, and four spheres 
below him. 

It may be inferred from this passage that besides the six corps of 
daemons commanded by the six planet-gods (§ 13), there is a seventh 
corps, commanded by a god who presides over the sphere of the 
fixed stars, and an eighth, commanded by a god who presides 
over the atmosphere. Compare the list of οὐσιάρχαι in Ased, Lat, 
IIL. το Ὁ. ᾿ 

τῶν δὲ δαιμόνων (ἤρτηνται) οἱ ἄνθρωποι. The few men who are 
‘illumined by God’s light’ must be excepted; but that exception 
is not here mentioned. As far as their bodies are concerned, all 
men alike ‘are dependent on the daemons’; but ‘the illuminated’ 
are unaffected by bodily influences. 

§ 18. διὸ πατὴρ μὲν πάντων 6 θεός, δημιουργὸς δὲ ὁ ἥλιος" ὁ δὲ 
κόσμος ὄργανον τῆς δημιουργίας. According to the doctrine οὗ 
§§ 4-10 a, the ὄργανον δημιουργίας (i.e. the instrument by means of 
which the Sun puts life into things) is the sunlight; according to 
that of δὲ 13-16, the dpy. δημ. is the army of daemons commanded 
by the planets. On the assumption that the writer here had in mind 
the former doctrine, the words 6 δὲ κόσμος ὄργανον τῆς δημιουργίας 
would be meaningless, and it would be necessary to write τὸ δὲ 
φῶς 6. τ. δ, instead. But in §§ 17, 18, the doctrine of φῶς is ignored, 
and that of planets and daemons only is recognized ; and that being 
50, it is possible to make sense of the words as they stand, if we 
take ὃ κόσμος to mean the system of spheres which has just been 
described. The Sun does his work as δημιουργός by means of the 
eight spheres ; i. 6. he employs as his instruments or agents the god _ 
of the fixed stars, the gods of the five planet-stars and the moon, 
and the god of the atmosphere; and these gods employ as their 





LIBELLVS XVI: §& 17-19 457 


instruments or agents the daemons who are subject to them. 
Compare ὃ 7, where ὁ κόσμος seems to mean the heavenly bodies 
regarded collectively. 

καὶ Γοὐρανὸν μὲν ἡ νοητὴ οὐσία διοικεῖ, odpavds! δὲ θεούς, δαίμονες 
δὲ θεοῖς ὑποτεταγμένοι ἀνθρώπους διοικοῦσιν. This is unintelligible. 
The θεοί to whom the daemons are subject must be the gods of 
the eight spheres. But according to §§ 13-16, these gods are 
subject, not to ‘Heaven’, but to the Sun; and there remains no 
function which could be assigned to an entity called οὐρανός. If 
the passage was intended to agree with §§ 13-16 (as it probably 
was), it ought to have been written thus: καὶ ἥλιον μὲν ὁ θεὺς διὰ 
τῆς νοητῆς οὐσίας διοικεῖ, ἥλιος δὲ θεούς" δαίμονες δὲ κιτιλ. If it had 
been meant to agree with §§ 4-104, it would have been necessary 
to write something like this: καὶ ἥλιον μὲν ὁ θεὸς διὰ τῆς νοητῆς 
οὐσίας διοικεῖ, ἥλιος δὲ διὰ τοῦ φωτὸς πάντα δημιουργεῖ. The word 
οὐρανόν, which seems to have been wrongly substituted for ἥλιον, 
may possibly have arisen out of ὄργανον in the preceding line. 

§ 19. πάντα οὖν ποιῶν ἑαυτὸν ποιεῖ. Cf. Corp. ΧΙ. ii, r4a: ἀεί 
ἐστιν (ὁ θεὸς) ἐν τῷ ἔργῳ, αὐτὸς dv ὃ ποιεῖ." 

οὐκ ἄν ποτε παύσαιτο (nov). The Kosmos therefore will continue 
to exist for ever. 

[καὶ ὥσπερ ὁ θεὸς ... τέλος exer.) This is merely a paraphrase 
of the preceding sentence. (But see note on Ase. Lat, III. 29 c.) 


LIBELLVS XVII 


In the MSS., this passage (εἰ δὲ νοεῖς. . . ἑξῆς θεολογήσομεν) 
follows the last words of Corp. XVI (τέλος ἔχει) without a break, 
as if it formed part of the ‘ Epistle of Asclepius to King Ammon’. 
But it is evidently the conclusion of another Zée//us, of which 


1 Compare Joannes Scotus Erigena (ninth century), De divisione naturae 1. 72, 
Migne Paty. Lat. cXxtt. 517D: ‘Coaeternum igitur est Deo suum facere et 
coessentiale.... Non ergo aliud est Deo esse, et aliud facere, sed ei esse id ipsum 
est et facere.... Cum ergo audimus Deum omnia facere, nil aliud debemus 
intelligere, quam deum in omnibus esse, hoc est, essentiam omnium subsistere. 
Ipse enim solus per se vere est, et omne, quod vere in his quae sunt dicitur esse, 
ipse solus est. Nihil enim eorum quae sunt per se ipsum vere est; quodcunque 
autem in eo vere intelligitur, participatione ipsius unius, qui solus per seipsum vere 
est, accipit.” J. 3. 1, Migne 621 B; God is ‘ principium omnium, et inseparabilis 
ab omni diversitate quam condidit.... In ipso enim immutabiliter et essentialiter 
sunt omnia, et ipse est divisio et collectio universalis creaturae ’, Erigena derived 
this part of his doctrine from the Neoplatonists, chiefly through Dionysius 
Areopag. 


458 CORPVS HERMETICVM 


all except the last few sentences has disappeared, presumably through | 
the loss of some leaves of the archetype from which our MSS. are 
derived. (By a similar accident, the beginning of Corp. II has 
been lost, together with the /ided/us which originally preceded it, and 
of which the title alone remains.) It is possible that the lost leaves. 
contained the end of Corp. XVI also, and that our text of that 
document is consequently incomplete; but this is uncertain, as 
§ τὸ serves very well as a conclusion of the Epistle of Asclepius, 
and it is not apparent from internal evidence that anything is 
missing after it. 

Corp. XVII is a dialogue between Tat (son of Hermes) and a 
king, who is probably Ammon. The concluding words (τῇ δὲ ἐπιούσῃ, 
περὶ τῶν ἑξῆς θεολογήσομεν) show that the dialogue as a whole came 
under the head of θεολογία, i.e. discussion of the gods or of God; 
and also, that its author intended to write one or more other 
dialogues of the same kind, in which other branches of the same 
subject were to be dealt with. If he carried out his intention, these 
other dialogues have perished. 

As the argument ends with the injunction προσκύνει τὰ ἀγάλματα, 
the particular topic (or the last of the topics) discussed in Corp. XVII 
must have been the question whether men ought to worship statues 
of the gods. That is a question to which the Christian attacks on 
idolatry forced Pagans to give attention in the third century especially, 
though it was sometimes discussed in earlier times, e.g. by Dio 
Chrysostomus and Maximus Tyrius. 

The writer is familiar with the Platonic contrast between σώματα 
and ἀσώματα, αἰσθητά and νοητά, and uses the Platonic term 6 νοητὸς 
κόσμος. - 

In this dialogue, the teacher is Tat; this implies that Hermes 
has departed to heaven, and that his son and disciple Tat has 
succeeded him as ‘prophet’ upon earth. (Cf. Kore Kosmu, Stob, 
Ἔχε. XXIIL. 6: Hermes ἀνέβαινεν εἰς ἄστρα. ἀλλ᾽ jv αὐτῷ διάδοχος — 
6 Τάτ, υἱὸς ὁμοῦ (τούτου) καὶ παραλήπτωρ τῶν μαθημάτων.) This 
notion is not likely to have arisen until a large body of Hermetic 
writings, including a collection of ‘ Discourses of Hermes to Tat’, 
was in existence. Corp. XVII must therefore be one of the later 
Hermetica; and we may conclude that it was probably written in 
the third century A. Ὁ. 

εἰ δὲ νοεῖς, ἔστιν κιτλ, ‘If you give your attention to it, (you 
cannot but see that) there are’ &c. 








LIBELLVS XVII 459 


ἔστιν... καὶ σωμάτων (εἴδωλα) ἀσώματα... . Τὰ ἐν τοῖς ἐσόπτροις 
φαινόμενα κιτλ, The reflections seen in mirrors are mentioned as 
instances of εἴδωλα in Pl. Soph. 239 Ὁ, where, in a discussion of the 
question ‘what is meant by an ¢idwdov’, Theaetetus says Δῆλον 
ὅτι φήσομεν τὰ ἐν τοῖς ὕδασι καὶ κατόπτροις εἴδωλα, ἔτι καὶ τὰ γεγραμμένα 
καὶ τὰ τετυπωμένα (i. 6. pictures and sculptures) «.7.A. 

The word ἀσώματος is here applied both to the εἴδωλα which are 
seen in mirrors, and to the ἰδέαι which are seen in bodies ; and the 
writer makes use of the εἴδωλα ἀσώματα seen in mirrors to explain 
by analogy the meaning of the statement that the ἰδέαι are ἀσώματοι. 
Cf. Corp. ΧΙ. ii. 17 a (μὴ θαυμάσῃς εἰ ἔστι τις ἀσώματος ἰδέα κ-τ.λ.), 
where the instance of a picture (i.e. an εἴδωλον of another kind) 
is employed to illustrate the meaning of ἀσώματος. 

θείως νοεῖς. The words ὁ βασιλεὺς εἶπεν could hardly be placed 
after the two distinct statements οὕτως ἔχει, ὦ Τάτ, and θείως νοεῖς. 
Besides, there is nothing specially ‘divine’ in the thought that the 

image seen in a mirror is not a body. 

* («5 οὕτως ἀντανακλάσεις εἰσὶ τῶν ἀσωμάτων πρὸς τὰ σώματα. 
There is a want of sequence here. οὕτως was probably preceded 
by a clause beginning with ὥσπερ, and containing a statement about 
ἔσοπτρα and the εἴδωλα seen in them. As εἴδωλα are given off by 
bodies, and are seen in mirrors, so ἰδέαι are given off by τὰ νοητά 
(= τὰ ὄντως ὄντα, the entities of which the νοητὸς κόσμος is composed), 
and are seen in bodies. In other words, bodies are mirrors in 
which the νοητά are reflected. We cannot see the νοητά themselves ; 
but we can see reflections of them in material things.’ It is these 
reflections, and not τὰ ὄντως ὄντα themselves, that in this passage 
are called ἰδέαι (= formae visibiles). They correspond to τὰ εἰσιόντα 
καὶ ἐξιόντα τῶν ὄντων ἀεὶ μιμήματα in Pl. Zim. 50. Cf. Ase. Lat 
III. 36 fiz. : ‘sunt enim (sol et luna) quasi speculorum nostrorum 
similes, imaginum similitudines aemulo splendore reddentium.’ 

In ἀντανακλάσεις τῶν ἀσωμάτων, the term ἀσώματα, which was 
previously applied (x) to the εἴδωλα, and (2) to the ἰδέαι, seems to 
denote neither εἴδωλα nor ἰδέαι, but the νοητά (= ὄντως ὄντα) from 
which the ἰδέαι come. In place of πρὸς τὰ σώματα, we might 
rather have expected ἐν τοῖς σώμασι (cf. αἱ ἰδέαι, αἱ ἐν σώμασι φαινό- 
μεναι above). What the writer probably meant might be expressed 
thus: ἰδέαι τῶν ἀσωμάτων ἀντανακλῶνται πρὸς τὰ σώματα. ‘Forms 


2 Ch Paul, 1 Cor, 13. 12: βλέπομεν γὰρ ἄρτι δι᾿ ἐσόπτρου ἐν αἰνίγματι. 


460 CORPVS HERMETICVM 


of (or derived from) the incorporeal νοητά are reflected agarnst 
bodies’, i.e. are projected on bodies, and reflected from them to 
our eyes, as the image of a thing is projected on a mirror and 
reflected from it. 

[καὶ τῶν σωμάτων πρὸς τὰ ἀσώματα, τουτέστι τοῦ αἰσθητοῦ πρὸς τὸν 
νοητὸν κόσμον.] This is a meaningless addition. It could not be 
said that bodies are reflected in τὰ νοητά as in a mirror. 

καὶ τοῦ νοητοῦ (κόσμου) πρὸς τὸν αἰσθητόν. The Aisthetos Kosmos 
(i.e. the whole made up of all σώματα) is a mirror in which the 
Noetos Kosmos (i.e. the whole made up of all νοητά or ὄντως ὄντα) 
is reflected. 

διὸ προσκύνει τὰ ἀγάλματα, . . . ὡς καὶ αὐτὰ ἰδέας ἔχοντα ἀπὸ τοῦ 
(νοητοῦ) κόσμου, Here, the general principle laid down in the 
preceding sentences is brought to bear on the question whether 
statues of the gods ought to be worshipped. On this question, see 
Ascl. Lat. 111. 24a and 37. Perhaps it was in answer to Christian 
attacks on idol-worship that the author of Corp. XVII wrote in 
defence of the Pagan usage, as the passages on ‘ god-making’ in 
Ascl, Lat. 11 were certainly written in defence of the Pagan cults 
against the attacks of Christians. 

A cultestatue is a σῶμα, and, like all σώματα, presents a ‘ reflection’ 
of a νοητόν. But the νοητόν which the statue ‘reflects’ is a living 
being,—a νοητὸς θεός. Compare Philo’s identification of the ἰδέαι 
or λόγοι with daemons or angels (Schiirer, Gesch. des Jud. Volkes 
1909, iii, p. 707). 

As to the notion that cult-statues are mirrors in which νοητά are 
reflected, cf. Plut. Zs. ef Os. (Parthey) 77, on Egyptian animal- 
worship: εἴπερ οὖν οἱ δοκιμώτατοι τῶν φιλοσόφων οὐδ᾽ ἐν ἀψύχοις 
καὶ ἀσωμάτοις πράγμασιν αἴνιγμα τοῦ θείου κατιδόντες ἠξίουν ἀμελεῖν 
οὐδὲν οὐδ᾽ ἀτιμάζειν, ἔτι μᾶλλον οἴομαι τὰς ἐν αἰσθανομέναις καὶ ψυχὴν 
ἐχούσαις καὶ πάθος καὶ ἦθος φύσεσιν (i.e. animals) Γἰδιότητας" (ὁμοιό- 
τῆτας Squire) [κατὰ τὸ ἦθος] (.. .). ἀγαπητέον οὖν οὐ ταῦτα (se. τὰ 
ξῷα) τιμῶντας, ἀλλὰ διὰ τούτων τὸ θεῖον, ὡς ἐναργεστέρων ἐσόπτρων, 
καὶ φύσει yeyovdrwy, “ds ὄργανον ἢ τέχνην ἀεὶ τοῦ πάντα κοσμοῦντος 
θεοῦ νομίζειν.) (Perhaps, καὶ φύσει γεγονότων [ὡς ὄργανον, ἣ(ν) 
τέχνην det τοῦ πάντα κοσμοῦντος θεοῦ νομίζειν. Statues of the gods 
are τοῦ θείου ἔσοπτρα, made by human τέχνη ; the animals worshipped 
by the Egyptians are évapyéorepa τοῦ θείου ἔσοπτρα, made by φύσις, 
which is God's τέχνη.) Plotinus 4. 3. rz: καί μοι δοκοῦσιν of πάλαι 
σοφοί, ὅσοι ἐβουλήθησαν θεοὺς αὐτοῖς παρεῖναι, ἱερὰ καὶ ἀγάλματα 








LIBELLVS XVII—XVIII 461 


ποιησάμενοι, εἰς τὴν τοῦ παντὸς φύσιν ἀπιδόντες ἐν νῷ λαβεῖν ὡς 
πανταχοῦ μὲν εὐάγωγον ψυχῆς φύσις, δέξασθαι γε μὴν ῥᾷστον ἂν εἴη 
ἁπάντων, εἴ τις προσπαθές τι τεκτήναιτο, ὑποδέξασθαι δυνάμενον μοῖράν 
τινα αὐτῆς. προσπαθὲς δὲ τὸ ὁπωσοῦν μιμηθέν, ὥσπερ κάτοπτρον ἁρπάσαι 
εἶδός τι δυνάμενον. 

Ὥρα ἐστίν, ὦ προφῆτα, περὶ τὴν τῶν ξένων ἐπιμέλειαν γενέσθαι 
(γίνεσθαι MSS.). The time has come for the evening meal, at 
which the King must be present as host; the discussion must 
therefore be adjourned. Cf. the concluding words of Julian Or. II: 
ἀλλ᾽ ὥρα λοιπὸν πρὸς ἔργον τρέπεσθαι. : 

Tat is here called προφήτης. The word may mean ‘an inspired 
teacher’, But προφήτης was the title borne by Egyptian priests 
of a certain rank or grade; and it is possible that the writer 
intended to imply that Tat was a priest of the class denoted by 
this title. 


LIBELLVS XVIII 


This document has nothing to do with Hermes or any pupil of 
Hermes; and the only reason for calling it ‘Hermetic’ is that it is 
included in the Corpus Hermeticum in one of the two classes of MSS. 
in which the collection has come down to us, and in that respect 
stands on a par with Corp. XVI and Corp. XVII. It consists of 
two or three fragments of an epideictic oration ‘in praise of kings’. 
Its author does not, like the Hermetists, put what he has to say 
into the mouth of a prehistoric teacher, but speaks in his own 
person. He appears to have been a rhefor by profession, and one 
who made high claims for the art which he professed. He says 
that musicians and other artists are inspired by God, and 
asserts that he himself, as an artist in speech-making, is likewise 
inspired. 

The circumstances presupposed are these. The Roman empire is 
under the rule of two or more ‘kings’ who reign conjointly. The 
rulers have recently brought a formidable war, or series of wars, to 
a successful conclusion (ἐκ τῶν ἐκείνων τροπαίων ἡ τοῦ λόγου προθυμία, 
§ 7b; αὐτοῖς τὰ τῆς νίκης πεπρυτάνευται, ὃ 8 ; πᾶσαι αἱ νῖκαι, ὃ 9; οἷς 
ἡ νίκη . . . πεπρυτάνευται κιτιλ., § 10 ;) and established peace (τοὺς τῆς 
κοινῆς ἀσφαλείας καὶ εἰρήνης πρυτάνεις, ὃ 10; τοσαύτης ἡμῖν εἰρήνης 
εὐετηρίαν ἁπλώσασι κιτιλ., ὃ τό). Their success is celebrated at a 





462 CORPVS HERMETICVM 


festival held in some city of the empire;' and the orator does his 
part in the celebration by delivering this speech. 

Who are the reigning ‘kings’? That part of the oration in which 
their actions were spoken of in detail has been lost; but the style 
and diction agree well with a date not far from a.D, 300.2 It is 
most likely then that Reitzenstein is right in his conclusion that the 
‘kings’ are Diocletian and his colleagues,—i.e. the two August, 
Diocletian and Maximian, and the two Caesares, Galerius and Con- 
stantius,—who reigned jointly * from Α. Ὁ. 293 to 305. During the 
first five or six years of their joint rule, Maximian and Constantius 
re-established the imperial power and restored security in the West 
by a series of successful wars in Gaul, Britain, and Africa, while — 
Diocletian and Galerius did the like in the eastern half of the empire, 
Galerius secured the Balkan peninsula against barbarian invasion by 
his campaigns on the Danube; Diocletian in person reconquered 
Egypt (295-296); and the war waged by Diocletian and Galerius 
against the Persians (296-297) was concluded by a treaty of peace, the 
terms of which were highly satisfactory to the Romans, By the 
year 298, a situation such as is implied in Corp. XVIII had been 
attained ; a series of successful wars had ended in the establishment, 
throughout the empire, of peace and prosperity such as had long 
been unknown.‘ It is probable then that the speech was composed 
in or about A, Ὁ, 300. 


1. Reitzenstein (Poim, p. 199) says that the oration is addressed to certain 
emperors ‘who are present, or are supposed to be present’, But I can find no 
proof that the presence of the emperors, or any of them, is assumed. The βασιλεῖς 
are spoken of in the third person only, ὦ τιεμιώτατοι, ὃ 7a, may very well have 
been addressed to the local dignitaries who presided at the festival, and not to the 
emperors themselves: and! αὐτοῖς τοῖς βασιλεῦσι φίλον, § 8, does not necessarily 
imply that the ‘kings’ are present. 

Keil, in Reitz. Poim. pp. 371 ff., investigates the rhythm of the claxsulae in 
Corp, XVIII, and seeks to show that the writer observed laws of accentual rhythm 
which were in force for artistic prose in the fourth century A. D., but not earlier; 
and he infers from this that the speech ‘ cannot have been written before the end of 
the third century’. This inference seems to me to be stated somewhat too — 
positively. In the first place, the rhythmical form of a large proportion of the 
clausulae is doubtful, because of the corruption of the text. In the second place, 
it is not likely that all writers of artistic prose throughout the Roman empire 
adopted the new laws of accentual rhythm simultaneously; and it would be 
difficult to prove that rules which were commonly observed in the fourth centu’ 
were not observed by a few writers here and there before A.D. 300. Still, Keil’s 
argument gives support to the opinion that the speech was not written before the 
reign of Diocletian, which is probable for other reasons, 

* *Quattuor principes mundi... unum in rem publicam sentientes’ (Vopiscus, 
Hist, Aug. 30. 18.4). ΟΕ the description of celestial concord in Corp, XVIII. 14b. 

4 Paneg. Lat, VIII (V.) 20. 2 (A.D. 298): ‘ Tenet uno pacis amplexu Romana 
respublica quidquid variis temporum vicibus fuit aliqnando Romanum; et illa, quae 








LIBELLVS XVIII 463 


There is nothing to show in what city the oration was delivered, 
or supposed to be delivered.' Corp. XVIII has come down tous in 
a collection of documents most of which were certainly written in 
Egypt ; and this fact points to Alexandria, But the successes of 
the rulers must have been celebrated in every city of importance 
throughout the empire ; speeches of this character were doubtless 
delivered at many different places,—e.g. at Antioch, and at Nico- 
media (Diocletian’s place of residence); and the compiler of the 
Corpus (or the man who added Zidel/us XVIII to the Corpus) may 
have used for his purpose any such oration, of which a copy chanced 
to have come into his hands. 

Did he include the whole of the speech in his collection? If so, 
the loss of the greater part of it might be due either to accident or 
to deliberate excision. (A Christian transcriber would have a strong 
motive for omitting the praises of Diocletian and Galerius, of which 
it is to be presumed that the bulk of the speech consisted.) But it 
seems more likely that the compiler of the Corpus himself selected 
* those parts of the speech in which religious thoughts occurred, and 
rejected the rest. He would be interested in the theory of inspira- 
tion which is set forth in the prooemium (§§ 1-7 a), the ‘ praises 
of God’ with which the oration began and ended (§§ 7 b-9 and 
11-144), and the passage in which the concord of the celestial gods 
is spoken of (§ 14.b); but he would see no reason to include in his 
collection of religious documents a description of the achievements 
of certain Roman emperors. 

The probable character of the missing parts of the speech may be 
inferred from the rules which Menandros Rhetor (Περὶ ἐπιδεικτικῶν, 
Spengel Rhefores Graect, vol. iii, pp. 368 ff.) lays down for the com- 
position of an ἐγκώμιον βασιλέως, and from extant specimens of such 


saepe yeluti nimia diffluxerat mole, tandem solido cohaesit imperio, Nihil ex 
omni terrarum caelique regione non aut metu quietum est, aut armis domitum, aut 
pietate devinctum.’ (The Panegyric? Latini, ed. G, Baehrens, Teubner Ig1!, are 
aseries of orations spoken mostly in Gaul, and ranging in date from A.D, 291 to 391. 
See especially Paneg. VIII (V), delivered March 1, A.D. 298, addressed to 
Constantius, and dealing chiefly with his reconquest of Britain; and X and XI, 
addressed to Maximian.)—D. Cozza, L’ /mperatore dalmata (Diocletianus), 1912, 
p. 68, says that ‘after the Persian war, or, to speak more precisely, about A. Ὁ. 300, 
the Roman world was tranquil; the defence of the boundaries was by that time 
guaranteed, and peace was assured’. Diocletian's Hdictum de pretiis rerum 
venalium, A.D. 301, begins thus: ‘ Fortunam rei publicne nostrae, cni iuxta 
immortales deos bellorum memoria, quae feliciter gessimus, gratulari licet, tran- 
quillo orbis statu et in gremio altissimae quietis locato....’ 

1 We cannot be sure that it was really delivered ; it may be a literary composition 
written in the form of an oration. 





a 


464 CORPVS HERMETICVM 


encomia, e.g. the anonymous Eis βασιλέα included in the works of 
Aelius Aristides (Or. 35, vol. ii, p. 253 Keil), and Julian’s panegyrics 
of Constantius (Or. 1 and 2). 

The traditional text of Corp. XVIII presents numerous passages 
in which a phrase or statement is repeated in slightly different words. 
The author of the oration cannot have thus repeated himself; how 
then did these iterations arise? They might perhaps be accounted 
for by the supposition that our text is not derived from the author’s 
manuscript, but that two or three men who heard the speech 
delivered took notes of it in writing, and a written text was con- 
structed by putting their notes together. Or possibly the text given 
in the Corpus may have been transcribed from a rough copy or first 
draft of the speech, in which the author wrote down alternative 
phrases as they occurred to him, with the intention of subsequently 
choosing between them, and working up this raw material into a 
finished oration. 

Contents. 


Prooemium, §§ 1-9, ((15)), το, ((16)). If the music goes amiss by 
reason of a defect in the instrument, the blame must not be laid on 
the musician. And so, if my speech goes amiss by reason of my 
human weakness, you must not lay the blame on the inspiration 
which comes to me from above. God is the great musician; he 
makes music in all the universe; and I too am an instrument on 
which he plays. If there is any failure, do not blame the divine 
Musician,—for he cannot fail,—but lay the blame on the defects of 
his human instrument. §§ 1-4. 

But sometimes a musician, when his instrument has failed him, 
has found the defect made good by help sent from above. And so 
it is with me. I feel in me a God-given power which will make 
good my deficiencies ; and so I shall not fail. §§ 6, 7a. 

I am to speak in praise of kings. I will begin by praising God, 
the supreme King. God reigns for ever ; and from him all earthly 
kings derive their power. §§ 7 b-o. 

Having praised God, I will pass on to the praise of these our 
kings on earth. In praising them, we shall be training ourselves to 
praise God rightly. God has given them their sovereignty, and 
grants them victory even before war begins. To them our thanks 
are due for the boon of peace. To establish peace is the chief 
function of a king. The very word ‘king’ suggests peace ; and the 
statue of a king is a safe refuge. §§ ((15)), το, ((16)). 








LIBELLVS XVIII 465 


Praise of the reigning kings (missing, except this fragment) : 
Among the celestial gods there is perfect concord ; (and in like 
manner there is concord among our kings). ὃ. ((14 b)). 


Peroration, δ 11-144: 

I will end, as I began, by praising God, God is to us as the Sun 
is to the plants. He fosters the growth of our souls by pouring down 
on us the efflux of his wisdom ; and it is meet that we should use in 
praise of him the faculties which he has fostered in us. ὃ 11. 

God is to us as a father is to his infant children. His greatness 
transcends all that we can say; but he pardons the inadequacy of 
our praise, and takes pleasure in our childish lispings. §§ 12, 13. 

God is good, and infinitely great. He is eternal, and he makes 
the world endure for ever. § 14a. (The rest is lost.) 


Title. The original title is lost. Some late transcriber has in- 
serted περὶ τῆς ὑπὸ τοῦ πάθους τοῦ σώματος ἐμποδιζομένης ψυχῆς before 
§1,and περὶ εὐφημίας τοῦ κρείττονος, καὶ ἐγκώμιον βασιλέως before § rr. 
The first of these two headings is inappropriate, but must have been 
meant for an interpretation of what is said about the musician and 
his instrument in §§1-7a.'_ The other is made up of two distinct 
headings. περὶ εὐφημίας τοῦ κρείττονος would be a suitable heading 
for §§ 11-14; and ἐγκώμιον βασιλέων (not βασιλέως) would serve 
either as a heading for §§ 15-16, or as a title of the whole document. 

§§ 1-5. τοῖς τῆς παμμούσου.... ἐναρμόσασθαι λύραν. In this passage, 
the statement that the musician is not to be blamed for a failure 
caused by a defect in his instrument is repeated no less than five 
times. (§ 1: ὃ μὲν γὰρ... ., τῶν δὲ (ὀργάνων) τὸ ἀσθενὲς καταμέμφεται. 
—§2: οὐ τῷ πνεύματι... ., τῇ δὲ τοῦ ὀργάνου καταμέμφεται σαθρότητι. 
—§ 4: μὴ εἰς αὐτὸν ...,) τῆς δὲ χορδῆς καταμεμφώμεθα τὴν ἀσθένειον.---- 
8 5: τοῦ συμπτώματος περὶ τὸ ὄργανον γεγενημένου, οὐδείς ποτε τὸν 
μουσουργὸν ἡτιάσατο.---70.: οὐκ ἔσχον [τὴν] κατ᾽ αὐτοῦ αἰτίασιν.) 
Seeing that the author was evidently trying to produce a masterpiece 
of style, and must have taken pains about his composition, it is 
impossible to believe that he can have been guilty of this purposeless 
iteration. Some of the phrases in which the thought is repeated 
may have been written as alternatives or substitutes; and some of 
them may have been notes intended to explain the meaning of the text. 

§ 1. ἡ τῶν ὀργάνων ἀναρμοστία. Properly speaking, it is the musician 

1 The man who inserted this heading must have taken ‘ the musician’ to mean 
the soul, and ‘the instrument’ to mean the body. 

2806.2 Hh 





466 CORPVS HERMETICVM 


that ἁρμόττεται (tunes) τὴν λύραν, i. 6. adjusts the several strings so as. 
to make them sound the notes of the particular scale (ἁρμονία) which 
he intends to use. But it may be supposed that there is some defect 
in the lyre which makes it impossible for the musician to tune it 
rightly, or causes it to go out of tune after he has tuned it rightly; 
e. g. a peg may be loose, and fail to keep the string at the right pitch, 

[καταγέλαστον τὸ ἐπιχείρημα' τῶν γὰρ ὀργάνων ἐξασθενούντων πρὸς 
τὴν χρείαν, τὸν μουσουργὸν ἀνάγκη παρὰ τῶν θεωρῶν ἐπιτωθάξζεσθαι. 
The statement that, under the circumstances supposed, ‘the musician — 
is bound to be jeered at by the audience’ contradicts a proposition 
which is asserted five times over in the text (οὐδείς ποτε τὸν μουσουργὸν 
ἠτιάσατο, &c.) ; therefore it cannot have been written by the author, 
but must be a note appended by an objector. That being so, it 
seems best to take καταγέλαστον τὸ ἐπιχείρημα as part of the same 
note, and translate ‘The writer’s argument is absurd; for’ &c. 
(ἐπιχείρημα, ‘an attempted proof’, is a technical term of logic.) The 
words xatay. τὸ ἐπιχ. would not be suitable as an apodosis toc... 
ἐμποδὼν . . . γένηται κιτιλ.; for though the result produced might be 
ridiculous, there would, according to the author’s view, be nothing 
contemptible in the enterprise or endeavour (ἐπιχείρημα) of the 
musician. 

[ὁ μὲν yap (sc. μουσουργὸς) ἀκάματον [εὐγνωμόνως] ἀποδίδωσι τὴν 
τέχνην, τῶν δὲ (sc. ὀργάνων) τὸ ἀσθενὲς καταμέμφεται (ὁ ἀκροατής ?). | 
For ἀκάματον, cf. ἀκάματός ἐστιν (ὁ θεός) below. εὐγνωμόνως is probably 
an alternative for ἀκάματον. 

§ 2. [ἄρτι μὲν [καὶ] σαλπιγκτῶν .. τὴν μολπὴν ἐπιτελούντων. This 
seems to be a description of a concert in which four different kinds 
of instruments are used. The instruments are the trumpet (σάλπιγξ), 
the flute (αὐλός), the reed-pipe (κάλαμος)," and the lyre (implied by 
πλῆκτρον, the thing with which the lyre is struck). From the words 
ἄρτι piv... ἄρτι δέ it must be inferred that in the case supposed 
these different kinds of instruments are played, not simultaneously, 
but separately and in succession. 

The passage is clearly out of place here ; and I cannot find any 
place at which it would fit into the text. Possibly it may have 


‘ Does κάλαμος here mean an instrument made of a single reed, with holes at 
intervals,—a simpler kind of flute? Or does it mean a ‘Pan-pipe’ (adpryé), i.e. a 
mouth-organ consisting of a number of reeds of different lengths fastened together? 

2 Tt might perhaps be made to follow the words τοῖς τῆς παμμούσου μελῳδίας τὴν 
ἁρμονίαν ἐπαγγελλομένοις, § 1 ἐγεῖ, 5 but this would unduly lengthen out a sentence 
that is already long enough. 








LIBELLVS XVIII: §§ 1-3 467 


come from a sentence preceding ὃ τ; the orator may have begun by 
describing a concert, and then gone on to put the case of defects 
occurring in the music. The opening of the oration might perhaps 
be accounted for by assuming that, at the festival at which it was 
delivered, the speech-making was preceded by a concert such as is 
here spoken of. An audience that had just been listening to a series 
of musical performances would be prepared to appreciate what the 
speaker says about musicians and instruments. 

οὐ τῷ πνεύματι τοῦ μουσικοῦ τις ἀναπέμπεται τὴν αἰτίαν. πνεῦμα 
here means ‘inspiration’, in the sense of artistic impulse derived 
from a divine source. The writer assumes that the musician is 
‘inspired’, as poets were commonly said to be. Cf. Pseudo-Pl. 
Axiochus 370 Ὁ (see note on Corp. XII. ii. 19). Spiritus (= πνεῦμα) 
is similarly used by Latin authors. Cic. Arch. 8. 18: the poet is 
‘divino quodam spiritu inflatus’. Hor, Saf τ. 4. 46: ‘quidam 
comoedia necne poema | esset quaesivere, quod acer spiritus ac vis | 
nec verbis nec rebus inest.’ Od. 2, 16. 38: ‘mihi spiritum Graiae 
tenuem Camenae Parca non mendax dedit.’ Od. 4. 6. 29: ‘ spiritum 
Phoebus mihi, Phoebus artem carminis nomenque dedit poetae.’ 
Hence, ‘to lay the blame on the musician’s πνεῦμα ᾿ means, to say 
that the failure results from the inadequacy of the artistic impulse 
which comes to him from God. 

[οὐ τῷ κρείττονί (τι ἀναπέμπεταιν τὴν αἰτίαν, ἀλλὰ τῷ μὲν ἀποδίδωσι 
πρέπον τὸ σέβας. This was evidently written as an alternative for οὐ 
τῷ πνεύματι TOD μουσικοῦ τις ἀναπέμπεται τὴν αἰτίαν.---τῷ μέν must 
mean τῷ κρείττονι (-- τῷ θεῷ), and not τῷ μουσικῷ ; for σέβας 
(reverential awe) is too strong a term to describe the hearer’s approval 
of a competent performer. 

ἐμποδὼν κατέστη, . . . [ἐμποδίσασ(α)!, ἐμποδίσασα has probably 
been substituted by error for some nearly equivalent word, 6. g. 
ἐνοχλήσασα. But it is possible that the sentence originally ended at 
ἐμποδὼν κατέστη, and that τῷ μὲν... συλήσασα has been subsequently 
added. 

8 g. οὑτωσὶ δὲ καὶ ἡμῶν τῆς περὶ τὸ σῶμα ἀσθενείας χάριν μή τις τῶν 
θεωρῶν καταμέμψηται (τὴν τέχνην). καταμέμφεσθαι usually takes an 
accusative; cf. τὸ ἀσθενὲς καταμέμφεται in ὃ 1, and καταμεμφώμεθα 
τὴν ἀσθενείαν in § 4. (In § 2, it seems best to read τὴν σαθρότητα in 
place of τῇ σαθρότητι) Menandros Rhetor epi ἐπιδεικτικῶν, 
Spengel III, p. 374: καταμέμφεσθαι τὴν θρασύτητα. Hence it is to 
be presumed that an accusative has been lost after καταμέμψηται ; 

2806-2 Hh 2 


468 CORPVS HERMETICVM 


and τὴν τέχνην would serve the purpose. In this connexion, ἡ τέχνη 
differs little in meaning from τὸ πνεῦμα. 

At this point, the speaker brings to bear on his own case the prin- 
ciple which he has laid down in the instance of the musician and his 
instrument. The orator’s πνεῦμα or τέχνη (i. 6. he himself, σία inspired 
artist) corresponds to the musician ; the orator’s σῶμα (i. 6. he himself, 
as subject to human weakness or error,) corresponds to the instrument. 
If his performance falls short of perfection, the hearers must ascribe 
the blame, not to his πνεῦμα or τέχνη (which comes from God, and 
partakes of God’s infallibility), but to personal defects arising from 
the body in which his immortal soul is incarnated. The thought 
might be expressed in terms familiar to Platonists by saying that the 
πνεῦμα or τέχνη of the human artist is one aspect of the divine νοῦς 
implanted in man, and that the divine νοῦς is infallible. Perhaps 

_ the*writer had in mind Pl, Ze. τ. 342 B, where Socrates maintains that 
an artist, gva artist, cannot err; οὔτε γὰρ πονηρία οὔτε ἁμαρτία οὐδεμία 
οὐδεμιᾷ τέχνῃ πάρεστιν, .. . αὐτὴ δὲ ἀβλαβὴς καὶ ἀκέραιός ἐστιν K.7.A. 

ἀκάματον μὲν [ἐστι] (τὸν πνεῦμα (εἰσπνεῖ ? or χορηγεῖ ?) ὁ θεὸς (eis) ((7d 
ἡμέτερον γένος). (Cf. ὁ μὲν γὰρ ἀκάματον [ 1 ἀποδίδωσι τὴν τέχνην 
in §1.) This very doubtful restoration of the text is at least a 
possible way of expressing what must have been the sense intended, 
viz. that the orator who delivers this speech is inspired by God, as 
musicians, and artists in general, are inspired (cf. ἡμῖν τῆς ἐκείνου 
σοφίας τὴν ἀπόρροιαν δεξαμένοις in ὃ 11), and that, in so far as he is 
inspired, he cannot fail. 

For the notion that orators are inspired, cf. Seneca the elder, Swas. 
4. 6: ‘memini una nos ab auditione Nicetis ad Messalam venisse. — 
Nicetes suo impetu valde Graecis placuerat. Quaerebat a Gallione 
Messala, quid illi visus esset Nicetes. Gallio ait “plena deo”. 
Quotiens audierat aliquem ex his declamatoribus quos scholastici 
caldos vocant, statim dicebat “ plena deo”.’ 

I have inserted after this sentence the misplaced fragment 6 yap 
To... ἀκάματός ἐστιν, because the statement that ‘God is dxaparos’ 
serves to explain and justify the assertion that ‘the πνεῦμα which 
God gives is d«déparov’. 

((6 γάρ τοι ((Beds)), κατὰ φύσιν μουσικὸς [1] (ὑπάρχων), καὶ [ ] 
ἁρμονίαν οὐ μόνον (ἐν τῷ παντὶ) ἐργαζόμενος, ἀλλὰ καὶ ἄχρι τῶν κατὰ μέρος 
[1 τῆς οἰκείας μελῳδίας τὸν ῥυθμὸν παραπέμπων, κιτιλ) God is a 
musician. The universe is the instrument on which he plays, and the 
cosmic process is the music which he makes. (Cf. ἔρως... μίαν 








LIBELLVS XVIII: δὲ 4.4 460 


ἐργαζόμενος ἁρμονίαν τῶν πάντων in ὃ τῷ Ὁ. The writer was thinking of 
‘the music of the spheres .) But God plays on each thing severally, as 
well as on the sum of things collectively; and when he inspires an 
individual orator, that is merely one special instance of his universal 
music-making. 

For the notion that God ‘ plays on’ the man inspired by him, as 
a musician plays on his lyre, cf. Philo, Quis rer. div. heres 52. 259, 
Wendland III, p. 59: προφήτης γὰρ ἴδιον μὲν οὐδὲν ἀποφθέγγεται, 
ἀλλότρια δὲ πάντα, ὑπηχοῦντος ἑτέρου. ... μόνῳ δὲ σοφῷ ταῦτ᾽ ἐφαρ- 
μόττει, ἐπεὶ καὶ μόνος (6 σοφὸς) ὄργανον θεοῦ ἐστιν, ἠχεῖον κρουόμενον 
καὶ πληττόμενον ἀοράτως ὑπ᾽ αὐτοῦ. Lb. 53. 265 f.: ἐξοικίζεται γὰρ ἐν 
ἡμῖν ὃ νοῦς (1. 6. our merely human intellect quits us) κατὰ τὴν τοῦ 
θείου πνεύματος ἄφιξιν. ... ὄντως γὰρ ὁ προφήτης, καὶ ὁπότε λέγειν 
δοκεῖ, πρὸς ἀλήθειαν ἡσυχάζει, καταχρῆται δὲ ἕτερος αὐτοῦ τοῖς φωνητηρίοις 
ὀργάνοις, στόματι καὶ γλώττῃ, πρὸς μήνυσιν ὧν ἂν θέλῃ" τέχνῃ δὲ ἀοράτῳ 
καὶ παμμούσῳ ταῦτα κρούων, εὔηχα καὶ παναρμόνια καὶ γέμοντα συμφωνίας 
τῆς πάσης ἀποτελεῖ. Reitzenstein compares Montanus (Epiphan. 
Haer, 48. 4): Wov ὁ ἄνθρωπος ὡσεὶ λύρα, κἀγὼ ἐφίπταμαι ὡσεὶ πλῆκτρον. 

The ordered sequence of things may be described as ἃ ‘rhythm’ ; 
the word ῥυθμόν may therefore be allowed to stand here, though it is 
inappropriate in ὃ 4 fiz. But it would be possible to cut out τῆς 
οἰκείας μελῳδίας τὸν ῥυθμόν, and take the preceding ἁρμονίαν as the 
object of both ἐργαζόμενος and παραπέμπων. 

ἀκάματός ἐστιν. God, the supreme Musician, cannot fail or fall 
short in his art. 

det [δὲ καὶ] ὡσαύτως ἔχων τῆς [οἰκείας] ἐπιστήμης. I take this to 
be an explanation or expansion of ἀκάματός ἐστιν. 

[διηνεκὴς δὲ ταῖς εὐδαιμονίαις]. This seems to be a clumsily written 
alternative for the following words, εὐεργεσίαις δὲ ταῖς αὐταῖς διὰ παντὸς 
κεχρημένος. The εὐεργεσίαι of God, in this connexion, are his gifts 
of πνεῦμα (inspiration) to men. 

§ 4. εἰ δὲ μάλιστα [τῷ Φειδίᾳ, τῷ δημιουργῷ οὐχ ὑπήκουσεν ἡ τῆς 
ὕλης χρεία πρὸς ἐντελῆ τὴν ποικιλίαν (. . .). Hitherto, the only art 
discussed (except that of the orator) has been the art of music; and 
there has been nothing to lead up to a mention of Phidias the 
sculptor. If we cut out 7G Φειδίᾳ, and take τῷ δημιουργῷ to mean 
God, the sentence expresses one of the leading thoughts of the 
Timaeus. God, in his ordering of the universe, aims at the best; 
and if the result falls short of perfection, that is due to the resistance 
of the ὕλη on which God has to work. Perhaps a genitive—rod 

Hh 3 


470 CORPVS HERMETICVM 


κόσμου or something of the sort,—may have been lost after τὴν 
ποικιλίαν. We may suppose that τῷ Φειδίᾳ was inserted by a reader 
who misunderstood the sentence, and took τῆς ὕλης to mean the block 
of marble which the sculptor shapes. 

In the missing words which followed, the writer must have applied 
the general principle laid down in the Zimaeus to the particular case 
of the inspired orator. In this instance also, God does his part 
without fail; and if there is any failure in the speech delivered, it 
must be caused by the intractability of the ὕλῃ with which God has 
to deal,—that is, in this instance, by the human deficiency (i) περὶ 
τὸ σῶμα ἀσθένεια) of the orator. 

The same thought might be expressed in another way by saying 
that it is not the divine Musician, but the human instrument, that 
is to blame ; and if we retain the following passage, (. . .) διήρκεσε 
δὲ αὐτὸς ὁ μουσουργὸς κιτιλ., We Must interpret it accordingly ; i.e. 
we must here take ‘the musician’ to mean God, and ‘the string’ 
to mean the orator. This one repetition of the statement in § 2 
(οὐ τῷ πνεύματι τοῦ μουσικοῦ x.r.A.) may perhaps be allowed to stand, 
—especially as the terms are to be understood differently in the 
second passage. In § 2, the words are used in their literal sense ; 
‘the musician’ there means the lyre-player, and ‘the instrument’ 
means his lyre. But in § 4, (the analogy having been explained 
in the interval,) the words are to be taken metaphorically; ‘the 
musician’ means God, and ‘the string’ means the man whom God 
inspires. It might, however, be argued against this interpretation 
that the limiting words κατὰ δύναμιν are more applicable to the 
human artist than to God; and Iam not sure that it would not be 
better to bracket διήρκεσε... ἠφάνισεν. 

τῆς εὐμουσίας τὸν Γῥυθμὸν! ἠφάνισεν, ῥυθμός cannot here mean 
‘rhythm’, in the sense in which that term is commonly used in 
speaking of music ; for the fact that a string is out of tune makes 
no difference to the rhythm. Even if every note were wrong in 
pitch, the rhythm might still be faultless. If the reading is sound, 
we must take τῆς εὐμουσίας τὸν ῥυθμόν to mean, not the keeping of 
right “me, but the sounding of right /owes. But this would be 
a strange use of the word ῥυθμός. 

§ 5. [ἀλλὰ δὴ] [τοῦ συμπτώματος... τὸν μουσουργὸν ἠτιάσατο κ.τιλ.] 
The thought so many times repeated is here expressed in plain and 
simple language ; and as such language is out of keeping with the 
florid style of the oration, it is most likely that this passage is an 





LIBELLVS XVIII: §§ 4-6 


explanatory note appended by some reader. 
a doublet of the ἀλλὰ δή at the beginning of ὃ 6. 

"émdre τῆς κρούσεως πολλάκις πρὸς τὸν τόνον ἐμπεσούσης". These 
words might perhaps be struck out with advantage ; but if we retain 
them, we must suppose the writer’s meaning to have been ‘ when the 
musician strikes the string (rightly, and yet the sound produced is 
wrong)’. 

[οὕτω καὶ ἡμεῖς, ὦ τιμιώτατοι.7)7 This may be a misplaced dupli- 
cation either of οὑτωσὶ δὲ καὶ ἡμῶν κιτιλ. in § 3 ἐγ, or of οὕτως 
οὖν καὶ αὐτὸς. .., ὦ τιμιώτατοι in ὃ 7 a ὧν, 

§ 6. [ὥσπερ αὐτῷ πολλάκις ὀργάνῳ κεχρημένον (αἰ. κεχρημένος). 
If we altered this into (6 θεὸς) αὐτῷ (sc. τῷ ἀνθρώπῳ) πολλάκις (ὥσπερ) 
ὀργάνῳ κεχρημένος, it would be intelligible as a fragment of a sentence 
dealing with the subject of §§ 3, 4 (God plays on the man inspired 
by him as a musician plays on his instrument); and it may 
possibly have come from the lost passage after τὴν ποικιλίαν in ὃ 4. 

[kat τὴν τῆς νευρᾶς θεραπείαν.) This looks like a doublet of καὶ 
τῆς νευρᾶς φυλάττειν τὴν χώραν below. 

(τὴν λύραν) δι᾿ ἀπορρήτων ἐναρμοσάμενον, (Cf. τὴν οἰκείαν ἐναρμόσα- 
σθαι λύραν in ὃ 5 fix.) The following story of the cicala is told 
for the purpose of illustrating this statement. The orator ‘ puts 
his lyre in tune by mysterious (or supernatural) means’, i.e. makes 
up for his own deficiencies by means of πνεῦμα breathed into him by 
God, as in the story the musician made the tune go right, in spite 
of his broken string, by means of the cicala sent by Apollo. For 
δ᾽ ἀπορρήτων, cf. πληττόμενον ἀοράτως ὑπ᾽ αὐτοῦ and τέχνῃ ἀοράτῳ 
in Philo Quis rer. div, heres 52. 259 and 53. 265, quoted above. 

ἱλέγεται μὲν δὴ κιτιλ} In the traditional text, two differently 
worded versions of the story have been intermixed. 


471 
ἀλλὰ δή is perhaps 





(a) λέγεται μὲν δὴ (ὡς) καί 
τινος τεχνίτου κιθαρῳδίαν διαγωνι- 
ζομένου, τῆς νευρᾶς ῥαγείσης, [ὑπὸ 
τοῦ Kpetrrovos| τὸ παρὰ τοῦ κρείτ- 
τονος εὐμενὲς (. .. 


εν τὴν νευρὰν ἀνεπλήρωσεν 
αὐτῷ, καὶ τῆς εὐδοκιμήσεως παρέσχε 
τὴν χάριν. 


(Ὁ) λέγεται μὲν δή τινα τεχνίτην, 
τὸν τῆς μουσουργίας ἔφορον θεὸν 
ἔχοντα εὐμενῆ, ἐπειδὴ ἐναγώνιον 
τὴν κιθαρῳδίαν ποιουμένῳ [ἢ] νευρὰ 
ῥαγεῖσα πρὸς ἐμπόδιον τῆς ἀθλήσεως 
αὐτῷ γεγένητο, (. . “δ 
γὰρ τῆς νευρᾶς αὐτῷ τέττιγα κατὰ 
πρόνοιαν τοῦ κρείττονος ἐφιζάνοντα 
ἀναπληροῦν τὸ μέλος 1, τὸν 
κιθαρῳδὸν δὲ [1 τῆς λύπης παυσά- 
μενον τῆς νίκης ἐσχηκέναι τὴν 
εὐδοκίμησιν, 


ἀντὶ μὲν 


472 CORPVS HERMETICVM 


ὑπὸ τοῦ κρείττονος is probably a doublet of τὸ παρὰ τοῦ κρείττονος. 
The cicala must have been mentioned in (a) as well as in (b); 
something corresponding to τέττιγα... ἐφιζάνοντα must therefore 
have occurred in (a) before τὴν νευρὰν ἀνεπλήρωσεν. In (a), the 
verbs ἀνεπλήρωσεν and παρέσχε are in the indicative, and must 
therefore have been preceded by ὡς or ὅτι ; in (b), the corresponding 
verbs are in the infinitive, and the accusative twa shows that the 
lost verb of the first sentence also must have been in the infinitive, 

ἀντὶ (ἄρτι MSS.) μὲν γὰρ τῆς νευρᾶς αὐτῷ τέττιγα «7.4. This tale 
is told, on the authority of Timaeus (c. 264 8.c.), by Strabo, 6. 1. 9, 
p. 260: ἐδείκνυτο δ᾽ ἀνδριὰς ἐν Λοκροῖς (Locri in South Italy) Eévopov 
τοῦ κιθαρῳδοῦ, τέττιγα ἐπὶ τὴν κιθάραν καθήμενον ἔχων. φησὶ δὲ 
Tiwatos Πυθίοις ποτὲ ἀγωνιζομένους τοῦτόν τε καὶ ᾿Αρίστωνα Ῥηγῖνον 
ἐρίσαι "epi τοῦ κλήρου), τὸν μὲν δὴ ᾿Αρίστωνα δεῖσθαι τῶν Δελφῶν 
ἑαυτῷ συμπράττειν"... τοῦ δ᾽ Τὐνόμου φήσαντος ἀρχὴν μηδὲ μετεῖναι 
ἐκείνοις αὐτοῖς (sc. the Rhegines) τῶν περὶ φωνὴν ἀγωνισμάτων, παρ᾽ οἷς καὶ 
οἱ τέττιγες εἶεν ἄφωνοι, τὰ εὐφθογγότατα τῶν ζῴων, ὅμως εὐδοκιμεῖν 
μηδὲν ἧττον τὸν ᾿Αρίστωνα, καὶ ἐν ἐλπίδι τὴν νίκην ἔχειν' νικῆσαι 
μέντοι τὸν Εὔνομον, καὶ ἀναθεῖναι τὴν λεχθεῖσαν εἰκόνα ἐν τῇ πατρίδι, 
ἐπειδὴ κατὰ τὸν ἀγῶνα μιᾶς τῶν χορδῶν ῥαγείσης ἐπιστὰς ἢ" τέττιξ 
ἐκπληρώσειε τὸν φθόγγον. 

Clem. Alex. Protrepi. 1: ἔχοιμ᾽ ἄν σοι καὶ ἄλλον τούτοις ἀδελφὸν ® 
διηγήσασθαι μῦθον, Γκαὶ ὠδὸν! Bivoyov τὸν Λοκρὸν καὶ τέττιγα τὸν 
Τυθικόν. πανήγυρις Ἑλληνικὴ ἐπὶ νεκρῷ δράκοντι συνεκροτεῖτο ΤΙυθοῖ, 
ἐπιτάφιον ἑρπετοῦ ἄδοντος Εὐνόμου. ... ἀγὼν δὲ ἦν, καὶ ἐκιθάριζεν 
ὥρᾳ καύματος Ἐὔνομος, ὁπηνίκα ot τέττιγες ὑπὸ τοῖς πετάλοις ἦδον ἀνὰ 
τὰ ὄρη θερόμενοι ἡλίῳ... . ῥήγνυται χορδὴ τῷ Λοκρῷ. ἐφίπταται 
[6] τέττιξ τῷ ζυγῷ᾽ ἐτερέτιζεν ὡς ἐπὶ κλάδῳ τῷ ὀργάνῳ καὶ τοῦ τέττιγος 
Γτῷ ἄσματι ἁρμοσάμενος ὁ δὸς! τὴν λείπουσαν ἀνεπλήρωσε χορδήν." 
οὐκοῦν 089 τῇ ὐνόμου ἄγεται ὁ τέττιξ, ὡς ὁ μῦθος βούλεται. χαλκοῦν 
Γάναστήσας 1" Πυθοῖ" τὸν Ἐὔνομον αὐτῇ τῇ κιθάρᾳ καὶ τὸν συναγωνιστὴν 

1 Strabo has just said that in the territory of Rhegium the cicalas are mute, 
whereas those across the border, in the territory of Locri, sing like the rest of their 
ΤῊΣ ἐπιπτὰς. ' 

* L.e, similar to the tales told about Amphion, Arion, and Orpheus. 


* Sense might be made by reading either rod τέττιγος τὸ pe [1 τὴν λείπουσαν 
ἀμεελύρνσε χορδήν, or τοῦ τέττιγος τῷ ἄσματι (τὴν κιθάραν) ἁρμοσάμενος ὃ δὸς τὴν 
AL aX. 
5 Perhaps ἀνέστησαν. It could not be said that the μῦθος set up a statue. 
δ Strabo speaks of a statue at Locri; Clement speaks of a statue at Delphi. 
There must have been somewhere a statue of a musician with a cicala perched on 
his lyre ; and no doubt the story was invented to account for the statue. 








LIBELLVS XVIII: §§ 6-7b 473 


τοῦ Aoxpod.! Clement ignores the point of the story; for he uses 
it merely to show that, according to the mistaken belief of the 
Pagans, animals have sometimes been charmed by music.? 

Pseudo-Julian Zp. 186 Bidez and Cumont, 421d (a letter to 
Iamblichus, written by a rhefor, probably about ἃ. Ὁ. 325): ἤδη που 
. « « κιθαρῳδῷ τὸν ὄρθιον (sc. νόμον) ᾷδοντι πρὸς τὸ ἐλλεῖπον τῆς χορδῆς 
ὑπὸ τῷ τέττιγι τὸ ἴσον ὁ ἸΤύθιος ἀντεφθέγξατο. 

κατὰ πρόνοιαν τοῦ κρείττονος. τὸ κρεῖττον means τὸ θεῖον ΟΥ̓ ὁ θεός. 

§ 7a. οὕτως οὖν καὶ αὐτὸς αἰσθάνομαι πάσχειν. The orator’s bodily 
organs, or merely human faculties, correspond to the strings of the 
musician’s lyre. They are defective ; but the deficiency is made 
good by an influx of divine inspiration, just as in the story the 
broken string was replaced by the cicala, The orator himself, as 
distinguished from his organs or faculties, corresponds to the 
musician in the story. 

‘The application of the analogy of music in this paragraph is 
different from that in §§ 3, 4, according to which God is the musician, 
and the orator is the instrument on which God plays. When God 
is the player, there is nothing that can be compared to the cicala 
which was sent to help the player. 

ἄρτι μὲν yap τὴν ἀσθένειαν καθωμολόγησα (καθομολογεῖν ἔοικα MSS.), 
This refers to τῆς περὶ τὸ σῶμα ἀσθενείας χάριν in ὃ 3. The orator’s 
‘body’ is a lyre with a broken string. There would be no sense in 
saying ‘it seems that 1 am (or was) confessing *, when it is an 
unquestionable fact that the speaker has confessed; I have therefore 
cut out ἔοικα here, and written ((Zo1xa)) μουσουργζήσγειν below. 

πρὸ βραχέος ἀρρώστως διακεῖσθαι (καθωμολόγησα) is an alternative 
for ἄρτι... τὴν ἀσθένειαν καθωμολόγησα. 

δ 7 Ὁ. τοιγάρτοι τὸ πέρας τῆς Γῳὠῳφελείας 1 ἐστ α]ὶ βασιλέων εὔκλεια, 
Down to this point, the orator has been speaking of himself ; he has 
told his audience that he is a man inspired by God. He now pro- 
ceeds to announce the subject of his oration ; it is to be a speech 
‘in praise of kings’. πέρας here means ‘end’ in the sense of ‘aim’ 
or ‘object’ (σκοπός). Cf. Lucian Harmonides 2: ἐπὶ τὸ πέρας ἀφίξῃ 
τῆς εὐχῆς. J, 3: ἐπὶ πέρας ἥκειν με τῆς ἐλπίδος. It is impossible to 
make sense of ὠφελείας. The author may perhaps have written 
ἐπαγγελίας ; οἴ. τοῖς... ἐπαγγελλομένοις in ὃ 1 init. 

! Ie, τὸν τέττιγα. The cicala ‘helped him in the contest’. 


2 Th. § 2: πῇ δὴ οὖν μύθοις κενοῖς πεπιστεύκατε, θέλγεσθαι μουσικῇ τὰ (pa ὑπολαμ- 
βάνοντες, .T.A. 


474 CORPVS HERMETICVM 


ἐκ τῶν (τῶν ἐξ MSS.) ἐκείνων τροπαίων ἡ τοῦ λόγου προθυμία. It is 
because of the victories which our kings (i.e. the reigning Augusti 
and Caesares) have won that I am eager to tell forth their praise. As 
to ἡ τοῦ λόγου προθυμία, one might compare Ps. 44 (45). 1: ἐξηρεύξατο 
ἡ καρδία μου λόγον ἀγαθόν" λέγω ἐγὼ τὰ ἔργα pov τῷ βασιλεῖ. 

ἄγε δὴ ἴωμεν' τοῦτο γὰρ {[6 μουσουργὸς] (ὁ θεὸς) βούλεται. The 
μουσουργός spoken of in this section is the orator himself. The word 
cannot here mean God, the Musician who uses the orator as his 
instrument ; for it could hardly be said that God ‘will make sweeter 
melody ᾿ (λιγυρώτερον μελῳδήσει) when he deals with a loftier theme, 
Cf. § 9 énit., where ὁ μουσουργός is spoken of as praising God, and 
therefore cannot be God, and must be the orator. But if ὃ μουσουργός 
means the orator, τοῦτο 6 μουσουργὸς βούλεται would mean merely 
‘I wish this’, which would be intolerably feeble and pointless ; 
I have therefore substituted ὁ θεός for ὁ μουσουργός in this clause. 

[ἄγε δὴ σπεύσωμεν' τοῦτο γὰρ ὁ μουσουργὸς θέλει. This is an 
alternative for dye δὴ ἴωμεν . .. βούλεται. 

[καὶ πρὸς τοῦτο τὴν λύραν ἥρμοσται. I have bracketed these words, 
because they too closely resemble τὰ τῆς λύρας ἐνήρμοσται in § 8 ἐπ. 

ὅσῳπερ τὰ τῆς ὑποθήκης μείζονα [τὴν δὴν] ἔχει. τὰ τῆς ὑποθήκης 
means τὴν ὑπόθεσιν, ‘his theme’. The subject of ἔχει is ὁ μουσουργός ; 
but a reader took τὰ τῆς ὑποθ. to be the subject of the verb, and 
inserted τὴν ὠδήν to serve as object. 

§8. εἰς βασιλέας αὐτῷ μάλιστα τὰ τῆς λύρας ἐνήρμοσται, καὶ τῶν 
ἐγκωμίων τὸν τόνον ἔχει. The orator is prepared (1) to speak of Aings, 
and (2) to speak in praise of them. But it may be suspected that 
the author wrote εἰς βασιλέων ἐγκώμιον αὐτῷ μάλιστα τὰ τῆς λύρας 
ἐνήρμοσται, and that καὶ... τόνον ἔχει isa subsequent addition. The 
following words, [καὶ τὸν σκοπὸν εἰς βασιλικοὺς ἐπαίνους}, are mere 
repetition of this. 

τοὺς κατ᾽ εἰκόνα ἐκείνου τὴν σκηπτουχίαν ἔχοντας. Earthly kings are 
εἰκόνες Of God, the supreme King. The thought is similar to that of 
Hor. Od. 3. τ. 5: ‘regum timendorum in proprios greges, reges in 
ipsos imperium est Iovis, clari giganteo triumpho, cuncta supercilio 
moventis.’ (Clari giganteo triumpho corresponds to καλλίνικος πρῶτος 
in 8 9.) 

ὃ 9. ὃς ἀθάνατος μέν ἐστι [διὰ παντὸς] [ἀίδιός τε] καὶ ἐξ ἀιδίου τὸ 
κράτος ἔχων. An earthly king reigns for a little time ; but God lives 
and reigns from a past without beginning to a future without end. 
διὰ παντός is a meaningless addition to ἀθάνατος, which of itself 








LIBELLVS XVIII: § γ8-τὸ 475 


implies ‘ living on through all time’. Perhaps ὃς ἀΐδιος μέν ἐστι καὶ 
ἐξ ἀιδίου τὸ κράτος ἔχων would be more satisfactory. 

815. ((ζοὕτω μὲν δὴ τὸν θεὸν... ἡ πρὸς τοὺς βασιλέας εὐφημία.) In 
§ 11, the speaker says ‘I will now γα my speech by praising God’. All 
that followed ὃ τὰ must therefore have had to do with God, and not 
with human kings. But §§ 15 and 16 have to do with human kings, 
and not with God. It is evident then that these two sections are out 
of place, and must have been shifted from an earlier position, § 15 
fits in well after ὃ 9, and § 16 after ὃ το. 

δεῖ γὰρ [ἀπὸ τῶν βασιλέων ἀρξαμένους καὶ] ἀπὸ τούτων ἀσκουμένους. ‘The 
speaker has said ‘I will begin with God’ (ὃ 8), and has done so (§ 9). 
He would be contradicting himself if he then proceeded to say ‘ we 
must deg?x with human kings’. But he might very well say ‘it is 
good to praise human kings, because the practice which we get in 
doing so will enable us to praise God better ’,—especially as it is his 
intention, after speaking of human kings, to come back to the subject 
of God, and praise him again at greater length (ὃ 11 ff.). 

§ 10. ἐπὶ (τοὺς τούτων) ἐπαίνους τοίνυν ἡμῖν καταβαίνει ὁ λόγος. This is 
almost a repetition of ἀλλὰ δὴ καταβαίνομεν καὶ ἐπὶ τοὺς δεξαμένους 
παρ᾽ ἐκείνου τὰ σκῆπτρα in ὃ 15. But perhaps καταβαίνει may have 
been substituted for some other verb. 

οἷς [πάλαι] μάλιστα τὸ κῦρος apd τοῦ κρείττονος [θεοῦ] κεκορύφωται. 
This looks like a reminiscence of Pindar O/. 1. 182: ἐπ᾽ ἄλλοισι 
δ᾽ ἄλλοι μεγάλοι, τὸ δ᾽ ἔσχατον κορυφοῦται βασιλεῦσι (‘the topmost 
summit is for kings’, Gildersleeve), πάλαι may have arisen out of a 
duplication of μάλιστα. 

οἷς ἡ νίκη πρὸς τῆς ἐκείνου δεξιᾶς πεπρυτάνευται. τῆς ἐκείνου δεξιᾶς 
is probably a sign of Jewish influence. The ‘right hand’ of God is 
often spoken of in the Old Testament; e.g. Ps. 117 (118). 15: 
δεξιὰ Κυρίου ἐποίησε δύναμιν, δεξιὰ Κυρίου ὕψωσέν pe. 

οἷς τὰ βραβεῖα καὶ πρὸ τῆς ἐν πολέμοις [ἀρρωστίας] (ἀριστείας) 
προευτρέπισται, This probably means that a mere threat of war is 
enough to make the enemy yield, so that there is no need for actual 
fighting. Perhaps the speaker alludes especially to the recently 
concluded treaty of peace with the Persians; for though battles 
were fought with them in 296 and 297, the Persian king recognized 
the superiority of the forces organized by Diocletian before they 
were fully brought into action, and the settlement with which the 
war ended was considered a triumph of Roman diplomacy rather 
than a conquest by force of arms. Paneg. X. 7.5: ‘...antequam 


476 CORPVS HERMETICVM 


Diocletiano sponte se dederent regna Persarum. Verum hoc Iovis sui. 
more nutu illo patrio, quo omnia contremescunt, et maiestate vestrj 


᾿ 


nominis consecutus est.’ Jd. το. 6: ‘ Rex ille Persarum, numquam > 
Se ante dignatus hominem confiteri, fratri tuo (i.e. Diocletiano) 


supplicat, totumque, si ingredi ille dignetur, regnum suum pandit; 


. amicitiae nomen impetrare contentus promeretur obsequio,’ 
faneg. XI. 5. 4: ‘etiam illa quae armorum vestrorum terrore facta 
sunt velut armis gesta praetereo, Francos ad petendam pacem cum 
rege venientes, Parthumque vobis munerum miraculis blandientem,’ 


Cf, Paneg. VIII (V). 13. 1 (of the recovery of Britain by Constantius) ; 
‘Hoc igitur bellum... ita, Caesar, adgressus es, ut, statim atque 
illo infestum maiestatis fulmen intenderas, confectum omnibus 


videretur.’ 


οἷς οὐ τὸ βασιλεύειν μόνον ἀλλὰ Kal τὸ ἀριστεύειν συντέτακται.] This 
μ ‘i 


feeble clause is an a ticlimax after the more vigorous phrases which — 


precede it; and τὸ ἀριστεύειν is a repetition of ἀριστείας (ἀρρωστίας, 
MSS.). It is very likely that one or two of the other parallel clauses. 


also are interpolations. Perhaps the sentence originally ended at 


προευτρέπισται, and dv... ἵσταται and ots... τὸ βάρβαρον, as well 


as ols... συντέτακται, were subsequently added. (Note the rhythmical 


correspondence of κεκορύφωται, πεπρυτάνευται, and προευτρέπισται.) 

§ 16. τοσαύτης (rocatrny?) ἡμῖν εἰρήνης εὐετηρίαν ἁπλώσασι κ.τιλ. 
The thought expressed by τοὺς τῆς κοινῆς ἀσφαλείας καὶ εἰρήνης 
πρυτάνεις ἴῃ ὃ 10 is carried on and amplified in what is said about 
εἰρήνη in ὃ 16. εἰρήνης εὐετηρίαν is rather awkward; it is possible 
that the original reading was τοσαύτην ἡμῖν εἰρήνην ἁπλώσασι, and 
that εὐετηρίαν was written as an alternative for εἰρήνην. 

καὶ (διὰ τοῦ λόγου [τοῦ εἰς εἰρήνην (αἰ, καὶ τῆς εἰρήνης)} κρατεῖ. 
This must be intended for an explanation of βάσει λείᾳ ταῖς κορυφαῖς 
ἐπεμβαίνει. The true king gets the mastery by reason or persuasion 


(and not by force) ; his authority meets with no resistance ; and so 


he attains to the topmost height ‘ with smooth tread’, i. e. by peaceful 


means. But it may be suspected that the words καὶ (διὰ) rod λόγου ἡ 


κρατεῖ Were added by a later hand, and that the passage originally 
ran thus: βασιλεὺς yap διὰ τοῦτο εἴρηται, ἐπειδὴ βάσει λείᾳ ταῖς 
κορυφαῖς ἐπεμβαίνει" ὥστε καὶ τοὔνομα σύμβολόν ἐστιν εἰρήνης. 


καὶ ὅτι γε ὑπερέχειν πέφυκε [τῆς βασιλείας] τῆς βαρβαρικῆς.] 1 
ἢ ΡΕΧ' : 


we retain the traditional text, we get the statement that kings, as 
such, are necessarily victorious over certain kings. This absurdity 


can be avoided by cutting out τῆς βασιλείας, supplying γῆς with τῆς 








LIBELLVS XVIII: §§ 10, 16, 14b 477. 


βαρβαρικῆς, and assuming that the writer applied the term βασιλεύς 
to the Roman emperors alone. 

[τοιγάρτοι καὶ ἐπηγορία βασιλέως πολλάκις εὐθὺς τὸν πολέμιον 
ἀνέστειλεν (ἀναστέλλειν πέφυκεν MSS.)]. πέφυκεν can hardly be com- 
bined with πολλάκις ; and it may very well be a mistaken repetition 
of πέφυκε above. ‘ 

In this paragraph, the speaker is talking about the blessings of 
peace ; it is therefore inappropriate here to speak of driving back 
the enemy in war. For the same reason I have bracketed ἐνήργησε 
τὴν νίκην καί below. 

καὶ οἱ ἀνδριάντες οἱ τούτου τοῖς μάλιστα χειμαζομένοις ὅρμοι τυγχά- 
νουσιν [εἰρήνης]. This probably refers to the practice of claiming 
ἀσυλία (ius asyZi) by clinging to a statue of the emperor. Do the 
words ἤδη δὲ καὶ μόνη εἰκὼν φανεῖσα βασιλέως τὸ ἄτρομον προυξένησε 
refer to that same practice, or to incidents of some other kind ?* 

8 14 Ὁ. ((οὐκ ἔστιν οὖν (τοῖς) ἐκεῖσε. . . ἁρμονίαν τῶν mévrwv.)) 
ἐκεῖσε (= ἐκεῖ) means ‘in heaven’; and οἱ ἐκεῖσε are the astral gods. 
In this passage the orator speaks of gods, but not of God ; it cannot 
therefore have formed part of the peroration (ὃ 11 ff.), which con- 
sisted of ‘ praise of God’; and it is presumably a detached fragment 
of the lost ‘praise of earthly kings’ which preceded ὃ 11. The 
unanimity of the celestial gods was doubtless spoken of as a 
type or pattern of the unanimity of the kings (Diocletian and his 
colleagues). Cf. Aelius Aristides Περὶ ὁμονοίας ταῖς πόλεσιν, 23. 76 f., 
vol. ii, p. 52 f. Keil: οὗτος (sc. concord) ὁ τῶν πόλεων κόσμος ἀληθινός 
νον ν᾽ ἐπεὶ καὶ τὸν πάντα οὐρανὸν καὶ κόσμον ... μία δή που γνώμη καὶ 
φιλίας δύναμις διοικεῖ" καὶ μετὰ ταύτης ἥλιός τε πορεύεται τὴν αὑτοῦ 
χώραν φυλάττων δι’ αἰῶνος, καὶ σελήνης φάσματα καὶ ἀστέρων φορὰ 
χωρεῖ, «.. καὶ τάξεις ἑκάστων πρὸς ἄλληλα... φυλάττονται, νικώσης 
τῆς ὁμολογίας, διαφορᾶς δὲ οὐδεμίας ἐνούσης οὐδὲ ἐγγιγνομένης, ἀλλὰ τῷ 
θεσμῷ πάντων συγκεχωρηκότων, καὶ μιᾷ γνώμῃ περὶ παντὸς τοῦ προσ- 

1 Schiller, Gesch. der rim. Katzerseit Il, p. 34: ‘ in the third century, the images 
of the emperors played an important part, and one of the first cares of a new 
goyernment is to set up such images, and to send them to the provinces. From 
the time of Maxentius onward, we can see more exactly what was meant by sending 
them, When Maxentius got the sovereignty, he caused his image to be carried 
about in Africa, and thereby publicly proclaimed his rule. This practice had 
developed out of a custom of the camps, The image of the reigning emperor stood 
in the shrine of the camp, and received divine worship there; the fall of an emperor 
caused this image to be thrown down, and when a new emperor was appointed, his 
image was at once set up.’ Paneg. Lat. VIII (V). 15. 6: ‘Demens qui nesciebat, 


quacunque fugeret, ubique vim vestrae divinitatis esse, ubi vultus vestri, ubi signa 
(statuae) colerentur.’ 


478 CORPVS HERMETICVM 


ἥκοντος χρωμένων" ὥστ᾽ εἰ τὸ μιμεῖσθαι τοὺς κρείττους εὖ φρονούντων ἐστίν, 
εὖ φρονούντων ἂν εἴη καὶ τὸ ὡς οἷόν τε μάλιστα ἕν τι τοὺς σύμπαντας 
αὑτοὺς ἡγεῖσθαι. ὑπάρχει δ᾽ ὑμῖν καὶ τῶν ἀνθρωπείων παράδειγμα ἐν 
ὀφθαλμοῖς τὸ μέγιστον, οἱ πάντα ἄριστοι βασιλεῖς (M. Aurelius and 
L. Verus, A.D. 161-169), οἷς πολλῶν καὶ μεγάλων ὑπαρχόντων 
κάλλιστον εἶναι δοκεῖ ἡ πρὸς ἀλλήλους ὁμόνοια καὶ σπουδή. . .. καὶ μὴν 
βασιλεῖς μὲν ἄριστ᾽ ἂν ἄγοιεν τὰ τῶν ἀνθρώπων πράγματα τοῖς τῶν ὅλων 
κυρίοις ὁμοιοῦντες ἑαυτοὺς τοῖς θεοῖς, πόλεις δ᾽ ἄριστ᾽ ἂν ἄγοιντο ἐγγυτάτω, 
τῆς τῶν ἀρχόντων γνώμης ἰοῦσαι. Paneg. VIII (V). 4. 1: ‘la Iovis 
et Herculis cognata maiestas in Iovio Herculioque principibus (i.e, 
Diocletian and Maximian) totius mundi caelestiumque rerum simili- 
tudinem requirebat. Quippe isto numinis vestri numero (i. 6. the 
number four) summa omnia nituntur et gaudent: elementa quattuor, 

εν et duobus caeliluminibus (i.e sun and moon) adiuncti Vesper et 
Lucifer.’ Paneg. X. το. 1 (to Maximian): ‘ Vos vero, qui imperium 
non terrae, sed caeli regionibus terminatis, tantam vim, tantam 
potestatem mutuo vobis impartire divinae profecto immortalisque 
fiduciae est, quam cupiditas nulla perturbet.’... 11. 1; ‘ Vestra hoe 
concordia facit, invictissimi principes, ut vobis tanta aequalitate — 
successuum etiam fortuna respondeat. Rempublicam enim una 
mente regitis ; neque vobis tanta locorum diversitas obest quominus 
etiam velut iunctis dexteris gubernetis. Ita, quamvis maiestatem 
regiam geminato numine augeatis, utilitatem imperii singularis con-— 
sentiendo retinetis.’ Paneg. XI. 6. 3 (to Maximian): ‘Quanta 
vosmet invicem pietate colitis! Quae enim umquam videre saecula 
talem in summa potestate concordiam? Qui germani geminive 
fratres indiviso patrimonio tam aequabiliter utuntur quam vos orbe 
Romano? Ex quo profecto manifestum est... animas esse... 
vestras . .. caelestes et sempiternas.’ 

[pia δὲ πάντων mpdyvwors.] The star-gods foresee and collectively 
predict the future. This seems to be an allusion to astrology ; but 
if so, it is irrelevant here. 

εἷς αὐτοῖς νοῦς [ |, μία αἴσθησις. The writer of Corp. IX speaks 
of the νόησις and αἴσθησις of the Kosmos, and the νόησις and αἴσθησις 
of God, 

[δι᾿ αὐτῶν ἐργαζομένη.] ἐργαζομένη has come by duplication from 
ἐργαζόμενος below. Ἴ 

τὸ (γὰρ) εἰς ἀλλήλους φίλτρον ἔρως ὁ αὐτός, That which unites 
them to one another (as if by a magic charm), and makes peace and 
harmony among them, is their ἔρως (rod καλοῦ, or τοῦ θεοῦ), which 








LIBELLVS XVIII: §&§ 14b, 11 479 


is the same in each and all of them. The word ἔρως here carries 
with it its Platonic associations. For φίλτρον, cf. Plut. Numa 16: 
τὴν γεωργίαν... οἷον εἰρήνης φίλτρον ἐμμίξας τοῖς πολίταις. 

§ 11. ἀλλὰ σπεύδει ὁ Γλόγος]. .. περατῶσαι τὸν λόγον. ὃ λόγος 
has been substituted by error for some term meaning ‘the 
speaker’. 

This is the beginning of the peroration. The whole of the 
discourse in praise of the reigning ‘kings’, which must have followed 
§§ 1-10 ((76)), and preceded ὃ rr, has been lost, with the exception 
of the misplaced fragment 14 b. 

[ἔπειτα δὲ καὶ τῶν θειοτάτων βασιλέων τῶν εἰρήνην ἡμῖν βραβευόντων.] 
There ought to be no mention of kings here. The meaning must 
have been that the orator, having been employed in praising earthly 
kings throughout the main body of his speech, will now end by 
praising God, as he began by doing so (§§ 8, 9). The simile which 
follows (ὥσπερ 6 ἥλιος x.7.A.) supplies a reason for praising God, but 
not for praising kings. The words ἔπειτα. . . βραβευόντων must 
have been added after §§ 15, 16, in which earthly kings are spoken 
of, had been shifted from their original position to the end of 
the text. 

[ὥσπερ γὰρ ἐκ τοῦ κρείττονος [kal τῆς ἄνω δυνάμεως] ἠρξάμεθα, οὕτως 
εἰς αὐτὸ πάλιν τὸ κρεῖττον ἀντανακλάσομεν τὸ πέρας. This is a 
paraphrase of the preceding sentence, and was most likely written 
as an explanatory note on it. The words εἰς. . . τὸ κρεῖττον 
ἀντανακλάσομεν τὸ πέρας directly contradict ἔπειτα δὲ καὶ τῶν θειοτάτων 
βασιλέων κιτιλ. If the speaker said that he was going to end his 
oration by talking about God, he could not say that he was going 
to pass on afterwards to human kings. 

τῆς ἄνω δυνάμεως is a correct but superfluous explanation of τοῦ 
κρείττονος. 

ὥσπερ ὁ ἥλιος ... τὴν βλάστην ἅπασαν κιτιλ' The Sun fosters the 
growth of plants by pouring down his light and heat upon them ; 
and when they have grown and flowered, he draws out their fragrance, 
and takes it to himself as the firstfruits of the produce. Thus the 
sweet scents which rise from the plants are a payment which the 
Sun receives from them in return for what he has done for them.— 
God is to us as the Sun is to the plants. He fosters the growth of 
our souls (i.e. develops our faculties) by pouring down on us ‘the 
efflux of his wisdom’; and it is our duty to use in his worship the 
powers which he has made to grow up in us, We ought then to 








480 CORPVS HERMETICVM 


send up our songs of praise to God, to whose fostering we owe it 
that we have power to sing, as the plants give forth their fragrance 
to the Sun, to whose fostering they owe it that they have power to 
give forth fragrance. 

[πρῶτος (πρῶτον ἢ) ἀνασχών.] ‘There is no reason to speak of the 
sunrise here. It is not ‘on his first rising’ only, but throughout 
the day, that the Sun both fosters the growth of plants and draws. 
out their fragrance. 

τῶν καρπῶν τὰς ἀπαρχάς. The scent of the flowers is regarded as _ 
the ‘ firstlings’ of the produce which the plants will yield when the 
fruit has ripened. The heat of the sun makes the flowers give 
forth their scent ; and this is what is meant by saying that the 
Sun " plucks the sweet odours of the plants with his rays’. 

Χερσὶ peylorais[ | ταῖς ἀκτῖσι, This is repeated in the words 
[kal χεῖρες αὐτῷ ai ἀκτῖνες]. ‘The notion might be illustrated by the 
carvings of Ikhnaton, the heretic king of Egypt, in which the sun- 
disk is depicted sending forth rays, each of which terminates in 
a hand, 

[ἀπὸ τοῦ κρείττονος ἀρξαμένοις καί, This has nothing to do with 
the simile of the Sun. The interpolation was suggested by ἐκ rod 
xpeirrovos .. . ἠρξάμεθα in the preceding sentence. 

τὰ [ἡμέτερα] τῶν ψυχῶν [ὁπερ]οὐράνια φυτά, This is a reminiscence 
of Pl. Zim. 90.4:. πρὸς δὲ τὴν ἐν οὐρανῷ ξυγγένειαν.. ἡμᾶς αἴρειν, ds 
ὄντας φυτὸν οὐκ ἐγγεῖον ἀλλὰ οὐράνιον. See note on Ase/, Lat. I. 6 b, 
‘desuper deorsum radices pervenientes.’ 

καταχρωμένοις πάλιν εἰς αὐτὸν) [| ] [ 1 τὴν βλάστην ἅπασαν. ἡ 
βλάστη ἅπασα is that in us which corresponds to πάντα τὰ βλαστήματα, 
in the case of the plants nurtured by the Sun; that is, it means the 
faculties which God has developed in us by means of the ἀπόρροια 
τῆς ἐκείνου σοφίας which he has poured down on us. We must 
apply these faculties to the worship of Him from whom we have 
received them. 

[γυμναστέον τὰ τῆς εὐφημίας]. The verb γυμνάζειν is meaningless _ 
in this context ; it must have come from δ 15, where γυμνασία is 
spoken of. But γυμναστέον may have taken the place of some other 
verbal in -réov ; and we might get a satisfactory construction for 
the sentence by writing ἀνοιστέον τὰ τῆς εὐφημίας (cf. τὴν εὐφημίαν 
ἀναφέρεσθαι πρέπει in § 12), and placing these words before 
καταχρωμένοις. The praise which we send up to God corresponds — 
to the scent which the sun’s heat draws forth from the flowers, 


LIBELLVS XVIII: δὲ 11-12 481 





[ἧς αὐτὸς ἡμῖν ἐπομβρήσει.] ἐπομβρεῖν τί τινι means ‘to rain down 
something on something’. ἐπομβρίζειν is sometimes used in the 
same sense, but occurs also in the sense ‘to water (something) with 
rain’. If we write ἣν αὐτὸς ἡμῖν ἐπώμβρισεν, and put this after 
τὴν βλάστην ἅπασαν, we get a possible meaning: ‘all the growth 
(of faculties within us) which God has watered (with the ἀπόρροια 
of his wisdom)’, i, e. which God has fostered by showering down 
his wisdom on us. A mention of rain seems inappropriate in a 
sentence in which God is compared to the Sun; but perhaps the 
Sun, as lord of heaven, might be considered to send down rain upon 
the plants as well as light and heat. 

A man speaking in Egypt would not be likely to mention ‘rain’ 
in this connexion ; it may therefore be thought probable that this 
phrase at least, if not the whole oration, was written elsewhere than 
in Egypt. But the word ἐπομβρίζειν might perhaps be applied to 
irrigation also. 

§ 12. τῷ πατρὶ τῶν ἡμετέρων ψυχῶν. In this paragraph the simile 
of the Sun is dropped, and the relation between God and men 
is described by a different figure ; ‘ we are God’s infant children’. 

κἂν εἰ ph [τὸ] πρὸς ἀξίαν ἔστιν εἰπεῖν. Cf. Pseudo-Aristides His 
βασιλέα, 35. 3f., vol. ii, p. 254 Keil: ὅμως δὲ οὐκ ἀποδειλιατέον, ἀλλ᾽ 
ὅση δύναμις πειρατέον εἰπεῖν. οὐδὲ γὰρ ἂν θύωμεν τοῖς θεοῖς, τὸ πρὸς 
ἀξίαν, οἶμαι, “Spavres! (δρῶντες ?) τοῦτο ποιοῦμεν, ἀλλ᾽ ὅσον δυνατὸν ἡμῖν 
χάριν αὐτοῖς ταύτην ἀποτίνομεν. 

[kal συγγνώμην ἔχουσιν.) This unduly anticipates αἰτητέον δὲ τὰ 
τῆς συγγνώμης κιτιλ. in ὃ 13; and it is not wanted here, as the word 
πρεπόντως sufficiently implies that all is well when the children do the 
best they can. 

τὸ μείζονα αὐτὸν εἶναι (τοῦ) τῶν ἑαυτοῦ γεννημάτων (ἐπαίνου. It 
would be absurd to say that ‘the fact that God is greater than his 
offspring’ redounds to his glory; it is small glory to a father that 
he is taller and stronger than his infant children. The thing which 
redounds to God’s glory must be this,—that the utmost that men 
can say is too little to describe his greatness. Cf. Corp. I. 31: ἅγιος 
εἶ, 6 κρείττων (πάνγτων ἐπαίνων. 

τὸ ὁμολογεῖν τὸν πατέρα ἀπειροδύναμον (εἶναι) Kal ΓἀπειροτέρμοναἽ. 
God’s power and (goodness?) are infinite; (and we, being finite, 
are incapable of describing what is infinite.) All that we can 
say in praise of God amounts to no more than acknowledging 
this. 










482 CORPVS HERMETICVM 


ἀπειροτέρμων does not occur elsewhere. It ought to signify 
‘having infinite boundaries or limits’; but that, if it means anything — 
at all, can only mean what would be more clearly expressed by 
ἄπειρος OF ἀτέρμων. 

δ 18. [φύσει γὰρ ἡμῖν τοῖς ἀνθρώποις, ὥσπερ ἐκγόνοις [ἀπ᾽] ἐκείνου. 
τυγχάνουσι, τὰ τῆς εὐφημίας ἔνεστιν. The sentence interrupts the 
sequence of thought. It is probably part of an explanatory note on 
the paragraph. 

((xat)) ὥσπερ {{[καὶ]] τοὺς [ ] dptiyeveis . . . χαίρειν ἐπὶ τῆς 
ἐπιγνώσεως, οὕτωϊσι δὲ] καὶ (ἡμᾶς .. .). In the preceding sentence, ~ 
it was said that God pardons us for the inadequacy of our praise, 
In this sentence, the speaker goes further, and says that God not 
only pardons us, but takes pleasure in our praise, inadequate though — 
it be. For χαίρειν ἐπὶ τῆς ἐπιγνώσεως, cf. Corp. 1, 31: ἅγιος ὃ θεός, 
ὃς γνωσθῆναι βούλεται. 

Teal τὴν εἰς θεὸν εὐφημίαν ἣν ἡμῖν ἐδωρήσατο. The subject of 
ἐδωρήσατο must be God ; and its object cannot be τὴν εὐφημίαν, but — 
might be τὴν τῆς εὐφημίας δύναμιν, ‘our power to praise him’, 
Perhaps the original may have been something like (6 θεὸς) τὴν 
τῆς εὐφημίας δύναμιν ἡμῖν ἐδωρήσατο; and it is possible that this may 
have come from a note on the simile of the Sunin§1r. It is 
fitting that we should praise God, because it is from him that we 
have received our power to praise. 

δ 14a. ἐν (ἐγαυτῷ [1 τῆς οἰκείας ἀριπρεπείας (ἀειπρεπείας MSS.) — 
ἔχων τὸ πέρας. God’s pre-eminence is limited by himself alone, i. 6. 
by nothing external to him. This seems to be a roundabout way 
of saying that God's greatness is infinite. God is αὐτοπερίγραφος,, 
and therefore ἀπερίγραφος. Compare the use of αὐτογέννητος as an 
equivalent for ἀγέννητος. 

ἀθάνατος δὲ dv, καὶ [ἐν ἑαυτῷ] τὴν ἀτελεύτητον λῆξιν [περιέχων] 
[| ][ Jaws τῆς [9Οῦ:7ἢ ((ἀενίν]άουν) ἐνεργείας καὶ εἰς τόνδε τὸν κόσμον͵ 
παρέχων. ἐν ἑαυτῷ has been repeated by error; and περιέχων is a 
doublet of παρέχων.---τὴν ἀτελεύτητον λῆξιν must be taken to mean | 
τὴν τῆς ἀτελευτησίας λῆξιν, ‘its appointed lot of endless existence’, 
God, being himself immortal (or eternal), bestows everlasting dura- 
tion on the Kosmos. Cf. Pl. Zim. 39D and 418; Corp, VIII. 2 
as emended: ὁ δὴ κόσμος ὑπὸ τοῦ πατρὸς ἀιδίου ὄντος ἀθάνατος γέγονε. 

Γτὴν ἐπαγγελίαν εἰς διασωστικὴν εὐφημίαν]. The sentence ends 
with these meaningless words; and the rest of the ‘ praise of God’ 
with which the oration concluded has been lost. 


es ee 


= 











PRINTED IN ENGLAND 
AT THE OXFORD UNIVERSITY PRESS