The Voyage of the 'Discovery', Vol. II
Robert Falcon Scott, 1905
========================================================================

PROVENANCE NOTE (Tower of Babel staging): Scott's Discovery narrative, Vol. II — completing the 1901-04 expedition account. Source: Internet Archive (https://archive.org/details/voyageofdiscover02scotuoft). This 1905 publication is in the public domain in the United States.

========================================================================

The 

§1  mAQL  of 

m  the 'DISCOVERY 


Captain 

KQliartOcotI 


THE    VOYAGE 

OF 

THE     'DISCOVERY' 
VOL.  II. 


THE 

VOYAGE    OF 
THE    'DISCOVERY' 


BY 

CAPTAIN    ROBERT    F.    SCOTT 

C.V.O.,    R.N. 


WITH    ILLUSTRATIONS    AND    MAPS 
IN   TWO  VOLUMES 

VOL    II. 


THE    COPP,    CLARK    CO.,    LIMITED 

Ifxmiiott 

MACMILLAN    AND    CO.,    LIMITED 

1905 

(All  rights  reserved) 


H  Polar- 

604292 


CONTENTS 

OF 

THE     SECOND     VOLUME 


CHAPTER  XIII 

JOURNEY  TO- THE  FARTHEST  SOUTH 

Future  Plans  Modified  by  Reconnaissance  Journeys — Trip  to  Cape 
Crozier — Start  of  the  Southern  Journey — Depot  '  A ' — Descrip- 
tion of  the  Dog  Team — Equipment  of  Sledges — Return  of  Sup- 
porting Party — Failure  of  the  Dogs — Relay  Work — Dog-driving 
— Dcg-food— Atmospheric  Phenomenon— Cracking  of  the  Sur- 
face Crust—New  Land  in  Sight—  Beautiful  Effects  produced  by 
Snow-Crystals— Dogs  Weakening — Slow  Progress — Depot  '  B' — 
The  Chasm — Pushing  Southward — Increase  of  Hunger — Further 
Land — Scurvy  Appearing—  Cooking  Arrangements — Soft  Snow — 
Experiences  with  the  Dogs — Christmas  Day  and  its  Good  Cheer 


CHAPTER  XIV 

RETURN   FROM   THE   FAR   SOUTH 

Result  of  Shortage  of  Food — Nature  of  the  Coastline — Snow-blind- 
ness— Approaching  the  Limit  of  our  Journey — View  to  the  South 
—  New  Mountains — Blizzard  at  our  Extreme  South — Turning 
Homeward — Attempt  to  Reach  the  Land — The  Passing  of  our 
Dog  Team— Help  from  our  Sail — Difficult  Surfaces — Running 


VI 


THE   VOYAGE   OF   THE    'DISCOVERY' 


PAGE 


before  a  Storm — Finding  Depot  '  B  '—  Scurvy  Again — Shackleton 
Becomes  111-  The  Last  of  our  Dog  Team — Bad  Light  for  Steer- 
ing— Anxious  Days — Depot  'A' — Over-eating — The  Last  Lap — 
Home  Again— Our  Welcome 49 


CHAPTER  XV 

WHAT  HAD   HAPPENED  DURING  OUR  ABSENCE   IN  THE  SOUTH 

Royds'  Journey  to  Cape  Crozier — The  King's  Birthday — Athletic 
Sports — The  Western  Journey — Difficulties  amongst  the  Moun- 
tains— Ascent  of  the  Ferrar  Glacier — Approaching  the  Summit — 
First  Party  on  the  Interior  of  Victoria  Land— Return  of  Western 
Party — Summer  Thawing — About  the  Islands  to  the  South-West 
— Curious  Ice  Formations — Recovery  of  the  Boats — Preparing 
for  Sea — History  of  the  Relief  Expedition — Arrival  of  the 
•  Morning  ' 94 


CHAPTER  XVI 

OUR  SECOND  WINTER 

Effects  of  the  Strain  of  the  Southern  Journey — Communication  with 
the  '  Morning'—  Change  of  Weather — Stores  Transported — 
Delays  in  the  Break-up  of  the  Ice — Closing  of  the  Season  —De- 
parture of  the  '  Morning ' — Making  Provision  for  the  Winter — 
Settling  Down—  Hockey — Departure  of  the  Sun — Fishing  Opera- 
tions— Record  Temperatures — The  Electrometer — Midwinter 
Feast — Our  Growing  Puppies— Hodgson  at  Work— The  '  Flying 
Scud'— Return  of  the  Sun — Signs  of  Summer— Plans  for  the 
Future- -  General  Good  Health .120 


CHAPTER  XVII 

COMMENCEMENT  OF  OUR  SECOND  SLEDGING  SEASON 

Parlies  Starting— Away  to  New  Harbour— We  Find  a  Good  Road, 
Establish  a  Depot,  and  Return— Sledging  in  Record  Tempera- 
tures—Experiences in  Different  Directions— Emperor  Penguin 
Chicks — Eclipse  of  the  Sun— A  Great  Capture— Preparing  for 
the  Western  Journey-  Ascending  Ferrar  Glacier— Our  Sledges 
Break  Down— Forced  to  Return— Some  Good  Marching  —  Fresh 


CONTENTS    OF   THE   SECOND    VOLUME       vii 

I'AUE 

Start — More  Troubles  with  the  Sledges— A  Heavy  Loss— Wind 
from  the  Summit — The  Upper  Glacier — A  Week  in  Camp— We 
Break  Away  and  Reach  the  Summit— Hard  Conditions — Party 
Divided — Eight  Days  Onward — An  Awe-inspiring  Plain — We 
Turn  as  the  Month  Ends 151 


CHAPTER    XVIII 

RETURN   FROM   THE   WEST 

Returning  over  the  Great  Plateau — Doubts  about  Provisions  and  Oil 
— Harrowing  Effect  of  Fresh  Snowfall — Thick  Weather — No 
Sight  of  Landmarks — Sudden  Descent  into  Glacier — Escape  from 
a  Crevasse — Exploration  of  North  Arm — A  Curious  Valley — 
Return  to  the  Ship— Results  of  other  Sledging  Efforts — Ferrar's 
Journey — Barne's  Journey — Royds'  Journey — Shorter  Journeys — 
Review  of  Sledging  Work 197 


CHAPTER   XIX 

ESCAPE   FROM   THE   ICE 

Indigestion — Arrival  at  the  Sawing  Camp — Sawing  Operations — 
Break-up  of  Sawing  Party — The  Open  Water — Arrival  of  the 
Relief  Ships — Unwelcome  News — Stagnant  Condition  of  the 
Ice — Depressing  Effect— Preparations  for  Abandoning  the  'Dis- 
covery ' — Ice  Breaking  Away — Explosions  —Anxious  Days — 
Final  Break-up  of  the  Ice  -Dramatic  Approach  of  the  Relief  Ships 
— The  Small  Fleet  Together — Final  Explosion — The  '  Discovery  ' 
Free 227 


CHAPTER   XX 

HOMEWARD    BOUND 

Memorial  to  our  Lost  Shipmate — Gale  Commences— Ship  Driven 
on  Shore — Gloomy  Outlook — Sudden  Escape — Coaling — Driven 
North — Departure  of  'Morning' — Wood  Bay— Trouble  with 
Pumps— Possession  Islands— Rudder  Disabled — Robertson  Bay — 
Rudder  Replaced — Towards  Cape  North — Heavy  Pack — Skirting 
Pack— 'Terra   Nova'    Parts  Company— Balleny  Islands— Over 


viii        THE   VOYAGE   OF   THE   'DISCOVERY 


TAGE 


Wilkes'  Land— Turning  North -The  Last  Iceberg —Auckland 
Islands — Reassembly — New  Zealand  Again — Voyage  Homeward 
—  Completion  of  our  Work — Our  First  Monotony— Home  .         .     262 


GENERAL  SURVEY  OF  OUR  OBSERVATIONS  ...     300 


APPENDIX    I 

Summary  of  the  Geological  Observations  made  during  the  Cruise  of 
the  s.s.  'Discovery,'  1901-1904.  By  II.  T.  Ferrar,  M.A., 
F.G.S.,  Geologist  to  the  National  Antarctic  Expedition     .         .     32  j 


APPENDIX    II 

On  the  Whales,  Seals  and  Birds  of  Ross  Sea  and  South  Victoria 
Land.  By  Edward  A.  Wilson,  M.B.,  F.Z.S.,  Zoologist  on 
the  National  Antarctic  Expedition 35: 


INDEX 375 


ILLUSTRATIONS 

IN 

THE     SECOND     VOLUME 


Christmas  Camp  amongst  the  Ice-borne  Boulders  .      Frontispiece 

Chasm  which  Prevented  us  from   Reaching  the 

Land Facing  p.    62 

Looking  up  from  New  Harbour       ....         ,,152 

Emperors'  Rookery  under  the  Broken   Ice-cliff 
at  Cape  Crozier ,,        370 


Chart  of  Sledge  Journeys  from    Winter    Quar- 
ters     Facing  p.  374 


CHAPTER  XIII 

JOURNEY  TO  THE  FARTHEST  SOUTH 

Future  Plans  Modified  by  Reconnaissance  Journeys — Trip  to  Cape  Crozier 
— Start  of  the  Southern  Journey — Depot  '  A  ' — Description  of  the  Dog 
Team — Equipment  of  Sledges — Return  of  Supporting  Party — Failure 
of  the  Dogs— Relay  Work — Dog-driving — Dog-food — Atmospheric 
Phenomenon— Cracking  of  the  Surface  Crust — New  Land  in  Sight — 
Beautiful  Effects  Produced  by  Snow-crystals— Dogs  Weakening  —Slow 
Progress — Depot  '  B  ' — The  Chasm — Pushing  Southward — Increase 
of  Hunger — Further  Land— Scurvy  Appearing — Cooking-arrange- 
ments— Soft  Snow — Experiences  with  the  Dogs — Christmas  Day  and 
its  Good  Cheer. 

Hold  hard  the  breath  and  bend  up  every  spirit 
To  his  full  height.  .  .  . 

.  .  .  Shew  us  here 
That  you  are  worth  your  breeding,  which  I  doubt  not. 
For  there  is  none  so  mean  or  base 
That  have  not  noble  lustre  in  your  eyes. 
I  see  you  stand  like  greyhounds  in  the  slips, 
Straining  upon  the  start. — Shakespeare. 

Although  the  gravity  of  our  outbreak  of  scurvy  was  not  under- 
rated, and  we  had  been  busied  in  measures  for  the  prevention 
of  its  recurrence,  it  must  not  be  supposed  that  we  had  allowed 
it  in  any  way  to  interfere  with  our  plans  for  the  future.  Our 
preparations  were  pushed  on  as  vigorously  as  though  no  such 
cloud  had  come  to  overshadow  the  brightness  of  our  outlook. 

The  general  results  of  the  spring  journeys  had  enabled  us 
to  lay  our  plans  for  the  summer  with  greater  definition.  Our 
reconnaissance  to  the  south  had  indicated  that  the  main  party, 

VOL.    II.  B 


2  THE   VOYAGE   OF   THE   'DISCOVERY'    [Oct. 

after  leaving  the  Bluff,  would  have  to  travel  directly  over  the 
snow-plain  at  a  long  distance  from,  and  possibly  out  of  sight  of, 
land  ;  the  probability  was  that  no  further  depots  could  be 
established,  and  hence  it  was  desirable  that  the  party  should 
be  supported  as  far  as  possible  on  their  route.  This  theory 
added  another  object  for  our  sledging  efforts,  for  if  the  coast 
ran  sharply  to  the  west  after  rounding  the  Bluff  it  was  evidently 
desirable  that  we  should  gain  some  information  concerning  it. 
To  meet  these  requirements  it  was  decided  that  Barne,  with  a 
party  of  twelve  men,  should  accompany  the  dog  team  until  the 
weights  were  reduced  to  an  amount  which  the  latter  could 
drag  without  assistance.  He  was  then  to  return  to  the  ship, 
and,  after  a  short  rest,  to  start  again,  with  a  party  of  six,  and 
endeavour  to  follow  the  coastline  west  of  the  Bluff.  With 
such  a  plan  as  I  have  outlined  it  was  hoped  that  there  would 
be  a  good  chance  of  solving  the  mysteries  in  a  southerly 
direction ;  and  as  soon  as  this  was  in  train  Armitage  was  to 
have  at  his  disposal  all  the  resources  of  men  and  material  in 
the  ship  for  his  attack  on  the  western  region. 

In  considering  his  earlier  observations,  Armitage  had  come 
to  the  conclusion  that  it  was  impossible  to  force  a  way  through 
the  entrance  to  New  Harbour,  where  for  so  many  miles  he  had 
seemed  to  see  a  chaos  of  ice  and  morainic  material,  and  he 
thought  his  best  chance  lay  in  ascending  to  the  foothill  plateau, 
in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  so-called  '  Eskers,'  as  from  this  he 
hoped  to  rind  a  pass  which  would  lead  him  over  the  main  ridge 
of  mountains. 

In  busily  preparing  for  this  programme  we  did  not  forget 
the  advantage  we  possessed  in  the  fact  that  our  surfaces  and 
general  travelling  conditions  were  likely  to  improve  rather 
than  otherwise  as  the  summer  advanced  ;  we  should  have 
little  of  the  sea-ice  to  cross,  and  we  knew  that  with  our  cold 
summer  this  would  not  develop  into  the  same  treacherous 
condition  that  it  does  in  the  North,  whilst  the  surfaces  to  the 
south  or  inland  could  not  possibly  grow  moist  and  sludgy. 
With  these  conditions  we  could  arrange  our  movements  to 
take  advantage  of  what  we  hoped  to  find  the  warmest  and 


i902]  MODIFICATION  OF  PLANS  3 

finest  summer  months ;  and  since  there  was  no  chance  of  the 
ship  being  released  from  the  ice  until  February,  there  was 
little  object  in  our  sledge  parties  being  back  much  before  that 
date,  while  we  should  travel  during  the  time  that  the  sun  was 
circling  at  its  greatest  altitude. 

As  a  further  result  of  our  reconnaissance  journeys,  we 
were  now  better  able  to  judge  of  the  requirements  of  each 
individual  party  as  far  as  smaller  matters  of  equipment  were 
concerned.  It  was  evident  that  the  western  travellers  would 
have  to  be  provided  with  ice-axes,  crampons,  ropes,  and  other 
necessaries  for  climbing ;  but  it  seemed  that  in  going  to  the 
south  we  should  be  safe  in  omitting  these  accessories,  and  in 
preparing  for  a  journey  in  which  there  was  no  formidable 
obstruction.  As  we  proposed  to  begin  our  journey  to  the 
south  at  the  end  of  October,  it  can  be  imagined  that,  with  so 
many  minor  details  to  be  attended  to,  the  last  weeks  of  the 
month  were  not  a  slack  season  for  any  of  us. 

On  Friday,  October  24,  Royds  and  his  party  returned  to 
the  ship,  having  achieved  the  object  of  communicating  with 
our  '  Record '  post  at  Cape  Crozier.  We  now  had  the  satis- 
faction of  knowing  that  we  had  done  all  in  our  power  to  guide 
a  possible  relief  ship  to  our  winter  quarters  ;  should  she  make 
a  diligent  search  on  the  northern  slopes  of  Terror,  as  had 
been  arranged,  she  would  at  least  have  a  good  prospect  of 
receiving  the  latest  information  concerning  us.  It  was  also  a 
very  great  source  of  satisfaction  to  find  that  the  party  returned 
in  excellent  health,  for  they  had  left  us  almost  immediately 
after  the  outbreak  of  scurvy,  and  that  they  should  have  come 
back  safe  and  well  went  far  to  show  that  hard  sledging  work 
would  not  necessarily  cause  a  return  of  the  disease. 

From  our  experience  of  the  previous  season  we  had  con- 
cluded that  Terror  Point,  as  the  eastern  extremity  of  the  land 
mass  was  called,  was  an  extremely  windy  region,  and  the 
adventures  of  this  party  left  the  matter  beyond  much  doubt. 
Skirting  the  large  bay  south  of  Erebus  to  avoid  the  deeper 
snow,  they  had  carried  fine  but  cold  weather  with  them  on 
the  outward  march,  and  until  October  10,  when  they  were 

B2 


4  THE  VOYAGE   OF  THE   'DISCOVERY'    [Oct. 

able  to  make  their  most  advanced  camp,  ready  to  proceed 
over  the  bare  rocks  towards  the  rookery.  The  nth  proved  a 
beautifully  calm,  bright  day,  and  Royds,  having  injured  his 
ankle,  deputed  the  task  of  reaching  the  '  Record '  to  Skelton. 
The  latter  left  the  camp  at  noon  with  Evans,  and  by  6  p.m. 
returned,  having  accomplished  his  errand  ;  in  the  bright,  clear 
afternoon  he  had  little  difficulty  in  finding  the  spot,  and  came 
to  the  conclusion  that  they  must  have  been  within  a  very  short 
distance  of  it  in  their  autumn  wanderings. 

On  the  1 2th  Skelton  set  out  again  with  two  companions, 
this  time  intent  on  photographing  the  immense  ice  disturbance 
caused  by  the  barrier  pushing  around  the  land.  After  taking 
several  photographs  he  returned,  and  the  homeward  route 
brought  him  close  to  the  edge  of  the  Crozier  cliffs,  where  they 
rise  with  magnificent  grandeur  and  form  a  frowning  precipice 
more  than  8oo  feet  sheer  above  the  sea ;  from  this  point  of 
vantage  he  looked  down  directly  on  the  barrier  edge  and  into 
the  small  bay  which  breaks  its  outline  near  the  land.  Whilst 
he  was  admiring  the  beauty  of  the  scene,  his  quick  eye  caught 
sight  of  numerous  small  dots  on  the  sea-ice  far  below ;  it  was 
not  long  before  he  decided  that  they  must  be  Emperor  pen- 
guins. He  asked  himself  what  they  could  be  doing  here  in 
such  numbers,  and  wondered  if  it  were  possible  that  at  last  the 
breeding-place  of  these  mysterious  birds  had  been  discovered 
— it  seemed  almost  too  good  to  be  true.  Assurance  must  wait 
for  some  future  occasion,  and  in  the  meanwhile  he  returned  to 
the  camp  in  no  small  state  of  excitement. 

To-morrow  the  mystery  must  be  cleared  up ;  but  to-morrow 
brought  the  wind,  and  not  a  yard-  from  their  tents  could  the 
party  stir.  This  was  the  13th.  On  the  14th  the  weather 
proved  equally  bad,  save  for  a  short  lull,  when  they  were  able 
to  prepare  a  hot  meal ;  directly  afterwards,  the  blizzard  swept 
down  on  them  again  and  continued  without  intermission 
throughout  the  15th,  16th,  and  17  th. 

Before  the  gale  they  had  built  elaborate  protecting  snow 
walls  to  windward  of  the  tents,  and  these  almost  proved  their 
undoing;    for  the   never-ceasing  drift   collected   deeper  and 


i9o2]  TRIP  TO   CAPE   CROZIER  5 

deeper  behind  these  walls,  and  the  occupants  of  the  tents  were 
conscious  that  the  snow  was  gradually  accumulating  around 
them  and  that  they  were  now  powerless  to  prevent  it.  It  soon 
reduced  the  light  within  to  a  mere  glimmer,  and  then,  becoming 
heavier  and  heavier  on  every  fold  of  canvas,  it  diminished  their 
interior  space  to  such  an  extent  that  all  were  obliged  to  lie  with 
their  knees  bent  double.  In  the  end  they  were  practically 
buried  in  the  heart  of  a  snowdrift;  but  whilst  the  stout 
bamboos  bent  under  the  load  and  still  further  narrowed  the 
space  within,  they  luckily  withstood  the  strain  to  the  end. 

It  was  now  only  by  observing  the  extreme  summit  of  their 
tents  that  the  prisoners  had  any  indication  of  what  was 
happening  without.  Though  in  some  respects  this  was  a 
relief,  yet  for  want  of  space  they  were  unable  to  cook  any  food, 
they  could  barely  turn  from  side  to  side,  and  they  suffered  a 
martyrdom  from  cramp.  Their  enclosed  position  brought 
them  comparative  warmth,  but  what  advantage  they  gained  in 
this  way  was  largely  discounted  by  the  sodden  dampness  of 
articles  which  had  thawed. 

On  the  17  th  the  snow  ceased  to  drift.  The  occupants  of 
one  tent  were  able  to  free  themselves  after  some  difficulty,  but 
the  other  tent  had  literally  to  be  dug  out  before  its  imprisoned 
members  could  be  got  into  the  open  ;  whilst  the  sledges  and 
all  that  had  been  left  without  were  buried  completely  out  of 
sight.  The  tale  of  five  days  spent  in  the  manner  which  I  have 
described  is  soon  told — Mr.  Royds  dismisses  it  in  half  a  page 
of  his  report — but  I,  and  I  believe  the  reader  may,  find  that  no 
great  effort  of  imagination  is  needed  to  grasp  the  horrible  dis- 
comforts that  it  involved ;  and  yet  when  this  party  were 
recounting  their  adventures  on  board  the  ship,  one  might  have 
imagined  that  the  incident  was  all  extremely  amusing.  The 
hardships  had  been  forgotten,  and  all  that  the  men  seemed  to 
remember  was  how  So-and-so  had  launched  out  with  the  cramp 
and  kicked  someone  else  fair  in  the  middle,  or  how  the  occu- 
pants of  one  tent  had  declared  that  they  had  been  awakened 
by  the  snoring  of  some  particular  member  in  the  other. 

It  was  not  until  the  18th  that  the  wind  ceased,  and  they 


6  THE   VOYAGE   OF  THE   'DISCOVERY'    [Oct. 

were  able  to  make  shift  to  dry  their  equipment  and  to  look  out 
on  the  scene  about  them.  When  they  had  arrived  the  whole 
Ross  Sea  had  been  frozen  over  as  far  as  their  eyes  could  see, 
and  now  they  gazed  on  a  sheet  of  open  water.  Not  a  scrap  of 
ice  remained  in  sight,  except  in  the  bay  to  which  Skelton  had 
directed  his  footsteps  at  an  early  hour ;  in  this  bay  the  ice 
still  hung,  and  it  was  doubtless  the  permanency  of  this  sheet 
which  had  caused  the  Emperor  penguins  to  adopt  it  as  a 
breeding-place. 

For  Skelton  had  not  been  deceived  in  his  observation :  on 
reaching  the  sea-ice  in  this  bay,  after  a  stiff  climb  over  the 
high-pressure  ridges,  he  found  again  his  colony  of  Emperors, 
numbering  some  four  hundred,  and,  to  his  delight,  amongst 
them  several  that  were  nursing  chicks. 

Upon  the  great  interest  of  this  find,  and  upon  the  many 
important  notes  which  were  made  concerning  the  colony,  both 
at  this  time  and  at  a  later  date,  I  will  not  dwell,  as  these  facts 
are  dealt  with  in  the  excellent  appendix  which  our  zoologist, 
Dr.  Wilson,  has  contributed  to  this  volume,  describing  the 
habits  of  these  extraordinary  birds  far  more  clearly  than  I 
could  hope  to  do  ;  I  will  only  testify  to  the  joy  which  greeted 
this  discovery  on  board  the  ship.  We  had  felt  that  .  this 
penguin  was  the  truest  type  of  our  region.  All  other  birds 
fled  north  when  the  severity  of  winter  descended  upon  us :  the 
Emperor  alone  was  prepared  to  face  the  extremest  rigours  of 
our  climate  :  and  we  gathered  no  small  satisfaction  from  being 
the  first  to  throw  light  on  the  habits  of  a  creature  that  so  far 
surpasses  in  hardihood  all  others  of  the  feathered  tribe. 

Full  of  their  exploits  the  party  started  for  home  on  the 
rcjth,  and,  as  I  have  said,  reached  the  ship  on  the  24th. 

Before  the  end  of  the  month  everything  was  prepared  for 
the  southern  journey,  instructions  for  various  sledge  parties 
and  for  the  custody  of  the  ship  had  been  given,  details  of  the 
conduct  of  affairs  had  been  discussed  and  rediscussed.  Every 
eventuality  seemed  to  be  provided  for,  and  nothing  now  re- 
mained but  to  wait  for  the  date  which  had  been  fixed  for  our 
departure. 


1902]     START  OF  THE  SOUTHERN  JOURNEY        7 

The  southern  supporting  party,  as  I  have  said,  consisted 
of  Mr.  Barne  with  eleven  men  ;  and  as  it  was  expected  that  at 
first,  at  any  rate,  the  dogs  would  outstrip  the  men,  it  was 
decided  that  this  party  should  start  on  October  30,  but  that 
the  dog  team  should  not  leave  until  a  few  days  later.  All  were 
to  meet  at  the  depot  which  I  had  laid  out,  and  which  was  now 
known  as  Depot  '  A.' 

Accordingly,  on  October  30,  I  record  :  '  The  supporting 
party  started  this  morning,  amidst  a  scene  of  much  enthusiasm  ; 
all  hands  had  a  day  off,  and  employed  it  in  helping  to  drag  the 
sledges  for  several  miles.  The  sledges  carried  some  decora- 
tions :  Barne's  banner  floated  on  the  first,  the  next  bore  a 
Union  Jack,  and  another  carried  a  flag  with  a  large  device 
stating  "  No  dogs  need  apply  " ;  the  reference  was  obvious.  It 
was  an  inspiriting  sight  to  see  nearly  the  whole  of  our  small 
company  step  out  on  the  march  with  ringing  cheers,  and  to 
think  that  all  work  of  this  kind  promised  to  be  done  as  heartily. 
Later  Shackleton  had  a  trial  trip  with  the  dogs  to  get  our 
runners  in  better  order,  and  the  animals  started  so  strongly  that 
they  carried  away  the  central  trace  and  started  to  gallop  off ; 
but  luckily  they  all  wanted  to  go  in  different  directions,  and  so 
didn't  get  far,  and,  luckily  also,  there  were  a  few  of  us  about 
to  prevent  the  worst  effect  of  the  inevitable  fights.' 

'  November  2. —  .  .  .  We  are  off  at  last.  By  ten  this 
morning  the  dogs  were  harnessed  and  all  was  ready  for  a  start ; 
the  overcast  sky  was  showing  signs  of  a  break  in  the  south. 
Every  soul  was  gathered  on  the  floe  to  bid  us  farewell,  and 
many  were  prepared  to  accompany  us  for  the  first  few  miles. 
A  last  look  was  given  to  our  securings,  the  traces  were  finally 
cleared,  and  away  we  went  amidst  the  wild  cheers  of  our 
comrades.  The  dogs  have  never  been  in  such  form ;  despite 
the  heavy  load,  for  the  first  two  miles  two  men  had  to  sit  on  the 
sledges  to  check  them,  and  even  thus  it  was  as  much  as  the 
rest  of  us  could  do  to  keep  up  by  running  alongside.  One  by 
one  our  followers  tailed  off,  and  by  noon  we  three  were  alone 
with  our  animals  and  still  breathlessly  trying  to  keep  pace  with 
them.     Soon  after  lunch  we  saw  a  dark  spot  far  ahead,  and 


8  THE   VOYAGE   OF  THE   'DISCOVERY'    [Nov. 

about  5  p.m.  we  made  this  out  to  be  our  supporting  party ;  we 
caught  them  up  just  as  they  were  rounding  the  corner  of  White 
Island,  and  learnt  that  they  had  had  very  bad  weather  which 
had  confined  them  to  their  tents.  Relieving  them  of  some  of 
their  loads,  we  camped,  whilst  they  pushed  on  to  get  the 
advantage  of  a  night  march.' 

'  November  3. —  ...  At  2  p.m.  we  came  up  with  Barne's 
people.  They  are  doing  their  best,  but  making  very  slow 
progress.  The  difficulty  is  the  slipperiness  of  the  wind-swept 
snow,  the  surface  being  particularly  hard  amongst  the  sastrugi 
opposite  the  gullies  of  the  island.  They  can  get  no  hold  with 
their  fur  boots,  and  find  their  leather  ski  boots  dreadfully  cold 
for  the  feet ;  the  result  is  that  they  scarcely  cover  a  mile  an 
hour.  The  only  thing  is  for  us  to  take  life  easy  whilst  they  go 
on  in  the  best  manner  possible;  we  have  relieved  them  of 
over  150  lbs.  of  weight,  so  that  they  now  only  help  us  to  the 
extent  of  500  lbs.  I  have  told  Barne  to  go  on  quite  indepen- 
dently of  us.' 

In  this  manner  we  journeyed  slowly  to  the  south  outside 
the  White  Island,  the  parties  constantly  passing  and  repassing ; 
it  was  impossible  at  this  part  to  keep  together,  as  men  and 
dogs  took  the  march  at  quite  a  different  pace.  To  add  to  the 
slowness  of  our  journey,  the  weather  proved  very  unpropitious, 
for  the  wind  constantly  sprang  up  and  obliged  us  to  camp,  and 
we  were  forced  to  lie  up  during  the  greater  part  of  the  8th  and 
9th,  whilst  a  heavy  blizzard  passed  over  us. 

On  the  9th  I  wrote :  '  The  wind  still  blows  with  exasperat- 
ing persistence,  though  the  sun  has  been  peeping  out  all  day ; 
it  adds  to  the  trying  nature  of  this  inactivity  to  watch  the  sun 
pass  pole  after  pole  of  our  tent  and  to  know  that  the  support- 
ing party  are  cut  off  from  their  slow  daily  progress.  We  are 
now  south  of  the  Bluff,  and  cannot  be  more  than  eight  miles 
from  the  depot.  To-night  the  wind  is  dying ;  the  cloud  mantle 
on  the  Bluff  has  vanished,  and  for  the  first  time  for  many  days 
one  can  catch  a  view  of  the  western  lands. 

'  On  our  outward  track  we  have  kept  rather  too  close  to  the 
White  Island,  and  consequently  have  had  to  traverse  a  good 


i902]       DESCRIPTION   OF  THE   DOG  TEAM  9 

many  undulations;  it  was  curious  to  watch  the  supporting 
party  dipping  out  of  sight  on  what  appeared  to  the  eye  to  be  a 
plain  surface.  Disturbed  by  much  barking  from  the  dogs,  we 
crawled  out  of  our  bags  to-night  about  eleven  o'clock,  to  find, 
much  to  our  satisfaction,  that  our  supporting  party  had  arrived; 
they  camped  close  by,  and  Barne  tells  me  they  have  had  a 
hard,  cold  pull  up  against  the  wind.' 

1  November  10. — Started  early  this  morning,  leaving  the 
supporting  party  quietly  slumbering.  Had  much  difficulty  in 
forcing  the  dogs  along  in  face  of  a  low  drift  and  cutting  wind, 
but  managed  to  make  good  progress.  At  one  o'clock,  sighted 
the  depot  and  were  soon  camped  beside  it,  when  the  wind  died 
away,  the  sky  cleared,  and  we  have  again  the  whole  splendid 
panorama  of  the  northern  and  western  mountains  in  full  view. 

1  On  the  march  to-day  a  small  snow  petrel  suddenly 
appeared  hovering  above  us,  and  later  it  was  joined  by  a 
second ;  these  are  the  first  birds  we  have  seen  since  the 
departure  of  the  skuas  in  the  autumn,  and  form  a  very  pleasant 
reminder  of  summer.  We  are  left  in  wonder  as  to  why  they 
should  be  so  far  from  the  sea.  We  were  first  apprised  of 
their  coming  by  the  conduct  of  the  dogs,  and  for  a  moment  or 
two  we  could  not  understand  why  these  animals  should  sud- 
denly begin  to  leap  about  and  bark  furiously,  but  their  wild 
dashes  soon  drew  attention  to  our  fluttering  visitors. 

1  Already  it  seems  to  me  that  the  dogs  feel  the  monotony 
of  a  long  march  over  the  snow  more  than  we  do ;  they  seem 
easily  to  get  dispirited,  and  that  it  is  not  due  to  fatigue  is 
shown  when  they  catch  a  glimpse  of  anything  novel.  On  see- 
ing the  men  ahead  they  are  always  eager  to  get  up  with  them, 
and  even  a  shadowy  ice  disturbance  or  anything  unusual  will 
excite  their  curiosity.  To-day,  for  instance,  they  required  some 
driving  until  they  caught  sight  of  the  depot  flag,  when  they 
gave  tongue  loudly  and  dashed  off  as  though  they  barely  felt 
the  load  behind  them.' 

It  would  perhaps  be  as  well  to  introduce  the  reader  to  our 
dog  team,  as  they  played  so  important  a  part  in  this  journey, 
and  before  the  tale  of  its  ending  will  have  disappeared  from 


io         THE   VOYAGE   OF   THE    'DISCOVERY'    [Nov. 

the  scene  for  ever.  Their  origin  and  the  names  by  which  they 
had  been  formerly  known  are,  as  I  have  explained,  mysteries 
which  we  could  not  penetrate,  but  long  before  the  commence- 
ment of  this  journey  each  had  learnt  to  answer  to  his  own  title 
in  the  following  list : — 


•  Nigger,' 

'Birdie,' 

'  Wolfe,' 

'  Jim>' 

'Nell,' 

'  Vic,' 

1  Spud,' 

'Blanco,' 

'  Bismarck, 

'  Snatcher,' 

'  Grannie,' 

'  Kid,' 

'  FitzCIarence,' 

'  Lewis,' 

'  Boss,' 

'  Stripes,' 

'  Gus,' 

*  Brownie.' 

'Joe,' 

Each  of  these  dogs  had  his  own  peculiar  characteristics, 
and  altogether  they  displayed  as  great  a  variety  as  could  well 
be  comprehended  in  a  team  of  the  size ;  it  can  be  imagined 
that  what  we  did  not  know  concerning  their  individuality  we 
had  ample  opportunities  of  learning  during  the  weeks  that 
followed. 

I  have  already  given  some  idea  of  the  dignity  of  character 
of  our  leader,  '  Nigger.'  He  was  a  black  dog  with  some  tawny 
markings,  and  possessed  the  most  magnificent  head  and  chest, 
though  falling  off  a  little  in  the  hinder  quarters.  A  more 
perfect  sledge  dog  could  scarcely  be  imagined ;  he  chose  his 
place  naturally  as  the  leader,  and  if  put  into  any  other  position 
would  make  himself  so  unpleasant  to  his  neighbours,  and 
generally  behave  so  ill,  that  he  was  very  quickly  shifted.  In 
the  happy  times  before  sickness  fell  on  our  team,  it  was  a 
delight  to  watch  '  Nigger '  at  his  work  :  he  seemed  to  know  the 
meaning  of  every  move.  He  would  lie  still  as  a  graven  image 
till  he  saw  the  snow  being  shovelled  from  the  skirting  of  the 
tent,  when  up  he  would  spring  and  pace  to  and  fro  at  his 
picket,  giving  out  a  low  throaty  bark  of  welcome  as  any  of  us 
approached,  and  now  and  again  turning  towards  his  neigh- 
bours to  express  his  opinion  of  them  in  the  most  bloodthirsty 
snarl.  A  few  minutes  later,  as  the  leading  man  came  to  uproot 
his  picket,  his  keen  eye  would  watch  each  movement,  and  a 
slow  wagging  of  his  tail  would  quite  obviously  signify  approval ; 


i902]        DESCRIPTION   OF   THE    DOG   TEAM  n 

then  as  the  word  came  to  start,  he  would  push  affectionately 
against  the  leader,  as  much  as  to  say,  '  Now,  come  along,'  and 
brace  his  powerful  chest  to  the  harness.  At  the  evening  halt 
after  a  long  day  he  would  drop  straight  in  his  tracks  and 
remain  perfectly  still  with  his  great  head  resting  on  his  paws ; 
other  dogs  might  clamour  for  food,  but  '  Nigger '  knew  perfectly 
well  that  the  tent  had  to  be  put  up  first.  Afterwards,  however, 
when  one  of  us  approached  the  dog-food,  above  the  howling 
chorus  that  arose  one  could  always  distinguish  the  deep  bell- 
like note  of  the  leading  dog,  and  knew  that  if  disturbance  was 
to  be  avoided,  it  was  well  to  go  to  the  front  end  of  the  trace 
first. 

1  Lewis  f  was  a  big,  thick-coated,  brindled  dog,  a  very 
powerful  but  not  a  consistent  puller ;  always  noisily  affectionate 
and  hopelessly  clumsy,  he  would  prance  at  one  and  generally 
all  but  succeed  in  bowling  one  over  with  boisterous  affection. 
He  was  very  popular  with  everyone,  as  such  a  big,  blustering, 
good-natured  animal  deserved  to  be. 

1  Jim '  was  a  sleek,  lazy,  greedy  villain,  up  to  all  the  tricks 
of  the  trade  ;  he  could  pull  splendidly  when  he  chose,  but 
generally  preferred  to  pretend  to  pull,  and  at  this  he  was 
extraordinarily  cunning.  During  the  march  his  eye  never  left 
the  man  with  the  whip,  on  whose  approach  '  Jim '  could  be 
seen  panting  and  labouring  as  though  he  felt  sure  that  every- 
thing depended  on  his  efforts;  but  a  moment  or  two  later, 
when  the  danger  had  passed,  the  watchful  eye  would  detect 
Master  J  Jim '  with  a  trace  that  had  a  very  palpable  sag  in  it. 
Yet  with  all  his  faults  it  was  impossible  not  to  retain  a  certain 
affection  for  this  fat  culprit,  who  was  so  constantly  getting 
himself  into  hot  water. 

The  general  opinion  of  '  Spud '  was  that  he  was  daft — 
there  was  something  wanting  in  the  upper  storey.  In  the 
middle  of  a  long  and  monotonous  march  he  would  suddenly 
whimper  and  begin  to  prance  about  in  his  traces  ;  in  dog- 
language  this  is  a  signal  that  there  is  something  in  sight,  and 
it  always  had  an  electrical  effect  on  the  others,  however  tired 
they  might  be.     As  a  rule  they  would  set  off  at  a  trot  with 


12         THE   VOYAGE  OF  THE   'DISCOVERY'    [Nov. 

heads  raised  to  look  around  and  noses  sniffing  the  breeze.  It 
was  '  Spud '  alone  who  gave  this  signal  without  any  cause,  and, 
curiously  enough,  the  rest  never  discovered  the  fraud  ;  to  the 
end  he  openly  gulled  them.  On  ordinary  occasions  '  Spud ' 
would  give  one  the  impression  of  being  intensely  busy  ;  he 
was  always  stepping  over  imaginary  obstacles,  and  all  his 
pulling  was  done  in  a  jerky,  irregular  fashion.  He  was  a  big, 
strong,  black  dog,  and  perhaps  the  principal  sign  of  his  mental 
incapacity  was  the  ease  with  which  others  could  rob  him  of 
his  food. 

Amongst  the  team  there  had  been  one  animal  who  was 
conspicuous  for  his  ugliness :  with  a  snubbish  nose,  a  torn  ear, 
an  ungainly  body,  ribs  that  could  be  easily  counted  through  a 
dirty,  tattered  coat,  and  uncompromisingly  vulgar  manners,  he 
was  at  first  an  object  of  derision  to  all ;  and  being  obviously 
of  the  most  plebeian  origin,  he  was  named  '  FitzQarence.' 
Kindness  and  good  food  worked  wonders  for  '  Clarence,'  and 
although  he  never  developed  into  a  thing  of  beauty  or  of 
refined  habits,  he  became  a  very  passable  sledge  dog. 

'  Kid '  and  c  Bismarck '  were  the  only  two  dogs  of  the  team 
that  bore  an  outward  resemblance,  both  being  short-legged 
animals  with  long,  fleecy,  black-and-white  coats.  But  the 
likeness  was  only  superficial.  Inwardly  they  differed  much, 
for  whereas  Bismarck  was  counted  amongst  the  lazy  eye- 
servers,  •  Kid  '  was  the  most  indefatigable  worker  in  the  team  ; 
from  morn  to  night  he  would  set  forth  his  best  effort.  The 
whip  was  never  applied  to  his  panting  little  form,  and  when  he 
stopped  it  was  to  die  from  exhaustion. 

With  all  our  efforts  we  could  never  quite  tame  '  Birdie,' 
who  had  evidently  been  treated  with  scant  respect  in  his 
youth.  At  the  ship  he  would  retire  into  his  kennel  and  growl 
at  all  except  those  who  brought  him  food,  and  to  the  end  he 
remained  distrustful  and  suspicious  of  all  attempts  to  pet  him. 
He  was  a  large,  reddish-brown  dog,  very  wolfish  in  appearance, 
but  a  powerful  puller  when  he  got  to  understand  what  was 
required  of  him. 

Of  the  rest  of  the  team,  c  Gus,'  ■  Stripes,'  '  Snatcher,'  and 


i9o2]        DESCRIPTION   OF  THE   DOG  TEAM  13 

'Vic'  were  nice,  pleasant-mannered  dogs,  and  good  average 
pullers.  '  Brownie '  was  a  very  handsome  animal,  but  rather 
light  in  build.  He  was  charming  as  a  pet,  but  less  gifted  as  a 
sledge-puller,  and  always  appealed  to  one  as  being  a  little  too 
refined  and  ladylike  for  the  hardest  work  ;  nor  did  he  ever  lose 
a  chance  of  utilising  his  pleasing  appearance  and  persuasive 
ways  to  lighten  his  afflictions. 

'Wolf  was  the  most  hopelessly  ill-tempered  animal;  his 
character  seemed  to  possess  no  redeeming  virtue.  Every 
advance  was  met  with  the  same  sullen,  irreconcilable  humour, 
and  the  whip  alone  was  capable  of  reducing  him  to  subjection. 
On  the  principle  that  you  can  lead  a  horse  to  the  water  but  you 
cannot  make  him  drink,  '  Wolf '  had  evidently  decided  that  we 
might  lead  him  to  the  traces  but  nothing  could  make  him  pull ; 
and,  as  a  consequence,  from  start  to  finish  no  efforts  of  ours 
could  make  him  do  even  a  reasonable  share  of  his  work.  We 
should  have  saved  ourselves  much  trouble  and  annoyance  had 
we  left  him  behind  in  the  first  place. 

To  the  effort  to  swell  the  numbers  of  our  team  Bemacchi 
had  sacrificed  his  own  property,  '  Joe,'  and  poor  '  Joe '  had  a 
history.  He  had  been  born  in  the  Antarctic  Regions  at  Cape 
Adare  ;  later  in  life  he  had  learnt  to  behave  himself  with 
proper  decorum  in  a  London  drawing-room ;  and  now  he  had 
returned,  no  doubt  much  against  his  will,  to  finish  his  career 
in  the  land  of  his  birth.  He  was  a  very  light  dog,  with  a 
deceptively  thick  coat;  much  pulling  could  not  be  expected 
from  his  weight,  and  he  certainly  gave  but  little. 

Such  was  our  team  as  regards  the  dog  element ;  but  a  word 
may  be  added  about  the  three  of  the  other  sex,  whom  at  first  I 
was  very  reluctant  to  take.  '  Nell '  was  a  pretty  black  animal 
with  a  snappish  little  temper  but  attractive  ways  ;  '  Blanco,'  so 
called  because  she  ought  to  have  been  white,  had  few  attrac- 
tions, and  was  of  such  little  use  that  she  was  sent  back  with  the 
supporting  party  ;  and  poor  '  Grannie '  was  old  and  toothless, 
but  lived  and  died  game  on  the  traces. 

Whilst  the  loads  for  this  dog  team  had  been  heavy  from 
the  start,  it  had  not  been  proposed  to  bring  them  up  to  full 


14         THE   VOYAGE   OF   THE   'DISCOVERY'    [Nov. 

weights  till  after  our  departure  from  Depot  ?  A,'  and  from  that 
spot  we  proposed  to  assist  by  pulling  ourselves ;  it  may  be  of 
some  interest,  therefore,  to  note  the  weights  which  we  actually 
dragged. 

The  table  given  on  page  15  was  one  of  a  number  of  sheets 
which  I  prepared  in  order  that  we  might  know  at  each  place 
exactly  how  we  stood,  and  it  seemed  to  simplify  matters  to  draw 
rough  diagrams  of  the  sledges  on  the  margin.  The  total  of 
1,850  lbs.  was  of  course  a  heavy  load  for  our  team  of  nineteen, 
especially  as  the  team  possessed  a  few  animals  which  were  ot 
little  account ;  but  it  must  be  remembered  that  we  expected  to 
pull  ourselves,  and  that  each  night,  after  the  first  start,  would 
see  a  reduction  of  between  thirty  and  forty  pounds  by  the  time 
all  creature  comforts  had  been  attended  to. 

The  load  here  shown  allows  for  nine  weeks  only  for  our  own 
food,  and  it  was  in  order  that  we  might  increase  this  allowance 
to  thirteen  that  the  supporting  party  was  arranged  to  accompany 
us  for  some  part  of  our  journey. 

On  the  afternoon  of  the  nth  the  supporting  party  hove  in 
sight,  and  we  were  soon  busily  engaged  in  arranging  matters 
for  an  early  start  on  the  morrow. 

The  1 2th  proved  a  misty,  raw,  cold  day — not  a  happy  omen 
for  our  start — but  we  got  away  betimes,  and  with  a  cheer  set 
off  for  the  first  time  on  a  due  south  course.  The  dogs  were  in 
such  high  feather  that  they  quickly  caught  up  the  men,  and 
little  by  little  we  had  to  increase  their  load  until  they  were 
drawing  no  less  than  2,100  lbs.  When  we  camped  for  the 
night  we  had  made  n^  miles,  and,  in  the  slightly  misty  weather, 
already  appeared  to  be  lost  on  the  great  open  plain.  I  note  in 
my  diary  :  f  The  feeling  at  first  is  somewhat  weird ;  there  is 
absolutely  nothing  to  break  the  grey  monotone  about  us,  and 
yet  we  know  that  the  mist  is  not  thick,  but  that  our  isolation 
comes  from  the  immense  expanse  of  the  plain.  The  excellent 
pulling  of  the  dogs  is  likely  to  modify  our  plans,  and  I  think 
of  sending  half  the  supports  back  to-morrow.' 

'  November  13. — Sights  to-day  showed  us  to  be  nearly  up  to 
the  79th  parallel,  and  therefore  farther  south  than  anyone  has 


1902] 


i  jr 


Weights  on  Leaving  '  A ' 


Dog-food 
Tank 
Sledge     . 
Bamboo  . 
Tomahawk 


lbs. 

400 

8 

35 

4 

3 


450 


4? 


s — 


Dog-food  ....  400 

Tank 8 

Sledge 35 

Bamboo 3 


446 


;'0; 


Ready  provision  bag 

Kit  bag   .... 

Spare  foot-gear  bag  . 

Five  biscuit  cases 

Tent        .... 

Ice-axe,  shovel,  and  dog  picket 

Three  blouses  . 

Sledge     .... 

Bamboo  and  straps  . 


16 
20 
10 
217 
29 
10 
15 
35 
5 


357 


Three  sleeping-bags  . 

Tank       . 

Contents  9  provision  bags 

Seal-meat 

Alpine  rope 

All  ski  on  top  . 

Sledge     . 

Bamboo  and  straps  . 


45 

6 

227 

70 
5 

30 

35 
4 


422 


Dl 


Repair  bag 
Instrument  box 
Cooker,  Primus,  &c. 
Oil 

Sledge     . 
Securings 


The  dotted  lines  show  plans 
of  sledges  and  straps. 


12 
40 

34 

60 

28 

3 


177 
1,852 


16         THE   VOYAGE   OF  THE   'DISCOVERY'    [Nov. 

yet  been.  The  announcement  of  the  fact  caused  great 
jubilation,  and  I  am  extremely  glad  that  there  are  no  fewer 
than  fifteen  of  us  to  enjoy  this  privilege  of  having  broken  the 
record.  Shackleton  suggested  that  all  should  be  photo- 
graphed, whereat  the  men  were  much  delighted,  and  we 
all  gathered  about  the  sledges  with  our  flags  fluttering  over 
us.  Then  half  our  supporting  party  started  to  return,  bearing 
the  good  news  of  our  present  success,  and  the  other  half 
stepped  out  once  more  on  a  due  south  line,  with  the  dogs 
following. 

1  This  morning  it  was  very  bright  and  sunny  except  to  the 
far  north,  where  probably  those  on  board  the  ship  are  not  en- 
joying such  delightful  weather ;  behind  us  only  the  Bluff 
showed  against  a  dark  background,  and  that  was  already  grow- 
ing small  in  the  distance.  Away  to  the  west  the  view  was  per- 
fectly clear,  and  we  now  know  that  there  is  land  beyond  our 
western  horizon ;  it  is  very  distant,  and  appears  in  detached 
masses,  but  it  is  evident  that  the  general  trend  of  it  is  in  a  more 
southerly  direction  than  we  had  supposed.  At  this  great  dis- 
tance it  looks  to  be  completely  snow-covered;  we  can  only 
catch  the  high  lights  and  shadows  due  to  irregularity  of  shape, 
and  can  only  say  definitely  that  there  must  be  many  lofty 
mountains.  I  took  a  round  of  bearings  with  the  prismatic 
compass,  and  then  asked  Barne  to  do  the  same ;  he  got 
different  readings,  and  on  trying  again  myself  I  got  a  third 
result.  The  observations  only  differed  by  a  few  degrees,  but 
it  shows  that  these  compasses  are  not  to  be  relied  upon  where 
the  directive  force  is  so  small.' 

The  needle  of  the  prismatic  compass  carries  a  weighty 
graduated  circle  with  it ;  it  therefore  bears  heavily  on  the  pivot, 
and  the  friction  produced  is  sufficient  to  prevent  accuracy  of 
reading  where  the  earth  has  such  small  influence  on  the  needle. 
After  this  I  depended  for  all  bearings  on  the  compass  attached 
to  our  small  theodolite,  which  possessed  a  simple  light  needle 
and  seemed  to  give  greater  accuracy.  I  record  this  fact,  be- 
cause it  was  important  that  we  should  obtain  accurate  observa- 
tions on  our  extended  sledge  journeys,  and  it  would  be  well 


1 


1902]  FAILURE   OF  THE   DOGS  17 

that  this  point  should  be  more  carefully  considered  in  future 
expeditions. 

On  the  13th  and  14th  we  pushed  on  to  the  south  in  spite 
of  thick  snowy  weather  which  followed  the  fine  morning  of  the 
13th,  and  during  those  two  days  we  managed  to  add  fifteen 
miles  to  our  southing.  On  the  afternoon  of  the  14th  I  record: 
'  The  men  go  ahead,  and  when  they  have  got  a  good  start  we 
cheer  on  our  animals,  who  work  hard  until  they  have  caught 
up  with  them  ;  in  this  manner  we  get  over  the  ground  fairly 
well.  The  day  has  been  murky  and  dull  with  a  bad  light,  and 
we  have  come  upon  a  new  form  of  sastrugus  :  instead  of  the 
clean-cut  waves  about  the  Bluff,  we  have  heaped-up  mounds  of 
snow  with  steepish  edges.  Heavily  laden  as  they  are,  it  is 
difficult  work  for  the  dogs  when  they  come  across  the  sudden 
rises.  Now  and  then  the  clouds  have  lifted,  showing  the 
horizon  line  and  glimpses  of  the  land  to  the  north,  but  for  the 
main  part  the  sky  and  snow-surface  have  been  merged  in  a 
terrible  sameness  of  grey,  and  it  has  been  impossible  to  see  the 
spot  on  which  one's  foot  was  next  to  be  placed  ;  falls  have  been 
plentiful.  The  surface  itself  is  getting  softer,  but  the  sledges 
run  fairly  easily.  The  dogs  were  pretty  "done"  when  we 
camped  to-night,  but  we  are  feeding  them  up,  and  I  do  not 
propose  to  overwork  them  whilst  the  load  remains  as  heavy  as 
at  present.  That  we  are  travelling  over  a  practically  level  sur- 
face was  evident  from  our  view  of  the  supporting  party  today; 
though  we  were  often  some  distance  apart  they  were  always 
clearly  in  view,  which  would  not  have  been  the  case  had  there 
been  undulations.' 

'■November  15.— A  beautifully  bright,  calm  morning;  the 
sun  shone  warmly  on  our  tents,  making  them  most  cheerful 
and  comfortable  within.  To  the  north  the  land  has  become 
dim,  to  the  west  we  have  the  same  prospect  of  distant  detached 
snow-covered  ranges,  and  in  all  other  directions  the  apparently 
limitless  snow-plain. 

'  We  were  very  busy  this  morning  making  arrangements  for 
our  last  parting :  the  loads  had  to  be  readjusted,  the  dog- 
harness  attended  to,  observations  taken,  and  notes  of  farewell 
vol.  11.  c 


18         THE   VOYAGE   OF   THE    'DISCOVERY'    [Nov. 

written.  All  this  was  not  finished  till  after  noon,  when  many 
willing  hands  helped  us  to  pack  up  our  tent  and  make  all 
ready  for  our  final  start.  If  former  moments  of  parting  have 
seemed  unpropitious,  the  same  cannot  be  said  of  to-day  ;  the 
sun  shone  brightly  on  our  last  farewells,  and  whilst  behind  us 
we  left  all  in  good  health  and  spirits,  it  is  scarcely  to  be  won- 
dered at  that  our  hopes  ran  high  for  the  future.  We  are 
already  beyond  the  utmost  limit  to  which  man  has  attained  : 
each  footstep  will  be  a  fresh  conquest  of  the  great  unknown. 
Confident  in  ourselves,  confident  in  our  equipment,  and  con- 
fident in  our  dog  team,  we  can  but  feel  elated  with  the  prospect 
that  is  before  us. 

\  The  day's  work  has  cast  a  shadow  on  our  highest  aspira- 
tions, however,  and  already  it  is  evident  that  if  we  are  to 
achieve  much  it  will  be  only  by  extreme  toil,  for  the  dogs  have 
not  pulled  well  to-day;  possibly  it  may  be  something  to  do 
with  the  surface,  which  seems  to  get  softer,  possibly  something 
to  do  with  the  absence  of  the  men  in  front  to  cheer  them  on, 
and  possibly  something  to  do  with  the  temperature,  which  rose 
at  one  time  to  +  200  and  made  the  heavy  pulling  very  warm 
work.  Whatever  the  reason  may  be,  by  five  o'clock  we  had 
only  covered  about  three  miles,  and  this  is  by  no  means  up  to 
expectation.  We  have  decided  that  if  things  have  not  improved 
in  the  morning  we  will  take  on  half  the  load  at  a  time ;  after  a 
few  days  of  this  sort  of  thing  the  loads  will  be  sufficiently 
lightened  for  us  to  continue  in  the  old  way  again.' 

The  above  extract  shows  that  our  troubles  were  already 
beginning,  but  as  yet  we  had  no  suspicion  that  they  were  likely 
to  be  as  grievous  as  they  soon  became.  On  the  following  day 
we  attempted  once  more  to  start  our  heavy  loads,  but  after  a 
few  yards  of  struggling  the  dogs  seemed  to  lose  all  heart,  and 
many  looked  round  with  the  most  pathetic  expression  as  much 
as  to  say  we  were  really  expecting  too  much  of  them ;  there 
was  but  one  thing  to  be  done — namely,  to  divide  the  load  into 
two  portions  and  take  on  half  at  a  time.  This  meant,  of  course, 
that  each  mile  had  to  be  traversed  three  times,  but  as  there 
was  no  alternative  we  were  forced  to  start  on  this  tedious  form 


i902]  RELAY  WORK  19 

of  advance.  With  this,  even,  we  should  have  been  content 
had  the  dogs  shown  their  former  vigour ;  but  now,  for  some 
reason  which  we  could  not  fathom,  they  seemed  to  be  losing 
all  their  spirit,  and  they  made  as  much  fuss  over  drawing  the 
half-load  as  a  few  days  before  they  had  done  over  the  whole 
one. 

On  November  18  I  write:  'A  dull  day  again,  but  we 
plodded  on  in  the  same  monotonous  style.  Starting  at  11  a.m., 
we  pushed  on  for  two  and  a  half  miles  by  our  sledge-meter, 
with  half  the  load,  then  returned  for  the  second  half;  the 
whole  operation  took  about  four  hours  and  a  half,  after  which 
we  had  lunch  and  then  repeated  the  same  performance.  It 
was  n  p.m.  before  we  were  in  our  sleeping-bags,  and  at  the 
end  of  the  march  the  dogs  were  practically  "  done."  What 
can  be  the  cause  it  is  almost  impossible  to  guess.  It  cannot 
be  wholly  the  surface,  though  this  is  certainly  much  worse ; 
not  only  is  it  softer,  but  all  day  long  snow-crystals  are  falling, 
and  these  loose,  light  crystals  enormously  increase  the  friction 
on  the  runners  ;  nor  can  it  be  altogether  the  temperature,  for 
even  when  it  falls  very  chill  there  is  no  sign  of  improvement  in 
the  pace.  I  fear  there  must  be  another  reason  which  is  at 
present  beyond  us.  We  gained  five  miles  to-day,  but  to  do  it 
we  had  to  cover  fifteen.' 

These  miles  to  which  I  refer  are  geographical,  and  not 
statute  miles :  in  all  our  journeys  we  calculated  in  the  former 
unit,  for  ease  of  reference  to  the  degrees  and  minutes  of 
latitude,  but  it  must  be  explained  that  there  is  a  considerable 
difference  in  these  measurements :  seven  geographical  miles 
are  equal  to  a  little  more  than  eight  statute.  In  many  cases  I 
have  reduced  the  mileage  in  this  book  to  the  better-known 
statute  mile  for  the  convenience  of  the  reader,  but  in  some  of 
my  quotations  I  leave  the  original  figure  unaltered;  I  think 
with  this  explanation  it  will  be  clear  when  either  is  used. 

A  word  may  be  added  concerning  the  sledge-meter.  Our 
engine-room  staff  cleverly  manufactured  these  instruments  by 
applying  the  counter  apparatus  of  some  recording  blocks  to 
wheels  of  a  certain  definite  diameter,  and  thus  as  one  of  these 

C2 


20         THE  VOYAGE   OF  THE   <  DISCOVERY'    [Nov. 

wheels  trundled  behind  the  sledge  it  revolved  the  mechanism 
of  the  counter  so  as  to  show  the  number  of  yards  travelled.  As 
I  think  I  have  said,  at  first  we  all  thought  we  were  walking 
very  long  distances  through  the  snow,  and  when  we  adopted 
the  sledge-meter  and  it  showed  us  the  chilling  truth,  many 
were  inclined  to  be  sceptical  of  its  accuracy  until  it  was  found 
that  when  there  was  a  difference  of  opinion  between  the  party 
and  the  sledge-meter,  astronomical  observations  invariably 
decided  in  favour  of  the  latter,  so  that  we  were  obliged  to 
acknowledge  that  it  was  we,  and  not  the  sledge-meter,  who 
were  going  too  slowly. 

After  our  experience  one  cannot  help  thinking  that  not  a 
few  sledging  records  would  have  been  modified  had  this  truth- 
telling  instrument  always  been  available ;  it  is  to  be  recom- 
mended to  future  expeditions,  not  only  for  this  reason,  but  on 
account  of  the  excellent  check  it  affords  to  the  position  of  a 
sledge  party  for  geographical  purposes. 

1  November  19. — The  sun  was  shining  when  we  started 
to-day,  and  the  fine  snow  was  falling  continuously ;  it  is  a 
drizzle  of  tiny  crystals,  which  settle  on  the  sledges  and  quickly 
evaporate.  The  effect  on  the  surface  is  very  bad,  and  the 
dogs  are  growing  more  and  more  listless.  We  could  only 
advance  four  and  three-quarter  miles,  and  that  only  by  hard 
driving  and  going  longer  than  we  have  yet  gone.  Two  of  us 
always  pull  on  the  traces  whilst  the  third  drives;  the  latter 
task  is  by  far  the  most  dreaded.  In  going  to  the  rear  for  the 
second  half-load,  we  always  carry  an  empty  sledge,  and  up  to 
the  present,  to  prevent  confusion  of  the  traces,  someone  has 
sat  on  the  sledge,  but  to-day  even  this  appeared  to  be  a  per- 
ceptible drag  on  our  poor  animals. 

'  It  is  very  tiring  work.  When  one  goes  out  in  the  morn- 
ing there  is  now  no  joyous  clamour  of  welcome ;  one  or  two  of 
the  animals  have  to  be  roused  up  out  of  their  nests,  then  we 
start  in  a  spiritless  fashion.  We  take  our  duties  in  turns ;  one 
of  us  attaches  his  harness  to  the  head  of  the  trace,  and  whilst 
he  pulls  he  endeavours  [to  cheer  on  the  flagging  team.  A 
second  takes  the  best  position,  which  is  to  pull  alongside  the 


i9o2j  DOG-FOOD  21 

sledges,  in  silence ;  the  third  does  not  pull,  but  carries  the 
whip  and  has  to  use  it  all  too  frequently.  Thus  our  weary 
caravan  winds  its  slow  way  along  until  the  sledge- meter  has 
reeled  off  the  required  distance.  When  we  halt,  the  dogs  drop 
at  once,  but  when  the  lightened  sledge  is  attached  and  we 
start  to  wheel  them  round,  they  wake  up  and  for  the  first  time 
display  a  little  energy  in  trying  to  fight  as  they  circle  about ; 
but  this  show  of  spirit  soon  fails,  though  we  naturally  get  back 
at  a  brisker  pace.  Then  the  second  half- load  is  joined  up,  and 
the  whole  thing  has  to  be  done  over  again.  When  the  dogs 
sight  the  advanced  load,  however,  there  is  a  distinct  improve- 
ment ;  they  know  that  to  get  there  means  rest,  and,  encouraging 
this  spirit  as  much  as  we  can,  the  last  half-mile  is  done  almost 
at  a  trot.  The  afternoon  march  is  of  the  same  nature  as  that 
of  the  forenoon,  but  is  made  worse  by  the  increased  fatigue  of 
our  wretched  animals.     It  is  all  very  heart-breaking  work. 

'  This  morning  we  sighted  further  land  to  the  south-west, 
and  like  the  rest  it  appears  as  a  detached  fragment.  We  now 
see  three  distinct  gaps  between  the  several  land  masses,  and 
the  distance  is  too  great  for  us  to  make  out  any  detail  of  the 
latter ;  to  the  south  and  round  through  east  to  the  north  we 
have  still  the  unbroken  snow  horizon. 

'  To-night  we  have  been  discussing  our  position  again ;  it 
is  evidently  going  from  bad  to  worse.  We  have  scarcely  liked 
to  acknowledge  to  ourselves  that  the  fish  diet  is  having  a 
permanently  bad  effect  on  the  dogs,  but  it  looks  very  much 
like  it ;  we  saw  that  it  disagreed  with  them  at  first,  but  we  have 
tried  to  persuade  ourselves  that  the  effect  is  only  temporary. 
It  will  be  a  terrible  calamity  if  this  is  the  cause  of  all  our 
distress,  for  there  is  no  possible  change  of  diet  except  to  feed 
the  poor  things  on  each  other,  and  yet  it  is  difficult  to  account 
in  any  other  way  for  the  fact  that  whilst  they  are  receiving  an 
ample  amount  of  food  they  should  daily  be  growing  weaker. 
One  of  the  most  trying  circumstances  in  our  position  is  that  we 
are  forced  to  spend  hours  in  our  tent  which  might  be  devoted 
to  marching ;  it  is  the  dogs,  and  not  we,  who  call  the  halt  each 
night.' 


22         THE   VOYAGE   OF  THE   'DISCOVERY'    [Nov. 

Though  it  was  only  gradually  that  we  could  convince  our- 
selves that  the  dog-food  was  at  the  bottom  of  our  trouble, 
subsequent  events  proved  it  beyond  a  doubt,  and  therefore  it 
may  be  of  interest  to  give  some  account  of  that  food.  Originally, 
I  had  intended  to  take  ordinary  dog-biscuits  for  our  animals, 
but  in  an  evil  moment  I  was  persuaded  by  one  who  had  had 
great  experience  in  dog-driving  to  take  fish.  Fish  has  been 
used  continually  in  the  north  for  feeding  dogs,  and  the 
particular  article  which  we  ordered  was  the  Norwegian  stock- 
fish such  as  is  split,  dried,  and  exported  from  that  country  in 
great  quantities  for  human  food.  There  is  no  doubt  about  the 
excellent  food-value  of  this  fish,  and  in  every  way  it  seemed 
well  adapted  to  our  purpose  ;  and  yet  it  was  this  very  fish  that 
poisoned  our  poor  animals. 

It  is  easy  to  be  wise  after  the  event,  and  on  looking 
back  now  one  sees  the  great  probability  of  its  suffering 
deterioration  on  passage  through  the  Tropics,  and,  doubtless, 
had  it  been  designed  for  human  food  we  should  have  considered 
that  point ;  but,  unfortunately  for  our  dogs,  this  probability 
escaped  our  notice,  and  as  there  was  no  outward  sign  of 
deterioration  it  was  carried  on  our  sledge  journey.  As  a  result 
the  dogs  sickened,  and  in  some  cases  died,  from  what  one  can 
only  suppose  was  a  species  of  scurvy.  The  lesson  to  future 
travellers  in  the  South  is  obvious,  in  that  they  should  safe- 
guard their  dogs  as  surely  as  they  do  their  men.  The  dog  is 
such  a  terrible  scavenger  that  one  is  apt  to  overlook  this 
necessity. 

''November  21. — This  morning  the  sun  was  shining  in  a 
cloudless  sky,  and  to  our  surprise  we  found  land  extending  all 
along  our  right ;  probably  it  appears  deceptively  close  owing  to 
the  mirage.  At  any  rate,  things  are  growing  so  bad  that  we 
have  decided  to  edge  towards  it,  and  have  altered  our  course 
to  S.S.W.  All  things  considered,  this  seems  the  best  course,  as 
our  prospect  of  reaching  a  high  latitude  is  steadily  melting 
away.  Our  method  of  advance  gives  us  at  least  the  advantage 
of  gauging  the  level  nature  of  the  surface  over  which  we  are 
travelling.     To  judge  by  one's  feelings  on  the  march,  one  might 


i902]  PERSONAL   DISCOMFORTS  23 

be  climbing  the  steepest  of  hills  all  day,  but  the  fact  that  we 
can  always  see  our  advanced  or  rear  sledges  from  the  other  end 
shows  that  there  must  be  an  absence  of  inequality ;  even  the 
man  who  sits  on  the  returning  sledge  with  his  eye  not  more 
than  three  feet  above  the  surface  rarely  loses  sight  of  these  tiny 
black  dots.  It  is  surprising  that  although  a  sledge  appears  as 
a  very  minute  object  at  two  and  a  half  miles,  it  can  generally 
be  seen  clearly  against  the  white  background.  On  dull  days, 
however,  I  am  not  sure  but  that  it  is  a  risk  to  advance  them 
so  far.' 

1  November  22. — The  surface  is  becoming  smoother,  with 
less  sastrugi,  but  the  snow  covering  is,  if  anything,  thicker ; 
one  sinks  deeper,  and  there  is  no  reduction  of  friction  on  the 
sledge  runners.  After  lunch  we  made  a  trial  to  start  with  full 
loads  ;  the  dogs  made  a  gallant  effort,  but  could  scarcely  move 
the  sledges,  and  we  had  to  proceed  as  before.  With  this  land 
ahead  we  ought  to  get  some  variation  of  the  monotony  of  our 
present  travelling,  but  there  is  a  fear  that  the  snow  may  get  still 
softer  as  we  approach  it. 

1  We  are  growing  very  sunburnt,  and  noses  and  lips  are 
getting  blistered  and  cracked  and  extremely  sore ;  lips  are 
especially  painful,  as  one  cannot  help  licking  them  on  the 
march,  and  this  makes  them  worse.  With  the  constant  varia- 
tions of  temperature  and  the  necessary  application  of  the  hot 
rim  of  the  pannikin  they  get  no  chance  to  heal ;  hazeline  cream 
is  in  much  request  at  night  to  deaden  the  burning.  We  have 
also  had  some  trouble  with  our  eyes,  though  we  wear  goggles 
very  regularly.  Our  appetites  seem  to  be  increasing  by  leaps 
and  bounds  :  it  is  almost  alarming,  and  the  only  thing  to  be 
looked  to  on  our  long  marches  is  the  prospect  of  the  next 
meal.' 

1  November  23. —  .  .  .  There  was  a  distinct  improvement 
in  the  surface  to-day,  with  a  N.N.E.  wind  rolling  the  snow  along 
like  fine  sand ;  in  this  way  the  old  hard  surface  crust  became 
exposed  in  patches,  and  the  sledges  drew  easily  over  these. 
Altogether  we  have  advanced  5!  miles,  travelling  over  15^ 
miles  to  do  it.     We  raised  the  land  considerably,  and  were 


24         THE   VOYAGE   OF  THE   'DISCOVERY'    [Nov. 

able  to  see  something  more  of  the  bold  black  headland  for 
which  we  are  making.' 

1  November  24. —  .  .  .  To-day  we  started  a  new  routine, 
which  eases  us  and  gives  a  chance  for  odd  jobs  to  be  done. 
After  pushing  on  the  first  half-load  one  of  us  stops  with  it,  gets 
up  the  tent,  and  prepares  for  lunch  or  supper,  as  the  case  may 
be,  whilst  the  other  two  bring  up  the  second  half-load. 

x  The  land  which  appeared  to  be  rising  so  quickly  yesterday 
was  evidently  thrown  up  by  mirage  ;  I  fear  it  is  farther  off  than 
we  thought.' 

1  November  25. — Before  starting  to-day  I  took  a  meridian 
altitude,  and  to  my  delight  found  the  latitude  to  be  8o°  i'.  All 
our  charts  of  the  Antarctic  Regions  show  a  plain  white  circle 
beyond  the  eightieth  parallel ;  the  most  imaginative  carto- 
grapher has  not  dared  to  cross  this  limit,  and  even  the 
meridional  lines  end  at  the  circle.  It  has  always  been  our 
ambition  to  get  inside  that  white  space,  and  now  we  are  there 
the  space  can  no  longer  be  a  blank  ;  this  compensates  for  a  lot 
of  trouble.' 

1  November  26. — Last  night  we  had  almost  decided  to  give 
our  poor  team  a  day's  rest,  and  to-day  there  is  a  blizzard  which 
has  made  it  necessary.  We  had  warning  in  the  heavy  stratus 
clouds  that  came  over  fast  from  the  south  yesterday,  and  still 
more  in  Wilson's  rheumatism  ;  this  comes  on  with  the  greatest 
regularity  before  every  snowstorm,  and  he  suffers  considerably. 
Up  to  the  present  it  has  been  in  his  knee,  but  last  night  it 
appeared  in  his  foot,  and  though  he  ought  to  have  known  its 
significance,  he  attributed  it  to  the  heavy  walking.  To-day  it 
has  passed  away  with  the  breaking  of  the  storm,  and  there  can 
be  no  longer  a  doubt  that  it  is  due  to  change  of  weather,  and 
that  he,  poor  chap,  serves  as  a  very  effective  though  unwilling 
barometer/ 

'  November  27. — To-day  it  is  beautifully  bright,  clear,  and 
warm,  the  temperature  up  to  +  200 ;  but,  alas  !  this  morning 
we  found  that  the  dogs  seemed  to  have  derived  no  benefit 
from  their  rest.  They  were  all  snugly  curled  up  beneath  the 
snow  when  we  went  out,  but  in  spite  of  their  long  rest  we  had 


1902]  SLOW  PROGRESS  25 

to  drag  them  out  of  their  nests  ;  some  were  so  cramped  that  it 
was  several  minutes  before  they  could  stand.  However,  we 
shook  some  life  into  them  and  started  with  the  full  load,  but 
very  soon  we  had  to  change  back  into  our  old  routine,  and,  if 
anything,  the  march  was  more  trying  than  ever.  It  becomes  a 
necessity  now  to  reach  the  land  soon  in  hopes  of  making  a 
depot,  so  our  course  has  been  laid  to  the  westward  of  S.W., 
and  this  brings  the  bold  bluff  cape  on  our  port  bow.  I  imagine 
it  to  be  about  fifty  miles  off,  but  hope  it  is  not  so  much  ;  nine 
hours'  work  to-day  has  only  given  us  a  bare  four  miles. 

1  It  was  my  turn  to  drive  to-day ;  Shackleton  led  and 
Wilson  pulled  at  the  side.  The  whole  proceedings  would  have 
been  laughable  enough  but  for  the  grim  sickness  that  holds  so 
tight  a  grip  on  our  poor  team :  Shackleton  in  front,  with 
harness  slung  over  his  shoulder,  was  bent  forward  with  his 
whole  weight  on  the  trace;  in  spite  of  his  breathless  work, 
now  and  again  he  would  raise  and  half-turn  his  head  in  an 
effort  to  cheer  on  the  team.  "  Hi,  dogs,"  "  Now  then,"  "  Hi 
lo-lo-lo  ..."  or  any  other  string  of  syllables  which  were 
supposed  to  produce  an  encouraging  effect,  but  which  were 
soon  brought  to  a  conclusion  by  sheer  want  of  breath.  Behind 
him,  and  obviously  deaf  to  these  allurements,  shambled  the 
long  string  of  depressed  animals,  those  in  rear  doing  their  best 
to  tread  in  the  deep  footprints  of  the  leaders,  but  all  by  their 
low-carried  heads  and  trailing  tails  showing  an  utter  weariness 
of  life.  Behind  these,  again,  came  myself  with  the  whip, 
giving  forth  one  long  string  of  threats  and  occasionally  bringing 
the  lash  down  with  a  crack  on  the  snow  or  across  the  back  of 
some  laggard.  By  this  time  all  the  lazy  dogs  know  their 
names,  as  well  they  ought;  I  should  not  like  to  count  the 
number  of  times  I  have  said,  "  Ah,  you,  '  Wolf,' "  or  "  Get  on 
there,  '  Jim,' "  or  "  '  Bismarck,'  you  brute  " ;  but  it  is  enough  to 
have  made  me  quite  hoarse  to-night,  for  each  remark  has  to 
be  produced  in  a  violent  manner  or  else  it  produces  no  effect, 
and  things  have  now  got  so  bad  that  if  the  driver  ceases  his 
flow  of  objurgation  for  a  moment  there  is  a  slackening  of  the 
traces.     Some  names  lend  themselves  to  this  style  of  language 


26         THE   VOYAGE   OF  THE    'DISCOVERY'    [Nov. 

better  than  others ;  "  Boss  "  can  be  hissed  out  with  very  telling 
effect,  whereas  it  is  hard  to  make  "  Brownie  "  very  emphatic. 
On  the  opposite  side  of  the  leading  sledge  was  Wilson,  pulling 
away  in  grim  silence.  We  dare  not  talk  on  such  occasions — 
the  dogs  detect  the  change  of  tone  at  once ;  they  seize  upon 
the  least  excuse  to  stop  pulling.  There  are  six  or  eight 
animals  who  give  little  trouble,  and  these  have  been  placed  in 
the  front,  so  that  the  others  may  be  more  immediately  under 
the  lash ;  but  the  loafers  are  growing  rather  than  diminishing 
in  numbers.  This,  then,  is  the  manner  in  which  we  have 
proceeded  for  nine  hours  to-day — entreaties  in  front  and 
threats  behind — and  so  we  went  on  yesterday,  and  so  we  shall 
go  on  to-morrow.  It  is  sickening  work,  but  it  is  the  only  way ; 
we  cannot  stop,  we  cannot  go  back,  we  must  go  on,  and  there 
is  no  alternative  but  to  harden  our  hearts  and  drive.  Luckily, 
the  turn  for  doing  the  actual  driving  only  comes  once  in  three 
days,  but  even  thus  it  is  almost  as  bad  to  witness  the  driving 
as  to  have  to  do  it. 

'To-night  we  discussed  the  possibility  of  getting  some 
benefit  by  marching  at  night ;  it  was  very  warm  to-day  in  the 
sun,  and  the  air  temperature  was  up  to  +  250.' 

On  the  days  which  followed  we  gradually  made  our  starting- 
hour  later  until  we  dropped  into  a  regular  night-marching 
routine;  we  then  used  to  breakfast  between  4  and  5  p.m.,  start 
marching  at  6  p.m.,  and  come  to  camp  somewhere  about  three 
or  four  in  the  morning.  Thus  while  the  sun  was  at  its  greatest 
altitude  we  were  taking  our  rest,  and  during  the  chiller  night 
hours  we  marched.  There  were  some  advantages  in  this 
arrangement  which  scarcely  need  notice,  but  it  was  curious 
that  with  it  we  never  quite  got  rid  of  the  idea  that  there  was 
something  amiss,  and  it  will  be  seen  that  it  was  likely  to  lead 
to  confusion  as  to  the  date  of  any  particular  occurrence. 
Other  drawbacks  were  that  we  were  often  obliged  to  march 
with  the  sun  in  our  faces  at  midnight,  and  that  sometimes  the 
tent  was  unpleasantly  warm  during  the  hours  of  sleep. 

'  November  29.— Shortly  after  four  o'clock  to-day  we 
observed  the  most  striking  atmospheric  phenomenon  we  have 


i9o2]         AN   ATMOSPHERIC   PHENOMENON  27 

yet  seen  in  these  regions.  We  were  enveloped  in  a  light,  thin 
stratus  cloud  of  small  ice-crystals  ;  it  could  not  have  extended 
to  any  height,  as  the  sun  was  only  lightly  veiled.  From  these 
drifting  crystals  above,  the  sun's  rays  were  reflected  in  such  an 
extraordinary  manner  that  the  whole  arch  of  the  heavens  was 
traced  with  circles  and  lines  of  brilliant  prismatic  or  white 
light.  The  coloured  circles  of  a  bright  double  halo  were 
touched  or  intersected  by  one  which  ran  about  us  parallel  to 
the  horizon;  above  this,  again,  a  gorgeous  prismatic  ring 
encircled  the  zenith  ;  away  from  the  sun  was  a  white  fog-bow, 
with  two  bright  mock  suns  where  it  intersected  the  horizon 
circle.  The  whole  effect  was  almost  bewildering,  and  its 
beauty  is  far  beyond  the  descriptive  powers  of  my  sledging 
pencil.  We  have  often  seen  double  halos,  fog-bows,  mock 
suns,  and  even  indications  of  other  circles,  but  we  have  never 
been  privileged  to  witness  a  display  that  approaches  in  splen- 
dour that  of  to-day.  We  stopped,  whilst  Wilson  took  notes  of 
the  artistic  composition,  and  I  altitudes  and  bearings  of  the 
various  light  effects.  If  it  is  robbed  of  some  of  the  beauties 
of  a  milder  climate,  our  region  has  certainly  pictures  of  its  own 
to  display.' 

On  our  return  to  the  ship  I  could  find  no  account,  in  such 
reference  books  as  we  had,  of  anything  to  equal  this  scene,  nor 
have  I  since  heard  of  its  having  been  witnessed  elsewhere. 

\  November  29  {continued). — Both  in  the  first  and  second 
advance  to-day  we  noticed  that  the  points  of  starting  and 
finishing  were  in  view  of  one  another,  but  that  in  travelling 
between  them  either  end  was  temporarily  lost  to  sight  for  a 
short  time.  This  undoubtedly  indicates  undulation  in  the 
surface,  but  I  should  think  of  slight  amount,  probably  not 
more  than  seven  or  eight  feet,  the  length  of  the  waves  being 
doubtful,  as  we  cannot  be  certain  of  the  angle  at  which  we  are 
crossing  them ;  they  cannot  exceed  two  miles  from  crest  to 
crest,  and  are  probably  about  one. 

1  We  had  rather  a  scare  to-night  on  its  suddenly  coming 
over  very  thick  just  as  Wilson  and  I  were  coupling  up  the 
second  load  to  bring  it  on  ;  all  our  food  and  personal  equip- 


28         THE   VOYAGE   OF  THE   'DISCOVERY'    [Nov. 

ment  had  been  left  with  Shackleton  in  the  advanced  position, 
and,  of  course,  we  could  see  nothing  of  it  through  the  haze. 
We  followed  the  old  tracks  for  some  way,  until  the  light  got 
so  bad  that  we  repeatedly  lost  sight  of  them,  when  we  were 
obliged  to  halt  and  grope  round  for  them.  So  far  we  were 
only  in  danger  of  annoying  delays,  but  a  little  later  a  brisk 
breeze  sprang  up,  and  to  our  consternation  rapidly  drifted  up 
the  old  tracks ;  there  was  nothing  for  it  but  to  strike  out  a 
fresh  course  of  our  own  in  the  direction  in  which  we  supposed 
the  camp  to  lie,  which  we  did,  and,  getting  on  as  fast  as 
possible,  had  the  satisfaction  of  sighting  the  camp  in  about 
half  an  hour.  "  All's  well  that  ends  well,"  and  luckily  the  fog 
was  not  very  thick ;  but  the  incident  has  set  us  thinking  that 
if  very  thick  weather  were  to  come  on,  the  party  away  from 
the  camp  might  be  very  unpleasantly  situated,  so  in  future  we 
shall  plant  one  or  two  flags  as  we  advance  with  the  first  load, 
and  pick  them  up  as  we  come  on  with  the  second.' 

'  December  2. — We  noticed  again  to-day  the  cracking  of  the 
snow-crust ;  sometimes  the  whole  team  with  the  sledges  get  on 
an  area  when  it  cracks  around  us  as  sharply  and  as  loudly  as 
a  pistol  shot,  and  this  is  followed  by  a  long-drawn  sigh  as  the 
area  sinks.  When  this  first  happened  the  dogs  were  terrified, 
and  sprang  forward  with  tails  between  their  legs  and  heads 
screwed  round  as  though  the  threatened  danger  was  behind ; 
and,  indeed,  it  gave  me  rather  a  shock  the  first  time — it  was 
so  unexpected,  and  the  sharp  report  was  followed  by  a  distinct 
subsidence.  Though  probably  one  dropped  only  an  inch  or 
two,  there  was  an  instantaneous  feeling  of  insecurity  which  is 
not  pleasant.  Digging  down  to-night  Shackleton  found  a 
comparatively  hard  crust  two  or  three  inches  under  the  soft 
snow  surface  ;  beneath  this  was  an  air  space  of  about  an  inch, 
then  came  about  a  foot  of  loose  snow  in  large  crystals,  and 
then  a  second  crust.  There  is  a  good  deal  that  is  puzzling 
about  these  crusts.' 

During  the  following  year  on  our  sledge  journeys  we 
frequently  dug  into  the  snow  surface  to  see  what  lay  below, 
and  though  we  always  found  a  succession  of  crusts  with  soft 


i9o2j  NEW   LAND   IN  SIGHT  29 

snow  between,  the  arrangement  was  very  irregular  and  gave  us 
no  very  definite  information. 

1  December  3. —  ...  Our  pemmican  bag  for  this  week  by 
an  oversight  has  been  slung  alongside  a  tin  of  paraffin,  and  is 
consequently  strongly  impregnated  with  the  oil ;  one  can  both 
smell  and  taste  the  latter  strongly ;  it  is  some  proof  of  the 
state  of  our  appetites  that  we  really  don't  much  mind  ! 

*  We  are  now  sufficiently  close  to  the  land  to  make  out 
some  of  its  details.  On  our  right  is  a  magnificent  range  of 
mountains,  which  we  are  gradually  opening  out,  and  which 
must  therefore  run  more  or  less  in  an  east-and-west  direction. 
My  rough  calculations  show  them  to  be  at  least  fifty  miles 
from  us,  and,  if  so,  their  angle  of  altitude  gives  a  height  of 
over  10,000  feet.  The  eastern  end  of  this  range  descends  to 
a  high  snow-covered  plateau,  through  which  arise  a  number  of 
isolated  minor  peaks,  which  I  think  must  be  volcanic ;  beyond 
these,  again,  is  a  long,  rounded,  sloping  snow-cape,  merging 
into  the  barrier.  These  rounded  snow-capes  are  a  great 
feature  of  the  coast ;  they  can  be  seen  dimly  in  many  places, 
both  north  and  south  of  us.  They  are  peculiar  as  presenting 
from  all  points  of  view  a  perfectly  straight  line  inclined  at  a 
slight  angle  to  the  horizon.  North  of  this  range  the  land  still 
seems  to  run  on,  but  it  has  that  detached  appearance,  due  to 
great  distance,  which  we  noted  before,  and  we  can  make  little 
of  it.  The  south  side  of  the  range  seems  to  descend  com- 
paratively abruptly,  and  in  many  cases  it  is  bordered  by 
splendid  high  cliffs,  very  dark  in  colour,  though  we  cannot 
make  out  the  exact  shade.  Each  cliff  has  a  band  of  white 
along  its  top  where  the  ice-cap  ends  abruptly ;  at  this  distance 
it  has  a  rather  whimsical  resemblance  to  the  sugaring  of  a 
Christmas  cake.  The  cliffs  and  foothills  of  the  high  range 
form  the  northern  limit  of  what  appears  to  be  an  enormous 
strait ;  we  do  not  look  up  this  strait,  and  therefore  cannot  say 
what  is  beyond,  but  the  snow-cape  on  this  side  is  evidently  a 
great  many  miles  from  the  high  range,  and  there  appears  to 
be  nothing  between.  This  near  snow-cape  seems  to  be  more 
or  less  isolated.     It  is  an  immense  and  almost  dome-shaped, 


3o         THE   VOYAGE   OF  THE   'DISCOVERY'    [Dec. 

snow-covered  mass  ;  only  quite  lately  could  we  see  any  rock 
at  all,  but  now  a  few  patches  are  to  be  made  out  towards  the 
summit,  and  one  or  two  at  intervals  along  the  foot.  It  is  for 
one  of  these  that  we  have  now  decided  to  make,  so  that  we 
may  establish  our  depot  there,  but  at  present  rate  of  going  we 
shall  be  a  long  time  before  we  reach  it. 

'South  of  this  isolated  snow-cape,  which  is  by  far  the 
nearest  point  of  land  to  us,  we  can  see  a  further  high  moun- 
tainous country ;  but  this  also  is  so  distant  that  we  can  say 
little  of  it.  One  thing  seems  evident — that  the  high  bluff 
cape  we  were  making  for  is  not  a  cape  at  all,  but  a  curiously 
bold  spur  of  the  lofty  mountain  ranges,  which  is  high  above 
the  level  of  the  coastline,  and  must  be  many  miles  inland. 
It  is  difficult  to  say  whether  this  land  is  more  heavily  glaciated 
than  that  which  we  have  seen  to  the  north  ;  on  the  whole,  I 
think  the  steeper  surfaces  seem  equally  bare.  There  is  a  con- 
solation for  the  heavier  surface  and  harder  labour  we  are 
experiencing  in  the  fact  that  each  day  the  scene  gets  more 
interesting  and  more  beautiful. 

'To-day,  in  lighting  the  Primus,  I  very  stupidly  burnt  a 
hole  in  the  tent ;  I  did  not  heat  the  top  sufficiently  before  I 
began  to  pump,  and  a  long  yellow  flame  shot  up  and  set  light 
to  the  canvas.  I  do  not  think  I  should  have  noticed  what 
had  happened  at  first,  but  luckily  the  others  were  just 
approaching  and  rushed  forward  to  prevent  further  damage. 
As  it  was,  there  was  a  large  hole  which  poor  Shackleton  had 
to  make  shift  to  repair  during  our  last  lap  ;  it  is  not  much  fun 
working  with  a  needle  in  the  open  at  the  midnight  hours,  even 
though  the  season  happens  to  be  summer.' 

'  December  4. — After  a  sunshiny  day  and  with  the  cooler 
night  hours  there  comes  now  a  regular  fall  of  snow-crystals. 
On  a  calm  night  there  is  nothing  to  indicate  the  falling 
crystals  save  a  faint  haze  around  the  horizon  ;  overhead  it  is 
quite  clear.  Suddenly,  and  apparently  from  nowhere,  a  small 
shimmering  body  floats  gently  down  in  front  of  one  and  rests 
as  lightly  as  thistle-down  on  the  white  surface  below.  If  one 
stoops  to  examine  it,  as  we  have  done  many  times,  one  finds 


1902]  BEAUTIFUL   SNOW-CRYSTALS  31 

that  it  is  a  six-pointed  feathery  star,  quite  flat  and  smooth  on 
either  side.  We  find  them  sometimes  as  large  as  a  shilling, 
and  at  a  short  distance  they  might  be  small  hexagonal  pieces 
of  glass  ;  it  is  only  on  looking  closely  that  one  discovers  the 
intricate  and  delicate  beauty  of  their  design. 

'  The  effect  of  these  en  masse  is  equally  wonderful ;  they 
rest  in  all  positions,  and  therefore  receive  the  sun's  rays  at  all 
angles,  and  in  breaking  them  up  reflect  in  turn  each  colour  of 
the  spectrum.  As  one  plods  along  towards  the  midnight  sun, 
one's  eyes  naturally  fall  on  the  plain  ahead,  and  one  realises 
that  the  simile  of  a  gem-strewn  carpet  could  never  be  more 
aptly  employed  than  in  describing  the  radiant  path  of  the  sun 
on  the  snowy  surface.  It  sparkles  with  a  myriad  points  of 
brilliant  light,  comprehensive  of  every  colour  the  rainbow  can 
show,  and  is  so  realistic  and  near  that  it  often  seems  one  has 
but  to  stoop  to  pick  up  some  glistening  jewel. 

'  We  find  a  difficulty  now  in  gaining  even  four  miles  a  day; 
the  struggle  gets  harder  and  harder.  We  should  not  make  any 
progress  if  we  did  not  pull  hard  ourselves  ;  several  of  the  dogs 
do  practically  nothing,  and  none  work  without  an  effort. 
Slowly  but  surely,  however,  we  are  "  rising  "  the  land.  Our 
sastrugi  to-day,  from  the  recent  confused  state,  have  developed 
into  a  W.N.W.  direction;  it  looks  as  though  there  was  a  local 
wind  out  of  the  strait.' 

'  December  5. — At  breakfast  we  decided  that  our  oil  is  going 
too  fast ;  there  has  been  some  wastage  from  the  capsizing  of 
the  sledge,  and  at  first  we  were  far  too  careless  of  the  amount 
we  used.  When  we  came  to  look  up  dates,  there  was  no  doubt 
that  in  this  respect  we  have  outrun  the  constable.  We  started 
with  the  idea  that  a  gallon  was  to  last  twelve  days  ;  ours  have 
averaged  little  over  ten.  As  a  result  we  calculate  that  those 
which  remain  must  be  made  to  last  fourteen.  This  is  a  distinct 
blow,  as  we  shall  have  to  sacrifice  our  hot  luncheon  meal  and 
to  economise  greatly  at  both  the  others.  We  started  the  new 
routine  to-night,  and  for  lunch  ate  some  frozen  seal-meat  and 
our  allowance  of  sugar  and  biscuit.  The  new  conditions  do  not 
smile  on  us  at  present,  but  I  suppose  we  shall  get  used  to  them. 


32         THE   VOYAGE   OF  THE    'DISCOVERY'    [Dec. 

'  The  events  of  the  day's  march  are  now  becoming  so  dreary 
and  dispiriting  that  one  longs  to  forget  them  when  we  camp  j 
it  is  an  effort  even  to  record  them  in  a  diary.  To-night  has 
been  worse  than  usual.  Our  utmost  efforts  could  not  produce 
more  than  three  miles  for  the  whole  march,  and  it  would  be 
impossible  to  describe  how  tiring  the  effort  was  to  gain  even 
this  small  advance.  We  have  an  idea  we  are  rising  in  level 
slightly,  but  it  is  impossible  to  say  so  with  certainty. 

*  Shackleton  broke  the  glass  of  his  watch  yesterday  after- 
noon ;  the  watch  still  goes,  but  one  cannot  further  rely  on  it, 
and  I  am  therefore  left  with  the  only  accurate  time-keeper.  It 
is  a  nuisance  to  lose  a  possible  check  on  future  observations, 
but  luckily  my  watch  seems  to  be  a  very  trustworthy  instrument ; 
its  rate  on  board  the  ship  was  excellent,  and  I  have  no  reason 
to  suppose  that  it  has  altered  much  since  we  left.  My  watch 
was  presented  to  me  by  Messrs.  Smith  &  Son,  of  the  Strand, 
and  I  believe  it  to  be  an  exceptionally  good  one,  but  the 
important  observations  which  we  take  ought  not  to  depend  on 
a  single  watch,  and  future  expeditions  should  be  supplied  with 
a  larger  number  than  we  carry.' 

1  December  6.  —  ...  A  dire  calamity  to-day.  When  I  went 
outside  before  breakfast  I  noticed  that  "  Spud  "  was  absent 
from  his  place.  I  looked  round  and  discovered  him  lying  on 
the  sledge  with  his  head  on  the  open  mouth  of  the  seal-meat 
bag ;  one  glance  at  his  balloon-like  appearance  was  sufficient  to 
show  what  had  happened.  As  one  contemplated  the  impossi- 
bility of  repairing  the  mischief  and  of  making  him  restore  his 
ill-gotten  provender,  it  was  impossible  not  to  laugh ;  but  the 
matter  is  really  serious  enough  :  he  has  made  away  with  quite 
a  week's  allowance  of  our  precious  seal-meat.  How  he  could 
have  swallowed  it  all  is  the  wonder,  yet,  though  somewhat 
sedate  and  somnolent,  he  appeared  to  suffer  no  particular 
discomfort  from  the  enormously  increased  size  of  his  waist. 
We  found  of  course  that  he  had  gnawed  through  his  trace,  but 
the  seal-meat  bag  will  be  very  carefully  closed  in  future. 

*  Whilst  we  were  making  preparations  for  a  start  last  night 
we  were  overtaken  by  a  blizzard  and  had  to  camp  again  in  a 


i902]  DOGS    WEAKENING  33 

hurry.  The  barometer  has  been  falling  for  two  days,  and 
Wilson  has  had  twinges  of  rheumatism ;  the  former  we  took 
for  a  sign  that  we  were  rising  in  altitude,  but  we  ought  to  have 
been  warned  by  a  further  drop  of  two-tenths  of  an  inch  whilst 
we  were  in  camp.  The  blizzard  was  ushered  in  with  light  flaky 
snow  and  an  increasing  wind,  and  a  quarter  of  an  hour  later 
there  was  a  heavy  drift  with  strong  wind.  We  have  been 
completing  our  calculations  of  what  is  to  be  left  at  the  depot 
and  what  carried  on  to  the  south.' 

'  December  8. —  .  .  .  Our  poor  team  are  going  steadily 
downhill  j  six  or  seven  scarcely  pull  at  all,  perhaps  five  or  six 
do  some  steady  work,  and  the  remainder  make  spasmodic 
efforts.  The  lightening  of  the  load  is  more  than  counter- 
balanced by  the  weakening  of  the  animals,  and  I  can  see  no 
time  in  which  we  can  hope  to  get  the  sledges  along  without 
pulling  ourselves.  Of  late  we  have  altered  our  marching 
arrangements ;  we  now  take  the  first  half-load  on  for  four 
miles,  then  return  for  the  other  half,  eating  our  cold  luncheon 
on  the  way  back.  To-day  it  took  us  three  and  a  half  hours  to 
get  the  advance  load  on,  and  I  who  remained  with  it  had  to 
wait  another  five  and  a  half  before  the  others  came  back — nine 
hours'  work  to  gain  four  miles. 

'  Before  supper  we  all  had  a  wash  and  brush-up.  We  each 
carry  a  tooth-brush  and  a  pocket-comb,  and  there  is  one  cake  of 
soap  and  one  pocket  looking-glass  amongst  the  party;  we  use 
our  tooth-brushes  fairly  frequently,  with  snow,  but  the  soap 
and  comb  are  not  often  in  request,  and  the  looking-glass  is 
principally  used  to  dress  our  mangled  lips.  Snow  and  soap 
are  rather  a  cold  compound,  but  there  is  freshness  in  the 
glowing  reaction,  and  we  should  probably  use  them  oftener  if 
the  marches  were  not  so  tiring.  To-night  the  tent  smells  of 
soap  and  hazeline  cream.' 

'  December  10. — Yesterday  we  only  covered  two  miles,  and 
to  get  on  the  second  load  at  all  we  had  to  resort  to  the  igno- 
minious device  of  carrying  food  ahead  of  the  dogs. 

'  "  Snatcher  "  died  yesterday ;  others  are  getting  feeble — it 
is  terrible  to  see  them.     The  coast  cannot  be  more  than  ten  or 
VOL,  11,  d 


34         THE   VOYAGE   OF   THE   'DISCOVERY'    [Dec. 

twelve  miles,  but  shall  we  ever  reach  it  ?  and  in  what  state 
shall  we  be  to  go  on?  The  dogs  have  had  no  hesitation  in 
eating  their  comrade ;  the  majority  clamoured  for  his  flesh  this 
evening,  and  neglected  their  fish  in  favour  of  it.  There  is  the 
chance  that  this  change  of  diet  may  save  the  better  animals. 

'  This  evening  we  were  surprised  by  the  visit  of  a  skua 
gull ;  even  our  poor  dogs  became  excited.  We  are  nearly 
1 80  miles  from  any  possible  feeding-ground  it  may  have,  and 
it  is  impossible  to  say  how  it  found  us,  but  it  is  curious  that  it 
should  have  come  so  soon  after  poor  "Snatcher"  has  been 
cut  up.' 

1  December  11. — Last  night  I  had  a  terrible  headache  from 
the  hot  work  in  the  sun  and  the  closeness  of  the  tent.  I 
couldn't  sleep  for  a  long  time,  though  we  had  the  tent  open 
and  our  bags  wide;  sleep  eventually  banished  the  headache, 
and  I  awoke  quite  fit.  The  weather  has  improved,  for  although 
still  hot  a  southerly  breeze  has  cooled  the  air.  In  covering 
three  and  a  half  miles  we  have  altered  several  bearings  of  the 
land,  so  that  it  cannot  now  be  far  off.  As  we  travel  inward 
the  snow-covered  ridges  of  our  cape  are  blocking  out  the 
higher  range  to  the  north. 

'About  1  a.m.  a  bank  of  stratus  cloud  came  rapidly  up 
from  the  south;  it  looked  white  and  fleecy  towards  the  sun 
and  a  peculiar  chocolate-brown  as  it  passed  to  the  northward 
and  disappeared.  It  must  have  been  travelling  very  fast  and 
about  two  or  three  thousand  feet  above  us  ;  in  an  hour  we  had 
a  completely  clear  sky. 

1  Hunger  is  beginning  to  nip  us  all,  and  we  have  many 
conversations  as  to  the  dainties  we  could  devour  if  they  were 
within  reach.' 

1  December  14. — We  have  arrived  at  a  place  where  I  think 
we  can  depot  our  dog-food,  and  none  too  soon  ;  I  doubt  if  we 
could  go  on  another  day  as  we  have  been  going.  We  have 
just  completed  the  worst  march  we  have  had,  and  only 
managed  to  advance  two  miles  by  the  most  strenuous  exer- 
tions. The  snow  grows  softer  as  we  approach  the  land ;  the 
sledge-runners  sink  from  three  to  four  inches,  and  one's  feet 


! 


1902]  SLOW    PROGRESS  35 

well  over  the  ankles  at  each  step.  After  going  a  little  over  a 
mile  things  got  so  bad  that  we  dropped  one  sledge  and  pushed 
on  to  bring  some  leading  marks  in  line.  Then  Shackleton 
and  I  brought  up  the  second  half- load  with  the  dogs  some- 
how ;  after  which,  leaving  the  dogs,  we  all  three  started  back 
for  the  sledge  that  had  been  dropped.  Its  weight  was  only 
250  lbs.,  yet  such  was  the  state  of  the  surface  that  we  could 
not  drag  it  at  the  rate  of  a  mile  an  hour. 

'The  air  temperature  has  gone  up  to  +  270,  and  it  feels  hot 
and  stuffy;  the  snow  surface  is  +220.  It  would  be  difficult 
to  convey  an  idea  of  what  marching  is  like  under  present  con- 
ditions. The  heel  of  the  advanced  foot  is  never  planted 
beyond  the  toe  of  the  other,  and  of  this  small  gain  with  each 
pace,  two  or  three  inches  are  lost  by  back-slipping  as  the 
weight  is  brought  forward.  When  we  come  to  any  particularly 
soft  patch  we  do  little  more  than  mark  time. 

1  The  bearings  of  our  present  position  are  good  but  distant. 
To  the  west  we  have  a  conspicuous  rocky  patch  in  line  with 
one  of  three  distant  peaks,  and  to  the  north  another  small  patch 
in  line  with  a  curious  scar  on  the  northern  range.  The  back 
marks  in  each  case  are  perhaps  twenty  or  thirty  miles  from  us, 
and,  though  they  will  be  easy  enough  to  see  in  clear  weather, 
one  cannot  hope  to  recognise  them  when  it  is  misty.  It  is  for 
this  reason  that  I  propose  to-morrow  to  take  our  own  food,  on 
which  our  safety  depends,  closer  in  to  the  land,  so  that  there 
may  be  no  chance  of  our  missing  it.' 

'■December  15  (3.15  a.m.). — As  soon  as  we  had  lightened 
our  load  last  night  we  started  steering  straight  for  the  rocky 
patch  to  the  westward.  The  sky  was  overcast  and  the  light 
bad,  and  after  proceeding  about  a  quarter  of  a  mile  we  found 
that  we  were  crossing  well-marked  undulations.  Still  pushing 
on,  we  topped  a  steep  ridge  to  be  fronted  by  an  enormous 
chasm  filled  with  a  chaotic  confusion  of  ice-blocks.  It  was 
obvious  that  we  could  go  no  further  with  the  sledges,  so  we 
halted  and  pitched  camp,  and  after  eating  our  meagre  lunch 
set  forth  to  explore.  The  light  was  very  bad,  but  we  roped 
ourselves  together,  and,  taking  our  only  ice-axe  and  the  meat- 


36         THE   VOYAGE   OF   THE    'DISCOVERY'    [Dec. 

chopper,  descended  cautiously  over  a  steep  slope  into  the 
rougher  ice  below.  Taking  advantage  of  the  snow  between 
the  ice-blocks  we  wended  our  way  amongst  them  for  some 
distance,  now  and  again  stepping  on  some  treacherous  spot 
and  finding  ourselves  suddenly  prone  with  our  legs  down  a 
crevasse  and  very  little  breath  left. 

'  At  first  we  could  get  some  idea  of  where  these  bad  places 
lay,  but  later  the  light  grew  so  bad  that  we  came  on  them  quite 
without  warning,  and  our  difficulties  were  much  greater,  whilst 
the  huge  ice-blocks  about  us  swelled  to  mountainous  size  in 
the  grey  gloom,  and  it  was  obvious  that  we  could  make  no 
useful  observations  in  such  weather.  We  stumbled  our  way 
back  with  difficulty,  and,  cutting  steps  up  the  slope,  at  length 
caught  a  welcome  view  of  the  camp. 

'The  dogs  were  more  excited  than  they  have  been  for 
many  a  day ;  poor  things,  they  must  have  been  quite  non- 
plussed when  we  suddenly  vanished  from  sight.  We  can 
make  little  out  of  the  chasm  so  far,  except  that  it  quite  cuts  us 
off  from  a  nearer  approach  to  the  land  with  our  sledges,  so  that 
we  shall  have  to  depot  our  own  food  with  the  rest  of  the  dog 
food  and  trust  to  fortune  to  give  us  clear  weather  when  we 
return.' 

'  December  16. — There  was  bright,  clear  sunshine  when  we 
awoke  yesterday  afternoon,  and  we  not  only  had  a  good  view 
of  the  chasm,  but  Shackleton  was  able  to  photograph  it.  It 
looks  like  a  great  rift  in  the  barrier  which  has  been  partly  filled 
up  with  irregular  ice-blocks;  from  our  level  to  the  lowest  point 
in  the  valley  may  be  about  a  hundred  feet,  and  the  peaks  of 
some  of  the  larger  blocks  rise  almost  to  our  level.  The  rift  is 
perhaps  three-quarters  of  a  mile  broad  opposite  to  us,  but  it 
seems  to  narrow  towards  the  south,  and  there  is  rather~~a 
suggestion  that  it  ends  within  a  few  miles.  The  general  lie  of 
the  rift  is  N.N.W.  and  S.S.E.  j  on  the  other  side  the  surface 
appears  to  be  level  again,  and  probably  it  continues  so  for  five 
or  six  miles  to  the  land ;  however,  it  is  certainly  not  worth  our 
while  to  delay  to  ascertain  this  fact.  In  the  sunlight  the  lights 
and  shadows  of  the  ice-blocks  are  in  strong  contrast,   and 


i902]  DEPOT   'B'  37 

where  the  sun  has  shone  on  blue  walls,  caverns  have  been 
melted  and  icicles  hang  over  glassy,  frozen  pools.  We  found 
some  of  the  icicles  still  dripping. 

'Intent  on  wasting  no  more  of  our  precious  time,  we  got 
back  to  our  depot  as  quickly  as  possible,  and  set  about  re- 
arranging the  loads,  taking  stock,  and  fixing  up  the  depot. 
Whilst  we  were  thus  employed  a  very  chill  wind  came  up  from 
the  south,  and  we  did  not  escape  without  some  frost-bitten 
fingers ;  however,  after  luncheon  we  got  away  and  started 
head  to  wind  and  driving  snow  at  n  p.m.  At  midnight  I  got 
an  altitude  which  gives  the  latitude  as  80.30,  and  at  1.30  we 
camped,  as  we  have  decided  now  to  start  our  marches  earlier 
every  day  until  we  get  back  into  day  routine. 

'  As  I  write  I  scarcely  know  how  to  describe  the  blessed 
relief  it  is  to  be  free  from  our  relay  work.  For  one-and-thirty 
awful  days  have  we  been  at  it,  and  whilst  I  doubt  if  our  human 
endurance  could  have  stood  it  much  more,  I  am  quite  sure 
the  dogs  could  not.  It  seems  now  like  a  nightmare,  which 
grew  more  and  more  terrible  towards  its  end. 

' 1  do  not  like  to  think  of  the  difference  between  the  state 
of  our  party  now  and  as  it  was  before  we  commenced  this 
dreadful  task;  it  is  almost  equally  painful  to  think  of  the  gain, 
for  during  all  this  time  we  have  advanced  little  more  than  half 
a  degree  of  latitude,  though  I  calculate  we  have  covered 
330  miles  (380  statute  miles). 

1  But  it  is  little  use  thinking  of  the  past ;  the  great  thing  is 
to  make  the  best  of  the  future.  We  carry  with  us  provisions 
for  four  weeks  and  an  odd  day  or  two,  a  little  dog-food,  our 
camp  equipment,  and,  for  clothing,  exactly  what  we  stand  in. 

'  At  the  depot,  which  I  have  now  called  Depot  "  B,"  we 
have  left  three  weeks'  provision  and  a  quantity  of  dog-food. 
This  should  tide  us  over  the  homeward  march,  so  that  the 
present  stock  can  all  be  expended  before  we  return  to 
Depot  "B  ";  and  all  will  be  well  if  we  can  get  back  within 
four  weeks,  and  if  we  have  a  clear  day  to  find  the  spot. 

'Poor  "Vic"  was  sacrificed  to-night  for  the  common 
good.' 


38         THE   VOYAGE   OF    THE    'DISCOVERY'    [Dec. 

''December  17. — We  roused  out  yesterday  afternoon  at 
3  p.m.  in  very  bright  sunshine.  To  our  astonishment,  a  couple 
of  hundred  yards  behind  us  lay  the  end  of  the  chasm  which 
stood  between  us  and  the  coast ;  it  gradually  narrows  to  a 
crevasse,  which  in  places  is  bridged  over  with  snow,  but  in 
others  displays  a  yawning  gulf.  We  must  have  crossed  it 
within  a  few  feet  of  such  a  gulf;  our  sledge  track  could  be 
seen  quite  clearly  leading  across  the  bridge.  Not  suspecting 
anything  of  this  sort  we  were  quite  regardless  of  danger 
during  our  last  march,  and  unconsciously  passed  within  an 
ace  of  destruction.  It  certainly  has  been  a  very  close  shave, 
as  we  could  scarcely  have  escaped  at  the  best  without  broken 
limbs  had  we  fallen  into  the  hole,  and  one  doesn't  like  to 
contemplate  broken  limbs  out  here. 

'This  new  light  on  the  chasm  seems  to  show  that  it  is 
caused  by  a  stream  of  ice  pressing  out  through  the  strait  to  the 
north  against  the  main  mass  of  the  barrier ;  this  would  naturally 
have  such  a  rending  effect  on  either  side  of  the  entrance.  We 
have  got  the  dogs  on  seven  miles  to-night ;  they  need  a  lot  of 
driving,  especially  as  the  surface  has  become  irregular,  with 
wavy  undulations.  It  is  almost  impossible  to  make  out  how 
these  waves  run.  As  the  chill  of  the  evening  comes  on 
now,  a  mist  arises  along  the  whole  coastline  and  obscures 
the  land;  for  this  reason  we  are  the  more  anxious  to  get 
back  into  day-marches,  and  we  shall  make  a  much  earlier 
start  to-morrow.' 

'  December  18. — Started  at  5  p.m.  and  finished  at  midnight. 
The  short  hours  are  to  get  to  earlier  marches,  but  I  begin  to 
doubt  whether  we  shall  ever  be  able  to  work  the  dogs  for  much 
more  than  eight  hours  again ;  the  poor  creatures  are  generally 
in  a  healthier  state  with  the  fresh  food,  but  all  are  very  weak 
and  thin.  With  such  a  load  as  we  now  have  there  would  have 
been  no  holding  them  when  we  left  the  ship  ;  as  someone  said 
to-day,  "  If  only  we  could  come  across  some  good,  fat  seals, 
we  could  camp  for  a  week  and  start  fair  again."  It  is  curious 
to  think  that  there  is  possibly  not  a  living  thing  within  two 
hundred  miles  of  us.     Bad  as  the  dog-driving  is,  however,  the 


i9o2]  PUSHING    SOUTHWARD  39 

fact  that  each  mile  is  an  advance,  and  has  not  to  be  covered 
three  times,  is  an  inexpressible  relief. 

•  We  are  gradually  passing  from  the  hungry  to  the  ravenous ; 
we  cannot  drag  our  thoughts  from  food,  and  we  talk  of  little 
else.  The  worst  times  are  the  later  hours  of  the  march  and 
the  nights ;  on  the  march  one  sometimes  gets  almost  a  sickly 
feeling  from  want  of  food,  and  the  others  declare  they  have  an 
actual  gnawing  sensation.  At  night  one  wakes  with  the  most 
distressing  feeling  of  emptiness,  and  then  to  reflect  that  there 
are  probably  four  or  five  hours  more  before  breakfast  is  posi- 
tively dreadful.  We  have  all  proved  the  efficacy  of  hauling  our 
belts  quite  tight  before  we  go  to  sleep,  and  I  have  a  theory 
that  I  am  saved  some  of  the  worst  pangs  by  my  pipe.  The 
others  are  non-smokers,  and,  although  they  do  not  own  it,  I 
often  catch  a  wistful  glance  directed  at  my  comforting  friend ; 
but,  alas !  two  pipes  a  day  do  not  go  far,  even  on  such  a 
journey  as  ours.' 

1  December  19. — We  are  now  about  ten  miles  from  the  land, 
but  even  at  this  distance  the  foothills  cut  off  our  view  of  the 
higher  mountains  behind,  save  to  the  north  and  south. 
Abreast  of  us  the  sky-line  is  not  more  than  three  or  four 
thousand  feet  high,  though  we  know  there  are  loftier  peaks 
behind.  The  lower  country  which  we  see  strongly  resembles 
the  coastal  land  far  to  the  north ;  it  is  a  fine  scene  of  a  lofty 
snow-cap,  whose  smooth  rounded  outline  is  broken  by  the 
sharper  bared  peaks,  or  by  the  steep  disturbing  fall  of  some 
valley.  Here  and  there  local  glaciers  descend  to  barrier  level ; 
the  coastline  itself  winds  greatly,  forming  numerous  headlands 
and  bays ;  we  are  skirting  these  and  keeping  our  direct  course, 
a  little  to  the  east  of  south.  The  coast  is  fringed  with  white 
snow-slopes,  glaciers,  and  broken  ice-cascades;  but  in  many 
places  black  rocky  headlands  and  precipitous  uncovered  cliffs 
serve  more  clearly  to  mark  its  windings.  Perhaps  one  of  the 
most  impressive  facts  is  that  we  see  all  this  above  a  perfectly 
level  horizon  line.  Everywhere  apparently  there  is  as  sharp 
and  definite  a  line  between  the  land  and  the  level  surface  of 
the  barrier  as  exists  on  an  ordinary  coastline  between  land  and 


4o        THE   VOYAGE   OF   THE    'DISCOVERY'    [Dec. 

water.  When  it  becomes  at  all  thick  or  gloomy  the  rocks 
stand  out  and  the  white,  snowy  surfaces  recede,  giving  rise  to 
curious  optical  illusions.  The  high,  curiously  shaped  rocky 
patches  seem  to  be  suspended  in  mid-air  j  there  was  one  a  few 
days  ago,  long  and  flat  in  shape,  which  appeared  to  be  so 
wholly  unsupported  that  it  was  named  "  Mahomet's  Coffin," 
but  when  the  weather  cleared  we  could  see  that  the  snow  about 
it  was  really  closer  than  the  rock  itself. 

1  Wilson  is  the  most  indefatigable  person.  When  it  is  fine 
and  clear,  at  the  end  of  our  fatiguing  days  he  will  spend  two 
or  three  hours  seated  in  the  door  of  the  tent  sketching  each 
detail  of  the  splendid  mountainous  coast-scene  to  the  west. 
His  sketches  are  most  astonishingly  accurate ;  I  have  tested 
his  proportions  by  actual  angular  measurement  and  found  them 
correct.  If  the  fine  weather  continues  we  shall  at  least  have  a 
unique  record  of  this  coastline.  But  these  long  hours  in  the 
glare  are  very  bad  for  the  eyes ;  we  have  all  suffered  a  good 
deal  from  snow-blindness  of  late,  though  we  generally  march 
with  goggles,  but  Wilson  gets  the  worst  bouts,  and  I  fear  it  is 
mainly  due  to  his  sketching. 

*  "  Wolf "  was  the  victim  to-night.  I  cannot  say  "  poor 
%  Wolf,' "  for  he  has  been  a  thorn  in  the  flesh,  and  has  scarcely 
pulled  a  pound  the  whole  journey.  We  have  fifteen  dogs  left, 
and  have  decided  to  devote  our  energies  to  the  preservation  of 
the  nine  best ;  we  have  done  nearly  eight  miles  to-day,  but  at 
such  an  expenditure  of  energy  that  I  am  left  in  doubt  as  to 
whether  we  should  not  have  done  better  without  any  dogs 
at  all.' 

'  December  20. —  .  .  .  Poor  "  Grannie  "  has  been  ailing  for 
some  time.  She  dropped  to-day.  We  put  her  on  the  sledge, 
hoping  she  might  recover,  and  there  she  breathed  her  last ; 
she  will  last  the  others  three  days.  It  is  little  wonder  that  we 
grow  more  and  more  sick  of  our  dog-driving. 

1  The  sky  has  been  overcast  with  low  stratus  cloud,  but  it  is 
wonderfully  clear  below ;  we  have  had  this  sort  of  weather  for 
some  time.  One  looks  aloft  and  to  the  east  and  finds  the 
outlook  dull  and  apparently  foggy,  when  it  is  surprising  to  turn 


i902]     HOPELESS   CONDITION   OF  THE   DOGS      41 

to  the  west  and  get  a  comparatively  clear  view  of  all  the  low- 
lying  rocks  and  snow- slopes  which  are  now  ten  or  a  dozen 
miles  from  us. 

1  My  tobacco  supply  is  at  such  "  low  water  "  that  to-day  I 
have  been  trying  tea-leaves  :  they  can  be  described  as  nothing 
less  than  horrid.' 

1  December  21. — We  are  now  crossing  a  deep  bay,  but  the 
sky  is  still  overcast  and  our  view  obscured ;  the  surface  was 
particularly  heavy  to-day,  and  our  poor  dogs  had  an  especially 
bad  time.  After  a  few  miles  we  determined  to  stop  and  go  on 
at  night  again,  as  the  heat  was  very  great ;  the  thermometer 
showed  2  70,  but  inside  the  instrument-box,  which  is  covered 
with  white  canvas,  it  showed  520.  There  must  be  an  astonish- 
ing amount  of  radiation,  even  with  the  sun  obscured.  Starting 
again  at  8  p.m.,  we  found  that  matters  were  not  improved  at 
all.  Very  few  of  the  dogs  pulled,  whilst  "Stripes"  and 
"  Brownie  "  were  vomiting.  Things  began  to  look  very  hope- 
less, so  we  thought  it  would  be  wise  to  see  what  we  could  do 
alone  without  assistance  from  our  team.  We  found  that  on 
ski  we  could  just  move  our  own  sledges,  but  only  just ;  on 
foot,  after  going  for  ten  minutes,  we  found  we  were  doing 
something  under  a  mile  an  hour,  but  only  with  much  exertion. 
After  this  experiment  we  camped  again,  and  have  been  dis- 
cussing matters.  We  calculate  we  were  pulling  about  170  lbs. 
per  man  ;  either  the  surface  is  extraordinarily  bad  or  we  are 
growing  weak.  It  is  no  use  blinding  ourselves  to  facts :  we 
cannot  put  any  further  reliance  on  the  dogs.  Any  day  they 
might  all  give  out  and  leave  us  entirely  dependent  on  our- 
selves. In  such  a  case,  if  things  were  to  remain  just  as  they 
are,  we  should  have  about  as  much  as  we  could  do  to  get  home  ; 
on  the  other  hand,  will  things  remain  just  as  they  are?  It 
seems  reasonable  to  hope  for  improvement,  we  have  seen  so 
many  changes  in  the  surface  ;  at  any  rate,  we  have  discussed 
this  matter  out,  and  I  am  glad  to  say  that  all  agree  in  taking 
the  risk  of  pushing  on. 

1  Misfortunes  never  come  singly ;  since  starting  we  have 
always  had  a  regular  examination  of  gums  and  legs  on  Sunday 


42         THE   VOYAGE   OF   THE    'DISCOVERY'    [Dec. 

morning,  and  at  first  it  seemed  to  show  us  to  be  in  a  very 
satisfactory  condition  of  health,  but  to-night  Wilson  told  me 
that  Shackleton  has  decidedly  angry-looking  gums,  and  that 
for  some  time  they  have  been  slowly  but  surely  getting  worse. 
He  says  there  is  nothing  yet  to  be  alarmed  at,  but  he  now 
thought  it  serious  enough  to  tell  me  in  view  of  our  future  plans. 
We  have  decided  not  to  tell  Shackleton  for  the  present ;  it  is  a 
matter  which  must  be  thought  out.  Certainly  this  is  a  black 
night,  but  things  must  look  blacker  yet  before  we  decide  to 
turn.' 

*■  December  22. —  .  .  .  This  morning  we  had  bright  sun- 
shine and  a  clear  view  of  the  land  ;  the  coastline  has  receded 
some  way  back  in  a  deep  bay,  beyond  which  the  land  rises  to 
the  magnificent  mountain  ranges  which  evidently  form  the 
backbone  of  the  whole  continent.  There  are  no  longer  high 
snow-covered  foothills  to  intercept  our  view  of  the  loftier  back- 
ground ;  it  is  as  though  at  this  portion  of  the  coast  they  had 
been  wiped  out  as  a  feature  of  the  country,  though  farther  to 
the  south  where  the  coastline  again  advances  they  seem  to 
recur. 

1  But  just  here  we  get  an  excellent  view  of  the  clean-cut 
mountain  range.  Abreast  of  us  is  the  most  splendid  specimen 
of  a  pyramidal  mountain ;  it  raises  a  sharp  apex  to  a  height  of 
nine  thousand  feet  or  more,  and  its  precisely  carved  facets 
seem  to  rest  on  a  base  of  more  irregular  country,  fully  four 
thousand  feet  below.  With  its  extraordinary  uniformity  and 
great  altitude  it  is  a  wonderfully  good  landmark.  Close  to  the 
south  of  this  is  an  equally  lofty  table  mountain,  the  top  of 
which  is  perfectly  flat  though  dipping  slightly  towards  the 
north;  this  tabular  structure  is  carried  on,  less  perfectly,  in 
other  lofty  mountain  regions  to  the  south ;  we  have  not  seen  it 
so  well  marked  on  any  part  of  the  coast  since  the  land  we 
discovered  south  of  Cape  Washington,  which  seems  to  indicate 
some  geological  alliance  with  that  part.  We  can  now  see  also 
the  high  land  that  lies  beyond  the  foothills  we  have  lately  been 
skirting ;  it  is  more  irregular  in  outline,  with  high  snow-ridges 
between  the  sharper   peaks.      To    the   south   one  particular 


1902]  FURTHER    LAND  43 

conical  mountain  stands  much  closer  to  the  coast  than  the 
main  ranges.  It  looks  to  be  of  great  height,  but  may  not  be 
so  distant  as  we  imagine ;  it  will  form  our  principal  landmark 
for  the  next  week.  It  is  noticeable  that  along  all  this  stretch 
of  coast  we  can  see  no  deep  valley  that  could  contain  a  glacier 
from  the  interior  ice-cap  (if  there  is  one). 

'  The  beauty  of  the  scene  before  us  is  much  enhanced  when 
the  sun  circles  low  to  the  south  :  we  get  then  the  most  delicate 
blue  shadows  and  purest  tones  of  pink  and  violet  on  the  hill- 
slopes.  There  is  rarely  any  intensity  of  shade — the  charm  lies 
in  the  subtlety  and  delicacy  of  the  colouring  and  in  the  clear 
softness  of  the  distant  outline. 

1  We  have  decided  to  cease  using  our  bacon  and  to  increase 
the  seal  allowance,  as  the  former  seems  the  most  likely  cause 
of  the  scurvy  symptoms.  To  Shackleton  it  was  represented  as 
a  preventive  measure,  but  I  am  not  sure  that  he  does  not 
smell  a  rat.  The  exchange  is  not  quite  equal  in  weight ;  we 
again  lose  a  little.  We  cannot  certainly  afford  to  lose  more, 
as  we  are  already  reduced  to  starvation  rations.  Our  allowance 
on  leaving  the  ship  ran  to  about  i  'q  lb.  per  man  per  day,  but 
various  causes  have  reduced  this.  At  first  we  went  too  heavy 
on  our  biscuit ;  then  we  determined  to  lay  by  two  extra  weeks 
out  of  eleven  ;  then  "  Spud  "  had  his  share  of  the  seal-meat 
bag ;  altogether  I  calculate  we  are  existing  on  about  a  pound 
and  a  half  of  food  a  day ;  it  is  not  enough,  and  hunger  is 
gripping  us  very  tightly.  I  never  knew  what  it  was  like  before, 
and  I  shall  not  be  particularly  keen  on  trying  it  again. 

'  Our  meals  come  regularly  enough,  but  they  are  the  poorest 
stop-gaps,  both  from  want  of  food  and  want  of  fuel.  At 
breakfast  now  we  first  make  tea — that  is  to  say,  we  put  the  tea 
in  long  before  the  water  boils,  and  lift  and  pour  out  with  the 
first  bubbling.  The  moment  this  is  over  we  heap  the  pemmican 
and  biscuit  into  the  pot  and  make  what  we  call  a  "  fry  " ;  it 
takes  much  less  time  than  a  hoosh.  The  cook  works  by  the 
watch,  and  in  twenty  minutes  from  the  time  it  is  lighted  the 
Primus  lamp  is  out ;  in  two  or  three  more  the  breakfast  is 
finished.     Then  we  serve  out  luncheon,  which  consists  of  a 


44        THE   VOYAGE   OF    THE   'DISCOVERY'    [Dec. 

small  piece  of  seal-meat,  half  a  biscuit,  and  eight  to  ten  lumps 
of  sugar.  Each  of  us  keeps  a  small  bag  which,  when  it  contains 
the  precious  luncheon,  is  stowed  away  in  the  warmth  of  a 
breast-pocket,  where  it  thaws  out  during  the  first  march. 
Absurd  as  it  may  sound,  it  is  terribly  difficult  not  to  filch  from 
this  bag  during  the  hours  of  the  march.  We  have  become 
absolutely  childish  in  this.  We  know  so  perfectly  the  contents 
of  the  bags  that  one  will  find  oneself  arguing  that  to-day's  piece 
of  seal  is  half  an  inch  longer  than  yesterday's ;  ergo,  if  one 
nibbles  half  an  inch  off,  one  will  still  have  the  same  lunch  as 
yesterday. 

1  Supper  is  of  course  the  best  meal ;  we  then  have  a  hoosh 
which  runs  from  between  three-quarters  to  a  whole  pannikin 
apiece,  but  even  at  this  we  cannot  afford  to  make  it  thick. 
Whilst  it  is  being  heated  in  the  central  cooker,  cocoa  is  made 
in  the  outer.  The  lamp  is  turned  out  directly  the  hoosh  boils, 
usually  from  twenty-eight  to  thirty  minutes  after  it  has  been 
lighted ;  by  this  time  the  chill  is  barely  off  the  contents  of  the 
outer  cooker,  and  of  course  the  cocoa  is  not  properly  dissolved, 
but  such  as  it  is,  it  is  the  only  drink  we  can  afford.  We  have 
long  ceased  criticising  the  quality  of  our  food ;  all  we  clamour 
for  now  is  something  to  fill  up,  but,  needless  to  say,  we  never 
get  it.  Half  an  hour  after  supper  one  seems  as  hard  set 
as  ever. 

'  My  companions  get  very  bad  "  food  dreams  " ;  in  fact, 
these  have  become  the  regular  breakfast  conversation.  It 
appears  to  be  a  sort  of  nightmare  ;  they  are  either  sitting  at 
a  well-spread  table  with  their  arms  tied,  or  they  grasp  at  a  dish 
and  it  slips  out  of  their  hand,  or  they  are  in  the  act  of  lifting  a 
dainty  morsel  to  their  mouth  when  they  fall  over  a  precipice. 
Whatever  the  details  may  be,  something  interferes  at  the  last 
moment  and  they  wake.  So  far,  I  have  not  had  these  dreams 
myself,  but  I  suppose  they  will  come. 

'When  we  started  from  the  ship  we  had  a  sort  of  idea  that 
we  could  go  as  we  pleased  with  regard  to  food,  hauling  in 
automatically  if  things  were  going  too  fast ;  but  we  soon  found 
that  this  would  not  do  at  all — there  must  be  some  rigid  system 


1902]      THE   NOBLE   GAME   OF   'SHUT-EYE'  45 

of  shares.  After  this  we  used  to  take  it  in  turns  to  divide 
things  into  three  equal  portions  j  it  is  not  an  easy  thing  to  do 
by  eye,  and  of  course  the  man  who  made  the  division  felt 
called  upon  to  make  certain  that  he  had  the  smallest  share.  It 
was  when  we  found  that  this  led  to  all  sorts  of  absurd  remon- 
strances and  arguments  that  Shackleton  invented  the  noble 
game  of  "  shut-eye,"  which  has  solved  all  our  difficulties  in  this 
respect.  The  shares  are  divided  as  equally  as  possible  by  any- 
one ;  then  one  of  the  other  two  turns  his  head  away,  the 
divider  points  at  a  "  whack  "  and  says,  "  Whose  is  this  ?  "  He 
of  the  averted  head  names  the  owner,  and  so  on.  It  is  a  very 
simple  but  very  efficacious  game,  as  it  leaves  the  matter  entirely 
to  chance.  We  play  it  at  every  meal  now  as  a  matter  of 
course,  and  from  practice  we  do  it  very  speedily;  but  one 
cannot  help  thinking  how  queer  it  would  appear  for  a  casual 
onlooker  to  see  three  civilised  beings  employed  at  it.' 

1  December  23. — We  have  been  getting  on  rather  faster  than 
we  thought,  though  we  had  a  suspicion  that  the  sledge-meter 
was  clogging  in  the  very  soft  snow.  Our  latitude  is  now  about 
8 1  \°  S.  To-day  I  had  to  shift  the  balance-weight  on  the 
theodolite  compass  needle;  the  dip  must  be  decreasing 
rapidly.  Theodolite  observations  are  now  difficult,  as  the 
tripod  legs  cannot  be  solidly  planted.  I  find  it  a  good  plan 
to  leave  it  up  for  the  night,  as  in  the  morning  there  is  always  a 
little  cake  of  ice  under  each  leg.  The  surface  is  so  soft  that 
one  can  push  the  shaft  of  the  ice-axe  down  with  a  finger. 

'  The  dogs  of  course  feel  it  much,  but  the  leaders  have  the 
worst  time,  for  they  have  to  make  the  foot-prints ;  the  others 
step  carefully  into  them,  and  are  saved  the  trouble  of  making 
their  own.  Several  times  lately,  and  especially  to-day,  the 
dogs  have  raised  their  heads  together  and  sniffed  at  the  breeze ; 
with  a  northerly  wind  one  might  suppose  that  their  keen  scent 
might  detect  something,  but  it  is  difficult  to  imagine  what  they 
can  find  in  air  coming  from  the  south.  Shackleton,  who 
always  declares  that  he  believes  there  is  either  open  water  or  an 
oasis  ahead,  says  that  the  dogs  merely  confirm  his  opinion. 

1  We  felt  the  chill  wind  in  our  faces  much,  owing  to  their 


46         THE   VOYAGE   OF   THE    'DISCOVERY'     [Dec. 

very  blistered  state.  We  have  especial  trouble  with  our  nostrils 
and  lips,  which  are  always  bare  of  skin ;  all  our  fingers,  too, 
are  in  a  very  chapped,  cracked  condition.  We  have  to  be  very 
economical  with  our  eyes  also,  after  frequent  attacks  of  snow- 
blindness;  all  three  of  us  to-day  had  one  eye  completely 
shaded,  and  could  see  only  by  peering  with  the  other  through 
a  goggle.  But  all  our  ailments  together  are  as  nothing  beside 
our  hunger,  which  gets  steadily  worse  day  by  day.' 

'December  24. — Wilson  examined  us  again  this  morning.  I 
asked  him  quietly  the  result,  and  he  said,  "  A  little  more."  It 
is  trying,  but  we  both  agree  that  it  is  not  time  yet  to  say 
"Turn."  But  we  have  one  fact  to  comfort  us  to-night — we 
have  passed  on  to  a  much  harder  surface,  and  though  it  still 
holds  a  layer  of  an  inch  or  two  of  feathery  snow,  beneath  that 
it  is  comparatively  firm,  and  we  are  encamped  on  quite  a  hard 
spot;  the  sastrugt  are  all  from  the  S.S.E.  parallel  to  the  land. 
If  the  dogs  have  not  improved,  they  have  not  grown  much 
worse  during  the  past  day  or  two ;  their  relative  strength  alters 
a  good  deal,  as  the  following  tale  will  show :  "  Stripes "  and 
"Gus"  pull  next  one  another;  a  week  ago  one  had  great 
difficulty  in  preventing  "  Stripes "  from  leaping  across  and 
seizing  "  Gus's "  food.  He  was  very  cunning  about  it ;  he 
waited  till  one's  back  was  turned,  and  then  was  over  and  back 
in  a  moment.  Time  has  its  revenges:  now  "Gus"  is  the 
stronger,  and  to-night  he  leapt  across  and  seized  "  Stripes's  " 
choicest  morsel.  At  other  times  they  are  not  bad  friends  these 
two ;  loser  and  winner  seem  to  regard  this  sort  of  thing  as  part 
of  the  game.  After  all,  it  is  but  "the  good  old  rule,  the 
simple  plan,"  but  of  course  we  right  matters  when  we  detect 
such  thefts. 

1  To-night  is  Christmas  Eve.  We  have  been  thinking  and 
talking  about  the  folk  at  home,  and  also  much  about  our 
plans  for  to-morrow.' 

1  December  25,  Christmas  Day. —  .  .  .  For  a  week  we  have 
looked  forward  to  this  day  with  childish  delight,  and,  long 
before  that,  we  decided  that  it  would  be  a  crime  to  go  to  bed 
hungry  on  Christmas  night ;  so  the  week  went  in  planning  a 


1902]  CHRISTMAS    DAY  47 

gorgeous  feed.  Each  meal  and  each  item  of  each  meal  we 
discussed  and  rediscussed.  The  breakfast  was  to  be  a  glorious 
spread ;  the  Primus  was  to  be  kept  going  ten  or  even  fifteen 
minutes  longer  than  usual.  Lunch  for  once  was  to  be  warm 
and  comforting ;  and  supper  ! — well,  supper  was  to  be  what 
supper  has  been. 

1  In  fact,  we  meant  this  to  be  a  wonderful  day,  and  every- 
thing has  conspired  to  make  it  so. 

'When  we  awoke  to  wish  each  other  "A  merry  Christmas  " 
the  sun  was  shining  warmly  through  our  green  canvas  roof. 
We  were  outside  in  a  twinkling,  to  find  the  sky  gloriously  clear 
and  bright,  with  not  a  single  cloud  in  its  vast  arch.  Away  to 
the  westward  stretched  the  long  line  of  gleaming  coastline ; 
the  sunlight  danced  and  sparkled  in  the  snow  beneath  our 
feet,  and  not  a  breath  of  wind  disturbed  the  serenity  of  the 
scene.  It  was  a  glorious  morning,  but  we  did  not  stay  to 
contemplate  it,  for  we  had  even  more  interesting  facts  to 
occupy  us,  and  were  soon  inside  the  tent  sniffing  at  the 
savoury  steam  of  the  cooking-pot.  Then  breakfast  was  ready, 
and  before  each  of  us  lay  a  whole  pannikin-full  of  biscuit  and 
seal-liver,  fried  in  bacon  and  pemmican  fat.  It  was  gone  in 
no  time,  but  this  and  a  large  spoonful  of  jam  to  follow  left  a 
sense  of  comfort  which  we  had  not  experienced  for  weeks, 
and  we  started  to  pack  up  in  a  frame  of  mind  that  was  wholly 
joyful. 

'  After  this  we  started  on  the  march,  and  felt  at  once  the 
improvement  of  surface  that  came  to  us  last  night ;  so  great  was 
it  that  we  found  we  three  alone  could  draw  the  sledges,  and 
for  once  the  driver  was  silent  and  the  whip  but  rarely  applied. 
The  dogs  merely  walked  along  with  slack  traces,  and  we  did 
not  attempt  to  get  more  out  of  them.  No  doubt  an  outsider 
would  have  thought  our  procession  funereal  enough,  but  to  us 
the  relief  was  inexpressible;  and  so  we  trudged  on  from  11.30 
to  4  p.m.,  when  we  thoroughly  enjoyed  our  lunch,  which  con- 
sisted of  hot  cocoa  and  plasmon  with  a  whole  biscuit  and 
another  spoonful  of  jam.  We  were  off  again  at  5.30,  and 
marched  on  till  8.30,  when  we  camped  in  warmth  and  comfort 


48        THE   VOYAGE    OF  THE   'DISCOVERY'    [Dec. 

and  with  the  additional  satisfaction  of  having  covered  nearly 
eleven  miles,  the  longest  march  we  have  made  for  a  long  time. 

'Then  we  laid  ourselves  out  for  supper,  reckless  of  con- 
sequences, having  first  had  a  Christmas  wash  and  brush-up. 
Redolent  of  soap,  we  sat  around  the  cooking-pot,  whilst  into 
its  boiling  contents  was  poured  a  double  "  whack  "  of  every- 
thing. In  the  hoosh  that  followed  one  could  stand  one's 
spoon  with  ease,  and  still  the  Primus  hissed  on,  as  once 
again  our  cocoa  was  brought  to  the  boiling-point.  Meanwhile 
I  had  observed  Shackleton  ferreting  about  in  his  bundle,  out 
of  which  he  presently  produced  a  spare  sock,  and  stowed  away 
in  the  toe  of  that  sock  was  a  small  round  object  about  the  size 
of  a  cricket  ball,  which  when  brought  to  light,  proved  to  be  a 
noble  "plum-pudding."  Another  dive  into  his  lucky-bag  and 
out  came  a  crumpled  piece  of  artificial  holly.  Heated  in  the 
cocoa,  our  plum-pudding  was  soon  steaming  hot,  and  stood 
on  the  cooker-lid  crowned  with  its  decoration.  For  once  we 
divided  food  without  "  shut-eye." 

*  I  am  writing  over  my  second  pipe.  The  sun  is  still 
slowly  circling  our  small  tent  in  a  cloudless  sky,  the  air  is 
warm  and  quiet,  all  is  pleasant  without,  and  within  we  have  a 
sense  of  comfort  we  have  not  known  for  many  a  day;  we 
shall  sleep  well  to-night — no  dreams,  no  tightening  of  the  belt. 

1  We  have  been  chattering  away  gaily,  and  not  once  has 
the  conversation  turned  to  food.  We  have  been  wondering 
what  Christmas  is  like  in  England — possibly  very  damp, 
gloomy,  and  unpleasant,  we  think ;  we  have  been  wondering, 
too,  how  our  friends  picture  us.  They  will  guess  that  we  are 
away  on  our  sledge  journey,  and  will  perhaps  think  of  us  on 
plains  of  snow;  but  few,  I  think,  will  imagine  the  truth,  that 
for  us  this  has  been  the  reddest  of  all  red-letter  days.' 


1962]  49 


CHAPTER  XIV 

RETURN    FROM   THE   FAR   SOUTH 

Result  of  Shortage  of  Food — Nature  of  the  Coastline — Snow-blindness — 
Approaching  the  Limit  of  our  Journey — View  to  the  South — New 
Mountains — Blizzard  at  our  Extreme  South — Turning  Homeward — 
Attempt  to  Reach  the  Land— The  Passing  of  our  Dog  Team — Help  from 
our  Sail — Difficult  Surfaces — Running  before  a  Storm — Finding  Depot 
'B' — Scurvy  Again — Shackleton  Becomes  111 — The  Last  of  our  Dog 
Team  —Bad  Light  for  Steering — Anxious  Days — Depot  *  A ' — Over- 
eating— The  Last  Lap — Home  Again— Our  Welcome. 

How  many  weary  steps 
Ot  many  weary  miles  you  have  o'ergone, 
Are  numbered  to  the  travel  of  one  mile. 

Shakespeare. 

*  An'  we  talks  about  our  rations  and  a  lot  of  other  things.' 

Kipling. 

Our  Christmas  Day  had  proved  a  delightful  break  in  the 
otherwise  uninterrupted  spell  of  semi-starvation.  Some  days 
elapsed  before  its  pleasing  effects  wore  off,  and  for  long  it 
remained  green  in  our  memories.  We  knew  by  this  time  that 
we  had  cut  ourselves  too  short  in  the  matter  of  food,  but  it 
was  too  late  to  alter  our  arrangements  now  without  curtailing 
our  journey,  and  we  all  decided  that,  sooner  than  do  the  latter, 
we  would  cheerfully  face  the  pangs  that  our  too  meagre  fare 
would  cost. 

Looking  back  now  on  the  incidents  of  this  journey,  the 
original  mistake  is  evident,  and  even  at  the  time,  apart  from 
the  physical  distress  which  it  caused  us,  it  is  clear  that  we 
suspected,  what  was  indeed  the  case,  that  we  were  slowly  but 

VOL.  II.  E 


50         THE   VOYAGE    OF  THE    'DISCOVERY'    [Dec. 

surely  sapping  our  energies  and  reducing  ourselves  to  the 
condition  of  our  more  willing  dogs,  who,  with  every  desire  to 
throw  their  weight  on  the  traces,  were  incapable  of  doing  so. 
Of  course  we  never  sank  into  the  deplorable  state  of  these 
poor  animals,  but  there  is  no  doubt  that  from  this  time  on  we 
were  gradually  wearing  out,  and  the  increasing  weariness  of 
the  homeward  marches  showed  that  we  were  expending  our 
energies  at  a  greater  rate  than  we  were  able  to  renew  them 
with  our  inadequate  supply  of  food,  and  thus  drawing  on  a 
capital  stock  which  must  obviously  have  restricted  limits. 

Such  a  state  of  affairs  is,  as  I  have  pointed  out  elsewhere,  a 
false  economy,  and  the  additional  weight  which  we  should 
have  carried  in  taking  a  proper  allowance  of  food  would  have 
amply  repaid  us  on  this  occasion  by  the  maintenance  of  our 
full  vigour. 

A  shortage  of  food  has  another  great  disadvantage  which 
we  experienced  to  the  full  :  our  exceptionally  hungry  condition 
caused  our  thoughts  and  conversation  to  run  in  a  groove  from 
which  it  was  almost  impossible  to  lift  them.  We  knew 
perfectly  well  how  ridiculous  this  was,  and  appreciated  that 
it  was  likely  to  increase  rather  than  diminish  the  evil,  but  we 
seemed  powerless  to  prevent  it.  After  supper,  and  before  its 
pleasing  effects  had  passed,  some  detachment  was  possible, 
and  for  half  an  hour  or  more  a  desultory  conversation  would 
be  maintained  concerning  far-removed  subjects  ;  but  it  was 
ludicrous  to  observe  the  manner  in  which  remarks  gradually 
crept  back  to  the  old  channel,  and  it  was  odds  that  before  we 
slept  each  one  of  us  gave,  all  over  again,  a  detailed  description 
of  what  he  would  now  consider  an  ideal  feast. 

On  the  march  it  was  even  worse  ;  one's  thoughts  were 
reduced  to  the  most  trivial  details  of  the  one  unsatisfying 
subject.  One  would  find  oneself  calculating  how  many  foot- 
steps went  to  the  minute,  and  how  many,  therefore,  must  be 
paced  before  lunch;  then,  with  a  sinking  heart,  one  would 
begin  to  count  them,  suddenly  lose  count,  and  find  oneself 
mentally  scanning  the  contents  of  the  pemmican  bag  and 
wondering  exactly  how  much  could  be  allowed  for  to-night's 


i902]  RECORD-MAKING  51 

hoosh.  This  would  lead  to  the  stock  of  pemmican  on  board 
the  ship,  and  a  recollection  of  the  gorgeous  yellow  fat  with 
which  it  was  incorporated ;  the  ship  would  recall  feasts  of  seal, 
thick  soup,  and  thicker  porridge,  and  on  one  would  speed  to 
the  recollection  of  special  nights  when  our  fare  had  been  still 
more  bountiful,  and  on  again  to  all  the  resources  of  civilised 
life ;  the  farewell  dinner  at  So-and-so,  what  would  it  be  like  if 
it  was  spread  out  here  on  the  barrier  ?  One  remembers 
declining  a  particularly  succulent  dish  ;  what  an  extraordinary 
thing  to  do  !  What  a  different  being  one  must  have  been  in 
those  days  !  And  so  one's  thoughts  travelled  on  from  place 
to  place,  but  always  through  the  one  medium  of  creature 
comfort. 

It  is  natural  that  a  diary  kept  through  these  long  weeks 
should  have  reflected  the  subject  that  most  fully  occupied  our 
thoughts  and  our  conversation,  and,  as  the  weakness  of  the 
dogs  curtailed  our  marches  and  left  ample  time  for  writing,  I 
find  copious  allusions  to  the  somewhat  distressing  circum- 
stances which  attended  our  experiences  in  this  respect. 

But  it  must  not  be  supposed  that  we  were  wholly  absorbed 
by  this  subject ;  if  there  were  trials  and  tribulations  in  our 
daily  life  at  this  time,  there  were  also  compensating  circum- 
stances whose  import  we  fully  realised.  Day  by  day,  as  we 
journeyed  on,  we  knew  we  were  penetrating  farther  and  farther 
into  the  unknown ;  each  footstep  was  a  gain,  and  made  the 
result  of  our  labour  more  solid  It  would  be  difficult  to 
describe  with  what  eagerness  we  studied  the  slowly  revolving 
sledge-meter,  or  looked  for  the  calculated  results  of  our  obser- 
vations, while  ever  before  our  eyes  was  the  line  which  we  were 
now  drawing  on  the  white  space  of  the  Antarctic  chart.  Day 
by  day,  too,  though  somewhat  slowly,  there  passed  on  that 
magnificent  panorama  of  the  western  land.  Rarely  a  march 
passed  without  the  disclosure  of  some  new  feature,  something  on 
which  the  eye  of  man  had  never  yet  rested  ;  we  should  have 
been  poor  souls  indeed  had  we  not  been  elated  at  the  privilege 
of  being  the  first  to  gaze  on  these  splendid  scenes. 

On   December    26   we   had   another   brilliant,    calm   and 


52         THE  VOYAGE   OF  THE   'DISCOVERY'    [Dec. 

cloudless  day,  with  a  clear  view  to  the  west ;  the  coastal  ice-cape 
again  obscured  our  view  of  the  higher  ranges  behind,  but  now 
it  rose  to  a  more  considerable  altitude,  being  at  least  three  or 
four  thousand  feet  above  our  level ;  it  undulated  in  long 
sweeping  curves,  with  here  and  there  a  black  jagged  outcrop 
of  rock,  and  elsewhere  a  steep  crevassed  fall.  Our  track  had 
been  taking  us  close  to  the  coast,  and  as  we  had  skirted  along, 
past  pointed  snow-capes  and  rocky  headlands,  we  had  gradually 
blocked  out  the  remarkable  tabular  and  pyramidal  mountains 
which  had  been  abreast  of  us  a  week  before;  behind  us 
also  we  had  left  the  sharp  conical  peak  which  had  been  our 
principal  landmark  for  many  days. 

When,  far  to  the  north,  we  had  first  seen  this  mountain, 
we  had  exaggerated  both  height  and  distance,  and  when  things 
had  gone  badly  with  us  we  had  wondered  if  our  fortunes  would 
ever  allow  us  to  pass  it.  On  Christmas  Day,  however,  we  were 
abreast  of  it,  and  though  I  calculated  its  height  to  be  under 
seven  thousand  feet,  this  was  no  mean  altitude  for  so  remark- 
able a  peak.  Since  in  preserving  its  uniform,  sharp,  conical 
appearance,  it  was  still  the  most  salient  feature  in  our  view,  we 
dubbed  it  '  Christmas  Mountain  '  in  honour  of  the  day.  We 
passed  within  eighteen  miles  of  it,  according  to  my  calculations, 
and  by  the  26th  it  was  '  abaft  the  beam.'  Whilst  still  retaining 
its  pointed  appearance,  it  seemed  from  this  new  aspect  to  have 
assumed  a  certain  resemblance  to  the  higher  pyramidal  hills  of 
the  north. 

Perhaps  the  most  interesting  part  of  our  view  just  at  this 
time  was  the  coastline  itself.  We  were  from  eight  to  ten  miles 
from  it,  and  at  such  a  distance  one  could  see  very  distinctly  in 
that  clear  air  ;  it  was  comparatively  steep  all  along — that  is  to 
say,  the  undulating  ice-cap  fell  gradually  to  a  height  of  one  or 
two  thousand  feet  and  then  abruptly  to  the  barrier  level.  In  a 
few  places  this  fall  was  taken  by  steep  but  comparatively 
smooth  snow-slopes,  in  others  the  snow  seemed  to  pour  over  in 
beautiful  cascades  of  immense  ice-blocks,  and  in  others,  again, 
the  coast  was  fringed  by  huge  perpendicular  cliffs  of  bare  rock. 
On  this  day  we  were  abreast  of  the  highest  cliffs  we  had  seen, 


i902]  NATURE  OF  THE   COASTLINE  53 

and  my  angles,  roughly  computed,  gave  a  height  of  1,800  feet 
between  their  base  and  the  white  snow-line  on  top,  and  they 
were  so  impressive  even  in  the  distance  that  I  cannot  believe 
them  to  have  been  much  under.  In  many  places  the  rock- 
face  must  have  been  sheer  to  this  great  height,  for  where  it  fell 
away  a  white  splash  showed  where  the  snow  had  found  lodg- 
ment. 

Even  at  a  distance  of  ten  miles  these  cliffs  were  magnificent, 
and  how  grand  they  would  have  appeared  had  we  been  able  to 
get  close  beneath  them  we  could  well  imagine.  In  colour  they 
were  a  rich,  deep  red,  though  a  little  farther  to  the  south  this 
rock  was  confusingly  bedded  with  a  darker,  almost  black  one ; 
this  alternation  of  black  and  red  occurred  along  the  whole  coast 
south  of  our  position  at  this  time,  always  in  the  same  irregular 
fashion,  but  always  with  a  definite  line  between  the  red  and 
the  black.  At  this  time  we  were  all  under  the  impression  that 
these  rocks  were  of  the  same  recent  volcanic  nature  as  those 
about  the  ship,  but  later  on,  after  my  visit  to  the  western  hills, 
I  came  to  doubt  this  belief.  It  is  possible  that  if  at  this  time 
we  had  known  more  of  the  structure  of  the  mainland  to  the 
north  we  should  have  been  able  to  note  points  of  similarity  or 
difference  which  threw  more  light  on  this  southern  land,  but  it 
is  doubtful  whether  in  any  case  we  could  have  discovered 
much  that  was  definite  at  the  distance  from  which  we  saw  it. 

It  can  be  imagined  that  as  we  travelled  onward  our  eyes 
were  most  frequently  lifted  towards  the  south.  It  is  always 
bewildering  to  look  along  a  coastline  at  such  an  oblique  angle. 
Shortly  before  this  the  south  had  meant  a  long  succession  of 
dark  rock-masses  and  hazy  snow-capes,  but  during  the  last  few 
days  we  had '  risen '  a  feature  of  noticeable  distinction,  and  now 
we  knew  that  we  looked  on  a  lofty  mountain  whose  eastern 
slopes  fell  to  the  long  snow-cape  which  for  the  present  bounded 
our  view. 

The  very  gradual  unfolding  of  its  details  told  us  that  this 
mass  of  land  was  both  distant  and  lofty,  and  as  we  approached 
the  limit  of  safe  endeavour  we  knew  that  here  was  an  object 
that  we  could  not  hope  to  reach ;  though  we  might  approach 


54         THE   VOYAGE   OF   THE    'DISCOVERY'    [Dec. 

it  by  many  miles  and  be  able  to  examine  it  with  care,  we 
should  never .  know  definitely  what  lay  beyond.  We  felt  that 
it  was  the  most  southerly  land  to  which  we  should  be  able  to 
apply  a  name,  and  we  thought  that  the  fine  peak  which  for  the 
present  must  remain  the  southerly  outpost  of  all  known  lands 
could  bear  no  more  fitting  title  than  one  derived  from  the  con- 
tributor whose  generous  donation  had  alone  made  our 
expedition  possible.  On  the  night  of  the  26th,  therefore,  we 
christened  this  distant  peak  '  Mount  Longstaff,'  but  it  was  only 
on  our  return  to  the  ship  that  I  was  able  to  fix  its  position  as 
well  beyond  the  83rd  parallel. 

From  a  point  of  view  of  further  exploration  our  position 
on  the  26th  did  not  promise  great  things.  On  our  right  lay 
the  high  undulating  snow-cap  and  the  steep  irregular  coast- 
line ;  to  the  south  lay  a  cape,  beyond  which  we  could  not  hope 
to  pass  ;  and  to  all  appearance  these  conditions  must  remain 
unaltered  to  the  end  of  our  journey.  We  argued,  however, 
that  one  never  knows  what  may  turn  up,  and  we  determined, 
in  spite  of  the  unpromising  outlook,  to  push  on  to  our  utmost 
limit.  As  events  proved,  we  argued  most  wisely,  for  had  we 
turned  at  this  point  we  should  have  missed  one  of  the  most 
important  features  of  the  whole  coastline ;  it  was  only  one 
more  instance  of  the  happening  of  the  unexpected. 

In  spite  of  the  comforting  nature  of  our  Christmas  festivi- 
ties, worry  was  never  long  absent  from  what  was  now  becoming 
rather  a  forlorn  party,  as  the  following  extract  shows  : 

'  December  26. —  .  .  .  Poor  Wilson  has  had  an  attack  of 
snow-blindness,  in  comparison  with  which  our  former  attacks 
may  be  considered  as  nothing  ;  we  were  forced  to  camp  early 
on  account  of  it,  and  during  the  whole  afternoon  he  has  been 
writhing  in  horrible  agony.  It  is  distressing  enough  to  see, 
knowing  that  one  can  do  nothing  to  help.  Cocaine  has  only 
a  very  temporary  effect,  and  in  the  end  seems  to  make  matters 
worse.  I  have  never  seen  an  eye  so  terribly  bloodshot  and 
inflamed  as  that  which  is  causing  the  trouble,  and  the  inflam- 
mation has  spread  to  the  eyelid.  He  describes  the  worst  part 
as  an  almost  intolerable  stabbing  and  burning  of  the  eyeball ; 


i9o2]  NEW   MOUNTAINS  55 

it  is  the  nearest  approach  to  illness  we  have  had,  and  one  can 
only  hope  that  it  is  not  going  to  remain  serious. 

'  Shackleton  did  butcher  to-night,  and  "  Brownie  "  was 
victim.  Poor  little  dog  !  his  life  has  been  very  careworn  of 
late,  and  it  is  probably  a  happy  release.' 

''December  27. — Late  last  night  Wilson  got  some  sleep,  and 
this  morning  he  was  better  ;  all  day  he  has  been  pulling  along- 
side the  sledges  with  his  eyes  completely  covered.  It  is 
tiresome  enough  to  see  our  snowy  world  through  the  slit  of 
a  goggle,  but  to  march  blindfolded  with  an  empty  stomach  for 
long  hours  touches  a  pitch  of  monotony  which  I  shall  be  glad 
to  avoid.  We  covered  a  good  ten  miles  to-day  by  sledge- 
meter,  though  I  think  that  instrument  is  clogging  and  showing 
short  measure.  The  dogs  have  done  little,  but  they  have  all 
walked,  except  "Stripes,"  who  broke  down  and  had  to  be 
carried  on  the  sledge ;  he  was  quite  limp  when  I  picked  him 
up,  and  his  thick  coat  poorly  hides  the  fact  that  he  is  nothing 
but  skin  and  bone.  Yesterday  I  noticed  that  we  were  ap- 
proaching what  appeared  to  be  a  deeper  bay  than  usual,  and 
this  afternoon  this  opening  developed  in  the  most  interesting 
manner. 

'  On  the  near  side  is  a  bold,  rocky,  snow-covered  cape,  and 
all  day  we  have  been  drawing  abreast  of  this ;  as  we  rapidly 
altered  its  bearing  this  afternoon  it  seemed  to  roll  back  like 
some  vast  sliding  gate,  and  gradually  there  stood  revealed  one 
of  the  most  glorious  mountain  scenes  we  have  yet  witnessed. 
Walking  opposite  to  Wilson  I  was  trying  to  keep  him  posted 
with  regard  to  the  changes,  and  I  think  my  reports  of  this  part 
must  have  sounded  curious.  It  was  with  some  excitement 
I  noticed  that  new  mountain  ridges  were  appearing  as  high  as 
anything  we  had  seen  to  the  north,  but,  to  my  surprise,  as  we 
advanced  the  ridges  grew  still  higher,  as  no  doubt  did  my 
tones.  Then,  instead  of  a  downward  turn  in  the  distant  out- 
line came  a  steep  upward  line ;  Pelion  was  heaped  on  Ossa, 
and  it  can  be  imagined  that  we  pressed  the  pace  to  see  what 
would  happen  next,  till  the  end  came  in  a  gloriously  sharp 
double  peak  crowned  with  a  few  flecks  of  cirrus  cloud. 


56         THE   VOYAGE   OF   THE    'DISCOVERY'    [Dec. 

1  We  can  no  longer  call  this  opening  a  bay ;  it  runs  for 
many  miles  in  to  the  foot  of  the  great  range,  and  is  more  in 
the  nature  of  an  inlet.  But  all  our  thoughts  in  camp  to-night 
turn  to  this  splendid  twin-peaked  mountain,  which,  even  in 
such  a  lofty  country,  seems  as  a  giant  among  pigmies.  We 
all  agree  that  from  Sabine  to  the  south  the  grandest  eminences 
cannot  compare  in  dignity  with  this  monster.  We  have 
decided  that  at  last  we  have  found  something  which  is  fitting 
to  bear  the  name  of  him  whom  we  must  always  the  most 
delight  to  honour,  and  "  Mount  Markham  "  it  shall  be  called 
in  memory  of  the  father  of  the  expedition.' 

'  December  28. — Sights  to-day  put  us  well  over  the  82nd 
parallel  (82.11  S.).  We  have  almost  shot  our  bolt.  If  the 
weather  holds  fine  to-morrow,  we  intend  to  drop  our  sledges 
at  the  midday  halt  and  push  on  as  far  as  possible  on  ski.  We 
stopped  early  this  afternoon  in  order  to  take  photographs  and 
make  sketches.  Wilson,  in  spite  of  his  recent  experiences, 
refuses  to  give  in ;  whatever  is  left  unsketched,  and  however 
his  eyes  may  suffer,  this  last  part  must  be  done. 

'It  is  a  glorious  evening,  and  fortune  could  not  have 
provided  us  with  a  more  perfect  view  of  our  surroundings. 
We  are  looking  up  a  broad,  deep  inlet  or  strait  which  stretches 
away  to  the  south-west  for  thirty  or  forty  miles  before  it  reaches 
its  boundary  of  cliff  and  snow-slope.  Beyond,  rising  fold  on 
fold,  are  the  great  neVe  fields  that  clothe  the  distant  range  ; 
against  the  pale  blue  sky  the  outline  of  the  mountain  ridge 
rises  and  falls  over  numerous  peaks  till,  with  a  sharp  turn 
upward,  it  culminates  in  the  lofty  summit  of  Mount  Markham. 
To  the  north  it  descends  again,  to  be  lost  behind  the  bluff 
extremity  of  the  near  cape.  It  seems  more  than  likely  that 
the  vast  inlet  before  us  takes  a  sharp  turn  to  the  right  beyond 
the  cape  and  in  front  of  the  mountains,  and  we  hope  to 
determine  this  fact  to-morrow. 

'  The  eastern  foothills  of  the  high  range  form  the  southern 
limit  of  the  strait ;  they  are  fringed  with  high  cliffs  and  steep 
snow-slopes,  and  even  at  this  distance  we  can  see  that  some 
of  the  rocks  are  of  the  deep-red  colour,  whilst  others  are  black. 


i9o2]  VIEW  TO  THE  SOUTH  57 

Between  the  high  range  and  the  barrier  there  must  lie  immense 
undulating  snow-plateaux  covering  the  lesser  foothills,  which 
seem  rather  to  increase  in  height  to  the  left  until  they  fall 
sharply  to  the  barrier  level  almost  due  south  of  us. 

1  To  the  eastward  of  this,  again,  we  get  our  view  to  the 
farthest  south,  and  we  have  been  studying  it  again  and  again 
to  gather  fresh  information  with  the  changing  bearings  of  the 
sun.  Mount  Longstaff  we  calculate  as  10,000  feet.  It  is 
formed  by  the  meeting  of  two  long  and  comparatively  regular 
slopes  ;  that  to  the  east  stretches  out  into  the  barrier  and  ends 
in  a  long  snow-cape  which  bears  about  S.  14  E.  ;  that  to  the 
west  is  lost  behind  the  nearer  foothills,  but  now  fresh  features 
have  developed  about  these  slopes.  Over  the  western  ridge 
can  be  seen  two  new  peaks  which  must  lie  considerably  to  the 
south  of  the  mountain,  and,  more  interesting  still,  beyond  the 
eastern  cape  we  catch  a  glimpse  of  an  extended  coastline ; 
the  land  is  thrown  up  by  mirage  and  appears  in  small  white 
patches  against  a  pale  sky. 

We  know  well  this  appearance  of  a  snow-covered  country ; 
it  is  the  normal  view  in  these  regions  of  a  very  distant  lofty 
land,  and  it  indicates  with  certainty  that  a  mountainous  country 
continues  beyond  Mount  Longstaff  for  nearly  fifty  miles.  The 
direction  of  the  extreme  land  thrown  up  in  this  manner  is 
S.  17  E.,  and  hence  we  can  now  say  with  certainty  that  the 
coastline  after  passing  Mount  Longstaft  continues  in  this 
direction  for  at  least  a  degree  of  latitude.  Of  course  one  can- 
not add  that  the  level  barrier  surface  likewise  continues,  as 
one's  view  of  it  is  limited  to  a  very  narrow  horizon ;  but  anyone 
who  had  travelled  over  it  as  we  have  done,  and  who  now,  like 
us,  could  gaze  on  these  distant  lands  beyond  its  level  margin, 
could  have  little  doubt  that  it  does  so. 

1  It  is  fortunate  to  have  had  such  glorious  weather  to  give 
us  a  clear  view  of  this  magnificent  scene,  for  very  soon  now 
we  must  be  turning,  and  though  we  may  advance  a  few  miles 
we  cannot  hope  to  add  largely  to  our  store  of  information.' 

'It  has  been  a  busy  evening,  what  with  taking  angles, 
sketching,  and  attending  to  our  camp  duties,  but  hours  so  full 


58         THE   VOYAGE   OF   THE    'DISCOVERY'    [Dec. 

of  interest  have  passed  rapidly ;  and  now  the  sun  is  well  to  the 
south,  and  from  all  the  coast  is  rising  the  thin  night  mist  ex- 
actly as  it  does  after  a  hot  day  in  England,  so  we  are  preparing 
to  settle  down  in  our  sleeping-bags,  in  the  hope  that  to-morrow 
may  prove  equally  fine. 

'  A  great  relief  comes  to  us  in  this  distant  spot  at  finding 
that  our  slight  change  of  diet  is  already  giving  a  beneficial 
result;  late  to-night  we  had  another  examination  of  our 
scurvy  symptoms,  and  there  is  now  no  doubt  that  they  are 
lessening.' 

1  December  29. — Instead  of  our  proposed  advance  we  have 
spent  the  day  in  our  tent,  whilst  a  strong  southerly  blizzard  has 
raged  without.  It  is  very  trying  to  the  patience,  and  to-night, 
though  the  wind  has  dropped,  the  old  well-known  sheet  of 
stratus  cloud  is  closing  over  us,  and  there  is  every  prospect  of 
another  spell  of  overcast  weather  which  will  obscure  the  land. 
This  afternoon  for  the  third  time  we  have  seen  the  heavens 
traced  with  bands  and  circles  of  prismatic  light,  and,  if  any- 
thing, the  phenomenon  has  been  more  complicated  than 
before ;  it  was  a  very  beautiful  sight. 

'  Only  occasionally  to-day  have  we  caught  glimpses  of  the 
land,  and  it  is  not  inspiriting  to  lie  hour  after  hour  in  a  sleeping- 
bag,  chill  and  hungry,  and  with  the  knowledge  that  one  is  so 
far  from  the  region  of  plenty.' 

1  December  30. — We  got  up  at  six  this  morning,  to  find  a 
thick  fog  and  nothing  in  sight ;  to  leave  the  camp  was  out  of 
the  question,  so  we  packed  up  our  traps  and  started  to  march 
to  the  S.S.W.  This  brought  us  directly  towards  the  mouth  of 
the  strait,  and  after  an  hour  we  found  ourselves  travelling  over 
a  disturbed  surface  with  numerous  cracks  which  seemed  to 
radiate  from  the  cape  we  were  rounding.  After  stumbling  on 
for  some  time,  the  disturbance  became  so  great  that  we  were 
obliged  to  camp.  If  the  fates  are  kind  and  give  us  another 
view  of  the  land,  we  are  far  enough  advanced  now  to  see  the 
inner  recesses  of  our  strait. 

'  After  our  modest  lunch  Wilson  and  I  started  off  on  ski  to 
the  S.S.W.     We  lost  sight  of  the  camp  almost  immediately, 


i9o2]  OUR   SOUTHERLY  LIMIT  59 

and  were  left  with  only  our  tracks  to  guide  us  back  to  it,  but 
we  pushed  on  for  perhaps  a  mile  or  more  in  hopes  that  the 
weather  would  clear ;  then,  as  there  was  no  sign  of  this,  and 
we  could  see  little  more  than  a  hundred  yards,  we  realised 
there  might  be  considerable  risk  and  could  be  no  advantage 
in  proceeding,  and  so  turned  and  retraced  our  footsteps  to  the 
camp. 

1  This  camp  we  have  now  decided  must  be  our  last,  for  we 
have  less  than  a  fortnight's  provision  to  take  us  back  to  Depot 
"  B,"  and  with  the  dogs  in  their  present  state  it  would  be  im- 
possible to  make  forced  marches ;  we  have,  therefore,  reached 
our  southerly  limit.  Observations  give  it  as  between  82.16  S. 
and  82.17  S.  l  if  this  compares  poorly  with  our  hopes  and 
expectations  on  leaving  the  ship,  it  is  a  more  favourable  result 
than  we  anticipated  when  those  hopes  were  first  blighted  by 
the  failure  of  the  dog  team. 

1  Whilst  one  cannot  help  a  deep  sense  of  disappointment 
in  reflecting  on  the  "  might  have  been  "  had  our  team  remained 
in  good  health,  one  cannot  but  remember  that  even  as  it  is 
we  have  made  a  greater  advance  towards  a  pole  of  the  earth 
than  has  ever  yet  been  achieved  by  a  sledge  party. 

'  We  feel  a  little  inclined  to  grumble  at  the  thick  weather 
that  surrounds  us ;  it  has  a  depressing  effect,  and  in  our  state 
of  hunger  we  feel  the  cold  though  the  temperature  is  +  150  ; 
but  we  must  not  forget  that  we  had  great  luck  in  the  fine 
weather  which  gave  us  such  a  clear  view  of  the  land  two  days 
ago.' 

1  December  31. — As  we  rose  this  morning  the  sun  was 
still  obscured  by  low  stratus  cloud,  which  rapidly  rolled  away, 
however;  first  the  headlands  and  then  the  mountains  stood 
out,  and  we  could  see  that  we  had  achieved  our  object  of 
yesterday  in  opening  out  the  inlet ;  but  in  this  direction  the 
cloud  continued  to  hang  persistently,  so  that  it  was  to  little 
purpose  that  we  had  obtained  such  a  position.  We  could  see 
now  that  the  inlet  certainly  turned  to  the  north  of  west ;  on 
either  side  the  irregular  outlines  of  the  mountains  were  clear 
against  a  blue  sky,  and,  descending  gradually  towards  the  level, 


60         THE   VOYAGE   OF  THE   'DISCOVERY'    [Dec. 

left  a  broad  gap  between,  but  low  in  this  gap  hung  the  tanta- 
lising bank  of  fog,  screening  all  that  lay  beyond.  By  turning 
towards  the  strait  we  had  partly  obscured  our  clear  view  of 
Mount  Longstaff  and  quite  cut  off  the  miraged  images  of  the 
more  distant  land,  but  we  had  approached  the  high  cliffs 
which  formed  the  southern  limit  of  the  strait,  and  in  the 
morning  sun  could  clearly  see  the  irregular  distribution  of  red 
and  black  rock  in  the  steep  cliff  faces. 

'In  hope  that  the  fog-bank  to  the  west  would  clear,  we 
proceeded  with  our  packing  in  a  leisurely  manner,  and  when 
all  was  ready,  turned  our  faces  homewards.  It  was  significant 
of  the  terrible  condition  of  our  team  that  the  turn  produced  no 
excitement.  It  appears  to  make  no  difference  to  them  now  in 
which  direction  they  bend  their  weary  footsteps;  it  almost 
seems  that  most  of  them  guess  how  poor  a  chance  they  have 
of  ever  seeing  the  ship  again.  And  so  we  started  our  home- 
ward march,  slowly  at  first,  and  then  more  briskly  as  we  realised 
that  all  chance  of  a  clearance  over  the  strait  was  gone. 

'  In  the  flood  of  sunlight  which  now  illumined  the  snow 
about  us,  we  were  able  to  see  something  of  the  vast  ice 
upheavals  caused  by  the  outflow  of  ice  from  the  strait ; 
pushing  around  the  cape,  it  is  raised  in  undulations  which 
seem  to  run  parallel  to  the  land.  We  directed  our  course 
towards  the  cape  with  the  hopes  of  getting  to  the  land,  but 
were  obliged  to  keep  outwards  to  avoid  the  worst  disturbances ; 
this  brought  us  obliquely  across  the  undulation,  and  as  we 
travelled  onward  they  rose  in  height  and  became  ridged  and 
broken  on  the  summit.  Now,  too,  we  came  upon  numerous 
crevasses  which  appeared  to  extend  radially  from  the  cape, 
and  these,  with  the  cracks  and  ridges,  formed  a  network  of 
obstruction  across  our  path  through  which  we  were  forced  to 
take  a  very  winding  course. 

'We  extended  our  march  until  we  had  passed  the  worst 
of  this  disturbance,  and  by  that  time  we  were  well  to  the  north 
of  the  cape  and  abreast  of  one  of  the  curious  rocky  groins  that 
occur  at  intervals  along  the  coast.  This  showed  samples  of 
both  the  red  and  the  black  rock,  which  seem  to  constitute  the 


1902]        ATTEMPT  TO   REACH   THE   LAND  61 

geological  structure  of  the  whole  coast,  and  we  decided  to  pitch 
our  camp  and  make  an  excursion  to  the  land  on  our  ski.  By 
the  time  that  we  had  swallowed  our  luncheon  the  clouds  had 
rolled  away,  leaving  us  in  the  same  brilliant  sunshine  that  we 
have  enjoyed  so  frequently  of  late,  and  in  which  even  at  a 
distance  of  five  or  six  miles  every  detail  of  the  high  groin  could 
be  distinctly  seen. 

'Not  knowing  what  adventures  we  might  encounter,  we 
thought  it  wise  to  provide  ourselves  with  a  second  luncheon, 
which  we  safely  stowed  in  our  breast-pockets,  and  taking  our 
ice-axe  and  Alpine  rope,  we  set  out  for  the  shore.  It  looked 
deceptively  near,  nor  was  it  until  we  had  marched  for  nearly  an 
hour  without  making  any  marked  difference  in  its  appearance 
that  we  realised  we  were  in  for  a  long  job. 

'By  this  time  we  were  again  crossing  long  undulations 
which  increased  in  height  as  we  advanced ;  soon  from  the 
summits  of  the  waves  we  could  see  signs  of  greater  disturbances 
ahead,  and  at  five  o'clock  we  found  ourselves  at  the  edge  of 
a  chasm  resembling  that  which  had  prevented  us  from  reaching 
the  shore  farther  to  the  north.  This  was  not  an  encouraging 
spectacle,  but  on  the  opposite  side,  a  mile  or  so  away,  we  could 
see  that  a  gentle  slope  led  to  the  rocks,  and  that  once  across 
this  disturbance  we  should  have  no  difficulty  in  proceeding. 
On  the  near  side  the  spaces  between  the  ice-blocks  had  been 
much  drifted  up  with  snow,  so  that  we  found  no  great  difficulty 
in  descending  or  in  starting  our  climb  amongst  the  ice-blocks ; 
but  as  we  advanced  the  snow  became  lighter  and  the  climbing 
steeper.  We  could  get  no  hold  with  our  finneskoes  on  the 
harder  places,  and  in  the  softer  we  sank  knee-deep,  whilst  the 
lightly-bridged  crevasses  became  more  difficult  to  avoid,  and 
once  or  twice  we  were  only  saved  from  a  bad  fall  by  the  fact 
of  being  roped  together.  Constantly  after  circling  a  large  block 
with  difficulty  we  found  in  front  of  us  some  unclimbable  place, 
and  were  obliged  to  retrace  our  steps  and  try  in  some  new 
direction;  but  we  now  knew  that  we  must  be  approaching 
the  opposite  side,  and  so  we  struggled  on. 

'At  length,  however,  when  we  thought  our  troubles  must 


62         THE   VOYAGE   OF  THE   'DISCOVERY'    [Dec. 

surely  be  ending,  we  cut  steps  around  a  sharp  corner  to  find 
the  opposite  bank  of  the  chasm  close  to  us,  but  instead  of  the 
rough  slopes  by  which  we  had  descended,  we  found  here  a 
steep,  overhanging  face  of  ice,  towering  some  fifty  feet  above 
us.  To  climb  this  face  was  obviously  impossible,  and  we  were 
reluctantly  forced  to  confess  that  all  our  trouble  had  been  in 
vain.  It  was  a  great  disappointment,  as  we  had  confidently 
hoped  to  get  some  rock  specimens  from  this  far  south  land, 
and  now  I  do  not  see  that  we  shall  have  a  chance  to  do  so. 

1  Before  starting  our  homeward  climb  we  sat  down  to  rest, 
and,  of  course,  someone  mentioned  the  provisions — it  was 
to-morrow's  lunch  that  we  carried — and  someone  else  added 
that  it  would  be  absurd  to  take  it  back  to  the  camp.  Then 
the  temptation  became  too  great  j  though  we  knew  it  was 
wrong,  our  famished  condition  swept  us  away,  and  in  five 
minutes  not  a  remnant  remained.  After  this  we  started  our 
return  climb,  and  at  ten  o'clock  we  reached  the  camp  pretty 
well  "  done." 

'There  can  be  little  doubt,  I  think,  that  the  chasm  we 
have  seen  to-day  is  caused  by  the  ice  pushing  out  of  the 
southern  strait  against  the  barrier,  and  possibly  it  may  end 
a  little  farther  to  the  north,  but  I  could  not  see  any  signs  of  its 
ending ;  the  blocks  of  ice  within  seem  to  have  been  split  off 
from  the  sloping  ice- foot — in  fact,  we  saw  some  in  the  process 
of  being  broken  away — and  the  fact  that  there  is  so  much  less 
snow  towards  the  land  seems  to  show  that  the  inner  ones  are 
of  more  recent  origin.  The  ice-foot  is  fed  by  the  ice-cap  on 
the  hills  above,  which  at  this  part  flows  over  in  a  steep  cascade. 
I  do  not  see  that  we  can  make  another  attempt  to  reach  the 
land  before  we  get  back  to  Depot  "  B  "  ;  in  fact,  we  shall  have 
none  too  easy  a  task  in  doing  that  alone.  We  shall  have  to 
average  more  than  seven  miles  a  day,  and  the  dogs  are  now 
practically  useless  ;  but,  what  is  worse,  I  cannot  help  feeling 
that  we  ourselves  are  not  so  strong  as  we  were.  Our  walk 
to-day  has  tired  us  more  than  it  ought. 

1  To-night  Shackleton  upset  the  hoosh  pot.  There  was  an 
awful  moment  when  we  thought  some  of  it  was  going  to  run 


h 


Y*> 


i902]      THE   PASSING   OF  OUR    DOG   TEAM  63 

away  on  to  the  snow ;  luckily  it  all  remained  on  our  waterproof 
floorcloth,  and  by  the  time  we  had  done  scraping  I  do  not 
think  that  any  was  wasted.' 

'Jamiary  1,  1903. — We  have  opened  the  new  year  with 
a  march  which  is  likely  to  be  a  sample  of  those  which  will 
follow  for  many  a  day  to  come.  The  state  of  our  dog  team  is 
now  quite  pitiable;  with  a  very  few  exceptions  they  cannot 
pretend  to  pull ;  at  the  start  of  the  march  some  have  to  be 
lifted  on  to  their  feet  and  held  up  for  a  minute  or  two  before 
their  limbs  become  stiff  enough  to  support  them.  Poor 
"  Spud "  fell  in  his  tracks  to-day ;  we  carried  him  for  a 
long  way  on  the  sledge,  and  then  tried  him  once  more, 
but  he  fell  again,  and  had  to  be  carried  for  the  rest  of  the 
journey  tucked  away  inside  the  canvas  tank.  Towards  the 
end  of  our  day's  march  it  has  always  been  possible  to  get 
a  semblance  of  spirit  into  our  poor  animals  by  saying,  "Up 
for  supper."  They  learnt  early  what  the  words  meant,  and 
it  has  generally  been  "Spud"  who  gave  the  first  responsive 
whimper.  This  afternoon  it  was  most  pathetic ;  the  cheering 
shout  for  the  last  half-mile  was  raised  as  usual,  but  there  was 
no  response,  until  suddenly  from  the  interior  of  the  sledge- 
tank  came  the  muffled  ghost  of  a  whimper.  It  was  "Spud's" 
last  effort :  on  halting  we  carried  him  back  to  his  place,  but  in 
an  hour  he  was  dead. 

'The  whole  team  are  in  a  truly  lamentable  condition  ; 
"  Gus  "  and  "  Bismarck  "  are  tottering ;  "  Lewis  "  and  "  Birdie  " 
may  fail  any  moment ;  "  Jim  "  is  probably  the  strongest — he 
had  reserves  of  fat  to  draw  on,  and  has  been  a  great  thief; 
"  Nigger "  is  something  of  a  mystery  :  he  is  weak,  but  not 
reduced  to  the  same  straits  as  the  others,  and  seems  capable 
of  surprising  efforts. 

1  This  afternoon  a  southerly  breeze  sprang  up,  and  we 
improvised  a  sail  out  of  our  tent  floorcloth  ;  it  makes  an 
excellent  spread  of  canvas.  Some  time  ago  I  fixed  up  our 
bamboo  mast  as  a  permanency  by  stepping  it  in  the  runner 
and  binding  it  with  wire  to  one  of  the  standards.  On  this  we 
hoisted  our  sail,  spreading  it  with  two  bamboo  ski-poles.     This 


64         THE  VOYAGE  OF  THE   'DISCOVERY'     Qad. 

evening  we  saw  the  last  of  Mount  Markham,  and  Mount  Long- 
staff  is  already  growing  small  in  the  distance.' 

iJa?iuary  3. — We  are  not  finding  our  homeward  march  so 
easy  as  we  expected,  and  we  are  not  clearing  a  large  margin 
over  the  distances  which  are  actually  necessary  for  each  day; 
it  is  plain  that  if  there  are  blizzards  now  we  must  go  on  right 
through  them.  But  to-day  we  have  done  rather  better  than 
before.  This  morning  there  was  a  hot  sun,  which  brought 
the  snow-surface  nearly  up  to  freezing-point,  and  we  found  the 
sledge  drew  easily.  This  afternoon  there  was  a  fresh  breeze, 
when  we  got  a  great  deal  of  help  from  our  sail.  The  dogs 
have  not  pulled  throughout  the  day — we  do  not  expect  it  of 
them  now — and  this  afternoon  Shackleton  was  ahead  dragging 
on  those  who  could  not  walk.  Wilson  was  carrying  their  long 
trace  in  rear  to  prevent  it  getting  foul  of  the  sledges,  whilst  I 
was  employed  in  keeping  the  latter  straight  before  the  wind 
and  in  helping  them  over  the  rough  places  ;  the  sail  did  most 
of  the  pulling.  We  have  only  two  sledges  left  now,  as  we  find 
this  is  sufficient  to  carry  our  much-lightened  load. 

'To  walk  eight  or  nine  miles  in  a  day  does  not  sound 
much  of  a  task  for  even  a  tired  dog,  yet  it  is  too  much  for 
ours,  and  they  are  dropping  daily.  Yesterday  poor  little 
"  Nell "  fell  on  the  march,  tried  to  rise,  and  fell  again,  looking 
round  with  a  most  pathetic  expression.  She  was  carried  till 
the  night,  but  this  morning  was  as  bad  as  ever,  and  at  lunch- 
time  was  put  out  of  her  misery.  This  afternoon,  shortly  after 
starting,  "Gus"  fell,  quite  played  out.  and  just  before  our 
halt,  to  our  greater  grief,  "  Kid  "  caved  in.  One  could  almost 
weep  over  this  last  case  ;  he  has  pulled  like  a  Trojan  through- 
out, and  his  stout  little  heart  bore  him  up  till  his  legs  failed 
beneath  him,  and  he  fell  never  to  rise  again. 

■  It  is  useless  to  carry  all  this  dog-food,  so  we  have  decided 
to  serve  it  out  freely,  and  the  seven  animals  that  remain  are 
now  lying  about  quite  replete ;  at  any  rate,  poor  things,  they 
will  not  die  of  starvation. 

1  Save  for  a  glimpse  of  the  sun  this  morning,  a  high  stratus 
cloud  has  hung  over  us  all  day.     We  see  the  land,  but  not 


i9o3]  A  NEW  EXPERIENCE  65 

very  clearly  j  we  are  inside  our  course  in  passing  down  the 
coast,  and  about  ten  miles  from  the  remarkable  cliffs  we  then 
noticed.  To  the  north-west  we  recognise  well-known  land- 
marks. In  spite  of  our  troubles  we  managed  to  keep  going 
for  seven  hours  to-day,  but  we  feel  that  this  is  the  utmost  that 
we  can  do  at  present  owing  to  our  poor  team.' 

1  January  6. — This  morning  saw  us  start  off  in  overcast 
weather,  but  with  a  high  temperature  making  very  wet  snow, 
and  in  consequence  a  comparatively  easy  surface.  By  lunch- 
time  it  had  commenced  to  snow  in  large  flakes,  and  the 
temperature  had  risen  to  +  33°  by  the  sling  thermometer ;  this 
is  the  first  time  the  air-temperature  has  been  above  freezing ; 
the  snow  falling  on  us  or  on  the  sledges  immediately  melted, 
so  that  the  effect  was  precisely  the  same  as  a  shower  of  rain  ; 
and  it  was  ludicrous  to  see  us  trying  to  push  things  into  holes 
and  corners  where  they  would  not  get  sopping  wet.  We  wore 
our  gaberdine  blouses  this  afternoon,  and  they  had  the  appear- 
ance and  the  effect  of  mackintoshes.  All  this  is  a  strangely 
new  experience  to  us,  and  certainly  one  would  never  have 
dreamt  that  an  umbrella  might  be  a  desirable  thing  on  the 
Great  Barrier.  This  wave  of  heat  with  thick  foggy  snow  came 
from  the  south  with  a  fairish  breeze. 

'  We  have  been  trying  once  or  twice  lately  to  go  on  ski  as 
the  snow  is  very  soft  and  we  sink  deeply,  but  we  find  that  we 
cannot  put  the  same  weight  on  the  traces  as  we  do  on  foot. 
On  the  whole  our  ski  so  far  have  been  of  little  value.  They 
have  saved  us  labour  on  the  rare  occasions  on  which  we  have 
not  had  to  pull,  such  as  when  we  returned  for  the  second  load 
at  our  relay  work  ;  but  the  labour  thus  saved  is  a  doubtful 
compensation  for  the  extra  weight  which  they  add  to  the  load. 
Another  thing  to  be  remembered  is  that  one  gets  used  to 
plodding,  even  in  heavy  snow,  and,  though  it  is  very  tiring  at 
first,  one's  capacity  for  performance  on  foot  ought  not  to  be 
judged  until  one  is  thoroughly  accustomed  to  the  work. 

'  We  have  passed  our  old  track  once  or  twice  lately  ;  it  is 
partly  obliterated  but  much  clearer  than  I  expected  to  find  it 
after  the  recent  winds.     We  made  sail  again  this  afternoon, 

VOL.  II.  F 


66         THE   VOYAGE   OF  THE    'DISCOVERY'     [Jan. 

and  the  dogs,  which  have  now  become  only  a  hindrance,  were 
hitched  on  behind  the  sledges — a  very  striking  example  of  the 
cart  before  the  horse.  "  Boss "  fell,  and  was  put  on  the 
sledge.' 

iJa?iuary  7. — We  have  had  a  very  warm  and  uncommonly 
pleasant  day.  The  temperature  at  noon  rose  to  340  and  the 
snow  surface  was  just  on  the  melting-point,  a  condition  that  is 
excellent  for  the  sledge-runners.  We  dropped  all  the  dogs  out 
of  the  traces  and  pulled  steadily  ourselves  for  seven  hours, 
covering  ten  good  miles  by  sledge-meter.  "  Boss,"  when  we 
left,  turned  back  to  the  old  camp  ;  later  he  was  seen  following, 
but  he  has  not  turned  up  to-night,  though  supper-hour  is  long 
past.  The  rest  of  the  animals  walked  pretty  steadily  alongside 
the  sledges.  It  is  a  queer  ending  for  our  team;  I  do  not 
suppose  they  will  ever  go  into  harness  again,  unless  it  is  to 
help  them  along. 

'  But  who  could  describe  the  relief  this  is  to  us  ?  No  more 
cheering  and  dragging  in  front,  no  more  shouting  and  yelling 
behind,  no  more  clearing  of  tangled  traces,  no  more  dismal 
stoppages,  and  no  more  whip.  All  day  we  have  been  steadily 
plodding  on  with  the  one  purpose  of  covering  the  miles  by  our 
own  unaided  efforts,  and  one  feels  that  one  would  sooner  have 
ten  such  days  than  one  with  the  harrowing  necessity  of  driving 
a  worn-out  dog  team.  For  the  first  time  we  were  able  to  con- 
verse freely  on  the  march,  and  in  consequence  the  time  passed 
much  more  rapidly. 

'  We  have  seen  little  of  the  land  of  late,  though  occasion- 
ally our  landmarks  show  up.  The  sun  has  been  flickering  in 
and  out  all  day.  Much  cloud  hangs  above  the  coast ;  this 
afternoon  it  developed  into  masses  of  rolled  cumulus  which 
clung  about  the  higher  peaks  like  rolls  of  cotton  wool.  It  is 
the  first  time  we  have  seen  these  to  the  south,  and  they  are 
pleasantly  reminiscent  of  milder  climates ;  they  would  certainly 
appear  to  have  some  connection  with  the  wave  of  heat  that  is 
passing  over  us. 

'  We  have  been  arguing  to-night  that  if  we  can  only  get  to 
the  depot  in  good  time  we  can  afford  to  have  an  extra  feed,  a 


1903]  DIFFICULT   SURFACES  67 

sort  of  revival  of  Christmas  Day  j  at  present  we  have  gained  a 
day  on  our  allowance.  We  are  positively  ravenous,  but  this 
thought  is  sending  us  to  bed  in  a  much  happier  frame  of 
mind.' 

'■January  8. — Truly  our  travelling  is  full  of  surprises.  Last 
night  we  had  a  mild  snow-storm  depositing  flaky  crystals,  but 
none  of  us  guessed  what  the  result  would  be.  This  morning 
the  air  temperature  had  fallen  to  220,  the  snow  surface  was 
2 30,  and  below  the  upper  layer  260  ;  after  breakfast  the  fog 
gradually  cleared,  the  sun  came  out,  and  a  brisk  northerly 
breeze  sprang  up.  We  got  into  our  harness  in  good  time, 
and,  lo  !  and  behold,  found  we  could  scarcely  move  the 
sledges.  We  scraped  the  runners  and  tried  again  without  any 
difference ;  somewhat  alarmed,  we  buckled  to  with  all  our 
energy,  and  after  three  hours  of  the  hardest  work  succeeded  in 
advancing  one  mile  and  a  quarter  ;  then  we  camped  to  discuss 
the  matter.  It  was  evident  that  the  surface  had  completely 
changed  :  last  night  we  could  have  dragged  double  our  present 
load  with  ease ;  this  morning  each  step  was  a  severe  strain,  we 
were  constantly  brought  to  a  standstill  and  had  to  break  the 
sledges  away  with  a  jerk.  As  the  wind  came  up,  the  loose 
snow  settled  into  little  sandy  heaps,  and  seemed  actually  to 
grip  at  the  runners.  We  have  decided  to  remain  in  camp  until 
the  surface  changes,  but  the  question  one  cannot  help  asking 
is,  Will  it  change  ?  I  suppose  it  is  bound  to  come  right,  but 
we  have  less  than  a  week's  provisions  and  are  at  least  fifty 
miles  from  the  depot.  Consequently  the  prospect  of  a  daily 
rate  of  one  mile  and  a  quarter  does  not  smile  on  us — in  fact, 
we  are  none  of  us  very  cheerful  to-night ;  and  to  add  to  his 
discomfort  poor  Shackleton  has  another  bad  attack  of  snow- 
blindness. 

1  We  got  a  clear  view  of  the  land  this  afternoon,  and  I  was 
able  to  get  an  excellent  round  of  angles.  We  are  opposite  the 
high  pyramidal  and  tabular  mountains  once  more,  and  get  a 
good  idea  of  the  general  loftiness  of  the  country. 

'  "  Birdie  "  remained  behind  at  the  camp  this  morning,  but 
came  on  later ;  "  Boss "  has  never  rejoined — he  must  have 

F  2 


68         THE   VOYAGE   OF  THE   'DISCOVERY'     [Jan. 

sunk  like  the  rest  from  sheer  exhaustion,  but  with  no  one  by 
to  give  him  the  last  merciful  quietus  ;  "  Joe  "  was  sacrificed  for 
the  common  good  to-night.  It  is  fortunate  that  numbers  will 
not  permit  these  massacres  to  continue  much  longer;  yet,  after 
all,  one  cannot  help  being  struck  with  the  extraordinary  and 
merciful  lack  of  intelligence  that  these  beasts  display  in  such 
tragic  moments.  We  have  had  the  most  impressive  examples 
of  this. 

1  When  a  decree  has  gone  forth  against  any  poor  wretch,  it 
has  been  our  custom  to  lead  him  some  way  to  the  rear  of  the 
sledges  and  there,  of  course,  to  put  an  end  to  him  as  painlessly 
as  possible.  As  the  intended  victim  has  been  led  away,  the 
rest  of  the  team  have  known  at  once  what  is  going  to  happen, 
and  as  far  as  their  feeble  state  has  allowed  they  have  raised  the 
same  chorus  of  barks  as  they  used  to  do  when  they  knew  that 
we  were  going  to  fetch  their  food.  Of  course  the  cause  is 
precisely  the  same  ;  they  know  in  some  way  that  this  means 
food.  But  the  astonishing  fact  is  that  the  victim  himself  has 
never  known  :  he  has  always  followed  willingly  with  his  tail 
wagging,  evidently  under  the  impression  that  he  is  going  to  be 
taken  to  the  place  where  the  food  comes  from,  nor,  until  the 
last,  has  he  ever  shown  the  least  suspicion  of  his  end. 

1  Thus  we  have  seen  an  animal  howling  with  joy  at  seeing 
his  comrade  led  to  the  slaughter,  and  the  next  night  going  on 
the  same  road  himself  with  every  sign  of  pleasure  ;  it  has  a 
distinctly  pathetic  side,  but  it  is  good  to  know  clearly  that  they 
have  not  the  intelligence  to  anticipate  their  fate. 

!  I  have  used  the  pronoun  "  we  "  above,  but  I  must  confess 
that  I  personally  have  taken  no  part  in  the  slaughter ;  it  is  a 
moral  cowardice  of  which  I  am  heartily  ashamed,  and  I  know 
perfectly  well  that  my  companions  hate  the  whole  thing  as 
much  as  I  do.  At  the  first  this  horrid  duty  was  performed  by 
Wilson,  because  it  was  tacitly  agreed  that  he  would  be  by  far 
the  most  expert ;  and  later,  when  I  was  perfectly  capable  of 
taking  a  share,  I  suppose  I  must  have  shrunk  from  it  so 
obviously  that  he,  with  his  usual  self-sacrifice,  volunteered  to 
do  the  whole  thing  throughout.     And  so  it  has  been  arranged, 


1903]  RUNNING   BEFORE   A  STORM  69 

and  I  occupy  the  somewhat  unenviable  position  of  allowing 
someone  else  to  do  my  share  of  the  dirty  work.' 

1  January  9.  —Late  last  night  I  was  awakened  by  a  flapping 
of  wings,  and  found  a  solitary  skua  gull  hovering  round  the 
camp.  One  cannot  guess  how  the  creature  can  have  spotted 
us,  especially  as  we  had  a  northerly  wind  yesterday  ;  but  what- 
ever has  brought  him,  it  is  cheering  to  see  a  sign  of  life  once 
more,  as  it  is  more  than  a  month  since  we  saw  the  last.  It  was 
anxious  work  trying  the  surface  this  morning,  and  we  hurried 
over  the  breakfast  to  get  into  harness.  We  found  the  pulling 
hard  work,  but  very  much  better  than  yesterday,  and  in  the 
afternoon  we  were  able  to  set  our  sail  again.  We  have  made  a 
fairly  good  march,  but  now,  unfortunately,  cannot  tell  the  exact 
distance  covered,  as  this  morning  we  found  that  the  sledge- 
meter  had  refused  duty.  An  examination  showed  that  one  of 
the  cog-wheels  had  dropped  off,  so  we  detached  the  counter 
mechanism  and  abandoned  the  rest ;  it  has  done  us  good 
service,  and  we  shall  miss  its  exact  record  of  our  work. 

1  Our  four  remaining  dogs  roam  around  the  sledges  all  day, 
sometimes  lying  down  for  a  spell,  but  never  dropping  far  be- 
hind. { Nigger '  and  '  Jim '  are  moderately  well,  but  '  Birdie  ' 
and  'Lewis'  are  very  weak  and  emaciated.  Poor  'Nigger' 
seems  rather  lost  out  of  harness  ;  he  will  sometimes  get  close 
to  our  traces  and  march  along  as  though  he  was  still  doing  his 
share  of  the  pulling.' 

* January  10. — We  started  this  morning  at  8.25,  with  a 
moderately  bright  outlook  and  the  land  clear ;  the  surface  was 
a  trifle  better  than  yesterday,  but  with  no  helping  wind  we 
found  it  heavy  enough  until  at  eleven  o'clock  a  high  stratus 
cloud  drifted  up  from  the  south  and  plunged  us  into  gloom. 
With  this  the  temperature  rose  and  the  surface  improved  as  if 
by  magic,  and  for  the  last  hour  before  lunch  we  were  able  to 
step  out  briskly.  Soon  after  this  the  wind  came,  and  as  we 
started  our  afternoon  march  it  became  evident  that  a  blizzard 
was  beginning.  It  is  the  first  time  we  have  marched  in  a 
blizzard,  and  though  it  has  been  very  trying  work,  it  has  given 
us  several  extra  miles, 


70         THE   VOYAGE   OF   THE    'DISCOVERY'     (Jan. 

'Almost  immediately  after  lunch  the  sledges  began  to  out- 
run us,  and  soon  we  were  obliged  to  reef  our  sail,  and  even 
with  reduced  canvas  the  mast  was  bending  like  a  whip.  The 
great  difficulties  were  to  keep  the  course  and  to  run  the  sledges 
straight.  At  first  we  tried  to  steer  by  the  direction  of  the 
wind,  and  only  discovered  how  wildly  we  were  going  by  the 
sail  suddenly  flying  flat  aback  on  either  tack.  The  air  was  so 
thick  with  driving  snow  that  one  could  not  see  more  than 
twenty  or  thirty  yards,  and  against  the  grey  background  it  was 
impossible  to  see  the  direction  in  which  the  snow  was  driving. 
After  this  we  tried  steering  by  compass;  Shackleton  and 
Wilson  pushed  on  before  the  wind,  whilst  I  rested  the  compass 
in  the  snow,  and  when  the  needle  had  steadied  directed  them 
by  shouting ;  then  as  they  were  disappearing  in  the  gloom,  I 
had  to  pick  up  the  compass  and  fly  after  them.  It  can  be 
imagined  how  tiring  this  sort  of  thing  was  to  all  concerned. 
At  length  I  made  up  my  mind  that  we  could  only  hope  to  hold 
an  approximate  course,  and  getting  Shackleton  well  ahead  of 
me,  I  observed  the  manner  in  which  the  snow  was  drifting 
against  his  back,  and  for  the  remainder  of  the  day  I  directed 
him  according  to  this  rough  guide. 

'As  it  was  evident  that,  although  we  were  not  steering 
straight,  we  were  covering  the  ground  quickly,  we  decided  to 
go  on  for  two  hours  extra  and  take  every  advantage  we  could 
from  the  wind.  It  was  as  much  as  we  could  do  to  hold  out 
for  this  time,  and  when  at  length  the  halt  was  called  we  were 
all  thoroughly  exhausted.  We  had  difficulty  in  getting  our 
tent  up  in  the  heavy  gale  that  was  now  blowing,  and,  as  luck 
would  have  it,  our  wretched  Primus  lamp  chose  this  occasion 
to  refuse  work,  so  that  it  was  late  before  we  could  prepare  our 
hot  meal. 

'  The  march  has  been  the  most  tiring  we  have  done ;  we 
are  more  or  less  used  to  steady  plodding,  but  to-day  we  have 
sometimes  had  to  run,  sometimes  to  pull  forward,  sometimes 
backward,  and  sometimes  sideways,  and  always  with  our  senses 
keenly  on  the  alert  and  our  muscles  strung  up  for  instant 
action.     Wilson  and  I  are  very  much  '  done,'  though  only  to 


igo3]  SHORT   OF   FOOD  71 

the  extent  that  needs  a  night's  rest ;  but  Shackleton  is  a  good 
deal  worse,  I  think,  and  I  am  not  feeling  happy  about  his 
condition. 

1  We  could  very  rarely  spare  our  attention  for  the  dogs  to- 
day. Poor  '  Birdie '  gave  out  early,  and  was  carried  on  the 
sledge  ;  as  to-night  he  could  not  stand,  we  have  had  to  give  up 
hope  of  saving  him,  and  he  has  breathed  his  last.  '  Nigger ' 
and  '  Jim '  have  kept  up  well,  but  '  Lewis '  has  only  done  so 
with  great  difficulty,  and  has  sometimes  dropped  a  long  way 
behind. 

'  We  cannot  now  be  far  from  our  depot,  but  then  we  do  not 
exactly  know  where  we  are ;  there  is  not  many  days'  food  left, 
and  if  this  thick  weather  continues  we  shall  possibly  not  be 
able  to  find  it.'     - 

January  n. — The  surface  has  been  truly  awful  to-day; 
with  the  wind  swelling  our  sail  and  our  united  efforts  we  could 
scarcely  budge  the  sledges.  Nothing  could  be  seen ;  not  a 
sign  of  land  ;  cold  snow  was  driving  at  our  backs,  and  it  was 
most  difficult  to  steer  anything  like  a  straight  course.  At  noon 
the  sun  peeped  out  for  a  few  minutes,  and  I  got  an  altitude 
which  gives  the  latitude  as  80.44  S. ;  to-night,  therefore,  we 
cannot  be  more  than  ten  or  twelve  miles  from  the  depot. 

1  Our  loads  are  ridiculously  light,  and  that  we  should  be 
making  such  heavy  weather  of  them  is  very  discouraging.  It 
may  be  because  we  are  overdone,  but  I  cannot  help  thinking  that 
the  surface  is  getting  consistently  worse ;  and  with  no  know- 
ledge of  our  climate  we  have  certain  dismal  forebodings  that  a 
snowy  season  has  set  in,  which  may  be  a  regular  thing  at  this 
time  of  year.  With  no  sight  of  landmarks  and  nothing  about 
one  but  the  unchanging  grey  it  is  impossible  to  avoid  a  sense 
of  being  lost ;  never  before  have  we  entirely  lost  sight  of  the 
land  for  more  than  twenty-four  consecutive  hours,  and  looking 
at  the  diminished  food- bag  we  are  obliged  to  realise  that  we  are 
running  things  very  close.  However,  it  is  no  use  meeting 
troubles  half-way ;  the  only  thing  now  is  to  push  on  all  we 
can. 

'  We  are  not  very  comfortable  in  our  camping  equipment, 


72       THE   VOYAGE   OF  THE   'DISCOVERY5      Qan. 

as  everything  is  wet  through — clothes,  sleeping-bags,  and  tent- 
gear.  The  canvas  tanks  and  covers  of  the  sledges  are  shrunk 
and  sodden ;  the  snow  was  melted  as  it  drifted  against  one 
side  of  our  sail  to-day,  and  from  the  other  hung  long  icicles. 

'  "  Lewis  "  dropped  farther  and  farther  astern  this  morning, 
and  as  he  has  not  come  up  to-night  I  fear  we  shall  not  see  him 
again. 

'•January  12. — This  morning  as  we  breakfasted  there  was 
just  a  glimpse  of  landmarks,  but  before  we  could  properly 
recognise  them  the  pall  of  cloud  descended  once  more ;  we 
saw  enough  to  show  us  that  we  cannot  be  very  far  from  the 
depot.  Thanks  to  a  good  southerly  breeze  we  have  done 
a  good  march,  and  with  the  help  of  another  latitude  sight 
I  calculate  the  depot  must  be  within  a  very  few  miles,  but 
the  continuance  of  this  thick  weather  naturally  damps  our 
spirits. 

'There  is  no  doubt  we  are  approaching  a  very  critical 
time.  The  depot  is  a  very  small  spot  on  a  very  big  ocean  of 
snow ;  with  luck  one  might  see  it  at  a  mile  and  a  half  or  two 
miles,  and  fortune  may  direct  our  course  within  this  radius  of 
it ;  but,  on  the  other  hand,  it  is  impossible  not  to  contemplate 
the  ease  with  which  such  a  small  spot  can  be  missed.  In  a 
blizzard  we  should  certainly  miss  it ;  of  course  we  must  stop 
to  search  when  we  know  we  have  passed  its  latitude,  but  the 
low  tide  in  the  provision-tank  shows  that  the  search  cannot  be 
prolonged  for  any  time,  though  we  still  have  the  two  dogs  to 
fall  back  on  if  the  worst  comes  to  the  worst.  The  annoying 
thing  is  that  one  good  clear  sight  of  the  land  would  solve  all 
our  difficulties. 

'  For  a  long  time  we  have  been  discussing  the  possible 
advantage  of  stripping  the  German  silver  off  the  sledge- 
runners.  Once  off  it  cannot  be  replaced,  and  therefore  to 
strip  them  is  a  serious  step ;  the  only  way  in  which  we  have 
been  able  to  guess  the  relative  merits  of  the  wood  and  metal 
runners  is  by  contrasting  the  sledges  and  the  ski,  and  it  has 
always  seemed  to  us  that  the  latter  are  as  likely  to  clog  as  the 
former,  but  the  differing  conditions  of  their  use  make  the 


i9o3]  FINDING   DEPOT   <B'  73 

comparison  difficult.  However,  the  pulling  has  been  so 
severe  lately  that  I  cannot  but  think  that,  however  bad  the 
wood  may  be,  it  cannot  be  worse  than  the  German  silver,  and, 
though  we  may  not  gain  by  stripping  our  runners,  we  cannot 
very  well  lose ;  so  to-morrow  morning  I  intend  to  strip  one 
of  the  sledges  for  trial,  and  we  are  looking  forward  with  some 
anxiety  to  the  result  of  the  experiment.' 

1  January  13,  noon. — This  morning  we  stripped  a  sledge 
and  then  started  on  our  march.  Everything  was  as  bad  as 
it  could  be.  There  was  not  a  sign  of  the  land ;  the  whole 
outlook  was  one  monotonous  grey,  and  when  we  started  to 
march  we  found  the  surface  in  the  most  trying  condition. 
Steering  could  only  be  done  by  one  person  pulling  behind, 
catching  the  shadow  of  the  others  on  the  light  sastrugi,  and 
constantly  directing  right  or  left ;  we  were  obliged  to  put  every 
ounce  of  our  strength  on  the  traces,  and  even  thus  advanced 
at  a  rate  which  was  something  less  than  three-quarters  of  a 
mile  an  hour.  The  whole  thing  was  heartbreaking,  and  after 
three  hours  of  incessant  labour  we  decided  to  halt.  I  am  now 
writing  in  the  tent,  and,  I  am  bound  to  say,  in  no  very  cheerful 
frame  of  mind.  We  have  thought  it  wise  to  reduce  our  meals 
still  further,  so  that  luncheon  has  been  the  very  poorest  ray 
of  comfort. 

1  And  so  here  we  lie,  again  waiting  for  a  favourable  change. 
Little  has  been  said,  but  I  have  no  doubt  we  have  all  been 
thinking  a  good  deal.  The  food-bag  is  a  mere  trifle  to  lift ; 
we  could  finish  all  that  remains  in  it  at  one  sitting  and  still 
rise  hungry ;  the  depot  cannot  be  far  away,  but  where  is  it 
in  this  terrible  expanse  of  grey  ?  And  with  this  surface,  even 
if  we  pick  it  up,  how  are  we  to  carry  its  extra  weight  when  we 
cannot  even  make  headway  with  our  light  sledges  ? 

CI  have  been  staring  up  at  the  green  canvas  and  asking 
myself  these  questions  with  no  very  cheering  result.' 

1  January  13,  midnight. — Catching  a  glimpse  of  the  sun 
in  the  tent  to-day,  I  tumbled  out  of  my  sleeping-bag  in  hopes 
of  getting  a  meridional  altitude  ;  it  was  one  of  those  cases 
which  have  been  common  of  late   when  observation  is  very 


74       THE   VOYAGE   OF   THE    'DISCOVERY'       [Jan. 

difficult.  Light,  ragged  clouds  were  drifting  across  the  face 
of  the  sun,  and  through  the  theodolite  telescope  at  one 
moment  one  saw  its  blurred,  indistinguishable  image,  and  at 
the  next  was  blinded  with  the  full  force  of  its  rays.  After 
getting  the  best  result  that  I  could,  I  casually  lowered  the 
telescope  and  swept  it  round  the  horizon ;  suddenly  a  speck 
seemed  to  flash  by,  and  a  wild  hope  sprang  up.  Slowly 
I  brought  the  telescope  back ;  yes,  there  it  was  again ;  yes, 
and  on  either  side  of  it  two  smaller  specks — 'the  depot,  without 
the  shadow  of  a  doubt.  I  sprang  up  and  shouted,  "Boys, 
there's  the  depot."  We  are  not  a  demonstrative  party,  but 
I  think  we  excused  ourselves  for  the  wild  cheer  that  greeted 
this  announcement.  It  could  not  have  been  more  than  five 
minutes  before  everything  was  packed  on  the  sledges  and  we 
were  stepping  out  for  those  distant  specks.  The  work  was 
as  heavy  as  before,  but  we  were  in  a  very  different  mood  to 
undertake  it.  Throughout  the  morning  we  had  marched  in 
dogged  silence;  now  every  tongue  was  clattering  and  all 
minor  troubles  were  forgotten  in  knowledge  that  we  were 
going  to  have  a  fat  hoosh  at  last.  It  took  us  nearly  two  hours 
to  get  up,  and  we  found  everything  as  we  had  left  it,  and  not 
much  drifted  up  with  snow. 

'We  have  had  our  fat  Zioosk,  and  again,  after  a  long 
interval,  have  a  grateful  sense  of  comfort  in  the  inner  man. 
After  supper  we  completed  our  experimental  comparison  of 
the  two  sledges,  which  have  respectively  metal  and  wood 
runners ;  we  equalised  the  weights  as  nearly  as  possible,  and 
started  to  tow  the  sledges  round  singly  ;  we  found  that  there 
was  an  astonishing  difference  :  two  of  us  could  barely  move 
the  metalled  sledge  as  fast  as  one  could  drag  the  other.  We 
are  wholly  at  a  loss  to  account  for  this  difference  ;  one  would 
have  thought  that  if  metal  was  ever  to  give  a  good  running 
surface  it  would  be  now  when  the  temperatures  are  high; 
but  though  the  result  puzzles  us,  we  have  of  course  decided 
to  strip  the  second  sledge. 

'  On  the  whole  things  stand  favourably  for  us ;  we  have 
perhaps  130  miles  to  cover  to  our  next  depot,  but  we  have 


1903]  SCURVY  AGAIN  75 

a  full  three  weeks'  provisions,  and  it  looks  as  though  we 
should  not  have  great  difficulties  with  our  load,  now  that  we 
are  on  wood  runners.  On  the  other  hand,  I  am  not  altogether 
satisfied  with  the  state  of  our  health.  There  is  no  doubt  that 
we  are  not  as  fit  as  we  were  :  we  are  all  a  bit  "  done."  In 
Shackleton's  case  especially  I  feel  uneasy ;  his  scorbutic  signs 
are  increasing,  and  he  was  again  terribly  done  up  when  we 
camped  to-night.  All  things  considered,  without  knowledge 
of  what  may  be  before  us,  it  is  safer  not  to  increase  our  food 
allowance  for  the  present,  more  especially  as  in  going  north 
I  want  to  steer  inwards  so  as  to  examine  more  closely  those 
masses  of  land  which  we  have  seen  only  in  the  far  distance. 
But  in  spite  of  all,  our  circumstances  are  very  different  to-night 
from  what  they  were  last  night ;  the  finding  of  the  depot  has 
lifted  a  load  of  anxiety,  and  I  think  we  shall  all  sleep  the 
better  for  it. 

1  We  are  all  terrible-looking  ruffians  now ;  the  sun  has 
burnt  us  quite  black,  and  for  many  days  our  only  bit  of  soap 
has  remained  untouched.  It  is  some  time,  too,  since  we 
clipped  our  beards,  and  our  hair  has  grown  uncomfortably 
long  ;  our  faces  have  developed  new  lines  and  wrinkles,  and 
look  haggard  and  worn — in  fact,  our  general  appearance  and 
tattered  clothing  have  been  a  source  of  some  amusement  to 
us  of  late.' 

'■January  14. — This  morning  we  had  a  thorough  medical 
examination,  and  the  result  was  distinctly  unsatisfactory. 
Shackleton  has  very  angry-looking  gums — swollen  and  dark  ; 
he  is  also  suffering  greatly  from  shortness  of  breath  ;  his  throat 
seems  to  be  congested,  and  he  gets  fits  of  coughing,  when  he 
is  obliged  to  spit,  and  once  or  twice  to-day  he  has  spat  blood. 
I  myself  have  distinctly  red  gums,  and  a  very  slight  swelling  in 
the  ankles.  Wilson's  gums  are  affected  in  one  spot,  where 
there  is  a  large  plum-coloured  lump  ;  otherwise  he  seems  free 
from  symptoms.  Both  he  and  I  feel  quite  fit  and  well,  and  as 
far  as  we  are  concerned  I  think  a  breakdown  is  very  far 
removed. 

1  Early   this   morning   we   reorganised  our  load,  dropping 


76       THE  VOYAGE   OF  THE   'DISCOVERY'       gAN. 

everything  that  was  unnecessary,  overhauling  mast  and  sail, 
and  generally  putting  everything  ship-shape.  When  we  got 
away  at  last  we  carried,  besides  our  own  belongings,  a  small 
quantity  of  food  for  our  two  remaining  dogs,  the  whole 
amounting  to  a  weight  of  510  lbs.,  or  170  lbs.  per  man.  We 
made  a  fairly  good  march,  and  to  our  surprise  the  sledges  came 
easily  ;  the  only  marring  element  was  poor  Shackleton's  heavy 
breathing.  The  sky  has  been  overcast  all  day,  but  for  a  short 
time  we  had  a  good  view  of  the  lower  land  and  could  very 
clearly  see  the  leading  marks  on  which  we  had  placed  the 
depot,  a  sight  which  would  have  meant  much  to  us  a  day  or 
two  ago. 

c  Soon  after  coming  to  camp  I  went  to  the  sledges  to  feed 
the  dogs,  and,  looking  round,  found  that  Wilson  had  followed 
me  ;  his  face  was  very  serious,  and  his  news  still  more  so. 
He  told  me  that  he  was  distinctly  alarmed  about  Shackleton's 
condition  ;  he  did  not  know  that  the  breakdown  would  come 
at  once,  but  he  felt  sure  that  it  was  not  far  removed.  The 
conversation  could  only  be  conducted  in  the  most  fragmentary 
fashion  for  fear  it  should  be  overheard,  but  it  was  sufficiently 
impressive  to  make  our  supper  a  very  thoughtful  meal.  It's  a 
bad  case,  but  we  must  make  the  best  of  it  and  trust  to  its  not 
getting  worse  ;  now  that  human  life  is  at  stake  all  other  objects 
must  be  sacrificed.  It  is  plain  that  we  must  make  a  bee-line 
for  the  next  depot  regardless  of  the  northern  coast ;  it  is  plain 
also  that  we  must  travel  as  lightly  as  possible. 

'  It  went  to  my  heart  to  give  the  order,  but  it  had  to  be 
done,  and  the  dogs  are  to  be  killed  in  the  morning.  I  have 
thought  of  the  instruments,  which  are  a  heavy  item,  but  some 
of  them  may  be  needed  again,  and  I  am  loath  to  leave  any 
until  it  is  absolutely  necessary. 

1  One  of  the  difficulties  we  foresee  with  Shackleton,  with  his 
restless,  energetic  temperament,  is  to  keep  him  idle  in  camp, 
so  to-night  I  have  talked  seriously  to  him.  He  is  not  to  do 
any  camping  work,  but  to  allow  everything  to  be  done  for 
him  ;  he  is  not  to  pull  on  the  march,  but  to  walk  as  easily 
as  possible,  and  he  is  to  let  us  know  directly  he  feels  tired. 


i9o3]  SHACKXETON   FALLS   ILL  77 

I  have  tried  to  impress  on  him  the  folly  of  pretending  to  be 
stronger  than  he  is,  and  have  pointed  out  how  likely  he  is  to 
aggravate  the  evil  if  he  does  not  consent  to  nurse  himself. 
We  have  decided  to  increase  our  seal-meat  allowance  in 
another  effort  to  drive  back  the  scurvy. 

1  More  than  this  I  do  not  see  that  we  can  do  at  present. 
Every  effort  must  be  devoted  to  keeping  Shackleton  on  his 
legs,  and  we  must  trust  to  luck  to  bring  him  through.  In  case 
he  should  break  down  soon  and  be  unable  to  walk,  I  can  think 
of  absolutely  no  workable  scheme ;  we  could  only  carry  him 
by  doing  relay  work,  and  I  doubt  if  Wilson  or  I  am  up  to 
covering  the  distance  in  that  fashion  ;  it  is  a  knotty  problem 
which  is  best  left  till  the  contingency  arises. 

1  It  looks  as  though  life  for  the  next  week  or  two  is  not 
going  to  be  pleasant  for  any  of  us,  and  it  is  rather  curious 
because  we  have  always  looked  forward  to  this  part  of  the 
journey  as  promising  an  easier  time.' 

1  January  15. — This  morning  "Nigger  "and  "Jim"  were 
taken  a  short  distance  from  the  camp  and  killed.  This  was 
the  saddest  scene  of  all ;  I  think  we  could  all  have  wept. 
And  so  this  is  the  last  of  our  dog  team,  the  finale  to  a  tale  of 
tragedy  ;  I  scarcely  like  to  write  of  it.  Through  our  most 
troublous  time  we  always  looked  forward  to  getting  some  of 
our  animals  home.  At  first  it  was  to  have  been  nine,  then 
seven,  then  five,  and  at  the  last  we  thought  that  surely  we 
should  be  able  to  bring  back  these  two. 

1  After  the  completion  of  this  sad  business  we  got  into  our 
harness,  where  another  shock  awaited  us,  for  we  put  our 
weights  on  the  traces  without  the  least  effect,  and  it  was  only 
when  we  jerked  the  sledges  sideways  the  least  movement 
followed.  It  was  evident  that  something  was  wrong,  and  on 
turning  the  sledges  up  we  found  the  runners  solidly  crusted 
with  ice.  It  took  us  twenty  minutes  to  clear  them  ;  but  after- 
wards we  got  on  well  and  have  covered  nearly  eight  miles.  As 
this  caking  of  the  runners  is  likely  to  happen  whenever  our 
sledges  are  left  long  in  one  position,  we  have  decided  to  lift 
them  off  the  snow  every  night. 


78       THE   VOYAGE   OF  THE   'DISCOVERY'       [Jan. 

'  In  the  morning  march  we  had  bright  sunlight,  and  it 
cheered  us  all  wonderfully  after  its  long  absence.  We  could 
see  the  northern  side  of  the  high  rounded  snow-cape  abreast 
of  which  we  left  our  depot,  and  which  we  have  always  known 
as  "  Cape  A."  This  northern  side  forms  the  southern 
boundary  of  the  great  glacier  which  occupies  the  strait,  and  it 
is  very  steep,  with  high  frowning  cliffs.  We  are  now  crossing 
more  directly  across  the  mouth  of  the  strait,  and  there  are 
already  indications  of  ice  disturbances ;  we  have  been  travel- 
ling over  slight  undulations  and  most  confused  sastrugi. 

'  Shackleton's  state  last  night  was  highly  alarming  ;  he 
scarcely  slept  at  all,  and  had  violent  paroxysms  of  coughing, 
between  which  he  was  forced  to  gasp  for  breath.  This  morn- 
ing to  our  relief  he  was  better,  and  this  evening  he  is  rather 
better  than  last,  though  very  fagged  with  the  day's  work.  We 
try  to  make  him  do  as  little  pulling  as  possible  until  the  pace 
is  settled,  and  he  can  lean  steadily  forward  in  his  harness. 

?  It  is  early  to  judge,  but  the  double  ration  of  seal-meat 
seems  already  to  have  a  good  effect :  gums  seem  a  trifle  better. 
On  the  other  hand,  I  have  some  stiffness  in  the  right  foot, 
wrhich  I  suppose  is  caused  by  the  taint,  but  at  present  I  have 
not  mentioned  it,  as  my  gums  look  so  well  that  I  am  in  hopes 
it  will  pass  away.' 

'January  16. — The  sledges  have  been  running  easily,  and 
we  have  made  a  good  march,  but  the  surface  is  getting  more 
uneven,  and  under  the  dark,  gloomy  sky  we  could  not  see  the 
inequalities  and  stumbled  frequently.  This  sort  of  thing  is 
very  bad  for  Shackleton ;  twice  he  slipped  his  leg  down  a  deep 
crack  and  fell  heavily,  and  on  each  occasion  we  had  to  stop 
several  minutes  for  him  to  recover.  He  has  been  coughing 
and  spitting  up  blood  again,  and  at  lunch  time  was  very 
"  groggy."  With  his  excitable  temperament  it  is  especially 
difficult  for  him  to  take  things  quietly,  and  at  the  end  of  each 
march  he  is  panting,  dizzy,  and  exhausted. 

'  It  is  all  very  dreadful  to  watch,  knowing  that  we  can  do 
nothing  to  relieve  him ;  if  at  the  ship,  he  would  be  sent 
straight  to  bed,  but  here  every  effort  must  be  made  to  keep 


1903]  BAD    LIGHT   FOR   STEERING  79 

him  on  his  feet  during  the  marches.  There  is  now  no  doubt 
that  the  scorbutic  symptoms  are  diminishing ;  both  Wilson  and 
I  have  much  cleaner  gums,  and  my  leg  is  vastly  improved. 
Our  seal-meat  at  the  present  rate  will  last  another  fifteen  days, 
by  which  time  we  ought  to  be  within  reach  of  safety.  Six 
weeks  ago  we  were  very  much  inclined  to  swear  at  the  cook, 
who  had  been  careless  enough  to  leave  a  good  deal  of  blubber 
in  our  seal-meat,  but  now  we  bless  his  carelessness,  and  are 
only  too  eager  to  discover  that  our  "  whack  "  has  a  streak  of 
yellow  running  through  the  dark  flesh.  I  could  not  have 
believed  it  possible  that  I  should  ever  have  enjoyed  blubber, 
and  the  fact  that  we  do  is  an  eloquent  testimony  to  our  famished 
condition. 

1  This  afternoon  we  have  had  some  glimpses  of  the  land 
and  have  got  some  bearings,  but  there  are  still  masses  of  cloud 
over  the  mountains.  We  can  see  the  steep  cliffs  on  the 
northern  side  of  Cape  A,  and  similar  cliffs  fringing  the  foot- 
hills on  the  opposite  side  of  the  strait,  but  what  stands  behind 
we  cannot  hope  to  know,  unless  the  weather  clears.  So  far 
as  exploring  is  concerned,  on  these  overcast  days  one  might 
just  as  well  be  blindfolded. 

'  The  sunlight  this  afternoon  showed  that  we  are  crossing 
a  very  peculiar  surface  of  hard,  cracked,  lateral  ridges,  with 
softish  snow  between,  due  no  doubt  to  the  pressure  of  the 
ice-mass  pushing  out  through  the  strait.' 

'January  17. —  .  .  .  The  continuance  of  our  overcast 
weather  has  brought  a  trouble  which  is  now  becoming  a 
serious  matter,  and  that  is  the  difficulty  of  steering.  I  take 
it  on  myself  to  do  most  of  it  now,  sometimes  by  a  cloud, 
sometimes  by  the  sun,  and  sometimes  by  sastrngi,  and  in  half 
an  hour  it  often  happens  that  each  of  these  methods  has  to  be 
employed  in  turn.' 

It  would  perhaps  be  as  well  here  to  make  a  short  digression 
to  explain  the  difficulties  connected  with  this  matter  in  such 
a  journey  as  ours.  It  will  be  understood  that  we  carried  a 
compass  in  our  instrument-box,  but  to  have  held  this  in  one's 
hand  as  one  marched  would  have  been  quite  useless,  as  it  was 


80       THE  VOYAGE  OF  THE   'DISCOVERY5      [jA*, 

not  until  several  minutes  after  it  was  placed  firmly  on  the  snow 
that  the  card  ceased  to  swing  and  indicated  a  definite  direction  ; 
the  compass  was  therefore  of  little  use  to  us  on  the  march. 

Knowing  that  this  would  be  so,  and  expecting  to  travel 
out  of  sight  of  land,  I  had  prepared  a  device  for  steering  by 
the  sun,  and  as  this  was  constantly  in  use,  and  can  be  highly 
recommended  to  future  expeditions,  it  deserves  a  short  de- 
scription. It  consisted  of  a  small  wooden  dial  in  the  centre 
of  which  was  a  shadow-pin.  The  edge  was  marked  with  two 
circles,  one  showing  the  points  of  the  compass  and  the  other 
a  twenty-four  hour  clock-face  subdivided  to  half-hours ;  the 
relation  of  these  circles  involved  a  consideration  of  mean 
latitude  and  equation  of  time,  details  which  are  somewhat 
technical,  but  will  be  understood  by  the  navigator. 

The  use  of  the  instrument  was  extremely  simple.  It  was 
held  in  the  hand  in  such  a  position  that  the  shadow  of  the  pin 
fell  on  the  hour,  and  when  so  held  the  outer  circle  showed  the 
true  north  and  south,  or  the  true  bearing  of  any  object.  Thus 
one  could  march  straight  on  in  any  required  direction  by 
occasionally  consulting  one's  watch  and  more  frequently  the 
dial.  Whenever  the  sun  was  out,  therefore,  with  this  instru- 
ment we  had  no  difficulty  at  all  in  keeping  a  straight  course  ; 
and  it  served  yet  another  practically  useful  purpose,  for  when 
it  was  put  down  correctly  at  night,  it  gave  the  time  to  anyone 
leaving  the  tent  later  on. 

But  when  the  sun  disappeared  this  instrument  was  useless. 
Then  it  was  that  our  troubles  began,  and  we  were  reduced  to 
all  sorts  of  shifts  and  devices  to  steer  a  course.  When  possible 
we  would  take  the  bearing  of  a  cloud  and  march  on  this  for 
some  time  until  we  were  conscious  that  its  direction  was 
altered  and  a  fresh  mark  must  be  sought.  Occasionally  the 
low,  rocky  patches  on  the  distant  coastline  formed  a  guide, 
but  on  the  majority  of  overcast  days  the  land  was  not  visible, 
and  the  cloud-forms  had  no  definite  shape.  At  such  times 
one  looked  on  a  monotonous,  uniform  sheet  of  grey  which 
extended  from  under  foot  to  the  zenith.  The  leader  could  see 
nothing,  but  others  might  catch  an  idea  of  the  direction  of  the 


1903] 


ANXIOUS   DAYS  81 


snow-waves  in  his  shadow.  But  the  expedients  to  which  we 
were  reduced  and  the  troubles  they  brought  can  be  gathered 
from  my  tale,  and  it  will  be  understood  why  the  continuance 
of  overcast  weather  should  have  caused  them  to  be  so  frequently 
mentioned  at  this  time. 

'■January  1 7  {continued). — This  morning  we  started  with  an 
overcast  sky  and  an  unshaded  wall  of  grey  ahead.  A  rapidly 
closing  bright  patch  on  our  starboard  beam  was  the  only  guide. 
After  two  hours  I  had  to  give  up  leading  ;  Wilson  went  ahead, 
but  by  lunch  his  eyes  had  had  enough,  and  I  finished  the 
afternoon.  It  is  difficult  to  describe  the  trying  nature  of  this 
work ;  for  hours  one  plods  on,  ever  searching  for  some  more 
definite  sign.  Sometimes  the  eye  picks  up  a  shade  on  the  sur- 
face or  a  cloud  slightly  lighter  or  darker  than  its  surroundings ; 
these  may  occur  at  any  angle,  and  have  often  to  be  kept  in  the 
corner  of  the  eye.  Frequently  there  comes  a  minute  or  two  of 
absolute  confusion,  when  one  may  be  going  in  any  direction 
and  for  the  time  the  mind  seems  blank.  It  can  scarcely  be 
imagined  how  tiring  this  is  or  how  trying  to  the  eyes ;  one's 
whole  attention  must  be  given  to  it,  without  relaxing  for  a 
moment  the  strain  on  the  harness.  At  lunch  to-day  I  fixed  up 
a  new  device  by  securing  a  small  teased-out  shred  of  wool  to 
the  end  of  a  light  bamboo  to  act  as  a  wind  vane.  The  wind 
was  light  and  shifty,  but  the  vane  relieved  my  eyes.' 

1 January  18. — We  started  to-day  on  another  abominable 
"  blind  "  march.  For  half  an  hour  I  could  just  see  some  ridges 
and  the  slightest  gleam  in  the  sky  to  the  north  ;  for  another 
spell,  a  very  light  easterly  breeze  kept  my  vane  on  the  flutter. 
The  sastrugi  under  foot  are  light  and  confused,  and  when  at 
last  the  wind  fell  we  were  left  with  no  guide  at  all,  and  were 
forced  to  camp ;  for  the  last  ten  minutes  we  had  been  four 
points  off*  our  course.  Wilson  says  his  eyes  are  on  the  point 
of  going ;  mine,  on  which  I  see  the  party  must  principally 
depend,  are  not  quite  right,  but  not  yet  painful.  The  situation 
is  startling,  but  we  have  not  yet  exhausted  our  resources.  If 
there  is  no  improvement  after  lunch,  Shackleton  will  start  on 
ahead  with  a  flag,  and  when  he  has  been  directed  for  half  a 
VOL.  11.  g 


82       THE   VOYAGE   OF   THE    'DISCOVERY'       [Jan. 

mile,  Wilson  and  I  propose  to  bring  on  the  sledges  ;  it  promises 
to  be  slow  work,  but  we  must  get  on  somehow.' 

'  Midnight. — All  was  going  well  with  our  march  this  after- 
noon, when  Shackleton  gave  out.  He  had  a  bad  attack  of 
breathlessness,  and  we  are  forced  to  camp  in  a  hurry ;  to-night 
matters  are  serious  with  him  again.  He  is  very  plucky  about 
it,  for  he  does  not  complain,  though  there  is  no  doubt  he  is 
suffering  badly.' 

''January  19. — Another  long  "blind"  march.  It  is  very 
distressing  work,  and  the  gloom  does  not  tend  to  enliven  our 
spirits ;  but  Shackleton  was  better  this  morning  and  is  still 
better  to-night.  We  have  now  had  overcast  weather  almost 
continuously  for  ten  days.' 

' January  20. — At  luncheon  we  found  ourselves  in 
latitude  79.51  S.,  and  on  coming  out  of  the  tent  were  rejoiced 
to  find  a  sight  of  the  land  on  our  left,  though  as  yet  but  hazy. 
It  rapidly  cleared  as  we  resumed  our  march,  and  soon  a  new 
scene  was  unfolded  to  our  view.  An  opportunity  of  this  sort 
was  not  to  be  missed,  and  we  camped  early,  since  which  we  have 
been  busy  taking  angles  and  sketching.  The  temperature  has 
fallen  to  zero,  so  that  both  these  tasks  have  been  pretty  "nippy." 
The  beautiful  feathery  hexagonal  ice-crystals  are  falling  again, 
and  came  floating  down  on  our  books  and  instruments  as  we 
worked. 

1  The  land  is  a  long  way  from  us,  but  much  closer  than  it 
was  on  the  outward  march  ;  the  detached  appearance  which  it 
then  had  is  still  maintained  to  some  extent,  but  there  is  now 
every  indication  that  a  still  closer  view  would  show  a  continuous 
coastline,  and  that  in  the  gaps  between  the  nearer  high 
mountain  ranges  would  be  found  lower  and  perhaps  more 
distant  hills. 

'  Cape  A  is  far  behind  us ;  we  get  a  distant  view  up  the 
strait  on  its  northern  side,  and  see  only  enough  to  show  that  it 
must  penetrate  deeply  into  the  land  before  it  rises  in  altitude 
to  any  extent.  If,  as  one  cannot  but  suppose,  it  contains  a 
glacier,  that  glacier  must  be  the  largest  yet  known  in  the  world; 
but  with  ice  disturbance  commencing  nearly  thirty  miles  from 


I9o3]  IMPROVING   PROSPECTS  83 

its  mouth,  one  can  imagine  that  to  travel  up  it  would  not  be 
an  easy  task.  Through  the  gap  of  the  strait  we  get  a  distant 
view  of  more  mountains — in  fact,  at  any  place  on  this  coastline 
one  is  struck  with  the  vast  numbers  of  peaks  that  are  within 
sight  at  the  same  moment.  There  are  far  more  than  one  could 
hope  to  fix  on  such  a  journey  as  ours  :  to  plot  the  coastal 
ranges  alone  would  be  a  big  task,  but  wherever  we  get  a  view 
behind  them  it  is  to  see  a  confusion  of  more  distant  hills. 

'Northward  of  the  strait  we  again  see  the  high  flanking 
range  end  on ;  northward  of  this,  again,  are  three  distinct 
coastal  ranges.  The  farthest  may  possibly  be  the  Royal  Society 
range,  though  of  this  we  cannot  be  sure  at  present  ;  but 
perhaps  the  most  pleasing  sight  to-night  is  the  glimpse  we  get 
of  Mount  Discovery;  its  conical  peak  rises  just  above  our 
horizon,  and  the  sight  of  that  well-known  landmark  has  seemed 
to  bring  us  miles  nearer  to  home  and  safety.' 

lJa?iuary  21. — The  clouds  have  drawn  down  on  us  again, 
shutting  out  the  land,  but  we  have  had  a  brisk  southerly  breeze, 
and,  setting  our  sail,  got  along  at  a  fine  rate.  For  a  time 
Shackleton  was  carried  on  the  sledges,  but  for  most  of  the 
march  he  walked  along  independently,  taking  things  as  easily 
as  possible.  Our  sail  did  most  of  the  pulling.  I,  hitched  to 
the  bow  of  the  front  sledge,  kept  it  straight,  and  helped  it  over 
the  rough  places ;  Wilson  hitched  to  the  back  of  the  rear  sledge, 
and  by  hauling  sideways  acted  as  a  sort  of  rudder.  We  got  on 
fast,  but  it  was  by  no  means  easy  work,  being  so  extraordinarily 
jerky  and  irregular.  Shackleton  is  improving,  but  takes  his 
breakdown  much  to  heart.' 

'January  22. — The  southerly  wind  continued  to-day;  it  is 
a  godsend,  and  is  taking  us  to  the  north  faster  than  we  ever 
hoped  for.  The  masses  of  low  heavy  cumulus  and  stratus  cloud 
and  the  higher  cirro-cumulus,  all  hurrying  to  the  north,  have 
given  us  the  most  beautiful  cloud  effects.  The  sun  has 
peeped  forth  occasionally,  but  the  land  is  still  heavily  overcast. 
We  are  beginning  to  hope  that  we  shall  soon  be  able  slightly 
to  increase  our  food  allowance.' 

1  January  23. — I  think  the  fates  have  decided  in  our  favour. 


84       THE  VOYAGE   OF  THE   'DISCOVERY5      [Jan. 

We  got  off  another  excellent  march  to-day.  The  wind  holds 
from  the  south,  sometimes  falling  light,  but  on  the  whole  giving 
us  great  help.  This  wind  is  the  greater  blessing  because  it  was 
so  wholly  unexpected. 

1  We  have  slightly  increased  our  food  allowance,  but  we  feel 
that  it  would  take  weeks  of  such  feeding  to  make  up  for  arrears. 
I  went  out  late  to-night  and,  as  usual,  inspected  our  biscuit 
tank  ;  it  looked  so  healthy  that  I  suggested  a  biscuit  all  round. 
There  was  loud  applause  from  the  tent,  and  we  munched  away 
at  our  small  extra  meal  with  immense  joy. 

1  Ever  since  the  warmer  weather  set  in  we  have  had  to  be 
very  careful  to  keep  our  provisions  out  of  the  sun's  rays.  Our 
first  warning  was  when  an  ominous  splash  on  the  canvas  showed 
where  the  grease  of  the  pemmican  had  melted  its  way  through. 
Since  then  this  class  of  food  has  been  put  in  the  middle  and 
banked  round  with  sugar  and  other  non-meltable  articles  j  and 
after  supper  every  night  the  ready  provision-bag  is  buried  under 
the  snow.  In  spite  of  such  precautions,  we  are  rather  afraid  that 
our  seal-meat  has  suffered  from  the  heat,  and  that  it  is  not  so 
anti-scorbutic  as  it  was  ;  our  scurvy  symptoms  for  the  last  few 
days  have  remained  about  the  same,  no  better  and  no  worse.' 

'January  24. — Things  are  still  looking  well.  Shackleton 
remains  about  the  same ;  he  is  having  a  cruel  time,  but  each 
march  brings  us  nearer  safety.  The  overcast  weather  still 
holds,  and  we  cannot  see  the  main  land,  although,  to  our 
great  joy,  we  caught  a  glimpse  of  the  Bluff  to  the  north  this 
afternoon. 

1  We  have  got  on  to  a  new  form  of  surface  which  makes 
the  pulling  very  wearisome.  There  is  a  thin  crust  an  inch  or 
so  beneath  the  soft  snow  surface  ;  this  crust  is  almost  sufficient 
to  bear  our  weight,  but  not  quite  ;  the  consequence  is  that  as 
one  steps  on  it,  one  is  held  up  until  the  whole  weight  comes  on 
the  advanced  foot,  when  the  crust  breaks  and  one  is  let  down 
some  three  or  four  inches.  To  go  on  breaking  the  surface  like 
this  throughout  a  long  day  is  extremely  tiring.  Such  work 
would  finish  Shackleton  in  no  time,  but  luckily  he  is  able  to 
go  on  ski  and  avoid  the  jars  altogether.     In  spite  of  our  present 


i9o3]  NEARING  HOME  85 

disbelief  in  ski,  one  is  bound  to  confess  that  if  we  get  back 
safely  Shackleton  will  owe  much  to  the  pair  he  is  now  using.' 

'January  25. — At  last  we  have  sunshine  again  and  a  grand 
opportunity  for  sketches  and  angles.  The  surface  is  bad  and 
the  work  increasingly  heavy,  but  Wilson  and  I  are  determined 
to  leave  as  little  as  possible  to  chance  and  to  get  our  invalid 
along  as  quickly  as  his  state  will  allow.  We  start  him  off 
directly  our  breakfast  is  over,  and  whilst  we  are  packing  up 
camp  he  gets  well  ahead,  so  that  he  is  able  to  take  things  easy ; 
we  follow  on  and  gradually  catch  him  up,  and  after  lunch  the 
same  procedure  is  adopted.  At  the  night  halt  he  sits  quietly 
while  the  tent  is  pitched,  and  only  goes  into  it  when  all  is 
prepared.  He  feels  his  inactivity  very  keenly,  poor  chap,  and 
longs  to  do  his  share  of  the  work,  but  luckily  he  has  sense 
enough  to  see  the  necessity  of  such  precaution. 

'  The  Bluff  looks  delightfully  close  in  the  bright  sunshine, 
but  the  depot  must  still  be  twenty  or  thirty  miles  away.  Just 
before  we  camped  to-night  we  could  see  a  little  round  cloud 
over  the  centre  of  the  Bluff  ridge,  and  as  we  "rose  "  it  further, 
we  made  it  out  to  be  the  smoke  of  Erebus  ;  it  was  cheerful  to 
think  that  here  was  something  which  was  beyond  the  ship  j  it 
is  more  than  a  hundred  miles  away  from  us,  but  we  are  too 
well  accustomed  to  see  things  at  a  distance  to  treat  this  fact  as 
wonderful.' 

1  January  26. — Plodding  on  in  our  usual  style  this  afternoon, 
we  suddenly  saw  a  white  line  ahead,  and  drawing  closer  found 
a  sledge  track ;  it  must  have  been  Barne's,  on  his  return  from 
his  survey  work  to  the  west.  Thinking  over  it  to-night,  it  is 
wonderful  what  that  track  told  us.  We  could  see  that  there 
had  been  six  men  with  two  sledges,  and  that  all  the  former  had 
been  going  sound  and  well  on  ski ;  the  sledge  runners  had 
been  slightly  clogged.  From  the  state  of  the  track  it  was 
evident  that  they  had  passed  about  four  days  before  on  the 
homeward  route,  and  from  the  zigzagging  of  the  course  we 
argued  that  the  weather  must  have  been  thick  at  the  time. 
Slight  discolouration  of  the  snow  showed  that  two  or  three 
had  been  wearing  leather  boots,  and  so  on :  every  imprint  in 


86       THE   VOYAGE   OF   THE    'DISCOVERY'       [Jan. 

the  soft  snow  added  some  small  fact,  and  the  whole  made  an 
excellent  detective  study.  The  main  point  is  that  we  know 
now,  as  certainly  as  if  we  had  been  told,  that  Barne  and  his 
party  are  safe  and  in  good  health,  and  this  is  no  small  relief 
after  our  own  experiences.' 

'January  27. — The  temperature  has  again  fallen  to  zero, 
but  it  has  been  brisk  and  pleasant  in  the  sun.  Old  and  familiar 
landmarks  have  been  showing  up  one  by  one.  Erebus  raised 
its  head  above  the  Bluff  range ;  Terror  opened  out  to  the  east ; 
the  western  range  developed  into  better-known  shape.  It  has 
been  grand  to  watch  it  all.  We  calculate  to  get  to  the  depot 
to-morrow,  and  have  been  wondering  whether  we  shall  find  all 
the  good  things  we  expect.' 

'■January  28. — Things  did  not  look  so  bright  this  morning  ; 
low,  suspicious-looking  clouds  came  up  from  the  south  with  a 
bitterly  cold  wind,  and  soon  they  were  about  us,  obscuring 
everything.  Shackleton  had  a  bad  return  of  his  cough,  but 
said  he  thought  he  could  manage  to  get  along ;  so  we  spread 
our  sail  and  proceeded.  One  has  to  be  prepared  for  very  quick 
changes  in  these  parts,  and  by  nine  o'clock  the  whole  sky  had 
cleared  again,  and  the  wind  had  gone  round  to  W.S.W. ;  this 
was  an  awkward  angle  for  our  sail,  and  resulted  in  frequent 
capsizes  of  the  sledges,  which  brought  a  considerable  strain  on 
our  tempers.  We  hoped  to  reach  the  depot  by  lunch,  but  it 
was  an  hour  after  that  meal  before  Shackleton,  who  was  ahead, 
spotted  the  flag,  and  we  turned  our  course  to  make  for  it.  As 
can  be  imagined,  the  last  of  the  march  was  as  near  a  rush  as 
our  tired  legs  could  command.  At  length  and  at  last  we  have 
reached  the  land  of  plenty ;  the  one  great  and  pressing  evil 
will  grip  us  no  more. 

1  Directly  our  tent  was  up  we  started  our  search  amongst 
the  snow-heaps  with  childish  glee.  One  after  another  our 
treasures  were  brought  forth  :  oil  enough  for  the  most  lavish 
expenditure,  biscuit  that  might  have  lasted  us  for  a  month, 
and,  finally,  a  large  brown  provision-bag  which  we  knew  would 
contain  more  than  food  alone.  We  have  just  opened  this 
provision-bag  and  feasted  our  eyes  on  the  contents.     There 


i9o3]  DEPOT    'A'  87 

are  two  tins  of  sardines,  a  large  tin  of  marmalade,  soup  squares, 
pea  soup,  and  many  another  delight  that  already  make  our 
mouths  water.  For  each  one  of  us  there  is  some  special  trifle 
which  the  forethought  of  our  kind  people  has  provided,  mine 
being  an  extra  packet  of  tobacco ;  and  last,  but  not  least,  there 
are  a  whole  heap  of  folded  letters  and  notes — billets-doux 
indeed.     I  wonder  if  a  mail  was  ever  more  acceptable. 

1  All  the  news  seems  to  be  good  ;  the  weather  at  the  ship 
has  been  wonderfully  warm  and  fine,  and  the  glare  of  the  sun 
so  great  that  our  people  have  had  to  wear  goggles  at  their 
work.  After  long  and  trying  labour  Royds  tells  me  he  has 
succeeded  in  rescuing  all  the  boats,  though  not  without 
damage.  Armitage  has  not  returned,  but  is  expected  soon. 
So  far  there  has  been  no  sign  of  a  return  of  scurvy.  Blissett 
has  discovered  an  Emperor  penguin's  egg,  and  his  messmates 
expect  him  to  be  knighted.  With  all  this  to  gossip  about,  we 
are  a  pretty  cheerful  party  to-night,  and  I  can  only  write 
scrappily.  Meanwhile  our  hoosh  is  preparing ;  we  are  putting 
a  double  "  whack "  of  everything  into  the  cooking-pot,  and 
when  in  doubt  as  to  what  is  double,  we  put  in  treble.  The 
smell  of  this  savoury  mess  is  already  arising,  so  I  cease.' 

''January  29. — I  intended  to  finish  writing  up  my  diary 
last  night,  but  I  couldn't,  and  I'm  afraid  it's  no  use  trying  to 
disguise  the  fact  that  this  was  due  to  nothing  but  a  condition 
of  horrible  surfeit.  The  tale  is  really  lamentable  ;  we  have 
got  into  a  habit  of  eating  our  food  in  the  most  wolfish  fashion, 
and  last  night  no  sooner  was  our  first  pannikin  of  hoosh  served 
out  than  it  was  gone,  the  unusual  second  pannikin  vanished 
almost  as  quickly,  and  even  when  it  came  to  the  hitherto  un- 
known third,  there  was  not  much  slackening  in  the  pace. 
Then,  having  exhausted  the  contents  of  the  inner  cooking-pot, 
in  almost  less  time  than  it  takes  to  tell,  we  passed  on  to  the 
thickest  brew  of  cocoa  with  "lashings"  of  jam  and  biscuit. 
Supper  did  not  last  more  than  twenty  minutes,  but  the  amount 
we  put  away  in  that  time  would  have  excited  the  envy  of  any 
gourmand. 

*  For  the   first   half-hour   everything    was   pure  joy  ;    we 


88       THE   VOYAGE   OF  THE   'DISCOVERY5      [Jan. 

revelled  in  the  sense  of  repletion,  and  read  once  more  all  the 
good  news  that  had  come  from  the  ship.  But  after  this  there 
slowly  crept  on  us  a  feeling  that  something  was  going  wrong  ; 
our  clothes  seemed  to  be  getting  extraordinarily  tight,  and  the 
only  conclusion  we  could  come  to  was  that  the  concentrated 
food  was  continuing  to  swell. 

'  For  me  at  least  discomfort  speedily  gave  place  to  acute 
suffering.  From  a  sitting  position  I  lowered  myself  until  I  was 
stretched  out  at  full  length,  but  this  did  not  ease  matters  at  all, 
and,  with  many  groans,  I  was  obliged  to  hoist  myself  to  my 
knees,  and,  later,  to  as  near  a  standing  position  as  I  could 
assume  in  the  confined  space  of  our  small  tent.  In  this  trying 
attitude  I  remained  until  explosion  seemed  so  imminent  that  I 
was  forced  to  gasp,  "  For  heaven's  sake,  undo  the  door,"  and 
directly  the  string  was  untied  I  dived  out  with  a  feeling  that 
nothing  less  than  the  vault  of  heaven  could  hold  me. 

'  But  if  I  expected  relief  outside  it  was  very  slow  in 
coming.  Round  and  round  our  small  tent  I  paced  with 
measured  tread  until  the  minutes  grew  into  hours,  a  well- 
beaten  track  had  been  worn,  and  I  began  to  wonder  whether  I 
should  ever  return  to  a  sense  of  normal  dimensions.  I  don't 
think  I  have  ever  spent  a  more  unpleasant  time,  and  it  did  not 
make  matters  easier  to  know  that  it  was  entirely  the  result  of 
my  own  greediness.  Moreover,  although  Shackleton  had  not 
been  in  a  fit  state  to  over-indulge  himself  as  I  had  done,  I  felt 
distinctly  aggrieved  that  Wilson  had  not  been  obliged  to  join 
me  in  my  midnight  walk,  and  such  sympathy  as  I  got  from 
these  others  very  thinly  disguised  their  inclination  to  find  the 
whole  incident  extremely  amusing. 

1  However,  when  at  length  my  pangs  subsided  sufficiently 
to  allow  me  to  return  to  the  tent  I  had  some  revenge,  for  as  I 
was  about  to  enter,  Wilson  realised  that  his  acutest  suffering  had 
only  been  deferred,  and  as  I  approached  he  burst  into  the  open 
with  a  pea-green  face,  and  I  had  some  consolation  in  knowing 
that  we  had  changed  places.  It  will  be  a  long  time  before  any 
of  us  over-eat  ourselves  again,  and  it  is  certainly  an  object- 
lesson  on  the  effects  of  hunger  ;  but  one  of  the  most  curious 


1903]  SHACKLETON'S   RELAPSE  89 

points  is  that  at  the  worst,  when  we  felt  that  we  carried  a  great 
deal  more  than  we  ought,  and  were  suffering  in  consequence, 
we  still  craved  for  more.  Our  appetites  are  in  a  state  which 
it  seems  impossible  to  satisfy,  and  this  morning  we  are  as 
hungry  as  ever. 

'A  few  hours  of  fitful  sleep  followed  this  uncomfortable 
experience,  and  we  awoke  to  find  a  heavy  blizzard  and  the 
usual  obscurity  without.  The  first  thought  of  pushing  onward 
was  speedily  abandoned  when  we  found  that  Shackleton  had 
relapsed  into  the  worst  condition.  To  the  reaction  from  the 
excitement  of  last  night  is  added  the  most  trying  condition  of 
weather.  The  result  is  very  dreadful.  Our  poor  patient  is 
again  shaken  with  violent  fits  of  coughing  and  is  gasping  for 
breath  ;  it  looks  very  serious.' 

1 Later. — There  is  no  doubt  Shackleton  is  extremely  ill; 
his  breathing  has  become  more  stertorous  and  laboured,  his 
face  looks  pinched  and  worn,  his  strength  is  very  much 
reduced,  and  for  the  first  time  he  has  lost  his  spirit  and  grown 
despondent.  It  is  terrible  to  have  to  remain  idle  knowing  that 
we  can  do  nothing  to  help.  I  have  talked  to  Wilson  to-night, 
who  thinks  matters  are  very  critical,  and  advises  pushing  on  to 
the  ship  at  all  hazards.  The  only  chance  of  improvement  lies 
in  a  change  of  weather,  and  if  this  blizzard  continues  the  worst 
consequences  may  ensue.  We  have  enough  food  now  to  carry 
him  on  the  sledge,  but  to-night  one  may  well  doubt  whether 
he  will  be  well  enough  for  that.  It  is  a  great  disappointment ; 
last  night  we  thought  ourselves  out  of  the  wood  with  all  our 
troubles  behind  us,  and  to-night  matters  seem  worse  than 
ever.  Luckily  Wilson  and  I  are  pretty  fit,  and  we  have  lots 
of  food.' 

1 January  30. — Shackleton  scarcely  slept  at  all  last  night ; 
his  paroxysms  of  coughing  grew  less  only  from  his  increasing 
weakness.  This  morning  he  was  livid  and  speechless,  and  his 
spirits  were  very  low.  He  revived  a  little  after  breakfast,  and 
we  felt  that  our  only  chance  was  to  get  him  going  again.  It 
took  him  nearly  twenty  minutes  to  get  out  of  the  tent  and  on 
to    his   ski  ;    everything    was    done  in  the    most    laboured 


9o       THE   VOYAGE   OF   THE    'DISCOVERY'       [Jan. 

fashion,  painful  to  watch.  Luckily  the  weather  had  cleared, 
and,  though  there  was  a  stiff  south-westerly  breeze  and  some 
drift,  the  sun  was  shining  brightly.  At  last  he  was  got  away, 
and  we  watched  him  almost  tottering  along  with  frequent  pain- 
ful halts. 

1  Re-sorting  our  provisions,  in  half  an  hour  we  had  packed 
our  camp,  set  our  sail,  and  started  with  the  sledges.  It  was 
not  long  before  we  caught  our  invalid,  who  was  so  exhausted 
that  we  thought  it  wiser  he  should  sit  on  the  sledges,  where 
for  the  remainder  of  the  forenoon,  with  the  help  of  our  sail, 
we  carried  him.  After  lunch  he  was  better,  and  in  one  way 
and  another  we  have  brought  off  a  very  long  march.  If  he  can 
only  sleep  to-night  there  is  a  chance  of  further  improvement ; 
much  depends  on  this.  It  is  all  very  anxious  work  ;  if  there 
is  no  improvement  I  half  think  of  pushing  on  to  the  ship  for 
assistance.  Wilson  thinks  that  the  relapse  is  mainly  due  to 
the  blizzard,  and  doubts  if  he  can  stand  another ;  one  would 
give  much  to  ensure  three  or  four  fine  days.  Nothing  could 
be  better  than  the  weather  to-night,  and  the  surface  is 
excellent.  Just  here  it  is  swept  hard  by  the  wind,  and  the 
relief  of  treading  on  something  solid  and  firm  is  enormous.  I 
did  not  fully  realise  what  terribly  bad  surfaces  we  had  been 
struggling  with  until  we  got  back  on  this  hard  one.' 

1  February  i. — For  two  days  the  weather  has  been  glorious, 
and  has  had  a  wonderful  effect  on  our  invalid,  who  certainly 
has  great  recuperative  powers.  He  managed  to  sleep  a  little 
last  night,  and  to-day  has  kept  going  on  his  ski.  After  the 
last  halt  he  had  an  attack  of  vertigo  and  fell  outside  the  tent, 
which  alarmed  us  greatly ;  but  after  about  ten  minutes  it 
passed  off,  and  to-night  he  is  better  again. 

1  All  day  we  have  been  travelling  along  outside  the  White 
Island.  So  many  parties  have  passed  to  and  fro  to  the  depot 
that  there  is  now  a  regular  beaten  track,  and  one's  eye  can 
follow  this  highway  for  miles  with  a  very  cheering  effect.  This 
afternoon  to  the  north  we  had  a  glorious  view  of  Erebus 
and  Terror  ;  the  smoke  of  the  former  trailed  away  in  a  long 
streamer  to  the  east,  and  most   curiously  a   second   similar 


i9o3]  THE   LAST   LAP  91 

streamer  floated  away  from  the  summit  of  Terror  ;  one  could 
have  sworn  that  both  mountains  were  active.' 

'  February  2. — Awaking  to  another  fine  day,  we  saw  at  last 
the  prospect  of  an  end  to  our  troubles,  and  since  that  we  have 
got  off  a  long  march  and  cannot  now  be  more  than  ten  or 
twelve  miles  from  home.  It  was  not  till  the  afternoon  that  we 
surmounted  a  slight  rise  and  altered  our  course  in  passing 
around  the  corner  of  the  White  Island ;  as  we  did  so  the 
old  familiar  outline  of  our  friendly  peninsula  burst  on  our 
view ;  there  stood  Castle  Rock  like  some  great  boulder 
dropped  from  the  skies,  and  there  to  the  left  the  sharp  cone 'of 
Observation  Hill.  Almost  one  could  imagine  the  figures  on  it 
looking  eagerly  out  in  our  direction.  Away  to  the  west  were 
all  the  well-known  landmarks  which  led  back  to  the  vast 
western  range,  and  to-night,  therefore,  on  every  side  we  have 
suggestions  of  home. 

1  That  it  is  none  too  soon  is  evident.  We  are  as  near 
spent  as  three  persons  can  well  be.  If  Shackleton  has  shown 
a  temporary  improvement,  we  know  by  experience  how  little 
confidence  we  can  place  in  it,  and  how  near  he  has  been  and 
still  is  to  a  total  collapse.  As  for  Wilson  and  myself,  we  have 
scarcely  liked  to  own  how  "  done "  we  are,  and  how  greatly 
the  last  week  or  two  has  tried  us.  We  have  known  that  our 
scurvy  has  been  advancing  again  with  rapid  strides,  but  as  we 
could  do  nothing  more  to  prevent  it,  we  have  not  looked 
beyond  the  signs  that  have  made  themselves  obvious.  Wilson 
has  suffered  from  lameness  for  many  a  day  ;  the  cause  was 
plain,  and  we  knew  it  must  increase.  Each  morning  he  has 
vainly  attempted  to  disguise  a  limp,  and  his  set  face  has 
shown  me  that  there  is  much  to  be  gone  through  before  the 
first  stiffness  wears  off.  As  for  myself,  for  some  time  I  have 
hurried  through  the  task  of  changing  my  foot-gear  in  an 
attempt  to  forget  that  my  ankles  are  considerably  swollen. 
One  and  all  we  want  rest  and  peace,  and,  all  being  well, 
to-morrow,  thank  Heaven,  we  shall  get  them.' 

At  this  point  my  sledge  diary  comes  to  an  end,  for  on  the 
following  day  I  had  neither  time  nor  inclination  to  write,  but 


92       THE   VOYAGE   OF  THE   'DISCOVERY'      [Jan. 

the  incidents  of  such  a  day  leave  too  deep  an  impression  to 
need  the  aid  of  any  note  to  recall  them. 

Nature  wore  its  brightest  aspect  to  welcome  us  home,  and 
early  in  the  brilliant,  cloudless  morning  we  packed  up  our  camp 
for  the  last  time,  and  set  our  faces  towards  Observation  Hill. 
We  had  plodded  on  for  some  hours  when  two  specks  appeared 
ahead,  which  at  first  we  took  to  be  penguins,  but  soon  made 
out  were  persons  hurrying  towards  us.  They  proved  to  be 
Skelton  and  Bernacchi.  We  had  been  reported  early  by 
watchers  on  the  hills  ;  these  two  had  hastened  out  to  meet  us, 
and  soon  we  were  gathered  in  our  small  tent  whilst  cocoa  was 
made,  and  we  listened  to  a  ceaseless  stream  of  news,  for  now 
not  only  had  all  our  other  travellers  returned  safe  and  sound 
with  many  a  tale  to  tell,  but  our  relief-ship,  the  'Morning/ 
had  arrived,  bringing  a  whole  year's  news  of  the  civilised 
world. 

And  so  at  our  last  sledging  lunch,  and  during  the  easy 
march  which  followed,  we  gradually  gathered  those  doings  of 
the  great  world  which  had  happened  between  December  1901 
and  December  1902,  and,  as  can  be  imagined,  these  kept  our 
thoughts  full  until  we  rounded  the  cape  to  see  once  more  our 
beloved  ship. 

Though  still  held  fast  in  her  icy  prison,  our  good  vessel 
looked  trim  and  neat.  She  was  fully  prepared  to  face  again 
the  open  seas,  and  the  freshly  painted  side  glistened  in  the 
sunlight.  A  fairer  sight  could  scarcely  meet  our  snow-tried 
eyes  ;  and  to  mark  the  especial  nature  of  the  occasion  a  brave 
display  of  bunting  floated  gently  in  the  breeze,  while,  as  we 
approached,  the  side  and  the  rigging  were  thronged  with  our 
cheering  comrades. 

But  how  can  I  describe  this  home-coming ;  how  we  again 
clasped  the  hands  of  our  friends  ;  how  our  eyes  wandered  about 
amongst  familiar  faces  and  objects  ;  how  we  dived  into  our 
comfortable  quarters  to  find  every  want  forestalled  and  every 
trouble  lifted  from  our  shoulders  by  our  kind  companions ; 
how  for  the  first  time  for  three  months  we  shaved  our  ragged 
chins  and  sponged  ourselves  in  steaming  hot  water ;  how  in 


i9o3]  OUR  WELCOME  93 

the  unwonted  luxury  of  clean  raiment  we  sat  at  a  feast  which 
realised  the  glories  of  our  day-dreams  ;  how  in  the  intervals  of 
chatter  and  gossip  we  scanned  again  the  glad  tidings  of  the 
home-land ;  and  how  at  last  in  the  comfort  of  our  bunks,  the 
closely  written  sheets  fluttered  from  our  hands,  and  we  sank 
into  the  dreamless  sleep  of  exhaustion  ? 

It  was  a  welcome  home  indeed,  yet  at  the  time  to  our  worn 
and  dulled  senses  it  appeared  unreal  :  it  seemed  too  good  to 
be  true  that  all  our  anxieties  had  so  completely  ended,  and  that 
rest  for  brain  and  limb  was  ours  at  last. 

And  so  our  southern  sledge  journey  came  to  an  end  on 
February  3,  1903,  when  for  ninety-three  days  we  had  plodded 
with  ever-varying  fortune  over  a  vast  snow-field  and  slept 
beneath  the  fluttering  canvas  of  a  tent.  During  that  time  we 
had  covered  960  statute  miles,  with  a  combination  of  success 
and  failure  in  our  objects  which  I  have  endeavoured  to  set 
forth  in  these  pages. 

If  we  had  not  achieved  such  great  results  as  at  one  time 
we  had  hoped  for,  we  knew  at  least  that  we  had  striven  and 
endured  with  all  our  might. 


94         THE   VOYAGE   OF    THE    'DISCOVERY'  [1902- 


CHAPTER   XV 

WHAT    HAD    HAPPENED    DURING    OUR   ABSENCE    IN    THE    SOUTH 

Royds'  Journey  to  CapeCrozier — The  King's  Birthday — Athletic  Sports — 
The  Western  Journey— Difficulties  amongst  the  Mountains — Ascent  of 
the  Ferrar  Glacier — Approaching  the  Summit — First  Party  on  the 
Interior  of  Victoria  Land — Return  of  Western  Party — Summer  Thaw- 
ing— About  the  Islands  to  the  South-West — Curious  Ice  Formations — 
Recovery  of  the  Boats— Preparing  for  Sea  —History  of  the  Relief 
Expedition — Arrival  of  the  '  Morning.' 

Up  along  the  hostile  mountains  where  the 
Hair-poised  snow-slide  shivers. — Kipling. 

As  cold  waters  to  a  thirsty  soul, 

So  is  good  news  from  a  far  country. — Proverbs. 

During  our  long  absence  in  the  south  much  work  had  been 
done  both  on  board  the  ship  and  by  parties  travelling  in 
various  directions,  wherefore  it  can  be  imagined  that  I  set 
myself  with  no  little  eagerness  to  gather  the  particulars  of  this 
employment,  and  especially  to  learn  how  it  had  fared  with 
those  who  had  undertaken  the  more  extended  journey  to  the 
west. 

It  was  soon  evident  that  since  our  departure  the  sledging 
resources  of  the  ship  had  been  utilised  to  the  fullest  extent ; 
the  ship  herself  had  become  the  centre  of  the  busiest  activity, 
and  throughout  the  summer  parties  had  been  going  and 
coming,  ever  adding  something  to  the  knowledge  of  our 
surroundings. 

On  November  2,  Royds  had  again  journeyed  to  Cape 
Crozier  to  see  how  matters  went  with  the  Emperor  penguins, 


i9o3]      ANOTHER   TRIP   TO   CAPE   CROZIER  95 

and  this  short  trip  produced  one  or  two  interesting  results.  It 
can  be  seen  from  the  chart  that  from  the  elevated  land  at  this 
cape  an  excellent  view  of  the  Ross  Sea  can  be  obtained,  and  it 
will  be  remembered  that  Royds  on  his  last  visit,  little  more 
than  a  fortnight  before,  had  seen  this  sheet  of  water  swept 
clear  of  ice.  We  had  thought  that  this  was  the  last  of  the  ice 
in  this  direction,  and  that  it  would  have  continued  to  drift  to 
the  north  ;  but  now,  to  his  astonishment,  he  found  the  whole 
sea  thickly  packed,  and  although  the  pack  sometimes  drifted 
away  from  the  land,  leaving  some  miles  of  open  water,  it  was 
evident  that  no  general  exodus  had  yet  commenced. 

Descending  to  the  Emperor  rookery,  he  found  several 
hundred  adult  birds,  but  not  a  single  chick  except  those  which 
lay  dead  on  the  floe  ;  this  was  a  most  surprising  fact,  as  it 
seemed  impossible  that  the  small  downy  chicks  of  a  fortnight 
before  could  have  already  taken  to  the  sea.  It  was  not  until 
the  following  year  that  we  learnt  the  interesting  manner  in 
which  these  small  creatures  leave  their  birthplace. 

Pushing  farther  on,  Royds  found  that  he  must  have  just 
missed  the  occupation  of  the  Adelie  penguin  rookery.  These 
small  birds  had  returned  in  their  thousands,  and  were  just 
commencing  to  lay  their  eggs ;  a  few  had  laid  their  second,  a 
larger  number  their  first,  but  the  majority  had  as  yet  laid  none 
at  all.  From  one  point  of  view  the  moment  could  not  have 
been  more  opportune,  and  it  was  not  long  before  the  party  were 
enjoying  the  greatest  delicacy  which  the  Antarctic  Regions  can 
afford.  In  their  good  fortune,  moreover,  they  did  not  forget 
their  comrades,  but  loaded  their  sledges  with  a  supply  of  eggs 
sufficient  to  provide  at  least  one  feast  for  those  on  board  the 
ship.  It  was  on  taking  a  last  look  at  the  spot  where  the 
Emperor  penguins  had  reared  their  young  that  Blissett  called 
Royds'  attention  to  a  rounded  object  almost  buried  in  the 
snow,  which  on  being  dug  out  proved  to  be  an  egg — the  first 
that  had  been  found.  The  joy  was  great,  and  soon  after  the 
party  hastened  back  with  their  treasure. 

Meanwhile  on  board  the  ship  all  efforts  were  devoted  to  the 
preparations  of  the  western  party,  and  it  was  hoped  that  in 


96        THE  VOYAGE   OF    THE   <  DISCOVERY '   [1902- 

spite  of  the  difficulties  of  providing  for  the  large  numbers  who 
were  to  be  employed,  all  would  be  ready  before  the  end  of  the 
month.  Progress  was  so  satisfactory  that  it  was  decided  that, 
November  9  being  the  King's  birthday,  there  should  be  a 
general  holiday,  and  it  seemed  no  more  fitting  occasion  could 
present  itself  for  holding  the  athletic  sports  which  we  had  often 
discussed.  Accordingly,  in  the  early  morning  the  ship  was 
dressed  with  flags,  the  large  silken  Union  Jack  was  hoisted  at 
Hut  Point,  and  marks  were  placed  and  arrangements  made 
for  the  various  competitions.  The  events  were  entered  into 
with  the  keenest  delight,  and  as  they  were  of  a  somewhat  novel 
character  for  English  sports,  some  of  them  deserve  notice. 

Since  our  men  had  become  expert  on  ski,  competitions 
connected  with  them  were  bound  to  be  included ;  in  the  flat 
ski  race  it  was  impossible  to  say  who  would  win,  as  so  many 
could  now  go  at  a  great  pace  ;  for  the  first  half  mile  this  event 
was  wildly  exciting,  the  leaders  passing  and  repassing  one 
another ;  but  after  that,  staying  powers  showed  up,  and  the 
race  was  won  by  Evans  'in  a  canter.'  Next  came  a  ski  race 
down  one  of  the  steep  hill-slopes  which  had  given  us  so  much 
amusement  in  the  previous  autumn  ;  here  of  course  it  •  was 
skill  and  dexterity  rather  than  strength  which  won  the  prize. 

A  very  sporting  event  was  the  half-mile  race  on  foot  between 
teams  of  officers  and  men  dragging  heavy  loaded  sledges ;  at 
the  start  the  teams  went  off  at  a  gallop,  but  this  pace  was  very 
soon  reduced,  and  as  the  officers  staggered  back  and  won  by  a 
small  margin  they  felt  that  they  had  had  enough  racing  to  last 
them  for  a  long  time. 

Perhaps  the  keenest  interest  had  been  taken  in  the  toboggan 
race.  For  this  the  men  had  entered  in  pairs,  and  each  pair 
had  been  obliged  to  provide  their  own  toboggan,  subject  to 
the  rule  that  no  sledge,  or  part  of  a  sledge,  and  no  ski  could  be 
used.  The  start  was  to  be  made  from  high  up  the  hillside, 
and  as  the  time  for  it  approached  there  were  gradually  assem- 
bled perhaps  the  queerest  lot  of  toboggans  that  had  ever  been 
seen  together.  The  greater  number  were  made  from  old  boxes 
and   cask  staves,  but  the  manner  in  which  these  were  put 


i9o3l         KING'S  BIRTHDAY  CELEBRATION  97 

together  and  the  ideas  they  embodied  were  widely  divergent ; 
at  last  our  canny  Scotch  carpenter's  mate  arrived  with  a  far 
more  pretentious  article,  though  fashioned  from  the  same 
material.  He  had  devoted  his  skill  in  secret  to  making  what 
was  really  a  very  passable  sledge,  and  when  he  and  his  com- 
panion proceeded  to  secure  themselves  to  this  dark  horse  the 
result  seemed  a  foregone  conclusion.  But  after  the  start  it 
was  seen  that  these  worthies  had  over-reached  themselves,  for 
though  at  first  they  shot  ahead,  the  speed  was  altogether  too 
great ;  in  a  brief  space  they  lost  control  of  their  machine,  and 
a  moment  after  were  rolling  head- over-heels  in  clouds  of  snow, 
and  whilst  the  hare  thus  disported  itself  the  tortoises  slid  past 
and  won  the  race. 

Another  competition  that  had  to  be  arranged  and  managed 
with  care  was  the  rifle-shooting  match.  On  this  occasion 
there  was  keen  competition  to  hit  the  bull's-eye,  and  amongst 
the  competitors  was  our  redoubtable  cook,  who  claimed  to 
be  a  marksman  of  the  highest  order.  But  by  this  time 
the  cook's  capacity  for  the  narration  of  fables  had  become 
proverbial.  It  first  became  evident  from  varying  accounts 
of  the  number  of  places  in  which  he  had  been  born,  and 
later,  when  the  long  hours  of  the  winter  had  given  him  an 
opportunity  of  relating  his  adventures  in  many  countries,  one 
of  the  sailors  computed  that  the  sum  total  of  these  thrilling 
experiences  must  have  extended  over  a  period  of  five  hundred 
and  ninety  years,  which,  as  he  said,  was  a  fair  age  even  for  a 
cook.  So  when  this  winner  of  many  competitions  possessed 
himself  of  a  rifle  at  the  firing-point,  the  markers  disappeared 
with  extraordinary  promptitude  behind  the  butt,  and  after  the 
first  two  bullets  had  buried  themselves  in  that  obstruction  the 
cook  was  informed  that  whoever  won  the  prize  the  honours  of 
the  day  were  certainly  his,  and  it  would  be  quite  unnecessary 
for  him  to  exert  himself  further. 

And  so  the  King's  birthday  was  kept  merrily  on  board  the 
1  Discovery,'  and  the  first  Antarctic  athletic  meeting  was  pro- 
nounced by  all  to  have  been  a  distinct  success. 

By  November  29  the  preparations  for  the  western  journey 
voL.  11,  n 


98        THE   VOYAGE   OF   THE    'DISCOVERY'  [1902- 

had  been  completed,  and  it  was  a  formidable  party  that  set 
out  on  that  day  to  cross  McMurdo  Sound  and  attack  the 
mainland.  In  Armitage's  own  party  were  included  Skelton 
and  ten  men,  whilst  the  supports  consisted  of  Koettlitz, 
Ferrar,  and  Dellbridge,  with  six  men.  In  all  twenty-one 
souls  went  forth  to  try  to  surmount  that  grim-looking  barrier 
to  the  west.  I  have  already  pointed  out  that  Armitage's  plan, 
formed  on  the  observations  of  his  reconnaissance  journey,  was 
to  attempt  an  ascent  of  the  mountain  region  in  the  vicinity  of 
that  vast  pile  of  morainic  material  which  had  erroneously  been 
termed  the  '  Eskers.' 

In  pursuance  of  this  plan,  late  on  December  2,  the  party 
started  to  ascend  the  steep  snow-slope  which,  as  can  be  seen 
on  the  chart,  divides  two  masses  of  bare,  rocky  foothills,  and 
rises  to  a  plateau  separating  them  from  the  higher  mountains 
beyond. 

As  the  party  ascended  the  gradient  became  steeper,  and 
it  was  soon  necessary  to  divide  the  loads  and  make  double 
journeys  in  the  usual  tedious  manner  of  relay  work.  It  was 
not  until  the  7th  that  they  reached  the  summit  of  the  slope 
and  found  themselves  on  a  plateau  with  the  lofty  mountain 
range  in  front  and  the  high  granite  foothills  behind.  They 
were  now  at  a  height  of  5,000  feet.  The  mer  de  glace  on 
which  they  stood  seemed  to  have  an  outlet  far  to  the  south  ; 
there  was  another  over  which  they  had  ascended,  and  yet  a 
third  to  the  north-west,  which  appeared  to  them  the  most 
hopeful  direction  in  which  to  find  a  pass  to  the  west.  To  the 
south  of  this  outlet  there  rose  a  mass  of  magnificent  rocky 
cliffs,  which  Armitage  named  the  Cathedral  Rocks,  and  which 
he  thought  he  recognised  as  being  the  southern  boundary  of 
the  New  Harbour  Glacier  ;  it  was  this  glacier  which  had 
appeared  to  him  so  unpromising  in  the  lower  reaches,  and 
which  he  now  hoped  to  reach  at  some  higher  point. 

Advancing  over  a  wavy,  uneven  surface  of  neve,  they 
reached  the  vicinity  of  the  outlet  by  the  9th.  It  was  evident 
that  it  descended  steeply  into  the  New  Harbour  Glacier, 
which  in  future  I  shall  call  by  its  subsequent  name,  the  Ferrar 


i903l  THE   WESTERN   JOURNEY  99 

Glacier  ;  but,  in  order  to  see  its  details  more  clearly,  the 
officers  were  obliged  to  leave  the  camp  and  travel  some 
distance  to  a  more  elevated  position.  On  reaching  this,  they 
looked  directly  down  on  the  Ferrar  Glacier,  and  saw  that  it 
wound  its  way  between  high  rocky  cliffs  far  to  the  inland  ;  but 
the  prospect  of  reaching  this  and  of  travelling  on  its  surface 
did  not  at  this  time  look  hopeful. 

To  quote  Armitage's  report  :  '  After  putting  on  the  rope, 
which  Koettlitz  held,  I  went  as  close  to  the  edge  of  the  slope 
overlooking  the  pass  as  possible.  It  certainly  did  not  look 
promising.  Unfortunately,  I  could  not  see  its  juncture  with 
the  glacier.  After  consulting  Dr.  Koettlitz,  I  came  to  the 
conclusion  that  it  would  be  best  to  seek  a  passage  across 
the  western  range.  .  .  .  If  we  find  it  impossible  to  drag 
the  sledges  over  the  mountains,  we  must  try  the  glacier, 
although  Koettlitz  considers  that  it  would  be  madness  to 
attempt  it.'  This  was  an  unfortunate  decision,  and  delayed 
the  party  greatly.  It  appears  that  in  addition  to  the  uncertainty 
of  the  steep  road  which  led  to  it,  the  observers  on  this  occasion 
were  very  distrustful  of  the  appearance  of  the  glacier  itself ; 
the  blue  ice,  with  no  snow  on  its  surface,  apparently  promised 
great  dangers  and  difficulties.  However,  the  decision  being 
made,  on  the  10th  the  parties  separated,  the  supports  turning 
towards  the  ship,  whilst  the  main  party  continued  to  ascend 
the  rising  snow-slopes  which  led  towards  the  higher  mountains. 

The  slopes  quickly  increased  in  gradient,  and  the  ascent 
became  the  most  arduous  and  toilsome  work.  Armitage's 
report  says  :  '  The  following  was  our  mode  of  procedure  :  two 
men  carried  the  crowbar  and  two  ice-axes  up  the  slope  to  the 
available  length  of  rope  (about  180  feet).  The  crowbar  was 
then  driven  into  the  ice,  and  the  ice-axes  served  as  a  backing ; 
a  strong  lashing  connected  the  three.  A  small  tailed  block 
was  made  fast  to  the  crowbar,  the  Alpine  rope  rove  through  it, 
and  the  other  end  made  fast  to  a  sledge.  Eight  hands  then 
walked  downwards  with  the  upper  end  of  the  rope,  hauling 
the  sledge  upwards  as  they  did  so ;  two  men  guided  the  up- 
going  sledge,  and  when  it  arrived  at  the  top  it  was  secured, 


ioo      THE   VOYAGE   OF   THE    'DISCOVERY'   [1902- 

and  another  was  hauled  up.  Three  hauls  made  one  fleet  of 
the  four  sledges.'  After  proceeding  for  two  days  in  this 
fashion  and  reaching  a  height  of  6,000  feet,  they  suddenly 
found  further  progress  barred  by  an  outcrop  of  rock  j  '  beyond 
this  was  an  undulating  plain  in  which  we  could  see  large  ugly- 
looking  crevasses  and  holes.  To  my  intense  disappointment 
there  was  no  route  by  which  I  could  justifiably  lead  my  party.' 
They  had  little  difficulty  in  descending  the  steep  hillside 
towards  their  former  camps,  but,  delayed  by  blizzards,  it  was 
not  until  the  16th  that  they  could  make  a  fresh  examination 
of  the  pass  to  the  Ferrar  Glacier,  which  they  were  now  obliged 
to  consider  the  only  possible  route  to  the  west. 

At  this  time  the  party  were  by  no  means  in  a  pleasant 
position.  The  plateau  on  which  they  stood  was  1,800  feet 
above  the  glacier  which  they  wished  to  reach  ;  it  was  evident 
that  the  pass  which  lay  between,  and  which  they  now  called 
'  Descent  Pass,'  was  filled  with  snow,  but  how  steep  the  slope 
might  be,  or  how  broken  and  crevassed  its  surface,  they  could 
not  guess.  They  attempted  to  make  a  reconnaissance  without 
the  sledges,  but  after  descending  a  few  hundred  feet  found  the 
valley  so  filled  with  cloud  that  they  could  see  little  except  that 
the  slope  appeared  to  get  steeper  as  they  proceeded.  In  this 
quandary  they  determined  to  take  their  fortunes  in  their  hands, 
and,  starting  blindly  with  the  sledges  above,  to  trust  to  fortune 
to  land  them  safely  in  the  valley  below. 

Armitage  says :  '  I  had  the  sledges  lashed  two  and  two, 
abreast  of  one  another,  rope  breaks  on  each  runner,  and  I  told 
the  teams  to  use  the  bridles  as  extra  breaks  on  the  steeper 
parts.  Four  men  were  told  off  to  each  sledge  ;  Skelton,  Allan, 
Macfarlane,  and  I  led  the  way.  We  started  slowly,  but  the 
pace  gradually  increased  until  we  were  beyond  all  power  of 
stopping  ;  it  seemed  but  a  moment  before  we  were  brought  to 
rest  on  a  much  more  gradual  slope,  and  I  stood  up  to  find 
that  we  had  descended  630  feet  by  aneroid.  The  other  sledges 
came  down  after  us  with  equal  speed,  and  all  arrived  safely 
abreast  of  us.  From  this  spot  there  was  a  long  gentle  slope, 
and  then  another  fall  of  400  feet,  which,  however,  was  not  so 


i9o3]      ASCENT   OF  THE   FERRAR   GLACIER        101 

steep  as  the  first.'  And  so  at  length  the  party  stood  safely  on 
the  Ferrar  Glacier  at  a  spot  whence  its  valley  could  be  seen 
cutting  deeply  through  the  mountains,  while  its  surface 
seemed  to  offer  a  gradual  ascent  to  the  interior.  The  place 
on  which  they  stood  was  barely  2,000  feet  above  the  sea  level, 
but,  as  will  be  seen,  in  their  pioneer  efforts  to  reach  it  they 
had  been  forced  to  drag  their  heavy  sledges  over  much  difficult 
country,  and  had  at  one  time  reached  an  altitude  of  6,000  feet. 

The  route  taken  by  the  party  from  this  point  was  one 
which,  as  I  shall  relate  in  due  course,  I  travelled  myself  in  the 
following  season.  I  was  enabled  then  not  only  to  observe  it 
at  first  hand,  but  with  much  enlightenment  which  further 
experience  had  given  us.  The  result  of  personal  observation 
must  ever  be  more  satisfactory  than  an  attempt  to  reproduce 
the  impressions  of  others,  and  although  this  party  were  the 
first  to  see  and  describe  the  magnificent  scenes  of  this  glacial 
valley,  I  reserve  an  account  of  them  until  I  can  tell  of  that 
which  I  saw  with  my  own  eyes. 

In  the  following  year  I  was  able  to  traverse  this  glacier  at 
considerable  speed  and  to  treat  its  difficulties  and  obstacles 
lightly,  but  this,  of  course,  was  largely  due  to  the  fact  that  I 
was  travelling  over  a  route  which  was  to  some  extent  known. 
One  is  apt  to  forget  the  benefits  conferred  by  the  experience 
of  others,  and  therefore,  before  recounting  the  slow  and 
laborious  progress  of  this  party,  I  take  the  opportunity  of 
acknowledging  the  debt  which  we  owed  to  it. 

On  December  18  a  start  was  made  to  ascend  the  glacier, 
and  during  the  following  days  the  party  proceeded  with  great 
caution  ;  before  the  new  track  was  broken  Armitage  went 
ahead,  sounding  at  every  other  footstep  with  his  ice-axe. 
Their  route  gradually  ascended,  but  though  the  gradient  was 
irregular  it  was  never  steep ;  sometimes  they  were  travelling 
over  long  stretches  of  blue  ice  where  cracks  and  crevasses 
could  be  seen  and  avoided,  but  at  others,  the  surface  was 
covered  with  a  thin  and  treacherous  layer  of  soft  snow,  and 
here  the  greatest  care  had  to  be  taken,  as  it  was  obvious  that 
all  dangers  would  be  hidden.     On  such  soft  places,  too,  even 


102       THE   VOYAGE   OF   THE   'DISCOVERY'   [1902- 

a  small  gradient  meant  very  heavy  labour  with  the  sledges,  and 
nearly  every  day  it  was  necessary  to  divide  the  loads  and  take 
the  sledges  on  singly.  The  difficulty  of  advance  was  greatly 
hampered  by  the  weather ;  though  temperatures  were  high, 
the  wind  and  snow-drift  constantly  swept  down  the  valley  with 
great  force,  and  on  many  occasions  masses  of  cloud  hung 
about  the  valley  and  shut  off  all  view  of  the  surroundings.  In 
bad  weather  it  was  almost  impossible  to  proceed  in  a  country 
which  was  so  utterly  unknown,  and  where  it  was  necessary  to 
direct  a  course  with  a  view  to  avoiding  obstacles  which  were 
sometimes  seen  a  great  distance  ahead. 

On  the  23rd  they  had  reached  a  plateau  some  4,500  feet 
above  the  sea.  Here  the  glacier,  as  may  be  seen  on  the  chart, 
opens  out  into  a  broad  basin  turning  towards  the  right ;  from 
this  point  a  slight  descent  led  them  to  a  lower  level,  where  a 
moraine  of  immense  boulders  ran  transversely  across  the  basin. 
Christmas  Day  was  spent  amongst  the  huge  rocks  of  this 
moraine,  but  instead  of  the  bright,  cloudless  weather  which  at 
this  time  we  were  experiencing  in  the  south,  here  the  sky  was 
overcast  with  heavy  nimbus  cloud  and  all  day  long  fierce 
squalls  swept  down  the  valley ;  nor  had  this  party  the  sauce  of 
hunger  to  give  that  full  enjoyment  of  their  Christmas  fare 
which  went  so  far  to  mark  this  day  in  our  southern  calendar. 
But  in  spite  of  these  facts  the  season  seems  to  have  been 
celebrated  with  much  merriment. 

From  this  time  the  party  still  continued  to  ascend  :  at 
first  over  very  rough  wavy  ice,  where  the  sledges  skidded 
but  could  be  pulled  with  ease,  and  where  neither  fur  nor 
leather  boot  could  get  a  hold,  and  crampons  armed  with  steel 
points  had  to  be  worn  ;  later  they  came  again  to  snow  surfaces, 
and  on  these  they  turned  the  corner  and  faced  once  more  to 
the  west  to  rise  over  the  last  stretch  of  the  widening  glacier. 
The  rocky  boundaries  of  the  glacier  were  now  comparatively 
lower.  They  had  no  longer  frowning  cliffs  on  each  side; 
gradually  the  bare  land  seemed  to  be  sinking  beneath  the  level 
of  the  great  ice  mass,  and  only  the  higher  mountains  showed 
as  nunataks  above  the  vast  neve"  fields 


i9o3]     FIRST  EXPLORERS  OF  VICTORIA  LAND    103 

On  December  31  they  were  abreast  of  one  of  the  last  of 
these  isolated  summits,  and  as  it  formed  a  most  conspicuous 
landmark  they  determined  to  leave  at  its  foot  a  depot  of  a 
week's  provision.  They  were  able  to  approach  the  high 
weathered  basaltic  cliffs  with  ease,  and  found  a  sheltered 
position  amongst  the  rough  talus  heaps  at  its  base.  Continuing 
to  the  west,  they  were  faced  by  a  steep  rise  over  which  the 
surface  was  much  broken ;  but,  selecting  the  smoothest  route, 
they  were  able  to  surmount  this  obstacle,  when,  after  crossing 
some  wide  bridged  crevasses,  they  found  themselves  on  a 
plateau  which  continued  for  many  miles  to  a  second  steep  rise. 

New  Year's  Day  found  them  on  this  plateau  at  a  height  of 
7,500  feet;  the  temperature  had  fallen  to  — 20,  and  a  strong 
wind  was  blowing  from  the  W.S.W.  It  was  whilst  they  were 
marching  under  these  conditions  that  one  of  their  number, 
Macfarlane,  suddenly  collapsed.  Armitage  says  :  'At  first  I 
was  very  much  alarmed ;  he  could  neither  move  nor  speak, 
and  his  face,  which  had  turned  to  a  dull  grey,  looked  positively 
ghastly.  I  had  a  tent  pitched  immediately,  and  soon  the  colour 
began  to  flow  back  into  his  face.  He  then  complained  of 
pains  under  his  heart  and  shortness  of  breath,  but  these 
troubles  gradually  subsided.  Being  anxious  to  push  on,  after 
waiting  some  time,  I  decided  to  leave  half  the  party  in  camp 
and  continue  to  the  west  with  the  remainder.  I  came  to  the 
conclusion  that  Macfarlane's  breakdown  was  due  to  some  form 
of  mountain  sickness.' 

Proceeding  to  the  westward  the  advance  party  ascended 
another  very  steep  rise,  and  then  travelled  over  a  gradual 
slope,  at  the  top  of  which  they  camped  on  the  night  of 
January  3.  This  Armitage  decided  should  be  his  last  camp. 
They  had  now  reached  a  height  of  8,900  feet,  and  as  far  as 
they  could  see  in  every  direction  to  the  westward  of  them  there 
extended  a  level  plateau  ;  to  the  south  and  north  could  be 
seen  isolated  nunataks,  and  behind  them  showed  the  high 
mountains  which  they  had  passed.  On  the  5th  the  party  left 
their  camp  and  proceeded  to  the  south-west  for  some  miles  on 
ski.     Armitage  says :  ■  We  ascended  seventy  feet  in  the  first 


io4      THE  VOYAGE   OF   THE   'DISCOVERY5  [1902- 

two  miles;  this  was  the  highest  elevation  we  reached,  being 
about  9,000  feet.  We  then  proceeded  along  a  dead  level  for 
two  miles,  then  we  gradually  descended  thirty  feet  in  a  mile. 
At  this  point  we  stopped ;  the  weather  was  beautifully  clear, 
and  observations  showed  that  the  horizon  was  rather  below  our 
level  in  every  direction  except  to  the  north  and  north-east, 
whence  we  had  come.  On  all  sides  the  surface  was  quite 
smooth,  and  there  was  very  little  sign  of  wind  ;  it  looked  as 
though  the  plateau  on  which  we  stood  was  the  summit  of  the 
ice-cap.' 

On  the  6th  the  party  started  to  return,  and  whilst  descend- 
ing the  upper  falls  met  with  an  incident  which  shows  the 
treacherous  nature  of  the  irregular  snow-slopes  over  which 
they  were  travelling.  I  quote  the  story  from  Armitage's 
report :  '  We  descended  the  upper  falls  with  ease,  and  whilst 
crossing  the  smooth  ice  at  their  foot  I  was  talking  casually  to 
Skelton  when  I  suddenly  became  conscious  that  I  was  taking 
a  dive,  then  I  felt  a  violent  blow  on  my  right  thigh,  and  all  the 
breath  seemed  to  be  shaken  out  of  my  body.  Instinctively  I 
thrust  out  my  elbows  and  knees,  and  then  saw  that  I  was  some 
little  way  down  a  crevasse.  It  was  about  four  feet  wide  where 
I  was,  but  broadened  to  the  right  and  left  of  me;  below  it 
widened  into  a  huge  fathomless  cavern.  Skelton  sang  out  that 
my  harness  had  held,  and  threw  down  the  end  of  the  Alpine 
rope  with  a  bowline  in  it.  I  slipped  this  over  my  shoulders, 
and  was  hauled  up  with  a  series  of  jerks,  and  landed  on  the 
surface,  feeling  rather  as  though  I  had  been  cut  in  two  and 
with  not  a  gasp  left  in  me.  They  told  me  that  below  my  face 
had  appeared  to  them  to  be  covered  in  blood  ;  the  force  of 
my  fall  had  scattered  everyone  right  and  left  and  pulled  the 
sledges  up  to  the  brink  of  the  chasm,  so  that  I  was  let  down 
about  twelve  feet.  It  shook  me  up  very  much,  and  I  could 
only  hobble  very  lamely  after  the  sledges  as  we  proceeded  on 
towards  the  camp  where  Macfarlane  had  been  left.'  After  this 
the  party  continued  to  descend,  following  more  or  less  the 
track  by  which  they  had  come.  Macfarlane,  who  had  shown 
some   signs   of   improvement,   had  further   trouble   with   his 


1903]  THE   DESCENT  105 

breathing,  and  was  carried  for  most  of  the  way  on  the 
sledges  ;  but  it  soon  became  evident  that  there  was  nothing 
very  wrong  with  him,  and  that  he  was  more  alarmed  about 
himself  than  others  were  for  him. 

On  the  way  down,  visits  were  made  to  the  cliffs  on  each 
side,  and  specimens  of  the  rock  were  obtained  in  situ  as  well 
as  from  the  various  moraines  which  were  passed.  By  January  1 1 
the  party  were  well  on  towards  the  lower  reaches  of  the  glacier, 
and  they  found  that  the  temperature  of  the  valley  had  risen 
considerably  ;  it  was  frequently  above  400,  and  the  air  inside 
the  tents  was  often  oppressively  warm.  This  led  to  several 
minor  and  unexpected  troubles  ;  for  instance,  it  was  found 
that  the  sleeping-bags  gradually  melted  the  surface  of  ice  or 
snow  on  which  they  were  laid,  and  in  the  morning  were  sur- 
rounded with  a  pool  of  water. 

The  high  temperatures  also  gave  rise  to  a  very  great 
amount  of  thawing  in  the  valley.  We  never  again  found  it 
in  this  condition,  and  it  is  probable  that  it  only  lasts  for  a 
period  of  a  fortnight,  or  at  the  most  three  weeks.  This  season 
of  thaw  is  an  extremely  interesting  matter,  and  no  doubt  it 
plays  an  important  part  in  the  denudation  of  the  country.  It 
will  be  remembered  that  before  our  arrival  in  winter  quarters, 
in  February  1902,  we  had  landed  on  the  tongue  of  a  glacier 
and  observed  the  beds  of  considerable  glacial  streams,  though 
at  that  time  the  thaw  had  ceased.  It  may  therefore  be  worth 
while  to  quote  some  remarks  from  a  report  made  by  Skelton, 
who,  as  a  member  of  this  party,  saw  the  glacier  in  its  most 
melting  mood.  Skelton  writes  :  '  During  the  hot  days  of  the 
latter  part  of  December  and  early  in  January  an  immense 
amount  of  melting  goes  on  in  the  valley.  On  the  glacier 
surface  there  is  quite  a  loud  "  buzzing  "  sound,  caused  by  the 
air  bubbles  confined  in  the  ice  being  freed  and  coming  to  the 
surface  through  water.  On  the  way  back  we  found  every 
boulder  in  the  moraines  standing  in  a  large  pool  of  water,  often 
three  or  four  feet  deep,  and  during  the  night  frequent  rumblings 
could  be  heard  as  the  boulders  lost  their  equilibrium  and 
shifted  their  positions.     Some  boulders  could  be  seen  in  the 


io6       THE   VOYAGE   OF   THE    'DISCOVERY'   [1902- 

clear  ice  several  feet  below  the  surface,  having  melted  their 
way  down.  There  was  quite  a  torrent  of  water  running  down 
past  the  Cathedral  Rocks,  where  it  flowed  into  a  lake  nearly 
half  a  mile  in  diameter ;  from  there  it  ran  in  a  rapid  stream 
past  Descent  Pass  towards  the  sea.  The  water  in  this  stream 
was  about  nine  inches  deep  and  seven  feet  across,  and  on 
measuring  its  speed  I  calculated  the  flow  of  water  to  be 
about  fifty-three  tons  per  minute  ;  this  was  only  one  of  many 
streams.' 

On  January  12  the  party  began  to  climb  the  steep  slopes 
of  Descent  Pass,  and  had  to  resort  to  their  old  device  of 
hauling  the  sledges  up  with  the  help  of  ropes  and  blocks.  As 
some  parts  of  these  slopes  stood  at  an  average  angle  of  45 °, 
the  task  proved  so  laborious  that  they  did  not  reach  the  summit 
of  the  pass  till  the  evening  of  the  14th.  From  this  time  their 
work  was  easy,  and  by  the  17  th  they  had  again  reached  the 
sea  level.  Here  they  were  fortunate  enough  to  find  numerous 
seals  basking  on  the  ice,  and  it  was  not  long  before  they 
regaled  themselves  on  fresh  meat. 

The  remainder  of  the  journey  was  uneventful,  and  on  the 
nineteenth,  when  the  party  reached  the  ship,  Macfarlane  had 
practically  recovered,  whilst  the  remainder  were  in  the  best  of 
health  and  condition.  Some  months  elapsed  before  I  was  able 
to  go  closely  into  the  results  of  this  journey,  and  by  that  time 
unexpected  circumstances  had  made  it  evident  that  we  should 
have  a  further  chance  of  exploring  the  interesting  region  which 
it  had  brought  to  our  knowledge.  By  that  time  also  the  several 
rock  specimens  which  had  been  secured  had  passed  into  the 
hands  of  the  geologist.  A  rough  map  had  been  constructed 
and  a  series  of  photographs  taken  by  Skelton  had  been  de- 
veloped, all  going  to  show  the  valuable  information  which  the 
party  had  collected,  and  opening  an  exceptionally  interesting 
field  of  investigation  for  a  second  visit  to  the  region. 

There  was  no  doubt  that  a  practicable  road  to  the  interior 
had  been  discovered  and  traversed,  and  that  the  grim  barrier 
of  mountains  which  had  seemed  so  formidable  an  obstruction 
from  the  ship  had  been  conquered,  but  the  portion  of  this  road 


1 9o3]  INTERESTING   PROBLEMS  107 

which  led  over  the  foothill  plateau  and  down  the  steep  slopes 
of  Descent  Pass  still  appeared  as  a  serious  impediment  in  the 
way  of  speedy  approach  to  the  ice-cap.  It  remained  to  be 
seen  whether  some  easier  route  might  not  be  found  to  the  base 
of  Cathedral  Rocks,  and,  in  spite  of  Armitage's  observations,  I 
could  not  help  thinking  that  there  must  be  some  way  by  which 
sledges  could  be  dragged  from  the  New  Harbour  over  the 
foot  of  the  Ferrar  Glacier. 

It  was  evident  that  this  party  had  reached  the  inland  ice- 
cap and  could  claim  to  be  the  first  to  set  foot  on  the  interior  of 
Victoria  Land ;  but  it  was  clear,  too,  that  they  had  been  forced 
to  terminate  their  advance  at  an  extremely  interesting  point, 
and  to  return  without  being  able  to  supply  very  definite  in- 
formation with  regard  to  the  ice-cap.  As  I  have  already 
pointed  out,  the  view  of  the  sledge- traveller  on  a  plain  is 
limited  to  an  horizon  of  three  or  four  miles  ;  beyond  this  he 
cannot  say  definitely  what  occurs.  This  party  appeared  to 
have  been  on  a  lofty  plateau,  but  the  very  short  advance  they 
had  been  able  to  make  over  it  could  not  give  a  clear  indication 
of  what  might  lie  to  the  westward ;  the  nature  of  the  interior  of 
this  great  country  was  therefore  still  wrapped  in  mystery. 

The  photographs,  the  rock  specimens,  and  the  enthusiastic 
descriptions  of  the  rugged  cliffs  which  bordered  the  glacier 
valley  showed  that  here  lay  the  most  promising  field  for 
geological  investigations  that  we  could  possibly  hope  to  find, 
and  that  at  all  hazards  our  geologist  must  be  given  the  chance 
of  exploring  it.  In  the  original  programme  it  had  been  im- 
possible to  guess  in  what  direction  this  important  officer  should 
direct  his  footsteps,  and  it  had  been  decided  that  his  ends 
would  best  be  served  by  making  short  journeys  in  various 
directions.  It  was  now  evident  that  this  deep  glacier  valley 
cutting  a  section  through  the  mountain  ranges  was  incom- 
parably more  interesting  than  any  other  region  known  to  us, 
and  what  could  be  learnt  of  it  from  the  returned  travellers  only 
went  to  show  more  clearly  the  extreme  importance  of  a  second 
visit.  But  perhaps  the  most  promising  circumstance  of  all 
that  pointed  to  the  interest  of  this  region  was  that  amongst  the 


ioS      THE  VOYAGE   OF    THE   'DISCOVERY'   [1902- 

rock  specimens  brought  back  were  fragments  of  quartz-grits. 
These,  with  other  observations,  showed  the  strong  probability 
of  the  existence  of  sedimentary  deposits  which  might  be 
reached  and  examined,  and  which  alone  could  serve  to  reveal 
the  geological  history  of  this  great  Southern  continent. 

On  the  whole,  therefore,  the  western  party  had  done 
excellent  pioneer  work ;  they  had  fulfilled  their  main  object, 
and  in  doing  so  had  disclosed  problems  which  caused  the 
greater  part  of  our  interest  to  be  focussed  in  this  direction 
throughout  the  remainder  of  our  stay  in  the  South. 

The  extensive  preparations  for  the  western  journey  had 
almost  denuded  the  ship  of  sledge  equipment,  and  the  travellers 
who  embarked  on  the  shorter  journeys  in  the  vicinity  of  the 
ship  were  obliged  to  do  as  best  they  could  with  the  little  that 
remained.  It  was  of  course  a  rule  that  everything  must  give 
way  to  the  extended  efforts.  However,  this  did  not  baulk  the 
energies  of  other  travellers,  who  were  willing  to  resort  to  all 
sorts  of  shifts  and  devices  rather  than  forego  their  share  of 
exploration,  and,  in  consequence,  many  short  journeys  were 
made  which  added  much  to  our  knowledge  of  the  very  interest- 
ing region  about  the  ship. 

A  glance  at  the  chart  will  give  some  small  idea  of  the  con- 
fused conditions  which  existed  to  the  south-west  of  our  winter 
quarters,  and  it  can  be  imagined  that  before  our  sledging 
commenced  this  district,  on  which  we  gazed  at  a  distance  of 
twenty  or  thirty  miles,  seemed  to  hold  many  mysteries.  We 
could  not  tell  whether  the  closer  masses  of  land  were  connected, 
or  whether,  as  seemed  more  probable,  they  were  detached 
islands.  Far  away  we  could  see  long  lines  of  irregular  debris- 
strewn  ice,  but  we  could  not  say  whence  they  came  or  what 
they  indicated.      \ 

Taken  as  a  whole,  from  the  point  of  view  of  the  map-maker, 
the  general  outline  of  the  coast  of  Victoria  Land  is  simple. 
The  land  is  bold  and  well  marked,  and  the  coast  is  of  a  nature 
that  lends  itself  to  rough  contouring ;  but,  in  marked  distinc- 
tion, the  region  of  Ross  Island  has  very  intricate  geographical 
features.      The  complication   seems  to   start  with   that  very 


i9o3]      THE  ISLANDS  TO  THE  SOUTH-WEST        109 

curious  formation  which  we  called  the  Bluff,  and  which  runs 
out  in  such  a  singularly  thin,  straight  strip  from  the  isolated 
volcanic  cone  of  Mount  Discovery.  North  of  this,  as  will  be 
seen,  there  are  three  large  volcanic  islands  and  a  number  of 
smaller  islets,  amongst  which  lie  the  rock-strewn  remains  of  an 
ancient  ice-sheet,  with  numerous  vast  and  partly  hidden 
moraines  ;  while  finally  comes  the  great  upheaval  of  Ross 
Island  itself.  The  land  masses  as  a  whole,  with  their  thousands 
of  craters,  great  and  small,  show  the  result  of  a  very  remarkable 
volcanic  outburst.  For  such  light  as  was  thrown  on  this 
region  during  the  summer  of  1902-3  we  had  to  thank  Koettlitz, 
Ferrar,  Hodgson,  Bernacchi,  and  others,  who  managed  from 
time  to  time  to  collect  a  rough  sledging  outfit  and  to  make 
short  trips  of  a  week  or  ten  days  towards  the  various  points  of 
interest.  In  this  manner  Koettlitz  proved  the  insularity  of  the 
Black  Island  by  surmounting  the  obstacles  which  had  checked 
the  first  reconnaissance  party,  and  succeeded  in  walking  com- 
pletely round  it.  On  another  occasion  he  examined  the 
northern  side  of  the  Bluff,  and  on  a  third  traversed  much  rough 
ice  and  ascended  to  the  summit  of  Brown  Island  (2,750  feet), 
whence  he  and  his  companions  were  able  to  get  some  idea  of 
what  lay  beyond. 

In  journeying  to  the  south-west  our  travellers  found  it 
advisable  to  make  for  the  northern  coast  of  Black  Island.  As 
I  have  mentioned  before,  on  such  a  track  after  crossing  some 
four  or  five  miles  of  recently  formed  ice,  they  rose  from  ten  to 
fifteen  feet  in  level  to  the  surface  of  an  older  ice-sheet.  The 
travelling  continued  good  till  within  two  or  three  miles  of  the 
island,  when  disturbances  were  met  with,  and  it  was  necessary 
to  cross  lines  of  morainic  material  which  streamed  north  from 
the  eastern  end  of  the  island.  This  morainic  material  was 
principally  composed  of  the  black  volcanic  rock  of  the  island, 
but  amongst  it  could  be  found  numerous  blocks  of  granite, 
altogether  foreign  to  the  region.  The  island  was  surrounded 
by  a  well-marked  tide-crack,  which  showed  that  the  ancient 
sheet  of  rubble-strewn  ice  to  the  north  was  afloat.  Amongst 
the  huge  heaps  of  rock  material  which  it  bore  were  found 


no       THE   VOYAGE   OF   THE    'DISCOVERY'  [1902- 

numerous  remains  of  marine  organisms,  shells,  polyzoa,  worm- 
casts,  and  sponge  spicules.  There  could  be  no  doubt  that  in 
some  manner  the  movement  of  the  ice  had  lifted  this  material 
from  below  the  water-level  to  its  present  elevation  of  perhaps 
fifteen  or  twenty  feet  above  j  but  precisely  how  this  had  been 
accomplished  it  was  impossible  to  say. 

From  any  of  the  small  peaks  which  fringed  the  Black 
Island  the  travellers  could  get  a  good  view  of  the  surface  of 
the  strait  which  separated  them  from  the  Brown  Island,  and 
this  was  a  very  impressive  sight.  From  the  base  of  Mount 
Discovery  in  the  south,  long  ridges  of  morainic  material  spread 
out  and  entirely  filled  the  strait,  where  they  were  disposed  in 
wonderfully  regular  parallel  lines  which  at  first  ran  towards  the 
north-east,  but  later  swept  round  with  perfectly  uniform  curves 
towards  the  north,  in  which  direction  they  continued  for  some 
fifteen  miles  to  the  sea.  Here,  then,  was  the  origin  of  that 
rough,  water-worn  tongue  on  which  we  had  landed  on  our  way 
to  winter  quarters. 

The  finer  material  of  these  long  lines  of  rock  debris  was 
naturally  blown  by  the  wind  in  all  directions,  and,  settling 
liberally  between  the  lines,  it  had  caught  the  rays  of  the  sun, 
melted  deep  and  irregular  channels,  and  left  standing  a  wild 
confusion  of  fantastic  columns  and  pinnacles  of  ice.  Seen  from 
the  distance  the  whole,  as  Koettlitz  says,  '  appeared  like  a  tumul- 
tuous frozen  sea  with  high  crested  waves  curling  towards  us.' 

To  cross  this  confusion  was  no  easy  matter :  long  distances 
had  to  be  done  by  portage,  and  in  the  thaw  season  the 
travellers  had  sometimes  to  take  off  shoes  and  stockings  to 
cross  rapid  streams  of  water  two  and  three  feet  in  depth. 

Whilst  Black  Island  was  formed  of  a  very  hard  black 
volcanic  rock,  Brown  Island  was  principally  composed  of  lava 
and  volcanic  ash.  The  rock  was  much  weathered,  and  had  a 
deep,  reddish-brown  appearance,  while  scattered  over  this 
island  to  a  height  of  500  or  600  feet  were  found  erratic  blocks 
of  granite. 

There  seemed  every  reason  to  suppose  that  Brown  Island 
is  joined  to  Mount  Discovery,  and  at  least  our  travellers  were 


i9o3J  CURIOUS   ICE   FORMATIONS  in 

certain  that  there  was  no  flow  of  ice  between  the  two ;  away  to 
the  west  they  could  see  the  long  sweep  of  the  Koettlitz  Glacier 
growing  rough  and  disturbed  as  it  fell  to  the  level  of  the  sea. 

The  snow  plateau  to  the  south  of  Black  Island  was  found 
to  be  from  ioo  to  150  feet  above  the  level  to  the  north,  rising 
to  the  general  barrier  level ;  it  afforded  a  comparatively  smooth, 
easy  crossing,  undisturbed  until  within  two  miles  of  the  Bluff, 
to  reach  which  the  travellers  had  again  to  cross  lines  of  morainic 
material  in  which  the  volcanic  rocks  of  the  region  were  mixed 
with  numerous  boulders  of  granite.  Taken  together,  these 
various  observations  gave  a  moderately  clear  outline  of  the  ice 
condition  in  this  region.  The  space  inside  the  Brown  Island 
is  governed  locally  by  the  Koettlitz  Glacier,  but  it  is  evident 
that  the  ice  of  the  barrier  itself  is  moving,  or  has  moved, 
around  the  end  of  the  Bluff,  and  close  along  its  northern  shore ; 
thence  it  is  pressing,  or  has  pressed,  northward  through  the 
two  channels  which  separate  the  islands,  the  greater  part  pass- 
ing round  to  the  west  of  Black  Island. 

All  this  led  up  to  a  highly  important  and  interesting  dis- 
covery. We  could  not  doubt  that  the  decayed  and  water-worn 
ice  on  which  we  had  landed  on  February  8,  1902,  marked 
what  was  nothing  less  than  the  end  of  the  lateral  moraine  of 
the  Great  Ice  Barrier.  When  it  is  considered  what  a  colossal 
agent  for  transportation  this  moraine  must  be,  it  is  curious  to 
find  that  it  ends  in  such  a  tame  manner. 

Whilst  these  efforts  at  exploration  had  been  going  on  in 
various  directions,  the  ship  had  been  left  in  the  charge  of  Mr. 
Royds.  With  people  constantly  going  and  coming,  the  numbers 
on  board  varied  much;  sometimes  there  might  be  ten  or  a 
dozen  hands  available  for  work,  at  others  no  more  than  four  or 
five  could  be  got  together ;  but,  whatever  the  number,  all  were 
kept  steadily  employed  on  the  one  most  important  task — that 
of  freeing  the  boats. 

I  have  already  explained  the  calamity  that  had  befallen  us 
in  this  respect — how  these  indispensable  articles  of  the  ship's 
furniture  had  been  placed  on  the  ice,  how  they  sank  below  the 
water  level,  and  how  we  were  forced  to  shovel  away  the  snow 


ii2       THE   VOYAGE   OF   THE   'DISCOVERY'  [1902- 

to  prevent  them  from  going  still  deeper.  This  work  of  clearance 
was  continued  well  on  into  the  sledging  season,  as  it  was  hope- 
less to  attempt  extrication  until  the  night  temperature  had  risen 
sufficiently  to  prevent  the  work  of  the  day  being  wasted.  This 
condition  was  not  reached  until  the  middle  of  December,  and 
even  then  it  was  rarely  that  the  thermometer  stood  above  the 
freezing-point  of  salt  water  throughout  the  whole  of  the  twenty- 
four  hours,  so  that  the  work  was  greatly  retarded. 

When  it  was  decided  that  the  time  had  come  to  make  an 
effort  to  free  the  boats,  many  shifts  and  expedients  were  tried. 
At  first  it  was  thought  that  something  might  be  done  by 
sprinkling  ashes  and  dark  volcanic  soil  over  the  ice,  but  it  was 
found  that  the  sun's  rays  were  not  sufficiently  powerful  or 
constant  to  make  this  device  a  success.  As  a  next  step,  after 
all  the  snow  was  cleared  off  the  surface  of  the  floe,  the  ice-saw 
was  brought  into  action,  and  a  complete  cut  was  made  around 
that  part  of  the  ice-sheet  in  which  the  boats  were  embedded  ; 
but  when  this  cut  was  finished  it  was  found  that,  contrary  to 
our  hopes,  the  centre  square  refused  to  rise.  Then  efforts 
were  concentrated  on  a  single  boat ;  the  saw-cut  was  com- 
pleted about  it,  not  altogether  without  injury  to  the  boat,  but 
even  this  small  detached  piece  was  held  down  in  some 
inexplicable  manner.  Finally,  in  order  to  bring  it  up,  small 
tins  of  gun-cotton  had  to  be  employed,  and  it  was  only  after 
several  explosions  that  the  block  was  successfully  brought  to 
the  surface. 

In  this  position,  the  men,  working  knee-deep  in  slush, 
were  able  to  dig  out  the  inside  of  the  boat,  and  bit  by  bit  to 
clear  away  the  ice  which  clung  to  the  outside  ;  then  with 
shears  and  tackles  she  was  slowly  dragged  from  her  icy  bed. 
In  this  manner  the  first  boat  was  got  out,  and  then  one  by 
one  the  rest  were  extricated  in  like  fashion. 

As  can  be  imagined,  with  so  much  sawing  and  blasting 
going  on  in  the  unseen  depths  of  the  ice  below,  it  was  not 
likely  that  the  task  could  be  accomplished  without  considerable 
injury  to  the  boats,  and  when  at  length  they  had  all  been 
brought    to  the   surface  they  presented  a  very   dilapidated 


i9o3]  RECOVERY  OF  THE  BOATS  113 

appearance,  very  different  from  that  which  they  had  possessed 
when  first  they  had  been  incautiously  placed  on  the  floe.  Of 
all  our  staunch  whale-boats  two  only  were  in  a  condition  to 
float,  and  it  was  evident  that  there  would  be  many  weeks  of 
work  for  our  carpenter  before  the  remainder  could  be  made 
seaworthy.  Still,  even  the  skeleton  of  a  boat  is  better  than  no 
boat  at  all,  and  when  on  January  1 7  the  last  had  been  raised 
it  was  justly  felt  that  a  big  load  of  anxiety  had  been  removed. 

Long  before  my  departure  to  the  south  I  had  given  in- 
structions that  the  '  Discovery '  should  be  prepared  for  sea  by 
the  end  of  January  ;  consequently  after  the  boats  had  been 
freed,  and  as  the  sledge  parties  returned,  everyone  was  very 
busily  employed.  To  the  non-nautical  reader  it  may  not  be 
very  clear  what  preparations  for  sea  may  mean  in  such  circum- 
stances, nor  is  he  likely  to  understand  what  a  lot  of  work  they 
entailed  on  the  few  men  who  were  available. 

From  the  deck,  tons  and  tons  of  snow  had  to  be  dug  out 
with  pickaxes  and  shovelled  over  the  side;  aloft,  sails  and 
ropes  had  to  be  looked  to,  the  running-gear  re-rove,  and 
everything  got  ready  for  handling  the  ship  under  sail;  many 
things  which  we  had  displaced  or  landed  near  the  shore- 
station  had  to  be  brought  on  board  and  secured  in  position  ; 
thirty  tons  of  ice  had  to  be  fetched,  melted,  and  run  into  the 
boilers ;  below,  steam-pipes  had  to  be  rejointed,  glands 
repacked,  engines  turned  by  hand,  and  steam  raised  to  see 
that  all  was  in  working  order.  But,  not  doubting  that  the  ice 
would  soon  break  up  and  release  us,  all  this  work  was 
pushed  forward  vigorously,  and  in  consequence,  as  I  have 
remarked,  on  returning  to  the  ship  I  found  her  looking  trim 
and  smart,  and  was  told  that  all  was  ready  for  us  to  put  to  sea 
again. 

But  meanwhile  the  great  event  of  the  season  had  happened. 
The  *  Morning,'  our  relief  ship,  had  arrived ;  and  here,  per- 
haps, I  may  be  permitted  to  make  a  digression  in  order  to 
explain  how  this  had  come  about. 

I  have  already  shown  the  manner  in  which  the  necessary 
funds  were  raised  for  the  '  Discovery,'  and  how,  after  arduous 
vol.  11.  1 


ii4      THE   VOYAGE   OF    THE    'DISCOVERY'   [1902- 

efforts,  enough  money  was  collected  to  equip  our  expedition  in 
a  thoroughly  efficient  manner.  This  being  the  case,  and  there 
being  no  reason  to  suppose  that  the  '  Discovery '  was  in  distress, 
it  may  not  be  quite  clear  why  it  was  thought  necessary  to  send 
a  relief  ship  in  the  following  year.  Indeed,  the  reason  will 
probably  not  be  plain  to  anyone  who  is  incapable  of  putting 
himself  into  the  position  of  those  who  bore  the  responsibility 
of  the  expedition. 

Taking  any  general  case  where  an  expedition  is  sent  forth 
to  the  Polar  Regions,  it  is  evident  that  when  it  has  passed 
beyond  the  limits  of  communication,  the  authorities  who 
despatched  it  must  bear  some  burden  of  anxiety  for  its  safety  ; 
whilst  they  may  hope  that  all  will  be  accomplished  without 
disaster,  they  cannot  blind  themselves  to  the  risks  that  have 
been  taken,  and  must  inevitably  ask  themselves  whether  on 
their  part  they  have  done  everything  possible  to  avert  mis- 
chance. If  the  expedition  has  departed  without  any  definite 
plan,  or  has  passed  into  a  region  in  which  it  would  be  hopeless 
to  search,  those  at  home  can  do  nothing ;  if,  on  the  other  hand, 
it  has  planned  to  pass  by  known  but  unvisited  places,  then  it 
is  obvious  that  its  footsteps  can  be  traced  with  the  possibility 
of  ascertaining  its  condition  and  of  relieving  distress.  In  this 
last  case  the  proper  action  of  the  authorities  is  clear :  they 
must  endeavour  to  take  no  risk  of  their  relief  arriving  too  late, 
but  do  their  utmost  to  despatch  it  as  early  as  possible  in  the 
track  of  the  first  venture.  Such  has  always  been  the  attitude 
of  those  responsible  for  North  Polar  voyages,  and  in  the  South 
there  is  a  further  reason  for  its  observance  in  the  fact  that  the 
Antarctic  Regions  are  surrounded  by  a  belt  of  tempestuous 
ocean,  across  which  it  would  be  impossible  for  explorers  to 
retreat  should  they  have  suffered  the  loss  of  their  ship. 

As  soon  as  the  '  Discovery '  had  departed  on  her  long 
voyage  all  these  facts  began  to  be  practically  considered,  and 
the  necessity  of  safeguarding  the  enterprise  by  the  early 
despatch  of  relief  was  realised. 

To  raise  the  necessary  funds  for  this  second  venture  was 
no   light   task,  but   the   Geographical   Society  recognised   its 


i9o3]  THE   RELIEF   EXPEDITION  115 

responsibility  and  energetically  supported  its  President  in  the 
campaign  which  he  immediately  opened  with  his  customary 
energy  and  pertinacity.  Urgent  appeals  were  issued  \  a  sub- 
scription list  was  opened  and  graciously  headed  by  H.M.  the 
King  and  H.R.H.  the  Prince  of  Wales;  Mr.  Longstaff  again 
came  to  the  front  with  an  addition  of  5,000/.  to  his  former 
munificent  donation  ;  Mr.  Edgar  Speyer  most  generously  sub- 
scribed a  like  sum. 

From  this  start  the  fund  gradually  grew  by  the  arrival  of 
gifts  from  the  most  diverse  and  interesting  quarters — from  five 
great  City  Companies,1  from  boys  at  school,  from  members  of 
the  Stock  Exchange  collected  by  Mr.  Newall,  from  sub- 
lieutenants at  Greenwich,  from  officers  of  a  Gurkha  regiment 
in  Chitral,  from  the  New  Zealand  Government,  from  officers 
in  South  Africa,  and  from  a  thousand  private  individuals  who 
gave  what  they  could  afford.  But,  great  as  was  the  interest 
shown,  as  always  on  such  occasions,  its  manifestation  was 
slow,  and  there  were  times  when  it  seemed  almost  impossible 
that  the  urgency  of  the  case  could  be  met.  Sir  Clements 
Markham,  however,  refused  to  acknowledge  defeat ;  as  usual, 
having  set  his  shoulder  to  the  wheel,  he  worked  on  in  good 
times  or  bad  with  the  same  untiring  zeal  and  singleness  of 
purpose,  and,  as  all  who  know  of  this  troublous  time  most 
freely  acknowledge,  it  was  due  to  this  alone  that  the  sum  of 
22,600/.  was  eventually  raised  in  time  to  make  the  despatch  of 
the  projected  relief  expedition  possible. 

Even  this  sum  did  not  admit  of  elaborate  plans  in  the 
equipment  of  the  relief  expedition  ;  the  greatest  economy  was 
necessary. 

A  stout  wooden  whaler  named  the  '  Morgenen,'  or  '  Morn- 
ing,' was  purchased  in  Norway,  and  after  being  thoroughly 
refitted  and  overhauled  by  Messrs.  Green,  of  Poplar,  was 
stored  with  the  requisites  for  the  voyage. 

At  an  early  date  her  commander  had  been  appointed,  and 
this    proved   in   every    respect   a   most    fortunate    selection. 

1  Goldsmiths,  Fishmongers,  Drapers,  Mercers,  and  Skinners. 

I  2 


n6      THE  VOYAGE   OF  THE   'DISCOVERY'    [i9o2~ 

Lieutenant  William  Colbeck,  R.N.R.,  was  at  this  time  in  the 
employment  of  Messrs.  Wilson,  of  Hull,  who  generously  lent 
his  services ;  he  had  already  been  in  the  Antarctic  Regions, 
having  spent  a  winter  at  Cape  Adare  with  Sir  George  Newnes's 
expedition,  and  he  was  therefore  chosen  as  the  most  fitting 
person  to  command  this  new  venture.  Colbeck  selected  some 
of  his  officers  and  most  of  his  men  from  amongst  those  with 
whom  he  was  personally  acquainted  ;  many  had  served  at  one 
time  or  another  in  the  Wilson  Line.  The  Admiralty  showed 
their  interest  in  the  enterprise  by  permitting  two  naval  officers 
to  join  the  expedition. 

At  length,  all  being  prepared,  the  '  Morning '  left  the 
London  Docks  on  July  9,  1902,  and  after  a  long  sea  voyage, 
in  which  she  rounded  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope  without 
touching  land,  on  November  16  she  duly  arrived  at  Lyttelton, 
New  Zealand,  the  base  of  all  our  operations.  Here  she 
received  the  same  generous  treatment  which  had  been 
accorded  to  the  'Discovery,'  and  on  December  6  made  her 
final  departure  for  the  South,  stored  with  many  an  additional 
present  supplied  by  the  kindly  thought  of  our  New  Zealand 
friends. 

Here  perhaps  it  is  necessary  to  pause  for  a  moment  to 
consider  the  work  which  lay  before  Captain  Colbeck  and  his 
crew. 

Long  before  the  '  Discovery '  had  left  New  Zealand  the 
idea  of  a  relief  ship  had  been  mooted,  and  although  I  saw 
the  great  difficulties  that  were  to  be  overcome  in  sending  her, 
I  felt  confident  that  if  the  thing  was  to  be  done,  Sir  Clements 
Markham  would  do  it.  From  any  point  of  view  it  was 
desirable  to  leave  as  much  information  as  possible  in  our 
track,  and  with  this  idea  I  had  foreshadowed  the  positions  at 
which  I  hoped  to  be  able  to  leave  records,  and  had  laid  down 
a  rough  programme  for  any  ship  which  might  follow  us. 
These  instructions  could  only  be  indefinite  ;  but  such  as  they 
were,  they  stated  that  attempts  would  be  made  to  leave  in- 
formation at  one  or  more  of  a  number  of  places — Cape  Adare, 
Possession   Islands,   Coulman    Island,   Wood   Bay,   Franklin 


i9o3]       THE   PRE-ARRANGED   PROGRAMME         117 

Island,  and  Cape  Crozier.  Especially  in  the  last  place,  as  the 
most  southerly,  I  hinted  that  news  of  us  might  be  looked  for ; 
the  relief  ship  was  to  endeavour  to  pick  up  such  clues  as  might 
be  found  in  this  way,  but  if  this  was  unproductive  or  signified  that 
we  had  passed  to  the  eastward  without  returning,  she  was  to 
turn  homeward  after  having  landed  provisions  and  stores  at 
certain  definite  spots. 

It  will  be  seen,  therefore,  that  it  was  in  order  to  act  up  to 
this  pre-arranged  plan  that  we  had  left  records  at  such  of  the 
named  places  as  we  could  approach,  and  that  I  had  been  so 
anxious  to  establish  sledge  communication  with  the  record  at 
Cape  Crozier.  For  this  enabled  me  to  start  south  with  the 
knowledge  that  a  relief  ship  might  gather  meagre  information 
at  Cape  Adare  and  Coulman  Island,  whilst,  should  she  recover 
the  Cape  Crozier  record,  she  would  at  once  ascertain  our 
whereabouts. 

Captain  Colbeck's  instructions  were  to  fall  in  with  the 
purport  of  my  letter,  but  the  manner  in  which  he  should  do  so 
was  left  entirely  to  his  discretion,  and  wisely,  for  with  such 
slender  information  as  was  available  no  one  could  have  acted 
more  promptly  or  with  greater  discretion. 

Thus  it  came  about  that  whilst  we  were  surmounting  the 
difficulties  of  the  great  snow-plain  and  finding  a  way  amongst 
the  mountain  ranges,  the  gallant  little  '  Morning '  was  hurrying 
towards  us,  eager  to  perform  her  helpful  mission  and  bring  us 
news  of  our  distant  home. 

Small  as  she  was,  and  without  the  ability  to  force  a  way 
through  heavy  pack-ice,  her  voyage  to  the  South  was  full  of 
adventure,  and  is  a  record  of  difficulties  overcome  by  sturdy 
perseverance ;  but  of  this  I  hope  that  Captain  Colbeck  will 
himself  tell  one  day.  On  December  25  he  crossed  the  Ant- 
arctic Circle,  and  a  short  way  to  the  south,  to  his  great 
surprise,  discovered  some  small  islands  which  he  has  since 
done  me  the  great  honour  of  naming  the  Scott  Islands.  The 
pack  was  negotiated  successfully,  if  slowly,  and  on  January  8 
a  larding  was  effected  at  Cape  Adare,  where  the  notice  of  the 
'Discovery's'  safe  arrival  in  the  South  was   found.      The 


n8      THE   VOYAGE   OF   THE    'DISCOVERY'    [1902- 

Possession  Islands  were  drawn  blank,  since  we  had  not  been 
able  to  land  there.  South  of  this  the  whole  coast  was  found 
thickly  packed ;  it  was  impossible  to  approach  Coulman 
Island  or  Wood  Bay,  and  the  ship  was  obliged  to  keep  well 
to  the  eastward  to  get  any  chance  of  an  ice-free  sea. 

Franklin  Island  was  visited  on  January  14,  but  without 
result,  and  again  quantities  of  pack  had  to  be  skirted  in 
making  a  way  to  Cape  Crozier,  so  that  it  was  not  until  1  a.m. 
on  the  1 8th  that  a  landing  was  effected  at  this  spot.  Captain 
Colbeck  himself  joined  the  landing  party,  which  spent  some 
hours  in  searching  for  a  sign  of  us.  He  had  almost  given 
the  matter  up  in  despair,  and  was  despondently  wondering 
what  to  do  next,  when  suddenly  our  small  post  was  seen 
against  the  horizon;  a  rush  was  made  for  it,  and  in  a  few 
minutes  the  contents  of  the  tin  cylinder  were  being  eagerly 
scanned.  It  can  be  imagined  with  what  joy  the  searchers 
gathered  all  the  good  news  concerning  us  and  learnt  that  they 
had  but  to  steer  into  the  mysterious  depths  of  McMurdo 
Sound  to  find  the  'Discovery'  herself;  their  work  seemed 
practically  accomplished. 

But  though  they  got  hastily  back  to  their  ship,  and  started 
westward  with  a  full  head  of  steam,  the  goal  was  not  yet 
reached.  The  channel  between  Beaufort  Island  and  Ross 
Island  was  filled  with  an  ugly  pack  in  which  the  '  Morning ' 
could  do  little  more  than  drift  idly  along,  but  fortunately  this 
drift  carried  her  steadily  to  the  west,  and  on  the  23rd  our 
friends  were  able  to  free  themselves  from  the  ice,  and,  turning 
south,  to  round  Cape  Royds  and  recognise  the  landmarks 
which  had  been  described  and  sketched  for  their  instruction. 

On  board  the  '  Discovery  '  the  idea  that  a  relief  ship  would 
come  had  steadily  grown.  For  no  very  clear  reason  the  men 
had  gradually  convinced  themselves  that  it  was  a  certainty,  and 
at  this  time  it  was  not  uncommon  for  wild  rumours  to  be 
spread  that  smoke  had  been  seen  to  the  north.  It  was  there- 
fore without  much  excitement  that  such  a  report  was  received 
on  the  night  of  the  23rd  ;  but  when,  shortly  after,  a  messenger 
came  running  down  the  hill  to  say  that  there  was  a  veritable 


1903]  ARRIVAL   OF  THE    'MORNING'  119 

ship  in  sight,  it  was  a  very  different  matter,  and  few  found 
much  sleep  that  night  whilst  waiting  and  wondering  what  news 
that  distant  vessel  might  bear. 

Early  on  the  24th  a  large  party  set  out  over  the  floe,  and 
after  marching  a  few  miles  could  see  clearly  the  masts  and 
yards  of  the  relieving  vessel,  which  lay  at  the  limit  of  the  fast 
ice  some  ten  miles  north  of  the  '  Discovery,'  and  comparatively 
close  to  the  Dellbridge  Islets.  The  last  mile  was  covered  with 
difficulty,  as  here  the  ice  was  only  a  thin  sludgy  sheet  which 
had  formed  since  August,  and  which  would  only  bear  those  who 
were  fortunate  enough  to  be  wearing  ski.  There  was  much 
shouting  and  gesticulation,  and  one  or  two  of  the  most  eager, 
sinking  waist-deep  in  the  treacherous  surface,  had  to  be 
rescued  with  boards  and  ropes ;  but  at  last  our  party  stood  on 
the  deck  of  the  '  Morning,'  and  the  greetings  which  followed 
can  be  well  imagined.  Those  who  had  remained  in  the 
1  Discovery '  were  not  forgotten,  and  soon  the  sledges  were 
speeding  back,  dragged  by  willing  hands  and  stacked  high 
with  the  welcome  mail-bags. 

During  the  last  week  of  the  month  the  weather  remained 
gloriously  fine ;  some  of  the  treacherous  thin  ice  broke  away, 
allowing  the  '  Morning  '  to  approach  us  by  about  a  mile ;  other- 
wise all  was  placid.  In  the  bright  sunshine  parties  were 
constantly  passing  to  and  fro,  and  all  gave  themselves  up  to 
the  passing  hour  in  the  delight  of  fresh  companionship  and  the 
joy  of  good  news  from  the  home  country,  and  with  an  unshaken 
confidence  that  the  '  Discovery  '  would  soon  be  freed  from  her 
icy  prison. 

It  was  thus  that  I  found  things  on  my  return  on  February  3, 
and  when  I  and  my  companions,  the  last  to  open  our  letters, 
could  report  that  all  was  well,  we  had  the  satisfaction  of  knowing 
that  the  '  Morning '  had  brought  nothing  but  good  news. 


120      THE   VOYAGE   OF   THE   'DISCOVERY'     [Feb. 


CHAPTER   XVI 

OUR     SECOND    WINTER 

Effects  of  the  Strain  of  the  Southern  Journey — Communication  with  the 
'  Morning  ' — Change  of  Weather— Stores  Transported — Delays  in  the 
Break-up  of  the  Ice  -Closing  of  the  Season — Departure  of  the  '  Morn- 
ing ' — Making  Provision  for  the  Winter — Settling  Down— Hockey — 
Departure  of  the  Sun — Fishing  Operations— Record  Temperatures — 
The  Electrometer — Midwinter  Feast — Our  Growing  Puppies — Hodg- 
son at  Work — The  '  Flying  Scud  ' — Return  of  the  Sun — Signs  of 
Summer — Plans  for  the  Future — General  Good  Health. 

And  so  without  more  circumstance  at  all 
I  hold  it  fit  that  we  shake  hands  and  part. 
Shakespeare. 

Come  what  come  may 
Time  and  the  hour  runs  through  the  darkest  day. 

Shakespeare. 

It  was  a  curious  coincidence  that  Colbeck  should  have  chosen 
the  night  of  our  return  for  his  first  visit  to  the  '  Discovery.' 
Up  to  this  time  he  had  felt  reluctant  to  leave  his  ship,  not 
knowing  when  a  change  of  weather  might  occur,  but  on  this 
day  he  had  decided  to  visit  the  company  to  which  he  had 
brought  such  welcome  intelligence,  and  soon  after  I  had 
emerged  from  my  first  delicious  bath  and  was  revelling  in  the 
delights  of  clean  garments,  I  had  the  pleasure  of  welcoming 
him  on  board. 

In  those  last  weary  marches  over  the  barrier  I  had  little 
expected  that  the  first  feast  in  our  home  quarters  would  be 
taken  with  strange  faces  gathered  about  our  festive  table,  but 


1903]    STRAIN  OF  THE  SOUTHERN  JOURNEY     121 

so  it  was,  and  I  can  well  remember  the  look  of  astonishment 
that  dawned  on  those  faces  when  we  gradually  displayed  our 
power  of  absorbing  food.  As  we  ate  on  long  after  the  appe- 
tites of  our  visitors  had  been  satisfied,  there  was  at  first  mild 
surprise  :  then  we  could  see  politeness  struggling  with  bewilder- 
ment ;  and  finally  the  sense  of  the  ludicrous  overcame  all 
forms,  and  our  guests  were  forced  to  ask  whether  this  sort  of 
thing  often  happened,  and  whether  we  had  had  anything  at  all 
to  eat  on  our  southern  journey. 

But  although  we  found  our  appetites  very  difficult  to 
appease,  for  a  fortnight  after  our  return  from  the  south  our 
party  were  in  a  very  sorry  condition.  Shackleton  at  once  took 
to  his  bed,  and  although  he  soon  made  an  effort  to  be  out  and 
about  again,  he  found  that  the  least  exertion  caused  a  return 
of  his  breathlessness,  and  more  than  once  on  entering  or  leav- 
ing the  living-quarters  he  had  a  return  of  those  violent  fits  of 
coughing  which  had  given  him  so  much  trouble  on  the  journey  ; 
now,  however,  after  such  attacks,  he  could  creep  into  his  cabin 
and  there  rest  until  the  strain  had  worn  off  and  some  measure 
of  his  strength  returned.  With  Wilson,  who  at  one  time  had 
shown  the  least  signs  of  scurvy,  the  disease  had  increased  very 
rapidly  towards  the  end.  He  had  slightly  strained  his  leg 
early  in  the  journey,  and  here  the  symptoms  were  most 
evident,  causing  swelling  and  discolouration  behind  the  knee ; 
his  gums  also  had  dropped  into  a  bad  state,  so  he  wisely 
decided  to  take  to  his  bed,  where  he  remained  perfectly  quiet 
for  ten  days.  This  final  collapse  showed  the  grim  determination 
which  alone  must  have  upheld  him  during  the  last  marches. 

If  I  was  the  least  affected  of  the  party,  I  was  by  no  means 
fit  and  well :  although  I  was  able  to  struggle  about  during  the 
daytime,  I  had  both  legs  much  swollen  and  very  uncomfortable 
gums.  But  the  worst  result  of  the  tremendous  reaction  which 
overcame  us,  I  found  to  be  the  extraordinary  feeling  of  lassi- 
tude which  it  produced ;  it  was  an  effort  to  move,  and  during 
the  shortest  walks  abroad  I  had  an  almost  unconquerable 
inclination  to  sit  down  wherever  a  seat  could  be  found.  And 
this  lassitude  was  not  physical  only  5  to  write,  or  even  to  think, 


122       THE   VOYAGE    OF    THE    'DISCOVERY'     [Feb. 

had  become  wholly  distasteful,  and  sometimes  quite  impossible. 
At  this  time  I  seemed  to  be  incapable  of  all  but  eating  or 
sleeping  or  lounging  in  the  depths  of  an  armchair,  whilst  I 
lazily  scanned  the  files  of  the  newspapers  which  had  grown  so 
unfamiliar.  Many  days  passed  before  I  could  rouse  myself 
from  this  slothful  humour,  and  it  was  many  weeks  before  I  had 
returned  to  a  normally  vigorous  condition. 

It  was  probably  this  exceptionally  relaxed  state  of  health 
that  made  me  so  slow  to  realise  that  the  ice  conditions  were 
very  different  from  what  they  had  been  in  the  previous  season. 
I  was  vaguely  surprised  to  learn  that  the  '  Morning  '  had 
experienced  so  much  obstruction  in  the  Ross  Sea,  and  I  was 
astonished  to  hear  that  the  pack  was  still  hanging  in  the 
entrance  of  the  Sound,  and  as  yet  showed  no  sign  of  clearing 
away  to  the  north ;  but  it  was  long  before  I  connected  these 
facts  with  circumstances  likely  to  have  an  adverse  bearing  on 
our  position,  and  the  prospect  of  the  ice  about  us  remaining 
fast  throughout  the  season  never  once  entered  my  head. 

My  diary  for  this  month  shows  a  gradual  awakening  to  the 
true  state  of  affairs,  and  I  therefore  give  some  extracts  from  it, 
more  especially  as  when  the  news  of  our  detention  first 
reached  England  it  was  half  suspected  that  the  delay  was 
intentional,  and  it  is  doubtful  whether  that  view  has  been 
entirely  dissipated  even  yet. 

1  February  8. — We  are  expecting  a  general  break-up  of  the 
ice  every  day,  but  for  some  reason  it  is  hanging  fire.  This  is 
the  date  of  our  arrival  at  Hut  Point  last  year,  and  then  the 
open  water  extended  as  far  as  the  Point ;  it  is  evident  that 
this  season  is  very  backward,  and  I  do  not  like  the  way  in 
which  the  pack  is  hanging  about  in  sight  of  the  "  Morning." 
It  must  go  far  to  damp  all  prospects  of  the  swell  necessary  for 
a  general  break-up.  The  "  Morning "  is  eight  miles  away ; 
very  slowly  she  is  creeping  closer,  but  I  do  not  think  that  she 
has  advanced  more  than  a  quarter  of  a  mile  in  the  last  week. 
We  have  been  arranging  the  stores  which  are  to  be  transferred, 
but  it  will  be  rather  a  waste  of  labour  to  transport  them  whilst 
the  distance  remains  so  great. 


i9o3]  COMMUNICATION  WITH  THE  'MORNING'  123 

'To-day  England,  Evans,  and  nine  men  came  from  the 
"  Morning,"  bringing  us  a  fresh  load  of  papers  and  some  more 
luxuries,  especially  potatoes.  At  present  I  feel  that  if  I  had 
the  power  of  poetic  expression  I  should  certainly  write  an  ode 
to  the  potato.  Can  one  ever  forget  that  first  fresh  "hot  and 
floury"  after  so  long  a  course  of  the  miserable  preserved 
article  ? ' 

'  February  10. — To-day  we  gave  a  dinner  party,  the  invita- 
tion being  delivered  across  six  miles  of  ice  through  the  medium 
of  the  semaphore.  Colbeck,  Doorly,  Morrison,  and  Davidson 
arrived  as  guests  clad  in  good  stout  canvas  suits  and  quite 
ready  for  the  feast.  They  brought  good  news,  for  they  re- 
ported that  more  than  a  mile  of  ice  has  broken  away  yesterday 
and  this  morning.  We  entertained  our  guests  principally  on 
the  luxuries  they  had  brought  us,  and  there  was  little  to  be 
complained  of  in  the  fare  ;  we  had  giblet  soup,  skua  gull  as 
an  entree,  then  our  one  and  only  turkey,  and  a  joint  of  beef, 
with  plum-pudding  and  jellies  to  follow.  Truly  we  are  living 
high  in  these  days,  and  I  ask  myself  whether  it  was  really  I 
who  was  eating  seal  blubber  a  fortnight  ago.  After  dinner  we 
had  the  usual  musical  gathering,  to  which  our  guests  brought 
a  great  deal  of  fresh  talent.  We  have  had  a  right  merry  night, 
and  now  all  are  coiled  down  to  sleep ;  those  who  cannot  find 
berths  are  snoring  happily  on  the  wardroom  table.' 

''February  12. — The  weather  has  changed  very  much  for 
the  worse.  The  day  of  our  return  seemed  to  mark  the  last  of 
the  fine  sunny  summer  ;  since  that  it  has  been  almost  con- 
tinuously overcast,  and  our  old  enemy  the  wind  returns  at  all 
too  frequent  intervals.  Colbeck  was  weather-bound  yesterday, 
but  it  gave  us  an  opportunity  of  discussing  the  situation.  If 
the  ice  is  to  be  very  late  in  breaking  up,  I  think  it  is  advisable 
that  the  "  Morning  "  should  not  delay  to  await  our  release  ; 
she  at  least  should  run  no  risk  of  being  detained,  and  it  is  to  be 
remembered  that  she  has  little  power  to  push  through  the 
young  ice.  We  have  decided  to  commence  the  transport  of 
stores  to-morrow ;  it  will  be  tiresome  work,  but  we  ought  to 
get  it  over  in  less  than  a  fortnight.' 


124      THE  VOYAGE   OF   THE   <  DISCOVERY '    [Feb. 

On  February  13  the  work  of  transferring  the  stores  was 
commenced  ;  it  was  arranged  that  the  loads  should  be  taken 
half-way  by  the  '  Morning's  '  men,  and  from  thence  brought  in 
by  our  own.  It  seemed  at  first  that  the  '  Morning,'  with  her 
smaller  company,  would  have  the  heavier  task,  but  this  was 
avoided  by  a  very  liberal  interpretation  of  the  half-way  point ; 
in  fact,  the  distance  they  covered  gradually  became  little  more 
than  a  quarter  of  the  whole,  whilst  our  parties  took  3!  hours 
to  fetch  the  load  in  from  the  junction.  The  loads  ran  from 
1,500  lbs.  to  1,800  lbs.,  and  in  good  weather  two  could  be  got 
across  in  the  day,  but  the  biting  cold  east  wind  was  a  great 
hindrance,  and  was  felt  more  keenly  at  the  '  Discovery '  end. 
It  was  in  general  especially  strong  about  Hut  Point,  showing 
that,  as  we  had  suspected,  chance  had  placed  our  winter 
quarters  in  the  most  windy  spot  in  the  vicinity. 

Owing  to  this  interference  of  the  weather,  by  the  20th  only 
eight  loads  had  been  brought  in ;  on  that  day,  therefore,  we 
started  an  extra  party,  which  went  to  the  ■  Morning '  in  the 
forenoon  and  returned  with  a  whole  load  in  the  afternoon.  In 
this  manner  ten  more  loads  were  transported  by  the  evening 
of  the  23rd,  and  this  completed  the  work  except  for  sundry 
light  articles.  The  manner  in  which  the  officers  and  men  of 
the  relief  ship  stuck  to  this  very  monotonous  task  was  beyond 
praise ;  if  anything  had  been  wanting  to  show  their  ardent 
desire  to  assist  us  by  every  means  in  their  power,  this  surely 
would  have  proved  it.  On  our  side,  our  people  laboured  for 
their  own  comfort,  though,  whatever  the  cause,  they  were  little 
likely  to  jib  at  hard  work  ;  in  fact,  on  this  occasion  there  were 
not  a  few  who,  like  Mr.  Barne,  volunteered  to  make  the  double 
journey  each  day — a  matter  involving  eleven  or  twelve  hours 
of  solid  marching. 

The  goods  which  we  thus  obtained  from  our  relief  ship 
were  none  of  them  necessary  to  our  continued  existence  in  the 
South,  but  they  were  such  as  added  greatly  to  the  comfort  of 
our  position,  and  I  do  not  use  the  word  'necessary'  here  in 
its  strictest  sense;  as  far  as  food  is  concerned,  the  absolute 
necessities  of  life  are  very  limited,  and  in  the  South  they  were 


1903]  STORES  TRANSPORTED  125 

amply  provided  by  the  region  in  which  we  lived,  for  life  could 
have  been  maintained  on  the  seals  alone.  But  although 
existence  may  be  supported  in  this  simple  fashion,  it  is  scarcely 
to  be  supposed  that  civilised  beings  would  willingly  subject 
themselves  to  such  limitations,  and  therefore  it  is  reasonable 
to  include  as  necessaries  such  articles  as  not  only  make 
existence  possible,  but  life  tolerable. 

From  this  broader  point  of  view  we  were  well  equipped  in 
the  '  Discovery,'  and  experience  had  taught  us  that  we  could 
continue  to  live  with  comparative  comfort  on  very  modest 
requirements.  We  had  an  ample  stock  of  flour — enough  to 
have  lasted  us  for  at  least  three  years.  To  this  might  be 
added  a  large  store  of  biscuit,  which  had  been  rarely  used 
except  on  our  sledge  journeys.  We  were  well  provided  with 
sugar,  butter,  pea-flour,  tea,  chocolate,  jam,  and  marmalade, 
and  had  a  moderate  supply  of  lard,  bottled  fruits,  pickles, 
cheese,  and  milk.  With  our  holds  thus  stored  we  should  have 
had  little  cause  for  anxiety  for  at  least  two  or  three  years  to 
come,  but  with  the  relief  ship  so  well  stocked  it  can  be 
imagined  that  we  were  not  long  in  considering  how  we  might 
still  further  increase  our  comfort  and  provide  for  a  greater 
variety  in  our  fare.  Our  vegetables,  both  tinned  and  dried, 
had  been  a  distinct  failure,  and  it  was  in  this,  therefore,  that 
we  made  our  first  call  on  the  resources  of  the  '  Morning.'  But 
besides  this  we  had  run  very  short  of  sauces,  herbs,  tinned 
soups,  and  articles  of  this  nature,  which  were  particularly 
desirable  for  cooking  and  seasoning  our  dishes  of  seal-meat. 
Our  cheese,  too,  was  not  very  satisfactory,  whereas  that  brought 
by  the  '  Morning '  from  New  Zealand  was  in  excellent  condi- 
tion ;  and  although  our  tinned  butter  was  very  good,  we  were 
not  long  in  discovering  that  the  fresh  New  Zealand  butter 
brought  by  the  '  Morning '  was  a  great  deal  better. 

The  sledge  loads  which  were  dragged  across  the  ice  with 
so  much  hard  labour  during  this  month  of  February  went, 
therefore,  as  far  as  food  was  concerned,  to  supplying  minor 
deficiencies  and  to  ensuring  for  us  in  the  second  winter  a 
greater  degree  of  comfort  than  we  had  enjoyed  in  the  first ; 


126       THE   VOYAGE    OF    THE    'DISCOVERY'     [Feb. 

but,  besides  food,  they  contained  other  stores  which,  although 
we  could  have  done  without,  we  were  exceedingly  glad  to  have. 
In  this  manner  we  took  the  small  quantity  of  engine-oil  which 
the  utmost  generosity  could  spare,  nearly  a  hundred  gallons 
of  paraffin,  some  finneskoes,  mits,  and  socks,  and  some  canvas 
and  light  material  to  repair  our  tattered  garments. 

'  February  18. —  .  .  .  Yesterday  I  paid  my  first  visit  to  the 
"Morning,"  and  although  I  took  the  journey  very  slowly,  I 
found  it  an  awful  grind.  Hodgson  accompanied  me  and 
shared  in  a  royal  welcome.  During  the  night  the  ship  broke 
away  twice  and  had  to  steam  up  and  re-secure  to  the  floe  ;  it 
was  strange  to  feel  the  throD  of  the  engines  once  more.  A  few 
small  pieces  of  ice  are  breaking  away,  but  there  is  practically 
no  swell,  and  the  pack  can  still  be  seen  on  the  northern 
horizon.  At  this  time  last  year  we  had  a  constant  swell  rolling 
into  the  strait,  but  as  I  returned  to-day  the  ice  conditions  were 
so  stagnant  that  one  begins  to  wonder  whether  our  floe  is 
going  to  break  up  at  all.  It  is  rather  late  in  the  day,  but  I 
have  arranged  to  send  some  people  down  to  the  ice-edge  to  try 
the  effect  of  explosions.' 

'  February  22. — Yesterday  I  took  the  explosive  party  down 
to  the  "  Morning."  We  made  a  hole  about  three  hundred 
yards  from  the  ice-edge,  and  sank  a  charge  of  19  lbs.  of  gun- 
cotton  about  six  feet  below  the  surface.  It  blew  up  a  hole 
about  twenty  feet  in  diameter,  but  the  effect  was  altogether 
local ;  there  were  no  extending  cracks.  We  next  tried  closer 
to  the  edge,  and  sank  the  charge  about  thirty  feet.  The  effect 
was  better  :  a  similar  hole  was  made,  but  from  it  a  few  long 
cracks  ran  to  right  and  left.  To-day  two  more  charges  were 
exploded  near  the  cracks  already  formed ;  the  cracks  were 
increased  in  length  and  number,  but  no  part  of  the  floe  was 
detached.  I  came  to  the  conclusion  that  it  was  only  a  waste 
of  material  to  continue  these  experiments  further,  and  sent 
the  party  back.  On  the  whole,  I  think,  something  might  be 
done  in  this  way  towards  breaking  up  the  ice,  but,  if  so,  the 
business  must  be  undertaken  in  a  thoroughly  systematic 
manner  j   we   must  be  prepared  to  employ  everyone  at  the 


1903]  DELAYS   IN   THE    BREAK-UP  127 

work,  and  to  expend  gun-cotton  with  a  lavish  hand ;  it  is  far 
too  late  to  commence  such  a  big  undertaking  this  year.' 

''February  25. —  .  .  .  There  is  no  doubt  things  are  looking 
serious.  The  ice  is  as  stagnant  as  ever ;  there  has  been 
scarcely  any  change  in  the  last  week.  I  have  had  to  rouse 
myself  to  face  the  situation.  The  "  Morning  "  must  go  in  less 
than  a  week,  and  it  seems  now  impossible  that  we  shall  be  free 
by  that  time,  though  I  still  hope  the  break-up  may  come  after 
she  has  departed.  I  have  been  busy  all  day  writing  despatches, 
and  have  drawn  up  a  summary  of  our  proceedings,  as  well  as 
a  more  detailed  description  of  our  present  position. 

1  Some  time  ago  I  decided  that,  if  we  are  to  remain  on 
here,  it  will  be  with  a  reduced  ship's  company,  and  certainly 
without  the  one  or  two  undesirables  that  we  possess. 

'Yesterday  I  had  a  talk  to  the  men.  I  put  the  whole 
situation  before  them  ;  I  told  them  that  I  thought  we  should 
probably  get  out  after  the  "Morning"  had  left,  but  it  was 
necessary  to  consider  the  possibility  of  our  not  being  able  to 
do  so,  and  to  make  arrangements  for  such  a  contingency  at 
once.  I  said  that  I  wished  nobody  to  stop  on  board  who  did 
not  do  so  voluntarily,  and  I  hinted  that  I  should  be  glad  for  a 
reduction  in  our  numbers ;  anyone  who  wished  to  leave  would 
be  given  a  passage  in  the  "  Morning." 

'  To-day  a  list  has  been  sent  round  for  the  names  of  those 
who  desire  to  quit,  and  the  result  is  curiously  satisfactory.  I 
had  decided  to  reduce  our  number  by  eight,  and  there  are 
eight  names  on  the  list,  and  not  only  that,  but  these  names  are 
precisely  those  which  I  should  have  placed  there  had  I  under- 
taken the  selection  myself. 

\  As  regards  the  mess-deck,  therefore,  we  shall  be  left  with 
the  pick  of  our  company,  all  on  good  terms,  and  all  ready,  as 
they  say,  to  stand  by  the  ship  whatever  betides.  Of  course, 
all  the  officers  wish  to  remain ;  but  here,  with  much  reluctance, 
I  have  had  to  pick  out  the  name  of  one  who,  in  my  opinion, 
is  not  fitted  to  do  so.  It  has  been  a  great  blow  to  poor 
Shackleton,  but  I  have  had  to  tell  him  that  I  think  he  must 
go  ;  he  ought  not  to  risk  further  hardships  in  his  present  state 


i28      THE  VOYAGE   OF    THE   'DISCOVERY5    [FriJ. 

of  health.  But  we  cannot  afford  to  lose  officers,  and  Colbeck 
has  already  kindly  consented  to  replace  Shackleton  by  his 
Naval  sub-lieutenant,  Mulock,  and  the  latter  is  most  anxious 
to  join  us.' 

1  February  26. — We  have  84  tons  of  coal  left  in  the 
"  Discovery."  This  will  be  enough  for  more  than  one  winter, 
but  will  not  be  sufficient  to  allow  us  to  do  any  further 
exploration  if,  as  I  hope,  we  get  out  of  the  ice ;  so  I  asked 
Colbeck  to  leave  20  tons  on  the  Erebus  glacier  tongue.  He 
came  on  board  to-night  with  Skelton  and  Davidson  to  say  that 
this  was  done  yesterday.  It  appears  that  they  had  a  great 
excitement  last  night,  for  as  they  came  back  to  the  ice-edge, 
for  the  first  time  they  found  a  northerly  swell  rolling  into  the 
strait,  and  the  ice  was  breaking  up  with  extraordinary  rapidity. 
In  little  more  than  half  an  hour  nearly  a  mile  and  a  quarter 
went  out,  and  bets  were  being  freely  made  that  they  would  be 
up  to  Hut  Point  in  the  morning  ;  but,  alas  !  the  swell  lasted 
little  beyond  the  half-hour,  and  after  that  all  was  quiet  again.' 

' February  28. — Colbeck  has  spent  the  last  few  days  with 
us  ;  he  goes  back  to-morrow  early,  and  with  him  go  those  of 
our  party  who  are  homeward  bound.  Then  in  the  evening  we 
are  invited  to  a  last  feast  before  our  gallant  little  relief  ship 
turns  her  bows  to  the  north.' 

'  March  2. —  .  .  .  Yesterday  early  our  guests  left  us,  and 
our  returning  members  soon  followed  with  their  baggage.  In 
the  afternoon  all  our  company,  except  two  or  three  men  and 
Wilson,  set  forth  for  the  "  Morning,"  there  to  be  entertained 
for  the  last  time  by  our  good  friends ;  there  was  much  revelry 
on  the  small  mess-deck  forward,  and  at  the  eight-o'clock 
dinner  aft  seats  had  to  be  found  for  no  fewer  than  sixteen  ;  as 
the  utmost  seating  capacity  of  the  wardroom  table  was  eight, 
the  overflow  had  to  be  accommodated  in  the  tiny  cabins  at  the 
side,  but  this  in  no  way  detracted  from  the  excellence  of  the 
dinner  or  the  merriment  of  the  evening.  After  a  most  satisfy- 
ing meal  we  all  gathered  about  the  piano,  the  air  became  thick 
with  tobacco  smoke,  and  for  the  last  time  we  raised  our  voices 
in  the  now  familiar  choruses.     It  was  well  into  the  small  hours 


1903]        DEPARTURE  OF  THE   'MORNING'  129 

before  this  final  merry-making  came  to  an  end,  and  the 
occupants  of  the  crowded  wardroom  rolled  themselves  into 
blankets  to  snatch  a  few  hours'  rest. 

1  During  the  night  the  temperature  had  fallen  to  zero,  and 
young  ice  had  formed  over  the  open  water  ;  it  needed  no  great 
experience  to  see  that  it  was  quite  time  that  our  farewells  were 
said.  The  morning  proved  overcast  and  gloomy,  and  as  we 
snatched  a  hasty  breakfast  a  strong  south-easterly  wind  sprang 
up,  drifting  thick  clouds  of  snow  across  the  floe  and  dissipating 
the  young  ice  to  seaward.  It  was  not  a  cheering  scene  for  our 
leave-taking,  but  delay  was  impossible. 

1  At  length  we  of  the  "  Discovery,"  with  our  belongings, 
were  mustered  on  the  floe  ;  the  last  good-byes  had  been  said, 
and  the  last  messages  were  being  shouted  as  the  "  Morning  " 
slowly  backed  away  from  the  ice-edge ;  in  a  few  minutes  she 
was  turning  to  the  north,  every  rope  and  spar  outlined  against 
the  black  northern  sky.  Cheer  after  cheer  was  raised  as  she 
gradually  gathered  way,  and  long  after  she  had  passed  out  of 
earshot  our  forlorn  little  band  stood  gazing  at  her  receding  hull, 
following  in  our  minds  her  homeward  course  and  wondering 
when  we  too  should  be  permitted  to  take  that  northern  track. 

1  Then  we  turned  our  faces  to  the  south,  and,  after  a  long 
and  tiring  walk  against  the  keen  wind,  have  reached  our  own 
good  ship  ;  so  now  we  must  settle  down  again  into  our  old 
routine.  If  the  ice  does  not  break  up  we  are  cut  off  from 
civilisation  for  at  least  another  year,  but  I  do  not  think  that 
prospect  troubles  anyone  very  much.  We  are  prepared  to 
take  things  as  they  come,  but  one  wonders  what  the  future  has 
in  store  for  us.' 

1  March  13. — I  have  abandoned  all  hope  of  the  ice  going 
out.  The  most  optimistic  members  of  our  community  still 
climb  up  the  Arrival  Heights  in  hopes  of  bringing  back  favour- 
able reports,  but  it  is  long  since  they  have  been  able  to  return 
with  cheerful  faces.  We  had  a  strong  north-easterly  blow  on 
the  5  th  and  6th,  during  which  hope  ran  high,  and  was  followed 
by  much  excitement  when  Dellbridge  dashed  on  board  to  say 
that  nearly  all  the  ice  had  gone  out,  and  that  the  open  water 

VOL.    II.  K 


i3o      THE   VOYAGE  OF    THE   'DISCOVERY'   [Mar. 

was  little  more  than  a  mile  from  us.  We  ran  out  to  see  this 
pleasing  prospect,  but  only  to  find  that  the  report  was  based 
on  a  curious  mirage  effect,  and  that  it  would  have  been  nearer 
the  mark  to  have  given  four  miles  instead  of  one  as  the  distance 
of  the  open  sea.  Since  this  incident  there  has  been  no  change ; 
heavy  pack  has  again  been  seen  to  the  north,  and  it  is  evident 
that  there  is  no  swell  entering  the  strait. 

1  The  weather  is  a  great  deal  worse  than  it  was  last  year ; 
we  have  had  much  more  wind  and  much  lower  temperatures  ; 
the  thermometer  has  not  been  above  zero  since  the  6th,  but 
possibly  this  is  due  to  the  absence  of  open  water  about  us. 
We  were  frozen  in  last  year  on  the  24th,  but  the  old  ice  had 
ceased  to  break  away  some  time  before  that,  and  so  I  fear  the 
chance  of  more  ice  going  out  now  is  very  small. 

'  But  meanwhile  we  have  not  been  idle ;  we  have  deter- 
mined to  stick  rigidly  to  our  fresh-meat  routine  throughout  the 
winter,  and  whenever  the  weather  has  permitted,  our  seal-killing 
parties  have  been  away  on  their  murderous  errand.  Already 
the  snow-trench  larder  contains  116  frozen  carcases.  We  have 
now  thirty-seven  mouths  to  feed,  and  an  average  seal  lasts 
about  a  day  and  a  half ;  later,  when  appetites  fall  off,  it  ought 
to  run  to  two  or  two  and  a  half  days,  so  that  we  shall  be  safe 
in  allowing  an  average  of  two  days  per  seal. 

1  Our  sportsmen,  too,  have  been  adding  to  our  food  supply, 
and  have  succeeded  in  killing  over  five  hundred  skuas ;  one 
would  not  have  thought  there  were  so  many  to  be  killed. 
These  birds  will  form  a  good  change  to  the  regulation  seal. 
Our  ideas  and  customs  'liave  certainly  changed :  last  year  we 
regarded  the  skua  as  an  unclean,  carrion-feeding  bird.  It  was 
Skelton  who  first  discovered  the  error  of  our  ways.  Whilst 
sledging  to  the  west  he  caught  one  in  a  noose,  and  promptly 
put  it  into  the  pot ;  the  result  was  so  satisfactory  that  the  skua 
has  figured  largely  on  our  menu  ever  since.  In  summer  each 
appetite  demands  its  whole  skua,  but  in  winter  a  single  bird 
ought  to  do  for  two  people ;  the  legs  and  wings  are  skinny,  but 
the  breast  is  full  and  plump.  Like  all  polar  animals  it  is 
protected  with  blubber,  and  unusual  precautions  have  to  be 


1903]     PREPARING  FOR  OUR  SECOND  WINTER  131 

taken  to  prevent  the  meat  being  impregnated  with  its  rancid 
taste.  The  birds  that  have  been  shot  for  the  winter  have  been 
cleaned  and  hung  in  the  rigging,  with  their  skins  and  plumage 
still  on.  It  is  found  that  when  they  are  taken  below  and 
thawed  out  the  skin  can  be  removed  without  difficulty, 

'  Summing  up  our  food  supply  for  the  winter,  therefore,  we 
seem  to  be  in  pretty  good  case  : 

116  seals  should  last  about  230  days 

551  skuas    ,,        ,,      „        25     ,, 
20  sheep    „        ,,      ,,        20     ,, 

Total     275     11 

Of  course  some  of  the  seal-meat  will  be  required  for  sledging 
operations,  and  we  must  allow  margins  for  accidents,  but  on 
the  whole  I  think  we  ought  to  steer  through  the  winter  without 
difficulty.  We  deplore  very  heartily  that  we  cannot  add  pen- 
guins to  the  variety  of  our  fare,  but  it  is  long  since  any  have 
approached  the  ship,  and  they  are  not  likely  to  come  now, 
across  so  many  miles  of  ice. 

1  March  14. — We  have  admitted  the  certainty  of  a  second 
winter,  and  to-day  orders  have  been  given  to  prepare  the  ship 
for  it.  It  is  like  putting  the  clock  back :  all  our  care  and 
trouble  in  getting  ready  for  the  sea  voyage  are  wasted.  The 
boilers  will  be  run  down  again,  the  engines  pulled  to  pieces, 
small  steam-pipes  disconnected,  ropes  unrove  and  coiled  away, 
the  winter  awning  prepared,  and  snow  brought  in  on  the  decks. 
The  awning  is  in  a  very  dilapidated  state,  and  looks  anything 
but  fit  to  face  the  rigours  of  another  season,  but  I  suppose  we 
shall  be  able  to  patch  it  up  somehow.  One  thing  we  shall  not 
do  this  year,  and  that  is,  place  the  boats  out  on  the  floe ;  those 
in  the  way  of  the  awning  will  be  carried  over  on  to  the  land,  in 
which  it  is  to  be  hoped  they  will  not  sink  out  of  sight' 

''March  20. — To-day  I  went  out  on  ski  to  Cone  Hill,  close 
to  Castle  Rock.  The  day  has  been  fine,  calm,  with  a  bright 
sun,  but  the  temperature  has  fallen  to  —  200.  From  the  hill  it 
was  clear  that  the  old  ice  had  broken  away  a  good  deal  since 
the  "  Morning  "  left,  but  it  is  still  a  long  way  from  the  ship— 

K  2 


132      THE  VOYAGE  OF    THE  'DISCOVERY'  [Ma*. 

quite  three  and  a  half  miles.  The  young  ice  nearly  covers  the 
sea,  and  must  be  getting  pretty  solid.  There  were  a  good 
many  open  leads  in  it,  but  very  few  seals  were  up,  which  is 
curious  on  such  a  fine  day ;  yesterday  we  added  twenty-eight 
to  our  stock,  which  ought  now  to  be  ample. 

1  On  my  walks  I  can  rarely  think  of  much  else  but  our 
position  and  its  possibilities.  What  does  our  imprisonment 
mean  ?  Was  it  this  summer  or  the  last  which  was  the  excep- 
tion ?  Does  the  ice  usually  break  away  around  the  cape,  or 
does  it  usually  stop  short  to  the  north  ?  For  us  these  must  be 
the  gravest  possible  questions,  for  on  the  answers  depend  our 
prospects  of  getting  away  next  year  or  at  all.  It  is  little  wonder 
that  I  think  of  these  things  continually  and  scan  every  nook 
and  corner  in  hopes  of  discovering  evidences  to  support  my 
views ;  for  I  hold  steadily  to  a  belief  that  the  answers  are  in 
our  favour,  and  that  our  detention  is  due  to  exceptional 
conditions. 

\  The  Ross  Sea  has  certainly  never  been  found  in  such  a 
heavily  packed  state  as  it  was  this  year,  but  how  far  this  bears 
on  the  question  one  can  only  surmise.  Coming  more  im- 
mediately to  our  neighbourhood,  we  have  but  one  thing  which 
can  help  us  in  the  comparison  of  the  two  seasons — namely,  the 
state  of  the  old  ice  on  our  arrival.  If  this  was  one  year's  ice, 
as  we  supposed,  then  there  must  have  been  open  water  round 
the  cape  for  two  years  in  succession,  and  we  could  reasonably 
complain  of  ill  fortune  if  there  are  many  close  seasons  to 
follow  ;  but  the  question  is,  Was  what  we  found  one  year's  ice? 
On  our  arrival  we  never  doubted  the  fact,  but  for  this  reason 
we  never  looked  critically  at  it,  and  now  it  is  most  difficult  to 
remember  the  indications  which  we  observed  so  casually  more 
than  a  year  ago.  All  sorts  of  complicated  difficulties  arise  in 
thinking  out  this  problem,  yet  if  it  were  purely  an  academic 
one,  I  should  long  ago  have  given  my  opinion  unhesitatingly 
in  the  direction  I  have  indicated.  But,  alas  !  it  is  far  too 
serious  to  be  disposed  of  by  the  strongest  expression  of  opinion, 
and  no  certain  answer  will  come  until  we  have  waited  to  see 
what  happens  next  year. 


1903]  SETTLING   DOWN  133 

1  So  at  the  end  of  all  my  cogitations  on  this  most  important 
matter,  I  get  little  further  than  the  knowledge  that  patience  is 
an  invaluable  quality,  and  that  it  is  not  the  least  use  worrying 
about  the  question  now.  I  think  this  is  pretty  well  the  attitude 
of  everyone  on  board,  for  although  the  subject  sometimes 
crops  up  in  conversation,  it  is  generally  dismissed  as  unprofit- 
able :  all  are  content  to  make  the  best  of  the  present  and  hope 
for  the  best  in  the  future. 

1  It  is  certainly  a  great  matter  for  congratulation  that  we 
are  rid  of  the  undesirable  members  of  our  community ; 
although  they  were  far  too  small  a  minority  to  cause  active 
trouble,  there  was  always  the  knowledge  that  they  were  on 
board,  mixing  freely  with  others,  ready  to  fan  the  flame  of  dis- 
content and  exaggerate  the  smallest  grievance.  No  doubt  it 
would  have  been  possible  to  suppress  this  element  as  effectually 
during  a  second  winter  as  during  the  first,  but  one  grows  tired 
of  keeping  a  sharp  eye  on  disciplinary  matters,  and  it  is  an 
infinite  relief  to  feel  that  there  is  no  longer  the  necessity  for  it. 
With  such  an  uncertain  future  before  us,  it  is  good  to  feel  that 
there  is  not  a  single  soul  to  mar  the  harmony  of  our  relations, 
and  to  know  that,  whatever  may  befall,  one  can  have  complete 
confidence  in  one's  companions. 

'It  is  not  until  lately  also  that  I  realised  how  easily  we 
could  spare  the  actual  services  of  those  who  have  left ;  in  fact, 
the  manner  in  which  the  work  is  done  now  seems  to  show  that 
they  were  a  hindrance  rather  than  a  help  to  it.  For  instance, 
though  I  was  unaffectedly  glad  to  see  the  last  of  our  cook,  I 
was  a  little  doubtful  as  to  how  we  should  manage  in  the  galley 
department,  but  as  things  have  turned  out,  we  are  doing 
infinitely  better.  It  has  been  arranged  that  the  cook's  mate, 
Clarke,  should  be  nominally  the  cook,  and  that  volunteers 
from  the  crew  should  take  spells  of  a  fortnight  or  more  as  his 
assistant ;  this  means  practically  that  Clarke  continues  to  make 
the  excellent  bread  and  cakes  which  we  have  always  enjoyed, 
whilst  the  cooking  is  conducted  more  or  less  by  a  committee 
of  taste,  who  collectively  bring  considerable  knowledge  to  bear 
on  the  subject  and  take  a  huge  delight  in  trying  to   make 


134      THE  VOYAGE  OF    THE   'DISCOVERY'   [Mar. 

pleasing  dishes.  Of  course,  as  is  natural  with  such  an  arrange- 
ment, there  are  occasional  failures,  but  on  the  whole  it  works 
admirably ;  the  men  are  delighted  with  what  might  be  termed 
the  freedom  of  the  galley,  and  at  least  they  know  now  that 
everything  is  prepared  with  a  proper  regard  for  cleanliness.' 

1  March  23.— The  sun  is  sinking  rapidly,  and  already  lamps 
are  lit  for  dinner.  It  is  curious  to  observe  the  varying  effect 
which  the  summer  has  had  on  the  ice  about  us.  At  the  end 
of  the  winter  it  was  from  six  to  seven  feet  thick,  but  now  at  its 
thickest,  in  Arrival  Bay,  it  is  only  five  feet,  whereas  a  few 
hundred  yards  away  off  Hut  Point  at  one  time  it  was  almost 
melted  through,  while  off  Cape  Armitage  there  was  a  large  hole 
where  it  had  disappeared  altogether.  Under  this  hole  we  have 
recently  found  a  shallow  bank  of  three  fathoms,  and  we  know 
there  is  another  bank  off  Hut  Point ;  there  can  be  no  doubt, 
therefore,  that  the  melting  takes  place  where  the  current  runs 
rapidly  over  shallow  places.  In  our  small  bay  the  ice  is  eight 
or  nine  feet  thick,  and  in  some  places  much  more,  but  this  is 
due  to  the  quantity  of  snow  which  has  fallen  on  its  surface. 

'  It  is  strange  how  the  tracks  of  footsteps  remain  indicated 
in  the  snow  round  about;  as  a  rule,  the  compressed  snow 
under  each  footprint  remains  firm,  and  is  left  like  a  small  islet 
after  the  surrounding  deposit  has  been  swept  away  by  the  wind. 
In  this  manner  the  whole  nature  of  the  surface  about  our 
colony  has  been  altered  ;  it  is  surrounded  by  a  hard  trodden 
area  from  which  radiate  beaten  highways  in  all  directions. 
The  hill  slopes  round  about  are  quite  spoiled  for  skiing 
purposes.' 

*  April  7. — With  the  exception  of  spreading  the  awning 
our  preparations  for  winter  are  now  pretty  well  completed. 
Snow  has  been  brought  in  and  distributed  liberally  over  the 
decks,  and  has  been  banked  up  on  each  side  opposite  the 
living-quarters  ;  guide-ropes  to  the  screen  and  to  the  huts  have 
been  erected ;  one  of  the  boats  has  been  placed  on  the  ice- 
foot, and  the  remainder  so  secured  that  they  will  be  clear  of 
the  awning  ;  leading  away  in  various  directions  can  be  seen 
long  lines  of  sticks  and  cask  staves,   which  go   to   different 


i9o3]  HOCKEY  135 

fishing  holes  and  other  outlying  stations  for  work.  All  these 
are  due  to  the  industry  of  Hodgson  and  Barne. 

1  The  great  game  for  the  season  is  hockey ;  whenever  the 
weather  permits  all  hands  join  in  the  keen  contests  we  hold  on 
the  floe.  The  game  is  played  with  light  bandy-sticks  and  a 
hard  ball  made  on  board ;  it  is  just  as  well  we  have  not  the 
heavier  sticks,  as  few  rules  are  observed  and  figures  can  be  seen 
flying  about  with  sticks  held  high  above  their  heads  ready  to 
deliver  the  most  murderous  blows,  back-handed  or  front,  as 
suits  best.  There  is  really  no  time  to  consider  rules,  and 
although  there  is  the  proper  organisation  of  backs  and  forwards 
on  each  side,  no  one  wants  to  take  the  part  of  umpire. 
Occasionally  there  is  a  cry  of  "  Off  side  ! "  but  no  one  pays 
very  much  attention. 

1  However,  in  spite  of  this,  we  have  very  exciting  matches. 
Sometimes  the  officers  play  the  men,  sometimes  we  divide  by 
an  age  limit,  and  sometimes  in  other  ways.  To-day  it  has 
been  "  Married  and  Engaged  v.  Single,"  and  as  the  former  side 
lacked  numbers  we  had  to  include  in  it  those  who  were 
accused  of  being  engaged,  in  spite  of  protest.  The  match"  was 
played  in  a  temperature  of  —  400,  and  it  was  odd  to  see  the 
players  rushing  about  with  clouds  of  steam  about  their  heads 
and  their  helmets  sparkling  with  frost.  We  played  half-an-hour 
each  way,  which  was  quite  enough  in  such  weather.  We  shall, 
I  hope,  keep  to  this  capital  exercise  until  the  light  fails.' 

'  April  24. — On  Wednesday  the  sun  left  us,  and  darkness 
is  coming  on  apace  ;  and  so  we  are  entering  on  the  course  of 
our  second  winter,  but  withal  in  the  highest  spirits,  just  as 
happy  and  contented  a  community  as  can  be.  It  would  be 
agreeable  to  know  what  is  going  to  happen  next  year,  but 
otherwise  we  have  no  wants.  Our  routine  goes  like  clock- 
work ;  we  eat,  sleep,  work,  and  play  at  regular  hours,  and  are 
never  in  lack  of  employment.  Hockey,  I  fear,  must  soon 
cease,  for  lack  of  light,  but  it  has  been  a  great  diversion, 
although  not  unattended  with  risks,  for  yesterday  I  captured  a 
black  eye  from  a  ball  furiously  driven  by  Royds. 

'  Our  acetylene  plant  is  now  in  full  swing,  and  gives  us 


136      THE   VOYAGE  OF    THE   'DISCOVERY'    [May 

light  for  twelve  hours  at  an  expenditure  of  about  3  lbs.  of 
carbide.  The  winter  awning  is  spread,  and  all  is  as  snug  as 
we  can  make  it;  but  the  temperature  is  extremely  low,  and 
we  have  the  old  trouble  with  the  ice  inside  our  living-spaces.' 

'  May  6. — A  brilliant  idea  struck  us  a  fortnight  ago.  We 
thought  of  putting  our  large  fish-trap  down  on  the  shallow 
bank  off  the  cape,  and  weighing  it  every  few  days  to  see  what 
it  contained.  Visions  of  supplying  our  whole  company  with 
this  delightful  luxury  were  before  our  eyes.  The  fish-trap 
consists  of  a  large  pyramidal  frame,  six  feet  square  on  the 
base,  and  covered  with  wire  netting,  in  which  there  are  cone- 
shaped  openings. 

'  In  accordance  with  our  idea,  this  trap  was  taken  out  to 
the  bank,  which  is  about  a  mile  from  the  ship,  and  over  which 
the  ice  is  still  comparatively  thin.  Here  a  high  tripod  was 
erected,  a  hole  made,  and  the  trap  lowered  ;  two  days  after  it 
was  got  up  again,  and  to  our  great  joy  we  found  it  contained 
105  fish.  Our  visions  seemed  realised  ;  down  went  the  trap 
again,  and  without  a  moment's  delay  we  set  about  making 
another  and  digging  a  second  hole  close  to  the  ship.  This 
was  no  light  task,  and  the  workers  were  lost  to  view  from 
above  long  before  they  reached  the  bottom  of  our  solid  ice, 
which  proved  to  be  more  than  eight  feet  thick.  However,  at 
length  both  traps  were  down,  and  since  that  we  have  been 
getting  them  up  every  other  day ;  but,  alas  !  there  has  been  a 
most  terrible  falling-off  in  the  catches.  The  outer  trap  fell 
from  105  to  thirty,  then  to  ten,  and  lately  we  are  lucky  if  we 
find  more  than  five  or  six.  The  inner  has  never  had  more 
than  this  last  number,  and  sometimes  comes  up  empty.  One 
of  the  reasons  for  the  failure  of  the  outer  trap  is,  I  think,  that 
the  seals  have  found  it,  and  feel  that  they  ought  to  have  first 
choice  of  the  fish  that  it  attracts,  and  this  would  naturally  not 
be  encouraging  to  the  latter.  Sometimes  the  seals  must  run 
full  speed  into  the  trap,  because  it  often  comes  up  badly 
dented ;  one  can  only  hope  it  gives  them  a  bad  headache. 
Another  great  enemy  to  our  fishing  industry  is  the  small 
shrimp -like    amphipod  ;     these    small    creatures    collect    in 


1903]  FISHING   OPERATIONS  137 

millions,  and  eat  things  up  with  extraordinary  rapidity ;  they 
are  submarine  locusts,  and  vast  armies  of  them  settle  on  the 
bait,  or  even  on  the  live  fish,  and  in  a  few  hours  not  a  remnant 
remains  of  what  they  have  attacked. 

'  The  small  bottom  fish  which  we  catch  are  very  ugly  little 
creatures;  they  have  an  enormous  head,  a  protruding  under 
lip,  and  a  gradually  tapering  body — rather  the  shape  of  a 
whiting,  only  exaggerated.  They  are  extremely  good  eating, 
but  unfortunately  the  majority  are  very  small ;  it  takes  two  of 
the  largest  to  make  a  decent  meal  for  one  person,  and  of  the 
average  size  four  or  five  will  scarcely  suffice.  They  are  of  the 
genus  Notathenia,  and  I  believe  there  is  more  than  one  species ; 
the  Weddell  seals  feed  principally  on  these,  but  they  also  catch 
other  sorts,  whose  present  habitat  we  cannot  discover  by  any 
of  our  fishing  methods.  Besides  what  we  may  call  the  Ant- 
arctic whiting,  our  people  caught  a  quantity  of  a  surface  fish 
that  frequented  the  pools  and  cracks  in  the  ice  during  the 
summer.  This  was  whilst  I  was  absent  from  the  ship,  and  I 
have  neither  seen  nor  tasted  this  fish,  but  I  hear  that  it  gave 
very  good  sport.  Some  of  the  men  would  go  out  for  an  hour 
or  two  with  quite  a  short  line  and  bread  for  bait,  returning 
with  a  dozen  or  two  decent-sized  fish,  which  report  declares  to 
have  been  much  better  eating  than  even  the  whiting.  Now 
that  all  the  cracks  are  frozen  over  we  do  not  get  a  glimpse  of 
these  fish,  except  when  they  are  brought  to  view  from  the 
interior  of  a  seal.  We  know  that  there  must  be  lots  of  fish 
about  from  the  continuance  of  the  seals  in  our  region,  and  we 
have  strong  reason  for  supposing  that  there  must  be  some  of  a 
much  greater  size  than  any  we  have  caught,  but  we  have  tried 
all  sorts  of  methods  and  all  sorts  of  baits  without  success  in 
capturing  anything  but  our  whiting. 

1  The  seal  is  certainly  the  best  fisherman,  and  very  frequently 
when  one  is  captured  our  people  have  the  benefit  of  its  latest 
prey  as  well  as  the  animal  itself. 

1  As  far  as  our  fish-traps  are  concerned,  I'm  afraid  as  the 
darkness  deepens  our  catches  are  likely  to  get  smaller  and 
smaller.     Recently  we  have  been  saving  up,  so  that  the  mess- 


138      THE  VOYAGE   OF    THE   'DISCOVERY'    [May 

deck  should  have  a  fish  breakfast  one  Sunday  and  the  officers 
the  same  on  the  next,  but  this  will  not  continue,  as  we  cannot 
hope  to  keep  up  the  supply  for  so  many  months. 

'  Our  winter  routine  of  feeding  is  now  pretty  well  fixed. 
We  shall  have  mutton  on  Sunday  as  long  as  it  will  last,  skua  on 
Tuesday,  seal's  heart  on  Thursday,  and  plain  seal  on  the  other 
days.  The  kidneys  are  used  to  make  seal-steak  pie,  an  excel- 
lent dish ;  the  liver  comes  at  breakfast  twice  a  week  ;  and  the 
sweetbreads  I  suppose  pass  as  cook's  perquisites,  as  we 
never  see  them  aft.  I  am  thinking  of  having  cold  tinned 
meat  one  night  a  week,  so  as  to  give  the  galley  people  a 
night  off.' 

1  May  1 6. — We  are  getting  record  temperatures.  Yester- 
day the  minimum  at  the  outer  thermometer  was  —  66°,  and 
to-day  I  read  it  myself  at— 67*7°;  the  screen  thermometer 
has  not  been  below— 55 °,  showing  that  we  still  enjoy  the 
shelter  of  our  comparatively  warm  corner.  It  would  appear 
that  this  year  is  going  to  be  much  colder  than  last,  but  since 
March  we  have  had  far  less  wind  than  during  the  corresponding 
period  of  last  year,  and  we  could  welcome  a  far  severer  cold  if 
it  assures  us  an  absence  of  this  scourge. 

'Some  of  our  costumes  this  year  are  very  quaint.  Our 
gaberdine  wind  clothes  are  badly  worn,  and  what  remains  of 
them  is  being  reserved  for  sledging ;  to  take  the  place  of  these 
we  have  served  out  all  sorts  of  odd  scraps  of  material  together 
with  a  large  green  tent  which  was  brought  south  by  the 
'  Morning.'  This  has  resulted  in  the  most  curious  outer 
garments,  and  one  may  see  a  figure  approaching  in  a  pair  of 
gaily  striped  and  patched  trousers  and  a  bright  green  jumper, 
a  combination  of  colour  which  in  any  other  place  could 
scarcely  fail  to  attract  marked  attention.' 

'June  12. — This  week  we  have  had  the  first  blizzard  for  the 
winter,  with  some  rather  novel  features.  The  wind  has  come 
and  gone  with  surprising  rapidity.  Sometimes  it  has  been 
blowing  with  extreme  violence,  harder  than  I  have  ever  known 
it ;  at  others  it  has  been  almost  calm,  with  the  air  still  filled 
with  snow.     The  barometer  has  been  hurrying  down  and  up 


1903]  THE   ELECTROMETER  139 

over  a  range  of  nearly  an  inch,  and  the  thermometer  rose  at 
one  time  to  +  17^°.  Last  night  the  floor  of  the  entrance 
porch  was  a  swamp,  whilst  water  was  dripping  from  the  sides 
and  roof.  It  has  never  been  in  this  state  before  during  the 
winter.  In  many  respects  the  gale  has  been  the  worst  we  have 
had,  and  yet,  thanks  to  experience,  we  have  weathered  it  with- 
out any  of  the  minor  mishaps  of  last  year,  except  the  temporary 
loss  of  our  stove-pipe  exhaust.  From  without  the  ship  looks 
to  be  completely  buried  in  snow. 

1  We  are  still  at  a  loss  for  any  warning  of  our  approaching 
blizzards.  The  barometer  only  commences  its  vagaries  after 
the  storm  is  on  us.  There  has  been  a  suggestion  that  strong 
mirage  is  a  sign  of  bad  weather  to  come,  but  this  fortunately  is 
not  the  case,  as  very  extraordinary  mirage  effects  are  constantly 
seen.  At  one  time  we  had  an  idea  that  the  electrometer  might 
be  taken  as  a  guide,  but  this,  again,  seems  to  show  little  until 
the  gale  has  actually  begun. 

1  But  although  the  electrometer  may  not  serve  us  in  this 
way,  it  has  yielded  some  extremely  interesting  results. 
Bernacchi  has  continued  to  take  regular  observations  with 
this  instrument ;  he  mounts  it  on  a  tripod  and  takes  observa- 
tions with  the  match  conductor  just  above  it,  or  hoisted  on  a 
pole  fifteen  feet  high.  He  is  thus  able  to  discover  the  electrical 
potential  at  both  these  heights,  though  the  task  is  not  always  a 
pleasing  one,  as  the  small  screws  of  the  instrument  have  to  be 
manipulated  with  bared  fingers.  Once  or  twice  Skelton  has 
assisted  Bernacchi  in  taking  hourly  observations  over  a  con- 
siderable period.  Perhaps  the  most  interesting  point  is  that 
there  is  almost  continuously  a  negative  potential  in  our  regions, 
whereas  in  temperate  regions  the  air  is  generally  electro-positive 
to  the  earth. 

'The  observations  at  four  feet  and  fifteen  feet  show  that  the 
difference  of  potential  increases  considerably  with  the  altitude. 
During  the  summer  months  there  is  a  perceptible  daily  range, 
with  a  maximum  at  midnight  and  a  minimum  at  noon,  and  the 
potential  is  higher  than  in  winter  when  there  is  no  measurable 
range.     When  the  air  is  filled  with  falling  or  drifting  snow  the 


140      THE   VOYAGE  OF    THE   'DISCOVERY'    [June 

potential  becomes  very  large  and  the  tension  is  often  great 
enough  to  discharge  the  instrument.' 

'June  23. — Our  second  mid-winter  day  has  come  and  gone, 
finding  us  even  more  cheerful  than  the  last.  We  made  a  great 
night  of  it  last  night ;  the  warrant  officers  dined  aft,  and  we 
had  soup  made  from  a  real  turtle  sent  to  us  by  our  kind  friend 
Mr.  Kinsey,  of  Christchurch,  and  brought  over  in  the  last 
sledge-load  from  the  "Morning."  After  this  came  tinned 
halibut,  roast  beef  with  artichokes,  devilled  wing  of  skua  as 
savoury,  and  the  last  of  our  special  brand  of  champagne.  On 
ordinary  nights  we  are  now  reduced  to  enamelled  plates  and 
mugs,  but  we  still  hold  in  reserve  some  crockery  and  glass  for 
these  special  occasions,  and  it  adds  to  our  cheer  to  see  our 
table  well  appointed  again. 

1  After  dinner  we  felt  we  must  have  some  novelty,  so  some- 
one suggested  a  dance.  The  table  was  got  out  of  the  way, 
Royds  went  to  the  piano,  and  the  rest  of  us  assembled  for  a 
set  of  lancers,  one  of  the  most  uproarious  in  which  I  have 
ever  indulged.  Then  came  cock-fighting  and  tugs  of  war,  and 
altogether  we  had  as  festive  an  evening  as  we  have  ever  spent.' 

'July  3. — Our  winter  is  speeding  along  in  the  pleasantest 
fashion,  and  all  are  keeping  in  good  health  and  spirits.  Our 
puppies  of  last  year  are  puppies  no  longer,  but  have  developed 
into  dogs,  showing  all  the  unmerciful,  bullying  traits  of 
character  of  their  parents.  In  all  there  are  eight  survivors 
of  last  year's  litters:  "  Blackie,"  "Nobby,"  "Toby,"  and 
"  Violet "  are  descendants  of  poor  "  Nell,"  "  Roger "  and 
"Snowball"  of  "Blanco,"  and  "Wolf"  and  "Tin-tacks"  of 
"  Vincka."  The  different  families  are  not  at  all  fond  of  one 
another,  nor  is  there  any  wild  attachment  between  members  of 
the  same.  However,  we  have  decided  they  must  take  care  of 
themselves  and  settle  their  own  grievances,  as,  although  they 
may  be  useful  next  year,  we  do  not  propose  to  take  them  on 
long  journeys ;  they  are  therefore  allowed  to  roam  about  as 
they  please,  though  kennels  are  provided  for  them,  and  of 
course  they  are  regularly  fed.  The  result  of  this  freedom  is 
that  there  are  already  new  families  of  puppies  arriving  on  the 


1903]  HODGSON  AT  WORK  141 

scene.  The  greater  number  of  these  must  be  removed,  as  it 
cannot  be  hoped  that  they  will  be  anything  but  poor  creatures  ; 
meanwhile  there  has  been  a  searching  for  names,  and  the 
latest  suggestion  is  a  series  including  "  Plasmon,"  "  Soma- 
tose,"  and  "  Ptomaine  "  ! 

1 1  am  taking  rather  longer  walks  over  the  hills  than  I  did 
last  winter,  as  I  want  to  be  thoroughly  fit  for  the  sledging.  As  a 
rule  four  or  five  of  the  dogs  come  with  me,  and  my  appearance 
outside  is  the  signal  for  a  chorus  of  welcome  ;  as  we  go  up  the 
hills  my  companions  scrimmage,  playfully  or  otherwise,  the 
whole  time ;  then  their  delight  is  for  me  to  roll  stones  down 
the  steeper  slopes,  when  they  dash  after  them  at  a  prodigious 
speed  and  in  a  smother  of  snow.  They  are  wonderfully  sure- 
footed, and  will  sometimes  bring  themselves  up  in  mid-career 
with  extraordinary  suddenness,  and  come  trotting  up  the  slope 
as  though  it  was  the  easiest  of  feats.' 

''July  13. — Yesterday  Wilson  reported  an  eruption  of 
Erebus,  a  considerable  sheet  of  flame  bursting  forth  and  light- 
ing up  the  rolls  of  vapour,  so  that  he  could  clearly  see  the 
direction  in  which  they  were  going — a  fact  impossible  to  dis- 
tinguish either  before  or  after  ;  the  flare  only  lasted  for  five  or 
ten  seconds.  These  eruptions  have  been  seen  before,  and 
possibly  many  have  occurred  without  being  seen,  but  they  are 
certainly  not  frequent,  and  never  last  for  more  than  a  few 
seconds.  I  myself  have  never  seen  more  than  a  red  glare  on 
the  cloud  of  vapour  immediately  over  the  crater.' 

1  Tidy  16. — Hodgson  has  been  working  away  throughout  the 
winter  in  the  same  indefatigable  manner  as  before.  His  fish- 
traps  and  tow-nets  merely  go  down  through  a  hole  in  the  ice, 
and  there  is  no  great  difficulty  about  working  them,  but  the 
manner  in  which  he  has  carried  out  his  dredging  is  really  very 
cunning,  and  deserves  description.  Now  and  again,  and 
especially  after  a  cold  snap,  fresh  cracks  are  formed  in  the  ice- 
sheet  across  the  strait,  and  these  open  out  perhaps  two  or  three 
inches.  Before  the  space  left  has  time  to  freeze  thickly, 
Hodgson  goes  out  with  a  long  line,  and  presses  the  bight  down 
between  the  sides  of  the  crack  until  it  is  hanging  in  a  long 


142      THE  VOYAGE   OF    THE   'DISCOVERY'    [July 

loop  between  points  two  or  three  hundred  yards  apart.  Then 
at  each  end  of  the  loop  he  starts  to  dig  a  large  hole ;  this  is  the 
work  of  several  days,  and  meanwhile  the  ice  along  the  crack 
has  become  solid  and  thick,  but  this  does  not  matter  when 
once  he  has  got  what  he  wants — namely,  two  holes  connected 
by  a  line  which  passes  underneath  the  ice. 

'  Eater  on,  when  the  holes  are  completed  and  shelters  have 
been  erected  about  them,  the  more  important  work  commences. 
A  net  is  secured  to  the  line  and  lowered  to  the  bottom  at  one 
hole,  whilst  at  the  other  the  line  is  manned  and  gradually 
hauled  in ;  thus  the  net  is  dragged  along  the  bottom  to  the 
second  hole,  where  it  is  hoisted  out  and  its  contents  emptied 
into  a  vessel.  Then  the  process  is  repeated  by  hauling  the 
net  back  to  the  first  hole.  Finally  the  vessel,  usually  an  old 
tin-lined  packing-case,  with  its  precious  contents  of  animals 
buried  in  a  mass  of  hardening  slush,  is  sledged  back  to  the  ship 
and  deposited  close  to  the  wardroom  fire. 

•  On  the  following  day  the  table  is  littered  with  an  array  of 
glass  jars  and  dishes,  with  bottles  of  alcohol,  formalin,  and 
other  preservatives,  and  soon  we  are  able  to  examine  the  queer 
denizens  of  our  polar  sea-floor,  and  to  watch  their  contortions 
as  they  are  skilfully  turned  into  specimens  for  the  British 
Museum.' 

lJu/y  31. — For  some  days  there  has  scarcely  been  any 
wind,  and  we  have  been  able  to  enjoy  delightful  walks  in  the 
light  noontide.  The  northern  horizon  at  this  hour  is  dressed 
in  gorgeous  red  and  gold,  and  the  lands  about  are  pink  and 
rosy  with  brightness  of  returning  day.  I  am  not  sure  that  a 
polar  night  is  not  worth  the  living  through  for  the  mere  joy  of 
seeing  the  day  come  back. 

1  The  latest  addition  to  our  forces,  in  the  shape  of  Mulock, 
has  been  a  great  acquisition.  In  one  way  and  another  we  have 
collected  a  very  large  amount  of  surveying  data,  but  the 
trouble  was  that  we  none  of  us  had  sufficient  knowledge  to 
chart  it.  Mulock  came  in  the  nick  of  time  to  supply  the 
deficiency ;  he  has  been  trained  as  a  surveyor,  and  has  extra- 
ordinary natural  abilities  for  the  work,     He  has  done  an 


1903]  THE  '  FLYING  SCUD  '  143 

astonishing  amount  this  winter,  first  in  collecting  and  reworking 
all  our  observations,  and  later  in  constructing  temporary  charts. 
A  special  table  was  fixed  up  for  him  in  my  cabin,  where  he 
now  spends  most  of  his  time.  The  result  of  his  diligence  is 
most  useful  to  me,  as  I  can  now  see  much  more  clearly  what 
we  ought  to  try  to  do  during  our  next  sledging  season.' 

1  August  1. — Walks  over  the  hills  are  now  delightful. 
However  cold  one  may  be  on  starting,  by  the  time  one  reaches 
the  crest  one's  blood  is  circulating  freely,  and  the  rest  is  wholly 
enjoyable.  A  good  look  at  the  glorious  scene  round  about,  a 
long  trot  over  the  hill  plateau,  an  observation  of  Erebus  with 
its  gilded  coil  of  smoke,  a  half  slide,  half  shuffle  down  some 
convenient  snow-slope  amidst  two  or  three  scrambling,  sky- 
larking dogs,  a  sharp  walk  back  over  the  level,  and  a  glorious 
appetite  for  tea  to  follow  :  there  is  not  much  hardship  about 
this  sort  of  life. 

1  Perhaps  Barne  has  enjoyed  himself  as  much  as  anyone 
this  winter  in  his  own  queer  way.  The  improved  weather  has 
given  him  a  chance  to  spend  many  a  day  at  his  distant  sound- 
ing holes,  and  he  has  constantly  departed  soon  after  breakfast 
to  vanish  from  our  ken  until  dinner.  But  this  winter  he  has 
rigged  his  small  sledge  with  sails,  and  if  it  has  not  aided  his 
work  much,  it  has  given  him  a  deal  of  extra  amusement.  The 
sledge  carries  a  small  sounding  machine,  mounted  high  on  a 
box  in  the  centre.  The  box  contains  a  miscellaneous  collection 
of  sinkers,  thermometers,  &c,  together  with  the  owner's  light 
midday  repast.  In  front  of  and  behind  the  box  are  the  main 
and  mizzen  masts,  to  which  are  hoisted  a  dashing  suit  of  sails, 
made  from  the  drop  scene  of  the  Terror  Theatre.  There  is 
also  a  drop  keel  or  lee  board,  made  from  a  piece  of  boiler- 
plate, and  a  wooden  outrigger,  which  can  be  placed  on  either 
side  and  weighted  with  a  sinker  to  increase  the  stability  of  the 
machine.  Barne  declares  that  if  there  is  any  breeze  his  noble 
craft  sails  like  a  witch,  on  or  off  the  wind,  but  this  is  scarcely 
the  opinion  of  others  who  have  watched  his  movements.  How- 
ever, when  the  "  Flying  Scud,"  as  she  is  called,  is  lying  astern 
of  the  "  Discovery  "  with  sails  neatly  furled,  or  when  with  all 


144      THE   VOYAGE   OF    THE   'DISCOVERY'    [Aug. 

canvas  spread  she  is  prepared  for  her  voyage  over  the  floe,  she 
at  least  looks  a  very  imposing  and  business-like  tender.' 

1  August  13. — For  three  days  we  have  had  a  furious  blizzard, 
which  has  kept  us  closely  confined.  On  the  few  occasions 
when  we  attempted  to  reach  the  ship  side  we  found  it  almost 
impossible  to  stand,  and  there  was  a  curious  suffocating  feeling 
in  battling  with  the  whirling  drift.  Some  gusts  were  so  violent 
that  the  ship  was  shaken,  and  things  hanging  in  the  wardroom 
were  set  on  the  swing,  notwithstanding  that  the  ice  must  now 
be  from  eighteen  to  twenty  feet  thick  immediately  around  us. 
On  Tuesday,  with  a  lull,  the  glass  rose  three-quarters  of  an  inch 
in  six  hours — about  the  steepest  gradient  we  have  known.  It 
then  fell  again  sharply,  and  the  wind  returned  in  full  force. 
To-day  it  is  quite  calm  again,  and  we  can  see  that  there  has 
been  an  immense  deposition  of  snow  ;  the  ice-sledges  are 
covered,  and  the  surface  has  risen  to  the  level  of  the  meteoro- 
logical screens.  From  the  hills  I  could  see  no  sign  of  open 
water — a  curious  difference  from  last  year,  when  after  such  a 
gale  the  sea  would  certainly  have  been  open  up  to  the  Northern 
Islets.' 

*  August  20. — Sometime  ago  poor  little  "Tin-tacks,"  who 
has  a  litter  of  pups  in  the  after  deckhouse,  was  found  with  her 
mouth  covered  with  blood;  she  was  unable  to  eat,  and  on 
examination  Wilson  found  that  her  tongue  had  been  torn  or 
cut  off  within  an  inch  or  two  of  the  root.  The  only  fitting 
theory  seems  to  be  that  the  poor  beast  got  it  frozen  to  a  tin 
and  then  became  frightened,  and  jagged  or  bit  it  off.  It  was  a 
horrible  accident,  but  it  shows  the  astonishing  vitality  of  these 
dogs  that  within  a  few  days  she  was  able  to  eat  and  ran  about 
as  though  nothing  had  happened  ;  she  had  evidently  quite 
ceased  to  suffer  pain.  But  although  she  can  feed  herself  she 
cannot  keep  herself  clean,  and  she  is  likely  to  get  into  such  a 
bad  state  in  this  way  that  I  fear  we  shall  have  to  kill  her. 

1  Wilson  has  found  a  hard,  calcareous  growth  in  the  seals' 
hearts  which  appears  to  show  that  these  animals  suffer  from 
gout ! 

'We  have  seen  some  very  beautiful   "mother-of-pearl" 


1903]  RETURN  OF  THE  SUN  145 

clouds  to  the  north  lately — little  patches  of  yellowish-white 
close  to  the  horizon,  edged  with  pale  green  passing  to  red 
and  yellow,  this  bordering  extending  all  around.  The  pris- 
matic colouring  we  have  hitherto  seen  in  the  light  high  cirrus 
has  been  horizontal  only.  The  Danish  Lapland  Expedition 
noted  prismatic  clouds  as  having  a  height  of  thirty  miles  ;  ours 
are  certainly  nothing  like  so  high.' 

1  August  21. — The  rim  of  the  refracted  sun  could  just  be 
seen  above  the  northern  horizon  at  12.30  to-day.  I  climbed 
Arrival  Heights  and  got  a  view  of  the  golden  half-disc.  It  was 
a  glorious  day ;  everything  was  inspiriting.  For  the  first  time 
for  many  a  month  the  sun's  direct  rays  were  gilding  our  sur- 
rounding hills  ;  little  warm,  pink  clouds  floated  about,  growing 
heavier  towards  the  south,  where  the  deepening  shadow  was 
overspread  with  a  rich  flush  \  the  smoke  of  Erebus  rose  straight 
in  a  spreading  golden  column.  It  was  indeed  a  goodly  scene  ! 
One  feels  that  the  return  of  day  is  beyond  all  power  of  descrip- 
tion— that  splendid  view  from  the  hills  leaves  one  with  a  sense 
of  grandeur  and  solemnity  which  no  words  can  paint. 

1  And  now  our  second  long  polar  night  has  come  to  an  end. 
I  do  not  think  there  is  a  soul  on  board  the  "  Discovery  "  who 
would  say  that  it  has  been  a  hardship.  All  disappointment  at 
our  enforced  detention  has  passed  away,  and  has  been  replaced 
by  a  steady  feeling  of  hopefulness.  There  is  not  one  of  us 
who  does  not  believe  that  we  shall  be  released  eventually, 
however  difficult  he  might  find  it  to  give  his  reasons.  All 
thoughts  are  turned  towards  the  work  that  lies  before  us,  and 
it  would  be  difficult  to  be  blind  to  the  possible  extent  of  its 
usefulness.  Each  day  has  brought  it  more  home  to  us  how  little 
we  know  and  how  much  there  is  to  be  learned,  and  we  realise 
fully  that  this  second  year's  work  may  more  than  double  the 
value  of  our  observations.  Life  in  these  regions  has  lost  any 
terror  it  ever  possessed  for  us,  for  we  know  that,  come  what 
may,  we  can  live,  and  live  well,  for  any  reasonable  number  of 
years  to  come.' 

' August  25. — The  earth  shadows  on  the  southern  sky 
thrown  by  the  sun  as  it  skims  along  the  northern  horizon  have 
VOL.  i|.  l/ 


i46      THE   VOYAGE   OF  THE   'DISCOVERY'    [Sept 

been  very  distinct  this  year,  and  there  is  much  that  cannot  be 
explained  and  therefore  gives  rise  to  hot  argument.  Between 
nine  and  ten  in  the  morning  a  dark  shaded  line,  inclined  to 
the  right  at  an  acute  angle  to  the  horizon,  appears  to  the  west- 
ward of  the  Black  Island;  this  line  gradually  rises  to  the 
vertical  to  the  east  of  Black  Island,  and  then  sinks  to  the  left 
with  a  diminishing  angle.  Just  before  noon  its  extremity  rests 
on  the  Bluff,  when  it  is  inclined  well  to  the  east,  but  sometimes 
at  about  this  time  two  other  shadows  spring  up,  one  vertical 
and  the  other  inclined  to  the  west;  the  whole  phenomenon 
then  has  the  appearance  of  an  inverted  broad  arrow. 

f  It  is  very  curious  and  interesting,  and  we  have  failed  to 
produce  any  sound  explanation  for  it.  It  must  in  some  way 
be  connected  with  Erebus,  as  it  is  on  the  opposite  side  of  it  to 
the  sun ;  but  what  particular  parts  of  the  mountain  mass  trace 
these  confused  shadowy  lines  we  cannot  guess.  Some  of  us 
have  tried  to  drag  in  the  western  mountains  as  reflecting 
agents,  but  I  think  this  theory  has  little  to  support  it.  Mean- 
while we  have  all  been  busy  with  candles  and  sheets  of  paper 
trying  to  reproduce  the  various  effects,  but  so  far  without  much 
success. 

1  Beyond  the  region  of  our  bay  the  snow  which  has  fallen 
during  the  winter  is  heaped  into  patches  which  are  clearly 
distinguishable  from  the  old  surface,  on  which  can  still  be  seen 
in  large  numbers  the  pellets  of  the  cartridges  used  in  the  skua 
battues  of  last  autumn.  We  have  started  our  hockey  matches 
again,  and  had  some  excellent  games,  but  the  ground  is  in  very 
poor  condition,  with  patches  of  soft  snow  where  the  ball  gets 
half  buried.' 

1  September  3. — After  the  return  of  the  sun  there  are  some 
very  pleasing  signs  of  summer,  for  which  we  watch  eagerly. 
Amongst  these  are  the  first  records  of  our  solar  instruments, 
one  of  which,  the  radiation  thermometer,  gave  its  first  indica- 
tion on  the  28th,  when  there  was  an  extremely  slight  difference 
between  the  black  and  silvered  bulb  thermometers.  This 
instrument  faces  the  sun  on  Hut  Point,  and  to-day  it  showed 
a  very  marked  difference  between  the  two  readings ;  and  at  the 


i9o3]  SLEDGING  PREPARATIONS  147 

same  time  another  instrument,  the  sunshine  recorder,  gave  its 
first  sign  of  life.  The  sunshine  recorder  consists  of  a  crystal 
sphere,  by  which  the  sun  rays  are  focussed  on  a  circular  strip 
of  graduated  paper ;  when  the  sun  is  out,  the  track  of  the  focus 
is  marked  by  a  burnt  line,  and  in  this  way  the  hours  during 
which  the  sun  shows  are  recorded.  Last  year  we  got  several 
papers  burnt  for  the  complete'twenty-four  hours,  and  doubtless 
we  shall  get  the  same  again ;  I  believe  this  is  the  first  time  such 
a  record  has  been  got.' 

Such  extracts  as  I  have  given  from  my  diary  show  that  our 
second  winter  passed  away  in  the  quietest  and  pleasantest 
fashion.  Throughout  the  season  the  routine  of  scientific 
observations  was  carried  out  in  the  same  manner  as  it  had 
been  during  the  previous  year,  whilst  many  new  details  of 
interest  were  added.  The  weather  on  the  whole,  though 
colder,  had  been  far  less  windy,  and  this,  together  with  the  help 
which  experience  gave  to  our  methods  of  living,  had  greatly 
added  to  our  comfort.  Whilst  everything  was  taken  calmly 
and  easily,  the  work  of  preparation  for  the  coming  season  had 
been  steadily  pushed  forward.  An  examination  of  our  sledge 
equipment  showed  that  there  was  scarcely  an  article  which 
did  not  need  to  be  thoroughly  overhauled  and  refitted,  and 
throughout  the  winter  our  men  had  been  systematically  em- 
ployed in  repairing  the  sledges,  sleeping-bags,  tents,  &c,  in 
weighing  out  and  packing  the  various  provisions,  and  generally 
in  preparing  for  the  long  journeys  which  had  been  arranged. 
With  our  best  efforts,  however,  it  was  evident  that  our  outfit 
for  this  seasoa  would  be  a  somewhat  tattered  and  makeshift 
affair  compared  with  what  it  had  been  at  the  commencement 
of  the  last.  For  our  sleeping-bags  we  were  obliged  to  employ 
skins  that  we  knew  to  be  of  inferior  quality ;  our  tents  were 
blackened  with  use,  threadbare  in  texture,  and  patched  in 
many  places ;  our  cooking-apparatus  were  dented  and  shaky  ; 
our  wind  clothes  were  almost  worn  out ;  and  for  all  the  small 
bags  which  were  required  for  our  provisions  we  were  obliged 
to  fall  back  on  such  sheets  and  tablecloths  as  could  be  scraped 
together. 

l  2 


i48      THE   VOYAGE   OF  THE   'DISCOVERY'    [Sept. 

As  in  the  previous  year,  the  plan  of  campaign  for  the 
coming  season  had  been  drawn  up  in  good  time,  so  that 
everyone  might  have  ample  opportunity  of  preparing  himself 
for  the  work ;  and  in  the  peaceful  quiet  of  the  winter  it  had 
been  easy  to  see  the  weak  places  in  our  former  explorations 
and  the  directions  in  which  the  future  journeys  should  be 
made. 

Perhaps  here,  therefore,  it  would  be  well  to  mention  briefly 
the  considerations  which  led  me  to  the  adoption  of  the  pro- 
gramme of  sledging  carried  out  during  our  second  year. 

The  first  point  was  of  course  to  review  our  resources  ;  as 
before,  I  knew  that  extended  journeys  could  only  be  made  by 
properly  supported  parties,  and  an  easy  calculation  showed  me 
that  our  small  company  would  only  admit  of  two  such  sup- 
ported journeys,  though  numbers  might  permit  of  a  third  more 
or  less  lengthy  journey  without  support. 

The  next  thing  was  to  decide  in  what  direction  these 
parties  should  go.  In  this  connection,  as  I  have  already 
explained,  the  principal  interest  undoubtedly  lay  in  the  west ; 
to  explore  the  Ferrar  Glacier  from  a  geological  point  of  view 
and  to  find  out  the  nature  of  the  interior  ice-cap  were  matters 
which  must  be  attempted  at  all  hazards. 

In  the  south  it  was  evident  to  me  that  however  well  a 
party  might  march,  or  however  well  they  might  be  supported, 
without  dogs  they  could  not  hope  to  get  beyond  the  point 
which  we  had  reached  in  the  previous  year ;  but  our  journey 
had  been  made  a  long  way  from  land,  and  had  consequently 
left  many  unsolved  problems,  chief  amongst  which  were  the 
extraordinary  straits  which  had  appeared  to  us  to  run  through 
the  mountain  ranges  without  rising  in  level.  It  was  obviously 
absurd  for  us  to  pretend  that  we  knew  all  about  these  places 
when  we  had  only  seen  them  at  a  distance  of  twenty  or  thirty 
miles  ;  any  further  light  thrown  on  these,  or  on  the  junction 
of  the  barrier  with  the  land,  must  prove  of  immense  interest 
to  us.  It  was  therefore  with  the  main  object  of  exploring  one 
of  these  straits  that  I  decided  that  the  second  supported  party 
should  set  forth, 


X903]  THE  PROGRAMME  149 

The  credit  for  arranging  the  direction  in  which  the  un- 
supported party  should  go  really  belongs  to  Bemacchi,  for  it 
was  he  who  first  asked  me  what  proof  we  had  that  the  barrier 
surface  continued  on  a  level  to  the  eastward.  Since  the 
previous  year,  and  having  regard  to  the  barrier  edge  in  this 
direction,  we  had  assumed  this  fact,  but  when  I  came  to  look 
into  it  I  found  we  really  had  no  definite  proof.  The  only  way 
to  obtain  it  was  to  go  and  see,  and  this  was  therefore  named  as 
the  objective  of  the  unsupported  party,  who  affected  to  believe 
that  they  were  destined  to  discover  all  sorts  of  interesting  land 
arising  through  the  monotonous  snow-plains  for  which  they 
were  bound.  Besides  the  longer  journeys,  the  programme  for 
the  season  included,  as  before,  a  number  of  short  journeys  for 
specific  purposes.  The  most  important  of  these  were  periodic 
visits  to  the  Emperor  penguin  rookery,  as  we  hoped  that  this 
year  our  zoologist  would  be  able  to  observe  the  habits  of  these 
extraordinary  creatures  from  the  commencement  of  their 
breeding  season. 

The  next  step  in  this  programme  was  the  most  difficult  of 
all  j  it  was  to  name  the  individuals  for  the  various  journeys. 
When  all  had  supported  me  so  loyally,  and  when  all  were  so 
eager  to  go  to  the  front,  it  can  be  imagined  what  a  hard  task 
lay  before  me  in  making  a  selection.  However,  this  difficulty, 
like  others,  was  gradually  overcome  by  much  thought,  and  the 
various  parties  were  told  off.  The  journey  to  the  west  I  de- 
cided to  lead  myself,  that  to  the  south  I  entrusted  to  Barne 
and  Mulock,  whilst  the  two  officers  named  for  the  south-eastern 
effort  were  Royds  and  Bernacchi. 

Finally,  it  was  decided  that  one  important  factor  must 
dominate  all  our  sledging  arrangements.  We  knew  that  we 
were  mainly  at  the  mercy  of  natural  causes  as  to  whether  the 
1  Discovery '  would  be  freed  from  the  ice  in  the  coming  year, 
but  at  least  I  determined  that  as  far  as  man's  puny  efforts  could 
prevail,  nothing  should  be  left  undone  to  aid  in  the  release  of 
the  ship.  At  the  earliest  date  at  which  we  could  hope  to  make 
any  impression  on  the  great  ice-sheet  about  us,  the  whole  force 
of  our  company  must  be  available  for  the  work  of  extrication ; 


150      THE  VOYAGE   OF  THE   'DISCOVERY'   [Sept. 

consequently  the  last  of  the  summer  must  be  sacrificed,  and  it 
was  ordered  that  all  sledging  journeys  should  start  at  such  a 
date  as  to  assure  their  return  to  the  ship  by  the  middle  of 
December. 

Thus  when  the  sun  returned  again  in  1903  it  found  us 
ready  to  start  on  our  journeys  once  more,  and  only  waiting  with 
impatience  for  the  light  which  was  to  guide  us  on  our  way. 
The  story  of  these  journeys  I  reserve  for  a  future  chapter,  but 
in  what  state  of  health  and  spirits  we  undertook  them  can  be 
gathered  from  the  following  : — 

'  September  6. — To-morrow  we  start  our  sledging  j  the 
Terror  party  go  to  Cape  Crozier.  The  ship  is  in  a  state  of 
bustle,  people  flying  to  and  fro,  packing  sledges,  weighing 
loads,  and  inspecting  each  detail  of  equipment.  To  judge  by 
the  laughter  and  excitement  we  might  be  boys  escaping  from 
school.  The  word  "scurvy"  has  not  been  heard  this  year, 
and  the  doctor  tells  me  there  is  not  a  sign  of  it  in  the  ship. 
Truly  our  prospects  look  bright  for  the  sledge-work  of  the 
future.' 


1903]  I5I 


CHAPTER   XVII 

COMMENCEMENT   OF  OUR   SECOND   SLEDGING    SEASON 

Parties  Starting — Away  to  New  Harbour — We  Find  a  Good  Road,  Es- 
tablish a  Depot,  and  Return— Sledging  in  Record  Temperatures- 
Experiences  in  Different  Directions— Emperor  Penguin  Chicks— Eclipse 
of  the  Sun— A  Great  Capture— Preparing  for  the  Western  Journey- 
Ascending  Ferrar  Glacier— Our  Sledges  Break  Down — Forced  to 
Return— Some  Good  Marching— Fresh  Start— More  Troubles  with  the 
Sledges— A  Heavy  Loss— Wind  from  the  Summit — The  Upper  Glacier 
— A  Week  in  Camp — We  Break  Away  and  Reach  the  Summit— Hard 
Conditions— Party  Divided — Eight  Days  Onward — An  Awe-inspiring 
Plain — We  Turn  as  the  Month  Ends. 

Where  the  great  sun  begins  his  state 

Robed  in  flames  and  amber  light. — MiLTON. 

Path  of  advance  !  but  it  leads 

A  long  steep  journey  through  sunk 

Gorges,  o'er  mountains  in  snow. — M.  Arnold. 

When  the  great  sun  had  begun  his  state  in  1903  we  were  all, 
as  I  have  said,  eager  to  be  off  on  our  travels  once  more. 

Royds  and  Wilson  were  the  first  to  get  away,  on  Septem- 
ber 7  ;  they  had  with  them  four  men — Cross,  Whitfield, 
Williamson,  and  Blissett  ;  their  mission  lay  on  the  old  track 
to  Cape  Crozier,  and  the  object  of  going  thus  early  was  to 
catch  those  mysterious  Emperor  penguins  before  they  should 
have  hatched  out  their  young. 

Barne  and  his  party  were  timed  to  start  some  days  later, 
with  the  idea  of  laying  out  a  depot  beyond  the  White  Island, 
in  preparation  for  the  longer  journey  to  come. 

On  the  9th  I  got  away  with  my  own  party,  which  included 
Mr.  Skelton,  Mr.  Dailey,  Evans,  Lashly,  and  Handsley.     Our 


152     THE  VOYAGE   OF  THE   'DISCOVERY'    [Sept. 

object  was  to  find  a  new  road  to  the  Ferrar  Glacier,  and  on  it 
to  place  a  depot  ready  for  a  greater  effort  over  the  ice-cap.  I 
pause  a  moment  to  recall  to  the  reader  the  position  of  affairs 
in  this  region.  The  Ferrar  Glacier  descends  gradually  to  the 
inlet,  which  we  named  New  Harbour,  but  it  will  be  remembered 
that  Mr.  Armitage  had  reported  most  adversely  on  this  inlet 
as  a  route  for  sledges,  and  in  conducting  his  own  party  had 
led  it  across  the  high  foothills.  I  had  not  been  to  this  region, 
but  in  the  nature  of  things  I  could  not  help  thinking  that 
some  practicable  route  must  exist  up  the  New  Harbour  inlet, 
and  I  knew  that  if  it  could  be  found  our  journey  to  the  west 
would  be  made  far  easier.  It  was  in  this  direction,  therefore, 
that  I  set  out  with  my  party. 

Half-way  across  the  strait  we  had  the  misfortune  to  en- 
counter a  blizzard,  which  delayed  us  in  our  tents  and  effectually 
covered  all  our  camping  equipment  with  ice  ;  then  the  tem- 
perature fell  rapidly,  and  we  knew  that  our  discomfort  for  the 
trip  was  ensured.  Owing  to  the  delay  we  did  not  reach  the 
New  Harbour  until  the  13th,  and  it  took  us  the  whole  of 
the  daylight  hours  of  the  14th  to  struggle  up  the  south  side 
of  the  inlet  to  the  commencement  of  the  disturbances  caused 
by  the  glacier. 

The  night  of  the  14th  was  an  anxious  one,  and  I  remem- 
ber it  well.  On  each  side  of  us  rose  the  great  granite  foothills. 
The  light  had  been  poor  in  the  afternoon  march,  and  now 
that  the  sun  had  sunk  behind  the  mountains  in  a  crimson 
glow,  we  were  left  with  only  the  barest  twilight.  We  had  been 
forced  to  camp  when  we  had  suddenly  found  ourselves  on  a 
broken  surface,  and  all  about  us  loomed  up  gigantic  ice-blocks 
and  lofty  morainic  heaps.  To-morrow  was  to  decide  whether 
or  not  these  obstructions  could  be  tackled ;  meanwhile  the 
temperature  had  fallen  to  —  490,  and  in  the  frigid  gloom  our 
prospects  did  not  look  hopeful. 

On  the  following  day,  however,  with  cheerful  sunshine  to 
aid  our  efforts,  we  proceeded  for  some  way  up  the  bed  of  a 
frozen  stream,  still  on  the  south  side  of  the  glacier.  On  our 
right  was  the  glacier  itself,  distorted  into  a  mass  of  wall  faces 


*J§ 

•' \5ffll 

,:: 

V', 

1903]  A  GOOD   ROAD  153 

and  pinnacles,  which  looked  unscalable,  whilst  on  our  left 
were  the  steep  bare  hillsides  ;  soon  the  glacier  stream  came 
to  an  end,  and  we  were  forced  to  consider  what  was  next  to  be 
done. 

As  a  result  of  our  consultation  some  of  the  party  climbed 
the  hillside  to  prospect,  whilst  Skelton  and  I  attacked  the 
glacier.  We  fully  expected  to  discover  a  mass  of  broken  ice 
extending  right  across  the  inlet,  but  were  agreeably  surprised 
to  find,  first,  that  by  carefully  selecting  our  route  we  could 
work  our  way  to  the  summit  of  the  disturbance  ;  and,  secondly, 
that  beyond  our  immediate  neighbourhood  the  high,  sharp 
ice-hillocks  settled  down  into  more  gradual  ridges.  This  im- 
plied that  to  the  north  things  were  smoother,  and  after  our 
short  reconnaissance  and  a  confirming  report  from  the  hills, 
we  occupied  the  rest  of  the  day  in  carrying  our  loads  and 
sledges  in  the  direction  we  had  chosen  across  the  disturbance. 
It  was  a  difficult  portage,  but  by  night  we  were  camped  in  a 
small  dip  well  in  on  the  glacier  surface. 

Those  who  have  seen  glaciers  in  a  mountainous  country 
will  recall  the  regular  and  beautiful  curves  they  present  in 
sweeping  around  the  sharp  turns  of  the  valleys  they  occupy. 
It  was  such  a  curve  that  the  Ferrar  Glacier  now  showed  us  as 
we  looked  westward  on  the  morning  of  the  16th;  its  surface, 
as  we  afterwards  found,  was  comparatively  regular,  but  in  the 
distance  it  looked  like  a  smooth  polished  road — a  ribbon  of 
blue  down  the  centre  of  which  ran  a  dark  streak  caused  by  a 
double  line  of  boulders.  On  each  side  towered  the  massive 
cliffs  and  steep  hillsides  which  limited  its  course.  But  the 
foot  of  this  promising  road  was  some  way  from  us,  and  we 
had  still  four  or  five  miles  of  unviewed  surface  to  cross  before 
we  could  reach  it.  Here,  again,  we  were  agreeably  surprised, 
for  instead  of  further  ice  disturbances  we  found  our  way 
gradually  growing  smoother,  and  in  the  afternoon  we  reached 
the  incline  without  further  difficulty. 

What  followed  was  easy.  We  proceeded  to  ascend  the 
smooth  icy  surface  of  the  glacier  until  we  came  abreast  of 
Cathedral  Rocks,  and  when  their  lofty  pinnacles  towered  three 


i54     THE   VOYAGE   OF   THE    'DISCOVERY'    [Sept. 

or  four  thousand  feet  immediately  above  our  heads  we  selected 
a  conspicuous  boulder  in  the  medial  moraine,  about  2,000  feet 
above  the  sea,  and,  ascertaining  its  bearings,  '  cached '  the 
provisions  which  we  had  brought,  and  turned  homeward. 

The  result  of  our  short  journey  had  been  really  important. 
It  had  taken  the  western  party  of  the  previous  year  three 
weeks  to  reach  the  spot  at  which  we  had  left  our  depot;  I 
knew  now  it  would  go  hard  with  us  if  we  could  not  get  there 
well  within  the  week,  and  if  in  the  future  we  found  a  still  easier 
road,  avoiding  the  portage  stage,  we  might  hope  to  journey  out 
in  four  or  five  days. 

On  our  return,  therefore,  we  steered  more  to  the  north, 
and  to  our  further  delight  found  that  the  route  in  that  direc- 
tion was  much  easier,  so  that  eventually  we  reached  the  sea- 
ice  without  having  to  carry  our  sledges  across  any  difficult 
places. 

The  fact  which  was  thus  discovered,  and  which  was  amply 
supported  by  further  observations,  is  a  general  one  that  is 
highly  important  to  future  explorers.  In  all  cases  in  the 
Antarctic  Regions  where  glaciers  run  more  or  less  east  and 
west,  the  south  side  will  be  found  very  much  broken  up  and 
decayed,  whilst  the  north  side  will  be  comparatively  smooth 
and  even.  The  reason  is  a  very  simple  one— so  simple  that  it 
seems  to  argue  some  obtuseness  that  we  did  not  guess  its 
effect.  The  sun  of  course  achieves  its  greatest  altitude  in  the 
north,  and  consequently  its  warmest  and  most  direct  rays  fall 
on  the  south  side  of  a  valley,  and  on  the  loose  morainic 
material  and  blown  debris  that  rest  on  that  side  of  a  glacier. 
Here,  therefore,  the  greater  part  of  the  summer  melting  takes 
place  with  irregular  denudation,  causing  the  wild  chaos  of  ice 
disturbance  that  I  have  described. 

At  the  foot  of  the  Ferrar  Glacier,  Armitage  had  seen  the 
disturbance  on  the  south  side,  and  had  concluded  that  it  must 
extend  right  across  ;  our  fortunate  step  had  been  to  push 
over  the  southern  disturbance  and  find  the  easier  conditions 
beyond. 

Throughout  this   short  journey  we  had  exceedingly  low 


i9o3]    EXPERIENCES  IN  OTHER  DIRECTIONS     155 

temperatures.  Nearly  every  night  the  thermometer  fell  below 
—  500,  and  in  the  daytime  it  was  very  little  above  that  mark. 
After  the  effects  of  our  blizzard  we  were  extraordinarily  un- 
comfortable ;  it  was  partly  for  this  reason,  and  partly  to  test 
the  real  marching  capabilities  of  my  party,  that,  our  object 
attained,  I  decided  to  put  on  the  speed  in  crossing  the  fifty 
miles  of  sea-ice  which  lay  between  us  and  our  snug  ship.  We 
crossed  this  stretch  in  less  than  two  and  a  half  days  ;  we  were 
to  do  better  marching  still  under  better  conditions,  but  at  the 
time  we  were  very  pleased  with  this  effort,  and  considering  the 
excessive  cold  and  our  heavily  clad  and  ice-encumbered  con- 
dition, it  was  certainly  worthy  of  note.  It  was  on  the  night  of 
the  20th,  therefore,  that  we  tramped  into  our  small  bay  and 
saw  the  pleasantly  familiar  outlines  of  the  ship. 

We  were  inclined  to  be  exceedingly  self-satisfied ;  we  had 
accomplished  our  object  with  unexpected  ease,  we  had  done  a 
record  march,  and  we  had  endured  record  temperatures— at 
least,  we  thought  so,  and  thought  also  how  pleasant  it  would 
be  to  tell  of  these  things  in  front  of  a  nice  bright  fire.  As  we 
approached  the  ship,  however,  Hodgson  came  out  to  greet  us, 
and  his  first  question  was,  '  What  temperatures  have  you  had  ? ' 
We  replied  by  complacently  quoting  our  array  of  minus  fifties, 
but  he  quickly  cut  us  short  by  remarking  that  we  were  not  in 
it.  It  was  evident,  therefore,  that  we  should  have  tales  to 
Jisten  to  as  well  as  to  tell. 

For  such  tales  I  draw  once  more  on  my  diary : 
'  September  22. — It  is  pleasant  to  be  back  in  the  ship  again 
after  our  hard  spring  journeys.  They  have  awakened  us  all 
and  given  us  plenty  of  fresh  matter  to  talk  about,  so  that 
there  is  a  running  fire  of  chaff  and  chatter  all  day.  Every- 
thing looks  very  bright  and  hopeful :  the  journeys  have  accom- 
plished all  that  was  expected  of  them,  and  there  is  not  a  sign 
of  our  old  enemy  the  scurvy ;  and  this  in  spite  of  the  fact 
that  our  travellers  have  endured  the  hardest  conditions  on 
record. 

1  It  is  no  small  tribute  to  our  sledging  methods  that  our 
people  have  come  through  temperatures  nearly  seventy  degrees 


156     THE   VOYAGE   OF  THE    'DISCOVERY'    [Sept. 

below  zero  without  accident  or  injury ;  a  tent  and  a  sleeping- 
bag  have  never  protected  men  under  such  conditions  before. 

'  Whilst  we  have  been  away  there  seems  to  have  been  a 
cold  snap  throughout  our  region.  Barne  with  his  party  got 
the  worst  of  it,  as  they  were  away  out  on  the  barrier,  where 
conditions  are  always  most  severe.  He  was  absent  for  eight 
days,  and  succeeded  in  laying  out  a  depot  to  the  S.E.  of  White 
Island.  His  party  consisted  of  Mulock,  Quartley,  Smythe, 
Crean,  and  Joyce ;  all  have  tales  to  tell  of  their  adventures, 
and  agree  that  it  was  pretty  "  parky."  The  temperature  was 
well  below  — 400  when  they  left  the  ship  ;  it  dropped  to  —  500 
as  they  reached  the  corner  of  White  Island,  and  a  little  way 
beyond  to  —  6o°;  but  even  at  this  it  did  not  stop,  but  con- 
tinued falling  until  it  had  reached  and  passed  —  650.  At 
—  67 70  the  spirit-column  of  the  thermometer  broke,  and  they 
found  it  impossible  to  get  it  to  unite  again ;  we  shall  never 
know  exactly,  therefore,  what  degree  of  cold  this  party  actually 
faced,  but  Barne,  allowing  for  the  broken  column,  is  sure  that 
it  was  below  —  700. 

1  Joyce  was  the  only  one  who  suffered  seriously  from  these 
terribly  severe  conditions.  After  his  features  had  been  frost- 
bitten several  times  individually,  they  all  went  together,  and  he 
was  seen  with  his  whole  face  quite  white.  Though,  of  course, 
it  is  in  a  very  bad  state  now,  the  circulation  was  restored  in  it 
at  the  time  without  much  difficulty ;  but  worse  was  to  follow, 
for  on  the  march  he  announced  that  one  of  his  feet  was  gone, 
and,  having  pitched  the  tents,  Barne  examined  it,  and  found 
that  it  was  white  to  the  ankle.  It  was  quite  an  hour  before 
they  could  get  any  signs  of  life  in  it,  and  this  was  only  accom- 
plished by  the  officers  taking  it  in  turns  to  nurse  the  frozen 
member  in  their  breasts. 

\  All  the  party,  and  especially  the  owner  of  the  frozen  foot, 
seem  to  regard  this  incident  as  an  excellent  jest ;  but  for  my 
part  I  should  be  slow  to  see  a  joke  when  I  had  a  frost-bitten 
foot  myself,  or  even  when  I  had  to  undo  my  garments  in  a 
temperature  of  —  700  to  nurse  someone  else's.  It  appears  that 
those  who  were  giving  the  warmth  found  that  they  could  keep 


1903]  EMPEROR   PENGUIN   CHICKS  157 

the  icy  foot  in  contact  with  their  bodies  for  nearly  ten  minutes, 
but  at  the  end  of  that  time  they  had  to  hand  it  on  to  the  next 
member  of  the  party ;  they  own  that  it  was  not  a  pleasing  sen- 
sation, but  think  that  it  increased  their  appetites.  However, 
their  ministrations  have  brought  Joyce  safely  back  to  the  ship 
with  his  full  allowance  of  toes,  which  is  the  main  point. 

1  Royds  and  his  party  also  had  very  low  temperatures,  as 
their  thermometer  often  showed  — 6o°,  and  at  the  lowest  —  620. 
Blissett  was  the  chief  sufferer  on  this  journey,  as  he  also  had 
his  face  very  severely  frost-bitten ;  the  rest  seem  to  have  stood 
it  well,  and  Whitfield  is  described  as  standing  outside  the  tent 
with  his  pipe  in  his  mouth,  his  hands  in  his  pockets,  and  the 
air  of  cheerful  satisfaction  of  one  who  contemplates  his  garden 
on  a  warm  summer  day  at  home. 

1  This  party  have  had  a  great  stroke  of  luck.  On  arriving 
at  Cape  Crozier  it  was  found,  in  spite  of  calculations,  that  the 
Emperors  had  already  hatched  out  their  young ;  about  a 
thousand  adult  birds  were  seen,  and  a  good  number  of 
chicks,  but  at  first  there  appeared  to  be  no  eggs.  The 
luck  came  when  the  travellers  examined  the  ice  towards 
the  land  and  found  that  there  had  been  a  recent  fall  of  ice- 
blocks  ;  close  to  this  they  discovered  a  number  of  deserted 
eggs.  It  seems  evident  that  the  avalanche  frightened  away  the 
sitting  birds,  much  to  the  benefit  of  our  collection.  Including 
the  single  find  of  last  year  we  have  now  seventeen  specimens 
of  this  new  egg ;  some  are  cracked,  but  a  good  number  are 
whole ;  they  weigh  about  a  pound  apiece. 

'As  may  be  imagined,  the  party  were  highly  elated  with 
this  find,  and  Wilson  was  glad  of  the  opportunity  of  studying 
the  chicks  at  a  more  tender  age  than  they  were  seen  last  year. 
In  spite  of  the  severe  temperature,  Cross  determined  to  try  to 
bring  two  of  these  small  mites  home.  He  sacrificed  his 
sleeping-jacket  to  keep  them  warm,  and  tended  them  with 
such  motherly  care  that  he  has  succeeded  in  his  design,  and 
now  these  small  creatures  are  housed  in  Wilson's  cabin,  much 
to  our  amusement.  They  chirrup  like  overgrown  chickens, 
and  possess  the  most  prodigious  appetites,' 


i53     THE  VOYAGE   OF  THE   'DISCOVERY'    [Sept. 

These  chicks  continued  to  afford  us  entertainment;  they 
had  no  fear  whatever,  and  when  they  thought  that  the  time 
had  come  for  more  food,  they  clamoured  loudly  for  it. 

At  first  they  were  fed  on  crustaceans,  and  afterwards  on 
seal-meat,  but  both  of  these  were  chewed  up  by  the  person 
who  fed  them,  so  that  there  should  be  no  chance  of  indigestion. 
It  was  obvious  from  their  shape  that  they  were  well  designed 
as  regards  capacity  for  containing  food,  but  even  allowing  for 
the  fact  that  they  did  not  study  the  symmetry  of  their  waists, 
one  paused  aghast  at  the  amount  they  swallowed.  From  the 
first  we  had  to  regard  them  as  small  tanks,  but  as  they  grew 
they  almost  seemed  to  be  bottomless  caverns,  into  which  any 
quantity  of  material  might  be  dropped  without  making  any 
appreciable  difference. 

After  meals  their  small  heads  would  sink  back  on  their 
round,  distended  little  bodies,  and  they  would  go  placidly  off 
to  sleep  in  their  well-lined  nest,  when  they  were  covered  up 
and  for  the  moment  forgotten;  but  as  the  next  meal-hour 
approached  there  would  be  a  great  '  to-do/  and  the  box  would 
be  uncovered  to  show  the  small  heads  bobbing  up  and  down 
and  giving  forth  shrill  demands  for  more  food,  nor  was  there 
peace  till  they  got  it. 

Things  went  on  like  this  until  our  small  friends  suddenly 
took  it  into  their  heads  that  there  was  much  too  long  an 
interval  between  supper  and  breakfast,  and  after  this  they  used 
to  go  off  like  alarum  clocks  in  the  middle  of  the  night.  There 
was  only  one  way  of  pacifying  them,  and  their  custodian  had 
perforce  to  get  out  of  his  warm  bed  and  to  chew  up  more  seal- 
meat  until  they  were  satisfied. 

Of  course  we  could  scarcely  hope  to  rear  these  birds  under 
such  artificial  conditions,  and  we  were  not  surprised  when  one 
of  them  pined  away  and  died  ;  but  the  other  lived  and  throve 
for  a  long  time,  and  only  met  his  end  when  the  warmer  weather 
came  on  and  he  was  incautiously  put  in  one  of  the  deck-houses 
for  a  short  time;  this  exposure  brought  on  the  rickets,  from 
which  he  never  recovered. 

During  the  interval    between   the  return   of   our   spring 


I9o3]  ECLIPSE  OF   THE   SUN  159 

expeditions  and  the  start  of  the  longer  summer  ones  we  had 
several  small  excitements  on  board. 

In  one  of  these  we  suffered  a  grievous  disappointment. 
Our  nautical  almanac  told  us  that  there  would  be  an  eclipse 
of  the  sun  on  September  21.  It  was  not  to  be  a  total  eclipse 
for  us,  but  nine-tenths  of  the  sun  would  be  obscured. 
Bernacchi  was  especially  busy  in  preparation  for  this  event, 
and  all  placed  themselves  under  his  orders  for  the  occasion. 
When  the  great  day  came  all  telescopes  and  the  spectroscopic 
camera  were  trained  in  the  right  direction,  magnetic  instru- 
ments were  set  to  run  at  quick  speed,  and  observers  were  told 
off  to  watch  the  meteorological  instruments,  the  tide  gauge,  and 
everything  else  on  which  the  absence  of  sun  could  possibly 
have  a  direct  or  indirect  effect.  Everything,  in  fact,  was  ready 
but  the  sun  itself,  which  obstinately  refused  to  come  out  j  from 
early  morning  a  thick  stratus  cloud  hung  over  our  heads,  and 
as  the  hours  went  by  we  were  forced  to  abandon  all  hope  of 
a  clearance.  There  may  have  been  an  eclipse  of  the  sun  on 
September  21,  1903,  as  the  almanac  said,  but  we  should  none 
of  us  have  liked  to  swear  to  the  fact. 

After  our  return  from  the  spring  journey,  appetites  had 
increased  to  such  an  alarming  extent  that  we  began  to  have 
renewed  doubts  as  to  the  adequacy  of  our  stock  of  seal-meat, 
and  by  this  time  all  the  especial  luxuries  in  the  shape  of  livers 
and  kidneys  had  entirely  disappeared.  Seals  rarely  came  up 
on  the  ice,  and  when  they  did  our  wretched  dogs,  the  puppies 
of  the  previous  year,  did  their  best  to  worry  them  down  again. 
It  was  at  this  juncture  that  our  hunters  were  called  upon,  and 
their  chief,  Skelton,  devised  an  excellent  harpoon  with  hinged 
barbs  which  proved  the  most  effective  weapon.  With  a  line 
attached,  it  was  kept  in  readiness  at  one  of  the  nearer  fishing 
holes,  and  the  keenest  sportsmen  would  go  out  and  wait  by  the 
hour,  harpoon  in  hand,  ready  for  the  first  unfortunate  seal 
which  should  come  up  to  breathe.  The  long  wait  in  the  cold 
was  rather  a  drawback,  but  when  at  last  a  black  snout  appeared 
on  the  surface  and  the  murderous  weapon  was  plunged  down- 
ward there  was  great  excitement,  and  loud  shouts  were  raised 


i6o     THE   VOYAGE   OF  THE   'DISCOVERY'    [Sept. 

for  assistance  to  haul  in  the  line.  In  this  way  our  larder  was 
kept  well  supplied,  whilst  a  few  obtained  feasts  of  the  fish 
which  we  had  long  ceased  to  catch  by  our  own  efforts. 

There  was  great  excitement  one  day  when  one  of  the  men 
went  to  this  hole  in  the  ice  and,  seeing  a  disturbance  in  the 
water,  plunged  the  harpoon  down.  Evidently  striking  some- 
thing, he  rushed  back  to  the  ship  to  say  that  he  had  hit  a  big 
fish.  There  was  a  general  stampede  for  the  hole,  and  the 
harpoon  line  was  soon  being  hauled  in,  in  spite  of  the  very 
lively  something  at  the  other  end  ;  but  when  at  last  this  some- 
thing was  landed  on  the  floe  it  was  found  to  be  nothing  more 
unusual  than  a  large  seal,  and  naturally  there  was  a  chorus  of 
jeers  at  the  expense  of  the  man  who  had  claimed  to  have 
struck  a  big  fish.  In  spite  of  ridicule,  however,  this  individual 
stuck  to  his  story  that  there  had  been  a  fish,  and  soon  after  it 
was  proved  that  he  had  been  quite  accurate,  for,  searching 
amongst  the  brash  ice  in  the  hole,  Skelton  suddenly  raised  a 
shout,  and  in  a  moment  or  two  produced  the  headless  body  of 
the  large  fish  for  which  we  had  angled  so  ineffectually. 

It  was  borne  back  in  triumph  to  the  ship  and  hung  up  for 
general  admiration  ;  in  its  mangled  condition  it  was  three  feet 
ten  inches  in  length  and  weighed  thirty-nine  pounds. 

The  importance  of  this  capture  deserves  some  description. 
Large  fish  are  very  uncommon  in  polar  waters :  as  a  general 
rule,  the  colder  the  water  the  smaller  the  fish.  We  had 
known,  however,  that  large  fish  existed  in  our  regions,  as  more 
than  once  we  had  found  the  skeletal  remains  of  one  on  the  ice. 
But  this  was  the  first  time  we  had  actually  seen  the  creature 
itself,  and  now,  alas !  it  had  no  head,  and  therefore  lacked  the 
most  important  detail  for  its  scientific  classification.  The 
most  scientific,  and,  in  fact,  the  only  account  we  ever  had  of 
the  missing  head  was  from  the  originator  of  the  incident,  who 
declared  that  '  it  was  like  one  of  Mr.  Barne's  crampons.'  This 
account,  whilst  it  delighted  those  who  not  infrequently  entered 
into  discussions  with  Barne  as  to  the  size  of  his  feet,  failed  to 
supply  the  accuracy  necessary  for  scientific  description.  There 
was  one  consolation,  however,  in  the  fact  that  if  the  head  had 


1903]  A  GREAT  CAPTURE  161 

remained  on,  the  fish  would  have  sunk  and  we  should  have 
seen  nothing  of  it. 

Piecing  together  the  facts  of  the  capture,  we  came  to  see 
how  it  had  all  happened,  and  the  whole  makes  a  curious  story. 
We  found  that  the  seal  was  a  female  with  young,  and  had  not 
had  food  for  a  long  time.  In  this  condition  it  had  attacked 
the  large  fish,  and  evidently  had  had  a  tremendous  tussle  with 
it.  The  seal  must  have  been  almost  at  the  end  of  its  diving 
powers  when  it  had  dragged  its  struggling  prey  to  the  surface, 
and  at  this  point  the  harpoon  must  have  transfixed  both  it  and 
the  fish.  Whether  the  seal  had  mutilated  the  head  of  the  fish 
we  could  not  tell,  but  close  to  the  tail  and  on  the  tail-fin  of 
the  latter  were  found  distinct  wounds  caused  by  the  seal's 
teeth.  It  shows  the  great  swimming  powers  of  the  seal  that  it 
should  have  been  able  to  capture  so  powerful  a  victim. 

When  we  had  safely  got  our  big  fish  on  board,  a  dreadful 
fear  arose  that  our  biologist  would  demand  its  preservation  in 
spirit.  I  do  not  know  whether  it  was  the  absence  of  the  head 
or  his  own  appetite  that  prompted  his  decision  on  this 
question,  but  to  our  relief  he  announced  that  as  long  as  he 
had  the  skeleton,  the  rest,  after  he  had  examined  it,  could  go 
to  the  cook.  As  we  had  no  use  for  the  skeleton,  we  were 
perfectly  contented  with  this  arrangement,  and  on  the  follow- 
ing day  our  fish  provided  the  most  sumptuous  repast  for  our 
whole  company.  It  is  difficult  to  say  exactly  what  this  fish 
tasted  like.  Science  would,  I  suppose,  dismiss  its  qualities  in 
this  respect  by  the  single  word  'edible,'  and  we,  whilst  we 
could  muster  a  good  many  adjectives  to  express  our  apprecia- 
tion, found  it  difficult  to  liken  it  to  anything  we  had  previously 
tasted.  It  had  a  firm,  white  flesh,  and  a  most  deliciously 
delicate  flavour,  and  that  perhaps  is  all  I  can  say  of  it. 

Not  long  after  this  great  capture  the  ship  was  once  more 
busy  with  all  the  preparations  for  the  coming  sledging  cam- 
paign. Barne  and  Mulock  were  the  first  to  get  away,  on 
October  6.  This  was  one  of  the  two  extended  journeys  of 
which  our  complement  would  allow.  In  the  advance  party 
with  these  two  officers  went  the  men  who  had  accompanied 

VOL,  II.  || 


162     THE   VOYAGE   OF  THE   'DISCOVERY'      [Oct. 

them  on  their  severe  depot  journey,  whilst  the  supporting  party 
consisted  of  Dellbridge,  Allan,  Wild,  Pilbeam,  and  Croucher. 
The  whole  party  were  to  journey  south  around  the  Bluff,  and 
thence  to  strike  across  for  the  entrance  to  the  big  strait  since 
called  the  Barne  Inlet.  After  about  a  fortnight  the  supporting 
party  were  to  turn  back,  whilst  the  advance  party  made  the 
best  of  a  ten  weeks'  absence  from  the  ship. 

By  October  1 1  all  preparations  for  my  own  western  effort 
had  been  completed,  and  on  the  following  day  we  started  full 
of  high  hopes  of  penetrating  far  into  the  interior. 

I  have  already  pointed  out  what  great  interests  lay  to  the 
west  at  this  time,  and  how  incomplete  our  knowledge  was  of 
this  region.  The  long  hours  of  our  second  winter  had  given 
me  ample  time  to  consider  the  importance  of  the  problems 
which  yet  remained  to  be  solved  there,  and  these  thoughts  had 
not  only  resigned  me  to  our  detention  in  the  ice,  but  had 
gradually  shown  me  that  if  all  went  well  in  future,  it  might 
turn  out  to  be  an  unmixed  blessing. 

If  we  could  do  all  that  I  hoped  in  the  Ferrar  Glacier  and 
beyond,  during  a  second  season's  work,  I  knew  that  the  value 
of  our  labours  of  the  first  year  would  be  immensely  increased. 
As  I  have  said  before,  the  interest  centred  in  this  region  ;  there 
were  fascinating  problems  elsewhere,  but  none  now  which 
could  compare  with  those  of  the  western  land.  It  was  such 
considerations  that  made  me  resolve  to  go  in  this  direction 
myself,  and  I  determined  that  no  effort  should  be  spared  to 
ensure  success. 

Rarely,  I  think,  has  more  time  and  attention  been  devoted 
to  the  preparation  of  a  sledge  journey  than  was  given  to  this 
one.  I  rightly  guessed  that  in  many  respects  it  was  going  to 
be  the  hardest  task  we  had  yet  undertaken,  but  I  knew  also 
that  our  experience  was  now  a  thing  that  could  be  counted 
upon,  and  that  it  would  take  a  good  deal  to  stop  a  party  of  our 
determined,  experienced  sledge  travellers. 

I  am  bound  to  confess  that  I  have  some  pride  in  this 
journey.  We  met  with  immense  difficulties,  such  as  would 
have  brought  us  hopelessly  to  grief  in  the  previous  year,  yet 


i9o3]  THE  WESTERN   JOURNEY  163 

now  as  veterans  we  steered  through  them  with  success  j  and 
when  all  circumstances  are  considered,  the  extreme  severity  of 
the  climate  and  the  obstacles  that  stood  in  our  path,  I  cannot 
but  believe  we  came  near  the  limit  of  possible  performance. 

It  is  for  this  reason,  and  because  the  region  in  which  much 
of  our  work  lay  was  very  beautiful  and  interesting,  that  I  pro- 
pose to  take  the  reader  into  the  details  of  one  more  sledging 
excursion. 

The  party  with  which  I  left  the  ship  on  October  12,  1903, 
numbered  twelve  members  in  all.  It  was  really  the  combina- 
tion of  three  separate  parties.  First  came  my  own  advance 
party,  which  I  had  selected  with  great  care,  and  which  included 
our  chief  engineer,  Skelton,  our  boatswain,  Feather,  and  three 
men,  Evans,  Lashly,  and  Handsley ;  secondly,  there  was  a 
small  party  for  our  geologist,  Ferrar,  with  whom  went  two  men, 
Kennar  and  Weller  ;  and  thirdly,  there  were  the  supports, 
consisting  of  our  carpenter,  Dailey,  and  two  other  men, 
Williamson  and  Plumley. 

The  original  scheme  was  that  the  whole  party  should 
journey  together  to  the  summit  of  Victoria  Land,  and  as  far 
beyond  as  could  be  reached  within  a  certain  limit  of  time ;  then 
the  advance  party  should  proceed  and  the  remainder  turn 
back.  An  absence  of  nine  weeks  was  calculated  for  the 
advance  party.  The  supports  were  to  return  direct  to  he 
ship,  but  stores  were  to  be  so  arranged  in  the  glacier  depots 
that  Ferrar  was  allowed  an  absence  of  six  weeks  in  which  to 
make  a  geological  survey  of  the  region. 

We  started  from  the  ship  with  four  eleven-foot  sledges,  and 
with  an  outfit  of  permanent  stores  which  the  reader  will  find  on 
referring  to  the  chapter  dealing  with  sledge  equipment. 
Altogether  our  loads  were  a  little  over  200  lbs.  per  man ;  but 
most  of  us  were  in  pretty  hard  condition  by  this  time,  and  we 
found  little  difficulty  in  dragging  such  a  weight. 

And  so  we  started  away  with  the  usual  cheers  and  good 
wishes,  little  thinking  how  soon  we  should  be  on  board  again. 

As  I  had  determined  that  from  first  to  last  of  this  trip  there 
should  be  hard  marching,  we  stretched  across  over  the  forty- 

m  2 


1 64      THE   VOYAGE  OF  THE   'DISCOVERY'     [Oct. 

five  miles  to  New  Habour  at  a  good  round  pace,  and  by  work- 
ing long  hours  succeeded  in  reaching  the  snow-cape  on  the 
near  side  early  on  the  14th— a  highly  creditable  performance 
with  such  heavy  loads. 

This  snow-cape  was  in  future  to  be  known  as  'Butter 
Point.'  It  was  here  that  on  our  return  journey  we  could  first 
hope  to  obtain  fresh  seal-meat,  and,  in  preparation  for  this 
great  event,  a  tin  of  butter  was  carried  and  left  at  this  point  for 
each  party. 

And  here  I  fall  back  on  my  diary  as  may  be  required  to 
continue  the  thread  of  my  tale. 

1  October  14. — Had  to  camp  early  to-night,  as  Dailey  and 
Williamson  are  a  bit  seedy,  probably  a  little  overcome  with  the 
march.  At  supper  the  third  member  of  this  unlucky  unit, 
Plumley,  cut  off  the  top  of  his  thumb  in  trying  to  chop  up 
frozen  pemmican.  He  is  quite  cheerful  about  it,  and  has  been 
showing  the  frozen  detached  piece  of  thumb  to  everyone  else 
as  an  interesting  curio.  For  the  present  we  are  comparatively 
comfortable;  the  temperature  has  not  been  below  —  200,  and 
I  do  not  expect  anything  lower  till  we  get  to  the  upper  reaches 
of  the  glacier.' 

On  the  15  th  we  struck  the  glacier  snout  well  on  its  north 
side,  and  found,  as  I  had  guessed,  an  easy  road ;  from  there  on 
to  the  first  incline  of  the  glacier  we  crossed  only  mild  undula- 
tions and  had  no  difficulties  with  our  sledges.  It  was  extra- 
ordinary, after  we  had  discovered  and  travelled  over  this  easy 
route,  to  remember  what  a  bogey  it  had  been  to  us  for  more 
than  twelve  months. 

On  the  1 6th  we  reached  our  spring  depot  under  the  Cathe- 
dral Rocks,  and  after  picking  it  up  and  readjusting  our  loads, 
proceeded  a  few  miles  higher  to  a  spot  where  Armitage  had 
planted  some  sticks  in  the  previous  year  to  mark  the  move- 
ment of  the  glacier.  We  camped  in  gloriously  fine  weather, 
and  I  wrote  :  '  To-night  it  is  difficult  to  imagine  oneself  in  a 
polar  region.  If  one  forgets  for  the  moment  that  there  is  ice 
under  foot,  which  it  is  not  difficult  to  do  as  it  is  very  dark  in 
colour  and  there  are  many  boulders  close  about  us,  one  might 


i9o3]  ASCENDING  FERRAR  GLACIER  165 

be  in  any  climate,  for  nearly  all  around  is  dark  bare  rock.  We 
are  in  a  deep  gorge,  not  narrow,  as  the  glacier  here  is  probably 
four  or  five  miles  across,  but  the  cliffs  on  either  side  are  so 
majestic  and  lofty  that  the  broad  surface  of  the  glacier  is 
wholly  dwarfed  by  them. 

'We  are  on  the  south  side  of  the  valley,  and  towering 
precipitously  between  three  and  four  thousand  feet  above  our 
heads  are  the  high  sunlit  pinnacles  of  the  Cathedral  Rocks ; 
they  were  well  named  by  Armitage,  for  their  lofty  peaks  might 
well  be  the  spires  of  some  mighty  edifice.  Low  down  the 
rock  itself  is  gneiss,  I  believe  ;  in  colour  a  greyish  black,  but 
veined  and  splashed  with  many  a  lighter  hue.  The  high 
weathered  pinnacles  have  a  rich  brown  shade  ;  this  is  basalt, 
which  here  directly  overlies  the  gneiss.  On  the  further  side 
of  our  valley  the  hills  rise  almost  as  abruptly  as  on  this  j 
reddish  brown  is  the  predominant  colour  there  also,  but 
where  the  sunlight  falls  on  the  steeper  cliffs  it  is  lightened 
almost  to  a  brick  red.  A  little  snow  can  be  seen  amongst 
the  peaks  and  gullies  opposite  to  us,  and  here  and  there  the 
sparkling  white  of  some  hanging  glacier  is  in  marked  contrast 
to  the  rich  tones  of  the  bare  rock. 

1  We  are  camped  in  the  medial  moraine,  a  long  scattered 
line  of  boulders  of  every  form  and  colour.  Looking  east  one 
can  see  this  line  winding  down  with  graceful  curves  over  the 
blue  surface  of  the  glacier,  towards  the  sea ;  far  away  beyond 
is  the  ice-covered  sea  itself,  pearly  grey  in  the  distance.  One 
can  follow  this  highway  of  boulders  to  the  west  too,  till  it 
vanishes  over  the  undulating  inclines  above  us  ;  in  this 
direction  the  glacier  wears  a  formidable  aspect,  for  in  its 
centre  is  an  immense  cascade.  It  is  exactly  as  though  this 
was  some  river  which  had  been  suddenly  frozen  in  its  course, 
with  the  cascade  to  show  where  its  waters  had  been  dashing 
wildly  over  a  rocky  shallow ;  it  is  very  beautiful,  with  its 
gleaming  white  waves  and  deep  blue  shadows,  but  we  shall 
have  to  give  it  a  wide  berth  when  we  travel  upward.  The 
upper  valley  is  perhaps  our  most  beautiful  view  ;  the  dark 
cliffs  form  a  broad  V  and  frame  the  cascading  glacier,  and 


166      THE   VOYAGE   OF  THE    < DISCOVERY'     [Oct. 

above  it  the  distant  solitary  peak  of  the  Knob  Head  Mountain 
and  a  patch  of  crimson  sky.' 

'  October  17. — We  have  been  climbing  upward  all  day,  at 
first  over  a  gentle  incline  on  smooth,  hard,  glassy  ice,  where 
the  sledges  came  very  easily  but  unsteadily,  skidding  in  all 
directions  ;  later  the  incline  increased  and  the  surface  was 
roughened  with  tiny  wavelets  like  those  formed  by  a  catspaw 
sweeping  over  a  placid  lake.  We  walked  on  without  crampons, 
getting  foothold  in  the  hollow  of  these  wavelets.  Later  still 
we  came  to  a  stiffer  rise,  and  transverse  cracks  appeared  across 
our  path,  growing  more  numerous  and  widening  out  as  we 
ascended  till  we  found  ourselves  crossing  miniature  crevasses 
lightly  bridged  with  snow.  We  had  to  step  across  these,  and 
often  it  meant  a  long  step.  In  this  manner  we  steered  round 
to  the  north  of  the  cascade,  and  by  lunch-time  had  ascended 
almost  to  the  higher  basin  of  the  glacier. 

'  Immediately  before  lunch  we  had  to  get  over  a  very  stiff 
little  bit,  where  the  cracks  were  sometimes  three  or  four  feet 
across,  and  the  ice  very  rough  between  ;  it  was  heavy  work 
getting  the  sledges  up,  and  I  rather  feared  someone  would 
get  a  strain  or  sprain,  but  we  all  got  over  it  in  safety.  In  the 
afternoon,  at  a  height  of  4,500  feet,  we  topped  the  last  rise 
that  led  to  the  glacier  basin  ;  and  then,  on  a  surface  covered 
with  the  usual  tiny  wavelets,  and  from  which  the  cracks 
rapidly  disappeared,  we  travelled  over  a  stretch  of  seven  or 
eight  miles  with  a  gradual  fall  of  600  or  700  feet,  and  at 
length  reached  a  stream  of  enormous  boulders  which  ran  right 
across  our  track.  This  is  what  Armitage  called  the  Knob 
Head  Moraine.  He  was  twenty-seven  days  out  from  the 
ship  before  he  reached  it ;  we  have  got  here  in  six. 

1  The  changes  of  scene  throughout  the  day  have  been 
bewildering.  Not  one  half-hour  of  our  march  has  passed 
without  some  new  feature  bursting  upon  our  astonished  gaze. 
Certainly  those  who  saw  this  valley  last  year  did  not  exaggerate 
its  grandeur — indeed,  it  would  be  impossible  to  do  so.  It  is 
wonderfully  beautiful.  As  we  came  up  the  lower  gorge  this 
morning,  we  passed  from  side  to  side  with  frowning  cliffs 


i9o3]  SCENIC  GRANDEUR  167 

towering  over  us  on  either  hand  ;  ahead  between  these  dark 
walls  the  sky,  perhaps  by  contrast,  looked  intensely  blue,  and 
here  and  there  in  the  valley  floated  a  little  wisp  of  feathery 
white  cloud ;  again  and  again  these  appeared  under  some 
forbidding  rock-face  only  to  melt  impalpably  away.  As  we 
emerged  into  the  great  ice-basin  we  turned  towards  the  north 
to  face  a  new  aspect  of  this  wonderful  country. 

'To  describe  the  wildly  beautiful  scene  that  is  about  us 
to-night  is  a  task  that  is  far  beyond  my  pen.  Away  behind 
us  is  the  gorge  by  which  we  have  come  ;  but  now  above  and 
beyond  its  splendid  cliffs  we  can  see  rising  fold  on  fold  the 
white  snow-clad  slopes  of  Mount  Lister.  Only  at  the  very 
top  of  its  broad,  blunt  summit  is  there  a  sign  of  bare  rock, 
and  that  is  11,000  feet  above  our  present  elevated  position; 
so  clear  is  the  air  that  one  seems  to  see  every  wrinkle  and 
crease  in  the  rolling  masses  of  neve  beneath. 

■  The  great  basin  in  which  we  are  camped  has  four  outlets. 
Opposite  that  by  which  we  have  come  descends  what  we  call 
the  south-west  arm ;  it  is  a  prodigious  ice-flow,  but  falls 
steeply  and  roughly  between  its  rocky  boundaries.  Away 
ahead  of  us  is  the  north-west  arm ;  we  have  some  twisting 
and  turning  to  get  to  it,  but  shall  eventually  round  a  sharp 
corner  and  steer  up  it  to  the  westward.  To  the  right  of  this 
and  ahead  of  us  also  is  the  north  arm,  which  seems  to  descend 
sharply  towards  the  sea.  Besides  these  main  outlets  or  inlets, 
there  are  some  places  to  the  west  of  us  where  smaller  ice-flows 
fall  into  our  basin  with  steep  crevassed  surfaces,  and  in  many 
places  around  are  lighter  tributaries  descending  from  the  small 
local  neve  fields.  But  for  the  main  part  we  are  surrounded 
with  steep,  bare  hillsides  of  fantastic  and  beautiful  forms  and 
of  great  variety  in  colour.  The  groundwork  of  the  colour- 
scheme  is  a  russet-brown,  but  to  the  west  especially  it  has 
infinite  gradations  of  shade,  passing  from  bright  red  to  dull 
grey,  whilst  here  and  there,  and  generally  in  banded  form, 
occurs  an  almost  vivid  yellow.  The  whole  forms  a  glorious 
combination  of  autumn  tints,  and  few  forests  in  their  autumnal 
raiment  could  outvie  it. 


168      THE  VOYAGE   OF  THE   'DISCOVERY'     [Oct. 

1  The  most  curious  feature  about  us  is  the  great  mass  of 
rock  immediately  in  front.  It  appears  to  form  two  islands,  for 
the  great  body  of  ice  which  occupies  the  basin  seems  to  join 
again  beyond  it.  Armitage  called  these  islands  the  "  Solitary 
Rocks  "  ;  they  are  comparatively  flat  on  top,  and  rich  brown 
in  colour,  save  where  two  broad  bands  of  yellow  run  horizontally 
through  them.  These  bands  are  so  regular  and  uniform  in 
thickness  that  one  might  almost  imagine  they  had  been  painted 
on.  Geologically  all  this  should  be  of  immense  interest,  for 
the  bands  which  are  broken  off  so  sharply  at  the  cliffs  of  these 
islands  can  be  seen  to  appear  again  in  the  high  hills  beyond, 
and  no  doubt  would  appear  everywhere  if  many  of  the  hill- 
sides were  not  covered  with  loose  rubble.  The  whole  structure 
of  the  country  seems  to  be  horizontal,  but  exactly  what  the 
rocks  are,  we  have  not  yet  ascertained ;  the  brown  is  probably 
basalt,  and  the  yellow,  Ferrar  hopes,  is  the  sedimentary  rock 
which  he  has  found  in  the  moraines.' 

As  Mr.  Ferrar  has  added  an  appendix  to  this  volume 
dealing  with  the  geological  formation  of  this  interesting  region, 
I  shall  in  future  omit  all  remarks  of  mine  which  bear  on  the 
subject.  I  have  only  included  the  foregoing  to  give  some 
idea  of  the  task  which  Ferrar  had  before  him.  Both  before 
and  after  this  he  found  in  the  various  moraines  a  large  variety 
of  rocks — granites,  gneisses,  sandstone,  quartz,  &c. — but  as 
this  was  all  transported  material  it  told  very  little.  It  was 
only  as  we  ascended  this  great  glacier  and  saw  the  curious 
horizontal  stratification  of  the  hills  that  the  problem  gradually 
unfolded  itself  before  him,  and  he  arrived  at  some  notion  of 
the  places  to  be  visited  when  he  commenced  his  investigations. 

It  was  on  the  night  of  the  17th,  whilst  we  were  still 
absorbed  in  the  beauty  and  novelty  of  the  scene  about  us, 
that  the  first  cloud  of  trouble  loomed  above  our  horizon,  for 
it  was  on  this  night  the  carpenter  reported  that  the  German 
silver  had  split  under  the  runners  of  two  of  our  sledges.  As 
this  matter  was  of  the  gravest  import  to  us,  it  perhaps  needs 
a  little  explanation.  I  have  pointed  out  before  that  the  wood 
runners  of  our  sledges  were  quite  capable  of  running  on  snow 


1903]  OUR  SLEDGES   BREAK  DOWN  169 

without  protection ;  on  the  hard,  sharp  ice,  however,  it  was  a 
different  matter.  In  such  circumstances,  a  wood  runner  would 
be  knocked  to  pieces  in  a  very  few  hours,  especially  if  the 
sledge  was  heavily  laden.  At  all  hazards,  therefore,  it  was 
necessary  to  protect  our  runners  over  this  hard  ice,  but  un- 
fortunately the  German  silver  protection  had  already  stood 
one  season's  work,  and  this  had  worn  it  thin  without  giving 
any  outward  sign.  We  only  found  out  how  thin  it  had  become 
when  it  gave  out  on  this  journey,  and  hence  the  troubles  which 
I  am  about  to  describe  were  quite  unexpected. 

From  start  to  finish  of  the  Ferrar  Glacier  there  were  about 
ninety  miles  in  which  hard  ice  might  be  expected,  and  the 
problem  that  soon  came  before  us  was  how  to  get  our  sledges 
over  this  without  damage. 

On  the  17th  I  scarcely  realised  myself  the  full  importance 
of  the  carpenter's  report,  but  on  the  18th  matters  came  to  a 
crisis,  as  will  be  seen. 

'  October  18. — We  got  away  early  this  morning,  crossed 
the  moraines  and  continued  our  ascent  over  hard,  wavy  ice. 
It  was  quite  calm  about  us,  with  the  temperature  at  about 
—  200,  but  a  short  distance  ahead  we  could  see  the  wind 
sweeping  down  from  a  gully  on  our  left,  carrying  clouds  of 
snowdrift.  We  did  not  at  all  like  the  look  of  this  wind-swept 
area,  but  it  had  to  be  crossed,  and  we  plunged  into  it  after 
adjusting  our  wind-guards.  It  took  us  over  an  hour  to  get 
across,  and  several  of  us  got  badly  frost-bitten,  as  immediately 
opposite  the  gully  the  wind  was  extraordinarily  violent,  and  it 
was  as  much  as  we  could  do  to  hold  up  against  it.  Once  past 
the  gully,  however,  it  was  nearly  calm  and  comparatively  warm 
again  ;  by  lunch-time  we  had  reached  a  new  meandering 
moraine,  almost  abreast  of  the  Solitary  Rocks,  and  had 
achieved  a  height  of  over  6,000  feet. 

1 1,  with  my  party,  was  some  way  ahead  when  I  decided  to 
camp,  but  the  supports  soon  came  up,  bringing,  alas  !  a  woeful 
tale — another  sledge  had  split  its  runners. 

'  After  lunch  I  had  all  the  sledges  unpacked  and  the  runners 
turned  up  for  inspection,  with   horrid  revelations.     On  two 


T7o      THE   VOYAGE   OF  THE   'DISCOVERY'     [Oct. 

sledges  the  German  silver  was  split  to  ribbons  and  the  wood 
deeply  scored,  a  third  was  only  in  slightly  better  case,  whilst 
the  fourth  still  remained  sound.  I  could  see  nothing  for  it 
but  to  return  home ;  if  we  had  two  sound  sledges  we  might 
struggle  on  with  the  advance  party,  but  with  one  we  could  do 
nothing.  It  was  no  use  even  discussing  the  matter — there  was 
only  one  course ;  so  we  left  the  sound  sledge  with  everything 
else  except  the  half-week's  provisions  necessary  to  take  us 
back,  and  after  crossing  the  windy  area  once  more,  we  are  now 
back  at  our  old  encampment  in  the  Knob  Head  Moraine.  It 
is  a  bitter  disappointment  to  my  hopes ;  everything  will  have 
to  be  reorganised,  and  Heaven  knows  what  sacrifices  of  time 
we  shall  have  to  make.  However,  there  shall  not  be  more 
than  I  can  help,  and  things  which  have  gone  fast  in  the  past, 
will  positively  have  to  fly  in  the  future.' 

On  the  following  days  we  came  as  near  flying  as  is  possible 
with  a  sledge  party.  We  had  eighty-seven  miles  to  cover  on 
the  morning  of  the  19th,  when  we  were  up  and  away  with  the 
first  streak  of  dawn ;  then  we  started  our  rush,  at  first  up  the 
slight  incline  to  the  summit  of  the  pass,  and  then  down  through 
the  steeper  gorge  towards  the  sea.  We  did  not  pause  to  pick 
a  road,  but  went  straight  forward,  scrambling  as  best  we  could 
over  steep  places  and  taking  all  obstacles  in  our  stride.  Once 
only  we  halted  to  snatch  a  hasty  lunch,  and  then  were  off 
again  over  the  rugged,  slippery  ice. 

That  night  we  camped  at  sea  level  twenty-seven  miles 
below  our  starting  point.  The  next  morning  brought  us  a 
hard  pull  with  our  torn  runners  over  the  long  stretch  of  rough 
snow-covered  glacier  tongue,  but  at  lunch-time  we  had  reached 
the  end,  and  devoted  an  hour  to  stripping  the  broken,  twisted 
metal  from  our  sledges. 

By  this  time  I  had  determined  to  test  my  own  party  to 
the  utmost,  but  I  did  not  see  that  the  supporting  people  need 
be  dragged  into  our  effort ;  so  telling  the  latter  that  they  might 
take  their  own  time,  I  started  away  with  my  own  detachment 
over  the  sea-ice  towards  the  mouth  of  the  inlet  at  the  quickest 
pace  we  had  yet  attempted.    When  the  brief  night  descended 


1903]  RETURN  TO   THE   SHIP  171 

on  us  we  camped  with  twenty-four  miles  to  our  credit  for  the 
day,  and  as  our  tents  were  being  secured  I  looked  round  to 
find  that  the  supporting  party  were  still  gallantly  struggling  on 
in  our  wake ;  seeing  our  tents  go  up,  they  halted  about  a  mile 
and  a  half  behind  us. 

At  dawn  on  the  21st  we  were  away  once  more,  and  stretch- 
ing out  directly  for  the  ship  j  far  away  we  could  see  Castle  Rock 
and  Observation  Hill,  small  dots  on  the  horizon.  Hour  after 
hour  went  by,  but  we  never  eased  our  pace  till  at  our  lunch  hour 
we  came  on  a  fat  seal  and  paused  to  eat  our  meal  and  to  secure 
the  certainty  of  a  good  supper  from  the  animal  that  had  been 
unwise  enough  to  bask  in  our  track.  In  the  afternoon  our 
home  landmarks  grew  more  distinct,  and  as  the  sun  dipped  we 
came  on  the  last  six  miles  of  wind-tossed  snow  that  skirted  our 
peninsula.  The  semi-darkness  found  us  struggling  on  over 
this  uneven,  difficult  surface,  but  at  half-past  eight  we  were 
through  and  reached  the  ship,  having  covered  thirty-six  miles 
in  the  day. 

We  had  accomplished  a  record  for  which  the  glow  of  satis- 
faction that  we  felt  was  excusable  ;  but  more  was  to  follow,  for 
later  that  night  a  shout  of  welcome  announced  that  our 
undefeated  supporting  party  had  also  struggled  home.  Ferrar 
soon  told  me  his  tale ;  at  first  they  had  not  intended  to  come 
in  at  racing  speed,  but  seeing  the  advance  party  striding  off  at 
such  a  pace,  their  feelings  of  emulation  had  been  excited,  and 
they  had  felt  bound  to  follow.  On  camping  behind  us  on  the 
previous  night  they  had  determined  to  catch  us  in  the  early 
morning,  but  as  they  roused  out  with  that  intention  they  saw 
that  we  also  were  preparing  to  be  off.  Then  followed  the  long 
march,  when,  despite  all  their  efforts,  the  leading  party  grew 
more  and  more  indistinct.  It  was  not  until  late  in  the  after- 
noon that  they  lost  sight  of  us  altogether,  and  then  there  could 
be  no  doubt  of  our  intention  to  reach  the  ship  before  night. 

In  spite  of  their  lame  and  exhausted  condition,  they  deter- 
mined to  follow.  Once  or  twice  they  had  halted  to  brew  tea 
to  keep  themselves  going,  but  not  one  of  them  had  suggested 
that  the  halt  should  be  extended.     In  the  hard  struggle  of  the 


172      THE   VOYAGE   OF  THE   'DISCOVERY'     [Oct. 

last  few  hours  some  of  the  men  had  kept  things  going  by 
occasionally  indulging  in  some  dry  remark  which  caused  every- 
one to  laugh.  Kennar's  attitude  had  been  one  of  grieved 
astonishment ;  presumably  referring  to  me,  he  had  kept  repeat- 
ing, 'If  he  can  do  it,  I  don't  see  why  I  can't :  my  legs  are  as 
long  as  his.' 

And  so  it  was  that  this  party  made  the  record  march  of  all, 
for  they  started  more  than  a  mile  behind  us,  and  must  have 
covered  over  thirty-seven  miles  in  the  day. 

In  spite  of  our  marching,  it  was  a  blow  to  be  back  in  the 
ship  so  soon  after  we  had  made  our  first  hopeful  start,  and,  as 
can  be  imagined,  I  did  not  allow  time  to  be  wasted  in  pre- 
paring to  be  off  again.  Our  carpenter  was  soon  at  work 
repairing  the  sledges  with  all  the  assistance  that  could  be 
afforded  him.  Meanwhile  I  saw  that  it  would  be  necessary  to 
reorganise  our  arrangements.  Without  going  into  the  reasons 
which  guided  me,  I  may  say  that  I  now  thought  the  best 
scheme  was  for  the  advance  party  to  start  off  on  its  own 
account,  to  pick  up  the  glacier  provisions,  and  to  dispose  of 
them  on  a  new  plan.  I  arranged  that  Ferrar  should  start  with 
a  small  sledge  of  his  own,  and  should  be  entirely  indepen- 
dent ;  but  as  he  signified  his  wish  to  remain  with  us  as  long  as 
possible,  it  was  still  a  party  of  nine  that  started  out  on  October 
26,  five  days  after  our  flying  return.  Our  material  for  repair- 
ing sledges  was  very  scanty,  but  at  length  out  of  the  parts  of 
various  broken  ones  we  had  succeeded  in  producing  one  sound 
eleven-foot  sledge  for  our  own  party  and  a  short  seven-foot  one 
for  Ferrar's  glacier  work. 

With  these  we  once  more  started  to  cross  the  long  stretch 
of  sea-ice  to  the  mainland.  The  night  of  the  27  th  found  us  at 
the  end  of  the  glacier  tongue,  and  I  wrote :  '  We  can  fairly 
claim  to  be  in  good  marching  condition,  having  crossed  the 
strait  at  an  average  of  over  twenty-five  miles  a  day.  This 
morning  we  met  a  small  group  of  Emperor  penguins;  they 
were  going  south  towards  the  "  Eskers,"  for  what  reason  one 
cannot  guess,  travelling  on  their  breasts  and  propelling  them- 
selves with  their  powerful  feet  at  a  speed  of  at  least  five  miles 


i9o3]  A  FRESH   START  173 

an  hour.  Of  course  when  they  saw  us  they  made  in  our 
direction,  and  when  quite  close  stood  up  and  squawked  loudly. 
They  watched  us  for  some  time  with  every  manifestation  of 
amazement,  and  then  started  to  follow  in  our  wake,  but  of  this 
they  soon  tired,  and  resuming  their  old  course  to  the  south, 
were  shortly  out  of  sight.' 

In  preparation  for  our  renewed  struggle  with  the  hard  ice 
of  the  glacier,  we  had  brought  with  us  some  under-runners 
shod  with  German  silver,  and  at  the  glacier  tongue  we  picked 
up  all  the  scraps  of  this  metal  which  we  had  formerly  discarded. 
'  October  28. — We  are  camped  opposite  Descent  Pass  after 
a  hard  day.  This  morning  early  we  had  a  glorious  view  of  the 
glacier  valley.  The  sun  shone  brightly  on  the  great  gaunt  cliffs 
which  rose  one  above  the  other  towards  the  inland,  and  every 
outline  was  sharp  against  the  deep  blue  sky.  Later,  low  sheets 
of  stratus  cloud  spread  across  the  valley  and  shimmered  in  the 
sunlight.  This  afternoon  a  nimbus  cloud  crept  in  over  our 
heads,  bringing  a  trifling  snowfall ;  the  sun  struggled  against  it, 
but  for  the  time  the  valley  was  clothed  in  mists. 

'  Troubles  have  already  come  upon  us  ;  the  under-runners 
of  our  sledge  split  on  the  first  incline,  and  we  had  to  take  them 
off.  The  metal  on  one  of  the  runners  on  which  we  now  rely 
is  badly  laminated,  and  may  go  at  any  moment.  These 
difficulties  are  very  annoying,  but  I  have  determined  to  get  to 
the  top  this  time,  even  if  we  have  to  carry  our  loads.' 

From  this  time  on  we  had  constant  worries  with  these 
wretched  runners.  On  the  29th  Ferrar's  small  sledge  gave  out, 
and  we  had  a  long  delay  to  get  it  into  working  order  again. 
Notwithstanding  this  we  got  within  a  few  hundred  yards  of  the 
Knob  Head  Moraine  before  we  called  a  halt  for  the  night. 
On  the  broad  surface  of  this  glacier  there  were  few  places  in 
which  we  could  camp  for  want  of  snow  to  secure  our  tents  :  for 
this  reason  we  generally  kept  moderately  close  to  the  long  lines 
of  morainic  boulders,  as  under  the  largest  of  these  there  was 
usually  sufficient  snow  for  our  purpose.  In  a  few  places 
elsewhere  we  found  a  thin  sheet  or  isolated  patches,  but  this 
was  not  common. 


174      THE   VOYAGE    OF  THE   'DISCOVERY'     [Oct. 

On  the  night  of  the  29th  we  camped  in  a  calm,  with  the 
sun  shining  brightly,  and  had  a  fair  view  of  grand  hills  that 
surrounded  the  glacier  basin,  but  now  also  we  again  observed 
a  fact  which  was  not  so  cheering.  On  each  occasion  when  we 
were  in  this  basin  it  was  calm  all  about  us,  except  in  two 
regions  where  the  wind  evidently  swept  down  with  great  and 
almost  continuous  violence.  One  of  these  was  what  we  called 
the  '  Vale  of  Winds,'  across  which  we  had  passed  before,  and 
the  other  was  unfortunately  the  north-west  arm,  up  which  we 
proposed  to  go.  We  had  never  seen  the  latter  without  clouds 
of  drift  pouring  down  over  its  surface, '  and  we  shrewdly 
suspected  that  we  were  in  for  a  pretty  bad  time  when  we 
reached  it. 

1  October  30. — We  have  grown  a  little  careless  in  leaving 
our  things  about  outside  the  tent,  and  this  morning  we  had  a 
lesson.  Our  sleeping-bags,  with  socks,  finneskoes,  and  other 
garments,  lay  scattered  about  on  the  ice  whilst  we  were  having 
breakfast,  when  suddenly  the  wind  swept  down  on  us  ;  before 
we  could  move  everything  was  skidding  away  over  the  surface 
of  the  ice.  The  moment  we  realised  what  was  happening  the 
tents  were  empty  and  we  were  flying  over  the  ice  as  fast  as  we 
could  after  our  lost  garments.  The  incident  would  have  been 
extremely  funny  had  it  not  involved  the  possibility  of  such 
serious  consequences.  The  sleeping-bags  were  well  on 
towards  the  steep  fall  of  the  north  arm  before  they  were 
recovered,  and  by  good  luck  the  whole  affair  closed  with  the 
loss  of  only  a  few  of  the  lighter  articles. 

'  As  soon  as  we  had  struggled  back  against  the  heavy  wind 
that  was  now  blowing,  we  packed  our  sledges,  put  on  our 
crampons,  and  started  onward  ;  but  by  this  time  the  wind  had 
increased  to  a  full  gale,  and  we  could  hardly  stand  against  it, 
so  we  steered  to  the  westward  to  get  under  shelter.  This 
brought  us  on  a  slope  which  gradually  grew  steeper  till  it 
ended  in  the  perpendicular  side  of  the  glacier.  Proceeding 
down  as  far  as  we  thought  safe,  we  entered  the  moraine  and 
pitched  our  camp  again.  I  do  not  know  what  to  make  of  this 
moraine,   which,  starting  from  the  side  of  the  glacier,  runs 


1903]  DELAYED   BY  THE   WIND  175 

directly  across  it,  and,  after  first  rising  for  several  hundred 
feet,  descends  again  steeply  down  the  north  arm  towards  the 
sea.' 

I  may  here  mention  that  these  crampons  to  which  I  refer 
were  manufactured  on  board  the  ship  ;  those  used  in  the 
previous  year  were  voted  wholly  unsatisfactory,  and  gave  rise 
to  many  blisters,  whereupon  our  chief  engineer  took  the  matter 
in  hand,  and  with  the  assistance  of  the  boatswain  produced  an 
article  which  rendered  us  excellent  service  on  this  journey. 
Each  crampon  had  two  steel  plates  studded  with  mild  steel 
spikes,  one  for  the  sole  and  the  other  for  the  heel ;  the  plates 
were  riveted  on  to  a  canvas  overall  half- boot  which  could  be 
put  on  over  a  finnesko  and  kept  tight  with  thongs.  The  device 
was  heavy,  but  as  quite  the  best  sort  of  thing  in  the  circum- 
stances it  is  well  worthy  of  imitation  by  future  travellers  in 
these  regions. 

The  moraine  which  at  this  time  bewildered  us  so  much 
was  one  of  those  signs  of  a  former  greater  extension  of  the  ice 
to  which  I  shall  refer  in  my  final  chapter. 

The  wind  kept  us  in  this  wretched  moraine  for  two  days — 
a  tiresome  delay — but  we  managed  to  get  out  for  an  hour  or 
two  and  make  an  interesting  excursion  to  the  side  of  the 
glacier.  After  a  short  search  we  found  a  way  by  which,  with 
some  aid  from  a  rope,  we  could  climb  down  the  steep  ice- face 
and  visit  the  land  beyond. 

We  afterwards  found  that  the  side  of  this  glacier  was  more 
or  less  typical  of  other  places.  It  must  be  understood  that 
from  the  top  of  this  wall  the  surface  sloped  rapidly  up,  whilst 
the  bottom  layer  of  ice  would  naturally  have  sloped  down  into 
the  valley,  so  that  in  the  middle  the  glacier  must  have  been 
very  many  times  as  thick  as  at  the  side.  The  ice  was  curiously 
stratified ;  the  white  part  contained  numerous  air  vesicles,  the 
darker  parts  were  in  many  cases  due  to  included  dirt,  but  a 
broad  dark  band  running  through  the  middle  had  no  dirt  in 
it  at  all — it  was  the  cleanest  ice  we  saw.  A  piece  split  off  it 
was  like  the  purest  crystal  without  a  sign  of  grit  or  air  bubble 
to  obstruct  its  perfect  transparency. 


176      THE   VOYAGE   OF  THE   'DISCOVERY'     [Nov. 

Between  this  ice-wall  and  the  mountain  side  lay  a  deep 
trench,  showing  the  smooth  glassy  surface  of  frozen  thaw-water. 
The  mountain  side  itself,  except  for  one  place  lower  down 
where  there  was  an  outcrop  of  red  granite,  was  thickly  strewn 
with  boulders  of  every  kind  of  rock  which  the  region  produced, 
whilst  here  and  there  could  be  seen  enormous  perched  blocks 
ranging  up  to  three  or  four  hundred  tons  in  weight. 

All  this  vast  quantity  of  debris  had  evidently  been  carried 
by  ice,  and  it  was  now  that  we  first  realised  to  what  vastly 
greater  limits  our  glacier  had  once  extended,  for  these  thickly 
strewn  boulders  covered  the  mountain  side  to  a  height  of  three 
thousand  feet  above  our  heads,  where  a  horizontal  line  signi- 
fied their  limit  and  the  extent  of  the  glacier  at  its  maximum. 

'  November  i. — It  was  overcast  and  dull  this  morning,  but 
the  wind  had  fallen  light  and  we  decided  to  push  on ;  although 
the  air  was  comparatively  still  about  us,  close  ahead  the  "Vale 
of  Winds  "  was  sending  forth  its  snow-laden  gusts  as  merrily  as 
ever.  Before  we  came  to  this  unattractive  area  we  passed  two 
more  carcases  of  Weddell  seals  ;  the  last  was  at  the  greatest 
altitude  we  have  yet  found  one,  nearly  5,000  feet  above  the 
sea ;  it  grows  more  than  ever  wonderful  how  these  creatures 
can  have  got  so  far  from  the  sea.'  We  never  satisfactorily 
explained  this  matter.  The  seal  seems  often  to  crawl  to  the 
shore  or  the  ice  to  die,  possibly  from  its  instinctive  dread  of  its 
marine  enemies ;  but  unless  we  had  actually  found  these 
remains,  it  would  have  been  past  believing  that  a  dying  seal 
could  have  transported  itself  over  fifty  miles  of  rough  steep 
glacier  surface. 

'  We  got  safely  past  the  "  Vale  of  Winds  "  with  only  one  or 
two  frost-bites,  and  a  few  miles  beyond  found  our  depot  with- 
out much  difficulty.  At  first  we  thought  that  everything  was 
intact,  but  a  closer  examination  showed  us  that  the  lid  of  the 
instrument  box  had  been  forced  open  and  that  some  of  the 
contents  were  missing.  Evidently  there  has  been  a  violent 
gale  since  we  were  here  before.  When  we  came  to  count 
up  the  missing  articles,  we  found  that  Skelton  had  lost  his 
goggles  and  that  one  or  two  other  trifles  had  disappeared }  but 


1903 j  A  HEAVY  LOSS  177 

before  we  could  congratulate  ourselves  on  escaping  so  lightly, 
I  found  to  my  horror  that  the  "  Hints  to  Travellers  "  had 
vanished. 

1  The  gravity  of  this  loss  can  scarcely  be  exaggerated ;  but 
whilst  I  realised  the  blow  I  felt  that  nothing  would  induce  me 
to  return  to  the  ship  a  second  time  ;  I  thought  it  fair,  however, 
to  put  the  case  to  the  others,  and  I  am,  as  I  expected,  fortified 
by  their  willing  consent  to  take  the  risks  of  pushing  on.' 

I  must  here  explain  what  this  loss  signified.  In  travelling 
to  the  west,  we  expected  to  be,  as  indeed  we  were,  for  some 
weeks  out  of  sight  of  landmarks.  In  such  a  case  as  this  the 
sledge  traveller  is  in  precisely  the  same  position  as  a  ship  or 
boat  at  sea :  he  can  only  obtain  a  knowledge  of  his  where- 
abouts by  observations  of  the  sun  or  stars,  and  with  the  help 
of  these  observations  he  finds  his  latitude  and  longitude.  To 
find  the  latitude  from  an  observation  of  a  heavenly  body,  how- 
ever, it  is  necessary  to  know  the  declination  of  that  body,  and 
to  find  the  longitude  one  must  have  not  only  the  declination, 
but  certain  logarithmic  tables.  In  other  words,  to  find  either 
latitude  or  longitude,  a  certain  amount  of  data  is  required. 
Now,  all  these  necessary  data  are  supplied  in  an  excellent 
little  publication  issued  by  the  Royal  Geographical  Society 
and  called  '  Hints  to  Travellers,'  and  it  was  on  this  book  that 
I  was  relying  to  be  able  to  work  out  my  sights  and  accurately 
fix  the  position  of  my  party. 

When  this  book  was  lost,  therefore,  the  reader  will  see  how 
we  were  placed  ;  if  we  did  not  return  to  the  ship  to  make  good 
our  loss,  we  should  be  obliged  to  take  the  risk  of  marching 
away  into  the  unknown  without  exactly  knowing  where  we 
were  or  how  to  get  back. 

As  will  be  seen,  this  last  is  precisely  what  happened,  and 
if  the  loss  of  our  '  Hints  to  Travellers '  did  not  lead  us  into 
serious  trouble  it  caused  me  many  a  bad  half-hour. 

'Having  decided   to   push  on,  we  lost  as   little  time  as 

possible   in   packing   our   sledges,  and   in  the   afternoon  we 

were  off  once  more,  steadily  ascending  over  the  rough  ice. 

The   Solitary  Rocks   have  fallen  behind  us,  and   our  camp 

YOL.  11.  n 


178     THE  VOYAGE  OF  THE   'DISCOVERY'     [Nov. 

to-night  looks  out  on  the  broad  amphitheatre  above  them 
where  the  glacier  sweeps  round  from  the  upper  reach.  On 
our  left  is  the  Finger  Mountain,  a  precipitous  mass  of  rock 
showing  the  most  extraordinary  "  fault "  in  that  yellow-banded 
structure  which  now  seems  to  surround  us  on  every  side.' 
The  reader  will  understand  the  significance  of  this  fault  from 
Mr.  Ferrar's  notes  on  the  Beacon  Sandstone  formation. 

1  Finger  Mountain  forms  the  pivot  about  which  the  glacier 
turns,  and  the  great  difference  in  the  level  of  the  ice  above  and 
below  the  mountain  is  taken  by  two  heavy  broken  falls.  We 
are  encamped  under  the  lower  and  smaller  one,  but  the  upper, 
some  three  or  four  miles  beyond,  is  a  magnificent  mass  of 
twisted,  torn  ice-blocks.  To-morrow  we  have  to  rise  over  these 
falls,  but  I  propose  to  take  a  very  roundabout  way  to  avoid 
difficulties. 

'  The  scene  behind  us  is  glorious ;  we  look  down  now  on 
the  great  glacier  basin  with  the  dark  rugged  mountains  that 
surround  it,  and  far  away  beyond,  the  summit  of  Mount  Lister 
shows  above  a  bank  of  twisted  sunlit  cloud.  But,  alas  ! 
pleasant  as  it  is  to  look  at  this  beautiful  scene,  trouble  is 
never  far  from  us,  and  this  afternoon  we  have  had  our  full 
share.  First  one  sledge-runner  gave  out  and  then  another, 
and  we  arrived  at  camp  with  three  out  of  four  disabled.  Now, 
however,  there  is  a  fixed  determination  in  the  party  to  get 
through  somehow,  and  each  difficulty  only  serves  to  show  more 
clearly  their  resourcefulness.  This  particular  trouble  has  called 
on  the  metal  workers,  and  no  sooner  had  we  halted  and  un- 
packed the  sledges  than  Skelton  and  Lashly  were  hard  at  work 
with  pliers,  files,  and  hammers  stripping  off  the  torn  metal  and 
lapping  fresh  pieces  over  the  weak  places.  They  have  estab- 
lished a  little  workshop  in  this  wild  spot,  and  for  hours  the 
scrape  of  the  file  and  the  tap  of  the  hammer  have  feebly  broken 
the  vast  silence. 

1  We  have  hopes  of  the  lapping  process  which  is  now  being 
effected,  but  it  needs  very  careful  fitting ;  each  separate  piece 
of  metal  protection  is  made  to  overlap  the  piece  behind  it,  like 
slates  on  a  roof !     I  should  doubt  whether  such  work  could 


1903]  WIND   FROM   THE   SUMMIT  179 

be    done   by   people   unaccustomed   to    dealing    with    these 
matters.' 

'  November  2. — This  morning  it  was  perfectly  calm  and 
still,  with  a  bright  sun  and  the  temperature  at  +  20.  There 
was  little  difficulty  in  finishing  off  our  repairing  work,  and  when 
the  sledges  were  ready  we  started  to  march  upwards  again. 

?  We  steered  well  to  the  eastward  to  make  a  wide  circuit  of 
Finger  Mountain  and  its  dangerous  ice-falls,  and  on  this  course 
gradually  approached  the  northern  limit  of  the  great  amphi- 
theatre beyond.  The  precipitous  mountains  that  fringe  this 
limit  show  in  the  clearest  and  most  beautiful  manner  the 
horizontal  stratification  of  their  rocks,  and  now  there  can  be 
no  doubt  that  this  simple,  banded  structure  is  common  to  the 
whole  region  about  us,  and  that  the  sharp  clear  lines  of  the 
strata  are  singularly  free  from  faulting. 

1  In  ascending  we  gradually  passed  from  hard  ice  to  snow. 
Apparently  there  is  a  considerable  snowfall  in  this  amphi- 
theatre; it  has  made  our  pulling  much  harder,  but,  on  the 
other  hand,  it  saves  our  sledge-runners  from  injury,  and  the 
more  we  can  get  of  it  the  better  we  shall  be  pleased.  After 
lunch  we  passed  on  to  ice  again,  and  the  wind  sprang  up. 
Coming  at  first  in  eddying  gusts,  it  increased  with  great 
rapidity,  and  very  soon  we  were  all  getting  frost-bitten.  It 
was  obviously  desirable  to  camp  as  soon  as  possible,  but  never 
a  patch  of  snow  could  be  seen,  and  we  pushed  on  with  all 
haste  towards  the  base  of  the  mountains  and  the  fringing 
moraines  of  the  glacier.  We  had  to  search  long  amongst 
the  latter  before  we  could  find  the  least  sign  of  snow,  and 
when  at  length  we  found  some,  it  was  so  hard  that  it  took  us 
nearly  an  hour  to  get  our  tents  up. 

1  We  are  now  at  the  base  of  the  upper  glacier  reach.  From 
here  it  rises  directly  to  the  inland,  and  it  is  over  this  broad 
surface  that  the  wind  seems  to  sweep  perpetually.  The  whole 
valley  is  very  ugly  with  wind  and  driving  snow,  and  there 
cannot  be  a  doubt  that  this  is  its  usual  condition,  and  that  we 
shall  have  a  hard  fight  with  the  wind  in  our  teeth ;  it  will  be 
no  child's  play  battling  with  this  icy  blast  from  the  summit. 

N  2 


180     THE   VOYAGE   OF  THE   < DISCOVERY'     [Nov. 

We  have  had  a  foretaste  of  it  this  afternoon,  and  at  the  present 
moment  it  is  straining  our  threadbare  tent  in  no  reassuring 
manner.' 

On  the  following  day  the  wind  was  as  strong  as  ever,  but 
we  knew  it  was  useless  to  wait,  so  pushed  on  once  more.  For 
a  brief  half-hour  we  got  some  shelter  in  a  curious  horseshoe 
bay  which  we  entered  to  repair  Ferrar's  sledge-runners.  Here 
the  cliffs  rose  perpendicularly,  and  immediately  above  our  heads 
the  broad  band  of  sandstone  ran  with  perfect  uniformity  around 
the  whole  bay.  On  rising  to  the  open  glacier  again,  I  struck 
off  for  the  south  side,  hoping  to  get  better  conditions,  and  with 
very  happy  results,  for  shortly  after  lunch  we  walked  out  of  the 
wind  as  easily  as  we  had  walked  into  it  on  the  previous  day. 
And  now  I  made  an  error,  for  I  started  from  this  point  to 
ascend  directly  upward.  It  is  impossible  to  describe  all  the 
turns  and  twists  which  were  taken  by  this  glacier,  or  to  mention 
the  numerous  undulations  and  disturbances  which  obliged  us 
constantly  to  alter  our  course  from  side  to  side,  but  it  must 
not  be  imagined  that  our  route  was  all  plain  sailing  and  easy 
travelling. 

From  a  very  early  time  we  saw  that  it  was  desirable  to  map 
out  our  course  a  long  way  ahead,  and  to  do  so  with  reference 
to  the  various  land  masses  so  as  to  avoid  disturbances  which 
we  could  not  see,  but  at  which  we  guessed.  I  mention  this 
matter  because  it  impressed  on  us  a  golden  rule  for  travelling 
in  this  region,  which  was,  'Always  take  a  long  sweep  round 
corners.'  We  were  often  tempted  to  break  this  rule  when  a 
shorter  road  looked  easy,  but  we  never  did  so  without  suffering. 
It  was  an  error  of  this  nature  that  I  made  on  the  afternoon  of 
the  3rd,  and  which  after  an  hour's  work  landed  us  in  such  a 
dangerously  crevassed  region  that  we  were  very  glad  to  struggle 
back  by  the  way  we  had  come.  The  note  I  made  at  this  time 
may  perhaps  be  quoted  :  '  The  whole  of  this  glacier  can  be 
made  easy  by  taking  the  right  course — a  course  such  as  a 
steamer  takes  in  rounding  the  bends  of  a  river.  The  tempta- 
tion to  cut  corners  is  excessive,  but  it  is  always  a  mistake.  By 
walking  round  obstructions  such  as  cascades,  not  only  does 


1903]  AN   EVENTFUL   DAY  i8r 

one  avoid  danger  to  life  and  limb,  but  also  the  chance  of  relay 
work,  which  alone  would  allow  the  longer  distance  to  be  three 
times  as  far,  without  loss  of  time. 

1  Whilst  we  were  in  difficulties  this  afternoon  there  occurred 
one  of  those  extraordinary  climatic  changes  which  are  such  a 
menace  to  sledge  travellers.  The  cold  had  been  so  intense 
that  we  had  been  walking  all  day  in  our  wind  clothes  and  with 
our  heaviest  head-gear ;  but  now  we  suddenly  found  ourselves 
perspiring  freely,  and  within  half  an  hour  we  had  stripped  off 
our  outer  garments,  and  the  majority  were  walking  bare- 
headed.' 

That  night  we  camped  in  gloriously  fine  weather,  after 
crossing  to  the  south  side  of  the  glacier  and  finding  another 
long  stream  of  boulders.  Here  we  had  our  usual  trouble  in 
repairing  our  battered,  torn  runners;  and,  to  add  to  this 
annoyance  we  had  come  to  the  end  of  our  scraps  of  metal, 
nails,  and  everything  else  necessary  for  repairing  work.  It  was 
evident  that  we  could  not  stand  many  more  miles  of  this  rough 
ice,  and  that  it  would  be  touch-and-go  whether  we  ever  reached 
the  snow  above  without  having  to  carry  our  belongings. 

We  had  now  attained  a  height  of  7,000  feet,  and  whilst  the 
summits  of  the  mountains  on  each  side  still  stood  high  above 
our  level,  they  no  longer  overawed  us  or  conveyed  that  sense 
of  grandeur  which  we  had  felt  so  keenly  at  our  former  camps. 
The  majestic  cliffs  of  the  lower  valley  were  beneath  us,  and  we 
gazed  over  the  top  of  many  a  lesser  summit  to  the  eastward. 
To  the  west  the  glacier  still  wound  its  way  upward,  and  we  saw 
that  there  was  a  stiff  climb  yet  to  come ;  but  already  the 
character  of  the  valley  was  altering,  the  boundary  cliffs  were 
cut  by  the  broad  channels  of  tributary  glaciers,  the  masses  of 
dark,  bare  rock  were  becoming  detached  and  isolated,  whilst 
the  widening  snowfields  were  creeping  upward  with  the  ever- 
increasing  threat  to  engulf  all  beneath  their  white  mantle. 

November  4  was  such  an  eventful  day  that  I  quote  its 
incidents  from  my  diary  : 

'Started  in  bright  sunshine,  but  with  a  chill,  increasing 
wind  in  our  teeth.     At  first  we  made  good  progress  over  hard, 


182      THE   VOYAGE   OF  THE   'DISCOVERY'     [Nov. 

smooth  ice,  but  soon  came  to  a  broad  field  of  snow  where  a 
large  tributary  entered  the  main  ice-stream.  It  was  heavy 
pulling  across  this  snow  with  our  ragged  runners,  and  to  add 
to  our  discomfort,  the  wind  swept  down  the  side  valley  with 
the  keenest  edge.  Beyond  this  valley  lay  the  "  Depot  Nunatak," 
a  huge  mass  of  columnar  basalt,  and  at  length  we  were  able  to 
get  our  breath  beneath  its  shelter.  Here  Evans  told  me  that 
one  of  his  feet  was  "  gone."  He  was  foolishly  wearing  a  single 
pair  of  socks  in  remembrance  of  the  warm  march  of  yesterday. 
As  soon  as  we  had  got  his  unruly  member  back  to  life  we 
proceeded. 

{ Ahead  of  us  there  showed  up  an  immense  and  rugged 
ice-fall,  one  of  those  by  which  the  glacier  signifies  its  entrance 
into  the  valley ;  at  this  I  knew  the  bare  blue  ice  would  come 
to  an  end,  and  with  it  our  difficulties  with  the  sledge-runners, 
so  I  determined  to  push  on  to  the  foot  of  this  fall  before 
camping.  The  way  led  up  a  steep  crevassed  slope  of  rough, 
blue  ice,  and  before  we  had  even  reached  this  slope  the  weather 
assumed  a  most  threatening  aspect.  The  sun  was  obscured 
by  stratus  cloud,  which  drifted  rapidly  overhead,  and  the  wind 
momentarily  increased.  We  went  on  at  our  best  speed,  but 
when  we  were  half-way  up  the  bare  icy  slope,  which  proved 
much  longer  than  I  had  expected,  the  full  force  of  the  gale 
burst  upon  us,  and  the  air  became  thick  with  driving  snow. 

1  We  pushed  on  almost  at  a  run  to  reach  the  summit  of  the 
slope,  and  then  started  to  search  in  every  direction  for  a  camping 
spot.  By  this  time  things  were  growing  serious,  everyone  was 
badly  frost-bitten  in  the  face,  and  it  was  evident  that  the  effects 
might  be  very  ugly  if  we  did  not  find  shelter  soon.  I  shall  not 
forget  the  next  hour  in  a  hurry ;  we  went  from  side  to  side 
searching  vainly  for  a  patch  of  snow,  but  everywhere  finding 
nothing  but  the  bare  blue  ice.  The  runners  of  our  sledges 
had  split  again,  so  badly  that  we  could  barely  pull  them  over 
the  rough  surface ;  we  dared  not  leave  them  in  the  thick  drift, 
and  every  minute  our  frost-bites  were  increasing.  At  last  we 
saw  a  white  patch,  and  made  a  rush  for  it ;  it  proved  to  be 
snow  indeed,  but  so  ancient  and  wind-swept  that  it  was  almost 


1903]  A  WEEK   IN   CAMP  183 

as  hard  as  the  solid  ice  itself.  Nevertheless,  we  knew  it  was 
this  or  nothing,  and  in  a  minute  our  tents  and  shovels  were 
hauled  off  the  sledges,  and  we  were  digging  for  dear  life. 

'  I  seized  the  shovel  myself,  for  my  own  tent-party,  but 
found  that  I  could  not  make  the  least  impression  on  the  hard 
surface.  Luckily,  at  this  moment  the  boatswain  came  to  my 
relief,  and  managing  the  implement  with  much  greater  skill, 
succeeded  in  chipping  out  a  few  small  blocks.  Then  we  tried 
to  get  up  the  tent,  but  again  and  again  it  and  the  poles  were 
blown  flat ;  at  last  the  men  came  to  our  assistance,  and  with 
our  united  efforts  the  three  tents  were  eventually  erected. 
All  this  had  taken  at  least  an  hour,  and  when  at  length  we 
found  shelter  it  was  not  a  moment  too  soon,  for  we  were 
thoroughly  exhausted,  and  fingers  and  feet,  as  well  as  faces, 
were  now  freezing.  As  soon  as  possible  we  made  a  brew  of 
tea,  which  revived  us  greatly;  afterwards  we  got  our  sleeping- 
bag  in,  and  since  that  we  have  been  coiled  up  within  it. 

1  The  temperature  to-night  is  —  240,  and  it  is  blowing 
nearly  a  full  gale  ;  it  is  not  too  pleasant  lying  under  the  shelter 
of  our  thin,  flapping  tent  under  such  conditions,  but  one 
cannot  help  remembering  that  we  have  come  mighty  well  out 
of  a  very  tight  place.  Nothing  but  experience  saved  us  from 
disaster  to-day,  for  I  feel  pretty  confident  that  we  could  not 
have  stood  another  hour  in  the  open.' 

Whilst  we  congratulated  ourselves  on  the  fortunate  manner 
in  which,  in  the  nick  of  time,  we  had  been  able  to  find  shelter 
in  this  camp,  we  little  thought  of  the  dismal  experience  that 
we  were  to  suffer  before  we  left  it.  It  was  Wednesday, 
November  4,  when  we  pitched  our  tents  so  hurriedly ;  it  was 
Wednesday,  November  11,  before  we  resumed  our  march; 
and  if  I  were  asked  to  name  the  most  miserable  week  I  have 
ever  spent,  I  should  certainly  fix  on  this  one.  Throughout 
this  whole  time  the  gale  raged  unceasingly ;  if  the  wind  lulled 
for  a  few  brief  minutes,  it  was  to  return  with  redoubled 
violence  immediately  after.  Meanwhile  not  a  vision  of  the 
outer  world  came  to  us ;  we  were  enveloped  continuously  in 
a  thick  fog  of  driving  snow. 


i84      THE  VOYAGE   OF  THE   'DISCOVERY'     [Nov. 

It  is  difficult  to  describe  such  a  time ;  twenty-two  hours 
out  of  each  twenty-four  we  spent  in  our  sleeping-bags,  but 
regularly  in  the  morning  and  in  the  evening  we  rolled  these 
up,  prepared  and  ate  a  hot  meal,  and  then  once  more  sought 
the  depths  of  the  bag.  To  sleep  much  was  out  of  the  question, 
and  I  scarcely  know  how  the  other  long  hours  went.  In  our 
tent  we  had  one  book,  Darwin's  delightful  '  Cruise  of  the 
"Beagle,"'  and  sometimes  one  or  another  would  read  this 
aloud  until  our  freezing  fingers  refused  to  turn  the  pages. 
Often  we  would  drop  into  conversation,  but,  as  can  be 
imagined,  the  circumstances  were  not  such  as  to  encourage 
much  talking,  and  most  of  the  commoner  topics  were  thread- 
bare by  the  end  of  the  week.  Sometimes  we  would  gaze  up 
at  the  fluttering  green  canvas  overhead,  but  this  was  not 
inspiriting.  I  find  I  have  written  a  great  deal  in  my  diary, 
obviously  as  an  occupation ;  but  the  combination  of  all  such 
things  was  far  from  filling  a  whole  day,  and  therefore  for  the 
greater  part  of  the  time  we  lay  quite  still  with  our  eyes  open 
doing  nothing  and  simply  enduring.  Communication  between 
tents  was  only  possible  in  the  lulls ;  we  therefore  watched  for 
these  eagerly,  and  in  the  quietest,  rushed  round  to  shout 
greetings  and  learn  how  our  comrades  fared. 

One  task  only  we  were  able  to  perform  throughout  the 
time,  and  that  on  the  first  day  of  our  imprisonment,  when, 
thinking  all  would  soon  blow  over,  we  hauled  our  sledges 
beneath  one  of  the  tents  and  stripped  the  German  silver  ready 
for  the  onward  march. 

At  first,  of  course,  we  went  to  sleep  each  night  with  the 
comforting  hope  that  the  next  morning  would  see  a  change  for 
the  better  j  but  as  day  followed  day  without  improvement,  it 
was  impossible  to  cherish  this  hope.  And  yet  I  do  not  believe 
we  ever  grew  despondent ;  the  feeling  that  there  must  be  a 
change  if  we  had  the  patience  to  wait,  never  left  us. 

By  the  fifth  day  of  our  imprisonment,  however,  sleep 
threatened  to  desert  us,  and  matters  in  general  began  to  take  a 
more  serious  aspect.  Our  sleeping-bags  were  getting  very  icy  ; 
some  complained   that  they  could  po  longer  keep  their  feet 


1903]  A  DASH   FOR   THE   SUMMIT  185 

warm  in  them,  and  there  could  be  no  doubt  that  the  long 
inactivity  was  telling  on  our  circulation  and  health. 

On  the  evening  of  this  day,  therefore,  realising  that  things 
were  beginning  to  go  badly  for  us,  I  determined  that  whatever 
the  conditions  might  be,  we  would  make  an  attempt  to  start 
on  the  following  morning.  To  show  the  result  of  this  attempt 
I  again  have  recourse  to  my  diary. 

1  November  10. — Before  breakfast  this  morning  we  shifted 
our  foot-gear  ready  for  the  march,  and  during  a  lull  the  boat- 
swain and  I  dug  out  our  sledges  and  provisions.  After  break- 
fast the  wind  came  down  on  us  again,  but  we  went  out  to 
complete  our  work.  In  ten  minutes  we  were  back  in  the 
tent;  both  my  hands  were  "gone,"  and  I  had  to  be  assisted  in 
nursing  them  back.  Skelton  had  three  toes  and  the  heel  of 
one  foot  badly  frost-bitten,  and  the  boatswain  had  lost  all 
feeling  in  both  feet.  One  could  only  shout  an  occasional 
inquiry  to  the  other  tents,  but  I  gather  their  inmates  are  in 
pretty  much  the  same  condition.  I  think  the  wind  and  drift 
have  never  been  quite  so  bad  as  to-day,  and  the  temperature  is 
—  200.  Things  are  looking  serious  ;  I  fear  the  long  spell  of 
bad  weather  is  telling  on  us.  The  cheerfulness  of  the  party  is 
slowing  waning ;  I  heard  the  usual  song  from  Lashly  this 
morning,  but  it  was  very  short-lived  and  dolorous.  Luck  is 
not  with  us  this  trip,  and  yet  we  have  worked  hard  to  make 
things  go  right.  Something  must  be  done  to-morrow,  but 
what  it  will  be,  to-morrow  only  can  show.  Weller  complained 
of  feeling  giddy  to-day,  but  Ferrar  says  it  is  because  he  eats 
too  fast. 

'  November  11. — Thank  heaven  we  have  broken  away  from 
our  "  Desolation  Camp  "  at  last.  It  is  impossible  to  describe 
how  awful  the  past  week  has  been;  it  is  a  "nightmare"  to 
remember.  When  we  turned  out  this  morning  there  was  a 
lull,  but  the  air  was  still  as  thick  as  a  hedge.  We  hurried  over 
breakfast,  dreading  each  moment  that  the  wind  would  return, 
then  we  bundled  everything  on  to  the  sledges  anyhow,  seized 
our  harness  and  were  away.  I  thad  just  time  to  give  a  few 
directions  to  Ferrar,  who  turned  back  to  seek  shelter  under 


186      THE  VOYAGE  OF  THE  'DISCOVERY'     [Nov. 

the  Depot  Nunatak.  Then  we  started  for  the  icefall,  and 
since  that  we  have  got  to  the  top,  but  how,  I  don't  quite  know, 
nor  can  I  imagine  how  we  have  escaped  accident.  On  start- 
ing we  could  not  see  half-a-dozen  yards  ahead  of  us ;  within 
a  hundred  yards  of  the  camp  we  as  nearly  as  possible  walked 
into  an  enormous  chasm  ;  and  when  we  started  to  ascend  the 
slope  we  crossed  any  number  of  crevasses  without  waiting  to 
see  if  the  bridges  would  bear.  I  really  believe  that  we  were  in 
a  state  when  we  none  of  us  really  cared  much  what  happened ; 
our  sole  thought  was  to  get  away  from  that  miserable  spot. 

1  At  the  top  of  the  slope,  after  ascending  nearly  500  feet, 
we  passed  suddenly  out  of  the  wind,  which  we  could  still  see 
sweeping  down  the  valley  behind  us,  and  here  we  halted  for 
lunch,  after  which  all  six  of  us  got  in  one  tent  whilst  the  other 
was  hauled  in  for  repairs,  which  it  badly  needed  after  its  late 
ill-usage.  While  we  were  chatting  over  this  work,  it  would 
have  been  difficult  to  recognise  us  as  the  same  party  which 
had  started  under  such  grim  circumstances  in  the  morning.' 

We  rose  nearly  700  feet  on  the  nth,  and  over  another 
steep  fall  of  about  the  same  height  on  the  12  th,  but  the  13th 
found  us  on  a  more  gradual  incline,  and  at  the  end  of  the 
day  we  camped  with  our  aneroids  showing  an  elevation  of 
8,900  feet  above  the  sea.  We  had  at  length  won  our  fight  and 
reached  the  summit.  We  had  nearly  five  weeks'  pro- 
visions in  hand,  and  I  felt  that  things  would  go  hard  if  we 
could  not  cover  a  good  many  miles  before  we  returned  to  the 
glacier. 

During  these  few  days  the  weather  had  been  overcast  and 
dull,  but  on  the  14th  it  cleared,  and  we  got  a  good  view  of  our 
surroundings.  We  found  ourselves  on  a  great  snow-plain, 
with  a  level  horizon  all  about,  but  above  this  to  the  east  rose  the 
tops  of  mountains,  many  of  which  we  could  recognise.  Directly 
to  the  east  and  to  the  north-east  only  the  extreme  summits  of 
the  higher  hills  could  be  seen,  but  to  the  south-east  Mount 
Lister  and  the  higher  peaks  of  the  Royal  Society  Range  still 
showed  well  above  our  level.  It  was  a  fortunate  view,  for  it 
gave  me  a  chance  of  fixing  our  latitude  by  bearings  and  of 


1903]  HARD   CONDITIONS  187 

noting  the  appearance  of  objects  which  would  be  our  leading 
marks  on  returning  to  the  glacier. 

The  latitude  also  assisted  me  in  putting  into  execution  a 
plan  which  I  had  thought  out,  and  which,  though  it  is  some- 
what technical,  I  give  for  the  benefit  of  explorers  who  may  be 
in  like  case  in  future.     I  have  already  mentioned  the  loss  of 
the   tables  necessary  for  working  out  our  observations,  and 
the  prospect  which  lay  before  us  of  wandering  over  this  great 
snow-plain  without  knowing   exactly  where  we  were.      The 
matter  had  naturally  been  much  in  my  thoughts,  and  whilst  I 
saw  that  there  was  no  hope  of  working  out  our  longitudes  till 
we  got  back  to  the  ship,  it  occurred  to  me  that  we  might 
gather  some  idea  of  our  latitude  if  I  could  improvise  some 
method  of  ascertaining  the  daily  change  in  the  sun's  declination. 
With  this  idea  I  carefully  ruled  out  a  sheet  of  my  note- 
book into  squares  with  the  intention  of  making  a  curve  of  the 
sun's  declination.     I  found  on  reflection  that  I  had  some  data 
for  this  curve,  for  I  could  calculate  the  declination  for  certain 
fixed  days,  such  as  the  day  when  the  sun  had  returned  to  us, 
and  the  day  when  it  first  remained  above  our  horizon  at  mid- 
night ;  other  points  were  given  by  observations  taken  at  known 
latitudes  on  the  glacier.     To  make  a  long  story  short,  I  plotted 
all  these  points  on  my  squared  paper,  and  joined  them  with  a 
freehand  curve  of  which  I  have  some  reason  to  be  proud,  for 
on  my  return  to  the  ship  I  found  it  was  nowhere  more  than  4'  in 
error.     On  the  journey  I  did  not  place  so  much  reliance  on 
my  handiwork  as  it  deserved,  for  there  is  no  doubt  it  gave  us 
our  latitude  with  as  great  an  accuracy  as  we  needed  at  the 
time. 

We  had  scarcely  reached  the  summit  of  the  ice-cap  and 
started  our  journey  to  the  west,  when  troubles  began  to  gather 
about  us  once  more.  Our  long  stay  in  '  Desolation  Camp ' 
had  covered  our  sleeping-bags  and  night- jackets  with  ice,  and 
now  the  falling  temperature  gave  this  ice  little  or  no  chance  to 
evaporate,  so  that  our  camping  arrangements  were  attended 
with  discomforts  from  which  there  seemed  little  prospect  of 
relief.     Each  night  the  thermometer  fell  a  trifle  lower,  until  on 


1 88      THE   VOYAGE   OF  THE   'DISCOVERY'     [Nov. 

the  1 6th  it  had  reached  —  440,  and  although  it  rose  slightly  in 
the  daytime,  the  general  conditions  of  our  work  were  such  as 
we  had  experienced  on  the  spring  journeys  at  sea  level.  The 
snow  surface  in  places  became  extremely  hard  and  slippery,  so 
that  we  were  obliged  to  wear  crampons,  and  between  the  hard 
patches  lay  softer  areas  through  which  we  had  the  greatest 
difficulty  in  dragging  our  sledges.  But  the  worst  feature  of 
our  new  conditions  was  the  continuous  wind ;  it  was  not  a 
heavy  wind — probably  its  force  never  much  exceeded  3  or  4  in 
the  Beaufort  scale — but,  combined  with  the  low  temperature 
and  the  rarefied  air,  its  effect  was  blighting.  It  blew  right  in 
our  teeth,  and  from  the  first  it  was  evidently  not  the  effect  of 
temporary  atmospheric  disturbance,  but  was  a  permanent  con- 
dition on  this  great  plateau. 

I  do  not  think  that  it  would  be  possible  to  conceive  a  more 
cheerless  prospect  than  that  which  faced  us  at  this  time,  when 
on  this  lofty,  desolate  plateau  we  turned  our  backs  upon  the 
last  mountain  peak  that  could  remind  us  of  habitable  lands. 
Yet  before  us  lay  the  unknown.  What  fascination  lies  in  that 
word  !  Could  anyone  wonder  that  we  determined  to  push  on, 
be  the  outlook  ever  so  comfortless  ? 

And  so  we  plodded  on  to  the  west,  working  long  hours  and 
straining  at  our  harness  with  all  our  strength,  but  in  spite  of 
every  effort  our  progress  became  slower.  Up  to  the  17  th  we 
kept  a  fairly  good  pace,  but  on  the  18th  and  19th  there  was  a 
visible  slackening.  By  this  time  we  had  divided  our  sledges  ; 
Feather,  Evans,  and  I  pulled  one  of  them,  whilst  Skelton, 
Handsley,  and  Lashly  pulled  the  other.  It  was  customary  for 
my  sledge  to  pull  ahead  whilst  the  other  followed  as  best  it 
could,  but  soon  I  found  that  the  second  sledge  was  only 
keeping  up  with  the  greatest  difficulty,  and  it  was  borne  in  on 
me  that  the  excessive  strain  of  our  labour  was  beginning  to  tell 
on  the  party. 

The  realisation  of  this  fact  placed  me  in  a  rather  amusing 
but  awkward  predicament,  because,  whilst  I  knew  my  own 
strength  was  unimpaired,  I  was  forced  to  admit  that  some  of 
my  companions  were  failing,  and  in  order  to  find  out  which  of 


1903]  FEELING  THE   STRAIN  i8g 

them  it  was,  I  was  obliged  to  keep  a  constant  watch  on  their 
actions.  As  was  natural  with  such  men,  not  one  of  them  would 
own  that  he  was  ■  done ' ;  they  had  come  to  see  the  thing 
through,  and  they  would  have  dropped  in  their  tracks  sooner 
than  give  in.  And  so  it  was  only  by  the  keenest  attention, 
and  by  playing  the  somewhat  unattractive  part  of  a  spy,  that  I 
could  detect  those  who  from  sheer  incapacity  were  relaxing 
their  strain  on  the  traces.  Even  when  the  knowledge  came  to 
me,  my  position  seemed  no  clearer,  for  how  could  I  tell  these 
lion-hearted  people  that  they  must  turn  back  ?  Thus  it  came 
about  that  all  six  of  us  marched  onward,  though  I  knew  that 
progress  would  have  been  bettered  had  the  party  been 
divided. 

But  this  state  of  affairs  came  to  a  climax  on  the  20th,  as 
the  following  extract  shows  : 

1  We  have  struggled  on  some  miles  to-day,  but  only  with 
difficulty.  Late  last  night  Handsley  came  to  me  to  ask  if  there 
was  anything  in  the  medical  bag  to  relieve  a  sore  throat ;  of 
course  there  was  nothing.  I  asked  his  tent-mates  about  it, 
and  they  told  me  that  for  some  time  he  had  suffered  from  his 
chest,  and  that  on  getting  up  in  the  morning  he  had  been  un- 
able to  speak.  This  morning  he  could  only  answer  my  ques- 
tions in  a  whisper,  but  declared  that  he  was  feeling  perfectly 
fit  and  quite  up  to  pulling  all  day.  I  didn't  like  the  look  of 
things,  but  we  pushed  on.  After  about  two  hours,  however, 
Skelton  ranged  alongside  to  say  that  Handsley  had  broken 
down  ;  it  appears  that  the  rear  sledge  party  is  finding  it 
terribly  hard  work  to  keep  up  with  us,  and  Handsley  has  been 
overstraining  himself  in  attempting  to  do  so.  We  camped  and 
had  lunch,  after  which  Handsley  said  he  felt  sure  he  could  go 
on,  so  we  packed  up,  but  this  time  I  put  all  hands  on  a  single 
sledge,  marched  it  out  about  three  miles,  and  leaving  Handsley 
to  pitch  camp,  went  back  to  fetch  the  other  one.  This  sort  of 
thing  won't  do  at  all,  but  what  is  one  to  do  ? 

1  Handsley  came  to  me  to-night  to  beg  that  he  might  not 
be  made  an  example  of  again.  I  tried  to  explain  that  I  had 
no  intention  of  reflecting  on  his  conduct,  but   apparently 


i9o      THE  VOYAGE   OF  THE   'DISCOVERY5     [Nov. 

nothing  will  persuade  him  but  that  his  breakdown  is  in  the  nature 
of  disgrace.  What  children  these  men  are  !  and  yet  what 
splendid  children  !  They  won't  give  in  till  they  break  down, 
and  then  they  consider  their  collapse  disgraceful.  The  boat- 
swain has  been  suffering  agonies  from  his  back ;  he  has  been 
pulling  just  behind  me,  and  in  some  sympathy  that  comes 
through  the  traces  I  have  got  to  know  all  about  him,  yet  he 
has  never  uttered  a  word  of  complaint,  and  when  he  knows  my 
eye  is  on  him  he  straightens  up  and  pretends  he  is  just  as  fit 
as  ever.     What  is  one  to  do  with  such  people  ?  ' 

*  November  21. —  .  .  .  There  was  nothing  for  it  this  morn- 
ing but  to  go  on  with  relay  work.  We  started  over  heavy 
sastrugi,  but  soon  came  to  a  space  where  there  was  a  smooth 
glazed  crust,  which  made  travelling  easier.  The  wind  blows 
continuously  from  the  W.S.W.,  and  the  temperature  has  not 
been  above  —  300  all  day ;  conditions  could  not  be  more 
horrid.  Handsley  is  better,  but  our  whole  day's  work  has 
only  yielded  four  or  five  miles.  Whatever  disappointment  it 
may  entail,  we  cannot  go  on  like  this.' 

*  November  22. — After  a  night's  cogitation,  I  determined 
this  morning  on  a  separation  of  our  'party.  Till  lunch  we 
went  on  in  the  usual  order,  but  at  that  meal  I  was  obliged 
to  announce  my  decision.  Those  told  off  to  return  took  it 
extremely  well ;  they  could  not  disguise  their  disappointment, 
but  they  all  seemed  to  understand  that  it  had  to  be.  The 
boatswain  was  transferred  to  the  other  tent,  and  Lashly  to 
mine.  After  lunch  the  whole  party  manned  our  single  sledge 
and  marched  out  with  us  for  two  hours,  then  as  the  sky  looked 
threatening,  the  three  returning  members  turned  back  to  seek 
their  own  camp,  whilst  I  and  my  chosen  two  marched  steadily 
on  to  the  west.' 

We  had  now  lost  sight  of  landmarks  for  several  days,  and 
were  marching  as  straight  a  course  as  we  could,  principally 
with  the  aid  of  a  small  steering  dial  such  as  I  described  as 
being  in  use  on  our  southern  journey.  The  error  of  our 
compass  had  passed  from  east  to  west,  and  was  nearly  at  its 
maximum  of  1 8o°  ;  although  I  could  not  calculate  it  accurately 


i9o3]      MY  TWO  REMAINING  COMPANIONS        191 

at  the  time,  I  could  get  a  good  idea  of  its  amount  by  observing 
the  direction  in  which  the  sun  reached  its  greatest  altitude. 
The  reader  will  see  that  from  a  magnetic  point  of  view  this 
was  a  very  interesting  region.  We  were  directly  south  of  the 
south  magnetic  pole,  and  the  north  end  of  our  compass  needle 
was  pointing  towards  the  South  (geographical)  Pole. 

To  show  what  a  practical  bearing  this  reversal  of  the 
compass  had,  I  may  remark  that  in  directing  Skelton  on  his 
homeward  track  to  the  eastward,  I  told  him  to  steer  due  west 
by  the  compass  card.  It  is  only  on  this  line  or  the  similar 
one  which  joins  the  northern  poles  that  such  an  order  could 
be  given,  and  we  were  not  a  little  proud  of  being  the  first  to 
experience  this  distinctly  interesting  physical  condition  in  the 
Southern  Hemisphere. 

From  the  date  on  which,  so  reluctantly,  I  decided  that 
some  of  my  party  should  turn  homeward,  there  followed  for 
us  who  remained,  three  weeks  of  the  hardest  physical  work 
that  I  have  ever  experienced,  and  yet  three  weeks  on  which 
I  cannot  but  look  with  unmixed  satisfaction,  for  I  do  not  think 
it  would  have  been  possible  to  have  accomplished  more  in  the 
time.  I  have  little  wonder  when  I  remember  the  splendid 
qualities  and  physique  of  the  two  men  who  remained  with  me 
by  such  a  severe  process  of  selection.  Evans  was  a  man  of 
Herculean  strength,  very  long  in  the  arm  and  with  splendidly 
developed  muscles.  He  had  been  a  gymnastic  instructor  in 
the  Navy,  and  had  always  been  an  easy  winner  in  all  our  sports 
which  involved  tests  of  strength.  He  weighed  12  st.  10  lbs.  in 
hard  condition.  Lashly,  in  appearance,  was  the  most  deceptive 
man  I  have  ever  seen.  He  was  not  above  the  ordinary  height, 
nor  did  he  look  more  than  ordinarily  broad,  and  yet  he  weighed 
13  st.  8  lbs.,  and  had  one  of  the  largest  chest  measurements  in 
the  ship.  He  had  been  a  teetotaller  and  non-smoker  all  his 
life,  and  was  never  in  anything  but  the  hardest  condition. 

My  own  weight  at  this  time  was  about  1 1  st.  6  lbs.  j  it  fell 
so  far  short  of  the  others  that  I  felt  I  really  did  not  deserve 
such  a  large  food  allowance,  though  I  continued  to  take  my 
full  share. 


i92      THE  VOYAGE   OF  THE  'DISCOVERY'     [Nov. 

With  these  two  men  behind  me  our  sledge  seemed  to 
become  a  living  thing,  and  the  days  of  slow  progress  were 
numbered.  We  took  the  rough  and  the  smooth  alike,  working 
patiently  on  through  the  long  hours  with  scarce  a  word  and 
never  a  halt  between  meal  and  meal.  Troubles  and  discom- 
forts were  many,  and  we  could  only  guess  at  the  progress  we 
made,  but  we  knew  that  by  sticking  to  our  task  we  should 
have  our  reward  when  our  observations  came  to  be  worked 
out  on  board  the  ship. 

We  were  now  so  far  from  the  edge  of  the  plateau  that  our 
circumstances  and  conditions  were  such  as  must  obtain  over 
the  whole  of  this  great  continental  area  at  this  season  of  the 
year.  It  is  necessary,  therefore,  to  give  some  description  of 
them. 

I  used  to  read  my  aneroid  with  great  regularity,  and  I  find 
that  the  readings  vary  from  20*2  in.  to  22*1  in.,  but  both  of 
these  limits  were  under  exceptional  atmospheric  conditions. 
By  far  the  greater  number  of  readings  lie  between  21*1  and 
2i*6  inches,  and  these  differences  were  due  to  change  of  level 
to  some  extent,  but,  as  will  be  seen,  they  do  not  admit  of  any 
considerable  change  in  level.  It  was  evident  to  us  as  we 
travelled  onward  that  there  were  undulations  in  the  plain ;  we 
could  sometimes  see  the  shadow  of  a  rise  and  sometimes  a 
marked  depression,  but  these  variations  were  so  slight  and  so 
confused  that  we  could  make  little  of  them,  until  we  recognised 
a  connection  between  them  and  the  occurrence  of  the  sastrugi. 
We  then  came  to  see  that  the  summits  and  eastern  faces  of 
undulations  were  quite  smooth  with  a  very  curious  scaly  con- 
dition of  surface,  whilst  the  hollows  and  the  western  faces  were 
deeply  furrowed  with  the  wind.  On  our  track,  therefore,  we 
met  with  great  differences  of  surface.  For  long  stretches  we 
travelled  over  smooth  glazed  snow,  and  for  others  almost 
equally  long  we  had  to  thread  our  way  amongst  a  confused 
heap  of  sharp  waves.  I  have  rarely,  if  ever,  seen  higher  or 
more  formidable  sastrugi  than  we  crossed  on  this  plateau. 
For  instance,  on  November  24  I  wrote :  '  At  first  there  were 
lanes  of  glazed  surface  leading  to  the  W.S.W.,  but  afterwards 


i9o3]  LOW   SUMMER    TEMPERATURES  193 

these  disappeared,  and  we  struggled  over  a  sea  of  broken  and 
distorted  snow-waves.  We  were  like  a  small  boat  at  sea :  at 
one  moment  appearing  to  stand  still  to  climb  some  wave,  and 
at  the  next  diving  down  into  a  hollow.  It  was  distressing 
work,  but  we  stuck  to  it,  though  not  without  frequent  capsizes, 
which  are  likely  to  have  a  serious  effect  on  our  stock  of  oil,  for 
I  fear  a  little  is  lost  with  each  upset.' 

Regularly  each  night,  when  the  sun  was  low  in  the  south, 
the  temperature  fell  to  —  400  or  below,  whilst  during  the 
marching  hours  it  rarely  rose  much  above  —  250,  and  with 
this  low  temperature  we  had  a  constant  wind.  At  first  it  blew 
from  the  W.  by  S.,  and  it  was  in  this  direction  that  most  of  the 
hard  high  sastrugi  pointed,  but  we  noticed  that  it  was  gradually 
creeping  to  the  southward.  Before  we  left  the  plateau  it  had 
gone  to  S.W.  by  W.,  and  now  and  again  it  became  still  more 
southerly  and  brought  a  light  snowfall  which  formed  fresh 
waves  in  the  new  direction. 

There  can  be  little  doubt,  I  think,  that  the  wind  blows 
from  west  to  east  across  this  plateau  throughout  the  winter, 
and  often  with  great  violence,  as  the  high  snow- waves  showed. 
What  the  temperature  can  be  at  that  season  is  beyond  guess- 
ing, but  if  the  thermometer  can  fall  to  —  400  in  the  height  of 
summer,  one  can  imagine  that  the  darker  months  produce  a 
terrible  extremity  of  cold. 

On  November  26  I  wrote  :  'The  wind  is  the  plague  of  our 
lives.  It  has  cut  us  to  pieces.  We  all  have  deep  cracks  in  our 
nostrils  and  cheeks,  and  our  lips  are  broken  and  raw;  our 
fingers  are  also  getting  in  a  shocking  state  ;  one  of  Evans's 
thumbs  has  a  deep  cut  on  either  side  of  the  nail  which  might 
have  been  made  by  a  heavy  slash  with  a  knife.  We  can  do 
nothing  for  this  as  long  as  we  have  to  face  this  horrid  wind. 
We  suffer  most  during  the  first  half-hour  of  the  morning  march 
before  we  have  warmed  up  to  the  work,  as  then  all  these  sore 
places  get  frost-bitten.  There  is  a  good  deal  of  pain  also  in  the 
tent  at  night,  and  we  try  to  keep  our  faces  as  still  as  possible  ; 
laughing  is  a  really  painful  process,  and  so  from  this  point  of 
view  jokes  are  not  to  be  encouraged.  The  worst  task  of  all  is 
vol.  11.  o 


i94      THE   VOYAGE   OF   THE    'DISCOVERY'     [Nov. 

the  taking  of  observations.  I  plant  the  theodolite  as  close  as 
possible  to  the  tent  to  gain  what  shelter  I  can,  but  it  is  im- 
possible to  get  away  from  the  wind,  which  punishes  one  badly 
at  such  times.' 

1  November  28. — To-day  we  have  a  new  development  in  the 
weather.  The  sky  has  been  overcast  with  a  bank  of  stratus 
cloud  ;  the  light  has  been  very  bad,  and  we  have  had  the 
usual  difficulty  under  such  conditions  in  keeping  our  course. 
This  is  really  serious.  At  this  altitude  I  had  expected  at  least 
the  single  advantage  of  a  clear  sky,  but  if  we  are  to  have  over- 
cast weather,  our  return  journey  will  be  a  difficult  matter.  I 
almost  thought  of  stopping  to-day,  but  reflecting  that  days  of 
this  sort  cannot  be  common,  I  resolved  to  push  on  to  the 
appointed  date.' 

'  November  29. — Started  in  moderately  bad  light,  but  in 
half  an  hour  struggled  through  sastrugi  to  a  decent  surface  and 
did  a  long  march.  Stopped  for  a  minute  or  two  to  dig  down 
in  an  apparent  crevass,  but  found,  as  I  expected,  that  the 
resemblance  was  superficial.  We  have  not  seen  a  crack, 
crevass,  or  sign  of  ice-disturbance  since  we  reached  the 
summit. 

'  Our  finneskoes  are  getting  very  worn.  Evans  has  had  to 
take  to  his  spare  pair,  but  Lashly  and  I  still  have  ours  in 
reserve.  One  of  the  pair  I  am  using,  however,  is  scarcely  good 
for  more  than  two  or  three  marches.  We  are  all  in  excellent 
condition  and  health :  not  a  sign  of  the  scurvy  fiend  has 
appeared,  though  I  watch  narrowly  for  it.' 

'  November  30. — We  have  finished  our  last  outward  march, 
thank  heaven  !  Nothing  has  kept  us  going  during  the  past 
week  but  the  determination  to  carry  out  our  original  intention 
of  going  on  to  the  end  of  the  month,  and  so  here  we  have 
pitched  our  last  camp.  We  made  an  excellent  march  in  the 
forenoon,  and  started  well  after  lunch,  when  we  could  see  the 
sun  gleaming  on  a  more  than  ordinarily  steep  incline  ahead. 
I  altered  course  a  little  to  take  it  square,  and  soon  we  were 
amongst  heavy  sastrugi.  I  think  it  must  have  taken  an  hour 
and  a  half  to  struggle  through.     It  is  not  that  it  reduces   our 


1903]  OUR   LAST   OUTWARD   MARCH  195 

pace  so  much,  but  it  shakes  us  up  dreadfully ;  falls  are 
constant,  and  the  harness  frequently  brings  up  with  a  heavy 
jerk,  which  is  exasperating  to  a  tired  man.  At  last  we  got 
through,  and  found  on  looking  back  that  we  must  have 
descended  into  a  hollow,  as  the  horizon  was  above  us  on  all 
sides.  Ahead  the  slope  was  quite  smooth,  and,  in  spite  of  all 
the  dreary  monotony  of  the  plain  we  have  crossed,  I  felt 
distinctly  excited  to  know  what  we  should  see  when  we  got 
to  the  top.  I  knew  it  was  the  end  of  our  effort,  and  my 
imagination  suggested  all  sorts  of  rewards  for  our  long  labours. 
Perhaps  there  would  be  a  gradual  slope  downward,  perhaps 
more  mountains  to  indicate  a  western  coast  for  Victoria  Land. 
1  Greenland,  I  remembered,  would  have  been  crossed  in 
many  places  by  such  a  track  as  we  have  made.  I  thought,  too, 
what  a  splendid  thing  it  would  be  to  find  a  coast  in  this  way. 
All  very  vain  imaginings,  of  course,  for  after  200  miles  of 
changeless  conditions  there  was  a  poor  chance  indeed  of  find- 
ing a  difference  in  the  last  one.  But  so  it  was.  I  journeyed 
up  this  slope  with  lively  hopes,  and  had  a  distinct  sense  of 
disappointment  when,  on  reaching  the  summit,  we  saw  nothing 
beyond  but  a  further  expanse  of  our  terrible  plateau. 

'  Here,  then,  to-night  we  have  reached  the  end  of  our 
tether,  and  all  we  have  done  is  to  show  the  immensity  of  this 
vast  plain.  The  scene  about  us  is  the  same  as  we  have  seen 
for  many  a  day,  and  shall  see  for  many  a  day  to  come — a 
scene  so  wildly  and  awfully  desolate  that  it  cannot  fail  to 
impress  one  with  gloomy  thoughts.  I  am  not  an  imaginative 
person,  but  of  late  all  sorts  of  stupid  fancies  have  come 
into  my  mind.  The  sastrugi  now  got  on  my  nerves;  they 
are  shaped  like  the  barbs  of  a  hook  with  their  sharp  points 
turned  to  the  east,  from  which  direction  many  look  high  and 
threatening,  and  each  one  now  seems  to  suggest  that,  however 
easy  we  may  have  found  it  to  come  here,  we  shall  have  a  very 
different  task  in  returning. 

'  But,  after  all,  it  is  not  what  we  see  that  inspires  awe,  but 
the  knowledge  of  what  lies  beyond  our  view.  We  see  only  a 
few  miles  of  ruffled  snow  bounded  by  a  vague  wavy  horizon, 


196      THE   VOYAGE   OF   THE    'DISCOVERY'     [Nov. 

but  we  know  that  beyond  that  horizon  are  hundreds  and  even 
thousands  of  miles  which  can  offer  no  change  to  the  weary 
eye,  while  on  the  vast  expanse  that  one's  mind  conceives  one 
knows  there  is  neither  tree  nor  shrub,  nor  any  living  thing, 
nor  even  inanimate  rock — nothing  but  this  terrible  limitless 
expanse  of  snow.  It  has  been  so  for  countless  years,  and 
it  will  be  so  for  countless  more.  And  we,  little  human 
insects,  have  started  to  crawl  over  this  awful  desert,  and 
are  now  bent  on  crawling  back  again.  Could  anything  be  more 
terrible  than  this  silent,  wind-swept  immensity  when  one  thinks 
such  thoughts? 

'Luckily,  the  gloom  of  the  outer  world  has  not  been 
allowed  to  enter  the  door  of  our  tent.  My  companions  spare 
no  time  for  solemn  thought  ;  they  are  invariably  cheerful  and 
busy.  Few  of  our  camping  hours  go  by  without  a  laugh  from 
Evans  and  a  song  from  Lashly.  I  have  not  quite  penetrated 
the  latter  yet ;  there  is  only  one  verse,  which  is  about  the 
plucking  of  a  rose.  It  can  scarcely  be  called  a  finished  musical 
performance,  but  I  should  miss  it  much  if  it  ceased. 

1  We  are  all  very  proud  of  our  march  out.  I  don't  know 
where  we  are,  but  I  know  we  must  be  a  long  way  to  the  west 
from  my  rough  noon  observation  of  the  compass  variation  ; 
besides  which  we  cannot  have  marched  so  many  hours  without 
covering  a  long  distance.  We  have  been  discussing  this  matter 
at  supper,  and  wondering  whether  future  explorers  will  travel 
further  over  this  inhospitable  country.  Evans  remarked  that  if 
they  did  they  "  would  have  to  leg  it,"  and  indeed  I  think  they 
would.' 


1903]  197 


CHAPTER   XVIII 

RETURN    FROM    THE    WEST 

Returning  aver  the  Great  Plateau— Doubts  about  Provisions  and  Oil — 
Harrowing  Effect  of  Fresh  Snowfall — Thick  Weather — No  Sight  of 
Landmarks — Sudden  Descent  into  Glacier — Escape  from  a  Crevasse — 
Exploration  of  North  Arm — A  Curious  Valley — Return  to  the  Ship— 
Results  of  other  Sledging  Efforts  —  Fcrrar's  Journey  —  Barne's 
Journey — Royds'  Journey — Shorter  Journeys — Review  of  Sledging 
Wc  rk. 

Ceaseless  frost  round  the  vast  solitude 
Bound  its  broad  zone  of  stillness. — Shelley. 

The  interior  of  Victoria  Land  must  be  considered  the  most 
desolate  region  in  the  world.  There  is  none  other  that  is  at 
once  so  barren,  so  deserted,  so  piercingly  cold,  so  wind-swept 
or  so  fearsomely  monotonous. 

I  have  attempted  to  give  some  idea  of  it  in  the  last  chapter, 
but  I  feel  that  my  pen  has  poorly  expressed  the  awe-inspiring 
nature  of  its  terrible  solitude.  Nevertheless,  when  the  reader 
considers  its  geographical  situation,  its  great  elevation,  and  the 
conditions  to  which  we  were  subjected  while  travelling  across 
it,  he  will,  I  think,  agree  that  there  can  be  no  place  on  earth 
that  is  less  attractive.  For  me  the  long  month  which  we  spent 
on  the  Victoria  Land  summit  remains  as  some  vivid  but  evil 
dream.  I  have  a  memory  of  continuous  strain  on  mind  and 
body  lightened  only  by  the  unfailing  courage  and  cheerfulness 
of  my  companions. 

From  first  to  last  the  month  was  a  grim  struggle  with 
adversity,  and  never  a  trouble  was  overcome  but  some  fresh 
one  arose,  until  an  ever-increasing  load  of  anxiety  was  suddenly 


198      THE   VOYAGE   OF   THE   'DISCOVERY'    [Dec. 

and  finally  removed.  Thus  it  was  that  on  turning  homeward 
on  December  i,  whilst  we  enjoyed  the  relief  of  having  the 
biting  wind  at  our  back,  new  difficulties  soon  appeared. 
Scarcely  had  we  started  our  return  march  when  the  weather 
again  grew  overcast,  and,  though  we  struggled  on  for  the  first 
part  of  the  day,  the  sky  eventually  became  so  gloomy  that  we 
were  forced  to  camp  and  sacrifice  more  than  an  hour  of  the 
afternoon.  On  December  2,  this  sort  of  thing  was  still  worse 
and  landed  us  at  one  time  in  what  seemed  a  most  serious 
position,  as  my  diary  shows  : 

'  We  started  at  seven  o'clock  this  morning,  the  sky  very 
overcast,  but  the  sun  struggling  through  occasionally.  All 
went  well  until  ten  o'clock,  when  the  sun  vanished  and  the  light 
became  shockingly  bad.  We  plunged  on  for  an  hour  amongst 
high  sastrugi;  our  sledge  capsized  repeatedly  and  we  ourselves 
sprawled  in  all  directions.  At  length  we  could  see  nothing  at 
all,  and  our  falls  became  so  frequent  and  heavy  that  I  felt  that 
we  were  running  too  great  a  risk  of  injury  to  our  limbs,  and 
that  there  was  nothing  for  it  but  to  camp.  So  here  we  are  in 
our  sleeping-bag  in  the  middle  of  the  marching-hours,  and  I 
don't  like  the  look  of  things  at  all.  We  are  about  seventeen 
marches  out  from  the  glacier,  but  of  course  this  includes  the 
days  when,  with  full  numbers,  we  did  poor  distances.  We 
have  something  over  fourteen  days'  full  rations  left,  and 
perhaps  twelve  days'  oil  allowance.  If  we  could  get  clear 
weather,  I  believe  we  have  not  over-estimated  our  marching 
powers  in  supposing  we  can  cover  the  longer  daily  distance 
required  to  reach  the  safety  of  the  glacier,  but  this  overcast 
weather  puts  an  entirely  new  complexion  on  the  matter ;  it  is 
quite  clear  that  we  cannot  afford  delay.  I  don't  like  to  think 
of  half  rations  ;  we  are  all  terribly  hungry  as  it  is,  and  I  feel 
sure  that  we  cannot  cut  down  food  without  losing  our  strength. 
I  try  to  think  that  at  this  altitude  there  cannot  be  long  spells 
of  overcast  weather,  but  I  cannot  forget  that  if  this  condition 
should  occur  frequently  we  shall  be  in  "  Queer  Street." ' 

The  reader  will  remember  that  this  same  difficulty  with  an 
overcast  sky  had  been  met  by  my  southern  party  of  the  previous 


i9o3]       RETURNING   OVER  THE  PLATEAU         199 

year,  and  therefore  it  was  not  new  to  me ;  but,  as  I  have 
pointed  out,  at  the  high  altitude  to  which  we  had  climbed, 
and  with  the  low  temperatures  that  prevailed,  to  find  banks 
of  cloud  still  above  us  was  unexpected  and  added  a  most 
alarming  circumstance  to  our  situation.  For,  as  will  be  seen, 
we  had  placed  ourselves  in  a  position  from  which  we  could 
only  hope  to  retreat  by  relying  on  our  hard  condition  and 
utilising  all  our  marching  powers  ;  a  simple  arithmetic  sum 
showed  that  we  could  not  afford  an  hour's  delay,  and  to  be 
forced  to  lie  idle  in  our  tent  was  one  of  the  most  serious 
misfortunes  that  could  overtake  us.  But  this  black  outlook 
was  not  to  remain  for  long,  and  later  this  day  I  was  able  to 
make  a  more  cheering  entry  : 

1  After  we  had  lain  for  two  hours  in  the  bag  in  a  highly 
disconsolate  frame  of  mind,  Evans  suddenly  put  his  head 
outside  and  in  his  usual  matter-of-fact  tones  remarked  that  the 
sun  was  shining.  We  were  up  in  a  moment.  I  do  not  believe 
sledges  have  ever  been  packed  so  quickly  j  it  was  certainly 
less  than  ten  minutes  before  we  were  in  our  harness  and  away. 
As  this  meant  shifting  foot-gear,  packing  everything,  and 
hoisting  our  sail,  it  can  be  imagined  how  we  flew  about. 
Strangely  enough,  by  a  good  light  we  found  the  surface  we 
had  been  struggling  with  in  the  morning  was  by  no  means 
bad,  and  now  that  we  could  see  where  to  step,  we  got  on  at  a 
great  pace.  In  spite  of  our  distressing  delay  we  have  covered 
a  good  distance.  My  companions  are  undefeatable.  However 
tiresome  our  day's  march  or  however  gloomy  the  outlook,  they 
always  find  something  to  jest  about.  In  the  evenings  we  have 
long  arguments  about  naval  matters,  and  generally  agree  that 
we  could  rule  that  Service  a  great  deal  better  than  any  Board 
of  Admiralty.  Incidentally  I  learn  a  greal  deal  about  lower- 
deck  life — more  than  I  could  hope  to  have  done  under  ordinary 
conditions.' 

'■December  3. —  .  .  .  About  an  hour  after  lunch  we 
suddenly  came  on  one  of  our  outward-bound  night  camps, 
and  from  that  we  followed  our  old  track  with  some  difficulty 
till  we  came  to  what  I  think  must  be  our  lunch  camp  of  the 


200       THE   VOYAGE   OF    THE    'DISCOVERY'    [Dec. 

27th,  which  means  that  we  have  gained  half  a  day  on  the 
outward  march.  Considering  the  bad  light,  this  is  good 
enough,  but  I  shall  hope  to  gain  at  a  greater  rate  if  the 
weather  holds.  The  wind  to-day  was  exceedingly  cold,  but 
with  our  backs  to  it  it  was  not  so  much  felt,  except  at  packing 
and  camp  work,  which  were  simply  horrible.  The  old  track 
we  followed  is  being  rapidly  drifted  up ;  we  are  unlikely  to  see 
it  again.  Evans  and  Lashly  have  both  been  suffering  a  good 
deal  from  cold  feet  and  fingers  ;  my  feet  keep  well,  though 
fingers  easily  go.' 

1  December  4. —  ...  We  were  up  before  five  o'clock  and 
away  early.  Started  marching  along  the  faint  remains  of  our 
old  track  but  soon  lost  it.  We  kept  a  good  surface  for  two 
hours,  then  fell  amongst  bad  sastrugi  which  gave  us  the  usual 
trouble  ;  by  lunch  we  were  fairly  clear  again.  Returning 
now  we  can  see  more  clearly  the  undulations  of  the  surface  j 
they  seem  irregular  depressions  rather  than  waves.  We  cross 
the  hollows  sometimes  and  seem  to  skirt  them  at  others  ; 
they  average  anything  from  three  to  five  miles  across.  The 
sledge  has  not  capsized  the  whole  day,  which  is  a  relief.  The 
weather  has  been  very  threatening  on  several  occasions  during 
the  last  two  days,  but,  thank  heaven,  it  has  come  to  nothing, 
and  the  sun  only  disappears  altogether  for  very  short  intervals.' 

1  December  6. —  ...  I  am  a  little  alarmed  about  our  oil, 
so  have  decided  to  march  half  an  hour  extra  each  night. 
To-night  the  weather  became  overcast  again,  but  luckily  not 
until  our  camping  time  had  arrived.  It  is  still  terribly  cold 
work,  but  we  all  feel  exceedingly  fit.  My  trouble  is  want  of 
sleep,  or,  rather,  it  doesn't  seem  to  trouble  me  except  as 
regards  the  nuisance  of  lying  awake  in  the  bag.  I  have  had 
extraordinarily  little  sleep  this  last  week,  and  none  of  us  seems 
to  want  much ;  after  our  long  marches  we  ought  to  be  in  a  fit 
state  to  go  straight  off  into  dreamland,  but  for  some  reason  we 
are  not. 

1  This  afternoon  two  skua  gulls  were  suddenly  seen  circling 
around  us.  It  was  such  a  pleasant  sight  that  we  could  almost 
have  cheered  ;  but  how  in  the  world  they  can  have  found  us 


1903]     HARROWING   EFFECT   OF   SNOWFALL       201 

at  this  great  altitude  and  distance  from  the  sea  is  beyond 
guessing.  Hunger  is  growing  upon  us  once  more,  though  not 
to  such  an  alarming  extent  as  it  did  last  year  ;  still,  we  practise 
the  same  devices  for  serving  out  our  rations,  and  are  as  keen 
at  picking  up  the  scraps  as  ever.  It  is  curious  that  last  year 
we  used  to  think  mostly  of  beefsteak  pies  and  what  Shackleton 
called  "  three-decker  puddings,"  but  this  year  there  is  ever 
before  my  eyes  a  bowl  of  Devonshire  cream.  If  it  was  only  a 
reality,  how  ill  I  should  be  !  I  think  Evans's  idea  of  joy  is 
pork,  whilst  Lashly  dreams  of  vegetables,  and  especially  apples. 
He  tells  us  stories  of  his  youth  when  these  things,  and  not 
much  else,  were  plentiful.' 

During  this  time  we  were  making  excellently  long  marches, 
and  gradually  as  the  days  passed  we  were  losing  much  of  our 
fear  of  the  overcast  weather  in  its  power  of  delaying  us,  though 
I  still  saw  that  the  greatly  increased  amount  of  cloud  might 
make  it  most  difficult  for  us  to  recognise  our  landmarks  when 
they  should  appear  in  sight. 

Certainly  the  ups  and  downs  of  sledging  life  are  wonderful  ; 
for  instance,  on  the  8th,  I  find  my  record  full  of  hope.  We 
had  marched  long  hours  over  a  comparatively  easy  surface ;  I 
did  not  know  where  we  were,  but  I  knew  that  we  must  be  up 
to  date,  and  that  if  conditions  held  as  they  were,  we  should 
reach  the  glacier  in  good  time,  even  if  we  had  to  spend  some 
time  in  looking  for  landmarks.  But  on  the  9th  came  a  most 
serious  change  of  surface  which  seemed  to  baffle  all  our  hopes 
at  one  blow,  for  we  knew  well  that  this  new  condition  had 
come  to  stay.  I  found  out  afterwards  that  at  this  time  we 
must  have  been  somewhere  close  to  the  spot  which  we  had 
crossed  on  November  16  when  outward  bound.  I  have  given 
some  description  of  the  surface  at  that  time ;  it  was  alternately 
hard  and  soft,  but  the  hard  places  had  been  so  slippery  that 
we  had  been  obliged  to  wear  crampons  to  pull  our  sledges  over 
them.  Now  all  this  was  changed  by  a  recent  fall  of  snow, 
which  had  covered  everything  with  a  sandy  layer  of  loose  ice- 
crystals  and  brought  terrible  friction  on  the  sledge-runners. 

This  layer  grew  heavier  as  we  approached  the  edge  of  the 


202       THE   VOYAGE   OF    THE   '  DISCOVERY  '    [Dec, 

plateau  :  apart  from  the  difficulty  which  it  presented  to  our 
travelling,  this  was  an  interesting  observation,  for  it  shows  that 
the  plateau  snowfall  takes  place  in  December,  and  that  it  is 
far  heavier  on  the  edge  than  in  the  interior  of  the  continent. 
Another  interesting  fact  was  observable  in  this  connection,  for 
whilst  this  light  snow  had  been  falling  the  wind  had  crept 
round  to  the  south,  sometimes  to  such  an  angle  with  our  course 
that  it  was  most  difficult  to  trim  our  sledge  sail  to  derive  any 
benefit  from  it.  In  its  most  southerly  direction  it  brought  a 
desirable  increase  of  temperature,  and  on  some  days  we  had  a 
fair  imitation  of  the  mild  southerly  blizzards  which  were  such 
a  conspicuous  feature  at  the  ship.  But  at  this  time,  as  we 
plodded  on  with  an  eye  on  our  diminishing  stock  of  provisions, 
it  can  be  imagined  that  we  were  not  inclined  to  bless  the 
climatic  conditions  which  had  wrought  such  a  change  in  the 
surface.  December  9,  in  fact,  seemed  to  show  everything 
going  wrong  for  us,  and  the  marches  on  that  day  and  those 
which  followed  I  can  never  forget.  Our  sledge  weight  was 
reduced  almost  to  a  minimum,  and  we  ourselves  were  inured 
to  hard  marching  if  ever  three  persons  were,  yet  by  our  utmost 
exertion  we  could  barely  exceed  a  pace  of  a  mile  an  hour.  I 
have  done  some  hard  pulling,  but  never  anything  to  equal  this. 
The  sledge  was  like  a  log ;  two  of  us  could  scarcely  move  it, 
and  therefore  throughout  the  long  hours  we  could  none  of  us 
relax  our  efforts  for  a  single  moment — we  were  forced  to  keep 
a  continuous  strain  on  our  harness  with  a  tension  that  kept  our 
ropes  rigid  and  made  conversation  quite  impossible.  So  heavy 
was  the  work  that  I  may  remark  we  once  tried  pulling  on  ski 
and  found  we  simply  couldn't  move  the  sledge. 

It  was  on  the  evening  of  the  9th  that  the  seriousness  of 
our  position  once  more  manifested  itself,  and  I  therefore  resort 
again  to  my  diary  : 

1  .  .  .  This  afternoon  the  surface  grew  worse  and  worse, 
and  at  the  end  of  the  march  we  were  all  dog  tired.  The  state 
of  affairs  is  again  serious,  whereas  this  morning  I  thought  it 
would  only  be  a  matter  of  hours  before  we  should  be  able  to 
increase  our  rations  and  satisfy  the  pangs  of  hunger,  which  are 


1903]  A   GLOOMY   PROSPECT  203 

now  growing  very  severe.  I  have  had  to  think  things  out  under 
this  new  development,  and  I  don't  find  the  task  is  pleasant ; 
nothing  is  in  sight  ahead,  and  the  prospect  is  gloomy.  We 
have  a  week's  provision  in  hand,  but  it  looks  mighty  little  in 
the  midst  of  this  horrible,  never-ending  plain  ;  but  what  is 
more  alarming  is  that  we  are  well  into  our  last  can  of  oil,  and 
there  is  only  a  few  days'  allowance  left,  at  the  rate  we  have 
been  using  it. 

1  We  have  had  a  long  discussion  about  matters  to-night.  I 
told  the  men  I  thought  we  were  in  a  pretty  tight  place,  and 
that  we  should  have  to  take  steps  accordingly.  I  proposed 
that  we  should  increase  our  marching  hours  by  one  hour,  go  on 
half  allowance  of  oil,  and  if  we  don't  sight  landmarks  in  a 
couple  of  days  reduce  our  rations.  I  explained  the  scheme  for 
oil  economy  which  we  adopted  last  year,  and  when  I  came  to 
the  cold  lunch  and  fried  breakfast  poor  Evans's  face  fell ;  he 
evidently  doesn't  much  believe  in  the  virtue  of  food  unless  it 
is  in  the  form  of  a  hoosh  and  has  some  chance  of  sticking  to 
one's  ribs.  Lashly  is  to  do  all  the  cooking  until  we  come  to 
happier  times,  as  he  is  far  the  best  hand  at  the  Primus,  and  can 
be  relied  upon  not  to  exceed  allowance. 

'I  have  been  struggling  with  my  sights  and  deviations 
table,  but  although  I  believe  we  cannot  be  far  off  the  glacier 
the  sense  of  uncertainty  is  oppressive.  We  are  really  travelling 
by  rule  of  thumb,  and  one  cannot  help  all  sorts  of  doubts 
creeping  in  when  the  consequences  are  so  serious.' 

'  December  10. — This  morning  we  plugged  away  for  five 
mortal  hours  on  a  surface  which  is,  if  anything,  worse  than 
yesterday.  The  pulling  is  so  heavy  that  it  is  impossible  to 
drag  one's  thoughts  away  to  brighter  subjects,  and  the  time 
passes  in  the  most  wearisome  manner.  Then  came  our  new 
routine  of  cold,  comfortless  lunch,  and  we  started  once  more. 
We  had  not  been  going  more  than  an  hour  in  the  afternoon, 
however,  when  Evans's  sharp  eye  sighted  the  land,  and  soon 
some  isolated  nunataks  appeared  on  both  bows.  This  was 
very  cheering,  and  we  struggled  on  through  the  remainder  of 
our  march  with  renewed  hope.     Later  we  rose  several  mountain 


2o4       THE   VOYAGE   OF    THE    'DISCOVERY'    [Dec. 

peaks  to  the  S.E.,  but  cloud  hangs  so  persistently  about  them 
that  I  cannot  recognise  anything.  I  imagine  we  are  too  far 
to  the  south,  but  I  am  not  at  all  certain.  I  rather  thought 
that  when  we  saw  the  land  it  would  bring  immediate  relief  to 
all  anxiety,  but  somehow  it  hasn't.  I  know  that  we  must  be 
approaching  the  edge  of  the  plateau,  but  now  the  question  is, 
where  ?  There  must  be  innumerable  glaciers  intersecting  the 
mountains,  and  one  cannot  but  see  that  it  will  be  luck  if  we  hit 
off  our  own  at  the  first  shot,  and  that  we  cannot  afford  to  make 
a  mistake.  I  hope  and  trust  we  shall  soon  recognise  land- 
marks ;  but  the  sky  is  most  unpromising,  and  it  looks  very  much 
as  though  we  were  about  to  have  a  return  of  thick  weather.' 

On  the  nth  we  caught  only  the  same  fleeting  glimpses 
of  the  land  as  on  the  previous  day,  but  we  marched  stolidly 
on,  hoping  for  clearer  weather,  and  on  December  12  I  wrote  : 

1  It  has  been  overcast  all  day.  Now  and  again  this  morning 
I  caught  glimpses  of  land,  which  seems  much  closer,  but  I  am 
still  left  in  horrible  uncertainty  as  to  our  whereabouts,  as  I 
could  not  recognise  a  single  point.  The  light  became  very  bad 
before  lunch  ;  everything  except  the  sun  was  shut  out,  and 
that  was  only  seen  through  broken  clouds.  Lately  we  have 
been  pulling  for  ten  hours  a  day  ;  it  is  rather  too  much  when 
the  strain  on  the  harness  is  so  great,  and  we  are  becoming 
gaunt  shadows  of  our  former  selves.  My  companions'  cheeks 
are  quite  sunken  and  hollow,  and  with  their  stubbly  untrimmed 
beards  and  numerous  frost-bite  remains  they  have  the  wildest 
appearance ;  yet  we  are  all  fit,  and  there  has  not  been  a  sign  of 
sickness  beyond  the  return  of  those  well-remembered  pangs  of 
hunger  which  are  now  becoming  exceedingly  acute.  We  have 
at  last  finished  our  tobacco  ;  for  a  long  time  Evans  and  I  have 
had  to  be  content  with  a  half-pipe  a  day,  but  now  even  that 
small  comfort  has  gone ;  it  was  our  long  stay  in  the  blizzard 
camp  that  has  reduced  us  to  this  strait.  There  is  one  blessing ; 
the  next  day  or  two  will  show  what  is  going  to  happen  one  way 
or  the  other.  If  we  walk  far  enough  in  this  direction  we  must 
come  to  the  edge  of  the  plateau  somewhere,  and  anything 
seems  better  than  this  heavy  and  anxious  collar  work.' 


1903]  AN   ADVENTUROUS    DAY  205 


1  December  13. — Strong  southerly  wind  with  blinding  drift 
when  we  started  this  morning.  Marched  steadily  on  for  four 
hours,  when  Evans  had  his  nose  frost-bitten.  Evans's  nose 
has  always  been  the  first  thing  to  indicate  stress  of  frost-biting 
weather.  For  some  weeks  it  has  been  more  or  less  constantly 
frost-bitten,  and  in  consequence  it  is  now  the  most  curious- 
looking  object.  He  speaks  of  it  with  a  comic  forbearance,  as 
though,  whilst  it  scarcely  belonged  to  him,  it  was  something 
for  which  he  was  responsible,  and  had  to  make  excuses. 
When  I  told  him  of  its  fault  to-day,  he  said  in  a  resigned  tone, 
"  My  poor  old  nose  again  ;  well,  there,  it's  chronic  !  "  When 
this  unruly  member  was  brought  round  we  found  the  storm 
increasing,  and  the  surface  changed  to  the  hard  wind-swept 
one  which  we  encountered  on  our  ascent.  On  this  we  slipped 
badly,  and  when  we  stopped  to  search  for  our  crampons  the 
wind  had  grown  so  strong  that  I  thought  it  necessary  to  camp. 
Before  this  was  accomplished  we  were  all  pretty  badly  frost- 
bitten, and  we  had  to  make  some  hot  tea  to  bring  us  round. 
After  waiting  for  an  hour  there  were  some  signs  of  clearance, 
and  as  we  cannot  now  afford  to  waste  a  single  moment  I 
decided  to  push  on.  We  held  steadily  to  the  east,  and 
towards  the  end  of  our  march  there  could  be  no  doubt  that 
we  were  commencing  to  descend.  But  it  was  uncanny  work, 
for  I  haven't  any  notion  where  we  are,  and  the  drift  was  so 
thick  about  us  that  for  aught  we  knew  we  might  have  been 
walking  over  the  edge  of  a  precipice  at  any  moment.  To-night 
it  is  as  thick  as  ever;  it  is  positively  sickening,  but,  good 
weather  or  bad,  we  must  go  on  now.' 

*  December  15. — We  all  agree  that  yesterday  was  the  most 
adventurous  day  in  our  lives,  and  we  none  of  us  want  to  have 
another  like  it.  It  seems  wonderful  that  I  should  be  lying  here 
in  ease  and  comfort  to  write  of  it,  but  as  it  is  so,  I  can  give  its 
incidents  in  some  detail. 

1  Very  early  in  the  morning  I  awoke  to  find  that  the  storm 
had  passed,  and  that  the  land  was  all  around  us;  but  the 
clouds  hung  about  the  higher  summits,  and  I  was  still  unable 
to  recognise  any  peak  with  certainty.     In  this  bewildered  con- 


2o6       THE   VOYAGE   OF    THE    'DISCOVERY'    [Dec. 

dition  we  packed  our  sledge,  and  I  could  see  no  better  course 
than  to  continue  our  march  due  east.  We  had  scarcely  been 
going  half  an  hour,  however,  when  high  ice  hummocks  and 
disturbances  appeared  ahead,  and  we  found  ourselves  on  a 
hard  glazed  surface,  which  was  cracked  in  all  directions. 
Hoping  to  avoid  the  disturbed  area,  we  first  made  a  circuit 
to  the  right  and  then  another  to  the  left,  but  in  neither  of 
these  directions  did  the  prospect  look  more  hopeful;  we 
stopped  and  had  a  council  of  war,  but  by  this  time  the  wind 
had  sprung  up  again,  it  was  bitterly  cold,  and  the  only  result 
of  our  deliberations  was  to  show  more  clearly  that  we  did  not 
know  where  we  were.  In  this  predicament  I  vaguely  realised 
that  it  would  be  rash  to  go  forward,  as  the  air  was  once  more 
becoming  thick  with  snowdrift ;  but  then  to  stop  might  mean 
another  long  spell  in  a  blizzard  camp,  when  starvation  would 
soon  stare  us  in  the  face.  I  asked  the  men  if  they  were 
prepared  to  take  the  risk  of  going  on  ;  they  answered  promptly 
in  the  affirmative.  I  think  that  after  our  trying  experiences 
we  were  all  feeling  pretty  reckless. 

\  At  any  rate,  we  marched  straight  on  for  the  ice  disturb- 
ances, and  were  soon  threading  our  way  amongst  the 
hummocks  and  across  numerous  crevasses.  After  a  bit  the 
surface  became  smoother,  but  at  the  same  time  the  slope  grew 
steeper,  and  our  sledge  began  to  overrun  us.  At  this  juncture 
I  put  the  two  men  behind  the  sledge  to  hold  it  back  whilst  I 
continued  in  front  to  guide  its  course ;  we  were  all  wearing 
crampons,  which  at  first  held  well,  but  within  a  few  minutes, 
as  the  inclination  of  the  surface  increased,  our  foothold  became 
less  secure. 

'  Suddenly  JLashly  slipped,  and  in  an  instant  he  was  sliding 
downward  on  his  back  ;  directly  the  strain  came  on  Evans,  he 
too  was  thrown  off  his  feet.  It  all  happened  in  a  moment, 
and  before  I  had  time  to  look  the  sledge  and  the  two  men 
hurtled  past  me ;  I  braced  myself  to  stop  them,  but  might  as 
well  have  attempted  to  hold  an  express  train.  With  the  first 
jerk  I  was  whipped  off  my  legs,  and  we  all  three  lay  sprawling  on 
our  backs  and  flying  downward  with  an  ever-increasing  velocity. 


i9o3]       SUDDEN   DESCENT   INTO   GLACIER         207 

1  For  some  reason  the  first  thought  that  flashed  into  my 
mind  was  that  someone  would  break  a  limb  if  he  attempted  to 
stop  our  mad  career,  and  I  shouted  something  to  this  effect, 
but  might  as  well  have  saved  my  breath.  Then  there  came  a 
sort  of  vague  wonder  as  to  what  would  happen  next,  and  in 
the  midst  of  this  I  was  conscious  that  we  had  ceased  to  slide 
smoothly,  and  were  now  bounding  over  a  rougher  incline, 
sometimes  leaving  it  for  several  yards  at  a  time  ;  my  thoughts 
flew  to  broken  limbs  again,  for  I  felt  we  could  not  stand  much 
of  such  bumping.  At  length  we  gave  a  huge  leap  into  the 
air,  and  yet  we  travelled  with  such  velocity  that  I  had  not  time 
to  think  before  we  came  down  with  tremendous  force  on  a 
gradual  incline  of  rough,  hard,  wind-swept  snow.  Its  irregu- 
larities brought  us  to  rest  in  a  moment  or  two,  and  I  staggered 
to  my  feet  in  a  dazed  fashion,  wondering  what  had  happened. 

1  Then  to  my  joy  I  saw  the  others  also  struggling  to  their 
legs,  and  in  another  moment  I  could  thank  heaven  that  no 
limbs  were  broken.  But  we  had  by  no  means  escaped  scathe- 
less ;  our  legs  now  show  one  black  bruise  from  knee  to  thigh, 
and  Lashly  was  unfortunate  enough  to  land  once  on  his  back, 
which  is  bruised  and  very  painful.  At  the  time,  as  can  be 
imagined,  we  were  all  much  shaken.  I,  as  the  lightest, 
escaped  the  easiest,  yet  before  the  two  men  crawled  painfully 
to  their  feet  their  first  question  was  to  ask  if  I  had  been  hurt. 

1  As  soon  as  I  could  pull  myself  together  I  looked  round, 
and  now  to  my  astonishment  I  saw  that  we  were  well  on 
towards  the  entrance  of  our  own  glacier  j  ahead  and  on  either 
side  of  us  appeared  well-remembered  landmarks,  whilst  behind, 
in  the  rough  broken  ice-wall  over  which  we  had  fallen,  I  now 
recognised  at  once  the  most  elevated  ice  cascade  of  our  valley. 
In  the  rude  fashion  which  I  have  described  we  must  have 
descended  some  300  feet ;  above  us  the  snow-drift  was  still 
being  driven  along,  but  the  wind  had  not  yet  reached  our 
present  level,  so  that  all  around  us  the  sky  was  bright  and 
clear  and  our  eyes  could  roam  from  one  familiar  object  to 
another  until  far  away  to  the  eastward  they  rested  on  the  smoke  - 
capped  summit  of  Erebus. 


2o8      THE   VOYAGE   OF  THE    'DISCOVERY'     [Dec. 

1  I  cannot  but  think  that  this  sudden  revelation  of  our 
position  was  very  wonderful.  Half  an  hour  before  we  had 
been  lost ;  I  could  not  have  told  whether  we  were  making  for 
our  own  glacier  or  for  any  other,  or  whether  we  were  ten  or  fifty 
miles  from  our  depot ;  it  was  more  than  a  month  since  we  had 
seen  any  known  landmark.  Now  in  this  extraordinary  manner 
the  curtain  had  been  raised  ;  we  found  that  our  rule-of-thumb 
methods  had  accomplished  the  most  accurate  "  land  fall,"  and 
down  the  valley  we  could  see  the  high  cliffs  of  the  Depot 
Nunatak  where  peace  and  plenty  awaited  us. 

'  How  merciful  a  view  this  was  we  appreciated  when  we 
came  to  count  up  the  result  of  our  fall.  Our  sledge  had  not 
capsized  until  we  all  rolled  over  together  at  the  end,  but  the 
jolting  had  scattered  many  of  our  belongings  and  had  burst 
open  the  biscuit  box,  so  that  all  that  had  remained  in  it  lay 
distributed  over  the  cascade ;  we  had  no  provisions  left  except 
the  few  scraps  we  could  pick  up  and  the  very  diminished 
contents  of  our  food  bag.  As  well  as  our  stiffening  limbs 
would  allow  we  hastened  to  collect  the  scattered  articles,  to 
repack  the  sledge,  and  to  march  on  towards  the  depot.  Before 
us  now  lay  a  long  plateau,  at  the  edge  of  which  I  knew  we 
should  find  a  second  cascade,  and  beneath  it  the  region  of 
our  Desolation  Camp  and  a  more  gradual  icy  surface  down 
to  the  Nunatak.  By  lunch-time  we  were  well  across  the 
plateau,  and  we  decided  that  our  shaken  condition  deserved 
a  hot  meal,  so  we  brewed  cocoa  and  felt  vastly  better  after 
swallowing  it.  By  this  time  the  wind  had  reached  us  again, 
and  I  had  cold  work  in  taking  a  round  of  angles,  but  I  got 
through  it,  and  in  an  hour  we  were  on  the  march  once  more. 
We  soon  found  ourselves  at  the  top  of  the  second  cascade, 
and  under  conditions  which  prevented  us  from  looking  for 
an  easy  descent ;  however,  fortune  favoured  us,  and  by  going 
very  slowly  and  carefully  we  managed  to  get  down  without 
accident. 

'Though  we  were  all  much  shaken  and  tired,  we  con- 
gratulated ourselves  on  having  overcome  the  worst  difficulties, 
and  started  off  briskly  to  cover  the  last  five  or  six  miles  which 


1903]  ESCAPE   FROM   A   CREVASSE  209 

lay  between  us  and  our  goal.  Feeling  quite  unsuspicious  of 
danger,  we  all  three  joined  up  our  harness  to  our  usual 
positions  ahead  of  the  sledge  ;  this  brought  me  in  the  middle 
and  a  little  in  advance,  with  Lashly  on  my  right  and  Evans 
on  my  left.  After  we  had  been  tramping  on  in  this  way  for 
a  quarter  of  an  hour  the  wind  swept  across  from  the  south, 
and  as  the  sledge  began  to  skid  I  told  Lashly  to  pull  wide 
in  order  to  steady  it.  He  had  scarcely  moved  out  in  response 
to  this  order  when  Evans  and  I  stepped  on  nothing  and  dis- 
appeared from  his  view ;  by  a  miracle  he  saved  himself  from 
following,  and  sprang  back  with  his  whole  weight  on  the  trace ; 
the  sledge  flashed  by  him  and  jumped  the  crevasse  down  which 
we  had  gone,  one  side  of  its  frame  cracked  through  in  the 
jerk  which  followed,  but  the  other  side  mercifully  held. 
Personally  I  remember  absolutely  nothing  until  I  found  myself 
dangling  at  the  end  of  my  trace  with  blue  walls  on  either  side 
and  a  very  horrid  looking  gulf  below ;  large  ice-crystals 
dislodged  by  our  movements  continued  to  shower  down  on 
our  heads. 

•  As  a  first  step  I  took  off  my  goggles ;  I  then  discovered 
that  Evans  was  hanging  just  above  me.  I  asked  him  if  he  was 
all  right,  and  received  a  reassuring  reply  in  his  usual  calm, 
matter-of-fact  tones.  Meanwhile  I  groped  about  on  every 
side  with  my  cramponed  feet,  only  to  find  everywhere  the 
same  slippery  smooth  wall.  But  my  struggles  had  set  me 
swinging,  and  at  one  end  of  a  swing  my  leg  suddenly  struck  a 
projection.  In  a  moment  I  had  turned,  and  saw  at  a  glance 
that  by  raising  myself  I  could  get  foothold  on  it ;  with  the 
next  swing  I  clutched  it  with  my  steel-shod  feet,  and  after  a 
short  struggle  succeeded  in  partly  transferring  my  weight  to  it. 
In  this  position,  with  my  feet  firmly  planted  and  my  balance 
maintained  by  my  harness,  I  could  look  about  me. 

'  I  found  myself  standing  on  a  thin  shaft  of  ice  which  was 
wedged  between  the  walls  of  the  chasm — how  it  came  there  I 
cannot  imagine,  but  its  position  was  wholly  providential ;  to 
the  right  or  left,  above  or  below,  there  was  not  the  vestige  of 
another  such  support — nothing,  in  fact,  but  the  smooth  walls 
vol.  11.  p 


2io      THE  VOYAGE  OF   THE   'DISCOVERY'     [Dec. 

of  ice.  My  next  step  was  to  get  Evans  into  the  same  position 
as  myself,  and  when  he  had  slipped  his  harness  well  up  under 
his  arms  I  found  I  could  pilot  his  feet  to  the  bridge. 

'  All  this  had  occupied  some  time,  and  it  was  only  now 
that  I  realised  what  had  happened  above  us,  for  there,  some 
twelve  feet  over  our  heads,  was  the  outline  of  the  broken 
sledge.  I  saw  at  once  what  a  frail  support  remained,  and 
shouted  to  Lashly  to  ask  what  he  could  do,  and  then  I  knew 
the  value  of  such  a  level-headed  companion;  for  whilst  he 
held  on  grimly  to  the  sledge  and  us  with  one  hand,  his  other 
was  busily  employed  in  withdrawing  our  ski.  At  length  he 
succeeded  in  sliding  two  of  these  beneath  the  broken  sledge 
and  so  making  our  support  more  secure.  The  device  was  well 
thought  of,  but  it  still  left  us  without  his  active  assistance ;  for, 
as  he  told  us,  directly  he  relaxed  his  strain  the  sledge  began  to 
slip,  and  he  dared  not  trust  only  to  the  ski. 

'  There  remained  no  other  course  for  Evans  and  me  but  to 
climb  out  by  our  own  unaided  efforts,  and  I  saw  that  one  of 
us  would  have  to  make  the  attempt  without  delay,  for  the 
chill  of  the  crevasse  was  already  attacking  us  and  our  faces 
and  fingers  were  on  the  verge  of  freezing.  After  a  word  with 
Evans  I  decided  to  try  the  first  climb  myself,  but  I  must 
confess  I  never  expected  to  reach  the  top.  It  is  some  time 
since  I  swarmed  a  rope,  and  to  have  to  do  so  in  thick  clothing 
and  heavy  crampons  and  with  frost-bitten  fingers  seemed  to 
me  in  the  nature  of  the  impossible.  But  it  was  no  use  think- 
ing about  it,  so  I  slung  my  mits  over  my  shoulders,  grasped 
the  rope,  and  swung  off  the  bridge.  I  don't  know  how  long  1 
took  to  climb  or  how  I  did  it,  but  I  remember  I  got  a  rest 
when  I  could  plant  my  foot  in  the  belt  of  my  harness,  and 
again  when  my  feet  held  on  the  rings  of  the  belt.  Then 
came  a  mighty  effort  till  I  reached  the  stirrup  formed  by  the 
rope  span  of  the  sledge,  and  then,  mustering  all  the  strength 
that  remained,  I  reached  the  sledge  itself  and  flung  myself 
panting  on  to  the  snow  beyond.  Lashly  said,  "  Thank  God  !  " 
and  it  was  perhaps  then  that  I  realised  that  his  position  had 
been  the  worst  of  all. 


1903]  BACK   TO   DEPOT   NUNATAK  211 

'  For  a  full  five  minutes  I  could  do  nothing  ;  my  hands 
were  white  to  the  wrists,  and  I  plunged  them  into  my  breast, 
but  gradually  their  circulation  and  my  strength  came  back,  and 
I  was  able  to  get  to  work.  With  two  of  us  on  top  and  one 
below,  things  had  assumed  a  very  different  aspect,  and  I  was 
able  to  unhitch  my  own  harness  and  lower  it  once  more  for 
Evans  ;  then  with  our  united  efforts  he  also  was  landed  on  the 
surface,  where  he  arrived  in  the  same  frost-bitten  condition  as 
I  had.  For  a  minute  or  two  we  could  only  look  at  one 
another,  then  Evans  said,  "  Well,  I'm  blowed "  ;  it  was  the 
first  sign  of  astonishment  he  had  shown. 

'  But  all  this  time  the  wind  was  blowing  very  chill,  so  we 
wasted  no  time  in  discussing  our  escape,  but  turning  our 
broken  sledge  end  for  end,  we  were  soon  harnessed  to  it  again 
and  trudging  on  over  the  snow.  After  this,  as  can  be  imagined, 
we  kept  a  pretty  sharp  look-out  for  crevasses,  marching  in 
such  an  order  as  prevented  more  than  one  of  us  going  down 
at  once,  and  so  we  eventually  reached  the  bare  blue  ice  once 
more,  and  at  six  o'clock  found  our  depot  beneath  the  towering 
cliffs  of  the  Depot  Nunatak. 

'As  long  as  I  live  I  can  never  forget  last  night.  Our 
camp  was  in  bright  sunshine,  for  the  first  time  for  six  weeks 
the  temperature  was  above  zero,  but  what  we  appreciated  still 
more  was  the  fact  that  it  was  perfectly  calm ;  the  canvas  of 
our  tent  hung  limp  and  motionless,  and  the  steam  of  our 
cooking  rose  in  a  thin,  vertical  shaft.  All  Nature  seemed  to 
say  that  our  long  fight  was  over,  and  that  at  length  we  had 
reached  a  haven  of  rest.  And  it  has  been  a  fight  indeed  ;  it  is 
only  now  that  I  realise  what  discomforts  we  have  endured  and 
what  a  burden  of  anxiety  we  have  borne  during  the  past  month. 
The  relief  of  being  freed  from  such  conditions  is  beyond  the 
power  of  my  pen  to  describe,  but  perhaps  what  brought  it 
home  to  us  most  completely  was  the  fact  that  the  worst  of  our 
troubles  and  adventures  came  at  the  end,  and  that  in  the  brief 
space  of  half  an  hour  we  passed  from  abject  discomfort  to  rest 
and  peace. 

'  And  so  we  dawdled  over  everything.     We  were  bruised, 

P  2 


212       THE   VOYAGE   OF    THE    'DISCOVERY'    [Dec. 

sore,  and  weary,  yet  Lashly  sang  a  merry  stave  as  he  stirred 
the  pot,  and  Evans  and  I  sat  on  the  sledge,  shifted  our  foot- 
gear, spread  our  garments  out  to  dry,  and  chatted  away  merrily 
the  whole  time.  Evans's  astonishment  at  the  events  of  the 
day  seemed  to  grow  ever  deeper,  and  was  exhibited  in  the 
most  amusing  manner.  With  his  sock  half  on  he  would 
pause  to  think  out  our  adventures  in  some  new  light  and 
would  say  suddenly,  "Well,  sir,  but  what  about  that  snow 
bridge?"  or  if  so-and-so  hadn't  happened  "where  should  we 
be  now?  "  and  then  the  soliloquy  would  end  with  "  My  word, 
but  it  was  a  close  call  ! "  Evans  generally  manages  to  sum  a 
case  up  fairly  pithily,  and  perhaps  this  last  remark  is  a  com- 
prehensive description  of  our  experiences  of  yesterday. 

•  This  morning  the  sun  shines  as  brightly  as  ever,  and  there 
is  still  no  breath  of  wind.  It  is  so  warm  in  the  tent  that  as  I 
write  I  have  had  to  throw  open  my  jacket.  Meanwhile  out- 
side I  can  hear  the  tap  of  the  hammer  as  my  companions  are 
arming  our  sledge  runners  for  the  hard  ice  of  the  glacier.' 

We  only  found  a  very  small  quantity  of  food  at  the  Depot 
Nunatak,  but  it  was  enough  to  carry  us  to  the  main  depot, 
which  lay  several  miles  below,  provided  we  marched  hard,  as 
we  were  quite  prepared  to  do.  Luckily,  here  also  we  found  a 
new  nine-foot  sledge  which  had  been  left  the  previous  year,  and 
to  which  we  could  now  transfer  the  greater  part  of  our  load. 
But  one  of  our  most  pleasing  discoveries  at  the  Depot  Nunatak 
was  the  small  folded  notes  which  told  us  of  the  movements 
of  our  fellow-travellers.  By  these  I  learnt  to  my  relief  that 
Skelton  and  his  companions  had  safely  reached  the  glacier, 
and  that  Ferrar's  party  was  all  well  after  it  had  left  our  Desola- 
tion Camp.  According  to  previous  arrangements  I  found 
these  notes  at  various  stated  points  in  the  glacier,  and  there 
were  few  pleasanter  things  for  us  returning  wayfarers  than  to 
find  these  cheery  documents. 

Starting  our  downward  march  on  the  afternoon  of  the  15th, 
we  stretched  over  the  miles  with  ease.  This  sort  of  work  was 
mere  child's  play  to  our  hardened  muscles,  and  that  night  we 
reached  the  broad  amphitheatre  below  Finger  Mountain.     On 


i9o3]  EXPLORATION   OF  NORTH   ARM  213 

the  1 6th  we  picked  up  the  ample  supply  of  food  which  we  had 
left  in  our  depot  opposite  the  Solitary  Rocks,  and  that  evening 
took  up  our  old  quarters  in  the  Knob  Head  Moraine.  I 
mention  these  movements  because  at  this  point  I  had  deter- 
mined to  do  a  small  piece  of  exploration  which  is  of  some 
interest.  The  reader  will  see  that  we  were  now  in  the  large 
glacier  basin  which  I  described,  and  will  remember  that  I 
mentioned  amongst  other  outlets  its  northern  arm.  This  arm 
of  the  glacier  descended  with  a  very  steep  incline  to  the  right 
of  the  Solitary  Rocks,  and  then  its  valley  seemed  to  turn 
sharply  to  the  eastward.  The  direction  of  flow  of  the  ice- 
streams  in  the  glacier  basin  had  always  been  something  of  a 
mystery  for  us,  and  we  had  thought  that  the  main  portion  of 
the  ice  must  discharge  through  this  valley. 

On  the  17th,  therefore,  we  started  to  descend  it  to  see 
what  the  conditions  actually  were,  and  after  rattling  down  over 
a  sharp  gradient  for  several  miles  we  found  ourselves  turning 
to  the  east.  We  followed  a  long  string  of  morainic  boulders 
through  a  deep  valley  on  a  moderate  incline,  but  early  in  the 
afternoon  the  descent  became  steeper  and  the  surface  of  the 
ice  much  rougher,  until  at  length  our  sledge  bumped  so  heavily 
that  we  thought  it  wise  to  camp. 

Our  camp  life  by  this  time  had  become  wholly  pleasant 
except  to  poor  Lashly,  who  had  a  fierce  attack  of  snow- 
blindness.  We  pitched  our  tent  behind  a  huge  boulder  which 
must  have  weighed  at  least  five  hundred  tons,  and  here  we 
were  pleasantly  sheltered  from  the  wind,  whilst  close  by  us 
trickled  a  glacier  stream  from  which  we  were  able  to  fill  our 
cooking-pot  and  obtain  an  unlimited  quantity  of  drinking-water. 
We  had  a  splendid  view  of  the  great  ice  masses  sweeping  down 
from  above,  but  looking  downward  we  were  much  puzzled,  for 
the  glacier  surface  descended  steeply,  and  beyond  it  stood  a 
lofty  groin  of  rock  which  seemed  a  direct  bar  to  its  further 
passage.  This  sight  made  us  very  anxious  to  proceed  with  our 
exploration,  and  as  we  could  not  advance  further  with  our 
sledge,  it  became  necessary  to  arrange  for  a  long  absence  from 
our  camp.     Accordingly  we  rose  very  early  on  the  following 


2i4      THE   VOYAGE   OF  THE   'DISCOVERY'    [Dec. 

day,  and  taking  our  coil  of  Alpine  rope,  with  our  crampons 
and  a  supply  of  food,  we  set  off  over  the  rough  ice  of  the 
glacier.  As  this  walk  had  several  points  of  interest,  I  give  its 
outline  from  my  diary  : 

'  Started  at  seven  o'clock  with  a  supply  of  pemmican,  choco- 
late, sugar,  and  biscuit  in  our  pockets,  and  our  small  provision 
measure  to  act  as  a  drinking-cup.  It  is  an  extraordinary 
novelty  in  our  sledging  experience  to  find  that  one  can  get 
water  by  simply  dipping  it  up.  As  we  descended,  the  slope 
became  steeper,  and  soon  the  ice  grew  so  disturbed  that  we 
were  obliged  to  rope  ourselves  together  and  proceed  with 
caution.  The  disturbance  was  of  very  much  the  same  nature 
as  that  which  we  had  found  on  the  south  side  of  the  Ferrar 
Glacier ;  the  ice  seemed  to  have  broken  down,  leaving  steep 
faces  towards  the  south.  Here  and  there  we  found  scattered 
boulders  and  finer  morainic  material,  and  the  channels  of  the 
glacial  streams  became  visible  in  places,  to  vanish  again  under 
deep  blue  arches  of  ice. 

1  At  length  we  descended  into  one  of  these  watercourses  and 
followed  it  for  some  distance,  until,  to  our  surprise,  it  came 
abruptly  to  an  end,  and  with  it  the  glacier  itself,  which  had 
gradually  dwindled  to  this  insignificant  termination.  Before  us 
was  a  shallow,  frozen  lake  into  which  the  thaw- water  of  the 
glacier  was  pouring.  The  channel  in  which  we  stood  was 
about  twenty  feet  above  its  surface,  and  the  highest  pinnacles 
of  ice  were  not  more  than  the  same  distance  above  our  heads, 
whereas  the  terminal  face  of  the  glacier  was  about  three  or  four 
hundred  yards  across.  So  here  was  the  limit  of  the  great  ice- 
river  which  we  had  followed  down  from  the  vast  basin  of  the 
interior  ;  instead  of  pouring  huge  icebergs  into  the  sea,  it  was 
slowly  dwindling  away  in  its  steep-sided  valley.  It  was,  in  fact, 
nothing  but  the  remains  of  what  had  once  been  a  mighty  ice- 
flow  from  the  inland. 

'  With  a  little  difficulty  we  climbed  down  to  the  level  of  the 
lake,  and  then  observed  that  the  glacier  rested  on  a  deep 
ground  moraine  of  mud,  in  some  places  as  much  as  ten  or 
twelve  feet  in  thickness ;  this  layer  of  mud  extended  beyond 


i9o3]  A  CURIOUS  VALLEY  215 

the  face  of  the  glacier,  where  it  had  been  much  worn  by  water  ; 
enough  remained,  however,  for  Lashly  to  remark,  "What  a 
splendid  place  for  growing  spuds  !  "  Skirting  the  lake  below  the 
glacier,  we  found  ourselves  approaching  the  high,  rocky  groin 
which  puzzled  us  so  much  last  night,  but  we  now  saw  that  a  very 
narrow  channel  wound  round  its  base.  At  its  narrowest  this 
channel  was  only  seventeen  feet  across,  and  as  we  traversed 
this  part,  the  high  cliffs  on  either  side  towered  above  our  heads 
and  we  seemed  to  be  passing  through  a  massive  gateway ; 
beyond  this  the  valley  opened  out  again,  and  its  floor  was 
occupied  by  a  frozen  lake  a  mile  in  breadth  and  three  or  four 
miles  in  length.  As  the  snow  surface  of  this  lake  was  very 
rough,  we  were  obliged  to  skirt  its  margin;  we  were  now 
1,300  feet  below  our  camp,  and  about  300  feet  above  sea  level. 
The  shores  of  the  lake  for  several  hundred  feet  up  the  hillsides 
were  covered  with  a  coarse  granitic  sand  strewn  with  numerous 
boulders,  and  it  was  curious  to  observe  that  these  boulders, 
from  being  rounded  and  sub-angular  below,  gradually  grew  to 
be  sharper  in  outline  as  they  rose  in  level. 

'  At  the  end  of  the  second  lake  the  valley  turned  towards 
the  north-east ;  it  was  equally  clearly  cut,  but  the  floor  rose  on 
a  mass  of  morainic  material.  At  first  there  was  a  general 
tendency  for  this  to  be  distributed  in  long  ridges,  but  later  the 
distribution  was  disturbed,  and  it  was  easy  to  see  that  broad 
water-channels  had  made  clean  breaches  in  these  vast  piles  of 
sand  and  boulders.  Quite  suddenly  these  moraines  ceased, 
and  we  stepped  out  on  to  a  long  stretch  of  undulating  sand 
traversed  by  numerous  small  streams,  which  here  and  there 
opened  out  into  small,  shallow  lakes  quite  free  from  ice. 

'I  was  so  fascinated  by  all  these  strange  new  sights  that  I 
strode  forward  without  thought  of  hunger  until  Evans  asked  if 
it  was  any  use  carrying  our  lunch  further  ;  we  all  decided  that 
it  wasn't,  and  so  sat  down  on  a  small  hillock  of  sand  with  a 
merry  little  stream  gurgling  over  the  pebbles  at  our  feet.  It 
was  a  very  cheery  meal,  and  certainly  the  most  extraordinary 
we  have  had.  We  commanded  an  extensive  view  both  up  and 
down  the  valley,  and  yet,  except  about  the  rugged  mountain 


2i6       THE   VOYAGE   OF   THE    'DISCOVERY'    [Dec. 

summits,  there  was  not  a  vestige  of  ice  or  snow  to  be  seen  ;  and 
as  we  ran  the  comparatively  warm  sand  through  our  fingers 
and  quenched  our  thirst  at  the  stream,  it  seemed  almost 
impossible  that  we  could  be  within  a  hundred  miles  of  the 
terrible  conditions  we  had  experienced  on  the  summit. 

'  Proceeding  after  lunch,  we  found  that  the  valley  descended 
to  a  deep  and  splendid  gorge  formed  by  another  huge  groin 
extending  from  the  southern  side,  but  as  we  approached  the 
high  cliffs  we  found  our  way  again  obstructed  by  confused 
heaps  of  boulders,  amongst  which  for  the  first  time  we  saw  the 
exposed  rocks  of  the  floor  of  the  valley  smoothed  and  striated 
in  a  manner  most  typical  of  former  ice  action.  My  object  in 
pressing  on  had  been  to  get  a  view  of  the  sea,  and  I  now 
thought  the  best  plan  would  be  to  ascend  the  neck  of  the  groin 
on  our  right.  It  was  a  long  climb  of  some  700  feet  over 
rough,  sharp  boulders.  We  eventually  reached  the  top,  but, 
alas !  not  to  catch  any  glimpse  of  the  sea  ;  for  the  valley 
continued  to  wind  its  way  onward  through  deep  gorges,  and 
some  five  or  six  miles  below  yet  another  groin  shut  out  our 
further  view. 

1  But  from  our  elevated  position  we  could  now  get  an 
excellent  view  of  this  extraordinary  valley,  and  a  wilder  or  in 
some  respects  more  beautiful  scene  it  would  have  been 
difficult  to  imagine.  Below  lay  the  sandy  stretches  and  con- 
fused boulder  heaps  of  the  valley  floor,  with  here  and  there  the 
gleaming  white  surface  of  a  frozen  lake  and  elsewhere  the 
silver  threads  of  the  running  water;  far  above  us  towered 
the  weather-worn,  snow-splashed  mountain  peaks,  between 
which  in  places  fell  in  graceful  curves  the  folds  of  some  hang- 
ing glacier.  The  rocks  at  our  feet  were  of  every  variety  of 
colour  and  form,  mixed  in  that  inextricable  confusion  which 
ice  alone  can  accomplish.  The  lower  slopes  of  the  mountains 
were  thickly  clothed  with  similar  rocks,  but  the  variety  of 
colour  was  lost  in  the  distance,  and  these  steep  slopes  had  a 
general  tone  of  sober  grey.  This  colour  was  therefore  pre- 
dominant, but  everywhere  at  a  height  of  3,000  feet  above  the 
valley  it  ended  in  a  hard  line  illustrating  in  the  most  beautiful 


i9o3]  A  GOOD   DAY'S   WORK  217 

manner  the   maximum   extent   to    which   the   ice   had   once 
spread. 

•  I  cannot  but  think  that  this  valley  is  a  very  wonderful 
place.  We  have  seen  to-day  all  the  indications  of  colossal  ice 
action  and  considerable  water  action,  and  yet  neither  of  these 
agents  is  now  at  work.  It  is  worthy  of  record,  too,  that  we 
have  seen  no  living  thing,  not  even  a  moss  or  a  lichen;  all 
that  we  did  find,  far  inland  amongst  the  moraine  heaps,  was 
the  skeleton  of  a  Weddell  seal,  and  how  that  came  there  is 
beyond  guessing.  It  is  certainly  a  valley  of  the  dead;  even 
the  great  glacier  which  once  pushed  through  it  has  withered 
away. 

'  It  was  nearly  four  o'clock  before  we  turned  towards  our 
camp,  and  nearly  ten  before  we  reached  it,  feeling  that  it  was 
quite  time  for  supper.  The  day's  record,  however,  is  a  pretty 
good  tribute  to  our  marching  powers,  for  we  have  walked  and 
climbed  over  the  roughest  country  for  more  than  fourteen 
hours  with  only  one  brief  halt  for  lunch.' 

With  this  short  expedition  our  last  piece  of  exploration 
came  to  an  end,  and  on  the  19th  we  started  to  ascend  the 
north  arm.  By  the  night  of  the  20th  we  had  reached  our 
second  depot  under  Cathedral  Rocks,  and  here  for  the  first 
time,  and  with  anxious  eyes,  we  looked  out  towards  the  sea. 
Many  a  time  we  had  discussed  this  prospect,  and  agreed  that 
we  should  not  have  cared  how  far  round  we  had  to  walk  if 
only  that  stubborn  sheet  of  ice  in  the  strait  would  break  away. 
But  now,  alas  !  it  was  evident  that  our  homeward  track  might 
be  as  direct  as  we  chose  to  make  it,  for  the  great  unbroken 
plain  of  ice  still  bridged  the  whole  strait.  Only  in  the  far 
distance  could  we  see  the  open  water,  where  a  thin  blue  ribbon 
ran  in  from  Cape  Bird  and  ended  abreast  of  the  black  rocks 
of  Cape  Royds.  We  saw  with  grief  that  there  must  be  very 
many  miles  between  it  and  our  unfortunate  ship. 

On  rounding  Butter  Point  we  had  another  blow  on  finding 
an  entire  absence  of  seals,  but,  thanks  to  the  kindness  of 
Skelton  and  his  party,  we  were  not  deprived  of  our  long- 
expected  feast  of  fresh  meat,  for  close  to  our  tin  of  butter  we 


218      THE   VOYAGE   OF    THE    'DISCOVERY'    [Dec. 

found  a  buried  treasure  in  the  shape  of  some  tit-bits  of  an 
animal  which  they  had  killed.  From  Butter  Point  we  turned 
our  course  south  to  those  curious  moraine  heaps  which  we  had 
called  the  '  Eskers,'  and  which  I  had  not  yet  seen.  We  spent 
half  a  day  in  rambling  amongst  these  steep  little  hills,  and  in 
trying  to  find  skuas'  eggs  which  were  not  hard  set;  but 
fortune  was  against  us  in  this  last  respect,  and  we  found  that 
we  were  at  least  a  week  too  late. 

On  the  afternoon  of  the  23rd  we  started  to  cross  the  strait 
for  the  last  time,  and  late  on  Christmas  Eve  we  saw  the  masts 
of  the  '  Discovery,'  and  were  soon  welcomed  by  the  four 
persons  who  alone  remained  on  board.  And  so  after  all  our 
troubles  and  trials  we  spent  our  Christmas  Day  in  the  snug 
security  of  our  home  quarters,  and  tasted  once  again  those 
delights  of  civilised  existence  to  which  we  had  so  long  been 
strangers. 

And  now,  seated  at  my  desk,  I  could  quietly  work  out  my 
observations,  and  trace  the  track  which  we  had  made.  I 
found,  to  my  relief,  that  my  watch  had  kept  an  excellent  rate, 
as  far  as  my  observed  positions  could  check  it.  This  was  a 
matter  of  great  importance,  as  the  longitude  of  our  position  on 
the  great  plain  of  the  interior  depended  entirely  on  its  accuracy. 
This  watch  has  since  been  given  to  me  by  its  makers,  and  I 
value  it  highly  ;  as  I  think  few  watches  have  done  greater 
service ;  and  here,  for  the  benefit  of  future  explorers,  I  must 
again  point  out  the  importance  of  the  manner  in  which  a  watch 
is  carried  on  such  a  journey.  I  shifted  my  watch-pocket 
several  times  during  my  earlier  experiences  before  I  decided 
on  its  best  position,  and  throughout  my  travels  I  never  failed 
to  treat  my  watch  with  the  greatest  care.  The  pocket  was 
eventually  sewn  to  my  inner  vest,  in  such  a  position  that  my 
harness  could  not  touch  it,  and  I  never  took  the  watch  out  of 
this  warm  place  unless  it  was  necessary  ;  when  taking  sights  I 
held  it  in  the  palm  of  my  hand,  and  as  far  as  possible  under 
the  cover  of  a  mit. 

When  I  had  worked  out  our  various  positions  and  calcu- 
lated the  distances  we  had  travelled,  I  had  before  me  an  array 


i9o3]  RETURN  TO  THE  SHIP  219 

of  figures  of  which  our  party  might  justifiably  feel  proud.  In 
our  last  absence  of  fifty-nine  days  we  had  travelled  725  miles  ; 
for  nine  complete  days  we  had  been  forced  to  remain  in  camp, 
so  that  this  distance  had  been  accomplished  in  fifty  marching 
days,  and  gave  a  daily  average  of  14-5  miles. 

Taking  the  eighty-one  days  of  absence  which  had  con- 
stituted our  whole  sledging  season,  I  found  that  Evans,  Lashly, 
and  I  had  covered  1,098  miles,  at  an  average  of  15*4  miles  a 
day,  and  that,  not  including  minor  undulations,  we  had  climbed 
heights  which  totalled  to  19,800  feet. 

I  started  my  account  of  this  journey  by  saying  that  I 
thought  we  came  near  the  limit  of  possible  performance  in  the 
circumstances,  and  I  hope  these  figures  will  be  considered  as 
justifying  that  remark.  What  the  circumstances  were  I  have 
endeavoured  to  show,  but  when  it  is  considered  that  to  the 
rigours  of  a  polar  climate  were  added  those  which  must  be 
a  necessary  consequence  of  a  great  altitude,  it  needs  little 
explanation  to  prove  that  they  were  exceptionally  severe. 

We  may  claim,  therefore,  to  have  accomplished  a  creditable 
journey  under  the  hardest  conditions  on  record,  but  for  my 
part  I  devoutly  hope  that  wherever  my  future  wanderings  may 
trend,  they  will  never  again  lead  me  to  the  summit  of  Victoria 
Land. 

The  four  persons  whom  we  found  on  board  the  '  Discovery  ' 
on  our  return  were  Dr.  Koettlitz,  our  ship's  steward,  Handsley 
(who  had  not  yet  fully  recovered  from  his  chest  troubles),  and 
Quartley  (who  had  received  a  slight  injury  on  the  southern 
journey).  All  the  remainder  of  our  company  had  gone  to  the 
north,  in  accordance  with  our  pre-arranged  plan,  to  saw  through 
the  ice.  I  purposed  shortly  to  go  in  this  direction  myself,  but 
after  our  excessive  work  the  usual  reaction  set  in,  and  I 
thought  that  my  small  party  had  earned  a  few  days'  rest  in 
which  we  might  renew  our  energies.  Communications  with 
the  northern  camp  were  of  daily  occurrence,  thanks  to  our  new 
team  of  dogs,  which  had  been  brought  into  capital  working 
order  by  their  driver,  Dell. 

It  was  not  long  therefore  before  I  learnt  the  outlines  of  the 


220      THE   VOYAGE    OF  THE    'DISCOVERY'    [Dec 

other  sledge  journeys,  and  was  able  to  read  the  reports  of  the 
officers  who  had  led  them  and  study  the  advance  which  had 
been  made  in  our  knowledge  by  the  sledging  work  of  our 
second  season.  Space  does  not  permit  me  to  go  in  detail  into 
these  various  journeys,  nor  do  I  think  that  the  reader  would 
be  grateful  for  the  minute  relation  of  more  sledging  adven- 
tures. But  this  story  would  not  be  complete  without  a 
summary  of  the  material  facts  which  these  efforts  produced, 
nor  could  I  omit  to  pay  a  well-earned  tribute  to  those  who 
secured  them  by  prolonged  and  arduous  labour  and  unfailing 
spirit. 

I  purpose,  therefore,  to  give  in  brief  the  movements  of 
other  members  of  the  expedition  during  our  absence  to  the 
west. 

It  will  be  remembered  that  the  party  which  had  left  the 
ship  with  me  towards  the  end  of  October  had  eventually  split 
into  three  units.  At  first  our  geologist,  Ferrar,  left  us  to 
explore  the  glacier  valley,  and  later  Skelton  and  I  parted 
company  on  the  inland  ice.  Skelton,  returning  with  his 
overworked  party,  had  wisely  taken  matters  easily,  but  on 
arriving  at  the  Depot  Nunatak  he  had  picked  up  the  half-plate 
camera,  and,  although  he  had  only  a  very  limited  number  of 
plates,  he  succeeded  in  taking  some  excellent  photographs  of 
the  valley. 

Ferrar  with  his  two  companions  had  also  come  down  the 
valley  slowly,  not  because  he  had  lingered  on  his  way,  but 
because  he  had  crossed  and  recrossed  the  glacier  to  examine 
the  rocks  on  each  side.  I  was  quite  astonished  to  learn  the 
numbers  of  places  he  had  visited  and  the  distances  he  had 
traversed  in  pursuit  of  his  objects,  especially  when  I  remem- 
bered that  all  had  been  done  with  one  rickety  little  sledge 
which  I  knew  must  have  broken  down  repeatedly  and  have 
given  endless  trouble  to  those  who  dragged  it.  The  results  of 
this  journey  are  told  by  the  geologist  himself  in  the  appendix 
which  he  has  supplied  to  this  volume,  but  he  has  not  told  of 
all  the  difficulties  which  he  had  to  overcome  and  which  in 
themselves  might  well  form  a  chapter  of  this  book.     For  each 


i$03]  OTHER  JOURNEYS  221 

specimen  of  rock  which  Ferrar  brought  back  was  obtained 
only  by  traversing  long  miles  of  rough  ice,  by  clambering  over 
dangerous  crevassed  slopes,  and  by  scaling  precipitous  cliffs  ; 
and  all  this  at  a  great  distance  from  home,  and  where  a  strained 
limb  might  have  led  to  very  serious  consequences. 

It  will  be  remembered  that  the  main  work  of  this  season 
was  thoroughly  to  explore  this  valley  and  the  ice-cap  which 
lay  beyond  ;  thus,  when  to  the  results  of  the  longer  journey 
were  added  Ferrar's  survey  and  Skelton's  photographic  work 
we  had  the  satisfaction  of  knowing  that  our  object  had  been 
well  accomplished. 

The  object  before  Barne  and  Mulock  on  their  journey  to 
the  south  has  already  been  stated.  They  left  the  ship  on 
October  6,  and,  passing  around  the  Bluff,  steered  for  the  inlet 
which  has  since  been  named  after  the  former. 

But  ill  fortune  dogged  this  party  from  the  start.  They 
were  hampered  by  continual  gales  from  the  south,  and  again 
and  again  had  to  spend  long  days  in  their  tents,  as  it  was 
impossible  to  march  onward  with  the  wind  directly  in  their 
faces.  In  this  manner  no  fewer  than  ten  days  were  wasted  on 
the  outward  march,  four  of  these  being  consecutive,  and  con- 
sequently it  was  not  until  the  middle  of  November  that  they 
approached  the  entrance  to  the  inlet,  and  here  they  became 
involved  amongst  numerous  undulations  and  disturbances 
which  greatly  impeded  their  progress. 

As  they  advanced  these  disturbances  grew  worse,  and  it 
was  necessary  to  cross  wide  crevasses  and  clamber  over  steep 
ridges.  On  November  19,  to  their  great  disappointment,  they 
were  forced  to  turn,  having  barely  passed  the  mouth  of  the 
inlet  which  they  had  hoped  to  explore.  From  their  observa- 
tions, however,  it  seems  evident  that  the  whole  of  this  area  is 
immensely  disturbed,  and  it  is  doubtful  whether  a  sledge  party 
could  ever  cross  it  unless  they  were  prepared  to  spend  many 
weeks  in  the  attempt.  Although  from  their  farthest  position 
they  could  see  no  definite  rise  in  the  level  of  the  ice  in  the 
inlet,  as  they  travelled  towards  its  northern  side  they  found  a 
moraine  of  large  granite  boulders  which  showed  conclusively 


222       THE   VOYAGE    OF   THE    'DISCOVERY'    [Dec. 

the  general  flow  of  the  ice-stream  and  gave  some  indication  of 
the  nature  of  the  land  which  lay  beyond. 

Throughout  this  journey  Mulock  was  indefatigable  in  using 
the  theodolite.  The  result  of  this  diligence  is  that  this  stretch 
of  coastline  is  more  accurately  plotted  than  any  other  part  of 
Victoria  Land,  and  by  the  fixing  of  the  positions  and  heights 
of  more  than  two  hundred  mountain  peaks  a  most  interesting 
topographical  survey  of  this  region  has  been  achieved. 

But  one  of  the  most  important  results  of  this  expedition 
was  obtained  almost  by  an  accident.  The  reader  will  remember 
that  in  my  early  journey  in  1902  I  fixed  on  a  position  off  the 
Bluff  to  establish  what  I  called  Depot  '  A.'  This  position  lay 
on  the  alignment  of  a  small  peak  on  the  Bluff  with  Mount 
Discovery.  On  visiting  this  depot  in  1903,  Barne  found  to 
his  astonishment  that  the  alignment  was  no  longer  '  on,'  and 
therefore  it  was  evident  that  the  depot  had  moved.  Thirteen 
and  a  half  months  after  the  establishment  of  the  depot  he 
measured  its  displacement,  and  found  it  to  be  608  yards.  And 
thus  almost  accidentally  we  obtained  a  very  good  indication  of 
the  movement  of  the  Great  Barrier  ice-sheet. 

To  this  very  interesting  fact  I  shall  refer  in  considering 
the  results  of  the  expedition.  Barne  and  his  party  safely 
reached  the  ship  on  December  13,  after  being  absent  sixty- 
eight  days. 

I  have  already  referred  to  the  projected  trip  to  the  south- 
east; it  will  be  remembered  that  its  object  was  to  ascertain 
whether  the  barrier  continued  level  in  that  direction.  The 
conduct  of  this  journey  was  undertaken  by  Royds,  and  with 
him  went  our  physicist  Bernacchi,  Cross,  Plumley,  Scott,  and 
Clarke  ;  the  track  which  was  taken  by  the  party  can  be  seen 
on  the  chart.  It  was  a  short  journey,  as  it  only  occupied 
thirty  days,  and  for  those  who  took  part  in  it  it  could  not  be 
otherwise  than  monotonous  and  dull ;  yet  it  deserves  to  rank 
very  high  in  our  sledging  efforts,  for  every  detail  was  carried 
out  in  the  most  thoroughly  efficient  manner. 

The  party  went  on  a  very  short  food  allowance,  and  day 
after  day  found  themselves  marching  over  the  same  unutterably 


i9o3]  OTHER  JOURNEYS  223 

wearisome  plain,  and  on  a  surface  of  such  a  nature  as  I  de- 
scribed in  my  own  southern  journey ;  yet  they  marched  steadily 
on,  and  fully  accomplished  the  main  object  for  which  they 
were  sent — a  negative  but  highly  important  result.  It  was  on 
this  journey  also  that  a  most  interesting  series  of  magnetic 
observations  were  taken  by  Bernacchi,  who  carried  with  him 
the  Barrow  dip  circle,  an  especially  delicate  instrument.  The 
great  value  of  these  observations  lies  in  the  fact  that  they  were 
taken  in  positions  which  were  free  from  all  possible  disturbance 
either  from  casual  iron  or  from  land  masses  ;  the  positions 
also  run  in  a  line  which  is  almost  directly  away  from  the  mag- 
netic pole,  and  consequently  the  series  is  an  invaluable  aid 
to  mapping  out  the  magnetic  conditions  of  the  whole  of  this 
region. 

To  Bernacchi  belongs  the  credit  of  these  observations,  but 
a  certain  amount  of  reflected  glory  must  be  allowed  to  those 
who  accompanied  him,  for  whilst  he  wrestled  with  the  usual 
troubles  of  the  observer  within  the  tent,  his  companions  had  to 
cool  their  heels  outside  ;  and  as  they  consented  to  do  this 
night  after  night  for  an  hour  or  more,  it  may  be  considered 
that  they  showed  considerable  practical  sympathy  with  his 
scientific  aims. 

On  December  10  Royds  and  his  party  arrived  on  board  the 
ship  in  an  extremely  famished  state,  but  with  the  satisfaction 
of  having  accomplished  an  exceedingly  fine  journey. 

Our  sledging  efforts  of  1903  were  not  confined  to  the 
longer  journeys,  for,  as  in  the  previous  year,  many  shorter 
trips  were  made.  From  October  12  Wilson  was  away  for 
more  than  three  weeks  to  pay  yet  another  visit  to  the  Emperor 
penguin  rookery.  It  was  on  this  occasion  that  he  observed 
the  extraordinary  manner  in  which  these  penguins  migrated 
with  their  young.  It  will  be  remembered  that  in  the  previous 
year  these  birds  had  been  found  with  very  young  chicks  in 
down,  and  that  on  a  second  visit,  shortly  after,  all  the  chicks 
had  vanished,  though  it  was  evident  that  they  could  not  have 
been  prepared  to  take  to  the  water.  Now  this  mystery  was 
explained.     Soon  after  Wilson's  arrival  the  ice  began  to  break 


224      THE   VOYAGE   OF    THE    'DISCOVERY'    [Dec. 

away,  and  he  watched  the  parent  birds  and  their  young  leave 
their  rookery  and  station  themselves  in  batches  near  the  edge 
of  the  ice-sheet.  In  due  course  a  piece  of  ice  on  which  a  batch 
stood  was  broken  off,  and  slowly  sailed  away  to  the  north  with 
its  freight  of  penguins,  and  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  in  this 
manner  these  curious  creatures  are  transported  for  many  hun- 
dreds of  miles  until  the  chicks  have  attained  their  adult 
plumage  and  can  earn  their  own  living. 

Wilson  spent  twelve  days  at  Cape  Crozier,  and  probably  at 
what  is  the  most  interesting  season  of  the  year  in  that  region. 
Whilst  the  steady  emigration  of  parties  of  Emperor  penguins 
went  on  day  after  day,  a  little  further  to  the  west  there  was  an 
equally  steady  immigration  of  Adelie  penguins  now  coming 
south  to  lay  their  eggs  on  the  lower  slopes  of  Mount  Terror. 
Both  these  movements  were  evidently  dependent  on  the 
seasonal  change  which  was  taking  place,  for  on  his  arrival 
Wilson  found  the  Ross  Sea  frozen  over,  and  on  precisely  the 
same  date  as  on  the  previous  year  a  series  of  S.W.  gales  com- 
menced, and  swept  the  sea  clear,  giving  at  once  a  chance  for 
the  Emperors  to  go  and  the  Adelies  to  come.  Such  a  long 
stay  as  this  party  made  was  only  rendered  possible  by  a  lucky 
find  of  seals  on  the  sea-ice,  these  animals  providing  them  with 
food  and  fuel.  As  this  was  the  only  time  that  our  sledge  parties 
cooked  their  meals  with  a  blubber  fire,  I  quote  from  Wilson's 
report  :  '  We  killed  a  seal  and  brought  the  whole  skin  to  camp. 
It  was  cut  into  three  long  strips  with  all  the  blubber  on,  and 
to  each  was  tied  a  piece  of  line.  Each  of  us  had  one  strip  to 
manage  in  crossing  the  pressure  ridges.  When  we  reached 
camp  a  stove  was  improvised  outside  the  tent  by  Whitfield  and 
Cross ;  it  was  made  out  of  an  old  tin  biscuit  box,  which  had 
been  left  on  a  previous  journey,  and  some  stones,  and  in  this 
we  eventually  succeeded  in  lighting  a  blubber  fire,  over  which 
we  cooked  our  supper.' 

Altogether  this  journey  to  Cape  Crozier  was  more  produc- 
tive of  information  than  any  of  its  predecessors,  for  Wilson 
by  no  means  confined  himself  to  his  zoological  studies.  He 
climbed  high  on  the  foothills  of  Mount  Terror  and  discovered 


i9o3]  REVIEW  OF   SLEDGING  WORK  225 

a  curious  ice-formed  terrace  800  feet  above  the  barrier  level ; 
he  collected  numerous  geological  specimens  from  this  area,  and 
found  erratic  boulders  at  great  altitudes.  Next  he  made  a 
complete  examination  of  the  enormous  and  interesting  pressure 
ridges  which  form  the  junction  of  the  Great  Barrier  ice-mass 
with  the  land,  and  now  and  at  a  later  date  he  spent  much  time 
in  studying  the  curious  windless  area  which  exists  to  the  south 
of  Ross  Island,  and  thus  threw  considerable  light  on  meteoro- 
logical facts  that  puzzled  us,  and  on  the  ice  condition  of  an 
extremely  interesting  region. 

I  cannot  conclude  a  summary  of  our  last  sledging  season 
without  referring  to  an  excellent  little  journey  made  by 
Armitage,  Wilson,  and  Heald.  This  small  party  crossed  the 
strait  towards  the  end  of  November  and  then  turned  sharply 
to  the  south  under  the  foothills  of  the  mainland.  In  this 
manner  they  broke  new  ground,  and  reached  and  examined 
the  Koettlitz  Glacier.  This  had  previously  been  seen  only  from 
Brown  Island,  and  its  closer  examination  was  important  not 
only  to  complete  the  topographical  survey  of  our  region,  but  to 
verify  numerous  observations  taken  in  the  Ferrar  Glacier, 
Amidst  a  scene  of  wild  beauty  Armitage  obtained  some  excel- 
lent photographs  which  give  a  good  idea  of  the  typical  moun- 
tain scenery,  and  would  alone  prove  the  receding  glacial 
conditions  of  the  whole  continent. 

Thus  it  will  be  seen  that  whilst  I  had  been  away  on  my 
long  journey  to  the  west,  my  companions  had  been  working 
diligently  in  every  direction  which  promised  to  increase  our 
store  of  information.  All,  however,  had  returned  before  my- 
self, so  that  when  I  arrived  at  the  ship  on  Christmas  Eve,  1903, 
it  was  to  ring  the  curtain  down  on  the  last  of  our  sledging 
efforts  in  this  Far  Southern  region. 

When  all  things  are  considered,  it  must  be  conceded  that 
no  polar  ship  ever  wintered  in  a  more  interesting  spot  than  the 
1  Discovery.'  It  was  good  fortune  which  had  brought  us  to  our 
winter  quarters  in  February  1902,  and  from  the  first  we  saw 
what  great  possibilities  lay  before  us,  and  determined  that  no 
effort  should  be  spared  to  take  advantage  of  our  opportunities. 

VOL.  II.  Q 


226      THE   VOYAGE   OF   THE    '  DISCOVERY  >    [Dfx. 

During  one  long  season  we  had  laboured  hard  to  this  end,  but 
yet  its  finish  found  us  with  many  important  gaps  in  our  know- 
ledge. Then  fortune  decided  that  we  should  be  given  another 
season  to  complete  our  work,  and  we  started  forth  once  more 
to  fill  in  those  gaps.  With  what  success  this  was  accomplished 
I  have  endeavoured  to  show,  and  I  trust  it  will  be  agreed  that 
after  the  close  of  our  second  sledging  season  we  were  justified 
in  considering  that  the  main  part  of  our  work  was  done. 


i9o3j  2  2? 


CHAPTER   XIX 

ESCAPE   FROM    THE    ICE 

Indigestion — Arrival  at  the  Sawing  Camp — Sawing  Operations — Break-up 
of  Sawing  Party — The  Open  Water — Arrival  of  the  Relief  Ships- 
Unwelcome  News — Stagnant  Condition  of  the  Ice — Depressing 
Effect — Preparations  for  Abandoning  the  'Discovery' — Ice  Breaking 
Away — Explosions— Anxious  Days — Final  Break-up  of  the  Ice- 
Dramatic  Approach  of  the  Relief  Ships — The  Small  Fleet  Together — 
Final  Explosion — The  '  Discovery  '  Free. 

And  Thor 
Set  his  shoulder  hard  against  the  stern 
To  push  the  ship  through  .  .  . 
.  .  .  and  the  water  gurgled  in 
And  the  ship  floated  on  the  waves  and  rock'd. 

M.  Arnold. 

On  the  whole,  the  few  days'  rest  which  I  allowed  myself  and 
my  party  after  our  return  to  the  ship  was  enjoyable,  and  for 
such  sensations  as  were  not  I  had  only  myself  to  thank.  I 
found  that  Ford  had  become  cook  for  the  few  who  remained 
on  board,  and  that,  as  a  result  of  studying  Mrs.  Beeton's 
cookery  book,  he  was  achieving  dishes  of  a  more  savoury 
nature  than  we  had  thought  possible  with  the  resources  at  our 
command.  It  was  unfortunate  that  the  highest  development 
of  the  cooking  art  should  have  occurred  at  this  season,  as  it 
found  us  too  morally  weak  to  resist  its  allurements,  and,  as 
a  consequence,  we  suffered  from  the  most  violent  indigestion. 
Though  my  limbs  craved  for  rest,  I  was  obliged  to  be  up  and 
doing  to  silence  the  worst  pangs  of  this  complaint. 

The  ship  at  this  time  was  in  a  more  snowed-up  condition 

Q2 


228      THE   VOYAGE   OF   THE    'DISCOVERY'     [Dec. 

than  I  ever  remember  to  have  seen  her,  and  Koettlitz  told  me 
there  had  been  such  heavy  falls  of  snow  a  week  earlier  that 
they  had  been  obliged  to  dig  their  way  out  of  the  lobby 
entrances.  Koettlitz  had  remained  on  board  to  attend  on  the 
medical  cases;  these  were  now  practically  off  his  hands,  but 
he  was  devoting  most  of  his  time,  as  he  had  done  throughout 
the  summer,  to  bacteriological  studies.  He  rather  feared,  how- 
ever, that  his  diligence  in  this  line  would  prove  of  little  avail, 
as  few  less  promising  places  could  have  been  found  for  pursuing 
such  investigations  than  the  wardroom  of  the  '  Discovery.' 

After  two  or  three  days  on  board  I  began  to  grow  restless 
to  see  what  was  doing  to  the  north  j  moreover,  I  saw  that  as 
I  could  not  curb  my  appetite  there  was  little  chance  of  being 
rid  of  my  indigestion  until  I  was  once  more  on  the  march. 
Our  inactivity  was  also  having  a  most  obvious  effect  on  my 
sledging  companions.  It  had  to  be  acknowledged  that  they 
were  'swelling  wisibly';  each  morning  their  faces  became  a 
more  ludicrous  contrast  to  what  I  remembered  of  them  on  the 
summit.  Lashly  was  a  man  who  usually  changed  little,  and 
therefore  he  quickly  fell  back  into  his  ordinary  condition,  but 
Evans  continued  to  expand,  and  reached  quite  an  alarming 
maximum  before  he  slowly  returned  to  his  normal  size. 

On  the  morning  of  the  31st,  therefore,  we  three,  with 
Handsley,  who  was  now  quite  recovered,  packed  our  sledge 
once  more,  and  started  away  for  the  sawing  camp,  some  ten  and 
a  half  miles  to  the  north ;  in  the  afternoon  we  arrived  at  the 
camp,  to  be  greeted  with  cheers  and  congratulations. 

I  may  perhaps  now  explain  how  this  camp  came  to  be 
formed.  The  reader  will  remember  that  I  had  arranged  that 
the  sledging  parties  should  return  by  the  middle  of  December, 
and  that  in  the  meantime  a  special  tent  should  be  prepared 
and  disposition  made  so  that  as  soon  as  possible  after  this 
date  all  hands  should  be  available  for  the  projected  attempt 
to  saw  through  the  great  ice-sheet  which  intervened  between 
the  '  Discovery '  and  the  open  sea.  In  drawing  out  instructions 
I  could  not  foretell,  of  course,  how  broad  this  ice-sheet  would 
be  when  operations  were  commenced;   I  could  only  assume 


i9o3]  THE   SAWING   CAMP  229 

that  it  would  be  about  the  same  as  in  the  previous  year,  when 
the  open  water  had  extended  to  the  Dellbridge  Islets,  about 
eleven  miles  from  the  ship.  I  directed,  therefore,  that  the 
camp  should  be  made  behind  these  islets,  so  that  there  might 
be  no  chance  of  its  being  swept  away.  I  had  hoped  to  be 
back  in  time  to  commence  the  operations  myself,  but  the 
breakdown  of  my  sledges  had  made  this  impossible,  and  in 
my  absence  the  command  devolved  on  Armitage.  He  made 
all  preparations  in  accordance  with  my  instructions,  but  was 
then  met  with  a  difficulty,  for  when  the  middle  of  December 
came  the  open  water,  instead  of  being  up  to  the  islets,  ended 
at  least  ten  miles  farther  to  the  north.  In  these  circumstances 
he  thought  it  dangerous  to  take  the  camp  out  to  the  ice-edge, 
and  decided  to  pitch  it  behind  the  islets  as  had  been  previously 
arranged.  But  this,  of  course,  meant  that  the  sawing  work  had 
to  be  commenced  in  the  middle  of  the  ice-sheet  instead  of 
at  its  edge,  with  the  result  that  I  shall  presently  describe. 

When  I  arrived  at  the  camp  the  greater  number  of  our 
people  had  been  at  work  for  ten  days  ;  the  work  and  the 
camp  life  had  fallen  into  a  regular  routine,  so  that  I  was 
able  to  judge  at  once  of  past  results  and  future  prospects. 
Life  at  this  sawing  camp  was  led  under  such  curious  condi- 
tions that  it  deserves  some  description.  The  main  tent  was 
a  very  palatial  abode  judged  by  our  standards  of  sledging  life. 
It  was  of  long  pent-roof  shape,  the  dimensions  being  about 
50  feet  long  and  18  feet  across,  and  it  had  a  door  with  a 
small  lobby  at  each  end.  The  interior  was  divided  into  two 
compartments  by  a  canvas  screen;  the  smaller,  about  18  feet 
in  length,  was  for  the  officers,  whilst  the  larger  accommo- 
dated the  men.  Close  to  this  screen  in  the  men's  quarters 
stood  a  small  cooking-range  mounted  on  boards.  The  floor 
of  both  spaces  was  covered  with  tarpaulin  as  far  as  possible, 
and  as  time  went  on  imposing  tables  and  stools  were  manufac- 
tured from  packing-cases.  All  the  fur  sleeping-bags  were  in 
use,  but  as  these  were  not  sufficient  for  all  hands,  some  slept 
between  blankets.  However,  this  was  no  hardship,  as  very 
little  covering  was  needed  and  nearly  everyone  complained  of 


23o      THE   VOYAGE   OF  THE    'DISCOVERY'     [Dec. 

the  heat  of  the  tent.  The  temperature  had  been  extra- 
ordinarily high,  sometimes  rising  to  350  or  360,  and  when  the 
sun  shone  on  the  dark  canvas  of  the  tent  a  few  found  the 
interior  so  oppressive  that  they  sought  outside  shelter  in  the 
smaller  sledging  tents,  or  spread  their  sleeping-bags  on  a  piece 
of  canvas  in  the  open. 

Thirty  people  were  at  the  camp  when  we  arrived.  They 
were  divided  into  three  parties  of  ten,  which  relieved  one 
another  on  the  saws.  The  work  on  the  latter  was  exceedingly 
heavy,  so  that  a  four-hour  spell  was  quite  sufficient  for  one 
party.  It  took  them  twenty  minutes  to  get  to  their  work,  and 
another  twenty  to  get  back  to  the  tent  when  they  were 
relieved ;  then,  after  cooking  and  eating  a  meal,  they  would 
coil  down  for  five  or  six  hours,  and  rise  in  time  for  a  fresh 
meal  before  the  next  spell  of  work.  With  three  parties  work- 
ing in  this  manner  the  preparation  of  meals  practically  never 
ceased  throughout  the  twenty-four  hours,  and  cook  succeeded 
cook  at  the  small  range.  Luckily  this  was  a  land  of  plenty. 
The  tent  lay  within  200  yards  of  the  largest  of  the  islets,  where 
the  working  of  the  ice  formed  spaces  of  open  water  through 
which  hundreds  of  seals  rose  to  bask  on  the  floe.  Now  and 
again  also  a  small  troop  of  Adelie  penguins  would  hurry 
towards  the  tent  full  of  curiosity — to  find  their  way  promptly 
into  the  cooking-pot.  Every  other  day  the  dog  sledge  came 
from  the  ship  laden  with  flour,  biscuit,  sugar,  butter,  and  jam, 
so  that  supplies  of  all  sorts  were  readily  available — and  con- 
stant supplies  were  very  much  needed,  as  my  earliest  impres- 
sions of  the  camp  assured  me. 

'  It  is  a  real  treat  to  be  amongst  our  people  once  more  and 
to  find  them  in  such  splendid  condition  and  spirits.  I  do  not 
think  there  is  a  whole  garment  in  the  party  ;  judging  by  the 
torn  and  patched  clothing,  they  might  be  the  veriest  lot  of 
tramps,  but  one  would  have  to  go  far  to  find  such  sturdy 
tramps.  Everyone  is  burnt  to  a  deep  bronze  colour  by  the 
sun,  but  in  each  dark  face  one  has  not  to  wait  long  for  the 
smiles  which  show  the  white  of  teeth  and  clear  healthy  eyes. 
I  have  been  sitting  on  a  packing-case  with  everyone  trying  to 


i9o3]  LIFE  AT  THE   CAMP  231 

tell  me  stories  at  once,  and  from  the  noise  which  has  come 
from  beyond  the  screen  I  know  that  my  sledge  companions 
have  been  in  much  the  same  position. 

1  It  appears  that  the  work  on  the  saws  was  felt  very  much 
at  first,  and  arms  and  backs  became  one  huge  ache.  Every- 
one had  felt  that  if  it  had  been  leg  work  there  would  have 
been  no  difficulty  after  the  sledging  experience,  but  the  new 
departure  exercised  a  different  set  of  muscles  altogether,  so 
that  after  the  first  efforts  people  suffered  much  from  stiffness  ; 
but  this  soon  wore  off,  and  then  there  had  come  the  emulation 
of  one  party  against  another  to  show  which  could  complete  the 
longest  cut  in  a  four-hour  spell.  There  had  been  no  reason  to 
be  alarmed  about  the  appetites  even  before  this  work  com- 
menced, but  as  soon  as  it  had  settled  down  into  full  swing,  it 
was  as  much  as  the  dog  team  and  the  seal  killers  could  do  to 
keep  up  supplies.  I  could  scarcely  wonder  at  this  from  what 
I  saw  to-night  :  one  of  the  returning  parties  first  fell  on  an 
enormous  potful  of  porridge,  and  it  was  gone  before  one  could 
well  look  round;  next  came  a  dish  piled  high  with  sizzling 
seal  steaks,  and  very  soon  the  dish  was  empty  ;  then  came  the 
jam  course,  with  huge  hunks  of  bread  and  "flap  Johnny" 
cakes,  the  sort  of  thing  that  is  produced  on  a  griddle,  and 
which  I  hear  is  very  popular.  Finally,  after  their  light  supper, 
this  party  composed  themselves  to  sleep,  and  very  soon  other 
people  arose  and  inquired  how  their  breakfast  was  getting  on. 

1  Each  party  have  four  of  these  meals  in  the  day,  so  that 
twelve  meals  altogether  are  served  in  the  tent.  Barne's  party 
seem  to  hold  the  record  ;  it  appears  that  they  possess  an 
excellent  cook  in  Smythe,  and  that  a  few  days  ago  he  prepared 
for  them  a  splendid  stew  which  took  seven  penguins  in  the 
making  j  after  cooking  this  he  turned  his  attention  to  making 
cakes,  and  not  until  these  were  finished  did  he  demand  his 
share  of  the  first  dish,  and  then  he  discovered  that  there  was 
none  left  !  Considering  that  a  penguin  is  not  far  off  the  size 
of  a  goose,  I  think  this  party  deserve  to  retain  the  palm. 

1  But,  apart  from  this,  I  do  not  think  I  ever  saw  such 
exuberant,  overflowing  health  and  spirits  as  now  exist  in  this 


23 2      THE   VOYAGE    OF  THE    'DISCOVERY'      [Jan. 

camp.  It  is  a  good  advertisement  for  teetotalers,  as  there  is 
no  grog,  and  our  strongest  drinks  are  tea  and  cocoa,  but  of 
course  the  most  potent  factor  is  the  outdoor  life  with  the  hard 
work  and  good  food.  Apart  from  the  work,  everyone  agrees 
that  it  has  been  the  most  splendid  picnic  they  have  ever  had  j 
the  weather  on  the  whole  has  been  very  fine  and  the  air  quite 
mild.  But  it  is  certainly  well  that  the  conditions  have  been  so 
pleasant,  for  I  hear  on  all  sides  that  the  work  is  hopeless. 
This  is  a  matter  I  must  see  for  myself,  however;  for  the 
present  I  have  decided  that  to-morrow,  being  New  Year's  day, 
shall  be  a  whole  holiday ;  this  will  be  a  treat  for  all,  and  will 
give  me  time  to  think  what  shall  be  done  next. 

*  January  i. — Last  night  I  was  irresistibly  reminded  of 
being  in  a  farmyard.  Animals  of  various  kinds  were  making 
the  queerest  noises  all  about  us.  I  lay  awake  in  my  own  small 
tent  for  a  long  while  listening  to  these  strange  sounds.  The 
Weddell  seal  is  a  great  musician,  and  can  produce  any  note 
from  a  shrill  piping  whistle  to  a  deep  moan,  and  between  whiles 
he  grunts  and  gurgles  and  complains  in  the  weirdest  fashion. 
As  there  were  some  hundreds  of  these  animals  on  the  ice,  there 
was  a  chorus  of  sounds  like  the  tuning  of  many  instruments. 
To  this  was  added  the  harsh,  angry  cawing  of  the  skua  gulls  as 
they  quarrelled  over  their  food,  and  now  and  again  one  of  the 
dogs  would  yap  in  his  dreams,  whilst  from  the  main  tent  came 
the  more  familiar  snores  of  humanity.  At  first  I  missed  one 
sound  from  this  Antarctic  concert,  but  it  came  at  last  when  the 
squawk  of  a  penguin  was  borne  from  afar  on  the  still  air  ;  then 
the  orchestra  was  completed. 

1  Royds,  Wilson,  and  I  took  a  sledge  and  our  lunch,  and 
went  out  to  the  ice-edge.  It  was  farther  than  we  expected, 
and  the  sledge-meter  showed  close  on  ten  miles  before  we  came 
to  open  water.  Everything  looked  terribly  stagnant ;  a  thick 
pack,  two  or  three  miles  across,  hung  close  to  the  fast  ice. 
The  day  was  beautiful,  and  one  could  not  feel  very  depressed 
in  such  weather ;  but  I  cannot  say  that  it  is  pleasing  to  think 
that  there  is  a  solid  sheet  of  twenty  miles  between  us  and 
freedom.' 


i9o4]  SAWING   OPERATIONS  233 

'January  2. — To-day  I  had  all  hands  on  the  saws,  and 
then  went  out  to  see  how  matters  were  going.' 

Perhaps  it  would  be  well  to  pause  here  to  describe  the 
nature  of  an  ice-^saw.  A  typical  saw  such  as  we  had  is  about 
18  feet  in  length,  8  or  9  inches  in  depth,  and  \\  or  2  inches 
in  thickness;  the  teeth  are  naturally  very  coarse.  It  has  a 
wooden  cross-handle  at  the  top,  and  is  worked  by  the  aid  of  a 
tripod  in  a  very  simple  and  primitive  fashion.  A  rope  is 
attached  close  to  the  handle,  and  led  through  a  block  on  the 
tripod  ;  it  then  divides  into  numerous  tails,  to  each  of  which  a 
man  is  stationed.  When  all  these  men  pull  down  together  the 
saw  is  lifted,  and  as  they  release  their  ropes  other  men  on  the 
handles  press  the  saw  forward,  and  it  makes  a  downward  cut. 
From  time  to  time  as  the  saw-cut  advances  the  tripod  has  to 
be  shifted.  The  arrangement  will  probably  be  well  under- 
stood when  it  is  explained  that  the  action  of  the  men  on 
the  ropes  is  very  much  that  of  bellringers,  and  it  can  be 
imagined  that  four  hours  of  this  sort  of  thing  is  a  very  good 
spell. 

I  must  now  ask  the  reader  to  consider  what  the  sawing  of  a 
channel  through  a  solid  ice-sheet  actually  means.  It  will  be 
obvious  of  course  that  two  cuts  must  be  made,  one  on  each 
side  of  the  channel ;  but  the  rest  is  not  so  evident.  It  lies  in 
the  problem  of  how  to  get  rid  of  the  ice  which  remains  in  the 
channel.  In  order  to  do  this  cross-cuts  must  be  made  at 
intervals ;  but  this  is  not  sufficient,  for  it  is  impossible  to  make 
the  two  side-cuts  exactly  parallel,  so  that  by  a  cross-cut  alone 
an  irregular  parallelogram  is  left,  which  will  be  immovable 
without  being  broken  up.  The  simplest  manner  in  which  this 
can  be  effected  is  to  make  a  diagonal  cut  right  through  it. 
The  net  result  of  the  foregoing  is  to  show  that,  in  order  to 
make  a  channel  a  mile  in  length,  it  is  necessary  to  cut  through 
four  miles  of  ice.  What  added  difficulties  there  were  in  our 
case  my  diary  shows  : 

•  I  found  that  the  result  of  twelve  solid  days'  work  was  two 
parallel  cuts  150  yards  in  length,  and  as  operations  had  been 
commenced  in  the  middle  of  the  ice-sheet,  instead  of  at  the  edge, 


234      THE   VOYAGE   OF  THE   'DISCOVERY'      [Jan. 

the  ice  between  the  cuts  could  not  be  detached,  and  in  some 
places  it  seemed  to  have  frozen  across  again.  I  started  the 
saws  to  see  how  matters  had  been  going,  and  was  astonished  at 
the  small  result  of  the  work.  The  ice  was  between  six  and  seven 
feet  thick,  and  each  stroke  only  advanced  the  saw  a  fraction  of 
an  inch.  The  plain  Rule  of  Three  sum  before  us  was,  as 
150  yards  is  to  12  days,  so  is  20  miles  to  x ;  and  we  did  not 
have  to  work  this  sum  out  to  appreciate  the  futility  of  further 
operations.  I  therefore  directed  that  everything  except  the 
large  tent  should  be  taken  back  to  the  ship.  The  men  will 
attempt  to  make  a  cut  round  Hut  Point,  so  as  to  ease  matters 
at  the  end  if  the  ice  breaks  up,  and  the  officers  will  be  freed 
for  their  usual  scientific  work.  Our  sawing  efforts  have  been 
an  experience,  but  I'm  afraid  nothing  more. 

'  I  have  been  much  struck  by  the  way  in  which  everyone 
has  cheerfully  carried  on  this  hopeless  work  until  the  order 
came  to  halt.  There  could  have  been  no  officer  or  man 
amongst  them  who  did  not  see  from  the  first  how  utterly  useless 
it  was,  and  yet  there  has  been  no  faltering  or  complaint,  simply 
because  all  have  felt  that,  as  the  sailor  expresses  it,  "  Them's 
the  orders." ' 

' January  3. — Most  of  our  company  went  back  to  the  ship 
yesterday  afternoon;  some  officers  remain  in  the  large  tent, 
Hodgson  to  do  some  fishing  and  Ferrar  some  rock  searching. 
Twenty  miles  of  ice  hangs  heavy  upon  me,  and  I  have  decided 
we  must  be  prepared  for  another  winter.  We  have  fifty  tons  of 
coal  left  and  an  ample  stock  of  provisions ;  also  we  can  now 
take  advantage  of  every  resource  that  our  region  provides,  for 
there  are  evidently  a  large  number  of  penguins  to  the  north 
which  will  make  a  most  grateful  addition  to  our  usual  seal-meat. 
I  have  therefore  told  off  four  of  the  men — Lashly,  Evans, 
Handsley,  and  Clarke — to  fix  their  headquarters  in  the  large 
tent,  and  to  make  such  raids  on  the  penguins  as  will  assure  us 
a  winter  stock. 

'This  afternoon,  after  making  these  arrangements,  I  started 
away  to  the  north  with  Wilson.  We  are  off  on  a  real  picnic  ; 
there  is  to  be  no  hard  marching,  and  we  have  made  ample  pro- 


1904]  THE   OPEN   WATER  235 

vision  for  the  commissariat.  We  know  there  will  be  number- 
less seals  and  penguins,  and  we  have  brought  plenty  of  butter 
to  cook  our  unsuspecting  victims  ;  and  then  also  we  have  jam 
and  all  sorts  of  unheard-of  sledging  luxuries.  Personally  I 
want  to  watch  the  ice-edge  and  see  what  chance  there  is  of  a 
break-up  ;  Wilson  wants  to  study  the  life  in  that  region.  There 
has  also  been  a  talk  of  trying  to  get  some  way  up  Erebus,  but 
this  means  hard  work,  for  which  at  present  we  are  neither  of  us 
inclined. 

1  To-night  we  are  camped  near  some  rocks  half  way  towards 
the  ice-edge  ;  there  are  several  seals  close  by,  and  small  bands 
of  Adelie  penguins  are  constantly  passing  us.  It  is  curious 
there  should  be  so  many,  as  we  know  of  no  rookery  near,  and 
it  is  still  more  curious  why  they  should  be  making  south,  as 
there  is  no  open  water  beyond  the  few  cracks  near  the  land. 
It  gives  us  the  idea  that  they  don't  quite  know  what  they  are 
doing,  especially  since  we  watched  the  movements  of  one 
small  band ;  they  were  travelling  towards  the  south  with  every 
appearance  of  being  in  a  desperate  hurry — flippers  outspread, 
heads  bent  forward,  and  little  feet  going  for  all  they  were 
worth.  Their  business-like  air  was  intensely  ludicrous  ;  one 
could  imagine  them  saying  in  the  fussiest  manner,  "  Can't  stop 
to  talk  now,  much  too  busy,"  and  so  we  watched  them  until 
their  plump  little  bodies  were  mere  specks,  when  suddenly,  for 
no  rhyme  or  reason,  they  turned  round  and  came  hurrying 
back  just  as  fussy  and  busy  as  ever.  I  can't  tell  whether  they 
saw  us,  but  to  our  surprise  they  showed  no  curiosity.  When 
they  were  about  twenty  yards  beyond  us  again,  three  of  them 
suddenly  plumped  down  on  their  breasts,  drew  their  heads 
close  in,  shut  their  eyes,  and  apparently  went  fast  asleep.  It 
was  the  queerest  performance ;  one  can  imagine  that  in  an 
hour  or  two  they  will  be  up  and  off  again  without  even  giving 
themselves  time  for  a  shake.' 

1  January  4. — We  pursued  our  leisurely  way,  skirting  the 
land  towards  the  ice-edge  this  morning.  When  within  half  a 
mile  of  the  open  water  Wilson  suddenly  said,  "  There  they 
are."     I  looked  round,  and,  lo  and  behold  !  on  the  dark  bare 


236      THE   VOYAGE    OF  THE    'DISCOVERY'      [Jan. 

rocks  of  Cape  Royds  there  was  a  red  smudge  dotted  with 
thousands  of  little  black-and-white  figures — a  penguin  rookery 
without  a  doubt.  It  is  wonderful  that  we  should  have  been 
here  two  years  without  knowing  of  this,  and  it  is  exasperating 
to  think  of  the  feasts  of  eggs  we  have  missed.  We  steered 
into  a  small  bay  behind  the  cape,  climbed  a  steep  little  rock- 
face,  and  found  ourselves  on  a  small  plateau,  luckily  to  wind- 
ward of  the  rookery.  No  place  could  be  better  for  our  camp, 
so  we  hauled  our  belongings  up  with  the  Alpine  rope  and 
pitched  our  tent  on  a  stretch  of  sand. 

'  Words  fail  me  to  describe  what  a  delightful  and  interest- 
ing spot  this  is.  From  our  tent  door  we  look  out  on  to  the 
open  sea,  deep  blue  but  dotted  with  snowy-white  pack-ice. 
Erebus  towers  high  above  us  on  our  right,  and  to  the  left  we 
look  away  over  the  long  stretch  of  fast  ice  to  the  cloud-capped 
western  mountains.  We  hear  the  constant  chatter  of  the 
penguins,  and  find  a  wonderful  interest  in  watching  their  queer 
habits ;  the  brown  fluffy  chicks  are  still  quite  small,  and  the 
adult  birds  are  constantly  streaming  to  and  from  the  sea. 
Close  about  us  many  skuas  are  nesting  j  they  naturally  regard 
us  as  intruders,  and  are  terribly  angry.  The  owners  of  one 
nest  near  by  are  perched  on  a  rock  ;  whenever  we  move  they 
arch  their  necks  and  scream  with  rage,  and  when  we  go  out  of 
the  tent  they  sweep  down  on  us,  only  turning  their  course  as 
their  wings  brush  our  heads.  However,  if  we  do  not  disturb 
their  nest  no  doubt  they  will  soon  get  used  to  us. 

'  We  have  seen  facts  to-day  which  throw  some  light  on  the 
ferocious  character  of  this  robber  gull.  On  returning  from  our 
walk  Wilson  saw  one  of  them  swoop  down  on  Ihe  nest  of 
another  and  fly  off  with  a  stolen  egg  in  its  beak.  The  owner 
of  the  nest  was  only  a  few  yards  away,  and  started  in  such  hot 
pursuit  that  the  thief  was  forced  to  relinquish  its  prize,  which 
was  dashed  to  pieces  on  the  rocks.  It  is  evident  that  there  is 
not  even  honour  amongst  thieves  in  the  skua  code  of  morality. 

1  To-night  we  watched  another  incident  in  connection  with 
the  domestic  life  of  these  birds.  Close  by  us  there  is  a  nest 
with   two   tiny  chicks  ;    they   might    be   ordinary   barn-door 


i904]  SKUA   GULLS  237 

chickens  but  for  their  already  formidable  bill  and  claws,  and  it 
is  quite  evident  that  they  have  not  been  hatched  out  more 
than  a  day  or  two.  Suddenly  we  saw  the  parent  bird  come 
from  the  sea  with  a  very  fair-sized  fish  in  its  bill.  It  perched 
on  a  rock  and  began  to  tear  pieces  from  its  prey  and  offer  them 
to  its  offspring  ;  the  latter  seized  these  tempting  morsels  with 
avidity,  and  though  they  could  scarcely  stand  they  tore  and 
gobbled  at  the  food  with  wonderful  energy.  But  after  a  bit 
both  chicks  found  themselves  wrestling  with  the  same  piece, 
and  for  some  time  there  was  quite  a  tug  of  war  until  both 
seemed  to  realise  that  this  was  not  the  way  to  settle  such  a 
matter,  and,  as  if  by  mutual  consent,  they  dropped  the  cause 
of  contention  and  went  for  one  another.  They  became  perfect 
little  furies  as  they  staggered  about  clawing  and  pecking  at  each 
other.  Of  course  they  were  too  feeble  to  do  any  harm,  and 
soon  fell  apart  exhausted,  but  the  struggle  shows  that  the 
youthful  skua  possesses  a  very  full  share  of  original  sin. 

'  We  had  a  charming  walk  to  the  north  side  of  the  cape  this 
afternoon,  where  the  sea  is  lapping  lazily  on  a  shelving  sandy 
beach,  and  where  also  there  are  several  ponds  with  weeds  and 
conferva.  How  delightful  it  is  to  look  on  the  sea  once  more  ! 
Yet  how  much  more  delightful  it  would  be  if  one  could  lift 
the  '  Discovery '  up  and  deposit  her  twenty  miles  to  the  north  ! 

'On  our  return  we  got  amongst  the  penguins,  much  to 
their  annoyance.  They  swore  at  us  in  the  vilest  manner,  and 
their  feathers  and  tempers  remained  ruffled  long  after  we  had 
passed  them. 

1  Before  supper  we  took  soap  and  towels  down  to  a  small 
rill  of  thaw-water  that  runs  within  ten  yards  of  the  tent  and 
had  a  delightful  wash  in  the  warm  sunlight.  Then  we  had  a 
dish  of  fried  penguins'  liver  with  seal  kidneys  ;  eaten  straight 
out  of  the  frying-pan  this  was  simply  delicious.  I  have  come 
to  the  conclusion  that  life  in  the  Antarctic  Regions  can  be  very 
pleasant.' 

*  January  5. — This  morning  we  got  up  in  the  most  leisurely 
fashion,  and  after  a  wash  and  our  breakfast  we  lazily  started  to 
discuss   plans   for   the   day.     Our  tent  door  was  open   and 


238      THE   VOYAGE   OF   THE    « DISCOVERY  '      [Jan. 

framed  the  clear  sea  beyond,  and  I  was  gazing  dreamily  out 
upon  this  patch  of  blue  when  suddenly  a  ship  entered  my  field 
of  view.  It  was  so  unexpected  that  I  almost  rubbed  my  eyes 
before  I  dared  to  report  it,  but  a  moment  after,  of  course,  all 
became  bustle  and  we  began  to  search  round  for  our  boots  and 
other  articles  necessary  for  the  march.  Whilst  we  were  thus 
employed,  Wilson  looked  up  and  said,  "Why,  there's  another," 
and  sure  enough  there  were  now  two  vessels  framed  in  our 
doorway.  We  had  of  course  taken  for  granted  that  the  first 
ship  was  the  "  Morning,"  but  what  in  the  name  of  fortune 
could  be  the  meaning  of  this  second  one  ?  We  propounded 
all  sorts  of  wild  theories  of  which  it  need  only  be  said  that  not 
one  was  within  measurable  distance  of  the  truth. 

'Meanwhile  we  were  busily  donning  our  garments  and 
discussing  what  should  be  done  next.  The  ships  were  making 
towards  the  ice-edge  some  five  miles  to  the  westward  ;  our 
easiest  plan  would  be  to  go  straight  on  board,  but  then  if  we 
did  so  our  companions  on  board  the  "  Discovery  "  would  know 
nothing  of  it,  and  it  would  mean  a  long  delay  before  they  could 
get  their  mails.  Our  duty  seemed  to  be  to  consider  first  the 
establishment  of  communications,  so,  hastily  scribbling  some 
notes  with  directions  for  the  dog  team  and  a  sledge  party  to 
be  sent  down  without  delay,  we  started  southward  to  search 
for  the  penguin  hunters  in  order  that  these  notes  might  be 
delivered. 

1  We  went  on  for  a  long  time  without  seeing  a  sign  of  them, 
but  after  travelling  some  six  miles  we  caught  sight  of  their 
tent,  though  without  any  signs  of  life  about  it ;  we  had  to  come 
within  a  hundred  yards  before  our  shouts  were  answered  and 
four  very  satisfied  figures  emerged,  still  munching  the  remains 
of  what  evidently  had  been  a  hearty  meal.  Of  course  I  thought 
they  had  not  seen  the  ships,  but  they  had,  only,  as  they  ex- 
plained, they  didn't  see  there  was  any  call  for  them  to  do  any- 
thing in  the  matter.  I  said,  "But,  good  heavens,  you  want 
your  mails,  don't  you?"  "Oh,  yes,  sir,"  they  replied,  "but 
we  thought  that  would  be  all  right."  In  other  words,  they  as 
good  as  said  that  life  was  so  extremely  easy  and  pleasant  that 


i9o4]        ARRIVAL   OF   THE   RELIEF   SHIPS  239 

there  was  no  possible  object  in  worrying  over  such  a  trifle  as 
the  arrival  of  a  relief  expedition.  And  these  are  the  people 
whom,  not  unnaturally,  some  of  our  friends  appear  to  imagine 
in  dire  straits  and  in  need  of  immediate  transport  to  civilised 
conditions  ! 

1  However  j  once  they  got  their  orders  they  were  off  like  the 
wind,  and  Wilson  and  I  turned  about  and  faced  for  the  ships. 
We  were  quite  close  before  figures  came  hurrying  forth  to  meet 
us,  but  then  we  were  soon  surrounded  with  many  familiar  faces, 
and  with  many  also  that  were  quite  strange.  Of  course  I  learnt 
at  once  that  the  second  ship  was  the  "  Terra  Nova,"  and  that 
her  captain,  MacKay,  was  an  old  acquaintance  whom  I  was 
more  than  pleased  to  welcome  in  this  Far  South  region  ;  but 
it  was  not  until  I  had  had  a  long  talk  with  my  good  friend 
Colbeck  that  I  began  to  understand  why  a  second  ship  had 
been  sent  and  what  a  strangely  new  aspect  everything  must 
wear.  Indeed,  as  I  turn  in  to-night,  amidst  all  the  comfort 
that  the  kindness  and  forethought  of  my  "  Morning "  friends 
have  provided,  I  can  scarcely  realise  the  situation  fully.  I  can 
only  record  that  in  spite  of  the  good  home  news,  and  in  spite 
of  the  pleasure  of  seeing  old  friends  again,  I  was  happier  last 
night  than  I  am  to-night' 

And  now  I  must  briefly  explain  how  it  was  that  these 
vessels  had  descended  upon  us  like  a  bolt  from  the  blue,  and 
what  messages  of  comfort  and  discomfort  they  bore. 

To  do  so  I  must  hark  back  to  March  2,  1902,  when,  as 
will  be  remembered,  the  '  Morning '  left  us  bearing  despatches 
which  outlined  the  work  we  had  done  and  described  our 
situation  and  the  prospect  of  our  detention  for  a  second 
winter.  The  'Morning'  arrived  in  New  Zealand  in  April, 
and  the  general  outline  of  affairs  was  flashed  over  the  cables, 
but  received  in  a  very  garbled  form ;  it  was  not  until  six  weeks 
later  that  the  mails  brought  a  clear  account  of  the  situation  to 
those  who  had  been  so  anxiously  awaiting  news  at  home.  And 
now  for  a  moment  I  must  pause  to  explain  what  this  account 
conveyed  to  those  authorities  at  home  who  were  responsible 
for  the  despatch  of  the  expedition.     My  report  informed  them 


240      THE   VOYAGE   OF   THE    'DISCOVERY'      [Jan. 

that  the  '  Discovery '  and  all  on  board  her  were  safe  and  well 
and  prepared  for  a  second  winter,  but  perhaps  rather  unfor- 
tunately it  referred  to  the  return  of  the  'Morning'  in  the 
following  summer  as  a  foregone  conclusion  and  enumerated 
the  stores  which  it  was  advisable  she  should  bring ;  it  spoke 
also  of  our  attack  of  scurvy,  though  stating  that  there  was  little 
chance  of  its  recurrence.  I  had  been  tempted  to  omit  this 
matter  as  calculated  to  cause  unnecessary  anxiety,  but, 
reflecting  that  the  rumour  might  spread  from  some  other 
source  and  become  greatly  exaggerated,  I  had  finally  decided 
to  state  the  facts  exactly  as  they  were. 

Such  a  report  could  leave  only  one  impression  on  the 
minds  of  the  authorities  to  which  I  have  referred— namely, 
that  at  all  hazards  the  'Morning'  must  be  sent  South  in  1903. 
But  this  contingency,  which  could  not  easily  have  been  fore- 
seen, involved  a  serious  difficulty,  as  the  '  Morning '  fund  was 
found  to  be  wholly  inadequate  to  meet  the  requirements  of 
another  year.  There  can  be  little  doubt,  I  think,  that  had 
time  permitted  an  appeal  to  the  public  and  a  full  explanation 
of  the  necessities  of  the  case,  the  required  funds  would  have 
been  raised,  but,  unfortunately,  time  was  very  limited,  and 
already  some  weeks  had  elapsed  since  the  reception  of  the 
news.  In  these  circumstances  no  course  was  left  to  the 
Societies  but  to  appeal  to  the  Government,  and  after  some 
correspondence  the  Government  agreed  to  undertake  the 
whole  conduct  of  the  relief  expedition  provided  that  the 
'  Morning,'  as  she  stood,  was  delivered  to  it.  These  arrange- 
ments being  made,  the  Government  naturally  placed  the  active 
management  of  affairs  in  the  hands  of  the  Admiralty,  and  a 
small  committee  of  officers  was  appointed  by  this  department 
to  deal  with  it. 

It  is  scarcely  necessary  to  point  out  that  when  the  Govern- 
ment undertakes  a  matter  of  this  sort  it  must  be  with  larger 
responsibilities  than  can  rest  on  private  individuals.  Had  the 
Societies  possessed  the  necessary  funds,  they  would  have  been 
quite  justified  in  relying  on  the  '  Morning '  to  force  her  way  to 
the  South  as  she  had  done  before,  but  when  the  Government 


i9o4]      THE   SECOND    RELIEF   EXPEDITION         241 

undertook  that  relief  should  be  sent,  it  could  not  afford  to 
entrust  the  fulfilment  of  its  pledge  to  one  small  ship,  which, 
however  ably  handled,  might  break  down  or  become  entangled 
in  the  ice  before  she  reached  her  destination. 

It  was  felt,  therefore,  that  to  support  the  Government  pledge 
and  ensure  the  relief  of  the  '  Discovery '  two  ships  should  be 
sent.  This  decision  and  the  very  short  time  which  was  left 
for  its  performance  brought  a  heavy  strain  on  the  Admiralty 
Committee  to  which  I  have  referred.  It  consisted  of  the 
Hydrographer,  Sir  William  Wharton,  Admiral  Pelham  Aldrich, 
and  Admiral  Boyes,  and  it  is  thanks  to  the  unremitted  labour 
of  these  officers  that  the  relief  expedition  was  organised  to  that 
degree  of  efficiency  which  the  Government  desired. 

To  meet  the  requirements  of  the  case  the  '  Terra  Nova,'  one 
of  the  finest  of  the  whaling  ships,  was  purchased  and  brought 
to  Dundee  to  be  thoroughly  refitted ;  whilst  there  she  was 
completely  stocked  with  provisions  and  all  other  necessaries 
for  the  voyage,  and  a  whaling  crew,  under  the  command  of 
Captain  Harry  MacKay,  was  engaged  to  navigate  her.  Perhaps 
never  before  has  a  ship  been  equipped  so  speedily  and  efficiently 
for  polar  work,  and  it  is  a  striking  example  of  what  can  be  done 
under  able  guidance  and  urgent  requirement.  Even  when  the 
1  Terra  Nova '  had  been  prepared  for  her  long  voyage  in  this 
rapid  manner  the  need  for  haste  had  not  vanished,  and  it 
appeared  that  the  time  still  left  was  quite  inadequate  to  allow 
her  to  make  the  long  voyage  around  the  Cape  under  her  own 
motive  power.  The  same  high  pressure  was  therefore  continued, 
and  her  course  was  directed  through  the  Mediterranean  and 
Suez  Canal,  on  which  route  cruiser  after  cruiser  took  her  in  tow 
and  raced  her  through  the  water  at  a  speed  which  must  have 
surprised  the  barnacles  on  her  stout  wooden  sides. 

Thanks  to  this  haste,  however,  she  arrived  in  the  South  in 
time  to  make  the  final  preparations  for  her  Antarctic  voyage, 
and  towards  the  end  of  November  she  lay  off  Hobart  Town 
in  Tasmania.  In  December  she  was  joined  by  the  '  Morning,' 
and  in  the  middle  of  the  same  month  both  ships  sailed  for  the 
Ross  Sea.     Captain  Colbeck  was   directed  to  take  charge  of 

VOL.  II.  R 


242      THE   VOYAGE   OF  THE    'DISCOVERY'      [Jan. 

this  joint  venture  until  such  time  as  both  ships  should  come 
under  my  command.  And  so  it  came  about  that,  much  to 
our  surprise,  two  ships,  instead  of  one,  arrived  off  the  edge  of 
our  fast  ice  on  January  5,  1904. 

Looking  back  now,  I  can  see  that  everything  happened  in 
such  a  natural  sequence  that  I  might  well  have  guessed  that 
something  of  the  sort  would  come  about,  yet  it  is  quite  certain 
that  no  such  thought  ever  entered  my  head,  and  the  first  sight 
of  the  two  vessels  conveyed  nothing  but  blank  astonishment. 
But  it  was  not  the  arrival  of  the  '  Terra  Nova,'  whose  captain 
I  saw  from  the  first  was  anxious  to  do  everything  in  his  power 
to  fall  in  with  my  plans,  that  disconcerted  me  and  prompted 
that  somewhat  lugubrious  entry  in  my  diary  which  I  have 
quoted.  This  was  caused  by  quite  another  matter,  and  one 
which  I  might  equally  have  guessed  had  I  thought  the  problem 
out  on  the  right  lines. 

When  the  news  of  our  detention  in  the  ice  became  known 
in  England,  it  is  not  too  much  to  say  that  the  majority  of  those 
who  were  capable  of  forming  a  competent  opinion  believed 
that  the  '  Discovery '  would  never  be  freed.  There  is  no  doubt 
the  Admiralty  inclined  to  this  opinion,  but  whether  they  did 
so  or  not,  it  was  equally  their  duty  to  see  that  the  expense  of 
furnishing  a  relief  expedition  on  such  an  elaborate  scale  should 
not  be  incurred  again  in  a  future  season,  and  consequently 
they  had  no  other  course  than  to  issue  direct  instructions  to 
me  to  abandon  the  '  Discovery '  if  she  could  not  be  freed  in 
time  to  accompany  the  relief  ships  to  the  North. 

When  I  came  to  understand  the  situation  I  could  see  clearly 
the  reason  which  dictated  these  instructions,  but  this  did  little 
to  lighten  the  grievous  disappointment  I  felt  on  receiving  them. 

It  does  not  need  much  further  explanation,  I  think,  to  show 
that  the  arrival  of  the  relief  ships  with  this  mandate  placed  me 
and  my  companions  unavoidably  in  a  very  cruel  position. 
Under  the  most  ordinary  conditions,  I  take  it,  a  sailor  would 
go  through  much  rather  than  abandon  his  ship.  But  the  ties 
which  bound  us  to  the  •  Discovery  '  were  very  far  beyond  the 
ordinary ;  they  involved  a  depth  of  sentiment  which  cannot  be 


i9o4]  UNWELCOME    NEWS  243 

surprising  when  it  is  remembered  what  we  had  been  through 
in  her  and  what  a  comfortable  home  she  had  proved  in  all  the 
rigours  of  this  Southern  region. 

In  spite  of  our  long  detention  in  the  ice,  the  thought  of 
leaving  her  had  never  entered  our  heads.  Throughout  the 
second  winter  we  had  grown  ever  more  assured  that  she  would 
be  freed  if  we  had  the  patience  to  wait ;  we  could  not  bring 
ourselves  to  believe — and,  as  events  proved,  quite  rightly — that 
the  ice-sheet  about  us  was  a  permanency.  When  the  end  of 
December  came  and  we  still  found  twenty  miles  between  us 
and  the  open  sea,  we  had  small  fits  of  depression  such  as  my 
diary  showed ;  but,  as  is  also  shown,  they  did  not  interfere 
with  the  healthy,  happy  course  of  our  lives,  and  any  one  of  us 
would  have  scouted  the  idea  that  hope  should  be  abandoned. 
We  had  felt  that  at  the  worst  this  only  opened  up  for  us  the 
prospect  of  a  third  winter,  and  we  had  determined  that  if  we 
had  to  go  through  with  it,  it  would  not  be  our  fault  if  we  were 
not  comfortable. 

It  was  from  this  easy  and  passably  contented  frame  of  mind 
that  we  were  rudely  awakened.  The  situation  we  were  now 
obliged  to  face  was  that  if  the  twenty-mile  plain  of  ice  refused 
to  break  up  within  six  weeks,  we  must  bid  a  long  farewell  to 
our  well-beloved  ship  and  return  to  our  homes  as  castaways 
with  the  sense  of  failure  dominating  the  result  of  our  labours. 
And  so  with  the  advent  of  the  relief  ships  there  fell  on  the 
•  Discovery '  the  first  and  last  cloud  of  gloom  which  we  were 
destined  to  experience.  As  day  followed  day  without  improve- 
ment in  the  ice  conditions,  the  gloom  deepened  until  our  faces 
grew  so  long  that  one  might  well  have  imagined  an  Antarctic 
expedition  to  be  a  very  woeful  affair. 

As  we  were  very  human  also,  it  may  be  confessed  that  not 
a  little  of  our  discontent  arose  from  wounded  vanity.  By  this 
time  we  considered  ourselves  very  able  to  cope  with  any  situa- 
tion that  might  arise,  and  believed  that  we  were  quite  capable 
of  looking  after  ourselves.  It  was  not  a  little  trying,  therefore, 
to  be  offered  relief  to  an  extent  which  seemed  to  suggest  that 
we  had  been  reduced  to  the  direst  need.     No  healthy  man 

R  2 


244      THE   VOYAGE   OF   THE    < DISCOVERY'      [Jan. 

likes  to  be  thought  an  invalid,  and  there  are  few  of  us  who 
have  not  at  some  time  felt  embarrassed  by  an  excess  of  con- 
sideration for  our  needs. 

Although  the  month  that  followed  the  arrival  of  the  relief 
ships  was  on  the  whole  a  very  dismal  one,  it  was  by  no  means 
uneventful ;  in  fact,  it  was  a  season  which  displayed  the  most 
extraordinary  ups  and  down  in  our  fortunes,  and  therefore  I 
take  up  the  tale  once  more  with  extracts  from  my  diary : 

4  January  7. — I  write  again  in  camp  at  Cape  Royds,  where 
I  have  joined  Wilson  to  get  some  quiet  in  order  to  read  my 
letters  and  consider  the  situation.  I  don't  know  in  what  state 
the  relief  ships  expected  to  find  us,  but  I  think  they  must 
have  soon  appreciated  that  we  were  very  much  alive.  The 
messages  I  sent  back  to  the  "  Discovery  "  on  the  5  th  were 
carried  at  such  speed  that  by  10  p.m.  the  dog  team  arrived  at 
the  ice-edge.  This  meant  that  my  orders  had  been  conveyed 
forty  miles  in  twelve  hours.  Early  the  next  morning  the  first 
sledge  team  of  men  arrived  and  departed  with  a  large  load  of 
parcels  and  presents.  These  by  arrangement  were  taken  to 
the  main  camp,  whence  another  party  took  them  to  the  ship, 
and  so  our  friends  saw  teams  of  our  distressful  company 
coming  north  with  a  swinging  march,  appearing  on  board  with 
very  brown  faces  and  only  waiting  for  their  sledges  to  be  loaded 
before  they  vanished  over  the  horizon  again.  The  number  of 
parcels  sent  by  our  kind  friends  in  England  and  New  Zealand 
is  enormous,  but  as  one  cannot  tell  what  each  contains  till  the 
owner  opens  it,  I  decided  to  send  all. 

1  Conditions  at  the  ice-edge  have  been  absolutely  quiescent, 
the  weather  calm  and  bright,  and  the  loose  pack  coming  and 
going  with  the  tide ;  not  a  single  piece  has  broken  away  from 
the  main  sheet.  I  asked  Colbeck  to  start  his  people  on  an 
ice-saw  to  give  them  an  idea  of  what  the  work  was  like ;  a 
single  day  was  quite  enough  for  them.  MacKay  suggested 
that  he  should  get  up  a  full  head  of  steam  and  attempt  to 
break  the  ice  up  by  ramming,  or,  as  he  says,  "butting"  it. 
He  has  little  hope  of  success,  but  points  out  that  the  "  Terra 
Nova  "  is  a  powerful  steamer,  and  may  accomplish  something  ; 


i9o4]        ARRANGING  FOR  ABANDONMENT  245 

for  my  part,  except  as  regards  damage  to  his  ship,  I  think  he 
might  as  well  try  to  "  butt  "  through  Cape  Royds.  However, 
he  is  to  make  the  attempt  to-morrow  or  the  next  day,  and  it  is 
perhaps  as  well  that  every  expedient  should  be  tried.  We  can 
but  try  every  means  in  our  power  and  leave  Providence  to  do 
the  rest ;  but  it  looks  as  though  Providence  will  have  a  very 
large  share. 

*  There  is  a  light  snowfall  to-night ;  the  penguins  are  un- 
usually quiet,  and  the  skuas  lie  low  on  the  rocks;  does  this 
mean  a  blow  ?  It  is  a  curious  irony  of  fate  that  makes  one 
pray  for  a  gale  in  these  regions,  but  at  present  bad  weather 
seems  the  only  thing  that  can  help  us.' 

1  January  9. — At  the  main  camp.  Came  up  from  Cape 
Royds  last  night  intending  to  reach  the  ship  this  morning. 
This  resulted  in  rather  a  curious  experience.  I  started  early 
and  trudged  on  towards  the  ship  through  snow  that  has  be- 
come rather  deep  and  sticky.  Half-way  across  the  air  grew 
thick  and  misty.  I  lost  sight  of  all  landmarks,  but  went  on 
for  some  time  guided  by  the  sun,  which  showed  faintly  at  my 
back.  After  a  while  the  sun  vanished,  but  thinking  I  might 
make  some  sort  of  general  direction  I  turned  towards  the  land 
and  plodded  on  ;  for  nearly  an  hour  I  saw  nothing,  but  then 
suddenly  came  across  fresh  footsteps ;  they  were  my  own  ! 
I  naturally  decided  that  this  was  not  good  enough,  so  turned 
to  retrace  the  track  towards  the  camp;  a  mile  back  I  fell  across 
a  sledge  party,  and  on  inquiring  where  they  were  going  was 
told  that  they  had  been  following  my  footsteps  to  the  ship. 
Needless  to  say,  we  are  all  back  at  the  main  camp  again.' 

'January  10. — Reached  the  ship  this  morning  and  this 
afternoon  assembled  all  hands  on  the  mess-deck,  where  I  told 
them  exactly  how  matters  stood.  There  was  a  stony  silence. 
I  have  not  heard  a  laugh  in  the  ship  since  I  returned.' 

*  January  11. — I  have  decided  to  arrange  for  the  transport 
of  our  collections  and  instruments  to  the  relief  ships.  To-day 
the  officers  have  been  busy  making  out  lists  of  the  things  to  be 
sent.' 

'January  13. — For  some  time  we  have  had  a  flagstaff  on 


246      THE   VOYAGE   OF  THE   'DISCOVERY'      [Jan. 

the  Tent  Islet,  ten  miles  to  the  north,  and  a  system  of  signals 
in  connection  with  it  descriptive  of  the  changes  in  the  ice 
conditions.  A  flag  or  shape  is  hoisted  on  the  staff  each  morn- 
ing which  has  a  special  meaning  in  our  code,  and  each  morning 
our  telescope  is  anxiously  trained  towards  it.  Up  to  the  pre- 
sent only  one  signal  has  been  read :  it  signifies  "  No  change 
in  the  ice  conditions."  I  don't  know  whether  it  is  worse  to 
be  on  board  the  relief  ships  and  observe  the  monotony  of  the 
changeless  conditions  or  to  be  here  and  observe  the  terrible 
sameness  of  that  signal.  Our  people  have  been  steadily 
struggling  on  with  the  ice-saw  off  Hut  Point  ;  the  work  is 
even  heavier  than  it  was  to  the  north,  as  the  ice  is  thicker  and 
more  deeply  covered  with  snow.  I  have  kept  it  going  more 
as  an  occupation  than  from  any  hope  of  useful  result,  but  to- 
day it  has  been  stopped.' 

'January  15. — I  thought  for  some  time  about  the  advisa- 
bility of  starting  to  transport  our  valuables.  The  distance  is 
long,  and  with  the  recent  snowfall  the  work  will  be  very  heavy, 
but  what  I  think  principally  held  me  back  was  the  thought 
that  it  might  be  taken  as  a  sign  that  we  are  giving  up  hope. 
Bad  as  things  are,  we  are  not  reduced  to  that  yet.  In  the  end, 
however,  I  reflected  that,  whether  the  "  Discovery  "  gets  out  or 
not,  there  is  no  reason  why  the  relief  ships  should  not  carry 
our  collections  and  instruments  back  to  civilisation,  and  mean- 
while the  work  of  transport  will  relieve  the  terrible  monotony 
of  waiting.  There  is,  perhaps,  nothing  so  trying  in  our  situa- 
tion as  the  sense  of  impotence.  I  have  decided,  therefore, 
to  set  things  going ;  our  parties  will  drag  the  loads  down  to 
the  main  camp,  and  the  crews  of  the  relief  ships  will  share  the 
work  of  taking  them  on.  Royds  has  gone  north  to  arrange 
the  details,  and  also  to  try  some  experiments  with  explosives. 
I  have  told  him  not  to  use  much  of  the  latter,  as  the  distance 
is  so  great  that  it  would  only  be  waste  to  undertake  serious 
operations  of  this  sort  at  present.  1  merely  want  to  know 
exactly  how  to  set  about  the  work  when  the  time  comes,  if  it 
ever  does  come.' 

January  21. — Wilson  returned  to  the  ship  to-night  after  a 


i9o4]  CAPTURE   OF   A   SEA   ELEPHANT  247 

long  spell  at  the  Cape  Royds  camp,  and  told  me  all  about  his 
great  capture.  It  appears  that  one  day  he  strolled  over  to  the 
north  beach  to  see  what  he  at  first  took  for  a  prodigiously 
large  seal  lying  asleep  on  it.  As  he  got  closer  he  saw,  however, 
that  the  animal  was  quite  different  from  any  of  the  ordinary 
Southern  seals,  and  his  excitement  can  be  imagined.  Two  of 
the  "  Morning  "  officers  were  in  camp  with  him,  and  when 
Wilson  had  seized  the  gun  the  three  proceeded  to  stalk  this 
strange  new  beast.  Their  great  fear  was  that  they  might  only 
succeed  in  wounding  it,  and  that  it  would  escape  into  the  sea, 
so  in  spite  of  the  temperature  of  the  water  they  waded  well 
round  it  before  they  attacked.  These  tactics  proved  quite 
successful,  and  their  quarry  was  soon  despatched,  but  it  was 
far  too  heavy  for  them  to  move  or  for  Wilson  to  examine 
where  it  lay.  The  following  day,  however,  Colbeck  came  over 
in  the  "  Morning,"  and  with  the  aid  of  boats  and  ropes  the 
carcase  was  eventually  landed  on  his  decks. 

1  On  close  examination  Wilson  came  to  the  conclusion  that 
the  animal  is  a  sea-elephant  of  the  species  commonly  found  at 
Macquarie  Island,  but  this  is  the  first  time  that  such  a  beast 
has  been  found  within  the  Antarctic  Circle  :  and  that  it  should 
now  have  been  captured  so  many  hundreds  of  miles  beyond  is 
a  very  extraordinary  circumstance.  The  sea-elephant  is,  I 
believe,  a  vegetarian  ;  the  stomach  of  this  one  was  empty.' 

I  may  remark  that  we  got  to  know  this  particular  sea 
elephant  very  well.  As  a  rule,  skeletons  which  are  bound  for 
the  British  Museum  are  not  cleaned  until  they  arrive  on  the 
premises,  in  order  that  there  may  be  no  difficulty  in  reassem- 
bling the  parts.  In  accordance  with  this  custom,  the  skeleton  of 
this  animal  was  carried  on  the  skid  beam  of  the  '  Discovery '  in 
a  partially  stripped  state.  All  went  well  until  we  arrived  in  the 
tropics,  but  after  that  we  had  no  chance  of  forgetting  that  we 
carried  the  remains  of  a  sea  elephant.  Shift  it  from  place  to 
place  as  we  would,  it  made  its  presence  felt  everywhere.  In 
the  end  the  Museum  came  very  close  to  losing  a  specimen, 
and  I  doubt  if  it  possesses  many  that  have  caused  more  woe. 

1  January  23. — Since   the    start  of  our   transporting  work 


248      THE   VOYAGE   OF   THE    'DISCOVERY'      [Jan. 

more  than  a  week  ago,  the  weather  has  changed.  We  have 
had  a  great  deal  of  wind  from  the  east  and  south-east  with 
drifting  snow,  and  an  almost  continuously  overcast  sky.  The 
work  has  been  impeded,  but  by  steadily  pushing  on  we  have 
managed  to  accomplish  a  good  deal.  Our  people  go  out  all 
together  and  drag  four  heavily  laden  sledges  down  to  the  main 
camp;  there  they  remain  for  the  night,  and  return  on  the 
following  day.  The  relief  ships  work  the  remainder  of  the 
distance  in  much  the  same  way.  We  keep  a  cook  at  the  main 
camp  to  provide  the  necessary  meals.  Hodgson,  Bernacchi, 
and  Mulock  have  been  down  to  the  ships  to  see  to  the  storage 
of  our  belongings.  Most  of  them  will  go  in  the  "  Terra  Nova," 
which  has  the  greater  accommodation. 

1  From  these  sources  or  from  notes  which  come  every  other 
day  I  receive  accounts  of  the  ice.  I  scarcely  like  to  write  that 
things  are  looking  more  hopeful.  Nothing  happened  until  the 
1 8th,  but  on  that  day  some  large  pieces  broke  away,  and  since 
that  the  ships  have  made  steady  but  slow  progress.  I  estimate 
from  reports  that  they  are  four  or  five  miles  nearer  than  when 
I  was  down  a  fortnight  ago.  I  learn  that  the  "  Terra  Nova's  " 
"  butting  "  came  to  naught,  as  I  expected ;  she  could  make  no 
impression  on  the  solid  sheet,  though  she  rammed  it  full  tilt.' 

'January  24. — Our  people  report  that  the  ships  were  again 
on  the  move  last  night,  and  this  morning  did  not  appear  to  be 
more  than  three  miles  from  the  camp.  I  have  been  calculating 
that  for  things  to  be  as  they  were  in  the  year  of  our  arrival 
thirteen  or  fourteen  miles  of  ice  must  go  out  in  fifteen  days — 
nearly  an  average  of  a  mile  a  day,  whereas  I  scarcely  like  to 
think  what  a  difference  this  would  be  from  what  has  happened 
in  the  last  fifteen  days.  We  are  at  present  behind  last  year's 
date  as  regards  the  ice,  but,  on  the  other  hand,  the  recent  winds 
have  swept  the  pack  away — a  condition  that  never  happened 
last  year.' 

*  January  27. — Yesterday  the  large  tent  was  shifted  two 
miles  this  way,  and  is  now  this  side  of  the  glacier  tongue  ;  this 
is  by  way  of  equalising  the  distance  for  the  transporting  parties, 
but  our  people  have  still  much  the  longer  distance  to  travel. 


I0O4]  THE   ICE   BREAKING   AWAY  249 

Advices  from  the  relief  ships  inform  me  that  the  ice  is  still 
breaking  away,  but  not  so  rapidly  as  at  the  beginning  of  the 
week.     I  fear,  I  much  fear,  that  things  are  going  badly  for  us.' 

'•January  28. — This  morning  as  I  lay  in  my  bunk,  I  was 
astonished  to  hear  the  ship  creaking.  On  getting  up  I  found 
that  she  was  moving  in  the  ice  with  a  very  slow  rhythmic 
motion.  After  breakfast  we  all  went  out  to  Hut  Point  and 
found  that  the  whole  ice-sheet  was  swaying  very  slightly  under 
the  action  of  a  long  swell ;  its  edge  against  the  land  was  rising 
and  falling  as  much  as  18  inches.  This  is  the  most  promising 
event  that  has  happened  ;  we  have  not  known  such  a  thing 
since  our  first  imprisonment.  It  is  too  thick  to  see  what  is 
happening  to  seaward,  but  one  cannot  but  regard  this  as  a  hopeful 
sign.  We  are  all  very  restless,  constantly  dashing  up  the  hill 
to  the  look-out  station  or  wandering  from  place  to  place  to 
observe  the  effects  of  the  swell.  But  it  is  long  since  we 
enjoyed  such  a  cheerful  experience  as  we  get  on  watching  the 
loose  pieces  of  ice  jostling  one  another  at  Hut  Point.' 

iJa?iuary  29. — Still  no  definite  news  of  what  is  happening 
to  seaward.  The  ship  worked  loose  yesterday,  and  moves  an 
inch  or  two  in  her  icy  bed.  This  has  caused  a  great  increase 
in  the  creaking  and  groaning  of  the  timbers.  This  pleasant 
music  is  now  almost  continuous,  and  one  feels  immensely 
cheered  till  one  goes  up  the  hill  and  looks  out  on  the  long 
miles  of  ice  and  the  misty  screen  which  hides  the  sea.  I  grow 
a  little  sceptical  of  reports  which  tell  of  the  departure  of  a  mile 
or  half  a  mile  of  ice,  for  if  all  these  distances  could  be  added 
together  the  relief  ships  should  have  been  at  Hut  Point  by 
now.' 

'January  30. — Went  up  the  hill  with  Koettlitz,  and  saw  a 
most  cheering  sight.  The  ice  has  broken  away  well  inside  the 
glacier,  and  the  relief  ships  are  not  much  more  than  eight 
miles  away.  Through  the  telescope  one  can  see  the  hull  and 
rigging  very  distinctly,  and  even  the  figures  of  men  walking 
about. 

'  Later  came  full  reports  from  the  ships  with  excellent 
news,     Colbeck  tells  me  that  during  the  last  few  days  there 


250      THE   VOYAGE    OF   THE    'DISCOVERY'      [Feb. 

has  been  a  great  change.  On  the  26th  the  open  water  ex- 
tended to  the  outer  islet,  on  the  28th  to  the  inner  one,  and 
now  it  has  reached  inside  the  glacier.  The  ice  broke  away  in 
very  large  sheets,  and  so  rapidly  that  he  was  carried  away  to 
the  westward.  As  if  to  show  contempt  for  our  puny  efforts,  the 
scene  of  our  sawing  labours  was  carried  away  in  the  centre  of  a 
large  floe  ;  our  feeble  scratches  did  not  even  help  to  form  one 
of  the  cracks  which  broke  up  the  ice-sheet  about  them.  In 
the  last  five  days  fully  six  miles  of  ice  have  broken  away,  so 
that  we  are  all  inclined  to  be  very  cheerful  again.  There  is 
only  one  drawback  :  the  swell  is  slowly  but  surely  dying  away, 
and  there  is  no  doubt  that  we  are  entirely  dependent  on  it.' 

1  February  1. — We  seem  to  be  hanging  in  the  balance,  with 
even  chances  either  way.  On  the  one  hand,  the  swell  has  died 
away,  the  ice  is  very  quiet  again,  and  one  remembers  that  we 
are  not  really  further  advanced  than  we  were  at  this  time  last 
year ;  on  the  other,  we  hear  the  hopeful  sign  of  a  clear  sea  to 
the  north,  and  the  knowledge  that  a  swell  will  have  full 
freedom  of  action.     It's  a  toss-up. 

1  The  work  of  transport  has  been  going  on  steadily,  and  a 
few  more  days  will  see  its  finish.  The  main  tent  is  now  about 
five  miles  from  the  ship,  so  that  the  work  progresses  more 
speedily.  All  our  scientific  collections  and  most  of  the  valuable 
instruments  were  taken  across  some  time  ago  ;  then  followed 
the  scientific  library,  a  very  heavy  item  ;  and  now  some  of  our 
personal  effects  and  the  pictures,  &c,  from  the  wardroom  are 
packed  for  transit.  Our  living  quarters  are  beginning  to  look 
bare  and  unfurnished,  but  we  shall  not  mind  that  a  particle  if 
we  can  only  get  out. 

'  I  find  myself  growing  ridiculously  superstitious,  and  cannot 
banish  the  notion  that  if  we  make  every  preparation  for  leaving 
the  "Discovery,"  Nature  with  its  usual  cussedness  will  free 
her.' 

*  February  3. — I  imagine  the  ice  all  over  the  sound  has 
been  thinning  underneath  ;  off  the  various  headlands  it  has 
rotted  right  through  to  a  greater  extent  than  it  did  last  year. 
There  is  a  very  large  open  pool  off  Cape  Armitage,  and  another 


X904]  EXPLOSIONS  251 

smaller  one  off  Hut  Point,  beyond  which  the  ice  is  very  thin 
and  treacherous  for  three  or  four  hundred  yards.  The  sledge 
parties  have  to  go  a  long  way  round  to  avoid  this,  though  un- 
loaded travellers  can  climb  over  the  land  and  down  on  to  the 
firm  ice  in  Arrival  Bay. 

'  For  some  days  now  there  has  been  practically  no  advance 
in  the  ice  conditions.  Our  spirits  are  steadily  falling  again, 
and  I  am  just  off  to  the  "  Morning  "  to  see  if  anything  more 
can  be  done.' 

* February  4. — On  board  the  "Morning."  The  ships  are 
lying  about  one  and  a  half  mile  inside  the  glacier,  where  they 
have  been  without  change  for  the  last  three  days.  I  have 
discontinued  transport  work  for  the  present.  It  has  been  a 
lovely  calm,  bright  day— alas  !  much  too  calm  and  bright.  I 
cannot  describe  how  irritating  it  is  to  endure  these  placid  con- 
ditions as  the  time  speeds  along.  There  being  nothing  else  to 
be  done,  Colbeck  took  me  round  the  glacier  tongue  in  the 
"  Morning,"  and  we  sounded  on  both  sides,  getting  most  extra- 
ordinarily regular  depths  of  230  to  240  fathoms,  except  at  one 
inlet  on  the  north  side,  where  we  got  170.  In  the  afternoon 
we  climbed  to  the  top  of  the  Tent  Islet  (480  feet)  and  brought 
down  the  telescope  and  flags  left  by  the  signalling  party.  The 
ice  to  the  westward  is  not  broken  away  so  far  as  I  expected ; 
altogether  the  view  was  not  inspiriting.  Spent  the  evening 
with  Captain  MacKay,  who  is  excellent  company  for  a  depressed 
state  of  mind.' 

'  February  5. — I  did  not  want  to  begin  explosions  whilst 
the  distance  was  so  great,  but  on  considering  the  stagnant 
condition  of  affairs  I  decided  to  make  a  start  to-day.  It  has 
been  evident  to  me  for  some  time  that  if  explosives  are  to  be 
of  any  use,  they  must  be  expended  freely,  and  so  to-day  we 
experimented  in  this  direction.  To  explain  matters,  it  is 
necessary  to  describe  the  condition  of  the  fast  ice.  Its  edge 
starts  about  a  mile  from  the  end  of  the  glacier,  and  after  a 
sweep  to  the  south  turns  to  the  west,  in  which  direction  it 
runs  for  five  or  six  miles  before  it  gradually  turns  to  the  north  j 
any  point  along  this  long  western  line  is  more  or  less  equi- 


252      THE   VOYAGE    OF   THE    'DISCOVERY'      [Feb. 

distant  from  the  "  Discovery."  As  one  approaches  the  open 
water  from  the  south,  one  crosses  a  series  of  cracks  which  run 
for  miles  parallel  to  each  other  and  to  the  ice-edge ;  this  is  the 
first  step  that  the  swell  makes  towards  breaking  up  the  sheet. 
These  cracks  are  from  50  to  150  yards  apart,  and  according  to 
the  dimensions  of  the  swell  there  may  be  any  number  from  two 
or  three  to  a  dozen.  They  are  constantly  working,  those  near 
the  ice-edge  of  course  more  perceptibly  than  the  others.  After 
one  of  the  long  strips  thus  formed  has  been  working  for  some 
time  a  transverse  crack  suddenly  appears,  and  then  a  piece 
breaks  away,  usually  at  the  eastern  end  ;  and  very  soon  after 
it  is  weakened  in  this  manner  the  rest  of  the  strip  peels  away 
right  across  the  bay.  I  have  now  seen  two  or  three  strips  go 
in  this  manner,  and  it  appears  to  me  that  what  we  require  to 
do  is  to  get  ahead  of  Nature  by  forming  the  transverse  cracks. 
To-day,  therefore,  I  planted  the  charges  at  intervals  in  line 
with  the  "  Discovery,"  and  with  a  specially  made  electric  circuit 
blew  them  up  together.  On  the  whole  the  result  was  satis- 
factory ;  we  formed  a  transverse  crack  and  the  strip  under 
which  the  charges  had  been  placed  went  out  within  the  hour. 
It  is  not  a  great  gain,  and  the  expenditure  of  material  is  large, 
but  I  think  the  result  justifies  an  attempt  to  continue  the  work 
on  properly  organised  lines.  I  have  therefore  sent  to  the  "  Dis- 
covery "  for  a  party  of  our  special  torpedo  men  who  will  continue 
to  fit,  place  and  fire  the  charges  whilst  the  men  of  the  relief 
ships  go  on  digging  the  holes.  I  feel  that  the  utility  of  these 
explosives  depends  entirely  on  the  swell ;  we  can  do  nothing 
unless  Nature  helps  us ;  on  the  other  hand,  we  in  turn  may 
help  Nature. 

1  February  6. — We  have  started  our  explosive  work  in  full 
swing,  and  all  hands  are  working  very  vigorously  at  it.  We 
have  had  eight  men  from  the  "Terra  Nova"  and  seven  from 
the  "  Morning  "  digging  holes.  I  went  along  first  and  planted 
small  sticks  where  these  holes  were  to  be  dug ;  then  the  men 
set  to,  three  at  each  hole. 

'  The  ice  is  from  five  to  six  feet  in  thickness,  and  the  work 
is  quite  easy  until  the  hole  is  two  or  three  feet  deep,  but  then 


1904]  DANGEROUS   WORK  253 

it  becomes  hard  and  tiresome,  and  can  be  continued  only  by 
chipping  away  with  long-handled  implements  and  occasionally 
clearing  out  the  detached  pieces  with  a  shovel.  The  worst 
part  comes  when  the  water  is  admitted,  as  this  happens  before 
the  bottom  of  the  hole  can  be  knocked  out,  and  it  is  most 
difficult  to  continue  the  chipping  under  water ;  in  fact,  towards 
the  end  of  the  day  we  gave  up  attempting  to  do  this,  and 
decided  that  it  was  better  to  blow  the  bottom  out  with  a  small 
charge.  Whilst  the  holes  were  being  dug,  our  own  "  Discovery  " 
party  were  busily  fitting  and  firing  charges  ;  this  is  dangerous 
work  of  course,  and  I  have  been  very  careful  to  see  that  proper 
precautions  are  taken.  The  charge  fitters  are  isolated  in  a  tent 
some  way  from  the  scene  of  action,  and  the  fitted  charges  are 
brought  up  on  a  sledge  under  proper  custody,  and  handled  only 
by  our  own  experts.  The  battery  is  kept  on  a  small  sledge  of 
its  own,  and  can  thus  be  taken  out  of  reach  of  the  electric 
circuits  when  not  in  use. 

1  We  are  doing  things  on  a  large  scale ;  three  charges  are 
fired  together,  and  each  charge  contains  35  lbs  of  guncotton. 
When  three  holes  are  finished,  a  charge  is  taken  to  each  with 
a  small  line  five  fathoms  long  attached  to  it ;  then  the  electric 
wires  are  joined  up  and  the  charges  are  lowered  under  water  to 
the  extent  of  their  lines,  everyone  clears  away  from  the  region, 
and  the  battery  is  run  up  to  the  other  end  of  the  wires,  a 
hundred  and  fifty  yards  away.  When  all  is  ready  the  key  is 
pressed.  Then  the  whole  floe  rises  as  though  there  were  an 
earthquake ;  three  mighty  columns  of  water  and  ice  shoot  up 
into  the  sky,  rising  high  above  the  masts  of  the  ships ;  there  is 
a  patter  of  falling  ice-blocks  and  then  quiet  again.  One  might 
imagine  that  nothing  could  withstand  such  prodigious  force 
until  one  walks  up  and  finds  that  beyond  three  gaping  blackened 
craters  there  is  nothing  to  show  for  that  vast  upheaval — at 
least,  nothing  that  can  be  detected  with  a  casual  glance ;  but  a 
close  scrutiny  of  the  surface  between  the  holes  generally  shows 
that  after  all  something  has  been  effected,  for  from  each  hole  a 
number  of  minute  cracks  radiate,  and  one  can  see  that  in  two 
or  three  places  these  have  joined.     At  first  these  cracks  are  so 


254      THE  VOYAGE   OF  THE   'DISCOVERY'      [Feb. 

thin  as  to  be  scarcely  discernible,  but  if  one  watches  on  for  ten 
minutes  or  more,  one  can  detect  the  fact  that  they  are  very  gradu- 
ally opening ;  half  an  hour  later  they  may  be  a  quarter  of  an  inch 
in  width,  and  then  it  is  possible  to  see  that  the  ice  on  each  side 
is  moving  unequally.  This  is  the  beginning  of  the  end,  for  in 
an  hour  or  two  the  broken  floe,  small  enough  in  area  but  con- 
taining many  hundreds  of  tons  of  ice,  will  quietly  detach  itself 
and  float  calmly  away  to  the  north. 

'  It  is  in  this  manner,  therefore,  that  we  now  hope  to  reach 
the  "  Discovery,"  if  only  the  swell  will  hold.  We  have  advanced 
about  a  third  of  a  mile  to-day,  though  how  much  is  due  to  our 
own  efforts,  and  how  much  to  the  ordinary  course  of  Nature, 
we  cannot  tell,  nor  do  we  much  care  as  long  as  the  advance  is 
made.' 

'February  7. — We  certainly  have  curious  ups  and  downs  of 
fortune.  This  forenoon  nothing  happened  after  our  explosion, 
and  I  felt  very  despondent,  but  after  lunch  as  I  was  sitting  in 
Colbeck's  cabin,  he  suddenly  rushed  down  to  say  that  an 
enormous  piece  was  breaking  away — and  sure  enough  when 
I  got  on  deck  I  found  that  a  floe  from  a  half  to  three-quarters 
of  a  mile  across  was  quietly  going  out  to  sea.  The  men  of  the 
relief  ships  are  working  like  Trojans  at  the  hole-digging  ;  they 
are  taking  a  keen  interest  in  the  proceedings  and  are  especially 
delighted  with  the  explosions.  There  is  a  competition  in 
cutting  the  holes,  and  some  take  particular  care  in  making 
them  very  neat  and  round  regardless  of  the  fact  that  in  half 
an  hour  their  handiwork  will  be  blown  to  pieces.  The  best 
implement  for  this  work  is  a  sort  of  spud  with  a  sharp  cutting 
edge  at  the  bottom.  We  are  short  of  good  tools  of  this  sort, 
but  the  "  Terra  Nova's  "  blacksmith  and  our  own  engineers  are 
busy  making  more.' 

February  8. — Wretched  luck  to-day.  It  is  quite  calm,  and 
the  swell  has  almost  vanished  ;  the  floes  that  broke  away  last 
night  are  still  hanging  about  the  ice-edge  and  damping  what 
little  swell  remains.  Barne  has  a  bad  attack  of  snow-blindness, 
and  so  Evans,  of  the  "  Morning,"  relieves  him  for  the  present 
in  the  charge  of  explosive  operations.' 


i9o4J  ANXIOUS   DAYS  255 

1 February  9, — On  board 'the  "Discovery."  Our  hopes, 
which  were  high  on  the  7th,  have  fallen  again  to  a  low  ebb. 
Last  night  a  few  of  the  broken  floes  cleared  away,  but  the 
swell  did  not  return.  Explosions  were  continued,  but  with 
little  result.  However,  I  felt  that  we  could  do  no  more  than 
work  on  systematically,  and  as  that  has  now  been  arranged 
I  saw  no  object  in  my  staying  on  board  the  "  Morning," 
whereupon,  asking  Colbeck  to  superintend  operations,  I  jour- 
neyed homeward  again. 

'At  this  date  two  years  ago  the  ice  had  broken  back  to 
Hut  Point,  and  now  it  is  fast  for  six  miles  beyond ;  one  never 
appreciates  what  a  distance  six  miles  is  till  one  comes  to  walk 
over  it,  and  as  I  plodded  homeward  for  two  hours  to-day  I  am 
bound  to  confess  my  heart  gradually  sank  into  my  boots. 
There  would  be  nothing  to  worry  about  if  we  only  had  time 
on  our  side,  but  each  day  now  the  sun  is  sinking  lower  and 
the  air  getting  colder.  It  is  only  a  matter  of  days  now  before 
the  season  closes.' 

''February  10. — To-day  I  have  done  very  little  but  walk 
restlessly  about.  Twice  I  have  been  up  to  the  observation 
station  on  Arrival  Heights.  On  this  vantage  point  some  500 
feet  up  we  have  a  large  telescope  with  which  we  can  see  pretty 
clearly  what  is  happening  at  the  ice-edge,  and  sad  to  relate  it 
is  very  little. 

'The  ice  about  Hut  Point  is  now  so  thin  as  to  be  dan- 
gerous for  a  long  way  out.  Crean  fell  in  yesterday,  and  had 
a  very  narrow  shave,  as  he  could  not  attempt  to  swim  amongst 
the  sodden  brash-ice.  Luckily  he  kept  his  head,  and  remained 
still  until  the  others  were  able  to  run  for  a  rope  and  haul  him 
out.  To  avoid  this  in  future  we  have  constructed  a  roadway 
over  the  land  so  that  sledges  can  be  hauled  up  the  steep  snow- 
slope  from  Arrival  Bay.  Everyone  now  is  making  an  effort  to 
be  cheerful,  but  it  is  an  obvious  effort. 

'  I  have  made  every  arrangement  for  abandoning  the  ship. 
I  have  allotted  the  officers  and  men  to  the  relief  ships  and 
drawn  up  instructions  for  the  latter.  The  "  Morning,"  I  think, 
ought  to  be  outside  the  strait  by  the  25th,  but  the  "  Terra 


256      THE    VOYAGE    OF   THE   'DISCOVERY'      [Feb. 

Nova"  with  her  greater  power  can  remain  perhaps  a  week 
longer.  I  don't  think  I  ever  had  a  more  depressing  evening's 
work.' 

'February  n. — Awoke  this  morning  to  find  a  light 
southerly  wind  and  the  air  filled  with  snow.  We  could  see 
nothing  but  the  dismal  grey  wall  all  around  us,  and,  as  may 
be  imagined,  the  general  gloom  was  not  much  lightened  by 
the  view  of  things  without  ;  and  yet,  as  always  seems  to 
happen  to  us,  when  things  look  blackest  the  sun  breaks 
through.  This  morning  I  sent  the  dog  team  over  with  the 
laboured  instructions  which  I  wrote  last  night.  A  few  hours 
later  it  returned  with  a  note  to  say  the  ice  was  breaking  up 
fast.  A  good  deal  had  gone  out  in  the  night  and  more  in  the 
morning.  At  eight  o'clock  Doorly,  of  the  "  Morning,"  arrived 
with  a  second  letter  to  say  that  the  afternoon  had  proved 
equally  propitious,  and  to  ask  that  more  men  might  be  sent  to 
dig  holes  for  the  explosives.  Half  an  hour  later  Royds  was 
away  with  a  party  of  ten  men,  and  since  that  I  have  been  able 
to  do  nothing  but  record  these  pleasant  facts.  I  can't  think 
that  much  excitement  of  this  sort  would  be  good  for  us.' 

1  February  12. — The  weather  was  clearer  this  morning,  but 
the  sky  still  overcast.  We  were  out  at  Hut  Point  early,  and 
the  difference  in  distance  of  the  ships  was  obvious  at  a  glance, 
so  from  there  we  dashed  up  Arrival  Heights.  From  our 
observation  station  we  could  now  see  everything.  The 
"  Terra  Nova  "  was  just  picking  up  our  large  tent,  which  was  a 
little  over  four  miles  from  Hut  Point,  but  the  "  Morning  "  was 
to  the  westward  and  quite  half  a  mile  nearer,  and  it  was  here 
that  the  explosive  work  was  being  pushed  vigorously  forward ; 
one  could  see  the  tiny  groups  of  figures  digging  away  at  the 
holes.  This  afternoon  I  went  down  to  the  "Morning,"  and 
arrived  after  a  walk  of  three-quarters  of  an  hour.  I  learnt  that 
there  had  been  a  considerable  swell,  but  that  it  was  now 
decreasing  rapidly  and  things  were  growing  quieter  again  ;  the 
explosions  to-day  had  not  done  much,  and  the  broken  ice  was 
again  hanging  about  the  edge  instead  of  drifting  to  the  north. 
To-night   matters  are   not  quite  so  pleasing  again ;    I  don't 


i9o4]  FINAL  BREAK-UP  OF  THE   ICE  257 

fancy  another  long  wait  for  a  swell,  yet  one  has  to  remember 
that  appearances  are  very  different  from  what  they  were  two 
nights  ago.' 

{ February  13. — Thick  weather  again  to-day  ;  have  seen 
or  heard  nothing  from  the  ice-edge.  Very  anxious  for  a 
clearance.' 

'  February  14. — So  much  has  happened  to-night  that  I 
have  some  difficulty  in  remembering  the  events  of  the  day. 
This  morning  the  wind  was  strong  from  the  south-east  and 
carried  a  good  deal  of  drift ;  although  one  could  see  the  relief 
ships,  one  could  not  make  out  what  was  happening  with 
regard  to  the  work,  or  whether  the  ice  was  breaking  away. 
The  afternoon  found  us  in  very  much  the  same  condition, 
and  even  by  dinner-time  we  had  no  definite  news. 

•  It  was  not  until  we  were  quietly  eating  this  meal  that  the 
excitement  first  commenced,  when  we  heard  a  shout  on  deck 
and  a  voice  sang  out  down  the  hatchway,  "The  ships  are 
coming,  sir ! " 

1  There  was  no  more  dinner,  and  in  one  minute  we  were 
racing  for  Hut  Point,  where  a  glorious  sight  met  our  view. 
The  ice  was  breaking  up  right  across  the  strait,  and  with  a 
rapidity  which  we  had  not  thought  possible.  No  sooner  was 
one  great  floe  borne  away  than  a  dark  streak  cut  its  way  into 
the  solid  sheet  that  remained  and  carved  out  another,  to  feed 
the  broad  stream  of  pack  which  was  hurrying  away  to  the 
north-west. 

c  I  have  never  witnessed  a  more  impressive  sight ;  the  sun 
was  low  behind  us,  the  surface  of  the  ice-sheet  in  front  was 
intensely  white,  and  in  contrast  the  distant  sea  and  its  forking 
leads  looked  almost  black.  The  wind  had  fallen  to  a  calm, 
and  not  a  sound  disturbed  the  stillness  about  us. 

'  Yet  in  the  midst  of  this  peaceful  silence  was  an  awful 
unseen  agency  rending  that  great  ice-sheet  as  though  it  had 
been  naught  but  the  thinnest  paper.  We  knew  well  by  this 
time  the  nature  of  our  prison  bars ;  we  had  not  plodded  again 
and  again  over  those  long  dreary  miles  of  snow  without 
realising  the  formidable  strength  of  the  great  barrier  which 
vol.  11.  s 


258      THE   VOYAGE   OF   THE    'DISCOVERY'      [Feb. 

held  us  bound ;  we  knew  that  the  heaviest  battleship  would 
have  shattered  itself  ineffectually  against  it,  and  we  had  seen  a 
million-ton  iceberg  brought  to  rest  at  its  edge.  For  weeks  we 
had  been  struggling  with  this  mighty  obstacle,  controlling  the 
most  powerful  disruptive  forces  that  the  intelligence  of  man 
has  devised,  but  only  to  realise  more  completely  the  inadequacy 
of  our  powers.  Even  Nature  had  seemed  to  pause  before  such 
a  vast  difficulty,  and  had  hitherto  delivered  her  attacks  with 
such  sluggish  force  that  we  had  reasonably  doubted  her  ability 
to  conquer  it  before  the  grip  of  the  winter  arrested  her  efforts. 
1  But  now  without  a  word,  without  an  effort  on  our  part,  it 
was  all  melting  away,  and  we  knew  that  in  an  hour  or  two  not 
a  vestige  of  it  would  be  left,  and  that  the  open  sea  would  be 
lapping  on  the  black  rocks  of  Hut  Point. 

'  Fast  as  the  ice  was  breaking,  it  was  not  fast  enough  for 
our  gallant  relief  ships ;  already  we  could  see  them  battling 
through  the  floes  with  a  full  head  of  steam  and  with  their  bows 
ever  pressing  forward  on  the  yet  unbroken  sheet;  working  this 
way  and  that,  they  saw  the  long  cracks  shot  out  before  them 
and  in  a  moment  their  armoured  stems  were  thrust  into  them 
and  they  forged  ahead  again  in  new  and  rapidly  widening 
channels.  There  was  evidently  a  race  as  to  which  should  be 
first  to  pass  beyond  the  flagstaff  round  which  our  small 
company  had  clustered,  but  the  little  "  Morning,"  with  her 
bluff  bows  and  weak  engines,  could  scarcely  expect  to  hold 
her  own  against  her  finer-built  and  more  powerful  competitor. 

'By  ten  o'clock  we  could  observe  the  details  of  the 
game  and  watch  each  turn  and  twist  with  a  knowledge  of  its 
immediate  cause.  By  10.30  we  could  see  the  splintering  of 
the  ice  as  they  crashed  into  the  floes  and  hear  the  hoarse 
shouts  of  the  men  as,  wild  with  excitement,  they  cheered  each 
fresh  success.  Scarcely  half-a-mile  of  ice  remained  between 
us,  and  now  the  contest  became  keener,  and  the  crew  of  the 
"Terra  Nova"  gathered  together  by  word  of  command  and 
ran  from  side  to  side  of  their  ship  till  she  rolled  heavily  and 
seemed  to  shake  herself,  as  the  force  of  each  rush  was  gradually 
expended  and  she  fell  back  to  gather  way  for  a  fresh  attack ; 


i9o4]      DRAMATIC  APPROACH  OF  THE  SHIPS     259 

but  in  spite  of  all  her  efforts  the  persistent  little  "  Morning," 
dodging  right  and  left  and  seizing  every  chance  opening,  kept 
doggedly  at  her  side,  and  it  still  seemed  a  chance  as  to  who 
should  be  first  to  reach  that  coveted  goal,  the  open  pool  of 
water  at  our  feet. 

'Meanwhile  our  small  community  in  their  nondescript, 
tattered  garments  stood  breathlessly  watching  this  wonderful 
scene.  For  long  intervals  we  remained  almost  spell-bound, 
and  then  a  burst  of  frenzied  cheering  broke  out.  It  seemed 
to  us  almost  too  good  to  be  real.  By  eleven  o'clock  all  the 
thick  ice  had  vanished,  and  there  remained  only  the  thin  area 
of  decayed  floe  which  has  lately  made  the  approach  to  the  ship 
so  dangerous  j  a  few  minutes  later  the  "  Terra  Nova "  forged 
ahead  and  came  crashing  into  the  open,  to  be  followed  almost 
immediately  by  her  stout  little  companion,  and  soon  both  ships 
were  firmly  anchored  to  all  that  remains  of  the  "  Discovery's  " 
prison,  the  wedge  that  still  holds  in  our  small  bay. 

'It  seems  unnecessary  to  describe  all  that  has  followed: 
how  everyone  has  been  dashing  about  madly  from  ship  to 
ship,  how  everyone  shook  everyone  else  by  the  hand,  how  our 
small  bay  has  become  a  scene  of  wild  revelry,  and  how  some 
have  now  reached  that  state  which  places  them  in  doubt  as  to 
which  ship  they  really  belong  to.  Much  can  be  excused  on 
such  a  night. 

'And  so  to-night  the  ships  of  our  small  fleet  are  lying 
almost  side  by  side;  a  rope  from  the  "Terra  Nova"  is 
actually  secured  to  the  "  Discovery."  Who  could  have  thought 
it  possible?  Certainly  not  we  who  have  lived  through  the 
trying  scenes  of  the  past  month.' 

'February  15. — The  rapid  passage  of  events  has  caught  us 
unprepared,  and  to-day  all  hands  have  been  employed  in 
making  up  for  lost  time.  It  has  been  a  busy  day ;  our  own 
men  have  been  on  board  making  things  ship-shape  and  trim, 
whilst  parties  from  the  other  ships  have  been  digging  ice  and 
bringing  it  on  board  to  fill  our  boilers.  The  small  wedge  of 
sea-ice  that  still  remains  in  our  bay  is  cracked  in  many  places, 
and  no  doubt  it  would  go  out  of  its  own  accord  in  the  course 


26o      THE   VOYAGE   OF  THE   'DISCOVERY'     [Fes. 

of  a  few  days,  but  I  am  now  all  impatience  to  be  away,  and 
therefore  contemplate  expediting  matters  by  some  explosions. 
To  make  the  necessary  holes  in  the  ice  I  have  been  obliged  to 
call  in  the  assistance  of  the  officers,  who  have  been  digging 
away  busily,  but  it  has  been  no  light  matter  to  get  through,  for 
the  ice  at  the  edge  is  twelve  feet  thick,  whilst  closer  to  the  ship 
it  runs  from  fifteen  to  seventeen  feet.  We  shall  work  all  night 
till  our  boilers  are  filled,  but  what  a  very  different  matter  work 
is  under  these  new  conditions  !  Faces  have  regained  the  old 
cheerful  expression,  and  already  the  wags  are  finding  new 
subjects  for  their  sallies.' 

''February  16. — I  felt  much  too  restless  to  go  to  bed  last 
night,  and  so  after  spending  the  evening  with  my  fellow 
captains  I  wandered  about  to  see  how  the  work  went,  and 
presently  mustered  the  explosion  party  and  prepared  a  large 
charge  containing  67  lbs.  of  gun-cotton.  We  lowered  this 
carefully  into  a  hole  some  fifteen  yards  ahead  of  the  ship,  and 
at  1  A.M.,  regardless  of  the  feelings  of  the  sleepers,  blew  it  up. 
It  shook  the  whole  bay,  and  I  fear  awakened  all  those  who 
slumbered,  but  its  effects  were  much  what  I  had  hoped.  The 
ice,  which  had  been  very  solid  about  the  "  Discovery,"  now 
showed  cracks  in  all  directions,  and  I  knew  I  could  go  to  bed 
with  the  hope  of  finding  many  of  these  well  open  when  I  arose. 
After  breakfast  I  found  this  had  duly  happened.  Nearly  all 
had  opened  out  an  inch  or  two,  whilst  one  from  the  stern  of  the 
ship  was  gaping  a  foot  or  more  in  width  ;  our  ship  work  was 
completed,  and  nothing  remained  but  the  last  stroke  for 
freedom. 

'  So  the  last  explosive  charge  was  borne  out  and  lowered 
into  the  yawning  crack  astern  of  the  ship,  the  wires  were 
brought  on  board  and  everyone  was  directed  to  seek  shelter. 
When  all  was  ready,  I  pressed  the  firing  key ;  there  was  a 
thunderous  report  which  shook  the  ship  throughout,  and  then 
all  was  calm  again.  For  a  brief  moment  one  might  have 
imagined  that  nothing  had  happened,  but  then  one  saw  that 
each  crack  was  slowly  widen  ng ;  presently  there  came  the 
gurgle  of  water  as  it  was  sucked  into  our  opening  ice-bed,  and 


1904]  THE   < DISCOVERY'   FREE  261 

in  another  minute  there  was  a  creaking  aft  and  our  stern  rose 
with  a  jump  as  the  keel  was  freed  from  the  ice  which  had  held 
it  down.  Then,  as  the  great  mass  of  ice  on  our  port  hand 
slowly  glided  out  to  sea  our  good  ship  swung  gently  round  and 
lay  peacefully  riding  to  her  anchors  with  the  blue  water  lapping 
against  her  sides.' 

Thus  it  was  that  after  she  had  afforded  us  shelter  and  com- 
fort for  two  full  years,  and  after  we  had  borne  a  heavy  burden 
of  anxiety  on  her  behalf,  our  good  ship  was  spared  to  take  us 
homeward.  On  February  16,  1904,  the 'Discovery '  came  to 
her  own  again— the  right  to  ride  the  high  seas. 


262       THE   VOYAGE   OF    THE    'DISCOVERY'     [Feb. 


CHAPTER  XX 

HOMEWARD     BOUND 

Memorial  to  our  Lost  Shipmate— Gale  Commences — Ship  Driven  on 
Shore — Gloomy  Outlook —Sudden  Escape — Coaling — Driven  North 
— Departure  of  '  Morning  ' — Wood  Bay — Trouble  with  Pumps — 
Possession  Islands — Rudder  Disabled  —  Robertson  Bay — Rudder 
Replaced — Towards  Cape  North— Heavy  Pack — Skirting  Pack — 
1  Terra  Nova'  Parts  Company — Balleny  Islands — Over  Wilkes'  Land 
— Turning  North — The  Last  Iceberg — Auckland  Islands — Reassembly 
— New  Zealand  again  —  Voyage  Homeward  —  Completion  of  our 
Work — Our  First  Monotony — Home. 

Now  strike  yr  sails,  yee  jolly  mariners, 

For  we  are  come  into  a  quiet  rode 

Where  we  must  land  some  of  our  passengers 

And  light  this  wearie  vessel  of  her  lode. 

Here  she  awhile  may  make  her  safe  abode 

Till  she  repaired  have  her  tackles  spent 

And  wants  supplied  ;  and  then  again  abroad 

On  the  long  voyage  whereto  she  is  bent 

Well  may  she  speede  and  fairly  finish  her  intent. — Spenser. 

I  wish  I  could  convey  some  idea  of  our  feelings  when  the 
1  Discovery '  was  once  more  floating  freely  on  the  sea,  but  I 
doubt  if  any  written  words  could  express  how  good  it  was  to 
walk  up  and  down  the  familiar  bridge,  to  watch  the  gentle 
movement  of  the  ship  as  she  swung  to  and  fro  on  the  tide,  to 
feel  the  throb  of  the  capstan  engine  as  we  weighed  one  of  our 
anchors,  to  glance  aloft  and  know  that  sails  and  ropes  had 
now  some  meaning,  to  see  the  men  bustling  about  with  their 
old  sailor  habit,  and  to  know  that  our  vessel  was  once  more 


i9o4]  SHORTAGE   OF   COAL  263 

able  to  do  those  things  for  which  a  ship  is  built.  It  is  sufficient 
to  say  that  it  would  have  been  hard  to  find  a  prouder  or  happier 
ship's  company  than  we  were  that  day. 

But  with  all  our  feelings  of  elation  we  did  not  imagine  that 
our  troubles  were  at  an  end;  we  knew  that  it  was  far  from 
likely  that  after  so  long  a  period  of  disuse  everything  would  be 
found  to  work  smoothly,  and  we  knew  also  that  if  we  were  to 
carry  out  the  remainder  of  the  programme  which  we  had  set 
ourselves  there  must  be  no  delay  in  getting  to  work.  It  had 
always  been  my  intention  when  the  '  Discovery '  was  freed  from 
the  ice  to  devote  what  remained  of  the  navigable  season  to  an 
exploration  of  that  interesting  region  which  lay  to  the  westward 
of  Cape  North,  but  now,  arter  two  years'  imprisonment,  we 
lacked  what  constituted  a  primniy  necessity  for  such  a  scheme; 
our  long  detention  had  made  a  deep  inroad  into  our  coal 
supply,  and  after  lighting  fires  in  our  main  boilers  and  raising 
steam  afresh  we  found  ourselves  with  barely  forty  tons  remain- 
ing— an  amount  on  which  it  would  have  been  most  difficult  for 
us  to  reach  New  Zealand,  and  which  absolutely  precluded  all 
idea  of  further  exploration. 

One  of  my  first  inquiries,  therefore,  on  the  arrival  of  the 
relief  ships  had  been  to  find  out  the  amount  of  this  valuable 
commodity  with  which  they  could  afford  to  supply  us  in  the 
event  of  our  release.  At  first  they  had  been  able  to  name  a 
very  satisfactory  figure,  but  after  the  long  month  of  combat 
with  ice  and  wind  which  had  just  passed  their  powers  of  assist- 
ance had  been  greatly  diminished ;  and  now  I  saw,  to  my 
disappointment,  that  even  at  the  best  we  should  only  increase 
our  stock  by  an  amount  which  would  ensure  our  safe  return 
to  New  Zealand,  without  leaving  any  adequate  margin  for 
exploring  work.  However,  it  was  no  use  deploring  facts  which 
could  not  be  altered.  I  determined  to  get  all  that  could  be 
spared  without  delay,  and  to  use  it  as  far  as  possible  in  carry- 
ing out  our  original  programme. 

As  the  '  Discovery '  seemed  to  be  lying  very  snugly  at 
anchor,  we  decided  to  get  in  what  we  could  whilst  we  remained 
in  the  shelter  of  our  small  bay,  and  on  the  afternoon  of  the 


264      THE  VOYAGE   OF   THE   'DISCOVERY'    [Feb. 

i 6th  the  'Terra  Nova'  came  alongside  us  to  hand  over  her 
supply.  Thus  a  few  hours  after  our  release  the  two  ships  lay 
snugly  berthed  together,  busily  securing  whips  and  yards  for 
the  transfer  of  coal  which  was  to  commence  on  the  following 
morning.  The  afternoon  was  beautifully  calm  and  bright,  and 
the  weather  seemed  to  smile  peacefully  on  the  termination  of 
our  long  and  successful  struggle  with  the  ice.  We  little 
guessed  what  lay  before  us,  and  assuredly  if  ever  the  treacher- 
ous nature  of  the  Antarctic  climate  and  the  need  for  the 
explorer  to  be  constantly  on  guard  were  shown  it  was  by  our 
experiences  of  the  succeeding  twenty-four  hours,  of  which  my 
diary  gives  the  following  account : 

'-February  16. — We  have  felt  that  our  last  act  before  leaving 
the  region  which  has  been  our  home  for  so  long  should  be  one 
of  homage  to  the  shipmate  who  sacrificed  his  life  to  our  work. 
We  have  had  a  large  wooden  cross  prepared  for  some  time  ; 
it  bears  a  simple  carved  inscription  to  the  memory  of  poor 
Vince,  and  yesterday  it  was  erected  on  the  summit  of  Hut 
Point,  so  firmly  that  I  think  in  this  undecaying  climate  it 
will  stand  for  centuries.  To-day  our  small  company  landed 
together  for  the  last  time,  and  stood  bareheaded  about  this 
memorial  whilst  I  read  some  short  prayers.  It  was  calm,  but 
the  sky  had  become  heavily  overcast  and  light  snow  was 
falling  on  our  heads.  The  little  ceremony  brought  sad  re- 
collections, but  perhaps  also  a  feeling  of  gratitude  for  escapes 
from  many  accidents  which  might  well  have  added  to  the 
single  name  which  the  memorial  bears. 

1  The  water  was  oily  calm  as  we  pulled  back  to  the  ship, 
and  the  sky  very  gloomy  and  threatening,  but  this  sort  of 
weather  has  been  so  common  we  thought  little  of  it.  It  had 
been  decided  that  as  to-day  was  the  first  time  Captain  MacKay 
had  set  foot  on  board  the  "  Discovery,"  we  should  show  him 
and  his  officers  what  an  Antarctic  feast  was  like.  Accordingly 
by  dinner-time  our  cooks  had  prepared  very  savoury  dishes  of 
seal  and  penguin,  and  we  sat  down,  a  very  merry  party,  to 
discuss  them.  In  the  midst  of  dinner  word  came  down  that 
the  wind  had  sprung  up,  and  although  I  did  not  expect  to 


1904]  A  GALE  COMMENCES  265 

find  anything  serious  I  thought  it  as  well  to  go  up  and  see 
how  the  land  lay.  On  stepping  out  into  the  open,  however, 
I  saw  we  were  in  for  a  stiff  blow,  and  had  reluctantly  to  inform 
our  guests  of  the  fact.  MacKay  took  one  glance  at  the  sky 
and  was  over  the  rail  like  a  shot,  followed  by  as  many  of  his 
people  as  could  be  collected  at  such  short  notice.  In  a 
minute  or  two  the  warps  were  cast  off,  and  the  "Terra  Nova" 
was  steaming  for  the  open,  where  she  was  soon  lost  in  the  drift. 
Since  that  it  has  been  blowing  very  stiff,  and  a  good  deal  of 
ice  has  come  down  upon  us  ;  but  I  have  a  pretty  firm  reliance 
on  our  ground  tackle — the  anchor  weighs  over  two  tons,  and 
we  have  a  fair  drift  of  cable  out.  The  wind  is  from  the  south, 
and  the  sea,  which  has  risen  rapidly,  is  dashing  over  the  ice- 
bound land  close  astern,  but  we  have  not  yet  dragged. 
Colbeck  is  on  board  with  two  officers  and  six  men  of  the 
"Terra  Nova."  I  don't  altogether  like  the  look  of  things, 
and  shall  get  up  steam  as  soon  as  possible ;  but  I  don't  want 
to  hurry  the  engine-room  people,  or  we  shall  have  all  sorts  of 
trouble  with  our  steam-pipes,  &c.' 

1  February  17. — We  have  had  a  day  and  no  mistake  ;  I 
hope  I  may  never  have  such  another.  Early  this  morning  the 
wind  lulled  but  the  sky  still  wore  a  most  threatening  aspect,  and 
I  sent  word  for  steam  as  soon  as  it  could  possibly  be  raised. 
At  about  8  a.m.  the  "  Morning  "  appeared  out  of  the  gloom  and 
sent  a  boat  for  Colbeck,  who  got  away  as  quickly  as  he  could. 
He  had  scarcely  reached  his  ship  when  the  wind  came  down 
on  us  again  with  redoubled  fury,  the  sea  got  up  like  magic, 
and  soon  the  "  Discovery  "  began  to  jerk  at  her  cables  in  the 
most  alarming  manner.  I  knew  that  in  spite  of  our  heavy 
anchor  the  holding  ground  was  poor,  and  I  watched  anxiously 
to  see  if  the  ship  dragged. 

1  It  came  at  last,  just  as  Skelton  sent  a  promise  of  steam  in 
half  an  hour.  The  sea  was  again  breaking  heavily  on  the  ice- 
foot astern  and  I  walked  up  and  down  wondering  which  was 
coming  first,  the  steam  or  this  wave-beaten  cliff.  It  was  not 
a  pleasant  situation,  as  the  distance  grew  shorter  every  minute, 
until  the  spray  of  the  breaking  waves  fell  on  our  poop,  and 


266       THE   VOYAGE   OF    THE    'DISCOVERY'     [Feb. 

this  was  soon  followed  by  a  tremendous  blow  as  our  stern 
struck  the  ice.  We  rebounded  and  struck  again,  and  our 
head  was  just  beginning  to  fall  off  and  the  ship  to  get  broad- 
side on  (heaven  knows  what  would  have  happened  then)  when 
steam  was  announced.  Skelton  said  he  could  only  go  slow 
at  first,  but  hoped  to  work  up.  I  told  him  to  give  her  every 
ounce  he  could,  when  he  could,  and  he  fled  below  to  do  his 
best. 

'  With  the  engines  going  ahead  and  the  windlass  heaving 
in,  we  gradually  pulled  up  to  our  anchor  and  tripped  it ;  then 
we  ceased  to  advance.  The  engines  alone  would  not  send  the 
ship  to  windward  in  the  teeth  of  the  gale  ;  we  just  held  our 
own,  but  only  just.  Once  around  Hut  Point  I  knew  we 
should  be  safe  with  an  open  sea  before  us ;  the  end  of  the 
Point  was  only  a  quarter  of  a  mile  out,  but  off  the  end,  some 
twenty  or  thirty  yards  beyond,  I  knew  there  was  a  shallow 
patch  which  had  also  to  be  cleared  to  get  safely  away.  So 
finding  we  could  make  no  headway  I  started  to  edge  out 
towards  the  Point.  All  seemed  to  be  going  well  until  we 
got  opposite  the  Point  itself,  when  I  saw  to  my  alarm  that 
although  there  was  no  current  in  our  bay  there  was  a  strong 
one  sweeping  past  the  Point. 

1  Nothing  remained  but  to  make  a  dash  for  it,  and  I  swung 
the  helm  over  and  steered  for  the  open.  But  the  moment 
our  bows  entered  the  fast-running  stream  we  were  swung 
round  like  a  top,  and  the  instant  after  we  crashed  head  fore- 
most on  to  the  shoal  and  stopped  dead  with  our  masts 
shivering.  We  were  in  the  worst  possible  position,  dead  to 
windward  of  the  bank  with  wind,  sea,  and  current  all  tending 
to  set  us  faster  ashore. 

'We  took  the  shore  thus  at  about  n  a.m.,  and'the  hours 
that  followed  were  truly  the  most  dreadful  I  have  ever  spent. 
Each  moment  the  ship  came  down  with  a  sickening  thud 
which  shook  her  from  stem  to  stern,  and  each  thud  seemed  to 
show  more  plainly  that,  strong  as  was  her  build,  she  could  not 
long  survive  such  awful  blows.  As  soon  as  possible  I  had 
soundings  taken  all  around  and  found  the  depth  was  1 2  feet 


1904]  SHIP   DRIVEN   ON   SHORE    «  267 

everywhere  except  under  the  stern,  where  the  line  showed 
18  feet ;  I  sent  for  the  carpenter  to  know  our  draught  of  water 
and  he  reported  12^  feet  at  the  bows  and  14J  feet  aft.  This 
signified  that  the  midship  section  must  be  very  hard  aground, 
and  that  the  only  chance  of  release  was  by  the  stern,  a  direction 
in  which  we  could  not  hope  to  move  under  present  circum- 
stances. 

'  So  things  stood  before  the  men's  dinner,  but  by  the  time 
it  was  finished  we  seemed  to  have  worked  another  fathom 
ahead  and  then  the  soundings  all  around  were  1 2  feet  except 
at  the  extreme  bowsprit  end,  where  15  feet  was  obtained.  I 
knew  the  bank  must  be  very  small  in  extent,  and  asked  myself, 
would  it  be  possible  to  force  her  clean  over  it  ?  I  determined 
to  try,  and  ordered  sail  to  be  made.  The  wind  had  steadily 
increased  in  force,  and  it  was  now  blowing  a  howling  gale  j 
the  temperature  was  low  enough  to  make  the  water  slushy  as  it 
fell  on  board.  In  spite  of  this  we  got  the  foresail  and  foretop- 
sail  spread,  and  at  the  same  time  rang  the  telegraph  to  full 
speed  ahead.  The  ship  began  to  move,  but  it  was  only  to 
swing  round  till  her  bowsprit  almost  touched  the  rocks  of  the 
Point  3  the  seas  came  tumbling  over  her  starboard  quarter  and 
she  herself  listed  heavily  to  port. 

1  In  two  minutes  I  saw  that  we  were  only  making  matters 
worse,  and  shouted  for  the  sails  to  be  clewed  up ;  and  at  the 
same  moment  Skelton  appeared  on  the  bridge  and  reported 
that  the  inlets  were  choked  and  the  engines  useless.  Once 
more  we  sounded  around  the  ship,  to  find  that  there  was  not 
more  than  9  to  10  feet  from  the  bows  to  the  mainmast  or  from 
10  to  12  feet  beyond:  she  seemed  to  be  hopelessly  and 
irretrievably  ashore.  After  this,  for  a  very  short  time,  we 
hoped  that  her  high  position  on  the  bank  would  bring  less  strain 
from  the  seas,  but  soon  she  had  formed  a  new  bed  for  herself, 
and  within  an  hour  she  was  bumping  more  heavily  than  ever. 

1  It  was  now  about  three  o'clock.  We  had  come  to  the 
end  of  our  resources ;  nothing  more  could  be  done  till  the 
gale  abated.  We  could  only  consider  the  situation  and  wait 
for  the  hours  to  go  by. 


268      THE   VOYAGE   OF   THE    '  DISCOVERY '     [Feb. 

'  And  the  situation  seemed  to  have  no  ray  of  comfort  in  it. 
On  deck  the  wind  was  howling  through  our  rigging,  the  ship 
was  swaying  helplessly  and  rising  slightly  each  moment,  to 
crash  down  once  more  on  the  stony  bottom  j  the  seas  were 
breaking  heavily  over  the  stern  and  sending  clouds  of  spray 
high  up  the  masts ;  the  breakers  on  the  shore  flung  the  back- 
wash over  our  forecastle ;  the  water  was  washing  to  and  fro  on 
our  flooded  decks.  Towering  above  us  within  a  stone's  throw 
was  the  rocky  promontory  of  Hut  Point ;  on  its  summit,  and 
clearly  outlined  against  the  sky,  stood  the  cross  which  we  had 
erected  to  our  shipmate.  I  remember  thinking  how  hard  it 
seemed  that  we  had  rescued  our  ship  only  to  be  beaten  to 
pieces  beneath  its  shadow. 

'  If  the  situation  on  deck  was  distressing,  that  below  fairly 
rivalled  it.  Each  time  that  the  ship  descended  with  a  sicken- 
ing thud  into  her  rocky  bed  the  beams  and  decks  buckled 
upwards  to  such  an  extent  that  several  of  our  thick  glass  dead- 
lights were  cracked  across,  every  timber  creaked  and  groaned, 
doors  flew  to  and  fro,  crockery  rattled,  and  every  loose  article 
was  thrown  into  some  new  position.  With  the  heavier  blows 
one  could  see  the  whole  ship  temporarily  distorted  in  shape  ; 
through  all  and  directly  beneath  one's  feet  could  be  heard  the 
horrible  crunching  and  grinding  of  the  keel  on  the  stones 
below. 

1  When  it  was  known  that  nothing  more  could  be  done  it 
was  curious  to  see  how  different  temperaments  took  it.  Some 
sat  in  stony  silence  below,  some  wandered  about  aimlessly,  and 
some  went  steadily  on  with  an  ordinary  task  as  though  nothing 
had  happened.  I  almost  smiled  when  I  saw  our  excellent 
marine  Gilbert  Scott  dusting  and  sweeping  out  the  wardroom 
and  polishing  up  the  silver  as  if  the  principal  thing  to  be  feared 
was  an  interference  with  the  cleanly  state  in  which  he  usually 
keeps  all  these  things.  For  myself  I  could  not  remain  still. 
How  many  times  I  wandered  from  the  dismal  scene  on  deck 
to  the  equally  dismal  one  below  I  do  not  know,  but  what  I  do 
know  is  that  I  tasted  something  very  near  akin  to  despair. 

'  But  if  this  afternoon  was  a  horrible  experience,  it  has  at 


1904]  SUDDEN   ESCAPE  »6g 

least  shown  me  again  how  firmly  I  can  rely  on  the  support  and 
intelligence  of  my  companions.  For,  seeing  the  utter  im- 
possibility of  doing  anything  at  the  time,  I  bethought  me  that 
the  next  best  thing  was  to  be  prepared  to  act  promptly  when 
the  weather  moderated.  Accordingly  I  first  sent  for  Skelton 
to  see  by  how  much  we  could  lighten  the  ship.  I  had  scarcely 
asked  him  the  question  when  he  said,  "  I  have  been  thinking 
that  out,  sir,"  and  in  a  minute  or  two  he  produced  a  list  of  our 
movable  weights.  I  next  sent  for  the  boatswain  to  discuss  the 
manner  in  which  we  could  lay  out  our  anchors,  and  he  also 
had  his  scheme  cut  and  dried  ;  and  so  it  went  on  with  every- 
body concerned  in  this  knotty  problem,  until  I  knew  that  if 
the  gale  left  us  with  any  ship  at  all  we  should  at  least  be  able 
to  make  a  bold  bid  to  get  her  afloat. 

1  And  so  hour  after  hour  went  by  whilst  we  thought  and 
planned  as  well  as  our  dejected  state  would  allow,  and  the  ship 
quivered  and  trembled  and  crashed  again  and  again  into  her 
rocky  bed. 

'  The  first  sign  of  a  lull  came  at  seven  o'clock,  and  then, 
though  the  seas  still  swept  over  our  counter,  there  was  a 
decided  slackening  in  the  wind.  Soon  after  we  all  assembled 
for  dinner — not  that  any  of  us  wanted  to  eat,  but  because  it 
never  does  to  disturb  a  custom.  It  was  a  dreary  meal,  the 
dreariest  and  most  silent  I  ever  remember  in  the  "  Discovery." 
Yet  we  were  not  more  than  half-way  through  it,  when  the 
officer  of  the  watch,  Mulock,  suddenly  burst  in  and  said,  "The 
ship's  working  astern,  sir."  I  never  reached  the  bridge  in  less 
time.  I  found  that  the  wind  and  sea  had  dropped  in  the  most 
extraordinary  manner,  but  what  surprised  me  still  more  was 
that  the  current,  which  had  been  running  strongly  to  the  north, 
had  turned  and  was  running  with  equal  speed  to  the  south.  I 
took  this  in  at  a  glance  as  I  turned  to  get  a  bearing  on  with 
the  shore  ;  in  a  minute  or  two  I  was  left  without  doubt  that 
Mulock's  report  had  been  correct.  Each  time  that  the  ship 
lifted  on  a  wave  she  worked  two  or  three  inches  astern,  and 
though  she  was  still  grinding  heavily  she  no  longer  struck  the 
bottom  with  such  terrific  force.     I  had  scarcely  observed  these 


270       THE   VOYAGE   OF    THE    'DISCOVERY'     [Feb. 

facts  when  Skelton  rushed  up  to  say  that  the  inlets  were  free 
again.  Every  soul  was  on  deck,  and  in  a  moment  they  were 
massed  together  and  running  from  side  to  side  in  measured 
time.  The  telegraphs  were  put  full  speed  astern  j  soon  the 
engines  began  to  revolve,  and  the  water  foamed  and  frothed 
along  the  side.  For  a  minute  or  two  the  ship  seemed  to 
hesitate,  but  then  there  came  a  steady  grating  under  the 
bottom,  which  gradually  travelled  forward,  and  ceased  as  the 
ship,  rolling  heavily,  slid  gently  into  deep  water. 

'To  this  moment  I  do  not  know  how  it  has  all  happened, 
but  thinking  things  over  to-night  a  fact  has  been  recalled  to 
my  recollection  which  I  noticed  without  realising  its  full  signifi- 
cance. It  seemed  to  me  that  the  level  of  the  water  at  Hut 
Point,  as  far  as  I  could  judge  it  in  its  agitated  state,  was 
abnormally  low  this  afternoon,  and  taking  this  in  connection 
with  the  change  in  direction  of  the  current,  I  am  inclined  to 
believe  that  events  have  come  about  much  as  follows.  The 
heavy  southerly  wind  tended  to  drive  the  water  out  of  the 
Sound  and  lowered  its  level  by  some  feet.  We  must  have 
run  ashore  when  it  was  at  this  low  ebb  ;  then  came  the  lull, 
and  the  water  swept  back  again,  with  the  happy  result  of 
floating  us  off. 

'But  whether  things  have  come  about  in  this  natural 
manner  or  not,  I  cannot  but  regard  it  as  little  short  of  a 
miracle  that  I  should  be  going  to  bed  free  from  anxiety  at  the 
end  of  this  horrid  day.  We  were  clear  of  our  shoal  none  too 
soon,  for  an  hour  after  the  wind  blew  up  from  the  south  again. 
Early  in  the  day  we  had  caught  a  glimpse  of  the  "  Terra 
Nova  "  far  away  to  the  south,  so  we  made  in  this  direction  to 
find  her  and  to  seek  shelter.  At  midnight  we  got  up  to  the 
edge  of  the  fast  ice,  where  we  found  our  consort  secured  with 
ice-anchors,  and  where  we  have  been  able  to  return  her 
officers  and  men.  We  are  now  anchored  close  by  her ;  I  do 
not  know  what  has  become  of  the  "  Morning." 

'  We  have  been  diligently  sounding  our  wells  for  signs  of 
extra  leakage,  but  the  carpenter  reports  there  is  nothing  to 
speak  of,  and  so  apparently,  beyond  the  loss  of  our  false  keel, 


1904J  COALING  271 

we  have  suffered  little  damage.     It  is  an  eloquent  testimony 
to  the  solid  structure  of  the  ship.' 

When  I  subsequently  came  to  compare  the  experiences  of 
the  three  ships  during  this  long  gale,  I  found  that  the  com- 
plete lulls,  such  as  I  have  recorded,  took  place  at  different 
times  in  their  various  localities  ;  and  I  have  no  doubt  that  by 
this  irregular  action  of  the  wind  the  waters  of  the  Sound  were 
pressed  down  in  some  places  and  heaped  up  in  others  in  a 
manner  that  is  well  known  in  inland  lakes.  But,  even  when 
all  the  physical  facts  are  realised,  the  story  of  our  grounding 
and  release  remains  a  very  extraordinary  one.  Rarely,  if  ever, 
can  a  ship  have  appeared  in  such  an  uncomfortable  plight  as 
ours  to  find  herself  free  and  safe  within  the  space  of  an  hour. 
Such  a  sudden  and  complete  relief  of  our  distress  seemed  to 
argue  that  we  had  been  rather  unnecessarily  and  foolishly 
alarmed  at  our  situation,  but  on  looking  back  I  remember 
that  we  had  no  reason  to  expect  that  the  forces  of  Nature 
would  so  suddenly  come  to  our  rescue  :  the  best  we  looked 
for  was  a  period  of  calm  when  we  might  lighten  the  ship  and 
attempt  to  drag  her  from  her  perilous  position;  and  such  a 
prospect,  with  the  weather  thoroughly  unsettled  and  the 
season  closing  rapidly,  was  not  hopeful.  To  be  in  ten  feet  of 
water  in  a  ship  that  draws  fourteen  feet  cannot  be  a  pleasant 
position,  nor  can  there  be  a  doubt  that  the  shocks  which  the 
'  Discovery '  sustained  would  have  very  seriously  damaged  a 
less  stoutly  built  vessel. 

On  the  1 8th  the  wind  was  still  blowing  strong,  but  had 
gone  round  to  the  south-east,  bringing  smoother  water  in  our 
Sound,  and  now,  as  we  were  most  anxious  to  complete  our 
coaling  operations,  I  decided  to  seek  shelter  in  the  inlets  of 
the  glacier  tongue  to  the  north.  So  at  a  comparatively  early 
hour  we  uprooted  our  ice-anchors  and  steered  in  that  direc- 
tion, closely  followed  by  the  '  Terra  Nova.'  In  half  an  hour 
we  were  passing  close  by  Hut  Point,  and  the  small  bay  in 
which  we  had  spent  such  long  months,  but  which  had  tendered 
us  such  a  treacherous  farewell.  As  we  sped  along  we  looked 
for  the  last  time  with  almost  affectionate  regard  on  the  scene 


272      THE   VOYAGE   OF   THE   'DISCOVERY'     [Feb. 

which  had  grown  so  familiar,  on  the  hills  of  which  we  knew 
every  ridge  and  fold,  on  the  paths  which  our  footsteps  had  so 
often  trodden,  and  on  the  huts  and  other  signs  of  human  life 
which  we  were  leaving  behind  us.  One  wonders  what  is 
happening  now  in  that  lonely  solitude,  once  the  scene  of  so 
much  activity  ! 

In  the  afternoon  we  ran  alongside  the  ice-edge  in  an  inlet 
on  the  north  side  of  the  glacier  tongue ;  soon  the  '  Terra 
Nova '  was  rubbing  sides  with  us,  and  our  whips  were  rigged 
for  coaling.  The  weather  by  this  time  had  cleared  and  the 
wind  had  almost  dropped,  but  we  knew  that  these  conditions 
were  not  likely  to  last  long,  and  officers  and  men  buckled  to 
with  a  will  to  remedy  the  alarmingly  empty  state  of  our 
bunkers.  Late  in  the  afternoon  the  'Morning'  suddenly 
appeared  around  the  corner.  She  had  been  driven  far  to 
leeward  by  the  gale,  but  at  length  had  worked  up  and  found 
some  shelter  in  the  New  Harbour,  where  also  the  ice  had 
recently  broken  away  for  the  first  time  for  two  years. 

By  midnight  we  had  received  fifty  tons  of  coal  from  the 
'  Terra  Nova,'  and  that  ship  stood  out  in  the  offing.  A 
northerly  breeze  had  sprung  up,  and  we  were  now  obliged  to 
go  round  to  the  south  side  of  the  glacier  to  get  alongside  the 
1  Morning.'  Notwithstanding  the  long  hours  which  they  had 
already  worked,  our  people  elected  to  go  right  on  throughout 
the  night,  and  soon  more  coal  sacks  were  being  tumbled  on 
board. 

Now,  as  always,  the  manner  in  which  our  people  undertook 
a  heavy  task  and  worked  on  at  it  without  rest  was  a  sight  for 
the  gods.  Perhaps  the  strongest  support  of  this  splendid  spirit 
was  the  fact  that  on  such  occasions,  by  mutual  consent,  there 
was  no  distinction  between  officers  and  men.  At  such  times 
our  geologist  could  be  seen  dragging  coal  bags  along 
the  decks,  whilst  the  biologist,  the  vertebrate  zoologist, 
lieutenants  and  A.B.'s,  with  grimed  faces  and  chafed  hands, 
formed  an  indistinguishable  party  on  the  coaling  whips.  It 
did  not  matter  how  formidable  might  be  the  scientific  designa- 
tion of  any  officer:   in  time  of  difficulty  and  stress  he  was 


r9o4]    PLANS  FOR  THE  HOMEWARD  JOURNEY     273 

content  to  be  plain  John  Smith  and  to  labour  in  common  for 
the  general  good. 

The  '  Morning  '  afforded  us  twenty-five  tons  of  coal,  and  I 
have  an  ever  grateful  recollection  of  that  kindly  deed,  for  in 
giving  us  so  much,  Colbeck  reduced  himself  to  the  narrowest 
margin,  and  voluntarily  resigned  himself  to  the  necessity  of 
having  to  return  directly  homeward  without  joining  in  any 
attempt  at  further  exploration.  I  have  already  mentioned  that 
I  had  determined  to  try  to  penetrate  to  the  westward  around 
Cape  North,  and  now  that  it  had  become  necessary  to  pro- 
mulgate my  plans,  I  saw  that  whilst  the  'Terra  Nova 'could 
keep  pace  with  us  wherever  we  went,  we  were  likely  to  be 
much  hampered  by  the  company  of  the  small  *  Morning,'  with 
her  feeble  engine  power.  But  whilst  these  facts  were  evident, 
I  naturally  felt  a  reluctance  to  except  from  our  further  ad- 
ventures the  ship  which  had  stood  by  us  so  faithfully  in  our 
troubles. 

But  Colbeck  needed  no  reminder  to  see  the  difficulty  of 
my  position ;  his  practical  common  sense  told  him  he  could 
be  of  little  use  to  us,  and  with  his  usual  loyalty  he  never 
hesitated  to  act  for  the  best,  at  whatever  sacrifice  to  his  own 
hopes  and  wishes. 

So  before  we  left  the  glacier  in  McMurdo  Sound  our  pro- 
gramme was  arranged,  and  it  was  decided  that  the  three  ships 
should  remain  in  company  while  we  journeyed  up  the  coast, 
but  that  afterwards  we  should  separate,  the  'Morning'  pro- 
ceeding to  the  north,  whilst  the  '  Discovery '  and  the  '  Terra 
Nova  '  turned  west.  The  companies  of  both  our  relief  ships 
expressed  a  strong  wish  that,  whatever  separation  took  place, 
they  might  be  permitted  to  be  with  us  when  we  entered  our 
first  civilised  port ;  and  as  this  seemed  to  me  a  most  reasonable 
desire  after  all  their  efforts  on  our  behalf,  I  fixed  upon  Port 
Ross,  in  the  Auckland  Islands,  as  a  spot  at  which  we  might 
rendezvous  before  our  final  return  to  New  Zealand. 

In  accordance  with  these  plans,  before  we  left  McMurdo 
Sound,  the  captain  of  each  relief  ship  was  in  possession  of 
full  instructions   providing  for  all   such   eventualities  as  the 

VOL,    II.  T 


274       THE   VOYAGE   OF   THE    'DISCOVERY'     [Feb. 

premature  separation  of  the  ships  or  the  failure  of  any  to 
arrive  at  the  rendezvous  before  a  certain  limiting  date. 

We  finished  our  coaling  from  the  '  Morning '  at  6  a.m.  on 
the  19th,  and  by  seven  were  alongside  the  glacier  for  the  pur- 
pose of  getting  in  water,  as  our  tanks  were  quite  empty,  and 
we  had  nothing  to  supply  the  wastage  of  the  boilers.  Our 
people  had  now  been  almost  continuously  at  work  for  thirty- 
six  hours,  but  not  a  moment  was  lost  in  setting  about  this 
fresh  task.  Now,  however,  commenced  all  those  small  diffi- 
culties which  were  a  natural  result  with  complicated  machinery 
which  had  so  long  been  idle.  It  was  beyond  expectation  that 
things  would  be  found  to  work  as  efficiently  as  if  they  had 
been  in  constant  use,  and  the  engine-room  staff  especially 
knew  that,  as  they  expressed  it,  they  would  have  to  work 
1  double  tides '  to  put  their  department  in  order  again. 

On  this  particular  morning  it  was  the  steam -pipes  of  our 
ice-melters  which  gave  out  and  caused  a  long  and  tantalising 
delay,  so  that  by  the  afternoon,  when  we  were  preparing  to 
start  work,  the  wind  had  sprung  up  from  the  south  again, 
making  our  position  untenable.  We  got  clear  of  the  south 
side  of  the  glacier  with  some  difficulty,  and  steered  round  to 
the  north  side,  but  scarcely  had  we  planted  our  anchors  when 
the  wind  increased  to  a  gale.  So  swiftly  did  it  sweep  down  on 
us  that  the  ship  could  be  kept  up  to  the  ice  only  by  steaming 
full  speed,  and  we  had  barely  time  to  recover  our  men  and 
anchors  before  we  were  drifted  out  of  the  inlet  altogether. 
There  was  nothing  for  it  now  but  to  run  to  the  north  and 
hope  to  get  our  water  elsewhere,  and  away  we  flew  with  our 
consorts  at  our  heels. 

And  so  that  night,  running  swiftly  through  the  water  with 
a  howling  gale  behind,  we  saw  the  last  of  McMurdo  Sound. 
It  was  a  fine  scene,  for  although  the  wind  blew  with  great 
force,  the  sky  was  comparatively  clear.  Away  to  the  south- 
west behind  the  ragged  storm  clouds  could  be  seen  the  deep 
red  of  the  setting  sun,  against  which  there  stood  in  sharp  out- 
line the  dark  forms  of  the  western  mountains  and  the  familiar 
cone  of  Mount  Discovery.    On  our  right  in  a  gloomy  threaten- 


1904]  DRIVEN   NORTH  275 

ing  sky  rose  the  lofty  snow-clad  slopes  of  Erebus  and  the  high 
domed  summit  of  Cape  Bird.  For  the  last  time  we  gazed  at 
all  these  well-known  landmarks  with  feelings  that  were  not 
far  removed  from  sadness,  and  yet  whatever  sorrow  we  may 
have  felt  at  leaving  for  ever  the  region  which  had  been  our 
home,  it  is  not  surprising  that  after  our  recent  experiences  the 
last  entry  in  my  diary  for  this  night  should  have  been, '  Oh  !  but 
it  is  grand  to  be  on  the  high  seas  once  more  in  our  good  ship.' 

February  20  saw  us  still  speeding  along  the  coastline  to  the 
north  with  a  strong  following  breeze  ;  although  the  sky  was 
overcast  the  land  was  clearly  in  view  and  we  were  able  to  keep 
within  ten  miles  of  it  in  a  perfectly  clear  sea,  though  we  could 
see  a  fringe  of  pack-ice  and  numerous  small  bergs  close  to  the 
coast.  It  will  be  remembered  that  this  stretch  of  the  coast 
was  quite  unknown  until  we  had  made  our  way  south  along  it, 
and  that  even  then  we  had  been  obliged  to  keep  a  long  dis- 
tance out  in  many  places  on  account  of  the  pack-ice.  Now  we 
were  able  to  fill  in  all  the  gaps  which  had  formerly  been 
missed,  and  even  more;  for  our  indefatigable  surveyor, 
Mulock,  remained  on  deck  day  and  night  during  this  run, 
taking  innumerable  angles  to  peaks  and  headlands,  whilst  our 
artist,  Wilson,  was  equally  diligent  in  transferring  this  long 
panorama  of  mountain  scenery  to  his  sketch-book. 

At  three  in  the  afternoon  of  the  20th  we  sighted  the  white 
cliffs  of  the  curious  glacier  tongue  which,  as  may  be  seen  on 
the  chart,  runs  out  for  many  miles  in  a  strangely  attenuated 
form.  At  10  p.m.  we  rounded  the  end  of  this  snout  and  bore 
up  for  Wood  Bay  ;  the  high  cone  of  Mount  Melbourne  and  the 
bluff  cliffs  of  Cape  Washington  could  be  seen  in  the  distance. 

The  main  object  in  going  to  Wood  Bay  was  to  fill  up  our 
water  supply,  but  we  had  also  come  to  the  conclusion  that  this 
place  must  be  closer  to  the  magnetic  pole  than  had  been 
supposed,  and  for  a  long  time  we  had  cherished  the  hope  of 
being  able  to  make  a  series  of  magnetic  observations  on  its 
shores,  but  in  this  respect  we  were  destined  to  be  disappointed, 
as  my  diary  shows  : 

'■February  21. — At  2  a.m.  the  wind,  still  freshening  from 

T2 


276      THE   VOYAGE  OE  THE    <  DISCOVERY'     [Fed. 

the  west,  brought  the  "  Morning  "  up  on  us  again.  She  looked 
very  trim  and  snug  under  her  canvas.  As  she  approached  she 
ran  up  a  signal  which  we  could  not  distinguish,  but  guessing 
that  she  wanted  to  take  advantage  of  the  breeze  and  get  away 
north,  I  hoisted  "Proceed  on  your  voyage,"  and  soon  her 
answering  pennant  fluttered  out,  her  helm  went  up,  and  she 
shot  away  to  the  north-east ;  and  so  our  imposing  little  fleet  is 
breaking  up.  At  6  a.m.  we  rounded  the  inner  angle  of  Cape 
Washington,  and  to  our  surprise  found  the  whole  bay  full  of 
pack-ice.  We  passed  through  one  broad  stream  and  got  well 
inside  the  headland,  but  beyond  this  from  the  crow's-nest  I 
could  see  no  open  water,  and  it  was  obviously  impossible  to 
proceed  into  any  of  the  inlets.  Signalling  to  the  "Terra 
Nova  "  to  remain  outside,  we  pushed  in  towards  the  southern 
shore,  and  tried  to  secure  the  ship  to  a  small  berg ;  but  there 
was  a  considerable  swell  running  into  the  bay,  and  after  some 
unsuccessful  efforts  to  reach  the  berg  we  tied  up  to  a  small  but 
solid  floe.  Then  all  hands,  officers  and  men,  tumbled  over 
the  side  and  started  working  like  demons  to  get  the  ice  on 
board ;  by  3  p.m.  we  had  finished,  and  I  was  sincerely  glad,  for 
some  of  our  people  are  almost  dropping  with  fatigue.  They 
had  little  rest  before  we  came  out  of  the  ice,  but  since,  they 
have  had  practically  none.  We  never  quite  appreciated  what 
a  lot  of  work  there  was  to  be  done  till  we  got  to  sea,  but  what 
with  the  bending  of  ropes  and  sails,  the  securing  of  movable 
articles,  and  the  constant  chipping  away  of  ice  from  every 
conceivable  place,  there  has  not  been  a  moment's  peace  for 
our  overworked  crew. 

'  The  day  has  been  very  fine  and  bright,  with  occasional 
south-westerly  breezes,  but  quite  warm  when  the  wind  fell. 
There  was  a  good  deal  of  young  ice  in  the  bay  when  we 
entered,  but  it  vanished  in  the  course  of  the  day.  Wood  Bay 
was  looking  its  best.  The  south  side  is  fringed  by  the  ice- 
cliffs  terminating  the  slopes  of  Mount  Melbourne,  with  rocky 
headlands  and  huge  masses  of  black  morainic  material  occa- 
sionally occurring.  The  north  side  is  limited  by  splendid  bare 
rocky  cliffs  intersected  with  deep  glacier  valleys. 


1904]  TROUBLE  WITH   PUMPS  277 

'  It  was  5  p.m.  before  we  could  clear  the  pack  by  standing 
close  along  the  southern  shore,  where  we  saw  quantities  of 
skuas,  and  one  small  Adelie  penguin  rookery,  showing  again 
how  these  birds  take  advantage  of  every  available  landing 
place.  On  arriving  in  the  open  water,  Armitage  swung  the 
ship,  but  before  he  could  complete  his  task  the  sun  dis- 
appeared. At  seven  we  steamed  out  of  the  bay,  meeting  a 
heavy  swell  from  the  south-east,  which  is  causing  us  to  roll 
heavily.  I  trust  this  does  not  mean  a  gale,  as  we  are  by  no 
means  prepared  to  meet  one  yet.' 

1  February  22. — Last  night  we  had  an  exceedingly  unpleasant 
experience,  with  some  hours  of  serious  alarm.  I  suppose  such 
things  must  be  expected  to  happen  under  the  circumstances, 
but  I  shall  be  extremely  glad  when  we  have  settled  down  into 
sea  trim.  As  far  as  I  was  concerned  the  trouble  began  at 
1  a.m.,  when  Skelton  called  me  and  asked  permission  to  stop 
the  engines,  as  the  pumps  had  refused  duty,  and  the  water  was 
gaining  on  the  ship.  When  we  stopped,  the  ship  dropped 
broadside  on  the  swell  and  commenced  to  roll  300  each  way. 
This  was  not  a  pleasing  condition  under  which  to  contend  with 
any  difficulty,  much  less  with  such  a  one  as  now  faced  us,  for 
on  looking  down  into  the  engine-room  I  found  that  the  water 
had  risen  well  over  the  stokehold  plates,  and  with  the  rolling 
of  the  ship,  it  was  washing  to  and  fro  with  tremendous  force. 
It  was  evident  that  the  fires  in  the  main  boilers  would  soon  be 
swamped ;  so  to  avoid  accidents  they  were  drawn,  which  of 
course  put  the  steam  pump  out  of  action,  even  if  it  had  been 
in  working  order. 

'The  next  thing  was  to  try  the  hand  pumps,  and  the 
carpenter  with  the  deck  watch  was  soon  heaving  at  these,  but 
without  any  result.  Examination  showed  that  they  were  quite 
choked  up  with  ice,  so  the  next  hour  or  two  was  spent  in 
attempts  to  clear  them.  Meanwhile  the  water  was  obviously 
gaining,  though  to  this  moment  we  have  failed  to  discover 
exactly  why,  as  there  is  no  serious  leak  to  our  knowledge.  At 
3  a.m.  it  was  suggested  that  the  small  boiler  under  the  fore- 
castle should  be  lighted,  and  an  attempt  be  made  to  work  the 


278       THE   VOYAGE  OF    THE    'DISCOVERY'    [Feb. 

steam  pump  with  it.  An  hour  later  therefore  one  party  was 
rushing  to  and  fro  with  fuel  for  this  boiler,  and  another  was 
struggling  with  the  refractory  hand  pumps,  but  the  water  was 
gaining  as  steadily  as  ever.  Meanwhile  Dellbridge,  working 
up  to  his  waist  in  water,  had  taken  the  steam  pump  to  pieces, 
examined  each  part,  and  replaced  it. 

1  It  was  6  a.m.  before  we  had  steam  in  the  small  boiler,  and 
this  meant  that  it  had  been  raised  in  the  quickest  time  on 
record.  At  the  same  time  Dellbridge  reported  the  pump 
ready  again.  I  asked  somewhat  needlessly  if  he  thought  it 
would  work  now,  to  which  he  grimly  replied,  "  It's  got  to,  sir." 
Nevertheless  when  it  was  started  we  found  to  our  consterna- 
tion that  it  did  not.  Then,  and  not  till  then,  someone  thought 
of  examining  the  bilge  suction,  and  here  in  a  moment  was 
found  the  cause  of  all  the  trouble.  The  pump,  we  discovered, 
had  never  been  out  of  order,  but  the  rose  which  drew  the 
water  from  the  bilges  was  quite  choked  up  with  fine  ashes. 
When  we  left  our  winter  quarters  all  this  part  had  been  a  mass 
of  ice,  and  it  had  therefore  been  impossible  to  clear  out  the 
bilges,  which  were  still  in  a  half-frozen  condition.  When  this 
suction  had  been  cleared  we  had  the  satisfaction  of  seeing  a 
stream  of  water  pouring  out  of  the  ship's  side,  and  soon  after 
the  hand  pumps  brought  their  small  power  to  aid  in  the  relief. 
By  eight  o'clock  everything  was  reported  in  working  order,  the 
fires  were  re-lit  and  I  got  to  bed.  The  whole  of  our  engine- 
room  staff  have  been  on  duty  for  twenty-four  hours  without  a 
spell.  Our  scare  has  been  useful  in  one  way,  as  we  can  rely  on 
our  pumps  for  any  sudden  call  in  future.' 

The  heavy  swell  continued  throughout  the  22nd,  but 
gradually  fell  towards  the  evening.  Somewhat  to  our  sur- 
prise, it  did  not  prove  to  be  the  forerunner  of  a  gale,  and  on 
the  23rd  the  sky  was  comparatively  clear  and  the  wind  light. 
In  the  middle  of  this  day  we  approached  and  passed  Coulman 
Island  at  a  very  short  distance,  getting  a  fine  view  of  its  high 
cliffs  and  of  the  mountainous  mainland.  The  coast  to  the 
south  of  the  island  was  heavily  packed,  as  it  had  been  on  our 
former  visit,  and  even  on  the  outside  of  the  island  we  were 


1904]  THE   RUDDER   DISABLED  279 

obliged  to  force  our  way  through  several  loose  streams,  besides 
a  quantity  of  young  ice,  broken  into  tiny  rounded  pancakes 
with  frilled  edges,  caused  by  the  chafe  of  the  swell.  In  the 
evening  a  breeze  sprang  up  from  the  west,  which  enabled  us  to 
make  sail  and  afforded  us  much  relief  from  the  continual  heavy 
rolling.  We  had  always  thought  that  the  '  Discovery '  was  a 
particularly  lively  ship,  but  we  never  appreciated  it  more  than 
on  this  day,  when  we  found  ourselves  lurching  from  side  to  side 
in  the  most  uncomfortable  fashion,  while  our  consort  followed 
in  our  wake  with  scarcely  a  movement. 

After  passing  Coulman  Island  we  were  able  to  hug  the 
coast  much  closer  than  we  had  done  when  travelling  south, 
and  it  is  worthy  of  note  that,  as  we  could  see,  both  Tucker 
Inlet  and  another  unnamed  one  north  of  Cape  Hallet  are 
much  deeper  than  Ross  supposed.  Either  would  afford  excel- 
lent shelter  to  a  ship.  The  two  inlets  curve  in  such  a  manner 
that  the  mass  of  land  on  which  Ross  has  placed  the  names  of 
Wheatstone,  Hallet,  and  Cotter  forms  a  peninsula.  Mowbray 
Bay  is  also  a  deep  inlet. 

Early  on  the  24th  we  sighted  the  Possession  Islands,  and 
later  passed  through  the  group.  There  are  nine  islands  and 
islets,  very  various  in  size  and  shape.  That  on  which  Ross 
landed  is  the  largest,  and  has  a  shelving  beach  on  the  western 
side,  though  it  is  steep  and  precipitous  on  the  eastern.  The 
smaller  islets  are  mere  rocks,  but  some  are  of  very  curious 
shape.  One  is  an  almost  perfect  column  more  than  300  feet  in 
height ;  another  which  has  a  similar  but  broader  appearance 
from  the  south,  when  viewed  from  the  east  or  west  is  seen  to 
be  pierced  with  two  huge  arches,  the  larger  of  which  must  be 
nearly  1 50  feet  in  height.  Altogether  these  islands  are  a  curious 
and  interesting  group. 

Directly  after  we  had  passed  through  the  channels  between 
them  the  carpenter  came  to  me  with  a  serious  face  to  call  my 
attention  to  the  rudder,  and  I  immediately  went  aft '  to  inspect 
it.  I  found  that  the  solid  oak  rudder-head  was  completely 
shattered,  and  that  it  was  held  together  by  little  more  than  its 
weight ;  as  the  tiller  was  moved  to  the  right  or  left  the  rudder 


28o      THE   VOYAGE   OE   THE   'DISCOVERY'     [Feb. 

followed  it,  but  with  a  lag  of  many  degrees,  so  that  it  was 
evident  that  the  connection  between  the  two  was  quite  insecure. 
How  we  had  come  by  such  an  injury  I  could  not  guess,  unless 
it  was  on  the  freeing  of  the  ship  or  from  collision  with  some 
submerged  spur  of  the  glacier  in  McMurdo  Sound  ;  but  it  was 
obvious  that  in  such  a  condition  we  could  not  hope  to  weather 
a  gale  without  losing  all  control  over  the  ship,  and  therefore 
that  the  sooner  we  got  our  spare  rudder  shipped  in  place  of 
the  damaged  one,  the  better.  On  looking  back  at  this  incident 
I  cannot  but  recognise  how  exceedingly  fortunate  it  was  that 
the  sharp  eyes  of  our  carpenter  should  have  detected  the  fault 
at  this  time,  for,  as  will  be  seen,  a  few  days  later  we  were  in 
such  a  position  that  the  loss  of  our  rudder  would  have  been  a 
most  serious  matter,  and  the  steps  which  we  now  took  would 
have  been  almost  impossible  in  the  open  sea.  The  fault,  such 
as  it  was,  was  not  easily  seen,  for  the  injured  rudder-head  was 
below  the  level  of  the  deck  and  partly  submerged  by  the  wash 
of  the  screw.  I  have  had  reason  before  to  speak  of  the 
invaluable  qualities  of  our  warrant  officers,  and  certainly  this 
was  a  case  that  proved  them.  As  it  was,  immediately  I  realised 
our  crippled  state,  I  determined  to  make  for  Cape  Adare  and 
to  seek  shelter  in  Robertson  Bay  ;  the  events  which  followed 
I  quote  from  my  diary  : 

•  We  signalled  to  the  "  Terra  Nova  "  that  our  rudder  was 
damaged  and  that  we  should  anchor  in  the  bay.  There  was 
now  a  brisk  breeze,  and  with  sail,  steam,  and  current  we 
approached  Cape  Adare  at  a  rapid  pace.  As  we  came  nearer 
we  could  see  a  very  large  number  of  bergs  scattered  about  off 
the  entrance  of  the  bay ;  nearly  all  were  tabular,  and  they 
varied  from  50  to  150  feet  in  height  and  from  a  quarter  to 
three-quarters  of  a  mile  in  length.  Streams  of  pack  were  lying 
inshore  and  stretching  from  berg  to  berg.  It  was  not  alto- 
gether pleasant  turning  and  twisting  amongst  these  immense 
masses  of  ice  with  the  knowledge  that  the  rudder  might  give 
out  at  any  moment.  At  the  entrance  of  the  bay  we  were 
involved  in  a  heavy  pack,  but  it  was  noticeable  that  the  floes 
were  decayed  and  water-worn  to  an  extent  which  we  have  not 


i9o4i  TliE   RUDDER   REPLACED  281 

seen  since  we  first  entered  the  Ross  Sea.  As  we  came  through 
this  pack  the  leadsman  suddenly  got  a  sounding  of  five  fathoms, 
but  though  we  sounded  repeatedly  before  and  after,  nowhere 
else  could  we  get  anything  but  deep  water.  It  appeared  as  though 
there  must  be  a  submarine  ridge  or  hill  at  this  particular  spot. 

1  Late  in  the  afternoon  we  dropped  our  anchor  in  thirteen 
fathoms  off  the  beach  we  had  formerly  visited ;  a  few  officers 
went  on  shore  to  take  magnetic  observations  and  to  secure 
bird  specimens,  but  the  majority,  with  the  men,  set  to  work  at 
once  to  shift  the  rudder.  In  spite  of  the  facilities  which  are 
afforded  by  our  rudder-well,  the  task  is  not  an  easy  one,  as  the 
rudder  itself  and  all  the  fittings  connected  with  it  are  very 
ponderous.  By  ten  to-night,  however,  when  the  light  grew 
dim,  the  damaged  rudder  had  been  hoisted  on  deck  and  the 
spare  one  prepared  for  lowering  it  into  its  place.  Whilst  we 
were  at  work  the  tide  setting  out  of  the  bay  brought  down  on 
us  a  heavy  pack ;  our  anchor  held  well,  but  the  "  Terra  Nova  " 
evidently  did  not  like  the  look  of  things,  and  has  weighed  her 
anchor  and  put  out  to  sea.' 

'  February  25. — By  6  a.m.  we  were  at  work  again.  The 
weather  fortunately  remained  quite  calm  and  bright.  At  9.30 
the  spare  rudder  was  in  place,  and,  after  a  hasty  breakfast,  at 
10.15  we  weighed  our  anchor  and  pushed  out  to  sea.  A  snow- 
storm swept  down  upon  us  immediately  after,  and  we  lost 
sight  of  the  "  Terra  Nova,"  but  pushing  out  in  the  direction  in 
which  she  had  last  been  seen  we  had  the  satisfaction  of  finding 
ourselves  close  to  her  when  the  storm  passed,  and  soon  after 
we  were  steaming  north-west  in  company.  An  almost  in- 
credible amount  of  work  has  been  done  in  the  "  Discovery  " 
since  we  left  winter  quarters ;  it  has  been  one  long  fight  to 
bring  her  into  sea  trim,  and  difficulty  after  difficulty  has  arisen 
in  the  most  exasperating  manner  ;  but  now,  I  think,  thanks  to 
the  determined  energy  of  our  people,  we  may  say  that  all 
things  are  in  order  again,  and  that  our  ship  is  prepared  to  face 
most  emergencies.  The  only  thing  I  am  doubtful  about  is  the 
steering  power  of  our  spare  rudder,  as  it  has  scarcely  half  the 
area  of  the  old  one.' 


282       THE   VOYAGE   OF  THE    'DISCOVERY       [Feb. 

It  was  of  great  importance  that  our  ship  should  be  in  good 
sea  trim  at  this  time,  because  according  to  our  program  me  we 
were  now  about  to  make  the  attempt  to  penetrate  a  new  region, 
and  we  expected  to  find  quite  enough  to  occupy  our  minds  in 
contending  with  the  obstacles  in  our  path  without  having  to 
consider  internal  troubles. 

Now,  therefore,  we  turned  to  the  west  with  high  hope  that 
with  our  steam-power  we  should  be  able  to  pass  beyond  the 
point  which  had  been  reached  by  Sir  James  Ross  in  his  sailing 
ships.  At  first  all  went  well  with  us,  as,  except  for  bergs  and 
very  loose  streams  of  pack,  there  seemed  nothing  to  obstruct 
our  course.  The  number  of  bergs  was  extraordinary  j  it  would 
appear  that  the  current  which  runs  up  the  east  coast  of  Victoria 
Land  continues  to  the  north-west  after  passing  Cape  Adare, 
and  leaves  a  region  of  slack  water  to  the  westward  of  Robertson 
Bay,  and,  as  a  consequence,  many  of  the  bergs  which  stream 
up  the  coast  are  carried  by  eddies  into  this  area  where  they 
present  such  a  formidable  accumulation. 

When  pack-ice  is  entangled  amongst  icebergs  it  has  to  be 
navigated  with  some  caution,  as  amongst  the  floes  will  always 
be  found  numerous  fragments  of  the  bergs  themselves  ;  these 
pieces  generally  float  low  and  are  not  easily  seen,  but  as  they 
are  very  solid  and  often  possess  sharp  spurs  it  is  eminently 
desirable  to  avoid  them. 

By  the  afternoon  of  the  25th  we  were  in  the  thick  of  the 
bergs,  and,  to  our  disappointment,  we  found  the  pack-ice 
growing  closer.  Having  but  a  very  limited  supply  of  coal  in 
our  bunkers,  it  was  necessarily  our  policy  to  avoid  the  pack  as 
far  as  possible  ;  and  as  we  could  not  afford  to  force  our  way 
through  long  stretches  of  it,  we  turned  outwards  in  hopes  of 
finding  a  clearer  passage.  This  took  us  a  long  distance  from 
the  land,  but  we  trusted  that  we  should  soon  be  able  to  return 
towards  it. 

With  the  closing  of  the  season  and  our  advance  to  the 
north,  our  days  were  gradually  drawing  in,  and  already  we  had 
a  night  of  four  or  five  hours,  when  navigation  amongst  the  ice 
promised  to  be  anxious  work. 


1904]  HEAVY  PACK  283 

For  the  incidents  of  the  next  few  days  I  turn  to  my  diary 
once  more.     On  the  night  of  the  25th  I  wrote  : 

'Shortly  after  8  p.m.  it  became  thick  with  driving  snow- 
storms from  the  east.  We  are  still  surrounded  with  bergs,  and 
thick  weather  is  undesirable;  however,  the  snowstorms  are 
like  April  showers,  frequent  but  quickly  over,  and  after  they 
burst  upon  us  it  is  not  long  before  we  see  our  consort  and  the 
bergs  again.  We  are  going  half-speed  for  the  night  hoping 
that  to-morrow  will  afford  us  a  brighter  outlook.' 

'  February  26. — I  had  scarcely  lain  down  in  my  clothes 
last  night,  thinking  of  a  clear  sea  ahead,  when  the  pack  was 
again  reported.  We  pushed  through  several  streams,  hoping 
to  escape,  but  to  no  purpose.  At  5.30  we  found  ourselves 
completely  embayed ;  then  the  fog  came  down  upon  us,  and 
we  were  obliged  to  stop  engines.  Whilst  waiting  about  we 
took  the  opportunity  to  sound,  and,  to  my  surprise,  got  no 
bottom  with  1,000  fathoms  of  line  out.  It  is  evident  that  the 
continental  plateau  slopes  down  very  steeply  off  this  coast.  We 
were  just  preparing  to  get  a  net  over  when  the  weather  cleared 
and  we  saw  the  land  and  clear  water  for  some  way  towards  it. 
We  decided  to  waste  no  time  in  pushing  on  in  this  direction, 
but  soon  after  noon  our  channel  closed  in  again  and  we  found 
ourselves  surrounded  with  heavy  pack.  The  weather  was  now 
quite  clear,  and  from  the  crow's-nest  one  could  get  a  good  idea 
of  our  surroundings. 

'From  the  high  peaks  of  Mounts  Minto  and  Adam  the 
mountains  gradually  descend  towards  the  west  and  grow  more 
heavily  glaciated;  the  coastline  abreast  of  us  seems  very 
indented  and  is  marked  with  numerous  dark  outstanding  cliffs 
behind  which  the  comparatively  low  mountains  are  entirely 
snow-covered  except  where  occasionally  a  sharp  pyramidal 
peak  thrusts  its  summit  through  the  white  sheet.  Away  to 
the  west  the  land  still  descends,  and  all  eminences  are  lost 
under  the  snowy  mantle  which  slopes  down  gradually  to  the 
sea  level  at  Cape  North.  A  little  ahead  of  us  I  could  see  the 
black  headlands  of  Smith's  Inlet,  but  between  us  and  it,  and, 
in  fact,  over  the  whole  sea  to  the  west,  lay  the  broad  expanse 


234      THE   VOYAGE   OF    THE   'DISCOVERY5     [Fe6. 

of  a  mighty  field  of  pack-ice  dotted  with  numberless  bergs. 
Here  and  there  towards  the  shore  could  be  seen  leads  of  open 
water,  but  they  were  nowhere  continuous,  and  it  was  evident 
that  at  the  best  it  would  take  us  some  days  to  reach  the 
far  cape. 

1  The  temptation  to  push  on  was  great,  and  I  sent  to  learn 
how  our  coal  supply  stood  ;  the  reply  showed  me  that  we  had 
little  over  eighty  tons  remaining,  an  amount  which  would 
allow  of  sixteen  days'  steaming  at  our  present  consumption. 
I  reflected  that  at  least  ten  of  these  should  be  allowed  for  the 
return  voyage,  and  I  knew  how  little  we  could  do  with  the 
six  that  remained  if  once  we  became  involved  in  the  pack. 
Reluctantly,  therefore,  I  decided  to  turn  to  the  north-east  and 
seek  a  way  around  this  formidable  barrier  ;  we  must  now  look 
for  the  first  opening  in  it  and  reserve  our  small  margin  of  coal 
for  more  promising  circumstances.  It  is  grievously  disappoint- 
ing to  find  the  pack  so  far  to  the  east ;  Ross  carried  the  open 
water  almost  to  Cape  North. 

'After  being  brought  up  by  the  pack,  we  sounded  and 
obtained  bottom  at  610  fathoms,  and  then  devoted  the  after- 
noon to  getting  a  haul  with  our  trawl.  Whilst  this  operation 
was  in  progress  a  stiff  breeze  sprang  up  from  the  west  and  the 
glass  commenced  to  fall  rapidly.  Hampered  with  our  trawl- 
line  we  drifted  alarmingly  close  to  several  small  bergs,  so  that 
I  was  not  sorry  when  we  got  our  net  on  board  again ;  it  pro- 
duced some  new  species,  but  the  catch  was  not  so  satisfactory 
as  we  could  have  wished. 

'  By  the  time  we  were  ready  to  proceed  the  wind  had 
increased  to  a  moderate  gale,  and  the  ice-streams  began  to 
move  with  such  rapidity  that  we  made  all  possible  speed  for 
the  open  sea.  We  could  not  reach  it,  however,  without  forcing 
our  way  through  a  broad  belt  of  the  heaviest  pack  we  have 
seen ;  the  floes  were  much  hummocked,  and  rose  almost  to  the 
level  of  our  deck.  However,  with  a  full  head  of  steam  we 
forced  a  way  through,  and  reached  the  open  water  just  before 
dark.  We  have  since  made  sail,  and  are  now  standing  to  the 
eastward  with  a  strong  ice-blink  on  our  port  hand,  but  a  com- 


i9o4]  SKIRTING  THE   PACK  285 

paratively  open  sea  to  leeward.  The  sky  has  become  very 
overcast  and  the  weather  threatening,  but  the  sea  is  smooth.'     • 

''February  27. — We  are  skirting  this  wretched  pack;  I 
cannot  think  what  brings  it  so  far  to  the  east ;  last  night  we 
came  through  several  streams,  and  were  forced  to  turn  to  the 
south-east;  but  this  morning  we  straightened  up  again,  and 
are  now  going  nearly  due  north. 

1  Before  noon  the  wind  gradually  died  away,  and  we  now 
have  a  brisk  and  increasing  breeze  from  the  south.  The  glass, 
which  had  been  steadily  falling  since  noon  yesterday,  is  slowly 
rising  ;  we  have  passed  away  from  this  region  of  bergs,  but  the 
strong  ice-blink  is  always  on  our  port  hand.  If  in  no  other 
way,  we  can  guess  our  proximity  to  the  pack-ice  by  the  con- 
stant presence  of  the  charming  little  snow  petrels  ;  they  never 
seem  to  wander  far  from  the  pack.  Last  night  we  had  a  flight 
of  Antarctic  petrels  around  the  ship ;  they  came  and  went  in 
the  gloom  in  very  ghostly  fashion,  and  this  morning  there  were 
still  a  number  about  us.  This  morning  brought  more  of  the 
bird  friends  that  we  have  missed  for  so  long,  and  we  saw  again 
the  fulmar  petrel,  the  small  prion,  and  a  sooty  albatross ;  these 
indicate,  without  doubt,  a  clear  sea  to  the  north.  I  wish  one 
could  say  the  same  of  the  west. 

1  Our  poor  dogs  are  made  very  miserable  by  the  wet.  Born 
in  the  South,  they  have  absolutely  no  experience  of  damp  con- 
ditions, and  at  first  they  were  much  alarmed  by  them ;  they 
show  the  same  horror  of  a  wet  deck  or  a  wet  coat  as  a  cat 
might  do.  But  the  most  curious  result  of  their  ignorance  was 
the  fact  that  they  had  to  be  taught  to  lap;  they  had  never 
quenched  their  thirst  except  by  eating  snow,  and  when  water 
was  put  before  them  they  didn't  know  what  to  do  with  it  ;  in 
fact,  they  grew  very  thirsty  before  they  could  be  persuaded  to 
drink  by  thrusting  their  noses  into  the  water  tins.' 

'  February  28. — The  S.E.  breeze  increased  in  force  during 
the  night,  and  by  morning  it  was  blowing  a  full  gale  with  con- 
stant snowstorms.  The  night  was  not  pleasant,  as  we  got 
amongst  the  ice  again,  which  kept  us  all  on  the  qui  vive ;  at 
midnight  we  found  it  stretching  across  our  bows,  and  the  snow 


286       THE   VOYAGE    OF   THE    'DISCOVERY'     [Feb. 

petrels  had  increased  in  number ;  at  3  a.m.  we  passed  through 
several  loose  streams,  and  immediately  hauled  to  the  north. 
With  a  strong  breeze  we  now  bowled  along  at  a  good  rate. 
The  "Terra  Nova"  was  some  distance  astern,  but  turned  in 
our  wake  ;  in  order  that  she  might  come  up  with  us,  I  stopped 
the  engines,  and  we  stood  on  under  sail  alone.  At  six  o'clock 
she  was  some  two  miles  astern,  but  soon  after  a  heavy  snow 
squall  blotted  her  out,  and  when  this  had  passed  nothing  of  her 
could  be  seen.  I  do  not  think  there  is  any  cause  for  anxiety, 
as  the  weather  remained  thick,  but  I  cannot  think  why  she  did 
not  keep  close  touch  with  us,  as  she  should  have  found  it  easy 
to  catch  us  after  we  stopped  our  engines. 

'  During  the  forenoon  it  blew  very  hard  with  a  rapidly  rising 
sea.  I  was  very  anxious  about  our  foremost  spars,  as  the  hemp 
rigging  is  now  quite  slack  and  we  have  had  no  chance  of  set- 
ting it  up.  Our  foretop-gallant-mast  was  bending  like  a  whip ; 
it  must  be  a  beautiful  spar  to  have  stood  the  strain. 

'The  ship  has  been  kicking  and  plunging  about  in  the 
most  objectionable  manner :  the  upper  deck  has  been  awash, 
and  water  has  been  pouring  down  through  the  skylights  and 
chimneys.  It  has  been  horribly  stuffy  below,  and  the  majority 
of  us  have  been  feeling  extremely  sea-sick.  Altogether  it  has 
been  a  very  unpleasant  day,  but  perhaps  the  most  serious  thing 
that  it  has  disclosed  is  the  uselessness  of  our  small  rudder 
under  such  conditions ;  it  had  so  little  effect  on  the  ship  that 
we  could  only  keep  our  course  by  constantly  trimming  our 
sails.  Had  we  met  an  iceberg,  we  should  have  had  no  choice 
but  to  throw  the  yards  aback.  This  is  really  a  grave  matter, 
as  the  nights  are  long  and  we  may  fall  across  bergs  at  any 
moment.  Our  deck  watch  is  reduced  to  five  hands,  moreover, 
and  this  is  all  too  small  a  number  to  deal  with  any  sudden 
emergency  ;  as  it  is,  they  have  to  be  constantly  on  the  alert  to 
stand  by  the  braces. 

'The  barometer  ceased  to  fall  at  seven  o'clock,  and  the 
wind  immediately  slackened.' 

'  February  29. — We  stood  steadily  on  to  the  north  last 
night  in  hopes  that  the  "  Terra  Nova  "  would  catch  us  up,  but 


I9Q4]  BALLENY   ISLANDS  287 

as  there  were  no  signs  of  her  at  4  a.m.  I  determined  to  go 
about.  The  wind  had  fallen  light,  but  there  was  a  heavy  sea 
running,  and  it  was  a  good  half-hour  before  we  could  wear  the 
ship  round.  We  have  been  standing  due  west  all  day  about 
latitude  67^  ;  the  glass  has  been  rising,  the  wind  dropping  and 
the  ship  kicking  about  most  unmercifully.  We  passed  a  few 
bergs,  mostly  small  and  flat-topped ;  the  seas  were  breaking 
over  them,  dashing  the  spray  to  a  height  of  200  or  300  feet. 
I  fear  there  is  no  chance  of  seeing  the  "  Terra  Nova  "  again 
until  we  reach  the  rendezvous.' 

'  March  1. — Last  night  we  got  amongst  a  number  of  bergs 
and  some  loose  streams  of  pack,  so  we  hove-to  and  kept  a 
sharp  look-out ;  at  four  o'clock  we  got  under  way  again  with 
steam  and  proceeded  steadily  to  the  west.  The  weather  has 
been  thick,  with  an  overcast,  gloomy  sky,  and  we  have  had  a 
light  breeze  from  the  north  ;  there  has  been  a  steady  ice-blink 
on  our  lee,  sometimes  appearing  ahead,  to  be  quickly  followed 
by  sight  of  a  loose  stream  of  pack.  There  can  be  no  doubt 
that  since  leaving  Victoria  Land  we  have  been  skirting  a  con- 
tinuous mass  of  pack  which  must  cover  the  whole  sea  south  of 
the  Balleny  Islands. 

'  That  it  should  have  lain  so  far  to  the  eastward  this  year 
is  very  annoying ;  however,  if  we  can  push  on  upon  this  course 
we  ought  to  strike  the  islands.  Birds  have  been  plentiful  all 
day,  but  to-night  the  albatrosses  have  left  us;  snow  petrels, 
Antarctic  and  fulmar  petrels  are  our  constant  companions,  and 
this  afternoon  we  had  the  very  unusual  sight  of  a  small  flock 
of  black-headed  terns.  We  have  also  passed  two  or  three  sea 
leopards  asleep  on  the  floes :  one  we  surprised  greatly  by 
ramming  the  floe  on  which  he  was  taking  his  siesta,  whereat  he 
opened  his  formidable  jaws  and  threatened  us  in  the  most 
ferocious  manner.' 

'■March  2. —  ...  Land  was  reported  at  5  a.m.,  and  on 
the  port  bow  we  could  see  black  rock  showing  streakily  through 
the  mist.  By  7.30  we  were  close  up,  and  found  on  our  port 
bow  an  island  of  considerable  size.  Our  course  took  us  just 
to  the  northward  of  its  steep  northern  extremity.     The  general 


238      THE   VOYAGE   OF  THE    'DISCOVERY'  [Mar. 

aspect  of  the  land  much  resembled  that  of  Coulman  Island, 
but  the  glaciation  was  much  heavier.  High,  precipitous,  dark 
cliffs  were  capped  by  the  sharp  edge  of  the  ice-cap,  which 
undulated  smoothly  over  the  lesser  slopes,  and  lay  broken  and 
crevassed  on  the  steeper  ones ;  at  places  the  vast  snow-sheet 
descended  to  the  sea,  and  spread  out  with  immense  fan-shaped 
glaciers  fringed  with  high  ice-cliffs.  These  conditions  of  the 
coast  could  be  seen  clearly,  but  above  the  height  of  300  or 
400  feet  all  was  hidden  in  dense  stratus  cloud. 

'  By  noon  we  were  abreast  of  this  forbidding  land ;  the 
clouds  showed  signs  of  lifting,  but  still  enveloped  the  summit 
of  the  island.  The  coast  was  less  than  two  miles  from  us,  so 
that  we  could  see  each  detail  clearly,  and  twice,  as  we  passed, 
an  immense  mass  of  n6v6  became  detached  from  the  cliffs  and 
fell  with  a  huge  splash  into  the  sea.  As  I  write  we  are  standing 
to  the  west  of  the  island,  and,  to  our  astonishment,  with  a  clear 
sea.  Once  more  we  are  treading  untrodden  paths.  But 
before  we  turn  our  thoughts  to  the  west  we  are  puzzling  over 
the  question  as  to  what  this  island  and  others  we  can  dimly 
see  to  the  north  really  are.  We  are  about  the  latitude  of  the 
Russell  Islands,  yet  we  cannot  follow  Ross's  description  of 
them,  nor  can  we  understand  where  the  Balleny  Group  lies. 
One  thing  is  certain,  however  :  whatever  these  islands  may  be, 
no  one  has  ever  seen  them  from  this  side  before,  and  the  sight 
of  a  clear  sea  to  the  west  is  most  encouraging.' 

It  is  as  well  perhaps  to  explain  the  dilemma  we  found 
ourselves  in  with  regard  to  these  islands.  In  1839  Balleny 
discovered  a  group  of  islands  in  this  region,  but  whilst  the 
position  of  his  ship  was  most  carefully  reckoned  and  the 
bearings  of  the  land  masses  taken,  he  did  not  supply  sufficient 
data  accurately  to  fix  the  position  of  the  various  islands  which 
he  named.  Three  years  later,  Ross,  when  some  way  to  the 
eastward  of  this  position,  saw  land  which  he  imagined  must  be 
to  the  southward  of  Balleny's  discoveries ;  from  the  great 
distance  at  which  he  saw  it  he  believed  it  to  be  divided  into 
three  distinct  masses,  and  under  this  impression  named  them 
the  Russell  Islands.     We  came  to  this  region,  therefore,  with 


i9o4]  A   PROBLEM   SOLVED  289 

the  expectation  of  seeing  two  groups  of  islands,  and  were 
naturally  much  puzzled  when  we  found  that  by  no  means 
could  we  reconcile  the  accounts  of  the  two  explorers  to  fit  this 
theory  ;  and  at  first  the  clouded  condition  of  the  land  added 
much  to  this  difficulty. 

It  was  only  after  I  had  read  the  accounts  many  times,  and 
compared  them  with  what  we  actually  saw,  that  the  solution 
suddenly  flashed  upon  me,  and  as  is  so  often  the  case,  when 
the  key  was  once  supplied  the  matter  became  obvious  to  us 
all.  We  saw  then  that  the  island  which  we  had  just  passed  was 
Balleny's  Sturge  Island.  Balleny  had  seen  it  from  the  north, 
in  which  direction  it  presents  a  comparatively  narrow  front ; 
he  could  have  had  no  idea  of  its  length  in  a  north-and-south 
line.  At  a  later  date  Ross  must  have  seen  this  same  island, 
and,  as  we  saw  was  quite  possible,  from  a  great  distance  he 
must  have  imagined  it  to  be  divided  into  three,  and  hence 
made  the  mistake  of  naming  it  as  a  separate  group. 

Later  on  this  same  day  the  cloudy  screen  about  the  islands 
gradually  vanished  ;  we  were  able  to  see  the  land  clearly  both 
north  and  south  of  us,  and  Mulock  obtained  sufficient  bearings 
to  fix  accurately  the  position  of  each  island. 
In  the  evening  of  the  2nd  I  wrote  : 

1  This  afternoon,  as  the  weather  cleared  and  the  sun  shone 
forth,  we  got  a  good  view  of  the  islands  now  falling  behind  us, 
and  had  no  longer  a  doubt  as  to  their  identity.  Looking 
astern,  on  our  right  was  Sturge  Island,  more  than  twenty  miles 
in  length,  with  the  lofty  summit  of  Brown's  Peak  arising 
towards  its  northern  end.  The  nearest  island  on  the  left  was 
Buckle  Island,  its  outline  from  this  side  being  the  exact 
reverse  of  that  sketched  by  Balleny's  mate  from  the  other. 
The  smaller  island  next  to  the  north  was  Borrodaile  Island, 
and  this  also  could  be  recognised  from  the  sketch.  Young 
Island  presented  a  high  land  to  the  left,  though  Peak  Freeman, 
its  highest  point,  was  never  wholly  clear  of  cloud.  The  last 
of  the  group  reported  by  Balleny,  Row  Island,  we  did  not  see, 
but  this  was  not  surprising,  as  it  is  stated  to  be  comparatively 
low. 

vol.  ?i,  y 


29o      THE   VOYAGE   OF  THE    'DISCOVERY'    [Mar. 

'  Now  that  we  have  settled  the  knotty  question  as  to  the 
geography  of  these  islands,  our  position  seems  extremely 
hopeful.  This  region  to  the  westward  has  always  been  found 
heavily  packed.  We  are  the  first  to  enter  it,  and  to  our 
delight  we  find  an  open  sea  ;  it  seems  as  though  the  pack  has 
been  driven  to  the  south-east,  into  that  area  which  we  skirted. 
The  wind  has  fallen,  and  we  have  furled  our  sails  ;  a  long 
swell  comes  from  the  north-west,  showing  an  absence  of  ice  in 
that  direction.  We  are  standing  directly  to  the  west,  towards 
Wilkes  Land,  and  every  eye  is  keenly  on  the  alert  for  some 
new  development — so  keenly,  in  fact,  that  twice  this  after- 
noon has  an  excited  person  rushed  up  to  me  to  report  some 
imaginary  discovery  of  land  in  the  fantastical  cloud  forms  that 
fringe  our  horizon.  The  night  promises  to  be  fine,  though  the 
glass  is  falling.  Birds  are  gathering  about  us  in  numbers  once 
more — the  commonest  to-day  is  the  fulmar  petrel ;  it  looks  as 
though  it  nested  on  the  islands.  Rorqual  whales  have  been 
spouting  in  all  directions,  and  altogether  signs  of  life  are 
plentiful  and  cheering.' 

1  March  3. — Early  last  night  the  sky  clouded  over,  and 
towards  the  end  of  the  middle  watch  it  began  to  snow  ;  by  the 
morning  we  found  ourselves  in  a  thick  fog.  We  had  made 
sail  again  to  a  northerly  breeze,  and  at  5.30  a.m.  we  hove-to  in 
none  too  pleasant  a  position,  for  we  could  not  tell  where  we 
were  drifting  or  when  some  monster  iceberg  might  appear  on 
our  lee.  At  11  a.m.  there  was  a  slight  clearance,  and  we 
decided  to  push  on,  which  we  have  since  done,  though  every 
now  and  again  the  fog  comes  down  on  us  as  thick  as  ever. 
At  noon  to-day  we  estimated  we  were  in  longitude  159  E.,  and 
since  that  we  have  sailed  some  way  to  the  west,  so  that  we  are 
now  practically  behind  Wilkes'  alleged  land.  But  as  there  is  a 
long  swell  from  the  north,  it  is  plain  that  there  cannot  be  any 
extent  of  land  in  that  direction ;  it  is  still  possible  that  Wilkes 
may  have  seen  some  islands,  but  this  we  can  only  determine 
when  the  weather  clears. 

1  It  has  cleared  to  some  extent  to-night,  and  has  shown  us 
more   than   one  berg  in  our  vicinity.     At  seven  o'clock  we 


i9o4]  TURNING   NORTH  291 

passed  a  large  one  that  was  slowly  oscillating.  We  could  see 
it  gradually  tilt  over  until  its  flat  surface  was  half  submerged, 
then  it  slowly  righted  itself  again  ;  this  went  on  for  some  time, 
the  oscillations  growing  larger,  until  suddenly  it  got  beyond  the 
point  of  recovery  and  with  a  huge  splash  turned  turtle.  The 
sight  of  this  immense  mass  rolling  over  in  the  foaming  sea  was 
very  impressive,  and  we  were  grateful  that  it  should  have 
chosen  such  an  opportune  moment  for  our  benefit.  We  are 
longing  for  clear  weather  •  one  cannot  but  believe  there  must 
be  land  somewhere  in  this  region,  especially  on  account  of  our 
soundings,  but  we  know  that  we  cannot  go  on  like  this  much 
longer.  We  have  only  sixty  tons  of  coal  remaining,  a  bare 
sufficiency  to  take  us  north  ;  no  doubt  the  wisest  plan  would 
be  to  turn  north  now,  but  I  have  decided  to  go  on  as  we  are 
for  another  day  in  hopes  that  fortune  may  favour  us  with  one 
clear  sight  of  our  surroundings.' 

'  March  4. — The  wind  failed  us  last  night,  and  it  has  been 
calm  all  day.  The  sky  has  been  dull,  but  the  horizon  quite 
clear ;  we  could  have  seen  land  at  a  great  distance,  yet  none 
has  been  in  sight,  and  thus  once  and  for  all  we  have  definitely 
disposed  of  Wilkes  Land.  Both  Armitage  and  I  got  good 
sights,  and  both  fixed  our  noon  position  to  be  in  latitude 
67.23  S.,  longitude  155-30  E.  We  have  been  standing  N.W. 
true,  and  on  such  a  course  we  should  have  sighted  Eld's  Peak 
and  Ringold's  Knoll  on  our  right  had  these  places  existed.  It 
is  therefore  quite  evident  that  they  do  not,  nor  can  there  be 
any  land  in  this  direction,  as  the  long  ocean  swell  has  never 
ceased  to  roll  steadily  in  from  the  north,  and  we  have  other 
signs  of  bird  life  which  show  a  clear  sea  in  that  direction. 
To-night  Cape  Hudson  should  be  in  sight  on  the  port  bow, 
but  that  also  is  conspicuous  by  its  absence.  After  reading 
Wilkes'  report  again,  I  must  conclude  that  as  these  places  are 
non-existent,  there  is  no  case  for  any  land  eastward  of  Adelie 
Land.  It  is  a  great  disappointment  to  have  to  turn  north  at 
such  an  interesting  time,  but  I  feel  that  it  is  imperative ;  we 
have  scarcely  coal  enough  for  ten  days'  steaming,  and  our  late 
experiences  have  shown  clearly  how  unmanageable  the  ship 

u  2 


292       THE   VOYAGE   OF  THE    'DISCOVERY'   [Mar. 

is  under  sail  alone  with  our  small  spare  rudder.  There  is 
nothing  for  it  but  to  turn  homeward,  and  even  as  it  is 
we  shall  have  to  rely  on  favouring  winds  to  reach  our 
rendezvous. 

*  It  is  a  curious  fact  that  although  we  have  sighted  no  land 
we  are  still  on  the  edge  of  a  continental  plateau,  and  in  com- 
paratively shallow  water.  This  morning  we  got  250  fathoms, 
and  this  afternoon  254  fathoms  ;  the  continental  shelf  would 
seem  to  extend  as  far  as  the  Balleny  Islands.  This  afternoon 
we  put  over  a  trawl  and  got  a  haul  which  delighted  the  heart 
of  our  biologist  with  quite  a  number  of  new  species.' 

1 March  5. — During  the  night  we  passed  close  to  the 
supposed  position  of  Cape  Hudson — except  for  a  few  bergs, 
in  a  perfectly  clear  sea.  We  had  a  full  moon  which,  although 
usually  hidden  by  clouds,  gave  a  good  light  by  which  objects 
— and  certainly  land— could  have  been  seen  at  a  great  distance. 
This  morning  there  is  not  a  sign  of  land,  and  remarkably  few 
bergs.  At  3.30  we  got  soundings  in  245  fathoms,  and  at  eight 
in  260  fathoms.  The  continental  plateau  must  be  extensive, 
and  Wilkes  certainly  had  the  chance  of  being  misled  by  his 
soundings.  At  noon  to-day  we  were  in  latitude  66.23  S., 
longitude  154.7  E.,  and  so  we  have  crossed  the  Antarctic 
Circle  again  after  an  interval  of  two  years  and  sixty  two  days. 

1  This  morning  the  breeze  sprang  up  from  the  north-west, 
and  we  made  sail,  standing  close-hauled  to  the  N.N.E. 
Throughout  the  day  the  wind  has  freshened  and  hauled  round 
to  the  west,  so  that  we  are  now  standing  almost  due  north.  I 
hoped  to  sound  again  to-night,  but  it  is  blowing  too  hard  ;  I 
think  we  are  in  for  a  gale.' 

On  March  5,  1904,  therefore,  our  exploring  work  came  to 
an  end,  and  we  found  ourselves  entering  once  more  that 
storm -swept  area  of  the  '  Westerlies  '  which  separated  us  from 
civilisation.  The  programme  with  which  I  had  hoped  to  close 
the  season  had  been  much  hampered  by  our  lack  of  coal,  but 
if  we  had  been  unable  to  carry  out  our  cherished  plan  of 
rounding  Cape  North,  we  had  at  least  cleared  up  some 
geographical  misconceptions  in  a  more  northerly  latitude. 


i9o4J  THE   LAST   ICEBERG  293 

Two  days  later  we  saw  the  last  of  the  Antarctic  ice  under 
conditions  which  made  us  exceeding  grateful  that  it  was  the 
last,  as  my  diary  shows  : 

*  March  7. —  .  .  .  Since  we  shut  off  steam  yesterday  we 
have  been  progressing  to  the  north,  but  in  a  very  curious 
manner.  In  spite  of  all  head  sails  being  set,  the  ship  has 
such  a  tendency  to  come  up  in  the  wind  that  the  helm  has  to 
be  kept  hard  up,  and  so  we  plunge  along  about  five  knots,  with 
no  power  of  control  over  the  ship  except  to  stop  her  by  throw- 
ing the  yards  aback.  This  is  not  so  bad  as  long  as  there  are 
no  bergs  in  sight,  and  yesterday  I  thought  we  had  seen  the  last 
of  these  unwelcome  neighbours;  but  this  morning,  when  it 
was  blowing  great  guns,  the  boatswain  came  down  and  reported 
a  berg  on  the  lee  bow,  and  I  dashed  on  deck  to  see  a  huge 
mass  of  ice  showing  under  the  foot  of  the  foresail.  We  had 
either  to  go  on  or  to  "  heave-to,"  as  I  knew  we  could  not  alter 
course  to  pass  to  leeward.  I  decided  finally  to  go  on,  but  the 
ship  was  labouring  so  heavily  that  it  was  fully  twenty  minutes 
before  we  could  be  certain  that  the  bearing  was  changing  in  the 
right  direction,  and  that  we  stood  a  good  prospect  of  weather- 
ing it.  In  another  ten  minutes  we  passed  close  to  windward  of 
it,  and  could  see  the  mountainous  waves  dashing  over  its  lofty 
pinnacles  and  imagine  the  condition  of  the  unfortunate  vessel 
that  should  run  foul  of  it.  It  was  an  impressive  farewell  to  the 
Southern  ice,  for  since  that  gaunt,  wave-beaten  mass  has 
dropped  astern  we  have  seen  no  more.' 

With  our  last  view  of  these  formidable  Southern  bergs 
my  tale  draws  to  a  close,  for  what  remains  is  little  more  than 
the  story  of  ordinary  life  on  the  high  seas,  and  may  be  told 
briefly. 

The  month  of  March  is  the  most  stormy  season  of  the  year 
in  the  Southern  Seas,  and  during  the  days  which  we  spent  in 
travelling  to  the  north  the  weather  made  no  exception  in  our 
favour.  From  the  6th  to  the  14th  we  had  continuous  gales 
with  conditions  of  greater  physical  discomfort  than  we  had 
ever  experienced  on  board  the  '  Discovery.'  The  ship  was  in 
very  light  trim  and  was  tossed  about  on  the  mountainous  seas 


294       THE  VOYAGE   OF  THE    'DISCOVERY'    [Mar. 

like  a  cork.  There  are  few  things  more  exasperating  than  the 
unceasing  pitching  and  plunging  of  a  very  lively  ship.  Many 
of  us  were  very  seasick,  and,  to  add  to  our  distress,  our  decks 
were  leaking  badly,  so  that  we  lived  in  a  perpetual  drip  below. 
The  wind  blew  almost  constantly  northward  of  west,  so  that 
we  were  obliged  to  remain  close-hauled.  Our  crab-like  motion 
under  sail  soon  showed  us  that  we  should  be  drifted  to  leeward 
of  our  rendezvous,  and  on  the  9th  we  were  obliged  to  start  our 
engines  again.  Even  with  steam  and  sail  it  was  touch  and  go 
whether  we  lay  our  course  until  the  13th,  when  a  lucky  slant  of 
wind  sent  us  well  to  windward.  On  the  14th  we  sighted  the 
Auckland  Islands  on  our  lee  bow,  and  early  on  the  following 
morning  we  furled  our  sails  off  the  entrance  of  Ross  Harbour, 
and  steamed  into  the  calm  waters  of  the  bay. 

It  is  not  easy  to  forget  that  morning  when,  weary  and  worn 
with  all  our  long  struggle  with  the  ice  and  the  tempests  of  the 
South,  we  steered  into  this  placid  shelter  and,  for  the  first  time 
for  more  than  two  years,  feasted  our  eyes  on  hillsides  clothed 
with  the  green  of  luxuriant  vegetation. 

Ross  Harbour  is  a  splendidly  protected  winding  inlet,  and 
it  was  in  its  deepest  arm,  shut  of!  from  all  view  of  the  sea,  that 
we  finally  came  to  an  anchor,  within  a  hundred  yards  of  the 
thick  scrub  which  grows  down  to  the  water's  edge.  A  glance 
at  our  bunkers  was  alone  sufficient  to  show  by  how  narrow  a 
margin  we  had  accomplished  our  work,  for  less  than  ten  tons 
remained  of  our  stock  of  coal,  and  yet  not  an  ounce  had  been 
wasted  on  our  northward  voyage.  Our  plans  had  barely 
carried  us  to  this  uninhabited  island,  and  with  such  a  remnant 
we  could  not  have  made  the  longer  journey  to  New  Zealand. 

It  was  with  great  surprise,  and  not  altogether  without 
anxiety,  that  I  found  neither  of  our  consorts  had  yet  arrived  at 
the  rendezvous.  However,  I  reflected  that  it  was  quite  pos- 
sible that  by  going  to  the  west  we  had  achieved  a  windward 
position  and  thus  got  ahead  of  them  in  spite  of  their  long  start, 
and  this  conjecture  proved  to  be  correct. 

Meanwhile  we  settled  ourselves  down  to  wait,  determined 
to  enjoy  our  new  surroundings  thoroughly,  and  to  make  our 


i904]        REASSEMBLY   IN   ROSS   HARBOUR  295 

ship  as  smart  as  possible  for  her  first  appearance  to  the  eyes  of 
the  multitude.  It  was  a  curious  idea  this  last,  but  it  was  very 
strongly  held  by  us  all ;  it  seemed  a  point  of  pride  with  us  that 
the  good  ship  which  had  carried  us  so  well  should  not  be 
allowed  to  display  any  untidiness  in  public,  and  so  all  hands 
fell  to  with  a  will.  There  was  much  scrubbing  of  decks  and 
cleaning  of  paint  work ;  then  came  a  fresh  coat  of  paint  to 
cover  up  all  the  travel  stains,  and  in  a  few  days  the  '  Discovery ' 
looked  as  though  she  had  spent  her  three  adventurous  years  in 
some  peaceful  harbour. 

On  March  19  the  'Terra  Nova'  hove  in  sight,  and  on  the 
following  day  we  were  still  more  relieved  by  the  safe  arrival  of 
the  '  Morning.'  Both  ships  had  the  same  tale  to  tell — a  tale  of 
continuous  adverse  gales  which  had  blown  so  heavily  that  at 
times  they  had  been  obliged  to  '  heave-to,'  and  throughout  had 
had  a  long  and  hard  struggle  in  beating  up  to  the  islands. 
The  little  '  Morning '  had  had  an  especially  dismal  experience. 
She  had  been  nearly  a  month  fighting  this  terribly  hard 
weather,  with  all  sorts  of  added  troubles  in  connection  with 
her  ramshackle  engines  and  pumps,  and  her  ill-ballasted  con- 
dition. Captain  Colbeck  will  no  doubt  tell  of  the  adventurous 
incidents  of  this  month,  but  none  of  us  is  likely  to  forget  the 
utterly  worn-out  condition  in  which  his  small  company  arrived 
at  Ross  Harbour,  or  the  universal  testimony  of  officers  and 
men  that  disaster  had  only  been  averted  by  the  consummate 
seamanship  with  which  their  small  vessel  had  been  handled. 

The  few  days  which  we  remained  in  Ross  Harbour  after 
the  arrival  of  our  consorts  were  spent  in  ballasting  the  '  Morn- 
ing '  and  in  giving  a  much-needed  rest  to  her  crew ;  we  were  also 
able  to  obtain  from  the  '  Terra  Nova '  the  addition  to  our  coal 
supply  necessary  for  the  last  stage  of  our  journey  to  civilisation. 

On  March  29  our  small  fleet  set  sail  once  more,  and  now 
everything  favoured  our  prosperous  voyage;  with  a  strong 
breeze  from  the  south-west  and  a  moderate  sea,  we  set  all  our 
canvas  and  ran  rapidly  to  the  north.  On  the  30th  we  sighted 
Stewart  Island,  and  later  the  coast  of  the  mainland  ;  the  fol- 
lowing  day  found   us   running   up   the   coast,  and  at  length 


296       THE   VOYAGE   OF   THE    '  DISCOVERY  '  [April 

with  the  well-remembered  outline  of  the  Bankes  Peninsula 
before  us. 

At  daybreak  on  Good  Friday,  April  i,  we  were  off  the 
Heads  of  Lyttelton  Harbour,  and  before  noon  we  were  safely 
berthed  alongside  the  jetty  from  which  we  had  sailed  with 
such  hearty  good  wishes  more  than  two  years  before. 

I  have  found  my  pen  inadequate  to  describe  many  an 
incident  in  this  narrative,  but  perhaps  I  never  realised  its 
inadequacy  so  completely  as  when  I  set  about  to  picture  the 
warmth  of  the  welcome  which  we  received  on  our  arrival  in 
New  Zealand.  Those  who  have  been  patient  enough  to  follow 
the  course  of  this  story  will  remember  the  kindness  with 
which  our  small  party  of  adventurers  were  treated  before  our 
departure  for  the  South,  and  how  each  visit  of  the  relief  ship 
brought  us  not  only  welcome  news  from  the  Old  Country,  but 
greetings  and  presents  from  this  newer  land.  It  is  little 
wonder,  therefore,  that  as  we  entered  Lyttelton  Heads  after 
so  long  an  absence,  each  one  of  us  felt  that  we  were  returning 
to  what  was  very  nearly  our  home — to  a  place  where  we 
should  find  rest  and  peace  after  our  wanderings,  and  to  people 
who  would  greet  us  with  sympathetic  friendship.  And  all  this 
we  found  in  fullest  measure ;  New  Zealand  welcomed  us  as 
its  own,  and  showered  on  us  a  wealth  of  hospitality  and 
kindness  which  assuredly  we  can  never  forget,  however  diffi- 
cult we  may  have  found  it  to  express  our  thanks.  In  these 
delightful  conditions,  with  everything  that  could  make  for 
perfect  rest  and  comfort,  we  abode  for  two  full  months  before 
we  set  out  on  our  last  long  voyage;  and  even  though  that 
voyage  was  to  carry  us  to  our  homeland,  there  was  many  a  sad 
heart  when  for  the  last  time  we  steamed  out  of  Lyttelton 
Harbour  and  waved  our  farewells  to  those  who  had  taken  so 
deep  an  interest  in  our  fortunes. 

June  8  found  us  at  sea  again.  The  '  Morning  '  sailed  with 
us,  but  soon  parted  company ;  the  !  Terra  Nova '  had  left  more 
than  a  fortnight  earlier.  We  did  not  sight  land  again  until 
July  6,  when  we  first  saw  the  mountains  of  Tierra  del  Fuego. 
Meanwhile,  however,  our  voyage  had  not  been  without  interest, 


i$04]  VOYAGE   HOMEWARD  29? 

as  it  had  enabled  us  to  accomplish  some  tasks  of  importance. 
Amongst  these  was  the  completion  of  our  magnetic  survey, 
which  was  thus  carried  about  the  greater  part  of  the  circum- 
ference of  the  Antarctic  area,  as  well  as  to  such  regions  as  we 
had  visited  within  it. 

After  leaving  New  Zealand  we  gradually  increased  our 
latitude  until  the  greater  part  of  our  track  lay  between  the 
parallels  of  5 6°  and  6o°.  This  was  a  route  which  had  often 
been  taken  by  ships,  but  one  in  which  the  depth  of  the  ocean 
was  entirely  unknown.  So  far  as  the  weather  and  the  circum- 
stances of  the  voyage  would  permit,  we  endeavoured  to  supply 
this  deficiency,  and  although  we  were  not  able  to  sound  so 
frequently  as  I  had  hoped,  the  few  soundings  which  we  took 
are  of  great  interest,  as  they  constitute  our  only  knowledge  of 
the  depth  of  the  Pacific  in  high  Southern  latitudes.  On  the 
whole,  these  soundings  showed  a  fairly  uniform  depth  of 
something  over  2,000  fathoms.  The  shallowest,  1,710  fathoms, 
was  obtained  on  the  meridian  of  136  W.,  whilst  the  deepest, 
2,738  fathoms,  occurred  on  that  of  106  W.  close  down  on  the 
60th  parallel.  This  is  only  a  step,  and  a  very  small  one, 
towards  what  is  greatly  needed — namely,  a  complete  oceano- 
graphic  survey  of  the  seas  about  the  Antarctic  Circle. 

Another  point  of  geographical  interest  occurring  in  this 
voyage  may  be  noted  :  on  two  occasions  an  island  named 
Dogherty  Island  has  been  reported  approximately  in  latitude 
59  S.,  longitude  120  W.,  but  later  observations  have  thrown 
some  doubt  upon  its  existence.  On  June  25  we  arrived  on 
the  supposed  position  of  this  land,  and  found  a  depth  of 
2,318  fathoms.  It  was  remarkably  clear  both  before  and  after 
we  took  this  sounding,  and  had  there  been  an  island  within 
any  reasonable  limits  of  its  assigned  position  we  could  not 
have  failed  to  see  it.  The  case  for  the  retention  of  an  oceanic 
island  on  the  chart  after  it  has  been  proved  absent  from  its 
supposed  position  is  that  the  original  discoverer  may  have 
largely  miscalculated  that  position,  but  the  evidence  against 
the  existence  of  Dogherty  Island  is  now  too  strong  to  allow  of 
this  explanation. 


298       THE   VOYAGE   OF   THE    'DISCOVERY'    [July 

-I  had  originally  intended  to  round  Cape  Horn  on  our 
homeward  voyage,  but  as  we  approached  this  longitude  we 
were  driven  to  the  northward  by  S.E.  winds,  and  consequently 
altered  our  plans  to  pass  through  the  Magellan  Strait.  We 
entered  this  beautiful  channel  on  the  evening  of  July  6,  and 
on  the  following  night  anchored  off  Puntas  Arenas ;  the  9th 
found  us  racing  out  through  the  Eastern  Narrows  on  the 
strong  ebb  tide,  and  three  days  later  we  anchored  in  Port 
Stanley  (Falkland  Islands).  Here  we  replenished  our  stock  of 
coal  and  took  the  last  series  of  magnetic  observations  in  con- 
nection with  our  Southern  Survey. 

On  the  20th  we  put  to  sea  and  turned  our  head  to  the 
north,  to  face  the  last  long  stage  of  our  journey ;  and  now 
for  the  first  time  we  found  our  life  on  board  contained  the 
elements  of  monotony.  Our  work  was  done — nothing  re- 
mained but  to  hasten  homeward — and  we  realised  how  poor  a 
show  of  haste  the  '  Discovery '  was  capable  of  displaying.  We 
would  willingly  have  spirited  our  good  ship  from  the  southern 
to  the  northern  hemisphere,  and  chafed  at  the  long  weeks  at 
sea  which  resulted  from  our  slow  progress. 

And  so  our  passage  to  the  north  was  somewhat  wearisome, 
but  slowly  and  surely  the  miles  were  traversed,  and  we  passed 
from  the  wild  and  stormy  seas  of  the  Westerlies  to  the  mild 
regions  of  the  gentle  S.E.  trade  wind,  and  from  this  to  the 
sweltering  heat  of  the  Doldrums. 

On  August  13  we  recrossed  the  line,  and  a  week  later 
struggled  slowly  through  the  N.E.  trade  towards  the  Azores ; 
here  I  decided  to  take  in  a  small  stock  of  coal,  and  on  the 
last  day  of  the  month  we  anchored  off  Punta  Delgada,  in  the 
island  of  San  Miguel. 

On  September  2  we  put  to  sea  for  the  last  time,  and  now, 
with  favouring  breezes,  made  comparatively  rapid  progress 
towards  the  Channel. 

Early  on  the  morning  of  the  9th  we  sighted  the  home- 
land once  more,  after  an  interval  of  three  years  and  one 
month,  and  as  we  slowly  steamed  up  the  Channel  it  can  be 
imagined  there  were  not  many  eyes  that  did  not  gaze  long- 


1904J  HOME  299 

ingly  over  our  port  bulwarks.  All  Nature  was  smiling  to  wel- 
come us,  and  all  day  long  we  passed  in  clear  view  of  that 
glorious  panorama  of  the  south  coast  which  every  sailor 
knows  so  well ;  one  wonders  how  many  hearts  have  swelled  at 
that  sight  ! 

At  daylight  on  the  10th  we  were  south  of  the  Isle  of 
Wight,  and  before  noon  the  '  Discovery '  lay  at  Spithead, 
surrounded  by  many  craft,  whilst  on  board  we  welcomed 
those  who  had  waited  so  long  and  so  patiently  for  this 
moment. 

There  seems  little  to  add.  To  attempt  to  describe  the 
hearty  welcome  which  we  received  from  our  countrymen,  and 
the  generous  tributes  which  have  been  paid  to  our  efforts, 
would  be  beyond  the  scope  of  this  book,  which  purports  to 
deal  only  with  the  simple  narrative  of  our  voyage.  For  me, 
and  for  the  small  band  who  laboured  so  faithfully  together  in 
the  '  Discovery,'  there  has  been  one  cloud  to  dim  the  joy  of 
this  home-coming,  for  there  was  not  one  of  us,  I  think,  who 
did  not  feel  the  sadness  of  the  day  which  brought  the  end  of 
our  close  companionship  and  the  scattering  of  those  ties 
which  had  held  us  together  for  so  long. 

Yet  although  this  inevitable  parting  has  taken  place,  we 
hope  that  as  the  years  roll  on  we  may  meet  again,  and  we 
know  that  when  such  meetings  come  they  will  renew  old 
friendships  and  recall  some  of  the  pleasantest  memories  of  our 
lives. 


3oo       THE   VOYAGE   OF  THE   ■  DISCOVERY  ' 


GENERAL  SURVEY  OF  OUR   OBSERVATIONS 

They  that  have  wrought  the  end  unthought 

Be  neither  saint  nor  sage, 
But  men  that  merely  did  the  work 

For  which  they  drew  the  wage. — Kipling. 

It  is  impossible  at  this  date  to  give  anything  like  a  complete 
summary  of  the  results  of  our  Antarctic  Expedition,  for  until 
the  scientific  collection  and  observations  have  been  thoroughly 
examined  by  experts,  all  deductions  that  can  be  drawn  from 
them  must  be  open  to  doubt.  But  in  addition  to  the  mass  of 
important  matter  which  cannot  be  safely  discussed  until  it  has 
been  completely  investigated,  there  is  a  large  field  of  more 
general  interest  which  does  not  need  the  close  study  of  records, 
and  concerning  which  ideas  can  be  advanced  without  prejudice. 
In  this  field  lie  the  purely  geographical  problems  which  we  set 
forth  to  solve,  as  well  as  the  outlines  of  others  which  formed 
the  main  objects  of  our  various  sledge  journeys. 

In  the  course  of  the  narrative  of  our  voyage  I  found  it 
impossible  to  give  in  connected  fashion  all  the  observations  of 
irregular  occurrence  which,  when  pieced  together,  form  the 
main  facts  of  our  discoveries  and  exhibit  problems  of  the 
greatest  interest  for  future  explorers. 

At  this  point  I  propose,  therefore,  to  collect  these  facts  and 
observations  in  more  connected  form,  partly  to  give  a  clearer 
idea  of  the  physical  conditions  of  the  field  of  our  labours,  but 
mainly  that  those  who  follow  in  our  footsteps  may  have  the 
full  benefit  of  our  experience.  In  considering  these  objects 
the  reader  will  readily  understand  the  order  in  which  I  present 
the  following  paragraphs. 


PACK-ICE  301 

Pack-ice. — The  ice  conditions  in  the  Ross  Sea  have  been 
observed  in  the  course  of  five  different  seasons.  Although 
differences  in  date  make  it  impossible  to  compare  these  seasons 
closely,  one  is  led  to  believe  that  four  were  very  similar  and 
constitute  the  normal  condition,  whilst  one — the  summer  of 
1902-3 — was  exceptional.  The  normal  condition  seems  to  be 
that  the  sea  becomes  completely  frozen  over  in  the  winter,  the 
movement  of  the  ice-sheet  leaving  narrow  spaces  of  open  water 
only  at  its  edge,  in  such  places  as  the  northern  face  of  the  Great 
Barrier,  and  possibly  in  rents  which  are  speedily  refrozen. 

The  gales  at  Cape  Crozier  grow  excessively  violent  towards 
the  end  of  September  and  in  October,  and  by  this  time  the 
ice-sheet  has  probably  commenced  to  weaken.  The  general 
break-up  which  results  was  witnessed  on  two  occasions  by  our 
sledge  parties  ;  on  one  day  they  saw  the  sea  completely  covered 
with  ice,  and  on  the  next  looked  forth  on  a  clear  sheet  of  open 
water.  The  ice  thus  freed  drifts  to  the  north,  and  forms  that 
belt  of  pack  through  which  ships  must  pass  to  reach  the  sea  in 
the  early  summer.  Drifting  under  the  influence  of  wind,  loose 
pieces  will  always  travel  faster  than  the  main  pack,  and  con- 
sequently the  southern  edge  of  the  belt  will  generally  be  a  hard 
and  fast  line  where  loose  pieces  are  crowding  on  the  main  pack, 
and  the  northern  edge  will  be  free  where  loose  pieces  are 
tending  to  detach  themselves  from  it. 

Towards  the  end  of  December  and  the  early  part  of  January 
this  belt  extends  from  the  Antarctic  Circle  for  about  200  miles 
to  the  south,  and  is  probably  best  attacked  on  the  meridians  of 
1780  to  i3o°  E.  To  the  westward  of  this  the  pack  would  be 
augmented  by  the  /coastal  ice  of  Victoria  Land,  and  to  the 
eastward  by  conditions  which  are  not  well  known,  but  on  which 
the  discovery  of  Scott  Island  and  the  difficulties  experienced 
by  Ross  throw  some  light. 

The  ice  probably  leaves  the  Ross  Sea  in  large  fields  and  is 
broken  by  the  ocean  swell,  which  penetrates  the  pack  for  a 
great  distance;  and  this  accounts  for  the  fact  that  the  floes 
increase  in  size  as  one  approaches  the  southern  edge,  though 
nowhere  exceeding  one  or  two  miles  in  length,    The  character 


3o2       THE   VOYAGE   OF  THE    'DISCOVERY' 

of  the  ice  in  the  main  pack  frequently  changes,  giving  the 
impression  that  a  quantity  of  ice  of  a  previous  season  is  caught 
when  the  sea  freezes  over  ;  but  none  of  the  floes  met  with  is 
formidable — all  are  more  or  less  rotten  and  decayed. 

The  exceptional  ice  conditions  of  the  summer  of  1902-3 
seem  to  have  arisen  from  causes  commencing  at  a  very  early 
date  in  the  winter  of  1902.  What  must  be  considered  an 
abnormal  succession  of  southerly  gales  again  and  again  broke 
up  the  ice  in  McMurdo  Sound,  and  even  late  in  the  winter 
there  was  open  water  within  a  few  miles  of  the  '  Discovery.' 
The  continual  formation  of  fresh  sheets  of  ice  must  have  tended 
to  congestion,  which  the  exceptionally  fine  weather  conditions 
of  December  and  January  failed  to  relieve,  so  that  the  greater 
part  of  the  Ross  Sea  remained  filled  with  ice ;  and  not  only 
had  the  '  Morning '  great  difficulty  in  getting  to  the  south,  but 
the  sea  was  never  sufficiently  open  to  admit  of  the  swell  on 
which  we  depended  to  break  up  the  ice  in  McMurdo  Sound 
and  release  the  ■  Discovery.' 

In  connection  with  this  fact  it  is  interesting  to  note  that, 
though  the  main  pack  usually  drifts  to  the  north  early,  there  is 
an  eddy  in  McMurdo  Sound  in  which  a  mass  of  ice  is 
detained  throughout  December  and  January.  At  the  end  of 
January  in  1902  and  1904,  this  mass  was  suddenly  carried  to 
the  north,  but  it  did  not  disappear  until  nearly  a  month  later 
in  1903.  When  this  occurred  there  was  a  noticeable  change  in 
the  drift  of  the  surface  waters  through  the  Sound. 

Continuing  to  drift  northward,  the  main  pack  is  dissipated 
by  the  beginning  of  February,  and  during  this  month  a  ship, 
by  coming  directly  south  on  the  178th  meridian,  could  reach 
the  Great  Barrier  without  encountering  any  pack-ice.  It  is 
strange  to  think  that  there  may  be  a  season  in  the  year  when 
the  enterprising  tourist  steamer  may  show  its  passengers  the 
lofty  smoke-capped  form  of  Mount  Erebus,  as  easily  as  it  now 
does  the  fine  scenery  of  Spitzbergen. 

The  sea-ice  met  with  on  the  coast  of  Victoria  Land  is  of  a 
different  character  from  that  found  in  the  main  pack.  It  is 
very  solid  and  hard,  comparatively  free  from  snow,  and,  except 


ICEBERGS  303 

where  dust  and  grit  have  settled  on  the  surface,  little  decayed. 
Its  uniform  smoothness  shows  there  is  very  little  pressure. 
The  pack-ice  met  with  in  the  vicinity  of  King  Edward's  Land 
was  very  heavy  also,  but  the  floes  were  much  hummocked  and 
many  were  evidently  more  than  one  season  old.  It  appears 
probable  that  a  large  quantity  of  pack  is  detained  amongst  the 
numerous  grounded  bergs  and  ice-islands  in  this  region,  where 
also  the  snowfall  seems  heavier  than  to  the  west.  The  region 
south  of  the  Balleny  Islands  will  probably  always  be  found 
heavily  packed  owing  to  the  constant  drift  from  the 
Victoria  Land  coast,  but  it  is  evident  that  the  exact  position 
of  this  pack  is  uncertain,  as  although  in  February  1904  we 
found  it  far  to  the  east,  Ross  at  the  same  season  in  1841 
observed  an  open  sea  to  the  eastward  of  the  168th  meridian. 

The  pack-ice  is,  of  course,  the  main  obstruction  to  explora- 
tion in  the  far  South.  A  study  of  its  disposition  and  move- 
ment is  therefore  of  great  importance  to  the  navigator.  Mr. 
Ferrar  has  added  some  interesting  notes  on  the  physical  pro- 
perties of  sea-ice  in  his  geological  summary. 

Icebergs. — The  main  supply  of  icebergs  in  the  Ross  Sea  is 
from  the  Barrier  and  King  Edward's  Land.  The  glaciers  on 
the  coastline  of  Victoria  Land  are  in  an  extraordinary  con- 
dition of  stagnation,  and  nearly  all  the  bergs  met  with  along 
its  coast  have  undoubtedly  come  from  the  east.  From  Cape 
Adare  to  Cape  Crozier  there  are  only  two  ice-flows  capable  of 
giving  off  a  clean  tabular  berg  of  any  dimensions,  and  our 
observations  went  to  show  that  the  supply  from  these  is 
extremely  small.  In  this  connection  it  is  instructive  to  note 
that  the  rate  at  which  bergs  are  given  off  in  various  regions 
can  be  gauged  to  some  extent  by  the  comparative  newness  of 
the  exposed  faces  of  the  ice-cliffs.  As  a  rule,  the  cliffs  of  the 
Barrier  exhibit  a  smooth  uniform  face,  whereas  those  on  the 
coast  of  Victoria  Land  are  honeycombed  with  the  action  of 
the  sea  and  the  weather. 

It  will  be  remembered  that  we  found  innumerable  bergs 
aground  on  the  shoals  off  King  Edward's  Land,  and  that  some 
were  very  large.     We  saw  one  or  two  small  ones  in  the  act  of 


304       THE  VOYAGE   OF  THE   'DISCOVERY' 

calving  from  the  high  cliffs  in  that  direction,  but  we  did  not 
see  any  being  detached  from  the  Barrier  itself,  and  I  am 
under  the  impression,  after  our  examination  of  its  edge,  that  it 
must  break  away  in  very  large  pieces. 

A  stream  of  small  bergs,  with  an  occasional  large  one,  sets 
along  the  Barrier  and  turns  north  along  Victoria  Land.  Many 
of  these  are  delayed  in  the  larger  bays  and  inlets  of  the  coast 
and  hung  up  on  such  shoal  patches  as  exist  off  Cape  Crozier, 
Cape  Washington,  and  Cape  Adare.  From  the  latter  especially 
there  extends  a  long  string  of  grounded  bergs  which  appear  to 
have  run  ashore  in  an  attempt  to  round  the  corner  too  sharply. 
To  the  westward  of  Cape  Adare,  stretching  on  to  Cape  North, 
we  found  immense  quantities  of  bergs,  but  after  turning  to  the 
north  we  saw  none  until  we  had  passed  to  the  westward  of  the 
Balleny  Islands,  when  they  were  again  fairly  numerous.  I 
cannot  think  that  the  bergs  we  saw  before  entering  the  pack  in 
January  1902  can  have  had  any  connection  with  the  Ross  Sea. 
I  imagine  they  must  have  come  from  further  east. 

The  size  of  Antarctic  icebergs,  as  I  mentioned  in  my 
narrative,  has  been  much  exaggerated,  though  when  the 
formidable  appearance  of  these  objects  is  considered  there  is 
every  excuse  for  such  exaggeration.  Of  the  many  hundreds 
seen  by  us,  very  few  exceeded  a  mile  in  length  or  150  feet  in 
height ;  the  vast  majority  were  less  than  a  quarter  of  a  mile 
across  and  less  than  120  feet  high.  The  largest  we  saw  were 
aground  off  King  Edward's  Land,  and  here  too  it  will  be 
remembered,  we  found  some  exceedingly  tall  ice-cliffs.  We 
had  various  devices  for  measuring  the  heights  of  icebergs  and 
ice-cliffs  when  we  cruised  alone,  but  it  was  easier  still  to  get  a 
true  estimate  of  these  when  the  '  Terra  Nova '  was  in  company 
with  us,  as  then  a  direct  comparison  could  be  made  with  the 
height  of  the  masts. 

Another  very  important  point  to  be  determined  with  regard 
to  Antarctic  icebergs  is  the  proportion  of  the  submerged  to  the 
visible  part.  Sir  John  Murray  has  estimated  this  as  about 
7  to  1,  but  I  am  inclined  to  think  that  it  is  much  less.  My 
opinion  is  founded,   firstly,   on  general  observations  of  the 


CURRENT  305 

depths  in  which  bergs  ground  (120  to  150  feet  bergs  do  not 
touch  bottom  in  more  than  100  to  120  fathoms  of  water) ) 
secondly,  on  an  eye  estimate  of  the  proportion  as  indicated  in 
an  overturned  berg;  and,  thirdly,  on  the  nature  of  the  ice 
itself  as  exposed  in  the  face  of  the  berg  on  the  cliff  from  which 
it  has  come.  The  transition  from  snow  to  ice  is  very  gradual, 
and  strongly  impresses  one  that  the  mass  throughout  must 
contain  large  quantities  of  air — an  impression  supported  by  the 
examination  of  some  ice  taken  from  the  bottom  of  an  over- 
turned berg.  It  would  be  difficult,  if  not  impossible,  to 
ascertain  exactly  this  proportion  by  actual  measurement,  but 
for  the  reasons  which  I  have  adduced  I  believe  that  it  is  not 
greater  than  5  to  1. 

I  regard  this  factor  as  highly  important.  It  would  be  of 
interest  if  it  only  enabled  the  mass  of  these  great  floating 
islands  to  be  calculated,  but  it  does  much  more  ;  for  it  must 
be  remembered  that  the  bergs  are  detached  from  ice-sheets 
covering  or  connected  with  the  land,  and  that  the  dimensions 
of  the  bergs  give  the  thickness  of  the  sheets  from  which  they 
have  come.  In  fact,  from  these  data  we  can  make  an 
extremely  interesting  statement.  If  the  average  height  of 
bergs  be  taken  as  150  feet,  and  the  proportion  of  the  sub- 
merged to  the  visible  part  be  accepted  as  5  to  1,  we  can  say 
that  900  feet  is  the  average  thickness  of  the  ice-sheet  extending 
over  a  very  large  area  of  the  Antarctic  Regions. 

Current. — The  general  drift  of  the  current  in  the  Ross  Sea 
is  indicated  by  the  direction  taken  by  the  bergs,  to  which  I 
have  referred.  It  will  be  remembered  that  on  our  return 
along  the  Barrier  we  had  the  good  fortune  to  recognise  a  berg 
which  we  had  seen  on  our  outward  journey.  It  had  drifted 
seventy  miles  to  the  west  in  twelve  days,  but  the  surface  water 
had  been  moving  at  a  greater  speed,  as  we  could  tell  by  its 
effect  on  the  ship.  The  tidal  streams  do  little  more  than 
accelerate  or  retard  this  current,  and  it  was  only  occasionally 
that  we  were  helped  in  our  journey  to  the  south  and  east  by  a 
favouring  stream.  To  the  eastward  of  the  Balleny  Islands  the 
surface  water  is  moving  towards  the  north,  but  the  absence  of 
vol.  11.  x 


3o6       THE   VOYAGE   OF   THE   'DISCOVERY' 

bergs  seems  to  show  that  there  is  no  deeper  stream  in  this 
direction.  To  the  westward  of  the  Balleny  Islands  we  did  not 
notice  any  marked  current,  and  the  bergs  were  much  scattered. 
On  the  whole,  there  seems  little  doubt  that  the  water  is  circu- 
lating from  east  to  west  about  the  Antarctic  lands,  and  therefore 
I  think  that,  apart  from  other  considerations,  exploring  efforts 
in  the  Far  South  should  be  directed  to  the  west.  I  may  remark 
that  had  the  '  Discovery '  been  released  from  the  ice  after  her  first 
season  it  was  my  intention  to  ask  permission  to  go  south  on 
the  meridian  of  Cook's  farthest  position,  and  from  there  to 
work  to  the  west,  in  hopes  of  making  King  Edward's  Land. 

I  have  touched  so  far  on  those  results  of  our  experience 
which  may  serve  to  aid  the  explorer  to  reach  the  Far  South  ;  I 
pass  now  to  matters  more  immediately  connected  with  our 
work.  The  main  geographical  interest  of  our  expedition  lies 
in  the  practical  observation  of  a  coastline  from  Mount 
Melbourne  in  latitude  74^°  to  Mount  Longstaff  in  latitude 
830,  and  of  the  conditions  which  lie  to  the  east  and  west  of 
this  line.  Our  previous  knowledge  extended  only  to  that  part 
which  lies  between  Mount  Melbourne  and  McMurdo  Sound ; 
and  of  this  we  had  but  the  vaguest  description.  This  great 
region,  which  constituted  the  principal  field  of  our  labours, 
afforded  interests  of  a  most  varied  description,  as  I  trust  the 
reader  of  this  book  will  have  gathered. 

It  remains  to  give  some  connected  account  of  these 
interests,  and  as  the  most  extensive  problems,  here  as  else- 
where in  polar  regions,  depended  on  conditions  of  glaciation, 
it  is  well  first  to  consider  this  governing  factor. 

The  Inland  Ice. — The  extent  and  uniformity  of  this  great 
sheet  must  necessarily  be  matters  of  some  doubt  ;  it  is  there- 
fore desirable  to  marshal  all  the  evidence  concerning  them. 

The  outline  of  the  coast  which  limits  the  ice-cap  and  the 
position  and  heights  of  the  mountain  ranges  are  shown  on  the 
chart.  It  will  be  seen  that  these  coastal  ranges  are  com- 
paratively low  between  Mount  Melbourne  and  the  Ferrar 
Glacier,  whence  one  might  be  led  to  suppose  that  the  ice-cap 
was  also  lower  at  this  part.     But  low  as  the  mountains  are,  in 


THE   INLAND   ICE  307 

one  place  only  does  the  inland  ice  pour  any  of  its  volume  into 
the  sea,  whilst  the  mountains  themselves  form  an  effective 
screen  to  the  conditions  which  exist  behind  them.  I  have  only 
one  note  that  throws  light  on  these  \  as  we  journeyed  down  the 
coast  we  looked  back  over  the  ice-river  in  latitude  75°and  saw 
its  surface  rise  sharply  to  a  ridge  between  the  mountains. 
I  wrote  :  '  Beyond  this  the  surface  still  seemed  to  rise,  and  bare 
patches  of  rock  could  be  seen  at  a  greater  altitude,  but  it  was 
impossible  to  estimate  the  exact  distance  or  height  of  these.' 

Turning  now  to  our  journey  up  the  Ferrar  Glacier,  it  will 
be  remembered  that  the  mountains  rose  on  each  side  of  us  as 
we  approached  the  interior,  and  that  when  we  reached  the 
interior  plateau  at  a  height  of  8,900  feet  we  observed  nunataks 
to  the  north  standing  above  our  own  level.  From  these 
observations  I  think  there  can  be  little  doubt  that  the  land 
rises  behind  the  coastal  mountains  of  the  Prince  Albert  Range, 
and  that  the  interior  ice-cap  nearly  maintains  the  altitude 
which  it  has  to  the  southward. 

To  the  south  of  the  Ferrar  Glacier  there  are  a  number  of 
detached  mountain  ranges  of  great  altitude  that  flank  the 
coast.  In  the  distance  at  which  we  first  saw  them  they  bore 
the  appearance  of  islands,  but  closer  approach  narrowed  the 
glaciers  which  lay  between  them,  and  revealed  an  extensive 
mountain  region  beyond,  behind  which  must  lie  an  ice-cap  of 
great  altitude  and  extent. 

Coming  now  to  our  journey  over  the  ice-cap,  it  will  be 
remembered  that  we  travelled  to  the  westward  over  a  plain 
which  did  not  vary  in  altitude  more  than  sixty  or  seventy  feet 
for  200  miles;  but  as  one's  view  on  such  a  plain  was  very 
limited,  it  would  be  impossible  to  state  definitely  that  the 
conditions  were  the  same  for  many  miles  north  or  south  of 
our  course.  We  did  not  reach  the  inland  plateau  until  we 
were  fully  seventy  miles  from  the  coast,  and  it  is  therefore 
extremely  improbable  that  the  full  height  of  the  ice-cap  could 
be  seen  anywhere  from  the  sea  or  from  the  Barrier  surface. 

From  the  facts  before  us,  therefore,  we  may  say  with 
certainty  that  the  ice-cap  is  of  very  great  extent,  and  that  in 


3o8       THE   VOYAGE   OF   THE    ! DISCOVERY ' 

the  latitude  of  7 8°  it  is  comparatively  uniform  in  altitude; 
while,  beyond  this,  the  evidences  which  I  have  briefly  sketched 
serve  to  increase  the  impression  of  its  vastness,  and  to  indicate 
that  it  maintains  an  approximately  uniform  level  over  the 
whole  continent.  Whether  we  accept  what  our  imagination 
must  suggest  or  pause  at  the  actual  facts  which  have  been  dis- 
covered, this  great  ice-sheet  is  unique  ;  it  has  no  parallel  in 
the  world,  and  its  discovery  must  be  looked  upon  as  a  notable 
geographical  fact. 

Glaciers. — There  are  innumerable  glaciers  on  the  coast  of 
Victoria  Land,  but  the  great  majority  merely  discharge  local 
neve  fields  lying  in  the  coastal  valleys  ;  very  few  run  back  to 
the  inland  ice,  and  these  may  be  divided  into  two  classes — the 
living  and  the  dead.  In  the  long  stretch  of  coast  between 
Cape  Adare  and  Mount  Longstaff,  over  n°  of  latitude,  there 
appear  to  be  only  four  living  ice-discharges  from  the  interior. 
The  first  falls  into  Lady  Newnes  Bay,  the  second  into  the  ice- 
river  in  750  S.  to  which  I  have  referred,  whilst  the  Barne  and 
Shackleton  Inlets  form  channels  for  the  other  two.  The 
Skelton  and  Mulock  Inlets  may  also  actively  discharge  from  the 
inland  ice,  but  this  is  very  doubtful.  From  observations  which  I 
have  mentioned  one  must  gather  that  the  movement  of  the  most 
northerly  of  these  discharges  is  very  slow,  but,  judging  by  the 
movement  of  the  Barrier,  the  southern  ones  are  more  active. 

The  Ferrar  Glacier  is  typical  of  the  dead  glaciers  j  the  ice 
lies  in  the  valley  practically  stationary  and  gradually  wasting 
away  from  the  summer  thawing,  so  that  to  all  intents  and  pur- 
poses it  is  a  dead  limb.  The  most  conclusive  proof  of  the 
stagnant  condition  of  the  ice  in  this  region  was  afforded  by  the 
north  arm  of  this  glacier;  the  reader  will  remember  that  I 
descended  this  to  find  that  the  ice-stream  ended  in  the  tamest 
manner  far  from  the  sea.  All  these  evidences,  and  many  others 
which  space  will  not  allow  me  to  mention,  lead  up  to  one  great 
fact — namely,  that  the  glaciation  of  the  Antarctic  Regions  is 
receding. 

For  us  in  the  South  the  appreciation  of  this  fact  and  all  its 
consequences  served  to  throw  a  flood  of  light  on  many  a  knotty 


THE   GREAT   BARRIER  309 

point,  as  I  shall  presently  show,  and,  indeed,  the  fact  itself  was 
wonderfully  impressive  when  we  came  to  consider  what  must 
once  have  been  the  condition  of  Victoria  Land.  The  Ferrar 
Glacier  probably  contains  as  much  ice  as  any  hitherto  known 
in  the  world;  the  Barne  and  Shackleton  Glaciers  contain  a 
great  deal  more.  Yet  in  the  first  of  these  we  saw  that  the  ice 
must  have  been  from  3,000  to  4,000  feet  above  its  present  level, 
and  we  knew  that  naturally  the  others  must  have  been  enlarged 
in  like  proportion.  It  is  difficult  to  conceive  the  vastness  of 
these  great  ice-streams  at  the  period  of  maximum  glaciation. 

The  Great  Barrier. — If  the  lofty  plateau  of  Victoria  Land 
is  unique  and  wonderful,  surely  this  great  plain  on  the  sea-level 
is  still  more  marvellous.  It  was  a  surprise  to  everyone,  and  not 
least  to  ourselves,  to  find  that  our  long  journey  to  the  south 
was  made  without  a  rise  of  level.  What  was  the  thickness  of 
the  ice-sheet  to  the  south,  or  what  lay  beneath  it,  was  obviously 
impossible  for  us  to  determine,  but  on  collecting  all  the 
indirect  evidences  which  bear  on  these  points,  I  came  to  a 
conclusion  which  I  still  hold — that  the  greater  part  of  it  is 
afloat  j  and,  strange  as  it  is  to  imagine  that  the  sea  should  run 
beneath  such  a  solid  sheet  for  so  many  hundreds  of  miles,  I 
have  yet  to  learn  any  reasonable  argument  against  such  an  idea. 
As  there  are  some,  however,  who  do  not  agree  with  my  con- 
clusion, I  will  endeavour  to  give  the  reasons  which  guided  me 
in  forming  it. 

In  first  considering  the  edge  of  the  Barrier  the  reader  will 
see  that  on  the  chart  the  height  of  the  cliff  is  given  in  feet  and 
the  depth  of  the  sea  in  fathoms ;  if  the  proportion  of  five  or 
even  six  to  one  be  taken  as  the  depth  of  the  submerged  ice,  a 
small  calculation  will  show  that  there  are  still  some  hundreds 
of  fathoms  of  water  between  the  bottom  of  the  ice  and  the 
floor  of  the  sea.  And  the  Barrier  edge  sixty  years  ago  was  in 
advance  of  its  present  position,  in  places  as  much  as  twenty  or 
thirty  miles,  consequently  our  soundings  lie  directly  beneath 
Sir  James  Ross's  Barrier  and  a  long  way  from  its  edge.  The 
part  that  has  broken  away  must  therefore  have  been  water- 
borne,  and  this  at  least  shows  the  possibility  of  the  ice-sheet 


310       THE   VOYAGE   OF  THE   'DISCOVERY' 

being  afloat  for  an  almost  indefinite  distance  to  the  south.  But 
had  there  been  any  doubt  about  the  flotation  of  the  present 
Barrier  edge,  it  must  have  been  dispelled  by  the  fact  that 
during  our  stay  in  the  Balloon  Inlet,  although  we  had  evidence  of 
considerable  tidal  movement,  the  ice  rose  and  fell  with  the  ship. 

We  have  so  far  proved,  therefore,  that  the  edge  of  the  Great 
Barrier  ice-sheet  is  afloat,  and  since  thirty  miles  of  this  floating 
sheet  have  been  broken  away  without  altering  this  condition, 
there  is  no  reason  for  limiting  the  distance  for  which  it 
continues. 

Passing  now  to  our  southern  journey,  it  remains  to  be 
shown  that,  as  I  have  stated,  we  travelled  practically  over  a 
level  plain.  Of  this  the  gradual  disappearance  and  reappear- 
ance of  land  masses  over  a  continually  level  horizon  left  little 
doubt,  but  a  yet  clearer  indication  was  the  uniformity  of  the 
barometric  pressures.  The  aneroid  readings  were  recorded 
three  or  four  times  a  day,  and  were  frequently  checked  with 
the  hypsometer.  On  my  return  from  the  southern  journey  I 
tabulated  the  readings  on  each  half-degree  of  latitude,  in  com- 
parison with  simultaneous  readings  taken  in  the  ship,  applying 
the  necessary  corrections.  When  an  empirical  correction  for  a 
height  of  250  feet  is  applied  to  the  Barrier  readings,  the  com- 
parative differences  are  small,  and  if  anything  the  Barrier  read- 
ings are  the  greater,  showing  a  fall  in  level,  or,  what  is  more 
probable,  a  rise  in  the  barometric  gradient.  The  following  is 
extracted  from  the  table  in  question  : 


1 

Latitude 

Difference  between  Means  of  Ship  and 

Barrier   Readings  corrected,  and  with 

allowance    of   250    feet   for  height  of 

Barrier 

79° 

79°  30' 
8o° 

8o°  30' 
8i° 

8i°  30' 
820 

+  •045 
+  *o6 
+  -04 
+  •085 
+  -06 

—  '02 

-•035 

THE  GREAT   BARRIER  311 

The  sign  shown  in  the  second  column  indicates  the 
manner  in  which  the  difference  must  be  applied  to  the  ship 
readings  to  produce  equality. 

It  must  be  remembered,  of  course,  that  this  comparison  of 
pressures  cannot  be  an  exact  method  of  determining  levels  in 
such  circumstances.  A  small  difference  in  pressure  may  be 
due  to  the  normal  barometric  gradient  or  to  local  disturbance, 
as  well  as  to  a  small  difference  of  level,  yet  I  do  not  think  that 
anyone  studying  these  figures  can  come  to  any  conclusion  but 
that  we  travelled  over  a  level  plain,  except  perhaps  for  a  slight 
rise  where  the  last  two  readings  were  taken,  and  this  is  easily 
explained  by  our  exceptional  nearness  to  the  coastline  at  the 
time. 

As  this  great  ice-sheet  moves  along  the  coast  of  Victoria 
Land,  the  thrust  of  the  immense  glaciers  in  the  Shackleton 
and  Barne  Inlets  tends  to  push  it  from  the  land,  and  thus  the 
vast  chasms  of  which  I  have  given  some  account  are  formed. 
For  many  miles  from  the  entrances  of  these  inlets  the  ice  is 
waved  into  long  undulations,  and  as  one  approaches  them  the 
waves  become  more  marked,  the  confusion  increases,  and  the 
cracks  and  crevasses  grow  numerous.  Within  ten  miles  of  the 
coastline  at  any  place  there  are  signs  of  disturbance,  and,  as 
my  story  showed,  such  a  region  is  ill  adapted  for  the  sledge 
traveller.  But  without  the  region  of  these  disturbances,  or 
some  ten  or  fifteen  miles  from  the  land  (except  immediately 
off  the  mouths  of  the  inlets,  where  the  confusion  is  wider 
spread),  the  Barrier  moves  with  tranquillity,  no  ridge  or 
crevasse  or  other  irregularity  is  met  with,  and  the  surface 
presents  one  monotonous,  even  plain  of  snow.  Although  it 
may  be  possible,  it  seems  to  me  highly  improbable,  that  a  mass 
of  ice  could  be  travelling  over  the  land  in  such  an  even, 
undisturbed  fashion.  Where  the  ice-sheet  is  pushing  past  the 
Minna  Bluff  and  around  the  north  and  south  ends  of  the 
White  Island,  it  is  starred  into  long  radial  crevasses,  running 
from  ten  to  twenty  miles  from  the  land.  The  rifts  are  so 
straight  and  close  so  gradually  that  on  crossing  them  the  sides 
appear5to  be  mathematically  ruled  straight  parallel  lines.     It  is 


3i2       THE   VOYAGE   OF  THE    < DISCOVERY' 

scarcely  imaginable  that  such  extraordinary  uniformity  of 
fracture  should  occur  in  an  ice-sheet  that  is  resting  on  the 
land,  where  there  must  be  some  irregularity  in  friction  and 
ice-tension  tending  to  divert  the  straightness  of  the  rents. 

One  other  evidence  of  importance  remains  to  be  noticed 
in  this  connection.  In  one  of  the  crevasses  extending  from 
the  north  end  of  White  Island  Mr.  Royds  took  some  serial 
temperatures.  Close  to  the  land  he  found  that  the  tempera- 
ture fell  with  the  depth  to  a  mean  level  of  —  90,  but  at  a 
distance  of  ten  miles  from  the  land  he  got  a  different  result. 
Here  at  first  the  temperature  fell,  but  as  the  thermometer  was 
lowered  its  column  rose  again  until,  at  a  depth  of  nineteen 
fathoms,  it  showed  zero.  Deeper  than  this  he  could  not  go  on 
account  of  the  snow  in  the  crevasse,  but  I  think  it  must  be 
conceded  that  the  only  reasonable  cause  for  such  a  rise  of 
temperature  as  was  observed  is  the  presence  of  water  beneath 
the  ice. 

When  all  the  facts  which  I  have  mentioned  are  considered, 
I  do  not  see  that  there  can  be  any  reasonable  cause  to  doubt 
that  the  Great  Barrier  ice-sheet  is  afloat  at  least  as  far  south  as 
we  travelled. 

Movement  and  Extent  of  the  Great  Barrier. — After  our 
observations  of  the  stagnant  condition  of  the  ice  about  our 
winter  quarters  and  in  the  Ferrar  Glacier,  the  report  of  the 
Barrier  movement  came  as  a  surprise.  The  reader  will 
remember  that  its  discovery  was  more  or  less  accidental,  and 
resulted  from  the  fact  that  Mr.  Barne,  on  visiting  Depot  '  A ' 
in  1903,  found  that  its  bearing  was  altered,  and  thirteen  and  a 
half  months  after  its  establishment  he  carefully  measured  its 
displacement,  which  he  found  to  be  608  yards.  The  direction 
in  which  it  is  travelling  must  be  a  little  to  the  east  of  north, 
and  consequently  this  figure  probably  represents  the  whole 
movement  during  the  period.  The  direction  of  movement  is 
indicated  by  the  vast  disturbances  encountered  off  the  eastern 
slopes  of  Mount  Terror.  Here  the  sheet  is  pressing  up  and 
shearing  past  the  land-ice,  raising  numerous  huge  parallel 
pressure  ridges.     It  would  almost  seem  possible  that  move- 


THE   GREAT   BARRIER  313 

ment  was  taking  place  along  each  of  these  according  to  the 
state  of  the  tide.  Dr.  Wilson,  who  had  the  greatest  oppor- 
tunity of  examining  this  region,  thinks  that  there  must  be  a 
submarine  land  ridge  between  Mount  Terror  and  the  White 
Island,  checking  the  flow  of  ice  in  that  direction.  He  also 
observed  that  glaciers  on  the  south  side  of  Erebus  and  Terror, 
where  there  is  an  exceptionally  heavy  snowfall,  are  pressing 
towards  the  south-west,  eventually  finding  relief  around  Cape 
Armitage.  That  there  was  some  pressure  from  the  Barrier 
around  White  Island  was  shown  by  the  ridges  which  formed 
on  the  eastern  side  of  our  peninsula. 

I  am  inclined  to  place  the  eastern  limit  of  the  floating 
portion  of  the  Barrier  near  the  Balloon  Inlet  in  longitude 
1630  W.  It  is  noticeable  that  the  ice-cliff  immediately  to  the 
east  of  this  has  not  broken  away  since  Sir  James  Ross  traced 
it.  The  disturbed  condition  of  the  ice  in  this  vicinity  is  no 
doubt  due  to  King  Edward's  Land,  but  it  is  not  easy  to  see 
why  the  effect  should  be  precisely  what  it  is. 

The  full  extent  of  the  Barrier  ice- sheet  must,  for  the 
present,  be  a  matter  of  surmise.  At  our  most  southerly  point 
we  saw  long  snow-capes  running  out  beyond  Mount  Longstaff 
and  meeting  the  level  horizon,  while  further  still  the  mirage 
threw  up  small  patches  of  white,  indicative  of  still  more  distant 
capes  and  mountains.  The  scene  to  the  south  was  much  what 
it  was  to  the  north,  and  the  weather  so  bright  and  clear  that 
we  can  at  least  make  one  statement  with  certainty.  The  high 
mountainous  coastline  does  not  turn  to  the  east  before  reaching 
the  84th  parallel  beyond  the  slight  trend  it  already  has  in  that 
direction.  But  at  such  distances  one  can  only  speak  of  the 
high  land ;  whether  the  level  surface  of  the  Barrier  continues 
to  skirt  those  lofty  land  masses  it  is  impossible  to  say,  but,  for 
my  part,  I  am  strongly  of  opinion  that  it  does. 

Speculations  on  Former  Ice  Conditions. — Having  given  the 
reasons  for  my  belief  that  the  Great  Barrier  is  afloat,  it  may  be 
interesting  to  add  some  ideas  which  have  come  to  me  with 
regard  to  its  origin,  although  I  make  no  pretence  to  being  an 
expert  in  glacial  matter?. 


3M       THE   VOYAGE   OF  THE   'DISCOVERY' 

It  is  evident  that  when  the  Southern  glaciation  was  at  a 
maximum,  when  the  glacier  valleys  were  filled  to  overflowing, 
and  when  the  great  reservoir  of  the  interior  stood  perhaps  400 
or  500  feet  above  its  present  level  and  was  pouring  vast  masses 
of  ice  into  the  Ross  Sea,  the  Great  Barrier  was  a  very  different 
formation  from  what  it  is  at  present.  There  are  abundant 
evidences  of  its  great  enlargement ;  granite  boulders  were 
found  on  Cape  Royds  and  high  on  every  volcanic  island  in 
our  neighbourhood  ;  on  the  slopes  of  Terror,  Dr.  Wilson 
found  morainic  terraces  800  feet  above  the  present  surface  of 
the  ice  ;  Mr.  Ferrar  showed  that  nearly  the  whole  of  the  Cape 
Armitage  Peninsula  was  once  submerged ;  and,  in  fact,  on  all 
sides  of  us  and  everywhere  were  signs  of  the  vastly  greater 
extent  of  the  ancient  ice-sheet. 

It  is  not  until  one  has  grasped  the  extent  of  the  former 
glaciation  and  the  comparatively  rapid  recession  of  the  present 
that  one  can  hope  to  explain  the  many  extraordinary  ice  forma- 
tions that  now  remain  in  the  Ross  Sea,  but  armed  with  this 
knowledge  one  is  at  least  able  to  advance  a  theory  concerning 
their  origin. 

My  opinion  is  that  at  or  near  the  time  of  maximum  glacia- 
tion the  huge  glaciers,  no  longer  able  to  float  in  a  sea  of  400 
fathoms,  joined  hands  and  spread  out  over  the  Ross  Sea, 
completely  filling  it  with  an  immense  sheet  of  ice.  At  that 
time  the  edge  of  the  sheet  and  the  first  place  at  which  it  could 
be  water-borne  bordered  on  the  ocean  depths  to  the  north  of 
Cape  Adare.  Then  followed  the  receding  ice  conditions,  when 
the  ice-sheet  as  a  whole  grew  thinner,  and  at  length  a  time 
came  when  it  was  curiously  circumstanced.  The  Ross  Sea  is 
comparatively  uniform  in  depth  north  and  south  •  the  ice-sheet 
pressing  out  over  this  level  floor  would  consequently  have  been 
more  or  less  uniform  in  thickness,  and  finally  the  wastage 
would  have  been  more  or  less  uniform  over  the  whole  area. 
As  a  result  of  these  conditions  there  came  a  time  when  the 
whole  ice-sheet  became  buoyant,  and  when  it  had  either  to 
break  away  with  great  rapidity  or  to  float  whilst  remaining  fast. 
I  imagine  that  it  floated  and  broke  away  gradually,  and  that 


FORMER   ICE   CONDITIONS   AND   CLIMATE     315 

the  present  rapidly  diminishing  Barrier  is  the  remains  of  the 
great  ice-sheet 

It  is  not  the  only  remains,  for  the  whole  coast  bears  signs 
of  the  old  ice- sheet  in  curious  ice  formations  that  can  be 
accounted  for  in  no  other  way.  Lady  Newnes  Bay  contains 
a  large  fragment  of  it ;  the  present  ice  discharges  are  wholly 
insufficient  to  account  for  such  a  sheet  as  fills  this  bay ;  more- 
over, its  surface  is  not  gradually  inclined  but  advances  in  long 
and  steep  undulations,  the  outer  waves  cut  off  by  deep  hollows 
from  the  interior  mass.  The  single  sounding  taken  in  this 
vicinity  shows  that  here,  too,  the  greater  part  of  the  ice-mass 
is  still  afloat.  In  the  course  of  the  narrative  I  referred  to  the 
long  ice-tongue  in  latitude  750  S.  ;  this  also  must  be  a  remnant 
of  the  heavier  glaciation.  Other  typical  remnants  are  to  be 
found  in  the  steep  snow-slopes  and  ice-cliffs  which  fringe  many 
parts  of  the  coast.  These  slopes,  which  are  very  common 
about  our  winter  quarters,  start  on  a  bare  hillside  and,  wedge- 
shaped  in  section,  gradually  increase  in  thickness  till  they  end 
in  a  perpendicular  cliff  dipping  into  the  sea,  consequently  they 
have  no  present  source  of  supply. 

In  conclusion  it  may  be  said  that  there  are  few  photographs 
of  the  coastal  scenery  which  do  not  exhibit  in  some  way  or 
another  evidence  of  the  vastly  greater  extension  of  the  ice- 
sheet  in  former  times. 

Former  Climate. — A  word  may  be  added  as  to  the  change 
of  climate  which  has  caused  the  recession  of  the  ice  conditions 
in  the  Far  South.  It  has  been  a  surprise  to  me  to  find  that 
the  idea  that  a  great  glacial  epoch  is  the  result  of  a  compara- 
tively mild  climate  is  supported  by  much  authority.  Both 
Mr.  Ferrar  and  I  arrived  at  this  conclusion  independently 
when  in  the  South.  The  chief  argument  in  its  favour  is  that 
it  is  physically  impossible  for  cold  air  to  contain  much  moisture, 
but  living  in  a  severe  climate  it  was  impossible  not  to  realise 
that  greater  severity  would  have  meant  more  sterile  ice  condi- 
tions. In  this  connection  it  is  also  interesting  to  note  that  our 
greatest  snowfall  occurred  in  the  summer,  and  that  the  Balleny 
Islands  are  more  heavily  glaciated  than  Victoria  Land. 


316       THE   VOYAGE   OF  THE    'DISCOVERY' 

There  can  be  little  doubt,  therefore,  that  at  the  period  of 
maximum  glaciation  the  climate  of  Victoria  Land  was  milder 
than  it  is  at  present. 

Physical  Geography  of  Victoria  Land. — Mr.  Ferrar  has  dealt 
with  this  subject  at  such  length  in  his  geological  summary  that 
it  is  unnecessary  for  me  to  add  many  remarks  concerning  it. 
He  has  set  forth  the  general  results  of  his  labours,  and  I  think 
it  must  be  admitted  that  they  are  of  great  importance. 

It  has  to  be  remembered  that  little  or  nothing  was  known 
of  the  geology  of  this  land  before  we  set  forth,  that  since  our 
return  the  formation  of  a  very  large  part  of  it  has  been  revealed, 
and  that  there  is  much  evidence  to  show  that  this  part  may  be 
taken  as  typical  of  the  whole. 

The  simple  horizontal  structure  which  Mr.  Ferrar  describes, 
and  the  absence  of  lateral  pressure  in  the  formation  of  such  a 
huge  and  extensive  range  of  mountains,  appear  to  have  been 
wholly  unexpected,  and  to  have  excited  the  interest  of  many 
geologists.  The  details  of  Mr.  Ferrar's  reports  and  collections 
have  yet  to  be  investigated,  but  there  can  be  little  doubt  that, 
when  all  is  made  known,  the  geology  of  the  Antarctic  Continent 
will  have  received  an  immense  addition.  In  this  connection, 
however,  we  have  to  record  one  disappointment ;  we  confi- 
dently hoped  that  Mr.  Ferrar's  discovery  of  fossil  remains 
would  prove  of  great  importance,  but  an  examination  of  them 
since  our  return  has  shown  that  they  cannot  be  identified,  and 
consequently  much  of  the  value  of  the  discovery  is  lost. 

Speaking  at  the  Royal  Geographical  Society,  Dr.  Smith 
Woodward  said  on  this  subject :  '  The  carbonaceous  matter  is 
really  of  great  importance,  because  it  was  discovered  500  miles 
south  of  the  fossil  plants  brought  back  by  the  Swedish  Ex- 
pedition. .  .  .  All  who  have  seen  it  are  quite  agreed  that  this 
carbonaceous  matter  must  be  due  to  vegetation,  but  it  shows 
no  structure  whatever.  ...  It  seems  impossible  to  determine 
whether  it  is  due  to  land  vegetation  or  to  marine  vegetation.' 
It  seems,  therefore,  that  the  fossils  of  which  we  hoped  so  much 
are  in  too  carbonised  a  state  to  be  of  use  in  indicating  the  age 
of  the  great  sandstone  formation  in  which  they  were  found. 


VICTORIA  LAND  3-17 

Although  Mr.  Ferrar  has  dealt  with  the  general  disposition 
of  the  mountain  ranges  and  the  more  recent  volcanic  outbursts 
on  the  coast  of  Victoria  Land,  a  word  might  be  added  in 
speculating  on  the  distribution  of  land  beyond  the  limits  of  our 
discoveries.  I  recall  once  more  that  in  our  most  southerly 
position  we  saw  the  high  mountainous  coastline  running  in  a 
S.S.E.  direction.  If  such  a  line  be  carried  for  a  hundred 
miles  beyond  our  position,  it  will  be  seen  to  be  making  directly 
towards  Graham  Land,  and  I  cannot  but  think  that  it  continues 
to  do  so.  If  so,  the  geographical  pole  would  be  situated  200 
miles  or  more  from  it,  and  on  the  high  ice -plateau  which  must 
continue  behind,  if  we  are  to  allow  for  the  comparatively  rapid 
movement  of  the  Barrier.  The  alternative  theory  held  by  some 
is  that  this  coast  sweeps  round  and  joins  King  Edward's  Land  ; 
if  so,  the  turn,  as  I  have  pointed  out,  must  be  made  a  very 
long  way  south.  Unfortunately,  our  knowledge  of  King 
Edward's  Land  is  very  limited.  Judged  by  the  outline  of  the 
hills  and  the  blackness  of  the  rocks,  it  appeared  to  be  of  the 
same  comparatively  recent  volcanic  formation  as  the  land  in 
the  vicinity  of  our  winter  quarters,  and  if  this  is  so,  there  would 
be  little  to  prove  a  connection  with  Victoria  Land  ;  but,  on 
the  other  hand,  pieces  of  granite  were  brought  up  with  the  lead 
from  the  shallow  water  in  its  vicinity,  and  this  would  seem  to 
show  that  it  is  continental.  I  have  already  described  our  view 
of  King  Edward's  Land,  and  it  will  be  remembered  that  we  saw 
nothing  of  the  wild  rugged  mountain  scenery  of  Victoria  Land. 
In  all  such  remarks  as  I  have  made  concerning  the  exten- 
sion of  Victoria  Land  to  the  south,  and  the  limits  of  the 
Barrier  ice-sheet,  there  is  one  factor  which  must  be  acknow- 
ledged to  be  extremely  confusing.  I  can  think  of  no  reason  to 
account  for  the  comparatively  rapid  motion  of  the  ice-sheet ; 
it  is  certain  that  there  must  be  a  supply  of  ice  from  some 
region  to  the  south,  and  it  would  seem  that  in  this  region  there 
is  a  heavier  precipitation  than  that  which  we  experienced  in 
the  vicinity  of  the  ship,  but  it  is  most  difficult  to  reconcile 
these  facts  with  the  general  conditions  of  glaciation  which  came 
under  our  observation. 


318       THE   VOYAGE   OF   THE    'DISCOVERY' 

The  cause  of  the  Barrier  movement  remains  therefore  a 
problem  of  extraordinary  interest,  and  shows  that  there  are  still 
conditions  in  the  extreme  South  of  which  we  have  no  know- 
ledge. It  would  seem  not  altogether  unreasonable  to  suppose 
that  there  may  be  some  connection  between  this  matter  and 
the  warm  snow-bearing  southerly  winds  which  we  so  constantly 
experienced. 

In  considering  the  northern  extension  of  Victoria  Land  it 
would  appear  probable  that  the  coast  runs  more  or  less  in  a 
straight  line  from  Cape  North  to  Adelie  Land.  With  reference 
to  our  work  in  this  region,  I  have  already  shown  the  probable 
cause  of  Ross's  error  in  imagining  the  Russell  Islands  to  be  a 
group  separate  from  that  discovered  by  Balleny,  and  I  have 
described  our  course  to  the  westward.  Concerning  the  latter 
I  may  add  that  whilst  it  is  certain  that  we  must  reject  Wilkes 
Land  to  the  eastward  of  Adelie  Land,  Wilkes'  soundings  still 
remain  as  a  guide  to  the  limit  of  the  continental  plateau  in  this 
region.  Our  own  uniform  soundings  of  250  fathoms,  together 
with  his,  show  that  there  is  a  considerable  extent  of  shallow 
sea,  limited  more  or  less  by  the  track  of  Wilkes'  ship,  approxi- 
mately along  the  Antarctic  Circle. 

Meteorological  Conditions. — The  meteorological  work  of  our 
expedition  consists  of  that  laborious  record  kept  by  Mr.  Royds, 
which  embodied  continuous  observations  for  two  years  in  our 
winter  quarters  four  hundred  miles  south  of  any  former 
meteorological  stations,  as  well  as  such  as  were  taken  on  our 
sledging  journeys.  All  these  observations  have  to  be  corrected 
and  reduced  before  definite  results  can  be  obtained,  and  there- 
fore their  full  value  cannot  be  known  at  present.  The  reader 
can  hardly  have  read  the  narrative  of  our  voyage  without 
gleaning  some  idea  of  the  climate  in  which  we  lived,  and  of 
some  of  the  interesting  meteorological  problems  with  which  we 
were  confronted ;  so  that  a  few  additional  remarks  concerning 
them  may  not  be  out  of  place. 

In  some  respects  our  meteorological  station  was  very 
fortunately  situated,  whilst  in  others  it  was  less  satisfactory. 
From  this  point  of  view  the  proximity  of  Mount  Erebus  was 


METEOROLOGICAL   CONDITIONS  319 

a  great  stroke  of  luck,  as  the  smoke  of  that  volcano  gave  us  an 
indication  of  the  direction  of  the  upper  air  currents,  and  showed 
that  they  blew  almost  constantly  from  the  west.  In  this  con- 
nection it  will  be  remembered  also  that  there  were  some 
interesting  evidences  to  be  gathered  from  the  surface  of  the 
snow  on  the  high  level  plateau  of  Victoria  Land ;  here  also,  as 
shown  by  the  sastrugi,  the  wind  blows  continuously  from  the 
west. 

As  regards  the  winds  at  our  winter  quarters,  the  commonest 
direction  was  S.E.,  but  although  one  would  wish  this  to  be 
typical  of  the  whole  region,  I  fear  there  is  much  evidence  to 
show  that  this  wind  was  purely  local.  It  was  often  possible  to 
see  very  varying  weather  conditions  simultaneously  at  different 
places  about  the  '  Discovery.'  For  instance,  at  one  time  a 
bank  of  heavy  nimbus  cloud  hung  over  Cape  Bird  ;  the  western 
ranges  were  in  calm  and  sunshine ;  clouds  of  drift  were  being 
swept  from  the  slopes  of  Mount  Discovery  by  a  southerly 
wind ;  the  wind  was  S.E.  at  the  ship ;  whilst  off  Cape  Armitage 
and  a  mile  or  two  to  the  eastward  of  our  peninsula  it  was  again 
calm.  The  same  confusion  was  shown  by  the  snow-waves  :  as 
a  rule,  in  the  vicinity  of  the  ship  they  pointed  to  the  S.E. ;  out- 
side White  Island  they  were  confused  from  W.S.W.  to  S.S.E.  ; 
south  of  White  Island  and  to  the  Bluff  they  were  south  ;  at  the 
depot  S.W. ;  and  off  the  eastern  slopes  of  Terror  again  south. 

All  this,  together  with  the  observations  made  on  sledge 
journeys,  shows  such  a  confused  condition  of  air-currents  that 
it  would  be  impossible  to  assert  that  the  prevalent  wind  in  our 
region  was  S.E.  It  is  true  that  at  the  eastern  end  of  the 
Barrier  we  experienced  east  and  S.E.  winds,  but  if  this  is  the 
general  direction  over  the  whole  Barrier,  it  is  difficult  to  see 
where  the  body  of  air  goes  to,  unless  it  turns  to  the  north  on 
arriving  at  Victoria  Land ;  it  certainly  does  not  go  over  the 
mountains. 

The  prevalent  direction  of  the  wind  has  naturally  an 
important  bearing  on  the  general  circulation  of  the  atmo- 
sphere in  the  Southern  Regions,  and  it  is  therefore  un- 
fortunate that  we  should  have  been  subject   to  local  winds. 


320       THE  VOYAGE   OF  THE   <  DISCOVERY  ' 

The  reduction  of  barometric  pressures  will  doubtless  throw 
light  on  the  question,  however.  Another  drawback  common 
to  all  polar  expeditions  is  the  impossibility  of  measuring 
the  snowfall  on  account  of  surface  drift,  &c.  There  is 
no  form  of  snow-gauge  that  can  be  used  with  success. 
One  effort  was  made  to  ascertain  the  precipitation  in  our 
region,  which,  although  it  was  not  exact,  is  perhaps  worth 
recording.  When  the  ice  about  Cape  Armitage  was  a  year 
old  it  occurred  to  me  that  we  might  get  a  rough  idea  of  the 
net  annual  deposit  by  measuring  the  depth  of  snow  at  various 
points  on  its  surface.  This  was  done  with  difficulty,  owing  to 
the  sastrugi  and  varying  nature  of  the  snow,  but  I  calculated 
that  a  rough  average  of  the  results  would  represent  between 
four  and  five  inches  of  hard  packed  snow.  Rough  as  it  is, 
this  figure  is  something  of  a  guide,  for  it  means  that  the  surface 
of  the  Barrier  is  annually  augmented  by  about  this  amount. 
It  may  be  added  that  excavations  into  the  surface  of  the 
Barrier  invariably  revealed  a  succession  of  crusts  at  irregular 
intervals,  the  amount  of  snow  between  being  usually  in  fair 
agreement  with  the  deposit  mentioned. 

In  speaking  of  the  deposit  on  the  lower  level  of  the  Barrier, 
a  word  may  be  added  concerning  that  on  the  lofty  plateau  of 
Victoria  Land.  It  may  be  remembered  that  in  many  parts 
of  this  plain  we  found  the  surface  covered  with  a  shining  crust 
traversed  by  innumerable  transverse  cracks  which  gave  it  a 
scaly  appearance,  such  as  may  be  seen  in  the  mud  of  a  dried 
pond.  I  thought  at  the  time  that  this  could  be  no  recent 
formation,  but  it  was  only  much  later  that  the  possible  meaning 
of  it  occurred  to  me — namely,  that  there  was  no  net  deposit  of 
snow  on  this  plateau  ;  or,  in  other  words,  that  the  climatic 
conditions  were  such  that  the  evaporation  equalled  or  exceeded 
the  deposition. 

The  meteorological  condition  which  puzzled  us  most  was 
the  warm  southerly  blizzard  to  which  I  have  repeatedly  referred, 
and  it  must  be  admitted  that  the  fact  of  our  highest  tempera- 
tures coming  with  a  southerly  wind  is  a  very  extraordinary  one. 
On  this,  as  on  other  matters,  however,  it   is  premature  to 


ZOOLOGY  321 

speculate  at  present,  and  I  have  only  made  the  foregoing 
remarks  to  show  that  there  are  many  interesting  and  curious 
problems  which  it  is  to  be  hoped  a  close  study  of  the  '  Dis- 
covery's '  meteorological  records  will  solve. 

Vertebrate  Zoology. — This  department,  with  exceptions,  lay 
in  Dr.  Wilson's  hands,  and  as  it  is  one  which  must  excite  a 
very  general  interest  I  have  asked  him  to  supply  to  this  book 
a  summary  of  his  work.  To  this  I  can  add  little  except  to 
remark  that,  if  the  birds  and  beasts  that  came  under  his 
observation  were  few  in  species  as  compared  with  those 
observed  by  others,  it  is  because  our  expedition  laboured 
on  the  limit  of  such  life,  and  for  the  first  time  travelled 
beyond  its  limit.  It  is  only  reasonable  that  the  expedition 
which  most  deeply  penetrates  the  sterile  polar  area  should 
have  least  to  record  in  this  respect. 

Invertebrate  Zoolog)'. — The  readers  of  my  narrative  will 
have  gathered  that  Mr.  Hodgson,  our  biologist,  was  a  very 
active  member  of  our  community,  and  I  certainly  breathed  a 
sigh  of  relief  when  I  learned  that  his  collections  had  been  safely 
received  at  the  British  Museum.  But  this  is  only  the  commence- 
ment of  the  work  which  has  to  be  done  in  this  connection, 
and  it  will  be  many  months,  and  possibly  years,  before  the  full 
results  of  this  important  department  are  published. 

Physical  Work. — The  most  important  branch  of  this  work 
carried  out  by  our  expedition  was  that  connected  with  mag- 
netism. The  magnetic  work  may  be  divided  into  three 
classes  :  that  done  at  sea,  that  done  at  the  shore  station,  and 
that  done  on  sledge  journeys.  The  first  consists  of  obser- 
vations taken  around  the  belt  of  the  Southern  Seas  and 
throughout  the  area  of  the  Ross  Sea ;  the  second,  of  the 
continuous  records  taken  with  the  variometer  instruments; 
and  the  third,  of  the  important  observations  taken  by  Mr. 
Bernacchi  on  the  Barriers,  others  taken  by  Mr.  Armitage 
to  the  west,  and  observations  for  declination  taken  on  my 
southern  and  western  journeys.  The  reduction  of  all  these 
data  requires  much  patience  and  skill,  and  it  must  be  a  long 
while  ere  the  full  results  are  made  known ;  but  it  can  at  least 
vol.  11.  y 


322       THE   VOYAGE   OF   THE    'DISCOVERY' 

be  said  that  the  mass  of  material  obtained  will  go  far  to  accom- 
plish the  main  object  which  was  named  by  the  Royal  Society 
when  it  appealed  to  the  Government  for  the  despatch  of  an 
Antarctic  Expedition. 

Of  other  physical  work  performed  by  the  expedition  I  have 
made  mention  in  the  course  of  the  narrative,  and  in  this  con- 
nection the  reader  will  no  doubt  remember  the  seismic,  the 
gravity,  and  the  auroral  observations,  as  well  as  those  taken  for 
atmospheric  electricity  and  for  tidal  movement,  the  whole  of 
which  must  show  that  many  valuable  records  were  brought 
back  by  the  '  Discovery.' 

Oceanography.— A  considerable  number  of  soundings  were 
taken  during  our  voyage,  and  in  most  cases  in  very  interesting 
places,  but  it  must  be  confessed  that  the  ocean ographical  work 
as  a  whole  was  very  limited.  The  reason  is  obvious,  as  the 
greater  part  of  our  time  was  spent  either  locked  in  the  ice 
or  cruising  in  shallow  seas ;  yet,  as  I  look  at  the  vast  amount 
of  this  work  which  remains  to  be  done  in  this  area,  I  cannot 
but  regret  that  we  were  unable  to  effect  more. 

In  the  foregoing  summary  I  have  been  forced  to  pass 
rapidly  from  subject  to  subject,  and  yet  I  hope  that  in  so 
doing  I  shall  have  persuaded  the  reader  that  the  voyage  of 
the  '  Discovery '  was  not  conducted  in  a  spirit  of  pure  adven- 
ture, but  that  we  strove  to  add,  and  succeeded  in  adding, 
something  to  the  sum  of  human  knowledge. 

The  natural  result  of  such  an  attack  as  the  beginning  of 
this  century  has  seen  on  the  Antarctic  Regions  is  a  period 
of  reaction  and  quiescence,  during  which  the  light  thrown  on 
Southern  conditions  will  be  considered  and  discussed  and 
fresh  problems  will  be  evolved.  But  it  is  not  reasonable  to 
suppose  that  this  period  will  continue  indefinitely;  all  ex- 
perience shows  that  as  long  as  problems  remain  to  be  solved, 
sooner  or  later  their  solution  will  be  attempted.  With  the  full 
knowledge,  therefore,  that  the  time  will  come  when  others  will 
follow  in  our  footsteps  and  pass  beyond  them,  I  have  written 
these  pages  for  the  future  as  well  as  for  the  present. 


APPENDIX  I 


SUMMARY  OF  THE  GEOLOGICAL  OBSERVATIONS 

MADE  DURING  THE  CRUISE  OF  THE 

S.S.  '  DISCOVERY,'  1901-1904 

By  H.  T.  Ferrar,  M.A.,  F.G.S.,  Geologist  to  the  National 
Antarctic  Expedition 

Previous  Knowledge. 

It  is  unnecessary  to  recapitulate  the  numerous  voyages  that  have 
been  made  to  the  southward  of  latitude  6o°  S.,  therefore  we  will 
very  briefly  touch  on  the  points  of  interest  obtained  by  the 
expeditions  which  have  entered  our  area,  in  so  far  as  the 
information  obtained  bears  on  this  subject. 

In  the  year  1839  Captain  Balleny,  of  the  shipping  firm  of 
Messrs.  Enderby,  of  London,  discovered  five  islands  near  the 
Antarctic  Circle  in  about  longitude  1630  E.  On  one  of  these 
islands  (Buckle  Island)  an  active  volcano  was  observed,  and  on 
another  specimens  of  '  scoria  and  basalt  with  crystals  of  olivine ' 
were  found. 

Sir  James  Clarke  Ross,  in  the  year  1841,  when  in  charge  of  the 
Magnetic  Survey  Expedition  in  H.M.S.  'Erebus'  and  H.M.S. 
'  Terror,'  made  the  discoveries  on  which  the  work  of  this 
expedition  has  been  built.  These  discoveries  may  be  summed  up 
very  briefly  : 

(1)  An  open  shallow  sea  to  the  south  of  the  Antarctic  Circle. 

(2)  A   great   range   of  mountains   which  rise   occasionally  to 

heights  of  1 5,000  feet,  and  extend  in  a  north-and-south 
direction  for  at  least  500  miles. 

(3)  An  active  volcano  (Mount  Erebus),  over  12,000  feet  high, 

'  emitting  flame  and  smoke  in  great  profusion.' 

(4)  A  wall  of  ice  (the  Great  Ice  Barrier)  on  an  average  150  feet 

high  and  about  470  miles:long. 

Y  2 


324      THE   VOYAGE   OF   THE    'DISCOVERY'    [Appx. 

Dr.  Robert  MacCormick,  who  was  in  charge  of  the  geological 
work  of  the  expedition,  landed  on  two  islands  lying  off  this  coast. 
The  specimens  he  obtained  have  been  recently  described  by  Mr. 
G.  T.  Prior  ;  they  include  basalt,  palagonite-tuff,  phonolite  and 
muscovite-granite  from  Possession  Island,  and  basalt  from 
Franklin  Island. 

Dr.  MacCormick  considered  the  whole  range  to  be  volcanic, 
but  this  is  obviously  not  the  case,  for  all  the  higher  peaks  are 
pyramidal  in  outline  and  exhibit  house-roof  structure — a  structure 
which  could  not  be  produced  by  the  eruption  of  rocks  from  local 
centres. 

The  French  expedition  under  Dumont  D'Urville,  during  this 
international  attack  on  the  South  Pole,  obtained  specimens  of 
granite  from  some  low  rocky  islets  lying  off  the  coast  of  Adelie 
Land,  and  it  was  thought  that  these  strongly  suggested  the 
existence  of  a  continental  mass  of  land.  The  fact  that  H.M.S. 
*  Challenger,'  in  1874,  in  an  area  about  2,000  miles  from  South 
Victoria  Land,  dredged  up  gneiss  and  granite,  probably  dropped 
from  icebergs,  was  also  given  as  evidence  of  the  existence  of  a 
continent,  and  it  was  thought  that  these  rocks  had  been  derived 
directly  from  that  continent. 

Many  years  elapsed  before  any  additional  information  was 
obtained.  Captain  Jansen,  in  the  year  1895,  returned  from  Cape 
Adare  bringing,  among  other  rocks,  a  granitic  pebble,  which  Dr. 
Teall  tells  me  '  has  been  crushed  by  earth  movements,  and  must 
at  one  time  have  formed  part  of  an  extensive  tract  of  land.'  In  the 
same  year  Mr.  Borchgrevink  obtained  schistose  and  granitic  rocks, 
and  these  are  said  to  show  a  strong  similarity  of  the  South  Victoria 
Land  rocks  to  those  of  Ade'lie  Land. 

The  'Southern  Cross'  collection  (Sir  George  Newnes'  expedi- 
tion, 1 898- 1 899)  includes  various  plutonic  and  volcanic  rocks  as 
well  as  slates  and  quartz  grits,  the  latter  being  apparently  the  only 
sedimentary  rocks  found  by  them  in  situ  in  South  Victoria  Land. 
These  have  been  carefully  described  by  Mr.  Prior  in  one  of  the 
British  Museum  publications.  The  slates  and  quartz  grits  are 
noted  as  occurring  at  the  head  of  Robertson  Bay.  Being  cleaved 
they  must  have  been  subjected  to  earth  pressures,  and  as  such 
pressures  were  probably  long  anterior  to  the  stretching  tension 
which  dislocated  the  Beacon  Sandstone  formation  of  the  Royal 
Society  Range,  these  rocks  would  seem  to  be  of  a  much  older 
date. 


I.]  GEOLOGICAL  OBSERVATIONS  323 

1 
South  Victoria  Land. 

If  reference  be  made  to  the  chart,  it  will  be  seen  that  we  have 
to  consider  : 

(a)  Islands  lying  off  the  coast  of  South  Victoria  Land. 

(b)  A   magnificent   range   of  mountains,  proved  by  the  great 

journey  of  Captain  Scott  to  be  at  least  800  miles  long. 

(c)  The  rocks  composing  this  range. 

(d)  The  ice  in  all  its  forms. 

The  Islands. 

The  islands  such  as  the  Balleny  Group  and  Beaufort  Island 
may  be  dismissed  with  the  observation  that  these,  like  the  islands 
from  which  specimens  have  been  obtained,  were  surrounded  by 
cliffs.  These  cliffs  occasionally  display  irregular  coloured  bands 
similar  to  the  bands  on  Cape  Adare  and  Coulman  Island,  and  as 
the  latter  proved  to  consist  of  basalt  agglomerate,  it  is  highly 
probable  that  the  same  rock  is  developed  in  all.  The  soundings 
near  these  islands  showed  the  depth  of  the  sea  to  be  about  270 
fathoms,  and  as  the  outlines  of  the  Balleny  Islands,  at  any  rate, 
are  stepped  cones,  great  denudation  must  have  taken  place  in  the 
past. 

Scott  Island^  in  latitude  670  24'  5"  S.,  longitude  1 790  55'  5"  W., 
was  discovered  by  Captain  Colbeck  in  December  1902,  and  the 
specimens  collected  by  Mr.  Morrison  are  all  of  the  same  type  of 
olivine  basalt. 

The  Possession  Islands  have  already  been  mentioned,  but  it  is 
very  probable  that  the  specimens  previously  obtained  here  were 
not  found  in  situ.  The  rocks  collected  by  Mr.  Morrison  may  be 
safely  taken  as  representative  of  this  group  of  islands.  Two 
varieties  were  procured  by  him  :  the  one  a  palagonite-tuff  very 
similar  to  the  tuffs  found  on  Cape  Adare  and  Castle  Rock  near  the 
1  Discovery's '  Winter  Quarters,  and  the  other  a  grey  olivine  basalt 
with  large  porphyritic  crystals  of  olivine. 

Coulman  Island,  like  the  other  islands,  is  surrounded  by  very 
high  and  almost  perpendicular  cliffs,  which  show  occasional  bright 
red  and  yellow  patches.  These  patches  prove  to  consist  of  basalt- 
agglomerate  at  Cape  Wadworth,  the  northern  end,  and  it  is  prob- 
able, therefore,  that  the  coloured  bands  on  Cape  Anne  consist  of 
the  same  rock.  The  'Southern  Cross'  obtained  a  hornblende- 
basalt,  and  the  '  Discovery's '  collection  includes  a  specimen  from 


326      THE   VOYAGE   OF   THE    'DISCOVERY'    [Appx. 

a  basaltic  dyke  which  was  exposed  at  the  north  end.  The  rocks  of 
this  island  appear  to  lie  horizontally  as  a  whole,  but  an  anticline  on 
the  west  side  shows  that  they  have  been  gently  folded  over  an  east- 
and-west  axis. 

Franklin  Island  has  been  visited  three  times,  the  first  time  by 
Ross,  who  describes  the  north  side  as  '  a  line  of  dark  precipitous 
cliffs  between  500  and  600  feet  high,  exposing  several  longitudinal 
broad  white  bands,  two  or  three  being  of  a  red  ochre  colour.' 
The  specimens  he  collected  are  all  of  basalt  of  the  same  type,  and 
in  the  'Southern  Cross'  collection  there  is  a  specimen  of  limbrugite 
remarkable  for  the  number  and  large  size  of  the  olivine  enstutite 
nodules.  Mr.  J.  D.  Morrison,  of  the  'Morning'  supplied  similar 
specimens  with  a  note  to  the  effect  that  this  rock  '  forms  a  belt 
about  30  feet  thick  running  horizontally  along  one  side  about  300 
feet  above  sea  level.'  In  addition  he  mentions  a  pebbly  beach 
similar  to  that  at  Cape  Adare,  and  therefore  probably  due  to  the 
same  cause. 

Ross  Island  Group. 

This  group  of  islands  includes  practically  all  the  land  within 
fifty  miles  of  the  '  Discovery's  '  Winter  Quarters,  and  is  by  far  the 
most  extensive  mass  not  attached  to  the  mainland.  The  rocks  of 
which  these  islands  are  composed  are  all  volcanic,  and  point  to 
volcanic  activity  of  the  first  magnitude,  which  dates  back  from  the 
present  day,  but  does  not  quite  bridge  over  the  very  long  period 
since  the  intrusion  of  the  dolerite  sheets  on  the  mainland. 

Ross  Island  is  practically  made  up  by  the  material  ejected  from 
the  four  volcanoes,  Erebus,  Terror,  Bird,  and  Terra  Nova.  It  is 
roughly  triangular  in  shape,  and  measures  almost  exactly  fifty 
miles  from  north  to  south  and  from  east  to  west. 

Mount  Erebus,  in  the  year  1841,  was  observed  to  be  emitting 
flame  and  smoke  in  great  profusion,  but  during  the  years  1902-1903 
only  steam  was  seen  to  be  produced.  The  mountain  rises  more  as 
a  dome  than  as  a  cone,  and  the  flowing  convex  curves  give  it  a 
very  massive  and  undenuded  aspect.  It  appears  to  have  been 
built  up  in  three  stages,  the  activity  becoming  less  as  each  stage 
was  completed.  The  earliest  stage  is  marked  by  a  girdle  of  rock 
encircling  the  mountain  at  a  height  of  about  6,000  feet  above  sea 
level,  which  on  the  north  side  appears  as  a  huge  crag.  The 
second  stage  ended  with  the  production  of  a  crater  at  about  11,000 
feet  above  sea-level,  and  the  lava  streams  which  issued  from  it  are 


I.j  GEOLOGICAL   OBSERVATIONS  327 

still  preserved.  The  last  stage  produced  the  small  cone  placed 
asymmetrically  in  the  upper  crater,  and  from  this  cone  the  steam 
now  issues. 

Mount  Bird,  the  low  dome  at  the  northern  foot  of  Mount 
Erebus,  and  Mount  Terra  Nova,  the  dome  which  joins  Mount 
Erebus  to  Mount  Terror,  are  both  undenuded  and  obviously 
have  craters  at  their  summits,  and  therefore  belong  to  the  same 
recent  eruptions. 

Mount  Terror,  like  Mount  Erebus,  is  entirely  covered  by  snow, 
and  as  it  is  more  conical  than  Mount  Erebus  it  covers  almost  the 
same  area,  though  it  is  only  a  little  over  10,000  feet  high.  The 
cone  is  truncated,  apparently  by  a  crater  half  a  mile  in  diameter, 
and  the  sides  of  the  cone,  where  bare  of  snow,  display  many 
small  parasitic  vents. 

The  rocks  collected  from  this  huge  island  are  chiefly  of  volcanic 
origin,  but  granite..,  sandstones,  and  rocks  of  a  hypabyssal  nature 
are  found  as  erratics  in  certain  localities. 

The  '  Southern  Cross '  obtained  hornblende-basalts  from  a 
bare  rock-cliff,  ten  miles  or  so  to  the  westward  of  Cape  Crozier, 
and  Mr.  Morrison  brought  back  a  portion  of  a  basaltic  bomb  from 
a"  boulder  on  the  beach  at  Cape  Crozier.  Lieutenant  Royds, 
Dr.  Koettlitz,  and  Dr.  Wilson  have  all  added  to  the  collection 
from  this  locality  by  bringing  rocks  on  sledges  over  the  ice 
under  very  trying  conditions.  These  rocks,  with  the  exception  of 
the  columnar  olivine-basalt  obtained  by  Dr.  Wilson  from  the 
so-called  Crozier  cliffs,  do  not  differ  materially  from  those 
collected  near  the  penguin  rookery.  The  latter  include  granites 
and  sandstones,  which  are  probably  erratic,  olivine-basalts  from 
recent  lava  flows,  yellow  trachytic  rocks  which  occur  as  bosses 
on  the  slopes  of  Mount  Terror,  and  tuffs  from  below  the  lava  flows. 

From  the  'V  cliffs,  Hogsback  and  the  Sultan's  Head,  Mr. 
T.  V.  Hodgson  has  supplied  the  expedition  with  vesicular  basalts 
and  a  great  variety  of  palagonite-tuffs.  Hutton  Cliffs,  near  Turtle 
Back  Island,  are  composed  of  bedded  tuff- rocks,  which  strike  N.E. 
and  S.W.  and  therefore  may  be  contemporaneous  with  the  tuffs  of 
Sultan's  Head.  The  Turtle  Back  is  composed  of  fragments  of 
black  basalt  similar  to  that  of  Winter  Quarters.  Cape  Royds, 
Cape  Barne,  and  the  Skuary,  three  bare  areas  on  the  west  side  of 
Mount  Erebus,  besides  supplying  boulders  of  granite  and  other 
rocks,  give  us  the  basalt  which  contains  lenticular  crystals  of 
felspar  in  parallel  orientation.     Cape  Royds  consists  entirely  of  this 


328      THE   VOYAGE   OF  THE   'DISCOVERY'    [Appx, 

basalt,  and  it  is  found  also  at  a  height  of  1,500  feet  on  the  side  of 
Mount  Erebus. 

Winter  Quarters. 

About  four  square  miles  of  bare  rock,  entirely  of  volcanic  origin, 
was  the  only  land  within  walking  distance  of  the  'Discovery's' 
Winter  Quarters,  and  therefore  did  not  offer  a  promising  field 
for  discovering  the  geological  history  of  South  Victoria  Land.  Of 
this  area,  Castle  Rock,  a  crag  400  feet  above  the  snow  and  1,400 
feet  above  sea  level,  consists  of  palagonite-tuff  very  similar  to  that 
at  Cape  Adare  and  Possession  Island,  and  is  probably  the  neck  of 
some  ancient  volcano. 

The  three  heights  called  Harbour  Heights,  as  well  as  the  cone 
called  Crater  Hill,  are  scoria  cones,  but  the  chief  ejecta  from 
them  consists  of  black  fine-grained  basalt,  both  compact  and 
vesicular.  On  one  of  these  masses  of  black  basalt,  near  the  base 
of  Castle  Rock,  a  small  quantity  of  native  sulphur  was  found,  and 
this  was  the  only  example  of  solfataric  action  observed  in  the 
immediate  neighbourhood 

At  the  base  of  Crater  Hill,  on  the  S.E.  side,  an  olivine  basalt 
of  high  specific  gravity  was  found  ;  a  similar  basalt  also  appears 
on  Cape  Armitage  and  the  rock  at  both  places  occurs  in  almost 
horizontal  sheets. 

Observation  Hill,  about  750  feet  high,  consists  principally  of 
hornblende-trachytes,  and  these,  having  been  erupted  from  a  local 
centre,  practically  form  the  hill.  The  rock  with  parallel  stmcture 
which  is  found  at  the  north  foot  of  the  hill  and  in  the  Gap  is  an 
earlier  extrusion  than  the  rest,  and  lies  unconformably  below  them. 

Turning  now  to  the  other  islands,  White  Island  is  so  covered 
by  detritus  that  it  is  only  near  the  summit  that  the  rock  met  with 
is  undoubtedly  in  situ.  Here  also  extrusions  of  basalt  are  found, 
which  suggest  that  this  island  is  of  the  same  general  age  as  Ross 
Island. 

Black  Island  likewise  consists  mainly  of  basalt,  and  near  the 
north-west  extremity  vesicular  and  amygdaloidal  flows  were 
encountered.  At  the  south-west  end  yellow  trachytic  rocks  form 
a  bold  headland,  but  do  not  cover  an  area  greater  than  about  four 
square  miles. 

Brown  Island  has  a  well-defined  crater  at  its  summit,  which 
is  quite  undenuded,  and  from  it  have  issued  basalts  in  various 
conditions.      A  great  part  of  the  summit  consists  of  a   yellow 


I.j  GEOLOGICAL   OBSERVATIONS  329 

trachytic  rock,  but  owing  to  lack  of  time  a  specimen  was  only 
obtained  from  an  off-shoot  of  this  huge  boss  of  rock.  The  northern 
end  is  comparatively  low,  and  the  bright  red  areas  around  small 
conical  depressions  point  to  the  presence  of  scoria  cones  similar  to 
those  at  Winter  Quarters. 

The  Dailey  Islands  are  fine  small  conical  masses  surrounded 
by  the  ice  in  the  middle  of  McMurdo  Sound.  Only  one  of  these — 
the  largest— has  been  visited,  and  the  usual  scoriaceous  basalts 
were  procured. 

The  Dellbridge  Islands,  situated  near  the  base  of  Mount 
Erebus,  have  supplied  a  rather  surprising  variety  of  rocks. 

Razor  Back  consists  of  a  vesicular  basalt  which  is  very  much 
contorted  and  locally  is  scoriaceous. 

Tent  Island  has  an  exposure  of  about  100  feet  of  conglomerate 
on  the  steep  north-west  face.  The  upper  part  of  the  island  consists 
of  sheet  on  sheet  of  basalt,  making  up  a  thickness  of  about  200 
feet.  These  sheets  dip  at  an  angle  of  about  150  to  the  S.E.  and 
mainly  consist  of  red  basalt  glass  with  lenticular  crystals  of 
feldspar. 

Inaccessible  Island  was  visited  by  Mr.  Hodgson,  and  the 
specimens  he  obtained  include  tuffs,  vesicular  basalts,  and 
trachytic  rocks.  He  tells  me  the  rocks  are  all  very  confused, 
but  generally  dip  to  the  north  at  an  angle  of  about  400. 

The  Volcanic  Cones  on  the  Mainland. 

Four  or  five  perfect  cones,  quite  undenuded,  stand  at  intervals 
along  the  coast  of  South  Victoria  Land,  and  form  a  very  striking 
contrast  with  the  comparatively  unbroken  outline  of  the  mountain 
ranges  that  abut  on  the  Ross  Sea.  There  are  one  or  two  other 
cones  which  need  not  be  considered,  such  as  that  on  the  summit 
of  Cape  Jones,  but  all  are  isolated  and  do  not  form,  as  was 
previously  supposed,  a  continuous  belt. 

Mou?it  Brewster,  probably  only  4,000  feet  high,  is  situated  near 
Lady  Newnes  Bay,  and  is  important  as  it  obviously  does  not 
belong  to  the  high  land  which  rises  to  heights  of  over  10,000  feet 
on  the  west  of  it.  This  small  mountain  is  an  almost  perfect  dome, 
and  has  a  slightly  flattened  summit.  It  rises  rather  suddenly 
from  the  low  foothills  at  the  base  of  the  great  Admiralty  Range, 
and  the  snow-covered  curves  differ  essentially  from  the  com- 
paratively bare  precipitous  cliffs  of  that  range. 


33o      THE   VOYAGE   OF  THE   'DISCOVERY'    [Appx. 

Mount  Melbourne  is  conical,  but  has  a  small  crater,  probably  a 
quarter  of  a  mile  in  diameter,  at  its  summit.  It  is  situated  on  the 
south  side  of  Wood  Bay,  and  rises  directly  out  of  the  sea  on  two 
sides.  The  mountains  to  the  west  of  it  recede  from  the  coast, 
so  that  it  stands  in  icy  isolation  guarding  the  entrance  to  the 
bay.  Basalt  was  obtained  near  the  mountain  by  the  '  Southern 
Cross'  Expedition,  and  pumice  pebbles,  which  must  have  come 
from  its  flanks,  have  since  been  found  on  a  small  floe  floating  in 
Wood  Bay. 

Mount  Morning  is  about  5,000  feet  high,  and  is  situated  near 
the  foot  of  the  Royal  Society  Range.  It  is  a  low  dome  which 
covers  a  comparatively  large  area,  and  lava-streams  are  still 
apparent  on  its  sides  ;  but  as  no  specimens  have  been  collected, 
nothing  further  need  be  said. 

Mount  Discovery  is  a  most  striking  mountain  of  accumulation, 
as  it  has  the  shape  of  a  pear  standing  on  its  broader  end,  and  the 
curves  which  meet  at  its  summit  descend  symmetrically  on  all 
sides  almost  to  sea  level.  It  appears  to  be  composed  of  basalt 
similar  to  that  of  the  Ross  Island  Group,  and  parasitic  vents  are 
not  conspicuous.  The  Minna  Bluff,  a  long  narrow  peninsula  pro- 
jecting from  it  towards  the  south-east,  is  also  composed  of  basalt 
similar  to  that  from  Winter  Quarters. 


King  Edward  VII.  Land. 

King  Edward  VII.  Land,  between  the  latitudes  of  760  and 
780  S.  and  the  longitudes  of  160^  and  1500  W.,  does  not  show  great 
relief,  but  a  bold  headland  stands  out  conspicuously  before  the 
main  mass.  As  fragments  of  plutonic  and  gneissic  rocks  were 
obtained  from  an  iceberg  which  had  grounded  near  here,  it  is 
possible  that  the  main  mass  is  made  up  partly  of  rocks  of  these 
types. 

The  Continental  Range. 

South  Victoria  Land,  as  far  as  we  know  at  present,  consists  of 
a  great  range  of  mountains,  stretching  in  a  north-and- south  direc- 
tion for  at  least  800  miles,  and  apparently  it  is  the  eastern  edge  of 
a  vast  plateau.  The  only  direct  evidence  of  the  existence  of  this 
plateau  was  obtained  between  latitudes  770  and  780  S.,  where 
Captain  Scott  travelled  200  miles  westward  at  a  uniform  height 
of  9,000  feet  above  sea  level. 


L]  GEOLOGICAL  OBSERVATIONS  33 1 

The  land  as  a  whole  does  not  show  great  relief,  though  Surgeon 
MacCormick  considered  the  whole  range  to  be  volcanic.  The 
Ross  Expedition  was  less  fortunate  than  the  !  Discovery '  :  the 
latter  was  able  to  steam  in  close  to  the  land  and  so  see  the  peaks 
from  many  points  of  view.  Thus,  just  south  of  Cape  Washington 
a  tabular  mountain  was  observed  with  apparently  horizontal  bed- 
ding planes  and  almost  perpendicular  scarps  which  showed  plateau 
structure,  but  the  earlier  explorers  were  too  far  from  the  land  to 
see  this. 

The  great  chain  of  mountain  ranges  naturally  divides  itself 
into  sections  or  links,  and  these  may  be  conveniently  considered 
separately. 

(1)  The  area  between  Cape  Adare  and  Cape  North,  a  distance 
of  100  miles,  is  more  snow-covered  than  is  the  land  further  to  the 
south,  and  near  Cape  North  the  cloak  of  snow  is  almost  uniform. 
The  coast,  which  is  parallel  to  the  mountains,  faces  north-east, 
and  the  peaks,  which  are  generally  pyramidal,  have  their  shoulders 
truncated  sharply  at  the  shore.  There  are  very  few  deep  valleys, 
but  the  snow  often  exhibits  prominent  terraces,  one  above  another 
and  parallel  to  the  coast,  and  the  whole  suggests  the  existence  of 
some  horizontal  structure  in  the  rock  beneath. 

(2)  The  Admiralty  Range  occupies  the  250  miles  of  coast 
between  Cape  Adare  and  Cape  Washington,  and  forms  the  highest 
and  perhaps  the  largest  land  mass.  Here  one  sees  the  possibility 
of  a  division  of  the  area  into  two  distinct  geological  districts,  fol- 
low foothills  are  almost  continuous  along  the  whole  length  of  this 
part  of  the  coast.  Behind  the  foothills  there  appears  to  be  a  de- 
pression, and  behind  this,  again,  a  wall — possibly  a  fault-face  or 
escarpment — which  rises  up  to  heights  of  10,000  feet  and  which 
has  weathered  into  a  series  of  fine  pyramidal  peaks. 

(3)  The  Prince  Albert  Range,  an  area  200  miles  in  length  and 
trending  due  north  and  south,  is  the  lowest  large  land  mass  seen 
by  the  Expedition.  This  range  is  important,  not  only  because  it  is 
practically  a  new  discovery,  but  because  of  its  extreme  uniformity 
of  character.  It  is  remarkable  that  here  the  eastern  border  is 
always  steep,  and  gives  the  impression  that  it  is  only  the  outlying 
edge  of  some  great  plateau  from  which  streams  of  ice  flow  down 
between  nunataks.  The  structure  of  the  Royal  Society  Range  is 
perhaps  the  key  to  the  explanation  of  this  uniformity  of  landscape. 

(4)  The  Royal  Society  Range  has  a  length  of  some  fifty  miles, 
and   is   the   only  part  of  South  Victoria  Land  which  has  been 


:,32      THE  VOYAGE   OF  THE   'DISCOVERY5    [An>x. 

examined  in  detail.  In  the  main,  all  the  structures  observed  in  the 
Admiralty  Range  are  again  seen,  but  are  much  more  striking. 
There  are  foothills  of  insignificant  height,  a  north-and- south  valley 
separating  the  foothills  from  the  main  mountain  mass,  and  a 
mountain  mass  rising  in  a  uniform  cliff  behind  to  a  height  of 
10,000  feet,  and  with  occasional  peaks  rising  to  12,000  or  15,000 
feet  in  altitude.  From  our  Winter  Quarters  this  range  could 
always  be  seen,  though  quite  fifty  miles  away  ;  and  even  at  this 
great  distance,  so  clear  was  the  atmosphere,  the  plateau  form  was 
always  evident,  and  was  rendered  still  more  striking  by  the  broad 
band  of  lighter-coloured  rock  below,  which  extends  from  end  to 
end  of  the  range.  Thus  the  form  of  the  range  appears  to  be 
determined  by  the  horizontality  of  the  rocks  which  compose  it — 
a  fact  abundantly  proved  by  the  sledge  parties  who  traversed  it. 

(5)  The  four  ranges  which  determine  the  300  miles  of  almost 
straight  coast  to  the  south  of  latitude  79°  S.  appear  to  be  exactly 
similar  to  those  already  considered,  and  may  be  dismissed  with 
the  mention  of  the  plateau  character  which  is  strikingly  shown  and 
beautifully  illustrated  by  sketches  made  by  Dr.  Wilson  during 
Captain  Scott's  great  journey  to  the  south,  when  latitude  820  17'  S. 
was  reached,  and  are  all  the  more  valuable  in  that  they  were 
made  by  an  unprejudiced  observer.  At  the  same  time,  Mr. 
E.  H.  Shackleton  obtained  some  valuable  photographs,  and  the 
next  year  Mr.  Barne  repoited  a  horizontal  structure  in  the  land  at 
about  8o°  S.  Mr.  Mulock  has  carefully  surveyed  the  land  in  this 
high  latitude,  and  the  great  plateaux  separated  by  the  deep,  steep- 
sided  channels  or  inlets  are  being  carefully  charted,  and  this  will 
form  a  valuable  addition  to  the  geology  of  the  area. 


The  Rocks  Obtained  in  South  Victoria  Land. 

The  rocks  obtained  by  the  expedition  fall  naturally  into  five 
quite  distinct  groups.  Briefly  they  may  be  classed  as  gneisses, 
granites,  sandstones,  dolerites,  and  recent  volcanics,  but  little  is 
known  of  the  field  relations  of  these  types,  except  the  order  in 
which  they  occur.  The  important  deposit  of  sandstone  provides 
a  convenient  stratigraphical  datum  line  with  reference  to  which 
the  other  phenomena  may  be  considered,  and  the  above  order 
may  be  taken  as  chronological. 


I.]  GEOLOGICAL  OBSERVATIONS  333 

The  Gneissic  Rocks. 

As  the  gneissic  rocks  occur  at  sea  level  at  the  foot  of  the 
highest  part  of  the  Royal  Society  Range,  and  as  they  are  also 
found  in  the  interior  of  the  range  below  a  sequence  of  rocks  12,000 
feet  thick,  they  may  safely  be  regarded  as  forming  the  ancient 
platform  on  which  the  central  part  of  South  Victoria  Land  is  built. 

The  foothills  of  the  Royal  Society  Range  appear  to  be  mainly 
composed  of  metamorphic  limestone,  which  Mr.  G.  T.  Prior  tells 
me  probably  belongs  to  the  gneissic  series.  These  limestones 
form  rounded  hills  which  rise  to  heights  of  over  4,000  feet  above 
sea  level  and  are  quite  isolated.  Dr.  Koettlitz  and  Dr.  Wilson 
both  aided  me  in  collecting  from  these  hills,  and  Mr.  Barne  pro- 
cured a  specimen  of  schist  from  near  latitude  8o°  S. 

On  both  sides  of  the  Blue  Glacier  the  rock  shows  important 
structural  planes  which  dip  to  the  east  at  an  angle  of  700  while  the 
strike  is  north  and  south.  The  hills  end  sharply  on  the  west  in  a 
very  straight  and  steep  face,  which  is  suggestive  of  a  fault.  The 
limestone  is  almost  pure  white,  and  the  calcite  is  in  rather  well- 
formed  rhombohedral  crystals  often  an  eighth  of  an  inch  across. 
When  weathered  it  becomes  so  crumbly  that  it  was  difficult  to  get 
a  hand  specimen  from  the  rounded  surfaces  that  were  exposed. 
Basic  dykes  cut  obliquely  across  the  planes  of  division,  but  only 
at  one  spot,  where  one  of  these  dykes  is  twenty  yards  thick,  was 
thermal  metamorphism  evident. 

Cape  Bernacchi  and  the  low  rounded  hills  to  the  west  of  it 
appear  to  consist  of  gneissic  rocks  which  are  similar  to  the  gneisses 
forming  the  lowest  part  of  the  left  bank  of  the  Ferrar  Glacier.  At 
the  point  where  the  ice  of  this  glacier  just  begins  to  float  in  its 
narrow  fjord-like  channel  there  is  an  exposure  of  the  limestone, 
which  dips  to  the  north-east  at  an  angle  of  about  70°  The  New 
Harbour  Heights,  as  well  as  the  north-western  extremity  of  the 
foothills,  are  composed  of  hornblende-gneiss.  The  rock  at  the 
latter  spot  is  dark,  fine-grained,  and  very  streaky  ;  the  foliations 
dip  to  the  south-west  at  an  angle  of  6o° — a  fact  of  some  importance 
when  we  consider  the  dip  of  the  rocks  of  New  Harbour  Heights, 
which  is  to  the  north-east. 

At  the  foot  of  Cathedral  Rocks,  at  a  distance  of  forty  miles 
from  the  coast  and  over  2,000  feet  above  sea  level,  there  is  an 
exposure  of  gneiss  some  500  feet  high  and  three  miles  long. 
There  is  a  very  sharp  dividing  line  between  the  gneiss  and  the 


334      THE   VOYAGE   OF  THE    'DISCOVERY'    [Appx. 

granite  which  overlies  it,  but  numerous  dykes  of  both  grey  and 
pink  granite  form  a  network  over  the  face  of  the  cliff.  The  cliff 
of  gneiss  is  covered  by  the  ice  on  the  west  side,  and  is  cut  off 
suddenly  on  the  east  by  a  tongue  of  granite  ;  and  occasionally 
quite  isolated  patches  and  wisps  of  gneiss  may  be  observed  in  the 
middle  of  a  mass  of  this  granite.  The  gneiss  as  a  whole  is  dark 
in  colour,  being  composed  of  thin  laminae,  usually  under  a  quarter 
of  an  inch  thick,  in  which  light  and  dark  minerals  are  alternately 
dominant. 

The  Granites. 

Numerous  fragments  of  granite  rocks  have  been  recorded  from 
the  Ross  Sea  area,  but  up  to  the  time  of  the  departure  of  the 
'Discovery'  Expedition  nothing  is  recorded  as  to  the  occurrence 
in  situ  of  this  type  of  rock.  Granites  are  very  abundant  in  all  the 
moraines  from  Cape  Adare  to  Cape  Crozier,  and  therefore  must 
have  a  very  wide  distribution. 

The  first  locality  where  this  type  of  rock  was  found  in  place  is 
in  latitude  JJ°  S.,  at  the  entrance  to  the  so-called  Granite  Harbour. 
Here  a  prominent  headland,  two  miles  long  and  some  500  feet 
high,  proved  to  be  composed  entirely  of  granite,  and  no  other  rock 
in  contact  with  it  was  examined  during  the  short  time  spent  ashore 
here.  The  massif  consists  of  an  ordinary  grey  granite  in  which 
occur  basic  dykes  and  segregation  veins.  These  segregation  veins 
as  a  rule  consist  of  a  coarse-grained  variety  of  granite  with  large 
pink  idiomorphic  crystals  of  feldspar.  They  are  usually  vertical  and 
about  ten  yards  wide,  and  shade  off  almost  gradually  on  each  side 
into  the  ordinary  grey  rock.  It  is  noteworthy  that  the  change  from 
grey  to  pink  is  not  quite  gradual,  but  takes  place]in  stages  repre- 
sented by  bands  a  foot  or  so  across,  which  is  suggestive  of  a  com- 
posite dyke.  These  bands  become  successively  coarser  and  pinker 
from  the  edges  towards  the  centre,  and  are  separated  from  one 
another  by  smooth  vertical  joints.  Schistose,  gneissic,  and  various 
hypabyssal  rocks,  as  well  as  the  ordinary  dolerites  and  sandstones, 
occur  as  boulders  on  the  narrow  beach  at  the  foot  of  this  hill. 

Between  the  Royal  Society  Range  and  the  foothills  several 
isolated  knolls  of  granite  occur,  but  they  are  almost  completely 
buried  in  snow. 

At  a  height  of  5,500  feet  Mr.  Skelton  collected  a  grey  granite 
in  which  schistose  veins  had  been  developed  dipping  towards  the 
south.     Again,  at  a  height  of  4,000  feet,  he  collected  a  somewhat 


I.]  GEOLOGICAL  OBSERVATIONS  335 

coarse-grained  pink  granite  with  phenocrysts  of  feldspar  up  to  a 
quarter  of  an  inch  across.  This  exposure  has  suffered  denudation, 
and  it  is  here  that  the  type  of  hollowed  crystalline  rock  with  the 
white  incrustation  occurs.  Mr.  Prior  kindly  analysed  parts  of 
this  incrustation  for  me,  and  tells  me  it  consists  mainly  of  carbonate 
of  lime. 

The  hill  on  the  east  side  of  Descent  Pass  rises  to  a  height  of 
4,900  feet,  and  consists  mainly  of  granite  with  abundant  large 
crystals  of  orthoclase,  and  here  the  second  type  of  cavity  occurs. 
On  the  north  side  of  this  hill,  and  in  the  Ferrar  Glacier,  the  same 
type  of  granite  is  found  ;  but  in  it  occur  basic  dykes  which,  by 
weathering,  produce  black  patches  visible  on  the  hill-side  at  a 
distance  of  at  least  eight  miles. 

Dr.  Koettlitz  collected  granitic  and  gneissic  rocks  from  an 
exposure  more  than  3,000  feet  above  sea  level  in  the  transverse 
valley  at  the  east  foot  of  the  Royal  Society  Range,  while  the  author 
obtained  quite  a  normal  grey  granite  from  one  of  the  neighbouring 
isolated  hillocks. 

The  gneiss  of  Cathedral  Rocks  is  overlain  by  a  mass  of  granite 
nearly  4,000  feet  thick,  which  appears  to  build  up  this  the  northern 
extremity  of  the  Royal  Society  Range.  Dykes  of  both  grey  and 
pink  granite  ramify  into  the  gneiss,  but  as  a  whole  the  granite  has 
nearly  horizontal  upper  and  lower  surfaces,  which  can  be  traced 
round  the  spurs  of  the  range  for  a  distance  of  four  or  five  miles  up 
the  south  arm  on  the  western  side.  At  the  foot  of  the  first  of  the 
three  shoulders  which  go  to  form  the  Cathedral  Rocks,  a  tongue  of 
granite  appears  to  burst  through  the  gneiss  from  below.  This 
tongue  is  mainly  grey  in  colour,  but  great  masses  of  pink  feldspar 
rock  seem  to  have  been  caught  up  in  it ;  but  the  masses  become 
scarcer  as  one  proceeds  eastward  along  the  foot  of  the  cliff.  The 
connection  of  this  granite  with  that  of  the  hill  on  the  east  side  of 
Descent  Pass  has  not  been  established  owing  to  the  glaciers  which 
descend  from  the  valleys  at  the  foot  of  the  Camel's  Hump. 

Granite  has  been  obtained  from  three  spots  on  the  north  side 
of  the  Ferrar  Glacier,  or  rather  on  the  north  side  of  the  East 
Fork. 

The  mountain  north-east  of  Cathedral  Rocks  rises  to  a  fine 
gable  nearly  7,000  feet  high,  but  does  not  rise  much  above  the 
mountains  to  the  west,  of  which  it  is  a  part.  The  gable  is  about 
5,000  feet  above  the  ice,  and  of  this  height  4,000  feet  appear  to  be 
of  granite,  and  a  specimen  of  augen-gneiss  taken  from  the  foot  is 


336      THE   VOYAGE   OF  THE    'DISCOVERY'    [Appx. 

probably  a  modification  of  the  mass  above.  The  dark  rock  pro- 
ducing the  gable  is  separated  from  the  granite  by  a  very  definite 
and  almost  horizontal  line  which  may  be  traced  westwards  for  over 
ten  miles. 

Half-way  between  this  gable  and  the  point  where  this  group  of 
hills  terminates  on  the  west,  a  dolerite  has  been  found  to  lie 
directly  upon  the  even  surface  of  the  granite.  The  former 
appears  to  have  flowed  out  over  the  surface  of  the  latter,  and  the 
contact  plane  dips  to  the  west  with  an  inclination  of  about  2°. 
The  western  end  of  this  exposure  of  grey  granite  is  hidden  from 
view  by  a  rise  in  the  surface  of  the  ice,  but  on  gaining  the  western 
extremity  of  these  hills  a  pink  granite  is  found.  This  granite 
appears  to  be  intrusive  in  the  dolerite  ;  tongues  of  the  former 
extend  upwards  into  the  latter,  and  the  usual  vertical  columns  of 
dolerite  are  very  much  disturbed. 

Fifty  miles  inland,  in  the  Dry  Valleys,  and  at  a  height  of  5,000 
feet  above  sea  level,  small  and  large  boulders  of  both  grey  and 
pink  granite  were  found.  These  boulders  were  resting  on  the  side 
of  Beacon  Height  West  on  a  surface  of  sandstone  ;  and  since  the 
hills  to  the  southward  rise  to  great  heights,  it  is  possible  that 
granite  occurs  at  a  greater  elevation  than  5,000  feet.  On  the  side 
of  Knob  Head  Mountain  great  boulders  of  granite  lie  on  a  surface 
of  dolerite,  and  as  the  mountain  consists  mainly  of  sandstone, 
these  boulders  must  have  their  source  further  inland. 


The  Beacon  Sandstone  Formation. 

The  existence  of  a  fossiliferous  sedimentary  rock  in  South 
Victoria  Land  has  always  been  considered  probable  since  the 
'Challenger'  dredged  up  sandstones,  limestones,  and  shales  in  a 
high  southern  latitude  ;  but,  on  the  whole,  it  seemed  very  doubtful 
whether  the  '  Discovery'  would  be  able  to  encounter  any  of  these, 
as  it  was  thought  the  coastal  belt  of  the  land  was  composed 
entirely  of  volcanic  rocks. 

Granular  sandstone  fragments  were  dredged  up  by  the 
'  Discovery '  near  Coulman  Island,  and  the  tabular  structure  of  the 
Prince  Albert  Range  pointed  to  the  possibility  of  a  sandstone  rock 
being  developed.  Sandstone  was  also  found  in  Granite  Harbour, 
and  when  a  broad  band  was  observed  extending  horizontally  from 
end  to  end  of  the  Royal  Society  Range,  it  seemed  probable  that 
here  a  sedimentary  rock  would  be  found.    Mr.  Armitage's  pioneer 


t]  GEOLOGICAL   OBSERVATIONS  337 

journey  through  the  mountains  proved  the  existence  of  plateau 
features  as  well  as  horizontal  structure,  and  among  the  specimens 
he  brought  back  were  a  quartz  grit  and  an  arkose.  Therefore 
there  was  a  very  great  possibility  of  fossiliferous  sandstones,  shales, 
or  even  limestones  being  developed  locally.  He  reported  the 
sandstone  to  reach  a  height  of  8,000  feet,  and  to  be  accessible  at 
a  spot  eighty  miles  inland  and  at  the  very  edge  of  the  inland  ice. 

Captain  Scott  therefore  arranged  that  I  should  accompany  him 
to  the  edge  of  the  inland  ice,  and  should  do  as  much  geological 
work  as  was  possible  on  the  return  journey.  At  the  second 
attempt  to  gain  the  inland  ice,  the  parties  were  confined  to  their 
tents  for  a  period  of  six  and  a  half  days.  At  the  end  of  this  time, 
November  11,  1903,  I  found  I  had  a  month  in  which  to  examine 
600  square  miles  of  new  country  and  get  back  to  the  ship  by 
December  12. 

Accordingly,  as  soon  as  the  gale  abated,  I  made  straight  for 
Depot  Nunatak.  Utilising  the  outward  journey  as  a  reconnais- 
sance, I  knew  that  here  the  capping  dolerite  would  be  encountered, 
and  possibly  the  very  top  of  the  Beacon  Sandstone.  The  latter 
was  not  exposed,  but  in  the  moraine  at  the  base  of  the  nunatak  I 
found  abundant  masses  of  sandstone,  the  majority  of  which  were 
locally  blackened  by  what  I  took  to  be  graphite. 

My  companions,  Kennar  (P.O.)  and  Weller  (A.B.),  had  mean- 
while spread  out  our  gear  in  order  to  get  rid  of  the  moisture  that 
had  accumulated  in  it  during  the  lie-up,  and  that  night  hopes  ran 
high  as,  under  the  shelter  of  the  nunatak,  we  exchanged  minus 
temperatures  and  driving  snow  for  bright  sunshine  and  not  more 
than  thirty  degrees  of  frost,  and  we  all  looked  forward  to  finding 
something  new.  The  next  day,  therefore,  saw  the  camp  at  a  spot 
about  ten  miles  south-west  of  Finger  Mountain,  where  300  feet  or 
so  of  the  sandstone  could  be  seen  cropping  ^ut  below  the  500  feet 
of  overlying  dolerite.  Imagine  my  delight  when,  taking  bag  and 
hammer  up  to  the  rock  face,  I  discovered  thin,  irregular,  black 
seams  running  through  an  almost  pure  sandstone.  The  seams 
here  were  in  close  proximity  to  the  dolerite,  and  were  therefore 
much  charred  ;  so,  after  collecting  the  best  specimens,  a  move  was 
made  diagonally  down  the  valley  to  the  Inland  Forts,  where  2,000 
feet  of  sandstone  was  exposed.  Here  I  hoped  to  find  better 
specimens  on  the  base  of  the  sandstone  or  the  surface  on  which  it 
rested,  but,  after  carefully  examining  1,500  feet,  no  better  speci- 
mens were  obtained,  nor  was  thj  old  floor  to  be  seen. 

VOL.  II.  z 


338      THE   VOYAGE   OF  THE   'DISCOVERY5    [Appx. 

The  Beacon  Sandstone  was  also  examined  at  the  foot  of  Finger 
Mountain,  in  the  Dry  Valleys  at  the  foot  of  Beacon  Height  West, 
and  at  the  foot  of  Knob  Head  Mountain.  In  character  it  is  mar- 
vellously uniform,  and  the  horizontal  bedding  planes  have  seldom 
been  tilted  by  the  intrusive  sheets  of  dolerite.  Locally  the  beds 
have  been  disrupted,  but,  as  masses  have  been  lifted  bodily,  no 
great  changes  in  the  character  of  the  rock  have  been  produced. 

The  relation  of  the  dolerite  to  the  sandstone  can  perhaps  be 
best  studied  at  Finger  Mountain.  Here  dykes  are  displayed  cut- 
ting upwards  across  the  bedding  planes  of  the  sandstone,  sills 
forcing  their  way  between  the  strata,  or  even  pipes  which  appear  ■ 
to  feed  the  superincumbent  sheets. 

The  Beacon  Sandstone  as  a  whole  is  very  uniform  in  texture, 
but  the  grains  of  quartz  are  not  very  firmly  packed  together. 
Locally  it  becomes  almost  a  quartz  grit,  or  again,  arkose 
characters  are  developed.  Current  bedding  and  collections  of 
quartz  pebbles  appear  and  disappear  quite  suddenly  in  the 
mass,  and  these  may  even  form  part  of  the  carbonaceous  seams. 
Only  at  one  spot  did  the  rock  become  calcareous,  and  the 
calcite,  by  cementing  the  quartz  grains  together,  produced  a 
more  durable  rock,  which  therefore  projected  as  a  shelf  beyond 
the  remainder. 

This  calcareous  band  is  only  about  four  inches  thick,  and  as  it 
occurs  near  the  top  of  the  sandstone,  and  as  such  abundant  traces 
of  organic  matter  occur  in  the  sandstone  blocks  at  the  foot  of 
Depot  Nunatak,  it  is  highly  probable  that  this  vicinity  will  yield 
more  abundant  organic  matter  than  any  other.  A  nunatak  higher 
than  Depot  Nunatak,  and  about  six  miles  from  the  south  of  it, 
displays  dark  bands  in  what  is  possibly  the  Beacon  Sandstone, 
and  this  spot  therefore  may  be  worthy  of  closer  examination  in 
future. 

The  two  following  sections  will  give  a  general  idea  of  the  nature 
of  the  great  Beacon  Sandstone  formation  : 

a.  At  a  spot  ten  miles  south-west  of  Finger  Mountain — 
(8)  700  feet      columnar  dolerite. 
(7)  200    „         almost     pure     sandstone     with     occasional 

pebbles. 
(6)      2    „         carbonaceous  band  with  fossils. 
(5)     12    „         sandstone  with  brown  bands. 
(4)     12    „         hard    white    sandstone,    with    a    three-inch 
fibrous  strip. 


(12) 

200 

(II) 

200 

(IO) 

200 

(9) 

IOO 

(8) 

2CX) 

(7) 

50 

(6) 

200 

(5) 

IOO 

(4) 

So 

(3) 

10 

<«) 

60 

(0 

30 

t)  GEOLOGICAL  OBSERVATIONS  339 

(3)     12  feet      black  shale. 

(2)      6  inches  hard  calcareous  band. 

( 1 )      6  feet      black  shale. 

B.  At  the  Inland  Forts — 

(13)  100  feet  dolerite  cap. 

white  sandstone. 

sandstone  with  ferruginous  concretions. 

yellow  sandstone. 

sandstone  with  rod-like  impressions. 

yellow  sandstone  with  ferruginous  concretions. 

white  sandstone. 

yellow  sandstone. 

marble-like  sandstone. 

white  sandstone. 

sandstone  with  stalagmites. 

almost  white  sandstone. 

variegated  brown  and  yellow  sandstone. 


The  Dolerites. 

The  dolerites  appear  to  be  confined  to  the  mainland,  where 
they  occur  as  very  extensive  sheets,  which  in  the  main  cap  the 
Beacon  Sandstone.  The  top  of  these  sheets,  which  probably  form 
the  highest  summits  of  the  Royal  Society  Range,  has  not  been 
attained,  and  therefore  there  is  no  direct  evidence  that  surface 
flows  have  not  been  produced.  As  indirect  evidence  we  have  the 
fact  that  no  scoriaceous  rock  of  any  description  has  been  found  in 
any  of  the  moraines,  and  therefore  it  is  probable  that  no  surface 
flows  occur  in  this  district. 

It  is  convenient  to  commence  at  the  highest  point  above  sea 
level,  about  8,000  feet,  from  which  doleritic  rocks  have  been 
obtained,  and  work  down  the  great  valley  to  the  lowest  point 
where  they  occur,  at  a  height  of  about  4,000  feet  above  sea 
level. 

Mr.  Armitage,  on  the  first  journey  through  the  Royal  Society 
Range,  returned  with  weathered  specimens  of  dolerite  from  Depot 
Nunatak,  and  at  the  same  time  Mr.  Skelton  photographed  the 
rock,  which  rises  as  a  mass  of  great  columns  through  the  snow. 
The  rock  is  an  outlier,  and  rears  itself  up  to  a  height  of  500  feet 
above  the  snow,  and  the  columns,  which  are  continuous  from  top  to 

z  2 


340      THE   VOYAGE   OF   THE   < DISCOVERY'    [Appx, 

bottom,  are  about  twelve  feet  in  diameter.  The  Nunatak  is  about 
sixty  miles  from  the  coast,  at  an  elevation  of  about  8,000  feet,  and 
appears  to  be  part  of  the  great  sheet  capping  the  sandstone  five  or 
six  miles  to  the  eastward. 

This  sheet,  on  the  east  side  of  the  South- West  Arm,  is  quite 
similar  in  outward  form  to  Depot  Nunatak,  and  rises  some 
700  feet  in  an  almost  sheer  cliff.  Locally  portions  of  sandstone 
have  been  lifted  bodily  by  the  dolerite,  and  the  junction  specimens 
prove  that  the  dolerite  is  the  younger  rock.  A  great  pipe  fifty 
yards  in  diameter  bursts  vertically  across  the  bedding  planes  of  the 
stratified  rock,  and  appears  to  feed  the  sheet,  which  extends  con- 
tinuously as  far  as  Finger  Mountain. 

At  the  Inland  Forts  on  the  north  side  of  the  Ferrar  Glacier 
the  hills  rise  to  a  very  uniform  height  and  are  capped  by  dolerite. 
Two  or  three  small  pipes  rise  through  the  sandstone,  but  these 
could  hardly  have  supplied  an  appreciable  proportion  of  the  great 
mass  above. 

Finger  Mountain  rises  500  feet  above  the  ice,  and  is  composed 
of  alternate  layers  of  sandstone  and  dolerite.  Near  the  ice- 
cascade  the  lowest  rock  visible  is  part  of  the  Beacon  Sandstone 
formation,  and  above  this  is  a  sheet  of  columnar  dolerite  which 
unites  with  another  sheet  on  the  west  side  of  the  hill.  These 
two  sheets  are  partially  separated  by  a  wedge  of  sandstone  half  a 
mile  long,  and  the  wedge  is  200  feet  thick,  where  it  is  cut  off  by 
the  eastern  slope  of  the  hill.  The  bedding  planes  are  horizontal, 
and  are  made  conspicuous  by  the  metamorphic  action  of  the 
dolerite.  Where  the  dolerite  sheets  are  in  contact  the  columns 
are  continuous  and  vertical,  but  where  the  sandstone  intervenes 
the  columns  of  the  upper  portion  have  a  slight  tilt  to  the  west. 
Here  also  numerous  dykes  and  sills  prove  the  intrusive  nature  of 
the  dolerite. 

These  same  relations  were  observed  in  the  Dry  Valleys  and  on 
the  Terra  Cotta  Hills,  and  need  not  be  reiterated. 

The  summits  of  both  the  Beacon  Heights,  of  New  Mountain 
and  of  Knob  Head  appear  to  consist  of  dolerite ;  and  in  all 
four  a  second  sheet,  almost  identical  with  the  lower  sheet  in 
Finger  Mountain,  separates  200  feet  or  so  of  sandstone  from 
the  main  mass  which  forms  the  greater  bulk  of  the  said 
mountains. 

At  the  foot  of  New  Mountain  and  at  the  foot  of  Knob  Head 
there  is  another  sheet  of  dolerite.     The  outcrop  at  the  last  spot, 


L]  GEOLOGICAL  OBSERVATIONS  341 

which  is  100  yards  long  and  200  feet  high,  exhibits  columns  about 
twelve  feet  in  diameter  and  between  twenty  and  200  feet  in  length. 
There  are  occasional  horizontal  joints,  but  cup-and-ball  structure 
is  not  developed  to  any  great  extent.  The  sandstone  appears  to 
rest  upon  the  surface  of  this  dolerite,  but  the  junction  of  the  two 
could  not  be  discovered. 

We  have  already  seen  that  the  mountains  which  separate  the 
North  from  the  East  Fork  are  capped  by  dolerite,  and  that  another 
sheet  of  dolerite,  apparently  arising  at  the  western  end,  has  flowed 
over  a  surface  of  granite.  This  last  feature  appears  to  be  again 
developed  in  the  Cathedral  Rocks,  for  a  black  columnar  rock  is 
separated  from  the  granite  by  a  very  definite  line.  Therefore 
dolerite  probably  helps  to  build  the  Cathedral  Rocks  as  well  as 
other  parts  of  the  Royal  Society  Range. 

In  Granite  Harbour  a  dark  rock  lies  unconformably  upon  the 
surface  of  a  light-coloured  one,  and  as  the  lower  rock  was  proved 
to  be  granite,  and  boulders  of  dolerite  were  found  on  it,  we  may 
very  reasonably  assume  that  here  also  a  sheet  of  dolerite  lies  upon 
an  older  mass  of  granite. 

A  few  additional  notes  on  the  basaltic  rocks  of  Cape  Adare  may 
be  included  here.  It  may  be  remarked  that  this  Cape  lies  at  the 
foot  of  the  gigantic  mountain  range  and  possesses  horizontal  sheets 
of  basalt,  basaltic  agglomerate  and  tuffs,  and  its  rocks  may  there- 
fore have  some  connection  with  the  same  rocks  in  Coulman  Island 
and  the  other  islands  off  the  coast.  The  sheets  consist  of  both 
olivine  and  hornblende  bearing  basalts  which  are  occasionally  cut 
through  by  vertical  dykes. 

This  structure  appears  to  be  characteristic  of  the  steep  coast- 
line between  Cape  Adare  and  Cape  Jones,  a  distance  of  150  miles. 
This  part  of  the  coast  is  a  cliff  varying  in  height  from  500  to  1,000 
feet,  and  always  shows  layers  arranged  more  or  less  horizontally, 
making  up  the  whole  cliff.  Low  anticlines  and  synclines  with  east 
and  west  axes,  occur  at  intervals  along  this  piece  of  coast,  and 
occasionally  red  bands  could  be  distinguished  which  appear  similar 
to  those  on  Coulman  Island  or  Cape  Adare. 

The  Ice. 

The  Sea-ice. — The  term  Sea  ice  is  perhaps  the  most  suitable  for 
all  ice  produced  by  the  freezing  of  the  sea,  and  it  also  draws  a 
distinction  between  this  ice  and  that  which  has  another  origin.     In 


342      THE   VOYAGE   OF   THE    'DISCOVERY'    [Appx. 

high  latitudes  the  sea  freezes  over  during  the  winter  months  often 
in  a  very  uniform  sheet.  This  sheet  breaks  up  during  the  summer 
and  floats  north  to  form  the  pack-ice,  which  is  usually  encountered 
by  exploring  ships  near  the  Antarctic  Circle.  The  pack  varies  from 
year  to  year,  and  its  structure  in  Arctic  regions  has  been  described 
by  Dr.  Drygalski  and  others.  The  first  two  inches  frozen  are 
composed  of  plates  of  ice  lying  horizontally.  These  plates  are 
usually  under  half  an  inch  across  and  are  separated  from  the 
greater  mass  of  ice  by  a  half-inch  layer  of  very  confused  crystals. 
The  major  part  consists  of  bundles  or  sheaves  of  fibres  arranged 
perpendicularly  to  the  surface  of  freezing,  and  this  fibrous  structure 
extends  to  the  bottom  of  any  given  floe. 

The  salinity  of  sea-ice  seems  to  depend  more  upon  the  rate  of 
freezing  than  upon  the  depth  or  distance  from  the  upper  surface. 
The  amount  of  salt  varies  greatly,  as  may  be  seen  if  reference  be 
made  to  our  observations  on  the  salinity  of  the  sea-ice.  The  mean 
salinity  is  about  4*3  grammes  of  sodium  chloride  per  litre  of  melted 
ice,  but  by  fractional  crystallisation  a  salinity  up  to  266-6  grammes 
per  litre  may  be  produced. 

Snow  accumulates  on  the  surface  of  the  ice,  and  by  pressing  it 
down  below  sea  level  weakens  it ;  and  sometimes  so  much  snow 
accumulates  that  a  drift  is  formed  which  has  its  under  surface 
dissolved  by  the  sea  during  the  ensuing  summer.  Thus,  then,  we 
see  that  it  is  possible  for  water  substance  to  pass  from  the 
atmosphere  back  to  the  ocean  without  taking  part  in  the  glaciation 
of  the  land. 

Hummocks  are  rather  exceptional  in  the  sea-ice  of  McMurdo 
Sound,  but  where  the  Ross  ice-sheet  moves  in  towards  Winter 
Quarters  Peninsula  a  great  series  of  hummocks  was  produced 
some  two  miles  long.  These  hummocks  in  the  year  1903  rose  to 
heights  of  from  twelve  to  twenty  feet  above  sea  level,  and  were 
sometimes  merely  bucklings  of  the  ice,  or  at  other  times  were 
fractured  slabs  standing  up  vertically. 

The  thickness  of  the  sea-ice  varies  according  to  circumstances. 
Where  snow  accumulates  any  thickness  may  be  produced,  but  in 
an  exposed  spot,  such  as  100  yards  off  Hut  Point,  the  thickness 
produced  by  freezing  is  under  Z\  feet  in  the  year.  In  Arrival  Bay, 
where  the  land  precludes  a  rapid  circulation  of  the  water,  as  much 
as  ten  feet  has  been  produced  by  freezing  alone.  The  following 
observations  were  made  at  the  ice-gauge  off  Hut  Point  : 


I.]  GEOLOGICAL  OBSERVATIONS  343 

March  1,  1903. — A  water-hole,  or  an  area  uncovered  by  floe- 
ice. 

April  24,  1903. — Sun  below  the  horizon  ;  thickness  3  feet. 

August  23,  1903. — Re-appearance  of  the  sun  ;  thickness  3  feet 
6  inches. 

December  5,  1903. — Nearly  midsummer;  maximum  thickness 
8  feet  5£  inches. 

January  5,  1904. — Summer  month  ;  thickness  5  feet  10  inches, 

January  28,  1904. — Air  becoming  colder  ;  a  water-hole. 

The  ice  is  therefore  dissolved  from  below,  and  the  water-hole 
observed  three  years  in  succession  off  Cape  Armitage  is  further 
proof  of  this  action  of  the  sea-water. 

The  sea-ice  in  McMurdo  Sound  gradually  creeps  north  during 
the  winter,  but  the  ice-foot  protecting  the  land  prevents  the  sea-ice 
acting  as  an  abrading  or  transporting  agent  to  any  great  extent. 

The  Shore-ice  may  be  taken  to  include  all  ice  that  fringes  the 
shores  of  South  Victoria  Land  and  remains  firmly  frozen  to  them. 
Three  types  may  be  distinguished  : 

(a)  The  fringe  due  solely  to  the  spray  from  the  sea  which 
freezes  on  the  land.  This  is  the  'typical  ice-foot,' and  owing  to  the 
small  rise  and  fall  of  the  tide  its  height  never  exceeds  three  feet. 
The  chief  function  of  this  fringe  is  conservative,  for  it  protects  the 
beach  from  the  action  of  floating  ice  and  eroding  breakers. 

(b)  There  is  a  border  of  glacier-ice  around  the  land  of  Winter 
Quarters.  This  ice  has  no  apparent  source.  It  slopes  gently  sea- 
wards, and  ends  as  a  cliff  which  varies  in  height  from  six  feet  to 
300  feet,  and  the  distance  between  the  cliff  and  the  bare  land 
varies  from  ten  yards  to  a  mile.  This  fringe  is  even  more  effective 
than  the  ice-foot  as  a  conservative  agent,  for  its  surface  is  inclined 
at  an  angle  of  less  than  20°,  and  seldom  allows  stones  to  roll  over 
it  on  to  the  sea-ice. 

(c)  The  third  type  of  shore-ice  is  more  in  the  nature  of  a 
'piedmont.'  The  great  snow-fan  between  the  hills  and  the 
stranded  moraines  on  the  west  side  of  McMurdo  Sound  maybe  taken 
as  an  example.  This  mass  of  snow  is  about  ten  miles  long  and 
five  broad,  and  the  whole  of  it  is  aground.  It  has  no  obvious 
source,  and  the  surface  rises  from  a  few  feet  at  the  seaward  edge 
to  about  1,000  feet  on  the  sides  of  the  foothills.  As  it  is 
practically  motionless,  it  must  afford  a  very  material  protection  to 
the  land. 


344      THE   VOYAGE   OF   THE   'DISCOVERY'    lAppx. 

The  Land  Ice. 

The  Inland  Ice. — By  the  term  inland  ice  we  mean  the  uniform 
cloak  of  ice  and  snow  of  unknown  extent  which  covers  land  of 
continental  dimensions.  In  South  Victoria  Land  this  uniform 
covering  has  been  met  with  on  the  west  side  of  the  Royal  Society 
Range  at  a  height  of  nearly  9,000  feet,  and  has  been  traversed  by 
Captain  Scott  and  party  for  a  distance  of  about  200  miles.  The 
inland  ice  drains  eastwards  through  very  deep  and  steep-sided 
valleys,  and  no  nunataks  have  been  observed  far  from  the  actual 
edge  of  the  bare  land.  The  Ferrar  Glacier  lies  in  one  of  these 
valleys,  and  it  is  remarkable  that  the  ice  from  the  hinterland  which 
flows  into  the  North  Fork  does  not  reach  the  sea,  but  ends  in  an 
insignificant  cliff  some  distance  from  it.  No  gradual  passage 
from  granular  snow  to  compact  glacier-ice  was  observed  at  the 
edge  of  the  inland  ice  ;  the  granular  snow  as  a  rule  lies  directly 
upon  a  corrugated  surface  of  massive  blue  ice. 

The  inlets,  which  seem  to  be  characteristic  of  the  South 
Victorian  mountain  ranges,  appear  to  be  best  developed  south  of 
latitude  790  S.  The  inland  ice  drains  through  these  inlets,  and 
augments  the  Ross  Piedmont,  or  ice-sheet.  The  Prince  Albert 
Mountains  appear  to  be  a  fringe  of  land  buttressing  a  vast  interior 
ice-field.  This  ice  drains  into  the  Ross  Sea  through  channels  the 
breadth  of  which  appears  to  be  greater  than  the  length,  and  there- 
fore in  form  the  ice-streams  resemble  the  Greenland  glaciers  made 
familiar  to  us  in  Dr.  Drygalski's  work. 

Local  Ice-caps. — This  type  of  ice-covering  may  be  described  as 
being  continental  on  a  small  scale.  The  covering  of  snow  on  Ross 
Island  is  a  very  good  example  of  an  Antarctic  local  ice-cap,  and 
any  features  exhibited  by  it  may  be  applied  to  the  mantles  of  snow 
upon  other  isolated  land  masses. 

On  Mount  Erebus,  as  on  the  mainland,  there  are  streams  of 
ice  which  drain  radially  and  are  separated  from  one  another  by 
nunataks.  The  streams  of  ice  do  not  follow  definite  depressions 
that  could  be  described  as  valleys,  but  descend  to  the  sea  in  an 
almost  uniform  cloak.  This  cloak  is  interrupted  along  the  margin 
of  the  land  by  hills  of  lava  which  have  all  the  characteristics  of 
nunataks.  The  streams,  which  thus  become  individualised,  end  in 
cliffs  which  vary  in  height  between  fifty  and  200  feet,  and  oc- 
cationally  give  birth  to  icebergs. 

Piedmonts. — Large  areas  of  ice  which  lie  at  the  foot  of  high 


L]  GEOLOGICAL  OBSERVATIONS  345 

land  and  which  have  no  obvious  single  source  may  be  described 
as  'piedmonts.' 

(a)  Three  types  may  be  distinguished,  and  the  first  may  be 
termed  a  piedmont  on  land.  The  slope  of  snow  west  of  the 
stranded  moraines  in  McMurdo  Bay  should  probably  be  included 
here,  but  as  there  is  evidence  that  it  is  a  relic  of  a  once  greater 
glaciation,  it  has  been  included  with  the  more  permanent  develop- 
ments of  '  shore-ice.'  Along  the  foot  of  the  Prince  Albert  Range 
there  appear  to  be  many  such  snow-slopes,  and  together  they 
produce  a  continuous  series  of  piedmonts  which  coalesce  almost 
imperceptibly  with  the  great  ice-streams  flowing  between  the 
hills. 

(b)  The  second  type  of  piedmont  is  well  represented  on  the 
sides  of  Coulman  Island.  The  flat  top  of  this  island  sheds  its 
superfluous  snow  over  the  bare  rock-cliffs,  and  produces  along 
the  base  of  the  cliffs  great  snow-talus  fans.  These  fans,  which 
are  sometimes  separate,  sometimes  continuous,  end  as  a  cliff  of 
ice  in  the  sea.  The  outline  of  this  cliff  is  an  undulating  line,  and 
the  height  usually  varies  between  fifty  and  100  feet.  This  type 
may  be  called  a  '  piedmont  aground,'  because  the  ice  is  resting  on 
the  sea-bottom,  and  the  bergs  seem  to  be  calved  just  at  that  point 
where  the  ice  becomes  water-borne. 

(c)  Piedmonts  afloat  are  by  far  the  most  important  and  are 
represented  by  three  very  prominent  examples — namely,  the  sheet 
of  ice  in  Lady  Newnes  Bay,  the  sheet  near  Cape  Gauss,  and  the 
great  Ross  Ice  Sheet.  All  three  have,  as  characteristics,  a  surface 
of  great  extent  which  may  or  may  not  be  slightly  undulating,  a 
seaward  edge  forming  a  cliff  between  fifty  and  200  feet  high,  and 
a  depth  of  water  at  that  edge  which  is  without  a  doubt  sufficient  to 
float  the  ice.  (As  far  as  possible  I  have  avoided  using  the  word 
'  barrier,'  as  it  does  not  imply  area,  and  in  preference  employ  the 
term  '  sheet '  in  restricted  sense,  as  it  does  imply  a  plane  super- 
ficies.) In  this  summary  it  is  not  necessary  to  marshal  the 
evidence  in  favour  of  the  view  that  these  ice-sheets  are  afloat,  and 
we  will  therefore  conclude  with  the  suggestion  that  the  term 
'  piedmont  afloat '  is  descriptive  of  this  class  of  ice  formation. 
No  foreign  matter  was  observed  in  the  great  ice-cliffs  of  these 
piedmonts,  and  no  rock  debris  was  met  with  on  its  surface  either 
by  Mr.  Royds  and  Mr.  Bernacchi  on  their  journey  south-eastwards, 
or  by  Captain  Scott  and  his  party  on  the  great  journey  southwards. 
Soundings  made  in  an  area  which  was  covered  by  ice  only  sixty- 


346      THE   VOYAGE   OF  THE   'DISCOVERY'    [Arpx. 

five  years  ago,  proved  the  sea-floor  to  be  mainly  rock-floor  with 
occasional  pebbles  and  diatoms,  which  show  that  the  soles  of 
these  floating  sheets  do  carry  rock  matter. 


The  Glaciers 

All  Heim's  types  of  glaciers  may  be  recognised  in  South 
Victoria  Land. 

(a)  The  ice-streams,  or  the  Greenland  type  of  glacier,  which 
have  their  source  in  the  inland  ice,  end  in  the  sea  ;  these  are 
present  in  great  number  in  the  Prince  Albert  Mountains,  as  well 
as  in  the  succession  of  ranges  forming  the  coast  between  latitudes 
79°  and  830  S.  They  also  appear  to  be  developed  in  the  Admiralty 
Range,  and  there  are  two  examples — the  Ferrar  Glacier  and  the 
Koettlitz  Glacier — which  lie  north  and  south  respectively  of  the 
Royal  Society  Range. 

{b)  The  Norwegian  type  of  glacier  consists  of  streams  of  ice 
flowing  down  well-refined  valleys  from  a  large  firn  field.  This 
is  exemplified  by  the  Blue  Glacier,  which  arises  in  the  Royal 
Society  Range  and  ends  in  McMurdo  Sound  in  a  cliff*  some 
seventy  or  eighty  feet  high. 

(r)  Valley  glaciers,  or  those  of  Alpine  type  occur  in  great  pro- 
fusion in  the  Royal  Society  Range.  Some  of  those  flow  into  the 
Ferrar  Glacier  and  blend  with  it,  while  others,  such  as  the  three 
flowing  southwards  into  the  North  Fork,  end  some  distance  above 
the  ice  in  the  main  valley. 

{d)  Cliff-glaciers  are  best  represented  on  the  left  bank  of  the 
East  Fork  of  the  Ferrar  Glacier,  but  others  may  be  seen  along  the 
coast  of  South  Victoria  Land,  notably  on  Cape  Washington.  The 
cliff-glaciers  among  the  Royal  Society  Mountains  often  arise  in 
corries  and  are  often  only  an  intermediate  stage  between  a '  corrie " 
and  a  '  valley '  glacier. 

(e)  The  corrie-glaciers  that  are  found  at  the  foot  of  the  Inland 
Forts  are  perhaps  the  most  notable.  Four  occur  here,  and  they 
fill  up  the  cirques  between  the  Forts.  At  present  they  flow  south- 
wards and  are  building  up  crescentic  moraines  around  their 
terminal  faces ;  whereas,  at  some  former  time,  they  drained 
northwards  through  cols  into  another  valley  system. 

(/)  Ice-slabs  occur  among  the  foothills  of  the  Royal  Society 
Range,  and  consist  of  masses  of  ice  about  fifty  feet  thick,  and  four 
to  six  square  miles  in  area.     They  appear  to  have  been  nourished 


L]  GEOLOGICAL   OBSERVATIONS  347 

by  the  Snow  Valley  until  their  supply  was  cut  off  by  decrease  of 
precipitation,  and  they  now  lie  as  relics  among  the  comparatively 
ice-free  hills. 

Icebergs. 

When  the  slow  rate  of  movement  of  the  glaciers  of  South 
Victoria  Land  is  considered,  we  are  driven  to  the  conclusion  that 
they  do  not  supply  an  appreciable  number  of  icebergs.  Therefore 
the  piedmonts  afloat,  which  have  been  proved  to  move  at  the 
greatest  rate,  must  supply  the  majority.  If  this  is  the  case,  then 
the  preponderance  of  the  well-known  tabular  form  is  not  surprising. 
It  has  long  been  established  that  bergs  travel  with  the  ocean- 
currents,  so  that  little  need  be  said  regarding  the  transport  of  rock- 
material  by  floating  ice  beyond  stating  that  the  drift  is  north  up 
the  coast  of  South  Victoria  Land  ;  therefore  any  rock-fragment 
dredged  from  the  sea-bottom  in  the  Ross  quadrant  must  have 
come  from  a  point  further  to  the  south. 

The  Moraines. 

The  so-called  beach  at  Cape  Adare  appears  to  be  a  collection 
of  old  moraines,  and  even  on  the  summit  of  the  cape  at  an  alti- 
tude of  800  feet  moraines  and  ice-scratched  stones  may  be  seen. 

On  Possession  Island  as  well  as  in  Wood  Bay  similar  flat  areas 
covered  by  moraines  are  said  to  occur,  and  Mr.  Morrison's 
description  of  the  beach  on  Franklin  Island  leads  one  to  suppose 
that  here  also  ice  has  played  its  part.  These  observations  are  in 
keeping  with  those  made  on  Ross  Island  and  elsewhere  during  our 
stay  in  the  Antarctic,  and  the  simplest  explanation  of  the  occurrence 
of  isolated  moraines  in  this  frigid  region  is  that  the  ice  was  once 
developed  on  a  greater  scale  than  at  present.  Other  moraines 
have  been  seen  near  Cape  Crozier,  above  the  cliffs  on  the  eastern 
side  of  Mount  Terror,  near  Winter  Quarters,  and  on  the  side  of 
Mount  Erebus  above  Cape  Royds.  The  islands  at  the  south  end 
of  McMurdo  Sound,  and  also  the  ice  between  them,  are  literally 
buried  in  transported  material. 

Englacial  rock  debris  is  only  encountered  near  the  snouts  of 
glaciers,  where  it  is  usually  found  in  well-defined  layers  separated 
by  almost  pure  ice.  The  Blue  Glacier  and  the  ice-slabs  in  the 
foothills  of  the  Royal  Society  Range  afford  the  best  examples,  and 
tliese  are  brought  into  prominence  by  the  fact  that  thawing  usually 


348      THE   VOYAGE   OF  THE   'DISCOVERY'    [Appx. 

proceeds  at  a  greater  rate  where  ice  and  gravel  occur  together. 
In  the  channel  at  the  foot  of  Knob  Head,  and  also  in  the  Dry 
Valleys  near  Finger  Mountain,  englacial  matter  may  be  seen 
below  a  layer  of  ice  at  least  fifty  feet  thick.  At  the  former  locality 
two  streams  of  ice  flowing  in  opposite  directions  meet,  glacial  up- 
thrust  takes  place,  and  the  boulders  which  are  raised  to  the 
surface  form  an  ordinary  medial  moraine. 

Supra-glacial  material  is  very  scarce  if  we  take  the  Tasman 
Glacier  of  New  Zealand,  or  the  Zmutt  Glacier  of  the  Alps,  to  be 
normal.  The  lateral  and  medial  moraines  of  the  Ferrar  Glacier 
consist  of  long  lines  of  stones  which  are  sometimes  three  feet  in 
diameter,  and  are  seldom  accompanied  by  finer  material.  These 
lines  are  usually  about  thirty  yards  in  width,  and  the  larger  boulders 
are  generally  five  or  six  feet  apart. 

The  stranded  moraines  both  on  Cape  Royds  and  on  the  main- 
land often  have  a  core  of  ice,  and  it  is  often  difficult  to  make  sure 
what  proportion  of  a  given  moraine  is  formed  of  rock  matter. 
During  the  summer  this  ice  melts,  and  the  finer  material  is  separated 
from  the  boulders  and  gravel  by  water  action,  so  that  stratified  and 
false-bedded  sands  and  gravels  are  now  being  produced  in  an  area 
which  is  virtually  the  centre  of  a  continental  ice-sheet. 

Among  the  moraines  on  the  west  side  of  McMurdo  Sound,  as 
well  as  on  one  of  the  Dellbridge  Islands,  and  among  the  moraines 
on  the  west  side  of  Discovery  Gulf,  great  deposits  of  sodium 
sulphate  in  well-formed  crystals  have  been  found.  Among  the 
isolated  moraines  in  the  bay  between  Black  and  White  Islands, 
large  bosses  or  mounds  of  the  same  white  salt  have  been  seen  ; 
and  at  one  spot  near  White  Island  a  mass  of  perfect  crystals  was 
found  on  the  surface  of  pure  ice.  In  the  White-Black  Island  Bay 
balanus  shells  and  sponge  spicules  occurred  upon  the  ice  in 
association  with  this  salt.  The  occurrence  of  this  salt,  mingled 
with  shells  and  ice-scratched  stones,  is  a  freak  of  Nature  which  is 
difficult  to  explain. 

Tetnperatures  at  fixed  depths  in  the  ice  fringing  the  land  around 
Winter  Harbour  were  determined  during  the  year  1903.  It  will 
suffice  here  to  note  that  the  highest  temperature  recorded  at  a 
depth  of  six  feet  was  —  90  C,  and  the  lowest  —  24-4°  C.  The  change 
throughout  the  year  was  very  gradual  :  the  minimum  reading 
was  made  some  time  after  midwinter,  and  the  maximum  in 
January. 

Observations  of  temperature  in  crevasses  at  greater   depths 


I.]  GEOLOGICAL   OBSERVATIONS  349 

show  that  the  seasonal  variations  occur  at  considerably  later  date 
than  the  corresponding  air  temperatures,  and  that  the  maximum 
temperature  reached  by  the  ice  is  far  below  its  freezing-point.  One 
observation  may  be  quoted  in  conclusion  :  Crevasse  near  the  meet- 
ing-point of  the  ice  of  the  South-West  Arm  and  of  the  main 
stream  from  the  inland  ice,  November  3,  1903,  7  p.m.,  depth  thirty 
feet. 

Temperature  of  the  air,  +  200  F.  ( -  670  C.) 
ice,  -210  F.  (-29-4°  C.) 

Denudation. 

Wind. — The  winds  of  South  Victoria  Land  prove  to  be  as 
strong  and  as  constant  as  any  oceanic  trade-wind.  Around  Winter 
Quarters  the  bare  land  surfaces  are  usually  covered  by  a  loose 
cloak  of  rock  debris  quite  six  inches  deep.  Below  this  depth  the 
earth  is  permanently  frozen  throughout  the  year,  and  from  this 
zone  rocks  with  fresh  unweathered  fractures  may  be  obtained. 
The  wind  removes  all  the  finer  disintegration  products,  so  that  the 
exposed  surfaces  are  always  composed  of  stones  loosely  packed 
together,  which  protect  a  mixture  of  small  stones  and  impalpable 
powder  beneath.  These  loose  stones  are  often  smoothed  and  pitted 
in  the  manner  peculiar  to  wind- worn  stones,  and  some  of  the  harder 
ones  have  a  superficial  glaze  on  their  exposed  surfaces. 

In  the  Snow  Valley  at  the  foot  of  the  Royal  Society  Range 
there  are  granite  boulders  which  have  become  hollowed  by  some 
agent  which  may  be  aided  by  wind.  These  hollowed  blocks 
resemble  cavities  in  Corsica  and  elsewhere,  to  which  reference  has 
already  been  made. 

Water. — In  the  area  covered  by  our  observations  the  effect  of 
water  as  an  agent  of  denudation  is  limited.  On  the  sides  of 
glaciers  and  among  the  moraines  it  serves  to  separate  the  gravel 
from  the  finer  material  and  to  distribute  the  latter  over  the  surface 
of  the  ice.  On  the  north-east  side  of  Brown  Island  its  present-day 
effects  are  most  marked,  for  after  a  summer  snowfall  in  January 
1903,  thawing  took  place  at  such  a  rate  that  cascades  were  pro- 
duced. These  coursed  down  the  hillside  in  narrow  channels  and 
spread  mud  and  sand  in  deltaic  form  over  the  lower  slopes. 

On  the  sides  of  the  Ferrar  Glacier,  the  streams  that  are  pro- 
duced during  the  summer  follow  channels  between  the  ice  and  the 
rock,  and  in  this  way  must  undercut  such  cliffs  as  the  Cathedral  Rocks. 


350      THE   VOYAGE   OF   THE   'DISCOVERY'    [Apf*. 

The  presence  of  the  Beacon  Sandstone  formation  proves  that 
water  in  times  past  had  at  any  rate  an  important  constructive 
action,  and  even  since  the  deposition  of  the  sandstone  and  the 
intrusion  of  the  plateau  dolerites,  water  seems  to  have  had  a  destruc- 
tive effect  upon  the  original  plateaux  of  the  Royal  Society  Range. 

Chemical  Action. — Decomposition  of  rocks  by  chemical  action 
is  more  obvious  in  the  dry  climate  of  South  Victoria  Land  than  in 
other  areas  where  rain  removes  the  soluble  salts  as  soon  as  they 
are  formed.  The  common  occurrence  of  soluble  crystalline  salts 
in  the  moraines  has  already  been  mentioned,  and  perhaps  the  fact 
that  many  ponds  among  the  moraines  are  extremely  saline  to  the 
taste  suggests  a  clue  to  the  peculiar  distribution  of  the  soluble 
matter. 

Frost  Action. — In  high  southern  latitudes  the  precipitation  of 
water-substance  is  very  small,  and  therefore  frost-riven  rock  masses 
are  not  very  conspicuous.  As  wind  usually  removes  thin  coverings 
of  snow  from  bare  rock  surfaces,  it  is  only  on  the  edges  of  local 
snow-fields  that  thawing  and  freezing  can  take  place  with  any 
degree  of  regularity.  Snow  is  drifted  by  the  wind  on  to  the  north 
side  of  Castle  Rock  during  the  winter,  and  during  the  summer  great 
masses  of  rock  are  split  off  and  litter  the  area  at  its  foot.  Cathe- 
dral Rocks  likewise  face  north,  and  appear  to  be  more  subject 
to  frost-action  than  the  more  isolated  peaks  of  the  Western 
Mountains. 

The  Action  of  Ice. — The  types  of  surface  clearly  due  to  ice 
action  are  rather  inconspicuous.  A  few  roches  moutonnies  have 
been  observed  in  Granite  Harbour  and  on  the  foothills  of  the 
Royal  Society  Range,  but  owing  to  the  extremely  low  mean 
annual  temperature  the  ice  appears  to  be  more  conservative  than 
erosive  in  its  action. 

Transport  has  taken  place  on  a  great  scale  in  the  past,  but 
now,  owing  to  the  almost  stagnant  condition  of  the  ice,  it  has 
practically  ceased.  The  icebergs,  which  appear  remarkably  free 
from  foreign  matter,  are  the  chief  agents  of  transport  at  present, 
and,  as  we  have  seen,  they  always  carry  matter  from  a  higher  to 
a  lower  latitude.  So  great  is  the  quantity  of  loose  rock  material 
on  the  surface  of  the  land  that  one  is  tempted  to  speculate  on  the 
effect  that  would  be  produced  if  a  slight  increase  of  the  ice  were 
to  bodily  remove  this  covering  and  distribute  it  over  the  clayey 
floor  of  the  Ross  Sea. 

In  conclusion,  it  is  my  pleasant  duty  to  briefly  express  my 


t]  GEOLOGICAL   OBSERVATIONS  351 

thanks  to  Captain  R.  F.  Scott,  R.N.,  C.V.O.,  U.Sc,  &c,  and  the 
officers  of  the  '  Discovery,'  who  by  their  interest  in  my  work,  and 
their  ever-ready  help,  were  a  very  material  assistance  to  me. 
The  photographs  taken  by  Lieutenant-Engineer  R.  W.  Skelton, 
R.N.,  are  invaluable,  and  by  them  I  was  able  to  decide  before 
leaving  the  ship  what  localities  would  repay  close  examination. 
The  kindly  interest  Captain  Scott  took  in  my  work  and  the 
arrangements  he  made  for  me  were  more  than  I  could  possibly 
have  expected.  To  Mr.  W.  G.  Fearnsides,  M.A.,  F.G.S.,  Fellow 
of  Sidney  Sussex  College,  and  to  Mr.  Bernard  Smith,  B.A.,  of 
Sidney  Sussex  College,  my  thanks  are  due  for  many  valuable 
suggestions.  Lastly,  I  am  indebted  to  Mr.  R.  H.  Rastall,  B.A., 
F.G.S.,  of  Christ's  College,  for  reading  the  manuscript  and 
suggesting  many  improvements  in  the  text. 


APPENDIX  II 


ON  THE  WHALES,  SEALS,  AND  BIRDS  OF  ROSS 
SEA  AND  SOUTH  VICTORIA  LAND 

By  Edward  A.  Wilson,  M.B.,  F.Z.S.,  Zoologist  on  the 
National  Antarctic  Expedition 

There  are  no  land  mammals,  properly  so  called,  within  the 
Antarctic  Circle.  There  are  no  South  Polar  bears  ;  there  are  no 
Antarctic  foxes  ;  there  are  no  large  mammals  of  any  sort  or  kind 
save  whales,  which  live  entirely  in  the  water,  and  seals,  which 
spend  more  than  half  their  time  there. 

Geology  has  not  disclosed  to  us  any  lost  Antarctic  mammalian 
fauna,  although  it  has  suggested  to  us  the  possibility  that  at  one 
time  there  was  a  climate,  and  perhaps  a  vegetation,  that  might 
have  suited  it.  There  are  deep  and  difficult  questions  upon  which 
it  appears  right  to  hold  whatever  theory  best  suits  our  immediate 
requirements,  as  to  the  various  connections  and  communications, 
whether  of  land  or  ice,  which  have  or  have  not  existed  between  all 
or  any  of  the  Southern  Hemisphere  land  masses  and  the  Antarctic 
continent.  There  is  every  probability  that  in  some  bygone  age  the 
Antarctic  land  mass  acted  as  a  bridge  between  some  of  the 
Southern  continents,  but  whatever  it  may  have  done  of  service  in 
the  distribution  of  types  for  them,  it  has  apparently  done  little  or 
nothing  for  itself.  Separated  now  by  some  hundreds  of  miles  of 
very  stormy  ocean  from  the  nearest  habitable  lands,  with  currents 
of  wind  and  water  all  setting  in  precisely  the  wrong  direction,  it 
maintains  an  almost  perfect  barrenness. 

The  Antarctic  continent  now  boasts  of  a  vegetation  which 
includes  a  few  low  forms  of  moss  and  lichen,  and  a  terrestrial 
fauna  which  consists  of  one  minute  and  primitive  form  of  wingless 
insect.     Of  the  whales  and  seals  and  birds,  the  last-named  alone 


Appx.IL]  ANTARCTIC   FAUNA  353 

have  any  pretension  at  all  to  a  terrestrial  habit  of  life,  in  that  they 
use  the  moraines  and  rocky  cliffs  of  the  continental  shores  as 
nesting  sites.     But  they  are  all  pelagic  sea-birds. 

Yet  in  this  exceedingly  unpromising  land  of  barren  rock  and 
ice  there  are  forms  of  life  which  are  to  be  met  with  nowhere  else, 
and  in  this  very  fact  lies  the  interest  that  attaches  to  a  study  of  the 
Antarctic  fauna. 

To  begin  with  the  mammals,  there  are  whales  and  seals  ;  and 
of  these  a  somewhat  surprising  number  of  different  species.  In 
Ross  Sea  alone  we  met  no  fewer  than  seven  different  whales  and 
dolphins.  In  Ross  Sea  also  we  found  five  different  kinds  of  seal, 
and  as  many  as  twelve  different  species  of  bird.  Of  these  at  least 
half  are  known  to  make  use  of  the  coasts  of  South  Victoria  Land 
for  nesting. 

Of  the  whales,  the  most  prominent  of  all  are  the  Killers,  or 
Orca  whales,  which  scour  the  seas  and  the  pack-ice  in  hundreds  to 
the  terror  of  seals  and  penguins.  The  Killer  is  a  powerful  piebald 
whale  of  some  fifteen  feet  in  length.  It  hunts  in  packs  of  a  dozen, 
or  a  score,  or  sometimes  many  scores.  No  sooner  does  the  ice 
break  up  than  the  Killers  appear  in  the  newly  formed  leads  of 
water,  and  the  penguins  show  well  that  they  appreciate  the  fact  by 
their  unwillingness  to  be  driven  off  the  floes.  From  the  middle  of 
September  to  the  end  of  March  these  whales  were  in  McMurdo 
Strait,  and  the  scars^  that  they  leave  on  the  seals,  more  particularly 
on  the  Crab- eating  seal  of  the  pack-ice,  afford  abundant  testimony 
to  their  vicious  habits.  Not  one  in  five  of  the  pack-ice  seals  is  free 
from  the  marks  of  the  Killer's  teeth,  and  even  the  Sea  Leopard, 
which  is  the  most  powerful  seal  of  the  Antarctic,  has  been  found 
with  fearful  lacerations.  Only  the  Weddell  seal  is  more  or  less 
secure,  because  it  avoids  the  open  sea.  Living,  as  it  does,  quite 
close  in  shore,  breeding  in  bights  and  bays  on  fast  ice  some  ten  or 
twenty  miles  from  the  open  water,  it  thus  avoids  the  attacks  of  the 
Killer  to  a  large  extent. 

Two  other  dolphins  are  commonly  to  be  seen  on  the  outskirts 
of  the  Ross  Sea  pack-ice.  Of  these  one  is  known  as  the  Dusky 
dolphin,  a  very  handsomely  marked  animal,  with  dark  brown  back 
and  whitish  under  parts. 

The  other  is  an  allied  species  that  has  hitherto  been  undescribed. 
We  were  not  able  to  procure  one,  though  many  attempts  were  made 
with  the  harpoon,  but  as  all  these  dolphins,  the  Killer  included,  are 
easily  seen  as  they  play  in  herds  around  the  ship,  the  fact  that  the 

VOL.  II.  A  A 


354      THE   VOYAGE   OF  THE    'DISCOVERY'    [Appx. 

back  and  belly  are  dark  brown,  and  the  sides  have  two  white 
patches  like  an  hour  glass,  sufficiently  distinguishes  the  animal 
from  any  other  that  is  known.  It  is  not  well  to  name  a  beast  that 
has  not  been  captured,  but  for  convenience  sake  amongst  ourselves 
we  called  it  the  '  Hour-glass  dolphin.'  It  never  was  seen  to  asso- 
ciate with  the  Dusky  form,  though  both  occurred  in  herds  about 
the  same  latitude  and  longitude,  and  both  were  much  the  same  in 
size — from  eight  to  ten  feet  long — and  of  a  similar  colouration. 

We  saw  also  a  very  large  number  of  Rorquals  in  Ross  Sea,  but 
not  a  single  Right  whale.  When  Sir  James  Ross  reported  large 
numbers  of  the  latter  in  the  seas  of  South  Victoria  Land,  consider- 
able hopes  of  a  new  and  valuable  whaling  ground  were  raised,  and 
a  number  of  whaling  ships  left  Dundee  for  the  Antarctic.  But  their 
hopes  were  not  realised,  for  no  Right  whale  was  either  seen  or 
taken  where  Ross  had  seen  so  many. 

The  real  reason  for  this  has  been  an  open  question  ever  since  ; 
and  the  explanations  given  vary  between  a  lack  of  faith  in  Sir 
James  Ross's  power  to  identify  the  Right  whale  on  the  one  hand, 
and,  on  the  other,  a  belief  that  the  animal  which  had  been  hunted 
almost  to  extermination  in  more  northern  waters  had  disappeared 
in  consequence  from  the  Antarctic ;  or,  thirdly,  perhaps,  that  it 
had  changed  its  summer  feeding-grounds  to  seas  still  less  accessible 
than  these. 

Whichever  is  the  true  explanation,  the  fact  remains  that  no  one 
has  since  seen  a  Right  whale  in  Ross  Sea.  It  still  occurs  in  the 
more  northern  waters,  round  Chatham  and  Campbell  Islands, 
and  in  the  Southern  oceans  generally,  but  apparently  it  avoids 
the  ice. 

The  Rorqual,  on  the  other  hand,  is  abundant.  Hardly  a  day 
passed,  in  cruising  along  the  coasts  of  South  Victoria  Land,  but 
one  or  two,  and  sometimes  a  much  larger  number,  were  seen. 
Near  the  Balleny  Islands  they  were  for  some  days  particularly  in 
evidence,  and  the  broad,  blue  slate-coloured  back,  with  its  small 
dorsal  fin,  was  almost  constantly  in  sight,  while  the  spout  was  to 
be  seen  on  all  hands,  a  high  jet  of  condensed  vapour  rising  verti- 
cally for  twelve  or  fifteen  feet  into  the  cold  grey  air.  The  Rorqual, 
or  Blue  whale,  as  it  is  called,  has  a  habit  of  appearing  at  the 
surface  to  blow  without  showing  the  dorsal  fin  at  all.  This  has 
led  to  the  belief  that  Sir  James  Ross  mistook  it  for  the  Right 
whale.  But  as  one  watches  the  Rorqual,  one  sees  that  before  each 
deeper  sounding  the  dorsal  fin  comes  plainly  into  view,  and  it  is 


II.]  ANTARCTIC   FAUNA  355 

hardly  to  be  believed  that  experienced  whalers  whom  Ross  had 
with  him  on  the  '  Erebus '  could  have  made  such  a  mistake  as 
this.  The  spout  of  the  Rorqual,  moreover,  is  characteristically 
high,  single,  and  upright,  whereas  the  spout  of  the  Right,  or 
Whalebone  whale,  is  definitely  shorter  and  divided  into  two  to 
form  a  double  spout. 

There  are  still  two  other  forms  of  Finner  whales  which  must  be 
mentioned  :  the  one,  a  round-backed,  black,  and  solitary  whale  of 
from  twenty  to  thirty  feet,  with  a  very  small  hook-like  dorsal  fin  ; 
and  the  other,  in  direct  contrast  to  this,  a  gregarious  whale  having 
a  dorsal  fin  of  quite  enormous  length  and  prominence.  This  latter, 
which  was  apparently  noticed  in  Ross  Sea  by  MacCormick  as 
well  as  Ross,  has  not  been  named.  No  example  has  yet  been 
taken.  It  is  a  square-headed  whale  of  some  twenty  feet  in  length, 
black  above,  but  white,  so  far  as  we  could  see,  beneath  the  throat. 
The  dorsal  fin,  which  comes  well  out  of  the  water,  must  have  been 
between  two  and  three  feet  in  height,  long,  curved,  and  pointed, 
somewhat  like  a  sabre.  There  was  no  possibility  of  mistaking  it 
for  the  only  other  high-finned  form,  the  Killer,  for  the  ochre- 
coloured  saddle  of  the  Killer  and  the  buff  patch  on  the  head  are 
recognisable  even  at  a  distance.  The  shape  of  the  head,  too,  is 
more  pointed  in  the  Killer,  and  its  movements  far  more  active  and 
restless  than  those  of  the  High-finned  black  whale. 

Beaked  whales  were  also  to  be  seen  in  schools  from  time  to 
time,  and  we  had  the  good  fortune  in  McMurdo  Strait  to  see  one 
'breeching.'  The  whole  school  of  whales,  about  ten  in  number, 
was  blowing  and  splashing  in  the  bay,  when  suddenly  we  saw  one 
of  them  leap  clean  out  of  the  water  and  fall  back  with  a  resound- 
ing splash. 

It  would  be  unwise  to  attempt  to  give  specific  names  as  yet  to 
these  various  whales,  but  if,  as  may  some  day  happen,  their  study 
should  be  more  systematically  taken  up,  it  may  be  of  use  to  know 
that  there  are  at  least  these  seven  different  species  that  I  have 
mentioned  to  be  found  within  the  limited  area  of  Ross  Sea  alone, 
and  that  two,  at  any  rate,  are  new,  and  at  present  undescribed. 

Leaving  now  the  whales,  we  come  to  a  group  of  animals 
which  are  very  typical  of  the  polar  regions.  There  are  five  species 
of  Antarctic  seals,  of  which  three  are  only  to  be  found  within 
the  Circle.  These  are  the  Crab-eating  or  White  seal  {JLobodon 
carcinofihagiis),  the  Ross  seal  {Ommatophoca  rossi),  and  the 
Weddell  seal   {Leptonychotes  weddelli).     Of  the  other  two,  the 


356      THE   VOYAGE   OF   THE    'DISCOVERY'    [Ai-rx. 

Sea  Leopard  (Stenorhynchus  lefttonyx)  and  the  Sea  Elephant 
{Macrorhinus  /eom'mts),  the  former  is  constantly  to  be  found  in 
the  pack-ice,  though  it  wanders  more  or  less  freely  to  the  shores 
of  all  the  Southern  ocean  continents  and  islands. 

But  the  Sea  Elephant  has  not  the  same  right  to  be  included 
in  the  Antarctic  list  as  the  others,  since  his  occurrence  there  is 
almost  certainly  accidental,  just  as  the  occasional  occurrence  of 
the  Weddell  seal  in  Kerguelen  Island  and  the  river  Santa  Cruz 
must  also  be  considered  as  purely  accidental.  The  Crab-eater 
also  has  been  reported  twice  from  Australia,  both  accidental 
occurrences  of  a  typical  Antarctic  species  in  temperate  regions, 
and  to  be  explained  by  the  fact  that  large  masses  of  ice  drift 
up  into  more  northern  waters  from  the  south,  no  doubt  very 
often  with  seals  upon  them.  It  is  less  easy  to  account  for  the 
appearance  of  the  Sea  Elephant  so  far  south  as  latitude  yy°  50', 
in  McMurdo  Strait,  for  the  animal  must  have  traversed  some 
hundreds  of  miles  of  open  sea  against  the  prevailing  winds  and 
ocean  currents. 

That  seals  do  travel  long  distances  by  sea  is  obvious,  and  a 
fact  well  known  to  sealers,  but  it  is  curious  to  find  one  so  far  from 
its  usual  home  as  this.  The  headquarters  of  the  Sea  Elephant  are 
the  Macquarie,  Kerguelen,  and  other  islands  of  the  Southern 
oceans,  as  well  as  the  coast  of  California. 

The  one  Sea  Elephant  which  fell  to  our  lot  in  the  Antarctic 
was  a  young  male  of  eleven  feet  in  length  and  a  girth  of  no  less 
than  eight  feet  under  the  fore  flippers.  He  was  the  only  example 
seen,  and  was  discovered  as  he  lay  asleep  on  a  sandy  beach  at  Cape 
Royds.  The  stomach  itself  was  empty  of  food,  as  also  were  the 
intestines,  which  were  contracted  into  firm,  hard  cords,  and  con- 
tained only  a  few  threadworms  ;  yet  the  seal  was  heavily 
blubbered,  having  upwards  of  two  inches  of  fat  under  the  skin  all 
over.  The  Sea  Elephant,  as  we  had  the  opportunity  of  seeing  also 
on  the  Macquarie  Islands,  uses  his  fore  flippers  much  more  as  do 
the  Eared  seals  than  the  Earless,  both  for  support  and  for  pro- 
gression. The  colour  of  the  beast  is  a  uniform  dirty  yellowish 
grey,  somewhat  darker  along  the  back  than  underneath,  and 
without  either  spots  or  streaks  ;  the  head  is  enormous.  The  lion- 
like breadth  of  the  flattened  muzzle,  the  wide  gape  of  the  mouth 
showing  a  huge  pink  cavern,  with  massive  canines,  the  immensity 
of  the  neck  and  shoulders  raised  high  on  the  fore  flippers,  the  very 
large  brown  eyes,  and  the  protruding  nostrils,  all  combine  to  give  a 


II.]  ANTARCTIC   FAUNA  357 

most  characteristic  appearance  to  this  seal  which  distinguishes  it  at 
once  from  all  the  others. 

The  nostrils  are  extensile  sacs  which  give  the  appearance  of  a 
short  proboscis  to  the  animal  when  much  excited,  and  the  openings 
when  at  rest,  instead  of  facing  upwards  as  in  the  other  Antarctic 
seals,  look  straight  ahead  from  an  enormous  width  of  muzzle. 
It  has  a  peculiar  habit  of  throwing  up  the  head  and  tail  simultane- 
ously, while  it  gives  vent  to  a  hoarse  and  wide-mouthed  roar,  which 
is  intended  to  dismay  the  onlooker,  as  the  seal  himself  makes  clumsy 
efforts  to  retire. 

The  animal,  as  is  now  well  known,  is  becoming  very  scarce  ; 
it  was  a  few  years  ago  within  the  danger  limits  of  extinction, 
thanks  to  the  thoughtless  methods  of  the  sealers  who  worked 
on  the  Southern  ocean  islands.  There  is  now,  however,  a  close 
time  which  protects  the  animals  to  some  extent,  and  although  it 
is  now  almost  impossible  to  find  the  older  full-grown  males,  there 
are  still  in  certain  favoured  spots  a  large  number  of  young  males 
and  females. 

The  Sea  Leopard  is,  after  the  Sea  Elephant,  the  least  strictly 
polar  of  the  Antarctic  seals.  It  is  to  be  met  with,  however,  fairly 
constantly  in  the  pack-ice,  but  always  solitary.  It  runs  to  twelve 
feet  in  length,  and  may  have  a  girth  beneath  the  flippers  of  six 
feet.  Its  head  is  large  in  proportion  to  its  body,  and  holds  a  most 
formidable  array  of  teeth.  It  is  very  long  and  snake-like,  and 
most  admirably  adapted  to  move  rapidly  under  water,  where  its 
diet,  as  we  verified  by  examining  the  contents  of  the  stomach, 
includes  not  only  fish  and  Emperor  penguins,  but,  when  occasion 
offers,  the  young  of  the  other  more  harmless  kinds  of  seal. 

It  is,  as  a  rule,  dark  grey,  with  blacker  back,  and  rich  black 
and  silver  splashes  on  the  flanks  and  shoulders.  There  is,  in 
some  cases,  a  tendency  to  a  tawny  colour  in  the  under-parts  and 
flippers,  but  the  most  sure  way  of  determining  the  species,  as  it  is 
of  every  other  species,  is  to  examine  the  teeth.  In  this  animal  the 
canines  and  the  incisors,  particularly  the  outer  incisors  of  the 
upper  jaw,  are  very  large,  recurved,  and  powerful.  The  post 
canines,  five  on  each  side  above  and  below,  are  powerful  three- 
lobed  tridents,  admirably  made  for  catching  and  holding  fish 
and  tearing  flesh  to  pieces.  This  seal  is  a  carnivore  of  the  most 
aggressive  type,  and  probably  in  the  Antarctic  has  but  one  enemy 
to  fear,  and  that  enemy  is  the  still  more  aggressive  carnivorous 
dolphin,  the  Orca  or  Killer  whale. 


358      THE   VOYAGE   OF   THE   'DISCOVERY'    [App*. 

The  Crab-eater,  the  common  White  seal  of  the  Antarctic  pack- 
ice,  is  the  most  variable  in  appearance  of  all  the  Southern  seals. 
In  the  summer  months  it  is  possible  to  find  a  group  of  chocolate- 
brown  seals  with  a  very  beautiful  silver  sheen  and  handsome 
dappling  on  the  sides  of  the  neck  and  flanks  and  shoulders.  The 
flippers  may  be  a  rich  dark  brown  with  blacker  shades,  and  nothing 
on  the  whole  could  be  less  appropriate  than  to  call  the  animal 
white.  Again,  one  may  find  an  individual  with  a  chestnut  dappling 
on  a  creamy  coloured  coat,  with  a  long  line  of  chocolate  colour 
down  the  centre  of  the  back.  This  animal  would  be  moulting, 
and  by  casting  off  the  coat  which  has  been  bleached  to  a  creamy 
white,  would  become  converted  into  the  dark  and  handsome  silvery- 
coated  seal  described  above.  But  in  an  old  seal  the  coat  may  have 
become  bleached  to  such  an  extent  as  to  have  lost  all  trace  of  the 
characteristic  dappling  on  the  flanks  and  shoulders.  In  this  con- 
dition it  is  as  nearly  white  as  possible.  It  is  not  so  large  as  either 
of  the  seals  that  I  have  yet  described,  nor  is' it  nearly  so  large  as 
the  Weddell  seal,  which  will  be  mentioned  later  on.  The  Crab- 
eater  runs  to  about  eight  feet  in  length,  and  is  one  of  the  most 
active  seals  in  all  its  movements.  It  lives  almost  entirely  upon  a 
shrimp-like  crustacean  which  it  collects  in  large  numbers  with 
mud  and  gravel  by  grouting  along  the  bottom  of  shallow  seas  or 
along  the  submerged  foot  of  an  iceberg.  The  use  of  the  extra- 
ordinary development  of  the  lobes  of  the  post  canine  teeth  in  this 
seal  was  suggested  by  Captain  Barrett  Hamilton,  in  an  article  on 
the  seals  of  the  '  Southern  Cross  '  collection.  These  lobes,  as  he 
pointed  out,  form  a  sieve  when  the  jaws  are  closed,  through  which 
the  water  can  be  ejected  from  the  mouth,  while  the  mud  and 
crustaceans  are  retained  and  swallowed.  There  is  probably  some 
object  to  be  served  in  the  swallowing  of  mud  and  gravel  with  the 
food,  as  it  is  a  habit  common  to  many  of  the  seals,  and  the  most 
probable  object  to  be  gained  by  so  doing  is  the  trituration  of  the 
shells  and  bones  of  the  fish  and  crustaceans  which  form  their  staple 
diet. 

The  Crab-eater,  or  White  seal,  is  to  be  found  in  little  groups 
of  from  three  to  four  or  six,  lying  out  in  the  sun  on  the  floes  of  the 
Ross  Sea  pack  ;  and  in  this  tendency  to  collect  in  companies  it 
differs  markedly  from  the  next  one  to  be  mentioned,  the  Ross  seal, 
which  has,  without  exception,  always  been  found  alone. 

The  Ross  seal  is  the  smallest  of  all,  and  is  not  often  found  of 
a  greater  length  than  seven  or  eight  feet.     It  is  a  blackish  or 


II.]  ANTARCTIC   FAUNA  359 

brownish  grey  above,  and  lighter  below,  with  the  chin  and  throat 
in  some  quite  pale,  in  others  black,  and  a  number  of  paler  streaks 
pass  obliquely  backwards  along  the  sides  of  the  neck  to  the  hinder 
third  of  the  body. 

This  seal  has  the  most  astonishing  power  of  withdrawing  its  head 
within  the  blubber-laden  skin  of  the  neck  till  its  face  is  almost  lost. 
Its  vocal  powers  have  been  well  described  by  M.  Racovitzi,  of  the 
'  Belgica.'  As  the  Weddell  seal,  so  far  as  our  own  observations 
go,  has  vocal  accomplishments  of  even  a  higher  order  than  the 
Ross,  I  will  reserve  my  description  of  them  till  we  come  to  deal 
with  the  species  later  on. 

Until  the  return  of  the  recent  Argentine  Expedition  no  young 
Ross  seal  had  ever  been  discovered.  The  precise  age  of  the  one 
brought  home  by  that  expedition  has  not  yet  transpired.  It  is 
likely,  however,  that  the  skull  may  throw  fresh  light  upon  an 
interesting  question  in  this  connection — namely,  the  relationship 
which  apparently  exists,  and  has  been  before  this  suggested  by 
Captain  Barrett  Hamilton,  between  the  Ommatophoca  and  the 
more  Northern  forms  Cystophora  and  Macrorhinus. 

The  teeth  of  Ross's  seal  are  still  a  puzzling  problem.  It  is 
obvious  that  the  post  canines  are  in  process  of  disappearing,  for  in 
those  cases  in  which  they  have  not  already  gone  they  are  as 
often  as  not  quite  loose  and  ready  to  drop  out.  The  canines  and 
incisors  alone  have  been  properly  developed  into  needle-pointed, 
recurved  hooks  for  dealing  with  such  slippery  prey  as  jelly-fish  and 
squids,  which  apparently  form  their  food. 

There  is  now  only  one  more  form  of  seal  to  be  described,  and 
to  ourselves  it  was  the  most  important  of  all,  for  it  provided  us 
with  a  fresh  meat  diet  in  abundance  during  the  greater  part  of  our 
sojourn  in  the  ice.  The  Weddell  seal  is  the  most  sluggish  of  all, 
and  is  to  be  found  only  along  the  coastline.  It  herds  together  in 
a  manner  which  must  be  considered  thoroughly  gregarious.  In 
the  breeding  season,  which  occupies  October  and  November, 
there  are  colonies  at  the  head  of  bights  and  bays  in  the  fast  and 
unbroken  ice,  which  number  in  some  cases  many  hundreds  of  seals, 
scattered  often  over  a  very  vast  area,  along  a  crack  which  runs 
perhaps  for  miles  across  the  strait  or  bay. 

The  Weddell  seal  avoids  the  pack-ice  of  the  open  sea,  and  so 
avoids  the  attentions  of  the  Killer  whale,  and  can  procure  its  food, 
which  consists  of  fish,  without  either  fear  or  molestation. 

The  wisdom  of  this  course  is  obvious,  and  accounts   for  the 


36o      THE  VOYAGE   OF   THE   'DISCOVERY'    [Ap?x. 

absence  in.  this  seal  of  the  scars  and  rents  which  disfigure  so  many 
of  the  Crab-eaters. 

In  McMurdo  Sound  we  had  an  abundance  of  Weddell  seals 
around  us  throughout  the  summer  months,  and  as  they  spent 
most  of  their  time  in  sleeping  on  the  ice  outside  their  blow-holes, 
there  was  no  difficulty  whatever  in  supplying  the  ship's  company 
with  meat. 

But  in  the  winter  months  there  was  often  a  scarcity,  as  the 
seals  preferred  to  remain  in  the  water  below  the  ice,  breathing 
and  sleeping  at  their  blow-holes,  and  along  the  coastal  tide-cracks, 
instead  of  coming  up  to  lie  in  the  bitter  wind  and  lower  tempera- 
tures that  were  constant  during  the  darkness  of  the  winter. 
At  this  time  it  was  found  feasible  by  certain  of  the  crew  to  harpoon 
them  as  they  came  up  to  breathe,  and  land  them  on  the  ice  with  a 
line  ;  and  the  contents  of  the  stomach  on  these  occasions  proved 
especially  interesting,  as  they  included  whole  fish  just  swallowed 
of  a  kind  which  we  were  unable  in  any  other  way  to  obtain. 

The  Weddell  seal  is  perhaps  the  most  handsome  of  all  that  I 
have  mentioned.  Measuring  upwards  of  nine  to  ten  feet,  and 
having  a  girth  of  from  six  to  seven,  this  enormous  beast  has  a  coat 
richly  marked  with  black  and  grey  and  silvery  white  ;  the  upper 
parts  are  the  darkest,  but  below  these  shades  are  blended  in  a 
most  striking  manner. 

In  character  the  seal  is  wholly  devoid  of  fear  until  actually 
and  intentionally  annoyed  or  frightened.  Lying  on  the  ice  by  its 
open  breathing  hole,  as  often  on  its  back  as  on  its  belly,  it  will 
merely  wake  to  glance  at  the  strange  intruder  and  then  often  go  to 
sleep  again.  At  times  it  exhibits  a  certain  amount  of  nervousness 
and  rolls  over  the  better  to  gaze  at  the  disturber  of  its  peace, 
blinking  and  blowing  through  its  nostrils  the  while  in  an  unwonted 
endeavour  to  realise  the  unusual  condition  of  things  before  it. 
Sometimes  it  is  induced  to  lope  away,  with  suspicious  glances 
over  its  back  from  time  to  time,  to  see  whether  anyone  is  following. 
If  this  actually  happens,  it  may  get  really  scared,  and  losing  all  its 
dignity  at  once,  may  hurriedly  flop  itself  along  with  a  breathless, 
quivering,  blubber-burdened  haste,  which  shows  how  seldom  the 
necessity  for  speed  arises  except  in  its  aquatic  life. 

The  young  of  the  Weddell  seal,  the  only  species  whose  breed- 
ing habits  we  were  able  to  observe,  were  born  during  the  last  week 
of  October  and  the  beginning  of  November.  They  lay  on  the  ice 
at  the  mouth  of  the  blow-holes,  which  the  parents  kept  open  for 


II.]  ANTARCTIC   FAUNA  361 

the  purpose  of  procuring  food.  The  old  seals  showed  very  little 
fear,  and  would  generally  allow  us  to  handle  their  young  without 
much  tendency  to  interfere. 

The  young  were  born  in  a  thick  and  woolly  coat  of  dull  ochre 
grey  and  black,  showing  something  of  the  markings  which  would 
appear  later  on  in  the  adult.  This  woolly  coat  began  to  drop  off 
at  the  end  of  fourteen  days,  and  by  the  end  of  a  month  the  moult 
was  finished.  The  young  seal,  attired  now  in  a  very  handsome 
coat  of  glossy  black  and  silver  hair,  could  for  the  first  time  enter 
the  water  and  take  a  share  in  finding  its  own  food.  Still,  for  a 
variable  time,  these  young  were  suckled  on  the  ice,  but  sooner  or 
later  they  would  be  separated  from  their  parents,  and  from  that 
time  onward  would  lead  an  independent  life.  The  Weddell  seal 
takes  at  least  two  years  to  arrive  at  full  maturity,  and  the  size  of 
the  animal  appears  to  increase  considerably  for  many  years,  if  one 
may  judge  by  the  immensity  of  some  of  the  oldest  breeding  bulls 
and  cows,  compared  with  what  were  evidently  younger  ones. 

The  teeth  of  the  Weddell  are  less  strikingly  adapted  to  a 
special  food  than  are  those  of  the  Crab-eater  or  the  Ross  ;  but 
the  incisors  are  again  recurved  and  hook-like,  to  assist  the 
canines  in  procuring  fish.  The  bigger  teeth  in  an  old  seal  are 
often  broken  and  worn  down  almost  to  the  gums  by  the  habit 
of  using  them  to  enlarge  the  blow-holes  in  the  ice.  On  several 
occasions  this  habit  was  actually  watched  in  progress,  and  the 
action  was  somewhat  like  that  of  a  centre-bit,  the  central  fixed 
point  being  the  sharp  teeth  of  the  lower  jaw,  while  the  upper  jaw 
was  revolved  upon  it. 

The  bulls  have  desperate  fights  with  one  another  for  the 
possession  of  the  females,  and  their  coats  are  cut  to  pieces  by 
December.  From  head  to  tail  they  are  at  this  time  covered  with 
ugly  sores,  and  are  to  be  found  in  secluded  corners  amongst  the 
hummocks  of  ice-pressure  ridges,  often  apparently  feeling  far  from 
well,  and  unwilling  to  fight  again. 

Old  seals  at  the  point  of  death  retire  to  the  most  secluded 
spots.  It  was  therefore  not  altogether  unaccountable  to  find  the 
remains  of  dead  seals  many  miles  from  the  actual  coast,  and  high 
up  on  the  biggest  glaciers.  Almost  all  the  sledging  expeditions 
which  made  their  way  to  the  west  up  the  glaciers  of  the  Royal 
Society  range  of  mountains  found  these  dead  seals  ;  and  they 
included  not  Weddells  only,  but  Crab-eaters,  of  which  we  saw 
only  very  few  in  McMurdo  Sound  during  the  whole  two  years  that 


362      THE   VOYAGE   OF   THE    'DISCOVERY     [Appx. 

we  were  quartered  there.  Not  one,  but  several,  were  found  by 
Armitage  at  a  height  of  2,000  feet,  and  between  twenty  and  thirty 
miles  from  the  actual  coast. 

I  have  already  mentioned  the  Weddell  seal  as  a  rival  of  the 
Ross  in  its  powers  of  producing  vocal  music.  It  was  a  constant 
source  of  amusement  to  us  to  stir  up  an  old  bull  Weddell  and 
make  him  sing  ;  he  would  begin  sometimes  with  a  long  and 
musical  moan  at  a  high  pitch,  which  gradually  got  lower  and 
sounded  much  like  the  ice-moans  that  are  common  on  an  exten- 
sive sheet  of  ice.  This  was  followed  by  a  series  of  grunts  and 
gurgles,  and  a  string  of  plaintive  piping  notes,  which  ended  up 
exactly  on  the  call-note  of  a  bullfinch.  Then  came  a  long,  shrill 
whistle,  and  a  snort  to  finish,  as  though  he  had  for  too  long  held 
his  breath. 

All  this  was  leisurely,  and  interrupted  with  the  sleepy  blinking 
that  characterised  his  half-awakened  consciousness  of  something 
strange  and  unusual  in  the  look  of  the  observer  standing  near  him  ; 
one  could  not  but  wonder  how  long  the  impression  of  such  a 
novelty  would  last  upon  the  memory  of  a  seal,  for  while  one 
watched  and  wondered  he  would  fall  asleep  again,  and  be  just  as 
puzzled  if  he  was  awakened  two  minutes  later. 

We  were  well  situated  to  observe  the  Weddells,  as  they  were 
with  us  throughout  the  year,  but  of  the  others  we  saw  much  less 
for  the  reasons  given  above.  There  is  no  probability  that  any 
new  form  remains  to  be  discovered,  and  the  breeding  habits  of 
the  others  will  become  known  only  to  such  as  have  the  luck  of 
wintering  in  the  pack-ice  as  did  the  'Belgica.'  And  it  is  my 
belief  that  the  pack-ice  around  Cape  North  and  the  Balleny 
Islands  is  one  of  the  strongholds  of  the  Ross. 

There  is  no  doubt  that  so  far  as  birds  were  concerned  our 
position  in  780  S.  latitude  was  too  far  south. 

Although  in  the  pack-ice  and  during  our  cruise  along  the 
coast  of  South  Victoria  Land  we  saw  twelve  different  species  of 
bird,  this  number,  except  for  an  occasional  straggler,  was  reduced 
to  three  in  our  winter  quarters.  At  the  mouth  of  McMurdo  Sound 
we  saw  occasionally  a  few  Giant  petrels,  Snow  petrels,  and 
Wilson's  Stormy  petrels,  but  where  the  ship  was  wintered,  ten  or 
twenty  miles  farther  to  the  south,  they  were  very  rarely  seen.  In 
the  pack-ice  and  in  the  Ross  Sea  we  saw  the  Southern  Fulmar 
petrel  {Priocella glacialoides)  and  the  Antarctic  petrel  {Thalass<zca 
antarctica),  but  not  in  McMurdo  Sound. 


II.]  ANTARCTIC   FAUNA  363 

On  the  outskirts  of  the  pack  we  saw  besides  a  few  small  whisps 
of  Tern,  a  Sooty  albatross  or  two,  a  Black-browed  albatross  or 
two,  and  a  few  of  the  blue-grey  Whale-birds  ;  but  all  these  left 
us  as  we  entered  the  denser  pack,  and  were  not  seen  again  till  our 
return  more  than  two  years  later. 

From  the  first  day  till  the  last  on  which  we  encountered  ice,  we 
saw  no  other  birds  but  those  that  I  have  mentioned  ;  and  except 
for  a  few  hours  on  shore  at  Cape  Adare,  where  we  found  the  little 
Wilson's  Stormy  petrel  nesting,  we  had  no  opportunity  of  investi- 
gating the  nesting  habits  of  any  of  them,  except  of  the  three  that 
were  with  us  in  McMurdo  Sound. 

Nevertheless,  what  could  be  written  of  the  three  birds  that  we 
had  there  would  alone  suffice  to  fill  a  volume,  and  we  consider 
ourselves  exceedingly  fortunate  in  that  the  Emperor  penguin  was 
one  of  them  ;  for  no  one  had  previously  seen  its  breeding  grounds, 
nor  had  anyone  been  enabled  to  throw  any  material  light  upon  its 
habits  since  the  time  that  the  bird  was  first  discovered. 

The  second  of  our  trio  was  the  other  most  typical  Antarctic 
penguin,  the  Adelie  Land  penguin  (Pygoscelis  addlice),  which  bred 
at  Cape  Crozier,  within  our  reach,  and  had  there  one  of  the  largest 
rookeries  of  the  species  that  is  known.  We  had  also  on  Cape 
Royds,  at  the  mouth  of  McMurdo  Sound,  another  small  rookery,  or 
breeding  colony,  and  we  were  thus  well  placed  for  making  further 
observations  on  this  bird.  And  of  the  third,  the  McCormick's 
skua  {Megalestris  maccormicki)  we  saw  no  end,  and  were  able  to 
investigate  a  very  large  number  of  its  nesting  sites. 

Now,  of  all  the  birds  that  I  have  mentioned,  the  Emperor 
penguin's  history  is  by  far  the  most  interesting  and  important.  I 
will  therefore  deal  first  with  the  others,  and  write  somewhat  more 
fully  of  the  Emperor  below. 

The  nesting  places  of  a  large  number  of  the  petrels,  even  in 
temperate  climes,  are  still  unknown,  and  in  our  hasty  visit  to  South 
Trinidad  we  were  able  to  procure  the  eggs  and  young  of  two 
petrels,  neither  of  which  had  been  obtained  before.  It  is  there- 
fore not  surprising  to  find  that  the  eggs  and  young  of  the  Antarctic 
petrel  ( Thalassceca  antarctica)  are  still  unknown  ;  nor  have  any  of 
the  recent  expeditions  succeeded  in  finding  them.  Yet  the  bird  is 
plentiful  not  only  in  the  pack-ice  but  throughout  Ross  Sea,  and 
particularly  in  very  large  numbers  first  about  the  Possession 
Islands,  and  then  in  a  very  local  area  about  King  Edward's  Land, 
at  the  extreme  eastern  end  of  Ross's  Great:  Ice  Barrier,   where 


364      THE   VOYAGE   OF  THE   'DISCOVERY'    [Apwl 

a  search  for  the  nesting  grounds  might  quite  possibly  be  well 
repaid. 

It  is,  further,  a  fact  not  widely  understood  that  this  bird  leaves 
the  Antarctic  Seas  during  the  winter  months,  and  is  then  to  be 
found  in  large  numbers  in  the  South  Pacific  Ocean,  away  from  ice 
and  out  of  sight  of  icebergs. 

The  blue-grey  Southern  Fulmar  petrel  (Priocella  glacialoides), 
a  bird  of  wider  range,  is  to  be  seen  during  the  winter  months  in 
large  numbers  about  the  Magellan  Straits.  In  the  summer  it  is 
constantly  met  with  in  the  pack,  but,  so  far  as  is  known,  does  not 
breed  within  the  Circle.  We  saw  it  more  abundantly  around  the 
Balleny  Isles  than  elsewhere,  and  its  absence  was  particularly 
noticeable  south  of  Cape  Adare — so  much  so  that  along  the  coast 
of  South  Victoria  Land  and  in  McMurdo  Sound  it  was  never 
seen. 

The  Wilson's  Stormy  petrel  (Oceanites oceanicus)  is  to  be  found 
in  Ross  Sea  throughout  the  summer  months,  but  very  rarely  came 
so  far  south  as  McMurdo  Sound.  We  discovered  its  burrow  on 
Cape  Adare,  and  after  excavating  it  sufficiently  to  admit  an  arm, 
we  found  a  nest  of  penguins'  feathers  on  hard  blue  ice,  with  two 
adult  birds,  a  male  and  a  female,  a  fresh  egg,  an  addled  egg,  and  a 
flattened  dead  bird  under  all. 

This  little  petrel  is  a  great  wanderer  in  the  Northern  Hemi- 
sphere as  well  as  in  the  South,  and  we  ourselves  twice  saw  it 
apparently  exploring  the  Great  Ice  Barrier  in  latitude  780  some 
twenty  miles  from  the  nearest  open  water,  where  alone  it  could 
find  its  food,  which  consists  of  minute  crustaceans. 

The  Snow  petrel  (Pagodroma  nlvea)  is  perhaps  the  most  beauti- 
ful of  all  the  Southern  petrels.  In  size  about  as  big  as  a  turtle 
dove,  it  is  pure  white  all  over,  with  black  eyes  and  bill  and  feet. 
It  hovers  about  the  ship  often  in  considerable  flocks,  and  was  our 
most  constant  companion  so  long  as  we  had  ice  in  sight  during  the 
summer  months  of  cruising.  It  was  a  rare  visitor  to  our  winter 
quarters,  and,  so  far  as  we  could  discover,  did  not  breed  in 
McMurdo  Sound.  Its  eggs  were  taken  by  McCormick  on  the 
Cockburn  Islands,  and  since  then  by  members  of  the  '  Southern 
Cross'  expedition  on  Cape  Adare.  It  drops  down  most  daintily 
to  pick  up  little  shrimp-like  crustaceans  from  the  ice-floes  as  they 
are  stranded  by  the  breaking  surf. 

There  is  a  question  of  much  interest  in  the  reason  for  the 
individual  variation  in  the  size  of  this  bird,  which  varies  between 


II.]  ANTARCTIC   FAUNA  365 

wide  limits,  apparently  without  anything  corresponding  to  it  in  its 
geographical  distribution. 

The  largest  of  all  the  petrels  is  the  Giant  (Ossifraga  gigantea), 
which  is  also  one  of  the  most  variable  of  species.  It  is  very 
commonly  white  in  the  Antarctic,  although  the  normal  colouration  in 
more  temperate  regions  is  a  dark  greyish  brown  or  black.  The 
reason  for  this  is  still  unknown,  but  it  seems  probable  that,  apart 
from  all  question  of  avoiding  enemies  or  procuring  food,  there  is 
an  inherent  tendency  in  polar  species  to  take  on  the  Arctic  dress. 
One  wonders  in  the  same  connection  what  point  there  can  be  in 
the  pure  white  dress  of  the  Snowy  petrel. 

The  Giant  petrel  is  a  great  scavenger,  and  lives  principally  on 
carrion  refuse  even  in  the  South,  finding  an  abundance  about  the 
penguin  rookeries.  It  is  a  very  large  and  ungainly  bird,  with  a 
composite  yellow  bill,  which  looks  as  though  it  had  many  ways  of 
opening.  It  is  often  to  be  seen  squatted  on  the  ice-floes,  gorged 
by  a  full  meal  of  blubber  from  a  dead  seal.  On  finding  itself  pur- 
sued it  will  deliberately  disgorge  before  it  attempts  to  fly,  knowing 
from  experience  that  even  a  lengthy  run  will  not  enable  it  to  rise  and 
fly  away  except  on  an  empty  stomach.  It  has  never  as  yet  been 
known  to  breed  on  South  Victoria  Land,  and  in  our  winter  quarters 
it  was  only  a  rare  summer  visitor. 

Before  dealing  with  the  penguins,  it  remains  for  me  to  say 
something  about  the  one  gull  which  was  our  constant  companion 
throughout  the  summer  in  McMurdo  Sound.  McCormick's  skua 
{Megalestris  maccormicki)  is  a  large  brown  gull  with  a  white  patch 
on  each  wing.  Often  as  the  bird  advances  in  age  the  moult 
appears  to  be  deferred,  and  the  feathers  become  bleached  and 
weathered  to  a  very  marked  degree — so  much  so  that  the  head  and 
breast  become  almost  white  instead  of  brown.  McCormick's  skua 
is  closely  allied  to  the  sub-Antarctic  species,  but  is  nevertheless 
distinct.  It  is  smaller  than  Megalestris  antarcticus,  and  has  a  well- 
marked  golden  collar,  which  is  very  distinctive  in  adults  but  is 
absent  in  the  young.  The  bird  breeds  all  along  the  coasts  of  South 
Victoria  Land  and  on  all  the  islands,  in  company  with  the  Ad&ie 
penguins,  on  whose  eggs  and  chicks  it  preys.  On  the  gravelly 
ground  it  lays  two  eggs,  which  are  brown  or  greenish,  with  spots 
and  blotches  of  a  darker  brown  and  purple  grey.  The  chicks  are 
grey,  with  pale  blue  bills  and  feet  and  legs,  and  it  is  a  very  note- 
worthy fact  that  although  two  chicks  are  always  hatched,  not  more 
than  one  is  ever  reared.     This  is  due  no  doubt  to  the  fact  that  its 


366      THE   VOYAGE   OF   THE    'DISCOVERY'    [Appx. 

neighbours  do  not  discriminate  between  the  eggs  and  chickens  of 
their  own  and  other  species  of  bird,  and  find  a  young  skua  gull  as 
good  to  eat  as  a  young  Addlie  penguin. 

The  excessive  mortality  amongst  the  penguin  chickens  is  due 
without  a  doubt  to  the  skua  gulls,  which  were  again  and  again 
seen  to  attack  and  destroy  them  ;  their  eggshells,  too,  lay  about  in 
hundreds,  yet  the  penguins  allow  the  skuas  to  nest  and  remain 
unmolested  in  their  very  midst. 

The  skuas  were  much  annoyed  if  one  appeared  within  sight  of 
their  nests  ;  and  while  the  sitting  bird  loudly  and  vehemently  pro- 
tested against  such  an  unwarrantable  intrusion,  her  mate  would 
make  frequent  dashes  at  the  intruder's  head — never,  however, 
touching  him  with  the  claws  or  bill,  but  frequently  striking  with 
the  wings.  The  chickens  were  able  to  run  as  soon  as  hatched,  and 
pecked  their  food  for  themselves  from  bits  that  were  disgorged  and 
left  in  front  of  them  by  their  parents. 

The  birds  were  by  no  means  shy,  though  easily  frightened. 
They  would  at  times  fly  up  and  take  a  piece  of  blubber  from  the 
hand,  and  often  would  attempt  to  remove  a  coat  or  belt  or  knife 
sheath  which  had  been  carelessly  thrown  down  while  the  owner 
might  be  occupied  in  dealing  with  a  seal. 

The  skuas  in  our  winter  quarters  lived  on  anything  they  could 
find  ;  but  under  ordinary  conditions,  and  when  penguins'  eggs  and 
chickens  are  not  in  season,  they  catch  fish  for  themselves  at  sea  or 
chase  the  petrels  that  have  fed  themselves  till  they  disgorge.  The 
skuas  used  to  arrive  in  McMurdo  Sound  from  the  north  at  the 
beginning  of  November.  In  a  month  the  first  eggs  were  laid,  and 
these  were  hatched  at  the  beginning  of  January.  About  the  end  of 
March  the  exodus  was  in  full  swing,  and  we  saw  no  more  of  them 
till  the  following  year. 

The  Addlie  penguins,  as  I  have  said,  are  wont  to  collect  in 
enormous  numbers  at  certain  spots  on  the  Antarctic  coasts  to 
breed.  Arriving  at  Cape  Crozier  during  the  latter  half  of  October, 
they  spent  about  a  fortnight  in  collecting  pebbles  for  their  nests. 
They  then  laid  two  round*white  eggs,  which  were  incubated  in 
turns  by  the  male  and  female  for  upwards  of  thirty-two  days,  when 
two  little  sooty-black  chickens  would  appear,  the  one  as  a  rule 
rapidly  growing  to  double  the  size  of  the  other. 

The  process  of  feeding  during  the  early  stage  is  managed 
alternately  by  each  of  the  parents,  who  take  it  in  turns  to  protect 
the  nestlings  and  go  to  the  sea  for  shrimps.     But  the  time  comes 


II.]  ANTARCTIC   FAUNA  367 

when  the  chickens  are  not  to  be  satisfied  by  the  efforts  of  one  bird, 
and  their  hunger  becomes  so  urgent  that  both  parents  have  to  go 
and  hunt. 

The  chickens  are  now  large  and  independent,  and  so  a  new 
general  method  develops  for  the  good  of  all.  The  young  black 
woolly  chickens  collect  in  groups  of  from  twenty  to  thirty  each, 
and  these  groups  are  herded  and  protected  from  the  skuas  by  three 
or  four  adults  who  station  themselves  on  the  outskirts  of  the 
group. 

The  adults  from  time  to  time  return  with  a  load  of  shrimps,  and 
immediately  set  to  work  to  find  their  infants.  Amongst  the  first 
group  of  infants  they  pass,  however,  are  three  or  four  too  hungry 
to  be  patient — so  hungry,  in  fact,  that  they  mistake  this  bird  for 
their  parent,  and  give  him  chase.  Up  and  down,  and  dodging 
here  and  there,  they  run  every  bit  as  fast  as  he,  and,  heeding  not 
his  growls  as  he  stops  now  and  then  to  swear  and  punish  them, 
they  eventually  tire  him  out  and  literally  force  him  to  feed  them 
because  of  their  importunity.  Edging  close  up  to  him,  the  most 
pressing  of  the  infants  squeaks  out  his  dreadful  hunger,  till  at  last 
the  old  bird  can  stand  it  no  longer,  and  allows  the  little  infant's 
head  to  disappear  inside  his  own  and  find  its  food  there. 

In  this  race  for  life  that  is  thus  constantly  going  on,  the  weakest 
rapidly  go  to  the  wall.  A  chick  that  cannot  run  down  the  old  bird 
and  its  rivals  in  the  race  goes  supperless.  Needless  to  point  out, 
the  next  race  is  still  less  likely  to  be  successful,  and  the  chicken  is 
soon  marked  down  by  a  roving  skua,  who  quickly  brings  an  end 
to  its  unsuccessful  life. 

Nothing  is  more  amusing  in  some  ways  than  to  watch  the  busy 
life  of  thousands  of  these  quaint  little  individuals,  and  few  things 
more  pathetic  than  the  sad  side  of  it  all. 

Towards  the  end  of  January  the  chickens  have  shed  their  down, 
and  now  appear  in  a  glossy  coat  of  blue-grey  feathers  with  white 
breasts  and  throat.  This  stage,  which  lasts  a  year,  is  never  seen 
in  the  breeding  rookeries,  but  is  found  quite  commonly'in  the 
pack-ice  in  January  ;  and  before  the  fact  was  recognised  that  it 
was  only  an  immature  stage  of  the  Ad&ie  penguin,  it  was  burdened 
with  a  specific  title  which  has  since,  of  course,  been  dropped. 

By  the  end  of  February  the  old  birds  have  left  the  rookeries, 
and  only  the  young  remain.  These  soon  learn  to  take  the  water, 
and  before  long  follow  their  parents  in  migration  to  the  north, 
where  they  spend  the  winter  with  them  in  the  looser  pack. 


368      THE    VOYAGE   OF   THE    'DISCOVERY5    [Arrx. 

There  is  no  end  to  the  drollery  of  the  penguin,  and  it  would 
require  a  cinematograph  to  do  justice  to  its  peculiarities  and  its 
grotesque  attitudes.  When  annoyed  in  any  way  the  cock  bird 
ranges  up  in  front  of  his  wife,  his  eyes  flashing  anger,  his  feathers 
erect  in  a  ruffle  round  his  head,  and  his  language  unfit  for  publica- 
tion. He  stands  there  for  a  minute  or  two  breathing  out  threatenings 
and  slaughter  till  his  rage  overpowers  him,  and  putting  his  head 
down  he  makes  a  dash  at  one's  legs  and  hails  blows  upon  them 
with  his  flippers  like  bullets  from  a  machine-gun. 

His  ecstatic  attitude,  too,  in  making  love  is  beyond  all  praise  ; 
though  not  a  sound  escapes  him,  one  can  imagine  the  most 
seductive  music  as  he  slowly  waves  his  flippers  to  and  fro  and 
gazes  upwards  in  a  perfect  rhapsody.  The  next  moment  he  will 
be  chasing  his  nearest  neighbour  with  the  most  unwarrantable 
desire  to  do  him  damage  for  having  removed  one  of  the  dirty 
little  pebbles  in  the  nest  he  was  supposed  to  be  protecting. 

One  would  like  to  follow  the  bird  in  his  aquatic  life— if  such 
a  thing  were  possible.  It  is  tantalising  to  see  him  darting  about 
in  the  water  like  a  fish,  shooting  zig-zag  under  the  ice-floes  to 
leap  up  on  to  the  ice  a  hundred  yards  away  with  a  Jack-in-the 
box  appearance  merely  to  wag  his  tail  and  '  squawk '  to  a  distant 
neighbour. 

In  again  he  plunges,  and,  keeping  his  direction  perfectly, 
comes  up  exactly  where  he  wished.  One  wonders  how  he  does 
so,  but  half  his  life  is  spent  in  an  element  into  which  we  cannot 
follow.  We  see  them,  too,  in  the  open  sea,  shooting  out  of  the 
water  like  a  school  of  little  dolphins,  swimming  with  strong 
sharp  strokes  of  their  fin-like  wings  as  fast  as  fish  and  using 
their  feet  and  tails  for  steering  ;  each  one  follows  his  leader,  and 
pops  up  on  the  ice-floe  like  a  rabbit.  Smart,  comical,  confiding 
little  beasts,  the  most  excellent  company  imaginable  in  such  a 
desolate  region  as  the  Antarctic,  they  are  like  anything  in  the 
world  but  birds. 

It  is  strange  to  think  that  at  one  time  they  probably  used 
their  wings  for  flight.  They  are  some  of  the  most  primitive  of 
birds,  but  at  one  time  their  wings  were  fully  feathered.  Even 
now  as  one  sees  them  drop  to  sleep  with  the  bill  tucked  in 
behind  the  wing,  exactly  as  one  sees  it  in  a  barn-door  fowl,  one 
feels  convinced  that  here  is  a  relic  of  the  past,  for  the  wing  which 
is  now  a  comfortless  fin  was  once  a  bunch  of  feathers  into  which 
with  some  comfort  the  bird  could  snuggle  down. 


II.]  ANTARCTIC   FAUNA  369 

And  lastly,  the  Emperor  penguin  (Afttenodytes  forsteri),  in 
all  probability  the  most  primitive  of  all  the  penguins,  by  far  the 
largest  not  only  in  inches  but  in  weight  and  width,  has  also  this 
trait  of  bygone  times.  He,  too,  sleeps  upright  with  the  tip  of 
his  long  curved  bill  tucked  in  behind  his  flipper.  Exactly  as  in 
a  dog  which  turns  round  and  round  before  settling  down  to  sleep 
upon  a  bare  board  floor,  the  habit  has  outlived  the  conditions  that 
called  it  into  being,  so,  too,  this  habit  of  the  penguin  has  out- 
lived the  comfortable  feathering  of  its  wings. 

It  will  be  seen  on  looking  at  the  map  of  the  Antarctic  Region 
that  the  Great  Ice  Barrier,  which  runs  four  hundred  miles  east 
and  west  as  a  continuous  cliff  of  ice,  comes  to  an  abrupt  termin- 
ation where  it  impinges  on  Ross  Island  at  Cape  Crozier. 
Between  the  rocky  cliffs  which  rise  perpendicularly  five  hundred 
feet  out  of  the  sea,  and  the  ice-cliffs  which  are  here  broken  and 
irregular  in  height,  varying  from  twenty  to  fifty  or  sixty  feet,  lies 
a  bay  with  about  a  mile  of  frontage,  sheltered  from  the  southerly 
winds  and  open  to  the  north  for  every  ray  of  sunshine  in  the 
spring.  A  more  perfect  spot  than  this  for  shelter  could  hardlv 
be  discovered,  and  so  circumscribed  is  it  in  the  corner  between 
land  and  barrier  ice-cliff,  that  the  sea-ice  which  is  formed  here  in 
March  or  April  remains  intact  throughout  the  winter  months, 
a  fixture  till  the  general  break-up  occurs  in  the  following 
summer. 

In  Ross  Sea  the  ice  that  forms  at  the  commencement  of 
winter,  in  March,  April  or  even  May,  is  unstable,  and  is  liable 
to  be  broken  up  by  every  blizzard  from  the  South,  and  the  ice 
then  drifts  to  the  north  to  swell  the  belt  of  pack  in  670  or  68°  S. 
latitude. 

But  in  this  small  bight  the  ice  is  formed  to  stay  ;  and  here 
the  Emperor  penguins  congregate  during  the  early  winter  months 
in  anticipation  of  their  approaching  duties  of  incubation. 

No  doubt  in  other  sheltered  bays  the  ice  remains  intact  as 
well  as  here,  and  where  King  Edward's  Land  abuts  on  the 
eastern  extremity  of  the  Great  Ice  Barrier,  we  entered  a  bay 
with  the  '  Discovery '  and  found  ourselves  not  far  from  what 
appeared  to  be  an  enormous  rookery  of  Emperor  penguins.  There 
were  Emperors  all  round  us— in  the  water  and  out  of  the  water, 
shooting  up  on  to  the  ice-floes, -and  standing  in  knots  on  the  edges 
of  the  fast  ice.  Moreover,  through  the  telescope  in  the  crow's- 
nest  could  be  seen,  about  five  miles  distant,  groups  of  hundreds  of 
VOL.  11.  B  B 


37o      THE   VOYAGE   OF   THE   'DISCOVERY'    [Appx. 

the  birds  all  huddled  together  in  enormous  colonies.  It  was  im- 
perative, as  we  could  see,  that  we  should  run  no  risk  of  being 
frozen  in  prematurely  in  a  place  so  utterly  unsuitable  for  winter- 
ing as  this,  so  we  were  forced  to  leave  without  investigating 
further  ;  but  although  at  the  time  we  thought  the  birds  were 
collected  there  for  nesting,  we  now  are  almost  certain,  in  the  light 
of  what  we  discovered  later  on,  that  they  were  simply  moulting 
birds,  waiting  patiently  for  their  feathers  to  drop  off,  where  for 
three  weeks  they  could  sit  safely  without  being  forced  to  take  to 
the  water. 

Not  many  birds  undertake  to  lay  their  eggs  in  the  darkness  of 
a  polar  winter,  nor  do  many  birds  appear  to  think  that  sea-ice  is 
the  most  attractive  ground  to  I  sit '  on.  And  when,  in  addition  to 
this,  we  find  the  Emperor  penguin  hatching  out  its  chicks  in  the 
coldest  month  of  the  whole  Antarctic  year,  when  the  mean  tempera- 
ture for  the  month  is  eighteen  degrees  below  zero,  Farenheit,  and 
the  minimum  may  fall  to  minus  sixty-eight,  I  think  we  may  rightly 
consider  the  bird  to  be  eccentric. 

The  Emperor  penguin  stands  nearly  four  feet  high,  and  weighs 
upwards  of  eighty  to  ninety  pounds.  He  is  an  exceedingly  hand- 
some bird,  with  a  rich  black  head,  a  bluish-grey  back  and  wings,  a 
lemon  yellow  breast  with  a  satin-like  gloss  on  the  feathers,  and  a 
brilliant  patch  of  orange  on  the  neck  and  lower  bill.  His  move- 
ments are  slow  and  stately,  and  the  dignity  of  his  appearance  is 
much  increased  by  the  upright  carriage  of  his  head  and  bill. 
When  a  group  of  these  birds  is  met  with  in  the  middle  of  the 
desert  ice,  where  all  around  is  grey  and  cold  and  white  and  silent, 
the  richness  of  their  colouring  strikes  one  very  forcibly.  Their 
voice  is  loud  and  trumpet-like,  and  rings  out  in  the  pack-ice  with 
a  note  of  defiance  that  makes  one  feel  that  man  is  the  real 
intruder.  They  have  no  fear,  but  an  abundance  of  inquisitiveness, 
and  a  party  such  as  I  have  mentioned  will  walk  up  to  one  with 
dignity,  and  stand  in  a  ring  all  round,  with  an  occasional  remark 
from  one  to  the  other,  discussing,  no  doubt,  the  nature  of  this  new 
and  upright  neighbour.  That  the  new  beast  is  a  friendly  one  they 
appear  to  have  no  doubt,  and  one  can  only  regret  that  from  time 
to  time  necessity  compelled  us  to  disillusion  them. 

In  October  of  1902  Royds  made  a  sledge  journey  to  Cape 
Crozier  to  establish  a  record  there  for  the  relief  ship,  and  it  was 
during  this  visit  that  Skelton,  who  was  with  him,  discovered  the 
Emperor  penguins'  rookery.     The  number  of  birds  using  it  he  put 


II.]  ANTARCTIC   FAUNA  371 

down  at  about  four  hundred,  and  the  number  of  living  chicks  at 
thirty,  with  about  eighty  dead  ones.  Everywhere  they  searched  for 
eggs,  but  without  success,  and  nothing  but  some  scraps  of  eggshell, 
evidently  swallowed  by  the  birds,  was  found. 

When  this  party  returned  to  the  ship  with  several  chicks  and 
the  news  that  there  was  a  rookery  at  Cape  Crozier,  I  was  myself  on 
the  point  of  starting  in  another  direction,  so  Royds  kindly  offered  to 
make  another  journey,  and  get  further  particulars  and  examples  of 
the  chicks.  He  was  in  this  more  lucky  than  one  could  have  hoped, 
for  he  brought  back,  amongst  other  things,  the  first  authentic  egg, 
which  Blissett,  a  lance-corporal  in  the  R.M.L.I.,  had  found  lying 
frozen  in  the  snow.  He  also  found  that,  arriving  on  November  8, 
the  young  penguins  had  all  left  the  rookery — a  most  unexpected 
discovery,  as  it  was  impossible  that  they  could  have  shed  their 
down,  and  so  it  was  impossible  that  they  could  have  taken  to  the 
water  to  support  themselves  on  the  fish  and  shrimps  and  cuttlefish 
that  form  their  food.  The  only  conclusion,  therefore,  was  that  they 
had  drifted  up  on  the  ice-floes  to  the  north. 

This  for  the  time  being  brought  an  end  to  our  observations  ; 
but  the  following  spring  two  journeys  more  were  made  to  Cape 
Crozier,  for  the  purpose  of  filling  in  the  gaps  in  our  knowledge  of 
the  bird's  life-history. 

The  first  was  undertaken  on  September  7,  about  a  fortnight 
after  the  sun's  return.  The  days  were  short  and  the  nights  were 
long,  and  the  cold  and  discomfort  were  intense.  We  reached  the 
rookery  in  a  week  and  reconnoitred  for  the  morrow,  when  we  made 
our  way  over  the  gigantic  pressure  ridges,  and  at  last  got  into  the 
bay  where  the  Emperors  were  collected.  Here,  to  our  surprise, 
we  saw  first  a  number  of  deserted  eggs  lying  on  the  ice — some 
cracked,  some  crushed,  some  perfect,  some  half-incubated,  some 
half-addled,  but  all  frozen  as  hard  as  rock. 

Just  where  the  birds  had  been  quietly  sitting  on  their  eggs  we 
could  see  that  there  had  been  a  sudden  fall  of  ice  from  the  face  of 
the  Barrier  Cliff.  Without  breaking  through,  this  fall  had  crumpled 
and  split  the  sea-ice  in  all  directions,  and  had  so  scared  the  sitting 
birds  that  those  which  had  escaped  sudden  death  by  burial  in  the 
mass  had  fled  precipitately,  and  left  their  eggs  behind  them.  In 
some  cases  we  could  see  that  the  birds  had  returned  when  it  was 
too  late,  and  had  then  resumed  the  incubation  of  their  eggs,  though 
the  frost  had  killed  them. 

Proceeding  next  to  where  the  birds  were  congregated,  we  found 


372      THE   VOYAGE   OF   THE   'DISCOVERY5    [Appx. 

that  even  so  early  in  the  spring  as  it  then  was  every  egg  was 
hatched,  and  only  chickens  were  to  be  found  under  the  old  birds. 
There  could  not  have  been  fewer  than  a  thousand  birds  and  about 
one  hundred  and  fifty  chicks. 

The  method  employed  by  the  Emperor  penguin  for  carrying 
the  egg  and  chick  upon  his  feet  is  shared  also  by  the  King  penguin 
of  the  sub-Antarctic  area,  as  we  saw  in  our  visit  to  their  rookeries 
in  the  Macquarie  Islands.  The  King  penguin  we  saw  as  he  sat  in 
mud  and  puddles,  with  his  single  egg  upon  his  feet,  and  now  we 
saw  the  Emperor  penguin  doing  precisely  the  same  thing  with  his 
single  chicken  to  keep  it  off  the  ice  ;  and  we  are  agreed  that  the 
term  '  pouch,'  which  has  been  used  in  this  connection,  is  one  which 
not  only  does  not  describe  the  matter,  but  is  anatomically  wrong 
and  misleading.  The  single  egg,  or  the  chick,  sits  resting  on  the 
dorsum  of  the  foot,  wedged  in  between  the  legs  and  the  lower 
abdomen  ;  and  over  it  falls  a  fold  of  heavily  feathered  skin,  which 
is  very  loose,  and  can  completely  cover  up  and  hide  the  egg  or 
chick  from  view.  When  the  chick  is  hungry  or  inquisitive  it  pokes 
out  from  under  the  maternal  (or  paternal)  lappet  a  piebald  downy 
head  of  black  and  white,  emitting  its  shrill  and  persistent  pipe 
until  the  mother  (or  the  father)  fills  it  up. 

The  feeding  is  managed  as  with  cormorants  and  many  other 
birds,  the  little  one  finding  regurgitated  food  when  it  thrusts  its 
head  inside  the  parent's  mouth. 

I  think  the  chickens  hate  their  parents,  and  when  one  watches 
the  proceedings  in  a  rookery  it  strikes  one  as  not  surprising.  In 
the  first  place  there  is  about  one  chick  to  ten  or  twelve  adults,  and 
each  adult  has  an  overpowering  desire  to  '  sit '  on  something. 
Both  males  and  females  want  to  nurse,  and  the  result  is  that  when 
a  chicken  finds  himself  alone  there  is  a  rush  on  the  part  of  a  dozen 
unemployed  to  seize  him.  Naturally  he  runs  away,  and  dodges 
here  and  there  till  a  six-stone  Emperor  falls  on  him,  and  then 
begins  a  regular  football  '  scrimmage,'  in  which  each  tries  to  hustle 
the  other  off,  and  the  end  is  too  often  disastrous  to  the  chick. 
Sometimes  he  falls  into  a  crack  in  the  ice  and  stays  there  to  be 
frozen  while  the  parents  squabble  at  the  top  ;  sometimes,  rather 
than  be  nursed  I  have  seen  him  crawl  in  under  an  ice-ledge  and 
remain  there,  where  the  old  ones  could  not  reach  him.  I  think  it  is 
not  an  exaggeration  to  say  that  of  the  J 7  per  cent,  that  die  no  less 
than  half  are  killed  by  kindness. 

This  excessive  desire  to  'sit'  on  something  leads  otten  to  the 


II.]  ANTARCTIC   FAUNA  373 

most  pathetic  sights.  One  may  see  quite  frequently  an  old  bird 
go  up  to  one  of  the  numerous  dead  chickens  lying  about  upon  the 
ice,  and  try  to  coax  it  to  sit  upon  its  feet,  helping  the  lifeless  little 
thing  with  its  beak,  in  evident  distress  at  the  total  lack  of  response 
to  its  attention.  One  may  see  quite  frequently  the  head  and  neck 
of  a  chicken  trailing  limp  and  lifeless  from  under  the  feather  lappet 
of  a  broody  bird  ;  and  most,  if  not  all,  the  chicks  that  are  lying 
dead  upon  the  ice  bear  marks  of  having  first  been  torn  in  life 
during  the  quarrels  of  the  adults  for  their  possession,  and  then  of 
having  been  nursed  persistently  after  death. 

Some  of  the  chickens,  of  course,  survive  and  leave  the  rookery, 
and,  thanks  to  a  spell  of  real  Antarctic  weather,  which  for  eight 
days  out  of  eleven  confined  us  to  our  sleeping-bags,  we  were 
enabled  to  guess  how  this  is  managed. 

During  an  interminable  blizzard  we  laid  out  guiding-posts  with 
our  ski,  ski-poles,  ice-axes,  and  a  length  of  Alpine  rope,  which 
made  it  possible  for  us  every  alternate  day  to  visit  the  edge  of  the 
cliffs  that  overlooked  the  rookery  ;  and  here  we  saw  how  these 
birds  have  come  to  make  use  of  inanimate  nature  to  serve  their 
ends.  They  wanted  to  migrate.  They  saw  that  the  sea-ice  was 
breaking  up  and  drifting  to  the  north,  and  they  knew  that  their 
chicks  were  as  yet  in  down,  and  not  fit  to  enter  water.  So  day  by 
day  as  we  watched  them  we  saw  parties  of  a  hundred  birds  or 
more  making  their  way  in  single  file  out  from  the  sheltered  bay  to 
the  edge  of  the  open  water.  And  here  they  stood  and  waited 
deliberately  till  the  floe  broke  off  and  carried  them  northward  to 
the  pack. 

The  pack-ice,  I  have  now  no  doubt,  is  the  great  Antarctic 
nursery  for  the  young  of  the  Southern  seals  and  penguins.  Here 
they  live  in  comparative  safety.  One  finds  here  young  Emperor 
penguins  and  the  young  of  the  Adelie  penguins,  and  one  finds  them 
apparently  nowhere  else  when  once  they  have  left  their  breeding- 
grounds. 

Food  is  abundant  and  they  are  safe  from  the  surf  and  swell  ot 
the  heaviest  storms  ;  shelter  they  can  find  easily  under  a  berg  or 
hummock,  and  here  the  young  Emperor  proceeds  to  moult  his 
down. 

His  first  feather  plumage  appears  in  January,  when  he  is  five 
months  old  ;  the  silver-grey  down  is  changed  for  a  blue-grey  coat 
with  a  white  front  ;  there  is  as  yet  no  colour  to  relieve  it.  But 
a  year  later  a  second  moult  occurs,  and  then  the   orange  patch 


374    THE  VOYAGE  OF  THE  'DISCOVERY'   [Appx.  II. 

appears  on  the  neck,  and  the  head  and  throat  turn  black.  In  the 
third  year  the  full  rich  plumage  of  the  adult  is  reached,  and  this, 
by  a  yearly  moult  in  January,  he  retains  until  the  end. 

Of  the  enemies  that  the  Emperor  must  avoid  I  have  already 
said  enough.  Being  strictly  an  inhabitant  of  sea  and  ice,  he  has 
no  enemies  on  land,  but  in  the  water  he  has  to  avoid  the  Sea 
Leopard  and  the  Killer  whale.  His  food  consists  of  fish  and 
cuttlefish,  and  his  stomach  invariably  contains  pebbles,  which 
assist  him  to  grind  up  the  bones. 

It  was  with  much  disappointment  that  we  found  ourselves 
unable  to  rear  the  chicks.  The  heroic  self-sacrifice  of  Cross,  who 
gave  up  his  sleeping-jacket  at  night,  when  the  temperature  was 
1  sixty  below '  and  more,  to  keep  his  charges  warm,  deserved  a 
better  issue  ;  but  it  was  soon  seen  to  be  a  forlorn  hope,  and  eventu- 
ally they  died  from  the  result  of  unnatural  feeding.  Had  we  even 
succeeded  in  bringing  them  to  the  age  when  they  put  on  their 
feathers,  I  fear  that  the  journey  home  through  the  tropics  would 
have  proved  too  much  for  them,  as  we  had  no  means  of  making  a 
cool  place  for  them  on  the  ship. 

In  conclusion  I  may  be  allowed  perhaps  to  say  what  a  good 
right-hand  I  was  given  in  Cross,  who  not  only  learned  to  make 
good  skins  for  our  bird  collection,  but  who,  in  the  matter  of 
making  Emperors'  skins,  improved  upon  his  teacher.  Always 
willing  and  thoroughly  capable,  it  was  to  a  large  extent  thanks  to 
him  that  I  was  enabled  at  times  to  save  much  of  what  would 
otherwise  have  been  lost,  when,  as  on  our  visit  to  the  Macquarie 
Islands,  we  had  far  more  in  hand  than  one  man  could  possibly 
have  managed. 

Of  Skelton's  help  I  should  also  like  to  say  much,  for  not  only 
was  he  a  keen  collector,  who  gave  his  time  and  all  he  caught  un- 
grudgingly for  the  general  collections,  but  his  notes  and  observa- 
tions were  at  all  times  excellent,  and  his  photographs  of  the 
Emperor  penguin  rookery  unique. 

But  while  it  is  fair  to  make  a  special  point  of  acknowledging 
the  help  I  had  from  Skelton  and  from  Cross,  it  is  also  right  to  say 
that  from  everyone,  without  exception,  I  received  abundant  help  at 
all  times. 


INDEX 


Acetylene  gas,  i.  260  ;  ii.  135 
Adelie   Land,    i.   13,   14,    57,  76 ; 

ii.  291,  318,  324,  363 
Admiralty,  i.  21,  27;  ii.  116,  240, 

241 
—  Range,  i.  98,  101  ;  ii,  329-332 
'  Adventure,'  i.  6,  32 
Albatross,  i.    76,   77,  90;  ii.  285, 

287,  362 
Aldershot,  i.  146 
Aldrich,  Admiral    Pelham,  i.   64  ; 

ii.  241 
i  Alert,'  i.  33,  302 
Alexander  I.  Land,  i.  8,  12,  18 
Alexandra,  Queen,  i.  66 
Allan,    David     (P.O.     I,     R.N.), 

i.  56 ;  ii.  100,  162 
•  Ancient  Mariner,'  i.  77 
Andrews,  Mr.,  i.  72 
'Antarctic,'  i.  18 

'  Antarctic  Manual,'  i.  29,  64,  226 
Archangel,  i.  345,  346 
Argentine  Expedition,  ii.  359 
Argyll,  late  Duke  of,  i.  21 
Armitage,  Lieut.  A.  B.,  i.  28,  48, 

49,  72,  101,  102,  126,   144,  148, 

165,    175,    181,    182,  227,  284, 

296,   303,  305,    374-379,    395- 

399;  ii.   2,  98-104,    152,    154, 

164-168,    225,   229,   277,   291, 

321,  336,  339,  362 
Armitage  Cape   (see   under   *  Cape 

Armitage ') 
Arnold,  Matthew,  quoted,  ii.    151, 

227 
Arrival    Bay,    i.     163,    237,    290 ; 

ii.  134,  251,  255,  342 
Arrival     Heights,     i.     163,     294  ; 

ii.  129,  145,  255,  256 


Auckland  Islands,  i.   79  ;   ii.  273, 

294 
Aurora  Australis,  i.  255,  269,  270 
Austin  Search  Expedition,  i.  301 
Australia  (New  Holland),  i.  4,  160, 

407 
Azores,  ii.  298 


Baffin  Bay,  i.  37 
Baffin,  William,  i.  37 
Balaclava  helmets,  i.  337 
Balfour,  Rt.  Hon.  A.  J.,  i.  22 
Balleny,     Capt.    John,    i.     9-11  ; 
ii.  288-289,  318,  323 

—  Islands,  i.  10  ;  ii.  287  seq.,  303- 
306,  315,  325,  354,  362,  364 

Balloon  ascents,  i.  146  seq. 

—  Inlet,  i.  310,  313 
Bankes  Peninsula,  ii.  296 

Barne,  Lieut.  Michael,  i.  50,  72, 
101,  124,  125,  164,  169-184, 
191,  192,  232,  268,  282,  289, 
296,  322,  325,  375,  381-387, 
400;  ii.  2,  7,  8,  16,  85,  86,  124, 
135,  143,  149,  151,  156,  160, 
161,  221,  222,   231,  254,    312, 

332-3 
'   Barne     Cape     (see     under    '  Cape 

Barne ') 
I   —  Glacier,  ii.  309 
I   —  Inlet,  ii.  162,  308,  311 
I    Barry,  Sir  Graham,  i.  20 
{    Beacon  Height  West,  ii.  336  seq. 
I   — Sandstone    formation,    ii.      178 

seq.,  324,  336^. 
j   Beatty,  Prof.,  i.  72 
i   Beaufort   Island,  i.    122;    ii.   118, 

325 


376      THE   VOYAGE   OF   THE    'DISCOVERY 


•  Beaufoy,'  cutter,  i.  9 
Beaumont,  Sir  Lewis,  i.  80 
Beauvais,  Messrs.,  i.  324 
Beeton,    Mrs.,     'Cookery    Book,' 

ii.  227 
Belcher  Search  Expedition,  i.  301 

*  Belgica,'  i.  18,  172;  ii.  359,  362 
Bellingshausen,  Capt.,  i.  7,  8,   II, 

12 
Beresford,  Admiral    Lord  Charles, 

i.  21 
Berlin,  i.  25,  35 
Bernacchi,     Louis    C.    (physicist), 

i.  52,  81,  101,  102,  124,  144,  165, 

172,    207-209,    224,    231,    238, 

240,  258,  274,  347;  ii.    13,  92, 

109,    139,    149,    159,    222,  223, 

248,  321,  345 
Bernacchi  Cape   (see  under  *  Cape 

BemacchP) 
Bird  &  Sons,  i.  31 
'Birdie,'  dog,  i.   287;   ii.    10,    12, 

63,  67-71 
Birds,  i.    10,   76,   77,  87,  90,  101, 

209  ;  ii.  352  sea. 

—  skinning  of,  i.  229,  258  ;  ii.  374 

—  trapping  of,  i.  77 
Birmingham,  i.  49 
Biscay,  Bay  of,  i.  67 
Biscoe,  Capt.,  i.  9,  17 

'  Bismarck,'  dog,  ii.  10,  12,  25,  63 
Black    Island,    i.    292,    376,    382, 

386  j  ii.  109-111,  146,  328,  348 
'  Blackie,'  dog,  ii.  140 
'  Blanco,'  dog,  i.  284,  285  ;  ii.  10, 

13,  HO 
Blandy,  Messrs.,  i.  68 
Blanford,  Dr.  W.  T.,  i.  64 
Blissett,  Private  A.   H.,  ii.  87,  95, 

I51i  157,  371 
'  Blizzard,'  The  (journal),  i.  268 
'  Bloodhound,'  whaler,  i.  33 
Blubber  as  fuel,  ii.  224 
Blue  Glacier,  ii.  333,  346,  347 
'Bluff,'    The,    i.    376,    386,    392; 

ii.  2,  8,  16,  17,  84,  85,  109,  in, 

146,  162,  221,  222,  319  (see  also 

under  '  Minna  Bluff'') 
Bonner,  Charles,  i.  84,  85 
Boothia  Felix,  i.  299 
Boots,  i.  243  seq.,  358  seq. 


Borchgrevink,  Mr.,  i.  18,  99,  109 

ii.  324 
Borrodaile  Island,  ii.  289 
'  Boss,'   dog,    i.    191  ;    ii.    10,   26, 

66 
Bouvet,  Capt.,  i.  4 

—  Island,  i.  5 
Bovril  Co.,  i.  324 
Bowen,  Hon.  C.  C,  i.  80 
Boyes,  Admiral,  ii.  241 
Brazil,  i.  2 

'  Britannia,'  H.M.S.,  i.  50 
British  Association,  i.  1 1 

—  —  Antarctic  Committee,  i.  20 
British  Museum,  i.  31,  73  ;  ii.  142, 

247,  321,  324 
Brown    Island,  ii.    109-111,    225, 

328,  349 
'  Brownie,'     dog,    i.     285,     383  ; 

ii.  10,  13,  26,  41,  55 
Brown's  Peak,  ii.  289 
Buchan,  Dr.  A.,  i.  64 
Buchanan,  J.  Y.,  i.  64 
Buckle  Island,  ii.  289,  323 
Buckridge,  Mr.,  i.  164 
Burberry,  Messrs.,  i.  245,  336 
Burlington  House,  i.  28,  29 
Butter  Point,  ii.  164,  217,  218 


Cadbury,  Messrs.,  i.  31 

Caius  College,  i.  51 

California,  ii.  356 

Callao,  i.  3 

Camel's  Hump,  ii.  335 

Campbell  Island,  ii.  354 

Cape  A  depot,  ii.  7S,  79,  82 

Cape  Adare,  i.  18,  98,  100-103  » 
ii.  13,  116,  117,  280,  282,  303, 
304,  308,  314,  324-331,  334, 
341,  347,  363,  364 

Cape  Anne,  ii.  325 

—  Armitage,  i.  162,  16S,  196,  206, 
209,  227,  229  ;  ii.  134,  250,  313, 
319,  320,  328,  343 

Cape  Armitage  Peninsula,  ii.  314 

—  Barne,  ii.  327 

—  Bernacchi,  ii.  333 

—  Bird,  i.  122,   151,  213  ;  ii.  217, 

275,  319 

—  Cotter,  ii.  279 


INDEX 


377 


Cape  Crozier,  i.  122-128,  156,  157, 

169,   175,   376,   399  5   "•   3,   94, 
117,   118,    150,    151,   157,    223, 
301-304,    327,    334,    347,    363, 
366,  369-371 
Cape  Crozier  Cliffs,  ii.  4,  327 

—  Gauss,  i.  112  ;  ii.  345 

—  Hallet,  ii.  279 

—  Horn,  i.  4,  7  ;  ii.  298 

—  Hudson,  ii.  291,  292 

—  Jones,  i.  108,  109  ;  ii.  329,  341 

—  North,  i.  16  ;  ii.  263,  273,  283, 
284,  292,  304,  318,  331 ,  362 

—  of  Good  Hope,  i.  71-73,  187  ;  ii. 
116 

—  Royds,  ii.  118,  217,  236,  244- 
247,  313,  327,  347-348,  356, 
363 

—  Sibbald,  i.  ill 

—  Town,  i.  72 

—  Wadworth,  i.  108 ;  ii.  325 

—  Washington,  i.  112,  113,  121  ; 
ii.  42,  275,  276,  304,  331,  346 

—  Wheatstone,  ii.  279 

Castle  Rock,  i.    163,  174-186,240, 

290,  294,  401  ;  ii.   91,  131,  171, 

325,  328,  350 
Cathedral  Rocks,  ii.  98,   106,  107  , 

153,   164,    165,  217,    333,    335, 

341,  349,  350 
1  Century  Dictionary,'  i.  224 
•Challenger,'  H.M.S.,   i.    19,    20, 

57,  88  ;  ii.  324,  336 
Chalmers,  Mr.,  i.  26 
Chatham  Island,  ii.  354 
Cheltenham  College,  i.  51 
Chesapeake  Bay,  i,  12 
Chitral,  ii.  115 
Christchurch,    N.Z.,    i.     59,    84  ; 

ii.  140 

—  Bishop  of,  i.  83 

—  Magnetic  Observatory,  i.  80 

—  Museum,  i.  80 
Christiania,  i.  304,  311 
Christiansen,  Capt.,  i.  18 
Christmas  Mountain,  ii.  52 
Clarke,  Charles,  ship's  cook,  i.  248  ; 

ii.  133,  222,  234 
Clarkson,  Mr.,  i.  278 
Clement  VIII.,  Pope,  i.  3 
Cockburn  Islands,  ii.  364 


Cocks,  E.  L.  Somers,  i.  26 
Colbeck,    Capt.   William,   ii.    116- 

128,  239-265,  273,  295,  325 
Colman,  Ltd.,  i.  31 
Colomb,  Admiral,  i.  21 
Cone  Hill,  ii.  131 
'Conway,'  H.M.S.,  i.  50 
Cook,  Capt.  James,  i.  5-12,  17,  19, 

32-37,  88  ;  ii.  306 
Copenhagen,  i.  324 
Corsica,  ii.  348 
Cote  Clarie,  i.  13,  14 
Coulman  Island,  i.   106,   107,  in, 

115,  122;  ii.  116-118,  278,  279, 

288,  325,  336,  341,  345 
Cowes  Harbour,  i.  66 
Cramp,    i.    191,    192,  351  ;   ii.   5, 

seq. 
Crampons,    i.    332 ;    ii.    102,    160, 

174-175,  188,  201,  209,  214 
Crater  Heights,  i.  163 
—  Hill,  i.  163,  176,  186,  229,  289- 

293  ;  ii.  328 
Creak,  Capt.  E.  W.,  i.  34,  63 
Crean,    Thomas   (A.B.    R.N.),    ii. 

156,  255 
'Crescent,'  H.M.S.,  i.  50 
Crevasses,  i.    167,  389  seq.  ;  ii.   36, 

103,  104,  186,  206,  209,  348 
Cross,  Jacob  (P.O.  1,  R.N.)  i.  56, 
no,  229,  379,398,401  ;  ii.  151, 

157,  222,  224,  374 
Croucher,  George  B.  (A.B.  R.N.), 

ii.  162 
Crozets,  i.  5 
'Cruise   of    the    "Beagle,"   The,' 

ii.  184 
'  Cruise  of  the  "  Falcon,"  The,'  i.  70 
Currents,  ii.  305-6 


Dailey,  F.  E.,  carpenter,  i.  54, 
164,  168-172;  ii.  151,  163 

Dailey  Islands,  ii.  329 

Danger  Slope,  i.  187,  188 

Danish  Lapland  Expedition,  ii.  145 

Darwin,  Charles,  '  Origin  of 
Species,'  i.  221 

'Cruise   of  the    "Beagle"' 

ii.  184 

—  Major  L.,  i.  63 


378       THE   VOYAGE   OF  THE   'DISCOVERY 


1  David,'  dog,  i.  243 

Davidson,  Mr.  (of  the  '  Morning '), 
ii.  123,  128 

'  Deeds  that  Won  the  Empire,' 
i.  220 

Dell,  James (A.B.  R.N.),  ii.  219 

Dellbridge,  James  H.,  second  en- 
gineer, i.  55,  77,  172,  181 ;  ii. 
98,  128,  162,  229,  278 

Dellbridge  Islets,  ii.  119,  229,  329, 
348 

Depot,  (see  under  '  Cape  A  ') 

Depot  'A,'  i.  393  ;  ii.  7,  14,  86, 
222,  312 

—  'B,' ii.  37,  59,  62,  72-74 

—  Nunatak,  ii.  182,  186,  208,  211, 
212,  220,  337  sea. 

Deptford,  i.  6 

Descent   Pass,   ii.    100,    106,    107, 

i73>  335 
1  Desolation   Camp,'  ii.    185,    187, 

208,  212 
Dickens,  Charles,  i.  220 
1  Discovery,'  No.  1  (1616)  i.  37 

—  No.  2  (1719)1-  37 

—  No.  3  (1776)  i.  32,  37 

—  No.  4  (Vancouver's)  i.  37 

—  No.  5  (1875)  i.  32,  37,  302 
Discovery  Gulf,  ii.  348 

'  Dishcover    Minstrel    Troupe,'    i. 

360 
Dogherty  Island,  ii.  297 
Dogs,   i.   83,    161-166,    175,    182, 

189-191,  200  .r^. ,  230,  237-243, 

255,  283-286,  296  ;  ii.  9  sea.,  140 

sea.,  219,  285 

—  on  sledge  journeys,  i.  340  sea., 
375  seq.  ;  ii.  7  seq. 

Dolphins,  ii.  353  seq. 

Doorly,  Mr.  (of  the  '  Morning'),  ii. 

123,  256 
Double  halos,  ii.  27 
Douglas,  Sir  Archibald,  i.  27,  28 
Dover  College,  i,  49 
Drake,  Sir  Francis,  i.  3 
Drapers'  Company,  ii.  115 
Dredging,  i.   19,  89,  135  ;  ii.   141, 

142 
Dry  Valleys,  ii.  336  seq. 
Drygalski,  Prof,  von,  i.  20,  25  ;  ii. 

342,  344 


Dulwich  School,  i.  53 

Dundee,  i.  28-41,  48,  245  ;  ii.  241, 

354 
—  Shipbuilding  Co.,  i.  23,  36 
Durnford,  Admiral,  i.  28 
D'Urville,  Dumont,  i.    12-15,  57, 

76  ;  ii.  324 


Earth  shadows,  ii.  145 
East  India  Docks,  i.  31,  62,  407 
Eastern  Narrows,  ii.  298 
Edward  VII.,  King,  i.  22,  66,  223  ; 

ii.  96,  115 
Egerton,  Captain,  i.  260 

—  Admiral  G.  Le  C,  i.  64 
Eld's  Peak,  ii.  291 

Electric  light,  i.  172,  235,  259 

'  Eliza  Scott '  schooner,  i.  10 

1  Encyclopaedia  Britannica,'  i.  224 

'  Endeavour,'  i.  32 

Enderby  &  Co.,  whaling  merchants, 

i.  8-10 ;  ii.  323 
Enderby,  Charles,  i.  10 

—  Land,  i.  9,  10 

—  Quadrant,  i.  57 
England,  Mr.,  ii.  123 
'  Enterprise,'  i.  33 

'Erebus,'  H.M.S.,  i.  15,  17,  33  J 
ii  323.  355 

—  Bay,  i.  288 

—  Glacier,  ii.  128 

—  Mount  (see  under  '  Mount 
Erebus ') 

Esher,  Lord,  i.  28 

•  Eskers,'  The,  i.   396  ;  ii.    2,  98, 

172,  218 
'  Eva  '  balloon,  i.  147 
Evans,  Mr.  (of  the  '  Morning  '),  ii. 

123 

—  Edgar  (P.O.  2,  R.N.),  i.  56, 
1 74-181,  379,  399  5  "•  4,  96, 
151,  162,  188-219,  228,  234,  254 

—  Sir  John,  i,  64 

Evans,  Lescher  &  Webb,  Messrs., 

L  31 

Evenson,  Captain,  i.  18 


Falkland  Islands,  ii.  298 
Farr,  Coleridge,  i.  80 


INDEX 


379 


Fearnsides,  W.  G.,  ii.  351 
Feather,  Thomas  A.,  boatswain,  i. 
54,  387,  390  ;  ii-  163,  183,  185, 
188 
Ferrar,  Hartley  T.,  geologist,  i.  52, 
no,  133,  164,  181,  220,  232, 
379,  388,  397,  398 ;  ii-  98,  106, 
109,  163,  168-173,  178,  180, 
185,  212,  220,  221,  234,  272, 
303,  314-317 

—  Summary  of  the  Geological 
Observations,  Appx.  I.,  ii.  323- 
351 

—  Glacier,  ii.  98-101,  107,  148, 
152  seq.,  162  seq.,  214  seq.,  306 
seq.,  333  seq. 

'  Fights  for  the  Flag,'  i.  220 
Finger  Mountain,  ii.  178,  179,  212, 

337  seq. 
Fish,  i.  155  ;  ii.  137,  160 
Fish-traps,  i.    281,    282 ;    ii.    136, 

141 
Fisherman's  Cove,  i.  78 
Fishing-holes,  i.  218,  233  ;  ii.  136 
Fishmongers'  Company,  ii.  115 
Fitchett,  Rev.  W.  H.,  i.  220 
1  FitzClarence,'  dog,  ii.  10,  12 
Flower,  Sir  William,  i.  21 
Flowers,  i.  198,  199,  396 
'  Flying  Fish,'  i.  12 
'  Flying  Scud  '  sledge,  ii.  143 
Fog  bows,  ii.  27 
Food  allowance,  i.  321  seq. 

—  dreams,  ii.  44,  50-51 

—  supply  for  winter,  ii.  130-131 
Ford,  Charles  R. ,  ship's  steward,  i. 

^  55,  164,  219,  227 
Fossil  remains,  ii.  316 
Foster,  Sir  Michael,  i.  63 
Foyn,  Svend,  i.  18 
<Fram,'i.  34,  35 
Franklin  Expedition,  i.  33 

—  Island,  ii.  1 16-1 18, 324,  326,  347 

—  Search  Expeditions,  i.  33,  299 
Franz-Josef  Land,  i.  49,  302,  346 
Frezne,  Marion  du,  i.  4,  5 
Frost-bites,  i.   177,  182-184,    191, 

200,    212,  240,  241,   255,    275, 
356,  362,  384;  ii-  176,  179,  182, 
185,  204,  205,  210 
Funchal,  i.  68 


Fur  boots,  i.   176,   179,  186,  244 

ii.  8 
Furs,  i.  247,  304 
'  Fury,'  i.  33 


Gama,  Vasco  da,  i.  3 

'  Gap,'  The,  i.  162-165,  170,  195- 

200;  ii.  328 
Gauss,  Prof.,  i.  13 
«  Gauss,'  i.  20,  25,  35,  57 
Gauss  Cape  (see  under  *  Cape  Gauss  ') 
Geikie,  Sir  Archibald,  i.  64 
Geographical  Congress,    Berlin,    i. 

35 
Geological   Investigations,    ii.    107 

seq.,  163,  323-351 
Gerlache,  M.  de,  i.  18 
Gill,  Sir  David,  i.  72 
Glaciers,  i.  114,  117,  154-156,  344, 

349,  377  seq.  ;  ii.  30,  39,  78,  82, 

98^.,   152  seq.,   207  seq.,  30%- 

309,  346-347 
Goggles,  i.  336,  339,  371  ;  ii.  23, 

40,  55,  87,  176 
'  Golden  Slippers,'  song,  i.  281 
Goldie,  Sir  George,  i.  59,  60 
Goldsmiths'  Company,  ii.  115 
Gordon,  Lindsay,  quoted,  i.  340 
Goschen,  Mr.,  i.  27 
Gourlay  Bros.,  i.  42 
Government     Arctic     Expedition, 

1875,  i-  33 
Graham  Land,  i.  10,   12,   17,   18; 

ii-  317 

Grampus  (see  under  *  Whale,   Kil- 
ler') 

Granite  Harbour,  i.  116,  118,  153; 

ii-  334,  336,  34i,  35o 
'Grannie,'  dog,  ii.  10,  13,  40 
Great  Ice  Barrier,  i.  16,  18,  109, 
in,  114,  124-132,  142,  143, 
148-150,  156,  158,  171,  224,  307 
seq.,  386;  ii.  40  seq.,  in  seq., 
148  seq.,  301  seq.,  309-312,  323 

movement  of,  i.  284 ;  ii. 

222,  310-312,  313 
Greely,  i.  226,  324 
Green,  Messrs.,  ii.  115 
Greenland,  i.   1,  33,  299,  307  ;  ii. 
195,  344 


380      THE   VOYAGE   OF   THE    'DISCOVERY' 


Greenwich,  i.  60;  ii.  115 

'Gus,'  dog,  i.  191  ;  ii.  10,  12,  46, 

63,  64 
Guy's  Hospital,  i.  49 


Hakluyt,  i.  2 

Hamilton,    Capt.   Barrett,  ii.  358, 

359 
—  Admiral,  Sir  Vesey,  i.   21,   34, 

64 
Handsley,   Jesse   (A.B.    R.N.),  ii. 

151,     162,    188-190,    219,    228, 

234 
Hanson,  naturalist,  i.  101,  102 
Harbour  Heights,  ii.  328 
Hare,  Mr.,  i.  174,   176,   178,   182, 

185 
Harmsworth,  Sir  Alfred,  i.  23 
Harrison,  Mr.,  i.  63 
Hartley,  Simon,  i.  77 
Haydn's  'Dictionary  of  Dates,'  i. 

224 
Hazell's  '  Annual,'  i.  224 
Heald,  William  L.  (A.B.  R.N.),  i. 

56,  174.  379,  397,  398,  401  ;  ii. 

225 
Health  Office,  i.  407 
■  Hecla,'  i.  33 

Hely- Hutchinson,  Sir  Walter,  i.  72 
'  Hertha,'  i.  18 
•  Hints  to  Travellers,'  ii.  177 
Hobart  Town,  i.  12,  15  ;  ii.  241 
Hodgson,  Thomas  V.,  biologist,  i. 

49,  96,  107,  155,  164,   199,  220, 

231,    233,    280,  282,   293,   380, 

381  ;  ii.  109,  126,  135,  141,  155, 

234,    248,    272,  292,   321,   327, 

329 
Hogsback  Cliffs,  ii.  327 
Hondius,  i.  2 
Hooker,  Sir  Joseph,  i.  17,  21,  123, 

146 
Hoskins,  Admiral  Sir  Anthony,  i. 

21,  27,  34 
Hudson  Bay,  i.  37 

Territory,  i.  299,  323 

Huggins,  Sir  William,  i.  63 
Hughes,  J.  F.,  i.  63 
Hull,  i.  33 
Humboldt,  i.  11 


Hut  Point,  i.  163,  165,  181,  182, 
209-215,293;  ii.  96,  122-124, 
128,  134,  146,  234,  246-271, 
342 

Huts,  erection  of,  i.  160  seq. 

Hutton,  Captain,  i.  80 

—  Cliffs,  ii.  327 


Ice  axes,  i.  185,  332  ;  ii.  99,  101 

—  barrier    {see   under   *  Great  Ice 
Barrier'') 

—  'blink,'  i.  90,  152 

—  cascades,  ii.  39,  52,  180 

—  crystals,  i.  242,  273,  369,   380, 
381,  391  ;  ii.  82,  209 

—  flowers,  i.  198,  199,  396 

—  Inland,  ii.  306-308,  344-346 

—  saw,  ii.  112,  233 

—  sea,  i.  199  ;  ii.  341-343  {see  also 
under  '  Pack- Ice') 

Iceberg,  '  Belleisle,' i.  150 

—  turning  turtle,  ii.  291 
Icebergs,  i.  4,  76,  87,  88,  102,  108, 

in,  130-149,  162;  ii.  214,  258, 

275  *£•»  303-305,. .347 
Inaccessible  Island,  ii.  329 
Inland  Forts,  ii.  337  seq. 
Institution  of  Naval  Architects,  i.  37 
<  Intrepid,'  i.  33 
'  Investigator,'  i.  33 
Isle  of  Wight,  ii.  299 


Jackson-Harmsworth    Expedi- 
tion, i.  49,  302,  305 
'Jane,'  brig,  i.  9 
Jansen,  Capt.,  ii.  324 
'Jason,'  whaler,  i.  17 
Java,  i.  2,  3 
'Jim,'  dog,  ii.  10,   II,  25,  63,  69, 

71,77 
'Joe,' dog,  i.  347;  ii.  10,  13,  68 
Joinville  Island,  i.  12,  17 
Joyce,  Ernest  E.  (A.B.  R.N.),  ii. 

156,  157 
'Jupiter,'  H.M.S.,  i.  56 


Keltie,  Dr.  Scott,  i.  63 
Kemp  Land,  i.  10 


INDEX 


38i 


Kempe,  A.  B.,  i.  26,  59 

Kennar,  Thomas  (P.O.   2,   R.N.), 

ii.  163,  172,  337 
Kerguelen  Island,  i.  5,  6  ;  ii.  356 
Kerguelen-Tremarec,  De,  i.  5 
Kerr,  Lord  Walter,  i.  27 
Kew  Physical  Laboratory,  i.  31 
•  Kid,'  dog,  i.  392  ;  ii.  10,  12,  64 
King  Edward's  Land,  i.   88,   135, 

141 ;  ii.  303  seq.,  313,  317,  33°> 

363>  369 

Kinsey,  Mr.,  i.  80;  ii.  140 

Kipling,  Rudyard,  quoted,  ii.  49, 
94,  300 

Knight,  E.  F.,  i.  70 

Knob  Head  Moraine,  ii.  166,  170, 
i73>  213 

Knob  Head  Mountain,  ii.  166,  336 
seq. 

Koettlitz,  Dr.  Reginald,  surgeon 
and  botanist,  i.  49,  50,  96,  170, 
192,  227,  228,  250,  273,  282, 
379.  386,  395,  399,  401  ;  ii.  98, 
99,  109,  no,  219,  225,  228,  249, 

327,  333.  335 
Koettlitz  Glacier,  ii.  in,  346 
Kronstadt,  i.  8 


'  La  Zelee,'  ship,  i.  12 

Lady  Newnes  Bay,  i.  109,  114;  ii. 

308,  315,  329,  345 
Lambton,  Misses  Dawson,  i.  23 
Larsen,  Captain,  i.  17,  18 
Lashly,  William  (Ig.  stoker  R.N.), 

i.  244,  379,    399;  ii.   151,   162, 

178,    185,    188,    191,     194-219, 

228,  234 
'  L' Astrolabe,'  ship,  i.  12 
Le  Maire,  Capt,  i.  4 
'  Lewis,'  dog,  ii.  io,  n,  63,  69-72 
Lichen,  ii.  217,  352 
Lindley,  Lord,  i.  59 
Lister,  Lord,  i.  63 
—  Mount  (see  under i  Mount  Lister'') 
'  Lively,'  cutter,  i.  9 
'Lizard,'  H.M.S.,  i.  84 
London  Docks,  i.  65,  305  ;  ii.  1 16 

Co.,  i.  31 

London  Stock  Exchange,  ii.  115 
Longfellow,  quoted,  i.  32 


Longhurst,  Cyril,  i.  26,  28 
Longstaff,    Llewellyn,    i.    22,    23 ; 
ii.  115 

—  Mount  (see  under  *  Mount  Long- 
i       staff') 

1   Louis-Philippe  Land,  i.  12 
Lyon,  Mr.,  i.  42 
Lyttelton,  i.  80-83  ;  ii.  116 

—  Harbour,  ii.  296 

—  Harbour  Board,  i.  79 

—  Heads,  i.  79,  84  ;  ii.  296 


MacCormick,   Dr.    Robert,   ii. 

323,  33,i ,  35s,  363..  364 
MacCormick's  Skua,  ii.  363  seq. 
Macfarlane,  Mr.,  ii.  100,  103- 106 
MacKay,  Capt.  Harry,  ii.  239,  241, 

244,  251,  264,  265 
Macquarie  Island,  i.  78 ;   ii.   247, 

356,  372,  374 
Madeira,  i.  67-69 
Magellan,  i.  3 

—  Straits,  i.  3  ;  ii.  298,  364 
Magnetic   huts,    i.    161,   169,   196, 

207,  231,  260 

—  instruments,    i.   1.23,   161,  231  ; 
ii.  159 

—  observations,    i.    72,    124,    125, 
204,  229,  230;  ii.  281 

—  observatory,  i.  43 

—  Pole,   i.   13,  58,  74,   113,  270; 
ii.  191,  223,  275 

North,  i.  299 

—  Survey,  ii.  297,  298 
Expedition,  ii.  323 

1  Mahomet's  Coffin,'  ii.  40 
'Majestic,'  H.M.S.,  i.  24,  50,  51, 

56 
'  Marching  through  Georgia,'  song, 

i.  281 
Markham,  Sir  Albert,  i.  34,  64 

—  Sir  Clements,  i.  20-26,  57-59, 
64,  226,  305  ;  ii.  115,  116 

—  Lady,  i.  48 

—  Mount  (see  under  *  Mount  Mark- 
ham  ') 

Marryat,  Captain,  i.  220 
McClintock,  Admiral  Sir  Leopold, 

i.  21,  34,  59,  64,  226,  324,  329, 

341  ;  quoted,  i.  298  seq. 


382       THE   VOYAGE    OF   THE    'DISCOVERY' 


McDougall,  i.  226 
McMurdo  Bay,  i.  16,  127 

—  Sound,  i.  119,  126,  150-152; 
ii.  98,  118,  122,  270-274,  280, 
302,  306,  329,  342,  seq. 

Melbourne,  i.  60,  73 

—  Observatory,  i.  52 
Mercers'  Company,  ii.  115 
Merchant  Shipping  Act,  i.  56 
Meteorological  conditions,  ii.  318- 

321 

—  observations,  i.  204  seq. 

—  screen,  i.  203,  237  ;  ii.  144 
Mill,  Dr.  H.  R.,  i.  1,  63,  68 

—  John,  i.  85 
Miller,  H.  J.,  i.  80,  82 
Milton,  John,  quoted,  ii.  151 
Minna  Bluff,  ii.  311,  330  {see  also 

under  '  Bluff'') 

Mirage,  i.  115,  164,  402;  ii.  22, 
24,  40,  57,  60,  130,  313 

Mock  suns,  ii.  27 

Moore,  Sir  Arthur,  i.  72 

1  Morning  '  ('  Morgenen  '),  relief 
ship,  i.  102,  124,  324  ;  ii.  92, 
113-131,  138,  140,  238-265, 
270-272,  276,  295,  296,  302 

Morrison,  Professor,  i.  72 

—  J.  D.  (of  the  '  Morning  '),  ii. 
123,  325-327,  347 

Moss,  ii.  217,  352 

Mount  Adam,  i.  101  ;  ii.  283 

—  Bird,  ii.  326,  327 

—  Brewster,  ii.  329 

—  Discovery,  i.  120,  153,  292,  392, 
393,  402;  ii.  83,  109,  no,  222, 
319,  330 

—  Erebus,  i.  16,  in,  115,  119- 
123,  151-158,  168,  175,  206, 
278,  283,  289-294,  377,  392, 
394;  ii-  3,  85>  86,  90,  141-146, 
207,  235,  236,  275,  302,  313, 
318,  323,  326-329,  344,  347 

—  Herschel,  i.  109 

—  Lister,  ii.  167,  178,  186 

—  Longstaff,  ii.  54,  57,  60,  64, 
308,  313 

—  Markham,  ii.  56,  64 

—  Melbourne,  i.  112,  113,  115; 
ii.  275,  276,  306,  330 

—  Minto,  i.  101  ;  ii.  283 


Mount    Monteagle,    i.    109,    112, 

115 
— ■  Morning,  ii.  330 

—  Murchison,  i.  112 

—  Terra  Nova,  ii.  326,  327 

—  Terror,  i.  16,  119,  122,  123, 
126,  151,  153,  157,  175,  192, 
195,  290,  291,  392  ;  ii.  3,  86, 
90,  91,  224,  312-314,  319,  326, 

327,  347 
Mowbray  Bay,  ii.  279 
Mulock,  S.  Lieut.  George  F.  A., 

i.   53;  ii.    128,    142,    149,    156, 

161,    221,    222,    248,  269,  275, 

289,  332 

—  Inlet,  ii.  308 
Murray,  George,  i.  28,  29 

—  Sir  John,  i.  20,  21  ;  ii.  304 


Nansen,  Dr.  Fridtjof,  i.  25,  35, 
41,  62,  303-314,  325,  327,  329, 
333,  346,  406 

—  '  Farthest  North,'  i.  226 

—  '  First  Crossing  of  Greenland,' 
i.  226,  308 

Nares,  Sir  George,  i.   19,   34,  64, 

226,  324 
Naval  Discipline  Act,  i.  56 
Needles  Channel,  i.  66 
1  Nell,'  dog,  i.  285  ;  ii.   10,  13,  64, 

140 
Neumayer,  Georg,  i.  20 
New  Harbour,  i.    288,    374,    396, 

398;  ii.  2,  107,  151,  164,  272 

Glacier,  ii.  98 

Heights,  ii.  333 

New  Hebrides,  i.  4 

New  Mountain,  ii.  340 

New  Zealand,  i.  4-9,  52,  72,  73, 

79-85,  248,  250,  346,    407;   ii. 

116,  125,  239,  244,  263,  296 
New  Zealand  Co.,  i.  88 

Government,  i.  80  ;  ii.  115 

Newall,  Mr.,  ii.  115 
Newbolt,  Henry,  quoted,  i.  65 
Newnes,  Sir  George,  Expedition  to 

Cape  Adare,  i.   18,  52,    99 ;   ii. 

116,  324 

—  Bay  (see  under  '  Lady  Neiunes 
Bay') 


INDEX 


3*3 


'Nigger,'  dog,  i.  191,  242,  243, 
283,  347,  390;  ii-  10,  11,63,69, 
7i,  77 

1  Nobby,'  dog,  ii.  140 

Nordenskjold,  i.  226 

North  Foreland,  i.  9 

Northern  Islets,  ii.  144 

Norway,  i.  25,  304,  318,  338  ;  ii. 
"5 


Observation  Hill,  i.  162,  215, 

394;  ii.  91,  92,  171,  328 
Ortelius,  quoted,  i.  2,  3 
Oundle  School,  i.  52 


Pack-ice,  i.  34,  75,  89-102,  111- 
120,  134-145,  ISI-I53  ?  "•  275 
seq.,  301-303 

1  Paddy,'  dog,  i.  242 

Parhelion,  i.  381 

Parr,  Admiral  Chase,  i.    4 

Parry,  Capt.,  i.   15,  33,  252,  299, 

324 

—  Mountains,  i.  119,  126,  127, 
158 

Payer,  i.  226 

<  Peacock,'  i.  12 

Peak  Freeman,  ii.  289 

Peary,  Lieut.,  i.  226,  303,  307 

Pemmican,  i.  168,  323  ;  ii.  29 

Penguins,  i.  91,  92,  102,  106,  124, 

212-213,     396;    "•      357    seq.  ; 

rookeries,  i.  78,  125,  192,  193 

—  Adelie,  i.  138  ;  ii.  230,  235,  363 
seq.  ;  rookeries,  i.  99-100,  123, 
124;  ii.  95,  236,  277  ;  eggs,  i. 
100  ;  ii.  95,  224 

—  Emperor,  i.  109,  138,  199  ;  ii. 
94,  172,  357  seq.  ;  hunt,  i.  212- 
213  ;  rookeries,  ii.  4  seq.,  95,  149, 

151,  157,  223,  224,  370-373 ; 

eggs,  ii.  87,  95,  157 

—  King,  i.  78  ;    ii.  372 

P.  &  O.  Steamship  Co.,  i.  48,  49, 

305 
Peter  I.  Island,  i.  8,  12 
Peterhead,  i.  33 
Petrels,   i.    76,   90  ;    ii.  362  seq.  ; 

nicknames  of,  i.  77 


Petrels,  Antarctic,  i.  78,  90,  105  ; 
ii.  285,  287,  362  seq. 

—  Giant,  i.  90,  122  ;  ii.  362  seq. 
— Southern    Fulmar,  i.   78,  90  ;  ii. 

285,  287,  290,  362  seq. 

—  White  Snow,  i.   78,  90,  91  ;  ii. 
9,  285,  287,  362  seq. 

—  Wilson  Stormy,  i.  71,  76,   101  ; 
ii.  362  seq. 

Philip  III.,  King  of  Spain,  i.  3 
Philosophical  Society,  i.  72 
Pilbeam,    Arthur   (L.S.   R.N.),  ii. 

162 
'  Pioneer,'  steamer,  i.  33 
Plumley,    Frank    (stoker,    R.N.), 

i.  174  ;  ii.  163,  164,  222 
Plymouth    Biological    Laboratory, 

i.  50 

—  Museum,  i.  50 

Port  Chalmers,  i.  83,  85 

—  Ross,  ii.  273 

—  Stanley,  ii.  298 
Portsmouth,  i.  33 

Possession   Islands,  i.   16,  104  ;  ii. 
116,    118,    279,   324,   325,   328, 

347 
Poulton,  Prof.  E.  B.,  i.  64 
Pram  Point,  i.  283,  291 
Primus  lamp,  i.  167,  329,  349-350  ; 

ii.  30,  70 
Prince  Albert  Range,  ii.  307,  331, 

336,  344-346 
Prion  {see  under  '  Whale-bird^) 
Prior,  G.  T.,  ii.  324,  333,  335 
Prismatic  clouds,  ii.  145 

—  compass,  ii.  16 

—  light,  i.  381  ;  ii.  27,  58 
Proverbs,  qtwted,  i.  94 
Punta  Delgada,  ii.  298 
Puntas  Arenas,  ii.  298 


Quartley,   Arthur  L.   (leading 
stoker,    R.N.),   i.    56,    174-181, 
191,  379,  399  5  ii-   156,  219 
Queensland,  Government  of,  i.  23 
Quiros,  Pedro  Fernandez  de,  i.  3 


Racovitzi,  M.,  ii.  359 
Ranfurly,  Lord,  i.  80 


384      THE    VOYAGE    OF   THE    'DISCOVERY 


Rastall,  R.  H.,  ii.  351 

Razor  Back,  ii.  329 

Records,  i.  102,  III,  124,  191-193, 

399;  ii.  3,  4,  116-118 
'  Resolution,'  i.  6,  32 
Rhodes,  A.,  i.  80 
Rich,  Capt.,  i.  80,  85 
'  Ringarooma,'  H.M.S.,  i.  80,  84, 

.85 
Ringold's  Knoll,  ii.  291 

Robertson  Bay,  i.  98 ;  ii.  280,  282, 

324 
Rodd,  Rennell,  quoted,  i.  1,  374 
*  Roger,'  dog,  ii.  140 
Ross  Harbour,  ii.  294  seq. 

—  Island,  ii.  108,  109,  118,  225, 
326-330,  344,  347,  369 

—  Sir  James  Clarke,  i.  12-19,  58- 
61,  88,  89,  98,  104,  119,  123- 
132,  299-301  ;  ii.  279  seq.,  301 
seq. 

Ross,  Sir  John,  i.  15,  299 

—  Quadrant,  i.  57,  58  ;  ii.  347 

—  Sea,  i.  58,  89,  90,  192,  377  ; 
ii.  6,  95,  122,  132,  224,  241, 
281,  301-305,  3H,  321,  334, 
344,  350  seq. 

Row  Island,  ii.  289 

Royal  Geographical  Society,  i.  20, 
49,  62,  63;  ii.  177,  316;  ii.  114  ; 
Antarctic  Committee,  i.  21  ;  Con- 
tribution to  the  Expedition,  i.  22, 
23  ;  Joint  Committee,  i.  23  seq., 
59;  Relief  Expedition,  ii.  113, 
240 

Royal  Society,  i.  21,  22,  26,  62, 
63  ;  ii.  240,  322  ;  Contribution  to 
the  Expedition,  i.  23  ;  Joint 
Committee,  i.  23  seq. ,  59 

Royal  Society  Range,  i.  120  ;  ii. 
83,  186,  324,  330 

1  Royal  Terror  '  Theatre,  i.  278- 
280  ;  ii.  143 

Royds  Cape  (see  under  '  Cape 
Royds ') 

—  Lieut.  Charles  W.  R.,  i.  27,  50, 
124,  140,  166,  169-175,  191, 
192,  203,  205,  230,  250,  272, 
274,  277-281,  375,  379,  382, 
386,  399  ;  ii.  3-5,  87,  94,  95, 
in,    135,    140,    149,    151,    157, 


222,   223,    232,    256,    312,   318, 

327,345,  37o,37i 
Royds,  Mrs.,  i.  254 
Riicker,  Sir  Arthur,  i.  26,  63 
Russell  Islands,  ii.  288,  318 


Sabine,  Sir  Edward,  i.  11 

—  Mountains,  i.  101  ;  ii.  56 
•  Sabrina,'  cutter,  i.  10 

—  Land,  i.  10 

St.  George's  Hospital,  i.  51 

«  St.  Vincent,'  H.M.S.,  i.  56 

San  Miguel  Island,  ii.  298 

Santa  Cruz,  river,  ii.  356 

Saunders,  Howard,  i.  64 

Sawing  Camp,  ii.  228  seq. 

'  Scamp,'  Aberdeen  terrier,  i.   78- 

79 
Schouten,  i.  4 
Sclater,  P.  L.,  i.  64 
Scoresby,  i.  226 
Scott,  Gilbert,  marine,  i.   379  ;  ii. 

222,  268 

—  Island,  ii.  117,  301,  325 

—  R.  H.,  i.  64 

Scottish  Geographical  Journal,  i.  20 
Scurvy,  i.  395  seq.  ;  ii.   43,  46,  58, 

75,  79,  150,  240 
Sea  Elephant,  ii.  247,  356  seq. 

—  Ice,  ii.  341-343 

—  Leopard,  i.  91  ;  ii.  287,  353  seq. 
Seal  Bay,  i.  240 

—  holes,  i.  144,  240  ;  ii.  159 

—  meat,  i.  96-7,  210,  217,  400, 
402;  ii.  32,  79,  130-131,  138, 
159,  164 

—  skins,  i.  92,  245 

Seals,  i.  91,  117,  122,  144,  148, 
168,  169,  209-213,  242,  282, 
286,  287,  396  ;  ii.  132,  136,  159- 
161,  224,  230,  352  seq. 

—  and  gout,  ii.  144 

—  capture  of,  i.  92,  no,  210 

—  Crab-eater,  i.  91,  209;  ii.  353 
seq. 

—  Ross,  i.  91  ;  ii.  358  seq. 

—  Weddell,  i.  210  ;  ii.  137,  176, 
217,  353  seq.  ;  as  musicians,  ii. 
232,  362 

Seddon,  Mr.,  i.  80 


INDEX 


385 


Shackleton,  S.  Lieut.  Ernest  H.,  i. 
S3,  148,  164,  181,  199,  229, 
230,  267,  281,  282,  288,  289, 
375,  38o-383s  390,  392;  ii.  7, 
16,  25-48,  55,  62-91,  121,  127, 
128,  201,  332 

—  Glacier,  ii.  308 

—  Inlet,  ii.  308,  311 
Shakespeare,  Wm.,  quoted,  i.  188, 

298  ;  ii.  1.  49,  120 
Shelley,   quoted,   i.    216,    256 ;   ii. 

197 
Shelvocke,  i.  77 
Sidney  Sussex   College,  i.   52  ;  ii. 

35i 

Simon's  Bay,  i.  71 

Skelton,  Lieut.  Reginald  W. ,  chief 
engineer,  i.  27,  51,  52,  77,  148, 
157,  163,  170,  192,  233,  274, 
333,  399  5  "•  4,  6,  92,  98-106, 
128,  139,  151,  153,  159,  160, 
163,  176,  178,  185,  188-191, 
212,    217,    220,    221,    265-270, 

277,  334,  339,  351,  370,  374 

—  Inlet,  ii.  308 

Ski,  i.  92,  no,  144,  149,  157,  163, 
169,  173,  193,  225,  242,  304, 
333,  334,  39o;  n.  41,  58,  61 
65,  81,  90 

—  boots,  i.  176,  244,  338 

—  racing,  ii.  96 
Skiing,  i.  163,  214 
Skinners'  Company,  ii.  115 

Skua  gulls,  i.  90,  100,  117,  169, 
209;  ii.  9,  69,  130,  232,  236, 
237 

eggs,  ii.  218 

MacCormick's,  ii.  363  seq. 

Skuary,  The,  ii.  327 

Sledge  cooker,  i.  327  seq. 

—  equipment,  i.  197,  218,  225, 
282,  301,  305^. 

—  Journey,  Southern,  i.  375  ;  ii. 
7-93,  332 

Western,  ii.  97  seq.,  162  seq. 

—  meter,  ii.  19,  20,  66,  69,  232 

—  parties,  i.  148,  164,  167-174, 
191  seq.,  198  seq.,  21 1,  277,  291, 
374  seq.  ;  ii.  150  seq.,  220  seq., 
238 

—  travelling,  history  of,  i.  298  seq. 

VOL.  II. 


Sledges,  i.  161,232,  277,  288,  295, 
300,  304,  311  seq.  ;  ii.  72-73,  74, 
97,  163,  169 

—  Greenland,  i.  299,  314 
— ice,  i.  300 ;  ii.  144 

Sledging  experiences,  i.  340  seq.  ; 
ii.  7  seq.,  97  seq.,  162  seq. 

—  weights,  i.  200,  331  seq.,  379  ; 
ii.  14,  15,  76,  163 

—  with  sails,  ii.  64  seq.t  83   seq., 
,       90,  143,  202 

Sleeping-bags,  i.  318  seq.,  352  seq. ; 
ii.  105,  147  seq. 
J    Smith,  Bernard,  ii.  351 

—  Inlet,  ii.  283 

—  John,  i.  36 

—  W.  E.,  i.  23,  36,  37,  41,  48 

—  &  Son,  ii.  32,  218 

Smythe,  William  (P.O.   1,  R.N.), 

i.  56;  ii.  156,  231 
'Snatcher,'  dog,  i.  287  ;  ii.  10,  12, 

33,  34 
Snow  crystals,  i.  236-238,  393  ;  ii. 
19,  20,  27-31,  67 

—  blindness,  i.  356,  371  ;  ii.  40, 
54,  67,  81,  213,  254 

—  shoes  (see  under  '  S/a') 

—  Valley,  ii.  347,  349 

1  Snowball,'  dog,  ii.  140 

•  Solitary  Rocks  '  islands,  ii.    168, 

169,  177,  213 
Sounding  holes,  ii.  143 

—  machine,  i.  232,  281  ;  ii.  143 
Soundings,  i.  19,  y6,  89,  98,  122, 

128-136,  144,  155  ;  ii.  283,  284, 
292,  297,  318,  322,  345 
South  Africa,  ii.  115 

—  Georgia,  i.  2,  7 

'  South  Polar  Times,'  i.  221,  229, 
230,  267,  268,  279 

—  Pole,  ii.  191,  317 

—  Trinidad      Island,     i.      69-71  ; 

".  363 

South  Victoria  Land  (see  under 
'  Victoria  Land ') 

•  Southern    Cross '    Expedition,    i. 

18,  100  ;  ii.  324-327,  330,  358, 

364 

Spenser,  quoted,  i.  152  ;  ii.  262 
Speyer,  Edgar,  ii.  115 
Spithead,  i.  65  ;  ii.  299 

C  C 


386       THE   VOYAGE    OF  THE    'DISCOVERY 


Spitzbergen,  ii.  302 

*  Spud,'  dog,  ii.  10-12,  32,  43,  63 

Start  Point,  i.  67 

Statesman's  Year  Book,  i.  224 

Steering,  inland,  ii.  70,  73,  79-81, 

190 
Stevens's  Yard,  i.  36 
Stevenson,  Sir  Henry  F.,  i.  37 
Stewart  Island,  ii.  295 
'Stripes,'  dog,  ii.   10,   12,  41,  46, 

55 
Stubbington  School,  i.  50 
Sturge  Island,  ii.  289 
Suez  Canal,  ii.  241 
Sultan's  Head  Cliffs,  ii.  327 
Sun,  eclipse  of,  ii.  159 
'  Swanee  River,'  song,  i.  281 
Swedish  Expedition,  ii.  316 
Sydney,  i.  13 


Table  Bay,  i.  71 
Tasman,  i.  4 

—  Glacier,  ii.  348 
Tasmania,  i.  4,  13 
Tay,  river,  i.  36 
Teall,  Dr.,  ii.  324 
-J.,i.  64 

Templer,  Colonel,  i.  146 

Tent  Islet,  ii.  246,  251,  329 

Tents,  i.  177,  300,  316-318,  383 

Terns,  black -headed,  ii.  287,  363 

Terra  Cotta  Hills,  ii.  340 

1  Terra    Nova,'   ii.    239-287,    295, 

296,  304 
'Terror,'  H.M.S.,  i.   15,   17,  33; 

ii-  323 

—  Point,  ii.  3 

Thomson,  quoted,  i.,  12 1,  256 
'  Ticket  of  Leave,'  comedy,  i.  278 
Tide-gauge,  i.  206-7 
Tierra  del  Fuego,  i.  3  ;  ii.  296 
'Tin-tacks,' dog,  ii.  140,  144 
Tinned  provisions,  i.  81,  405  seq. 
Tizard,  Captain  T.  H.,  i.  64 
Tobogganing,  i.  173  ;  ii.  96 
'  Toby,'  dog,  ii.  140 
Tow-nets,  i.  95,  164  ;  ii.  141 
Trawl-net,  i.  107,  122  ;  ii.  284 

—  '  Agassiz,'  i.  129 
'Triton,'  H.M.S.,  i.  53 


Trontheim  (Russian  agent),  i.  346 
Tucker  Inlet,  ii.  279 
'  Tula,'  brig,  i.  9 
Turtle  Rock,  i.  376 
—  Back  Island,  ii.  327 


Union  Castle  Line,  i.  53,  68, 
72 


Vale  of  the  Winds,  ii.  174,  176 

Vancouver,  i.  37 

—  Island,  i.  37 

Varthema,  Ludovici  di,  i.  2,  3 

Vespucci,  Amerigo,  i.  2 

'Vic,'  dog,  ii.  10,  13,  37 

Victoria  Land,  i.  16,  18,  60,  98, 
113,  121,  137,  141,  149-158, 
229,  310,  368;  ii.  107,  108,  163, 
195,  x97>  2I9>  222>  282,  287, 
301  seq.,  325,  332  seq.  352  seq.  ; 
physical  geography  of,  ii.  316-318 

Victoria  Quadrant,  i.  57 

Victorian  Government,  i.  20 

Vince  (A.B.  R.N.),  i.  174-187, 
191,  347  ;  ii.  264 

'  Vincennes,'  i.  13 

'  Vincka,'  dog,  i.  284,  285  ;  ii.  140 

'  Violet,'  dog,  ii.  140 


Wales,  Prince  of,  i.  22  ;  ii.  115 
Walker,  A.B.,  i.  164,  379,  398 
War  Office,  i.  146 
Water  supply,  i.  94,  216,  217  ;  ii. 

H3,  274 
Waymouth,  Mr.,  i.  80 
Weddell,  James,  i.  9-12,  16,  57 

—  Quadrant,  i.  57 

—  seals  (see  under  '  Seals  ') 
Weller,   William   J.,  A.B.,  i.  no, 

174,  192  ;  ii.  163,  185,  337 
Whale-bird,  i.  78  ;  ii.  285,  363 
Whales,  i.   17,  34;  ii.  352  seq. 

—  Killer,     i.    91,     154,    396;    ii. 
353  seq. 

—  Rorqual,  ii.  290,  354  seq. 
Wharton,   Sir   William,    i.  63  ;   ii. 

241 
'  Whitaker's  Almanack,'  i.  224 


INDEX 


387 


White  Island,  i.  167,  168,  291,  | 
376,  394;  ii.  8,  90,  91,  151,  I 
156,311-313,  319,  328,  348 

Whitfield,  Thomas  (leading  stoker,  \ 
R.N.),  H.  ISI,  157,  224 

Whiting,  ii.  137 

Wild,  Frank  (A.B.  R.N.),  f.  *74, 
179,  180,  379,  399  ;  ii.  162 

Wilkes,  Commodore,  i.  I2-I5>  57  5 
ii.  290-292,  318 

—  Land,  ii.  290,  291,  318 

Williamson,  Thomas  S.  (A.B. 
R.N.),  ii.  151,  163,  164 

Wilson,  Dr.  Edward  A.,  surgeon, 
artist,  vertebrate  zoologist,  i.  51, 
71,  77,  no,  in,  124,  139,  164, 
185,  207,  212,  226-229,  267, 
380,  398,  400;  ii.  6,24-91,  121, 
128,  141,  144,  149,  151,  157, 
223-225,  232-239,  244-247, 
272,    275,   313,    314,  321,    327, 


332-333  ;  on  whales,  seals,  and 
birds,  352-374 
Wilson  petrel  (see  under  *  Petrels  ') 

—  Line,  ii.  116 

—  Messrs.,  ii.  116 
Wilton,  Mr.,i.  345,  346 
Windmill,  i.  171,  214,  235,  259 
Winter  Quarter  Bay,  i.  163 
'Wolf,'  dog,  ii.  10,  13,  25,  40 

—  puppy,  ii.  140 

Wood  Bay,   i.    16,    in,    1 12,  115; 

ii.  116,  118,  275,  276,  330,  347 
Woodward,  Dr.  Smith,  ii.  316 
'  Worcester,'  training  ship,  i.  48 
Wrangell,  Admiral,  i.  301 

Yarmouth,  i.  66 
Young  Island,  ii.  289 

Zmutt  Glacier,  ii.  348 


THE    END 


PRINTED    BY 

Sl'OTTISWOODE   AND  CO.    LTD.,    NEW- STREET  SQUARE 

LONDON 


University  of  Toronto 
Library 


DO  NOT 

REMOVE 

THE 

CARD 

FROM 

THIS 

POCKET 


Acme  Library  Card  Pocket 
LOWE-MARTIN  CO.  LIMITED 


