Letters on Demonology and Witchcraft
========================================
Walter Scott (1830) — Scott's skeptical history of witchcraft — the great Romantic-era demonology every later writer answers. Source: https://archive.org/details/10133210bsb. Public domain.

FY Be 439

LETTERS

ON

DEMONOLOGY AND WITCHCRAFT.

78/7000

em by. Skeno Feq.at Rubislaw Engraved by Wi Lizars

ta i
LONDON:
AY, ALBEMARLE STREET.


MDCCCXXx.

CONTENTS.

LETTER I.

Origin of the general Opinions respecting Demonology
among Mankind—The Belief in the Immortality of
the Soul is the main inducement to credit its occa-
sional reappearance—The Philosophical Objections
to the Apparition of an Abstract Spirit little un-
derstood by the Vulgar and Ignorant—The situa-
tions of excited Passion incident to Humanity,
which teach Men to wish or apprehend Supernatu-
ral Apparitions—They are often presented by the
Sleeping Sense—Story of Somnambulism—The In-
fluence of Credulity contagious, so that Individuals
will trust the Evidence of others in despite of their
own Senses—Examples from the Historia Verda-
dera of Bernal Dias del Castillo, and from the Works
of Patrick Walker—The apparent Evidence of In-
tercourse with the Supernatural World is sometimes

. Owing to a depraved State of the bodily Organs—
Difference between this Disorder and Insanity, in
which the Organs retain their tone, though that of
the Mind is lost—Rebellion of the Senses of a Lu-
Natic against the current of his Reveriés—Narra-
tives of a contrary nature, in which the Evidence
of the Eyes overbore the Conviction of the Under-
Standing—Example of a London Man of Pleasure

a

Page

CONTENTS.

—Of Nicolai, the German Bookseller and Philoso-
pher—Of a Patient of Dr Gregory—Of an Emi-
nent Scottish Lawyer deceased—Of this same fal.
lacious Disorder are other instances, which have but
sudden and momentary Endurance—Apparition of
Maupertuis—OF a late illustrious modern Poet—
The Cases quoted chiefly relating to false Impres-
sions on the Visual Nerve, those upon the Ear next
considered— Delusions of the Touch chiefly experi-
enced in Sleep—Delusions of the Taste—and of the
Smelling—Sum of the Argument, ° . °

LETTER II.

Consequences of the Fall on the communication be-

tween Men and the Spiritual World—Effects of
the Flood—Wizards of Pharaoh—Text in Exodus
against Witches—The word Witch is by some said
to mean merely Poisoner—Or, if in the Holy Text
it also means a Divineress, she must, at any rate,
have been a character very different to be identified
with it—The original, Chasaph, said to mean a per-
son who dealt in Poisons, often a traffic of those
who dealt with Familiar Spirits— But different from
the European Witch of the Middle Ages—Thus a
Witch is not accessary to the temptation of Job—
The Witch of the Hebrews probably did not rank
higher than a Divining Woman—Yet it was a
crime deserving the doom of death, since it inferred
the disowning of Jehovah's Supremacy— Other texts
of Scripture, in like manner, refer to something cor~
responding more with a Fortune-teller or Divining
Woman, than what is now called a Witch—Ex-
ample of the Witch of Endor— Account of her meet-
ing with Saul—Supposed by some a mere Impostor
— By others a Sorceress powerful enough to raise
the Spirit of the Prophet by her own art—Difficul-
ties attending both positions—A middle course adopt-

Page

CONTENTS.

ed, supposing that, as in the case of Balak, the Al-
mighty had, by exertion of his will, substituted
Samuel, or a good spirit in his character, for the de-
ception which the Witch intended to produce—Re-
sumption of the Argument, showing that the Witch
of Endor signified something very different from
the modern ideas of Witchcraft—The Witches men-
tioned in the New Testament are not less different
from modern ideas, than those of the Books of Mo-
ses, nor do they appear to have possessed the power
ascribed to Magicians—Articles of Faith which we
may gather from Scripture on this point—That
there might be certain Powers permitted by the Al-
mighty to inferior, and even evil Spirits, is possible ;
and, in some sense, the Gods of the Heathens might
be accounted Demons—More frequently, and ina
general sense, they were but logs of wood, without
sense or power of any kind, and their worship
founded on imposture—Opinion that the Oracles
were silenced at the Nativity, adopted by Milton—
Cases of Demoniacs—The incarnate Possessions
probably ceased at the same time as the intervention
of Miracles—Opinion of the Catholics— Result that
Witchcraft, as the word is interpreted in the Middle
Ages, neither occurs under the Mosaic or Gospel
Dispensation—It arose in the ignorant period, when
the Christians considered the Gods of the Maho-
medan or Heathen Nations as Fiends, and their
Priests as Conjurers or Wizards—TInstance as to
the Saracens, and among the Northern Europeans
yet unconverted—The Gods of Mexico and Peru
explained on the same system—Also the Powahs
of North America—Opinion of Mather—Gibb, a
supposed Warlock, Aes eee by the other Dissent-
ers— Conclusion, Ri ' . ‘ é

¥

iii

Page

49

g
.
B
R-
i

iv CONTENTS.

LETTER III.

Creed of Zoroaster—received partially into most Hea-

then Nations—Instances among the Celtic Tribes
of Scotland—Beltane Feast—Gudeman’s Croft—
Such abuses admitted into Christianity after the
earlier Ages of the Church—Law of the Romans
against Witchcraft—Romish Customs survive the
fall of their Religion—Instances— Demonology of
the Northern Barbarians— Nicksas— Bhar-geist
—Correspondence between the Northern and Ro-
man Witches—The power of Fascination ascribed
to the Sorceresses—Example from the Eyrbiggia
Saga—The Prophetesses of the Germans—The
Gods of Vathalla not highly regarded by their Wor-

- shippers—Often defied by the Champions—De-

mons of the North—Story of Assueit and Asmund
—<Action of Ejectment against Spectres—Adven-
ture of a Champion with the Goddess Freya—Con-
yersion of the Pagans of Iceland to Christianity—
Northern Superstitions mixed with those of the
Celts—Satyrs of the North—Highland Ourisk—
Meming the Satyr, . . . ° ° ‘

LETTER IV.

The Fairy Superstition is derived from different

sources—The Classical Worship of the Silvans, or
Rural Deities, proved by Roman Altars discovered
—The Gothic Duergar, or Dwarfs, supposed to be
derived from the Northern Laps or Fins—The
Niebelungen-Lied—King Laurin’s Adventure-—
Celtic Fairies of a gayer character, yet their plea-
sures empty and illusory —Addicted to carry off Hu-
man Beings, both Infants and Adults—Adventures
of a Butler in Ireland—The Elves supposed to pay
a Tax to Hell—The Irish, Welsh, Highlanders,

Page

87

CONTENTS.

: and Manxmen, held the same belief—It was rather
rendered more gloomy by the Northern Traditions
—Merlin and Arthur carried off by the Fairies—
Also Thomas of Erceldoune—His Amour with the
Queen of Elfland—His re-appearance in latter
times—Another Account from Reginald Scot—
Conjectures on the derivation of the word Fairy,

LETTER V.

Those who dealt in fortune-telling, mystical cures by
charms, and the like, often claimed an intercourse
with Fairy Land—Hudbart or Hudikin—Pit-
cairn’s Scottish Criminal Trials—Story of Bessie
Dunlop and her Adviser—Her Practice of Medi-
cine—and of Discovery of Theft—Account of her
Familiar, Thome Reid—Trial of Alison Pearson—
Account of her Familiar, William Sympson—Trial
of the Lady Fowlis, and of Hector Munro, her
Stepson—Extraordinary species of Charm used by
the latter—Confession of John Stewart, a Juggler,
of his intercourse with the Fairies—Trial and Con-
fession of Isobel Gowdie— Use of Elf-arrow Heads
—Parish of Aberfoyle—Mr Kirke, the Minister of
Aberfoyle’s Work on Fairy Superstitions—He is
himself taken to Fairy Land—Dr Grahame’s In-
teresting Work, and his Information on Fairy Su-
perstitions—Story of a Female in East Lothian
carried off by the Fairies—Another instance from
Pennant, . : . . . . 7

LETTER VI.

Immediate Effect of Christianity on Articles of Po-
pular Superstition—Chaucer’s Account of the Ro-
I man Catholic Priests banishing the Fairies— Bishop

Corbett imputes the same Effect to the Reforma-

<

118

142

vi CONTENTS.

tion—his Verses on that Subject—his Iter Septen-
trionale— Robin Goodfellow, and other Superstitions
mentioned by Reginald Scot—Character of the Eng-
lish Fairies—The Tradition had become obsolete in
that Author’s Time—That of Witches remained in
vigour—but impugned by various Authers after the
Reformation, as Wierus, Naudeus, Scot, and others
— Demonology defended by Bodinus, Remigius, &c.
—Their mutual Abuse of each other—Imperfection
of Physical Science at this Period, and the Predo-
minance of Mysticism in that Department, . mI

LETTER VII.

Penal laws unpopular when rigidly exercised —Pro-
secution of Witches placed in the hand of Special
Commissioners, ad inquirendum—Prosecution for
Witchcraft not frequent in the elder Period of the
Roman Empire—nor in the Middle Ages—Some
Cases took place, however—The Maid of Orleans
—The Duchess of Gloucester— Richard the Third’s
Charge against the Relations of the Queen Dow-
ager—But Prosecutions against Sorcerers became
more common in the end of the Fourteenth Cen-
tury— Usually united with the Charge of Heresy—
Monstrelet’s Account of the Persecution against the
Waldenses, under pretext of Witchcraft—Flori-
mond’s testimony concerning the Increase of Witches
in his own Time—Bull of Pope Innocent VIII.—

Various Prosecutions in Foreign Countries under.

this severe Law—Prosecutions in Labourt by the
Inquisitor De Lancre and his Colleagae—Lycan-
thropy—Witches in Spain—in Sweden—and par-
ticularly those apprehended at Mobra, ° °

Page

173

195

CONTENTS.

LETTER VIII.

The effects of the Witch Superstition are to be traced:

in the Laws of a Kingdom—Usually punished in
England as a crime connected with Politics—At-
tempt at Murder for Witchcraft not in itself Capi-
tal—Trials of Persons of Rank for Witchcraft, con-
nected with State Crimes—Statutes of Henry VIII.
—How Witchcraft was regarded by the three Lead-

ing Sects of Religion in the Sixteenth Century;
first, by the Catholics; second, by the Calvinists ;
third, by the Church of England, and Lutherans
—Impostures unwarily countenanced by Individual
Catholic Priests, and also by some Puritanic Cler-
gymen—Statute of 1562, and some Cases upon it—
Case of Dugdale—Case of the Witches of Warbois,
and execution of the family of Samuel—That of
Jane Wenham, in which some Church of England
Clergymen insisted on the Prosecution—Hutchi-
son's Rebuke to them—James the First's Opinion
of Witchcraft—His celebrated Statute, 1 Jac. I.—
Canon passed by the Convocation against Posses-
sion—Case of Mr Fairfax’s Children—Lancashire
Witches in 1613—Another Discovery in 1634—
Webster's account of the manner in which the Im-
posture was managed—Superiority of the Calvinists
is followed by a severe Prosecution of Witches—
Executions in Suffolk, &c. to a dreadful extent—
Hopkins, the pretended Witchfinder, the cause of
these Cruelties—His Brutal Practices—His Letter
—Execution of Mr Lowis—Hopkins Punished—
Restoration of Charles—Trial of Coxe—of Dunny
and Callender before Lord Hales—Royal Society
and Progress of Knowledge—Somersetshire Witches
—Opinions of the Populace—A Woman swum for
Witchcraft at Oakly—Marder at Tring—Act
against Witchcraft abolished, and the belief in the
Crime becomes forgotten—Witch Trials in New

Page

viii CONTENTS.

Page
England—Dame Glover’s Trial—Afiliction of the %
Parvises, and frightful increase of the Prosecutions
—Suddenly put a stop to—The Penitence of those
concerned in them, . : : : 38 PBS

LETTER IX.

Scottish Trials—Ear] of Mar—Lady Glammis—Wil-
liam Barton—Witches of Auldearne—Their Rites
and Charms—Their Transformation into Hares—
Satan’s Severity towards them—Their Crimes—
Sir George Mackenzie's Opinion of Witchcraft—
Instances of Confessions made by the Accused, in
despair, and to avoid future annoyance and Perse-
cution—Examination by Pricking—The Mode of
Judicial Procedure against Witches, and Nature of
the Evidence admissible, opened a door to Accusers,
and left the Accused no chance of escape—The Su-
perstition of the Scottish Clergy in King James
VI.’s time, led them, like their Sovereign, to encou-
rage Witch Prosecutions—Case of Bessie Graham—
Supposed Conspiracy to Shipwreck James in his
Voyage to Denmark—Meetings of the Witches, and
Rites performed to accomplish their purpose—Trial
of Margaret Barclay in 1618—Case of Major Weir
—Sir John Clerk among the first who declined act-
ing as Commissioner on the Trial of a Witch—
Paisley and Pittenweem Witches—A Prosecution
in Caithness prevented by the Interference of the
King’s Advocate in ]1718—The Last Sentence of
Death for Witchcraft pronounced in Scotland in
1722—Remains of the Witch Superstition—Case
of supposed Witchcraft related from the Author's
own knowledge, which took place so Jate as 1800, 283

<7

CONTENTS.

LETTER X,

Other Mystic Arts independent of Witchcraft—As-
trology—lIts Influence during the 16th and 17th
Centuries— Base Ignorance of those who practised
it—Lilly’s History of his Life and Times— Astro-
loger’s Society—Dr Lamb—Dr Forman—Estab-
lishment of the Royal Society—Partridge—Con-
nexion of Astrologers with Elementary Spirits—
Dr Dun—Irish Superstition of the Banshie—Si-
milar Superstition in the Highlands—Brownie—
Ghosts—Belief. of Ancient Philosophers on that
Subject—Enquiry into the respect due to such tales
in Modern Times—Evidence of a Ghost against a
Murderer—Ghost of Sir George Villiers—Story of
Earl St Vincent—of a British General Officer—of
an Apparition in France—of the Second Lord Lyt-
telton—of Bill Jones—of Jarvis Matcham—Trial
of two Highlanders for the Murder of Sergeant Da-
vis, discovered by a Ghost— Disturbances at Wood-
stock, anno 1649—Imposture called the Stockwell
Ghost—Similar Case in Scotland—Ghost appear-
ing to an Exciseman—Story of a Disturbed House
discovered by the firmness of the Proprietor—Ap-
parition at Plymouth—A Club of Philosophers—
Ghost Adventure of a Farmer—Trick upon a Ve-
teran Soldier—Ghost Stories recommended by the
Skill of the Authors who compose them—Mrs
Veal’s Ghost—Dunton’s Apparition Evidence—
Effect of appropriate Scenery to encourage a ten~

to Superstition—differs at distant Periods of
Life—Night at Glammis Castle about 1791— Visit

Page

to Dunyegan in 1814, . . . . 344

LETTERS

ON

DEMONOLOGY AND WITCHCRAFT.

To J. G. LOCKHART, Esa.
—>——_

LETTER I.

«fh

in of the general Opinions respecting Demonology:
sips Vankind The Betiot in the Immortality. of the
‘Sou is the main inducement to credit its occasional re-
sana The Philosophical Objections to the Appari-'

an Abstract Spirit litile understood by the Vulgar

‘ant— The situations of excited Passion incident

co ‘umanity, which teach men to wish or apprehend Su-

« pernatural Apparitions— They are often presented by the
ing Sense—Story of Somnambulism—The Influence
edulity contagious, so that Individuals will trust the-
: of others in despite of their own Senses—Exam--
= from the Historia Verdadera of Bernal Dias del Cas~-.
_ tillo, and from the Works of Patrick Walker—The appa-.
_ rent Evidence of Intercourse with the Supernatural World
“is sometimes owing to a depraved State of the evn Or-
ifference between this Disorder and Insanity, in

‘which the Organs retain their tone, though that of the Mind
+ is lost—Rebellion of the are of a Lunatic against the:

2 LETTERS ON

current of his Reveries—Narratives of a contrary Nature,
in which the Evidence of the Eyes overbore the Conviction
of the Understanding—Example of a London Man of
Pleasure— Of Nicolai, the German Bookseller and Phi-
losopher— Of a Patient of Dr Gregory— Of an Eminent
Scottish Lawyer deceased— Of this same fallacious Dis-
order are other instances, which have but sudden and mo-
mentary endurance—Apparition of Maupertuis— Of a late
illustrious modern Poet— The Cases quoted chiefly relating
to false Impressions on the Visual Nerve, those upon the
Ear next considered—Delusions of the. Touch chiefly.ex-

* perienced in Sleep—Delusions of the Taste—and of the
Smelling—Sum of the Argument,

You have asked of me, my dear friend, that I
should assist the Family Library, with the history
of a dark chapter in human nature, which the in-
creasing civilisation of all well-instructed coun-
tries has now almost blotted out, though the sub-
ject attracted no ordinary degree of considera,
tion in the older times of their history.
. Among much reading of my early days, it is
no doubt true that I travelled a good deal in the
twilight regions of superstitious disquisitions.
Many hours haye I lost,—“ I would their debt
were less !”—in examining old, as well as more
recent: narratives of this character, and even in
looking into some of the criminal trials so. fre-
uent in early days, upon a subject which our
fhthers considered as matter of the last import-
ance. And, of Jate years, the very curious ex-
tracts published by Mr Pitcairn, from the Crimi-
nal Records of Scotland, are, besides their histo-
rical value, of a nature so much. calculated to
illustrate the credulity of our ancestors en such

DEMONOLOGY AND WITCHCRAFT. 3

subjects, that, by perusing them, I have been in-
duced more recently to recall what I had read and
thought upon the subject at a former period.

As, however, my information is only miseel-
Janeous, and I make no pretensions, either to
combat the systems of those by whom I am anti-
cipated in consideration of the subject, or to erect
any new one of my own, my purpose is, after a
general account of Demonology and Witcheraft,
to confine myself to narratives of remarkable
eases, and to the observations which naturally and
easily arise out of them ;—in the confidence that
such a plan is, at the present time of day, more
likely to suit the pages of a popular miscellany,
than an attempt to reduce the contents of many
hundred tomes, from the largest to the smallest
size, into an abridgement, which, however com-

, must remain greatly too large for the
reader's powers of patience,

A few general remarks on the nature of De-
monology, and the original cause of the almost
universal belief in communication betwixt mortals
and beings of a power superior to themselves, and
of a nature not to be comprehended by human or-
gans, are a necessary introduction to the subject.

The general, or, it may be termed, the univer-
sal belief: of the inhabitants of the earth, in the
existence of spirits separated from the encum-
brance and incapacities of the body, is grounded
on the consciousness of the divinity that s in
our bosoms, and demonstrates to all men, except
the few who are hardened to the celestial voice,
that there is within us a portion of the divine sub-

stance, whichis not subject to the law of death

~* 2 4

4 ‘ LETTERS ON

and dissolution, but which, when the body is no
longer fit for its abode, shall seek its own place,
as a sentinel dismissed from his post. Unaided by
revelation, it cannot be hoped that mere earthly
reason should be able to form any rational or pre-
cise conjecture concerning the destination of the
soul when parted from the body ; but the convic-
tion that such an indestructible essence exists, the
belief expressed by the poet in a different sense,
Non omnis moriar, must infer the existence of
many millions of spirits, who have not been anni-
hilated, though they have become invisible to
mortals who still see, hear, and perceive, only by
means of the imperfect organs of humanity. Pro-
bability may lead some of the most reflecting to
anticipate a state of future rewards and punish-
ments ; as those experienced in the education of
the deaf and dumb, find that their pupils, even
while cut off from all instruction by ordinary
means, have been able to form, out of their own
unassisted conjectures, some ideas of the exist-
ence of a Deity, and of the distinction between the
soul and body—a circumstance which proves how
naturally these truths arise in the human mind.
The principle that they do so arise, being taught
or communicated, leads to further conclusions.
These spirits, in a state of separate existence,
being admitted to exist, are not, it may be sup-
ttn indifferent to the affairs of mortality, per-
aps not incapable of influencing them. It is true,
that, in a more advanced state of society, the
philosopher may challenge the possibility of a se-
rate appearance of a disembodied spirit, unless
in the case of a direct miracle, to which, being a

DEMONOLOGY AND WITCHCRAFT. 5
suspension of the laws of nature, directly wrought
by the Maker of these laws, for some express pur-
pose, no bound or restraint can possibly be assign-
ed. But under this necessary limitation and ex-
ception, philosophers might plausibly argue, that,
when the soul is divorced from the body, it loses
all those qualities which made it, when clothed
with a mortal shape, obvious to the organs of its
fellow men. The abstract idea of a spirit certain-
ly implies, that it has neither substance, form,
shape, voice, or any thing which can render its
presence visible or sensible to human faculties.
But these sceptic doubts of philosophers on the
possibility of the appearance of such separated
spirits, do not arise till a certain degree of in-
formation has dawned upon a country, and even
then only reach a very small proportion of re-

: flecting and better informed members of society.
To the multitude, the indubitable fact, that so
many millions of spirits exist around and even
amongst us, seems sufficient to support the belief
that they are, in certain instances at least, by some
means or other, able to communicate with the
world of humanity. The more numerous part of
mankind cannot form in their mind the idea of
the spirit of the deceased existing, without pos-
sessing or having the power to assume the appear-
ance which their acquaintance bore during his life,
and do not push their researches beyond this point.
- Enthusiastic feelings of an impressive and so-
lemn nature, occur both in private and public life,
which seem to add ocular testimony to an inter-
course betwixt earth and the world beyond it.
For example, the son who has been lately depri-

il

6 LETTERS ON

ved of his father, feels a sudden crisis approach,
in which he is anxious to have recourse to his
sagacious advice—or a bereaved husband earnest-
ly desires again to behold the form of which the
grave has deprived him for ever—or, to use a dark-
er, yet very common instance, the wretched man
who has dipped his hand in his fellow-creature’s
blood, is haunted by the apprehension that the
phantom of the slain stands by the bedside of his
murderer. In all, or any of these cases, who shall
doubt that imagination, favoured by circumstances,
has power to summon up to the organ of sight,
spectres which only exist in the mind of those by
whom their apparition seems to be witnessed ?

~ Ifwe add, that such a vision may take place in
the course of one of those lively dreams, in which
the patient, except in respect to the single sub-
ject of one strong impression, is, orseems, sensible
of the real particulars of the scene around him,
a state of slumber which often oceurs—If he is
so far conscious, for example, as to know that he
is lying on his own bed, and surrounded byhisown
familiar furniture, at the time when the supposed
apparition is manifested, it becomes almost in vain
to argue with the visionary against the reality of
his dream, since the spectre, though itself pure-
ly fanciful, is inserted amidst so many circum-
stances which he feels must be true beyond the
reach of doubt or question. That which is un-
deniably certain, becomes in a manner a warrant
for the reality of the appearance to which doubt
would have been otherwise attached. And if any
event, such as the death of the person dreamt-of,
chances to take place, so as to correspond with the

DEMONOLOGY AND WITCHCRAFT. 7

nature and the time of the apparition, the coinci-
dence, though one which must be frequent, since
our dreams usually refer to the accomplishment
of that which haunts our minds when awake, and
often presage the most probable events, seems per-
fect, and the chain of circumstances touching the
evidence may not unreasonably be considered as
complete. Such a concatenation, we repeat, must
frequently take place, when it is considered of
what stuff dreams are made—how naturally they
turn upon those who occupy our mind while awake,
and, when a soldier is exposed to death in battle,
whena sailor is incurring the dangers of the sea,
when a beloved wife or relative is attacked by dis-
ease, how readily our sleeping imagination rashes
to the very point of alarm, which when waking
it had shuddered to anticipate. The number of
instances in which such lively dreams have been
quoted, and both asserted and received as spiritual
communications, is very great at all periods; in
ignorant times, where the natural cause of dream-
ing is misapprehended, and confused with an idea
of mysticism, it is much greater. Yet perhaps,
considering the many thousands of dreams, which
must, night after night, pass through the imagi-
nation of individuals, the number of coincidences
between the vision and real. event, are fewer and
less remarkable than a fair calculation of chances
would warrant us to expect. But in countries
where such presaging dreams are subjects of at-
tention, the number of those which seemed to be
‘coupled with the corresponding issue, is large
‘enough to spread a very general belief of a positive

«communication betwixt the living and the dead.

8 LETTERS ON

Somnambulism and other nocturnal deceptions
frequently lend their aid to the formation of such
phantasmata as are formed in this middle state, be-
twixt sleeping and waking. A most respectable
person, whose active life had been spent as master
and part owner of a large merchant vessel in the
Lisbon trade, gave the writer an account of such
an instance which came under his observation, He
was lying in the Tagus, when he was put to great
anxiety and alarm, by the following incident and
its consequences. One of his crew was murdered
by a Portuguese assassin, and a report arose that
the ghost of the slain man haunted the vessel.
Sailors are generally superstitious, and those of
my friend’s vessel became unwilling to remain on
board the ship ; and it was probable they might
desert rather than return ‘to England with the
ghost for a passenger. To prevent so great a
calamity, the Captain determined to examine the
story to the bottom. He soon found, that though
all pretended to have seen lights, and heard noi-
ses and so forth, the weight of the evidence lay
upon the statement of one of his own mates, an
Irishman and a Catholic, which might increase
his tendency to superstition, but in other respects
a veracious, honest, and sensible person, whom
Captain —— had no reason to suspect would
wilfully deceive him. He affirmed to Captain
S——, with the deepest obtestations, that the spec-
tre of the murdered ‘man appeared to him almost
ni ghtly, took him from his place in the vessel, and,
according to his own expression, worried his life
‘out. He made these communications with a de-
gree of horror, which intimated the reality of his

DEMONOLOGY AND WITCHCRAFT. 9

distress and apprehensions. The Captain, with-
out any argument at the time, privately resolved
to watch the motions of the ghost-seer in the
night ; whether alone, or with a witness, I have
forgotten.’ As the ship bell struck twelve, the
sleeper started up, with a ghastly and disturbed
countenance, and lighting a candle, proceeded to
the galley or cook-room of the vessel. . He sate
down with his eyes open, staring before him as on
some terrible object which he beheld with horror,
yet from which he could not withhold his eyes.
After a short space he arose, took up a tin can or
decanter, filled it with water, muttering to him-
self all the while—mixed salt in the water, and
sprinkled it about the galley. Finally, he sighed
deeply, like one relieved from a heavy burden,
and, returning to his hammock, slept soundly. In
the next morning, the haunted man told the usual
precise story of his apparition, with the additional
circumstances, that the ghost had led him to the
galley, but that he had fortunately, he knew not
how, obtained possession of some holy water, and
succeeded in getting rid of his unwelcome visitor.
The visionary was then informed of the real trans-
actions of the night, with so many particulars as
to satisfy him he had been the dupe of his imagi-
nation ; he acquiesced in his commander’s reason-
ing,and the dream, as often happens in these cases,
returned no more after its imposture had been de-
teeted. In this case, we find the excited imagina-
tion acting upon the half-waking senses, which
were intelligent enough for the purpose of making
him sensible where he was, but not sufficiently so
to judge truly of the objects before him.

10 LETTERS ON

But it is not only private life alone, or that te-
nor of thought which has been depressed into me-
lancholy by gloomy anticipations respecting the
future, which disposes the mind to mid-day fan-
tasies, or to nightly apparitions—a state of eager
anxiety, or excited exertion, is equally favourable
to the indulgence of such supernatural commu-
nications. The anticipation of a dubious battle,
with all the doubt and uncertainty of its event,
and the conviction that it must involve his own
fate, and that of his country, was powerful enough
to conjure up to the anxious eye of Brutus the
spectre of his murdered friend Cesar, respecting
whose death he perhaps thought himself less jus-
tified than at the Ides of March, since, instead
of having achieved the freedom of Rome, the
event had only been the renewal of civil wars, and
the issue might appear most likely to conclude in
the total subjection of liberty. It is not miracu-
lous, that the masculine spirit of Marcus Brutus,
surrounded by darkness and solitude, distracted
probably by recollection of the kindness and fa-
vour of the great individual whom he had i to
death to avenge the wrongs of his country, though
by the slaughter of his own friend, should at length
place before his eyes in person the appearance
which termed itself his evil Genius, and promised
again to meet him at Philippi. Brutus’ own in-
tentions, and his knowledge of the military art,
had probably long since assured him that the de-
cision of the civil war must take place at or near
that place ; and, allowing that his own imagina-
tion supplied that part of his dialogue with the
spectre, there is nothing else which might not be

DEMONOLOGY AND WITCHCRAFT. ll

pov ina a dream or a waking reverie,
approaching, in absorbing and engrossing charac-
pa. the usual matter of which aban consist.
That Brutus, well acquainted with the opinions
of the Platonists, should be disposed to receive
without doubt the idea that he had seen a real
apparition, and was not likely to scrutinize very
minutely the supposed vision, may be naturally
conceived ; and it is also natural to think, that al-
though no one saw the figure but himself, his con-
temporaries were little disposed to examine the
testimony of a man so eminent, by the strict rules
of cross-examination and conflicting evidence,
which:they might have thought applicable to an-
other person, and a less dignified occasion.

Even in the field of death, and amid the mortal
tug of combat itself, strong belief has wrought the
same wonder, which we have hitherto mentioned
as occurring in solitude and amid darkness ; and
those who were themselves on the verge of the
world of spirits, or employed in dispatching others.
to these gloomy regions, conceived they beheld
the itions of those beings whom their na-
tional mythology associated with such scenes. In
such moments of undecided battle, amid the vio-
lence, hurry, and confusion of ideas incident to
the situation, the ancients supposed that they saw
their deities, Castor and Pallux, fighting in the
van for their encouragement; the heathen Scan-
dinavian beheld the Choosers of the slain ; and the
Catholics were no less easily led to recognise the
warlike Saint George or Saint James in the very
front of the strife, showing them the way to con-
quest. Such apparitions being generally visible

12 LETTERS ON

to a multitude, have in all times been supported
by the greatest strength of testimony. When
the common feeling of danger, and the animating
burst of enthusiasm, act on the feelings of many
men at once, their minds hold a natural corres-
pondence with each other, as it is said is the case
with stringed instruments tuned to the same pitch,
of which, when one is played, the chords of the
others are supposed to vibrate in unison with the
tones produced. If an artful or enthusiastic in-
dividual exclaims, in the heat of action, that he
perceives an apparition of the romantic kind
which has been intimated, his companions catch
at the idea with emulation, and most are willing —
to sacrifice the conviction of their own senses,
rather than allow that they did not witness the
same favourable emblem, from which all draw
confidence and hope. One warrior catches the idea
from another ; all are alike eager to acknowledge
the present miracle, and the battle is won before
the mistake is discovered. In such cases, the
number of persons present, which would other-
wise lead to detection of the fallacy, becomes the
means of strengthening it.

. Of this disposition, to see as much of the super-
natural as is seen by others around, or, in other
words, to trust to the eyes of others rather than
to our own, we may take the liberty to quote two
remarkable instances.

The first is from the Historia Verdadera of Don
Bernal Dias del Castillo, one of the companions
of the celebrated Cortez, in his Mexican conquest.
After having given an account of a great victory
over extreme odds, he mentions the report in-

DEMONOLOGY AND WITCHCRAFT. 13

serted in the contemporary Chronicle of Gomara,
that Saint Iago had appeared on a white horse in
van of the combat, and led on his beloved Spaniards
to victory. It is very curious to observe the Cas-
tilian cavalier’s internal conviction, that the ru-
mour arose out of a mistake, the cause of which
he explains from his own observation ; whilst, at
the same time, he does not venture to disown the
miracle.- The honest Conquestador owns, that he
himself did not see this animating vision; nay,
that he beheld an individual cavalier, named Fran-
cisco de Morla, mounted on a chestnut horse, and
fighting strenuously in the very place where Saint
James is said to have appeared. But instead of
proceeding to draw the necessary inference, the
devout Conquestador exclaims,—* Sinner that I
am; what am I that I should have beheld the bless-
ed apostle !” . ;

» The other instance of the infectious character
of superstition occurs in a Scottish book, and there
can be little doubt that it refers, in its first origin,
to some uncommon appearance of the aurora bo-
realis, or the northern lights, which do not appear
to have been seen in Scotland so frequently as to
be accounted a common and familiar atmospherical
phenomenon, until the beginning of the eighteenth
century. The passage is striking and curious, for
the narrator, Peter Walker, though an enthusiast,
was a man of credit, and does not evenaftect tohave
seen the wonders, the reality of which he unscru-
pulously adopts on the testimony of others, to
whose eyes he trusted rather than to his own. The
conversion of the sceptical gentleman of whom he
speaks, is highly illustrative of popular credulity,

14 LETTERS ON

carried away into enthusiasm, or into imposture,
by the evidence of those around, and at once shows
the imperfection of sucha general testimony, and
the ease with which it is procured, since the gene-
ral excitement of the moment impels even the
more cold-blooded and judicious persons present
to catch up the ideas, and echo the exclamations,
of the majority, who, from the first, had consi-
dered the heavenly phenomenon as a supernatural
weapon-schaw, held for the purpose of a sign and
warning of civil wars to come.

« In the year 1686, in the months of June and
July,” says the honest chronicler, “ many yet
alive can witness, that about the Crossford Boat,
two miles beneath Lanark, especially at the Mains,
on the water of Clyde, many people gathered to-
gether for several afternoons, where there were
showers of bonnets, hats, guns, and swords, which
covered the trees and the ground; companies of
men in arms marching in order upon the water
side; companies meeting companies, going all
through other, and then all falling to the ground
and disappearing; other companies immediately
appeared, marching the same way. I went there
three afternoons together, and as I observed there
were two-thirds of the people that were together
saw, anda third that saw not, and though J could
see nothing, there was such a fright and trembling
on those that: did see, that was discernible to all
from those that saw not. ee was a gentleman
standing next to me, who s as too many gen-
ees others speak, re said, ‘ A mn of
damned witches and warlocks that have the second
sight! the devil ha’t do I see; and immediately

DEMONOLOGY AND WITCHCRAFT. 15

there was a discernible change in his countenance.
With as much fear and trembling as any woman
I saw there, he called. out, « All you that do not
see, say nothing; for I persuade you it is matter
of fact, and discernible to all that is not stone-
blind.’ And those who did see told what works
(ie. locks) the guns had, and their length and
wideness, and what handles the swords had, whe-
ther small or three-barr'd, or Highland guards,
and the closing knots of the bonnets, black or
blue; and those who did see them there, whenever
they went abroad, saw a bonnet and a sword drop
in the way.”*

This singular phenomenon, in which a multitude
believed, although only two-thirds of them saw
what must, if real, have been equally obvious to
all, may be compared with the exploit of a humour-
ist, who planted himself in an attitude of astonish«
ment, with his eyes riveted on the well-known
bronze lion that graces the front of Northumber-
land-house in the Strand, and having attracted the
attention of those who looked at him by mutter.

« By Heaven, it wags !—it wags again !”
eontrived in a few minutes to blockade the whole
street with an immense crowd, some conceiving
that they had absolutely seen the lion of Percy
wag his tail, others expecting to witness the same

menon.
- Qnsuch occasions as we have hitherto mention-

~ * Walker’s Lives, Edinburgh, 1827, vol I. p. xxxvi, Itis

evident that honest Peter believed in the apparition of this

martial gear, on the principle of Partridge’s terror for the

aghont of Hlanlet—not that he was afraid himself, but because
showed such evident marks of terror.

E
.

16 ; LETTERS ON

ed, we have supposed that the ghost-seer has been
in full possession of his ordinary powers of per-
ception, unless in the case of dreamers, in whom
they may have been obscured by temporary slum-
ber, and the possibility of correcting vagaries of
the imagination rendered more difficult by want
of the ordinary appeal to the evidence of the bo-
dily senses. In other respects, their blood beat
temperately, they possessed the ordinary capacity
of ascertaining the truth, or discerning the false-
hood, of external appearances, by an appeal to the
organ of sight. Unfortunately, however, as is now
universally known and admitted, there certainly
exists more than one disorder known to profes-
sional men, of which one important symptom is a
disposition to see apparitions.

- This frightful disorder is not properly insanity,
although it is somewhat allied to that most horri-
ble of maladies, and may, in many constitutions,
be the means of bringing it on, and although such
hallucinations are proper to both. The difference
I conceive to be, that, in cases of insanity, the
taind of the patient is principally affected, while
the senses, or organic system, offer in vain to the
lunatic their decided testimony against the fantasy
of a deranged imagination. Perhaps the nature
of this collision—between a disturbed imagination
and organs of sense possessed of their usual accu-
racy—cannot be better described than in the em-
barrassment expressed by an insane patient con-
fined in the Infirmary of Edinburgh. The poor
man’s malady had taken a gay turn. The house,’
in his idea, was his own, and he contrived to ac-
count for all that seemed inconsistent with his

DEMONOLOGY AND WITCHCRAFT. 17

imaginary right of property ;—there were many

atients in it, but that was owing to the benevo-
of his nature, which made him love to see
the relief of distress. He went little, or rather
never abroad—but then his habits were of a do-
mestic and rather sedentary character. He did
not see much company—but he daily received vi-
sits from the first characters in the renowned me-
dical school of this city, and he could not there-
fore be much in want of society. With so many
supposed comforts around him—with so many
visions of wealth and splendour, one thing alone
disturbed the peace of the poor optimist, and would
indeed have confounded most bons vivans,—“ He
was curious,” he said, “ in his table, choice in his
selection of cooks, had every day a dinner of three
regular courses and a dessert ; and yet, somehow
or other, every thing he eat ¢asted of porridge.”
This dilemma could be no great a te to the
friend to whom the poor patient communicated it,

-who knew the lunatic eat nothing but this simple

aliment at any of his meals. The case was obvious ;
the disease lay in the extreme vivacity of the pa-
tient’s imagination, deluded in other instances, yet
not absolutely powerful enough to contend with

the honest evidence of his stomach and palate,

which, like Lord Peter’s brethren in the Tale of
a Tub, were indignant at the attempt to impose
boiled oatmeal upon them, instead of such a ban-
quet as Ude would have displayed when peers were
to partake of it.. Here, therefore, is one instance
of actual insanity, in which the sense of taste con-
trolled and attempted to restrain the ideal hypo-
thesis adopted by a deranged imagination. But
B

18 LETTERS ON

the disorder to which I previously alluded is en-
tirely of a bodily character, and consists principal-
ly in a disease of the visual organs, which pre-
sent to the patient a set of spectres or appearances,
which have no actual existence. It is a disease
of the same nature, which renders many men in-
capable of distinguishing colours; only the pa-
tients goa step further, and pervert the external
form of objects. In their case, therefore, contrary
to that of the maniac, it is not the mind, or rather
the imagination, which imposes upon, and over-
powers, the evidence of the senses, but the sense
of seeing (or hearing) which betrays its duty, and
conveys false ideas to a sane intellect.

More than one learned physician, who have
given their attestations to the existence of this
most distressing complaint, have agreed that it
actually occurs, and is occasioned by different
causes. The most frequent source of the malady
is in the dissipated and intemperate habits of those
who, by a continued series of intoxication, be-
come subject to what is popularly called the
Blue Devils, instances of which mental disorder
may be known to most who have lived for any
period of their lives in society where hard drink-
ing was a common vice. The joyous visions sug-
gested by intoxication when the habit is first ac-
quired, in time disappear, and are supplied by
frightful impressions and scenes, which destroy the
tranquillity of the unhappy debauchee. Appari-
tions of the most unpleasant appearance are his
companions in solitude, and intrude even upon
‘his hours of society ; and when by an alteration
of habits, the mind is cleared of these frightful

DEMONOLOGY AND WITCHCRAFT. 19

ideas, it requires but the slightest renewal of the
association to bring back the full tide of misery
upon the ntant libertine.

» Of this the following instance was told to the
author by a gentleman connected with the suffer-
er. A young man of fortune, who had led what
is” sogay a life as considerably to injure
both his health and fortune, was at length obliged
to consult the physician upon the means of re-
storing at least the former. One of his principal

ints was the frequent presence of a set of
apparitions, resembling a band of figures dressed
in green, who performed in his drawingroom a
‘singular dance, to which he was compelled to bear
‘witness, though he knew, to his great annoyance,
that the whole corps de ballet existed only in his
own imagination. His physician immediately in-
formed him that he had lived upon town too ex
and too fast not to require an exchange to a more
healthy and natural course of life, He therefore
prescribed a gentle course of medicine, but ear-
mestly recommended to his patient to retire to his
‘own house in the country, observe a temperate diet
and early hours, practising regular exercise, on the
‘same principle avoiding fatigue, and assured him
that by doing so he might bid adieu to black spirits
and white, blue, green, and grey, with all their
trumpery. The patient observed the advice, and
His physician, after the interval of
a month, received a grateful letter from him,
+ opie mg the success of his regimen. The
green goblins had disappeared, and with them
the unpleasant train of emotions to which their
-visits had given rise, and the patient had order~

20 LETTERS ON

ed his town-house to be disfurnished and sold,
while the furniture was to be sent down to his
residence in the country, where he was deter-
mined in future to spend his life, without exposing
himself to the temptations of town. One would
have supposed this a well-devised scheme for
health. But, alas! no sooner had the furniture
of the London drawingroom been placed in order
in the gallery of the old manor-house, than the
former delusion returned in full force! the green
Jigurantés, whom the patient’s depraved imagina-
tion had so long associated with these movables,
came capering and frisking to accompany them,
‘exclaiming with great glee, as if the sufferer
should have been rejoiced to see them, “ Here we
‘all are—here we all are!” The visionary, if I
recollect right, was so much shocked at their ap-
‘pearance, that he retired abroad, in despair that
‘any part of Britain could shelter him from the
‘daily persecution of this domestic ballet.
here is reason to believe that such cases are
numerous, and that they may perhaps arise not
only from the debility of stomach brought on by
excess in wine or spirits, which derangement often
‘sensibly affects the eyes and sense of sight, but
‘also because the mind becomes habitually ‘pre-
“dominated over by a train of fantastic visions,
the consequence of frequent intoxication; and is
thus, like a dislocated joint, apt again to go wrong,
even when a different cause occasions the derange-
“ment. :
It is easy to be supposed that habitual excite-
ment by means of any other intoxicating drug, as
“opium, or its various substitutes, must expose

DEMONOLOGY AND WITCHCRAFT. 2h

those who practise the dangerous custom to the
same inconvenience. Very frequent use of the
nitrous oxide which affects the senses so strongly,
and produces ashort but singular state of ecstasy,
cai probably be found to occasion this species
of disorder. But there are many other causes
which medical men find attended with the same
symptom, of embodying before the eyes of a pa-
tient imaginary illusions which are visible to no
one else.: This persecution of spectral deceptions
is also found to exist when no excesses of the pa-
tient can be alleged as the cause, owing, doubt-
less, to a deranged state of the blood, or nervous
system. ;

| The learned and acute Dr Ferriar of Manches-
ter was the first who brought before the English
public the leading case, as it may be called, in
this department, namely, that of Mons. Nicolai,
the celebrated bookseller of Berlin. This gen-
tleman was not a man merely of books, but of
letters, and had the moral courage to lay before
the Philosophical Society of Berlin an account
of his own sufferings, from having been, by dis-
ease, subjected to a series of spectral illusions.
The leading circumstances of this case may be
stated very shortly, as it has been repeatedly be-
fore the public, and is insisted on by Dr Ferriar,
Dr Hibbert, and others who have assumed De-
monology as a subject. Nicolai traces his illness
remotely to a series of disagreeable incidents which
had happened to him in the beginning of the year
1791. The depression of spirits which was oc-
casioned by these unpleasant occurrences, was
aided by the consequences of neglecting a course

22 LETTERS ON

of periodical bleeding which he had been accus-
tomed to observe. ‘This state of health brought
on the disposition to see phantasmata, who visited,
or it may be more properly said frequented, the
apartments of the learned bookseller, presenting
crowds of persons who moved and acted before
him, nay, even spoke to and addressed him. These
phantoms afforded nothing unpleasant to the ima-
gination of the visionary either in sight or expres
sion, and the patient was possessed of too much
firmness to be otherwise affected by their pre-
sence than with a species of curiosity, as he re-
mained convinced, from the beginning to the end
of the disorder, that these singular effects were
merely symptoms of the state of his health, and
did not in any other respect regard them as a sub-
ject of apprehension. After a certain time, and
some use of medicine, the phantoms became less
distinct in their outline, less vivid in their colour-
ing, faded, as it were, on the eye of the patient,
and at length totally disappeared.

The case of Nicolai has unquestionably been
that of many whose love of science has not been
able to overcome their natural reluctance to com-
municate to the public the particulars attending
the visitation of a disease so peculiar. That such
illnesses have been experienced, and have ended
fatally, there can be no doubt ;. though it is by no
means to be inferred, that the symptom of im-
portance to our present discussion has, on all oc-
easions, been produced from the same identical
cause.

Dr Hibbert, who has most ingeniously, as well
as philosophically, handled this subject, has treat-

DEMONOLOGY AND WITCHCRAFT. 23

ed it-also in a medical point of view, with science
to which we make no pretence, and a precision
of detail to which our superficial investigation af-
fords us no room for extending ourselves.

- Thevisitation of spectral phenomena is described
by this learned gentleman as incidental to sundry
complaints; and he mentions, in particular, that
the symptom occurs not only in plethora, as in the
ease of the learned Prussian we have just mention-
ed, but is a frequent hectic symptom—often an
associate of febrile and inflammatory disorders—
frequently accompanying inflammation of the brain
—a concomitant also of highly excited nervous
irritability— equally connected with hypochon-
dria—and finally, united in some cases with gout,
and in others with the effects of excitation pro-
duced by several gases. In all these cases there
seems to be a morbid degree of sensibility, with
which this symptom is ready to ally itself, and
which, though inaccurate as a medical definition,
may be held sufficiently descriptive of one cha+
racter of the various kinds of disorder with which
this painful symptom may be found allied.

A very singular and interesting illustration of
such combinations as Dr Hibbert has recorded of
the spectral illusion with an actual disorder, and
that of a dangerous kind, was frequently related
in society by the late learned and accomplished
Dr Gregory of Edinburgh, and sometimes, I be-
lieve, quoted by him in his lectures. The narra-
tive, to the author's best recollection, was as fol-
lows:—A patient of Dr Gregory, a person, it is
understood, of some rank, having requested the
Doctor's advice, made the following extraordinary

24 : LETTERS ON

statement of his complaint. “I am in the habit,” he
said, “ of dining at five, and exactly as the hour
of six arrives, I am subjected to the following
painful-visitation. The door of the room, even
when I have been weak enough to bolt it, which
I have sometimes done, flies wide open; an old
hag, like one of those who haunted the heath of
Forres, enters with a frowning and incensed
countenance, comes straight up to me with every
demonstration of spiteand indignation which could
characterise her who haunted the merchant Abu-
dah, in the Oriental tale; she rushes upon me;
says something, but so hastily, that I cannot dis-
cover the purport, and then strikes me a severe
blow with her staff. I fall from my chair in a
swoon, which is of longer or shorter endurance.
To the recurrence of this apparition I am daily
subjected. And suchis my new and singular com-
plaint.” The Doctor immediately asked, Whe-
ther his patient had invited any one to sit with
him when he expected such a visitation? He
was answered in the negative. The nature of the
complaint, he said, was so singular, it was so likely
to be imputed to fancy, or even to mental derange-
ment, that he had shrunk from communicating the
cireumstance to any one. Then,” said the Doc-
tor, “ with your permission, I will dine with you
to-day, ¢éte-d-téte, and we will see if your malig-
nant old woman will venture to join our com-
Li The patient accepted the proposal with

ope and gratitude, for he had expected ridicule
rather than sympathy. They met at dinner, and
Doctor Gregory, whe suspected some nervous
disorder, exerted his powers of conversation, well

DEMONOLOGY AND WITCHCRAFT. 25

known to be of the most varied and brilliant cha-
racter, to keep the attention of his host engaged,
and prevent him from thinking on the approach
of the fated hour, to which he was accustomed to
look forward with so much terror. He succeed-
ed in his purpose better than he had hoped. The
hour of six came almost unnoticed, and it was
hoped, might pass away without any evil conse-
jee but it was scarce a moment struck when

owner of the house exclaimed, in an alarmed
voice—“* The hag comes again!” and dropped
back in his chair in a swoon, in the way he had
himself described. The physician caused him to
be let blood, and satisfied himself that the perio-
dical shocks of which his patient complained, arose
from a tendency to apoplexy.

- The phantom with the crutch was only a spe-
cies of machinery, such as that with which fancy
is found to supply the disorder called Ephialtes,
or nightmare, or indeed any other external im-
pression upon our organs in sleep, which the pa-
tient’s morbid imagination may introduce into
the dream preceding the swoon. In the night-
mare an oppression and suffocation is felt, and
our fancy instantly conjures up a spectre to lie
on our bosom. In like manner it may be re-
marked, that any sudden noise which the slum-
berer hears, without being actually awakened by
it—any casual touch of his person occurring in the
same manner—becomes instantly adopted in his
dream, and accommodated to the tenor of the cur-
rent train of thought, whatever that may happen
to be; and nothing is more remarkable than the
rapidity with which imagination supplies a com-

26 LETTERS ON

plete explanation of the interruption, according
to the previous train of ideas expressed in the
dream, even when scarce a moment of time is
allowed for that purpose. In dreaming, for
example, of a duel, the external sound becomes,
in the twinkling of an eye, the discharge of the
combatants’ pistols ;—is an orator haranguing in
his sleep, the sound becomes the applause of his
supposed audience;—is the dreamer wandering
among supposed ruins, the noise is that of the fall
of some part of the mass. In short, an explanatory
system is adopted during sleep with such extreme
rapidity, that supposing the intruding alarm to
have been the first call of some person to awakea
the slumberer, the explanation, though requiring
some process of argument or deduction, is usually
formed and perfect before the second effort of the
speaker has restored the dreamer to the waking
world and its realities. So rapid and intuitive is
the succession of ideas in sleep, as to remind us of
the vision of the prophet Mahommed, in which he
saw the whole wonders of heayen and hell, though
the jar of water which fell when his ecstasy com-
menced, had not spilled its contents when he re-
turned to ordinary existence.

A. second, equally remarkable instance,
was communicated to the author by the medical
man under whose observation it tell, but who
was, of course, desirous to keep private the name
of the hero of so singular a history. Of the friend
by whom the facts were attested, I can only say,
that if I found myself at liberty to name him, the
rank which he holds in his profession, as well as

DEMONOLOGY AND WITCHCRAFT. 27

his attainments in science and philosophy, form
an undisputed claim to the most implicit credit.
It was the fortune of this gentleman to be call-
ed in to attend the illness of a person now long de-
ceased, who in his lifetime stood, as I understand,
high im a particular department of the law, which
often placed the property of others at his discre-
tion and control, and whose conduct, therefore,
being open to public observation, he had for many
years borne the character of a man of unusual
steadiness, good sense, and integrity. He was, at
the time of my friend’s visits, confined principally
tohis sick-room, sometimes to bed, yet occasionally
attending to business, and exerting his mind, ap-
parently with all its usual strength and energy, to
the conduct of important affairs intrusted to him;
nor did there, toa superficial observer, appear any
thing in his conduct, while so engaged, that could
argue vacillation of intellect, or depression of mind,
His outward symptoms of malady argued no acute
oralarming disease. Butslowness of pulse, absence
of appetite, difficulty of digestion, and constant
depression of spirits, seemed to draw their origin
from some hidden cause, which the patient was de-
termined to conceal. The deep gloom of the unfor-
tunate gentleman—the embarrassment, which he
could not conceal from his friendly physician—the
briefness and obvious constraint with which he an-
swered the interrogations of his medical adviser,
induced my friend to take other methods for pro-
secuting hisenquiries. He applied tothe sufferer’s
family, to learn, if possible, the source of that se-
eret grief which was gnawing the heart and suck-
ing the life-blood of his unfortunate patient. The

28 LETTERS ON

persons applied to, after conversing together pre-
viously, denied all knowledge of any cause for
the burden which obviously affected their relative.
So far as they knew—and they thought they
could hardly be ‘deceived—his worldly affairs
were prosperous ; no family loss had occurred
which could be followed with such persevering
distress; no entanglements of affection could be
supposed to apply to his age, and no sensation of
severe remorse could be consistent with his cha-
racter. The medical gentleman had finally re-
course to serious argument with the invalid him-
self, and urged to him the’folly of devoting him-
self to a lingering and melancholy death, rather
than tell the subject of affliction which was thus
wasting him. He specially pressed upon him the
injury which he was doing to his own character,
by suffering it to be inferred that the secret cause
of his dejection and its consequences, was some-
thing ‘too scandalous or flagitious to be made
known, bequeathing in this manner to his family
a suspected and dishonoured name, and leaving a
memory with which might be associated the idea
of guilt, which the criminal had died without con-
fessing. The patient; more moyed by this species
of appeal than by any which had yet been urged,
expressed his desire to speak out frankly to Dr
Every one else was removed, and the
door of the sick-room made secure, when he be-
gan his confession in the following manner :—

» You cannot, my dear friend, be more con-
scious than I, that I am in the course of dying
under the oppression of the fatal disease which
consumes my vital powers ; but neither can you

DEMONOLOGY AND WITCHCRAFT. 29

understand the nature of my complaint, and man-
ner in which it acts upon me, nor, if you did, I
fear,could your zeal and skillavail to rid me of it.”
—“ It is possible,” said the physician, “ that my
skill may not equal my wish of serving you; yet
medical science has many resources, of which those
unacquainted with its powers never can form an
estimate. But until you plainly tell me your
symptoms of complaint, it is impossible for either
of us to say what may or may not be in my power,
or within that of medicine.’—* I may answer
you,” replied the patient, “ that my case is not
a singular one, since we read of it in the famous
novel of Le Sage. You remember, doubtless,
the disease of which the Duke d’Olivarez is there
stated to have died?”— Of the idea,” answered
the medical gentleman, “ that he was haunted by
an apparition, to the actual existence of which he
gave no credit, but died, nevertheless, because he
was overcome and heart-broken by its imaginary
presence.’ —“ I, my dearest Doctor,” said the
sick man, “am in.that very case; and so painful
and abhorrent is the presence of the persecuting
vision, that my reason is totally inadequate to com-
bat the effects of my morbid imagination, and I
am sensible I am dying, a wasted victim to an ima-
‘ginary disease.” The medical gentleman listened
with anxiety to his patient’s statement, and for
the present judiciously avoiding any contradiction
of the sick man’s preconceived fancy, contented
himself with more minute enquiry into the nature
of the apparition with which he conceived himself
haunted, and into the history of the mode by
which so singular a disease had made itself mas-

30 LETTERS ON

ter of his imagination, secured, as it seemed, by
strong powers of the understanding, against an
attack so irregular. The sick person replied by
stating, that its advances were gradual, and at first
not of a terrible or even disagreeable character.
To illustrate this, he gave the following account
of the progress of his disease.

*« My visions,” he said, “ commenced two or
three years since, when I found myself from
time to time embarrassed by the presence of a
large cat, which came and disappeared I could
not exactly tell how, till the truth was finally
forced upon me, and I was compelled to a
it as no domestic household cat, but as a bubble
of the elements, which had no existence, save
in my deranged visual organs, or depraved ima-
gination. Still I had not that positive objec-
tion to the animal entertained by a late gallant
Highland Chieftain, who has been seen to change
to all the colours of his own plaid, if a cat by
accident happened to be in the room with him,
even though he did not see it. On the contrary,
‘Tam rather a friend to cats, and endured with so
much equanimity the presence of my imaginary
attendant, that it had become almost indifferent.
to me; when within the course of a few months
it gave place to, or was succeeded by, a spectre
of a more important sort, or which at least hada
more imposing appearance. This was no other
than the apparition of a gentleman-usher, dressed
as if to wait upon a Lord Lieutenant of Ireland,
a Lord High Commissioner of the Kirk, or any
other who loan on his brow the rank and stamp:
of delegated sovereignty. sik

DEMONOLOGY AND WITCHCRAFT. 831

« This personage, arrayed in a court dress,
with bag and sword, tamboured waistcoat, and
chapeau-bras, glided beside me like the ghost of
Beau Nash; and whether in my own house or in
another, ascended the stairs before me, as if to
announce me in the drawingroom; and at some
times appeared to mingle with the company,
though it was sufficiently evident that they were
not aware of his presence, and that [ alone was
sensible of the visionary honours which this ima-

inary being seemed desirous to render me. This
freak of the fancy did not produce much impres-
sion on me, though it led me to entertain doubts
on the nature of my disorder, and alarm for the
effect it might produce upon my intellects. But
that modification of my disease also had its ap-
pointed duration. After a few months, the phan-
tom of the gentleman-usher was seen no more, but
was succeeded by one horrible to the sight, and
distressing to the imagination, being no other than
the image of death itself—the apparition of a ske-
leton. Alone or in company,” said the unfortu-
nate invalid, « the presence of this last phantom
neyer quits me. I in vain tell myself a hundred
times over that it is no reality, but merely an
image summoned up by the morbid acuteness of
my own excited imagination, and deranged organs
of sight. But what avail such reflections, while
the emblem at once and presage of mortality is
before my eyes, and while I feel myself, though
in faney only, the companion of a phantom repre-
senting a ghastly inhabitant of the grave, even
while I yet breathe on the earth? Science, phi-
Josophy, even religion, has no cure for such a dis-

32 LETTERS ON

order; and I feel too surely that I shall die the
victim to so melancholy a disease, although I have
no belief whatever in the reality of the phantom
which it places before me.”

The physician was distressed to perceive, from
these details, how strongly this visionary appari-
tion was fixed in the imagination of his patient.
He ingeniously urged the sick man, who was then
in bed, with questions concerning the circumstances
of the phantom’s appearance, trusting he might
lead him, as a sensible man, into such contradic-
tions and inconsistencies as might bring his com-
mon sense, which seemed to be unimpaired, so
strongly into the field, as might combat success-
fully the fantastic disorder which produced such
fatal effects. “ This skeleton, then,” said the Doc-
tor, ‘seems to you to be always present to your
eyes ?”—*« It is my fate, unhappily,” answered the
invalid, “always to see it.” —“ Then I understand,”
continued the physician, “ it is now present to
your imagination ?”—“ To my imagination it cer-
tainly is so,” replied the sick man.—* And in
what part of the chamber do you now conceive
the apparition to appear?” the physician enqui-
red. “ Immediately at the foot of my bed; when
‘the curtains are left a little open,” answered the
invalid, “ the skeleton, to my thinking, is placed
between them, and fills the vacant space.”—“ You
say you are sensible of the delusion,” said his
friend ; “ have you firmness to convince yourself
of the truth of this? Can you take courage enough
to rise and place yourself in the spot so seeming to
be occupied, and convince yourself of the illusion?”
‘The poor man sighed, and shook his head nega-

DEMONOLOGY AND WITCHCRAFT. 33

tively. ‘ Well,” said the Doctor, “ we will try
the experiment otherwise.” Accordingly, he rose
from his chair by the bedside, and placing him-
self between the two half-drawn curtains at the
foot of the bed, indicated as the place occupied by

the apparition, asked if the spectre was still visi-

ble? “ Not entirely so,” replied the patient, “ be-

_ cause your person is betwixt him and me; but I

observe his skull peering above your shoulder.”

© It isalleged the man of science started on thein-
stant, despite philosophy, on receiving an answer
ascertaining, with such minuteness, that the ideal

was close to his own person. He resort-
ed to other means of investigation and cure, but
with equally indifferent success. The patient sunk
into deeper and deeper dejection, and died in the
same distress of mind in which he had spent the
latter months of his life; and his case remains a
melancholy instance of the power of imagination
to kill the body, even when its fantastic terrors
cannot overcome the intellect, of the unfortunate -
persons who suffer under them. The patient, in»
the present case, sunk under his malady ; and the
cireumstances of his singular disorder remaining
concealed, he did not, by his death and last illness,
lose any of the well-merited reputation for pru-
dence and sagacity which had attended him during
the whole course of his life. '

» Having added these two remarkable instances
to the general train of similar facts quoted by
Ferriar, Hibbert, and other writers who have
more recently considered the subject, there can,
we think, be little doubt of the proposition, that

. o

34 LETTERS ON

the external organs may, from various causes,
become so much deranged, as to make false re-
presentations to the mind ; and that, in such cases,
men, in the literal sense, really see the empty and
false forms, and hear the ideal sounds, which, ina
more primitive state of society, are naturally
enough referred to the action of demons or disem-~
bodied spirits. In such unhappy cases, the patient
is intellectually in the condition of a general whose
spies have been bribed by the enemy, and who
must engage himself in the difficult and delicate
task of examining and correcting, by his own
powers of argument, the probability of the reports
which.are too inconsistent to be trusted to.

But there is a corollary to this proposition,
which is worthy of notice. The same species of
organic derangement which, as a continued habit
of his deranged vision, presented the subject of
our last tale with the successive apparitions of his
cat, his gentleman-usher, and the fatal skeleton,
may occupy, for a brief or almost. momentary
space, the vision of men who are otherwise per-
fectly clear-sighted. Transitory deceptions are
thus presented to the organs, which, when they
occur to men of strength of mind and of education,
give way to scrutiny, and, their character being
once investigated, the true takes the place of the
unreal representation. But in ignoranttimes, those
instances in which any object is misrepresented,
whether through the action of the senses, or of
the imagination, or the combined influence of both,
for however short a space of time, may be admit-
ted as direct evidence of a supernatural apparition;
a proof the more difficult to be disputed, if the

DEMONOLOGY AND WITCHCRAFT. 35

phantom has been personally witnessed by a man
of sense and estimation, who, perhaps, satisfied in
the general as to the actual existence of appari-
tions, has not taken time or trouble to correct his
first impressions. This species of deception is so
frequent, that one of the greatest poets of the pre-
sent time: answered a lady who asked him if he
believed in ghosts,—“ No, madam; I have seen
too many myself.” I may mention one or two
instances of the kind, to which no doubt can be
attached.

The first shall be the apparition of Maupertuis,
to a brother professor in the Royal Society of
Berlin.

This extraordinary circumstance appeared in
the Transactions of the Society, but is thus sta-
ted by M. Thiebault, in his “ Recollections of
Frederick the Great and the Court of Berlin.” It
is necessary to premise that M, Gleditsch,to whom
the circumstance happened, was a botanist of emi-
nence, holding the professorship of natural philo-
sophy at Berlin, and respected as a man of an ha-
bitually serious, simple, and tranquil character.

A short time after the death of Maupertuis,*
M. Gleditsch being obliged to traverse the hall
in which the Academy held its sittings, having
some arrangements to make in the cabinet of na-
tural history, which was under his charge, and
being willing to complete them on the Thursday

* Long the ypemnidery: of the Berlin Academy, and muck
fayoured ty rederick II., till he was overwhelmed by the
Tidicule oltaire. He retired, in a species of disgrace, to
oe country of Switzerland, and died there shortly af-

wards,

36 LETTERS ON

before the meeting, he perceived, on entering the
hall, the apparition of M. de Maupertuis, upright
and stationary, in the first angle on his left hand,
having his eyes fixed on him. This was about
three o'clock afternoon. The professor of natural
philosophy was too well acquainted with physical
science to suppose that his late president, who had
died at Bale, in the family of Messrs Bernoullie,
could have found his way back to Berlin in person.
He regarded the apparition in no other light than
as a phantom produced by some derangement
of his own proper organs. M. Gleditsch went
to his own business, without stopping longer
than to ascertain exactly the appearance of that
object. But he related the vision to his bre-
thren, and assured them that it was as defined
and perfect as the actual person of Maupertuis
could have presented. When it is recollected
that Maupertuis died at a distance from Berlin,
once the scene of his triumphs—overwhelmed
by the petulant ridicule of Voltaire, and out of
favour with Frederick, with whom to be ridicu-
lous was to be worthless—we can hardly wonder
attheimaginationeven of aman of physical science
calling up his Eidolon in the hall of his former
greatness.

The sober-minded professor did not, however,
push his investigation to the point to which it was
carried by a gallant soldier, from whose mouth a

articular friend of the author received the fol-
owing circumstances of a similar story.

Captain C—— was a native of Britain, but
bred in the Irish Brigade. He was aman of the
most dauntless courage, which he displayed in

DEMONOLOGY AND WITCHCRAFT. 37

some uncommonly desperate adventures during
the first years of the French Revolution, being
repeatedly employed by the royal family in ver
dangerous commissions. After the King’s ret
he came over to England, and it was then the
following circumstance took place.

Captain C was a Catholic, and, in his hour
of adversity at least, sincerely attached to the du-
ties of his religion. His confessor was a clergyman
who was residing as chaplain to a man of rank in
the west of England, about four miles from the
place where Captain C—— lived. On riding over
one morning tosee this gentleman, his penitent had
the misfortune to find him very ill from a danger-
ous complaint. He retired in great distress and
apprehension of his friend’s lite, and the feeling
brought back upon him many other painful and
disagreeable recollections. These occupied him
till the hour of retiring to bed, when, to his great

‘astonishment, he saw in the room the figure of the

absent confessor. He addressed it, but received
no answer—the eyes alone were impressed by
the appearance. Determined to push the matter
to the end, Captain C. advanced on the phan-
tom, which appeared to retreat gradually before
him. In this manner he followed it round the
bed, when it seemed to sink down on an elbow
chair, and remain there in a sitting posture, To
ascertain positively the nature of the apparition,
the soldier himself sate down on the same chair,
ascertaining thus, beyond question, that the whole
was illusion; yet he owned that, had his friend
died about the same time, he would not well have
known what name to give to his vision. But as

38 LETTERS ON

the confessor recovered, and, in Dr Johnson's
phrase, “ nothing came of it,” the incident was
only remarkable as showing that men of the
strongest nerves are not exempted from such
delusions.

Another illusion of the same nature we have
the best reason for vouching as a fact, though,
for certain reasons, we do not give the names of
the parties. Not long after the death of a late
illustrious poet, who had filled, while living, a
great station in the eye of the public, a literary
friend, to whom the deceased had been well known,
was engaged, during the darkening twilight of an
autumn evening, in perusing one of the publica-
tions which professed to detail the habits and opi-
nions of the distinguished individual who was now
nomore. As the reader had ee the inti-
macy of the deceased to a considerable degree, he
was deeply interested in the publication, which
contained some particulars relating to himself
and other friends. A visitor was sitting in the
apartment, who was also engaged in reading.
Their sitting-room opened into an entrance-hall,
rather fantastically fitted up with articles of ar-
mour, skins of wild animals, and the like. It was
when laying down his book, and passing into this.
hall, through which the moon was beginning to
shine, that the individual of whom I speak saw,
right before him, and in a standing posture, the
exact representation of his departed friend, whose
recollection had been so strongly brought to his
imagination. He stopped for a single moment, so
as to notice the wonderful accuracy with which
fancy had impressed upon the bodily eye the pe-

DEMONOLOGY AND WITCHCRAFT. 39

culiarities of dress and posture of the illustrious
poet. Sensible, however, of the delusion, he felt
no sentiment save that of wonder at the extraor-
dinary accuracy of the resemblance, and stepped
onwards towards the figure, which resolved itself,
as he approached, into the various materials of
which it was composed. These were merely a
screen, occupied by great-coats, shawls, plaids, and
such other articles as usually are found in a coun-
try entrance-hall. The spectator returned to the
spot from which he had seen the illusion, and en-
deavoured, with all his power, to recall the image
which had been so singularly vivid. But this was
beyond hiseapacity ; and the person who had wit-
nessed the apparition, or, more properly, whose
excited state had been the means of raising it, had
only to return into the apartment, and tell his
om friend under what a striking hallucination
had for a moment laboured.

There is every reason to believe that instances
of this kind are frequent among persons of a cer-
tain temperament, and when such occur in an early
period of society, they are almost certain to be
considered as real supernatural appearances. They
differ from those of Nicolai, and others formerly
noticed, as being of short duration, and constitu-
ting no habitual or constitutional derangement of
thesystem. Theapparition of Maupertuis to Mon-
sieur Gleditsch, that of the Catholic clergyman to
Captain C——, that of a late poet to his friend,
are of the latter character. They bear to the for-
mer the analogy, as we may say, which a sudden
and temporary fever-fit has to a serious feverish
illness. But, even for this very reason, it is more

40 LETTERS ON

. difficult to bring such momentary impressions back
to their real sphere of optical illusions, since they
accord much better with our idea of glimpses of
the futare world than those in which the vision is
continued or repeated for hours, days, and months,
affording opportunities of discovering, from other
circumstances, that the symptom originates in de-

ranged health. ;

Before concluding these observations upon th
deceptions of the senses, we must remark, that the
eye is the organ most essential to the purpose of
realizing to our mind theappearance of external ob-
jects, and that when the visual organ becomes de-
praved for a greater or less time, and to a farther
or more limited extent, its misrepresentation of
the objects of sight is peculiarly apt to termi-
nate in such hallucinations as those we have been
detailing. Yet the other senses or organs, in their
turn, and to the extent of their power, are as ready,
in their various departments, as the sight itself,
to retain false or doubtful impressions, which mis-
lead, instead of informing, the party to whom
they are addressed.

Thus, in regard to the ear, the next organ in
importance to the eye, we are repeatedly decei-
ved by such sounds as are imperfectly gathered up
and erroneously apprehended. From the false
impressions received from this organ, also arise
consequences similar to those derived from erro-
neous reports made by the organs of sight. A
whole class of superstitious observances arise, and
are grounded upon inaccurate and imperfect hear-
ing. To the excited and imperfect state of the

DEMONOLOGY AND WITCHCRAFT. 4]

ear, we owe the existence of what Milton sub-
limely calls

The airy tongues that syllable men’s names,
On shores, in desert sands, and wildernesses.

These also appear such natural causes of alarm,
that we do not sympathize more readily with Ro-
binson Crusoe’s apprehensions when he witnesses
the print of the savage’s foot in the sand, than in
those which arise from his being waked from
sleep by some one calling his name in the soli-
tary island, where there existed no man but the
shipwrecked mariner himself. Amidst the train
of superstitions deduced from the imperfections
of the ear, we may quote that visionary summons
which the natives of the Hebrides acknowledged
as one sure sign of approaching fate. The voice

_of some absent, or, probably, some deceased, re-
lative was, in such cases, heard as repeating the
_party’s name. Sometimes the aerial summoner
intimated his own death, and at others, it was no

uncommon circumstance that the person who fan-
cied himself so called, died in consequence ;—for,
the same reason that the negro pines to death
who is laid under the ban of an Obi woman, or
the Cambro-Briton, whose name is put into the
famous cursing well, with the usual ceremonies,
devoting him to the infernal gods, wastes away
and dies, as one doomed to doso. It may be re-
marked also, that Dr Johnson retained a deep

impression that, while he was opening the door .

of his college chambers, he heard the voice of
his mother, then at many miles’ distance, call him

-by his name; and it appears he was rather dis-

42 LETTERS ON

appointed that no event of consequence follow-
ed a summons sounding so decidedly superna-
tural. It is unnecessary to dwell on this’sort of
auricular deception, of which most men’s recol-
lection will supply instances. The following may
be stated as one serving to show by what slen-
der accidents the human ear may be imposed up-
on. The author was walking, about two years
since, in a wild and solitary scene with a young
friend, who laboured under the infirmity of a se-
vere deafness, when he heard what he conceived
to be the cry of a distant pack of hounds, sound-
ing intermittedly. As the season was summer,
this, on a moment's reflection, satisfied the hearer
that it could not be the clamour of an actual chase,
and yet his ears repeatedly brought back the
supposed cry. He called upon his own dogs, of
which two or three were with the walking party.
They came in quietly, and obviously had no ac-
cession to the sounds which had caught the au-
thor’s attention, so that he could not help say-
ing to his companion, “I am doubly sorry for
your infirmity at this moment, for I could other-
wise have let you hear the cry of the Wild
Huntsman.” As the young gentleman used a
hearing tube, he turned when spoken to, and, in
doing so, the cause of the phenomenon became
apparent. The supposed distant sound was in fact
a nigh one, being the singing of the wind in the
instrument which the young gentleman was obli-
ged to use, but which, from various circumstances,
ad never occurred to his elder friend as likely
to produce the sounds he had heard.
lt is scarce necessary to add, that the highly

DEMONOLOGY AND WITCHCRAFT. 43

imaginative superstition of the Wild Huntsman
in Germany seems to have had its origin in strong
fancy, operating upon the auricular deceptions, re-
ys the numerous sounds likely to occur in
the dark recesses of pathless forests. The same
clew may be found to the kindred Scottish belief,
so finely embodied by the nameless author of
« Albania :’—

“ There, since of old the haughty Thanes of Ross
Were wont, with clans and ready vassals throng’d,
‘To wake the bounding stag, or guilty wolf ;
There oft is heard at midnight or at noon,
Beginning faint, but rising still more loud,

And louder, voice of hunters, and of hounds,
And horns hoarse-winded, blowing far and keen.
Forthwith the hubbub multiplies, the air
Labours with louder shouts and rifer din

Of close pursuit, the broken cry of deer

Mangled by throttling dogs, the shouts of men,
And hoofs, thick-beating on the hollow hill :
Sudden the grazing heifer in the vale

Starts at the tumult, and the herdsman’s ears
Tingle with inward dread. Aghast he eyes’
The upland ridge, and every mountain round,
But not one trace of living wight discerns,

Nor knows, o’erawed and trembling as he stands,
To what or whom he owes his idle fear—

To ghost, to witch, to fairy, or to fiend,

But wonders, and no end of wondering finds.” *

and Dr Beattie, possess,
frintein the earlier part ‘of last century. It was reprinted by my late
Dr » in a small volume, entitled ‘* Scottish Descriptive

Poems.” «« Albania ** contains the above, and many other poetical
highest merit.

passages of the

44 LETTERS ON

It must also be remembered, that to the auri-
cular deceptions practised by the means of ventri-
loquism or otherwise, may be traced many of the
most successful impostures which credulity has
received as supernatural communications.

The sense of touch seems less liable to perver-
sion than either that of sight or smell, nor are
there many cases in which it can become acces-
sary to such false intelligence, as the eye and ear,
collecting their objects from a greater distance,
and by less accurate enquiry, are but too ready
toconvey, Yet there is one circumstance in which
the sense of touch as well as others is very apt
to betray its possessor into inaccuracy, in ‘respect
to the cireumstances which it impresses on its
owner. The case occurs during sleep, when the
dreamer touches with his hand some other part of
his own person. Heisclearly, in this case, both the
actor and patient, both the proprietor of the mem-
ber touching, and of that whichis touched; while, to
increase the complication, the hand is both toucher
of the limb on which it rests, and receives an im-
pression of touch from it; and the same is the case
with the limb, which at one and the same time
receives an impression from the hand, and con-
veys to the mind a report respecting the size, sub-
stance, and the like, of the member touching. Now,
as, during sleep, the patient is unconscious that
both limbsare his own identical property, his mind
is apt to be much disturbed by the complication
of sensations arising from two parts of his person
beingat once acted upon, and from their reciprocal
action; and false impressions are thus received,
which, accurately enquired into, would afford a

DEMONOLOGY AND WITCHCRAFT. 45

clew to many puzzling phenomena in the theory
of dreams. This peculiarity of the organ of touch,
as also that it is confined to no particular organ,
but is diffused over the whole person of the man,
is noticed by Lucretius :—

Ut si forte manu, quam vis jam corporis, ipse
Tute tibi partem ferias, eque experiare.

A remarkable instance of such an illusion was
told me by a late nobleman. He had fallen asleep,
with some uneasy feelings arising from indiges-
tion. They operated in their usual course of
visionary terrors. At length they were all sum-
med up in the apprehension, that the phantom of
a dead man held the sleeper by the wrist, and en-
deavoured to drag him out of bed. He awaked in
horror, and still felt the cold dead grasp of a
corpse’s hand on his right wrist. It was a minute
before he discovered that his own left hand was
in a state of numbness, and with it he had aeci-
dentally encircled his right arm.

The taste and the smell, like the touch, convey
more direct intelligence than the eye and the ear,
and are less likely than those senses to aid in mis-
leading the imagination. We have seen the pa-
late, in the case of the porridge-fed lunatic, enter
its protest against the acquiescence of eyes, ears,

touch, in the gay visions which gilded the pa-
tient’s confinement. The palate, however, is sub-
ject to imposition as well as the other senses. The
best and most acute bon vivant loses his power of
discriminating betwixt different kinds of wine, if
he is prevented from assisting his palate by the aid
of his eyes,—that is, if the glasses of each are ad-

46 LETTERS ON

ministered indiscriminately while he is blindfolded.
Nay, weare authorized to believe, that individuals
have died in consequence of having supposed them-
selves to have taken poison, when, in reality, the
draught they had swallowed as such, was of an in-
noxious or restorative quality. The delusions of
the stomach can seldom bear upon our present
subject, and are not otherwise connected with su-
pernatural appearances, than as a good dinner
and its accompaniments are essential in fitting
out a daring Tam of Shanter, who is fittest to en-
counter them, when the poet's observation is not
unlikely to apply—

*¢ Inspiring bauld John Barleycorn, -
What dangers thou canst make us scorn !
Wi tippenny we fear nae evil,

‘Wi’ usquebae we'll face the devil.

The swats sae ream’d in Tammie’s noddle,
Fair play, he caredna deils a bodle!”

Neither has the sense of smell, in its ordinary
state, much connexion with our present subject.
Mr Aubrey tellsus, indeed, of an apparition, which
disappeared with a curious perfume as well as a
most melodious twang; and popular belief ascribes
to the presence of infernal spirits, a strong relish
of the sulphureous element of which they are in-
habitants. Such accompaniments, therefore, are
usually united with other materials for imposture.
If, as a general opinion assures us, which is not
positively discountenanced by Dr Hibbert, by the
inhalation of certain gases or poisonous herbs,
necromancers can di a person to believe he
sees phantoms, it is likely that the nostrils are

DEMONOLOGY AND WITCHCRAFT. 47

made to inhale such suffumigation, as well as the
mouth.*

I have now arrived, by a devious path, at the
conclusion of this letter, the object of which is to
show, from what attributes of our nature, whether
mental or corporeal, arises that predisposition to
believe in oprreners! occurrences. It is, I think,
conclusive, that mankind, from avery early period,
have their minds prepared for such events by the
consciousness of the existence of a spiritual world,
inferring in the general proposition the undeni-
able truth, that each man, from the monarch to the
beggar, who has once acted his part on the stage,
continues to exist, and may again, even in a dis-
embodied state, if such is the pleasure of Heaven,
for aught that we know to the contrary, be per-
mitted or ordained to mingle amongst those who
yet remain in the body. The abstract possibility
of apparitions must be admitted by every one who
believes ina Deity, and his superintending omni-
potence, But imagination is apt to intrude its

lanations and inferences founded on inadequate
evidence. Sometimes our violent and inordinate
passions, originating in sorrow for our friends,

* Most ancient authors, who pretend to treat of the won-
ders of natural magic, give receipts for calling up phantoms.
The ng lamps fed by peculiar kinds of medicated
oil, and the use of suffumigations of strong and deleterious
herbs, are the means recommended. From these authorities,
perhaps, a professor of legerdemain assured Dr Alderson
of Hull, that he could compose a preparation of antimony,
sulphur, and other drugs, which, when burnt in a confined
room, would have the effect of causing the patient to sup-
pose he saw phantoms.—See Hibbert on Apparitions, p. 120.

48 LETTERS ON

remorse for our crimes, our eagerness of patriot-
ism, or our deep sense of devotion—these or other
violent excitements of a moral character, in the
visions of night, or the rapt ecstasy of the day,
persuade us that we witness, with our eyes and
ears, an. actual instance of that supernatural com-
munication, the possibility of which cannot be
denied. At other times, the corporeal organs
impose upon the mind, while the eye, and the ear,
diseased, deranged, or misled, convey false im-
pressions to the patient. Very often both the
mental delusion and the physical deception exist
at the same time, and men’s belief of the pheno-
mena presented to them, however seb ater 0
by the senses, is the firmer and more readily
granted, that the physical impression correspond-
ed with the mental excitement.

So many causes acting thus upon each other in
various degrees, or sometimes separately, it must
happen early in the infancy of every society, that .
there should occur many apparently well authen-
ticated instances of supernatural intercourse, satis-
factory enough to authenticate peculiar examples
of the general proposition whichisimpressed upon
us by belief of the immortality of the soul. These
examples of undeniable apparitions, (for they are
apprehended to be incontrovertible,) fall like the
seed of the husbandman, into fertile and prepared
soil, and are usually followed by a plentiful crop
ofsuperstitious figments, which derive their sources
from circumstances and enactments in sacred and
profane history, hastily adopted, and perverted
from their genuine reading. This shall be the
subject of my next letter.

DEMONOLOGY AND WITCHCRAFT. 49

| LETTER II.

Consequences of the Fall on the communication between Men
7 . and the Spiritual World—Effects of the Flood— Wizards
of Pharaoh—Text in Exodus against Witches—The
word Witch is by some said to mean merely Poisoner—Or
| . tf inthe holy text it also means a Divineress, she must, at
. any rate, have been a character very different to be identi-
. fied with it—The original, Chasaph, said to mean a per-
_ son who dealt in Poisons, often a traffic of those who dealt
; with familiar ea different from the European
\ Witch of the Middle Ages—Thus a Witch is not accessary
; _ to the temptation of Job—The Witch of the Hebrews pro-
bably did not rank higher than a Divining Woman— Yet
it was a crime deserving the doom of death, since it inferred
| __ the disowning of Jehovah's Supremacy— Other texts of
| Scripture, in like manner, refer to something corresponding
* more with a Fortune-teller or Divining Woman, than what
' is now called a Witch—Example of the Witch of Endor—
» Account of her Meeting with Saul—Supposed by some a
_ mere Impostor—By others, a Sorceress powerful enough
to raise the Spirit of the Prophet by her own art—Difficul-
_ ties attending both positions—A middle course adopted,
"supposing that, as in the case of Balak, the Almighty had,
© by exertion of his will, substituted Samuel, or a good
} . spirit in his character, for the deception which the Witch
| . intended to produce—Resumption of the Argument, show-
__ ing that the Witch of Endor signified senting very dif-
ferent from the modern ideas of Witcheraft— The Witches
‘mentioned in the New Testament, are not less different
_ from modern ideas, than those of the Books of Moses, nor
do they appear to have possessed the power ascribed to
- Magicians— Articles of Faith which we may gather from
- Scripture on this point— That there might be certain Powers
D : Pra

50 LETTERS ON

permitted by the Almighty to inferior, and even evil Spirits,
as possible ; and in some sense, the Gods of the Heathens
might be accounted Demons—More frequently, and in a
general sense, they were but logs of wood, without sense
or power of any kind, and their worship founded on impos-
ture— Opinion that the Oracles were silenced at the Nati-
vity, adopted by Milton— Cases of Demoniacs— The incar-
nate Possessions probably ceased at the same time as the
intervention of Miracles— Opinion of the Catholics—Re-
sult that Witcheraft, as the word is interpreted in the
Middle Ages, neither occurs under the Mosaic or Gospel
Dispensation—It arose in the ignorant period, when the
Christians considered the Gods of the Mahomedan or
Heathen Nations as Fiends, and their Priests as Conjurers
or Wizards—JInstance as to the Saracens, and a’

Northern Europeans yet unconverted—The Gods of Mex-
ico and Peru explained on the same system—Also the
Powahs of North America— Opinion of Mather— Gibb,
a supposed Warlock, persecuted by the other Dissenters—

Wuart degree of communication might have
existed between the human race and the inhabit-
ants of the other world, had our first parents kept
the commands of the Creator, can only be subject
of unavailing speculation. We do not, perhaps,
presume too much when we suppose, with Milton,
that one necessary consequence of eating the
« fruit of that forbidden tree” was removing toa
wider distance from celestial essences the beings,
who, although originally but a little lower than
the angels, had, by their own crime, forfeited the
gift of immortality, and degraded themselves into
an inferior rank of creation.

Some communication between the spiritual
world, by the union of those termed in Scripture
* Sons of God” and the daughters of Adam, still

DEMONOLOGY AND WITCHCRAFT. 51

continued after the fall, though their inter-alliance
‘was notapproved of by the Rulerof mankind. We
are given to understand, darkly indeed, but with
as much ogre i we can be entitled to require,
that the mixture between the two species of created
‘beings was sinful on the part of both, and displea-
sing to the Almighty. It is probable, also, that
the extreme longevity of the antediluvian mortals
vented their feeling sufficiently that they had
rought themselves under the banner of Azrael,
the angel of death, and removed to too great a
distance the period between their crime and its
ishment. The date of the avenging Flood gave

irth to a race, whose life was gradually shorten-
ed, and who, being admitted to slighter and rarer
intimacy with beings who possessed a higher rank
in creation, assumed, as of course, a lower posi-
tion in the scale. Accordingly, after this period,
‘we hear no more of those unnatural alliances
which preceded the flood, and are given to un-
derstand that mankind, dispersing into different
‘of the world, separated from each other, and

m, in various places, and under separate au-
ices, to pursue the work of replenishing the
world, which had been imposed upon them as an
end of their creation. In the meantime, while the
Deity was pleased to continue his manifestations
to those who were destined to be the fathers of
his elect people, we are made to understand that
wicked men, it may be by the assistance of fallen
angels, were enabled to assert rank with, and at-
tempt to match, the prophets of the God of Israel.
"The mattermust remain uncertain, whether it was
by sorcery or legerdemain that the wizards of

52 LETTERS ON

Pharaoh, King of Egypt, contended with Moses,
in the face of the prince and people, changed their
rods into serpents, and imitated several of the
lagues denounced against the devoted kingdom.
Those owers of the Magi, however, whether ob-
tained by supernatural communications, or arising
from knowledge of legerdemain and its kindred
accomplishments, were openly exhibited; and who
can doubt that, though we may be left in some
darkness, both respecting the extent of their skill
and the source from which it was drawn, we are
told all which it can be important for us to know ?
We arrive here at the period when the Almighty
chose to take upon himself directly to legislate for
-his chosen people, without having obtained any
-accurate knowledge, whether the crime of witch-
craft, or the intercourse between the spiritual world
and embodied beings, for evil purposes, either ex-
isted after the flood, or was visited with any open
marks of Divine displeasure.

But in the Law of Moses, dictated by the Di-
vinity himself, was announced a text, which, as
interpreted literally, having been inserted into the
criminal code of all Christian nations, has occa-
sioned much cruelty and bloodshed, either from
its tenor being misunderstood, or that, being ex-
clusively calculated for the Israelites, it made
part of the jadicia) Mosaic dispensation, and was
abrogated, like the greater part of that law, by
the more benign oa clement dispensation of the
Gospel. :
_. The text alluded to is that verse of the twen-
ty-second chapter of Exodus, bearing, “ men shall
not suffer a witch to liye.” Many learned men

DEMONOLOGY AND WITCHCRAFT. 58

have affirmed, that in this remarkable passage the
Hebrew word cHasAPH means nothing more than
poisoner, although, like the word veneficus, by
which it is rendered in the Latin version of the
Septuagint, other learned men contend, that it
hath the meaning of a witch also, and may be
understood as denoting a person who pretended
to hurt his or her neighbours in life, limb, or
goods, either by noxious potions, by charms, or
similar mystical means. In this particular the
witches of Scripture had probably some resem-
blance to those of ancient Europe, who, although
their skill and power might be safely despised, as
long as they confined themselves to their charms
and spells, were very apt to eke out their capa-
city of mischief by the use of actual poison, so
that the epithet of sorceress and poisoner were
almost synonymous. This is known to have been
the case in many of those darker iniquities, which
bear as their characteristic something connected
with hidden and prohibited arts. Such was the
statement in the indictment of those concerned
in the famous murder of Sir Thomas Overbury,
when the arts of Forman and other sorcerers ha-
ving been found insufficient to touch the victim’s
life, practice by poison was at length successfully
resorted to; and numerous similar instances might
be quoted. But supposing that the Hebrew witch
proceeded only by charms, invocations, or such
means as might be innoxious, save for the assist-
ance of demons or familiars, the connexion be-
tween the conjurer and the demon must have been
of avery different character, under the law of Mo-
ses, from that which was conceived, in latter days,

s

54 LETTERS ON

to constitute witchcraft. There was no contract of
subjection to a diabolic power, no infernal stamp
or sign of such a fatal league, no revellings of Satan.
and his hags, and no infliction of disease or mis~
fortune upon good men. At least there is not a
word in Scripture, authorizing us to believe that
such a system existed. On the contrary, we are
told, (how far literally, how far metaphorically, it
is not for us to determine,) that, when the Enemy
of mankind desired to probe the virtue of Job to
the bottom, he applied for permission to the Su-

reme Governor of the world, who granted him
iberty to try his faithful servant with a storm
of disasters, for the more brilliant exhibition of
the faith which he reposed in his Maker. In all
this, had the scene occurred after the manner of
the like events in latter days, witcheraft, sorce-
ries, and charms, would have been introduced, and.
the Devil, instead of his own permitted agency,
would have employed his servant the witch, as
the necessary instrument of the Man of Uzz’s afflic-
tions. In like manner, Satan desiredtohave Peter,
that he might sift him like wheat. But neither is
there here the agency of any sorcerer or witch.
Luke, xxii. 31.

Supposing the powers of the witch to be limit-
ed, in the time of Moses, to enquiries at some pre-
tended deity or real evil spirit concerning future
eyents, in what respect, may it be said, did such
a crime deserve the severe punishment of death ?
To answer this question, we must reflect, that the
object of the Mosaic dispensation being to pre-
serve the knowledge of the True Deity within
the breasts of a selected and separated people, the

DEMONOLOGY AND WITCHCRAFT. 55

God of Jacob necessarily showed himself a jealous
God to all who, straying from the path of direct
worship of Jehovah, had recourse to other dei-
ties, whether idols or evil spirits, the gods of the
neighbouring heathen. The swerving from their
allegiance to the true Divinity, to the extent of
praying to senseless stocks and stones, which
could return them no answer, was, by the Jewish
law, an act of rebellion to their own Lord God,
and.as such most fit to be punished capitally. Thus
the prophets of Baal were deservedly put to
death, not on account of any success which they
might obtain by their intercessions and invoca-
tions, (which, though enhanced with all their ve-
hemence, to the extent of cutting and wounding
themselves, proved so utterly unavailing, as to
incur the ridicule of the prophet,) but because
they were guilty of apostasy from the real Deity,
while they worshipped, and encouraged others to
worship, the false divinity Baal. The Hebrew
witch, therefore, or she who communicated, or
attempted to communicate, with an evil spirit,
was justly punished with death, though her com-
munication with the spiritual world might either
not exist at all, or be of a nature much less in-
timate than has been ascribed to the witches of
later, days ; nor does the existence of this law,
against the witches of the Old Testament, sanc-
tion, in any respect, the severity of similar enact-
ments subsequent to the Christian revelation,
against a different class of persons, accused of a
very different species of crime.

In another passage, the practices of those per
sons termed witches in the Holy Scriptares, are

56 LETTERS ON

again alluded to; and again it is made manifest
that the sorcery or witchcraft of the Old Testa-
ment resolves itself into a trafficking with idols,
and asking counsel of false deities; in other words,
into idolatry, which, notwithstanding repeated
prohibitions, examples, and judgments, was still
the prevailing crime of the Israelites. The pas-
sage alluded to is in Deuteronomy, xviii. 10, 11.—
«« There shall not be found among you any one that
maketh his son or his daughter to pass through
the fire, or that useth divination, or an observer
of times, or an enchanter, or a witch, ora charmer,
or a consulter with familiar spirits, or awizard, or a
necromancer.” Similar denunciations occur in the
nineteenth and twentieth chapters of Leviticus.
In like manner, it is a charge against Manasses,
2 Chronicles, xxxviii., that he caused his children
to pass through the fire, observed times, used en-
chantments and witcheraft, and dealt with fami-
liar spirits and with wizards. These passages seem
to concur with the former, in classing witchcraft
among other desertions of the prophets of the
Deity, in order to obtain responses by the supersti-
tious practices of the pagan nations around them.
To understand the texts otherwise, seems to con-
found the modern system of witcheraft, with all its
unnatural and improbable outrages on common-
sense, with the crime of the person who, in classi-
cal days, consulted the oracle of Apollo;—a capital
offence in a Jew, but surely a venial sin in arf
ignorant and deluded pagan.

To illustrate the. nature of the Hebrew witch
and her prohibited criminal traffic, those who have
written on this subject have naturally dwelt upon

DEMONOLOGY AND WITCHCRAFT. 57

the interview between Saul and the Witch of En-
dor, the only detailed and particular account of
such a transaction which is to be found in the
Bible ;—a fact, by the way, which proves that
the crime of witchcraft (capitally punished as it
was when discovered) was not frequent among
the chosen people, who enjoyed such peculiar ma-
nifestations of the Almighty’s presence. The
Scriptures seem only to have conveyed to us the
general fact (being what is chiefly edifying) of
the interview between the Witch and the King of
Israel. They inform us, that Saul, disheartened
and discouraged by the general defection of his
subjects, and the consciousness of his own un-
worthy and ungrateful disobedience, despairing of
obtaining an answer from the offended Deity, who
had previously communicated with him through
his prophets, at length resolved, in his despera-
tion, to go to a divining woman, by which course
he involved himself in the crime of the person
whom he thus consulted, against whom the law
denounced death,—a sentence which had been of-
ten executed by Saul himself on similar offenders.
Scripture proceeds to give us the general informa-
tion, that the king directed the Witch to call up
the Spirit of Samuel, and that the female exclaim-
ed, that gods had arisen out of the earth—that Saul,
more particularly requiring a description of the ap-
parition, (whom, consequently, he did not himself
see,) she described it as the figure of an old man
with amantle. In thisfigurethe king acknowledges
the resemblance of Samuel, and, sinking on his face,
hears from the apparition, speaking in the charac-

58 LETTERS ON

ter of the prophet, the melancholy prediction of
his own defeat and death.

In this description, though all is told whichis ne-
cessary to convey to us an awful morallesson, yet
we are left ignorant of the minutiz attending the
apparition, which perhaps we ought to accept asa
sure sign, that there wasno utility inour being made .
sgeiniost withthem. It isimpossible, forinstance,
to know with certainty whether Saul was present
when the woman used her conjuration,orwhether he
himself personally ever saw the appearance which
the Pythoness described to him, It is left still
more doubtful whether any thing supernatural was
actually evoked, or whether the Pythoness and her
assistant meant to practise a mere deception, ta-
king their chance to prophesy the defeat and death
of the broken-spirited king, as an event which the
circumstances in which he was placed rendered
highly probable, since he was surrounded by a
superior army of Philistines, and his character as
a soldier rendered it likely that he would not sur-
vive a defeat, which must involve the loss of his
kingdom. On the other hand, admitting that the
apparition had really a supernatural character, it
remains equally uncertain what was its nature, or
by what power it was compelled to an appearance,
unpleasing, as it intimated, since the supposed spi-
rit of Samuel asks wherefore he was disquieted
inthe grave. Was the power of the witch over
the invisible world so great, that, like the Eric-
tho of the heathen poet, she could disturb the
sleep of the just, and especially that of a prophet
so important as Samuel; and are we to suppose
that he, upon whom the Spirit of the Lord was

DEMONOLOGY AND WITCHCRAFT. 59

wont to descend, even while he was clothed with
frail mortality, should be subject to be disquieted
in his grave, at the voice of a vile witch, and the
command of an apostate prince? Did the true
Deity refuse Saul the response of his prophets,
and could a witch compel the actual spirit of Sa-
muel to make answer notwithstanding ?
Embarrassed by such difficulties, another course
of explanation has been resorted to, which, freed
from some of the objections which attend the two
extreme suppositions, is yet liable to others. It has
been mupencst thatsomething tookplace upon this
remarkable occasion, similar to that which disturb-
ed the preconcerted purpose of the prophet Ba-
laam, and compelled him to exchange his preme-
ditated curses for blessings. According to thishy-
pothesis, the divining woman of Endor was prepa=
ring to practise npen Saul those tricks of legerde-
main orjugglery by which sheimposed upon mean-
er clients who resorted to her oracle. Or we may
conceive that, in those days, when the laws of na-
ture were frequently suspended by manifestations
ofthe Divine Power, some degree of jugglingmight
be permitted between mortals and the spirits of
lesser note ; in which case, we must suppose that
the woman really expected or hoped to call up
some supernatural appearance. But in eithercase,
this second solution of the story supposes that the
will of the Almighty substituted, on that memo-
rable occasion, for the phantasmagoria intended
by the witch, the spirit of Samuel, in his earthly
resemblance—or, if thereadermay think this more
likely, some good being, the messenger of the di-
vine pleasure, in the likeness of the departed pro-

60 ; LETTERS ON

phet—and, to the surprise of the Pythoness her-
self, exchanged the juggling farce of sheer deceit
or petty sorcery which she had intended to pro-
duce, for a deep tragedy, capable of appalling the
heart of the hardened tyrant, and furnishing an
awful lesson to future times.

This exposition has the advantage of explain-
ing the surprise expressed by the Witch at the
unexpected consequences of her own invocation,
while it removes the objection of supposing the
spirit of Samuel subject to her influence. It does
not apply so well to the complaint of Samuel, that
lie was disquieted, since neither the prophet, nor
any good angel wearing his likeness, could be
supposed to complain of an apparition which took
Soo in obedience to the direct command of the

eity. If, however, the phrase is understood,
not as a murmuring against the pleasure of Pro-
vidence, but as a reproach to the prophet’s for-
mer friend Saul, that his sins and discontents,
which were the ultimate cause of Samuel's ap-
pearance, had withdrawn the prophet, for a space,
from the enjoyment and repose of heaven, to re-
view this miserable spot of mortality, guilt, grief,
and misfortune, the words may, according to that
interpretation, wear no stronger sense of com-
plaint than might become the spirit of a just man
made perfect, or any benevolent angel by whom
he might be represented. It may be observed,
that, in Ecclesiasticus, xlvi. 19, 20, the opinion of
Samuel's actual appearance is adopted, since it is
said of this man of God, that after death he prophe-
sied, and showed the hing his latter end.
~ Leaving the further discussion of this dark and

DEMONOLOGY AND WITCHCRAFT. 61

difficult question to those whose studies have qua-
.lified them to give judgment on so obscure a sub-
ject, it so far appears clear, that the Witch of En-
dor was not a being such as those believed in by
our ancestors, who could transform themselves
and others into the appearance of the lower ani-
mals, raise and allay tempests, frequent the com-
pany and join the revels of evil spirits, and, by
their counsel and assistance, destroy human lives,
and waste the fruits of the earth, or perform feats
of such magnitude as to alter the face of nature.
The Witch of Endor was a mere fortune-teller, to
whom, in despair of all aid or answer from the
Almighty, the unfortunate King of Israel had
recourse in his despair, and by whom, in some
way or other, he obtained the awful certainty of
his own defeat and death. She was liable, indeed,
deservedly, to the punishment of death, for intru-
ding herself upon the task of the real prophets, by
whom the will of God was, in that time, regularly
made known. But her existence and her crimes
can go no length to prove the possibility that
another class of witches, no otherwise resembling
her than as called by the same name, either exist-
ed at a more recent period, or were liable to the
same capital punishment, for a very different and
much more doubtful class of offences, which, how-
ver odious, are nevertheless to be proved possible
before they can be received as a criminal charge,
. Whatever may be thought of other occasional
expressions in the Old Testament, it cannot be
said, that, in any part of that sacred volume, a
text occurs, indicating the existence of a system
of witchcraft, under the Jewish dispensation, many

62 LETTERS ON

respect similar to that against which the law-books
of so many European nations have, till very late-
ly, denounced punishment; far less under the
Christian dispensation—a system under which the
emancipation of the human race from the Leviti-
cal law was happily and miraculously perfected.
This latter crime is supposed to infer a compact
implying reverence and adoration on the part of
the witch who comes under the fatal vat and
tronage, support, and assistance, on the of
The diabolical patron. Indeed, in the four Gos.
pels, the word, under any sense, does not occur ;
although, had the possibility of so enormous a
sin been admitted, it was not likely to escape the
warning censure of the Divine Person who came
to take away the sins of the world. Saint Paul,
indeed, mentions the sin of witchcraft in a cursory
manner, as superior in guilt to that of ingratitude;
and in the offences of the flesh, it is ranked imme-
diately after idolatry ;which juxta-position inclines
us to believe that the witchcraft mentioned by the
ta must have been analogous to that of the
Old Testament, and equivalent to resorting to the
assistance of soothsayers, or similar forbidden
arts, to acquire knowledge’ of futurity. Sorcerers
are also joined with other criminals, in the Book
of Revelations, as excluded from the city of God.
And with these occasional notices, which indicate
that there was a transgression so called, but leave
us ignorant of its exact nature, the writers upon
witchcraft attempt to wring out of the New Tes-
tament proofs of a crime in itself so disgustingly
improbable. Neither do the exploits of Elymas,
ed the Sorcerer, or Simon, called Magus or the

DEMONOLOGY AND WITCHCRAFT. 63

Magician, entitle them to rank above the class of
impostors, who assumed a character to which they
had no real title, and put their own mystical and
ridiculous pretensions to supernatural power in
competition with those who had been conferred on
to diffuse the gospel, and facilitate its
reception by the exhibition of genuine miracles.
It is clear that, from his presumptuous and pro-
fane proposal to acquire, by purchase, a portion
of those powers which were directly derived from
inspiration, Simon Magus displayed a degree of
profane and brutal ignorance, inconsistent with his
possessing even the intelligence of a skilful im-
= and it is plain that a leagued vassal of
ell, should we pronounce him such, would have
known his own rank and condition, com-
pared to that of the Apostle, than to have made
such a fruitless and unavailing proposal, by which
he could only expose his own impudence and ig-
norance.

With this observation we may conclude our
brief remarks upon witchcraft, as the word occurs
in the Scripture; and it now only remains to men-
tion the nature of the demonology, which, as ga«
thered from the sacred volumes, every Christian
believer is bound to receive as a thing declared
and proved to be true.

And in the first place, no man can read the
Bible, or call himself a Christian, without belie-
ving that, during the course of time comprehend-
ed by the divine writers, the Deity, to confirm the
faith of the Jews, and to overcome and confound.
the pride of the heathens, wrought in the land
many great miracles, using either good spirits, the

64 LETTERS ON

instruments of his pleasure, or fallen angels, the
permitted agents of such evil as it was his will
should be inflicted upon, or suffered by, the chil-
dren of men. This proposition comprehends, of
course, the acknowledgment of the truth of mi-
racles during this early period, by which the ordi-
nary laws of nature were occasionally suspended,
_and recognises the existence in the spiritual world
of the two grand divisions of angels and devils,
Severally exercising their powers according to the
commission or permission of the Ruler of the uni-
verse.

Secondly, wise men have thought and argued,
that the idols of the heathen were actually fiends,
or rather, that these enemies of mankind had power
to assume the shape and appearance of those fee-
ble deities, and to give a certain degree of coun-
tenance to the faith of the worshippers, by work-
ing seeming miracles, and returning, by their
priests or their oracles, responses which “ palter’d
in a double sense” with the deluded persons who
consulted them. Most of the fathers of the Chris-
tian church have intimated such an opinion. This
doctrine has the advantage of affording, to a cers
tain extent, a confirmation of many miracles rela-
ted in pagan or classical history, which are thus
ascribed to the agency of evil spirits. It corre-
sponds also with the texts of Scripture, which
declare that the gods of the heathen are all devils
and evil spirits ; and the idols of Egypt are class-
ed, as in Isaiah, chap. xix. ver. 2, with charmers,
those who have familiar spirits, and with wizards,
But whatever license it may be supposed was
permitted to the evil spirits of that period,—and

DEMONOLOGY AND WITCHCRAFT. 65

although, undoubtedly, men owned the sway of
deities who were, in fact, but personifications of
certain evil passions of humanity, as, for example,
in their sacrifices to Venus, to Bacchus, to Mars,
&e. and, therefore, might be said, in one sense, to
worship evil spirits—we cannot, in reason, sup-
that every one, or the thousandth part of the
innumerable idols worshipped among the heathen,
was endowed with supernatural power; it is clear
that the greater number fell under the description
applied to them in another passage of Scripture,
in which the part of the tree burned in the fire
for domestic purposes is treated as of the same
wer and estimation, as that carved into an
image, and preferred for gentile homage. This
striking passage, in which the impotence of the
senseless block, and the brutish ignorance of the
worshipper, whose object of adoration is the
work of his own hands, occurs in the 44th chapter
‘of the prophecies of Isaiah, verse 10, e¢ seg. ‘The
recise words of the text, as well as common sense,
forbid us to believe that the images so construct-
ed by common artisans, became the habitation or
resting-place of demons, or possessed any mani-
festation of strength or power, whether through
‘demoniacal influence or otherwise. The whole
oe ean of doubt, delusion, and trick exhibited by
the oracles, savours of the mean juggling of im-
postors, rather than the audacious intervention
of demons. Whatever degree of power the false
_ of heathendom, or devils in their name, might
‘be permitted occasionally to exert, was, unques-
tionably, under the general restraint and limita-
tion of Providence; and though, on the one hand,
E

66 LETTERS ON

‘we cannot deny the possibility of such permission
being granted, in cases unknown to us, it is cer-
tain, on the other, that the Scriptures mention no
one specific instance of such influence, expressly
recommended to our belief. ;
Thirdly, as the backsliders among the Jews
repeatedly fell off to the worship of the idols of
the neighbouring heathens, so they also resorted
to the use of charms and enchantments, founded
on a superstitious perversion of their own Leviti+
eal ritual, in which they endeavoured by sortilege,
by Teraphim, by observation of augury, or the
flight of birds, which they called Nahas, by the
means of Urim and Thummim, to find as it were
a by-road to the secrets of futurity: But for the
same reason that withholds us from delivering any
opinion upon the degree to which the devil and
his angels might be allowed to countenance the
impositions of the heathen priesthood, it is im-
possible for us conclusively to pronounce what
effect might be permitted by supreme Providence,
to the ministry of such evil spirits as presided
over, and, so far as they had liberty, directed,
these sinful enquiries among the Jews themselves,
We are indeed assured from the sacred writings;
that the promise of the Deity to his chosen peo-
le, if they conducted themselves agreeably to the
w which he had given, was, that the communi-
cation with the invisible world would be enlarged;
so that in the fulness of his time, he would pour
out his spirit upon all flesh, when their sons and
daughters should prophesy, their: old men see
visions, and their young men dream dreams. Sucl
were the promises delivered to the Israelites by

DEMONOLOGY AND WITCHCRAFT. 67

Joel, Ezekiel, and other holy seers, of which St
Peter, in the second chapter of the Acts of the
-Aposties, hails the fulfilment in the mission of our
Saviour. And on the other hand, it is no less evi-
dent that the Almighty, to punish the disobe-
dience of the Jews, abandoned them to their own
fallacious desires, and suffered them to be deceived
by the lying oracles, to which, in flagrant violation
of his commands, they had recourse. Of this
the punishment arising from the Deity abandon-
‘ing Ahab to his own devices, and suffering him to
be deceived by a lying spirit, forms a striking in-
stance.

Fourthly, and on the other hand, abstaining
with reverence from accounting ourselves judges
of the actions of Omnipotence, we may safely con-
clude, that it was not his pleasure to employ in the
execution of his judgments, the consequences of
any such species of league or compact betwixt
devils and deluded mortals, as that denounced
in the laws of our own ancestors under the name
of witchcraft. What has been translated by that
word, seems little more than the art of a medicator
of poisons, combined with that of a Pythoness or
false prophetess ; a crime, however, of a capital
nature, by the Levitical law, since, in the first
capacity, it implied great enmity to mankind, and
in the second, direct treason to the divine Legis-
lator. The book of Tobit contains, indeed, a pas-
mee résembling more an incident in an Arabian

ale, or Gothic romance, than a part of inspired
writing. In this, the fumes produced by broil-
ing the liver of a certain fish, are described as
having power to drive away an evil genius who

68 LETTERS ON

guards the nuptial chamber of an Assyrian prin-
cess, and who has strangled seven bridegrooms
in succession, as they approached the nuptial couch.
But the romantic and fabulous strain of this le-
gend has induced the fathers of all Protestant
churches to deny it a place amongst the writings
sanctioned by divine origin, and we may, there-
fore, be excused from entering into discussion on
such imperfect evidence.

Lastly, In considering the incalculable change
which took place upon the Advent of our Saviour
and the announcement of his law, we may observe,
that according to many wise and learned men, his
mere appearance upon earth, without awaiting the
fulfilment of his mission, operated as an act of
banishment of such heathen deities as had hither-
to been suffered to deliver oracles, and ape in some
degree the attributes of the Deity. Milton has,
in the Paradise Lost, it may be upon conviction
of its truth, embraced the theory which identifies
the followers of Satan with the gods of the hea-
then ; and, in a tone of poetry almost unequalled,
even in his own splendid writings, he thus de-
scribes, in one of his earlier pieces, the departure
of these pretended deities on the eve of the bless-
ed Nativity.

* The oracles are dumb,
No voice or hideous hum
Runs through the arched roof in words deceiving ;
Apolle from his shrine
Can no more divine,
With hollow shriek the steep of Delphos leaving ;
‘No nightly trance or breathed spell
Inspires the pale-eyed priests from the prophetic cell.

DEMONOLOGY AND WITCHCRAFT. 69

“ The lonely mountains o’er,
And the resounding shore,
A voice of weeping heard and loud lament ;
From haunted spring and dale,
___ Edged with poplar pale,
The parting Genius is with sighing sent ;
With flower-inwoven tresses torn,
The Nymphs in twilight shade of tangled thickets mourn. »

* Tn consecrated earth,
And on the holy hearth,

The Lars and Lemures moan with midnight plaint ;
In urns and altars round,

_ A drear and dying sound

Affrights the Flamens at their service quaint ;

And the chill marble seems to sweat,

While each peculiar Power foregoes his wonted seat.

 Peor and Baalim
Forsake their temples dim,
With tliat twice-batter’d god of Palestine ;
‘ And mooned Ashtaroth,
Heayen’s queen and mother both,
Now sits not girt with tapers’ holy shine ;
The Lybic Hammon shrinks his horn ;
Tn vain the Tyrian maids their wounded Thammuz mourn.

** And sullen Moloch, fled,
Hath left in shadows dread
His burning idol all of darkest hue ;
In vain with cymbals’ ring,
They call the grisly king,
In dismal dance about the furnace blue ;
The brutish gods of Nile as fast,
Isis and Orus, and the Dog Anubis, haste.”

_ The quotation is a long one, but it is scarcely
possible to shorten what is so beautiful and inte-
resting a description of the heathen deities, whe-

70 LETTERS ON

ther in the classic personifications of Greece, the
horrible shapes worshipped by mere barbarians,
or the hieroglyphical enormities of the Egyptian
Mythology. The idea of identifying the pagan
deities, especially the most distinguished of them,
with the manifestation of demoniac power, and
concluding that the descent of our Saviour st
them with silence, so nobly expressed in the poetr
of Milton, is not certainly to be lightly rejecte
It has been asserted, in simple prose, by autho-
rities of no mean weight; nor does there appear
any thing inconsistent in the faith of those who,
laieving that, in the elder time, fiends and de-
mons were permitted an enlarged degree of power
in uttering predictions, may also give credit to
the proposition, that at the Divine Advent that
power was restrained, the oracles silenced, and
those demons who had aped the Divinity of the
place, were driven from their abode on earth, ho-
noured as it was by a guest so awful.

It must be noticed, however, that this great
event had not the same effect on that peculiar
class of fiends who were permitted to vex mortals
by the alienation of their minds, and the abuse of
their persons, in the cases of what is called Demon-
iacal possession. In what exact sense we should
understand this word possession, it is impossible to
discover ; but we feel it impossible to doubt, (not-
withstanding learned authorities to the contrary,)
that it was -a dreadful disorder, of a kind not
merely natural; and may be pretty well assured
that it was suffered to continue aiter the incdr-
nation, because the miracles effected by our Sa-
viour and his apostles, in curing those tormented

DEMONOLOGY AND WITCHCRAFT. 71

in this way, afforded the most direct proofs of
his divine mission, even out of the very mouths
of those ejected fiends, the most malignant ene-
mies of a power to which they dared not refuse
homage and obedience. And here is an addi-
tional proof, that witchcraft, in its ordinary and
r sense, was unknown at that period: al-
though cases of possession are repeatedly men-
tioned in the Gospels, and Acts of the Apostles,
yet in no one instance do the devils ejected men-
tion a witch or sorcerer, or plead the commands
of such a person, as the cause of occupying or
tormenting the victim ;—whereas, in a great pro-
portion of those melancholy cases of witcheraft
with which the records of later times abound, the
stress of the evidence is rested on the declaration
of the possessed, or the demon within him, that
some old man or woman in the neighbourhood, had
compelled the fiend to be the instrument of evil.
_ It must also be admitted, that in another most
remarkable respect, the power of the Enemy of
mankind was rather enlarged than bridled or re-
strained, in consequence of the Saviour coming
upon earth. It is indisputable, that in order that
Jesus might have his share in every species of de-
Iusion ‘and persecution, which the fallen race of
Adam is heir to, he personally suffered the tempt-
ation im the wilderness at the hand of Satan, whom,
without resorting to his divine power, he drove,
confuted, silenced, and shamed, from his pre-
sence. But it appears, that although Satan was
allowed, upon this memorable occasion, to come
on earth with great power, the perniission was
given expressly because his time was short.

72 LETTERS ON

The indulgence which was then granted to him
in 2 case so unique and peculiar, soon passed over,
and was utterly restrained. It is evident, that
after the lapse of the period during which it plea-
sed the Almighty to establish his own Church by
miraculous displays of power, it could not con-
sist with his kindness and wisdom, to leave the
enemy in the possession of the privilege of delu-
ding men by imaginary miracles calculated for
the perversion of that faith, which real miracles
were no longer present to support. There would,
we presume to say, be a shocking inconsistency
in supposing, that false and deceitful prophecies
and portents should be freely. circulated by any
demoniacal influence, deceiving men’s bodily or-
gans, abusing their minds, and perverting their
faith, while the true religion was left by its great
Anthor devoid of every supernatural sign and
token, which, in the time of its Founder and his
immediate disciples, attested and celebrated their
inappreciable mission. Such a permission on the
part of the Supreme Being, would be (to speak.
under the deepest reverence) an abandonment of
his chosen people, ransomed at such a price, to
the snares of an enemy, from whom the worst.
evils were to be apprehended. Nor would it con-
sist with the remarkable promise in holy writ,
that “ God will not suffer his people to be tempted.
above what they are able to bear.” 1 Cor. x. 13.
The Fathers of the Faith are not strictly agreed.
at. what period the miraculous power was with-.
drawn from the Church ; but few Protestants are.
disposed to bring it down beneath the accession.
of Constantine, when the Christian religion was

A

DEMONOLOGY AND WITCHCRAFT. 73

fully established in supremacy. The Roman Ca-
tholics, indeed, boldly affirm, that the power of
miraculous interference with the course of nature
is still in being; but the enlightened even of this
faith, though they dare not deny a fundamental
tenet of their church, will hardly assent to any
particular case, without nearly the same evidence
which might conquer the incredulity of theirneigh-
bours the Protestants. It is alike inconsistent with
the common sense of either, that fiends should be
permitted to work marvels which are no longer
exhibited on the part of Heaven, or in behalf of
religion.

It will be observed that we have not been
anxious to decide upon the limits of probability
on this question. It is not necessary for us, to,
ascertain in what degree the power of Satan was
at liberty to display itself during the Jewish dis-

ensation, or down to what precise period in the

istory of the Christian church cures of demon-
iacal possession, or similar displays of miraculous
power, may have occurred. We have avoided
controversy on that head, because it comprehends

uestions not more doubtful than unedifying.

ittle benefit could arise from attaining the exact.
knowledge of the manner in which the apostate
Jews practised unlawful charms or auguries. Af-
ter their conquest and dispersion, they were re-
marked among the Romans for such supersti-
tious practices; and the like, for what we know,
may continue to linger among the benighted wan-.
derers of their race at the present day. But all
these things are extraneous to our enquiry, the
purpose of which was to discover whether any.

74 : LETTERS ON

real evidence could be derived from sacred his-
tory, to prove the early existence of that branch
of demonology which has been the object, in com-
paratively modern times, of criminal prosecution
and capital punishment. We have already allu-
ded to this as the contract of witchcraft, in which,
as the term was understood in the middle ages,
the demon and the witch or wizard combined
their various powers of doing harm to inflict ca-
lamities upon the person and property, the for-:
tune and the fame, of innocent human beings;
imposing the most horrible diseases, and death
itself, as marks of their slightest ill-will; trans-
forming their own persons and those of others at
their pleasure; raising tempests to ravage the
crops of their enemies, or carrying them home to
their own garners; annihilating or transferring to
their own dairies the produce of herds ; spreading
pestilence among cattle, infecting and blighting
children; and, in a word, doing more evil than the
heart of man might be supposed capable of con-
ceiving, by means far beyond mere human power
to accomplish. If it could be supposed that such
unnatural leagues existed, and that there were
wretches wicked enough, merely for the gratifica-
tion of malignant spite or the enjoyment of some
beastly revelry, to become the wretched slaves
of infernal spirits, most just and equitable would
be those laws which cut them off from the midst
of every Christian commonwealth. But it is still
more just and equitable, before punishment be in-
flieted for any crime, to prove that there is a
wrens of that crime being committed. We

ve, therefore, advanced an important step in

DEMONOLOGY AND WITCHCRAFT. 75

our enquiry, when we have ascertained that the
witch of the Old Testament was not capable of
any thing he the ore woh MBG of baleful
drugs, or the practising of paltry imposture, in
other words, that she did not hold rs character
aseribed to a modern sorceress. We have thus
removed out of the argument the startling objec-
tion, that, in denying the existence of witchcraft,
we deny the possibility of a crime which was
declared capital in the Mosaic law; and are left
at full liberty to adopt the opinion, that the more
modern system of witchcraft was a part, and by
no means the least gross, of that mass of errors
which appeared among the members of the Chris-
tian Church, when their religion, becoming gra-
dually corrupted by the devices of men, and the
barbarism of those nations among whom it was.
spread, showed a light, indeed, but one deeply.
tinged with the remains of that very pagan igno-
rance which its divine founder came to dispe
. We will, in a future part of this enquiry, en-
deavour to show that many of the particular ar-
ticles of the popular belief respecting magic and
witchcraft were derived from the opinions which
the ancient heathens entertained as part of their
religion. To recommend them, however, they.
had principles lying deep in the human mind and
heart of all times; the tendency to belief in su-
ncies is natural, and indeed seems
connected with, and deduced from, the invaluable
conviction of the certainty of afuture state. More-~
over, it is very possible that particular stories of
this class may have seemed undeniable in the dark
ages, though our better instructed period can ex-

76. LETTERS ON

plain them in a satisfactory manner, by the excited’
temperament of spectators, or the influence of de-

lusions produced by derangement of the intellect,

or imperfect reports of the external senses. They

obtained, however, universal faith and credit ; and

the churchmen, either from craft or from igno-:
rance, favoured the progress of a belief which cer-

tainly contributed, in a most powerful manner, to

extend their own authority over the human mind.

To pass from the pagans of antiquity—the Ma-

hometans, though their profession of faith is ex-
clusively unitarian, were accounted worshippers

of evil spirits, who were supposed to aid them in

their continual warfare against the Christians, or
to protect and defend them in the Holy Land,

where their abode gave so much scandal and of-

fence to the devout. Romance, and even history,

combined in representing all who were out of the

pale of the Church as the personal vassals of Satan,

who played his deceptions openly amongst them ;
and Mahound, Termagaunt, and Apollo were, in

the opinion of the Western Crusaders, only so

many names of the Arch-fiend and his principal

angels. The mostenormous fictions, spread abroad

and believed through Christendom, attested the

fact, that there were open displays of supernatural

aid afforded by the evil spirits to the Turks and

Saracens ; and fictitious reports were not less li-

beral in assigning to the Christians extraordinary
means of defence through the direct protection of
blessed saints and angels, or of holy men, yet in
the flesh, but already anticipating the privileges

proper to a state of beatitude and glory, and pos-
sessing the power to work miracles.

DEMONOLOGY AND WITCHCRAFT. 77

To show theextreme grossness of these legends,
we may give an example from the romance of
Richard Ceeur de Lion, premising, at the same
time, that, like other romances, it was written in
what the author designed to be the style of true
history, and was addressed to hearers and readers,
not as a tale of fiction, but a real narrative of
facts, so that the legend is a proof of what the
age esteemed credible, and were disposed to be-
lieve, as much as if it had been extracted from a
graver chronicle.

The renowned Saladin, it is said, had dispatch-
ed an embassy to King Richard, with the present
of a colt, recommended as a gallant warhorse,
challenging Cour de Lion to meet him in single
combat between the armies, for the purpose of de-
ciding at once their pretensions to the land of Pa-
lestine, and the theological question, whether the
God of the Christians, or Jupiter, the deity of the
Saracens, should be the future object of adoration
by the subjects of both monarchs. Now, under this
seemingly chivalrous defiance, was concealed a
most unknightly stratagem, and which we may,
atthe same time, call a very clumsy. trick for
the devil to be concerned in. A Saracen clerk had
conjured two devils into a mare and her colt, with
the instruction, that whenever the mare neighed,
the foal, which was a brute of uncommon size,
should kneel down to suckhis dam. The enchant-
ed foal was sent to King Richard, in the belief
that, the foal obeying thesignal of itsdam asusual,
the Soldan, who mounted the mare, might get an
easy advantage over him.

But the English king was warned by an angel

78 LETTERS ON

im a dream of the intended stratagem, and the
colt was, by the celestial mandate, previously to
the combat, conjured in the holy name, to be
obedient to his rider during the encounter. The
fiend-horse intimated his submission by droopi
his head, but his word was not entirely credited,
His ears were stopped with wax. In this con-
dition, Richard, armed at all points, and with va-
rious marks of his religious faith displayed on
his weapons, rode forth to meet Saladin, and the
Soldan, confident of his stratagem, encountered
him boldly. The mare neighed till she shook the
ground for miles around. But the sucking devil,
whom the wax prevented from hearing the sum-
mons, could not obey the signal. Saladin was
dismounted, and narrowly escaped death, while his
army were cut to pieces by the Christians. It is
but an awkward tale of wonder, where a demon is
worsted by a trick which could hardly have cheat-
ed a common horse-jockey; but by such legends
our ancestors wereamused and interested, till their
belief a, the demons of the Holy Land
seems to have been not very far different from
that expressed in the title of | Ben Jonson’s play,
« The Devil is an Ass.” ;
One of the earliest maps ever published, which
at Rome in the 16th century, intimates
a similar belief in the connexion of the heathen
nations of the north of Europe with the demons
of the spiritual world. In Esthonia, Lithuania,
Courland, and such districts, the chart, for want,
it may be supposed, of an accurate account of the
country, exhibits rude cuts of the fur-clad natives
paying homage atthe shrines of demons, who make

DEMONOLOGY AND WITCHCRAFT. 79

themselves visibly present to them; while at other
places ——— displayed as doing battle with the
Teutonic knights, or other military associations
formed for the conversion or expulsion of the
heathens in these parts. Amid the pagans, armed
with scimitars, and dressed in caftans, the fiends
are painted as assisting them, pourtrayed in all
the modern horrors of the cloven-foot, or, as the
Germans term it, horse’s-foot, bat-wings, saucer-
eyes, locks like serpents, and tail like a dragon.

hese attributes, it may be cursorily noticed,
themselves intimate the connexion of modern de-
monology with the mythology of the ancients.
The cloven foot is the attribute of Pan, to whose
talents for inspiring terror we owe the word panic.
—the snaky tresses are borrowed from the shield
of Minerva, and the dragon train alone seems to
be connected with the scriptural history.*

Other heathen nations, whose creeds could not
have directly contributed to the system of demon-
ology, because their manners and even their v
existence was unknown when it was te
were nevertheless involved, so soon as Europeans
became acquainted with them, in the same charge
of witchcraft and worship of demons, brought by
the Christians of the middle ages, against the hea-
thens of northern Europe and the Mahommedans
of the East. We learn from the information of
a Portuguese voyager, that even the native Chris-

* The chart alluded to is one of the fac-similes of an an~
cient planisphere, engraved in bronze, about the end of the
15th century, and called the Borgian Table, from its pos~
sessor, Cardinal Stephen Borgia, and preserved in his Mu-
seum at Veletri, -

‘80 LETTERS ON

‘tians, (called those of St Thomas,) whom the dis-
coverers found in India when they first arrived
there, fell under suspicion of diabolical practices.
It was almost in vain that the priests of one of
their chapels produced to the Portuguese officers
‘and soldiers a holy image, and called on them,
as good Christians, to adore the blessed Virgin.
The sculptor had been so little acquainted with
his art, and the hideous form which he had pro-
duced resembled an inhabitant of the infernal
regions so much more than Our Lady of Grace,
that one of the European officers, while, like his
companions, he dropped on his knees, added the
loud protest, that if the image represented the
‘Devil, he paid his homage to the Holy Virgin.
In South America the Spaniards justified the
unrelenting cruelties exercised on the unhappy
natives, by reiterating, in all their accounts of the
countries which they discovered and conquered,
that the Indians, in their idol worship, were fa-
voured by the demons with a direct intercourse,
-and that their priests inculcated doctrines and
rites the foulest and most abhorrent to Christian
ears. The great Snake-god of Mexico and other
idols, worshipped with human sacrifices, and bathed
in the gore of their prisoners, gave but too much
probability to this accusation ; and, if the images
themselves were not actually tenanted by evil spi-
rits, the worship which the Mexicans paid to them
was founded upon such deadly eruelty and dark
superstition, as might easily be believed to have
been breathed into mortals by the agency of hell.
Even in North America, the first settlers in
New England, and other parts of that immense

SES

DEMONOLOGY AND WITCHCRAFT. 81

continent, uniformly agreed that they detected,
among the inhabitants, traces of an intimate con-
nexion with Satan. It is scarce necessary to re-
mark, that this opinion was founded exclusively
upon the tricks practised by the native Powahs,
or cunning men, to raise themselves to influence
among the chiefs, and to obtain esteem with the
people, which, possessed as they were profession-
ally of some skill in jugglery, and the knowledge
of some medical herbs and secrets, the understand-
ing of the colonists was unable to trace to their
real source—legerdemain and imposture. By the
account, however, of the Reverend Cotton Mather,
in his Magnalia, book vi.,* he does not ascribe to
these Indian conjurersany skill greatly superior to
a maker of almanacks, or common fortune-teller.
“ They,” says the Doctor, “ universally acknow-
eo and worshipped many gods, and therefore
highly esteemed and. reverenced their priests,
powahs, or wizards, who were esteemed as having
immediate converse with the gods. To them,
therefore, they addressed themselves in all diffi-
cult cases; yet could not all that desired that dig-
nity, as they esteemed it, obtain familiarity with
the infernal spirits. Nor were all powahs alike
successful in their addresses; but they became
such, either by immediate revelation, or in the
use of certain rites and ceremonies, which tradi-
tion had left as conducing to that end. In so
much, that parents, out of zeal, often dedicated
their children to the gods, and educated them
accordingly, observing a certain diet, debarring

* On Remarkable Mercies of Divine Providence.
F

82 LETTERS ON

sleep, &c.: yet of the many designed, but few
obtained their desire. Supposing that where the
practice of witcheraft has been highly esteemed,,
there must be given the plainest demonstration of
mortals having familiarity with infernal spirits, I
am willing to let my reader know, that, not many
years since, here died one of the powahs, who ne-
ver pretended to astrological knowledge, yet could
precisely inform such who desired his assistance,,
from whence goods stolen from them were gone,,
and whither carried, with many things of the like
nature; nor was he ever known to endeayour to
conceal his knowledge to be immediately froma.
god. subservient to him that the English worship.
This powah being, by an Englishman worthy of
credit, (who lately informed me of the same,) de-
sired to advise him who had taken certain. goods
which had been stolen, having formerly been an
eye-witness of his ability, the powah, after a
little pausing, demanded why he requested that
from him, since himself served another God? that
therefore he could not help him; but added, «
you can believe that my god may help you, I wi
try what I can do; which diverted the man from
further enquiry. I must a little digress, and tell
my reader, that this powah’s wife was accounted
a godly woman, and lived in the practice and pro-
fession of the Christian religion, not only by the
approbation, but encouragement of her husband.
She constantly prayed in the family, and attend-
ed the public worship on the Lord’s days. He
declared that he could not blame her, for that she
served a god that was above his; but that as to

himself, his god’s continued kindness obliged him

DEMONOLOGY AND WITCHCRAFT. 83

not to forsake his service.’ It appears, from the
above and similar passages, that Dr Cotton Ma-
ther, an honest and devout, but sufficiently cre-.
dulous man, had mistaken the purpose of the to-
lerant powah. The latter only desired to elude
the necessity of his practices being brought under
= observant eye of an Rasepinie while he found
ious apology in the admitted superiority
whick he naturally conceded to the Deity of a
people, advanced, as he might well. conceive, so
far above his own in power and attainments, as
might reasonably infer a wee eh superior-
ity in the nature and objects of their worship.
another narrative, we are entitled to in-
fer that the European wizard was held superior
to the native sorcerer of North America. Among
the numberless extravagances of the Scottish
Dissenters of the 17th century, now canonized
ima lump by those who view them in the general
light of enemies to Prelacy, was a certain shi
master, called, from his size, Meikle John Gibb.
This man, a person called Jamie, and one or two
other men, besides twenty or thirty females who
adhered to them, went the wildest lengths of
enthusiasm. Gibb headed a party, who followed
him into the moorlands, and at the Ford Moss,
between Airth and Stirling, burned their Bibles,
as an act of a acme to their new faith.
They were apprehended in consequence, and com-
mitted to prison; and the rest. of the Dissenters,
however differently they were affected by the per-
seeution of government, when it applied to them-
selves, were nevertheless much offended that these
poor mad people were not brought to capital pu-

84 LETTERS ON

nishment for their blasphemous extravagances ;
and imputed itas afresh crime to the Duke of York,
that, though he could not be often accused of toler-
ation, he considered the discipline of the house of
correction as more likely to bring the unfortunate
Gibbites to their senses, than the more dignified
severities of a public trial and the gallows. The
Cameronians, however, did their best to correct .
this scandalous lenity. As Meikle John Gibb,
who was their comrade in captivity, used to dis-
turb their worship in jail by his maniac howling,
two of them took turn about to hold him down
by force, and silence him by a napkin thrust into
his mouth. This mode of quieting the unlucky
heretic, though sufficiently emphatic, being deemed
ineffectual or inconvenient, George Jackson, aCa-
meronian, who afterwards suffered at the gallows,
dashed the maniac with his feet and hands against
the wall, and beat him so severely, that the rest
were afraid that he had killed him outright. Af-
ter which specimen of fraternal chastisement, the
lunatic, to avoid the repetition of the discipline,
whenever the prisoners began worship, ran behind
the door, and there, with his own napkin crammed
into his mouth, sat howling like a chastised cur.
But on being finally transported to America, John
Gibb, we are assured, was much admired by the
heathen for his familiar converse with the devil
bodily, and offering sacrifices to him. “ He died
there,” says Walker, “about the year 1720."* We.

* See Patrick Walker’s Biographia Presbyteriana, vol.
ii. p. 23; also God’s Judgment upon Persecutors, and
Wedrow’s History, upon the article John Gibb.

DEMONOLOGY AND WITCHCRAFT. ‘85

-must necessarily infer, that the pretensions of the
natives to supernatural communication could not
“be of a high class, since we find them honouring
ace madman as their superior; and, in ge-
neral, that the magic, or powahing, of the North
. American Indians, was not of a nature to be much
apprehended by the British colonists, since the
-natives themselves gave honour and precedence
to those Europeans who came among them with
‘the character of possessing intercourse with the
irits whom they themselves professed to wor-
ship. é
Notwithstanding this inferiority on the part
of the powahs, it occurred to the settlers that the
‘heathen Indians and Roman Catholic Frenchmen
were particularly favoured by the demons, who
sometimes adopted their appearance, and showed
‘themselves in their likeness, to the great annoy-
‘ance of the colonists. Thus, in the year 1692, a
-party of real or imaginary French and Indians ex-
hibited themselves occasionally to the colonists of
the town of Gloucester, in the county of Essex,
‘New England, alarmed the country around very
greatly, skirmished repeatedly with the English,
and caused the raising of two regiments, and the
‘dispatching a strong reinforcement to the assist-
ance of the settlement. But as these visitants,
‘by whom they were plagued more than a fortnight,
‘though they exchanged fire with the settlers, ne-
ver killed or scalped any one, the English became
convinced that they were not real Indians and
Frenchmen, but that the devil and his agents had
-assumed such an appearance, although seemingly

86 LETTERS ON

not enabled effectually to support it, for the mo-
lestation of the colony.*

It appears, then, that the ideas of superstition
which the more ignorant converts to the Christian
faith borrowed from the wreck of the classic my-
thology, were so rooted in the minds of their suc-
cessors, that these found corroboration of their
faith in demonology in the practice of every pa-
gan nation whose destiny it was to encounter them
as enemies, and that as well within the limits of
Europe, as in every other part of the globe to
which their arms were carried. Ina word, itmay
be safely laid down, that the commonly received
doctrine of demonology, presenting the same ge-
neral outlines, though varied according to the
fancy of particular nations, existed through all
Europe. It seems to have been founded origi-
nally on feelings incident to the human heart, or
diseases to which the human frame is liable,—to
have been largely augmented by what classic su-
perstitions survived the ruins of paganism,—and
to have received new contributions from the opi-
nions collected among the barbarous nations, whe-
ther of the east or of the west. It is now neces-
sary to enter more re uestion, and
pa see to trace from w sige sources the
people of the middle ages derived those notions,
which gradually assumed the shape of a regular
system of demonology. t

* Magnalia, book vii. article xviii. The fact is also
alleged in the Life of Sir William Phipps. 4

DEMONOLOGY AND WITCHCRAFT. 87

LETTER Iil.

‘Creed of Zoroaster—received partially into most Heathen Na-
- tions—Instances among the Celtic Tribes of Scotland—Bel-

tane Feast—Gudeman’s Croft— Such abuses admitted into

the earlier Ages of the Church—Law

jainst Witcher Customs sur-

Proph

’ Valhalla not highly regarded
their Worshippers— Often defied by the Champions—
lemons of the North—Story of Assueit and Asmund—
Action of eo meae against es—Adventure of a
with the Goddess Conversion of the

| Pagans of Iceland to Christianity—Northern
_ tions mixed with those of the Celts—Satyrs of the North

— Highland Ovrish—Meming the Satyr.

‘Tae creed of Zoroaster, which naturally occurs
Secunassistod reason as a mode of accounting for
mingled existence of good and evil in the vi-
‘sible world—that belief which, in one modification
or another, sup the co-existence of a benevo-
dentand malevolent principle, which contend toge-
ther without either being able decisively to prevail
~over his antagonist, leads the fear and awe —
on the human mind to the worship as well
en theauthor of ate TET in all the effects
accounts him the primary cause,
as to mom paper ars opponent, who is loved and

88 LETTERS ON

adored as the father of all that is good and boun-
tiful. Nay, such is the timid servility of human
nature, that the worshippers will neglect the altars
of the Author of good, rather than that of Arima-
nes, trusting with indifference to the well-known
mercy of the one, while they shrink from the idea
of irritating the vengeful jealousy of the awful fa-
ther of evil.

The Celtic tribes, by whom, wnder various de-
nominations, Europe seems to have been origin-
ally peopled, possessed, in common with other
Savages, a natural tendency to the worship of the
evil principle. They did not, perhaps, adore Ari-
manes under one sole name, or consider the malig-
nant divinities as sufficiently powerful to under-
take a direct struggle with the more benevolent
gods ; yet they thought it worth while to propi-
tiate them by various expiatory rites and prayers,
that they, and the elementary tempests, which they
conceived to be under their direct command, might
be merciful to suppliants who had acknowledged
their power, and deprecated their vengeance.

Remains of these superstitions might be traced
‘till past the middle of the last century, though fast
becoming obsolete, or passing into mere pop
customs of the country, which the peasantry ob-
-serve, without thinking of their origin. About
-1769, when Mr Pennant made his tour, the.cere-
mony of the Baaltein, Beltane, or First of May,
though varying in different districts of the High-
lands, was yet in strict observance ; and the cake,
which was then baken with scrupulous attention
.to certain rites and forms, was divided into frag-
ments, which were formally dedicated to birds or

DEMONOLOGY AND WITCHCRAFT. 89.

beasts of prey, that’ they, or rather the being.
whose agents they were, might spare the flocks
and herds.*
- Another custom of similar origin lingered late
among us, In many parishes of Scotland, there
was suffered to exist a certain portion of land,
called the gudeman’s croft, which was never plough.
ed or cultivated, but suffered to remain waste,
like the Temenos of a pagan temple. Though it
was not expressly avowed, no one doubted that
the goodman’s croft was set apart for some evil
being ; in fact, that it was the portion of the arch-
fien himself, whom our ancestors distinguished
by a name, which, while it was generally under-
could not, it was supposed, be offensive to
the stern inhabitant of the regions of despair.
This was so general a custom, that the church
published an ordinance against it as an impious
aud blasphemous usage.
« This singular custom sunk before the efforts of
in the seventeenth century ; but there
must still be many alive, who in childhood have
been taught to look with wonder on knolls and
of ground left uncultivated, because,
whenever a ploughshare entered the soil, the
elementary spirits were supposed to testify ‘their
displeasure by storm and thunder. Within our
own memory, many such places, sanctified to
barrenness by some favourite popular supersti-
tion, existed, ‘oth 3 in Wales an ie reland, as well

* See Pennant’s Scottish Tour, vol. i. p. 111. The tra-
epervicem ree festival of the same esas
his | observed in Gloucestershire,

90 - LETTERS ON

as in Scotland; but the high price of agricultu-
ral produce during the late war, renders it doubt-
ful if a veneration for greybearded superstition
has suffered any one of them to remain undese-
crated. For the same reason, the mounts called
Sith Bhruaith were respected, and it was deemed
unlawful and dangerous to cut wood, dig earth
and stones, or otherwise disturb them.*

Now, it may at first sight seem strange that
the Christian religion should have permitted the
existence of such gross and impious relics of hea-
thenism, ina land where its doctrines had obtain-
ed universal credence. But this will not appear
so wonderful, when it is recollected that the origi-
nal Christians under the heathen emperors were
called to conversion by the voice of apostles and
saints, invested for the purpose with miraculous
powers, as well of language, for communicating
their doctrine to the Gentiles, as of cures, for the
purpose of authenticating their mission. These
converts must have been in general such elect
persons as were effectually called to make part of
the infant church ; and when hypocrites ventured,
like Ananias and Sapphira, to intrude themselves
ito so select an association, they were liable, at
the Divine pleasure, to be detected and punish-
ed. On the contrary, the nations who were con-
verted after Christianity had become the religion
of the empire were not brought within the pale
upon ‘sucha principle of selection, as when ‘the

* See Essay on the Subterranean Commonwealth, by Mr
Rozerr Kirke, Minister of Aberfoyle.

DEMONOLOGY AND WITCHCRAFT. 91

church consisted of a few’ individuals, who had,
upon conviction, exchanged the errors of the pa-
gan religion for the dangers and duties incurred
by those who embraced a faith inferring the self-
denial of its votaries, and at the same time expo-
sing them to persecution. When the cross became
triumphant, and its cause no longer required the
direction of inspired men, or the evidence of mi-
racles, to compel reluctant belief, it is evident that
the converts who thronged into the fold must have,
many of them, entered because Christianity was
the prevailing faith—many because it was the
church, the members of which rose most readily
to promotion—many, finally, who, though content
to resign the worship of divinities, could
not, at once, clear their minds of heathen ritual
and heathen observances, which they inconsist-
ently laboured to unite with the more simple and
majestic faith that disdained such impure union.
If this was the case, even in the: Roman empire,
where the converts to the Christian faith must

and perfect sense of the word, » as
was frequently the case, they only assumed
profession of the religion become the

choice of some favoured chief, whose example
they followed in mere love and loyalty, without,

92 LETTERS ON

_perhaps, attaching more consequence to a change
-of religion than to a change of garments. Such
hasty converts, professing themselves Christians,
but neither weaned from their old belief, nor in-
structed in their new one, entered the sanctuar
without laying aside the superstitions with whith
‘their young minds had been imbued ; and accus-
-tomed to a plurality of deities, some of them, who
‘bestowed unusual thought on the matter, might
be of opinion, that, in adopting the God of the
Christians, they had not renounced the service of
every inferior power.

If, indeed, the laws of the empire could have
been supposed to have had any influence over those
fierce barbarians, who conceived that the empire
itself lay before them as a spoil, they might have
been told that Constantine, taking the offence of
alleged magicians and sorcerers in the same light
in which it was viewed in the law of Moses, had
denounced death against any who used these un-
lawful enquiries into futurity. “ Let the unlawful

‘curiosity of prying into futurity,” says the law,
‘be silent in every one henceforth and for ever.*
For, subjected to the avenging sword of the law,
he shall be punished capitally who disobeys’ our

-commands in this matter.”

Tf, however, we look more closely into this enact-
“ment, we shall be led to conclude that the civil law
- does not found upon the prohibitions and penalties

in Scripture ; although it condemns the ars mathe-
‘matica (for the most mystic and uncertain of all
‘sciences, real or pretended, at that time held the

* Codex, lib. ix. tit. 18, cap. 1, 2, 3, 5, 6, 7, 8.

DEMONOLOGY AND WITCHCRAFT. 93

title which now distinguishes the most exact) asa
damnable art, and utterly interdicted, and declares
that the practitioners therein should die by fire, as
enemies of the human race—yet the reason of this
severe treatment seems to be different from that
acted upon inthe Mosaicalinstitutions. The weight
of the crime among the Jews was placed on the bla -
phemy of the diviners, and their treason against
the theocracy instituted by Jehovah. The Ro-
man legislators were, on the other hand, moved
chiefly by the danger arising to the person of the
prince and the quiet of the state, so apt to be un-
settled by every pretence or encouragement to in-
novation. The reigning emperors, therefore, were
desirous to place a check upon the mathematics,
(as they termed the art of divination,) much more
for a political than a religious cause, since we ob-
serve, in the history of the empire, how often the
dethronement or death of the sovereign was pro-
duced by conspiracies or mutinies which took
their rise from pretended prophecies. In this
mode of viewing the erime, the lawyers of the
lower empire acted upon the example of those
who had compiled the laws of the twelve tables.*

__® By this more ancient code, the punishment of death
was indeed denounced against those who destroyed crops,
awakened storms, or brought over to their barns and gar-
ners the fruits of the earth; but, by good fortune, it left
the agriculturists of the period at liberty to use the means
they thought most proper to render their fields fertile and
plentiful. Pliny informs us, that one Caius Furius Cre-
sinus, a Roman of mean estate, raised larger crops from a
small field, than his neighbours could obtain from more
ample possessions. He was brought before the judge,
upon a charge, averring that he conjured the fruits of the

94 LETTERS ON

The mistaken and misplaced devotion which Ho-
race recommends to the rural nymph, Phidyle,
would have been a crime of a deep dye in a Chris-
tian, convert, and must have subjected him to,
excommunication, as one relapsed to the rites
of paganism ; but he might indulge his supersti-
tion, by supposing, that though he must not
worship Pan or Ceres as gods, he was at liber-
ty to fear them in their new capacity of fiends.
Some compromise between the fear and the con-
science of the new converts, at a time when the
church no longer consisted exclusively of saints,
martyrs, and confessors, the disciples of inspired
Apostles, led them, and even their priestly guides,
subject like themselves to human passions and
errors, to resort as a charm, if not as an act of
worship, to those sacrifices, words, and tse 4
which the heathen, whom they had succeeded,
pretended to arrest evil, or procure benefits.

_ When such belief in a hostile principle and its
imaginations was become general in the Roman
empire, the ignorance of its conquerors, those
wild nations, Franks, Goths, Vandals, Huns, and
similar classes of unrefined humanity, made them
prone to an error which there were few judicious
preachers to warn them against; and we ought ra-
ther to wonder and admire the Divine clemency,
which imparted to so rude nations the light of
the Gospel, and disposed them to receivea religion

earth, produced by his neighbours’ farms, into-his own pos-
session.. Cresinus appeared, and, having proved the returm
of his farm to be the produce of his own hard and unremit-
ting Jabour, as well as superior skill, was dismissed with
the highest honours,

DEMONOLOGY AND. WITCHCRAFT. 95

so. repugnant to their warlike habits, than that
they should, at the same time, have adopted many
gross superstitions, borrowed from the pagans,
or retained numbers of those which had made
part of their own national forms of heathenism.

. Thus, though the thrones of Jupiter, and the
superior deities of the heathen Pantheon, were
totally overthrown and broken to pieces, frag-
ments of their worship, and many of their rites,
survived the conversion to Christianity,—nay, are
in. existence even at this late and enlightened pe-
riod, althongh those by whom they are practised
have not preserved the least memory of their ori-
ginal p - We may hastily mention one or
two. customs of classical origin, in addition to the
Beltane and those already noticed, which remain
as examples that the manners of the Romans once
gaye the tone to the greater part of the island of
Britain, and at least to the whole which was to
the south of the wall. of Severus.

The following customs still linger in the south
ef Scotland, and belong to this class: The bride,
when she enters the house of her husband, is lifted
over the threshold, and to step on it, or over it,
yoluntarily, isreckoned.a bad omen. This custom
was universal in Rome, where it was observed as
keeping in memory the rape of the Sabines, and
that it was by a show of violence towards the fe-
males, that the object of peopling the city was at-
tained. On the same occasion, a sweet cake, baked
for the purpose, is broken above the head of the
bride; which is also a rite of classic antiquity.

In like manner, the Scottish, even of the better
rank, avoid contracting marriage in the month of

96 LETTERS ON

May, which genial season of flowers and breezes
might, in other respects, appear so peculiarly fa-
vourable for that purpose. It was specially ob-
jected to the marriage of Mary with the profligate
Earl of Bothwell, that the union was formed with-.
in this interdicted month. This prejudice was so
rooted among the Scots, that, in 1684, a set of en-’
thusiasts, called Gibbites, proposed to renounce it,
among a long list of stated festivals, fast days, po-
pish relics, not forgetting the profane names of
the days of the week, names of the months, and
all sorts of idle and silly practices which their ten-
der consciences took an exception to. This ob-
jection to solemnize marriage in the merry month
of May, however fit a season for courtship, is also
borrowed from the Roman pagans, which, had
these fanatics been aware of it, would have been
an additional reason for their anathema against
the practice. The ancients have given us as a
maxim, that it is only bad women who marry in
that month.*

The custom of saying, God bless you, when a
person in company sneezes, is, in like manner, de- _
rived. from sternutation being considered as a
crisis of the plague at Athens, and the hope that,
when it was attained, the patient had a chance of
recovery.

But besides these, and many other customs
which the various nations of Europe received
from the classical times, and which it is not our
object to investigate, they derived from thence a
shoal of superstitious beliefs, which, blended and

* Male nubent Maia.

DEMONOLOGY AND WITCHCRAFT. 97

mingled with those which they brought with them
out of their own country, fostered and formed the
materials of a demonological creed, which has de-
scended down almost to our owntimes. Nixas, or
Nicksa, a river or ocean god, worshipped on the
shores of the Baltic, seems to have taken uncon-
tested possession of the attributes of Neptune.
Amid the twilight winters and overpowering
tempests of these gloomy regions, he had been
not unnaturally chosen as the power most adverse
to man, and the supernatural character with
which he was invested, has descended to our time
under two different aspects. The Nixa of the
Germans is one of those fascinating and lovely
fays whom the ancients termed Naiads ; and un-
Jess her pride is insulted, or her jealousy awaken-
ed, by an inconstant lover, her temper is gene-
rally mild, and her actions beneficent. The Old
Nick, known in England, is an equally genuine
descendant of the northern sea god, and possesses
a larger portion of his powers and terrors. The
British sailor, who fears nothing else, confesses

. his terror for this terrible being, and believes him

a

’ the author of almost all the various calamities to

which the precarious life of a seaman is so con-
tinually exposed. .

The Srna gest or Bhar-geist, by which name
it is generally acknowledged through various

country parts of England, and particularly in
‘Yorkshire, also called : *

a Dobie—a local spectre
which haunts a particular spot under various
forms—is a deity, as his name implies, of Teuto-
nie descent ; and if it be true, as the author has
been informed, that some families’ bearing the

Bayerische
Staatsbibliothek
Minchen

—_,

98 LETTERS ON

name of Dobie carry a phantom, or spectre pas-
sant, in their armorial bearings,* it plainly im-
in that, however the word may have been se-
ected for a proper name, its original derivation
had not then been forgotten.

The classic mythology presented numerous _
points in which it readily coalesced with that of
the Germans, Danes, and Northmen of a later
period. They recognised the power of Erictho,
Canidia, and other sorceresses, whose spells could
perplex the course of the elements, intercept the
influence of the sun, and prevent his beneficial
= upon the fruits of the earth ; call down
the moon from her appointed sphere, and disturb
the original and destined course of nature by their
words and charms, and the power of the evil spi-
rits whom they evoked. They were also profes-
sionally implicated in all sach mystic and secret
rites and ceremonies as were used to conciliate
the favour of the infernal powers, whose disposi-
tions were supposed as dark and wayward, as
their realms were gloomy and dismal. Such hags
were frequent agents in the violation of unbu-
ried bodies, and it was believed, by the vulgar at
least, that it was dangerous to leave es un-
guarded, lest they should be man by the
witches, who took from them the most choice

* A similar bearing has been ascribed, for the same rea-
son, te those of the name of Fantome, who carried of olda
goblin, or phantom, in a shroud sable passant, on a field
azure, Both bearings are founded on what is called cant-
ing heraldry, a species of art disowned by the writers on
the science, yet universally made use of by those who prac-
tise the art of blazonry. t i

, a ee

DEMONOLOGY AND WITCHCRAFT. 99

-ingredients composing their charms. Above all,
it must not be forgotten that these frightful sor-
weresses possessed the power of transforming

‘themselves and others into animals, which are
used in their degree of quadrupeds, or in what-
ever other laborious occupation belongs to the
‘transformed state. The poets of the heathens,
‘with authors of fiction, such as Lucian and Apu-

leius, ascribe all these powers to the witches of
the pagan re a them with the art of

“poisoning, and of making magical philtres, to se-
duce the affections of de young aa beautiful ;

and such were the characteristics which, in greater
or less extent, the people of the middle ages ascri-
bed to the witches of their day,

- But in thus adopting the superstitions of the
‘ancients, the conquerors of the Roman empire
-combined them with similar articles of belief, which
‘they had brought with them from their original
poo tom in the North, where the existence of
-hags of thesame character formed a great feature
in their Sagas and their Chronicles. It requires
“but a slight acquaintance with these compositions,
-to-enable the reader to recognise in the Galdrakin-
na of the Scalds, the Stryga, or witch-woman of
‘more classical ‘climates. In the northern ideas of
“witches, there was no irreligion concerned with
-their lore ; on the contrary, the possession of ma-
bo knowledge was.an especial attribute of Odin
-himself ; and to intrude themselves upon a deity,
‘and compel him to instruct them in what they de-
sired to know, was accounted not an act of impiety,
but of gallantry and high courage, among those
sons of the sword and the spear.’ Their matrons

100 LETTERS ON

possessed a high repntation for magic, for prophe-
tic powers, for creating illusions ; and, if not capa-
ble of transformations of the human body, they
were at least able to impose such fascination on the
sight of their enemies, as to conceal for a period
the objects of which they were in search.
There is a remarkable story in the Eyrbiggia
“Saga, (Historia Eyranorum,) giving the result of
such a controversy between two of these gifted
‘women, one of whom was determined on disco-
-yering and putting to death the son of the other,
named Katla, who in a brawl had cut off the hand
“of the daughter-in-law of Geirada. A party de-
-tached to avenge this wrong, by putting Oddo to
death, returned deceived by the skill of his mother.
They had found only Katla, they said, spinning flax
from a large distaff. “ Fools,” said Geirada, “ that
‘distaff was the man you sought.” They returned,
seized the distaff, and burnt it. But this second
time, the witch disguised her son under the ap-
earance of a tame kid. A third time he was a
so whicltgrovelled among the ashes. The pa’
returned yet 6 a ; augmented, as one ‘of Katla’s
“maidens, who kept watch, informed her mistress,
by oneina blue mantle. “ Alas!” said Katla, “ it
is the sorceress Geirada, against whom spells avail
not.” Accordingly, the hostile party, entering for
-the fourth time, seized on the object of their ani-
‘mosity, and put him to death.* This species of
-witcheraft is well known in Scotland as the gla-
-mour, or deceptio visus, and was supposed to be a
‘special attribute of the race of Gipsies. :

* Eyrbiggia Saga, in Northern Antiquities.

DEMONOLOGY AND WITCHCRAFT 101°

‘ Neither are those prophetesses to be forgotten,
so much honoured among the German tribes, that,
as weareassured by Tacitus, they rose to the highest
rank in their councils, by their supposed superna-
tural knowledge, and even obtained a share in the
direction of their armies. This peculiarity in the
habits of the North was so general, that it was no
unusual thing to see females, from respect to their
supposed views into futurity, and the degree of di-
yine inspiration which was vouchsafed to them,
arise to the degree of Haxa, or chief priestess,
from which comes the word Heze, now univer-
sally used for a witch; a circumstance which
plainly shows, that the mythological system of the
ancient natives of the North had given to the
modern language an appropriate word for dis-
tinguishing those females who had intercourse
with the spiritual world.*
| It is undeniable that these Pythonesses were
_ * It may be worth while to notice, that the word Haxa
is still used in Scotland in its sense of a druidess, or chief
priestess, to distinguish the: places where such females ex-
ercised their ritual. . There is a species of small intrench-
ment on the western descent of the Eildon hills, which
Mr Milne, in his account of the parish of Melrose, drawn
up about eighty years ago, says was denominated Bourjo,
a word of unknown derivation, by which the place is still
known. Here an universal and subsisting tradition bore,
that human sacrifices were of yore offered, while the people
assisting could behold the ceremony from the elevation of ,
the glacis, which slopes inward. With this place of sacrifice
‘communicated a path, still discernible, called the Huzell-
gate, leading to a small glen, or narrow valley, called the
Hazellcleuch—hoth which words are probably derived from
the Haxa, or chief priestess of the pagans.

102 LETTERS. ON

held in high respect while the pagan. religion

; but for that very reason they became odi-
ous so soon as the tribe was converted to Chris-
tianity. They were, of course, if they pretended
to retain their influence, either despised as impos->
tors, or feared as sorceresses ; and the more that,
in particular instances, they became dreaded for
their power, the more they were detested, under
the conviction that they derived it from the ene-
my of man. The deities of the northern hea-
thens underwent a similar metamorphosis, resem-
bling that proposed by Drawcansir in the Re-
hearsal, who threatens “ to make a god subscribe
himself a devil.”

The warriors of the North received this new
impression concerning the influence of their dei-
ties, and the source from which it was derived, with
the more indifference, as their worship, when their
mythology was most generally established, was
never of a very reverential or devotional charac-
ter.. Their ideas of their own- merely human
prowess was so high, that the champions made
it their boast, as we have already hinted, they
would not give way in fight even to the immor-
tal gods themselves. Such, we learn from Czx-
sar, was the idea of the Germans concerning the
Suevi or Swabians, a tribe to whom the others
yielded the palm of valour; and many individual
stories are told in the Sagas concerning bold
champions, who had fought, not only with the
sorcerers, but with the demigods of the system,
and come off unharmed, if not victorious, in the
contest. Hother, for example, encountered the
god Thor in battle, as Diomede, in the Iliad, enga-:

DEMONOLOGY AND WITCHCRAFT. 103

ges with Mars, and with like success. Bartholine*
gives us repeated examples of the same kind.
“ Know this,” said Kiartan to Olaus Trigguasen,
“that I believe neither in idols or demons. I have
travelled through various strange countries, and
haye encountered many giants and monsters, and
have never been conquered by them; I therefore
put my sole trust in my own strength of body
and courage of soul.” Another yet more broad
answer was made to St Olaus, King of Norway,
by Gaukater. “Iam neither Pagan nor Chris-
tian. My comrades and I profess no other reli-
gion than a perfect confidence in our own strength
and invincibility in battle.” Such chieftains were
of the sect of Mezentius—

© Dextra mihi Deus, et telum, quod missile libro,
Nune adsint !”

And we cannot wonder that champions of such a
character, careless of their gods while yet acknow-
ledged as such, readily regarded them as demons,
after their conversion to Christianity.

. To incur the highest extremity of danger be-
came accounted a proof of that insuperable valour
for which every Northman desired to be famed,
and their annals afford numerous instances of en-
counters with ghosts, witches, furies, and fiends,
whom the Kiempé, or champions, compelled to
submit to their mere mortal strength, and yield
to their seryice the weapons or other treasures
which they guarded in their tombs.

* De causis contemptz necis, lib. i. cap. 6.
+ Zneid, lib. x. line 773.

104 : LETTERS ON

The Norsemen were the more prone to these
superstitions. because it was a favourite fancy of
theirs that, in many instances, the change from
life to death altered the temper of the human spi-
rit from benignant to malevolent ; or perhaps, that
when the soul left the body, its departure was oe-
casionally supplied by a wicked demon, who took
the opportunity to enter and occupy its late habi-
tation.

Upon such a supposition the wild fiction that
follows is probably grounded; which, extravagant
as it is, possesses something striking to the ima-
gination. Saxo Grammaticus tells us of the fame
of two Norse princes or chiefs, who had formed
what was called a brotherhood in arms, imply-
ing not only the firmest friendship and constant
support during all the adventures which they
should undertake in life, but binding them by a
solemn compact, that after the death of either, the
survivor should descend alive into the sepulchre
of his brother-in-arms, and consent to be bu-
ried alongst with him. The task of fulfilling this
dreadful compact fell upon Asmund, his eompa-
nion, Assueit, having been slain in battle. The
tomb was formed after the ancient northern cus-
tom in what was called the age of hills,—that
is, when it was usual to bury persons of distin-
guished merit or rank on some conspicuous spot,
which was crowned with a mound. With this pur-'
pose a deep narrow vault was constructed, to be
the apartment of the future tomb over which
the sepulchral heap was to be piled. Here they
deposited arms, trophies, poured forth, perhaps,
the blood of victims, introduced into the tomb

DEMONOLOGY AND WITCHCRAFT. 105

the war-horses of the champions, and when these
rites had been duly paid, the body of Assueit was
placed in the dark and narrow house, while his
faithful brother-in-arms entered and sat down by
the corpse, without a word or look which testified
regret or unwillingness to fulfil his fearful en-
gagement. The soldiers who had witnessed this
singular interment of the dead and living, rolled

«a huge stone to the mouth of the tomb, and piled
so much earth and stones above the spot as made
a mound visible from a great distance, and then,
with loud lamentation for the loss of such un-
daunted leaders, they dispersed themselves like a
flock which has lost its shepherd.

Years passed away after years, and a century
had elapsed, ere a noble Swedish rover, bound
upon some high adventure, and supported by a
gallant band of followers, arrived in the valley

' which took its name from the tomb of the breth-

ren-in-arms. The story was told to the strangers,
whose leader determined on opening the sepul-
chre, partly because, as already hinted, it was reck-
oned a heroic action to brave the anger of depart-
ed heroes by violating their tombs; partly to at-
tain the arms and swords of proof with which the
deceased had done their great actions. He set his
soldiers to work, and soon removed the earth
and stones from one side of the mound, and laid
bare the entrance. But the stoutest of the rovers
started back when, instead of the silence of a tomb,
they heard within horrid cries, the clash of swords,
the clang of armour, and all the noise of a mor-
tal combat between two furious champions. A
young warrior was let down into the profound

106 LETTERS ON

tomb by a cord, which was drawn up shortly af-
ter, in hopes of news from beneath. But when
the adventurer descended, some one threw him
from the cord, and took his place in the noose.
When the rope was pulled up, the soldiers, in~
stead of their companion, beheld Asmund, the
survivor of the brethren-in-arms. He rushed into
the open air, his sword drawn in his hand, his
armour half torn from his body, the left side of ,
his face almost scratched off, as by the talons of
‘some wild beast. He had no sooner appeared
in the light of day, than, with the improvisa-
tory one talent, which these champions often
united with heroic strength and bravery, he

oured forth a string of verses containing the
eore of his hundred years’ conflict within the
tomb. It seems that no sooner was the sepul-
chre closed than the corpse of the slain Assueit
arose from the ground, inspired by some raven-
ous goule, and having first torn to pieces and de-
voured the horses which had been entombed with
them, threw himself upon the companion who
had just given him such a sign of devoted friend-
ship, in order to treat him in the same manner.
The hero, no way discountenanced by the hor-
rors of his situation, took to his arms, and de-
fended himself manfully apne Assueit, or rather
against the evil demon who tenanted that cham-
pion’s body. In this manner the living brother
waged a preternatural combat, which had endu-
red during a whole century, when Asmund, at
last obtaining the victory, prostrated his enemy,
and by driving, as he boasted, a stake through
his body, had finally reduced him to the state of

DEMONOLOGY AND WITCHCRAFT. 107

quiet becoming a tenant of the tomb. Having
chanted the triumphant account of his contest:
and victory, this mangled conqueror fell dead be-
fore them. The body of Assueit was taken
out of the tomb, burnt, and the ashes disper-
sed to heaven; whilst that of the victor, now
lifeless, and without a companion, was deposited
there, so that it was hoped his slumbers might
remain undisturbed.* The precautions taken
against Assueit’s reviving a second time, remind
us of those adopted in the Greek islands, and in
the Turkish provinces, against the Vampire. It
affords also a derivation of the ancient English
law in case of suicide, when a stake was driven
through the body, originally to keep it secure in
the tomb.

The Northern people also acknowledged a kind
of ghosts, who, when they had obtained posses-
sion of a building, or the right of haunting it,
did not defend themselves against mortals on
the knightly principle of duel, like Assueit, nor
were amenable to the prayers of the priest or the
spells of the sorcerer, but became tractable when
peoneet convened in a legal process, ‘The Eyr-

iggia acquaints us, that the mansion of a
respectable landholder in Iceland was, soon after
the settlement of that island, exposed to a per-
secution of this kind. The molestation was pro-
duced by the concurrence of certain mystical and
spectral phenomena, calculated to introduce such
persecution. About the commencement of win-
ter, with that slight exchange of darkness and

* See Saxo Grammaticus, Hist. Dan. lib. v.

108 LETTERS ON

. twilight which constitutes night and day in these
latitudes, a contagious disease arose in a family
of consequence, and in the neighbourhood, which,
sweeping off several members of the family at
different times, seemed to threaten them all with
death... But the death of these persons was at-
tended with the singular consequence, that their
spectres were seen to wander in the neighbour-
hood of the mansion-house, terrifying,’ and even
assaulting, those of the living family who ven-
tured abroad. As the number of the dead mem-
bers of the devoted household seemed to in-
crease in proportion to that of the survivors, the
ghosts took it upon them to enter the house, and
produce their aerial forms and wasted physiog-
nomy, even in the stove where the fire was main-
tained for the general use of the inhabitants,
and which, in an Iceland winter;is the only com-
fortable place of assembling the family. But the
remaining inhabitants of the place, terrified by
the intrusion of these spectres, chose rather to
withdraw to the other extremity of the house,
and abandon their warm seats, than to endure
the neighbourhood of the phantoms. Complaints
were at length made to a pontiff of the god Thor,
named Snorro, who exercised considerable influ-
ence in the island. By his counsel, the young
proprietor of the haunted mansion assembled a
jury, or inquest, of his neighbours, constituted in
the usual judicial form, as if to judge an ordinary
civil matter, and proceeded, in their presence, to
cite individually the various phantoms and resem-
blances of the deceased members of the family,
to show by what warrant they disputed with

DEMONOLOGY AND WITCHCRAFT. 109

him and his servants the quiet possession of his
roperty, and what defence they could plead for
_thus interfering with and incommoding the living.
The spectres of the dead, by name, and in order
as summoned, appeared on their being called, and
muttering some regrets at being obliged to aban-
don their dwelling, departed, or vanished, from
the astonished inquest. Judgment then» went
against the ghosts by default; and the trial by
jury, of which we here can trace the origin, ob-
tained a triumph unknown to any of the great wri-
ters who have made it the subject of eulogy.*

It was not only with the spirits of the dead that
the warlike people of the North made war with-
out timidity, and successfully entered into suits
of ejectment: These daring champions often bra-
ved the indignation even of the superior deities
of their mythology, rather than allow that there
existed any being before whom their boldness
could quail. Such is the singular story, how a
young man of high courage, in crossing a desolate

idge of mountains, met with a huge waggon, in
which the goddess Freya, (i. e. a gigantic idol
formed to represent her,) together with her shrine,
and the wealthy offerings attached to it, was tra-
velling from one district of the country to ano-
ther. The shrine, or sanctuary of the idol, was,
like a modern caravan travelling with a show,
screened by boards and curtains from the pub-
lie gaze, and the equipage was under the im-
mediate guidance of the priestess of Freya, a
-young, good-looking, and attractive woman. The

Hauzn # Eyrbiggia Saga. See Northern Antiquities.

110 LETTERS ON

traveller naturally associated himself with the
riestess, who, as she walked on foot, apparent-
I was in no degree displeased with the com-
pany of a powerful and handsome young man,
as a guide and companion on the journey. It
chanced, however, that the presence of the cham-
= and his discourse with the priestess, was
s satisfactory to the goddess than to the par-
‘ties principally concerned. By a certain signal
the divinity summoned the priestess to the sane-
‘tuary, who presently returned with tears in her
eyes, and terror in her countenance, to inform her
companion that it was the will of Freya that he
‘should depart, and no longer travel in their com-
pany. ¢ You must have mistaken the meaning of
the goddess,” said the champion; “ Freya cannot
have formed a wish so unreasonable, as to desire I
should abandon the straight and good road, which
Jeads me directly on my journey, to choose pre-
cipitous paths and byroads, where I may break
my neck.’—“ Nevertheless,” said the priestess,
« the goddess will be highly offended if you dis-
obey her commands, nor can I conceal from you
that she may personally assault you.’—« It will
be at her own peril if she should be so auda-
cious,” said the champion, “for I will try the
power of this axe against the strength of beams
and boards.” ‘The priestess chid him for his im-
piety ; but being unable to compel him to obey the
dess’s mandate, they again relapsed into fami-
iarity, which advanced to such a point, that a clat-
tering noise within the tabernacle, as of machine-
put in motion, intimated to the travellers that
Broyas who perhaps had some qualities in common

DEMONOLOGY AND WITCHCRAFT. lll

with the classical Vesta, thought a personal inter-
ruption of this téte-d-téte ought to be deferred no
longer. The curtains flew open, and the massive
and awkward idol, who, we may suppose, resem-
bled in form the giant created by Frankenstein,
leapt lumbering from the carriage, and rushing on
the intrusive traveller, dealt him, with its wooden
hands and arms, such tremendous blows, as were
equally difficult to parry or to endure. But the
champion was armed with a double-edged Danish
axe, with which he bestirred himself with somuch
strength and activity, that at length he split the
head of the image, and with a severe blow hewed
off its left leg. The image of Freya then fell
motionless to the ground, and the demon which
had animated it, fled yelling from the battered
tenement. The champion was now victor ; and,
according to the law of arms, took possession of
the female and the baggage. The priestess, the
divinity of whose patroness had been, by the
event of the combat, sorely lessened in her eyes,
was now easily induced to become the associate
and concubine of the conqueror. She accompa-
nied him to the district whither he was travelling,
and there displayed the shrine of Freya, taking
care to hide the injuries which the goddess had
received in the brawl. The champion came in for
a share of a gainful trade driven by the priestess,
besides Teagan g to himself most of the trea-
sures which the sanctuary had formerly contained.
Neither does it appear that Freya, having, per-
haps, a sensible recollection of the power of
axe, ever again ventured to appear in person for the
purpose of calling her false stewards to account.

112 LETTERS ON

The national estimation of deities, concerning
whom such stories could be told and believed, was,
of course, of no deep or respectful character. The

Icelanders abandoned Odin, Freya, Thor, and

their whole pagan mythology, in consideration of
a single disputation Coipien the heathen priests
and the Christian missionaries. The priests
threatened the island with a desolating eruption
of the volcano called Hecla, as the necessary con-
sequence of the vengeance of their deities. Snor-
ro, the same who advised the inquest against the
ghosts, had become a convert to the Christian reli-
gion, and was present on the occasion, and as the

conference was held on the surface of what had

been a stream of lava, now covered with vegetable
substances, he answered the priests with much
readiness, “ To what was the indignation of the
gods owing, when the substance on which we stand
was fluid and scorching? Believe me, men of Ice-
Jand, the eruption of the voleano depends on na-
tural circumstances, now as it did then, and is
not the engine of vengeance intrusted to Thor
and Odin.” It is evident, that men who reasoned
with so much accuracy concerning the imbecility
of Odin and Thor, were well prepared, on aban-
doning their bee 5 » to consider their former dei-
ties, of whom they believed so much that was im-
pious, in the light of evil demons.

- But therewere some particulars of the northern
ereed, in which it corresponded so exactly with
that of the classics, as leaves room to doubt
whether the original Ase, or Asiatics, the found-
ers of the Scandinavian system, had, before their
migration from Asia, derived them from some

DEMONOLOGY AND WITCHCRAFT. 113

common source with those of the Greeks and
Romans ; or whether; on the other hand, the same
proneness of the human mind to superstition, has
caused that similar ideas are adopted in different
regions, as the same plants are found in distant
countriés, without the one, as far as can be dis-
covered, haying obtained the seed from the others.
- The classical fiction, for example, of the satyrs,
and other subordinate deities of wood and wild,
whose power is rather delusive than formidable,
and whose supernatural pranks intimate rather
a wish to inflict terror than to do hurt, was re-
ceived among the northern people, and perhaps
transferred by them to the Celtic tribes. It is
an idea which seems common to many nations,
The existence of a satyr, in the silvan form, is
even pretended to be proved by the evidence of
Saint Anthony, to whom one is said to have ap-
( in the desert. The Scottish Gael have an
idea of the same kind, respecting a goblin called
Ourisk, whose form is like that of Pan, and his
attendants something between a man and a goat,
the nether extremities being in the latter form.
A species of cavern, or rather hole, in the rock,
affords to the wildest retreat in the romantic
neighbourhood of Loch Katrine, a name taken
from classical superstition. It is not the least
curious circumstance, that from this silvan deity
the modern nations of Europe have borrowed the
degrading and unsuitable emblems of the goat's
visage and form, the horns, hoofs, and tail, with
which they have depicted the author of evil; when
it pleased him to show himself on earth. - So that
the alteration of a single word, would. render
H

M4 LETTERS ON

Pope's well-known line more truly adapted to
the fact, should we venture to read,

* And Pan to Satan lends his heathen horn.”

We cannot attribute the transference of the at-
tributes of the northern satyr, or Celtic ourisk, to
the arch-fiend, to any particular resemblance be-
tween the character of these deities and that of:
Satan. On the contrary, the ourisk of the Celts:
was a creature by no means peculiarly male-)
volent, or formidably powerful ; but rather a me-:
lancholy spirit, which dwelt in wildernesses far re-
moved from men. If we are to identify him with
the Brown Dwarf of the Border moors, the ourisk
has a mortal term of life, and a hope of salva-
tion, as indeed the same high claim was made by
the satyr who appeared to St Anthony. More-
over, the Highland ourisk was a species of lubber
fiend, and capable of being overreached by those
who understood philology. It'is related of one of
these goblins, which frequented a mill near the foot
of Loch Lomond, that the miller, desiring to get
rid of this meddling spirit, who injured the i-
nery by setting the water on the wheel when there
was no grain to be ae contrived to have a
meeting with the goblin by watching in his mill
till night. The ourisk then entered, anddemanded
the miller’s name, and was informed that he was
called Myself ; on which is founded astory almost)
exactly like that of Ourts in the Odyssey, a tale’
which, though classic, is by no means an elegant or’
ingenious fiction, but which we are astonished to
find in an obscure district, and in the Celtic tongue,

— ~~

DEMONOLOGY AND WITCHCRAFT. 115

seeming to argue some connexion or communica-
tion heies these remote Highlands of Scotland
and the readers of Homer in former days, which
we cannot account for. After all, perhaps, some
church-man more learned than his brethren may
have transferred the legend from Sicily to Dun-
crune, from the shores of the Mediterranean to
those of Loch Lomond. I have heard it also told,
that the gta freebooter, Rob Roy, once
suet a victory by disguising a part of his men
Highted exty? so as to resemble the ourish, or
nd satyr.
Rhone was an individual satyr called, I think,
Meming, belonging to the Scandinavian mytho-
logy, of a character different from the ourisk
h similar in shape, whom it was the boast of
the highest champions to seek out in the solitudes
which he inhabited. He was an armourer of ex-
treme dexterity, and the weapons which he forged
were of the highest value. But as club-law perva-
ded the ancient system of Scandinavia, Meming
had the humour of refusing to work for any cus-
tomer save such as compelled him to it with force
of arms. He may be, perhaps, identified with the
recusant smith who led before Fingal from Ire-
land to the iepeg and being there overtaken,
was compelled to forge the sword which Fingal
afterwards wore in all his battles, and which was
called the Son of the dark brown Luno, from the
name of the armourer who forged it.*

* The wenpea is often mentioned in Mr MacPherson’s . r
; but the Irish ballad, which gives a spirited ae

y pbeotibe debate between the champion a
is nowhere introduced, ‘

116 LETTERS ON

- From this it will appear that there were origi-
nals enough in the mythology of the Goths, as well
as Celts, to furnish the modern attributes ascribed
to Satan in later times, when the object of painter
or poet was to display him in his true form, and
with all his terrors. Even the genius of Guido
and of Tasso have been unable to surmount this
prejudice, the more rooted, perhaps, that the
wicked are described as goats in Scripture,and that
the devil is called the old dragon. In Raffael’s fa-
mous painting of the arch-angel Michael binding
Satan, the dignity, power, and angelic character
expressed by the seraph, form an extraordinary
contrast to the poor conception of a being who
ought not, even in that lowest degradation, to
have seemed so unworthy an antagonist. Neither
has Tasso been more happy, where he represents
the divan of darkness, in the enchanted forest,
as presided over by a monarch having a huge
tail, hoofs, and all the usual accompaniments of
popular diablerie. The genius of Milton alone
could discard all these vulgar puerilities, and as-
sign to the author of evil the terrible dignity
of one who should seem not “ less than arch-
angel ruined.” This species of degradation is
yet grosser when we take into consideration the
changes which popular opinions have wrought re-
specting the taste, habits, powers, modes of tempt-
ing, and habits of tormenting, which are such as
might rather be ascribed to some stupid super-
annuated and doting ogre of a fairy tale, than to
the powerful-minded demon, who fell through
pride and rebellion, not through folly or incapa-
city, 4

DEMONOLOGY AND WITCHCRAFT. 117

Having, however, adopted our present ideas of
the devil as they are expressed by his nearest ac-
quaintances, the witches, from the accounts of sa-
tyrs, which seem to have been articles of faith
both among the Celtic and Gothic tribes, we
must next notice another fruitful fountain of de-
monological fancies. But as this source of the
mythology of the middle ages must necessarily
comprehend some account of the fairy folk, to
whom much of it must be referred, it is neces-
sary to make a pause before we enter upon the
mystic and marvellous connexion supposed to
exist between the impenitent kingdom of Satan,
and those merry dancers by moonlight.

v
hi

1s LETTERS ON

LETTER IV.

‘The Fairy Superstition is derived from different sources—
The Classical Worship of the Silvans, or Rural Deities,
proved by Roman Altars discovered—The Gothic Duer-
gar, or Dwarfs—supposed to be derived from the North-
ern Laps, or Fins—The Niebelungen-Lied—King Lau-
rin’s Adventures— Celtic Fairies of a gayer character, yet
their pleasures empty and illusory—Addicted to carry off
Human Beings, both Infants and Adults—Adventures of
a Butler,in Ireland—The Elves supposed to pay a Taz
io Hell—The Irish, Welsh, Highlanders, and Manxmen,
held the same belief—It was rather rendered more gloomy
by the Northern Traditions—Merlin and Arthur carried
off by the Fairies—also Thomas ¥. Erceldoune—His
mour with the Queen of Elfland—His re-appearance in
latter times—another Account from Reginald Scot—Con-
Jectures on the derivation of the word Fairy.

WE may premise by observing, that the classics.
had not forgotten to enrol in their mythology a
certain species of subordinate deities, resembling
the modern elves in their habits. Good old Mr
Gibb of the Advocates’ Library, (whom all law-

ers, whose youth he assisted in their studies by
is knowledge of that noble collection, are bound
to name with gratitude, ) used to point out amongst
the ancient altars under his charge, one which is
consecrated, Diis campestribus, and usually add-
ed, with a wink, “ The Fairies, ye ken.”* This

“ Another altar of elegant form, and perfectly preserved,
was, within these few weeks, dug up near the junction of

DEMONOLOGY AND WITCHCRAFT. 119

relic of antiquity was discovered near Roxburgh
Castle, and avicinity more delightfully appropriate
to the abode of the silvan deities can hardly be
found. Two rivers of considerable size, made
yet more remarkable by the fame which has ren-
dered them in some sort classical, unite their
streams beneath the vestiges of an extensive cas-
‘tle, renowned in the wars with England, and
for the valiant, noble, and even royal blood,
which has been shed around and before it ;—
a landscape, ornamented with the distant village
and huge abbey tower of Kelso, arising out of
es of aged trees ;—the modern mansion of
eurs, with its terrace, its woods, and its ex-
tensive lawn, form altogether a kingdom for
Oberon and Titania to reign in, or any spirit who,
before their time, might love scenery, of which
the majesty, and even the beauty, impress the
mind with a sense of awe mingled with pleasure.
These silvans, satyrs, and fauns, with whom su-
perstition peopled the lofty banks and tangled
-copses of this romantic country, were obliged to
give place to deities very nearly resembling them- _
selves in character, who probably derive some of
their attributes from their classic predecessors,
although more immediately allied to the barba-

“the Leader and the Tweed, in the neighbourhood of the
“village of Newstead, to the east of Melrose. It was in-
scribed by Carrius Domitianus, the prefect of the twentieth
legion, to the god Sytvanus, forming another instance how

“much the wild and silvan character of the country dis-

~ posed the feelings of the Romans to acknowledge the pre-

- sence of the rural deities. The altar is preserved at Dry-
grange, the seat of Mr Tod.

120 LETTERS ON

rian conquerors ;—we allude to the fairies, which,
as received into the popular creed, and as descri-
bed by the poets who have made use of them as
machinery, are certainly among the most pleasing
legacies of fancy.

Dr Leyden, who exhausted on this subject, as
upon most others, a profusion of learning, found
the first idea of the Elfin people in the northern
opinions concerning the duergar, or dwarfs.*
These were, however, it must be owned, spirits
of a coarser sort, more laborious vocation, and
more malignant temper, and in all respects less
propitious to humanity, than the fairies, properly
so called, which were the invention of the Celtic
people, and displayed that superiority of taste and

cy, which, with the love of music and poetry,
has been generally ascribed to their race, through
its various classes and modifications.

In fact, there seems reason to conclude that these
duergar were originally nothing else than the
diminutive natives of the Lappish, Lettish, and
Finnish nations, who, flying before the conquer-
ing weapons of the Ase, sought the most retired
regions of the north, and there endeavoured to
hide themselves from their eastern invaders. They
were a little diminutive race, but possessed of
some skill probably in mining or smelting mine-
rals, with which the country abounds ; perhaps al-
-so they might, from their acquaintance with the

* See the Essay on the Fairy Superstition, in the “ Min-

strelsy of the Scottish Border,” of which many of the mate-

- rials were contributed by Dr Leyden, and the whole brought
into its present form by the author.

DEMONOLOGY AND WITCHCRAFT, 12]

changes of the clouds, or meteorological pheno-
mena, be judges of weather, and so enjoy another
title to supernatural skill. At any rate, it has been
plausibly supposed, that these poor people, who
sought caverns and hiding-places from the perse-
cution of the Ase, were in some respects compen-
sated for inferiority in strength and stature, by
the art and power with which the superstition of
the enemy invested them. These oppressed, yet
dreaded fugitives, obtained, naturally enough, the
character of the German spirits called Kobold,
from which the English Goblin and the Scottish
Bogle, by some inversion and alteration of pro-
nanciation, are evidently derived. ;
The Kobolds were a species of gnomes, who
haunted the dark and solitary places, and. were
often seen. in the mines, where they seemed to
imitate the labours of the miners, and some-
times took pleasure in frustrating their objects,
and rendering their toil unfruitful.. Sometimes
they were malignant, especially if neglected. or
insulted; but sometimes also they were indul-
gent to individuals whom they took under their
_protection. When a miner, therefore, hit upon
a rich vein of ore, the inference commonly was,
not that he possessed more skill, industry, or
even luck, than his fellow workmen, but that the
Spirits of the mine had directed him to the trea-
sure. The employment and apparent occupation
_of these subterranean gnomes, or fiends, led very
naturally to identify the Fin, or Laplander, wit
the Kobold; but it was a bolder stretch of the
imagination, which confounded this reserved and
sullen race with the livelier and gayer spirit which

122 LETTERS ON

bears correspondence with the British fairy. Nei-
ther can we be surprised that the Duergar, ascri-
bed by many persons to this source, should exhi-
bit a darker and more malignant character, than
the elves that revel by moonlight in more south-
ern climates.

According to the old Norse belief, these dwarfs
form the current machinery of the northern Sa-
gas, and their inferiority in size is represented as
‘compensated by skill and wisdom superior to
those of ordinary mortals. In the Niebelungen-
Lied, one of the oldest romances of Germany, and
compiled, it would seem, not long after the time
of ‘Attila, Theodorick of Bern, or of Verona,
figures among a cycle of champions, over whom
he oe like te Charlemagne of France, or
Arthur of England. Among others. vanquished
by him is the Elf King, or Dwarf Laurin, whose
dwelling was in an enchanted garden of roses, and
who had a body-guard of giants, a sort of per-
sons seldom supposed to be themselves conjurers.
He becomes a formidable opponent to Theodo-
rick and his chivalry; but as he attempted by
treachery to attain the victory, he is, when over-
come, condemned to fill the dishonourable yet ap-
propriate office of buffoon and juggler at the court
of Verona.*

Such possession of supernatural wisdom is still
imputed, by the natives of the Orkney and Zet-
land islands, to the people called Drows, being a

* See an abstract, by the late learned Henry Weber, of a
Lay on this subject of King Laurin, compiled by Henry of
Osterdingen, Northern Antiquities, Edinburgh, 1814.

DEMONOLOGY AND WITCHCRAFT. 123

corruption of Duergar or dwarfs, and who may,
in most other respects, be identified with the Ca-
Jedonian fairies. Lucas Jacobson Debes, who
dates his description of Feroe from his Pathmos,
in Thors-haven, 12th March, 1670, dedicates along
chapter to the spectres who disturbed his con-
é tion, and sometimes carried off his hearers.

e actors in these disturbances he states to be
the Skow, or Biergen-Trold, i. e. the spirits of
the woods and mountains, sometimes called sub-
terranean people, and adds, they appeared in
deep caverns and oe horrid rocks; as also,
that they haunted the places where murders, or
other deeds of mortal sin, had been acted. They
‘appear to have been the genuine northern dwarfs,
or Trows, another pronunciation of Trollds, and
are considered by the reverend author as some-
thing very little better than actual fiends.

But it is not only, or even chiefly, to the Go-
thie race that we must trace the opinions concern-
ing the elves of the middle ages ; these, as already
‘hinted, were deeply blended with the attributes
which the Celtic tribes had, from the remotest ages,
ascribed to their deities of rocks, valleys, and
forests. We have already observed, what indeed
makes a great feature of their national character,
that the power of the imagination is peculiarly ac-
‘tive among the Celts, and leads to an enthusiasm
‘concerning national music and dancing, national
poetry and song, the departments in which fancy
most readily indulges herself. The Irish, the
Welsh, the Gael or Scottish Highlander, all tribes
of Celtic descent, assigned to the Men of Peace,
Good Neighbours, or by whatever other names

124 LETTERS ON

they called these silvan pigmies, more social ha-
bits, and a course of existence far more gay,
than the sullen and heavy toils of the more sa-
turnine Duergar. Their elves did not avoid the
society of men, though they behaved to those
who associated with them with caprice, which
rendered it dangerous to displease them ; and al-
though their gifts were sometimes valuable, they
were usually wantonly given, and unexpectedly
resumed.

The employment, the benefits, the amusements
of the Fairy court, resembled the aerial people
themselves. Their government was always repre-
sented as monarchical. A King, more frequently
a Queen, of Fairies,was acknowledged ; and some-
times both held their court together. Their pa-
geants and court entertainments comprehended
all that the imagination could conceive of what
was, by that age, accounted gallant and splendid.
At their processions, they paraded more beautiful
steeds than those of mere earthly parentage—the
hawks and hounds which they employed in their
chase were of the first race. At their daily ban-
quets, the board was set forth with a splen-
dour which the proudest kings of the earth dared
not aspire to; and the hall of their dancers echoed
.to the most exquisite music. But when viewed
by the eye of a seer the illusion vanished. The
young knights and beautiful ladies showed them-
selves as wrinkled carles and odious hags—their
wealth turned into slate-stones—their splendid
plate into pieces of clay fantastically twisted—
and their victuals, unsavoured by salt, (prohibit-
ed to them, we are told, because an emblem of

DEMONOLOGY AND WITCHCRAFT. 125

eternity, ) became tasteless and insipid—the state-
ly halls were turned into miserable damp caverns
—all the delights of the Elfin Elysium vanished
at once. In a word, their pleasures were showy,
but totally unsubstantial—their activity uncea-
sing, but fruitless and unavailing—and their con-
demnation appears to have consisted in the neces-
sity of maintaining the appearance of constant in-
dustry or enjoyment, though their toil was fruit-
less, and their pleasures shadowy and unsubstan-
tial. . Hence poets have designed them as “ the
crew that never rest.” Besides the unceasing and
useless bustle in which these spirits seemed to
live, they had propensities unfavourable and dis-
tressing to mortals.
_, One injury of avery serious nature was suppo-
sed to be constantly practised by the fairies against
* the human mortals,” that of carrying off their
children, and breeding them as beings of their
race. Unchristened infants were chiefly expo-
sed to this calamity ; but adults were also lia-
ble to be abstracted from earthly commerce, not-
withstanding it was their natural sphere. With
respect to the first, it may be easily conceived that
the want of the sacred ceremony of introduction
into the Christian church rendered them the more
obnoxious to the power of those creatures, who, if
not to be in all respects considered as fiends, had
nevertheless, considering their constant round of
idle occupation, little right to rank themselves
‘among gaod spirits, and were accounted by most
divines as belonging toa very different class. An
adult, on the other hand, must have been engaged
in some action which exposed him to the power

126 ‘ LETTERS ON

of thie spirits, and so, as the legal phrase went,

“ taken in the manner.” Sleeping on a fairy
mount, within which the Fairy court happened.
to be held for the time, was a very ready mode
of obtaining a passport for Elfland. It was

well for the individual if the irate elves were

contented, on such occasions, with transporting

him through the air to a city at some forty miles’

distance, and leaving, perhaps, his hat or bonnet

on some steeple between, to mark the direct line

of his course. Others, when engaged in some un-

lawful action, or in the act of giving way to some

headlong and sinful passion, exposed themselves

also to become inmates of Fairy land.

The same belief on these points obtained in
Ireland. Glanville, in his Eighteenth Relation,
tells us of the butler of a gentleman, a neighbour
of the Earl of Orrery, who was sent to purchase
cards. In crossing the fields, he saw a table sur-
rounded by people apparently feasting and ma-
king merry. They rose to salute him, and in-
vited him to join in their revel; but a friendly
voice from the party whispered in his ear, « Do
nothing which this company invite you to.” Ac-
cordingly, when he caah to join in feasting,
the table vanished, and the company began to
dance, and play on musical instruments ; but the
butler would not take part in these recreations.
They then left off dancing, and betook them-
selves to work; but neither in this would the mor-
tal join them. He was then left alone for the pre-:
sent ; but in spite of the exertions of my Lord Or-
— in spite of two bishops who were his guests
at the time, in spite of the celebrated Mr Greatrix,

DEMONOLOGY AND WITCHCRAFT. 127

it was all they could do to prevent the butler from
being carried off bodily from amongst them by the
fairies, who considered him as their lawful prey.
They raised him in the air above the heads of
the mortals, who could only run beneath, to break
his fall when they pleased to let him go. The

which formerly advised the poor man,
continued to haunt him, and at length discovered
himself to be the ghost of an acquaintance who
had been dead for seven years. “ You know,”
added he, “ I lived a loose life, and ever since
have I been hurried up and down in a restless
condition, with the company you saw, and shall
be till the day of judgment.” He added, that if
the butler had acknowledged God in all his ways,
he had not suffered so much by their means ; he
reminded him that he had not prayed to God in
the morning before he met with this company in
the field, and, moreover, that he was then going
on an unlawful business.

It is pretended that Lord Orrery confirmed the
whole of this story, even to having seen the
butler raised into the air by the invisible beings
who strove to carry him off. Only he did not
bear witness to the passage which seems to call
the purchase of cards an unlawful errand.*

Individuals, whose lives had been engaged in in-
trigues of politics or stratagems of war, were some-
times surreptitiously carried off to fairy land; as
Alison Pearson, the sorceress who cured Arch-

bishop Adamson, averred that she had recog-

“ Sadducismus ‘[riumphatus, by Joseph Glanville.
Edinburgh, 1700, p, 131. Pail

128 LETTERS ON

nised in the Fairy court the celebrated Se-
cretary Lethington and the old Knight of Buc-
cleuch, the one of whom had been the most busy
politician, the other one of the most unwearied
partisans of Queen Mary, during the reign of that
unfortunate queen. Upon the whole, persons
carried_off by sudden death were usually suspect-
ed of having fallen into the hands of the fairies,
and unless redeemed from their power, which it
was not always safe to attempt, were doomed to
conclude their lives with them. We must not
omit to state, that those who had an intimate
communication with these spirits, while they were -
a inhabitants of middle earth, were most apt to

e seized upon and carried off to Elfland before
their death.

The reason assigned for this kidnapping of the
human race, so peculiar to the elfin people, is said
to be that they were under a necessity of paying
to the infernal regions a yearly tribute out of
their population, which they were willing to de-
fray by delivering up to the prince of these re-
gions the children of the human race, rather than
their own. From this it must be inferred, that
they have offspring among themselves, as it is
‘aid by some authorities, and particularly by Mr
Kirke, the minister of Aberfoyle. He indeed adds,
that, after a certain length of life, these spirits
are subject to the universal lot of mortality,—a
position, however, which has been controverted,
and is scarcely reconcilable to that which holds
them amenable to pay a tax to hell, which in-
fers existence as eternal as the fire which is not
quenched. The opinions on the subject of the

DEMONOLOGY AND WITCHCRAFT. 129

ba waeare here expressed, are such as are enter-
tained in the Highlands, and some remote quar-
ters of the © soslanwtet of Scotland. We know,
from the lively and entertaining legends pub-
lished by Mr Crofton Croker—which, though
in most cases, told with the wit of the editor
and the humour of his country, contain points
of curious antiquarian information—that the opi-
nions of the Irish are conformable to the ac-
count we have given of the general creed of the
Celtic nations respecting elves. If the Lrish elves
are anywise distinguished from those of Britain,
it seems to be by their disposition to divide into
factions, and fight among themselves—a pugna-
city characteristic of the Green Isle. The Welsh
fairies, according to John Lewis, barrister-at-law,
agree in the same general attributes with those
of Ireland and Britain. We must not omit the
creed of the Manxmen, since we find, from the in-
fenious researches of Mr Waldron, that the Isle
of Man, beyond other places in Britain, was a pe-
culiar depository of the fairy traditions, which,
‘on the island being conquered by the Norse, be-
eame, in all probability, chequered with those of
Scandinavia, froma source peculiar and more di-
rect than that by which they reached Scotland or
Treland.

- Such as it was, the popular system of the Celts
easily received the northern admixture of Drows
and Duergar, which gave the belief, perhaps, a
darker colouring than originally belonged to the
British fairyland. It was from the same source
also, in all probability, that additional legends
were obtained, of a gigantic and malignant fe-

5 I

130 LETTERS ON

male, the Hecate of this mythology, who rode on
the storm, and marshalled the rambling host of
wanderers under her grim banner. This hag (in
all respects the reverse of the Mab or Titania of
the Celtic creed) was called Nicneven in that
later system which blended the faith of the Celts
and of the Goths on this subject. The great Scot-
tish poet Dunbar has made a spirited description
of this Hecate riding at the head of witches and
good neighbours, (fairies, manly? sorceresses
and elves, indifferently, upon the ghostly eve of
All-Hallow Mass.* In Italy we hear of the hags
arraying themselves under the orders of Diana,
os her triple character of Hecate, doubtless,) and
erodias, who were the joint leaders of their
choir. But we return to the more simple fairy
belief, as entertained by the Celts before they
were conquered by the Saxons.
- Of these early times we can know little ; but it
is singular to remark what light the traditions of
Scotland throw upon the poetry of the Britons of
Cumberland, then called Reged. Merlin Wyllt, or
the wild, is mentioned by both ; and that renown-
ed wizard, the son of an elf, or fairy, with King
Arthur, the dubious champion of Britain at that
early period, were both said by tradition to have
been abstracted by the fairies, and to have vanish-
ed, without having suffered death, just at the time
when it was supposed, that the magic of the wi-
zard, and the celebrated sword of the monarch,
which had done so much to preserve British in-
dependence, could no longer avert the impending

* See Flyting of Dunbar and Kennedy.

DEMONOLOGY AND WITCHCRAFT. 131

ruin. It may be conjectured that there was a de-
sire on the part of Arthur, or his surviving cham-
pions, to conceal his having received a mortal
wound in the fatal battle of Camlan ; and to that
we owe the wild and beautiful incident so finely
versified by Bishop Percy, in which, in token of
his renouncing in future the use of arms, the mo-
narch sends his attendant, sole survivor of the
field, to throw his sword, Excalibar, into the lake
hard by. Twice eluding the request, the esquire
at last complied, and threw the far-famed weapon
into the lonely mere. A hand and arm arose from
the water and caught Excalibar by the hilt, flou-
rished it thrice, and then sank into the lake.*
The astonished messenger returned to his master
to tell him the marvels he had seen, but he only
saw a boat at a distance push from the land, and
heard shrieks of females in agony :—

* And whether the king was there or not
He never knew, ne never colde,

For never since that doleful day
Was British Arthur seen on molde.”

The circumstances attending the disappearance
of Merlin would probably be found as imaginative
as those of Arthur's removal, but they cannot
be recovered; and, what is singular enough, cir-
cumstances which originally belonged to the his-
tory of this famous bard, said to be the son of the
Demon himself, have been transferred to a later
poet, and surely one of scarce inferior name, Tho-
mas of Erceldoune. The legend was supposed to

* See Percy’s Reliques of Ancient English Poetry.

132 LETTERS ON

be only preserved among the inhabitants of his
native valleys, but a copy as old as the reign of
Henry VII. has been recovered. The story is
interesting and beautifully told, and, as one of the
oldest fairy legends, may well be quoted in this
place.

Thomas of Erceldoune, in Lauderdale, called the
Rhymer, on account of his producing a poetical
romance on the subject of ‘Tristrem and Yseult,
which is curious as the earliest specimen of Eng-
lish verse known to exist, flourished in the reign
of Alexander III. of Scotland. Like other men
of talent of the period, Thomas was suspected of
magic. He was said also to have the gift of pro-
phecy, which was accounted for in the following
peculiar manner, referring entirely to the Elfin
superstition. As True Thomas (we give him
the epithet by a lay on Huntly bank,
a place on the descent of the Eildon hills, which
raise their triple crest above the celebrated mo-~
nastery of Melrose, he saw a lady so extremely
beautiful that he imagined it must be the Virgin
Mary herself. Her appointments, however, were
those rather of an Amazon or goddess of the
woods. Her steed was of the highest beauty and
spirit, and at his mane hung thirty silver bells and
nine, which made music to the wind as she paced
along: Her saddle was of royal bone, (ivory,) laid
over with orfeverie, i.e. goldsmith’s work: Her
stirrups, her dress, all corresponded with her ex-
treme beauty and the magnificence of her array.
The fair huntress had her bow in hand, and her
arrows at her belt. She led three greyhounds
in a Jeash, and three raches, or hounds of scent;

DEMONOLOGY AND WITCHCRAFT. 133

followed her closely. She rejected and disclaimed
the homage which Thomas desired to pay to her;
80 that, passing from one extremity to the other,
Thomas became as bold as he had at first been
humble. The lady warns him that he must be-
come her slave, if he should prosecute his suit
towards her in the manner he proposes. Before
their interview terminates, the appearance of the
beautiful lady is changed into that of the most
hideous hag in existence ; one side is blighted and
wasted, as if by palsy; one eye drops from her
head; her colour, as clear as the virgin silver, is
now of a dun leaden hue. A witch from the
spital or almshouse would have been a goddess
in comparison to the late beautiful huntress. Hi-
deous as she was, Thomas's irregular desires had
placed him under the control of this hag, and
when she bade him take leave of sun, and of the
leaf that grew on tree, he felt himself under the
necessity of obeying her. A cavern received
them, in which, following his frightful guide, he
for three days travelled in darkness, sometimes
hearing the booming of a distant ocean, sometimes
walking through rivers of blood, which crossed
their subterranean path. At length they emerged
into daylight, in a most beautiful orchard. Tho-
mas, almost fainting for want of food, stretches
out his hand towards the goodly fruit which hangs
around him, but is forbidden by his conductress,
who informs him these are the fatal apples which
were the cause of the fall of man. He perceives
also that his guide had no sooner entered this mys-
terious ground, and breathed its magic air, than
she was revived in beauty, equipage, and splen-

134 LETTERS ON

dour, as fair or fairer than he had first seen her
on the mountain. She then commands him to lay
his head upon her knee, and proceeds to explain
to him the character of the country. “ Yonder
right-hand path,” she says, “ conveys the spirits
of the blest to paradise; yon downward and well-
worn way leads sinful souls to the place of ever-
lasting punishment; the third road, by yonder
dark brake, conducts to the milder place of pain,
from which prayer and mass may release offend-
ers. But see you yet a fourth road, sweeping
along the plain to yonder splendid castle ? yonder
is the road to Elfland, to which we are now bound.
The lord of the castle is king of the country, and
Iam his queen. But, Thomas, I would rather
be drawn with wild horses, than he should know
what hath passed between you and me. There-
fore, when we enter yonder castle, observe strict
silence, and answer no question that is asked at
you, and I will account for your silence by say-
ing I took your speech when I brought you from
middle earth.”

Having thus instructed her lover, they jour-
neyed on to the castle, and entering by the kit-
chen, found themselves in the midst of such a
festive scene as might become the mansion of a
great feudal lord or prince. Thirty carcasses of
deer were lying on the massive kitchen board,
under the hands of numerous cooks, who toiled
to cut them up and dress them, while the gigan-
tic greyhounds which had taken the spoil lay
lapping the blood, and enjoying the sight of the
slain game. They came next to the royal hall,
where the king received his loving consort with-

DEMONOLOGY AND WITCHCRAFT. 135

out censure or suspicion. Knights and ladies,
dancing by threes, resee perhaps,) occupied the
floor of the hall, and Thomas, the fatigues of his
journey from the Eildon hills forgotten, went for-
ward and joined in the revelry. After a period,
however, which seemed to him a very short one,
the queen spoke with him apart, and bade him
ee to return to his own country. “ Now,”
said the queen, “ how long think you that you
have been here ?”—“ Certes, fair lady,” answered
Thomas, “ not above these seven days.’—“ You
are deceived,” answered the queen, “ you have
been seven years in this castle ; and it is full time
you were gone. Know, Thomas, that the fiend
of hell will come to this castle to-morrow to de-
mand his tribute, and so handsome a man as you
will attract his eye. For all the world would I
not suffer you to be betrayed to such a fate ; there-
fore up, and let us be going.” These terrible news
reconciled Thomas to his departure from Elfin
land, and the queen was not long in placing him
upon Huntly bank, where the birds were singing.
took a tender leave of him, and to ensure his
‘reputation, bestowed on him the tongue which
could not lie. Thomas in vain objected to this in-
convenient and involuntary adhesion to veracity,
which would make him, as he thought, unfit for
church or for market, for king’s court or for la-
dy’s bower. But all his remonstrances were dis-
-regarded by the lady, and Thomas the Rhymer,
whenever the discourse turned on the future,
‘gained the credit of a prophet whether he would
or not; for he could say nothing but what was
“sure to come to-pass. It is plain, that had Tho-

136 LETTERS ON

mas been a legislator instead of a poet, we have
here the story of Numa and Egeria.

Thomas remained several years in his own
tower near Erceldoune, and enjoyed the fame of
his predictions, several of which are current among
the country people to this day. Atlength, as the
prophet was entertaining the Earl of March in his
dwelling, a cry of astonishment arose in the village,
on the appearance of a hart and hind,* which left
the forest, and, contrary to their shy nature, came
guietly onward, traversing the village towards
the dwelling of Thomas. The prophet instantly
rose from the board ; and, acknowledging the pro-
digy as the summons of his fate, he accompanied
the hart and hind into the forest, and though
occasionally seen by individuals to whom he has
chosen to show himself, has never again mixed
familiarly with mankind.

Thomas of Erceldoune, during his retirement,
has been supposed, from time to time, to be levy-
ing forces to take the field in some crisis of his
country’s fate. The story has often been told, of
a daring horse-jockey having sold a black horse to
aman of venerable and antique appearance, who
ap inted the remarkable hillock upon Eildon
hils, called the Lucken-hare, as the place where,
at twelve o'clock at night, he shomia receive the
price. He came, his money was paid in ancient
coin, and he was invited by his customer to view
his residence. The trader in horses followed his:

- This last circumstance seems imitated from a passage
in the Life of Merlin, by Jefirey of Monmouth. See
Ellis’s Ancient Romances, vol. i. p. 73. yes

DEMONOLOGY AND WITCHCRAFT. 137

guide in the deepest astonishment through several
long ranges of stalls, in each of which a horse stood
motionless, while an armed warrior lay equally still
at the charger’s feet. ‘“ All these men,” said the
wizard in a whisper, “ will awaken at the battle
of Sheriffmoor.” At the extremity of this extra-
ordinary depdt hung a sword and a horn, which
the prophet pointed out to the horse-dealer as
containing the means of dissolving the spell. The
man in confusion took the horn, and attempted to
wind it. The horses instantly started in their
stalls, stamped, and shook their bridles, the men
arose and clashed their armour, and the mortal,
terrified at the tumult he had excited, dropped the
horn from his hand. A voice like that of a giant,
louder even than the tumult around, pronounced
these words :—

“ Woe to the coward that ever he was born,
That did not draw the sword before he blew the horn!”

A whirlwind expelled the horse-dealer from the
cavern, the entrance to which he could never again
tind. A moral might be perhaps extracted from
the legend,—namely, that it is best to be armed
against danger before bidding it defiance. But it
is a circumstance worth notice, that although this
edition of the tale is limited to the year 1715, by
the very mention of the Sheriffmoor, yet a similar
story appears to have been current during the
reign of Queen Elizabeth, which is given by Re-
ginald Scot. The narrative is edifying, as pe-
culiarly illustrative of the mode of marring a cu-
rious tale in telling it, which was one of the vir-
tues professed by Caius when he hired himself

138 LETTERS ON

to King Lear. Reginald Scot, incredulous on the
subject of witchcraft, seems to have given some
weight to the belief of those who thought that
the spirits of famous men do, after death, take
up some particular habitations near cities, towns,
and countries, and act as tutelary and guardian
spirits to the places which they loved while in the
flesh.

“ But more particularly to illustrate this con-
jecture,” says he, “ I could name a person who
hath lately appeared thrice since his decease, at
least some ghostly being or other that calls itself
by the name of such a person, who was dead above
a hundred years ago, and was, in his lifetime, ac-
counted as a prophet or predicter, by the assist-
ance of sublunary spirits ; and now, at his appear-
ance, did also give strange predictions respecting
famine and plenty, war and bloodshed, and the
end of the world. By the information of the per-
son that had communication with him, the last of
his appearances was in the following manner.
“ Thad been,” said he, “ to sella horse at the next
market town, but not attaining my price, as I re-
turned home, by the way I met this man, who
began to be familiar with me, asking what news,
and how affairs moved through the country ? Ian-
swered as I thought fit; withall, I told him of my
horse, whom he began to cheapen, and proceeded
with me so far, that the price was agreed upon. So
he turned back with me, and told me that if I
would go along with him, I should receive my mo-
ney. On our way we went, I upon my horse,
heonanothermilk-white beast. Aftermuch travel;
I asked him where he dwelt, and what his name

DEMONOLOGY AND WITCHCRAFT. 139

was? He told me that his dwelling was a mile
off, at a place called Farran, of which place I had
never heard, though I knew all the country round
about.* He also told me that he himself was
that person of the family of Learmonths,+ so much
spoken of as a prophet. At which I began to be
somewhat fearful, perceiving we were on a road
which I never had been on before, which increa-
sed my fear and amazement more. Well! on we
went till he brought me under ground, I knew
not how, into the presence of a beautiful woman,
who paid the money without a word speaking.
He conducted me out again through a large and
long entry, where I saw above six hundred men
in armour laid prostrate on the ground as if asleep.
Atlast I found myself in the open field, by the help
of the moonlight, in the very place where i first met
him, and made a shift to get home by three in
the morning. But the money I had received was
just double of what I esteemed it when the wo-
man paid me, of which, at this instant, I have
several pieces to show, consisting of ninepennies,.
thirteen-pence-halfpennies,” &c.

* In this the author is in the same ignorance as his name-
sake Reginald, though having at least as many opportuni-
ties of information. :
> In popular tradition, the name of Thomas the Rhymer

‘Was always averred to be Learmonth, though he neither

‘uses it himself, nor is described by his son other than Le

Rymour. The Learmonths of Dairsie, in Fife, claimed

descent from the prophet.

~~ £ Discourse of Devils and Spirits appended to the Dis-

mation Witchcraft, by Reginald Scot, Esq. book ii. chap.
$19. ;

140 LETTERS ON

It is a great pity that this horse-dealer, ha-
ving specimens of the fairy coin, of a quality more
permanent than usual, had not favoured us with
an account of an impress so valuable to medalists.
It is not the less edifying, as we are deprived of
the more picturesque parts of the story, to learn
that Thomas’s payment was as faithful as his pro-
phecies. The beautiful lady who bore the purse
must have been undoubtedly the Fairy Queen,
whose affection, though, like that of his own he-
roine Yseult, we cannot term it altogether laud-
able, seems yet to have borne a faithful and firm
character.

I have dwelt at some length on the story of
Thomas the Rhymer, as the oldest tradition of the
kind which has reached us in detail, and as pre-
tending to show the fate of the first Scottish

oet, whose existence, and its date, are established

oth by history and records ; and who, if we con-
sider him as writing in the Anglo-Norman lan-
guage, was certainly one among the earliest of its
versifiers. But the legend is still more curious,
from its being the first, and most distinguished
instance, of a man alleged to have obtained super-
natural knowledge by means of the fairies.

Whence or how this singular community de-
rived their more common popular name, we Bi &
say has not as yet been very clearly established.
It is the opinion of the learned, that the Persian
word Peri, expressing an unearthly being, of a
species very similar, will afford the best deriva-
tion, if we suppose it to have reached Europe
through the medium of the Arabians, in whose
alphabet the letter P does not exist, so that

DEMONOLOGY AND WITCHCRAFT. 141

they pronounce the word Feri instead of Peri.
Still there is something uncertain in this etymo-
logy. We hesitate to ascribe, either to the Per-
sians or the Arabians, the distinguishing name of
an ideal commonwealth, the notion of which they
certainly didnot contribute to us. Some are, there-
fore, tempted to suppose, that the elves may have
obtained their most frequent name from their
being, par excellence, a fair or comely people, a
quality which they affected on all occasions ; while
the superstition of the Scottish was likely enough
to give them a name which might propitiate the
yanity for which they deemed the race remark-
able; just as, in other instances, they called the
fays “men of peace,” “ good neighbours,” and
by other titles of the like import. It must be
owned, at the same time, that the words fay
and fairy may have been mere adoptions of the
French fee and feerie, though these terms, on the
other side of the Channel, have reference to a
class of spirits corresponding, not to our fairies,
but with the far different Fata of the Italians.
Bat this is a question which we willingly leave
for the decision of better etymologists than our-

selves,

142 LETTERS ON

LETTER V.

Those who dealt in fortune-telling, mystical cures by charms,
and the like, often claimed an intercourse with Fairy
Land—Hudhart or Hudikin—Pitcairn’s Scottish Crimi-
nal Trials—Story of Bessie and her adviser—
Her Practice of Medicine—and of Discovery of Theft
Account of her Familiar, Thome Reid—Trial of Alison
Pearson—Account of her Familiar, William Sympson—

* Trial of the Lady Fowlis, and of Hector Munro, her Step-
son—Extraordinary Species of Charm used by the latter
— Confession of John Stewart, a Juggler, of his Inter-
course with the Fairies—Trial and Confession of Isobel
Gowdie— Use of Elf-arrow Heads—Parish of Aberfoyle
—Mr Kirke, the Minister of Aberfoyle’s Work on Fairy
Superstitions—He is himself taken to Fairyland—Dr
Grahames Interesting Work, and his Information on
Fairy Superstitions— Story of a Female in East Lothian

. carried off by the Fairies—Another instance from Pennant.

- To return to Thomas the Rhymer, with an ac-
eount of whose legend I concluded last letter, it
would seem, that the example which it afforded of
obtaining the gift of prescience, and other super-
natural powers, by means of the fairy people, be-
came the common apology of those who attempted
to cure diseases, to tell fortunes, to revenge inju-
ries, or to engage in traffic with the invisible world,
for the purpose of satisfying their own wishes,
curiosity, or revenge, or those of others. Those
who practised the petty arts of deception in such
mystic cases, being naturally desirous to screen

DEMONOLOGY AND WITCHCRAFT. 143

their own impostures, were willing to be suppo-
sed to derive from the fairies, or from mortals
transported to fairyland, the power necessary
to effect the displays of art which they pretend-
ed to exhibit. A confession of direct commu-
nication and league with Satan, though the accu-
sed were too frequently compelled by torture to
admit and avow such horrors, might, the poor
wretches hoped, be avoided, by the avowal of a less
disgusting intercourse with sublunary spirits, a
race which might be described by negatives, be-
ing neither angels, devils, nor the souls of decea-
‘ol men; nor would it, they might flatter them-
selves, be considered as any criminal alliance, that
they held communion with a race not properly
hostile to man, and willing, on certain conditions,
to be useful and friendly to him. Such an inter-
course was certainly far short of the witch’s re-
nouncing her salvation, delivering herself person-
ally to the devil, and at once ensuring condemna-
tion in this world, together with the like doom in
the next.

. Accordingly, the credulous, who, in search of
health, knowledge, greatness, or moved by any
of the numberless causes for which men seek to
look into futurity, were anxious to obtain super-
human assistance, as well as the numbers who had
it in view to dupe such willing clients, became,
both cheated and cheaters, alike anxious to esta:
blish the possibility of a harmless process of re-
search into futurity, for laudable, or at least in-
nocent objects, as healing diseases, and the like ;
in short, of the existence of white magic, as it
was called, in opposition to that black art exclu-

144 LETTERS ON

sively and directly derived from intercourse with
Satan. Some endeavoured to predict a man’s for-
tune in marriage or his success in life by the as-
pect of the stars; others pretended to possess
spells, by which they could reduce and compel an
elementary spirit to enter within a stone, a look-
ing-glass, or some other local place of abode, and
confine her there by the power of an especial
charm, conjuring her to abide and answer the
questions of her master. Of these we shall after-
wards say something; but the species of evasion
now under our investigation is that of the fanaties
or impostors, who pretended to draw information
from the equivocal spirits called fairies ; and the
number of instances before us is so great as in-
duces us to believe, that the pretence of commu-
nicating with Elfland, and not with the actual de-
mon, was the manner in which the persons accused
of witcheraft most frequently endeavoured to ex-
cuse themselves, or at least to alleviate the charges
brought against them of practising sorcery. But
the Scottish law did not acquit those who accom-
plished even praiseworthy actions, such as re-
markable cures, by mysterious remedies ; and the
proprietor of a patent medicine, who should in
those days have attested his having wrought such
- miracles as we see sometimes advertised, might
perhaps have forfeited his life before he establish-
ed the reputation of his drop, elixir, or pill.

- Sometimes the soothsayers, who pretended to
act on this information from sublunary spirits,
soared to higher matters than the practice of phy-
sic, and interfered in the fate of nations. hen
James the First was murdered at Perth, in 1487,

DEMONOLOGY AND WITCHCRAFT. 145

a Highland woman prophesied the course and pur-
pose of the conspiracy, and had she been listened
to, it might have been disconcerted. Being ask-
ed her source of knowledge, she answered, Hud-
hart had told her; which might either be the
same with Hudikin, a Dutch spirit somewhat si-
milar to Friar Rush, or Robin Goodfellow,* or
with the Red-capped demon so powerful in the
case of Lord Soulis, and other wizards, to whom
the Scots assigned rather more serious influence.

The most special account which I have found
of the intercourse between fairyland and a female
professing to have some influence in that court,
combined with a strong desire to be useful to the
distressed of both sexes, occurs in the early part of
a work to which I have been sree a obliged
in the present and other publications.+ The details
of the evidence, which consists chiefly of the unfor-
tunate woman’s own confession, are more full than
usual, and comprehend some curious particulars.
To spare technical repetitions, I must endeavour

* “ Hudkin is a very familiar devil, who will do nobody
hurt, except he receive injury ; but he cannot abide that, nor
yetbe mocked. He talketh with men friendly, sometimes
visibly, sometimes invisibly. There go as many tales upon
this Hudkin in some parts of Germany, as there did in
England on Robin Goodfellow.”—Discourse concerning
Devils, annexed to The Discovery of Witchcraft, by Reax-
watp Scor, book i. chap. xxi.

+ The curious collection of Trials, from the Criminal
Records of Scotland, now in the course of publication, by
Robert Pitcairn, Esq. affords so singular a picture of the
manners and habits of our ancestors, while yet a semibar-—
barous people, that it is equally worth the attention of the
historian, the antiquary, the philosopher, and the poet.

K

146 LETTERS ON

to select the principal facts in evidence in detail,.
so far as they bear upon the present subject.

On the 8th November, 1576, Elizabeth or Bessie
Dunlop, spouse to Andro Jak, in Lyne, in the
Barony of Dalry, Ayrshire, was accused of sor-
cery and witchcraft, and abuse of the people. Her
answers to the interrogatories of the judges or
prosecutors ran thus. It being required of her,
by what art she could tell of lost goods, or pro-
shone the event of illness? she replied, that of
herself she had no knowledge or science of such
matters, but that when questions were asked at
her concerning such matters, she was in the habit
of applying to one Thome Reid, who died at the.
battle of Pinkie (10th September, 1547) as he
himself affirmed, and who resolved her any ques-
tions which she asked at him. This person she
described as a respectable elderly-looking man,.
grey-bearded, and wearing a grey coat, with Lom-
bard sleeves, of the auld fashion. A pair of grey
breeches, and white stockings gartered above the
knee, a black bonnet on his head, close behind and
ame before, with silken laces drawn through the

ips thereof, and a white wand in his hand, com-'
pleted the description of what we may suppose a
respectable-looking man of the province and pe-
Hod. Being demanded concerning her first inter-
view with this mysterious Thome Reid, she gave
rather an affecting account of the disasters with
which she was then afflicted, and a sense of which
perhaps aided to conjure up the imaginary coun-
sellor. She was ing between her own house:
and the yard of Monkcastle, driving her cows.
to the common pasture, and making heavy moan.

DEMONOLOGY AND WITCHCRAFT. 147

with herself, weeping bitterly for her cow that
was dead, her husband and child that were sick
of the land-ill, (some contagious sickness of the
time,) while she herself was in a very infirm state,
having lately borne a child. On this occasion,
she met Thome Reid for the first time, who sa-
luted her courteously, which she returned. “ Sanc-
ta Maria, Bessie!” said the apparition ; “ why
must thou make such dole and weeping for any
earthly thing ?’——-“ Have I not reason for great
sorrow,” said she, “since our property is going
to destruction, my husband is on the point of
death, my baby will not live, and I am myself at
a weak point? Have I not cause to have a sore
heart ?”—“ Bessie,” answered the spirit, “ thou
hast displeased God in asking something that thou
should not, and I counsel you to amend your
fault. I tell thee, thy child shall die ere thou get
home; thy two sheep shall also die, but thy hus-
band shall recover, and be as well and feir as ever
he was.” The good woman was something com-
forted to hear that her husband was to be spared
in such her general calamity, but was rather
alarmed to see her ghostly counsellor pass from
her, and disappear through a hole in the garden-
wall, seemingly too narrow to admit of any living
n passing through it. Another time he met

her a the Thorn ammrye ath pap his
timate ose, by offering ty of every
thing if s ceed but deny Christendom and the
faith she took at the font-stone, She answered,
that rather than do that she would be torn at
horses’ heels, but that she would be conformable
to his advice in less matters. He parted with

148 LETTERS ON

her in some displeasure. Shortly afterwards he
appeared in her own house, about noon, which
was at the time occupied by her husband and three
tailors. But neither Andrew Jak nor the three
tailors were sensible of the presence ofthe phantom
warrior who was slain at Pinkie ;'so that, without
attracting their observation, he led out the good-
wife to the end of the house near the kiln.’ Here he
showed her a company of eight women and four
men. The women were busked in their plaids, and
very seemly. The strangers saluted her, and said,
«“ Welcome, Bessie; wilt thou go with us?” But
Bessie was silent, as Thome Reid had previously
recommended. After this she saw their lips move,
but did not understand what they said; and in a
short time they removed from thence with a hide-
ous ugly howling sound, like that of a hurricane.
Thome Reid then acquainted her that these were
the good wights (fairies) dwelling in the court of
lfland, who came to invite her to go thither with
them. Bessie answered, that before she went that
road, it would require some consideration. Thome
answered, “ Seest thou not me both meat-worth,
clothes-worth, and well enough in person ?” and
engaged she should be easier than ever she was.
But she replied, she dwelt with her husband and
children, and would not leave them; to which
Thome Reid replied, in very ill-humour, that if
such were her sentiments, she would get little
good of him.’

Although they thus disagreed on the prin-
cipal object of Thome Reid’s visits, Bessie Dun-
lop affirmed he continued to come to her frequent-
ly, and assist her with his counsel; and that if any

DEMONOLOGY AND WITCHCRAFT. 149

one consulted her about the ailments of human
beings or of cattle, or the recovery of things lost
and stolen, she was, by the advice of Thome
Reid, always able to answer the querists. She
was also taught by her (literally ghostly) adviser,
how to watch the operation of the ointments he
gave her, and to presage from them the recovery
or death of the patient. She said Thome gave
her herbs with his own hand, with which she
eured John Jack’s bairn and Wilson’s of the
Townhead. She also was helpful to a waiting-
woman of the young Lady Stanlie, daughter of
the Lady Johnstone, whose disease, according to
the opinion of the infallible Thome Reid, was “a
cauld blood that came about her heart,” and fre-
quently caused her to swoon away. For this
Thome mixed a remedy as generous as the Balm
of Gilead itself. It was composed of the most
potent ale, concocted with spices and a little white
sugar, to be drunk every morning before taking
food. For these prescriptions Bessie Dunlop’s fee:
was a peck of meal and some cheese. The young
woman recovered. But the poor old Lady Kil-
bowie could get no help for her leg, which had
been crooked for years ; for Thome Reid said the
marrow of the limb was perished and the blood
benumbed, so that she would never recover, and
if she sought farther assistance, it would be the
worse for her. These opinions indicate common
sense and prudence at least, whether we consider
them. as originating with the cage apes Thome
Reid, or with the culprit whom he patronised.
The judgments given in the case of stolen goods
were also well chosen; for though they seldom led:

150 LETTERS ON

to recovering the property, they generally alleged
such satisfactory reasons for its not being found,
as effectually to cover the credit of the prophet-
ess. Thus Hugh Scott’s cloak could not be re-
turned, because the thieves had gained time to
make it into a kirtle. James Jamieson and James
Baird would, by her advice, have recovered their
eon which had been stolen, had it not

the will of fate that William Dougal, sheriff’s
officer, one of the parties searching for them,
should accept a bribe of three pounds not to find
them. In short, although she lost a lace which
Thome Reid gave her out of his own hand, which,
tied round women in childbirth, had the power
of helping their delivery, Bessy Dunlop’s pro-
fession of a wise woman seems to have flourished
indifferently well till it drew the evil eye of the
law upon her.

More minutely pressed upon the subject of her
familiar, she said she had never known him while
among the living, but was aware that the person
socalling himself was onewho had, in his lifetime,
actually been known in middle earth as Thome
Reid, officer to the Laird of Blair, and who died
at Pinkie. Of this she was made certain, be-
cause he sent her on errands to his son, who
had succeeded in his office, and to others his re-
latives, whom he named, and commanded them
to amend certain trespasses which he had done
while alive, furnishing her with sure tokens by
which they should know that it was he who had
sent her. One of these errands was somewhat
remarkable. She was to remind a neighbour of
some particular which she was to recall to his me«

DEMONOLOGY AND WITCHCRAFT. 151

mory by the token, that Thome Reid and he had
set out together to go to the battle which took
place on the Black Saturday ; that the person to
whom the message was sent, was inclined rather
to move in a different direction, but that Thome
Reid heartened him to pursue his journey, and
oe him to the Kirk of Dalry, where he
bought a parcel of figs, and made a present of
them to his companion, tying them in his hand-
kerchief; after which they kept company till they
¢ame to the field upon the fatal Black Saturday,
as the battle of Pinkie was long called.

Of Thome’s other habits, she said that he al-
ways behaved with the strictest propriety, only
that he pressed her to go to Elfland with him,
and took hold of her apron as if to pull her
along. Again, she said she had seen him in pub-
lic places, both in the churchyard at Dalry, and
on the street of Edinburgh, where he walked
about among other people, and handled goods
that were exposed to sale, without attracting
any notice. She herself did not then speak to
him; for it was his command that, upon such
oceasions, she should never address him, unless
he spoke first to her. In his theological opinions,
Mr Reid appeared to lean to the Church of
Rome, which, indeed, was most indulgent to the
‘fairy folk. He said that the new law, i.e. the Re-
formation, was not good, and that the old faith
should return again, but not exactly as it had been
before. Being questioned why this visionary sage
attached himself to her more than to others, the
aceused person replied, that when she was con-
fined in childbirth of one of her boys, a stout wo-

152 LETTERS ON

man came into her hut, and sate down ona bench
by her bed, like a mere earthly gossip; that she
demanded a drink, and was accommodated ac-
cordingly ; and thereafter told the invalid that the
child should die, but that her husband, who was
then ailing, should recover. . This visit seems to
have been previous to her meeting Thome Reid
near Monkcastle garden, for that worthy explained
to her that her stout visitant was Queen of Fairies,
and that he had since attended her by the.express
command of that lady, his queen and mistress.
This reminds us of the extreme doting attach-
ment which the Queen of the Fairies is repre-
sented to have taken for Dapper, in the Alche-
mist. Thome Reid attended her, it would seem,
on being summoned thrice, and appeared to her
very often within four years. He often requested
her to go with him on his return to Fairyland,
and when she refused, he shook his head, and said
she would repent it.

If the delicacy of the reader’s imagination be a
little hurt at imagining the elegant Titania in the
disguise of a stout woman, a heavy burden for a
clumsy bench, drinking what Christopher Sly
would have called very sufficient small-beer with
a peasant’s wife, the following description of the
fairy host may come more near the idea he has
formed of that invisible company. Bessie Dun-
lop declared, that as she went to tether her nag
by the side of Restalrig Loch, (Lochend, near the
eastern port of Edinburgh,) she heard a tremen-
dous sound of a body of riders rushing past her,
with such a noise as if heaven and earth would
come together. That the sound swept past her,

DEMONOLOGY AND WITCHCRAFT. 153

and seemed to rush into the lake with a hideous
rumbling noise. All this while she saw nothing ;
but Thome Reid showed her that the noise was
occasioned by the wights, who were performing
one of their cavaleades upon earth.

The intervention of Thome Reid, as a partner
in her, trade of petty sorcery, did not avail poor
Bessie Dunlop, although his affection to her was
apparently entirely Platonic,—the greatest fami-
liarity on which he ventured was taking hold of
her gown as he pressed her to go with him to Elf-
land. Neither did it avail her, that the petty
sorcery which she practised was directed to ve-
nial or even beneficial purposes. The sad words
on the margin of the record, “ Convict and burnt,”
sufficiently express the tragic conclusion of a cu-
rious tale.

Alison Pearson, in Byrehill, was, 28th May,
1588, tried for invocation of the spirits of the
devil, specially in the vision of one Mr William
Sympson, her cousin, and her mother’s brother’s
son, who, she affirmed, was a great scholar and
doctor of medicine, dealing with charms, and
abusing the ignorant people. Against this poor
woman, her own confession, as in the case of Bes-
sie Dunlop, was the principal evidence.

_ As Bessie Dunlop had Thome Reid, Alison Pear-
son had also a familiar in the court of Elfland.
This was her relative William Sympson afore-
said, born in Stirling, whose father was king’s
‘smith in that town. William had been taken away,
she said, by a man of Egypt, (a Gipsy.) who
carried him to Egypt along with him. That he
remained there twelve years, and that his father

154 LETTERS ON

died in the meantime, for opening a priest's book,
and looking upon it. She declared that she had
renewed her acquaintance with her kinsman, so
soon as he returned. She further confessed,
that one day, as she passed through Grange Muir,
she lay down, in a fit of sickness, and that a green
man came to her, and said, if she would be faith-
ful, he might do her good. In reply, she charged
him, in the name of God, and by the law he lived
upon, if he came for her soul’s good, to tell his
errand. On this the green man departed. But
he afterwards appeared to her, with many men and
women with him; and, against her will, she was
obliged to pass with them farther than she could
tell, with piping, mirth, and good cheer; also
that she accompanied them into Lothian, where
she saw puncheons of wine, with tasses, or drink-
ing cups. She declared, that when she told of
these things, she was sorely tormented, and re-
ceived a blow that took away the power of her
left side, and left on it an ugly mark, which had
no feeling. She also confessed that she had seen,
before sunrise, the Good Neighbours make their
~ salves with pans and fires. Sometimes, she said,
they came in such fearful forms as frightened her
very much. At other times they spoke her fair,
and promised her that she should never want, if
faithful; but if she told of them and their doings,
they threatened to martyr her. She also boasted
of her favour with the Queen of Elfiand, and the
good friends she had at that court, notwithstand-
ing that she was sometimes in disgrace there,
and had not seen the queen for seven years. She
said, William Sympson is with the fairies, and

DEMONOLOGY AND WITCHCRAFT. 155

that he lets her know when they are coming ; and
that he taught her what remedies to use, and how
to apply them. She declared that when a whirl-
wind blew, the fairies were commonly there, and
that her cousin Sympson confessed that every year
the tithe of them were taken away to hell. The
celebrated Patrick Adamson, an excellent divine,
and accomplished scholar, created by James VI.
Archbishop of St Andrews, swallowed the pre-
scriptions of this poor hypochondriae, with good
faith and will, eating a stewed fowl, and drinking
out at two draughts a quart of claret, medicated
with the drugs she recommended. According to
the belief of the time, this Alison Pearson trans-
ferred the bishop’s indisposition from himself to a
white palfrey, which died in consequence. There
is a very severe libel on him for this and other
things unbecoming his order, with which he-was
charged, and from which we learn that Lething-
ton and Buccleuch were seen by Dame Pearson
in the Fairyland.* This poor woman’s kinsman,
Sympson, did not give better shelter to her than
Thome Reid had done to her predecessor. The
margin of the court-book again bears the me-
lancholy and brief record, “ Convicta et combusta.”

The two poor women last mentioned are the
more to be pitied, as, whether enthusiasts or im-
postors, they practised their supposed art exclu-
sively for the advantage of mankind. The fol-
lowing extraordinary detail involves persons of
far higher quality, and who sought to familiars
for more baneful purposes.

See Scottish Poems, edited by John G. Dalzell, p. 321.

156 LETTERS ON

Katherine Munro, Lady Fowlis, by birth Ka-
therine Ross of Balnagowan, of high rank, both
by her own family and that of her husband, who
was the fifteenth Baron of Fowlis, and chief of
the warlike clan of Munro, had a stepmother’s
quarrel with Robert Munro, eldest son of her
husband, which she gratified by forming a
scheme for compassing his death by unlawful
arts. Her proposed advantage in this was, that
the widow of Robert, when he was thus removed,
should marry with her brother George Ross of
Balnagowan; and for this purpose, her sister-
in-law, the present Lady Balnagowan, was also
to be removed. Lady Fowlis, if the indictment
had a syllable of truth, carried on her practices
with the least possible disguise. She assem-
bled persons of the lowest order, stamped with
an infamous celebrity as witches; and besides
making pictures or models in clay, by which they
hoped to bewitch Robert Munro and Lady Bal-
nagowan, they brewed, upon one occasion, poi-
son so strong, that a page tasting of it immediate-
ly took sickness. Another earthen jar, (Scotticé,

ig,) of the same deleterious liquor, was prepared
es the Lady Fowlis, and sent with her own nurse,
for the purpose of administering it to Robert
Munro. The messenger having stumbled in the
dark, broke the jar, and a rank grass grew on
the spot where it fell, which sheep and cattle ab-
horred to touch; but the nurse, having less sense
than the brute beasts, and tasting of the liquor
which had been spilled; presently died. What is
more to our present purpose, Lady Fowlis made
use of the artillery of Elfland, in order to de-

DEMONOLOGY AND WITCHCRAFT. 157

stroy her stepson and sister-in-law. Laskie Lon-
cart, one of the assistant hags, produced two of
what the common people call elf-arrow-heads,
being, in fact, the points of flint used for arming
the ends of arrow-shafts in the most ancient
times, but accounted by the superstitious the
weapons by which the fairies were wont to de-
stroy both man and beast. The pictures of the
intended victims were then set up at the north
end of the apartment, and Christian Ross Mal-
colmson, an assistant hag, shot two shafts at the
image of Lady Balnagowan, and three against the
picture of Robert Munro, by which shots they
were broken, and Lady Fowlis commanded new
figures to be modelled. Many similar acts of
witcheraft, and of preparing poisons, were alle-
ged against Lady Fowlis.

Her son-in-law, Hector Munro, one of his
stepmother’s prosecutors, was, for reasons of his
own, active in a similar conspiracy against the
life of his own brother. The rites that he prac-
tised were of an uncouth, barbarous, and unusual
nature. Hector being taken ill, consulted on his
case some of the witches or soothsayers, to whom
this family appears to have been partial. The
answer was unanimous, that he must die un-
less the principal man of his blood should suffer
death in his stead. It was agreed that the vicarious
substitute for Hector must mean George Munro,
brother to him by the half blood, (the son of the
Katherine, Lady Fowlis, before commemorated.)
Hector sent at least seven messengers for this

oung man, refusing to receive any of his other
iends, till he saw the substitute whom he desti-

158 LETTERS ON

ned to take his place in the grave. When George
at length arrived, Hector, by advice of a noto-
rious witch, called Marion MacIngarach, and of
his own foster mother, Christian Neil Dalyell, re-
eeived him with peculiar coldness and restraint.
He did not speak for the space of an hour, till his
brother broke silence, and asked “« How he did?”
Hector replied, “‘ That he was the better George
had come to visit him,” and relapsed into silence,
which seemed singular when compared with the
anxiety he had displayed to see his brother ; but
it was, it seems, a necessary part of the spell.
After midnight, the sorceress Marion MacIn-
garach, the chief priestess, or Nieneven, of the
company, went forth with her accomplices, car-
rying spades with them. They then proceeded
to dig a grave, not far from the sea-side, upon a
piece of land, which formed the boundary betwixt
two proprietors. The grave was made as near-
ly as possible to the size of their patient Hec-
tor Munro, the earth dug out of the grave being
laid aside for the time. After ascertaining that
the operation of the charm on George Munro,
the destined victim, should be suspended for a
time, to avoid suspicion, the conspirators proceed-
ed to work their spell ina singular, impressive,
and, I believe, unique manner. The time being
January 1588, the patient, Hector Munro, was
borne forth in a pair of blankets, accompanied with
all who were intrusted with the secret, who were
warned to be strictly silent, till the chief sorceress
should have received her information from the
angel whom they served. Hector Munro was
carried to his grave, and laid therein, the earth

DEMONOLOGY AND WITCHCRAFT. 159

being filled in on him, and the grave secured with
stakes, as ata real funeral. Marion MacIngarach,
the Hecate of thenight, then sat down by thegrave,
while Christian Neil Dalyell, the foster mother,
ran the breadth of about nine ridges distant, lead-
ing a boy in her hand, and, coming again to the
ve where Hector Munro was interred alive,
emanded of the witch which victim she would
choose, who replied, that she chose Hector to live,
and George to die in his stead. This form of in-
cantation was thrice repeated ere Mr Hector was
removed from his chilling bed ina January grave,
and carried home, all remaining mute as before.
The consequence of a process, which seems ill
adapted to produce the former effect, was, that
Hector Munro recovered, and, after the inter-
vention of twelve months, George Munro, his
brother, died. Hector took the principal witch
into high favour, made her keeper of his sheep,
and evaded, it is said, to present her to trial, when
charged at Aberdeen to produce her. Though
one or two inferior persons suffered death on ac-
count of the sorceries practised in the house of
Fowlis, the Lady Katharine, and her stepson
Hector, had both the unusual good fortune to be
found not guilty. Mr Pitcairn remarks, that the
juries being composed of subordinate persons, not
suitable to the rank or family of the person tried,
has all the appearance of having been packed on
purpose for acquittal. It might also, in some in-.
terval of good sense, creep into the heads of Hec-
tor Munro’s assize, that the enchantment being
abet in January 1588, and the deceased
eing only taken ill of his fatal disease in April

160 LETTERS ON

1590, the distance between the events might'seem
too, great to admit the former being regardedias
the.cause ofthe latter* ,
,» Another instance of the skill of a sorcerer being
traced to the instructions of the elves, is found in
the. confession of John Stewart, called a vaga-
bond, but professing skill in palmestrie and jug-
glerie, and accused of having assisted Margaret
Barelay or Dein, to sink:or cast away a vessel
belonging to her own good-brother. It being de-
manded of him by what means he‘ professed him-
selfito have knowledge of things to'come, the said
John confessed; that'the space of twenty-six years
ago, he being travelling on All-Hallow-Even night,
between the towns of Monygoif (so spelled) and
Clary;;in Galway, he met:with the King of the
Fairies and his company, and that the King of
the Fairies gave him a stroke with a white rod
over the forehead, which took from him the power
of speech, and the use of one eye, which he want-
ed for the space of three’ years. He declared, that
the use of speech and eyesight was restored to
him by the King of Fairies'and hisicompany, onan
Hallowe'en night, at the town of Dublin, in Ire-
land, and that since that time; he had joined these
people every Saturday at seven. o'clock, and re-
mained with them all the ‘night ; also, that they
met every Hallow tide, sometimes on Lanark Hill,
(Tintock, perhaps,) sometimes on Kilmaurs Hill,
and that he was then taught by them. He pointed
out the spot of his forehead, on which; he said, the
King: of the! Fairies struck him with a white rod,
‘ ty ‘ ’ ¥ rintton a af =)

| * Piteairn’s Trials, vols 4. pp191, 201.27"

DEMONOLOGY AND WITCHCRAFT. 161

whereupon, the prisoner being blindfolded, they
pricked the spot with a large pin, whereof he ex-
pressed no sense or feeling. He made the usual
declaration, that he had seen many persons at
the Court of Fairy, whose names he rehearsed
particularly, and declared that all such persons as
are taken away by sudden death go with the
King of Elfland. With this man’s evidence we
have at present no more to do, though we may
revert to the execrable proceedings which then
took place against this miserable juggler, and the
poor women who were accused of the same crime.
At present it is quoted as another instance of a
fortune-teller referring to Elfland as the source
of his knowledge.
~ At Auldearne, a parish and burgh of barony,
in the county of Nairne, the epidemic terror of
witches seems to have gone very far. - The con-
fession of a woman called Isobel Gowdie, of date
April, 1662, implicates, as usual, the Court of Fai-
, and blends the operations of witchcraft with
the facilities afforded by the fairies. These need
be the less insisted upon in this place, as the arch-
fiend, and not the elves, had the immediate agency
in the abominations which she narrates. Yet she
had been, she said, in the Dounie Hills, and got
Meat there from the Queen of Fairies more than
she could eat. She added, that the queen is
bravely clothed in white linen, and in white and
brown cloth,—that the King of Fairy is a brave
man; and there were elf-bulls roaring and skoilling
at the entrance of their palace, which frightened
her much. On another occasion this frank penitent
eonfesses her presence at a rendezvous of witches,
L

162 LETTERS ON

Lammas 1659, where, after they had rambled
through the country in different shapes, of cats,
hares, and the like, eating, drinking, and wasting
the goods of their neighbours, into whose houses
they could penetrate, they at length came to the
Dounie hills, where the mountain opened to receive
them, and they entered a fair big room, as brightas
day. At the entrance ramped and roared the large
fairy bulls, which always alarmed Isobel Gowdie.
These animals are probably the water bulls, fa-
mous both in Scottish and Irish tradition, which
are not supposed to be themselves altogether can-
ny, or safe to have concern with, In their caverns
the fairies manufactured those elf-arrow-heads,
with which the witches and they wrought so much
evil. The elves and the archfiend laboured joint-
ly at this task, the former forming and sharpening
the dart from the rough flint, and the latter per-
fecting and finishing, or, as it is called, dighting it.
Then came the sport of the meeting. The witches
bestrode either corn straws, bean stalks, or rushes,
and calling “ Horse and Hattock, in the Devil’s
name!” which is the elfin signal for mounting, they
flew wherever they listed. If the little whirlwind
which accompanies their transportation passed an
mortal, who neglected to bless himself, all such fi
under the witches’ power, and they acquired th
right of shooting at him. The penitent prisoner
gives the names of many whom she and her sisters
ad so slain, the death for which she was most
sorry being that of William Brown, in the Miln-
town of Mains. A shaft was also aimed at the
Reverend Harrie Forbes, a minister who was
present at the examination of Isobel, the confess~

DEMONOLOGY AND WITCHCRAFT. 163

ing party. The arrow fell short, and the witch
would have taken aim again, but her master for-
bade her, saying, the reverend gentleman’s life
was not subject to their power. To this strange
and very particular confession we shall have oc-
casion to recur, when witchcraft is the more im-
mediate subject. What is above narrated marks
the manner in which the belief in that crime was
blended with the Fairy superstition.

To proceed to more modern instances of per-
sons supposed to have fallen under the power
of the fairy race, we must not forget the Rev.
Robert Kirke, minister of the Gospel, the first
translator of the Psalms into Gaelic verse. He
was, in the end of the seventeenth century, suc-
cessively minister of the Highland parishes of Bal-

uidder and Aberfoyle, lying in the most roman-
tic district of Perthshire, and within the Highland
line. These beautiful and wild regions, compre-
hending so many lakes, rocks, sequestered valleys,
and dim copsewoods, are not even yet quite aban-
doned by the fairies, who have resolutely main-
tained secure footing ina region so well suited for
their residence. Indeed, so much was this the
ease formerly, that Mr Kirke, while in his latter
charge of Aberfoyle, found materials for collect-
ee compiling his Essay on the “ Subter-
and for the most part Invisible People,
heretofore going under the name of Elves,
Fawnes, and Fairies, or the like.”* In this dis-

* The title continues,—* Among the Low Country Scots
as they are described by those who have the second sight,
and now,.to occasion farther enquiry, collected and com-

164 LETTERS ON

course, the author, “ with undoubting mind,” de-
seribes the fairy race as a sort of astral spirits,
of a kind betwixt humanity and angels—sa
that they have children, nurses, marriages, deaths,
and burials, like mortals in appearance ; that,-in
some,respect, they represent mortal men, and
that, individual, apparitions, or Double-men, are
found among’ them, corresponding with mortals
existing on earth. Mr. Kirke accuses them of
stealing the milk from the cows, and of carry-
ing away what is more material, the women in
pregnancy, and new-born children -from: their
nurses. ‘The remedy is easy in both cases. The
milk cannot be stolen, if the mouth of the calf;
before he is permitted to suck, be rubbed with a
certain balsam; yery easily come by; and the wo-
man in,travailis ut if a piece of cold iron is put
into the bed. Mr Kirke accounts for this, by
informing us, that the, great northern mines of
iron, lying adjacent to the place of eternal punish-
ment, have/a savour odious to these “ fascinating
ereatures.” They have, says the reverend author,
what one would not expect, many light toyish
books, (noyels and plays, doubtless,) others on
Rosycrucian subjects, and of an abstruse mystical
character; but they have no Bibles, or works of
devotion. The essayist fails not to mention ae
elf-arrow-heads, which have something of thi
subtlety of thunderbolts, and can mortally wound

eh
pared by a circumspect enquirer residing among the Seot-
ftish‘Trish (i. ¢: the Gael, or Highlanders) in Scotland,”
Ttewas | printed withthe; author’s name in 169], and) re~
printed, Edinhurgh, 1813, for Longman and Co.) py

DEMONOLOGY AND WITCHCRAFT. 165

the vital parts, without breaking the skin. Tliese
wounds, he says, he has himself observed ‘in
beasts, and felt the fatal lacerations which he could
not see. y
It was by no means to be supposed that the
elves, so jealous and irritable a race as to be in-
censed against those who spoke of them under
their proper names, should be less than mortally
offended at the temerity of the reverend author,
who had pried so deeply into their mysteriés, for
the purpose of giving them to the public; Al-
though, therefore, the learned divine’s monument,
with his name duly inscribed, is to be seen atthe
east end of the churchyard at Aberfoyle, yet those
acquainted with his’real history do not believe
that he enjoys the natural repose of the tomb.
His successor, the Rey. Dr Grahame, has informed
us of the general belief, that as Mr Kirke was walk-
ing’ one evening in his night-gown upon a Dun-shi,
or fairy mount, in the vicinity of the manse or par-
sonage, behold! he sunk down in what seemed
to be a fit of apoplexy, which the unenlightened
took for death, while the moré understanding
Knew it to be a swoon produced by the superna-
tural influence of the pedble whose precincts he
ad violated. After the ceremony of a seeming
meral, the form of the Rev. Robert Kirke ap-
eared to a relation, and commanded him 'té
to Grahame of Duchray, ancestor of the present
General Graham Stirling. * Say to Duchray,
who is my cousin, as well as your own, that I
am not dead, but a captive in Fairy Land;
and only one chance remains for my liberation.
When the posthumous child, of which my wife

166 LETTERS ON

has been delivered since my disappearance, shall
be brought to baptism, I will appear in the room,
when, if Duchray shall throw over my head the
knife or dirk which he holds in his hand, I may
be restored to society ; but if this opportunity
is neglected, I am lost for ever.” Duchray was
apprised of what was to be done. The cere-
mony took place, and the apparition of Mr Kirke
was visibly seen while they were seated at table ;
but Grahame of Duchray, in his astonishment,
failed to perform the ceremony enjoined, and. it
is to be feared that Mr Kirke still “ drees his
weird in Fairy Land,” the Elfin state declaring
to him, as the Ocean to poor Falconer, who pe-
rished at sea, after having written his popular
poem of the Shipwreck,—

‘* Thou hast proclaim’d our power—be thou our prey !”

Upon this subject the reader may consult a
very entertaining little volume, called “ Sketches
of Perthshire,”* by the Rev. Dr Grahame of Aber-
foyle. The terrible visitation of fairy vengeance
which has lighted upon Mr Kirke has not intimi-:
dated his successor, an excellent man, and good
antiquary, from affording us some curious infor-
mation on fairy superstition. He tells us that
these capricious elves are chiefly dangerous on a
Friday, when, as the day of the Crucifixion, evil
spirits have most power, and mentions their dis-
pleasure at any one who assumes their accustomed
livery of green, a colour fatal to several families
in Scotland, to the whole race of the gallant

* Edinburgh, 1812.

DEMONOLOGY AND WITCHCRAFT. 167

Grahames in particular ; insomuch, that we have
heard that in battle a Grahame is generally shot
through the green check of his plaid ; moreover,
that a veteran sportsman of the name, having come
by a bad fall, he thought it sufficient to account
for it, that he had a piece of green whip-cord to
complete the lash of his hunting whip. I remem-
ber, also, that my late amiable friend, James
Grahame, author of “ The Sabbath,” would not
break through this ancient prejudice of his clan,
but had his library table covered with blue or
black cloth, rather than use the fated colour com-
monly employed on such occasions.

To return from the Perthshire fairies, I may
quote a story of a nature somewhat similar to
that of Mas Robert Kirke. The life of the ex-
cellent person who told it was, for the benefit of
her friends and the poor, protracted to an unusual
duration ; so I conceive that this adventure, which
took place in her childhood, might happen before
the middle of last century. She was residing with
some relations, near the small seaport town of
North Berwick, when the place and its vicinity
were alarmed by the following story :—

» An industrious man, a weaver in the little town,
was married to a beautiful woman, who, after bear-

_ ing two or three children, was so unfortunate as

to die during the birth of a fourth child. The in-
fant was saved, but the mother had expired in
convulsions ; and as she was much disfigured after
death, it became an opinion among her gossips,
that, from some neglect of those who ought to
have watched the sick woman, she must have been
carried off by the elves, and this ghastly corpse

168 LETTERS ON

substituted in| the place of the body. The wi-
dower paid little attention to these rumours, and,
after. bitterly lamenting his wife for a yearvof
mourning, began. to think on the prudence »of
forming a new -marriage, which, to a poor artisan
with so young a family, and without the assist<
ance of a housewife, was almost a matter of neces+
sity. He readily found a neighbour with whose
good looks he was satisfied, whilst her character
for temper seemed:to warrant her good usage-of
his, children. He :proposed himself and was ae-
cepted, and carried the names of the parties to
the clergyman. (called; I believe, Mr: Matthew.
Reid) for the due proclamation of bans. As the

man had really loved his late partner, it is likelyr

that this proposed decisive alteration of his con-
dition brought back.many reflections concerning
the period of their union, and with these recalled
the extraordinary rumours whieh were afloatoat
the time-of her decease, so that the whole for
ced,upon him the following lively dream. «As
he lay-in his bed; awake as he thought, he beheld,:
at the ghostly hour of midnight, the figure \of
a female dressed in white, who entered his hut,
stood by the side of his: bed, and appeared):to:
him the very likeness of his late wife. He cons

jared her to speak, and with astonishment heard

her say, like the minister of Aberfoyle, that-she:
was not dead, but the unwilling captive of the
Good Neighbours, Like Mr Kirke, too, sheiteld:
him, that if all the love which he once had for
her was not entirely gone, an opportunity still;
remained of recovering her, or wenning her baeky.

asit was usually: termed, from) the comfoxtless.

DEMONOLOGY AND WITCHCRAFT. 169

realms ‘of Elfland.'' She charged him, on a cer-
tain day of the ensuing week, that he should
convene the most respectable housekeepers in
the town, with the clergyman at their head, and
should disinter the coffin in which she was suppo+
sed to have been buried. « The clergyman is 'to
recite certain: prayers, upon which,” said the ap-
parition; “ I will start from the coffin, and fly with
great speed round the church, and you must have
the fleetest. runner of the: parish (naming a man’
famed forswiftness) to pursue me, and such a one,
the-smith, renowned: for, his strength, to hold
me fast after I am overtaken; and in that case’
Iyshall, bythe prayers of the chureh, and the
efforts of my loving husband and neighbours,
again -recover»my station-in human society.” In
the morning, the poor widower was distressed
with the recollection of his: dream, but, ashamed
and: puzzled, took no measures in consequence\’
Avsecond: night, as is not»very surprising; the
visitation was again: repeated. On the third
night she appeared witha sorrowful and displea-
sed countenance, upbraided ‘him with want’ of
love and affection, and conjured him, for thelast
time, to attend to her instractions, which; if he
now néglected; she would never have “power ‘to
-visit»earth or communicate with him again, »In
order to convince’ him there was no delusion, he
‘saw in his dream” that she took up the nursling
at whose birth she'had died, and gave it suck;
she spilled also a drop or:two of her milk on the’
poor man’s! bed-clothes, as if to assure him of the’
reality of thevisions) «2 gues yon ty bomiauas:
«The next morning the-terrified»widower var-.

170 LETTERS ON

ried a statement of his perplexity to Mr Matthew
Reid, the clergyman. This reverend person, be-
sides being an excellent divine in other respects,
was at the same time a man of sagacity, who un-
derstood the human passions. He did not attempt
to combat the reality of the vision which had
thrown his parishioner into this tribulation, but
he contended it could be only an illusion of the
devil. He explained to the widower, that no
created being could have the right or power to
imprison or detain the soul of a Christian—con-
jured him not to believe that his wife was other-
wise disposed of than according to God's plea-
sure—assured him that Protestant doctrine ut-
terly denies the existence of any middle state in
the world to come—and explained to him that he,
as a clergyman of the Church of Scotland, neither
could nor dared authorize opening graves, or
using the intervention of prayer to sanction rites
of a suspicious character. _'The poor man, con-
founded and perplexed by various feelings, asked
his pastor what he should do. “ I will give youmy.
best advice,” .said the clergyman. ‘“ Get your new
bride’s consent to be married to-morrow, or to-
day, if you can; I will take it on me to dispense
with the rest of the bans, or proclaim them three
times in one day. You will have a new wife,
and if you think of the former, it will be only as
of one from whom death has separated you, and
for whom you may have thoughts of affection and
sorrow, but as a saint in Heaven, and not as @
prisoner in Elfland.” The advice was taken, and
the perplexed widower had no more visitations.
from his former spouse. :

DEMONOLOGY AND WITCHCRAFT. 171

. An instance, perhaps the latest which has been
made. public, of communication with the Rest-
less People—(a more proper epithet than that of
Daoine Shi, or Men of Peace, as they are called
in Gaclic)—came under Pennant’s notice, so late
as during that observant traveller's tour in 1769.
Being perhaps the latest news from the invisible
commonwealth, we give the tourist’s own words.
‘« A poor visionary who had been working in his
cabbage garden, (in Breadalbane,) imagined that
he was raised suddenly upinto the air, and convey~
ed over a wall into an adjacent cornfield; that
he found himself surrounded by a crowd of men.
and women, many of whom he knew to have been;
dead for some years, and who appeared to him.
skimming over the tops of the unbending corn,
and mingling together like bees going to hive ;
that they spoke an unknown language, and with
a hollow sound; that they very roughly pushed
him to and fro, but on his uttering the name of
Gop, all vanished but a female sprite, who, sei-
zing him by the shoulder, obliged him to pro-
mise an assignation, at that very hour that day
seven-night; that he then found his hair was all
tied in double knots, (well known by the name
of elf-locks,) and that he had almost lost his
speech; that he kept his word with the spectre,
whom he soon saw floating through the air to-
wards him; that he spoke to her, but she told
him she was at that time in too much haste to
attend to him, but bid him go away and no harm
should befall him, and so the affair rested when
I left the country. But it is incredible the
mischief these @gri somnia did in the neigh-

172 ‘LETTERS ON

bourhood. The friends and neighbours of the
deceased, whom the old dreamer had named,
were in the utmost anxiety at finding them in
such bad company in the other world ; the almost
extinct belief of the old idle tales began to gain
ground, and the good minister will have many a
weary discourse and exhortation before he can
eradicate the absurd ideas this idle story has re-
vived.”* ie

It is scarcely necessary to add, that this com-
paratively recent tale is just the counterpart of
the story of Bessie Dunlop, Alison Pearson, and
of the Irish butler, who was so nearly carried off,
all of whom found in Elfland some friend for-
merly of middle earth, who attached themselves
to the child of humanity, and who endeayoured to
protect a fellow mortal against their less philan-
thropic companions.

These instances may tend to show how the fairy
superstition, which, in its general sense of wor-
shipping the Dii Campestres, was much the older
of the two, came to bear upon, and have connexion
with, that horrid belief in witchcraft, which cost
so many innocent persons, and crazy impostors,
their lives, for the supposed commission of im-
possible crimes. In the next chapter, I propose
to trace how the general disbelief in the fairy
creed began to take place, and gradually brought
into discredit the supposed feats of witchcraft,
which afforded pretext for such cruel practical
consequences.

wlis wo seg hi AP ai

ae Penmant’s Tour in Scotland; vol. i. p. 110,
: Mity ‘oa #1

DEMONOLOGY AND WITCHCRAFT. 173

LETTER VI.

Immediate Effect of Christianity on Articles of Popular Su-
perstition—Chaucer’s Account of the Roman Catholic
Priests banishing the Fairies—Bishop Corbett imputes
the same Effect to the Reformation—his Verses on ‘that
Subject—his Iter Septentrionale— Robin Goodfellow, and

' other Superstitions mentioned by Reginald Scot—Cha-
_racter, of the English Fairies—The, Tradition had become
obsolete in that Author's Time—-That of Witches remained
in vigour—but impugned by various Authors after the Re-
formation, as Wierus, Naudeus, Scot, and others—De-

~ monology defended’ by Bodinus, Remigius, §c.— Their mu-
tual Abuse of each other-—Imperfection of Physical Science
at this Period, and the predominance of Mysticism in that
Department, rd

AxrHoven the influence of the Christian re-
ligion was not introduced tothe nations of Kuro
with such radiance as to dispel at once those
clouds of superstition which continued to obscure
the understanding of hasty and ill-instructed con-
verts, there canbe no-doubt that its immediate
operation went to modify the erroneous and ex-
travagant articles of credulity, which lingered be-
hind the old Pagan faith, and which gaye way
before it, in proportion as its light became more
pure and refined fromthe devices of men.

The poet Chaucer, indeed, pays the Church of
Rome, with its monks and preaching friars, the
compliment of haying, at,an.early, period, ex-
pelled from the land all spirits of‘an inferior and

174 LETTERS ON

less holy character. The verses are curious as
well as picturesque, and may go some length to
establish the existence of doubts concerning the
general belief in fairies among the well instructed
in the time of Edward III.

The fairies of whom the bard of Woodstock
talks, are, it will be observed, the ancient Celtic
breed, and he seems to refer for the authorities
of his tale to Bretagne, or Armorica, a genuine
Celtic colony.

Tn old time of the King Artour,

Of which that Bretons speken great honour,
All was this land fulfilled of faerie ;

The Elf queen, with her joly company,
Danced full oft in many a grene mead,
This was the old opinion, as I rede—

T speake of many hundred years ago;

But now can no man see no elves mo.

For now the great charity and prayers

Of limitours,* and other holy freres,

That searchen every land and every stream,
As thick as motes in the sunne-beam,
Blessing halls, chambers, kitchenes, and boures,
Cities and burghes, castles high and towers,
Thropes and barnes, sheep-pens and dairies,
This maketh that there ben no fairies.

For there as wont to walken was an elf,
There walketh now the limitour himself,
In under nichtes and in morwenings,

And saith his mattins and his holy things,
As he goeth in his limitation.

Women may now go safely up and doun;
In every bush, and under every tree,

There is no other incubus than he,

And he ne will don them no dishonour.” +

* Friars limited to beg within a certain district.
t Wife of Bath's Tale

DEMONOLOGY AND WITCHCRAFT. 175

When we see the opinion which Chaucer has
expressed of the regular clergy of his time, in
some of his other tales, we are tempted to sus-
pect some mixture of irony in the compliment,
which ascribes the exile of the fairies, with which
the land was “ fulfilled,” in King Arthur's time,
to the warmth and zeal of the devotion of the
limitary friars. Individual instances of scepticism
there might exist among scholars, but a more mo-
dern poet, witha vein of humour not unworthy of
Geoffrey himself, has with greater probability de-
layed the final banishment of the fairies from Eng-
land, that is, from popular faith, till the reign of
Queen Elizabeth, and has represented their expul-
sion as a consequence of the change of religion.
Two or three verses of this lively satire may be
very well worth the reader’s notice, who must,
at the same time, be informed, that the author,
Dr Corbett, was nothing less than the Bishop of
Oxford and Norwich, in the beginning of the se-
venteenth century. The poem is named, “ A
proper new Ballad, entitled the Feiries’ Fare-
well, to be sung or whistled to the tune of the
Meadow Brow, by the learned; by the unlearn-
ed, to the tune of Fortune.”—

* Farewell, rewards and fairies,
Good housewives now may say,
For now foul sluts in dairies
‘Do fare as well as they ;
And though they sweep their hearths no less
_ Than maids were wont to do,
Yet who of late for cleanliness
Finds sixpence in her shoe?

176 LETTERS ON

= .,. Lament, lament, old abbies,
The fairies’ lost command ;
_ They did but change priests’ babies,
But some have changed your land ;
’ And all your children sprung from hence ©"?
Are now grown Puritans,
Who live as changelings ever since
For love of your domains,

*« At morning and at evening both,
You merry were and glad,

So little care of sleep and sloth
Those pretty ladies had.

‘When Tom came home from labour,
Or Cis to milking rose,

Then merrily, merrily went their tabor,
And merrily went their toes.

, Witness, those rings and roundelays
Of theirs, which yet remain,

Were footed, in Queen Mary’s days,
On many a grassy plain ;

But since of late Elizabeth,
And later, James came in,

They never danced on any heath
As when the time hath bin.

“ By which we note, the fairies
Were of the old profession,
Their songs were Ave Maries,
Their dances were procession.
But now, alas! they all are dead,
Or gone beyond the seas; ;
Or farther for religion fled, —
Or Pr tl sy ei

The remaini ing. ‘part of bs oem is dedicated
to the praise an glory of old William Chourne
of Staffordshire, wh 0 remained a true and stanch

Y poids .2 tae!
v

DEMONOLOGY AND WITCHCRAFT. 177

evidence in behalf of the departed elves, and
kept, much it would seem to the amusement of
the witty bishop, an inexhaustible record of their
pranks and feats, whence the concluding verse.

“ To William all give audience,
And pray ye for his noddle,

For all the fairies’ evidence,
Were lost if that were addle.” *

This William Chourne appears to have attend-
ed Dr Corbett’s party on the iter septentrionale,
“two of which were, and two desired to be,
doctors ;’ but whether William was guide, friend,
or domestic, seems uncertain. The travellers lose
themselves in the mazes of Chorley Forest, on
their way to Bosworth, and their route becomes
so confused, that they return on their steps, and
labour

* As in a conjurer’s circle—William found

A mean for our deliverance,—‘ Turn your cloaks,’
Quoth he, ‘ for Puck is busy in these oaks;

If ever you at Bosworth would be found,

Then turn your cloaks, for this is fairy ground.’
But ere this witchcraft was perform’d, we meet

A very man who had no cloven feet.

Though William, still of little faith, has doubt,
Tis Robin, or some sprite that walks about.

. ‘ Strike him,’ quoth he, ‘ and it will turn to air—
Cross yourselves thrice and strike it.’—* Strike that dare,’
Thought I, ‘ for sure this massy forester,

In strokes will prove the better conjurer.’
_ But ’twas a gentle keeper, one that knew |,
‘Humanity and mamners, where they grew, _
faiots 1 fie fi Mt iel ge
* Corbett’s Poems, edited by Octavius Gilchrist, p. 215,
M

178 LETTERS ON

And rode along so far, till he could say,
* See, yonder Bosworth stands, and this your way.’’*

In this passage, the Bishop plainly shows the
fairies maintained their influence in William’s
imagination, since the courteous keeper was mis-
taken by their associate champion, for Puck, or
Robin Goodfellow. The spells resorted to to get
rid of his supposed delusions, are alternatively
that of turning the cloak—(recommended, in vi-
sions of the second-sight, or similar illusions, as a
means of obtaining a certainty concerning the being
which is before imperfectly seen+)—and that of
exorcising the spirit with a cudgel; which last,
Corbett prudently thinks, ought not to be resort-
ed to, unless under an absolute conviction that the
exorcist is the stronger party. Chaucer, therefore,
could not be serious in averring that the fairy su-
perstitions were obsolete in his day, since they were
found current three centuries afterwards.

Tt is not the less certain, that, as knowledge
and religion became more widely and brightly
displayed over any country, the superstitious
fancies of the people sunk gradually in esteem
and influence; and in the time of Queen Eliza-
beth, the unceasing labour of many and popular
preachers, who declaimed against the “ splendid
miracles” of the Church of Rome, produced also
its natural effect upon the other stock of super-

* Corbett’s poems, p. 191.

+ A common instance is, that of a person haunted with
a resemblance, whose face he cannot see. If he turn his
cloak, or plaid, he will obtain the full sight which he de-
sires, and may probably find it to be his own fetch, or wraith,
or double-ganger,

DEMONOLOGY AND WITCHCRAFT. 179

stitions. ‘ Certainly,” said Reginald Scot, talk-
ing of times before his own, “ some one knave
in a white sheet hath cozened and abused many
thousands, specially when Robin Goodfellow kept
such a coilin the country. In our childhood, our
mothers’ maids have so terrified us with an ugly
devil having horns on his head, fire in his mouth,
and a tail at his breech; eyes like a basin, fangs
like a dog, claws like a bear, a skin like a negro,
and a voice roaring like a lion, whereby we start
and are afraid when we hear one cry, Boh! and
they have so frayd us with bull-beggars, spirits,
witches, urchins, elves, hags, fairies, satyrs, Pans,
faunes, sylvans, Kitt-with-the-candlestick, tritons,
centaurs, dwarfs, giants, imps, calcars, conjurers,
nymphs, changelings, incubus, Robin Goodfellow,
‘the spoorn, the man-in-the-oak, the hellwain, the
fire-drake, the puckle, Tom Thomb, Hobgoblin,
Tom-Tumbler, Boneless, and such other bugbears,
that we are afraid of our own shadows, insomuch,
that some never fear the devil but on a dark night ;
and then a polled sheep is a perilous beast, and
many times is taken for our father’s soul, specially
in a churchyard, where a right hardy man here-
tofore durst not to have passed by night but his
hair would stand upright. Well, thanks be to
God, this wretched and cowardly infidelity, since
the preaching of the Gospel, is in part forgotten,
and doubtless the rest of these illusions will, in
a short time, by God’s grace, be detected, and
vanish away.”*

* Reginald Scot’s Discovery of Witchcraft, book vii.
chap, 15.

180 LETTERS ON

Lt would require a better demonologist than,I
am, to,explain the various obsolete superstitions
which Reginald Scot. has introduced as articles of
the. old English faith, into the preceding passage.
I might indeed, say, the Phuca is a Celtic super-
stition, from which the word Pook, or Puckle, was
doubtless derived; and I. might conjecture, that
the man-in-the-oak was the) same with the Erl-
Konig of the Germans;,and that the hellwain were
a kind of wandering spirits, the descendants of a
champion, named, Hellequin, who ‘are introduced
into the romance of Richard:sans Peur.,But most
antiquaries.will be at fault concerning the spoorn,
Kitt-with-the-candlestick, | Boneless, , and. some
others. The,catalogue, however; serves to show
what progress the English have made in two cen-
turies, in forgetting’ the Nok names of objects
which had been the sources of terror to their an-
cestors of the Elizabethan age. : th
Before leaving, the subject of fairy supersti-
tion in England, we may. remark, that it was of
amore playful and gentle, less. wild and neero-
mantic character, than that received among the
sister people. |. The amusements of the southern
fairies were light.and sportive ; their resentments
were satisfied with pinching or scratching the eb-
jects of their displeasure ; their peculiar sense of
cleanliness rewarded the housewives with the sil-
yer token in the shoe; their nicety was extreme
concerning any coarseness or negligence which
‘eould offend their delicacy ; and:I cannot discern,
éxcept, ‘perhaps, fromthe insinuations of sonite
ah ami divines, that they were vassals to, or
in close alliance with, the infernals, as there is

DEMONOLOGY AND WITCHCRAFT. 181

too much reason to’beliéve was the ‘case with their
North British sisterhood.* ‘The common nur-
sery story cannot be forgotten, how, shortly after
the death of what'is called a nice tid eat
the! Elfin band were shocked to’see x fe a pe

of different character, with whom the welder
had filled his deserted arms; instead of the nicely
arranged little loaf of the whitest bread, anda ba-
sin of sweet cream, duly placed for their 're-
freshment’ by the deceased, had’ substituted a
brown loaf and a cobb of herrings.’ Incenseéd at
such a coarse regale, the elves dragged the peceant
housewife out of bed, and pulled her down the
wooden stairs by the heels, repeating, at the sanie
time, in scorn of her churlish hospitality,

“ Brown bread and herring cobb !
_ Thy fat sides shall haye many a bob !”

ty

But beyond such playful malice, they had n0 de-
sire to extend their resentment.

The constant attendant upon the English fairy
court was the celebrated Puck, or Robin Good-
fellow, who, to the elves, acted in some measure
as the jester, or clown of the company,—-(a charac-
ter then to be found in the establishment of every
person of quality, )—or to use a more motor’ com-

‘\®@ Dy Jackson, in his’ Treatise on Unbelief, opines Yor
“the'severer opinion.’ “ Thus aré'the Fayries, from differ-
‘enceof events ascribed to them; divided into good and bad,
Jwhen-as it is but i ie same vey ery there that
eden in, oth, wh tab feared ather-

Pa wie 28 aire Joneft witha 9f ifPe touts on vba,
>. td ons Pecerslaseata ful

a! vel ive 3 MEAIL Lh 9820lo

182 LETTERS ON

parison, resembled the Pierrot of the pantomime.
His jests were of the most simple, and at the same
time the broadest comic character—to mislead a
clown on his path homeward, to disguise himself
like a stool, in order to induce an old gossip to
commit the egregious mistake of sitting down on
the floor, when she expected to repose on a chair,
were his special enjoyments. If he condescended
to do some work for the sleeping family, in which
he had some resemblance to the Scottish house-
hold spirit called a Brownie, the selfish Puck
was far from practising this labour on the disin-
terested principle of the northern goblin, who, if
raiment or food was left in his way, and for his
use, departed from the family in displeasure. Ro-
bin Goodfellow, on the contrary, must have both
his food and his rest, as Milton informs us, amid
his other notices of country superstitions, in the
poem of L’ Allegro. And itis to be noticed, that
he represents these tales of the fairies, told round
the cottage hearth, as of a cheerful rather than a
serious cast; which illustrates what I have said
concerning the milder character of the southern
superstitions, as compared with those of the same
class in Scotland—the stories of which are for the
most part of a frightful, and not seldom of a dis-
gusting, quality.

Poor Robin, however, between whom and King
Oberon Shakspeare contrives to keep a degree
of distinct subordination, which for a moment
deceives us by its appearance of reality, notwith-
standing his turn for wit and humour, had been
obscured by oblivion even in the days of Queen
Bess. We have already seen, in a passage quoted

DEMONOLOGY AND WITCHCRAFT. 183

from Reginald Scot, that the belief was fallen into
abeyance ; that which follows from the same au-
thor, affirms more positively that Robin's date.
was over.

«“ Know you this by the way, that heretofore
Robin Goodfellow and Hobgoblin were as ter-
rible, and also as credible, to the people, as hags
and witches be now; and, in time to come, a witch
will be as much derided and condemned, and as
clearly perceived, as the illusion and knavery of
Robin Goodfellow, upon whom there have gone
as many and as credible tales as witchcraft, saving
that it hath not pleased the translators of the
Bible to call spirits by the name of Robin Good-
fellow, as they have diviners, soothsayers, poison-
ers, and cozeners, by the name of witches.”* In the
same tone Reginald Scot addresses the reader inthe
preface—“ To make a solemn suit to you that are
partial readers to set aside partiality, to take in
good part my writings, and with indifferent eyes
to look upon my book, were labour lost and time
ill employed ; for I should no more prevail here-
in, than if a hundred years since J should have
entreated your predecessors to believe that Robin
Goodfellow, that great and ancient bull-beggar,
had been but a cozening merchant, and no devil
indeed. But Robin Goodfellow ceaseth now to
be much feared, and Popery is sufficiently dis-
covered, nevertheless witches’ charms and con-
jurers’ cozenage are yet effectual.” This passage
seems clearly to prove, that the belief in Robin

' * Reginald Scot’s Discovery of Witchcraft, book vii,
chap. ii.

184 ‘) LETTERS ON

Goodfellow and: his ‘fairy companions’ was*now
out of date, while that as- to witchcraft, as was
-afterwards but too well shown, kept -its ground
against argument and controversy, and survived
‘to shed more blood.” .4 bs

‘We are then to take’ leave of this fascinating
atticle of the popular ereed; having in it so much
of interest to the imagination, that we almost
etivy the credulity of those who, in the gentle
moonlight of asummer night in England, amid the
tangled glades' of a deep forest, of the turfy swell
of her romantic commons, could-faney they saw
the fairies tracing their sportive rings) Butit isin
vain to regret illusions which, however engaging,
must of necessity yield their place before the in-
crease of knowledge, like shadows at the advanee
of'morn. These superstitions have already ser-
ved their best and most useful purpose, having
béenembalmed in) the poetrysof Milton and of
Shakspeare, as well as writers only inferior to
these great names. Of Spenser we must say no+
thing, because in his Faery Queen, the title is the
only circumstance which ‘connects his splendid
allegory with the popular superstition, and, ashe
uses it, means nothing more’ than ‘an Utopia, or
nameless countrys =) mh TEL

With the fairy popular creed fell, doubtless,
many subordinate articles of credulity in) Eng-
land; but the belief in witches kept its ground.
It was rooted in the minds of the common peo*
ple, as well by the easy solution it afforded: of
much which they found otherwise hard to ex~
plain, as in reverence to the Holy Scriptures, ir
which the word witch being used in several places,

DEMONOLOGY AND WITCHCRAFT. 185

conveyed to those who did not trouble themselves
about the nicety of the-translation from the East-
ern tongues, the inference that the same. species
of witches were meant as those against whom
modern legislation had, in most European na-
tions, directed the punishment of death.. These
two. circumstances furnished, the numerous. be-
lievers in witchcraft with arguments in divinity
and Jaw which they conceived irrefragable.; They
might say to the theologist, Will you not believe
in-witches? the Scripturesaver their existences.
tothe jurisconsult,,Will you dispute the exist-
ence ofa‘ crime, against, which our own statute-
book, and the code of almost all civilized cown-
tries, have attested, by laws upon which hundreds
and thousands have been convicted, many,,oreven
most of whom have, by their judicial confessions,
acknowledged their guilt.and the justice of their
punishment? Itis a strange scepticism, they might
add, which rejects the evidence of Scripture, of
human legislature, and -of the. accused persons
themselves. int
Notwithstanding these specious reasons, the
sixteenth and seventeenth centuries were periods
when the revival of learning, the invention of
printing, the fearless investigations, of the, re;
formers into subjects thought formerly too sacred
for consideration.of any save the clergy, had in-
troduced a system of doubt, enquiry, disregard
of authority, when unsupported by argument, and
unhesitating exercise of the private judgment, on
ee which had occupied the bulls of popes,
decrees of councils. In short, the spirit,of
the age was little disposed to spare error, how-

186 LETTERS ON

ever venerable, or countenance imposture, how-
ever sanctioned by length of time and universal
acquiescence. Learned writers arose in different
countries to challenge the very existence of this
imaginary crime, to rescue the reputation of the
great men whose knowledge, superior to that of
their age, had caused them to be suspected of
magic, and to put a stop to the horrid supersti-
tion whose victims were the aged, ignorant, and
defenceless, and which could only be compared to
that which sent victims of old through the fire
to Moloch.

The courageous interposition of those philoso-
phers who opposed science and experience to the
prejudices of superstition and ignorance, and in
doing so, incurred much misrepresentation, and
perhaps no little ill-will, in the cause of truth
and humanity, claim for them some distinction
in a work on Demonology. The pursuers of
exact science to its coy retreats, were sure to be
the first to discover, that the most remarkable
phenomena in nature are regulated. by certain
fixed laws, and cannot rationally be referred to
supernatural agency, the sufticing cause to which
superstition attributes all that is beyond her own
narrow power of explanation. Each advance in
natural knowledge teachesus that itis the pleasure
of the Creator to govern the world by the laws
which he has imposed, and which are not in our
times interrupted or suspended.

The learned Wier, or Wierus, was a man 0’
great research in physical science, and studied
under the celebrated Cornelius Agrippa, against
whom the charge of sorcery was repeatedly al-

DEMONOLOGY AND WITCHCRAFT. 187

leged by Paulus Jovius, and other authors, while
he suffered on the other hand from the persecu-
tion of the inquisitors of the church, whose ac-
cusation against this celebrated man was, that
he denied the existence of spirits, a charge very
inconsistent with that of sorcery, which consists
in corresponding with them. Wierus, after ta-
king his degrees as a doctor of medicine, became
physician to the Duke of Cleves, at whose court
he practised for thirty years, with the highest
reputation. This learned man, disregarding the
scandal which, by so doing, he was likely to bring
upon himself, was one of the first who attacked
the vulgar belief, and boldly assailed, both by se-
rious arguments and by ridicule, the vulgar cre- |
dulity on the subject of wizards and witches.
Gabriel Naudé, or Naudzus, as he termed him-
self, was a perfect scholar and man of letters,
busied during his whole life with assembling
books together, and enjoying the office of libra-
rian to several persons of high rank, amongst
others, to Queen Christina of Sweden. He was,
besides, a beneficed clergyman, leading a most
unblemished life, and so temperate, as never to
taste any liquor stronger than water ; yet did he
not escape the scandal which is usually flung by
their prejudiced contemporaries upon those dis-
putants whom it is found more easy to defame
than to answer. He wrote an interesting work,
entitled, “ Apologie pour les Grands Hommes
Accusés de Magie;” and as he exhibited a good
deal of vivacity of talent, and an earnestness in
pleading his cause, which did not always spare
some of the superstitions of Rome herself, he was

188 LETTERS ON

charged by his contemporaries as guilty of heresy
and scepticism, when justice could only accuse
him of an incautious eagerness to make good his
argument. -~

Among persons who, upon this subject, purged
their eyes with rue and euphrasie, besides the
Rev. Dr Harsnet, and many others, (who wrote
rather on special cases of Desnomulogy than on
the general question,) Reginald Scot ought to be
distinguished: Webster assures us, that he was
a “person of competent’ learning, pious, and of
a good family.” He seems to have been a zeal-
ous Protestant, and much of his book, as well as
that of Harsnet, is designed to throw upon the
Papists in particular those tricks, in which, by
confederacy and imposture, the popular ideas
See witcheraft, possession, and other su-
pernatural fancies, were maintained and kept ‘in
exercise ; but he also writes on the general ques-
tion with some force and talent, considering that
his subject is incapable of being reduced into a re-
gular form, and is of a nature particularly seduc-
tive to an excursive talent. He appears to have
studied legerdemain for the purpose of showing
how much, that is apparently unaccountable, ean
nevertheless’ be performed without the intef-
vention of supernatural assistance, even when it
is impossible to persuade the vulgar that the devil
has not been consulted on the occasion. Scot
also had intercourse with some of the celebrated
fortune-tellers, or Philomaths, of the time ;'one
of whom he brings forward: to declare: the-va-
nity of the science which he himself had

wtlivibgihs Hho retsc iiss olay

DEMONOLOGY AND WITCHCRAFT. 189

To, defend, the popular belief of witcheraft,
there arose a number of advocates, of whom Bo-
din, and some others, neither wanted knowledge
nor powers of reasoning. They pressed the inere-
dulous party with the charge that they denied
the existence of a crime against which the law
had denounced a capital punishment; As that
law was understood to emanate from James him-
self, who was reigning monarch during, the hot-
test part of the controversy, the English authors
who defended the opposite side were obliged to
intrench themselves under an evasion, to avoid
maintaining an argument unpalatable to a degree
to those in power, and which might,perchance
have proved unsafe to.those who;used. it..; With
a.certain degree of sophistry, they answered, that
they did not doubt the possibility of witches, but
only demurred to what is their nature, and how
they came to be such—according to, the scholas-
tie jargon, that the question in respect to’ witches,
was not de existentia, but only de modo existendi,:
By resorting to so subtle an argument, those
who impugned the popular belief. were obliged,
with some inconsistency, to grant that witcheraft
had existed, and might exist, only insisting that.it
was a species of witchcraft .consisting of the
knew not what, but certainly of something: dif-
ferent from that which legislators, judges, and
juries, had hitherto considered the statute as de-
signed to repress. 0 * +4 :
sydn the meantime, (the rather that the debate
was on a subject particularly difficult of compre-
hension,) the debating parties grew warm, and
began to call names. Bodin, a lively Frenchman

190 LETTERS ON

of an irritable habit, explained the zeal of Wie-
rus to protect the tribe of sorcerers from punish-
ment, by stating, that he himself was a conjurer,
and the scholar of Cornelius Agrippa, and might
therefore well desire to save the lives of those
accused of the same league with Satan. Hence
they threw on their antagonists the offensive
names of witch-patrons and witch-advocates, as if
it were impossible for any to hold the opinion of
Naudeus, Wierus, Scot, &c., without patronising
the devil and the witches against their brethren
of mortality. Assailed by such heavy charges,
the philosophers themselves lost patience, and
retorted abuse in their turn, calling Bodin, Del-
rio, and others who used their arguments, witch-
advocates, and the like, as the affirming and de-
fending the existence of the crime seemed to in-
crease the number of witches, and assuredly aug-
mented the list of executions. But, for a certain
time, the preponderance of the argument lay en
the side of the Demonologists, and we may briefly
observe the causes which gave their opinions, for
a period, greater influence than their opponents,
on the public mind.

It is first to be observed, that Wierus, for what
reason cannot well be conjectured, except to show
the extent of his cabalistical knowledge, had in-
troduced into his work against witchcraft the whole
Stenographia of Trithemius, which he had co-
pied from the original in the library of Cornelius
Agrippa; and which, suspicious from the place
where he found it, and from the Jong catal
of fiends which it contained, with the charms for
raising and for binding them to the service of

DEMONOLOGY AND WITCHCRAFT. 191

mortals, was considered by Bodin as containing
proof that Wierus himself was a sorcerer; not
one of the wisest, certainly, since he thus unne-
cessarily placed at the disposal of any who might
buy the book, the whole secrets which formed
his stock in trade.

Secondly, we may notice, that, from the state
of physical science at the period when Van Hel-
mont, Paracelsus, and others, began to penetrate
into its recesses, it was an unknown, obscure, and
ill-defined region, and did not permit those who
laboured in it to give that precise and accurate ac-
count of their discoveries, which the progress of
reasoning experimentally, and from analysis, has
enabled the late discoverers to do with success,
Natural magic, a phrase used to expres those
phempmeene which could be produced by a know-
edge of the properties of matter, had so much in
it that was apparently uncombined and uncertain,
that the art of chemistry was accounted mystical,
and an opinion prevailed, that the results now
known to be the consequence of laws of matter,
could not be traced through their various com-
binations, even by those who knew the effects
themselves. Physical. science, in a word, was
cumbered by a number of fanciful and incorrect
opinions, chiefly of a mystical character. If, for
instance, it was observed that a flag and a fern
never grew near each other, the circumstance
was imputed to some antipathy between these
vegetables; nor was it for some time resolved
by the natural rule, that the flag has its nourish-
ment in marshy ground, whereas the fern loves a
deep dryish soil. .The attributes of the divining-

192 LETTERS ON

rod were fully credited; the discovery of the
philosopher’s stone was daily hoped for ; and elec-
tricity, magnetism, and other remarkable and mis-
conceived phenomena, were appealed to as proof
of the reasonableness. of their expectations. Until
such phenomena were traced to their sources,
imaginary, and often mystical causes were assign-
ed to them, for the same reason that, in the wilds
of a partially discovered country, according to the
satirist,

* Geographers on pathless downs

Place elephants for want of towns,”

- This substitution of mystical fancies for ex-
perimental reasoning, gave, in the sixteenth and
seventeenth centuries, a doubtful and twilight
appearance to the various branches of physical
philosophy. The learned and sensible Dr Web-
_ ster, for instance, writing in detection of supposed
witchcraft, assumes, as a string of undeniable
facts, opinions which our more experienced age
would reject as frivolous fancies ; “ for example,
the effects of healing by the weapon-salve, the
sympathetic powder, the curing of various dis-
eases by apprehensions, amulets, or by trans-
plantation.” All of which undoubted wonders he
accuses the age of desiring to threw on the de-
vil’s back—an unnecessary load, certainly, since
such things do not exist, and it is therefore in
vain to seek to account for them. It followed,
that while the opposers of the ordinary theory
might have struck the deepest blows at the witch-
hypothesis by an appeal to common sense, they
were themselves hampered by articles of philoso-

DEMONOLOGY AND WITCHCRAFT. 193

phical belief, which, they must have been sensible,
contained nearly as deep draughts upon human
credulity as were made by the Demonologists,
against whose doctrine they protested. This error
had a doubly bad effect, both as degrading the im-
mediate department in which it occurred, and as
affording a protection for falsehood in other
branches of science. The champions who, in their
own province, were obliged by the imperfect
knowledge of the times, to admit much that was
mystical and inexplicable—those who opined,
with Bacon, that warts could be cured by sym-
pathy—who thought, with Napier, that hidden
treasures could be discovered by the mathematics
—who salved the weapon instead of the wound,
and detected murders as well as springs of water
by the divining-rod, could not consistently use, to
confute the believers in witches, an argument
turning on the impossible or the ineredible.

_ Such were the obstacles, arising from the vanity
of philosophers and the imperfection of their
science, which suspended the strength of their
appeal to reason and common sense against the
condemning of wretches to a cruel death, on ac-
count of crimes which the nature of things ren-
dered in modern times totally impossible. We
cannot doubt that they suffered considerably in
the contest, which was carried on with much
anger and malevolence ; but the good seed which
they had sown remained uncorrupted in the soil,
to bear fruit so soon as the circumstances should
be altered which at first impeded its growth.. In
the next Letter Ishall take:a view of the causes

orolida to -olbitis vd bagoqaied eo vigeiiigns 214%"

194 LETTERS ON

which helped to remove these impediments—in
addition, it must always be remembered, to the
general increase of knowledge and improvement
of experimental philosophy.

DEMONOLOGY AND WITCHCRAFT. 195

LETTER VII.

Penal Laws unpopular when rigidly exercised— Prosecution
of Witches placed in the hand of Special Commissioners,
ad inquirendum—Prosecution for Witchcraft not frequent
in the elder Period of the Roman Empire—nor in the
Middle Ages—Some Cases took place, however—The
Maid of Orleans—The Duchess of Gloucester—Richard
the Third’s Charge against the Relations of the Queen
Dowager— But Prosecutions against Sorcerers becamemore
common in the end of the Fourteenth Century— Usually
united with the Charge of Heresy—Monstrelet's Account
of the Persecution against the Waldenses, under pretext
of Witchcrafi—Florimond’s testimony concerning the In-
crease of Witches in his own time—Bull of Pope Innocent
VIII.— Various Prosecutions in Foreign Countries un-
der this severe Law—Prosecutions in Labourt by the In-
gies De Lancre and his Collecger aceite

itches. in Spain—in Sweden—and particularly those
apprehended at Mohra.

Prenat laws, like those of the middle ages
denounced against witchcraft, may be at first
hailed with unanimous acquiescence and approba-
tion, but are uniformly found to disgust and of-
fend at least the more sensible part of the public,
when the punishments become frequent, and are
relentlessly inflicted. Those against treason are
no exception. Each reflecting government will
do well to shorten that melancholy reign of ter-
ror, which perhaps must necessarily follow on
the discovery of a plot, or the defeat of an in-

196 LETTERS ON

surrection. They ought not, either in humanity
or policy, to wait till the voice of the nation calls
to them, as Meceenas to Augustus, “ Surge tandem,
carnifex !”

It is accordingly remarkable, in different coun-
tries, how often, at some particular period of
their history, there occurred an epidemic terror
of witches, which, as fear is always cruel and cre-
dulous, glutted the public with seas of innocent
blood—and how uniformly men loathed the gore
after having swallowed it, and by a reaction na-
tural to the human mind, desired in prudence to
take away or restrict those laws, which had been
the source of carnage, in order that their posterity
might neither have the will nor the means to enter
into similar excesses.

A short review of foreign countries before we
come to notice the British Islands and their colo-
nies, will prove the truth of this statement. In
Catholic countries on the continent, the various
kingdoms adopted readily that part of the civil
law already mentioned, which denounces sorcerers
and witches as rebels to God, and authors of se-
dition in the empire. But being considered as ob-
noxious equally to the canon and civil law, Com-
missions of Inquisition were especially empower-
ed to weed out of the land the witches and those
who had intercourse with familiar spirits, or in
any other respect fell under the ban of the church,
as well as the heretics who promulgated or adhe-
red to false doctrine. Special warrants were thus
granted from time to time in behalf of such inqui-
sitors, authorizing them to visit those provinces
of Germany, France, or Italy, where any report,

DEMONOLOGY AND WITCHCRAFT. 197

concerning witches or sorcery had alarmed the
public mind ; and those commissioners, proud of
the trust reposed in them, thought it becoming to
use the utmost exertions on their part, that the
subtlety of the examinations, and the severity of
the tortures they inflicted, might wring the truth
out of all suspected persons, until they rendered
the province in which they exercised their juris-
diction, a desert from which the inhabitants fled.
It would be impossible to give credit to the ex-
tent of this delusion,’ had not some of the inqui-
sitors themselves been reporters of their own ju-
dicial exploits: the same hand which subscribed
the sentence has recorded the execution.

In the earlier period of the Church of Rome,
witcheraft is frequently alluded to, and a capital
punishment assigned to those who were supposed
to have accomplished by sorcery the death of
others, or to have attempted, by false prophecies,
or otherwise, under pretext of consulting with the
spiritual world, to make innovation in the state.
But no general denunciation against witchcraft it-
self, as a league with the Enemy of Man, or deser-
tion of the Deity, and a crime sui generis, appears
to have been so acted upon, until the later pe-
riod of the sixteenth century, when the Papal sys-
tem had attained its highest pitch of power and
of corruption. Theinfluence of the churchmen was,
in early times, secure, and they rather endeavour-
ed, by the fabrication of false miracles, to pro-
long the blind veneration of the people, than to
vex others, and weary themselves, by secret inves-~
tigations into dubious and mystical trespasses, in
which, probably, the higher and better instructed

198 LETTERS ON

members of the clerical order put as little faith
at that time, as they do now. Did there remain a
mineral fountain, respected for the cures which
it had wrought, a huge oak-tree, or venerated
mount, which beauty of situation had recommend-
ed to traditional respect, the fathers of the Ro-
man Church were in policy reluctant to abandon
such impressive spots, or to represent. them as
exclusively the rendezvous of witches, or of evil
spirits. On the contrary, by assigning the virtues
of the spring, or the beauty of the tree, to the
guardianship of some saint, they acquired, as it
were, for the defence of their own doctrine, a
frontier fortress which they wrested from the
enemy, and which it was at least needless to dis-
mantle, if it could be conveniently garrisoned and
defended. Thus, the Church secured possession
of many beautiful pieces of scenery, as Mr White-
field is said to have grudged to the devil the mo-
nopoly of all the fine tunes.

t is true, that this policy was not uniformly
observed. The story of the celebrated Jeanne
d’Are, called the Maid of Orleans, preserves the
memory of such a custom, which was in that case
turned to the prejudice of the poor woman who
observed it.

It is well known that this unfortunate female
fell into the hands of the English, after having,
by her courage and enthusiasm manifested on
many important occasions, revived the droopin
courage of the French, and inspired them wi
the hope of once more freeing their country.
The English vulgar regarded her as a sorceress—
the French as an inspired heroine ; while the wise

DEMONOLOGY AND WITCHCRAFT. 199

on both sides considered her as neither the one
nor the other, but a tool used by the celebrated
Dunois, to play the part which he assigned her.
The Duke of Bedford, when the ill-starred
Jeanne fell into his hands, took away her life, in
order to stigmatize her memory with sorcery,
and to destroy the reputation she had acquired
among the French. The mean recurrence to
such a charge against such a person, had no more
success than it deserved, although Jeanne was
condemned, both by the Parliament of Bourdeaux
and the University of Paris. Her indictment ac-
cused her of having frequented an ancient oak-
tree, and a fountain arising under it, called the
Fated, or Fairy Oak of Bourlemont. Here she
was stated to have repaired, during the hours of
divine service, dancing, skipping, and making ges-
tures, around the tree and fountain, and hanging
on the branches chaplets and garlands of flowers,
gathered for the purpose, reviving, doubtless, the
obsolete idolatry which, in ancient times, had
been rendered on the same spot to the Genius
Loci. The charmed sword and blessed banner,
which she had represented as signs of her celes-
tial mission, were, in this hostile charge against
her, described as enchanted implements, design-
ed by the fiends and fairies whom she worshipped,
to accomplish her temporary success. The death
of the innocent, high-minded, and perhaps amiable
enthusiast, was not, we are sorry to say, a sacri-
fice to a superstitious fear of witchcraft, but a
cruel instance of wicked policy, mingled with na-
tional jealousy and hatred. ;

_ To the same cause, about the same period, we

200 LETTERS ON

may impute the trial of the Duchess of Glouces-
ter, wife of the good Duke Humphrey, accused of
consulting witches concerning the mode of com-
passing the death of her husband’s nephew, Henry
VI. The Duchess was condemned to do penance,
and thereafter banished to the Isle of Man, while:
several of her accomplices died in prison, or were
executed. But in this instance also, the alleged
witchcraft was only the ostensible cause of a pro-
cedure which had its real source in the deep ha-
tred between the Duke of Gloucester and Cardi-
nal Beaufort, his half-brother. The same pre-
text was used by Richard III., when he brought
the charge of sorcery against the Queen Dowager,
Jane Shore, and the queen’s kinsmen; and yet
again was, by that unscrupulous prince, directed
against Morton, afterwards Archbishop of Can-
terbury, and other adherents of the Karl of Rich-
mond. The accusation, in both cases, was only
chosen as a charge easily made, and difficult to
be eluded or repelled.

But, in the meanwhile, as the accusation of
witchcraft thus afforded to tyranny, or policy, the
ready means of assailing persons whom it might’
not have been possible to convict of any other
crime, the aspersion itself was gradually consider-
ed with increase of terror, as spreading wider and
becoming more contagious. So early as the year.
1398, the University of Paris, in laying down rules
for the judicial prosecuting of witches, express’
their regret that the crime was growing more fre-
quent than in any former age. The more severe’
enquiries and frequent punishments, by which the’
judges endeavoured to check the progress of this”

DEMONOLOGY AND WITCHCRAFT. 201

impious practice, seem to have increased the dis-
ease ;—as indeed, it has been always remarked,
that those morbid affections of mind which de-
pend on the imagination are sure to become more
common, in proportion as public attention is fas-
tened on stories connected with their display.

In the same century, schisms, arising from dif-
ferent causes, greatly alarmed the Church of
Rome. The universal spirit of enquiry which
was now afloat, taking a different direction in
different countries, had, in almost all of them,
stirred up a sceptical dissatisfaction with the
dogmas of the church,—such views being ren-
dered more credible to the poorer classes through
the corruption of manners among the clergy, too
many of whom wealth and ease had caused to
neglect that course of morality which best re-
commends religious doctrine. In almost every
nation in Europe, there lurked, in the crowded
cities, or the wild solitude of the country, sects
who agreed chiefly in their animosity to the su-
premacy of Rome, and their desire to cast off her
domination. The Waldenses and Albigenses were
parties existing in great numbers through the
south of France. ‘The Romanists became ex-
tremely desirous to combine the doctrine of the
hereties with witchcraft, which, according to their
account, abounded especially where the Protest-
ants were most numerous; and the bitterness
inereasing, they scrupled not to throw the charge
of sorcery, as a matter of course, upon those who
dissented from the Catholic standard of Faith.
The Jesuit Delrio alleges several reasons for the
affinity which he considers as existing between the

202 LETTERS ON

Protestant and the sorcerer; he accuses the for-
mer of embracing the opinion of Wierus, and other
defenders of the devil, (as he calls all who oppose
his own opinions concerning witchcraft,)—thus
fortifying the kingdom of Satan against that of
the church.*

A remarkable passage in Monstrelet puts in a
clear view the point aimed at by the Catholics in
thus confusing and blending the doctrines of he-
resy and the practice of witchcraft, and how a
meeting of inoffensive Protestants could be cun-
ningly identified with a Sabbath of hags and
fiends.

“« In this year, [1459,] in the town of Arras,
and county of Artois, arose, through a terrible
and melancholy chance, an opinion called, I know
not why, the Religion of Vaudoisie. This sect con-
sisted, it is said, of certain persons, both men and
women, who, under cloud of night, by the power
of the devil, repaired to some solitary spot, amid
woods and deserts, where the devil appeared be-
fore them in a human form, save that his vii
is never perfectly visible to them,—read to the
assembly a book of his ordinances, informing
them how he would be obeyed,—distributed a
very little money, and a plentiful meal, which
was concluded by a scene of general profligacy,—
after which, each one of the party was conveyed
home to her or his own habitation. .

“ On accusations of access to such acts of mad-
ness,” continues Monstrelet, “ several creditable
persons of the town of Arras were seized and

™ Delrio, de Magia. See the Preface

DEMONOLOGY AND WITCHCRAFT. 203

imprisoned, along with some foolish women and
persons of little consequence. These were so
horribly tortured, that some of them admitted
the truth of the whole accusations, and said, be-
sides, that they had seen and recognised in their
nocturnal assembly, many persons of rank, pre-
lates, seigneurs, and governors of bailliages and
cities, being such names as the examinators had
sted to the persons examined, while they
constrained them by torture to impeach the per-
sons to whom they belonged. Several of those
who had been thus informed against were arrest-
ed, thrown into prison, and tortured for so long a
time, that they also were obliged to confess what
was charged against them. ter this, those of
mean condition were executed and inhumanly
burnt, while the richer and more powerful of
the accused ransomed themselves by sums of
money, to avoid the punishment and the shame
attending it. Many even of those also confess-
ed being persuaded to take that course by the
interrogators, who promised them indemnity for
life and fortune. Binns there were, of a truth,
who suffered, with marvellous patience and con-
stancy, the torments inflicted on them, and would
confess nothing imputed to their charge ; but they,
too, had to give sums to the judges, who
exacted that such of them as, notwithstanding
their mishandling, were still able to move, should
banish themselves from that part of the country.”
Monstrelet winds up this shocking narrative
informing us, “ that it ought not to be conceal
that the whole accusation was a stratagem of
wicked men for their own covetous purposes, and

204 LETTERS ON

in order, by these false accusations and forced con-
fessions, to destroy the life, fame, and fortune, of
wealthy persons.’

Delrio himself confesses that Franciscus Bal+
duinus gives an account of the pretended punish-
ment, but real persecution, of these Waldenses, i in
similar terms with Monstrelet, whose suspicions
are distinctly spoken out, and adds, that the Par-
liament of Paris, having heard the affair by appeal,
had declared the sentence illegal, and the judges
iniquitous, by an arrét, dated 20th May, 1491.
The Jesuit Delrio quotes the passage, but adheres
with lingering reluctance, to the truth of the ac-
cusation.—* The Waldenses, (of whom the Albi-
genses are a species) were,” he says, “ never free
from the most wretched excess of fascination ;”
and finally, though he allows the conduct of the
judges to have been most odious, he cannot pre-
vail on himself to acquit the parties charged, b
such interested accusers, with horrors, which
should hardly have been found proved even upon
the most distinct evidence. He appeals on this
oceasion to Florimond’s work on Antichrist. The
introduction of that work deserves to be quoted,
as strongly illustrative of the condition to which
the country was reduced, and calculated to make
an impression, the very reverse probably of that
which the writer would have desired.

« All those who have afforded us some signs
of the approach of Antichrist, agree that the n=
crease of sorcery and witchcraft is to distinguish
the melancholy period of his advent; and was
ever age so afflicted with them as ours? The
seats destined for criminals before our judicato«

DEMONOLOGY AND WITCHCRAFT. 205

ries are blackened with persons accused of this
guilt. There are not judges enough to try them.
Our dungeons are gorged with them. No day

ses that we do not render our tribunals bloody
by the dooms which we pronounce, or in which
we do not return to our homes discountenanced
and terrified at the horrible contents of the con-
fessions which it has been our duty to hear. And
the devil is accounted so good a master, that we
cannot commit so great a number of his slaves to
the ames, but what there shall arise from their
ashes a number sufficient to supply their place.”*

This last statement, by which it appears that
the most active and unsparing inquisition was ta-
king place, corresponds with the historical notices
of repeated persecutions upon this dreadful charge
of sorcery.» A bull of Pope Innocent the VIII.
rang the tocsin against this formidable crime, and
set forth in the most dismal colours the guilt, while
it stimulated the inquisitors to the unsparing dis-
charge of their duty, in searching out and punish-
ing the guilty. “ It is come to our ears,” says
the bull, “ that numbers of both sexes do not
avoid to have intercourse with the infernal fiends,
and that by their sorceries they afflict both man
and beast; that they blight the marriage-bed,
destroy the births of women, and the increase of
cattle; they blast the corn on the ground, the
grapes of the vineyard, the fruits of the trees, the
grass, and herbs of the field.” For which reasons,
the inqaisitors were armed with the Apostolic

'* Florimond concerning the Antichrist, cap. 7, n, 5,
quoted by Delrio, de Magia, p. 820, 4

206 LETTERS ON

power, and called upon to “ convict, imprison,
and punish,” and so forth.

Dreadful were the consequences of this bull all
over the continent, especially in Italy, Germany,
and France.* About 1485, Cumanus burnt as
witches forty-one poor women in one year, in the
county of Burlia. In the ensuing years, he con-
tinued the prosecution with such unremitting zeal,
that many fled from the country.

Alciatus states, that an inquisitor, about the
same period, burnt an hundred sorcerers in Pied-
mont, and persevered in his enquiries till human
patience was exhausted, and the people arose and
drove him out of the country, after which the ja-
risdiction was deferred to the archbishop. That
prelate consulted Alciatus himself, who had just
then obtained his doctor’s degree in civil law, to
which he was afterwards an honour. A number
of unfortunate wretches were brought for judg-
ment, fitter, according to the civilian’s opinion,
for a course of hellebore, than forthe stake. Some
were accused of having dishonoured the crucifix,
and denied their salvation; others of having ab-
sconded to keep the Devil’s Sabbath, in spite of
bolts and bars ; others of having merely joined in
the choral dances around the witches’ tree of ren-
dezvous. Several of their husbands and relatives
swore that they were in bed andasleep during these
pretended excursions. Aleiatus recom
gentle and temperate measures ; and the minds of
the country became at length composed.+

* Dr Hutchison quotes H. Institor, 105, 161,
+ Alciat. Parerg. Juris, lib, viii. chap. 22.

DEMONOLOGY AND WITCHCRAFT. 207

In 1488, the country four leagues around Con-
stance was laid waste by lightning and tempest,
and two women being, by fair means or foul, made
to confess themselves guilty as the cause of the
devastation, suffered death.

About 1515, five hundred persons were exe-
cuted at Geneva, under the character of “ Protest-
ant witches ;” from which we may suppose many
suffered for heresy. Forty-eight witches were
burnt at Ravensburgh within four years, as Hut-
chison reports, on the authority of Mengho, the
author of the “ Malleus Maleficarum.” In Lor-
raine, the learned inquisitor, Remigius, boasts that
he put to death nine hundred people in fifteen

As many were banished from that coun-
try; so that whole towns were on the point of
becoming desolate. In 1524, a thousand persons
were put to death in one year at Como, in Italy,
and about one hundred every year after for seve-
ral years.*

In the beginning of the next century, the per-
secution of witches broke out in France with a
fury which was hardly conceivable, and multitudes
were burnt amid that gay and lively people. Some
notion of the extreme prejudice of their judges
may be drawn from the words of one of the in-
quisitors themselves, Pierre de Lancre, royal
councillor in the Parliament of Bourdeaux, with
whom the President Espaignel was joined in a
commission to enquire into certain acts of sor-
cery, reported to have been committed in La-
bourt and its neighbourhvod, at the foot of the

* Bart. de Spina, de Strigilibus.

208 LETTERS ON

Pyrenees, about the month of May, 1619." A
few extracts from the preface will best evince
the state of mind in whick he proceeded to the
discharge of his commission.
His story assumes the form of a narrative of a
direct war between Satan on the one side, and the

‘Royal Commissioners on the other, “ because,”
‘says: Councillor de Lancre, with self-complai-

sance, “ nothing is so calculated to strike terror
into the fiend and his dominions, as a commission
with such plenary powers.”

At first, Satan endeavoured to supply his vas-
sals who were brought before the ial with
strength to support the examinations, so that

if, by intermission of the torture, the wretches

should fall into a doze, they declared, when they
were recalled from it to the question, that the
profound stupor “ had something of Paradise in
it,—being gilded,” said the judge, “ with the im-
mediate presence of the devil;” though, in all
probability, it rather derived its charms from the
natural comparison between the insensibility of
exhaustion, and the previous agony of acute tor-
ture. The judges took care that the Fiend seldom
obtained any advantage in the matter, by refusing
their victims, in most cases, any interval of rest or
sleep. Satan then proceeded, in the way of direct
defiance, to stop the mouth of the accused openly,
and by mere force, with something like a visible
obstruction in their throat.. Notwithstanding this,

to put the devil to shame, some of the accused

found means, im spite of him, to confess and be
hanged, or rather burnt. The fiend lost mach
credit by his failure on this occasion. »Before the

DEMONOLOGY AND WITCHCRAFT. 209

fermidable commissioners arrived, he had held
his cour pléniére before the gates of Bourdeaux,
and in the square of the palace of Galienne, where-
as he was now insulted publicly by his own vas-
sals, and in the midst of his festival of the Sab-
bath, the childrenand relations of the witches, who
had suffered, not sticking to say to him, “ Out
upon you! your promise was, that our mothers
who were prisoners should not die ; and look how
‘ou have kept your word with us! They have been
tern, and are a heap of ashes.” To appease this
mutiny, Satan had two eyasions. He produced
illusory fires, and encouraged the mutinous to
walk through them, assuring them that the judi-
cial pile was as frigid and inoffensive as those
which he exhibited to them, “Again, taking: his
refuge in lies, of which he is well known to be the
father, he stoutly affirmed that their parents, who
seemed to have suffered, were safe in a foreign
country, and that if their children would call on
them they would receive an answer. They made
the invocation accordingly, and Satan answered:
each of them ina tone which resembled the voice
of the lamented parent, almost as successfully as
Monsieur Alexandre could have done,
. Proceeding toa yet more close attack, the Com-
missioners, on the eve of one of the Fiend’s Sab-
baths, placed the gibbet on which they executed.
their victims just on the spot where § atan’s gilded
chair was usually stationed. The devil was much
offended at such an affront, and yet had so little
ower in the matter, that he could only express.

Messieurs D’Amon and D'Urtubbe, gentlemen,
Oo

s resentment by threats, that he would hang:

\

210 LETTERS ON

who had solicited and promoted the issuing of
the commission, and would also burn the com-
missioners themselves in their own fire. We re-
gret to say that Satan was unable to execute either
of these laudable resolutions. Ashamed of his ex-
euses, he abandoned for three or four sittings his
attendance on the Sabbaths, sending as his repre-
sentative an imp of subordinate account, and in
whom no one reposed confidence. When he took
courage again to face his parliament, the Arch-
fiend covered his defection by assuring them, that
he had been engaged in a lawsuit with the Deity,
which he had gained with costs, and that sixscore
of infant children were to be delivered up to him
in name of damages, and the witches were direct-
ed to procure such victims accordingly. After
this grand fiction, he confined himself to the petty
vengeance of impeding the access of confessors to
the condemned, which was the more easy, as few
of them could speak the Basque language. I have
no time to detail the ingenious method by which
the learned Councillor de Lancre explains why
the district of Labourt should be particularly ex-
posed to the pest of sorcery. The chief reason
seems to be, that it is a mountainous, a sterile,
and a border country, where the men are all fish-
ers, and the women smoke tobacco, and wear
short petticoats.

Toa person who, in this presumptuous, trifling,
and conceited spirit, has composed a quarto vo-
lume, full of the greatest absurdities and
est obscenities ever impressed on paper, it was
the pleasure of the most Christian Monarch to
consign the most absolute power which could be

DEMONOLOGY AND WITCHCRAFT. 211

exercised on these poor people; and he might
with as much prudence have turned a ravenous
wolf upon an undefended flock, of whom the ani-
mal was the natural enemy, as they were his na-
tural prey. The priest, as well as the ignorant
peasant, fell under the suspicion of this fell com-
mission; and De Lancre writes with much-com-
placency, that the accused were brought to trial
to the number of forty in one day,—with what
chance of escape, when the judges were blinded
with prejudice, and could only hear the evidence
and the defence through the medium of an in-
terpreter, the understanding of the reader may
easily anticipate.

Among other gross transgressions of the most
ordinary rules, it may be remarked, that the ac-
cused, in what their judges called confessions,
contradicted each other at every turn respecti
the description of the Domdaniel in which they
pretended to have been assembled, and the fiend
who presided there. All spoke to a sort of gilded
throne; but some saw a hideous wild he-goat
seated there—some a man disfigured and twisted,
as suffering torture—some, with better taste, be-
held a huge indistinct form, resembling one of
those mutilated trunks of trees found in ancient
forests. But De Lancre was no “ Daniel come
to judgment,” and the discrepancy of evidence,
which saved the life and fame of Susannah, made
no impression in favour of the sorcerers of La-
bourt.

Instances occur in De Lancre’s book of the
trial and condemnation of persons accused of the

crime of lycanthropy, a superstition which was

rr ee

212 LETTERS ON

chiefly current in France, but was known in other
countries, and is the subject of great debate be-
tween Wier, Naudé, Scot, on the one hand, and
their demonological adversaries on the other. The
idea, said the one party, was, that a human being
had the power, by sorcery, of transforming himself
into the shape of awolf, and in that bipeniays being
seized with a species of fury, he rushed out, and
made havoc among the flocks, slaying and was-
ting, like the animal whom he represented, far
more than he could devour. The more incredu-
lous reasoners would not allow of a real transfor-
mation, whether with or without the enchanted
hide of a wolf, which in some cases was supposed
to aid the metamorphosis, and contended that ly-
canthropy only subsisted as a woful species of dis-
ease, a melancholy state of mind, broken with occa-
sional fits of insanity, in which the patient ima-
gined that he committed the ravages of which he
was accused. Such a person, a mere youth, was
tried at Besancon, who gave himself out for a ser-
vant, or yeoman pricker, of the Lord of the Forest,
so he called his superior, who was judged to be the
devil. He was, by his master’s power, transform-
ed into the likeness, and performed the usual fune-
tions, of a wolf, and was attended in his course
by one larger; which he supposed the Lord of
the Forest himself. These wolves, he said, rava-
d the flocks, and throttled the dogs which stood
in their defence. If either had not seen the other,
he howled, after the manner of the animal, to call
his comrade to his share of the prey; if he did not
come upon this signal, he proceeded to bury it the
4 - iT?

best way he could. _

DEMONOLOGY AND WITCHCRAFT. 213

Such was the general persecution under Messrs
Espaignel and De Lancre. Many similar scenes
occurred in France, till the edict of Louis XIV.
discharging all future prosecutions for witchcraft,
after which the crime itself was heard of no
more.*

While the spirit of superstition was working
such horrors in France, it was not, we may be-
lieve, more idle in other countries of Europe. In
Spain, particularly, long the residence of the
Moors, a people putting deep faith in all the day-
dreams of witcheraft, good and evil genii, spells,
and talismans, the ardent and devotional temper
of the old Christians dictated a severe research
after sorcerers, as well as heretics, and relapsed
Jews or Mahometans. In former times, during
the subsistence of the Moorish kingdoms in Spain,
a school was supposed to be kept open in Toboso,
for the study, it is said, of magic, but more likely
of chemistry, algebra, and other sciences, which,
altogether mistaken by the ignorant and vulgar,
and imperfectly understood even by those who
studied them, were supposed to be allied to ne-
eromancy, or at least to natural magic. — It was,
of course, the business of the Inquisition to purify
whatever such pursuits had left of suspicious Ca-
tholicism, and their labours cost as much blood
on accusations of witchcraft and magic, as for
heresy and relapse.

Even the colder nations of Europe were sub-
ject to the same epidemic terror for witchcraft,

* The reader may sup full on such wild horrors in the
Causes Célébres.

214 LETTERS ON

and a specimen of it was exhibited in the sober
and rational country of Sweden about the middle
of last century, an account of which, being trans-
lated into English by a respectable clergyman,
Doctor Horneck, excited general surprise how
a whole people could be imposed upon to the

of shedding much blood, and commit-
ting great cruelty and injustice, on account of
the idle falsehoods propagated by a crew of lying
children, who, in this case, were both actors and
witnesses.

The melancholy truth, that “the human heart
is deceitful above all things, and desperately
wicked,” is by nothing proved so strongly as by
the imperfect sense displayed by children of the
sanctity of moral truth. Both the gentlemen
and the mass of the people, as they advance in
years, learn to despise and avoid falsehood ; the
former out of pride, and from a remaining feel-
ing derived from the days of chivalry, that the
character of a liar is a deadly stain on their ho-
nour; the other, from some general refleetion
upon the necessity of preserving a character for
integrity in the course of life, and a sense of
the truth of the common adage, “ that honesty is
the best policy.” But these are acquired habits
of thinking. The child has no natural love of
trath, as is experienced by all who have the least
acquaintance with early youth. If they are char-
ged with a fault, while they can hardly speak,
the first words they stammer forth are a false-
hood to excuse it. Nor is this all: The tempt-
ation of attracting attention, the pleasure of en-
Joying importance, the desire to escape from an

DEMONOLOGY AND WITCHCRAFT. 215

anpleasing task, or accomplish a holiday, will at
any time overcome the sentiment of truth, so
weak is it within them. Hence thieves and house-
breakers, from a surprisingly early period, find
means of rendering children useful in their mys-
tery; nor are such acolytes found to evade just-
ice with less dexterity than the more advanced
rogues. Wherea number of them are concerned
in the same mischief, there is something resem-
bling virtue in the fidelity with which the com-
mon secret is preserved. Children, under the
usual age of their being admitted to give evi-
dence, were necessarily often examined in witch
trials ; and it is terrible to see how often the little
impostors, from spite, or in mere gaiety of spirit,
haye, by their art and perseverance, made ship-
wreck of men’s lives. But it would be hard to
discover a case, which, supported exclusively by
the evidence of children, (the confessions under
torture excepted,) and obviously existing only in
the young witnesses’ own imagination, has been
attended with such serious consequences, or given
cause to so extensive and fatal a delusion, as that
which occurred in Sweden.

The scene was the Swedish village of Mohra,
in the province of Elfland, which district had pro-
bably its name from some remnant of ancient
superstition. The delusion had come to a great
height ere it reached the. ears of government,
when, as was the general procedure, royal com-
missioners were sent down, men well fitted for
the duty intrusted to them; that is, with ears
open to receive the incredibilities with which they
were to be crammed, and hearts hardened against

216 LETTERS ON

every degree of compassion to the accused. The
complaints of the common people, backed by
some persons of better condition, were, that a
number of persons, renowned as witches, had
drawn several hundred children of all classes un=
der the devil’s authority. They demanded, there-
fore, the punishment of these agents of hell, re-
minding the judges, that the province had been
clear of witches since the burning of some ona
former occasion. The accused were numerous, so
many as threescore and ten witches and sorcerers
being seized in the village of Mohra; three-and-
twenty confessed their crimes, and were sent to
Faluna, where most of them were executed. Fif-
teen of the children were also led to death. Six-
ad thirty of those who were young were forced
to run the gauntlet, as it is called, and were,
besides, lashed weekly at the church-doors for
a whole year. Twenty of the youngest were
condemned to the same discipline for three days
only.

The process seems to have consisted in con-
fronting the children with the witches, and hear-
ing the extraordinary story which the former in-
sisted upon maintaining. The children, to the
number of three hundred, were found more or
less perfect in a tale as full of impossible absurd-
ities as ever was told around a nursery fire.
Their confession ran thus:

They were taught by the witches to go to a
cross way, and with certain ceremonies to invoke
the devil by the name of Antecessor, begging him +
to carry them off to Blockula, meaning, perhaps,
the Brockenberg, in the Hartz forest, a mountain »

DEMONOLOGY AND WITCHCRAFT. 217

infamous for being the common scene of witches’
meetings, and to which Goethé represents the
spirit Mephistopheles as conducting his pupil
Faustus. The devil courteously appeared at the
call of the children, in various forms, but chiefly
as a mad Merry-Andrew, with a grey coat, red
and blue stockings, a red beard, a high-crowned
hat, with linen of various colours wrapt round it,
and garters of peculiar length. He set each child
on some beast of his providing, and anointed them
with a certain unguent composed of the scrapings
of altars, and the filings of church-clocks, There
is here a discrepancy of evidence which, in an-
other court, would have cast the whole. Most of
the children considered their journey to be corpo-
real and actual. Some supposed, however, that
their strength, or spirit, only travelled with the
fiend, and that their body remained behind. Very
few adopted this last hypothesis, though the pa-
rents unanimously bore witness, that the bodies
of the children remained in bed, and could not
be awakened out of a deep sleep, though they
shook them for the purpose of awakening them.
So strong was, nevertheless, the belief of nurses
and: mothers in their actual transportation, that
a sensible clergyman, mentioned in the preface,
who had resolved he would watch his son the
whole night, and see what hag, or fiend, would
take him from his arms, had the utmost difficulty,
notwithstanding, in convincing his mother that the
child had not been transported to Blockula, du-
ring the very night he held him in his embrace.
The learned translator candidly allows, “ out
of so great a multitude as were accused, condemn

218 LETTERS ON

ed, and executed, there might be some who suf-
fered unjustly, and owed their death more to the
malice of their enemies than to their skill in the
black art, I will readily admit. Nor will I deny,”
he continues, “ but that when the news of these
transactions and accounts, how the children be-
witched fell into fits and strange unusual postures,
spread abroad in the kingdom, some fearful and
eredulous people, if they saw their children any
way disordered, might think they were bewitch-
ed, or ready to be carried away by imps.”* The
learned gentleman here stops short in a train of
reasoning, which, followed out, would have de-

ived the world of the benefit of his translation.

‘or if it was possible that some of these unfortu-
nate persons fell a sacrifice to the malice of their
neighbours, or the prejudices of witnesses, as
he seems ready to grant, is it not more reason-
able to believe, that the whole of the accused
were convicted on similar grounds, than to al-
low, as truth, the slightest part of the gross and
vulgar impossibilities upon which alone their exe-
cution can be justified ?

The Blockula, which was the object of their
journey, was a house having a fine gate painted
with divers colours, with a paddock, in which they
turned the beasts to graze which had brought them
to such scenes of revelry. If human beings had
been employed, they were left slumbering against
the wall of the house. The plan of the devil's

* Translator’s Preface to Horneck’s “ Account of what
happened in the Kingdom of Sweden.” See Appendix to
Glanyille’s work.

DEMONOLOGY AND WITCHCRAFT, 219

palace consisted of one large banqueting apart-
ment, and several withdrawing-rooms. Their
food was homely enough, being broth made of
coleworts and bacon, with bread and butter, and
milk and cheese. The same acts of wickedness
and profligacy were committed at Blockula which
are usually supposed to take place upon the de-
vil’s Sabbath elsewhere ; but there was this parti-
cular, that the witches had sons and daughters by
the fiends, who were married together, and pro-
duced an offspring of toads and serpents.

These confessions being delivered before the
accused witches, they at first stoutly denied them;
at last some of them burst into tears, and acquies-
ced in the horrors imputed to them. They said,
the practice of carrying off children had been en-
larged very lately, (which shows the whole ru-
mours to have arisen recently ;) and the despair-
ing wretches confirmed what the children said,
with many other extravagant circumstances, as
the mode of elongating a goat's back by means
of a spit, on which we care not to be particular.
It is worth mentioning, that the devil, desirous
of enjoying his own reputation among his sub-
jects, pretended at one time to be dead, and was
much lamented at Blockula—but he soon revived
again.

Some attempts these witches had made to harm
individuals on middle earth, but with little sue<
cess. One old sorceress, indeed, attempted to
strike a nail, given her by the devil for that pur-
pose, into the head of the minister of Elfiand; but
as the skull was of unusual solidity, the reverend
gentleman only felt a headach from her efforts.

220 LETTERS ON

They could not be persuaded to exhibit any of
their tricks before the commissioners, excusing
themselves by alleging that their witchcraft had
left them, and that the devil had amused them
with the vision of a burning pit, having a hand
thrust out of it. i
- The total number who lost their lives on this
singular occasion, was fourscore and four per-
sons, including fifteen children; and at this ex-
pense of blood was extinguished a flame that arose
as suddenly, burned as fiercely, and decayed as
rapidly, as any portent of the kind within the
annals of superstition. The commissioners re-
turned to court with the high approbation of all
concerned—prayers were ordered through the
churches weekly, that Heaven would be pleased
to restrain the powers of the devil, and deliver
the poor creatures who hitherto had groaned un-
der it, as well as the innocent children, who were
carried off by hundreds at once.

If we could ever learn the true explanation of
this story, we should probably find that the ery
was led by some clever mischievous boy, who
wished toapologize to his parents forlying an hour
longer in the morning, by alleging he had been
at Blockula on the preceding night ; and that the
desire to be as much distinguished as their com-
rade, had stimulated the bolder and more acute
of his companions to the like falsehoods; whilst.
those of weaker minds assented, either from fear
of punishment, or the force of dreaming over at
night the horrors which were dinned into their
ears all day. Those who were ingenuous, as it
was termed, in their confessions, received praise”

DEMONOLOGY AND WITCHCRAFT. 221

and encouragement; and those who denied, or
were silent, and, as it was considered, impenitent,
were sure to bear the harder share of the punish-
ment which was addressed to all. It is worth
while also to observe, that the smarter children
began to improve their evidence, and add touches
to the general picture of Blockula. “ Some of
the children talked much of a white angel, which
used to forbid them what the devil bid them do,
and told them that these doings should not last
long.—And, they added, this better being would
place himself sometimes at the door betwixt the
witches and the children, and when they came to
Blockula he pulled the children back, but the
witches went in.”

This additional evidence speaks for itself, and
shows the whole tale to be the fiction of the child-
ren’s imagination, which some of them wished to
improve upon. The reader may consult, “« An Ac-
count of what happened in the Kingdom of Sweden
in the years 1669 and 1670, and afterwards trans-
lated out of High Dutch into English, by Dr An-
tony Horneck,” attached to Glanville’s “ Sadducis-
mus Triumphatus.” The translator refers to the
evidence of Baron Sparr, ambassador from the
court of Sweden to the court of England, in 1672;
and that of Baron Lyonberg, envoy extraordinary
of the same power, both of whom attest the con-
fession and execution of the witches. The King of
Sweden himself answered the express enquiries of
the Duke of Holstein with marked reserve. “ His
judges and commissioners,” he said, “ had caused
divers men, women, and children, to be burnt
and executed, on such pregnant evidence as was

222 LETTERS ON

brought before them. But whether the actions
confessed, and proved against them, were real, or
only the effects of strong imagination, he was not
as yet able to determine ;’—a sufficient reason,
erhaps, why punishment should have been at
east deferred te the interposition of the royal
authority.

We must now turn our eyes to Britain, in
which our knowledge as to such events is neces-
sarily more extensive, and where it is in a high
degree more interesting to our present pur-
pose.

DEMONOLOGY AND WITCHCRAFT. 223

LETTER VIII.

The effects of the Witch Superstition are to be traced in the
Laws of a Kingdom— Usually punished in England as a
Crime connected with Politics—Attempt at Murder for
Witchcraft not in itself Capital—Trials of Persons of
Rank for Witchcraft, connected with State Crimes—Sta-
tutes of Henry VIII.—How Witchcraft was regarded by
the three Leading Sects of Religion in the Sixteenth Cen-
tury ; first, by the Catholics ; second, by the Calvinists ;
third, by the Church of England and Lutherans—Impos-
tures unwarily countenanced by individual Catholic Priests,
and also by some Puritanic Clergymen—Statute of 1562,
and some Cases upon it—Case of Dugdale—Case of
the Witches of Warbois, and execution of the Family of
Samuel—That of Jane Wenham, in which some Church
of England Clergymen insisted on the Prosecution—Hut-
chison’s Rebuke to them—James the First's Opinion of
Witchcraft—His celebrated Statute, 1 Jac. I.—Canon
passed by the Convocation against Possession—Case of
Mr Fairfax’s Children—Lancashire Witches in 1613—
Another Discovery in 1634— Webster's Account of the
manner in which the Imposture was managed—Superiority
ve Calvinists is followed by a severe Prosecution of

itches—Executions in Suffolk, &c. to a dreadful extent
—Hophins, the pretended Witchfinder, the cause of these
Cruchies—His Brutal Practices—His Letter—Execution
of Mr Lowis— Hopkins Punished— Restoration of Charles

—Trial of Coxe—of Dunny and Callender before Lord

Hales—Royal Society and Progress of Knowledge—

Somersetshire Witches—Opinions of the Populace—A

Woman swum for Witchcraft at Oakly—Murder at Tri:

—Aet against Witchcraft abolished, and the belief in the

Crime becomes forgotten— Witch Trials in New England

—Dame Glover's Trial—Affliction of the Parvises, and

224: a @ LETTERS ON 5 >t

frightful increase of the Prosecutions—Suddenly put a
stop to— The Penitence of those concerned in them,

Our account of Demonology in England must
naturally, as in’ every other country, depend
chiefly on the instances which history contains of
the laws and prosecutions against witclicraft.
Other superstitions arose and decayed, were
dreaded or despised, without greater embarrass-
ment, in the provinces in which they have a tem-
porary aman F than that cowards and children
go out more seldom at night, while the reports of
ghosts and fairies are peculiarly current. But
when the alarm of witchcraft arises, Superstition
dips her hand in the blood of the persons accused,
and records in the annals of jurisprudence their
trials, and the causes alleged in vindication of
their execution. Respecting other fantastic alle-
gations, the proof is necessarily transient and
doubtful, depending upon the inaccurate testi-
mony of yague report and of doting tradition.
But in cases of witchcraft, we have before us the
recorded evidence upon which judge and jury act-
ed, and can form an opinion with some degree of
‘certainty of the grounds, real or fanciful, on which
they acquitted or condemned. It is, therefore, in
tracing this part of Demonology, with its accom-
panying circumstances,that we have the best chance
of obtaining an accurate view of our subject. -

- The existence of witchcraft was, no doubt, re-—
ceived and credited in England, as in the coun-
tries on the continent, and originally punished
accordingly. But after the fourteenth century,
the practices which fell under such a description

>

DEMONOLOGY AND WITCHCRAFT. 225

were thought unworthy of any peculiar animad-
version, unless they were connected with some-
thing which would have been of itself a capital
crime, by whatever means it had been either es-
sayed or accomplished. Thus, the supposed pac-
tion between a witch and the demon was perhaps
deemed in itself to have terrors enough to pre-
vent its becoming an ordinary crime, and was
not, therefore, visited with any statutory penalty.
But to attempt or execute bodily harm to others,
through means of evil spirits, or, in a word, by the
black art, was actionable at common law, as much
as if the party accused had done the same harm
with an arrow or pistol-shot. The destruction
or abstraction of goods by the like instruments,
supposing the charge proved, would, in like man-
ner, be punishable. A fortiori, the consulting
soothsayers, familiar spirits, or the like, and the
obtaining and circulating pretended prophecies,
to the unsettlement of the state, and the endan-
gering of the king’s title, is yet a higher degree
of guilt. And it may be remarked, that the enquiry
into the date of the king’s life bears a close affinity
with the desiring or compassing the death of the
sovereign, which is the essence of high treason.
Upon such charges, repeated trials took place in
the courts of the English, and condemnations
were pronounced, with sufficient justice, no doubt,
where the connexion between the resort to sor-
cerers, and the design to perpetrate a felony,
could be clearly proved. We would not, indeed,
be disposed to go the length of so high an autho-
rity as Selden, who pronounces, (in his Zadle-
talk,) that if a man heartily believed that he could
P

226 - LETTERS ON

take the life of another by waving his hat three
times, and crying, Buzz! and should, under this
fixed opinion, wave his hat and ery, Buzz! accord-
ingly, he ought to be executed as a murderer.
But a false prophecy of the king’s death is not
to be dealt with exactly on the usual principle;
because, however idle in itself, the promulgation
of such a prediction has, in times such as we are
speaking of, a strong tendency to work its com-
piatien:

Many persons, and some of great celebrity,
iaffored. for the charge of trafficking with witches,
to the prejudice of those in authority. We have
already mentioned the instance of the Duchess
of Gloucester, in Henry the Sixth’s reign, and
that of the Queen Dowager’s kinsmen, in the
Protectorate of Richard, afterwards the Third.
In 1521, the Duke of Buckingham was beheaded,
owing much to his having listened to the predic-
tions of one Friar Hopkins. In the same reign,
the Maid of Kent, who had been esteemed a
prophetess, was put to death as a cheat. She
suffered with seven persons who had man
her fits for the support of the Catholic religion,
and confessed her fraud upon the scaffold. About
seven years after this, Lord Hungerford was be-
headed for mipeing certain soothsayers con-
cerning the length of Henry the Eighth’s life.
But these cases rather relate to the purpose for
which the sorcery was employed, than to the fact
of using it.

Two remarkable statutes were passed in the
year 1541 ; one against false prophecies, the other
against the act of conjuration, witchcraft, and

DEMONOLOGY AND WITCHCRAFT. 227

sorcery, and, at the same time, against break-
ing and destroying crosses. The former enact-
ment was certainly made to ease the suspicious
and wayward fears of the tetchy King Henry.
The prohibition against witchcraft might be also
dictated by the king’s jealous doubts of hazard to
the succession. The enactment against breaking
crosses, was obviously designed to check the ra-
vages of the reformers, who, in England as well
as elsewhere, desired to sweep away Popery with
the besom of destruction. This latter statute
was abrogated in the first year of Edward VL.,
perhaps as placing an undue restraint on the zeal
of good Protestants against idolatry.

At length, in 1562, a formal statute against
sorcery, as penal in itself, was actually passed;
but as the penalty was limited to the pillory for
the first transgression, the legislature probably
regarded those who might be brought to trial as
impostors rather than wizards. There are in-
stances of individuals tried and convicted as im-
postors and cheats, and who acknowledged them-
selves such before the court and people: But in
their articles of visitation, the prelates directed
enquiry to be made after those who should use
enchantments, witchcraft, sorcery, or any like
evaft, invented by the devil.

But it is here proper to make a pause, for the
purpose of enquiring in what manner the reli-
gious disputes which occupied all Europe about
this time influenced the proceedings of the rival
sects in relation to Demonology.

The Papal Church had long reigned by the
proud and absolute humour which she had assu-

228 LETTERS ON

med, of maintaining every doctrine which her ru-
lers had adopted in dark ages ; but this pertinacity
at length made her citadel too large to be defend-
ed at every point, by a garrison whom prudence
would have required to abandon positions which
had been taken in times of darkness, and were
unsuited to the warfare of a more enlightened
age. The sacred motto of the Vatican was, “ Ves-
tigia nulla retrorsum ;” and this rendered it im-
possible to comply with the more wise and mode-
rate of her own party, who would otherwise have
desired to make liberal concessions to the Protest-
ants, and thus prevent, in its commencement, a
formidable schism in the Christian world.

To the system of Rome the Calvinists offered
the most determined opposition, affecting, upon
every occasion, and on all points, to observe an
order of church-government, as well as of wor-
ship, expressly in the teeth of its enactments ;—
in a word, to be a good Protestant, they held it
almost essential to be, in all things, diametrically
opposite to the Catholic form and faith. - As the
foundation of this sect was laid in republican
states; as its clerical discipline was settled on a
democratic basis; and as the countries which
adopted that form of government were chiefly
poor, the preachers, having lost the rank and opu-
lence enjoyed by the Roman Church, were gra-
dually thrown on the support of the people. In-
vomit ly they became occupied with the ideas and
tenets natural to the common people, which, if
they have usually the merit of being honestly
conceived and boldly expressed, are not the less
often adopted with cvahatig and precipitation,

DEMONOLOGY AND WITCHCRAFT. 229

and carried into effect with unhesitating harsh-
ness and severity.

Betwixt these extremes the Churchmen of Eng-
land endeavoured to steer a middle course, re-
taining a portion of the ritual and forms of Rome,
as in themselves admirable, and at any rate too
greatly venerated by the people, to be changed
merely for opposition’s sake. Their compara-
tively undilapidated revenue, the connexion of
their system with the state, with views of ambition
as ample as the station of a churchman ought to
command, rendered them independent of the ne-
cessity of courting their flocks by any means save
regular discharge of their duty ; and the excellent
provisions made for their education afforded them
learning to confute ignorance, and enlighten pre-
judice.

Such being the general character of the three
Churches, their belief in, and persecution of, such
crimes as witchcraft and sorcery, were necessa-
rily modelled upon the peculiar tenets which each
system professed, and gave rise to various re-
sults in the countries where they were severally
received.

The Church of Rome, as we have seen, was
unwilling, in her period of undisputed power, to
call in the secular arm to punish men for witch-
craft, a crime which fell especially under eccle-
siastical cognizance, and could, according to her
belief, be subdued by the spiritual arm alone.
The learned men at the head of the establish-
ment might safely despise the attempt at those
hidden arts as impossible; or, even if they were
of a more credulous disposition, they might be

230 LETTERS ON

unwilling to make laws by which their own en-
quiries in the mathematics, algebra, chemistry,
and other pursuits vulgarly supposed to approach
the confines of magic art, might be inconvenient-
ly restricted. The more selfish part of the priest-
hood might think that a general belief in the ex-
istence of witches should be permitted to remain,
as a source both of power and of revenue—that
if there were no possessions, there could be no
exorcism-fees—and, in short, that a wholesome
faith in all the absurdities of the vulgar creed, as
to supernatural influences, was necessary to main-
tain the influence of Diana of Ephesus. They
suffered spells to be manufactured, since every
friar had the power of reversing them—they per-
mitted poison to be distilled, beeause every con-
vent had the antidote, which was disposed of to,
all who chose to demand it. It was not till the
universal progress of heresy, in the end of the
fifteenth century, that’ the bull of Pope Innocent
VIII., already quoted, called to convict, impri-
son, and condemn the sorcerers, chiefly because
it was the object to transfer the odium of these
crimes to the Waldenses, and excite and direct
the public hatred against the new sect, by con-
founding their doctrines with the influences of
the Devil and his Fiends. The bull of Pope In-
nocent was afterwards, in the year 1523, enfor-
eed by Adrian VI., with a new one, in which ex-
communication was directed against sorcerers and
heretics.

While Rome thus positively declared herself
against witches and sorcerers, the Calvinists, in
whose numbers must be included the greater part

DEMONOLOGY AND WITCHCRAFT. 231

of the English Puritans, who, though they had
not finally severed from the communion of the
Anglican Church, yet disapproved of her ritual
and ceremonies, as retaining too much of the Pa-
pal stamp, ranked themselves, in accordance with
their usual policy, in diametrical opposition to
the doctrine of the Mother Church. They assu-
med in the opposite sense whatever Rome pre-
tended to as a proof of her omnipotent authority.
The exorcisms, forms, and rites, by which good
Catholics believed that incarnate fiends could be
expelled, and evil spirits of every kind rebuked
—these, like the holy water, the robes of the
priest, and the sign of the cross, the Calvinists
considered either with scorn and contempt, as the
tools of deliberate quackery and imposture, or
with horror and loathing, as the fit emblems and
instruments of an idolatrous system.

Such of them as did not sires deny the
supernatural powers of which the Romanists
made boast, regarded the success of the exorci-
sing priest, to whatever extent they admitted it,
as at best a casting out of devils by the power of
Beelzebub, the King of the Devils. They saw
also, and resented bitterly, the attempt to con-
found any dissent from the doctrines of Rome
with the proneness to an encouragement of rites
of sorcery. On the whole, the Calvinists, gene-
rally speaking, were, of all the contending sects,
the most suspicious of sorcery, the most undoubt-
ing believers in its existence, and the most eager
to follow it up with what they conceived to be
the due punishment of the most fearful of crimes.

The leading divines of the Church of England

232 j LETTERS ON :

were, without doubt, fundamentally as much op-
posed to the doctrines of Rome, as those who alto-
gether disclaimed opinions and ceremonies, mere-
ly because she had entertained them. But their
position in society tended strongly to keep them
from adopting, on such subjects as we are now
discussing, either the eager credulity of the valgar
mind, or the fanatic ferocity of their Calvinistic
rivals. We have no purpose to discuss the mat<
ter in detail—enough has probably been said to
show generally why the Romanist should have
cried out a miracle, respecting an incident which
the Anglican would have contemptuously termed
an imposture ; while the Calvinist, inspired with
a darker zeal, and, above all, with the unceasing
desire of open controversy with the Catholics,
would have styled the same event an operation
of the Devil.

It followed, that while the divines of the Church
of England possessed the upper hand in the king-
dom, witchcraft, though trials and even condem-
nations for that offence occasionally occurred, did
not create that epidemic terror which the very
suspicion of the offence carried with it elsewhere ;
so that Reginald Scot and others alleged, it was
the vain pretences and empty forms of the Church
of Rome, by the faith reposed in them, which had
led to the belief of witcheraft or sorcery in gene-
ral. Nor did prosecutions on account of such
charges frequently involve a capital punishment,
while learned judges were jealous of the imper-
fection of the evidence to support the charge, and
entertained a strong and growing suspicion that
legitimate grounds for jack

trials seldom actually.

fi

\\

DEMONOLOGY AND WITCHCRAFT. 233

existed. On the other hand, it usually happened
that wherever the Calvinist interest became pre-
dominant in Britain, a general persecution of sor-
cerers and witches seemed to take place of con-
sequence. Fearing and hating sorcery more than
other Protestants, connecting its ceremonies and
usages with those of the detested Catholic Church,
the Calvinists were more eager than other sects
in searching after the traces of this crime, and,
of course, unusually successful, as they might sup-
pose, in making discoveries of guilt, and pursuing
it to the expiation of the fagot. In a word, a prin-
ciple already referred to by Dr Francis Hutchi-
son, will be found to rule the tide and the reflux
of such cases in the different churches. The num-
bers of witches, and their supposed dealings with
Satan, will increase or decrease according as such
doings are accounted probable or impossible.
Under the former supposition, charges and con-
victions will be found augmented in a terrific de-
gree. When the accusations are disbelieved. and
dismissed as not worthy of attention, the crime
becomes unfrequent, ceases to occupy the public
mind, and affords little trouble to the judges.
The passing of Elizabeth’s statute against witch-
craft in 1562, does not seem to have been intended
to increase the number of trials, or cases of con-
viction at least ; and the fact is, it did neither the
one nor the other. Two children were tried in
1574 for counterfeiting possession, and stood in
the pillory for impostors, Mildred Norrington,
called the Maid of Westwell, furnished another
instance of possession ; but she also confessed her
imposture, and publicly showed her fits and tricks

234 LETTERS ON

of mimicry. The strong influence already pos-
sessed by the Puritans may probably be sufficient
to account for the darker issue.of certain cases,
in whieh both juries and judges, in Elizabeth’s
time, must be admitted to have shown fearful
severity. f
These cases of possession were in some respects
sore snares to the priests of the Church of Rome,
who, while they were too sagacious not to be
aware that the pretended fits, eontortions, strange
sounds, and other extravagances, produced as evi-
dence of the Demon's influence on the possessed
rson, were nothing else than marks of imposture
y some idle vagabond, were nevertheless often
tempted to admit them as real, and take the cre-
dit of curing them. The period was one when the
Catholic Church had much occasion to rally around
her all the respect that remained to her in a schis-
matic and heretical kingdom ; and when her fathers
and doctors announced the existence of such a
dreadful disease, and of the power of the church’s
prayers, relics, and ceremonies, to cure it, it was
difficult for a priest, supposing him more tender
of the interest of his order than that of truth, to
avoid such a tempting opportunity as a supposed
case of possession offered, for diecast the high
privilege in which his profession made him a par-
taker, or to abstain from conniving at the impos-
ture, in order to obtain for his church the credit
of expelling the demon. It was hardly to be won-
dered at, if the ecclesiastic was sometimes indu-
ced to aid the fraud of which such motives for-
bade him to be the detector. At this he might
hesitate the less, as he was not obliged to adopt

DEMONOLOGY AND WITCHCRAFT. 235

the suspected and ‘degrading course of holding an
immediate communication in limine with the im-
postor, since a hint or two, dropped in the sup-
posed sufferer’s presence, might give him the ne-
cessary information what was the most exact mode
of performing his part, and if the patient was pos-
sessed by a devil of any acuteness or dexterity,
he wanted no farther instruction how to’ play it.
Such combinations were sometimes detected, and
brought more discredit on the Church of Rome
than was counterbalanced by any which might be
more cunningly managed. On this subject, the
reader may turn to Dr Harsnett's celebrated book
on Popish Impostures, wherein he gives the his-
tory of several notorious cases of detected fraud,
in which Roman ecclesiastics had not hesitated
to mingle themselves. That of Grace Sowerbutts,
instructed by a Catholic priest to impeach her
grandmother of witchcraft, was a very gross fraud.

Such cases were not, however, limited to the
ecclesiastics of Rome. We have already stated,
that, as extremes usually approach each other,
the Dissenters, in their violent opposition to the
Papists, adopted some of their ideas respecting de-
moniacs ; and, we have now to add, that they also
claimed, by the vehemence of prayer, and the au-
thority of their own sacred commission, that power
of expelling devils, which the Church of Rome
pretended to exercise by rites, ceremonies, and
relics. The memorable case of Richard Dugdale,
called the Surrey Impostor, was one of the most
remarkable which the Dissenters brought forward.
This youth was supposed to have sold his soul te
the devil, on condition of being made the best dan-

236 LETTERS ON

cer in Lancashire, and during his possession played.
a number of fantastic tricks, not much different
from those exhibited by expert posture-masters of
the present day. This person threw himself into
the hands of the Dissenters, who, in their eager-
ness, caught at an opportunity to relieve an affiict-
ed person, whose case the regular clergy appeared
to have neglected. They fixeda committee of their
number, who weekly attended the supposed suf-
ferer, and exercised themselves in appointed days
of humiliation and fasting, during the course of a
whole year. All respect for the demon seems to
have abandoned the reverend gentlemen, after they
had relieved guard in this manner for some little
time, and they gotso regardless of Satanas to taunt
him with the modein which he executed his promise
to teach his vassal dancing. The following specimen
of raillery is worth commemoration :—“ What,
Satan ! is this the dancing that Richard gave him-
self to thee for? &c. Canst thou dance no bet-
ter? &c. Ransack the old records of all past times
and places in thy memory: canst thou not there
find out some better way of trampling? Pum

thine invention dry; cannot the universal seed-
plot of subtile wiles and stratagems spring up one
new method of cutting capers? Is this the top
of skill and pride, to shuffle feet and brandis

knees thus, and to trip like a doe, and skip like
asquirrel? And wherein differ thy leapings from
the hoppings of a frog, or the bouncings of a goat,
or friskings of a dog, or gesticulations of a mon-
key? And cannot a palsy shake such a loose leg
as that? Dost thou not twirl like a calf that

e

DEMONOLOGY AND WITCHCRAFT. 237

hath the turn, and twitch up thy houghs just like
a springhault tit?”* One might almost conceive
the demon replying to this raillery in the words
of Dr Johnson, “ This merriment of parsons is
extremely offensive.”

The dissenters were probably too honest, how-
ever simple, to achieve a complete cure on Dug-
dale by: an amicable understanding ; so, after
their year of vigil, they relinquished their task
‘by degrees. Dugdale, weary of his illness, which
now attracted little notice, attended a regular
physician, and was cured of that part of his dis-
ease which was not affected, in a regular way,
par ordonnance du médecin. But the reverend
gentlemen who had taken his case in hand still
assumed the credit of curing him, and if any thing
could have induced them to sing Ze Deum, it
would have been this occasion. They said that
the effect of their public prayers had been for a
time suspended, until seconded by the continued
earnestness of their private devotions ! !

Theministers of the Church of England, though,
from education, intercourse with the world, and
other advantages, they were less prone to preju-
dice than those of other sects, are yet far from
being entirely free of the charge of encouraging
in particular instances the witch superstition.
Even while Dr Hutchison pleads that the Church
of England has the least to answer for in that
matter, he is under the necessity of acknow-
ledging, that some regular country clergymen so
far shared the rooted prejudices of congrega-

* Hutchison on Witchcraft, p. 162.

238 LETTERS ON

tions, and of the government which established
Jaws against it, as to be active in the persecution
of the suspected, and even in countenancing the
pe pt signs by which in that period the
vulgar thought it possible to ascertain the exist-
ence of the afflictions by witcheraft, and obtain
the knowledge of the perpetrator. A singular
case is mentioned of three women, called the
Witches of Warbois. Indeed, their story is a
matter of solemn enough record; for Sir Samuel
Cromwell, having received the sum of forty pounds
as lord of the manor, out of the estate of the poor
persons who suffered, turned it into a rent charge
of forty shillings yearly, for the endowment of
an annual lecture on the subject of witchcraft, to
be preached by a doctor or bachelor of divinity of
Queen's College, Cambridge. The accused, one
Samuel and his wife, were old, and very poor per-
sons, and their daughter, a young woman. The
daughter of a Mr Throgmorton, seeing the poor
old woman in a black knitted cap, ata time when
she was not very well, took a whim that she had
bewitched her, and was ever after exclaiming
against her. The other children of this fanciful
family canght up the same cry, and the eldest of
them at last got up a vastly pretty drama, in
which she herself furnished all the scenes, and
played all the parts.

Such imaginary scenes, or make-believe stories,
are the common amusement of lively children ;
and most readers may remember having had some
Utopia of their own. But the nursery drama of
Miss Throgmorton had a horrible conclusion.
This young lady and her sisters were supposed

DEMONOLOGY AND WITCHCRAFT. 239

to be haunted by nine spirits, dispatched by the
wicked Mother Samuel for that purpose. The
sapient parents heard one part of the dialogue,
when the children in their fits returned answers,
as was supposed, to the spirits who afflicted
them; and when the patients from time to time
recovered, they furnished the counterpart by
telling what the spirits had said to.them. The
names of the spirits were Pluck, Hardname, Catch,
Blue, and three Smacks, who were cousins. Mrs
Joan Throgmorton, the eldest, (who, like other
young women of her age, about fifteen, had some
disease on her nerves, and whose fancy ran appa-
rently on love and gallantry, ) supposed that one of
the Smacks was her lover, did battle for her with
the less friendly spirits, and promised to protect
her against Mother Samuel herself; and the fol-
lowing curious extract will show on what a footing
of familiarity the damsel stood with her spiritual
gallant: “ «From whence'come you, Mr Smack?’
says the afflicted young lady ; ‘and what news do

ou bring?’ Smack, nothing abashed, informed
hel he came from fighting with Pluck: the wea-

ons, great cowl-staves,—the scene, a ruinous

akehouse in Dame Samuel's yard. ‘ And who
got the mastery, I pray you?’ said the damsel.
Smack answered, he had broken Pluck’s head.
‘I would,’ said the damsel, ‘ he had broken your
neck also.’—* Is that the thanks I am to have for
my labour ?’ said the disappointed Smack. * Look
-you for thanks at my hand?’ said the distressed
maiden. ‘I would you were all hanged up against
each other, with your dame for company, for you
are all naught.’” On this repulse, exit Smack,

240 LETTERS ON

and enter Pluck, Blue, and Catch, the first with
his head broken, the other limping, and the third
with his arm in a sling, all trophies of Smack’s vie-
tory. They disappeared, after having threatened
vengeance upon the conquering Smack. However,
he soon afterwards appeared with his laurels. He
told her of his various conflicts. “‘ I wonder,’ said
Mrs Joan, or Jane, ‘that you are abletobeatthem;
youare little, and they very big. —‘ He cared not
for that,’ he replied ; ‘he would beat the best two
of them, and his cousins Smacks would beat the
other two.” This most pitiful mirth, for such it
certainly is, was mixed with tragedy enough. Miss
Throgmorton and her sisters railed against Dame
Samuel ; and when Mr Throgmorton brought her
to his house by force, the little fiends longed to
draw blood of her, scratch her, and torture her, as
the witch-creed of that period recommended ; yet
the poor woman incurred deeper suspicion when
she expressed a wish to leave a house where she
was so coarsely treated, and lay under such odious
suspicions.

It was in vain that this unhappy creature endea-
youred to avert their resentment, by submitting
to all the ill usage they chose to put upon her;
in vain that she underwent, unresistingly, the
worst usage at the hand of Lady Cromwell, her
landlady, who, abusing her with the worst epithets,
tore her cap from her head, clipped out some of
her hair, and gave it to Mrs Throgmorton, to burn
it for a counter charm. Nay, Mother Samuel's
complaisance in the latter case only led to a new
charge. It happened that the Lady Cromwell, on
her return home, dreamed of her day’s work, and

DEMONOLOGY AND WITCHCRAFT. 241

especially of the old dame and her cat ; and as her
Ladyship died in a year and quarter from that very
day, it was sagaciously concluded that she must
have fallen a victim tothe witcheries of the terrible
Dame Samuel. Mr Throgmorton also compelled
the old woman and her daughter to use expres-
sions which put their lives in the power of these
malignant children, who had carried on the farce
so long that they could not well'escape from their
own web of deceit but by the death of these help-
less creatures: For example, the prisoner, Dame
Samuel, was induced to say to the supposed spirit,
« Aslam awitch, andacauser of Lady Cromwell's
death, I charge thee to come out of the maid-
en.” The girl lay still; and this was accounted
a proof that the poor woman, who only, sub-
dued and crushed by terror and tyranny, did as
she was bidden, was a witch. One is ashamed
of an English judge and jury, when it must be
repeated, that the evidence of these enthusias-
tic and giddy-pated girls was deemed sufficient
to the condemnation of three innocent persons.
Goody Samuel, indeed, was at length worried
into a confession of her guilt, by the various
‘vexations which were practised on her. But
her husband and daughter continued to main-
tain their innocence. The last showed a high
spirit, and proud yalue for her character. She
was advised by some, who pitied her youth, to
gain at least a respite by pleading pregnancy ; to
which she answered disdainfully, « No, I will not
be both held witch and strumpet!” The mother,
to’ show her sanity of mind, and the real value of
her confession, caught at the advice recommended
Q

242 LETTERS ON

to her daughter. As her years put such a plea out
of the question, there was a laugh among the un-
feeling audience, in which the poor old victim _
joined loudly and heartily. Some there were who
thought it no joking matter, and were inclined to
think they had a Joanna Southcote before them,
and that the devil must be the father. These un-
fortunate Samuels were condemned at Hunting-
don, before Mr Justice Fenner, 4th April, 1593.,
It was a singular case to be commemorated by an
annual lecture, as provided by Sir Samuel Crom-
well ; for the purposes of Justice were never so
perverted, nor her sword turned to a more fla-
grant murder.

We may here mention, though mainly for the
sake of contrast, the much-disputed case of Jane
Wenham, the witch of Walkerne, as she was
termed ; which was of a much later date. Some
of the country clergy were carried away by the
landflood of superstition in this instance also, and
not only encouraged the charge, but gave their
countenance to some of the ridiculous and inde-
cent tricks resorted to as proofs of witchcraft by
the lowest vulgar. But the good sense of the
judge, seconded by that of other reflecting and
sensible persons, saved the country from the ulti-
mate disgrace attendant on too many of these un-
hallowed trials.. The usual sort of evidence was
brought against this poor woman, by pretences
of bewitched persons vomiting fire; a trick very
easy to those who chose to exhibit such a piece
of jugglery, amongst such as rather desire to be
taken in it, than to detect the imposture.
The witchfinder practised upon her the most

DEMONOLOGY AND WITCHCRAFT. 243

vulgar and ridiculous tricks, or charms ; and out
of a perverted examination, they drew what they
called a confession, though of a forced and mu-
tilated character. Under such proof the jury
brought her in Guilty, and she was necessarily
condemned to die. More fortunate, however, than
many persons placed in the like circumstances,
Jane Wenham was tried before a sensible and
philosophic judge, who could not understand that
the life of an Englishwoman, howeyer mean, should
be taken away by a set of barbarous tricks and ex-
periments, the efficacy of which depended on po-
pular credulity. He reprieved the witch before he
left the assize-town. The rest of the history is
equally a contrast to some we have told, and others
we shall have to recount. A humane and high-
spirited gentleman, Colonel Plummer of Gilston,
putting at defiance popular calumny, placed the
poor old woman in a small house near his own, and
under his immediate protection. Here she lived
and died, in honest and fair reputation, edifying
her visitors by her accuracy and attention in re-
peating her devotions ; and, remoyed from her bru-
tal and malignant neighbours, never afterwards

aye the slightest cause of suspicion or offence till

er dying day. As this was one of the last cases
of convictionin England, Dr Hutchison has been
led to dilate upon it with some strength of elo-
quence as well as argument.

He thus expostulates with some of the bet-
ter class that were eager for the prosecution :—
“ 1. What single fact of sorcery did this Jane
Wenham do? What charm did she use, or what
act of witchcraft could you prove upon her?

244 LETTERS ON

Laws are against evil actions, that can be proved
to be of the person’s doing—What single fact
that was against the statute could you fix upon
her? Task, 2. Did she so much as speak an
imprudent word, or do an immoral action, that
you could put into the narrative of her case?
When she was denied a few turnips, she laid
them down very submissively—when she was
called witch, and bitch, she only took the proper
means for the vindication of her good name—
when she saw this storm coming upon her, she
lock'd herself in her own house, and tried to keep
herself out of your cruel hands— When her door
was broken open, and you gave way to that bar-
barous usage that she met with, she protested
her innocence, fell upon her knees, and begg’d
she might not go to gaol, and, in her innocent
emit? would have let you swim her; and at
her tryal, she declar’d herself a clear woman,
This was her behaviour ; and what could any of
us have done better, excepting in that case where
she comply’d with you too much, and offered to
let you swim her?

«3. When you used the meanest of paganish
and popish superstitions—when you scratch’d,
and mangled, and ran pins into her flesh, and
used that ridiculous tryal of the bottle, &e«—
whom did you consult—and from whom did you
expect your answers? who was your father—
and into whose hands did you put yourselves ?
and if the true sense of the statute had been
turn’d upon you, which way would you have de-
fended yourselves? 4. Durst you have used her
in this manner if she had been rich; and doth not

DEMONOLOGY AND WITCHCRAFT. 245

her poverty increase rather than lessen your guilt
in what you did?

«* And therefore, instead of closing your book
with a liberavimus animas nostras, and reflecting
upon the court, I ask you, 5. Whether you have
not. more reason to give God thanks that you
met with a wise judge, and a sensible gentleman,
who kept you from shedding innocent blood, and
reviving the meanest and cruelest of all supersti-
tions amongst us?” *

But although individuals of the English church
might, on some occasions, be justly accused of fall-
ing into lamentable errors on a subject where error
was so general, it was not an usual point of their
professional character; and it must be admitted,
that the most severe of the laws against witchcraft
originated with a Scottish King of England, and
that the only extensive persecution following that
statute, occurred during the time of the Civil
Wars, when the Calvinists obtained, for a short
period, a predominating influence in the councils
of Parliament.

James succeeded to Elizabeth amidst the high-
est expectations on the part of his new people,
who, besides their general satisfaction at coming
once more under the rule of a king, were also
pares of his supposed abilities and real know-

dge of books and languages, and were natu-
rally, though imprudently, disposed to gratify
him by deferring to his judgment in matters
wherein his studies were supposed to have ren-
dered him a special proficient. Unfortunately,

_* Hatchison’s Essay on Witchcraft, p. 166.

246 LETTERS ON

besides the more harmless freak of becoming a
Prentice in the art of Poetry, by which words
and numbers were the only sufferers, the mo-
narch had composed a deep work upon Demon-
ology, embracing, in their fullest extent, the most
absurd and gross of the popular errors on this
subject. He considered his crown and life as
habitually aimed at by the sworn slaves of Sa-
tan. Several had been executed for an attempt
to poison him by magical arts; and the turbu-
lent Francis Stewart, Earl of Bothwell, whose
repeated attempts on his person had long been
James’s terror, had begun his course of rebel-
lion by a consultation with the weird sisters
and soothsayers. Thus the king, who had proved
with his pen the supposed sorcerers to be the di-
rect enemies of the Deity, and who conceived he
knew them from experience to be his own, who,
moreover, had, upon much lighter occasions (as
in the case of Vorstius,) showed no hesitation at
throwing his royal authority into the scale to aid
his arguments, very naturally used his influence
when it was at the highest, to extend and en-
force the laws against a crime which he both
hated and feared.

The English statute against witchcraft, passed
in the very first year of that reign, is therefore
of a most special nature, describing witchcraft by
all the various modes and ceremonies in which,
according to King James's fancy, that crime
could be perpetrated ; each of which was decla-
red felony, without benefit of clergy.

This gave much wider scope to prosecution on
the statute than had existed under the milder

DEMONOLOGY AND WITCHCRAFT. 247

acts of Elizabeth. Men might now be punished
for the practice of witchcraft, as itself a crime,
without necessary reference to the ulterior ob-
jects of the perpetrator. It is remarkable, that
in the same year, when the ae rather
adopted the passions and fears of the king, than
expressed their own, by this fatal enactment, the
Convocation of the Church evinced a very differ-
ent spirit; for, seeing the ridicule brought on
their sacred profession by forward and presump-
tuous men, in the attempt to relieve demoniacs
from a disease which was commonly occasioned
by natural causes, if not the mere creature of
imposture, they passed a canon, establishing that
no minister, or ministers, should in future at-
tempt to expel any devil or devils, without the
license of his bishop; thereby virtually putting
a stop to a fertile source of knavery i the
people, and disgraceful folly among the inferior
churchmen.

The new statute of James does not, however,
appear to have led at first to many prosecutions.
One of the most remarkable was (proh pudor!)
instigated by a gentleman, a scholar of classical
taste, and aindaaifel poet, being no other than
Edward Fairfax of Fayston, in Knaresborough
Forest, the translator of Tasso’s “ Jerusalem De-
livered.” In allusion to his credulity on such
subjects, Collins has introduced the following
elegant lines :

« How have I sate while piped the pensive wind,
To hear thy harp, by British Fairfax strung ;

Prevailing poet, whose undoubting mind
Believed the magic wonders which he sung!”

248 LETTERS ON

Like Mr Throgmorton in the Warbois case, Mr
Fairfax accused six of his neighbours of torment-
ing his children by fits of an extraordinary kind,
by imps, and by appearing before the afflicted in
their own shape during the erisis of these opera-
tions. The admitting this last circumstance to
be a legitimate mode of proof, gave a most cruel

advantage against the accused, for it could not,

according to the ideas of the demonologists, be
confuted even by the most distinct alii. Toa
defence of that sort, it was replied, that the afflict-
ed person did not see the actual witch, whose cor-
poreal presence must indeed have been obvious to
every one in the room as wellas to the afflicted, but
that the evidence of the sufferers related to the
appearance of their spectre, or apparition ; and this
was accounted a sure sign of guilt in those whose
forms were so manifested during the fits of the
afflicted, and who were complained of and cried
out upon by the victim. The obvious tendency
of this doctrine, as to visionary or spectral evi-
dence, as it was called, was to place the life and
fame of the accused in the power of any hy-
pochondriac patient or malignant impostor, who
might either seem to see, or aver she saw, the
spectrum of the accused old man or old woman,
as if enjoying and urging on the afflictions which
she complained of ; and, strange to tell, the fatal
sentence was to rest not upon the truth of the

witnesses’ eyes, but that of their. imagination,
It happened fortunately for Fairfax’s memory,
that the objects of his prosecution were persons
of good character, and that the judge was a man ©
of sense, and made so wise and skilful a charge to»

DEMONOLOGY AND WITCHCRAFT. 249

the jury, that they brought in a verdict of Not
Guilty.

The celebrated case of “ the Lancashire witches,”
(whose name was, and will be, long remembered,
partly from Shadwell’s play, but more from the
ingenious and well-merited compliment to the
beauty of the females of that province, which it
was held to contain, ) followed soon after. Whe-
ther the first notice of this sorcery sprung from
the idle head of a mischievous boy, is uncertain ;
but there is no doubt that it was speedily caught
up and fostered for the purpose of gain. The
original story ran thus :

These Lancaster trials were at two periods,
the one in 1613, before Sir James Altham and
Sir Edward Bromley, Barons of Exchequer,
when nineteen witches were tried at once at Lan-
caster, and another of the name of Preston, at
York. The report against these people is drawn
up by Thomas Potts. An obliging correspond-
ent sent me a sight of a copy of this curious and
rare book. The chief personage in the drama is
Elizabeth Southam, a witch redoubted under
the name of Dembdike, an account of whom may
be seen in Mr Roby’s Antiquities of Lancaster,
as well as a description of Maulkins’ Tower, the
witches’ place of meeting. It appears that this
remote county was full of Popish recusants, tra-
yelling priests, and so forth; and some of their
spells are given, in which the holy names and
things alluded to form a strange contrast with the
purpose to which they were applied, as to secure
a good brewing of ale or the like. The public
imputed to the accused parties a long train of

250 LETTERS ON

murders, een charms, mischances, hell-
ish and damnable practices, “‘ apparent,” says the
editor, “ on their own examinations and confes-
sions,” and, to speak the truth, visible nowhere
else. Mother Dembdike had the good luck to die
before conviction. Among other tales, we have
one of two female devils, called Fancy and Tib.
It is remarkable that some of the unfortunate
women endeavoured to transfer the guilt from
themselves to others with whom they had old quar-
rels, which confessions were held good evidence
against those who made them, and against the
alleged accomplice also. Several of the unhappy
women were found Not Guilty, to the great dis-
pleasure of the ignorant people of the county.
Such was the first edition of the Lancashire
witches. In that which follows, the accusation
¢an be more clearly traced to the most villainous
conspiracy.

About 1634, a boy called Edmund Robinson,
whose father, a very poor man, dwelt in Pendle
Forest, the scene of the alleged witching, decla-
red, that while gathering budlees (wild plums,
perhaps) in one of the glades of the forest, he
saw two greyhounds, which he imagined to be-
long to gentlemen in that neighbourhood. The
boy reported that, seeing nobody following them,
he proposed to have a course; but though a hare
was started, the dogs refused to run. On this,
young Robinson was about to punish them with a
switch, when one Dame Dickenson, a neighbour's
wife, started up instead of the one greyhound ; a
little boy instead of the other. The witness aver-
red, that Mother Dickenson offered him money to

DEMONOLOGY AND WITCHCRAFT. 251

eonceal what he had seen, which he refused, saying
«“ Nay, thou art a witch.” Apparently, she was
determined he should have fall evidence of the
truth of what he said, for, like the Magician Queen
in the Arabian Tales, she pulled out of her pocket
a bridle, and shook it over the head of the boy
who had so lately represented the other grey-
hound. He was directly changed into a horse;
Mother Dickenson mounted, and took Robinson
before her. They then rode to a large house, or
barn, called Hourstoun, into which Edmund Ro-
binson entered with others. He there saw six or
seven persons pulling at halters, from which, as
they pulled them, meat ready dressed came flying
in quantities, together with lumps of butter, por-
ringers of milk, and whatever else might, in the
boy’s fancy, complete a rustic feast. He declared,
that while engaged in the charm, they made such
ugly faces, and looked so fiendish, that he was
frightened. There was more to the same pur-
pose—as the boy’s having seen one of these

sitting half way up his father’s chimney, and some
such goodly matter. But it ended in near a score
of persons being committed to prison ; and the con-
sequence was, that young Robinson was carried
fromchurch to church in the neighbourhood, that
he might recognise the faces of any persons he
had seen at the rendezvous of witches. Old Ro-
binson, who had been an evidence against the for-
mer witches in 1613, went along with his son, and
knew, doubtless, how to make his journey profit-
able ; and his son probably took care to recognise
none who might make a handsome consideration.
“ This boy,” says Webster, “ was brought into

252 LETTERS ON

the church at Kildwick, a parish church; where I,
being then curate there, was preaching at the time,
to look about him, which made some little dis-
turbance for the time.” After prayers, Mr Web-
ster sought and found the boy, and two very un-
likely persons, who, says he, “did conduct himand
manage the business ; I did desire some discourse
with the boy in private, but that they utterly de«
nied. In the presence of a great many people, I
took the boy near me, and said, ‘ Good boy, tell
me truly, and in earnest, didst thou hear and see
such strange things of the motions of the witches,
as many do report that thou didst relate, or did
not some person teach thee to say such things of
thyself ?’ But the two men did pluck the boy from
me, and said he had been examined by two able
justices of peace, and they never asked him such a
question. To whom I replied, ‘ The persons ac-
cused had the more wrong.’ ” The boy afterwards
acknowledged, in his more advanced years, that
he was instructed and suborned to swear these
things against the accused persons, by his father
and others, and was heard often to confess, that on
the day which he pretended to see the said witches
at the house, or barn, he was gathering plums
in a neighbour's orchard.*

There was now approaching a time, when the
law against witchcraft, sufficiently bloody in it-
self, was to be pushed to more violent extremi-
ties than the quiet scepticism of the Church of
England clergy gave way to. The great Civil
War had been preceded and anticipated by the

* Webster on Witchcraft, edition 1677, p. 278

DEMONOLOGY AND WITCHCRAFT. 253

fierce disputes of the ecclesiastical parties. The
rash and ill-judged attempt to enforce upon the
Scottish a compliance with the government and
ceremonies of the High Church divines, and the
severe prosecutions in the Star Chamber and Pre-
rogative Courts, had given the Presbyterian sys-
tem for a season a great degree of popularity
in England ; and as the king’s party declined du-
ring the Civil War, and the state of church-govern-
ment was altered, the influence of the Calvinisti-
cal divines increased. With much strict morality
and pure practice of religion, it is to be regretted
these were still marked by unhesitating belief
in the existence of sorcery, and a keen desire to
extend and enforce the legal penalties against it.
Wier has considered the clergy of every sect as
being too eager in this species of persecution: Ad
gravem hanc impietatem, connivent theologi pleri

omnes. But it isnot to be denied that the Presby-
terian ecclesiastics, who, in Scotland, were often
appointed by the Privy Council commissioners,
for the trial of witchcraft, evinced a very extra-
ordinary degree of credulity in such cases, and that
the temporary co bist of the same sect in Eng-
land wasmarked by enormous cruelties of this kind.
To this general error we must impute the misfor-
tune, that good men, such as Calamy and Baxter,
should have countenanced or defended such pro-
ceedings as those of the impudent and cruel wretch
called Matthew Hopkins, who, in those unsettled
times, when men did what seemed good in their
own eyes, assumed the title of Witchfinder Ge-
neral, and travelling through the counties of
Essex, Sussex, Norfolk, and Huntingdon, pre-

254 LETTERS ON

tended to discover witches, superintending their
examination by the most unheard-of tortures,
and compelling forlorn and miserable wretches
to admit and confess matters equally absurd and
impossible ; the issue of which was the forfeiture
of their lives. Before examining these cases
more minutely, I will quote Baxter’s own words ;
for no one can have less desire to wrong a devout
and conscientious man, such as that divine most
unquestionably was, though borne aside on this
occasion by prejudice and credulity,

“ The hanging of a great number of witches
in 1645 and 1646 is famously known, Mr Ca-
lamy went along with the judges on the cireuit,
to hear their confessions, and see there was no
fraud or wrong done them, I spoke with many
understanding, pious, learned, and credible per-
sons, that lived in the counties, and some that
went to them in the prisons, and heard their sad
confessions. Among the rest, an old reading
parson, named Lowis, not far from Framlingham,
was one that was hanged, who confessed that he
had two imps, and that one of them was always
putting him upon doing mischief; and he being
near the sea, as he saw a ship under sail, it
moved him to send it to sink the ship; and he
consented, and saw the ship sink before them,”
Mr Baxter passes on to another story of a mo-
ther, who gave her child an imp like a mole,
and told her to keep it in a can near the fire,
and she would never want; and more such stuff
as nursery maids tell froward children to keep,
them quiet.

It is remarkable that, in this passage, Baxter

8

DEMONOLOGY AND WITCHCRAFT. 255

names the Witchfinder General rather slightly,
as “one Hopkins,” and without doing him the jus-
tice due to one who had discovered more than
one hundred witches, and brought them to con-
fessions which that good man received as indubi-
table. Perhaps the learned divine was one of
those who believed that the Witchfinder General
had cheated the devil out of a certain memoran-
dum-book, in which Satan, for the benefit of his
memory certainly, had entered all the witches’
names in England, and that Hopkins availed him-
self of this record.*

It may be noticed, that times of misrule and vio-
lence seem to create individuals fitted to take ad-
vantage from them, and having a character suited
to the seasons which raise them into notice and
action ; just as a blight on any tree or vegetable,
calls to life a peculiar insect to feed upon and
enjoy the decay which it has produced. A mon-
ster like Hopkins could only have existed du-
ring the confusion of civil dissension. He was,
perhaps, a native of Manningtree, in Essex ; at any
rate, he resided there in the year 1644, when an
epidemic outcry of witchcraft arose in that town.

pon this occasion he had made himself busy,

* This reproach is noticed in avery rare tract, which
was bought at Mr Lort’s sale, by the celebrated collector
Mr Bindley, and is now in the author’s possession. Its
full title is, “ The Discovery of Witches, in Answer to
several Queries lately delivered to the Judge of Assize for
the County of Norfolk; and now published by Matthew
Hopkins, Witchfinder, for the Benefit of the whole King-
dom. Printed for R. Royston, at the Angel, in Inn
Lane. 1647,”

256 LETTERS ON

and affecting more zeal and knowledge than other
men, learned his trade of a witchfinder, as he
pretends, from experiment. He was afterwards
permitted to perform it asa legal profession, and
moved from one place to another, with an assist-
ant named Sterne, and a female. In his defence
against an accusation of fleecing the country, he
declares his regular charge was twenty shillings a-
town, including charges of living, and journeying
thither and back again with his assistants. He also
affirms, that he went nowhere unless called and
invited. His principal mode of discovery was, to
strip the accused persons naked, and thrust pins
into various parts of their body, to discover the
witch’s mark, which was supposed to be inflicted
by the devil, as a sign of his sovereignty, and at
which she was also said to suckle her imps. He
also practised and stoutly defended the trial by
swimming, when the suspected person was wrapt
in a sheet, having the great toes and thumbs tied
together, and so dragged through a pond or river.
If she sank, it was received in favour of the ac-
cused ; but if the body floated, (which must have
occurred ten times for once, if it was placed with
care on the surface of the water,) the accused was
condemned, on the principle of King James, who,
in treating of this mode of trial, lays down, that
as witches have renounced their baptism, so it is
just that the element through which the holy rite
is enforced, should reject them ; which is a figure
of speech, and no argument. It was Hopkins’s
custom to keep the poor wretches waking, in order
to prevent them from having encouragement from
the devil, and, doubtless, to put infirm, terrified,
1

DEMONOLOGY AND WITCHCRAFT. 257

éverwatched persons in the next state to absolute
madness ; and, for the same purpose, they were
dragged about by their keepers, till extreme
weariness, and the pain of blistered feet, might
form additional inducements to confession. Hop-
kins confesses these last practices of keeping the
accused persons waking, and forcing them to walk,
for the same purpose, had been originally used by
him. But as his tract is a professed answer to
charges of cruelty and oppression, he affirms that
both practices were then disused, and that they
had not of late been resorted to.

The boast of the English nation is a manly in-
dependence and common sense, which will not
long permit the license of tyranny or oppression
on the meanest and most obscure sufferers. Many
clergymen and gentlemen made head against the
practices of this cruel oppressor of the defenceless,
and it required courage to do so, when such an
unscrupulous villain had so much interest.

Mr Gaul, a clergyman of Houghton in Hun-
tingdonshire, had the courage to appear in print
on the weaker side; and Hopkins, in conse-

uence, assumed the assurance to write to some
unctionaries of the place the following letter,
which is an admirable medley of impudence, bul-
lying, and cowardice :—

“ My service to your worship presented.—I
have this day received a letter to come to a town
called Great Houghton, to search for evil dispo-
sed persons called witches, (though I hear your
minister is far against us, through ignorance.) I
intend to come, God willing, the sooner to hear
his singular judgment in the behalf of such parties.

R

258 LETTERS ON

I have known a minister in Suffolk, as much
against this discovery in a pulpit, and forced to
recant it by the Committee,* in the same place.
I much marvel such evil men should have any
(much more any of the clergy, who should daily
speak terror to convince such offenders) stand up
to take their parts against such as are complain-
ants for the king, and sufferers themselves, with
their families and estates. I intend to give your
town a visit suddenly. I will come to Kimbol-
ton this week, and it will be ten to one but I
will come to your town first ; but I would cer-
tainly know before, whether your town affords
many sticklers for such cattle, or is willing to
give and allow us good welcome and entertain-
ment, as others where I have been, else I shall
waive your shire, (not as yet beginning in any
part of it myself,) and betake me to such places
where*I do and may punish (not only) without
control, but with thanks and recompense. So I
humbly take my leave, and rest your servant to
be commanded, :
« MarrHew Hopxins.”

The sensible and courageous Mr Gaul de-
scribes the tortures employed by this fellow as
equal to any practised in the Inquisition. “ Ha-
ving taken the suspected witch, she is placed in
the middle of a room, upon a stool, or table,
cross-legged, or in some other uneasy posture, to
which, if she submits not, she is then bound with
cords; there she is watched, and kept without

* Of Parliament. i

DEMONOLOGY AND WITCHCRAFT. 259

meat or sleep for four-and-twenty hours, for they
say, they shall within that time see her imp come
and suck. A little hole is likewise made in the
door for the imps to come in at; and lest they
should come in some less discernible shape, they
that watch are taught to be ever and anon sweep-
ing the room, and if they see any spiders or flies
to kill them, and if they cannot kill them, they
re: be sure they are their imps.”

f torture of this kind was applied to the Re-
verend Mr Lewis, whose death is too slightly
announced by Mr Baxter, we can conceive him, or
any man, to have indeed become so weary of his
life as to acknowledge, that, by means of his imps,
he sunk a vessel, without any purpose of gratifi-
cation to be procured to himself by such iniquity.
But in another cause, a judge would have de-
manded some proof of the corpus delicti, some
evidence of avessel being lost at the period, whence
coming and whither bound; in short, something
to establish that the whole story was not the idle
rey ae vr of a man who might have been en-
tirely deranged, and certainly was so at the time
he made the admission. John Lewis was present-
ed to the vicarage of Brandiston, near Framling-
ton, in Suffolk, 6th May, 1596, where he lived
about fifty years, till executed as a wizard, on
such evidence as we have seen. Notwithstand-
ing the story of his alleged confession, he defend-
ed himself courageously at his trial, and was pro-
bably condemned rather as a royalist and malig-
nant, than for any other cause. He showed at
the execution considerable energy, and to secure
that the funeral service of the church should be

260 LETTERS ON

said over his body, he read it aloud for himself
while on the road to the gibbet.

We have seen that, in 1647, Hopkins’s tone
became lowered, and he began to disavow some
of the cruelties he had formerly practised. About
the same time, a miserable old woman had fallen
into the cruel hands of this miscreant near Hoxne,
a village in Suffolk, and had confessed all the usual
enormities, after being without food or rest a suf-
ficient time. Her imp, she said, was called Nan. A
gentleman in the neighbourhood, whose widowsur-
vived to authenticate the story, was so indignant,
that he went to the house, took the woman out
of such inhuman hands, dismissed the witchfind-
ers, and after due food and rest, the poor old wo-
man could recollect nothing of the confession, but
that she gave a favourite pullet the name of Nan.
For this Dr Hutchison may be referred to, who
quotes a letter from the relict of the humane
gentleman. els

In the year 1645, a commission of Parliament
was sent down, comprehending two clergymen in
esteem with the leading party, one of whom, Mr
Fairclough of Kellar, preached before the rest on
the subject of witchcraft ; and after this appear-
ance of enquiry, the inquisitions and executions
went on as before. But the popular indignation
was so strongly excited against Hopkins, that
some gentlemen seized on him, and put him to his
own favourite experiment of swimming, on which,
as he happened to float,-he stood convicted of
witchcraft, and so the country was rid of him,
Whether he was drowned outright or not, does

DEMONOLOGY AND WITCHCRAFT, 261

not exactly appear, but he has had the honour to
be commemorated by the author of Hudibras :—

“ Hath not this present parliament

A leiger to the devil sent,

Fully empower’d to treat about

Finding revolted witches out ?

And has he not within a year

Hang’d threescore of them in one shire ?
Some only for not being drown’d,

And some for sitting above ground

Whole days and nights upon their breeches,
And feeling pain, were hang’d for witches.
And some for putting knayish tricks
Upon green geese or turkey chicks ;

Or pigs that suddenly deceased

Of griefs unnatural, as he guess’d,

Who proved himself at length a witch,
And made a rod for his own breech.”*

The understanding reader will easily conceive,
that this alteration of the current in favour of those
who disapproved of witch-prosecutions, must have
received encouragement from some quarter of
weight and influence; yet it may sound strangely
enough, that this spirit of lenity should have been
the result of the peculiar principles of those sect-
arians of all denominations, classed in general as
Independents, who, though they had originally
courted the Presbyterians as the more numerous
and prevailing party, had at length shaken them-
selves loose of that connexion, and finally com-
bated with and overcome them. The Inde-
pendents were distinguished by the wildest li-

* Hudibras, part ii. canto 3.

262 LETTERS ON

cense in their religious tenets, mixed with much
that was nonsensical and mystical. They dis-
owned even the title of a regular clergy, and al-
lowed the preaching of any one who could’ draw
together a congregation that would support him,
or who was willing, without recompense, to mi-
nister to the spiritual necessities of his hearers.
Although such laxity of discipline afforded scope
to the wildest enthusiasm, and room for all possible
varieties of doctrine, it had, on the other hand, this
inestimable recommendation, that it contributed
to a degree of general toleration which was at that
time unknown to any other Christian establish-
ment. The very genius of a religion which ad-
mitted of the subdivision of sects ad infinitum,
excluded a legal prosecution of any one of these
for heresy or apostasy. If there had even existed
a sect of Manichzeans, who made it their prac-
tice to adore the Evil Principle, it may be doubt-
ed whether the other sectaries would have ac-
counted them absolute outcasts from the pale of
the church; and, fortunately, the same senti-
ment induced them to regard with horror the
prosecutions against witchcraft. Thus the Inde-
pendents, when under Cromwell they attained a
supremacy over the Presbyterians, who to a cer-
tain point had been their allies, were disposed
to counteract the violence of such proceedings
under pretence of witchcraft, as had been driven
forward by the wretched Hopkins, in Essex, Nor-
folk, and Suffolk, for three or four years previous
to 1647. 2 :
The return of Charles II. to his crown and
kingdom, served in some measure to restrain the

DEMONOLOGY AND WITCHCRAFT. 2638

general and wholesale manner in which the laws
against witchcraft had been administered during
the warmth of the Civil War. The statute of the
lst of King James, nevertheless, yet subsisted ;
nor is it in the least likely, considering the cha-
racter of the prince, that he, to save the lives of a
few old men or women, would have run the risk
of incurring the odium of encouraging or sparing
a crime still held in horror by a great part of his
subjects. The statute, however, was generally
administered by wise and skilful judges, and the
accused had such a chance of escape as the rigour
of the absurd law permitted.

Nonsense, it is too obvious, remained in some
cases predominant. In the year 1663, an old dame
named Julian Coxe, was convicted chiefly on the
evidence of a huntsman, who declared on his oath,
that he laid his greyhounds on a hare, and, coming
up to the spot where he saw them mouth her,
there he found, on the other side of a bush, Ju-
lian Coxe lying panting and breathless, in sucha
manner as to convince him that she had been the
creature which afforded him the course. The un-
happy woman was executed on this evidence.

Two years afterwards (1664), it is with regret
we must quote the venerable and devout Sir Mat-
thew Hales, as presiding at a trial, in consequence
of which Amy Dunny and Rose Callender were
hanged at Saint Edmondsbury. But no man,
unless very peculiarly circumstanced, can extri-
cate himself from the prejudices of his nation and
age. The evidence against the accused was laid,
Ist, on the effect of spells used by ignorant per-
sons to counteract the supposed witchcraft ; the

264 LETTERS ON

use of which was, under the statute of James I., as
criminal as the act of sorcery which such counter-
charms were meant to neutralize. 2dly, The two’
old women, refused even the privilege of purcha-
sing some herrings, having expressed themselves
with angry impatience, a child of the herring-
merchant fell ill in consequence. 3dly, A cart
was driven against the miserable cottage of Amy
Dunny, She scolded, of course ; and shortly after
the cart—(what a good driver will scarce com~
prehend)—stuck fast in a gate, where its wheels
touched neither of the posts, and yet was moved
easily forward on one of the posts (by which it was
not impeded) being cut down. 4thly, One of the
afflicted girls being closely muffled, went suddenly
into a fit upon being touched by one of the sup-
posed witches. But, upon another trial, it was’
found that the person so blindfolded fell into the
same rage at the touch of an unsuspected person.
What perhaps sealed the fate of the accused, was
the evidence of the celebrated Sir Thomas Browne,
“that the fits were natural, but heightened by
the power of the devil co-operating with the ma-
lice of witches ;’—a strange opinion, certainly,
from the author of a treatise on Vulgar Errors |*
But the torch of science was now fairly lighted,
and gleamed in more than one kingdom of the
world, shooting its rays on every side, and catch-
ing at all means which were calculated to increase
the illumination. The Royal Society, which had
taken its rise at Oxford, from a private association,’

~* See the account of Sir T. Browne, in No. XIV. of
the Family Library (“ Lives of British Physicians,”) p. 60.

DEMONOLOGY AND WITCHCRAFT. 265

who met in Dr Wilkin’s chambers about the year
1652, was, the year after the Restoration, incor-
porated by royal charter, and began to publish
their Transactions, and give a new and more ra-
tional character to the pursuits of philosophy.

In France, where the mere will of the govern-
ment could accomplish greater changes, the conse«
quence of an enlarged spirit of scientific discovery
was, that a decisive stop was put to the witch-pro-
secutions, which had heretofore been ascommon in
thatkingdom as in England. About the year 1672,
there was a general arrest of very many shep-
herds, and others, in Normandy, and the Parlia~
ment of Rouen prepared to proceed in the inves«
tigation with the usual severity. But an order,
or arrét, from the king, (Louis XTV.,) with advice
of his council, commanding all these unfortunate
persons to be set at liberty and protected, had
the most salutary effects all over the kingdom.
The French Academy of Sciences was also found«
ed; and, in imitation, a society of learned Ger-
mans established a similar institution at Leipsic,
Prejudices, however old, were overawed and con-~
trolled—much was accounted for on natural prin-
ciples that had hitherto been imputed to spiritual
agency—every thing seemed to promise, that far-
ther access to the secrets of nature might be
opened to those who should prosecute their
studies experimentally and by analysis—and the
mass of ancient opinions which overwhelmed the
dark subject of which we treat, began to be de-
rided and rejected by men of sense and education.

In many cases the prey was now snatched from
the spoiler. A pragmatical justice of peace in

266 LETTERS ON

Somersetshire, commenced a course of enquiry
after offenders against the statute of James L,
and had he been allowed to proceed, Mr Hunt
might have gained a name as renowned for witch-
finding as that of Mr Hopkins; but his researches’
were stopped from higher authority—the lives
of the poor people arrested (twelve in number)
were saved, and the country remained at quiet,
though the supposed witches were suffered to live.
The examinations attest some curious particu-
lars, which may be found in Sadducismus Trium-
phatus: For, among the usual string of froward,
fanciful, or, as they were called, afflicted children, -
brought forward to club their startings, starings,
and screamings, there appeared also certain re-
markable confessions of the accused, from which
we learn that the Somerset Satan enlisted his
witches, like a wily recruiting sergeant, with one
shilling in hand, and twelve in promises; that
when the party of weird-sisters passed to the
witch-meeting, they used the magic words, Thout,
tout, throughout and about; and that when they
departed, they exclaimed, Rentum, Tormentum !
We are further informed, that his Infernal High-
ness, on his departure, leaves a smell, and that
(in nursery-maid’s phrase) not a pretty one, be-
hind him. Concerning this fact we have a cu-
rious exposition by Mr Glanville: “This,” accord-
ing to that respectable authority, “seems to imply
the reality of the business, those ascititious parti-
cles which he held together in his sensible shape
being loosened at his vanishing, and so offending
the nostrils by their floating and diffusing them-

DEMONOLOGY AND WITCHCRAFT. 267

selves in the open air.”* How much are we
bound to regret, that Mr Justice Hunt's discovery
“ of this hellish kind of witches,” in itself so clear
and plain, and containing such valuable informa-
tion, should have been smothered by meeting with
opposition and discouragement from some then
in authority !

Lord-Keeper Guilford was also a stifler of the
proceedings against witches. Indeed, we may
generally remark, during the latter part of the
seventeenth century, that where the judges were
men of education and courage, sharing in the in-
formation of the times, they were careful to check
the precipitate ignorance and prejudice of the
juries, by giving them a more precise idea of the
indifferent value of confessions by the accused
themselves, and of testimony derived from the
pretended visions of those supposed to be be-
witched. Where, on the contrary, judges shared
with the vulgar in their ideas of such fascination,
or were contented to leave the evidence with the
jury, fearful to withstand the general cry too
common on such occasions, a verdict of Guilty
often followed.

We are informed by Roger North, that a case
of this kind happened at the assizes in Exeter,
where his brother, the Lord Chief-Justice, did
not interfere with the crown trials, and the other
judge left for execution a poor old woman, con-
demned, as usual, on her own confession, and on
the testimony of a neighbour, who deponed that he
saw a cat jump into the accused person’s cottage

* Glanville’s Collection of Relations.

268 LETTERS ON

window at twilight, one evening, and that he verily
believed the said cat to be the devil; on which pre-
cious testimony the poor wretch was accordingly
hanged. On another occasion, about the same
time, the passions of the great and little vulgar
were so much excited by the acquittal of an aged
village dame whom the judge had taken some pains
to rescue, that Sir John Long, a man of rank
and fortune, came to the judge in the greatest

erplexity, requesting that the hag might not
be permitted to return to her miserable cottage
on his estates, since all his tenants had, in that
case, threatened to leave him. In compassion toa
gentleman who apprehended ruin from a cause so
whimsical, the dangerous old woman was appoint-
ed to be kept by the town where she was acquit~
ted, at the rate of half-a-crown a-week paid by
the parish to which she belonged. But, behold !
in the period betwixt the two assizes, Sir John
Long and his farmers had mustered courage
enough to petition that this witch should be sent
back to them in all her terrors, because they could
support her among themat a shilling a-week cheap-
er than they were obliged to pay to the town for
her maintenance. In a subsequent trial before
Lord Chief-Justice North himself, that judge de-
tected one of those practices which, it is to be
feared, were too common at the time, when wit-
nesses found their adyantage in feigning them-
selves bewitched. A woman, supposed to be the
victim of the male sorcerer at the bar, vomited pins
in quantities, and those straight, differing from the
crooked pins usually produced at such times, and
less easily concealed in the mouth, The judge,

DEMONOLOGY AND WITCHCRAFT. 269

however, discovered, by cross-examining a candid
witness, that in counterfeiting her fits of convul-
sion, the woman sunk her head on her breast, so
as to take up with her lips the pins which she had
placed ready inher stomacher. The man was ac-
quitted, of course. A frightful old hag who was
present, distinguished herself so much by her
benedictions on the judge, that he asked the
cause of the peculiar interest which she took in
the acquittal. ‘“ Twenty years ago,” said the
poor woman, “ they would have hanged me for
a witch, but could not; and now, but for your
lordship, they would have murdered my innocent
son.” *

Such scenes happened frequently on the assizes,
while country gentlemen, like the excellent Sir
Roger de Coverley, retained a private share
in the terror with which their tenants, servants,
and retainers, regarded some old Moll White,
who put the hounds at fault, and ravaged the
fields with hail and hurricanes. Sir John Reres-
by, after an account of a poor woman tried for
a witch at York, in 1686, and acquitted, as
he thought, very properly, proceeds to tell us,
that, notwithstanding, the sentinel upon the jail
where she was confined, avowed, “ that he saw
a scroll of paper creep from under the prison-
door, and then change itself first into a mon-
key, and then into a turkey, which the under
keeper confirmed. This,” says Sir John, « I
have heard from the mouth of both, and now
leave it to be believed, or disbelieved, as the

“ Roger North’s Life of Lord-Keeper Guilford,

270 LETTERS ON

reader may be inclined.”* We may see that
Reresby, a statesman and a soldier, had not as yet
“ plucked the old woman out of his heart.” Even
Addison himself ventured no farther in his inere-
dulity respecting this crime, than to contend, that
although witchcraft might, and did exist, there was
no such thing as a modern instance competently
proved.

As late as 1682, three unhappy women, named
Susan Edwards, Mary Trembles, and Temperance
Lloyd, were hanged at Exeter for witcheraft, and,
as usual, on their own confession. This is believed
to be the last execution of the kind in England,
under form of judicial sentence. But the ancient
superstition, so interesting to vulgar credulity,
like sediment clearing itself from water, sunk
down in a deeper shade upon the ignorant and
lowest classes of society, in proportion as the high-
er regions were purified from its influence. The
populace, including the ignorant of every class,
were more enraged against witches, when their
passions were once excited, in proportion to the
lenity exercised towards the objects of their
indignation, by those who administered the laws.
Several cases occurred in which the mob, im-
pressed with a conviction of the guilt of some
destitute old creatures, took the law into their
own hands, and, proceeding upon such evidence
as Hopkins would have had recourse to, at once,
in their own apprehension, ascertained their eri-
minality, and administered the deserved punish-
ment. ve

4

* Memoirs of Sir John Reresby, p. 237.

DEMONOLOGY AND WITCHCRAFT. 271

The following instance of such illegal and
inhuman proceedings occurred at Oakly, near
Bedford, on 12th July, 1707. There was one
woman, upwards of 60 years of age, who, being
under an imputation of witcheraft, was desirous
to escape from so foul a suspicion, and to conci-
liate the good-will of her neighbours, by allowing
them to duck her. The parish officers so far con-
sented to their humane experiment as to promise
the poor woman a guinea if she should clear her-
self by sinking. The unfortunate object was tied
up in a wet sheet, her thumbs and great toes were
bound together, her cap torn off, and all her appas
rel searched for pins; for there is an idea that a
single pin spoils the operation of the charm. She
was then dragged through the river Ouse by a
rope tied round her middle. Unhappily for the
poor woman, her body floated, though her head re-
mained under water. The experiment was made
three times with the same effect. The cry to
hang or drown the witch then became general ;
and as she lay half dead on the bank, they loaded
the wretch with reproaches, and hardly forbore
blows. A single humane bystander took her
part, and exposed himself to rough usage ee
so. Luckily one of the mob themselves at lengt
suggested the additional experiment of weighing
the witch against the Church Bible. The friend
of humanity caught at this means of escape, sup-
porting the proposal by the staggering argument,
that the Scripture, being the work of God him-
self, must outweigh necessarily all the operations
or vassals of the deyil. The reasoning was re-
ceived as conclusive, the more readily as it promi-

272 LETTERS ON

sed anew species ofamusement. The woman was
then weighed against a Church Bible of twelve
pounds jockey weight, and as she was consider-
ably preponderant, was dismissed with honour.
But many of the mob counted her acquittal irre-
gular, and would have had the poor dame drown-
ed or hanged on the result of her ducking, as the
more authentic species of trial.

At length asimilar piece of inhumanity, which
had a very different conclusion, led to the final
abolition of the statute of James L, as affording
countenance for such brutal proceedings. An
aged pauper, named Osborne, and his wife, who
resided near Tring, in Staffordshire, fell under
the suspicion of the mob on account of suppo-
sed witchcraft. The overseers of the poor, un-
derstanding that the rabble entertained a pur-
pose of swimming these infirm creatures, which
indeed they had expressed in a sort of procla-
mation, endeavoured to oppose their purpose by
securing the unhappy couple in the vestry-room,
which they barricaded. They were unable, how-
ever, to protect them in the manner they intend.
ed. Themob forced the door, seized the accused,
and with ineffable brutality continued dragging
the wretches through a pool of water till the wo-
man lost her life. A brute in human form, who
had superintended the murder, went among the
spectators, and requested money for the sport he
had shown them! The life of the other victim was
with great difficulty saved. Three men wei
tried for their share in this inhuman action, Only
one of them, named Colley, was condemned an
hanged, When he came to execution, the rabble,

DEMONOLOGY AND WITCHCRAFT. 273

instead of crowding round the gallows as usual,
stood at a distance, and abused those who were
putting to death, they said, an honest fellow for
ridding the parish of an accursed witch. This abo-
minable murder was committed 30th July, 1751.

The repetition of such horrors, the proneness
of the people to so cruel and heart-searing a super-
stition, was traced by the legislature to its source,
namely, the yet unabolished statute of James I.
Accordingly, by the 9th George II. cap. 5, that
odious law, so long the object of horror to all an-
cient and poverty-stricken females inthekingdom,
was abrogated, and all criminal procedure on the
subject of sorcery or witchcraft discharged in fu-
ture throughout Great Britain ; reserving for such
as should pretend to the skill of fortune-tellers,
discoverers of stolen goods or the like, the punish-
ment of the correction-house, as due to rogues
and vagabonds. Since that period, witchcraft has
been little heard of in England, and although the
belief in its existence has, in remote places, sur-
vived the law that recognised the evidence of the
crime, and assigned its punishment—yet such faith
is gradually becoming forgotten since the rabble
have been deprived of all pretext to awaken it by
their own riotous proceedings. Some rare instan-
ces have occurred of attempts similar to that for
which Colley suffered; and I obserye one is pre-
served in that curious Register of knowledge,
Mr Hone’s Popular Amusements, from which it
appears, that as late as the end of last century
this brutality was practised, though happily with-
out loss of life.

The Irish statute against witchcraft still ex-

s

274 LETTERS ON

ists, as it would seem. Nothing occurred in that
kingdom which recommended its being formally
annulled; but it is considered as obsolete, and
should so wild a thing be attempted in the pre-
sent day, no procedure, it is certain, would now
be permitted to lie upon it.

If any thing were wanted to confirm the gene-
ral proposition, that the epidemic terror of witch-
craft increases and becomes general in proportion
to the increase of prosecutions against witches, it
would be sufficient to quote certain extraordinary
occurrences in New England. Only a brief ac-
count can be here given of the dreadful halluci-
nation under which the colonists of that province
were for a time deluded and oppressed by a
strange contagious terror, and how suddenly and
singularly it was cured, even by its own excess ;
but it is too strong evidence of the imaginary
character of this hideous disorder, to be altoge-
ther suppressed.

New England, as is well known, was peopled
mainly by emigrants who had been disgusted with
the government of Charles I. in church-and state,
previous to the great Civil War. Many of the
more wealthy settlers were Presbyterians and
Calvinists ; others, fewer in number, and less in-
fluential from their fortune, were Quakers, Ana-
baptists, or members of the other sects who were
included under the general name of Independ-
ents. The Calvinists brought with them the same
zeal for religion and strict morality which every-
where distinguished them. Unfortunately they
were not wise according to their zeal, but enter-
tained a proneness to believe in supernatural and

DEMONOLOGY AND WITCHCRAFT. 275

direct personal intercourse between the devil and
his vassals, an error to which, as we have endea-
voured to show, their brethren in Europe had,
from the beginning, been peculiarly subject. In
a country imperfectly cultivated, and where the
partially improved spots were embosomed in in-
accessible forests, inhabited by numerous tribes of
savages, it was natural that a disposition to super-
stition should rather gain than lose ground, and
that to other dangers and horrors with which they
were surrounded, the colonists should have added
fears of the devil, not merely as the Evil Principle
tempting human nature to sin, and thus endan-
gering our salvation, but as combined with sor-
cerers and witches to inflict death and torture
upon children and others.

The first case which I observe, was that of four
children of a person called John Goodwin, a ma-
son. The eldest, a girl, had quarrelled with the
laundress of the family about some linen -which
was amissing. The mother of the laundress, an
ignorant, testy, and choleric old Irishwoman,
scolded the accuser; and shortly after, the elder
Goodwin, her sister, and two brothers, were sei-
zed with such strange diseases, that all their neigh-
bours concluded they were bewitched. They con-
ducted themselves as those supposed to suffer
under maladies created by such influence were ac-
customed to do. They stiffened their necks so
hard at one time that the joints could not be
moved ; at another time their necks were so flex-
ible and supple, that it seemed the bone was dis-
solved. They had violent convulsions, in which
their jaws snapped with the force of a spring-

276 LETTERS ON

trap set for vermin. Their limbs were curiously
coutorted, and to those who had a taste for the
marvellous, seemed entirely dislocated and dis-
placed. Amid these distortions, they cried out
against the poor old woman, whose name was
Glover, alleging that she was in presence with
them adding to their torments. The miserable
Trishwoman, who hardly could speak the Eng-
lish language, repeated her Pater Noster and
Ave Maria like a good Catholic; but there were
some words which she had forgotten. She was
therefore supposed to be unable to pronounce the
whole consistently and correctly—and condemned
and executed accordingly. 33
But the children of Goodwin found the trade
they were engaged in to be too profitable to be
laid aside, and the eldest, in particular, conti-
nued all the external signs of witchcraft and
possession, Some of these were excellently cal-
culated to flatter the self-opinion and prejudices
of the Calvinist ministers, by whom she was at-
tended, and accordingly bear in their very front
the character of studied and voluntary imposture,
The young woman, acting, as was supposed, un-
der the influence of the deyil, read a Quaker
treatise with ease and apparent satisfaction ;—
but a book written against the poor inoffensive
Friends, the devil would not allow his victim to
touch, She could look on a Church of England
Prayer-book, and read the portions of Scripture
which it contains, without difficulty or impedi-
ment ;—but the spirit which possessed her threw
her into fits if she attempted to read the same
Scriptures from the Bible, as if the awe which

DEMONOLOGY AND WITCHCRAFT. 277

it is supposed the fiends entertain for holy writ,
depended, not on the meaning of the words, but
the arrangement of the page, and the type in
which they were printed. ‘This singular species
of flattery was designed to captivate the clergy-
man through his professional opinions ;—others
were more strictly personal. The afflicted damsel
seems to have been somewhat of the humour of
the Inamorata of Messrs Smack, Pluck, Catch,
and Company, and had, like her, merry as well as
melancholy fits. She often imagined that her at-
tendant spirits brought her a, handsome pony to
ride off with them to their rendezvous. On such
occasions she made a spring upwards, as if to
mount her horse, and then, still seated on her
chair, mimicked with dexterity and agility the
motions of the animal pacing, trotting, and gal-
loping, like a child on the nurse’s knee; but
when she cantered in this manner up stairs, she
affected inability to enter the clergyman’s study,
and when she was pulled into it by force, used
to become quite well, and stand up as a rational
being. ““ Reasons were given for this,” says the
simple minister, “ that seem more kind than
true.” Shortly after this, she appears to have
treated the poor divine with a species of sweet-
ness and attention, which gave him greater
embarrassment than her former violence. She
used to break in upon him at his studies to im-
portune him to come down stairs, and thus ad-
vantaged doubtless the kingdom of Satan by the
interruption of his pursuits. At length the Good-
wins were, or appeared to be, cured. But the
example had been given and caught, and the

278 LETTERS ON

blood of poor Dame Glover, which had been the
introduction to this tale of a hobby-horse, was to
be the forerunner of new atrocities, and fearfully
more general follies.

This scene opened by the illness of two girls,
a daughter and niece of Mr Parvis, the minister
of Salem, who fell under an affliction similar to
that of the Goodwins. Their mouths were stop-
ped, their throats choked, their limbs racked,
thorns were stuck into their flesh, and pins were
ejected from their stomachs. An Indian and his
wife, servants of the family, endeavouring, by
some spell of their own, to discover by whom
the fatal charm had been imposed on their mas-
ter’s children, drew themselves under suspicion,
and were hanged. The judges and juries paw
severed, encouraged by the discovery of these
poor Indians’ guilt, and hoping they might thus
expel from the colony the authors of such prac-
tices. They acted, says Mather, the historian,
under a conscientious wish to do justly; but the
cases of witchcraft and possession increased as if
they were transmitted by contagion, and the
same sort of spectral evidence being received
which had occasioned the condemnation of the In-
dian woman, Titu, became generally fatal. The
afflicted persons failed not to see the spectres, as
they were termed, of the persons by whom they
were tormented. Against this species of evidence
no alibi could be offered, because it was admitted,
as we have said elsewhere, that the real persons of
the accused were not there present; and every
thing rested upon the assumption that the afflicted
persons were telling the truth, since their evidence

DEMONOLOGY AND WITCHCRAFT. 279

could not be redargued. These spectres were
generally represented as offering their victims a
book, on signing which they would be freed from
their torments. Sometimes the devil appeared
in person, and added his own eloquence to move
the afflicted persons to consent.

At first, as seems natural enough, the poor
and miserable alone were involved; but presently,
when such evidence was admitted as incontro-
vertible, the afflicted began to see the spectral
appearances of persons of higher condition, and
of irreproachable lives, some of whom were ar-
rested, some made their escape, while several
were executed. The more that suffered, the
greater became the number of afflicted persons,
and the wider and the more numerous were the
denunciations against supposed witches. The
accused were of all ages. A child of five years
old was indicted by some of the afflicted, who
imagined they saw this juvenile wizard active in
tormenting them, and appealed to the mark of
little teeth on their bodies, where they stated
it had bitten them. A poor dog was also hang-
ed, as having been alleged to be busy in this in-
fernal persecution. These gross insults on com-
mon reason occasioned a revulsion in public feel-
ing, but not till many lives had been sacrificed.
By this means nineteen men and women were
executed, besides a stout-hearted man, named
Cory, who refused to plead, and was accord-
ingly pressed to death, according to the old
law. On this horrible occasion a circumstance
took place disgusting to humanity, which must
-yet be told, to show how superstition can steel

280 LETTERS ON

the heart of a man against the misery of his fel-
low-creature. The dying man, in the mortal
agony, thrust out his tongue, which the Sheriff
crammed with his cane back again into his mouth.
Eight persons were condemned, besides those
who had actually suffered ; and no less than two
hundred were in prison and under examination. ;
Men began then to ask, whether the devil might
not artfully deceive the afflicted into the aecusa-
tion of good and innocent persons, by presenting
witches and fiends in the resemblance of blameless
persons, as engaged in the tormenting of their dis-
eased countryfolk. This argument was by no
means inconsistent with the belief in witchcraft,
and was the more readily listened to on that ac-
count. Besides, men found that no rank or con-
dition could save them from the danger of this
horrible accusation, if they continued to encou-
rage the witnesses in such an unlimited course
as had hitherto been granted tothem. Influen-
ced by these reflections, the settlers awoke as
from a dream, and the voice of the public, which
had so lately demanded vengeance on all who
were suspected of sorcery, began now, on the
other hand, to lament the effusion of blood, under
the strong suspicion that part of it at least had
been innocently and unjustly sacrificed. In Ma-
ther’s own language, which we use as that of a
man deeply convinced of the reality of the crime,
“ experience showed that the more were appre-
hended, the more were still afflicted by Satan,
and the number of confessions increasing, did
but increase the number of the accused, and the .
execution of some made way to the apprehension

DEMONOLOGY AND WITCHCRAFT. 281

of others. For still the afflicted complained of
being tormented by new objects, as the former
were removed, so that some of those that were
concerned grew amazed at the number and con-
dition of those that were accused, and feared that
Satan, by his wiles, had enwrapped innocent per-
sons under the imputation of that crime ; and at
last, as was evidently seen, there must be a stop
put, or the generation of the kingdom of God
would fall under condemnation.”*

The prosecutions were, therefore, suddenly
stopped, the prisoners dismissed, the condemned
pardoned, and even those who had confessed, the
number of whom was very extraordinary, were
free amongst others ; and the author we
ave just quoted thus records the result :—
“ When this prosecution ceased, the Lord so
chained up Satan, that the afflicted grew present-
ly well. The accused were generally quiet, and
for five years there was no such molestation
among us.”

To this it must be added, that the congrega-
tion of Salem compelled Mr Parvis, in whose fa-
mily the disturbance had begun, and who, they
alleged, was the person by whom it was most

* Mather’s Magnalia, book vi. chap. Ixxxii. The zeal-
ous author, however, regrets the general gaol-delivery on
the score of sorcery, and thinks, had the times been calm,
the case might have required a farther investigation, and
that, on the whole, the matter was ended too abruptly.
But, the temper of the times considered, he admits can-
didly, that it is better to act moderately in matters capital,
and to let the guilty escape, than run the risk of destroying
the innocent,

282 LETTERS ON

fiercely driven on in the commencement, to leave
his settlement amongst them. Such of the accused
as had confessed the acts of witchcraft imputed to
them, generally denied and retracted their con-
fessions, asserting them to have been made un-
der fear of torture, influence of persuasion, or
other circumstances exclusive of their free will.
Several of the judges and jurors concerned in the
sentence of those who were executed, published
their penitence for their rashness in convicting
these unfortunate persons ; and one of the judges,
a man of the most importance in the colony, ob-
served, during the rest of his life, the anniversary
of the first execution as a day of solemn fast and
humiliation for his own share in the transaction.
Even the barbarous Indians were struck with
wonder at the infatuation of the English colo-
nists on this occasion, and drew disadvantageous
comparisons between them and the French, among
whom, as they remarked, “ the Great Spirit sends
no witches.”

The system of witchcraft, as believed in Scot-
land, must next claim our attention, as it is dif-
ferent in some respects from that of England,
and subsisted to a later period, and was prosecu-
ted with much more severity.

DEMONOLOGY AND WITCHCRAFT. 283

LETTER IX,

Scottish Trials—Earl of Mar—Lady Glammis— William
Barton— Witches of Auldearne— Their Rites and Charms
—Their Transformation into Hares—Satan’s Severity
towards then—Their Crimes—Sir George Mackenzie's
Opinion of Witchcraft—Instances of Confessions made
by the Accused, in despair, and to avoid future annoyance

and persecution—Examination by Pricking—The Mode

9 Judicial Procedure against. Witches, Nature of the
vidence admissible, opened a door to Accusers,

the Accused no chance of escape—The Superstition of the
Scottish Clergy in King James VI.’s time, led them, like
their Sovereign, to encourage Witch-Prosecutions— Case
of Bessie Graham—Supposed Conspiracy to Shipwreck
James in his Voyage to Denmark—Meetings of the
Witches, and Rites performed to accomplish their oekae
—Trial of Margaret Barclay in 1618— Case of lajor
Weir—Sir John Clerk among the first who declined act-
ing as Commissioner on the Trial of a Witch—Paisley
and Pittenweem Witches—A Prosecution in Caithness
prevented by the Interference of the King’s Advocate in
1718—The Last Sentence of Death for Witchcraft pro-
nounced in Scotland in 1722—Remains of be wks oe
perstition— Case of supposed Witchcraft, ri from

Author's cout teadicioaraitie’ took place so late as

1800.

For many years the Scottish nation had been
remarkable for a credulous belief in witchcraft,
and repeated examples were supplied by the annals
of sanguinary executions on this sad accusation.
Our acquaintance with the slender foundation on
which Boetius and Buchanan reared the early part

284 LETTERS ON

of their histories, may greatly incline us to doubt
whether a king named Duffus ever reigned in
Scotland, and still more, whether he died by the
agency of a gang of witches, who inflicted tor-
ments upon an image made in his name, for the
sake of compassing his death, In the tale of
Macbeth, which is another early instance of De-
monology in Scottish history, the weird-sisters,
who were the original prophetesses, appeared to
the usurper in a dream, and are described as
vole, or sibyls, rather than as witches, though
Shakspeare has stamped the latter character in-
delibly upon them.

One of the earliest real cases of importance
founded upon witchcraft, was, like those of the
Duchess of Gloucester, and others in the sister
country, mingled with an accusation of a political
nature, which, rather than the sorcery, brought
the culprits to their fate. The Earl of Mar, bro-
ther of James III. of Scotland, fell under the
king’s suspicion, for consulting with witches and
sorcerers how to shorten the king’s days. On
such a charge,-very inexplicitly stated, the un-
happy Mar was bled to death in his own lod-
gings, without either trial or conviction ; imme-
diately after which catastrophe, twelve women
of obscure rank, and three or four wizards, or
warlocks as they were termed, were burnt at
Edinburgh, to give a colour to the Earl’s guilt,

In the year 1537, a noble matron fell a victim
to a similar charge. This was Janet Douglas,
Lady Glammis, who, with her son, her second
husband, and several others, stood accused of at-
tempting James's life by poison, with a view to

DEMONOLOGY AND WITCHCRAFT. 285

the restoration of the Douglas family, of which
Lady Glammis’s brother, the Earl of Angus, was
the head. She died much pitied by the people,
who seem to have thought the articles against her
forged for the purpose of taking her life ; her kin-
dred, and very name, being so obnoxious to the
King.

Previous to this lady's execution, there would
appear to have been but few prosecuted to death
on the score of witchcraft, although the want of
the Justiciary records of that period leaves us in
uncertainty. But in the end of the fifteenth and
beginning of the sixteenth centuries, when such
charges grew general over Europe, cases of the
kind occurred very often in Scotland, and, as we
have already noticed, were sometimes of a peculiar
character. There is, indeed, a certain monotony
in most tales of the kind. The yassals are usually
induced to sell themselves at a small price to the
Author of Ill, who, having commonly to do with
women, drives a very hard bargain. On the con-
trary, when he was pleased to enact the female
on a similar occasion, he brought his gallant, one
William Barton, a fortune of no less than fifteen
pounds ; which, even supposing it to have been the
Scottish denomination of coin, was a very liberal
endowment, compared with his niggardly conduct
towards the fair sex on such an occasion. Neither
did he pass false coin on this occasion, but, on the
contrary, generously gaye Barton a merk, to kee
the fifteen pounds whole. In observing on Satan’s
conduct in this matter, Master George Sinclair
observes, that it is fortunate the Enemy is but
seldom permitted to bribe so high (as L.15 Scots, )

286 LETTERS ON

for were this the case, he might find few men or
women capable of resisting his munificence. I
look upon this as one of the most severe reflec-
tions on our forefathers’ poverty which is extant.

In many of the Scottish witches’ trials, as to
the description of Satan’s Domdaniel, and the
Sabbath which he there celebrates, the northern
superstition agrees with that of England. But
some of the confessions depart from the mono-
tony of repetition, and add some more fanciful
circumstances than occur in the general case.
Isobel Gowdie’s confession, already mentioned,
is extremely minute, and some part of it at least
may be quoted, as there are other passages not
very edifying. The witches of Auldearne, ac-
cording to this penitent, were so numerous, that
they were told off into squads, or covines, as they
were termed, to each of which were appointed
two officers. One of these was called the Maiden
of the Covine, and was usually, like Tam o’ Shan-
ter’s Nannie, a girl of personal attractions, whom
Satan placed beside himself, and treated with a
particular attention, which greatly provoked the
spite of the old hags, who felt themselves insulted
by the preference.* When assembled, they dug
up graves, and possessed themselves of the car-

* This word Covine seems to signify a subdivision, or
squad. ‘The tree near the front of an ancient castle was
called the Covine tree, probably because the Lord received his
company there.

“ He is Lord of the hunting horn,
And King of the Covine tree;

He’s well loo’d in the western waters,
But best of his ain minnie.”

DEMONOLOGY AND WITCHCRAFT. 287

easses, (of unchristened infants in particular,)
whose joints and members they used in their ma-
gic unguents and salves. When they desired to
secure for their own use the crop of some neigh-
bour, they made a pretence of ploughing it with
a yoke of paddocks. These foul creatures drew
the plough, which was held by the devil himself.
The plough harness and soams were of quicken

s, the sock and coulter were made out of a
riglen’s horn, and the covine attended on the
operation, praying the devil to transfer to them
the fruit of the ground so traversed, and leave
the proprietors nothing but thistles and briers.
The witches’ sports, with their elfin archery, I
have already noticed, (page 162.) They entered
the house of the Earl of Murray himself, and
such other mansions as were not fenced against
them by vigil and prayer, and feasted on the pro-
visions they found there.

As these witches were the countrywomen of
the weird sisters in Macbeth, the reader may be
desirous to hear some of their spells, and of the
poetry by which they were accompanied and en-
forced. They used to hash the flesh of an un-
christened child, mixed with that of dogs and
sheep, and place it in the house of those whom
they devoted to destruction in body or goods,

saying, or singing,—

“ We put this intill this hame,

In our lord the Deyil’s name;

The first hands that handle thee,

Burn’d and scalded may they be !

We will destroy houses and hald,

With the sheep and nolt into the fauld ;
6

288 LETTERS ON

And little sall come to the fore,
Of all the rest of the little store!” .

. Metamorphoses were, according to Isobel, very
common among them, and the forms of crows,
eats, hares, and other animals, were on such oc-
casions assumed. In the hare shape Isobel her-
self had a bad adventure. She had been sent by
the devil to Auldearne, in that favourite disguise,
with some message to her neighbours, but had
the misfortune to meet Peter Pape of Killhill’s
servants going to labour, having his hounds with
them. The hounds sprung on the disguised witch,
« And I,” says Isobel, “ run a very long time,
but being hard pressed, was forced to take to
my own house, the door being open, and there
took refuge behind a chest.” But the hounds
came in, and took the other side of the chest, so
that Isobel only escaped by getting into another
house, and gaining time to say the disenchanting
rhyme :—

‘ Hare, hare, God send thee care!

T am in a hare’s likeness now ;

But I shall be woman even now—

Hare, hare, God send thee care!”

. Such accidents, she said, were not uncommon,
and the witches were sometimes bitten by the
dogs, of which the marks remained after their
restoration to human shape. But none had been
killed on such oceasions. :

The ceremonial of the Sabbath meetings was
very strict. The foul fiend was very rigid in
exacting the most ceremonious attention from
his votaries, and the title of Lord when addressed

16

\

DEMONOLOGY AND WITCHCRAFT. 289

by them. Sometimes, however, the weird sisters,
when whispering amongst themselves, irreverent-
ly spoke of their sovereign by the name of Black
ia; upon such occasions, the fiend rushed on
them like a schoolmaster who surprises his pupils
in delict, and beat and buffeted them without
merey or discretion, saying, “ I ken weel eneugh
what you are saying of me.” Then might be seen
the various tempers of those whom he command-
ed. Alexander Elder in Earlseat, often fell under
his lord’s displeasure for neglect of duty, and,
being weak and simple, could never defend bhim-
self save with tears, cries, and entreaties for
mercy; but some of the women, according to
Isobel Gowdie’s confession, had more of the spirit
which animated the old dame of Kellyburn Braes.
Margaret Wilson in Auldearne would “ defend
herself finely,” and make her hands save her
head, after the old Scottish manner. Bessie Wil-
son could also speak very crustily with her tongue,
and “ belled the cat’ with the devil stoutly.
The others chiefly took refuge in crying “ pity!
mercy !” and such like, while Satan kept beating
them with wool cards, and other sharp scourges,
without attending to their entreaties or complaints.
There were attendant devils and imps, who ser-
ved the witches. They were usually distinguish-
ed by their liveries, which were sad-dun, grass-
green, sea-green, and yellow. The witches were
taught to call these imps by names, some of
which might belong to humanity, while others
had a diabolical sound. These were Robert the
Jakis, Saunders the Red Reaver, Thomas the
Feary, Swein, an old Scandinavian Duerg pro-
t

290 LETTERS ON

bably ; the Roaring Lion, Thief ‘of Hell,) Wait-
upon-Herself, MacKeeler, Robert the Rule,
Hendrie Craig, and Rorie. These names, odd and
uncouth enough, are better imagined: ‘at least.
than those which Hopkins contrived for the imps
which he discovered—such as Pyewacket, Peck-
in-the-Crown, Sack-and-Sugar, News, Vinegar-
Tom, and Grizell Greedigut, the broad vulgarity
of which epithets shows what a flat imagination he
brought to support his impudent fictions.

The Devil, who commanded the fair sister-
hood, being fond of mimicking the forms of the
Christian church, used to rebaptize the witches
with their blood, and in his own great name.
The |proud-stomached: Margaret’ Wilson, who
scorned to take a blow unrepaid, even from Satan
himself, was called Pickle-nearest-the- Wind; her
compeer, Bessie Wilson, was Throw-the-Corn-
yard; Elspet Nishe’s was Bessie Bald; Bessie
Hay’s nickname was, Able-and-Stout, and Jane
Mairten, the Maiden of the Covine, was called
Ower-the-Dike-with-it.

Isobel took upon herself, and imputed to her
sisters, as ars mentioned, the death of sundry
persons shot with elf-arrows, because they had
emitted to bless themselves as the aerial flight of
the hags swept past them.* She had herself the
temerity to shoot at the Laird of Park as he was
riding through a. ford, but missed him, through
the influence of the running stream perhaps, for
which she thanks God in her confession ; and
adds, that at the time, she received a great cuff

* Seep. 162, -  . : , 4

DEMONOLOGY AND WITCHCRAFT. 291

from’ Bessie Hay for her awkwardness. They
devoted the male children of this gentleman, (of
the well-known family of Gordon of Park, I pre-
sume, )-to wasting illness, by the following lines,
placing at the same time in the fire figures com-
posed of clay mixed with paste, to represent the
object :-— nilYn

** We put this water amongst this meal, \| »
For long dwining* and ill heal ;
We put it in into the fire,

‘Fo burn them up stook and stour.}
That they be burned with our will,
Like any stikkle } in a kiln,”

™

Such was the singular confession of Isobel
Gowdie, made voluntarily, it would seem, and
without compulsion of any kind, judicially au-
thenticated by the subscription of the notary,
clergymen, and gentlemen present; adhered to
after their separate diets, as they are called, of
examination, and containing no variety or con-
tradiction in its details. Whatever might be her
state of mind in other respects, she seems to have
been. perfectly conscious of the perilous conse-
quence of her disclosures to her own person. “I
do not deserve,” says she, “ to be seated here’ at
ease and unharmed, but rather to be stretched on
an iron rack; nor can my crimes be atoned for;
were I to be drawn asunder by wild horses.”

. It only remains to suppose, that this wretched
-') "®' pining.
+ We should read perhaps, “ limb and lire.”
$ Stubble,

292 LETTERS ON

‘creature was under the dominion of some pecu-
liar species of lunacy, to which a full perusal of
her confession might perhaps guide a medical per-
son of judgment and experience. Her case is
interesting, as throwing upon the rites and cere-
monies of the Scottish witches, a light which we
seek in vain elsewhere. rev
Other unfortunate persons were betrayed to
their own reproof by other means than the derange-
ment of mind, which seems to have operated on
Isobel Gowdie. Some, as we have seen, endea-
voured to escape from the charge of witchcraft,
by admitting an intercourse with the fairy people;
an excuse which was never admitted as relevant.
Others were subjected to cruel tortures, by which
our ancestors thought the guilty might be brought
to confession, but which far more frequently
compelled the innocent to bear evidence against
themselves. On this subject the celebrated Sir
George Mackenzie, “ that noble wit of Scot-
land,” as he is termed by Dryden, has some most
judicious reflections, which we shall endeavour
to abstract, as the result of the experience of one,
who, in his capacity of Lord Advocate, had often
occasion to conduct witch-trials, and who, not
doubting the existence of the crime, was of opi-
nion, that, on account of its very horror, it re-
quired the clearest and most strict probation.
He first insists on the great improbability of
the Fiend, without riches to bestow, and avowed-
ly subjected to a higher power, being able to en-
list such numbers of recruits, and the little ad-
vantage which he himself would gain by doing so.
But, 2dly, says Mackenzie, “ the persons ordina-

DEMONOLOGY AND WITCHCRAFT. 293

rily accused of this crime are poorignorant men, or
else women, who understand not the nature of
what they are accused of ; and many mistake their
own fears and apprehensions for witchcraft, of
which I shall give two instances. One, of a poor
weaver, who, after he had confessed witcheraft,
being asked how he saw the devil, made answer,
‘ Like flies dancing about the candle.’ Another,
of a woman, who asked seriously, when she was
accused, if a woman might be a witch and not
know it? And it is dangerous that persons, of all
others the most simple, should be tried for a
crime of all others the most mysterious. 3dly,
These poor creatures, when they are defamed,
become so confounded with fear, and the close
prison in which they are kept, and so starved for
want of meat and drink, either of which wants
is enough to disarm the strongest reason, that’
hardly wiser and more serious people than they
would escape distraction ; and when men are con-
founded with fear and apprehension, they will
imagine things the most ridiculous and absurd,’ —
of which instances are given. 4thly, “ Most of
these poor creatures are tortured by their keepers,
who, being persuaded they do God good service,
think it their duty to vex and torment poor pri-
soners delivered up to them, as rebels to heaven
and enemies to men; and I know,” (continues Sir
George, ) “ ex certissima scientia, that most of all
that ever were taken were tormented in this man-
ner, and this usage was the ground of all their
confession ; and albeit the poor miscreants cannot
prove this usage, the actors being the only wit-
nesses, yet the judge should be jealous of it, as

294 LETTERS ON

that which did at first elicit the confession, and
for fear of which they dare not retract it.” 5thly,
This learned author gives us an instance, how
these unfortunate creatures might be reduced ‘to
conféssion, by the very infamy which the accusa~
tion cast upon them, and which was sure to follow;
condemning them for life to a state of necessity,
misery, and suspicion, such as any person of re-
putation would willingly exchange for ‘a short

death, however painful. ee
“I went when I was a Justice-deput to exa-
mine some women who had confessed judicially;
and one of them, who was a silly creature; told
me under secresie, that she had not confest be-’
cause she was guilty, but being a poor creature
who wrought for her meat, and being defamed for
a witch, she knew she would starve, for no person
thereafter would either give her meat or lodging,
and that all men would beat her and hound dogs
at’ her, and that therefore she desired to be out
of the world ; whereupon she wept most bitterly,
and upon her knees called God to witness to what
she said. Another told me, that she was afraid
the devil would challenge aright to her, after she’
was said to be his servant, and would haunt her,
as the minister said, when he was desiring her to
confess, and therefore she desired to die. “And
really ministers are oft times indiscreet in their
zeal to have poor creatures to confess in this; and
Irecommend to judges, that the wisest ministers
should be sent to them, and those who are sent
should be cautious in this particular.”* RA
ushe

* Mackenzie’s Criminal Law, p. 45.0 9

DEMONOLOGY AND WITCHCRAFT. 295

-, As a corollary to this affecting story, I may
quote the case of a,woman in Lauder jail, who
lay there with other females on a charge of witch-
craft... Her companions in prison were adjudged
to die, and she too had, by a confession as full
as, theirs, given herself up as guilty. She, there-
fore, sent for the minister of the town, and en-
treated to be put to death with the others who
had. been appointed to, suffer upon the next Mon-
day. The clergyman, however, as well as others,
had adopted a strong persuasion that this confes-
sion was made up in the pride of her heart, for
the destruction of her own life, and had no foun-
dation in truth. We give the result in the mi-
nister’s words :—

. © Therefore much pains was taken on her, by
ministers and others, on Saturday, Sunday, and
Monday morning, that she might resile from that
confession, which was suspected to be but a tempt-
ation of the devil, to destroy both her soul and
body ; yea, it was charged home upon her by the
ministers, that there was just ground of jealousy
that her confession was not sincere, and she was
charged before the Lord to declare the truth, and
not to take her blood upon her own head. Yet
she, stiffly adhered to what she had said, and cried
always to be put away with the rest. Where-
upon, on Monday morning, being called before
the judges, and confessing before them what she
had said, she was found guilty, and condemned
to die with the rest that same day. Being car-
ried forth to the place of execution, she remained
silent during the first, second, and third prayer,
and then perceiving that there remained no more,

296 LETTERS ON

but to rise and go to the stake, she lifted up her
body, and with a loud voice cried out, ‘ Now, all
you that see me this day, know that I am now to
die as a witch by my own confession, and I free
all men, especially the ministers and magistrates,
of the guilt of my blood. I take it wholly upon
myself—my blood be upon my own head ; and as
I must make answer to the God of heaven pre-
sently, I declare I am as free of witcheraft as
any child; but being delated by a malicious wo-
man, and put in prison under the name of a
witch, disowned by my husband and friends, and
seeing no ground of hope of my coming out of
prison, or ever coming in credit again, through
the temptation of the devil I made up that con-
fession, on purpose to destroy my own life, being
weary of it, and choosing rather to die than live;
—and so died. Which lamentable story, as it
did then astonish all the spectators, none of which
could restrain themselves from tears ; so it may be
to all a demonstration of Satan’s subtlety, whose
design is still to destroy all, partly by tempting
many to presumption, and some others to de-
spair. These things to be of truth, are attested
by an eye and ear-witness who is yet alive, a
faithful minister of the gospel.” * It is strange
the inference does not seem to have been dedu-
ced, that as one woman, out of very despair, re-
nounced her own life, the same might have been
the case in many other instances, wherein the
eonfessions of the accused constituted the prin-
cipal, if not sole, evidence of the guilt.

“ Sinelair’s Satan’s Invisible World Discovered, p. 43. -

DEMONOLOGY AND WITCHCRAFT. 297

One celebrated mode of detecting witches, and
torturing them at the same time, to draw forth
confession, was, by running pins into their body,
on pretence of discovering the devil’s stigma, or
mark, which was said to be inflicted by him upon
all his vassals, and to be insensible to pain. This
species of search, the practice of the infamous
Hopkins, was in Scotland reduced to a trade; and
the young witchfinder was allowed to torture
the accused party, as if in exercise of a lawful
calling, although Sir George Mackenzie stigma-
tises it as a horrid imposture. I observe in the
Collections of Mr Pitcairn, that, at the trial of
Janet Peaston of Dalkeith, the magistrates and
ministers of that market town caused John Kin-
caid of Tranent, the common pricker, to exer-
cise his craft upon her, “ who found two marks
of what he called the devil’s making, and which

- appeared indeed to be so, for she could not feel
the pin when it was put into either of the said
marks, nor did they (the marks) bleed when they
were taken out again; and when she was asked
where she thought the pins were put in, she
pointed toa part of her body distant from the real
place. They were pins of three inches in length.”

Besides the fact, that the persons of old peo-
ple especially sometimes contain spots void of
sensibility, there is also room to believe that the
professed prickers used a pin, the point, or lower
part of which was, on being pressed down, sheath-.
ed in the upper, which was hollow for the pur-
pose, and that which appeared to enter the body
did not pierce it at all. But, were it worth while
to dwell on a subject so ridiculous, we might re-

298 LETTERS ON

collect, that in so terrible an agony of shamé as
is likely to convulse a human being under sucha
trial, and such personal insults, the blood is apt’
to return to the heart, and a slight wound, as with’
a pin, may be inflicted, without being followed
by blood. In the latter end of the seventeenth’
century, this childish, indecent, and brutal prac-
tice, began to be called by its right name. Foun-
tainhall has recorded, that in 1678 the Privy’
Council received the complaint of a poor woman,’

who had been abused by a country magistrate)!
and one of those impostors called prickers. They’
expressed high displeasure against the presump~
tion of the parties complained against, and treated:
the pricker as a common cheat.*

From this and other instances, it appears ‘that
the predominance of the superstition of witch-
craft, and the proneness to persecute those ac+
cused of such practices in Scotland, were in--
creased by the too great readiness of subordi-
nate judges to interfere in matters which were;
in fact, beyond their jurisdiction. The Supreme:
Court of Justiciary was that in which the cause
properly and exclusively ought to) have been
tried. But, in practice, each inferior judge’ in
the country, the pettiest bailie in the most trifling
burgh, the smallest and most ignorant baron of
a rude territory, took it on him to arrest, impri-)
son, and examine, in which examinations, as we’
have already seen, the accused suffered the gross
est injustice. The copies of these examinations,
made ap of extorted sper jer or the pera

* Fountainhall’s Decisions, yol. in p. 15,

DEMONOLOGY AND WITCHCRAFT. 299

of inhabile witnesses, were all that were transmit-
ted to the Privy Council, who were to direct the
future mode of procedure. Thus no creature was
secure against the malice or folly of some —_
matory accusation, if there was.a timid or su
stitious judge, though of the meanest dehgndlings
tion, to be found within the district. -

But, secondly, it was the course of the Privs
Council to appoint commissions of the peers
of the country, and particularly of the clergymen,’
though not likely from their education to be freed
from general prejudice, and peculiarly liable to be
affected by the clamour of the neighbourhood
against the delinquent. Now, as it is well known
that such a commission could not be granted ina
case of murder in the county where the erime was
charged, there seems no good reason why) the
trial of witches, so liable to excite the passions,
should not have been uniformly tried by a court
whose rank and condition secured them from the
suspicion of partiality. But our ancestors ar-
ranged it otherwise, and it was the consequence
that such commissioners very seldom, by
ting the persons brought before them, lost an on
portunity of destroying a witch.

Neither must it be forgotten, that the proof
led in support of the prosecution, was of a kind
very unusual in jurisprudence. The lawyers ad-
mitted as evidence what they called damnum mi-
natum, et malum secutum—some mischief, that
is to say, following close upon a threat, or wish
of revenge, uttered by the supposed witch, which,
though it might be attributed to the: most ¢ natural

300 LETTERS ON

course of events, was supposed necessarily to be
in consequence of the menaces of the accused.

Sometimes this vague species of evidence was
still more loosely adduced, and allegations of dan-
ger threatened, and mischief ensuing, were ad-
mitted, though the menaces had not come from
the accused party herself. On 10th June, 1661, as
John Stewart, one of a party of stout burghers of
Dalkeith, appointed to guard an old woman, eall-
ed Christian Wilson, from that town to Niddrie,
was cleaning his gun, he was slyly questioned by
Janet Cocke, another confessing witch, who pro-
bably saw his courage was not entirely constant,
“ What would you think, if the devil raise a whirl-
wind, and take her from you on the road to-mor-
row ?” Sure enough, on their journey to Niddrie,
the party actually were assailed by a sudden gust
of wind, (not avery uncommon event in that cli-
mate,) which scarce permitted the valiant guard
to keep theirfeet, while the miserable prisoner was
blown into a pool of water, and with difficulty
raised again. There is some ground to hope that
this extraordinary evidence was not admitted
upon the trial. i

There is a story told of an old wizard, whose
real name was Alexander Hunter, though he was
more generally known by the nickname of Hat-
teraick, which it had pleased the devil to confer
upon him, This man had for some time adopted
the credit of being a conjurer, and curing the dis-
eases of man and beast, by spells and charms. One
summer's day, on a green hill-side, the devil ap-
peared to him in shape of a grave “ Mediciner,”.
addressing him thus, roundly,—« Sandie, you have

DEMONOLOGY AND WITCHCRAFT. 301

too long followed my trade without acknowledg-
ing me for a master. You must now enlist with
with me, and become my servant, and I will teach
you your trade better.” Hatteraick consented to
the proposal, and we shall let the Rev. Mr George
Sinclair tell the rest of the tale.

“ After this, he grew very famous through the
country for his charming and curing of diseases
in men and beasts, and turned a vagrant fellow
like a jockie,* gaining meal, and flesh, and money
by his charms, such was the ignorance of many
at that time. Whatever house he came to, none
durst refuse Hatteraick an alms, rather for his ill
than his good. One day he came to the yait (gate)
of Samuelston, when some friends after dinner
were going to horse. A young gentleman, bro-
ther to the lady, seeing him, switcht him about the
ears, saying,—‘* You warlock carle, what have you
to do here?’ Whereupon the fellow goes away
grumbling, and was overheard to say, ‘ You shall
dear buy this, ere it be long.’ This was dam-
num minatum. The young gentleman convey-
ed his friends a far way off, and came home that
way again, where he supped. After supper, ta-
king his horse and crossing Tyne water to go
home, he rides through a shady piece of ahaugh,
commonly called Allers, and the evening being
somewhat dark, he met with some persons there
that begat a dreadful consternation in him, which
for the most part, he would never reveal. This
was malum secutum. When he came home, the
servants observed terror and fear in his counte-

* Or Scottish wandering beggar.

302 LETTERS ON

nance. The next'day he became distracted; and
was bound for several days. \ His sister, the Lady
Samuelston, hearing of it, was heard say, ‘ Sure-
ly that knave Hatteraick is the cause of his trou-
ble; call for him im all haste.’’ When he had come
to her, ‘ Sandie,’ says she, ‘ what is this you have
done to my brother William ?’— I told him,’
says he, ‘I should make him repent of his striking
me at the yait, lately.’ She, giving the rogue fair
words, and promising him his pockfull of meal,
with beef and cheese, persuaded the fellow to cure
him again. He undertook the business; ‘but F
must first,’ says he, ‘have one of his sarks’ (shirts),
which was ‘soon gotten. What pranks he plaid
with it cannot be known; but within a short
while the gentleman recovered his health. When
Hatteraick came to receive his wages, he told‘the
lady, ‘ Your brother William shall quickly go off
the country, but shall never return.’ She, know-
ing the fellow’s prophecies to hold true, caused
the brother to makea disposition to her of all his
patrimony, to the defrauding of his younger bro-
ther, George. After that this warlock had abu-
sed the country for a long time, he was at last
apprehended at Dunbar, and brought into Edin-
burgh, and burnt upon the Castlehill.”*

Now, if Hatteraick was really put to death on
such evidence, it is worth while to consider what
was itsrealamount. A hot-tempered s ri

young gentleman horsewhips a beggar of ill fame
for loitering about the gate of his sister’s house:
The beggar grumbles, as any man would.) The

* Sinclair’s Satan’s Invisible World Discovered, p. 98.)

DEMONOLOGY AND WITCHCRAFT. 303

oung.man, riding in the night, and probably in
iquor, through.a dark shady — is frightened
by, he would. not, and probably could not, tell
what, and has.a fever-fit. His sister employs the
wizard to take off the spell according to his pro-
fession ; and here\is damnum minatum, et malum
secutum, and all legal cause for burning a man to
ashes! The vagrant Hatteraick probably knew
something of the wild young man which might
soon oblige him to leave the country ; and the sel-
fish, Lady Samuelston, learning the probability
of his departure, committed. a fraud which ought
to have rendered her evidence inadmissible. -

Besides these particular disadvantages, to which
the parties.accused of this.crime in Scotland were
necessarily exposed, both in relation to the judi-
cature by which they were:tried, and the evidence
upon which they were convicted, their situation
was rendered intolerable by the detestation in
which they were held by all ranks. The gentry
hated them, because the diseases and death of
their relations and children were often imputed
to them; the grossly superstitious vulgar ab-
horred them with still more perfect dread and
loathing. And amongst those natural feelings,
others of a less, pardonable description found
means to shelter themselves. In one case, weare
informed by Mackenzie,.a poor girl was to die
for witcheraft, of whom the real crime was, that
she had attracted too great a share, in the lady’s
opinion, of the attention of the laird.
. Having thus given some reasons why the pro-
secutions for witchcraft in Scotland were so nu-.
merous and fatal, we return to the general his~

304 LETTERS ON

tory of the trials recorded from the reign of James
V. to the Union of the kingdoms. Through the
reign of Queen Mary these trials for sorcery be-
came numerous, and the crime was subjected to
heavier punishment by the 73d act of her 9th
Parliament. But when James VI. approached
to years of discretion, the extreme anxiety which
he displayed to penetrate more deeply into mys-
teries which others had regarded as a very mill-
stone of obscurity, drew still larger attention to
the subject. The sovereign had exhausted his ta-
lents of investigation on the subject of witch-
craft, and credit was given to all who acted in de-
fence of the opinions of the reigning prince. This
natural tendency to comply with the opinions of
the sovereign, was much augmented by the dispo-
sition of the Kirk to the same sentiments. We
have already said that these venerable persons en-
tertained, with good faith, the general erroneous
belief respecting witcheraft,—regarding it indeed
as a crime which affected their own order more
nearly than others in the state, since, especially
called to the service of heaven, they were pecu-
liarly bound to oppose the incursions of Satan. The
works which remain behind them show, among
better things, an unhesitating belief in what were
called by them “ special providences ;” and this
was equalled, at least, by their credulity as to the
actual interference of evil spirits in the affairs of
this world. They applied these principles of belief
to the meanest causes. A horse falling lame was a
snare of the devil, to keep the good clergyman
from preaching ; the arrival of a skilful farrier
was accounted a special providence, to defeat the

DEMONOLOGY AND WITCHCRAFT. 305

purpose of Satan. This was, doubtless, in a ge-
neral sense true, since nothing can happen without
the foreknowledge and will of Heaven; but we
are authorized to believe that the period of su-
pernatural interference has long passed away, and
thatthegreat Creator iscontent to execute his pur-
poses by the operation of those laws which in-
fluence the general course of nature. Our ancient
Scottish divines thought otherwise. Surrounded,
as they conceived themselves, by the snares and
temptations of hell, and relying on the aid of
Heaven, they entered into war with the kingdom
of Satan, as the crusaders of old invaded the land
of Palestine, with the same confidence in the jus-
tice of their cause, and similar indifference con-
cerning the feelings of those whom they accounted
the enemies of God and man. We have already
seen that even the conviction that awoman was in-
nocent of the crime of witchcraft, did not induce a
worthy clergyman to use any effort to withdraw
her from the stake; and in the same collection,*
there occur some observable passages of God's
providence to a godly minister, in giving him
“ full clearness” concerning Bessie Grahame, sus-
pected of witchcraft. The whole detail is a curi-
ous illustration of the spirit of credulity which
well-disposed men brought with them to such in-
vestigations, and how easily the gravest doubts
were removed, rather than a witch should be left
undetected.

* Satan’s Invisible World, by Mr George Sinclair. The
author was Professor of Moral Philosophy in the Univer-
sity of Glasgow, and afterwards minister of Eastwood, in
Renfrewshire. é

wT

306 LETTERS ON

.. Bessie Grahame had: been committed; it would
seem; under suspicions of no-great weight, singé
the minister; after various conferences, found her
defence so:successful, that he actually pitied her
hard usage; and wished for her delivery) from
prison, especially as he doubted whether:a civil
eourt would send her to an assize, or whether
an assize would be disposed to convict her.
While the minister was in this doubt, a fellow.
named Begg was employed.as a skilful pricker;
by whose authority it is not said, he thrust)a
great brass pin up to the head in a wart-on the
woman’s back; which he affirmed to be the devil’s
mark, A commission was granted for trial; but
still the chief gentlemen in the county refused
toact, and the clergyman’s own. doubts were.
far from being removed. This put the worthy
man upon a solemn prayer to God, “ that if he
would find out a way for giving the minister
full clearness of her guilt, he would acknowledge
itvas a singular favour. and mercy.” This, ac-
cording to his idea, was accomplished in the fol-
lowing manner, which he regarded as an answer
to his prayer. One evening the clergyman, with
Alexander Simpson, the kirk-officer, and his own
servant, had visited Bessie in her eell, to urge her
to confession, but in vain. As they stood on the
stair-head behind the door, they heard the prisoner,
whom they had left alone in her place of confine-
ment, discoursing with another person,who useda
low and ghostly tone, which the minister instantly
recognised as the Foul Fiend’s voice. But for this
discovery, we should have been of opinion that
Bessie Grahame talked to herself, as melancholy.
6

DEMONOLOGY AND WITCHCRAFT. 307

and despairing wretches are in the habit of doing.
Butas Alexander Simpson pretended to under-
stand thei sense of what was:said within the cell,
and the minister himself was pretty sure he heard
two voices at the same time, he regarded the over-
hearing this conversation as the answer of the
Deity to his petition—and thenceforth was trou-
bled with no doubts either as to the reasonable-
ness and propriety of his prayer, or the guilt of
Bessie Grahame, though she died obstinate, and
would not confess ; nay, made a most decent and
Christian end, acquitting her judges and jury of
her blood, in respect of the strong delusion under
which they laboured.

Although the ministers, whose opinions were
but too strongly; on this head, in correspondence
with the prevailing superstitions of the people,
nourished, in the early system of church govern-
ment, a considerable desire to secure their own
immunities and privileges as a national chureh,
which failed not at last to be brought into con-
tact with the king’s prerogative; yet, in the
earlier part of his reign, James, when freed from
the influence of such a favourite as the profligate
Stuart, Earl of Arran, was, in his personal qua-
lities, rather acceptable to the clergy of his king-
dom and period. At his departing from Scot-
land, on his romantic expedition to bring home a
consort from Denmark, he very politically .re-
commended to the clergy to contribute all that
lay in their power to assist the civil magistrates,
and preserve the: publie peace of the kingdom.
The king, after his return, acknowledged, with
many thanks, the care which the clergy had-be-

308 LETTERS ON

stowed in this particular. Nor were they slack
in assuming the merit to themselves, for they of-
ten reminded him, in their future discords, that
his kingdom had never been so quiet as during
his voyage to Denmark, when the clergy were, in
a great measure, intrusted with the charge of the
public government. 4
During the halcyon period of union between
kirk and king, their hearty agreement on the
subject of witchcraft failed not to heat the fires
‘against the persons suspected of such iniquity.
The clergy considered that the Roman Catholics,
their principal enemies, were equally devoted to
the devil, the mass, and the witches, which, in
their opinion, were mutually associated together,
and natural allies in the great cause of mischief,
On the other hand, the pedantic sovereign, ha-
ving exercised his learning and ingenuity in the
Demonologia, considered the execution of every
witch who was burnt, as a necessary conclusion
of his own royal syllogisms. The juries were also
afraid of the consequences of acquittal to them-
selves, being liable to suffer under an assize of
error, should they be thought to have been un-
justly merciful; and as the witches tried were per-
sonally as insignificant as the charge itself was
odious, there was no restraint whatever upon those
in whose hands their fate lay, and there seldom
wanted some such confession as we have often
mentioned, or such evidence as that collected by
the minister who overheard the dialogue between
the witch and her master, to salve their con-
sciences, and reconcile them to bring in a verdict
of Guilty... +

- Saf

DEMONOLOGY AND WITCHCRAFT. 309

The execution of witches became, for these
reasons, very common in Scotland, where the
king seemed in some measure to have made
himself a party in the cause, and the clergy es-
teemed themselves such from the very nature of
their profession. But the general spite of Sa-
tan and his adherents was supposed to be espe-
cially directed against James, on account of his
match with Anne of Denmark—the union of a
Protestant princess with a Protestant prince, the
King of Scotland, and heir of Raghad, being, it
could not be doubted, an event which struck the
whole kingdom of darkness with alarm. James
was self-gratified by the unusual spirit which he
had displayed on his voyage in quest of his bride,
and well disposed to fancy that he had performed
it in positive opposition, not only to the indirect
policy of Elizabeth, but to the malevolent pur-
pose of hell itself. His fleet had been tempest-
tost, and he very naturally believed that the Prince
of the power of the air had been personally active
on the occasion.

The principal person implicated in these here-
tical and treasonable undertakings, was one Ag-
nes Simpson, or Samson, called the Wise Wife
of Keith, and described by Archbishop Spottis-
wood, not as one of the base or ignorant class of
ordinary witches, but a grave matron, composed
and deliberate in her answers, which were all to
some purpose. This grave dame, from the terms
of her indictment, seems to have been a kind of
white witch, affecting to cure diseases by words
and charms, a dangerous profession considering
the times in which she lived. Neither did she

310 LETTERS ON

always’ keep the right and slieltered side ‘of! the
law in sach delicate operations.’ One article of
her indictment proves this; and at the same time
establishes; that the Wise Woman of Keith knew
how to turn her profession to account; for, being
-consulted in the illness of Isobel Hamilton, she
gave her opinion, that nothing could amend her
unless the devil was raised ; and the sick woman's
husband startling at the proposal, and being: in-
different perhaps about the issue, would not: be-
stow the necessary expenses, whereupon the Wise
Wife refused to raise the devil, and the patient
died. This woman was principally engaged in an
extensive conspiracy to destroy the fleet of the
queen by raising a tempest ; and to take the king’s
life by anointing his linen with poisonous mate-
rials, and by constructing figures of clay, to be
wasted and tormented after the usual fashion of
ecromancy. ME
Amongst her associates was an unhappy lady
of much higher degree. This was Dame Enu-
phane MacCalzean, the widow of a Senator of the
College of Justice, and a person infinitely above
the rank of the obscure witches with whom she
was joined in her crime. Mr Pitcairn supposes,
that this connexion may have arisen from her
devotion to the Catholic faith, and her friendship
for the Earl of Bothwell. Lyn
The third person in this singular league’‘o
sorcerers, was Doctor John Fian, otherwise Cun-
-ninghame, who was schoolmaster at Tranent,
and enjoyed much hazardous reputation as a war-
lock. This man was made the hero of the whole
tale of necromancy, in an account of it published

DEMONOLOGY AND WITCHCRAFT. 311

at) London, and entitled, « News from Scotland,”
which, has been lately reprinted by the Rox-
burghe Club. It is remarkable that the Scottish
witcherafts were not thought sufficiently horrible
by the editor of this tract, without adding to them
the story of a philtre being applied to a cow’s hair
instead of that of the young woman for whom it
was designed, and telling how the animal came
lowing after the sorcerer to his schoolroom door,
like a second Pasiphaé, the original of whie
charm occurs in the story of Apuleius.* «it
«Besides these persons, there was one Barbara
Napier, alias Douglas, a person of some rank;
Geillis Duncan, a, very active witch, and about
thirty other poor creatures of the lowest condi-
tion,—among the rest, and doorkeeper to the con-
clave, a silly old ploughman, called as his nickname
Graymeal, who was cuffed by the devil for say-
ing simply, “ God bless the king !”

» When the monarch of Scotland sprung) this
strong covey of his favourite game, they afforded
the Privy Council and him sport for the greatest
part of the remaining winter. He attended on
the examinations’ himself, and by one means or
other, they were indifferently well dressed to his
palate.

_ | Agnes Sampson, the grave matron before men-
tioned, after being an hour tortured by the twist-
ing of a cord around her head, according to the
eustom of the Buccaneers, confessed that she had
consulted with one Richard Grahame concern-
ing the probable length of the king’s life, and

( * Lucit Apuleit Metamorphoses, lib. iii.

312 LETTERS ON

the means of shortening it. But Satan, to whom
they at length resorted for advice, told them in
French respecting King James, J/ est un homme
de Dieu. The poor woman also acknowledged that
she had held a meeting with those of her sister-
hood, who had charmed a cat by certain spells,
having four joints of men knit to its feet, which
they threw into the sea to excite a tempest.
Another frolic they had, when, like the weird
sisters in Macbeth, they embarked in sieves with
much mirth and jollity, the Fiend rolling himself
before them upon the waves, dimly seen, and re-
sembling a huge haystack in size and appear-
ance. They went on board of a foreign ship
richly laded with wines, where, invisible to the
crew, they feasted till the sport grew tiresome,
and then Satan sunk the vessel and all on board.
Fian, or Cunninghame, was also visited by the
sharpest tortures, ordinary and extraordinary.
The nails were torn from his fingers with smiths’ ©
pincers; pins were driven into the places which
the nails usually defended; his knees were erushed
in the boots, his finger bones were splintered in the
pilniewinks. At length his constancy, hitherto
sustained, as the bystanders supposed, by the
help of the devil, was fairly overcome, and
gave an account of a great witch-meeting at North
Berwick, where they paced round the church
withershinns, that is, in reverse of the motion of
the sun. Fian then blew into the lock of the
church-door, whereupon the bolts gave way, the
unhallowed crew entered, and their master the
devil appeared to his servants in the shape of a
black man occupying the pulpit. He was saluted

DEMONOLOGY AND WITCHCRAFT. 313

with an “ Hail, Master!” but the company were
dissatisfied with his not having brought a picture
of the king, repeatedly promised, which was to
place his majesty at the mercy of this infernal
crew. The devil was particularly upbraided
on this subject by divers respectable-looking fe-
males,—no question, Euphane MacCalzean, Bar-
bara Napier, Agnes Sampson, and some other
amateur witch above those of the ordinary pro-
fession. The devil, on this memorable occasion,
forgot himself, and called Fian by his own name,
instead of the demoniacal sobriquet of Rob the
Rowar, which had been assigned tohim as Master
of the Rows, or Rolls. This was considered as
bad taste, and the rule is still observed at every
rendezvous of forgers, smugglers, or the like,
where it is accounted very indifferent manners to
name an individual by his own name, in case of
affording ground of evidence which may upon a
day of trial be brought against him, Satan, some-
thing disconcerted, concluded the evening with a
divertisement and a dance after his own manner.
The former consisted in disinterring a new-bu-
ried corpse, and dividing it in fragments among
the company, and the ball was maintained by well-
nigh two hundred persons, who danced a ring
dance, singing this chant-—

“ Cummer, gang ye before; Cummer, gang ye.
Gif ye will not gang before, Cummers, let me.”

After this choral exhibition, the music seems
to have been rather imperfect, the number of dan-
cers considered. Geillis Duncan was the only
instrumental performer, and she played on a Jews

814 LETTERS ON

harp, called in Scotland a trump. Dr Fian, muf-
fled, led the ring, and was highly honoured, ge-
pee acting as clerk or recorder, as above’men-
tioned. - Spy
‘King: James was deeply interested in those
mysterious meetings, and took great delight tobe
present at the examinations of the accused. He
sent for Geillis Duncan, and caused her to pla
before him the same tune to which Satan and his
companions led the brawl in North Berwick
charchyard.* His ears were gratified in another
way, for at this meeting it was said the witches
demanded of the devil why he did bear such en-
mity against the king? who returned the flatter-
ing answer, that the king was the greatest enemy
whom he had in the world. {oen
Almost all these poor wretches were éxecu-
ted, nor did EKuphane MacCalzean’s station “in
life save her from the common doom, which was
‘strangling to death, and burning to ashes there-
after. The majority of the jury which tried
Barbara Napier, having acquitted her of attend-
ance at the North Berwick meeting, were them-
selves threatened with a trial for wilful error
“upon an assize, and could only escape from severe
censure and punishment by pleading Guilty, and
submitting themselves to the king’s pleasure.

* The music of this witch tune is unhappily lost. But
that of another, believed to have been popular on such oc-
easions, is preserved. + aes

The silly bit chicken, gar cast her a pickle, —
And she will grow mickle, /

sHh7
And she will do good, 0) Shea

DEMONOLOGY AND WITCHCRAFT. 315

This rigorous and iniquitous conduct shows a suf-
ficient reason why there should be so few acquit-
tals from a charge of witchcraft, where the juries
were so much at the mercy of the crown.

It would be disgusting to follow the numerous
eases in which the same uniform, credulity, the
same extorted confessions, the same prejudiced
and exaggerated evidence, concluded in the same
tragedy at the stake and the pile. The altera-
tions and trenching which lately took place for
the purpose of improving the Castlehill of Edin-
burgh, displayed the ashes of the numbers who
‘had perished in this manner, of whom a large
proportion must have been executed, between
-1590, when the great discovery was made concern-
ing Euphane MacCalzean, and the Wise Wife of
Keith, and their accomplices, and the union of the
‘crowns.

Nor did King James’s removal to England sof-
ten this horrible persecution. In Sir Thomas
Hamilton’s Minutes of Proceedings in the Privy
Council, there occurs a singular entry, evincing
plainly that the Earl of Mar, and others of James’s
Council, were becoming fully sensible of the des-
perate iniquity and inhumanity of these proceed-
ings. I have modernized the spelling, that this
appalling record may be legible to. all my readers.

“1608, December 1. The Earl of Mar declared
to the Council, that some women were taken in
Broughton as witches, and being put to an assize,
and convicted, albeit they persevered constant in
their denial to the end, yet they were, burned
quick [alive], after such a cruel manner, that
some of them died, in despair, renouncing and

316 LETTERS ON

blaspheming [God]; and others, half burned,
brak out of the fire,* and were cast quick in it
again, till they were burned to the death.”

This singular document shows, that even in the
reign of James, so soon as his own august per-
son was removed from Edinburgh, his dutiful
Privy Council began to think that they had —
full with horrors, and were satiated with the
excess of cruelty, which dashed half-consumed
wretches back into the flames from which they
were striving to escape.

But the picture, however much it may have been
disgusting and terrifying to the Council at the
time, and though the intention of the entry upon
the records was obviously for the purpose of pre-
venting such horrid cruelties in future, had no
lasting effect on the course of justice, as the seve-
rities against witches were most unhappily still
considered necessary. Through the whole of the
sixteenth, and the greater part of the seventeenth
century, little abatement in the persecution of
this metaphysical crime of witchcraft can be traced
in the kingdom. Even while the Independents
held the reins of government, Cromwell himself,
and his major-generals and substitutes, were
obliged to please the common people of Scotland
by abandoning the victims accused of witchcraft
to the power of the law, though the journals of

* Lam obliged to the kindness of Mr Piteairn for this
singular extract.—The southern reader must be informed,
that the jurisdiction or regality of Broughton embraced
Holyrood, Canongate, Leith, and other suburban parts of
Edinburgh, and bore the same relation to that city as the
‘borough of Southwark to London, |

DEMONOLOGY AND WITCHCRAFT, 317,

the. time express the horror and disgust with which
the English sectarians beheld a practice so incon-
sistent with their own humane principle of uni-
versal toleration.

Instead of plunging into a history of these
events, which, generally speaking, are in detail
as monotonous as they are melancholy, it may
amuse the reader to confine the narrative to a
single trial, having in the course of it some pe-
culiar and romantic events. It is the tale of a
sailor's wife, more tragic in its event than that of
the chestnut-muncher in Macbeth.*

. Margaret Barclay, wife of Archibald Dein,
burgess of Irvine, had been slandered by her
sister-in-law, Janet Lyal, the spouse of John
Dein, brother of Archibald, and by John Dein
himself, as guilty of some act of theft. Upon this
provocation Margaret Barclay raised an action of
slander before the church court, which prosecu-
tion, after some procedure, the kirk-session dis-
charged, by directing a reconciliation between the
parties. Nevertheless, although the two women
shook hands before the court, yet the said Mar-
garet Barclay declared that she gave her hand
only in obedience to the kirk-session, but that
she still retained her hatred and ill-will against
John Dein, and his wife, Janet Lyal. About
this time the bark of John Dein was about to
sail for France, and Andrew Train, or Tran,
Provost of the burgh of Irvine, who was an

“ A copy of the record of the trial, which took place in
Ayrshire, was sent to me by a friend, who withheld his
name, so that I can only thank him in this general ac-
knowledgment. :

318 ; LETTERS ON

owner of the vessel, ‘went with him to suj
intend the commercial part of the voyage. | Two:
other merchants of some consequence went in)
the same vessel, with a sufficient number of ma-'
riners. Margaret Barclay, the revengeful per-
son already mentioned, was heard to imprecate
curses upon the provost’s argosy,’ praying to
God that sea nor salt-water might never bear the
ship, and that partans (crabs) might eat the crew
at the bottom of the sea. ie
When, under these auspices, the ship was ab-
sent on her voyage, a vagabond fellow, named
John Stewart, pretending to have knowledge of
jugglery, and to possess the power of a spaeman,)
came to the residence of Tran, the provost, and
dropped explicit hints that the ship was lost, and
that the good woman of the house was a widow.
The sad truth was afterwards learned on more
certain information. Two of the seamen, after a
space of doubt and anxiety, arrived with the me-
lancholy tidings that the bark, of which John Dein
was skipper, and Provost Tran part owner, had
been wrecked on the coast of England, near Pad«
stow, when all on board had been lost, except the
two sailors who brought the notice. Suspicion of
sorcery, in those days easily awakened, was fixed
on Margaret Barclay, who had imprecated curses
on the ship, and on John Stewart, the juggler;
who had seemed to know of the evil fate of the
voyage before he could have become acquainted
with it by natural means. ;
_ Stewart, who was first apprehended, acknow-
ledged that Margaret Barclay, the other sus-
pected person, had applied to him to teach her

DEMONOLOGY AND WITCHCRAFT, 319

some magic arts, “ in order that she might get
gear, kyes milk, love of man, her heart's desire
on such persons as had done her wrong, and,
finally, that she might obtain the fruit of sea and
land,” Stewart declared that he denied to Mar-
garet that he possessed the said arts himself, or
had the power of communicating them. So far
was well; but, true or false, he added a stringy
of circumstances, whether voluntarily declared.
or extracted by torture, which tended to fix, the
cause of the loss of the bark on Margaret Bar-
clay. He had come, he said, to. this woman’s.
house in Irvine, shortly after the ship set sail
from harbour. He went to Margaret's house by,
night, and found her engaged, with other two
women, in making clay figures ; one of the figures
was made handsome, with fair hair, supposed, to
represent Provost Tran. They then proceeded
to mould a figure of a ship in clay, and during
this labour the devil appeared to the company in.
the shape of a handsome black lap-dog, such as
ladies use to keep.* He added, that the whole
party left the house together, and went into, an
empty wastehouse nearer the seaport, which house
he pointed out to the city magistrates. From
this house they went to the sea-side, followed by.
the black lap-dog aforesaid, and cast in the figures
of clay representing the ship and the men ; after
which the sea raged, roared, and became red like
the juice of madder in a dyer's cauldron.
This confession having been extorted from the

* This may remind the reader of Cazotte’s Diable Amou-
reut. |, +f

320 LETTERS ON

unfortunate juggler, the female acquaintances, of
Margaret Barclay were next convened, that he
might point out her associates in forming the
charm, when he pitched upon a woman called
Isobel Insh, or Taylor, who resolutely denied
having ever seen him before. She was impri-
soned, however, in the belfry of the chureh,
An addition to the eyidence against the poor
old woman Insh was then procured from her
own daughter, Margaret Tailzeour, a child of
eight years old, who lived as servant with Mar-
garet Barclay, the person principally accused.
This child, who was keeper of a baby belong-
ing to Margaret Barclay, either from terror, or
the innate love of falsehood, which we have ob-
served as proper to childhood, declared, that she
was present when the fatal models of clay were
formed, and that in plunging them in the sea,
Margaret Barclay her mistress, and her mother
Isobel Insh, were assisted by another woman,
and a girl of fourteen years old, who dwelt at
the town-head. Legally considered, the evidence
of this child was contradictory, and inconsistent
with the confession of the juggler, for it assigned
other particulars, and dramatis persone in many
respects different. But all was accounted sufhi-
ciently regular, especially since the girl failed
not to swear to the presence of the black dog, to
whose appearance she: also added the additional
terrors of that of a black man. The dog also,
according to her account, emitted flashes from
its jaws and nostrils, to illuminate the witches du-
ring the performance of the spell. The child
maintained this story even to her mother’s face,
5

DEMONOLOGY AND WITCHCRAFT. 321

only alleging that Isobel Insh remained behind
in the wastehouse, and was not present when the
images were put into the sea. For her own coun-
tenance and presence on the occasion, and to en-
sure her secrecy, her mistress promised her a
pair of new shoes.

John Stewart, being re-examined, and confront
ed with the child, was easily compelled to allow
that the “ little smatchet” was there, and to give
that marvellous account of his correspondence
with Elfland, which we have noticed elsewhere.

The conspiracy thus far, as they conceived,
disclosed, the magistrates and ministers wrought
hard with Isobel Insh, to prevail upon her to tell
the truth; and she at length acknowledged her
presence at the time when the models of the ship
and mariners were destroyed, but endeavoured so
to modify her declaration as to deny all personal
accession to the guilt,. This poor creature almost
admitted the supernatural powers imputed to her,
promising Bailie Dunlop, (also a wgemen by
whom she was imprisoned, that if he would dis-
miss her, he should never make a bad voyage,
but have success in all his dealings by sea and
land. She was finally brought to promise, that
she would fully confess the whole that she knew
of the affair on the morrow.

But finding herself in so hard a strait, the
unfortunate woman made use of the darkness
to attempt an escape. With this view she got
out by a back window of the belfry, although,
says the report, there were “ iron bolts, locks,
and fetters on her;” and attained the roof of the
church, where, losing her footing, she sustained

x

322 LETTERS ON

a severe fall, and was greatly bruised. Being ap
prehended, Bailie Dunlop again urged her to con-
fess; but the poor woman was determined to ap-
peal to a more merciful tribunal, and maintained
her innocence to the last minute of her life, deny-
ing all that she had formerly admitted, and dying
five days after her fall from the roof of the church.
The inhabitants of Irvine attributed her death
to poison.

The scene began to thicken, for a commission
was granted for the trial of the two remaining
persons accused, namely, Stewart the jngeier, and
Margaret Barclay. The day of trial being ar-
rived, the following singular events took place,
which we give as stated in the record :—

« My Lord and Earl of Eglintoune (who
dwells within the space of one mile to the said
burgh) having come to the said burgh at the
earnest request of the said Justices, for giving to
them of his lordship’s countenance, concurrence,
and assistance, in trying of the foresaid devilish
practises, conform to the tenor of the foresaid
commission, the said John Stewart, for his better
preserving to the day of the assize, was put in a
sure lockfast booth, where no manner of person
might have access to him till the downsitting of
the Justice Court, and for avoiding of putting
violent hands on himself, he was very strictly
guarded, and fettered by the arms, as use is. And
upon that same day of the assize, about half an
hour before the downsitting of the Justice Court,
Mr David Dickson, minister at Irvine, and Mr
George Dunbar, minister of Air, having gone to
him, to exhort him to call on his God for mercy

DEMONOLOGY AND WITCHCRAFT. 323

for his bygone wicked and evil life, and that God
would of his infinite mercy loose him out of the
bonds of the devil, whom he had served these
many years bygone, he acquiesced in their prayer
and godly exhortation, and uttered these words :
«I am so straitly guarded, that it lies not in my
power to get my hand to take off my bonnet, nor
to get bread tomy mouth.’ And immediately af-
ter the departing of the two ministers from him,
the juggler being sent for at the desire of my Lord
of Kglintoune, to be confronted with a woman of
the burgh of Air, called Janet Bous, who was ap-
prehended by the magistrates of the burgh of Air
for witchcraft, and sent to the burgh of Irvine
pes? spa for that affair, he was found by the

urgh officers who went about him, strangled and
hanged by the cruik of the door, with a éait of
hemp, or a string made of hemp, supposed to
have been his garter, or string of his bonnet, not
above the length of two span long, his knees
not being from the ground half a span, and was
brought out of the house, his life not being to-
tally expelled. But, notwithstanding of whatso-
ever means used in the contrary for remeid of
his life, he revived not, but so ended his life mise-
rably, by the help of the devil his master.

« And because there was then only in life the
said Margaret Barclay, and that the persons sum-
moned to pass upon her assize, and upon the as-
size of the juggler, who, by the help of the devil
his master, had put violent hands on himself,
were all present within the said burgh ; therefore,
and for eschewing of the like in the person of the
said Margaret, our sovereign lord's justices in

324 LETTERS ON

that part, particularly above-named, constituted
by commission, after solemn deliberation and
advice of the said noble lord, whose concurrence
and advice was chiefly required and taken in
this matter, concluded with all possible diligenee
before the downsitting of the Justice Court, ito
put the said Margaret in torture; in respect the
devil, by God’s permission, had made her asso-
ciates, who were the lights of the cause, to be
their own burrioes, (slayers). They used the tor-
ture underwritten as being most safe and gentle,
(as the said noble lord assured the said justices, )
by putting of her two bare legs in a pair of
stocks, and thereafter by onlaying of certain iron
gauds (bars) severally one by one, and then eiking
and augmenting the weight by laying on more
gauds, and in easing of her by offtaking of the iron
gauds one or more, as occasion offered, which iron
gauds were but little short gauds, and broke not
the skin of her legs, &e. + lrnEAa
« After using of the which kind of gentle tor-
ture, the said Margaret began, aceording to the
increase of the pain, to cry, and crave for God's
éause to take off her shins the foresaid irons, and.
she should declare truly the whole matter. Which
being removed, she began at her former denial:
And being of new assayed in torture as of befoir,
she then uttered these words; *‘ Take off, take
off, and before God I shall show you the whole
form!’ ;
« And the said irons being of new, upon her
faithfull promise, removed, she then desired my
Lord of Eglintoune, the said: four justices, and.
the said Mr David Dickson, minister. ofthe,

jieat

DEMONOLOGY AND WITCHCRAFT. 325

burgh, Mr George Dunbar, minister of Ayr, and
Mr Mitchell Wallace, minister of Kilmarnock,
and Mr John Cunninghame, minister of Dalry,
and Haugh Kennedy, provost of Ayr, to come by
themselves, and to remove all others, and she
should declare truly, as she should answer to
God, the whole matter. Whose desire in that
being fulfilled, she wade her confession in this
manner, but (é. e. without) any kind of demand,
freely, without ‘interrogation; God’s name by
earnest prayer being called upon for opening of
her lips, and easing of her heart, that she, by
rendering of the truth, might glorify and magnify
his holy name, and disappoint the enemy of her
salvation.”— Trial of Margaret Barclay, he. 1618,

Margaret Barclay, who was a young and lively
person, had hitherto conducted herself like a pas-
sionate and high-tempered woman innocently ac-
cused, and the only appearance of conviction ob-
tained against her was, that she carried about her
rowan-tree and coloured thread, to make, as she
said, her cow give milk, when it began to fail. But
the gentle torture—a strange junction of words—
recommended as an anodyne by the good Lord
Eglinton—the placing, namely, her legs in the
stocks, and loading her bare shins with bars of iron,
overcame her resolution ; when, ather screams and
declarations that she was willing to tell all, the
weights were removed. She then told a story of
destroying the ship of John Dein, affirming, that
it was with the purpose of killing only her bro-
ther-in-law, and Provost Tran, and saving the rest
of the crew. She at the same time involved in the
guilt Isobel Crawford. Thispoor woman was also

326 LETTERS ON

apprehended, and, in great terror, confessed the
imputed crime, retorting the principal blame on
Margaret Barclay herself. The trial was then ap-

ointed to proceed, when Alexander Dein, the
Fasband of Margaret Barclay, appeared in court
with a lawyer to act in his wife’s behalf. Appa-
rently, the sight of her husband awakened some
hope and desire of life, for when the prisoner was
asked by the lawyer whether she wished to be
defended? she answered, “ As you please. But
all I have confest was in agony of torture; and,
before God, all I have spoken is false and un-
true.” To which she pathetically added—* Ye
have been too long in coming.”

The jury, unmoved by these affecting cireum-
stances, proceeded upon the principle that the
confession of the accused could not be considered
as made under the influence of torture, since the
bars were not actually upon her limbs at the time
it was delivered, although they were placed at her
elbow ready to be again laid on her bare shins, if
she was less explicit in her declaration than her
auditors wished. On this nice distinction, they in
one voice found Margaret Barclay guilty. It is
singular that she should have again returned to
her confession after sentence, and died affirming
it ;—the explanation of which, however, might
be, either that she had really in her ignorance and
‘folly tampered with some idle spells, or that an
apparent penitence for her offence, however ima-
ginary, was the only mode in which she could
obtain any share of public sympathy at her death,
or a portion of the prayers of the clergy and
congregation, which, in her circumstances, she

DEMONOLOGY AND WITCHCRAFT. 827

might be willing to purchase, even by confession
of what all believed respecting her. It is re-
markable, that she earnestly entreated the magis-
trates that no harm should be done to Isobel
Crawford, the woman whom she had herself ac-
cused. This unfortunate young creature was
strangled at the stake, oe her body burnt to
ashes, having died with many expressions of reli-
gion and penitence.

It was one fatal consequence of these cruel per-
secutions, that one pile was usually lighted at the
embers of another. Accordingly in the present
case, three victims having already perished by
this accusation, the magistrates, incensed at the
nature of the crime, so perilous as it seemed to
men of a maritime life, and at the loss of several
friends of their own, one of whom had been their
principal magistrate, did not forbear to insist
against Isobel Crawford, inculpated by Margaret
Barclay’s confession. A new commission was
granted for her trial, and after the assistant mi-
nister of Irvine, Mr David Dickson, had made
earnest prayers to God for opening her obdurate
and closed heart, she was subjected to the tor-
ture of iron bars laid upon her bare shins, her
feet being in the stocks, as in the case of Mar-
garet Barclay.

She endured this torture with incredible firm-
ness, since she did “ admirably, without any kind
of din or exclamation, suffer above thirty stone
of iron to be laid on her legs, never shrinking
thereat in any sort, but remaining, as it were,
steady.” But in shifting the situation of the
iron bars, and removing them to another part of

ses Ci rj LETTERS ON

her shins, her constancy gave way ; she broke out
into horrible cries (though not more than three
bars were then actually on her person) of —“« Tak
aff—tak aff !” On being relieved from the torture,
she made the usual confession of all that she was
charged with, and of a connexion with the devil
which had subsisted for several years.. Sentence
awas given against her accordingly. After this
had been denounced, she openly denied all: her
former confessions, and died without any sign of
repentance, offering repeated interruption to: the
minister in his prayer, and absolutely refusing to.
pardon the executioner. 155
This tragedy happened in the year 1613, and
recorded as it is very particularly,-and at: consi-
derable length, forms the most detailed specimen
I have met with, of a Scottish trial for witchcraft,
— illustrating, in. particular, how poor wretches,
abandoned, as they conceived, by God and the
world, deprived of all human sympathy, and ex-
posed to. personal tortures of an acute descrip-
tion, became disposed to. throw away the lives
that were rendered bitter to: them, by a voluntary
confession of guilt, rather than struggle hopelessly
against so many evils.. Four persons here lost
their lives, merely because the throwing some clay
models into the sea, a fact told differently bythe
witnesses who spoke of it, corresponded with the.
season, for no day was fixed, in which a particu»
lar vessel was lost. It is scarce possible that, after
reading such a story, aman of sense can listen for
an instant to the evidence founded on confessions
thus obtained, which has been almost the sole rea=
son by which a few indiyiduals, even in:modern

DEMONOLOGY AND WITCHCRAFT, 329.

times; have endeavoured to justify a belief inthe
existence of witchcraft,

The result of the judicial examination of a cri-
minal, when extorted by such means, is the most
suspicious of all evidence, and even when volun-
tarily given, is searce admissible, without the cor-
roboration of other testimony.

We might here take leave of our Scottish his-
tory of witchcraft, by barely mentioning that many
hundreds, nay perhaps thousands, lost their lives
during two centuries, on such charges and such
evidence as proved the death of those persons in
the trial of the Irvine witches. One case; how-
ever, is so much distinguished by fame among
the numerous instances which occurred in Scot-
tish history, that we are under the necessity of
bestowing a few words upon those celebrated per-
sons, Major Weir and his sister.

The case of this notorious wizard was remark
ablechiefly from his being aman of some condition,
(the son of a gentleman, and his mother a lady
of family in Clydesdale,) which was seldom the
case with those that fell under similar accusa-
tions. It was also remarkable in his case that
he had been a Covenanter, and peculiarly attach-
edito that cause, | In the years of the Common-
wealth, this man was trusted and employed by
those who were then at the head of affairs, and
was, in 1649, commander of the City-guard of
Edinburgh, which procured him his title of Ma-
jor. In this capacity he was understood, as was
indeed implied in the duties of that officer at the
period, to be very strict in executing severity
upon such Royalists as fell under his: military

330 LETTERS ON

charge. It appears that the Major, with a maid-
en sister who had kept his house, was subject to
fits of melancholic lunacy, an infirmity easily re-
concilable with the formal pretences which he
made to a high show of religious zeal. He was
peculiar in his gift of prayer, and as was the cus-
tom of the period, was often called to exercise
this talent by the bedside of sick persons, until it
came to be observed, that, by some association,
which it is more easy to conceive than to explain,
he could not pray with the same warmth and
fluency of expression, unless when he had in his
hand a stick of peculiar shape and appearance,
which he generally walked with. It was noticed,
in short, that when this stick was taken from him,
his wit and talent appeared to forsake him. This
Major Weir was seized by the magistrates on a
strange whisper that became current respectin
vile practices, which he seems to have admitt
without either shame or contrition. The dis-
gusting profligacies which he confessed, were of
such a character, that it may be charitably hoped
most of them were the fruits of a depraved
imagination, though he appears to have been in
many respects a wicked and criminal hypocrite.
When he had completed his confession, he avow-
ed solemnly that he had not confessed the hun-
dredth part of the crimes which he had committed.
From this time he would answer no interroga-
tory, nor would he have recourse to prayer, ar-
guing, that as he had no hope whatever of esca-
ping Satan, there was no need of incensing him by
vain efforts at repentance. His witchcraft seems
to have been taken for granted on his own confes-

DEMONOLOGY AND WITCHCRAFT. 831

sion ; as his indictment was chiefly founded on the
same document, in which he alleged he had never
seen the devil, but any feeling he had of him was
in the dark. He received sentence of death, which
he suffered 12th April, 1670,.at the Gallow-hill,
between Leith and Edinburgh. He died so stu-
pidly sullen and impenitent, as to justify the opi-
nion that he was oppressed with a kind of melan-
choly frenzy, the consequence perhaps of remorse,
but such as urged him not to repent, but to despair.
It seems probable that he was burnt alive. His
sister, with whom he was supposed to have had
an incestuous connexion, was condemned also to
death, leaving a stronger and more explicit testi-
mony of their mutual sins, than could be extracted
from the Major. She gave, as usual, some account
of her connexion with the queen of the fairies, and
acknowledged the assistance she received from
that sovereign in spinning an unusual quantity of
yarn, Of her brother, she said, that one day a
friend called upon them at noonday with a fier

chariot, and invited them to visit a friend at Dab.
keith, and that while there her brother received
information of the event of the battle of Worces-
ter. No one saw the style of their equipage ex-
cept themselves. On the scaffold, this woman,
determining, as she said, to die “ with the great-
est shame possible,” was with difficulty prevent-
ed from throwing off her clothes before the peo-
ple, and with scarce less trouble was she flung
from the ladder by the executioner. Her last
words were in the tone of the sect to which her
brother had so long affected to belong : “ Many,”
she said, “ weep and lament for a poor old wretch

332 LETTERS ON

like me; but, alas !-few are weeping for a broken
Covenant.” ' Mig
The Scottish prelatists, upon whom the Cove-
nanters used to throw many aspersions respect-
ing their receiving proof against shot from the
devil, and other infernal practices, rejoiced to have
an opportunity, in their turn, to retort on their
adversaries the charge of sorcery. Dr Hickes,
the author of * Thesaurus Septentrionalis,” pub-
lished on the subject of Major Weir, and the case
of Mitchell, who fired at the Archbishop of St
Andrews, his book called ‘ Ravaillac Redivyi-
vus,” written with the unjust purpose of attach-
ing to the religious sect to which the wizard and
assassin belonged the charge of having fostered
and encouraged the crimes they committed or
attempted.
It is certain that no story of witchcraft or ne-
cromancy, so many of which occurred near and in
Edinburgh, made such a lasting impression on
the public mind, as that of Major Weir. The
remains of the house in which he and his sister
lived are still shown at the head of the West-
bow, which, as our readers may perceive from
looking at the frontispiece, has a gloomy as
well suited for a necromancer. It was at differs
ent times a brazier’s shop, and a magazine for lint,
and in my younger days was employed for the
latter use ; but no family would inhabit the h :
ed walls as a residence ; and bold was the urchin
from the High-School who dared approach the
gloomy ruin, at the risk of seeing the Major's
enchanted staff parading through the old apart-
ments, or hearing the hum of the necromantic

DEMONOLOGY AND WITCHCRAFT. 833

wheel, which procured for his sister such a cha+
racter as a spinner. At the time I am writing,
this last fortress of superstitious renown is in the
course of being destroyed, in order to the modern
improvements now carrying on in a quarter long
thought unimprovable.

As knowledge and learning began to increase,
the gentlemen and elergy of Scotland became
ashamed of the credulity of their ancestors, and
witch trials, although not discontinued, more
seldom disgrace our reeords of Criminal Juris-
prudence.

Sir John Clerk, a scholar and an antiquary;
the grandfather of the late celebrated John Clerk
of Eldin, had the honour to be amongst the first
to decline acting as a commissioner on the trial
of a witch, to which he was appointed so early
as 1678,* alleging drily; that he did not feel him-
self warlock (that is, conjurer) sufficient to be a
judge upon such an inquisition.. Allan Ramsay,
his friend, and who must be supposed. to one
the sense of his many respectable patrons, had de-
livered his opinion on the subject in the “ Gentle
Shepherd,” where Mause’s imaginary witchcraft
constitutes the machinery of the poem.

Yet these dawnings of sense and humanity
were obscured by the clouds of the ancient super-
stition on more than one distinguished occasion.
In 1676, Sir Geo: Maxwell of Pollock, ap
rently a man of niateiebobe and valetudinary ha-
bits, believed himself bewitched to death by six,
witches, one man and five women, who were

© See Fountainhall’s Decisions, vol. i. p. 15. :

334 LETTERS ON t
leagued for the purpose of tormenting a clay
image in his likeness. The chief evidence on the
subject was a vagabond girl, pretending to be
deaf and dumb. But as her imposture was after-
wards discovered, and herself punished, it is rea-
sonably to be concluded that she had herself
formed the picture or image of Sir George, and
had hid it, where it was afterwards found, in con-
sequence of her own information. In the mean-
time, five of the accused were executed, and the
sixth only escaped on account of extreme youth.
A still more remarkable case occurred at Pais-
ley, in 1697, where a young girl, about eleven
years of age, daughter of John Shaw of Bargar-
ran, was the principal evidence. This unlucky
damsel, beginning her practices out of a quarrel
with a maid-servant, continued to imitate a case of
possession so accurately, that no less than twenty.
persons were condemned upon her evidence, of
whom five were executed, besides one John Reed,
who hanged himself in prison, or, as was charitably
said, was strangled by the devil in person, lest he
should make disclosures to the detriment of the
service. But even those who believed in witchcraft
were now beginning to open their eyes to the dan-
gers in the present mode of prosecution. ‘“ I own,”
says the Rev. Mr Bell, in his MS. Treatise on
Witchcraft, « there has been much harm done to
worthy and innocent persons in the common way
of finding out witches, and in the means made use
of for promoting the discovery of such wretches,
and bringing them to justice; so that oftentimes
old age, poverty, features, and ill fame, with such
like grounds not worthy to be represented toa

DEMONOLOGY AND WITCHCRAFT. 835

magistrate, have yet moved many to suspect and
defame their neighbours, to the unspeakable pre-
judice of Christian charity; a late instance where-
of we had in the west, in the business of the sor-
ceries exercised upon the Laird of Bargarran’s
daughter, anno 1697, a time when persons of
more goodness and esteem than most of their
calumniators were defamed for witches, and
which was occasioned mostly by the forwardness
and absurd credulity of diverse otherwise wor-
thy ministers of the gospel, and some topping
professors in and about the city of Glasgow.” *
Those who doubted of the sense of the law, or
reasonableness of the practice, in such eases, be;
to take courage, and state their objections boldly,
In the year 1704, a frightful instance of popular
bigotry occurred at Pittenweem. A strolling vaga-
bond, who affected fits, laid an accusation of witch+
craft against two women, who were accordingly
seized on, and imprisoned with the usual severities,
One of the unhappy creatures, Janet Cornfoot by
name, escaped from prison, but was unhappily
caught, and brought back to Pittenweem, where
she fell into the hands of a ferocious mob, con-
sisting of rude seamen and fishers. The magis-
trates made no attempts for her rescue, and the
crowd exercised their brutal pleasure on the poor
old woman, pelted her with stones, swung her
suspended on a rope betwixt a ship and the
shore, and finally ended her miserable existence
by throwing a door over her as she lay exhausted

* Law’s Memorials, edited by C. K. Sharpe, Esq., Pre-
fatory Notice, p. 93. :

336 LETTERS ON

on the beach, and heaping stones upon it till
she was pressed to death. As even the existin,
laws against witcheraft were transgressed by this
brutal riot, a warm attack was made upon the
magistrates and ministers of the town, by those
who who were shocked at a tragedy of such a
horrible cast. There were answers published, in
which the parties assailed were zealously de-
fended. The superior authorities were expected
to take up the affair, but it so happened, during
the general distraction of the country concerning
the Union, that the murder went without the in-
vestigation which a crime so horrid demanded.
Still, however, it was something gained that the
cruelty was exposed to the public. ‘The voice
of general opinion was now appealed to, and, in
the long run, the sentiments which it advocates
are commonly those of good sense and humanity.
The officers in the higher branches of the law
dared now assert. their official authority, and re-
serve for their own decision cases of supposed
witchcraft which the fear of public clamour had
induced them formerly to leave in the hands of
inferior judges, operated upon by all the preju«
dices of the country and the populace. :
In 1718, the celebrated lawyer, Robert Dun-
das of Arniston, then King’s Advocate, wrote a
severe letter of censure to the Sheriff-depute of
Caithness, in the first place, as having neglected
to communicate officially certain precognitions
which he had led respecting some recent prac-
tices of witchcraft in his county. The Advocate
reminded this local judge, that the duty of in-
ferior magistrates, in such cases, was to advise

DEMONOLOGY AND WITCHCRAFT. 337

with the King’s Counsel, first, whether they
should be made subject of a trial or not; and, if
so, before what court, and in what manner, it
should take place. He also called the magis-
trate’s attention to a report, that he, the Sheriff-
depute, intended to judge in the case himself;
“ a thing of too great difficulty to be tried with-
out very deliberate advice, and beyond the juris-
diction of an inferior court.” The Sheriff-depute
sends, with his apology, the precognition* of the
affair,- which is one of the most nonsensical in
this nonsensical department of the law. A cer-
tain carpenter, named William Montgomery, was
so infested with cats, which, as his servant-maid
reported, “ spoke among themselves,” that he
fell in a rage upon a party of these animals which
had assembled in his house at irregular hours,
and betwixt his Highland arms of knife, dirk, and
broadsword, and his professional weapon of an
axe, he made such a dispersion that they were
quiet for the night. In consequence of his blows,
two witches were said to have died. The case
of a third, named Nin-Gilbert, was still more
remarkable. Her leg being broken, the injured
limb withered, pined, and finally fell off; on
which the hag was inclosed in prison, where she
also died: and the question which remained was,
whether any process should be directed against
persons whom, in her compelled confession, she
had, as usual, informed against. The Lord Ad-

“ The precognition is the record of the preliminary evi-
dence on which the public officers charged, in Scotland,
with duties intrasted to a ‘grand jury in England, incur
the responsibility of sending an accused person to trial.

Yy

338 LETTERS ON

vocate, as may be supposed, quashed all further
procedure.

In 1720, an unlucky boy, the third son of
James, Lord Torphichen, took it into his head,
under instructions, it is said, from a knayish go-
vernor, to play the possessed and bewitched per-
son, laying the cause of his distress on certain
.old witches in Calder, near to which village his
father had his mansion. The women were im-
prisoned, and one or two of them died; but the
crown counsel would not proceed to trial. The
noble family also began to see through the cheat.
The boy was sent to sea, and though he is said
at one time to have been disposed to try his fits
while on board, when the discipline of the navy
proved too severe for his cunning, in process of
time he became a good sailor, assisted gallantly in
defence of the vessel against the pirates of An-
gria, and finally was drowned in a storm.

In the year 1722, a Sheriff-depute of Suther-
land, Captain David Ross of Littledean, took it
upon him, in flagrant violation of the then estab-
lished rules of jurisdiction, to pronounce the last
sentence of death for witchcratt which was ever
passed in Scotland. The victim was an insane
old woman belonging to the parish of Loth, who
had so little idea of her situation as to rejoice at
the sight of the fire which was destined to con-
sume her. She had a daughter lame both of hands
and feet, a circumstance attributed to the witch’s
having been used to transform her into a pony,
and get her shod by the devil. It does not appear
that any punishment was inflicted for this cruel
abuse of the law on the person of a creature so

DEMONOLOGY AND WITCHCRAFT. 339

helpless; but the son of the lame daughter, he
himself distinguished by the same misfortune,
was living so lately as to receive the charity of
the present Marchioness of Stafford, Countess of
Sutherland in her own right, to whom the poor
of her extensive country are as well known, as
those of the higher order.

Since this deplorable action, there has been no
judicial interference in Scotland on account of
witchcraft, unless to prevent explosions of po-
pular enmity against people suspected of such a
crime, of which some instances could be produced.
The remains of the superstition sometimes occur ;
there can be no doubt that the vulgar are still ad-
dicted to the custom of scoring above the breath,*
(as it is termed), and other counter-spells, evin-
cing that the belief in witchcraft is only asleep,
and might in remote corners be again awakened
to deeds of blood. An instance or two may be
ro gan chiefly as facts known to the author him-
self.

In a remote part of the Highlands, an igno-
rant and malignant woman seems really to have
meditated the destruction of her neighbour's pro-
perty, by placing in a cowhouse, or byre, as we
call it, a pot of baked clay, containing locks of
hair, parings of nails, and other trumpery. This
precious spell was discovered, the design con-
jectured, and the witch would have been torn
to pieces, had not a high-spirited and excellent

* Drawing blood, that is, by two cuts in the form of a
cross on the witch’s forehead, confided in all throughout
Scotland as the most powerful counter. charm.

340 LETTERS ON

lady in the neighbourhood gathered some of her
people, (though these were not very fond of the
service,) and by main force taken the unfortunate
creature out of the hands of the populace. The
formidable spell is now in my possession. i

About two years since, as they were taking
down the walls of a building formerly used as.a
feeding-house for cattle, in the town of Dalkeith,
there was found below the threshold-stone the wi-
thered heart of some animal stuck full of many
scores of pins ;—a counter-charm, according to
tradition, against the operations of witcheraft on
the cattle which are kept within. Among the
almost innumerable droves of bullocks which come
down every year from the Highlands for the south,
there is scarce one but has a curious knot upon his
tail, which is also a precaution, lest an evil eye, or
an evil spell, may do the animal harm.

The last Scottish story with which I will
trouble you, happened in or shortly after the year
1800, and the whole circumstances are well
known tome. The dearth of the years in the
end of the eighteenth, and beginning of this cen-
tury was inconvenient to all, but distressing to
the poor. A solitary old woman, in a wild and
lonely district, subsisted chiefly by rearing ehick-
ens, an operation requiring so much care and at-
tention, that the gentry, and even the farmers’
wives, often find it better to buy poultry at a
certain age, than to undertake thetrouble of bring-
ing them up. As the old woman, in the present in-
stance, fonght her way through life better than
her neighbours, envy stigmatized her as having
some unlawful mode of increasing the gains of

DEMONOLOGY AND WITCHCRAFT. 341

her little trade, and apparently she did not take
much alarm at the accusation. But she felt, like
others, the dearth of the years alluded to, and
chiefly because the farmers were unwilling to
sell grain in the very moderate quantities which
she was able to purchase, and without which, her
little stock of poultry must have been inevitably
starved. In distress on this account, the dame
went to a neighbouring farmer, a very goat:
natured, sensible, honest man, and requested him,
as a favour, to sell her a peck of oats at any price.
“ Good neighbour,” he said, “ I am sorry to be
obliged to refuse you, but my corn is measured
out for Dalkeith market; my carts are loaded
to set out, and to open these sacks again, and
for so small a quantity, would cast my accounts
loose, and create much trouble and disadvantage ;
I dare say you will get all you want at such a
place, or sucha place.” On receiving this answer,
the old woman’s temper gave way. She scolded
the wealthy farmer, and wished evil to his pro-

erty, which was just setting off for the market.

hey parted, after some angry language on both
sides; and sure enough, as the carts crossed the
ford of the river beneath the farm-house, off came
the wheel from one of them, and five or six sacks
of corn were damaged by the water. The good
farmer hardly knew what to think of this; there
were the two circumstances deemed of old essen-
tial and sufficient to the crime of witchcraft—
Damnum minatum, et malum secutum.— Scarce
knowing what to believe, he hastened to consult
the Sheriff of the county, as a friend rather than
as a magistrate, upon a case so extraordinary.

342 LETTERS ON

The official person showed him that the laws
against witchcraft were abrogated, and had little
difficulty to bring him to regard the matter in its
true light of an accident. ;

It is strange, but true, that the accused hersel:
was not to be reconciled to the sheriff’s doctrine
so easily. He reminded her, that if she used her
tongue with so much license, she must expose her-
self to suspicions, and that should coincidences
happen to irritate her neighbours, she might suf-
fer harm at a time when there was no one to
protect her. He therefore requested her to be
more cautious in her language for her own sake,
professing, at the same time, his belief that her
words and intentions were perfectly harmless,
and that he had no apprehension of being hurt
by her, let her wish her worst to him. She was
rather more angry than pleased at the well-mean-
ing sheriff's scepticism. “I would be laith to
wish ony ill either to you or yours, sir,” she said ;
“for I kenna how it is, but something aye comes
after my words when I am ill-guided, and speak
ower fast.” In short, she was obstinate in claim-
ing an influence over the destiny of others by
words and wishes, which might have in other
times conveyed her to the stake ; for which her
expressions, their consequences, and her disposi-
tion to insist upon their efficacy, would certainly
of old have made her a fit victim. At present,
the story is scarcely worth mentioning, but as it
contains materials resembling those out of which
many tragic incidents have arisen.

So low, in short, is now the belief in witch-
craft, that, perhaps, it is only received by those

DEMONOLOGY AND WITCHCRAFT. 343

half-crazy individuals who feel a species of con-
sequence derived from accidental coincidences,
which, were they received by the community in
general, would go near, as on former occasions,
to cost the lives of those who make their boast
of them. At least one hypochondriac patient is
known to the author, who believes himself the
victim of a gang of witches, and ascribes his ill-
ness to their charms, so that he wants nothing
but an indulgent judge to awake again the old
ideas of sorcery.

344 LETTERS ON

LETTER X.

Other Mystic Arts independent of Shey poor g 5
. dts Influence during the 16th and 17th Centuries
Ignorance of those who practised it—Lilly’s History of his
Life and Times—Astrologer’s Society—Dr Lamb—Dr
 Forman—Establishment of the Royal Gest: Raa
— Connexion of Astrologers with Elementary Spirits—
Dun—Irish Superstition of the Banshie—Similar Su-
perstition in the Highlands—Brownie—Ghosts—Belief
of Ancient Philosophers on that Subject—Enquiry into
the respect due to such Tales in Modern Times—Evidence
of a Ghost against a Murderer— Ghost of Sir George
Villiers— Story of Earl St Vincent—of a British Gene-
ral Officer—of an Apparition in France—of the Second
Lord Lyttelton—of Bill Jones—of Jarvis Matcham—
Trial of two Highlanders for the Murder of Sergeant
Davis, discovered by a Ghost—Disturbances at Wood-
stock, anno 1649—Jmposture called the Stockwell Ghost
—Similar Case in Scotland— Ghost appearing to an Ex-
ciseman—Story of a Disturbed House discovered by the
firmness of the Proprietor—Apparition at Plymouth—A
Club of Philosophers—Ghost Adventure of a Farmer—
Trick upon a Veteran Soldier—Ghost Stories recom-
mended by the Skill of the Authors who compose them—
Mrs Veal's Ghost—Dunton’s Apparition Evi dl
fect of appropriate Scenery to encourage a t to Su-
perstition—differs at distant Periods of Li ight at
Glammis Castle about 1791— Visit to Dunvegan in 1814.

Wuite the vulgar endeavoured to obtain a
glance into the darkness of futurity by consulting:
the witch or fortune-teller, the great were sup-
posed to have a royal path of their own, com-

DEMONOLOGY AND WITCHCRAFT. 345

manding a view from a loftier quarter of the same
terra incognita. This was represented as acces-
sible by several routes. Physiognomy, Chiro-
mancy, and other fantastic arts of prediction, af+
forded each its mystical assistance and guidance.
But the road most flattering to human vanity;
while it was at the same time most seductive to
human credulity, was that of Astrology, the queen
of mystic sciences, who flattered those who con-
fided in her, that the planets and stars in their
spheres figure forth and influence the fate of the
creatures of mortality, and that a sage acquainted
with her lore could predict, with some approach
to certainty, the events of any man’s career, his
chance of success in life or in marriage, his ad-
vance in favour of the great, or answer any other
horary questions, as they were termed, which he
might be anxious to propound, provided always
he could supply the exact moment of his birth.
This, in the sixteenth, and greater part of the
seventeenth centuries, was all that was necessary
to enable the astrologer to erect a scheme of the
position of the heavenly bodies, which should dis-
close the life of the interrogator, or Native, as
he was called, with all its changes, past, present,
and to come.
Imagination was dazzled by a prospect so
splendid; and we find that, in the sixteenth cen-
tury, the cultivation of this fantastic science was
the serious object of men whose understandings
and acquirements admit of no question. Ba-
con himself allowed the truth which might be
found in a well- ated astrology, making thus
a distinction betwixt the art as commonly prac-

346 LETTERS ON

tised, and the manner in which it might, as he
conceived, be made a proper use of. Buta grave
or sober use of this science, if even Bacon could
have taught such moderation, would not have
suited the temper of those who, inflamed by hopes
of temporal aggrandizement, pretended to under-
stand and explain to others the language of the
stars. Almost all the other paths of mystic know-
ledge led to poverty ; even the alchemist, though
talking loud and high of the endless treasures his
art was to produce, lived from day to day, and
from year to year, upon hopes as unsubstantial
as the smoke of his furnace. But the pursuits of
the astrologer were such as called for instant re-
muneration. He became rich by the eager hopes
and fond. credulity of those who consulted him,
and that artist lived by duping others, instead of
starving, like others, by duping himself. The
wisest men have been cheated ae the idea that
some supernatural influence upheld and guided
them; and from the time of Wallenstein to that
of Buonaparte, ambition and success have placed
confidence in the species of fatalism inspired
by a belief of the influence of their own star.
Such being the case, the science was little pur-
sued by those who, faithful in their remarks and
reports, must soon have discovered its delusive
vanity through the splendour of its professions;
and the place of such calm and disinterested
pursuers of truth was occupied by a set of men
sometimes ingenious, always forward and assu-
ming, whose knowledge was imposition, whose
responses were, like the oracles of yore, ground-
ed on the desire of deceit, and who, if sometimes

DEMONOLOGY AND WITCHCRAFT. 347

they were elevated into rank and fortune, were
more frequently found classed with rogues and
vagabonds. This was the more apt to be the case
that a sufficient stock of impudence, and some
knowledge by rote of the terms of art, were all
the store of information necessary for establish-
ing a conjurer. The natural consequence of the
degraded character of the professors, was the de-
gradation of the art itself. Lilly, who wrote the
History of his Own Life and Times, notices in that
eurious volume the most distinguished persons
of his day, who made pretensions to astrology,
and almost without exception describes them as
profligate, worthless, a cheats, abandoned
to vice, and imposing, by the grossest frauds,
upon the silly fools who consulted them. From
what we learn of his own history, Lilly himself;
a low-born ignorant man, with some gloomy
shades of fanaticism in his temperament, was sut-
ficiently fitted to 1m others, and perhaps cheat-
ed himself, merely by perusing, at an advanced
period of life, some of the astrological tracts
devised by men of less cunning, though perhaps
more pretence to science, than he himself might
boast. Yet the public still continued to swal-
low these gross impositions, though coming from
such unworthy authority. The astrologers em-
braced different sides of the Civil War, and the
king on one side, with the Parliamentary lead-
ers on the other, were both equally curious to
know, and eager to believe, what Lilly, Wharton,
or Gadbury, had discovered from the heavens,
touching the fortune of the strife. Lilly was
a prudent person, contriving with some address

348 : LETTERS ON

to shift the sails of his prophetic bark, so as to’
suit the current of the time, and the gale of for-
tune. No person could better discover from va-
rious omens the course of Charles’s misfortunes,
so soon as they had come to pass. In the time
of the Commonwealth, he foresaw the perpetual
destruction of the monarchy, and in 1660, this
did not prevent his foreseeing the restoration
of King Charles II. He maintained some credit
even among the better classes, for Aubrey and
Ashmole both called themselves his friends,
being persons extremely credulous doubtless re-
specting the mystic arts. Once a-year, too, the
astrologers had a public dinner or feast, where
the knaves were patronized by the company of
such fools as claimed the title of Philomaths ;
that is, lovers of the mathematics, by which name
were still distinguished those who encouraged the
pursuit of mystical prescience, the most opposite
possible to exact science. Elias Ashmole, the
« most honourable Esquire” to whom Lilly’s Life
is dedicated, seldom failed to attend ; nay, several
men of sense and knowledge honoured this ren-
dezvous. Congreve’s picture of a man like Fore-
sight, the dupe of astrology and its sister arts,
was then common in society. But the astrologers
of the 17th century did not confine themselves to
the stars. There was no province of fraud which
they did not practise; they were scandalous as
panders, and as quacks sold potions for the most
unworthy purposes. For such reasons the com-
mon people detested the astrologers of the great,
as cordially as they did the more vulgar witches
of their own sphere, nee

DEMONOLOGY AND WITCHCRAFT. 349

Dr Lamb, patronized by the Duke of Buck-
ingham, who, like other overgrown favourites,
was inclined to cherish astrology, was, in 1640,
pulled to pieces in the city of London by the en-
raged populace, and his maid-servant, thirteen
ps afterwards, hanged as a witch at Salisbury.

n the villainous transaction of the poisoning of
Sir Thomas Overbury, in King James’s time,
much mention was made of the art and skill of Dr
Forman, another professor of the same sort with
Lamb, who was consulted by the Countess of
Essex on the best mode of conducting her guilty
intrigue with the Earl of Somerset. He was
dead before the affair broke out, which might
otherwise have cost him the gibbet, as it did all
others concerned, with.the exception only of the
principal parties, the atrocious authors of the
crime. When the cause was tried, some little
puppets were produced in court, which were
viewed by one party with horror, as representing
the most horrid spells. It was even said that the
devil was about to pull down the court-house on
their being discovered. Others of the audience
only saw in them the baby figures on which dress-
makers then, as now, were accustomed to expose
new fashions.

The erection of the Royal Society, dedica-
ted to far different. purposes than the pursuits
of astrology, had a natural operation in bringing
the latter into discredit; and although the ecre-
dulity of the ignorant and uninformed continued
to support some pretenders to that science, the
name of Philomath assumed by these persons
and their clients began to sink under ridicule

350 LETTERS ON

and contempt. When Sir Richard Steele set
up the paper called the Guardian, he chose, un-
der the title of Nestor Ironside, to assume the
character of an astrologer, and issued predictions
accordingly, one of which, announcing the death
of a person called Partridge, once a shoemaker,
but at the time the conductor of an Astrological
Almanack, led to a controversy, which was
ported with great humour by Swift and other
wags. I believe you will find that this, with
Swift's Elegy on the same person, is one of the
last occasions in which astrology has afforded
even a jest to the good people of England.
This dishonoured science has some right to be
mentioned in a Treatise on Demonology, because
the earlier astrologers, though denying the use of
all necromancy, that is, unlawful or black magic,
pretended always to a correspondence with the
various spirits of the elements, on the principles
of the Rosicrucian philosophy. They affirmed
they could bind to their service, and imprison
in a ring, a mirror, or a stone, some fairy, sylph,
or salamander, and compel it to appear when
called, and render answers to such questions as
the viewer should propose. It is remarkable
that the sage himself did not pretend to see the
“spirit ; but the task of viewer, or reader, was in-
trusted to a third party, a boy or girl usually un-
‘der the years of puberty. Dr Dee, an excellent
mathematician, had a stone of this kind, and is
said to have been imposed upon concerning the
spirits attached to it, their actions and answers,
by the report of one Kelly, who acted as his
viewer. The unfortunate Dee was ruined by his

DEMONOLOGY AND WITCHCRAFT. 351

associates both in fortune and reputation. His
show-stone, or mirror, is still preserved, among
other curiosities, in the British Museum. Some
superstition of the same kind was introduced by
the celebrated Count Cagtiostro, during the course
of the intrigue respecting the diamond necklace,
in which the late Marie Antoinette was so un-
fortunately implicated.

Dismissing this general class of impostors, who
are now seldom heard of, we come now briefly
to mention some leading superstitions, once, per-
haps, common to all the countries of Europe, but
now restricted to those which continue to be in-
habited by an undisturbed and native race. Of
these, one of the most beautiful is the Irish fic-
tion, which assigns to certain families of ancient
descent and distinguished rank the privilege of
a Banshie, as she is called, or household fairy,
whose office it is to appear, seemingly mourning
while she announces the approaching death of
some one of the destined race. The subject has
been so lately and beautifully investigated and
illustrated by Mr Crofton Croker and others,
that I may dispense with being very particular
regarding it. If I am rightly informed, the dis-
tinction of a banshie is only allowed to families
of the pure Milesian stock, and is never ascribed
to any descendant of the proudest Norman or
boldest Saxon who followed the banner of Earl
Strongbow, much less to adventurers of later
dete who have obtained settlements in the Green

sle.

Several families of the Highlands of Scotland
anciently laid claim to the distinction of an attend-

15

352 : LETTERS ON

ant spirit, who performed the office of the Irish
banshie, Amongst them, however, the functions
of this attendant genius, whose form and appear-
ance differed in different cases, were not limit-
ed to announcing the dissolution of those whose
days were numbered. The Highlanders contri-
ved to exact from them other points of service,
sometimes as warding off dangers of battle; at
others, as guarding and protecting the infant
heir through the dangers of childhood ; and some-
times as condescending to interfere even in the
sports of the chieftain, and point out the fittest
move to be made at chess, or the best card to be
played at any other game.. Among those spirits
who have deigned to vouch their existence by
apeuerEne of late years, is that of an ancestor of
the family of MacLean of Lochbuy. Before the
death of any of his race, the phantom-chief gal-
lops along the sea-beach, near to the castle, an-
nouncing the event by cries and lamentations,
The spectre is said to have rode his rounds and
uttered his death-cries within these few years, in
consequence of which, the family and clan, though

‘much shocked, were in no way surprised, to hear,
-by next accounts, that their gallant chief was

dead at Lisbon, where he served under Lord Wel-

lington. vig
Of a meaner origin and occupation was the

Scottish Brownie—already mentioned, as some-

‘what resembling Robin Goodfellow in the frolic-

some days of Old England. This spirit was easily

banished, or, as it was styled, hired away, by the

offer of clothes or food ; but many of the simple in-

habitants could little see the prudence of parting
ll

DEMONOLOGY AND WITCHCRAFT. 353

_with such a useful domestic drudge, who served
faithfully, without fee and reward, food or raimenti
Neither was it at all times safe to reject Brownie’s
assistance. Thus, we are informed by Brand,
that a young man in the Orkneys “ used to
brew, and sometimes read upon his Bible; to
whom an old woman in the house said, that
Brownie was displeased with that book he read
upon, which, if he continued to do, they would

et no more service of Brownie; but he being
Petter instructed from that book, which was
Brownie’s eyesore, and the object of his wrath;
when he brewed, would not suffer any sacrifice
to be given to Brownie; whereupon the first
and second brewings were spoilt, and for no use;
for though the wort wrought well, yet in a little
time it left off working, and grew cold; but of
the third broust, or brewing, he had ale vety good,
though he would not give any sacrifice to Brownie,
with whom afterwards they were no more trou-
bled.” Another story of the same kind is told of
alady in Uist, who refused, on religious grounds,
the usual sacrifice to this domestic spirit. The
first and second brewings failed, but the third
succeeded ; and thus, when Brownie lost the per-
quisite to which he had been so long accustomed;
he abandoned the inhospitable house, where his
services had so long been faithfully rendered.
The last place in the south of Scotland supposed
to have.been honoured, or benefited, by the resi-
dence of a Brownie, was Bodsbeck, in Moffat-
dale, which has been the subject of an entertain-
ing tale by Mr James Hogg, the self-instructed
genius of Ettrick Forest. ,

Zz

354 LETTERS ON

These particular, superstitions, however, are
too limited, and too much obliterated from recol-
lection, to call for special discussion. The gene-
ral faith in fairies has already undergone our
consideration ; but something remains to be said
upon another species of superstition, so general,
that it may be called proper te mankind in ever
climate; so deeply rooted also in human belief,
that it is found to survive in states of society du-
ring which all other fictions of the same order
are entirely dismissed from influence. Mr Crabbe,
with his usual felicity, has called the. belief in
ghosts “ the last lingering fiction of the brain.” -

Nothing appears more simple at: the first view
of the subject, than that human memory should
recall and bring back to the eye-of the imagina-
tion, in perfect similitude, even the very form
and features of a person with whom we have been
long conversant, or which have been imprinted
in our minds with. indelible strength, by some
striking cireamstances touching our meeting in
life. The son does not easily forget the aspect of
an affectionate father; and, for reasons opposite,
but-equally powerful, the countenance of a mur-
dered person is engraved upon the recollection
of his slayer. . A. thousand additional cireum-
stances, far too obvious to require recapitulation,

_ render the supposed, apparition of the dead the

most ordinary spectral phenomenon which is ever
believed to occur among the living, All that
we have formerly said respecting supernatural ap-
pearances in general, applies with peculiar force
to the belief of ghosts; for whether the cause
of delusion exists in an excited imagination or

DEMONOLOGY AND WITCHCRAFT. 355

a disordered organic system, it is in this way
that it commonly exhibits itself. Hence Lucre-
tius himself, the most absolute of sceptics, consi-
ders the existence of ghosts, and their frequent
apparition, as facts so undeniable, that he endea-
vours to account for them at the expense of as-
senting to a class of phenomena very irreconci-
lable to his general system. As he will not allow
of the existence of the human soul, and at the
same time cannot venture to question the pheno-
mena supposed to haunt the repositories of the
dead, he is obliged to adopt the belief that the
body consists of several coats like those of an
onion, and that the outmost and thinnest, being
detached by death, continues to wander near the
place of sepulture, in. the exact resemblance of
the person while alive.

We have said there are many ghost stories
which we do not feel at liberty to challenge as
impostures, because we are confident. that those
who relate them on their own authority actually
believe what they assert, and may have good rea-
son for doing so, though there is no real phan-
tom after all. We are far, therefore, from aver-
ring that such. tales anearurery: false. It is
easy to suppose the visionary has been imposed
upon by a lively dream, a waking reverie, the ex-
citation of a powerful imagination, or the misre-. .
presentation of a diseased organ of sight; and, in
one or other of these causes, to. say nothing of a
system of deception which may in many instances
be probable, we apprehend a solution will be
found for all cases of what are called real ghost
stories.

$56 v2 LETTERS ON

In truth, the evidence with respect to such ap-
paritions is very ‘seldom accurately or distinctly
questioned. A supernatural tale is, in most cases,
received as an agreeable mode of amusing society,
and he would be rather accounted a sturdy mo-
ralist than an entertaining companion, who should
employ himself in assailing its credibility. It
would indeed be a solecism in manners, something
like that of impeaching the genuine value of the
antiquities exhibited by a good-natured collector,
for the gratification of his guests. This diffienl-
ty will appear greater, should a company have the
rare good fortune to meet the person who himself
witnessed the wonders which he tells ; a well-bred
or prudent man will, under such circumstances,
abstain from using the rules of cross-examination

practised in a court of justice; and if in any case
he presumes to do so, he is in danger of receiving
answers, even from the most candid and honour-
able persons, which are rather fitted to support the
credit of the story which they stand committed to
maintain, than to the pure service of unadorned
truth. The narrator is asked, for example, some
unimportant question with respect to the appari-

tion; he answers it on the hasty suggestion of his’

own imagination, tinged as it is with belief of the
general fact, and by doing so, often gives a feature

of minute evidence which was before wanting,’
and this with perfect unconsciousness on his own
part. ‘ It is a rare occurrence, indeed, to find an’
opportunity of dealing with an actual ghost-seer ;

such instances, however, I have certainly my-
self met with, and that in the case of able, wise,

candid, and resolute persons, of whose veracity’

DEMONOLOGY AND WITCHCRAFT. 3857

I had every reason to be confident. But in such
instances, shades of mental aberration have af-
terwards occurred, which ‘sufficiently: accounted
for the supposed apparitions, and will incline me
always to feel alarmed in behalf of the continued
health of a friend, who should conceive himself to
have witnessed such a visitation.

The nearest approximation which can be gene-
rally made to exact evidence in this case, is the
word of some: individual who has had the story,
it may be, from the — to whom it has hap-
pened, but most likely from his family, or some
friend of the family. Far more commonly, the
narrator possesses no better means of knowledge
than that of dwelling in the country where the
thing happened, or are well acquainted with
the outside of the mansion in the inside of which
the ghost appeared. © a
. In every point, the evidence of such a second-
hand retailer of the mystic story must fall under
the adjudged case in an English court. The judge
stopped a witness who was about to give an ac-
eount of the murder upon trial, as it was narrated
to him by the ghost of the murdered person.
« Hold, sir,” said his lordship; ‘ the ghost is an ex-
cellent witness, and his evidence the best possible ;
but he cannot be heard by. proxy. in this court.
Summon him hither, and: I'll hear him in person ;
but your communication is mere hearsay, which
my office compels me to reject.” Yet it is upon the
eredit of one man, who pledges it upon thatof three
or four persons who have told it successively to
each other, that we are often expected to believe
an incident inconsistent with the laws of nature,

358 LETTERS ON

however agreeable to our love of the wonderful
and the horrible.

In estimating the truth or falsehood of such
stories, it is evident we can derive no proofs from
that period of society when men affirmed boldly,
and believed stoutly, all the wonders which could
be coined or fancied. That such stories are be-
lieved and told by grave historians, only shows that
the wisest men cannot rise in all things above the
general ignorance of their age. Upon the evidence
of such historians, we might as well believe the por-
tents of ancient, or the miracles of modern, Rome.
For example, we read in Clarendon, of the ap-
parition of the ghost of Sir George Villiers :to
an ancient dependant. This is, no doubt, a story
told by a grave author, at a time when such sto-
ries were Gelieved by all the world; but does it
follow that our reason must acquiesce in a state-
ment so positively contradicted by the voice of
Nature, through all her works? The’miracle of
raising a dead man was aera refused by our
Saviour to the Jews, who demanded it as a proof
of his mission ; because they had already suf-
ficient grounds of conviction, and, as they belie+
ved them not, it: was irresistibly argued by the
Divine Person whom they tempted, that neither
would they believe if one arose from the dead.
Shall we suppose that a miracle refused for the
conversion of God’s chosen people, was sent ona
vain errand, to save the life ofa profligate spend-
thrift ? Ilay aside, you observe, entirely, the not
unreasonable supposition that Towers, or what-
ever was the ghost-seer’s name, desirous to make
an impression upon Buckingham, as an old servant

DEMONOLOGY AND WITCHCRAFT. 859

of his house, might be tempted to give him his ad-
vice, of which we are not told the import, in the
character of his father’s 1 Hy and authenticate
the tale by the mention of some token known to
him as a former retainer of the family. The Duke
was superstitious, and theready dupe ofastrol
and soothsayerss The manner in which he had
provoked the fury of the people, must have warn-
ed every reflecting person of his approaching fate ;
and, theage considered, it was not unnatural that a
faithful friend should take this mode of calling his
attention to his perilous situation. Or, if we sup-
pose that the incident was not a mere pretext to
obtain access to the Duke’s ear, the messenger
may have been imposed upon by an idle dream—
ina word, numberless conjectures might be form-
ed for accounting forthe event in anatural way, the
most extravagant of which is more probable, than
that the laws of nature were broken through in
order to give a vain and fruitless warning to an
ambitious minion.

. It is the same with all those that are called ac-
credited ghost stories usually told at the fireside.
They want evidence. It is true, that the general
wish to believe, rather than power of believing,
has given some such stories a certain currency in
society. I may mention, as one of the class of
tales I mean, that of the late Earl St Vincent,
who watched, with a friend, it is said, a whole
night, in order to detect the cause of certain noc-
turnal disturbances which took place in a certain
mansion. The house was under lease to Mrs
Ricketts, his sister. The result of his lordship’s
vigil is said to have been, that he heard the noises,

360 LETTERS ON

without being able to detect the causes, and in-
sisted on his sister giving up the house. This is
told as a real story, with a thousand different cir-
cumstances. But who has heard or seen an au-
thentic account from Earl St Vincent, or from his
“ companion of the watch,” or from his lordship’s
sister? And as in any other case, such sure spe-
cies of direct evidence would be necessary to prove
the facts, it seems unreasonable to believe such a
story on slighter terms, When the particulars are
precisely fixed and known, it might be time to en-
quire whether Lord St Vincent, amid the other
eminent qualities of a first-rate seaman, might not
be in some degree tinged with their tendency to
superstition ; and still farther, whether, having
ascertained the existence of disturbances not im-
mediately or easily detected, his lordship might
not advise his sister rather to remove, than to
remain in a house so haunted, though he might
believe that poachers or smugglers were the
worst ghosts by whom it was disturbed. .

The story of two highly respectable officers in
the British army, who are supposed to have seen
the spectre of the brother of one of them in a hut,
or barrack, in America, is also one of those accre-
dited ghost tales, which attain a sort of brevet
rank as true, from the mention. of respectable
names as the parties who witnessed the vision,
But we are left without a glimpse when, how, and
in what terms, this story obtained its currency ;
as also by whom, and in what manner, it was first
circulated ; and among the numbers by whom it
has been quoted, although all agree in the gene-
ral event, scarcely two, even of those who pre-

DEMONOLOGY AND WITCHCRAFT. 361

tend to the best information, tell the story in the
same way.

Another such story, in which the name of a

lady of condition is made use of as having seen
an apparition in a country-seat in France, is so
far better borne out than those I have mention-
ed, that I have seen a narrative of the circum-
stances, attested by the party principally con-
cerned. That the house was disturbed seems to
be certain, but the circumstances (though very re-
markable) did not, in my mind, by any means ex-
clude the probability that the disturbance and ap-
pearances were occasioned by the dexterous ma-
nagement of some mischievously-disposed per-
sons.
The remarkable circumstance of Thomas, the
second Lord Lyttelton, prophesying his own death
within a few minutes, upon the information of an
apparition, has been always quoted asa true story.
But of late it has been said and published, that
the unfortunate nobleman had previously deter-
mined to take poison, and of course had it in his
own power toascertain the execution of the predic-
tion. It was no doubt singular that a man, whe
meditated his exit from the world, should have
chosen to play such a trick on his friends. But it
is still more credible that a whimsical man should
do so wild a thing, than that a messenger should
be sent from the dead, to tell a libertine at what
precise hour he should expire.

To this list other stories of the same class might
be added. But it is sufficient to show that such
stories as these, having gained a certain degree of
currency in the world, and bearing creditable names

362 LETTERS ON

on their front, walk through society unchallen-
ged, like bills through a bank, when they bear
respectable indorsations, although, it may be, the
signatures are forged after all. There is, indeed,
an unwillingness very closely to examine such
subjects, for the secret fund of superstition in
every man’s bosom, is gratified by believing them
to be true, or at least induces him to abstain from
challenging them as false. And no doubt it must.
happen that the transpiring of incidents, in which
men have actually seen, or conceived that they
saw, apparitions which were invisible to others,
contributes to the increase of such stories,—which
do accordingly sometimes meet us in a shape of
veracity difficult to question.

The following story was narrated tome by my
friend Mr William Clerk, chief clerk to the Jury
Court, Edinburgh, when he first learned it, now
nearly thirty years ago, from a passenger in the
mail coach. With Mr Clerk's consent, I gave
the story at that time to poor Mat Lewis, who
published it with a ghost-ballad which he adjust-
ed on the same theme. From the minuteness of
the original detail, however, the narrative is better
calculated for prose than verse ; and more espe-
cially, as the friend to whom it was originally
communicated, is one of the most accurate, in-
telligent, and acute persons whom I have known
in the course of my life, I am willing to preserve
the precise story in this place.

It was about the eventful year 1800, when the
Emperor Paul laid his ill-judged embargo on Bri-
tish trade, that my friend Mr William Clerk; on
a journey to London, found himself in company;

DEMONOLOGY AND WITCHCRAFT. 863

in the mail-coach, with a seafaring man of middle
age and respectable appearance, who announced
himself as master of a vessel in the Baltic trade,
and a sufferer by the embargo. In the course of
the desultory conversation which takes place on
such occasions, the seaman observed, in com-
pliance with a common superstition, “ I wish we
may have good luck on our journey—there is a
magpie.”—“ And why should that be unlucky?”
said my friend.—<« I cannot tell you that,” replied
the sailor; “ but all the world agrees that one
magpie bodes bad luck—two are not so bad, but
three are the devil.. I never saw three magpies
but twice, and once I had near lost my vessel, and
the second I fell from a horse, and was hart.”
This conversation led Mr Clerk to observe, that
he supposed he believed also in ghosts, since he
credited such auguries. “ And if I do,” said the
sailor, “« I may have my own reasons for doing
so ;” and he spoke this in a deep and serious man-
ner, implying that he felt deeply what he was
saying. On being further , he confessed
that, if he could believe his own eyes, there was
one ghost at least which he had seen repeatedly.
He then told his story as I now relate it.

Our mariner had, in his youth, gone mate of a
slave vessel from Li ool, of which town he
seemed to be a native. The captain of the vessel
was a man of a variable temper, sometimes kind
and courteous to his men, but subject to fits of
humour, dislike, and passion, during which he
was very violent, tyrannical, and cruel. He took
a particular dislike at one sailor aboard, an elder-
ly man; called Bill Jones, or some such name.

364 LETTERS ON

He seldom spoke to this person without threats
and abuse, which the old man, with the license
which sailors take in merchant vessels, was very
apt to return. On one occasion, Bill Jones ap-
peared slow in getting out on the yard to hand a
sail. The captain, according to custom, abused
the seaman as a lubberly rascal, who got fat by
leaving his duty to other people. The man made
& saucy answer, almost amounting to mutiny, on
which, in a towering passion, the captain ran down
to his cabin, and returned with a blunderbuss
‘loaded with slugs, with which he took deliberate
aim at the supposed mutineer, fired, and mortally
wounded him. The man was handed down from
the yard, and stretched on the deck, evidently dy-
ing. He fixed his eyes on the captain, and said,
“ Sir, you have done for me, but J will never leave
you.” The captain, in return, swore at him fora
fat lubber, and said he would have him thrown
into the slave-kettle, where they made food for
the negroes, and see how much fat he had got.
The man died ; his body was actually thrown into
the slave-kettle, and the narrator observed, witha
naiveté which confirmed the extent of his own
belief in the truth of what he told, “ There was
not much fat about him after all.”

The captain told the crew they must keep ab=
solute silence on the subject of what had passed ;
and as the mate was not willing to give an ex-
ey and absolute promise, he ordered him to

e confined below. After a day or two, he
came to the mate, and demanded if he had an
intention to deliver him up for trial when the
vessel got home. The mate, who was tired of

DEMONOLOGY AND WITCHCRAFT. 365

close confinement in that sultry climate, spoke
his commander fair, and obtained his liberty.
When he mingled among the crew once more, he
found them impressed with the idea, not unna-
tural in their situation, that the ghost of the dead
man appeared among them when they had a spell
of duty, especially if a sail was to be handed, on
which occasion the spectre was sure to be out
upon the yard before any of the crew. The nar-
rator had seen this apparition himself repeated!

—he believed the captain saw it also, but he too

no notice of it for some time, and the crew, terri-
fied at the violent temper of the man, dared not
call his attention to it. Thus, they held on their
course homeward, with great fear and anxiety. *

At length the captain invited the mate, who
was now in a sort of favour, to go down to the
cabin and take a glass of grog with him. In this
interview, he assumed a very grave and anxious
aspect. “ I need not tell you, Jack,” he said,
«¢ what sort of hand we have got on board with
us—He told me he would never leave me, and
he has kept his word—You only see him now
and then, but he is always by my side, and never
out of my sight. At this very moment I see him
—I am determined to bear it no longer, and I
have resolved to leave you.”

The mate replied, that his leaving the vessel
while out of the sight of any Jand was impossible.
He advised, that if the captain apprehended any
bad consequences from what had happened, he
should run for the west of France or Ireland, and
there go ashore, and leave him, the mate, to ow
the vessel into Liverpool. The captain only shoo

366 LETTERS ON

his head gloomily, and reiterated his determina-
tion to leave the ship. At this moment, the mate
was called to the deck for some purpose or other,
and the, instant he got up the companion-ladder,
he heard a splash in the water, and looking over
the ship’s side, saw that the captain had thrown
himself into the sea from the quarter-gallery, and
was running astern at the rate of six knots an
hour. When just about. to. sink, he seemed to
make a last exertion, sprung half out of the water,
and clasped his hands towards the mate, calling,
« By ——, Bill is with me now!” and fain >
to be seen no more.

After hearing this singular story, Mr Clerk
asked some questions about the captain, and whe-
ther his companion considered him as at all times
rational. The sailor seemed struck with the ques-
tion, and answered, after a moment's delay, that
in general he conversationed well enough.

It would have been desirable to have been able
to ascertain how far this extraordinary tale was
founded on fact; but want of time, and other
circumstances, prevented Mr Clerk from learn-
ing the names and dates, that might, to a certain.
degree, have verified the events. Granting the
murder to have taken place, and the tale to have
been truly told, there was nothing more likely to.
arise among the ship’s company than the belief
in the apparition; as the captain was a man of a
passionate and irritable disposition, it was nowise
improbable that he, the victim of remorse, should
participate in the horrible visions of those less
concerned, especially as he was compelled to ayoid.
communicating his sentiments with any one else ;

DEMONOLOGY AND WITCHCRAFT. 367

and the catastrophe would. in such a case be but
the natural consequence of that superstitious re-
morse, which has conducted so many criminals to
suicide or the gallows. If the fellow-traveller of
Mr Clerk be not allowed this degree of credit,
he must at least be admitted to have displayed a
singular talent for the composition of the horrible
in fiction. The tale, properly detailed, might have
made the fortune of a romancer.

I cannot forbear giving you, as congenial to
this story, another instance of a guilt-formed
phantom, which made.considerable noise about
twenty years ago or more. I am, I think, toler-
ably correct in the details, though I have lost the
account of the trial. Jarvis Matcham—such, if I
am not mistaken, was the name of my hero—was
pay-sergeant in aregiment, where he was so highly
esteemed as a steady and accurate man, that he
was permitted opportunity to embezzle aconsider-
able part of the money lodged in his hands for
pay of soldiers, bounty of recruits, then a large
sum, and other charges which fell within his duty.
He was summoned to join his regiment from a
town where he had been on the recruiting service,
and this perhaps under some shade of suspicion.
Matcham perceived discovery was at hand, and
would have deserted, had it not been for the pre-
sence of a little drummer lad, whowwas the only
one of his party appointed to attend him. In the
desperation of his crime, he resolved to murder
the poor boy, and avail himself of some balance
of money to make his escape. He meditated this
wickedness the more readily, that the drummer,
he thought, had been put asa spy on him. He

368 LETTERS ON

perpetrated his crime, and, changing his dress
after the deed was done, made a long walk across
the country to an inn on the Portsmouth road,
where he halted, and went to bed, desiring to be
called when the first Portsmouth coach came.
The waiter summoned him accordingly ; but long
after remembered, that when he shook the guest
by the shoulder, his first words as he awoke were,
“ My God! I did not kill him.” :

Matcham went to the seaport by the coach, and
instantly entered as an able-bodied landsman or
marine, I know not which. His sobriety and at-
tention to duty gained him the same good opinion
of the officers in his new service which he had en-
joyed in the army. He was afloat for several
years, and behaved remarkably well in some ac-
tions. At length the vessel came into Plymouth,
was paid off, and some of the crew, amongst whom
was Jarvis Matcham, were dismissed as too old
for service. He and another seaman resolved to
walk to town, and took the route by Salisbury.
It was when within two or three miles of this
celebrated city, that they were overtaken by a
tempest so sudden, and accompanied with such
vivid lightning, and thunder so dreadfully loud,
that the obdurate conscience of the old sinner.
began to be awakened. He expressed more ter~
ror than seemed natural for one who was fami-
liar with the war of elements, and began to look
and talk so wildly, that-his companion became
aware that something more than usual was the
matter. At length Matcham complained to his:
companion that the stones rose from the road
and flew after him. He desired the man. to

DEMONOLOGY AND WITCHCRAFT. 369

walk on the other side of the highway, to see
if they would follow him when he was alone.
The sailor complied, and Jarvis Matcham com-
plained that the stones still flew after him, and
did not pursue the other. “ But what is worse,”
he added, coming up to his companion, and whis-
pering, with a tone of mystery and fear, “ who
is that little drummer boy, and what business has
he to follow us so closely ?”—« I can see no one,”
answered the seaman, infected by the supersti-
tion of his associate. “ What! not see that little
boy with the bloody pantaloons!” exclaimed the
secret murderer, so much to the terror of his
comrade, that he conjured him, if he had any
thing onhis mind, to make a clear conscience as far
as confession could do it. The criminal fetched a
deep groan, and declared that he was unable long-
er to endure the life which he had led for years.
He then confessed the murder of the drummer,
and added, that as a considerable reward had
been offered, he wished his comrade to deliver
him up to the magistrates of Salisbury, as he
would desire a shipmate to profit by his fate, which
he was now convinced was inevitable. Having
overcome his friend’s objections to this mode of
proceeding, Jarvis Matcham. was surrendered to
justice accordingly, and made a full confession
of his guilt. But before the trial the love of life
returned. The prisoner denied his confession,
and pleaded Not Guilty. By this time, however,
full evidence had been procured from other quar-
ters. Witnesses appeared from his former regi-
ment to prove his identity with the murderer and
deserter, and the waiter remembered the omin-
2a

370 LETTERS ON

ous words which he had spoken when he awoke
him to join the Portsmouth coach. Jarvis Match-
am was found guilty, and executed. When his
last chance of life was over, he returned to his
confession, and with his dying breath averred, and
truly, as he thought, the truth of the vision on
Salisbury plain. Similar stories might be pro-
duced, showing plainly that, under the direction
of Heaven, the influence of superstitious fear may
be the appointed means of bringing the criminal
to repentance for his own sake, and to punishment
for the advantage of society.

Cases of this kind are numerous, and easily
imagined, so I shall dwell on them no further;
but rather advert to at least an equally abun-
dant class of ghost stories, in which the appari-
tion is pleased not to torment the actual mur-
derer, but proceeds in a very circuitous manner,
acquainting some stranger or ignorant old wo-
man with the particulars of his fate, who, though
perhaps unacquainted with all the parties, is di-
rected by the phantom to lay the facts before a
magistrate. In this respect, we must certainly
allow that ghosts have, as we are informed by the
facetious Captain Grose, forms and customs pe-
culiar to themselves.

There would be no edification, and little amuse-
ment, in treating of clumsy deceptions of this
kind, where the grossness of the imposture de-
tects itself. But occasionally cases occur like the
following, with respect to which it is more diffi-
cult, to use James Boswell’s phrase, ‘* to know
what to think.” i avers

Upon the 10th of June, 1754, Duncan Terig, |

DEMONOLOGY AND WITCHCRAFT. 371

alias Clark, and Alexander Bain MacDonald, two
Highlanders, were tried before the Court of Jus-
ticiary, Edinburgh, for the murder of Arthur Da-
vis, sergeant in Guise’s regiment, on the 28th Sep-
tember, 1749. The accident happened not lon

after the civil war, the embers of which were still
reeking, so there existed too many reasons on ac-
count of which an English soldier, straggling far
from assistance, might be privately cut off by the
inhabitants of these wilds. It appears that Ser-
geant Davis was amissing for years, without any
certainty as to his fate. At length, an account of
the murder appeared from the evidence of one
Alexander MacPherson, (a Highlander, speaking
no language but Gaelic, and sworn by an interpret-
er,) who gave the following extraordinary account
of his cause of knowledge :—He was, he said, in
bed in his cottage, when an apparition came to his
bedside, and commanded him to rise and follow
him out of doors. Believing his visitor to be one
Farquharson, a neighbour and friend, the witness
did as he was bid; and'when they were without
the cottage, the appearance told the witness he
was the ghost of Sergeant Davis, and requested
him to go and bury his mortal remains, which
lay concealed in a place he pointed out, in a moor-
land tract called the hill of Christie. He desired
him to take Farquharson with him as an assist-
ant. Next day the witness went to the place
specified, and there found the bones of a human
body much decayed. The witness did not at that
time bury the bones so found, in consequence of
which negligence the sergeant’s ghost again ap-
peared to him, upbraiding him with his breach of

372 LETTERS ON

promise. On this occasion the witness asked the
ghost who were the murderers, and received for
answer that he had been slain by the prisoners at
the bar. The witness, after this second visita-
tion, called the assistance of Farquharson, and
buried the body.

Farquharson was brought in evidence, to prove
that the preceding witness, MacPherson, had
called him to the burial of the bones, and told
him the same story which he repeated in court.’
Isabel MacHardie, a person who slept in one of
the beds which run along the wall in an ordinary
Highland hut, declared, that upon the night when
MacPherson said he saw the ghost, she saw a
naked man enter the house, and go towards Mac-
Pherson’s bed.

Yet though the supernatural incident was thus.
fortified, and although there were other strong
presumptions against the prisoners, the story of
the apparition threwan air of ridicule on the whole
evidence for the prosecution. It was followed
up by the counsel for the prisoners asking, in,
the cross-examination of MacPherson, ‘“ What
language did the ghost speak in?” The witness,
who was himself ignorant of English, replied,
«“ As good Gaelic as I ever heard in Lochaber.”
—* Pretty well for the ghost of an English
sergeant,” answered the counsel. The inference
was rather smart and plausible than sound, for,
the apparition of the ghost being admitted, we
know too little of the other world to judge whe-
ther all languages may not be alike familiar to.
those who chore to it. It imposed, however,
on the jury, who found the accused parties Not

DEMONOLOGY AND WITCHCRAFT. 373

Guilty, although their counsel and solicitor, and
most of the court, were satisfied of their ha-
ving committed the murder. In this case, the
interference of the ghost seems to have rather im-
peded the vengeance which it was doubtless the
murdered sergeant’s desire to obtain. Yet there
may be various modes of explaining this myste-
rious story, of which the following conjecture
may pass for one.

The reader may suppose that MacPherson was
privy to the fact of the murder, perhaps as an
accomplice, or otherwise, and may also suppose,
that from motives of remorse for the action, or
of enmity to those who had committed it, he en-
tertained a wish to bring them to justice. But
through the whole Highlands there is no cha-
racter more detestable than that of an informer,
or one who takes what is called Tascal-money,
or reward for discovery of crimes. To have in-
formed against Terig and MacDenald might have
cost MacPherson his life ; and it is far from being
impossible, that he had recourse to the story of
the ghost, knowing well that his superstitious
countrymen would pardon his eommunicating
the commission intrusted to him by a being from
the other world, although he might probably have
been murdered, if his delation of the crime had
been supposed voluntary. This explanation, in
exact conformity with the sentiments of the
Highlanders on such subjects, would: reduce the
whole story to a stroke of address on‘the part of
the witness. i) '

It is therefore of the last consequenee, in con-
sidering the truth of stories of ghosts and appa-

374 LETTERS ON

ritions, to consider the possibility of wilful de-
ception, whether on the part of those who are
agents in the supposed disturbances, or the au-
thor of the legend. We shall separately notice
an instance or two of either kind. ;
The most celebrated instance in which human
agency was used to copy the disturbances im-
puted to supernatural beings, refers to the an-
cient palace of Woodstock, when the Commis-
sioners of the Long Parliament came down to
dispark what had been lately a royal residence.
The Commissioners arrived at Woodstock 13th
October, 1649, determined to wipe away. the
memory of all that connected i with the re-
collection of monarchy in England. But, in the
course of their progress, they were encountered
by obstacles which apparently came from the next
world. Their bedehambers. were. infested with
visits of a thing resembling a dog, but which
came and passed as mere earthly dogs cannot do.
Logs of wood, the remains of a very large tree
called the King’s Oak, which they had splinter-
ed into billets for burning, were tossed 0,
the house, and the chairs displaced and shuffied
about. While they were in bed, the feet of their
couches were lifted higher than their heads, and
then dropped with ck Trenchers “ with-
out a wish” flew at their heads, of free will.
Thunder and lightning came next, which were
set down to the same cause. Spectres made their
appearance, as they thought, in different »
and one of the party saw the apparition of a hoof,
which kicked a candlestick and lighted candle
into the middle of the room, and. then politely

DEMONOLOGY AND WITCHCRAFT. 375

scratched on the red snuff to extinguish it. Other
and worse tricks were practised on the astonished
Commissioners, who, considering that all the
fiends of hell were let loose upon them, retreated
from Woodstock without completing an errand,
which was, in their opinion, impeded by infernal
powers, though the opposition offered was rather
of a playful and malicious, than of a dangerous
cast

The whole matter was, after the Restoration,
discovered to be the trick of one of their own
party, who had attended the Commissioners as
a clerk, under the name of Giles Sharp. This
man, whose real name was Joseph Collins of
Oxford, called Funny Joe, was a concealed loyal-
ist, and well acquainted with the old mansion of
Woodstock, where he had been brought up be-
fore the Civil War. Being a bold, active, spirited
man, Joe availed himself of his local knowledge
of trap-doors and private passages, so as to favour
the tricks which he played off upon his masters
by aid of his fellow-domestics. The Commis-
sioners’ personal reliance on him made his task
the more -easy, and it was all along remarked,
that trusty Giles Sharp saw the most extraordi-
nary sights and visions among the whole party.
The unearthly terrors experienced by the Com-
missioners are detailed with due gravity by Sin-
clair, and also, I think, by Dr Plott. But al-
though the detection, or explanation of the real
history of the Woodstock demons, has also been
published, and I have myself seen it, 1 have at
this time forgotten whether it exists in a separate
collection, or where it is to be looked for.

376 ‘ LETTERS ON H

Similar disturbances have been often experien-
ced, while it was the custom to believe in and
dread such frolics of the invisible world, and
under circumstances which induce us to wonder,
both at the extreme trouble taken by the agents
in these impostures, and the slight motives from
which they have been induced to do much wan-
ton mischief. Still greater is our modern surprise
at the apparently simple means by which terror has
been excited to so general an extent, that even
the wisest and most prudent have not escaped its
contagious influence.

On the first point, Iam afraid there ean be no
better reason assigned than the conscious pride
of superiority, which induces the human being in
all cases to enjoy and practise every means of em-
ploying an influence over his fellow mortals ; to
which we may safely add, that general love of
tormenting, as common to our race, as to that
noble mimick of humanity, the monkey. To this
is owing the delight with which every school-
boy anticipates the effects of throwing a stone
into a glass shop; and to this we must also as-
cribe the otherwise unaccountable pleasure which
individuals have taken in practising the tricksy
pranks of a goblin, and filling a household, or
neighbourhood, with anxiety and dismay, with
little gratification to themselves besides the con-
sciousness of dexterity if they;remain undisco-
vered, and with the risk of loss of character, and
punishment, should the imposture be found out.

In the year 1772, a train of transactions com-
mencing upon Twelfth Day, threw the utmost
consternation into the village of Stockwell, near

DEMONOLOGY AND WITCHCRAFT. 377

London, and impressed upon some of its in-
habitants the inevitable belief that they were
produced by invisible agents. The plates, dishes,
china, and glass-ware, and small movables of
every kind, contained in the house of Mrs Gold-
ing, an elderly lady, seemed suddenly to become
animated, shifted their places, flew through the
room, and were broken to pieces. The particulars
of this commotion were as curious, as the loss and
damage occasioned in this extraordinary manner
were alarming and intolerable. Amidst this com-
bustion, a young woman, Mrs. Golding’s maid,
named Anne Robinson, was walking backwards
and forwards, nor could she be prevailed on to sit
down for a moment, excepting while the family
were at prayers, during which time no disturbance
happened. This Anne Robinson had been but a
few days in the old lady’s service, and it was re-
markable that she endured with great composure
the extraordinary display which others beheld
with terror, and coolly advised her mistress not
to be alarmed or uneasy, as these things could
not be helped. This excited an idea that she had
some reason for being so composed, not incon-
sistent with a degree of connexion with what was
going forward. The afflicted Mrs Golding, as she
might be well termed, considering such a commo-
tion and demolition among her goods and chattels,
invited neighbours to stay in her house, but they
soon became unable to ie the sight of these
supernatural proceedings, which went so far, that
not above two cups and saucers remained out of
a valuable set of china. She next abandoned her
dwelling, and took refuge with a neighbour, but,

878 LETTERS ON

finding his movables were seized with the same
sort of St Vitus’s dance, her landlord reluctantly
refused to shelter any longer a woman who seem-
ed to be persecuted by so strange a subject of
vexation. Mrs Golding’s suspicions against Anne
Robinson now gaining ground, she dismissed her
maid, and the hubbub among her movables ceased
at once and for ever.

This circumstance of itself indicates that Anne
Robinson was the cause of these extraordinary
disturbances, as has been since more completely
ascertained by a Mr Brayfield, who persuaded
Anne, long after the events had happened, to
make him her confident. There was a love story
connected with the case, in which the only magie
was the dexterity of Anne Robinson, and the sim-
sera of the spectators. She had fixed lon

orse hairs to some of the crockery, and sinsed
wires under others, by which she could throw
them down without touching them. Other things
she dexterously threw about, which the specta-
tors, who did not watch her motions, imputed to
invisible agency. At times, when the family
were absent, she loosened the hold of the strings
by which the hams, bacon, and similar articles
were suspended, so that they fell on the slightest
motion. She employed some simple chemical
secrets ; and, delighted with the success of her
pranks, pushed them farther than she at first in-
tended. Such was the solution of the whole mys-
tery, which, known by the name of the Stock-
well ghost, terrified many well-meaning persons,
and had been nearly as famous as that of Cock-
lane, which may be hinted at as another impos-

DEMONOLOGY AND WITCHCRAFT. 379

ture of the same kind. So many and wonderful
are the appearances described, that, when I first
met with the original publication, I was strongly
impressed with the belief that the narrative was
like some of Swift’s advertisements, a jocular ex-
periment upon the credulity of the public. But
it was certainly published bona fide, and Mr Hone,
on the authority of Mr Brayfield, has since fully
explained the wonder.*

Many such impositions have been detected,
and many others have been successfully conceal-
ed; but to know what has been discovered in
many instances, gives us the assurance of the
ruling cause in all. I remember a scene of the
kind attempted to be got up near Edinburgh,
but detected at once by a sheriff’s officer, a sort
of persons whose habits of incredulity and suspi-
cious observation render them very dangerous
spectators on such occasions. The late excellent
Mr Walker, minister at Dunottar, in the Mearns,
gave me a curious account of an imposture of
this kind, practised by a young country girl, who
was surprisingly quick at throwing stones, turf,
and other missiles, with such dexterity, that it
was for a long time impossible to ascertain her
agency in the disturbances of which she was the
sole cause.

The belief of the spectators that such scenes of
disturbance arise from invisible beings, will ap-
pear less surprising, if we consider the common
feats of jugglers, or professors of legerdemain,
and recollect that it is only the frequent exhibi-

* See Hone’s Every-Day_ Book, p. 62.

380 LETTERS ON

tion of such powers which reconciles us to them
as matters of course, although they are wonders
at which, in our fathers’ time, men would have
cried out either sorcery or miracles. The spee-
tator also, who has been himself duped, makes
no very respectable appearance when convicted
of his error ; and thence, if too candid to add to
the evidence of supernatural agency, is yet un-
willing to stand convicted, by cross-examination,
of having been imposed on, and unconsciously
becomes disposed rather to colour more highly
than the truth, than acquiesce in an explanation
resting on his having been too hasty a believer.
Very often, too, the detection depends upon the
combination of certain circumstances, which, ap-
prehended, necessarily explain the whole story.

For example, I once heard a sensible and in-
telligent friend in company, express himself con-
vinced of the truth of a wonderful story told him
by an intelligent and bold man, about an appari-
tion. The scene lay in an ancient castle on the
coast of Morven, or the Isle of Mull, where the
ghost-seer chanced to be resident. He was given
to understand by the family, when betaking him-
self to rest, that the chamber in which he slept
was occasionally disquieted by supernatural ap-
pearances. Being at that time no believer in such
stories, he attended little to this hint, until the
witching hour of night, when he was awakened
from a dead sleep by the pressure of a human
hand on his body. He looked up at the figure of
a tall Highlander in the antique and picturesque
dress of his country, only that his brows were
bound with a bloody bandage. Struck with sudden

DEMONOLOGY AND WITCHCRAFT. 3s

and extreme fear, he was willing to have sprung
from bed, but the spectre stood before him in
the bright moonlight, its one arm extended, so as
to master him if he attempted to rise ; the other
hand held up in a warning and grave posture, as
menacing the Lowlander if he should attempt to
quit his recambent posture. Thus he lay in mor-
tal agony for more than an hour, after which it
pleased the spectre of ancient days to leave him
to more sound repose. So singular a story had
on its side the usual number of votes from the
company, till, upon cross-examination, it was ex-
plained that the principal person concerned was
an exciseman; after which eclaircissement, the
same explanation struck all present, viz., that
the Highlanders of the mansion had chosen to de-
tain the exciseman by the apparition of an ancient
heroic ghost, in order to disguise from his vigi-
lance the removal of certain modern enough spi-
rits, which his duty might have called upon him
to seize. Here a single circumstance explained
the whole ghost story.

_ At other times it happens that the meanness
and trifling nature of a cause not very obvious to
observation, has occasioned it to be entirely over-
looked, even on account of that very meanness,
since no one is willing to acknowledge that he has
been alarmed by a cause of little consequence, and
which he would be ashamed of mentioning. An
incident of this sort happened to a gentleman of
birth and distinction, who is well known in the
political world, and was detected by the precision
of his observation. Shortly after he succeeded
to his estate and title, there was arumour among

382 LETTERS ON

his servants concerning a strange noise heard in
the family-mansion at night, the cause of which
they had found it impossible to trace. The gen-
tleman resolved to watch himself, with a domes-
tie who had grown old in the family, and who
had begun to murmur strange things concerning
the knocking having followed so close upon the
death of his old master: They watched until the
noise was heard, which they listened to with that
strange uncertainty attending midnight sounds,
which prevents the hearers from immediately.
tracing them to the spot where they arise, while
the silence of the night generally occasions the
imputing to them more than the due importance
which they would receive, if mingled with the
usual noises of daylight. At length the —
man and his servant traced the sounds which they
had a to.a small store-room used
as a place for keeping provisions of various kinds
for the family, of which the old butler had the
key. They entered this place, and remained
there for some time, without hearing the noises
which they had traced thither; at wie a the sound
was heard, but much lower than it had formerly
seemed to be; while acted upon at a distance by
the imagination of the hearers. The cause was
immediately discovered. A rat caught in an old-
fashioned trap had occasioned this tumult, by its _
efforts to escape, \in which it was able to raise
the trap-door of its prison to acertain height, but
was then obliged to drop it. The noise of the
fall resounding through the house, had oceasion=
ed the disturbance which, but for the cool inves-
tigation of the proprietor, might easily ‘have

DEMONOLOGY AND WITCHCRAFT. 383

established an accredited ghost story. The cir-
cumstance was told me by the gentleman to whom
it happened.

There are other occasions in which the ghost
story is rendered credible by some remarkable
combination of circumstances very unlikely to
have happened, and which no one could have sup-
posed, unless some particular fortune occasioned
a discovery.

An apparition which took place at Plymouth
is well known, but it has been differently related ;
and having some reason to think the following
edition correct, it is an incident so much to my
purpose, that you must pardon its insertion.

A club of persons connected with science and
literature, was formed at the great sea-town we
have named. During the summer months, the so-
ciety met in a cave by the sea-shore ; during those
of autumn and winter, they convened within the

remises of a tavern, but, for the sake of privacy,
had their meetings in a summer-house: situated
in the garden, at a distance from the main build-
ing. Some of the members to whom the position
of their own dwellings rendered this convenient;
had a pass key to the garden-door, by which they
could enter the garden and reach the summer-
house without the publicity or trouble of passing
through the open tavern. It was the rule of this
club that its members presided alternately. On
one occasion, in the winter, the president of the
evening chanced to be very ill ; indeed, was report-
ed to be on his death-bed. The club metas usual,
and, from a sentiment of respect, left vacant the
chair which ought to have been occupied by him, if

384 LETTERS ON

in his usual health; for thesame reason, the conver
sation turned upon the absent gentleman’s talents,
and the loss expected to the society by his death.
While they were upon this melancholy theme,
the door suddenly opened, and the appearance of
the president entered the room. He wore a white
wrapper, a nightcap round his brow, the appear-
ance of which was that of death itself. He stalk-
ed into the room with unusual gravity, took the
vacant place of ceremony, lifted the empty glass
which stood before him, bowed around, and put
it to his lips; then replaced it on the table, and
stalked out of the room as silent as he had
entered it.. The company remained deeply ap-
palled; at length, after many observations on
the strangeness of what they had seen, they re-
solved.to dispatch two of their number as ambas-
sadors, to see how it fared with the president,
who had thus strangely appeared among them.
They went, and returned with the frightful in-
telligence, that the friend, after whom they had
enquired, was that evening deceased. Asides
The astonished party then resolved that they
would remain absolutely silent respectingthe won-
derful sight which they had seen. | Their habits
were too philosophical to permit them to believe
that they had actually seen the ghost of their de-
ceased brother, and at the same. time they were
too wise men, to wish to confirm the superstition
ef the vulgar, by what might seem. indubitable
evidence of a ghost. The affair was therefore kept
a strict secret, although, as usual, some dubious
rumours of the tale found their way to the public.
Several years afterwards, an old woman eas
7

DEMONOLOGY AND WITCHCRAFT. 385

long filled the place of a sick-nurse, was taken
very ill, and on her death-bed was attended by a
medical member of the philosophical club. To
him, with many expressions of regret, she ac-
knowledged that she had long before attended Mr
» naming the president, whose appearance
had surprised the club so strangely, and that she
felt distress of conscience on account of the man-
ner in which he died. She said, that as his ma-
Jady was attended by light-headedness, she had
been directed to keep a close watch upon him
during his illness. Unhappily she slept, and du-
ring her sleep the patient had awaked, and left
the apartment. When, on her own awaking, she
found the bed empty and the patient gone, she
forthwith hurried out of the house to seek him,
and met him in the act of returning. She got him,
she said, replaced in bed, but it was only to die
there. She added, to convince her hearer of the
truth of what she said, that immediately after
the poor gentleman expired, a deputation of two
members from the club came to enquire after
their president's health, and received for answer
that he was already dead. This confession ex-
plained the whole matter. The delirious patient
had very naturally taken the road to the club,
from some recollections of his duty of the night.
In approaching and retiring from the apartment,
he had used one of the pass-keys already men-
tioned, which made his way shorter. n the
’ other hand, the gentlemen sent to enquire after
his health had reached his lodging by a more cir-
cuitous road; and thus there had been time for
him to return to what proved his death-bed, long
2B

386 LETTERS ON

before they reached his chamber. The philoso-
phical witnesses of this strange scene, were now
as anxious to spread the story as they had for-
merly been to conceal it, since it showed in what
a remarkable manner men’s eyes might turn trai-
tors to them, and impress them with ideas. far
different from the truth.

Another occurrence of the same kind, although
scarcely so striking in its circumstances, was yet
one which, had it remained unexplained, might
have passed as an indubitable instance of a super-
natural apparition. ;

A Teviotdale farmer was riding from a fair, at
which he had indulged himself with John Bar-
leycorn, but not to that extent of defying goblins
which it inspired into the gallant Tam O'Shanter.
He was pondering with some anxiety upon the
dangers of travelling alone on a solitary road,
which passed the corner of a churchyard, now
near at hand, when he saw before him, in the
moonlight, a pale female form standing upon the
very wall which’surrounded the cemetery. The
road was very narrow, with no opportunity of
giving the apparent phantom what seamen call
a wide birth. It was, however, the only path
which led to the rider’s home, who therefore re-
solved, at all risks, to pass the apparition. He
accordingly approached, as slowly as — the
spot where the spectre stood, while the figure re-
mained, now perfectly still and silent, now brand-
ishing its arms, and gibbering to the moon. When
the farmer came close to the spot, he dashed in
the spurs, and set the horse off upon a gallop ; but
the spectre did not miss its opportunity.» As

DEMONOLOGY AND WITCHCRAFT. 387

he passed the corner where she was perched, she
contrived to drop behind the horseman, and seize
him round the waist; a manceuvre which greatly
increased the speed of the horse, and the terror
of the rider; for the hand of her who sat behind
him, when pressed upon his, felt as cold as that
of a corpse. At his own house at length he ar-
rived, and bid the servants who came to attend
him, “ Tak aff the ghaist !” They took off accord-
ingly a female in white, and the poor farmer
himself was conveyed to bed, where he lay strug-
gling for weeks with a strong nervous fever.
The female was found to be a maniac, who had
been left a widow very suddenly by an affectionate
husband, and the nature and cause of her malady.
induced her, when she could make her escape, to
wander to the churchyard, where she sometimes
wildly wept over his grave, and sometimes stand-
ing on the corner of the churchyard wall, looked
out, and mistuok every stranger on horseback for
the husband she had lost. If this woman, which
was very penny had dropt from the horse un-
observed by him whom she had made her invo-
luntary companion, it would have been very hard
to have convinced the honest farmer that he had
not actually performed part of his journey with
a ghost behind him. :

There is also a large class of stories of this sort,
where various secrets of Chemistry, of Acous-
tics, Ventriloquism, or other arts, have been ei-
ther employed to dupe the spectators, or have
tended to do so through mere accident and cvin-
cidence. Of these it is scarce necessary to quote
instances ; but the following may be told as a

388 LETTERS ON

tale recounted by a foreign nobleman, known to
me nearly thirty years ago, whose life, lost in the
service of his sovereign, proved too short for his
friends and his native land.

At a certain old castle on the confines of Hun-
gary, the lord.to whom it belonged had deter-
mined upon giving an entertainment worthy of his
own rank, and of the magnificence of the antique
mansion which he inhabited. The guests of course
were numerous, and among them was a veteran
officer of Hussars, remarkable for his. bravery.
When the arrangements for the night were made,
this officer was informed that there would be dif-
ficulty ‘in accommodating the company in the
castle, large as it was, unless some one would
take the risk of sleeping in a room supposed to
be haunted; and that as he was known to be
above such prejudices, the apartment was, in the
first place, proposed for his occupation, as the
person least likely to suffer a bad night's rest
from such a cause. The Major thankfully ac-
cepted the preference, and having shared the fes-
tivity of the evening, retired after midnight, ha-
ving denounced vengeance against any one who
should presume by any trick to disturb his repose ;
a threat which his habits would, it was suppose
render him sufficiently ready to execute. Some-
what contrary to the custom in these cases, the
Major went to bed, having left his candle burn-
ing, and laid his trusty pistols carefully loaded
on the table by his bedside. a

He had not slept an hour when he was awa-
kened by a solemn strain of music—he looked
out. Three ladies, fantastically dressed in green,

DEMONOLOGY AND WITCHCRAFT. 389

were seen in the lower end of the apartment, who
sung a solemn requiem. The Major listened for
some time with delight ; at length he tired —*« La-
dies,” he said, “ this is very well, but somewhat
monotonous—will you be so kind as to change the
tune?” The ladies continued singing ; he expos-
tulated, but the music was not interrupted. The
Major began to grow angry: “ Ladies,” he said,
«« T must consider this as a trick for the purpose
of terrifying me, and as I regard it as an im-
pertinence, [ shall take a rough mode of stop-
ping it.” With that he began to handle his pis-
tols. The ladies sung on. He then got serious]

angry—* I will but wait five minutes,” he said,
“and then fire without hesitation.” The song
was uninterrupted—the five minutes were expi-
red—* I still give you law, ladies,” he said,
“ while I count twenty.” This produced as little
effect as his former threats. He counted one,
two, three, accordingly; but on approaching the
end of the number, and repeating more than once
his determination to fire, the last numbers, seven-
teen—eighteen—nineteen, were pronounced with
considerable pauses between, and an assurance
that the pistols were cocked. The ladies sung on.
- As he pronounced the word twenty he fired both
pistols against the musical damsels ;—but the
ladies sung on! The Major was overcome by the
unexpected inefficacy of his violence, and had
an illness which lasted more than three weeks.
The trick put upon him may be shortly descri-
bed by the fact, that the female choristers were
oe in an adjoining room, and*that he only
red at their reflection thrown forward into that

390 LETTERS ON

in which he slept by the effect of a concave mir-
ror. 44658

Other stories of the same kind are numerous
and well known. The apparition of the Brocken
mountain, after having occasioned great admira-
tion and some fear, is now ascertained by philo-
sophers to be a gigantic reflection, which makes
the traveller's shadow, represented upon the misty
clouds, appear a colossal figure of almost immea-
surable size. By a similar deception, men have
been induced, in Westmoreland and other moun-
tainous countries, to imagine they saw troops of
horse and armies marching and countermarching,
which were in fact only the reflection of horses
pasturing upon an opposite height, or of the forms
of peaceful travellers.

A very curious case of this kind was commu-
nicated to me by the son of the lady principally
concerned, and tends to show out of what mean
materials a venerable apparition may be some-
times formed. In youth this lady resided with
her father, a man of sense and resolution. Their
house was situated in the principal street of a
town of some size. The back part of the house
ran at right angles to an Anabaptist chapel, divi-
ded from it by a small cabbage-garden. The
young lady siveil sometimes to indulge the roman-
tic love of solitude, by sitting in her own =
ment in the evening till twilight, and even -
ness, was approaching. One evening while she
was thus placed, she was surprised to see a gleamy
figure, as of some aerial being hovering, as it
were, against the arched window in the end of
the Anabaptist chapel. Its head was surrounded

DEMONOLOGY AND WITCHCRAFT. 391

by that halo which painters give to the Catholic
saints ; and, while the young lady’s attention was
fixed on an object so extraordinary, the figure
bent gracefully towards her more than once, as if
intimating a sense of her presence, and then dis-
appeared. The seer of this striking vision de-
scended to her family, so much discomposed as to
call her father’s attention. He obtained an ac-
count of the cause of her disturbance, and ex-
pressed his intention to watch in the apartment
next night. He sat, accordingly, in his daugh-
ter’s chamber, where she also attended him. Twi-
light came, and nothing appeared; but as the
gray light faded into darkness, the same female
figure was seen hovering on the window; the
same shadowy form; the same pale light around
the head; the same inclinations, as the evening
before. ‘ What do you think of this ?” said the
daughter to the astonished father.—* Any thing,
my dear,” said the father, “rather than allow that
we look upon what is supernatural.” —A strict re-
search established a natural cause for the appear-
ance on the window. It was the custom of an old
woman, to whom the garden beneath was rented,
to go out at night to gather cabbages. The lan-
tern she carried in her hand threw up the refract-
ed reflection of her form on the chapel window.
As she stooped to gather her cabbages, the re-
flection appeared to bend forward ; and that was
the whole matter. ’

- Another species of deception affecting the cre-
dit of such supernatural communications, arises
from the dexterity and skill of the authors who
have made it their business to present such sto-

392 LETTERS ON

ries in the shape most likely to attract belief.
Defoe—whose power in rendering credible that
which was in itself very much the reverse was so
feeteny distinguished—has not failed to show
1is superiority in this species of composition. A’
bookseller of his acquaintance had, in the trade
phrase, rather overprinted an edition of Drelin-
court on Death, and complained to Defoe of
the loss which was likely to ensue. The expe-
rienced bookmaker, with the purpose of recom-
mending the edition, advised his friend to prefix
the celebrated narrative of Mrs Veal’s ghost,
which he wrote for the occasion, with such an
air of trath, that although, in fact, it does not
afford a single tittle ef evidence properly so
called, it nevertheless was swallowed so eagerly
by the people, that Drelincourt’s work on death,
which the supposed spirit recommended to the
perusal of her friend Mrs Bargrave, instead of
sleeping on the editor's shelf, moved off by thous
sands at once; the story, incredible in itself, and
unsupported as it was by evidence or enquiry,
was received as true, merely from the cunning
of the narrator, and the addition of a number of
adventitious circumstances, which no man alive
could have conceived as having occurred to the
inind of a person composing « fiction. '

It did not require the talents of Defoe, though
in that species of composition he must stand un-
rivalled, to fix the public attention om a ghost
story. John Dunton, a man of scribbling cele-
brity at the time, succeeded to a great degree in
imposing upon the public a tale which he calls”
the Apparition Evidence. The beginning of itat

DEMONOLOGY AND WITCHCRAFT. 393

least, for it is of great length, has something in
it a little new. At Mynehead, in Somerset-
shire, lived an ancient gentlewoman, named Mrs
Leckie, whose only son and daughter resided in
family with her. The son traded to Ireland, and
was supposed to be worth eight or ten thousand
pounds, They had a child about five or six
years old. ‘This family was generally respected
in Mynehead; and especially Mrs Leckie, the
old lady, was so pleasant in society, that her
friends used to say to her, and to each other, that
it was a thousand pities such an excellent, good-
humoured gentlewoman must, from her age,
soon lost to her friends. To which Mrs Leckie
_ often made the somewhat startling reply: “ For as
much as you now seem to like me, I am afraid you
will but little care to see or speak with me after
my death, though I believe you may have that
satisfaction.” Die, however, she did, and after
her funeral, was repeatedly seen in her personal
likeness, at home and abroad, by night and by
noon-day. :
One story is told, of a doctor of physic walks
ing into the fields, who in his return met with
this spectre, whom he at first accosted civilly,
and paid her the courtesy of handing her over
a stile; observing, however, that she did not
move her lips in speaking, or her eyes in look-
ing round, he became suspicious of the condition
of his companion, and showed some desire to
be rid of her society. Offended at this, the
hag at next stile planted herself upon it, and
obstructed his passage. He got through at
length with some difficulty, and not without a

394 LETTERS ON

sound kick, and an admonition to pay more atten-
tion to the next aged gentlewoman whom he met,
« But this,” says John Dunton, “ was a pe’

and inconsiderable prank to what she played
in her son’s house, and elsewhere. She would
at noon-day appear upon the key of Mynehead,
and cry, ‘ A boat, a boat, ho! a boat, a boat,
ho!’ If any boatmen or seamen were in sight
and did not come, they were sure to be cast
away; and if they did come, ’twas all one, they
were cast away. It was equally dangerous to
please and displease her. Her son had _seve-
ral ships sailing between Ireland and England;
no sooner did they make land, and come in sight
of England, but this ghost would appear in the
same garb and likeness as when she was alive,
and, standing at the mainmast, would blow with
a whistle, and though it were never so great a
calm, yet immediately there would arise a most
dreadful storm, that would break, wreck, and
drown the ship and goods, only the seamen would
escape with their lives—the devil had no per-
mission from God to take them away. Yet at this
rate, by her frequent apparitions and disturb-
ances, she had made a poor merchant of her son,
for his fair estate was all buried in the sea, and
he that was once worth thousands, was reduced
to a very poor and low condition in the world;
for whether the ship were his own or hired, or he
had but goods on board it to the value of twenty
shillings, this troublesome ghost would come as
before, whistle in a calm at the mainmast at
noon-day, when they had descried land, and then
ship and goods went all out of hand to wreck;

DEMONOLOGY AND WITCHCRAFT. 395

insomuch that he could at last get no ships where-
in to stow his goods, nor any mariner to sail in
them ; for, knowing what an uncomfortable, fatal;
and losing voyage they should make of it, they
did all decline his service. In her son’s house
she hath her constant haunts by day and night;
but whether he did not, or would not own, if he
did see her, he always professed he never saw
her. Sometimes when in bed with his wife, she
would cry out, ‘ Husband, look, there’s your
mother !’ And when he would turn to the right
side, then was she gone to the left; and when to
the left side of the bed, then was she gone to
the right: only one evening their only child, a
girl of about five or six years old, lying in a
truckle-bed under them, cries out, ‘ O help me,
father! help me, mother, for grandmother will
choke me!’ and before they could get to their
child’s assistance, she had murdered it; they
finding the poor girl dead, her throat having been
pinched by two fingers, which stopped her breath
and strangled her. This was the sorest of all
their afflictions; their estate is gone, and now
their child is gone also; you may guess at their
grief and great sorrow. One morning after the
child’s funeral, her husband being abroad, about
eleven in the forenoon, Mrs Leckie the younger
goes up into her chamber to dress her head, and;
as she was looking into the glass, she spies her
mother-in-law, the old beldam, looking over her
shoulder. This cast her into a great horror;
but recollecting her affrighted spirits, and reco-
vering the exercise of her reason, faith, and hope,
having cast up a short and silent prayer to God,

963 LETTERS ON

she turns about, and bespeaks her: ‘ In the name
of God, mother, why do you trouble me?’—
‘ Peace!’ says the spectrum; ‘I will do thee no
hurt.'—‘ What will you have of me?” says the
daughter,” &c.* Dunton, the narrator, and proba-
bly the contriver of the story, proceeds to inform
us, at length, of a commission which the wife of
Mr Leckie receives from the ghost to deliver to
Atherton, Bishop of Waterford, a guilty and un-
fortunate man, who afterwards died by the hands
of the executioner; but that part of the subject
is too disagreeable and tedious to enter upon.

So deep was the impression made by the story
on the inhabitants of Mynehead, that it is said
the tradition of Mrs Leckie still remains in that
port, and that mariners belonging to it often,
amid tempestuous weather, conceive they hear
the whistle-call of the implacable hag who was the
source of so much mischief to her own family.
However, already too desultory, and too long, it
would become intolerably tedious were we to in-
sist farther on the peculiar sort of genius by which
pr of this kind may be embodied and pro-
onged.

I may, however, add, that the charm of the
tale depends much upon the age of the person
to whom it is addressed; and that the vivacity
of fancy which engages us in youth to pass over
much that is absurd, in order to enjoy some single
trait of imagination, dies within us when we ob-
tain the age of manhood, and the sadder and
graver regions which lie beyond it. I am the

* Apparition Evidence.

DEMONOLOGY AND WITCHCRAFT. 897

more conscious of this, because I have been my-
self, at two periods of my life, distant from each
other, engaged in scenes favourable to that de-
gree of me ae awe which my countrymen
expressively call being eerie.

On the first of these occasions, I was only
nineteen or twenty years old, when I happened
to pass a night in the magnificent old baronial
castle of Glammis, the hereditary seat of the
Earls of Strathmore. The hoary pile contains
much in its appearance, and in the traditions
connected with it, impressive to the imagina-
tion. It was the scene of the murder of a Scot-
tish king of great antiquity ; not, indeed, the
gracious Duncan, with whom the name natu-
rally associates itself, but Malcolm the Second.
It contains also a curious monument of the peril
of feudal times, being a secret chamber, the en-
trance of which, by the law or custom of the fa-
mily, must only be known to three persons at
once, viz. the Earl of Strathmore, his heir appa-
rent, and any third person whom they may take
into their confidence. The extreme antiquity of
the building is vouched by the immense thickness
of the walls, and the wild and straggling arrange-
ment of the accommodation within doors. As
the late Earl of Strathmore seldom resided in that
ancient mansion, it was, when I was there, but
half furnished, and that with movables of great
antiquity, which, with the pieces of chivalric ar-
mour hanging upon the walls, greatly contribu-
ted to the general effect of the whole, After a
very hospitable reception from the late Peter
Proctor, Esq., then seneschal of the castle, in

398 LETTERS ON

Lord Strathmore’s absence, I was conducted to
my apartment in a distant corner of the building.
I must own, that as I heard door after door shut,
after my conductor had retired, 1 began to con-
sider myself too far from the living, and some-
what too near the dead. We had passed through
what is called “ the King’s room,” a vaulted
apartment, garnished with stags’ antlers, and si-
milar trophies of the chase, and said by tradi-
tion to be the spot of Malcolm’s murder, and I
had an idea of the vicinity of the castle chapel. -

In spite of the truth of history; the whole
night scene in Macbeth’s castle rushed at once
upon my mind, and struck my imagination more
forcibly than even when I have seen its terrors
represented by the late John Kemble and his in-
imitable sister. In a word, I experienced sensa-
tions, which, though not remarkable either for
timidity or superstition, did not fail to affect me
to the point of being disagreeable, while they
were mingled at the same time with a strange
and indescribable kind of pleasure, the recollee-
tion of which affords me gratification at this
moment, .

In the year 1814, accident placed me, then
past middle life, in a situation somewhat similar
to that which I have described. elo

I had been on a pleasure voyage with some
friends around the north coast of Scotland, and
in that course had arrived in the salt-water lake
under the Castle of Dunvegan, whose turrets,
situated upon a frowning rock, rise immediately
above the waves of the loch.» As most of the
party, and I myself in particular, chanced to be

DEMONOLOGY AND WITCHCRAFT. 399

well known to the Laird of Macleod, we were
welcomed to the castle with Highland hospitality,
and glad to find ourselves in polished society,
after a cruise of some duration. The most mo-
dern part of the castle was founded in the days
of James VI.; the more ancient is referred to a
period “ whose birth tradition notes not.” Until
the present Macleod connected by a drawbridge
the site of the castle with the mainland of Skye,
the access must have been extremely difficult. In-
deed, so much greater was the regard paid to se-
curity than to convenience, that in former times
the only access to the mansion arose through a
vaulted cavern in a rock, up which a staircase
ascended from the sea shore, like the buildings
we read of in the romances of Mrs Radcliffe.
Such a castle in the extremity of the High-
lands was of course furnished with many a tale of
tradition, and many a superstitious legend, to fill
occasional intervals in the music and song, as pro-
per to the halls of Dunvegan as when Johnson
commemorated them. We reviewed the arms
and ancient valuables of this distinguished family
—saw the dirk and broadsword of I Rorie Mhor,
and his horn, which would drench three chiefs of
these degenerate days. The solemn drinking cup
of the Kings of Man must not be forgotten, nor
the fairy banner given to Macleod by the Queen
of Fairies ; that magic flag, which has been victo-
rious in two pitched fields, and will still float in
a third, the bloodiest and the last; when the Elfin
Sovereign shall, after the fight is ended, recall
her banner, and carry off the standard-bearer.
Amid such tales of ancient tradition, I had from

400 LETTERS ON

Macleod and his lady the courteous offer of the
haunted apartment of the castle, about which, as
a stranger, I might be supposed interested. Ac-
cordingly, I took possession of it about the witch-
ing hour. Except ren some tapestry hang-
ings, and the extreme thickness of the walls, which
argued great antiquity, nothing could have been
more comfortable than the interior of the a
ment; but if you looked from the windows, the
view was such as to correspond with the highest
tone of superstition. An autumnal blast, some-
times clear, sometimes driving mist before it,
swept along the troubled billows of the lake, which
it occasionally concealed, and by fits disclosed.
The waves rushed in wild disorder on the shore,
and covered with foam the steep piles of rock,
which, rising from the sea in forms something
resembling the human figure, have obtained the
name of Macleod’s Maidens, and in such a night,
seemed no bad representatives of the Norwegian
goddesses, called Choosers of the Slain, or Riders
of the Storm. There was something of the dig-
nity of danger in the scene; for on a platform
beneath the windows lay an ancient battery of
cannon, which had sometimes been used against
privateers even of late years. The distant scene
was a view of that part of the Quillan mountains
which are called, from their form, Macleod’s Di-
ning-Tables. The voice of an angry cascade,
termed the Nurse of Rorie Mhor, use that
chief slept best in its vicinity, was heard from
time to time mingling its notes with’ those of
wind and wave. Such was the haunted room at
Dunvegan, and as such, it well deserved a less”
18

—_—

Wen Zia, ME od

DEMONOLOGY AND WITCHCRAFT. 401

sleepy inhabitant. In the language of Dr’ John-
son, who has stamped his memory on this remote
place, * I looked around me, and wondered that:
I was not more affected; but the mind is not at
all times equally ready to be moyed.” Ina word,
it is necessary to confess, that of all I heard) or,
saw, the most engaging spectacle was the com-;
fortable bed, .in which I hoped to make amends
for some rough nights on ship-board, and where-
I slept accordingly without thinking of ghost. or,
goblin, till I was called by my servant in the.
morning. :
~ From this I am taught to infer, that tales. of
ghosts and demonology are out of date at forty:
years and upwards ;_ that it is only in the morn-
ing of life that this feeling of superstition “ comes
o'er us like a summer cloud,” affecting us with
fear, which is solemn and awful rather than pain-
ful; and I am tempted to think, that if I were
to write on the subject at all, it should have been
during a period of life when I could have treated
it with more interesting vivacity, and might have
been at least amusing, if I could not be instrue-
tive. Even the present fashion of the world
seems to be ill suited for studies of this fantastic
nature; and the most ordinary mechanic has
learning sufficient to laugh at the figments which
in former times were believed by persons far ad-
vanced in the deepest knowledge of the age.

I cannot, however, in conscience carry my opi-
nion of my countrymen’s good sense so far as to
exculpate them entirely from the charge of credu-
lity. Those who are disposed to look for them
may, without much fhe see such manifest ©

402 LETTERS, &c.

signs, both of superstition and the disposition to x
believe in its doctrines, as may render it no use-

less occupatien to compare the follies of our fa-

thers with our own. The sailors have a proverb — a
that every man in his lifetime must eat a peck

of impurity; and it seems yet more clear that

every generation of the human race must swal- =
low a certain measure of nonsense. There re- y
mains hope, however, that the grosser faults of

our ancestors are now out of date; and that what- >
ever follies the present race may be guilty of,

the sense of humanity is too universally s

to permit them to think of tormenting wretches

till they confess what is impossible, and then — T
burning them for their pains.

é

THE END.

I EDINBURGH =
| PRINTED BY BALLANTYNE AND COMPANY;
PAUL'S WORK, CANONGATE.

ae

eS MESSE be al da tod
3 Fg ONS 8 om

Bet ie MDZ PiatlsteunysZentrun
taatsBibliothe! Digitale Bibliothek

Scott, Walter,

Letters on demonology and witchcraft Addressed to J. G. Lockhart

London 1830

Phys.m. 439 m
urn:nbn:de-bvb:12-bsb10133210-9
