The Journal of Sir Walter Scott, Vol. I (Walter Scott, 1890)
Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive: scan of the 1890 David Douglas edition, Vol. I (https://archive.org/details/journalofsirwalt027371mbp). Scott's journal, Vol. I — the novelist's private record of fame, financial ruin, and recovery.
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

127  067 


J 


lije  tl*?»  nni  wjt<d  tlmw  It 

Mint  tihot  norost  /fof  innminu  ff/irf'/tww,  jfft  Ftlnntfc  (Sml  it  i.  ttntlnr  ^n« 
no/*  (HMonMlttlrfy  Iwwrinij    /*  *f*ft'/*  tiHt iff/it    tttnt  it*  j^»" 


* 


NTS  PAP  HPXBTAI, 


•'  /  i/turf  Aowfl  to  wfc  w/<ito  rt  v>  co^e^  ^  ,-  /or  We  w 
jw  HUM  <wn  wor/3,   /^jw^  W«i  UsA,  many  n  ytw  <^»;,  «w  w//  lUnl-tlMF  i  bit! 
it  (tfbn  pwfad  vn  Dat»:"-*SocMH!'s  ti/h  x.  88, 


THE  JOURNAL  OF 

SIR  WALTER  SCOTT 

FROM   THE  ORIGINAL  MANUSCRIPT 
AT  ABBOTSFORD 


•VOLUME  II 

NEW  YORK 

HARPER  &  BROTHERS,  FRANKLIN  SQUARE 

1891 


ILLUSTRATIONS. 

VOL.    IT. 

POIITRAIT,  painted  l»y  BIR  FBANCIB  GBANT,  P.  II.  A.,  for  tlio  Baroness  Ruthven, 
•and  now  in  the  National  Portrait  Gallory  of  Scotland.  Copied  by 
permiHHiou  of  tlio  ITon.  Tlio  Board  of  Manufactures,  ,  .  Frontispiece 

n  Title-page 

"  The  "Dial-Stone"  in  tlio  Garden, 
from  drawing  made  at  Alvbotsford  1>y  G  ROUGH  REID,  U.S.A. 

"THE  NIGHT  COMETH." 


TAP 

"  /  nwnt  ham?  to  '  iwrk  while  It  It  ettlttd  day  ;  far  tJio  nlyUt  romfth  iclwn  no  man  can  tarn  A.'    /put  that 
ti'tt,  intiny  //<»«>•«  ttf/ti,  on  my  dial  tfrmo/  but  It  t^ftenjtirettfftetl  in  i>af«."—  Soorr'H  Life,  x.  R8. 


SIR  WALTER  SCOTT'S  JOURNAL, 


JULY. 

July  1,  [AVbotsford]. — A  most  delicious  day,  in  the  course 
of  which  I  have  not  done 

"The  least  right  thing." 

Before  breakfast  I  employed  myself  in  airing  my  old  biblio- 
maniacal  hobby,  entering  all  the  books  lately  acquired  into  a 
temporary  catalogue,  so  as  to  have  them  shelved  and  marked. 
After  breakfast  I  wont  out,  the  day  being  delightful — warm, 
yet  cooled  with  a  gentle  breeze,  all  around  delicious;  the 
rich  luxuriant  green  refreshing  to  the  eye,  soft  to  the  tread, 
and  perfume  to  the  smell  Wandered  about  and  looked  at 
my  plantations.  Came  home,  and  received  a  visit  from  Sir 
Adam.  Loitered  in  the  library  till  dinner-time.  If  there  is 
anything  to  bo  done  at  all  to-day,  it  must  be  in  the  evening. 
But  J  foar  there  will  be  nothing.  One  can't  work  always 

vwwther, 

u  ETujUQ semper  wrcuvn  tendit  Apollo" 

There 's  warrant  for  it. 

July  2. — Wrote  in  the  morning,  correcting  the  Essay  on 
the  Highlands,  which  is  now  nearly  completed.  Settled 
accounts  with  Tom  and  Bogie.  Went  over  to  Huntly  Burn 
at  two  o'clock,  and  reconnoitred  the  proposed  plantation  to 
be  called  Jane's  Wood.  Dined  with  the  Fergusons, 

July  $  — Worked  in  the  morning  upon  the  Introduction 
to  the  Chronicle  \  it  may  be  thought  egotistical  Learned 
a  bad  accident  had  happened  yesterday.  A  tinker  (drunk  I 
suppose)  entered  the  stream  opposite  to  Faldonside  with  an 
ass  bearing  his  children.  The  ass  was  carried  down  by  the 

VOL.  ll.  A 


2  JOURNAL.  [JULY 

force  of  the  stream,  and  one  of  the  little  creatures  was 
drowned ;  the  other  was  brought  out  alive,  poor  innocent, 
clinging  to  the  ass.  It  had  floated  as  far  down  as  Dead- 
water-heugh.  Poor  thing,  it  is  as  well  dead  as  to  live  a 
tinker!  The  Fergusons  dine  with  us  en  wmsse;  also  Dr. 
Brewster. 

July  4,  [Edinburgh], — Worked  a  little  in  the  morning,  and 
took  a  walk  after  breakfast,  the  day  so  delicious  as  makes  it 
heart-breaking  to  leave  the  country.  Set  out,  however,  about 
four  o'clock,  and  reached  Edinburgh  a  little  after  nine.  Slept 
part  of  the  way;  read  De  Vere  the  rest.1  Tt  is  well  written, 
in  point  of  language  and  sentiment,  but  has  too  little  action 
in  it  to  be  termed  a  pleasing  novel.  Everything  is  brought, 
out  by  dialogue — or  worse,  through  the  medium  of  tlw 
author's  reflections,  which  is  the  clumsiest  of  all  expedients. 

July  5. — This  morning  worked,  and  sent  off  to  *T,  I>.  tho, 
Introduction  to  the  Chronicles,  containing  my  (lonfoHHioiiH,- 
and  did  something,  but  not  fluently,  to  the  Confessions 
themselves.  Not  happy,  however;  the  black  <lo#  worries 
me.  Bile,  T  suppose.  "But  I  will  rally  and  combat  tho, 
reiver."  Reiver  it  is,  that  wretched  malady  of  tho  mind ;  got 
<j[uite  well  in  the  forenoon.  Wont  out  to  Portobollo  aftor 
dinner,  and  chatted  with  little  Johnnie,  and  told  him  tho 
history  of  the  Field  of  Prestonpans.  Few  remain  who  earn 
about  these  stories. 

July  6. — This  morning  wrought  a  good  deal,  but  acurcjc 
a  task.  The  Court  lasted  till  half-past  three;  exhausting 
work  in  this  hot  weather.  I  returned  to  dints  alone,  Anno 
going  to  Roslin  with  a  party.  After  noon  a  Miss  Bell  broko 
in  upon  me,  who  bothered  me  some  time  since  about  a  book 
of  hers,  explaining  and  exposing  the  conduct  of  a  Mothcxlifll 
Tartuffe,  who  had  broken  off  (by  anonymous  letters)  a  match 

1  Written,  "by  R,  Humer  Ward,  publiahed  iu  1850,  In  two  vols,  Svn, 

author    of    Tremaine    and    other  edited  by  Hon.  K.  I'hipptf. 
works.    Mr.  Ward's  Political  L\fe, 

including  a   Di&ry  to    1820,  waa  *  $ee  poil,  71.  r>#,  note. 


1827.]  JOTIKtSTAL.  3 

betwixt  her  and  an  accepted  admirer.  Tried  in  vain  to 
make  her  comprehend  how  little  the  Edinburgh  people 
would  care  aboxit  her  wrongs,  since  there  was  no  knowledge 
of  the  parties  to  make  the  scandal  acceptable.  1  believe  she 
lias  suffered  groat  wrong.1  Letter  from  Longman  and  Co.  to 
J.  B.  grumbling  about  bringing  out  the  second  edition, 
because  they  have,  forsooth,  700  copies  in  hand  out  of  5000, 
five  days  after  the  first  edition 2  is  out  What  would  they 
have  ?  It  is  uncomfortable,  though, 

July  7. — Night  dreadfully  warm,  and  bilious ;  I  could 
not  be  fool  enough  surely  to  be  anxious  for  these  wise  men 
of  the  East's  prognostication.  Letters  from  Lockhart  give  a 
very  cheerful  prospect ;  if  there  had  been  any  thundering 
upsetting  broadside,  he  would  have  noticed  it  surely  more  or 
less.  II  Cadell  quite  stout,  and  determined  to  go  on  with 
the  second  edition.  Well,  T  hope  all's  right — thinking 
won't  help  it.  Charles  came  down  this  morning  penniless, 
poor  fellow,  but  we  will  soon  remedy  that.  Lockhart  remits 
£100  for  reviewing;  1  hope  the  next  will  be  for  Sophia,  for 
cash  affairs  loom  well  in  the  offing,  and  if  the  trust  funds  go 
right,  I  was  never  so  easy.  I  will  take  care  how  I  get  into 
debt  again.  I  do  not  like  this  croaking  of  these  old  owls  of 
Saint  Paul's  when  all  is  done.  The  pitcher  has  gone  often 
to  the  well.  But—  However,  1  worked  away  at  the  Chro- 
nicles. T  will  take  pains  with  them,  I  will,  by  Jove ! 

ihdy  8. — J  did  little  to-day  but  arrange  papers,  and  put 
bills,  receipts,  etc.,  into  apple-pie  order.  I  believe  the  fuir 
prospect  J  have  of  clearing  off  some  enctunbrances,  which  uro 
like  thorns  in  my  flonh,  nay,  in  my  very  eye,  contribute 
much  to  HUH.  1  did  not  even  correct  proof-sheets ;  nay, 
could  not,  for  I  have  cancelled  two  sheets,  instantc  Jawlv, 
and  3  myself  being  of  his  opinion ;  for,  as  T  said  yesterday, 
we  must  and  will  take  pains.  The  fiddle-faddle  of  arranging 
all  the  things  was  troublesome,  but  they  give  a  good  account 

1  See  ante,  vol.  i  pp.  301.2.  2  Napoleon. 


4  JOURNAL.  [JULY 

of  my  affairs.  The  money  for  the  necessary  payments  is 
ready,  and  therefore  there  is  a  sort  of  pleasure  which  does 
not  arise  out  of  any  mean  source,  since  it  has  for  its  object  the 
prospect  of  doing  justice  and  achieving  independence.  J.  I>. 
dined  with  me,  poor  fellow,  and  talked  of  his  views  as  hopeful 
and  prosperous.  God  send  honest  industry  a  fair  riddance. 

July  9. — Wrote  in  the  morning.  At  eleven  went  by  ap- 
pointment with  Colin  Mackenzie  to  the  New  Edinburgh 
Academy.  In  the  fifth  class,  Mr.  Mitchell's,  wo  heard  Greek, 
of  which  I  am  no  otherwise  a  judge  than  that  it  was  fluently 
read  and  explained.  In  the  rector  Mr.  Williams'**  class 
we  heard  Virgil  and  Livy  admirably  translated  ad  upert'uraTn, 
libri,  and,  what  I  thought  remarkable,  the  rector  giving  the 
English,  and  the  pupils  returning,  with  singular  dexterity, 
the  Latin,  not  exactly  as  in  the  original,  but  often  by 
synonymes,  which  showed  that  the  exercise  referred  to  the 
judgment,  and  did  not  depend  on  the  memory.  I  could  not 
help  saying,  with  great  truth,  that,  as  wo  had  all  long  known 
how  much  the  pupils  were  fortunate  in  a  rector,  so  wo  were 
now  taught  that  the  rector  was  equally  lucky  in  his  pupils. 
Of  my  young  friends,  I  saw  a  son  of  John  Swinton,  a  son  of 
Johnstone  of  Alva,  and  a  son  of  Oraufxird  Tait.1  JDiuud 
at  John  Murray's;  Mr.  and  Mrs,  Philips  of  Liverpool, 
General  and  Charles  Stuart  of  Blantyro,  Lord  Aboreromby, 
Clerk  and  Thomson.  Pleasant  evening, 

July  10* — Corrected  proofs,  but  wrote  nothing.  To  Oourt 
till  two  o'clock.  I  went  to  Cadell's  by  the  Mound,  a  long 
roundabout ;  transacted  some  business.  1  mot  Huron  Hume 
coming  home,  and  walked  with  him  in  the  Gardens  Hit* 
remarkable  account  of  his  celebrated  uncle's  last  moments  is 
in  these  words:— Dr.  Black  called  on  Mr.  I).  Hume2  on  the 
morning  on  which  he  died.  The  patient  complained  of 
having  suffered  a  great  deal  during  the  night,  and  expressed  a 

1  Archibald  Campbell  Tait,  after-        9  Bavid  Hume,  fcho  historian,  died 
wards  Archbishop  of  Canterbury.        August  26,  1770, 


1827.]  JOURNAL.  5 

fear  that  his  struggle  might  be  prolonged,  to  his  great  dis- 
tress, for  days  or  weeks  longer.  "  No,  sir,"  said  Dr.  Black, 
with  the  remarkable  calmness  and  sincerity  which  character- 
ised him,  "I  have  examined  the  symptoms,  and  observe 
several  which  oblige  me  to  conclude  that  dissolution  is 
rapidly  approaching."  "  Are  you  certain  of  that,  Doctor  ? " 
"Most  assuredly  so,"  answered  the  physician.  The  dying 
philosopher  extended  his  arm,  and  shook  hands  with  his 
medical  friend.  "I  thank  you,"  he  said,  "for  the  news." 
So  little  reason  there  was  for  the  reports  of  his  having  been 
troubled  in  mind  when  on  his  deathbed. 

Dined  at  Lord  Abercromby's,  to  meet  Lord  Melville  in 
private.  We  had  an  interview  betwixt  dinner  and  tea.  I 
was  sorry  to  see  my  very  old  friend,  this  upright  statesman 
and  honourable  gentleman,  deprived  of  his  power  and  his 
official  income,  which  the  number  of  his  family  must  render  a 
matter  of  importance.  He  was  cheerful,  not  affectedly  so, 
and  bore  his  declension  like  a  wise  and  brave  man.  I  had 
nursed  the  idea  that  he  had  been  hasty  in  his  resignation ; 
but,  from  the  letters  which  he  showed  me  coniidentially, 
which  passed  betwixt  him  and  Canning,  it  is  clear  his  resigna- 
tion was  to  be  accomplished,  not  I  suppose  for  personal  con- 
siderations, but  because  it  rendered  the  Admiralty  vacant 
for  the  Duke  of  Clarence,  as  his  resignation  was  eagerly 
snapped  at.  Tt  cannot  be  doubted  that  if  he  had  hesitated 
or  hung  back  behind  his  friends,  forcible  means  would  have 
been  used  to  compel  to  the  measure,  which  with  moro  dignity 
he  took  of  his  own  accord — at  least  so  it  seemed  to  me.  The 
first  intimation  which  Lord  Melville  received  of  his  sxiccessor 

was  through  Mr.  ,  who  told  him,  as  great  news,  that 

there  waH  to  be  a  now  Duke  of  York.1    Lord  M.  understood 

A  To  plcaso   the  king,  Canning  much  to  disconcert  his  opponents, 

appointed  the  Duko  of  Clarence  as  Lord  Melville  had  hold  the  oilico  of 

Lord  High  Admiral,  but  Greville  First  Lord  from  March  25,  1812,  to 

eays  it  was  a  moat  judicious  stroke  April  1 3, 1827.    The  Duke  reigned 

of  policy,  and  nothing  served  so  in  the  following  year.—  SooCroker'a 


6  JOUKNAL.  [JULY 

the  allusion  so  little,  as  to  inquire  whether  his  informant 
meant  that  the  Duke  of  Cambridge  had  taken  the  Duke  of 
York's  situation,  when  it  was  explained  to  refer  to  the  Duke 
of  Clarence  getting  the  Admiralty.  There  are  some  few 
words  that  speak  volumes.  Lord  Melville  said  that  none  of 
them  suspected  Canning's  negotiations  with  the  "Whigs  but 
the  Duke  of  Wellington,  who  found  it  out  through  the  ladies 
ten  days  before.  I  asked  him  how  they  came  to  be  so  un- 
prepared, and  could  not  help  saying  I  thought  they  hail  acted 
without  consideration,  and  that  they  might  have  shown  a 
face  even  to  Canning.  He  allowed  the  truth  of  what  1  said, 
and  seemed  to  blame  Peel's  want  of  courage.  In  his  place,  he 
said,  he  would  have  proposed  to  form  a  government  disclaim- 
ing any  personal  views  for  himself  as  being  Premier  and  thcs 
like,  but  upon  the  principle  of  supporting  the  measxires  of 
Lord  Oastlereagh  and  Lord  Liverpool.  T  think  this  would 
have  been  acceptable  to  the  King.  Mr.  Peel  obviously  feared 
his  great  antagonist  Canning,  and  perhaps  throw  the  game 
up  too  soon.  Canning  said  the  office  of  Premier  was  his 
inheritance ;  he  could  not,  from  constitution,  hold  it  abovo 
two  years,  and  theu  it  would  descend  to  Peel.  Such  i« 
ambition !  Old  friends  forsaken — old  principles  channel — 
every  effort  used  to  give  the  vessel  of  the  State  a  new 
direction,  and  all  to  be  Palinurus  for  two  years  I 

July  11,  [AblotsforA], — Worked  at  proofs  in  tho  morn- 
ing ;  composed  nothing.  Got  off  by  one,  and  to  this  place 
between  six  and  seven.  Weather  delicious. 

July  12. — Unpacking  and  arranging;  the  urchins  aro 
stealing  the  cherries  iu  the  outer  garden.  But  I  can  fcparo 
a  thousand  larch-trees  to  put  it  in  order  with  a  good  fence 
for  next  year.  It  is  not  right  to  leave  fruit  exposed ;  for 
if  Adam  in  the  days  of  innocence  fell  by  an  apple,  how 

Correspondence,  vol.  i  pp.  264  in  the  Duko  of  Wellington'*  admin- 
Getter  to  Blomfield),  427,  429 ;  also  fetration  !n  1828,  ami  again  First 
ante,  vol.  i.  p.  202.  Lord  Melville  Lord  from  Sept.  17  of  the  same 
was  President  of  the  India  Board  year  until  Nov.  22, 1830. 


1837.J  JOUENAL.  r 

much  may  the  little  gossoon  Jamie  Moffatt  be  tempted  by 
apples  of  gold  in  an  age  of  iron  !  Anne  and  I  walked  to 
Huntly  Burn—  a  delicious  excursion.  That  place  is  really 
become  beautiful;  the  Miss  Fergusons  have  displayed  a 
great  deal  of  taste. 

July  13.  —  Two  agreeable  persons  —  Bev.  Mr.  Gilly,1  one  of 
the  prebendaries  of  Durham,  with  his  wife,  a  pretty  little 
woman  —  dined  with  us,  and  met  Mr.  Scrope.  I  heard  the 
whole  history  of  the  discovery  of  St,  Cuthbert's2  body  at 
Durham  Cathedral.  The  Catholics  will  deny  the  identity, 
of  course  ;  but  I  think  it  is  constaU  by  the  dress  and  other 
circumstances.  Made  a  pleasant  day  of  it,  and  with  a  good 
conscience,  for  I  had  done  my  task  this  morning, 

July  14.  —  Did  task  this  morning,  and  believe  that  I 
shall  get  on  now  very  well.  Wrote  about  five  leaves.  I 
have  been  baking  and  fevering  myself  like  a  fool  for  these 
two  years  in  a  room  exposed  to  the  south;  comfortable  in 
winter,  but  broiling  in  the  hot  weather.  Now  I  have 
removed  myself  into  the  large  cool  library,  one  of  the  most 
refreshing  as  well  as  handsomest  rooms  in  Scotland,  and  will 
not  use  the  study  again  till  the  heats  are  past.  Here  is  an 
entry  as  solemn  as  if  it  respected  the  Vicar  of  Wakefield's 
removal  from  the  yellow  room  to  the  brown.  But  I  think 
my  labours  will  advance  greatly  in  consequence  of  this 
arrangement.  Walked  in  the  evening  to  the  lake. 

July  15.  —  Achieved  six  pages  to-day,  and  finished  volume 
i  of  Chronicles.  It  is  rather  long;  but  I  think  the  last 
story  interesting,  and  it  should  not  be  split  up  into  parts. 
J.  B.  will,  I  fear,  think  it  low  ;  and  if  he  flunks  so,  others 
will.  Yet  —  vamos.  Drove  to  Huntly  Burn  in  the  evening. 

July  16.  —  Made  a  good  morning's  work  of  the  Tales. 
In  the  day-time  corrected  various  proofs.  J.  B.  thinks  that 


1  The    Eov.     William    Stephen  1823  ;  Rwearchw  among  the 

Oilly,   D.D.,   Vicar    of    ttorhaxn,  or  Waldemes,  1827-31. 

author  of  Narrative  of  an  flxcur-  *  See  Kaine's  St.   Cuthlwt,  4io, 

#ion  to  the  Mountains  of  Piemont,  Durham,  1828. 


8  JOUKNAL.  [JULY 

in  the  proposed  introduction  I  contemn  too  much  the 
occupation  by  which  I  have  thriven  so  well,  and  hints  that 
I  may  easily  lead  other  people  to  follow  my  opinion  in 
vilipending  my  talents,  and  the  use  I  have  made  of  them. 
I  cannot  tell.  I  do  not  like,  on  the  one  hand,  to  suppress 
my  own  opinion  of  the  flocci-pauci-nihili-pilification  with 
which  I  regard  these  things ;  but  yet,  in  duty  to  others,  I 
cannot  afford  to  break  my  own  bow,  or  befoul  my  own  nest, 
and  there  may  be  something  like  affectation  and  nolo  cpi- 
scopari  in  seeming  to  underrate  my  owu  labours;  BO,  all 
things  considered,  I  will  erase  the  passage.  Truth  should 
not  be  spoke  at  all  times.  In  the  evening  we  had  a  de- 
lightful drive  to  Ashestiel  with  Colonel  and  Miss  Ferguson. 

July  17. — I  wrote  a  laborious  task;  seven  pages  of 
Tales.  Kept  about  the  doors  all  day.  Gave  Bogie  £10  to 
buy  cattle  to-morrow  at  St.  Boswell's  "Fair.  Here  is  a 
whimsical  subject  of  affliction.  Mr.  Harper,  a  settlor,  who 
went  from  this  country  to  Botany  Bay,  thinking  himself 
obliged  to  me  for  a  recommendation  to  GoriciraJ  McAllister 
and  Sir  Thomas  Brisbane,  has  thought  proper  to  bring  me 
home  a  couple  of  Emus.  I  wish  his  gratitude  had  cither 
taken  a  different  turn,  or  remained  as  quiescent  as  that  of 
others  whom  1  have  obliged  more  materially.  T  at  first 
accepted  the  creatures,  conceiving  them,  in  my  ignorance*, 
to  be  some  sort  of  blue  and  greeu  parrot,  which,  though  I 
do  not  admire  their  noise,  might  scream  and  yoll  at  their 
pleasure  if  hung  up  in  the  hall  among  the  armour.  But 
your  emu,  it  seems,  stands  six  feet  high  on  his  stocking 
soles,  and  is  little  better  than  a  kind  of  cassowary  or  ostrich. 
Hang  them  1  they  might  [eat]  up  my  collodion  of  old  arms 
for  what  I  know.  It  reminds  ine  of  the  story  of  the  adjutant 
birds  in  Theodore  Hook's  novel.1  No ;  1 11  no  Emusos  1 

July  18. — Entered  this  morning  on  the  history  of  Sir 

"William  "Wallace.     I  wish  I  may  be  able  to  find  my  way 

1  See  Danver*  in  First  Series  of  jSayvnyji  and 


1827.]  JOUBNAL.  9 

between  what  the  child  can  comprehend  and  what  shall  not 
yet  be  absolutely  uninteresting  to  the  grown  readers.  Un- 
common facts  I  should  think  the  best  receipt.  Learn  that 
Mr.  Owen  Eees  and  John  Gibson  have  amicably  settled 
their  differences  about  the  last  edition  of  Napoleon,  the 
Trustees  allowing  the  publishers  nine  months*  credit.  My 
nerves  have  for  these  two  or  three  last  days  been  susceptible 
of  an  acute  excitement  from  the  slightest  causes ;  the  beauty 
of  the  evening,  the  sighing  of  the  summer  breeze,  brings  the 
tears  into  my  eyes  not  unpleasingly.  But  1  must  take  exer- 
cise, and  caseharden  myself.  There  is  no  use  in  encourag- 
ing these  moods  of  the  mind.  It  is  not  the  law  we  live  on. 

We  had  a  little  party  with  some  luncheon  at  the  lake, 
whore  Mr,  Bainbridgc  fished  without  much  success.  Captain 
Hamilton  and  two  Messrs.  Stirling,  relatives  of  my  old  friend 
Kcir,  were  there,  and  walked  with  me  a  long  round  home.  I 
walked  better  than  I  had  done  for  some  days.  Mr.  Scrope 
dined  with  us ;  he  was  complaining  of  gout,  which  is  a  bad 
companion  for  the  stag-shooting. 

July  1 9. — I  made  out  my  task  this  forenoon,  and  a  good 
deal  more.  Sent  five  or  six  pages  to  James  Ballantyne,  i.c. 
got  them  ready,  and  wrote  till  the  afternoon,  then  I  drove 
over  to  Huntly  Burn,  and  walked  through  the  glens  till 
dinnor-timo,  After  dinner  read  and  worked  till  bed-time. 
Yet  I  have  written  well,  walked  well,  talked  well,  and  have 
nothing  to  regret 

July  20. — Despatched  my  letters  to  J.  B.,  with  supply  of 
copy,  and  made  up  more  than  my  task — about  four  leaves,  1 
think.  Offered  my  Emuses  to  the  Duke  of  Buccleuch.  1 
had  an  appointment  with  Captain  Hamilton  and  his  friends 
the  Htirlings,  that  they  were  to  go  up  Yarrow  to-day.  But 
the  weather  seems  to  overcast. 

My  visitors  camo,  however,  and  we  went  up  to  Newark. 
Here  is  a  little  misfortune,  for  Spico  left  me,  and  we  could 
not  find  her.  As  we  had  no  servant  with  us  on  horseback, 


10  JOUElsTAL.  [JULY 

I  was  compelled  to  leave  her  to  her  fate,  resolving  to  send  in 
quest  of  her  to-morrow  morning.  The  keepers  are  my  lonos 
socios,  as  the  host  says  in  the  Devil  of  Edmonton,1  and  would 
as  soon  shoot  a  child  as  a  dog  of  mine.  But  there  are  scamps 
and  traps,  and  I  am  ashamed  to  say  how  reluctantly  I  left 
the  poor  little  terrier  to  its  fate. 

Slie  came  home  to  me,  however,  about  an  hour  and  a 
half  after  we  were  home,  to  my  groat  delectation,  Chir 
visitors  dined  with  us. 

July  21. — This  morning  wrote  five  pages  of  children's 
history.  Went  to  Minto,  where  we  met,  besides  Lord  M. 
and  his  delightful  countess,  Thomas  Thomson,  Kennedy  of 
Dunure,2  Lord  Carnarvon,  and  his  younger  son  and  daughter- 
in-law  ;  the  dowager  Lady  Minto  also,  whom  I  always  delight 
to  see;  she  is  so  full  of  spirit  and  intelligence.  We  rubbed 
up  some  recollections  of  twenty  years  ago,  when  T  was  more 
intimate  with  the  family  till  Whig  and  Tory  separated  ua 
for  a  time.  By  the  way,  nobody  talks  Whig  or  Toiy  junt 
now,  and  the  fighting  men  on  each  side  go  about  immled 
and  mute  like  dogs  after  a  proclamation  about  caiiino  mad- 
ness. Am  I  sorry  for  this  truce  or  not  ?  Half  and  half.  It 
is  all  we  have  left  to  stir  the  blood,  this  little  political 
brawling;  but  better  too  little  of  it  than  too  much. 

July  22,  [Atfoteford]. — Eoac  a  little  later  than  usual,  and 
wrote  a  letter  to  Mrs.  Joanna  Baillio.  Slio  is  writing  a 
tragedy3  on  witchcraft.  I  shall  be  curious  to  see  it.  Will  it 
be  real  witchcraft — the  ipsistsm/us  JUabalw — or  an  impostor, 
or  the  half-crazed  being  who  believes  herself  an  ally  of  con- 
demned spirits,  and  desires  to  be  so  ?  That  last  is  a  sublime 
subject.  We  set  out  after  breakfast,  and  reached  this  about 

1  The  Merry  Devil  of  £ldmon~  at  Dalquharran  in  1870. 
ton,  a  play  by  "T.  B.,"  which  has 

also  been,  attributed  to   Anthony  3  TUw  powerful  drama,  entitled 

Brewer.  Witduwtfl:  a  Tragedy  in  Prow,  wa« 

a  Bight  Hon.   Thomas    Francis  auggcsted,  as  the  author  say»  iu  her 

Kennedy,  M.P.  for  Ayr  Burghs,  preface,  Tby  reading  a  scene  in,  The 

1818-34.   Died  at  the  age  of  ninety  Bride  <tf  Lammermoor. 


1827.]  JOURNAL.  11 

two.  I  walked  from  two  till  four :  chatted  a  long  time  with 
Charles  after  dinner,  and  thus  went  my  day  sine  linea.  Lut 
we  will  make  it  up.  James  Ballantyne  dislikes  my  "  Drovers." 
But  it  shall  stand.  I  must  have  my  own  way  sometimes. 

I  received  news  of  two  deaths  at  once :  Lady  Die  Scott, 
my  very  old  friend,  and  Archibald  Constable,  the  bookseller. 

July  23. — Yes!  they  are  both  for  very  different  reasons 
subjects  of  reflection.  Lady  Diana  Scott,  widow  of  Walter 
Scott  of  Harden,  was  the  last  person  whom  I  recollect  so 
much  older  than  myself,  that  she  kept  always  at  the  same 
distance  in  point  of  years,  so  that  she  scarce  seemed  older 
to  me  (relatively)  two  years  ago,  when  in  her  ninety-second 
year,  than  fifty  years  before.  Sho  was  the  daughter  (alone 
remaining)  of  Pope's  Earl  o£  Marchmont,  and,  like  her 
father,  had  an  acute  mind  and  an  eager  temper.  She  was 
always  kind  to  me,  remarkably  so  indeed  when  I  was  a  boy. 

Constable's  death  might  have  been  a  most  important 
thing  to  me  if  it  had  happened  some  years  ago,  and  I  should 
then  have  lamented  it  much.  He  has  lived  to  do  ine  some 
injury ;  yet,  excepting  the  last  £5000, 1  think  most  unin- 
tentionally. He  was  a  prince  of  booksellers ;  his  views 
sharp,  powerful,  and  liberal ;  too  sanguine,  however,  and,  like 
many  bold  and  successful  schemers,  never  knowing  when  to 
stand  or  stop,  and  not  always  calculating  his  means  to  his 
objects  with  mercantile  accuracy.  He  was  very  vain,  for 
which  he  had  some  reason,  having  raised  himself  to  great 
commercial  eminence,  as  he  might  also  have  attained  great 
wealth  with  good  management,  He  knew,  I  think,  more  of 
the  business  of  a  bookseller  in  planning  and  executing 
popular  works  than  any  man  of  his  time.  In  books  them- 
selves ho  had  much  bibliographical  information,  but  none 
whatever  that  could  be  termed  literary.  He  knew  the  rare 
volumes  of  his  library  not  only  by  the  eye,  but  by  the  touch, 
when  blindfolded.  Thomas  Thomson  saw  him  make  this 
experiment,  and,  that  it  might  be  complete,  placed  in  his 


12 


JOURNAL. 


[JULY 


hand  an  ordinary  volume  instead  of  OUG  of  these  libri  rariores. 
He  said  he  had  over-estimated  his  memory ;  he  could  not 
recollect  that  volume.  Constable  was  a  violent-tempered 
man  "with  those  that  he  dared  use  freedom  with.  He  was 
easily  overawed  by  people  of  consequence,  but,  as  usual,  took 
it  out  of  those  whom  poverty  made  subservient  to  him. 
Yet  he  was  generous,  and  far  from  bad-hearted.  In  person 
good-looking,  but  very  corpulent  latterly ;  a  large  feeder,  and 
deep  drinker,  till  his  health  became  weak.  lie  dicid  of  water 
in  the  chest,  which  the  natural  strength  of  his  constitution 
set  long  at  defiance.  I  have  no  great  reason  to  regret  him  ; 
yet  I  do.  If  he  deceived  me,  he  also  deceived  himself.1 


1  Bid  Constable  ruin  Scott,  as 
has  been  generally  supposed  ?  It  is 
right  to  say  that  such  a  charge  was 
not  made  during  the  lifetime  of 
either.  Immediately  after  ftcott'a 
death  Misn  Edgeworth  wroto  to  Sir 
James  Gibson-Craig  and  asked  him 
for  authentic  information  as  to  Sir 
Walter's  connection  with  Constable. 
Sir  James  in  reply  stated  that  to  life 
personal  knowledge  Mr.  Constable 
had,  in.  his  anxiety  to  save  Scott, 
about  18 1 4  [3  81 3],  commenced  a  sys- 
tem of  accommodation  bills  which 
could  not  fail  to  produce,  and 
actually  did  produce,  the  ruin  of 
both  parties.  To  another  corre- 
spondent, some  years  later,  ho  wrote 
still  more  strongly  (M&n#irn,  vol. 
ih.p  467). 

Scott  appears  to  have  boon  aware 
of  the  facts  so  far,  as  he  says  to 
Laidlaw,  in  a  letter  of  December  10, 
1825,  "The  confusion  of  1814  is  a 
joke  to  this  .  .  .  but  it  arises  out 
of  the  nature  of  the  same  connection 
which  gives,  and  has  given,  mo  a 
fortune  j"  and  Mr.  Lockhart  says 
that  the  firm  of  J.  B.  &  Co.  "had 
more  than  once  owed  its  escape  from 
utter  ruin  and  dinhonour  "  through 
Constable's  exertions,— Life,  vol.  v. 
p.  150. 


On  reading  the  third  volume  of 
Constable's  Memoirs  (3  vote.  Hvo, 
1873),  one  cannot  fail  to  HO<J  that 
all  the  throe  parties  -  -  printer, 
publisher,  and  author -were  <tqual 
sharers  111  the  imprudtmetw  that  led 
to  the  disaster  in  18120.  Whothor 
Mr.  Constable  was  right  in  recom- 
mending further  advanottff  to  the 
London  JXOUBO  in  doubtful  ;  hut  if 
it  was  an  error  of  judgment,  ifc 
was  one  which  apjxsarn  to  have 
been  wh&rod  by  Mr.  Cudoll  iw<l 
Mr.  James  Ballautyno.  It  in  tint  bo 
admitted  that  the  throe  (irniH  went 
equally  culpable  iu  maintaining  for 
so  many  years  a  ayatom  of  fictitiouH 
credit.  Countable,  at  leant,  from  a 
letter  to  Scott,  printed  in  vol.  iii.  p. 
274,  had  become  soriouHly  alunnod 
as  early  as  August  H,  1 8'J'J, 

That  Countable  wan  oorroot  in  him 
estimate  of  tho  vahw  of  tho  litorary 
property  has  boon  fthown  by  tho 
largo  nnms  real i mid  from  the  Hale  of 
Scott's  works  ainoo  IHiK) ;  and  that 
his  was  the  brain  ("tho  pcmclulnm 
of  the  clock  "  aa  Scott  tormml  it)  to 
plan  is  alao  shown  by  tho  fa«t  that 
tho  ao-callcd  "favourito"  edition, 
the  magnum  oputt,  appears  to  have 
been  Constable's  idea  (Memoira, 
vol.  iii.  p.  256),  although,  accord* 


1827.]  JOURNAL.  13 

Wrote  five  pages  to-day,  and  went  to  see  Mr  Scrope, 
who  is  fast  with  the  gout — a  bad  companion  to  attend  him 

"  to  Athole  Braes, 

To  shoot  the  dun  doer  down,  down — 
To  shoot  the  dun  deer  down." 

July  24. — Finished  five  pages  before  eleven  o'clock,  at 
which  time  Mr.  Deputy  Register x  arrived  from  Minto,  and 
we  had  an  agreeable  afternoon,  talking  about  the  old  days 
we  have  had  together.  I  was  surprised  to  find  that  Thomson 
knew  as  little  as  I  do  myself  how  to  advise  Charles  to  a  good 
course  of  Scottish  History,  Hailes  and  Pinkerton,  Robertson 
and  Laing — there  is  nothing  else  for  it — and  Pinkerton  is 
poor  work.  Laing,  besides  his  party  spirit,  has  a  turn  for 
generalising,  which  renders  him  rathor  dull,  which  was  not 
the  nature  of  the  acute  Orcadian. 

July  25. — Thomson  left  us  this  morning  early.  I  finished 
four  pages,  and  part  of  a  fifth,  then  drove  to  Huntiy  Burn 
and  returned  through  the  (Hen ;  I  certainly  turn  heavy-footed, 
not  in  the  female  sense,  however.  I  had  one  or  two  falls 
among  the  slippy  heather,  not  having  Tom  Purdie  to  give  me 
his  arm.  I  suppose  I  shall  need  a  go-cart  one  of  these  days ; 
and  if  it  must  be  so — so  let  it  be.  Mat  wlmtas  tua. 

A  letter  from  John  Gibson  in  the  evening  brought  me 
word  that  Lord  Newton  had  adjudged  the  profits  of  Woodstock 
and  Napoleon  to  be  my  own.  This  is  a  great  matter,  and  re- 
moves the  most  important  part  of  my  dispute  with  Constable's 
creditors.  I  waked  in  the  middle  of  the  night.  Sure  I  am 
not  such  a  feather-headed  gull  as  not  to  be  able  to  sleep  for 
good  news.  I  am  thankful  that  it  is  as  it  is.  Had  it  been 
otherwise,  I  could  have  stood  it.  The  money  realised  will 
pay  one-third  of  all  that  I  owe  in  the  world — and  what  will 

ing  to  the  Anmcd  Register  of  1849,  A  Thomas  Thomson,  Deputo-Clork 

Mr.  Caxloll  claimed  the  merit  of  a  "Register  for  Scotland  under  Lord 

scheme  which  he  had  "quietly  and  JBYoderick  Campbell, 
privately  matured.'* 


14  JOURNAL.  [JULY 

pay  the  other  two-thirds  ?  I  am  as  well  and  as  capable  as 
when  those  misfortunes  began — January  was  a  year.  The 
public  favour  may  wane,  indeed,  but  it  has  not  failed  as  yet, 
and  I  must  not  be  too  anxious  about  that  possibility. 

James  B.  has  found  fault  with  my  tales  for  being  too 
historical ;  formerly  it  was  for  being  too  infantine.  He  calls 
out  for  starch,  and  is  afraid  of  his  cravat  being  too  stiff, 

0  ye  critics,  will  nothing  melt  ye  ? 

July  26, — Wrote  till  one  o'clock,  and  finished  the  first 
volume  of  Tales — about  six  leaves.  To-morrow  I  resume  the 
Chronicles,  tooth  and  nail.  They  must  be  good,  if  possible. 
After  all,  works  of  fiction,  viz.,  cursed  lies,  are  easier  to 
write,  and  much  more  popular  than  the  best  truths.  Walked 
over  to  the  head  of  the  Roman  road,  coming  round  by  "Baud it- 
land  and  the  Abbot's  "Walk.  Wrote  letters  in  the  evening. 

July  27. — In  the  morning  still  busied  with  my  corre- 
spondence. No  great  desire  to  take  up  the  Chronicle.  But 
it  must  be  done.  Devil  take  the  necessity,  and  the  folly 
and  knavery,  that  occasioned  it !  But  this  is  no  matlor  now* 
Accordingly  I  set  tightly  to  work,  and  got  on  till  two,  when 

1  took  a  walk.    Was  made  very  happy  by  the  arrival  of 
Sophia  and  her  babies,  all  in  good  health  and  spirits. 

July  28. — Worked  hard  iu  the  morning.  The  two 
Ballantynes,  and  Mr.  Hogarth  with  them.  Owen  RUOH  ouwo 
early  in  the  day.  Fergusons  came  to  dinner.  Iteou  iu 
great  kindness  and  good-humour,  but  a  little  drwnlio,  I 
think,  about  Napoleon.  We  heard  Handle's  violin  after 
dinner — 

u Whoso  touch  harmonious  can  rornovo 

The  pangs  of  guilty  power  and  hopclcflB  love."  * 

1  do  not  understand  or  care  about  fine  music ;  but  there  is 
something  in  his  violin  which  goes  to    the  very  heart. 
Sophia  sung  too,  and  we  were  once  more  merry  iu  hall — the 
first  time  for  this  many  a  month  and  many  a  day, 
1  Johnson's  Epitaph  on  Claude  PHlMp*. 


1827.]  JOURNAL.  15 

July  29, — Could  not  do  more  than  undertake  my  proofs 
to-day,  of  which  J.  B,  has  brought  out  a  considerable 
quantity.  Walked  at  one  with  Hogarth  and  Eees— the  day 
sultry,  hot,  and  we  hot  accordingly,  hut  crept  about  notwith- 
standing. I  am  sorry  io  see  my  old  and  f eal  friend  James 
rather  unable  to  walk — once  so  stout  and  active— so  was  1 
in  my  way  once.  Ah !  that  vile  word,  what  a  world  of  loss 
it  involves ! 

July  30, — One  of  the  most  peppering  thunder-storms 
which  J  have  heard  for  some  time.  Routed  and  roared  from 
six  in  the  morning  till  eight  continuously. 

"  The  thunder  ceased  not,  nor  the  fire  reposed ; 
Well  done,  old  Botherby." 

Time  wasted,  though  very  agreeably,  after  breakfast.  At 
noon,  wet  out  for  Chiefswood  iu  the  carriage,  and  walked 
home,  footing  it  over  rough  and  smooth,  with  the  vigour  of 
early  days.  James  Ballantyne  marched  on  too,  somewhat 
ineltingly,  btit  without  complaint.  We  again  had  beautiful 
music  after  dinner.  The  heart  of  age  arose.  I  have  often 
wondered  whether  1  have  a  taste  for  music  or  no.  My  ear 
appears  to  me  as  dull  as  my  voice  is  incapable  of  musical 
expression,  and  yet  1  feel  the  utmost  pleasure  in  any  such 
music  as  I  can  comprehend,  learned  pieces  always  excepted. 
f  believe  J  may  be  about  the  pitch  of  Terry's  connoisseur- 
ship,  and  that €l  T  have  a  reasonable  good  ear  for  a  jig,  but 
your  solos  and  sonatas  give  me  the  spleen." 

July  31. — Employed  the  morning  writing  letters  and 
correcting  proofs ;  this  is  the  second  day  and  scarce  a  line 
written,  but  circumstances  are  so  much  my  apology  that 
even  Duty  does  not  murmur,  at  least  not  wwih.  We  had  a 
drive  tip  to  Galashiels,  and  sent  J.  B.  off  to  Ediu burgh  in  the 
Mail.  Music  in  the  evening  as  before. 


AUGUST. 

August  1, — My  guests  left  me  and  I  thought  of  turning 
to  work  again  seriously.  Finished  five  pages.  J)iued  alone, 
excepting  Huntly  Gordon,  who  is  come  on  a  visit,  poor  lad. 
I  hope  he  is  well  fixed  uiider  Mr.  Plaula's1  patroimgo. 
Smoked  a  cigar  after  dinner.  Laughed  with  my  daughters, 
and  read  them  the  review  of  Hoffmann's  production  out  of 
Gillies's  new  Foreign  Revietc. 

The  undertaking  would  do,  I  am  convinced,  in  auy  other 
person's  hands  than  those  of  the  improvident  editor ;  but  I 
hear  he  is  living  as  thoughtlessly  as  ever  in  London,  has  hired 
a  large  house,  and  gives  Burgundy  to  his  guests,  This  will 
hardly  suit  £500  a  year. 

August  2. — Got  off  my  proofs.  Went  over  to  breakfast  at 
Huntly  Burn;  the  great  object  was  to  see  my  cascade  in 
the  Glen  suitably  repaired.  I  have  had  it  put  to  rights  by 
puddling  and  damming.  What  says  the  frog  in  the  JbWry 

Tale?— 

"  Stuff  with  moss,  and  clog  with  clay, 
And  that  will  weisse  the  water  away." 

Having  seen  the  job  pretty  tightly  done,  walked 
deliciously  home  through  the  woods.  But  no  work  all  this 
while.  Then  for  up  and  at  it.  But  in  spito  of  good  resolu- 
tions I  trifled  with  my  children  after  dinner,  and  read  to 
them  in  the  evening,  and  did  just  nothing  at  all. 

August  3. — Wrote  five  pages  and  upwards — scarce  amends 
for  past  laziness.  Huntly  Gordon  lent  mo  a  volume  of  his 
father's  manuscript  memoirs.2  They  are  not  withoxit  interest, 
for  Pryse  Gordon,  though  a  bit  of  a  rout,  is  a  clever  follow  in 

1  Eight  Hon.  Joseph  Planta  (son  Secretaries  to  the  Treasury.    Ho 

of  Joseph  Planta,  Principal  Libra-  died  in  184?. 

rian  of  the  British  Museum  from  a  Personal  Memoirs  "by  l\   L 

1799)  was  at  this  time  one  of  the  Gordon,  2  vok  8vo,  Load.  1830. 

16 


1827.]  JOUEFAL.  17 

liis  way.  One  thing  struck  me,  being  the  story  of  an  Irish 
swindler,  who  called  himself  Henry  King  Edgeworth,  an 
impudent  gawsey  fellow,  who  deserted  from  Gordon's  re- 
cruiting party,  enlisted  again,  and  became  so  great  a  favourite 
with  the  Colonel  of  the  regiment  which  he  joined,  that  he 
was  made  pay-sergeant  Here  he  deserted  to  purpose  with 
£200  or  £300,  escaped  to  France,  got  a  commission  in  the 
Corps  sent  to  invade  Ireland,  was  taken,  recognised,  and 
hanged.  What  would  Mr.  Theobald  "Wolfe  Tone  have  said 
to  such  an  associate  in  his  regenerating  expedition  ?  These 
are  thy  gods,  0  Israel !  The  other  was  the  displeasure  of 
the  present  Cameron  of  Lochiel,  on  finding  that  the  forty 
Camerons,  with  whom  he  joined  the  Duke  of  Gordon's 
Northern  Fencible  regiment,  were  to  be  dispersed.  He  had 
wellnigh  mutinied  and  marched  back  with  them.  This 
would  be  a  good  anecdote  for  Garth.1 

August  4. — Spent  the  morning  at  Selkirk,  examining 
people  about  an  assault  When  I  returned  I  found  Charlotte 
ICerr  here  with  a  clever  little  boy,  Charles  Scott,  grandson  of 
Charles  of  the  Woll,  and  son  of  William,  and  grand-nephew 
of  John  of  Midgehope.  He  seems  a  smart  boy,  and,  consider- 
ing that  he  is  an  only  son  with  expectations,  not  too  much 
spoiled.  General  Yermoloff  called  with  a  letter  from  a  Dr. 
Knox,  whom  I  do  not  know.  If  it  be  Vicesimus,  we  met 
nearly  twenty-five  years  ago  and  did  not  agree.  But  General 
YermolofF s  name  was  luckily  known  to  me.  He  is  a  man 
iix  the  flower  of  lifo,  about  thirty,  handsome,  bold,  and 
enthusiastic ;  a  great  admirer  of  poetry,  and  all  that  He 
had  been  in  the  Moscow  campaign,  and  those  which  followed, 
but  must  have  been  very  young.  He  made  not  the  least 
doubt  that  Moscow  was  burned  by  Eostopchin,  and  said  that 
there  was  a  general  rumour  before  the  French  entered  the 

1  General  David  Stewart  of  Garth,  in  1829.     Sir  Walter  said  of  him 

author   of   flfatches  of  the   High-  that  no  man  waa  "  more  regretted, 

landers.    2  vote.  8vo,  Edin.  1822.  or  porhapa  by  a  wider  circle  of 

General  Stewart  died  in  St.  Lucia  friends  and  acquaintance." 
VOL.  II.  U 


18  JOUENAL.  [AUGUST 

town,  and  while  the  inhabitants  were  leaving  it,  that  persons 
were  left  to  destroy  it.  I  asked  him  why  the  magazine  of 
gunpowder  had  not  "been  set  fire  to  in  the  first  instance. 
He  answered  that  he  believed  the  explosion  of  that  magazine 
would  have  endangered  the  retreating  Eussians.  This 
seemed  unsatisfactory.  The  march  of  the  Eussians  was  too 
distant  from  Moscow  to  be  annoyed  by  the  circumstance. 
I  pressed  him  as  well  as  I  could  about  the  slowness  of 
Koutousoff's  operations;  and  he  frankly  owned  that  the 
Russians  were  so  much  rejoiced  and  surprised  to  see  the 
French  in  retreat,  that  it  was  long  ere  they  could  credit  the 
extent  of  the  advantage  which  they  had  acquired.  This  has 
been  but  an  idle  day,  so  far  as  composition  is  concerned,  but 
I  was  detained  late  at  Selkirk. 

August  5. — Wrote  near  six  pages.  General  Yermoloff 
left  me  with  many  expressions  of  enthusiastic  regard,  as 
foreigners  use  to  do.  He  is  a  kinsman  of  Princess  Galitxiu, 
whom  I  saw  at  Paris.  I  walked  with  Tom  after  one  o'clock. 
Dined  cnfcmille  with  Miss  Todd,  a  pretty  girl,  and  wrote* 
after  dinner. 

August  6. — This  morning  finished  proofs  and  was  limy  up 
with  everything.  When  I  was  about  to  sit  down  to  write, 
I  have  the  agreeable  tidings  that  Henderson,  the  fellow  who 
committed  the  assault  at  Selkirk,  and  who  made  his  escape 
from  the  officers  on  Saturday,  was  retaken,  and  that  it  became 
necessary  that  I  should  go  up  to  examine  him.  Returned  at 
four,  and  found  Mrs.  George  Swinton  from  Calcutta,  to  whoso 
husband  I  have  been  much  obliged,  with  Archie  and  cousin 
Peggie  Swinton,  arrived.  So  the  evening  was  done  up. 

August  7. — Cousins  still  continuing,  we  wont  to  Melrono. 
I  finished,  however,  in  the  first  place,  a  pretty  smart  task, 
which  is  so  far  well,  as  we  expect  the  Skenes  to-morrow. 
Lockhart  arrived  from  London,  The  news  are  that  Canning 
is  dangerously  ill.  This  is  the  bowl  being  broken  at  the* 
cistern  with  a  vengeanca  If  he  dies  now,  it  will  be  pity 


1827.]  JOURNAL.  ]9 

it  was  not  five  months  ago.  The  time  has  been  enough  to 
do  much  evil,  but  not  to  do  any  permanent  good. 

August  8. — Huntly  Gordon  proposed  to  me  that  I  should 
give  him  my  correspondence,  which  we  had  begun  to  arrange 
last  year.  I  resolved  not  to  lose  the  opportunity,  and  began 
to  look  out  and  arrange  the  letters  from  about  1810,  throwing 
out  letters  of  business  and  such  as  are  private.  They  are  of 
little  consequence,  generally  speaking,  yet  will  be  one  day 
curious.  I  propose  to  have  them  bound  up,  to  save  trouble. 
It  is  a  sad  task;  how  many  dead,  absent,  estranged,  and 
altered !  I  wrought  till  the  Skenes  came  at  four  o'clock.  I 
love  them  well ;  yet  I  wish  their  visit  had  been  made  last 
week,  when  other  people  were  here.  It  kills  time,  or  rather 
murders  it,  this  company-keeping.  Yet  what  remains  on 
earth  that  I  like  so  well  as  a  little  society  ?  I  wrote  not 
a  line  to-day. 

August  9. — I  finished  the  arrangement  of  the  letters  so 
as  to  put  them  into  Mr.  Gordon's  hands.  It  will  be  a  great 
job  done.  But,  in  the  meanwhile,  it  interrupts  my  work 
sadly,  for  I  kept  busy  till  one  o'clock  to-day  with  this  idle 
man's  labour.  Still,  however,  it  might  have  been  long 
enough  ere  I  got  a  confidential  person  like  Gordon  to  arrange 
these  confidential  papers,  They  are  all  in  his  hands  now. 
Walked  after  one, 

August  10. — This  is  a  morning  of  fidgety,  nervous  con- 
fusion. I  sought  successively  my  box  of  Bramah  pens,  my 
proof-sheets,  and  last,  not  least  anxiously,  my  spectacles. 
I  am  convinced  I  lost  a  full  hour  in  these  various  chases. 
I  collected  all  my  insubordinate  movables  at  once,  but  had 
scarce  corrected  the  proof  and  written  half-a-score  of  lines, 
than  enter  Dalgleish,  declaring  the  Blucher  hour  is  come. 
The  weather,  however,  is  rainy,  and  fitted  for  a  day  of  pure 
work,  but  I  was  able  only  to  finish  my  task  of  three  pages. 

The  death  of  the  Premier  is  announced.  Late  George 
Canning,  the  witty,  the  accomplished,  the  ambitious;  he 


20  JOURNAL.  [AUGUST 

who  had  toiled  thirty  years,  and  involved  himself  in  the 
most  harassing  discussions  to  attain  this  dizzy  height;  he 
who  had  held  it  for  three  months  of  intrigue  and  obloquy — 
and  now  a  heap  of  dust,  and  that  is  all.  He  was  an  early 
and  familiar  friend  of  mine,  through  my  intimacy  with 
George  Ellis.  No  man  possessed  a  gayer  and  more  playful 
wit  in  society;  no  one,  since  Pitt's  time,  had  more  com- 
manding sarcasm  in  debate ;  in  the  House  of  Commons  he 
was  the  terror  of  that  species  of  orators  called  the  Yelpert*. 
His  lash  fetched  away  both  skin  and  flesh,  and  would  have 
penetrated  the  hide  of  a  rhinoceros.  Iix  his  conduct  as  a 
statesman  he  had  a  great  fault :  he  lent  himself  too  willingly 
to  intrigue.  Thus  he  got  into  his  quarrel  with  Lord  Castle- 
reagh,1  and  lost  credit  with  the  country  for  want  of  openness. 
Thus  too,  he  got  involved  with  the  Queen's  party  to  such 
an  extent  that  it  fettered  him  upon  that  memorable  quarrel, 
and  obliged  him  to  butter  Sir  Robert  Wilson  with  dear 
friend,  and  gallant  general,  and  so  forth.  The  last  composi- 
tion with  the  Whigs  was  a  sacrifice  of  principle  on  both 
sides.  I  have  some  reason  to  think  they  counted  on  getting 
rid  of  him  in  two  or  three  years.  To  mo  Canning  was 
always  personally  most  kind.  I  saw,  with  pain,  a  great 
change  in  his  health  when  I  met  him  at  Colonel  Bolton's  at 
Stors  in  1825.  In  London  T  thought  him  looking  better. 

August  11. — Wrote  nearly  five  pages;  then  walked.  A 
visit  from  Henry  Scott ; 2  nothing  known  as  yet  about  politics. 
A  high  Tory  Administration  would  be  a  great  evil  at  this 
time.  There  are  repairs  in  the  structure  of  our  constitution 
which,  ought  to  be  made  at  this  season,  and  without  which 
the  people  will  not  long  bo  silent.  A  pure  Whig  Adminis- 
tration would  probably  play  the  devil  by  attempting  a 
thorough  repair.  As  to  a  compound,  or  molo-dramatic, 
Ministry,  the  parts  out  of  which  such  a  one  could  be  or- 

1  Resulting  in  the  duel  of  21st  September  1809, — See  Croker1**  Oorre~ 
spondence,  vol.  i.  p.  20 ;  and  Zf/e,  vol.  iiju  eh.  xix, 
s  Afterwards  Lord  Polwarth. 


1827.]  JOURNAL.  21 

ganised  just  now  are  at  a  terrible  discount  in  public  estima- 
tion, nor  will  they  be  at  par  in  a  hurry  again.  The  public 
were  generally  shocked  at  the  complete  lack  of  principle 
testified  by  public  men  on  the  late  occasion,  and  by  some 
who  till  then  had  some  credit  with  the  public.  The  Duke 
of  W.  has  risen  by  his  firmness  on  the  one  side,  Earl  Grey 
on  the  other. 

August  12. — Wrote  my  task  and  no  more.  Walked  with 
Lockhart  from  one  o'clock  to  four.  Took  in  our  way  the 
Glen,  which  looks  beautiful.  I  walked  with  extreme  pain 
and  feebleness  until  we  began  to  turn  homewards,  when  the 
relaxation  of  the  ankle  sinews  seemed  to  be  removed,  and  I 
trode  merrily  home.  This  is  strange  ;  that  exercise  should 
restore  the  nerves  from  the  cliill  or  numbness  which  is 
allied  to  palsy,  I  am  well  aware,  but  how  it  should  restore 
elasticity  to  sinews  that  are  too  much  relaxed,  I  for  one 
cannot  comprehend.  Colonel  Eussell  came  to  dinner  with 
us,  and  to  consult  me  about  some  family  matters.  He  has 
the  spirit  of  a  gentleman ;  that  is  certain. 

August  1 3. — A  letter  from  booksellers  at  Brussels  informs 
xae  of  the  pleasant  tidings  that  Napoleon  is  a  total  failure ; 
that  they  have  lost  much  money  on  a  version  which  they 
were  afc  great  expense  in  preparing,  and  modestly  propose 
that  I  should  write  a  novel  to  make  them  amends  for  loss 
on  a  speculation  which  I  knew  nothing  about  "  Have  you 
nothing  else  to  ask  ? "  as  Sancho  says  to  the  farmer,  who  asks 
him  to  stock  a  farm  for  his  son,  portion  off  his  daughters,  etc. 
etc.  They  state  themselves  to  be  young  booksellers ;  certes, 
they  must  hold  me  to  be  a  very  young  author !  Napoleon, 
however,  has  failed  on  the  Continent — and  perhaps  in 
England  also ;  for,  from  the  mumbling,  half -grumbling  tone 
of  Longman  and  Co.,  dissatisfaction  may  be  apprehended. 
Well,  I  can  set  my  face  to  it  boldly.  I  live  not  in  the 
public  opinion,  not  I ;  but  egad !  I  live  ly  it,  and  that  is 
worse.  Tu  ne  cede  tnalis,  sed  contra,  etc. 


22  JOUKNAL.  [AUGUST 

I  corrected  and  transmitted  sheets  before  breakfast; 
afterwards  went  and  cut  wood  with  Tom,  but  returned 
about  twelve  in  rather  a  melancholy  humour.  I  fear  this 
failure  may  be  followed  by  others ;  and  then  what  chance  of 
extricating  my  affairs.  But  they  that  look  to  freits,  froits 
will  follow  them,  ffussards  en  avant, — care  killed  a  cat.  T 
finished  three  pages — that  is,  a  full  task  of  the  Chronicles — 
after  I  returned.  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Philips  of  Manchester  came 
to  dinner, 

August  14. — Finished  my  task  before  breakfast.  A  bad 
rainy  day,  for  which  I  should  not  have  cared  but  for  my 
guests.  However,  being  good-humoured  persons  and  gifted 
with  taste,  we  got  on  very  well,  by  dint  of  showing  prints, 
curiosities ;  finally  the  house  up  stairs  and  down ;  and  at 
length  by  undertaking  a  pilgrimage  to  Melrose  in  the  rain, 
which  pilgrimage  we  accomplished,  but  never  entered  the 
Abbey  Church,  having  just  had  wetting  enough  to  induce  us, 
when  we  arrived  at  the  gate,  to  "  Turn  again,  Whittington/' 

August  15. — Wrote  in  the  morning.  After  breakfast 
walked  with  Mr.  Philips,  who  is  about  to  build  and  plan 
himself,  and  therefore  seemed  to  enter  con  anwre  into  all 
I  had  been  doing,  asked  questions,  and  seemed  really  in- 
terested to  learn  what  I  thought  myself  not  ill-qualified  to 
teach.  The  little  feeling  of  superior  information  in.  such 
cases  is  extremely  agreeable.  On  the  contrary,  it  is  a  great 
scrape  to  find  you  have  been  boring  some  one  who  did  not 

care  a  d about  the  matter,  so  to  speak ;  and  that  you 

might  have  been  as  well  employed  in  buttering  a  wlun-stonc. 
Mr,  and  Mrs.  Philips  left  us  about  twelve — day  bad.  I 
wrote  nearly  five  pages  of  Chronicles. 

August  16. — A  wet,  disagreeable,  sulky  day,  but  such 
things  may  be  carried  to  account.  I  wrote  upwards  of  seven 
pages,  and  placed  myself  redu*  m  curia,  with  Madam  Duty, 
who  was  beginning  to  lift  up  her  throat  against  me. 
Nothing  remarkable  except  that  Huntly  Gordon  left  us. 


1827.]  JOTJKNAL.  23 

August  17. — Wrote  my  task  in  the  morning.  After 
breakfast  went  out  and  cut  wood  with  Tom  and  John 
Swanston,  and  hewed  away  with  my  own  hand ;  remained 
on  foot  from  eleven  o'clock  till  past  three,  doing,  in  my 
opinion,  a  great  deal  of  good  in  plantations  above  the  house, 
where  the  firs  had  been  permitted  to  predominate  too  much 
over  the  oak  and  hardwood.  The  day  was  rough  and 
stormy — not  the  worst  for  working,  and  I  could  do  it  with 
a  good  conscience,  all  being  well  forward  in  the  duty  line. 
After  tea  I  worked  a  little  longer.  On  the  whole  finished 
four  leaves  and  upwards — about  a  printed  sheet — which  is 
enough  for  one  day. 

August  18. — Finished  about  five  leaves,  and  then  out 
to  the  wood,  where  I  chopped  away  among  the  trees,  laying 
the  foundation  for  future  scenery.  These  woods  will  one 
day  occupy  a  great  number  of  hands.  Four  years  hence  they 
will  employ  ten  stout  woodsmen  almost  every  day  of  the 
year.  Henry  and  William  Scott  (Harden)  came  to  dinner. 

Augitst  19. — Wrote  till  about  one,  then  walked  for  an 
hour  or  two  by  myself  entirely ;  finished  five  pages  before 
dinner,  when  we  had  Captain  and  Mrs.  Hamilton  and  young 
Davidoff,  who  is  their  guest.  They  remained  with  us  all 
night. 

August  20. — I  corrected  proofs  and  wrote  one  leaf  before 
breakfast ;  then  wont  up  to  Selkirk  to  try  a  fellow  for  an 
assault  The  people  there  get  rather  riotous.  This  is  a 
turbulent  fierce  fellow.  Some  of  his  attitudes  were  good 
during  the  trial  This  dissipated  my  attention  for  the  day, 
although  I  was  back  by  half-past  two.  I  did  not  work  any 
more,  so  am  behind  in  my  reckoning. 

August  21. — Wrote  four  pages,  then  set  out  to  make  a 
call  at  Sunderland  Hall  and  Yair,  but  the  old  sociable  broke 
down  before  we  had  got  past  the  thicket,  so  we  trudged  all 
back  on  foot,  and  I  wrote  another  page,  This  makes  up 
the  deficiency  of  yesterday. 


24  JOURNAL.  [AUGUST 


22.  —  I  wrote  four  or  five  leaves,  but  begin  to 
get  aground  for  want  of  Indian  localities.  Colonel  Ferguson's 
absence  is  unlucky,  and  half-a-dozen  Qui  Hi's  besides, 
willing  to  write  chits,1  eat  tiffin,  and  vent  all  their  Pagan 
jargon  when  one  does  not  want  to  hear  it;  and  now 
that  I  want  a  touch  of  their  slang,  lo  '  there  is  not  one  near 
me.  Mr.  Adolphus,  son  of  the  celebrated  counsel,  and 
author  of  a  work  on  the  Waverley  Novels?  came  to  make 
me  a  visit.  He  is  a  modest  as  well  as  an  able  man,  and 
I  am  obliged  to  him  for  the  delicacy  with  which  he  treated 
a  matter  in  which  I  was  personally  so  much  concerned* 
Mr.  and  Mrs.  Hamilton  asked  us  to  breakfast  to-morrow, 

August  23.  —  Went  to  breakfast  at  Chiefswood,  which, 
with  a  circuitous  walk,  have  consumed  the  day.  Found, 
in  the  first  place,  my  friend  Allan,  the  painter,  busy  about 
a  picture,  into  which  he  intends  introducing  living  char- 
acters —  a  kind  of  revel  at  Abbotsford.  Second,  a  whimsical 
party,  consisting  of  John  Stevenson,  the  bookseller,  Peter 
Buchan  from  Pcterhead,  a  quiz  of  a  poetical  creature,  and 
a  bookbinder,  a  friend  of  theirs.  The  plan  was  to  consult 
me  about  publishing  a  great  quantity  of  ballads  which  this 
Mr.  Buchan  has  collected.  I  glanced  them  over.  He  lias 
been  very  successful,  for  they  are  obviously  genuine,  and 
many  of  them  very  curious.  Others  are  various  editions 
of  well-known  ballads.  I  could  not  make  the  man  com- 
prehend that  these  last  were  of  little  value,  being  generally 
worse  readings  of  what  was  already  published  A  small 
edition  published  by  subscription  may  possibly  succeed, 
It  is  a  great  pity  that  few  of  those  ballads  are  historical, 
almost  all  being  of  the  romantic  cast.  They  certainly  ought 
to  be  preserved,  after  striking  out  one  or  two  which  have 
been  sophisticated,  I  suppose  by  Mr,  Buchan  himself,  which 

1  Persian  chiMyss  a  short  note.          Series    of  Wovek  beginning    with 

"Waverley,"  and  an  Attempt   to 

9  Letters  to  Richard  Heber,  Mq*,     ascertain  their  Author,     Svo,  kott- 
containing  Critical  Remarks  on  t7ie     doa,  1821. 


1827.]  JOUKWAL.  25 

are  easily  distinguishable  from  the  genuine  ballads.1  No 
one  but  Burns  ever  succeeded  in  patching  up  old  Scottish 
songs  with  any  good  effect 

August  24. — Corrected  proofs  and  wrote  letters  in  the 
morning.  Began  a  review  upon  Monteath's  Planter  for 
Lockhart.2  Other  matters  at  a  stand.  A  drive  down  to 
Mertoun,  and  engaged  to  dine  there  on  Sunday  first  This 
consumed  the  day. 

August  25. — Mr.  Adolphus  left  us  this  morning  after  a 
very  agreeable  visit.  "We  all  dined  at  Dr.  Brewster's.  Met 
Sir  John  Wright,  Miss  Haig,  etc.  Slandered  our  neigh- 
bours, and  were  good  company.  Major  John  Scott  there. 

1  did  a  little  more  at  the  review  to-day.    But  I  cannot  go 
on  with  the  tale  without  I  could  speak  a  little  Hindostanee 
— a  small  seasoning  of  curry-powder.    Ferguson  will  do  it 
if  T  can  screw  it  out  of  him. 

August  26. — Encore  review.  Walked  from  twelve  till 
three,  then  drove  to  Mertoun  with  Lockhart  and  Allan. 
Dined  en  famttle,  and  home  by  half-past  ten.  We  thought 
of  adding  a  third  volume  to  the  Chronicles,  but  Gibson  is 
afraid  it  would  give  grounds  for  a  pretext  to  seize  this  work 
on  the  part  of  Constable's  creditors,  who  seem  determined 
to  take  any  advantage  of  me,  but  they  can  only  show  their 
teeth  I  trust ;  though  I  wish  the  arbitration  was  ended. 

August  27. — Sent  off  proofs  in  morning,  revised  in  after- 
noon. Walked  from  one  till  four.  What  a  life  of  uniformity  I 
Yet  I  never  wish  to  change  it.  I  even  regret  I  must  go  to 
town  to  meet  Lady  Compton 8  next  week. 

A  singular  letter  from  a  lady,  requesting  I  would  father 
a  novel  of  hers.  That  won't  pass.4 

1  They  wore  published  under  the  Prose  Works,  vol.  xxi.  pp,  1-76. 

title  Ancient  Ballads  and  Songs,  *  Daughter    of    Mrs.    Maclean 

2  vols.  8vo,  1828.  Olephane,    and    afterwards    Mar* 
a  The  JForente^a  Guide  and  Profit-  chioness  of  Northampton. 

able  Planter,  reviewed  in  the  Quar-  4  Scott's  indorsation  of  this  letter 
trrly,  Oct.  1827,  See  also  "On  is  characteristic— "Prodigious,  bold 
Planting  Waste  Lands,"  in  Misc.  request."— -Tom  Thumb. 


20  JOURNAL.  [AUGUST 

Cadell  writes  me,  transmitting  a  notice  from  the  French 
papers  that  Gourgaud  has  gone,  or  is  going,  to  London  to 
verify  the  facts  alleged  in  my  history  o£  Napoleon,  and  the 
bibliopolist  is  in  a  great  funk.  I  lack  some  part  of  his 
instinct  I  have  done  Gourgaud  no  wrong:  every  word 
imputed  to  him  exists  in  the  papers  submitted  to  me  as 
historical  documents,  and  I  should  have  been  a  shameful 
coward  if  I  had  shunned  using  them.  At  my  years  it  is 
somewhat  late  for  an  affair  of  honour,  and  as  a  reasonable 
man  I  would  avoid  such  an  arbitrament,  but  will  not  plead 
privilege  of  literature.  The  country  shall  not  bo  disgraced  in 
my  person,  and  having  stated  why  I  think  I  owe  him  no  satis- 
faction, I  will  at  the  same  time  most  willingly  give  it  to  him. 
"  II  sera  re$u, 

Biribi, 
A  la  faqon  do  Barbara, 

Mon  ami" 

I  have  written  to  Will  Clerk*  to  stand  my  friend  if  necessary. 
He  has  mettle  in  him,  and  thinks  of  my  honour  as  well  as 
my  safety. 

1  Among  tho  documents  laid  bo-  as  Oolond  Oroyy  would  have  <lono 

fore  Scott  in  tho  Colonial  Office,  forty  years  before  to  TJm  ftwtrnt't " 

when  he  was  in  London  at  tho  [W.  Clerk].-— Life,  vol.  ix.  pp.  14U-& 
close  of  182G,  "were  some  which  A  short  time  previously  Gourgaud 

represented    one    of    Bonaparte'**  had  had  a  quarrel  with  Count  Slgur 

attendants  at  St.  Helena,  General  regarding  tho  latter'a  History  of  f/ir 

Gourgaud,  as  having  been  guilty  of  Ihmian   Campaign,  to   -which   ho 

gross  unfairness,  giving  the  English  wrote  a  reply  in  1825,  and  then 

Government    private    information  fought  a  duel  with  the  author  m 

that  the  Emperor's  complaints  of  support    of    his    allegations*      Ju 

ill-usage  wore  utterly  unfounded,  Scott's  case,  however,  it  came  to 

and  yet  then  and  afterwards  aid-  nothing  beyond  a  paper  war,  which 

ing  and  assisting  tho  delusion  in  Sir  Walter   declined   to   prolong, 

France  as  to  the  harshness  of  Sir  leaving  the  question  to  bo  dooidccl 

Hudson  Lowe's   conduct  towards  by  the  general  public.    It  i«  flue  to 

his    captive.      Sir   Waiter,    when  Uourgaud   to   fltato   that  on  two 

using  these  remarkable  documents,  occasions  he  saved  Napoloon'e  life, 

guessed  that  Gourgaud  might  be  though  his  subsequent  information 

inclined  to  fix  a  personal  quarrel  on  to  the  British  Government  did  not 

himself;  and  there  now  appeared  tend  to  increase  his  popularity  with 

m  the  newspapers  a  succession  of  the  Bonapartists.    Ho  died  at  Paris 

hints  that  the  General  was  seriously  in  his  sixty-ninth  year  on  July  25th, 
bent  on  this  purpose.  He  applied 


1827.]  JOURNAL.  27 

August  28. — I  am  still  bothering  with  the  review,  but 
gave  Lockhart  fifteen  leaves,  which,  is  something.  Learned 
with  regret  that  Williams  leaves  his  situation  of  Eector  of 
the  !N"ew  Academy.  It  is  a  shot  in  the  wing  of  the  institution ; 
for  he  is  a  heaven-born  teacher.  Walked  at  two  till  four 
along  the  thicket,  and  by  the  river-side,  where  I  go  seldom ; 
I  can't  say  why,  unless  that  the  walk  is  less  private  than 
those  more  distant.  Lockhart,  Allan,  and  I,  talk  of  an  ex- 
cursion to  Kelso  to-morrow.  I  have  no  friends  there  now. 
Yet  once  how  many ! 

August  29. — Went  on  our  little  expedition,  breakfasting 
at  Mertoun.  Called  at  Meurs,  where  we  found  Sir  John  S. 
and  his  whole  family.  The  great  lady  received  us  well, 
though  we  had  been  very  remiss  in  our  duty.  From  that 
we  went  to  Kelso,  where  I  saw  not  a  soul  to  acknowledge 
former  acquaintance,  How  should  I,  when  my  residence 
there  was  before  1 783, 1  fancy  ?  *  The  little  cottage  in  which 
I  lived  with  poor  Aunt  Jenny  is  still  standing,  but  the  great 
garden  is  divided  betwixt  three  proprietors.  Its  huge 
platanus  tree  withered,  I  was  told,  in  the  same  season  which 
was  fatal  to  so  many  of  the  species.  It  was  cut  down.  The 
yew-hedges,  labyrinths,  wildernesses,  and  other  marks  that 
it  had  once  been  the  abode  of  one  of  the  Millers  connected 
with  the  author  of  the  Gardener's  Dictionary  (they  were  a 
Quaker  family),  are  all  obliterated,  and  tho  place  is  as 
common  and  vulgar  as  may  be.  The  lady  the  cottage 
belongs  to  was  very  civiL  Allan,  as  a  man  of  taste,  was 
much  delighted  with  what  he  saw.  When  we  returned,  we 
found  our  party  at  home  increased  by  Lady  Anna  Maria 
Elliot,  who  had  been  showing  Melrose  to  two  friends,  Miss 
Drinkwaters.  Lady  M.'s  wit  and  good-humour  made  the 
evening  go  pleasantly  off.  There  were  also  two  friends  of 
Charles's,  by  name  Paley  (a  nephew  of  the  archdeacon)  and 
Ashworth.  They  seem  nice  young  men,  with  modesty  and 
good-breeding.  I  am  glad,  as  my  mother  used  to  say,  that 
i  Life,  vol.  i.  pp,  47,  155-156. 


28 


JOUEISTAL. 


[AUG.  1827. 


his  friends  are  so  presentable.  Moreover,  there  came  my 
old,  right  trusty,  and  well-beloved  friend,  John  liichardson, 
so  we  were  a  full  party.  Lady  Anna  Maria  returned  in  the 
evening.  Francis  Scott  also  dined  "with  us. 

August  30. — Disposed  of  my  party  as  I  best  might,  and 
worked  at  my  review.  Walked  out  at  one,  and  remained 
till  near  five.  Mr.  Scott  of  Harden  and  David  Thomson, 
W.S.,  dined  with  us.  Walked  with  Mr.  Allan  through  Haxel 
Cleugh. 

August  31. — Went  on  with  my  review ;  but  I  have  got 
Sir  Henry's  original  pamphlet,1  which  is  very  cleverly  written. 
I  find  I  cannot  touch  on  his  mode  of  transplantation  at  all 
in  this  article.  It  involves  many  questions,  and  some  of 
importance,  so  I  will  make  another  article  for  January. 
Walked  up  the  Khymer's  Glen  with  John  Richardson.2 


1  The   Plmt&rt?    Guide,   by   Sir 
Henry  Seton  Steuart. 

2  In  the  Nortli  British  Jlemew, 
No.  82,  there  ia  an  extremely  in- 
teresting  sketch   of   this   learned 
Peerage  lawyer.     He  died  in  hia 
85th  year,  in  1864,  at  his  country 
scat,  Kirklands  in  Roxburghshire) 
which  he  had  jmrchas/Ki  by  Sir 
Walter's  advice. 

The  following  amusing  narrative 
of  what  took  placo  on  Tweedsidc 
when  these  two  old  friends  were 
in  their  prime  ia  given  In  Mr. 
Richardson's  own  words : — 

"On  a  beautiful  morning  in  Sep- 
tember 1810  I  started  with  flir 
Walter  from  Ashiestiel.  We  be- 
gan nearly  under  the  ruins  of  Kli- 
bank,  and  in  sight  of  the  *  Hanging 
Tree.1  I  only  had  a  rod,  but  Sir 
Walter  walked  by  my  side,  now 
quoting  Izaak  Walton,  as,  '"Fish 
me  this  stream  by  inches/  and  now 
delighting  me  with  a  profusion  of 
Border  stories.  After  the  capture 
of  numerous  fine  trout,  I  hooked 
something  greater  and  unseen, 
which  powerfully  ran  out  my  line. 


Sir  Walter  got  into  a  state  of  groat 
excitement,  exclaiming,  '  J  t  'a  a 
fish!  It's  a  fish!  Hold  up  your 
rod  1  Give  him  lino  1'  and  »o  on. 
The  rod,  which  belonged  to  one  of 
his  boys,  broke,  and  put  us  both 
into  groat  alarm ;  but  I  contrived, 
-•>y  ascending  the  steep  bank  and 
holding  down  the  rod,  still  to  givo 
play  to  the  reel,  till,  after  a  good 
quarter  of  an  hour's  struggle,  a 
trout,  for  so  it  turned  out  to  be, 
was  conducted  round  a  little  pen- 
insula. Sir  Walter  jumped  into 
tlxo  water,  seized  hitn,  and  threw 
him  out  on  the  grass.  Tom  Purdio 
came  up  a  little  time  after,  and  "was 
certainly  rather  diHCompoaod  at  my 
success.  *  It  will  be  acme  mtu 
brute,'  lie  observed  y  but  ho  became 
satisfied  that  it  was  a  fine  river- 
trout,  and  auoli  a»,  ho  afterward* 
admitted,  had  not  boon  killed  in 
Tweed  for  twenty  years ;  and  when 
I  moved  down  the  water,  ho  went, 
as  Sir  Walter  afterwards  observed, 
and  gave  it  a  kick  on  the  head,  ox* 
claiming,  'To  be  ta'en  by  the  like 
o'  him  f  rae  Lunnon  I  * " 


SEPTEMBER. 

September  1. — Colonel  Ferguson  and  Colonel  Byers 
breakfasted;  the  latter  from  India,  the  nephew  of  the  old 
antiquarian  j1  but  I  had  not  an  opportunity  to  speak  to  him 
about  the  Eastern  information  required  for  the  Chronicles. 
Besides,  my  review  is  not  finished,  though  I  wrought  hard 
to-day.  Sir  William  Hamilton  and  his  brother,  Captain 
Hamilton,  called;  also  young  Davidoff.  I  am  somewhat 
sorry  for  my  young  friend.  His  friends  permit  him  to 
remain  too  long  in  Britain  to  be  happy  in  Russia.  Yet  this 
[is  a]  prejudice  of  those  who  suppose  that  when  the  insti- 
tutions and  habits  by  which  they  are  governed  come  to 
be  known  to  strangers,  they  must  become  exclusively  at- 
tached to  them.  This  is  not  so.  The  Hottentot  returns 
from  civilisation  to  the  wild  manners  of  his  kraal,  and 
wherefore  should  not  a  Russian  resume  his  despotic  ideas 
when  returned  to  his  country  ? 

September  2. — This  was  a  very  warm  day.  I  remained 
at  home,  chiefly  engaged  in  arranging  papers,  as  I  go  away 
to-morrow.  It  is  lucky  these  starts  happen  from  time  to 
time  as  I  should  otherwise  never  get  my  table  clear.  At 
five  o'clock  the  air  became  cooler,  and  I  sat  out  of  doors  and 
played  with  the  children.  Anne,  who  had  been  at  Mertoun 
the  day  before,  brought  up  Anne  and  Elizabeth  Scott 2  with 
her,  and  Francis  has  been  with  us  since  yesterday.  Richard- 
son left  us. 

September  3. — Went  on  with  my  arranging  of  papers  till 
twelve,  when  I  took  chaise  and  arrived  at  Melville  Castle. 

1  James  Byers,  1733-1817.  and  Elizabeth,  of  Ooloiiol  Charles 

2  Anne  Scott  of  Harden,  after-     Wyudham. 

wife  of  Lord  Jerviswoode,  20 


30  JOURNAL  JSJBJT. 

Found  Lord  and  Lady  M,  and  the  two  young  ladies.  Dr. 
Hope,  my  old  school-fellow  James  Hope  *  and  his  son,  made 
up  our  party3  which  was  very  pleasant.  After  they  went 
away  we  had  some  private  conversation  about  politics. 
The  Whigs  and  Tories  of  the  Cahinet  are  strangely  divided, 
the  former  desiring  to  have  Mr.  Herries  for  Chancellor  of 
the  Exchequer,  the  latter  to  have  Lord  Palmerston,  that 
Calcraft  may  be  Secretary  of  War.  The  King  has  declared 
firmly  for  Herries,  on  which  Lord  Goderich  with  tears 
entreated  Herries  to  remove  the  bone  of  contention  by 
declining  to  accept.  The  King  called  him  a  blubbering  fool. 
That  the  King  does  not  like  or  trust  the  Whigs  is  obvious 
from  his  passing  over  Lord  Lansdowne,  a  man  who,  I  should 
suppose,  is  infinitely  better  fitted  for  a  Premier  than  Godericli. 
But  he  probably  looks  with  no  greater  [favour]  on  the  return 
of  the  High  Tories.  I  fear  he  may  wish  to  govern  by  the 
system  of  lasculC)  or  balancing  the  two  parties,  u  perilous 
game.2  The  Advocate 3  also  dined  with  us. 

September  4,  \EflwbwrgK\. — Came  into  town  after  break- 
fast, and  saw  Gibson,  whose  account  of  affairs  is  comfortable. 
Also  William.  Clerk,  whom  I  found  quite  ready  and  willing 
to  stand  my  friend  if  Gourgaud  should  come  my  road.  H« 
agrees  with  me  that  there  is  no  reason  why  he  should  turn 
on  me,  but  that  if  he  docs,  reason  or  none,  it  is  best  to  stand 
buff  to  him.  It  is  clear  to  me  that  what  is  least  forgiven  in 
a  man  of  any  mark  or  likelihood  is  want  of  that  article, 
blackguardly  called  pluck.  All  the  fine  qualities  of  genius 
cannot  make  amends  for  it.  We  are  told  the  genius  of 
poets  especially  is  irreconcilable  with  this  species  of 
grenadier  accomplishment.4  If  so,  %uel  chwn  dc  g&iu  I  Saw 
Lady  Compton.  I  dine  with  her  to-day,  and  go  to  Glasgow 
with  her  to-morrow. 

Septeniber  5. — Dined  with  Lady  Compton  yesterday,  and 

1  James    Hope,    W.S.,    Scott's  *  Sir   W.  Rao,  who  waa   Lord 

school-follow,  died  in  Edinburgh  Advocate  from  1819  to  1830, 

Mth  November  1842.  *  £00  letter  to  Duko  of  Buculouch 

a  <jfrcntte9  vol.  i,  pp.  110-133.  on  James  Hogg  at  p,  40, 


1827]  JOUENAL.  31 

talked  over  old  stories  until  nine,  our  Ute-h-Ute  being  a 
very  agreeable  one.  Then  home  to  my  good  friend  John 
Gibson's,  and  talked  with  him  of  sundries.  I  had  an  odd 
dream  last  night.  It  seemed  to  me  that  I  was  at  a  pan- 
orama, when  a  vulgar  little  man  behind  me  was  making 
some  very  clever  but  impudent  remarks  on  the  picture,  and 
at  the  same  time  seemed  desirous  of  information,  which  no 
one  would  give  him.  I  turned  round  and  saw  a  young 
fellow  dressed  like  a  common  carter,  with  a  blue  coat  and 
red  waistcoat,  and  a  whip  tied  across  him.  He  was  young, 
with  a  hatchet-face,  which  was  turned  to  a  brick  colour  by 
exposure  to  the  weather,  sharp  eyes,  and  in  manner  and 
voice  not  unlike  John  Leyden.  I  was  so  much  struck  with 
his  countenance  and  talents  that  I  asked  him  about  his 
situation,  and  expressed  a  wish  to  mend  it.  He  followed 
me,  from  the  hopes  which  I  excited,  and  we  had  a  dreadful 
walk  among  ruins,  and  afterwards  I  found  myself  on  horse- 
back, and  in  front  of  a  roaring  torrent.  I  plunged  in  as  I 
have  formerly  done  in  good  sad  earnest,  and  got  to  the 
other  side.  Then  I  got  home  among  my  children  and 
grandchildren,  and  there  also  was  my  genius.  Now  this 
would  defy  Daniel  and  the  soothsayers  to  boot;  nor  do  I 
know  why  I  should  now  put  it  down,  except  that  I  have 
seldom  seen  a  portrait  in  life  which  was  more  strongly 
marked  on  my  memory  than  that  man's.  Perhaps  my  genius 
was  Mr.  Dickinson,  papermaker,  who  has  undertaken  that 
the  London  creditors  who  hold  Constable's  bills  will  be  satis- 
fied with  10s.  in  the  pound.  This  would  be  turning  a  genius 
to  purpose,  for  6s,  8d.  is  provided,  and  they  can  have  no 
difficulty  about  3s.  4d.  These  debts,  for  which  I  am  legally 
responsible,  though  no  party  to  their  contraction,  amount  to 
£30,000  odds.  Now  if  they  can  be  cleared  for  £15,000  it  is 
just  so  much  gained.  This  would  be  a  giant  step  to  free- 
dom. I  see  in  my  present  comfortable  quarters l  some  of  my 

1  No  10  Walker  Street. 


32  JOUENAL.  [SEPT. 

own  eld  furniture  in  Castle  St.,  which  gives  me  rather  queer 
feelings.  I  remember  poor  Charlotte  and  I  having  so  much 
thought  about  buying  these  things.  Well,  they  are  in  kind 
and  friendly  hands. 

September  6. — Went  with  Lady  Compton  to  Glasgow, 
and  had  as  pleasant  a  journey  as  the  kindness,  wit,  and 
accomplishment  of  my  companion  could  make  it.  Lady  C. 
gives  an  admirable  account  of  Borne,  and  the  various  strange 
characters  she  has  met  in  foreign  parts.  I  was  much  taken 
with  some  stories  out  of  a  romance  called  Manuscrit  irom6 
(I  Saragosse,  by  a  certain  Count  John  Potowsky  [Potocki?], 
a  Pole.  It  seems  betwixt  the  stylo  of  Calotte,  Count 
Hamilton  and  Le  Sage.  The  Count  was  a  toiler  after  super- 
natural secrets,  an  adept,  and  understood  the  cabbala.  lie 
put  himself  to  death,  with  many  odd  circumstances,  inferring 
derangement.  I  am  to  get  a  sight  of  the  book  if  it  be 
possible.  At  Glasgow  (Buck's  Head)  we  met  Mrs.  Maclean 
Clephane  and  her  two  daughters,  and  there  was  much  joy* 
After  the  dinner  the  ladies  sung,  particularly  Anna  Jaue> 
who  has  more  taste  and  talent  of  every  kind  than  half  the 
people  going  with  great  reputations  on  their  backs. 

A  very  pleasant  day  was  paid  for  by  a  restless  night 

September  7. — This  day  had  calls  from  Lord  Provost  and 
Mr.  Eutherford  (William)  with  invitations,  which  I  declined. 
Read  in  manuscript  a  very  clever  play  (comedy)  by  Misn 
A.  J.  Clephane  in  the  old  style,  which  was  very  happily 
imitated.  The  plot  was  confused — too  much  taking  and 
retaking  of  prisoners,  but  the  dialogue  was  excellent 

Took  leave  of  these  dear  friends,  nover  perhaps  to  meet 
all  together  again,  for  two  of  us  arc  old.  Wont  down  by 
steam  to  Colonel  Campbell's,  Blythswood  House,  whero  I 
was  most  courteously  received  by  him  and  hin  sisters.  We 
are  kinsfolk  and  very  old  acquaintance.  His  scat  hero  is  a 
fine  one ;  the  house  is  both  grand  and  comfortable. 

We  walked  to  Lawrence  Lockhart'a  of  Inchinnan,  within 


1827.]  JOURNAL,  33 

a  mile  of  Blythswood  House.  It  is  extremely  nice  and 
comfortable,  far  beyond  the  style  of  a  Scotch  clergyman; 
but  Lawrence  is  wealthy.  I  found  John.  Lockhart  and 
Sophia  there,  returned  from  Largs.  We  all  dined  at 
Colonel  Campbell's  on  turtle,  and  all  manner  of  good  things. 
Miss  A.  and  H.  Walker  were  there.  The  sleep  at  night 
made  amends  for  the  Buck's  Head. 

September  8. — Colonel  Campbell  carried  me  to  breakfast 
in  Glasgow,  and  at  ten  I  took  chaise  for  Corehouse,  where  I 
found  my  old  friend  George  Cranstoun  rejoiced  to  see  me, 
and  glad  when  I  told  him  what  Lord  Newton  had  determined 
in  my  affairs.  I  should  observe  I  saw  the  banks  of  the 
Clyde  above  Hamilton  much,  denuded  of  its  copse,  untimely 
cut ;  and  the  stools  ill  cut,  and  worse  kept.  Cranstoun  and 
I  walked  before  dinner.  1  never  saw  the  great  fall  of 
Corehouse  from  this  side  before,  and  I  think  it  the  best 
point,  perhaps ;  at  all  events,  it  is  not  that  from  which  it  is 
usually  seen ;  so  Lord  Corehouse  has  the  sight  and  escapes 
the  tourists.  Dined  with  him,  his  sister  Mrs.  Cunningham, 
and  Corehouse. 

F  omitted  to  mention  in  yesterday's  note  that  within 
Blythswood  plantation,  near  to  the  Bridge  of  Inchinnan, 
the  unfortunate  Earl  of  Argyle  was  taken  in  1685,  at  a 
stone  called  Argyle's  Stone.  Blythswood  says  the  Highland 
drovers  break  down  his  fences  in  order  to  pay  a  visit  to 
the  place.  The  Earl  had  passed  the  Cart  river,  and  was 
taken  on  the  Kenfrew  side. 

September  9. — This  is  a  superb  place  of  Corehouse's. 
Cranstoun  has  as  much  feeling  about  improvement  as  other 
things.  Like  all  new  improvers,  he  is  at  more  expense  than 
is  necessary,  plants  too  thick,  and  trenches  where  trenching 
is  superfluous.  But  this  is  the  eagerness  of  a  young  artist, 
Besides  the  grand  lion,  the  Fall  of  Clyde,  he  has  more 
than  one  lion's  whelp ;  a  fall  of  a  brook  in  a  cleugh  called 
Mill's  Gill  must  be  superb  in  rainy  weather.  The  old 

VOL.  n.  c 


34:  JOUBNAL,  [SEPT. 

Castle  of  Corehouse  is  much  more  castle-like  on  this  than 
from  the  other  side. 

Left  Corehouse  at  eight  in  the  morning,  and  reached 
Lanark  by  half-past  nine.  I  was  thus  long  in  travelling 
thiee  miles  because  the  postilion  chose  to  suppose  I  was 
bound  for  Biggar,  and  was  two  miles  ere  I  discovered  what 
ha  was  doing.  I  thought  he  aimed  at  crossing  the  Clyde  by 
some  new  bridge  above  Bonnington.  Breakfasted  at  Lanark 
with  the  Lockharts,  and  reached  Abbotsford  this  evening 
by  nine  o'clock. 

Thus  ends  a  pleasant  expedition  among  the  people  J 
like  most.  Drawback  only  one.  It  has  cost  mo  £15,  in- 
cluding two  gowns  for  Sophia  and  Anne ;  and  I  have  lost 
six:  days'  labour.  Both  may  be  soon  made  up. 

JfiB. — We  lunched  (dined,  videlicet)  with  Profesftor 
Wilson  at  Inverleithen,  and  met  James  Hogg,1 

September  10,  [Albotsford]. — Gourgaud's  wrath  has  burst 
forth  in  a  very  distant  clap  of  thunder,  in  which  ho  accuser 
me  of  combining  with  the  ministry  to  slander  his  rag  of  a 
reputation.  He  be  d — d  for  a  fool,  to  make  his  case  worse, 

1  Scott's  tin-weaned   interest  in  The  critics  of  tho  (lay,  headed  by 

James  Hogg,  despite  the  wayward-  Professor  Wilaon,  declared  ho  was 

ness  of  this  imaginative   genius,  Burns's  rival  as  a  song-writor,  and 

is  one  of  the  most  beautiful  traits  his  superior  in  anything  relating  to 

in  his  character.    Readers  of  Mr.  external  nature  I  indeed  they  wrote 

Lockhart's  Life  do  not  require  to  of  him  as   unsurpassed   by  poet 

be  reminded  of  tho  active  part  he  or  painter   in  hi»  fairy    tales   of 

took  in  promoting  tho  welfare  of  ancient  time,  dubbing  him    Poet 

the  " Ettrick  Shepherd"  on  many  Laureate  to  the  Quoon  of  Elfland, 

occasions,  from  the  outset  of  their  and    yet    his    unrofinod    manner 

acquaintance  in  1801  until  the  end  tempted  these  friends  to  speak  of 

of  his  life.  Ixim  familiarly  as  tho  greatest  hog 

Hogg  was  a  strange  compound  in  all  Apollo'n  hord,  or  tho  Boar  of 

of  boisterous  roughness  and  refine-  the  Forest,  etc*  etc. 

meat  in  expression,  and  those  odd  Wordsworth,  however,  on  Novem- 

contrasts  surprised  strangers  such  bor  21,    1835,  when  his  brother 

as  Moore  and  Ticknor.    The  former  bard  had  just  left  tho  sunshine  for 

was  shocked,  and  the  latter  said  his  tho  sunless  land,  wrote  from  Ms 

conversation  was  a  perpetual  con-  heart  tho  noblo  linoa  ending— 

tradiction  to  the  exquisite  delicacy  <« And  4eath  npott  th<J  1)rM,  of  TwT<)W 

of  Kilmeny.  HAS  closed  tho  Shepherd-poof «  «y<>&  " 


1827.]  JOUKNTAL  35 

by  stirring.  1  shall  only  revenge  myself  by  publishing  the 
whole  extracts  I  made  from  the  records  of  the  Colonial 
Office,  in  which  he  will  find  enough  to  make  him  bite  his 
nails.  Still  I  wonder  he  did  not  come  over  and  try  his 
manhood  otherwise.  I  would  not  have  shunned  him  nor 
any  Frenchman  who  ever  kissed  Bonaparte's  breech. 

September  11. — Went  to  Huntly  Burn  and  breakfasted 
with  Colonel  Ferguson,  who  has  promised  to  have  some 
Indian  memoranda  ready  for  me.  After  breakfast  went  to 
choose  the  ground  for  a  new  plantation,  to  be  added  next 
week  to  the  end  of  Jane's  Wood.  Came  to  dinner  Lord 
Carnarvon  and  his  son  and  daughter;  also  Lord  Francis 
Leveson  Gower,  the  translator  of  Faust. 

September  12. — Walk  with  Lord  Francis.  When  we 
return,  behold  ye !  enter  Lady  Hampden  and  Lady  Wedder- 
burn.  In  the  days  of  George  Square,  Jane  and  Maria 
Brown,1  beauties  and  toasts.  There  was  much  pleasure  on 
iny  side,  and  some,  I  suppose,  on  theirs ;  and  there  was  a 
riding,  and  a  running,  and  a  chattering,  and  an  asking,  and 
a  showing — a  real  scene  of  confusion,  yet  mirth  and  good 
spirits.  Our  guests  quit  us  next  day. 

September  13. — Fined  a  man  for  an  assault  at  Selkirk. 
He  pleaded  guilty,  which  made  short  work.  The  beggarly 
appearance  of  the  Jury  in  the  new  system  is  very  worthy 
of  note.  One  was  a  menial  servant.  When  I  returned, 
James  Ballantyne  and  Mr.  Cadell  arrived.  They  bring  a 
good  account  -of  matters  in  general.  Cadell  explained  to  me 
a  plan  for  securing  the  copyright  of  the  novels,  which  has 
a  very  good  face.  It  appears  they  are  going  off  fast ;  and 
if  the  glut  of  the  market  is  once  reduced  by  sales,  the 
property  will  be  excellent,  and  may  be  increased  by  notes. 
James  B.  brought  his  son.  Eobert  Rutherford  also  here, 
and  Miss  Bussells. 

*  Another,  sister  Georgiana,  mar-     Alexander  Hope,   O.C.B.,  grand- 
ried  General  the  Honourable   Sir     father  of  Mrs.  Maxwell  Scott. 


36  JOUENAL.  [SEPT. 

September  14. — In  the  morning  wrote  my  answer  to 
Gourgaud,  rather  too  keen  perhaps,  but  I  owe  him  nothing ; 
and  as  for  exciting  his  resentment,  T  will  neither  seek  nor 
avoid  it. 

Cadcll's  views  seem  fair,  and  he  is  open  and  explicit. 
His  brothers  support  him,  and  ho  has  no  want  of  cash. 
He  sells  two  or  three  copies  of  Bonaparte  and  one  of  the 
novels,  or  two,  almost  every  clay.  He  must  soon,  he  says, 
apply  to  London  for  copies.  Eead  a  Refutation,  as  it  calk 
itself,  of  Napoleon's  history.  It  is  so  very  polite  and 
accommodating  that  every  third  word  is  a  concession — the 
work  of  a  man  able  to  judge  distinctly  on  specific  facts, 
but  erroneous  in  his  general  results.  Ho  will  say  the  somo 
of  me,  perhaps.  Ballantyne  and  Oadell  leave  us.  Enter 
Miss  Sinclairs,  two  in  number,  also  a  translator,  and  a  little 
Flemish  woman,  his  wife — very  good-humoured,  rather  a 
little  given  to  compliment ;  name  Fauconpret.  They  arc  to 
return  at  night  in  a  gig  as  far  as  KO!BO — a  bold  undertaking. 

September  16. — The  ladies  went  to  Church;  I,  God  for- 
give me,  finished  the  Chronicles1  with  a  good  deal  of  assist- 
ance from  Colonel  Ferguson's  notes  about  Indian  affairs 
The  patch  is,  I  suspect,  too  glaring  to  bo  pleasing;  but  tho 
Colonel's  sketches  are  capitally  good,  I  understand,  too, 
there  are  one  or  two  East  Indian  novels  which  haw  lately 
appeared.  Naboclish !  wyue  fa  yal&rc. ! 

September  17. — Received  from  James  B.  tho  proofe  of 
my  reply  to  General  Gourgaud,  with  some  cautious  balaam 
from  mino  honest  friend,  alarmed  by  a  Highland  Colonel, 
who  had  described  Gourgaud  as  a  vicmwm  gargmi,  famous 
fencer,  maxksmau,  and  so  forth,  I  wrote  in  answer,  which 
is  true,  that  I  would  hope  all  my  friends  would  trust  to  iny 
acting  with  proper  caution  and  advice ;  but  that  if  I  weru 
capable,  in  a  moment  of  weakness,  of  doing  anything  short 

Chronicles  of  the  C&nongate,    First  Serioa,  ending  with  lh<>  »tr>ry  of 


1827.]  JOURNAL.  37 

of  what  iny  honour  demanded,  I  would  die  the  death  of  a 
poisoned  rat  in  hole,  out  of  mete  sense  of  my  own  degrada- 
tion. God  knows,  that,  though  life  is  placid  enough  with 
me,  I  do  not  feel  anything  to  attach  me  to  it  so  strongly 
as  to  occasion  my  avoiding  any  risk  which  duty  to  my  char- 
acter may  demand  from  me. 

I  set  to  work  with  the  Tales  of  a  Grandfather,  second 
volume,  and  finished  four  pages. 

September  18. — Wrote  five  pages  of  the  Tales.  Walked 
from  Huntly  Burn,  having  gone  in  the  carriage.  Smoked  my 
cigar  with  Lockhart  after  dinner,  and  then  whiled  away  the 
evening  over  one  of  Miss  Austen's  novels.  There  is  a  truth 
of  painting  in  her  writings  which  always  delights  me. 
They  do  not,  it  is  true,  got  above  the  middle  classes  of  society, 
but  there  she  is  inimitable. 

September  19. — Wrote  three  pages,  but  dawdled  a  good 
deal;  yet  the  Tales  get  on,  although  I  feel  bilious,  and 
vapourish,  I  believe  I  must  call  it.  At  such  times  my 
loneliness,  and  the  increasing  inability  to  walk,  come  dark 
over  me,  but  surely  these  mulligrubs  belong  to  the  mind 
more  than  the  body. 

September  22. — Captain  and  Colonel  Ferguson,  the  last 
returned  from  Ireland,  dined  here.  Prayer  of  the  minister  of 
the  Cumbrays,  two  miserable  islands  in  the  mouth  of  tho 
Clyde :  "  0  Lord,  bless  and  be  gracious  to  the  Greater  and 
the  Lesser  Cumbrays,  and  in  thy  mercy  do  not  forget  the 
adjacent  islands  of  Great  Britain  and  Ireland/' 

September  23. — Worked  in  the  morning;  then  drove  over 
to  Huntly  Burn,  chiefly  to  get  from  the  good-humoured 
Colonel  the  accurate  spelling  of  certain  Hindu  words  which 
I  have  been  using  under  his  instructions.  By  the  way,  the 
sketches  he  gave  me  of  Indian  manners  are  highly  pictur- 
esque. I  have  made  up  my  Journal,  which  was  three  days 
in  arrear.  Also  I  wrought  a  little,  so  that  the  second  volume 
of  Grandfather's  Tales  is  nearly  half  finished. 


38  JOUENAL.  [SEPT. 

September  24. — "Worked  in  the  morning  as  usual,  and  sent 
off  the  proofs  and  copy.  Something  of  the  black  dog  still 
hanging  about  me ;  but  I  will  shake  him  off.  I  generally 
affect  good  spirits  in  company  of  my  family,  whether  I  am 
enjoying  them  or  not.  It  is  too  severe  to  sadden  the  harmless 
mirth  of  others  by  suffering  your  own  causeless  melancholy  to 
be  seen;  and  this  species  of  exertion  is,  like  virtue,  its  own 
reward;  for  the  good  spirits,  which  are  at  first  simulated, 
become  at  length  real.1 

Sept&nib&r  25,  [Edinburgh]. — Got  into  town  by  one  o'clock, 
the  purpose  being  to  give  my  deposition  before  Lord  Newton 
in  a  case  betwixt  me  and  Constable's  creditors.  My  oath 
seemed  satisfactory ;  but  new  reasons  were  alleged  for  addi- 
tional discussion,  which  is,  I  trust,  to  end  this  wearisome 
matter.  I  dined  with  Mr.  Gibson,  and  slept  there.  J.  B.  dined 
with  us,  and  we  had  thoughts  how  to  save  our  copyright 
by  a  bargain  with  CadelL  I  hope  it  will  turn  to  good,  as 
I  could  add  notes  to  a  future  edition,  and  give  them  some 
value. 

September  26,  [Abbots/ord]. — Set  off  in  mail  coach,  and 
my  horses  met  me  at  Yair  Bridge.  I  travelled  with  rather 
a  pleasant  man,  an  agent,  I  found,  on  Lord  Seaf  ord's 2  West 
Indian  Estates.  Got  home  by  twelve  o'clock,  and  might 
have  been  here  earlier  if  the  Tweed  had  not  been  too  largfc 
for  fording,  I  must  note  down  my  cash  lest  it  gets  out  of 
my  head;  "may  the  foul  fa1  the  gear,  and  the  blathrie  o't,"8 
and  yet  there 's  no  doing  either  with  it  or  without  it. 

September  27. — The  morning  was  damp,  dripping,  and 
unpleasant ;  so  I  even  made  a  work  of  necessity,  and  set  to 
the  Tales  like  a  dragon,  I  murdered  M'Lellan  of  Bomby  at 
Thrieve  Oastle ;  stabbed  the  Black  Douglas  in  tho  town  of 
Stirling;  astonished  King  James  before  Koxburgh;  and 

1  Mr.  Lockhart  justly  remarks  a  Chat-los  Rose  Kllis  had  been 

that  this  entry  "  paints  the  man  in  cieated  Baron  Seaford  in  1820. 

his  tenderness,  his  fortitude,  and  *  See  Cromok's  RdigwiB  of  Bum*, 

happy  wisdom."  p.  210. 


1827.]  JOURNAL.  39 

stifled  the  Earl  of  Mar  in  his  bath  in  the  Canongate.  A  wild 
world,  my  masters,  this  Scotland  of  ours  must  have  been. 
"No  fear  of  want  of  interest ;  no  lassitude  in  those  days  for 
want  of  work, 

"For  treason,  dj  ye  see, 
Was  to  them  a  dish,  of  tea, 

And  murther  bread  and  butter." 

We  dined  at  Gattonside  with  Mr.  Bainbridge,  who  kindly 
presented  me  with  six  bottles  of  super-excellent  Jamaica 
rum,  and  with  a  manuscript  collection  of  poetry,  said  to  be 
Swift's  handwriting,  which  it  resembles.  It  is,  I  think,  poor 
Stella's.  Nothing  very  new  in  it. 

September  28. — Another  dropping  and  busy  day.  1 
wrought  hard  at  the  Historical  Tales,  which  get  on  fast. 

September  29. — I  went  on  with  the  little  history  which 
ULOW  (i.e.  vol.  ii.)  doth  appropinque  an  end.  Beceived  in  the 
evening  [Nos.  37  to  41  ?]  of  the  Eoxburghe  publications. 
They  are  very  curious,  and,  generally  speaking,  well  selected. 
The  following  struck  me : — An  Italian  poem  on  the  subject  of 
Floddenfield ;  the  legend  of  St.  Eobert  of  Knaresborough ; 
two  plays,  printed  from  MS.  by  Mr.  Haslewood.  It  does  not 
appear  that  Mr.  H.  fully  appreciated  the  light  which  he  was 
throwing  on  the  theatrical  history  by  this  valuable  com- 
munication. It  appears  that  the  change  of  place,  or  of  scene 
as  we  term  it,  was  intimated  in  the  following  manner. 

In  the  middle  of  the  stage  was  placed  Colchester,  and 
the  sign  of  Pigot's  tavern — called  the  Tarlton — intimated 
what  part  of  the  town  was  represented.  The  name 
was  painted  above.  On  one  side  of  the  stage  was,  in  like 
manner,  painted  a  town,  which  the  name  announced  to  be 
Maldon ;  on  the  other  side  a  ranger's  lodge.  The  scene  lay 
through  the  piece  in  one  or  other  of  these  three  places,  and 
the  entrance  of  the  characters  determined  where  each  scene 
lay.  If  they  came  in  from  Colchester,  then  Colchester  was 
for  the  time  the  scene  of  action.  When  that  scene  was 


40  JOUKKAL  [SEPT.  1827. 

shifted  to  Maldon,  it  was  intimated  by  the  approach  of  the 
actors  from  the  side  where  it  was  painted  —  a  clumsy  con- 
trivance, doubtless,  compared  to  changeable  scenery  ;  yet 
sufficient  to  impress  the  audience  with  a  sense  of  what  was 
meant. 

September  30.  —  Wet,  drizzling,  dismal  day.  T  finished 
odds  and  ends,  scarce  stirring  out  of  my  room,  yet  doing 
little  to  the  purpose.  Wrote  to  Sir  Henry  [Seton  Steuart] 
about  his  queries  concerning  transplanted  trees,  and  to  Mr. 
Freeling  concerning  the  Koxburghe  Club  books,  I  have 
settled  to  print  the  manuscript  concerning  the  murder  of 
the  two  Shaws  by  the  Master  of  Sinclair,  I  dallied  with 
the  precious  time  rather  than  used  it.  Bead  the  two  Eox- 
burghe  plays  ;  they  are  by  William  Percy,  a  son  of  the  eighth 
Earl  of  Northumberland  ;  worthless  and  very  gross,  but 
abounding  with  matter  concerning  scenery,  and  so  forth, 
highly  interesting  to  the  dramatic  antiquary. 

NOTE  on  the  "grenadier  accomplishment"  mentioned  in  p,  tfO. 

In  a  letter  to  the  Duke  of  Buc-  whether  he  was  to  fight  or  not, 

cleuch,  of  May  1818,  Scott  gives  aud  all  that  he  had  to  do  was  to  go 

the  following  amusing  account  of  an  to  the  Police  Cilice  and  toll  the 

incident  in  the  life  of  the  Ebtrick  charge  he  had  to  bring  against  the 

Shepherd:  —  two  Glaagow  gentlemen.  .  „  .  Tho 

**  OUT  poor  friend  Hoa;g  has  had  Glaswegians  were  greatly  too  many 

an  affair  cf  honour.  .  .  .  Two  for  him  [in  Court].  .  .  .  They  re- 

mornings  ago,  about  seven  in  the  turned  in  all  triumph  and  glory, 

of  the 


morning,   my  servant  announced,  and  Hogg  took  the  winga  of  the 

while  I  was  shaving  in  my  dress-  morning  and  fled  to  lua  cottage  at 

ing-room,  that  Mr    Hogg  wished  Altrive,  not  deeming  himself  alto- 

earnestly  to  speak  with  me.  He  was  gether  saf  e  in  the  sti  cetn  of  Etlui* 

ushered  in,  and  I  cannot  describe  burgh.  !    Now,  although  I  do  not 

the  half  -startled,  half-humorous  air  hold  valour  to  be  an  essential  article 

with  which  he  said,  scratching  his  in  the  compoaitioa  of  a  man  like 

head  most  vehemently,  'Odd,  Scott,  Hogg,  yet  I  hoai  tily  <v\  iwh  he  could 

here's  twae  fo'k's  come  frae  Glas-  have  prevailed  on  hhuaelf  to  swag- 

gow  to   provoke  mey  to  fecht  a  ger  a  little   .  .  .  But  considering 

duel1    'A  duel/  answered  I,  in  his  failure  in  tho   field  and   the 

great  astonishment,  '  and  what  do  Sheriff  Office,  I  ana  afraid  we  nmat 

you  intend  to  do?'    'Odd,  I  just  apply  to  Hogg  tho  apology  which 

locket  them  up  in  my  room  and  is  made  for   Waller  by  his   bio- 

sent  the   lassie  for  twae  o*  tho  grapher  :  '  Let  us  not  condemn  him 

police,    and^  just   gie'd   the   men  with  untemporcd  severity  bccauac 

ower  to  their  chairge,  and  I  thocht  he  was  not  such  a  prodigy  aa  the 

I  wad  come  and  ask  you  what  I  world  has  seldom  soon-—  -beoauge 

should  do.  *  .    '    He  had  already  bis  character    included    not   the 

settled  for  himself  the   question  poet,  the  orator,  and  the  horo.1" 


OCTOBER. 

October  1. — I  set  about  work  for  two  hours,  and  finished 
three  pages ;  then  walked  for  two  hours ;  then  home,  adjusted 
sheriff  processes,  and  cleared  the  table.  I  am  to  set  off  to- 
morrow for  Eavensworth  Castle,  to  meet  the  Duke  of 
Wellington ; x  a  great  let  off,  I  suppose.  Tet  I  would  almost 
rather  stay  and  sec  two  days  more  of  Lockhart  and  my 
daughter,  who  will  be  off  before  my  return.  Perhaps.  But 
there  is  no  end  to  perhaps.  We  must  cut  the  rope  and  let 
the  vessel  drive  down  the  tide  of  destiny. 

Odobar  2.— Set  out  in  the  morning  at  seven,  and  reached 
Kelso  by  a  little  past  ten  with  my  own  horses.  Then  took 
the  Wellington  coach  to  carry  me  to  Wellington — smart 
that.  Nobody  inside  but  an  old  lady,  who  proved  a  toy-woman 
in  Edinburgh ;  her  head  furnished  with  as  substantial  ware  as 
her  shop,  but  a  good  soul,  I  }se  warrant  her.  Heard  all  her 
debates  with,  her  landlord  about  a  new  door  to  the  cellar, 
etc.  etc. ;  propriety  of  paying  rent  on  the  15th  or  25th  of 

1  '*  The  Duke  was  then  making  a  under  the  new  Premier,  gaining 
progress  in  the  North,  of  England,  ground  every  day.  Sir  Walter, 
to  which  additional  importance  was  who  felt  for  the  great  Captain  the 
given  by  the  uncertain  state  of  pure  and  exalted  devotion  that 
political  arrangements ;  the  chance  might  have  been  expected  from 
of  Lord  Goderioh's  being  able  to .  some  honoured  soldier  of  his  ban- 
maintain  himself  as  Canning's  sue-  nera,  accepted  this  invitation,  and 
ccssor  seeming  very  precarious,  and  witnessed  a  scene  of  enthusiasm 
the  opinion  that  his  Grace  must  with  which  its  principal  object 
soon  be  called  to  a  higher  station  could  hardly  have  been  more  gra- 
than  that  of  Commander  of  the  tificd  than  he  was." — £(/>,  vol.  iac» 
Forces,  which  he  had  accepted  pp.  15G-7* 

41 


42  JOURNAL.  [Oct. 

May.  Landlords  and  tenants  have  different  opinions  on 
that  subject.  Danger  of  dirty  sheets  in  inns.  We  dined 
at  Wooler,  and  I  found  out  Dr.  Douglas  on  the  outside,  son 
of  my  old  acquaintance  Dr.  James  Douglas  of  Kelso.  This 
made  us  even  lighter  in  mind  till  we  came  to  Whittingham. 
Thence  to  Newcastle,  where  an  obstreperous  horse  retarded 
us  for  an  hour  at  least,  to  the  great  alarm  of  my  friend  the 
toy-woman.  N.B. — She  would  have  made  a  good  feather-bed 
if  the  carriage  had  happened  to  fall,  and  her  undermost. 
The  heavy  roads  had  retarded  us  near  an  hour  more,  so  that 
I  hesitated  to  go  to  Eavensworth  so  late;  but  my  good 
woman's  tales  of  dirty  sheets,  and  certain  recollections  of  a 
Newcastle,  inn,  induced  me  to  go  on.  When  I  arrived 
the  family  had  just  retired.  Lord  Ravensworth  and  Mr, 
Liddell  came  down,  however,  and  each  received  mo  a& 
kindly  as  possible. 

October  3  — Eose  about  eight  or  later*  My  morals  begin 
to  be  corrupted  by  travelling  and  fine  company.  Went  to 
Durham  with  Lord  Bavensworth  betwixt  one  and  two. 
Pound  the  gentlemen  of  Durham  county  and  town  assembled 
to  receive  the  Duke  of  Wellington.  I  saw  several  old  friends, 
and  with  difficulty  suited  names  to  faces,  and  faces  to  names. 
There  was  Headlam,  Dr.  Gilly  and  his  wife,  and  a  world  of 
acquaintance  besides,  Sir  Thomas  Lawrence  too,  with  Lord 
Londonderry.  I  asked  him  to  come  on  with  me,  but  ho 
could  not  He  is,  from  habit  of  coaxing  his  subjects  I  sup- 
pose, a  littlel  too  fair-spoken,  otherwise  very  pleasant.  Tho 
Duke  arrived  very  late.  There  were  bells  and  cannon  and 
drums,  trumpets  and  banners,  besides  a  fine  troop  of  yeomanry. 
The  address  was  well  expressed,  and  as  well  answered  by 
the  Duke.  The  enthusiasm  of  the  ladies  and  the  gentry 
was  great — the  common  people  were  lukewarm.1  Tho  T)uko 
has  lost  popularity  in  accepting  political  power.  JIo  will 

3  See  Correspondence  of  Princes*  Lieven  and  tikrl  Cfrvy  for  Lord  Urey'g 
opinion,  vol.  i.  p.  60. 


1827.]  JOURNAL.  43 

be  more  useful  to  his  country  it  may  be  than  ever,  but  will 
scarce  be  so  gracious  in  the  people's  eyes ;  and  he  will  not 
care  a  curse  for  what  outward  show  he  has  lost.  But  I 
must  not  talk  of  curses,  for  we  are  going  to  take  our  dinner 
with  the  Bishop  of  Durham,1  a  man  of  amiable  and  courteous 
manners,  who  becomes  his  station  well,  but  has  traces  of 
bad  health  on  his  countenance. 

We  dined,  about  one  hundred  and  forty  or  fifty  men,  a 
distinguished  company  for  rank  and  property.  Marshal 
l>eresf  ord,  and  Sir  John,2  amongst  others,  Marquis  of  Lothian, 
Lord  Buncombe,  Marquis  Londonderry,  and  I  know  not  who 

besides : 

"  Lords  and  Dukes  and  noble  Princes, 
All  the  pride  and  flower  of  Spain." 

We  dined  in  the  rude  old  baronial  hall,  impressive  from 
its  antiquity,  and  fortunately  free  from  the  plaster  of  former 
improvement,  as  I  trust  it  will,  from  the  gingerbread  taste 
of  modern  Gothicisers.  The  bright  moon  streaming  in  through 
the  old  Gothic  windows,  made  a  light  which  contrasted 
strangely  with  the  artificial  lights  within ;  spears,  banners, 
aud  armour  were  intermixed  with  the  pictures  of  old,  and 
the  whole  had  a  singular  mixture  of  baronial  pomp  with 
the  graver  and  more  chastened  dignity  of  prelacy.  The 
conduct  of  our  reverend  entertainer  suited  the  character 
remarkably  well.  Amid  the  welcome  of  a  Count  Palatine 
he  did  not  for  an  instant  forget  the  gravity  of  the  Church 
dignitary.  All  his  toasts  were  gracefully  given,  and  his 
little  speeches  well  made,  and  the  more  affecting  that  the 
failing  voice  sometimes  reminded  us  that  our  aged  host 
laboured  under  the  infirmities  of  advanced  life.  To  me 
personally  the  Bishop  was  very  civil,  and  paid  me  his  public 

1  Dr.  William  Van  Mildert  had  had  some  few  years  before  this 

been  appointed  to  the  Soe  of  Dur-  commanded  on  the  Leith  Station — 

ham  iu  1826  on  -the  death  of  Dr.  when  Sir  Walter  and  he  saw  a  great 

Shute  Barrington.  He  died  in  1 836.  deal  of  each  other—6  e  and  merry  men 

3  Admiral    Sir    John.    Beresford  wore  they." — ,1,0.1.. 


44  JOUENAL.  [OCT. 

compliments  Toy  proposing  my  health,  in  the  most  gratifying 
manner.1 

The  Bishop's  lady  received  a  sort  of  drawing-room  after 
we  rose  from  table,  at  which  a  groat  many  ladie's  attended 
I  ought  not  to  forget  that  the  singers  of  the  choir  attended 
at  dinner,  and  sung  the  Anthem  Non  noUs  Doming  as  they 
said  who  understood  them,  very  well — and,  as  I  think,  who 
did  not  understand  the  music,  with  an  unusual  degree  of 
spirit  and  interest.  It  is  odd  how  this  can  be  distinguished 
from  the  notes  of  fellows  who  use  their  throats  with  as  littlo 
feeling  of  the  notes  they  utter  as  if  they  were  composed  of 
the  -same  metal  as  their  bugle-horns. 

After  the  drawing-room  we  went  to  the  Assembly-room  «, 
which  were  crowded  with  company.  I  saw  some  very 
pretty  girls  dancing  merrily  that  old-fashioned  thing  called 
a  country-dance  which  Old  England  has  now  thrown  aside, 
as  she  would  do  her  creed,  if  there  were  some  foreign 
frippery  offered  instead.  We  got  away  after  midnight,  a 
large  party,  and  reached  Eavensworth  Castle — Duke  of 
Wellington,  Lord  Londonderry,  and  about  twenty  besides — 
about  half-past  one.  Soda  water,  and  to  bed  by  two, 

October  4, — Slept  till  nigh  ten— -fatigued  by  our  loilw  of 
yesterday,  and  the  unwonted  late  hours.  Still  too  early  for 
this  Castle  of  Indolence,  for  I  found  few  of  last  night's 
party  yet  appearing.  I  had  an  opportunity  of  «omo  talk 
with  the  Duke.  He  does  not  consider  Foy's  book2  as  written 

1  An  eye-witness  writes  , — "The  upon  the  laboms  of  a  long  literary 

manner  in  which  Bishop  Van  Mil-  life,  with  the  consciouanoHB  that 

dert  proceeded   on   this   occasion  everything  ho  had  written  tended 

will  never  be  forgotten  "by  those  who  to  the  practice  of  virtue,  and  to 

know  how  to  appreciate  scholar-  tho   improvement  of   the   humau 

ship  without  pedantry,  and  dignity  race."— Hon.  Honry  LiddolL     J,ife, 

without  ostentation.     Sir  Walter  vol.  ix.  p.  ICO, 
had  been  observed  throughout  tho         2  Ilwiowe  de   la  ffuerra  d?   ht, 

day  with  extraordinary  interest— 1  Wninsule     wutt     J^apoldon^     oto, 

should  say  enthusiasm.  The  Bishop  I'ublie'e  par  Madame  la  Oomttmwo 

gave  his  health  withpeculiarfehcity,  Foy.   Paris,  4  vols,  Svo,  1827.    M«e 

remarking  that   ho   could  reflect  Croker,  vol.  i.  p.  3512. 


1827.]  JOURNAL.  45 

by  himself,  but  as  a  thing  got  up  perhaps  from  notes.  Says 
he  knew  Foy  very  well  in  Spain.  Mentioned  that  he  was, 
like  other  French  officers,  very  desirous  of  seeing  the 
English  papers,  through  which  alone  they  could  collect  any 
idea  of  what  was  going  on  without  their  own  cantonments, 
for  Napoleon  permitted  no  communication  of  that  kind  with 
France.  The  Duke,  growing  tired  of  this,  at  length  told 
?>aron  Tripp,  whose  services  he  chiefly  used  in  communica- 
tion with  the  outposts,  that  he  was  not  to  give  them  the 
newspapers.  "What  reason  shall  I  allege  for  withholding 
them  ? "  said  Baron  Tripp.  "  None/'  replied  the  Duke 
"  Let  them  allege  some  reason  why  they  want  them."  Foy 
was  not  at  a  loss  to  assign  a  reason.  He  said  he  had  con- 
siderable sums  of  money  in  the  English  funds  and  wanted 
to  see  how  Stocks  fell  and  rose.  The  excuse  did  not,  how- 
ever, go  down.1  I  remember  Baron  Tripp,  a  Dutch  nobleman, 
and  a  dandy  of  the  first  water,  and  yet  with  an  energy  in 
his  dandyism  which,  made  it  respectable.  He  drove  a  gig 
as  far  as  Dunrobin  Castle,  and  back  again,  without  a  whip. 
He  looked  after  his  own  horse,  for  he  had  no  servant,  and 
after  all  his  little  establishment  of  clothes  and  necessaries, 
with  all  the  accuracy  of  a  pctit-maitrc.  He  was  one  of  the 
best-dressed  men,  and  his  horse  was  in  equally  fine  condition 
as  if  he  had  had  a  dozen  of  groomvS.  I  met  him  at  Lord 
Somerville's,  and  liked  him  much.  But  there  was  some- 
thing exaggerated,  as  appeared  from  the  conclusion  of  his  life. 
Baron  Tripp  shot  himself  in  Italy  for  no  assignable  cause, 

What  is  called  great  society,  of  which  I  have  seen  a  good 
deal  in  my  day,  is  now  amusing  to  me,  because  from  age 
and  indifference  I  have  lost  the  habit  of  considering  myself 
as  a  part  of  it,  and  have  only  the  feelings  of  looking  on.  as  a 
spectator  of  the  scene,  who  can  neither  play  his  part  well 
nor  ill,  instead  of  being  one  of  the  dramatis  personce ;  and, 

i  This  story  is  told  also  in  Lord     Duke  of  Wellington     8vo,  London, 
Stanhope's   Conversations  with  the     3  888,  p.  54. 


46  JOUENAL.  [OCT. 

careless  what  is  thought  of  myself,  I  have  full  time  to  attend 
to  the  motions  of  others. 

Our  party  went  to-day  to  Sunderland,  where  the  Duke 
was  brilliantly  received  by  an  immense  population,  chiefly 
of  seamen.  The  difficulty  of  getting  into  the  rooms  was 
dreadful,  for  we  chanced  to  march  in  the  rear  of  an  immense 
Gibraltar  gun,  etc.,  all  composed  of  glass,  which  is  here 
manufactured  in  great  quantities.  The  disturbance  created 
by  this  thing,  which  by  the  way  I  never  saw  afterwards, 
occasioned  an  ebbing  and  flowing  of  the  crowd,  which  nearly 
took  me  off  my  legs.  I  have  seen  the  day  I  would  have 
minded  it  little.  The  entertainment  was  handsome ;  about 
two  hundred  dined,  and  appeared  most  hearty  in  the  cause 
which  had  convened  them — some  indeed  so  much  so,  that, 
finding  themselves  so  far  on  the  way  to  perfect  happiness, 
they  e'en  .  .  .  After  the  dinner-party  broke  tip  there  was 
a  ball,  numerously  attended,  where  there  was  a  prodigious 
anxiety  discovered  for  shaking  of  hands.  The  Duke  had 
enough  of  it,  and  I  came  in  for  my  share ;  for,  though  as 
jackal  to  the  lion,  I  got  some  part  in  whatever  was  going. 
We  got  home  about  half-past  two  in  the  morning,  suffi 
ciently  tired.  The  Duke  went  to  Seaham,  a  house  of  Lord 
Londonderry's.  After  all,  this  Sunderland  trip  might  have 
been  spared. 

October  5. — A  quiet  day  at  Eavensworth  Castle,  giggling 
and  making  giggle  among  the  kind  and  frank-hearted  young 
people.  Eavensworth  Castle  is  chiefly  modern,  excepting 
always  two  towers  of  great  antiquity.  Lord  Ilavensworth 
manages  his  woods  admirably  well,  and  with  good  tasto. 
His  castle  is  but  half -built.  Elections l  have  come  between. 
In  the  evening,  plenty  of  fine  music,  with  heart  as  well 
as  voice  and  instrument.  Much  of  the  music  was  th<* 

1  The  present  generation  are  apt  ii.  p.  215)  that  Lord  liavensworth's 

to  forget  the  enormous  sums  spent  neighbour,  the  Duke  of  INTorthum- 

in   Parliamentary  elections;   e.0.,  berland,  will  subscribe  £100,000 

Mme.  de  Lieven  tells  Earl  Grey  (Cor.  towards  the  election  of  1831. 


1827.]  JOURNAL.  47 

spontaneous  effusions  of  Mrs.  Arkwright,  who  had  set 
Hohenlinden  and  other  pieces  of  poetry  Her  music  was  of 
a  highly-gifted  character.  She  was  the  daughter  of  Stephen 
Kemble.  The  genius  she  must  have  inherited  from  her 
mother,  who  was  a  capital  actress.  The  Miss  Liddells  and 
Mrs.  Barrington  sang  the  "  The  Campbells  are  coming,"  in 
a  tone  that  might  have  waked  the  dead. 

October  6. — Left  Eavensworth  this  morning,  and  travelled 
as  far  as  Whittingham  with  Marquis  of  Lothian.  Arrived 
at  Alnwick  to  dinner,  where  I  was  very  kindly  received. 
The  Duke  is  a  handsome  man,1  who  will  be  corpulent  if  he 
does  not  continue  to  take  hard  exercise.  The  Duchess  very 
pretty  and  lively,  but  her  liveliness  is  of  that  kind  which 
shows  at  once  it  is  connected  with  thorough  principle,  and 
is  not  liable  to  be  influenced  by  fashionable  caprice.  The 
habits  of  the  family  are  early  and  regular;  I  conceive  they 
may  be  termed  formal  and  old-fashioned  by  such  visitors  as 
claim  to  be  the  pink  of  the  mode.  The  Castle  is  a  fine  old 
pile,  with  various  courts  and  towers,  and  the  entrance  is 
magnificent.  It  wants,  however,  the  splendid  feature  of  a 
keep.  The  inside  fitting  up  is  an  attempt  at  Gothic,  but 
the  taste  is  meagre  and  poor,  and  done  over  with  too  much 
gilding.  It  was  done  half  a  century  ago,  when  this  kind 
of  taste  was  ill-understood.  I  found  here  the  Bishop  of 
[Gloucester],  etc.  etc, 

October  7. — This  morning  went  to  church  and  heard  an 
excellent  sermon  from  the  Bishop  of  Gloucester;2  he  has 
great  dignity  of  manner,  and  his  accent  and  delivery  were 
forcible.  Drove  out  with  the  Duke  in  a  phaeton,  and  saw 
part  of  the  park,  which  is  a  fine  one,  lying  along  the  Alne. 
But  it  has  been  ill-planted.  It  was  laid  out  by  the  celebrated 
Brown,8  who  substituted  clumps  of  birch  and  Scottish  firs  for 

J  Hugh,  third  Duke  of  Northum*  land,  held  at  this  time  the  See  of 

berland.  Gloucester. -^j.  o.  L. 

2  Dr.    Bethell,    who   had    been 

tutor  to  the  Duke  of  Korthumber-  3  Launcelot  Brown,  1715-1782. 


48  JOURNAL.  [OCT. 

the  beautiful  oaks  and  copse  which  grows  nowhere  so  freely 
as  in  Northumberland.  To  complete  this,  the  late  Duke  did 
not  thin,  so  the  wood  is  in  poor  state.  All  that  the  Duke 
cuts  down  is  so  much  waste,  for  the  people  will  not  buy  it 
where  coals  are  so  cheap.  Had  they  been  oak-wood,  the 
bark  would  have  fetched  its  value;  had  they  been  grown 
oaks,  the  sea-ports  would  have  found  a  market.  Had  they 
been  [larch],  the  country  demands  for  rustic  purposes  would 
have  been  innumerable.  The  Duke  does  the  best  he  can 
to  retrieve  his  woods,  but  seems  to  despond  more  than  a 
young  man  ought  to  do.  It  is  refreshing  to  see  a  man  in 
his  situation  give  so  much  of  his  time  and  thoughts  to  the 
improvement  of  his  estates,  and  the  welfare  of  the  people. 
The  Duke  tells  me  his  people  in  Keeldar  were  all  quite  wild 
the  first  time  his  father  went  up  to  shoot  there.  The  women 
had  no  other  dress  than  a  bed-gown  and  petticoat.  The 
men  were  savage  and  could  hardly  be  brought  to  rise  from 
the  heath,  either  from  sullenness  or  fear.  They  sung  a 
wild  tune,  the  burden  of  which  was  Ourina,  ourina,  ourina. 
The  females  sung,  the  men  danced  round,  and  at  a  certain 
part  of  the  tune  they  drew  their  dirks,  which  they  always 
wore. 

We  came  by  the  remains  of  the  old  Carmelite  Monastery 
of  Hulne,  which  is  a  very  fine  object  in  the  park.  Tt  was 
finished  by  De  Vesci.  The  gateway  of  Alnwick  Abbey, 
also  a  fine  specimen,  is  standing  about  a  milo  distant.  Tho 
trees  are  much  finer  on  the  left  side  of  the  Alnc,  where  they 
have  been  let  alone  by  the  capability- villain.  Visited  the 
enceinte  of  the  Castle,  and  passed  into  the  dungeon*  There 
is  also  an  armoury,  but  damp,  and  the  arms  in  indifferent 
order.  One  odd  petard-looking  thing  struck  me. — Mem,  to 
consult  Grose.  I  had  the  honour  to  sit  in  Hotspur's  seat, 
and  to  see  the  Bloody  Gap,  where  the  external  wall  must 
have  been  breached.  The  Duchess  gave  me  a  book  of 
etchings  of  the  antiquities  of  Alnwick  and  Warkworth  from 


1827.]  JOURNAL.  49 

her  own  drawings.1  I  had  half  a  mind  to  stay  to  see  Wark- 
worth,  "but  Anne  is  alone.  We  had  prayers  in  the  evening 
read  by  the  Archdeacon.2 

The  Marquis  of  Lothian  on  Saturday  last  told  me  a 
remarkable  thing,  which  he  had  from  good  authority.  Just 
before  Bonaparte's  return  from  Elba  there  was  much  dis- 
union at  the  Congress  of  Vienna.  Russia  and  Prussia, 
conscious  of  their  own  merits,  made  great  demands,  to  which 
Austria,  France,  and  Britain,  were  not  disposed  to  accede. 
This  went  so  far  that  war  became  probable,  and  the  very 
Prussian  army  which  was  so  useful  at  Waterloo  was  held  in 
readiness  to  attack  the  English.  On  the  other  hand,  England, 
Austria,  and  France  entered  into  a  private  agreement  to 
resist,  beyond  a  certain  extent,  Prussia's  demands  of  a 
barrier  on  the  Rhine,  etc.,  and,  what  is  most  singular  of  all, 
it  was  from  Bonaparte  that  the  Emperor  Alexander  first 
heard  of  this  triple  alliance.3  But  the  circumstance  of 
finding  Napoleon  interesting  himself  so  far  in  the  affairs 
of  Europe  alarmed  the  Emperor  more  than  the  news  he 
sent  him.  On  the  same  authority,  Gneisenau  and  most  of 
Blucher's  personal  suite  remained  behind  a  house  at  the 
battle  of  Ligny,  and  sent  out  an  officer  from  time  to  time, 
but  did  not  remain  even  in  sight  of  the  battle,  till  Blucher 
put  himself  at  the  head  of  the  cavalry  with  the  zeal  of  an 
old  hussar. 

October  8. — Left  Alnwick,  where  I  have  experienced 
a  very  kind  reception,  and  took  coach  at  Whittingham 
at  eleven  o'clock.  I  find  there  is  a  new  road  to  be  made 
between  Alnwick  and  Wooler,  which  will  make  the  com- 
munication much  easier,  and  avoid  Eemside  Moor. 

Saw  some  fine  young  plantations  about  Wliittingham 
suffering  from  neglect,  which  is  not  the  case  under  the 

1  A  quarto   volume,   containing  2Kr.    Archdeacon    Singleton. — 

39  etchings  (privately  printed  in  j.  a.  L. 

1823),   still  preserved   at   Abbots-  s  Stanhope's  Notes,  p.   24 ;  and 

ford.  Oo&er,  vol.  ii.  p.  233, 

VOL.  XL  D 


50  JOUKNAL.  [OCT. 

Duke's  own  eye.  He  has  made  two  neat  cottages  at  Percy's 
Cross,  to  preserve  that  ancient  monument  of  the  fatal  battle 
of  Hedgeley  Moor.  The  stones  marking  the  adjacent  spot 
called  Percy's  Leap  are  thirty-three  feet  asunder.  To  show 
ihe  uncertainty  of  human  testimony,  I  measured  the  distance 
(many  years  since,  it  is  true),  and  would  have  said  and 
almost  sworn  that  it  was  but  eighteen  feet.  Dined  at 
Wooler,  and  reached  home  about  seven  o'clock,  having  left 
Alnwick  at  half-past  nine.  So  it  would  be  easy  to  go  there 
to  dinner  from  Abbotsford,  starting  at  six  in  the  morning, 
or  seven  would  do  very  well. 

October  9,  [Ablotsford], — No  proofs  here,  which  I  think 
odd  of  Jas.  B.  But  I  am  not  sorry  to  have  a  day  to  write 
letters,  and  besides  I  have  a  box  of  books  to  arrange.  It  is 
a  bad  mizzling  day,  and  might  have  been  a,  good  day  for 
work,  yet  it  is  not  quite  uselessly  spent. 

October  10. — Breakfasted  at  Huntly  Burn  with  the  merry 
knight,  Sir  Adam  Ferguson.  When  we  returned  we  found 
a  whole  parcel  of  proofs  which  had  been  forgot  yesterday  at 
the  toll — so  here  ends  play  and  begins  work.  Dr.  Brewster 
and  Mr.  ThornhilL  The  latter  gave  me  a  box,  made  of  the 
real  mulberry-tree.1  Very  kind  of  him. 

October  11. — Being  a  base  melancholy  weeping  day  I  e'en 
made  the  best  of  it,  and  set  in  for  work.  "Wrote  ten  leaves 
this  day,  equivalent  to  forty  pages.  But  then  the  theme 
was  so  familiar,  being  Scottish  history,  that  my  pen  never 
rested.  It  is  more  than  a  triple  task, 

Octoler  12. — Sent  off  proofs  and  copy,  a  full  task  of 
three  pages.  At  one  Anne  drove  me  to  Huntly  Burn,  and 
I  examined  the  earthen  fence  intended  for  the  new  planting, 
and  altered  the  line  in  some  points.  This  employed  me  till 
near  four,  the  time  of  my  walking  home  being  included. 

October  13. — Wrote  in  the  forenoon.    Lord  Bessborough 
and  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Ponsonby  called  to  see  the  place.    His 
1  From  Stratford-on-Avon* 


1827.]  JOUEISTAL.  51 

lady  used  to  be  civil  to  me  in  London — an  accomplished  and 
pleasing  woman.  They  only  stayed  an  hour.  At  dinner 
we  had  Lord  and  Lady  Bathurst,  and  my  friend  Lady 
Georgiana — also  Marquis  of  Lothian  and  Lord  Castlereagh, 
plenty  of  fine  folks.  Expected  also  the  Lord  Eegister  and 
Mrs.  Dundas,  hut  they  could  not  coma  Lord  Bathurst  told 
me  that  Gourgaud  had  negotiated  with  the  French  Govern- 
ment to  the  last  moment  of  his  leaving  London,  and  that 
he  had  been  told  so  by  the  French  Ambassador.  Lord  B, 
refused  to  see  him,  because  he  understood  he  talked  dis- 
respectfully of  Napoleon. 

October  14 — I  read  prayers  to  the  company  of  yesterday, 
and  we  took  a  drive  round  by  Drygrange  Bridge.  Lord  B. 
told  me  that  the  late  king  made  it  at  one  time  a  point  of 
conscience  to  read  every  word  of  every  act  of  parliament 
before  giving  his  assent  to  it.  There  was  a  mixture  of 
principle  and  nonsense  in  this.  Lord  Lothian  left  us.  I 
did  a  full  task  to-day,  which  is  much,  considering  I  was  a 
good  deal  occupied. 

October  15. — My  noble  guests  departed,  pleased  I  believe 
with  their  visit.  I  have  had  to  thank  Lord  Bathurst  for 
former  kindness.  I  respect  him  too,  as  one  who  being  far 
from  rich,  has  on  the  late  occasion  preferred  political  con- 
sistency to  a  love  of  office  and  its  emoluments.  He  seems 
to  expect  no  opposition  of  a  formal  kind  this  next  session. 
"What  is  wonderful,  no  young  man  of  talents  seems  to  spring 
up  in  the  House  of  Commons.  I  wonder  what  comes  of  all 
the  clever  lads  whom  we  see  at  college.  The  fruit  ap- 
parently does  not  ripen  as  formerly.  Lord  Castlereagh 
remained  with  us.  I  bestowed  a  little  advice  on  him.  He 
is  a  warm-hearted  young  fellow,  with  some  of  the  fashionable 
affectations  of  the  age  about  him,  but  with  good  feelings  and 
an  inclination  to  come  forward. 

October  16. — With  all  this  racketing  the  work  advances 
fast.  The  third  volume  of  the  Tales  is  now  half  finished, 


52  JOURNAL.  [OCT. 

and  will,  I  think,  be  a  useful  work.  Some  drizzling  days 
have  been  of  great  use  to  its  progress.  This  visiting  has 
made  some  dawdling,  but  not  much,  perhaps  not  more  than 
there  ought  to  be  for  such  a  task. 

I  walked  from  Huntly  Burn  up  the  little  Glen,  which 
was  in  all  the  melancholy  beauty  of  autumn,  the  little  brook 
brawling  and  bickering  in  fine  style  over  its  falls  and 
currents. 

October  17. — Drove  down  to  Mertoun  and  brought  up 
Elizabeth  Scott  to  be  our  guest  for  some  days  or  so. 
Various  chance  guests  arrived.  One  of  the  most  welcome 
was  Captain  MacKenzie  of  the  Celtic  Society  and  the  72d 
regiment,  a  picture  of  a  Highlander  in  his  gigantic  person 
and  innocent  and  generous  disposition.  Poor  fellow,  ho  is 
going  to  retreat  to  Brittany,  to  make  his  half-pay  support  a 
wife  and  family.  I  did  not  dare  to  ask  how  many.  God 
send  I  may  have  the  means  of  serving  him. 

He  told  me  a  Maclean  story  which  was  new  to  mo.  At 
the  battle  of  Sheriffmuir  that  clan  was  commanded  by  a 
chief  called  Hector.  In  the  action,  as  the  chief  rushed 
forward,  he  was  frequently  in  situations  of  peril.  His 
foster-father  followed  him  with  seven  sons,  whom  he 
reserved  as  a  body-guard,  whom  he  threw  forward  into  tho 
battle  as  he  saw  his  chief  pressed.  The  signal  he  gavo  was, 
"Another  for  Hector!"  The  youths  replied,  "Death  for 
Hector ! "  and  were  all  successively  killed.  These  words  make 
the  sign  and  countersign  at  this  day  of  the  clan  Gillian.1 

Young  Shortreed  dined  with  us  and  the  two  Fergusons, 
Sir  Adam  and  the  Colonel.  We  had  a  pleasant  evening. 

October  19. — Wrought  out  my  task,  and  bettor — as  I  have 
done  for  these  several  days  past  Lady  Anna  Maria  Elliot 
arrived  unexpectedly  to  dinner,  and  though  she  had  a  head- 
ache, brought  her  usual  wit  and  good-humour  to  enliven1  us. 

October  20. — The  day  being  basely  muggy,  I  had  no 

1  For  the  utilisation  of  this  story,  see  Fair  Maid  of  Perth,  published 
in  the  following  year. 


1827.]  JOUENAL.  53 

•walk,  which  I  was  rather  desirous  to  secure  I  wrought, 
however ;  and  two-thirds  of  the  last  volume  of  Tales  of  my 
Grandfather  are  finished.  I  received  a  large  packet  of 
proofs,  etc,,  which  for  some  reason  had  been  delayed.  We 
had  two  of  Dr.  Brewster's  boys  to  dinner — fine  children; 
they  are  spirited,  promising,  and  very  well-behaved. 

October  21. — Wrought  till  one  o'clock,  then  walked  out 
for  two  hours,  though  with  little  comfort,  the  bushes  being 
loaded  with  rain ;  but  exercise  is  very  necessary  to  me,  and  I 
have  no  mind  to  die  of  my  arm-chair.  A  letter  from  Skene, 
acquainting  me  that  the  Censors  of  the  French  press  have 
prohibited  the  insertion  of  my  answer  to  the  man  Gourgaud. 
This  is  their  freedom  of  the  press !  The  fact  is  there  is  an 
awkward  "  composition "  between  the  Government  and  the 
people  of  Trance,  that  the  latter  will  endure  the  former  so 
long  as  they  will  allow  them  to  lull  themselves  asleep  with 
recollections  of  their  past  glory,  and  neither  the  one  nor  the 
other  sees  that  truth  and  honesty  and  freedom  of  discussion 
are  the  best  policy.  He  knows,  though,  there  is  an  answer ; 
and  that  is  all  I  care  about. 

October  22. — Another  vile  damp  drizzling  day.  I  do  not 
know  any  morning  in  my  life  so  fit  for  work,  on  which  I 
nevertheless,  while  desirous  of  employing  it  to  purpose, 
make  less  progress.  A  hang-dog  drowsy  feeling  wrought 
against  me,  and  I  was  obliged  to  lay  down  the  pen  and 
indulge  myself  in  a  drumly  sleep. 

The  Haigs  of  Bemerside,  Captain  Hamilton,  Mr.  Bain- 
bridge  and  daughter,  with  young  Nicol  Milne  and  the 
Fergusons,  dined  here.  Miss  Haig  sings  Italian  music 
better  than  any  person  I  ever  heard  out  of  the  Opera-house. 
But  I  am  neither  a  judge  nor  admirer  of  the  science.  I  do 
not  know  exactly  what  is  aimed  at,  and  therefore  cannot 
tell  what  is  attained.  Had  a  letter  from  Colin  Mackenzie, 
who  has  proposed  himself  for  the  little  situation  in  the 
Eegister  House.  I  have  written  him,  begging  him  to  use 
the  best  interest  in  his  own  behalf,  and  never  mind  me. 


54  JOUENAL.  [OCT. 

October  23. — Another  sullen  rainy  day.  "Hazy  weather, 
Mr,  Noah,"  as  Punch  says  in  the  puppet-show.1  I  worked 
slow,  however,  and  untowardly,  and  fell  one  leaf  short  of 
my  task. 

Went  to  Selkirk,  and  dined  with  the  Forest  Club,  for 
the  first  time  I  have  been  there  this  season.  It  was  the 
collar-day,  but  being  extremely  rainy,  I  did  not  go  to  see 
them  course.  N.R— Of  all  things,  the  greatest  bore  is  to 
hear  a  dull  and  bashful  man  sing  a  facetious  song. 

October  24. — Vilely  low  in  spirits.  I  have  written  a  pago 
and  a  half,  and  doubt  whether  I  can  write  more  to-day.  A 
thick  throbbing  at  my  heart,  and  fancies  thronging  on  me. 
A  disposition  to  sleep,  or  to  think  on  things  melancholy  and 
horrible  while  I  wake.  Strange  that  one's  nerves  should 
thus  master  them,  for  nervous  the  case  is,  as  I  know  too 
well  I  am  beginning  to  tire  of  my  Journal,  and  no  wonder, 
faith,  if  I  have  only  such  trash  as  this  to  record.  But  the 
best  is,  a  little  exertion  or  a  change  of  the  current  of 
thought  relieves  me, 

God,  who  subjects  us  to  these  strange  maladies,  whether 
of  mind  or  body  I  cannot  say,  has  placed  the  power  withiu 
our  own  reach,  and  we  should  be  grateful.  I  wrestled 
myself  so  far  out  of  the  Slough  of  Despond  as  to  take  a 
good  long  walk,  and  my  mind  is  restored  to  its  elasticity, 
I  did  not  attempt  to  work,  especially  as  we  were  going  down 
to  Mertoun,  and  set  off  at  five  o'clock. 

Octoler  25. — We  arrived  at  Mertoun  yesterday,  and  hoard 
with  some  surprise  that  George  had  gone  up  in  an  air  balloon, 
and  ascended  two  miles  and  a  half  above  this  sublunary 
earth.  I  should  like  to  have  an  account  of  his  sensations, 
but  his  letters  said  nothing  serious  about  them.  Honest 
George,  I  certainly  did  not  suspect  him  of  being  so  flighty ! 
I  visited  the  new  plantations  on  the  river-side  with  Mrs, 
Scott ;  I  wish  her  lord  and  master  had  some  of  her  taste 

1  See  M.  G.  Lewis's  Journal  of  a  West  Indian  Proprietor,    8vo,  LoncL, 
1834,  p.  47 ;  and  Introduction  to  ffcwr  Maid  of  Perth,  p.  10. 


1827.]  JOUEISTAL.  55 

for  planting.  When  I  came  home  I  walked  through  the 
Bhymer's  Glen,  and  I  thought  how  the  little  fall  would  look 
if  it  were  heightened.  When  I  came  home  a  surprise 
amounting  nearly  to  a  shock  reached  me  in  another 
letter  from  L.  J.  S.1  Methinks  this  explains  the  gloom 
which  hung  about  me  yesterday.  I  own  that  the  recurrence 
to  these  matters  seems  like  a  summons  from  the  grave.  It 
fascinates  me.  I  ought  perhaps  to  have  stopped  it  at  once, 
but  I  have  not  nerve  to  do  so.  Alas !  alas ! — But  why 
alas  ?  Humana  perpessi  swmus. 

October  26. — Sent  off  copy  to  Ballantyne.  Drove  over  to 
Huntly  Burn  at  breakfast,  and  walked  up  to  the  dike  they 
are  building  for  the  new  plantation.  Returned  home.  The 
Fergusons  dined;  and  we  "had  the  kirn  Supper.2  I  never 
saw  a  set  of  finer  lads  and  lasses,  and  blithely  did  they  ply 
their  heels  till  five  in  the  morning.  It  did  me  good  to  see 
them,  poor  things, 

October  27. — This  morning  went  again  to  Huntly  Burn 

1  On    the  13th  of    October    Sir  could  I  but  know  that  you  would 

Walter  had  received  a  letter  from  take  it  as  I  give  it  without  a  draw- 

"one  who  had  in  former  happy  back  or  misconstruction  of  my  in- 

days  been  no  stranger,"  and   on  ^ntions; 

turning  to  the  signature  he  found  an<^  sne  a(^s~ 

to  his  astonishment   that  it   was  "Were  I  to  lay  open  my  heart 

from  Lady  Jane  Stuart,  with  whom  (°f  whidi  you  know  little  indeed) 

he   had    had    no    communication  %£$***  S£ft£?  My" 

srnce  the  memorable  vait  he  had  ago  [she  waa  theri  seTenty.four]  en- 

made  to  Invermay  in  the  autumn  courages  me,  and  I  have  longed  to 

of  1796.     The  letter  was  simply  a  tell  you.    Not  the  mother  who  bore 

formal  request  on  behalf  of  a  friend  you  followed  you  more  anxiously 

forpermissiontopnntsomehaUads  gjff  ^t^^^l 

m  Scott's  handwriting  winch  were  sorrows  to  ^old." 
in  an  album  that  had  apparently 

belonged  to  her  daughter,  yet  it  •**  is  seen  ]*"•  Journal  Sir 

stirred  his  nature  to  its  depths.  Walter  WTOM*  his  personal  inter- 

The  substance  of  his  roply  may  f^86  ?**•  hl*  venerable  friend  on 

be  gatherod  from  tho  second  letter,  November   6th   and   continued  it 

which  he  had  just  read  before  mak-  «**  hef  death>  whloh  *°ok  P1*? 

ing  this  sad  entry  in  his  Journal-  m  the  ™*J«  of  1829.-^e,  vol.  l. 

Lady  Jane  tolls  him  that  she  would  P- 404'  and  W*'  voL  '•  PP-  329'336- 

convey  to  him  the  Manuscript  Book  s  Kirn,  the  feast  at  the  end  of 

— "  as  a  secret  and  sacred  Treasure,  the  harvest  in  Scotland. 


56  JOTJENAL.  [OcT. 

to  breakfast.  There  picked  tip  Sir  Adam  and  the  Colonel, 
and  drove  down  to  old  Melrose  to  see  the  hounds  cast  oft" 
upon  the  Gateheugh,  the  high  rocky  amphitheatre  which 
encloses  the  peninsula  of  old  Melrose,  the  Tweed  pouring 
its  dark  and  powerful  current  between  them.  The  galloping 
of  the  riders  and  hallooing  of  the  huntsmen,  the  cry  of  the 
hounds  and  the  sight  of  sly  Reynard  stealing  away  through 
the  brakes,  waked  something  of  the  old  spirit  within  me — 

"  Even  in  our  ashes  glow  their  wonted  fires." 
On  return  home  I  had  despatches  of  consequence.  John 
Gibson  writes  that  Lord  Newton  has  decided  most  of  the 
grand  questions  in  our  favour.  Good,  that !  Kev.  Mr.  Turner 
writes  that  he  is  desirous,  by  Lord  Londonderry's  consent, 
to  place  in  my  hands  a  quantity  of  original  papers  concerning 
the  public  services  of  the  late  Lord  Londonderry,  with  a  view 
to  drawing  up  a  memoir  of  his  life.  Now  this  task  they 
desire  to  transfer  to  me.  It  is  highly  complimentary ;  and 
there  is  this  of  temptation  in  it,  that  I  should  be  able  to  do 
justice  to  that  ill-requited  statesman  in  those  material  points 
which  demand  the  eternal  gratitude  of  his  country.  But 
then  for  me  to  take  this  matter  up  would  lead  mo  too  much 
into  the  hackneyed  politics  of  the  House  of  Commons,  which 
odi  ct  cmeo.  Besides,  I  would  have  to  study  the  Irish  question, 
and  I  detest  study*  Item. — I  might  arrive  at  conclusions 
different  from  those  of  my  Lord  of  Londonderry,  and  I 
have  a  taste  for  expressing  that  which  I  think.  Fourthly, 
I  think  it  is  sinking  myself  into  a  party  writer.  Moreover, 
I  should  not  know  what  to  say  to  the  disputes  with  Canning ; 
and,  to  conclude,  I  think  my  Lord  Londonderry,  if  ho  desired 
such  a  thing  at  my  hands,  ought  to  have  written  to  me. 
For  all  which  reasons,  good,  bad,  and  indifferent,  I  will  write 
declining  the  undertaking. 

October  28. — Wrote  several  letters,  and  one  to  Mr*  Turner, 
declining  the  task  of  Lord  Castlereagh's  Memoirs,1  with  due 

1  The  correspondence  of  Robert,     was  edited  by  his  brother  in  1850, 
second   Marquis  of  Londonderry,     but  there  was  no  memoir  published 


1827.]  JOUENAL.  57 

acknowledgments.  Had  his  public  and  European  politics 
alone  been  concerned,  I  would  have  tried  the  task  with  plea- 
sure. I  wrote  out  my  task  and  something  more,  corrected 
proofs,  and  made  a  handsome  remittance  of  copy  to  the  press. 
October  31. — Just  as  I  was  merrily  cutting  away  among 
my  trees,  arrives  Mr.  Gibson  with  a  melancholy  look,  and 
indeed  the  news  he  brought  was  shocking  enough.  It  seems 
Mr.  Abud,  the  same  Jew  broker  who  formerly  was  disposed 
to  disturb  me  in  London,  has  given  the  most  positive  orders 
to  take  out  diligence  against  me  for  his  debt  of  £1500.  This 
breaks  all  the  measures  we  had  resolved  on,  and  prevents 
the  dividend  from  taking  place,  by  which  many  poor  persons 
will  be  great  sufferers.  For  me  the  alternative  will  be  more 
painful  to  my  feelings  than  prejudicial  to  my  interest.  To 
take  out  a  sequestration  and  allow  the  persons  to  take  what 
they  can  get  will  be  the  inevitable  consequence.  This  will 
cut  short  my  labour  by  several  years,  which  I  might  spend 
and  spend  in  vain  in  labouring  to  meet  their  demands,  No 
doubt  they  may  in  the  interim  sell  the  liferent  of  this  place, 
with  the  books  and  furniture.  But,  perhaps,  it  may  be 
possible  to  achieve  some  composition  which  may  save  these 
articles,  as  I  would  make  many  sacrifices  for  that  purpose, 
Gibson  strongly  advises  taking  a  sequestration  at  all  events. 
But  if  the  creditors  choose  to  let  Mr.  Abud  have  his  pound 
of  flesh  out  of  the  first  cut,  my  mind  will  not  be  satisfied 
with  the  plan  of  deranging,  for  the  pleasure  of  disappointing 
him,  a  plan  of  payment  to  which  all  the  others  had  consented. 
We  will  know  more  on  Saturday,  and  not  sooner.  I  went 
to  Bowhill  with  Sir  Adam  Ferguson  to  dinner,  and  main- 
tained as  good  a  countenance  in  the  midst  of  my  perplexities 
as  a  man  need  desire.  It  is  not  bravado ;  I  literally  feel 
myself  firm  and  resolute. 

until  Alison  wrote  the  Lives  of    queases  of  Londonderry.    3vols.8vo, 
Lord  Qas&ereagh  and  Sir  Charles    Edinburgh,  1861. 
Stewart,  Second  and  Tfiird  Mar- 


NOVEMBER 

November  1. — I  waked  in  the  night  and  lay  two  hours  in 
feverish  meditation.  This  is  a  tribute  to  natural  feeling. 
But  the  air  of  a  fine  frosty  morning  gave  me  some  elasticity 
of  spirit.  It  is  strange  that  about  a  week  ago  I  was  more 
dispirited  for  nothing  at  all  than  I  am  now  for  perplexities 
which  set  at  defiance  my  conjectures  concerning  their  issue. 
I  suppose  that  I,  the  Chronicler  of  the  Canongate,  will  have 
to  take  up  my  residence  in  the  Sanctuary  *  for  a  week  or  so, 
unless  I  prefer  the  more  airy  residence  of  the  Calton  Jail,  or 
a  trip  to  the  Isle  of  Man.  These  furnish  a  pleasing  choice 
of  expedients.  It  is  to  no  purpose  being  angry  at  Ehud  or 
Ahab,  or  whatever  name  he  delights  in.  He  is  seeking  his 
own,  and  thinks  by  these  harsh  measures  to  render  his  road 
to  it  more  speedy.  And  now  I  will  trouble  myself  no  more 
about  the  matter  than  I  can  possibly  help,  which  will  bo 
quite  enough  after  all.  Perhaps  something  may  turn  up 
better  for  me  than  I  now  look  for.  Sir  Adam  Ferguson  left 
Bowhill  this  morning  for  Dumfriesshire.  I  returned  to 
Abbotsford  to  Anne,  and  told  her  this  unpleasant  news* 
She  stood  it  remarkably  well,  poor  body. 

November  2. — I  was  a  little  bilious  to-night— no  wonder. 
Had  sundry  letters  without  any  power  of  giving  my  mind 
to  answer  them — one  about  Q-ourgaud  with  his  nonsense, 
I  shall  not  trouble  my  head  more  on  that  score.  Well,  it  is 

1  Holyrood  remained  an  asylum  abolished.      3Tor     description     of 

for  civil  debtors  until  1880,  when  bounds  see  Chronicles  of  the  Ccvnon* 

by  the  Act  43  &  44  Victoria,  cap.  gate,  p.  7.  (vol.  adi.). 
34,    imprisonment   for   debt    was 

58 


1827.]  JOURNAL.  59 

a  hard  knock  on  the  elbow ;  I  knew  I  had  a  life  of  labour 
before  me,  but  I  was  resolved  to  work  steadily ;  now  they 
have  treated  me  like  a  recusant  turnspit,  and  put  in  a  red- 
hot  cinder  into  the  wheel  alongst  with  [me].  But  of  what 
use  is  philosophy — and  I  have  always  pretended  to  a  little 
of  a  practical  character — if  it  cannot  teach  us  to  do  or  suffer  ? 
The  day  is  glorious,  yet  I  have  little  will  to  enjoy  it,  but  sit 
here  ruminating  upon  the  difference  and  comparative  merits 
of  the  Isle  of  Man  and  of  the  Abbey.  Small  choice  be- 
twixt them.  Were  a  twelvemonth  over,  I  should  perhaps 
smile  at  what  makes  me  now  very  serious. 

Smile! — No,  that  can  never  be.  My  present  feelings 
cannot  be  recollected  with  cheerfulness  \  but  I  may  drop  a 
tear  of  gratitude.  I  have  finished  my  Tales,1  and  have  now 
nothing  literary  in  hand.  It  would  be  an  evil  time  to  begin 
anything. 

November  3. — Slept  ill,  and  lay  one  hour  longer  than 
usual  in  the  morning.  I  gained  an  hour's  quiet  by  it,  that 
is  much.  I  feel  a  little  shaken  at  the  result  of  to-day's  post. 
Bad  it  must  be,  whatsoever  be  the  alternative.  I  am  not 
able  to  go  out,  my  poor  workers  wonder  that  I  pass  them 
without  a  word.  I  can  imagine  no  alternative  but  either 

A  The  book  was  published  ditring  of  Kaoburn,  vol.  xli.  p.  61 : — 

November,    under    the    following  "Theywerena.illtot7i,em,sir9and 

title,   Chronicles  of  the  Canongate  that   is   aye  something;  they  were 

(First  Series).    By  the  author  of  just  decent  bien  bodies.     Ony  poor 

Waverley,  etc. — sio  ITUK,  AD  ASTRA,  creature  that  had  face  to  beg  got  an 

motto  of  Canongate  arms.    In  two  awmous  and  welcome  ;  they  that  were 

vols.     The  Two  Drovers,  The  High-  shamefaced  gaed  by,  and  twice  as 

land  Widow,  TheSurgeon's  Daughter,  welcome.    But  they  foeepit  an  honest 

Edinburgh,  printed  for  Cadell  and  walk  before  God  and  man,  the  Croft- 

Co.,  and  Simpkin  Marshall.  London  angrys,  and  as  I  said  before,  if  they 

J827.  did  little  good,  they  did  as  little,  ill. 

The   introduction  to  this  work  They  lifted   their  rents  and  spent 

contains  sketches  of   Scott's  own  them;  called  in  their  katn  and  cat 

life,  with  portraits  of  his  friends,  them;  gaedto  the  Urk  oj  a  timday, 

unsurpassed  in  any  of  his  earlier  bowed  civilly  if  folk  took  off  their 

writings  ;      for     example,     what  bannets  as  they  gaed  by,  and  looklt 

could  be  better  than  the  descrip-  as  black  an  sin  at  them  that 

tion   of  his  ancestors    the  Scotta  them  on." 


60  JOURNAL.  [Nov. 

retreat  to  the  Sanctuary  or  to  the  Isle  of  Man.  Both  shock- 
ing enough.  But  in  Edinburgh  I  am  always  near  the  scene 
of  action,  free  from  uncertainty  and  near  my  poor  daughter ; 
so  I  think  I  will  prefer  it,  and  thus  I  rest  in  unrest.  But  T 
will  not  let  this  unman  me.  Our  hope,  heavenly  and  earthly, 
is  poorly  anchored,  if  the  cable  parts  upon  the  strain.  I 
believe  in  God  who  can  change  evil  into  good ;  and  I  am 
confident  that  what  befalls  us  is  always  ultimately  for  the 
best.  I  have  a  letter  from  Mr.  Gibson,  purporting  the 
opinion  of  the  trustees  and  committee  of  creditors,  that  I 
should  come  to  town,  and  interesting  themselves  warmly  in 
the  matter.  They  have  intimated  that  they  will  pay  Mr. 
Abud  a  composition  of  six  shillings  per  pound  on  his  debt. 
This  is  a  handsome  offer,  but  I  understand  he  is  determined 
to  have  his  pound  of  flesh.  If  I  can  prevent  it,  he  shall  not 
take  a  shilling  by  his  hard-hearted  conduct. 

November  4 — Put  my  papers  in  some  order,  and  prepared 
for  my  journey.  It  is  in  the  style  of  the  Emperors  of 
Abyssinia  who  proclaim — Cut  down  the  Kantuffa  in  the 
four  quarters  of  the  world, — for  I  know  not  where  1  am 
going.  Yet,  were  it  not  for  poor  Anne's  doleful  looks,  I 
would  feel  firm  as  a  piece  of  granite.  Even  tlie  poor  dogs 
seem  to  fawn  on  me  with  anxious  meaning,  as  if  there  were 
something  going  on  they  could  not  comprehend.  They 
probably  notice  the  packing  of  the  clothes,  and  other 
symptoms  of  a  journey. 

Set  off  at  twelve,  firmly  resolved  in  body  and  in  inincl. 
Dined  at  Fushie  Bridge.  Ah !  good  Mrs.  Wilson,  you  know 
not  you  are  like  to  lose  an  old  customer.1 

But  when  I  arrived  in  Edinburgh  at  my  faithful  friend, 

1  Mrs.  Wilson,  landlady  of  the  that  sho  had  passed  hor  childhood 

inn  at  Fushie,    one  stage   from  among  tho  Gipsies  of  tho  Border. 

Edinburgh,— an  old  damo  of  some  But  hor  fiery  Radicalism  latterly 

humour,   with  whom  Sir  Walter  was  another  source  of  high  morri- 

always  had  a  friendly  colloquy  in  ment. — jr.  a  L. 
passing.    I  believe  the  charm  was, 


1827.]  JOURNAL.  61 

Mr.  Gibson's,  lo !  the  scene  had  again  changed,  and  a  new 
hare  is  started.1 

The  trustees  were  clearly  of  opinion  that  the  matter 
should  be  probed  to  the  very  bottom ;  so  Cadell  sets  off 
to-morrow  in  quest  of  Robinson,  whose  haunts  he  knows. 
There  was  much  talk  concerning  what  should  be  done,  how  to 
protect  my  honour's  person,  and  to  postpone  commencing  a 
defence  which  must  make  Ahab  desperate,  before  we  can 
ascertain  that  the  grounds  are  really  tenable.  This  much 
I  think  I  can  see,  that  the  trustees  will  rather  pay  the  debt 
than  break  off  the  trust  and  go  into  a  sequestration.  They 
are  clearly  right  for  themselves,  and  I  believe  for  me  also. 
Whether  it  is  in  human  possibility  that  I  can  clear  off  these 
obligations  or  not,  is  very  doubtful.  But  I  would  rather  have 
it  written  on  my  monument  that  I  died  at  the  desk  than  live 
under  the  recollection  of  having  neglected  it.  My  conscience 
is  free  and  happy,  and  would  be  so  if  I  were  to  be  lodged 
in  the  Oalton  Jail.  Were  I  shirking  exertion  I  should  lose 
heart,  under  a  sense  of  general  contempt,  and  so  die  like  a 
poisoned  rat  in  a  hole. 

Dined  with  Gibson  and  John  Home.  His  wife  is  a 
pretty  lady-like  woman.  Slept  there  at  night. 

November  6. — I  took  possession  of  No.  6  Shandwick 
Place,  Mrs.  Jobson's  house.  Mr.  Cadell  had  taken  it  for 
me;  terms  £100  for  four  months — cheap  enough,  as  it  is  a 
capital  house.  I  offered  £5  for  immediate  entrance,  as  I  do  not 
like  to  fly  back  to  Abbotsford.  So  here  we  are  established 
i.e.  John  Nicolson2  and  I,  with  good  fires  and  all  snug. 

1  The  *  *  new  hare  "  was  this :  "  It  gible  to  justify  Ballantyne's  trustees 

transpired  in.  the  very  nick  of  time,  in  carrying  the  point  before  the 

that  a  suspicion  of  usury  attached  Court  of  Session ;  but  they  failed 

to  these  Israelites  without  guile,  to    establish   their    allegation." — 

in  a  transaction  with  Hurst  and  Life,  vol.  ix.  pp.  1 78-9. 
Robinson,  as    to  one  or  more  of        3  A  favourite  domestic  at  Abbots- 

the  bills  for  which  the  house  of  ford,  whose  name  was  never  to  bo 

Ballantyne  had  become  responsible,  mentioned  by  any  of  Scott's  family 

This  suspicion,  upon  investigation,  without  respect  and  gratitude. — 

assumed  a  shape  sufficiently  tan-  L\fe>  vol.  x.  p.  3. 


62 


JOUBNAL. 


[Nov. 


I  waited  on  L.  J.  S. ;  an  affecting  meeting.1 
Sir  William  Forbes  came  in  before  dinner  to  me,  high- 
spirited  noble  fellow  as  ever,  and  true  to  his  friend.    Agrees 
mth  my  feelings  to  a  comma.    He  thinks  CadelTs  account 
must  turn  up  trumps,  and  is  for  going  the  vole.2 

November  7. — Began  to  settle  myself  this  morning,  after 
the  hurry  of  mind,  and  even  of  body,  which  I  have  lately 
undergone.  Commenced  a  review — that  is,  an  essay,  on 
Ornamental  Gardening  for  the  Quarterly.  But  I  stuck  fast 
for  want  of  books.  As  I  did  not  wish  to  leave  the  mind 
leisure  to  recoil  on  itself,  I  immediately  began  the  Second 
Series  of  the  Chronicles  of  Canongate,  the  First  having  been 
well  approved.  I  went  to  make  another  visit,  and  fairly 
softened  myself  like  an  old  fool,  with  recalling  old  stories 


1  Lady  Jane  Stuart's  house  was 
No.  12  Maitland  Street,  opposite 
Shaadwick  Place.  Mrs.  Skene  told 
Mr.  Lockhart  that  at  Sir  Walter's 
first  meeting  with  his  old  friend  a 
very  painful  scene  occurred,  and 
she  added— "I  think  it  highly 
probable  that  it  was  on  returning 
from  this  call  that  he  committed 
to  writing  the  verses,  To  Time,  by 
his  early  favourite."— l/yfe,  vol.  ix. 
p.  183. 

The  lines    referred   to   are    as 
follow — 
Friend  of  the  wretch  oppress'd  with  grief, 

Whose  lenient  hand,  though  slow,  sup- 
plies 
The  balm  that  lends  to  care  relief, 

That  wipes  her  tears—that  checks  her 

sighs  I 
'Tis  thine  the  wounded  soul  to  heal 

That  hopeless  bleeds  for  sorrow's  smart, 
From  stem  misfortune's  shaft  to  steal 

The  barb  that  rankles  in  the  heart. 
What  though  with  theo  the  rosos  fly, 

And  jocund  youth's  gay  reign  is  o'er , 
Though  dimm'd  the  lustre  of  the  eye, 

And  hope's  vain  dreams  enchant  no  moi  c 
Yet  in  thy  tram  come  dove-eyed  peace, 

Indifference  with  her  heart  of  enow ; 
At  her  cold  couch,  lo !  sorrows  ceaao, 

No  thorns  beneath  her  roses  grow. 


O  hasto  to  grant  thy  suppliant's  prayer, 
To  mo  thy  torpid  calm  impart ; 

Bond  from  my  brow  youth'8  garland  fair, 
But  take  tho  thorn  that  'H  In  my  h<iart. 

Ah !  why  do  fabling  pootw  toll 

That  thy  fleet  wmgH  outstrip  the  wind  J? 
Why  feign  thy  cour.sc  of  joy  tho  knell, 

And  call  thy  hlowoHt  pace  unkind  ? 

To  me  tliy  tod)ou«  fooblo  paoo 
Oomcs  ladon.  with  the  weight  ot  years ; 

With  «iffh«  J  view  morn's  blushing  fnco, 
And  hail  mild  evening  with  my  tears. 

— Life,  vol.  i  pp.  334-336* 

3  Sir  William  Forbes  crowned  hia 
generous  efforts  for  Scott's  relief 
l/y  privately  paying  tho  whole  of 
Abud's  demand  (nearly  £2000)  out 
of  his  own  pocket — ranking  as  an 
ordinary  creditor  for  tho  amount; 
and  taking  care  at  the  same  time 
that  his  old  friend  should  be  allowed 
to  believe  that  the  affair  had  merged 
quietly  in  tho  general  measures 
of  the  trustees.  In  faet  it  was 
not  until  some  time  after  Sir 
William's  death  (in  the  following 
year)  that  Sir  Walter  learned 
what  he  had  done.— -Life,  vol.  ix. 
p.  179. 


1827.]  JOU-KNAL.  63 

till  I  was  fit  for  nothing  but  shedding  tears  and  repeating 
verses  for  the  whole  night.  This  is  sad  work.  The  very- 
grave  gives  up  its  dead,  and  time  rolls  back  thirty  years  to 
add  to  my  perplexities.  I  don't  care.  I  begin  to  grow  over- 
hardened,  and,  like  a  stag  turning  at  bay,  my  naturally 
good  temper  grows  fierce  and  dangerous.  Yet  what  a  ro- 
mance to  tell,  and  told  I  fear  it  will  one  day  be.  And  then 
my  three  years  of  dreaming  and  my  two  years  of  wakening 
will  be  chronicled  doubtless.  But  the  dead  will  feel  no 
pain. 

November  8. — Domum  mansi,  lanamfeci.  I  may  borrow 
the  old  sepulchral  motto  of  the  Eoman  matron.  I  stayed  at 
home,  and  began  the  third  volume  of  Chronicles,  or  rather 
the  first  volume  of  the  Second  Series.1  This  I  pursued  with 
little  intermission  from  morning  till  night,  yet  only  finished 
nine  pages.  Like  the  machinery  of  a  steam-engin6,  the 
imagination  does  not  work  freely  when  first  set  upon  a 
new  task. 

November  9. — Finished  my  task  after  breakfast,  at  least 
before  twelve.  Then  went  to  College  to  hear  this  most 
amusing  good  matter  of  the  Essay  read.2  Imprimis  occurs 
a  dispute  whether  the  magistrates,  as  patrons  of  the  Uni- 
versity, should  march  in  procession  before  the  Royal  visitors ; 
and  it  was  proposed  on  our  side  that  the  Provost,  who  is 
undoubtedly  the  first  man  in  his  own  city,  should  go  in 
attendance  on  the  Principal,  with  the  Chairman  of  the 
Commission  on  the  Principal's  right  hand,  and  the  whole 

1  St.    Valentine's   Day   or   Fair  This   prize,    which,   excited   great 

Maid  of  Perth.  interest    among     the     Edinburgh 

3  A  Koyal  Commission,  of  which  students,  was  won  by  John  Brown 

Sir  Walter  was   a   member,  had  Patterson,  and  ordered  to  be  read 

been  appointed  in  1826  to  visit  the  before  the  Commissioners,  and  the 

Universities  of  Scotland.    At  the  other  public  bodies,  with  the  result 

suggestion  of   Lord  Aberdeen,    a  described  by  Sir  Walter.     It  was 

hundred   guinea    prize   had   been  read  on  the  17th  November  before 

offered  for  the  best  essay  on  the  a  distinguished  audience, 
national  character  of  the  Athenians. 


64:  JOUKSTAL.  [Nov. 

Commission  following,  taking  pas  of  the  other  Magistrates  as 
well  as  of  the  Senatus  Academicus — or  whether  we  had  not 
better  waive  all  question  of  precedence,  and  let  the  three 
bodies  find  their  way  separately  as  they  best  could.  This 
last  method  was  just  adopted  when  we  learned  that  the 
question  was  not  in  what  order  of  procession  we  should 
reach  the  place  of  exhibition,  but  whether  we  were  to  get 
there  at  all,  which  was  presently  after  reported  as  an  im- 
possibility. The  lads  of  the  College  had  so  effectually  taken 
possession  of  the  class-room  where  the  essay  was  to  be  read, 
that,  neither  learning  or  law,  neither  Magistrates  nor  Magis- 
ters,  neither  visitors  nor  visited,  could  make  way  to  the 
scene  of  action.  So  we  grandees  were  obliged  to  adjourn 
the  sederunt  till  Saturday  the  17th — and  so  ended  the 
collie-shangie. 

November  10. — Wrote  out  my  task  and  little  more*  At 
twelve  o'clock  I  went  to  poor  Lady  J.  S.  to  talk  over  old 
stories.  I  am  not  clear  that  it  is  right  or  healthful  indul- 
gence to  be  ripping  up  old  sorrows,  but  it  seems  to  give 
her  deep-seated  sorrow  words,  and  that  is  a  mental  blood- 
letting. To  me  these  things  are  now  matter  of  calm  and 
solemn  recollection,  never  to  be  forgotten,  yet  scarce  to  be 
remembered  with  pain. 

We  go  out  to  Saint  Catherine's1  to-day.  I  am.  glad  of 
it,  for  I  would  not  have  these  recollections  haunt  mo,  and 
society  will  put  them  out  of  my  head. 

November  11. — Sir  William  Eae  road  us  prayers. 
Sauntered  about  the  doors,  and  talked  of  old  cavalry 
stories.  Then  drove  to  Melville,  and  saw  the  Lord  and 
Lady,  and  family,  I  think  I  never  saw  anything  more 
beautiful  than  the  ridge  of  Carnethy  (Pentlaml)  against  a 
clear  frosty  sky,  with  its  peaks  and  varied  slopes.  The 
hills  glowed  like  purple  amethysts,  the  sky  glowed  topaz 
and  vermilion  colours.  I  never  saw  a  finer  screen  than 

1  Sir  William  Rae's  house,  in  Liberton  parish,  near  Ktlmburgh, 


1827.]  JOTJBNAL.  65 

Pentland,  considering  that  it  is  neither  rocky  nor  highly 
elevated. 

November  12. — I  cannot  say  I  lost  a  minute's  sleep  on 
account  of  what  the  day  might  bring  forth ;  though  it  was 
that  on  which  we  must  settle  with  Abud  in  his  Jewish 
demand,  or  stand  to  the  consequences.  I  breakfasted  with 
an  excellent  appetite,  laughed  in  real  genuine  easy  fun, 
and  went  to  Edinburgh,  resolved  to  do  what  should  best 
become  me.  When  I  came  home  I  found  Walter,  poor 
fellow,  who  had  come  down  on  the  spur,  having  heard  from 
John  Lockhart  how  things  stand,  Gibson  having  taken  out 
a  suspension  makes  us  all  safe  for  the  present.  So  we  dined 
merrily.  He  has  good  hopes  of  his  Majesty,  and  I  must 
support  his  interest  as  well  as  I  can.  Wrote  letters  to 
Lady  Shelley,  John  L.,  and  one  or  two  chance  correspon- 
dents. One  was  singular.  A  gentleman,  writing  himself 
James  Macturk,  tells  me  his  friends  have  identified  him 
with  Captain  Macturk  of  St.  Bonan's  Well,  and  finding 
himself  much  inconvenienced  by  this  identification,  he 
proposes  I  should  apply  to  the  Bong  to  forward  his  re- 
storation and  advance  in  the  service  (he  writes  himself  late 
Lieutenant  4th  Dragoon  Guards)  as  an  atonement  for 
having  occasioned  him  (though  unintentionally  no  doubt) 
so  great  an  injury.  This  is  one  road  to  promotion,  to  be 
sure.  Lieutenant  Macturk  is,  I  suppose,  tolerably  mad. 

We  dined  together,  Anne,  Walter,  and  I,  and  were  happy 
at  our  reunion,  when,  as  I  was  despatching  my  packet  to 

London, 

In  started  to  heeze  up  our  howp  * 

John  Gibson,  radiant  with  good-natured  joy.  He  had 
another  letter  from  Oadell,  enclosing  one  from  Robinson,  in 
which  the  latter  pledges  himself  to  make  the  most  explicit 
affidavit. 

On  these  two  last  days  I  have  written  only  three  pages* 
1  Prom  the  old  song  Andrew  and  his  Cutty  Cfw. 

VOL.  IL  B 


66  JOURNAL.  [Nov. 

but  not  from  inaptitude  or  incapacity  to  labour.  It  is  odd 
enough — I  think  it  difficult  to  place  me  in  a  situation  of 
danger,  or  disagreeable  circumstances,  purely  personal,  which 
would  shake  my  powers  of  mind,  yet  they  sink  under  mere 
lowness  of  spirits,  as  this  Journal  bears  evidence  in  too  many 


November  13. — Wrote  a  little  in  the  morning,  but  not 
above  a  page.  Went  to  the  Court  about  one,  returned,  and 
made  several  visits  with  Anne  and  Walter.  Cadell  came, 
glorious  with  the  success  of  his  expedition,  but  a  little  allayed 
by  the  prospect  of  competition  for  the  copyrights,  on  which 
he  and  I  have  our  eyes  as  joint  purchasers.  We  must  have 
them  if  possible,  for  I  can  give  new  value  to  an  edition 
corrected  with  notes.  Nous  verrons!  Captain  Musgravo, 
of  the  house  of  Edenhall,  dined  with  us.  After  dinner, 
while  we  were  over  our  whisky  and  water  and  cigars,  enter 
the  merry  knight.  Misses  Kerr  came  to  tea,  and  wo  had 
fun  and  singing  in  the  evening. 

November  14. — A  little  work  in  the  morning,  but  no 
gathering  to  my  tackle.  Went  to  Court,  remained  till  nigh 
one.  Then  came  through  a  pitiless  shower;  dressed  and 
went  to  the  christening  of  a  boy  of  John  Richardson's  who 
was  baptized  Henxy  Cockburn.  Read  the  Gazette  of  the 
great  battle  of  Navarino,  in  which  wo  have  thumped  the 
Turks  very  well.  But  as  to  the  justice  of  our  interference, 
I  will  only  suppose  some  Turkish  plenipotentiary,  with  an 
immense  turban  and  long  loose  trousers,  comes  to  dictate  to 
us  the  mode  in  which  we  should  deal  with  our  refractory 
liegemen  the  Catholics  of  Ireland.  We  hesitate  to  admit 
his  interference,  on  which  the  Moslem  admiral  runs  into 
Cork  Bay  or  Bantry  Bay,  alongside  of  a  British  squadron, 
and  sends  a  boat  to  tow  aside  a  fire-ship.  A  vessel  fires  on 
the  boat  and  sinks  her.  Is  there  an  aggression  on  the  part 
of  those  who  fired  first,  or  of  those  whose  manoeuvres 
occasioned  the  firing  ? 


1827.]  JOURNAL.  67 

Dined  at  Henry  Cockburn's  with  the  christening 
party. 

November  15. — Wrote  a  little  in  the  morning.  Detained 
in  Court  till  two;  then  returned  home  wet  enough.  Met 
with  Chambers,  and  complimented  him  about  his  making 
a  clever  book  of  the  1745  for  Constable's  Miscellany.  It 
is  really  a  lively  work,  and  must  have  a  good  sale.  Before 
dinner  enter  Cadell,  and  we  anxiously  renewed  our  plan  for 
buying  the  copyrights  on  19th  December.  It  is  most 
essential  that  the  whole  of  the  Waverley  Novels  should  be 
kept  under  our  management,  as  it  is  called.  I  may  then 
give  them  a  new  impulse  by  a  preface  and  notes ;  and  if  an 
edition,  of  say  30  volumes,  were  to  be  published  monthly  to 
the  tune  of  5000,  which  may  really  be  expected  if  the  shops 
were  once  cleared  of  the  over-glut,  it  would  bring  in  £10,000 
clear  profit,  over  all  outlay,  and  so  pay  any  sum  of  copy- 
money  that  might  be  ventured.  I  must  urge  these  things 
to  Gibson,  for  except  these  copyrights  be  saved  our  plans 
will  go  to  nothing. 

Walter  and  Anne  went  to  hear  Madame  Pasta  sing  after 
dinner.  I  remained  at  home;  wrote  to  Sir  William 
Knighton,  and  sundry  other  letters  of  importance. 

November  16. — There  was  little  to  do  in  Court  to-day, 
but  one's  time  is  squandered,  and  his  ideas  broken  strangely. 
At  three  we  had  a  select  meeting  of  the  G-as  Directors  to 
consider  what  line  we  were  to  take  in  the  disastrous  affairs  of 
the  company.  Agreed  to  go  to  Parliament  a  second  time. 
James  Gibson  [Craig]  and  I  to  go  up  as  our  solicitors.  So 
curiously  does  interest  couple  up  individuals,  though  I  am 
sure  I  have  no  objection  whatever  to  Mr.  James  Gibson- 
Craig.1 

November  17. — Returned  home  in  early  time  from  the 
Court.  Settled  on  the  review  of  Ornamental  Gardening 

1  Sir  James  Gibson-Craig,  one  of     advocate  of  reform  at  the  end  of 
the  Whig  leaders,  and  a  prominent     last  century. 


68  JOUENAL.  [Nov. 

for  Lockhart,  and  wrote  hard.  Want  several  quotations, 
though — that  is  the  bore  of  being  totally  without  books. 
Anne  and  I  dined  quietly  together,  and  I  wrote  after  tea 
— an  industrious  day, 

November  18. — This  has  been  also  a  day  of  exertion.  I 
was  interrupted  for  a  moment  by  a  visit  from  young  Davidoff 
with  a  present  of  a  steel  snuff-box  [Tula  work],  wrought  and 
lined  with  gold,  having  my  arms  on  the  top,  and  on  the  sides 
various  scenes  from  the  environs  and  principal  public  build- 
ings of  St.  Petersburg — &joli  cadeau — and  I  take  it  very  kind 
of  my  young  friend.  I  had  a  letter  from  his  uncle,  Denis 
Davidoff,  the  black  captain  of  the  French  retreat.  The 
Russians  are  certainly  losing  ground  and  men  in  Persia,  and 
will  not  easily  get  out  of  the  scrape  of  having  engaged  an 
active  enemy  in  a  difficult  and  unhealthy  country,  I  am  glad 
of  it ;  it  is  an  overgrown  power ;  and  to  have  them  kept  quiet 
at  least  is  well  for  the  rest  of  Europe.  I  concluded  the 
evening — after  writing  a  double  task — with  the  trial  of 
Malcolm  Gillespie,  renowned  as  a  most  venturous  excise 
officer,  but  now  like  to  lose  his  life  for  forgery.  A  bold  man 
in  his  vocation  he  seems  to  have  been,  but  the  law  seems  to 
have  got  round  to  the  wrong  side  of  him  on  tho  present 
occasion.1 

November  19. — Corrected  the  kst  proof  of  Tales  of  my 
Grandfather.  Eeceived  Oadell  at  breakfast,  and  conversed 
fully  on  the  subject  of  the  Cfhromdes  and  the  application 
of  the  price  of  2d  series,  say  £4000,  to  the  purchase  of  the 
moiety  of  the  copyrights  now  in  the  market,  and  to  bo  sold 
this  day  month.  If  I  have  the  command  of  a  new  Edition 
and  put  it  into  an  attractive  shape,  with  notes,  introductions, 
and  illustrations  that  no  one  save  I  myself  can  give,  I  am 
confident  it  will  bring  home  the  whole  purchase-money  with 


1  G-illespie  was  tried  at  Aberdeen     26,  and  sentenced  to  be  executed  on 
before  Lord  Alloway  on  September    Friday,  16th.  November  1827, 


1827,]  JOURNAL.  69 

something  over,  and  lead  to  the  disposal  of  a  series  of  the 
subsequent  volumes  of  the  following  works, 

St.  Bonan's  Well, 3  vols. 

Eedgauntlet,     .  3     „ 

Tales  of  Crusaders,     .  .  4     „ 

Woodstock, .  3     „ 

13 

make  a  series  of  7  vols. !     The  two  series  of  the  Chronicles 
and  others  will  be  ready  about  the  same  time. 

November  20. — Wrought  in  the  morning  at  the  review, 
which  I  fear  will  be  lengthy.  Called  on  Hector  as  I  came 
home  from  the  Court,  and  found  him  better,  and  keeping 
a  Highland  heart.  I  came  home  like  a  crow  through  the 
mist,  half  dead  with  a  rheumatic  headache  caused  by  the 
beastly  north-east  wind. 

"  What  am  I  now  when  every  breeze  appals  me  ? " l  I  dozed 
for  half -an-hour  in  my  chair  for  pain  and  stupidity.  I  omitted 
to  say  yesterday  that  I  went  out  to  Melville  Castle  to  inquire 
after  my  Lord  Melville,  who  had  broke  his  collar-bone  by  a 
fall  from  his  horse  in  mounting.  He  is  recovering  well,  but 
much  bruised.  I  came  home  with  Lord  Chief-Commissioner 
Adam.  He  told  me  a  dictum  of  old  Sir  Gilbert  Elliot, 
speaking  of  his  uncles.  "  No  chance  of  opulence,"  he  said,  "  is 
worth  the  risk  of  a  competence."  It  was  not  the  thought 
of  a  great  man,  but  perhaps  that  of  a  wise  one.  Wrought 
at  my  review,  and  despatched  about  half  or  better,  I  should 
hope.  I  incline  to  longer  extracts  in  the  next  sheets. 

November  21. — Wrought  at  the  review.  At  one  o'clock  I 
attended  the  general  meeting  of  the  Union  Scottish  Assurance 
Company.  There  was  a  debate  arose  whether  the  ordinary 
acting  directors  should  or  should  not  have  a  small  sum, 
amounting  to  about  a  crown  a  piece  allotted  to  them  each 
day  of  their  regular  attendance.  The  proposal  was  rejected 
by  many,  and  upon  grounds  which  sound  very  well, — such 

1  Slightly  altered  from  Macbeth,  Act  n.  Sc.  2. 


70  JOUEKAL.  [Nov. 

as  the  shabbiness  of  men  being  influenced  by  a  trifling  con- 
sideration like  this,  and  the  absurdity  of  the  Company 
volunteering  a  bounty  to  one  set  of  men,  when  there  are 
others  willing  to  act  gratuitously,  and  many  gentlemen 
volunteered  their  own  services ;  though  I  cannot  help  suspect- 
ing that,  as  in  the  case  of  ultroneous  offers  of  service  upon 
most  occasions,  it  was  not  likely  to  be  acceptable.  The 
motion  miscarried,  however — impoliticly  rejected,  as  I  think. 
The  sound  of  five  shillings  sounds  shabby,  but  the  fact  is  that 
it  does  in  some  sort  reconcile  the  party  to  whom  it  is  offered 
to  leave  his  own  house  and  business  at  an  exact  hour; 
whereas,  in  the  common  case,  one  man  comes  too  late — 
another  does  not  come  at  all — the  attendance  is  given  by 
different  individuals  upon  different  days,  so  that  no  one 
acquires  the  due  historical  knowledge  of  the  affairs  of  the 
Company.  Besides,  the  Directors,  by  taking  even  this  trifling 
sum  of  money,  render  themselves  the  paid  servants  of  the 
Company,  and  are  bound  to  use  a  certain  degree  of  diligence, 
much  greater  than  if  they  continued'  to  serve,  as  hitherto, 
gratuitously.  The  pay  is  like  enlisting  money  which,  whether 
great  or  small,  subjects  to  engagements  under  the  Articles  of 
war. 

A  china-merchant  spoke, — a  picture  of  an  orator  with 
bandy  legs,  squinting  eyes,  and  a  voice  like  an  ungreased 
cart-wheel — a  liberty  boy,  I  suppose.  The  mooting  was 
somewhat  stormy,  but  I  preserved  order  by  listening  with 
patience  to  each  in  turn;  determined  that  they  should 
weary  out  the  patience  of  the  meeting  before  I  lost  mine. 
An  orator  is  like  a  top.  Let  him  alone  and  he  must  stop 
one  time  or  another — flog  him,  and  he  may  go  on  for  ever* 

Dined  with  Directors,  of  whom  I  only  know  the 
Manager,  Sutherland  Mackenzie,  Sir  David  Milne,  and 
Wauchope,  besides  one  or  two  old  Oil  Gas  friends.  It  wont 
off  well  enough. 

November  22. — Wrought  in  the  morning.     Then  made 


1827.]  JOUKKA.L.  71 

arrangements  for  a  dinner  to  celebrate  the  Duke  of 
Buccleuch  coming  of  age — that  which  was  to  have  teen 
held  at  Melville  Castle  being  postponed,  owing  to  Lord  M.'s 
accident.  Sent  copy  of  Second  Series  of  Chronicles  of 
Canonffate  to  Ballantyne. 

November  23. — I  bilked  the  Court  to-day,  and  worked  at 
the  review.  I  wish  it  may  not  be  too  long,  yet  know  not 
how  to  shorten  it.  The  post  brought  me  a  letter  from  the 
Duke  of  Buccleuch,  acquainting  me  with  his  grandmother, 
the  Duchess-Dowager's  death.1  She  was  a  woman  of  un- 
bounded beneficence  to,  and  even  beyond,  the  extent  of  her 
princely  fortune.  She  had  a  masculine  courage,  and  great 
firmness  in  enduring  affliction,  which  pressed  on  her  with 
continued  and  successive  blows  in  her  later  years.  She  was 
about  eighty-four,  and  nature  was  exhausted;  so  life 
departed  like  the  extinction  of  a  lamp  for  lack  of  oil.  Our 
dinner  on  Monday  is  put  off.  I  am  not  superstitious,  but  I 
wish  this  festival  had  not  been  twice  delayed  by  such 
sinister  accidents — first,  the  injury  sustained  by  Lord 
Melville,  and  then  this  event  spreading  crape  like  the  shroud 
of  Saladin  over  our  little  festival.2  God  avert  bad  omens ! 

Dined  with  Archie  Swinton.  Company — Sir  Alexander 
and  Lady  Keith,  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Anderson,  Olanronald,  etc. 
Clanronald  told  us,  as  an  instance  of  Highland  credulity,  that 
a  set  of  his  kinsmen,  Borradale  and  others,  believing  that  the 
fabulous  Water  Cow  inhabited  a  small  lake  near  his  house, 
resolved  to  drag  the  monster  into  day.  With  this  view  they 
bivouacked  by  the  side  of  the  lake,  in  which  they  placed,  by 
way  of  night-bait,  two  small  anchors,  such  as  belong  to  boats, 
each  baited  with  the  carcase  of  a  dog  slain  for  the  purpose. 
They  expected  the  Water  Cow  would  gorge  on  this  bait,  and 
were  prepared  to  drag  her  ashore  the  next  morning,  when,  to 

1  Lady  Elizabeth  Montagu,  daugh-     standard  "to  admonish  the  East 
ter  of  George  Duke  of  Montagu.          of  the  instability  of  human  great- 

2  Saladin Js   shroud,  which   -was     ness."— GIBBON. 
said  to  have  been  displayed  as  a 


72  JOTJENAL.  [Nov. 

their  confusion  of  face,  the  baits  were  found  untouched.  It  is 
something  too  late  in  the  day  for  setting  "baits  for  "Water 
Cows,1 

November  24. — Wrote  at  review  in  the  morning.  I  have 
made  my  revocation  of  the  invitation  for  Monday.  For 
myself  it  will  give  me  time  to  work.  I  could  not  get  home 
to-day  till  two  o'clock,  and  was  quite  tired  and  stupid.  So 
I  did  little  but  sleep  or  dose  till  dressing-time.  Then  went 
to  Sir  David  Wedderburn's,  where  I  met  three  beauties 
of  my  own  day,  Margaret  Brown,  Maria  Brown,  and  Jane 
Wedderburn,  now  Lady  "Wedderburn,  Lady  Haiupdon,  and 
Mrs.  Oliphant.  We  met  the  pleasant  Irish  family  of 
MeatL  The  resemblance  betwixt  the  Earl  of  Meath  and 
the  Duke  of  Wellington  is  something  remarkably  striking 
— ithis  not  only  the  profile,  but  the  modo  of  bearing  the 
person,  and  the  person  itself.  Lady  Theodosia  Brabazon,  the 
Earl's  daughter,  and  a  beautiful  young  lady,  told  me  that  in 
Paris  her  father  was  often  taken  for  Lord  Wellington. 

November  26. — This  forenoon  finished  the  review,  and 
despatched  it  to  Lockhart  before  dinner.  Will  Clerk,  Tom 
Thomson,  and  young  Frank  Scott  dined  with  mo.  Wo  had 
a  pleasant  day.  I  have  wrought  pretty  well  to-day,  But 
I  must 

Do  a  little  more 

And  produce  a  little  ore, 

*  The  belief  in  the  existence  of  smallness  of  the  pumps,  though  it 

the  *  Water  Cow  '  is  not  even  yet  was  persevered  in  for  two  years,  ho 

extinct  in  the  Highlands.    In  Mr.  next  tried  poisoning  the  •water  by 

J.  H.  Dixon's  book  on  Qairloch,  8vo,  emptying  into  the  loch  a  quantity 

1886,  it'  is  said  the  monster  lives  of  quick  limo  J  ! — Whatever  harm 

or   did  live  in  Loch  na  Beiste!  was  thus  done  to  the  trout  none 

Some  years   ago    the  proprietor,  was  experienced  by  the  Beast,  which 

moved  by  the  entreaties  of  the  it  is  rumoured  has  been  seen  in 

people,  and  on  the  positive  testimony  the  neighbourhood  as  late  as  1884 

of  two  elders  of  the  Free  Church,  (p.  162).    This  transaction  formed 

that  the  creature  was  hiding  in  his  an  element  in  a  case  before  the 

loch,  attempted  its  destruction  by  Crofters'  Commission  at  Aultbea  in 

pumping  and  running  off  the  water ;  May  1 888. 
this  plan  having  failed  owing  to  the 


1827.]  JOUENAL.  73 

November  26. — Corrected  proof-sheets  of  Chronicles  and 
Tales.  Advised  Sheriff  processes,  and  was  busy. 

Dined  with  Eobert  Dundas  of  Arniston,  Lord  Eegister,  etc. 
An  agreeable  evening. 

November  27. — Corrected  proofs  in  the  morning,  and 
attended  the  Court  till  one  or  two  o'clock,  Mr.  Hamilton 
being  again  ill.  I  visited  Lady  S.  on  my  return.  Came 
home  too  fagged  to  do  anything  to  purpose. 

Anecdote  from  George  Bell.  In  the  days  of  Charles  n.  or 
his  brother,  flourished  an  old  Lady  Elphinstone,  so  old  that  she 
reached  the  extraordinary  period  of  103.  She  was  a  keen 
Whig,  so  did  not  relish  Graham  of  Clavers.  At  last,  having  a 
curiosity  to  see  so  aged  a  person,  he  obtained  or  took  per- 
mission to  see  her,  and  asked  her  of  the  remarkable  things 
she  had  seen.  "  Indeed,"  said  she,  "  I  think  one  of  the  most 
remarkable  is,  that  when  I  entered  the  world  there  was  one 
Knox  deaving  us  a'  with  his  clavers,  and  now  that  I  am  going 
out  of  it,  there  is  one  Clavers  deaving  us  with  his  knocks." 

November  28. — Corrected  proofs  and  went  to  Court.  Ee- 
turned  about  one,  and  called  on  the  Lord  Chief-Baron. 
Dined  with  the  Duchess  of  Bedford  at  the  Waterloo,  and 
renewed,  as  I  may  say,  an  old  acquaintance,  which  began 
while  her  Grace  was  Lady  Georgiana.1  She  has  now  a  fine 
family,  two  young  ladies  silent  just  now,  but  they  will  find 
their  tongues,  or  they  are  not  right  Gordons,  a  very  fine 
child,  Alister,  who  shouted,  sung,  and  spoke  Gaelic  with  much 
spirit.  They  are  from  a  shooting-place  in  the  Highlands, 
called  Invereshie,  in  Badenoch,  which  the  Duke  has  taken  to 
gratify  the  Duchess's  passion  for  the  heather. 

November  29. — My  course  of  composition  is  stopped 
foolishly  enough.  I  have  sent  four  leaves  to  London  with 
Lockhart's  review.  I  am  very  sorry  for  this  blunder,  and 
here  is  another.  Forgetting  I  had  been  engaged  for  a  long 
time  to  Lord  Gillies — a  first  family  visit  too — the  devil 

1  Daughter  of  Alexander,  fourth  Duke  of  Gordon. 


74:  JOUENAL.  [Nov. 

tempted  me  to  accept  of  the  office  of  President  of  the 
Antiquarian  Society.  And  now  they  tell  me  people  have 
come  from  the  country  to  be  present,  and  so  forth,  of  which  I 
may  believe  as  much  as  I  may.  But  I  must  positively  take 
care  of  this  absurd  custom  of  confounding  invitations.  My 
conscience  acquits  me  of  doing  so  by  malice  prepense,  yet  one 
incurs  the  suspicion.  At  any  rate  it  is  uncivil  and  must  bo 
amended.  Dined  at  Lord  C.  Commissioner's — to  meet  the 
Duchess  and  her  party.  She  can  be  extremely  agreeable,  but 
I  used  to  think  her  Grace  journalise.  She  may  have  been 
cured  of  that  fault,  or  I  may  have  turned  less  jealous  of  my 
dignity.  At  all  events  let  a  pleasant  hour  go  by  unquestioned, 
and  do  not  let  us  break  ordinary  gems  to  pieces  because  they 
are  not  diamonds.  I  forgot  to  say  Edwin  Landseer  was  in  the 
Duchess's  train.  He  is,  in  my  mind,  one  of  the  most  striking 
masters  of  the  modern  school.  His  expression  both  in  man 
and  animals  is  capital.  He  showed  us  many  sketches  of 
smugglers,  etc.,  taken  in  the  Highlands,  all  capital. 

"Some  gaed  there,  and  some  gaed  here, 
And  a3  the  town  -was  in  a  steer, 
And  Johnnio  on  his  "brocket  incar, 
He  raid  to  fetch  the  howdio." 

November  30. — Another  idle  morning,  with  letters, 
however.  Had  the  great  pleasure  of  a  letter  from  Lord 
Dudley1  acquainting  me  that  he  had  received  his  Majesty's 
commands  to  put  down  the  name  of  my  son  Charles  for  the 
first  vacancy  that  should  occur  in  the  Foreign  Office,  and  at 
the  same  time  to  acquaint  me  with  his  gracious  intentions, 
which  were  signified  in  language  the  most  gratifying  to  mo. 
This  makes  me  really  feel  light  and  happy,  and  most  grateful 
to  the  kind  and  gracious  sovereign  who  has  always  shown,  I 
may  say,  so  much  friendship  towards  me.  Would  to  God  the 
King's  errand  might  lie  in  the  cadger's  gait,  that  I  might  have 

1  Lord  Dudley,  then  Secretary  of  had  boon  partly  educated  in  Kdin- 
State  for  the  Foreign  Department,  burgh,  under  Dugald  Stewart's 
was  an  early  friend  of  Scott's.  He  care. 


1827.]  JOURNAL.  75 

some  better  way  of  showing  my  gratitude  than  merely  by  a 
letter  of  thanks  or  this  private  memorandum  of  my  gratitude. 
The  lad  is  a  good  boy  and  clever,  somewhat  indolent  I  fear, 
yet  with  the  capacity  of  exertion.  Presuming  his  head  is 
full  enough  of  Greek  and  Latin,  he  has  now  living  languages 
to  study ;  so  I  will  set  him  to  work  on  French,  Italian,  and 
German,  that,  like  the  classic  Cerberus,  he  may  speak  a  leash 
of  languages  at  once.  Dined  with  Gillies,  very  pleasant; 
Lord  Chief- Commissioner,  Will  Clerk,  Cranstoun,  and  other 
old  friends.  I  saw  in  the  evening  the  celebrated  Miss 
Grahame  Stirling,1  so  remarkable  for  her  power  of  personify- 
ing a  Scottish  old  lady.  Unluckily  she  came  late,  and  I  left 
early  in  the  evening,  so  I  could  not  find  out  wherein  her 
craft  lay.  She  looked  like  a  sensible  woman.  I  had  a  con- 
ference with  my  trustees  about  the  purchase  (in  company 
with  Cadell)  of  the  copyrights  of  the  novels  to  be  exposed  to 
sale  on  the  19th  December,  and  had  the  good  luck  to  persuade 
them  fully  of  the  propriety  of  the  project.  I  alone  can,  by 
notes  and  the  like,  give  these  works  a  new  value,  and  in  fact 
make  a  new  edition.  The  price  is  to  be  made  good  from  the 
Second  Series  Chronicles  of  Canongate,  sold  to  Cadell  for 
£4000 ;  and  it  may  very  well  happen  that  we  shall  have  little 
to  pay,  as  part  of  the  copyrights  will  probably  be  declared 
mine  by  the  arbiter,  and  these  I  shall  have  without  money 
and  without  price.  Cadell  is  most  anxious  on  the  subject. 
He  thinks  that  two  years  hence  £10,000  may  be  made  of  a 
new  edition. 

1  See  p.  138  n. 


DECEMBER 

December  1. — This  morning  again  I  was  idle.  But  I  must 
work,  and  so  I  will  to-morrow  whether  the  missing  sheets 
arrive,  ay  or  no,  by  goles !  After  Court  I  went  with  Lord 
Wriothesley  Kussell,1  to  Dalkeith  House,  to  see  the  pictures ; 
Charles  K.  Sharpe  alongst  with  us.  We  satisfied  ourselves 
that  they  have  actually  frames,  and  that,  I  think,  was  all  we 
could  be  sure  of.  Lord  "Wriothesley,  who  is  a  very  pleasant 
young  man,  well-informed,  and  with  some  turn  for  humour, 
dined  with  us,  and  Mr.  Davidoff  met  him.  The  Misses 
Kerr  also  dined  and  spent  the  evening  with  us  in  that  sort  of 
society  which  I  like  best.  Charles  Sharpe  came  in  and  we 
laughed  over  oysters  and  sherry, 

te  And  a  lig  for  your  Sultun  and  Sophi." 

December  2. — Laboured  to  make  lee-way,  and  finished 
nearly  seven  pages  to  eke  on  to  the  end  of  the  missing 
sheets  when  returned.  I  have  yoked  Charles  to  Monsieur 
Surenne,  an  old  soldier  in  Napoleon's  Italian  army,  and  I 
think  a  clever  little  fellow,  with  good  general  ideas  of 
etymology.  Signer  Bugnie  is  a  good  Italian  teacher;  and 
for  a  German,  why,  I  must  look  about.  It  is  not  the  least 
useful  language  of  the  leash. 

December  3. — A  day  of  petty  business,  which  killed  a 
holiday.  Finished  my  tale  of  the  Mirror ; 2  wont  with  Tom 
Allan  to  see  his  building  at  Lauriston,  where  he  has  displayed 
good  taste — supporting  instead  of  tearing  down  or  destroying 
the  old  chateau,  which  once  belonged  to  the  famouB 
Mississippi  Law.  The  additions  are  in  very  good  taste,  and 
will  make  a  most  comfortable  house.  Mr.  Burn,  architect, 
1  The  Duchess  of  Bedford's  eldest  son.  2  My  A  unt  Margaret* a  Mirror. 

76 


1827.]  JOTJKNAL.  77 

would  fain  have  had  the  old  house  pulled  down,  which  I 
wonder  at  in  him,1  though  it  would  have  been  the  practice  of 
most  of  his  brethren.  When  I  came  up  to  town  I  was  just 
in  time  for  the  Bannatyne  Club,  where  things  are  going 
on  reasonably  well  I  hope  we  may  get  out  some  good 
historical  documents  in  the  course  of  the  winter.  Dined  at 
the  Eoyal  Society  Club.  At  the  society  had  some  essays 
upon  the  specific  weight  of  the  ore  of  manganese,  which  was 
caviare  to  the  President,  and  I  think  most  of  the  members. 
But  it  seemed  extremely  accurate,  and  I  have  little  doubt  was 
intelligible  to  those  who  had  the  requisite  key.  We  supped 
at  Mr.  Russell's,  where  the  conversation  was  as  gay  as  usual. 
Lieut-Col.  Ferguson  was  my  guest  at  the  dinner. 

December  4. — Had  the  agreeable  intelligence  that  Lord 
Newton  had  finally  issued  his  decree  in  my  favour,  for  all  the 
money  in  the  bank,  amounting  to  £32,000.  This  will  make 
a  dividend  of  six  shillings  in  the  pound,  which  is  presently  to 
be  paid.  A  meeting  of  the  creditors  was  held  to-day,  at 
which  they  gave  unanimous  approbation  of  all  that  has  been 
done,  and  seemed  struck  by  the  exertions  which  had  produced 
£22,000  within  so  short  a  space.  They  all  separated  well 
pleased.  So  far  so  good.  Heaven  grant  the  talisman  break 
not !  I  sent  copy  to  Ballantyne  this  morning,  having  got 
back  the  missing  sheets  from  John  Lockhart  last  night  I 
feel  a  little  puzzled  about  the  character  and  style  of  the  next 
tale.  The  world  has  had  so  much  of  chivalry.  Well,  I  will 

1  Sir  Walter  need  have  expressed  Andrew    Fairservice's    "whigma- 

no  surprise  at  this  architect's  desire  leeries,    ourliewurlies,    and     open 

to   pull   down  the  old   house   of  steek  hems"  most  thoroughly  re- 

Lauriston  !    Thepresent  generation  moved  !— JKo6  Roy,  vol.  viii.  pp.  29- 

can  judge  of  Mr.  Burn's  apprecia-  30.     Fortunately    the    tower  and 

tion  of   ancient   Architecture   by  crown  were  untouched,  and   the 

looking  at  the  outside  of  St.  Giles,  interior,  which  was  injured  in  a  less 

Edinburgh.— -It  was  given  over  to  degree,  has,  through  the  liberality 

his   tender   mercies    in    1829,    a  and  good  taste  of  the  late  William 

picturesque  old  building,  and  it  left  Chambers,    been    restored  to  its 

his  hands  in  1834  a  bit  of  solid  original  statelinoss. 
well-jointed   mason-work  with  all 


78  JOURNAL.  [DEO. 

dine  merrily,  and  thank  God,  and  bid  care  rest  till  to-morrow. 
How  suddenly  things  are  overcast,  and  how  suddenly  the  sun 
can  break  out  again !  On  the  31st  October  I  was  dreaming  as 
little  of  such  a  thing  as  at  present,  when  behold  there  came 
tidings  which  threatened  a  total  interruption  of  the  amicable 
settlement  of  my  affairs,  and  menaced  my  own  personal 
liberty.  In  less  than  a  month  we  are  enabled  to  turn  chase 
on  my  persecutors,  who  seem  in  a  fair  way  of  losing  their 
recourse  upon  us.  Non  noUs,  Domine. 

December  5. — I  did  a  good  deal  in  the  way  of  preparing 
my  new  tale,  and  resolved  to  make  something  out  of  the  story 
of  Harry  Wynd.  The  North  Inch  of  Perth  would  bo  no  bad 
name,  and  it  may  be  possible  to  make  a  difference  betwixt 
the  old  Highlander  and  him  of  modern  date.  The  fellow  that 
swam  the  Tay,  and  escaped,  would  be  a  good  ludicrous 
character.  But  I  have  a  mind  to  try  him  in  the  serious  line 
of  tragedy.  Miss  Baillie  has  made  the  Ethling l  a  coward  by 
temperament,  and  a  hero  when  touched  by  filial  affection. 
Suppose  a  man's  nerves  supported  by  feelings  of  honour,  or 
say  by  the  spur  of  jealousy  supporting  him  against  con- 
stitutional timidity  to  a  certain  point,  then  suddenly  giving 
way, — I  think  something  tragic  might  be  produced.  James 
Ballantyne's  criticism  is  too  much  moulded  upon  the  general 
taste  of  novels  to  admit,  I  fear,  this  species  of  reasoning.  But 
what  can  one  do  ?  I  am  hard  up  as  far  as  imagination  is  con- 
cerned, yet  the  world  calls  for  novelty.  Well,  1 11  try  my 
brave  coward  or  cowardly  bravo  man.  Vakat  quanttm. 
Being  a  teind  day,  remained  at  home,  adjusting  my  ideas 
on  this  point  until  one  o'clock,  then  walked  as  far  as  Mr. 
CadelTs.  Finally,  went  to  dine  at  Hawkhill  with  Lord  and 
Lady  Binning.  Party  were  Lord  Chief-Commissioner,  Lord 
Chief-Baron,  Solicitor,  John  "Wilson,  Lord  Corehouse.  The 
right  was  so  dark  and  stormy  that  I  was  glad  when  we  got 
upon  the  paved  streets* 

1  See  Ethwald,  Plays  on  the  Pcusion*,  voL  ii,  Lond.  1802. 


1827.]  JOTJKKAL.  79 

December  6. — Corrected  proofs  and  went  to  Court.  Bad 
news  of  Ahab's  case.  I  hope  he  won't  beat  us  after  all. 
It  would  be  mortifying  to  have  them  paid  in  full,  as  they 
must  be  while  better  men  must  lie  by.  Spero  meliora. 

I  think  that  copy  of  Beard's  Judgments  is  the  first  book 
which  I  have  voluntarily  purchased  for  nearly  two  years. 
So  I  am  cured  of  one  folly  at  least.1 

December  7. — Being  a  blank  day  in  the  rolls,  I  stayed  at 
home  and  wrote  four  leaves — not  very  freely  or  happily ;  I 
was  not  in  the  vein.  Plague  on  it !  Stayed  at  home  the 
whole  day.  There  is  one  thing  I  believe  peculiar  to  me — 
I  work,  that  is,  meditate  for  the  purpose  of  working,  best, 
when  I  have  a  quasi  engagement  with  some  other  book  for 
example.  When  I  find  myself  doing  ill,  or  like  to  come  to 
a  stand-still  in  writing,  I  take  up  some  slight  book,  a  novel 
or  the  like,  and  usually  have  not  read  far  ere  my  difficulties 
are  removed,  and  I  am  ready  to  write  again.  There  must 
be  two  currents  of  ideas  going  on  in  my  mind  at  the  same 
time,2  or  perhaps  the  slighter  occupation  serves  like  a 
woman's  wheel  or  stocking  to  ballast  the  mind,  as  it  were, 
by  preventing  the  thoughts  from  wandering,  and  so  give  the 
deeper  current  the  power  to  flow  undisturbed.  I  always 
laugh  when  I  hear  people  say,  Do  one  thing  at  once.  I  have 
done  a  dozen  things  at  once  all  my  life.  Dined  with  the 
family.  After  dinner  Lockhart's  proofs  came  in  and 
occupied  me  for  the  evening.  I  wish  I  have  not  made  that 
article  too  long,  and  Lockhart  will  not  snip  away. 

December  8. — Went  to  Court  and  stayed  there  a  good 
while.  Made  some  consultations  in  the  Advocates'  Library, 
not  furiously  to  the  purpose. 

Court  in  the  morning.  Sent  off  Lockhart's  proof,  which 
I  hope  will  do  him  some  good.  A  precatory  letter  from 

•L  Alluding  to  an  entry  in   the  is    still   in    the    Abbotsford    Lib- 

JournaZ,  that  he  had  expended  30s,  raxy. 

in  the  purchase  of  the  Theatre  of  a  See  note  to  May  30,  1827,  vol.  i 

God?s  Judgments,  1612,  a  book  which  p.  398. 


80  JOUENAL.  [DEC. 

Gillies.  I  must  do  Moli&re  for  him,  I  suppose ;  but  it  is 
wonderful  that  knowing  the  situation  I  am  in,  the  poor 
fellow  presses  so  hard.  Sure,  I  am  pulling  for  life,  and  it  is 
hard  to  ask  me  to  pull  another  man's  oar  as  well  as  my  own. 
Yet,  if  I  can  give  a  little  help, 

"We'll  get  a  blessing  wi9  the  lave, 
And  never  miss  V 1 

Went  to  John  Murray's,  where  were  Sir  John  Dalrymple  and 
Lady,  Sir  John  Cayley,  Mr.  Hope  Vere,  and  Lady  Elizabeth 
Vere,  a  sister  of  the  Marquis  of  Tweeddale,  and  a  pleasant 
sensible  woman.  Some  turn  for  antiquity  too  she  shows — 
and  spoke  a  good  deal  of  the  pictures  at  Tester.  Henderland 
was  there  too.  Mrs.  John  Murray  made  some  very  agree- 
able music. 

December  9. — I  set  hard  to  work,  and  had  a  long  day 
with  my  new  tale.  I  did  about  twelve  leaves.  Cadoll 
came  in,  and  we  talked  upon  the  great  project  of  buying  in 
the  copyrights.  He  is  disposed  to  finesse  a  little  about  it,  but 
I  do  not  think  it  will  do  much  good ;  all  the  fine  arguments 
will  fly  off  and  people  just  bid  or  not  bid  as  the  report  of 
the  trade  may  represent  the  speculation  as  a  good  or  bad 
one.  I  daresay  they  will  reach  £7000 ;  but  £8000  won't 
stop  us,  and  that  for  books  over-printed  so  lately  and  to 
such  an  extent  is  a  pro-di-gi-ous  price ! 

December  10. — I  corrected  proofs  and  forwarded  copy. 
Went  out  for  an  hour  to  Lady  J.  S,  Home  and  dozed  a 
little,  half  stupefied  with  a  cold  in  my  head — made  up  thi& 
Journal,  however.  Settled  I  would  go  to  Abbotsford  on  the 
24th  from  Arniston.  Before  that  time  I  trust  the  business 
of  the  copyrights  will  be  finally  settled.  If  they  can  be  had 
on  anything  like  fair  terms,  they  will  give  the  greatest 
chance  I  can  see  of  extricating  my  affairs.  Cadell  seems  to 
be  quite  confident  in  the  advantage  of  making  the  purchase 
upon  almost  any  terms,  and  truly  I  am  of  his  opinion.  If 

1  Burns's  lines  To  a  Mouse. 


1827.J  JOURNAL.  81 

they  get  out  of  Scotland  it  will  not  be  all  I  can  do  that  will 
enable  me  to  write  myself  a  free  man  during  the  space  I 
have  to  remain  in  this  world. 

I  smoked  a  couple  of  cigars  for  the  first  time  since  I 
came  from  the  country ;  and  as  Anne  and  Charles  went  to 
the  play,  I  muddled  away  the  evening  over  my  Sheriff-Court 
processes,  and  despatched  a  hugeous  parcel  to  Will  Scott  at 
Selkirk.  It  is  always  something  off  hand. 

December  11. — "Wrote  a  little,  and  seemed  to  myself  to 
get  on.  I  went  also  to  Court.  On  return,  had  a  formal 
communication  from  Ballantyne,  enclosing  a  letter  from 
Cadell  of  an  unpleasant  tenor.  It  seems  Mr.  Cadell  is 
dissatisfied  with  the  moderate  success  of  the  First  Series  of 
Chronicles  ;x  and  disapproves  of  about  half  the  volume 
already  written  of  the  Second  Series,  obviously  rueing  his 
engagement.  I  have  replied  that  I  was  not  fool  enough  to 
suppose  that  my  favour  with  the  public  could  last  for  ever, 
and  was  neither  shocked  nor  alarmed  to  find  that  it  had 
ceased  now,  as  cease  it  must  one  day  soon;  it  might  be 
inconvenient  for  me  in  some  respects,  but  I  would  be  quite 
contented  to  resign  the  bargain  rather  than  that  more  loss 
should  be  incurred.  I  saw,  I  told  them,  no  other  receipt  than 
lying  lea  for  a  little,  while  taking  a  fallow-break  to  relieve 
my  imagination,  which  may  be  esteemed  nearly  cropped  out. 
I  can  make  shift  for  myself  amid  this  failure  of  prospects  j 
but  I  think  both  Cadell  and  J.  B.  will  be  probable  sufferers. 
However,  they  are  very  right  to  speak  their  mind,  and  may 
be  esteemed  tolerably  good  representatives  of  the  popular 
taste.  So  I  really  think  their  censure  may  be  a  good  reason 
for  laying  aside  this  work,  though  I  may  preserve  some  part 
of  it  till  another  day, 

1  Ante,  p.  59.    The  book  had  only  viz.  :  My  Aunt  Margaret's  Mirror 

been  published  two  months.     "The  and  the  Laird's  Jock  appeared  in 

Second  Series,"  when  published  in  the  Keepsake  of   1828,   and  were 

the  following  year,  contained  St.  afterwards  included  in  vol.  xli.  of 

Valentine's  JBve,  or  the  Fair  Maid  of  the  Magnum  Opus. 
Perth ;  the  two  stories  objected  to, 

VOL.  II.  F 


82  JOURNAL.  [DEC. 

December  12. — Eeconsidered  the  probable  downfall  of  my 
literary  reputation.  I  am  so  constitutionally  indifferent  to 
the  censure  or  praise  of  the  world,  that  never  having  aban- 
doned myself  to  the  feelings  of  self-conceit  which  my  great 
success  was  calculated  to  inspire,  I  can  look  with  the  most 
unshaken  firmness  upon  the  event  as  far  as  my  own  feelings 
are  concerned.  If  there  be  any  great  advantage  in  literary 
reputation,  I  have  had  it,  and  I  certainly  do  not  care  for 
losing  it. 

They  cannot  say  but  what  I  had  the  crown.  It  is  un- 
happily inconvenient  for  my  affairs  to  lay  by  my  [work] 
just  now,  and  that  is  the  only  reason  why  I  do  not  give  up 
literary  labour;  but,  at  least,  I  will  not  push  the  losing 
game  of  novel-writing.  I  will  take  back  the  sheets  now 
objected  to,  but  it  cannot  be  expected  that  I  am  to  write 
upon  return.  I  cannot  but  think  that  a  little  thought  will 
open  some  plan  of  composition  which  may  promise  novelty 
at  the  least.  I  suppose  I  shall  hear  from  or  see  these 
gentlemen  to-day ;  if  not,  I  must  send  for  them  to-morrow. 
How  will  this  affect  the  plan  of  going  shares  with  Cadell 
in  the  novels  of  earlier  and  happier  date  ?  Very  much,  1 
doubt,  seeing  I  cannot  lay  down  the  cash.  But  surely  the 
trustees  may  find  some  mode  of  providing  this,  or  else  with 
cash  to  secure  these  copyrights.  At  any  rate,  I  will  gain  a 
little  time  for  thought  and  discussion. 

"Went  to  Court.  At  returning  settled  with  Chief-Com- 
missioner that  I  should  receive  him  on  26th  December  at 
Abbotsford. 

After  all,  may  there  not  be,  in  this  failure  to  please,  some 
reliques  of  the  very  unfavourable  matters  in  which  I  have 
been  engaged  of  late, — the  threat  of  imprisonment,  the 
resolution  to  become  insolvent  ?  I  cannot  feel  that  there  is. 
What  I  suffer  by  is  the  difficulty  of  not  setting  my  foot  upon 
such  ground  as  I  have  trod  before,  and  thus  instead  of 
attaining  novelty  I  lose  spirit  and  nature.  On  the  other 


1827.]  JOURNAL.  83 

hand,  who  would  thank  me  for  "  repented  sheets  "  ?  Here  is 
a  good  joke  enough,  lost  to  all  who  have  not  known  the 
Clerk's  table  before  the  Jurisdiction  Act. 

My  two  learned  Thebans  are  arrived,  and  departed  after 
a  long  consultation.  They  deprecated  a  fallow-break  as 
ruin.  I  set  before  them  my  own  sense  of  the  difficulties 
and  risks  in  which  I  must  be  involved  by  perseverance,  and 
showed  them  I  could  occupy  my  own  time  as  well  for  six 
months  or  a  twelvemonth,  and  let  the  public  gather  an 
appetite.  They  replied  (and  therein  was  some  risk)  that 
the  expectation  would  in  that  case  be  so  much  augmented 
that  it  would  be  impossible  for  any  mortal  to  gratify  it.  To 
this  is  to  be  added  what  they  did  not  touch  upon — the  risk 
of  being  thrust  aside  altogether,  which  is  the  case  with  the 
horses  that  neglect  keeping  the  lead  when  once  they  have 
got  it.  Finally,  we  resolved  the  present  work  should  go  on, 
leaving  out  some  parts  of  the  Introduction  which  they  object 
to.  They  are  good  specimens  of  the  public  taste  in  general ; 
and  it  is  far  best  to  indulge  and  yield  to  them,  unless  I  was 
very,  very  certain  that  I  was  right  and  they  wrong.  Besides, 
I  am  not  afraid  of  their  being  hypercritical  in  the  circum- 
stances, being  both  sensible  men,  and  not  inclined  to  sacrifice 
chance  of  solid  profit  to  the  vagaries  of  critical  taste.  So 
the  word  is  "  as  you  were." 

December  13. — A  letter  from  Lockhart  announcing  that 
Murray  of  Albemarle  Street  would  willingly  give  me  my 
own  terms  for  a  volume  on  the  subject  of  planting  and  land- 
scape gardening.  This  will  amuse  me  very  much  indeed. 
Another  proposal  invites  me,  on  the  part  of  Colburn,  to  take 
charge  of  the  G-arrick  papers.  The  papers  are  to  be  edited 
by  Colman,  and  then  it  is  proposed  to  me  to  write  a  life  of 
Garrick  in  quarto.1  Lockhart  refused  a  thousand  pounds 

J  The  Garrick  papers  were  pub-  trated  with  notes  and  Memoir,  2 
lished  under  the  title  Private  Corre-  vols.  4to,  London,  1 831-32.  [Edited 
qpondence  of  David  Qarridc,  illus-  by  James  Boaden,] 


84  JOITKKA.L.  [DEC. 

which  were  offered,  and  carte  Uancke  was  then  sent.  But  I 
will  not  "boat.1  My  book  and  dolman's  would  run  each 
other  down.  It  is  an  attempt  to  get  more  from  the  public 
out  of  the  subject  than  they  will  endure.  Besides,  my  name 
would  be  only  useful  in  the  way  of  puff,  for  I  really  know 
nothing  of  the  subject.  So  I  will  refuse;  that's  flat 

Having  turned  over  my  thoughts  with  some  anxiety 
about  the  important  subject  of  yesterday,  I  think  we  have 
done  for  the  best.  If  I  can  rally  this  time,  as  I  did  in  the 
Crusaders,  why,  there  is  the  old  trade  open  yet.  If  not, 
retirement  will  come  gracefully  after  my  failure.  I  must 
get  the  return  of  the  sales  of  the  three  or  four  last  novels, 
so  as  to  judge  what  style  of  composition  has  best  answered. 
Add  to  this,  giving  up  just  now  loses  £4000  to  the  trustees, 
which  they  would  not  understand,  whatever  may  be  my  nice 
authorial  feelings.  And  moreover,  it  ensures  the  purchase 
of  the  copyrights — i.e.  almost  ensures  them. 

December  14. — Summoned  to  pay  arrears  of  our  unhappy 
Oil  Gas  concern — £140 — which  I  performed  by  draft  on 
Mr.  CadeU.  This  will  pinch  a  little  close,  but  it  is  a  debt 
of  honour,  and  must  be  paid.  The  public  will  never  bear  a 
public  man  who  shuns  either  to  draw  his  purse  or  his  sword, 
when  there  is  an  open  and  honest  demand  on  him. 

December  15. — Worked  in  the  morning  on  the  shoots 
which  are  to  be  cancelled,  and  on  the  Tale  of  St.  Valentine's 
J@ve — a  good  title,  by  the  way.  Had  the  usual  quantum  suffidl 
of  the  Court,  which,  if  it  did  not  dissipate  one's  attention  so 
much,  is  rather  an  amusement  than  otherwise.  But  the  plague 
is  to  fix  one's  attention  to  the  sticking  point,  after  it  has 
been  squandered  about  for  two  or  three  hours  in  such  a  way. 
It  keeps  one,  however,  in  the  course  and  stream  of  actual 
life,  which  is  a  great  advantage  to  a  literary  man. 

I  missed  an  appointment,  for  which  I  am  very  sorry. 
It  was  about  our  Advocates'  Library,  which  is  to  be  rebuilt. 
During  all  my  life  we  have  mismanaged  the  largo  funds 

1  ».e.  to  embark. 


1827.]  JOUENAL.  85 

expended  on  the  rooms  of  our  library,  totally  mistaking  the 
objects  for  which,  a  library  is  built  ;  and  instead  of  taking  a 
general  and  steady  view  of  the  subject,  patching  up  discon- 
nected and  ill-sized  rooms,  totally  unequal  to  answer  the 
accommodation  demanded,  and  bestowing  an  absurd  degree 
of  ornament  and  finery  upon  the  internal  finishing.  All 
this  should  be  reversed  :  the  new  library  should  be  calculated 
upon  a  plan  which  ought  to  suffice  for  all  the  nineteenth 
century  at  least,  and  for  that  purpose  should  admit  of  being 
executed  progressively  ;  then  there  should  be  no  ornament 
other  than  that  of  strict  architectural  proportion,  and  the 
rooms  should  be  accessible  one  through  another,  but  divided 
with  so  many  partitions,  as  to  give  ample  room  for  shelves. 
These  small  rooms  would  also  facilitate  the  purposes  of 
study.  Something  of  a  lounging  room  would  not  be  amiss, 
which  might  serve  for  meetings  of  Faculty  occasionally.  I 
ought  to  take  some  interest  in  all  this,  and  I  do.  So  I  will 
attend  the  next  meeting  of  committee.  Dined  at  Baron 
Hume's,  and  met  General  Campbell  of  Lochnell,  and  his  lady. 

December  16.  —  Worked  hard  to-day  and  only  took  a  half 
hour's  walk  with  Hector  Macdonald!  Colin  Mackenzie 
unwell  ;  his  asthma  seems  rather  to  increase,  notwithstanding 
his  foreign  trip  !  Alas  !  long-seated  complaints  defy  Italian 
climate.  We  had  a  small  party  to  dinner.  Captain  and 
Mrs.  Hamilton,  Davidoff,  Frank  Scott,  Harden,  and  his  chum 
Charles  Baillie,  second  son  of  Mellerstain,  who  seems  a 
clever  young  man.1  Two  or  three  of  the  party  stayed  to 
take  wine  and  water. 

December  17.  —  Sent  off  the  beginning  of  the  Chronicles 
to  Ballantyne.  I  hate  cancels  ;  they  are  a  double  labour. 

Mr.  Cowan,  Trustee  for  Constable's  creditors,  called  in 
the  morning  by  appointment,  and  we  talked  about  the  upset 
price  of  the  copyrights  of  Waverley,  etc.  I  frankly  told 


1  Afterwards  Judge  in  the  Court  of  Session  under  the  title  of  Lord 
Jerviswoode. 


86  JOUENAL.  [Dae. 

that  I  was  so  much  concerned  that  they  should  remain  more 
or  less  under  my  control,  that  I  was  willing,  with  the  advice 
of  my  trustees,  to  offer  a  larger  upset  than  that  of  £4750, 
which  had  been  fixed,  and  that  I  proposed  the  price  set  up 
should  be  £250  for  the  poetry,  Paul's  letters,  etc.,  and 
£5250  for  the  novels,  in  all  £5500  ;  but  that  I  made  this 
proposal  under  the  condition,  that  in  case  no  bidding  should 
ensue,  then  the  copyrights  should  be  mine  so  soon  as  the  sale 
was  adjourned,  without  any  one  being  permitted  to  bid  after 
the  sale.  It  is  to  be  hoped  this  high  upset  price  will 
"Fright  the  fuds 
Of  the  pock-puds." 

This  speculation  may  be  for  good  or  for  evil,  but  it  tends 
incalculably  to  increase  the  value  of  such  copyrights  as 
remain  in  my  own  person ;  and,  if  a  handsome  and  cheap 
edition  of  the  whole,  with  notes,  can  be  instituted  in  con- 
formity with  CadelTs  plan,  it  must  prove  a  mine  of  wealth, 
three-fourths  of  which  will  belong  to  me  or  my  creditors. 
It  is  possible,  no  doubt,  that  the  works  may  lose  their  effect 
on  the  public  mind ;  but  this  must  be  risked,  and  I  think 
the  chances  are  greatly  in  our  favour.  Death  (my  own  1 
mean)  would  improve  the  property,  since  an  edition  with  a 
life  would  sell  like  wildfire.  Perhaps  those  who  read  this 
prophecy  may  shake  their  heads  and  say,  "  Poor  fellow,  he 
little  thought  how  he  should  see  the  public  interest  in  him 
and  his  extinguished  even  during  his  natural  existence/* 
It  may  be  so,  but  I  will  hope  better.  This  I  know,  that  no 
literary  speculation  ever  succeeded  with  mo  but  whore  my 
own  works  were  concerned;  and  that,  on  the  other  hand, 
these  have  rarely  failed.  And  so —  Vogue  la  galbre  I 

Dined  with  the  Lord  Chief-Commissioner,  and  met  Lord 
and  Lady  Binning,  Lord  and  Lady  Abercromby,  Sir  Robert 
O'Callaghan,  etc.  These  dinners  put  off  time  well  enough, 
and  I  write  so  painfully  by  candle-light  that  they  do  not 
greatly  interfere  with  business. 


1827.]  JOTIENAL.  87 

December  18. — Poor  Huntly  Gordon  writes  me  in  despair 
about  £180  of  debt  which  he  has  incurred.  He  wishes  to 
publish  two  sermons  which  I  wrote  for  him  when  he  was 
taking  orders ;  but  he  would  get  little  money  for  them  with- 
out my  name,  and  that  is  at  present  out  of  the  question. 
People  would  cry  out  against  the  undesired  and  unwelcome 
zeal  of  him  who  stretched  out  his  hands  to  help  the  ark 
with  the  best  intentions,  and  cry  sacrilege.  And  yet  they 
would  do  me  gross  injustice,  for  I  would,  if  called  upon,  die 
a  martyr  for  the  Christian  religion  so  completely  is  (in  my 
poor  opinion)  its  divine  origin  proved  by  its  beneficial  effects 
on  the  state  of  society.  Were  we  but  to  name  the  abolition  of 
slavery  and  of  polygamy,  how  much  has  in  these  two  words 
been  granted  to  mankind  by  the  lessons  of  our  Saviour  I1 

December  19. — Wrought  upon  an  introduction  to  the 
notices  which  have  been  recovered  of  George  Bannatyne,2 
author,  or  rather  transcriber,  of  the  famous  Eepository  of 
Scottish  Poetry,  generally  known  by  the  Bannatyne  MS. 
They  are  very  jejune  these  same  notices — a  mere  record  of 
matters  of  business,  putting  forth  and  calling  in  of  sums  of 
money,  and  such  like.  Tet  it  is  a  satisfaction  to  learn  that 
this  great  benefactor  to  the  literature  of  Scotland  lived  a 
prosperous  life,  and  enjoyed  the  pleasures  of  domestic 

1  A  few  days  later,  however,  the  You  may  trust  that  to  the  news- 
following  reply  was  sent: — "Bear  papers. 

Gordon, — As  I  have  no  money  to  "Pray  do  not  think  of  returning 

spare  at  present,  I  find  it  necessary  any  thanks  about  this ;  it  is  enough 

to   make  a  sacrifice   of   my  own  that  I  know  it  is  likely  to  serve  your 

scruples  to  relieve1  you  from  serious  purpose.    But  use  the  funds  arising 

difficulties.    The  enclosed  will  en-  from  this  unexpected  source  with 

title  you  to  deal  with  any  respect-  prudence,  for  such  fountains  do  not 

able  bookseller.    You  must  tell  tho  spring  up  at  every  place  of   the 

history  in  your  own  way  as  shortly  desert.     I  am,  in  haste,  ever  yours 

as  possible.    All  that  is  necessary  most  truly,  Walter  Scott"— Life, 

to  say  is  that  the  discourses  were  vol.  ix.  p.  205. 

written  to  oblige  a  young  friend,  2  Issued  in  1829  as  No.  33  of  the 

It  is  understood  my  name  is  not  to  Bannatyne  Club  Books.    Memorials 

be  put  in  the  title-page,  or  blazed  of   George   Bannatyne,    1545-1608, 

at    full   length    in    the    preface,  with  Memoir  by  Sir  Walter  Scott. 


88  JOURNAL.  [DEC. 

society,  and,  in  a  time  peculiarly  perilous,  lived  unmolested 
and  died  in  quiet. 

At  eleven  o'clock  I  had  an  appointment  with  a  person 
unknown.    A  youth  had  written  me,  demanding  an  audience. 
I  excused  myself  by  alleging  the  want  of  leisure,  and  my 
dislike  to  communicate  with  a  person  perfectly  unknown  on 
unknown  business.    The  application  was  renewed,  and  with 
an  ardour  which  left  me  no  alternative,  so  I  named  eleven 
this  day.    I  am  too  much  accustomed  to  the  usual  cant  of 
the  followers  of  the  muses  who  endeavour  by  flattery  to 
make  their  bad  stale  butter  make  amends  for  their  stinking 
fish.    I  am  pretty  well  acquainted  with  that  sort  of  thing. 
I  have  had  madmen  on  my  hands  too,  and  once  nearly  was 
Kotzebued  by  a  lad  of  the  name  of  Sharpe.    All  this  gave 
me  some  curiosity,  but  it  was  lost  in  attending  to  the  task  1 
was  engaged  in;  when  the  door  opened  and  in  walked  a 
young  woman  of  middling  rank  and  rather  good  address,  but 
something  resembling  our  secretary  David  Laing,  if  dressed 
in  female  habiliments.      There  was  the  awkwardness  of  a 
moment  in  endeavouring  to  make  me  understand  that  she  was 
the  visitor  to  whom  I  had  given  the  assignation.    Then 
there  were  a  few  tears  and  sighs.    "  I  fear,  Madam,  this  relates 
to  some  tale  of  great  distress."    "  By  no  means,  sir ; "  and 
her  countenance  cleared  up.    Still  there  was  a  pause;  at 
last  she  asked  if  it  were  possible  for  her  to  see  the  king.     I 
apprehended  then  that  she  was  a  little  mad,  and  proceeded 
to  assure  her  that  the  king's  secretary  received  all  such 
applications  as  were  made  to  his  Majesty,  and  disposed  of 
them.     Then  came  the  mystery.     She  wished  to  relieve 
herself  from  a  state  of  bondage,  and  to  be  rendered  capable 
of  maintaining  herself  by  acquiring  knowledge.    I  inquired 
what  were  her  immediate  circumstances,  and  found  she  resided 
with  an  uncle  and  aunt.    Not  thinking  the  case  without 
hope,  I  preached  the  old  doctrine  of  patience  and  resigna- 
tion, I  suppose  with  the  usual  effect. 


1827.]  JOURNAL.  89 

Went  to  the  Bannatyne  Club;  and  on  the  way  met 
Cadell  out  of  breath,  coining  to  say  he  had  bought  the 
copyrights  after  a  smart  contention.  Of  this  to-morrow. 
There  was  little  to  do  at  the  club. 

Afterwards  dined  with  Lord  and  Lady  Abercromby, 
where  I  met  my  old  and  kind  friend,  Major  Buchanan  of 
Cambusmore.  His  father  was  one  of  those  from  whom  I 
gained  much  information  about  the  old  Highlanders,  and  at 
whose  house  I  spent  many  merry  days  in  my  youth.1  The 

last  time  I  saw  old  Cambusmore  was  in .    He  sat  up 

an  hour  later  on  the  occasion,  though  then  eighty-five.  I 
shall  never  forget  him,  and  was  delighted  to  see  the  Major, 
who  comes  seldom  to  town. 

December  20. — Anent  the  copyrights — the  pock-puds  were 
not  frightened  by  our  high  price.  They  came  on  briskly, 
four  or  five  bidders  abreast,  and  went  on  till  the  lot  was 
knocked  down  to  Cadell  at  £8400 ;  a  very  large  sum  cer- 
tainly, yet  he  has  been  offered  profit  on  it  already.  For  my 
part  I  think  the  loss  would  have  been  very  great  had  we  suf- 
fered these  copyrights  to  go  from  those  which  we  possessed 
They  would  have  been  instantly  stereotyped  and  forced  on 
the  market  to  bring  home  the  price,  and  by  this  means 
depreciated  for  ever,  and  all  ours  must  have  shared  the 
same  fate.  Whereas,  husbanded  and  brought  out  with  care, 
they  cannot  fail  to  draw  in  the  others  in  the  same  series,  and 
thus  to  be  a  sure  and  respectable  source  of  profit.  Consi- 
dered in  this  point  of  view,  even  if  they  were  worth  only 
the  £8400  to  others,  they  were  £10,000  to  us.  The  large- 
ness of  the  price  arising  from  the  activity  of  the  contest 
only  serves  to  show  the  value  of  the  property.2  Had 
at  the  same  time  the  agreeable  intelligence  that  the 

1  It  was  thus  that   the  scenery  compose  the  Lady  of  the  Lake  was 

of    Loch    Katrine    came     to     be  a  labour  of  love,  and  no  less  so  to 

so  associated  with  the  recollection  recall  the  manners  and  incidents  in- 

of  many  a  dear  friend  and  merry  troduced. — Life,  vol.  i.  p.  296. 

expedition  of  former  days,  that  to  2  See  note,  Jan,  8, 1828,  pp.  107-8- 


90  JOUKKTAL.  [DEC. 

octavo  sets,  which  were  bought  by  Hurst  and  Company  at  a 
depreciated  rate,  are  now  rising  in  the  market,  aud  that  in- 
stead of  1500  sold,  they  have  sold  upwards  of  2000  copies, 
This  mass  will  therefore  in  all  probability  be  worn  away  in 
a  few  months  and  then  our  operations  may  commence.  On 
the  whole,  I  am  greatly  pleased  with  the  acquisition.  If 
this  first  series  be  worth  £8400,  the  remaining  books  must 
be  worth  £10,000,  and  then  there  is  Napoleon,  which  is 
gliding  away  daily,  for  which  I  would  not  take  the  same 
sum,  which  would  come  to  £24,200  in  all  for  copyrights; 
besides  £20,000  payable  by  insurance.1  Add  the  value  of 
my  books  and  furniture,  plate,  etc.,  there  would  be  £150,000. 
So  this  may  be  considered  my  present  progress.  There  will 
still  remain  upwards  of  £35,000. 

"  Heaven's  arm  strike  mth  us  —  'tis  a  fearful  odds."  2 
Yet  with  health  and  continued  popularity  there  are  chances 
in  my  favour. 

Dine  at  James  Ballantyne's,  and  happy  man  is  ho  at  the 
result  of  the  sale  ;  indeed  it  must  have  been  the  making  or 
marring  of  him.  Sir  Henry  Steuart  there,  who  "  fooled  mo 
to  the  top  of  my  bent." 

December  21.  —  A  very  sweet  pretty-looking  young  lady, 
the  Prima  Donna  of  the  Italian  Opera,  now  performing 
here,  by  name  Miss  Ayton,8  came  to  breakfast  this  morning, 
with  her  father,  (a  bore,  after  the  manner  of  all  fathers, 
mothers,  aunts,  and  other  chaperons  of  pretty  actresses)! 
Miss  Ayton  talks  very  prettily,  and,  I  daro  say,  sings  beauti- 
fully, though  too  much  in  the  Italian  manner,  I  fear,  to  be 
a  great  favourite  of  mine.  But  I  did  not  hear  her,  being 
called  away  by  the  Clerk's  coach.  I  am  like  Jeremy  in 
love  for  Love*  —  have  a  reasonable  good  oar  for  a  jiy,  but 
your  solos  and  sonatas  give  me  the  spleen. 

1  On  his  <wn  life.  day  intimate  the  "Second  appoar- 


See  Henry  V.,  Aet  iv.  So.  3.         *nce  °f  , 

Donna  of  the  King's  Theatre,  " 

The  Edinburgh  play-bills  of  the        *  By  Congreve—  Act  n.  8c.  7. 


1827.]  JOURNAL.  91 

Called  at  Cadell's,  who  is  still  enamoured  of  his  bargain, 
and  with  good  reason,  as  the  London  booksellers  were  offer- 
ing him  £1000  or  £2000  to  give  it  up  to  them.  He  also 
ascertained  that  all  the  copies  with  which  Hurst  and 
Kobinson  loaded  the  market  would  be  off  in  a  half  year. 
Make  us  thankful!  the  weather  is  clearing  to  windward. 
Cadell  is  cautious,  steady,  and  hears  good  counsel;  and 
Gibson  quite  inclined,  were  I  too  confident,  to  keep  a  good 
look-out  ahead. 

December  22  — Public  affairs  look  awkward.  The  present 
Ministry  are  neither  Whig  nor  Tory,  and,  divested  of  the 
support  of  either  of  the  great  parties  of  the  State,  stand 
supported  by  the  will  of  the  sovereign  alone.  This  is  not 
constitutional,  and  though  it  may  be  a  temporary  augmenta- 
tion of  the  sovereign's  personal  influence,  yet  it  cannot  but 
prove  hurtful  to  the  Crown  upon  the  whole,  by  tending  to 
throw  that  responsibility  on  the  Sovereign  of  which  the  law 
has  deprived  him.  I  pray  to  God  I  may  be  wrong,  but  an 
attempt  to  govern  par  "bascule — "by  trimming  betwixt  the 
opposite  parties — is  equally  unsafe  for  the  crown  and  detri- 
mental to  the  country,  and  cannot  do  for  a  long  time.  The 
fact  seems  to  be  that  Lord  Goderich,  a  well-meaning  and  timid 
man,  finds  himself  on  a  precipice — that  his  head  is  grown 
dizzy  and  he  endeavours  to  cling  to  the  person  next  him. 
This  person  is  Lord  Lansdowne,  who  he  hopes  may  support 
him  in  the  House  of  Lords  against  Lord  Grey,  so  he  proposes 
to  bring  Lord  Lansdowne  into  the  Cabinet.  Lord  G.  resigns, 
and  his  resignation  is  accepted.  Lord  Harrowby  is  then 
asked  to  place  himself  at  the  head  of  a  new  Administration, 
— declines.  The  tried  abilities  of  Marquis  Wellesley  are  next 
applied  to ;  it  seems  he  also  declines,  and  then  Lord  Goderich 
comes  back,  his  point  about  Lord  Lansdowne  having  failed, 
and  his  threatened  resignation  goes  for  nothing.  This  must 
lower  the  Premier  in  the  eyes  of  every  one.  It  is  plain  the 
K.  will  not  accept  the  Whigs ;  it  is  equally  plain  that  he 


92  JOURNAL.  [DEC. 

has  not  made  a  move  towards  the  Tories,  and  that  with 
a  neutral  administration,  this  country,  hard  ruled  at  any 
time,  can  be  long  governed,  I,  for  one,  cannot  believe.  God 
send  the  good  King,  to  whom  I  owe  so  much,  as  safe  and 
honourable  extrication  as  the  circumstances  render  pos- 
sible.1 

After  Court  Anne  set  out  for  Abbotsford  with  the  Miss 
Kerrs.  I  came  off  at  three  o'clock  to  Arniston,  where  T 
found  Lord  Register  and  lady,  E.  Dundas  and  lady,  Robl. 
Adam  Dundas,  Durham  of  Calderwood  and  lady,  old  and 
young  friends.  Charles  came  with  me. 

December  23. — Went  to  church  to  Borthwick  with  the 
family,  and  heard  a  well-composed,  well-delivered,  sensible 
discourse  from  Mr.  Wright,2  the  clergyman — a  different  sort 
of  person,  I  wot,  from  my  old  half-mad,  half-drunken,  little 
hump-back  acquaintance  Clunie,3  renowned  for  singing  "  Tho 
Auld  Man's  Mear  's  dead,"  and  from  the  circumstance  of  his 
being  once  interrupted  in  his  minstrelsy  by  the  information 
that  his  own  horse  had  died  in  the  stable. 

After  sermon  we  looked  at  the  old  castle,  which  made 
me  an  old  man.  The  castle  was  not  a  bit  older  for  the 
twenty-five  years  which  had  passed  away,  but  the  ruin«  of 
the  visitor  were  very  apparent;  to  climb  up  round  stair- 

1  The  dissolution  of  the  Goderich     much  beloved  and  respected  *  ho 
Cabinet  confirmed  very  soon  these     died  on  13th  March  1855  in  hin 
shrewd  guesses ;   and  Sir  Walter     seventy-first  year. 

anticipated  nothing  but  good  from        3  Rev.  John  Clunie,  Mr.  Wright's 

the  Premiership   of   the  Duke  of  predecessor  in  tho  pariHh,  of  whom 

Wellington.—  Life,  vol.  ix.  p.  186.  many  absurd    stories   were   told, 

2  The  Kev.  Thomas  Wright  was  appears  to  have  boen  an  enthusi- 
minister  of  Borthwick  from  1817  to  astic  lover  of   Scottish  songa,  as 
1841,  when  he  was  deposed  on  the  Burns  in  3  794  saya  it  was  owing  to 
ground   of   alleged   heresy.      His  his  singing  Ca*   the   yowe*  to   ttw 
works,  The  True  Plan  of  a  Living  Howes  so  charmingly  that  he  took 
Temple,  Morning  and  Evening  Sacri-  it  down  from  his  voice,  and  sent 

fice,Farewellto  Time,  MyOldJffouse,  it  to  Mr.  Thomson.—  Currie's  .Zfam, 

etc.,  were  published  anonymously,  vol.  iv,  p.    ICO,    and   Chambers^ 

Mr.  Wright  lived  ia  Edinburgh  for  Scottish  Songs,  2  vols.  Kdin.  1820, 

fourteen  years  after  his  deposition,  p.  269. 


1827.]  JOURNAL.  93 

cases,  to  creep  through  vaults  and  into  dungeons,  were  not 
the  easy  labours  but  the  positive  sports  of  my  younger  years ; 
but  that  time  is  gone  by,  and  I  thought  it  convenient  to 
attempt  no  more  than  the  access  to  the  large  and  beautiful 
hall  in  which,  as  it  is  somewhere  described,  an  armed  horse- 
man might  brandish  his  lance.  The  feeling  of  growing 
and  increasing  inability  is  painful  to  one  like  me,  who 
boasted,  in  spite  of  my  infirmity,  great  boldness  and  dex- 
terity in  such  feats;  the  boldness  remains,  but  hand  and 
foot,  grip  and  accuracy  of  step,  have  altogether  failed  me  ; 
the  spirit  is  willing  but  the  flesh  is  weak,  and  so  I  must 
retreat  into  the  invalided  corps  and  tell  them  of  my  former 
exploits,  which  may  very  likely  pass  for  lies.  We  drove 
to  Dalhousie  Castle,  where  the  gallant  Earl,  who  had  done 
so  much  to  distinguish  the  British  name  in  all  and  every 
quarter  of  the  globe,  is  repairing  the  castle  of  his  ancestors, 
which  of  yore  stood  a  siege  against  John  of  Gaunt.  I  was 
Lord  Dalhousie's  companion  at  school,  where  he  was  as 
much  beloved  by  his  companions  as  he  has  been  ever 
respected  by  his  companions-in-arms,  and  the  people  over 
whom  he  has  been  deputed  to  exercise  the  authority  of  his 
sovereign.  He  was  always  steady,  wise,  and  generous. 
The  old  Castle  of  Dalhousie — potiics  Dalwolsey  —  was 
mangled  by  a  fellow  called,  I  believe,  Douglas,  who  de- 
stroyed, as  far  as  in  him  lay,  its  military  and  baronial  char- 
acter, and  roofed  it  after  the  fashion  of  a  poor-house.  The 
architect.  Burn,  is  now  restoring  and  repairing  in  the  old 
taste,  and  I  think  creditably  to  his  own  feeling.  God  bless 
the  roof-tree  1 

We  returned  home  through  the  Temple  banks  by  the 
side  of  the  South  Esk,  where  I  had  the  pleasure  to  see  that 
Robert  Dundas  is  laying  out  his  woods  with  taste,  and 
managing  them  with  care.  His  father  and  uncle  took 
notice  of  me  when  I  was  a  "  fellow  of  no  mark  or  likeli- 
hood." and  I  am  always  happy  in  finding  myself  in  the  old 


94  JOUENAL.  [DEC. 

oak  room  at  Arniston,  where  I  have  drunk  many  a  merry 
bottle,  and  in  the  fields  where  I  have  seen  many  a  hare 
killed. 

December  24. — Left  Arniston  after  breakfast  and  arrived 
to  dinner  at  Abbotsford. 

My  reflections  on  entering  my  own  gate  were  of  a  very 
different  and  more  pleasing  cast  than  those  with  which  I  left 
my  house  about  six  weeks  ago.  I  was  then  in  doubt  whether 
I  should  fly  my  country  or  become  avowedly  bankrupt,  and 
surrender  my  library  and  household  furniture,  with  tin* 
liferent  of  my  estate,  to  sale.  A  man  of  the  world  will  say 
I  had  better  done  so.  ISTo  doubt  had  I  taken  this  course  at 
once,  I  might  have  employed  the  £25,000  which  I  made 
since  the  insolvency  of  Constable  and  Eobinson's  houses 
in  compounding  my  debts.  But  I  could  not  have  slept 
sound  as  I  now  can,  under  the  comfortable  impression 
of  receiving  the  thanks  of  my  creditors  and  the  conscious 
feeling  of  discharging  my  duty  like  a  mau  of  houotxr  and 
honesty.  I  see  before  me  a  long  tedious  and  dark  J>ath, 
but  it  leads  to  true  fame  and  stainless  reputation.  If  t^jlie 
in  the  harrows,  as  is  very  likely,  I  shall  die  with  honour ; 
if  I  achieve  my  task  I  shall  have  the  thanks  of  all  concerned, 
and  the  approbation  of  my  own  conscience.  And  so  1 
think  I  can  fairly  face  the  return  of  Christmas  Day. 

December  25. — I  drove  over  to  Huntly  Burn,  and  saw 
the  plantation  which  is  to  be  called  Janeswood,  iu  honour 
of  my  daughter-in-law.  All  looking  well  and  iu  order. 
Before  dinner,  arrived  Mrs.  George  Ellis  and  her  nephew 
and  niece,  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Charles  Ellis,  whom  I  was  delighted 
to  see,  as  there  are  a  thousand  kind  recollections  of  old  days. 
Mrs.  George  ]Jllis  is  less  changed  in  manner  and  appear- 
ance than  any  one  I  know.  The  gay  and  light-hearted  have 
in  that  respect  superiority  over  those  who  are  of  a  deeper 
mould  and  a  heavier.  There  is  something  even  in  the 
slightness  and  elasticity  of  person  which  outlasts  the 


1827  ]  JOUENAL.  95 

ponderous  strength  which  is  borne  down  by  its  own  weight. 
Colonel  Ellis  is  an  enthusiastic  soldier :  and,  though  young, 
served  in  Spain  and  at  Waterloo. 

"  And  so  we  held  our  Christmastide 
With  mirth  and  burly  cheer." 

December  26. — Colonel  Ellis  and  I  took  a  pretty  long 
walk  round  by  the  glen,  etc.,  where  I  had  an  extraordinary 
escape  from  the  breaking  down  of  a  foot-bridge  as  I  put  my 
foot  upon  it.  I  luckily  escaped  either  breaking  my  leg  by 
its  passing  through  the  bridge  in  so  awkward  a  manner,  or 
tearing  it  by  some  one  of  the  hundred  rusty  nails  through 
which  it  fell.  However,  I  was  not,  thanks  to  Heaven,  hurt 
in  the  slightest  degree.  Tom  Purdie,  who  had  orders  to 
repair  the  bridge  long  since,  was  so  scandalised  at  the  con- 
sequence of  his  negligence  that  the  bridge  is  repaired  by 
the  time  I  am  writing  this.  But  how  the  noiseless  step 
of  Tate  dogs  us  in  our  most  seeming  safe  and  innocent 
sports. 

On  returning  home  we  were  joined  by  the  Lord  Chief- 
Commissioner,  the  Lord  Chief  Baron,  and  William  Clerk, 
of  gentlemen;  and  of  ladies,  Miss  Adam  and  young  Miss 
Thomson  of  Charlton.  Also  the  two  Miss  Kerrs,  Lord 
Bobert's  daughters,  and  so  behold  us  a  gallant  Christmas 
party,  full  of  mirth  and  harmony.  Moreover,  Captain  John 
Ferguson  came  over  from  Huntly  Burn,  so  we  spent  the 
day  jocundly.  I  intend  to  take  a  holiday  or  two  while 
these  friends  are  about  us.  I  have  worked  hard  enough 

to  merit  it,  and 

" Maggie  -will  not  sleep 

For  that,  ere  summer." l 

December  27. — This  morning  we  took  a  drive  up  the 
Yarrow  in  great  force,  and  perambulated  the  Duchess's 
Walk  with  all  the  force  of  our  company.  The  weather 
was  delightful,  the  season  being  considered ;  and  Newark 

1  See  Burns's  "  Auld  Farmer's  New-year  Salutation." 


96  JOURNAL.  [Disc 

Castle,  amid  its  leafless  trees,  resembled  a  dear  old  man 
who  smiles  upon  the  ruins  which  time  has  spread  around 
him.  It  is  looking  more  venerable  than  formerly,  for  the 
repairs  judiciously  undertaken  have  now  assumed  colouring 
congenial  with  the  old  walls ;  formerly,  they  had  a  raw  and 
patchy  appearance.  I  have  seldom  seen  the  scene  look 
better  even  when  summer  smiled  upon  it. 

I  have  a  letter  from  James  Hogg,  the  Ettrick  Shepherd, 
asking  me  to  intercede  with  the  Duke  of  Buccleuch  about 
his  farm,1  He  took  this  burthen  upon  himself  without 
the  advice  of  his  best  friends,  and  certainly  contrary  to 
mine.  From  the  badness  of  the  times  it  would  have  been 
a  poor  speculation  in  any  hands,  especially  in  those  of  a 
man  of  letters,  whose  occupation,  as  well  as  the  society  in 
which  it  involves  him,  [are  so  different].  But  I  hope  this 
great  family  will  be  kind  to  him ;  if  not,  cela  ne  vaudra  pas 
A  moi.  But  I  cannot  and  ought  not  to  look  for  having  the 
same  interest  with  this  gentleman  which  I  exercised  in  the 
days  of  Duke  Charles. 

December  28, — A  demand  from  Cadell  to  prepare  a  re- 
vised copy  of  the  Tales  of  my  Gh*andfa£hcr  for  tho  press." 
I  received  it  with  great  pleasure,  for  I  always  had  private 
hopes  of  that  work.  If  I  have  a  knack  for  anything  it  is 
for  selecting  the  striking  and  interesting  points  out  of  dull 
details,  and  hence,  I  myself  receive  so  much  pleasure  and 
instruction  from  volumes  which  are  generally  reputed  dull 
and  uninteresting.  Give  me  facts,  I  will  find  fancy  for  my- 
self. The  first  two  volumes  of  these  little  tales  are  shorter 
than  the  third  by  seventy  or  eighty  pages.  Cadell  proposes 
to  equalise  them  by  adding  part  of  vol.  ii.  to  voL  i,  and  of 

1  "Mount  Benger,"  of  which  stories  taken  from  Scottuh  History. 
Hogg  had  taken  a  lease  on  his  Humbly  inscribed  to  Hugh  Little- 
marriage,  in  1820,  and  found  that  John,  Esq.,  in  three  volumes, 
he  could  not  make  it  pay.  Printed  for  CadcH  and  Co.,  Edin- 

*  The  first  series  had  just  been  burgh,  Simpkin  and  Marshall,  Lon- 

published  tinder  the  following  title:  don,  and  rTolm  Ounxming,  Dublin, 

Tales  of  a  Grandfather t  leing  1828. 


1827.] 


JOUENAL. 


97 


vol.  iii.  to  vol.  ii.  But  then  voL  i.  ends  with  the  reign  of 
Eobert  Bruce,  voL  ii.  with  the  defeat  of  Hodden;  happy 
points  of  pause  which  I  cannot  think  of  disturbing,  the 
first  in  particular,  for  surely  we  ought  to  close  one  volume 
at  least  of  Scottish  history  at  a  point  which  leaves  the  king- 
dom triumphant  and  happy ;  and,  alas  !  where  do  her  annals 
present  us  with  such  an  era  excepting  after  Bannoekburn  ? 
So  I  will  set  about  to  fill  up  the  volumes,  which  are  too 
short,  with  some  additional  matter,  and  so  diminish  at 
least,  if  we  cannot  altogether  remove,  their  unsightly  in- 
equality in  size.  The  rest  of  the  party  went  to  Dryburgh — 
too  painful  a  place  of  pilgrimage  for  me.1  I  walked  with  the 
Lord  Chief  Commissioner  through  our  grounds  at  Huntly 
Burn,  and  by  taking  the  carriage  now  and  then  I  succeeded 
in  giving  my  excellent  old  friend  enough  of  exercise  without 
any  fatigue.  We  made  our  visit  at  Huntly  Burn. 


1  During  Sir  Walter's  illness  in 
1818-19  Mr  Skene  was  with  him 
at  Abbotsford,  and  he  records  a 
curious  incident  regarding  Dry- 
burgh  which  may  be  given  here : — 
"  For  nearly  two  years  he  had 
to  struggle  for  his  life  with  that 
severe  illness,  which  the  natural 
strength  of  his  constitution  at  length 
proved  sufficient  to  throw  off. 
With  its  disappearance,  although 
restored  to  health,  disappeared 
also  much  of  his  former  vigour 
of  body,  activity,  and  power  of 
undergoing  fatigue,  while  in  per- 
sonal appearance  he  had  advanced 
twenty  years  in  the  downward 
course  of  life ;  his  hair  had  become 
bleached  to  pure  white  and  scanty 
locks ;  the  fire  of  his  eye  quenched ; 
and  his  step,  more  uncertain,  had 
lost  the  vigorous  swinging  gait 
with  which  he  was  used  to  proceed ; 
in  fact,  old  age  had  by  many  years 
anticipated  its  usual  progress  and 
marked  how  severely  he  hadsuffered. 
The  complaint,  that  of  gall-stones, 

VOL.  II. 


was  one  of  extreme  bodily  suffering. 
During  his  severest  attack  he  had 
been  alone  at  Abbotsford  with  his 
daughter  Sophia,bef  ore  her  marriage 
to  Mr.  Lockhart,  and  had  sent  to 
say  that  he  was  desirous  I  should 
come  to  him,  which  I  did,  and  re- 
mained for  ten  days  till  the  attack 
had  subsided.  During  its  course 
the  extreme  violence  of  the  pain 
and  spasmodic  contraction  of  the 
muscles  of  the  stomach  were  such 
that  I  scarcely  expected  the  powers 
of  endurance  could  sustain  him 
through  the  trial,  and  so  much  at 
times  was  he  exhausted  by  it  as  to 
leave  us  in  alarm  as  to  what  the 
result  had  actually  been.  One  night 
I  shall  not  soon  forget :  he  had  been 
frequently  and  severely  ill  during 
the  day,  and  having  been  summoned 
to  his  room  in  the  middle  of  the 
night,  where  his  daughter  was  al- 
ready standing,  the  picture  of  deep 
despair,  at  his  bed-side,  the  attack 
seemed  intense,  and  we  followed 
the  directions  left  by  the  physician 


98 


JOTJKNAL. 


[DK( 


December  29, — Lord  Chief-Baron,  Lord  Chief-Commis 
sioner,  Miss  Adam,  Miss  Anstruther  Thomson,  and  "Willian 
Clerk  left  us.  We  read  prayers,  and  afterwards  walkec 
round  the  terrace. 

I  had  also  time  to  work  hard  on  the  additions  to  the 
Tales  of  a  Grandfather,  vols.  1  and  2.  The  day  passed  plea 
santly  over. 

December  30. — The  Fergusons  came  over,  and  we  wel- 
comed in  the  New  Tear  with  the  usual  forms  of  song  anc 
flagon. 

Looking  hack  to  the  conclusion  of  1826,1  observe  thai 
the  last  year  ended  in  trouble  and  sickness,  with  pressures 
for  the  present  and  gloomy  prospects  for  the  future.  The 
sense  of  a  great  privation  so  lately  sustained,  together  with 
the  very  doubtful  and  clouded  nature  of  my  private  affairs 
pressed  hard  upon  my  mind.  I  am  now  perfectly  well  in 


to  assuage  it.  At  length  it  seemed  to 
subside,  and  he  fell  back  exhausted 
on  the  pillow,  his  eyes  were  closed, 
and  his  countenance  wan  and  livid. 
ApparentlyuWith  corresponding  mis- 
givings, his  daughter  at  one  side  of 
the  bed  and  I  at  the  other  gazed 
for  some  time  intently  and  in  silence 
on  his  countenance,  and  then  glanced 
with  anxious  inquiring  looks  to 
each  other,  till,  at  length,  having 
placed  my  finger  on  his  pulse,  to 
ascertain  whether  it  had  actually 
ceased  to  throb,  I  shall  never  for- 
get the  sudden  beam  which  again 
brightened  his  daughter's  counten- 
ance, and  for  a  moment  dispelled 
the  intense  expression  of  anxiety 
which  had  for  some  time  overspread 
it,  when  Sir  Walter,  aware  of  my 
feeling  his  pulse,  and  the  probable 
purpose,  whispered,  with  a  faint 
voice,  but  without  opening  his  eyes, 
'I  am  not  yd  gone.'  After  some 
time  he  revived,  and  gave  us  a  proof 
of  the  mastery  of  his  mind  over 
the  sufferings  of  the  body.  'Bo 


you  recollect,'  ho  said  to  mo,  *a 
small  round  turret  near  tho  gato  oJ 
the  Monastery  of  Aberbrothwick, 
and  placed  so  as  to  overhang  the 
street  ? '  Upon  answering  that  1 
did  perfectly,  and  that  a  pictur- 
esque little  morsel  it  was,  ho  said, 
'Well,  I  was  over  there  when  a 
mob  had  assembled,  excited  by 
some  purpose,  which  I  do  not  re- 
collect, but  failing  of  their  original 
intention,  they  took  umbrage  at 
the  little  venerable  emblem  of  aris- 
tocracy, which  still  bore  its  weather- 
stained  head  so  conspicuously  aloft, 
and,  resolving  to  humble  it  with  tho 
dust,  they  got  a  stout  hawser  from 
a  vessel  in.  tho  adjoining  harbour, 
which  a  sailor  lad,  climbing  up, 
coiled  round  tho  body  of  tho  little 
turret,  and  the  rabble  seizing  the 
rope  by  both  ends  tugged  and 
pulled,  and  laboured  long  to  strangle 
and  overthrow  the  poor  old  turret, 
but  in  vain,  for  it  withstood  all 
their  endeavours.  Now  that  ia 
exactly  the  condition  of  my  poor 


1827.] 


JOURNAL. 


99 


constitution;  and  though  I  am  still  on  troubled  waters,  yet  I 
am  rowing  with  the  tide,  and  less  than  the  continuation  of  my 
exertions  of  1827  may,  with  God's  blessing,  carry  me  suc- 
cessfully through  1828,  when  we  may  gain  a  more  open  sea,  if 
not  exactly  a  safe  port.  Above  all,  my  children  are  well. 
Sophia's  situation  excites  some  natural  anxiety ;  but  it  is  only 
the  accomplishment  of  the  burthen  imposed  on  her  sex. 
Walter  is  happy  in  the  view  of  his  majority,  on  which 
matter  we  have  favourable  hopes  from  the  Duke  of  Welling- 
ton. Anne  is  well  and  happy.  Charles's  entry  upon  life 
under  the  highest  patronage,  and  in  a  line  for  which  I  hope 
he  is  qualified,  is  about  to  take  place  presently. 

For  all  these  great  blessings  it  becomes  me  well  to  be 
thankful  to  God,  who  in  his  good  time  and  good  pleasure 
sends  us  good  as  well  as  evil. 


stomach :  there  is  a  rope  twisted 
round  it,  and  the  malicious  devils 
are  straining  and  tugging  at  it,  and, 
faith,  I  could  almost  think  that  I 
sometimes  hear  them,  shouting  and 
cheering  each  other  to  their  task, 
and  when  they  are  at  it  I  always 
have  the  little  turret  and  its  tor- 
mentors before  my  eyes.'  He  com- 
plained that  particular  ideas  fixed 
themselves  down  upon  his  mind, 
which  he  had  not  the  power  of 
shaking  off ;  but  this  was,  in  fact, 
the  obvious  consequence  of  the 
quantity  of  laudanum  which  it  was 
necessary  for  him  to  swallow  to 
allay  the  spasms. 

"After  he  had  got  some  repose, 
and  had  become  rather  better  in 
the  morning,  he  said,  with  a  smile 


on  his  countenance,  clf  you  will 
promise  not  to  laugh  at  me  I  have 
a  favour  to  ask.  Do  you  know  I 
have  taken  a  childish  desire  to  see 
the  place  where  I  am  to  be  laid 
when  I  go  home,  which  there  is 
some  probability  may  not  now  be 
long  delayed.  Now,  as  I  cannot  go 
to  Dryburgh  Abbey — that  is  out  of 
the  question  at  present — it  would 
give  me  much  pleasure  if  you 
would  take  a  ride  down  and  bring 
me  a  drawing  of  that  spot,  which 
he  minutely  described  the  position 
of,  and  mentioned  the  exact  point 
where  he  wished  it  drawn,  that  the 
site  of  his  future  grave  might  ap- 
pear. His  wish  was  accordingly 
complied  with." — Reminiscences. 


1828 


JANUARY. 

*4  As  I  walked  by  myself, 
I  talked  to  myself, 
And  thus  myself  said  to  me." 

January  1. — Since  the  20th  November  1825,  for  two 
months  that  is,  and  two  years,  I  have  kept  this  custom  of  a 
diary.  That  it  has  made  me  wiser  or  better  I  dare  not  say, 
but  it  shows  by  its  progress  that  I  am  capable  of  keeping  a 
resolution.  Perhaps  I  should  not  congratulate  myself  on 
this ;  perhaps  it  only  serves  to  show  I  am  more  a  man  of 
method  and  less  a  man  of  originality,  and  have  no  longer 
that  vivacity  of  fancy  that  is  inconsistent  with  regular 
labour.  Still,  should  this  be  the  case,  I  should,  having  lost 
the  one,  be  happy  to  find  myself  still  possessed  of  the 
other. 

January  2. — CCBC&  wuntes  hominum. — My  last  entry 
records  my  punctuality  in  keeping  up  my  diary  hitherto; 
my  present  labour,  commenced  notwithstanding  the  date, 
upon  the  9th  January,  is  to  make  up  my  little  record 
betwixt  the  second  and  that  latter  date.  In  a  word,  I  have 
been  several  days  in  arrear  without  rhyme  or  reason, — days 
too  when  there  was  so  little  to  write  down  that  the  least 
jotting  would  have  done  it.  This  must  not  be  in  future. 

January  3. — Our  friends  begin  to  disperse.  Mrs.  Ellis, 
who  has  been  indisposed  for  the  last  two  days,  will  I  hope 
bear  her  journey  to  London  well.  She  is  the  relict  of  my 
dear  old  friend  George  Ellis,1  who  had  more  wit,  learning, 
and  knowledge  of  the  world  than  would  fit  out  twenty 

1  To  whom  Scott  addressed  the  fifth  canto  of  Marmion. 

103 


104  JOUENAL.  [JAN. 

literati.  The  Hardens  remained  to-day,  and  I  had  a  long 
walk  with  the  laird  up  the  Glen,  and  so  forth.  He  seemed 
a  little  tired,  and,  with  all  due  devotion  to  my  Chief,  I  was 
not  sorry  to  triumph  over  some  one  in  point  of  activity  at 
my  time  of  day. 

January  4, — Visited  by  Mr.  Stewart  of  Dalguise,  who 
came  to  collect  materials  for  a  description  of  Abhotsford,  to 
"be  given  with  a  drawing  in  a  large  work,  Views  of  Gentle- 
men's Seats.  Mr.  Stewart  is  a  well-informed  gentleman-like 
young  man,  grave  and  quiet,  yet  possessed  of  a  sense  of 
humour.  I  must  take  care  he  does  not  in  civility  over-puff 
my  little  assemblage  of  curiosities.  Scarce  anything  can  be 
meaner  than  the  vanity  which  details  the  contents  of  China 
closets, — basins,  ewers,  and  chamberpots.  Horace  Walpole, 
with  all  his  talents,  makes  a  silly  figure  when  he  gives 
an  upholsterer's  catalogue  of  his  goods  and  chattels  at 
Strawberry  Hill. 

January  5. — This  day  I  began  to  review  Taschereau's 
Life  of  MoK&re  for  Mr.  Gillies,  who  is  crying  help  for  God's 
sake.  Messrs.  Treuttel  and  Wurtz  offer  guerdon.  I  shall 
accept,  because  it  is  doing  Gillies  no  good  to  let  him  have 
my  labour  for  nothing,  and  an  article  is  about  £100,  In  my 
pocket  it  may  form  a  fund  to  help  this  poor  gentleman  or 
others  at  a  pinch ;  in  his,  I  fear  it  would  only  encourage  a 
neglect  of  sober  economy,  "When  in  his  prosperity  ho  asked 
me  whether  there  was  not,  in  my  opinion,  something  interest- 
ing in  a  man  of  genius  being  in  embarrassed  circumstances. 
God  knows  he  has  had  enough  of  them  since,  poor  fellow ; 
and- it  should  be  remembered  that  if  he  thus  dallied  with 
his  good  fortune,  his  benevolence  to  others  was  boundless. 

We  had  the  agreeable  intelligence  of  Sophia  being  safely 
delivered  of  a  girl;  the  mother  and  child  doing  well 
Praised  be  God ! 

January  6. — I  have  a  letter  from  the  Duke  of  Wellington, 
making  no  promises,  but  assuring  me  of  a  favourable  con- 


1828.]  JOUE1STAL.  105 

sideratlon  of  "Walter's  case,  should  an  opening  occur  for 
the  majority.  This  same  step  is  represented  as  the  most 
important,  but  so  in  their  time  were  the  lieutenancy  and 
the  troop.  Each  in  its  turn  was  the  step  par  excellence.  It 
appears  that  these  same  steps  are  those  of  a  treadmill, 
where  the  party  is  always  ascending  and  never  gains  the 
top.  But  the  same  simile  would  suit  most  pursuits  in  life. 

The  Misses  Kerr  left  us  on  Friday — two  charming  young 
persons,  well-looked,  well-mannered,  and  well-horn;  above 
all,  well-principled.  They  sing  together  in  a  very  delightful 
manner,  and  our  evenings  are  the  duller  without  them. 

I  am  annoyed  beyond  measure  with  the  idle  intrusion  of 
voluntary  correspondents ;  each  man  who  has  a  pen,  ink,  and 
sheet  of  foolscap  to  spare,  flies  a  letter  at  me.  I  believe  the 
postage  costs  me  £100  [a  year],  besides  innumerable  franks; 
and  all  the  letters  regard  the  writer's  own  hopes  or  projects, 
or  are  filled  with  unasked  advice  or  extravagant  requests.  I 
think  this  evil  increases  rather  than  diminishes.  On  the 
other  hand,  I  must  fairly  own  that  I  have  received  many  com- 
munications in  this  way  worth  all  the  trouble  and  expense 
that  the  others  cost  me,  so  I  must "  lay  the  head  of  the  sow  to 
the  tail  of  the  grice,"  as  the  proverb  elegantly  expresses  itself. 

News  again  of  Sophia  and  baby.  Mrs.  Hughes  thinks 
the  infant  a  beauty.  Johnnie  opines  that  it  is  not  very 
pretty,  and  grandpapa  supposes  it  to  be  like  other  new-born 
children,  which  are  as  like  as  a  basket  of  oranges. 

January  7. — Wrought  at  the  review,  and  finished  a 
good  lot  of  it.  Mr.  Stewart  left  us,  amply  provided  with  the 
history  of  Abbotsford  and  its  contents.  It  is  a  kind  of 
Conundrum  Castle  to  be  sure,  and  I  have  great  pleasure  in 
it,  for  while  it  pleases  a  fantastic  person  in  the  style  and 
manner  of  its  architecture  and  decoration,  it  has  all  the 
comforts  of  a  commodious  habitation. 

Besides  the  review,  I  have  been  for  this  week  busily 
employed  in  revising  for  the  press  the  Tales  of  a  Grandfather. 


106  JOURNAL.  [JAN. 

Cadell  rather  wished  to  rush  it  out  by  employing  three 
different  presses,  but  this  I  repressed  (smoke  the  pun !).  I 
will  not  have  poor  James  Ballantyne  driven  off  the  plank 
to  which  we  are  all  three  clinging.1  I  have  made  great 
additions  to  volume  first,  and  several  of  these  Tales ;  and  I 
care  not  who  knows  it,  I  think  well  of  them.  Nay,  I  will  hash 
history  with  anybody,  be  he  who  he  will.2  I  do  not  know 
but  it  would  be  wise  to  let  romantic  composition  rest,  and 
turn  my  mind  to  the  history  of  England,  France,  and  Ireland, 
to  be  da  capo  rota'd,  as  well  as  that  of  Scotland.  Men  would 
laugh  at  me  as  an  author  for  Mr.  Newbery's  shop  in  Paul's 
Churchyard.  I  should  care  little  for  that.  Virginilw 
puerisgue.  I  would  as  soon  compose  histories  for  boys  and 
girls,  which  may  be  useful,  as  fictions  for  children  of  a  larger 
growth,  which  can  at  best  be  only  idle  folk's  entertainment. 
But  write  what  I  will,  or  to  whom  I  will,  I  am  doggedly 
determined  to  write  myself  out  of  the  present  scrape  by  any 
labour  that  is  fair  and  honest. 

January  8. — Despatched  my  review  (in  part),  and  in  the 
morning  walked  from  Chiefswood,  all  about  the  shearing 
fiats,  and  home  by  the  new  walk,  which  I  have  called  the 
Bride's  Walk,  because  Jane  was  nearly  stuck  fast  in  the 
bog  there,  just  after  her  marriage,  in  the  beginning  of  1825. 

1  See  letter  to  E.  Cadell,  Itfe,  library,  the   boudoir,  the  school- 
voL  ix,  p.  209.  room,  and  the  nursery;  it  is  adopted 

2  "  The  first  Tales  of  a  Grand-  as  the  happiest  of  manuals,  not 
father  [as  has  already  been  said]  only  in  Scotland,  but  wherever  the 
appeared  early  in  December,  and  English  tongue  is  spoken ;  nay,  it 
their  reception  was  more  rapturous  is  to  be  seen  in  the  hands  of  old 
than  that  of  any  one  of  his  works  and  young  all  over  the  civilised 
since    Ivanhoe.      He    had  solved  world,  and  has,  I  have  little  doubt, 
for    the    first   time  the   problem  extended  the  knowledge  of  Scottish 
of  narrating  history,  so  as  at  once  history  in  quarters  where  little  or 
to  excite  and  gratify  the  curiosity  no  interest  had  ever  before  been 
of  youth,  and  please  and  instruct  awakened  as  to  any  other  parts  of 
the  wisest  of  mature  minds.    The  that    subject    except    those    inv 
popularity  of  the  book  has  grown  mediately   connected   with   Mary 
with   every  year  that  has  since  Stuart  and  the  Chevalier."— 
elapsed ;  it  is  equally  prized  in  the  voL  ix.  pp.  186-7. 


1828.]  JOUBNAL.  107 

My  post  brings  serious  intelligence  to-day,  and  of  a  very 
pleasing  description.  Longman  and  Company,  with  a  reserve 
which  marks  all  their  proceedings,  suddenly  inform  Mr. 
Gibson  that  they  desire  1000  of  the  8vo  edition  of  St.  Bonan's 
Well,  and  the  subsequent  series  of  Novels  thereunto  belong- 
ing, for  that  they  have  only  seven  remaining,  and  wish  it  to 
be  sent  to  their  printers,  and  pushed  out  in  three  months. 
Thus  this  great  house,  without  giving  any  previous  notice  of 
the  state  of  the  sale,  expect  all  to  be  boot  and  saddle,  horse 
and  away,  whenever  they  give  the  signal  In  the  present 
case  this  may  do,  because  I  will  make  neither  alteration  nor 
addition  till  our  grand  opus,  the  Improved  Edition,  goes  to 
press.  But  ought  we  to  go  to  press  with  this  1000  copies 
knowing  that  our  project  will  supersede  and  render  equiva- 
lent to  waste  paper  such  of  them  as  may  not  reach  the 
public  before  our  plan  is  publicly  known  and  begins  to 
operate  ?  I  have,  I  acknowledge,  doubt  as  to  this.  No  doubt 
I  feel  perfectly  justified  in  letting  Longman  and  Co.  look 
to  their  own  interest,  since  they  have  neither  consulted  me 
nor  attended  to  mine.  But  the  loss  might  extend  to  the 
retail  booksellers ;  and  to  hurt  the  men  through  whom  my 
works  are  ultimately  to  find  their  way  to  the  public  would 
be  both  unjust  and  impolitic.  On  the  contrary,  if  the  St. 
Eonan  Series  be  hurried  out  immediately,  there  is  time 
enough  perhaps  to  sell  it  off  before  the  Improved  Edition 
appears.  In  the  meantime  it  appears  that  the  popularity  of 
these  works  is  increasing  rather  than  diminishing,  that  the 
measure  of  securing  the  copyrights  was  most  judicious, 
and  that,  with  proper  management,  things  will  work  them- 
selves round.  Successful  first  editions  are  good,  but  they 
require  exertion  and  imply  fresh  risk  of  reputation.  But 
repeated  editions  tell  only  to  the  agreeable  part  of  litera- 
ture.1 

1  It  may  be  remarked  at   this     has  been  sustained  by  the  public  de- 
point  how  the  value  of  these  works     mand  during  the  term  of  legal  copy- 


108  JOURNAL  [JAN. 

Longman  and  Company  have  also  at  length  opened  their 
oracular  jaws  on  the  subject  of  Bonaparte,  and  acknowledged 
its  rapid  sale,  and  the  probable  exhaustion  of  the  present 
edition. 

These  tidings,  with  the  success  of  the  Tales,  "  speak  of 
Africa  and  golden  joys."1  But  the  tidings  arriving  after 
dinner  rather  discomposed  me.  In  the  evening  I  wrote  to 
Cadell  and  Ballantyne  at  length,  proposing  a  meeting  at  my 
house  on  Tuesday  first,  to  hold  a  privy  council. 

January  9. — My  first  reflection  was  on  Napoleon.  I 
will  not  be  hurried  in  my  corrections  of  that  work;  and  that 
I  may  not  be  so,  I  will  begin  them  the  instant  that  I  have 
finished  the  review.  It  makes  me  tremble  to  think  of  the 
mass  of  letters  I  have  to  look  through  in  order  to  select  all 
those  which  affect  the  subject  of  Napoleon,  and  which,  iu 
spite  of  numerous  excellent  resolutions,  I  have  never  separ- 
ated from  the  common  file  from  which  they  are  now  to  bo 
selected.  Confound  them !  but  they  are  confounded  already. 
Indolence  is  a  delightful  indulgence,  but  at  what  a  rate  we 

riglxt  and  since  that  date.     That  of     works,  Including  stereotypes,  stools,  wood- 

Waverley  expired  in  1856,  and  the     cut*>  ?tc  >  to,  *  ™*  lalf  °  meAc*m  *  of  lll° 

.-  .   •    ,     *  »         ,1         publishers  of  tins  country.    Aftor  ono  or 

others  at  f orty-two  years  from  the     two  of  our  loa(lmg  flma  ^  rotimi  from 

date  of  publication.  the  contest,  the  lot  was  bought  in  for,  wo 

On  December  19,  1827,  the  copy-  believe,  £15, COO,    This  sum  did  not  Jncludo 

right  of  the  Novels  from  Wwerley  the  stock  on  hand»  valw«d  »*  410,000. 

to  g«*  *„«*»«  acquired,  »^!«*M£-S 

as   mentioned    in    the    text,    for  copyrights,  etc ,  of  Scott's  works." 

£8400  as  a  joint  purchase.     Five  Meflsrs>  A.  &  C.  Black  in  185I 

years  later,  viz.,  in  1832,  Mr.  Cadell  purchased  the  property  at  nearly 

purchased   from   Sir  Walter's  re-  the  0ame  price>  vis5>  :_Copyright, 

presentatives,  for  about  £40,000,  £17,000?   stock,   £10,000— in  all, 

the  author's  share  in   stock    and  £27,000.     Mr.  Francis  Black,  who 

entire  copyrights  1  haa  kindly  gvon  me  informatioa 

^o?^  ^f  ^oTff'  ^"     ^garding  the  sale  of  these  works, 
on  the  26th  March  1851  (after  Mr.     tells  me  that  of  tha  volumefl  of  ^ 

Cadell's  death),  the  stock  and  copy-  of  the  oheaper  issues  about  throe 

nghts  were  exposed  for   sale   by  ^mions  have  been  sold  since  1851 

auction  in  London .regarding  which  This>  of  oourse>  is  independeixt  of 

a  Trade  Journal  of  the  date  says-  other  publishers>  editions  in  Great 

"Mr.  Hodgson  offered  for  sale  the  whole     Britain,  the  Continent,  and  America 
of  the  copyrights  of  Sir  Walter  Scott's  x  2  Henry  IV.,  Act  V.  Sc.  3. 


1828.]  JOUEETAL.  109 

purchase  it !  To-day  we  go  to  Mertoun,  and  having  spent 
some  time  in  making  up  my  Journal  to  this  length,  and  in 
a  chat  with  Captain  John,  who  dropped  in,  I  will  presently 
set  to  the  review — knock  it  off,  if  possible,  before  we  start 
at  five  o'clock.  To-morrow,  when  I  return,  we  will  begin  the 
disagreeable  task  of  a  thorough  rummage  of  papers,  books, 
and  documents.  My  character  as  a  man  of  letters,  and  as  a 
man  of  honour,  depends  on  my  making  that  work  as  correct 
as  possible.  It  has  succeeded,  notwithstanding  every  effort 
here  and  in  France1  to  put  it  down,  and  it  shall  not  lose 
ground  for  want  of  backing.  We  went  to  dine  and  pass  the 
night  at  Mertoun,  where  we  met  Sir  John  Pringle,  Mr.  and 
Mrs.  Baillie  Mellerstain,  and  their  daughters. 

January  10. — When  I  rose  this  morning  the  weather  was 
changed  and  the  ground  covered  with  snow.  I  am  sure  it 's 
winter  fairly.  We  returned  from  Mertoun  after  breakfast 
through  an  incipient  snowstorm,  coming  on  partially,  and 
in  great  flakes,  the  sun  bursting  at  intervals  through  the 
clouds.  At  last  Die  WolJcen  laufen  zusammen.  We  made  a 
slow  journey  of  it  through  the  swollen  river  and  heavy 
roads,  but  here  we  are  at  last. 

I  am  rather  sorry  we  expect  friends  to-day,  though  these 
Mends  be  the  good  Fergusons.  I  have  a  humour  for  work, 
to  which  the  sober,  sad  uniformity  of  a  snowy  day  always 
particularly  disposes  me,  and  I  am  sure  I  will  get  poor 
Gillies  off  my  hand,  at  least  if  I  had  morning  and  evening. 
Then  I  would  set  to  work  with  arranging  everything  for 
these  second  editions  of  Napoleon,  The  Romances,  etc.,  which 
must  be  soon  got  afloat.  I  must  say  "the  wark  gangs 

1  In  an  interesting  letter  to  Scott  It  would  be  impossible  to  write  tlxe 

from  Fenimore  Cooper,  dated  Sept.  truth  on  such  a  subject  and  please 

12th,  1827,  ho  tells  him  "that  the  this  nation.    One  frothy  gentleman 

French  abuse  you  a  little,  but  as  denounced  you  in  my  presence  as 

they  began  to  do  this,  to  my  certain  having  a  low,   vulgar  style,  very 

knowledge,  five  months  before  the  much  such  an  one  as  characterised 

book  was  published,  you  have  no  the  pen  of  Shakespeare  '  " 
great  reason  to  regard  their  criticism. 


110  JOUKNAL,  [JAN. 

bonnily  on/'1    Well,  I  will  ring  for  coals,  mend  my  pen, 
and  try  what  can  be  done. 

I  wrought  accordingly  on  Gillies's  review  for  the  Life 
of  Molidre,  a  gallant  subject.  I  am  only  sorry  I  have  not 
time  to  do  it  justice.  It  would  have  required  a  complete 
re-perusal  of  his  works,  for  which,  alas !  I  have  no  leisure. 

"  For  long,  though  pleasant,  is  the  way, 
And  life,  alas !  allows  but  one  ill  winter's  day." 

Which  is  too  literally  my  own  case, 

Jawuary  11. — Eenewed  my  labour,  finished  the  review, 
talis  qualis,  and  sent  it  off.  Commenced  then  my  infernal 
work  of  putting  to  rights.  Much  cry  and  little  woo',  as  the 
deil  said  when  he  shore  the  sow.  But  I  have  detected  one 
or  two  things  that  had  escaped  me,  and  may  do  more  to- 
morrow. I  observe  by  a  letter  from  Mr.  Cadell  that  I  had 
somewhat  misunderstood  his  last.  It  is  he,  not  Longman, 
that  wishes  to  publish  the  thousand  copies  of  St.  JZonaris 
Series,  and  there  is  no  immediate  call  for  Napoleon.  This 
makes  little  difference  in  my  computation.  The  pressing 
necessity  of  correction  is  put  off  for  two  or  three  months 
probably,  and  I  have  time  to  turn  myself  to  the  Chronicles. 
I  do  not  much  like  the  task,  but  when  did  I  over  like 
labour  of  any  kind  ?  My  hands  were  fully  occupied  to-day 
with  writing  letters  and  adjusting  papers — both  a  groat 
bore. 

The  news  from  London  assure  a  change  of  Ministry. 
The  old  Tories  come  in  play.  But  I  hope  they  will  com- 
promise nothing.  There  is  little  danger  since  Wellington 
takes  the  lead. 

Jawiary  12. — My  expenses  have  been  considerably 
more  than  I  expected ;  but  I  think  that,  having  done  so 

1  A  proverb  having  its  rise  from  followers.  —  Wishart'a     Mwifrose, 

an  exclamation  made  by  Mr.  David  quoting  from  Guthrie's   jfcfemoir*, 

Dick,  a  Covenanter,  on  witnessing  p.  182, 
the  execution  of  some  of  Montrose's 


1828.]  JOUBNAL.  Ill 

much,  I  need  not  undergo  the  mortification  of  giving  up 
Abbotsford  and  parting  with  my  old  habits  and  servants.1 

January  13,  [Edinburgh]. — We  had  a  slow  and  tiresome 
retreat  from  Abbotsford  through  the  worst  of  weather,  half- 
sleet,  half-snow.  Dined  with  the  Eoyal  Society  Club,  and, 
being  an  anniversary,  sat  till  nine  o'clock,  instead  of  half- 
past  seven. 

January  14. — I  read  Cooper's  new  novel,  The  Red  Saver-, 
the  current  of  it  rolls  entirely  upon  the  ocean.  Something 
there  is  too  much  of  nautical  language;  in  fact,  it  over- 
powers everything  else.  But,  so  people  once  take  an  interest 
in  a  description,  they  will  swallow  a  great  deal  which  they 
do  not  understand.  The  sweet  word  "  Mesopotamia  "  has  its 
charm  in  other  compositions  as  well  as  in  sermons.  He  has 
much  genius,  a  powerful  conception  of  character,  and  force 
of  execution.  The  same  ideas,  I  see,  recur  upon  him  that 
haunt  other  folks.  The  graceful  form  of  the  spars,  and  the 
tracery  of  the  ropes  and  cordage  against  the  sky,  is  too  often 
dwelt  upon. 

January  15. — This  day  the  Court  sat  down.  I  missed 
my  good  friend  Colin  Mackenzie,  who  proposes  to  retire, 
from  indifferent  health.  A  better  man  never  lived — eager 
to  serve  every  one — a  safeguard  over  all  public  business 
which  came  through  his  hands.  As  Deputy-Keeper  of  the 
Signet  he  will  be  much  missed.  He  had  a  patience  in 
listening  to  every  one  which  is  of  the  [highest  consequence] 
in.  the  management  of  a  public  body ;  for  many  men  care 
less  to  gain  their  point  than  they  do  to  play  the  orator,  and 
be  listened  to  for  a  certain  time.  This  done,  and  due 

i  Scott's  biographer  records  his  wages.     Old  Peter,  who  had  been 

admiration    for    the    manner    in  f  or  five-and-twenty  years  a  dignified 

which  all  his  dependants  met  the  coachman,  was  now  ploughman  in 

reverse  of  their  master's  fortunes,  ordinary ;  only  putting  his  horses 

The  butler,  instead  of  being  the  easy  to  the  carriage  on  high  and  rare 

chief  of  a  large  establishment,  was  occasions ;  and  so  on  with  all  that 

now  doing  half  the  work  of  the  remained  of  the  ancient  train,  and 

house  at  probably  half  his  former  all  seemed  happier. 


112  JOUKNAL.  [JAN. 

quantity  of  personal  consideration  being  gained,  the  in- 
dividual orator  is  usually  satisfied  with  the  reasons  of  the 
civil  listener,  who  has  suffered  him  to  enjoy  his  hour  of 
consequence.  I  attended  the  Court,  but  there  was  very 
little  for  me  to  do.  The  snowy  weather  has  annoyed  my 
fingers  with  chilblains,  and  I  have  a  threatening  of 
rheumatism — which.  Heaven  avert  I 

James  Ballantyne  and  Mr,  Oadell  dined  with  me  to-day 
and  talked  me  into  a  good  humour  with  my  present  task, 
which  I  had  laid  aside  in  disgust.  It  must,  however,  be 
done,  though  I  am  loth  to  begin  to  it  again. 

January  16. — Again  returned  early,  and  found  my  way 
home  with  some  difficulty.  The  weather — a  black  frost 
powdered  with  snow,  my  fingers  suffering  much  and  my 
knee  very  stiff.  When  I  came  home,  I  set  to  work,  but  not 
to  the  CIiTonicles.  I  found  a  less  harassing  occupation  iu 
correcting  a  volume  or  two  of  Napoleon  in  a  rough  way. 
My  indolence,  if  I  can  call  it  so,  is  of  a  capricious  kind.  Tt 
never  makes  me  absolutely  idle,  but  very  often  inclines  ino 
— as  it  were  from  mere  contradiction's  sake — to  exchange 
the  task  of  the  day  for  something  which  I  am  not  obliged 
to  do  at  the  moment,  or  perhaps  not  at  all. 

January  17. — My  knee  so  swelled  and  the  weather  so 
cold  that  I  stayed  from  Court.  I  nibbled  for  an  hour  or  two 
at  Napoleon,  then  took  handsomely  to  my  gear,  and  wrote 
with  great  ease  and  fluency  six  pages  of  the  Ohronides.  If 
they  are  but  tolerable  I  shall  be  satisfied.  In  fact,  such  as 
they  are,  they  must  do,  for  I  shall  get  warm  as  I  work,  as 
has  happened  on  former  occasions.  The  fact  is,  I  scarce 
know  what  is  to  succeed  or  not ;  but  this  is  the  consequence 
of  writing  too  much  and  too  often.  I  must  get  some 
breathing  space.  But  how  is  that  to  be  managed  ?  There 
is  the  rub. 

January  18-19. — Eemained  still  at  home,  and  wrought 
hard.  The  fountain  trickles  free  enough,  but  God  knows 


1828.]  JOUKNAL,  113 

whether  the  waters  will  be  worth  drinking.    However,  I  have 
finished  a  good  deal  of  hard  work, — that 's  the  humour  of  it. 

January  20. — Wrought  hard  in  the  forenoon.  At  dinner 
we  had  Helen  Erskine, — whom  circumstances  lead  to  go  to 
India  in  search  of  the  domestic  affection  which  she  cannot 
find  here, — Mrs.  George  Swinton,  and  two  young  strangers : 
one,  a  son  of  my  old  friend  Dr.  Stoddart  of  the  Times,  a  well- 
mannered  and  intelligent  youth,  the  other  that  unnatural 
character,  a  tame  Irishman,  resembling  a  formal  Englishman. 

January  21. — This  morning  I  sent  J,  E.  as  far  as  page 
forty-three,  being  fully  two-thirds  of  the  volume.  The 
rest  I  will  drive  on,  trusting  that,  contrary  to  the  liberated 
posthorse  in  John  Gilpin,  the  lumber  of  the  wheels  rattling 
behind  me  may  put  spirit  in  the  poor  brute  who  has  to 
drag  it. 

Mr.  and  Mrs.  Moscheles  were  here  at  breakfast.  She  is 
a  very  pretty  little  Jewess ;  he  one  of  the  greatest  performers 
on  the  pianoforte  of  the  day, — certainly  most  surprising 
and,  what  I  rather  did  not  expect,  pleasing. 

I  have  this  day  the  melancholy  news  of  Glengarry's 
death,  and  was  greatly  shocked.  The  eccentric  parts  of  his 
character,  the  pretensions  which  he  supported  with  violence 
and  assumption  of  rank  and  authority,  were  obvious  subjects 
of  censure  and  ridicule,  which  in  some  points  were  not  un- 
deserved. He  played  the  part  of  a  chieftain  too  nigh  the 
life  to  be  popular  among  an  altered  race,  with  whom  he 
thought,  felt,  and  acted,  I  may  say  in  right  and  wrong,  as  a 
chieftain  of  a  hundred  years  since  would  have  done,  while 
his  conduct  was  viewed  entirely  by  modern  eyes,  and  tried 
by  modern  rules.1 

January  22. — I  am,  I  find,  in  serious  danger  of  losing  the 
habit  of  my  Journal ;  and,  having  carried  it  on  so  long,  that 
would  be  pity.  But  I  am  now,  on  the  1st  February,  fishing 
for  the  lost  recollections  of  tjie  days  since  the  21st  January. 

1  Ante,  vol.  i.  p.  120. 
VOL.  II.  H 


114  JOURNAL.  [JAN. 

Luckily  there  is  not  very  much  to  remember  or  forget,  and 
perhaps  the  best  way  would  be  to  skip  and  go  on. 

January  23, — Being  a  Teind  day,  I  had  a  good  oppor- 
tunity of  work.  I  should  have  said  I  had  given  breakfast 
on  the  21st  to  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Moscheles;  she  a  beautiful 
young  creature, "  and  one  that  adores  me,"  as  Sir  Toby  says,1 
— that  is,  in  my  poetical  capacity; — in  fact,  a  frank  and 
amiable  young  person.  I  liked  Mr,  Moscheles'  playing 
better  than  I  could  have  expected,  considering  my  own  bad 
ear.  But  perhaps  I  flatter  myself,  and  think  I  understood 
it  better  than  I  did.  Perhaps  I  have  not  done  myself 
justice,  and  know  more  of  music  than  I  thought  I  did. 
But  it  seems  to  me  that  his  variations  have  a  more  decided 
style  of  originality  than  those  I  have  commonly  heard, 
which  have  all  the  signs  of  a  da  capo  rota. 

Dined  at  Sir  Archibald  Campbell's,2  and  drank  rather 
more  wine  than  usual  in  a  sober  way.  To  be  sure,  it  was 
excellent,  and  some  old  acquaintances  proved  a  good  excuse 
for  the  glass. 

January  24. — I  took  a  perverse  fit  to-day,  and  went  off 
to  write  notes,  et  cetera,  on  Guy  Mannering.  This  was 
perverse  enough ;  but  it  was  a  composition  between  humour 
and  duty;  and  as  such,  let  it  pass. 

January  25. — I  went  on  working,  sometimes  at  my 
legitimate  labours,  sometimes  at  my  jobs  of  Notes,  but  still 
working  faithfully,  in  good  spirits,  and  contented. 

Huntly  Gordon  has  disposed  of  the  two  sermons3  to  the 
bookseller  Colburn  for  £250 — well  sold,  I  think — and  is  to 
go  forth  immediately.  The  man  is  a  puffing  quack;  but 
though  I  would  rather  the  thing  had  not  gone  there,  and  far 
rather  that  it  had  gone  nowhere,  yet,  hang  it  I  if  it  makes  the 

1  Twdfth  Night,  Act  11.  Sc.  3.  206.    They  were  issued  in  a  thin 
3  Sir  Archibald  Campbell  of  Sue-  octavo  vol.  under  the  title  Retigiou* 
<x>th.    He  lived  at  1  Park  Place.  Discourses,  by  a  Layman,  with  a 
3  The  circumstances  under  which  short  Preface  signed  W.  S.     There 
these  sermons  were  written  are  fully  were  more  editions  than  ore  pub- 
detailed  in  the  Life,  vol.  ix.  pp.  193,  lished  during  1828. 


1828.]  JOURNAL.  115 

poor  lad  easy,  what  needs  I  fret  about  it  ?  After  all,  there 
would  be  little  gain  in  doing  a  kind  thing,  if  you  did  not 
suffer  pain  or  inconvenience  upon  the  score. 

January  26. — Being  Saturday,  attended  Mr.  Moscheles1 
concert,  and  was  amused ;  the  more  so  that  I  had  Mrs.  M. 
herself  to  flirt  a  little  with.  To  have  so  much  beauty  as  she 
really  possesses,  and  to  be  accomplished  and  well-read,  she 
is  an  unaffected  and  pleasant  person.  Mr.  Moscheles  gives 
lessons  at  two  guineas  by  the  hour,  and  he  has  actually 
found  scholars  in  this  poor  country.  One  of  them  at  least 
(Mrs.  John  Murray)  may  derive  advantage  from  his 
instructions;  for  I  observe  his  mode  of  fingering  is  very 
peculiar,  as  he  seems  to  me  to  employ  the  fingers  of  the 
same  hand  in  playing  the  melody  and  managing  the  bass  at 
the  same  time,  which  is  surely  most  uncommon. 

I  presided  at  the  Celtic  Society's  dinner  to-day,  and 
proposed  Glengarry's  memory,  which,  although  there  had 
been  a  rough  dispute  with  the  Celts  and  the  poor  Chief,  was 
very  well  received.  I  like  to  see  men  think  and  bear  them- 
selves like  men.  There  were  fewer  in  the  tartan  than  usual 
— which  was  wrong. 

January  27. — Wrought  manfully  at  the  Chronicles  all 
this  day  and  have  nothing  to  jot  down ;  only  I  forgot  that  I 
lost  my  lawsuit  some  day  last  week  or  the  week  before. 
The  fellow  therefore  gets  his  money,  plack  and  bawbee,  but 
it  *s  always  a  troublesome  claim  settled,1  and  there  can  be  no 
other  of  the  same  kind,  as  every  other  creditor  has  accepted 
the  composition  of  7s.  in  the  £,  which  my  exertions  have 
enabled  me  to  pay  them.  About  £20,000  of  the  fund  had 
been  created  by  my  own  exertions  since  the  bankruptcy 
took  place,  and  I  had  a  letter  from  Donald  Home,  by 
commission  of  the  creditors,  to  express  their  sense  of  my 
exertions  in  their  behalf.  All  this  is  consolatory. 

January  28. — I  am  in  the  scrape  of  sitting  for  my 
picture,  and  had  to  repair  for  two  hours  to-day  to  Mr.  Colviu 

e9  p.  65. 


116  JOUKNAL.  [JAN. 

Smith — Lord  Gillies's  nephew.  The  Chief  Baron l  had  the 
kindness  to  sit  with  me  great  part  of  the  time,  as  the  Chief 
Commissioner  had  done  on  a  late  occasion.  The  picture  is 
for  the  Chief  Commissioner,  and  the  Chief  Baron  desires  a 
copy.  I  trust  it  will  be  a  good  one.  At  home  in  the 
evening,  and  wrote.  I  am  well  on  before  the  press,  notwith- 
standing late  hours,  lassitude,  and  laziness.  I  have  read 
Cooper's  Prairie — better,  I  think,  than  his  Red  Rover,  in 
which  you  never  get  foot  on  shore,  and  to  understand 
entirely  the  incidents  of  the  story  it  requires  too  much 
knowledge  of  nautical  language.  It 's  very  clever,  though,2 

Jwmary  29. — This  day  at  the  Court,  and  wrote  letters 
at  home,  besides  making  a  visit  or  two — rare  things  with  me. 
I  have  an  invitation  from  Messrs  Saunders  and  Otley,  book- 
sellers, offering  me  from  £1500  to  £2000  annually  to 
conduct  a  journal ;  but  I  am  their  humble  servant.  I  am 
too  indolent  to  stand  to  that  sort  of  work,  and  I  must 
preserve  the  undisturbed  use  of  my  leisure,  and  possess  my 
soul  in  quiet.  A  large  income  is  not  my  object;  I  must 
clear  my  debts ;  and  that  is  to  be  done  by  writing  things 
of  which  I  can  retain  the  property.  Made  my  excuses 
accordingly. 

January  30. — After  Court  hours  I  had  a  visit  from  Mr. 
Charles  Heath,  the  engraver,  accompanied  by  a  son  of 
Reynolds  the  dramatist.  His  object  was  to  engage  me  to 
take  charge  as  editor  of  a  yearly  publication  called  The 
Ke&psaJce,  of  which  the  plates  are  beyond  comparison 
beautiful,  but  the  letter-press  indifferent  enough.  He  pro* 
posed  £800  a  year  if  I  would  become  editor,  and  JS400  if  I 
would  contribute  from  seventy  to  one  hundred  pages.  I 
declined  both,  but  told  him  I  might  give  him  some  trifling 

1  Sir  Samuel  Shepherd.  and  he  writes  to  Scott  in  the  autumn 

2  Mr.  Cooper  did  not  relax  his  of  1827  :  "This,  sir,  is  a  pitiful  ao 
efforts    to    secure    Scott    an    in-  count  of  a  project  from  which  I 
terest  in  his  works  reprinted  in  expected  something  more  just  to  you 
America,  but  he  was  not  successful,  and  creditable  to  my  country, " 


1828.]  JOUENAL.  117 

thing  or  other,  and  asked  the  young  men  to  breakfast  the 
next  day.  Worked  away  in  the  evening  and  completed,  "  in 
a  way  and  in  a  manner,"  the  notes  on  Gwy  Mannering.  The 
first  volume  of  the  Clironides  is  now  in  Ballantyne's  hands, 
all  but  a  leaf  or  two.  Am  I  satisfied  with  my  exertions  ? 
So  so.  Will  the  public  be  pleased  with  them  ?  Umph !  I 
doubt  the  bubble  will  burst.  While  it  is  current,  however,  it 
is  clear  I  should  stand  by  it.  Each  novel  of  three  volumes 
brings  £4000,  and  I  remain  proprietor  of  the  mine  when  the 
first  ore  is  cropped  out.  This  promises  a  good  harvest,  from 
what  we  have  experienced.  Now,  to  become  a  stipendiary 
editor  of  a  New- Year's  Gift-Book  is  not  to  be  thought  of, 
nor  could  I  agree  to  work  for  any  quantity  of  supply  to  such 
a  publication.  Even  the  pecuniary  view  is  not  flattering, 
though  these  gentlemen  meant  it  should  be  so.  But  one 
hundred  of  their  close-printed  pages,  for  which  they  offer 
£400,  is  not  nearly  equal  to  one  volume  of  a  novel,  for 
which  I  get  £1300,  and  have  the  reversion  of  the  copyright. 
ITo,  I  may  give  them  a  trifle  for  nothing,  or  sell  them  an 
article  for  a  round  price,  but  no  permanent  engagement  will 
I  make.  Being  the  Martyrdom,  there  was  no  Court.  I 
wrought  away  with  what  appetite  I  could. 

January  31. — I  received  the  young  gentlemen  to  break- 
fast and  expressed  my  resolution,  which  seemed  to  dis- 
appoint them,  as  perhaps  they  expected  I  should  have  been 
glad  of  such  an  offer.  However,  I  have  since  thought  there 
are  these  rejected  parts  of  the  Chronicles,  which  Cadell  and 
Ballantyne  criticised  so  severely,  which  might  well  enough 
make  up  a  trifle  of  this  kind,  and  settle  the  few  accounts 
which,  will  I  nill  I,  have  crept  in  this  New  Tear.  So  I 
have  kept  the  treaty  open.  If  I  give  them  100  pages  I 
should  expect  £500. 

I  was  late  at  the  Court  and  had  little  time  to  write  any 
till  after  dinner,  and  then  was  not  in  the  vein;  so  com- 
mentated* 


FEBKITAEY. 

February  1. — I  had  my  two  youths  again  to  breakfast, 
but  I  did  not  say  more  about  my  determination,  save  that  I 
would  help  them  if  I  could  make  it  convenient.  The  Chief 
Commissioner  has  agreed  to  let  Heath  have  his  pretty  picture 
of  a  Study  at  Abbotsford,  by  Edwin  Landseer,  in  which  old 
Maida  occurs.  The  youth  Eeynolds  is  what  one  would 
suppose  his  father's  son  to  be,  smart  and  forward,  and  knows 
the  world.  T  suppose  I  was  too  much  fagged  with  sitting 
in  the  Court  to-day  to  write  hard  after  dinner,  but  I  did 
work,  however. 

February  2. — Corrected  proofs,  which  are  now  nearly  up 
with  me.  This  day  was  an  idle  one,  for  I  remained  in.  Court 
till  one,  and  sat  for  my  picture  till  half-past  three  to  Mr. 
Smith.  He  has  all  the  steadiness  and  sense  in  appearance 
which  his  cousin  E.  P.  G.  lacks.1  Whether  he  has  genius  or 
no,  I  am  no  judge.  My  own  portrait  is  like,  but  I  think  too 
broad  about  the  jowls,  a  fault  which  they  all  fall  into,  as 
I  suppose,  by  placing  their  subject  upon  a  high  stage  and 
looking  upwards  to  them,  which  must  foreshorten  tho  face. 
The  Chief  Baron  and  Chief  Commissioner  had  the  good- 
ness to  sit  with  me. 

Dressed  and  went  with  Anne  to  dine  at  Pinkie  House, 
where  I  met  the  President,2  Lady  Charlotte,  etc. ;  above  all, 
Mrs.  Scott  of  Gala,  whom  I  had  not  seen  for  some  time, 
We  had  much  fun,  and  I  was,  as  Sir  Andrew  Aguecheek 

1  Mr.  Colvin  Smith  painted  in  all  of  the  persons  who  commissioned 

about    twenty    portraits    of    Sir  them  is  given  at  p.  73  of  the  Oen* 

Walter,  for  seven  of  which  he  ob-  tenary  Catalogue. 

tained  occasional  sittings.     A  list  *  The  Right  Hon.  Charles  Hope, 
113 


1828.]  JOURNAL.  119 

says,  in  good  fooling.1  A  lively  Trench  girl,  a  governess  I 
think,  but  very  pretty  and  animated,  seemed  much  amused 
with  the  old  gentleman.  Home  at  eleven  o'clock. 

By  the  by,  Sir  John  Hope  had  found  a  Roman  eagle 
on  his  estate  in  Fife  with  sundry  of  those  pots  and  coffee- 
pots, so  to  speak,  which  are  so  common :  but  the  eagle  was 
mislaid,  so  I  did  not  see  it. 

February  3. — I  corrected  proofs  and  wrote  this  morning, — 
but  slowly,  heavily,  lazily.  There  was  a  mist  on  my  mind 
which  my  exertions  could  not  dispel.  I  did  not  get  two 
pages  finished,  but  I  corrected  proofs  and  commentated. 

February  4, — Wrote  a  little  and  was  obliged  to  correct 
the  Moli&re  affair  for  R.  P.  G.  I  think  his  plan  cannot  go 
on  much  longer  with  so  much  weakness  at  the  helm.  A 
clever  fellow  would  make  it  take  the  field  with  a  vengeance, 
but  poor  G.  will  run  in  debt  with  the  booksellers  and  let  all 
go  to  the  devil  I  sent  a  long  letter  to  Lockhart,  received 
from  Horace  Smith,  very  gentlemanlike  and  well-written, 
complaining  that  Mr.  Leigh  Hunt  had  mixed  him  up,  in 
his  Life  of  Byron,  with  Shelley  as  if  he  had  shared  his  ir- 
religious opinions.  Leigh  Hunt  afterwards  at  the  request 
of  Smith  published  a  swaggering  contradiction  of  the  in- 
ference to  be  derived  from  the  way  in  which  he  has  named 
them  together,  Horatio  Smith  seems  not  to  have  relied 
upon  his  disclamation,  as  he  has  requested  me  to  mention 
the  thing  to  John  Lockhart,  and  to  some  one  influential 
about  Ebony,  which  I  have  done  accordingly. 

Felruary  5. — Concluded  the  first  volume  before  breakfast. 
I  am  but  indifferently  pleased ;  either  the  kind  of  thing  is 
worn  out,  or  I  am  worn  out  myself,  or,  lastly,  I  am  stupid 
for  the  time.  The  book  must  be  finished,  however.  Cadell 
is  greatly  pleased  with  annotations  intended  for  the  new 
edition  of  the  Waverley  series.  I  believe  that  work  must 
be  soon  sent  to  press,  which  would  put  a  powerful  wheel  in 

1  Twelfth  Night,  Act  n.  Sc.  3. 


120  JOURNAL.  [FEB. 

motion  to  clear  the  ship.  I  went  to  the  Parliament  House, 
and  in  return  strolled  into  CadelTs,  being  rather  anxious  to 
prolong  my  walk,  for  I  fear  the  constant  sitting  for  so  many 
hours.  When  I  returned,  the  Duke  of  Buccleuch  came  in. 
He  is  looking  very  well,  and  stout,  but  melancholy  about 
his  sister,  Lady  Charlotte  Stopford.  He  is  fitting  up  a  part 
of  Bowhill  and  intends  to  shoot  there  this  year.  God  send 
fa"rn  life  and  health,  for  it  is  of  immense  consequence. 

February  6. — This  and  visits  wasted  my  time  till  past 
two,  and  then  I  slept  half-an-hour  from  mere  exhaustion. 
Went  in  the  evening  to  the  play,  and  saw  that  good  old 
thing,  an  English  tragedy,  well  got  up.  It  was  Venice  Pre- 
served. Mrs.  H.  Siddons  played  Belvidera  with  much  truth, 
feeling,  and  tenderness,  though  short  of  her  mother-in-law's 
uncommon  majesty,  which  is  a  thing  never  to  be  forgotten. 
Mr.  Young  played  Pierre  very  well,  and  a  good  Jaffier  was 
supplied  by  a  Mr.  Vandenhoff.  And  so  the  day  glided  by ; 
only  three  pages  written,  which,  however,  is  a  fair  task. 

February  7. — It  was  a  Teind  day,  so  no  Court,  but  very 
little  work.  I  wrote  this  morning  till  the  boy  made  his 
appearance  for  proofs;  then  I  had  letters  to  write.  Item, 
at  five  o'clock  I  set  out  with  Charles  for  Dalkeith  to  present 
liini  to  the  young  Duke. 

I  asked  the  Duke  about  poor  Hogg.  I  think  he  has 
decided  to  take  Mr.  Eiddell's  opinion;  it  is  unlucky  the 
poor  fellow  has  ever  taken  that  large  and  dear  farm.1 
Altogether  Dalkeith  was  melancholy  to-night,  and  I  could 
not  raise  my  spirits  at  all 

February  8. — I  had  a  little  work  before  dinner,  but  we 
are  only  seven  pages  into  volume  second.  It  is  always  a 
beginning,  however;  perhaps  not  a  good  one — I  cannot  tell 
I  went  out  to  call  on  Gala  and  Jack  Eutherfurd  of  Edgers- 
toun;  saw  the  former,  not  the  latter.  Gala  is  getting  much 
better.  He  talked  as  if  the  increase  of  his  village  was  like  to 
1  Mount  Benger,  which  he  had  taken  in  1820.— -See  ante,  page  96. 


1828.]  JOURNAL.  121 

drive  him  over  the  hill  to  the  Abbotsford  side,  which  would 
greatly  beautify  that  side  and  certainly  change  his  residence 
for  the  better,  only  that  he  must  remain  some  time  without 
any  appearance  of  plantation.  The  view  would  be  enchanting. 

I  was  tempted  to  buy  a  picture  of  Nell  Gywnne,1  which 
I  think  has  merit ;  at  least  it  pleases  me.  Seven  or  eight 
years  ago  Graham  of  Gartmore  bid  for  it  against  me,  and 
I  gave  it  up  at  twenty-five  guineas.  I  have  now  bought 
it  for  £18,  18s.  Perhaps  there  was  folly  in  this,  but  I 
reckoned  it  a  token  of  good  luck  that  I  should  succeed  in 
a  wish  I  had  formerly  harboured  in  vain.  I  love  marks  of 
good  luck  even  in  trifles. 

February  9. — Sent  off  three  leaves  of  copy ;  this  is  using 
the  press  like  the  famished  sailor  who  was  fed  by  a  comrade 
with  shell-fish  by  one  at  a  time.  But  better  anything  than 
stop,  for  the  devil  is  to  get  set  a-going  again.  I  know  no 
more  than  my  old  boots  whether  I  am  right  or  wrong,  but 
have  no  very  favourable  anticipations. 

As  I  came  home  from  the  Court  about  twelve  I  stepped 
into  the  Exhibition.  It  makes  a  very  good  show;  the 
portraits  are  better  than  kst  year,  those  of  Colvin  Smith 
and  Watson  Gordon  especially  improve.  Landseer's  Study 
at  Abbotsford  is  in  a  capital  light,  and  generally  admired* 
I  particularly  distinguished  John  Thomson's  picture  of  Turn- 
berry,  which  is  of  first-rate  excellence.  A  picture  by  Scrope 
was  also  generally  distinguished.  It  is  a  view  in  Calabria. 

There  is  a  rival  Exhibition  which  floes  not  hurt  the 
earlier  foundation,  but  rather  excites  emulation.  I  am  told 
there  are  good  paintings  there.  I  came  home  with  little 
good-will  to  work,  but  I  will  compel  myself  to  do  something. 
Unluckily,  I  have  again  to  go  out  to  dinner  to-day,  being 
President  of  the  Bannatyne. 

The  dinner  was  a  pleasant  one ;  about  thirty  members 

1  It  now  hangs  in  the  Drawing-room  at  Abbotsford. — See  Sharpe'a 
Letters,  vol.  ii.  p.  408. 


122  JOURNAL. 

attended.  I  kept  the  chair  till  near  eleven,  and  the  com- 
pany were  very  joyous. 

February  10. — I  set  myself  doggedly  to  work,  and  turned 
off  six  leaves  before  dinner.  Had  to  dinner  Sir  John  Pringle, 
my  dear  Gala  and  his  lady,  and  young  Mackenzie  and  Miss 
Jardine.  I  was  quite  pleased  to  see  Gala  so  well  recovered 
of  the  consequences  of  his  frightful  fall,  which  hung  about 
him  so  long.  He  is  one  of  the  kindest  and  best-informed 
men  whom  I  know. 

February  11. — I  had  Charles  Young1  to  breakfast  with 
us,  who  gave  us  some  striking  anecdotes  of  Talma  during 
the  Reign  of  Terror,  which  may  figure  in  Napoleon  to  great 
advantage. 

My  son  Charles  left  us  this  morning  to  take  possession 
of  his  situation  in  the  Foreign  Office.  He  has  been  very 
lucky.  Correcting  sheets,  etc.,  took  up  the  morning  hours. 
I  wrote  three  leaves  before  two  o'clock.  Day  bitter  cold — 
with  snow,  a  strong  contrast  to  the  mild  weather  we  had 
last  week. 

Salutation  of  two  old  Scottish  lairds : — "  Ye  7re  maist 
obedient  hunimil  servant,  Tannachy  Tulloh." — "Your  naiu 
man,  Kilspindie." 

Finished  six  pages,  twenty-five  pages  of  print  that  is,  or 
about  the  thirteenth  part  of  a  volume.  That  would  be  a 
volume  in  a  fortnight,  with  a  holiday  to  boot.  It  would  be 
possible  enough  for  a  little  while. 

February  12. — I  wrought  hard  this  morning.  Ballantyne 
blames  the  Ossianic  monotony  of  my  principal  characters. 
Now  they  are  not  Ossianic.  The  language  of  the  Ossianic 
poetry  is  highly  figurative ;  that  of  the  knights  of  chivalry 
may  be  monotonous,  and  probably  is,  but  it  cannot  be 
Ossianic.  Sooth  to  say,  this  species  of  romance  of  chivalry 

1  Charles  Mayne  Young,  Trage-  pleasant  account  in  a  Momoir  of 

dian,  had  been  a  visitor  at  Abbots-  his  father,  pp.  88-96.    London,  ]  871. 

ford  in  the  autumn  of  1821.    Of  Mr.  Young  died  in  June  1856. 
this  visit  his  son  Julian  gives  a 


1828.]  JOUKNAL.  123 

is  an  exhaustible  subject.  It  affords  materials  for  splendid 
description  for  once  or  twice,  but  they  are  too  unnatural 
and  formal  to  bear  repetition.  We  must  go  on  with  our 
present  work,  however,  valeat  quantum.  Mr.  Cadell,  less 
critical  than  J.  B.,  seems  pleased.  The  world  will  soon 
decide  if  I  get  on  at  this  rate;  for  I  have  finished  four 
leaves  to-day,  notwithstanding  my  attendance  on  the  Court. 

February  13. — Mr.  Macintosh  Mackay,  minister  of  Laggan, 
breakfasted  with  us  this  morning.  This  reverend  gentleman 
is  completing  the  Highland  Dictionary,1  and  seems  very 
competent  for  the  task.  He  left  in  my  hands  some  papers 
of  Cluny  Macpherson,  concerning  the  affair  of  1745,  from 
which  I  have  extracted  an  account  of  the  battle  of  Clifton 
for  Waverley.  He  has  few  prejudices  (for  a  Highlander), 
and  is  a  mild,  well-mannered  young  man.  We  had  much 
talk  on  Highland  matters. 

The  Children's  Tales  continue  in  demand.  Cadell  ex- 
pects a  new  edition  of  10,000  about  next  year,  which  may  be 
£750  or  £800  in  pouch,  besides  constituting  a  fine  property. 

February  14. — Mr.  Edwards,  a  candidate  for  the  situa- 
tion of  Eector  in  the  Edinburgh  Academy,  a  pleasant, 
gentlemanlike  man,  and  recommended  highly  for  experience 
and  learning ;  but  he  is  himself  afraid  of  wanting  bodily 
strength  for  the  work,  which  requires  all  the  nerve  and 
muscle  of  Williams.  I  wish  he  had  been  three  inches  taller, 
and  stout  in  proportion.  I  went  to  Mr.  John  Kussell's, 
where  there  was  an  Academical  party  at  dinner.  Home  at 
nine,  a  cigar,  and  to  bed. 

1  This  enthusiastic  Gaelic  scholar,  he  died  at  Portobello  in  1873. 

then   parish  minister   of   Laggan,  The    Gaelic    dictionary   of   the 

joined  the  Free  Church  of  Scotland  Highland   Society  was   completed 

in  1843,  and  was  elected  Modera-  and  published  in  2  vols.  4to,  1S28. 

tor  of  its  General  Assembly  in  1849.  The  editor  was   Dr.    Macleod  of 

As  a  clergyman,  he  had  afterwards  Dundonald,  assisted  by  other  Gaelic 

a  varied  experience  in  this  country  scholars.      Dr.  Mackay  edited  the 

and  in  Australia,  before  he  finally  poems  of  Rob  Donn  in  1829.— See 

settled  in   the   island    of  Harris ;  Quarterly  ftemew,  July  1831. 


124  JOUENAL.  [FEB. 

February  15. — Rose  this  morning  about  seven  and  wrote 
at  the  desk  till  breakfast;  finished  about  a  page  and  a 
halt  I  was  fagged  at  Court  till  near  two.  Then  called  on 
Cadell,  and  so  home,  tired  enough. 

February  16. — There  dined  with  me  to-day  Tom 
Thomson,  Will  Clerk,  Mr.  Edwards,  and  my  Celtic  friend 
Mr.  Mackay  of  Laggan. 

February  17. — A  day  of  hard  work,  being  I  think  eight 
pages1  before  dinner.  I  cannot,  I  am  sure,  tell  if  it  is 
worth  marking  down,  that  yesterday  at  dinner-time  I  was 
strangely  haunted  by  what  I  would  call  the  sense  of  pre- 
existence, — videlicet,  a  confused  idea  that  nothing  that  passed 
was  said  for  the  first  time,  that  the  same  topics  had  been 
discussed,  and  the  same  persons  had  stated  the  same 
opinions  on  the  same  subjects.  It  is  true  there  might  have 
been  some  ground  for  recollections,  considering  that  three  at 
least  of  the  company  were  old  friends,  and  kept  much  com- 
pany together :  that  is,  Justice-Clerk,2  [Lord]  Abercromby, 
and  L  But  the  sensation  was  so  strong  as  to  resemble  what 
is  called  a  iwirage  in  the  desert,  or  a  calenture  on  board 
ship,  when  lakes  are  seen  in  the  desert,  and  silvan  land- 
scapes in  the  sea.  It  was  very  distressing  yesterday,  and 
brought  to  my  mind  the  fancies  of  Bishop  Berkeley  about 
an  ideal  world.  There  was  a  vile  sense  of  want  of  reality 
in  all  I  did  and  said.  It  made  me  gloomy  and  out  of 
spirits,  though  I  flatter  myself  it  was  not  observed.  The 
bodily  feeling  which  most  resembles  this  unpleasing  hallu- 
cination is  the  giddy  state  which  follows  profuse  bleeding, 
when  one  feels  as  if  walking  on  feather-beds  and  could  not 
find  a  secure  footing.  I  think  the  stomach  has  something 
to  do  with  it  I  drank  several  glasses  of  wine,  but  these 
only  augmented  the  disorder,  I  did  not  find  the  in  vino 
veritas  of  the  philosophers.  Something  of  this  insane  feel- 
ing remains  to-day,  but  a  trifle  only. 
1  See  next  page,  under  Feb.  19.  a  The  Eight  Hon.  David  Boylo, 


1828.]  JOUENAL.  125 

February  18. — I  had  other  work  to  do  this  day.  In  the 
morning  corrected  proofs.  After  breakfast,  made  a  visit  or 
two,  and  met  Sandie  Buchanan,  whom  it  joys  me  to  see. 
Then  despatched  all  my  sheriff  processes,  save  one,  which 
hitches  for  want  of  some  papers.  Lastly,  here  I  am,  before 
dinner,  with  my  journal  I  sent  all  the  county  money  to 
Andrew  Lang.  Wrote  to  Mr.  Eeynolds  too;  methinks  I 
will  let  them  have  the  Tales  which  Jem  Ballantyne  and 
Cadell  quarrelled  with.1  I  have  asked  £500  for  them — 
pretty  well  that.  I  suppose  they  will  be  fools  enough  to 
give  it  me.  In  troth  she  11  no  pe  cheaper. 

February  19. — A  day  of  hard  and  continued  work,  the 
result  being  eight  pages.  But  then  I  hardly  ever  quitted 
the  table  save  at  meal-time.  So  eight  pages  of  my  manu- 
script may  be  accounted  the  maximum  of  my  literary 
labour.  It  is  equal  to  forty  printed  pages  of  the  novels. 
I  had  the  whole  of  this  day  at  my  own  disposal,  by  the 
voluntary  kindness  of  Sir  Eobert  Dundas  interfering  to  take 
up  my  duty  at  the  Court.  The  proofs  of  my  Sermons  are 
arrived,  but  I  have  had  no  time,  saving  to  blot  out  some 
flummery,  which  poor  Gordon  had  put  into  the  preface.2 

February  20. — Another  day  of  labour ;  but  not  so  hard. 
I  worked  from  eight  till  three  with  little  intermission,  but 
only  accomplished  four  pages.  Then  I  went  out  and  made 
a  visit  or  two,  and  looked  in  on  CadelL  If  I  get  two  pages 
in  the  evening  I  will  be  satisfied,  for  volume  n.  may  be 
concluded  with  the  week,  or  run  over  to  Sunday  at  most. 
Will  it  tell,  this  work  ?  I  doubt  it,  but  there  is  no  standing 
still. 

A  certain  Mr.  Mackay  from  Ireland  called  on  me,  an 
active  agent,  it  would  seem,  about  the  reform  of  prisons. 
He  exclaims,  justly  I  have  no  doubt,  about  the  state  of  our 
Lock-up  House.  For  myself,  I  have  some  distrust  of  the 
fanaticism — even  of  philanthropy.  A  good  part  of  it  arises 

*  My  Aunt  Margaret's  Miwor,  etc.  2  See  Jan.  25,  1828  (p.  114). 


126  JOURNAL.  [FEB. 

in  general  from  mere  vanity  and  love  of  distinction,  gilded 
over  to  others  and  to  themselves  with  some  show  of 
"benevolent  sentiment.  The  philanthropy  of  Howard, 
mingled  with  his  ill-usage  of  his  son,  seems  to  have 
risen  to  a  pitch  of  insanity.  Yet  without  such  extra- 
ordinary men,  who  call  attention  to  the  subject  by  their 
own  peculiarities,  prisons  would  have  remained  the  same 
dungeons  which  they  were  forty  or  fifty  years  ago.  I  do 
not  see  the  propriety  of  making  them  dandy  places  of 
detention.  They  should  be  a  place  of  punishment,  and  that 
can  hardly  be  if  men  are  lodged  better,  and  fed  bettor,  than 
when  they  are  at  large.  The  separation  of  ranks  is  an 
excellent  distinction,  and  is  nominally  provided  for  in  all 
modern  prisons.  But  the  size  of  most  of  them  is  inadequate 
to  the  great  increase  of  crime,  and  so  the  pack  is  shuffled 
together  again  for  want  of  room  to  keep  them  separate. 
There  are  several  prisons  constructed  on  excellent  principles, 
the  economy  of  which  becomes  deranged  so  soon  as  the 
death  takes  place  of  some  keen  philanthropist  who  had  the 
business  ef  a  whole  committee,  which,  having  lost  him, 
remained  like  a  carcass  without  a  head.  But  I  have  never 
seen  a  plan  for  keeping  in  order  these  resorts  of  guilt  and 
misery,  without  presupposing  a  superintendence  of  a  kind 
which  might  perhaps  be  exercised,  could  we  turn  out  upon 
the  watch  a  guard  of  angels.  But,  alas !  jailors  and  turn- 
keys are  rather  like  angels  of  a  different  livery,  nor  do  I  see 
how  it  is  possible  to  render  them  otherwise.  Superinten- 
dence is  all  you  can  trust  to,  and  superintendence,  save  in 
some  rare  cases,  is  hard  to  come  by,  where  it  is  to  be 
vigilantly  and  constantly  exercised.  Quis  custodiet  ipsos 
custodesl  As  to  reformation,  I  have  no  great  belief  in  it, 
where  the  ordinary  class  of  culprits,  who  are  vicious  from 
ignorance  or  habit,  are  the  subjects  of  the  experiment.  "A 
sliver  from  a  broken  loaf "  is  thought  as  little  of  by  the 
male  set  of  delinquents  as  by  the  fair  frail.  The  stato  of 


1828.]  JOUKNAL.  127 

society  now  leads  so  much  to  great  accumulations  of 
humanity,  that  we  cannot  wonder  if  it  ferment  and  reek 
like  a  compost  dunghill.  Nature  intended  that  population 
should  be  diffused  over  the  soil  in  proportion  to  its  extent. 
We  have  accumulated  in  huge  cities  and  smothering 
manufactories  the  numbers  which  should  be  spread  over 
the  face  of  a  country ;  and  what  wonder  that  they  should  be 
corrupted  ?  We  have  turned  healthful  and  pleasant  brooks 
into  morasses  and  pestiferous  lakes, — what  wonder  the  soil 
should  be  unhealthy  ?  A  great  deal,  I  think,  might  be  done 
by  executing  the  punishment  of  death,  without  a  chance  of 
escape,  in  all  cases  to  which  it  should  be  found  properly 
applicable  \  of  course  these  occasions  being  diminished  to  one 
out  of  twenty  to  which  capital  punishment  is  now  assigned. 
Our  ancestors  brought  the  country  to  order  by  kilting1 
thieves  and  banditti  with  strings.  So  did  the  French 
when  at  Naples,  and  bandits  became  for  the  time  unheard 
of.  When  once  the  evil  habit  is  altered — when  men 
are  taught  a  crime  of  a  certain  character  is  connected 
inseparably  with  death,  the  moral  habits  of  a  population 
become  altered,  and  you  may  in  the  next  age  remit  the 
punishment  which  in  this  it  has  been  necessary  to  inflict 
with  stern  severity,  I  think  whoever  pretends  to  reform  a 
corrupted  nation,  or  a  disorderly  regiment,  or  an  ill-ordered 
ship  of  war,  must  begin  by  severity,  and  only  resort  to 
gentleness  when  he  has  acquired  the  complete  mastery  by 
terror — the  terror  being  always  attached  to  the  law ;  and, 
the  impression  once  made,  he  can  afford  to  govern  with 
mildness,  and  lay  the  iron  rule  aside. 

Mr.  Mackay  talked  big  of  the  excellent  state  of  prisons 
in  Ireland.  J'en  doute  wxipeM.  That  the  warm-hearted  and 
generous  Irish  would  hurry  eagerly  into  any  scheme  which 

1  To  WA9  i.e.  to  elevate  or  lift  "  Their  bare  preaching  now 

,P  aaytMng  4uioUy ,  this  appUed,  ^  KT  7^^ 

ludicrously,  to  tucking  by  a  halter.  Could  do  by  ^^  ^  mt]l  s^ngs." 
— Jamieson's  Dictionary.  CLELAND, 


128  JOUKKAL.  [FEB. 

had  benevolence  for  its  motive,  I  readily  believe ;  but  that 
Pat  should  have  been  able  to  maintain  that  calm,  all-seeing, 
all-enduring  species  of  superintendence  necessary  to  direct 
the  working  of  the  best  plan  of  prison  discipline,  I  greatly 
hesitate  to  believe. 

Well,  leaving  all  this,  I  wish  Mr.  Mackay  good  luck,  with 
some  little  doubt  of  his  success,  but  none  of  his  intentions.  I 
am  come  in  my  work  to  that  point  where  a  lady  who  works  a 
stocking  must  count  by  threads,  and  bring  the  various  loose 
ends  of  my  story  together.  They  are  too  many. 

February  21. — Last  night  after  dinner  I  rested  from  my 
work,  and  read  third  part  of  [Theodore  Hook's]  Sayings  and 
Doings,  which  shows  great  knowledge  of  life  in  a  certain 
sphere,  and  very  considerable  powers  of  wit,  which  somewhat 
damages  the  effect  of  the  tragic  parts.  But  he  is  an  able 
writer,  and  so  much  of  his  work  is  well  said,  that  it  will  carry 
through  what  is  mangut.  I  hope  the  same  good  fortune  for 
other  folks. 

I  am  watching  and  waiting  till  I  hit  on  some  quaint  and 
clever  mode  of  extricating,  but  do  not  see  a  glimpse  of  any 
one.  James  B.,  too,  discourages  me  a  good  deal  by  his  silence, 
waiting,  I  suppose,  to  be  invited  to  disgorge  a  full  allowance 
of  his  critical  bile.  But  he  may  wait  long  enough,  for  I  am 
discouraged  enough.  Now  here  is  the  advantage  of  Edin- 
burgh. In  the  country,  if  a  sense  of  inability  once  seizes  me, 
it  haunts  me  from  morning  to  night ;  but  in  Edinburgh  the 
time  is  so  occupied  and  frittered  away  by  official  duties  and 
chance  occupation,  that  you  have  not  time  to  play  Master 
Stephen  and  be  gentlemanlike  and  melancholy.1  On  th& 
other  hand,  you  never  feel  in  town  those  spirit-stirring 
influences — those  glances  of  sunshine  that  make  amends  for 
clouds  and  mist.  The  country  is  said  to  be  quieter  life ;  not 
to  me,  I  am  sure.  In  the  town  the  business  I  have  to  do 
hardly  costs  me  more  thought  than  just  occupies  my  mind, 

1  See  Jonson's  Every  Man  in  his  Humour,  Act  i.  Sc.  3. 


1828.]  JOURNAL.  129 

and  I  have  as  much  of  gossip  and  ladylike  chat  as  consumes 
the  time  pleasantly  enough.  In  the  country  I  am  thrown 
entirely  on  my  own  resources,  and  there  is  no  medium 
betwixt  happiness  and  the  reverse. 

February  22. — Went  to  Court,  and  remained  there  until 
one  o'clock.  Then  to  Mr.  Colvin  Smith's  and  sat  to  be  stared 
at  till  three  o'clock.  This  is  a  great  bore  even  when  you 
have  a  companion,  sad  when  you  are  alone  and  can  only 
disturb  the  painter  by  your  chatter.  After  dinner  I  had 
proofs  to  the  number  of  four.  J.  B.  is  outrageous  about 
the  death  of  Oliver  Proudf ute,  one  of  the  characters ;  but 
I  have  a  humour  to  be  cruel. 

"His  business  'tis  to  die." 

Eeceived  a  present  from  a  Mr.  Dobie  of  a  candlestick  said  to 
be  that  of  the  Eev.  Mr.  G-uthrie,  minister  of  Fenwick  in  the 
seventeenth  century, — very  civil  of  a  gentleman  unknown,  if 
there  comes  no  request  to  look  over  poems,  or  to  get  made  a 
gauger,  or  the  like,  for  I  have  seen  that  kind  of  compliment 
made  on  the  principle  on  which  small  balloons  are  sent  up 
before  a  large  one,  to  see  how  the  wind  sits.  After  dinner 
proof-sheets. 

February  23. — Morning  proof-sheets  galore.  Then,  to 
Parliament  House.  After  that,  at  one,  down  to  Sir  William 
MacLeod  Bannatyne,  who  has  made  some  discoveries  con- 
cerning Bannatyne  the  collector  of  poetry,  and  furnished  me 
with  some  notes  to  that  purpose.  He  informs  me  that  the 
MacLeod,  alias  MacOruiskin,  who  met  Dr.  Johnson  on  the 
Isle  of  Skye,  was  Mr.  Alexander  MacLeod,  Advocate,  a  son  of 
MacLeod  of  Muiravonside.  He  was  subject  to  fits  of  insanity 
at  times,  very  clever  at  others.1  Sir  William  mentioned  the 
old  Laird  of  Bernera,  who,  summoned  by  his  Chief  to  join  him 
with  all  the  men  he  could  make,  when  the  Chief  was  raising 
his  men  for  Government,  sent  him  a  letter  to  this  purpose : — 
"Dear  Laird, — No  man  would  like  better  to  be  at  your  back 
1  See  Boswell's  Johwon,  Croker's  ed.  imp.  Svo,  p.  318. 

VOL.  II.  I 


130  JOURNAL.  [FEB. 

than  I  would ;  but  on  this  occasion  it  cannot  be.  I  send  my 
men,  who  are  at  your  service ;  for  myself,  higher  duties  carry 
me  elsewhere."  He  went  off  accordingly  alone,  and  joined 
Eaasay  as  a  volunteer.  I  returned  by  the  printing  office  and 
found  J.  B.  in  great  feather.  He  tells  me  Oadell,  on  squaring 
his  books  and  making  allowance  for  bad  debts,  has  made 
between  £3000  and  £4000,  lodged  in  bank.  He  does  nothing 
but  with  me.  Thus  we  stand  on  velvet  as  to  finance.  Met 
Staffa,1  who  walked  with  me  and  gave  me  some  Gaelic  words 
which  I  wanted. 

I  may  mention  that  I  saw  at  the  printing-office  a  part  of 
a  review  on  Leigh  Hunt's  Anecdotes  of  Byron,  It  is  written 
with  power,  apparently  by  Professor  Wilson,  but  with  a  degree 
of  passion  which  rather  diminishes  the  effect;  for  nothing 
can  more  lessen  the  dignity  of  the  satirist  than  being  or 
seeming  to  be  in  a  passion.  I  think  it  may  come  to  a  bloody 
arbitrament,2  for  if  L  H.  should  take  it  up  as  a  gentleman, 
Wilson  is  the  last  man  to  flinch.  I  hope  Lockhart  will  not 
be  dragged  in  as  second  or  otherwise.  Went  to  Jeffrey's  to 
dinner — there  were  Mrs.  and  Miss  Sydney  Smith,  Lords 
Gillies  and  Corehouse,  etc.  etc. 

February  24. — I  fancy  I  had  drunk  a  glass  or  two  over 

1  Sir  Reginald  Steuart  Seton  of  duels  arising  from  the  some  party 
Stafia,  for  many  years  Secretary  to  rancour  in  February  1821  (Scott  and 
the    Highland    and    Agricultural  Christie)  and  in  March  1822  (Stuart 
Society;  died  at  Edinburgh  in  1838.  and  Boswell),  with  all  the  untold 

2  On  reading  the  savage  article  domestic    miseries    accompanying 
on  Hunt's  Byron  published  in  Black-  them.     It  is  satisfactory  to  think 
wood,  for  March  1828,  Sir  Walter's  that  this  was  about  the  last  of  those 
thoughts  must  have  gone  back  not  uncalled  for  literary  onslaughts,  as 
only  to  Gourgaud's  affair    of  the  one  finds,  in  turning  over  the  pago» 
previous  year,    and  to  the  more  of  Blacfaoood,  that  in  1834  Pro- 
aerwus  matter  of  the  Beacon  news-  f essor  Wilson  in  the  Nodes  rebukes 
paper  in  1821,— when,  to  use  Lord  some  one  for  reviving  "forgotten 
Cockbura's words,  "it  was  dreadful  falsehoods,"  praises  Leigh  Hunt's 
to  think  that  a  life  like  Scott's  was  London   Journal,    and    adds   the 
for  a  moment  in  peril  in  such  a  ecstatic  words,  wnich  he  also  ad- 
cause  "—but  he  must  also  have  had  dressed  later  on  to  Lord  Jeffrey, 
very  sad  recollections  of  the  bloody  "The  animosities  are  mortal,  but 
results   of   the    two    melancholy  the  humanities  live  for  ever." 


1828.]  JOURNAL.  131 

much  last  night,  for  I  have  the  heartburn  this  morning. 
But  a  little  magnesia  salves  that  sore.  Meantime  I  have 
had  an  inspiration  which  shows  me  my  good  angel  has  not 
left  me.  Tor  these  two  or  three  days  I  have  been  at  what 
the  "Critic"  calls  a  dead-lock1 — all  my  incidents  and  per- 
sonages ran  into  a  gordian  knot  of  confusion,  to  which  I 
could  devise  no  possible  extrication.  I  had  thought  on  the 
subject  several  days  with  something  like  the  despair  which 
seized  the  fair  princess,  commanded  by  her  ugly  step-mother 
to  assort  a  whole  garret  full  of  tangled  silk  threads  of  every 
kind  and  colour,  when  in  comes  Prince  Perciaet  with  a 
wand,  whisks  it  over  the  miscellaneous  mass,  and  lol  all 
the  threads  are  as  nicely  arranged  as  in  a  seamstress*  house- 
wife. It  has  often  happened  to  me  that  when  I  went  to 
bed  with  my  head  as  ignorant  as  my  shoulders  what  I  was 
to  do  next,  I  have  waked  in  the  morning  with  a  distinct 
and  accurate  conception  of  the  mode,  good  or  bad,  in  which 
the  plot  might  be  extricated.  It  seems  to  me  that  the  action 
of  the  intellect,  on  such  occasions,  is  rather  accelerated  by 
the  little  fever  which  an  extra  glass  of  wine  produces  on  the 
system.  Of  course  excess  is  out  of  the  question.  Now  this 
may  seem  strange,  but  it  is  quite  true ;  and  it  is  no  less  so 
that  I  have  generally  written  to  the  middle  of  one  of  these 
novels,  without  having  the  least  idea  how  it  was  to  end, 
in  short  in  the  hob  nab  at  a  venture  style  of  composition. 
So  now,  this  hitch  being  over,  I  fold  my  paper,  lock  up 
my  journal,  and  proceed  to  labour  with  good  hope. 

February  25. — This  being  Monday,  I  carried  on  my  work 
according  to  the  new  model.  Dined  at  home  and  in  quiet. 
But  I  may  notice  that  yesterday  Mr.  "Williams,  the  learned 
Eector  of  our  new  Academy,  who.  now  leaves  us,  took  his 
dinner  here,  We  had  a  long  philological  t£te-&-t&te.  He  is 
opinionative,  as  he  has  some  title  to  be,  but  very  learned, 
and  with  a  juster  view  of  his  subject  than  is  commonly 
1  Act  m,  Sc.  1. 


132  JOURNAL.  [EBB. 

entertained,  for  he  traces  words  to  the  same  source — not 
from  sound  but  sense.  He  casts  "backwards  thus  to  the 
root,  while  many  compare  the  ends  of  the  twigs  without 
going  further. 

This  day  I  went  to  the  funeral  of  Mr.  Henderson,  late 
of  Eildon  Hall,  a  kind-hearted  man,  who  rose  to  great  wealth 
by  honest  means,  and  will  be  missed  and  regretted. 

In  the  evening  I  went  to  the  promenade  in  the  Exhibi- 
tion of  Pictures,  which  was  splendidly  lighted  up  and  filled 
with  fashionable  company.  I  think  there  was  a  want  of 
beauty,^or  perhaps  the  gas-lights  were  unfavourable  to 
the  ladies'  looks. 

February  26. — Business  filled  up  the  day  till  one,  when 
I  sat  to  Mr.  Smith.  Tiresome  work,  even  though  "Will  Clerk 
chaperoned  me.  We  dined  at  Archi6  Swinton's.  Met  Lord 
Lothian,  Lord  Cringletie,  etc.  This  day  I  have  wrought 
almost  nothing,  but  I  am  nearly  half  a  volume  before  tho 
press.  Lord  Morton,1  married  to  a  daughter  of  my  friend 
Sir  George  Rose,  is  come  to  Edinburgh.  He  seems  a  very 
gentlemanlike  man,  and  she  pleasing  and  willing  to  bo 
pleased.  I  had  the  pleasure  to  be  of  some  little  use  to  him 
in  his  election  as  one  of  the  Scottish  Peers.  T  owe  Sir 
George  Eose  much  for  his  attention  to  "Walter  at  Berlin. 

February  27. — At  Court  till  half-past  two.  Then  to  tho 
Waterloo  Tavern,  where  we  had  a  final  and  totally  uixf ruc- 
tuous  meeting  with  the  Committee  of  the  Coal  Gas  people* 
So  now  my  journey  to  London  is  resolved  on-  I  shall  lose 
at  least  £500  by  the  job,  and  get  little  thanks  from  those 
.  I  make  the  sacrifice  for.  But  the  sacrifice  shall  bo  made. 
Anything  is  better  than  to  break  one's  word,  or  desert  a 
sinking  vessel.  Heartily  do  I  wish  these  "Colliers"  had 
seen  the  matter  in  the  best  light  for  their  own  interest 
But  there  is  no  help.  One  thing  is  certain,  that  I  shall  see 
my  whole  family  once  more  around  me,  and  that  is  worth  the 

1  Sholto  Douglas,  eighteenth  Earl  of  Morton, 


1828.]  JOUENAL.  133 

£500.  Anne  too  starts  at  the  idea  of  the  sea.  I  am  horribly 
vexed,  however.  Gibson  always  expected  they  would  come 
in,  but  there  seemed  to  me  little  chance  of  it ;  perhaps  they 
thought  we  were  not  serious  in  our  proposal  to  push  through 
the  Act.  Wrought  a  little  in  the  evening,  not  much. 

February  28. — At  Court  till  four.  When  I  came  home 
I  did  work  a  little,  but  as*we  expected  company  it  was  not 
to  much  purpose.  Lord  Chief  Commissioner  dined  with  us 
with  Miss  Adam ;  Mr.  Hutchinson,  brother  of  Lord  Donough- 
more,  and  Miss  Jones,  Will  Clerk  and  John  Thomson  made 
up  the  party,  and  we  had  a  pleasant  evening,  as  such  a 
handful  always  secures.  Stayed  till  wine-and- water  time. 
Thus  flew  another  day. 

February  29. — I  had  my  proof-sheets  as  usual  in  the 
morning  and  the  Court  as  usual  till  two.  Then  one  or  two 
visits  and  corrected  the  discourses  for  Gordon.  This  is 
really  a  foolish  scrape,  but  what  could  I  do  ?  It  involved 
the  poor  lad's  relief  from  something  very  like  ruin.  I  got 
a  letter  from  the  young  man  Beynolds  accepting  on  Heath's 
part  my  terms  for  article  to  The  Keepsake,  namely  £500, 
— I  to  be  at  liberty  to  reprint  the  article  in  my  works  after 
three  years.  Mr.  Heath  to  print  it  in  The  Keepsake  as  long 
and  often  as  he  pleases,  but  not  in  any  other  form.  I  shall 
close  with  them.  If  I  make  my  proposed  bargain  with 
Murray,  all  pecuniary  matters  will  be  easy  in  an  unusual 
degree.  Dined  at  Robert  Hamilton's  with  Lord  and  Lady 
Belhaven,  Walter  Campbell,  and  a  number  of  Westlanders. 


MAECH. 

March  1. — Wrought  a  little  this  morning;  always  creep- 
ng  on.  "We  had  a  hard  pull  at  the  Court,  and  after  It 
[  walked  a  little  for  exercise,  as  I  fear  indigestion  from 
lining  out  so  often. 

Dined  to-day  with  the  bankers  who  went  as  delegates 
;o  London  in  Malachi  Malagrowther's  days.  Sir  John  Hay 
EQnnear  and  Tom  Allan  were  my  only  acquaintances  of  the 
party ;  the  rest  seemed  shrewd  capable  men.  I  particularly 
•emarked  a  Mr.  Sandeman  with  as  intellectual  a  head  as 
[  ever  witnessed. 

March  2. — A  day  of  hard  work  with  little  interrup- 
ion,  and  completed  volume  second.  I  am  not  much  pleased 
vith  it.  It  wants  what  I  desire  it  to  have,  and  that  is 
Dassion. 

The  two  Ballantynes  and  Mr.  Cadell  dined  with  me 
quietly.  Heard  from  London ;  all  well. 

March  3. — I  set  about  clearing  my  desk  of  unanswered 
etters,  which  I  had  suffered  to  accumulate  to  an  Augean 
leap.  I  daresay  I  wrote  twenty  cards  that  might  have 
)een  written  at  the  time  without  half-a-minute  being  lost. 
Co  do  everything  when  it  ought  to  be  done  is  the  soul  of 
expedition.  But  then,  if  you  are  interrupted  eternally 
with  these  petty  avocations,  the  current  of  the  mind  is 
compelled  to  flow  in  shallows,  and  you  lose  the  deep  in- 
tensity of  thought  which  alone  can  float  plans  of  depth 
and  magnitude.  I  sometimes  wish  I  were  one  of  those 
formalists  who  can  assign  each  hour  of  the  day  its  special 
sccupations,  not  to  be  encroached  upon;  but  it  always 


134 


1828.]  JOITKNAL.  135 

returns  upon  my  mind  that  I  do  better  d  la  dtbandade  than 
I  could  with  rules  of  regular  study.  A  work  begun  is  with 
me  a  stone  turned  over  with  the  purpose  of  rolling  it  down 
hill.  The  first  revolutions  are  made  with  difficulty — but  vires 
acquirit  eundo.  Now,  were  the  said  stone  arrested  in  its  pro- 
gress, the  whole  labour  would  be  to  commence  again.  To 
take  a  less  conceited  simile :  I  am  like  a  spavined  horse,  who 
sets  out  lame  and  stiff,  but  when  he  warms  in  his  gear 
makes  a  pretty  good  trot  of  it,  so  that  it  is  better  to  take 
a  good  stage  of  him  while  you  can  get  it.  Besides,  after 
all,  I  have  known  most  of  those  formalists,  who  were  not 
men  of  business  or  of  office  to  whom  hours  are  prescribed 
as  a  part  of  duty,  but  who  voluntarily  make  themselves 
"  Slaves  to  an  hour,  and  vassals  to  a  bell," J — 

to  be  what  I  call  very  poor  creatures. 

General  Ainslie  looked  in,  and  saddened  me  by  talking 
of  poor  Don.  The  General  is  a  medallist,  and  entertains 
an  opinion  that  the  bonnet-piece  of  James  V.  is  the  work 
of  some  Scottish  artist  who  died  young,  and  never  did  any- 
thing else.  It  is  far  superior  to  anything  which  the  Mint 
produced  since  the  Eoman  denarii.  He  also  told  me  that 
the  name  of  Andrea  de  Ferrara  is  famous  in  Italy  as  an 
armourer. 

Dined  at  home,  and  went  to  the  Eoyal  Society  in  the 
evening  after  sending  off  my  processes  for  the  Sheriff 
Court.  Also  went  after  the  Society  to  Mr.  James  Russell's 
symposium. 

March  4. — A  letter  from  Italy  signed  J.  S.  with  many 
acute  remarks  on  inaccuracies  in  the  life  of  Bonaparte. 

His  tone  is  hostile  decidedly,  but  that  shall  not  prevent 
my  making  use  of  all  his  corrections  where  just. 

The  wretched  publication  of  Leigh  Hunt  on  the  subject 
of  Byron  is  to  bring  forward  Tom  Moore's  life  of  that  dis- 

1  Oldham— "  Lines  addressed  to     sity."— Poems    and    Translations, 
a  friend  about  to  loave  the  Univer-     8vo.    Loud.  1694. 


136  JOUEUAL.  [MAKCH 

tinguished  poet,  and  I  am  honoured  and  flattered  by  the 
information  that  he  means  to  dedicate  it  to  me.1 

A  great  deal  of  worry  in  the  Court  to-day,  and  I  lost 
my  spectacles,  and  was  a  dark  and  perplexed  man — found 
them  again  though.  Wrote  to  Lockhart  and  to  Charles, 
and  will  do  more  if  I  can,  but  am  sadly  done  up.  An  old 
friend  came  and  pressed  unmercifully  some  selfish  request 
of  his  own  to  ask  somebody  to  do  something  for  his  son. 
I  shall  be  glad  to  be  at  Abbotsford  to  get  rid  of  this  town, 
where  I  have  not,  in  the  proper  and  social  sense  of  the  word, 
a  single  friend  whose  company  pleases  me.  In  the  country 
I  have  always  Tom  Purdie. 

Dined  at  the  Lord  Chief  Commissioner's,  where  I  met, 
the  first  time  for  thirty  years,  my  old  friend  and  boon  com- 
panion, with  whom  I  shared  the  wars  of  Bacchus,  Venus, 
and  sometimes  of  Mars.  The  past  rushed  on  me  like  a 
flood  and  almost  brought  tears  into  my  eyes.  It  is  no  very 
laudable  exploit  to  record,  but  I  once  drank  three  bottles 
of  wine  with  this  same  rogue — Sir  William  Forbes  and  Sir 
Alexander  "Wood  being  of  the  party.  David  Erskine  of 
Cardross  keeps  his  looks  better  than  most  of  our  contem- 
poraries. I  hope  we  shall  meet  for  a  longer  time. 

March  5. — I  corrected  sheets,  and,  being  a  Teind  Wednes- 
day, began  the  second  volume  and  proceeded  as  far  as  page 
fourth. 

We  dined  at  Hector  Macdonald's  with  several  Highlanders, 
most  of  whom  were  in  their  garb,  intending  to  go  to  a  great 
fancy  ball  in  the  evening.  There  were  young  Cluny  Mac* 
pherson,  Campbell  Airds,  Campbell  Saddell,  and  others  of 
the  race  of  Diarmid.  I  went  for  an  hour  to  the  ball,  where 

1  On  the  20tli  April  Moore  writes  Wisdom  and  Wit, 
to  Scott :  «*  I  am  delighted  you  do         '  With  folly  at  full  lengttt  between.' 

not  reject  my  proffered  dedication,  However,  never  mind ;  in  cordial 

though  between  two  such  names  as  feeling  and  good  fellowship  I  flatter 

yours  and  Byron's  I  shall  but  realise  myself  I  am  a  match  for  cither  of 

the  description  in  the  old  couplet  of  you. " 


1828.]  JOURNAL.  137 

there  were  many  gay  and  some  grotesque  figures.  A  dressed 
ball  is,  for  the  first  half-hour,  a  splendid  spectacle ;  you  see 
youth  and  beauty  dressed  in  their  gayest  attire,  unlimited, 
save  by  their  own  taste,  and  enjoying  the  conscious  power 
of  charming,  which  gives  such  life  and  alacrity  to  the 
features.  But  the  charm  ceases  in  this  like  everything  else. 
The  want  of  masks  takes  away  the  audacity  with  which  the 
disguised  parties  conduct  themselves  at  a  masquerade,  and 
[leaves]  the  sullen  sheepishness  which  makes  them,  I  suppose, 
the  worst  maskers  in  Europe.  At  the  only  real  masquerade 
which  I  have  known  in  Edinburgh  there  were  many,  if  not 
most,  of  those  who  had  determined  to  sustain  characters, 
who  had  more  ill-breeding  than  facetiousness.  The  jests 
were  chiefly  calculated  to  give  pain,  and  two  or  three  quarrels 
were  with  difficulty  prevented  from  ripening  into  duels. 
A  fancy  ball  has  no  offence  in  it,  therefore  cannot  be  wrecked 
on  this  rock.  But,  on  the  other  hand,  it  is  horribly  dull 
work  when  the  first  coup  d'c&il  is  familiar. 

There  were  some  good  figures,  and  some  grossly  absurd. 
A  very  gay  cavalier  with  a  broad  bright  battle-axe  was 
pointed  out  to  me  as  an  eminent  distiller,  and  another 
knight  in  the  black  coarse  armour  of  a  cuirassier  of  the 
17th  century  stalked  about  as  if  he  thought  himself  the 
very  mirror  of  chivalry.  He  was  the  son  of  a  celebrated 
upholsterer,  so  might  claim  the  broad  axe  from  more  titles 
than  one.  There  was  some  good  dancing ;  Cluny  Macpher- 
son  footed  it  gallantly. 

March,  6. — Wrote  two  pages  this  morning  before  break- 
fast. Went  to  the  Court,  where  I  learned  that  the  "  Colliers  " 
are  in  alarm  at  the  determination  shown  by  our  Committee, 
and  are  willing  to  give  better  terms.  I  hope  this  is  so — but 
Cogan  no,  Sfiie — peace  or  war,  I  care  not.  I  never  felt  less 
anxiety  about  where  I  went  and  what  I  did.  A  feather 
just  lighted  on  the  ground  can  scarce  be  less  concerned 
where  the  next  blast  may  carry  it.  If  I  go,  I  shall  see  my 


138  JOUBNAL  [MAitcir 

cluldren — if  I  stay,  I  shall  mend  my  fortune.  Dined  at  home 
and  went  to  the  play  in  the  evening.  Lady  Torphichen  had 
commanded  the  play,  and  there  were  all  my  Swinton  cousins 
young  and  old.  The  play  was  "  A  Bold  Stroke  for  a  Wife," l 
— Charles  Kemble  acting  as  Feignwell.  The  plot  is  extra- 
vagant nonsense,  but  with  lively  acting  the  ludicrousness  of 
the  situation  bears  it  through,  and  few  comedies  act  better. 
After  this  came  Rob  Eoy,  where  the  Bailie  played  with 
his  usual  excellence.  The  piece  was  not  over  until  near 
one  in  the  morning,  yet  I  did  not  feel  tired — which  is  much. 

March  7. — To-day  I  wrought  and  corrected  proof-sheets ; 
went  to  the  Court,  and  had  a  worry  at  the  usual  trashy 
small  wares  which  are  presented  at  the  end  of  a  Session. 
An  official  predecessor  of  mine,  the  facetious  Robert  Sinclair, 
was  wont  to  say  the  three  last  days  of  the  Session  should 
be  abolished  by  Act  of  Parliament.2  Came  home  late,  and 
was  a  good  deal  broken  in  upon  by  visitors.  Amongst 
others,  John  Swinton,  now  of  Swinton,  brought  me  the 
skull  of  his  ancestor,  Sir  Allan  Swinton,  who  flourished  five 
hundred  years  ago.  I  will  get  a  cast  made  of  the  stout  old 
carle.  It  is  rare  to  see  a  genuine  relic  of  the  mortal  frame 
drawing  so  far  back.  Went  to  my  Lord  Gillies's  to  dinner, 
and  witnessed  a  singular  exhibition  of  personification. 

Miss  Stirling  Grame,8  a  lady  of  the  Duntroon  family, 

1  By  Mrs.  Centlivre.  traordinary  in  her,  but  let  her  put 

2  See  Life,  vol.  viii.  p.  257w.  on  the  old  lady ;  it  was  as  if  a  war- 

3  Miss  Graham  tells  us  in  her  lock  spell  had  passed  over  her ;  not 
Mystifications  (Edin.  1864)  that  Sir  merely  her  look  but  her  nature  was 
Walter,  on  leaving  the  room,  whis-  changed  :    her   spirit   had    passed 
pered  in  her  ear,  "  Awa,  awa,  the  into  the  character  she  represented ; 
Beil's  ower  grit  wi'  you."    "To  and  jest,  quick  retort,  whimsical 
meet  her  in  company,"  wrote  Dr.  fancy,  the  wildest  nonsense  flowed 
John  Brown  half  a  century  later,  from  her  lips,  with  a  freedom  and 
when  she  was  still  the  charm  and  truth  to  nature  which  appeared  to 
the  delight  as  well  as  the  centre  of  be  impossible  in  her  own  person- 
a   large   circle,  of    friends,    "one  ality." 

saw  a  quiet,  unpretending,  sensible,  With  this  faculty  for  satire  and 
shrewd,  kindly  little  lady ;  perhaps  imitation,  Miss  Graham  never  used 
you  would  not  remark  anything  ex-  it  to  give  pain.  She  was  as  much 


1828.]  JOUENAL.  139 

from  which  Clavers  was  descended,  looks  like  thirty  years 
old,  and  has  a  face  of  the  Scottish  cast,  with  a  good  expres- 
sion in  point  of  good  sense  and  good  humour.  Her  con- 
versation, so  far  as  I  have  had  the  advantage  of  hearing  it, 
is  shrewd  and  sensible,  but  no  ways  brilliant.  She  dined 
with  us,  went  off  as  to  the  play,  and  returned  in  the  char- 
acter of  an  old  Scottish  lady.  Her  dress  and  behaviour 
were  admirable,  andi^,  conversation  unique.  I  was  in  the 
secret,  of  course,  did  my  best  to  keep  up  the  ball,  but  she 
cut  me  out  of  all  feather.  The  prosing  account  she  gave 
of  her  son,  the  antiquary,  who  found  an  auld  wig  in  a  slate 
quarry,  was  extremely  ludicrous,  and  she  puzzled  the  Pro- 
fessor of  Agriculture  with  a  merciless  account  of  the  suc- 
cession of  crops  in  the  parks  around  her  old  mansion-house. 
No  person  to  whom  the  secret  was  not  intrusted  had  the 
least  guess  of  an  imposture,  except  one  shrewd  young  lady 
present,  who  observed  the  hand  narrowly  and  saw  it  was 
plumper  than  the  age  of  the  lady  seemed  to  warrant.  This 
lady,  and  Miss  Bell 1  of  Ooldstream,  have  this  gift  of  personifi- 
cation to  a  much  higher  degree  than  any  person  I  ever  saw. 
March  8. — Wrote  in  the  morning,  then  to  Court,  where 
we  had  a  sederunt  till  nigh  two  o'clock.  From  thence  to 
the  Coal  Gas  Committee,  with  whom  we  held  another,  and, 
thank  God,  a  final  meeting.  Gibson  went  with  me.  They 
had  Mr.  Munro,  Trotter,  Tom  Burns,  and  Inglis.  The  scene 
put  me  in  mind  of  Chichester  Cheyne's  story  of  a  Shawnee 

at  home,  too,  with  old  Scotch  say-  Miss  Graham's  friends  will  never 
ings  as  Sir  Walter  himself.  For  ex-  forget  the  evenings  they  have  spent 
ample,  speaking  of  a  field  of  cold,  at  29  Forth  Street,  Edinburgh,  or 
wetland  she  said,  "It grata*  winter  their  visits  at  Duntrune,  where  the 
and  giraed  a'  simmer,"  and  of  her-  venerable  lady  died  in  her  ninety- 
self  one  morning  at  breakfast  when  sixth  year  in  September  1877. 
she  thought  she  was  getting  too  *  Miss  Elizabeth  Bell,  daughter 
much  attention  from  her  guests  (she  of  the  Bev.  James  Bell,  minister  of 
was  at  this  time  over  ninety)  she  the  parish  of  Coldstream  from  1778 
exclaimed,  "I'm  like  the  bride  in  to  1794.  This  lady  lived  all  her  life 
the  old  song : —  in  her  native  county,  and  died  at  a 
'  Twa  were  blawing  at  her  nose  great  age  at  a  house  on  the  Tweed, 
And  three  were  buckling  at  her  shoon.' "  named  Springhill,  in  1 876. 


140  JOUENAL.  [MARCH 

Indian  and  himself,  dodging  each  other  from  behind  trees, 
for  six  or  seven  hours,  each  in  the  hope  of  a  successful  shot. 
There  was  bullying  on  both  sides,  but  we  bullied  to  best 
purpose,  for  we  must  have  surrendered  at  discretion,  not- 
withstanding the  bold  face  we  put  on  it.  On  the  other 
hand,  I  am  convinced  they  have  got  a  capital  bargain. 

March  9. — I  set  about  arranging  my  papers,  a  task  which 
I  always  take  up  with  the  greatest  possible  ill-will  and  which 
makes  me  cruelly  nervous.  I  don't  know  why  it  should  be 
so,  for  I  have  nothing  particularly  disagreeable  to  look  at ; 
far  from  it,  I  am  better  than  I  was  at  this  time  last  year,  my 
hopes  firmer,  my  health  stronger,  my  affairs  bettered  and 
bettering.  Yet  I  feel  an  inexpressible  nervousness  in  conse- 
quence of  this  employment.  The  memory,  though  it  retains 
all  that  has  passed,  has  closed  sternly  over  it;  and  this 
rummaging,  like  a  bucket  dropped  suddenly  into  a  well, 
deranges  and  confuses  the  ideas  which  slumbered  on  the 
mind.  I  am  nervous,  and  I  am  bilious,  and,  in  a  word,  I  am 
unhappy.  This  is  wrong,  very  wrong ;  and  it  is  reasonably 
to  be  apprehended  that  something  of  serious  misfortune  will 
be  the  deserved  punishment  of  this  pusillanimous  lowness  of 
spirits.  Strange  that  one  who,  in  most  things,  may  be  said 
to  have  enough  of  the  '  care  na  by ',  should  be  subject  to  such 
vile  weakness !  Well,  having  written  myself  down  an  ass, 
I  will  daub  it  no  farther,  but  e'en  trifle  till  the  humour  of 
work  comes. 

Before  the  humour  came  I  had  two  or  three  long  visits. 
Drammond  Hay,  the  antiquary  and  lyon-herald,  came  in.1 
I  do  not  know  anything  which  relieves  the  mind  so  much 
from  the  sullens  as  trifling  discussion  about  antiquarian  old- 
womawries.  It  is  like  knitting  a  stocking,  diverting  the  mind 
without  occupying  it ;  or  it  is  like,  by  Our  Lady,  a  mill-dam, 
which  leads  one's  thoughts  gently  and  imperceptibly  out  of 
the  channel  in  which  they  are  chafing  and  boiling.  To  be 
Ante,  vol.  i.  p.  253. 


1828.]  JOURNAL.  141 

sure,  it  is  only  conducting  them  to  turn  a  child's  mill ;  what 
signifies  that  ? — the  diversion  is  a  relief,  though  the  object  is 
of  little  importance.  I  cannot  tell  what  we  talked  of;  but  I 
remember  we  concluded  with  a  lamentation  on  the  unlike- 
lihood that  Government  would  give  the  Museum  £2000 
to  purchase  the  "bronze  Apollo  lately  discovered  in  Trance, 
although  the  God  of  Delos  stands  six  feet  two  in  his 
stocking-soles,  and  is  perfectly  entire,  saving  that  on  the 
right  side  hejwants  half  a  hip,  and  the  leg  from  the  knee, 
and  that  on  the'left  his  heel  is  much  damaged.  Colonel 
Ferguson  just  come  to  town — dings  with  us. 

March  10. — I  had  a  world  of  trumpery  to  do  this  morning  : 
cards  to  write,  and  business  to  transact,  visits  to  make,  etc. 
Eeceived  letters  from  the  youth  who  is  to  conduct  The 
JZeepsaJce,  with  blarney  on  a  £200  Bank  note.  No  blarney  in 
that.  I  must  set  about  doing  something  for  these  worthies. 
I  was  obliged  to  go  alone  to  dine  at  Mr.  Scott  Gala's.  Met 
the  Sinclair  family*  Lady  Sinclair  told  me  a  singular  story 
of  a  decrepit  man  keeping  a  lonely  toll  at  a  place  called  the 
Rowan-tree,  on  the  frontiers,  as  I  understood,  between  Ayr- 
shire and  Dumfriesshire  [Wigtownshire  ?].  It  was  a  wild, 
lonely  spot,  and  was  formerly  inhabited  by  robbers  and 
assassins,  who  murdered  passengers.  They  were  discovered  by 
a  boy  whom  they  had  taken  into  the  cottage  as  a  menial.  He 
had  seen  things  which  aroused  his  attention,  and  was  finally 
enlightened  as  to  the  trade  of  his  masters  by  hearing  one  of 
them,  as  he  killed  a  goat,  remark  that  the  cries  of  the  creature 
resembled  those  of  the  last  man  they  had  dealt  with.  The  boy 
fled  from  the  house,  lodged  an  information,  and  the  whole 
household  was  seized  and  executed.  The  present  inhabitants 
Lady  Sinclair  described  as  interesting.  The  man's  feet  and 
legs  had  been  frost-bitten  while  herding  the  cattle,  and  never 
recovered  the  strength  of  natural  limbs.  Tet  he  had  acquired 
some  education,  and  was  a  country  schoolmaster  for  some  time, 
till  the  distance  and  loneliness  of  the  spot  prevented  pupils 


142  JOURNAL.  [MAE 

from  attending.  His  daughter  was  a  reader,  and  begged  < 
some  old  magazines,  newspapers,  or  any  printed  book,  that  s 
might  enjoy  reading.  They  might  have  been  better  had  th 
"been  allowed  to  keep  a  cow.  But  if  they  had  been  in  co 
fortable  circumstances,  they  would  have  had  visitors  a 
lodgers,  who  might  have  carried  guns  to  destroy  the  gent 
man's  creation,  i.e.  game ;  and  for  this  risk  the  wretches  w< 
kept  in  absolute  and  abject  poverty.  I  would  rather 

himself  than  this  brutal  Earl.     The  daughter  show 

Lady  Sinclair  a  well  in  the  midst  of  a  small  bog,  of  gre 
depth,  into  which,  like  Thurtell  and  Probert,  they  used 
thrust  the  bodies  of  their  victims  till  they  had  an  opportuni 
of  burying  them.    Lady  Sinclair  stooped  to  taste  the  wat 
but  the  young  woman  said,  with  a  strong  expression 
horror, "  You  would  not  drink  it  ? "     Such  an  impression  h 
the  tale,  probably  two  centuries  old,  made  upon  the  prese 
inhabitants  of  this  melancholy  spot.     The  whole  legend 
curious ;  I  will  try  to  get  hold  of  it.1 

March  11. — I  sent  Beynolds  a  sketch  of  two  Scotti 
stories  for  subjects  of  art  for  his  Keepsake — the  death  of  t 
Laird's  Jock  the  one,  the  other  the  adventure  of  Dune 
Stuart  with  the  stag. 

Mr.  Drummond  Hay  breakfasted  with  me — a  good  f ello 
but  a  considerable  bore.  He  brought  me  a  beautiful  bron 
statue  of  Hercules,  about  ten  inches  or  a  foot  in  heigl 
beautifully  wrought.  He  bought  it  in  France  for  70  fran< 
and  refused  £300  from  Payne  Knight.  It  is  certainly  a  me 
beautiful  piece  of  art.  The  lion's  hide  which  hung  over  t 
shoulders  had  been  of  silver,  and,  to  turn  it  to  account,  t 
arm  over  which  it  hung  was  cut  off;  otherwise  the  stat 
was  perfect  and  extremely  well  wrought.  Allan  Swintoi 
skull  sent  back  to  Archibald  Swinton 

March  12. — The  boy  got  four  leaves  of  copy  to-day,  a] 

1  The    Murder    Hole,    a    story     this  name,   was  printed  in  Bla* 
founded  on  the  tradition  and  Tinder     wood's  Mag.,  vol.  xxv.  p.  189 :  185 


1828.]  JOTJENAL.  143 

I  wrote  three  more.  Eeceived  by  Mr.  Cadell  from  Treuttel 
and  Wurtz  for  articles  in  Foreign  Review  £52,  10s.;  which 
is  at  my  credit  with  him.  Poor  Gillies  has  therefore  kept 
his  word  so  far,  but  it  is  enough  to  have  sacrificed  £100  to 
him  already  in  literary  labour,  which  I  make  him  welcome 
to.  I  cannot  spare  him  more — which,  besides,  would  do  him 
no  good. 

March  13,  [Abbotsford]. — I  wrote  a  little  in  the  morning 
and  sent  off  some  copy.  We  came  off  from  Edinburgh  at 
ten  o'clock,  and  got  to  Abbotsford  by  four,  where  everything 
looks  unusually  advanced ;  the  birds  singing  and  the  hedges 
budding,  and  all  other  prospects  of  spring  too  premature  to 
be  rejoiced  in. 

I  found  that,  like  the  foolish  virgins,  the  servants  had 
omitted  to  get  oil  for  my  lamp,  so  I  was  obliged  to  be  idle  all 
the  evening.  But  though  I  had  a  diverting  book,  the  Tales 
of  the  Munster  Festivals,1  yet  an  evening  without  writing  hung 
heavy  on  my  hands.  The  Tales  are  admirable.  But  they 
have  one  fault,  that  the  crisis  is  in  more  cases  than  one  pro- 
tracted after  a  keen  interest  has  been  excited,  to  explain  and 
to  resume  parts  of  the  story  which  should  have  been  told 
before.  Scenes  of  mere  amusement  are  often  introduced 
betwixt  the  crisis  of  the  plot  and  the  final  catastrophe. 
This  is  impolitic.  But  the  scenes  and  characters  are  traced 
by  a  firm,  bold,  and  true  pencil,  and  my  very  criticism  shows 
that  the  catastrophe  is  interesting, — otherwise  who  would 
care  for  its  being  interrupted  ? 

March  [14  to]  1 6. — The  same  record  applies  to  these  three 
days.  From  seven  to  half-past  nine  writing — from  half-past 
nine  to  a  quarter  past  ten  a  hearty  breakfast.  From  eleven  or 
thereby,  to  one  or  two,  wrote  again,  and  from  one  or  two  ride, 
drive,  or  walk  till  dinner-time — for  two  or  three  hours — five 
till  seven,  dine  and  rest  yourself — seven  till  nine,  wrote  two 
pages  more,  from  nine  to  quarter  past  ten  lounge,  read  the 
1  Written  by  Gerald  Griffin, 


144  JOUENAL.  [MARCH 

papers,  and  then  go  to  bed.  If  your  story  is  tolerably  for- 
ward you  may,  I  think,  keep  at  this  rate  for  twelve  days, 
which  would  be  a  volume.  But  no  brain  could  hold  it  out 
longer.  Wrote  two  additional  leaves  in  the  evening. 

March  17. — Sent  away  copy  this  morning  to  J.  B,  with 
proofs.  I  then  wrote  all  the  day  till  two  o'clock,  walked 
round  the  thicket  and  by  the  water-side,  and  returning  set  to 
work  again.  So  that  I  have  finished  five  leaves  before  dinner, 
and  may  discuss  two  more  if  I  can  satisfy  myself  with  the 
way  of  winding  up  the  story.  There  are  always  at  the 
end  such  a  plaguey  number  of  stitches  to  take  up,  which 
usually  are  never  so  well  done  but  they  make  a  botch.  I 
will  try  if  the  cigar  will  inspire  me.  Hitherto  I  have  been 
pretty  clear,  and  I  see  my  way  well  enough,  only  doubt  of 
making  others  see  it  with  sufficient  simplicity.  But  it  is 
near  five,  and  I  am  too  hungry  to  write  more.1 
"Ego  nunquam  potui  scribere  jejunus." 

March  18. — I  was  sorely  worried  by  the  black  dog  this 
morning,  that  vile  palpitation  of  the  heart — that  tremor 
cordis — that  hysterical  passion  which  forces  unbidden  sighs 
and  tears,  and  falls  upon  a  contented  life  like  a  drop  of  ink 
on  white  paper,  which  is  not  the  less  a  stain  because  it 
conveys  no  meaning.  I  wrought  three  leaves,  however, 
and  the  story  goes  on.  I  dined  at  the  Club  of  the  Selkirk- 
shire yeomanry,  now  disbanded. 

"  The  Eldrich  knight  gave  up  Ms  arms 
With  many  a  sorrowful  sigh.33 

The  dissolution  of  the  Yeomanry  was  the  act  of  the  last 
ministry.  The  present  did  not  alter  the  measure  on  account 
of  the  expense  saved.  I  am  one  of  the  oldest,  if  not  the 
very  oldest  Yeoman  in  Scotland,  and  have  seen  the  rise, 
progress,  and  now  the  fall  of  this  very  constitutional  part  of 
the  national  force.  Its  efficacy,  on  occasions  of  insurrection, 
was  sufficiently  proved  in  the  Eadical  time.  But  besides,  it 

1  St.  Valentine?*  &vet  or  The  Fair  Maid  of  Perth. 


1828.]  JOUENAL.  U5 

kept  up  a  spirit  of  harmony  between  the  proprietors  of  land 
and  the  occupiers,  and  made  them  known  to  and  beloved  by 
each  other ;  and  it  gave  to  the  young  men  a  sort  of  military 
and  high-spirited  character,  which  always  does  honour  to  a 
country.  The  manufacturers  are  in  great  glee  on  this 
occasion.  I  wish  Parliament,  as  they  have  turned  the 
Yeoman  adrift  somewhat  scornfully,  may  not  have  occasion 
to  roar  them  in  again.1 

March  19. — I  applied  myself  again  to  my  labour,  my  mind 
flowing  in  a  less  gloomy  current  than  yesterday.  I  laboured 
with  little  intermission,  excepting  a  walk  as  far  as  Faldonside 
with  the  dogs,  and  at  night  I  had  not  finished  more  than 
three  leaves.  But,  indeed,  it  is  pretty  fair ;  I  must  not  work 
my  brains  too  hard,  in  case  of  provoking  the  hypochondria 
which  extreme  exertion  or  entire  indolence  are  equally  un- 
favourable to. 

March  20. — Thomson  breakfasted.  I  left  him  soon,  being 
desirous  to  finish  my  labours.  The  volume  is  finished,  all  but 
one  fourth  or  somewhat  shorter ;  four  days  should  despatch 
it  easily,  but  I  have  letters  to  write  and  things  are  getting 
into  disorder.  I  took  a  drive  with  my  daughter,  for  exercise, 
and  called  at  Huntly  Burn.  This  evening  went  on  with  work 
as  usual;  there  was  not  above  four  pages  finished,  but  my 
conscience  is  quiet  on  my  exertions. 

March  21. — I  received  young  Whytbank  to  breakfast,  and 
talked  genealogy,  which  he  understands  well ;  I  have  not  a 
head  for  it.  I  only  value  it  as  interspersed  with  anecdote. 
"Whytbank's  relationship  and  mine  exists  by  the  Shaws.  A 
younger  brother  of  Shaw  of  Sauchie,  afterwards  Greenock, 
chief  of  the  name,  was  minister  of  the  Kirk  of  Selkirk.  My 
great-grandfather,  John  Eutherford,  minister  of  the  gospel  at 
Yarrow,  married  one  of  this  reverend  gentleman's  daughters ; 
and  John  Pringle,  rector  of  Fogo,  great-grandfather  of  the 
present  Whytbank,  married  another.  It  was  Christian  Shaw, 

1  Coriolanus,  Act  TV.  Sc  6. 
VOL.  II.  K 


146  JOURNAL.  [MARCH 

my  grandmother,  who  possessed  the  manuscript  respecting 
the  murder  of  the  Shaws  by  the  Master  of  Sinclair.1  She 
could  not,  according  to  the  reckoning  of  that  age,  be  a  distant 
relation*  Whytbank  parted,  agreeing  to  return  to  dinner  to 
meet  the  bride  and  bridegroom.  I  had  little  time  to  write, 
for  Colonel  Russell,  my  cousin,  called  between  one  and  two, 
and  he  also  agreed  to  stay  dinner ;  so  I  had  a  walk  of  three 
hours  with  him  in  the  plantations.  At  dinner  we  had 
Mr,  and  Mrs.  Bruce,  Mr.  Scrope,  Mrs.  and  Dr.  Brewster, 
Whytbank,  Russell,  and  young  Nicol  Milne,  who  will 
be  a  pleasant  lad  if  he  had  a  little  polish.  I  was  glad 
of  the  society,  as  I  had  rather  felt  the  lesoin  de  parler, 
which  was  perhaps  one  cause  of  my  recent  dumps. 
Scrope  and  Colonel  Russell  stayed  all  night ;  the  rest  went 
home. 

March  22. — Had  a  packet  from  James — low  about  the 
novel;  but  I  had  another  from  Cadell  equally  uppish.  He 
proposes  for  three  novels  in  eighteen  months,  which  would  be 
£12,600.  Well,  I  like  the  bookseller's  predictions  better 
than  the  printer's.  Neither  are  bad  j  udges ;  but  James,  who 
is  the  best,  is  not  sensible  of  historical  descriptions,  and 
likes  your  novel  style  out  and  out. 

CadelTs  letter  also  contained  a  state  of  cash  matters,  since 
much  improved.  I  will  arrange  them  a  day  or  two  hence. 
I  wrote  to-day  and  took  a  long  walk.  The  thought  more 
than  once  passed  over  me,  Why  go  to  London?  I  shall 
but  throw  away  £150  or  £200  which  were  better  saved. 
Then  on  the  other  hand,  it  is  such  a  gratification  to  see 
all  the  children  that  I  must  be  tempted.  If  I  were 
alone,  I  could  scrub  it,  but  there's  no  doing  that  witli 
Anne. 

March  23. — I  wrought  regularly  till  one,  and  then  took 
the  wood  and  marked  out  to  Tom  the  places  I  would  have 
thinned,  particularly  at  the  Carlin's  hole,  which  will  require 

1  Ante,  p.  40. 


1828.]  JOURNAL. 

much  thinning.  I  had  a  letter  from  Cadell  stating  that  3000 
Tales  of  a  Grandfather  must  go  to  press,  bringing  a  return 
to  me  of  £240,  the  price  being  £80  per  thousand.  This  is 
snug  enough,  and  will  prettily  cover  my  London  journey, 
and  I  really  think  ought  in  fairness  to  silence  my  prudential 
remorse.  With  my  usual  delight  in  catching  an  apology  for 
escaping  the  regular  task  of  the  day,  I  threw  by  the  novel  of 
St.  Valentine's  Eve  and  began  to  run  through  and  correct  the 
Grandfather's  Tales  for  the  press.  If  I  live  to  finish  them, 
they  will  be  a  good  thing  for  my  younger  children.  If  I  work 
to  the  amount  of  £10,000  a  year  for  the  creditors,  I  think  I 
may  gain  a  few  hundreds  for  my  own  family  at  by-hours. 

March  24. — Sent  copy  and  proof  to  J.  B.1  I  continued 
my  revision  of  the  Tales  of  a  Grandfather  till  half -past  one. 
Then  went  to  Torwoodlee  to  wait  on  George  Pringle  and  his 
bride.  We  did  not  see  the  young  people,  but  the  old  Laird 
and  Miss  Pringle  gave  us  a  warm  reception,  and  seemed  very 
happy  on  the  occasion.  We  had  friends  to  dinner,  Mr.  and 
Mrs.  Theobald,  Charles  Kerr  and  his  wife,  my  old  acquaint- 
ance Magdalen  Hepburn,  whose  whole  [kin]  was  known  to 
me  and  mine.  I  have  now  seen  the  fifth  generation  of  the 
family  in  Mrs.  Kerr's  little  girl,  who  travels  with  them. 
Well — I  partly  wish  we  had  been  alone.  Yet  it  is  perhaps 
better.  We  made  our  day  out  tolerably  well,  having  the 
advantage  of  Mr.  Davidoff  and  his  friend  Mr.  Collyer  to 
assist  us. 

March  25. — Mr.  and  Mrs.  Kerr  left  us,  Mr.  Davidoff  and 
Mr.  Collyer  also.  Mr.  Davidoff  showed  himself  a  good  deal 

1  It  may  have   been  with   this  after  James  n.  had  dirked  the  Earl, 

packet  that  the  following  admoni-  trailed  the   royal  safe-conduct  at 

tory  note  was  sent  to  BaJlantyne  : —  the  TAIL  of  a  serving  man,  instead  of 

"DEAR  JAMES, — I  return  the  sheets  the  tail  of  a  starved  Mare. — Yours 

of  Tales  with  some  waste  of  Na-  truly,  however,  W.  S."  So  printed 

poleon  for  ballast.    Pray  read  like  a  in  first  edition,  voL  ii.  p.  129,  but 

lynx,  for  with  all  your  devoted  at-  corrected  in  the  subsequent  editions 

tention  things  will  escape.    Imagine  to  "  a  miserable  cart  jade. " 
your  printing  that  the  Douglases 


148  JOURNAL.  [MARCH 

affected.  I  hope  well  of  this  young  nobleman,  and  trust  the 
result  will  justify  my  expectations,  but  it  may  be  doubted  if 
his  happiness  be  well  considered  by  those  who  send  a  young 
person,  destined  to  spend  his  life  under  a  despotic  govern- 
ment, to  receive  the  ideas  and  opinions  of  such  a  people  as 

we  are: 

*'  where  ignorance  is  bliss, 
'Tis  folly  to  be  wise." 1 

We  drove  as  far  as  Tair  with  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Theobald.  The 
lady  read  after  dinner — and  read  well 

March  26. — The  Theobalds  left  us,  giving  me  time  to 
work  a  little.  A  walk  of  two  hours  diversified  my  day.  I 
received  CadelTs  scheme  for  the  new  edition.  I  fear  the 
trustees  will  think  CadelTs  plan  expensive  in  the  execution. 
Yet  he  is  right ;  for,  to  ensure  a  return  of  speedy  sale,  the  new 
edition  should  be  both  handsome  and  cheap.  He  proposes 
size  a  Eoyal  12mo,  with  a  capital  engraving  to  each  volume 
from  a  design  by  the  best  artists.  This  infers  a  monstrous 
expense,  but  in  the  present  humour  of  the  public  ensures  the 
sale.  The  price  will  be  5s.  per  volume,  and  the  whole  set, 
32  volumes,  from  Waverley  to  Woodstock  included,  will  be  £8. 

March  27. — This  also  was  a  day  of  labour,  affording  only 
my  usual  interval  of  a  walk.  Five  or  six  sheets  was  the 
result.  We  now  appropinque  an  end.  My  story  las  un- 
happily a  divided  interest ;  there  are  three  distinct  strands  of 
the  rope,  and  they  are  not  well  twisted  together.  "  Ah,  Sirs, 
a  foul  fawt,"  as  Captain  Jamy  says.2 

March  28. — The  days  have  little  to  distinguish  each 
other,  very  little.  The  morning  study,  the  noontide  walk,  all 
monotonous  and  inclined  to  be  melancholy ;  God  help  me ! 
But  I  have  not  had  any  nervous  attack.  Bead  Tales  of  an 
Antiquary?  one  of  the  chime  of  bells  which  I  have  some  hand 
in  setting  a-ringing.  He  is  really  entitled  to  the  name  of  an 
antiquary ;  but  he  has  too  much  description  in  proportion  to 

1  Gray's  Ode  en  Eton.  3  By  Richard  Thomson,  author  of 

Chronicles  of  London  Bridge  etc. 
3  See  Henry  V.  Act.  ra.  Sc.  2.         He  died  in  1865. 


1828.]  JOURNAL.  149 

the  action.  There  is  a  capital  wardrobe  of  properties,  but 
the  performers  do  not  act  up  to  their  character. 

March  29. — Finished  volume  third  this  morning.  I  have 
let  no  grass  grow  beneath  my  heels  this  bout. 

Mr.  Cadell  with  J.  and  A.  Ballantyne  came  to  dinner. 
Mr,  and  Mrs.  George  Pringle,  new  married,  dined  with  us 
and  old  Torwoodlee.  Sandie's  music  made  the  evening  go 
sweetly  down. 

March  30. — A  long  discourse  with  Cadell,  canvassing  his 
scheme.  He  proposes  I  should  go  on  immediately  with  the 
new  novel.  This  will  furnish  a  fund  from  which  may  be 
supplied  the  advances  necessary  for  the  new  work,  which 
are  considerable,  and  may  reach  from  £4000  to  £8000 — 
the  last  sum  quite  improbable — before  it  makes  returns. 
Thus  we  can  face  the  expenditure  necessary  to  set  on  foot 
our  great  work.  I  have  written  to  recommend  the  plan  to 
John  Gibson.  This  theme  renewed  from  time  to  time 
during  the  forenoon.  Dr.  Clarkson1  dined  with  us.  We 
smoked  and  had  whisky  and  water  after. 

March  31. — The  Ballantynes  and  Cadell  left  us  in  high 
spirits,  expecting  much  from  the  new  undertaking,  and  I 
believe  they  are  not  wrong.    As  for  me,  I  became  torpid 
after  a  great  influx  of  morning  visitors. 
"  I  grev  vapourish  and  odd, 

And  would  not  do  the  least  right  thing, 
Neither  for  goddess  nor  for  god — 
Nor  paint  nor  jest  nor  laugh,  nor  sing." 

I  was  quite  reluctant  to  write  letters,  or  do  anything  what- 
soever, and  yet  I  should  surely  write  to  Sir  Cuthbert  Sharp 
and  Surtees.  We  dined  alone.  I  was  main  stupid,  indeed, 
and  much  disposed  to  sleep,  though  my  dinner  was  very 
moderate. 

1!Dr.  Ebenezer  Clarkson,  a  Sur-  neighbours    on   Tweedside   saw   a 

$eon  of  distinguished  merit  at  Sel-  true  picture— a  portrait  from  life 

kirk  and  through  life  a  trusty  friend  of  Scott's  hard-riding  and  sagacious 

and  crony  of  the  Sheriffs. — J.  G.  L.  old  friend  to  all  the  country  dear*" 

"In  Mr.   Gideon  Gray,  in  The  — £i/"e,vol.  ix.  p.  181. 
JSurgeon'*   Daughter,   Sir  Walter's 


APKIL. 

April  1.— All  Pools'  day,  the  only  Saint  that  keeps  up 
some  degree  of  credit  in  the  world ;  for  fools  we  are  with  a 
vengeance.  On  this  memorable  festival  we  played  the  fool 
with  great  decorum  at  Colonel  Ferguson's,  going  to  visit 
them  in  a  cold  morning.  In  the  evening  I  had  a  distressing 
letter  from  Mrs.  MacBarnet,  or  some  such  name,  the 
daughter  of  Captain  Macpherson,  smothered  in  a  great  snow 
storm.  They  are  very  angry  at  the  Review l  for  telling  a  raw- 
head  and  bloody  bones  story  about  him.  I  have  given  the 
right  version  of  the  tale  willingly,  but  this  does  not  satisfy. 
I  almost  wish  they  would  turn  out  a  clansman  to  be  free  of 
the  cumber.  The  vexation  of  having  to  do  with  ladies,  who 
on  such  a  point  must  be  unreasonable,  is  very  great.  With 
a  man  it  would  be  soon  ended  or  mended.  It  really  hurts 
my  sleep. 

April  2. — I  wrote  the  lady  as  civilly  as  I  could,  explain- 
ing why  I  made  no  further  apology,  which  may  do  some  good. 
Then  a  cursed  morning  of  putting  to  rights,  which  drives  me 
well-nigh  mad.  At  two  or  three  I  must  go  to  a  funeral — a 
happy  and  interesting  relief  from  my  employment.  It  is  a 
man  I  am  sorry  for,  who  married  my  old  servant,  Bell 
Ormiston.  He  was  an  excellent  person  in  his  way,  and  a 
capital  mason — a  great  curler. 

April  3. — Set  off  at  eight  o'clock,  and  fought  forward  to* 
Carlisle — a  sad  place  in  my  domestic  remembrances,  since 
here  I  married  my  poor  Charlotte.     She  is  gone,  and  I  am  , 
following  faster,  perhaps,  than  I  wot  of.     It  is  something  to 
1  See  Foreign  Quarterly,  !No.  I. 


150 


1828.]  JOURNAL.  151 

have  lived  and  loved ;  and  onr  poor  children  are  so  hopeful 
and  affectionate,  that  it  chastens  the  sadness  attending  the 
thoughts  of  our  separation.  We  slept  at  Carlisle.  I  have 
not  forgiven  them  for  destroying  their  quiet  old  walls,  and 
building  two  lumpy  things  like  mad-houses.  The  old  gates 
had  such  a  respectable  appearance  even, 

"When  Scotsmen's  heads  did  guard  the  wall." 
Come,  I'll  write  down  the  whole  stanza,  which  is  all  that 
was  known  to  exist  of  David  Hume's  poetry,  as  it  was 
written  on  a  pane  of  glass  in  the  inn : — 

"Here  chicks  in  eggs  for  breakfast  sprawl, 
Here  godless  boys  God's  glories  squall, 
Here  Scotsmen's  heads  do  guard  the  wall, 
But  Corby's  walks  atone  for  all." 

The  poetical  works  of  David  Hume,  Esq.,  might,  as  book- 
makers know  how,  be  driven  out  to  a  handsome  quarto.  Line 
1st  admits  of  a  descant  upon  eggs  roasted,  boiled  or  poached; 
2d,  a  history  of  Carlisle  Cathedral  with  some  reasons  why 
the  choir  there  has  been  proverbially  execrable;  3d,  the 
whole  history  of  1745  with  minute  memoirs  of  such  as 
mounted  guard  on  the  Scotch  gate.  I  remember  the  spikes 
the  heads  stood  upon ;  lastly,  a  description  of  Corby  Castle 
with  a  plan,  and  the  genealogy  of  the  Howards.  Gad,  the 
booksellers  would  give  me  £500  for  it.  I  have  a  mind  to 
print  it  for  the  Bannatynians. 

April  4. — In  our  stage  to  Penrith  I  introduced  Anne  to 
the  ancient  Petreia,  called  Old  Penrith,  and  also  to  the 
grave  of  Sir  Ewain  Csesarias,1  that  knight  with  the  puzzling 
name,  which  has  got  more  indistinct.  "We  breakfasted  at 
Buchanan's  Inn,  Penrith,  one  of  the  best  on  the  road,  and  a 
fine  stanch  fellow  owned  it.  He  refused  passage  to  some  of 
the  delegates  who  traversed  the  country  during  the  Eadical 
row,  and  when  the  worthies  threatened  him  with  popular 

1  For  an  account  of  this  monu-  land,  voL  ii.  p.  410,  and  "Nota- 
ment  see  Nicolson  and  Burns's  His-  bilia  of  Penrith,"  by  George  Wat- 
torycf  Westmoreland  and  Cumber-  son,  O.  and  W.  Transactions,  No.  xiv. 


152  JOURNAL.  [AraiL 

vengeance,  answered  gallantly  that  he  had  not  lived  so  long 
by  the  Crown  to  desert  it  at  a  pinch.  The  Crown  is  the 
sign  of  his  inn.  Slept  at  Garstang,  an  indifferent  house. 
As  a  petty  grievance,  my  ink-holder  broke  loose  in  the  case, 
and  spilt  some  of  the  ink  on  Anne's  pelisse.  Misfortunes 
seldom  come  single.  "Tis  not  alone  the  inky  cloak,  good 
daughter,"  but  I  forgot  at  Garstang  my  two  breastpins; 
one  with  Walter  and  Jane's  hair,  another  a  harp  of  pure 
Irish  gold,  the  gift  of  the  ladies  of  Llangollen.1 

April  5. — Breakfasted  at  Chorley,  and  slept  at  Leek. 
We  were  in  the  neighbourhood  of  some  fine  rock-scenery, 
but  the  day  was  unfavourable ;  besides,  I  did  not  come  from 
Scotland  to  see  rocks,  I  trow. 

April  6. — Easter  Sunday.  We  breakfasted  at  Ashbourne 
and  went  from  thence  to  Derby ;  and  set  off  from  thence  to 
Draycot  Hall  (five  miles)  to  visit  Hugh  Scott.  But  honest 
Hugh  was,  like  ourselves,  on  the  ramble;  so  we  had  no- 
thing to  do  but  to  drive  back  to  Derby,  and  from  thence  to 
Tamworth,  where  we  slept. 

April  7. — We  visited  the  Castle  in  the  morning.  It  is 
inhabited  by  a  brother-in-law  of  the  proprietor ;  and  who  is 
the  proprietor  ?  "Why,  Mr.  Kobbins,"  said  the  fat  house- 
keeper. This  was  not  a  name  quite  according  with  the  fine 
chivalrous  old  hall,  in  which  there  was  no  small  quantity  of 
armour,  and  odds  and  ends,  which  I  would  have  been  glad  to 
possess.  "  Well,  but  madam,  before  Mr.  Eobbins  bought  the 
place,  who  was  the  proprietor  ? "  "  Lord  Charles  Townshend, 
sir."  This  would  not  do  neither ;  but  a  genealogy  hanging 
above  the  chimney-piece  informed  me  that  the  Perrars  were 
the  ancient  possessors  of  the  mansion,  which,  indeed,  the  horse- 
shoes in  the  shield  over  the  Castle  gate  might  have  intimated. 
Tamworth  is  a  fine  old  place,  neglected,  but,  therefore,  more 

1  Lady  Eleanor  Butler  and  the  them  in  1825  is  given  by  Mr. 
Hon.  Mitt  Ponsonby.  An  amusing  Lookhart  in  the  Life,  voL  viii. 
account  of  Sir  Walter's  visit  to  pp.  47-50. 


1828.]  JOUEITAL.  153 

like  hoar  antiquity.  The  keep  is  round.  The  apartments 
appear  to  have  been  modernised  tempore  Jac.  Imi.  There  was 
a  fine  demipigiie  saddle,  said  to  have  been  that  of  James  II. 
The  pommel  rose,  and  finished  off  in  the  form  of  a  swan's 
crest,  capital  for  a  bad  horseman  to  hold  on  by. 

To  show  Anne  what  was  well  worth  seeing,  we  visited 
Kenilworth.  The  relentless  rain  only  allowed  us  a  glimpse 
of  this  memorable  ruin.  Well,  the  last  time  I  was  here,  in 
181 5,1  these  trophies  of  time  were  quite  neglected.  Now 
they  approach  so  much  nearer  the  splendour  of  Thunder-ten- 
tronckh,  as  to  have  a  door  at  least,  if  not  windows.  They  are, 
in  short,  preserved  and  protected.  So  much  for  the  novels. 
I  observed  decent  children  begging  here,  a  thing  uncommon 
in  England:  and  I  recollect  the  same  unseemly  practice 
formerly. 

We  went  to  Warwick  Castle.  The  neighbourhood  of 
Leamington,  a  watering-place  of  some  celebrity,  has  obliged 
the  family  to  decline  showing  the  Castle  after  ten  o'clock.  I 
tried  the  virtue  of  an  old  acquaintance  with  Lord  Warwick 
and  wrote  to  him,  he  being  in  the  Courthouse  where  the  as* 
sizes  were  sitting.  After  some  delay  we  were  admitted,  and  I 
found  my  old  friend  Mrs.  Home,  in  the  most  perfect  preser- 
vation, though,  as  she  tells  me,  now  eighty-eight.  She  went 

1  The  visit  to  Kenilworth  in  1815  and  with  keen  grey  eye,  passed 

is  not  noticed  in  the  Life,,  but  as  through  the  court    and  remained 

Scott  was  in    London    for    some  among  the  ruins  silent  and  alone  for 

weeks  in  the  spring  of  that  year  he  about  two  hours.    (Sliakspeare,  vol. 

may  have  gone  there  on  his  return  i.  p.  89.)    The  famous  romance  did 

journey.      Mr.     Charles    Knight,  not  appear  until  six  years  later,  viz. 

writing    in    1842,    says  that  Mr.  in  January  1821,  and  in  the  autumn 

Bonnington,  the  venerable  occupant  of  that  year  it  is  somewhat  singular 

of  the  Gate  House,  told  him  that  he  to  find  that  Scott  and  his  friend  Mr. 

remembered    the    visit    and    the  Stewart  Rose  are  at   Stratford-on- 

visitor!    It  was   "about  twenty-  Avon  writing  their  names  on  the  wall 

five  years  ago  " — and  after  examin-  of  Shakespeare's  birthplace  —  and 

ing  some  carving  in  the  interior  of  yet  leaving  Kenilworth  unvisited. — 

the  Gate  House  and  putting  many  Perhaps  the  reason  was  that  Mr. 

suggestive    questions,  the  middle-  Stewart  Rose  was  not  in  the  secret 

aged  active  stranger  slightly  lame,  of  the  authorship  of  the  Novels. 


154  JOURNAL.  [APRIL 

through  her  duty  wonderfully,  though  now  and  then  she  com- 
plained of  her  memory.  She  has  laid  aside  a  mass  of  black 
plumes  which  she  wore  on  her  head,  and  which  resemhled  the 
casque  in  the  Castle  of  Otranto.  Warwick  Castle  is  still  the 
noblest  sight  in  England.  Lord  and  Lady  Warwick  came 
home  from  the  Court,  and  received  us  most  kindly.  We 
lunched  with  them,  but  declined  further  hospitality.  When  T 
was  last  here,  and  for  many  years  before,  the  unfortunate  cir- 
cumstances of  the  late  Lord  W.  threw  an  air  of  neglect  about 
everything.  I  believe  the  fine  collection  of  pictures  would 
have  been  sold  by  distress,  if  Mrs.  Home,  my  friend,  had  not 
redeemed  them  at  her  own  cost.1  I  was  pleased  to  see  Lord 
Warwick  show  my  old  friend  kindness  and  attention.  We 
visited  the  monuments  of  the  Nevilles  and  Beauchamps, 
names  which  make  the  heart  thrill  The  monuments  are 
highly  preserved.  We  concluded  the  day  at  Stratford-upon- 
Avon. 

April  8. — We  visited  the  tomb  of  the  mighty  wizard.  It 
is  in  the  bad  taste  of  James  the  First's  reign ;  but  what  a 
magic  does  the  locality  possess !  There  are  stately  monuments 
of  forgotten  families ;  but  when  you  have  seen  Shakspeare's 
what  care  we  for  the  rest.  All  around  is  Shakspeare's  ex- 
clusive property.  I  noticed  the  monument  of  his  friend  John 
a  Combe  immortalised  as  drawing  forth  a  brief  satirical 
notice  of  four  lines. 

After  breakfast  I  asked  after  Mrs.  Ormsby,  the  old  mad 
woman  who  was  for  some  time  tenant  of  Shakspeare's  house, 
and  conceived  herself  to  be  descended  from  the  immortal  poet. 
I  learned  she  was  dying.  I  thought  to  send  her  a  sovereign ; 
but  this  extension  of  our  tour  has  left  me  no  more  than  will 
carry  me  through  my  journey,  and  I  do  not  like  to  run  short 

1  In   the    Annual   Register   for  of  the  Warwick  family.     She  had 

July  1834  is  the  following  notice  :  the  privilege  of  showing  the  Castle, 

"  Lately  at  Warwick  Castle,  aged  by  which  she  realised  upwards   of 

ninety-three,      Mrs.     Home,     for  £30,000." 
upwards  of  seventy  years  a  servant 


1828.]  JOUENAL.  155 

upon  the  road.  So  I  take  credit  for  my  good  intention,  and 
— keep  my  sovereign — a  cheap  and  not  unusual  mode  of 
giving  charity. 

Learning  from  Washington  Irving's  description  of  Strat- 
ford that  the  hall  of  Sir  Thomas  Lucy,  the  justice  who 
rendered  Warwickshire  too  hot  for  Shakspeare,  and  drove 
him  to  London,  was  still  extant,  we  went  in  quest  of  it. 

Charlcote  is  in  high  preservation,  and  inhabited  by  Mr. 
Lucy,  descendant  of  the  worshipful  Sir  Thomas.  The  Hall 
is  about  three  hundred  years  old,  an  old  brick  structure 
with  a  gate-house  in  advance.  It  is  surrounded  by  venerable 
oaks,  realising  the  imagery  which  Shakspeare  loved  so  well 
to  dwell  upon ;  rich  verdant  pastures  extend  on  every  side, 
and  numerous  herds  of  deer  were  reposing  in  the  shade. 
All  showed  that  the  Lucy  family  had  retained  their  "  land 
and  beeves."  While  we  were  surveying  the  antlered  old  hall, 
with  its  painted  glass  and  family  pictures,  Mr.  Lucy  came 
to  welcome  us  in  person,  and  to  show  the  house,  with  the 
collection  of  paintings,  which  seems  valuable,  and  to  which 
he  had  made  many  valuable  additions. 

He  told  me  the  park  from  which  Shakspeare  stole  the 
buck  was  not  that  which  surrounds  Gharlcote,  but  belonged 
to  a  mansion  at  some  distance  where  Sir  Thomas  Lucy 
resided  at  the  time  of  the  trespass.  The  tradition  went 
that  they  hid  the  buck  in  a  barn,  part  of  which  was  stand- 
ing a  few  years  ago,  but  now  totally  decayed.  This  park 
no  longer  belongs  to  the  Lucys.  The  house  bears  no  marks 
of  decay,  but  seems  the  abode  of  ease  and  opulence.  There 
were  some  fine  old  books,  and  I  was  told  of  many  more 
which  were  not  in  order.  How  odd  if  a  folio  Shakspeare 
should  be  found  amongst  them!  Our  early  breakfast  did 
not  prevent  my  taking  advantage  of  an  excellent  repast 
offered  by  the  kindness  of  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Lucy,  the  last  a 
lively  Welshwoman.  This  visit  gave  me  great  pleasure- 
it  really  brought  Justice  Shallow  freshly  before  my  eyes ; 


156  JOUEtfAL. 

the  luces  in  his  arms  "  which  do  become  an  old  coat  well " x 
were  not  more  plainly  portrayed  in  his  own  armorials  in 
the  hall-window  than  was  his  person  in  my  mind's  eye. 
There  is  a  picture  shown  as  that  of  the  old  Sir  Thomas,  but 
Mr.  Lucy  conjectures  it  represents  his  son.  There  were 
three  descents  of  the  same  name  of  Thomas.  The  party 
hath  "  the  eye  severe,  and  beard  of  formal  cut,"  which  fills 
up  with  judicial  austerity  the  otherwise  social  physiognomy 
of  the  worshipful  presence,  with  his  "  fair  round  belly  with 
fat  capon  lined."  2 

We  resumed  our  journey.  I  may  mention  among  the 
pictures  at  Charlcote  one  called  a  Roman  Knight,  which 
seemed  to  me  very  fine ;  Teniers'  marriage,  in  which,  con- 
trary to  the  painter's  wont,  only  persons  of  distinction  are 
represented,  but  much  in  the  attitude  in  which  he  delights 
to  present  his  boors ;  two  hawking  pieces  by  Wouvermans, 
very  fine  specimens,  cum  cdiis. 

We  took  our  way  by  Edgehill,  and  looked  over  the 
splendid  richness  of  the  fine  prospect  from  a  sort  of  gazeeboo 
or  modern  antique  tower,  the  place  of  a  Mr.  Miller.  It  is 
not  easy  to  conceive  a  richer  and  more  peaceful  scene  than 
that  which  stretched  before  us,  and  [one  with  which]  strife, 
or  the  memory  of  strife,  seems  to  have  nothing  to  do. 

"  But  man  records  his  own  disgrace, 
And  Edgehill  lives  in  history/' 

We  got  on  to  Buckingham,  an  ugly  though  I  suppose  an 
ancient  town.  Thence  to  Aylesbury  through  the  wealth  of 
England, — the  scene  of  the  old  ballad — 

"Neither  drunk  nor  sober,  but  neighbour  to  both, 
I  met  with  a  man  in  Aylesbury  vale ; 
I  saw  by  his  face  that  he  was  in  good  case, 
To  speak  no  great  harm  of  a  pot  of  good  ale." 

We  slept  at  Aylesbury.    The  landlord,  who  seemed  sensible, 
1  ATerry  Wives,  Act  I,  Sc.  1.  *  As  You  Like  It,  Act  n.  Sc.  7- 


1828.]  JOURNAL.  157 

told  me  that  the  land  round  the  town,  being  the  richest  in 
England,  lets  at  £3,  or  £3,  10s.  and  some  so  high  as  £4  per 
acre.  But  the  poor-rates  are  13s.  to  the  pound.  Now,  my 
Whitehaugh  at  Huntly  Burn  yielded  at  last  set  £4  per  acre. 

April  9,  [London]. — We  got  to  town  about  mid-day,  and 
found  Sophia,  Lockhart,  and  the  babies  quite  well — delighted 
with  their  companion  Charles,  and  he  enchanted  with  his 
occupation  in  the  Foreign  Office.  I  looked  into  my  cash  and 
found  £5 3  had  diminished  on  the  journey  down  to  about  £3. 
In  former  days  a  journey  to  London  cost  about  £30  or  thirty 
guineas.  It  may  now  cost  one-fourth  more.  But  I  own 
I  like  to  pay  postilions  and  waiters  rather  more  liberally 
than  perhaps  is  right.  I  hate  grumbling  and  sour  faces ; 
and  the  whole  saving  will  not  exceed  a  guinea  or  two  for 
being  cursed  and  damned  from  Dan  to  Beersheba.  We  had 
a  joyful  meeting,  I  promise  you.1 

April  10. — I  spent  the  morning  in  bringing  up  my 
journal ;  interrupted  by  two  of  these  most  sedulous  visitants 
who  had  objects  of  their  own  to  serve,  and  smelled  out  my 
arrival  as  the  raven  scents  carrion — a  vile  comparison,  though 
what  better  is  an  old  fellow,  mauled  with  rheumatism  and 
other  deplorables  ?  Went  out  at  two  and  saw  Miss  Dumergue 
and  other  old  friends ;  Sotheby  in  particular,  less  changed 
than  any  one  I  have  seen.  Looked  in  at  Murray's  and 
renewed  old  habits.  This  great  city  seems  almost  a  waste 
to  me,  so  many  of  my  friends  are  gone ;  Walter  and  Jane 
coming  up,  the  whole  family  dined  together,  and  were  very 
happy.  The  children  joined  in  our  festivity.  My  name-son, 
a  bright  and  blue-eyed  rogue,  with  flaxen  hair,  screams  and 
laughs  like  an  April  morning ;  and  the  baby  is  that  species 

1  Sir  Walter  remained   at   this  sister's  in  Regent's  Park.    He  had 

time  six  weeks  in  London.     His  thus  looked  forward  to  a  happy 

eldest  son's  regiment  was  stationed  meeting  with  all  his  family — but 

at  Hampton  Court ;  his  second  son  he  encountered  scenes  of  sickness 

had  recently  taken  his  desk  at  the  and  distress.— Life,   voL    ix.    pp. 

Foreign  Office,  and  was  living  at  his  226-7. 


158  JOUBNAL.  [APRIL 

of  dough  which  is  called  a  fine  baby.  I  care  not  for  children 
till  they  care  a  little  for  me. 

April  11. — Made  calls,  walked  myself  tired ;  saw  Eogers, 
Sharp,  Sotheby,  and  other  old  friends. 

April  12. — Dinner  at  home;  a  little  party  of  Sophia's 
in  the  evening.  Sharp  told  me  that  one  evening  being  at 
Sheridan's  house  with  a  large  party,  Tom  S.  came  to  him  as 
the  night  drew  late,  and  said  in  a  whisper,  "  I  advise  you  to 
secure  a  wax-light  to  go  to  bed  with,"  shewing  him  at  the 
same  time  a  morsel  which-  he  had  stolen  from  a  sconce. 
Sharp  followed  his  advice,  and  had  reason  to  be  thankful 
for  the  hint.  Tired  and  sleepy,  I  make  a  bad  niglit  watcher. 

April  13. — Amused  myself  by  converting  the  Tale  of  the 
Mysterious  Mirror  into  Aunt  Margarefs  Mirror,  designed  for 
Heath's  what-dye-call-it  Cadell  will  not  like  this,  but  I 
cannot  afford  to  have  my  goods  thrown  back  upon  my  hands. 
The  tale  is  a  good  one,  and  is  said  actually  to  have  happened 
to  Lady  Primrose,  my  great-grandmother  having  attended 
her  sister  on  the  occasion.  Dined  with  Miss  Dumergue. 
My  proofs  from  Edinburgh  reached  to-day  and  occupied  me 
all  the  morning. 

April  14.  Laboured  at  proofs  and  got  them  sent  off,  per 
Mr.  Freeling?s  cover.  So  there 's  an  end  of  the  Chronicles^ 
James  rejoices  in  the  conclusion,  where  there  is  battle  and 
homicide  of  all  kinds.  Always  politic  to  keep  a  trot  for  the 
avenue,  like  the  Irish  postilions.  J.  B.  always  calls  to  the 
boys  to  flog  before  the  carriage  gets  out  of  the  inn-yard. 
How  we  have  driven  the  stage  I  know  not  and  care  not — 
except  with  a  view  to  extricating  my  difficulties.  I  have 


1  The  book  was  published  early  Fair  Maid  of  Perth. )  Edinburgh  : 

in  April  under  the  following  title:  Printed  for  Cadell  and  Co.,  Edin- 

Chronides  of  ike  Canongate,  Second  burgh,  and  Simpkin  and  Marshall, 

Series,  by  the  Author  of  WaverUy,  London,  1828 ;  (at  the  end)  Edin- 

etc.,  "sic  ITUB  AD  ASTRA"  Motto  burgh:  Printed  by  Ballantyne  and 

of  Canongate  Arms,  in  three  vol-  Co. 
umes.   (St.  Valentine's  Day ;  or  The 


J828.]  JOUKNAL.  159 

lost  no  time  in  beginning  the  second  series  of  Grandfather's 
Tales,  being  determined  to  write  as  much  as  I  can  even  here, 
and  deserve  by  industry  the  soft  pillow  I  sleep  on  for  the 
moment. 

There  is  a  good  scene  supposed  to  have  happened  be- 
tween Sain  Eogers  and  a  lady  of  fashion — the  reporter, 
Lord  Dudley.  Sam  enters,  takes  a  stool,  creeps  close  to 
the  lady's  side,  who  asks  his  opinion  of  the  last  new  poem 
or  novel.  In  a  pathetic  voice  the  spectre  replies — "My 
opinion?  I  like  it  very  much — but  the  world  don't  like 
it ;  but,  indeed,  I  begin  to  think  the  world  wrong  in  every- 
thing, except  with  regard  to  you"  Now,  Rogers  either  must 
have  said  this  somewhere,  or  he  has  it  yet  to  say.  We 
dined  at  Lord  Melville's. 

April  15. — Got  the  lamentable  news  that  Terry  is 
totally  bankrupt.  This  is  a  most  unexpected  blow,  though 
his  carelessness  about  money  matters  was  very  great.  God 
help  the  poor  fellow !  he  has  been  ill-advised  to  go  abroad, 
but  now  returns  to  stand  the  storm — old  debts,  it  seems, 
with  principal  and  interest  accumulated,  and  all  the  items 
which  load  a  falling  man.  And  wife  such  a  good  and  kind 
creature,  and  children.  Alack !  alack !  I  sought  out  his 
solicitor.  There  are  £7000  or  more  to  pay,  and  the  only 
fund  his  share  in  the  Adelphi  Theatre,  worth  £5000  and 
upwards,  and  then  so  fine  a  chance  of  independence  lost. 
That  comes  of  not  being  explicit  with  his  affairs.  The 
theatre  was  a  most  flourishing  concern.  I  looked  at  the 
books,  and  since  have  seen  Tates.  The  ruin  is  inevitable, 
but  I  think  they  will  not  keep  him  in  prison,  but  let  him 
earn  his  bread  by  his  very  considerable  talents.  I  shall 
lose  the  whole  or  part  of  £500  which  I  lent  him,  but  that 
is  the  least  of  my  concern.  I  hope  the  theatre  is  quite 
good  for  guaranteeing  certain  payments  in  1829  and  1830. 
I  judge  they  are  in  no  danger. 

T  should  have  gone  to  the  Club  to-day,  but  Sir  James 


160  JOURNAL. 

Mackintosh  had  mistaken  the  day.  I  was  glad  of  it,  so 
stayed  at  home. 

It  is  written  that  nothing  shall  flourish  under  iny 
shadow — the  Ballantynes,  Terry,  Nelson,  Weber,  all  came 
to  distress.  Nature  has  written  on  my  brow,  "Your  shade 
shall  be  broad,  but  there  shall  be  no  protection  derived  from 
it  to  aught  you  favour." 

Sat  and  smoked  and  grumbled  with  Lockhart. 

April  16. — We  dined  at  Dr.  Young's;  saw  Captain  Parry, 
a  handsome  and  pleasant  man.  In  the  evening  at  Mr. 
Cunliffe's,  where  I  met  sundry  old  friends — grown  older. 

April  17. — Made  up  my  "Gurnal,"  which  had  fallen 
something  behind.  In  this  phantasmagoria!  place  the  ob- 
jects of  the  day  come  and  depart  like  shadows.1  Made  calls. 
Gave  [C.  K]  Sharpe's  memorial  to  Lord  Leveson  Gower. 
"Went  to  Murray's,  where  I  met  a  Mr.  Jacob,  a  great  econo- 
mist He  is  proposing  a  mode  of  supporting  the  poor,  by 
compelling  them  to  labour  by  military  force,  and  under  a 
species  of  military  discipline.  I  see  no  objection  to  it,  only 

1  Among  the  "  objects  that  came  elusion  he  adds,  "Being  in  this 
and  departed  like  shadows "  in  this  curious  fashion  appointed,  as  it 
phantasmagoria  of  London  life  was  were,  ambassador  between  two 
a  deeply  interesting  letter  from  kings  of  poetry,  I  would  willingly 
Thomas  Carlyle,  and  but  for  the  fact  discharge  my  mission  with  the 
that  it  bears  Sir  Walter's  London  solemnity  that  beseems  such  a  busi- 
address,  and  the  post-mark  of  this  ness ;  and  naturally  it  must  flatter 
day,  one  could  not  imagine  he  had  my  vanity  and  love  of  the  marvel- 
ever  seen  it,  as  it  remained  unac-  lous  to  think  that  by  means  of  a 
knowledged  and  unnoticed  in  either  foreigner  whom  I  have  never  seen, 
Journal  or  Correspondence.  I  might  soon  have  access  to  my 

It  is  dated  13th  April  1828 ;  and  native  sovereign,  whom  I  have  so 

one  of  the  latest  letters  he  indited  often  seen  in  public,  and  so  often 

from  "  21  Comely  Bank,  Edin-  wished  that  I  had  claim  to  see  and 

burgh."  After  advising  Scott  that  know  in  private  and  near  at  hand. 

"Goethe  has  sent  two  medals  .  .  .  Meanwhile,  I  abide  your  further 

which  he  is  to  deliver  into  his  own  orders  in  this  matter,  and  so  with 

hand,"  he  gives  an  extract  from  all  the  regard  which  belongs  to  one 

Goethe's  letter  containing  a  criti-  to  whom  I  in  common  with  other 

cism  on  Napoleon,  with  the  apology  millions  owe  so  much,  I  have  the 

that  "it  is  seldom  such  a  writer  honour  to  be,  sir,  most  respectfully, 

obtains  such  a  critic,"  and  in  con-  your  servant.— T.  C. "  [See  App.] 


1828.]  JOITKNAL.  161 

it  will  make  a  rebellion  to  a  certainty ;  and  the  tribes  of 
Jacob  will  certainly  cut  Jacob's  throat.1 

Canning's  conversion  from  popular  opinions  was  strangely 
brought  round.  While  he  was  studying  at  the  Temple,  and 
rather  entertaining  revolutionary  opinions,  Godwin  sent  to 
say  that  he  was  coming  to  breakfast  with  him,  to  speak  on 
a  subject  of  the  highest  importance.  Canning  knew  little 
of  him,  but  received  his  visit,  and  learned  to  his  astonish- 
ment, that  in  expectation  of  a  new  order  of  things,  the 
English  Jacobins  desired  to  place  him,  Canning,  at  the 
head  of  their  expected  revolution.  He  was  much  struck, 
and  asked  time  to  think  what  course  he  should  take — and, 
having  thought  the  matter  over,  he  went  to  Mr.  Pitt  and 
made  the  Anti-Jacobin  confession  of  faith,  in  which  he 

persevered  until .  Canning  himself  mentioned  this 

to  Sir  W.  Knighton,  upon  occasion  of  giving  a  place  in  the 
Charter-house,  of  some  ten  pounds  a  year,  to  Godwin's 
brother.  He  could  scarce  do  less  for  one  who  had  offered 
him  the  dictator's  curule  chair. 

Dined  with  Eogers  with  all  my  own  family,  and  met 
Sharp,  Lord  John  Eussell,  Jekyll,  and  others.  The  con- 
versation flagged  as  usual,  and  jokes  were  fired  like  minute 
guns,  producing  an  effect  not  much  less  melancholy, — a  wit 
should  always  have  an  atmosphere  congenial  to  him,  other- 
wise he  will  not  shine.  "Went  to  Lady  Davy's,  where  I  saw 
the  kind  face,  and  heard  the  no  less  friendly  greeting,  of 
Lady  Selkirk,2  who  introduced  all  her  children  to  me. 

1  William    Jacob,    author    of  of  Lord  Braybrooke  and  other  noble- 

Travels  in  Spain  in  1810-11,  and  men  and  gentlemen  in  various  dis- 

several  works  on  Political  Economy,  tricts  of  England,  appears  to  have 

Among  others   "some  tracts  con-  been  attended  with  most  beneficent 

cerningthe  Poor  Colonies  instituted  results." — Life,    vol.    ix.    p.    229. 

by  the  King  of  the  Netherlands,  Mr.  Jacob  died  in  1852  aged  eighty- 

which  had  marked  influence  in  pro-  eight. 

motiug  the  scheme  of  granting  a  The  widow  of  his  old  school- 
small  allotments  of  land  on  easy  fellow,  the  Hon.  Thomas  Douglas, 
terms  to  our  cottagers;  a  scheme  afterwards  Earl  of  Selkirk. — See 
which,  under  the  superintendence  Zife,  vol.  i.  p.  77,  and  208  n, 

VOL.  II.  L 


162  JOUENAL.  [APRIL 

April  18. — Breakfasted  with  Joanna  Baillie,  and  found 
that  gifted  person  extremely  well,  and  in  the  display  of  all 
her  native  knowledge  of  character  and  benevolence.  She 
looks  more  aged,  however.  I  would  give  as  much  to  have 
a  capital  picture  of  her  as  for  any  portrait  in  the  world. 
She  gave  me  a  manuscript  play  to  read  upon  Witchcraft.1 
Dined  with  the  Dean  of  Chester,  Dr.  Phillpotts.2 

"Where  all  above  us  was  a  solemn  row 
Of  priest  and  deacons,  so  were  all  below."  3 

There  were  the  amiable  Bishop  of  London  (Howley4), 
Coplestone,  whom  I  remember  a  first  man  at  Oxford,  now 
Bishop  of  Ilandaff,  the  Dean  of  St.  Paul's,  and  other  digni- 
taries of  whom  I  knew  less.  It  was  a  very  pleasant  day — 
the  wigs  against  the  wits  for  a  guinea  in  point  of  conversa- 
tion. Anne  looked  queer,  and  much  disposed  to  laugh  at 
finding  herself  placed  betwixt  two  prelates  [in  black  petti- 
coats]. 

April  19. — Breakfasted  with  Sir  George  Philips.  Had 
his  receipt  against  the  blossoms  being  injured  by  frost. 
It  consists  in  watering  them  plentifully  before  sunrise. 
This  is  like  the  mode  of  thawing  bee£  We  had  a  pleasant 
morning,  much  the  better  that  Morritt  was  with  us.  He 
has  agreed  to  go  to  Hampton  Court  with  us  to-morrow. 

Mr.  Eeynolds  called  on  me  about  the  drawing  of  the 
Laird's  Jock-  he  is  assiduous  and  attentive,  but  a  little 
forward.  Poor  Gillies  also  called.  Both  asked  me  to  dinner, 
but  I  refused.  I  do  not  incline  to  make  what  is  called 
literary  acquaintances ;  and  as  for  poor  G.,  it  is  wild  to  talk 
about  his  giving  dinner  to  others,  when  he  can  hardly  get 
credit  for  his  own. 

Dined  with  Sir  Robert  Henry  Inglis,  and  met  Sir  Thomas 

1  Ante,  p.  10.     Afterwards  in-  *  Grabbers    Tale    of   the   Dumb 

eluded  in  her  Poetical  and  Dramatic  Orators. — j.  a.  L. 

Works,  Lend.  1851.  *  Dr.  Howley,  raised  in  1828  to 

3  Dr.    Henry   Phillpotts,    conse-  the  Archbishopric  of    Canterbury, 

crated  Bishop  of  Exeter  in  1830.  — J.  G.  L. 


1828.]  JOURNAL.  163 

Acland,  my  old  and  kind  friend.  I  was  happy  to  see  Mm. 
He  may  be  considered  now  as  the  head  of  the  religious 
party  in  the  House  of  Commons,  a  powerful  body  which 
Wilberforce  long  commanded.  It  is  a  difficult  situation; 
for  the  adaptation  of  religious  motives  to  earthly  policy  is 
apt — among  the  infinite  delusions  of  the  human  heart — to 
be  a  snare.  But  I  could  confide  much  in  Sir  T.  Acland's 
honour  and  integrity.  Bishop  Blomfield  [of  Chester],1  one 
of  the  most  learned  prelates  of  the  church,  also  dined. 

Coming  home,  an  Irish  coachman  drove  us  into  a  cul  de 
sac,  near  Battersea  Bridge.  We  were  obliged  to  get  out  in 
the  rain.  The  people  admitted  us  into  their  houses,  where 
they  were  having  their  bit  of  supper,  assisted  with  lights, 
etc.,  and,  to  the  honour  of  London,  neither  asked  nor  ex- 
pected gratification. 

April  20. — We  went  to  Walter's  quarters  in  a  body, 
and  saw  Hampton  Court,  with  which  I  was  more  struck 
than  when  I  saw  it  for  the  first  time,  about  1806.  The 
pictures  are  not  very  excellent,  but  they  are  curious,  which 
is  as  interesting,  except  to  connoisseurs.  Two  I  particularly 
remarked,  of  James  I.  and  Charles  I.  eating  in  public.  The 
old  part  of  the  palace,  built  by  Wolsey,  is  extremely  fine. 
Two  handsome  halls  are  still  preserved :  one,  the  ceiling  of 
which  is  garnished,  at  the  crossing  and  combining  of  the 
arches,  with  the  recurring  heads  of  Henry  vm.  and  Anne 
Boleyn — great  stinginess  in  Henry,  for  these  ornaments 
must  have  been  put  up  after  Wolsey's  fall.  He  could 
surely  afford  a  diversity  of  this  species  of  ornament  if  any 
man  could.  Formerly,  when  the  palace  was  complete,  a 
fishing-house  extended  into,  or  rather  over,  the  river.  We 
had  a  good  dinner  from  Walter,  and  wended  merrily  home. 

April  21. — Dining  is  the  principal  act  of  the  day  in 
London.  We  took  ours  at  Kensington  with  Croker.  There 

1  Translated  to  the  see  of  London  in  1828,  where  he  remained  until 
his  death  in  1859. 


164  JOURNAL.  [APJLUL 

were  Theodore  Hook  and  other  witty  men.  He  looks  un- 
healthy and  bloated.  There  was  something,  I  know  not 
what,  awanting  to  the  cheerfulness  of  the  party.  And 

"  Silence  like  a  heavy  cloud, 
O'er  all  the  •warriors  hung." 

If  the  general  report  of  Croker's  retiring  be  accurate,  it  may 
account  for  this. 

April  22. — Sophia  left  this  to  take  down  poor  Johnnie 
to  Brighton.  I  fear — I  fear — but  we  must  hope  the  best. 
Anne  went  with  her  sister. 

Lockhart  and  I  dined  with  Sotheby,  where  we  met  a 
large  dining  party,  the  orator  of  which  was  that  extra- 
ordinary man  Coleridge.  After  eating  a  hearty  dinner, 
during  which  he  spoke  not  a  word,  he  began  a  most  learned 
harangue  on  the  Samothracian  Mysteries,  which  he  con- 
sidered as  affording  the  germ  of  all  tales  about  fairies  past, 
present,  and  to  come.  He  then  diverged  to  Homer,  whose 
Iliad  he  considered  as  a  collection  of  poems  by  different 
authors,  at  different  times  during  a  century.  There  was, 
he  said,  the  individuality  of  an  age,  but  not  of  a  country. 
Morritt,  a  zealous  worshipper  of  the  old  bard,  was  incensed 
at  a  system  which  would  turn  him  into  a  polytheist,  gave 
battle  with  keenness,  and  was  joined  by  Sotheby,  our  host. 
Mr.  Coleridge  behaved  with  the  utmost  complaisance  and 
temper,  but  relaxed  not  from  his  exertions.  "  Zounds !  I 
was  never  so  bethumped  with  words."  Morritt's  impatience 
must  have  cost  him  an  extra  sixpence  worth  of  snuff.1 

1  Mr.  Lockhart  gives  an  account  no  more  of  anything,  unless  it  were* 

of  another  dinner  party  at  which  punch.     The  materials  were  forth- 

Coleridge  distinguished  himself: —  with  produced;  the  bowl  wasplanted 

"The  first  time  I  ever  witnessed  before  the  poet,  and  as  he  proceeded 

it  [Hook's  improvisation]  was  at  a  in  his  concoction,  Hook,  unbidden, 

gay   young   bachelor's  villa  near  took  his  place  at  the  piano.    He 

Highgate,  when  the  other  lion  was  burst  into  a  bacchanal  of  egregious 

one  of  a  very  different  breed,  Mr.  luxury,   every  line  of  which  had 

Coleridge.     Much  claret  had  been  reference  to  the  author  of  the  Lay 

shed   before  the  Ancient  Mariner  Sermons  and  the  Aids  to  Reflection. 

proclaimed  that  he  could  swallow  The  room  was  becoming  excessively 


1828.]  JOTJENAL.  165 

We  went  to  Lady  Davy's  in  the  evening,  where  there 
was  a  fashionable  party. 

April  23. — Dined  at  Lady  Davy's  with  Lord  and  Lady 
Lansdowne,  and  several  other  fashionable  folks.  My  keys 
were  sent  to  Bramah's  with  my  desk,  so  I  have  not  had  the 
means  of  putting  matters  down  regularly  for  several  days ; 
but  who  cares  for  the  whipp'd  cream  of  London  society? 
Our  poor  little  Johnnie  is  extremely  ill  My  fears  have 
been  uniform  for  this  engaging  child.  We  are  in  God's 
hands.  But  the  comfortable  and  happy  object  of  my  journey 
is  ended, — Seged,  Emperor  of  Ethiopia,1  was  right  after  all 

April  24. — Spent  the  day  in  rectifying  a  road  bill  which 
drove  a  turnpike  road  through  all  the  Darnickers*  cottages, 
and  a  good  field  of  my  own.  I  got  it  put  to  rights.  I 
was  in  some  apprehension  of  being  obliged  to  address  the 
Committee.  I  did  not  fear  them,  for  I  suppose  they  are  no 
wiser  or  better  in  their  capacity  of  legislators  than  I  find 
them  every  day  at  dinner.  But  I  feared  for  my  reputation. 
They  would  have  expected  something  better  thto  the 
occasion  demanded,  or  the  individual  could  produce,  and 
there  Would  have  been  a  failure. 

April  25. — Threatened  to  be  carried  down  to  vote  at  the 
election  of  a  Collector  of  the  Cess.2  Eesolved  if  I  did  go  to 
carry  my  son  with  me,  which  would  give  me  a  double  vote. 

hot :  the  first  specimen  of  the  new  and  chandelier  and  the  peculiar 
compound  was  handed  to  Hook,  shot  of  each  individual  destroyer 
who  paused  to  quaff  it,  and  then,  had  apt,  in  many  cases  exquisitely 
exclaiming  that  he  was  stifled,  witty,  commemoration.  In  walk- 
flung  his  glass  through  the  window,  ing  home  with  Mr.  Coleridge*  he 

Coleridge  rose  with  the  aspect  of     entertained and    me    with    a 

a  benignant  patriarch  and  demo-  most    excellent     lecture     on    the 

lished  another  pane— the  example  distinction    between    talent    and 

was   followed  generally — the  win-  genius,  and   declared   that   Hook 

<Low  was  a  sieve  in  an  instant — the  was  as  true  a  genius  as  Dante-- that 

kind  host  was  furthest  from  the  was  his  example." — Theodork  &odk> 

mark,  and  his  goblet  made  havoc  Lond.  1853,  p.  23-4. 

of  the  chandelier.      The   roar    of  a  T  ,  „„     .0  p^t/*, 

laughter  was  drowned  in  Theodore's  JohnS°n  8  *am^ 

resumption  of  the  song— and  window  2  The  County  Land  Tax. 


166  JOUElsTAL. 

Had  some  disagreeable  correspondence  about  this  with  Lord 
Minto  and  the  Sheriff. 

We  had  one  or  two  persons  at  home  in  great  wretchedness 
to  dinner.  Lockhart's  looks  showed  the  misery  he  felt.  I 
was  not  able  to  make  any  fight,  and  the  evening  went  off  as 
heavily  as  any  I  ever  spent  in  the  course  of  my  life. 

Finished  my  Turnpike  business  by  getting  the  exception- 
able clauses  omitted,  which  would  be  good  news  to  Darnick. 
Put  all  the  Mirror  in  proof  and  corrected  it.  This  is  the 
contribution  (part  of  it)  to  Mr.  Eeynolds'  and  Heath's  Keep- 
sake. We  dined  at  Kichardson's  with  the  two  chief  Barons 
of  England1  and  Scotland.2  Odd  enough,  the  one  being  a 
Scotsman  and  the  other  an  Englishman.  Far  the  pleasantest 
day  we  have  had ;  I  suppose  I  am  partial,  but  I  think  the 
lawyers  beat  the  bishops,  and  the  bishops  beat  the  wits. 

April  26. — This  morning  I  went  to  meet  a  remarkable 
man,  Mr.  Boyd  of  the  house  of  Boyd,  Benfield  &  Co.,  which 
broke  for  a  very  large  sum  at  the  beginning  of  the  war. 
Benfield  went  to  the  devil,  I  believe.  Boyd,  a  man  of  a  very 
different  stamp,  went  over  to  Paris  to  look  after  some  large 
claims  which  his  house  had  over  the  French  Government. 
They  were  such  as  it  seems  they  could  not  disavow,  however 
they  might  be  disposed  to  do  so.  But  they  used  every  effort, 
by  foul  means  and  fair,  to  induce  Mr.  Boyd  to  depart.  He 
was  reduced  to  poverty ;  he  was  thrown  into  prison ;  and 
the  most  flattering  prospects  were,  on  the  other  hand,  held 
out  to  him,  if  he  would  compromise  his  claims.  His  answer 
was  uniform.  It  was  the  property,  he  said,  of  his  creditors, 
and  he  would  die  ere  he  resigned  it.  His  distresses  were 
so  great  that  a  subscription  was  made  among  his  Scottish 
friends,  to  which  I  was  a  contributor,  through  the  request  of 
poor  Will  Erskine.  After  the  peace  of  Paris  the  money  was 

1  The  Eight  Hon.  Sir  W.  Alex-     1824 ;  died  in  London  in  his  eighty- 
ander    of   Airdrie,    called   to   the     eighth  year,  1842. 
English    Bar    1782,   Chief    Baron        *  Sir  Samuel  Shepherd. 


1828.]  JOURNAL.  167 

restored,  and,  faithful  to  the  last,  Boyd  laid  the  whole  at  his 
creditors'  disposal ;  stating,  at  the  same  time,  that  he  was 
penniless  unless  they  consented  to  allow  him  a  moderate 
sum  in  name  of  percentage,  in  consideration  of  twenty  years 
of  danger,  poverty,  and  [exile],  all  of  which  evils  he  might 
have  escaped  by  surrendering  their  right  to  the  money. 
Will  it  be  believed  that  a  muck- worm  was  base  enough  to 
refuse  his  consent  to  this  deduction,  alleging  he  had  promised 
to  his  father,  on  his  death-bed,  never  to  compromise  this 
debt.  The  wretch,  however,  was  overpowered  by  the  execra- 
tions of  all  around  him,  and  concurred,  with  others,  ia 
setting  apart  for  Mr,  Boyd  a  sum  of  £40,000  or  £50,000  out 
of  half  a  million  of  money.1  This  is  a  man  to  whom  statues 
should  be  erected,  and  pilgrims  should  go  to  see  him.  He 
is  good-looking,  but  old  and  infirm.  Bright  dark  eyes  and 
eyebrows  contrast  with  his  snowy  hair,  and  all  his  features 
mark  vigour  of  principle  and  resolution.  Mr.  Morritt  dined 
with  us,  and  we  did  as  well  as  in  the  circumstances  could 
be  expected. 

Eeleased  from  the  alarm  of  being  summoned  down  to 
the  election  by  a  civil  letter  from  Lord  Minto.  I  am  glad 
both  of  the  relief  and  of  the  manner.  I  hate  civil  war 
amongst  neighbours. 

April  27. — Breakfasted  this  day  with  Charles  Dumergue 
on  a  poulet  &  la  twrtare,  and  saw  all  his  family,  specially  my 
godson.  Called  on  Lady  Stafford  and  others,  and  dined  at 
Croker's  in  the  Admiralty,  with  the  Duke  of  Wellington, 
Huskisson,  Wilmot  Horton,  and  others,  outs  and  ins.  No 
politics  of  course,  and  every  man  disguising  serious  thoughts 
with  a  light  brow.  The  Duke  alone  seemed  open,  though  not 
letting  out  a  word.  He  is  one  of  the  few  whose  lips  are  worth 
watching.  I  heard  him  say  to-day  that  the  best  troops  would 

1  Walter  Boyd  at  this  time  was  was  the  author  of  several  wcll- 
M.P.  for  Lymington;  he  had  been  known  tracts  on  finance,  and  died 
a  banker  in  Paris  and  in  London ;  in  1837. 


168  JOUBNAL.  [APRIL 

run  now  and  then.  He  thought  nothing  of  men  running,  he 
said,  providing  they  came  back  again.  In  war  he  had  always 
his  reserves.  Poor  Terry  was  here  when  I  returned.  He 
seems  to  see  his  matters  in  a  delusive  light. 

April  28. — An  attack  this  day  or  yesterday  from  poor 
Gillies,  boring  me  hard  to  apply  to  M>nzies  of  Pitfoddels  to 
entreat  him  to  lend  him  money.  I  could  not  get  him  to 
understand  that  I  was  decidedly  averse  to  write  to  another 
gentleman,  with  whom  I  was  hardly  acquainted,  to  do  that 
which  I  would  not  do  myself.  Tom  Campbell x  is  in  miser- 
able distress — his  son  insane — his  wife  on  the  point  of 
becoming  so.  Inunc,  et  versus  tecum  medicare  canoros? 

We,  i.e.  Charles  and  I,  dined  at  Sir  Francis  Freeling's 
with  Colonel  Harrison  of  the  Board  of  Green  Cloth,  Dr. 
[Maltby]  of  Lincoln's  Inn,  and  other  pleasant  people. 
Doctor  Dibdin  too,  and  Utterson,  all  old  Eoxburghe  men. 
Pleasant  party,  were  it  not  for  a  bad  cold,  which  makes  me 
bark  like  a  dog. 

April  29. — Anne  and  Lockhart  are  off  with  the  children 
this  morning  at  seven,  and  Charles  and  I  left  behind ;  and 
this  is  the  promised  meeting  of  my  household  I  I  went  to 
Dr.  Gilly's  to-day  to  breakfast.  Met  Sir  Thomas  Acland, 
who  is  the  youngest  man  of  his  age  I  ever  saw.  I  was 
so  much  annoyed  with  cough,  that,  on  returning,  I  took  to 
my  bed  and  had  a  siesta,  to  my  considerable  refreshment. 
Dr.  3?ergusson  called,  and  advised  caution  in  eating  and 
drinking,  which  I  will  attend  to. 

Dined  accordingly.  Duke  of  Sussex  had  cold  and  did 
not  come.  A  Mr.  or  Dr.  Pettigrew  made  me  speeches  on 
his  account,  and  invited  me  to  see  his  Eoyal  Highness's 
library,  which  I  am  told  is  a  fine  one.  Sit  Peter  Laurie, 
late  Sheriff,  and  in  nomination  to  be  Lord  Mayor,  beset 

1  Campbell  died  at  Boulogne  in  1844,  aged  sixty-seven  5  he  was  biiried 
in  Westminster. 
3  Hor.  Epp.  ii.  2,  76. 


1828.]  JOUENAL.  169 

me  close,  and  asked  more  questions  than  would  have  "been 
thought  warrantable  at  the  west  end  of  the  town. 

April  30. — We  had  Mr.  Adolphus  and  his  father,  the 
celebrated  lawyer,  to  breakfast,  and  I  was  greatly  delighted 
with  the  information  of  the  latter.  A  barrister  of  extended 
practice,  if  he  has  any  talents  at  all,  is  the  best  companion 
in  the  world.1 

Dined  with  Lord  Alvanley  and  a  fashionable  party,  Lord 
Pitzroy  Somerset,  Marquis  and  Marchioness  of  Worcester, 
etc.  Lord  Alvanley's  wit  made  the  party  very  pleasant,  as 
well  as  the  kind  reception  of  my  friends  the  Misses  Arden. 

1  The  elder  Mr.   Adolphus  dis-     his  History  of  the  R&ign  of  George 
languished  himself  early  in  life  by     ///.—  jr.  o.  L. 


MAY. 

im — Breakfasted  with  Lord  and  Lady  Leveson 
Gower,1  and  enjoyed  the  splendid  treat  of  hearing  Mrs. 
Arkwright  sing  her  own  music,2  which  is  of  the  highest 
order — no  forced  vagaries  of  the  voice,  no  caprices  of 
tone,  but  all  telling  upon  and  increasing  the  feeling  the 
words  require.  This  is  "marrying  music  to  immortal 
verse."3  Most  people  place  them  on  separate  maintenance. 

I  met  the  Eoxburghe  Club,  and  settled  to  dine  with  them 
on  15th  curt.  Lord  Spencer  in  the  chair.  "We  voted  Lord 
Olive  4  a  member. 

May  2. — I  breakfasted  with  a  Mr.  Bell,  Great  Ormond 
Street,  a  lawyer,  and  narrowly  escaped  Mr.  Irving,  the 
celebrated  preacher.  The  two  ladies  of  the  house  seemed 
devoted  to  his  opinions,  and  quoted  him  at  every  word.  Mr. 
Bell  himself  made  some  apologies  for  the  Millennium.  He  is 
a  smart  little  antiquary,  who  thinks  he  ought  to  have  been  a 
man  of  letters,  and  that  his  genius  has  been  mis-directed  in 
turning  towards  the  law.  I  endeavoured  to  combat  this  idea, 
which  his  handsome  house  and  fine  family  should  have 

1  See  ante,  vol.  i.  p.  13.  Lady  as  she  closed,  'Capital  words — 

Francis  Leveson  Gower  was  the  whose  are  they  1  Byron's,  I  suppose, 

eldest  daughter  of  Charles  Greville.  but  I  don't  remember  them.'  He 

8  Mr.  Lockhart  writes : — ' '  Among  was  astonished  when  I  told  him  they 

other  songs  Mrs.   Arkwright  de-  were  his  own  in  The  Pirate.    He 

lighted  Sir  Walter  with  her  own  set  seemed  pleased  at  the  moment,  but 

of—  said  next  minute,  'You  have  dis- 

•  Farewell  I  farewell  1  the  voice  you  hear  tressed  me— if  memory  goes,  all  is 

^SSS£!£££2     "  th  me>  -T^r  alTys 

And  slwut  among  the  shouting  crew.1  my  str°ng  P°mt-     —• &&>  vol.  IX. 

etc.  p.  236. 

He  was  sitting  by  me,  at  some  dis-       3  Milton's  L9 Allegro,  ver.  137,  294. 
tance  from  the  lady,  and  whispered,       4  Afterwards  second  Earl  Powis . 

170 


1828.]  JOITENAL.  171 

checked.  Compare  his  dwelling,  his  comforts,  with  poor 
Tom  Campbell's ! 

I  dined  with  the  Literary  Society ;  rather  heavy  work, 
though  some  excellent  men  were  there.  I  saw,  for  the  first 
time,  Archdeacon  Nares,  long  conductor  of  the  British  Critic, 
a  gentlemanlike  and  pleasing  man.  Sir  Henry  Eobert  Inglis 
presided. 

May  3. — Breakfasted  at  my  old  friend  Gaily  Knight's, 
with  whom,  in  former  days,  I  used  to  make  little  parties  to 
see  poor  Monk  Lewis.  After  breakfast  I  drove  to  Lee  and 
Kennedy's,  and  commissioned  seeds  and  flowers  for  about  £10, 
including  some  specimens  of  the  Corsican  and  other  pines. 
Their  collection  is  very  splendid,  but  wants,  I  think,  the 
neatness  that  I  would  have  expected  in  the  first  nursery- 
garden  in  or  near  London.  The  essentials  were  admirably 
cared  for.  I  saw  one  specimen  of  the  Norfolk  Island  pine,  the 
only  one,  young  Lee  said,  which  has  been  raised  from  all  the 
seed  that  was  sent  home.  It  is  not  treated  conformably  to  its 
dignity,  for  they  cut  the  top  off  every  year  to  prevent  its 
growing  out  at  the  top  of  the  conservatory.  Sure  it  were 
worth  while  to  raise  the  house  alongst  with  the  plant. 

Looked  in  at  Murray's — wrote  some  letters,  etc.,  and 
walked  home  with  the  Dean  of  Chester,  who  saw  me  to  my 
own  door.  I  had  but  a  few  minutes  to  dress,  and  go  to  the 
Eoyal  Academy,  to  which  I  am  attached  in  capacity  of  Pro- 
fessor of  Antiquities.  I  was  too  late  to  see  the  paintings, 
but  in  perfect  time  to  sit  half-an-hour  waiting  for  dinner,  as 
the  President,  Sir  Thomas  Lawrence,  expected  a  prince  of 
the  blood.  He  came  not,  but  there  were  enough  of  grandees 
besides.  Sir  Thomas  Lawrence  did  the  honours  very  well, 
and  compliments  flew  about  like  sugar-plums  at  an  Italian 
carnival.  I  had  my  share,  and  pleaded  the  immunities  of 
a  sinecurist  for  declining  to  answer. 

After  the  dinner  I  went  to  Mrs.  Scott  of  Harden,  to  see 
and  be  seen  by  her  nieces,  the  Herbert  ladies.  I  don't  know 


172  JOUENAL.  [MAY 

how  their  part  of  the  entertainment  turned  out,  but  I  saw 
two  or  three  pretty  girls. 

May  4. — I  breakfasted  this  morning  with  Sir  Coutts 
Trotter,  and  had  some  Scottish  talk.  Visited  Cooper,  who 
kindly  undertook  to  make  my  inquiries  in  Lyons.1  I  was 
at  home  afterwards  for  three  hours,  but  too  much  tired  to 
do  the  least  right  thing.  The  distances  in  London  are  so 
great  that  no  exertions,  excepting  those  which  a  bird  might 
make,  can  contend  with  them.  You  return  weary  and 
exhausted,  fitter  for  a  siesta  than  anything  else.  In  the 
evening  I  dined  with  Mr.  Peel,  a  great  Cabinet  affair,  and 
too  dignified  to  be  very  amusing,  though  the  landlord  and 
the  pretty  landlady  did  all  to  make  it  easy. 

May  5. — Breakfasted  with  Haydon,  and  sat  for  my  head. 
I  hope  this  artist  is  on  his  legs  again.  The  King  has  given 
him  a  lift  by  buying  his  clever  picture  of  the  election  in  the 
Fleet  prison,  to  which  he  is  adding  a  second  part,  representing 
the  chairing  of  the  member  at  the  moment  it  was  interrupted 
by  the  entry  of  the  guards.  Haydon  was  once  a  great  admirer 
and  companion  of  the  champions  of  the  Cockney  school,  and 
is  now  disposed  to  renounce  them  and  their  opinions.  To 
this  kind  of  conversation  I  did  not  give  much  way.  A  painter 
should  have  nothing  to  do  with  politics.  He  is  certainly  a 
clever  fellow,  but  somewhat  too  enthusiastic,  which  distress 
seems  to  have  cured  in  some  degree.  His  wife,  a  pretty 
tf  oman,  looked  happy  to  see  me,  and  that  is  something.  Yet 
it  was  very  little  I  could  do  to  help  them.2 

Dined  at  Lord  Bathurst's,  in  company  with  the  Duke. 
There  are  better  accounts  of  Johnnie.  But,  alas  ! 

7. — Breakfasted  with  Lord  Francis   Gower,  and 


1  Regarding  the  Chancery  busi-  scription  released    the  artist  pro- 
ness,  see  infra,  p.  191,  n.  duced,  I  need  scarcely  say,  the  pic- 

2  Sir  Walter  had  shortly  before  ture  mentioned  in theDiary.—j.G.L. 
been  one  of  the  contributors  to  a  Haydon  died  in  June  1846.    See 
subscription  for  Mr.  Haydon.    The  his  Life,  3  vols.,   1853,  edited  by 
imprisonment  from  which  the  sub-  Tom  Taylor. 


1828.]  JOURNAL.  173 

again  enjoyed  the  great  pleasure  of  meeting  Mrs.  Arkwright, 
and  hearing  her  sing.  She  is,  I  understand,  quite  a  heaven- 
born  genius,  having  scarce  skill  enough  in  music  to  write 
down  the  tunes  she  composes.  I  can  easily  believe  this. 
There  is  a  pedantry  among  great  musicians  that  deprives 
their  performances  of  much  that  is  graceful  and  "beautiful. 
It  is  the  same  in  the  other  fine  arts,  where  fashion  always 
prefers  cant  and  slang  to  nature  and  simplicity. 

Dined  at  Mr.  Watson  Taylor's,  where  plate,  etc.,  shone 
in  great  and  somewhat  ostentatious  quantity.  Cfroker]  was 
there,  and  very  decisive  and  overbearing  to  a  great  degree. 
Strange  so  clever  a  fellow  should  let  his  wit  outrun  his 
judgment ! l  In  general,  the  English  understand  conversation 
well  There  is  that  ready  deference  for  the  claims  of  every 
one  who  wishes  to  speak  time  about,  and  it  is  seldom  now-a- 
days  that  "  a  la  stoccata  "  carries  it  away  thus.2 

I  should  have  gone  to  the  Duchess  of  Northumberland's 
to  hear  music  to-night,  but  I  felt  completely  fagged,  and  be- 
took myself  home  to  bed. 

I  learned  a  curious  thing  from  Emily,  Lady  Londonderry, 
namely,  that  in  feeding  all  animals  with  your  hand,  you 
should  never  wear  a  glove,  which  always  affronts  them.  It 
is  good  authority  for  this  peculiarity. 

May  8. — Breakfasted  at  Somerset  House  with  Davies 
Gilbert,  the  new  preses  of  the  Eoyal  Society.  Tea,  coffee, 
and  bread  and  butter,  which  is  poor  work.  Certainly  a  slice 
of  ham,  a  plate  of  shrimps,  some  broiled  fish,  or  a  mutton 
chop,  would  have  been  becoming  so  learned  a  body.  I  was 
most  kindly  received,  however,  by  Dr.  D.  Gilbert,  and  a 
number  of  the  members.  I  saw  Sir  John  Sievwright — a 
singular  personage;  he  told  me  his  uniform  plan  was  to 
support  Ministers,  but  he  always  found  himself  voting  in 

1  The    Duke  of   Wellington,  in  down  by  Croker  and  Bankes  !  who 

after  years,  said  to  Lord  Mahon,  forgot  that  we  might  have  them 

"JIe  had  observed  on  several  occa-  every  day." — Notes,  p.  100. 

sions  that  Sir  Walter  was  talked  2  Romeo  and  Juliet,  Act  in.  Sc.  1. 


174  JOUENAL  [MAY 

Opposition.  I  told  "Him  his  deference  to  Ministers  was  like 
that  of  the  Frenchman  to  the  enemy,  who,  being  at  his  mercy, 
asked  for  his  life  : — "  Anything  in  my  power  excepting  that, 
sir,"  said  Monsieur.  Sir  John  has  made  progress  in  teaching 
animals  without  severity  or  beating.  I  should  have  liked  to 
have  heard  him  on  this  topic. 

Called  at  Northumberland  House  and  saw  the  Duke. 
According  to  his  report  I  lost  much  by  not  hearing  the  two 
rival  nightingales,  Sontag  and  Pasta,  last  night,  but  I  care 
not  for  it. 

Met  Sir  W.  K[nighton],  returned  from  the  Continent. 
He  gives  me  to  understand  I  will  be  commanded  for  Sunday. 
Sir  W.  K  asked  me  to  sit  for  him  to  KTorthcote,  and  to  meet 
Tij-m  there  at  one  to-morrow.  I  cannot  refuse  this,  but  it  is 
a  great  bore.1 

Dined  with  Mrs.  Alexander  of  Ballochmyle,  Lord  and 
Lady  Meath,  who  were  kind  to  us  in  Ireland,  and  a  Scottish 
party, — pleasant,  from  hearing  the  broad  accents  and  honest 
thoughts  of  my  native  land.  A  large  party  in  the  evening. 
A  gentleman  came  up  to  me  and  asked  "  if  I  had  seen  the 
'  Casket/  a  curious  work,  the  most  beautiful,  the  most  highly 
ornamented — and  then  the  editor  or  editress — a  female  so 
interesting, — might  he  ask  a  very  great  favour,"  and  out  he 
pulled  a  piece  of  this  pic-nie.  I  was  really  angry,  and  said 
for  a  subscription  he  might  command  me — for  a  contribu- 
tion no ;  that  I  had  given  to  a  great  many  of  these  things 
last  year,  and  finding  the  labour  occupied  some  considerable 
portion  of  my  time,  I  had  done  a  considerable  article  for  a 

1  Sir  W,  Knighton,  as  a  Devon-  considered  good."  —  Cunningham's 

shire  man,  naturally  wished  to  have  Lives,  vol.  vi.  p.  124     It  was  ex- 

the  portrait  painted  by  Northcote,  hibited  in  1871  in  Edinburgh ;  its 

who    was    a    brother    Devonian,  size  is  4  ft.  2  in.  x  3  ft.  2  in.     Mr. 

Cunningham  said  of   this  picture  David  Laing,  differing  from  Allan 

that  the  conception  was  good,  and  Cunningham,   considered  that  the 

reality  given  by  the  introduction  of  picture  presented  "anything  but  a 

the  painter,  palette m  hand,  putting  fortunate     likeness."       Northcote 

the  finishing  touch  to  the  head  of  died  July  13th,  1831,  in  his  eighty- 

the  poet.     "The   likenesses  were  fifth  year. 


1828.]  JOUKNAL.  175 

single  collection  this  year,  taking  a  valuable  consideration 
for  it,  and  engaged  not  to  support  any  other.  This  may  be 
misrepresented,  but  I  care  not.  Suppose  this  patron  of  the 
Muses  gives  five  guineas  to  his  distressed  lady,  he  will  think 
he  does  a  great  deal,  yet  takes  fifty  from  me  with  the  calmest 
air  in  the  world,  for  the  communication  is  worth  that  if  it 
be  worth  anything.  There  is  no  equality  in  the  proposal. 

I  saw  to-day  at  Northumberland  House,  Bridge  the 
jeweller,  having  and  holding  a  George,  richly  ornamented 
with  diamonds,  being  that  which  Queen  Anne  gave  to  the 
Duke  of  Marlborough,  which  his  present  representative 
pawned  or  sold,  and  which  the  present  king  bought  and 
presented  to  the  Duke  of  Wellington.  His  Grace  seemed 
to  think  this  interesting  jewel  was  one  of  two  which  had 
been  preserved  since  the  first  institution  of  that  order. 
That,  from  the  form  and  taste,  I  greatly  doubt.  Mr.  Bridge 
put  it  again  into  his  coat  pocket,  and  walked  through  the 
street  with  £10,000  in  his  pocket.  I  wonder  he  is  not 
hustled  and  robbed.  I  have  sometimes  envied  rich  citizens, 
but  it  was  a  mean  and  erroneous  feeling.  This  man,  who, 
I  suppose,  must  be  as  rich  as  a  Jew,  had  a  shabby  look  in 
the  Duke's  presence,  and  seemed  just  a  better  sort  of  pedlar. 
Better  be  a  poor  gentleman  after  all 

May  9. — Grounds  of  Foote's  farce  of  the  Cozeners.  Lady 

.  A  certain  Mrs.  Phipps  audaciously  set  up  in  a 

fashionable  quarter  of  the  town  as  a  person  through  whose 
influence,  properly  propitiated,  favours  and  situations  of 
importance  might  certainly  be  obtained — always  for  a  con- 
sideration. She  cheated  many  people,  and  maintained  the 
trick  for  many  months.  One  trick  was  to  get  the  equipage 
of  Lord  North,  and  other  persons  of  importance,  to  halt 
before  her  door  as  if  the  owners  were  within.  With  respect 
to  most  of  them,  this  was  effected  by  bribing  the  drivers. 
But  a  gentleman,  who  watched  her  closely,  observed  that 
Charles  J.  Fox  actually  left  his  carriage  and  went  into  the 


176  JOUEKAL.  [MAY 

house,  and  this  more  than  once.  He  was  then,  it  must  be 
noticed,  in  the  Ministry.  When  Mrs.  Phipps  was  blown  up, 
this  circumstance  was  recollected  as  deserving  explanation, 
which  Fox  readily  gave  at  Brooks's  and  elsewhere.  It  seems 
Mrs.  Phipps  had  the  art  to  persuade  him  that  she  had  the 
disposal  of  what  was  then  called  a  hyaena — that  is,  an 
heiress — an  immense  Jamaica  heiress,  in  whom  she  was 
willing  to  give  or  sell  her  interest  to  Charles  Fox.  "Without 
having  perfect  confidence  in  the  obliging  proposal,  the  great 
statesman  thought  the  thing  worth  looking  after,  and  became 
so  earnest  in  it,  that  Mrs.  Phipps  was  desirous  to  back  out 
of  it  for  fear  of  discovery.  With  this  view  she  made  con- 
fession one  fine  morning,  with  many  professions  of  the 
deepest  feelings,  that  the  hyaena  had  proved  a  frail  monster, 
and  given  birth  to  a  girl  or  boy — no  matter  which.  Even 
this  did  not  make  Charles  quit  chase  of  the  hyaena.  He 
intimated  that  if  the  cash  was  plenty  and  certain,  the  circum- 
stance might  be  overlooked.  Mrs.  Phipps  had  nothing  for 
it  but  to  double  the  disgusting  dose.  "  The  poor  child,"  she 
said,  "was  unfortunately  of  a  mixed  colour,  somewhat  tinged 
with  the  blood  of  Africa;  no  doubt  Mr.  Pox  was  himself 
very  dark,  and  the  circumstance  might  not  draw  atten- 
tion," etc.  etc.  This  singular  anecdote  was  touched  upon  by 
Foote,  and  is  the  cause  of  introducing  the  negress  into  the 
Cozeners}-  though  no  express  allusion  to  Charles  Fox  was 

admitted.    Lady tells  me  that,  in  her  youth,  the  laugh 

was  universal  so  soon  as  the  black  woman  appeared.  It,  is 
one  of  the  numerous  hits  that  will  be  lost  to  posterity.  Jack 
Fuller,  celebrated  for  his  attempt  on  the  Speaker's  wig,  told 
me  he  was  editing  Foote,  but  I  think  he  has  hardly  tact 
enough.  He  told  me  Colman  was  to  be  his  assistant.2 

1  Act  m.  So.  2.  him  in  Chantrey's  studio  in  1820. 

a  John  Mler,  long  M.P.  for  —See  Life,  vol.  vi.  pp.  206,  207. 

Surrey,  an  eccentric  character,  and  He  died  in  his  77th  year,  in  1834, 

looked  upon  as  standing  j  ester  to  the  without  apparently  having  carried 

House  of  Commons.  Scott  first  met  out  his  intention  of  editing  Foote. 


1828.]  JOUENAL.  177 

Went  down  in  the  morning  to  Montagu  House,  where  I 
found  the  Duke  going  out  to  suffer  a  recovery.1  I  had  some 
fancy  to  see  the  ceremony,  but  more  to  get  my  breakfast, 
which  I  took  at  a  coffee-house  at  Charing  Cross. 

I  sat  to  Northcote,  who  is  to  introduce  himself  in  the 
same  piece  in  the  act  of  painting  me,  like  some  pictures  of 
the  Venetian  school.  The  artist  is  an  old  man,  low  in  stature, 
and  bent  with  years — fourscore  at  least.  But  the  eye  is 
quick  and  the  countenance  noble.  A  pleasant  companion, 
familiar  with  recollections  of  Sir  Joshua,  Samuel  Johnson, 
Burke,  Goldsmith,  etc.  His  account  of  the  last  confirms  all 
that  we  have  heard  of  his  oddities. 

Dined  with  Mr.  Arbuthnot,  where  met  Duke  of  Rutland, 
Lord  and  Lady  Londonderry,  etc.  etc.  Went  to  hear  Mrs. 
Arkwright  at  Lady  Charlotte  Greville's.  Lockhart  came 
home  to-day. 

May  10. — Another  long  sitting  to  the  old  Wizard  North- 
cote.  He  really  resembles  an  animated  mummy.2  He  has 
altered  my  ideas  of  Sir  Joshua  Eeynolds,  whom,  from  the 
expressions  used  by  Goldsmith,  Johnson,  and  others,  I  used 
to  think  an  amiable  and  benevolent  character.  But  though 
not  void  of  generosity,  he  was  cold,  unfeeling,  and  indifferent 
to  his  family:  so  much  so  that  his  sister,  Miss  Reynolds, 
after  expressing  her  wonder  at  the  general  acceptance  which 
Sir  Joshua  met  with  in  society,  concluded  with,  "  For  me,  I 
only  see  in  him  a  dark  gloomy  tyrant."  I  own  this  view  of 
his  character  hurt  me,  by  depriving  me  of  the  pleasing 
vision  of  the  highest  talents  united  with  the  kindest  temper. 
But  Northcote  says  his  disagreeable  points  were  rather 
negative  than  positive — more  a  want  of  feeling  than  any 

1  A  process  in  English  law.  in  tombs.    He  seems  little  better 

than  a  ghost,  and  hangs  wavering 

*  Hazlitt  said  of  Northcote,  that  and  trembling  on  the  very  verge  of 
talking  with  him  was  like  convers-  life ;  you  would  think  a  breath 
ing  with  the  dead  :  "Y6u  see  a  would  blow  him  away,  and  yet 
little  old  man,  pale  and  fragile,  with  what  fine  things  he  says  !  "—Con- 
eyes  gleaming  like  the  lights  hung  versations. 

VOL.  II.  M 


178  JOURNAL.  [MAY 

desire  to  hurt  or  tyrannise.  They  arose  from  his  exclusive 
attachment  to  art. 

Dined  with  a  pleasant  party  at  Lord  Gower's.  Lady 
Grower  is  a  beautiful  woman,  and  extremely  courteous. 
Mis.  Arkwright  was  of  the  party.  I  am  getting  well 
acquainted  with  her,  and  think  I  can  see  a  great  deal  of 
sense  mixed  with  her  accomplishment. 

May  11, — Breakfasted  with  Dr.  Maltby,  preacher  in 
Lincoln's  Inn.  He  was  to  hare  been  the  next  Bishop,  if  the 
Whigs  had  held  their  ground.  His  person,  manners,  and 
attainments  would  have  suited  the  lawn  sleeves  well.  I 
heard  service  in  the  chapel,  which  is  a  very  handsome  place 
of  worship ;  it  is  upstairs,  which  seems  extraordinary,  and 
the  space  beneath  forms  cloisters,  in  which  the  ancient 
Benchers  of  the  Society  of  Lincoln's  Inn  are  interred.  I 
met  my  old  friend  Sir  William  Grant,1  and  had  some 
conversation  with  him.  Dr.  Maltby  gave  us  a  good  sermon 
upon  the  introduction  of  the  Gospel.  There  was  only  one 
monument  in  the  chapel,  a  handsome  tablet  to  the  memory 
of  Perceval.  The  circumstance  that  it  was  the  only 
monument  in  the  chapel  of  a  society  which  had  produced  so 
many  men  of  talents  and  distinction  was  striking — it  was  a 
tribute  due  to  the  suddenness  of  his  strange  catastrophe. 
There  is  nothing  very  particular  in  the  hall  of  Lincoln's  Inn, 
nor  its  parlour,  which  are  like  those  of  a  college.  Indeed 
the  whole  establishment  has  a  monastic  look. 

Sat  to  N"ortheote,  who  only  requires  (Deo  gratias)  another 
sitting.  Dined  with  his  Majesty  in  a  very  private  party — 
five  or  six  only  being  present.  I  was  received  most  kindly 
as  usual.  It  is  impossible  to  conceive  a  more  friendly 
manner  than  Ms  Majesty  used  towards  me.  I  spoke  to 
S.  W,  K  about  the  dedication  of  the  collected  works,  and  he 
says  it  will  be  highly  well  taken.2 

1  Born  1752,  died  1832;  Master        2  The  Magnum  Opus  was  dedi- 
of  the  Rolls  from  1801  to  1817.  cated  to  George  rv.—J*  G.  L. 


1828.]  JOUKKAL.  179 

I  went  after  the  party  broke  up  to  Mrs.  Scott  of  Harden, 
where  I  made  acquaintance  with  her  beautiful  kinswoman, 
Lady  Sarah  Ponsonby,  whose  countenance  is  really  seraphic 
and  totally  devoid  of  affectation. 

May  12. — Old  George  n.  was,  as  is  well  known,  ex- 
tremely passionate.  On  these  occasions  his  small  stock  of 
English  totally  failed  him,  and  he  used  to  express  his 
indignation  in  the  following  form :  "  G —  d — n  me,  who  I 
am  ?  Got  d — n  you,  who  you  be  ? "  Lockhart  and  I  visited 
a  Mrs.  Quillinan,1  with  whom  Wordsworth  and  his  wife  have 
pitched  their  tent.  I  was  glad  to  see  my  old  friend,  whose 
conversation  has  so  much  that  is  fresh  and  manly  in  it. 
I  do  not  at  all  acquiesce  in  his  system  of  poetry,  and  I 
think  he  has  injured  his  own  fame  by  adhering  to  it.  But 
a  better  or  more  sensible  man  I  do  not  know  than  W.  W. 

Afterwards  Lockhart  and  I  called  on  Miss  Nicolson,  and 
from  thence  I  wandered  down  into  that  immense  hash  of  a 
city  to  see  Heath,  and  fortunately  caught  hold  on  him.  All 
this  made  me  too  late  for  Nbrthcote, — who  was  placable, 
however.2 

Dined  at  Sir  John  Shelley's,  d  petit  convert.  Here  were 
the  Duke  of  Wellington,  Duke  of  Eutland,  and  only  one  or 
two  more,  particularly  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Arbuthnot.  The  evening 
was  very  pleasant,  and  did  not  break  up  till  twelve  at 
night. 

May  13. — Breakfasted  with  Sir  George  Philips — there 
was  Sydney  Smith,  full  of  fan  and  spirit,  and  his  daughter, 

1  Whose  son  afterwards  married  whenever  he  saw  a  man  take  out  a 
Dora,  Wordsworth's  daughter.  pencil  and  paper,  and  look  at  him, 

2  At  the  last  sitting  Northcote  he  set  up  a  howl,  and  ran  off  to  the 
remarked,  "  You  have  often  sat  for  Eildon    HiU.       His     unfortunate 
your  portrait  ?  "  master,  however  well  he  can  howl, 

"Yes,"  said  Sir  Walter;    "my  was  never  able  to  run  much;  he 

dog  Maida   and  I  have  sat  fre-  was  therefore  obliged  to  abide  the 

quently — so  often  that  Maida,  who  event.    Yes,  I  have  frequently  sat 

had    little   philosophy,    conceived  for    my   picture." — Cunningham's 

such   a   dislike  to  painters,  that  Painters,  vol.  vi.  pp.  125-6. 


180  JOUKNAL.  [MAY 

who  is  a  good-humoured  agreeable  girL  We  had  a  pleasant 
breakfast  party. 

The  Catholics  have  carried  their  question,  which  I 
suppose  will  be  thrown  out  in  the  Lords.  I  think  they  had 
better  concede  this  oft-disputed  point,  and  dissolve  the 
league  which  binds  so  many  people  in  opposition  to 
Government.  It  is  a  matter  of  great  consequence  that  men 
should  not  acquire  the  habit  of  opposing.  No  earthly 
advantage  would  arise  to  Ireland  from  ceding  what  is 
retained,  where  so  much  has  been  already  yielded  up. 
Indeed  the  Catholic  gentry  do  not  pretend  that  the  granting 
the  immunities  they  require  would  tranquillise  the  country, 
but  only  that  it  would  remove  from  men  of  honour  all  pretext 
for  countenancing  them.  This  is  on  the  principle  of  the  solici- 
tor of  the  unhappy  Eajah  Nuncomar,  who  after  extorting  as 
much  money  as  he  could,  under  pretence  of  bribing  persons  to 
procure  his  pardon,  facilitate  his  escape,  etc.,  found  himself 
pressed  by  his  victim  for  a  final  answer.  "  The  preparations 
for  death  are  ready,"  said  the  Eajah ;  "  I  fear,  notwithstanding 
all  you  have  told  me,  their  intention  is  to  take  my  life." 
"By  G — d"  replied  the  trusty  solicitor,  "if  they  do  I  will 
never  forgive  them."  So  if  there  are  further  disturbances 
after  the  Catholic  claims  are  granted,  I  suppose  those  by 
whom  they  are  now  advocated  will  never  forgive  their 
friends  the  Pats ;  and  that  will  be  all  John  Bull  will  get  for 
it  I  dined  with  Lady  Stafford,  for  whom  I  have  much 
regard.  I  recollect  her  ever  since  she  stood  at  hei;  aunt 
Lady  Glenorchy's  window,  in  George  Square,  reviewing  her 
regiment  of  Sutherland  giants.  She  was,  as  she  ever  is, 
most  attentive  and  kind. 

May  14. — I  carried  Lockhart  to  Lady  Francis  Gower's  to 
hear  Mrs.  Arkwright  sing,  and  I  think  he  admired  her  as 
much  as  his  nature  permits  him  to  love  anything  musical, 
for  he  certainly  is  not  quickly  moved  by  concord  of  sweet 
sounds.  I  do  not  understand  them  better  than  he,  but 


1828.]  JOUKNAL.  181 

the  wee  del  petto  always  affects  me,  and  Mrs.  A.  has  it  in 
perfection.  I  have  received  as  much  pleasure  from  that 
lady's  music  as  sound  could  ever  give  me.1  Lockhart  goes 
off  for  Brighton.  I  had  a  round  of  men  in  office.  I  waited 
on  the  Duke  at  Downing  St.,  and  I  think  put  L.  right  there, 
if  he  will  look  to  himself.  But  I  can  only  tee  the  ball ;  he 
must  strike  the  blow  with  the  golf  club  himself.  I  saw 
Mr.  Planta,  and  he  promised  to  look  after  Harper's 
business  favourably.  Good  gracious,  what  a  solicitor  we 
are  grown ! 

Dined  with  Lady  Davy — a  pleasant  party ;  but  I  was  out 
of  spirits ;  I  think  partly  on  Johnnie's  account,  partly  from 
fatigue.  There  was  "William  Henry  Lyttelton  amongst 
others;  much  of  his  oddity  has  rubbed  off,  and  he  is  an 
honoured  courtly  gentleman,  with  a  great  deal  of  wit ;  and 
not  one  of  the  fine  people  who  perplex  you  by  shutting 
their  mouths  if  you  begin  to  speak.  I  never  fear  quizzing, 
so  am  not  afraid  of  this  species  of  lying-in-wait  Lord  have 
mercy  on  me  if  I  were ! 

May  15. — Dined  at  the  Koxburghe  Club.  Lord  Spencer 
presided,  but  had  a  cold  which  limited  his  exertions. 
Lord  Olive,  beside  whom  I  sat,  was  deaf,  though  intelligent 
and  good-humoured.  The  Duke  of  Devonshire  was  still 
deafer.  There  were  many  little  chirruping  men  who  might 
have  talked  but  went  into  committee.  There  was  little 
general  conversation.  I  should  have  mentioned  that  I 
breakfasted  with  kind,  good  Mr.  Hughes,  and  met  the 
Bishop  of  Uandaff — strongly  intelligent.  I  do  not  under- 
stand his  politics  about  the  Catholic  question.  He  seems 
disposed  to  concede,  yet  is  Toryissimus.  Perhaps  they  wish 
the  question  ended,  but  the  present  opinions  of  the  Sovereign 
are  too  much  interested  to  permit  them  to  quit  it. 

May  16. — Breakfasted  with  Mr.  Beynolds;  a  miscel- 
laneous party.  Wordsworth,  right  welcome  unto  me  was 

1  See  ante,  May  1st,  p.  170,  note. 


182  JOUENAL.  [MAY 

there.  I  had  also  a  sight  of  Godwin  the  philosopher,  grown 
old  and  thin — of  Douglas  Kinnaird,  whom  I  asked  about 
Byron's  statue,  which  is  going  forward — of  Luttrell,  and 
others  whom  I  knew  not.  I  stayed  an  instant  at  Pickering's, 
a  young  publisher's,  and  bought  some  dramatic  reprints.  I 
love  them  very  much,  but  I  would  [not]  advise  a  young  man 
to  undertake  them.  They  are  of  course  dear,  and  as  they 
have  not  the  dignity  of  scarcity,  the  bibliomaniacs  pass  them 
by  as  if  they  were  plated  candlesticks.  They  may  hold  as 
good  a  light  for  all  that  as  if  they  were  real  silver,  and 
therefore  I  buy  them  when  I  can  light  on  them.  But  here 
I  am  spending  money  when  I  have  more  need  to  make  it. 
On  Monday,  the  26th,  it  shall  be  Northward  ho ! 

Dined  at  Lady  G-eorgiana  and  Mr.  Agar  Ellis's.1  There 
were  Lord  and  Lady  Stafford  there,  and  others  to  whom  I 
am  sincerely  attached. 

May  17. — A  day  of  busy  idleness.  Eichardson  came 
and  breakfasted  with  me  like  a  good  fellow.  Then  I  went 
to  Mr.  Chantrey,  and  sat  for  an  hour  to  finish  the  bust.2 
Thereafter,  about  twelve  o'clock,  I  went  to  breakfast  the 
second,  at  Lady  Shelley's,  where  there  was  a  great  morning 
party.  A  young  lady3  begged  a  lock  of  my  hair,  which 
was  not  worth  refusing.  I  stipulated  for  a  kiss,  which  I 
was  permitted  to  take.  From  this  I  went  to  the  Duke  of 
Wellington,  who  gave  me  some  hints  or  rather  details. 
Afterwards  I  drove  out  to  Chiswick,  where  I  had  never  been 
before.  A  numerous  and  gay  party,  assembled  to  walk,  and 
enjoy  the  beauties  of  that  Palladian  demesne,  make  the  place 
and  highly  ornamented  gardens  belonging  to  it  resemble  a 

1  Mr.   Ellis,   afterwards  created      Robert  Peel,  and  which  is  now  at 
Baron  Dover,   was  the  author  of     Drayton.— j.  G.  L. 

JETistortcoJ  Inquiries  into  the  Char- 
acter   of   Lord    Clarendon.    8vo,  3  Lady    Shelley    of    Maresfield 
Lond.,  1827.  Park.     Mr.     Lockhart    says    the 

2  Sir   P.   Chantrey  was  at  this  young  lady  was  Miss  Shelley,  who 
time  executing  his  second  bust  of  became  in    1834   the   Hon.    Mrs. 
Sir  Walter— -that  ordered  by  Sir  George Edgcumbe. 


1828.]  JOUENAL.  183 

picture  of  Watteau.  There  is  some  affectation  in  the  picture, 
but  in  the  ensemble  the  original  looked  very  well.  The 
Duke  of  Devonshire  received  every  one  with  the  best  possible 
manners.  The  scene  was  dignified  by  the  presence  of  an 
immense  elephant,  who,  under  charge  of  a  groom,  wandered 
up  and  down,  giving  an  air  of  Asiatic  pageantry  to  the  enter- 
tainment. I  was  never  before  sensible  of  the  dignity  which 
largeness  of  size  and  freedom  of  movement  give  to  this 
otherwise  very  ugly  animal.  As  I  was  to  dine  at  Holland 
House,  I  did  not  partake  in  the  magnificent  repast  which 
was  offered  to  us,  and  took  myself  off  about  five  o'clock.  I 
contrived  to  make  a  demi-toilette  at  Holland  House  rather 
than  drive  all  the  way  to  London.  Eogers  came  to  dinner, 
which  was  very  entertaining.  The  Duke  of  Manchester  was 
there,  whom  I  remember  having  seen  long  ago.  He  had 
left  a  part  of  his  brain  in  Jamaica  by  a  terrible  fracture, 
yet,  notwithstanding  the  accident  and  the  bad  climate,  was 
still  a  fine-looking  man.  Lady  Holland 1  pressed  me  to  stay 
all  night,  which  I  did  accordingly. 

May  18. — The  freshness  of  the  air,  the  singing  of  the 
birds,  the  beautiful  aspect  of  nature,  the  size  of  the  vener- 
able trees,  all  gave  me  a  delightful  feeling  this  morning. 
It  seemed  there  was  pleasure  even  in  living  and  breathing, 
without  anything  else.  We  (i.e.  Rogers  and  I)  wandered  into 
a  green  lane  bordered  with  fine  trees,  which  might  have  been 
twenty  miles  from  a  town.  It  will  be  a  great  pity  when 
this  ancient  house  must  come  down  and  give  way  to  brick 
works  and  brick-houses.  It  is  not  that  Holland  House  is 
fine  as  a  building ;  on  the  contrary,  it  has  a  tumble-down 
look;  and,  although  decorated  with  the  bastard  Gothic  of 
James  L'S  time,  the  front  is  heavy.  But  it  resembles  many 


1  Scott   had   dined    at   Holland  Thomas  Scott's  affairs,  there  had 

House  in.  1806,  but  ia  consequence  apparently  been  no  renewal  of  the 

of  some  remarks  by  Lord  Holland  acquaintanceship  until  HOT*  . 
in  the  House  of  Lords  in  1810,  on 


184  JOUENAL.  [MAY 

respectable  matrons,  who,  having  been  absolutely  ugly  during 
youth,  acquire  by  age  an  air  of  dignity.  But  one  is  chiefly 
affected  by  the  air  of  deep  seclusion  which  is  spread  around 
the  domain.  I  called  on  Mr.  Peel  as  I  returned  home,  and 
after  that  on  Lord  Melville.  The  latter  undertook  for 
Allan  Cunningham's  son's  cadetship,  for  which  I  am  right 
glad. 

Dined  at  Mr.  and  Lady  Sarah  Ponsonby's,  who  called 
on  us  last  year  at  Abbotsf ord.  The  party  was  very  pleasant, 
having  Lord  and  Lady  Gower,  whom  I  like,  Mr.  and  Lady 
Georgiana  Ellis,  and  other  persons  of  distinction.  Saw 
Wordsworth  too,  and  learned  that  Tom  Moore  was  come 
to  town. 

May  19. — A  morning  of  business.  Breakfasted  with 
Dumergue  and  one  or  two  friends.  Dined  by  command 
with  the  Duchess  of  Kent.  I  was  very  kindly  recognised 
by  Prince  Leopold.  I  was  presented  to  the  little  Princess 
Victoria, — I  hope  they  will  change  her  name, — the  heir  ap- 
parent to  the  Crown  as  things  now  stand.  How  strange 
that  so  large  and  fine  a  family  as  that  of  his  late  Majesty 
should  have  died  off  and  decayed  into  old  age  with  so  few 
descendants!  Prince  George  of  Cumberland  is,  they  say, 
a  fine  boy  about  nine  years  old — a  bit  of  a  pickle,  swears 
and  romps  like  a  brat  that  has  been  bred  in  a  barrack  yard. 
This  little  lady  is  educated  with  much  care,  and  watched 
so  closely  by  the  Duchess  and  the  principal  governess,  that 
no  busy  maid  has  a  moment  to  whisper,  "You  are  heir  of 
England."  I  suspect  if  we  could  dissect  the  little  head,  we 
should  find  that  some  pigeon  or  other  bird  of  the  air  had 
carried  the  matter.  She  is  fair,  like  the  Eoyal  Pamily,  but 
does  not  look  as  if  she  would  be  pretty.  The  Duchess 
herself  is  very  pleasing  and  affable  in  her  manners.  I  sat 
by  Mr.  Spring  Eice,  a  very  agreeable  man.  He  is  a  great 
leader  among  the  Pro-Catholics.  I  saw  also  Charles  Wynn 
and  his  lady — and  the  evening,  for  a  Court  evening,  went 


1828.]  JOUENAL.  185 

agreeably  off.  I  am  commanded  for  two  days  by  Prince 
Leopold,  but  will  send  excuses. 

May  20. — I  set  out  for  Brighton  this  morning  in  a  light 
coach,  which  performed  the  distance  in  six  hours — otherwise 
the  journey  was  uncomfortable.  Three  women,  the  very 
specimens  of  womankind, — I  mean  trumpery, — a  child  who 
was  sick,  but  afterwards  looked  and  smiled,  and  was  the  only 
thing  like  company.  The  road  is  pleasant  enough  till  it  gets 
into  the  Wealds  of  Sussex,  a  huge  succession  of  green  downs 
which  sweep  along  the  sea-coast  for  many  miles.  Brighton 
seems  grown  twice  as  large  since  1815.  It  is  a  city  of  loiterers 
and  invalids — a  Vanity  Fair  for  piping,  dancing  of  bears,  and 
for  the  feats  of  Mr.  Punch.  I  found  all  my  family  well 
excepting  the  poor  pale  Johnnie ;  and  he  is  really  a  thing  to 
break  one's  heart  by  looking  at — yet  he  is  better.  The  rest 
are  in  high  kelter. 

My  old  friend  Will  Bose  dined  with  us,  also  a  Doctor 
Yates  and  his  wife — the  Esculapius  of  Brighton,  who  seems 
a  sensible  man.  I  was  entertained  with  the  empire  he 
exerted  over  hiTn  as  protector  of  his  health.  I  was  very 
happy  to  find  myself  at  Sophia's  quiet  table,  and  am  only 
sorry  that  I  must  quit  her  so  soon. 

May  21. — This  being  a  fine  day,  we  made  some  visits  in 
the  morning,  in  the  course  of  which  I  waited  on  Mrs.  Dorset, 
sister  of  Mrs.  Charlotte  Smith,1  and  herself  the  author  of 
the  Peacock  at  Home,  one  of  the  prettiest  and  liveliest  jeux 
d?  esprit  in  our  language.  She  is  a  fine  stately  old  lady — not  a 
bit  of  a  literary  person, — I  mean  having  none  of  the  affectation 
of  it,  but  like  a  lady  of  considerable  rank.  I  am  glad  I  have 
seen  her.  Eenewed  my  acquaintance  with  Lady  Charlotte 
Hamilton,  n6e  Lady  Charlotte  Hume,  and  talked  over  some 
stories  thirty  years  old  at  least.  We  then  took  a  fly,  as  they 
call  the  light  carriages,  and  drove  as  far  as  the  Devil's  Ditch. 
A  rarapart  it  is  of  great  strength  and  depth,  enclosing,  I 

1  See  Miscellaneous  Prose  TFbrJfo,  voL  iv.  p.  20. 


186  JOUEJTAL.  [MAY 

presume,  the  precincts  of  a  British  town  that  must  have  held 
30,000  men  at  least.  I  could  not  discover  where  they  got 
water. 

We  got  home  at  four,  and  dined  at  five,  and  smoked 
cigars  till  eight  Will  Eose  came  in  with  his  man  Hinvaes,1 
who  is  as  much  a  piece  of  Eose  as  Trim  was  of  Uncle  Toby. 
We  laughed  over  tales  "  both  old  and  new  "  till  ten  o'clock 
came,  and  then  broke  up. 

May  22. — Left  Brighton  this  morning  with  a  heavy  heart. 
Poor  Johnnie  looks  so  very  poorly  that  I  cannot  but  regard 
his  case  as  desperate,  and  then  God  help  the  child's  parents  ! 
Amen! 

We  took  the  whole  of  one  of  the  post-coaches,  and  so 
came  rapidly  to  town,  Sophia  coming  along  with  us  about  a 
new  servant  This  enabled  me  to  dine  with  Mr.  Adolphus, 
the  celebrated  barrister,  the  father  to  my  young  friend  who 
wrote  so  like  a  gentleman  on  my  matters,2  I  met  Mr.  Gurney, 
Archdeacon  Wrangham,  and  a  lawyer  or  two  besides.  I  may 

1  David  Hinves,  Mr.  W.  Stewart  with  it  Gundimore,  a  poem  by  the 

Rose's    faithful    and    affectionate  same  "author,"  accept  of  this  cor- 

attendant,  furnished  Scott  with  some  reeled  copy  of  Ghristabel  as  a  small 

hints   for   his   picture    of    Davie  token  of  regard ;  yet  such  a  testi- 

Gellatly  in  Waverley.  monial  as  I  would  not  pay  to  any 

Mr.  Lockhart  tells  us  that  Hinves  one  I  did  not  esteem,  though  he 

was  more  than  forty  years  in  Mr.  were  an  emperor. 

Hose's    service  ;  he    had   been   a  **  *  Be  assured  I  will  send  you  for 

bookbinder  by  trade  and  a  preacher  your  private  library  every  work  I 

among  the  Methodists.  have  published  (if  there  be  any  to 

1 '  A  sermon  heard  casually  under  be  had)  and  whatever  I  shall  publish, 

a  tree  in  the  New  Forest  contained  Keep  steady  to  the  FAITH.    If  the 

such  touches  of  good  feeling  and  fountainhead  be   always  full,   the 

broad  humour  that  Rose  promoted  stream  cannot  be   long    empty. — 

the  preacher  to  be  his  valet  on  the  Yours  sincerely,  S.  T.  COLEKIDGE. 

spot     He  was  treated  more  like  a  IC<11  Xoveniber  isie,  Mucyfad.'" 

friend  than  a  servant  by  his  master  — Life,  vol.  iv.  pp.  397-8. 

and  by  all  his  master's    intimate  Hinves  died  in  Mr.  Rose's  service 

friends.    Scott  presented  him  with  circa  1838,  and  his  master  followed 

all  his  works;  and  Coleridge  gave  him  on  the  30th  April  1843,  a  few 

him  a  corrected  (or  rather  an  altered)  weeks  after  his  friend  Morritt. 

copy  of  Christabel  with  this  inscrip-  2  An  analysis  of  these  letters  was 

tion  on  the  fly-leaf:  'Bear  Hinves,  published  by  Mr.  Lockhart  in  the 

-Till  this  book  is  concluded,  and  Life,  vol.  vi.  pp.  364-386. 


1828.]  JOURNAL.  187 

be  partial,  but  the  conversation  of  intelligent  barristers  amuses 
me  more  than  that  of  other  professional  persons.  There  is 
more  of  real  life  in  it,  with  which,  in  all  its  phases,  people  of 
business  get  so  well  acquainted.  Mr.  Adolphus  is  a  man  of 
varied  information,  and  very  amusing.  He  told  me  a  gipsy 
told  him  of  the  success  he  should  have  in  life,  and  how  it 
would  be  endangered  by  his  own  heat  of  temper,  alluding,  I 
believe,  to  a  quarrel  betwixt  him  and  a  brother  barrister. 

May  23. — I  breakfasted  with  Chantrey,  and  met  the 
celebrated  Coke  of  Norfolk,1  a  very  pleasing  man,  who  gave 
me  some  account  of  his  plantations.  I  understand  from  Tn'm 
that,  like  every  wise  man,  he  planted  land  that  would  not  let 
for  5s.  per  acre,  but  which  now  produces  £3000  a  year  in 
wood.  He  talked  of  the  trees  which  he  had  planted  as  being 
so  thick  that  a  man  could  not  fathom  2  them.  Withers,  he  said, 
was  never  employed  save  upon  one  or  two  small  jobs  of 
about  twenty  acres  on  which  every  expense  was  bestowed  with 
a  view  to  early  growth.  So  much  for  Withers.  I  shall  have 
a  rod  in  pickle  for  him  if  worth  while.8  After  sitting  to 
Chantrey  for  the  last  time,  I  called  on  Lady  Shelley,  P.  P.  d, 
and  was  sorry  to  find  her  worse  than  she  had  been.  Dined 
with  Lady  Stafford,  where  I  met  the  two  Lochs,  John  and 
James.  The  former  gave  me  his  promise  for  a  cadetship  to 
Allan  Cunningham's  son ;  I  have  a  similar  promise  from  Lord 
Melville,  and  thus  I  am  in  the  situation  in  which  I  have  been 
at  Gladdies  Wiel,4  where  I  have  caught  two  trouts,  one  with 

1  Created  Earl  of  Leicester  in  4  A  deep  pool  in  the  Tweed,  in 

1837.  which  Scott  had  had  a  singular  noc- 

»  It  is  worth  noting  that  Sir  tnrnal  adventure  while  "burning 

Walter  first  wrote  "gra*p"-and  thewater»in  company  with  Hogg 

then  deleted  the  word  in  favour  of  and  LaMlaw.  Hogg  records  that 

the  technical  term—"  fathom. "  the  crazy  coble  went  *°  the  bottom 

while  Scott  was  shouting — 

»  W.  Withers  had  just  published          "  An'  gin  the  boat  -were  bottomless, 
a  Letter  to  Sir  Walter  Scott  exposing  An'  seven  miles  to  row." 

certain  fundamental  errors  in  his  The  scene  was  not  forgotten  when 

late   Essay     on    Planting. — Holt :  he  came  to  write  the  twenty-sixth 

Norfolk,  1828.  chapter  of 


188  JOURNAL.  [MAY 

the  fly,  the  other  with  the  bobber.  I  have  landed  both,  and 
so  I  will  now.  Mr.  Loch  also  promised  me  to  get  out  Short- 
reed  as  a  free  mariner.  Tom  Grenville  was  at  dinner. 

May  24. — This  day  we  dined  at  Eichmond  Park  with  Lord 
Sidmouth.  Before  dinner  his  Lordship  showed  me  letters 
which  passed  between  the  great  Lord  Chatham  and  Dr, 
Addington,  Lord  Sidmouth's  [father].  There  was  much  of 
that  familiar  friendship  which  arises,  and  must  arise,  between 
an  invalid,  the  head  of  an  invalid  family,  and  their  medical 
adviser,  supposing  the  last  to  be  a  wise  and  well-bred  man. 
The  character  of  Lord  Chatham's  handwriting  is  strong  and 
bold,  and  his  expressions  short  and  manly.  There  are  in- 
timations of  his  partiality  for  William,  whose  health  seems 
to  have  been  precarious  during  boyhood.  He  talks  of  William 
imitating  him  in  all  he  did,  and  calling  for  ale  because  his 
father  was  recommended  to  drink  it.  "  If  I  should  smoke," 
he  said,  "  William  would  instantly  call  for  a  pipe ; "  and,  he 
wisely  infers,  "  I  must  take  care  what  I  do."  The  letters  of 
the  late  William  Pitt  are  of  great  curiosity,  but  as,  like  all  real 
letters  of  business,  they  only  allude  to  matters  with  which  his 
correspondent  is  well  acquainted,  and  do  not  enter  into  details, 
they  would  require  an  ample  commentary.  I  hope  Lord 
Sidmouth  will  supply  this,  and  have  urged  it  as  much  as  I 
can,  I  think,  though  I  hate  letters  and  abominate  inter- 
ference, I  will  write  to  him  on  this  subject. 

I  have  bought  a  certain  quantity  of  reprints  from  a  book- 
seller in  Chancery  Lane,  Pickering  by  name.  I  urged  him 
to  print  the  controversy  between  Greene  and  the  Harveys. 
He  wished  me  to  write  a  third  part  to  a  fine  edition  of 
Cotton's  Angler,  for  which  I  am  quite  incompetent.1 

I  met  at  Eichmond  my  old  and  much  esteemed  friend  Lord 
Stowell,2  looking  very  frail  and  even  comatose.  Qiuwtum 

1  This    refers   to    the  splendid  in  1836  after  nearly  ten  years'  pre- 

edition   of    Walton    and   Cotton,  paration,  in  two  vols.  large  8vo. 

edited  by  Nicolas,  and  illnstrated  2  Sir  William  Scott,  Lord  Stowell, 

by  Stothard  and  Inskipp,  published  died  28th  January  1836,  aged  ninety. 


1828.]  JOURNAL.  189 

niutatus !  He  was  one  of  the  pleasantest  men  I  ever 
knew. 

Eespecting  the  letters,  I  picked  up  from  those  of  Pitt 
that  he  was  always  extremely  desirous  of  peace  with  France, 
and  even  reckoned  upon  it  at  a  moment  when  he  ought  to 
have  despaired.  I  suspect  this  false  view  of  the  state  of 
France  (for  such  it  was),  which  induced  the  British 
Minister  to  look  for  peace  when  there  was  no  chance  of  it, 
damped  his  ardour  in  maintaining  the  war.  He  wanted 
the  lofty  ideas  of  his  father — you  read  it  in  his  handwriting, 
great  statesman  as  he  was.  I  saw  a  letter  or  two  of  Burke's 
in  which  there  is  an  tyanchement  du  cceur  not  visible  in 
those  of  Pitt,  who  writes  like  a  Premier  to  his  colleague. 
Burke  was  under  the  strange  hallucination  that  his  son, 
who  predeceased  him,  was  a  man  of  greater  talents  than 
himself.  On  the  contrary,  he  had  little  talent  and  no  re- 
solution. On  moving  some  resolutions  in  favour  of  the 
Catholics,  which  were  ill-received  hy  the  House  of  Commons, 
young  Burke  actually  ran  away,  which  an  Orangeman  com- 
pared to  a  cross-reading  in  the  newspapers : — Yesterday  the 
Catholic  resolutions  were  moved,  etc.,  but,  the  pistol  missing 
fire,  the  villains  ran  off! 

May  25. — After  a  morning  of  letter-writing,  leave-taking, 
papers  destroying,  and  God  knows  what  trumpery,  Sophia 
and  I  set  out  for  Hampton  Court,  carrying  with  us  the 
following  lions  and  lionesses — Samuel  Eogers,  Tom  Moore, 
Wordsworth,  with  wife  and  daughter.  We  were  very 
kindly  and  properly  received  by  Walter  and  his  wife,  and 
a  very  pleasant  party.1 

May  26. — An  awful    confusion  with    paying  of  bills, 

1  Moore  writes  :  "  On  our  arrival  other  scribblers  not  coining  in  for 

at  Hampton  (where  we  found  the  a  glance.     The  dinner  odd ;   but 

Wordsworths),  walked  about, — the  being  near  Scott  I  fouud  it  agree- 

whole  party  in  the  gay  walk  where  able,  and  was  delighted  to  see  him 

the  band  plays,  to  the  infinite  de-  so  happy,  with  his   tall  son,"  the 

light  of  the  Hampton  blues,  who  Major,"  etc.  etc. — Diary,  vol.    v. 

were   all   eyes  after    Scott.      The  p.  287. 


190  JOUENAL.  [MAY 

writing  of  cards,  and  all  species  of  trumpery  business. 
Southey,  who  is  just  come  to  town,  breakfasted  with  us. 
He  looks,  I  think,  but  poorly,  but  it  may  be  owing  to  family 
misfortune.  One  is  always  tempted  to  compare  Wordsworth 
and  Southey.  The  latter  is  unquestionably  the  greater 
scholar — I  mean  possesses  the  most  extensive  stock  of  in- 
formation, but  there  is  a  freshness,  vivacity,  and  spring 
about  Wordsworth's  mind,  which,  if  we  may  compare  two 
men  of  uncommon  powers,  shows  more  originality.  I  say 
nothing  of  their  poetry.  Wordsworth  has  a  system  which 
disposes  Mm  to  take  the  bull  by  the  horns  and  offend 
public  taste,  which,  right  or  wrong,  will  always  be  the  taste 
of  the  public ;  yet  he  could  be  popular  if  he  would, — witness 
the  Feast  at  Brougham  Castle, — Song  of  the  Cliffords,  I 
think,  is  the  name. 

I  walked  down  to  call,  with  Eogers,  on  Mrs.  D'Arblay. 
She  showed  me  some  notes  which  she  was  making  about 
her  novels,  which  she  induced  me  to  believe  had  been 
recollected  and  jotted  down  in  compliance  with  my  sugges- 
tions on  a  former  occasion.  It  is  curious  how  she  contrived 
to  get  Evelina  printed  and  published  without  her  father's 
knowledge.  Her  brother  placed  it  in  the  hands  of  one 
Lowndes,  who,  after  its  success,  bought  it  for  £20 1 !  1  and 
had  the  magnanimity  to  add  ^610 — the  price,  I  think,  of 
Paradise  Lost.  One  of  her  sisters  betrayed  the  secret  to 
her  father,  who  then  eagerly  lent  his  ears  to  hear  what  was 
said  of  the  new  novel,  and  the  first  opinion  which  saluted 
his  delighted  ears  was  the  voice  of  Johnson  energetically 
recommending  it  to  the  perusal  of  Mrs  Thrale.1 

At  parting,  Eogers  gave  me  a  gold-mounted  pair  of 

1  The  author  of  Evehna  died  at  she  received  a  subscription  of  3000 

Bath    in    1840,    at    the     age    of  guineas,  and  for  the  Wanderer,  in 

eighty-eight.     Subsequent  to  this  1814,    £1500    for    the    copyright, 

meeting  with  Scott  she  published  This  was  the  year  in  which  Waver- 

memoirs  of  her  father,  Dr.  Burney  ley  appeared,    for    the    copyright 

(in  1832).    It  is  stated  that  for  her  of  which  Constable  did  not  see  his 

novel  Camilla,  published  in  1796,  way  to  offer  more  than  £700. 


1828.]  JOURNAL.  191 

glasses,  which  I  will  not  part  with  in  a  hurry.  I  really 
like  Rogers,  and  have  always  found  him  most  friendly. 
After  many  petty  delays  we  set  off  at  last  and  reached 
Bushy  Grove  to  dine  with  my  kind  and  worthy  family 
friend  and  relative,  David  Haliburton.  I  am  delighted  to  find 
him  in  all  the  enjoyment  of  life,  with  the  vivacity  of  youth 
in  his  sentiments  and  enjoyments.  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Campbell 
Marjoribanks  are  the  only  company  here,  with  Miss  Parker. 

May  27. — Well,  my  retreat  from  London  is  now  accom- 
plished, and  I  may  fairly  balance  the  advantage  and  loss 
of  this  London  trip.  It  has  cost  me  a  good  deal  of  money, 
and  Johnnie's  illness  has  taken  away  much  of  the  pleasure 
I  had  promised  myself.  But  if  I  can  judge  from  the 
reception  I  have  met  with,  I  have  the  pleasure  to  know  that 
I  stand  as  fair  with  the  public,  and  as  high  with  my  personal 
friends,  as  in  any  period  of  my  life.  And  this  has  enabled 
me  to  forward  the  following  objects  to  myself  and  others  : — 

1st.  I  have  been  able  to  place  Lockhart  on  the  right 
footing  in  the  right  quarter,  leaving  the  improvement  of  his 
place  of  vantage  to  himself  as  circumstances  should  occur. 

3d.  I  have  put  the  Chancery  suit  in  the  right  train, 
which  without  me  could  not  have  been  done.1 

3d.  I  picked  up  some  knowledge  of  the  state  of 
existing  matters,  which  is  interesting  and  may  be  useful 

4th.  I  have  succeeded  in  helping  to  get  a  commission 
for  James  Skene. 

5th.  I  have  got  two  cadetships  for  the  sons  of  Allan 
Cunningham. 

6th.  I  have  got  leave  to  Andrew  Shortreed  to  go  out  to 
India. 

7th.  I  have  put  John  Eckford  into  correspondence  with 
Mr.  Loch,  who  thinks  he  can  do  something  for  his  claim. 

8th.  I  have  been  of  material  assistance  to  poor  Terry  in 
his  affairs. 
1  This  item  refers  to  money  which  had  belonged  to  Lady  Scott's  parents. 


192  JOUKNAL.  [MAY 

9th.  I  have  effectually  protected  my  Darnick  neighbours 
and  myself  against  the  New  Eoad  Bill. 

Other  advantages  there  are,  besides  the  great  one  of 
scouring  up  one's  own  mind  a  little  and  renewing  intercourse 
with  old  friends,  bringing  one's-self  nearer  in  short  to  the 
currency  of  the  time. 

All  this  may  weigh  against  the  expenditure  of  £200  or 
£250,  when  money  is  fortunately  not  very  scarce  with  me. 

We  went  out  for  a  most  agreeable  drive  through  the 
Hertfordshire  Lanes — a  strange  intricate  combination  of 
narrow  roads  passing  through  the  country,  winding  and 
turning  among  oaks  and  other  large  timber,  just  like  path- 
ways cut  through  a  forest.  They  wind  and  turn  in  so 
singular  a  manner,  and  resemble  each  other  so  much,  that  a 
stranger  would  have  difficulty  to  make  way  amongst  them. 
We  visited  Moor  Park  (not  the  house  of  Sir  William 
Temple,  but  that  where  the  Duke  and  Duchess  of  Monmouth 
lived).  Having  rather  a  commanding  situation,  you  look  down 
on  the  valley,  which,  being  divided  into  small  enclosures 
bordered  with  wood,  resembles  a  forest  when  so  looked  down 
on.  The  house  has  a  handsome  entrance-hall,  painted  by 
Sir  James  Thornhill,  in  a  very  Trench  taste,  yet  handsome. 
He  was  Hogarth's  father-in-law,  and  not  easily  reconciled 
to  the  match.  Thornhill's  paintings  are  certainly  not  of  the 
first  class,  yet  the  practice  of  painting  the  walls  and  roof  of 
a  dwelling-house  gives,  in  my  eyes,  a  warm  and  rich  air  to 
the  apartments.  Lord  Grosvenor  has  now  bought  this  fine 
place,  once  Lord  Anson's — hence  the  Moor  Park  apricot  is 
also  called  Ansoniana.  After  seeing  Moor  Park  we  went  to 
the  Grove,  the  Earl  of  Clarendon's  country-seat.  The  house 
looks  small  and  of  little  consequence,  but  contains  many 
good  portraits,  as  I  was  told,  of  the  Hyde  family.1  The  park 
has  fine  views  and  magnificent  trees. 

1  It  contains  half  of  Chancellor  Clarendon's  famous  collection— the 
ouher  half  is  at  Bothwell  Castle. 


1828.]  JOUENAL.  193 

We  went  to  Cashiobury,  belonging  to  the  Earl  of  Essex, 
an  old  mansion,  apparently,  with  a  fine  park.  The  Oolne 
runs  through  the  grounds,  or  rather  creeps  through  them. 

"  For  the  Oolne 
Is  black  and  swollen, 

Snake-like,  he  winds  his  way, 
Unlike  the  burns 
Irora  Highland  urns 

That  dance  by  crag  and  brae." 

Borthwick-brae1  came  to  dinner  from  town,  and  we  had  a 
very  pleasant  evening.  My  excellent  old  friend  reminded 
me  of  the  old  and  bitter  feud  between  the  Scotts  and  the 
Haliburtons,  and  observed  it  was  curious  I  should  have 
united  the  blood  of  two  hostile  clans. 

May  28. — We  took  leave  of  our  kind  old  host  after  break- 
fast, and  set  out  for  our  own.  land.  Our  elegant  researches 
carried  us  out  of  the  high-road  and  through  a  labyrinth  of 
intricate  lanes, — which  seem  made  on  purpose  to  afford 
strangers  the  full  benefit  of  a  dark  night  and  a  drunk  driver, 
— in  order  to  visit  Gill's  Hill,  famous  for  the  murder  of 
Mr.  Weare. 

The  place  has  the  strongest  title  to  the  description  of 
Wordsworth : — 

"  A  merry  spot,  'tis  said,  in  days  of  yore, 
But  something  ails  it  now — the  place  is  cursed." 

The  principal  part  of  the  house  has  been  destroyed,  and  only 
the  kitchen  remains  standing.  The  garden  has  been  dis- 
mantled, though  a  few  laurels  and  garden  shrubs,  run  wild, 
continue  to  mark  the  spot.  The  fatal  pond  is  now  only  a 
green  swamp,  but  so  near  the  house  that  one  cannot  conceive 
how  it  was  ever  chosen  as  a  place  of  temporary  concealment 
of  the  murdered  body.  Indeed  the  whole  history  of  the 
murder,  and  the  scenes  which  ensued,  are  strange  pictures  of 
desperate  and  short-sighted  wickedness.  The  feasting — the 

1  William  Elliot  Lockhart  of  Cleghora  and  Borthwick-brae,  long 
M.R  for  Selkirkshire. 

VOL.  H.  N 


194  JOUElsTAL.  [MAY 

singing — the  murderer  with  his  hands  still  bloody  hanging 
round  the  neck  of  one  of  the  females — the  watch-chain  of 
the  murdered  man,  argue  the  utmost  apathy.  Even  Probert, 
the  most  frightened  of  the  party,  fled  no  further  for  relief 
than  to  the  brandy  bottle,  and  is  found  in  the  very  lane,  and 
at  the  spot  of  the  murder,  seeking  for  the  murderous  weapon, 
and  exposing  himself  to  the  view  of  the  passengers.  Another 
singular  mark  of  stupid  audacity  was  their  venturing  to  wear 
the  clothes  of  their  victim.  There  was  a  want  of  foresight 
in  the  whole  arrangement  of  the  deed,  and  the  attempts  to 
conceal  it,  which  argued  strange  inconsideration,  which  a 
professed  robber  would  not  have  exhibited.  There  was  just 
one  single  shade  of  redeeming  character  about  a  business  so 
brutal,  perpetrated  by  men  above  the  very  lowest  rank  of 
life — it  was  the  mixture  of  revenge  which  afforded  some 
relief  to  the  circumstances  of  treachery  and  premeditation 
which  accompanied  it.  But  Weare  was  a  cheat,  and  had  no 
doubt  pillaged  Thurtell,  who  therefore  deemed  he  might  take 
greater  liberties  with  him  than  with  others. 

The  dirt  of  the  present  habitation  equalled  its  wretched 
desolation,  and  a  truculent-looking  hag,  who  showed  us  the 
place,  and  received  half-a-crown,  looked  not  unlike  the 
natural  inmate  of  such  a  mansion.  She  indicated  as  much 
herself,  saying  the  landlord  had  dismantled  the  place  because 
no  respectable  person  would  live  there.  She  seems  to  live 
entirely  alone,  and  fears  no  ghosts,  she  says. 

One  thing  about  this  mysterious  tragedy  was  never  ex- 
plained. It  is  said  that  Weare,  as  is  the  habit  of  such  men, 
always  carried  about  his  person,  and  between  his  flannel 
waistcoat  and  shirt,  a  sum  of  ready  money,  equal  to  £1500 
or  £2000.  No  such  money  was  ever  recovered,  and  as  the 
sum  divided  by  Thurtell  among  his  accomplices  was  only 
about  £20,  he  must,  in  slang  phrase,  have  "bucketed  Ms  pals?- 

1  Weare,  Thurtell,  and  the  rest  were  professed  gamblers.  See  ante> 
July  16, 1826,  and  Life,  vol.  viiL  p.  381. 


1828.]  JOURNAL.  195 

We  came  on  as  far  as  Alconbury,  where  we  slept  com- 
fortably. 

May  29. — We  travelled  from  Alconbury  Hill  to  Eerry 
Bridge,  upwards  of  a  hundred  miles,  amid  all  the  beauties 
of  "flourish"  and  verdure  which  spring  awakens  at  her 
first  approach  in  the  midland  counties  of  England,  but  with- 
out any  variety  save  those  of  the  season's  making.  I  do 
believe  this  great  north  road  is  the  dullest  in  the  world,  as 
well  as  the  most  convenient  for  the  traveller.  Nothing 
seems  to  me  to  have  been  altered  within  twenty  or  thirty 
years,  save  the  noses  of  the  landlords,  which  have  bloomed 
and  given  place  to  another  set  of  proboscises  as  germane 
as  the  old  ones  to  the  very  welcome, — please  to  light — 'Orses 
forward,  and  ready  out.  The  skeleton  at  Baxnby  Moor  has 
deserted  his  gibbet,  and  that  is  the  only  change  I  recollect 

I  have  amused  myself  to-day  with  reading  Lockhart's 
Life  of  Burns,  which  is  very  well  written — in  fact,  an  ad- 
mirable thing.  He  has  judiciously  slurred  over  his  vices 
and  follies ;  for  although  Currie,  I  myself,  and  others,  have 
not  said  a  word  more  on  that  subject  than  is  true,  yet  as 
the  dead  corpse  is  straightened,  swathed,  and  made  decent, 
so  ought  the  character  of  such  an  inimitable  genius  as  Burns 
to  be  tenderly  handled  after  death.  The  knowledge  of  his 
vicious  weaknesses  or  vices  is  only  a  subject  of  sorrow 
to  the  well-disposed,  and  of  triumph  to  the  profligate. 

May  30. — We  left  Ferry  Biidge  at  seven,  and  turning 
westwards,  or  rather  northwestward,  at  Borough  Bridge,  we 
reach  Eokeby  at  past  three.  A  mile  from  the  house  we  met 
Morritt  looking  for  us.  I  had  great  pleasure  at  finding  myself 
at  Eokeby,  and  recollecting  a  hundred  passages  of  past  time. 
Morritt  looks  well  and  easy  in  his  mind,  which  I  am  de- 
lighted to  see.  He  is  now  one  of  my  oldest,  and,  I  believe, 
one  of  my  most  sincere,  friends,  a  man  unequalled  in  the 
mixture  of  sound  good  sense,  high  literary  cultivation,  and  the 
kindest  and  sweetest  temper  that  ever  guided  a  human  bpsom. 


196  JOUKNAL.  [MAT 

His  nieces  are  much  attached  to  him,  and  are  deserving  and 
elegant,  as  well  as  beautiful  young  women.  What  there  is 
in  our  partiality  to  female  beauty  that  commands  a  species 
of  temperate  homage  from  the  aged,  as  well  as  ecstatic 
admiration  from  the  young,  I  cannot  conceive,  but  it  is 
certain  that  a  very  large  proportion  of  some  other  amiable 
quality  is  too  little  to  counterbalance  the  absolute  want  of 
this  advantage.  I,  to  whom  beauty  is  and  shall  henceforth  be 
a  picture,  still  look  upon  it  with  the  quiet  devotion  of  an  old 
worshipper,  who  no  longer  offers  incense  on  the  shrine,  but 
peaceably  presents  his  inch  of  taper,  taking  special  care  in 
doing  so  not  to  burn  his  own  fingers.  Nothing  in  life  can 
be  more  ludicrous  or  contemptible  than  an  old  man  aping 
the  passions  of  his  youth. 

Talking  of  youth,  there  was  a  certain  professor  at 
Cambridge  who  used  to  keep  sketches  of  all  the  youths 
who,  from  their  conduct  at  college,  seemed  to  bid  fair  for 
distinction  in  life.  He  showed  these,  one  day,  to  an  old 
shrewd  sarcastic  Master  of  Arts,  who  looked  over  the  collec- 
tion, and  then  observed,  "A  promising  nest  of  eggs;  what 
a  pity  the  great  part  will  turn  out  addle ! "  And  so  they 
do ;  looking  round  amongst  the  young  men,  one  sees  to  all 
appearance  fine  flourish — but  it  ripens  not. 

May  31. — I  have  finished  Napier's  War  in  the  Peninsula* 
It  is  written  in  the  spirit  of  a  Liberal,  but  the  narrative  is 
distinct  and  clear,  and  I  should  suppose  accurate.  He  has, 
however,  given  a  bad  sample  of  accuracy  in  the  case  of 
Lord  Strangford,  where  his  pointed  affirmation  has  been  as 
pointedly  repelled.  It  is  evident  he  would  require  probing. 
His  defence  of  Moore  is  spirited  and  well  argued,  though  it 
is  evident  he  defends  the  statesman  as  much  as  the  general. 
As  a  Liberal  and  a  military  man,  Colonel  Napier  finds  it 
difficult  to  steer  his  course.  The  former  character  calls  on 

1  The  first  volume  had  just  been  published  in  1828.     The  book  was 
completed  in  6  vols.  in  1840. 


1828.]  JOUENAL.  197 

him  to  plead  for  the  insurgent  Spaniards ;  the  latter  induces 
"hi-m  to  palliate  the  cruelties  of  the  French.  Good-even  to 
him  until  next  volume,  which  I  shall  long  to  see.  This  was 
a  day  of  pleasure  and  nothing  else.  After  "breakfast  I 
walked  with  Morritt  in  the  new  path  he  has  made  up  the 
Tees.  "When  last  here,  his  poor  nephew  was  of  the  party. 
It  hangs  on  my  mind,  and  perhaps  on  Morritt's.  When 
we  returned  we  took  a  short  drive  as  far  as  Barnard  Castle ; 
and  the  business  of  eating  and  drinking  took  up  the  re- 
mainder of  the  evening,  excepting  a  dip  into  the  Greta 
Walk. 


JUSTE. 

June  L — We  took  leave  of  our  friends  at  Kokeby  after 
breakfast,  and  pursued  our  well-known  path  over  Stanmore 
to  Brough,  Appleby,  Penrith,  and  Carlisle.  As  I  have  this 
road  by  heart,  I  have  little  amusement  save  the  melancholy 
task  of  recalling  the  sensations  with  which  I  have  traced  it 
in  former  times,  all  of  which  refer  to  decay  of  animal 
strength,  and  abatement  if  not  of  mental  powers,  at  least 
of  mental  energy.  The  non  est  tanti  grows  fast  at  my  time 
of  life.  We  reached  Carlisle  at  seven  o'clock,  and  were 
housed  for  the  night.  My  books  being  exhausted,  I  lighted 
on  an  odd  volume  of  the  Gentleman's  Magazine,  a  work  in 
which,  as  in  a  pawnbroker's  shop,  much  of  real  curiosity  and 
value  are  stowed  away  and  concealed  amid  the  frippery  and 
trumpery  of  those  reverend  old  gentlewomen  who  were  the 
regular  correspondents  of  the  work. 

JWM  2. — We  intended  a  walk  to  the  Castle,  but  were 
baffled  by  rainy  weather.  I  was  obliged  to  wait  for  a 
certificate  from  the  parish  register — Hei  mihi  !  !  I  cannot 
have  it  till  ten  o'clock,  or  rather,  as  it  chanced,  till  past 
eleven,  when  I  got  the  paper  for  which  I  waited.1  We 

1  About  this  time  Miss  Anne  Maclvor's  very  dungeon.  Peveril 
Scott  wrote  to  Mrs.  Lockhart :  said,  *  Indeed,  are  you  quite  sure, 
"  Early  in  the  morning,  before  we  sir? '  And  on  being  told  there 
started,  papa  took  me  with  him  could  be  no  doubt,  was  troubled 
to  the  Cathedral.  This  he  had  done  with  a  fit  of  coughing,  which  ended 
often  before;  but  he  said  he  must  in  a  laugh.  The  mam  seemed  ex- 
stand  once  more  on  the  spot  where  ceeding  indignant ;  so,  when  papa 
he  marrjled  poor  mamma.  After  moved  on,  I  whispered  who  it  was. 
that  we  went  to  the  Castle,  where  I  wish  you  had  seen  the  man's  start, 
a  new  showman  went  through  the  and  how  he  stared  and  bowed  as 
old  trick  of  pointing  out  Fergus  he  parted  from  us ;  and  then 


1828.]  JOURNAL.  199 

lunched  at  Hawick,  and  concluded  our  pilgrimage  at 
Abbotsford  about  nine  at  night,  where  the  joyful  barking 
of  the  dogs,  with  the  sight  of  the  kind  familiar  faces  of  our 
domestics,  gave  us  welcome,  and  I  enjoyed  a  sound  repose 
on  my  own  bed.  I  remark  that  in  this  journey  I  have 
never  once  experienced  depression  of  spirits,  or  the  tremor 
cordis  of  which  I  have  sometimes  such  unpleasant  visits. 
Dissipation,  and  a  succession  of  trifling  engagements,  prevent 
the  mind  from  throwing  itself  out  in  the  manner  calculated 
to  exhaust  the  owner,  and  to  entertain  other  people.  There 
is  a  lesson  in  this. 

June  3,  [AllotsforcC]. — This  was  a  very  idle  day.  I  waked 
to  walk  about  my  beautiful  young  woods  with  old  Tom 
and  the  dogs.  The  sun  shone  bright,  and  the  wind  fanned 
my  cheek  as  if  it  were  a  welcoming.  I  did  not  do  the 
least  right  thing,  except  packing  a  few  books  necessary  for 
writing  the  continuation  of  the  Tales,  In  this  merry  mood 
I  wandered  as  far  as  Huntly  Burn,  where  I  found  the 
Miss  Fergusons  well  and  happy ;  then  I  sauntered  back  to 
Abbotsford,  sitting  on  every  bench  by  the  way,  and  thus 
"  It  grew  to  dinner  in  conclusion." 

A  good  appetite  made  my  simple  meal  relish  better  than  the 
magnificent  cheer  which  I  have  lately  partaken  of.  I  smoked 
a  cigar,  slept  away  an  hour,  and  read  Mure  of  Auchendrane's 
trial,  and  thus  ended  the  day.  I  cannot  afford  to  spend 
many  such,  nor  would  they  seem  so  pleasant. 

June  4,  \EdMwrgh~\. — The  former  part  of  this  day  was 
employed  much  as  yesterday,  but  some  packing  was  inevit- 
able. Will  Laidlaw  came  to  dinner,  of  which  we  partook  at 
three  o'clock.  Started  at  half-past  four,  and  arrived  at  home, 
if  we  must  call  it  so,  at  nine  o'clock  in  the  evening.  I  em- 
ployed my  leisure  in  the  chaise  to  peruse  Mure  of  Auohen- 

ramraed  his  keys  into  his  pocket  the  carriage  was  ready,  and  we 
and  went  off  at  a  hand-gallop  to  escaped  a  row." — Life,  vol.  ix. 
warn  the  rest  of  the  garrison.  But  pp.  256-7. 


200  JOTTKNAL.  [JUNE 

drane's  trial,  oufc  of  which  something  might  be  coopered  up 
for  the  public.1  It  is  one  of  the  wildest  stories  I  ever  read. 
Something  might  surely  be  twisted  out  of  it. 

June  5. — Cadell  breakfasted ;  in  great  spirits  with  the 
success  of  the  Fair  Maid  of  Perth.  A  disappointment 
being  always  to  be  apprehended,  I  too  am  greatly  pleased 
that  the  evil  day  is  adjourned,  for  the  time  must  come — and 
yet  I  can  spin  a  tough  yarn  still  with  any  one  now  going. 

I  was  much  distressed  to  find  that  the  last  of  the 
Macdonald  Buchanans,  a  fine  lad  of  about  twenty-one,  is 
now  decidedly  infected  by  the  same  pulmonary  complaint 
which  carried  off  his  four  brothers  in  succession.  This  is 
indeed  a  cruel  stroke,  and  it  is  melancholy  to  witness  the 
undaunted  Highland  courage  of  the  father. 

I  went  to  Court,  and  when  I  returned  did  some  work 
upon  the  Tales. 

"  And  now  again,  boys,  to  the  oar."  « 

June  6. — I  have  determined  to  work  sans  intermission 
for  lost  time,  and  to  make  up  at  least  my  task  every  day. 
J.  Gibson  called  on  me  with  good  hopes  that  the  trustees  will 
authorise  the  grand  opus  to  be  set  afloat.2  They  are  scrupu- 
lous a  little  about  the  expense  of  engravings,  but  I  fear  the 
taste  of  the  town  will  not  be  satisfied  without  them.  It  is 
time  these  things  were  settled.  I  wrought  both  before  and 
after  dinner,  and  finished  five  pages,  which  is  two  above 
bargain. 

June  7. — Saturday  was  another  working  day,  and  nothing 
occurred  to  disturb  me. 

June  8. — I  finished  five  sheets  this  day.  Will  Clerk 
and  Francis  Scott  of  Harden  came  to  dinner,  and  we  spent 
a  pleasant  evening. 

1  See  The.  Doom  of  Devorgoil:  A  of  the  Waverley  Novels  in  48  vols., 
Melo-Drcmn.  Avthendrane  :  or  the  which  began  to  be  issued  in  June 
Ayrshire   Tragedy.    Published  by  1829.    The  great  cost  of  the  publi- 
CadeUinSvo.  1830.  cation  naturally  caused  the  Trus- 

2  Referring  to  the  uniform  edition  tees  much  anxiety  at  this  period. 


1828.]  JOUKNAL.  201 


9.  —  I  laboured  till  about  one,  and  was  then  obliged 
to  go  to  attend  a  meeting  of  the  Oil  Gas  Company,  —  as  I 
devoutly  hope  for  the  last  time. 

After  that  I  was  obliged  to  go  to  sit  to  Colvin  Smith, 
which  is  an  atrocious  bore,  but  cannot  be  helped.1 

Cadell  rendered  me  report  of  accounts  paid  for  me  with 
vouchers,  which  very  nearly  puts  me  out  of  all  shop  debts. 
God  grant  me  grace  to  keep  so  ! 

June  10-14.  —  During  these  five  days  almost  nothing 
occurred  to  diversify  the  ordinary  task  of  the  day,  which,  I 
must  own,  was  dull  enough.  I  rose  to  my  task  by  seven, 
and,  less  or  more,  wrought  it  out  in  the  course  of  the  day,  far 
exceeding  the  ordinary  average  of  three  leaves  per  day.  I 
have  attended  the  Parliament  House  with  the  most  strict 
regularity,  and  returned  to  dine  alone  with  Anne.  Also, 
I  gave  three  sittings  to  Mr.  Colvin  Smith,  who  I  think  has 
improved  since  I  saw  him. 

Of  important  intelligence  nothing  occurs  save  the  ter- 
mination of  all  suspense  on  the  subject  of  poor  James 
Macdon&ld  Buchanan.  He  died  at  Malta.  The  celebrated 
Dugald  Stewart  is  also  dead,  famous  for  his  intimate  ac- 
quaintance with  the  history  and  philosophy  of  the  human 
mind.  There  is  much  of  water-painting  in  all  metaphysics, 
which  consist  rather  of  words  than  ideas.  But  Stewart  was 
most  impressive  and  eloquent.  In  former  days  I  was  fre- 
quently with  him,  but  not  for  many  years.  Latterly,  I  am 
told,  he  had  lost  not  the  power  of  thinking,  but  the  power  of 
expressing  his  thoughts  by  speech.  This  is  like  the  Meta- 
morphosis of  0"vfd,  the  bark  binding  in  and  hardening  the 
living  flesh. 

June  15.  —  W.  Clerk,  Francis  Scott,  and  Charles  Sharpe 
dined  with  me,  but  my  task  had  been  concluded  before  dinner. 

June  16.  —  Dined  at  Dalmahoy,  with  the  young  Earl  and 
Countess  of  Morton.  I  like  these  young  noble  folks  par- 

,  118,  February  2d. 


202  JOUEtfAL. 

ticularly  well.  Their  manners  and  style  of  living  are  easy 
and  unaffected,  and  I  should  like  to  see  them  often.  Came 
home  at  night.  The  task  finished  to-day.  I  should  mention 
that  the  plan  about  the  new  edition  of  the  novels  was  con- 
sidered at  a  meeting  of  trustees,  and  finally  approved  of.  I 
trust  it  will  answer ;  yet,  who  can  warrant  the  continuance 
of  popularity  ?  Old  Corri,1  who  entered  into  many  projects, 
and  could  never  set  the  sails  of  a  wind-mill  so  as  to  catch 
the  aura  pqpularis,  used  to  say  that  he  believed  that  were 
he  to  turn  baker,  it  would  put  bread  out  of  fashion.  I  have 
had  the  better  luck  to  dress  my  sails  to  every  wind ;  and  so 
blow  on,  good  wind,  and  spin  round,  whirligig. 

June  1 7. — Violent  rheumatic  headache  all  day.  Wrought, 
however.  But  what  difference  this  troublesome  addition 
may  make  on  the  quality  of  the  stuff  produced,  truly  I  do 
not  know.  I  finished  five  leaves. 

June  18. — Some  Italian  gentlemen  landed  here,  under 
the  conveyance  of  the  Misses  Haig  of  Bemerside.  They 
were  gentlemanlike  men;  but  as  I  did  not  dare  to  speak 
bad  French,  I  had  not  much  to  say  to  foreigners.  Gave 
them  and  their  pretty  guides  a  good  breakfast,  however* 
The  scene  seemed  to  me  to  resemble  Sheridan's  scene  in  the 
Critic.2  There  are  a  number  of  very  civil  gentlemen  trying 
to  make  themselves  understood,  and  I  do  not  know  which 
is  the  interpreter.  After  all,  it  is  not  my  fault.  They  who 
wish  to  see  me  should  be  able  to  speak  my  language*  I 
called  on  Mrs.  Stewart  Mackenzie.  She  received  me  with 
all  the  kindness  of  former  days,  and  I  was  delighted  to  see 
her.  I  sat  about  an  hour  with  her.  My  head  aches,  for  all 
that,  and  I  have  heavy  fits  of  drowsiness.  Well,  I  have 
finished  my  task,  and  have  a  right  to  sleep  if  I  have  a  mind. 

1  Natali  Corri,  born  in  Italy,  but  cal  works.     He  died  at  Trieste  in 

settled  in  Edinburgh,  where,  among  1823. 
other  schemes,  he  tried  to  set  up  an 

Italian  opera.   In  conjunction  with  a  See  Act  n.  Sc.  2.     The  Italian 

a  brother  he  published  several  musi-  family's  morning  call. 


1828.]  JOUENAL.  203 

I  dine  to-day  with  Lord  Mackenzie,  where  I  hope  to  meet 
Mrs.  Stewart  Mackenzie  again,  for  I  love  her  warm  heart 
and  lively  fancy.  Accordingly  I  enjoyed  this  pleasure.1 

June  19. — Scribbled  away  lustily.  Went  to  the  P.  H. 
Wrote  when  I  came  home,  both  before  and  after  dinner—- 
that ?s  all,  I  think  I  am  become  a  sort  of  writing  automaton, 
and  truly  the  joints  of  my  knees,  especially  the  left,  are  so 
stiff  and  painful  in  rising  and  sitting  down,  that  I  can  hardly 
help  screaming — I  that  was  so  robust  and  active ;  I  get  into 
a  carriage  with  great  difficulty.  My  head,  too,  is  bothered 
with  rheumatic  headaches.  Why  not?  I  got  headaches 
by  my  folly  when  I  was  young,  and  now  I  am  old  they 
come  uncalled.  Infirmity  gives  what  indiscretion  bought. 

June  20. — My  course  is  still  the  same.  But  I  have  a 
painful  letter  from  Lockhart,  which  takes  away  the  last  hope 
of  poor  Johnnie's  recovery.  It  is  no  surprise  to  me.  The 
poor  child,  so  amiable  in  its  disposition,  and  so  promising 
from  its  talents,  was  not  formed  to  be  long  with  us,  and  I 
have  long  expected  that  it  must  needs  come  to  this.  I  hope 
I  shall  not  outlive  my  children  in  other  cases,  and  I  think 
there  is  little  chance  of  it  My  father  did  not  long  survive 
the  threescore  and  ten ;  it  will  be  wonderful  if  I  reach  that 
goal  of  ordinary  mortality.  God  send  it  may  find  me  pre- 
pared; and,  whatever  I  may  have  been  formerly,  high  spirits 
are  not  now  like  to  carry  me  away. 

June  21. — At  Court,  and  called  on  Ballantyne  on  my 

i  "And  thou,  gentle  Dame,  who  must  bear  to  thy  grief 
For  thy  clan  and  thy  country  the  cares  of  a  Chief, 
Whom  brief  rolling  moons,  in  six  changes  have  left 
Of  thy  husband,  and  father,  and  brethren  bereft ; 
To  thine  ear  of  affection  how  sad  is  the  hail 
That  salutes  thee,  the  heir  of  the  line  of  Kintail." 

Poetical  WorTcs,  voL  viii.  p.  394. 

Mary,  daughter  of  Francis,   Lord  the   name    of    Mackenzie.      Mrs. 

Seaforth,  was  born  in  Ross-shire  in  Stewart  Mackenzie  died  at  Brahan 

1784,  married,  at  Barbadoes  in  1804,  Castle  in  1862 ;  her  funeral  was  one 

Sir  Samuel  Hood,  and  left  a  widow  of  the  largest  ever  witnessed  in  the 

in  1814.  She  married  again,  in  1817,  North. 
Mr.  J.  A.  Stewart,  who  assumed 


204  JOTJENAL.  [JUNE 

return.  I  was  obliged  to  go  to  the  Register  Office  at  one, 
where  I  waited  nearly  an  hour  without  meeting  my  brethren. 
But  I  wrote  a  letter  to  Lockhart  in  the  meantime.  My 
niece  Ann  arrived,  to  my  great  satisfaction.  I  am  glad 
that  Anne,  my  daughter,  has  such  a  sensible  and  clever 
companion.  Dined  at  Baron  Hume's. 

June  22. — Wrought.  Had  a  note  from  Ballantyne  com- 
plaining of  my  manuscript,  and  requesting  me  to  read  it 
over.  I  would  give  £1000  if  I  could;  but  it  would  take  me 
longer  to  read  than  to  write.  I  cannot  trace  my  pieds  de 
wmwhe  but  with  great  labour  and  trouble ;  so  e'en  take  your 
own  share  of  the  burden,  my  old  friend ;  and,  since  I  cannot 
read,  be  thankful  I  can  write.  I  will  look  at  his  proof,  how- 
ever, and  then  be  quiet  and  idle  for  the  rest  of  the  evening. 
I  am  come  to  Charles  the  First's  trial,  and  though  I  have  it 
by  heart,  I  must  refresh  myself  with  a  reading  of  Clarendon. 
Charles  Sharpe  and  Francis  Scott  came  in  the  evening. 

June  23. — This  morning  the  two  Annes  and  I  went  to 
Sir  Eobert  listen  at  Milburn  Tower — a  beautiful  retreat. 
The  travels  of  the  venerable  diplomatist  are  indicated  by 
the  various  articles  of  curiosity  which  he  has  picked  up  in 
different  corners  of  the  world,  and  put  together  with  much 
taste.  The  conservatory  and  gardens  are  very  fine,  and 
contain,  I  suppose,  very  curious  plants; — I  am  sure,  hard 
names  enough.  But  then  the  little  Gothic  tower,  embowered 
amid  trees  and  bushes,  surrounded  by  these  pleasant 
gardens,  offering  many  a  sunny  walk  for  winter,  many  a 
shade  for  summer,  are  inexpressibly  pleasing.  The  good 
old  knight  and  his  lady  are  worthy  of  it,  for  they  enjoy  it. 
The  artificial  piece  of  water  is  a  failure,  like  most  things  of 
the  kind.  The  offices,  without  being  on  an  extravagant  scale, 
are  most  substantial ;  the  piggery,  in  particular,  is  quite  a 
palace,  and  the  animals  clean  and  comfortable.  I  think  I 
have  caught  from  them  a  fit  of  piggish  obstinacy.  I  came 
at  one,  and  cannot  prevail  upon  myself  to  go  to  work.  I 


1828.]  JOITKNAL.  205 

answer  the  calls  of  duty  as  Caliban  does  those  of  Prospero, 
"  There  3s  wood  enough  within."  To  he  sure,  I  have  not  got 
the  Clarendon. 

June  24. — It  was  my  father's  own  son,  as  John  Hieland- 
man  said,  who  did  little  "both  yesterday  and  to-day — I  mean 
little  in  the  way  of  literary  work,  for,  as  to  positive  work,  I 
have  been  writing  letters  about  Chancery  business  till  I  am 
sick  of  it.  There  was  a  long  hearing,  and  while  Jeffrey 
exerted  his  eloquence  in  the  Inner  House,  I  plied  my 
eloquence  de  Hllet  in  the  Library.  So,  on  the  whole,  I  am 
no  bad  boy.  Besides,  the  day  is  not  yet  over. 

June  25. — I  was  surprised  to  hear  that  our  Academy 
Eector,  "Williams,  has  renounced  the  chair  of  Eoman  learning 
in  the  new  London  University.  His  alarm  was  excited 
by  the  interest  taken  by  the  prelates  in  opposing  a  High 
Church  institution  to  that  desired  by  Mr.  Brougham.  Both 
the  Bishops  and  Williams  have  been  unwise.  The  former 
have  manoeuvred  ill.  They  should,  in  the  outset,  have  taken 
the  establishment  out  of  the  hands  of  the  Whigs,  without 
suffering  them  to  reinforce  themselves  by  support  from 
[others].  And  Williams  was  equally  precipitate  in  joining 
an  institution  which  a  small  degree  of  foresight  might  have 
assured  him  would  be  opposed  by  his  spiritual  superiors. 
However,  there  he  stands,  deprived  of  his  professorship  by 
his  resignation,  and  of  his  rectorship  by  our  having  engaged 
with  a  successor.  I  think  it  very  doubtful  whether  the 
Bishops  will  now  [admit]  him  into  their  alliance.  He  has 
in  that  case  offended  both  parties.  But  if  they  are  wise, 
they  will  be  glad  to  pick  up  the  best  schoolmaster  in  Europe, 
though  he  comes  for  the  present  Graid  ex  urbe.  I  accom- 
plished more  than  my  task  to-day. 

June  26. — Wrote  a  long  letter  to  Lockhart  about  Williams' 
situation,  saying  how,  by  sitting  betwixt  two  stools,  he 

" Had  fallen  with  heavy  thump 

Upon  his  reverential  rump," 


206  JOUENAL.  [JUNE 

and  how  the  Bishops  should  pick  him  up  if  they  wanted 
their  establishment  to  succeed.  It  is  an  awkward  position 
in  which  Williams  has  placed  himself.  He  loses  the  Whig 
chair,  and  has  perhaps  no  chance  of  favour  from  the  High 
Church  for  having  been  willing  to  accept  it.  Even  if  they 
now  give  Mm  promotion,  there  will  be  a  great  outcry  on  his 
having  left  one  institution  to  join  another.  He  would  be 
thick-skinned  if  he  stands  the  clamour.  Yet  he  has  to 
all  appearance  rather  sacrificed  than  advanced  his  interest 
However,  I  say  again,  the  Bishops  ought  not  to  omit  securing 
him. 

Mr.  Macintosh  Mackay  breakfasted  with  me,  modest, 
intelligent,  and  gentle.    I  did  my  duty  and  more  in  the  course  - 
of  the  day. 

I  am  vexed  about  Mackay  missing  the  church  of  Cupar 
in  Angus.  It  is  ipi  the  Crown's  gift,  and  Peel,  finding  that 
two  parties  in  the  town  recommended  two  opposite  candi- 
dates, very  wisely  chose  to  disappoint  them  both,  and  was 
desirous  of  bestowing  the  presentation  on  public  grounds. 
I  heard  of  this,  and  applied  to  Mr.  Peel  for  Macintosh 
Mackay,  whose  quiet  patience  and  learning  are  accompanied 
by  a  most  excellent  character  as  a  preacher  and  a  clergy- 
man, but  unhappily  Mr.  Peel  had  previously  put  himself 
into  the  hands  of  Sir  George  Murray,  who  applied  to  Sir 
Peter  his  brother,  who  naturally  applied  to  certain  leaders 
of  the  Church  at  Edinburgh,  and  these  reverend  gentlemen 
have  recommended  that  the  church  which  the  minister 
desired  to  fill  up  on  public  grounds  should  be  bestowed  on  a 
boy,1  the  nephew  of  one  of  their  number,  of  whom  the  best 
that  can  be  said  is  that  nothing  is  known,  since  he  has 
only  been  a  few  months  in  orders.  This  comes  of  kith, 
kin,  and  ally,  but  Peel  shall  know  of  it,  and  may  perhaps 
judge  for  himself  another  time. 

1  Patrick  James  Stevenson   was  licensed  in  1825,    and  ordained  in 
182S.-£cott's  Fasti,  vol.  vi.  p.  746. 


1828.]  JOURNAL  207 

June  27. — I  came  out  after  Court  to  Blair  Adam,  with 
our  excellent  friend  the  Eev.  John  Thomson  of  Dudding- 
ston,  so  modest  and  so  accomplished  -, — delightful  drive  and 
passage  at  the  ferry.  We  found  at  Blair  Adam  the  C.  C. 
and  family,  Admiral  Adam  and  lady,  James  Thomson  of 
Charlton,  and  Miss  T.,  Will  Clerk,  and  last,  not  least, 
Lord  Chief  Baron  Shepherd — all  in  high  spirits  for  our 
excursions. 

Thomson  described  to  me  a  fine  dungeon  in  the  old 
tower  at  Cassillis  in  Ayrshire.  There  is  an  outer  and  inner 
vaulted  [chamber],  each  secured  with  iron  doors.  At  the 
upper  end  of  the  innermost  are  two  great  stones  or  blocks  to 
which  the  staples  and  chains  used  in  securing  the  prisoners 
are  still  attached.  Between  these  stone  seats  is  an  opening 
like  the  mouth  of  a  still  deeper  dungeon.  The  entrance 
descends  like  the  mouth  of  a  draw-well  or  shaft  of  a  mine, 
and  deep  below  is  heard  the  sullen  roar  of  the  river  Doon, 
one  branch  of  which,  passing  through  the  bottom  of  the 
shaft,  has  probably  swept  away  the  body  of  many  a  captive, 
whose  body  after  death  may  have  been  thus  summarily 
disposed  of.  I  may  find  use  for  such  a  place — Story  of 
[KittledarUe  ?] 

June  28. — Off  we  go  to  Castle  Campbell  after  breakfast, 
i.e.  Will  Clerk,  Admiral  Adam,  J.  Thomson,  and  myself. 
Tremendous  hot  is  the  day,  and  the  steep  ascent  of  the 
Castle,  which  rises  for  two  miles  up  a  rugged  and  broken 
path,  was  fatiguing  enough,  yet  not  so  much  so  as  the  streets 
in  London.  Castle  Campbell  is  unaltered ;  the  window,  of 
which  the  disjointed  stone  projects  at  an  angle  from  the 
wall,  and  seems  at  the  point  of  falling,  has  still  found  power 
to  resist  the  laws  of  gravitation.  Whoever  built  that 
tottering  piece  of  masonry  has  been  long  in  a  forgotten 
grave,  and  yet  what  he  has  made  seems  to  survive  in  spite 
of  nature  itself.  The  curious  cleft  called  Kemp's  Score, 
which  gave  the  garrison  access  to  the  water  in  case  of  siege, 


208  JOTTKlsrAL,  [JUNE 

is  obviously  natural,  but  had  been  improved  by  steps,  now 
choked  up.  A  girl  who  came  with  us  recollected  she  had 
shown  me  the  way  down  to  the  bottom  of  this  terrible  gulf 
seven  years  ago.  I  am  not  able  for  it  now. 

"  Wont  to  do  5s  awa  frae  me, 
Erae  silly  auld  John  Ochiltree." 1 

June  29. — Being  Sunday  we  kept  about  the  doors,  and 
after  two  took  the  drosky  and  drove  over  the  hill  and 
round  by  the  Kiery  Craigs.  I  should  have  said  Williams 
came  out  in  the  morning  to  ask  my  advice  about  staying 
another  year  in  Edinburgh,  I  advised  him  if  possible  to 
gain  a  few  days'  time  till  I  should  hear  from  Lockhart.  He 
has  made  a  pretty  mess  for  himself,  but  if  the  Bishops  are 
wise,  they  may  profit  by  it.  The  sound,  practical  advice  of 
Williams  at  the  first  concoction  would  be  of  the  last  conse- 
quence. I  suspect  their  systems  of  eating-houses  are  the 
most  objectionable  part  of  the  college  discipline.  When 
their  attentions  are  to  be  given  to  the  departments  of  the 
cook  and  the  butler,  all  zeal  in  the  nobler  paths  of  education 
is  apt  to  decay. 

Well,  to  return  to  the  woods.  I  think,  notwithstanding 
Lord  Chief  Commissioner's  assiduity,  they  are  in  some 
places  too  thick.  I  saw  a  fine  larch,  felled  seventy-two  years 
old,  value  about  five  pounds. 

Hereditary  descent  in  the  Highlands,  A  clergyman 
showed  J.  T.  the  island  of  Inch  Mahome  in  the  Port  of 
Monteith,  and  pointed  out  the  boatman  as  a  remarkable 
person,  the  representative  of  the  hereditary  gardeners  of  the 
Earls  of  Monteith,  while  these  Earls  existed.  His  son,  a 
priggish  boy,  follows  up  the  theme — "  Feyther,  when  Donald 
MacCorkindale  dees  will  not  the  family  be  extinct?" 
father — "No ;  I  believe  there  is  a  man  in  Balquhidder  who 
takes  up  the  succession'9 

June  30. — We  made  our  pleasant  excursion  to-day  round 

1  Ramsay's  Tea-table  Miscellany  (1795),  TO!,  i.  p.  125. 


1828.]  JOUPJSTAL.  209 

the  hill  of  Bennarty  par  Urre,  and  returned  par  mer.  Our 
route  by  land  led  us  past  Lochore,  where  we  made  a  pause 
for  a  few  moments.  Then  proceeded  to  Ballingray  or  Bin- 
gray,  and  so  by  Kirkness,  where  late  ravages  are  supplied  by 
the  force  of  vegetation  down  to  the  shores  of  Lochleven.  We 
embarked  and  went  upon  Saint  Serfs  Island,  supposed  to 
have  been  anciently  a  cell  of  the  Culdees.  An  old  pinfold, 
or  rather  a  modern  pinfold,  constructed  out  of  the  ancient 
chapel,  is  all  that  attests  its  former  sanctity.  We  landed 
on  Queen  Mary's  Island,  a  miserable  scene,  considering  the 
purpose  for  which  the  Castle  was  appointed.  And  yet  the 
captivity  and  surrender  of  the  Percy  was  even  a  worse  tale, 
since  it  was  an  eternal  blight  on  the  name  of  Douglas.  Well, 
we  got  to  Blair  Adam  in  due  time,  and  our  fine  company 
began  to  separate,  Lord  Chief  Baron  going  off  after  dinner. 
We  had  wine  and  wassail,  and  John  Thomson's  delightful 
flute  to  help  us  through  the  evening. 

Thus  end  the  delectations  of  the  Blair  Adam  Club  for 
this  year.  Mrs.  Thomson  of  Charlton  talks  of  Beaton's 
House,  and  other  Fife  wonders  for  the  next  year,  but  who 
knows  what  one  year  may  bring  forth  ?  Our  Club  has  beeu 
hitherto  fortunate.  It  has  subsisted  twelve  years. 


VOL.H, 


JULY. 

"  Up  in  the  morning 's  no  for  nie/ 1 
Yet  here  I  am  up  at  five — no  horses  come  from  the  North 

Ferry  yet. 

«  0  Mr.  Mitchell,  Mr.  Mitchell, 
Your  promises  and  time  keep  stitch  ill." 

July  1,  [Edinburgh]. — Got  home,  however,  by  nine,  and 
went  to  the  Parliament  House,  where  we  were  detained  till 
four  o'clock.  Miss  dined  with  'us,  a  professed  lion- 
huntress,  who  travels  the  country  to  rouse  the  peaceful 
beasts  out  of  their  lair,  and  insists  on  being  hand  and  glove 
with  all  the  leonine  race.  She  is  very  plain,  besides  fright- 
fully red-haired,  and  out-Lydia-ing  even  my  poor  friend 
Lydia  White.  An  awful  visitation !  I  think  I  see  her  with 
javelin  raised  and  buskined  foot,  a  second  Diana,  roaming 
the  hills  of  Westmoreland  in  quest  of  the  lakers.  Would 
to  God  she  were  there  or  anywhere  but  here !  Affectation  is 
a  painful  thing  to  witness,  and  this  poor  woman  has  the 
bad  taste  to  think  direct  flattery  is  the  way  to  make  her 
advances  to  friendship  and  intimacy. 

July  2. — I  believe  I  was  cross  yesterday.  I  am  at  any 
rate  very  ill  to-day  with  a  rheumatic  headache,  and  a  still 
more  vile  hypochondriacal  affection,  which  fills  my  head  with 
pain,  my  heart  with  sadness,  and  my  eyes  with  tears.  I  do 
not  wonder  at  the  awful  feelings  which  visited  men  less 
educated  and  less  firm  than  I  may  call  myself.  It  is  a  most 
hang-dog  cast  of  feeling,  but  it  may  be  chased  away  by  study 
or  by  exercise.  The  last  I  have  always  found  most  success- 
ful, but  the  first  is  most  convenient.  I  wrought  therefore, 

*  Burns's.  Acmig, 


1828,]  JOURNAL.  211 

and  endured  all  this  forenoon,  being  a  Teind  Wednesday.  I 
am  now  in  such  a  state  that  I  would  hardly  be  surprised 
at  the  worst  news  which  could  be  brought  to  me.  And 
all  this  without  any  rational  cause  why  to-day  should  be 
sadder  than  yesterday. 

Two  things  to  lighten  my  spirits — First,  Cadell  comes  to 
assure  me  that  the  stock  of  12mo  novels  is  diminished  from 
3800,  which  was  the  quantity  in  the  publishers'  hands  in 
March  1827,  to  600  or  700.  This  argues  gallant  room  for  the 
publication  of  the  New  Series.  Second,  said  Cadell  is  setting 
off  straight  for  London  to  set  affairs  a-going.  If  I  have  suc- 
cess in  this,  it  will  greatly  assist  in  extricating  my  affairs. 

My  aches  of  the  heart  terminated  in  a  cruel  aching  of  the 
head — rheumatic,  I  suppose.  But  Sir  Adam  and  Clerk  came 
to  dinner,  and  laughed  and  talked  the  sense  of  pain  and 
oppression  away.  We  cannot  at  times  work  ourselves  into 
a  gay  humour,  any  more  than  we  can  tickle  ourselves  into  a 
fit  of  laughter ;  foreign  agency  is  necessary.  My  huntress  of 
lions  again  dined  with  us.  I  have  subscribed  to  her  Album, 
and  done  what  was  civil. 

July  3. — Corrected  proofs  in  the  morning,  and  wrote  a 
little.  I  was  forced  to  crop  vol.  i.  as  thirty  pages  too  long ; 
there  is  the  less  to  write  behind.  We  were  kept  late  at  the 
Court,  and  when  I  came  out  I  bethought  me,  like  Christian 
in  the  Castle  of  Giant  Despair,  "Wherefore  should  I  walk 
along  the  broiling  and  stifling  streets  when  I  have  a  little 
key  in  my  bosom  which  can  open  any  lock  in  Princes  Street 
Walks,  and  be  thus  on  the  Castle  banks,  rocks,  and  trees  in  a 
few  minutes?"  I  made  use  of  my  key  accordingly,  and 
walked  from  the  Castle  TTill  down  to  Wallace's  Tower,1  and 
thence  to  the  west  end  of  Princes  Street,  through  a  scene  of 
grandeur  and  beauty  perhaps  unequalled,  whether  the  fore- 
ground or  distant  view  is  considered — all  down  hill,  too. 
Foolish  never  to  think  of  this  before.  I  chatted  with  the  girls 
a  good  while  after  dinner,  but  wrote  a  trifle  when  we  had  tea. 
1  Now  called  Wellhouse  Tower. 


212  JOUKNAL.  [JULY  1828, 

July  4. — The  two  Annes  set  off  to  Abbotsford,  though 
the  weather  was  somewhat  lowering  for  an  open  carriage, 
but  the  day  cleared  up  finely.  Hamilton  is  unwell,  so  we 
had  a  long  hearing  of  his  on  our  hands.  It  was  four  ere  I 
got  home,  but  I  had  taken  my  newly  discovered  path  by 
rock,  bush,  and  ruin.  I  question  if  Europe  has  such  another 
path.  We  owe  this  to  the  taste  of  James  Skene.  But  I 
must  dress  to  go  to  Dr.  Hope's,  who  makes  chkre  exquise,  and 
does  not  understand  being  kept  late. 

juty  5. — Saturday,  corrected  proofs  and  wrought  hard. 
Went  out  to  dinner  at  Oxenfoord  Castle,  and  returned  in 
the  company  of  Lord  Alloway,  Chief  Baron,  Clerk,  etc.,  and 
Mr.  Bouverie,  the  English  Commissioner. 

July  6. — A  day  of  hard  work.  The  second  volume  is 
now  well  advanced — wellnigh  one  half.  Dined  alone,  and 
pursued  my  course  after  dinner.  Seven  pages  were  finished. 
Solitude 's  a  fine  thing  for  work,  but  then  you  must  lie  by 
like  a  spider,  till  you  collect  materials  to  continue  your  web. 
Began  Simond's  Switzerland — clever  and  intelligent,  but 
rather  conceited,  as  the  manner  of  an  American  Frenchman. 
I  hope  to  knock  something  out  of  him  though. 

July  7. — Williams  seems  in  uncertainty  again,  and  I  can't 
guess  what  he  will  be  at.  Surely  it  is  a  misery  to  be  so  in- 
decisive ;  he  will  certainly  gain  the  ill  word  of  both  parties 
and  might  have  had  the  good  word  of  all;  and,  indeed, 
deserves  it.  We  received  his  resignation  to-day,  but  if  the 
King's  College  are  disposed  to  thrive,  they  will  keep  eyes  on 
this  very  able  man. 

July  8. — Hard  work  in  the  Court,  the  sederunts  turn  long 
and  burthensome.  I  fear  they  will  require  some  abridgment 
of  vacation. 

[From  July  8,  1828,  to  January  10,  1829,  there  are  no 
entries  in  the  Journal] 


1829 


JANUAKY. 

omitted  to  carry  on  my  Diary  for  two  or  three 
days,  I  lost  heart  to  make  it  up,  and  left  it  unfilled  for 
many  a  month  and  day.  During  this  period  nothing  has 
happened  worth  particular  notice.  The  same  occupations, 
the  same  amusements,  the  same  occasional  alternations  of 
spirits,  gay  or  depressed,  the  same  absence  of  all  sensible  or 
rational  cause  for  the  one  or  the  other.  I  half  grieve  to  take 
up  my  pen,  and  doubt  if  it  is  worth  while  to  record  such  an 
infinite  quantity  of  nothing,  but  hang  it  1  I  hate  to  be  beat, 
so  here  goes  for  better  behaviour. 

January  10. — I  resume  my  task  at  Abbotsford.  We  are 
here  alone,  except  Lockhart,  on  a  flying  visit.  Morritt,  his 
niece,  Sir  James  Stuart,  Skene,  and  an  occasional  friend  or 
two,  have  been  my  guests  since  31st  December.  I  cannot 
say  I  have  been  happy,  for  the  feeling  of  increasing  weak- 
ness in  my  lame  leg  is  a  great  affliction.  I  walk  now  with 
pain  and  difficulty  at  all  times,  and  it  sinks  my  soul  to 
think  how  soon  I  may  be  altogether  a  disabled  cripple.  I 
am  tedious  to  my  friends,  and  I  doubt  the  sense  of  it  makes 
me  fretful. 

Everything  else  goes  off  well  enough.  My  cash  affairs 
are  clearing,  and  though  last  year  was  an  expensive  one,  I 
have  been  paying  debt.  Tet  I  have  a  dull  contest  before 
me  which  will  probably  outlast  my  life.  If  well  maintained, 
however,  it  will  be  an  honourable  one,  and  if  the  Magnum 
Opus  succeed,  it  will  afford  me  some  repose. 

215 


216  JOUENAL.  [JAN. 

January  11. — I  did  not  write  above  a  page  yesterday; 
most  weary,  stale,  and  unprofitable  have  been  my  labours. 

Bepeived  a  letter  I  suppose  from  Mad.  T. ,  proposing 

a  string  of  historical  subjects  not  proper  for  my  purpose. 
People  will  not  consider  that  a  thing  may  already  be  so 
well  told  in  history,  that  romance  ought  not  in  prudence  to 
meddle  with  it 

The  ground  covered  with  snow,  which,  by  slipperiness 
and  the  pain  occasioned  by  my  lameness,  renders  walking 
unpleasant 

January  12. — This  is  the  third  day  I  have  not  walked 
out,  pain  and  lameness  being  the  cause.  This  bodes  very 
ill  for  my  future  life.  I  made  a  search  yesterday  and  to-day 
for  letters  of  Lord  Byron  to  send  to  Tom  Moore,  but  I  could 
only  find  two.  I  had  several  others,  and  am  shocked  at 
missing  them.  The  one  which  he  sent  me  with  a  silver  cup 
I  regret  particularly.  It  was  stolen  out  of  the  cup  itself  by 
some  vile  inhospitable  scoundrel,  for  a  servant  would  not 
have  thought  such  a  theft  worth  while. 

My  spirits  are  low,  yet  I  wot  not  why.  I  have  been 
writing  to  my  sons.  Walter's  majority  was  like  to  be 
reduced,  but  is  spared  for  the  present.  Charles  is  going  on 
well  I  trust  at  the  Foreign  Office,  so  I  hope  all  is  well. 

Loitered  out  a  useless  day,  half  arranging  half  dis- 
arranging books  and  papers,  and  packing  the  things  I  shall 
want  Der  AbscMedstag  ist  da. 

January  13. — The  day  of  return  to  Edinburgh  is  come. 
I  don't  know  why,  but  I  am  more  happy  at  the  change  than 
usual  I  am  not  working  hard,  and  it  is  what  I  ought  to  do, 
and  must  do.  Every  hour  of  laziness  cries  fie  upon  me. 
But  there  is  a  perplexing  sinking  of  the  heart  which  one 
cannot  always  overcome.  At  such  times  I  have  wished 
myself  a  clerk,  quill-driving  for  twopence  per  page.  You 
have  at  least  application,  and  that  is  all  that  is  necessary, 
whereas  unless  your  lively  faculties  are  awake  and  pro- 


1829.]  JOURNAL.  217 

pitious,  your  application  will  do  you  as  little  good  as  if 
you  strained  your  sinews  to  lift  Arthur's  Seat 

January  14,  [Edinburgh]. — Got  home  last  night  after  a 
freezing  journey.  This  morning  I  got  back  some  of  the  last 
copy,  and  tugged  as  hard  as  ever  did  soutar  to  make  ends 
meet.  Then  I  will  be  reconciled  to  my  task,  which  at 
present  disgusts  me.  Visited  Lady  Jane,  then  called  on 
Mr.  Eobison  and  instructed  him  to  call  a  meeting  of  the 
Council  of  the  Royal  Society,  as  Mr.  Knox  proposes  to  read 
an  essay  on  some  dissections.  A  bold  proposal  truly  from 
one  who  has  had  so  lately  the  boldness  of  trading  so  deep  in 
human  flesh!  I  will  oppose  his  reading  in  the  present 
circumstances  if  I  should  stand  alone,  but  I  hope  he  will  be 
wrought  upon  to  withdraw  his  essay  or  postpone  it  at  least. 
It  is  very  bad  taste  to  push  himself  forward  just  now. 
Lockhart  dined  with  us,  which  made  the  evening  a  pleasant 
but  an  idle  one.  Well !  I  must  rouse  myself. 

"  Awake  !  Arise,  or  be  for  ever  fallen." 1 

January  15. — Day  began  with  beggars  as  usual,  and 
John  JSTicolson  has  not  sense  to  keep  them  out  I  never 
yield,  however,  to  this  importunity,  thinking  it  wrong  that 
what  I  can  spare  to  meritorious  poverty,  of  which  I  hear  and 
see  too  much,  should  be  diverted  by  impudent  importunity. 
I  was  detained  at  the  Parliament  House  till  nearly  three  by 
the  great  case  concerning  prescription,  Maule  #.  Maule.2 
This  was  made  up  to  me  by  hearing  an  excellent  opinion 
from  Lord  Oorehouse,  with  a  curious  discussion  in  apicibus 
juris.  I  disappointed  Graham 3  of  a  sitting  for  my  picture. 

1  Milton's  Paradise  Lost,  Bk.  i.       Edinburgh.    "When  the  portrait  was 

2  See  Cases  in  Court  of  Session,     finished  it  was  placed  in  the  rooms 
vol.  vii.  S.  p.  527.  of  the  Society,  where  it  still  hangs. 

*  John  Graham,  who  afterwards  The  artist  retained  in  his  own  collec- 

assumed  the  name  of  Gilbert ;  born  tion  a  duplicate,  with  some  slight 

1794  died  1866.  variations,  which  his  widow  pre- 

He  was  at  this  time  painting  Sir  sented  to  the  National  Portrait 

Walter  for  the  Boyal  Society  of  Gallery,  London,  in  1867. 


218 


JOTIENAL. 


I  went  to  the  Council  of  the  Koyal  Society,  which  was  con- 
vened at  my  request,  to  consider  whether  we  ought  to  hear 
a  paper  on  anatomical  subjects  read  by  Mr.  Knox,  whose 
name  has  of  late  been  deeply  implicated  in  a  criminal 
prosecution  against  certain  wretches,  who  had  murdered 
many  persons  and  sold  their  bodies  to  professors  of  the 
anatomical  science.  Some  thought  that  our  declining  to 
receive  the  paper  would  be  a  declaration  unfavourable  to 
Dr.  Knox.  I  think  hearing  it  before  Mr.  Knox  has  made 
any  defence  (as  he  is  stated  to  have  in  view)  would  be  aa 
intimation  of  our  preference  of  the  cause  of  science  to  those 
of  morality  and  common  humanity.  Mr.  Knox's  friends 
undertook  to  deal  with  him  about  suffering  the  paper  to  be 
omitted  for  the  present,  while  adhiM  commjudice  Us  est.1 

Jam.ua/ry  16. — Nothing  on  the  roll  to-day,  so  I  did  not 
go  to  the  Parliament  House,  but  fagged  at  my  desk  till  two. 


1  Sir  Walter,  in  common  with  the 
majority  of  his  contemporaries, 
evidently  believed  that  Dr.  Robert 
Knox  was  partly  responsible  for  the 
West  Port  atrocities,  but  it  is  only 
just  to  the  memory  of  the  tal- 
ented anatomist  to  say  that  an 
independent  and  influential  com- 
mittee, after  a  careful  examination, 
reported  on  March  13th,  1829,  that 
there  was  no  evidence  showing  that 
he  or  his  assistants  knew  that 
murder  had  been  committed,  but 
the  committee  thought  that  more 
care  should  have  been  exercised 
in  the  reception  of  the  bodies  at 
the  Anatomical  Class-room. 

Lord  Cockburn,  who  was  one  of 
the  counsel  at  the  trial  of  Burke,  in 
writing  of  these  events,  remarks: 
"All  our  anatomists  incurred  a 
most  unjust  and  very  alarming, 
though  not  an  unnatural,  odium; 
Dr.  Knox  in  particular,  against 
whom  not  only  the  anger  of  the 
populace,  but  the  condemnation  of 


more  intelligent  persons,  wa& 
specially  directed.  But,  tried  in 
reference  to  the  invariable  and  the 
necessary  practice  of  the  profession, 
our  anatomists  were  spotlessly  cor- 
rect, and  Knox  the  most  correct  of 
them  all." 

At  this  date  Dr.  Knox  was  the 
most  popular  teacher  in  the  Medical 
School  at  Edinburgh,  and  as  his 
class-room  could  not  contain  more 
than  a  third  of  his  students,  he  had 
to  deliver  his  lectures  twice  or 
thrice  daily.  The  odium  attached 
to  his  name  might  have  been 
removed  in  time  had  his  personal 
character  stood  as  high  as  his  pro- 
fessional ability,  but  though  he 
remained  in  Edinburgh  until  1841 
he  never  recovered  his  position 
there,  and  for  the  last  twenty  years 
of  his  life  this  once  brilliant  teacher 
subsisted  as  best  he  could  in  Lon- 
don by  his  pen,  and  as  an  itinerant 
lecturer.  He  died  in  1862. 


1829.]  JOURNAL  219 

Dr.  Boss  called  to  relieve  me  of  a  corn,  which,  though  my 
lameness  needs  no  addition,  had  tormented  me  vilely.  I 
again  met  the  Eoyal  Society  Council  Dr.  Knox  consents 
to  withdraw  his  paper,  or  rather  suffers  the  reading  to  be 
postponed.  There  is  some  great  error  in  the  law  on  the 
subject.  If  it  was  left  to  itself  many  bodies  would  be  im- 
ported from  France  and  Ireland,  and  doubtless  many  would 
be  found  in  our  hospitals  for  the  service  of  the  anatomical 
science.  But  the  total  and  severe  exclusion  of  foreign  sup- 
plies of  this  kind  raises  the  price  of  the  "  subjects,"  as  they 
are  called  technically,  to  such  a  height,  that  wretches  are 
found  willing  to  break  into  "the  bloody  house  of  life,"1 
merely  to  supply  the  anatomists'  table.  The  law  which,  as 
a  deeper  sentence  on  the  guilt  of  murder,  declares  that  the 
body  of  the  convicted  criminal  should  be  given  up  to  ana- 
tomy, is  certainly  not  without  effect,  for  criminals  have 
been  known  to  shrink  from  that  part  of  the  sentence  which 
seems  to  affect  them  more  than  the  doom  of  death  itself, 
with  all  its  terrors  here  and  hereafter.  On  the  other  hand, 
while  this  idea  of  the  infamy  attending  the  exposition  of 
the  person  is  thus  recognised  by  the  law,  it  is  impossible  to 
adopt  regulations  which  would  effectually  prevent  such 
horrid  crimes  as  the  murder  of  vagrant  wretches  who  can 
be  snatched  from  society  without  their  being  missed,  as  in 
the  ease  of  the  late  conspiracy.  For  instance,  if  it  was  now 
to  be  enacted,  as  seems  reasonable,  that  persons  dying  in 
hospitals  and  almshouses,  who  die  without  their  friends 
claiming  their  remains,  should  be  given  up  to  the  men  of 
science,  this  would  be  subjecting  poverty  to  the  penalty  of 
these  atrocious  criminals  whom  law  distinguishes  by  the 
heaviest  posthumous  disgrace  which  it  can  inflict.  Even 
cultivated  minds  revolt  from  the  exposure  on  an  anatomical 
table,  when  the  case  is  supposed  to  be  that  of  one  who  is 
dear  to  them.  I  should,  I  am  conscious,  be  willing  that  I 

1  King  John,  Act  iv.  Sc.  2. 


220  JOUBNAL.  [JAN. 

myself  should  be  dissected  in  public,  if  doing  so  could  pro- 
duce any  advantage  to  society,  but  when  I  think  on  re- 
lations and  friends  being  rent  from  the  grave  the  case  is 
very  different,  and  I  would  fight  knee-deep  to  prevent  or 
punish  such  an  exposure.  So  inconsistent  we  are  all  upon 
matters  of  this  nature. 

I  dined  quietly  at  home  with  the  girls,  and  wrote  after 
dinner. 

January  17. — Nothing  in  the  roll ;  corrected  proofs,  and 
went  off  at  12  o'clock  in  the  Hamilton  stage  to  William 
Lockhart's  at  Auchinrath.  My  companions,  Mr.  Living- 
stone, the  clergyman  of  Oamnethan,  a  Bailie  Hamilton,  the 
king  of  trumps,  I  am  told,  in  the  Burgh  of  Hamilton,  and 
a  Mr.  Davie  Martin  gui  gau&et  eywis  et  canilus.  Got  to 
Auchinrath  by  six,  and  met  Lord  Douglas,1  his  brother, 
Captain  Douglas,  K.N.,  John  G-.  Lockhart  also,  who  had  a 
large  communication  from  Duke  of  W.  upon  the  subject  of 
the  bullion.  The  Duke  scouts  the  economist's  ideas  about 
paper  credit,  after  the  proposition  that  all  men  shall  be 
entitled  to  require  gold. 

January  18. — We  went,  the  two  Lockharts  and  I,  to 
William's  new  purchase  of  Milton.  We  found  on  his  ground 
a  cottage,  where  a  man  called  Greenshields,2  a  sensible, 
powerful-minded  person,  had  at  twenty-eight  (rather  too 
late  a  week) 3  taken  up  the  art  of  sculpture.  He  had  dis- 
posed of  the  person  of  the  King  most  admirably,  according 
to  my  poor  thoughts,  and  had  attained  a  wonderful  ex- 
pression of  ease  and  majesty  at  the  same  time.  He  was 
desirous  of  engaging  on  Burns'  Jolly  Beggars,  which  I 
dissuaded.  Caricature  is  not  the  object  of  sculpture. 

We  went  to  Milton  on  as  fine  a  day  as  could  consist 
with  snow  on  the  ground.  The  situation  is  eminently 

1  Archibald,  second  Lord  Douglas,  288.    He  died  at  the  age  of  forty 

who  died  in  1844.  in  1835. 

s  John  Greenshielda,  self-taught 
sculptor.    See  Ltfe,  vol.  ix.  p.  281-        3  As  You  Like  It,  Act  n.  So.  3. 


1829.]  JOUENAL.  221 

beautiful ;  a  fine  promontory  round  which  the  Clyde  makes 
a  magnificent  bend.  We  fixed  on  a  situation  where  the 
sitting-room  should  command  the  upper  view,  and,  with  an 
ornamental  garden,  I  think  it  may  be  made  the  prettiest 
place  in  Scotland. 

January  19. — Posted  to  Edinburgh  with  John  Lockhart 
We  stopped  at  Allanton  to  see  a  tree  transplanted,  which 
was  performed  with  great  ease.  Sir  Henry  is  a  sad  coxcomb, 
and  lifted  beyond  the  solid  earth  by  the  effect  of  his  book's 
success.  But  the  book  well  deserves  it.1  He  is  in  practice 
particularly  anxious  to  keep  the  roots  of  the  tree  near  the 
surface,  and  only  covers  them  with  about  a  foot  of  earth. 

Note. — Lime  rubbish  dug  in  among  the  roots  of  ivy 
encourages  it  much. 

The  operation  delayed  us  three  hours,  so  it  was  seven 
o'clock  before  we  reached  our  dinner  and  a  good  fire  in 
Shandwick  Place,  and  we  were  wellnigh  frozen  to  death. 
During  this  excursion  I  walked  very  ill — with  more  pain, 
in  fact,  than  I  ever  remember  to  have  felt — and,  even 
leaning  on  John  Lockhart,  could  hardly  get  on.  £aad  that, 
vara  load — it  might  be  the  severe  weather  though,  and 
the  numbing  effect  of  the  sitting  in  the  carriage.  Be  it 
what  it  will,  I  can't  help  myself. 

January  20. — I  had  little  to  do  at  the  Court,  and 
returned  home  soon.  Honest  old  Mr.  Terrier  is  dead,  at 
extreme  old  age.  I  confess  I  should  not  wish  to  live  so 
long.  He  was  a  man  with  strong  passions  and  strong  pre- 
judices, but  with  generous  and  manly  sentiments  at  the 
same  time.  We  used  to  call  him  Uncle  Adam,  after  that 
character  in  his  gifted  daughter's  novel  of  the  Heiress  [In- 
heritance]. I  wrote  a  long  letter  after  I  came  home  to  my 
Lord  Elgin  about  Greenshields,  the  sculptor.2  I  am  afraid 

1  Sir  Henry  Seton  Steuart's  work  died  in  March  1836. 
on  Planting  was  reviewed  by  Scott 

in  the  Quarterly.— See  Misc.  Prose  2  See  letter  in  Life,  vo/.  ix.  pp. 

Works,  vol.  xxi.    Sir  H.  Stenart  281-287. 


222  JOURNAL.  [JAN. 

he  is  going  into  the  burlesque  line,  to  which  sculpture  is 
peculiarly  ill  adapted.  So  I  have  expressed  my  veto  to 
his  patron,  valeat  quantum.  Also  a  letter  to  Mrs.  Professor 
Sandford  at  Glasgow  about  reprinting  Macaulay's  History 
of  St.  Kilda}  advising  them  to  insert  the  history  of  Lady 
Grange  who  was  kidnapped  and  banished  thither. 

I  corrected  my  proofs,  moreover,  and  prepared  to  dine. 
After  dinner  we  go  to  Euphemia  Erskine's  marriage.  Mr. 
Dallas  came  in  and  presented  me  with  an  old  pedigree  of 
the  M'Intoshes.  The  wedding  took  place  with  the  usual 
April  weather  of  smiles  and  tears.  The  bridegroom's  name 
is  Dawson.  As  he,  as  well  as  the  bride,  is  very  tall,  they 
have  every  chance  of  bringing  up  a  family  of  giants.  The 
bridegroom  has  an  excellent  character.  He  is  only  a 
captain,  but  economy  does  wonders  in  the  army,  where 
there  are  many  facilities  for  practising  it.  I  sincerely  wish 
them  happiness. 

January  21. — Went  out  to  Dalkeith  House  to  dine  and 
stay  all  night.  Found  Marquis  of  Lothian  and  a  family 
party.  I  liked  the  sense  and  spirit  displayed  by  this  young 
nobleman,  who  reminds  me  strongly  of  his  parents,  whom  I 
valued  so  highly, 

January  22. — Left  Dalkeith  after  breakfast,  and  gained 
the  Parliament  House,  where  there  was  almost  nothing  to 
do,  at  eleven  o'clock.  Afterwards  sat  to  Graham,  who  is 
making  a  good  thing  of  it.  Mr.  Colvin  Smith  has  made  a 
better  in  one  sense,  having  sold  ten  or  twelve  copies  of  the 
portrait  to  different  friends.2  The  Solicitor  came  to  dine 
with  me — we  drank  a  bottle  of  champagne,  and  two  bottles 
of  claret,  which,  in  former  days,  I  should  have  thought  a 
very  sober  allowance,  since,  Lockhart  included,  there  were 
three  persons  to  drink  it  But  I  felt  I  had  drunk  too 
much,  and  was  uncomfortable.  The  young  men  stood  it 

1  Originally  published  in  London  in  8vo,   1764.      This  contemplated 
edition  does  not  appear  to  have  been  printed.  2  Ante,  p.  118  n. 


1829.]  JOTJKNAL.  223 

like  young  men.  Skene  and  his  wife  and  daughter  looked 
in  in  the  evening.  I  suppose  I  am  turning  to  my  second 
childhood,  for  not  only  am  I  filled  drunk,  or  made  stupid 
at  least,  with  one  bottle  of  wine,  but  I  am  disabled  from 
writing  by  chilblains  on  my  fingers — a  most  babyish  com- 
plaint They  say  that  the  character  is  indicated  by  the 
handwriting ;  if  so,  mine  is  crabbed  enough. 

January  23. — Still  severe  frost,  annoying  to  sore  fingers. 
Nothing  on  the  roll  I  sat  at  home  and  wrote  letters  to 
Wilkie,  Landseer,  Mrs.  Hughes,  Charles,  etc.  Went  out  to 
old  Mr.  Ferrier's  funeral,  and  saw  the  last  duty  rendered 
to  my  old  friend,  whose  age  was 

*       " Like  a  lusty  winter, 

Frosty,  bat  kindly," I 

I  mean  in  a  moral  as  well  as  a  physical  sense.  I  then  went 
to  Cadell's  for  some  few  minutes. 

I  carried  out  Lockhart  to  DaJkeith,  where  we  dined, 
supped,  and  returned  through  a  clinking  frost*  with  snow 
on  the  ground.  Lord  Eamsay  and  the  Miss  Kerrs  were 
at  DalkeitL  The  Duke  shows,  for  so  young  a  man,  a  great 
deal  of  character,  and  seems  to  have  a  proper  feeling  of  the 
part  he  has  to  play.  The  evening  was  pleasant,  but  the 
thought  that  I  was  now  the  visitor  and  friend  of  the  family 
in  the  third  generation  lay  somewhat  heavy  on  me.  Every 
thing  around  me  seemed  to  say  that  beauty,  power,  wealth, 
honour  were  but  things  of  a  day. 

January  24. — Heavy  fall  of  snow.  Lockhart  is  off  in 
the  mail  I  hope  he  will  not  be  blockaded.  The  day  bitter 
cold.  I  went  to  the  Court,  and  with  great  difficulty  returned 
along  the  slippery  street.  I  ought  to  have  taken  the  carriage, 
but  I  have  a  superstitious  dread  of  giving  up  the  habit  of 
walking,  and  would  willingly  stick  to  the  last  by  my  old 
hardy  customs. 

1  As  You  Like  It,  Act  n.  Sc.  3. 


224  JOURNAL  [JAN. 

Little  but  trifles  to  do  at  the  Court.  My  hands  are  so 
covered  with  chilblains  that  I  can  hardly  use  a  pen — my 
feet  ditto. 

We  bowled  away  at  six  o'clock  to  Mr.  Wardlaw  Eamsay's. 
Found  we  were  a  week  too  early,  and  went  back  as  if  our 
noses  had  been  bleeding. 

January  25. — Worked  seriously  all  morning,  expecting 
the  Fergusons  to  dinner.  Alas !  instead  of  that,  I  learn 
that  my  poor  innocent  friend  Mary  is  no  more.  She  was  a 
person  of  some  odd  and  peculiar  habits,  wore  a  singular 
dress,  and  affected  wild  and  solitary  haunts,  but  she  was,  at 
the  same  time,  a  woman  of  talent,  and  even  genius.  She 
used  often  to  take  long  walks  with  me  up  through  the  glens; 
and  I  believe  her  sincere  good  wishes  attended  me,  as  I  was 
always  glad  of  an  opportunity  to  show  her  kindness.  I 
shall  long  think  of  her  when  at  Abbotsford.  This  sad  event 
breaks  up  our  little  party.  Will  Clerk  came,  however,  and 
his  ttte-a-t£te  was,  of  course,  interesting  and  amusing  in  the 
highest  degree.  We  drank  some  whisky  and  water,  and 
smoked  a  cigar  or  two,  till  nine  at  night. 

"  No  after  friendships  ere  can  raise 
The  endearments  of  our  early  days." 

January  26. — I  muzzed  on — I  can  call  it  little  better — 
with  Anne  of  Geierstdn.  The  materials  are  excellent,  but 
the  power  of  using  them  is  failing.  Yet  I  wrote  out  about 
three  pages,  sleeping  at  intervals. 

January  27. — A  great  and  general  thaw,  the  streets 
afloat,  the  snow  descending  on  one's  head  from  the  roofs. 
Went  to  the  Court.  There  was  little  to  do.  Left  about 
twelve,  and  took  a  sitting  with  Graham,  who  begs  for  another. 
Sir  James  Stuart  stood  bottle-holder  on  this  occasion. 
Had  rather  an  unfavourable  account  of  the  pictures  of 
James  Stuart  of  Dunearn,  which  are  to  be  sold.  I  had 
promised  to  pick  up  one  or  two  for  the  Duke  of  Bucdeuch. 


1829.]  JOUENAL.  225 

Came  home  and  wrote  a  leaf  or  two.  I  shall  be  soon  done 
with  the  second  volume  of  Anne  of  Geierstein.  I  cannot 
persuade  myself  of  the  obvious  risk  of  satisfying  the  public, 
although  I  cannot  so  well  satisfy  myself.  I  am  like  Beau- 
mont and  Fletcher's  old  Merrythought  who  could  not  be 
persuaded  that  there  was  a  chance  of  his  wanting  meat.  I 
never  came  into  my  parlour,  said  he,  but  I  found  the  cloth 
laid  and  dinner  ready ;  surely  it  will  be  always  thus.  Use 
makes  perfectness.1 

My  reflections  are  of  the  same  kind ;  and  if  they  are 
unlogical  they  are  perhaps  not  the  less  comfortable.  Fret- 
ting and  struggling  does  no  good.  Wrote  to  Miss  Margaret 
Ferguson  a  letter  of  condolence. 

January  28. — Breakfasted,  for  a  wonder,  abroad  with 
Hay  Drummond,  whose  wife  appears  a  pretty  and  agreeable 
little  woman.  We  worshipped  his  tutelar  deity,  the  Her- 
cules, and  saw  a  good  model  of  the  Hercules  Bibax,  or  the 
drunken  Hercules.  Graham  and  Sir  James  Stuart  were 
there.  Home-baked  bread  and  soldier's  coffee  were  the 
treat.  I  came  home ;  and  Sir  Robert  Dundas  having  taken 
my  duty  at  the  Court,  I  wrote  for  some  time,  but  not  much. 
Burke  the  murderer  hanged  this  morning.  The  mob,  which 
was  immense,  demanded  Knox  and  Hare,  but  though  greedy 
for  more  victims,  received  with  shouts  the  solitary  wretch 
who  found  his  way  to  the  gallows  out  of  five  or  six  who 
seem  not  less  guilty  than  he.  But  the  story  begins  to  be 
stale,  although  I  believe  a  doggerel  ballad  upon  it  would  be 
popular,  how  brutal  soever  the  wit.  This  is  the  progress  of 
human  passions.  We  ejaculate,  exclaim,  hold  up  to  Heaven 
our  hand,  like  the  rustic  Phidyle  2 — next  morning  the  mood 
changes,  and  we  dance  a  jig  to  the  tune  which  moved  us  to 
tears.  Mr.  Bell  sends  me  a  specimen  of  a  historical  novel, 

1  See   Beaumont    and  Fletcher,         2  Coelo  snpinas  si  toleris  manus 
Knight  of  the  Burning  J?estte9  Act  I.  Nascente  luna,  rustica  Fhidyle,  etc. 

gc.  3.  HOT.  Lib.  iii.  Od.  23.~jr.o.L. 

VOL.  n.  P 


226  JOURNAL.  [JAN. 

but  lie  goes  not  the  way  to  write  it ;  he  is  too  general,  and 
not  sufficiently  minute.  It  is  not  easy  to  convey  this  to  an 
author,  with  the  necessary  attention  to  his  feelings ;  and 
yet,  in  good  faith  and  sincerity,  it  must  be  done. 

January  29. — I  had  a  vacant  day  once  more  by  the 
kindness  of  Sir  Robert,  unasked,  but  most  kindly  afforded. 
I  have  not  employed  it  to  much  purpose.  I  wrote  six  pages 
to  Croker,1  who  is  busied  with  a  new  edition  of  BoswelTs 
Life  of  Johnson,  to  which  most  entertaining  book  he  hopes 
to  make  large  additions  from  Mrs.  Piozzi,  Hawkins  and 
other  sources.  I  am  bound  by  many  obligations  to  do  as 
much  for  him  as  I  can,  which  can  only  respect  the  Scottish 
Tour.  I  wrote  only  two  or  three  pages  of  Anne.  I  am 

" as  one  who  in  a  darksome  way 

Doth  walk  with  fear  and  dread." 

But  walk  I  must,  and  walk  forward  too,  or  I  shall  be  be- 
nighted with  a  vengeance.  After  dinner,  to  compromise 
matters  with  my  conscience,  I  wrote  letters  to  Mr.  Bell, 
Mrs.  Hughes,  and  so  forth ;  thus  I  concluded  the  day  with 
a  sort  of  busy  idleness.  This  will  not  do.  By  cock  and  pye 
it  will  not. 

January  30. — Mr.  Stuart  breakfasted  with  me,  a  grand- 
nephew  of  Lady  Louisa's,  a  very  pleasing  young  gentleman. 
The  coach  surprised  me  by  not  calling.  Will  it  be  for  the 
Martyrdom  ?  I  trow  it  will,  yet,  strange  to  say,  I  cannot 
recollect  if  it  is  a  regular  holiday  or  not. 

"  Uprouse  ye  then,  my  merry,  merry  men, 
Aid  use  it  as  ye  may." 

I  wrote  in  the  morning,  and  went  at  one  o'clock  to  a  meeting 
of  country  gentlemen,  about  bringing  the  direct  road  from 
London  down  by  Jedburgh,  said  to  be  the  nearest  line  by 
fifty  miles.  It  is  proposed  the  pleasant  men  of  Teviotdale 

1  This  letter,  brimful  of  anecdote,  is  printed  in  Croker's  Correspond- 
wux,  vol.  ii.  pp.  28-34. 


1829.]  JOURNAL.  227 

should  pay,  not  only  their  own  share, — that  is,  the  ex- 
pense of  making  the  road  through  our  own  country,  but  also 
the  expense  of  making  the  road  under  the  Ellsdon  Trust  in 
Northumberland,  "where  the  English  would  positively  do 
nothing.  I  stated  this  to  the  meeting  as  an  act  of 
Quixotry.  If  it  be  an  advantage,  which,  unless  to  in- 
dividuals, may  be  doubted,  it  is  equally  one  to  Northum- 
berland as  to  Eoxburgh,  therefore  I  am  clear  that  we 
should  go  "  equals-aquals." 

I  think  I  have  maybe  put  a  spoke  in  the  wheel  The 
raising  the  statute  labour  of  Eoxburgh  to  an  oppressive  ex- 
tent, to  make  roads  in  England,  is,  I  think,  jimp  legal,  and 
will  be  much  complained  of  by  the  poorer  heritors.  Henry 
of  Harden  dines  with  me  t$te  &  t£te,  excepting  the  girls. 

January  31. — I  thought  I  had  opened  a  vein  this  morn- 
ing and  that  it  came  freely,  but  the  demands  of  art  have  been 
more  than  I  can  bear.  I  corrected  proofs  before  break- 
fast, went  to  Court  after  that  meal ;  was  busy  till  near  one 
o'clock.  Then  I  went  to  Cadell's,  where  they  are  preparing 
to  circulate  the  prospectus  of  the  magnum,  which  will  have 
all  the  effect  of  surprise  on  most  people.  I  sat  to  Mr. 
Graham  till  I  was  quite  tired,  then  went  to  Lady  Jane,  who 
is  getting  better.  Then  here  at  four,  but  fit  for  nothing  but 
to  bring  up  this  silly  Diary. 

The  corpse  of  the  murderer  Burke  is  now  lying  in  state 
at  the  College,  in  the  anatomical  class,  and  all  the  world 
flock  to  see  him.  "Who  is  he  that  says  that  we  are  not  ill  to 
please  in  our  objects  of  curiosity  ?  The  strange  means  by 
which  the  wretch  made  money  axe  scarce  more  disgusting 
than  the  eager  curiosity  with  which  the  public  have  licked 
up  all  the  carrion  details  of  this  business. 

I  trifled  with  my  work.  I  wonder  how  Johnson  set 
himself  doggedly  to  it — to  a  work  of  imagination  it  seems 
quite  impossible,  and  one's  brain  is  at  times  fairly  addled. 
And  yet  I  have  felt  times  when  sudden  and  strong  exertion 


228  JOURNAL.  [JAN.  1829. 

would  throw  off  all  this  mistiness  of  mind,  as  a  north  wind 
•would  disperse  it. 

"  Blow,  blow,  thou  northern  wind."  l 

Nothing  more  than  about  two  or  three  pages.  I  went  to> 
the  Parliament  House  to-day,  but  had  little  to  do.  I  sat 
to  Mr.  Graham  the  last  time,  Heaven  be  praised !  If  I  be 
not  known  in  another  age,  it  will  not  be  for  want  of  pictures. 
We  dined  with  Mr.  Wardlaw  Ramsay  and  Lady  Anne — a 
fine  family.  There  was  little  done  in  the  way  of  work 
except  correcting  proofs.  The  bile  affects  me,  and  makes 
me  vilely  drowsy  when  I  should  be  most  awake.  Met  at 
Mr.  Wardlaw's  several  people  I  did  not  know.  Looked  over 
Cumnor  Hall  by  Mr.  Usher  Tighe  of  Oxford.  I  see  from 
the  inscription  on  Tony  Foster's  tomb  that  he  was  a  skilful 
planter,  amongst  other  fashionable  accomplishments. 
1  As  You  Lite  It,  Act  n.  Sc.  7. 


FEBRUARY. 

February  1. — Domum  mansi,  lanam  fed,  —  stayed  at 
home  videlicet,  and  laboured  without  interruption  except 
from  intolerable  drowsiness ;  finished  eight  leaves,  however, 
the  best  day's  work  I  have  made  this  long  time.  !Nb 
interruption,  and  I  got  pleased  with  my  work,  which  ends 
the  second  volume  of  Anne  of  Geierstein.  After  dinner 
had  a  letter  from  Lockhart,  with  happy  tidings  about  the 
probability  of  the  commission  on  the  Stewart  papers  being 
dissolved.  The  Duke  of  W.  says  commissions  never  either 
did  or  will  do  any  good.  John  will  in  that  case  be  sole 
editor  of  these  papers  with  an  apartment  at  St.  James's  cum 
plurimis  aliis.  It  will  be  a  grand  coup  if  it  takes  place. 

February  2. — Sent  off  yesterday's  work  with  proofs. 
Could  I  do  as  toughly  for  a  week — and  many  a  day  I  have 
done  more — I  should  be  soon  out  of  the  scrape.  I  wrote 
letters,  and  put  over  the  day  till  one,  when  I  went  down 
with  Sir  James  Stuart  to  see  Stuart  of  Dunearn's  pictures 
now  on  sale.  I  did  not  see  much  which  my  poor  taste 
covets;  a  Hobbema  much  admired  is,  I  think,  as  tame 
a  piece  of  work  as  I  ever  saw.  I  promised  to  try  to  get 
a  good  picture  or  two  for  the  young  Duke. 

Dined  with  the  old  Club,  instituted  forty  years  ago. 
There  were  present  Lord  Justice-Clerk,  Lord  Advocate,  Sir 
Peter  Murray,  John  Irving,  William  Clerk,  and  L  It  was 
a  party  such  as  the  meeting  of  fellow  scholars  and  fellow 
students  alone  could  occasion.  We  told  old  stories ;  laughed 
and  quaffed,  and  resolved,  rashly  perhaps,  that  we  would 
hold  the  Club  at  least  once  a  year,  if  possible  twice.  We 
will  see  how  this  will  fudge.  Our  mirth  was  more  un- 

229 


230  JOURNAL. 

expected  as  Sir  Adam,  our  first  fiddle,  was  wanting,  owing 
to  his  family  loss. 

February  3. — Eose  at  eight — felt  my  revel  a  little  in  my 
head.  The  Court  business  light,  returned  by  Cadell,  and 
made  one  or  two  calls,  at  Skene's  especially.  Dinner  and 
evening  at  home  ;  laboriously  employed 

February  4, — To-day  I  was  free  from  duty,  and  made 
good  use  of  my  leisure  at  home,  finishing  the  second  volume 
of  Anne,  and  writing  several  letters,  one  to  recommend 
Captain  Pringle  to  Lord  Beresford,  which  I  send  to-morrow 
through  Morritt.  "  My  mother  whips  me  and  I  whip  the 
top."  The  girls  went  to  the  play. 

February  5. — Attended  the  Court  as  usual,  got  dismissed 
about  one.  Finished  and  sent  off  volume  ii.  of  Anne.  Dined 
with  Eobert  Eutherford,  my  cousin,  and  the  whole  clan  of 
Swinton. 

February  6. — Corrected  proofs  in  the  morning,  then  to 
the  Court ;  thence  to  CadelPs,  where  I  found  some  business 
cut  out  for  me,  in  the  way  of  notes,  which  delayed  me. 
Walked  home,  the  weary  way  giving  my  feet  the  ancient 
twinges  of  agony :  such  a  journey  is  as  severe  a  penance  as 
if  I  had  walked  the  same  length  with  peas  in  my  shoes  to 
atone  for  some  horrible  crime  by  beating  my  toes  into  a 
jelly.  I  wrote  some  and  corrected  a  good  deal.  "We  dined 
alone,  and  I  partly  wrought  partly  slept  in  the  evening. 
It's  now  pretty  clear  that  the  Duke  of  W.  intends  to  have 
a  Catholic  Bill1  He  probably  expects  to  neutralise  and 
divide  the  Catholic  body  by  bringing  a  few  into  Parliament, 
where  they  will  probably  be  tractable  enough,  rather  than  a 

1  Sir  Walter  had  written  to  Mr.  just  received.  I  shall  lament  most 

Lockhart  on  October  26th,  1828,  on  truly  a  purple  article  at  this 

hearing  of  an  impending  article  moment,  when  a  strong,  plain, 

in  the  Quarterly  >  the  following  moderate  statement,  not  railing  at 

letter: —  Catholics  and  their  religion,  but 

"  I  cannot  repress  the  strong  reprobating  the  conduct  of  the  Irish 

desire  I  have  to  express  my  regret  Catholics,  and  pointing  out  the 

at  some  parts  of  your  kind  letter  necessary  effects  which  that  conduct 


1829.] 


JOUENAL. 


231 


large  proportion  of  them  rioting  in  Ireland,  where  they  will 
be  to  a  certain  degree  unanimous. 

February  7. — Up  and  wrought  a  little.  I  had  at  break- 
fast a  son  of  Sir  Thomas  Dick  Lauder,  a  very  quick,  smart- 
looking  young  fellow,  who  is  on  his  way  to  the  Continent 
with  a  tutor.  Dined  at  Mrs.  George  Swinton's  with  the 
whole  clan  and  alliance. 


must  have  on  the  Catholic  Question, 
would  have  a  powerful  effect,  and 
might  really  serve  king  and  country. 
Nothingthe  agitators  desire  so  much 
as  to  render  the  broil  general,  as 
a  quarrel  between  Catholic  and 
Protestant;  nothing  so  essential 
to  the  Protestant  cause  as  to  con- 
fine it  to  its  real  causes.  Southey, 
as  much  a  fanatic  as  e'er  a  Catholic 
of  them  all,  will,  I  fear,  pass  this 
most  necessary  landmark  of  debate. 
I  like  his  person,  admire  his  genius, 
and  respect  his  immense  erudition, 
but — non  omnia.  In  point  of  reason- 
ing and  political  judgment  he  is  a 
perfect  Harpado — nothing  better 
than  a  wild  bull.  The  circum- 
stances require  the  interference  of 
vir  gravis  pietafe  et  mortbus,  and  you 
bring  it  a  Highland  piper  to  blow 
a  Highland  charge,  the  more  mis- 
chievous that  it  possesses  much 
wild  power  of  inflaming  the  pas- 
sions. 

"  Your  idea  that  you  must  give 
Southey  his  swing  in  this  matter  or 
he  will  quit  the  Review, — this  is 
just  a  pilot  saying,  If  I  do  not  give 
the  helm  to  such  a  passenger  he  will 
quit  the  ship.  Let  him  quit  and 
be  d— d. 

' '  My  own  confidence  is,  you  know, 
entirely  in  the  D.  As  Bruce  said 
to  the  Lord  of  the  Isles  at  Bannock- 
burn,  *  My  faith  is  constant  in  thee.' 
Now  a  hurly-burly  charge  may  de- 
range his  line  of  battle,  and  therein 
be  of  the  most  fatal  consequence. 
Por  God's  sake  avail  yourself  of  the 


communication  I  opened  while  in 
town,  and  do  not  act  without  it. 
Send  this  to  the  D.  of  W.  If  you 
will,  he  will  appreciate  the  motives 
that  dictate  it.  If  he  approves  of  a 
calm,  moderate,  but  firm  statement, 
stating  the  unreasonable  course 
pursued  by  the  Catholics  as  the 
great  impediment  to  their  own 
wishes,  write  such  an  article  your- 
self; no  one  can  make  a  more  im- 
pressive appeal  to  common  sense 
than  you  can. 

"  The  circumstances  of  the  times 
are — must  be — an  apology  for  dis- 
appointing Southey.  But  nothing 
can  be  an  apology  for  indulging  him 
at  the  expense  of  aggravating  public 
disturbance,  which,  for  one,  I  see 
with  great  apprehension. 

"It  has  not  yet  come  our  length  ; 
those  [to]  whom  you  allude  ought 
certainly  to  be  served,  but  the  D.  is 
best  judge  how  they  may  be  lest 
served.  If  the  D.  says  nothing  on 
the  subject  you  can  slip  your  Der- 
wentwater  greyhound  if  you  like. 
I  write  hastily,  but  most  anxiously. 
.  .  „  I  repeat  that  I  think  it  possible 
to  put  the  Catholic  Question  as  it 
now  stands  in  a  light  which  the  most 
zealous  of  their  supporters  in  this 
country  cannot  but  consider  as 
fair,  while  the  result  would  be 
that  the  Question  should  not  be 
granted  at  all  under  such  guaran- 
tees ;  but  I  think  this  is  scarce  to 
be  done  by  inflaming  the  topic  with 
all  mutual  virulence  of  polemical 
discussion." 


232  JOUBNAL.  [FEB. 

February  8. — I  wrought  the  whole  day  and  finished 
about  six  pages  of  manuscript  of  voL  iii.  [Anne  of  Gfeierstein]. 
Sat  cito  si  sat  lene.  The  Skenes  came  in  to  supper  like  the 
olden  world. 

February  9. — Was  up  in  good  time  (say  half-past  seven), 
and  employed  the  morning  in  correcting  proofs.  At  twelve 
I  went  to  Stuart  of  Dunearn's  sale  of  pictures.  This  poor 
man  fell,  like  myself,  a  victim  to  speculation.  And  though 
I  had  no  knowledge  of  him  personally,  and  disliked  him  as 
the  cause  of  poor  Sir  Alexander  BoswelTs  death,  yet  "  had 
he  been  slaughterman  to  all  my  kin,"  *  I  could  but  pity  the 
miserable  sight  of  his  splendid  establishment  broken  up, 
and  his  treasures  of  art  exposed  to  public  and  unsparing 
sale.  I  wanted  a  picture  of  the  Earl  of  Rothes  for  the  Duke 
of  Buccleuch,  a  fine  Sir  Joshua,  but  Balfour  of  Balbirnie 
fancied  it  also,  and  followed  it  to  160  guineas.  Charles 
Sharpe's  account  is,  that  I  may  think  myself  in  luck,  for 
the  face  has  been  repainted.  There  is,  he  says,  a  print 
taken  from  the  picture  at  Leslie  House  which  has  quite 
a  different  countenance  from  the  present. 

This  job,  however,  took  me  up  the  whole  morning  to 
little  purpose.  Captain  and  Mrs.  Hall  dined  with  us,  also 
Sir  James  Stuart,  Charles  Sharpe,  John  Scott  of  Gala,  etc. 

February  10. — I  was  up  at  seven  this  morning,  and  will 
continue  the  practice,  but  the  shoal  of  proofs  took  up  all  my 
leisure.  I  will  not,  I  think,  go  after  these  second-rate 
pictures  again  to-day.  If  I  could  get  a  quiet  day  or  two 
I  would  make  a  deep  dint  in  the  third  volume ;  but  hashed 
and  smashed  as  my  time  is,  who  can  make  anything  of  it  ? 
I  read  over  Henry's  History  of  Henry  vi.  and  Edward  iv. ; 
he  is  but  a  stupid  historian  after  all.  This  took  me  up  the 
whole  day. 

February  11. — Up  as  usual  and  wrought  at  proofs.  Mr. 
Hay  Drummond  and  Macintosh  Mackay  dined.  The  last 
1 -arenryFZ.Acti.se.  4. 


1829.]  JOUBKAX.  233 

brought  me  his  history  of  the  Blara  Leine  or  White  Battle 
(battle  of  the  shirts).  To  the  Court,  and  remained  there  till 
two,  when  we  had  some  awkward  business  in  the  Council  of 
the  Boyal  Society. 

February  12. — W.  Lockhart  came  to  breakfast,  full  of 
plans  for  his  house,  which  will  make  a  pretty  and  romantic 
habitation.  After  breakfast  the  Court  claimed  its  vassaL 

As  I  came  out  Mr.  Chambers  introduced  a  pretty  little 
romantic  girl  to  me  who  possessed  a  laudable  zeal  to  know 
a  live  poet.  I  went  with  my  fair  admirer  as  far  as  the  new 
rooms  on  the  Mound,  where  I  looked  into  the  Eoyal  Society's 
Booms,  then  into  the  Exhibition,  in  mere  unwillingness  to 
work  and  desire  to  dawdle  away  time.  Learned  that  Lord 
Haddington  had  bought  the  Sir  Joshua.  I  wrought  hard  to- 
day and  made  out  five  pages. 

February  13. — This  morning  CoL  Hunter  Blair  break- 
fasted here  with  his  wife,  a  very  pretty  woman,  with  a  good 
deal  of  pleasant  conversation.  She  had  been  in  India,  and 
had  looked  about  her  to  purpose.  I  wrote  for  several  hours 
in  the  forenoon,  but  was  nervous  and  drumlie;  also  I 
bothered  myself  about  geography;  in  short,  there  was 
trouble,  as  miners  say  when  the  vein  of  metal  is  interrupted. 
Went  out  at  two,  and  walked,  thank  God,  better  than  in  the 
winter,  which  gives  me  hopes  that  the  failure  of  the  unfor- 
tunate limb  is  only  temporary,  owing  to  severe  weather.  We 
dined  at  John  Murray's  with  the  Mansfield  family.  Lady 
Caroline  Murray  possesses,  I  think,  the  most  pleasing  taste 
for  music,  and  is  the  best  singer  I  ever  heard.  No  temptation 
to  display  a  very  brilliant  voice  ever  leads  her  aside  from 
truth  and  simplicity,  and  besides,  she  looks  beautiful  when 
she  sings. 

February  14. — Wrote  in  the  morning,  which  begins  to  be 
a  regular  act  of  duty.  It  was  late  ere  I  got  home,  and  I  did 
not  do  much.  The  letters  I  received  were  numerous  and 
•craved  answers,  yet  the  third  volume  is  getting  on  hooly  and 


234  JOURNAL.  [FEB. 

fairly.  I  am  twenty  leaves  before  the  printers ;  but  Lal- 
lantyne's  wife  is  ill,  and  it  is  his  nature  to  indulge  appre- 
hensions of  the  worst,  which  incapacitates  him  for  labour.  I 
cannot  help  regarding  this  amiable  weakness  of  the  mind 
with  something  too  nearly  allied  to  contempt.  I  keep  the 
press  behind  me  at  a  good  distance,  and  I,  like  the 

"  Postboy's  horse,  am  glad  to  miss 
The  lumber  of  the  wheels." l 

February  15. — I  wrought  to-day,  but  not  much — rather 
dawdled,  and  took  to  reading  Chambers's  Beauties  of  Scot- 
land,2 which  would  be  admirable  if  they  were  more  accurate. 
He  is  a  clever  young  fellow,  but  hurts  himself  by  too  much 
haste.  I  am  not  making  too  much  myself  I  know,  and  I 
know,  too,  it  is  time  I  were  making  it.  Unhappily  there  is 
such  a  thing  as  more  haste  and  less  speed.  I  can  very 
seldom  think  to  purpose  by  lying  perfectly  idle,  but  when 
I  take  an  idle  book,  or  a  walk,  my  mind  strays  back  to  its 
task  out  of  contradiction  as  it  were ;  the  things  I  read  be- 
come mingled  with  those  I  have  been  writing,  and  something 
is  concocted.  I  cannot  compare  this  process  of  the  mind  to 
anything  save  that  of  a  woman  to  whom  the  mechanical 
operation  of  spinning  serves  as  a  running  bass  to  the  songs 
she  sings,  or  the  course  of  ideas  she  pursues.  The  phrase 
Hoc  age,  often  quoted  by  my  father,  does  not  jump  with  my 
humour.  I  cannot  nail  my  mind  to  one  subject  of  contem- 
plation, and  it  is  by  nourishing  two  trains  of  ideas  that  I 
can  bring  one  into  order. 

Colin  Mackenzie  came  in  to  see  me,  poor  fellow.  He 
looks  well  in  his  retirement.  Partly  I  envy  him — partly  I 
am  better  pleased  as  it  is. 

February  16. — Stayed  at  home  and  laboured  all  the  fore- 
noon. Young  Invernahyle  called  to  bid  me  interest  myself 
about  getting  a  lad  of  the  house  of  Scott  a  commission — how 

*  John  Oilpin.  Robert  Chambers,  author  of   Tra- 

3  The   Picture   of  Scotland    by     ditions  of  Edinburgh,  etc.,  8vo,  1829. 


1829.]  JOUENAL.  235 

is  this  possible  ?  The  last  I  tried  for,  there  was  about  3000 
on  the  list — and  they  say  the  boy  is  too  old,  being  twenty-four. 
I  scribbled  three  or  four  pages,  forbore  smoking  and  whisky 
and  water,  and  went  to  the  Eoyal  Society.  There  Sir 
William  Hamilton  read  an  essay,  the  result  of  some  ana- 
tomical investigations,  which  contained  a  masked  battery 
against  the  phrenologists. 

February  17. — In  the  morning  I  sent  off  copy  and  proof. 
I  received  the  melancholy  news  that  James  Ballantyne  has 
lost  his  wife.  With  his  domestic  habits  the  blow  is  ir- 
retrievable. What  can  he  do,  poor  fellow,  at  the  head  of 
such  a  family  of  children !  I  should  not  be  surprised  if  he 
were  to  give  way  to  despair. 

I  was  at  the  Court,  where  there  was  little  to  do,  but  it 
diddled  away  my  time  till  two.  I  went  to  the  library,  but 
not  a  book  could  I  get  to  look  at.  It  is,  I  think,  a  wrong 
system  the  lending  books  to  private  houses  at  all,  and  leads 
to  immense  annual  losses.  I  called  on  Skene,  and  borrowed 
a  volume  of  his  Journal,  to  get  some  information  about 
Burgundy  and  Provence.  Something  may  be  made  out  of 
King  Een^,  but  I  wish  I  had  thought  of  him  sooner.1 
Dined  alone  with  the  girls. 

February  18. — This  being  Teind  Wednesday  I  had  a 
holiday.  Worked  the  whole  day,  interrupted  by  calls  from 

1  Mr.  Skene  remarks  that  at  this  of  Ren4,  king  of  Provence,  which 

time  **  Sir  Walter  was  engaged  in  would   lead   to   many  interesting 

the  composition  of  the  Novel  of  topographical    details    which    my 

AnneofQeierst&in,  for  which  purpose  residence  in  that   country  would 

he  wished  to  see  a  paper  which  I  enable  me  to  supply,  besides  the 

had  some  time  before  contributed  opportunity  of  illustrating  so  eccen- 

to  the  Memoirs  of  the  Society  of  An-  trie  a  character  as '  le  "bon  roi  Ren.6? 

tiquarieson  the  subject  of  the  Secret  full  of  traits  which  were  admirably 

Tribunals  of  Germany,  and  upon  suited  to  Sir  Walter's  graphic  style 

which,  accordingly,  he  grounded  the  of  illustration,  and  that  he  could 

scene  in  the  novel.    Upon  his  de-  besides  introduce   the  ceremonies 

scribing  to  me  the  scheme  which  of     the    F$te    Dieu    with    great 

he  had  formed  for  that  work,  I  advantage,  as   I   had  fortunately 

suggested  to  M"\    that  he  might  seen  its  revival  the  first  time  it  was 

with  advantage  connect  the  history  celebrated  after  the  interruption  of 


236  JOUENAL. 

Dr.  Boss,  Sir  Hugh  PaUiser,  Sir  David  Hunter  Blair,  and 
Colonel  Blair.  I  made  out  about  six  pages  before  dinner, 
and  go  to  Lord  Gillies's  to  dine  with  a  good  conscienca  Hay 
Drummond  came  in,  and  discharged  a  volley  at  me  which 
Mons  Meg  could  hardly  have  equalled.  I  will  go  to  work 
with  Skene's  Journal.  My  head  aches  violently,  and  has 
done  so  several  days.  It  is  cold,  I  think. 

At  Lord  Gillies's  we  found  Sir  John  Dalrymple,  Lady 
Dalrymple,  and  Miss  Ferguson,  Mr.  Hope  Vere  of  Craigie- 
hall,  and  Lady  Elisabeth,  a  sister  of  Lord  Tweeddale,  Sir 
Eobert  O'Callaghan,  Captain  Cathcart,  and  others — a  gay 
party. 

Febriiary  19. — An  execrable  day — half  frost,  half  fresh, 
half  sleet,  half  rain,  and  wholly  abominable.  Having  made 
up  my  packet  for  the  printing-house,  and  performed  my  duty 
at  the  Court,  I  had  the  firmness  to  walk  round  by  the  North 
Bridge,  and  face  the  weather  for  two  miles,  by  way  of  exer- 
cise. Called  on  Skene,  and  saw  some  of  his  drawings  of 
Aix.  It  was  near  two  before  I  got  home,  and  now  I  hear 
three  strike ;  part  of  this  hour  has  been  consumed  in  a  sound 
sleep  by  the  fireside  after  putting  on  dry  things.  I  met 
Baron  Hume,1  and  we  praised  each  other's  hardihood  for 
daring  to  take  exercise  in  such  weather,  agreeing  that  if  a 
man  relax  the  custom  of  his  exercise  in  Scotland  for  a  bad 

the  revolution.    He  liked  the  idea  eighty-two.  He  had  filled  variousim- 

much,  and,  accordingly,  a  Journal  portant  situations  with  great  ability 

which  I  had  written  during  my  during   his  long    life -.—Sheriff  of 

residence    in    Provence,    with    a  BerwickandWestLothian,Professor 

volume  of  accompanying  drawings  of  Scots  Law  in  the  University,  and 

and  Papon's  History  of  Provence  afterwards  a  Baron  of  Exchequer, 

was  forthwith  sent  for,   and  the  which  latter  office  he  held  till  the 

whole    denouement    of    the    story  abolition  of  the  court  in  1830.    He 

of  Anne  of  Qeierstein  was  changed,  is  best  remembered  by  his  work 

and  the  Provence  part  woven  into  on  the  Criminal  Law  of  Scotland, 

it,  in  the  form  in  which  it  ulti-  published  in  1797.     He  bequeathed 

mately  came  forth. — Reminiscences,  his  uncle  the  historian's  correspond- 

1  This  learned  gentleman  died  in  ence  with  Rousseau  and  other  dis- 

his  house,  34  Moray  Place,  Edm-  tinguished  foreigners  to  the  Eoyal 

burgh,  on  the30th  August  1838,  aged  Society  of  Edinburgh. 


1829.]  JOUKNAL.  237 

day  lie  is  not  likely  to  resume  it  in  a  hurry.  The  other 
moiety  of  the  time  was  employed  in  looking  over  the 
MSmoires  de  Fauche-Sorel.1 

February  20. — The  Court  duly  took  me  up  from  eleven 
till  about  three,  hut  left  some  time  for  labour,  which  I 
employed  to  purpose,  at  least  I  hope  so.  I  declined  going  to 
the  exhibition  of  paintings  to-night ;  neither  the  beauties  of 
art  nor  of  nature  have  their  former  charms  for  me.  I 
finished,  however,  about  seven  pages  of  manuscript,  which  is 
a  fair  half  of  volume  HL  I  wish  I  could  command  a  little 
more  time  and  I  would  soon  find  you  something  or  other,  but 
the  plague  is  that  time  is  wanting  when  I  feel  an  aptitude 
to  work,  and  when  time  abounds,  the  will,  at  least  the  real 
efficient  power  of  the  faculties,  is  awanting.  Still,  however, 
we  make  way  by  degrees.  I  glanced  over  some  metrical 
romances  published  by  Hartshorne,  several  of  which  have  not 
seen  the  light.  They  are  considerably  curious,  but  I  was 
surprised  to  see  them  mingled  with  Manckefl&ur  and  Floras 
and  one  or  two  others  which  might  have  been  spared. 
There  is  no  great  display  of  notes  or  prolegomena,  and  there 
is,  moreover,  no  glossary.  But  the  work  is  well  edited.2 

February  21. — Colonel  Ferguson  breakfasted  with  us.  I 
was  detained  at  the  Parliament  House  till  the  hour  of  poor 
Mrs.  Ballantyne's  funeral,  then  attended  that  melancholy 
ceremony.  .The  husband  was  unable  to  appear ;  the  sight  of 
the  poor  children  was  piteous  enough.  James  Ballantyne  has 
taken  his  brother  Sandy  into  the  house,  I  mean  the  firm, 
about  which  there  had  formerly  been  some  misunderstanding. 

I  attended  the  Bannatyne  Club.  "We  made  a  very  good 
election,  bringing  in  Lord  Dalhousie  and  the  Lord  Clerk 
Register.8  Our  dinner  went  pretty  well  off,  but  I  have  seen 

1  Published  in  four  volumes,  8vo,  by  Rev.  C.  H.  Hartshorne.     8vo 

1829.   ffauche-Borel,anagentofthe  London,  1829. 

Bourbons,  had  just  died.    The  book  *  The     Bight    Hon.      William 

is  still  in  the  Abbotsford  library.  Dundas,  born  1762,  died  1845  ;  ap- 

3  Ancient  Metrical  Taks,  edited  pointed  Lord  Clerk  Register  in  1821. 


238  JOUBNAL.  [FEB. 

it  merrier.  To  be  sure  old  Dr.  J.,  like  an  immense  feather- 
bed, was  lurldng  me,  as  the  phrase  now  goes,  during  the 
whole  time.  I  am  sure  that  word  will  stick  in  the  language 
for  one  while. 

February  22. — Very  rheumatic.  I  e'en  turned  my  table 
to  the  fire  and  feagued  it  away,  as  Bayes  says.  Neither  did 
I  so  much  as  cast  my  eyes  round  to  see  what  sort  of  a  day  it 
was — the  splashing  on  the  windows  gave  all  information 
that  was  necessary.  Yet,  with  all  my  leisure,  during  the 
whole  day  I  finished  only  four  leaves  of  copy — somewhat  of 
the  least,  master  Matthew.1 

There  was  no  interruption  during  the  whole  day,  though 
the  above  is  a  poor  account  of  it 

February  23. — Up  and  at  it.  After  breakfast  Mr.  Hay 
Drummond  came  in  enchanted  about  Mons  Meg,2  and  roaring 
as  loud  as  she  could  have  done  for  her  life  when  she  was  in 
perfect  voice. 

James  Ballantyne  came  in,  to  my  surprise,  about  twelve 
o'clock.  He  was  very  serious,  and  spoke  as  if  he  had  some 
idea  of  sudden  and  speedy  death.  He  mentioned  that  he 
had  named  Cadell,  Cowan,  young  Hughes,  and  his  brother 
to  be  his  trustees  with  myself.  He  has  settled  to  go  to  the 
country,  poor  fellow,  to  Timpendean,  as  I  think. 

We  dined  at  Skene's,  where  we  met  Mr.  and  Mrs.  George 
Forbes,  Colonel  and  Mrs.  Blair,  George  Bell,  etc.  The  party 
was  a  pleasant  one.  Colonel  Blair  said,  that  during  the 
Battle  of  Waterloo  there  was  at  the  commencement  some 
trouble  necessary  to  prevent  the  men  from  breaking  their 
ranks.  He  expostulated  with  one  man:  "Why,  my  good 
fellow,  you  cannot  propose  to  beat  the  French  alone? — 
better  keep  your  ranks."  The  man,  who  was  one  of  the  71st, 
returned  to  his  ranks,  saying,  "I  believe  you  are  very  right, 

1  Ben  Jonson,  Every  Man  in  his     non,  see  ante,  vol.  i.   p.  43,  and 
ffumottr,  Act  i.  Sc.  4.  post,  pp.  247-8 ;  also  Life,  vol.  via. 

3  For  notices  of  this  gigantic  can-     pp.  86-87. 


1829,]  JOUENAL.  239 

sir,  but  I  am  a  man  of  very  Iwt  temper'9  There  was  much 
"bonhomie  in  the  reply. 

February  24. — Snowy  miserable  morning.  I  corrected 
my  proofs,  but  had  no  time  to  write  anything.  We,  i.e. 
myself  and  the  two  Annes,  went  to  breakfast  with  Mr. 
Drummond  Hay,  where  we  again  met  Colonel  and  Mrs. 
Blair,  with  Thomas  Thomson.  We  looked  over  some  most 
beautiful  drawings  *  which  Mrs.  Blair  had  made  in  different 
parts  of  India,  exhibiting  a  species  of  architecture  so  gorgeous, 
and  on  a  scale  so  extensive,  as  to  put  to  shame  the  magni- 
ficence of  Europe.  And  yet,  in  most  cases,  as  little  is  known 
of  the  people  who  wrought  these  wonders  as  of  the  kings 
who  built  the  Pyramids.  Fame  depends  on  literature,  not 
on  architecture.  We  are  more  eager  to  see  a  broken  column 
of  Cicero's  villa,  than  all  those  mighty  labours  of  barbaric 
power.  Mrs.  Blair  is  full  of  enthusiasm.  She  told  me  that 
when  she  worked  with  her  pencil  she  was  glad  to  have  some 
one  to  read  to  her  as  a  sort  of  sedative,  otherwise  her 
excitement  made  her  tremble,  and  burst  out  a-crying.  I 
can  understand  this  very  well,  having  often  found  the 
necessity  of  doing  two  things  at  once.  She  is  a  very  pretty, 
dark  woman  too,  and  has  been  compared  to  Eebecca,  daughter 
of  the  Jew,  Isaac  of  York. 

Detained  in  the  Court  till  half-past  two  bothering  about 
Lady  Essex  Kerr's  will  without  coining  to  a  conclusion.  I 
then  got  home  too  late  to  do  anything,  as  I  must  prepare  to 
go  to  Dalmalioy.  Mr.  Gibson  came  in  for  a  little  while; 
no  news. 

I  went  to  Dalmahoy,  where  we  were  most  kindly  received. 
It  is  a  point  of  friendship,  however,  to  go  eight  miles  to 
dinner  and  return  in  the  evening;  and  my  day  has  been  cut 
up  without  a  brush  of  work  Smoked  a  cigar  on  my  return, 
"being  very  cold. 

1  Some   of   these  fine  drawings     Tod's   Travels   in  Western   India. 
have  been   engraved   for   Colonel     Lond.,  4to,  1839.— J.  o.  L. 


240  JOURNAL.  [FEB^ 

February  25. — This  morning  I  corrected  my  proofs.  We 
get  on,  as  John  Ferguson  said  when  they  put  him  on  a 
hunter.  I  fear  there  is  too  much  historical  detail,  and 
the  catastrophe  will  be  vilely  huddled  up.  "  And  who  can 
help  it,  Dick  ? "  Visited  James  Ballantyne,  and  found  him 
bearing  his  distress  sensibly  and  like  a  man.  I  called  in 
at  CadelTs,  and  also  inquired  after  Lady  Jane  Stuart,  who  is 
complaining.  Three  o'clock  placed  me  at  home,  and  from 
that  hour  till  ten,  deduct  two  hours  for  dinner,  I  was  leaguing 
it  away. 

February  26. — Sent  off  ten  pages  this  morning,  with  a 
revise;  we  spy  land,  but  how  to  get  my  catastrophe  packed 
into  the  compass  allotted  for  it — 

"  It  sticks  like  a  pistol  half  out  of  its  holster, 
Or  rather  indeed  like  an  obstinate  bolster, 
Which  I  think  I  have  seen  you  attempting,  my  dear, 
In  vain  to  cram  into  a  small  pillowbeer." 

There  is  no  help  for  it — I  must  make  a  tow  deforce,  and 
annihilate  both  time  and  space.  Dined  at  home ;  neverthe- 
less made  small  progress.  But  I  must  prepare  my  dough 
before  I  can  light  my  oven.  I  would  fain  think  I  am  in  the 
right  road. 

February  27. — The  last  post  brought  a  letter  from  Mr. 
Heath,  proposing  to  set  off  his  engravings  for  the  Magmtm 
0]?u$  against  my  contributions  for  the  JEeepsake.  A  pretty 

mode  of  accounting  that  would  be ;  he  be .    I  wrote  him 

declining  his  proposal ;  and,  as  he  says  I  am  still  in  his 
debt,  I  will  send  him  the  old  drama  of  the  Souse  of  Aspen, 
which  I  wrote  some  thirty  years  ago,  and  offered  to  the  stage. 
This  will  make  up  my  contribution,  and  a  good  deal  more,, 
if,  as  I  recollect,  there  are  five  acts.  Besides,  it  will  save 
me  further  trouble  about  Heath  and  his  Annual.  Secondly, 
There  are  several  manuscript  copies  of  the  play  abroad,  and 
some  of  them  will  be  popping  out  one  of  these  days  in  a 
contraband  manner.  Thirdly,  If  I  am  right  as  to  the  length 


1829J  JOURNAL.  241 

of  the  piece,  there  is  £100  extra  work  at  least  which,  will 
not  be  evil  convenient  at  all 

Dined  at  Sir  John  Hay's  with  Bamsay  of  Barnton  and 
his  young  bride,  Sir  David  and  Lady  Hunter  Blair,  etc. 

I  should  mention  that  Cadell  breakfasted  with  me,  and 
entirely  approved  of  my  rejecting  Heath's  letter.  There  was 
one  funny  part  of  it,  in  which  he  assured  me  that  the  success 
of  the  new  edition  of  the  Wamrley  Novels  depended  entirely 
on  the  excellence  of  the  illustrations — voits  ffies  joaillier, 
Mbns.  Josse?-  He  touches  a  point  which  alarms  me;  he 
greatly  undervalues  the  portrait  which  Wilkie  has  proposed 
to  give  me  for  this  edition.  If  it  is  as  little  of  a  likeness  as 
he  says,  it  is  a  scrape.  But  a  scrape  be  it.  Wilkie  behaved 
in  the  kindest  way,  considering  his  very  bad  health,  in 
agreeing  to  work  for  me  at  all,  and  I  will  treat  him  with  due 
delicacy,  and  not  wound  his  feelings  by  rejecting  what  he 
has  given  in  such  kindness.2  And  so  farewell  to  Mr.  Heath, 
and  the  conceited  vulgar  Cockney  his  Editor. 

February  28. — Finished  my  proofs  this  morning,  and  read 
part  of  a  curious  work,  called  Memoirs  of  Vidocq  ;  a  fellow  who 
was  at  the  head  of  Bonaparte's  police.  It  is  a  pickaresque 
tale ;  in  other  words,  a  romance  of  roguery.  The  whole  seems 
much  exaggerated,  and  got  up ;  but  I  suppose  there  is  truth 
aufond.  I  came  home  about  two  o'clock,  and  wrought  hard 
and  fast  till  night 

1  Moliere,  IS  Amour  Mtdecin,  Act  shall  be  if  I  can  in  the  most  incon- 
L,  Sc.  1  (joaittier  for  orffrnre).  siderable  degree  assist  in  the  illus- 

2  The  following  extract  from  a  trations  of  the  great  work,  which 
letter  by  Wilkie  shows  how  will-  ™  all  hope  may  lighten  or  remove 
ingly  he  had  responded  to  Scott's  that  load  of  troubles  by  which  your 
request: noble  spirit  is  at  this  time  beset; 

7  TERRACE,  KENSINGTON,  considering  it  as  only  repaying  a 

LONDON,  Jan.  1829.  debt  of  obligation  which  you  your- 

"  DEAR  Sot  WALTER,-  -I  pass  over  self  have  laid  upon  me  when,  with 

all  those  disastrous  events  that  have  an  unseen  hand  in  the  Antiquary, 

arrived  to  us  both  since  our  last,  as  you  took  me  up  and  claimed  me,  the 

you  justly  call  it,  melancholy  part-  humble  painter  of  domestic  sorrow, 

ing,  to  assure  you  how  delighted  I  as  your  countryman. " 

VOL.  II.  Q 


MABCH, 

March  1. — I  laboured  hard  the  whole  day,  and,  between 
hands,  refreshed  myself  with  Vidocq's  Memoirs.  TSo  one 
called  except  Hay  Drmnmond,  who  had  something  to  say 
about  Mons  Meg.  So  I  wrote  before  and  after  dinner,  till 
no  less  than  ten  pages  were  finished. 

March  2. — I  wrought  but  little  to-day,  I  was  not  in  the 
vein,  and  felt  sleepy.  I  thought  to  go  out,  but  disgust  of 
the  pavement  kept  me  at  home,  0  rus,  etc.  It  is  pleasant  to 
think  that  the  1 1th  March  sets  us  on  the  route  for  Abbotsford. 
I  shall  be  done  long  before  with  this  confounded  novel.  I 
wish  I  were,  for  I  find  trouble  in  bringing  it  to  a  conclusion. 
People  compliment  me  sometimes  on  the  extent  of  my 
labour;  but  if  I  could  employ  to  purpose  the  hours  that 
indolence  and  lassitude  steal  away  from  me,  they  would 
have  cause  to  wonder  indeed.  But  day  must  have  night, 
vigilance  must  have  sleep,  and  labour,  bodily  or  mental, 
must  have  rest.  As  Edgar  says,  I  cannot  fool  it  further.1 
Anne  is  gone  to  Hopetoun  House  for  two  days. 

Dined  at  the  Eoyal  Society  Club,  and  went  to  the  Society 
in  the  evening. 

March  3. — Began  tjiis  day  with  labour  as  usual,  and 
made  up  my  packet.  Then  to  the  Court,  where  there  is  a 
deal  of  business,  Hamilton,  having  now  a  serious  fit  of  the 
gout,  is  not  expected  to  aid  any  more  this  season.  I  wrote 
a  little  both  before  and  after  dinner.  Niece  Anne  and  I 
dined  alone.  Three  poets  called,  each  bawling  louder  than 

1  See  Lear,  Act  iv.  Sc.  1. 

242 


1829.]  JOURNAL.  243 

the  other — subscribe,  subscribe  I  I  generally  do,  if  the  work 
be  under  10s. ;  but  the  wares  were  every  one  so  much  worse 
than  another,  that  I  declined  in  the  three  instances  before 
me.  I  got  cross  at  the  repeated  demands,  and  could  have 
used  Richard's  apology — 

"  Thou  troubFst  me  :  I  am  not  in  the  vein."  * 

March  4 — Being  Teind  Wednesday,  I  settled  myself  at 
my  desk  and  laboured  the  whole  forenoon.  Got  on  to  page 
seventy-two,  so  there  cannot  be  more  than  twenty  pages 
wanted.  Mr.  Drummond  Hay,  who  has  an  alertness  in 
making  business  out  of  nothing,  came  to  call  once  more  about 
Mons  Meg.  He  is  a  good-humoured  gentlemanlike  man,  but 
I  would  Meg  were  in  his  belly  or  he  in  hers.  William 
Laidlaw  also  called,  whom  I  asked  to  dinner.  At  four 
o'clock  arrives  Mr.  Oadell,  with  his  horn  charged  with  good 
news.  The  prospectus  of  the  Magnum,  already  issued  only 
a  week,  has  produced  such  a  demand  among  the  trade,  that 
he  thinks  he  must  add  a  large  number  of  copies,  that  the 
present  edition  of  7000  may  be  increased  to  the  demand ; 
he  talks  of  raising  it  to  10,000  or  12,000.  If  so,  I  shall  have 
a  constant  income  to  bear  on  my  unfortunate  debts  to  a 
large  amount  yearly,  and  may  fairly  hope  to  put  them  in  a 
secure  way  of  payment,  even  if  I  should  be  cut  off  in  life,  or 
in  health,  and  the  power  of  labour.  I  hope  to  be  able,  in  a 
year  or  two,  to  make  proposals  for  eating  with  my  own 
spoons,  and  using  my  own  books,  which,  if  I  can  give  value 
for  them,  can  hardly,  I  think,  be  refused  to  me.2  In  the 
meantime  I  have  enough,  and  something  to  bequeath  to  my 
poor  children.  This  is  a  great  mercy,  but  I  must  prepare 
for  disappointment,  and  I  will  not  be  elated. 

Laidlaw  dined  with  me,  and,  poor  fellow,  was  as  much 
elated  with  the  news  as  I  am,  for  it  is  not  of  a  nature  to 
be  kept  secret.  I  hope  I  shall  have  him  once  more  at 

1  Richard  IIL,  Act  iv.  Sc.  2.  from  Sir  Walter,  dated  Dec.  18ti, 

2  See   letter   to   George  Forbes     1830.— Life,  voL  x.  pp.  19-20. 


244  JOUKNAL.  [MABCH 

JSLaeside  to  debate,  as  we  used  to  do,  on  religion  and  politics. 
Meanwhile,  patience,  cousin,  and  shuffle  the  cards. 

I  must  do  what  I  can  to  get  CadelTs  discharge  from  his 
creditors ;  this  I  have  always  done,  and  so  far  effectually,  but 
it  would  be  most  inconvenient  to  be  at  the  mercy  of  creditors 
who  may  at  any  moment  make  inquiry  into  his  affairs 
and  so  stop  his  operations.  The  Old  Bank  of  Scotland  are 
the  only  parties  whose  consent  has  not  been  obtained  to  his 
discharge,  and  they  must  see  their  interest  in  consenting  to 
it  for  the  expediting  of  my  affairs ;  since  to  what  purpose 
oppose  it,  for  they  have  not  the  least  chance  of  mending 
their  own  by  refusing  it. 

March  5. — Proofs  arranged  in  the  morning.  Sir  Patrick 
Walker,  that  Solomon  the  second,  came  to  propose  to  me  that 
some  benefit  society,  which  he  patronises,  should  attend  upon 
Mons  Meg;  but,  with  the  Celts  at  my  disposal,  I  have  every 
reason  to  think  they  would  be  affronted  at  being  marched 
along  with  Sir  Peter  and  his  tail  of  trades'  lads.  I  went  to 
the  Court,  which  detained  me  till  two,  then  to  poor  old  Lady 
Seaforth's  funeral,1  which  was  numerously  attended.  It 
was  near  four  ere  I  got  home,  bringing  Skene  with  me.  We 
called  at  CadelTs ;  the  edition  of  the  Magnum  is  raised  from 
7000  to  10,000.  There  will  really  be  a  clearance  in  a  year 
or  two  if  E.  C.  is  not  too  sanguine.  I  never  saw  so  much 
reason  for  indulging  hope.  By  the  bye,  I  am  admitted  a 
member  of  the  Maitland  Club,  a  Society  on  the  principle  of 
the  Eoxburghe  and  Bannatyne.  What  a  tail  of  the  alphabet 
I  should  draw  after  me  were  I  to  sign  with  the  indications 
of  the  different  societies  I  belong  to,  beginning  with  President 
of  the  Eoyal  Society  of  Edinburgh,  and  ended  with  umpire 
of  the  Six-foot-high  Club ! 2  Dined  at  home,  and  in  quiet, 
with  the  girls. 

2  Widow  of  Francis,  Lord  Sea-  a  A  sportive  association  of  young 

forth,  last  Baron  of  Kintail,  and  athletes.     Hogg,  I  think,  was  their 

mother  of  the  Hon.  Mrs,  Stewart  Poet  Laureate.— J.  a  L. 
Mackenzie. 


1829.]  JOUENAL.  245 

March  6. — Made  some  considerable  additions  to  the 
Appendix  to  General  Preface.  I  am  in  the  sentiments 
towards  the  public  that  the  buffoon  player  expresses  towards 
his  patron — 

kC  Go  tell  my  young  lord,  said  this  modest  young  man, 

If  lie  will  but  invite  me  to  dinner, 
I'll  be  as  diverting  as  ever  I  can — 
I  will,  on  the  faith  of  a  sinner." 

I  will  multiply  the  notes,  therefore,  when  there  is  a  chance 
of  giving  pleasure  and  variety.  There  is  a  stronger  gleam 
of  hope  on  my  affairs  than  has  yet  touched  on  them ;  it  is 
not  steady  or  certain,  but  it  is  bright  and  conspicuous.  Ten 
years  may  last  with  me,  though  I  have  little  chance  of  it. 
At  the  end  of  this  time  these  works  will  have  operated  a 
clearance  of  debt,  especially  as  Cadell  offers  to  accommodate 
with  such  money  as  'their  house  can  save  to  pay  off  what 
presses.  I  hope  to  save,  rather  than  otherwise,  and  if  I 
leave  my  literary  property  to  my  children,  it  will  make  a 
very  good  thing  for  them,  and  Abbotsford  must  in  any  event 
go  to  my  family,  so,  on  the  whole,  I  have  only  to  pray  for 
quiet  times,  for  how  can  men  mind  their  serious  business — 
that  is,  according  to  CadelTs  views — buying  Wamrley  Novels 
when  they  are  going  mad  about  the  Catholic  question* 
Dined  at  Mr.  STairne's,  where  there  was  a  great  meeting  of 
Bannatynians,  rather  too  numerous,  being  on  the  part  of 
our  host  an  Election  dinner. 

March  7. — Sent  away  proofs.  This  extrication  of  my 
affairs,  though  only  a  Pisgah  prospect,  occupies  my  mind 
more  than  is  fitting;  but  without  some  such  hope  I  must 
have  felt  like  one  of  the  victims  of  the  wretch  Burke, 
struggling  against  a  smothering  weight  on  my  bosom,  till 
nature  could  endure  it  no  longer.  No ;  I  will  not  be  the 
sport  of  circumstances.  Come  of  it  what  will,  "  I  '11  bend 
my  brows  like  Highland  trows"  and  make  a  bold  fight 
of  it 


246  JOURNAL.  [MARCH 

|C  The  best  o't,  the  warst  o't, 
Is  only  just  to  die."  x 

And  die  I  think  I  shall,  though  I  am  not  such  a  coward 
as  mortem  conscire  me  ipso.  But  I  'gin  to  grow  aweary  of 
the  sun,  and  when  the  plant  no  longer  receives  nourish- 
ment from  light  and  air,  there  is  a  speedy  prospect  of  its 
withering. 

Dined  with  the  Banking  Club  of  Scotland,  in  virtue 
of  Sir  Malachi  Malagrowther ;  splendid  entertainment,  of 
course.  Sir  John  Hay  in  the  chair. 

March  8. — Spent  the  morning  in  reading  proofs  and  ad- 
ditions to  Magnum.  I  got  a  note  from  Oadell,  in  which 
Ballantyne,  by  a  letter  enclosed,  totally  condemns  Anne  of 
G-ei&rstein — three  volumes  nearly  finished — a  pretty  thing, 
truly,  for  I  will  be  expected  to  do  it  all  over  again.  Great 
dishonour  in  this,  as  Trinculo  says,2  besides  an  infinite  loss. 
Sent  for  Cadell  to  attend  me  next  morning  that  we  may 
consult  about  this  business.  Peel  has  made  his  motion  on 
the  Catholic  question,  with  a  speech  of  three  hours.  It  is 
almost  a  complete  surrender  to  the  Catholics,  and  so  it 
should  be,  for  half  measures  do  but  linger  out  the  feud. 
This  will,  or  rather  ought  to,  satisfy  all  men  who  sincerely 
love  peace,  and  therefore  all  men  of  property.  But  will  this 
satisfy  Pat,  who,  with  all  his  virtues,  is  certainly  not  the 
most  sensible  person  in  the  world?  Perhaps  not;  and  if 
not,  it  is  but  fighting  them  at  last.  I  smoked  away,  and 
thought  of  ticklish  politics  and  bad  novels.  Skene  supped 
with  us. 

March  9. — Cadell  came  to  breakfast.  We  resolved  in 

Privy  Council  to  refer  the  question  whether  Anne  of  ff n 

be  sea-worthy  or  not  to  further  consideration,  which,  as  the 

1  Mair  spier  na,  no  fear  na, 

Auld  age  ne'er  mind  A  feg ; 
The  last  o't,  the  warst  o't, 
Is  only  for  to  beg.— BURNS'S  Ep.  to  Davie. 

2  Tempest,  Act  iv,  Sc.  1.  (Stephano). 


1829.]  JOURNAL.  247 

book  cannot  be  published,  at  any  rate,  during  the  full  rage 
of  the  Catholic  question,  may  be  easily  managed.  After 
breakfast  I  -went  to  Sir  William  Arbuthnot's,1  and  met  there 
a  select  party  of  Tories,  to  decide  whether  -we  should  act 
with  the  Whigs  by  owning  their  petition  in  favour  of  the 
Catholics.  I  was  not  free  from  apprehension  that  the  petition 
might  be  put  into  such  general  language  as  I,  at  least,  was  un- 
willing to  authenticate  by  my  subscription.  The  Solicitor2 
was  voucher  that  they  would  keep  the  terms  quite  general ; 
whereupon  we  subscribed  the  requisition  for  a  meeting,  with 
a  slight  alteration,  affirming  that  it  was  our  desire  not  to 
have  intermeddled,  had  not  the  anti-Catholics  pursued  that 
course ;  and  so  the  Whigs  and  we  are  embarked  in  the  same 
boat,  wgue  la  galere. 

Went  about  one  o'clock  to  the  Castle,  where  we  saw  the 
auld  murderess  Mons  Meg  brought  up  there  in  solemn  pro- 
cession to  reoccupy  her  ancient  place  on  the  Ajgyle  battery. 
Lady  Hopetoun  was  my  belle.  The  day  was  cold  but  serene, 
and  I  think  the  ladies  must  have  been  cold  enough,  not  to 
mention  the  Celts,  who  turned  out  upon  the  occasion,  under 
the  leading  of  Cluny  Macpherson,  a  fine  spirited  lad.  Mons 
Meg  is  a  monument  of  our  pride  and  poverty.  The  size  is 
immense,  but  six  smaller  guns  would  have  been  made  at 
the  same  expense,  and  done  six  times  as  much  execution  as 
she  could  have  done.  There  was  immense  interest  taken  in 
the  show  by  the  people  of  the  town,  and  the  numbers  who 
crowded  the  Castle-hill  had  a  magnificent  appearance. 
About  thirty  of  our  Celts  attended  in  costume ;  and  as  there 
was  a  Highland  regiment  on  duty,  with  dragoons  and 
artillerymen,  the  whole  made  a  splendid  show.  The 

1  This  gentleman  was  a  favourite  prised  him  by  proposing  Ms  health 

with  Sir  Walter—a  special  point  of  at  the  civic  banquet  in  the  Parlia- 

commttnion  being  the  antiquities  of  ment    House,    as    "Sir    William 

the  British  drama.    He  was  Provost  Arbuthnot,  Baronet." — J.  G.  L. 

of  Edinburgh  in  1816-17,  and  again  2  John   Hope,  afterwards    Lord 

in  1822,  and  the  king  gracefully  sur-  Justice-Clerk. 


248  JOUBNAL.  [MAHCH 

dexterity  with  which  the  last  manned  and  wrought  the 
windlass  which  raised  old  Meg,  weighing  seven  or  eight 
tons,  from  her  temporary  carriage  to  that  which  has  been 
her  basis  for  many  years,  was  singularly  beautiful  as  a 
combined  exhibition  of  skill  and  strength.  My  daughter 
had  what  might  have  proved  a  frightful  accident.  Some 
rockets  were  let  off,  one  of  which  lighted  upon  her  head, 
and  set  her  bonnet  on  fire.  She  neither  screamed  nor  ran, 
but  quietly  permitted  Charles  K.  Sharpe  to  extinguish  the 
fire,  which  he  did  with  great  coolness  and  dexterity.  All 
who  saw  her,  especially  the  friendly  Celts,  gave  her  merit 
for  her  steadiness,  and  said  she  came  of  good  blood.  I  was 
very  glad  and  proud  of  her  presence  of  mind.  My  own 
courage  was  not  put  to  the  test,  for  being  at  some  distance, 
escorting  the  beautiful  and  lively  Countess  of  Hopetoun,  I 
did  not  hear  of  the  accident  till  it  was  over.  We  lunched 
with  the  regiment  (73d)  now  in  the  Castle.  The  little  en- 
tertainment gave  me  an  opportunity  of  observing  what  I 
have  often  before  remarked — the  improvement  in  the  char- 
acter of  the  young  and  subaltern  officers  in  the  army,  which 
in  the  course  of  a  long  and  bloody  war  had  been,  in  point 
of  rank  and  manners,  something  deteriorated.  The  number 
of  persons  applying  for  commissions  (3000  being  now  on 
the  lists)  gives  an  opportunity  of  selection,  and  officers 
should  certainly  be  gentlemen,  with  a  complete  opening  to 
all  who  can  rise  by  merit.  The  style  in  which  duty,  and  the 
knowledge  of  their  prof ession,  is  enforced,  prevents  faineants 
from  long  remaining  in  the  profession. 

In  the  evening  I  presided  at  the  Celtic  Club,  who  re- 
ceived me  with  their  usual  partiality.  I  like  this  society, 
and  willingly  give  myself  to  be  excited  by  the  sight  of  hand- 
some young  men  with  plaids  and  claymores,  and  all  the 
alertness  and  spirit  of  Highlanders  in  their  native  garb. 
There  was  the  usual  degree  of  excitation — excellent  dancing, 
capital  songs,  a  general  inclination  to  please  and  to  be 


1829.]  JOURNAL.  249 

pleased.  A  severe  cold,  caught  on  the  battlements  of  the 
Castle,  prevented  me  from  playing  first  fiddle  so  well  as 
usual,  but  what  I  could  do  was  received  with  the  usual 
partiality  of  the  Celts.  I  got  home,  fatigued  and  vino 
yravatus,  about  eleven  o'clock.  We  had  many  guests,  some 
of  whom,  English  officers,  seemed  both  amused  and  surprised 
at  our  wild  ways,  especially  at  the  dancing  without  ladies, 
and  the  mode  of  drinking  favourite  toasts,  by  springing  up 
with  one  foot  on  the  bench  and  one  on  the  table,  and  the 
peculiar  shriek  of  applause  so  unlike  English  cheering. 

March  10. — This  may  be  a  short  day  in  the  diary,  though 
a  busy  one  to  me.  I  arranged  books  and  papers  in  the 
morning,  and  went  to  Court  after  breakfast,  where,  as  Sir 
Eobert  Dundas  and  I  had  the  whole  business  to  discharge,  I 
remained  till  two  or  three.  Then  visited  Cadell,  and  trans- 
acted some  pecuniary  matters. 

March  11,  [Afibotsford]. — I  had,  as  usual,  a  sort  of  levde 
the  day  I  was  to  leave  town,  all  petty  bills  and  petty  business 
being  reserved  to  the  last  by  those  who  might  as  well  have 
applied  any  one  day  of  the  present  month.  But  I  need  not 
complain  of  what  happens  to  my  betters,  for  on  the  last  day 
of  the  Session  there  pours  into  the  Court  a  succession  of 
trifles  which  give  the  Court,  and  especially  the  Clerks,  much 
trouble,  insomuch  that  a  ci-devant  brother  of  mine  pro- 
posed that  the  last  day  of  the  Session  should  be  abolished 
by  Statute.  "We  got  out  of  Court  at  a  quarter-past  one,  and 
got  to  Abbotsford  at  half-past  seven,  cold  and  hungry 
enough  to  make  Scots  broth,  English  roast  beef,  and  a  large 
fire  very  acceptable. 

March  12. — I  set  apart  this  day  for  trifles  and  dawd- 
ling •  yet  I  meditate  doing  something  on  the  Popish 
and  Protestant  affray.  I  think  I  could  do  some  good, 
and  I  have  the  sincere  wish  to  do  it.  I  heard  the 
merry  birds  sing,  reviewed  my  dogs,  and  was  cheerful  I 
also  unpacked  books.  Deuce  take  arrangement!  I  think 


250  JOUEKA.L.  [MARCH 

it  the  most  complete  tore  in  the  world ;  but  I  will  try  a 
little  of  it.  I  afterwards  went  out  and  walked  till  dinner- 
time. I  read  Eeginald  Heber's  Journal1  after  dinner.  I 
spent  some  merry  days  with  him  at  Oxford  when  he  was 
writing  his  prize  poem.  He  was  then  a  gay  young  fellow, 
a  wit,  and  a  satirist,  and  burning  for  literary  fame.  My 
laurels  were  beginning  to  bloom,  and  we  were  both  madcaps. 
Who  would  have  foretold  our  future  lot  ? 
"  Oh,  little  did  my  mither  ken 

The  day  she  cradled  me 
The  land  I  was  to  travel  in, 

Or  the  death  I  was  to  die."  2 

March,  13. — Wrought  at  a  review  of  Eraser  Tytler's 
History  of  Scotland.  It  is  somewhat  saucy  towards  Lord 
Hailes.  I  had  almost  stuck  myself  into  the  controversy 
Slough  of  Despond — the  controversy,  that  is,  between  the 
Gothic  and  Celtic  system — but  cast  myself,  like  Christian, 
with  a  strong  struggle  or  two  to  the  further  side  of  this  Slough; 
and  now  will  I  walk  on  my  way  rejoicing — not  on  my  article, 
however,  but  to  the  fields.  Came  home  and  rejoiced  at  dinner. 
After  tea  I  worked  a  little  more.  I  began  to  warm  in  my 
gear,  and  am  about  to  awake  the  whole  controversy  of  Goth 
and  Celt.  I  wish  I  may  not  make  some  careless  blunders.3 

March  14. — Up  at  eight,  rather  of  the  latest — then  fagged 
at  my  review,  both  before  and  after  breakfast.  I  walked 
from  one  o'clock  till  near  three.  I  make  it  out,  I  think, 
rather  better  than  of  late  I  have  been  able  to  do  in  the 
streets  of  Edinburgh,  where  I  am  ashamed  to  walk  so  slow 
as  would  suit  me.  Indeed  nothing  but  a  certain  suspicion, 
that  once  drawn  up  on  the  beach  I  would  soon  break  up, 
prevents  me  renouncing  pedestrian  exercises  altogether, 
for  it  is  positive  suffering,  and  of  an  acute  kind  too. 

1  Narrative  of  a  Journey  through  letter  to  Mrs.  Dunlop  regarding 

the  Upper  Provinces  of  India,  2  Falconer,  author  of  The  Shipwreck. 

vols.  4to,  1828.  —Carrie's  Bums,  vol.  ii.  p.  290. 

3  Old  Ballad  (known  as  "  Marie  *  See  Quart.  Rw.>  Nov.  1829,  or 

Hamilton")  quoted  by  Burns  in  a  Misc.  Prose  Worto,  xxi.  152-198. 


1829.]  JOUENAL.  251 

March  15. — Altogether  like  yesterday.  Wrote  in  the 
morning — breakfasted — wrote  again  till  one — out  and  walked 
about  two  hours — to  the  quills  once  more — dinner — smoked 
a  brace  of  cigars  and  looked  on  the  fire — a  page  of  writing, 
and  so  to  bed. 

March  16. — Day  sullen  and  bitter  cold.  I  fear  it  brings 
chilblains  on  its  wings.  A  dusting  of  snow,  in  thin  flakes, 
wandering  from  the  horizon,  and  threatening  a  serious  fall 
As  the  murderer  says  to  Banquo,  "  Let  it  come  down ! " — we 
shall  have  the  better  chance  of  fair  weather  hereafter.  It 
cleared  up,  however,  and  I  walked  from  one,  or  thereabout, 
till  within  a  quarter  of  four.  A  card  from  Mr.  Dempster 
of  Skibo,1  whose  uncle,  George  Dempster,  I  knew  many 
years  since,  a  friend  of  Johnson,  Sir  Joshua  Reynolds,  and 
all  that  set — a  fine  good-humoured  old  gentleman.  Young 
Mrs.  Dempster  is  a  daughter  of  my  early  friend  and  patron, 
Kobert  Dundas  of  Arniston,  Lord  Advocate,  and  I  like  her 
for  his  sake.  Mr.  Dempster  is  hunting,  and  I  should  have 
liked  to  have  given  his  wife  and  sister  refuge  during  the 
time  he  must  spend  over  moss  and  moor.  But  the  two 
Annes  going  to  Edinburgh  to  a  fancy  ball  makes  it  im- 
possible till  they  return  on  Friday  night. 

March  17. — The  Annes  went  off  at  eight,  morning. 
After  breakfast  I  drove  down  to  Melrose  and  waited  on 
Mrs.  and  Miss  Dempster,  and  engaged  them  for  Saturday. 
Weather  bitter  cold;  yea,  atrociously  so.  Kaboclish — the 
better  for  work.  Ladies  whose  husbands  love  fox-hunting 
are  in  a  poor  way.  Here  are  two  pleasant  and  pretty  women 
pegged  up  the  whole  day 

"  In  the  worst  inn's  worst  room  "  2 


1  George  Dempster  of  Skibo,  one  home  at  Ormiston,  where,  in  the 

of  the  few  men  connecting  Scott  old  mansion-house,  rich   in   asso- 

with  this  generation,  died  in  Edin-  eiations   of   Knox,    Wishart,    and 

burgh  on  the  6th  of  February  1889.  Buchanan,  he  was  the  gracious  host 

This  accomplished  Scottish  gentle-  to  a  large  circle  of  friends. 

man  had  for  many  years  made  his  3  Pope's  Moral  Essays,  iii. 


252  JOUBNAL.  [MARCH 

for  the  whole  twenty-four  hours  without  interruption.  They 
manage  the  matter  otherwise  in  Trance,  where  ladies  are 
the  lords  of  the  ascendant.  I  returned  from  my  visit  to  my 
solitary  work  and  solitary  meal.  I  eked  out  the  last  two 
hours'  length  by  dint  of  smoking,  which  I  find  a  sedative 
without  being  a  stimulant. 

March  18. — I  like  the  hermit  life  indifferent  well,  nor 
would,  I  sometimes  think,  break  my  heart,  were  I  to  be  in 
that  magic  mountain  where  food  was  regularly  supplied 
by  ministering  genii,1  and  plenty  of  books  were  accessible 
without  the  least  intervention  of  human  society.  But  this 
is  thinking  like  a  fool  Solitude  is  only  agreeable  when  the 
power  of  having  society  is  removed  to  a  short  space,  and  can 
be  commanded  at  pleasure.  "  It  is  not  good  for  man  to  be 
alone."  It  blunts  our  faculties  and  freezes  our  active  virtues. 
And  now,  my  watch  pointing  to  noon,  I  think  after  four 
hours'  work  I  may  indulge  myself  with  a  walk.  The  dogs 
see  me  about  to  shut  my  desk,  and  intimate  their  happiness 
by  caresses  and  whining.  By  your  leave,  Messrs.  Genii  of 
the  Mountain  library,  if  I  come  to  your  retreat  I  '11  bring 
my  dogs  with  me. 

The  day  was  showery,  but  not  unpleasant — soft  dropping 
rains,  attended  by  a  mild  atmosphere,  that  spoke  of  flowers 
in  their  seasons,  and  a  chirping  of  birds  that  had  a  touch 
of  Spring  in  it.  I  had  the  patience  to  get  fully  wet,  and 
the  grace  to  be  thankful  for  it. 

Come!  a  leetle  flourish  on  the  trumpet.  Let  us  rouse 
the  genius  of  this  same  red  mountain,  so  called  because  it 
is  all  the  year  covered  with  roses.  There  can  be  no  diffi- 
culty in  finding  it,  for  it  lies  towards  the  Caspian,  and  is 
quoted  in  the  Persian  tales.  Well,  I  open  my  Ephemerides, 
form  my  scheme  under  the  suitable  planet,  and  the  genie 
obeys  the  invocation  and  appears. 

Genie  is  a  misshapen  dwarf,  with  a  huge  jolter-head  like 

1  Ante,  vol.  i.  p.  312,  n. 


1829.]  JOURNAL.  253 

that  of  Boerhave  on  the  Bridge,1  his  limbs  and  body  mar- 
vellously shrunk  and  disproportioned. 

"  Sir  Dwarf,"  said  I,  undauntedly, "  thy  head  is  very  large, 
and  thy  feet  and  limbs  somewhat  small  in  proportion/' 

Genie.  "I  have  crammed  my  head,  even  to  the  over- 
flowing, with  knowledge ;  I  have  starved  my  limbs  by  disuse 
of  exercise  and  denial  of  sustenance ! " 

Author.    "  Can  I  acquire  wisdom  in  thy  solitary  library  ?  " 

G.    "Thoumayest!" 

A.     "  On  what  conditions  ?  " 

G.  "  Eenounce  all  gross  and  fleshly  pleasure,  eat  pulse 
and  drink  water,  converse  with  none  but  the  wise  and 
learned,  alive  and  dead !" 

A.  "Why,  this  were  to  die  in  the  cause  of  wis- 
dom." 

G.  "If  you  desire  to  draw  from  our  library  only  the 
advantage  of  seeming  wise,  you  may  have  it  consistent  with 
all  your  favourite  enjoyments ! " 

A.    "  How  much  sleep  ? " 

G.     "  A  Lapland  night — eight  months  out  of  the  twelve!" 

A.  "Enough  for  a  dormouse,  most  generous  Genius. — 
A  bottle  of  wine  ?  " 

G.  "Two,  if  you  please;  but  you  must  not  seem  to 
care  for  them — cigars  in  loads,  whisky  in  lashings ;  but  they 
must  be  taken  with  an  air  of  contempt,  a  flocdpaudnihiU- 
pMfaation  of  all  that  can  gratify  the  outward  man." 

A.  "I  am  about  to  ask  you  a  serious  question — When 
you  have  stuffed  your  stomach,  drunk  your  bottle,  smoked 
your  cigar,  how  are  you  to  keep  yourself  awake  ?" 

G.    "  Either  by  cephalic  snuff  or  castle-building ! " 

1  Mr.  Lockhart  says,  writing  in  bust  in  question  -was  once  dis- 
1839:— "This  head  may  still  be  lodged  by  'Colonel  Grogg*  and 
seen  over  a  laboratory  at  No.  100  some  of  his  companions,  and  wag- 
South  Bridge,  Edinburgh.  [It  has  gishly  placed  in  a  very  inappro- 
since  been  removed.]  N. B.  There  priate  position. " 
is  a  tradition  that  the  venerable 


254  JOUKNAL.  [MARCH 

A.  "Do  you  approve  of  castle-building  as  a  frequent 
exercise  ? " 

6r.     "  Life  were  not  life  without  it ! 

*  Give  me  the  joy  that  sickens  not  the  heart, 
Give  me  the  wealth  that  has  no  wings  to  fly.3 " 

A.  "  I  reckon  myself  one  of  the  best  aerial  architects 
now  living,  and  nil  me  p&nitet  liujus " 

G.  "  Nee  e$t  cur  te  pceniteat ;  most  of  your  novels  have 
previously  been  subjects  for  airy  castles." 

A.  "You  have  me — and  moreover  a  man  of  ima- 
gination derives  experience  from  such  imaginary  situa- 
tions. There  are  few  situations  in  which  I  have  not  in 
fancy  figured,  and  there  are  few,  of  course,  which  I  am  not 
previously  prepared  to  take  some  part  in." 

Gf.  "True,  but  I  am  afraid  your  having  fancied  yourself 
victorious  in  many  a  fight  would  be  of  little  use  were  you 
suddenly  called  to  the  field,  and  your  personal  infirmities 
and  nervous  agitations  both  rushing  upon  you  and  incapaci- 
tating you." 

A.  "  My  nervous  agitations ! — away  with  thee !  Down, 
down  to  Limbo  and  the  burning  lake !  False  fiend,  avoid ! ' 

So  there  ends  the  tale, 
With  a  hey,  with  a  hoy, 
So  there  ends  the  tale, 

"With  a  ho. 

There  is  a  moral.    If  you  fail 
To  seize  it  by  the  tail, 
Its  import  will  exhale, 
You  must  know. 

MarcJi  19. — The  above  was  written  yesterday  before 
dinner,  though  appearances  are  to  the  contrary.  I  only 
meant  that  the  studious  solitude  I  have  sometimes  dreamed 
of,  unless  practised  with  rare  stoicism  and  pjivation,  was 
apt  to  degenerate  into  secret  sensual  indulgences  of  coarser 
appetites,  which,  when  the  cares  and  restraints  of  social 
life  are  removed,  are  apt  to  make  us  think,  with  Dr. 


1829.]  JOUEJSTAL.  255 

Johnson,  our  dinner  the  most  important  event  of  the  day. 
So  much  in  the  way  of  explanation — a  humour  which  I 
love  not.  Go  to. 

My  girls  returned  from  Edinburgh  with  full  news  of 
their  fial  par& 

March  20. — We  spent  this  day  on  the  same  terms  as 
formerly.  I  wrought,  walked,  dined,  drank,  and  smoked 
upon  the  same  pattern. 

March  21. — To-day  brought  Mrs.  Dempster  and  her 
sister-in-law.  To  dinner  came  Robert  Dundas  of  Arniston 
from  the  hunting-field,  and  with  him  Mr.  Dempster  of 
Skibo,  both  favourites  of  mine.  Mr.  Stuart,  the  grand- 
nephew  of  my  dear  friend  Lady  Louisa,  also  dined  with 
us,  together  with  the  Lyons  from  G-attonside,  and  the  day 
passed  over  in  hospitality  and  social  happiness. 

March  22. — Being  Sunday,  I  read  prayers  to  our  guests, 
then  went  a  long  walk  by  the  lake  to  Huntly  Burn.  It  is 
somewhat  uncomfortable  to  feel  difficulties  increase  and 
the  strength  to  meet  them  diminish.  But  why  should  man 
fret  ?  While  iron  is  dissolved  by  rust,  and  brass  corrodes, 
can  our  dreams  be  of  flesh  and  blood  enduring  ?  But  I  will 
not  dwell  on  this  depressing  subject.  My  liking  to  my 
two  young  guests  is  founded  on  "  things  that  are  long  enough 
ago."  The  first  statesman  of  celebrity  whom  I  personally 
knew  was  Mr.  Dempster's  grand-uncle,  George  Dempster 
of  Dunnichen,  celebrated  in  his  time,  and  Dundas's  father 
was,  when  Lord  Advocate,  the  first  man  of  influence  who 
showed  kindness  to  me. 

March  23. — Arrived  to  breakfast  one  of  the  Courland 
nobility,  Baron  A.  von  Meyersdorff,  a  fine,  lively,  spirited 
young  man,  fond  of  his  country  and  incensed  at  its  degrada- 
tion under  Russia,  He  talked  much  of  the  orders  of  chivalry 
who  had  been  feudal  lords  of  Livonia,  especially  the  order 
of  Porte  Glaive,  to  which  his  own  ancestors  had  belonged. 
If  he  report  correctly,  there  is  a  deep  principle  of  action  at 


256  JOUKNAL.  [MARCH 

work  in  Germany,  Poland,  Eussia,  etc.,  which,  if  it  does 
"not  die  in  thinking,"  will  one  day  make  an  explosion. 
The  Germans  are  a  nation,  however,  apt  to  exhaust  them- 
selves in  speculation.  The  Baron  has  enthusiasm,  and  is 
well  read  in  English  and  foreign  literature.  I  kept  my  state 
till  one,  and  wrote  notes  to  Croker  upon  Boswell's  Scottish 
tour.  It  was  an  act  of  friendship,  for  time  is  something 
of  a  scarce  article  with  me.  But  Croker  has  been  at 
all  times  personally  kind  and  actively  serviceable  to  me, 
and  he  must  always  command  my  best  assistance.  Then 
I  walked  with  the  Baron  as  far  as  the  Lake.  Our 
sportsmen  came  in  good  time  to  dinner,  and  our  afternoon 
was  pleasant. 

March  24. — This  morning  our  sportsmen  took  leave,  and 
their  ladyTdnd  (to  renMrir  on  Anthony  a-Wood  and  Mr. 
Oldbuck)  followed  after  breakfast,  and  I  went  to  my  work 
till  one,  and  at  that  hour  treated  the  Baron  to  another  long 
walk,  with  which  he  seemed  highly  delighted.  He  tells  me 
that  my  old  friend  the  Princess  Galitzin1  is  dead.  After 
dinner  I  had  a  passing  visit  from  Kinnear,  to  bid  me 
farewell.  This  very  able  and  intelligent  young  man,  so  able 
to  throw  a  grace  over  commercial  pursuits,  by  uniting  them 
with  literature,  is  going  with  his  family  to  settle  in  London. 
I  do  not  wonder  at  it.  His  parts  are  of  a  kind  superior  to 
the  confined  sphere  in  which  he  moves  in  Scotland.  In 
London,  he  says,  there  is  a  rapid  increase  of  business  and  its 
opportunities.  Thus  London  licks  the  butter  off  our  bread, 
by  opening  a  better  market  for  ambition.  "Were  it  not  for 
the  difference  of  the  religion  and  laws,  poor  Scotland  could 
hardly  keep  a  man  that  is  worth  having ;  and  yet  men  will 
not  see  this.  I  took  leave  of  Kinnear,  with  hopes  for  his 
happiness  and  fortune,  but  yet  with  some  regret  for  the 

1  Fenimore  Cooper  told  Scott  that    picture  taken  in  Paris.    [Mme.  Mir- 
the  Princess  had  had  Sir  Walter's    bel's  miniature?] 
portrait  engraved  in  1827  from  the 


1829.]  JOUKltfAL. 

sake  of  the  country  which  loses  him.  The  Baron  agreed  to 
go  with  Kinnear  to  Kelso  :  and  exit  with  the  usual  demon- 
strations of  German  enthusiasm. 

March,  25. — I  worked  in  the  morning,  and  think  I  have 
sent  Croker  a  packet  which  may  be  useful,  and  to  Lockhart 
a  critique  on  rather  a  dry  topic,  viz. :  the  ancient  Scottish 
History.  I  rememher  E.  Ainslie,  commonly  called  the  plain 
man,  who  piqued  himself  on  his  powers  of  conversation, 
striving  to  strike  fire  from  some  old  flinty  wretch  whom  he 
found  in  a  corner  of  a  public  coach,  at  length  addressed  hiipn  : 
"Friend,  I  have  tried  you  on  politics,  literary  matters,  religion, 
fashionable  news,  etc.  etc ,  and  all  to  no  purpose."  The  dry 
old  rogue,  twisting  his  muzzle  into  an  infernal  grin,  replied, 
"Can  you  claver  about  bend  leather?"  The  man,  be  it 
understood,  was  a  leather  merchant.  The  early  history  of 
Caledonia  is  almost  as  hopeless  a  subject,  but  off  it  goes. 
I  walked  up  the  Glen  with  Tom  for  my  companion.  Dined, 
heard  Anne  reading  a  paper  of  anecdotes  about  Cluny 
Macpherson,  and  so  to  bed. 

March  26. — As  I  have  been  so  lately  Johnsonizing,  I 
should  derive,  if  possible,  some  personal  use.  Johnson 
advises  Bos  well  to  keep  a  diary,  but  to  omit  registers  of  the 
weather,  and  like  trumpery.  I  am  resolved  in  future  not  to 
register  what  is  yet  more  futile — my  gleams  of  bright  and 
clouded  temper.  Boswell — whose  nervous  [ailments]  were 
one  half  madness,  one  half  affectation — has  thrummed  upon 
this  topic  till  it  is  threadbare.  I  have  at  this  moment  forty 
things  to  do,  and  a  great  inclination  to  do  none  of  them.  I 
ended  by  working  till  two,  walking  till  five,  writing  letters, 
and  so  to  bed. 

March  27. — Letters  again.  Let  me  see.  I  wrote  to 
Lord  Montagu  about  Scott  of  Bavelaw's  commission,  in 
which  Invernahyle  interests  himself.  Item,  to  a  lady  who 
is  pestering  me  about  a  Miss  Campbell  sentenced  to 
transportation  for  stealing  a  silver  spoon.  Item,  to 

VOL.  n.  K 


258  JOUENAL.  [MAKCH 

John  Eckf ord.  Item,  to  James  Locli,  to  get  an  appointment 
for  Sandie  Ballantyne's  son.  Not  one,  as  Dangle  says,1  about 
any  business  of  my  own.  My  correspondence  is  on  a  most 
disinterested  footing.  This  lasts  till  past  eleven,  then  enters 
my  cousin  K.,  and  remains  for  two  hours,  till  politics,  family 
news,  talk  of  the  neighbourhood  are  all  exhausted,  and  two 
or  three  reputations  torn  to  pieces  in  the  scouring  of  them. 
At  length  I  walk  him  out  about  a  mile,  and  come  back  from 
that  empfohement.  But  it  is  only  to  find  Mr.  [Henry] 
C[ranstoun],2  my  neighbour,  in  the  parlour  with  the  girls, 
and  there  is  another  sederunt  of  an  hour.  Well,  such  things 
must  be,  and  our  friends  mean  them  as  civility,  and  we 
must  take  and  give  the  currency  of  the  country.  But  I  am 
diddled  out  of  a  day  all  the  same.  The  ladies  came  from 
Huntly  Burn,  and  cut  off  the  evening.8 

March  28. — In  spite  of  the  temptation  of  a  fine  morning, 
I  toiled  manfully  at  the  remew  till  two  o'clock,  commencing 
at  seven.  I  fear  it  will  be  uninteresting,  but  I  like  the 

1  See  Sheridan's  Critic.  lords  rumbling  down  in  a  coach  and 

o  T      ,  «      ,         ,  ,     , ,  four.     The  Duke  had  no  half -pence 

2  Lord  Corehouse's  brother.  ,          ...        ,        ,  ,    . .      *  £ 

and  was  followed  and  bothered  for 

3  Room  may  be  made  for  part  of  some    time     by    the    tollman    on 
one  of  the  letters  received  by  this  Battersea  Bridge,  when  Hardinge 
morning's  mail,  in  which,  after  much  fished  out  some  silver  or  a  groom, 
interesting  family  detail,  his  son-in-  came    up.      There    were    various 
law  describes  the  duel  which  took  market  gardeners  on  the  road,  who, 
place  between  the  Duke  of  Welling-  when  Lord  Winchelsea's  equipage 
ton  and  Lord  Winchelsea: — "There  stopped,  stopped  also  and  looked 
is  no  reason  to  expect  a  duel  every  on.      One  of  them  advised  a  turn 
day,  and  all  has  been  very  quiet  since  up  with  nature's  weapons.      The 
Saturday. — The  letter  -was  utterly  moment    all  was  done   the  Duke 
forgotten  till  this  recalled  it  to  re-  clapped  spurs  to  his  horse  and  was 
membrance.  Ergo,  there  was  no  sort  back  in  Downing  Street  within  the 
of  call  on  the  Duke  after  beating  two  hours,  breakfasted,  and  off  to 
Buonaparte  to  go  to  war  with  a  Windsor,  where  he  transacted  busi- 
hooby.    But  he  could  not  stand  the  ness  for  an  hour  or  so,  and  then 
fling  at  the  fair.  His  correspondence  said,  6By-the-by,  I  was  forgetting 
seems  admirable  every  way,  and  the  I  have  had  a  field-day  with  Lord 
whole  affair  was  gone  through  in  ex-  W.  this  morning.'    They  say  the 
cellent  taste,— the  Duke  and  Hard-  King  rowed  Arthur  much  for  ex- 
inge  trotting  outa  the  two  peaceful  posing  himself  at  such  a  crisis." 


1829.]  JOURNAL.  259 

muddling  work  of  antiquities,  and,  besides,  wish  to  record 
my  sentiments  with  regard  to  the  Gothic  question.  No  one 
that  has  not  laboured  as  I  have  done  on  imaginary  topics 
can  judge  of  the  comfort  afforded  by  walking  on  all-fours, 
and  being  grave  and  dull.  I  dare  say,  when  the  clown  of 
the  pantomime  escapes  from  his  nightly  task  of  vivacity,  it  is 
his  special  comfort  to  smoke  a  pipe  and  be  prosy  with  some 
good-natured  fellow,  the  dullest  of  his  acquaintance.  I  have 
seen  such  a  tendency  in  Sir  Adam  Perguson,  the  gayest  man 
I  ever  knew ;  and  poor  Tom  Sheridan  has  complained  to  me 
of  the  fatigue  of  supporting  the  character  of  an  agreeable 
companion. 

March  29. — I  wrote,  read,  and  walked  with  the  most 
stoical  regularity.  This  muddling  among  old  books  has  the 
quality  of  a  sedative,  and  saves  the  tear  and  wear  of  an  over- 
wrought brain.  I  wandered  on  the  hills  pleasantly  enough 
and  concluded  a  pleasant  and  laborious  day. 

March  30. — I  finished  the  remainder  of  the  criticism 
and  sent  it  off.  Pray  Heaven  it  break  not  the  mail  coach 
down. 

Lord  and  Lady  Dalhousie,  and  their  relation,  Miss 
Hawthorne,  came  to  dinner,  to  meet  whom  we  had  Dr.  and 
Mrs.  Brewster.  Lord  Dalhousie  has  more  of  the  Caledonian 
prisca  fides  than  any  man  I  know  now  alive.  He  has  served 
his  country  in  all  quarters  of  the  world  and  in  every  climate ; 
yet,  though  my  contemporary,  looks  ten  years  my  junior. 
He  laughed  at  the  idea  of  rigid  temperance,  and  held  an 
occasional  skirmish  no  bad  thing  even  in  the  West  Indies, 
thinking,  perhaps,  with  Armstrong,  of  "  the  rare  debauch."1 
In  all  incidents  of  life  he  has  been  the  same  steady,  honest, 
true-hearted  Lord  Dalhousie,  that  Lordie  Eamsay  promised 
to  be  when  at  the  High  School.  How  few  such  can  I 
remember,  and  how  poorly  have  honesty  and  valour  been 
rewarded !  Here,  at  the  time  when  most  men  think  of 

1  Art  of  Preserving  Health,  book  ii. 


260  JOURNAL.  [MARCH  1829. 

repose,  he  is  bundled  off  to  command  in  India,1  Would  it 
had  been  the  Chief  Governorship  !  But  to  have  remained  at 
home  would  have  been  bare  livelihood,  and  that  is  all.  I 
asked  him  what  he  thought  of  "strangling  a  nabob,  and 
rifling  his  jewel  closet,"  and  he  answered,  "No,  no,  an  honest 
man."  I  fear  we  must  add,  a  poor  one.  Lady  Dalhousie, 
formerly  Miss  Brown  of  Coalstoun,  is  an  amiable,  intelligent, 
and  lively  woman,  who  does  not  permit  society  to  "  cream 
and  mantle  like  a  standing  pool."  2 

The  weather,  drifting  and  surly,  does  not  permit  us  to 
think  of  Melrose,  and  I  could  only  fight  round  the  thicket 
with  Dr.  Brewster  and  his  lordship.  Lord  Dalhousie  gave 
me  some  interesting  accounts  of  the  American  Indians. 
They  are,  according  to  his  lordship,  decaying  fast  in  numbers 
and  principle.  Lord  Selkirk's  property  now  makes  large 
returns,  from  the  stock  of  the  North  West  Company  and 
Hudson's  Bay  Companies  having  united.  I  learned  from 
Lord  Dalhousie  that  he  had  been  keeping  a  diary  since  the 
year  1800.  Should  his  narrative  ever  see  the  light,  what  a 
contrast  will  it  form  to  the  flourishing  vapouring  accounts 
of  most  of  the  French  merchants!  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Skene 
with  their  daughter  Kitty,  who  has  been  indisposed,  came 
to  dinner,  and  the  party  was  a  well-assorted  one. 

1  George  Ramsay,    Earl  of  Dal-     Indies ;  which  office  he  held  till 
housie,  had  just   been   appointed     1832.    He  died  in  1838. 
Coramander-in-Chief  in  the  East        a  Merchant  of  Few'ce,  Act  I.  So.  1. 


APEIK 

April  1. — A  pretty  first  of  April  truly ;  the  hills  white 
with  snow,  I  myself  as  bilious  as  a  dog.  My  noble  guests 
left  about  noon.  I  wrote  letters,  as  if  I  had  not  bile  enough 
in  my  bosom  already,  and  did  not  go  out  to  face  the  snow 
wreaths  till  half-past  two,  when  I  am  resolved  to  make  a 
brush  for  exercise.  There  will  be  fine  howling  among  the 
dogs,  for  I  am  about  to  shut  my  desk.  Found  Mrs.  Skene 
disposed  to  walk,  so  I  had  the  advantage  of  her  company. 
The  snow  lay  three  inches  thick  on  the  ground;  but  we  had 
the  better  appetite  for  dinner,  after  which  we  talked  and 
read  without  my  lifting  a  pen. 

April  2. — Begins  with  same  brilliant  prospect  of  snow 
and  sunshine  dazzling  to  the  eyes  and  chilling  to  the  fingers, 
a  beastly  disagreeable  coldness  in  the  air.  I  stuck  by  the 
pen  till  one,  then  took  a  drive  with  the  ladies  as  far  as 
Chiefswood  and  walked  home.  Young  William  Forbes1 
came,  and  along  with  him  a  Southron,  Mr.  Cleasby. 

April  3. — Still  the  same  party.  I  fagged  at  writing 
letters  to  Lockhart,  to  Charles,  and  to  John  Gibson,  to 
Mr.  Cadell,  Croker,  Lord  Haddington,  and  others.  Lockhart 
has  had  an  overture  through  Croker  requesting  him  to 
communicate  with  some  newspaper  on  the  part  of  the 
Government,  which  he  has  wisely  declined.  Nothing  but  a 

1  Son    of   Lord  Medwyn.     Mr.  Edinburgh  to  pursue  his  studies. 

Forbes  had  lately  returned  from  Mr.  Forbes  possessed  a  fine  tenor 

Italy,  where  he  had  had  as  travelling  voice,  and  his  favourite  songs  at 

companion  Mr.  Cleasby,  and  it  was  that  time  were  the  Neapolitan  and 

owing  to  Mr.  IPorbes's  recommen-  Calabrian  canzonetti,  to  which  Sir 

dation  that  Mr.  Cleasby  came  to  Walter  alludes  under  April  4. 

261 


262 


JOUKNAL. 


[APRIL 


thorough-going  blackguard  ought  to  attempt  the  daily  press, 
unless  it  is  some  quiet  country  diurnal.  Lockhart  has  also 
a  wicked  wit  which  would  make  an  office  of  this  kind  more 
dangerous  to  him  than  to  downright  dulness.  I  am  heartily 
glad  he  has  refused  it.1 

Sir  James  Mackintosh  and  Lord  Haddington  have  spoken 
very  handsomely  of  my  accession  to  the  Catholic  Petition, 
and  I  think  it  has  done  some  good ;  yet  I  am  not  confident 
that  the  measure  will  disarm  the  Catholic  spleen.2  And  I 
was  not  entirely  easy  at  finding  myself  allied  to  the  Whigs, 
even  in  this  instance,  where  I  agree  with  them.  This  is 
witless  prejudice,  however. 

My  walk  to-day  was  up  the  Ehymer's  Glen  with  Skene. 
Colonel  Ferguson  dined  with  us. 


1  Mr.  Lockhart's  own  account  of 
the  overture  is  sufficiently  amusing 
and  characteristic  of  the  men  and 
the  times  : — 

"I  had  not  time  to  write  more 
than  a  line  the  other  day  under 
Croker's  cover,  having  received  it 
just  at  post  time.  He  sent  for  me ; 
I  found  him  in  his  nightcap  at  the 
Admiralty,  colded  badly,  but  in 
audacious  spirits.  His  business 
was  this.  The  Duke  of  W[e31mgto]n 
finds  himself  without  one  news- 
paper he  can  depend  on.  He  wishes 
to  buy  up  some  evening  print,  such 
as  the  dull  Star;  and  could  I  do 
anything  for  it?  I  said  I  was  as 
well  inclined  to  serve  the  Duke  as 
he  could  be,  but  it  must  be  in  other 
fashion.  He  then  said  he.  agreed 
with  me — but  there  was  a  second 
question : "  Could  I  find  them  an 
editor,  and  undertake  to  communi- 
cate between  them  and  him — in 
short,  save  the  Treasury  the  incon- 
venience of  maintaining  an  avowed 
intercourse  with  the  Newspaper 
press?  He  said  he  himself  had 
for  some  years  done  this — then 


others.  I  said  I  would  endeavour 
to  think  of  a  man  for  their  turn  and 
would  call  on  him  soon  again. 

'  *  I  have  considered  the  matter  at 
leisure,  and  resolve  to  have  nothing 
to  do  with  it.  They  CAN  only  want 
me  as  a  writer.  Any  understrapper 
M.P.  would  do  well  enough  for 
carrying  hints  to  a  newspaper  office, 
and  I  will  not,  even  to  secure  the 
Duke,  mix  myself  up  with  the  news- 
papers. That  work  it  is  which  has 
damned  Croker,  and  I  can't  afford 
to  sacrifice  the  advantage  which  1 
feel  I  have  gamed  in  these  later 
years  by  abstaining  altogether  from 
partisan  scribbling,  or  to  subject 
the  Quarterly  to  risk  of  damage. 
The  truth  is,  I  don't  admire,  aft«.r 
all  that  has  come  and  gone,  being 
applied  to  through  the  medium  of 
friend  Crokey.  I  hope  you  will 
approve  of  my  resolution." 

2  Peel,  in  writing  to  Scott,  says, 
"The  mention  of  your  name  [in 
Parliament]  as  attached  to  the  Edin- 
burgh petition  was  received  with 
loud  cheers." 


1829.]  JOUKtfAL.  263 

April  4.  —  Mr.  Cleasby  left  this  morning.  He  has 
travelled  much,  and  is  a  young  man  of  copious  conversation 
and  ready  language,  aiming  I  suppose  at  Parliament1 
William  Forbes  is  singing  like  an  angel  in  the  next  room, 
but  he  sings  only  Italian  music,  which  says  naught  to  me. 
I  have  a  letter  from  one  David  Patterson,  who  was  Dr. 
ELnox's  jackal  for  buying  murdered  bodies,  suggesting  that  I 
should  write  on  the  subject  of  Burke  and  Hare,  and  offering 
me  his  invaluable  collection  of  anecdotes!  "Curse  him 
imperanee  and  him  dam  insurance,"2  as  Mungo  says  in 
the  farce.  Did  ever  one  hear  the  like?  The  scoundrel 
has  been  the  companion  and  patron  of  such  atrocious  mur- 
derers and  kidnappers,  and  he  has  the  impudence  to  write 
to  any  decent  man  ! 

Corrected  proof-sheets  and  dedication  of  the  Magnum 
and  sent  them  off. 

April  5.  —  Bead  prayers  to  what  remains  of  our  party  : 
being  Anne,  my  niece  Anne,  the  four  Skenes,  and  William 
Forbes.  We  then  walked,  and  I  returned  time  enough  to  work 
a  little  at  the  criticism.  Thus  it  drew  towards  dinner  in  con- 
clusion, after  which  we  smoked,  told  stories,  and  drank  tea. 

April  6.  —  Worked  at  the  review  for  three  or  four  hours  ; 
yet  hang  it,  I  can't  get  on.  I  wonder  if  I  am  turning  dunny 
in  other  matters  ;  certainly  I  cannot  write  against  time  as  I 
used  to  do.  My  thoughts  will  not  be  duly  regulated  ;  my 
pen  declares  for  itself,  will  neither  write  nor  spell,  and  goes 
under  independent  colours.  I  went  out  with  the  child  Kitty 
Skene  on  her  pony.  I  don't  much  love  children,  I  suppose 
from  want  of  habit,  but  this  is  a  fine  merry  little  girl. 

William  Forbes  sang  in  the  evening  with  a  feeling  and 

1  Bichard  Cleasby,  afterwards  the  editorship  of  Mr.  Vigfusson,  *  assisted 

well-known  scholar  ^ho  spen  .  many  by  Sir  George  Dasent. 

years  in  gathering  materials  for  an  a  Bickerataffs  PodZocfc,Acti.  Sc.6. 
Icelandic  Dictionary.    Mr.  Cleasby 
died  in  1847,  but  theworkhe  had 


planned  was    not   published  until     cieasby,  enlarged  and  completed  by  CK 
1874,  when  it  appeared  tinder  the     Vigfusson.   4to,  Oxford,  1874. 


264  JOURNAL.  [APRIL 

taste  indescribably  fine,  but  as  lie  had  no  Scottish,  or  English 
songs,  my  ears  were  not  much  gratified.  I  have  no  sense 
beyond  Mungo : "  What  signify  me  hear  if  me  no  understand !" 

William  Forbes  leaves  us.  As  to  the  old  story,  scribble 
till  two,  then  walk  for  exercise  till  four.  Deil  hae  it  else, 
for  company  eats  up  the  afternoon,  so  nothing  can  be  done 
that  is  not  achieved  in  the  forenoon, 

April  7. — We  had  a  gay  scene  this  morning — the  fox- 
hounds and  merry  hunters  in  my  little  base  court,  which 
rung  with  trampling  steeds,  and  rejoiced  in  scarlet  jackets 
and  ringing  horns.  I  have  seen  the  day  worlds  would  not 
have  bribed  me  to  stay  behind  them ;  but  that  is  over,  and 
I  walked  a  sober  pace  up  to  the  Abbot's  Knowe,  from  which 
I  saw  them  draw  my  woods,  but  without  finding  a  fox.  I 
watched  them  with  that  mixture  of  interest,  affection,  and 
compassion  which  old  men  feel  at  looking  on  the  amusements 
of  the  young.  I  was  so  far  interested  in  the  chase  itself  as 
to  be  sorry  they  did  not  find.  I  had  so  far  the  advantage  of 
the  visit,  that  it  gave  me  an  object  for  the  morning  exercise, 
which  I  would  otherwise  only  have  been  prompted  to  by  health 
and  habit.  It  is  pleasant  to  have  one's  walk, — as  heralds  say, 
with  a  difference.  By  the  way,  the  f oxhunters  hunted  the 
cover  far  too  fast.  When  they  found  a  path  they  ran  through 
it  pell-mell  without  beating  at  all  They  had  hardly  left  the 
hare-hole  cover,  when  a  fox,  which  they  had  over-run,  stole 
away.  This  is  the  consequence  of  breeding  dogs  too  speedy. 

April  8. — We  have  the  news  of  the  Catholic  question 
being  carried  in  the  House  of  Lords,  by  a  majority  of  105 
upon  the  second  reading.  This  is  decisive,  and  the  balsam 
of  Fierabras  must  be  swallowed.1  It  remains  to  see  how  it 
will  work.  Since  it  was  indubitably  necessary,  I  am  glad 
the  decision  on  the  case  has  been  complete.  On  these  last 
three  days  I  have  finished  my  review  of  Tytler  for  Lockhart 
and  sent  it  off  by  this  post.  I  may  have  offended  Peter  by 
1  Don  Quixote,  Pfc.  I.  Bk.  u.  Cap.  2. 


1829.]  JOUEKAL.  265 

censuring  him  for  a  sort  of  petulance  towards  his  predecessor 
Lord  Hailes,  This  day  visited  by  Mr.  Carr,  who  is  a  sensible, 
clever  young  man,  and  by  his  two  sisters l — beautiful  singer 
the  youngest — and  to  my  taste,  and  English  music. 

April  9. — Laboured  correcting  proofs  and  revising;  the 
day  infinitely  bad.  Worked  till  three  o'clock ;  then  tried  a 
late  walk,  and  a  wet  one. 

I  hear  bad  news  of  James  Ballantyne.  Hypochondriac 
I  am  afraid,  and  religiously  distressed  in  mind. 

I  got  a  book  from  the  Duke  de  L£vis,  the  same  gentle- 
man with  whom  I  had  an  awkward  meeting  at  Abbotsford, 
owing  to  his  having  forgot  his  credentials,  which  left  me  at 
an  unpleasant  doubt  as  to  his  character  and  identity.2  His 
book  is  inscribed  to  me  with  hyperbolical  praises.  'Now  I 
don't  like  to  have,  like  the  Persian  poets  who  have  the  luck 
to  please  the  Sun  of  the  Universe,  my  mouth  crammed  with 
sugar-candy,  which  politeness  will  not  permit  me  to  spit  out, 
and  my  stomach  is  indisposed  to  swallow.  The  book  is 
better  than  would  be  expected  from  the  exaggerated  nonsense 
of  the  dedication. 

April  10. — Left  Abbotsford  at  seven  to  attend  the  Circuit. 
Nota  bene — half-past  six  is  the  better  hour;  waters  are 
extremely  flooded.  Lord  Meadowbank  at  the  Circuit. 
Nothing  tried  but  a  few  trumpery  assaults.  Meadowbank 
announces  he  will  breakfast  with  me  to-morrow,  so  I  shall 
return  to-night.  Promised  to  my  cousin  Charles  Scott  to 
interest  myself  about  his  getting  the  farm  of  Milsington  upon 

1  Friends  of  Joanna  Baillie's  and  trunk,     on     which    was    written 
John  Richardson's.  "  Papiers  de  la  maison  de  Ldvist  " 

2  This  must  have  been  an  unusual  the  other  a  portrait  of  the  founder 
experience  for  the  head  of  a  family  of  the  house  bowing  reverently  to 
that  considered  itself  to  be  the  oldest  the  Virgin,  who  is  made  to  say, 
in  Christendom.   Their  chateau  con-  **  Couvrez-voits,  mon   cousin." — See 
tained,  it  was  said,  two  pictures  :  Walpole's£e#er$.  Thebookreferred 
one  of  the  Deluge,  in  which  Noah  to  by  Sir  Walter  is  The,  Garbonaro . 
is  represented  going  into  the  Ark,  a  Piedmontese  Tale,  by  the  Duke  de 
carrying  under    his    arm  a  small  L6vis.     2  vols.     London,  1829. 


266  JOUENAL. 

Borthwick  Water  and  mentioned  him  to  Colonel  Eiddell  as 
a  proposed  offerer.  The  tender  was  well  received.  I  saw 
James  the  piper  and  my  cousin  Anne ;  sent  to  James  Veitch 
the  spyglass  of  Professor  Ferguson  to  be  repaired.  Dined 
with  the  Judge  and  returned  in  the  evening. 

April  11. — Meadowbank  breakfasted  with  us,  and  then 
went  on  to  Edinburgh,  pressed  by  bad  news  of  his  family. 
His  wife  (daughter  of  my  early  patron,  President  Blair)  is 
very  ill ;  indeed  I  fear  fatally  so.  I  am  sorry  to  think  it  is 
so.  When  the  King  was  here  she  was  the  finest  woman  I 
saw  at  Holyrood.  My  proofs  kept  me  working  till  two; 
then  I  had  a  fatiguing  and  watery  walk.  After  dinner  we 
smoked,  and  I  talked  with  Mr.  Carr  over  criminal  juris- 
prudence, the  choicest  of  conversation  to  an  old  lawyer ;  and 
the  delightful  music  of  Miss  Isabella  Carr  closed  the  day. 
Still,  I  don't  get  to  my  task ;  but  I  will,  to-morrow  or  next  day. 

April  12. — Eead  prayers,  put  my  books  in  order  and 
made  some  progress  in  putting  papers  in  order  which  have 
been  multiplying  on  my  table.  I  have  a  letter  from  that 
impudent  lad  Eeynolds  about  my  contribution  to  the  Keep- 
sake. Sent  to  him  the  House  of  Aspen,  as  I  had  previously 
determined.  This  will  give  them  a  lumping  pennyworth 
in  point  of  extent,  but  that's  the  side  I  would  have  the  bar- 
gain rest  upon.  It  shall  be  a  warning  after  this  to  keep 
out  of  such  a  scrape. 

April  13. — In  the  morning  before  breakfast  I  corrected 
the  proof  of  the  critique  on  the  life  of  Lord  Pitsligo  in  Black- 
wood's  Magazine.1  After  breakfast  Skene  and  his  lady 
and  family,  and  Mr.  Carr  and  his  sisters,  took  their  de- 
parture. Time  was  dawdled  away  till  nearly  twelve  o'clock 
and  then  I  could  not  work  much.  I  finished,  however, 
a  painful  letter  to  J.  Ballantyne,  which  I  hope  will  have 
effect  upon  the  nervous  disorder  he  complains  of.  He 
must  w  awake,  arise,  or  be  for  ever  fallen."  I  walked 

1  No.  152— May,  1829. 


1829.]  JOUBNAL.  f>67 

happily  and  pleasantly  from  two  o'clock  till  four.  And  now 
I  must  look  to  Anne  of  G-eierstein.  Hang  it !  it  is  not  so  bad 
after  all,  though  I  fear  it  will  not  be  popular.  In  fact,  I  am 
almost  expended ;  but  while  I  exhort  others  to  exertion  I 
will  not  fail  to  exert  myself.  I  have  a  letter  from  E.  P. 
Gpllies]  proposing  to  subscribe  to  assist  him  from  £25  to 
£50.  It  will  do  no  good,  but  yet  I  cannot  help  giving  him 
something. 

"  A  daimen-icker  in  a  thrave  5s  a  sraa'  request  : 
I'll  get  a  blessing  wi'  the  lave,  and  never  miss't."1 

I  will  try  a  review  for  the  Foreign  and  he  shall  have 
the  proceeds. 

April  14. — I  sent  off  proofs  of  the  review  of  Eitson  for 
John  Lockhart.  Then  set  a  stout  heart  to  a  stay  brae,  and 
took  up  Anne  of  Geierstein.  I  had  five  sheets  standing  by 
me,  which  I  read  with  care,  and  satisfied  myself  that  worse 
had  succeeded,  but  it  was  while  the  fashion  of  the  thing  was 
new.  I  retrenched  a  good  deal  about  the  Troubadours,  which 
was  really  Jwrs  de  place.  As  to  King  Eene\  I  retained  him 
as  a  historical  character.  In  short,  I  will  let  the  sheets  go 
nearly  as  they  are,  for  though  J.  B.  be  an  excellent  judge  of 
this  species  of  composition,  he  is  not  infallible,  and  has  been 
in  circumstances  which  may  bias  his  mind.  I  "might  have 
taken  this  determination  a  month  since,  and  I  wish  I  had. 
But  I  thought  I  might  strike  out  something  better  by  tho 
braes  and  burn-sides.  Alas !  I  walk  along  them  with  pain- 
ful and  feeble  steps,  and  invoke  their  influence  in  vain.  But 
my  health  is  excellent,  and  it  were  ungrateful  to  complain 
either  of  mental  or  bodily  decay.  We  called  at  EUiston 
to-day  and  made  up  for  some  ill-bred  delay.  In  the 
evening  I  corrected  two  sheets  of  the  Magnum,  as  we  call  it 

April  15. — I  took  up  Anne,  and  wrote,  with  inter- 
ruption of  a  nap  (in  which  my  readers  may  do  well  to 

1  Burns's  Lines  to  a  Mouse:  "a      an  ear  of  corn  out  of  two  dozen 
daimen-icker  in  a  thrave,"  that  is,      sheaves. 


268  JOURNAL.  [APRIL 

imitate  me),  till  two  o'clock.  I  wrote  with,  care,  having 
digested  Comines.  "Whether  I  succeed  or  not,  it  would  be 
dastardly  to  give  in.  A  bold  countenance  often  carries  off 
an  indifferent  cause,  but  no  one  will  defend  him  who  shows 
the  white  feather.  At  two  I  walked  till  near  four.  Dined 
with  the  girls,  smoked  two  cigars,  and  to  work  again  till 
supper-time.  Slept  like  a  top.  Amount  of  the  day's  work, 
eight  pages — a  round  task. 

April  16. — I  meant  to  go  out  with  Bogie  to  plant  some 
shrubs  in  front  of  the  old  quarry,  but  it  rains  cats  and  dogs 
as  they  say,  a  rare  day  for  grinding  away  at  the  old  mill  of 
imagination,  yet  somehow  I  have  no  great  will  to  the  task. 
After  all,  however,  the  morning  proved  a  true  April  one, 
sunshine  and  shower,  and  I  both  worked  to  some  purpose, 
and  moreover  walked  and  directed  about  planting  the  quarry. 

The  post  brought  matter  for  a  May  or  April  morning — 
a  letter  from  Sir  James  Mackintosh,  telling  me  that  Moore 
and  he  were  engaged  as  contributors  to  Longman's  Encyclo- 
paedia, and  asking  me  to  do  a  volume  at  £1000,  the  subject 
to  be  the  History  of  Scotland  in  one  volume.  This  would 
be  very  easy  work.  I  have  the  whole  stuff  in  my  head,  and 
could  write  currente  calamo.  The  size  is  as  I  compute  it 
about  one-third  larger  than  Tlie  Tales  of  my  Grandfather. 
There  is  much  to  be  said  on  both  sides.  Let  me  balance 
pros  and  cons  after  the  fashion  of  honest  Robinson  Crusoe. 
Pro. — It  is  the  sum  I  have  been  wishing  for,  sufficient  to 
enable  me  to  break  the  invisible  but  magic  circle  which  petty 
debts  of  myself  and  others  have  traced  round  me.  With 
common  prudence  I  need  no  longer  go  from  hand  to  mouth, 
or  what  is  worse,  anticipate  my  means.  I  may  also  pay  off 
some  small  shop  debts,  etc.,  belonging  to  the  Trust,  clear  off 
all  Anne's  embarrassment,  and  even  make  some  foundation 
of  a  provision  for  her.  N.B. — I  think  this  whacking  reason 
is  like  to  prove  the  gallon  of  Cognac  brandy,  which  a  lady 
recommended  as  the  foundation  of  a  Liqueur.  "  Stop  there, 


1829.]  JOURNAL  269 

madam,  if  you  please,"  said  my  grandfather,  Dr.  Rutherford, 
"  you  can  [add]  nothing  to  that ;  it  is  ftawonade  with  £1 000," 
and  a  capital  hit,  egad.  Contra. — It  is  terribly  like  a  hack 
author  to  make  an  abridgement  of  what  I  have  written  so 
lately.  Pro. — But  a  difference  may  be  taken.  A  history 
may  be  written  of  the  same  country  on  a  different  plan, 
general  where  the  other  is  detailed,  and  philosophical  where 
it  is  popular.  I  think  I  can  do  this,  and  do  it  with  un- 
washed hands  too.  Tor  being  hacked,  what  is  it  but  another 
word  for  being  an  author?  I  will  take  care  of  my  name 
doubtless,  but  the  five  letters  which  form  it  must  take  care 
of  me  in  turn.  I  never  knew  name  or  fame  burn  brighter 
by  over  chary  keeping  of  it.  Besides,  there  are  two  gallant 
hacks  to  pull  with  me.  Contra. — I  have  a  monstrous  deal  on 
hand.  Let  me  see :  Life  of  Argyll,1  and  Life  of  Peterborough 
for  Lockhart.2  Third  series  Tales  of  my  Grandfather — 
review  for  Gillies — new  novel — end  of  Anne  of  Grderst&in. 
Pro. — But  I  have  just  finished  two  long  reviews  for  Lock- 
hart.  The  third  series  is  soon  discussed.  The  review  may 
be  finished  in  three  or  four  days,  and  the  novel  is  within  a 
week  and  less  of  conclusion.  For  the  rest,  we  must  first 
see  how  this  goes  off.  In  fine,  within  six  weeks,  I  am  sure 
I  can  do  the  work  and  secure  the  independence  I  sigh  for. 
Must  I  not  make  hay  while  the  sun  shines  ?  Who  can  tell 
what  leisure,  health,  and  life  may  be  destined  to  me*? 

Adjourned  the  debate  till  to-morrow  morning. 

April  17. — I  resumed  the  discussion  of  the  bargain  about 
the  history.  The  ayes  to  the  right,  the  noes  to  the  left. 
The  ayes  have  it — so  I  will  write  to  Sir  James  of  this  date. 
But  I  will  take  a  walk  first,  that  I  will  A  little  shaken 

with  the  conflict,  for  after  all  were  I  as  I  have  been . 

"  My  poverty  but  not  my  will  consents."  8 

1  John,    Duke   of   Argyll    and     The  Family  Library,  were  never 
Greenwich.  written. 

3  These  biographies,  intended  for       3  Romeo  and  Juliet,  Act  v.  Sc.  L 


270  JOUBNAL.  [APRIL 

I  have  been  out  in  a  most  delicious  real  spring  day.  I 
returned  -with  my  nerves  strung  and  my  mind  determined. 
I  will  make  this  plunge,  and  with  little  doubt  of  coming  off 
no  loser  in  character.  What  is  given  in  detail  may  be  sup- 
pressed, general  views  may  be  enlarged  upon,  and  a  bird's- 
eye  prospect  given,  not  the  less  interesting,  that  we  have 
seen  its  prominent  points  nearer  and  in  detail.  I  have  been 
of  late  in  a  great  degree  free  from  wafered  letters,  sums  to 
make  up,  notes  of  hand  wanted,  and  all  the  worry  of  an 
embarrassed  man's  life.  This  last  struggle  will  free  me  en- 
tirely, and  so  help  me  Heaven  it  shall  be  made !  I  have 
written  to  Sir  James,  stating  that  I  apprehend  the  terms 
to  be  £1000,  namely,  for  one  volume  containing  about  one- 
third  more  than  one  of  the  volumes  of  Tales  of  my  Grand- 
father,  and  agreeing  to  do  so.  Certes,  few  men  can  win  a 
thousand  pounds  so  readily. 

We  dine  with  the  Fergusons  to-day  at  four.  So  off  we 
went  and  safely  returned. 

April  18. — Corrected  proofs.  I  find  J.  B.  has  not  re- 
turned to  his  business,  though  I  wrote  him  how  necessary 
it  was.  My  pity  begins  to  give  way  to  anger.  Must  he  sit 
tihere  and  squander  his  thoughts  and  senses  upon  cloudy 
metaphysics  and  abstruse  theology  till  he  addles  his  brains 
entirely,  and  ruins  his  business?  I  have  written  to  him 
again,  letter  third  and,  I  am  determined,  last. 

Wrote  also  to  the  fop  Eeynolds,  with  preface  to  the  House 
of  Aspen,  then  to  honest  Joseph  Train  desiring  he  would 
give  me  some  notion  how  to  serve  him  with  Messrs.  Oarr, 
and  to  take  care  to  make  his  ambition  moderate  and  feasible. 

My  neighbour,  Mr.  Kerr  of  Kippielaw,  struck  with  a 
palsy  while  he  was  looking  at  the  hounds ;  his  pony  remained 
standing  by  his  side.  A  sudden  call  if  a  final  one. 

That  strange  desire  to  leave  a  prescribed  task  and  set 
about  something  else  seized  me  irresistibly.  I  yielded  to 
it,  and  sat  down  to  try  at  what  speed  and  in  what  manner 
I  could  execute  this  job  of  Sir  James  Mackintosh's,  and  I 


1829.]  JOTJEISrAL.  271 

wrote  three  leaves  before  rising,  well  enough,  I  think.  The 
girls  made  a  round  with  me.  We  drove  to  Chiefswood,  and 
from  that  to  Janeswood,  up  the  Bhymer's  Glen,  and  so 
home.  This  occupied  from  one  to  four.  In  the  evening  I 
heard  Anne  read  Mr.  Peel's  excellent  Bill  on  the  Police  of 
the  Metropolis,  which  goes  to  disband  the  whole  generation 
of  Dogberry  and  Verges.  Wrote  after  tea. 

April  19. — I  made  this  a  busy  day,  I  wrote  on  at  the 
history  until  two  o'clock,  then  took  a  gallant  walk,  then 
began  reading  for  Gillies's  article.  James  Ferguson  dined 
with  us.  We  smoked  and  I  became  woundy  sleepy.  Now 
I  have  taken  collar  to  this  arrangement,  I  find  an  open  sea 
before  me  which  I  could  not  have  anticipated,  for  though 
I  should  get  through  well  enough  with  my  expectations 
during  the  year,  yet  it  is  a  great  thing  to  have  a  certainty 
to  be  clear  as  a  new  pin  of  every  penny  of  debt.  There  is 
no  being  obliged  or  asking  favours  or  getting  loans  from 
some  grudging  friend  who  can  never  look  at  you  after  but 
with  fear  of  losing  his  cash,  or  you  at  lifm  without  the 
humiliating  sense  of  having  extorted  an  obligation.  Besides 
my  large  debts,  I  have  paid  since  I  was  in  trouble  at  least 
£2000  of  personal  encumbrances,  so  no  wonder  my  nose  is 
still  under  water.  I  really  believe  the  sense  of  this  ap- 
parently unending  struggle,  schemes  for  retrenchment  in 
which  I  was  unseconded,  made  me  low-spirited,  for  the  sun 
seems  to  shine  brighter  upon  me  as  a  free  man.  Never- 
theless, devil  take  the  necessity  which  makes  me  drudge 
like  a  very  hack  of  Grub  Street. 

"  May  the  foul  fa'  the  gear  and  the  bletherie  o  VJ  x 

I  walked  out  with  Tom's  assistance,  came  home,  went 
through  the  weary  work  of  cramming,  and  so  forth ;  wrought 
after  tea,  and  then  to  bed. 

April  20. — As  yesterday  till  two — sixteen  pages  of  the 
History  written,  and  not  less  than  one-fifth  of  the  whole 

1  "When  I  t.Mnlr  on  the  world's  pelf 

May  the  shame  fa'  and  the  blethrie  o  *tM 

Burden  of  old  Scottish  Song. 


272  JOTJBNAL.  [APRIL 

book.  What  if  they  should  be  off  ?  I  were  finely  holp'd 
for  throwing  my  time  away,  A  toy !  They  dare  not. 

Lord  Buchan  is  dead,  a  person  whose  immense  vanity, 
bordering  upon  insanity,  obscured,  or  rather  eclipsed,  very 
considerable  talents.  His  imagination  was  so  fertile  that 
he  seemed  really  to  believe  the  extraordinary  fictions  which 
he  delighted  in  telling.  His  economy,  most  laudable  in  the 
early  part  of  his  life,  when  it  enabled  him,  from  a  small 
income,  to  pay  his  father's  debts,  became  a  miserable  habit, 
and  led  him  to  do  mean  things.  He  had  a  desire  to  be  a 
great  man,  and  a  Maecenas  &  bon  march&  The  two  celebrated 
lawyers,  his  brothers,  were  not  more  gifted  by  nature  than 
I  think  he  was,  but  the  restraints  of  a  profession  kept  the 
eccentricity  of  the  family  in  order.  Henry  Erskine  was  the 
best-natured  man  I  ever  knew,  thoroughly  a  gentleman,  and 
with  but  one  fault :  he  could  not  say  not  and  thus  some- 
times misled  those  who  trusted  him.  Tom  Erskine  was 
positively  mad.  I  have  heard  him  tell  a  cock-and-a-bull 
story  of  having  seen  the  ghost  of  his  father's  servant,  John 
Burnet,  with  as  much  sincerity  as  if  he  believed  every  word 
he  was  saying.  Both  Henry  and  Thomas  were  saving  men, 
yet  both  died  very  poor.  The  one  at  one  time  possessed 
£200,000 ;  the  other  had  a  considerable  fortune.  The  Earl 
alone  has  died  wealthy.  It  is  saving,  not  getting,  that  is 
the  mother  of  riches.  They  all  had  wit.  The  Earl's  was 
crack-brained  and  sometimes  caustic;  Henry's  was  of  the 
very  kindest,  best-humoured,  and  gayest  that  ever  cheered 
society;  that  of  Lord  Erskine  was  moody  and  maddish. 
But  I  never  saw  him  in  his  best  days. 

Went  to  Haining.  Time  has  at  last  touched  the  beauti- 
ful Mrs.  Pringle.  I  wonder  he  was  not  ashamed  of  himself 
for  spoiling  so  fine  a  form.  But  what  cares  he  ?  Corrected 
proofs-  after  dinner.  James  B.  is  at  last  at  work  again. 

April  21. — Spent  the  whole  morning  at  writing,  still  the 
History,  such  is  my  wilful  whim.  Twenty  pages  now 


1829.]  JOTJEtfAL.  273 

finished — I  suppose  the  clear  fourth  part  of  a  volume.  I 
went  out,  but  the  day  "being  sulky  I  sat  in  the  Conservatory, 
after  trying  a  walk !  I  have  been  glancing  over  the  works  for 
G-illies's  review,  and  I  think  on  them  between-hands  while 
E  compose  the  History, — an  odd  habit  of  doing  two  things 
at  once,  but  it  has  always  answered  with  me  well  enough. 

April  22. — Another  hard  day's  work  at  the  History,  now 
increased  to  the  Bruce  and  Baliol  period,  and  threatening 
to  be  too  lengthy  for  the  Cyclopaedia.  But  I  will  make 
short  work  with  wars  and  battles.  I  wrote  till  two  o'clock, 
and  strolled  with  old  Tom  and  my  dogs1  till  half-past  four, 
hours  of  pleasure  and  healthful  exercise,  and  to-day  taken 
with  ease.  A  letter  from  J.  B.,  stating  an  alarm  that  he 
may  lose  the  printing  of  a  part  of  the  Magnum.  But  I 
shall  write  him  he  must  be  his  own  friend,  set  shoulder  to 
the  wheel,  and  remain  at  the  head  of  his  business ;  and  of 
that  I  must  make  "hi™  aware.  And  so  I  set  to  my  proofs. 
"  Better  to  work/'  says  the  inscription  on  Hogarth's  Bride- 
well, "than  stand  thus." 

April  23. — A  cold  blustering  day — bad  welcome  for  the 
poor  lambs.  I  made  my  walk  short  and  my  task  long,  my 
work  turning  entirely  on  the  History — all  on  speculation. 
But  the  post  brought  me  a  letter  from  Dr.  Lardner,  the 
manager  of  the  Cyclopaedia,  agreeing  to  my  terms ;  so  all  is 
right  there,  and  no  labour  thrown  away.  The  volume  is  to 
run  to  400  pages ;  so  much  the  better ;  I  love  elbow-room, 

1  That  these  afternoon  rambles  mistress,  who  beats  the  male  race  of 

with,  the  dogs  were  not  always  so  authors  out  of  the  pit  in  describing 

tranquil  may  be  gathered  from  an  the  higher  passions  that  are  more 

incident  described  by  Mr.  Adolphus,  proper   to    their    sex   than    hers, 

in  which  an  unsuspecting  cat  at  a  Alack-a-day !  my  poor  cat  Hinse,  my 

cottage   door  was   demolished  by  acquaintance,  and  in  some  sort  my 

Nimrod  in  one  of  his  gambols, — .  friend  of  fifteen  years,  was  snapped 

Life,  vol.  ix.  p.   362.      This  deer-  at  even   by  the  paynim  Kimrod. 

hound  was  an  old  offender.      Sir  What  could  I  say  to  him  but  what 

Walter  tells  his  friend  Richardson,  Brantdme  said  to  some  ferrailleur 

a,  propos  of  a  story  he  had  just  who  had  been  too  successful  in  a 

heard  of  Joanna  Baillie's  cat  having  duel,   *Ah  I  mon  grand  ami,  vous 

worried  a  dog :  "It  is  just  like  her  avez  tu£  mon  autre  grand  ami"* 

VOL.  II.  S 


274  JOUENAL.  [APRIL, 

and  will  have  space  to  do  something  to  purpose.  I  replied 
agreeing  to  his  terms,  and  will  send  him  copy  as  soon  as  1 
have  corrected  it.  The  Colonel  and  Miss  Ferguson  dined 
with  us.  I  think  I  drank  rather  a  cheerful  glass  with  my 
good  friend.  Smoked  an  extra  cigar,  so  no  more  at  present. 

April  25. — After  writing  to  Mr.  Cochrane,1  to  Cadell 
and  J.  B.,  also  to  Mr.  Pitcairn,2  it  was  time  to  set  out  for 
Lord  Buchan's  funeral  The  funeral  letters  were  signed  by 
Mr.  H.  David  Erskine,  his  lordship's  natural  son.  His 
nephew,  the  young  Earl,  was  present,  but  neither  of  them 
took  the  head  of  the  coffin.  His  lordship's  funeral  took 
place  in  a  chapel  amongst  the  ruins.  His  body  was  in  the 
grave  with  its  feet  pointing  westward.  My  cousin,  Max- 
popple,8  was  for  taking  notice  of  it,  but  I  assured  him  that  a 
man  who  had  been  wrong  in  the  head  all  his  life  would 
scarce  become  right-headed  after  death.  I  felt  something  at 
parting  with  this  old  man,  though  but  a  trumpery  body. 
He  gave  me  the  first  approbation  I  ever  obtained  from  a 
stranger.  His  caprice  had  led  him  to  examine  Dr.  Adam's 
class  when  I,  a  boy  twelve  years  old,  and  then  in  disgrace 
fot  some  aggravated  case  of  negligence,  was  called  up  from 
a  low  bench,  and  recited  my  lesson  with  some  spirit  and 
appearance  of  feeling  the  poetry  (it  was  the  apparition  of 
Hector's  ghost  in  the-SSneid)  amid  the  noble  Earl's  applause. 
I  was  very  proud  of  this  at  the  time. 

I  was  sad  on  another  account — it  was  the  first  time  I  had 
been  among  these  ruins  since  I  left  a  very  valued  pledge  there. 
My  next  visit  may  be  involuntary.  Even  so,  God's  will  be 
done !  at  least  I  have  not  the  mortification  of  thinking  what 
a  deal  of  patronage  and  fuss  Lord  Buchan  would  bestow  on 

1  Manager  of  the  Foreign  Review,  possession,  during  his  father's  life- 

*  Robert    Pitcairn,    author    of  time.    Whatever,  in  things  of  this 
Criminal  Trials  in  Scotland,  3  vols.  sort,  used  to  be  practised  among 
4to.  the    French    noblesse,   might    be 

*  William  Scott,  Esq.,  afterwards  traced,    till    very  lately,   in   the 
Laird  of  Raebura,  was  commonly  customs  of  the  Scottish  provincial 
thus    designated    from    a    minor  gentry. — J.  a.  L. 


1829.]  JOUKBTAL.  275 

my  funeral1  Maxpopple  dined  and  slept  here  with  four  of 
his  family,  much  amused  with  what  they  heard  and  saw. 
By  good  fortune  a  ventriloquist  and  partial  juggler  came  in, 
and  we  had  him  in  the  lihrary  after  dinner.  He  was  a  half- 
starved  wretched-looking  creature,  who  seemed  to  have  ate 
more  fire  than  bread.  So  I  caused  hrm  to  be  well  stuffed, 
and  gave  him  a  guinea,  rather  to  his  poverty  than  to  his  skill 
— and  now  to  finish  Anne  of  G&ierst&in. 

April  26. — But  not  a  finger  did  I  lay  on  the  jacket  of 
Anne.  Looking  for  something,  I  fell  in  with  the  little  drama, 
long  missing,  called  the  Doom  of  Devorgvil.  I  believe  it  was 
out  of  mere  contradiction  that  I  sat  down  to  read  and  correct 
it,  merely  because  I  would  not  be  bound  to  do  aught  that 
seemed  compulsory.  So  I  scribbled  at  a  piece  of  nonsense 
till  two  o'clock,  and  then  walked  to  the  lake.  At  night  I 
flung  helve  after  hatchet,  and  spent  the  evening  in  reading 
the  Doom  of  Devorgoil  to  the  girls,  who  seemed  considerably 
interested.  Anne  objects  to  the  mingling  the  goblinry,  which 
is  comic,  with  the  serious,  which  is  tragic.  After  all,  I  could 
greatly  improve  it,  and  it  would  not  be  a  bad  composition 
•of  that  odd  kind  to  some  picnic  receptacle  of  all  things. 

April  27. — This  day  must  not  be  wasted.  I  breakfast  with 
the  Fergusons,  and  dine  with  the  Brewsters.  But,  by  Heaven, 
I  will  finish  Anne  of  Geierstein  this  day  betwixt  the  two  en- 
gagements. I  don't  know  why  nor  wherefore,  but  I  hate^towie, 
I  mean  Anne  of  Gdwstein;  the  other  two  Annes  are  good  girls. 
Accordingly  I  well  nigh  accomplished  my  work,  but  about 
three  o'clock  my  story  fell  into  a  slough,  and  in  getting  it  out 
I  lost  my  way,  and  was  forced  to  postpone  the  conclusion  till 
to-morrow.  Wrote  a  good  day's  work  notwithstanding. 

April  28. — I  have  slept  upon  my  puzzle,  and  will  now 

finish  it,  Jove  bless  my  pia  mater,  as  I  see  not  further 

impediment  before  me.    The  story  will  end,  and  shall  end, 

because  it  must  end,  and  so  here  goes.    After  this  doughty 

1  Life,  vol.  vi  p.  90. 


276  JOTJENAL.  [APRIL 

resolution,  I  went  doggedly  to  work,  and  finished  five  leaves 
by  the  time  when  they  should  meet  the  coach.  But  the  mis- 
fortune of  writing  fast  is  that  one  cannot  at  the  same  time 
write  concisely.  I  wrote  two  pages  more  in  the  evening. 
Stayed  at  home  all  day.  Indeed,  the  weather  —  sleety, 
rainy,  stormy  —  forms  no  tempting  prospect.  Bogie,  too,  who 
sees  his  flourish  going  to  wreck,  is  looking  as  spiteful  as  an 
angry  fiend  towards  the  unpropitious  heavens.  So  I  made  a 

day  of  work  of  it, 

"  And  yet  the  end  was  not." 

April  29.  —  This  morning  I  finished  and  sent  off  three 
pages  more,  and  still  there  is  something  to  write  ;  but  I  will 
take  the  broad  axe  to  it,  and  have  it  ended  before  noon. 

This  has  proved  impossible,  and  the  task  lasted  me  till  nine, 
when  it  was  finished,  tant  lien  que  mal.  Now,  will  people 
say  this  expresses  very  little  respect  for  the  public  ?  In  fact, 
I  have  very  little  respect  for  that  dear  pu^licum  whom  I 
am  doomed  to  amuse,  like  Goody  Trash  in  Bartholomew  Fair, 
with  rattles  and  gingerbread  ;  and  I  should  deal  very  un- 
candidly  with  those  who  may  read  my  confessions  were  I  to 
say  I  knew  a  public  worth  caring  for  or  capable  of  dis- 
tinguishing the  nicer  beauties  of  composition.  They  weigh 
good  and  evil  qualities  by  the  pound.  Get  a  good  name  and 
you  may  write  trash.  Get  a  bad  one  and  you  may  write 
like  Homer,  without  pleasing  a  single  reader.  I  am,  perhaps, 
I'  enfant  g&tt  de  succte,  but  I  am  brought  to  the  stake,1  and 
must  perforce  stand  the  course. 

Having  finished  Anne  2  I  began  and  revised  fifteen  leaves 

1  "  They  have  ty'd  me  to  a  stake  ,  I  can-     What  !  will  the  aspiring  blood  of  Lancaster 
not  fly,  Sink  in  the  ground  ?  SHAKESPEARE. 


., 

Printed  for  Cadell  &  Co.,  Edin- 
3  The  work  was  published  in  May  burgh  ;  and  Simpkin  &  Marshall, 
under  the  foUowing  title  :—  "  Anne  London,  1829.  (At  the  end)  Edin- 
of  Geterstein,  or  The  Maiden  of  the  burgh  :  Printed  by  Ballantyne  & 
Mut  .  By  the  Author  of  Waverley,  Company,  Paul's  Work,  Canon- 
etc.  gate." 


1829.]  JOUKNAL.  277 

of  the  History,  and  sent  them  to  Dr.  Lardner.  I  think  they 
read  more  trashy  than  I  expected.  But  when  could  I  ever 
please  myself,  even  when  I  have  most  pleased  others  ?  Then 
I  walked  about  two  hours  by  the  thicket  and  river-side, 
watching  the  appearance  of  spring,  which,  as  Coleridge 
says— 

"  Comes  slowly  up  this  way." 

After  dinner  and  tea  I  resumed  the  task  of  correction, 
which  is  an  odious  one,  but  must  be  attempted,  ay,  and 
accomplished  too. 

April  30. — Dr.  Johnson  enjoins  Bozzy  to  leave  out  of 
his  diary  all  notices  of  the  weather  as  insignificant.  It  may 
be  so  to  an  inhabitant  of  Bolt  Court,  in  Fleet  Street,  who 
need  care  little  whether  it  rains  or  snows,  except  the  shilling 
which  it  may  cost  him  for  a  Jarvie ;  but  when  I  wake  and 
find  a  snow  shower  sweeping  along,  and  destroying  hundreds 
perhaps  of  young  lambs,  and  famishing  their  mothers,  I  must 
consider  it  as  worth  noting.  For  my  own  poor  share,  I  am 
as  indifferent  as  any  Grub  Streeter  of  them  all — 

« And  since  'tis  a  bad  day, 

Rise  up,  rise  up,  my  merry  men, 
And  use  it  as  you  may." 

I  have  accordingly  been  busy.  The  weather  did  not  permit 
me  to  go  beyond  the  courtyard,  for  it  continued  cold  and 
rainy.  I  have  employed  the  day  in  correcting  the  histoiy 
for  Cyclopaedia  as  far  as  page  35,  exclusive,  and  have  sent  it 
off,  or  shall  to-morrow.  I  wish  I  knew  how  it  would  run 
out.  Dr.  Lardner's  measure  is  a  large  one,  but  so  much  the 
better.  I  like  to  have  ample  verge  and  space  enough,  and  a 
mere  abridgment  would  be  discreditable.  Well,  nobody  can 
say  I  eat  the  bread  of  idleness.  Why  should  I  ?  Those 
who  do  not  work  from  necessity  take  violent  labour  from 
choice,  and  were  necessity  out  of  the  question  I  would  take 
the  same  sort  of  literary  labour  from  choice — something 
more  leisurely  though. 


MAY. 

May  1. — Weather  more  tolerable.  I  commenced  my 
review  on  the  Duke  of  Guise's  Expedition,1  for  my  poor 
correspondent  Gillies,  with  six  leaves.  What  a  curious  tale 
that  is  of  Masaniello!  I  went  to  Huntly  Burn  in  the 
sociable,  and  returned  on  foot,  to  my  great  refreshment. 
Evening  as  usuaL  Ate,  drank,  smoked,  and  wrote. 

May  2. — A  pitiful  day  of  rain  and  wind.  Laboured  the 
whole  morning  at  Gillies's  review.  It  is  a  fine  subject — the 
Duke  of  Guise  at  Naples — and  I  think  not  very  much 
known,  though  the  story  of  Masaniello  is. 

I  have  a  letter  from  Dr.  Lardner  proposing  to  me  to- 
publish  the  history  in  June.  But  I  dare  not  undertake  it 
in  so  short  a  space,  proof-sheets  and  all  considered ;  it  must 
be  October — no  help  for  it.2  Worked  after  dinner  as  usual 

May  3. — The  very  same  diary  might  serve  this  day  as 
the  last.  I  sent  off  to  Gillies  half  his  review,  and  I  wish 
the  other  half  at  Old  Nick. 

May  4. — A  poor  young  woman  came  here  this  morning, 
well-dressed  and  well-behaved,  with  a  strong  northern 
accent.  She  talked  incoherently  a  long  story  of  a  brother 
and  a  lover  both  dead.  I  would  have  kept  her  here  till 
I  wrote  to  her  friends,  particularly  to  Mr.  Sutherland  (an 
Aberdeen  bookseller),  to  inform  them  where  she  is,  but  my 

1  See  Foreign  Quarterly  Review,  give  the  author  £1500  for  two 

voL  iv.  p.  355.  volumes,  forming  the  first  and 

3  This  short  History  of  Scotland,  fourth  issues  of  their  own  Cabinet 

it  was  found,  could  not  be  com-  Cydopadia,  the  publioationof  which 

prised  in  a  single  volume,  and  the  was  commenced  before  the  end  of 

publishers  handsomely  agreed  to  the  year. 

278 


1829J  JOURNAL.  279 

datigliter  and  her  maidens  were  frightened,  as  indeed  there 
might  be  room  for  it,  and  so  I  sent  her  in  one  of  Davidson's 
chaises  to  the  Castle  at  Jedburgh,  and  wrote  to  Mr.  Shortreed 
to  see  she  is  humanely  treated.  I  hare  written  also  to  her 
brother. 

"Long  shall  I  see  these  things  forlorn. 
And  long  again  their  sorrows  feel.77 

The  rest  was  write,  walk,  eat,  smoke;  smoke,  and  write 
again. 

Hay  5. — A  moist  rainy  day,  mild,  however,  and  promising 
good  weather.  I  sat  at  my  desk  the  whole  day,  and  worked 
at  G-illies's  review.  So  was  the  day  exhausted. 

May  6, — I  sent  off  the  review.  Eeceived  the  sheets  of 
the  Secret  Tribunal  from  Master  Reynolds.  Keith  Scott,  a 
grandson  of  James  Scott,  my  father's  cousin-german,  came 
here,  a  fine  lively  boy  with  good  spirits  and  amiable  manners. 
Just  when  I  had  sent  off  the  rest  of  Gillies's  manuscript, 
W.  Laidlaw  came,  so  I  had  "him  for  my  companion  in  a  walk 
which  the  late  weather  has  prevented  for  one  or  two  days. 
Colonel  and  Mrs.  Ferguson,  and  Margaret  Ferguson,  came  to 
dinner,  and  so  passed  the  evening. 

May  7. — Cajptain  Percy,  brother  of  Lord  Lovaine,  and 
son  of  Lord  Beverley,  came  out  to  dinner.  Dr.  and  Mrs. 
Brewster  met  him.  He  is  like  his  brother,  Lord  Lovaine, 
an  amiable,  easy,  and  accomplished  man,  who  has  seen  a 
great  deal  of  service,  and  roamed  about  with  tribes  of 
Western  Indians. 

May  8. — Went  up  Yarrow  with  Captain  Percy,  which 
made  a  complete  day's  idleness,  for  which  I  have  little 
apology  to  offer.  I  heard  at  the  same  time  from  "the 
President1  that  Sir  Robert  Dundas  is  very  unwell,  so  I  must 
be  in  Edinburgh  on  Monday  llth.  Very  disagreeable,  now 
the  weather  is  becoming  pleasan't. 

May  9. — Captain  Percy  left  us  at  one  o'clock    He  has 

1  Bight  Hon.  Charles  Hope. 


280  JOURNAL.  [MAT 

a  sense  of  humour,  and  aptness  of  comprehension  which 
renders  Him  an  agreeable  companion.  I  am  sorry  his  visit 
has  made  me  a  little  idle,  but  there  is  no  help  for  it. 

I  have  done  everything  to-day  previous  to  my  going 
away,  but — gue  faut-il  faire?  one  must  see  society  now  and 
then,  and  this  is  really  an  agreeable  man.  And  so,  transeat 
ilk.  I  walked,  and  was  so  fatigued  as  to  sleep,  and  now  I  will 
attack  John  Lockhart's  proof-sheets,  of  which  he  has  sent  me 
a  revise.  In  the  evening  I  corrected  proofs  for  the  review. 

May  10. — This  must  be  a  day  of  preparation,  which  I 
hate ;  yet  it  is  but  laying  aside  a  few  books,  and  arranging  a 
few  papers,  and  yet  my  nerves  are  fluttered,  and  I  make 
blunders,  and  mislay  my  pen  and  my  keys,  and  make  more 
confusion  than  I  can  repair.  After  all,  I  will  try  for  once 
to  do  it  steadily. 

Well !  I  have  toiled  through  it ;  it  is  like  a  ground  swell 
in  the  sea  that  brings  up  all  that  is  disgusting  from  the 
bottom — admonitory  letters — unpaid  bills — few  of  these, 
thank  my  stars ! — all  that  one  would  wish  to  forget  perks 
itself  up  in  your  face  at  a  thorough  redding  up — devil  take 
it,  I  will  get  out  and  cool  the  fever  that  this  turmoil  has 
made  in  my  veins !  The  delightful  spring  weather  conjured 
down  the  evil  spirit  I  sat  a  long  time  with  my  nerves 
shaking  like  a  frightened  child,  and  then  laughed  at  it  all 
by  the  side  of  the  river,  coming  back  by  the  thicket. 

May  11,  \EdwbwrgK\. — We  passed  the  morning  in  the 
little  arrangements  previous  to  our  departure,  and  then 
returned  at  night  to  Edinburgh,  bringing  Keith  Scott  along. 
This  boy's  grandfather,  James  Scott  by  name,  very  clever 
and  particularly  well  acquainted  with  Indian  customs  and 
manners.  He  was  one  of  the  first  settlers  in  Prince  of  Wales 
Island.  He  was  an  active-minded  man,  and  thought  and  wrote 
a  great  deal  I  have  seen  a  trunkf  ul  of  his  MSS.  Unhappily, 
instead  of  writing  upon  some  subject  on  which  he  might  have 
conveyed  information  he  took  to  writing  on  metaphysics,  and 


1829.]  JOURNAL.  281 

lost  both  his  candles  and  his  labour.  I  was  consulted  about 
publishing  some  part  of  his  works ;  but  could  not  recommend 
it.  They  were  shallow  essays,  with  a  good  deal  of  infidelity 
exhibited.  Yet  James  Scott  was  a  very  clever  man.  He  only 
fell  into  the  common  mistake  of  supposing  that  arguments 
new  to  him  were  new  to  all  others.  His  son,  when  I  knew 
him  long  since  in  this  country,  was  an  ordinary  man  enough. 
This  boy  seems  smart  and  clever.  We  reached  the  house  in 
the  evening ;  it  was  comfortable  enough  considering  it  had 
been  shut  up  for  two  months.  I  found  a  letter  from  Cadell 
asserting  his  continued  hope  in  the  success  of  the  Magnum. 
I  begin  to  be  jealous  on  the  subject,  but  I  will  know 
to-morrow. 

May  12. — Went  to  Parliament  House.  Sir  Eobert  Dun- 
das  very  unwell  Poor  Hamilton  on  his  back  with  the  gout 
So  was  obliged  to  have  the  assistance  of  Rolland  *  from  the 
Second  Division.  Saw  Cadell  on  the  way  home.  I  was 
right :  he  had  been  disappointed  in  his  expectations  from 
Glasgow  and  other  mercantile  places  where  trade  is  low 
at  present.  But 

"  Tidings  did  he  bring  of  Africa  and  golden  joys." 

The  Magnum  has  taken  extremely  in  Ireland,  which  was 
little  counted  on,  and  elsewhere.  Hence  he  proposes  a 
new  edition  of  Tales  of  my  Grandfather,  First  Series ;  also 
an  enlargement  of  the  Third  Series.  All  this  drives  poverty 
and  pinch,  which  is  so  like  poverty,  from  the  door. 

I  visited  Lady  J.  S.,  and  had  the  pleasure  to  find  her  well 
I  wrote  a  little,  and  got  over  a  place  that  bothered  ma 
Cadell  has  apprehensions  of  A[nne]  of  Gf[eiersteiri],  so  have  I. 
Well,  the  worst  of  it  is,  we  must  do  something  better.2 

1  Adam  Rolland,  Principal  Clerk  tion  by  Raeburn's  masterpiece  of 

of   Session,    a    nephew   of   Adam  portraiture,  now  in  the  possession 

Holland  of  Gask,  who  was  in  some  of  Miss  Abercrombie,  Edinburgh, 
respects  the  prototype  of  Pleydell,         *  Sir  Walter  had  written  to  Mr. 

and  whose  face  and  figure  have  been  Lockhart  on  8th  May : — "  Anne  of 

made  familiar  to  the  present  genera-  Geier stein  is  concluded;  but  as  I 


282 


JOURNAL. 


[MAY 


13. — Attended  the  Court,  which  took  up  a  good 
deal  of  time.  On  my  return  saw  Sir  Robert  Dundas,  who 
is  better — and  expects  to  be  out  on  Tuesday.  I  went  to 
the  Highland  Society  to  present  Miss  Graiiame  Stirling's 
book,  being  a  translation  of  Gelieu's  work  on  bees,1  which 
was  well  received.  Went  with  the  girls  to  dine  at  Dalhousie 
Castle,  where  we  were  very  kindly  received.  I  saw  the 
Edgewell  Tree,2  too  fatal,  says  Allan  Ramsay,  to  the  family 
from  which  he  was  himself  descended.  I  also  saw  the  fatal 
Coalston  Pear,3  said  to  have  been  preserved  many  hundred 
years.  It  is  certainly  a  pear  either  petrified  or  turned  into 
wood,  with  a  bit  out  of  one  side  of  it. 

It  is  a  pity  to  see  my  old  school-companion,  this  fine 


do  not  like  her  myself,  I  do  Dot 
expect  she  will  be  popular." 

As  a  contrast  to  the  criticisms  of 
the  printer  and  publisher,  and  a  com- 
ment upon  the  author's  own  appre- 
hensions, the  subjoined  extract  from 
a  letter  written  by  Mr.  G-.  P.  B. 
James  may  be  given  : — "  When  I 
first  read  Anne  of  Geierstein  I  will 
own  that  the  multitude  of  surpass- 
ing beauties  which  it  contained 
frightened  me,  but  I  find  that  after 
having  read  it  the  public  mind  re- 
quired to  be  let  gently  down  from 
the  tone  of  excitement  to  which  it 
had  been  raised,  and  was  contented 
to  pause  at  my  book  ( Richelieu)9  as  a 
man  who  has  been  enjoying  a  fine 
prospect  from  a  high  hill  stops  before 
he  reaches  the  valley  to  take  another 
look,  though  half  the  beauty  be 
already  lost ....  You  cannot  think 
how  I  long  to  acquit  myself  of  the 
obligations  which  I  lie  under  to- 
wards you,  but  I  am  afraid  that 
fortune,  who  has  given  you  both  the 
will  and  the  power  to  confer  such 
great  favours  upon  me,  has  not  in 
any  degree  enabled  me  to  aid  or 
assist  you  in  return." 

1  The  Bee  Preserver,  or  Practical 


Directions  for  the  Management  and 
Preservation  of  Hives.  Translated 
from  the  French  of  J.  De  Gelieu. 
1829. 

2  "  An  oak  tree  which  grows  by 
the  side  of  a  fine  spring  near  the 
Castle  of  Dalhousie ;  very  much  ob- 
served by  the  country  people,  who 
give  out   that  before  any  of  the 
family  died  a  branch  fell  from  the 
Edgewell  Tree.    The  old  tree  some 
few  years  ago  fell  altogether,  but 
another  sprang  from  the  same  root, 
which  is  now  [1720]  tall  and  flour- 
ishing ;  and  lang  be  it  sae.  "—Allan 
Ramsay's    Works,  vol.   i   p.   329: 
"Stocks  in  1720."     2   vols.    8vo, 
Lond.  1800. 

The  tree  is  still  flourishing  [1889], 
and  the  belief  in  its  sympathy  with 
the  family  is  not  yet  extinct,  as  an 
old  forester,  on  seeing  a  large  branch 
fall  from  it  on  a  quiet  still  day  in 
July  1874,  exclaimed,  "The  laird 'a 
deed  noo  1 "  and  accordingly  news 
came  soon  after  that  Fox  Maule, 
llth  Earl  of  Dalhonaie,  had  died. 

3  The  Coalstoun  Pear  was  removed 
from  Dalhousie  to  Coalstoun  House 
in  1861. 


1829.]  JOUK1TAL.  28( 

true-hearted  nobleman  of  such  an  ancient  and  noble  descent 
after  having  followed  the  British  flag  through  all  quarter; 
of  the  world,  again  obliged  to  resume  his  wanderings  at  \ 
time  of  life  equal,  I  suppose,  to  my  own.  He  has  not 
however,  a  grey  hair  in  his  head. 

May  14. — Left  Dalhousie  at  eight  to  return  here  ix 
breakfast,  where  we  received  cold  tidings.  Walter  has  had  ar 
inflammatory  attack,  and  I  fear  it  will  be  necessary  to  hin 
to  return  without  delay  to  the  Continent.  I  have  letters 
from  Sophia  and  Sir  Andrew  Halliday.  The  last  has  been 
of  the  utmost  service,  by  bleeding  and  advising  active 
measures.  How  little  one  knows  to  whom  they  are  to  be 
obliged !  I  wrote  to  him  and  to  Jane,  recommending  the 
Ionian  Islands,  where  Sir  Frederick  Adam  would,  I  ana 
sure,  give  Walter  a  post  on  his  staff.  The  kind  old  ChieJ 
Commissioner  at  once  interested  himself  in  the  matter. 
It  makes  me  inexpressibly  anxious,  yet  I  have  kept  uj 
my  determination  not  to  let  the  chances  of  fate  over- 
come me  like  a  summer's-eloui1  I  wrote  four  or  five 
pages  of  the  History  to-day,  notwithstanding  the  agitatioD 
of  my  feelings. 

]£ay  15. — Attended  the  Court,  where  Mr.  Eolland  and 
I  had  the  duty  of  the  First  Division;  Sir  Eobert  and 
Hamilton  being  both  laid  up.  Dined  at  Granton  and  met 
Lord  and  Lady  Dalhousie,  Sir  John  Hope,  etc.  I  have 
spelled  out  some  work  this  day,  though  I  have  been  rathei 
knocked  about. 

May  16. — After  the  Court  this  day  I  went  to  vote  at 
the  Archers'  Hall,  where  some  of  the  members  had  become 
restive.  They  were  outvoted  two  to  one.  There  had  been 
no  division  in  the  Eoyal  Body  Guard  since  its  commence- 
ment, but  these  times  make  divisions  everywhere.  A  lettei 
from  Lockhart  brings  better  news  of  Walter,  but  my  heart 
is  heavy  on  the  subject.  I  went  on  with  my  History,  how- 
1  Macbeth,  Act  in.  Sc.  4. 


284  JOURNAL.  [MAY 

ever,  for  the  point  in  this  world  is  to  do  what  we  ought,  and 
tear  what  we  must. 

Dined  at  home  and  wrote  in  the  evening. 

May  17. — I  never  stirred  from  my  seat  all  this  day.  My 
reflections,  as  suggested  hy  Walter's  illness,  were  highly  un- 
comfortable ;  and  to  divert  it  I  wrought  the  whole  day,  save 
when  I  was  obliged  to  stop  and  lean  my  head  on  my  hand. 
Eeal  affliction,  however,  has  something  in  it  by  which  it  is 
sanctified.  It  is  a  weight  which,  however  oppressive,  may 
like  a  bar  of  iron  be  conveniently  disposed  on  the  sufferer's 
person.  But  the  insubstantiality  of  a  hypochondriac  affection 
is  one  of  its  greatest  torments.  You  have  a  huge  feather- 
bed on  your  shoulders,  which  rather  encumbers  and  oppresses 
you  than  calls  forth  strength  and  exertion  to  bear  it.  There 
is  something  like  madness  in  that  opinion,  and  yet  it  has 
a  touch  of  reality.  Heaven  help  me ! 

May  18. — I  resolved  to  take  exercise  to-day,  so  only 
wrought  till  twelve.  I  sent  off  some  sheets  and  copy 
to  Dr.  Lardner.  I  find  my  written  page  goes  as  better 
than  one  to  two  of  his  print,  so  a  little  more  than  one 
hundred  and  ninety  of  my  writing  will  make  up  the  sum 
wanted.  I  sent  him  off  as  far  as  page  sixty-two.  Went 
to  Mr,  Colvin  Smith's  at  one,  and  sat  for  my  picture  to 
three.  There  must  be  an  end  of  this  sitting.  It  devours 
my  time. 

I  wrote  in  the  evening  to  Walter,  James  MacCulloch, 
to  Dr.  Lardner,  and  others,  and  settled  some  other  corre- 
spondence. 

May  19. — I  went  to  the  Court,  sjid  abode  there  till  about 
one,  and  in  the  Library  from  one  to  two,  when  I  was  forced 
to  attend  a  public  meeting  about  the  King's  statue.  I  have 
no  turn  for  these  committees,  and  yet  I  get  always  jamm'd 
into  them.  They  take  up  a  cruel  deal  of  time  in  a  way 
very  unsatisfactory.  Dined  at  home,  and  wrought  hard. 
I  shall  be  through  the  Bruce's  reign.  It  is  lengthy;  but, 


1829.]  JOUKKiL.  285 

hang  it,  it  was  our  only  halcyon  period.     I  shall  be  soon 
done  with  one-half  of  the  thousand  pound's  worth. 

May  20. — Mr.  Cadell  breakfasted  with  us,  with  a  young- 
ster for  whom  he  wants  a  letter  to  the  Commander  or 
Governor  of  Bombay.  After  breakfast  C.  and  I  had  some 
talk  of  business.  His  tidings,  like  those  of  ancient  Pistol, 
are  of  Africa  and  golden  joys.  He  is  sure  of  selling  at  the 
starting  8000  copies  of  the  Magnum,  at  a  profit  of  £70 
per  1000 — that  is,  per  month.  This  seems  certain.  But  he 
thinks  the  sale  will  rise  to  12,000,  which  will  be  £280  more, 
or  £840  in  all.  This  will  tell  out  a  gross  divisible  profit  of 
upwards  of  £25,000.  This  is  not  unlikely,  but  after  this 
comes  a  series  of  twenty  volumes  at  least,  which  produce 
only  half  that  quantity  indeed ;  but  then  the  whole  profits, 
save  commissions,  are  the  author's.  That  will  come  to  as 
much  as  the  former,  say  £50,000  in  all.  This  supposes  I 
carry  on  the  works  of  fiction  for  two  or  three  novels  more. 
But  besides  all  this,  Cadell  entertains  a  plan  of  selling  a 
cheaper  edition  by  numbers  and  numbermen,  on.  which  he 
gives  half  the  selling  price.  One  man,  Mr.  Ireland,  offers 
to  take  10,000  copies  of  the  Magnum  and  talks  of  25,000. 
This  allows  a  profit  of  £50  per  thousand  copies,  not  much 
worse  than  the  larger  copy,  and  Cadell  thinks  to  carry  on 
both.  I  doubt  this.  I  have  great  apprehension  that  these 
interlopers  would  disgust  the  regular  trade,  with  whom  we 
are  already  deeply  engaged,  I  also  foresee  selling  the  worst 
copies  at  the  higher  price.  All  this  must  be  thought  and 
cared  for.  In  the  meantime,  I  see  a  fund,  from  which 
large  payments  may  be  made  to  the  Trustees,  capable  of 
extinguishing  the  debt,  large  as  it  is,  in  ten  years  or  earlier, 
and  leaving  a  reversion  to  my  family  of  the  copyrights. 
Sweet  bodements1 — good — but  we  must  not  reckon  our 
chickens  before  they  are  hatched,  though  they  are  chipping 
the  shell  now.  "We  will  see  how  the  stream  takes. 
1  Macbeth,  Act  w.  Sc.  1. 


286  JOUEISTAL.  [MAY 

Dined  at  a  public  dinner  given  to  the  excellent  Lord 
Dalhousie  before  his  departure  for  India,  An  odd  way  of 
testifying  respect  to  public  characters,  by  eating,  drinking, 
and  roaring.  The  names,  however,  will  make  a  good  show 
in  the  papers.  Home  at  ten.  Good  news  from  Sophia 
and  Walter.  I  am  zealous  for  the  Mediterranean  when 
the  season  comes,  which  may  be  the  beginning  of  Sep- 
tember. 

May  21. — This  is  only  the  23d  on  which  I  write,  yet 
I  have  forgotten  anything  that  has  passed  on  the  21st  worthy 
of  note.  I  wrote  a  good  deal,  I  know,  and  dined  at  home. 
The  step  of  time  is  noiseless  as  it  passes  over  an  old  man. 
The  non  est  tanti  mingles  itself  with  everything. 

May  22. — I  was  detained  long  in  the  Court,  though 
Ham.  had  returned  to  his  labour.  We  dined  with  Captain 
Basil  Hall,  and  met  a  Mr.  Codman,  or  some  such  name,  with 
Ms  lady  from  Boston.  The  last  a  pleasant  and  well-man- 
nered woman,  the  husband  Bostonian  enough*  We  had  Sir 
William  Arbuthnot,  besides,  and  his  lady. 

By-the-bye,  I  should  have  remembered  that  I  called  on 
my  old  friend,  Lady  Charlotte  Campbell,  and  found  her  in 
her  usual  good-humour,  though  miffed  a  little — I  suspect  at 
the  history  of  Gillespie  Grumach  in  the  Legend  of  Montrose. 
I  saw  Haining  also,  looking  thin  and  pale.  These  should 
have  gone  to  the  memorandum  of  yesterday. 

May  23. — Went  to-day  to  call  on  the  Commissioner,1  and 
saw,  at  his  Grace's  Levee,  the  celebrated  divine,  soi-disant 
prophet,  Irving.2  He  is  a  fine-looking  man  (bating  a  dia- 
bolical squint),  with  talent  on  his  brow  and  madness  in  his 
eye.  His  dress,  and  the  arrangement  of  his  hair,  indicated 
that  much  attention  had  been  bestowed  on  his  externals, 

1  Lord  Forbes  was  at  this  time         %  Rev.  Edward  Irving,  minister 

His  Majesty's  High  Commissioner  of  the  Scottish  Church  in  London, 

to   the  General  Assembly  of   the  was  deposed  March  1833,  and  died 

Church  of  Scotland :  he  had  been  Dec.  1834,  aged  forty-two, 
appointed  in  1826. 


1829.]  JOUENAL.  287 

and  led  me  to  suspect  a  degree  of  self-conceit,  consistent 
both  with  genius  and  insanity. 

Came  home  by  CadelTs,  who  persists  in  his  visions  of  El 
Dorado.  He  insists  that  I  will  probably  bring  £60,000 
within  six  years  to  rub  off  all  Constable's  debts,  which  that 
sum  will  do  with  a  vengeance.  Cadell  talks  of  offering  for 
the  Poetry  to  Longman.  I  fear  they  will  not  listen  to  him 
The  Na/poleon  he  can  command  when  he  likes  by  purchasing 
their  stock  on  hand.  The  Lives  of  the  Novelists  may  also  be 
had.  Pleasing  schemes  all  these,  but  dangerous  to  build 
upon.  Yet  in  looking  at  the  powerful  machine  which  we 
have  put  in  motion,  it  must  be  owned  "  as  broken  ships  have 
come  to  land." 

Waited  on  the  Commissioner  at  five  o'clock,  and  had 
the  pleasure  to  remain  till  eight,  when  the  debate  in  the 
Assembly  was  over.  The  question  which  employed  their 
eloquence  was  whether  the  celebrated  Mr.  Irving  could  sit 
there  as  a  ruling  elder.1  It  was  settled,  I  think  justly,  that 
a  divine,  being  of  a  different  order  of  officers  in  the  Kirk, 
cannot  assume  the  character  of  a  ruling  elder,  seeing  he 
cannot  discharge  its  duties. 

Mr.  Irving  dined  with  us.  I  could  hardly  keep  my  eyes 
off  him  while  we  were  at  table.  He  put  me  in  mind  of  the 
devil  disguised  as  an  angel  of  light,  so  ill  did  that  horrible 
obliquity  of  vision  harmonise  with  the  dark  tranquil  features 
of  his  face,  resembling  that  of  our  Saviour  in  Italian  pictures, 
with  the  hair  carefully  arranged  in  the  same  manner.  There 
was  much  real  or  affected  simplicity  in  the  manner  in  which 
he  spoke.  He  rather  made  play,  and  spoke  much  across  the 
table  to  the  Solicitor,  and  seemed  to  be  good-humoured. 
But  he  spoke  with  that  kind  of  unction  which  is  nearly 
[allied]  to  cajolerie.  He  boasted  much  of  the  tens  of 
thousands  that  attended  his  "ministry  at  the  town  of  Annan, 

1  That  is  as  a  lay-member  of  the  General  Assembly  of  the  Church  of 
Scotland. 


288  JOURNAL.  [MAY 

his  native  place,  till  he  wellnigh  provoked  me  to  say  he 
was  a  distinguished  exception  to  the  rule  that  a  prophet  was 
not  esteemed  in  his  own  country.  But  time  and  place  were 
not  fitting. 

May  24. — I  wrote  or  wrought  all  the  morning,  yea,  even 
to  dinner-time.  Miss  Kerr,  and  Mrs.  Skene,  and  Will  Clerk 
dined.  Skene  came  from  the  Commissioner's  at  seven  o'clock. 
We  had  a  merry  evening.  Clerk  exults  in  the  miscarriage 
of  the  Bill  for  the  augmentation  of  the  judges'  salaries.  He 
and  the  other  clerks  in  the  Jury  Court  had  hoped  to  have 
had  a  share  in  the  proposed  measure,  but  the  Court  had  con- 
sidered it  as  being  nospoma  natamus.1  I  kept  our  own  pippins 
quiet  by  declining  to  move  in  a  matter  which  was  to  expose 
us  to  the  insult  of  a  certain  refusal.  Clerk,  with  his  usual 
felicity  of  quotation,  said  they  should  have  remembered  the 
Clown's  exhortation  to  Lear,  "  Good  nuncle,  tarry  and  take 
the  fool  with  you."2 

May  25. — Wrote  in  the  morning.  Dr.  Macintosh 
Mackay  came  to  breakfast,  and  brought  with  him,  to  show 
me,  the  Young  Chevalier's  target,  purse,  and  snuff-box,  the 
property  of  Cluny  MacPherson.  The  pistols  are  for  holsters, 
and  no  way  remarkable ;  a  good  serviceable  pair  of  weapons 
silver  mounted.  The  targe  is  very  handsome  indeed,  studded 
with  ornaments  of  silver,  chiefly  emblematic,  chosen  with 
much  taste  of  device  and  happily  executed.  There  is  a 
contrast  betwixt  the  shield  and  purse,  the  targe  being  large 
and  heavy,  the  purse,  though  very  handsome,  unusually 
small  and  light.  After  one  o'clock  I  saw  the  Duke  and 
Duchess  of  Gordon ;  then  went  to  Mr.  Smith's  to  finish  a 
painting  for  the  last  time.  The  Duchess  called  with  a 
Swiss  lady,  to  introduce  me  to  her  friend,  while  I  was  doing 
penance.  I  was  heartily  glad  to  see  her  Grace  once  more. 
Called  in  at  CadeU's.  His  orders  continue  so  thick  that  he 
must  postpone  the  delivery  for  several  days,  to  get  new 

1  See  Fable  of  the  Golden  pippins.  s  Lear,  Act  I.  Sc.  4. 


1829.]  JOUKKAJL  289 

engravings  thrown  off,  etc.  Vogue  la  gaUre !  From  all  that 
now  appears,  I  shall  be  much  better  off  in  two  or  three 
years  than  if  my  misfortunes  had  never  taken  place. 
Periissem  ni  perlissem. 

Dined  at  a  dinner  given  by  the  Antiquarian  Society  to 
Mr,  Hay  Drummond,  Secretary  to  the  Society,  now  going 
Consul  to  Tangiers.  It  was  an  excellent  dinner — turtle, 
champagne,  and  all  the  agrJmens  of  a  capital  meal,  for 
£1,  6s.  a-head.  How  Barry  managed  I  can't  say.  The 
object  of  this  compliment  spoke  and  drank  wine  in- 
cessantly; good-naturedly  delighted  with  the  compliment, 
which  he  repeatedly  assured  me  he  valued  more  than 
a  hundred  pounds.  I  take  it  that  after  my  departure, 
which  was  early,  it  would  be  necessary  to  "carry  Mr. 
Silence  to  bed."  x 

May  26. — The  business  at  the  Court  heavy.  Dined  at 
Gala's,  and  had  the  pleasure  to  see  him  in  amended  health. 
Sir  John  and  Lady  Hope  were  there,  and  the  evening  was 
lively  and  pleasant.  George  Square  is  always  a  melancholy 
place  for  me.  I  was  dining  next  door  to  my  father's  former 
house.2 

May  27. — I  got  up  the  additional  notes  for  the  Waverley 
Novels.  They  seem  to  be  setting  sail  with  a  favourable  wind. 
I  had  to-day  a  most  kind  and  friendly  letter  from  the  Duke 
of  Wellington,  which  is  a  thing  to  be  vain  of.  He  is  a  most 
wonderful  man  to  have  climbed  to  such  a  height  without 
ever  slipping  his  foot  Who  would  have  said  in  1815  that 
the  Duke  would  stand  still  higher  in  1829,  and  yet  it  in- 
dubitably is  so.  We  dined  with  Lady  Charlotte  Campbell, 
now  Lady  Charlotte  Bury,  and  her  husband,  who  is  an 
egregious  fop  but  a  fine  draughtsman;  Here  is  another  day 
gone  without  work  in  the  evening. 

May  28. — The  Court  as  usual  till  one  o'clock.  But  I 
forgot  to  say  Mr.  Macintosh  Mackay  breakfasted,  and  in- 
i  2d  Henry  IV.,  Act  v.  Sc.  3.  2  STo.  25. 

VOL.  II.  T 


290  JOUKNAL  [MAY 

spected  my  curious  Irish  MS.,  which.  Dr.  Brinkley  gave  me.1 
Mr.  Mackay,  I  should  say  Doctor,  who  well  deserved  the 
name,  reads  it  with  tolerable  ease,  so  I  hope  to  knock  the 
marrow  out  of  the  bone  with  his  assistance.  I  came  home 
and  despatched  proof-sheets  and  revises  for  Dr.  Lardner.  I 
saw  kind  John  Gibson,  and  made  him  happy  with  the  fair 
prospects  of  the  Magnum.  He  quite  agrees  in  my  views. 
A  young  clergyman,  named  M'Combie,  from  Aberdeenshire, 
also  called  to-day.  I  have  had  some  consideration  about 
the  renewal  or  re-translation  of  the  Psalmody.  I  had 
peculiar  views  adverse  to  such  an  undertaking.2  In  the 
first  place,  it  would  be  highly  unpopular  with  the  lower 
and  more  ignorant  rank,  many  of  whom  have  no  idea  of 
the  change  which  those  spiritual  poems  have  suffered  in 
translation,  but  consider  their  old  translations  as  the  very 
songs  which  David  composed.  At  any  rate,  the  wiser  class 
think  that  our  fathers  were  holier  and  better  men  than  we, 
and  that  to  abandon  their  old  hymns  of  devotion,  in  order  to 
grace  them  with  newer  and  more  modish  expression,  would 
be  a  kind  of  sacrilege.  Even  the  best  informed,  who  think 
on  the  subject,  must  be  of  opinion  that  even  the  somewhat 
bald  and  rude  language  and  versification  of  the  Psalmody 
gives  them  an  antique  and  venerable  air,  and  their  want  of  the 
popular  graces  of  modish  poetry  shows  they  belong  to  a  style 
where  ornaments  are  not  required.  They  contain,  besides, 
the  very  words  which  were  spoken  and  sung  by  the  fathers 
of  the  Eeformation,  sometimes  in  the  wilderness,  sometimes 
in  fetters,  sometimes  at  the  stake.  If  a  Church  possessed  the 

1  The  manuscript  referred  to  Is  donor  of  this  book  is  the  Right  Rev. 

now  at  Abbotsford.    It  is  a  small  Bishop  of  Cloyne,   famed   for  his 

quarto  of  8fx6J  inches,  bound  in  skill  in  science,  and  especially  as 

old  mottled  leather,  and  consisting  an  astronomer. "     For  contents  of 

of  251  leaves  of  paper,  written  on  vol.  see  Appendix.    Dr.  JohnBrink- 

"both  sides  in  the  Irish  character,  ley,  Bishop  of  Cloyne,  was  Astro- 

apparently  in  the  reign  of  James  VL  nomer  Royal  for  Ireland. 

It  bears  the  following  inscription  2  See  letter  to  Principal  Baird, 

in  Sir  Walter's  hand  :— "  The  kind  ante,  vol.  i.  p. 


1829.]  JOURNAL.  291 

vessels  out  of  which  the  original  Reformers  partook  of  the 
Eucharist,  it  would  be  surely  bad  taste  to  melt  them  down 
and  exchange  them  for  more  modern.  No,  no.  Let  them 
write  hymns  and  paraphrases  if  they  will,  but  let  us  have  still 

"  All  people  tliat  on  earth  do  dwell"1 

Law  and  devotion  must  lose  some  of  their  dignity  as  often 
as  they  adopt  new  fashions. 

May  30. — The  Skenes  came  in  to  supper  last  night.  Dr. 
Scott  of  Haslar  Hospital  came  to  breakfast  He  is  a 
nephew  of  Scott  of  Scalloway,  who  is  one  of  the  largest  pro- 
prietors in  Shetland.  I  have  an  agreeable  recollection  of  the 
kindness  and  hospitality  of  these  remote  isles,  and  of  this 
gentleman's  connections  in  particular,  who  welcomed  me  both 
as  a  stranger  and  a  Scott,  being  duly  tenacious  of  their  claru 
This  young  gentleman  is  high  in  the  medical  department  of 
the  navy.  He  tells  me  that  the  Ultima  Thule  is  improving 
rapidly.  The  old  clumsy  plough  is  laid  asida  They  have 
built  several  stout  sloops  to  go  to  the  deep-sea  fishing, 
instead  of  going  thither  in  open  boats,  which  consumed  so 
much  time  between  the  shore  and  the  haaf  or  fishing  spot. 
Pity  but  they  would  use  a  steam-boat  to  tow  them  out !  I 
have  a  real  wish  to  hear  of  Zetland's  advantage.  I  often 
think  of  its  long  isles,  its  towering  precipices,  its  capes 
covered  with  sea-fowl  of  every  class  and  description  that 

1  The  first  line  of  the  Scottish  posed,    saying,    "No!     no!     the 

metrical  version  of  the  hundredth  Scotch   Psalms."      After    reading 

Psalm*    Mr.  Lockhart  tells  us,  in  to  him  a  little  while,  he  expressed 

his  affecting  account  of  Sir  Walters  a  wish  to  be  moved  nearer  the 

illness,  that  his  love  for  the  old  window,  through  which  he  looked 

metrical  version  of  the  Psalms  con-  long  and  earnestly  up  and  down 

tinued  unabated  to  the  end.   A  story  the  valley  and  towards  the  sky, 

has  been  told,  on  the  authority  of  and   then   on   the  woman's   face, 

the  nurse  in  attendance,  that  on  saying:    "I'll  know  it  all  "before 

the  morning  of  the  day  on  which  night."    This  story  will  find  some 

he  died,  viz.,  on  the 21st  Sept.  1832,  confirmation  from  the  entry  in  the 

he  opened  his  eyes  once  more,  quite  Journal  under    16th  April    1831  : 

conscious,  and  calmly  asked  her  to  "I  think  /  toiU  be  in  the  secret  next 

read  to  h*™  a  psalm.    She  proceeded  week,  unless  I  recruit  greatly. " 
to  do  so,   when  he  gently  inter- 


292  JOUBNAL.  [MAY  1829. 

ornithology  can  find  names  for,  its  deep  caves,  its  smoked 
geese,  and  its  sour  sillocks.  I  would  like  to  see  it  again. 
After  the  Court  I  came  round  by  Cadell,  who  is  like  Jemmy 

Taylor, 

"ML  of  mirth  and  full  of  glee," 

for  which  he  has  good  reason,  having  raised  the  impression 
of  the  Magnum  to  12,000  copies,  and  yet  the  end  is  not,  for 
the  only  puzzle  now  is  how  to  satisfy  the  delivery  fast 
enough.1 

May  31. — We  dined  at  Craigcrook  with  Jeffrey.  It  is 
a  most  beautiful  place,  tastefully  planted  with  shrubs  and 
trees,  and  so  sequestered,  that  after  turning  into  the  little 
avenue,  all  symptoms  of  the  town  are  left  behind  you.  He 
positively  gives  up  the  Edinburgh  Review?  A  very  pleasant 
evening.  Hather  a  glass  of  wine  too  much,  for  I  was  heated 
during  the  night.  Very  good  news  of  Walter. 

1  In  a  letter  to  Ms  son  at  this  2  Jeffrey,  who  had  just  retired 
time  he  says  the  * '  sale  of  the  Novels  from  the  editorship  of  the  Edinburgh 
is  pro-di-gi-ous.  If  it  last  but  a  JReview,  was  succeeded  by  Macvey 
few  years  it  will  clear  my  feet  of  Napier,  whose  first  No.  was  pub- 
old  encumbrances." — Life,  vol.  ix.  lished  in  October  1829. 
p.  328 


JUNE. 

Jwne  L — Being  Sunday  I  remained  to  work  the  whole 
day,  and  finished  half  of  the  proposed  volume  of  History. 
I  was  not  disturbed  the  whole  day,  a  thing  rather  unusuaL 

June  2. — Eeceived  Mr.  Eees  of  London  and  CoL  Ferguson 
to  breakfast.  Mr.  Eees  is  clearly  of  opinion  our  scheme  (the 
Magnum)  must  answer.1  I  got  to  letter-writing  after  break- 
fast, and  cleared  off  old  scores  in  some  degree.  Dr.  Eoss 
called  and  would  hardly  hear  of  my  going  out.  I  was 
obliged,  however,  to  attend  the  meeting  of  the  trustees  for 
the  Theatre.2  The  question  to  be  decided  was,  whether  we 
should  embrace  an  option  left  to  us  of  taking  the  old 
Theatre  at  a  valuation,  or  whether  we  should  leave  it  to 
Mrs.  Siddons  and  Mr.  Murray  to  make  the  best  of  it. 
There  were  present  Sir  Patrick  Murray,  Baron  Hume,  Lord 
Provost,  Sir  John  Hay,  Mr.  Gilbert  Innes,  and  myself. 
We  were  all  of  opinion  that  personally  we  ought  to  have 
nothing  to  do  with  it.  But  I  thought  as  trustees  for  the 
public,  we  were  bound  to  let  the  public  know  how  the 
matter  stood,  and  that  they  might,  if  they  pleased,  have  the 
theatrical  property  for  £16,000,  which  is  dog  cheap.  They 
were  all  clear  to  give  it  up  (the  right  of  reversion)  to  Mrs. 
Siddons.  I  am  glad  she  should  have  it,  for  she  is  an 
exceDent  person,  and  so  is  her  brother.  But  I  think  it'has 

1  The  first  volume  had  just  been  on  increasing  until  it  reached  35,000 

issued   with  a  dedication   to  the  monthly. 

King.  The  series  was  completed  2  Theatre  Royal,  Edinburgh, 
in  48  vols.,  published  at  the  be-  which  stood  at  that  time  in  Shake- 
ginning  of  each  month,  between  speare  Square,  the  site  of  the 
1829-33,  and  the  circulation  went  present  General  Post-Office. 


294  JOUEKAX.  [JUNE 

been  a  little  jobbish.  There  is  a  clause  providing  the  new 
patentees  may  redeem.  I  desired  that  the  circumstance 
should  be  noted,  that  we  were  only  exercising  our  own 
judgment,  leaving  the  future  trustees  to  exercise  theirs.  I 
rather  insisted  that  there  should  be  some  saving  clause  of 
this  kind,  even  for  the  sake  of  our  honour.  But  I  could  not 
prevail  upon  my  colleagues  to  put  such  a  saving  clause  on 
the  minutes,  though  they  agreed  to  the  possibility  of  the 
new  patentees  redeeming  on  behalf  of  the  public.  I  do  not 
think  we  have  done  right. 

I  called  on  Mr.  Cadell,  whose  reports  of  the  Magnum 
might  fill  up  the  dreams  of  Alnaschar  should  he  sleep  as 
long  as  the  seven  sleepers.  The  rest  was  labour  and  letters 
till  bed-time. 

June  3. — The  ugly  symptoms  still  continue.  Dr.  Eoss 
does  not  make  much  of  it,  and  I  think  he  is  apt  to  look 
grave.1  I  wrote  in  the  morning.  Dr.  Macintosh  Mackay 
came  to  breakfast,  and  brought  a  Gaelic  book,  which  he  has 
published — the  Poetry  of  Eob  Donn — some  of  which  seems 
pretty  as  he  explained  it.  Court  kept  me  till  near  two,  and 
then  home  comes  I.  Afternoon  and  evening  was  spent  as 
usual  In  the  evening  Dr.  Eoss  ordered  me  to  be  cupped, 
an  operation  which  I  only  knew  from  its  being  practised  by 
that  eminent  medical  practitioner  the  barber  of  Bagdad.  It 
is  not  painful;  and,  I  think,  resembles  a  giant  twisting 
about  your  flesh  between  his  finger  and  thumb. 

June  4. — I  was  obliged  to  absent  myself  from  the  Court 
on  Dr.  Boss's  positive  instance ;  and,  what  is  worse,  I  was 
compelled  to  send  an  apology  to  Hopetoun  House,  where  I 
expected  to  see  Madame  Caradori,  who  was  to  sing  Jock  of 

1  Mr.  Lockhart  remarks  that,  be-  the  darkest  prognostications.   After 

sides  the  usual  allowance  of  rheu-  some  weeks,  during  which  he  com- 

Tnatism,  and  other  lesser  ailments,  plained  of  headache  and  nervous 

Sir  Walter  had   an   attack   that  irritation,     certain     haemorrhages 

season  of  a  nature  which  gave  his  indicated  the  sort  of  relief  required, 

family  great  alarm,  and  which  for  and  he  obtained  it  from  copious 

some  days  he  himself  regarded  with  cupping. — Life,  voL  ix.  p.  327-8. 


1829.]  JOTnOSTAL.  29 

Hazeldean.    I  wrote  the  song  for  Sophia;   and  I  find  ra 
friends  here  still  prefer  her  to  the  foreign  syren. 

"  However,  Madame  Caradori, 
To  miss  you  I  am  very  sorry, 
I  should  have  taken  ifc  for  glory 
To  have  heard  you  sing  my  Border  story." 

I  worked  at  the  Tales  of  my  Grandfather,  but  leisurely. 

Jime  5. — Oadell  came  to  dine  with  me  t£te-a-t$te,  for  tb 
girls  are  gone  to  Hopetoun  House.  "We  had  ample  matte 
to  converse  upon,  for  his  horn  was  full  of  good  news.  "WhiL 
we  were  at  dinner  we  had  letters  from  London  and  Ireland 
which  decided  him  to  raise  the  impression  of  Waverley  t< 
15,000.  This,  with  10,000  on  the  number  line  whicl 
Ireland  is  willing  to  take,  will  make  £18,000  a  year  o 
divisible  profit.  This  leads  to  a  further  speculation,  as  . 
said,  of  great  importance.  Longman  &  Co.  have  agreed  t< 
sell  their  stock  on  hand  of  the  Poetry,  in  which  they  hav< 
certain  shares,  their  shares  included,  for  £8000.  Gadel 
thinks  he  could,  by  selling  off  at  cheap  rates,  sorting,  makinj 
waste,  etc.,  get  rid  of  the  stock  for  about  £5000,  leaving 
£3000  for  the  purchase  of  the  copyrights,  and  proposes  t< 
close  the  bargain  as  much  cheaper  as  he  can,  but  at  all  event* 
to  close  it.  "Whatever  shall  fall  short  of  the  price  returned  b} 
the  stock,  the  sale  of  which  shall  be  entirely  at  his  risk 
shall  be  reckoned  as  the  price  of  the  copyright,  and  we  shal 
pay  half  of  that  balance,  I  had  no  hesitation,  in  authorising 
Tiim  to  proceed  in  his  bargain  with  Owen  Bees  of  Longman'* 
house  upon  that  principle.  Por  supposing,  according  tc 
CadelTs  present  idea,  the  loss  on  the  stock  shall  amount  tc 
£2000  or  £3000,  the  possession  of  the  entire  copyright 
undivided  would  enable  us,  calculating  upon  similar  succesi 
to  that  of  the  Novels,  to  make  at  least  £500  per  cent 
Longman  &  Co.  have  indeed  an  excellent  bargain,  but  thei 
so  will  we.  We  pay  dear  indeed  for  what  the  ostensible 
subject  of  sale  is,  but  if  it  sets  free  almost  the  whole  of  ou 


296  JOURNAL.  [JUNE 

copyrights,  and  places  them  in  our  own  hands,  we  get  a  most 
valuable  quid  pro  giw.  There  is  only  one-fourth,  I  think, 
of  Marmion  in  Mr.  Murray's  hands,  and  it  must  he  the 
deuce  if  that  cannot  be  [secured].1  Mr.  Cadell  proposed 
that,  as  he  took  the  whole  books  on  his  risk,  he  ought 
to  have  compensation,  and  that  it  should  consist  in  the 
sum  to  be  given  to  me  for  arranging  and  making  addi- 
tions to  the  volumes  of  Poetry  thus  to  be  republished.  I 
objected  to  this,  for  in  the  first  place  he  may  suffer  no  loss, 
for  the  books  may  go  off  more  rapidly  than  he  thinks 
or  expects.  In  the  second  place,  I  do  not  know  what  my 
labours  in  the  Poetry  may  be.  In  either  case  it  is  a  blind 
bargain ;  but  if  he  should  be  a  sufferer  beyond  the  clear  half 
of  the  loss,  which  we  agree  to  share  with  him,  I  agreed  to 
make  him  some  compensation,  and  he  is  willing  to  take 
what  I  shall  think  just ;  so  stands  our  bargain.  Remained 
at  home  and  wrote  about  four  pages  of  Tales.  I  should 
have  done  more,  but  my  head,  as  Squire  Sullen  says,  "  aiked 
consurnedly."  2  Rees  has  given  Cadell  a  written  offer  to  be 
binding  till  the  twelfth ;  meantime  I  have  written  to  Lock- 
hart  to  ask  John  Murray  if  he  will  treat  for  the  fourth  share 
of  Marmion,  which  he  possesses.  It  can  be  worth  but  little 
to  him,  and  gives  us  all  the  copyrights.  I  have  a  letter  from 
Sir  Thomas  Dick  Lauder,  touching  a  manuscript  of  Messrs. 
Hay  Allan  called  the  Vestiarium  Scotice  by  a  Sir  Richard 
Forrester.  If  it  is  an  imposition  it  is  cleverly  done,  but  I 
doubt  the  quarter  it  comes  from.  These  Hay  Allans  are 
men  of  warm  imaginations.  It  makes  the  strange  averment 
that  all  the  Low-Country  gentlemen  and  border  clans  wore 
tartan,  and  gives  sets  of  them  all  I  must  see  the  manuscript 
before  I  believe  in  it.  The  Allans  are  singular  men,  of  much 
accomplishment  but  little  probity — that  is,  in  antiquarian 
matters.  Cadell  lent  me  £10, — funny  enough,  after  all  our 
grand  expectations,  for  Croesus  to  want  such  a  gratility ! 
1  See  wi/m,  p.  301.  2  The  Beaux's  Stratagem,  FarquJhar. 


1829.] 


JOURNAL. 


297 


June  7. — I  rose  at  seven,  and  wrote  to  Sir  Thomas 
Lauder  a  long  warning  on  the  subject  of  these  Allans  and 
their  manuscript.1  Proceeded  tot  write,  but  found  myself 
pulled  up  by  the  necessity  of  reading  a  little.  This  occupied 
my  whole  morning.  The  Lord  President  called  yery  kindly 


1  Through,  the  courtesy  of  Miss 
Dick  Lauder  I  am  enabled  to  give 
the  letter  referred  to : — 

"My  DEAB  SIB,  THOMAS,— I  re- 
ceived your  kind  letter  and  inter- 
esting communicatioa  yesterday, 
and  hasten  to  reply.  I  am  ashamed 
of  the  limited  hospitality  I  was  able 
to  offer  Mr.  Lauder,  but  circum- 
stances permitted  me  no  more.  I 
was  much  pleased  with  his  lively 
and  intelligent  manners,  and  hope 
he  will  live  to  be  a  comfort  and  a 
credit  to  Lady  Lauder  and  you. 

' :  I  need  not  say  I  have  the  greatest 
interest  in  the  MS.  which  you  men- 
tion. In  case  it  shall  really  prove 
an  authentic  document,  there  would 
not  be  the  least  difficulty  in  getting 
the  Bannatyne  Club  to  take,  per- 
haps, 100  copies,  or  obtaining  sup- 
port enough  so  as,  at  the  least, 
to  preclude  the  possibility  of  loss 
to  the  ingenious  Messrs.  Hay 
Allan.  But  I  think  it  indispens- 
able that  the  original  MS.  should 
be  sent  for  a  month  or  so  to  the 
Register  House  under  the  charge  of 
the  Deputy  Begister,  Mr.  Thomson, 
that  its  antiquity  be  closely  scrutin- 
ised by  competent  persons.  The 
art  of  imitating  ancient  writing  has 
got  to  a  considerable  perfection,  and 
it  has  been  the  bane  of  Scottish 
literature,  and  disgrace  of  her  anti- 
quities, that  we  have  manifested 
an  eager  propensity  to  believe  with- 
out inquiry  and  propagate  the  errors 
which  we  adopt  too  hastily  our- 
selves. The  general  proposition 
that  the  Lowlanders  ever  wore  plaids 
is  difficult  to  swallow.  They  were 


of  twenty  different  races,  and  al- 
most all  distinctly  different  from 
the  Scots  Irish,  who  are  the  proper 
Scots,  from  which  the  Royal  Family 
are  descended.  For  instance,  there 
is  scarce  a  great  family  in  the  Low- 
lands of  Scotland  that  is  not  to  be 
traced  to  the  Normans,  the  proudest 
as  well  as  most  civilised  race  in 
the  eleventh  and  twelfth  centuries. 
Is  it  natural  to  think  that  holding 
the  Scots  in  the  contempt  in  which 
they  did,  they  would  have  adopted 
their  dress?  If  you  will  look  at 
Brace's  speech  to  David  I.,  as  the 
historian  ffilred  tells  the  story,  you 
will  see  he  talks  of  the  Scots  as  a 
British  officer  would  do  of  Chero- 
kees.  Or  take  our  country,  the 
central  and  western  part  of  the 
border:  it  was  British,  Welsh  if 
you  please,  with  the  language  and 
manners  of  that  people  who  certainly 
wore  no  tartan.  It  is  needless  to 
prosecute  this,  though  I  could  show, 
I  think,  that  there  is  no  period  in 
Scottish  History  when  the  manners, 
language,  or  dress  of  the  High- 
landers were  adopted  in  the  Low 
Country.  They  brought  them  with, 
them  from  Ireland,  as  you  will  see 
from  the  very  curious  prints  in 
Derrick's  picture  of  Ireland,  where 
you  see  the  chiefs  and  followers 
of  the  wild  Irish  in  the  ordinary 
Highland  dress,  tempore  Queen 
[Elizabeth.  Besides  this,  where  has 
slept  this  universal  custom  that 
nowhere,  unless  in  this  MS.,  is 
it  even  heard  of?  Lesley  knew 
it  not,  though  the  work  had  been 
in  his  possession,  and  his  attention. 


298 


JOUBNAL 


[JUNE 


to  desire  me  to  keep  at  home  to-morrow.  I  thought  of 
being  out,  but  it  may  be  as  well  not.  I  am  somehow  or 
other  either  listless  or  lazy.  My  head  aches  cruelly.  I  made 
a  fight  at  reading  and  working  till  eleven,  and  then  came 
sleep  with  a  party-coloured  [mantle]  of  fantastic  hues,  and 
wrapt  me  into  an  imaginary  world. 

June  8. — I  wrote  the  whole  morning  till  two  o'clock. 
Then  I  went  into  the  gardens  of  Princes  Street,  to  my  great 
exhilaration,  I  never  felt  better  for  a  walk ;  also  it  is  the 
first  I  have  taken  this  whole  week  and  more.  I  visited  some 
remote  garden  grounds,  where  I  had  not  been  since  I  walked 
there  with  the  good  Samaritan  Skene,  sadly  enough,  at  the 


must  have  been  called  to  it  when 
writing  concerning  the  three  races 
of  Scots — Highlanders,  Lowlanders, 
and  Bordennen,  and  treating  of  their 
dress  in  particular.  Andrew  Borde 
knows  nothing  of  it,  nor  the  French- 
man who  published  the  geographi- 
cal work  from  which  Pinkerton 
copied  the  prints  of  the  Highlander 
and  Lowlander,  the  former  in  a 
frieze  plaid  or  mantle,  while  the 
Lowlander  struts  away  in  a  cloak 
and  trunk  hose,  liker  his  neighbour 
the  Fleming.  I  will  not  state  other 
objections,  though  so  many  occur, 
that  the  authenticity  of  the  MS. 
being  proved,  I  would  rather  sup- 
pose theauthor  had  beensome  tartan- 
weaver  zealous  for  his  craft,  who 
wished  to  extend  the  use  of  tartan 
over  the  whole  kingdom.  I  have 
been  told,  and  believe  till  now,  that 
the  use  of  tartan  was  never  general 
in  Scotland  (Lowlands)  until  the 
Union,  when  the  detestation  of  that 
measure  led  it  to  be  adopted  as 
the  national  colour,  and  the  ladies 
all  affected  tartan  screens  or  mantles. 
"Now,  a  word  to  your  own  private 
ear,  my  dear  Sir  Thomas.  I  have 
understood  that  the  Messrs.  Hay 
Allan  are  young  men  of  talent, 


great  accomplishments,  enthusiasm 
for  Scottish  manners,  and  an  exag- 
gerating imagination,  which  possibly 
deceives  even  themselves.  I  my- 
self saw  one  of  these  gentlemen 
wear  the  Badge  of  High  Constable 
of  Scotland,  which  he  could  have 
no  more  right  to  wear  than  the 
Crown.  Davidoff  used  also  to 
amuse  us  with  stories  of  knighthoods 
and  orders  which  he  saw  them 
wear  at  Sir  William  Cumming 
Gordon's.  Now  this  is  all  very 
well,  and  I  conceive  people  may 
fall  into  such  dreaming  habits  easily 
enough,  and  be  very  agreeable  and 
talented  men  in  other  respects,  and 
may  be  very  amusing  companions 
in  the  country,  but  their  authority 
as  antiquaries  must  necessarily  be 
a  little  apocryphal  when  the  faith 
of  MSS.  rests  upon  their  testimony. 
An  old  acquaintance  of  mine,  Cap- 
tain Watson  of  the  navy,  told  me 
he  knew  these  gentlemen's  father, 
and  had  served  with  him ;  he  was 
lieutenant,  and  of  or  about  Captain 
Watson's  age,  between  sixty  I  sup- 
pose, and  seventy  at  present.  Now 
what  chance  was  there  that  either 
from  age  or  situation  he  should  be 
receiving  gifts  from  the  young 


1829.]  JOURKAL.  299 

time  of  my  misfortunes.1  Tlie  shrubs  and  young  trees, 
which  were  then  invisible,  are  now  of  good  size,  and  gay 
with  leaf  and  blossom.  I,  too,  old  trunk  as  I  am,  have 
put  out  tender  buds  of  hope,  which  seemed  checked  for  ever. 

I  may  now  look  with  fair  hope  to  freeing  myself  of 
obligation  from  all  men,  and  spending  the  rest  of  my  life 
in  ease  and  quiet.  God  make  me  thankful  for  so  cheering 
a  prospect ! 

June  9. — I  wrote  in  the  morning,  set  out  for  a  walk  at 
twelve  o'clock  as  far  as  Mr.  CadelTs.  I  found  him  hesitat- 
ing about  his  views,  and  undecided  about  the  Number  plan. 
He  thinks  the  first  plan  answers  so  much  beyond  expectation 
it  is  a  pity  to  interfere  with  it,  and  talks  of  re-engraving  the 
plates.  This  would  be  touchy,  but  nothing  is  resolved  on. 

Anne  had  a  little  party,  where  Lady  Charlotte  Bury,  Lady 
Hopetoun,  and  others  met  the  Caradori,  who  sung  to  us 
very  kindly.  She  sung  Jock  of  Hazeldeaii  very  well,  and 
with  a  peculiar  expression  of  humour.  Sandie  Ballantyne 
kindly  came  and  helped  us  with  fiddle  and  flageolet.  Willie 
Clerk  was  also  here.  We  had  a  lunch,  and  were  very  gay, 

Chevalier     of     Highland     Manu-  The  Messrs.  Hay  Allan   subse- 

scripts.  quently  took  the  names  of   John 

"All  this,  my  dear  Sir  Thomas,  Sobieski  Stuart  (who  assumed  the 

you  -will  make   your  own,  but  I  title    of    Comte     d'Albanie)    and 

cannot  conceal  from  you  my  reasons,  Charles    Edward    Stuart.      John 

because  I  would  wish  you  to  know  Sobieski  died  in  1872,  and  Charles 

my  real  opinion.     If  it  is  an  irnita-  Edward  in  1880.     The  "original1' 

tion,  it  is  a  very  good  one,  but  the  of  Sir  Kichard  Forrester's  manu- 

title   '  Liber  Vestaarinm '  is   false  script  was  never  submitted  to  the 

Latin  I  should   think  not  likely  inspection  of  the  Deputy  Register, 

to  occur  to  a   Scotsman  of  Buch-  as  suggested  by  Scott ;  but  it  was 

anan's  age.    Did  you  look  at  the  published  in  a  very  handsome  shape 

watermark   of   the   MS.?      If   the  a  dozen  years  later,  and  furnished  a 

Manuscript  be  of  undeniable  anti-  text  for  an  article  in  the  Quarterly, 

quity,  I  consider  it  as  a  great  curi-  in  which  the  authenticity  of  the 

osity,  and  most  worthy  to  be  pub-  book,  and  the  claims  of  the  author 

lished.    But  I  believe  nothing  else  and  his  brother,  were  unsparingly 

than  ocular  inspection  will  satisfy  criticised    by   the    late  Professor 

most  cautious  antiquaries.  .  .  . —  Skene  of  Glasgow. — See  "TheHeirs 

Yours,  my  dear  Sir  Thomas,  always,  of  the  Stuarts  "  in  Quarterly  jRewflw, 

WALTER  SCOTT."  vol.  Ixxxit 

"BPINBUBOH,  5  Jwne  3829."  x  Ani^  vol.  i.  p.  91,  92. 


300 


JOURNAL. 


[JUNE 


not  the  less  so  for  the  want  of  Mr.  Bury,  who  is  a  thorough- 
paced coxcomb,  with  some  accomplishments,  however.  I 
drank  two  glasses  of  champagne,  which  have  muddled  my 
brains  for  the  day.  Will  Clerk  promised  to  come  back  and 
dine  on  the  wreck  of  the  turkey  and  tongue,  pigeon-pie,  etc. 
He  came,  accordingly,  and  stayed  till  nine ;  so  no  time  for 
work.  It  was  not  a  lost  day,  however.1 

June  10. — Nota  lem,  my  complaint  quite  gone.     I  at- 

bustle  of  the  marriage  feast,  to 
secrete  himself  within  the  apart- 
ment, and  that  soon  after  the  entry 
of  the  married  pair,  or  at  least  as 
soon  as  the  parents  and  others  re- 
treated and  the  door  was  made  fast, 
he  had  come  out  from  his  conceal- 
ment, attacked  and  desperately 
wounded  the  bridegroom,  and  then 
made  his  escape  by  the  window 
through  the  garden.  As  the  un- 
fortunate bride  never  spoke  after 
having  uttered  the  words  mentioned 
by  Sir  Walter,  no  light  could  be 
thrown  on  the  matter  by  them. 
But  it  was  thought  that  Bucklaw's 
obstinate  silence  on  the  subject 
favoured  the  supposition  of  the 
chastisement  having  been  inflicted 
by  his  rival.  It  is  but  fair  to  give 
the  unhappy  victim  (who  was  by 
all  accounts  a  most  gentle  and 
feminine  creature)  the  benefit  of  an 
explanation  on  a  doubtful  point.' 

"  So  far  my  worthy  friend,  who 
seems  a  little  jealous  of  the  poor 
bride's  reputation.  I  send  you  his 
note,  and  you  can  makewhatyou  like 
of  it  I  am  intending  a  little  jaunt 
to  his  country,  and  we  mean  to  visit 
sundry  old  castles  in  Aberdeenshire, 
and  wish  you  were  of  the  party.  I 
have  heard  nothing  of  Linton  [cog- 
nomen for  Sir  Adam  Ferguson]  this 
summer.  I  hope  you  have  been  pass- 
ing your  time  agreeably.  — With  best 
compliments  to  all  friends,  I  remain, 
my  dear  Sir  Walter,  ever  yours, 
"Wat.  CLERK." 


1  There  are  so  few    of  "Darsie 
LatimerV  letters  preserved  that 
the  following  may  be  given  relating 
to  the  Bride  of  Lammermoor : — 
"Eonr.  Sept  1,1829. 

' '  MY  DEAR  SIR  WALTER, — I  greet 
you  well  (which,  by  the  way,  is  the 
proper  mode  of  salutation  in  this 
cursed  weather,  that  is  enough  to 
make  us  all  greet).  But  to  come  to 
my  proposal,  which  is  to  forward 
to  you  a  communication  I  had  within 
these  few  days  from  Sir  Robert 
Home  Dalrymple  Elphinstone. 

"After  expressing  the  great  plea- 
sure the  perusal  of  your  notes  to 
the  new  edition  of  the  Novels 
had  given  him,  he  adds :  ( I  wish 
you  would  give  him  a  hint  of  what 
I  formerly  mentioned  to  you  re- 
garding my  great-grandaunt  and 
your  own  relative,  the  unfortunate 
Bride  of  Lammermoor.  It  was 
first  mentioned  to  me  by  Miss 
Maitland,  the  daughter  of  Lady 
Rothes  (they  were  the  nearest 
neighbours  of  the  Stair  family  in 
Wigtownshire),  and  I  afterwards 
heard  the  tradition  from  others  in 
that  country.  It  was  to  the  follow- 
ing effect,  that  when,  after  the  noise 
and  violent  screaming  in  the  bridal 
chamber,  comparative  stillness  suc- 
ceeded, and  the  door  was  forced, 
the  window  was  found  open,  and 
it  was  supposed  by  many  that  the 
lover  (Lord  Rutherford)  had,  by 
the  connivance  of  some  of  the  ser- 
vants, found  means,  during  the 


1829.]  JOUBNAL.  301 

tended  the  Court,  and  sat  there  till  late.  Evening  had  its 
lot  of  labour,  which  is,  I  think,  a  second  nature  to  me.  It 
is  astonishing  how  little  I  look  into  a  book  of  entertainment. 
I  have  been  reading  over  the  Five  Nights  of  St.  Allans, — 
very  much  extra  mc&nia,  nostri  mundit  and  possessed  of 
considerable  merit,  though  the  author1  loves  to  play  at 
cherry-pit  with  Satan.2 

June  11. — I  was  kept  at  Court  by  a  hearing  till  near  three. 
Then  sat  to  Mr.  Graham  for  an  hour  and  a  half.  When  I 
came  home,  behold  a  letter  from  Mr.  Murray,  very  hand- 
somely yielding  up  the  fourth  share  of  Marmion,  which  he 
possessed.3  Afterwards  we  went  to  the  theatre,  where  St 
Eonan's  Well  was  capitally  acted  by  Murray  and  the  Bailie, 
— the  part  of  Clara  Mowbray  being  heavy  for  want  of  Mrs. 
Siddons.  Poor  old  Mrs.  Eenaud,  once  the  celebrated  Mrs. 
Powell,  took  leave  of  the  stage.  As  I  was  going  to  bed  at 
twelve  at  night,  in  came  R.  P.  Gillies  like  a  tobacco  cask 
I  shook  him  off  with  some  difficulty,  pleading  my  having 
been  lately  ill,  but  he  is  to  call  to-morrow  morning. 

June  12. — Gillies  made  his  appearance.  I  told  him 
frankly  I  thought  he  conducted  his  affairs  too  irregularly 
for  any  one  to  assist  him,  and  I  could  not  in  charity  advise 
any  one  to  encourage  subscriptions,  but  that  I  should  sub- 
scribe myself,  so  I  made  over  to  him  about  £50,  which  the 
Foreign  Review  owes  me,  and  I  will  grow  hard-hearted  and 
do  no  more.  I  was  not  long  in  the  Court,  but  I  had  to  look 
at  the  controversy  about  the  descent  of  the  Douglas  family, 
then  I  went  to  Cadell  and  found  him  still  cock-a-hoop.  He 
has  raised  the  edition  to  17,000,  a  monstrous  number,  yet 
he  thinks  it  will  clear  the  20,000,  but  we  must  be  quiet  in 
case  people  jalouse  the  failure  of  the  plates.  I  called  on 
Lady  J.  S.4  When  I  came  home  I  was  sleepy  and  over- 

1  Written  by  William  Mudf ord,  4  The  last  reference  in  the  Jour- 
born  1782,  died  1848.  nal  to  his  old  friend   Lady  Jane 
a  Twelfth  NigU,  Act  m.  Sc.  4.  Stuart,  who  died  on  the  following 
3  See  Life,  vol.  be.  pp.  325-6.  October. 


302  JOURNAL.  [JUNE 

walked.  By  the  way,  I  sat  till  Graham  finished  my 
picture.1  I  fell  fast  asleep  before  dinner,  and  slept  for  an 
hour.  After  dinner  I  wrote  to  Walter,  Charles,  Lockhart, 
and  John  Murray,  and  took  a  screed  of  my  novel ;  so  con- 
cluded the  evening  idly  enough 

June  13. — We  hear  of  Sophia's  motions.  She  is  to  set 
sail  by  steam-boat  on  the  16th,  Tuesday,  and  Charles  is  to 
make  a  run  down  with  her.  But,  alas !  my  poor  Johnnie  is, 
I  fear,  come  to  lay  his  bones  in  his  native  land.  Sophia  can 
no  longer  disguise  it  from  herself,  that  as  his  strength 
weakens  the  disease  increases.  The  poor  child  is  so  much 
bent  on  coming  to  see  Abbotsford  and  grandpapa,  that  it 
would  be  cruel  not  to  comply  with  his  wish — and  if  afflic- 
tion comes,  we  will  bear  it  best  together. 

"Not  more  the  schoolboy  who  expires 
Far  from  his  native  home  desires 
To  see  some  friend's  familiar  face, 
Or  meet  a  parent's  last  embrace." 

It  must  be  all  as  God  wills  it.  Perhaps  his  native  air  may 
be  of  service. 

More  news  from  Cadell.  He  deems  it  necessary  to  carry 
up  the  edition  to  20,000. 

[AVbotsford.] — This  day  was  fixed  for  a  start  to  Abbots- 
ford,  where  we  arrived  about  six  o'clock,  evening.  To  my 
thinking,  I  never  saw  a  prettier  place ;  and  even  the  trees 
and  flowers  seemed  to  say  to  me,  We  are  your  own  again. 
But  I  must  not  let  imagination  jade  me  thus.  It  would 
be  to  make  disappointment  doubly  bitter :  and,  God  knows, 
I  have  in  my  child's  family  matter  enough  to  check  any 
exuberant  joy. 

Juw  14. — A  delicious  day — threatening  rain;  but  with 
the  languid  and  affecting  manner  in  which  beauty  demands 
sympathy  when  about  to  weep.  I  wandered  about  the 
banks  and  braes  all  morning,  and  got  home  about  three, 

1  Now  in  the  rooms  of  the  Royal  Society,  Edinburgh. 


1829.]  JOUENAL.  303 

and  saw  everything  in  tolerable  order,  excepting  that  there 
was  a  good  number  of  branches  left  in  the  walks.  There  is 
a  great  number  of  trees  cut,  and  bark  collected.  Colonel 
Ferguson  dined  with  us,  and  spent  the  afternoon. 

June.  15. — Another  charming  day.  Up  and  despatched 
packets  for  Eallantyne  and  Cadell;  neither  of  them  was 
furiously  to  the  purpose,  but  I  had  a  humour  to  be  alert. 

1  walked  over  to  Huntly  Burn,  and  round  by  Chiefswood 
and  Janeswood,  where  I  saw  Captain  Hamilton.      He  is 
busy  finishing  his  Peninsular  campaigns.1    He  will  not  be 
cut  out  by  Napier,  whose  work  has  a  strong  party  cast ;  and 
being,  besides,  purely  abstract  and  professional,  to  the  public 
seems  very  dull    I  read  General  Miller's  account  of  the 
South  American  War.2    I  liked  it  the  better  that  Basil  Hall 
brought  the  author  to  breakfast  with  me  in  Edinburgh. 
A  fine,  tall,  military  figure,  his  left  hand  withered  like  the 
prophet's  gourd,  and  plenty  of  scars  on  Tn'mt    There  have 
been  rare  doings  in  that  vast  continent;  but  the  strife  is 
too  distant,  the  country  too  unknown,  to  have  the  effect 
upon  the  imagination  which  European  wars  produce. 

This  evening  I  indulged  in  the/ar  niente — a  rare  event 
with  me,  but  which  I  enjoy  proportionally. 

June  16. — Made  up  parcel  for  Dr.  Lardner;  and  now  I 
propose  to  set  forth  my  memoranda  of  Byron  for  Moore's 
acceptance,  which  ought  in  civility  to  have  been  done  long 
since.3  I  will  have  a  walk,  however,  in  the  first  place. 

1  AnnaU  of  the  Peninsular  War.  they  should  be  forthcoming."    And 

3  vols.  8vo,  1829.  Moore  himself  had  previously  re- 

3  Memoirs  of  General  Miller  in  minded  Sir  Walter  of  his  promise. 
the  Service  of  the  Republic  of  Peru. 

2  vols.  8vo,  1829.  "^pri*  25ft,  1S29. 

3  Mr.  Lockhart  had  -written  on  "  Mr  DEAB  SCOTT,— It  goes  to  my 
June  6  : — "  Moore  is  at  my  elbow  heart  to  bother  yon,  knowing  how 
and  says  he  has  not  the  face  to  bravely  and  gloriously  you  are  em- 
bother  you,  but  he  has  come  exactly  ployed  for  that  task-mistress — Pos- 
to  the  part  where  your  reminiscences  terity.  But  you  may  thank  your 
of  Lord  Byron  would  come  in ;  so  stars  that  I  have  let  you  off  so  long, 
he  is  waiting  for  a  week  or  so  in  case  All  that  you  promised  me  about 


304 


JOURNAL 


[JUNE 


I  did  not  get  on  with  Byron  so  far  as  I  expected — began 
it  though,  and  that  is  always  something.  I  went  to  see  the 
woods  at  Huntly  Burn,  and  Mars  Lea,  etc.  Met  Captain 
Hamilton,  who  tells  me  a  shocking  thing.  Two  Messrs. 
Stirling  of  Drumpellier  came  here  and  dined  one  day,  and 
seemed  spirited  young  men.  The  younger  is  murdered  by 
pirates.  An  Indian  vessel  in  which  he  sailed  was  boarded 
by  these  miscreants,  who  behaved  most  brutally;  and  he, 
offering  resistance  I  suppose,  was  shockingly  mangled  and 
flung  into  the  sea.  He  was  afterwards  taken  up  alive,  but 
died  soon  after.  Such  horrid  accidents  lie  in  wait  for  those 


Mrs.  Gordon  and  Gicht,  and  a 
variety  of  other  things,  is  remitted 
to  you;  but  I  positively  must 
have  something  from  you  of  your 
recollections  personally  of  Byron 
— and  that  as  soon  as  possible, 
for  I  am  just  coming  to  the  period 
of  your  acquaintance  with  him, 
which  was,  I  think,  in  the  year 
1814  Tell  me  all  the  particulars 
of  the  presents  you  exchanged, 
and  if  his  letters  to  you  are  really 
all  lost  (-which  I  will  still  hope  is 
not  the  case) ;  try,  as  much  as  pos- 
sible, with  your  memory 

*  To  lure  the  tassel  genties  "back  again,' 
"  You  will  have  seen  by  the  news- 
papers the  sad  loss  my  little  circle 
of  home  has  experienced,  a  loss 
never  to  be  made  up  to  us  in  this 
world,  whatever  it  may  be  the  will 
of  God  in  another.  Mrs.  Moore's 
own  health  is  much  broken,  and 
she  is  about  to  try  what  Chelten- 
ham can  do  for  her,  while  I  pro- 
ceed to  finish  my  printing  in  town. 
It  would  be  far  better  for  me  to 
remain  in  my  present  quiet  retreat, 
where  I  am  working  quite  alone,  but 
the  devils  beckon  me  nearer  them, 
and  I  must  begin  in  a  few  days. 
Direct  to  me,  under  cover  to  Croker 
— you  see  I  take  for  granted  you 
will  have  a  packet  to  send — and 


he  will  always  know  where  to  find 
me. 

"My  kindest  remembrances  to 
Miss  Scott,  and  believe  me  ever,  my 
very  dear  friend,  your  truly  and 
affectionate,  "Tnos.  MOORE." 

The  "memoranda"  were  not  ac- 
knowledged by  Moore  till  Oct.  SI, 
when  he  wrote  Scott  as  follows : — 

"MY  DEAE  SCOTT,—!  ought  to 
blush  *  terrestrial  rosy-red,  shame's 
proper  hue '  for  not  sooner  acknow- 
ledging your  precious  notes  about 
Byron.  One  conclusion,  however, 
you  might  have  drawn  from  my 
silence,  namely,  that  I  was  satisfied, 
and  had  all  that  I  asked  for.  Your 
few  pages  indeed  will  be  the  best 
ornament  of  my  book.  Murray 
wished  me  to  write  to  you  (immedi- 
ately on  receipt  of  the  last  MS.  you 
sent  me)  to  press  your  asking 
Hobhouse  for  the  letter  of  your 
own  (in  181?)  that  produced  Byron's 
reply.  But  I  was  doubtful  whether 
you  would  like  to  authorise  the 
publication  of  this  letter,  and  be- 
sides it  would  be  now  too  late,  as 
the  devils  are  in  full  hue  and  cry 
after  my  heels. 

"Health  and  prosperity  to  you, 
my  dear  friend,  and  believe  me, 
ever  yours  most  truly, 

"  THOMAS  MOORE.  " 


1829.]  JOTJBNAL.  305 

whom  we  see  "all  joyous  and  unthinking," *  sweeping 
along  the  course  of  life;  and  what  end  may  be  waiting 
ourselves  ?  Who  can  tell  ? 

June  17. — Must  take  my  leave  of  sweet  Abbotsford,  and 
my  leisure  hour,  my  eve  of  repose.  To  go  to  town  will  take 
up  the  morning. 

[Edinburgh.} — "We  set  out  about  eleven  o'clock,  got  to 
Edinburgh  about  four,  where  I  dined  with  Baron  Clerk  and 
a  few  Exchequer  friends — Lord  Chief  Baron,  Sir  Patrick 
Murray,  Sir  Henry  Jardine,  etc.  etc. 

June  18. — Corrected  proofs  for  Dr.  Dionysius  Lardner. 
Cadell  came  to  breakfast.  Poor  fellow,  he  looks  like  one 
who  had  been  overworked;  and  the  difficulty  of  keeping 
paper-makers  up  to  printers,  printers  up  to  draughtsmen, 
artists  to  engravers,  and  the  whole  party  to  time,  requires 
the  utmost  exertion.  He  has  actually  ordered  new  plates, 
although  the  steel  ones  which  we  employ  are  supposed  to 
throw  off  30,000  without  injury.  But  I  doubt  something 
of  this.  "Well,  since  they  will  buckle  fortune  on  our  back 
we  must  bear  it  scholarly  and  wisely.2  I  went  to  Court. 
Called  on  my  return  on  J.  B.  and  Cadell.  At  home  I  set 
to  correct  Ivanhoe.  I  had  twenty  other  things  more  press- 
ing ;  but,  after  all,  these  novels  deserve  a  preference.  Poor 
Terry  is  totally  prostrated  by  a  paralytic  affection.  Con- 
tinuance of  existence  not  to  be  wished  for. 

To-morrow  I  expect  Sophia  and  her  family  by  steam. 

June  19. — Sopliia,  and  Charles  who  acted  as  her  escort, 
arrived  at  nine  o'clock  morning,  fresh  from  the  steamboat. 
They  were  in  excellent  health — also  the  little  boy  and  girl ; 
but  poor  Johnnie  seems  very  much  changed  indeed,  and  I 
should  not  be  surprised  if  the  scene  shortly  closes.  There 
is  obviously  a  great  alteration  in  strength  and  features.  At 
dinner  we  had  our  family  chat  on  a  scale  that  I  had  not 
enjoyed  for  many  years.  The  Skenes  supped  with  us. 

1  Burns.  2  Merry  Wires,  Act  i.  Sc.  3. 

VOL.  IL  IT 


306  JOUENAL.  [JUNE 

June  20. — Corrected  proof-sheets  in  the  morning  for 
Dr.  Lardner.  Then  I  had  the  duty  of  the  Court  to  perform. 

As  I  came  home  I  recommended  young  Shortreed  to 
Mr.  Cadell  for  a  printing  job  now  and  then  when  Ballantyne 
is  over-loaded,  which  Mr.  Cadell  promised  accordingly. 

Lady  Anna  Maria  Elliot's  company  at  dinner.  Helped 
on  our  family  party,  and  passed  the  evening  pleasantly 
enough,  my  anxiety  considering. 

June  21. — A  very  wet  Sunday.  I  employed  it  to  good 
purpose,  bestowing  much  labour  on  the  History,  ten  pages  of 
which  are  now  finished.  Were  it  not  for  the  precarious  health 
of  poor  Johnnie  I  would  be  most  happy  in  this  reunion 
with  my  family,  but,  poor  child,  this  is  a  terrible  drawback. 

June  22. — I  keep  working,  though  interruptedly.  But 
the  heat  in  the  midst  of  the  day  makes  rne  flag  and  grow 
irresistibly  drowsy.  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Skene  came  to  supper  this 
evening.  Skene  has  engaged  himself  in  drawing  illustrations 
to  be  etched  by  himself  for  Wafo&rley*  I  wish  it  may  do.1 

1  Mr.    Skene  at  this    time  was  and,    if    I   recollect,  the  view   is 

•engaged  upon  a  series  of  etchings,  limited  and  wooded.    But  that  can. 

regarding  which    he   had    several  be  no  objection  to  adopting  it  as 

letters    from  Sir    Walter,    one   of  that  which  public  taste  has  adopted 

which  may  be  given  here : —  as  coming  nearest  to  the  ideal  of  the 

"My  DEAR  SKENE, — I  enclose  you  place.     Of  the  places  in  the  Blade 

Basil  Hall's  letter,  which  is  very  Dwarf,  Meiklestane  Moor,  Ellislie, 

interesting   to  me ;   but  I  would  Earnscliffe,  are  all  and  each  vox  et 

rather  decline  fixing  the  attention  praeterea  nihil.    Westburnflat  once 

of  the  public  further  on  my  old  was  a  real  spot,  now  there  is  no 

friend    George    Constable.       You  subject  for  the  pencil.    The  vestiges 

know  the  modern  rage  for  publica-  of  a  tower  at  the  junction  of  two 

tion,   and   it    might    serve    some  wild  brooks  with  a  rude  hillside, 

newsmen's  purpose  by  publishing  are  all    that  are  subjects  for  the 

something  about  my  old  friend,  who  pencil,  and  they  are  very  poor  ones, 

was  an  humourist,  which  may  be  Earnscliffe  and  Ganderscleuch  are 

unpleasing  to  his  friends  and  sur-  also  visions, 

viving  relations.  "  I  hope  your  work  is  afloat1  and 

"  I  did  not  think  on  Craignethan  i  Twenty  numbers  of  this  work  were 

in  writing  about  Tillietudlem,  and  published  in  1828  and  1829  under  the  title 

I  believe  it  differs  in  several  respects  of  "A  Series  of  Sketches  of  the  existing 

from  my  Chateau  en  Espagne.    It  Locallties  •&«*•*   to   m  the  waverley 

,    J     , ,      ~    ,     .     1^6I,     .  Novels,'  etched  from  original  drawings  "by 

is  not  on  the  Clyde  m  particular,  James  Skene,  Esq. 


1829.]  JOUENAL.  307 

June  23. — I  was  detained  in  the  Court  till  half-past 
[three].  Captain  William  Lockhart  dined  with  Skene.  The 
Captain's  kind  nature  had  brought  him  to  Edinburgh  to 
meet  his  sister-in-law. 

June  24. — I  was  detained  late  in  the  Court,  but  still 
had  time  to  go  with  Adam  Wilson  and  call  upon  a  gentle- 
manlike East  Indian  officer,  called  Colonel  Francklin,  who 
appears  an  intelligent  and  respectable  man.  He  writes  the 
History  of  Captain  Thomas,1  a  person  of  the  condition  of  a 
common  seaman,  who  raised  himself  to  the  rank  of  a  native 
prince,  and  for  some  time  waged  a  successful  war  with 
the  powers  around  him.  The  work  must  be  entertaining. 

June  25. — Finished  correcting  proofs  for  Tales,  3d  Series. 
The  Court  was  over  soon,  but  I  was  much  exhausted.  On 
the  return  home  quite  sleepy  and  past  work.  I  looked  in 
on  Cadell,  whose  hand  is  in  his  housewife's  cap,  driving 
and  pushing  to  get  all  the  works  forward  in  due  order,  and 
cursing  the  delays  of  artists  and  engravers.  I  own  I  wish 
we  had  not  hampered  ourselves  with  such  causes  of  delay. 

June  26. — Mr.  Ellis,  missionary  from  the  South  Sea 
Islands,  breakfasted,  introduced  by  IMr.  Fletcher,  minister 
of  the  parish  of  Stepney. 

Mr.  Ellis's  account  of  the  progress  of  civilisation,  as 
connected  with  religion,  is  very  interesting.  Knowledge  of 
every  kind  is  diffused — reading,  writing,  printing,  abun- 
dantly common.  Polygamy  abolished.  Idolatry  is  put  down ; 
the  priests,  won  over  by  the  chiefs,  dividing  among  them 

sailing  bobbishly.    I  have  not  heard  1  A   copy  of     this   rather   rare 

of  or  seen  it.  book   is    still   in   the   Abbotsford 

"  Rob  JRoy  has  some  good  and  real  Library.  Its  title  is  "  Colonel  Wm. 

subjects,  as  the  pass  at  Loch  Ard,  Francklin's   Military   Memoirs   of 

the  beautiful  fall  at  Ledeard,  near  George  Thomas,  who  by  extraor- 

the  head  of  the  lake.   Let  me  know  dinary  talents  and  enterprise  rose 

all  you  desire  to  be  informed  with-  from  an  obscure  situation  to  the 

out    fear    of    bothering.    Kindest  rank  of  General  in  the  service  of 

compliments   to  Mrs.    Skene  and  the  Native  Powers  in  the  jNT.  W.  of 

the   young   folks.  —Always  yours  India,"  4to,  Calcutta,  1SQ3. 
entirely,             WALTER  SCOTT." 


08  JOUKNAL.  [JUNE 

tie  consecrated  lands  which  belonged  to  their  temples, 
rreat  part  of  the  population  are  still  without  religion,  but 
rilling  to  be  instructed.  Wars  are  become  infrequent ;  and 
here  is  in  each  state  a  sort  of  representative  body,  or 
enate,  who  are  a  cheek  on  the  despotism  of  the  chief.  All 
his  has  come  hand  in  hand  with  religion.  Mr.  Ellis  tells 
le  that  the  missionaries  of  different  sects  avoided  carefully 
itting  the  natives  know  that  there  were  points  of  disunion 
etween  them  !N"ot  so  some  Jesuits  who  had  lately  arrived, 
nd  who  taught  their  own  ritual  as  the  only  true  one.  Mr. 
illis  described  their  poetry  to  me,  and  gave  some  examples ; 
;  had  an  Ossianic  character,  and  was  composed  of  metaphor, 
le  gave  me  a  small  collection  of  hymns  printed  in  the 
slands.  If  this  gentleman  is  sincere,  which  I  have  no  doubt 
f,  he  is  an  illustrious  character  He  was  just  about  to  return 
>  the  Friendly  Islands,  having  come  here  for  his  wife's  health. 

[Bla%radam^\ — After  the  Court  we  set  off  (the  two 
liomsons  and  I)  for  Blair- Adam,  where  we  held  our  Mac- 
uff  Club  for  the  twelfth  anniversary.  "We  met  the  Chief 
laron,  Lord  Sydney  Osborne,  Will  Clerk,  the  merry  knight 
ir  Adam  Ferguson,  with  our  venerable  host  the  Lord  Chief 
Jominissioner,  and  merry  men  were  we. 

June  27. — I  ought  not,  where  merry  men  convene,  to 
mit  our  jovial  son  of  Neptune,  Admiral  Adam.  The 
lorning  proving  delightful,  we  set  out  for  the  object  of  the 
ay,  which  was  Falkland,  We  passed  through  Lochore,  but 
ithout  stopping,  and  saw  on  the  road  eastward,  two  or 
iree  places,  as  Balbedie,  Strathendry,  and  some  others 
nown  to  me  by  name.  Also  we  went  through  the 
3wn  of  Leslie,  and  saw  what  remains  of  the  celebrated 
andezvous  of  rustic  gallantry  called  Christ's  Kirk  on  the 
rreen.1  It  is  now  cut  up  with  houses,  one  of  the  most 
ideous  of  which  is  a  new  church,  having  the  very  worst 

1  The  poem  of  this  name  is  at-  of  Sco&h  Po&ry  says  the  earliest 
•ibuted  to  King  Jamea  i.  of  Scot-  edition  known  to  him  dates  only 
tnd,  but  Dr.  Irving  in  his  History  from  166$. 


1839.]  JOUENAL.  309 

and  most  offensive  kind  of  Venetian  windows.  This,  1  am 
told,  has  replaced  a  quiet  lowly  little  Gothic  building,  coeval, 
perhaps,  with  the  royal  poet  who  celebrated  the  spot  Next 
we  went  to  Falkland,  where  we  found  llr,  Howden,  factor 
of  Mr.  Tyndall  Bruce,  waiting  to  show  us  the  palace. 

Falkland  has  most  interesting  remains.  A  double 
entrance-tower,  and  a  side  building  running  east  from  it, 
is  roofed,  and  in  some  degree  habitable;  a  corresponding 
building  running  northward  from  the  eastern  corner  is 
totally  ruinous,  having  been  destroyed  by  fire.  The  archi- 
tecture is  highly  ornamented,  in  the  style  of  the  Palace 
at  Stirling.  Mches  with  statues,  with  projections,  cornices, 
etc.,  are  lavished  throughout  Many  curious  medallions  ex- 
hibited such  heads  as  those  procured  from  the  King's  room 
at  Stirling,  the  originals,  perhaps,  being  the  same.  The  re- 
peated cypher  of  James  v.  and  Mary  of  Guise  attest  the 
builder  of  this  part  of  the  palace.  "When  complete  it  had 
been  a  quadrangle.  There  is  as  much  of  it  as  remained 
when  Slezer  published  his  drawings.  Some  part  of  the 
interior  has  been  made  what  is  called  habitable,  that  is,  a 
half-dozen  of  bad  rooms  have  been  gotten  out  of  it  Am 
clear  in  my  own  mind  a  ruin  should  be  protected,  but  never 
repaired.  The  proprietor  has  a  beautiful  place  called  Nut- 
Mil,  within  ten  minutes'  walk  of  Falkland,  and  commanding 
some  fine  views  of  it  and  of  the  Lomond  Hill.  This  should  be 
the  residence.  But  Mr.  Bruce  and  his  predecessor,  my  old 
professor,  John  Bruce,1  deserve  great  credit  for  their  at- 

3  Professor  of  Logic  in  the  Uni-  the  Union   between  England  and 

versity  of   Edinburgh   from   1775  Scotland :  its  causes,  effects,  and 

till   1792,  when    he   resigned    his  influence     of     Great     Britain    in 

chair  and  became  Keeper  of  the  Europe."    In  the  previous  year  he 

State  Paper  Office,  and  Historic-  also  prepared  another  on  the  ar- 

grapher  to  the  East  India  Company  rangements  made  for  repelling  the 

in  London,      He  wrote  several  ela-  Armada,  and  their  application  to 

borate  and  valuable  reports  for  the  the  crisis  of  1798.    This  able  man 

Government,  which,  though  printed,  returned  to  Scotland,  and  died  in 

were  never  published;  among  others,  Falkland  about  two  years  before 

one  in  1799,  in  2  vols.  8vo,  "On  Scott  visited  the  place. 


310  JOUKETAL.  [JUNE 

tention  to  prevent  dilapidation,  which  was  doing  its  work 
fast  upon  the  ancient  palace.  The  only  remarkable  apart- 
ment was  a  large  and  well-proportioned  gallery  with  a 
painted  roof  —  tempcre  Jacobi  Sexti  —  and  built  after  his  suc- 
cession to  the  throne  of  England.  I  noticed  a  curious  thing, 
—  a  hollow  column  concealed  the  rope  which  rung  the  Castle 
bell,  keeping  it  safe  from  injury  and  interruption. 

The  town  of  Falkland  is  old,  with  very  narrow  streets. 
The  arrival  of  two  carriages  and  a  gig  was  an  event  im- 
portant enough  to  turn  out  the  whole  population.  They 
are  said  to  be  less  industrious,  more  dissipated,  and  readier 
to  become  soldiers  than  their  neighbours.  So  long  a  court 
retains  its  influence  ! 

We  dined  at  Wellfield  with  my  friend  George  Cheape, 
with  whom  I  rode  in  the  cavalry  some  thirty  years  ago. 
Much  mirth  and  good  wine  made  us  return  in  capital  tune* 
The  Chief  Baron  and  Admiral  Adam  did  not  go  on  this  trip. 
"When  we  returned  it  was  time  to  go  to  bed  by  a  candle. 

June  28.  —  Being  Sunday,  we  lounged  about  in  the  neigh- 
bourhood of  the  crags  called  Kiery  Craigs,  etc.  The  Sheriff- 
substitute  of  Kinross  came  to  dinner,  and  brought  a  gold 
signet1  which  had  been  found  in  that  town.  It  was  very 
neat  work,  about  the  size  of  a  shilling.  It  bore  in  a  shield 
the  arms  of  Scotland  and  England,  parti  per  paU,  those  of 
Scotland  occupying  the  dexter  side.  The  shield  is  of  the 
heater  or  triangular  shape.  There  is  no  crown  nor  legend 
of  any  kind  ;  a  slip  of  gold  folds  upwards  on  the  back  of 
the  hinge,  and  makes  the  handle  neatly  enough.  It  is  too 
well  wrought  for  David  n.'s  time,  and  James  rv.  is  the  only 
monarch  of  the  Scottish  line  who,  marrying  a  daughter  of 
England,  may  carry  the  arms  of  both  countries  parti  per 
Mr.  Skelton  is  the  name  of  the  present  possessor. 


1  An  account  of  the  finding  of  James  L)at  Kinross,  in  April  1829* 
this  seal  (which  -was  thought  to  be  is  given  in  the  Archceologia  Scotk<*> 
that  of  Joan  of  Beaufort,  wife  of  vol.  iv.  p.  420. 


1829.]  JOUENAL.  311 

Two  reported  discoveries.  One,  that  the  blaeberry  shrub 
contains  the  tanning  quality  as  four  to  one  compared  to  the 
oak — which  may  be  of  great  importance,,  as  it  grows  so 
commonly  on  our  moors. 

The  other,  that  the  cutting  of  an  apple-tree,  or  other 
fruit-tree,  may  be  preserved  by  sticking  it  into  a  potato  and 
planting  both  together.  Curious,  if  true. 

June  29  [Edinburgh]. — TVe  dined  together  at  Blair- Adam, 
having  walked  in  the  woods  in  the  morning,  and  seen  a 
beautiful  new  walk  made  through  the  woody  hill  behind  the 
house.  In  a  fine  evening,  after  an  early  dinner,  our  party 
returned  to  Edinburgh,  and  there  each  dispersed  to  his 
several  home  and  resting-place.  I  had  the  pleasure  of 
finding  my  family  all  well,  except  Johnnie. 

June  30. — After  my  short  sniff  of  country  air,  here  am 
I  again  at  the  receipt  of  custom.  The  sale  with  Longman 
&  Co.,  for  stock  and  copyrights  of  my  [Poetical]  "Works,  is 
completed,  for  £7000,  at  dates  from  twelve  to  thirty-six 
months.  There  are  many  sets  out  of  which  we  may  be 
able  to  clear  the  money,  and  then  we  shall  make  something 
to  clear  the  copyright.  I  am  sure  this  may  be  done,  and 
that  the  bargain  will  prove  a  good  one  in  the  long  run. 

Dined  at  home  with  my  family,  whom,  as  they  disperse 
to-morrow,  I  have  dedicated  the  evening  to. 


JULY. 

i. — This  morning  wrote  letters  and  sent  them  off 
by  Charles.  It  was  Teind  Wednesday,  so  I  was  at  home  to 
witness  the  departure  of  my  family,  which  was  depressing. 
My  two  daughters,  with  the  poor  boy  Johnnie,  went  off  at 
ten  o'clock,  my  son  Charles,  with  my  niece,  about  twelve. 
The  house,  filled  with  a  little  bustle  attendant  on  such  a 
removal,  then  became  silent  as  the  grave.  The  voices  of 
the  children,  which  had  lately  been  so  clamorous  with  their 
joyous  shouts,  are  now  hushed  and  still.  A  blank  of  this 
kind  is  somewhat  depressing,  and  I  find  it  impossible  to 
resume  my  general  tone  of  spirits.  A  lethargy  has  crept 
on  me  which  no  efforts  can  dispel ;  and  as  the  day  is  rainy, 
I  cannot  take  exercise.  I  have  read  therefore  the  whole 
morning,  and  have  endeavoured  to  collect  ideas  instead  of 
expending  them.  I  have  not  been  very  successful  In 
short,  diemperdidi. 
Localities  at  Blair- Adam : — 

Lochornie  and  Lochomie  Moss, 
The  Loutingstane  and  Dodgell's  Cross, 
Craigen  Cat  and  Craigen  Crow, 
Craiggaveral,  the  King's  Cross,  and  Dunglow. 

July  2. — I  made  up  for  my  deficiencies  yesterday,  and 
besides  attending  the  Court  wrote  five  close  pages,  which  I 
think  is  very  near  double  task.  I  was  alone  the  whole  day 
and  without  interruption.  I  have  little  doubt  I  will  make 
my  solitude  tell  upon  my  labours,  especially  since  they 
promise  to  prove  so  efficient  I  was  so  languid  yesterday 
that  I  did  not  record  that  J.  Ballantyne,  his  brother  Sandy, 

312 


1829.]  JOUBFAL.  313 

and  Mr.  Cadell  dined  here  on  a  beef-steak,  and  smoked  a 
cigar,  and  took  a  view  of  our  El  Dorado. 

July  3. — Laboured  at  Court,  where  I  was  kept  late,  and 
wrought  on  iny  return  home,  finishing  about  five  pages. 
I  had  the  great  pleasure  to  learn  that  the  party  with  the 
infantry  got  safe  to  Abbotsford. 

July  4. — After  Court  I  came  home  and  set  to  work,  still 
on  the  Tales.  When  I  had  finished  my  bit  of  dinner,  and 
was  in  a  quiet  way  smoking  iny  cigar  over  a  glass  of  negus, 
Adam  Ferguson  comes  with  a  summons  to  attend  hi™  to 
the  Justice-Clerk's,  where,  it  seems,  I  was  engaged.  I  was 
totally  out  of  case  to  attend  his  summons,  redolent  as  I  was 
of  tobacco.  But  I  am  vexed  at  the  circumstance.  It  looks 
careless,  and,  what  is  worse,  affected ;  and  the  Justice  is  an 
old  friend  moreover.1  I  rather  think  I  have  been  guilty 
towards  him  in  this  respect  before.  Devil  take  my 
stupidity !  I  will  call  on  Monday  and  say,  Here  is  my  sabre 
and  here  is  my  heart. 

July  5. — Sir  Adam  came  to  breakfast,  and  with  hvm  Mr. 
and  Mrs.  Johnstone  of  Bordeaux,  the  lady  his  cousin.  I 
could  not  give  them  a  right  Scottish  breakfast,  being  on  a 
Sunday  morning.  Laboured  on  the  Tales  the  whole  morning. 

The  post  brought  two  letters  of  unequal  importance. 
One  from  a  person  calling  himself  Haval,  announcing  to  me 
the  terrific  circumstance  that  he  had  written  against  the 
"Waverley  Novels  in  a  publication  called  La  Belle  Asseniblfa, 
at  which  doubtless,  he  supposes,  I  must  be  much  annoyed. 

He  be  d ,  and  that's  plain  speaking.  The  other  from 

Lord  Aberdeen,  announcing  that  Lockhart,  Dr.  Gooch,  and 
myself,  are  invested  with  the  power  of  examining  the  papers 
of  the  Cardinal  Duke  of  York,  and  reporting  what  is  fit  for 
publication.  This  makes  it  plain  that  the  Invisible  2  neither 
slumbers  nor  sleeps.  The  toil  and  remuneration  must  be 

1  Right  Hon.  David  Boyle.  Sir  "William  Knighton,  sometimes 

2  The  familiar  name  applied  to     also  the  Great  Unseen. 


314  JOUENAL.  [JULY 

Lockhart's,  and  to  any  person  understanding  that  sort  of 
work  the  degree  of  trust  reposed  holds  out  hope  of  advan- 
tage. At  any  rate,  it  is  a  most  honourable  trust,  and  I  have 
written  in  suitable  terms  to  Lord  Aberdeen  to  express  my 
acceptance  of  it,  adverting  to  my  necessary  occupations  here, 
and  expressing  my  willingness  to  visit  London  occasionally 
to  superintend  the  progress  of  the  work.  Treated  myself, 
being  considerably  fagged,  with  a  glass  of  poor  Glengarry's 
super-excellent  whisky  and  a  cigar,  made  up  my  Journal, 
wrote  to  the  girls,  and  so  to  roost  upon  a  crust  of  bread  and 
a  glass  of  small  beer,  my  usual  supper. 

July  6. — I  laboured  all  the  morning  without  anything 
unusual,  save  a  call  from  my  cousin,  Mary  Scott  of  Jedburgh, 
whom  I  persuaded  to  take  part  of  my  chaise  to  Abbotsford 
on  Saturday.  At  two  o'clock  I  walked  to  Cadell's,  and 
afterwards  to  a  committee  of  the  Bannatyne  Club.  There- 
after I  went  to  Leith,  where  we  had  fixed  a  meeting  of  The 
Club,  now  of  forty-one  years'  standing.1  I  was  in  the  chair, 
and  Sir  Adam  croupier.  We  had  the  Justice-Clerk,  Lord 
Abercromby,Lord  Pitmilly,  Lord  Advocate,  James  Ferguson, 
John  Irving,  and  William  Clerk,  and  passed  a  merry  day  for 
old  fellows.  It  is  a  curious  thing  that  only  three  have  died 
of  this  club  since  its  formation.  These  were  the  Earl  of  Sel- 
kirk ;  James  Clerk,  Lieutenant  in  the  Navy ;  and  Archibald 
Miller,  W.S.  Sir  Patrick  Murray  was  an  unwilling  absentee. 
There  were  absent — Professor  Davidson  of  Glasgow,  besides 
Glassford,  who  has  cut  our  society,  and  poor  James  Edmon- 
stoune,  whose  state  of  health  precludes  his  ever  joining 
society  again.  We  took  a  fair  but  moderate  allowance  of 
wine,  sung  our  old  songs,  and  were  much  refreshed  with  a 
hundred  old  stories,  which  would  have  seemed  insignificant 
to  any  stranger.  The  most  important  of  these  were  old 
college  adventures  of  love  and  battle. 

1  For  list  of  the  members  of  The  Club,  which  was  formed  in  1788,  see 
Life,  voL  i.  p.  208. 


1829.]  JOUBNAL.  315 

July  7. — I  was  rather  apprehensive  that  I  might  have 
felt  my  unusual  dissipation  this  morning,  hut  not  a  whit ;  I 
rose  as  cool  as  a  cucumber,  and  set  about  to  my  work  till 
breakfast-time.  I  am  to  dine  with  Ballantyne  to-day.  To- 
morrow with  John  Murray.  This  sounds  sadly  like  idle- 
ness, except  what  may  be  done  either  in  the  morning  before 
breakfast,  or  in  the  broken  portion  of  the  day  between  at- 
tendance on  the  Court  and  my  dinner  meal, — a  vile,  drowsy, 
yawning,  fagged  portion  of  existence,  which  resembles  one's 
day,  as  a  portion  of  the  shirt,  escaping  betwixt  one's  waist- 
coat and  breeches,  indicates  his  linen. 

Dined  with  James  Ballantyne,  who  gave  us  a  very 
pleasant  party.  There  was  a  great  musician,  Mr.  N"eukomm, 
a  German,  a  pupil  of  Haydn,  a  sensible,  pleasant  man. 

July  8. — This  morning  I  had  an  ample  dose  of  proofs 
and  could  do  nothing  but  read  them.  The  Court  kept  me 
till  two  ;  I  was  then  half  tempted  to  go  to  hear  Mr.  Neukomm 
perform  on  the  organ,  which  is  said  to  be  a  most  masterly 
exhibition,  but  I  reflected  how  much  time  I  should  lose  by 
giving  way  to  temptation,  and  how  little  such  ears  as  mine 
would  be  benefited  by  the  exhibition,  and  so  I  resolved  to 
return  to  my  proofs,  having  not  a  little  to  do.  I  was  so 
unlucky  as  to  meet  my  foreigner  along  with  Mr.  Laine,  the 
French  Consul,  and  his  lady,  who  all  invited  me  to  go  with 
them,  but  I  pleaded  business,  and  was  set  down,  doubtless, 
for  a  Goth,  as  I  deserved.  However,  I  got  my  proofs  settled 
before  dinner-time,  and  began  to  pack  up  books,  etc. 

I  dined  at  John  Murray's,  and  met,  amongst  others,  Mr. 
Schutze,  the  brother-in-law  of  poor  George  Ellis.  We  con- 
versed about  our  mutual  friend,  and  about  the  life  Canning 
was  to  have  written  about  him,  and  which  he  would  have 
done  con  amwe.  He  gave  me  two  instances  of  poor  George's 
neatness  of  expression,  and  acuteness  of  discrimination. 
Having  met,  for  the  first  time,  "  one  Perceval,  a  young  law- 
yer," he  records  him  as  a  person  who,  with  the  advantages 


316  JOURNAL.  [JULY 

of  life  and  opportunity,  would  assuredly  rise  to  the  head  of 
affairs.  Another  gentleman  is  briefly  characterised  as  "a 
man  of  few  words,  and  fewer  ideas."  Schutze  himself  is  a 
clever  man,  with  something  dry  in  his  manner,  owing,  per- 
haps, to  an  imperfection  of  hearing.  Murray's  parties  are 
always  agreeahle  and  well  chosen. 

July  9. — I  began  an  immense  arrangement  of  my  papers, 
but  was  obliged  to  desist  by  the  approach  of  four  o'clock. 
Having  been  enabled  to  shirk  the  Court,  I  had  the  whole 
day  to  do  what  I  wished,  and  as  I  made  some  progress  I 
hope  I  will  be  strengthened  to  resume  the  task  when  at 
Abbotsford. 

Heard  of  the  death  of  poor  Bob  Shortreed,1  the  com- 
panion of  many  a  long  ride  among  the  hills  in  quest  of  old 
ballads.  He  was  a  merry  companion,  a  good  singer  and 
mimic,  and  full  of  Scottish  drollery.  In  his  company,  and 
under  his  guidance,  I  was  able  to  see  much  of  rural  society 
in  the  mountains  which  I  could  not  otherwise  have  attained, 
and  which  I  have  made  my  use  of.  He  was,  in  addition,  a 
man  of  worth  and  character.  I  always  burdened  his  hos- 
pitality while  at  Jedburgh  on  the  Circuit,  and  have  been 
useful  to  some  of  his  family.  Poor  fellow !  He  died  at  a 
most  interesting  period  for  his  family,  when  his  eldest 
daughter  was  about  to  make  an  advantageous  marriage. 
So  glide  our  friends  from  us — Saec  poena  diu  mventilm. 
Many  recollections  die  with  him  and  with  poor  Terry.2  I 
dined  with  the  Skenes  in  a  family  way. 

July  10. — Had  a  hard  day's  work  at  the  Court  till  about 

1  Some  little  time  before  his  in  quest  of  the  materials  of  legend- 
death,  the  worthy  Sheriff-substi-  ary  lore  which  have  at  length  filled 
tute  of  Roxburghshire  received  a  so  many  volumes,  this  collection  of 
set  of  his  friend's  works,  with  this  the  results  of  their  former  rambles 
inscription: — "To  Robert  Short-  is  presented  by  his  sincere  friend, 
reed,  Esq.,  the  friend  of  the  author  Walter  Scott."— J.  G.  L. 
from  youth  to  age,  and  his  guide 

and  companion  upon  many  an  ex-         a  Who  had  died  on  the  22d  June 

pedztion  among  the  Border  hills,  1829. 


1829.]  JOUBKAJL  317 

two,  and  then  came  home  to  prepare  for  the  country.  I 
made  a  talis  qualis  arrangement  of  my  papers,  which  I  trust 
I  shall  be  able  to  complete  at  Abbotsford,  for  it  will  do 
much  good.  I  wish  I  had  a  smart  boy  like  Eed  Eobin  the 
tinker.  Wrote  also  a  pack  of  letters. 

AUbotsford,  July  11. — I  was  detained  in  the  Court  till 
nearly  one  o'clock,  then  set  out  and  reached  Abbotsford  in 
five  or  six  hours.  Pound  all  well,  and  Johnnie  rather  better. 
He  sleeps,  by  virtue  of  being  in  the  open  air,  a  good  deal. 

July  12. — The  day  excessively  rainy,  or,  as  we  call  it, 
soft.  I  e'en  unpacked  my  books  and  did  a  great  deal  to 
put  them  in  order,  but  I  was  sick  of  the  labour  by  two 
o'clock  and  left  several  of  my  books  and  all  of  my  papers 
at  sixes  and  sevens.  Sir  Adam  and  the  Colonel  dined  with 
us.  A  Spanish  gentleman  with  Ms  wife,  whom  I  had  seen 
at  the  French  Consul's,  also  dropped  in.  He  was  a  hand- 
some, intelligent,  and  sensible  man ;  his  name  I  have  forgot 
We  had  a  pleasant  evening. 

July  1 3. — This  day  I  wrote  till  one,  resuming  the  History, 
and  making  out  a  day's  task.  Then  went  to  Chiefswood,  and 
had  the  pleasure  of  a  long  walk  with  a  lady,  well  known  in 
the  world  of  poetry,  Mrs,  Hemans.  She  is  young  and  pretty, 
though  the  mother  of  five  children,  as  she  tells  me.  There 
is  taste  and  spirit  in  her  conversation.  My  daughters  are 
critical,  and  call  her  blue,  but  I  think  they  are  hypercritical. 
I  will  know  better  when  we  meet  again.  I  was  home  at 
four.  Had  an  evening  walk  with  little  Walter,  who  held  me 
by  the  finger,  gabbling  eternally  much  that  I  did,  and  more 
that  I  did  not,  understand.  Then  I  had  a  long  letter  to  write 
to  Lockhart,1  correct  and  read,  and  despatch  proofs,  etc. ;  and 
to  bed  heartily  tired,  though  with  no  great  exertion. 

July  14. — A  rainy  forenoon  broke  the  promise  of  a  de- 
lightful morning.  I  wrote  four  and  a  half  pages,  to  make 
the  best  of  a  bad  bargain.  If  I  can  double  the  daily  task, 
1  See  p.  329  n. 


318  JOUBNAL.  [JULY 


be  something  in  hand.  But  I  am  resolved  to  stick 
to  my  three  pages  a  day  at  least.  The  twelfth  of  August 
will  then  complete  my  labours. 

July  1  5.  —  This  day  two  very  pretty  and  well-bred  boys 
came  over  to  breakfast  with  us.  I  finished  my  task  of 
three  pages  and  better,  and  went  to  walk  with  the  little 
fellows  round  the  farm,  by  the  lake,  etc.,  etc.  They  were 
very  good  companions.  Tom  has  been  busy  thinning  the 
terrace  this  day  or  two,  and  is  to  go  on. 

July  16.  —  I  made  out  my  task-  work  and  betook  myself 
to  walk  about  twelve.  I  feel  the  pen  turn  heavy  after 
breakfast  ;  perhaps  my  solemn  morning  meal  is  too  much  for 
my  intellectual  powers,  but  I  won't  abridge  a  single  crumb 
for  all  that  I  eat  very  little  at  dinner,  and  can't  abide  to 
be  confined  in  my  hearty  breakfast.  The  work  goes  on  as 
task-work  must,  slow,  sure,  and  I  trust  not  drowsy,  though 
the  author  is.  I  sent  off  to  Dionysius  Lardner  (Goodness 
be  with  us,  what  a  name  !)  as  far  as  page  thirty-eight  in- 
clusive, but  I  will  wait  to  add  to-morrow's  quota.  I  had  a 
long  walk  with  Tom.1  I  am  walking  with  more  pleasure 

1  Mr.  Skene  in  his  Reminiscences  he  read  two  pages  it  was  sure  to  set 

records  that  —  "Tom  Purdie  identi-  him  asleep.      Tom,  with  the  usual 

fied  himself  with  all  his  master's  pur-  shrewdness  common  to  his  country- 

suits  and  concerns  ;  he  had  in  early  men  in  that  class  of  life,  joined  a 

life  heen  a  shepherd,  and  came  into  quaintness    and    drollery    in    his 

Sir  Walter's  service  upon  his  first  notions    and    mode  of    expressing 

taking  up  his  abode  at  Ashiestiel,  himself  that  was  very  amusing  ;  he 

of  which  he  became  at  last  the  farm  was  familiar,  but  at  the  same  time 

manager  ;  and  upon  the  family  re-  perfectly  respectful,   although    he 

moving   to  Abbotsford    continued  was   sometimes   tempted    to  deal 

that  function,  to  which  was  added  sharp  cuts,  particularly  at  Sir  Adam 

gamekeeper,  forester,  librarian,  and  Ferguson,  whom  he  seemed  to  take 

henchman  to  his  master  in  all  his  a  pleasure  in  assailing.      When  Sir 

rambles  about  the  property.      He  Walter   obtained    the   honour   of 

used  to  talk  of  Sir  Walter's  publica-  knighthood  for  Sir  Adam,  upon  the 

tions  as  our  books,  and  said  that  plea  of  his  being  Custodier  of  the 

the  reading  of  them  was  the  greatest  Regalia  of  Scotland,  Tom  was  very 

comfort  to  him,  for  whenever  he  indignant,    because    he   said,   'It 

was  off  his  sleep,  which  sometimes  would  take  some  of  the  shine  out 

happened  to  him,  he  had  only  to  of  us,'  meaning  Sir  Walter.     Tom 

take  one  of  the  novels,  and  before  was  very  fond  of  salmon  fishing, 


1829.]  JOURNAL.  319 

and  comfort  to  myself  than  I  have  done  for  many  a  day. 
May  Heaven  continue  this  great  mercy,  which  I  have  so 
much  reason  to  be  thankful  for ! 

July  17. — We  called  at  Ghiefswood  and  asked  Captain 
Hamilton,  and  Mrs.  K,  and  Mrs.  Hemans,  to  dinner  on 
Monday.  She  is  a  clever  person,  and  has  been  pretty.  I 
had  a  long  walk  with  her  Ute-a-tete.  She  told  me  of  the 
peculiar  melancholy  attached  to  the  words  no  more.  I  could 
not  help  telling,  as  a  different  application  of  the  words, 
how  an  old  dame  riding  home  along  Cockenzie  Sands,  pretty 
bowsy,  fell  off  the  pillion,  and  her  husband,  being  in  good 
order  also,  did  not  miss  her  till  he  came  to  Prestonpans. 
He  instantly  returned  with  some  neighbours,  and  found  the 
good  woman  seated  amidst  the  advancing  tide,  which  began 
to  rise,  with  her  lips  ejaculating  to  her  cummers,  who  she 
supposed  were  still  pressing  her  to  another  cup,  "  BTae  ae 
drap  mair,  I  thank  you  kindly."  "We  dined  in  family,  and 
all  well 

July  18. — A  Sunday  with  alternate  showers  and  sun- 
shine. Wrote  double  task,  wliich  brings  me  to  page  forty- 
six  inclusive.  I  read  the  Spac-wife  of  Gait.  There  is  some- 
thing good  in  it,  and  the  language  is  occasionally  very 
forcible,  but  he  has  made  his  story  difficult  to  understand, 
by  adopting  a  region  of  history  little  known,  and  having 
many  heroes  of  the  same  name,  whom  it  is  not  easy  to  keep 
separate  in  one's  memory.  Some  of  the  traits  of  the  Spa&urife, 
who  conceits  herself  to  be  a  changeling  or  ta'en  away,1  are 

•which  from  an  accordance  of  taste  exceedingly  amusing  to  see  a  clod- 
contributed  much  to  elevate  my  hopper  (for  he  was  always  in  the 
merits  in  his  eyes,  and  I  believe  I  garb  of  a  ploughman)  moving  about 
was  his  greatest  favourite  of  all  Sir  in  the  splendid  apartment  which 
Walter's  friends,  which  he  used  had  been  fitted  up  for  the  Library, 
occasionally  to  testify  by  imparting  scrutinising  the  state  of  the  books, 
to  me  in  confidence  some  secret  putting  derangement  to  rights, 
about  fishing,  which  he  concluded  remonstrating  when  he  observed 
that  no  one  knew  but  himself.  He  anything  that  indicated  careless- 
was  remarkably  fastidious  in  his  ness." 
-care  of  the  Library,  and  it  was  *  8pa£uxfet  vol.  i.  p.  12. 


320  JOUEBTAL.  [JULY 

very  good  indeed  His  Highland  Chief  is  a  kind  of  Caliban, 
and  speaks,  like  Caliban,  a  jargon  never  spoken  on  earth,  but 
full  of  effect  for  all  that. 

July  19. — I  finished  two  leaves  this  morning,  and  re- 
ceived the  Hamiltons  and  Mrs.  Hemans  to  breakfast.  After- 
wards we  drove  to  Yarrow  and  showed  Mrs.  Hemans  the 
lions.  The  party  dined  with  us,  and  stayed  till  evening* 
Of  course  no  more  work. 

July  20. — A  rainy  day,  and  I  am  very  drowsy  and  would 
give  the  world  to  * .  I  wrote  four  leaves,  however, 

and  then  my  industry  dropped  me.  I  have  made  up  for 
yesterday's  short  task. 


[NOTE. — From  July  20th,  1829,  to  May  23d,  1830,  there  are 
no  entries  in  the  Journal,  but  during  that  time  Sir  Walter  met 
with  a  sad  loss.  He  was  deprived  of  his  humble  friend  and 
staunch  henchman,  Thomas  Purdie.  The  following  little  note 
to  Laidlaw  shows  how  keenly  he  felt  his  death : — 

"  MY  DEAR,  WILLIE, — I  write  to  tell  you  the  shocking  news- 
of  poor  Tom  Purdie's  death,  by  which  I  have  been  greatly 
affected.  He  had  complained,  or  rather  spoken,  of  a  sore 
throat ;  and  the  day  before  yesterday,  as  it  came  on  a  shower 
of  rain,  I  wanted  him  to  walk  fast  on  to  Abbotsford  before  me, 
but  you  know  well  how  impossible  that  was.  He  took  some 
jelly,  or  trifle  of  that  kind,  but  made  no  complaint.  This 
morning  he  rose  from  bed  as  usual,  and  sat  down  by  the  table 
with  his  head  on  his  hand ;  and  when  his  daughter  spoke  to 
him,  life  had  passed  away  without  a  sigh  or  groan.  Poor  fellow! 
There  is  a  heart  cold  that  loved  me  well,  and,  I  am  sure,  thought 
of  my  interest  more  than  his  own.  I  have  seldom  been  so  much 
shocked.  I  wish  you  would  take  a  ride  down  and  pass  the 
night  There  is  much  I  have  to  say,  and  this  loss  adds  to  my 
•wish  to  see  you.  We  dine  at  four.  The  day  is  indifferent, 
but  the  sooner  the  better. — Yours  very  truly, 

"  WALTER  Scoxr.2 

"31rf  (sic)  October,"  Qy. 


Blank  in  original.  -  Abbotsford  Notanda,  p.  17o. 


1829.]  JOUKNAL.  321 

To  Mr.  Cadell,  a  few  days  later,  he  says,  "I  have  lost  my 
old  and  faithful  servant,  my  factotum,  and  am  so  mnch  shocked 
that  I  really  wish  to  be  quit  of  the  country.  I  have  this  day 
laid  him  in  the  grave." 

On  coming  to  Edinburgh,  Sir  Walter  found  that  his  old 
Mend  and  neighbour  Lady  Jane  Stuart *  was  no  longer  there  to 
welcome  him.  She  also  had  died  somewhat  suddenly  on  Octo- 
ber 28th,  and  was  buried  at  Invermay  on  November  4th.] 

1  Eldest  daughter  of  David,  sixth  Belsches  Stuart,  Bart.,  of  Fetter- 
Earl  of  Leven  and  fifth  of  Melville,  cairn.  See  ante,  vol.  i.  p.  404; 
and  widow  of  Sir  John  Wishart  vol.  ii.  pp.  55,  62. 


YOL.H. 


1830 


MAY. 

May  23,  {AKbotsford^ — About  a  year  ago  I  took  the  pet 
at  my  Diary,  chiefly  because  I  thought  it  made  me  abomin- 
ably selfish ;  and  that  by  recording  my  gloomy  fits  I 
encouraged  their  recurrence,  whereas  out  of  sight,  out  of 
mind,  is  the  best  way  to  get  rid  of  them;  and  now  I  hardly 
know  why  I  take  it  up  again ;  but  here  goes.  I  came  here  to 
attend  Eaeburn's  funeral  I  am  near  of  his  kin,  my  great- 
grandfather, Walter  Scott,  being  the  second  son  or  first 
cadet  of  this  small  family.  My  late  TrfTmrnftTi  was  also 
married  to  my  aunt,  a  most  amiable  old  lady.  He  was 
never  kind  to  me,  and  at  last  utterly  ungracious.  Of  course 
I  never  liked  hi™,  and  we  kept  no  terms.  He  had  forgot, 
though,  an  infantine .  cause  of  quarrel,  which  I  always 
remembered.  "When  I  was  four  or  five  years  old  I  was 
staying  at  Lessudden  House,  an  old  mansion,  the  abode  of 
this  BaeburiL  A  large  pigeon-house  was  almost  destroyed 
with  starlings,  then  a  common  bird,  though  now  seldom 
seen.  They  were  seized  in  their  nests  and  put  in  a  bag,  and 
I  think  drowned,  or  threshed  to  death,  or  put  to  some  such 
end.  The  servants  gave  one  to  me,  which  I  in  some  degree 
tamed,  and  the  brute  of  a  laird  seized  and  wrung  its  neck* 
I  flew  at  his  throat  like  a  wild  cat,  and  was  torn  from  him 
with  no  little  difficulty,  long  afterwards  I  did  him  the 
mortal  offence  to  recall  some  superiority  which  my  father 
had  lent  to  the  laird  to  make  up  a  qualification,  which  he 
meant  to  exercise  by  voting  for  Lord  Minto's  interest 
against  poor  Don.  This  made  a  total  breach  between  two 
relations  who  had  never  been  Mends,  and  though  I  was 

325 


326  JOURNAL.  [MAY 

afterwards  of  considerable  service  to  his  family,  he  kept  his 
ill-humour,  alleging  justly  enough  that  I  did  these  kind 
actions  for  the  sake  of  his  wife  and  family,  not  for  his 
benefit.  I  now  saw  him  at  the  age  of  eighty-two  or  three 
deposited  in  the  ancestral  grave.  Dined  with  my  cousins, 
and  returned  to  Abhotsford  about  eight  o'clock 

May  24,  [Edinburgh]. — Called  on  my  neighbour  Mcol 
Milne  of  Faldonside,  to  settle  something  about  the  road  to 
Selkirk.  Afterwards  went  to  Huntly  Burn  and  made  my 
compliments  to  the  family.  Lunched  at  half -past  two  and 
drove  to  town,  calling  at  George  Square  on  Gala.  He  pro- 
posed to  give  up  the  present  road  to  Selkirk  in  favour  of 
another  on  the  north  side  of  the  river,  to  be  completed  by 
two  bridges.  This  is  an  object  for  Abbotsford.  In  the 
evening  came  to  town.  Letter  from  Mr.  H[aydon]  soliciting 
£20.  Wait  till  Lockhart  comes. 

May  25. — Got  into  the  old  TyiiU  this  morning,  and 
grind  away.  Walked  in  very  bad  day  to  George  Square 
from  the  Parliament  House,  through  paths  once  familiar, 
but  not  trod  for  twenty  years.  Met  Scott  of  Woll  and 
Scott  of  Gala,  and  consulted  about  the  new  road  between 
Galashiels  and  Selkirk.  I  am  in  hopes  to  rid  myself 
of  the  road  to  Selkirk,  which  goes  too  near  me  at  Abbots- 
ford,  Dined  at  Lord  Chief  Commissioner's,  where  we  met 
the  new  Chief  Baron  Abercromby 1  and  his  lady,  I  thought 
it  was  the  first  time  we  had  met  for  above  forty  years, 
but  he  put  me  in  mind  we  had  dined  one  day  at  John 
Richardson's. 

May  26. — Wrought  with  proofs,  etc.,  at  the  Demonology, 
which  is  a  cursed  business  to  do  neatly.  I  must  finish  it 

1  James  Abercromby,  who  sue-  the  House  of  Commons  in  1835. 

ceeded  Sir  Samuel  Shepherd  as  On  Mr.  Abercromby's  retirement 

Chief  Baron,  was  the  third  son  of  in   1839,    he  was  raised   to   the 

Sir  Ralph.  Abercromby.    He  was  Peerage  as  Lord  Dunfermline.    He 

afterwards    elected    member    for  died  at  Oolinton  House  on  April 

Edinburgh  in  1832,  and  Speaker  of  17th,  1858,  aged  81. 


1830,] 


JOUKFAL. 


327 


though,  for  I  need  money.  I  went  to  the  Court ;  from  that 
came  home,  and  scrambled  on  with  half  writing,  half  reading, 
half  idleness  till  evening.  I  have  laid  aside  smoking  much ; 
and  now,  unless  tempted  by  company,  rarely  take  a  cigar. 
I  was  frightened  by  a  species  of  fit  which  I  had  in 
February,  which  took  from  me  my  power  of  speaking.  I 
am  told  it  is  from  the  stomach.  It  looked  woundy  like 
palsy  or  apoplexy.  Well,  be  it  what  it  wiH,  I  can  stand  it1 
May  27. — Court  as  usual  I  am  agitating  a  proposed 


1  Of  this  illness,  Sir  Walter  had 
written  the  following  account  to 
Mr.  Lockhart,  a  week  after  its 
occurrence : — 

"Anne  would  tell  you  of  an 
awkward  sort  of  fit  I  had  on 
Monday  last;  it  lasted  about  five 
minutes,  during  which  I  lost  the 
power  of  articulation,  or  rather  of 
speaking  what  I  wished  to  say*  I 
revived  instantly,  but  submitted  to 
be  bled,  and  to  keep  the  house  for 
a  week,  except  exercising  walks. 
They  seem  to  say  it  is  from  the 
stomach.  It  may  or  may  not  be  a 
paralytic  affection.  We  must  do 
the  best  we  can  in  either  event. 
I  +.M-nlr  by  hard  work  I  will  have 
all  my  affairs  regulated  within  five 
or  six  years,  and  leave  the  means  of 
clearing  them  in  case  of  my  death. 
I  hope  there  will  be  enough  for  all, 
and  provision  besides  for  my  own 
family.  The  present  return  of  the 
novels  to  me  is  about  £8000  a  year, 
which  moves  fast  on  to  clear  off  old 
scores. 

"This  awkward  turn  of  health 
makes  my  motions  very  uncertain. 
On  the  one  hand  I  want  to  save 
money  and  push  forward  work, 
both  which  motives  urge  me  to 
stay  at  home  this  spring.  On  the 
other,  besides  my  great  wish  to  see 
you  all,  and  besides  my  desire  to 
look  at  the  'forty-five'  affairs,  I 


am  also  desirous  to  put  in  for  my 
interest  upon  the  changes  at  the 
Court.  ...  It  must  be  very  much 
as  health  and  weather  shall  de- 
termine, for  if  I  see  the  least 
chance  of  a  return  of  this  irritation, 
my  own  house  will  be  the  only  fit 
place  for  me.  Do  not  suppose  I 
am  either  low-spirited  or  frightened 
at  the  possibilities  I  calculate 
upon,  but  there  is  no  harm  in 
looking  at  what  may  be  as  what 
needs  must  be.  I  really  believe 
the  ugly  symptoms  proceed  from 
the  stomach  particularly.  I  feel, 
thank  God,  no  mental  injury,  which 
is  most  of  all  to  be  deprecated. 
Still,  I  am  a  good  deal  failed  in 
body  within  these  two  or  three 
last  years,  and  the  singuLa  prae- 
dantur  come  by  degrees  to  make 
up  a  sum.  They  say,  'Do  not 
work,1  but  my  habits  are  such  that 
it  is  not  easily  managed,  for  I 
would  be  driven  mad  with  idleness. 
.  .  .  Adieu.  Love  to  all  The 
odds  are  greatly  against  my  seeing 
you  till  you  come  down  here,  but 
I  will  have  the  cottage  in  such 
order  for  you ;  and  as  Will  Laidlav 
comes  back  at  Whitsunday,  I  will 
have  hi™  to  lend  me  an  arm  to 
Ghiefswood,  and  I  have  no  doubt 
to  do  gallantly. 

"  EDINBURGH,  22<Z  February  [1830]." 


328  JOUKNAL.  [MAY 

retirement  from  the  Court.  As  they  are  only  to  have  four 
instead  of  six  Clerks  of  Session  in  Scotland,  it  will  be  their 
interest  to  let  me  retire  on  a  superannuation.  Probably  I 
shall  mate  a  bad  bargain,  and  get  only  two-thirds  of  the 
salary,  instead  of  three-fourths.  This  would  be  hard,  but  I 
could  save  between  two  and  three  hundred  pounds  by  giving 
up  town  residence ;  and  surely  I  could  do  enough  with  my 
time  at  reviews  and  other  ways,  so  as  to  make  myself 
comfortable  at  Abbotsford.  At  any  rate,/ocfo  est  alea;  Sir 
Eobert  Peel  and  the  Advocate  seem  to  acquiesce  in  the 
arrangement,  and  Sir  Eobert  Dundas  retires  alongst  with 
me.  I  think  the  difference  will  be  infinite  in  point  of 
health  and  happiness. 

May  28. — Wrought  in  the  morning,  then  the  Court,  then 
Cadeirs.  My  affairs  go  on  up  to  calculation,  and  the 
Magnum  keeps  its  ground.  If  this  can  last  for  five  or  six 
years  longer  we  may  clear  our  hands  of  debt ;  but  perhaps 
I  shall  have  paid  that  of  Nature  before  that  time  come. 
They  will  have  the  books,  and  Cadell  to  manage  them,  who 
is  a  faithful  pilot.  The  poetry  which  we  purchased  for 
[£7000],  payable  in  two  years,  is  melting  off  our  hands ;  and 
we  will  feed  our  Magnum  in  that  way  when  we  have  sold 
the  present  stock,  by  which  we  hope  to  pay  the  purchase- 
money,  and  so  go  on  velvet  with  the  continuation.  So  my 
general  affairs  look  well  I  expect  Lockhart  and  Sophia  to 
arrive  this  evening  in  the  Eoads,  and  breakfast  with  us  to- 
morrow. This  is  very  reviving. 

May  29. — The  Lockharts  were  to  appear  at  nine  o'clock, 
but  it  is  past  four,  and  they  come  not.  There  has  been 
easterly  wind,  and  a  swell  of  the  sea  at  the  mouth  of  the 
Rrth,  but  nevertheless  I  wish  they  would  come.  The 
liiachinery  is  liable  to  accidents,  and  they  may  be  delayed 
thus. 

Mr.  Piper,  the  great  contractor  for  the  mail  coaches,  one 
of  the  sharpest  men  in  his  line,  called  here  to-day  to  give 


1830.]  JOURNAL.  329 

his  consent  to  our  line  of  road.  He  pays  me  the  compli- 
ment of  saying  he  wishes  my  views  on  the  subject  That  is 
perhaps  fudge,  but  at  least  I  know  enough  to  choose  the  line 
that  is  most  for  my  own  advantage.  I  have  written  to  make 
Gala  acquainted  that  my  subscription  depends  on  their  taking 
the  Gala  foot  road ;  no  other  would  suit  me.  After  dinner  I 
began  to  tease  myself  about  the  children  and  their  parents, 
and  night  went  down  on  our  uncertainly. 

May  30. — Our  travellers  appeared  early  in  the  morning, 
cum  tota  sequela.  Bight  happy  were  we  all  Poor  Johnnie 
looks  welL  His  deformity  is  confirmed,  poor  fellow ;  but  he 
may  be  a  clever  lad  for  all  that.  An  imposthume  in  his 
neck  seems  to  be  the  crisis  of  his  complaint.  He  is  a  gentle, 
placid  creature.  "Walter  is  remarkably  handsome,  and  so  is 
little  Whippety  Stourie,1  as  I  call  her.  After  breakfast  I 
had  a  chat  with  Lockhart  about  affairs  in  general,  which,  as 
far  as  our  little  interests  are  concerned,  are  doing  very  well 
Lockhart  is  now  established  in  his  reputation  and  literary 
prospects,2  I  wrote  some  more  in  his  Deirwnology,  which  is 
a  scrape,  I  think. 

1  Els  grand-daughter,  Charlotte,     argue  some   additional   degree  of 
whom  lie  playfully  named  after  the     expense. 

fairy  in  the  old  Scottish  Nursery  "But  this  being pr&meesed,  lean- 
story,  not  help  highly  approving  of  your 

2  Mr.  Lockhart  had  some  thoughts  going  into  Parliament,  especially  as 
of  entering  Parliament,  at  this  time,  a  member  entirely  unfettered  and 
and  Sir  Walter  had  expressed  his  left  to  act  according  to  the  weal 
opinion  a  few  days  before   their  of  the  public,  or  what  you  conceive 
meeting  : —  such.    It  is  the  broad  turnpike  to 

"  Your  letter,  this  day  received,  importance  and  consequence  which 

namely  Wednesday,  gave  me  the  you,  as  a  man  of  talents  in   the 

greatest  pleasure  on  account  of  the  full  vigour  of  your  youth,  ought 

prosperous    intelligence  which   it  naturally  to  be  ambitious  of.    The 

gives  me  of  your  own  advancing  present  times  threaten  to  bring  in 

prospects.  ...  I  take  it  for  granted  many  occasions  when  there  will  and 

that  you  have  looked  to  the  income  must  be   opportunities  of  a  man 

of  future  years  before  thinking  of  distinguishing  himself  and  serving 

disposing  of  the  profits  of  a  sue-  his  country. 

cessful  one  in  a  manner  which  can-  "To  go  into  the  House  without 

not  be  supposed  to  produce  positive  speaking  would  be  useless.    I  will 

or  direct  advantage,  but  may  rather  frankly  tell  you  that  when  I  heard 


330  JOUBNAL  [MAT  1830. 

May  31,-Set  to  work  early,  and  did  a  good  day's  work 
withoutmuch puffing  and  blowing.  Had  Lockhart  at  dinner, 
and  a  tibtifa  over  our  cigar.  He  lias  got  the  right  ideas 
for  getting  to  the  very  head  of  the  literary  world  and  now 
stands  very  high  as  well  for  taste  and  judgment  as  for  genius. 
I  think  there  is  no  fear  now  of  his  letting  a  love  of  fun  run 
away  with  him.  At  home  the  whole  day,  except  a  walk  to 
CadelTs,  who  is  enlarging  his  sale.  As  he  comes  upon  heavy 
months,  and  is  come  now  to  the  Allot,  the  Monastery,  and 
the  less  profitable  or  popular  of  the  novels,  this  is  a  fortunate 
circumstance.  The  management  seems  very  judicious. 

you  speak  you  seemed  always  may  gain  advantage  from  taking 

sufficiently  np  to  the  occasion  both  this  hint,  No  one  is  disposed  to 

in  words  and  matter,  but  too  in-  weigh  any  man's  arguments  more 

different  in  the  manner  in  which  favourably  than  he  himself  does, 

yon  pressed  your  argument,  and  and  if  you  are  not  considered  as 

therefore  far  less  likely  to  at-  gravely  interested  in  what  you  say, 

tract  attention  than  if  you  had  and  conscious  of  its  importance, 


the  troth  and  importance  of  what      "EMBUBGH,  soft  %  isso." 
you  have  been  saying,  I  think  you 


JUNE. 

June  1. — Proofs  and  Court,  the  inevitable  employment 
of  the  day.  Louisa  Kerr  dined  with  us,  and  Williams  looked 
in.  We  talked  a  good  deal  on  Celtic  witchery  and  faiiy 
lore.  I  was  glad  to  renew  my  acquaintance  with  this  able 
and  learned  man, 

June  2. — The  Lockharts  left  us  again  this  morning,  and 
although  three  masons  are  clanking  at  their  work  to  clear  a 
well,  the  noise  is  mitigated,  now  the  poor  babies'  clang  of 
tongues  is  removed.  I  set  myself  to  write,  determining  to 
avoid  reasoning,  and  to  bring  in  as  many  stories  as  possible. 
Being  a  Teind  Wednesday,  I  may  work  undisturbed,  and 
I  will  try  to  get  so  far  ahead  as  may  permit  a  journey 
to  Abbotsford  on  Saturday.  At  nine  o'clock  was  as  far 
ahead  as  page  57,  It  runs  out  well,  and  150  pages  will  do. 

June  3. — Finished  my  proofs,  and  sent  them  off  witli 
copy.  I  saw  Mr.  Dickinson1  on  Tuesday:  a  right  plain  sensible 
man.  He  is  so  confident  in  my  matters,  that,  being  a  large 
creditor  himself,  he  offers  to  come  down,  with  the  support  of 
all  the  London  creditors,  to  carry  through  any  measure  that 
can  be  devised  for  my  behoof.  Mr.  Cadell  showed  him  that 
we  are  four  years  forward  in  matter  prepared  for  the  press. 
Got  Heath's  illustrations,  which,  I  dare  say,  are  finely 
engraved,  but  commonplace  enough  in  point  of  art. 

June  4. — Court  as  usual,  and  not  long  detained.  Visited 
CadelL  All  right,  and  his  reports  favourable,  it  being  the 

1  Mr.   John  Dickinson  of  Nash   Mill,    Herts,   the   eminent  paper- 
maker. — j.  G.  L.    Ante,  p.  31. 


332  JOURNAL.  [JUNE 

launch  of  our  annual  volume,  now  traversing  a  year,  with 
unblemished  reputation  and  success  uninterrupted.  I  should 
have  said  I  overhauled  proofs  and  furnished  copy  in  the 
morning  between  seven  and  ten  o'clock. 

After  coming  from  the  Court  I  met  Woll  and  Gala, 
and  agreed  upon  the  measures  to  be  attempted  at  Selkirk  on 
the  eighth  at  the  meeting  of  trustees.  In  the  evening 
smoked  an  extra  cigar  (none  since  Tuesday),  and  dedicated 
the  rest  to  putting  up  papers,  etc.,  for  Abbotsford.  Anne 
wants  me  to  go  to  hear  the  Tyrolese  Minstrels,  but  though 
no  one  more  esteems  that  bold  and  high-spirited  people,  I 
cannot  but  think  their  yodelling,  if  this  be  the  word,  is  a 
variation,  or  set  of  variations,  upon  the  tones  of  a  jackass, 
so  I  remain  to  dribble  and  scribble  at  home. 

June  5. — I  rose  at  seven  as  usual,  and,  to  say  truth, 
dawdled  away  my  time  in  putting  things  to  rights,  which  is 
a  vile  amusement,  and  writing  letters  to  people  who  write 
to  ask  my  opinion  of  their  books,  which  is  as  much  as 
to  say — "Tom,  come  tickle  me."  This  is  worse  than  the 
other  pastime,  but  either  may  serve  for  a  broken  day,  and 
both  must  be  done  sometimes. 

[AVbotsford.]— After  the  Court,  started  for  Abbotsford 
at  half-past  twelve  at  noon,  and  here  we  are  at  half-past  five 
imprcvnsi.  The  country  looks  beautiful,  though  the  foliage, 
larches  in  particular,  have  had  a  blight.  Yet  they  can  hardly 
be  said  to  lose  foliage  since  they  have  but  a  sort  of  brushes 
at  best 

June  6. — Went  through  a  good  deal  of  duty  as  to  proofs, 
and  the  like.  At  two  set  out  and  reached  by  four  Chiefs- 
wood,  where  I  had  the  happiness  to  find  the  Lockharts  all 
in  high  spirits,  well  and  happy.  Johnnie  must  be  all  his 
life  a  weakly  child,  but  he  may  have  good  health,  and  pos- 
sesses an  admirable  temper.  We  dined  with  the  Lockharts, 
and  were  all  very  happy. 

June  7. — Same  duty  carefully  performed.    I  continued 


1830.]  JOURNAL.  333 

working  till  about  one,  when  Lockhart  came  to  walk  We 
took  our  course  round  by  the  Lake.  I  was  a  good  deal 
fagged,  and  must  have  tired  my  companion  by  walking 
slow.  The  Fergusons  came  over — Sir  Adam  in  all  his  gloiy 
— and  *c  the  night  drave  on  wf  sangs  and  clatter." 1 

June  8. — Had  not  time  to  do  more  than  correct  a  sheet 
or  two.  About  eleven  set  off  for  Selkirk,  where  there  was  a 
considerable  meeting  of  road  trustees.  The  consideration  of 
the  new  road  was  intrusted  to  a  committee  which  in  sgine 
measure  blinks  the  question ;  yet  I  think  it  must  do  in  the 
end.  I  dined  with  the  Club,  young  Chesters  president.  It 
is  but  bad  fun,  but  I  might  be  father  of  most  of  them,  and 
must  have  patience.  At  length 

"  Hame  cam  our  gndeman  at  e'en, 
And  tame  tvyw  he."^ 

June  9. — In  the  morning  I  advised  Sheriff  Court  pro- 
cesses, carried  on  the  Demonoloffy  till  twelve,  then  put 
books,  etc.,  in  some  order  to  leave  behind  me.  Will  it 
be  ordered  that  I  come  back  not  like  a  stranger,  or  sojourner, 
but  to  inhabit  here  ?  I  do  not  know ;  I  shall  be  happy  either 
way.  It  is  perhaps  a  violent  change  in  the  end  of  life  to 
quit  the  walk  one  has  trod  so  long,  and  the  cursed  splenetic 
temper,  which  besets  all  men,  makes  you  value  opportunities 
and  circumstances  when  one  enjoys  them  no  longer.  Well ! 
things  must  be  as  they  may,  as  says  that  great  philosopher 
Corporal  Nym.8 

lEdwribuargh.] — I  had  my  walk,  and  on  my  return  found 
the  Lockharts  come  to  take  luncheon,  and  leave  of  us. 
Beached  Edinburgh  at  nine  o'clock.  Found,  among  less 
interesting  letters,  two  from  Lord  Northampton  on  the  death 
of  the  poor  Marchioness,4  and  from  Anna  Jane  Clephane  on 
the  same  melancholy  topic.  Hei  trvlhi  ! 

1  Burns's  Tarn  oj  Shawter.  s  Hexvry  V.  Act  n.  Sc.  1. 

2  See  Johnson's  Musical  Museum        4  Daughter    of    his    old   friend, 
Illustrations,  Pt  v.  No.  454.  Mrs.  Maclean  Clephane  of  Torloisk. 


334  JOUEN'AL.  [JUNE 

June  10. — Corrected  proofs,  prepared  some  copy,  and  did 
all  that  was  right.  Dined  and  wrought  in  the  evening,  yet  I 
did  not  make  much  way  after  all 

June  11. — In  the  morning,  the  usual  labour  of  two  hours. 
God  bless  that  habit  of  being  up  at  seven!  I  could  do 
nothing  without  it,  but  it  keeps  me  up  to  the  scratch,  as 
they  say.  I  had  a  letter  this  morning  with  deep  mourning 
paper  and  seal ;  the  mention  of  my  nephew  in  the  first  line 
made  me  sick,  fearing  it  had  related  to  Walter.  It  was 
from  poor  Sir  Thomas  Bradford,  who  has  lost  his  lady,  but 
was  indeed  an  account  of  Walter,1  and  a  good  one. 

June  12. — A  day  of  general  labour  and  much,  weariness. 

June  13. — The  same  may  be  said  of  this  day. 

June  14. — And  of  this,  only  I  went  out  for  an  hour  and 
a  half  to  Mr.  Colvin  Smith,  to  conclude  a  picture  for  Lord 
Gillies.  This  is  a  sad  relief  from  labour. 

"...  Sedet  seternmnqiie  sedebit 
Infelix  Theseus."2 

But  Lord  Gillies  has  been  so  kind  and  civil  that  I  must 
have  his  picture  as  like  as  possible. 

June  15. — I  had  at  breakfast  the  son  of  Mr.  Fellenburg3 
of  Hofwyll,  Switzerland,  a  modest  young  man.  I  used  to 
think  his  father  something  of  a  quack,  in  proposing  to  dis- 
cover how  a  boy's  natural  genius  lies,  with  a  view  to  his 
education.  How  would  they  have  made  me  a  scholar,  is 
a  curious  question.  Whatever  was  forced  on  me  as  a  task  I 
should  have  detested.  There  was  also  a  gentlemanlike  little 

man,  the  Chevalier  de  ,  silent,  and  speaks  no  English. 

Poor  George  Scott,  Harden,  is  dead  of  the  typhus  fever. 
Poor  dear  boy !  I  am  sorry  for  him,  and  yet  more  for  Ms 
parents,  I  have  a  letter  from  Henry  on  the  subject 

June  16. — I  wrote  this  forenoon  till  I  completed  the 
100  pages,  which  is  well  done.  I  had  a  call  from  Colin 

1  "Littile  Walter,"  Thomas  Scott's  son,  who  went  to  India  in  1826, 
ante,  voL  L  p.  103.  He  became  a  General  in  the  Indian  Army,  and 
died  in  1873.  *  Mneid  vi.  617, 

3  Emanuel  de  FeUentrarg,  who  died  in  1844. 


1830.]  JOURNAL  335 

Mackenzie,  whom  I  had  not  seen  for  nearly  two  years.  He 
has  not  been  so  well,  and  looks  ghastly,  but  I  think  not 
worse  than  I  have  seen  him  of  late  years.  We  are  very 
old  acquaintances.  I  remember  he  was  one  of  a  small 
party  at  college,  that  formed  ourselves  into  a  club  called  the 
Poetical  Society.  The  other  members  were  Charles  Kerr  of 
Abbotrule  (a  singular  being),  Colin  M'Laurin  (insane),  Colin, 
and  I,  who  have  luckily  kept  our  wits.  I  also  saw  this 
morning  a  Mr.  Low,  a  youth  of  great  learning,  who  has 
written  a  good  deal  on  the  early  history  of  Scotland.1  He  is 
a  good-looking,  frank,  gentlemanlike  lad;  with  these  good 
gifts  only  a  parish  schoolmaster  in  Aberdeenshire.  Having 
won  a  fair  holiday  I  go  to  see  Miss  Zemble  for  the  first 
time.  It  is  two  or  three  years  since  I  have  been  in  a 
theatre,  once  my  delight 

Jww  1 7. — Went  last  night  to  theatre,  and  saw  Miss  3f  anny 
Kemble's  Isabella,2  which  was  a  most  creditable  performance. 
It  has  much  of  the  genius  of  Mrs.  Siddons,  her  aunt.  She 
wants  her  beautiful  countenance,  her  fine  form,  and  her 
matchless  dignity  of  step  and  "manner.  On  the  other  hand, 
Miss  Fanny  Kemble  has  very  expressive,  though  not  regular, 
features,  and  what  is  worth  it  all,  great  energy  mingled  with 
and  chastened  by  correct  taste.  I  suffered  by  the  heat, 
lights,  and  exertion,  and  will  not  go  back  to-night,  for  it 
has  purchased  me  a  sore  headache  this  theatrical  excursion. 
Besides,  the  play  is  Mrs.  Beverley,3  and  I  hate  to  be  made 
miserable  about  domestic  distress,  so  I  keep  my  gracious 
presence  at  home  to-night,  though  I  love  and  respect  Miss 
Kemble  for  giving  her  active  support  to  her  father  in  his 
need,  and  preventing  Covent  Garden  from  coming  down 
about  their  ears,  I  corrected  proofs  before  breakfast,  at- 
tended Court,  but  was  idle  in  the  forenoon,  the  headache 
annoying  me  much.  Dinner  will  make  me  better.  And  so 

1  "The  History  of  Scotland  from  -See  Misc.  Prose  Works,  vol  xx. 

the  Earliest  Period  to  the  Middle  of  pp.  374-6. 

the  Ninth  Century,"  by  the  Eev.  *  Southerne's  Fat  at  Marriage. 

Alex.  Low.    Svo,  Edinburgh,  1S26.  3  In  the  Gamester  by  Moore. 


336  JOURNAL.  [JUNE 

it  did.  I  wrote  in  the  evening  three  pages,  and  tolerably 
well,  though  I  may  say  with  the  Emperor  Titus  (not  Titus 
Gates)  that  I  have  lost  a  day. 

June  18,.  [Blair-Adam].  —  Young  John  Colquhoun  of 
Killennont  and  his  wife  breakfasted  with  us,  —  A  neat  custom 
that,  and  saves  wine  and  wassail  Then  to  Court,  and 
arranged  for  our  departure  for  Blair-Adam,  it  being  near  mid- 
summer when  the  club  meets.  Anne  with  me,  and  Sir  Adam 
Ferguson.  The  day  was  execrable.  Our  meeting  at  Blair- 
Adam  was  cordial,  but  our  numbers  diminished  ;  the  good  and 
very  clever  Lord  Chief  Baron1  is  returned  to  his  own  country, 
with  more  regrets  than  in  Scotland  usually  attend  a  stranger. 
Will  Clerk  has  a  bad  cold,  [Thomas]  Thomson  is  detained, 
but  the  Chief  Commissioner,  Admiral  Adam,  Sir  Adam,  John 
Thomson  and  I,  make  an  excellent  concert.  I  only  hope 
our  venerable  host  will  not  fatigue  himself.  To-morrow  we 
go  to  Culross,  which  Sir  Robert  Preston  is  repairing,  and 
the  wise  are  asking  for  whose  future  enjoyment.  He  is 
upwards  of  ninety,  but  still  may  enjoy  the  bustle  of  life. 

June  19.  —  Arose  and  expected  to  work  a  little,  but  a 
friend's  house  is  not  favourable  ;  you  are  sure  to  want  the 
book  yoB  have  not  brought,  and  are  in  short  out  of  sorts, 
like  the  minister  who  could  not  preach  out  of  his  own  pulpit. 
There  is  something  fanciful  in  this,  and  something  real  too, 
and  I  have  forgot  my  watch  and  left  half  my  glasses  at  home. 

Off  we  set  at  half-past  eight  o'clock,  Lord  Chief  Com- 
missioner being  left  at  home  owing  to  a  cold.  We  break- 
fasted at  Luscar,  a  place  belonging  to  Adam  Eolland,  but 
the  gout  had  arrested  him  at  Edinburgh,  so  we  were  hospi- 
tably received  by  his  family.  The  weather  most  unpropi- 
tiotis,  very  cold  and  rainy.  After  breakfast  to  Culross,  where 
the  veteran,  Sir  Robert  Preston,2  showed  us  his  curiosities. 
Life  has  done  as  much  for  him  as  most  people.  In  his 


1  Sir  Samuel  Shepherd.  —  See  ante,  vol.  i.  p.  51  n. 

5  Sir  Robert  Preston,  Bart.,  died  in  May  1834,  aged  ninety-five.—  j.  a  L. 


1830.]  JOUKJTAL.  337 

ninety-second  year  he  has  an  ample  fortune,  a  sound  under- 
standing, not  the  least  decay  of  eyes,  ears,  or  taste ;  is  as 
big  as  two  men,  and  eats  like  three.  Yet  he  too  experiences 
the  singula  prcedantur  anni,  and  has  lost  something  since 
I  last  saw  him.  If  his  appearance  renders  old  age  tolerable, 
it  does  not  make  it  desirabla  But  I  fear  when  death  comes 
we  shall  be  unwilling  for  all  that  to  part  with  our  bundle 
of  sticks.  Sir  Robert  amuses  himself  with  repairing  the  old 
House  of  Culross,  built  by  the  Lord  Bruce  of  Kinloss.  To 
what  use  it  is  destined  is  not  very  eyident  to  me.  It  is  too 
near  his  own  comfortable  mansion  of  Valleyfield  to  be 
•useful  as  a  residence,  if  indeed  it  could  be  formed  into  a 
comfortable  modern  house.  But  it  is  rather  like  a  banqueting 
house.  Well,  he  follows  his  own  fancy.  We  had  a  sumptu- 
ous cold  dinner.  Adam  grieves  it  was  not  hot,  so  little  can 
war  and  want  break  a  man  to  circumstances.  We  returned 
to  Blair- Adam  in  the  evening,  through  "  the  wind  but  and  the 
rain."  For  June  weather  it  is  the  most  ungenial  I  have 
seen.  The  beauty  of  Culross  consists  in  magnificent  terraces 
rising  on  the  sea-beach,  and  commanding  the  opposite  shore 
of  Lothian ;  the  house  is  repairing  in  the  style  of  James  the 
Sixth.  The  windows  have  pediments  like  Heriot's  Work.1 
There  are  some  fine  relics  of  the  old  Monastery,  with  large 
Saxon  arches.  At  Luscar  I  saw  with  pleasure  the  painting  by 
Eaeburn,  of  my  old  friend  Adam  Rolland,  Es<j.,2  who  was  in 
the  external  circumstances,  but  not  in  frolic  or  fancy,  my 
prototype  for  Paul  PleydelL 

June  20. — We  settled  this  morning  to  go  to  church  at 
Lochore,  that  is,  at  Ballingray;  but  when  we  came  to  the 
earthly  paradise  so  called,  we  were  let  off  for  there  was  no 

1  Heriot's  Hospital,  Edinburgh.  posed  to  have  been  f otind  in  Andrew 

3  See  ante,  p.  281  note,  and  for  Crosbie,  Advocate,  but  as  Crosbie 

sketch,  of  Adam  Holland  of  Gask,  died  when  Scotfc  was  only  fourteen, 

Cockburn's  Memorials,  pp.  360-3.  and  had  retired  from  the  bar  for  some 

3  The  **  frolic  and  fancy"  of  Coun-  years,  the  latter  could  scarcely  have 

cillor  Pleydell  were  commonly  sup-  known  him  personally. 

VOL.  IL  Y 


338  JOURNAL.  [JUNE 

sermon,  for  which  I  could  not  in  my  heart  be  sorry.  So, 
after  looking  at  Lochore,  back  we  came  to  lounge  and  loiter 
about  till  dinner-time.  The  rest  of  the  day  was  good  com- 
pany, good  cheer,  and  good  conversation.  Yet  to  be  idle 
here  is  not  the  thing,  and  to  be  busy  is  impossible,  so  I  wish 
myself  home  again  in  spite  of  good  entertainment.  We  leave 
to-night  after  an  early  dinner,  and  I  will  get  to  work  again. 

June  21,  [Edinburgh]. — Wrote  to  Walter  a  long  letter. 
The  day  continued  dropping  occasionally,  but  Sir  Adam 
was  in  high  fooling,  and  we  had  an  amazing  deal  of  laughing. 
We  stole  a  look  at  the  Kiery  Craigs  between  showers.  In 
the  meantime  George  Cheape  and  his  son  came  in.  We  dined 
at  half -past  three,  but  it  was  seven  ere  we  set  off,  and  did  not 
Teach  the  house  in  Shandwick  Place  till  eleven  at  night. 
Thus  ended  our  Club  for  the  year  1830,  its  thirteenth 
anniversary.  Its  numbers  were  diminished  by  absence 
and  indisposition,  but  its  spirit  was  unabated. 

June  22. — Finished  proofs  and  some  copy  in  the  morning. 
Eeturned  at  noon,  and  might  have  laboured  a  good  day's  work, 
but  was  dull,  drowsy,  and  indolent,  and  could  not,  at  least 
did  not,  write  above  half  a  page.  It  was  a  day  lost,  and 
indeed  it  is  always  with  me  the  consequence  of  mental 
indolence  for  a  day  or  two,  so  I  had  a  succession  of  eating 
and  dozing,  which  I  am  ashamed  of,  for  there  was  nothing  to 
Hnder  me  but  "  thick-coming  fancies."  Pshaw,  rabbit  un ! 

June  23. — Worked  well  this  morning,  and  then  to  Court. 
At  two  called  on  Mr.  Gibson,  and  find  him  disposed  for  an 
instalment.  Cadell  has  £10,000,  and  Gibson  thinks  £12,000 
will  pay  2s.  6d»  I  wish  it  could  be  made  three  shillings, 
which  would  be  £15,000. 

Presided  at  a  meeting  of  the  Bannatyne  Club.  The 
Whigs  made  a  strong  party  to  admit  Kennedy  of  Dumire, 
which  set  aside  Lord  Medwyn,  who  had  been  longer  on  the 
Toll  of  candidates.  If  politics  get  into  this  Club  it  will  ruin 
the  literary  purpose  of  the  meeting,  and  the  general  good- 


1830.]  JOTJKNAL.  339 

humour  with  which  it  has  gone  on.  I  think  it  tetter  to 
take  the  thing  good-humouredly,  and  several  of  them 
volunteered  to  say  that  Medwyn  must  be  the  next,  which 
will  finish  all  &  I'awiable.  If  it  come  to  party-work  I  will 
cut  and  run.  Confound  it !  my  eyes  are  closing  now,  even 
now,  at  half-past  four. 

Dined  with  Lord  Medwyn,  a  pleasant  party.  The  guest 
of  importance,  Mrs.  Peter  Latouche  from  Dublin,  a  fine  old 
dame,  who  must  have  been  beautiful  when  young,  being 
pleasant  and  comely  at  seventy, — saintly  it  appears. 

June  24. — Hard  work  withBallantyne's  proofs  and  revises, 
but  got  them  accomplished.  I  am  at  the  twelfth  hour,  but  I 
think  I  shall  finish  this  silly  book  before  the  tenth  of  July. 

Notwithstanding  this  sage  resolution  I  did  not  write 
half  a  page  of  the  said  DemoTwlogy  this  day.  I  went  to 
the  Court,  called  on  Mr.  CadeU,  returned  dog-tired,  and 
trifled  my  time  with  reading  the  trial  of  Corder.  "What 
seemed  most  singular  was  his  love  to  talk  of  the  young 
woman  he  had  murdered,  in  such  a  manner  as  to  insinuate 
the  circumstances  of  his  own  crime,  which  is  a  kind  of 
^necessity  which  seems  to  haunt  conscience-struck  men. 
Charles  Sharpe  came  in  at  night  and  supped  with  us. 

June  25. — Slept  little  later  than  I  should.  The  proofs 
occupied  the  morning.  The  Court  and  walk  home  detained 
me  till  two.  "When  I  returned,  set  to  work  and  reached 
page  210  of  copy.  There  is  little  or  nothing  else  to  say. 
Skene  was  with  me  for  a  few  minutes.  I  called  at  CadelTs 
also,  who  thinks  a  dividend  of  3s.  per  pound  will  be  made 
out.1  This  will  be  one-half  of  the  whole  debts,  and  leave 
a  sinking  fund  for  the  rest  about  £10,000  a  year  "if  the 
beast  live  and  the  branks  bide  hale."2 

1  A  second  dividend  of  3s.  was  son.    Burns  in  a  Scotch  letter  to 
declared  on  December  17,  1830.  Nicol  of  June  1, 1787,  says,  *  *  1 11  be 

2  An     old    GaUo-way    proverb,  in  Dumfries  the  morn  gif  the  beast 
Brtwks,  **  a  sort  of  bridle  used  by  be  to  the  fore  and  the  branks  bide 
country  people  in  riding." — Jamie-  hale." — Cromek's  Reliques,  p.  29. 


340  JOURNAL.  [Jura 

June  26. — Miss  Kemble  and  her  father  breakfasted 
here,  with  Sir  Adam  and  Lady  Ferguson.  I  like  the  young 
lady  very  much,  respecting  both  her  talents  and  the  use 
she  has  made  of  them.  She  seems  merry,  unaffected,  and 
good-humoured.  She  said  she  did  not  like  the  apathy  of 
the  Scottish  audiences,  who  are  certain  not  to  give  applause 
upon  credit  I  went  to  the  Court,  but  soon  returned;  a 
bad  cold  in  my  head  makes  me  cough  and  sneeze  like  the 
Dragon  of  Wantley.  The  Advocates'  Bill x  is  read  a  third 
time.  I  hardly  know  whether  to  wish  it  passed  or  no,  and 
am  therefore  in  utrumgue  paratus. 

June  27. — In  the  morning  worked  as  usual  at  proofs 
and  copy  of  my  infernal  Demonology — a  task  to  which  my 
poverty  and  not  my  will  consents.  About  twelve  o'clock 
I  went  to  the  country  to  take  a  day's  relaxation.  We  (i.e. 
Mr.  Cadell,  James  Ballantyne,  and  I)  went  to  Prestonpans, 
and,  getting  there  about  one,  surveyed  the  little  village, 
where  my  aunt  and  I  were  lodgers  for  the  sake  of  sea-bathing 
in  1778, 1  believe.  I  knew  the  house  of  Mr.  Warroch,  where 
we  lived, — a  poor  cottage,  of  which  the  owners  and  their 
family  are  extinct.  I  recollected  my  juvenile  ideas  of 
dignity  attendant  on  the  large  gate,  a  black  arch  which 
lets  out  upon  the  sea.  I  saw  the  church  where  I  yawned 
under  the  inflictions  of  a  Dr.  M'Cormick,  a  name  in  which 
dulness  seems  to  have  been  hereditary.  I  saw  the  Links 
where  I  arranged  my  shells  upon  the  turf,  and  swam  my 
little  skiffs  in  the  pools.  Many  comparisons  between  the 
man,  and  the  recollections  of  my  kind  aunt,  of  old  George 
Constable,  who,  I  think,  dangled  after  her ;  of  Dalgetty,  a 
veteran  half -pay  lieutenant,  who  swaggered  his  solitary  walk 
on  the  parade,  as  he  called  a  little  open  space  before  the 
same  pool  We  went  to  Preston,  and  took  refuge  from  a 
thunder-plump  in  the  old  tower.  I  remembered  the  little 
garden  where  I  was  crammed  with  gooseberries,  and  the 
fear  I  had  of  Blind  Harry's  spectre  of  Fawdon  showing  his 


1830.]  JOUBMAI*  341 

headless  trunk  at  one  of  the  windows.  I  remembered  also 
a  very  good-natured  pretty  girl  (my  Mary  Duff),  whom  I 
laughed  and  romped  with  and  loved  as  children  lova  She 
was  a  Miss  Dalrymple,  daughter  of  Lord  Westhall,1  a  Lord 
of  Session ;  was  afterwards  married  to  Anderson  of  Winter- 
field,  and  her  daughter  is  now  [the  spouse]  of  my  colleague 
Robert  Hamilton.  So  strangely  are  our  cards  shuffled.  I 
was  a  mere  child,  and  could  feel  none  of  the  passion  which 
Byron  alleges,  yet  the  recollection  of  this  good-humoured 
companion  of  my  childhood  is  like  that  of  a  morning  dream, 
nor  should  I  now  greatly  like  to  dispel  it  by  seeing  the 
original,  who  must  now  be  sufficiently  time-honoured. 

Well,  we  walked  over  the  field  of  battle,  saw  the 
Prince's  Park,  Cope's  Loan,  marked  by  slaughter  in  his 
disastrous  retreat,  the  thorn-tree  which  marks  the  centre  of 
the  battle,  and  all  besides  that  was  to  be  seen  or  supposed. 
We  saw  two  broadswords,  found  on  the  field  of  battle,  one 
a  Highlander's,  an  Andrew  Jerrara,  another  the  dragoon's 
sword  of  that  day.  Lastly,  we  came  to  Gockenzie,  where 
Mr.  Francis  Cadell,  my  publisher's  brother,  gave  us  a  kind 
reception.  I  was  especially  glad  to  see  the  mother  of  the 
family,  a  fine  old  lady,  who  was  civil  to  my  aunt  and  me, 
and,  I  recollect  well,  used  to  have  us  to  tea  at  Gockenzie. 
Curious  that  I  should  long  afterwards  have  an  opportunity 
to  pay  back  this  attention  to  her  son  Eobert.  Once  more, 
what  a  kind  of  shuffling  of  the  hand  dealt  us  at  our  nativity. 
There  was  Mrs.  3?.  Cadell,  and  one  or  two  young  ladies,  and 
some  fine  fat  children,  I  should  be  a  bastard  to  the  time 2 
did  I  not  tell  our  fare.  We  had  a  tiled  whiting,8  a  dish 
unknown  elsewhere,  so  there  is  a  bone  for  the  gastronomers 
to  pick.  Honest  John  Wood,4  my  old  friend,  dined  with 

1  David  Dalrymple  of  Westhall     •whitings"   are   now  unknown   to 
was  a  judge  of  the  Court  of  Session    the  fisher-folk  of  Cockenzie. 

from  1777  till  his  death  in  1784.  *  John  Philip  Wood,   editor  of 

2  King  John,  Act  i.  Sc.  1.  Douglass  Peerage  of  Scotland,  etc., 

3  A  whiting  dried  in  the  sun ;  but  was  deaf  and  dumb  -f  he  died  in 
*'  tiled     haddocks"     and     "tiled  1838  in  his  seventy-fourth  year. 


342  JOUBNAL.  [JUNE  1830. 

us.  I  only  regret  I  cannot  understand  him,  as  he  has  a 
very  powerful  memory,  and  much  curious  information. 
The  whole  day  of  pleasure  was  damped  by  the  news  of  the 
King's  death;  it  was  fully  expected,  however,  as  the  ter- 
mination of  his  long  illness.  But  he  was  very  good  to  me 
personally,  and  a  kind  sovereign.  The  common  people  and 
gentry  join  in  their  sorrow.  Much  is  owing  to  a  kindly 
recollection  of  his  visit  to  this  country,  which  gave  all  men 
an  interest  in  him. 

June  29. — The  business  of  the  Court  was  suspended,  so 
back  I  came,  without  stop  or  stay,  and  to  work  went  L 
As  I  had  risen  early  I  was  sadly  drowsy ;  however,  I  fought 
and  fagged  away  the  day.  I  am  still  in  hope  to  send  my 
whole  manuscript  to  Ballantyne  before  the  10th  July. 
Well,  I  must  devise  something  to  myself ;  I  must  do  some- 
thing better  than  this  Demonological  trash.  It  is  nine 
o'clock,  and  I  am  weary,  yea,  my  very  spirit's  tired.1 
After  ten  o'clock  Mr.  Daveis,2  an  American  barrister  of 
eminence,  deputed  to  represent  the  American  States  in  a 
dispute  concerning  the  boundaries  of  Nova  Scotia  and  New 
England,  with  an  introduction  to  me  from  Mr.  Ticknor, 
called.  I  was  unable  to  see  him,  and  put  him  off  till  to- 
morrow morning  at  breakfast. 

June  30. — The  new  King  was  proclaimed,  and  the  College 
of  Justice  took  the  oaths.  I  assisted  Mr.  Daveis,  who  is  a 
pleasant  and  well-informed  man,  to  see  the  ceremony,  which, 
probably,  he  would  hardly  witness  in  his  own  country.  A 
day  of  noise  and  bustle.  We  dined  at  Mr,  and  Mrs.  Strange, 
chbre  eocquise  I  suppose.  Many  friends  of  the  Arniston 
family.  I  thought  there  was  some  belief  of  Lord  Melville 
losing  his  place.  That  he  may  exchange  it  for  another  is 
very  likely,  but  I  think  the  Duke  will  not  desert  T"m  who 
adhered  to  him  so  truly. 

1  Oaricfanus,  Act  i.  Sc.  9.  friend  of  Mr.  George  Ticknor,  in 

whose  Life  (2  vols.  8vo,   Boston, 
5  Charles  S.  Daveis  of  Portland,  a     1876)  he  is  often  mentioned. 


JULY. 

July  1. — Mr.  Daveis  breakfasted  with  me.  On  nearer 
acquaintance,  I  was  more  galled  by  some  portion  of  conti- 
nental manners  than  I  had  been  at  first,  so  difficult  is  it  for 
an  American  to  correct  his  manner  to  our  ideas  of  perfect 
good-breeding.1  I  did  all  that  was  right,  however,  and  asked 
Miss  Ferrier,  whom  he  admires  prodigiously,  to  meet  him  at 
dinner.  Hither  came  also  a  young  friend,  so  I  have  done  the 
polite  thing  every  way.  Thomson  also  dined  with  us.  After 
dinner  I  gave  my  strangers  an  airing  round  the  Corstorphine 
hills,  and  returned  by  the  Cramond  road.  I  sent  to  Mr. 
Gibson,  CadelTs  project  for  Lammas,  which  raises  £15,000  for 
a  dividend  of  3s.  to  be  then  made.  I  think  the  trustees 
should  listen  to  this,  which  is  paying  one-half  of  my  debt. 

July  2. — Have  assurances  from  John  Gibson  that 
£15,000  should  be  applied  as  I  proposed.  If  this  can  be 
repeated  yearly  up  to  1835  the  matter  is  ended,  and  well 
ended;  yet,  woe's  me!  the  public  change  their  taste,  and 
their  favourites  get  old.  Tet  if  I  was  born  in  1771, 1  shall 
only  be  sixty  in  1831,  and,  by  the  same  reasoning,  sixty- 
four  in  1835,  so  I  may  rough  it  out,  yet  be  no  Sir  Eobert 
Preston.  At  any  rate,  it  is  all  I  have  to  trust  to. 

I  did  a  morning's  task,  and  was  detained  late  at  the  Court ; 
came  home,  ate  a  hearty  dinner,  slumbered  after  it  in  spite 

1  An  amusing  illustration  of  the  shoes ;  at  dinner-table  it  was  not 

difficulty   of    seeing   ourselves  as  at  first  easy  to  recognise  the  same 

others  see  us  may  be  found  written  individuals.  .  .  .  But  after  a  while, 

twenty-five  years  later  by  Nathaniel  cyou   see  the  same  rough  figure 

Hawthorne,  where  the  author  of  through  all  the  finery,  and  become 

the  Scarlet  Letter  expresses  in  like  sensible  that  John  Bull  cannot  make 

manner  his  surprise  at  the  want  of  himself  fine,  whatever  he  may  put 

refinement  in  Englishmen: — "I  had  on.    He  is  a  rough  animal,  and  his 

been  struck  by  the  very  rough  aspect  female  is  well  adapted  to  him. ' " — 

of  these  John  Bulls  in  their  morn-  Hawthorne  and  His  Wife,  voL  iL 

ing  garb,  their  coarse  frock-coats,  p.  70.    2  vols.  8vo.     Cambridge* 

grey  hats,  check  trousers,  and  stout  U.S.A.,  1884. 


344  JOUENAL.  [JULY 

of  my  teeth,  and  made  a  poor  night's  work  of  it.  One's  mind 
gets  so  dissipated  by  the  fagging,  yet  insignificant,  business 
of  the  offices  ;  my  release  comes  soon,  but  I  fear  for  a  term 
only,  for  I  doubt  if  they  will  carry  through  the  Court  Bill. 

July  3. — My  day  began  at  seven  as  usual.  Sir  Adam 
came  to  breakfast.  I  read  Southey's  edition  of  the  Pilgrim's 
Progress,  and  think  of  reviewing  the  same.  I  would  I  had 
books  at  hand.  To  the  Court,  and  remained  till  two  ;  then 
went  to  look  at  the  drawings  for  repairing  Murthly,  the  house 
of  Sir  John  or  James  Stewart,  now  building  by  Gttlespie 
Graham,  and  which  he  has  planned  after  the  fashion  of 
James  VL'S  reign,  a  kind  of  bastard  Grecian1 — very  fanciful 
and  pretty  though.  Eead  Hone's  Every-day  JBooJc,  and  with  a 
better  opinion  of  him  than  I  expected  from  his  anti-religious 
frenzy.  "We  are  to  dine  with  the  Skenes  to-day. 

"Which  we  did  accordingly,  meeting  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Strange, 
Lord  Forbes,  and  other  friends. 

July  4. — Was  a  complete  and  serious  day  of  work,  only 

interrupted  in  the  evening  by ,  who,  with  all  the 

freedom  and  ease  of  continental  manners,  gratified  me 
with  his  gratuitous  presence.  Tet  it  might  have  been 
worse,  for  his  conversation  is  well  enough,  but  it  is  strange 
want  of  tact  to  suppose  one  must  be  alike  welcome  to  a 
stranger  at  all  hours  of  the  day;  but  I  have  stuffed  the 
portfolio,  so  do  not  grudge  half-an-hour. 

July  5. — I  was  up  before  seven  and  resumed  my  labours, 
and  by  breakfast-time  I  had  reached  p.  133;  it  may  reach 
to  160  or  170  as  I  find  space  and  matter.  Buchanan2  came 
and  wrote  about  fifteen  of  his  pages,  equal  to  mine  in  pro- 
portion of  three  to  one.  We  are  therefore  about  p.  138, 
and  in  sight  of  land.  At  two  o'clock  went  to  bury  poor 
George  Burnet,  the  son  of  Gilbert  Innes,  in  as  heavy  a  rain  as 
I  ever  saw.  Was  in  Shandwick  Place  again  by  four  and 

1  Architects  style  it  Elizabethan,         2  An  amanuensis  who  was  em- 
but  Sir  Walter's  term  is  not  ioap-     ployed  by  Scott  at  this  time, 
propriate. 


1830.]  JOUJRBAL.  345 

made  these  entries.  I  dine  to-day  with  the  dub;  grant 
Heaven  it  fair  before  six  o'clock  I 

We  met  at  Barry's,1  and  had  a  gallant  dinner,  but  only 
few  of  our  number  was  present.  Alas !  sixty  does  not  rally 
to  such  meetings  with  the  alacrity  of  sixteen,  and  our  Club 
has  seen  the  space  between  these  terms.  I  was  home  and 
abed  when  Charles  arrived  and  waked  me.  Poor  fellow !  he 
is  doing  very  well  with  his  rheumatic  limbs. 

Jidy  6. — I  did  little  this  morning  but  correct  some 
sheets,  and  was  at  the  Court  all  morning.  About  two  I 
called  at  Mr.  CadelTs,  and  I  learned  the  dividend  was 
arranged.  Sir  Adam  fell  in  with  us,  and  laid  anchors  to 
windward  to  get  an  invitation  to  Cockenzie  for  next  year, 
being  struck  with  my  life-like  description  of  a  tiled  haddock. 
I  came  home  much  fagged,  slept  for  half-an-hour  (I  don't 
like  this  lethargy),  read  /  Promessi  Sposi,  and  was  idle. 
Miss  Kerr  dined  and  gave  us  music. 

July  7 — This  morning  corrected  proofs,  with  which 
J.  B.  proceeds  lazily  enough,  and  alleges  printing  reasons, 
of  which  he  has  plenty  at  hand.  Though  it  was  the  Teind 
Wednesday  the  devil  would  have  it  that  this  was  a  Court 
of  Session  day  also  for  a  cause  of  mine;  so  there  I  sat 
hearing  a  dozen  cases  of  augmentation  of  stipend  pleaded, 
and  wondering  within  myself  whether  anything  can  be 
predicated  of  a  Scottish  parish,  in  which  there  cannot  be 
discovered  a  reason  for  enlarging  the  endowments  of  the 
minister.  I  returned  after  two,  with  a  sousing  shower  for 
companion ;  I  got  very  wet  and  very  warm.  But  shall  we 
go  mourn  for  that,  my  dear?2  I  rather  like  a  flaw  of 
-weather ;  it  shows  something  of  the  old  man  is  left.  I  had 
Mr.  Buchanan  to  help  pack  my  papers  and  things,  and  got 
"through  part  of  that  unpleasant  business. 

July  8. — I  had  my  letters  as  usual,  but  no  proofs  till 
I  was  just  going  out.  Returning  from  the  Court  met  Skene, 
1  British  Hotel,  70  Queen  St.  s  See  Winter's  Tale,  Act  iv.  Sc.  2. 


346 


JOUENAL. 


[JULY 


who  brought  me  news  that  our  visit  was  at  an  end  for  Satur- 
day, poor  Colin  having  come  to  town  very  unwell.  I  called 
to  see  him,  and  found  him  suffering  under  a  degree  of  slow 
palsy,  his  spirits  depressed,  and  his  looks  miserable,  worse 
a  great  deal  than  when  I  last  saw  him.  His  wife  and 
daughter  were  in  the  room,  dreadfully  distressed.  We  spoke 
but  a  few  words  referring  to  recovery  and  better  days,  which,, 
I  suspect,  neither  of  us  hoped.1  Tor  I  looked  only  on  the 
ghost  of  my  friend  of  many  a  long  day ;  and  he,  while  he 


1  See  ante,  January  15,  1828,  p. 
111.  Mr.  Mackenzie  of  Portmore 
died  in  September  1830,  when  Sir 
Walter  wrote  Mr.  Skene  the 
following  letter  — 

"DEAR  SKEITE, — I  observe  from 
the  papers  that  our  invaluable  friend 
is  no  more.  I  have  reason  to  think, 
that  as  I  surmised  when  I  saw  him 
last,  the  interval  has  been  a  melan- 
choly one,  at  least  to  those  who 
had  to  watch  the  progress.  I  never 
expected  to  see  his  kind  face  more, 
after  I  took  leave  of  him  in  Charlotte 
Square ;  yet  the  certainty  that  such 
must  be  the  case  is  still  a  painful 
shock,  as  I  can  never  hope  again  to 
meet,  during  the  remaining  span  of 
my  own  life,  a  friend  in  whom  high 
talents  for  the  business  of  life  were 
more  happily  mingled  with  all  those 
affections  which  form  the  dearest 
part  of  human  intercourse.  In  that 
respect  I  believe  his  like  hardly  is 
to  be  found.  I  hope  Mrs.  Skene 
and  you  will  make  my  assurance  of 
deep  sympathy,  of  which  they  know 
it  is  expressed  by  a  friend  of  poor 
Colin  of  fifty  years'  standing. 

"I  hope  my  young  friend,  his 
son,  will  keep  his  father's  example 
before  his  eyes.  His  best  friend 
cannot  wish  him  a  better  model. 

"I  am  just  setting  off  to  the 
West  for  along-promised  tour  of  a 
week.  I  shall  be  at  Abbotsford 


after  Monday,  27th  current,  and 
I  hope  Mrs.  Skene  and  you,  with 
some  of  our  young  friends,  will  do 
us  the  pleasure  to  come  here  for  a 
few  days.  We  see  how  separations 
may  happen  among  friends,  and 
should  not  neglect  the  opportunity 
of  being  together  while  we  can. 
Besides,  entre  nous*  it  is  time  to 
think  what  is  to  be  done  about  the 
Society,  as  the  time  of  my  retire- 
ment draws  nigh,  and  I  am  deter- 
mined, at  whatever  loss,  not  to  drag 
out  the  last  sands  of  my  life  in  that 
sand-cart  of  a  place,  the  Parliament 
House.  I  think  it  hurt  poor  Colin. 
This  is,  however,  subject  for  future 
consideration,  as  I  have  not  breathed 
a  syllable  about  resigning  the  Chair- 
to  any  one,  but  it  must  soon  follow 
as  a  matter  of  course.* 

"  Should  you  think  of  writing  to- 
let  me  know  how  the  distressed 
family  are,  you  may  direct,  during 
thebeginningof  next  week,  to  Drum- 
lanrig,  Thomhill,  Dumfriesshire. 

"  My  kind  love  attends  my  dear 
Mrs.  Skene,  girls,  boys,  and  all  the 
family,  and  I  am,  always  yours, 

"  WALTER  SCOTT. 
"ABBOTSFOBD,  18to  September  [1330]." 


*  Sir  Walter  had  teen  President  of  the 
Boyal  Society  of  Edinburgh  forsome  years ; 
his  resignation  <was  not  accepted,  and  he 
retained  the  office  until  he  died. 


1830.]  JOURNAL.  347 

said  to  see  me  did  Mm  good,  must  have  had  little  thought 
of  our  meeting  under  better  auspices.  We  shall,  of  course, 
go  straight  to  Abbotsford,  instead  of  travelling  by  Harcus 
as  we  intended. 

July  9.- — Two  distressed  damsels  on  my  hands,  one,  a 
friend  of  Harriet  Swinton,  translates  from  the  Italian  a 
work  on  the  plan  of  I  Promessi  Sposi,  but  I  fear  she  must 
not  expect  much  from  the  trade,  A  translation  with  them 
is  a  mere  translation — that  is,  a  thing  which  can  be  made 
their  own  at  a  guinea  per  sheet,  and  they  wiH  not  have  an 
excellent  one  at  a  higher  rate.  Second  is  Miss  Young, 
daughter  of  the  excellent  Dr.  Young  of  Hawick.  If  she 
can,  from  her  father's  letters  and  memoranda,  extract  materials 
for  a  fair  simple  account  of  his  life,  I  would  give  my  name 
as  editor,  and  I  think  it  might  do,  but  for  a  large  publica- 
tion— Palabras,  neighbour  Dogberry,1  the  time  is  by.  Dined 
with  the  Bannatyne,  where  we  had  a  lively  party.  Touching 
the  songs,  an  old  rou6  must  own  an  improvement  in  the 
times,  when  all  paw-paw  words  are  omitted,  and  naughty 
innuendos  gazfc.  One  is  apt  to  say — 

"Swear  me,  Elate,  like  a  lady  as  thou  art, 
A  good  mouth-filling  oath,  and  leave  *  in  sooth/ 
And  such  protest  of  pepper-gingerbread."  2 

I  think  there  is  more  affectation  than  improvement  in  the 
new  mode. 

July  10. — Bose  rather  late :  the  champagne  and  turtle, 
I  suppose,  for  our  reform  includes  no  fasting.  Then  poor 
Ardwell  came  to  breakfast;  then  Dr.  Young's  daughter. 
I  have  projected  with  Cadell  a  plan  of  her  father's  life,  to 
be  edited  by  me.s  If  she  does  but  tolerably,  she  may  have 
a  fine  thing  of  it.  Next  came  the  Court,  where  sixty  judg- 
ments were  pronounced  and  written  by  the  Clerks,  I  hope 

1  Much  Ado  about  Notlung,  Act  m.  Sc.  5. 

*  1  King  Senry  IF.,  Act  in.  Sc.  1. 

8  The  biography  here  spoken  of  was  not  published. 


348  JOIJBNAL  [JULY 

all  correctly,  though  an  error  might  well  happen  in  such  a 

crowd,  and  ,  one  of  the  test  men  possible,  is  beastly 

stupid.  Be  that  as  it  may,  off  came  Anne,  Charles,  and  I 
for  Abbotsford.  We  started  about  two,  and  the  water  being 
too  deep  didn't  arrive  till  past  seven ;  dinner,  etc.,  filled  up 
the  rest  of  the  day. 

July  11,  Allotsford. — Corrected  my  proofs  and  the  lave 
of  it  till  about  one  o'clock.  Then  started  for  a  walk  to 
Ohiefswood,  which  I  will  take  from  station  to  station,1  with, 
a  book  in  my  pouch.  I  have  begun  Lawrie  Todd,  which 
ought,  considering  the  author's  undisputed  talents,  to  have 
been  better.  He  might  have  laid  Cooper  aboard,  but  he 
follows  far  behind.  No  wonder :  Gait,  poor  fellow,  was  in 
the  King's  Bench  when  he  wrote  it.  No  whetter  of  genius 
is  necessity,  though  said  to  be  the  mother  of  invention. 

July  12. — Another  wet  day,  but  I  walked  twice  up  and 
down  the  terrace,  and  also  wrote  a  handsome  scrap  of  copy, 
though  mystified  by  the  want  of  my  books,  and  so  forth. 
Dr.  and  Mrs.  Lockhart  and  Violet  came  to  luncheon  and 
left  us  to  drive  on  to  Peebles.  I  read  and  loitered  and 
longed  to  get  my  things  in  order.  Got  to  work,  however, 
at  seven  in  the  morning. 

July  13.— Now  "what  a  thing  it  is  to  be  an  ass  !"2  I 
have  a  letter  from  a  certain  young  man,  of  a  sapient  family, 
announcing  that  his  sister  had  so  far  mistaken  my  attentions 
as  to  suppose  I  was  only  prevented  by  modesty  from  stating 
certain  wishes  and  hopes,  etc.  The  party  is  a  woman  of 
rank :  so  far  my  vanity  may  be  satisfied.  But  to  think  I 
would  wish  to  appropriate  a  grim  grenadier  made  to  mount 
guaxd  at  St.  James's  I  The  Lord  deliver  me!  I  excused 
myself  with  little  picking  upon  the  terms,  and  there  was 
no  occasion  for  much  delicacy  in  repelling  such  an  attack. 

July  14. — The  Court  of  Session  Bill  is  now  committed 

1  Sir  Walter  had  seats  placed  at  suitable  distances  between  the  house 
and  Chief swood.  a  Titus  Andronicus,  Act  iv.  So.  2. 


1830.]  JOTTKKTAL.  349 

in  the  House  of  Lords,  so  it  fairly  goes  on  this  season, 
and  I  have,  I  suppose,  to  look  for  my  cong£*  I  can  hardly 
form  a  notion  of  the  possibility  that  I  am  not  to  return  to 
Edinburgh.  My  clerk  Buchanan  came  here,  and  assists  me 
to  finish  the  Demonology  Letters,  and  be  d — d  to  them. 
But  it  is  done  to  their  hand.  Two  ladies,  Mrs.  Latouche  of 
Dublin,  and  her  niece,  Miss  Boyle,  came  to  spend  a  day  or 
two.  The  aunt  is  a  fine  old  lady ;  the  conversation  that  of  a 
serious  person  frightened  out  of  her  wits  by  the  violence  and 
superstition  of  our  workers  of  miracles  in  the  west.1  Miss 
Boyle  is  a  pretty  young  woman,  rather  quiet  for  an  Irish  lass. 

July  16. — We  visited  at  Lessudden  yesterday,  and  took 
Mrs.  Latouche  thither.  To-day,  as  they  had  left  us,  we  went 
alone  to  Major  John's  house  of  Itavenswood  and  engaged  a 
large  party  of  cousins  to  dine  to-morrow. 

In  the  evening  a  party  of  foreigners  came  around  the 
door,  and  going  out  I  found  Le  Comte  Ladislaus  de  Potocki, 
a  great  name  in  Poland,  with  his  lady  and  brother-in-law, 
so  offered  wine,  coffee,  tea,  etc.  The  lady  is  strikingly 
pretty.  If  such  a  woman  as  she  had  taken  an  affection  for 
a  lame  baronet,  nigh  sixty  years  old,  it  would  be  worth 
speaking  about  I  I  have  finished  the  Detnonology? 

July  17. — Another  bad  day,  wet  past  all  efforts  to  walk, 
and  threatening  a  very  bad  harvest.  Persecuted  with 
begging  letters;  an  author's  Pegasus  is  like  a  post-chaise 
leaving  the  door  of  the  inn :  the  number  of  beggars  is  un- 
countable. The  language  they  hold  of  my  character  for 
charity  makes  my  good  reputation  as  troublesome  as  that 
of  Joseph.  Surface.3  A  dinner  of  cousins,  the  young  Laird 
of  Eaeburn,  so  he  must  be  called,  though  nearly  as  old  as 
I  am,  at  their  head.  His  brother  Eobert,  who  has  been  in 

1  For  an  account  of  these  **mira-  Witchcraft,  addressed  to  J.  G-. 

cles "  see  Peace  in  JBelieving — a  Lockhart,  Esq.,  was  published 

memoir  of  Isabella  Campbell  of  before  the  end  of  the  year  in 

IFernicarry.  Roseneath,  8vo,  1829.  Murray's  Family  Library. 

3  Letters    on    D&monotogy   and  3  School  for  Scandal. 


350  JOURNAL.  [JULY  1830. 

India  for  forty  years,  excepting  one  short  visit :  a  fine  manly 
fellow,  who  has  belled  the  cat  with  fortune,  and  held  her  at 
bay  as  a  man  of  mould  may.  Being  all  kinsmen  and  friends, 
we  made  a  merry  day  of  our  re-union.  All  left  at  night. 

July  18. — 

"  Tune  runs,  I  know  not  how,  away.'3 

Here  am  I  beginning  the  second  week  of  my  vacation — 
though  what  needs  me  note  that  ? — vacation  and  session  will 
probably  be  the  same  to  me  in  the  future.  The  long  remove 
must  then  be  looked  to,  for  the  final  signal  to  break  up,  and 
that  is  a  serious  thought. 

I  have  corrected  two  sets  of  proofs,  one  for  the  mail, 
another  for  the  Blucher  to-morrow. 

[No  entry  between  July  1 8  and  September  5.] 

[Mr.  Lockhart  remarks  that  it  was  during  this  interval  that 
the  highest  point  of  his  recovery  was  reached.  The  following 
little  note  accompanied  the  review  of  Southey's  Bunym,  to 
Chiefswood  on  August  6th  : — 

"  Dear  Lockhart,  I  send  you  the  enclosed.  I  intended  to 
have  brought  it  myself  with  help  of  '  Daddy  Dun/  but  I  find 
the  weather  is  making  a  rain  of  it  to  purpose. 

"  I  suppose  you  are  all  within  doors,  and  the  little  gardeners 
all  off  work.— Tours,  W.  S."  J 

A  playful  yet  earnest  petition,  showing  Sir  Walter's  con- 
tinued solicitude  for  the  welfare  of  the  good  c  Dominie  Sampson/ 
was  also  written  at  this  time  to  the  Duke  of  Buccleuch : — 

"  ABBOTSFORD,  202&  August. 

"The  minister  of having  fallen  among  other  black 

cocks  of  the  season,  emboldens  me  once  more  to  prefer  my 
humble  request  in  favour  of  George  Thomson,  long  tutor  in  this 
family.  His  case  is  so  well  known  to  your  Grace  that  I  would 
be  greatly  to  blame  if  I  enlarged  upon  it.  His  morals  are  irre- 
proachable, his  talents  very  respectable.  He  has  some  oddity 
of  manner,  but  it  is  far  from  attaching  to  either  the  head  or  the 
heart  .  .  . 

"It  would  be  felt  by  me  among  one  of  the  deepest  obliga- 
tions of  the  many  which  I  owe  to  the  house  of  Buccleuch.  I 
daresay  your  Grace  has  shot  a  score  of  black  game  to-day. 
Pray  let  your  namesake  bag  a  parson." 


SEPTEMBER 

September  5. — In  spite  of  resolution  I  have  left  my  Diary 
for  seven  weeks,  I  cannot  tell  why.  "We  have  had  the  usual 
number  of  travelling  Counts  and  Countesses,  Yankees  male 
and  female,  and  a  Yankee-Doodle-Dandy  into  the  "bargain, 
a  smart  young  Virginia  man.  We  have  had  friends  of  our  own 
also,  the  Miss  Ardens,  young  Mrs.  Morritt  and  Anne  Morritt, 
most  agreeable  visitors.1  Cadell  came  out  here  yesterday  with 
his  horn  filled  with  good  news.  This  will  in  effect  put  an  end 
to  the  trust;  only  the  sales  and  produce  must  be  pledged  to 
answer  the  last  £15,000  and  the  annuity  interest  of  JE600. 
In  this  way  Mr.  Cadell  will  become  half-partner  in  the 
remaining  volumes  of  the  books  following  Si.  Ronarfs ;  with 
all  my  heart,  but  he  must  pay  well  for  it,  for  it  is  good 
property.  Neither  is  any  value  stated  for  literary  profits ; 
yet,  four  years  should  have  four  novels  betwixt  1830-4. 
This  at  £2500  per  volume  might  be  £8000,  which  would 
diminish  Mr.  CadelTs  advance  considerably.  All  this  seems 
feasible  enough,  so  my  fits  of  sullen  alarm  are  ill  placed. 
It  makes  me  care  less  about  the  terms  I  retire  upon.  The 
efforts  by  which  we  have  advanced  thus  far  are  new  in 
literature,  and  what  is  gained  is  secure. 

[No  entry  between  September  5  and  Decevriber  20 J 

1  Sir  Walter  had  written  to  Morritt  obedient  to  many  of  us  at  our  age 

on  his  retirement  from  the  Conrt  of  as  they  were  twenty  years    ago. 

Session,  and  his  old  friend  responded  non  immunes  ab  iUis  malls  sumus* 

in  the  following  cordial  letter : —  as  the  learned  Partridge  and  Lillys 

"  Nor  ember,  IS&Q.  Grammar  tells  us.  I  find  mine  swell, 

'*MT  DEAR  SCOTT, —  ...  I  am  and    am  forced  to  bandage,   and 

sorry  to  read  what  you  tell  me  of  should  not  exert  them  with   im- 

your  lameness,  but  legs  are  not  so  punity  in  walking  as  I  used  to  do> 

351 


352 


JOUENAL. 


[SEPT.  1830. 


either  in  long  walks  or  in  rough 
ground.  I  am  glad,  however,  you 
have  escaped  from  the  Cornet  of 
Session,  even  at  the  risk  of  some- 
times feeling  the  want  you  allude 
to  of  winter  society.  You  think 
you  shall  tire  of  solitude  in  these 
months :  and  in  spite  of  books  and 
the  lore  of  them,  I  havo  discovered 
by  experience  the  possibility  of 
such  a  feeling ;  but  can  we  not  in 
come  degree  remedy  this?  Why 
should  we  both  be  within  two  days' 
march  of  each  other  and  not  some- 
times together,  as  of  old  ?  How  I 
have  enjoyed  in  your  house  the 
summum  lonum  of  Sir  Win. 
Temple's  philosophy,  'something 
which  is  not  Home  and  yet  with  the 
liberty  of  Home,  which  is  not 
Solitude,  and  yet  hath  the  ease  of 
Solitude,  and  which  is  only  found 
in  the  house  of  an  old  friend.' 
Our  summer  months  are  well  pro- 
vided with  summer  friends.  You 
have  plenty  and  to  spare  of  sight- 
seers, Lions,  and  their  hunters,  and 
I  have  travellers,  moor-shooters, 
etc.,  in  equal  abundance,  but  now 
when  the  country  is  abandoned, 
and  Walter  is  leaving  you,  how  I 
wish  you  would  bring  dear  Anne 
and  partake  for  a  while  our  little 
circle  here — we  stir  not  till  Christ- 
inas— if  before  that  time  such  a 
pleasure  could  be  attainable.  Well, 
then,  forauld  lang  syne,  willyou  not, 
now  that  the  Session  has  no  claim 
on  you,  combine  our  forces  against 
the  possibility  of  ennui.  If  you 
will  do  this,  I  will  positively,  and 
in  good  faith,  hold  myself  in  readi- 
ness to  do  as  much  by  you  in  the 
next  November,  and  in  every  alter- 
nate November,  nor  shall  the  month 
eror  pass  without  bringing  us  to- 
gether. Do  not  tell  me,  as  Wm. 
Rose  would  not  fail  to  do  if  I  gave 
aim  so  good  an  opportunity,  that  my 


proposal  would  be  a  greater  bore 
than  the  solitude  it  destroyed.  It 
shall  be  no  such  thing,  but  only  the 
trouble  of  a  journey.  I  feel  too,  as 
I  grow  older,  the  vis  inertics,  and 
fancy  that  locomotion  is  more  diffi- 
cult, but  let  us  abjure  the  doctrine, 
for  it  baulks  much  pleasure.  Pray — 
pray  as  the  children  say — come  to 
us,  think  of  it  first  as  not  impossible, 
then  weigh  fairly  the  objections, 
and  if  they  resolve  themselves  into 
mere  aversion  to  change,  overcome 
them  by  an  assurance  that  the  veiy 
change  will  give  value  to  the  re- 
sumption of  your  home  avocations. 
If  I  plead  thus  strongly,  perhaps  it 
is  because  I  feel  the  advantage  to 
myself.  Time  has  made  gaps  in  the 
list  of  old  friends  as  in  yours ;  young 
ones,  though  very  cheering  and  use- 
ful, are  not,  and  cannot  be,  the  same. 
I  enjoy  them  too  when  present,  but 
in  absence  I  regret  the  others. 
What  remains  but  to  make  the 
most  of  those  we  have  still  left  when 
both  body  and  mind  permit  us  [to 
enjoy]  them.  I  have  books;  also 
a  room  that  shall  [be  your  own], 
and  a  [pony]  off  which  I  can  shoot, 
which  I  will  engage  shall  neither 
tumble  himself  or  allow  you  to 
tumble  in  any  excursion  on  which 
you  may  venture.  Dear  Anne  will 
find  and  make  my  womenkind  as 
happy  as  you  will  make  me,  and  we 
have  only  to  beg  you  to  stay  long 
and  be  most  cordially  welcome. 
.  .  .  Adieu,  dear  Scott.  I  fear  you 
will  not  come  for  all  I  can  say. 
I  could  almost  lose  a  tooth  or  a 
finger  (if  it  were  necessary)  to  find 
myself  mistaken.  Come,  and  come 
soon ;  stay  long ;  be  assured  of 
welcome. 

'<  All  unite  in  this  and  in  love  to- 
you  and  Anne,  with  your  assured 
friend,  J.  B.  MOEETTT." 


DECEMBEE. 

December  20. — From  September  5  to  December  20  is  a 
long  gap,  and  I  have  seen  plenty  of  tilings  worth  recollecting, 
had  I  marked  them  down  when  they  were  gliding  past. 
But  the  time  has  gone  by»  What  I  feel  capable  of  taking 
up,  I  will. 

Little  self  will  jostle  out  everything  else,  and  my  affairs, 
which  in  some  respects  are  excellent,  in  others,  like  the  way 
of  the  world,  are  far  from  being  pleasant. 

Of  good  I  have  the  pleasure  of  saying  I  have  my  children 
well,  and  in  good  health.  The  dividend  of  3s.  in  the  pound 
has  been  made  to  the  creditors,  and  the  creditors  have 
testified  their  sense  of  my  labours  by  surrendering  my  books, 
furniture,  plate,  and  curiosities.  I  see  some  friends  of  mine 
think  this  is  not  handsomely  dona  In  my  opinion  it  is 
extremely  so.  There  are  few  things  so  [easy]  as  to  criticise 
the  good  things  one  does,  and  to  show  that  we  ourselves 
would  have  done  [more]  handsomely.  But  those  who  know" 
the  world  and  their  own  nature  are  always  better  pleased 
with  one  kind  action  carried  through  and  executed,  than 
with  twenty  that  only  glide  through  their  minds,  while 
perhaps  they  tickle  the  imagination  of  the  benevolent 
Barmecide  who  supposes  both  the  entertainment  and  the 
eater.  These  articles  do  not  amount  to  less  than  £10,000 
at  least,  and,  without  dispensing  with  them  entirely,  might 
furnish  me  with  a  fond  for  my  younger  children.1  INbw, 
suppose  these  creditors  had  not  seriously  carried  their  pur- 
pose into  execution,  the  transaction  might  have  been  after- 
1  See  Life,  vol.  x.  pp.  10-25, 

VOL.  H.  2 


354  JOUKNAL.  [DEC. 

wards  challenged,  and  the  ease  of  mind  which  it  produced 
to  me  must  have  been  uncertain  in  comparison.  Well !  one- 
half  of  these  claims  are  cleared  off,  furnished  in  a  great 
measure  by  one-half  issue  of  the  present  edition  of  the 
Waverley  Novels,  which  had  reached  the  20th  of  the 
series. 

It  cannot  be  expected  that  twenty  more  will  run  off  so 
fast;  the  later  volumes  are  less  favourites,  and  are  really 
less  interesting.  Tet  when  I  read  them  over  again  since 
their  composition,  I  own  I  found  them  considerably  better 
than  I  expected,  and  I  think,  if  other  circumstances  do  not 
crush  them  and  blight  their  popularity,  they  will  make 
their  way.  Mr.  Cadell  is  still  desirous  to  acquire  one-half 
of  the  property  of  this  part  of  the  work,  which  is  chiefly  my 
own.  He  proposes  assembling  all  my  detached  works  of 
fiction  and  articles  in  Annuals,  so  that  the  whole,  supposing 
I  write,  as  is  proposed,  six  new  volumes,  will  run  the  col- 
lection to  fifty,  when  it  is  time  to  close  it.  Between  cash 
advanced  on  this  property,  and  a  profit  on  the  sale  of  the 
second  part,  Mr.  Cadell  thinks,  having  taken  a  year  or  two 
years'  time,  to  gather  a  little  wind  into  the  bag,  I  will  be 
able  to  pay,  on  my  part,  a  further  sum  of  £30,000,  or  the 
moiety  remaining  of  the  whole  debts,  amounting  now  to 
less  than  £60,000. 

Should  this  happy  period  arrive  in  or  about  the  year  1832 
the  heavy  work  will  be  wellnigh  finished.  For,  although 
£30,000  will  still  remain,  yet  there  is  £20,000  actually 
secured  upon  my  life,  and  the  remaining  £10,000  is  set 
against  the  sale  of  Waverley ,  which  shall  have  been  issued ; 
besides  which  there  is  the  whole  Poetry,  Bonaparte,  and 
several  other  articles,  equally  [available]  in  a  short  time  to 
pay  up  the  balance,  and  afford  a  very  large  reversion. 

This  view  cannot  be  absolutely  certain,  but  it  is  highly 
probable,  and  is  calculated  in  the  manner  in  which  trade 
schemes  [are  dealt  with],  and  is  not  merely  visionary.  The 


1830.]  JOURNAL.  355 

year  1833  may  probably  see  me  again  in  possession  of  my 
estate 

A  circumstance  of  great  consequence  to  my  habits  and 
comforts  was  my  being  released  from  the  Court  of  Session 
on  November  1830  (18th  day)  My  salary,  which  was 
£1300,  was  reduced  to  ,£840.  My  friends,  just  then  leav- 
ing office,  were  desirous  to  patch  up  the  deficiency  with 
a  pension.  I  do  not  see  well  how  they  could  do  this  with- 
out being  exposed  to  obloquy,  which  they  shall  not  be  OD 
my  account.  Besides,  though  £500  a  year  is  a  round  sum, 
yet  I  would  rather  be  independent  than  I  would  have  it. 

My  kind  friend  the  Lord  Chief  Commissioner  offered  to 
interfere  to  have  me  named  a  Privy  Councillor ;  but  besides 
that  when  one  is  poor  he  ought  to  avoid  taking  rank,  I 
would  be  much  happier  if  I  thought  any  act  of  kindness 
was  done  to  help  forward  Charles ;  and,  having  said  so  much, 
I  made  my  bow,  and  declared  my  purpose  of  remaining 
satisfied  with  the  article  of  my  knighthood.  And  here  I  am, 
for  the  rest  of  my  life  I  suppose,  with  a  competent  income, 
which  I  can  [increase]. 

All  this  is  rather  pleasing,  nor  have  I  the  least  doubt  that 
I  could  make  myself  easy  by  literary  labour.  But  much  of 
it  looks  like  winding  up  my  bottom  for  the  rest  of  my  Iife7 
But  there  is  a  worse  symptom  of  settling  accounts,  of  which 
I  have  felt  some  signs. 

Last  spring,  Miss  Young,  the  daughter  of  Dr.  Young, 
had  occasion  to  call  on  me  on  some  business,  in  which  I  had 
hopes  of  serving  her.  As  I  endeavoured  to  explain  to  her 
what  I  had  to  say,  I  had  the  horror  to  find  I  could  not  make 
myself  understood.  I  stammered,  stuttered,  said  one  word 
in  place  of  another — did  all  but  speak ;  Miss  Young  went 
away  frightened  enough,  poor  thing ;  and  Anne  and  Violet 
Lockhart  were  much  alarmed,  I  was  bled  with  cupping- 
glasses,  took  medicine,  and  lived  on  panada ;  but  In  two  or 
three  days  I  was  well  again.  The  physicians  thought,  or 


356  JOURNAL  [DEC. 

said  at  least,  that  the  evil  was  from  the  stomach.  It  is  very 
certain  that  I  have  seemed  to  speak  with  an  impediment, 
and  I  was,  or  it  might  be  fancied  myself,  troubled  with  a 
mispronouncing  and  hesitation.  I  felt  this  particularly  at 
the  Election,  and  sometimes  in  society.  This  went  on  till 

last  November,  when  Lord came  out  to  make  me  a 

visit.  I  had  for  a  long  time  taken  only  one  tumbler  of 
whisky  and  water  without  the  slightest  reinforcement 
This  night  I  took  a  very  little  drop,  not  so  much  as  a 
bumper  glass,  of  whisky  altogether.  It  made  no  difference 
on  my  head  that  I  could  discover,  but  when  I  went  to  the 
dressing-room  I  sank  stupefied  on  the  floor,  I  lay  a  minute 
or  two — was  not  found,  luckily,  gathered  myself  up,  and  got 
to  my  bed.  I  was  alarmed  at  this  second  warning,  consulted 
Abercrombie  and  Eoss,  and  got  a  few  restrictive  orders  as 
to  diet.  I  am  forced  to  attend  to  them ;  for,  as  Mrs.  Cole 
says,  *  Lack-a-day !  a  thimbleful  oversets  me." 

To  add  to  these  feelings  I  have  the  constant  increase  of 
my  lameness :  the  thigh-joint,  knee-joint,  and  ankle-joint. 

December  21. — I  walk  with  great  pain  in  the  whole 
limb,  and  am  at  every  minute,  during  an  hour's  walk,  re- 
minded of  my  mortality.  I  should  not  care  for  all  this,  if 
I  was  sure  of  dying  handsomely.  Cadell's  calculations 
would  be  sufficiently  firm  though  the  author  of  Waverley 
had  pulled  on  his  last  nightcap.  Nay,  they  might  be  even 
more  trustworthy,  if  Eemains,  and  Memoirs,  and  such  like, 
were  to  give  a  zest  to  the  posthumous.  But  the  fear  is  the 
blow  be  not  sufficient  to  destroy  life,  and  that  I  should 
linger  on  an  idiot  and  a  show.1  .... 

We  parted  on  good  terms  and  hopes.2    But,  fall  back, 

"  From  Marlborough's  eyes  the  streams  of  dotage  flow, 
Aad  Swift  expires  a  driveller  and  a  show." 

— Johnson's  Vanity  of  Hwaum  Wishes. 

3  Mr.  Cadell  and  Mr.  Ballantyne  news  from  Edinburgh  of  the  pay- 
had  arrived  at  Abbotsford  on  the  ment  of  the  second  dividend,  and 
18th,  bringing  with  them  the  good  of  the  handsome  conduct  of  the 


1830.]  JOURNAL.  357 

fall  edge,  nothing  shall  induce  me  to  publish  what  I  do  not 
think  advantageous  to  the  community,  or  suppress  what  is. 

December  23. — To  add  for  this  day  to  the  evil  thereof, 
I  am  obliged  to  hold  a  Black-fishing  Court  at  Selkirk. 
This  is  always  a  very  unpopular  matter  in  one  of  our 
counties,  as  the  salmon  never  do  get  up  to  the  heads  of  the 
waters  in  wholesome  season,  and  are  there  in  numbers  in 
spawning-time.  So  that  for  several  years  during  the  late 
period,  the  gentry,  finding  no  advantage  from  preserving  the 
spawning  fish,  neglected  the  matter  altogether  in  a  kind  of 
dudgeon,  and  the  peasantry  laid  them  waste  at  their  will 
As  the  property  is  very  valuable,  the  proprietors  down  the 
country  agreed  to  afford  some  additional  passage  for  fish 
when  the  river  is  open,  providing  they  will  protect  the 
spawning  fish  during  close-time.  A  new  Act  has  been 
passed,  with  heavy  penalties  and  summary  powers  of  re- 
covery. Some  persons  are  cited  under  it  to-day;  and  a 
peculiar  licence  of  poaching  having  distinguished  the 
district  of  late  years,  we  shall  be  likely  to  have  some  dis- 
turbance. They  have  been  holding  a  meeting  for  reform 
in  Selkirk,  and  it  will  be  difficult  to  teach  them  that  this 
consists  in  anything  else  save  the  privilege  of  obeying  only,, 
such  laws  as  please  them.  We  shall  see,  but  I  would  have 
counselled  the  matter  to  have  been  delayed  for  a  little 
season.  I  shall  do  my  duty,  however.  Do  what  is  right, 
come  what  will. 

creditors.  There  had  been  a  painful  to  read  aloud  a  political  essay  on 
discussion  between  them  and  Sir  Reform — intended  to  be  a  Fourth 
Walter  during  the  early  part  of  the  JSpistle  of  Malachi.  After  careful 
•winter  on  Count  Robert  of  Paris,  consideration,  the  critical  arbiters 
particulars  of  which  are  given  in  concurred  in  condemning  the  pro- 
the  Life  (vol.  x.  pp.  6, 10-17, 21-23),  duction,  but  suggested  a  corn- 
but  they  found  their  host  much  promise.  Hia  friends  left  him  on 
better  than  they  had  ventured  to  the  21st,  and  the  essay,  though  put 
anticipate,  and  he  made  the  gift  of  in  type,  was  never  published.  Proof 
his  library  the  chief  subject  of  con-  and  MS  were  finally  consigned  to 
versation  during  the  evening.  Next  the  flames ! — Life,  vol.  x.  pp.  21-25. 
booming  Mr.  Ballantyne  was  asked 


358  JOURNAL.  [DEC. 

Six  black-fishers  were  tried,  four  were  condemned.  All 
went  very  quietly  till  the  conclusion,  when  one  of  the 
criminals  attempted  to  break  out.  I  stopped  him  for  the 
time  with  my  own  hand.1  But  after  removing  him  from 
the  Court-house  to  the  jail  he  broke  from  the  officers,  who 
are  poor  feeble  old  men,  the  very  caricature  of  peace  officers. 

December  24 — This  morning  my  old  acquaintance  and 
good  friend  Miss  Bell  Ferguson  died  after  a  short  illness : 
an  old  friend,  and  a  woman  of  the  most  excellent  condition. 
The  last  two  or  almost  three  years  were  very  sickly. 

A  bitter  cold  day.  Anne  drove  me  over  to  Huntly  Burn 
to  see  the  family.  I  found  Colonel  Ferguson  and  Captain 
John,  R.N".,  in  deep  affliction,  expecting  Sir  Adam  hourly. 
Ajine  sets  off  to  Mertoun,  and  I  remain  alone.  I  wrote 
to  Walter  about  the  project  of  making  my  succession  in 
movables.  J.  B.  sent  me  praises  of  the  work  I  am  busy 
with.2  But  I  suspect  a  little  supercTierie,  though  he  pro- 
tests not.  He  is  going  to  the  country  without  sending  me 
the  political  article.  But  he  shall  either  set  up  or  return 
it,  as  I  won't  be  tutored  by  any  one  in  what  I  do  or 
forbear. 

December  25. — I  have  sketched  a  political  article  on  a 
union  of  Tories  and  an  Income  Tax.  But  I  will  not  show 
my  teeth  if  I  find  I  cannot  bite.  Arrived  at  Mertoun,  afcd 
found  with  the  family  Sir  John  Pringle,  Major  Pringle,  and 
Charles  Baillie.  Very  pleasant  music  by  the  Miss  Pringles. 

December  26,  [Mertoun]. — Prayers  after  breakfast,  being 
Sunday.  Afterwards  I  shut  myself  up  in  Mr,  Scott's  room. 

1  An  account  of  this  incident  is  path.     *  Never  i'  said  he  ;  '  if  you 

given  by  an  eye-witness,  Mr.  Peter  do,  it  will  be  over  the  body  of  an 

Eodger,     Procurator-Fiscal,     who  old  man.'    Whereupon  the  other 

says :  "  The  prisoner,  thinking  it  a  officials  of  the  Court  came  to  the 

good  chance  of  escaping,  made  a  Sheriffs  assistance  and  tiie  prisoner 

movement  in  direction  of  the  door,  was  secured." — Craig-Brown's  Sd- 

This  Sir  Walter  detected  in  time  kirtehire,  voL  ii.  p.  141. 
to  descend  from   the   Bench  and 

place  himself  in  the  desperate  man's  2  Count  Robert  of  Paris. 


1830.]  JOURNAL.  359 

He  has  lately  become  purchaser  of  Ms  grandfather's  valuable 
library,  which  was  collected  by  Pope's  Lord  Marchmont.  Part 
of  it  is  a  very  valuable  collection  of  tracts  during  the  great 
Civil  War.  I  spent  several  hours  in  turning  them  over,  but 
I  could  not  look  them  through  with  any  accuracy.  I  passed 
my  time  very  pleasantly,  and  made  some  extracts,  however, 
and  will  resume  my  research  another  day. 

Major  Pringle  repeated  some  pretty  verses  of  his  own 
composing. 

I  had  never  a  more  decided  inclination  to  go  loose,  yet  I 
know  I  had  better  keep  quiet. 

December  27,  [ABbots/ord]. — Commences  snow,  and  ex- 
tremely bitter  cold.  When  I  returned  from  Mertoun,  half- 
frozen,  I  took  up  the  Magnum,  and  began  to  notify  the 
romance  called  Woodstock,  in  which  I  got  some  assistance 
from  Harden's  ancient  tracts.  I  ought  rather  to  get  on 
with  Robert  of  Paris;  but  I  have  had  all  my  life  a  longing 
to  do  something  else  when  I  am  called  to  particular  labour, — 
a  vile  contradictory  humour  which  I  cannot  get  rid  o£  Well, 
I  can  work  at  something,  so  at  the  Magnum  work  I.  The 
day  was  indeed  broken,  great  part  having  been  employed 
in  the  return  from  Mertoun. 

December  28. — Drove  down  to  Huntly  Burn.  Sir  Adam 
very  melancholy,  the  death  of  his  sister  having  come  with  a 
particular  and  shocking  surprise  upon  him.  After  half -an- 
hour's  visit  I  returned  and  resumed  the  Magnum. 

December  29. — Attended  poor  Miss  Bell  Ferguson's 
funeral.  I  sat  by  the  Eev.  Mr.  Thomson,  Though  ten 
years  younger  than  me,  I  found  the  barrier  between  "him  and 
me  much  broken  down.  We  remember  it  though  with  more 
or  less  accuracy.  We  took  the  same  old  persons  for  subjects 
of  correspondence  of  feeling  and  sentiment  The  difference 
of  ten  years  is  little  after  sixty  has  passed.  In  a  cold  day 
I  saw  poor  Bell  laid  in  her  cold  bed.  Life  never  parted 
with  a  less  effort.  Letter  from  Cadell  offering  to  advance 


360  JOUKNAL.  [DEC.  1830. 

on  second  series  Prench  Tales.  This  will  come  in  good  time, 
and  keep  me  easy.  He  proposes  views  for  the  Magnum.  I 
fear  politics  may  disappoint  them. 

December  30. — Meeting  afc  Selkirk  to-day  about  the  new 
road  to  Galashiels.  It  was  the  largest  meeting  I  ever  saw 
in  Selkirkshire.  We  gain  the  victory  by  no  less  than 
14  to  4.  I  was  named  one  of  the  committee  to  carry  the 
matter  on,  so  in  gaining  my  victory  I  think  I  have  caught  a 
Tartar,  for  I  have  taken  on  trouble  enough.  Some  company, 
— Lord  Napier,  Scotts  of  Harden,  Johnstone  of  Alva,  Major 
Pringle.  In  the  evening  had  some  private  conversation  with 
H.  3T.  S.  and  B.  J.,  and  think  there  is  life  in  a  mussel. 
More  of  this  hereafter. 

December  31. — My  two  young  friends  left  this  morning, 
but  not  without  renewing  our  conversation  of  last  night. 
"We  carried  on  the  little  amusements  of  the  day,  and  spent 
our  Hogmanay  pleasantly  enough,  in  spite  of  very  bad 
auguries. 


1831 


JANUARY. 

January  1,  1831. — I  cannot  say  the  world  opens 
pleasantly  -with  me  this  new  year.  I  will  strike  the  balance. 
There  are  many  things  for  which  I  have  reason  to  he 
thankful. 

First. — CadelTs  plans  seem  to  have  succeeded,  and  he 
augurs  well  as  to  the  next  two  years,  reckoning  £30,000  on 
the  stuff  now  on  hand,  and  £20,000  on  the  insurance  money, 
and  £10,000  to  he  borrowed  somehow.  This  will  bring  us 
wonderfully  home. 

Second. — Cadell  is  of  opinion  if  I  meddle  in  politics, 
and  I  am  strongly  tempted  to  do  so,  I  shall  break  the  milk- 
pail,  and  threatens  me  with  the  fate  of  Basil  Hall,  who, 
as  he  says,  destroyed  his  reputation  by  writing  impolitic 
politics.  Well,  it  would  be  my  risk^  and  if  I  can  do  some 
good,  which  I  rather  think  I  can,  is  it  right  or  manly  to 
keep  myself  back  ? 

Third. — I  feel  myself  decidedly  weaker  in.  point  of 
health,  and  am  now  confirmed  I  have  had  a  paralytic  touch. 
I  speak  and  read  with  embarrassment,  and  even  my  hand- 
writing seems  to  stammer.  This  general  failure 

"  With  mortal  crisis  doth  portend, 
My  days  to  appropinque  an  end."  T 

I  am  not  solicitous  about  this,  only  if  I  were  worthy  I  would 
pray  God  for  a  sudden  death,  and  no  interregnum  between 
I  cease  to  exercise  reason  and  cease  to  exist. 

The  Scotts  of  Harden,  Pringles  of  Stitchill,  and  Eussells 
of  Ashestiel,  are  all  here  •  I  am  scarce  fit  for  company  though. 

January  2. — Held  a  great  palaver  with  the  Scotts,  etc. 

1  Hvdibras. 

363 


366  JOUENAL.  [JAN. 

January  8. — Spent  much  time  in  writing  instructions  for 
niy  last  will  and  testament.  Sent  off  parcel  by  Dr.  Milne, 
who  leaves  to-day.  Have  up  two  boys  for  shop-lifting. 
Eemained  at  Galashiels  till  four  o'clock,  and  returned 
starved.  Could  work  none,  and  was  idle  all  evening — try 
to-morrow  for  a  work-day ;  so  loiter  on. 

Januca*y  10. — Went  over  to  Galashiels,  and  was  busied 
the  whole  time  till  three  o'clock  about  a  petty  thieving 
affair,  and  had  before  me  a  pair  of  gallows'-birds,  to  whom  1 
could  say  nothing  for  total  want  of  proof,  except,  like  the 
sapient  Elbow,  Thou  shalt  continue  there ;  know  thou,  thou 
shalt  continue.1  A  little  gallow  brood  they  were,  and  their 
fate  will  catch  them.  Sleepy,  idle,  and  exhausted  on  this. 
Wrought  little  or  none  in  the  evening. 

Wrote  a  long  letter  to  Henry  [Scott],  who  is  a  fine 
fellow,  and  what  I  call  a  heart  of  gold.  He  has  sound 
parts,  good  sense,  and  is  a  true  man.  Also,  I  wrote  to 
my  excellent  friend  the  Lord  Chief  [Commissioner].  1 
thought  it  right  to  say  that  I  accepted  with  gratitude  his 
Majesty's  goodness,  but  trusted  it  was  not  to  bind  me  to 
keep  my  fingers  from  pen  and  ink  should  a  notion  impress 
me  that  I  could  help  the  country.  I  walked  a  little,  to  my 
exceeding  refreshment.  I  am  using  that  family  ungratefully. 
But  I  will  not,  for  a  punctilio,  avoid  binding,  if  I  can,  a 
strong  party  together  for  the  King  and  country,  and  if  I  see 
I  can  do  anything,  or  have  a  chance  of  it,  I  will  not  fear  for 
the  skin-cutting.  It  is  the  selfishness  of  this  generation 
that  drives  me  mad. 

"A  hundred  pounds  ? 
Ha  !  thou  hast  touched  me  nearly.77 

I  will  get  a  parcel  copy  to-morrow.    Wrote  several  letters 
at  night. 

Jawiary  11. — Wrote  and  sent  off  three  of  my  own  pages 
in  the  morning,  then  walked  with  Swanstoru    I  tried  to 
write  before  dinner,  but,  with  drowsiness  and  pain  in  my 
1  See  Measure  for  Measure,  Act  n.  So.  1. 


1831.]  JOURNAL.  367 

head,  made  little  way.  My  friend  Will  Laidlaw  came  in  to 
dinner  and  after  dinner  kindly  offered  his  services  as 
amanuensis.  Too  happy  was  I,  and  I  immediately  plunged 
>n'-m  into  the  depths  of  Count  Robert,  so  we  got  on  three  or 
four  pages,  worth  perhaps  double  the  number  of  print.  I 
hope  it  did  not  take  him  too  short,  but  after  all  to  keep  the 
press  going  without  an  amanuensis  is  impossible,  and  the 
publishers  may  well  pay  a  sponsible  person.  He  comes 
back  to-morrow.  It  eases  many  of  my  anxieties,  and  I  will 
stick  to  it.  I  really  think  Mr.  Laidlaw  is  pleased  with  the 
engagement  for  the  time.  Sent  off  six  close  pages. 

January  12.  —  I  have  a  visit  from  Mr.  Macdonald  the 
sculptor,  who  wishes  to  model  a  head  of  me.  He  is  a 
gentlemanlike  man,  and  pleasant  as  most  sculptors  and 
artists  of  reputation  are,  yet  it  is  an  awful  tax  upon  time. 
I  must  manage  to  dictate  while  he  models,  which  will 
do  well  enough. 

So  there  we  sat  for  three  hours  or  four,  I  sitting  on  a 
stool  mounted  on  a  packing-box,  for  the  greater  advantage  ; 
Maedonald  modelling  and  plastering  away,  and  I  dictating, 
without  interval,  to  good-natured  Will  Laidlaw,  who  wrought 
without  intermission.  It  is  natural  to  ask,  Do  I  progress  ? 
but  this  is  too  feverish  a  question.  A  man  carries  no  scales 
about  hrm  to  ascertain  his  own  value.  I  always  remember 
the  prayer  of  Virgil's  sailor  in  extremity  :  — 

"Kon  jam  prima  peto  JMnestihens,  neque  vincere  certo  ; 
Quamquani  0  !  —  Sed  snperent  quibns  hoc,  Neptune,  dedisti  ! 
Extremes  pndeat  rediisse  :  hoc  vincite,  cives, 
Etprohibetenefes!"1 


v.  194-7:  thus  rendered  in  English  by  Professor  Conington:  — 

'Tis  not  the  palm  that  Mnestheus  seeks  : 
No  hope  of  Victory  fires  his  cheeks  : 
Yet,  0  that  thought  !  —  but  conquer  they 
To  whom  great  Neptune  wills  the  day  : 
Not  to  be  last  make  that  your  aim, 
And  triumph  by  averting  shame. 


368  JOUEISTAL.  [JAN. 

We  must  to  our  oar ;  but  I  think  this  and  another  are 
all  that  even  success  would  prompt  me  to  write;  and  surely 
those  that  have  been  my  defenders 

"  Have  they  so  long  held  out  with  me  untired, 
And  stop  they  now  for  breath  ?    Well,  be  it  so."1 

January  13. — Went  to  Selkirk  on  the  business  of  the 
new  high  road.  I  perceive  Whytbank  and  my  cousin 
Colonel  Eussell  of  Ashestiel  are  disposed  to  peep  into  the 
expenses  of  next  year's  outlay,  which  must  be  provided  by 
loan.  This  will  probably  breed  strife.  Wrote  a  hint  of 
this  to  Charles  Balfour.  Agreed  with  Smith  so  far  as 
contracting  for  the  Bridges  at  £1200  each.  I  suspect  we 
are  something  like  the  good  manager  who  distressed  herself 
with  buying  bargains. 

January  15. — Grave  the  morning  from  ten  till  near  two 
to  Mr.  Macdonald,  who  is  proceeding  admirably  with  his 
bust.  It  is  bloody  cold  work,  but  he  is  an  enthusiast  and 
much  interested;  besides,  I  can  sit  and  dictate  owing  to  Mr. 
Laidlaw,  and  so  get  forward,  while  I  am  advancing  Lorenzo 
di  Guasco,  which  is  his  travelling  name.  I  wrote  several 
letters  too,  and  got  through  some  business.  Walked,  and 
took  some  exercise  between  one  and  three. 

January  16. — Being  Sunday,  read  prayers.  Mr.  and  Mrs. 
James2  go  to  look  for  a  house,  which  they  desire  to  take  in 
this  country.  As  Anne  is  ill,  the  presence  of  strangers, 
though  they  are  pleasant,  is  rather  annoying.  Macdonald 
continues  working  to  form  a  new  bust  out  of  my  old  scalp. 
I  think  it  will  be  the  last  sitting  which  I  will  be  enticed  to. 
Thanks  to  Heaven,  the  work  finishes  to-morrow.3 

1  King  Richard  the  Third,  Act  plenished"  in  1826,  Scott  sent 

iv.  Sc.  2.  him  the  full-length  portrait  of  him- 

1  Mr.  G.  P.  R.  James,  author  of  selfbyKaeburn,nowat  Abbotsford, 

Richdieu,  etc.  He  afterwards  took  saying  that  he  did  not  hesitate  to 

Maxpopple  for  the  season.  claim  his  protection  for  the  picture, 

8  Mr.  Skene  tells  us  that  when  which  was  threatened  to  be  paraded 

No.  39  Castle  Street  was  "dis-  under  the  hammer  of  the  auctioneer, 


1831.] 


JOUBXAL. 


369 


January  17. — This  morning,  when  I  came  down-stairs, 
I  found  Mr.  Macdonald  slabbering  away  at  the  modeL  He 
has  certainly  great  enthusiasm  about  his  profession,  which  is 
a  sine  qua  non.  It  was  not  till  twelve  that  a  post-chaise 
carried  off  my  three  friends. 

I  had  wrote  two  hours  when  Dr.  Turner  came  in,  and  I 
had  to  unfold  my  own  complaints.  I  was  sick  of  these 
interruptions,  and  dismissed  Mr.  Laidlaw,  having  no  hope  of 
resuming  my  theme  with  spirit.  God  send  me  more  leisure 
and  fewer  friends  to  peck  it  away  by  tea-spoonfuls ! 

Another  fool  sends  to  entreat  an  autograph,  which  he 


and  he  felt  that  his  interposition 
to  turn  aside  that  buffet  might 
admit  of  being  justified.  "As  a 
piece  of  successful  art,  many  might 
fancy  the  acquisition,  but  for  the 
sake  of  the  original  he  knew  no 
refuge  where  It  was  likely  to  find 
a  truer  welcome.  The  picture  ac- 
cordingly remained  many  years  in 
my  possession,  but  when  his  health 
had  begun  to  break,  and  the  plan 
of  his  going  abroad  was  proposed, 
I  thought  it  would  be  proper  to 
return  the  picture,  for  which  pur- 
pose I  had  a  most  successful  copy 
made  of  it,  an  absolute  facsimile, 
for  when  the  two  were  placed 
beside  each  other  it  was  almost 
impossible  to  determine  which  was 
the  original  and  which  the  copy." — 
Reminiscences.  Thus  forestalling 
the  wish  expressed  in  the  affecting 
letter  now  given,  which  belongs  to 
this  day.  See  ante,  vol.  L  p.  136  n. 
"  MY  DEAR  SKENTE, — I  have  had 
no  very  pleasant  news  to  send  you, 
as  I  know  it  will  give  Mrs,  Skene 
and  you  pain  to  know  that  I  am 
suffering  under  a  hundred  little 
ailments  which  have  greatly  en- 
croached upon  the  custom  of  the 
season  which  I  used  to  take.  On 
this  I  could  say  much,  but  it  is 
better  to  leave  alone  what  must 

VOL.  IL 


be  said  with  painful  feeling,  and 
you  would  be  vexed  with  reading. 

"  One  thing  I  will  put  to  rights 
with  all  others  respecting  my  liitle 
personal  affairs.  I  am  putting  [in 
order]  this  house  with  what  it  con- 
tains, and  as  Walter  will  probably 
be  anxious  to  have  a  memorial  of 
my  better  days,  I  intend  to  beg 
you  and  my  dear  Mrs.  Skene  .  .  . 
to  have  it  [the  picture]  copied  by 
such  an  artist  as  you  should  approve 
of,  to  supply  the  blank  which  must 
then  be  made  on  your  hospitable 
walls  with  the  shadow  of  a  shade. 
If  the  opportunity  should  occur  of 
copying  the  picture  to  your  mind, 
I  will  be  happy  to  liave  the  copy  as 
soon  as  possible.  You  must  not 
think  that  I  am  nervous  or  foolishly 
apprehensive  that  I  take  these  pre- 
cautions. They  are  necessary  and 
right,  and  if  one  puts  off  too  long, 
we  sometimes  are  unfit  for  the 
task  when  we  desire  to  take  it 
up.  ... 

"When  the  weather  becomes 
milder,  I  hope  Mrs.  Skene  and 
you,  and  some  of  the  children,  will 
come  out  to  brighten  the  chain  of 
friendship  with  your  truly  faith- 
ful, WALTER  SCOTT. 

*  ABBOTSTOBD,  16  January  1831." 
2A 


370  JOURNAL.  [JAN. 

should  be  ashamed  in  civility  to  ask,  as  I  am  to  deny  it.  I 
got  notice  of  poor  Henry  Mackenzie's  death.  He  has  long 
maintained  a  niche  in  Scottish  Literature — gayest  of  the  gay, 
though  most  sensitive  of  the  sentimental 

January  18. — Came  down  from  my  bedroom  at  eight, 
and  took  a  rummage  in  the  way  of  putting  things  to  rights. 
Dictated  to  Laidlaw  till  about  one  o'clock,  during  which 
time  it  was  rainy.  Afterwards  I  walked,  sliding  about  in 
the  mud,  and  very  uncomfortable.  In  fact,  there  is  no  mis- 
taking the  three  sufficients,1  and  Fate  is  now  straitening 
its  circumvallations  round  me.  Little  likely  to  be  better 
than  I  am.  I  am  heart-whole  35  a  biscuit,  and  may  last  on 
as  now  for  eight  or  ten  years ;  the  thing  is  not  uncommon, 
considering  I  am  only  in  my  sixtieth  year.  I  cannot  walk ; 
but  the  intense  cold  weather  may  be  to  blame  in  this.  My 
riding  is  but  a  scramble,  but  it  may  do  well  enough  for 
exercise ;  and  though  it  is  unpleasant  to  find  one's  enjoyment 
of  hill  and  vale  so  much  abridged,  yet  still  while  I  enjoy 
my  books,  and  am  without  acute  pain,  I  have  but  little  to 
complain  of,  considering  the  life  I  have  led. 

"  So  hap  what  may ; 
Time  and  the  hour  run  through  the  roughest  day."2 

Mr.  Laidlaw  came  down  at  ten,  and  we  wrought  till  one. 
This  should  be  'a  good  thing  for  an  excellent  man,  and  is  an 
important  thing  to  me,  as  it  saves  both  my  eyesight  and 
nerves,  which  last  are  cruelly  affected  by  finding  those  "who 
lookout  of  the  windows"  grow  gradually  darker  and  darker.8 
Eode  out,  or  more  properly,  was  carried  out,  into  the  woods 
to  see  the  course  of  a  new  road,  which  may  serve  to  carry 
off  the  thinnings  of  the  trees,  and  for  rides.  It  is  very  well 
lined,  and  will  serve  both  for  beauty  and  convenience.  Mr. 
Itfidlaw  engages,  to  qome  back  to  dinner,  and  finish  two  or 
three  more  pages.  Met  my  agreeable  and  lady-like  neighbour, 

1  Sir  W.  alludes  to  Mrs.  Piozzi's  Tak  o£  Tfo  Tteet  Warnings*— J*  o, I* 
a  Mwfatii,  Act  i.  Se.  3.  *  Eccle*  xii  3. 


1831.]  JOURNAL.  371 

Mrs.  Brewster,  on  my  pony,  and  I  was  actually  ashamed  to 
be  seen  by  her. 

"  Sir  Dennis  Brand,  and  on  so  poor  a  steed,"71 

I  believe  detestable  folly  of  this  kind  is  the  very  last 
that  leaves  us.  One  would  have  thought  I  ought  to  have 
little  vanity  at  this  time  o'  day ;  but  it  is  an  abiding  appur- 
tenance of  the  old  Adam,  and  I  write  for  penance  what,  like 
a  fool,  I  actually  felt. 

January  19. — Wrote  on  by  Mr.  Laidlaw's  assistance. 
Things  go  bobbishly  enough ;  we  have  a  good  deal  finished 
before  dinner.  Henry  Scott  comes  to  dine  with  me  vis-a-vis, 
and  we  have  a  grand  dish  of  politics.  The  friends  of  old 
Scotland  want  but  a  signal  A  certain  great  lawyer  says 
that  if  Sir  "W.  S.  wrote  another  Halaclii  it  would  set  more 
men  on  fire  than  a  dozen  associations.  This  almost  tempts 
me.  But  the  canny  lad  says  moreover  that  to  appeal  to 
national  partiality,  i.e.  that  you  should  call  on  Scotsmen  to 
act  like  Scotsmen,  is  unfair,  and  he  would  be  sorry  it  was 
known  he,  late  and  future  placeman,  should  encourage  such 
paw-paw  doings.  Yet  if  Sir  W.  S.  could  be  got  to  stand 
forlorn  hope,  the  legal  gentleman  would  suggest,  etc.  etc. 
Suggest  and  be  d — d.  Sir  W.  S.  knows  when  to  [doff]  his 
bonnet,  and  when  to  cock  it  in  the  face  of  all  and  sundry. 
Moreover,  he  will  not  be  made  a  cat's-paw  of,  look  you  now. 

January  20. —  Wrought  all  morning ;  a  monstrous  packet 
of  letters  at  mid-day.  Borrow  honest  laidlaw's  fingers  in 
the  evening.  I  hope  his  pay  will  recompense  him, :  it  is 
better  than  "  grieve-ing  "  or  playing  Triptolemus.2  Should  be, 
if  I  am  hard-working,  100  guineas,  whieh>  with  his  house, 
cow,  and  free  rent,  would  save,  I  believe,  some  painful 
thoughts  to  him  and  his  amiable  wife  and  children.  We  will 
see  how  the  matter  fudges.  Almost  finished  the  first  volume. 

January  21. — James  Ballantyne  in  ecstasies  at  our  plan 

1  Crabbe's  Borough,  Letter  xiii.— J.G.L.  2  See  Pirate. 


372  JOVIAL.  [JAN. 

of  an  amanuensis.  I  myself  am  sensible  that  my  fingers 
begin  to  stammer — that  is,  to  write  one  word  instead  of 
another  very  often.  I  impute  this  to  fancy,  the  terrible 
agency  of  which  is  too  visible  in  my  illness,  and  it  encourages 
me  to  hope  the  fatal  warning  is  yet  deferred.  I  feel  lighter  by 
a  million  ton  since  I  made  this  discovery.  If  I  can  dictate 
freely,  and  without  hesitation,  my  fear  to  speak  at  the 
meeting  about  the  road  was  vain  terror,  and  so  Andiamos 
Caracco.  Wrote  some  letters  this  afternoon. 

January  22. — Mr.  Laidlaw  rather  late  of  coming.  One 
of  his  daughters  has  been  ill,  and  he  is  an  approved  physician. 
Pity  when  one  so  gifted  employs  his  skill  on  himself  and 
family  for  all  patients.  We  got  on,  however,  to  page  46. 

January  23. — I  wrought  a  little  to-day.  Walked  to 
Chiefswood,  or  rather  from  it,  as  far  only  as  Babble's  Howe. 
Came  home,  cold  indeed,  but  hearty.  Slept  after  dinner. 
I  think  the  peep,  real  or  imaginary,  at  the  gates  of  death 
has  given  me  firmness  not  to  mind  little  afflictions.  I  have 
jumbled  this  and  the  preceding  day  strangely,  when  I  went 
to  Chiefswood  and  Huntly  Burn.  I  thought  this  a  week-day. 

January  24. — Worked  with  Mr.  Laidlaw,  and,  as  the 
snow  was  on  the  ground,  did  so  without  intermission,  which 
must  be  sinking  to  the  spirits.  Held  on,  however. 

January  25. — Same  drizzling  waste,  rendering  my  footing 
insecure,  and  leaving  me  no  refuge  but  in  sitting  at  home 
and  working  till  one  o'clock.  Then  retired  upon  the  Sheriff 
Court  processes.  Bran,1  poor  fellow,  lies  yawning  at  my 
feet,  and  cannot  think  what  is  become  of  the  daily  scamper, 
which  is  all  his  master's  inability  affords  him.  This  grieves 
me,  by  calling  back  the  days  of  old.  But  I  may  call  them 
as  I  may, 

.  "Youth  winna  return,  nor  the  days  of  lang  syne." 

1  The  deer-hound  Bran,  which  was     letter  to  Miss  Edgeworth,  printed 
presented  by  Macpherson  of  Clnny ;     in  Life,  vol.  is.  p.  345. 
Nimrod  was  Glengarry's  gift.— See 


1831.]  JOURNAL  373 

January  26, — I  have  Skene  and  Mr.  M'Culloch  of  Ard- 
well,  to  the  relief  of  my  spirits  and  the  diminishing  of  my 
time.  Mr.  Laidlaw  joined  us  at  dinner. 

Bitter  cold. 

January  27. — So  fagged  with  my  frozen  vigils  that  I 
slept  till  after  ten.  When  I  lose  the  first  two  hours  in  the 
morning  I  can  seldom  catch  them  again  during  the  whole  day. 

A  friendly  visit  from  Ebenezer  Glarkson  of  Selkirk,  a 
medical  gentleman  in  whose  experience  and  ingenuity  I 
have  much  confidence,  as  well  as  his  personal  regard  for 
myself.  He  is  quite  sensible  of  the  hesitation  of  speech  of 
which  I  complain,  and  thinks  it  arises  from  the  stomach. 
Recommends  the  wild  mustard  as  an  aperient.  Bur  the 
brightest  ray  of  hope  is  the  chance  that  I  may  get  some 
mechanical  aid  made  by  Fortune  at  Broughton  Street,  which 
may  enable  me  to  mount  a  pony  with  ease,  and  to  walk 
without  torture.  This  would,  indeed,  be  almost  a  restora- 
tion of  my  youth,  at  least  of  a  green  old  age  full  of  enjoy- 
ment. The  shutting  one  out  from  the  face  of  living  nature 
is  almost  worse  than  sudden  death. 

January  28. — I  wrote  with  Laidlaw.  It  does  not  work 
clear;  I  do  not  know  why.  The  plot  is,  nevertheless,  a 
good  plot,  and  full  of  expectation.1  But  there  is  a  cloud 
over  me,  I  think,  and  interruptions  are  frequent.  I  creep 
on,  however. 

January  29. — Much  in  the  same  way  as  yesterday, 
rather  filing  than  making  way.  !Mr.  Williams  and  his 
brother  came  in  after  dinner.  Welcome  both ;  yet  the  day 
was  not  happy.  It  consumed  me  an  afternoon,  which, 
though  well  employed,  and  pleasantly,  had  the  disagreeable 
effect  of  my  being  kept  from  useful  work. 

January  30. — Snow  deep,  which  makes  me  alter  my 
purpose  of  going  to  town  to-morrow.  For  to-day,  my  friends 
must  amuse  themselves  as  they  can. 

1  1  Henry  IV.,  Act  n.  Sc.  3. 


374  JOUBNAL.  [JAN. 

January  31  [to  February  9,  Edinburgh]. — Eetain  my 
purpose,  however,  and  set  out  for  Edinburgh  alone — that  is, 
no  one  but  my  servant.  The  snow  became  impassable,  and 
in  Edinburgh  I  remain  immovably  fixed  for  ten  days — that 
is,  till  Wednesday — never  once  getting  out  of  doors,  save  to 
dinner,  when  I  went  and  returned  in  a  sedan  chair.  I  com- 
menced my  quarantine  in  Mackenzie's  Hotel/  where  I  was 
deadly  cold,  and  it  was  tolerably  noisy.  The  second  day 
Mr.  Cadell  made  a  point  of  my  coming  to  his  excellent 
house,  where  I  had  no  less  excellent  an  apartment  and 
the  most  kind  treatment — that  is,  not  making  a  show 
of  me,  for  which  I  was  in  but  bad  tune.2  The  physical 
folks,  Abercrombie  and  Koss,  bled  me  with,  cupping- 
glasses,  purged  me  confoundedly,  and  restricted  me  of  all 
creature  comforts.  But  they  did  me  good,  as  I  am  sure 
they  meant  to  do  sincerely;  and  I  got  rid  of  a  giddy 
feeling,  which  I  have  been  plagued  with,  and  have  certainly 
returned  much  better.  I  did  not  neglect  my  testamentary 
affairs.  I  executed  my  last  will,  leaving  Walter  burdened, 
by  his  own  choice,  with  £1000  to  Sophia,  and  another 
received  at  her  marriage,  and  £2000  to  Anne,  and  the  same 
to  Charles.  He  is  to  advance  them  money  if  they  want  it ; 

1  Xo.  1  Castle  Street.  sation,  and  often  remained   alto- 

gether silent.    In  the  mornings  he 

2  "  His  host  perceived  that  he  wrote  usually  for  several  hours  at 
was  unfit:  for  any  company  but  the  Count    Robert  •    and    Mr.    Cadell 
quietest,  and  had  sometimes  one  old  remembers  in  particular,  that  on 
friend,  Mr.  Thomson,  Mr.  Clerk,  Ballantyne's  reminding  him  that  a 
or  Mr-  Skene  to   dinner,  but  no  motto  was  wanted  for  one  of  the 
more.    He  seemed  glad  to  see  them,  chapters  already  finished,  he  looked 
but  they  all  observed  him  with  pain,  out  for  a  moment  at  the  gloomy 
He  never  took  the  lead  in  conver-  weather,  and  penned  these  lines — 

*  The  storm,  increases—'tis  no  sunny  shower, 
Foster'd  in  the  moist  breast  of  March  or  April, 
Or  such,  as  parched  summer  eools  his  lips  with. 
Heaven's  -windows  are  flung  wide ;  the  inmost  deeps 
Gall  in  hoarse  greeting  one  upon  another;  ' 
On  comes  the  flood  in  all  its  foaming  horrors, 
And  Where's  the  dyke  shall  stop  it*1 "—  Tfie  Dduge—a  POM*. 

—Life,  voL  x.  p.  37. 


1831.]  JOUEKiL,  375 

if  not,  to  pay  them  interest,  which  is  his  own  choice,  other- 
wise I  would  have  sold  the  books  and  rattletraps.  I  have 
made  provisions  for  clearing  my  estate  by  my  publications, 
should  it  be  possible ;  and  should  that  prove  possible,  from 
the  time  of  such  clearance  being  effected,  to  be  a  fund  avail- 
able to  all  my  children  who  shall  be  alive  or  leave  represen- 
tatives. My  bequests  must,  many  of  them,  seem  hypothetical; 
but  the  thing,  being  uncertain,  must  be  so  stated 

Besides,  during  the  unexpected  stay  in  town,  I  employed 
Mr.  Fortune,  an  ingenious  artist,1  to  make  a  machine  to  assist 
my  lame  leg— an  odd  enough  purchase  to  be  mj.de  at  this 
time  of  day,  yet  who  would  not  purchase  ease?  I  dined 
with  the  lord  Chief  Commissioner,  with  the  Skenes  twice, 
with  Lord  Medwyn,  and  was  as  happy  as  anxiety  about  my 
daughter  would  permit  me. 

The  appearance  of  the  streets  was  most  desolate :  the 
hackney-coaches,  with  four  horses,  strolling  about  like  ghosts, 
the  foot-passengers  few  but  the  lowest  of  the  people. 

I  wrote  a  good  deal  of  Gmnt  Rolcrt,  yet  I  cannot  tell 
why  my  pen  stammers  egregiously,  and  I  write  horridly 
incorrect  I  long  to  have  Mend  Laidlaw's  assistance. 

1 A  skafnl  mechanist,  who,  by  a   for  a  brief  period.-I>/e,  voL  *, 
clever  piece  of  handiwork,  gave    p.  38. 
Sir  Walter  great  relief,  but  only 


FEBRUARY. 

February  9,  [Abbotsford], — A  heavy  and  most  effective 
thaw  coming  on  I  got  home  about  five  at  night,  and  found 
the  haugh  covered  with  water,  dogs,  pigs,  cows,  to  say  no- 
thing of  human  "beings,  all  who  slept  at  the  offices  in  danger 
of  being  drowned.  They  came  up  to  the  mansion-house 
about  midnight,  with  such  various  clamour,  that  Anne 
thought  the  house  was  attacked  by  Captain  Swing  and  all 
the  Radicals. 

February  10. — I  set  to  work  with  Mr.  Laidlaw,  and  had 
after  that  a  capital  ride;  my  pony,  little  used,  was  some- 
what frisky,  but  I  rode  on  to  Huntly  Burn.  Began  my  diet 
on  my  new  regime,  and  like  it  well,  especially  porridge  to 
supper.  It  is  wonderful  how  old  tastes  rise. 

February  11. — Wrought  again  to-day,  and  John  Swan- 
ston  walked  with  me.  Wrote  many  letters,  and  sent  copy 
to  Ballantyne.  Rode  as  usual  It  is  well  enough  to  ride 
every  day,  but  confoundedly  tiresome  to  write  it  down. 

February  13. — I  did  not  ask  down  Mr.  Laidlaw,  thinking 
it  fair  to  spare  his  Sunday.  I  had  a  day  of  putting  to  rights, 
a  disagreeable  work  which  must  be  done.  I  took  the 
occasion  to  tell  Mr.  Cadell  that  Malacki  will  break  forth 
again ;  but  I  will  not  make  a  point  of  it  with  him.  I  do 
not  fear  there  will  be  as  many  to  strike  up  as  to  strike  down, 
and  I  have  a  strong  notion  we  may  gain  the  day.  I  have  a 
letter  from  the  Duchess  of  Wellington,  asking  a  copy  of 
Melville's  Memoirs.  She  shall  have  it  if  it  were  my  last. 

February  14. — I  had  hardly  begun  my  letter  to  Mr. 

876 


1831.]  JOUENAL.  377 

Cadell  than  I  began  also  to  "pull  in  resolution."1  I  con- 
sidered that  I  had  no  means  of  retreat;  and  that  in  all  my 
sober  moments,  meaning  my  nnpassionate  ones,  for  the 
doctors  have  taken  from  me  the  means  of  producing  Dutch 
courage,  I  have  looked  on  political  writing  as  a  false  step, 
and  especially  now  when  I  have  a  good  deal  at  stake.  So, 
upon  the  whole,  I  cancelled  the  letter  announcing  the  publi- 
cation. If  this  was  actually  meanness  it  is  a  foible  nobody 
knows  of.  Anne  set  off  for  Edinburgh  after  breakfast. 
Poor  girl,  she  is  very  nervous.  I  wrote  with  ^Ir.  L.  till  one 
— then  had  a  walk  till  three — then  wrote  this  diary  till 
four.  Must  try  to  get  something  for  Mr.  Laidlaw,  for  I  am 
afraid  I  am  twaddling.  I  do  not  think  my  head  is  weak- 
ened, but  a  strange  vacillation  makes  me  sruspect.  Is  it  not 
thus  that  men  begin  to  fail,  becoming,  as  it  were,  infirm  of 
purpose, 

".  .  .  that  Tray  madness  lies  ;  let  me  shun  that : 
No  more  of  that  .  .  ."» 

Yet,  why  be  a  child  about  it?  what  must  be,  will  be. 

February  15. — I  wrote  and  corrected  through  the  long 
day  till  one  o'clock ;  then  rode  out  as  far  as  Dr.  Scott's,  and 
called  on  him.  Got  a  fresh  dose  of  proofs  at  Mathie- 
son's,  and  returned  home.  At  nine  o'clock  at  night  had  a 
card  from  Miss  Bell  [Maelachlan],  wishing  to  speak  to  me 
about  some  Highland  music.  Wrote  for  answer  I  knew 
nothing  of  the  matter,  but  would  be  happy  to  see  Mrs.  and 
Miss  Bell  to  breakfast.  I  had  a  letter  of  introduction  by 
Robert  Chambers,  which  I  declined,  being  then  unwell. 
But  as  Trotter  of  Braid  said,  "  The  ladies  maun  come." 

February  16. — Mrs.  and  Miss  Bell  Maclachlan  of  the 
West  Highlands,  mother  and  daughter,  made  their  way  to 
me  to  breakfast.  I  did  not  wish  to  see  them,  being  strangers ; 
but  she  is  very  pretty — that  is,  the  daughter — and  enthu- 
siastic, and  that  is  always  flattering  to  an  old  gentleman.  She 
1  Macbeth,  Act  v.  Sc.  5.  2  Lear,  Act  ra.  Sc.  4. 


378  JOUENAL.  [FEB. 

wishes  to  have  words  to  Celtic  melodies,  and  I  have  pro- 
mised her  some,  to  the  air  of  Crochallan,  and  incline  to  do 
her  good,  perhaps,  to  the  extent  of  getting  her  words  from 
Lord  Francis  Leveson  Gower,  Lockhart,  and  one  or  two 
others.  We  parted,  she  pleased  with  my  willing  patronage, 
and  I  with  an  uncommon  handsome  countenance  she 
showed  me. 

This  detained  Mr.  Laidlaw  re  infecta,  and  before  I  had 
written  a  page  the  pony  came  to  the  door ;  but  wrote  some- 
thing after  dinner. 

February  17  and  18. — We  had  the  usual  course  of  food, 
study,  and  exercise  in  the  forenoon*  Was  extremely  sleepy 
in  the  afternoon,  which  made,  I  fear,  but  bad  work.  We 
progress,  however.  In  riding  met  Sir  Adam  Ferguson,  and 
asked  him  and  his  brother  the  Colonel  to  dinner  to-morrow. 
Wrote  in  the  meantime  as  usual. 

February  19. — Plagued  by  the  stay  for  leg  starting  a 
screw  bolt,  which  is  very  inconvenient.  Sent  off,  this 
morning>  proofs  as  far  as  end  of  first  volume,  and  20 
manuscript  pages,  equal  to  about  a  quarter  of  the  second. 
Is  it  good  or  not  ?  I  cannot  say.  I  think  it  better  as  it 
goes  on ;  and  so  far  so  good.  I  am  certain  I  have  written 
worse  abomination,  as  John  Ballantyne,  poor  fellow,  used 
to  say. 

February  20. — Wrote  five  pages  this  morning ;  then  rode 
out  to  the  hill  and  looked  at  some  newly  planted;  rather 
transplanted,  trees,  Mr,  Laidlaw  gon,e  for  the  day.  I  trust  I 
shall  have  proofs  to  correct.  In  the  meantime  I  may  suck 
my  paws  and  prepare  some  copy,  or  rather  assemble  the  raw 
material. 

February  21. — I  made  up  parcels  by  mail-coach  and 
Bkbch&r  to  go  to-morrow — second  volume  Redgaflmtlet*  At 
one  fetched  a  walk  through  wet  and  dry,  looking  at  the 
ravages  of  the  late  flood.  After  I  came  in,  till  two  hours 
after  tea-time,  busied  with  the  Sheriff  Court  processes,  which 


1S3L]  JOUEXAL.  379 

I  have  nearly  finished.  After  this  I  will  lounge  one  with 
annotating.  The  Tales  of  the  Crusaders  come  next 

February  22. — Wrought  with  Mr.  L.  from  ten  to  three, 
then  took  the  pony  carriage,  with  the  purpose  of  going  to 
Chiefswood,  but  a  heavy  squall  came  on  with  snow,  so  we 
put  about-ship  and  returned.  Bead  Lyttelton's  History 
of  England  to  get  some  notes  for  Crusaders,  voL  i  After 
dinner  Mr.  Laidlaw  from  six  to  eight.  Sent  off  six  pages. 

February  23,  24,  25. — These  three  days  I  can  hardly  be 
said  to  have  varied  from  my  ordinary  for  action. 

Eose  at  seven,dressed  before  eight,  wrote  letters,  or  did  any 
little  business  till  a  quarter  past  nine.  Then  breakfast  Mr. 
Laidlaw  comes  from  ten  till  one.  Then  take  the  pony,  and 
ride  quantum  mutatus  two  or  three  miles,  John  Swanston 
walking  by  my  bridle-rein  lest  I  fall  off.  Come  home  about 
three  or  four.  Then  to  dinner  on  a  single  plain  dish  and 
half  a  tumbler,  or  by  *r  lady  three-fourths  of  a  tumbler,  of 
whisky  and  water.  Then  sit  till  six  o'clock,  when  enter  Mr. 
Laidlaw  again,  and  work  commonly  till  eight.  After  this, 
work  usually  alone  till  half -past  nine,  then  sup  on  porridge 
and  Tm'Tkj  and  so  to  bed.  The  work  is  half  done.  If  any 
[one]  asks  what  time  I  take  to  think  on  the  composition,  I 
might  say,  in  one  point  of  view,  it  was  seldom  five  minutes 
out  of  my  head  the  whole  day.  In  another  light,  it  was 
never  the  serious  subject  of  consideration  at  all,  for  it  never 
occupied  my  thoughts  entirely  for  five  minutes  together, 
except  when  I  was  dictating  to  Mr.  Laidlaw. 

February  26. — Went  through  the  same  routine,  only, 
being  Saturday,  Mr.  Laidlaw  does  not  come  in  the  evening. 
I  think  there  is  truth  in  the  well-known  phrase,  Aurora 
musis  arnica.  I  always  have  a  visit  of  invention  between 
six  and  seven — that  is,  if  anything  has  been  plaguing  me,  in 
the  way  of  explanation,  I  find  it  in  my  head  when  I  wake. 
I  have  need  of  it  to-night. 

February  27. — Being  Saturday,  no  Mr.  Laidlaw  came 


380  JOUBN'AI,.  [FEB.  1831. 

yesterday  evening,  nor  to-day,  being  Sunday.  Truth  is,  I 
"begin  to  fear  I  was  working  too  hard,  and  gave  myself  to 
putting  things  in  order,  and  working  at  the  Magnum,  and 
reading  stupid  G-erman  novels  in  hopes  a  thought  will  strike 
me  when  I  am  half  occupied  with  other  things.  In  fact, 
I  am  like  the  servant  in  the  Clandestine  Marriage,}  who 
assures  his  mistress  he  always  watches  best  with  his  eyes 
shut. 

Februa/ry  28. — Past  ten,  and  Mr.  Laidlaw,  the  model  of 
a  clerk  in  other  respects,  is  not  come  yet.  He  has  never 
known  the  value  of  time,  so  is  not  quite  accurate  in  punctu- 
ality ;  but  that,  I  hope,  will  come  if  I  can  drill  him  to  it 
without  hurting  him.  I  think  I  hear  him  coming.  I  am 
like  the  poor  wizard  who  is  first  puzzled  how  to  raise  the 
devil  and  then  how  to  employ  him.  But  vogue  la  gaUre. 
"Worked  till  one,  then  walked  with  great  difficulty  and  pain 
till  half -past  two.  I  think  I  can  hardly  stir  without  my 
pony,  which  is  a  sad  job.  Mr.  Laidlaw  dines  here. 

1  Colman  the  elder. 


MARCH. 

March  1,  2,  3.  —  AH  these  three  days  I  wrote  forenoon 
and  fagged  afternoon.  Kept  up  the  hall  indifferent  well,  hut 
hegan  to  tire  on  the  third,  and  suspected  that  I  was  flat  — 
a  dreary  suspicion,  not  easily  chased  away  when  once  it 
takes  root. 

March  4.  —  Laid  aside  the  novel,  and  began  with  vigour 
a  review  of  Robson's  Essay  on  Heraldry  ;  *  but  I  missed 
some  quotations  which  I  could  not  get  on  without.  I  gave 
up,  and  took  such  a  rash  ride  nowadays.  Returned  home, 
and  found  Colonel  Russell  there  on  a  visit.  Then  we  had 
dinner,  and  afterwards  the  making  up  this  miserable  Journal 

March  5.  —  I  have  a  letter  from  our  member,  Whytbank, 
adjuring  me  to  assist  the  gentlemen  of  the  county  with  an 
address  against  the  Reform  Bill,  which  menaces  them  with 
being  blended  with  Peeblesshire,  and  losing  of  consequence 
one  half  of  their  franchise.  Mr.  Pringle  conjures  me  not 
to  be  very  nice  in  choosing  my  epithets.  Mr.  Pringle, 
Torwoodlee,  comes  over  and  speaks  to  the  same  purpose, 
adding,  it  will  be  the  greatest  service  I  can  do  the  county, 
etc.  This,  in  a  manner,  drives  me  out  of  a  resolution  to  keep 
myself  clear  of  politics,  and  "let  them  fight  dog,  fight  bear." 
But  I  am  too,  easy  to  be  persuaded  to  bear  a  hand-  The 
young  Duke  of  Buccleuch  comes  to  visit  me  also;  so  I 
promised  to  shake  my  duds  and  give  them  a  cast  of  my 
calling,  fall  back,  fall  edge. 

March  7-10.  —  In  these  four  days  I  drew  up,  with  much 
anxiety,  an  address  reprobatory  of  the  BilX  both  with  respect 


1  The  British  Herald,  by  Thomas      Lockhart   says   this  review  never 
Robson,   3  vols.  4to,   1830.      Mr.      was  published. 

381 


382  JOUKNAL.  [MAHCH 

to  Selkirkshire,  and  in  its  general  purport.  I  was  not 
mealy-mouthed,  and  those  who  heard  the  beginning  could 
hardly  avoid  listening  to  the  end.  It  was  certainly  in  my 
best  style,  and  would  have  made  a  deal  of  noise.  From  the 
uncompromising  style  it  would  have  attracted  attention. 
Mr.  Laidlaw,  though  he  is  Mr.  Other  side  on  the  subject, 
thinks  it  the  best  thing  I  ever  wrote;  and  I  myself  am  happy 
to  find  that  it  cannot  be  said  to  smell  of  the  apoplexy.  The 
pointed  passages  were,  on  the  contrary,  clever  and  well  put. 
But  it  was  too  declamatory,  too  much  like  a  pamphlet,  and 
went  far  too  generally  into  opposition  to  please  the  country 
gentlemen,  who  are  timidly  inclined  to  dwell  on  their  own 
grievances  rather  than  the  public  wrongs. 

March  11.—  This  day  we  had  our  meeting  at  Selkirk.  I 
found  Borthwickbrae  (late  member)  had  sent  the  form  of  an 
address,  which  was  finished  by  Mr.  Andrew  Lang.1  It  was 
the  reverse  of  mine  in  every  respect.  It  was  short,  and  to 
the  point.  It  only  contained  a  remonstrance  against  the 
incorporation  with  [Peebles]shire,  and  left  it  to  be  inferred 
that  they  approved  the  Sill  in  other  respects.2  As  I  saw 
that  it  iriet  the  ideas  of  the  meeting  (six  in  number)  better 
by  far  than  such  an  address  as  mine,  I  instantly  put  it  in 
my  Docket.  But  I  endeavoured  to  add  to  their  complaint  of 
a  private  wrong  a  general  clause,  stating  their  sense  of  the 
hazard  of  passing  a  Bill  full  of  such  violent  innovations  at 
once  on  tne  public.  But  thougH'  Harden,  Alva,  tod 
Tdrwt)odlee  vested  for  this  measttre,  it  was  refused  by  the 
rest  of  the  meeting,  to  nty  disappointment;  since  in  its 
present  state  it  will  not  be  attended  to,  and.  is  in  fact  too 

1  Mr.  Andrew  Lang,  Sheriff  and  Montagu  of  Oct.  3, 1819,  describing 
Commissary    Clerk,   and  Clerk  of  Prince  Leopold  at  Seltirfc  (Life, 
Peace,  for  Selkirkshire,  grandfather  vt>L  vi.  p.  131). 
of  Mr.  Andrew  Lang,  the  accom- 
plish ^poet  andj  manJ  of  letters  of  *  This  proposal,  resisted  success- 
the  present  tim,e.      The  tact  and  fully  in  1832,  has  since  been,  put 
abnityoftlie'grahdfatlierarehoiac'eli  in  force  so  far  as  Parliament  is 
by  Sir  Walter  in  hia  letter '$  Lord  concerned. 


1831.]  JOUENAL.  383 

milk-and-water  to  attract  notice.  I  am,  however,  personally 
out  of  the  scrape;  I  was  a  fool  to  stir  such  a  mess  of 
skimmed  TrriTlr  with  so  honourable  an  action.1  If  some  of  the 
gentlemen  of  the  press  had  hold  of  this  story,  what  would 
they  make  of  it,  and  how  little  would  I  care !  One  thing 
is  clear :  it  gives  me  a  right  to  disclaim  future  interference, 
and  let  the  world  wag,  jSess&s 

March  12. — Wrote  the  history  of  my  four  days'  labour 
in  vain  to  Sandy  Pringle,  "Whytbank,  and  so  transeat  with 
cater  is  errorlbus.  I  only  gave  way  to  one  jest.  A  rat- 
catcher was  desirous  to  come  and  complete  his  labours  in  my 
house,  and  I,  who  thought  he  only  talked  and  laughed  with 
the  servants,  recommended  hJTn  to  go  to  the  head  courts  and 
meetings  of  freeholders,  where  he  would  find  rats  in  plenty. 

Marc/i  13. — I  have  finally  arranged  a  thorny  transaction. 
Mr.  Cadell  has  an  interest  in  some  of  the  Novels,  amounting 
to  one-half;  but  the  following  are  entirely  my  own,  viz. : — 

St.  Eonan's  "Well, 3  vols. 

Tales  of  Crusaders, 4  „ 

First  Chronicles,      ....  2  „ 

Anne  of  Gteierstein, 3  „ 

Bedgauntlet* 3  „ 

Woodstock, 3  „ 

Second  Chronicles, ...  3  „ 

Count  Eobert, 3  „ 

In  all,  twenty-four  volumes,  which  will  begin  printing  after 

\en6in  Durwa/rdy  and  concludes  the  year  1831.     For  half 

th<oroperty  &e  proposes  to  pay  €000  guineas  on  3d  February 

183T1832  ?].     I  thirtlr  that  with  t-hi«  sum,  and  others 

coining  A  J  may  reduce  the  debt  to  £45,000. 

But  I  03  *pt  see  clearly  enough  through  tins  affair  to 

accept  this  o&«^  JPiar&>  I  cannot  see  that  there  is  wisdom 

in  engaging  M:r\4ell  in  deep  specTilatkm&,  unless  they 

served  him  vetry  miK&.  I  ani,  in  this  respect,  a  burnt  child : 

1  1  Henry  IY.,  Act  n.  ^fev  *  Tanting  of  the  Skrtffi,  IntrocL 


384  JOUEXAL.  [ILuiCH 

I  have  not  forgotten  the  fire,  or  rather  the  furnace.  Second, 
I  think  the  property  worth  more,  if  publicly  sold.  Third,  I 
cannot  see  any  reasons  which  should  render  it  advantageous 
for  me  to  sell  one  half  of  this  property,  it  being  admittedly 
at  the  same  [time]  highly  judicious  to  keep  the  other  half. 
This  does  not  fadge.  Fourth,  As  to  the  immediate  command 
of  the  money,  I  am  not  pressed  for  it,  not  having  any  advan- 
tage by  paying  it  a  year  or  two  sooner  or  later.  The  actual 
proceeds  of  the  sales  will  come  in  about  1834,  and  I  daresay 
will  not  be  far  behind  in  amount  the  sum  of  £6000. 

In  short,  I  will  not  sell  on  a  rainy  day,  as  our  proverb 
says.  I  have  communicated  my  resolution  to  Cadell,  to 
w^hom,  no  doubt,  it  will  be  a  disappointment,  for  which  I  am 
sorry,  but  cannot  help  it. 

March  14. — Had  a  very  sensible  and  good-humoured 
answer  from  Mr.  Cadell,  readily  submitting  to  my  decision. 
He  mentions,  what  I  am  conscious  of,  the  great  ease  of  accom- 
plishing, if  the  whole  is  divided  into  two  halves.  But  this  is 
aot  an  advantage  to  me,  but  to  them  who  keep  the  books, 
=md  therefore  I  cannot  be  moved  by  it.  It  is  the  great 
advantage  of  uniformity,  of  which  Malachi  Malagrowther 
tells  so  much.  I  do  not  fear  that  Mr.  Cadell  will  neglect 
;he  concern  because  he  has  not  the  large  share  in  it  which 
ae  had  in  the  other.  He  is,  I  think,  too  honest  a  man.  He 
ms  always  shown  himself  every  way  willing  and  ready  to 
lelp  me,  and  verily  he  hath  his  reward ;  and  I  can  afford 
aim  on  that  property  a  handsome  percentage  for  thp 
management.  But  if  his  fate  was  to  lose  considerably*^ 
ids  transaction,  I  must  necessarily  be  a  sufferer;  if 
jreat  gainer,  it  is  at  my  expense,  so  it  is  like 
*ame  of  "  Odds  I  win,  evens  you  lose  " — so  wO^^y  no  more 
ibout  it.  I  think  I  will  keep  my  ground/^lj.  so  these 
auised  politics  do  not  ruin  the  country^-*  am  unable  to  sit 
at  good  men's  boards,  and  Anne  haa^^e  ^°  Mertoun  to-day 
without  ma  I  cannot  walk  or  rfe  but  f°r  a  mile  or  two. 


1831.]  JOUEKAL.  385 

JSFaboclish!  never  mind.  I  am  satisfied  that  I  am  heart- 
whole  as  a  biscuit,  and  I  may  live  to  see  the  end  of  those 
affairs  yet.  I  am  driving  on  the  Count  of  Paris  right 
merrily.  I  have  plenty  of  leisure,  and  vive  la  plume !  I 
have  arranged  matters  as  I  think  for  the  best,  so  will  think 
no  more  about  it. 

March  16.— The  affair  with  Mr.  Cadell  being  settled,  I 
have  only  to  arrange  a  set  of  regular  employment  for  my 
time,  without  over-fatiguing  myself.  What  I  at  present  prac- 
tise seems  active  enough  for  my  capacity,  and  even  if  I 
should  reach  the  threescore  and  ten,  from  which  I  am  thrice 
three  years  distant,  or  nearer  ten,  the  time  may  pass  honour- 
ably, usefully,  and  profitably,  both  to  myself  and  other  people. 
My  ordinary  for  action  runs  thus : — Rise  at  a  quarter 
before  seven ;  at  a  quarter  after  nine  breakfast,  with  eggs,  or 
in  the  singular  number,  at  least;  before  breakfast  private 
letters,  etc. ;  after  breakfast  Mr.  Laidlaw  comes  at  ten,  and 
we  write  together  till  one.  I  am  greatly  helped  by  this 
excellent  man,  who  takes  pains  to  write  a  good  hand,  and 
supplies  the  want  of  my  own  fingers  as  far  *  as  another 
person  can.  We  work  seriously  at  the  task  of  the  day  till 
one  o'clock,  when  I  sometimes  walk — not  often,  however, 
having  failed  in  strength,  and  suffering  great  pain  even  from 
a  very  short  walk.  Oftener  I  take  the  pony  for  an  hour  or 
two  and  ride  about  the  doors;  the  exercise  is  humbling 
enough,  for  I  require  to  be  lifted  on  horseback  by  two 
servants,  and  one  goes  with  me  to  take  care  I  do  not  fall  off 
and  break  my  bones,  a  catastrophe  very  like  to  happen.  My 
proud  promenade  &  pied  or  a  cheval,  as  it  happens,  concludes 
by  three  o'clock.  An  hour  intervenes  for  making  up  my 
Journal  and  such  light  work.  At  four  comes  dinner, — a  plate 
of  broth  or  soup,  much  condemned  by  the  doctors,  a  bit  of 
plain  meat,  no  liquors  stronger  than  small  beer,  and  so  I  sit 
quiet  to  six  o'clock,  when  Mr.  Laidlaw  returns,  and  remains 
with  me  till  nine  or  three  quarters  past,  as  it  happens 

VOL.  IL  2  B 


386  JOUBXAL.  [MAHCH 

Then  I  liave  a  bowl  of  porridge  and  milk,  which  I  eat  with 
the  appetite  of  a  child.  I  forgot  to  say  that  after  dinner 
I  am  allowed  half  a  glass  of  whisky  or  gin  made  into 
weak  grog.  I  never  wish  for  any  more,  nor  do  I  in  my  secret 
soul  long  for  cigars,  though  once  so  fond  of  them.  About 
six  hours  per  day  is  good  working,  if  I  can  keep  at  it. 

March  17. — Little  of  this  day,  but  that  it  was  so  uncom- 
monly windy  that  I  was  almost  blown  off  my  pony,  and 
was  glad  to  grasp  the  mane  to  prevent  its  actually  happen- 
ing. Rode  round  by  Brigends.  I  began  the  third  volume  of 
Count  Robert  of  Paris,  which  has  been  on  the  anvil  dur- 
ing all  these  vexatious  circumstances  of  politics  and  health. 
But  "the  blue  heaven  bends  over  all"  It  may  be  ended  in 
a  fortnight  if  I  keep  my  scheme.  But  I  will  take  time 
enough.  This  would  be  on  Thursday.  I  would  like  it  much. 

March  18. — We  get  well  on.  Gawd  Robert  is  finished  so 
far  as  the  second  goes,  and  some  twenty  [pages]  of  the  third. 
Blackwootfs  Magazine,  after  long  bedaubing  me  with  com- 
pliment, has  began  to  bedaub  Lockhart  for  my  sake,  or 
perhaps  me  for  Lockhart's  sake,  with  abuse.  Lockhart's 
chief  offence  seems  to  have  been  explaining  the  humbug  of 
showing  up  Hogg  as  a  fool  and  blackguard  in  what  he 
calls  the  Noctes?-  For  me  I  care  wonderfully  little  either 
for  his  flattery  or  his  abuse.2 

1  As  this  is  the  last  reference  to  think  right,  for  Hogg,  by  all  means ; 

the  Ettrick  Shepherd  in  the  Journal,  and  I  pray  God,  keep  farms  and 

it  may  be  noted  that  Sir  Walter,  as  other  absurd  temptations  likely  to 

late  as  March  23d,  1832,  was  still  beset  him  out  of  his  way.    He  has 

desirous  to  promote  Hogg's  welfare,  another  chance  for  comfort  if  he  will 

In  writing  from  Naples  he  says,  in  use  common  sense  with  his  very 

reference  to  the  Shepherd's  social  considerable  genius." 

success  in  London,  "I  am  glad  Hogg  2  This  expression  of   irritation 

has  succeeded  so  well.    I  hope  he  can    easily   be    understood    after 

will  make  hay  while  the  sun  shines ;  reading     the     passages     referred 

but  he  must  be  aware  that  the  lion  to  in  the  twenty-ninth  volume  of 

of  this  season  always  becomes  the  Blackwood's  Jfagassme,  pp.   30-35, 

Bow  of  the  next  ...  I  will  sub-  and  535-544.    Headers  of  this  Jour- 

scribe  the  proper  sum,  ie.  what  you  nod   have  seen  what  uphill  work 


1831.]  JOURNAL.  387 

March  1 9. — I  made  a  hard  working  day — almost  equal 
to  twenty  pages,  but  there  was  some  reason  for  it,  for 
Ballantyne  writes  me  that  the  copy  sent  will  not  exceed 
265  pages  when  the  end  of  volume  ii  is  reached;  so  45 
more  pages  must  be  furnished  to  run  it  out  to  page  329. 
This  is  an  awful  cast  back;  so  the  gap  is  to  be  made 
up. 

March  20, — I  thought  I  was  done  with  politics,  but  it 
is  easy  getting  into  the  mess,  and  difficult  and  sometimes 
disgraceful  to  get  out.  I  have  a  letter  from  Sheriff  Oliver, 
desiring  me  to  go  [to  Jedburgh]  on  Monday  (to-morrow) 
and  show  countenance  by  adhering  to  a  set  of  propositions, 
being  a  resolution.  Though  not  well  drawn,  they  are  un- 
compromising enough ;  so  I  will  not  part  company.  Had  a 
letter,  too,  from  Henry  Scott.  He  still  expects  to  refuse 
the  Bill.  I  wrote  him  that  would  but  postpone  the  evil  day, 
unless  they  could  bring  forward  a  strong  Administration,  and, 
what  is  most  essential,  a  system  of  finance ;  otherwise  it 
won't  do.  Henry  has  also  applied  to  me  for  the  rejected 
address.  But  this  I  shall  decline. 

March  22. — Went  to-day  at  nine  o'clock  to  the  meeting. 
A  great  number  present,  with  a  tribune  full  of  Eefonners, 
who  showed  their  sense  of  propriety  by  hissing,  hooting, 
and  making  all  sorts  of  noises;  and  these  unwashed  arti- 
ficers are  from  henceforth  to  select  our  legislators.  There 
was  some  speaking,  but  not  good.  I  said  something,  for  I 
could  not  sit  quiet.1 

We  did  not  get  home  till  about  nine,  having  fasted  the 

these  "Letters  on  Demonology"  1  Mr.  Lockhart  says : — "He  pro- 
were  to  the  author,  but  the  un-  posed  one  of  the  Tory  resolutions  in 
sparing  criticism  of  Christopher  a  speech  of  some  length,  "but  de- 
North  must  have  appeared  to  the  livered  in  a  tone  so  low,  and  with 
author  as  a  very  unfriendly  act,  such  hesitation  in  utterance,  that 
more  especially,  he  thought,  if  the  only  a  few  detached  passages  were 
critic  really  knew  the  conditions  intelligible  to  the  bulk  of  the 
under  which  the  book  had  been  audience*" — See  Life,  voL  x  pp. 
written.  46-8. 


388  JOUENAL. 

whole  time.  James,  the  blockhead,  lost  my  poor  Spice,  a 
favourite  terrier.  The  fool  shut  her  in  a  stable,  and  some- 
body, [he]  says,  opened  the  door  and  let  her  out.  I  suspect 
she  is  lost  for  aye,  for  she  was  carried  to  Jedburgh  in  a 
post-chaise. 

March  23. — The  measure  carried  by  a  single  vote.1  In 
other  circumstances  one  would  hope  for  the  interference  of 
the  House  of  Lords,  but  it  is  all  hab-nab  at  a  venture.  The 
worst  is  that  there  is  a  popular  party  who  want  personal 
power,  and  are  highly  unfitted  to  enjoy  it.  It  has  fallen 
easily,  the  old  Constitution ;  no  bullying  Mirabeau  to  assail, 
no  eloquent  Maury  to  defend.  It  has  been  thrown  away 
like  a  child's  broken  toy.  Well,  transeat,  the  good  sense 
of  the  people  is  much  trusted  to ;  we  will  see  what  it  will 
do  for  us.2 

The  curse  of  Cromwell  on  those  whose  conceit  brought 
us  to  this  pass.  Sed  transeat.  It  is  vain  to  mourn  what 
cannot  be  mended. 

March  24. — Frank  Grant  and  his  lady  came  here. 
Prank  will,  I  believe,  and  if  he  attends  to  his  profession,  be 
one  of  the  celebrated  men  of  the  age.  He  is  well  known 
to  me  as  the  companion  of  my  sons  and  the  partner  of 
my  daughters.  In  youth,  that  is  in  extreme  youth,  he  was 
passionately  fond  of  fox-hunting  and  other  sports,  but  not 
of  any  species  of  gambling.  He  had  also  a  strong  passion 
for  painting,  and  made  a  little  collection.  As  he  had  sense 
enough  to  feel  that  a  younger  brother's  fortune  would  not 
last  long  under  the  expenses  of  a  good  stud  and  a  rare 

1  The  passing  of  the  great  Reform  and  Jeffrey  and  Cockbum  in  their 

Bill  in  the  House  of  Commons  on  present  stations !  I  am  Afraid  that 

the  22d  March.  the  spirit  of  reform  goes  at  present 

beyond  the  limits  to  which  even  the 

*  His  friend  Richardson,  who  Government  will  go— and  but  for  the 
was  a  Whig,  writes  him  from  Lon-  large  stock  of  good  sense  and  feel- 
don  on  February  14 : — **  What  a  ing  which  I  think  yet  pervades  the 
singular  feeling  it  was  to  me  to  country,  I  should  tremble  for  the 
find  Brougham  Lord  Chancellor,  future." 


1831.]  JOURNAL  389 

collection  of  chef-dtcewvres,  he  used  to  avow  his  intention  to 
spend  Ms  patrimony,  about  £10,000,  and  then  again  to  make 
his  fortune  by  the  law.  The  first  he  soon  accomplished. 
But  the  law  is  not  a  profession  so  easily  acquired,  nor  did 
Frank's  talents  lie  in  that  direction.  His  passion  for  paint- 
ing turned  out  better.  If  ature  had  given  him  the  rare  power 
of  judging  soundly  of  painting,  and  in  a  remarkable  degree 
the  power  of  imitating  it  Connoisseurs  approved  of  his 
sketches,  both  in  pencil  and  oils,  but  not  without  the  sort  of 
criticisms  made  on  these  occasions — that  they  were  admir- 
able for  an  amateur ;  but  it  could  not  be  expected  that  he 
should  submit  to  the  technical  drudgery  absolutely  necessary 
for  a  profession,  and  all  that  species  of  criticism  which  gives 
way  before  natural  genius  and  energy  of  character. 

Meantime  Frank  Grant,  who  was  remarkably  handsome, 
and  very  much  the  man  of  fashion,  married  a  young  lady  with 
many  possibilities,  as  Sir  Hugh  Evans  says.1  She  was  eldest 
sister  of  Farquharson  of  Invereauld,  chief  of  that  clan;  and 
the  young  man  himself  having  been  almost  paralysed  by  the 
malaria  in  Italy,  Frank's  little  boy  by  this  match  becomes 
heir  to  the  estate  and  chieftainship.  In  the  meantime  fate 
had  another  chance  for  him  in  the  matrimonial  line.  At 
Melton-Mowbray,  during  the  hunting  season,  he  had  become 
acquainted  (even  before  Jiis  first  marriage)  with  a  niece  of 
the  Duke  of  Rutland,  a  beautiful  and  fashionable  young 
woman,  with  whom  he  was  now  thrown  into  company  once 
more.  It  was  a  natural  consequence  that  they  should  marry. 
The  lady  had  not  much  wealth,  but  excellent  connections  in 
society,  to  whom  Grant's  good  looks  and  good  breeding 
made  hitn  very  acceptable. 

March  25. — In  the  meantime  Frank  saw  the  necessity 
of  doing  something  to  keep  himself  independent,  having, 
I  think,  too  much  spirit  to  become  a  Stulko,2  drinking 

1  Merry  Wives,  Act  L  Sc.  1.  Irish),  a  word  formerly  in  common 

use  among  the  Irish,  signifying  an 
or  StuHk  (?$toco»re,  in     idle,  lazy,  good-for-nothing  fellow. 


390  JOTJENAL.  [MARCH 

out  the  last  glass  of  the  "bottle,  riding  the  horses  which 
the  laird  wishes  to  sell,  and  drawing  sketches  to  amuse  the 
lady  and  the  children, — besides  a  prospect  on  Invercauld 
elevating  him,  when  realised,  to  the  rank  of  the  laird's 
father. 

March  26. — Grant  was  above  all  this,  and  honourably  and 
manfully  resolved  to  cultivate  his  taste  for  painting,  and 
become  a  professional  artist.  I  am  no  judge  of  painting,  but 
I  am  conscious  that  Francis  Grant  possesses,  with  much 
taste,  a  sense  of  beauty  derived  from  the  best  source,  that 
of  really  good  society,  while  in  many  modern  artists,  the 
total  want  of  that  species  of  feeling  is  so  great  as  to  be 
revolting.  His  former  acquaintances  render  his  immediate 
entrance  into  business  completely  secure,  and  it  will  rest 
with  himself  to  carry  on  his  success.  He  has,  I  think,  that 
degree  of  energy  and  force  of  character  which  will  make 
Mm  keep  and  enlarge  any  reputation  which  he  may  acquire. 
He  has  confidence  too  in  his  own  powers,  always  a  requisite 
for  a  young  painter  whose  aristocratic  pretensions  must  be 
envied  by  [his  less  fortunate  brethren], 

March  27. — Frank  Grant  is  still  with  me,  and  is  well 
pleased — I  think  very  deservedly  so — with  a  cabinet  picture 
of  myself,  armour,  and  so  forth,  together  with  my  two  noble 
staghounds  of  the  greyhound  race.  I  wish  Cadell  had  got 
it ;  it  is  far  better  than  Watson's — though  his  is  well  too. 
The  dogs  sat  charmingly,  but  the  picture  took  up  some 
time.1 

1  Mary  Campbell,  Lady  Ruthven,  brilliant  men  of  her  day.  She  sur- 
fer whom  the  picture  was  painted,  vived  all  her  early  friends,  but  had 
was  not  only  the  friend  of  Scott,  the  gift  of  being  attractive  to  the 
but  she  held  relations  more  or  less  young,  and  for  three  generations 
close  with  nearly  every  one  famous  was  the  delight  of  their  children 
in  Art  and  Literature  during  and  grandchildren.  Those  who  were 
the  greater  part  of  the  nineteenth  privileged  to  share  in  the  refined 
century.  No  mean  artist  herself,  hospitality  of  Winton,  never  forgot 
and  though,  perhaps,  not  a  clever  either  the  picturesque  old  house 
letter-writer,  she  had  among  her  (the  supposed  Havenswood  Castle 
correspondents  some  of  the  most  of  the  Bride  of  Lammermoor)t  or 


1831.] 


JOUENAL. 


391 


March  28. — We  went  out  a  little  ride.  The  weather 
most  tempting,  the  day  beautiful.  We  rode  and  walked  a 
little. 

March  29. — We  had  an  hour's  sitting  of  the  dogs,  and  a 
good  deal  of  success.  I  cannot  compose  my  mind  on  this 
public  measure.  It  will  not  please  those  whom  it  is  the 
object  to  please. 

March  30. — Kobert  Dundas1  and  his  wife — Miss  Durham 
that  was — came  to  spend  a  day  or  two.  I  was  heartily  glad 


its  venerable  mistress  as  she  sat  of 
an  evening  in  her  unique  drawing- 
room,  the  walls  of  which  were 
adorned  with  pictures  of  Grecian 
temple  and  landscape,  her  own 
handiwork  in  days  long  gone  by 
when  she  was  styled  by  her 
friends  Queen  of  Athens,  Her 
conversation,  after  she  was  ninety, 
was  fresh  and  vigorous;  and,  de- 
spite blindness  and  imperfect  hear- 
ing, she  kept  herself  well  ac- 
quainted with  the  affairs  of  the 
day.  The  last  great  speech  in 
Parliament,  or  the  newest  boii 
mot,  were  equally  acceptable  and 
equally  relished.  Her  sense  of 
humour  and  fun  made  her,  at  times, 
forget  her  own  sufferings,  and  her 
splendid  memory  enabled  her  to 
while  away  many  a  sleepless  hour  by 
repeating  long  passages  from  the 
Bible  or  Milton.  The  former  she 
had  so  much  in  Her  heart  that  it  was 
scarcely  possible  to  believe  she  was 
not  reading  from  the  Book.  Above 
all  was  her  truly  divine  gift  of 
charity,  the  practical  application 
of  which,  in  her  every-day  life, 
was  only  bounded  by  her  means. 

It  was  said  of  her  by  one  who 
knew  her  well — 

"  She  lived  to  a  great  age,  dispensing  kind- 
ness and  benevolence  to  the  last,  and  cheered 
in  the  sore  infirmities  of  her  later  years  by 
the  love  of  friends  of  all  ranks,  and  ail  parties 
of  all  ages. 


"The  Living  Lamp  of  Lothian,  which 
from  Winton,  has  so  long  shed  its  benefi- 
cent lustre,  has  been  esmngmshed,  but  not 
so  will  be  lost  the  memory  of  the  gifted  lady, 
for  by  not  a  few  will  still  be  cherished  the 
recollection  of  her  noble  nature,  and  of  her 
Christian  life." 

Lady  Ruthven  prized  the  picture 
referred  to.  She  would  not,  as  Sir 
Francis  Grant  relates,*  permit  him 
to  touch  the  canvas  after  it  left 
the  Abbotsford  studio;  and  it  re- 
mained a  cherished  possession  which 
she  took  pride  in  showing  to  ap- 
preciative guests,  pointing  out  the 
details  of  face  and  form  which  she 
still  saw  with  that  inner  eye, 
which  time  had  not  darkened. 

It  is  now  in  the  National  Portrait 
Gallery  of  Scotland — bequeathed  to 
the  nation  with  other  pictures,  as 
well  as  the  magnificent  collection  of 
Greek  archaeological  objects  gathered 
by  herself  andLord  Ruthven  in  their 
early  married  life.  She  was  born 
in  1789,  and  died  in  1885. 

1  Robert  Dundas  of  Arniston, 
Esq.,  the  worthy  representative  of 
an  illustrious  lineage,  died  at  his 
paternal  seat  in  June  1838.— J.  G.  L. 
See  Arniston  MeTnoirs — Three  Cen- 
turies of  a  Scottish  House,  1571-1838. 
Edin.  Svo,  1837- 

*  See  long  and  interesting  letter  of  June  5, 
1ST2,  from  Sir  Francis  to  Sir  "W.  S.  Maxwell. 
— Laing's  CofaZoji",  pp.  79-81. 


392  JOURNAL.  [MABCH  1831. 

to  see  him,  being  my  earliest  and  best  friend's  son.  John 
Swinton  came  by  Bluoher,  on  the  part  of  an  anti-Beform 
meeting  in  Edinburgh ;  exhorting  me  to  take  tip  the,  pen, 
but  I  declined  and  pleaded  health,  which,  God  knows,  I 
have  a  right  to  urge.  I  might  have  urged  also  the  chance 
of  my  breaking  down,  but  that  would  be  a  cry  of  a  kind 
which  might  very  well  prove  real 

MarcJi  31. — Swinton  returned  in  the  forenoon  yesterday 
after  lunch.  He  took  my  denial  pretty  quietly,  and  owned  it 
would  be  wrong  to  press  me.  I  have  not  shunned  anything 
that  came  fairly  on  me,  but  I  do  not  see  the  sense  of  stand- 
ing forth  a  champion.  It  is  said  that  the  Duke  of  Buccleuch 
has  been  offered  the  title  of  Monmouth  if  he  would  cease  to 
oppose.  He  said  there  were  two  objections — they  would  not 
give  it  him  if  he  seriously  thought  of  it,  and  he  would  not 
take  it  if  they  did.  The  Dundases  went  off  to-day.  I 
was  glad  I  had  seen  them,  although  visitors  rather  interrupt 
work. 


APEIL. 

April  2. — Mr.  Hemy  liddell,  eldest  son  of  Lord  Havens- 
worth,  arrived  here.  I  like  frfon  and  his  brother  Tom  very 
much.  They  are  what  may  he  termed  fine  men.  Young 
Mackenzie  of  Cromarty  came  with  him,  who  is  a  fine  lad 
and  sings  very  beautifully.  I  knew  his  father  and  mother, 
and  was  very  glad  to  see  him.  They  had  been  at  Mertoun 
fishing  salmon,  with  little  sport. 

April  3. — A  letter  from  the  Lord  Chief  Commissioner, 
reporting  Lord  Palmerston  and  Sir  Herbert  Taylor's  letters 
in  Charles's  favour.  Wrote  a  grateful  answer,  and  resolved, 
that  as  I  have  made  my  opinion  public  at  every  place 
where  I  could  be  called  on  or  expected  to  appear,  I  will  not 
thrust  myself  forward  when  I  have  nothing  to  say*  May 
the  Lord  have  mercy  upon  us  and  incline  our  hearts  to 
keep  this  vow  I 

April  4. — Mr.  liddell  and  Hay  Mackenzie  left  us  this 
jnorning.  Liddell  showed  me  yesterday  a  very  good  poem, 
worthy  of  Pope  or  Churchill,  in  old-fashioned  hexameters, 
called  the  [illegible].  He  has  promised  me  a  copy,  for  it 
is  still  being  printed.  There  are  some  characters  very  well 
drawn.  The  force  of  it  belies  the  character  of  a  Dandie,  too 
hastily  ascribed  to  the  author.  He  is  accomplished  as  an 
artist  and  musician,  and  certainly  has  a  fine  taste  for  poetry, 
though  he  may  never  cultivate  it.1  He  promises  -to  bring 
his  lady — who  is  very  clever,  but  pretty  high,  they  say,  in 

1  Henry  Liddell,  second  Baron      tion  of  the  Odes  of  Horace,  a  volume 
Bavenfiworth,  author  of  a  transla-      of  Latin  Poems,  etc. 


396  JOURNAL. 

Constable's  creditors,  telling  that  the  manuscripts  of  the 
Waverley  Novels  had  been  adjudged  to  him,  and  offering 
them  to  me,  or  rather  asking  my  advice  about  the  disposal 
of  them.  Answered  that  I  considered  myself  as  swindled 
out  of  my  property,  and  therefore  will  give  no  consent  to 
any  sale  of  the  pillage.1  Cadell  says  he  is  determined  to  get 
the  MSS.  from  Cowan.  I  told  him  I  would  give  him  the 
rest  of  the  MSS.,  which  are  in  my  own  hand,  for  Mr.  Cadell 
has  been  very  friendly  to  me  in  not  suffering  me  to  want 
money  in  difficult  times.  We  are  not  pushed  by  our 
creditors,  so  can  take  our  own  time;  and  as  our  plans 
prosper,  we  can  pay  off  debt.  About  two  o'clock  enter  two 
gentlemen  in  an  open  carriage,  both  from  Makerstoun,  and 
both  Captains  in  the  Navy.  Captain  Blair,  a  son  of  the 
member  for  Ayrshire,  my  old  friend  the  Laird  of  Blair. 
Just  as  they  retreat,  Mr.  Pontey  is  announced.  I  was  glad 
to  see  this  great  forester.  He  is  a  little  man,  and  yet  with 
an  air  of  talent, — something  like  Gilford,  the  famous 
editor  of  the  Quarterly.  As  in  Ms  case,  mental  acuteness 
gives  animation  to  that  species  of  countenance  which  attends 
personal  deformity.  The  whole  of  his  face  was  bizarre  and 
odd,  yet  singularly  impressive.  We  walked  round,  I  with 
great  pain,  by  the  Hooded  Corbies'  seat,  and  this  great  Lord 
of  the  woodland  gave  the  plantation  great  approbation. 
He  seems  rather  systematic  in  priming,  yet  he  is  in  a  great 
measure  right.  He  is  tolerably  obstinate  in  his  opinions. 
He  dined,  leaving  me  flattered  with  his  applause,  and 
pleased  with  having  seen  him. 

1  The  Manuscripts  were  sold  by  £18;  (8)  Abbot,  £14;  (9)  Ivanhoe, 

auction  in  London  on  August  19th,  £12 ;  (10)  Pirate,  £12 ;  (11)  Nigel, 

1831,  and  the  prices  realised  fell  far  £16,  16s.;    (12)  KeruLworth,  £17; 

abort  of   what    might  have   been  (13)  Bride  of  Lammemoar,  £14, 

expected,  e.g.  (1)  Monastery,  £18;  14s.  — Total     £317.— See      David 

(2)  Guy  Mannering,  £27, 10s. ;  (3)  Laing's  Catalogue,  pp.  99-108,  for 

Old  Jfortafi*y,£33;  (4)  Antiquary,  an  account  of  the  dispersion  and 

£42;  (5)  Rob  £oy,£50;  (6)  Peveril  sales  of  the  original  MSS.,   prose 

of  the  Peak,  £42;    (7)    Waverley,  and  poetry. 


1831.]  JOTJBNAL,  397 

April  11. — This  day  I  ^ent,  with  Anne  and  Miss  Jane 
Erskine,1  to  see  the  laying  of  the  stones  of  foundation  of  two 
bridges  in  my  neighbourhood  over  Tweed  and  the  Ettrick 
There  were  a  great  many  people  assembled.  The  day  was 
beautiful,  the  scene  romantic,  and  the  people  in  good  spirits 
and  good-humour.  Mr.  Paterson  2  of  G-alashiels  made  a  most 
excellent  prayer;  Mr.  Smith3  gave  a  proper  repast  to  the 
workmen,  and  we  subscribed  sovereigns  apiece  to  provide  for 
any  casualty.  I  laid  the  foundation-stone  of  the  bridge 
over  Tweed,  and  Mr.  C.  B.  Scott4  of  "Woll  that  of  Ettrick. 
The  general  spirit  of  good-humour  made  the  scene,  though 
without  parade,  extremely  interesting. 

April  12, — We  breakfasted  with  the  Fergusons,  after 
which  Anne  and  Miss  Erskine  walked  up  the  Ehymer's 
Glen,  I  could  as  easily  have  made  a  pilgrimage  to  Rome 
with  pease  in  my  shoes  unboiled.  I  drove  home,  and  began 
to  work  about  ten  o'clock.  At  one  o'clock  I  rode,  and  sent 
off  what  I  had  finished.  Mr.  Laidlaw  dined  with  me.  In 
the  afternoon  we  wrote  five  or  six  pages  more.  I  am,  I  fear, 
sinking  a  little,  from  having  too  much  space  to  fill,  and  a 
want  of  the  usual  inspiration  which  makes  me,  like  the 
chariot  wheels  of  Pharaoh  in  the  sands  of  the  Bed  Sea,  drive 
heavily.  It  is  the  less  matter  if  this  prove,  as  I  suspect,  the 
last  of  this  fruitful  family. 

April  13. — Corrected  a  proof  in  the  morning.    At  ten 

1  Miss  J.  Erskine,  a  daughter  of  which  he  recognises  his  obligations 
Lord   Kinnedder*s.     She   died   in  to    Sir  Walter   in   the    following 
1838. — J.  G.  I*  terms : — "  From    him     I    derived 

2  The  Rev.  K.  Paterson,  author  courage  to  persevere  in  an  under- 
of  The  Manse  Garden ;  afterwards  taking  on  which  I  had  often  re- 
minister  of  St.  Andrew's,  Glasgow,  fleeted  with  terror  and  distrust." — 
He  died  in  1871.     Mr.  Paterson  Legend,  notes,  p.  305. 

was  a  grandson  of  Bobert  Paterson,         3  Mr.  John  Smith  of  Darnick,  the 

"Old  Mortality,"  and  brother  of  builder  of  Abbotsford,  and  architect 

the  Rev.  Walter  Paterson,  minister  of  these  bridges, — j.  G.  L. 
of  Kirkurd,  author  of  the  Legend        *  This  gentleman  died  in  Edin- 

of  lona — a  poem  written  in  imita-  burgh  on  the  4th  February  1838. — 

tion  of  the  style  of  Scott,  and  in  J.  G.  L. 


398  JOURNAL.  [APRIL 

o'clock  "began  where  I  had  left  off  at  my  romance.  Mr. 
Laidlaw  agrees  as  to  the  portion  of  what  we  are  presently 
busy  with.  Laidlaw  begins  to  smite  the  rock  for  not  giving 
forth  the  water  in  quantity  sufficient.  I  remarked  to  him 
that  this  would  not  profit  much.  Doing,  perhaps,  twelve 
pages  a  day  will  easily  finish  us,  and  if  it  prove  dull,  why, 
dull  it  must  be.  I  shall,  perhaps,  have  half  a  dozen  to  make 
up  this  night.  I  have  against  me  the  disadvantage  of  being 
called  the  Just,  and  every  one  of  course  is  willing  to  worry 
me.  But  they  have  been  long  at  it,  and  even  those  works 
which  have  been  worst  received  at  their  appearance  now 
keep  their  ground  fairly  enough.  So  we  11  try  our  old  luck 
another  voyage. 

It  is  a  close,  thick  rain,  and  I  cannot  ride,  and  I  am  too 
dead  lame  to  walk  in  the  house.  So,  feeling  really  exhausted, 
I  will  try  to  sleep  a  little. 

My  nap  was  a  very  short  one,  and  was  agreeably  re- 
placed by  Basil  Hall's  Fragments  of  Voyages.  Everything 
about  the  inside  of  a  vessel  is  interesting,  and  my  friend  has 
the  great  sense  to  know  this  is  the  case.  I  remember  when 
my  eldest  brother  took  the  humour  of  going  to  sea,  James 
Watson1  used  to  be  invited  to  George  Square  to  tell  him 
such  tales  of  hardships  as  might  disgust  hirn  with  the 
service.  Such  were  my  poor  mother's  instructions.  But 
Captain  Watson  could  not  render  a  sea  life  disgusting  to 
the  young  midshipman  or  to  his  brother,  who  looked  on  and 
listened.  The  account  of  assistance  given  to  the  Spaniards 
at  Cape  Enisterre,  and  the  absurd  behaviour  of  the  Junta, 
axe  highly  interesting — a  more  inefficient,  yet  a  more  re- 
solved class  of  men  than  the  Spaniards  were  never  conceived. 

1  The  late  Captain  Watson,  E.N.,  best  pieces.     He  became  President 

was  distantly  related  to  Sir  Walter *s  of   the  Royal    Scottish   Academy 

mother.     His  son,  Sir  John  Wat-  in  1850,  died  in  1864,  leaving  funds 

son  Gordon,  rose  to  great  eminence  to  endow  a  Chair  of  Fine  Arts  in 

as   a  painter ;   and   his  portraits  the  Edinburgh  University, 
of  Scott  and  Hogg  rank  among  his 


1831.]  JOUENAL  399 

April  14. — Advised  by  Mr.  Cadell  that  he  has  agreed 
with  Mr.  Turner,  the  first  draughtsman  of  the  period,  to 
furnish  to  the  poetical  "works  two  decorations  to  each  of  the 
proposed  twelve  volumes,  to  wit,  a  frontispiece  and  vignette 
to  each,  at  the  rate  of  £25  for  each,  which  is  cheap  enough 
considering  these  are  the  finest  specimens  of  art  going.  The 
difficulty  is  to  make  him  come  here  to  take  drawings.  I  have 
written  to  the  mau  of  art,  inviting  him  to  my  house,  though, 
if  I  remember,  he  is  not  very  agreeable,  and  offered  to  transport 
him  to  the  places  where  he  is  to  exercise  his  pencil  His 
method  is  to  take  various  drawings  of  remarkable  places  and 
towns  and  stick  them  all  together.  He  can  therefore  derive 
his  subjects  from  good  accurate  drawings,  so  with  Skene's 
assistance  we  can  equip  himr  "W"e  can  put  him  at  home 
on  all  the  subjects.  Lord  Meadowbank  and  his  son,  Skene 
and  his  son,  Colonel  Russell  and  his  sister,  dined  with  us.1 

April  15. — Lord  Meadowbank,  etc.,  went  to  Kfewark  with 
me,  and  returned  to  dine  with  the  foregoing.  Charming 
day. 

April  16. — Lord  Meadowbank  went  to  the  circuit  and 
our  party  to  their  various  homes.  By  the  bye,  John  Pringle 
and  his  brother  of  Haining  dined  with  us  yesterday.  Skene 
walks  with  me  and  undertakes  readily  to  supply  Turner 
witH  subjects.  Weather  enchanting.  About  100  leaves 
will  now  complete  Robert  of  Paris.  Query,  will  it  answer  ? 
Not  knowing,  can't  say.  I  think  it  will 

1  Mr.  W.  IT.  Skene,  Historiogra-  correspond  with  that  in  Sir  Walter's 

pher  Royal  for  Scotland,  and  son  Diary,  but,  as  there  are  only  thirty 

of  Scott's  dear  friend,  has  been  days  in  April  it  has  evidently  been 

good  enough  to  give  me  his  recol-  written  by  mistake  for  the  13th. 

lections  of  those  days : —  I  had  just  attained  my  twenty-first 

"On  referring  to  my  Diary  for  the  year,  and  as  such  a  visit  at  that 

year  1831  I  find  the  following  early  age  was  a  great  event  in  my 

entry :  e  This  Spring,  on  31st  life,  I  retain  a  very  distinct  recol- 

Aprtt,  I  went  with  my  father  to  lection  of  the  ma,fn  features  of  it. 

Abbotsford  and  left  on  Sir  Walter  I  recollect  that  Lord  Meadowbank 

Scott  being  taken  ill.'  The  date  and  his  eldest  son  Alan  came  at  the 

here  given  for  my  visit  does  not  same  time,  and  the  dinner  party, 


400  JOUENAL. 

Sunday  Ibtk  [172A]  April  to  Sunday  2tth  of  the  same 
month  unpleasantly  occupied  by  ill  [health],  and  its  con- 
sequences, a  distinct  shock  of  paralysis  affecting  both  my 
nerves  and  speech,  though  beginning  only  on  Monday  with 
a  very  bad  cold.  Dr.  [Abercrombie]  was  brought  out  by  the 
friendly  care  of  Cadell,  but  young  Clarkson  had  already 
done  the  needful — that  is,  had  bled  and  blistered  severely, 
and  placed  me  on  a  very  restricted  diet.  Whether  these 
precautions  have  been  taken  in  time  I  cannot  tell  I  think 
they  have,  though  severe  in  themselves,  beat  the  disease. 
But  I  am  alike  prepared, 

u  Sen  versare  doles,  seu  certss  occumbere  morti" 1 

I  only  know  that  to  live  as  I  am  just  now  is  a  gift  little 
worth  having.  I  think  I  will  be  in  the  Secret  next  week 
unless  I  recruit  greatly. 

April  27, — They  have  cut  me  off  from  animal  food  and 
fermented  liquor  of  every  kind,  and  would  press  upon  me 
such  trash  as  panada  and  the  like,  which  affect  my  stomach. 

at  which  Mr.  Pringle  of  the  Haining  into  the  room  and  sat  down  near 

and  his  brother  were  present.    The  the  table,  but   ate  nothing.     He 

day  after  our  arrival  Sir  Walter  seemed  in  a  dazed  state,  and  took 

asked  me  to  drive  with  him.    We  no  notice  of  any  one,  but  after  a 

went  in  his  open  carriage  to  the  few  minutes'  silence,  during  which 

Yarrow,  where  we  got  out,  and  his  daughter  ^ome,  who  was  at  table, 

Sir  Walter,   leaning  on  my  arm,  and  was  watching  hfm  with  some 

walked  up  the  side  of  the  river,  anxiety,  motioned  to  us  to  take  no 

pouring  forth  a  continuous  stream  notice,  he  began  in  a  quiet  voice  to 

of  anecdotes,  traditions,  and  scraps  tell  us  a  story  of  a  pauper  lunatic, 

of  ballads,    I  was  in  the  seventh  who,  fancying  he  was  a  rich  man, 

heaven   of    delight,    and    thought  and   was    entertaining    all    sorts 

I  had  never   spent   such  a  day.  of    high    persons    to    the    most 

On   Sunday   Sir  Walter   did  not  splendid  banquets,  communicated 

come     down    to    breakfast,    but  to  his  doctor  in  confidence   that 

sent  a  message  to  say  that  he  had  there  was  one  thing  that  troubled 

caught  cold  and  had  taken  some  him   much,    and  which  he  could 

medicine   for  it  the  night  before,  not   account    for,    and   that  was 

which  had  made  him  ill,  and  would  that    all   these    exquisite    dishes 

remain  in  bed.    When  we  sat  at  seemed    to    him      to     taste     of 

either  lunch  or  dinner,  I  do  not  re-  oatmeal    porridge.       Sir   Walter 

collect  which,  Sir  Walter   walked  told  this  with  much  humour,  and 


1831.] 


JOUBITAL. 


401 


This  I  will  none  of,  but  quietly  wait  till  my  ordinary  diet 
is  permitted,  and  thank  God  I  can  fast  with  any  one.  I 
walked  out  and  found  the  day  delightful;  the  woods  are 
looking  charming,  just  bursting  forth  to  the  tune  of  the 
birds.  I  have  been  whistling  on  my  wits  like  so  many 
chickens,  and  cannot  miss  any  of  them.  I  feel,  on  the 
whole,  better  than  I  have  yet  done.  I  believe  I  have  fined 
and  recovered,  and  so  may  be  thankful. 

April  28  and  29. — Walter  made  his  appearance,  well  and 
stout,  and  completely  recovered  of  his  stomach  complaints 
by  abstinence.  He  has  youth  on  his  side,  and  I  in  age  must 
submit  to  be  a  Lazarus.  The  medical  men  persist  in  recom- 
mending a  seton.  I  am  no  friend  to  these  risky  remedies, 
and  will  be  sure  of  the  necessity  before  I  yield  consent. 
The  dying  like  an  Indian  under  torture  is  no  joke,  and,  as 
Commodore  Trunnion  says,  I  feel  heart-whole  as  a  biscuit. 
My  mind  turns  to  politics.  I  feel  better  just  now,  and  so 
I  am.  I  will  wait  till  Lockhart  comes,  but  that  may  be  too 
late. 


after  a  few  minutes'  silence  began 
again,  and  told  the  same  story  over 
a  second  time,  and  then  again  a 
third  time.1  His  daughter,  who  was 
watching  fri-m  with  increasing  an- 
xiety, then  motioned  to  us  to  rise 
from  table,  and  persuaded  her 
father  to  return  to  his  bedroom. 
Next  day  the  doctor,  who  had  been 
sent  for,  told  us  that  he  was  seri- 
ously ill,  and  advised  that  his  guests 
should  leave  at  once,  so  that  the 
house  might  be  kept  quiet  and  his 
daughter  devote  herself  entirely 
to  the  care  of  her  father.  We  ac- 
cordingly left  at  once,  and  1  never 
saw  Sir  Walter  again.  I  still,  ho w- 

1  An  echo  of  one  of  his  own  singular 
illustrations  (see  Letters  on  Demonology') 
of  the  occasional  collision  between  a  dis- 
turbed imagination  and  the  oijjans  of  sense. 


ever,  retain  a  memorial  of  my  visit. 
I  had  fallen  into  indifferent  health 
in  the  previous  year,  and  been  re- 
commended Highland  air.  By  Sir 
Walter's  advice  I  was  sent  to  live 
with  a  friend  of  his,  the  Reverend 
Doctor  Macintosh  Mackay,  then 
minister  of  Laggan,  in  the  Inver- 
ness-shire Highlands,  and  had 
passed  my  time  learning  from  hfm 
the  Gaelic  language.  This  excited 
in  me  a  taste  for  Celtic  Antiquities, 
and  finding  in  Sir  Walter's  Library 
a  copy  of  O'Connor's  Rerum  Iliber- 
nlcarum  Scrtptores  wteres,  I  sat  up 
one  night  transcribing  from  it  the 
Armalg  of  Tighemac.  This  tran- 
script is  still  in  my  library.  — 
WILLIAM  F.  SKENK. 


*27  IXVSBLETTH  ROW, 

Sept.  1890." 


VOL.  IL 


2C 


MAY. 

April  30  and  May  1. — To  meet  Sandy  Pringle  to  settle 
the  day  of  election  on  Monday.  Go  on  with  Count  Robert 
half-a-dozen  leaves  per  day.  I  am  not  much  pleased  with 
my  handiwork.  The  Chancery  money  seems  like  to  be  paid. 
This  will  relieve  me  of  poor  Charles,  who  is  at  present  my 
chief  burthen.  The  task  of  pumping  my  brains  becomes 
inevitably  harder  when  "both  chain-pumps  are  choked 
below ; "  *  and  though  this  may  not  be  the  case  literally,  yet 
the  apprehension  is  well  nigh  as  bad. 

May  2. — The  day  passed  as  usual  in  dictating  (too  little) 
and  riding  a  good  deal  I  must  get  finished  with  Count 
Robert,  who  is  progressing,  as  the  Transatlantics  say,  at  a 
very  slow  pace  indeed.  By  the  bye,  I  have  a  letter  from 
Nathan  T.  Eossiter,  Williamstown,  New  York  City,  offering 
me  a  collection  of  poems  by  Byron,  which  are  said  to  have 
been  found  in  Italy  some  years  since  by  a  friend  of  Mr. 
Eossiter.  I  don't  see  I  can  at  all  be  entitled  to  these,  so 
shall  write  to  decline  them.  If  Mr.  Eossiter  chooses  to 
publish  them  in  Italy  or  America  he  may,  but,  published 
here,  they  must  be  the  property  of  Lord  Byron's  executors. 

May  3. — Sophia  arrives — with  all  the  children  looking 
well  and  beautiful,  except  poor  Johnnie,  who  looks  very 
pale.  But  It  is  no  wonder,  poor  thing ! 

May  4. — I  have  a  letter  from  Lockhart,  promising  to  be 
down  by  next  Wednesday,  that  is,  to-day.  I  will  consult 
him  about  Byron's  Exec.,  and  as  to  these  poems  said  to 
be  his  Lordship's.  They  are  very  probably  first  copies 

1  Falconer's  Shipwreck,  p.  162 — "  The  Storm."     12mo  ed.     London, 
Albion  Press,  1810. 

402 


18SL]  JOUPJvTAL.  403 

thrown  aside,  or  may  not  be  genuine  at  all.  I  will  be  glad 
to  see  Lockhart.  My  pronunciation  is  a  good  deal  improved. 
My  time  glides  away  ill  employed,  but  I  am  afraid  of  the 
palsy.  I  should  not  like  to  be  pinned  to  my  chair.  But  I 
believe  even  that  kind  of  life  is  more  endurable  than  we 
could  suppose.  Tour  wishes  are  limited  to  your  little  circle 
— yet  the  idea  is  terrible  to  a  man  who  has  been  active. 
My  own  circle  in  bodily  matters  is  daily  narrowing;  not  so 
in  intellectual  matters,  but  I  am  perhaps  a  bad  judge.  The 
plough  is  coming  to  the  end  of  the  furrow,  so  it  is  likely  I 
shall  not  reach  the  common  goal  of  mortal  life  by  a  few 
years.  I  am  now  in  my  sixtieth  year  only,  and 

"Three  score  and  tea  years  do  sum  up."1 

May  5. — A  fleece  of  letters,  which  must  be  answered,  I 
suppose — all  from  persons,  my  zealous  admirers,  of  course, 
and  expecting  a  degree  of  generosity,  which  will  put  to 
rights  all  their  maladies,  physical  and  mental ;  and  expecting 
that  I  can  put  to  rights  whatever  losses  have  been  their  lot, 
raise  them  to  a  desirable  rank,  and  [stand]  their  protector 
and  patron.  I  must,  they  take  it  for  granted,  be  astonished 
at  having  an  address  from  a  stranger ;  on  the  contrary,  I 
would  be  astonished  if  any  of  these  extravagant  epistles 
were  from  any  one  who  had  the  least  title  to  enter  into 
correspondence  with  me.  I  have  all  the  plague  of  answering 
these  teasing  people. 

Mr.  Burn,  the  architect,  came  in,  struck  by  the  appear- 
ance of  iny  house  from  the  road.  He  approved  my  architec- 
ture greatly.  He  tells  me  the  edifice  for  Jeanie  Deans — 
that  is,  her  prototype — is  nigh  finished,  so  I  must  get  the 
inscription  ready.2  Mr.  Burn  came  to  meet  with  Pringle 

1  Scotch  Metrical  Version  of  the  missioned,  and  which  now  stands 
90th  Psalm.  in  the  churchyard  of  Irongray  : — 

2  On  the  18th  October  Sir  Walter  "  This  stone  was  erected  by  the 
sent  Mr.  Burn  the  following  inscrip-  Author  of  Waverley  to  the  memory 
tion  for  the  monument  he  had  com-  of  Helen  Walker,  who  died  in  the 


404 


JOURNAL. 


[MAT 


of  Haining;  but,  alas!  it  is  two  nights  since  this  poor 
young  man,  driving  in  from  Ms  own  lake,  where  he  had  been 
fishing,  an  ill-broken  horse  ran  away  with  him,  and,  at  his 
own  stable-door,  overturned  the  vehicle  and  fractured  poor 
Pringle's  skull;  he  died  yesterday  morning.  A  sad  busi- 
ness ;  so  young  a  man,  the  proprietor  of  a  good  estate,  and 
a  well-disposed  youth.  His  politics  were,  I  think,  mis- 
taken, being  the  reverse  of  his  father's ;  but  that  is  nothing 
at  such  a  time.  Burn  went  on  to  Bichardson's  place  of 

year  of  God  1791.  This  humble 
individual  practised  in  real  life  the 
virtues  with  which  fiction  has  in- 
vested the  imaginary  character  of 
Jeanie  Deans ;  refusing  the  slightest 
departure  from  veracity,  even  to  save 
the  life  of  a  sister,  she  nevertheless 
showed  her  kindness  and  fortitude, 
in  rescuing  her  from  the  severity  of 
the  law,  at  the  expense  of  personal 
exertions,  which  the  time  rendered 
as  difficult  as  the  motive  was  laud- 
able. Respect  the  grave  of  Poverty 
when  combined  with  the  love  of 
Truth  and  dear  affection.** 


It  is  well  known  that  on  the 
publication  of  Old  Mortality  many 
people  were  offended  by  what  was 
considered  a  caricature  of  the 
Covenanters,  and  that  Dr.  M'Crie, 
the  biographer  of  Knox,  wrote  a 
series  of  papers  in  the  Edinburgh 
Christian  Instructor,  which  Scott 
affected  to  despise,  and  said  he 
would  not  read.  He  not  only  was 
obliged  to  read  the  articles,  but 
found  it  necessary  to  inspire  or 
write  an  elaborate  defence  of  the 
truth  of  his  own  picture  of  the 
Covenanters  in  the  Number  for 
January  1817  of  the  Quarterly 
Jteview. 

In  June  1818,  however,  he  made 
ample  amends,  and  won.  the  hearts 
of  all  classes  of  his  countrymen  by 
his  beautiful  pictures  of  national 


character  in    the   Heart   of  Mid- 
lothian. 

It  is  worth  noticing  also  that  ten 
years  later,  viz.,  in  December 
1828,  his  friend  Richardson  having 
written  that  in  the  Tales  of  a  Grand- 
father "  You  have  paid  a  debt  which 
you  owed  to  the  manes  of  the  Cove- 
nanters for  the  nattering  picture 
which  you  drew  of  Claverhouse  in 
Old  Mortality.  His  character  is 
inconceivable  to  me :  the  atrocity 
of  his  murder  of  those  peasants,  as 
undauntedly  devoted  to  their  own 
good  cause  as  himself  to  his,  his  per- 
sonal (almost  hangman-like)  super- 
intendence of  their  executions,  are 
wholly  irreconcilable  with  a  chival- 
rous spirit,  which,  however  scornful 
of  the  lowly,  could  never,  in  my 
mind,  be  cruel,"  Scott,  in  reply, 
gave  his  matured  opinion  in  the 
following  words : — 

"As  to  Covenanters  and  Malig- 
nants,  they  were  both  a  set  of  cruel 
and  bloody  bigots,  and  had,  not- 
withstanding, those  virtues  with 
which  bigotry  is  sometimes  allied. 
Their  characters  were  of  a  kind 
much  more  picturesque  than  beauti- 
ful; neither  had  the  least  idea  either 
of  toleration  or  humanity,  so  that  it 
happens  that,  so  far  as  they  can  be 
distinguished  from  each  other,  one 
is  tempted  to  hate  most  the  party 
which  chances  to  be  uppermost  for 
the  time.1* 


1831.]  JOUKNAL.  405 

Kirklands,  where  he  is  to  meet  the  proprietor,  whom  I  too 
would  wish  to  see,  but  I  can  hardly  make  it  out  Here  is  a 
world  of  arrangements.  I  think  we  will  soon  hit  upon 
something.  My  son  Walter  takes  leave  of  me  to-day  to 
return  to  Sheffield.  At  his  entreaty  I  have  agreed  to  put  in 
a  seton,  which  they  seem  all  to  recommend.  Sly  own 
opinion  is,  this  addition  to  my  tortures  will  do  me  no  good ; 
but  I  cannot  hold  out  against  my  son.  So,  when  the  present 
blister  is  well  over,  let  them  try  their  seton  as  they  call  it. 

May  6  and  7. — Here  is  a  precious  job.  I  have  a  formal 
remonstrance  from  these  critical  persons,  Ballantyne  and 
Cadell,  against  the  last  volume  of  Count  Robert,  which  is 
within  a  sheet  of  being  finished.  I  suspect  their  opinion 
will  be  found  to  coincide  with  that  of  the  public ;  at  least 
it  is  not  very  different  from  my  own.  The  blow  is  a  stun- 
ning one  I  suppose,  for  I  scarcely  feel  it.  It  is  singular,  but 
it  comes  with  as  little  surprise  as  if  I  had  a  remedy  ready. 
Yet  God  knows,  I  am  at  sea  in  the  dark,  and  the  vessel  leaky, 
I  think,  into  the  bargain.  I  cannot  conceive  that  I  should 
have  tied  a  knot  with  my  tongue  which  my  teeth  cannot 
untie.  We  will  sea  I  am  determined  to  write  a  political 
pamphlet  w&te  que  cw&te;  ay, — should  it  cost  me  my  lifa 

I  will  right  and  left  at  these  unlucky  proof -sheets,  and 
alter  at  least  what  I  cannot  mend. 

May  8. — I  have  suffered  terribly,  that  is  the  truth, 
rather  in  body  than  in  mind,  and  I  often  wish  I  could  lie 
down  and  sleep  without  waking.  But  I  will  fight  it  out  if 
I  can.  It  would  argue  too  great  an  attachment  of  conse- 
quence to  my  literary  labours  to  sink  under.  Did  I  know 
how  to  begin,  I  would  begin  this  very  day,  although  I  knew 
I  should  sink  at  the  end.  After  all,  this  is  but  fear  and 
f aintness  of  heart,  though  of  another  kind  from  that  which 
trembleth  at  a  loaded  pistol  My  bodily  strength  is  terribly 
gone ;  perhaps  my  mental  too  ? 

May  9. — The  weather  uncommonly  beautiful  and  I  am 


406  JOURNAL.  [MAT 

very  eager  to  get  on  thinning  woods  while  the  peeling  sea- 
son lasts.  "We  made  about  £200  off  wood  last  season,  and 
this  is  a  sum  worth  looking  at. 

May  10. — Some  repairs  on  the  mill-dam  still  keep  the 
people  employed,  and  we  cannot  get  to  the  thinning.  Yet 
I  have  been  urging  them  for  a  month.  It's  a  great  fault  of 
Scottish  servants  that  they  cannot  be  taught  to  time  their 
turns. 

May  11, — By  old  practice  I  should  be  going  into  town 
to-day,  the  Court  sitting  to-morrow.  Am  I  happier  that  I 
am  free  from  this  charge  ?  Poorer  I  am,  that  is  certain ; 
time  begins  to  render  my  literary  labours  more  precarious 
than  usuaL  Yery  weak,  scarce  able  to  crawl  about  without 
the  pony — lifted  on  and  off— and  unable  to  walk  half  a 
mile  save  with  great  pain. 

May  12. — Eesolved  to  lay  by  JRobert  of  Paris,  and  take 
it  up  when  I  can  work  Thinking  on  it  really  makes  my 
head  swim,  and  that  is  not  safe.  Miss  Ferrier  comes  out  to 
us.  This  gifted  personage,  besides  having  great  talents,  has 
conversation  the  least  esdgeante  of  any  author,  female  at 
least,  whom  I  have  ever  seen  among  the  long  list  I  have  en- 
countered,— simple,  full  of  humour,  and  exceedingly  ready  at 
repartee;  and  all  this  without  the  least  affectation  of  the 
blue  stocking.1 

May  13. — Mr.,  or  more  properly  Dr.,  Macintosh  Mackay 
comes  out  to  see  me,  a  simple  learned  man,  and  a  High- 
lander who  weighs  his  own  nation  justly — a  modest  and 
estimable  person. 

I  was  beat  up  at  midnight  to  sign  a  warrant  against 
some  delinquents.  I  afterwards  heard  that  the  officers 
wre  pursued  by  a  mob  from  Galashiels,  with  purpose  of 
deforcing  them  as  far  as  St.  BoswelTs  Green,  but  the  men 
were  lodged  in  Jedburgh  Castle. 

1  See  Miss  Farrier's  accoiint  of     choice  edition  of  her  works,  6  vols. 
this  Tisit  prefixed  to  Mr.  Bentley's     cr.  8vo,  London,  1881. 


1831.]  JOUENAL.  40T 

Eeports  of  mobs  at  all  the  elections,  which,  I  fear,  will 
prove  too  true.  They  have  much  to  answer  for  who  in 
gaiety  of  heart  have  brought  a  peaceful  and  virtuous  popu- 
lation to  such  a  pass. 

May  14. — Eode  with  Lockhart  and  itr.  Mackay  through 
the  plantations,  and  spent  a  pleasanter  day  than  of  late 
months.  Story  of  a  haunted  glen  in  Laggan : — A  chieftain's 
daughter  or  cousin  loved  a  man  of  low  degree.  Her  kindred 
discovered  the  intrigue  and  punished  the  lover's  presumption 
by  binding  the  unhappy  man,  and  laying  him  naked  in  one 
of  the  large  ants*  nests  common  in  a  Highland  forest.  He 
died  in  agony  of  course,  and  his  mistress  became  distracted, 
roamed  wildly  in  the  glen  till  she  died,  and  her  phantom, 
finding  no  repose,  haunted  it  after  her  death  to  such  a  degree 
that  the  people  shunned  the  road  by  day  as  well  as  night. 
Mrs.  Grant  of  Laggan  tells  the  story,  with  the  addition,  that 
her  husband,  then  minister  of  Laggan,  fixed  a  religious 
meeting  in  the  place,  and,  by  the  exercise  of  public  worship 
there,  overcame  the  popular  terror  of  the  Eed  Woman. 
Dr.  Mackay  seems  to  think  that  she  was  rather  banished 
by  a  branch  of  the  Parliamentary  road  running  up  the  glen 
than  by  the  prayers  of  his  predecessor.  Dr.  Mackay,  it 
being  Sunday,  favoured  us  with  an  excellent  discourse  on 
the  Socinian  controversy,  which  I  wish  my  friend  Mr. 
Laidlaw  had  heard. 

May  15. — Dr.  1L  left  us  early  this  morning ;  and  I  rode 
and  studied  as  usual,  working  at  the  Tales  of  My  Grand- 
father.  Our  good  and  learned  Doctor  wishes  to  go  down 
the  Tweed  to  Berwick.  It  is  a  laudable  curiosity,  and  I 
hope  will  be  agreeably  satisfied. 

May  16  and  17, — I  wrote  and  rode  as  usual,  and  had  the 
pleasure  of  Miss  Terrier's  company  in  my  family  hours, 
which  was  a  great  satisfaction ;  she  has  certainly  less  affecta- 
tion than  any  female  I  have  known  that  has  stood  so  high 
— Joanna  Baillie  hardly  exeepted.  By  the  way,  she  [Mrs. 


408  JOURNAL.  [MAY 

Baillie]  has  entered  on  the  Socinian  controversy,  for  which. 
I  am  veiy  sorry ;  she  has  published  a  number  of  texts  on 
which  she  conceives  the  controversy  to  rest,  but  it  escapes 
her  that  she  can  only  quote  them  through  a  translation.  I 
am  sorry  this  gifted  woman  is  hardly  doing  herself  justice, 
and  doing  what  is  not  required  at  her  hands.  Mr.  Laidlaw 
of  course  thinks  it  the  finest  thing  in  the  world.1 

J/ay  18. — Went  to  Jedburgh  to  the  election,  greatly 
against  the  wishes  of  my  daughters.  The  mob  were  ex- 
ceedingly vociferous  and  brutish,  as  they  usually  are  now- 
a-days.  But  the  Sheriff  had  two  troops  of  dragoons  at 
Ancrum  Bridge,  and  all  went  off  quietly.  The  populace 
gathered  in  formidable  numbers — a  thousand  from  Hawick 
alone — they  were  most  blackguard  and  abusive;  the  day 
passed  with  much  clamour  but  no  mischief  Henry  Scott 
was  re-elected — for  the  last  time,  I  suppose.  Trojafuit* 

I  left  the  burgh  in  the  midst  of  abuse  and  the  gentle 
hint  of  "Burke  Sir  Walter."  Much  obliged  to  the  brave  lads 
of  Jeddart  Upwards  of  forty  freeholders  voted  for  Henry 
Scott,  and  only  fourteen  for  the  puppy  that  opposed  him. 
Even  of  this  party  he  gained  far  the  greater  number  by  the 
very  awkward  coalition  with  Sir  William  Scott  of  Ancrum. 
I  came  home  tired  enough  at  seven  at  night. 

May  20. — This  is  the  Selkirk  election,  which  I  supposed 
would  be  as  tumultuous  as  the  Jedburgh  one,  but  the  soutars 
of  Selkirk  had  got  a  new  light,  and  saw  in  the  proposed 
Eeform  Bill  nothing  but  a  mode  of  disfranchising  their 
ancient  burgh.  Although  the  crowd  was  great,  yet  there 
was  a  sufficient  body  of  special  constables,  hearty  in  their 
useful  office,  and  the  election  passed  as  quietly  as  I  ever 

1  Mr.  Carruthers  remarks  in  His  and  Scott  was  indignant  that  his 

Abbotsford    Notandai — "Joanna  friend  should  have  meddled  with 

Baillie  published  a  thin  volume  of  such  a  subject.      *  What  had  she 

selections  from  the  New  Testament  to  do  with  questions  of  that  sort  ?  * 

*regarding  the  nature  and  dignity  of  He  refused  to  add  the  book   to 

Jesus  Christ.*    The  tendency  of  the  his  library  and  gave  it  to  Laidlaw." 

work  was  Socinian,  or  at  least  Arian,  —P.  179. 


•1831.]  JOURNAL.  409 

witnessed  one.  I  came  home  before  dinner,  very  quiet.  I 
ain  afraid  there  is  something  serious  in  Galashiels ;  Jeffrey  is 
fairly  funked  about  it>  and  has  written  letters  to  the  authorities 
of  Eoxburghshire  and  Selkirkshire  to  caution  us  against 
making  the  precognitions  public,  which  looks  ilL  Yet  I 
think  he  would  have  made  arrests  when  the  soldiers  were 
in  the  country.  The  time  at  which  I  settled  at  Abbotsford, 
Whitsunday  1811, 1  broke  up  a  conspiracy  of  the  weavers. 
It  will  look  like  signalising  my  removal  if  another  takes 
place  just  now.  Incendiary  letters  have  been  sent,  and 
the  householders  are  in  a  general  state  of  alarm.  The  men 
at  Jedbuigh  Castle  are  said  to  be  disposed  to  make  a  clean 
breast ;  if  so,  we  shall  soon  know  more  of  the  matter.  Lord 
William  Graham  has  been  nearly  murdered  at  Dumbarton. 
Why  should  he  not  have  brought  down  50  or  100  lads 
with  the  kilts,  each  with  a  good  kent *  in  his  hand  fit  to  call 
the  soul  out  of  the  body  of  these  weavers?  They  would 
have  kept  order,  I  warrant  you. 

May  21. — Little  more  than  my  usual  work  and  my 
usual  exercise.  I  rode  out  through  the  plantations  and  saw 
the  woodmen  getting  down  what  was  to  be  felled.  It  seems 
there  will  be  as  much  for  sale  as  last  year  of  bark :  I  think 
about  -£40  worth.  A  very  nice  additional  pond  to  the  saw- 
mill has  been  executed.  As  for  my  Tales,  they  go  on  well, 
and  are  amusing  to  myself  at  least.  The  History  of  France 
is  veiy  entertaining. 

May  22. — I  have  a  letter  from  my  Mend  John  Thomson 
of  Duddingston.  I  had  transmitted  him  an  order  for  the 
Duke  of  Bucdeuch  for  Ms  best  picture,  at  his  best  price, 
leaving  the  choice  of  the  subject  and  everything  else  to  him- 
self. He  expresses  the  wish  to  do,  at  an  ordinary  price,  a 
picture  of  common  size.  The  declining  to  put  himself 
forward  will,  I  fear,  be  thought  like  shrinking  from  his  own 
reputation,  which  nobody  has  less  need  to  do.  The  Duke 

1  A  long  staff. 


410  JOURNAL.  [MAT 

may  wish  a  large  picture  for  a  large  price  for  furnishing  a. 
large  apartment,  and  the  artist  should  not  shrink  from  it.  I 
have  written  him  my  opinion.  The  feeling  is  no  doubt  an 
amiable,  though  a  false  one.  He  is  modest  in  proportion  to 
Iiis  talents.  But  what  brother  of  the  finer  arts  ever  ap- 
proached [excellence]  so  as  to  please  himself? 

May  23,  24,  and  25. — Worked  and  exercised  regularly. 
I  do  not  feel  that  I  care  twopence  about  the  change  of  diet 
as  to  taste,  but  I  feel  my  strength  much  decayed.  On  horse- 
back my  spine  feels  remarkably  sore,  and  I  am  tired  with  a 
five  miles*  ride.  We  expect  Walter  coming  down  for  the- 
Kfe  election. 


[Prom  May  25th  to  October  9fch  there  are  no  dates  m 
the  Journal,  but  the  entry  beginning  "  I  have  been  very 
ill n  must  have  been  made  about  the  middle  of  September. 
"In  the  family  circle,"  says  Mr.  Lockhart,  "he  seldom 
spoke  of  his  illness  at  all,  and  when  lie  did,  it  was  always 
in  a  hopeful  strain/'  "  In  private,  to  Laidlaw  and  myself,. 
his  language  corresponded  exactly  with  the  tone  of  the 
Diary.  He  expressed  his  belief  that  the  chances  of  r eco  very 
were  few — very  few — but  always  added  that  he  considered 
it  his  duty  to  exert  what  faculties  remained  to  him  for  the 
sake  of  his  creditors  to  the  very  last. — 'I  am  very 
anxious/  he  repeatedly  said  to  me,  *  to  be  done  one  way 
or  other  with  this  Count  Eobert9  and  a  little  story  about 
the  Castle  Dangerous — which  also  I  had  long  in  my  head 
— but  after  that  I  will  attempt  nothing  more,  at  least, 
not  until  I  have  finished  all  the  notes  for  the  Novels,' "  etc. 

On  the  18th  July  he  set  out  In  company  with  Mr. 
Lockhart  to  visit  Douglas  Oastle>  St.  Bride's  Church  and 
its  neighbourhood,  for  the  purpose  of  verifying  the  scenery 
of  Castle  Dangerous,  then  partly  printed,  returning  on  the. 
20th. 

He  finished  that  book  and  Count  Hobert  before  the  end 
of  August. 

la  September,  Mr.  Lockhart,  then  stayii^gat  CHefs-vrood^ 
and  proposing  to  make  a  run  into  Lanarkshire  for  a  day  or 
two,  mentioned  overnight  at  Abbotsford  that  he  intended 


1831.]  JOUEXAL.  411 

to  take  Ms  second  son,  then  a  boy  of  five  or  six  years  of  age, 
and  Sir  "Walter's  namesake,  with  him  on  the  stage-coach. 

Next  morning  the  following  affectionate  billet  was  put; 
Into  his  hands : — 

To  J.  G.  LOGKHART,  Esq.,  Chiefswood. 

"  DEAR  DON,  or  Doctor  Giovanni, 

"  Can  you  really  be  thinking  of  taking  Wa-Wa  by 
the  coach — and  I  think  you  said  outside?  Think  of 
Johnny,  and  be  careful  of  this  little  man.  Are  you  par 
hazard  something  in  the  state  of  the  poor  capitaine  des 
dragons  that  comes  in  singing  : — 

*  Comment  ?     Parhleu  !     Qu'en  pen&ez  vous, 
Bon  gentilhorQiiie,  &t  pas  Tm  sons  *  ? 

"  If  so,  remember  *  Richard *s  himself  again/  and  make 
free  use  of  the  enclosed  cheque  on  Cadell  for  £50.  He 
will  give  you  the  ready  as  you  pass  through,  and  you  can 
pay  when  I  ask. 

**  Put  horses  to  your  carriage,  and  go  hidalgo  fashion. 
We  shall  all  have  good  days  yet. 

e  And  those  sad  days  you  deign  to  spend 
"With  me  I  shall  requite  them  all ; 
Sir  Eustace  for  his  mends  shall  send 
And  thank  their  love  in  Grayling  TTa.11  1 *  * 

"AY.  S."2 

On  the  1 5th  September  he  tells  the  Duke  of  Buccleuch, 
"  I  am  going  to  try  whether  the  air  of  Kaples  will  make  an 
old  fellow  of  sixty  young  again." 

On  the  17th  the  old  splendour  of  the  house  was 
revived.  CoL  Glencairn  Burns,  son  of  the  poet,  then  in 
Scotland,  came 

"  To  stir  with  joy  the  towers  of  AbbotsfordL" 

The  neighbours  were  assembled,  and,  having  his  son  to 
help  him,  Sir  "Walter  did  the  honours  of  the  table  once 
more  as  of  yore. 

On  the  1 9th  the  poet  "Wordsworth  arrived,  and  left  on 
the  22d. 

On  the  20th,  Mrs.  Lockhart  set  out  for  London  to  pre- 
pare for  her  fathers  reception  there,  and  on  the  23d  Sir 
Walter  left  Abbotsford  for  London,  where  he  arrived  on 
the  28th.s] 

1  See  Crabbe's  Sir  Eustace.  Grey.  a  Life,  voL  x.  pp.  100-1. 

»  See  Life,  voL  x.  pp.  76-106. 


OCTOBER 

INTERVAL. 

I  HAVE  been  very  ill,  and  If  not  quite  unable  to  write,  I 
liave  been  unfit  to  do  so.  I  have  wrought,  however,  at  two 
Waverley  things,  but  not  well,  and,  what  is  worse,  past 
mending.  A  total  prostration  of  bodily  strength  is  my  chief 
complaint.  I  cannot  walk  half  a  mile.  There  is,  besides, 
some  mental  confusion,  with  the  extent  of  which  I  am  not 
perhaps  fully  acquainted.  I  am  perhaps  setting,  I  am  my- 
self inclined  to  think  so,  and,  like  a  day  that  has  been 
admired  as  a  fine  one,  the  light  of  it  sets  down  amid  mists 
ajid  storms.  I  neither  regret  nor  fear  the  approach  of  death 
if  it  is  coming.  I  would  compound  for  a  little  pain  instead 
of  this  heartless  muddiness  of  mind  which  renders  me  in- 
capable of  anything  rational.  The  expense  of  my  journey 
will  be  something  considerable,  which  I  can  provide 
against  by  borrowing  £500  from  Mr.  Gibson.  To  Mr. 
Cadell  I  owe  already,  with  the  cancels  on  these  apo- 
plectic books,  about  £200,  and  must  run  it  up  to  £500 
more  at  least ;  yet  this  heavy  burthen  would  be  easily  borne 
if  I  were  to  be  the  Walter  Scott  I  once  was ;  but  the  change 
is  great.  This  would  be  nothing,  providing  that  I  could 
count  on  these  two  books  having  a  sale  equal  to  their  pre- 
decessors ;  but  as  they  do  not  deserve  the  same  countenance, 
they  will  not  and  cannot  have  such  a  share  of  favour,  and  I 
have  only  to  hope  that  they  will  not  involve  the  Waverley, 
which  are  now  selling  30,000  volumes  a  month,  in  their 
displeasure.  Something  of  a  Journal  and  the  Edigwiae 
Trotcosimse$  will  probably  be  moving  articles,  and  I  have  in 

412 


1831.]  JOUBSTAL.  413 

short  no  fears  on  pecuniary  matters.  The  ruin  which  I 
fear  involves  that  of  my  King  and  country.  Well  said 
wise  Colin  Mackenzie : — 

e*  Shall  this  desolation  strike  thy  towers  alone  ? 
ETo,  fair  EUandonan !  such  ruin  'twill  bring, 
That  the  storm  shall  have  power  to  unsettle  the  throne, 
And  thy  fate  shall  be  mixed  with  the  fate  of  thy  King."  * 

This  I  foresee,  that  the  great  part  of  the  memorialists  are 
bartering  away  the  dignity  of  their  rank  by  seeking  to  advance 
themselves  by  a  job,  which  is  a  melancholy  sight  The  ties 
between  aristocrat  and  democrat  are  sullen  discontent  with 
each  other.  The  former  are  regarded  as  a  house-dog  which 
has  manifested  incipient  signs  of  canine  madness,  and  is  not 
to  be  trusted.  Walter  came  down  to-day  to  join  our  party. 

[September  20  ?]  —  Yesterday,  Wordsworth,  his  son 
[nephew2]  and  daughter,  came  to  see  us,  and  we  went  up  to 
Yarrow.  The  eldest  son  of  Lord  Eavensworth  also  came  to 
see  us,  with  his  accomplished  lady.  We  had  a  pleasant 
party,  and  to-day  were  lefc  by  the  Liddells,  'manenk  the 
three  Wordsworths,  cum  cceteris.  A  German  or  Hungarian ; 
Count  Erdody,  or  some  such  name,  also  retires. 

We  arrived  in  London  [September  28,]  after  a  long  and 
painful  journey,  the  weakness  of  my  limbs  palpably  in- 
creasing, and  the  physic  prescribed  making  me  weaker  every 
day.  Lockhart,  poor  fellow,  is  as  attentive  as  possible,  and 
I  have,  thank  God,  no  pain  whatever.  Could  lite  decay  be 
so  easy  at  last,  it  would  be  too  happy.  I  fancy  the  instances 
of  Euthanasia  are  not  in  very  serious  cases  very  common. 
Instances  there  certainly  are  among  the  learned  and  the 

1  See  "EUandonan  Castle,"  in  the  between  May  25  and  October  8,  but 

Minstrelsy  of  the  Scottish  Border,  Wordsworth  says,  "At  noon  on 

Scott's  Poetical  Works, vol.  iv.  p.  361.  Thursday  we  left  Abbotsford,  and  on 

3  Now  the  Bishop  of  St.  Andrews,  the  morning  of  that  day  Sir  "Walter 

As  has  been  already  said,  Words-  and  I  had  a  serious  conversation 

worth  arrived  on  the  19th  and  left  f$e-d-#te,when  he  spoke  with  grati- 

on  the  22d  September,  i.e.  the  visit  tude  of  the  happy  life  which  upon 

lasted  from  Monday  till  Thursday,  the  whole  he  had  led."— Knight's- 

There  are  no  dates  in  the  Journal  VTordsicorfh,  voL  iii.  p.  201. 


414  JOUJUSTAL.  [Oar. 

unlearned — Dr.  Black,  Tom  Purdie.  I  should  wish,  if  it  please 
God,  to  sleep  off  in  such  a  quiet  way.  But  we  must  take  what 
Fate  sends.  I  have  not  warm  hopes  of  being  myself  again. 

"Wordsworth  and  his  daughter,  a  fine  girl,  were  with  us 
on  the  last  day.  I  tried  to  write  in  her  diary,  and  made  an 
ill-favoured  botch — no  help  for  it.  "  Stitches  will  wear,  and  ill 
ones  will  out,"  as  the  tailor  says.1 

[October  8,  Zondon,.] — The  King  has  localed  me  on  board 
the  £ar7iam,  with  my  suite,  consisting  of  my  eldest  son, 
youngest  daughter,  and  perhaps  my  daughter-in-law,  which, 
with  poor  Charles,  will  make  a  goodly  tail  I  fancy  the 
head  of  this  tail  cuts  a  poor  figure,  scarce  able  to  stir  about. 

The  town  is  in  a  foam  with  politics.  The  report  is  that 
the  Lords  will  throw  out  the  Bill,  and  now,  morning  of  8th 
October,  I  learn  it  is  quoited  downstairs  like  a  shovel-board 
shilling,  with  a  plague  to  it,  as  the  most  uncalled-for  attack 
upon  a  free  constitution,  under  which  men  lived  happily, 
which  ever  was  ventured  in  my  day.  Well,  it  would  have 
been  pleasing  to  have  had  some  share  in  so  great  a  victory, 
yet  even  now  I  am  glad  I  have  been  quiet,  I  believe  I 
should  only  have  made  a  bad  figure.  Well,  I  will  have  time 
enough  to  think  of  all  this. 

October  9. — The  report  to-day  is  that  the  Chancellor2  will 
unite  with  the  Duke  of  Wellington  and  Sir  Eobert  Peel  to 
bring  in  a  Bill  of  his  own  concocting,  modified  to  the  taste  of 
the  other  two,  with  which  some  think  they  will  be  satisfied. 
This  is  uot  very  unlikely,  for  Lord  Brougham  has  been  dis- 
pleased with  not  having  been  admitted  to  Lord  John.  Russell's 
task  of  bill-drawing.  He  is  a  man  of  unbounded  ambition, 
as  well  as  unbounded  talent  and  unhesitating  temper.  There 
have  been  hosts  of  people  here,  particularly  the  Duke  of 

1  Wordsworth  notes  that  on  plac-  they  are  probably  the  last  verses  I 

ing  the  volume  in  his  daughter's  shall  ever  write."— Knight's  Words- 

hand,  Sir  Walter  said,  "I  should  worth,  voL  iil  p.  201. 
not   have  done  anything   of  this 

kind  but  for  your  father's  sake;  s  Lord  Brougham. 


1831.]  JOURNAL.  415 

Buccleuch,  to  ask  me  to  the  christening  of  his  son  and  heir, 
when  the  King  stands  godfather.  I  am  asked  as  an  ally  and 
friend  of  the  family,  which  makes  the  compliment  greater. 
Singular  that  I  should  have  stood  godfather  to  this  Duke 
himself,  representing  some  great  man* 

October  10. — Yesterday  we  dined  alone,  so  I  had  an 
opportunity  of  speaking  seriously  to  John;  but  I  fear 
procrastination.  It  is  the  crisis  of  Friar  Bacon's  Brazen  head, 
time  is — time  was  (but  the  time  may  still  come) — time  sJudl 
fie  no  more.  The  "Whigs  are  not  very  bold,  not  much  above 
a  hundred  met  to  support  Lord  Grey  to  the  last.  Their 
resolutions  are  moderate,  probably  because  they  could  not 
have  carried  stronger.  I  went  to  breakfast  at  Sir  Robert 
Henry  Inglis',  and  coming  home  about  twelve  found  the  mob 
rising  in  the  Begent's  Park,  and  roaring  for  Beform  as  ration- 
ally as  a  party  of  Angusshire  cattle  would  have  done. 

Sophia  seemed  to  act  as  the  jolly  host  in  the  play. 
"These  are  my  windows,"  and,  shutting  the  shutters,  "let  them 
batter — I  care  not  serving  the  good  Duke  of  Nbrf oik"  After 
a  time  they  passed  out  of  our  sight,  wearying  doubtless  to 
seek  a  more  active  scene  of  reformation.  As  the  night 
-closed,  the  citizens  who  had  hitherto  contented  themselves 
with  shouting,  became  more  active,  and  when  it  grew  dark 
set  forth  to  make  work  for  the  glaziers. 

October  11,  Tuesday. — We  set  out  in  the  morning  to 
breakfast  with  Lady  Gifford.  We  passed  several  glorious 
specimens  of  the  last  night's  feats  of  the  reformers.  The 
Duke  of  Newcastle's  and  Lord  Dudley's  houses  were  suffi- 
ciently broken.  The  maidens,  however,  had  resisted,  and 
from  the  top  of  the  house  with  coals,  which  had  greatly  em- 
barrassed the  assembled  mob.  Surely  if  the  people  are 
determined  on  using  a  right  so  questionable,  and  the  Govern- 
ment resolved  to  consider  it  as  too  sacred  to  be  resisted, 
some  modes  of  resistance  might  be  resorted  to  of  a  character 
more  ludicrous  than  firearms, —  coals,  for  example,scalding  oil, 


416  JOUENAL.  [Ocx. 

"boiling  water,  or  some  other  mode  of  defence  against  a 
sudden  attack.  "We  breakfasted  with  a  very  pleasant  party 
at  Lady  Gifford's.  I  was  particularly  happy  to  meet  Lord 
Sidmouth ;  at  seventy-five,  lie  tells  me,  as  much  in  health  and 
spirits  as  at  sixty.  I  also  met  Captain  Basil  Hall,  to  whom  I 
owe  so  much  for  promoting  my  retreat  in  so  easy  a  manner. 
I  found  my  appointment  to  the  JBarkam  had  been  pointed  out 
by  Captain  Henry  Duncan,  E.N".,  as  being  a  measure  which 
would  be  particularly  agreeable  to  the  officers  of  the  service. 
This  is  too  high  a  compliment  In  returning  I  called  to  see 
the  repairs  at  Lambeth,  which  are  proceeding  under  the  able 
direction  of  Blore,  who  met  me  there.  They  are  in  the  best 
Gothic  taste,  and  executed  at  the  expense  of  a  large  sum,  to 
be  secured  by  way  of  mortgage,  payable  in  fifty  years ;  each 
incumbent  within  the  time  paying  a  proportion  of  about 
£4000  a  year.  I  was  pleased  to  see  this  splendour  of 
church  architecture  returning  again. 

Lord  Mahon,  a  very  amiable  as  well  as  a  clever  young 
man,  comes  to  dinner  with  Mr.  Croker ;  Lady  Louisa  Stuart 
in  the  afternoon,  or,  more  properly,  at  night. 

October  12. — Misty  morning — looks  like  a  yellow  fog, 
which  is  the  curse  of  London.  I  would  hardly  take  my 
share  of  it  for  a  share  of  its  wealth  and  its  curiosity — a  vile 
double-distilled  fog  of  the  most  intolerable  kind.  Children 
scarce  stirring  yet,  but  baby  and  the  Macaw  beginning  their 
Macaw  notes.  Among  other  feats  of  the  mob  on  Monday, 
a  gentleman  who  saw  the  onslaught  told  me  two  men  got 
on  Lord  Londonderry's  carriage  and  struck  him ;  the  chief 
constable  came  to  the  rescue  and  belaboured  the  rascals,  who 
ran  and  roared.  I  should  have  liked  to  have  seen  the  on- 
slaught— Dry  beating,  »and  plenty  of  it,  is  a  great  operator 
of  a  reform  among  these  gentry.  At  the  same  time  Lord 
Londonderry  is  a  brain-sick  man,  very  unlike  his  brother. 
He  horsewhipped  a  sentinel  under  arms  at  Vienna  for  obey- 
ing his  consiffne,  which  was  madness.  On  the  other  side 


1831.]  JOURNAL.  417 

all  seems  to  be  prepared.  Heavy  bodies  of  the  police  are 
stationed  in  all  the  squares  and  places  supporting  each  other 
regularly.  The  men  themselves  say  that  their  numbers 
amount  to  3000,  and  that  they  are  supported  by  troops  in 
still  greater  numbers,  so  that  the  Conservative  force  is  suffi- 
ciently strong.  Four  o'clock — a  letter  from  the  Duke  saying 
the  party  is  put  off  by  command  of  the  King,  and  probably 
the  day  will  be  put  off  until  the  Duke's  return  from 
Scotland,  so  our  hopes  of  seeing  the  fine  ceremony  are  all 
ended. 

October  13. — Nbete  pluit  tota — an  excellent  recipe  for  a 
mob,  so  they  have  been  quiet  accordingly,  as  we  are  in- 
formed. Two  or  three  other  wet  nights  would  do  much  to 
weary  them  out  with  inactivity.  Milman,  whom  I  remember 
a  fine  gentlemanlike  young  man,  dined  here  yesterday. 
He  says  the  fires  have  never  ceased  in  his  country,  but 
that  the  oppressions  and  sufferings  occasioned  by  the  poor's 
rates  are  very  great,  and  there  is  no  persuading  the  English 
farmer  that  an  amended  system  is  comfortable  both  for 
rich  and  poor.  The  plan  of  ministers  is  to  keep  their 
places  maugre  Peers  and  Commons  both,  while  they  have 
the  countenance  of  the  crown;  but  if  a  Prince  shelters, 
by  authority  of  the  prerogative,  ministers  against  the  will 
of  the  other  authority  of  the  state,  does  he  not  quit 
the  defence  which  supposes  he  can  do  no  wrong?  This 
doctrine  would  make  a  curious  change  of  parties.  "Will  they 
attempt  to  legitimize  the  Pitz  Clarences?  God  forbid! 
Yet  it  may  end  in  that, — it  would  be  Paris  all  over.  The 
family  is  said  to  have  popular  qualities.  Then  what  would 
be  the  remedy  ?  Marry !  seize  on  the  person  of  the  Princess 
Victoria,  carrying  her  north  and  setting  up  the  banner  of 
England  with  the  Duke  of  W.  as  dictator!  Well,  I  am 
too  old  to  fight,  and  therefore  should  keep  the  windy 
side  of  the  law;  besides,  I  shall  be  buried  before  times 
come  to  a  decision*  In  the  meantime  the  King  dare  not 

VOL.  IT.  2  D 


418  JOURNAL.  [OCT. 

go  to  stand  godfather  to  the  son  of  one  of  Ms  most  powerful 
peers,  a  party  of  his  own  ma.Tci.ng,  lest  his  loving  subjects 
pull  the  house  about  the  ears  of  his  noble  host  and 
the  company  invited  to  meet  him.  Their  loyalty  has  a 
pleasant  way  of  displaying  itself.  I  will  go  to  Westminster 
after  breakfast  and  see  what  people  are  saying,  and  whether 
the  Barkam  is  likely  to  sail,  or  whether  its  course  is  not 
altered  to  the  coast  of  the  Low  Countries  instead  of  the 
Mediterranean. 

October  14. — Tried  to  walk  to  Lady  Louisa  Stuart's,  but 
took  a  little  vertigo  and  came  back  Much  disturbed  by  a 
letter  from  Walter.  He  is  like  to  be  sent  on  an  obnoxious 
service  with  very  inadequate  force,  little  prospect  of  thanks 
if  he  does  his  duty,  and  much  of  blame  if  he  is  unable  to 
accomplish  it.  I  have  little  doubt  he  will  ware  his  mother's 
calf-skin  on  them. 

The  manufacturing  districts  are  in  great  danger,  London 
seems  pretty  secure.  Sent  off  the  revise  of  introduction  to 
Mr.  CadelL1 

October  16. — A  letter  from  Walter  with  better  news. 
He  has  been  at  hard-heads  with  the  rogues  and  come  ofi 
with  advantage ;  in  short,  practised  with  success  the  art  ol 
drawing  two  souls  out  of  one  weaver.2  All  seems  quiet 
now,  and  I  suppose  the  Major  will  get  his  leave  as  proposed. 
Two  ladies — [one]  Byron's  Mary  Chaworth — have  been 
frightened  to  death  while  the  mob  tore  the  dying  creatures 
from  their  beds  and  proposed  to  throw  them  into  the  flames, 
drank  the  wine,  destroyed  the  furniture,  and  committed  other 
excesses  of  a  jacquerie.3  They  have  been  put  down,  however, 
by  a  strong  force  of  yeomanry  and  regulars.  Walter  says 
the  soldiers  fired  over  the  people's  heads,  whereas  if  they 
had  levelled  low,  the  bullets  must  have  told  wider  among 
the  multitude.  I  cannot  approve  of  this,  for  in  such  cases 

1  The  introductory  address  to          a  Twelfth,  Night,  Act  n.  Sc.  3. 
Count  Itobert  of  Paris  bears  the          *  See  Moore's  edition  of  Byron's 
date  October  15th,  1831,  Works,  voL  vii.  pp.  43-44,  note. 


1831.]  JOITBNAL  419 

severity  is  ultimate  mercy,1  However,  if  they  have  made 
a  sufficient  impression  to  be  striking — why,  enough  is  as 
good  as  a  feast. 

There  is  a  strange  story  about  town  of  ghost-seeing 
vouched  by  Lord  Prudhoe,  a  near  relation  of  the  Bute  of 
Northumberland,  and  whom  I  know  as  an  honourable  man. 
A  colonel  described  as  a  cool-headed  sensible  man  of  worth 
and  honour,  Palgrave,  who  dined  with  us  yesterday,  told  us 
twice  over  the  story  as  vouched  by  Lord  Prudhoe,  and  Lock- 
hart  gave  us  Colonel  Felix's  edition,  which  coincided  exactly. 
I  will  endeavour  to  extract  the  essence  of  both.  While  at 
Grand  Cairo  they  were  attracted  by  the  report  of  a  physician 
who  could  do  the  most  singular  magical  feats,  and  was  in 
the  habit  not  only  of  relieving  the  living,  but  calling  up 
the  dead.  This  sage  was  the  member  of  a  tribe  in  the 
interior  part  of  Africa.  They  were  some  time  (two  years) 
in  finding  him  out,  for  he  by  no  means  pressed  himself  on 
the  curious,  nor  did  he  on  the  other  hand  avoid  them ;  but 
when  he  came  to  Grand  Cairo  readily  agreed  to  gratify  them 
by  a  sight  of  his  wonders.  The  scenes  exhibited  were  not 
visible  to  the  operator  himself,  nor  to  the  person  for  whose 
satisfaction  they  were  called  up,  but,  as  in  the  case  of  Dr. 
Dee  and  other  adepts,  by  means  of  a  viewer,  an  ignorant 
Nubian  boy,  whom,  to  prevent  imposture,  the  English 
gentlemen  selected  for  the  purpose,  and,  as  they  thought, 
without  any  risk  of  imposture  by  confederacy  betwixt  him 
and  the  physician.  The  process  was  as  follows: — A 
black  square  was  drawn  on  the  palm  of  the  boy's  hand,  or 
rather  a  kind  of  pentacle  with  an  Arabic  character  inscribed 
at  each  angle.  The  figures  evoked  were  seen  through  this 
space  as  if  the  substance  of  the  hand  had  been  removed 
Magic  rites,  and  particularly  perfumes,  were  liberally 

1  Scott's  views  received  strong  confirmation  a  few  days  later  at  Bristol, 
where  the  authorities,  through  mistaken  humanity,  hesitated  to  order  the 
military  to  act. 


420  JOUKNAL.  [OCT. 

resorted  to.  After  some  fumigation  the  magician  de- 
clared that  they  could  not  proceed  until  the  seven  flags 
should  become  visible.  The  boy  declared  he  saw  nothing, 
then  said  he  saw  a  flag,  then  two ;  often  hesitated  at  the 
number  for  a  certain  time,  and  on  several  occasions  the  spell 
did  not  work  and  the  operation  went  no  further,  but  in 
general  the  boy  saw  the  seven  flags  through  the  aperture  in 
his  hand.  The  magician  then  said  they  must  call  the  Sultan, 
and  the  boy  said  he  saw  a  splendid  tent  fixed,  surrounded 
by  immense  hosts,  Eblis  no  doubt,  and  his  angels.  The 
person  evoked  was  then  named,  and  appeared  accordingly. 
The  only  indispensable  requisite  was  that  he  was  named 
speedily,  for  the  Sultan  did  not  like  to  be  kept  waiting. 
Accordingly,  William  Shakespeare  being  named,  the  boy 
declared  that  he  saw  a  Frank  in  a  dress  which  he  described 
as  that  of  the  reign  of  Elizabeth  or  her  successor,  having  a 
singular  countenance,  a  high  forehead,  and  a  very  little 
beard.  Another  time  a  brother  of  the  Colonel  was  named. 
The  boy  said  he  saw  a  Frank  in  his  uniform  dress  and  a 
black  groom  behind  him  leading  a  superb  horse.  The  dress 
was  a  red  jacket  and  white  pantaloons ;  and  the  principal 
figure  turning  round,  the  boy  announced  that  he  wanted 
his  arm,  as  was  the  case  with  Felix's  brother.  The  cere- 
mony was  repeated  fourteen  times ;  successfully  in  twelve 
instances,  and  in  two  it  failed  from  non-appearance  of  the 
seven  banners  in  the  first  instance.  The  apparent  frankness 
of  the  operator  was  not  the  least  surprising  part  of  the  affair. 
He  made  no  mystery,  said  he  possessed  this  power  by  in- 
heritance, as  a  family  gift ;  yet  that  he  could  teach  it,  and  was 
willing  to  do  so,  for  no  enormous  sum — nay,  one  which 
seemed  very  moderate*  I  think  two  gentlemen  embraced 
the  offer.  One  of  them  is  dead  and  the  other  still  abroad. 
The  sage  also  took  a  price  for  the  exhibition  of  his  skill,  but 
it  was  a  moderate  one,  being  regulated  by  the  expense  of 
the  perfumes  consumed  in  the  ceremony. 


1831.] 


JOTJKETAL 


421 


There  remains  much  more  to  ask  I  understood  the 
witnesses  do  not  like  to  bother  about,  which  is  very 
natural.  One  would  like  to  know  a  little  more  of  the 
Sultan,  of  the  care  taken  to  secure  the  fidelity  of  the  boy 
who  was  the  viewer  and  on  whom  so  much  depended; 
whether  another  sage  practising  the  same  feat,  as  it  was 
said  to  be  hereditary,  was  ever  known  to  practise  in  the 
city.  The  truth  of  a  story  irreconcilable  with  the  common 
course  of  nature  must  depend  on  cross-examination.  If 
we  should  find,  while  at  Malta,  that  we  had  an  opportunity 
of  expiscating  this  matter,  though  at  the  expense  of  a  voyage 
to  Alexandria,  it  would  hardly  deter  me.1  The  girls  go  to  the 
Chapel  Eoyal  this  morning  at  St.  James's.  A  visit  from  the 
Honourable  John  Forbes,  son  of  my  old  and  early  friend 
Lord  Forbes,  who  is  our  fellow-passenger.  The  ship  expects 
presently  to  go  to  sea.  I  was  very  glad  to  see  this  young 


1  At  Malta,  accordingly,  we  find 
Sir  Walter  making  inquiry  regard- 
ing this  Arabian  conjurer,  and  •writ- 
ing to  Mr.  Lockhart,  on  Xov.  1831, 
in  the  following  terms : — 

"I  have  got  a  key  to  the  con- 
juring story  of  Alexandria  and 
Grand  Cairo.  I  have  seen  very 
distinct  letters  of  Sir  John  Stod- 
dart's  son,  who  attended  three  of 
the  formal  exhibitions  which  broke 
down,  though  they  were  repeated 
afterwards  with  success.  Young 
Stoddart  is  an  excellent  Arabian 
scholar — an  advantage  which  I 
understand  is  more  imperfectly 
enjoyed  by  Lord  Prudhoe  and 
Colonel  Felix,  Much  remains  to 
be  explained,  but  the  boldness  of 
the  attempt  exceeds  anything  since 
the  days  of  the  Automaton  chess- 
player, or  the  Bottle  conjurer.  The 
first  time  Shakespeare  was  evoked 
he  appeared  in  the  complexion  of 
an  Arab.  This  seems  to  have  been 
owing  to  the  first  syllable  of  his 
name,  which  resembled  the  Arabian 


word  Sheik,  and  suggested  the  idea 
of  an  Arabian  chief  to  the  conjurer. 
A  gentleman,  named  Galloway  has 
bought  the  secret,  and  talks  of 
being  frightened.  There  can  be 
little  doubt  that,  having  so  far  in- 
terested himself,  it  would  become 
his  interest  to  put  the  conjurer 
more  up  to  the  questions  likely  to 
be  asked.  So  he  was  more  perfect 
when  consulted  by  Lord  Prudhoe 
than  at  first,  when  he  made  various 
blunders,  and  when  we  must  needs 
sayfalsum  in  ttnofaZsvm  in  omnibus. 
As  all  this  will  come  out  one  day, 
I  have  no  wish  to  -mingle  in  the 
controversy.  .  .  .  There  are  still 
many  things  to  explain,  but  I  think 
the  mystery  is  unearthed  com- 
pletely." 

See  also  Lane's  Egyptians  for 
an  account  of  what  appears  to 
be  the  same  m*n  in  1857.  Also 
Quarterly  Itemew,  No.  117,  pp.  196- 
208,  for  an  examination  of  this 
"  Magic  Mirror  "  exhibition. 


4:22  JOUENAL.  [OCT. 

officer  and  to  hear  his  news.  Dmmmond  and  I  have  been 
friends  from  our  infancy. 

October  17. — The  morning  beautiful  To-day  I  go  to 
look  after  the  transcripts  in  the  Museum  and  have  a  card 
to  see  a  set  of  chessmen 1  thrown  up  by  the  sea  on  the  coast 
of  Scotland,  which  were  offered  to  sale  for  £100.  The  King, 
Queen,  Knights,  etc.,  were  in  the  costume  of  the  14th  cen- 
tury, the  substance  ivory  or  rather  the  tusk  of  the  morse, 
somewhat  injured  by  the  salt  water  in  which  they  had  been 
immersed  for  some  time. 

Sir  John  Malcolm  told  us  a  story  about  Garrick  and  his 
wife.  The  lady  admired  her  husband  greatly,  but  blamed 
form  for  a  taste  for  low  life,  and  insisted  that  he  loved  better 
to  play  Scrub  to  a  low-lifed  audience  than  one  of  his  superior 
characters  before  an  audience  of  taste.  On  one  particular 
occasion  she  was  in  her  box  in  the  theatre.  Eichard  IIL 
was  the  performance,  and  Garrick's  acting,  especially  in 
the  night  scene,  drew  down  universal  applause.  After 
the  play  was  over  Mrs.  G.  proposed  going  home,  which 
Garrick  declined,  alleging  he  had  some  business  in  the 
green-room,  which  must  detain  hi™,  In  short,  the  lady 
was  obliged  to  acquiesce,  and  wait  the  beginning  of  a  new 
entertainment,  in  which  was  introduced  a  farmer  giving 
his  neighbours  an  account  of  the  wonders  seen  on  a 
visit  to  London.  This  character  was  received  with  such 
peals  of  applause  that  Mrs.  Garrick  began  to  think  it 
rivalled  those  which  had  been  so  lately  lavished  on  Eichard 
the  Third  At  last  she  observed  her  little  spaniel  dog  was 
making  efforts  to  get  towards  the  balcony  which  separated 

1  A  hoard  of  seventy-eight  chess-  teresting  pieces  fell  into  the  hands 

men  fonnd  in  the  island  of  Lewis  in  of  Scott's  friend,  C.  K.  Sharpe,  and 

1831.    The  greater  number  of  the  afterwards  of  Lord  Londesborough. 

figures   were    purchased    for    the  More  recently  these  identical  pieces 

British  Museum,  and  formed  the  were  purchased  for  the  Museum 

subject  of  a  learned  dissertation  by  of  Antiquities,  Edinburgh,  where 

Sir  Frederick  Madden;  see  Archcso-  they   now   are.      See  Proc.   Soc, 

Zogrio»xxiv.  Eleven  of  these  very  in-  Antiq.,  voL  xxiiL 


1831.]  JOUBKAL  423 

him  from  the  facetious  farmer.  Then  she  became  aware  of 
the  truth.  "How  strange,"  she  said,  "that  a  dog  should 
know  his  master,  and  a  woman,  in  the  same  circumstances, 
should  not  recognise  her  hushand ! " 

October  18. — Sophia  had  a  small  but  lively  party  last 
night,  as  indeed  she  has  had  every  night  since  we  were 
here — Ladies — [Lady  Stafford,]  Lady  Louisa  Stuart,  Lady 
Montagu,  Miss  Montagu,  Lady  [Davy],  [ilrs.]  llacleod,  and 
two  or  three  others ;  Gentlemen — Lord  Montagu,  Macleod, 
Lord  Dudley,  Rogers  [Mackintosh].  A  good  deal  of  singing. 
If  Sophia  keeps  to  early  hours  she  may  pick  London  for 
small  parties  as  poor  Miss  White  did,  and  without  much 
expense.  A  little  address  is  all  that  is  necessary.  Sir  John1 
insists  on  my  meeting  this  Eammohun  Hoy ; 2  I  am  no  believer 
in  Ms  wandering  knight,  so  far.  The  time  is  gone  of  sages 
who  travelled  to  collect  wisdom  as  well  as  heroes  to  reap 
honour.  Men  think  and  fight  for  money.  I  won't  see  the 
man  if  I  can  help  it.  Hatterers  are  difficult  enough  to  keep 
at  a  distance  though  they  be  no  renegades.  I  hate  a  fellow 
who  begins  with,  throwing  away  his  own  religion,  and  then 
affects  a  prodigious  respect  for  another, 

Octob&r  19. — Captain  H.  Duncan  called  with  Captain 
Kgot,  a  smart-looking  gentlemanlike  man,  and  announces 
his  purpose  of  sailing  on  Monday.  I  have  made  my  pre- 
parations for  being  on  board  on  Sunday,  which  is  the  day 
appointed  Captain  Duncan  told  me  jocularly  never  to  take 
a  naval  captain's  word  on  shore,  and  quoted  Sir  "William 
Scott,  who  used  to  say,  waggishly,  that  there  was  nothing  so 

1  Sir  John  Malcolm,  who  was  at  been  among  the  contributors  to  that 

this  time  M.P.  for  Launceston.    His  shrine  of  genius.*'      Sir  John  was 

last    public    appearance    was    in  struck  down  by  paralysis  on  the 

London,  at  a  meeting  convened  for  following  day,  and  died   in  May 

the  purpose  of  raising  a  monument  1833. 

of  his  friend  Sir  Walter,  and  his         *  The  celebrated  Brahmin  philo* 

concluding  words  were,  that  when  sopher  and  theist ;  born  in  Bengal 

he  himself  "  was  gone,  his  son  might  about  1774,  died  at  Stapleton  Grove, 

be  proud  to  say  that  his  father  had  near  Bristol,  September  27,  1833. 


424:  JOUENAL,  [OCT. 

accommodating  as  a  naval  captain  on  shore;  but  when  on 
"board  he  became  a  peremptory  lion.  Henry  Duncan  has 
behaved  very  kindly,  and  says  he  only  discharges  the  wishes 
of  his  service  in  making  me  as  easy  as  possible,  which  is 
very  handsome.  No  danger  of  feud,  except  about  politics, 
which  would  be  impolite  on  my  part,  and  though  it  bars  out 
one  great  subject  of  discourse,  it  leaves  enough  besides.  That 
I  might  have  nothing  doubtful,  Walter  arrives  with  his 
wife,  both  ready  to  sail,  so  what  little  remains  must  be  done 
without  loss  of  time.  This  is  our  last  morning,  so  I  have 
money  to  draw  for  and  pay  away.  To  see  dear  Lord  Mon- 
tagu too.  The  Duchess  came  yesterday.  I  suppose  £50 
will  clear  me,  with  some  balance  for  Gibraltar. 

I  leave  this  country  uncertain  if  it  has  got  a  total  pardon 
or  only  a  reprieve.  I  won't  think  of  it,  as  I  can  do  no 
good.  It  seems  to  be  in  one  of  those  crises  by  which 
Providence  reduces  nations  to  their  original  elements.1  If  I 
had  my  health,  I  should  take  no  worldly  fee,  not  to  be  in  the 
bustle ;  but  I  am  as  weak  as  water,  and  I  shall  be  glad  when 
I  have  put  the  Mediterranean  between  the  island  and  me. 

October  21  and  22. — Spent  in  taking  of  farewell  and 
adieus,  which  had  been  put  off  till  now.  A  melancholy 
ceremonial,  with  some  a  useless  one ;  yet  there  are  friends 
whom  it  sincerely  touches  one  to  part  with.  It  is  the  cement 
of  life  giving  way  in  a  moment.  Another  unpleasant 
circumstance  is — one  is  called  upon  to  recollect  those  whom 
death  or  estrangement  has  severed,  after  starting  merrily 
together  in  the  voyage  of  life. 

October  23. — Portsmouth;  arrived  here  in  the  evening. 

1  Sir  Walter's  fears  for  the  during  the  Reform  Bill  troubles, 
country  were  also  shared  by  some  "Duke  of  Wellington,  you  have 
of  the  wisest  men.  in  it.  The  Duke  seen  a  great  deal  of  the  world.  Can 
of  Wellington,  it  is  well  known,  was  you  point  out  to  me  any  one  place 
most  desponding,  and  he  anticipated  in  Europe  where  an  old  man  could 
greater  horror  from  a  convulsion  here  go  to  and  be  quite  sure  of  being 
than  in  any  other  European  nation,  safe  and  dying  in  peace  ?  " — Stan- 
Talleyrand  said  to  the  Duke  hope  Notes,  p.  224. 


1831.]  JOUKKTAL.  425 

round  the  JBarTiam  will  not  sail  till  26th  October,  that  is 
Wednesday  next.  The  girls  break  loose,  mad  with  the  craze 
of  seeing  sights,  and  run  the  risk  of  our  losing  some  of  our 
things  and  deranging  the  naval  officers,  who  offer  their 
services  with  their  natural  gallantly.  Captain  Pigot  came  to 
breakfast,  with  several  other  officials.  The  girls  contrived 
to  secure  a  sight  of  the  Block  manufactory,  together  with 
that  of  the  Biscuit,  also  invented  by  Brunei  I  think  that 
I  have  seen  the  first  of  these  wonderful  [sights]  in  1816, 
or  about  that  time.1  Sir  Thomas  Foley  gives  an  enter- 
tainment to  the  Admiralty,  and  sends  to  invite  [me] ;  but  I 
pleaded  health,  and  remained  at  home.  Neither  will  I  go 
out  sight-seeing,  which  madness  seems  to  have  seized  my 
womankind.  This  ancient  town  is  one  of  the  few  in  Eng- 
land which  is  fortified,  and  which  gives  it  a  peculiar 
appearance.  It  is  much  surrounded  with  heaths  or  thin 
poor  muirs  covered  with  heather,  very  barren,  yet  capable 
of  being  converted  into  rich  arable  and  pasturage.  I  would 
[not]  desire  a  better  estate  than  to  have  2000  acres  which 
would  be  worth  40  shillings  an  acre. 

October  24. — My  womankind  are  gone  out  with  "Walter 
and  Captain  HalL  I  wish  they  would  be  moderate  in  their 
demands  on  people's  complaisance.  They  little  know  how 
inconvenient  are  such  seizures,  A  sailor  is  in  particular  a 
bad  refuser,  and  before  he  can  turn  three  times  round,  he 
is  bound  with  a  triple  knot  to  all  kinds  of  [engagements]. 
The  wind  is  west,  that  is  to  say  contrary,  so  our  sailing  on 
the  day  after  to-morrow  is  highly  doubtful 

October  25, — A  gloomy  October  day,  the  wind  inflexibly 
constant  in  the  west,  which  is  fatal  Sir  James  Graham 
proposes  to  wait  upon  us  after  breakfast.  A  trouble  occurs 
about  my  taking  an  oath  before  a  master-extraordinary  in 
Chancery ;  but  such  cannot  easily  be  found,  as  they  reside 

1  See  Mr.  Charles  Cowan's  pri-  Portsmouth  in  1816,  and  Ms  stories, 
vately  printed  Reminiscences  for  of  the  wonders  he  had  seen,  to  the 
Scott's  recollections  of  his  visit  to  little  boy  at  his  side. 


426  JOUBUAL.  [OCT. 

in  chambers  in  town,  and  rusticate  after  business,  so  they 
are  difficult  to  catch  as  an  eeL  At  ten  my  children  set  off 
to  the  dockyard,  which  is  a  most  prodigious  effort  of  machi- 
nery, and  they  are  promised  the  sight  of  an  anchor  in  the  act 
of  being  forged,  a  most  cyclopean  sight  Walter  is  to  call 
upon  the  solicitor  and  appoint  him  to  be  with  [me]  by  twelve. 

About  the  reign  of  Henry  vm.  the  French  took  the 

pile,  as  it  was  called,  of ,*  but  were  beat  off.  About 

the  end  of  the  American  war,  an  individual  named  John 
Aitken,  or  John  the  Painter,  undertook  to  set  the  dock- 
yard on  fire,  and  in  some  degree  accomplished  his  purpose. 
He  had  no  accomplice,  and  to  support  himself  committed 
solitary  robberies.  Being  discovered,  he  long  hung  in 
chains  near  the  outward  fortifications.  Last  night  a 
deputation  of  the  Literary  and  Philosophical  Society  of 
[Portsmouth]  came  to  present  me  with  the  honorary  freedom 
of  their  body,  which  I  accepted  with  becoming  gratitude. 
There  is  little  credit  in  gathering  the  name  of  a  disabled 
invalid.  Here  I  am,  going  a  long  and  curious  tour  without 
ability  to  walk  a  quarter  of  a  mile;  quere,  what  hope  of 
recovery  ?  I  think  and  think  in  vain,  when  attempting  to 
trace  the  progress  of  this  disease,  and  so  gradually  has  my 
health  declined,  that  I  believe  it  has  been  acting  upon  me 
for  ten  years,  gradually  diminishing  my  strength.  My 
mental  faculties  may  perhaps  recover ;  my  bodily  strength 
cannot  return  unless  climate  has  an  effect  on  the  human 
frame  which  I  cannot  possibly  believe  or  comprehend.  The 
safe  resolution  is,  to  try  no  foolish  experiments,  but  make 
myself  as  easy  as  I  can,  without  suffering  myself  to  be  vexed 
about  what  I  cannot  help.  If  I  sit  on  the  deck  and  look 
at  Vesuvius,  it  will  be  all  I  ought  to  think  of. 

Having  mentioned  John  the  Painter,  I  may  add  that  it 
was  in  this  town  of  Portsmouth  that  the  Duke  of  Bucking- 
ham was  stabbed  to  death  by  Felton,  a  fanatic  of  the  same 

1  Compare  Fronde's  History,  vol.  iv.  p.  43A. 


1831.]  JOUENAL.  427 

kind  with  the  Incendiary,  though  perpetrator  of  a  more 
manly  crime.  This  monster-breeding  age  can  afford  both 
Teltons  and  John  Aitkens  in  abundance.  Every  village 
supplies  them,  while  in  fact  a  deep  feeling  of  the  coarsest 
selfishness  furnishes  the  ruling  motive,  instead  of  an 
affectation  of  public  spirit — that  hackneyed  affectation  of 
patriotism,  as  like  the  reality  as  a  Birmingham,  halfpenny 
to  a  guinea. 

The  girls,  I  regret  to  see,  have  got  a  senseless  custom  of 
talking  politics  in  all  weathers  and  in  all  sorts  of  company. 
This  can  do  no  good,  and  may  give  much  offence.  Silence 
can  offend  no  one,  and  there  are  pleasanter  or  less  irritating 
subjects  to  talk  o£  I  gave  them  both  a  hint  of  this,  and  bid 
them  both  remember  they  were  among  ordinary  strangers. 
How  little  young  people  reflect  what  they  may  win  or  lose 
by  a  smart  reflection  imprudently  fired  off  at  a  venture ! 

Mr.  Barrow  of  the  Admiralty  came  and  told  us  the  whole 
fleet,  Barkam  eseepted,  were  ordered  to  the  North  Sea  to 
help  to  bully  the  King  of  Holland,  and  that  Captain  Pigot, 
whose  motions  are  of  more  importance  to  us  than  those  of 
the  whole  British  Navy,  sails,  as  certainly  as  these  things 
can  be  prophesied,  on  Thursday,  27th  October. 

October  26. — Here  we  still  are,  fixed  by  the  inexorable 
wind.  Yesterday  we  asked  a  few  old  friends,  Mr,  and  Mrs* 
Osborue,  and  two  or  three  others,  to  tea  and  talk.  I  engaged 
in  a  new  novel,  by  Mr.  Smith,1  called  New  Forest.  It  is 
written  in  an  old  style,  calculated  to  meet  the  popular  ideas 
— somewhat  like  "Man  as  he  is  not" 2  and  that  class.  The 
author's  opinions  seem  rather  to  sit  loose  upon  him  and  to 
be  adopted  for  the  nonce  and  not  very  well  brought  out. 
His  Idea  of  a  hero  is  an  A-mp.nV.fl.-n  philosopher  with  all  the 
affected  virtues  of  a  [Republican  which  no  man  believes  in. 

This  is  very  tiresome — not  to  be  able  to  walk  abroad  for 

1  Mr.  Horace  Smith,  one  of  the        3  An  anonymous  novel,  published 
authors  of  Rejected  Addresses.  some  years  earlier  in  4  vols.  12mo. 


428  JOURNAL.  [OCT. 

an  instant,  but  to  be  kept  in  this  old  house  which  they  call 
"  The  Fountain,"  a  mansion  made  of  wood  in  imitation  of 
a  ship.  The  timbers  were  well  tried  last  night  during 
the  squall  The  barometer  has  sunk  an  inch  very 
suddenly,  which  seems  to  argue  a  change,  and  probably  a 
deliverance  from  port.  Sir  Michael  Seymour,  Mr.  Harris, 
Captain  Lawrence  came  to  greet  us  after  breakfast ;  also  Sir 
James  Graham.  They  were  all  learned  on  this  change  of 
weather  which  seems  to  be  generally  expected.  I  had  a 
good  mess  of  Tory  chat  with  Mr.  Harris.  We  hope  to  see 
his  daughters  in  the  evening.  He  keeps  his  courage  amid 
the  despair  of  too  many  of  his  party.  About  one  o'clock 
our  Kofle,  as  Mungo  Park  words  it,  set  out,  self  excluded,  to 
witness  the  fleet  sailing  from  the  ramparts. 

October  27. — The  weather  is  more  moderate  and  there  is 
a  chance  of  our  sailing.  We  whiled  away  our  time  as  we 
could,  relieved  by  several  kind  visits.  We  realised  the 
sense  of  hopeless  expectation  described  by  Fielding  in  his 
Voyage  to  Lisbon,  which  identical  tract  Captain  Hall, 
who  in  his  eagerness  to  be  kind  seems  in  possession  of  the 
wishing-cap  of  Portunatus,  was  able  to  provide  for  us. 
To-morrow  is  spoken  of  as  certainly  a  day  to  move. 

October  28. — But  the  wind  is  as  unfavourable  as  ever  and 
I  take  a  hobbling  morning  walk  upon  the  rampart,  where  I 
am  edified  by  a  good-natured  officer  who  shows  me  the  place, 
marked  by  a  buoy,  where  the  Royal  George  went  down  "  with 
twice  four  hundred  men."1  Its  hull  forms  a  shoal  which  is  still 
in  existence,  a  neglect  scarcely  reconcilable  with  the  splen- 
dour of  our  proceedings  where  our  navy  is  concerned.  Saw  a 
battle  on  the  rampart  between  two  sailor  boys,  who  fought  like 
game-cocks.  Returned  to  "  The  Fountain,"  to  a  voluminous 
breaifast  Captain  Pigot  calls,  with  little  hope  of  pining 
to-day.  I  made  my  civil  affidavit  yesterday  to  a  master  ex- 
traordinary in  Chancery,  which  I  gave  to  Sophia  last  night. 

1  Cowper's  Monody. 


1831.]  JOUKSTAL.  429 

October  29  (The  Barham). — The  weather  is  changed  and 
I  think  we  shall  saiL  Captain  Forbes  comes  with  offer  of 
the  Admiral  Sir  Michael  Seymour's  barge,  but  we  must  pause 
on  our  answer.  I  have  had  a  very  disturbed  night.  Captain 
Pigot's  summons  is  at  length  brought  by  his  own.  announce- 
ment, and  the  same  time  the  Admiral's  barge  attends  for  our 
accommodation  and  puts  us  and  our  baggage  on  board  the 
Barham,  a  beautiful  ship,  a  74  cut  down  to  a  50,  and  well 
deserving  all  the  commendations  bestowed  on  her.  The 
weather  a  calm  which  is  almost  equal  to  a  favourable  wind, 
so  we  glide  beautifully  along  by  the  Isle  of  "Wight  and  the 
outside  of  the  island.  We  landsfolk  feel  these  queerish 
sensations,  when,  without  being  in  the  least  sick,  we  axe 
not  quite  welL  We  dine  enormously  and  take  my  cot  at 
nine  o'clock,  where  we  sleep  undisturbed  till  seven, 

October  30. — Find  the  Bill  of  Portland  in  sight,  having  run 
about  forty  miles  during  the  night.  About  the  middle  of 
the  day  turn  sea-sick  and  retire  to  my  berth  for  the  rest  of 
the  evening. 

Octo~b&r  31. — A  sleepless  night  and  a  bilious  morning,  yet 
not  so  very  uncomfortable  as  the  phrase  may  imply.  The 
bolts  clashed,  and  made  me  dream  of  poor  Bran.  The  wind 
being  nearly  completely  contrary,  we  have  by  ten  o'clock 
gained  Plymouth  and  of  course  will  stand  westward  for 
Cape  Finisterre ;  terrible  tossing  and  much  sea-sickness,  beat- 
ing our  passage  against  the  turn.  I  may  as  well  say  we 
had  a  parting  visit  from  Lady  Graham,  who  came  off  in  a 
steamer,  saluted  us  A  la  distaTwe  and  gave  us  by  signal  her 
"bon  voyage."  On  Sunday  we  had  prayers  and  Service 
from  Mr.  Marshall,  our  Chaplain,  a  Trinity  College  youth, 
who  made  a  very  respectable  figure. 


NOVEMBER 

November  1. — The  night  was  less  dismal  than  yesterday, 
and  we  hold  our  course,  though  with  an  unfavourable  wind, 
and  make,  it  is  said,  about  forty  miles  progress.  After  all,  this 
sort  of  navigation  recommends  the  steamer,  which  forces 
its  way  whether  the  breeze  will  or  no. 

Nowmh&r  2. — Wind  as  cross  as  two  sticks,  with  nasty 
squalls  of  wind  and  rain.  We  keep  dodging  about  the 
Lizard  and  Land's  End  without  ever  getting  out  of  sight  of 
these  interesting  terminations  of  Old  England.  Keep  the 
deck  the  whole  day  though  bitter  cold.  Betake  myself  to 
my  berth  at  nine,  though  it  is  liker  to  my  coffin. 

November  3. — Sea-sickness  has  pretty  much  left  us,  but 
the  nights  are  far  from  voluptuous,  as  Lord  Stowell  says. 
After  breakfast  I  established  myself  in  the  after-cabin  to  read 
and  write  as  well  as  I  can,  whereof  this  is  a  bad  specimen. 

November  4 — The  current  unfavourable,  and  the  ship 
pitching  a  great  deal ;  yet  the  vessel  on  the  whole  keeps  her 
course,  and  we  get  on  our  way  with  hope  of  reaching  Cape 
Finisterre  when  it  shall  please  God. 

Nov&niber  5. — We  still  creep  on  this  petty  pace  from  day  to 
day  without  being  able  to  make  way,  but  also  without  losing 
any.  Meanwhile,  IroMich  1  we  become  freed  from  the  nausea 
and  disgust  of  the  sea-sickness  and  are  chirruping  merrily. 
Spend  the  daylight  chiefly  on  deck,  where  the  sailors  are 
trained  in  exercising  the  great  guns  on  a  new  sort  of  carriage 
called,  from  the  inventor,  Marshall's,  which  seems  ingenious. 

November  6. — No  progress  to-day;  the  ship  begins  to 
lay  her  course  but  makes  no  great  way.  Appetite  of  the 
passengers  excellent,  which  we  amuse  at  the  expense  of  the 

430 


1831.]  JOUEKAL  431 

sea  stock.  Cold  beef  and  biscuit,  I  feel  myself  veiy  helpless 
on  board,  but  everybody  is  ready  to  assist  me. 

November  7. — -The  wind  still  holds  fair,  though  far  from 
blowing  steadily,  "but  by  fits  and  variably.  KTo  object  to  look 
at— 

**  One  vide  water  all  around  us, 
All  above  us  one  'grey7  sky."1 

There  are  neither  birds  in  the  air,  fish  in  the  sea,  nor  objects 
on  face  of  the  waters.  It  is  odd  that  though  once  so  great  a 
smoker  I  now  never  think  on  a  cigar ;  so  much  the  better. 

November  8. — As  we  begin  to  get  southward  we  feel  a 
milder  and  more  pleasing  temperature,  and  the  wind  becomes 
decidedly  favourable  when  we  have  nearly  traversed  the 
famous  Bay  of  Biscay.  "We  now  get  into  a  sort  of  trade 
wind  blowing  from  the  East. 

November  9. — This  morning  run  seventy  miles  from  twelve 
at  night.  This  is  something  like  going.  Till  now,  bating 
the  rolling  and  pitching,  we  lay 

" .  .  .  as  idle  as  a  painted  ship 
Upon  a  painted  ocean." 

November  10. — Wind  changes  and  is  both  mild  and 
favourable.  We  pass  Cape  Ortegal,  see  a  wild  cluster  of 
skerries  or  naked  rocks  called  Berlingas  rising  out  of  the 
sea  like  M'Leod's  Maidens  off  the  Isle  of  Skye. 

November  11. — Wind  still  more  moderate  and  fair,  yet 
it  is  about  eleven  knots  an  hour.  We  pass  Oporto  and 
Lisbon  in  the  night  See  the  coast  of  Portugal :  a  bare  wild 
country,  with  here  and  there  a  church  or  convent.  If  it 
keeps  fair  t.Tn's  evening  we  [make]  Gibraltar,  which  would 
be  very  desirable.  Our  sailors  have  been  exercised  at  a 
species  of  sword  exercise,  which  recalls  many  recollections. 

November  12. — The  favourable  wind  gets  back  to  its 
quarters  in  the  south-west,  and  becomes  what  the  Italians 
call  the  Sirocco,  abominated  for  its  debilitating  qualities.  I 
1  See  Sailor's  Song,  Cease,  rude  Boreas,  etc.,  ante,  p.  402 :  "  The  Storm," 


432  JOUENAL.  [Nov. 

cannot  say  I  feel  them,  but  I  dreamt  dreary  dreams  all  night, 
which  are  probably  to  be  imputed  to  the  Sirocco.  After  all, 
it  is  not  an  uncomfortable  wind  to  a  Caledonian  wild  and 
stern.  Ink  won't  serve. 

November  13. — The  wind  continues  unaccommodating  all 
night,  and  we  see  nothing,  although  we  promised  ourselves 
to  have  seen  Gibraltar,  or  at  least  Tangiers,  this  morning,  but 
we  are  disappointed  of  both.  Tangiers  reminded  me  of  my 
old  Antiquarian  Mend  Auriol  Hay  Drummond,  who  is  Con- 
sul there.1  Certainly  if  a  human  voice  could  have  made  its 
hail  heard  through  a  league  or  two  of  contending  wind  and 
wave,  it  must  have  been  Auriol  Drummond's.  I  remember 
him  at  a  dinner  given  by  some  of  his  friends  when  he  left 
Edinburgh,  where  he  discharged  a  noble  part  "  self  pulling 
like  Captain  Crowe  'for  dear  life,  for  dear  life*  against  the 
whole  boat's  crew,"  speaking,  that  is,  against  30  members  of 
a  drunken  company  and  maintaining  the  predominance. 
Mons  Meg  was  at  that  time  his  idol  He  had  a  sort  of  avarice 
of  proper  names,  and,  besides  half  a  dozen  which  were  his 
legitimately,  he  had  a  claim  to  be  called  Garcadh,  which 
uncouth  appellation  he  claimed  on  no  very  good  authority  to 
be  the  ancient  name  of  the  Hays — a  tale.  I  loved  him 
dearly;  he  had  high  spirits,  a  zealous  faith,  good-humour, 
and  enthusiasm,  and  it  grieves  me  that  I  must  pass  within 
ten  miles  of  him  and  leave  "him  unsaluted ;  for  mercy-a-ged 
what  a  yell  of  gratitude  would  there  be  1  I  would  put  up 
with  a  good  rough  gale  which  would  force  us  into  Tangiers 
aaid  keep  us  there  for  a  week,  but  the  wind  is  only  in  gentle 
opposition,  like  a  well-drilled  spouse.  Gibraltar  we  shall  see 
this  evening,  Tangiers  becomes  out  of  the  question.  Captain 
says  we  will  lie  by  during  the  night,  sooner  than  darkness 
shall  devour  such  an  object  of  curiosity,  so  we  must  look 
sharp  for  the  old  rock 

November  14. — The  horizon  is  this  morning  full  of  re- 
1  See  ante,  voL  L  p.  253,  note. 


1831.]  JOUESTAL  433 

membrances.  Cape  St.  Vincent,  Cape  Spartel,  Tarifa, 
Trafalgar — all  spirit-stirring  sounds,  are  within  our  ken,  and 
recognised  with  enthusiasm  both  by  the  old  sailors  whose  me- 
mory can  reinvest  them  with  their  terrors,  and  by  the  naval 
neophytes  who  hope  to  emulate  the  deeds  of  their  fathers. 
Even  a  non-combatant  like  myself  feels  his  heart  beat  faster 
and  fuller,  though  it  is  only  with  the  feeling  of  the  unworthy 
boast  of  the  substance  in  the  fable,  nos  poTna,  nafamus. 

I  begin  to  ask  myself,  Do  I  feel  any  symptoms  of  getting 
better  from  the  climate  ? — which  is  delicious, — and  I  cannot 
reply  with  the  least  consciousness  of  certainty ;  I  cannot  in 
reason  expect  it  should  be  otherwise :  the  failure  of  my  limbs 
has  been  gradual,  and  it  cannot  be  expected  that  an  infirmity 
which  at  least  a  year's  bad  weather  gradually  brought  on 
should  diminish  before  a  few  mild  and  serene  days,  but  I 
think  there  is  some  change  to  the  better;  I  certainly  write 
easier  and  my  spirits  are  better.  The  officers  compliment 
me  on  this,  and  I  think  justly.  The  difficulty  will  be  to  abstain 
from  working  hard,  but  we  will  try.  I  wrote  to  Mr.  Cadell 
to-day,  and  will  send  my  letter  ashore  to  be  put  into  Gib- 
raltar with  the  officer  who  leaves  us  at  that  garrison.  In 
the  evening  we  saw  the  celebrated  fortress,  which  we  had 
heard  of  all  our  lives,  and  which  there  is  no  possibility  of 
describing  well  in  words,  though  the  idea  I  had  formed  of  it 
from  prints,  panoramas,  and  so  forth,  proved  not  very  inac- 
curate. Gibraltar,  then,  is  a  peninsula  having  a  tremendous 
precipice  on  the  Spanish  side — that  is,  upon  the  north,  where 
it  is  united  to  the  mainland  by  a  low  slip  of  land  called  the 
neutral  ground.  The  fortifications  which  rise  on  the  rock 
are  innumerable,  and  support  each  other  in  a  manner  ac- 
counted a  model  of  modern  art ;  the  northern  face  of  the 
rock  itself  is  hewn  into  tremendous  subterranean  batteries 
called  the  hall  of  Saint  George,  and  so  forth,  mounted  with 
guns  of  a  large  calibre.  But  I  have  heard  it  would  be  diffi- 
cult to  use  them,  from  the  effect  of  the  report  on  the  artillery- 

VOL.  n.  2  K 


434  JOURNAL.  [Nov. 

men.  The  west  side  of  the  fortress  is  not  so  precipitous  as 
the  north,  and  it  is  on  this  it  lias  been  usually  assailed, 
It  bristles  with  guns  and  batteries,  and  has  at  its  northern 
extremity  the  town  of  Gibraltar,  which  seems  from  the  sea 
a  thriving  place,  and  from  thence  declines  gradually  to  Cape 
Europa,  where  there  is  a  great  number  of  remains  of  old 
caverns  and  towers,  formerly  the  habitation  or  refuge  of  the 
floors.  At  a  distance,  and  curving  into  a  bay,  lie  Algeciras, 
and  the  little  Spanish,  town  of  Saint  Roque,  where  the 
Spanish  lines  were  planted  during  the  siege.1  From  Europa 
Point  the  eastern  frontier  of  Gibraltar  runs  pretty  close  to 
the  sea,  and  arises  in  a  perpendicular  face,  and  it  is  called 
the  back  of  the  rock.  No  thought  could  be  entertained  of 
attacking  it,  although  every  means  were  used  to  make  the 
assault  as  general  as  possible.  The  efforts  sustained  by  such 
extraordinary  means  as  the  floating  batteries  were  entirely 
directed  against  the  defences  on  the  west  side,  which,  if  they 
could  have  been  continued  for  a  few  days  with  the  same 
fury  with  which  they  commenced,  must  have  worn  out  the 
force  of  the  garrison.  The  assault  had  continued  for  several 
hours  without  success  on  either  side,  when  a  private  man  of 
the  artillery,  his  eye  on  the  floating  batteries,  suddenly  called 
with  ecstasy,  "She  burns,  by  G — !";2  and  first  that  vessel 
and  then  others  were  visibly  discerned  to  be  on  fire,  and 
the  besiegers*  game  was  decidedly  up. 

We  stood  into  the  Eay  of  Gibraltar  and  approached  the 
harbour  firing  a  gun  and  hoisting  a  signal  for  a  boat :  one 
accordingly  came  off— a  man-of-war's  boat — but  refused  to 
have  any  communication  with  us  on  account  of  the  quar- 

1  Lasting  from  21st  June  1779  to     Ambassador  in  the  first  hours  of  his 
6th  February  1783.  anguish :  "I  have  burnt  the  Temple 

of   Ephesus;   everything  is  gone, 

2  Compare  the  reflection  of  the     and  through  my  fault  1  What  com- 
Ohevalier  d'Arcon,  the  contriver  of    forts  me  under  my  calamity  is  that 
the  floating  batteries.   He  remained     the  honour  of  the  two  kings  re- 
on  board  the  Tatta  Piedra  till  past     mains  untarnished."  — Mahon's  His- 
midnight,  and  wrote  to  the  French     tory  of£fnglcmd9  voL  vii.  p.  290. 


1831.]  JOUESTAL  435 

antine,  so  we  can  send  no  letters  ashore,  and  after  some 

pourparlers,  Mr.  L ,  instead  of  joining  his  regiment,  must 

remain  on  board.  TTe  learned  an  unpleasant  piece  of  news. 
There  has  been  a  tumult  at  Bristol  and  some  rioters  shot, 
it  is  said  fifty  or  sixty.  I  would  flatter  myself  that  this  is 
rather  good  news,  since  it  seems  to  be  no  part  of  a  formed 
insurrection,  but  an  accidental  scuffle  in  which  the  mob  have 
had  the  worst,  and  which,  like  Tranent,  Manchester,  and 
Bonnymoor,  have  always  had  the  effect  of  quieting  the 
people  and  alarming  men  of  property.1  The  Whigs  will 
find  it  impossible  to  permit  men  to  be  plundered  by  a  few 
blackguards  called  by  them  the  people,  and  education  and 
property  will  recover  an  ascendency  which  they  have  only 
lost  by  faintheartedness. 

We  backed  out  of  the  Bay  by  means  of  a  current  to  the 
eastward,  which  always  runs  thence,  admiring  in  our  retreat 
the  lighting  up  the  windows  in  the  town  and  the  various 
barracks  or  country  seats  visible  on  the  rock.  Far  as  we 
are  from  home,  the  general  lighting  up  of  the  windows  in 
the  evening  reminds  us  we  are  still  in  merry  old  England, 
where  in  reverse  of  its  ancient  law  of  the  curfew,  almost 
every  individual,  however  humble  his  station,  takes  as  of 
right  a  part  of  the  evening  for  enlarging  the  scope  of  his 
industry  or  of  his  little  pleasures.  He  trims  his  lamp  to 
finish  at  leisure  some  part  of  his  task,  which  seems  in  such 
circumstances  almost  voluntary,  while  his  wife  prepares  the 
little  meal  which  is  to  be  its  legitimate  reward.  But  this 
happy  privilege  of  English  freemen  has  ceased.  One  happi- 
ness it  is,  they  will  soon  learn  their  error. 

November  15. — I  had  so  much  to  say  about  Gibraltar 
that  I  omitted  all  mention  of  the  Strait,  and  more  distant 


1  Nothing  like  these  Bristol  riots  Tranent  (East  Lothian)  and  Bonny- 
had  occurred  since  those  in  Bir-  moor  (Stirlingshire)  conflicts  took 
mingham  in  1791. — Martinean's  place  in  1797  and  1820;  the  Man- 
Hitstory  of  ike  Peace,  p.  353.  The  Chester  riot  in  1826. 


436  JOUBNAL.  [Nov. 

shores  of  Spain  and  Barbary,  which  form  the  extreme  of  our 
present  horizon;  they  are  highly  interesting.  A  chain  of 
distant  mountains  sweep  round  Gibraltar,  bold  peaked,  well 
defined,  and  deeply  indented;  the  most  distinguishable 
points  occasionally  garnished  with  an  old  watch-tower  to 
afford  protection  against  a  corsair.  The  mountains  seemed 
like  those  of  the  first  formation,  liker,  in  other  words,  to 
the  Highlands  than  those  of  the  South  of  Scotland.  The 
chains  of  hills  in  Barbary  are  of  the  same  character,  but 
more  lofty  and  much  more  distant,  being,  I  conceive,  a  part 
of  the  celebrated  ridge  of  Atlas. 

Gibraltar  is  one  of  the  pillars  of  Hercules,  Ceuta  on  the 
Moorish  side  is  well  known  to  be  the  other ;  to  the  west- 
ward of  a  small  fortress  garrisoned  by  the  Spaniards  is  the 
Hill  of  Apes,  the  corresponding  pillar  to  Gibraltar.  There 
is  an  extravagant  tradition  that  there  was  once  a  passage 
under  the  sea  from  the  one  fortress  to  the  other,  and  that 
an  adventurous  governor,  who  puzzled  his  way  to  Ceuta  and 
back  again,  left  his  gold  watch  as  a  prize  to  him  who  had 
the  courage  to  go  to  seek  it. 

"We  are  soon  carried  by  the  joint  influence  of  breeze  and 
current  to  the  African  side  of  the  straits,  and  coast  nearly 
along  a  wild  shore  formed  of  mountains,  like  those  of  Spain, 
of  varied  form  and  outline.  Ub  churches,  no  villages,  no 
marks  of  human  hand  are  seen.  The  chain  of  hills  show 
a  mockeiy  of  cultivation,  but  it  is  only  wild  heath  inter- 
mingled with  patches  of  barren  sand.  I  look  in  vaiu  for 
cattle  or  flocks  of  sheep,  and  Anne  as  vainly  entertains  hopes 
of  seeing  lions  and  tigers  on  a  walk  to  the  sea-shore.  The 
land  of  this  wild  country  seems  to  have  hardly  a  name. 
The  Cape  which  we  are  doubling  has  one,  however — the 
Gape  of  the  Three  Points.  That  we  might  not  be  totally 
disappointed  we  saw  one  or  two  men  engaged  apparent!}' 
in  ploughing,  distinguished  by  their  turbans  and  the  long 
pikes  which  they  carried.  Dr.  liddell  says  that  on  former 


1831.]  JOUBXAL.  437 

occasions  lie  has  seen  flocks  and  shepherds,  but  the  war 
with  France  has  probably  laid  the  country  waste. 

November  16. — When  I  waked  about  seven  found  that 
we  had  the  town  of  Oran  twelve  or  fourteen  miles  off  astern. 
It  is  a  large  place  on  the  sea-beach,  near  the  bottom  of  a 
bay,  built  close  and  packed  together  as  iluorish  [towns],  from 
Fez  to  Timbuctoo,  usually  are.  A  considerable  hill  rises 
behind  the  town,  which  seems  capable  of  holding  10,000 
inhabitants.  The  hill  up  to  its  eastern  summit  is  secured 
by  three  distinct  lines  of  fortification,  made  probably  by 
the  Spanish  when  Oran  was  in  their  possession ;  latterly  it 
belonged  to  the  State  of  Algiers ;  but  whether  it  has  yielded 
to  the  French  or  not  we  have  no  means  of  knowing.  A 
French  schooner  of  eighteen  guns  seems  to  blockade  the 
harbour.  We  show  our  colours,  and  she  displays  hers,  and 
then  resumes  her  cruise,  looking  as  if  she  resumed  her 
blockade.  This  would  infer  that  the  place  is  not  yet  in 
French  hands.  However,  we  have  in  any  event  no  business 
with  Oran,  whether  African  or  French.  Bristol  is  a  more 
important  subject  of  consideration,  but  I  cannot  learn  there 
are  papers  on  board.  One  or  two  other  towns  we  saw  on 
this  dreary  coast,  otherwise  nothing  but  a  hilly  coast  covered 
with  shingle  and  gum  cistus. 

November  17. — In  the  morning  we  are  off  Algiers,  of  which 
Captain  Pigot's  complaisance  afforded  a  very  satisfactory 
sight.  It  is  built  on  a  sloping  hill,  running  down  to  the  sea, 
and  on  fihe  water  side  is  extremely  strong;  a  very  strong 
mole  or  causeway  enlarges  the  harbour,  by  enabling  them  to 
include  a  little  rocky  island,  and  mount  immense  batteries, 
with  guns  of  great  number  and  size.  It  is  a  wonder,  in  the 
opinion  of  all  judges,  that  Lord  Exmouth's  fleet  was  not 
altogether  cut  to  pieces.  The  place  is  of  little  strength  to 
the  land ;  a  high  turreted  wall  of  the  old  fashion  is  its  best 
defence.  When  Charles  T.  attacked  Algiers,  he  landed  in 
the  bay  to  the  east  of  the  town,  and  marched  behind  it. 


438  JOURNAL.  [Nov. 

He  afterwards  reached  what  is  still  called  the  Emperor's 
fort,  a  building  more  highly  situated  than  any  part  of  the 
town,  and  commanding  the  wall  which  surrounds  it.  The 
Moors  did  not  destroy  this.  When  Bourmont  landed  with 
the  French,  unlike  Charles  v.,  that  general  disembarked  to 
the  westward  of  Algiers,  and  at  the  mouth  of  a  small  river ; 
he  then  marched  into  the  interior,  and,  fetching  a  circuit, 
presented  himself  on  the  northern  side  of  the  town,  Here 
the  Moors  had  laid  a  simple  stratagem  for  the  destruction 
of  the  invading  army.  The  natives  had  conceived  they 
would  rush  at  once  to  the  fort  of  the  Emperor,  which  they 
therefore  mined,  and  expected  to  destroy  a  number  of  the 
enemy  by  its  explosion.  This  obvious  device  of  war  was 
easily  avoided,  and  General  Bourmont,  in  possession  of  the 
heights,  from  which  Algiers  is  commanded,  had  no  difficulty 
in  making  himself  master  of  the  place.  The  French  are 
said  now  to  hold  their  conquests  with  difficulty,  owing  to  a 
general  commotion  among  the  Moorish  chiefs,  of  whom  the 
Bey  was  the  nominal  sovereign.  To  make  war  on  these  wild 
tribes  would  be  to  incur  the  disaster  of  the  Emperor  Julian  ; 
to  neglect  their  aggressions  is  scarcely  possible. 

Algiers  has  at  first  an  air  of  diminutiveness  inferior  to  its 
fame  in  ancient  and  modern  times.  It  rises  up  from  the  shore 
like  a  wedge,  composed  of  a  large  mass  of  close-packed  white 
houses,  piled  as  thick  on  each  other  as  they  can  stand; 
white-terraced  roofs,  and  without  windows,  so  the  number 
of  its  inhabitants  must  be  immense,  in  comparison  to  the 
ground  the  buildings  occupy — not  less,  perhaps,  than  30,000 
men.  Even  from  the  distance  we  view  it,  the  place  has  a 
singular  Oriental  look,  very  dear  to  the  imagination.  The 
country  around  Algiers  is  [of]  the  same  hilly  description 
with  the  ground  on  which  the  town  is  situated — a  bold  hilly 
tract.  The  shores  of  the  bay  are  studded  with  villas,  and 
exhibit  enclosures:  some  used  for  agriculture,  some  for 
gardens,  one  for  a  mosque  with  a  cemetery  around  it.  It  is 


1831.]  JOURNAL.  439 

said  they  are  extremely  fertile ;  the  first  example  we  have 
seen  of  the  exuberance  of  the  African  soil  The  villas,  we 
are  told,  belong  to  the  Consular  Establishment.  "We  saw 
our  own,  who,  if  at  home,  took  no  remembrance  of  us.1 
Like  the  Cambridge  Professor  and  the  elephant,  "  We  were 
a  paltry  beast,"  and  he  would  not  see  us,  though  we  drew 
within  cannon  [shot],  and  our  fifty  36-pounders  might  have 
attracted  some  attention.  The  Moors  showed  their  old 
cruelty  on  a  late  occasion.  The  crews  of  two  foreign  vessels 
having  fallen  into  their  hands  by  shipwreck,  they  murdered 
two-thirds  of  them  in  cold  blood.  There  are  reports  of  a 
large  body  of  French  cavalry  having  shown  itself  without 
the  town.  It  is  also  reported  by  Lieutenant  Walker,2  that 
the  Consul  hoisted,  comme  de  raison,  a  British  fiag  at  his 
country  house,  so  our  vanity  is  safe. 

We  leave  Algiers  and  run  along  the  same  kind  of 
heathy,  cliffy,  barren  reach  of  hills,  terminating  in  high 
lines  of  serrated  ridges,  and  scarce  showing  an  atom  of 
cultivation,  but  where  the  mouth  of  a  river  or  a  sheltering 
bay  has  encouraged  the  Moors  to  some  species  of  fortification, 

November  18. — Still  we  are  gliding  along  the  coast  of 
Ainea,  with  a  steady  and  unruffled  gale;  the  weather 
delicious.  Talk  of  an  island  of  wild  goats,  by  name 
Golita;  this  species  of  deer-park  is  free  to  every  one  for 
shooting  upon — belongs  probably  to  the  Algerines  or 
Tunisians,  whom  circumstances  do  not  permit  to  be  very 
scrupulous  in  asserting  their  right  of  dominion;  but  Dr. 
Liddell  has  himself  been  present  at  a  grand  chasse  of  the 
goats,  so  the  thing  is  true. 

The  wild  sinuosities  of  the  land  make  us  each  moment 
look  to  see  a  body  of  Arabian  cavalry  wheel  at  full  gallop  out 
of  one  of  these  valleys,  scour  along  the  beach,  and  disappear 
up  some  other  recess  of  the  hills.  In  fact  we  see  a  few  herds, 
but  a  red  cow  is  the  most  formidable  monster  we  have  seen. 

1  Merchant  of  Venice,  Act  iv.  Sc.  1.     Walker,  so  long  in  command  of  the 

2  Afterwards  Admiral  Sir  Baldwin    Turkish  STavy. 


440  JOURNAL.  [Nov. 

A  general  day  of  exercise  on  board,  as  well  great  guns 
as  small  arms.  It  was  very  entertaining  to  see  the  men 
take  to  their  quarters  with  the  unanimity  of  an  individual 
The  marines  shot  a  target  to  pieces,  the  boarders  scoured 
away  to  take  their  position  on  the  yards  with  cutlass  and 
pistol.  The  exhibition  continued  two  hours,  and  was  loud 
enough  to  have  alarmed  the  shores,  where  the  Algerines 
might,  if  they  had  thought  fit,  have  imputed  the  firing  to  an 
opportune  quarrel  between  the  French  and  British,  and  have 
shouted  "Allah  Kerim" — God  is  merciful!  This  was  the 
Dey's  remark  when  he  heard  that  Charles  x.  was  dethroned 
by  the  Parisians. 

We  are  near  an  African  Cape  called  Bugiaroni,  where,  in 
the  last  war,  the  Toulon  fleet  used  to  trade  for  cattle. 

November  19. — Wind  favourable  during  night,  dies  away 
in  the  morning,  and  blows  in  flurries  rather  contrary.  The 
steamboat  packet,  which  left  Portsmouth  at  the  same  time 
with  us,  passes  us  about  seven  o'clock,  and  will  reach  a  day 
or  two  before  us.  We  are  now  off  the  coast  of  Tunis  :  not  so 
high  and  rocky  as  that  of  Algiers,  and  apparently  much 
more  richly  cultivated.  A  space  of  considerable  length  along 
shore,  between  a  conical  hill  called  Mount  Baluty  and  Cape 
Bon,  which  we  passed  last  night,  is  occupied  by  the  French 
as  a  coral  fishery.  They  drop  heavy  shot  by  lines  on  the 
coral  rocks  and  break  off  fragments  which  they  fish  up  with 
nets.  The  Algerines,  seizing  about  200  Neapolitans  thus 
employed  gave  rise  to  the  bombardment  of  their  town  by 
Lord  Exmouth.  All  this  coast  is  picturesquely  covered  with 
enclosures  and  buildings  and  is  now  clothed  with  squally 
weather.  One  hill  has  a  smoky  umbrella  displayed  over  its 
peak,  which  is  very  like  a  volcano — many  islets  and  rocks 
bearing  the  Italian  names  of  sisters,  brothers,  dogs,  and 
suchlike  epithets.  The  view  is  very  striking,  with  varying 
rays  of  light  and  of  shade  mingling  and  changing  as  the 
wind  rises  and  falls.  About  one  o'clock  we  pass  the  situa* 


1831.]  JOURXAL  441 

tion  of  ancient  Carthage,  but  saw  no  ruins,  though  such  are 
said  to  exist.  A  good  deal  of  talk  about  two  ancient  lakes 

called ;  I  knew  the  name,  but  little  more.  We  passed 

in  the  evening  two  rocky  islands,  or  skerries,  rising  straight 
out  of  the  water,  called  Gli  Fratelli  or  The  Brothers. 

November  20. — A  fair  wind  all  night,  running  at  the 
merry  rate  of  nine  knots  an  hour.  In  the  morning  we  are 
in  sight  of  the  highest  island,  Pantellaria,  which  the  Sicilians 
use  as  a  state  prison,  a  species  of  Botany  Bay.  We  are 
about  thirty  miles  from  the  burning  island — I  mean 
Graham's — but  neither  that  nor  Etna  make  their  terrors 
visible.  At  noon  Graham's  Island  appears,  greatly 
diminished  since  last  accounts.  We  got  out  the  boats  and 
surveyed  this  new  production  of  the  earth  with  great 
interest  Think  I  have  got  enough  to  make  a  letter  to  our 
Royal  Society  and  friends  at  Edinburgh.1  Lat  3  7°  10'  31*  X, 
long.  12°  40'  ID"  E.,  lying  north  and  south  by  compass,  by 
Mr.  Bokely,  the  Captain's  clerk['s  measurements].  Returned 
on  board  at  dinner-time. 

November  21. — Indifferent  night.  In  the  morning  we  are 
running  off  Gozo,  a  subordinate  island  to  Malta,  intersected 
with  innumerable  enclosures  of  dry-stone  dykes  similar  to 
those  used  in  Selkirkshire,  and  this  likeness  is  increased  by 
the  appearance  of  sundry  square  towers  of  ancient  days.  In 
former  times  this  was  believed  to  be  Calypso's  island,  and 
the  cave  of  the  enchantress  is  still  shown.  We  saw  the 
entrance  from  the  deck,  as  rude  a  cavern  as  ever  opened  out 
of  a  granite  rock.  The  place  of  St.  Paul's  shipwreck  is  also 
shown,  no  doubt  on  similarly  respectable  authority. 

At  last  we  opened  Malta,  an  island,  or  rather  a  city,  like 
no  other  in  the  world.  The  seaport,  formerly  the  famous 
Valetta,  comes  down  to  the  sea-shore.  On  the  one  side  lay 
the  [Knights],  on  the  other  side  lay  the  Turks,  who  finally  got 
entire  possession  of  it,  while  the  other  branch  remained  in  the 

3  See  long  letter  to  Mr.  Skene  in  Life,  voi  x.  pp.  126-130. 


JOUENAL.  [Xor. 

power  of  the  Christians.  Mutual  cruelties  were  exercised ; 
the  Turks,  seizing  on  the  remains  of  the  knights  who  had  so 
long  defended  St.  Elmo,  cut  the  Maltese  cross  on  the  bodies 
of  the  slain,  and,  tying  them  to  planks,  let  them  drift  with 
the  receding  tide  into  the  other  branch  of  the  harbour  still 
defended  by  the  Christians.  The  Grand-Master,  in  resent- 
ment of  this  cruelty,  caused  his  Turkish  prisoners  to  be 
decapitated  and  their  heads  thrown  from  mortars  into  the 
camp  of  the  infidels.1 

Noveniber  22. — To-day  we  entered  Malta  harbour,  to 
quarantine,  which  is  here  very  strict.  We  are  condemned 
by  the  Board  of  Quarantine  to  ten  days'  imprisonment  or 
sequestration,  and  go  in  the  JSarham's  boat  to  our  place  of 
confinement,  built  by  a  Grand-Master  named  Manuel2  for 
a  palace  for  himself  and  his  retinue.  It  is  spacious  and 
splendid,  but  not  comfortable;  the  rooms  connected  one 
with  another  by  an  arcade,  into  which  they  all  open,  and 
which  forms  a  delightful  walk.  If  I  was  to  live  here 
a  sufficient  time  I  think  I  could  fit  the  apartments  up  so  as 
to  be  handsome,  and  even  imposing,  but  at  present  they  are 
only  kept  as  barracks  for  the  infirmary  or  lazaretto.  A  great 
number  of  friends  come  to  see  me,  who  are  not  allowed  to 
approach  nearer  than  a  yard.  This,  as  the  whole  affair  is 
a  farce,  is  ridiculous  enough.  We  are  guarded  by  the 
officers  of  health  in  a  peculiar  sort  of  livery  or  uniform  with 
yellow  neck,  who  stroll  up  and  down  with  every  man  that 
stirs — and  so  mend  the  matter.8  My  friends  Captain  and 

1  In  the  memorable  siege  of  1565.      our  seamen  was  brushed  from  the 

»  Manuel    de   Vilhena,    Grand-     f^  ^  ^  fVl  f*  E* 

Master  1722-1736.  ***  toJ"T.  ^  **-  ^    T^ 

Maltese   boats  bore  off  to    avoid 

3  An  example  of  the  rigour  with  giving  him  assistance,  but  an  Eng- 

whichthe  Quarantine  laws  were  en-  lish  boat,  less  knowing,  picked  up 

forced  is  given  by  Sir  Walter  on  the  poor  fellow,  and  were  imme- 

the  24th:— "We  had  an  instance  of  diately  assigned   to  the  comforts 

the  strictness  of  these  regulations  of  the  Quarantine,  that  being  the 

from  an  accident  which  befell  us  as  Maltese  custom  of  rewarding  hu- 

we  entered  the  harbour.     One  of  manity."— Letter  to  J.  o.  L. 


1831.]  JOURNAL.  443 

Mrs.  Dawson,  the  daughter  and  son-in-law  of  the  late 
Lord  Kinnedder,  occupying  as  military  quarters  one  end  of 
the  Manuel  palace,  have  chosen  to  remain,  though  thereby 
subjected  to  quarantine,  and  so  become  our  fellows  in 
captivity.  Our  good  friend  Captain  Pigot,  hearing  some 
exaggerated  report  of  our  being  uncomfortably  situated, 
came  himself  in  his  barge  with  the  purpose  of  reclaiming 
his  passengers  rather  than  we  should  be  subjected  to  the 
least  inconvenience.  We  returned  our  cordial  thanks,  but 
felt  we  had  already  troubled  him  sufficiently.  We  dine 
with  Captain  and  Mrs.  Dawson,  sleep  in  our  new  quarters, 
and,  notwithstanding  mosquito  curtains  and  iron  bedsteads, 
are  sorely  annoyed  by  vermin,  the  only  real  hardship  we 
have  to  complain  of  since  the  tossing  on  the  Bay  of  Biscay, 
and  which  nothing  could  save  us  from. 

Les  Maltois  ne  se  mariaient  jamais  dans  le  niois  de  mai. 
Us  esper&rent  si  mal  des  ouvrages  de  tout  genre  commeneS 
durant  son  cours  qu'ils  ne  se  faisaient  pas  couper  d'habits 
pendant  ce  mois. 

The  same  superstition  still  prevails  in  Scotland. 

November  23. — This  is  a  splendid  town.  The  sea 
penetrates  it  in  several  places  with  creeks  formed  into  har- 
bours, surrounded  by  buildings,  and  these  again  covered 
with  fortifications.  The  streets  are  of  very  unequal  height, 
and  as  there  has  been  no  attempt  at  lowering  them,  the  great- 
est variety  takes  place  between  them ;  and  the  singularity  of 
the  various  buildings,  leaning  on  each  other  in  such  a 
bold,  picturesque,  and  uncommon  manner,  suggests  to  me 
ideas  for  finishing  Abbotsford  by  a  screen  on  the  west 
side  of  the  old  barn  and  with  a  fanciful  wall  decorated 
with  towers,  to  enclose  the  bleaching  green — watch-towers 
such  as  these,  of  which  I  can  get  drawings  while  I  am 
here.  Employed  the  forenoon  in  writing  to  Lockhart.  I 
am  a  little  at  a  loss  what  account  to  give  of  myself. 
Better  I  am  decidedly  in  spirit,  but  rather  hampered  by 


444  JOUBXAL.  [Nov. 

iny  companions,  who  are  neither  desirous  to  follow  my 
amusements,  nor  anxious  that  I  should  adopt  theirs.  I 
am  getting  on  with  this  Siege  of  Malta  very  well  I  think 
if  I  continue,  it  will  he  ready  in  a  very  short  time,  and  I 
will  get  the  opinion  of  others,  and  if  my  charm  hold  I  will 
be  ahle  to  get  home  through  Italy — and  take  up  my  own 
trade  again. 

November  24. — We  took  the  quarantine  hoat  and  visited 
the  outer  harbour  or  great  port,  in  which  the  ships  repose 
when  free  from  their  captivity.  The  British  ships  of  war  are 
there, — a  formidable  spectacle,  as  they  all  carry  guns  of  great 
weight.  If  they  go  up  the  Levant  as  reported,  they  are  a 
formidable  weight  in  the  bucket.  I  was  sensible  while 
looking  at  them  of  the  truth  of  Cooper's  description  of  the 
beauty  of  their  build,  their  tapering  rigging  and  masts,  and 
how  magnificent  it  looks  as 

u  Sulking  and  vast  the  gallant  warship  rides  ! 3> 

We  had  some  pride  in  looking  at  the  Barham,  once  in  a 
particular  manner  our  own  abode.  Captain  Pigot  and  some 
of  his  officers  dined  with  us  at  our  house  of  captivity.  By  a 
special  grace  our  abode  here  is  to  be  shortened  one  day, 
so  we  leave  on  Monday  first,  which  is  an  indulgence.  To-day 
we  again  visit  Dragut's  Point.  The  guardians  who  attend 
to  take  care  that  we  quarantines  do  not  kill  the  people 
whom  we  meet,  tell  some  stories  of  this  famous  corsair,  but 
I  scarce  can  follow  their  Arabic.  I  must  learn  it,  though, 
for  the  death  of  Dragut1  would  be  a  fine  subject  for  a  poem, 
but  in  the  meantime  I  will  proceed  with  my  Knights. 

[November  25-30.] 2 — By  permission  of  the  quarantine 
board  we  were  set  at  liberty,  and  lost  no  time  in  quitting  the 

1  High  Admiral  of  the  Turkish  absolutely  depended  upon  during 

fleet  before  Malta,  and  slam  there  the  Malta  visit,  as  they  appear  to 

in  1565.  See  Dragut  tfa  Corsair,  in  have  been  added  subsequently  by 

Lockhartfs  Spanish  Battads.  Sir  Walter. 

3  The    dates    are    not    to    be 


1831.]  JOURNAL.  445 

dreary  fort  of  Don  Manuel,  with  all  its  mosquitoes  and  its 
thousands  of  lizards  which  [stood]  shaking  their  heads  at 
you  like  their  brother  in  the  new  Arabian  tale  of  Daft  JocL 
My  son  and  daughter  are  already  much  tired  of  the  impri- 
sonment. I  myself  cared  less  about  it,  but  it  is  unpleasant 
to  be  thought  so  very  unclean  and  capable  of  poisoning  a 
whole  city.  We  took  our  guardians*  boat  and  again  made 
a  round  of  the  harbour;  were  met  by  Mrs.  Bathuxst's1 
carriage,  and  carried  to  my  very  excellent  apartment  at 
Beverley's  HoteL  In  passing  I  saw  something  of  the  city, 
and  very  comical  it  was ;  but  more  of  that  hereafter.  At 
or  about  four  o'clock  we  went  to  our  old  habitation  the 
Barham,  having  promised  again  to  dine  in  the  "Ward  room, 
where  we  had  a  most  handsome  dinner,  and  were  dismissed 
at  half -past  six,  after  having  the  pleasure  to  receive  and  give 
a  couple  hours  of  satisfaction.  I  took  the  boat  from  the  chair, 
and  was  a  little  afraid  of  the  activity  of  my  assistants,  but 
it  all  went  off  capitally ;  went  to  Beverley's  and  bed  in  quiet. 
At  two  o'clock  Mrs.  CoL  Bathurst  transported  me  to 
see  the  Metropolitan  Church  of  St.  John,  by  far  the  most 
magnificent  place  I  ever  saw  in  my  life;  its  huge  and 
ample  vaults  are  of  the  Gothic  order.  The  floor  is  of 
marble,  each  stone  containing  the  inscription  of  some  ancient 
knight  adorned  with  a  patent  of  mortality  and  an  inscription 
recording  his  name  and  family.  For  instance,  one  knight  I 
believe  had  died  in  the  infidels'  prison;  to  mark  his  fate,  one 
stone  amid  the  many-coloured  pavement  represents  a  door 
composed  of  grates  (iron  grates  I  mean),  displaying  behind 
them  an  interior  which  a  skeleton  is  in  vain  attempting  to 
escape  from  by  bursting  the  bars.  If  you  conceive  he  has 
pined  in  Ms  fetters  there  for  centuries  till  dried  in  the 
ghastly  image  of  death  himself,  it  is  a  fearful  imagination. 
The  roof  which  bends  over  this  scene  of  death  is  splendidly 
adorned  with  carving  and  gilding,  while  the  varied  colours 
1  Wife  of  the  Lieut. -Governor,  Colonel  Seymour  Bathurst 


DECEMBEE. 

December  1. — There  are  two  good  libraries,  on  a  different 
plan  and  for  different  purposes — a  modern  subscription 
library  that  lends  its  own  books,  and  an  ancient  foreign 
library  which  belonged  to  the  Knights,  but  does  not  lend 
books.  Its  value  is  considerable,  but  the  funds  unfortunately 
are  shamefully  small ;  I  may  do  this  last  some  good.  I  have 
got  in  a  present  from  IVere  the  prints  of  the  Siege  of  Malta, 
very  difficult  to  understand,  and  on  loan  from  Mr.  Murray, 
Agent  of  the  Navy  Office,  the  original  of  Boiardo,  to  be  re- 
turned through  Mr.  Murray,  Albemarle  Street.  Mr.  Murray 
is  very  good-natured  about  it. 

December  2. — My  chief  occupation  has  been  driving  with 
Frere.  Dr.  IMdell  declines  a  handsome  fee.  I  will  want 
to  send  some  oranges  to  the  children.  I  am  to  go  with 
CoL  Bathurst  to-day  as  far  as  to  wait  on  the  bishop.  My 
old  friend  Sir  John  Stoddart's  daughter  is  to  be  married  to 
a  Captain  Atkinson.  Eode  with  Frere.  Much  recitation. 

December  6. — Captain  Pigot  inclines  to  take  me  on  with 
him  to  Naples,  after  which  he  goes  to  Tunis  on  Government 
service.  This  is  an  offer  not  to  be  despised,  though  at  the 
expense  of  protracting  the  news  from  Scotland,  which  I 
engage  to  provide  for  in  case  of  the  worst,  by  offering  Mr. 
Cadell  a  new  romance,  to  be  called  The  Siege  of  Malta, 
which  if  times  be  as  they  were  when  I  came  off,  should 
be  thankfully  received]  at  a  round  sum,  paying  back  not 
only  what  is  overdrawn,  but  supplying  finances  during  the 
winter. 

December  10,  [No/pies]. — I  ought  to  say  that  before  leaving 
Malta  I  went  to  wait  on  the  Archbishop :  a  fine  old  gentle- 


448 


1831.]  JOURNAL. 

man,  very  handsome,  and  one  of  the  priests  who  commanded 
the  Maltese  in  their  insurrection  against  the  Prench.  I 
took  the  freedom  to  hint  that  as  he  had  possessed  a  journal 
of  this  blockade,  it  was  but  due  to  his  country  and  himself 
to  give  it  to  the  public,  and  offered  my  assistance.  He 
listened  to  my  suggestion,  and  seemed  pleased  with  the 
proposal,  which  I  repeated  more  than  once,  and  apparently 
with  success.  Next  day  the  Bishop  returned  my  visit  in 
full  state,  attended  by  his  clergy,  and  superbly  dressed  in 
costume,  the  pearls  being  very  fine.  (The  name  of  this  fine 
old  dignitary  of  the  Eomish  Church  is  Don  Francis 
Caruana,  Bishop  of  Malta.) 

The  last  night  we  were  at  Malta  we  experienced  a  rude 
shock  of  an  earthquake,  which  alarmed  me,  though  I  did  not 
know  what  it  was.  It  was  said  to  foretell  that  the  ocean, 
which  had  given  birth  to  Graham's  Island,  had,  like  Pelops, 
devoured  its  own  offspring,  and  we  are  told  it  is  not  now 
visible,  and  will  be,  perhaps,  hid  from  those  who  risk  the 
main ;  but  as  we  did  not  come  near  its  latitude  we  cannot 
say  from  our  own  knowledge  that  the  news  is  true.  I  found 
my  old  friend  Frere  as  fond  as  ever  of  old  ballads.  He 
took  me  out  almost  every  day,  and  favoured  me  with 
recitations  of  the  Cid  and  the  continuation  of  Whistle- 
craft  He  also  acquainted  me  that  he  had  made  up  to 
Mr.  Coleridge  the  pension  of  £200  from  the  Board  of 
Literature  *  out  of  his  own  fortune. 

1  By  "  Board  of  Literature  "  Scott  tinue  these  annuities.    Bepresenta- 

doubtless  means  the  Royal  Society  toons  were  made  to  the  Government, 

of   Literature,  instituted  in  1824  and  the  then  Prime  Minister,  Earl 

under  the  patronage  of  George  rv. ;  Grey,  offered  Coleridge  a  private 

see  ante,  vol.  i  pp.  390-91.    Besides  grant  of  £200  from  the  Treasury, 

the  members  who  paid  a  subscrip-  which  he  declined, 

tion  there  were  ten  associates,  of  The  pension  from  the  Society  or 

whom  Coleridge  was  one,  who  each  the   Privy  Purse    of   George  rv., 

received  an  annuity  of  a  hundred  which  Mr.    Hookham    Frere    told 

guineas  from  the  King's  bounty.  Sir  Walter   he   had    made  up  to 

When  William  TV.  succeeded  his  Coleridge,  was  one  hundred  guineas, 
brother  in  1830,  he  declined  to  con- 

VOL.  II,  '2  F 


450  JOUKNAL.  [DEC. 

December  13,  [S'aphs]. — "We  left  Malta  OIL  this  day,  and 
ufter  a  most  picturesque  voyage  between  the  coast  of  Sicily 
and  Malta  arrived  here  on  the  17th,  where  we  were  detained 
for  quarantine,  whence  we  were  not  dismissed  till  the  day 
before  Christmas.  I  saw  Charles,  to  my  great  joy,  and 
agreed  to  dine  with  his  master,  Eight  Hon.  Mr.  Hill,1  re- 
solving it  should  be  my  first  and  last  engagement  at  Naples. 
Next  morning  much  struck  with  the  beauty  of  the  Bay  of 
Naples.  It  is  insisted  that  my  arrival  has  been  a  signal  for 
the  greatest  eruption  from  Vesuvius  which  that  mountain 
has  favoured  us  with  for  many  a  day.  I  can  only  say,  as 
the  Frenchman  said  of  the  comet  supposed  to  foretell  his 
own  death,  "  Aht  messieurs,  la  comete  me  fait  trap  ffhonneur" 
Of  letters  I  can  hear  nothing.  There  are  many  English 
here,  of  most  of  whom  I  have  some  knowledge. 

December  25,  [Bay  of  Naples]. — We  are  once  more  fairly 
put  into  quarantine.  Captain  Pigot  does  not,  I  think,  quite 
understand  the  freedom  his  flag  is  treated  with,  and  could  he 
find  law  for  so  doing  would  try  his  long  thirty-six  pounders 
on  the  town  of  Naples  and  its  castles ;  not  to  mention  a  sloop 
of  ten  guns  which  has  ostentatiously  entered  the  Bay  to 
assist  them.  Lord  knows  we  would  make  ducks  and  drakes 
of  the  whole  party  with  the  JBarham's  terrible  battery ! 

There  is  a  new  year  like  to  begin  and  no  news  from 
Britain.  By  and  by  I  will  be  in  the  condition  of  those  who 
are  sick  and  in  prison,  and  entitled  to  visits  and  consolation 
on  principles  of  Christianity. 

December  26,  [Strada  JVi&wa]. — Went  ashore ;  admitted  to 
pratique,  and  were  received  here.2  Walter  has  some  money 
left,  which  we  must  use  or  try  a  begging-box,  for  I  see  no 
other  resource,  since  they  seem  to  have  abandoned  me  so. 
Go  ashore  each  day  to  sight-seeing.  Have  the  pleasure  to 

1  Afterwards  Lord  Berwick. 

3  The  travellers  established  them-      soon  as  they  were  released  from 
selves  in  the  Palazzo  Caramanico  as      quarantine. 


1831.]  JOURXAL.  451 

meet  Mr,1  and  Mrs.  Laing-Meason  of  Lindertis,  and  have 
their  advice  and  assistance  and  company  in  our  wanderings 
almost  every  day.  Mr.  Meason  has  made  some  valuable 
remarks  on  Baiae,  where  the  villas  of  the  middle  ages 
are  founded  on  the  lava  shores,  at  least  upon  the  ancient 
maritime  villas  of  the  Romans, — so  the  boot  of  the  moderns 
galls  the  kibe  of  the  age  preceding  them ;  the  reason  seems 
to  be  the  very  great  durability  with  which  the  Romans 
finished  their  domestic  architecture  of  maritime  arches,  by 
which  they  admitted  the  sea  into  their  lower  houses.2 

We  were  run  away  with,  into  the  grotto  very  nearly,  but 
luckily  stopped  before  we  entered,  and  so  saved  our  lives. 
"We  have  seen  the  Strada  Nuova — a  new  access  of  extreme 
beauty  which  the  Italians  owe  to  llurat 

The  Bay  of  Naples  is  one  of  the  finest  things  I  ever  saw. 
Vesuvius  controls  it  on  the  opposite  side  of  the  town. 

I  never  go  out  in  the  evening,  but  take  airings  in  the 
day-time  almost  daily.  The  day  after  Christmas  I  went 
to  see  some  old  parts  of  the  city,  amongst  the  rest  a  tower 
called  Torre  del  Carmine,  which  figured  during  the  Duke  of 
Guise's  adventure,  and  the  gallery  of  as  old  a  church,  where 
Masaniello  was  shot  at  the  conclusion  of  his  career.3  I 
marked  down  the  epitaph  of  a  former  Empress,*  which  is 
striking  and  affecting.  It  would  furnish  matter  for  my 
Tour  if  I  wanted  it. 

1  A  brother  of  ilalcolm  Laing,  Fortiyii,  Quarterly  Jierlcic,  vol.  iv. 
the  historian.  pp.  355-403. 

n   .  ...          ,       «.  4  See  Appendix  rv.:  **A  former 

-  ^  •??"*  M  &™  }*  **  Empress."  Sb  Walter  no  doubt 
TOlfa» Well  of  a*  eronmou  by  ^  mother  ^^  rf 

sea  to  the  ruins  of  such  a  Roman  _,     , .  .,       ,,  ,.  „ 

villaonthepromontoryofPosilipo,  *^ J5-  M   *"  ^^  ^ 

to  which  he  fad  tabn  Sir  Walter  J™-  Corrxino  -^rroneonsly  <alled 

in  a  boat  on  the  26th  of  January.  '  *"*"- '    .^ongh  her  hnslxmd 

T . ,        ,  ,  KW  Q  J  had   pretensions   to  the  Imperial 

— Life.  vol.  x.  pp.  15^-5-  ,.     .f       j-        .    >          j      ,      .. 

J  '  **  dignity,    disputed    and    abortive. 

3  For    a   picturesque   sketch   of  For  the  whole  affecting  story  see 

Naples  during  the  insurrection  of  Hi&oire  de  la  Conquetc  de  Naples, 

1647  see  Sir  Walter's  article  on  Mas-  St.   Priest,   voL    iii.   pp.   130-185, 

aniello  ^nA  the  Duke  of  Guise. —  especially  pp.  162-3. 


452  JOURNAL.  [DEC.  1831. 

"  Kaples,  thou'rt  a  gallant  city, 
But  thou  hast  been,  dearly  "bought " —  x 

So  is  King  Alphonso  made  to  sum  up  the  praises  of 
tills  princely  town,  with  the  losses  which  he  had  sustained 
in  making  himself  master  of  it.  I  looked  on  it  with  some- 
thing of  the  same  feelings,  and  I  may  adopt  the  same  train 
of  thought  when  I  recall  Lady  ^Northampton,  Lady  Abereorn, 
and  other  friends  much  beloved  who  have  met  their  death 
in  or  near  this  city. 

1  A  variation  of  the  lines  on  Alphonso's  capture  of  the  city  in  1442  : — 

"  And  then  he  looked  on  Naples,  that  great  city  of  the  sea, 
'  O  city*'  saith  the  King,  '  how  great  hath  been  thy  cost, 
For  thee  I  twenty  years — my  fairest  years — have  lost. ' " 

-— Lockhart's  Spanish  Ballads,  "The  King  of  Arragon." 


1832 


JASTUAEY. 

January  5. — Went  by  invitation  to  wait  upon  a  priest, 
who  almost  rivals  my  fighting  bishop  of  Malta,  He  is  the  old 
Bishop  of  Tarentum,1  and,  notwithstanding  his  age,  eighty 
and  upwards,  is  still  a  most  interesting  man.  A  face  formed 
to  express  an  interest  in  whatever  passes;  caressing 
manners,  and  a  total  absence  of  that  rigid  stiffness  which 
hardens  the  heart  of  the  old  and  converts  them  into  a  sort 
of  petrifaction.  Apparently  his  foible  was  a  fondness  for 
cats ;  one  of  them,  a  superb  brindled  Persian  cat,  is  a  great 
beauty,  and  seems  a  particular  favourite.  I  think  we  would 
have  got  on  well  together  if  he  could  have  spoken  English, 
or  I  French  or  Latin;  but  "hAlas!  I  once  saw  at  Lord 
Yarmouth's  house  a  Persian  cat,  but  not  quite  so  fine  as 
that  of  the  Bishop.  He  gave  me  a  T^atin  devotional  poem 
and  an  engraving  of  himself,  and  I  came  home  about  two 
o'clock. 

January  6  to  12. — We  reach  the  12th  January,  amusing 
ourselves  as  we  can,  generally  seeing  company  and  taking 
airings  in  the  forenoon  in  this  fine  country.  Sir  William 
Gell,  a  very  pleasant  man,  one  of  my  chief  cieerones.  Lord 
Hertford  comes  to  Naples.  I  am  glad  to  keep  up 
an  old  acquaintance  made  in  the  days  of  George  iv. 

3  Sir  William  Gell  styles  him  the  pleasant  tale  of  the  Bag  of  Gold 9 
"Archbishop,"  and  adds  that  at  and  is  immortalised  by  the  pencil  of 
this  time  he  was  in  his  ninetieth  Landseer  seated  at  table  enfamiUe 
year.  Can  this  prelate  be  Rogers's  with  three  of  his  velvet  favourites  ? 
"Good  Old  Cardinal,"  who  told  See  Italy,  fcp.  Svo,  1S3S,  p.  302. 

455 


456  JOUBNAL.  [JAN. 

He  has  got  a  breed  from  Maida,  of  which  I  gave  him 
a  puppy.  There  was  a  great  crowd  at  the  Palazzo, 
which  all  persons  attended,  being  the  King's  birthday. 
The  apartments  are  magnificent,  and  the  various  kinds 
of  persons  who  came  to  pay  court  were  splendid.  I 
went  with  the  boys  as  Brigadier-General  of  the  Archers1 
Guard,  wore  a  very  decent  green,  uniform,  laced  at  the 
cuffs,  and  pantaloons,  and  looked  as  well  as  sixty  could 
make  it  out  when  sworded  and  feathered  comme  il  faut. 
I  passed  well  enough.  Very  much  afraid  of  a  fall  on  the 
slippery  floor,  but  escaped  that  disgrace.  The  ceremony  was 
very  long.  I  was  introduced  to  many  distinguished  persons, 
and,  but  for  the  want  of  language,  got  on  well  enough.  The 
King  spoke  to  me  about  five  minutes,  of  which  I  hardly 
understood  five  words.  I  answered  him  in  a  speech  of  the 
same  length,  and  I  '11  be  bound  equally  unintelligible.  We 
made  the  general  key-tone  of  the  harangue  la  Idle  langue 
et  le  beau  del  of  $a  majeste*.  Very  fine  dresses,  very  many 
diamonds.  .  .  . 

A  pretty  Spanish  ambassadress,  Countess  da  Costa,  and 
her  husband.  Saw  the  Countess  de  Lebzeltern,  who  has 
made  our  acquaintance,  and  seems  to  be  very  clever.  I  will 
endeavour  to  see  her  again.  Introduced  to  another  Russian 
Countess  of  the  diplomacy.  Got  from  Court  about  two 
o'clock.  I  should  have  mentioned  that  I  had  a  letter  from 
Skene1  and  one  from  Cadell,  dated  as  far  back  as  2d 
December,  a  monstrous  time  ago,  [which]  yet  puts  a  period 

1  This  is  the  last  notice  in  the  her   "I   have    had  such  a    great 

Journal  by  Sir  Walter  of  his  dear  pleasure  1    Scott  has  been  here— 

friend.    James  Skene  of  Rubislaw  he  came  from  a  long  distance  to  see 

died  at  Fre wen  HaU,  Oxford,  in  1864,  me,  he  has  been  sitting  with  me 

in  his  ninetieth  year.    His  faculties  at  the   fireside   talking  over  our 

remained  unimpaired   throughout  happy  recollections  of  the  past. .  .  " 

his  serene  and  beautiful  old  age,  Two'  or  three  days  later  he  fol- 

untQ.  the  end  was  very  near— then,  lowed  his  well  loved  friend  into  the 

one   evening   his   daughter  found  unseen  world — gently  and  calmly 

him  with  a  look  of  inexpressible  like  a  child  falling  asleep  he  passed 

delight  on  his  face,  when  he  said  to  away  in  perfect  peace. 


1832.]  JOUENAL.  457 

to  my  anxiety.  I  have  written  to  Cadell  for  particulars  and 
supplies,  and,  besides,  nave  written  a  great  many  pages  of 
the  Siege  of  Malta,  which  I  think  will  succeed. 

\Jamiary  16-23]. — I  think  £200  a  month,  or  thereby, 
will  do  very  well,  and  it  is  no  great  advance. 

Another  piece  of  intelligence  was  certainly  to  be  ex- 
pected, but  now  it  has  come  afflicts  us  much.  Poor  Johnny 
Lockhart!  The  boy  is  gone  whom  we  have  made  so  much 
of.  I  could  not  have  borne  it  better  than  I  now  do,  and  I 
might  have  borne  it  much  worse,1 

I  went  one  evening  to  the  Opera  to  see  that  amuse- 
ment in  its  birthplace,  which  is  now  so  widely  received  over 
Europe.  The  Opera  House  is  superb,  but  can  seldom  be 
quite  full.  On  tliis  night,however,  it  was;  the  guards,  citizens, 
and  all  persons  dependent  on  the  Court,  or  having  anything 
'to  win  or  lose  by  it,  are  expected  to  take  places  liberally, 
and  applaud  with  spirit.  The  King  bowed  much  on  entrance, 
and  was  received  in  a  popular  manner,  which  he  has  no 
doubt  deserved,  having  relaxed  many  of  his  father's  violent 
persecutions  against  the  liberals,  made  in  some  degree  an 
amnesty,  and  employed  many  of  this  character.  He  has 
made  efforts  to  lessen  his  expenses;  but  then  he  deals  in 
military  affairs,  and  that  swallows  up  his  savings,  and  Heaven 
only  knows  whether  he  will  bring  [Neapolitans]  to  fight, 
which  the  Martinet  system  alone  will  never  do.  His  health 
is  undermined  by  epileptic  fits,  which,  with  his  great  corpu- 
lence, make  men  throw  their  thoughts  on  his  brother  Prince 
Charles.  It  is  a  pity.  The  King  is  only  two-and-twenty 
years  old. 

The  Opera  bustled  off  without  any  remarkable  music, 
and,  so  far  as  I  understand  the  language,  no  poetry ;  and 
except  the  coup  (£o$Ly  which  was  magnificent,  it  was  poor 
work.  It  was  on  the  subject  of  Constantine  and  Crispus — 

1  John  Hugh  Lockhart  died  December  15,  1831. 


458  JOURNAL.  [JAN. 

marvellous  good  matter,  I  assure  you.  I  came  home  at 
half-past  nine,  without  waiting  the  ballet,  but  I  was  dog- 
sick  of  the  whole  of  it.  Went  to  the  Studij  to-day.  I 
had  no  answer  to  my  memorial  to  the  Minister  of  the 
Interior,  which  it  seems  is  necessary  to  make  any  copies 
from  the  old  romances.  I  find  it  is  an  affair  of  State,  and 

Monsieur can  only  hope  it  will  be  granted  in  two  or 

three  days ; — to  a  man  that  may  leave  Naples  to-morrow ! 
He  offers  me  a  loan  of  what  books  I  need,  Annals  included, 
but  this  is  also  a  delay  of  two  or  three  days.  I  think  really 
the  Italian  men  of  letters  do  not  know  the  use  of  time  made 
by  those  of  other  places,  but  I  must  have  patience.  In  the 
course  of  my  return  home  I  called,  by  advice  of  my  valet  de 
place,  at  a  bookseller's,  where  he  said  all  the  great  messieurs 
went  for  books.  It  had  very  little  the  air  of  a  place  of 
such  resort,  being  kept  in  a  garret  above  a  coach-house. 
Here  some  twenty  or  thirty  odd  volumes  were  produced  by 
an  old  woman,  but  nothing  that  was  mercantile,  so  I  left 
them  for  Lorenzo's  learned  friends.  And  yet  I  was  sorry 
too,  for  the  lady  who  showed  them  to  me  was  very  [civil], 
and,  understanding  that  I  was  the  famous  Chevalier,  carried 
her  kindness  as  fax  as  I  could  desire.  The  Italians  under- 
stand nothing  of  being  in  a  hurry,  but  perhaps  it  is  their 
way.1 

January  24. — The  King  grants  the  favour  asked.  To  be 
perfect  I  should  have  the  books  [out]  of  the  room,  but  this 
seems  to  [hurt  ?]  Monsieur  Delieteriis  as  he,  kind  and  civil  as 
he  is,  would  hardly  [allow]  me  to  take  my  labours  out  of  the 
Studij,  where  there  are  hosts  of  idlers  and  echoes  and  askers 
and  no  understanders  of  askers.  I  progress,  however,  as  the 

1  Sir  W.  Gell  relates  that  an  old         The  transcript  is   now  in   the 

English  manuscript  of  the  Romance  library  at  Abbotsford,  under  the 

of  Sir  Bevis  of  Hampton,  existing  title,  Old  English  Romances,  tran- 

in  Naples,  had  attracted   Scott's  scribed  from   MSS.  in   the   Royal 

attention,  and  he  resolved  to  make  Library  at  Naples,   by  Sticohini, 

a  copy  of  it.  2  vols.  sm.  8vo. 


1832.]  JOUBNAL  ,  459 

Americans  say.  I  have  found  that  Sir  William  GelTs  amanu- 
ensis is  at  present  disengaged,  and  that  he  is  quite  the  man 
for  copying  the  romances,  which  is  a  plain  black  letter  of 
1377,  at  the  cheap  and  easy  rate  of  3  quattrons  a  day.  I  am 
ashamed  at  the  lowness  of  the  remuneration,  but  it  will  dine 
him  capitally,  with  a  share  of  a  bottle  of  wine,  or,  by  *r  lady, 
a  whole  one  if  he  likes  it ;  and  thrice  the  sum  would  hardly 
do  that  in  England  But  we  dawdle,  and  that  there  is  no 
avoiding.  I  have  found  another  object  in  the  Studij — the 
language  of  Naples, 

Jany,  2[5  ?]. — One  work  in  this  dialect,  for  such  it  is. 
was  described  to  me  as  a  histoiy  of  ancient  Neapolitan 
legends — quite  in  my  way ;  and  it  proves  to  be  a  dumpy  fat 
12mo  edition  of  Mother  Goose's  Tales,1  with  my  old  friends 
Puss  in  Boots,  Bluebeard,  and  almost  the  whole  stock  of 
this  very  collection.  If  this  be  the  original  of  this  charming 
book,  it  is  very  curious,  for  it  shows  the  right  of  Naples  to 
the  authorship,  but  there  are  French  editions  very  early  also ; 
— for  there  are  two — whether  Erench  or  Italian,  I  am  uncer- 
tain— of  different  dates,  both  having  claims  to  the  original 
edition,  each  omitting  some  tales  which  the  other  has. 

To  what  common  original  we  are  to  refer  them  the 
Lord  knows.  I  will  look  into  [this]  very  closely,  and  if 
this  same  copiator  is  worth  his  ears  he  can  help  me.  My 
friend  Mr.  D.  will  aid  me,  but  I  doubt  he  hardly  likes  my 
familiarity  with  the  department  of  letters  in  which  he  has 
such  an  extensive  and  valuable  charga  Yet  he  is  very  kind 
and  civil,  and  promises  me  the  loan  of  a  Neapolitan  vocabu- 
lary, which  will  set  me  up  for  the  attack  upon  Mother  Goose. 
Spirit  of  Tom  Thumb  assist  me !  I  could,  I  think,  make 
a  neat  thing  of  this,  obnoxious  to  ridicule  perhaps ; — what 
then !  The  author  of  Ma  Sceur  Anne  was  a  clever  man,  and 
his  tale  will  remain  popular  in  spite  of  all  gibes  and  flouts  so- 
ever. So  Tamos  Caraeri  !  If  it  was  not  for  the  trifling  and 

1  See  Appendix  v.  for  Mr.  Andrew  Lang's  letter  on  this  subject. 


460  JOURNAL.  [JAN. 

dawdling  peculiar  to  this  country,  I  should  Lave  time  enough, 
but  their  trifling  'with  time  is  the  devil  I  will  try  to  engage 
Mr.  Gell  in  two  researches  in  his  way  and  more  in  mine, 
namely,  the  Andrea  Ferrara  and  the  Bonnet  piece.1  Mr. 
Keppel  Craven  says  Andrea  de  Ferraras2  are  frequent  in  Italy. 
Plenty  to  do  if  we  had  alert  assistance,  but  Gell  and  Laing 
Meason  have  both  their  own  matters  to  puzzle  out,  and  why 
should  they  mind  my  affairs  ?  The  weather  is  very  cold,  and 
I  am  the  reverse  of  the  idiot  boy — 

"  For  as  my  body's  growing  worse, 
My  mind  is  growing  better."  3 

Of  this  I  am  distinctly  sensible,  and  thank  God  that  the 
mist  attending  this  whoreson  apoplexy  is  wearing  off 

I  went  to  the  Studij  and  copied  Bevis  of  Hampton, 
about  two  pages,  for  a  pattern.  From  thence  to  Sir 
William  Gell,  and  made  an  appointment  at  the  Studij 
with  his  writer  to-morrow  at  ten,  when,  I  trust,  I  shall 
find  Delicteriis  there,  but  the  gentleman  with  the  classi- 
cal name  is  rather  kind  and  friendly  in  his  neighbour's 
behalf.4 

January  26. — This  day  arrived  (for  the  first  time  indeed) 
answer  to  last  post  end  of  December,  an  epistle  from  Cadell 
full  of  good  tidings.5  Castle  Danyerozis  and  Sir  Robert  of 
Paris,  neither  of  whom  I  deemed  seaworthy,  have  performed 

1  The  forty-shilling  gold  piece  5  Sir  W.  Gell  records  that  on  the 

coined  by  James  v.  of  Scotland.  morning  he  received  the  good  news 

*  Sword-blades  of  peculiar  excel-  he  called  upon,  frfrn  and  said  he 

lence  bearing  the  name  of  this  felt  quite  relieved  by  his  letters, 

maker  have  been  known  in  Scot-  and  added,  "  I  could  never  have 

land  since  the  reign  of  James  rv.  slept  straight  in  my  coffin  till  I  had 

3  Altered  from  Wordsworth.  satisfied  every  claim  against  me  ; 

4  The  editor  of  ReKquia  Antiques  and  now,"  turning  to  a  favourite 
(2  vols,  Svo,  London,  1843),  writing  dog  that  was  with  them  in  the 
ten  years  after  this  visit,  says,  that  carriage  he  said,  c*  My  poor  boy,  I 
"The  Chevalier  de  Licteriis  [Chief  shall  have  my  house  and  my  estate 
librarian  in  the  Boyal  Library]  round  it  free,  and  I  may  keep  my 
showed  tia  the  manuscript,  and  dogs  as  big  and  as  many  as  I  choose 
well  remembered  his  drawing  Sir  without  fear  of  reproach." — Life, 
Walter's  attention  to  it  in  1832."  voL  x-  p.  160. 


1832.]  JOUKNAL  461 

two  voyages— that  is,  each  sold  about  3400,  and  the  same  of 
the  current  year.  It  proves,  what  I  have  thought  almost 
impossible,  that  I  might  right  myself  But  as  yet  my  spell 
holds  fast.  I  have  besides  two  or  three  good  things  on  which 
I  may  advance  with  spirit,  and  with  palmy  hopes  on  the  part 
of  Cadell  and  myself.  He  thinks  he  will  soon  cry  victoria 
on  the  bet  about  his  hat  He  was  to  get  a  new  one  when 
I  had  paid  off  all  my  debts.  I  can  hardly,  now  that  I 
am  assured  all  is  well  again,  form  an  idea  to  myself  that 
I  could  think  it  was  otherwise. 

And  yet  I  think  it  is  the  public  that  are  mad  for  passing 
those  two  volumes ;  but  I  will  not  be  the  first  to  cry  them 
down  in  the  market,  for  I  have  others  in  hand,  which,  judged 
with  equal  favour,  will  make  fortunes  of  themselves.  Let 
me  see  what  I  have  on  the  stocks — 

C'astle  Dangerous  (supposed  future  Editions),  £1000 

Eobert  of  Paris,           „            ,.            „  1000 

Lady  Louisa  Stuart,     „           „           „  500 

Knights  of  Malta,        „           „           „  2500 

Trotcosianse  Keliquise,              „           „  2500 

I  have  returned  to  my  old  hopes,  and  think  of  giving 
Milne  an  offer  for  his  estate.1 

Letters  or  Tour  of  Paul  in  3  vols.          .        .        3000 
Reprint  of  Bevis  of  Hampton  for  Eoxburghe 

Club, 

Essay  on  the  Neapolitan  dialect,   . 

1  Viz.,  Faldonside,  an  estate  ad-  laud  between  me  and   the  lake 

jacent  to  Abbotsford  which  Scott  which  lies  mighty  convenient,  but 

had  long  wished  to  possess.    As  far  I  am  mighty  determined  to  give 

back  as  November  1817  he  wrote  nothing  more  than  the  value,  so 

a  friend :    "My  neighbour,  Kicol  that  it  is  likely  to  end  like  the  old 

Milne,  is  mighty  desirous  I  should  proverb,  Ex  Nickilo  Nichilfit." 
buy,  at  a  mighty  high  rate,  some 


FEBRUARY. 

February  10. — We  went  to  Pompeii  to-day :  a  large  party, 
all  disposed  to  enjoy  the  sight  in  this  fine  weather.  We  had 
Sir  Frederick  and  Lady  Adam,  Sir  William  Qell,  the  cory- 
phaeus of  our  party,  who  played  his  part  very  well  Miss  de 
la  Ferronays,1  daughter  of  Monsieur  le  Due  de  la  Ferronays, 
the  head,  I  believe,  of  the  constitutional  Royalists,  very 
popular  in  France,  and  likely  to  be  called  back  to  the 
ministry,  with  two  or  three  other  ladies,  particularly  Mrs. 
Ashley,  born  Miss  Baillie,2  very  pretty  indeed,  and  lives  in 
the  same  house.  The  Countess  de  la  Ferronays  has  a  great 
deal  of  talent  both  musical  and  dramatic. 

February  16. — Sir  William  Gell  called  and  took  me  out 
to-night  to  a  bookseller  whose  stock  was  worth  looking 
over. 

We  saw,  among  the  old  buildings  of  the  city,  an  ancient 
palace  called  the  Vicaria,  which  is  changed  into  a  prison. 
Then  a  new  palace  was  honoured  with  royal  residence 
instead  of  the  old  dungeon.  I  saw  also  *  a  fine  arch  called 
the  Capuan  gate,  formerly  one  of  the  city  towers,  and  a 
very  pretty  one.  We  advanced  to  see  the  ruins  of  a  palace 
said  to  be  a  habitation  of  Queen  Joan,  and  where  she  put 
her  lovers  to  death  chiefly  by  potions,  thence  into  a  well, 
smothering  them,  etc.,  and  other  little  tenderly  trifling 
matters  of  gallantry. 

1  Probably  Pauline;  married  to  3  Daughter  of  Colonel  Hugh 
Hon.  Augustus  Craven,  and  author  Duncan  Baillie,  of  Tarradale  and 
of  R&ti  <fttne  Sosttr.  Redcastle. 

462 


MARCH. 

March. — Embarked  on  an  excursion  to  Paestuni,  with 
Sir  William  Gell  and  Mr.  Laing-ileason,  in  order  to  see  the 
fine  ruins.  "We  went  out  by  Pompeii,  which  we  had  visited 
before,  and  which  fully  maintains  its  character  as  one  of  the 
most  striking  pieces  of  antiquity,  where  the  furniture  trea- 
sure and  household  are  preserved  in  the  excavated  houses, 
just  as  found  by  the  labourers  appointed  by  Government. 
The  inside  of  the  apartments  is  adorned  with  curious  paint- 
ings, if  I  may  call  them  such,  in  mosaic.  A  meeting 
between  Darius  and  Alexander  is  remarkably  fine.1  A  street, 
called  the  street  of  Tombs,  reaches  a  considerable  way  out 
of  the  city,  having  been  flanked  by  tombs  on  each  side  as 
the  law  directed.  The  entrance  into  the  town  affords  an 
interesting  picture  of  the  private  life  of  the  Eomans.  "We 
came  next  to  the  vestiges  of  Herculaneum,  which  is  destroyed 
like  Pompeii  but  by  the  lava  or  molten  stone,  which  cannot 
be  removed,  whereas  the  tufa  or  volcanic  ashes  can  be 
with  ease  removed  from  Pompeii,  which  it  has  filled  up 
lightly.  After  having  refreshed  in  a  cottage  in  the  desolate 
town,,  we  proceed  on  our  journey  eastward,  flanked  by  one  set 
of  heights  stretching  from  Vesuvius,  and  forming  a  prolonga- 
tion of  that  famous  mountain.  Another  chain  of  mountains 

1  Of  this  visit  to  Pompeii  Sir  W.  He  examined,  however,  with  more 
Gell  says — "  Sir  Walter  viewed  the  interest  the  "splendid  mosaic  re- 
whole  with  a  poet's  eye,  not  that  presenting  a  combat  of  the  Greeks 
of  an  antiquarian,  exclaiming  fre-  and  the  Persians." — Ltft9  voL  x. 
qnently,  4  The  city  of  the  Bead ! ' "  p.  159. 

463 


4:64  JOURNAL.  [MAECH 

seems  to  intersect  our  course  in  an  opposite  direction  and 
descends  npon  the  town  of  Castellamare.  Different  from  the 
range  of  heights  which  is  prolonged  from  Vesuvius,  this  second, 
•which  runs  to  Castellamare,  is  entirely  composed  of  granite, 
and,  as  is  always  the  case  with  mountains  of  this  formation, 
betrays  no  trace  of  volcanic  agency.  Its  range  was  indeed 
broken  and  split  up  into  specimens  of  rocks  of  most  romantic 
appearance  and  great  variety,  displaying  granite  rock  as  the 
principal  part  of  its  composition.  The  country  on  which 
these  hills  border  is  remarkable  for  its  powers  of  vegetation, 
and  produces  vast  groves  of  vine,  elm,  chestnut,  and  similar 
trees,  which  grow  when  stuck  in  by  cuttings.  The  vines 
produce  Lacryma  Christi  in  great  quantities — not  a  bad 
wine,  though  the  stranger  requires  to  be  used  to  it.  The 
sea-shore  of  the  Bay  of  Naples  forms  the  boundary  on  the 
right  of  the  country  through  which  our  journey  lies,  and 
we  continue  to  approach  to  the  granite  chain  of  eminences 
which  stretch  before  us,  as  if  to  bar  our  passage. 

As  we  advanced  to  meet  the  great  barrier  of  cliffs,  a 
feature  becomes  opposed  to  us  of  a  very  pronounced  character, 
which  seems  qualified  to  interrupt  our  progress.  A  road 
leading  straight  across  the  branch  of  hills  is  carried  up  the 
steepest  part  of  the  mountain,  ascending  by  a  succession  of 
zig-zags,  which  the  French  laid  by  scale  straight  up  the  hill. 
The  tower  is  situated  upon  an  artificial  eminence,  worked 
to  a  point  and  placed  in  a  defensible  position  between  two 
biTlq  about  the  same  height,  the  access  to  which  the  de- 
fenders of  the  pass  could  effectually  prohibit. 

Sir  William  Gell,  whose  knowledge  of  the  antiquities  of 
this  country  is  extremely  remarkable,  acquainted  us  with  the 
history. 

In  the  middle  ages  the  pasturages  on  the  slope  of  these 
hills,  especially  on  the  other  side,  "belonged  to  the  rich 
republic  of  Amalfi,  who  built  this  tower  as  an  exploratory 
gazeeboo  from  which  they  could  watch  the  motions  of  the 


1832.]  JOUKKAX.  465 

Saracens  who  were  wont  to  annoy  them  with  plundering 
excursions ;  but  after  this  fastness  [was  built]  the  people  of 
Am  alii  usually  defeated  and  chastised  them.  The  ride  over 
the  opposite  side  of  the  mountain  was  described  as  so  un- 
commonly pleasant  as  made  me  long  to  ride  it  with 
assistance  of  a  pony.  That,  however,  was  impossible* 
We  arrived  at  a  large  town  situated  in  a  ravine  or  hollow, 
which  was  called  La  Cava  from  some  concavities  which 
it  exhibited 

We  were  received  by  Miss  TThyte,  an  English  lady  who  has 
settled  at  La  Cava,  and  she  afforded  us  the  warmest  hospi- 
tality that  is  consistent  with  a  sadly  cold  chilling  house. 
They  may  say  what  they  like  of  the  fine  climate  of  Xaples — 
unquestionably  they  cannot  say  too  much  in  its  favour,  but 
yet  when  a  day  or  two  of  cold  weather  does  come,  the 
inhabitants  are  without  the  means  of  parrying  the  temporary 
inclemency,  which  even  a  Scotsman  would  scorn  to  submit 
to.  However,  warm  or  cold,  to  bed  we  went,  and  rising  next 
morning  at  seven  we  left  La  Cava,  and,  making  something 
like  a  sharp  turn  backwards,  but  keeping  nearer  to  the 
Grulf  of  Salerno  than  in  yesterday's  journey,  and  nearer  to 
its  shore.  We  had  a  good  road  towards  Paestum,  and  in 
defiance  of  a  cold  drizzling  day  we  went  on  at  a  round  pace. 
The  country  through  which  we  travelled  was  wooded  and 
stocked  with  wild  animals  towards  the  fall  of  the  hills,  and 
we  saw  at  a  nearer  distance  a  large  swampy  plain,  pastured 
by  a  singularly  bizarre  but  fierce-looking  buffalo,  though  it 
might  maintain  a  much  preferable  stock.  This  palace  of 
Persano  was  anciently  kept  up  for  the  King's  sport,  but 
any  young  man  having  a  certain  degree  of  interest  is  allowed 
to  shoot  in  the  chase,  which  it  is  no  longer  an  object  to  pre- 
serve. The  guest,  however,  if  he  shoots  a  deer,  or  a  buffalo,  or 
wild  boar,  must  pay  the  keeper  at  a  certain  fixed  price,  not 
much  above  its  price  in  the  market,  which  a  sportsman  would 
hardly  think  above  its  worth  for  game  of  his  own  killing- 

VOL.  n.  2  G 


466  JOURNAL  [MARCH 

The  town  of  Salerno  is  a  beautiful  seaport  town,  and  it  is,  as 
it  were,  wrapt  in  an  Italian  cloak  hanging  round  the  limbs, 
or,  to  speak  common  sense,  the  new  streets  which  they  are 
rebuilding.  We  made  no  stop  at  Salerno,  but  continued  to 
traverse  the  great  plain  of  that  name,  within  sight  of  the 
sea,  which  is  chiefly  pastured  by  that  queer-looking  brute, 
the  buffalo,  concerning  which  they  have  a  notion  that  it 
returns  its  value  sooner,  and  with  less  expense  of  feeding, 
than  any  other  animaL 

At  length  we  came  to  two  streams  which  join  their  forces, 
and  would  seem  to  flow  across  the  plain  to  the  bottom  of  the 
hills.  One,  however,  flows  so  flat  as  almost  scarcely  to  move, 
and  sinking  into  a  kind  of  stagnant  pool  is  swallowed  up  by 
the  earth,  without  proceeding  any  further  until,  after  remain- 
ing buriedf  or  two  or  three  [miles  ?]  underground,it  again  bursts 
forth  to  the  light,  and  resumes  its  course.  When  we  crossed 
this  stream  by  a  bridge,  which  they  are  now  repairing,  we 
entered  a  spacious  plain,  very  like  that  which  we  had  [left] 
and  displaying  a  similar  rough  and  savage  cultivation.  Here 
savage  herds  were  under  the  guardianship  of  shepherds  as 
wild  as  they  were  themselves,  clothed  in  a  species  of  sheep- 
skins, and  carrying  a  sharp  spear  with  which  they  herd  and 
sometimes  kill  their  buffaloes.  Their  farmhouses  are  in  very 
poor  order,  and  with  every  mark  of  poverty,  and  they  have 
the  character  of  being  moved  to  dishonesty  by  anything  like 
opportunity;  of  this  there  was  a  fatal  instance,  but  so  well 
avenged  that  it  is  not  like  to  be  repeated  till  it  has  long 
faded  out  of  memory.  The  story,  I  am  assured,  happened 
exactly  as  follows : — A  certain  Mr.  Hunt,  lately  married  to  a 
lady  of  his  own  age,  and,  seeming  to  have  had  what  is  too 
often  the  Englishman's  characteristic  of  more  money  than  wit, 
arrived  at  Naples  a  year  or  two  ago  en  famftle,  and  desirous 
of  seeing  all  the  sights  in  the  vicinity  of  this  celebrated 
place.  Among  others  Paestum  was  not  forgot  At  one  of 
the  poor  farmhouses  where  they  stopped,  the  inhabitant  set 


1832.]  JOUKNAL.  '         467 

her  eyes  on  a  toilet  apparatus  which  was  composed  of  silver 
and  had  the  appearance  of  great  value.  The  woman  who 
spread  this  report  addressed  herself  to  a  youth  who  had  been 
[under]  arms,  and  undoubtedly  he  and  his  companions  showed 
no  more  hesitation  than  the  person  with  whom  the  idea  had 
originated.  Five  fellows,  not  known  before  this  time  for  any 
particular  evil,  agreed  to  rob  the  English  gentleman  of  the 
treasure  of  which  he  had  made  such  an  imprudent  display. 
They  were  attacked  by  the  banditti  in  several  parties,  but  the 
principal  attack  was  directed  to  Mr.  Hunt's  carriage,  a 
servant  of  that  gentleman  being,  as  well  as  himself,  pulled  out 
of  the  carriage  and  watched  by  those  who  had  undertaken  to 
conduct  this  bad  deed.  The  man  who  had  been  the  soldier, 
probably  to  keep  up  his  courage,  began  to  bully,  talk 
violently,  and  strike  the  valet  de  place,  who  screamed  out 
in  a  plaintive  manner,  "Do  not  injure  ma"  His  master, 
hoping  to  make  some  impression,  said,  "Do  not  hurt  my 
servant,"  to  which  the  principal  brigand  replied,  "  If  he  dares 
to  resist,  shoot  him.'*  The  Tna.r>  who  stood  over  Mr.  Hunt 
unfortunately  took  the  captain  at  the  word,  and  his  shot 
mortally  wounded  the  unfortunate  gentleman  and  his  wife, 
who  both  died  next  day  at  our  landlady's,  Miss  "Whyte,  who 
had  the  charily  to  receive  them  that  they  might  hear  their 
own  language  on  their  deathbed.  The  Neapolitan  Govern- 
ment made  the  most  uncommon  exertions.  The  whole  of 
the  assassins  were  taken  within  a  fortnight,  and  executed 
within  a  week  afterwards.  In  this  wild  spot,  rendered 
unpleasing  by  the  sad  remembrance  of  so  inhuman  an  ac- 
cident, and  the  cottages  which  serve  for  refuge  for  so 
wretched  and  wild  a  people,  exist  the  celebrated  ruins  of 
Paestunu  Being  without  arms  of  any  kind,  the  situation 
was  a  dreary  one,  and  though  I  can  scarce  expect  now  to 
defend  myself  effectually,  yet  the  presence  of  my  pistol 
would  have  been  an  infinite  cordial  The  ruins  are  of  very 
great  antiquity,  which  for  a  veiy  long  time  has  not  been 


468  JOUENAL.  [MAKCH 

suspected,  as  it  was  never  supposed  that  the  Sybarites,  a 
luxurious  people,  were  early  possessed  of  a  style  of  archi- 
tecture simple,  chaste,  and  inconceivably  grand,  which  was 
lost  before  the  time  of  Augustus,  who  is  said  by  Suetonius 
to  have  undertaken  a  journey  on  purpose  to  visit  these 
remains  of  an  architecture,  the  most  simple  and  massive  of 
which  Italy  at  least  has  any  other  specimen.  The  Greeks 
have  specimens  of  the  same  kind,  but  they  are  composed 
not  of  stone,  like  Paestum,  but  of  marble.  All  this  has  been 
a  discovery  of  recent  date.  The  ruins,  which  exist  without 
exhibiting  much  demolition,  are  three  in  number.  The 
first  is  a  temple  of  immense  size,  having  a  portico  of  the 
largest  columns  of  the  most  awful  species  of  classic  archi- 
tecture. The  roof,  which  was  composed  of  immense  stones, 
was  destroyed,  but  there  are  remains  of  the  Cella,  contrived 
for  the  sacrifices  to  which  the  priests  and  persons  of  high 
office  were  alone  [admitted]. 

A  piece  of  architecture  more  massive,  without  being 
cumbrous  or  heavy,  was  never  invented  by  a  mason. 

A  second  temple  in  the  same  style  was  dedicated  to- 
Ceres  as  the  large  one  was  to  Neptune,  on  whose  dominion 
they  looked,  and  who  was  the  tutelar  deity  of  Paestum,  and 
so  called  from  one  of  his  Greek  names.  The  fane  of  Ceres 
is  finished  with  the  greatest  accuracy  and  beauty  of  pro- 
portion and  taste,  and  in  looking  upon  it  I  forgot  all  the- 
unpleasant  feelings  which  at  first  oppressed  me.  The  third 
was  not  a  temple,  but  a  Basilica,  or  species  of  town-house,  as 
it  was  called,  having  a  third  row  of  pillars  running  up  the- 
middle,  between  the  two  which  surrounded  the  sides,  and 
were  common  to  the  Basilica  and  temple  both.  These  sur- 
prising public  edifices  have  therefore  all  a  resemblance  to 
each  other,  though  also  points  of  distinction.  If  Sir  William 
Gell  makes  clear  his  theory  he  will  throw  a  most  precious 
light  on  the  origin  of  civilisation,  proving  that  the  sciences- 
have  not  sprung  at  once  into  light  and  life,  but  rose  gradually 


1832.]  JOUKNAL.  469 

with  extreme  purity,  and  continued  to  be  practised  best 
by  those  who  first  invented  them.  Full  of  these  reflections, 
we  returned  to  our  hospitable  Miss  Whyte  in  a  drizzling 
evening,  but  unassassinated,  and  our  hearts  completely  filled 
with  the  magnificence  of  what  we  had  seen.  Miss  Whyte 
had  in  the  meanwhile,  by  her  interest  at  La  Triniti  with 
the  Abbot,  obtained  us  permission  to  pay  a  visit  to  him,  and 
an  invitation  indeed  to  dinner,  which  only  the  weather  and 
the  health  of  Sir  William  Gell  and  myself  prevented  our  ac- 
cepting. After  breakfast,  therefore,  on  the  18th  of  March,  we 
set  out  for  the  convent,  situated  about  two  or  three  miles 
from  the  town  in  a  very  large  ravine,  not  unlike  the  bed 
of  the  Rosslyn  river,  and  traversed  by  roads  which  from 
their  steepness  and  precipitancy  are  not  at  all  laudable, 
but  the  views  were  beautiful  and  changing  incessantly, 
while  the  spring  advancing  was  spreading  her  green  mantle 
over  rock  and  tree,  and  making  that  beautiful  which  was 
lately  a  blighted  and  sterile  thicket  The  convent  of  Trinita 
itself  holds  a  most  superb  situation  on  the  projection  of  an 
ample  rock.  It  is  a  large  edifice,  but  not  a  handsome  one — 
the  monks  reserving  their  magnificence  for  their  churches — 
but  was  surrounded  by  a  circuit  of  fortifications,  which,  when 
there  was  need,  were  manned  by  the  vassals  of  the  convent 
in  the  style  of  the  Feudal  system.  This  was  in  some  degree 
the  case  at  the  present  day.  The  Abbot,  a  gentlemanlike  and 
respectable-looking  man,  attended  by  several  of  his  monks, 
received  us  with  the  greatest  politeness,  and  conducted  "us 
to  the  building,  where  we  saw  two  great  sculptured  vases, 
or  more  properly  sarcophagi,  of  [marble?],  well  carved  in 
the  antique  style,  and  adorned  with  the  story  of  Meleager. 
They  were  in  the  shape  of  a  large  bath,  and  found,  I  think, 
at  Paestum.  The  old  church  had  passed  to  decay  about 
a  hundred  years  ago,  when  the  present  fabric  was  built; 
it  is  very  beautifully  arranged,  and  worthy  of  the  place, 
which  is  eminently  beautiful,  and  of  the  community,  who 


4:70  JOURNAL. 

are  Benedictines — the  most  gentlemanlike  order  in  the 
Roman  Church. 

We  were  conducted  to  the  private  repertory  of  the 
chapel,  which  contains  a  number  of  interesting  deeds 
granted  by  sovereigns  of  the  Grecian,  Norman,  and  even 
Saracen  descent.  One  from  Eoger,  king  of  Sicily,  extended 
His  Majesty's  protection  to  some  half  dozen  men  of  con- 
sequence whose  names  attested  their  Saracenism. 

In  all  the  society  I  have  been  since  I  commenced  this  tour, 
I  chiefly  regretted  on  the  present  occasion  the  not  having 
refreshed  my  Italian  for  the  purpose  of  conversation.  I 
should  like  to  have  conversed  with  the  Churchmen  very 
much,  and  they  seem  to  have  the  same  inclination,  but  it  is 
too  late  to  be  thought  of,  though  I  could  read  Italian  well 
once.  The  church  might  boast  of  a  grand  organ,  with  fifty- 
seven  stops,  all  which  we  heard  played  by  the  ingenious 
organist  We  then  returned  to  Miss  Whyte's  for  the  even- 
ing, ate  a  mighty  dinner,  and  battled  cold  weather  as  we  might. 

In  further  remarks  on  Paestum  I  maj|  say  there  is  a 
city  wall  in  wonderful  preservation,  one  of  the  gates  of 
which  is  partly  entire  and  displays  the  figure  of  a  Syren 
under  the  architrave,  but  the  antiquity  of  the  sculpture  is 
doubted,  though  not  that  of  the  inner  part  of  the  gate — so  at 
least  thinks  Sir  William,  our  best  authority  on  such  matters. 
Many  antiquities  have  been,  and  many  more  probably  will 
be,  discovered.  Paestum  is  a  place  which  adds  dignity  to  the 
peddling  trade  of  the  ordinary  antiquarian. 

Marck  19. — This  morning  we  set  off  at  seven  for  Naples ; 
we  observed  remains  of  an  aqueduct  in  a  narrow,  appar- 
ently designed  for  the  purpose  of  leading  water  to  La  Cava, 
but  had  no  tame  to  conjecture  on  the  subject,  and  took 
our  road  back  to  Pompeii,  and  passed  through  two  towns 
of  the  same  name,  Nocera  dei  [Cristiani]  and  ITocera  dei 
Pagani?  In  the  latter  village  the  Saracens  obtained  a  place 


1832.]  JOURNAL.  471 

of  refuge,  from  which  it  takes  the  name.  It;  is  also  said  that 
the  circumstance  is  kept  in  memory  by  the  complexion  and 
features  of  this  second  ITocera,  which  are  peculiarly  of  the 
African  caste  and  tincture.  After  we  passed  Pompeii,  where 
the  continued  severity  of  the  weather  did  not  permit  us, 
according  to  our  purpose,  to  take  another  survey,  we  saw 
in  the  adjacent  village  between  us  and  Portici  the  scene  of 
two  assassinations,  still  kept  in  remembrance.  The  one  I 
believe  was  from  the  motive  of  plunder.  The  head  of  the 
assassin  was  set  up  after  his  execution  upon  a  pillar,  which 
still  exists,  and  it  remained  till  the  skull  rotted  to  pieces. 
The  other  was  a  stoiy  less  in  the  common  style,  and  of  a 
more  interesting  character: — A  farmer  of  an  easy  fortune, 
and  who  might  be  supposed  to  leave  to  his  daughter,  a  very 
pretty  girl  and  an  only  child,  a  fortune  thought  in  the 
village  very  considerable.  She  was,  under  the  hope  of 
sharing  such  a  prize,  made  up  to  by  a  young  man  in  the 
neighbourhood,  handsome,  active,  and  of  a  very  good  general 
character.  He  was  of  that  sort  of  person  who  are  generally 
successful  among  women,  and  the  girl  was  supposed  to  have 
encouraged  his  addresses ;  but  her  father,  on  being  applied 
to,  gave  Trim  a  direct  and  positive  refusal  The  gallant 
resolved  to  continue  his  addresses  in  hopes  of  overcoming 
this  obstacle  by  his  perseverance,  but  the  father's  opposition 
seemed  only  to  increase  by  the  lover's  pertinacity.  At 
length,  as  the  father  walked  one  evening  smoking  his  pipe 
upon  the  terrace  before  his  door,  the  lover  unhappily  passed 
by,  and,  struck  with  the  instant  thought  that  the  obstacle  to 
the  happiness  of  his  life  was  now  entirely  in  his  own  power, 
he  rushed  upon  the  father,  pierced  him  with  three  mortal 
stabs  of  his  knife,  and  killed  him  dead  on  the  spot,  and  made 
his  escape  to  the  mountains.  "What  was  most  remarkable 
was  that  he  was  protected  against  the  police,  who  went,  as 
was  their  duty,  in  quest  of  him,  by  the  inhabitants  of  the 
neighbourhood,  who  afforded  him  both  shelter  and  such  food 


472  JOURNAL. 

as  lie  required,  looking  on  him  less  as  a  wilful  criminal  than 
an  unfortunate  man,  who  had  been  surprised  by  a  strong 
and  almost  irresistible  temptation.  So  congenial,  at  this 
moment,  is  the  love  of  vengeance  to  an  Italian  bosom,  and 
though  chastised  in  general  by  severe  punishment,  so  much 
are  criminals  sympathised  with  by  the  community. 

March  20. — I  went  with  Miss  Talbot  and  Mr.  Lushington 
and  his  sister  to  the  great  and  celebrated  church  of  San 
Domenico  Maggiore,  which  is  the  most  august  of  the  Domi- 
nican churches.  They  once  possessed  eighteen  shrines  in 
this  part  of  Naples.  It  contains  the  tomb  of  St.  Thomas 
Aquinas,  and  also  the  tombs  of  the  royal  family,  which 
remain  in  the  vestry.  There  are  some  large  boxes  covered 
with  yellow  velvet  which  contain  their  remains,  and  which 
stand  ranged  on  a  species  of  shelf,  formed  by  the  heads 
of  a  set  of  oaken  presses  which  contain  the  vestments  of 
the  monks.  The  pictures  of  the  kings  are  hung  above  their 
respective  boxes,  containing  their  bones,  without  any  other 
means  of  preserving  them.  At  the  bottom  of  the  lofty  and 
narrow  room  is  the  celebrated  Marquis  di  [Pescara],  one 
of  Charles  V/s  most  renowned  generals,  who  commanded  at 
the  battle  of  Pavia.  .  .  .  The  church  itself  is  very  large 
and  extremely  handsome,  with  many  fine  marble  tombs  in  a 
very  good  style  of  architecture.  The  time  being  now  nearly 
the  second  week  in  Lent,  the  church  was  full  of  worshippers. 


[While  at  Naples  Sir  Walter  wrote  frequently  to  his  daughter, 
to  Mr.  Cadell,  Mir.  Laidlaw,  and  Mr.  Lockhart.  The  latter 
says,  "  Some  of  these  letters  were  of  a  very  melancholy 
cast ;  for  the  dream  about  his  debts  being  all  settled  was 
occasionally  broken."  One  may  be  given  here.  It  is 
undated,  but  was  written  some  time  after  receiving  the 
news  of  the  death,  of  his  litfcle  grandson,  and  shows  the 
tender  relations  which  existed  between  Sir  Walter  and 
Ms  son-in-law : — 

"MY  DEAR  LOOKHA-RT, — I  have   written  with    such 
xegularity  that ...  I  will  not  recur  to  this  painful  subject 


1832.]  JOUESTAL.  473 

I  hope  also  I  have  found  you  both  persuaded  that  the  best 
thing  you  can  do,  both  of  you,  is  to  come  out  here,  where 
you  would  find  an  inestimable  source  of  amusement,  many 
pleasant  people,  and  living  in  very  peaceful  and  easy 
society.  I  wrote  you  a  full  account  of  my  own  matters, 
but  I  have  now  more  complete  [information].  I  am 
ashamed,  for  the  first  time  in  my  life,  of  the  two  novels, 
but  since  the  pensive  public  have  taken  them,  there  is  no 
more  to  be  said  but  to  eat  my  pudding  and  to  hold  my 
tongue.  Another  thing  of  great  interest  requires  to  be 
specially  mentioned.  You  may  remember  a  work  in  which 
our  dear  and  accomplished  friend  Lady  Louisa  condescended 
to  take  an  oar,  and  which  she  has  handled  most  admirably. 
It  is  a  supposed  set  of  extracts  relative  to  James  VI.  from  a 
collection  in  James  "VT/s  time,  the  costume  (f)  admirably  pre- 
served, and,  like  the  fashionable  wigs,  more  natural  than 
one's  own  hair.  This,  with  the  Lives  of  the  Novelists  and 
some  other  fragments  of  my  wreck,  went  ashore  in 
Constable's,  and  were  sold  off  to  the  highest  bidder,  viz.,  to 
Cadell,  for  himself  and  me.  I  wrote  one  or  two  fragments 
in  the  same  style,  which  I  wish  should,  according  to 
original  intention,  appear  without  a  name,  and  were  they 
fairly  lightly  let  off  there  is  no  fear  of  their  making  a 
blaze.  I  sent  the  whole  packet  either  to  yourself  or  Gadell, 
with  the  request.  The  copy,  which  I  conclude  is  in  your 
hands  by  the  time  this  reaches  you,  might  be  set  up  as 
speedily  and  quietly  as  possible,  taking  some  little  care 
to  draw  the  public  attention  to  you,  and  consulting  Lady 
Louisa  about  the  proofs.  The  fun  is  that  our  excellent 
Iriend  had  forgot  the  whole  affair  till  I  reminded  her  of 
her  kindness,  and  was  somewhat  inclined,  like  Lady  Teazle, 
to  deny  the  butler  and  the  coach-horsa  I  have  no  doubt, 
however,  she  will  be  disposed  to  bring  the  matter  to  an  end. 
The  mode  of  publication  I  fancy  you  will  agree  should  rest 
with  OadelL  So,  providing  that  the  copy  come  to  hand, 
which  it  usually  does,  though  not  very  regularly,  you  will 
do  me  the  kindness  to  get  it  out.  My  story  of  Malta 
will  be  with  you  by  the  time  you  have  finished  the  Letters, 
and  if  it  succeeds  it  will  in  a  great  measure  enable  me  to 
.attain  the  long  projected  and  very  desirable  object  of  clear- 
ing me  from  all  old  encumbrances  and  expiring  as  rich  a 
man  as  I  could  desire  in  my  own  freehold.  And  when  you 
recollect  that  this  has  been  wrought  out  in  six  years,  the  sum. 
amounting  to  at  least  £120,000,  it  is  somewhat  of  a  novelty 
in  literature.  I  shall  be  as  happy  and  rich  as  I  please 


474  JOURNAL.  [MARCH  1832. 

for  the  last  days  of  my  life,  and  play  the  good  papa  with 
my  family  without  thinking  on  pounds,  shillings,  and  pence^ 
Cadell,  with  so  fair  a  prospect  before  him,  is  in  high  spirits, 
as  you  will  suppose,  but  I  had  a  most  uneasy  time  from  the 
interruption  of  our  correspondence.  However,  thank  God, 
it  is  all  as  well  as  I  could  wish,  and  a  great  deal  better 
than  I  ventured  to  hope.  After  the  Siege  of  Malta  I  intend 
to  close  the  [series]  of  Waverley  with  a  poem  in  the  style  of 
the  Lay,  or  rather  of  the  Lady  of  tfie  Lake,  to  be  a  I/Envoy, 
or  final  postscript  to  these  tales.  The  subject  is  a  curious 
tale  of  chivalry  belonging  to  Rhodes.  Sir  Frederick  Adam 
will  give  me  a  cast  of  a  steam-boat  to  visit  Greece,  and 
you  will  come  and  go  with  me.  "We  live  in  a  Palazzo, 
which  with  a  coach  and  the  supporters  thereof  does  not,, 
table  included,  cost  £120  or  £130  a  month.  So  you  will 
add  nothing  to  our  expenses,  but  give  us  the  great  pleasure 
of  assisting  you  when  I  fear  literary  things  have  a  bad. 
•time-  We  will  return  to  Europe  through  Germany,  and 
see  what  peradventure  we  shall  behold.  I  have  written 
repeatedly  to  you  on  this  subject,  for  you  would  really  like 
this  country  extremely.  You  cannot  tread  on  it  but  you 
set  your  foot  upon  some  ancient  history,  and  you  cannot 
make  scruple,  as  it  is  the  same  thing  whether  you  or  I  are 
paymaster.  My  health  continues  good,  and  bettering,  as 
the  Yankees  say.  I  have  gotten  a  choice  manuscript  or 
old  English  Romances,  left  here  by  Richard,  and  for  which 
I  know  I  have  got  a  lad  can  copy  them  at  a  shilling  a  day. 
The  King  has  granted  me  liberty  to  carry  it  home  with 
me,  which  is  very  good-natured.  I  expect  to  secure  some- 
thing for  the  Roxburghe  Club.  Our  posts  begin  to  get 
more  regular.  I  hope  dear  baby  is  getting  better  of  its, 
accident,  poor  soul. — Love  to  Sophia  and  Walter. 
Your  affectionate  Father, 

WALTER  SCOTT.] 


APEIL 


April  15,  Naples. — I  am  on  the  eve  of  leaving  Xaples 
after  a  residence  of  tlrree  or  four  months,  my  strength 
strongly  returning,  though  the  weather  has  heen  very  un- 
certain. What  with  the  interruption  occasioned  hy  the 
cholera  and  other  inconveniences,  I  have  not  done  much. 
I  have  sent  home  only  the  letters  by  L.  L.  Stuart  and  three 
volumes  of  the  Siege  of  Malta.  I  sent  them  by  Lord 
Cowper's  son — Mi.  Cowper  returning,  his  leave  being  out — 
and  two  chests  of  books  by  the  Messrs,  Turner,  Malta,  who 
are  to  put  them  on  board  a  vessel,  to  be  forwarded  to  Mr. 
Cadell  through  "Whittaker.  I  have  hopes  they  will  come 
to  hand  safe.  I  have  bought  a  small  closing  carriage, 
warranted  new  and  English,  cost  me  £200,  for  the  con- 
venience of  returning  home.  It  carries  Anne,  Charles, 
and  the  two  servants,  and  we  start  to-morrow  morning 
for  Borne,  after  which  we  shall  be  starting  homeward, 
for  the  Greek  scheme  is  blown  up,  as  Sir  Frederick  Adam 
is  said  to  be  going  to  Madras,  so  he  will  be  unable  to 
send  a  frigate  as  promised.  I  have  spent  on  the  expenses 
of  medical  persons  and  books,  etc.,  a  large  sum,  yet  not 
excessive. 

Meantime  we  [may]  have  to  add  a  curious  journey  of  it. 
The  brigands,  of  whom  there  are  so  many  stories,  are 
afloat  once  more,  and  many  carriages  stopped.  A  curious 
and  popular  work  would  be  a  history  of  these  ruffians. 
Washington  Irving  has  attempted  something  of  the  kind, 

475 


476  JOUBNAL.  [APRIL 

but  the  person  attempting  this  should  be  an  Italian,  per- 
fectly acquainted  with  his  country,  character,  and  manners. 

Mr.  E ,  an  apothecary,  told  me  a  singular  [occurrence] 

which  happened  in  Calabria  about  six  years  ago,  and  which 
I  may  set  down  just  now  as  coming  from  a  respectable 
authority,  though  I  do  not  [vouch  it]. 


DEATH  OF  IL  BIZARRO. 

This  man  was  called,  from  his  wily  but  inexorable 
temper,  n  Bizarro,  i.e.  the  Bizar.  He  was  captain  of  a  gang 
of  banditti,  whom  he  governed  by  his  own  authority,  till 
he  increased  them  to  1000  men,  both  on  foot  and  horseback, 
whom  he  maintained  in  the  mountains  of  Calabria,  between 
the  French  and  Neapolitans,  both  of  which  he  defied,  and 
pillaged  the  country.  High  rewards  were  set  upon  his  head, 
to  very  little  purpose,  as  he  took  care  to  guard  himself 
against  being  betrayed  by  his  own  gang,  the  common  fate 
of  those  banditti  who  become  great  in  their  vocation.  At 
length  a  French  colonel,  whose  name  I  have  forgot,  occupied 
the  country  of  Bizarro,  with  such  success  that  he  formed  a 
cordon  around  him  and  his  party,  and  included  him  between 
the  folds  of  a  military  column.  Well-nigh,  driven  to  submit 
himself,  the  robber  with  his  wife,  a  very  handsome  woman, 
and  a  child  of  a  few  months  old,  took  a  position  beneath  the 
arch  of  an  old  bridge,  and,  by  an  escape  almost  miraculous, 
were  not  perceived  by  a  strong  party  whom  the  French 
maintained  on  the  top  of  the  arch.  Night  at  length  came 
without  a  discovery,  which  every  moment  might  have  made. 
"When  it  became  quite  dark,  the  brigand^  enjoining  strictest 
silence  on  the  female  and  child,  resolved  to  steal  from  his 
place  of  shelter,  and  as  they  issued  forth,  kept  his  hand 
on  the  child's  throat  But  as,  when  they  began  to  move,  the 
child  naturally  cried,  its  father  in  a  rage  stiffened  Ms  grip 
so  relentlessly  that  the  poor  infant  never  offended  more  in 


1832.]  JOUB2JAL.  477 

the  same  manner.  This  horrid  [act]  led  to  the  conclusion  of 
the  robber's  life. 

His  wife  had  never  been  very  fond  of  him,  though  he 
trusted  her  more  than  any  who  approached  him.  She  had 
been  originally  the  wife  of  another  man,  murdered  by  her 
second  husband,  which  second  marriage  she  was  compelled 
to  undergo,  and  to  affect  at  least  the  conduct  of  an  affection- 
ate wife.  In  their  wanderings  she  alone  knew  where  he 
slept  for  the  night.  He  left  his  men  in  a  body  upon  the  top 
of  an  open  hill,  round  which  they  set  watches.  He  then 
went  apart  into  the  woods  with  his  wife,  and  having  chosen 
a  glen — an  obscure  and  deep  thicket  of  the  woods,  there 
took  up  his  residence  for  the  night.  A  large  Galabrian  sheep- 
dog, his  constant  attendant,  was  then  tied  to  a  tree  at  some 
distance  to  secure  his  slumbers,  and  having  placed  his 
carabine  within  reach  of  his  lair,  he  consigned  himself  to 
such  sleep  as  belongs  to  his  calling.  By  such  precautions 
he  had  secured  his  rest  for  many  years. 

But  after  the  death  of  the  child,  the  measure  of  his 
offence  towards  the  unhappy  mother  was  full  to  the  brim, 
and  her  thoughts  became  determined  on  revenge.  One 
evening  he  took  up  his  quarters  for  the  night  with  these 
precautions,  but  without  the  usual  success.  He  had  laid  his 
caxabine  near  him,  and  betaken  himself  to  rest  as  usual, 
when  his  partner  arose  from  his  side,  and  ere  he  became 
sensible  she  had  done  so,  she  seized  [his  carabine],  and  dis- 
charging [it]  in  his  bosom,  ended  at  once  his  life  and  crimes. 
She  finished  her  work  by  cutting  off  the  brigand's  head,  and 
carrying  it  to  the  principal  town  of  the  province,  where  she 
delivered  it  to  the  police,  and  claimed  the  reward  attached 
to  his  head,  which  was  paid  accordingly.  This  female  still 
lives,  a  stately,  dangerous-looking  woman,  yet  scarce  ill 
thought  of,  considering  the  provocation. 

The  dog  struggled  extremely  to  get  loose  on  hearing  the 
shot  Some  say  the  female  shot  it;  others  that,  in  its  rage, 


478  JOUENAL.  [APRIL 

it  very  nearly  gnawed  through  the  stout  young  tree  to  which 
it  was  tied.  He  was  worthy  of  a  tetter  master. 

The  distant  encampment  of  the  band  was  disturbed  by 
the  firing  of  the  Bizarro's  carabine  at  midnight.  They  ran 
through  the  woods  to  seek  the  captain,  but  finding  hitn  life- 
less and  headless,  they  became  so  much  surprised  that  many 
of  them  surrendered  to  the  government,  and  relinquished 
their  trade,  and  the  band  of  Bizarro,  as  it  lived  by  his 
ingenuity,  broke  up  by  his  death. 

A  story  is  told  nearly  as  horrible  as  the  above,  respect- 
ing the  cruelty  of  this  bandit,  which  seems  to  entitle  him  to 
be  called  one  of  the  most  odious  wretches  of  his  name.  A 
Trench  officer,  who  had  been  active  in  the  pursuit  of  him, 
fell  into  his  hands,  and  was  made  to  die  [the  death]  of 
Marsyas  or  Saint  Polyearp — that  is,  the  period  being  the 
middle  of  summer,  he  was  flayed  alive,  and,  being  smeared 
with  honey,  was  exposed  to  all  the  intolerable  insects  of  a 
southern  sty.  The  corps  were  also  informed  where  they 
might  find  their  officer  if  they  thought  proper  to  send  for 
him.  As  more  than  two  days  elapsed  before  the  wretched 
man  was  found,  nothing  save  his  miserable  relics  could  be 
discovered. 

I  do  not  warrant  these  stories,  but  such  are  told 
currently. 

[Tour  from  Naples  to  Some],  April  1 6. — Having  remained 
several  months  at  Naples,  we  resolved  to  take  a  tour  to  Borne 
during  the  Holy  "Week  and  view  the  ecclesiastical  shows 
which  take  place,  although  diminished  in  splendour  by  the 
Pope's  poverty.  So  on  the  15th  we  set  out  from  Naples, 
my  children  unwelL  We  passed  through  the  Champ  de 
Mars,1  and  so  on  by  the  Terra  di  Lavoro,  a  rich  and  fertile 
country,  and  breakfasted  at  St  Agatha,  a  wretched  place, 
but  we  had  a  disagreeable  experience.  I  had  purchased  a 
travelling  carriage,  assured  that  it  was  English-built  and 

1  Pctese  dei  Mars*  or  Jtforaco. 


1832.]  JOURNAL  479 

all  that.  However,  when  we  were  half  a  mile  on  our 
journey,  a  hush  started  and  a  wheel  came  off,  hut  hy  dint 
of  contrivances  we  fought  our  way  back  to  Agatha,  where  we 
had  a  miserable  lodging  and  wretched  dinner.  The  people 
were  civil,  however,  and  no  bandits  abroad,  being  kept  in 
awe  by  the  escort  of  the  King  of  Westphalia,1  who  was  on 
his  road  to  Naples.  The  wheel  was  effectually  repaired,  and 
at  seven  in  the  morning  we  started  with  some  apprehension 
of  suffering  from  crossing  the  very  moist  marshes  called  the 
Pontine  Bogs,  which  lie  between  Xaples  and  Home.  This 
is  not  the  time  when  these  exhalations  are  most  dangerous, 
though  they  seem  to  be  safe  at  no  time.  We  remarked  the 
celebrated  Capua,  which  is  distinguished  into  the  new  and 
old.  The  new  Capua  is  on  the  banks  of  the  river  Yolturno, 
which  conducts  its  waters  into  the  moats.  It  is  still  a 
place  of  some  strength  in  modern  war.  The  approach  to 
the  old  Capua  is  obstructed  by  an  ancient  bridge  of  a  singular 
construction,  and  consists  of  a  number  of  massive  towers 
half  ruined.  We  did  not  pass  very  near  to  them,  but  the 
site  seems  very  strong.  We  passed  Sinuessa  or  Sessa, 
an  ancient  Greek  town,  situated  not  far  from  shore.  The 
road  from  Naples  to  Capua  resembles  an  orchard  on  both 
sides,  but,  alas !  it  runs  through  these  infernal  marshes,  which 
there  is  no  shunning,  and  which  the  example  of  many  of 
my  friends  proves  to  be  exceeding  dangerous.  The  road, 
though  it  has  the  appearance  of  winding  among  hills,  is 
in  fact,  on  the  left  side,  limited  by  the  sea-coast  running 
northward.  It  comes  into  its  more  proper  line  at  a  cele- 
brated sea-marsh  called  Cameria,2  concerning  which  the 
oracle  said  "  Ne  moveas  CamarinamJ9  and  the  transgression. 

1  Jerome  Bonaparte,  ex-King  of  Bogs  had  recalled  to  Sir  Walter 

Westphalia.  the  ancient  proverb  relating  to 

1  The  sea  marsh  "Cameria"  is  Camarina,  that  Sicilian  city  on  the 

not  indicated  in  the  latest  maps  of  marsh  "  which  Fate  forbad  to 

Italy,  but  it  would  appear  that  drain.'* — Conington's  Virgil  (JEn. 

some  snch  name  in  the  Pontine  iii.  700-1). 


480  JOUENAL. 

of  which  precept  brought  on  a  pestilence.  The  road  here  is 
a  wild  pass  bounded  by  a  rocky  precipice;  on  one  hand 
covered  with  wild  shrubs,  flowers,  and  plants,  and  on  the 
other  by  the  sea.  After  this  we  came  to  a  military  position, 
where  Murat  used  to  quarter  a  body  of  troops  and  cannonade 
the  English  gunboats,  which  were  not  slow  in  returning  the 
compliment.  The  English  then  garrisoned  Italy  and  Sicily 
under  Sir  [John  Stuart].  We  supped  at  this  place,  half 
fitted  up  as  a  barrack,  half  as  an  inn.  (The  place  is  now 
called  Terracina.)  Near  this  a  round  tower  is  shown,  termed 
the  tomb  of  Cicero,  which  may  be  doubted.  I  ought,  before 
quitting  Terracina,  to  have  mentioned  the  view  of  the  town 
and  castle  of  Gaeta  from  the  Pass.  It  is  a  castle  of  great 
strength.  I  should  have  mentioned  Aversa,  remarkable  for  a 
house  for  insane  persons,  on  the  humane  plan  of  not  agi- 
tating their  passions.  After  a  long  pilgrimage  on  this  beastly 
road  we  fell  asleep  in  spite  of  warnings  to  the  contrary,  and 
before  we  beat  the  reveille  were  within  twenty  miles  of  the- 
city  of  Borne.  I  think  I  felt  the  effects  of  the  bad  air  and 
damp  in  a  very  bad  headache. 

After  a  steep  climb  up  a  slippery  ill-paved  road  Velletri 
received  us,  and  accommodated  us  in  an  ancient  villa  or 
cMteau,  the  original  habitation  of  an  old  noble.  I  would 
have  liked  much  to  have  taken  a  look  at  it ;  but  I  am  tired 
by  my  ride.  I  fear  my  time  for  such  researches  is  now 
gone.  Monte  Albano,  a  pleasant  place,  should  also  be 
mentioned,  especially  a  forest  of  grand  oaks,  which  leads* 
you  pretty  directly  into  the  vicinity  of  Home.  My  son 
Charles  had  requested  the  favour  of  our  friend  Sir  William' 
Gell  to  bespeak  a  lodging,  which,  considering  his  bad  health, 
was  scarcely  fair.  My  daughter  had  imposed  the  same 
favour,  but  they  had  omitted  to  give  precise  direction  how 
to  correspond  with  their  friends  concerning  the  execution 
of  their  commission.  So  there  we  were,  as  we  had  reason 
to  think,  possessed  of  two  apartments  and  not  knowing 


1832.]  JOUBKAL.  481 

the  [way]  to  any  of  them.  We  entered  Borne  by  a  gate1 
renovated  by  one  of  the  old  Pontiffs,  but  which,  I  forget, 
and  so  paraded  the  streets  by  moonlight  to  discover,  if 
possible,  some  appearance  of  the  learned  Sir  William  G-ell 
or  the  pretty  Mrs.  Ashley.  At  length  we  found  our  old 
servant  who  guided  us  to  the  lodgings  taken  by  Sir  "William 
Gell,  where  all  was  comfortable,  a  good  fire  included,  which 
our  fatigue  and  the  chilliness  of  the  night  required.  We 
dispersed  as  soon  as  we  had  taken  some  food,  wine  and 
water. 

We  slept  reasonably,  but  on  the  next  morning 


FINIS. 


1  Porta  S.  Giovanni,  rebuilt  by  Gregory  mi.  in  1574. 
VOL.  IL  2  H 


APPENDIX 

Xo.  II. 
Letter  from  Mr.  Oarlyle  referred  to  in  voL  if.  p.  160.1 

EDIXBUKGH,  21  COMELY  BA^K, 

13th  April  1S2S. 

3 — In  February  last  I  had  the  honour  to  receive  a  letter 
from  Von  Goethe,  announcing  the  speedy  departure,  from 
Weimar,  of  a  Packet  for  me,  in  which,  among  other  valuables, 
should  he  found  "two  medals,"  to  be  delivered  "mit  ver- 
Undlichsten  Griissen "  to  Sir  Walter  Scott.  By  a  slow  enough 
conveyance  this  Kdstchen,  with  its  medals  in  perfect  safety,  has 
at  length  yesterday  come  to  hand,  and  now  lays  on  me  the 
enviable  duty  of  addressing  you. 

Among  its  multifarious  contents,  the  Weimar  Box  failed  not 
to  include  a  long  letter — considerable  portion  of  which,  as  it 
virtually  belongs  to  yourself,  you  will  now  allow  me  to 
transcribe.  Perhaps  it  were  thriftier  in  me  to  reserve  this 
for  another  occasion ;  but  considering  how  seldom  such  a  Writer 
obtains  such  a  Critic,  I  cannot  but  reckon  it  pity  that  this 
friendly  interview  between  them  should  be  anywise  delayed. 

"  Sehen  Sie  Herrn  Walter  Scott,  so  sagen  Sie  ihm  auf  das 
verbindlichste  in  meinem  Namen  Dank  fur  den  lieben  heitern 
Brief,  gerade  in  dem  schonen  Sinne  gescbrieben,  dass  der  Mensch 

1  It  is  much  to  be  regretted  that  have  seen  Scott  subsequently,  as 

Scott  and  Carlyle  never  met.    The  he  depicts  Trim  in  the  memorable 

probable   explanation  is  that   the  words,   "Alas!    his    fine   Scottish 

admirable   letter   now   printed  in  face,  with  its  shaggy  honesty  and 

eadenso,  coming  into  a  honse  where  goodness,  when  we  saw  it  latterly 

there  was  sickness,  and  amid  the  tor-  in  the  Edinburgh,  streets,  was  all 

moil  of  London  life,  was  carefully  laid  worn  with  care — the  joy  all  fled 

aside  for  reply  at  a  more  convenient  from  it,  and  ploughed  deep  with 

season.  This  season,  unfortunately,  labour  and  sorrow." 
never  came.    Scott  did  not  return         Mr.  Ixx&hart  once  said  to  a  friend 

to  Scotland  until  June  3d,  and  by  that  he  regretted  that   they  had 

that  time  Carlyle  had  left  Edin-  never  met,  and  gave  as  a  reason  the 

burgh    and    settled    at    Craigen-  state  of  Scott's  health, 
pnttock.        He    must,     however, 


484  APPENDIX. 

dem  Menschen  werth  seyn  musse.  So  auch  habe  ich  dessen 
Leben  Napoleon's  erhalten  und  solches  in  diesen  "Winter- 
abenden  und  Nachten  von  Anfang  bis  zu  Ende  mit  Aufmerksam- 
keit  durchgelesen. 

"Mir  war  hochst  bedeutend  zu  sehen,  wie  sich  der  erste 
Erzahler  des  Jahrhunderts  einem  so  ungemeinen  Geschaft 
unterzieht  nnd  Tins  die  iiberwichtigen  Begebenheiten,  deren 
Zeuge  zu  seyn  wir  gezwungen  wurden,  in  fertigem  Zuge  vor- 
iiberfuhrt.  Die  Abtheilung  durch  Capitel  in  grosse  zusammen- 
gehorige  Massen  giebt  den  verschlungenen  Ereignissen  die 
reinste  Fasslichkeit,  und  so  wird  dann  auch  der  Yortrag  des 
Einzelnen  auf  das  unschatzbarste  deutlich  und  anschaulich. 

"Ich  las  es  im  Original,  und  da  wirkte  es  ganz  eigentlich 
seiner  Natur  nach.  Es  ist  ein  patriotischer  Britte  der  spricht, 
der  die  Handlungen  des  Feindes  nicht  wohl  mit  giinstigen 
Augen  ansehen  kann,  der  als  ein  rechtlieher  Staatsbiirger  zu- 
gleich  mit  den  Unternehmungen  der  Politik  auch  die  Forderun- 
gen  der  Sittlichkeit  befriedigt  wiinscht,  der  den  Gegner,  im 
frechen  Laufe  des  Gliicks,  mit  unseligen  Folgen  bedroht,  und 
auch  im  bittersten  Verfall  ihrt  kaum  bedauern  kann. 

"  Und  so  war  mir  noch  ausserdem  das  "Werk  von  der  grossten 
Bedeutung,  indem  es  mich  an  das  Miterlebte  theils  erinnerte,, 
theils  mir  manches  Uebersehene  neu  vorfuhrte,  mich  auf  einem 
unerwarteten  Standpunkt  versetzte,  -mir  zu  erwagen  gab  was  ich 
fur  abgeschlossen  hielt,  und  besonders  auch  mich  befahigte  die 
Gegner  dieses  wichtigen  Werkes,  an  denen  es  nicht  fehlen  kann, 
zu  beurtheilen  und  die  Einwendungen,  die  sie  von  ihrer  Seite 
vortragen,  zu  wiirdigen. 

Sie  sehen  hieraus  dass  zu  Ende  des  Jahres  keine  hohere 
Gabe  hatte  zu  mir  gelangen  konnen.  Es  ist  dieses  Werk  mir 
zu  einem  goldenen  Netz  geworden,  womit  ich  die  Schattenbilder 
meines  vergangenen  Lebens  aus  den  Letheischen  Fluthen  mit 
reichem  Zuge  heraufzufischen  mich  beschaftige. 

"  Ungefahr  dasselbige  denke  ich  in  dem  nachsten  Stiicke  von 
Kunst  und  Alterthum  zu  sagen,  wo  sie  auch  einiges  Heitere 
uber " 

"With  regard  to  the  medals,  which  are,  as  I  expected,  the  two 
well-known  likenesses  of  Goethe  himself,  it  could  be  no  hard 
matter  to  dispose  of  them  safely  here,  or  transmit  them,  to  you, 
if  you  required  it,  without  delay:  but  being  in  this  curious 
fashion  appointed  as  it  were  Ambassador  between  two  Kings 


APPENDIX.  485 

of  Poetry,  I  would  willingly  discharge  my  mission  with  the 
solemnity  that  beseems  such  a  business,  and  nuturall}r  it  must 
flatter  my  vanity  and  love  of  the  marvellous,  to  think  that,  by 
means  of  a  Foreigner  whom  I  have  never  seen,  I  might  now 
have  access  to  my  native  Sovereign,  whom  I  have  so  often  seen 
in  public  and  so  often  wished  that  I  had  claim  to  see  and  know 
in  private  and  near  at  hand. — Till  Whitsunday  I  continue  to 
reside  here ;  and  shall  hope  that  some  time  before  that  period 
I  may  have  opportunity  to  wait  on  you,  and,  as  my  commission 
bore,  to  hand  you  these  memorials  in  person. 

Meanwhile  I  abide  your  further  orders  in  this  matter ;  and  so, 
with  all  the  regard  which  belongs  to  one  to  whom  I  in  common 
with  other  "millions  owe  so  much, — I  have  the  honour  to  be, 
Sir,  most  respectfully  your  servant,  THOMAS  CAHLYLE. 

Besides  the  two  medals  specially  intended  for  you,  there  have 
come  four  more,  which  I  am  requested  generally  to  dispose  of 
amongst  "  JFbJtlwollendcn."  Perhaps  Mr.  Lockhart,  whose  merits 
in  respect  of  German  Literature,  and  just  appreciation  of  this  its 
Patriarch  and  Guide,  are  no  secret,  will  do  me  the  honour  to 
accept  of  one  and  direct  me  through  your  means  how  I  am  to 
have  it  conveyed  ? 

Translation  of  the  Letter  from,  Goethe. 

"  Should  you  see  Sir  "Walter  Scott,  be  so  kind  as  return  to 
him  my  most  grateful  thanks  for  his  dear  and  cheerful 
letter, — a  letter  written  in  just  that  beautiful  temper  which 
makes  one  man  feel  himself  to  be  worth  something  to  another. 
Say,  too,  that  I  received  his  Life  of  Napoleon,  and  have  read  it 
this  winter — in  the  evening  and  at  night — with  attention  from 
beginning  to  end.  To  me  it  was  full  of  meaning  to  observe 
how  the  first  novelist  of  the  century  took  upon  himself  a  task 
and  business,  so  apparently  foreign  to  him,  and  passed  under 
review  with  rapid  stroke  those  important  events  of  which 
it  had  been  our  fate  to  be  eye-witnesses.  The  division  into 
chapters,  embracing  masses  of  intimately  connected  events, 
gives  a  clearness  to  the  historical  sequence  that  otherwise  might 
have  been  only  too  easily  confused,  while,  at  the  same  time, 
the  individual  events  in  each  chapter  are  described  with  a 
clearness  and  a  vividness  quite  invaluable. 

I  read  the  work  in  the  original,  and  the  impression  it  made 
upon  me  was  thus  free  from  the  disturbing  influence  of  a  foreign 


486  APPENDIX. 

medium.  I  found  myself  listening  to  the  words  of  a  patriotic 
Briton,  who  finds  it  impossible  to  regard  the  actions  of  the 
enemy  with  a  favourable  eye, — an  honest  citizen  this,  whose 
desire  is,  that  while  political  considerations  shall  always  receive 
due  weight,  the  demands  of  morality  shall  never  be  over- 
looked ;  one  who,  while  the  enemy  is  borne  along  in  his  wanton 
course  of  good  fortune,  cannot  forbear  to  point  with  warning 
finger  to  the  inevitable  consequences,  and  in  his  bitterest  disaster 
can  with  difficulty  find  him  worthy  of  a  tear. 

The  book  was  in  yet  another  respect  of  the  greatest  import- 
ance to  me,  in  that  it  brought  back  to  my  remembrance  events 
through  which  I  had  lived — now  showing  me  much  that  I  had 
overlooked,  now  transplanting  me  to  some  unexpected  stand- 
point, thus  forcing  me  to  reconsider  a  question  which  I  had  looked 
upon  as  settled,  and  in  a  special  manner  putting  me  in  a  position 
to  pass  judgment  upon  the  unfavourable  critics  of  this  book — for 
these  cannot  fail — and  to  estimate  at  their  true  value  the  objec- 
tions which  are  sure  to  be  made  from  their  side.  From  all  this 
you  will  understand  how  the  end  of  last  year  could  have  brought 
with  it  no  gift  more  welcome  to  me  than  this  book.  The  work 
has  become  to  me  as  it  were  a  golden  net,  wherewith  I  can 
recover  from  out  the  waves  of  Lethe  the  shadowy  pictures  of 
my  past  life,  and  in  that  rich  draught  I  am  finding  my  present 
employment 

I  intend  making  a  few  remarks  to  the  same  purpose  in  the 
next  number  of  Kunst  und  Alterthum.1  . 


No.  Ill 

Contents  of  the  Fblume  of  Irish  Manuscnpt  referred  to, vol.  ii.  p.  289* 

1.  The  rudiments  of  an  Irish  Grammar  and  Prosody;  the 
first  leaf  wanting. 

2.  The  Book  of  Eights ;  giving  an  account  of  ye  rents  and 

1  This  purpose  Goethe  seems  to  page  663X  the  following  entry  is 

have  carried  out,f or  in  the  "Chrono-  found:  —  **1827.       TTeber    neuere 

logje  "  which  is  printed  in  the  two-  franzo'sische  Idteratur. — Ueber  chi- 

volume  edition  of  his  works,  pub-  nesischeGedichte.— UeberdasLeben 

lished  at  Stuttgart  1827  (voL  ii.  Napoleon's  von  Walter  Scott » 


APPENDIX.  487 

subsidies  of  the  kings  and  princes  of  Ireland.  It  is  said  to 
have  (been)  written  by  Beinin  MacSescnen,  the  Psalmist  of 
Saint  Patrick  It  is  entirely  in  Terse,  except  a  few  sentences  of 
prose  taken  from  ye  booke  of  Glandelogh. 

3.  A  short  poem  giving  an  account  of  ye  disciples  and  favour- 
ites of  St.  Patrick. 

4.  A  poem  of  Eochy  0  Myn's;  giving  an  account  of  the 
followers  of  Partholan,  the  first  invader  of  Ireland  after  the 
flood. 

5.  A  poem  written  by  Macliag,  Brian  Boniay's  poet  Laureat. 
It  gives  an  account  of  the  twelve  sons  of  Kennedy,  son  of 
Lorcan,  Brian's  father ;  and  of  ye  Dalcassian  race  in  general 

6.  A  book  of  annals  from  the  year  976  to  1014,  including 
a  good  account  of  the  battle  of  Clontarf,  etc. 

7.  A  collection  of  Historical  poems  by  different  authors,  such 
as  0  Dugan,  etc.,  and  some  extracts,  as  they  seem,  from  the 
psalter  of  CashiU,  written  by  Gormac-mac-Cuilinan,  Archbishop 
and  King  of  Leath  Mogha,  towards  the  beginning  or  middle  of 
the  ninth  century;  Oobhach  0  Cannon  and  O  Heagusahave  their 
part  in  these  poems.     In  them  are  interspersed  many  other 
miscellaneous  tracts,  among  which  is  one  called  Sgeul-an-Erin, 
but  deficient,  wherein  mention  is  made  of  Garbh  mac  Stairn,  said 
to  be  slain  by  Cuchullin;  a  treatise  explaining  the   Ogham 
manner   of  writing  which  is  preserved  in  this    book ;    the 
privileges  of  the  several  kings  and  princes  of  Ireland,  in  making 
their  tours  of  the  Kingdom,  and  taking  their  seats  at  the  Feis 
of  Tara ;  and  an  antient  moral  and  political  poem  as  an  advice 
to   princes  and   chieftains,  other  poems  and  prophecies,  etc., 
chronological  and  religious,  disposed  in  no  certain  order. 

8.  The  last  will  and  testament  of  Ck>rmac-mac-Cuilinan  in 
verse. 

9.  The  various  forms  of  the  Ogham. 

10.  The  death  of  Cuchullin,  an  antient  story  interspersed 
with  poems,  which,  if  collected,  would  contain  the  entire  sub- 
stance of  the  composition,  which  is  very  good  (except  in  one 
instance)  and  founded  on  real  fact. 

11.  The  bloody  revenge  of  Conall  Cearnach  for  the  death  of 
Cuchullin,     This  may  be  considered  as  the  sequel  of  the  preced- 
ing story,  and  of  equal  authority  and  antiquity.    It  is  written 
in  the  very  same  style,   and    contains   a   beautiful   elegy  on 
Cuchullin  by  his  wife 


488  APPENDIX. 

12.  The  death  of  Cormac  Con  luings,  written  in  the  same 
style  with  the  foregoing  stories. 

13.  The  genealogies  of  all  ye  principal   Irish   and  Anglo 
Norman  families  of  Ireland  to  the  end. 


A  very  good  copy  of  the  Cath-Grabhra. 

he  above  table  of  contents  is  in  the  handwriting  of  Dr. 
Young,  Jate  Bishop  of  Clonf  ert,  a  man  possessing  the  highest  ta 
learning,  and  who  had  been  acquainted  with  the  Irish  language 
infanc.  J- 


infancy. 


No.  IV. 

"A  Former  Empress" — P.  451. 

The  Church  of  Santa  Maria  del  Carmine  contains  relics 
dear  alike  to  the  romance  of  democracy  and  empire.  It 
was  from  this  church  that  Masaniello  harangued  the  fickle 
populace  in  vain ;  it  was  here  that  he  was  despatched  by  three 
bandits  in  the  pay  of  the  Duke  of  Maddaloni ;  and  here  he  found 
an  honourable  interment  during  a  rapid  reflux  of  popular  favour. 
In  this  church,  too,  lies  Conradin  the  last  prince  of  the  great 
house  of  Suabia,  with  his  companion  in  arms  and  in  death, 
Erederic,  son  of  the  Margrave  of  Baden,  with  pretensions, 
through  his  mother,  to  the  Dukedom  of  Austria.  The  features 
of  the  mediaeval  building  have  long  since  been  obliterated  by 
reconstructions  of  the  17th  and  18th  centuries,  while  round  the 
tomb  of  Conradin  a  tissue  of  fictions  has  been  woven  by  the 
piety  and  fondness  of  after  times.  The  sceptics  of  modern  re- 
search do  not,  however,  forbid  us  to  believe  that  there  may  be 
an  element  of  truth  in  the  beautiful  legend  of  the  visit  and 
benefactions  of  Elizabeth  Margaret  of  Bavaria,  the  widowed 
mother  of  Conradin,  erroneously  dignified  with  the  title  of 
Empress,  to  the  resting-place  of  her  son.  Her  statue  in  the 
convent,  with  a  purse  in  her  hand,  seems  to  attest  the  tale, 
which  was  no  doubt  related  to  the  Scottish  Poei^  and  may  well 
have  stirred  his  fancy.  What  the  epitaph  was  which  he  copied 
we  cannot  now  determine.  It  is  not  pretended  that  the  unhappy 
lady  was  buried  here,  but  two  inscriptions  commemorate  the 
ferocity  of  Charles  of  Anjou,  and  the  vicissitudes  of  fortune 
which  befell  his  victims.  One,  believed  to  be  of  great  antiquity, 
is  attached  to  a  cross  or  pillar  erected  at  the  place  of  execu- 


APPENDIX.  489 

tion.  It  breathes  the  insolence  of  the  conqueror  mingled 
with  a  barbarous  humour  embodied  in  a  play  on  words — for 
"Asturis"  has  a  double  reference  to  the  kite  and  to  the  place 
"  Astura,"  at  which  the  fugitive  Princes  were  captured  : 

"  Astnris  ungue  Leo  Pullum  rapiens  Aquilinuxa 
Hie  deplumavit,  acephalmnque  dedit" 

The  other  lines,  in  the  Church,  of  more  modern  date,  are  con- 
ceived in  a  humaner  spirit,  and  may  possibly  be  those  which 
touched  the  heart  of  the  old  worshipper  of  chivalry. 

Ossibvs  et  memoriae  Conradim  de  Stovffen,  vltuui  ex  sva  progeme  Svevi«  dvcis, 
Conradi  Kom.  Regis  F.  et  Fridenci  u.  imp.  nepotis,  qm  cvm  Siciliae  et  Apvlae  regna 
exercitv  valido,  vti  hereditana  vindicate  proposvisset,  a  Carolo  Andegavio  L  Iivivs  nominis 
rege  Franco  caeperam  in  agro  Palento  victvs  et  debellatvs  extatit,  deniqvc  captvs  cvm 
Frederico  de  Asbvrgh  vltimo  ex  linea  Avstnae  dvce,  itinens,  ac  dvsdem  fortvn£  sotio, 
hie  cvm  aliis  (proh  scelvs)  a  victore  rege  secvri  percvssvs  est. 

Pivm  Neap  eoriariorvm  coUegivm,  livmanarnu  misenarvm  memor,  lcx»o  in  sedicrlam 
ledaeto,  illorvm  memoriam  at>  intentv  conservavit. 

(For  the  details  of  the  death  of  Conradin  and  the  stories 
connected  with  his  memory  see  Summonte,  Storia  di  Napoli,  vol.  ii 
Oelano,  Notizie  di  Napoli  Giornata  Quarto,  and  St.  Priest,  Histoirc 
de  la  Gongtitte  de  Naples,  vol.  iii.) 


No.  V. 

"  MOTHER  GOOSE'S  TALES,"  p.  459.  The  follomng  mte  by  a 
distinguished  authority  MI  Nursery  Tales,  witt  le  read  with 
interest. 

"It  is  unfortunate  that  Sir  Walter  Scott  did  not  record  in 
his  Diary  the  dates  of  the  Neapolitan  collection  of  *  Mother 
Goose's  Tales,'  and  of  the  early  French  editions  with  which  lie 
was  acquainted.  He  may  possibly  have  meant  Basile's  Lo  Qwdo 
de  li  cwrdi  (Naples,  163744  and  1645),  which  contains  some 
stories  analogous  to  those  which  Scott  mentions.  There  can  be 
no  doubt,  however,  that  France,  not  Italy,  can  claim  the  shapes 
of  Blue  Beard,  The  Sleeping  Beauty,  Puss  in  Boots,  and  the  other 
*  Tales  of  Mother  Goose,'  which  are  known  best  in  England. 
Other  forms  of  these  nursery  traditions  exist,  indeed,  not  only 
in  Italian,  but  in  most  European  and  some  Asiatic  and  African 
languages.  But  their  classical  shape  in  literature  is  that  which 


490  APPENDIX. 

Charles  Perrault  gave  them,  in  his  Conies  de  ma  Mkre  V0ie,  of 
1697,  Among  the  'early  French  editions'  which  Sir  "Walter 
knew,  probably  none  were  older  than  Dr.  Douce's  copy  of  1707, 
now  in  the  Bodleian.  The  British  Museum  has  no  early  copy 
There  was  an  example  of  the  First  Edition  sold  in  the 
Hamilton  sale  :  another,  or  the  same,  in  blue  morocco,  belonged 
to  Charles  Nodier,  and  is  described  in  his  Melanges.  The 
only  specimen  in  the  Public  Libraries  of  Paris  is  in  the  Biblio- 
theque  Victor  Cousin,  It  is  probable  that  the  'dumpy  duo- 
decimo '  in  the  Neapolitan  dialect,  seen  by  Scott,  was  a  transla- 
tion of  Perrault's  famous  little  work.  The  stories  in  it,  which 
are  not  in  the  early  French  editions,  may  be  EAdroite  Princesse, 
by  a  lady  friend  of  Perrault's,  and  Peau  tfAne  in  prose,  a  tale 
which  Perrault  told  only  in  verse.  These  found  their  way  into 
French  and  Flemish  editions  after  1707.  Our  earliest  English 
translation  seems  to  be  that  of  1729,  and  the  name  of  'Mother 
Goose'  does  not  appear  to  occur  in  English  literature  before 
that  date.  It  is  probably  a  translation  of  *  Ma  Mere  FOie,'  who 
gave  her  name  to  such  old  wives'  fables  in  France  long  before 
Perrault's  time,  as  the  spider,  Ananzi,  gives  his  name  to  the 
'Nancy  Stories'  of  the  negroes  in  the  "West  Indies.  Among 
Scott's  Century  of  Inventions,  unfulfilled  projects  for  literary 
work,  few  are  more  to  be  regretted  than  his  intended  study  of 
the  origin  of  Popular  Tales,  a  topic  no  longer  thought  *  obnoxious 
to  ridicule.' " — A.  L. 


INDEX. 


INDEX. 


ABBEVILLE,  L  284,  300. 

Abbotsford  labourers,  L  156. 

Abercorn,  Lady,  iL  452. 

Abercrombie,  Dr.,  L  159 ;  ii.  356, 
400. 

Miss,  ii.  281  n. 

Abercromby,  James  (afterwards 
Lord  Dunfermline),  iL  326  and  n. 

Lord  and  Lady,  i.  24-25,  109, 

225,  226 ;  iL  4, 5,  86,  89, 124,  314. 

Aberdeen,  Lord,  iL  63n.,  313,  314. 

Abud  &  Son,  bill-brokers,  London, 
i.  268 ;  iL  57  seq.,  62  n.,  65,  79. 

Academy,  Edinburgh,  Examination, 
iL  4. 

Acland,  Sir  Thomas,  ii.  163,  168. 

Adam,  Eight  Hon.  William,  Lord 
Chief  Commissioner,  i.  140,  203, 
209, 323, 357-8,  369  ;  ii.  69,  74«e^., 
86,  118,  133,  136,  326,  355,  364, 
366,  375;  sketch  of,  L  86;  at 
Abbotsford,  iL  95 ;  Scott's  visits 
to  Blair-Adam,  L  215,  246,  403  ; 
iL  207,  308,  336.  See  Blair- 
Adam. 

Admiral  Sir  Charles  andLady,  i. 

61,  140,  247,  357,  369;  iL  207, 
308,336. 

Sir  Frederick  and  Lady,  L  246 ; 

on  Byron  and  the  Greeks,  251, 
252  ;ii.  283,  462,  474. 

John,  L  86  ft. 

Adam's  class,  High  School,  Edin- 
burgh, iL  274. 

Addington,  Dr.,  iL  188. 

Adolphus,  John,  ii.  169,  186,  187. 

John  L. ,  Letters  to  Meber,  ii .  24 

and  n.,  25, 169,  273  n. 

Advocates1  library,  plans,  L  122; 
iL  84-85. 

African  travellers,  L  170. 

Ainslie,  General,  iL  135. 

Robert,  iL  257. 

Ainsworth,  W.  EL,  L  273  «. 

Airaines,  i.  300. 

Aitken,  John,  iL  426. 

Albums,  suppression  of,  L  1. 

Alexander,  Emperor,  L  292 ;  iL  49. 


Alexander,    Right   Hon.    Sir    W., 

Chief  Baron  of  Exchequer,  iL  166. 

Mrs.,  of  Ballochmyle,  iL  174. 

Algiers,   consular  establishment  at, 

IL  437-439. 
A ITan,  Thomas,  iL  76. 
Sir  William,    P.B.A.,    L   45 

and  n.,   119,  403;    ii.   24   seq. ; 

1  *  Landing  of  Queen  Mary, '*  L  225. 
Allans,  the  Hay  (John  Sobieski  and 

Charles  Edward  Stuart),  iL  296, 

299  n. 

Alloway,  Lord,  iL  68  71.,  212, 
Almackts,  a  novel,  L  370. 
Aln wick  Castle,  visit   to,    iL    47; 

Abbey,  48. 
Alvanley,  Lady,  L  196. 

Lord,  iL  169. 

Anderson,  Mr.  and  Mrs.,  iL  71. 
"Andrea  de  Ferraras,"  iL  460. 
Annandale  claim,  i.  210. 
Anne  of  Gderstein,  5L  225,  246,  267- 
Anstruther,  Philip,  L  405. 
Antiquarian   Society   of    Scotland, 

iL  74,  289. 

Appleby  Castle,  L  270. 
Arbuthnot,  Sir  William,  L  96  318; 

iL  247,  286,  293. 
Mr.    and   Mrs.,   L    305,  306 

and«.,  310;iLl77, 179. 
Arden,  Misses,  iL  169,  351. 
Argyle's  stone,  iL  33: 
Argyll,  John,  Duke  of,    projected 

life  of,  iL  269. 
Arkwright,  Mrs.,  iL  47,  170,  173, 

177, 178, 180. 

Arniston,  old  oak  room  at,  iL  94. 
Ashbourne,  iL  152. 
Ashestiel  visited  in  1826,  L  168. 
Ajsthf ord  criminal  case,  L  309  and  n. 
Ashley,  Lord,  L  292. 

Mrs.,  iL  462, 481. 

Ashworth,  Mr.,  ii.  27. 
Auchinrath,  iL  220. 
Audnbon,  John  James,  the  ornitho- 
logist, L  343-45,  354  n. 
Augmentation     cases    of     stipend, 

if.  345. 

495 


496 


INDEX. 


Austen's,  Miss,  novels,  i.   153  :  li. 

37. 

Aylesbury,  ii.  156,  157. 
Ayton,  Miss,  prima  donna  of   the 

Italian  Opera,  ii.  90. 

BAHJUE,  CHABLES,  afterwards  Lord 
Jerviswoode,  ii.  85  TI.,  358. 

Baillie,  Mrs.  Charles,  Mellerstain, 
ii.  109. 

-  Joanna,  i  150,  303  ;  ii.  78,  162, 
265  n  ,  273  n.,  408  andn.  ;  tragedy 
and  -witchcraft,  10. 

Bainbridge,  George,  of  Liverpool,  i. 
190,  233,  252,  262,  338,  381,  382, 
384,390;ii.  9,  39,53. 

-  Balaam,3  i  184  and  n. 
Balcaskie  Manor-house,  i.  40-1. 
Balf  our  of  Balbirnie,  ii.  232. 

-  Charles,  ii  368. 
Ballantyne  &  Co.,  i.  51-53;   stop 

payment,  83;   liabilities,  99  n., 


-  Alexander,  i.  192  ;  ii.  14,  149, 
258,  299,  312  ;  skill  as  a  violinist, 
i.   398;   assumed  as  a   partner, 
ii.  237. 

-  James,    meeting  with  Cadell 
and   Constable,  i.   13;   calls   at 
Castle  Street,   57;    dinner   and 
guests,  58  ;  on  Scott's  style,  75, 
81,  83;  on  Devorgoil*  95,  96  ;  'False 
Delicacy,'   99;    Woodstock,    103; 
as  *  'Tom  Tell-truth,"  recollections 
of  Lord  of  the  Isles,  128  ;  Malaehi, 
130,  132  ;  mottoes,  161  ;  opinion  of 
Woodstock,  167  ;  press  corrections, 
174,    191;    'roars  for  chivalry,' 
222;  opinion  on  Napoleon,   239, 
251  ;  illness,  257  ;  at  Abbotsford, 
263-264  ;    tfapdeon,    374,   398  ; 
on  Bride   of  Lammermoor  and 
Legend  ofMontrose,  408,  409  n.  ; 
prospect,  ii  4;  The  Drovers,  11  ; 
commercial     disasters,      12  n.  ; 
Chronicles,  14,  81,    90,   112;   at 
Abbotsford,  15,  356-357  n.,  395  ; 
the    copyrights,    38  ;    criticism, 
78  ;  Scott's  consideration  for,  106  ; 
on    "Ossianic"   character,    122, 
158;   Scott's  handwriting,  204; 
wife's  illness  and  death,  234-236  ; 
names  his  trustees,  238,  240,  266, 
267  ;  letter  from  Scott,  270,  272, 
312,  315  ;  visit  to  Prestonpans, 
340  $  objects  to  a  new  epistle  from 
Mftlafthij  357  n.  ;  approves  of  an 
amanuensis,  371  ;  a  motto  wanted, 
374*. 

Baffingray,  iL  209,  338, 


Baluty  Mount,  ii.  440. 
|  Bankes,  William,  L  12  and  ??  ,  306 
•      309 ;  ii  173  w. 
Bank  of  Scotland,  ii.  244. 
Banking  Club  of  Scotland,  ii.  246. 
Bank-note  business,  i  144 
Bannatyne  Club,  i.  350,  351,  370 ; 

ii  77,  89,  121,  237,  314,  338. 
Bannatyne,    George,   Memorial  of, 

ii.  87  and  n. 

Sir  Wm.  MacLeod,  ii  129. 

Barham,  TJie,  ii.  414  seq. 
Barnard  Castle,  ii  197. 
Barranco,  ii.  465. 
Barrington,  Mrs.,  ii.  47. 
Barrow,  Sir  John,   i.   21,  381 ;  ii 

427. 
Bathurst,  Earl,  i  362%. ;  ii  51, 172. 

Lady,  i  306. 

Colonel  Seymour,  ii.  445,  446. 

Bauchland,  ii.  14. 

Bayes  in  the  Rehearsal^  i.  205  and  n. 
Beacon  newspaper,  i  323  and  w. 
Beard's  Judgments,  ii.  79. 
Beauclerk,  Lady  Charlotte,  i.  18,  19. 
Beaumont  and   Fletcher's   Lover's 

Progress,  i  46. 

Beaumont,  Sir  George,  i  111 ;  anec- 
dote of,  with  Wordsworth,  334 ; 

death,  358. 

Beauvais  Cathedral,  i  285. 
Bedford,  Duke  and  Duchess  of,  ii. 

73. 

Belhaven,  Lord  and  Lady,  ii.  133. 
Bell,  Mr.,  London,  ii.  170. 

Mr.,  ii.  225,  226. 

George,  ii.  73,  238. 

Miss  E.,    of    Coldstream,    ii 

139  and  7k 
Miss  Jane,  of  North  Shields, 

i  101  ;  ii.  2-3. 
Belsches,  Miss  W.,  afterwards  Lady 

Forbes,  i.  404?i.;  ii  55. 
Beresford,  Lord,  ii  230. 
Admiral     Sir     John,     ii.    43 

and  n. 

Berlingas,  ii  431. 
Bernadotte,  i.  385. 
Bern,  Duchess  of,  i  296. 
Bessborough,  Lord,  ii.  50. 
Bethell,  Dr.,  Bishop  of  Gloucester, 

ii.  47. 

Bevis  of  Hampton,  ii  460. 
Big  bow-wow  strain,  i  61,  155. 
Binning,  Lord  and  Lady,  ii  78,  $6. 
Birmingham,  i.  313. 
Bishop,  Dr.,  L408. 
"  Bizarro,  death  of,"  ii  476. 
Black,  A.  &  C.,  publishers,  ii  108  n. 
Captain,  &.N.,  i  405. 


INDEX. 


497 


Black,  Dr.,  account  of  David  Hume's 

last  illness,  iL  4-5. 
Black  Dwarf,  scene  of  the,  ii.  306  n. 
Black-fishing  Court  at  Selkirk,  ii. 

357. 
Blackwood,  William,  and  3falachL 

i.  130,  179,  222,  233. 
Blaekwood's     Magazine,     ii.     266, 

38671. 
Blair,  Captain,  ii.  396. 

Sir  D.  Hnnter,  ii.  236- 

Colonel,  and  Mrs.  Hunter,  ii. 

233,  236,  238,  239. 
Blair- Adam,    i.    246;   meetings   of 

Blair-Adam  Club,  i.  215,  403 ;  ii. 

207;     12th     anniversary,     308; 

13th,  336. 
Blakeney,  Mr.,  tutor  to  the  Duke 

of  Buccleuch,  i.  321. 
Blomfield,  Bishop,  i.  26 ;  ii.  163- 
Bloomfield,  Lord,  i.  411. 
Boaden's,  James,  the  Garrick  papers, 

ii.  S3  n. 

Bonaparte.    See  Napoleon. 
Bonnechose,  Emile  de,  i.  287. 
Bonnie  Dundee,  air  of,  i.  60,  64,  65. 
Bonnington,  Mr.,  at  Kenil  worth,  ii. 

15371, 

Bonnymoor  conflict,  ii.  435. 
Boothby,  Sir  William,  i.  51. 
Borgo,  Count  Pozzo  di,  L  266,  286, 

289,  297. 

Borthwick  Castle,  ii.  92-93. 
Borthwicks  of  Crookston,  L  359,  395. 
Boswell,  Sir  Alexander,  duel  with 

Stuart  of  Dunearn,  i.  58  and  n.  ; 

ii.  232. 

James,  L  58  n. 

Bothwell  Castle,  motto  to  voL   i. 

p.  iv. ;  ii.  192  n. 

Boufflers,  Madame  de,  i  299  and  n. 
Boulogne,  L  300. 
Bourgoin,  Mademoiselle,  a  French 

actress,  i.  287. 
Bourmont,  General,  ii,  438. 
Boutourlin's  Moscow  Campaign,  i. 

318. 

Bouyene,   Mr.,  the  English  Com- 
missioner, ii.  212. 
Boyd,  Mr.,  Broadmeadows,  i.  242. 
Boyd,  Walter,  of  Boyd,  Benfield  & 

Co  ,  ii.  166,  167  and  n. 
Boyle,   Right    Hon.   David,    Lord 

Justice-Clerk,  i  10,  14,  27,  57, 

109,  409 ;  ii.  124,  229,  314. 
Brabazon,  Lady  Theodosia,  ii.  72. 
Bradford,  Sir  Thomas,  i.  264;  iL  3&i. 
Brahan  Castle,  ii.  203  n. 
Brambletye  ffoute,  i.  273  and  n. 
Bran,  Scott's  deerhound,  ii  372  n. 
VOL.IL 


Brasfield,  Lord,  i.  27  n. 

Brewer's  Merry  Devil,  iL  10  and  n. 

Brewster,      Dr.     (afterwards     Sir 

David),  and  .Mrs.,  i.  233  and  »., 

241 ;  ii.  2,  25,  50,  53,  146,  259, 

260,  275,  279,  371. 
Bride  oj  Lammermoor,  Ballantyne 

on,  i.  408 :   letter  from  William 

Clerk,  ii.  300  n. 

Bridge,  Mr.,  the  jeweller,  ii.  175. 
Brinkley,    Dr.    John,    Bishop     of 

Cloyne,  ii.  290. 
Brisbane,  Sir  Thomas  M.,  i.  249  and 

n.,  318;  ii.  8. 

Bristol  riots,  ii.  419  #.,  435  and  n. 
Brocque,  Monsieur,  of  Montpelier, 

i.  148. 

Brougham,  Lord,  ii.  205,  414. 
Brown's  (Craig-)  Selkirkshire  quoted, 

i.  46,  183,  356 ;  iL  141,  358  n. 
Brown,  Launcelot,  ii.  47. 
Brown,  Misses,  of  George  Square, 

Edinburgh,  ii.  35,  72. 
Brown's,  Mrs.,  lodgings,  St.  David 

Street,  i.  191,  226. 
Bruce,  Professor  John,  iL  309  and  n. 
Bruce,  Tyndall,  ii.  309. 
Bruce,  Mr.,  from  Persia,  i.  250,  251. 
Bruce,  Mr.  and  Mrs.,  ii.  146. 
Brunei,  ii.  425. 
Brunton,  Rev.  Dr.,  i.  175  n* 
Brydone,  Mrs.    (widow  of  Patrick 

Brydone),  L  61  and  n. 
Buccleuch,  fifth  Duke  of,  L  110, 244, 

265,  326  ».,  336 ;  ii.  71,  96,  120, 

177,  223,  224,  232,  3S1,  392,  415. 
Buccleuch,    Dowager    Duchess    of. 

See  Montagu. 
Buchan,  Earl  of,  i.  255,  328 ;  death 

of,  ii.  272. 

Buchan,  Dr.  James,  i.  14. 
Buchan,  Peter,  Peterhead,  ii.  24. 
Buchanan,  Hector  Macdonald,  i.  6 

n.,  31,  209,  326,  359,  412 ;  ii.  69, 

85>  136,  200. 

Buchanan,  James  Macdonald,  ii.  201. 
Buchanan,    Miss    Macdonald,      of 

Drnmmakill,  L  3,  106,  343,  361. 
Buchanan,  Major,  of  Cambusmore, 

iL  89,  125. 
Buchanan,  Mr.,  Scott's  amanuensis, 

ii.  344,  349. 

Buckingham,  Duchess  of,  i.  277. 
Buckingham's  assassination,  ii.  426. 
Bugnie,  Signer,  io.  76. 
Burchard,  Captain,  L  382. 
Burke,  Edmund,  iL  177,  189. 
Burke,  trial  of,  ii.  218  n. ;  execu- 
tion, 225,  227,  245;   Patterson's 

"  collection  of  anecdotes,"  263. 
21 


498 


INDEX. 


Burleigh  House,  visit  to,  i.  272. 
Burn,  Mr.,  architect,  it  76,  77  n., 

93,  403,  404 

Burnet,  George,  funeral  of,  ii.  344 
Burney,  Dr.,  anecdote  regarding,  i. 

309  ;  ii  190  and  n. 
Burns,  Col.  James  Glencairn,  ii.  411. 
Bums,  Robert,  i.  202,  276,  Scott's 

admiration  for,  321  ;  skill  in  patch- 

ing up  old  Scotch  songs,  ii.  25. 
Burns,  Tom,  Coal  Gas  Committee, 

ii.  139. 

Burrell,  a  teacher  of  drawing,  i.  137. 
Bury,   Lady  Charlotte  (Campbell), 

i  277  ;ii.  289*  299. 
Butcher,  Professor,  i.  113  n. 
Butler.  Lady  Eleanor,  ii.  152  %. 
Byers,  Colonel,  ii.  29. 
Byron,  Lord,  notes,  i.  1  ;  memoirs, 

8-9;    characteristics    of,    11-13; 

lunch  at  Long's  in  1815,  59;  views 

of  the  Greek  question,  252;  Moore's 

request  for  letters,  ii.  216,  303  ; 

allusion  to  early  attachment,  341  ; 

MSS.,  402. 


,  FBASTCTS,  ii  341. 
Cadell,  Robert,  of  Constable  and 
Co.,  meeting  with  Ballantyne 
and  Constable,  i  13;  on  affairs 
in  London,  18;  sympathy  for 
Scott,  56;  advice  to  Scott,  83; 
estrangement  from  Constable,  88  ; 
the  sanctuary,  105,  109  ;  121,  218  ; 
promised  the  Chronicles,  219,  248  ; 
second  instalment  on  Chronicles, 
268  ;  eighth  volume  of  Napoleon, 
343  ;  Tales  of  a  Grandfather,  401  ; 
second  edition  of  Napoleon,  ii.  3  ; 
equally  responsible  with  Con- 
stable and  Ballantyne,  12  n  ;  Gene- 
ral Gourgaud,  26  ;  copyright  of 
novels,  35  ;  Scott's  opinion  of,  38  ; 
visits  London,  61,  65,  66;  copy- 
right, 67  ;  second  series  Chronicles, 
68,  75  ;  copyrights,  80  ;  dissatis- 
fied with  the  Chronicles,  81,  82, 
84;  plans  for  acquiring  copy- 
rights, 86  ;  their  purchase,  89- 
91  ;  new  edition  of  Tales  of  a 
Grandfather,  96,  106,  110,  112, 
117;  the  Magnum,  119,  120,  123; 
proposals  for  three  novels,  146; 
tihird  edition  of  Tales  of  a  Grand- 
father, 147  ;  plans  for  the  Mag- 
num, 149,  158  ;  success  of  Fair 
Maid  of  Perth,  200,  201  ;  trustee 
for  Ballantyne,  238;  Heath's 
letter,  241  ;  prospectus  of  Mag- 
ram  issued,  243  j  Scott's  efforts  in 


behalf  of,  244 ;  and  reciprocation, 
245;  opinion  of  Anne  of  Geier- 
ste,n,  246,  249,  274,  281;  pro- 
spects of  Magnum,  285,  287,  294, 
295;  in  treaty  for  Poetical  Works, 
296,  299  ;  Magnum,  301,  302,  303, 
307,  313,  321 ;  a  faithful  pilot, 
328  ;  twelfth  volume  of  Magnum, 
331,  339  ;  Prestonpans,  340  ;  new 
copyrights,  351,  354;  at  Abbots- 
ford,  356  n  ;  remonstrates  against 
a  new  Malachi,  363  ;  Scott's  visit, 
374;  copyrights,  383;  bad  debts, 
395,  412,  418 ;  433,  456,  461,  472- 
473. 

Csesarias,  Sir  Ewain,  grave,  ii.  151. 

Calais,  i  283-284,  300. 

Cambridge  Master  of  Arts,  anec- 
dote of,  ii  196. 

«'Cameria,"ii.  479. 

Cameron  of  Lochiel,  ii.  17. 

Camilla,  a  novel,  ii.  190  w. 

Campbell  Airds,  ii.  136. 

Saddell,  ii.  136. 

Sir  Archibald,  of  Succoth,  i.  14; 

ii.  114. 

General,  of  Lochnell,  ii.  85. 

Sir  James,  of  Ardkinglas,  Me- 
moirs, i.  176w.,  319. 

Colonel,  of  Blythswood,  ii.  32, 

33. 

Thomas,  at  Minto,  i.  62;  char- 
acterised, 217-218,394;  in  great 
distress,  ii.  171. 

Walter,  ii.  133. 

Canning,  George,  i.  26,  267,  307, 
310,  381,  382,  383,  393;  ii.  6, 
56,  161 ;  his  death,  19-20. 

Canterbury,  Archbishop  of  (Howley), 
ii.  162  w.;  (Tait),  ii4w. 

Capua,  ii.  479. 

Caradori,  Madam,  ii  294,  299. 

Carlisle,  ii  150,  151,  198. 

Carlyle,  Thomas,  ii.  160  n.,  483-486. 

Carmine  Church  of  Santa  Maria,  ii. 
488-9. 

Carnarvon,  Lord,  ii.  10,  35. 

Carr,  Mr.  and  Misses,  ii  265,  266. 

Carthage,  ii.  441. 

Caruana,  Don  F.  (Bishop  of  Malta), 
ii.  449. 

Cashiobury,  ii  193. 

Cassillis,  Ayrshire,  ii.  207. 

CasteUamare,  ii.  464. 

Castle  Campbell,  ii.  207. 

Street,  "  Poor  39,"  i  122,  136- 

137,  155,  218. 

Castlereagh.    See  Londonderry. 

Cathcart,  Captain,  ii.  236. 

Cauldshiels,  i  228;  Loch,  241. 


INDEX. 


490 


Cay,  John,  i.  22,  31. 
Cayley,  Sir  John,  ii  80. 
Celtic  Society,  present  of  a  broad- 
sword, L  98 ;  dinner,  ii.  115,  248. 
Ceuta,  ii.  436. 
Chalmers,  Dr.,  on  Waverley  Novels, 

L  175  72. 
Chambers,  Robert,  ii.  67,  233. 

William,  ii.  77  n. 

Chantrey,  Sir  Francis,  i   119 ;   ii. 

176  7i. ;  Scott  sits  for  second  bust. 

182,  187. 

Charlcote  Hall,  ii.  155. 
Charles  v.  and  Algiers,  ii.  437. 
Edward,  Prince,  and  the  J45  at 

Culloden,  i.  114-115;  ii.  395. 
Charpentier,  Madame  (Lady  Scott's 

mother),  i.  188. 
Chatham,  Lord,  ii.  188. 
Chaworth,  Mary,  ii  418  and  n. 
Cheape,  Donglas,  i.  323-324  and  n. 

George,  ii.  310,  338. 

Chessmen  from  Lewis,  ii.  422  and  n. 
Cheltenham,  i.  312. 
Chevalier,  M  ,  i.  290. 
Chiefswood,   summer   residence   of 

Mr.  and  Mrs.  Lockhart,  i.  170, 

238,  262 ;  ii.  24,  271. 
Chiswick,  ii  182. 
Christie,  Mr.  and  Mrs.,  i  311. 
Chronicles   of  the   Canongate,  first 

series  :    commencement,    i.    200 ; 

progress,  213,  214 ;  ii  2,  36  w., 

58  n ;  completion  and  publication, 

59  7i. ;  i.  81-84 ;  second  series,  in 
progress,  ii.  62, 63,  68,  76 ;  finished 
in  April  1828, 158  and  n. 

Chroniques  Nationales^  Jacques  de 

lAlain,  i.  127. 
Civic  Grown,  the,  i.  10. 
dan  Ranald,  the,  i.  121.  i 

Clanronald's     story    of    Highland  [ 

credulity,  ii  71. 

Clarence,  Duke  of,  i  261 ;  it  5.         j 
Clarendon's   collection  of  pictures,  : 

ii.  192.  I 

darkson,  Dr.  James,  i  64,  381 ;  ii 

365. 

Dr.  Eben.,  ii.  149  and  n.,  373. 

deasby,  Mr.,  ii  261,  263. 
Cleghorn,  Hugh,  i.  405  and  n. 
Glephane,  Mrs.  and  Miss  Maclean, 

i.  116 ;  ii  32,  333. 
Clerk,  Sir  George,  i  393-394. 

Miss  E.,  death  o£  i  83. 

Lieut.  James,  ii.  314. 

William,  prototype  of  Darsie 

Latimer,  i  46,  61,  106,  124,  133, 

140,  215,  221,  223,  225,  326,  343, 

357,366,369,  395,  402>  403 ;  ii  4, 


72,  75,  98,  124,  132,  133,  200,  201, 
207,  211,  224,  229,  299,  300,  308, 
314,  37471  ;  sketch  of,  i  2  ;  cham- 
bers in  Rose  Court,  134;  as  a 
draughtsman,  138;  dinnerparty, 
368  ;  Gourgaud,  ii  26,  30  ;  on  the 
judges'  salaries,  288  ;  letter  from, 


Clerk,  Baron,  i  402  ;  ii  212,  305. 
Clerk's,  John,  Xaval  Tactirs,  i.  2  », 
Clive,  Lord,  it  170,  181. 
Clonfert,  Bishop  of,  ii  486-7. 
Club,  the,  i  135/2.;  ii  345. 
Clunie,  Rev.  John,  ii.  92  and  n. 
Coal  Gas  Co.,  i  398,  400;  ii.  132,  139. 
Coalstoun  Pear,  ii.  2S2  and  n. 
Cochrane,  Mr.,  of  the  Foreign  Re- 

view, ii  27-4. 
Cockburn,  Lord,  i  320  ;  the  poison- 

ing woman,  361  n.  ;  ii  67,  218  a, 

-  Sir  George,  i  278  ;  his  journal, 
281. 

-  Robert,  i  16. 
Cockenzie,  ii  341. 

Codman,  Mr.,  of  Boston,  it  286. 

Cohen.    See  Palgrave. 

Coke  of  Norfolk.    See  Leicester. 

Colburn,  Mr.  Henry,  and  the  Garriek 
Papers,  ii.  83;  Huntly  Gordon 
and  the  Religious  Discourses,  114. 

Coleridge,  Sir  John  Taylor,  i  21, 
26  n. 

-  S.  T.,  ii  164,  186  n.,  449  and  n. 
Collyer,  tutor  to  Count  Davidoff,  L 

15,  45;  ii  147. 

Colman,  Mr.,  ii.  83,  84,  176. 

Colne,  the,  ii  193. 

Colquhoun,  John,  of  Killermont,  it 
336. 

Commission  on  the  colleges  in  Scot- 
land, i.  256. 

Composition,  mode  of,  i.  117. 

Compton,  Lady,  ii  25  and  TZ.,  30,  32. 

Conjuring  story,  ii.  419-420. 

Conradin,  ii  451  and  «.,  488-9. 

Constable  &  Co.,  position  in  Nov. 
1825,  i  9;  bond  for  £5000  for 
relief  of  EL  and  R.,  30;  confid- 
ence in  London  house,  60;  the 
origin  of  the  Magnum,  63,  64; 
anxiety,  68,  75;  mysterious  let- 
ter from,  81  ;  H.  and  R.Js  dishon- 
oured bill  for  £1000,  82;  the 
consequences  of  the  fall,  85; 
MalacM,  130  ;  affairs,  99,109,  207, 
379  ;  *e  Did  Constable  ruin  Scott  ?  " 
ii.  12  «.  ;  creditors,  38,  85;  debts, 
287,473. 

-  Archibald,   confidence   in   H. 
and  R.,   i   13,  57;    in   London, 


500 


INDEX. 


81  ;  interview  with  Scott  on  Jan. 
24th,  1826,  92,  93  ;  and  on  Feb. 
6th,  107;  and  on  March  14th, 
154  ;  power  of  ganging  the  valne 
of  literary  property,  267  re.;  death, 
ii.  11,  12. 

Constable,  George,  ii.  306  n,,  340. 

Constable's  Miscellany,  dedication  to 
George  rv\,  i.  58  n. 

Contemporary  Club,  i.  226. 

Conversation,  English,  Scotch,  and 
Irish,  i  2,  247. 

Conyngham,  Lady,  i.  278. 

Cooper,  J.  Fenimore,  The  Pilot  at 
the  Adelphi,  London,  i.  280; 
meets  Scott  at  Paris,  295;  pub- 
lishing in  America,  295,  296,  298  ; 
letter  to  Scott,  ii.  109  n.  ;  Scott 
reads  JRedSoter,  111  ;  andPrairte, 
116,  172  ;  Mme.  Mirbel's  portrait 
of  Scott,  256  n. 

-  —  Mr.,  an  actor,  i.  400. 
~ghts   of    Waverley 


82, 


Novels, 
85,  86: 


of, 


of,  ii.    80, 
ght,  89  ;  90,  91. 
Corby  Castle,  ii  151. 
Corder's  trial,  ii  339. 
Corehouse,  ii.  33,  34. 
Cork,  freedom  of,  to  Scott,  i.  68. 
Cornwall,  Barry.    See  Procter. 
Corri,  Natali,  ii.  202  and  n. 
Coulter,  Provost,  i,  172  and  n. 
Count  Robert  of  Paris,  origin 

i.  128  ;  condemned  by  Cadell  and 

Ballantyne,  iL  405* 
Court  of  Session,  new  regulations,  i. 

207,  208. 
Coutts,  Mrs.,  afterwards  Duchess  of 

St.   Albans,  i.   18,  19,  93,  278; 

letter  from,  414  n. 
Covenanters,  Scott  and  the,  ii.  404  n. 
Cowan,  Alexander,  i.  98,  99  ;  ii.  85, 

238,  395. 

-  Chas.,  Reminiscences,  iL  425  n. 
Cowdenknowes,  visit  to,  L  262. 
Cowper,  Mr.,  iL  475. 

Crabbe,  Mr.,  L  334  ;  ii.  162  n. 

Craig,  Sir  James  Gibson,  ii.  12  n., 
67  n. 

Craigcrook,  ii.  292. 

Cramond  Brig,  i  368. 

Crampton,  Sir  Philip,  L  242  n. 

Cranstoun,  George,  Lord  Corehonse, 
Dean  of  Faculty,  L  206  and  n.,  223, 
357,  369;  Scott's  visit  to  Core- 
house,  ii  33,  130;  Maidev.  Mwde, 
217. 

-  Henry,  i  237  and  ».,  381  ;  !i 
258. 

Craven,  Mr.  Ejeppel,  ii  460. 


Crighton,  Tom,  L  245. 

Cringletie,  Lord.    See  Murray,  J.  W. 

Crocket,  Major,  i  364. 

Croker,  Crofton,  i.  278,  282. 

Croker,  J.  Wilson,  i.  26,  158,  309, 
385 ;  ii.  163,  167,  173,  226,  256, 
257,  304  n.,  416 ;  on  ZTalacH,  159, 
164;  Duke  of  Clarence,  261,  262, 
278,  302,  305,  306 ;  dinner  at  the 
Admiralty,  307. 

Culross,  excursion  to,  ii  336,  337. 

Cumberland,  Richard,  L  79. 

Cumbraes  minister,  prayer  of,  ii. 
37. 

Cumnor  Hall,  ii  228. 

Cunliffe,  Mr.,  ii.  160. 

Cunningham,  Allan,  i.  278,  282; 
ii.  174  n.,  184,  187,  191;  Scott's 
opinion  of,  L  305. 

Curie,  James,  Melrose,  i.  69,  196. 

Mrs.,  funeral  at  Kelso,  i.  78. 

Cutler,  Sir  John,  i.  73  n. 

DAILY  ROUTINE,  ii.  379,  385. 
Dalgleish,  Sir  Walter's  butler,  i.  65, 

135. 
Dalhousie,  George,  ninth  Earl  of, 

sketch  of,  ii.  93 ;  Bannatyne  Club, 

237, 259, 260 ;  public  dinner  to,  286. 
Dalkeith  House,  pictures  at,  ii.  76 ; 

visit  to,  222. 
Dallas,  Mr.,  iL  222. 
Dalrymple,  David,  Westhall,  ii  341 

and  n. 

Sir  John,  i.  395 ;  iL  80,  236. 

Lady  Hew  Hamilton,  L  266. 

Dandie  Dinmont  terriers,    L    166; 

Ginger,  379  ;  Spice,  ii  388. 
Danvers,  by  Hook,  ii.  8  n. 
D'Arblay,  Madame,  i  308-9;  ii  190. 
D'Arcon,  Chevalier,  ii.  434  n. 
"  Darsie  Latimer."    See  Clerk,  W. 
Dasent,  Sir  George,  ii.  263  n. 
Dauphine,  Madame  la,  i.  296. 
Daveis,  Chas.  S.,  ii.  342  and  n.9  343. 
Davidoff,  Count,  i.  15,  45,  63,  212, 

220;  ii.  23,  29,  68,  76,  85,  147, 

298  n. 
Denis,  the  Black  Captain,  i. 

176 ;  ii.  68. 

Davidson,  Prof.,  of  Glasgow,  ii.  314. 
Davy,  Lady,  ii.  161,  165,  181,423; 

sketch  of,  i.  107-109  and  n, 
Dawson,  Captain,  ii  222,  443. 
Dead  friends  to  be  spoken  of,  i  195. 
"  Death  for  Hector  I "  ii.  52. 
Dee,  Dr.,  ii.  419. 
Defoe,  criticism,  i  387  n.,  390. 
Delicteriis,  Chevalier,  ii  458,  460. 
Demonotogy,  The,  ii  326-327,  333. 


INDEX. 


501 


Dempster,  Geo.,  of  Dunnichen,  ii 

255. 
George  and  Mrs.,  of  Skibo,  i. 

395  and  n.;  ii.  251  and  n.,  255. 
Dependants  at  Abbotsford,  ii.  Ill  n. 
D'Escars,  Duchess,  i.  281. 
Descendants  of  Scott,  ii.  491. 
De  Fere,  ii.  2. 
Devonshire,  Duke  of,  i  297  ;  ii.  181, 

183. 

Diary,  custom  of  keeping,  ii  103. 
Dibdin,  Dr.,  ii  168. 
Dickinson,  John,  of  !Nash  Mm    ii. 

31,  331. 
Disraeli,  Benjamin,  i.  21,  22;  Vivian 

Grey,  i.  402  and  n, 
Distance  !  what  a  Magician !  i.  172. 
Dividends,  declaration  of,  ii.  77,353. 
Dixon's  Gairloch,  ii.  72  n. 
Dobie,  Mr.,  ii.  129. 
Dogs  take  a  hare  on  Sunday,  i.  264. 
Don,  Dowager  Lady,  i  98. 
Sir  Alexander,  i.  62, 1 16 ;  sketch 

of,  175-6 ;  death,  177;  funeral,  179. 
Doom  of  Devorgoil,  i.  94,  95  w. ;  ii. 

20071.,  275. 
Dorset,  Mrs.,  ii.  1S5. 
Douglas,   Archibald,  first  Lord,  L 

26  and  n. 

second  Lord,  ii.  220  and  n. 

Captain,  R  N.,  ii.  220. 

Charles,  i  244,  312. 

David,  Lord  Reston,  i.  133. 

Dr.  James,  of  Kelso,  ii.  42. 

Sir  John  Scott,  i.  177,  179. 

Hon.  Thos.     See  Selkirk. 

DovAterswivel,  a,  i  222. 

Dover,  Baron,  ii.  182  and  n. 

Dover  Cliff,  L  301. 

Dragut's  Point,  ii.  444  and  n. 

Dirumlanrig,  visit  to,  i  242-246. 

Druminond,  Mrs.,  of  Auteuil,  i  292, 

294. 

Hay.     See  Hay. 

Dryburgh  Abbey,  ii.  99  n. 
Dudley,  Lord,  i.  303;  it  74  ».,  159, 

423-4. 
Dumergue,  Charles,  ii.  167,  184. 

Miss,  i.  277,  283  ;  ii  157,  158. 

Duncan,   Captain    Henry,   ii.  416, 

423-4. 

Dundas,  Henry,  i.  49 ;  ii.  255. 
Robert,  of  Arniston,  i.  57,  323, 

399 ;  ii.  73,  92-94,  251,  255,  391. 
Sir  Robert,  of  Beechwood,  i  6 

and  IL,  24,  146,  148,  203,  399 ;  ii. 

125,  225,  226,  249,  279,  281,  282, 

283,  328. 
William,  the  Right  Hon.,  Lord 

Register,  ii.  51,  73,  92,  237. 


Dundas,  Sir  Lawrence,  i.  335. 
Hon.  Robert,    son   of   second 

Lord  Melville,  i.  261. 

Robert  Adam,  i  259 ;  ii.  92. 

Dunfermline,    Lord.       See    Aber- 

cromby. 

Duras,  Mr.,  i.  297. 
Durham,  Bishop  of.  See  Van  Mildert. 

Baronial  Hall,  ii  43. 

Mr.  and  Mrs.,  of  Calderwood, 

ii92. 
Duty,  i  168, 178, 197,  203,  205,  235, 

236,  237,  238,  260,  265,  375,  379, 

410,413;  ii  15,22. 

ECKFORD,  JOHN,  ii.  191.  258. 

"  Economics/'  i.  19. 

Edgcumbe,  Hon.  Mrs.  George,  ii. 
18271. 

Edgewell  Tree,  ii.  282  and  n. 

Edgeworth,  Henry  King,  ii  17. 

— r  Miss,  i.  236 ;  ii.  12  n, 

Edinburgh  Academy,  discussion  on 
flogging,  i  322 ;  pronunciation  of 
latin,  346. 

Life  Assurance  Company,  i.  48. 

Review,  editorship  of,  ii  292 

andn. 

Edmonstoune,  James,  ii.  314. 

Edwards,  Mr.,  ii  123-124. 

Elcho,  Lord,  and  Prince  Charles- 
Edward,  i  114-115. 

Eldin,  Lord,  i  350. 

Election  expenses,  i  271 ;  ii.  46  n. 

Elgin,  Lord,  ii.  221,  394 ;  imprison- 
ment in  France,  i  150,  319. 

Elibank,  Lord,  on  English  and  Scotch 
lawyers,  i.  153. 

Elizabeth  de  Bruce,  i.  344,  347. 

Elliot,  Sir  Gilbert,  ii.  69. 

Sir  Wilham,  of  Stobbs,  i.  177, 

179. 

Lady  Anna  Maria,  1  133  and 

n,  233 ;  ii.  27,  52,  306. 

Ellis,  Lady  Georgiana,  ii.  182,  184. 

Mr.  Agar.    See  Dover. 

Charles,  Lord  Seaford,  i  27, 

292 ;  ii.  38. 

George,  i.  247 ;  ii.  20,  103. 

Mrs.  George,  ii  94,  103. 

Colonel,  ii.  95. 

Rev.  William,  missionary  to 

Madagascar,  ii  307. 

Elphinstone,  Mountstuart,  i  264. 

SirR.  H.  D.,ii.300n. 

Emus,  ii  8,  9. 

"Epicurean pleasure,"  i  10. 

Erskine,  Lord,  i  288 ;  ii  272. 

David,  of  Cardross,  ii.  136. 

Henry,  ii.  272. 


502 


INDEX. 


Erskine,  William,  Lord  Kinnedder, 
i  61  n.  79,  95  n. ;  ii.  166  ;  destruc- 
tion of  Scott's  letters,  415. 

the  Misses,  i.  411 ;  ii  113,  222, 

397. 

H.  David,  ii.  274. 

Erdody,  Count,  ii.  413. 

Essay  on  Highlands,  i.  418 ;  ii.  I. 

Essex,  Earl  of,  ii.  193. 

Euthanasia,  instances  of  :  Dr.  Black, 
Tom  Purdie,  ii.  413-14. 

Evelina,  ii  190. 

Exeter,  Lady,  i.  272-273. 

Exhibition  of  pictures,  ii.  121-132. 

Expenses,  ii.  110-111. 

fair  Afaid  of  Perth  commenced,  ii 
62,  85;  progress,  124;  publication, 
158  n.  ;  success  of,  200. 

Falkland  Palace,  ii.  309. 

Fancy  Ball,  ii.  137. 

Fauconpret,  M.,  ii.  36. 

Featherstone,  Mr.,  i.  353. 

Felix,  Colonel,  ii.  419,  420. 

Fellenburg,  E.  de,  ii.  334  and  n. 

Ferguson,  Prof.  Adam,  ii.  266,  365. 

Sir  Adam,  i.  45,  188,  189,  329, 

333,  338,  357,  364,  367;  ii.  313, 
314,  317,  318  n.,  333,  336,  338, 
340,  359,  378 ;  ii.  1,  2,  50,  52, 
53,  56,  57,  58,  211,  230,  259, 
300  n. ;  Bonnie  Dundee,  i.  65, 
69 ;  New  Year's  Day  dinner,  74 ; 
fall  from  horse,  362 ;  dinner  at 
W.  Clerk's,  369 ;  tour  in  Fife,  403 ; 
at  Blair- Adam,  ii.  308. 

Colonel,  i.  164,  168,  174,  187, 

189,  229,  238,  240,  241,  250,  252, 
260,  264,  357,  376,  387,  389,  391 ; 
ii.  8,  29,  35,  77,  141,  159,  237, 
262,  274,  279,  303,  317,  358,  378; 
Hogmanay  dinner,  i.  69;  notes 
about  Indian  affairs,  36,  37,  52, 
53 ;  meet  of  the  hounds  at  Mel- 
rose,  56. 

Captain  John,  L  376,  391 ;  ii 

95,  109,  240,  358;  return  from 
Spanish  Main,  i.  373;  dines  at 
Abbotsford,  ii.  37. 

Miss  Isabell,  death,  ii.  358, 

359. 

Miss  Margaret,  i.  69,  162  and 

n.264;  ii.  225,279. 

Miss  Mary,  L  69;  death  of,  ii. 

224. 

the  Misses,  i  49,  69  and  n.,  162. 

Fergnsson,  James,  i  359 ;  ii.  271, 314. 

Sir  James,  i.  141. 

Dr.,  ii  168. 

Ferrars  of  Tamworfh,  ii.  152. 


Ferrier,  James,  i.  103  n.,  342;  death 
of,  ii.  221,  223. 

—  Miss,  ii  343 ;  visit  to  Abbots- 
ford,  406. 

Ferronays,  Miss  De  la,  ii.  462. 

Feversham,  Lord  (Duncombe),  ii 
43. 

Fiddle  or  Fiddle-stick,  i  154. 

Fielding's  farce,  Tumble-down  Dick, 
i.  118  n. 

Fine  Arts,  poetry  and  painting,  i 
118-120. 

Fitzgerald,  Yesey,  i.  306. 

Fitz- James,  Duke  of,  i  297. 

Flahault,  Count  de,  i.  291. 

Fletcher,  Rev.  Mr.,  ii.  307. 

Fleurs,  ii.  27. 

Flodden  field,  ii.  39. 

Foley,  Sir  Thomas,  ii.  425. 

Foote,  Miss,  i.  410. 

Foote's  Cozeners,  ii.  175. 

Forbes,  Viscount,  saved  by  his  dog, 
i!6. 

Baron,  iL  286,  287,  344. 

Hon.  John,  ii.  421. 

Captain,  ii.  429. 

Sir  John,  i  37. 

John  Hay.    See  Lord  Medwyn. 

Sir  William.,  offers  of  assist- 
ance, i.  86  and  n. ;  sketch  of,  96. 
97 ;  ii.  62,  136. 

George,  i.  397;  ii  238. 

William,  of  Med^vyn,  ii.   261 

and  n.,  263,  264. 

Foreigners  at  Abbotsford,  i.  13-15, 
255. 

Forest  Club,  Scott  dines  with,  ii  54, 

Fortune,  a  mechanist,  ii  375  and  n. 

Foscolo,  Ugo,  sketched,  i.  14. 

Fouch6,  Baron,  i.  292. 

Fox,  Charles  J.,  anecdote  of,  ii  175, 
176. 

Foy's  book,  and  the  Duke  of  Wel- 
lington, ii  44,  45. 

Francklin,  Colonel,  ii.  307. 

Frankenstein,  i  174;  dramatised,  400. 

Franks,  Mr.,  i  148. 

Freeling,  Sir  Francis,  ii.  168. 

French  Press,  censors  of  the,  ii  53. 

Frere,  J.  Hookham,  ii  446  and  n., 
447,  448,  449. 

Fuller,  John,  M.P.  for  Surrey,  ii 
176  and  n. 

Funerals,  dislike  to,  i  172-173, 180. 

Fushie  Bridge  Inn,  ii  60  and  n. 

Future  Life,  speculations  on,  i  43- 
45. 

GAETA,  ii  480. 
Gala£hiebBoad,ii360. 


INDEX. 


503 


Galignani,  Mr.,  Paris,  L  286  and  n.; 
oner  for  Napoleon,  298. 

Galitzin,  Princess,  i  294,  295,  299 ; 
ii  18,  256  and  n. 

Gallois,  M.,  L  286  and  n.,  288,  290, 
296. 

Gait's  Omen,  i  132  w.,  203,  215; 
Spaeioife,  ii  319;  Laurie  Todd, 
348. 

Gardening,  ornamental,  essay  on, 
for  the  Quarterly,  ii.  62. 

Oarrick,  David,  Private  correspond- 
erae  o/,  i.  248 ;  ii.  83  n. 

Mrs.,  anecdote  of,  i.  213  n. ;  ii. 

422. 

Garstang,  ii  152. 

Gateheugh,  ii.  56. 

Gattonside,  237  and  n. 

GeU,  Sir  William,  ii.  451  n.,  455, 
458  n.,  460,  462-464,  468-470,  480, 
481. 

Genie  and  author,  a  Dialogue,  ii 
253-4. 

George  n.,  anecdote  of,  ii.  179. 

m.,  anecdote  of,  ii.  51. 

iv.,  Scott  at  Windsor,  i  278  ; 

Scott  dines  with,  ii.  178 ;  statue, 
284;  death,  342. 

Prince,  of  Cumberland,  ii.  184, 

Gibraltar,  ii.  434  and  n.,  436. 

Gibson,  John,  jr.,  W.S.,  i.  83 and  n. ; 
creditors  agree  to  private  trust, 
96;  meeting  with  Scott,  Cowan, 
and  Ballantyne,  99 ;  creditors'  ap- 
proval, 104;  lends  Scott  £240, 
107;  124,  125;  Constable's  affairs, 
164,  165 ;  Constable's  claims,  203, 
206  ;  sale  of  39  Castle  Street,  218  ; 
248,  265 ;  Miss  flume's  trust,  347 ; 
348,  367;  Scott's  travelling  ex- 
penses, 394;  396;  U.  30,  31,  38; 
Lord  Newton's  decision,  56 ;  Abud 
&  Son,  57;  60,  61,  65 ;  value  of  the 
Waverley  copyrights,  67,  91 ;  St. 
Ronarfs  Weft,  107  ;  Coal  Gas  Co., 
133  ;  139  ;  plans  for  the  Magnum, 
149  ;  200,  239,  261 ;  preparations 
for  a  second  dividend.  333,  343, 
412. 

Gifford,  William,  i  26;  funeral  of, 
340-342. 

Baron,  i.  208  and  n. 

Lady,  ii.  415,  416. 

Giggleswick  School,  captain  of,  i.  42. 

Gilbert,  Dr.  Davies,  ii.  173. 

John  Graham,  ii.  222,  224,  225, 

227,  228,  301,  302;  portrait  of 
Scott,  217  and  n. 

Gillespie,  trial  of,  and  sentence,  ii 
68  and  re. 


Gillian,  the  clan,  ii.  52. 

Gillies,  Lord,  i  225  ;  ii.  73,  75,  116, 
138,  236. 

-  Robert  Pierce,  i  225,  378,  388 
and  n.,  389;  ii.  16,  80,  104,  109, 
110,  143,  162,  168,  267,  271,  273, 
301  ;  characterisation  of,  i  32, 
33;  difficulties,  50;  Scott  offers 
Chiefswood,  51  ;  in  extremity, 
53  ;  writes  a  satire,  221  ;  a  cool 
request.  262;  268;  Foreign  £e- 
view,  269. 

Gilly,  Rev.  William  Stephen,  ii  7 
and  n.,  42. 

Gipsies  of  the  Border,  ii.  60  n. 

Gladdies  WieL  ii  187  and  n. 

Glasgow,  visit  to,  in  September  1827, 
ii  33. 

Glengarry's  death,  ii  113. 

Glenorchy,  Lady,  ii  180. 

Gloucester,  Bishop  of  (Dr.  Bethell), 
ii.  47  and  n. 

Cfoderich,  Lord,  ii  30,  41  n.t  91,  92  n. 

Godwin,  William,  n.  161,  182. 

Goethe,  letters  from,  i  359  and  n., 
ii  160  w.,  483-4. 

Goldsmith,  Oliver,  ii  177- 

Gooch,  Dr.  Robert,  i  154,280  ;  ii313. 

Gordon,  Alexander,  fourth  Duke  of, 


-  Duke  and  Duchess,  ii  288. 

-  Lady  Georgiana,  ii.  73  and  n. 

-  J.  Watson,  ii  121,  398  and  n. 

-  Sir  Wm.  Gumming,  ii  298.  n. 

-  Major  Pryse,  Personallfemoirs, 
ii  16  and  n. 

-  George  Huntly,  amanuensis,  i. 
69  and  n.,  81,  100,  149,  339  ;  ii 
16,  19,  22;  sermons,  87,  114  and 
«.,  133. 

Gourgaud,  General,  i  298  n.,  397  ; 
ii  26  and  ».  ,  30,  34,  36,  51,  53,  58. 

Gower,  Lord  Francis  Leveson, 
Poetry,  i  13  and  n.  ;  Tale  of  the 
MUl,  356  ;  ii.  35,  160,  170,  172,  184. 

-  Lady  Frances  Leveson,  ii  170, 
178,  180,  384. 

Graeme,  Robert,  i.  395. 

Graham,  Sir  James,  ii.  425,  428,  429. 

-  John.    Ste  Gilbert. 

-  Lord  William,  ii  409. 

-  of  Clavers,  ii  73. 

-  Miss  Stirling,  ii  75,  139,  282; 
Mystifications,  138  and  n. 

Graham's  Island,  ii  441. 
Grahame  of  Airth,  i.  153. 
Grange,  Lady,  ii.  222. 
Grant,  Sir  Francis,  i  353  and  n.  ; 

sketch  of,   ii.  388-389;   portrait 

with  armour,  390. 


504: 


INDEX. 


Grant,  Sir  William,  ii.  178  and  n. 
Mrs.,  of  Laggan,  i  28,  29,  41 

and  n. ;  ii.  407. 
Granville,  Lord  and  Lady,  i  289, 

291,  292,  295,  297. 
Gray,  Lord  and  Lady,  i.  409,  410. 
Greenshields,  John,  ii.  220  and  n., 

221. 
Grenville,  Right  Hon.  Thomas,   i 

304  and  n.  ;  ii.  188. 
Greville,  Lady  Charlotte,  ii.  177. 

Charles,  ii.  170  n. 

Grey,  Lord,  ii.  91. 
Grey  Mare's  Tail,  L  246. 
Griffin's  Tales  of  the  Munster  Festi- 
vals, ii.  143  and  n. 
Grosvenor,  Lord,  ii.  192. 
Grove,  The:  Clarendon's  pictures, 

ii.  192  and  n. 
Guise's,  Z>ijfa  of,  Expedition,— review 

of,  in  the  Foreign  Quarterly,  i. 

145 ;  ii.  278. 
Gurney,  Mr.,  ii.  186. 
Guthrie's  Memoirs,  ii.  110  n. 
Guyzard,  M.,  i.  407  and  n. 
Gwydyr,  Lord,  i.  310. 

HADDIXGTOX,  LOBD,  ii.  233,  262. 
Haigs  of  Bemerside,  i,  256  n.,  390 ; 

ii.  25,  53,  202. 
Hailes,  Lord,  ii  250,  265. 
Haliburton,  David,  L  229,  232 ;  ii. 

191. 
Hall,    Captain    Basil,    L     149-150, 

237  n.,  318,  343 ;  ii  232,  286,  303, 

306  n.,  398,425,428. 

Sir  James,  i.  347. 

Haffiday,  Sir  A, ,  ii.  283. 
Hamilton,  Sir  WiUiam,  i.  29 ;  ii.  29, 

235. 

Lady  Charlotte,  iL  185. 

Robert,  i   203,  361,   369;  ii. 

73,  133,  212,  281,  283,  341. 
Captain  Thomas,  and  Mrs.,  L 

220  and  w.,  231,  238,  241,   262; 

ii  9,  23,  24,  29,  53,  85,  303,  304, 

320 ;  Cyril  Thornton,  L  392. 

Bailie,  ii,  220. 

Hampden,  Lady  (nit  Brown),  ii  35, 

72. 
Hampton  Court,  ii  162-163,  189  and 

Handley,  G.,  i  161, 188,  307. 
Harper,  Mr.,  ii.  181 ;  gift  of  emus,  8. 
Harris,  Mr.,  ii  428. 
Harrison,  Colonel,  ii  168. 
Haxrowhy,  Lord,  ii.  91. 
Hartafaome's  Ancient  Metrical  Tales, 

ii  237  aad  A. 
Haslewood,  Mr.,  ii  39. 


Haunted  Glen  in  Laggan,  ii.  407. 
Hawthorne,  N.,  on  the  English,  ii. 

343  n. 

Hay,  Mr.,  Under-Secretary  of  State, 

i  303. 
E.  W.   Anriol  Drummond,  i. 

253  and  n.  ;  ii.  140, 142,  225,  232, 

236,  238,  239,  242,  243,  289,  432. 
Hay,  Sir  John,  i.  42,  355 ;  ii  134, 

241 ;  Banking  Club  dinner,  246 ; 

meeting  of  theatre  trust,  293. 

Robert,  Colonial  Office,  i  283. 

Haydon,  B.,  i.  413 ;  ii  172  and  n., 

326. 
Heath,   Charles,  engraver,  ii.   118, 

133,  166,  240,  331. 
Heber,   Reginald,  i.  312;  Journal, 

ii.  250  and  n. 

Richard,  i.  21. 

Hedgeley  Moor,  ii.  50. 
Hemans,  Mrs.,  ii.  317,  319,  320. 
Henderson,  Mr.,  Eildon  Hall,   his 

funeral,  ii  132. 

Henry's  History  of  England,  ii.  232. 
Hermitage  Castle,  sketch  of,  i.  138. 
Herries,Mr.,ii.  30. 
Hertford,  Lord,  i.  385 ;  ii.  455. 
Hertfordshire  lanes,  ii.  192. 
Highland  credulity,  ii.  71. 
"  Highland    Society,"     and    Miss 

Stirling  Graham's  Bees,  ii.  282. 
Highland  Piper,  i  206. 
Hill,  Right  Hon.  Mr.,  ii.  450  and  n. 
Hinves,  David,  ii.  186  and  n. 
History  of  Scotland,  in  the  Cabinet 

Cyclopaedia,  ii.  278  and  n. 
Hobhouse,  John  Cam,  and  Moore, 

i.  9,  12. 

Hodgson,  Dr.  F.,  i  312. 
Hoffmann's   Novels,    reviewed   for 

Foreign  Quarterly,  i  389 ;  ii.  16. 
Hogarth,  George,  i,  83 ;  ii.  14,  15, 

Hogg,  James,  breakfasts  with  Scott, 
i.  46;    in   difficulties,  123,   192, 

344  n. ;  loses  his  farm,  352 ;  Royal 
Literary  Society,  390,  391 ;  ii.  34 
and  n. ;  his  affair  of  honour,  40ft., 
96,    187  n.  ;    Six-Foot  Club,  244 
n.  ;  the  Nodes  Ambrosianas,  386  ; 
Scott's  interest  in  him,  386  TZ. 

Robert,  i  398  and  TZ. 

Hogmanay  dinner  at  Abbotsford,  i. 

69. 
Holland,  Lady,  ii.  183. 

Dr.,  i  282  and  n. 

Holyrood,    an    asylum    for    civil 

debtors,  ii  58  and  n. 
Home,  Earl  and  Countess  of,  i  212 

».,  244. 


INDEX, 


505 


Home,  John,  ii.  61 ;  his  Works  re- 
viewed, i.  372  and  n.,  384, 

Hone's  Every  Day  Bool:,  ii.  344. 

Hood,  Sir  Samuel,  ii.  203  n. 

Hook,  Theodore,  i  302  ;  John  Bull, 
302 n.,  305;  Sayings  and  Doings, 
ii  128,  164  n. 

Hoole's  Tasso,  i.  204. 

Hope,  General  the  Hon.  Sir  Alex- 
ander, ii.  35  n. 

Right  Hon.  Charles,  i.  27,  57 

and  72.  ;  ii.  118,  279. 

Dr.,  ii.  30,  212. 

James,  W.  S. ,  i.  14 ;  ii.  30  and  n. 

John,  Solicitor  -  General  for 

Scotland,  i.  51,  136,  357,  407; 
ii.  78,  222,  247,  287  ;  chairman  to 
Lockhart's  parting  entertainment, 
i.  33 ;  characterised,  49  and  n. 

Sir  John  and  Lady,  of  Pinkie, 

3.  16,  84 ;  ii  283,  289 ;  dinner  at 
Pinkie,  1 18 ;  "Roman "  antiquities, 
119. 

Lady  Charlotte,  i.  57. 

Hopetoun,  Earl  of,  i.  407. 

Countess  of,  ii  247,  248,  299. 

Home,  Donald,  ii.  115. 
Horner,  Leonard,  i.  345  and  n. 
Horton,  Wilmot,  i  278,  280  and  n., 

283;  ii.  167. 
Hotham,  Lady,  ii.  447. 
House  of  Aspen,  ii.  240. 
Howden,  Mr.,  i  141. 
factor   for  Falkland,    ii. 

309. 

Howley,  Archbp.    See  Canterbury. 
How  to  make  a  critic,  i.  67. 
Hughes,  Dr.  and  Mrs.,  i.  106,  277, 

282  and  n.;  ii.  181,223. 

John,  i.  312. 

Mr.,  printer,  ii.  238. 

Hulne,  Carmelite  monastery  of,  ii. 

48. 
Hume,  Baron,  i.  343,  356,  399 ;  ii 

4,  85,  204,  236  and  n.,  293. 

David,     burial-place,     i    94; 

deathbed,  ii.  4  and  n. ;   Works  of, 

151. 
Lady  Charlotte.    See  Lady  C. 

Hamilton. 
Sir  John,  of  Cowdenknowes,  i. 

262. 

Miss,  i.  347. 

Joseph,    M.P.,    i.    160,    161, 

3oa 

Mrs.,  Warwick  Castle,  ii  153, 

154  and  n. 
Hunt,  Leigh,  The  liberal,  L  11  and 

n.;  ii  119 ;  "  anecdotes  of  Byron," 

130;  "Byron,"  135. 


Hunt,  Leigh,  Mr.,  English  traveller, 

murdered,  ii.  466. 
Hurst  and  Robinson,  i.  9,  20,  53.  82, 

96;  ii.  61  rc.,  90,  91. 
Huskisson,  Hon.  W.,  M.P.,  i  267, 

307,  310;  ii  167. 
Hutchinson,  Mr.,  ii.  133. 
Huxley,  Colonel,  i.  401. 


y,  WAND  OP,  i  66. 

"Imitators,"i  273-276. 
Immortality  of  the  soul,  i.  43-45. 
Impey,  Mr.  and  Mrs.,  i  247,  248, 

251,  252. 

Inchmahome,  ii.  208. 
Inglis,  Dr.,  i.347;  ii.  139. 

-  Sir  R.  H.,  Bart,  i  283;   ii. 
162,  171,  415. 

Innes,  Mr.  Gilbert,  ii  293. 
Invernahyle.    See  Stewart. 
Ireland,  Mr.,  ii.  285. 
Irish  Tour,  i  1-2. 

-  Anecdotes,  wit,  good-humour, 
absurdity,  i.  4,  5. 

Irving,   Rev.  Edward,  ii  170,  286 
and  7Z»,  287. 

-  Mr.  (Lord  Xewton),  i  248. 

-  John,  ii  229,  314. 

-  Washington,  ii.  155,  475. 
Itterburg,  Count,  ex-Crown  Prince 

of  Sweden,  i  385  and  n. 
Ivanhoe  dramatised,  i  289  and  n.; 
ii  305. 

JACOB,  WILLIAM,  ii.  160,  161  and  n. 
James,  G.  P.  R.,  letter  from,  ii  282 

n.,  368. 
Jamieson,  Dr.  John,  i  230  and  n., 

232;  ii.  238. 
Jardine,  Sir  Henry,  i  84,  358;  ii 

305. 

-  Mr.  and  Mrs.,  i.  335. 
Jeanie  Deans.    See  Walker,  Helen. 
Jedburgh  election,  i.  189  ;  ii  408. 
Jeffrey,  Lord,  i  364,  399;   ii   205, 

292  ;  address  on  the  combination 
of  workmen,  i.  16-17,  320;  on 
Wordsworth,  333  ;  dinner  and 
guests,  353  ;  the  poisoning  woman, 


Jekyli,  J-,  ii.  161. 
Jerviswoode,  Lord.    See  BaiUie. 
Jobson,  Mrs.,  i  340,  253,  315,  316, 

343,  395,  397  ;  ii  61. 
Johnson,  Dr.,  ii.  177,  190,  227,  251, 

255,   257,   277;   Evelina,  i  309; 

epitaph  on  C.  Phillips,  ii  14. 
Johnstone-Alva,  ii  360,  382,  394. 
Johnstone,  Mr.  Hope,  i.  246. 
Mrs.  J.,  i  344  and  n. 


506 


INDEX 


Johnstone,  Mr.  and  Mrs.,  of  Bor- 
deaux, ii.  313. 

the  Border  family,  I  210. 

Jollie,  James,  trustee,  i.  83  n.  3  98, 221. 

Jones,  Mr.,  i.  300. 

Miss,  ii.  133. 

Journal,  reflections,  i.  1,  31 ;  begins 
to  tire,  ii  54;  Johnson's  advice, 
257,  277. 

Kain  and  Carriages,  L  140  and  n. 
Katrine,    Loch,   scenery  of,  ii.   89 

and  n. 

Keeldar,  people  of,  ii.  48. 
Keepsake,  The,  ii  81  n.,  116,  133, 

166,240. 
Keith,  Sir  Alex.,  iL  71. 

William,  i.  29. 

Mrs.  Murray,   The.  HigJdand 

Widow,  i.  200. 
Kelly's  JReminiscences  reviewed,   i. 

187. 

Kelso,  visit  to,  ii  27. 
Kemble,  Charles,  ii  138. 

Stephen,  ii.  47. 

Fanny,  ii  335,  340. 

Kendal,  i  313. 

Kenilworth,  visit  to,  ii.  153  and  n. 

Kennedy,  Rt.  Hon.  F.,  of  Dunure, 

ii.  10  and  n.,  338. 
Kent,  Duchess  of,  ii.  184 
Kerr,    Mr.   and  Mrs.   Charles,    of 

Abbotrule,  ii  147,  335. 

Lord  and  Lady  Bobert,  i  16. 

the  Misses,  ii  17,  66,  76,  92, 

95,  105,  223,  288,  331. 

of  Kippielaw,  i  256,  270,  337. 

Ktnlooh,   George,  of  Konloch,    on 

Malachi,  i  224. 
Kinloch's  Scottish   Ballads,  I   369 

and  n. 

Kinnaird,  Douglas,  ii.  182. 
Kinnear,  Mr.,  i  96 ;  ii  134,  257. 
Kinnedder,  Lord.    See  Erskine. 
Kinniburgh,  R.,  i  257-258. 
Kirn  Supper,  ii.  55  and  n* 
Knight,  Charles,  ii.  153  n. 

J.  Prescott,  i  76,  79,  85  and  n. 

Gaily,  ii  171. 

Payne,  ii.  142. 

Knighton,  Sir  William,  i  142,  276 

and  n.,  304;  ii  67, 174,  313  and  n. ; 

letter  on  Constable's  Miscellany, 

i  37;  dedication  of  Magnum,  ii 

178. 
Knox,  Dr.  Robert,  ii  217, 218  and  n., 

219,  225,  263. 
William,    a  young    poet>    i 

39,  40  ;  ii  17. 
"Kubla-Khzux"  and  Hastings,  L  76. 


LAIDLAW,  JAMES,  i.  264. 

William,  i  229,  264,  289,  320, 

335,  382,  389 ;  ii.  199,  243 ;  Scott's 
letter  to,  i  97  n.  ;  summoned  to 
town,  105,  110  and  n. ;  death  and 
funeral  of  child,  171 ;  on  sale  of 
£Tapoleon,  414  n. ;  adventure  in 
Gladdies  Wiel,  ii.  187  n. ;  walk  with 
Scott,  279;  as  amanuensis,  367, 
369,  370,  371,  377,  378,  379,  380; 
opinion  on  Scott's  Essay  on  Re- 
form Bill,  382,  385;  at  Count 
Robert,  394;  smites  the  Rock, 
398;  Scott's  illness,  410,  472. 

Laine,  M.,  French  Consul,  ii  315. 

Laing,  David,  i  401  ;  ii  88,  174  n. 

Laing,  Malcolm,  ii  13,  451. 

Laing-Meason,  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Gil- 
bert, ii  451  and  n.,  463. 

Laird^s  Jock,  ii.  81  n. 

Lambeth,  ii.  416. 

Landseer,  Edwin,  ii  223;  picture 
of  dogs,  i  119 ;  ii  74 ;  "  Study  at 
Abbotsford,"  118,  121. 

Lang,  Andrew,  Sheriff-Clerk  for 
Selkirkshire,  ii  125,  382  and  n. 

Lang,  Andrew,  mD.,  ii  382  n., 
489-90. 

Lansdowne,  Marquis  of,  i  385;  ii 
30,  91 ;  Scott  dines  with,  165. 

Lardner,  Dr.,  ii  273,  277,  284,  303, 
305,  306,  318. 

Latin,  Scottish  pronunciation  of, 
i  392. 

Latouche,  Mrs.  Peter,  ii  339,  349. 

Lauder,  Sir  T.  Dick,  ii.  231,  296, 
297  and  n. 

Laughter,  natural  and  forced,  i.  59. 

Laurie,  Sir  Peter,  ii.  168. 

Laurzston,  near  Edinburgh,  i  299 ; 
iii  76,  77  n. 

Marquis  de,  i.  299. 

Law  as  a  profession  in  Scotland,  i 
35,36. 

Lawrence,  Captain,  ii.  428. 

Sir  Thomas,  i.  277,  281,  282, 

283,  303;  ii.  42,  171 ;  portrait  of 
Scott,  i  310,  388. 

Lebzeltern,  Countess  de,  ii.  456. 

Leicester,  Earl  of,  ii  187  and  7k 

LeEToir,  M.,  i  15. 

Leopold,  Prince,  ii  184,  185. 

Leslie,  C.  R.,  i.  119 ;  his  portrait  of 
Scott,  77  and  n. 

Lessudden  House,  ii  325,  349. 

Letters,  arrangement  of,  ii  19. 

L£vis,  Duke  de,  ii  265  and  n. 

Lewis,  M.  G.,  i  7;  ii  171;  Lewis 
and  Sheridan,  i  95  n. ;  Journal, 
ii  54  n. 


INDEX. 


507 


Lewis,  Mr.,  method  of  improving 
handwriting,  i  224. 

Leyden,  John,  i  218,  349. 

I/'homme  qui  cfierche,  i.  183,  372. 

Library,  enchanted,  i  312 ;  ii  252. 

LiddeU,  Dr  ,  ii.  436,  448. 

Hon.  Henry,  ii.  42,  393,  413. 

Misses,  ii.  47. 

Light  come,  light  go,  i.  106. 

Lilliard's  Stone,  i.  388  and  n. 

Lions  in  Edinburgh,  i  222,  354; 
" Lions, "ii.  210. 

Lister,  Thomas  Henry,  Grariby,  i 
164. 

Listen,  Sir  Robert,  ii.  204. 

Literary  Society,  ii.  171, 

Litigation  in  the  Sheriff  Courts,  i. 
46  47. 

Liverpool,  Lord,  i.  267,  309,  361. 

Livingstone,  Rev.  Mr.,  ii.  220. 

Llandaff,  Bishop  of,  ii.  181. 

Loch,  Mrs.,  i.  247. 

John  and  James,  ii  187,  191, 

258. 

Locker,  E.  H.,  i  267  and  n.,  268, 
283  and  n. 

Lockhart,  John  G.,  i.  1,  31,  379, 
381,  401 ;  ii.  3,  34,  41,  62  n.,  68, 
79,  83,  130,  136,  157,  160,  168, 
177,  179,  180,  191,  205,  215,  217, 
222,  283,  302,  313,  329  and  TO., 
330,  413,  419,  472;  the  Quarterly 
Heview,  L  20-24;  Blackwood'sjafa- 
gazine,  25-26 ;  parting  entertain- 
ment, 33;  London,  34;  Scott's  con- 
fidence in  and  affection  for,  39 ; 
MalacM,  142, 171;  on  Sir  Walter's 
style,  181 ;  Hook,  302  and  n. ; 
Scott's  letter,  home  politics,383  n. ; 
Hogg,  391 ;  account  of  Gillies,  402; 
PortobeUo,  411  and  n. ;  Abbots- 
ford,  ii  18, 21 ;  Kelso,  27 ;  Garrick 
papers,  83  and  n.  ;  Brighton,  181 ; 
Jjife  of  Burns,  195 ;  Auchinrath, 
220 ;  Edinburgh,  221 ;  Dalkeith, 
223 ;  Stewart  papers,  229  ;  letter 
from  Scott  regarding  illness,  Feb. 
1820,327 ;  Chiefswood,  332 ;  Hogg, 
386,  387  n. ;  accompanies  Scott 
to  Douglas,  410,  411. 

Mrs.,  i  22,  23,  31-33,  48,  50 ; 

154,  157,  196;  birth  of  a  son 
Walter,  182;  Abbotsford,  ii  14, 
99;  birth  of  a  girl,  104;  Brighton, 
164,423. 

J.  Hugh  (the  Hugh  Idttiejohn 

of  the  Tales  of  a  Grandfather),  i. 
32,  157,  217,  274,  306;  ii  2,  165, 
185,  186,  203,  302,  305,  306,  317, 
329,332;  death,  457 and n» 


Lockhart,  Walter  Scott,  i  182; 
death,  196  and  n.;  ii  317. 

-  Charlotte,  ii.  329  and  n. 

-  Dr.  and  Mrs.,  ii  348. 

-  Lawrence,  ii  32. 

-  Richard,  i.  36,  37  ;  death  of, 
i394. 

-  William,  i.  33,  272,  281;  ii 
220,  233. 

-  William  Elliot,  i  ii.   193  «., 
382. 

Logan's  Sermons  and  Poems,  L   19 

and  %.,  169. 

Londesborough,  Lord,  ii  422  n. 
London,  Scott's  visit  to,  in  October 

1826,  i.  273-283;    in   November 

1826,  301-311  ;  in  April  1828,  ii. 

157-192;     in     September,     413; 

October  1831,  414. 
Londonderry,  second  Marquis  of,  i 

291  ;  ii  20  ;  Memoirs,  56. 

-  Third  Marquis  of,  ii.  42,  43, 
44,  46,  56,  177,  416. 

-  Fourth  Marquis  of,  ii  51. 

-  Lady  Emily,  ii.  173. 
Longman  &  Co.,  Woodstock,  i  177; 

American  Copyright.  307;  Na- 
poleon, 343,  348;  ii  3;  St. 
Ronatfs  Well,  107,  108;  JSn~ 
cyclopcedia,  268  ;  copyright  of 
poetry,  287  ;  agrees  to  sell  poetry, 
295  ;  sale  completed,  311. 

Lothian,  Marquis  of,  ii  43,  47,  49, 
51,  132,  222. 

Louvre,  the,  i  287. 

Lovaine,  Lord,  ii  279. 

Low,  Alexander,  History  of  Scotland, 
ii  335  and  n. 

Lowndes,  ii  190. 

Lucy,  Sir  Thomas,  ii  155. 

Luscar,  ii  336. 

Lushington,  Mr.,  ii  472. 

Luttrelf,  Henry,  i  277. 

Lyndhurst,  Lord,  i  267,  383. 

Lyons  of  Gattonside,  ii  255. 

Lytfcelton,  W.  H.,  ii  181. 


ii  8. 
Macaulay's  History  of  St.  KZda,  ii 

222  and  n. 

MacB&rnet,  Mrs.,  ii.  150. 
M'Cormick,  Dr.,  ii  340. 
M'Crie,  Dr.  Thomas,  on  Old  Mortal- 

ity,  ii  404  n. 
Macclesfield,  i  313. 
Macculloch,  David,  of  Ardwell,  i. 

7,237,342. 

—  James,  ii  284. 
Macdonald,   L.,   sculptor,   ii    368, 


508 


INDEX. 


Macdonald,    Marshal,    i.    120    n.t 

295,  298. 
Macdonell  of  Glengarry,  i.  120  and 

71.,  121. 

Alacdougal,  Celtic  Society,  i  98. 

Macduff  Club,  ii  308.  See  Blair- 
Adam. 

Macduff  's  Castle,  i.  406. 

Mackay,  Mr.,  from  Ireland,  iL  125, 
127,  128. 

Mackay,  Rev.  Dr.  Macintosh,  ii.  123 
7i.,  124,  206,  232,  288,  289,  294, 
406-407  ;  Cluny  Macpherson's 
papers,  123 ;  Irish. MS.,  290  and  n. 

Mackenzie,  Captain,  72d  Regiment, 
ii.  52. 

Mackenzie,  Colin,  of  Portmore,  i. 
6  7i.,  14,  84,  88,  125,  134,  139, 
148,  177,  412,  413;  ii  53,  335; 
character,  31 ;  family,  217 ;  son  of, 
312 ;  new  Academy,  ii.  4 ;  illness, 
85 ;  Deputy  Keeper  of  Signet, 
retirement  from  office,  111,  234 ; 
death,  346  and  n.;  lines  by,  413. 

Hay,  of  Cromarty,  iL  393. 

Henry,  i.  41 ;  sketch  of,  35 ;  his 

edition  of  Home's  Works,  372; 
death,  ii.  370. 

Lord,  L  207  and 7i.,  258;  ii  203. 

Sutherland,  ii.  70. 

William,  L  406. 

Mrs.  Stewart,  ii.  202-203. 

Mackenzie's  Hotel,  Edinr.,  ii.  374. 

Mackintosh,  Sir  James,  L  114;  ii. 
160,  262,  268,  270. 

Maclachan,  Mrs.  and  Miss  Bell,  ii. 
377. 

M'Laurin,  Colin,  ii.  335. 

Macleod,  Lord,  ii.  423. 

Alex.,  advocate,  ii.  129. 

Mrs.,ii.  423. 

M'Nab  of  that  Ilk,  i.  368  and  ». 

Macpherson,  Captain,  ii.  150. 

Clany,  papers,  ii.  123,  136, 

137;  visit  to  Edinburgh  Castle, 
247,  257,  288. 

Macqueen,  Robert.     See  Braxfield. 

Macturk,  Captain,  of  St.  Ronaris 
WeU,  ii  65. 

Magnum  Opus,  prospectus  issued, 
ii.  243-244  ;  printing  of  the,  273; 
success  of,  281,  292,  293  n.,  294; 
twentieth  vol.  issued,  354. 

Mahon,  Lord,  ii.  173  ti. 

Maida,  the  deer-hound  and  the  art- 
ists, i  77,  166  ;  ii  179  n.,  456. 

Maitland,  Frederick,  capture  of 
Bonaparte,  i  145, 149  and  7*71. 

Miss,  ii  300  n. 

Club,  ii  244. 


Makdougall,  Lady  Brisbane,  i  249. 

Malachi  Malagrowther,  letters,  i. 
126-127,  130  and  n.,  136,  139-153, 
160. 

Malcolm,  Sir  John,  i.  308;  ii.  422, 
423  and  n. 

Malta,  ii  421,  441,  449. 

Maltby,  Dr.,  ii.  168,  178. 

Manchester,  i  313 ;  ii  435. 

Duke  of,  ii  183. 

Mandrin's  Memoirs,  i  104  and  n. 

Mansfield,  i.  362. 

Mar,  Earl  of,  ii  39. 

Marjoribanks,  Mr.  and  Mrs.  C.,  ii. 
191. 

Marmion,  copyright  of,  ii.  296,  301. 

Marmont,  Marshal,  i.  299. 

Marshall,  Mr.,  ii.  429. 

Marshman,  Dr  ,  Serampore  mission- 
ary, i  348  and  n.,  349. 

Martin,  Davie,  ii.  220. 

Mary  Queen  of  Scots,  portraits, 
i  4 ;  and  Elizabeth,  46. 

Masaniello,  ii.  278,  451  n.,  488. 

Matheson,  Peter,  i.  227  and  n. 

Mathews,  Charles,  Comedian,  i.  47, 
58 ;  Abbotsford,  78,  79,  80,  81  n. 

C.  J.,i.  78  and  TI. 

Matutinal  inspiration,  i  113 ;  ii.  379. 

Maxwells,  the,  i  210. 

Maxpopple.     See  Scott  of  Raeburn. 

Maywood,  Mr.,  i.  401. 

Meadowbank,  Lord,  ii.  265,  266, 
399. 

Meason,  Mr.     See  Laing-Meason. 

Meath,  Earl  of,  and  the  Duke  of 
Wellington,  ii.  72,  174. 

Medwyn,  Lord,  i  134,  221  &nd.n.t 
393;  ii.261  n.,  339,  375. 

Meleager,  story  of,  ii  469. 

Melville,  Lord  and  Lady  (second 
Viscount),  i.  6,  14,  16,  24,  147, 
148,  205,  226,  267,  302,  307,  383  ; 
ii  30,  64,  71,  159,  184,  187,  342 ; 
Mrs.  Grant's  pension,  28,  29; 
Malachi,  146  n. ;  Roxburgh  elec- 
tion, 178;  colleges  in  Scotland, 
256,  257 ;  Bannatyne  Club,  411 ; 
resignation,  ii.  5,  6 ;  reappoint- 
ment,  6  n.  ;  fall  from  his  horse,  69. 

Sir  James,  Memoirs,  i.  370  and 

w.,  400,  401. 

Menzies,  John,  of  Pitfoddels,  i  347, 
349  and  w.;  ii  168. 

Mertoun,  i  181,  229,  328;  ii.  25,  27, 
52,  54,  109. 

Methodists,  i  102 

Meyersdorff,  Baron  A.  von,  ii  255. 

Mildert,  Dr.  William  Van,  Bishop 
of  Durham,  ii  43  and  n. 


INDEX. 


509 


Milter,  Mr.,  ii.  156. 

Archibald,  W.S.,  ii.  314. 

Miller's,   General,  South  American 

War,  ii.  303  and  TO. 
Mills,  Scott's  feeling  regarding,  i.  ( 

356. 

Milman,  Bean,  ii.  417.  ! 

Miln,  Miss,  i.  253.  : 

Milne,  Sir  David,  ii  70.  ! 

Nicol,  ii.  53,  326,  461  n. 

N.,  jun.,  i.  264 ;  ii.  146.  ! 

Rev.  Mr.,  Quebec,  ii.  365,  366.  : 

Milton,  miniature  of,  by  Cooper,  i 

271  272. 
Minstrelsy  oj  the  Scottish  Border, 

i.  138  and  TI. 
Minto,  Gilbert,  first  Earl  of,  sketch 

of,  i.  61-63. 
second  Earl,  L  61,  229, 

238;  Abbotsford,  268;  350,  351, 

353,357,358;  ii  10,166,167. 

Dowager  Lady,  ii.  10. 

Minute  Philosophers,  L  60. 
Mirbel,  Madame,  L  293,  295,  296, 

297,298;  ii.  256  n. 
Misfortune  sometimes   convenient, 

L  171. 
"  Misfortune's  gowlingbark,"  i.  123- 

124. 
Mitchell,      Mr.,     Greek      master, 

Academy,  ii.  4. 
Moir,  D.  M.  (Delta),  lines  on  Leslie's 

picture,  i.  321  n. 
Moira,  Lord,  i.  327. 
Mole",  Monsieur  de,  i.  299. 
Moncreiff,  James,  i.  324  and  n. 
Monmouth,  Duke  and  Duchess  of, 

at  Moor  Park,  ii  192. 
"Mous  Meg,"  i.  43 ;  ii  238  and  n., 

242,  243,  244,  247,  432. 
Montagu,  Lord  and  Lady,  i  106, 

176,  178,  263 ;  ii.  257,  423,  424. 

Lady     Elizabeth     (Dowager 

Duchess  of  Buccleuch),  ii  71  andtt. 

Monteath's  Planter  reviewed,  ii  25. 
Monteith's,  Earls  of,  gardeners,  ii 

208. 
Monypenny,  Alexander,  trustee,  L 

83  ». 

David.    See  Pitmilly. 

Moore,  Sir  John,  ii  196. 

Thomas,    i   183  and  n. ;   ii 

184,  196;  characterised,  7-9;  re- 
gard for  Scott,  9  n. ;  anecdotes  of 
Byron,  112, 113  «.;  breakfast  with 
Scott,  281 ;  ii  34  ». ;  Life  of  Byron, 
135;  visit  to  Hampton  Courtj  189; 
Scott  sends  Byron's  letters,  216; 
268 ;  letter  to  Scotfc,  303,  304  n. 

"Morbus,"  the,  i  173-174. 


More,  J.  S. ,  i  206. 

More,  Mrs.   Han-nab,  Memoirs,    i 

213  ?2. 
Morgan's,   Lady,   O'Donnel,  i.   154 

and  ?i. 

Morpeth,  Lord,  i  292,  297. 
Morritt,  John  B.  S.,  of  Rokeby,  i. 

106 ;  Scott's  visit  to,  270-272  and 

n.;  London  dinner  party,  ii  162, 

164 ;  Scott's  visit  to,  195 ;  Abbots- 
ford,  215;  230;  letter  to  Scott, 

352  n. 
Morton,  Earl  and  Countess  of,  ii. 

132,  201. 
Moscheles,  Mr.  and  Mrs.,  ii.   113, 

114,  115. 

Moscow,  burning  of,  ii.  17,  18. 
Mother  Goose's  Tales,  ii  459,  489, 

490. 
Mottoes,  for  Woodstock,  i.  162 ;  for 

Count  Robert,  ii.  374  and  n. 
Mount  Benger,  Hogg's  farm,  ii  96 

n.,  120  n. 

MSS.  Waverlty  3Toveh<  ii.  396  and  n. 
Mudford's  Fue  Sights  of  St.  Allans* 

ii.  301  and  n. 
Munro,  Mr.,  ii.  139. 
Mure,  Mrs.,  of  Caldwell,  anecdote, 

i82. 

of  Auchendrane's  trial,  ii.  199. 

Hurray,  Andrew,  i.  249. 

Dr.,  Oxford,  i  205  n. 

Lord  James,,  i.  409. 

.  Lady  Caroline,  ii.  233. 

Sir  George,  ii  206. 

James  Wolfe  (Lord  Cringletie), 

i  322  rc. ;  ii  132. 
John  A.,  i   133,  225  and  n., 

318,  320,  353  and  n.,  369,  378 ;  ii 

4,  80»  233,  315. 

Mrs.  John  A.,  ii  115. 

John,  publisher,  i.  20-22;  ii  83, 

157,  160,  171,  296,  301,  302,  448. 
jun.,  of  Albemarle  Street, 

i  349-350. 
Sir  Patrick,  of  Ochtertyxe,  i. 

109  and  n.  ;  ii  229,  293,  305,  314. 

Peter,  of  Simprin,  i  135. 

William,  Henderland,  i    225, 

318,  320. 
W.  BL,  Theatre  Royal,  i  362 

and  n.,  366,  368  n. ;  ii  293,  301. 
"Murder  hole,"  ii  142  n. 
Murthly  House,  ii  344. 
Musgrave,  Captain,  ii  66. 
Music,  i  38 ;  ii  15. 
My  Aunt  Margaret's  Mirror,  ii  76, 

81  n,  158,  166. 
"My  spinning-wheel  is   anld  and 

stiff,"  i  10. 


510 


INDEX. 


Ndbodish,  i  223  and  n. 
Nairne,  Mr.,  ii.  245. 
Napier,  Colonel,  ii.  196. 

-  Lord,  ii.  360. 

-  Macvey,  ii.  292  n. 

Naples,  ii.  448,  464,  470,  472,  475, 
478. 

Napoleon,  Life  of,  i.  98  ;  finished  3d 
vol.,  i.  209,  238;  vol.  v.  com- 
menced, 240;  swells  to  7  vols., 
252;  264;  Longman's  offer,  267; 
vol.  vi.  finished,  334;  vol.  viii. 
proposed,  343;  Longman's  agree- 
ment, 348;  proceeds,  349;  Ap- 
pendix to,  396  ;  completion  June 
7,  400,  407;  ii.  9;  Brussels  re- 
print, 21  ;  preparation  for  a  new 
edition,  108,  109,  110,  287. 

-  Maria  Louise  :   Lord  Elgin's 
anecdotes,  i.  151  ;  Dr.  Shortt,  357  ; 
ii.  45  ;  on  the  triple  alliance,  49. 

Napoleon's  last  moments,  i.  139. 
Nares,  Archdeacon,  ii.  171. 
Nasmyth,  Mr.,  dentist,  i.  255. 
Navarino,  battle  of,  ii.  66. 
"Nell  Gwynne's  portrait,"  ii.  121. 
Nelson,  an  amanuensis,  i  148-149; 

ii.  160. 

Nenkomm,  Mr.,  ii.  315. 
Newark  Castle,  ii.  95. 
Newbery,  Mr.,ii.  106. 
Newenhams,  the,  i.  42. 
Newton,  Lord,  decision,  ii.  13,  33, 

38,  56,  77. 

-  Gilbert  S.>  R.A.,  i.  119,  278. 
New  Year  reflections,  L  73,  333  ;  ii. 

98,  103,  215,  363. 
NicoB,  Dr.jPtincipalof  St.  Andrews, 

L261. 
Nicolson,  John,  ii.  61  and  n. 

-  Miss,  ii.  179. 

Nimrod,  a  deerhound,  i.  371  and  n.  ; 

ii.  273  and  n* 

Nocera,  two  towns  of,  ii  470-471. 
North,  Lord,  ii  175. 
Northampton's,  Lady,  death,  ii  333, 

452. 
Northcote,  James,  R.A.,  ii.  174,  177 

and  ».,  178. 
Northumberland,  Duke  and  Duchess 

of,  ii  46  and  n.,  47  and  ».,  48. 

173,  174,  419. 
Nuncomar,  Rajah,  ii  180. 


,  HoK.  SlB  ROBERT,  i. 

27;ii.  86. 

Oil  Gas  Company,  i.  5  and  w.,  41, 
42,  356,  395,  402,  406;  ii  67,  70, 
84,201. 


Oliphant,  Mrs.,  ii.  72. 
Olonyne,  Count,  i  15. 
Oran,  ii.  437. 
Ormiston,  Bell,  ii.  150. 
Ormsby,  Mrs.,  ii  154. 
Osborne,  Lord  Sydney,  ii.  308. 

Mr.  and  Mrs.,  ii.  427. 

Owen,  Mrs  ,  i  307. 

Oxenfoord  Castle,  i  395 ;  ii.  212. 

Oxford,  i  311. 

PAESTUM,  ii.  463. 
Paley,  Mr.,  ii.  27. 
Palgrave,  Sir  Francis,  i  282  and  n., 

350. 

Palliser,  Sir  Hugh,  ii.  236. 
Palmerston,  Lord,  ii  30,  393. 
Pantellaria,  ii  4A1. 
Papers  mislaid,  i.  34. 
Pans  1826,  i  285-299. 
Parker,  Miss,  ii.  191. 
Parkgate,  i  243,  245,  246. 
Parr,  Dr.,  i.  270. 
Parry,  Captain,  ii  160. 
Pasta,  Madame,  ii  67. 
Paterson,  Dr.  N.,  ii  397  and  n. 

R.  (Old  Mortality),  ii  397  n. 

Walter,  ii.  397  n. 

"Patience,  cousin,  and  shuffle  the 

cards,"  i.  43. 
Patterson,  David,  ii  263. 

John  Brown,  ii.  63  n. 

Paul's  Letters  to  his  Kinsfolk,  i  301 

and  n. ;  ii.  86. 
"Pearling  Jean, "i  374  n. 
Peel,  Right  Hon.  Sir  Robert,  i.  306, 

307,  309,  310,  383;  ii6,  184,  206, 

246,  328,  414;  Chantrey's  bust  of 

Scott,  182  n. 
Penrith,  i.  314;  ii.  151. 
Pentland  Hills,  admiration  of,  ii  64, 

65. 

Pepys'  Diary,  review  of,  in  Quar- 
terly, i  65  and  n.y  76,  82,  179  and 

n. 

Perceval,  Mr.,  i  327-329. 
Percy,  Captain,  ii.  279. 
Percy's,  William,  plays,  ii  40. 
"Percy's  Cross,"  cottages  at,  ii.  50. 
"Percy's  Leap,"  ii.  50. 
Pescara,  Marquis  di,  tomb  of,  ii  472. 
Peterborough,  life  of,  ii  269  and  n. 
Petrie,  H.,  i  350. 
Pettigrew,  Dr.,  ii.  168. 
Pettycur,  i  406. 
Philips,  Mr.  and  Mrs.,  ii  4,  22. 

Sir  George,  ii.  162,  179. 

Phillips,  Sir  Richard,  i  353. 
Phfflpotts,  Dr.,  Dean  of   Chester, 

ii  162  and*. 


INDEX. 


511 


Phipps,  Mrs.,  ii  175-176. 

Pickering,  W.,  ii.  182,  188. 

Pigot,   Captain,  ii   423,  425,  427, 

428,  429,  437,  444. 
Pinkie  House,  ii.  118. 
Piozzi,  Mrs.,  ii.  226,  370  n. 
Piper,  Mr.,  mail  ^contractor,  ii.  328. 
Pirates1  heaven,  i.  97. 
Pitcairn,  Robert,  ii.  274  and  n. 
Pitmilly,  Lord,  i.  125  n.,  387 ;  ii.314. 
Pitsligo,  Lord,  ii.  266. 
Pitt,  Mr.,  ii.  161. 

William,  letters  of,  ii.  188, 189. 

Planta,  Joseph,  ii.  16  and  n.,  181. 
Plantations  at  Abbotsford,  i.  170, 

180,  187. 
Platoff,  i.  292. 
Playfair,  John,  burial-place,  i.  94, 

108  n. 
Plays,  Old,  Hector  of  Germany ,  etc., 

i.  234. 

Pteydett,  Paul,  ii.  281  n.9  337  and  n. 
Plunkett,  Lord,  i  18  n. 
Plymouth,  ii.  429. 
Pole,  Mr.  Frederick,  i.  89  and  n, 
Politics,  interest  in,  L  126. 
Pompeii,  iL  462,  463,  470. 
Ponsonby,  Mr.,  and  Lady  Sarah,  ii 

50,  179,  184. 

Hon.  Miss,  ii.  152  n. 

Pontey,  William,  ii  396. 
Pontine  Marshes,  ii.  479. 
Porchester's,  Lord,  PoeTns,  i.  13 

and  n. 

"Portuous  Boll,"  i.  178  n. 
Portland,  Bill  of,  ii.  429. 
Portsmouth,  ii.  434,  426. 
Potocki,  Le  Comte  Ladislaus  de,  ii 

349. 
Potockfs  Manuscrit  trouvd  d  Sara- 

gosse,  ii.  32. 
Powis,  Earl,  ii  170  n. 
Preston,  Sir  Robert,  ii  337  and  n. 
Prestonpans,  visit  to,  ii.  340-341. 
Primrose,  Lady,  ii.  158. 
Princes  Street  Gardens,  Edinburgh, 

i  395;  ii  211. 

Pringle,  John,  Rector  of  Togo,  ii.  145. 
Alexander,    of   Whytbank,  i. 

389;  ii  368,  381,  383,  402. 
Alexander,   junior,   of  WLyt- 

bank,  i  45,  253,  267. 
James,  Torwoodlee,  i  183  and 

«.,  340;  ii.  149,  381,  382. 
George,  of  Torwoodlee,  ii  147- 

149. 

Sir  John,  ii  109,  122,  358. 

John,  of  Clifton,  i  266,  337. 

junior,  of  Training,  death,  ii 

404. 


I  Pringle,  Mrs.,  Haining,  ii.  272 

i Thomas,  i  282  and  n 

1  Captain,    Battle  of    Waterloo, 

1     i  373 ;  ii  230. 

Major,  ii.  358,  360. 

Pringles  of  Stitchel,  ii.  363. 

of  yair,i.373;  ii.  23. 

Prisons,  ii  126-127. 
Procter,  Bryan  Waller,  i.  221  n. 
Proudfoot,  Oliver,  ii.  129. 
Prudhoe,  Lord,  ii.  419. 
Psalmody,  Scottish,!.  411-412and  *.; 
ii.  291  and  n.    (See  C.  S.  M.  Lock- 
hart,  Cent.  Jfem.,  Lond,  1871.) 
Purgstall,  Countess,  i  237. 
Purdie,  Tom.  i  82 ;  6*  S.  W.  S.,"  112 
n.,  156,  166,  187,  238,  256,  370, 
372,  374,  383;  ii.  1,  13, 18,  22,  23, 
95,  136,  257,  318 ;  death  of,  320. 

QUEENSBEBBT,    WlLLIAM   DOTTGLAS, 

fourth  Duke  of  ("  Old  Q. '),  i.  243, 

18  n. 
Duchess  of,   Catherine  Hyde, 

i  245  n. 
Quillinan,  Mrs.,  ii  179. 

RAE,  Sra  WILLIAM,  i  14  and  n.9  84, 
355 ;  ii  30  n.,  64,  229,  314,  328. 

Lady,  i  204. 

Raeburn,  Sir  Henry,  his  portrait  of 
Scott  given  to  Mr.  Skene,  i  136 
n;  portrait  of  Scott,  for  Lord 
Montagu,  212  n;  portrait  for  Con- 
stable at  Dalkeith,  322,  337 ;  por- 
trait now  at  Abbotsford,  ii.  368  n. 

Lady,  i  229. 

Raine's  St.  Cutfibert,  ii.  7  ». 

Rammohun  Roy,  ii  423  and  n. 

Ramsay,  Allan,  and  the  Edgewell 
tree,  ii  282  and  n. 

Dean,  i  196  and  ».,  197  n. 

Lord.    See  Dalhousie. 

Wardlaw,  ii.  224,  228. 

of  Barnton,  ii  241. 

Ravensworth,  Lord,  ii  42. 

Castle,  ii  41-47. 

tedding  up,  i  183,  392, 414 ;  ii  280. 

Jtedgauntlet,  ii.  378. 

Bees,  Owen,  i  277  ;  ii.  14, 15,  293, 
295,296. 

Reform  Bill,  ii.  381-382,  387,  388, 
394,  414-417.  ^ 

Remside  Moor,  ii  49. 

Remusat,  Charles  de,  i  407  and  n. 

Count  Paul  de,  i.  407  n. 

Rennie,  Sir  John,  i  347  n. 

Resignation  of  office  as  Clerk  of 
Session,  ii  355. 


512 


INDEX. 


Reynolds,  Sir  Joshua,  i.  272  and  n.; 

iu  177 ;  Earl  of  Rothes'  Portrait, 

232,  251. 
Mr.  (The  Keepsake),  ii.   125, 

133,  142,  162,  166,  181,  266,  270, 

279. 
Rice,  Mr.  Spring  (afterwards  Lord 

Monteagle),  ii.  184. 
Richardson,  John,  visit  to  Abbots- 
ford  and  fishing  adventure,  ii.  28 

and  Ti.,  66,  265  n. ;  letter  from,  to 

Scott,  273  n.  ;  Claverhouse,  182, 

404. 
Riddell,  Colonel,  ii.  266. 

Thomas,  i  180. 

Riddoch,  Mr.,  of  Falkirk,  i.  152. 
Rigby,  Miss.    See  John  A.  Murray. 
Robbins,  Mr.,  ii,  152. 
Robertson,  Patrick,  i,  259  and  n. 
Robinson  (of  H.  &  R.),  ii.  61,  65. 
Robison,  Mr.  (afterwards  Sir  John), 

ii.  217. 

Rob  Roy  at  the  Theatre  Royal,  ii.  138. 
Robson's  Es&ay  on  Heraldry,  ii.  381. 
Roche,  Sir  Boyle,  dream  of,  i,  223  n. 
Rodger,  Mr.  Peter,  ii.  358  n. 
Rogers,  Samuel,  i.  277,  308 ;  ii.  158, 

159,  161,  423 ;  advice  to  Moore,  i. 

8  n. ;  breakfast,  281,  304,  307 ; 

Holland  House,  ii  183 ;  Hampton 

Court,  189,  190. 
Rokeby,  i.  270 ;  ii  195. 
Holland,  Adam,  Clerk  of  Session, 

ii  281,  283,  336. 

Adam,    of   Gask,  ii.   281  n., 

337  and  n. 

Rollo,  Lord,  i  141. 
Rome,  ii  475,  478. 
Rose,  Sir  George,  i.  401 ;  ii.  132. 

William  Stewart,  anecdote  of 

Byron,  i.  11,  12,  26  ;  his  Ariosto, 
277  and  «;  at  Stratford,  ii  153; 
Brighton,    185;    David    Hinves, 
186  n. 

Ross,  Dr.  A.,  i  343 ;  ii.  219,  236, 

294,356 

Rossiter,  K".  T.,  ii.  402. 
Rothes,  Lady,  ii.  300  n. 
Roxburghe  Club,  ii.  39,  40,  170, 

181. 

Royal  Academy,  London,  ii.  171. 
Literary  Society,  i  390-391;  ii. 

449  and  n. 
Society,  Edinburgh,  dinner,  i 

34-35,  318,  354  ;  ii.  77,  217,  219 ; 

new  rooms,  233, 235,  242. 
Ruling  passion,  i  216-217. 
RusaeX   Alexander,  anecdote   told 

by,  i.  344«. 
Russell,  Claud,  i  14 


Russell,  Dr.  James,  i.  35  and  n.  ;  ii. 

77,  135. 
Lord  John,  on  Moore,  i.  8  n. 

ii.  161. 

John,  i  345  72. ;  ii  123. 

Major-General    Sir   James,   of 

Ashestiel,  i  29  n.,  30,  45,  74,  76, 

164,  230,  321,  381,  390,  391 ;  ii. 

21,  146,  258,  363,  368,  381,  399. 

Lord  Wriothesley,  ii  76. 

Misses,  i.  73,  97  ;  ii.  35. 

Rutherford,  Rev.  John,  of  Yarrow, 

ii.  145. 

Dr.,  ii.  269. 

Lord,  in  the  Bride  ofLammer- 

moor,  ii.  300  n. 

Captain  Robert,  i  147. 

Robert,  i.  29,  320  ;  ii,  35. 

William,  ii,  32. 

Miss  C.,  i  90. 

Rutherfurd,  John,  of  Edgerstoun, 

ii.  120. 
Ruthven,  Lord  and  Lady,  i.  61 ;  ii 

390-391  n. 
Rutty,  J.,  diary,  i.  68. 


ST.  AGATHA,  ii.  478. 

St.  Andrews,  visit  to,  in  1827,  i  403. 

St.  Boswell's  Fair,  i.  229. 

St.  Cuthbert's  remains  at  Durham, 

ii.  7. 

St.  Giles,  Edinburgh,  ii.  77  n. 
St.  Mary's  Loch,  i.  243. 
St.  Monans,  i.  405. 
St.  Paul's,  Dean  of,  ii.  162. 
8t.  Ronan's  Well,  Scott's  opinion  of, 

i  231 ;   Macturk  in,  ii.  65,  69 ; 

new  edition  required,  107  ;  drama- 
tised, 301. 
St.  Roque,  ii  434. 
St.  Thomas  Aquinas,   tomb  of,   ii. 

472. 

Saladin's  shroud,  ii  71  n. 
Salerno,  ii.  466. 

Samothracian  Mysteries,  ii.  164. 
Sanctuary,  the,  ii  58  and  n,  60. 
Sanders,  George  L.,  miniature  of 

M.  G.  Lewis,  i  7  and  n. 
San  Domenico  Maggiore,  ii  472. 
Sandford,  Mrs.  Professor,  ii  222. 
Sans  Oullotides,  April  mornings,  i 

184,  185. 

Savary,  H.,  i  59  and  n. 
Scarlett,  Sir  James  Y.,  i.  57. 
Schutze,  Mr.,  ii.  315-316, 
Schwab,  Gustavus,  i  412. 
Schwartzenberg,  i  292. 
Scott,  Lady,  i  47,  130;  removal 

from  Castle  Street,  143,  152 ;  ill- 


INDEX. 


513 


ness,  159,  161,  166,  178-191, 
death,  193 ;  ii.  150. 

Scott,  Miss  Anne,  Scottish  songs,  L 
38,  39  ;  characterised,  55  ;  retro- 
spect, 56-57,  116,  194,  195,  197 ; 
ii.  67,  118,  146 ;  London,  151,  198 
?&.;  Milbu.rn  Tower,  204;  Hopetoun 
House,  242;  castle,  248,  257; 
Blair-Adam,  336,  365,  475. 

Walter,  i.  144,  183,  197-99 ;  ii. 

65-67,  99,  105,  132,  157,  216,  401, 
418,  426 ;  choice  of  a  soldier's  life, 
i.  37 ;  15th  Hussars  going  to  India, 
73 ;  generous  offer  from,  101 ; 
lines  on  Irish  quarters,  232 ;  re- 
visits Abbotsford,  240,  242;  at 
Blair-Adam,  246,  249;  Ireland, 
250,  315 ;  Dalkeith,  321,  322,  325  ; 
Christmas  at  Abbotsford,  329, 
335  ;  dinner  and  guests  at  Hamp- 
ton Court,  163;  inflammatory 
attack,  283,  284,  286,  292,  302; 
wishes  to  preserve  the  library, 
365. 

Charles,  choice  of  profession, 

L  179;  arrives  at  Abbotsford, 
196,  201,  202,  228 ;  Drnmlanrig, 
242;  Ireland,  250;  return,  260, 
266;  Scott's  visit  to  Oxford,  311, 
369 ;  ii.  74,  76,  81,  92, 99 ;  Foreign 
Office,  122,  157,  168,  216;  Edin- 
burgh, 305,  312,  364,  475. 

Thomas  and  Mrs.,  i  7  w.,  180, 

312 ;  ii.  183  n. 

Anne,  niece  of  Sir  Walter,  i. 

188,  227,  237. 

Walter,   nephew,  i.  103,  116, 

264  ;  ii.  334  and  n. 

Sir  W.,   of  Ancrum,   ii.   408, 

423. 

of  Beirlaw,  ii.  257. 

of  Gala,  i.  59,  252,  253 ;  ii.  118, 

122, 141,  152,  232,  289,  326,  329, 
332. 

of  Harden,  L   105,  163,  168, 

176-179,  181,  188,  205,  214,  238, 
259,  337,  358,  390;  ii.  11,  20,  23, 
28,  29  and  «.,  52,  54,  72;  85,  104, 
171,  179,  200,  201,  204,  334,  359, 
360,  363,  365,  366,  371,  382,  387, 
408. 

John,  Midgehope,  ii  17. 

Charles,  of  Nesbit  Mill,  i  259; 

ii265. 

of    Raeburn    (Maxpopple),    L 

159  and  n.,  187,  238, 255, 269,  388, 
389 ;  ii  25,  59  «.,  81,  274  and  n., 
275,  279,  281,  314,  325,  356,  349, 
395. 

of  Scalloway,  ii  291. 

YOL.H. 


Scott,  of  Woll,  n.  326, 332, 397  and  n. 

Charles,  grandson  of  Charles  of 

Woll,  ii.  17. 

Dr.,  of  Haslar  Hospital,  ii.  291. 

James,  ii.  281. 

Keith,  ii.  2SO. 

James,  a  young  painter,  i.  308. 

Scottish  Nationality,  i  153. 

Scottish  Songs  v.  Foreign  music, 
i.  38. 

Scrope,  William,  i.  75,  78,  111,  121, 
174,  328,  336,  338,  377,  37S,  390; 
ii  7,  9,  13,  121,  146. 

Seafield,  Lord  Chancellor,  i  208  n. 

Seaford.      See  Ellis,  C. 

Seaforth,  Lady,  funeral,  ii.  244. 

Search  for  sealing-wax,  i  184. 

Selkirk,  fifth  Earl  of,  ii  161  n.9  260, 
314. 

Lady,  ii  161. 

Club,  i.  254. 

election,  ii.  365,  408. 

Sheriff-court  processes,  i.  47. 

Selkirkshire  Yeomanry  Club  dinner, 
ii  144. 

Seton,  Sir  Reginald  Steuart,  of  Staffa, 
ii.  130  n. 

Seymour,  Sir  Michael,  ii  428,  429. 

Shakespeare's  house,  ii  155. 

Shandwick  Place,  ZSTo.  6,  takes  pos- 
session Nov.  6,  1827,  ii  61. 

Shap  Fells,  drive  over  the,  i.  314. 

Sharp,  Sir  Cuthbert,  ii.  149. 

Richard,  i  247,  277,  283 ;  ii 

158,  161. 

Sharpe,  Charles  Kirkpatrick,  i 
121,  122,  221,  412;  ii  76,  160. 
201, 204, 232,339, 422  ».;  sketched, 
i  2-4;  alterations  in  Edinburgh, 
336 ;  restoration  of  **  Mons  Meg,'' 
ii  248. 

Shaw,  Dr.,  i  217,  280. 

Christian,  ii.  145. 

of  Sauchie,  ii.  145. 

Shaws,  murder  of,  ii.  40. 

Shelley,  Lady,  ii  65,  182,  187. 

Sir  John,  ii.  179. 

Percy  B.,  i  11-12. 

Mrs.,  Frankenstein^  L  174  n. 

Shepherd,  Sir  Samuel,  Lord  Chief 
Baron,  i  51  and  «.,  192, 207,  358, 
395;  ii  73,  78,  95,  98,  166,  212, 
305,  336;  sketch  of,  i.  57-58; 
Blair-Adam,  215,  217;  ii  207, 
209 ;  Charlton,  i  403 ;  at  Colvin 
Smith's,  ii  116,  118. 

Sheridan,  Rich.  B.,  dull  in  society, 
i  80 ;  price  of  Drury  Lane  Theatre, 
81;  review  of  Life,  173;  and 
Sharp,  ii  158. 

2K 


5U 


INDEX. 


Sheridan,  Tom,  ii.  259. 
SherifEbmir  trumpeter,  i.  185. 
Shortreed,  Robert,  i.  178,  257,  387 ; 
ii  279,  316  and  n. 

(junior),  ii.  52,  306. 

Andrew,  i.  388,  390 ;  ii.  188, 

191. 

Pringle,  L  93. 

Thos.,  I  257  n. ,  258. 

Shortt,  Dr,  i  355,  357,  364. 
Siddons,  Mrs.  H.,  as  Belvidera,  ii. 

120,  293,  301. 

Sidmouth,  Lord,  ii.  188,  416. 
Sievwright,  Sir  John,  ii  173. 
Silver  fir,  rapid  growth,  i  239. 
Simond's  Switzerland,  ii.  212. 
Simson,  William,  R.S.A.,  i  377. 
Sinclair,  Sir  John,  i.  85. 

Lady,  i  85;  ii.  141. 

Misses,  ii.  36. 

Master  of,  ii.  40,  146. 

Robert,  ii.  138. 

Singleton,  Archdeacon,  ii.  49  and  n. 

Six-foot-high  Club,  ii.  244. 

Skelton,  Mr.,  ii.  310. 

Skene,  James  and  Mrs.,  i.  31,  42 ; 
the  Boswells,  59  n.  ;  sketch  of, 
75;  recollections  of  Mathews,  80 
n. ;  recollections  of  financial  crisis, 
82-84  n. ;  a  walk  in  Princes  Street 
Gardens,  91  «.,  94,  95  ».,  118; 
proposal  that  Scott  should  live 
with  him,  129,  154;  letter 
from  Scott  on.  Lady  Scott's  death, 
197-198 n.;  the  whaling  captain, 
210 ».,  319,  325,  335,  350,  355, 
393 ;  note  from  Scott,  394  n.,  395, 
397,  403,  407, 412 ;  at  Abbotsf  ord, 
ii  19,  53;  Lady  Jane  Stuart,  62n.; 
at  Abbotsf  ord,  97  w.,  191 ;  Princes 
Street  Gardens,  212;  Abbotsf  ord, 
215,  223,  230,  232 ;  journal,  238, 
244,  260;  Abbotsf  ord,  262,  263, 
266,  288,  291;  the  good  Samaritan, 
298,  305 ;  sketches  for  Waverley, 
306  and  «.,  339,  345 ;  Raeburn's 
portrait  of  Scott,  368  n.,  374  n., 
375,  399 ;  death,  456  and  n. 

Professor  George,  ii.  299  n. 

W.  F.,  ii.  399  and  n. 

Skirving,  Arch.,  artist,  i.  138  and  n. 

Smith,  Colvin,  ii.  115,  118  and  n., 

121,  129,  132,  201,  222,  284,  334. 
Mrs.    Charlotte,  Demand,    i 

156and«.,342;ii.  185. 
Horace,  Brairibletye  House,  L 

273,275;  ii.  119,  427. 

John,  builder,  ii.  368, 397  and  n. 

Sydney,  i  362,  364,   369 ;  ii 

130, 179. 


Smith,  Mr.,  Forefen  Office,  i.  278. 
Mrs. ,  case  of  poisoning,  i.  355, 

361. 

Smoking,  i  11. 
Smollett,  Captain,  i.  27. 
Smythe  of  Methven,  i.  223. 
Solitude,  love  of,  v.  Confinement,  i. 

163,  168,  177. 

Somerset,  Lord  Fitzroy,  ii.  169. 
Somerset  House,  ii.  173. 
Somerville,  Lord,  Life  of,  i.  356. 
Somerville,  Dr.  Thos.,  i.  258,  259 

and  7i. 

Sotheby,  i  283 ;  ii  157,  158,  164. 
Southey,  Robert,  the  Quarterly,  i 

21,  25,  26,  38,  214;  Peninsular 

War,  277;  ii.  168  n.,  190,  231%.; 

Pilgrim's  Progress,  344,  350. 
Soutra,  Johnstones  of,  i.  210. 
Souza-Botelho,  Madame  de,  i.  290- 

291  and  n. 
Spectral  appearances  and  illusions, 

i47. 
Spencer,  Lord,  ii  170,  181. 

Hon.  W.  R.,  i.  292,  295, 393  n. 

Spice,  a  terrier,  ii.  9-10,  388. 
Stafford,  Lord  and  Lady,  i.  47,  304, 

406 ;  ii  167,  180,  182,  187,  423. 
Stain-more,  i.  271. 
Stanhope,  Spencer,  i  267. 
Stanhope's  Notes,  ii  49  n. 
Steuart-Denham,  Sir  James,  of  Colt- 
ness,  i  114  and  n. 

Sir  Henry  Seton,  ii.  40,  90,  221. 

Stevenson,  John,  i.  148,  413 ;  ii  24. 

Patrick  James,  ii  206  n. 

Stewart,    Sir    Charles    and    Lady 

Elizabeth,  i.  281. 

Dugald,  ii  74  n.,  death  of,  201. 

J.  A.,  ii  203  n. 

Sir  J.,  of  Murthly,  ii  344. 

James,  of  Brugh,  i.  20. 

Sir  M.  Shaw,  i.  319. 

General  David,  of  Garth,  death 

of,  ii  17  and  n. 

Thomas,  i  389. 

of  Dalguise,  ii  104,  105. 

younger  of  fnvernahyle,  ii  234. 

Mrs.,  of  Blackhill,  i  168. 

Stirling,  General  Graham,  i  9$. 
Sterlings  of  DrumpeUier,  ii.  9,  304. 
Stoddart,  Dr.,  ii  113. 

Mr.,  ii  421. 

Stokoe,  Dr.,  i  325. 

Stopford,  Lady  Charlotte,  i  244  and 

n* ;  ii.  120. 
Stowell,  Lord  (Sir  William  Scott), 

ii  188  and  w.,  430. 
Strange,  Mr.  and  Mrs.,  ii  342,  344. 
Strangford,  Lord,  ii  196. 


INDEX. 


515 


Stratford-on-Avon,  mulberry  tree 
from,  ii.  50  and  n.,  154. 

"Strict  retreat,"  i.  111. 

Stuart,  General,  of  Blantyre,  ii.  4. 

Charles,  Blantyre,  i  225 ;  ii.  4. 

Hon.  Mr  ,  i.  98. 

Mr.,  grand-nephew  of  Lady 

Louisa,  ii.  226,  255. 

Sir  John,  of  Fettereairn,  i. 

404  n. ;  ii.  321  n. 

Sir  John,  ii.  480. 

James,  of  Dunearn,  i.  58  n. ; 

ii.  224 ;  sale  of  pictures,  232. 

Sir  James,  AUanbank,  L  412  ; 

ii.  215,  224,  225,  229,  232. 

Lady  Jane,  letter  to  Scott, 

ii.  55  and  n. ;  an  affecting  meet- 
ing, 62  and  n.  ;  old  stories,  64, 
73,  80,  217  ;  illness,  240,  3tfL  and 
n. ;  death  of,  321. 

Lady  Louisa,  i.  107  and  n.. 

204,  311,  255 ;  ii.  416,  418,  423, 
473,  475. 

"Stulko,"ii389andtt. 

Style,  solecisms  in,  i.  181. 

Sunderland,  ii  46. 

Hall,  ii.  23. 

Surtees,  Mr.  i.  240,  242,  250,  260, 
266,311,312;  ii.  149. 

Sussex,  Duke  of,  iL  168* 

Sutherland,  Mr.,  Aberdeen,  ii.  278. 

Sutton,  Eight  Hon.  Charles  Man- 
ners, i.  305  and  n. 

Swanston,  John,  i  160,  238  ;  ii  23, 
364,  367. 

Swiftfs  handwriting,  ii  39. 

Swinton,  Archibald,  i  250;  dinner 
and  guests,  322 ;  ii.  18,  71,  132, 
138,  142. 

Mr.  and  Mrs.  George,  i  76, 

394;  ii  18,113,231,  392. 

John,  i.  205-206,  224, 403 ;  ii.  4. 

Harriet,  ii.  347. 

Mrs.  Peggie,  L  29;  ii  18. 

S.  W.  S.,  i  112?i. 

"TAGS  is  Latin  for  a  candle,"  i 
375  and  n. 

Tait,  Archbishop,  ii  4  n. 

Craufurd,  ii  4. 

Talbot,  Miss,  ii  472. 

Tale  of  Mysterious  Mirror,  ii  158. 

Tales  of  Crusaders,  ii.  379. 

Tales  of  a  Grandfather  first  thought 
of,  i  396;  arranged  with  Cadell, 
398;  413;  progress  of,  ii  8,  38; 
first  volume  finished,  14;  last 
proof  corrected,  68;  request  to 
revise,  96;  new  edition,  147; 
second  series  begun,  159,  268; 


third  series  in  hand,  269 ;  France, 
359 

Talleyrand,  i.  282;  ii  424  ». 
I  Tamworth,  ii  152. 
i  Tangiers,  ii.  432. 
(  Tanneguy  du  CMttl.  i.  209. 
Tarentum,  Bishop  of,  ii.  455. 

•  Taschereau's  Life  ofMolitre,  ii.  104, 

!        110. 

,  Taylor,  Sir  Herbert,  ii  393. 

•  —7-  Jemmy,  ii.  292. 

! Watson,  ii.  173. 

i  "Teind  Wednesday,"  i  37  n. 
;  Temple,  Sir  William,  ii  192,  352  n. 
I  Terracina,  ii  480. 
Terry,  Daniel,  i  192,  223;  visit  to 
I      Abbotsford,  230;  234,  251,  278, 
!     280,  352;  ruin,  ii.  159,  160,  191 ; 
!     illness,  305 ;  death,  316  and  n. 

The  Great  Ticalmley,  i.  8. 
;  Theatre  of  God's  Judgments,  ii.  79  ?<. 

I Royal,  meeting  of  trustees  for, 

,     ii292. 

!  Theatrical  Fund  Dinner,  i  362  and 
1     n.,  363,  3d*. 

|  "  The  grave  the  last  sleep  ?"  i  393. 
Theobald,  Mr.  and  Mrs.,  ii  147, 148. 
Thomas,  Captain,  ii.  307  and  n. 
Thomson,  David,  on  Moore,  i.  46. 

David,  W.S.,ii  28. 

Rev.  George,  tutor  at  Abbots- 
ford,  i  67  and  n.,  328,  336 ;  ii  350 
n.,  359. 

Mr.,  Mrs.,  and  Miss  Anstru- 

ther,  of  Charlton,  i  376,  403 ;  ii 
95,  98,  207,  209. 

Rev.  John,  of  Duddingston,  i 

111,  223,  379;  ii  121,  133,  207, 
209,  336,  409. 

Thomas,  Deputy  Clerk-Regis- 
ter,!. 61, 133  and  n.,  140,  205,  223 
and  n,  225,  357,  369,  400,  403, 
407;  ii  4,  10,  13,  72,  124,  239, 
37471, 
Thomson's  Tales  of  an  Antiquary, 

ii.  148. 
Thornhffl,  Mr.,  ii  50. 

Colonel,  i  265;  hawks,  266. 

Sir  James,  ii.  192. 

Thrale,  Mrs.,  i  309 ;  ii.  190  and  n. 
Thurteil  &  Co.  at  Gill's  Hill,  i  228 

ft;  ii.  194  and  n. 
Ticknor,  George,  of  Boston,  i.  77  n  : 

ii.  34w.,342n. 
Tighe,  Usher,  ii  228. 
"Tiled  haddock,"  ii  341  and  n., 

345. 

"Time  must  salve  the  sore,"  i  100. 
Tod's,  Colonel,  Travels  in  Western 
India,  ii  239  n. 


516 


INDEX. 


Tod,  Miss,  i.  267. 

Todd,  Miss,  ii.  18. 

Todd,  Thomas,  i.  260  and  n. 

"Tom  Tack,"  i.  382. 

Tone,  Wolfe,  ii.  17. 

Torre  del  Carmine,  ii.  451. 

Torphiehen,  Lady,  ii.  138. 

"  Touch  my  honour,  touch  my  life," 

i.  153  and  n. 

Townshend,  Lord  Charles,  ii.  152. 
Trafalgar,  ii  433. 
Train,  Joseph,  ii.  270. 
Tranent,  riots  at,  ii.  435. 
Travelling  expenses,  1790,  contrasted 

with  1826,  i.  314. 
Treuttel  &  Wurtz,  ii.  104,  143. 
Tripp,  Baron,  ii.  45. 
Trotter  (Coal  Gas  Co.),  ii.  139. 

Sir  Coutts,  ii.  172. 

Tuilleries,  i.  296. 

Tunis,  ii.  440. 

Turner,  Rev.  Mr.,  and  Lord  Castle- 

reagh's  Memoirs,  ii.  56. 

Dr.,  ii.  369. 

Messrs.,  Malta,  ii.  475. 

Turner's,    J.    W.,    illustration   to 

Poetical  Works,  ii.  395,  399. 
Tweeddale,  Marquis  of,  ii.  80,  236. 
Tytler,  Alexander  Eraser,  i.  236  n. 
Mrs.,  of  Woodhouselee,  i.  236, 

238. 
Patrick  Fraser,  i  354  and  n. ;  ii. 

264;  his  History  of  Scotland,  ii. 

250,  264,  267. 

UNION   SCOTTISH  ASSURANCE  Co., 

meeting  of,  ii.  69,  70. 
University  Commission,  i.  256,  257, 

326  and  n.;  ii  63  w. 
Upcott,  William,  i.  248. 
Uprouse  ye  fh&U)  my  merry,  merry 

men,  ii.  226. 
Utterson,  ii.  168. 

VA^EiraoFF,Mr.,as.7a$er,ii  120. 
Van  Mildert,  Bishop  of  Durham, 

ii.  43  and  n. 
Vasa,    Prince   Gustavus,    i.    385, 

386  n. 

Veitch,  James,  ii  266. 
Velletri,  ii.  480. 
Venice  Preserved,  ii.  120. 
Ventriloquism,  i.  79. 
Vere,  Hope,  of  Craigiehall,  ii.  80, 

236. 
Lady  Elizabeth  Hope,  ii.  80, 

236. 

Verplanck,  Mr.,  i.  400. 
Vesci,  De,  ii  48. 
Vesuvius,  ii  426,  450. 


Vicaria,  the,  ii.  462. 
Victoria,  Princess,  ii.  184. 
Vienna,  congress  of,  ii.  49. 
Views  of  Gentlemen's  Seats,  ii  104. 
Vilhena,  don   Manuel,  Fort  of,   i. 

443  and  n.,  444. 
Volturno,  ii.  479. 

WAUDIE,  MB.,  of  Henderland,  i.  253. 
Walker,    Mr.,    engraver    of    Kae- 

burn's  portrait  of  Scott,   i.    212 

and  n.,  398. 

—  teacher  of  drawing,  i.  137, 138 
and  TO. 

—  H.,  ii  33. 

—  of  Muirhouselaw,  i  388  and  n. 

—  Lieut,  (afterwards   Sir   Bald- 
win), ii.  439  and  n. 

—  Sir  Patrick,  ii.  244. 
Miss  A.,ii  33. 

Helen,  tombstone  at  Irongray, 

ii.  403  and  rc. 
Walker  Street,  No.  3,  Edinburgh 

(from  Nov.  27,  1826  to  June  30, 

1827),  i.  315  n.,  414. 
Wall  in  "  Pyramus  and  Thisbe,"  i. 

18. 

Wallace's  sword,  i.  43. 
Walpole,  Horace,  Historic  Doubts, 

i.  366 ;  ii.  104. 

Walton  andCottonJs-4ttgrkr,  ii.  188  %. 
Ward,  B.  Plumer,  i.  384  n.",  ii.  2  n. 

Mr.,  (Dover),i  300. 

Warkworth,  ii.  48,  49. 
Warroch,  Mr.,  ii.  340. 
Warwick,  Lord  and  Lady,  ii.  154. 

Castle,  ii.  153. 

Water-cow,     in     the     Highlands, 

superstition,  ii.  71,  72  and  n. 
Watson,  Capt.,  ii.  298  n.,  398. 
Wauchope,  Mr.,  ii.  70. 
Waverley  novels,  plans  for  buying 

copyright,  ii.  67,  85,  86,  89,  295 ; 

continued  demand  for.  107-8  TO. 
Weare's  murder,  i  228  ». ;  ii.  193-4. 
Weatherby,  i.  271. 
Weber,  Baron,  i  190. 
Henry,    amanuensis,    i.     149, 

339 ;  ii.  160. 
Wedderburn,  Sir  David,  ii  72. 

Lady  (nee  Brown),  i.  409 ;  ii. 

35,72. 

Weir,  Major,  i  346,  347  n. 
Wellesley,  Marquis,  ii.  91. 
Wellington,  Duke  of,  i.  267,  302, 

305,  362,  367,  379,  383,  411  ;  ii. 

92w.,  99, 104,  110,  167, 172,  179, 

181,  182,  220,  229,  262  *.,  289, 

414;  i  dinners  and  guests,  306 

seq.  ;  Scott's  interviews  with,  in 


INDEX.  517 

London,  310,  348;  Scott's  letter !  Wolcot,  Dr.,  L  341. 

to,  359-360  n. ;  Canning,  il.  6,  21 ; !  Wood,  Sir  Alexander,  ii.  136. 

Ravensworth  Castle,  41  and  ft.,  42;  ' John  Philip,  ii.  341  and  n. 

Baron   Tripp,  45  ;    and  Earl   of  |  Woodstock,  in  progress,  i  10,  68,  74, 

Meath,  72 ;  Lord  Maion,  173  n. ;  !      100,  114  ;  2d  voL  ended,  117, 123 

Catholic  Bill,  230  and  n.  \      127,  131,  146,  158 ;  finished,  162, 

Wemyss,  Captain,  i.  406.  ,      165 ;  Longman  buys,  182 ;  copy- 

Westphalia,  King  of,  iL  479  and  n.    '      right,  202 :  price  of,  407  n.;  anno- 
Whistlecraft,  ii.  449.  '      rated,  ii.  359. 

White,  Lydia,  i.   283,  305  ;  death,  j  Wooler,  ii.  42,  49,  50. 

351-352  and  n.  ;  ii.  210, 423,           |  Worcester,  L  313. 
Whitmore,  Lady  Lucy,  L  262.            !  Worcester,  Marquis  of,  iL  169. 
Whittingham,  ii.  42,  47,  49.                ,  Wordsworth,  William,  i.  26S,  333 ; 
Whyte,  Miss,  ii  465,  467.                   f     anecdote  of,  334 ;  lines  on  Hogg, 
Widow-burning  in  India,  i  30.           •      ii.  34  n. ;  179, 181, 184, 189, 190 ;  at 
Widow  ladies'  requests,  i.  163.           i      Abbotsford,  411,  413  and  n.,  414 
Wilberforce,  iL  163.                             '      and  n. 
Wilkie,  Sir  David,  picture  of  king's  , Miss,  iL  413,  414  and  n. 

arrival  at  Holyrood,  i.  77  ;  at    Bishop,  ii.  413  and 


Somerset  House,   119  ;  ii.  223  . 
portrait  for  Magnum^  241  ;   and 


Wrangham,  Archdeacon,  iL  186. 
Wright,  Sir  John,  iL  25, 


letter  from,  to  Scott,  241  ??.  Rev.  Thomas,  of  Borthwick,  ii. 

Williams,  Archdeacon,  i.  413,  414  ;        92  and  n. 

iL  4,  27,  123,  131,  205,  208,  212,  ' W.,  Lincoln's  Inn,  i.  26,  308 

373.  and  72.,  311. 
H.  W.  ("  Grecian"),  i.  138  and    Wyatville,  Mr.,  L  279. 

n.,  377-  ,  Wynn,  Charles,  iL  184. 

Williamson,  W.  of  Cardrona,  i.  131 

?i.  j  YABBOW,  excursion  in  August  1826, 
Wilson,  Adam,  i.  325 ;  £L  307.  L  242;  in  December  1827,  ii.  95; 
Professor  John,  letter  from  I  in  May  1829,  279 ;  in  July  1829, 

Lockhart,  L  26  n.;  iL  34  and  n.,  I     320 ;  in  September  1831,  413. 

78,  130.  ,  Yates,  Dr.?  i.  280 ;  ii.  185. 
Mr.,  of  Wilsontown,  L   225,  j  Yelin,  Chevalier,  i.  90,  94. 

283.  Yermoloff,  General,  ii.  17-18. 

Sir  Robert,  iL  20.  !  Yester,  pictures  at,  ii.  80. 

R.  Sym,  i.  50.  I  York,  Duke  of,  L   302,  308,  310  ; 

Harriet,  Memoirs,  remarks  on,        death,  337 ;  funeral,  343. 

L  41-42.  !  York,  Cardinal  Duke  of,  ii.  313. 

Wilton  nuns,  "go  spin  you  jades,"  '  Young,  Alexander,  of  Harburn,  i. 

i.  110,  157,  372.                                 I      148  and  n. 
Winchelsea,  Lord,  and  Wellington,  j Charles  Mayne  as  "Pierre,"  ii. 

ii.  258  n.  '      120,  122  and  n. 

Windsor  Castle,  L  279.  Dr.,  and  Miss,  Hawicfc,  ii.  160, 

Wisharts1,  Montrose,  iL  110  n.  \     347,  355. 

"  Wishing-cap,"  power  of,  i.  66.  Young  Lochinvar  written  at  Both- 

Witchcraft,  Joanna  Baillie,  ii.  10.      ,      well  Castle,  motto,  vol.  L  p.  iv, 

Withers,  Pope's  epitaph,  L  125.          , 

W.,  ii.  187.  i  ZETLAND,  ii.  291. 


MABCH  1891. 


Printed  by  T.  and  A.  COXSTABIJS,  Printers  to  Her  Majesty, 
at  the  Edinburgh  University  Press