Specific Medication and Specific Medicines
John Milton Scudder
Specific Medication and Specific Medicines. Cincinnati: Wilstach, Baldwin & Co., 1870 (first edition).
Public domain. Transcribed from the Internet Archive copy (https://archive.org/details/specificmedicat04scudgoog).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

Google


This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project

to make the world's books discoverable online.

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject

to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books

are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover.

Marks, notations and other maiginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the

publisher to a library and finally to you.

Usage guidelines

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing tliis resource, we liave taken steps to
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying.
We also ask that you:

+ Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for
personal, non-commercial purposes.

+ Refrain fivm automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help.

+ Maintain attributionTht GoogXt "watermark" you see on each file is essential for in forming people about this project and helping them find
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it.

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liabili^ can be quite severe.

About Google Book Search

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web

at |http: //books .google .com/I


I


i


RozUlai Crofford
Ba tata


/


^


SPECIFIC MEDICATION


AND


SPECIFIC MEDICINES.


BY

JOHN MrSCUDDER, M. D.

PROFESSOB OF THK PSIKCIPLSS AMD PRACTICK OF MXDICINB IN THS KCLICTIO

MEDICAL INSTITUTE ; AUTHOR OP " THK PRINCIPLK8 OF MEDICINE,"

" THK KCLEOTIC PRACTICK OF MXDIOINK," " THK XCLECTIO

MATERIA MXDICA AND THERAPEUTICS/' "a PRACTICAL

TREATISE ON THE DISEASES OF WOMKN/' KTO.


CINCINNATI:

WILSTACH, BALDWIN A CO., PRINTEKS.

1870.


Entered according to Act of Congress, in the year 1870, by

JOHN M. SCUDDER,
In the Office of the Librarian of Congress.


6


PREFACE.


For Bome hundred years or more, there has been a pretty

uniform agreement in the statement^ bo frequently repeated —

" there are no specifics in medicine." To have a good reputa-

' J tion for professional acquirements and standing, this was a fiXn-

-^ damental article of belief Whatever might be the certainty

^ * in Anatomy, Physiology, Chemistry, and the arts of the Ob-

\ stetrician and Surgeon, it was essential to belieye that the

^ practice of medicine was a great uncertainty.

V. That it was a great uncertainty, as commonly followed, we

1^ are well assured. The records of disease, the mortality

y^ , tables, and the resultant lesions from the mal-administration

of medicines, abundantly testify to this.

This stands confessed in the writings of the most prominent
men in the medical profession to-day, who unite in deprecating
the use of the older treatment of disease, and the greater
safety of the exfpedaiM plan — ^which is really diet and rest.

Must we give up medicine entirely? Are there no agencies
opposed to proce'sses of disease, that we can employ with cer-
tainty ? These are the questions of the day, and in answering
them, we will decide either for no medicine, or for specific
medication.

To determine which of these shall be chosen, the reader
will have to refer to his own experience of the action of medi-


yi PREFACE.

cines, and be gaided by it. All will admit the uncertainty of
medicine, as now used, but no one will be willing to confess
tbat he really knows nothing in therapeutics. I think it will
be safe to assert that every practitioner will have the knowl-
edge of some antagonism of medicine to disease, that is cleiar,
definite and uniform. If he has but one such, it is positive
proof there are others, and the evidence that direct or specific
medication is a possibility.

Specific medication requires specific diagnosis. We do not
propose to teach that single remedies are opposed to diseases
according to our present nosology. These consist of an asso-
ciation of functional and structural lesions, varying in degree
and combination at different times, very rarely the same in any
to analyze the disease and separate it into its component ele-
ments, and for these we select the appropriate remedy.

The writer has had a sufficiently extended experience in
the treatment of disease, to say that he knows absolutely that
remedies have this direct antagonistic action to disease, and
in many instances he is able to define it so that the reader can
readily determine its truth. Still the field of investigation is
a broad one, it has been but little cultivated, and there are
few careful observers, so that much of the work remains for
future investigation.

The tendency of medicine in all schools, however, is in the
one direction. The giving up of the old uncertainty is the
first step, then follows the carei^l study of individual reme-
dies, and their use to accomplish certain well defined objects.
One need not be a prophet to forecast the i^ture in this
respect. The medicine of the i^ture will very certainly be
direct^ or as we have chosen to term it, ** Specific Medication.''


PREFACE. vii

The object of the author has been to make the subject as

plain as possible, and not to obscure it with useless verbiage.

The first intention was to tell only what he knew — ^then this

small voliffme would have been but a pamphlet But on :for-
ther consideration it was deemed best, to point out the lines

of investigation with the larger number of our indigenous medi-
cines, that they might be thoroughly tested.

No apology is offered for its shortcomings. It has been
compiled in considerable part, from monthly articles in the
Eclectic Medical Journal, and is presented to the profession
as a guide in part, but especially as an incentive to the re-
stady of the Materia Medica.


#


SPECIFIC MEDICATION

AND

SPECIFIC MEDICINES.


THE THEORY OP SPBCIEIO MEPICATION.

I take it for granted that the reader will concede
that all agents employed as medicines act either
upon function or structure, and that this action to
be curative must be opposed to the processes of
disease. This proposition seems so plain that it re-
quires no presentation of -facts in proof, yet it is
well to give it careful consideration, and arrange
such facts as may liave come under the reader's ob-
servation in its support.

* If the action of a remedy is to oppose a process
of disease, evidently its selection will depend — first,
upon a correct knowledge of the disease, and
second, upon a correct knowledge of this opposition
of remedies to it.

It is a law of the universe, "that like causes
always produce like efiects," or to reverse it, " that
like effects always flow from like causes." There-
fore, if we can determine the opposition of a remedy


10 SPECIFIC MEDICATION.

to a process of disease iu any given case, we have
determiued it in all like cases. And, to make use
of this knowledge subsequently it is only necea^iry.
that we be able to determine the exact condition of
disease, when we very certainly expect to obtain
the same curative (opposing) action from the
remedy.

In describing this action to another, it is neces-
sary — first, that we so observe and group the signs
and symptoms of disease, that he may get the exact
idea of the pathological condition to be opposed.
The skill required is in diagnosis, and necessitates
a very thorough re-study of pathology, ignoring to
a great extent, our present nosology. To facilitate
this study, the author has published a work — " The
Principles of Medicine *' — which embodies his views,
and will serve as a basis for specific or direct medi-
cation. Much that might be deemed necessary in
this monograph, will there be found in its proper
connection, and we have not deemed it desirable to
separate it and reproduce it here.

Many persons are in error in regard to our use of
the term spedfic. They think of a specific medicine^
as one that will cure all cases of a certain disease,
according to our present nosology, as pneumonitis,
dysentery, diarrhoea, albuminuria, phthisis, etc. ; and
a person looking at the subject in this light, and
guided by his experience in the use of remedies,
would at once say there are no specifics.

We use the term specific with relation to definite
pathological conditions, and propose to say, that


SPECIFIC MEDICATION. 11

4

certain well determined deviations from the healthy
state, will always be corrected by certain specific
medicines.

A disease, according to our present nosology, may
be formed of one, or of a half-dozen or more distinct
pathological changes, bearing a determinate relation
to one another. We do not propose to rej^ch all of
these by one remedy, except in those cases in which
one lesion is primary, and the others result from it.
But on the contrary, we propose a remedy for each
pathological feature, using the remedy for that first
which is. first in the chain of morbid action^ and
that second which stands second, and so on.

As an example, we analyze a case of fever, and
find it to consist of a lesion of the circulation, a
lesion of innervation, a lesion of secretion, a lesion
of the blood, and a lesion of nutrition ; each of
these is regarded as a distinct element of the dis-
ease, but in the order named, — ^the one depending
upon the other to a certain extent. A remedy that
will rectify the lesion of circulation, will sometimes
be sufficient to arrest the entire chain of morbid
phenomena — as we notice in the simple fevers. Or
a remedy that will correct the lesion of the blood —
this being primary and the cause of the various
morbid processes, — ^will be a specific for all, as when
quinine arrests an intermittent or remittent fever.

But in the severer types of disease, we find it
necessary to use a rei!nedy or remedies for each path-
ological feature. Thus, we employ one to correct
the lesion of circulation, one to correct the lesion


12 SPJSCIFIC MBDICATION.

of innervation, special remedies to increase secre-
tion, to correct the lesion of the blood, etc. Instead
of one remedy to arrest the disease, according to
the ordinary use of the term specific, we employ a
number of different agents, which are none the less
specific, for they lineet distinct features of the dis-
eased action.

To employ remedies in this way, it is requisite
that we analyze the disease according to what we
know of pathology, determining definitely the ele-
ments that go to form it, and their relation to one
another.

And secondly, that we know the direct influence
of remedies upon the human body, both in health
and disease ; that we use them singly or in simple
combinations ; that we do one thing at a time :
that first which is first, that second which holds the
second place, and so on.

If one expects to obtain the advantages of specific
medication, he must not associate it with indirect
medication. The direct sedatives, with free podo-
phyllin catharsis — veratrum in pneumonia, with
nauseants, blisters, etc., are incompatible. Success
comes from one or the other alone. If I use direct
medication I use it alone, and if I use indirect medi-
cation I use it alone. If we propose to treat a case
of croup with Aconite, we do not use nauseants ;
if we propose to cure a case of cholera infantum
with Ipecac and Nux Vomica, we do not want as-
tringents.

But we go further into the analysis of diseased


SPBOIFIO MEDICATION. 18

action as expressed by symptoms, than many supr
pose. The success of direct medication comes from
the definiteness of diagnosis — ^determining the exact
condition of a function or part.

To illustrate, it is not sufficient in selecting a
sedative to know that the pulse is frequent, using
alike Veratrum, Aconite, Digitalis, Gelseminum, or
Lobelia. Frequency is but one element of the
lesion : and we have to determine in addition the
strength or weakness of the circulation, the degree
of obstruction of the capillary circulation, and the
condition of the nervous system that controls this
function. Thus, where there is strength with fre-
quency we employ Veratrum ; feebleness with fre-
quency, Aconite ; excitation of the nervous system
with strength and frequency, Gelseminum; atony
of the nervous system and tendency to stasis of
blood, Aconite and Belladonna ; feeble impulse from
the heart, without capillary obstruction, Digitalis,
etc.

It is not sufficient to know that the tongue is
coated, indicating an impairment or arrest of diges-
tion. We make this secretion give us the history
of blood lesions, as well as of gastric and intestinal
derangements. We learn that paUid mucous mem-
branes with white coat demand alkalies ; that deep
red mucous membranes and brown c§at call for
acids; that a dirty-white, pasty coat requires the
alkaline sulphites, etc. It is not necessary to con-
tinue this illustration f lirther, for the reader will see
by the above that the specific medication inquires spe-


14 SPECIFIC MEDICATION.

eijic diagnosis^ and that it will be successful just in
proportion as we become skilled in this.

It is true that almost any one can use Veratrum
and Aconite sticcessfuUy, for the conditions are so
prominent that they can not be mistaken ; or any
dysentery from cold ; Ipecac in the diarrhoea of chil-
dren; CoUinsonia or Hamamelis for hemorrhoids;
Collinsonia for ministers' sore throat; Cactus for.
heart disease; Pulsatilla for nervousness; Staphy-
sagria for prostatorrhoea ; Eryngium Aquaticum for
cystic or urethral irritation ; Apocynum Canabinum
for dropsy, etc., etc. These remedies have a;n extra
value attached to them, because the conditions in-
dicating them are so easily determined.

Yet the reader will learn with surprise that ten
years sincC; with but one exception, not one of these
agents were used for the purpose named. In 1860,
10 lbs. of the crude root of Collinsonia supplied the
market for a year ; now one house gets in 10,000
lbs. for the yeai^'s supply.

SPECIFIC DIAGNOSIS.

We have already insisted upon the necessity of
specific diagnosis if we are to expect definite cura-
tive action |rora medicines. This is a very impor-
tant element of specific or direct medication that
many physicians do not seem to understand. When
we speak of specific medication they get the idea
of an absohite cure for disease according to our


SPBCIFIC BUGNOSIS. 15

present noBology, and say there is no such thing as
a specific medicine. They expect to guess at the
name of a disease, and find a remedy that will fit
thefr guess-work. To suit such, a medicine must
be like a blunderbuss, scattering its shot all over the
field, giving a probability that some will reach the
mark.

Direct medication, on the contrary, requires spe-
cific diagnosis. We must know exactly what the de-
parture from health is, and knowing this we may
select a remedy which will correct it* As was re-
marked before, the physician must have first a thor-
ough knowledge of healthy life, and be able to re-
cognize it, or any departure from it. Thus Anat-
omy and Physiology are the true basis of direct
medication, for if we do not know the healthy
structure and function, it is not possible that we can
know the diseased structure and function.

We have a very simple rule for measuring the
departure from health, and it is easily applied. It
is in one of three directions — excess^ defect^ or perver-
sion — above, below, or from. If we can measure
disease in this way, the desired remedial action is at
once suggested — if in excess it is to be diminished,
if defective it is to be increased, if perverted it is to
be brought back to the normal standard. In a
majority of acute diseases, we will find these de-
partures so clearly marked that the diagnosis and
treatment are very easy.

But as there are many elements that go to make
healthy life in man, so there are many that go to


16 SPECIFIC MBDICATION.

make the sum of disease. These will be foand in
varying combination , yet in most cases there are
certain prominent lesions which may be regarded
as standing first in the chain of morbid phenomena
and upon which the others rest. K we can find
remedies which will reach and correct these, the
disease is at an end, and the natural restorative
power of the body soon gives health.

The most simple form of specific medication is
where a single remedy ia Bufficient to arrest the pro-
for ministers' sore throat, Drosera for the cough of
measles. Belladonna for congestive headache, Ma-
crotys for muscular pains, Hamamelis for hemor-
rhoids, Phytolacca for mammary irritation, .Cactus
for functional heart disease, Staphysagria for pros-
tatorrhoea, etc. This use of remedies gives great
satisfaction in the treatment of many diseases, and
we are led to wish that the practice of medicine
could be resolved into the giving of such specifics.

Not quite so simple, but yet very plain is the
second form of direct medication, illustrated by the
following examples. A heavily loaded tongue at
base, with a bad taste in the mouth and fullness in
the epigastric region, demanding an emetic. A
uniformly yellowish coated tongue from base to tip,
relieved by Podophyliin or Leptaudrin. A pallid
tongue, coated white, calling for a salt of soda. A
pallid large tongue, with a moist pasty coat, de-
manding the alkaline sulphites, say sulphite of soda.
The deep red tongue and mucous membranes with


SPBCmC DIAONOSIS. 17

brownish coatingB, demanding the use of acids, say
muriatic acid.

Quite as plain, but not so easily and directly
reached by medicine, is the nee^ of a good condi-
tion of the intestinal canal for digestion and blood
making, and associated with it the recognition of
the need of certain restoratives that may be neces-
sary to normal nutrition and functional activity.
These are essentials in the treatment of every fovm
of disease. In acute cases, it is required first to rid
our patient of functional disease before we can fully
establish digestion and nutrition, but in chronic dis-
ease it will many times stand first, and must always
be associated with treatment for local lesions.

The complement of this is, treatment to increase
the removal of old and word-out tissues, and thus
relieve the solids and fluids of material that must
necessarily depress functiotial activity. Probably
we have as little positive knowledge of remedies
that increase retrograde metamorphosis, as of any
other 9lass, still they are being studied, and in time
we will be enabled to use them directly. Remedies
that increase excretion are in common use, and
form a very important part of our practice. From
the earliest periods of medicine, the fact that dis-
ease is destructive has been recognized. Destruc-
tion of the material of our bodies, necessarily leaves
the debris either in solids or fluids, and exf)erience
has shown that it can not remain in the body with
safety. Hence the common use of those agents
2


18 sPBonric medication.

that stimulate excretion from sMn, kidneys and
bowels.

But there has been a failure to appreciate the
true nature of these processes, and from this has
flowed a very great deal of bad practice. These
processes are strictly vital processes, carried on by
delicate organisms under the control of the nervous
system. As they are the basis of life, we may well
suppose that nature has guarded them on all sides,
and that they are the true centre of life. The doc-
tor of the olden time has looked upon them as
mechanisms to be powerfully influenced by reme-
dies. He powerfully excites the stomach and intes-
tinal canal as a means of derivation, and works
upon the skin and kidneys as if secretion from them
were a purely physical process. Thousands of lives
have been and are being destroyed in this way.
Any one who will take up Huxley^s Physiology,
and read the clear and simple description of this
apparatus fov digestion and waste, upon which our
lives rest, can not but be satisfied that the common
practice of medicine is a very great wrong. A man
lives, because he has the power of renewing his life
day by day. Take away this power and he will die
in a brief time ; take it away in part, and you have
lessened his power to that extent ; take it away for
an hour, for a day, or for a week, and his power to
live is weakened to that extent.

When we regard these processes as strictly vital
processes, in highly developed organs, under the
control of a most delicately adjusted nervous system,


SPECIFIC DIAGNOSIS. 19

we will be in a position to use remedies to aid vital
action. Studying the condition of the stomach and
intestinal canal in this light, we will see how a
direct stimulant, or tonic, an alkali, an acid, a rem-
edy that will relieve nervous irritation, or one that
will give increased innervation, will in different
cases be an aid to digestion. Looking farther, we
will see the necessity, in one case of histogenetic
food, in another of calorifacient, in one of iron, in
another of phosphorus, etc. It is just as much
specific medication to be able to select the proper food
for the sick as it is the proper medicine.

One or two examples of this may not be out of
place. The past winter I was called in consultation,
in a case of continued fever in the third week.
The treatment, so far as medicine was concerned,
had been very judicious, but the food had been
starchy, and for a week the patient had been able
to take very little. He was failing fast, and stimu-
lants and tonics were used without advantage. The
most striking features of the disease to me were :
the feebleness of the heart's action, the want of
respiratory power, and the evidences of a general
failure of muscular power — in all other respects the
patient was in good condition. I advised enemata
of beef-essence, and its internal administration in
small quantities frequently repeated, and a suspen-
sion of all medicine.- The effect was marked in
twenty-four hours, and the patient speedily recov-
ered. In the early part of my practice I had occa-
sion to call Dr. William Judkins in consultation, in


20 SPBOIFIO MEDICATION.

the case of a lady who had incipient phthisis de^
veloped from meiistraal irregularity. She was very
feeble, and 1 had been giving her freely of the bit-
ter tonics, stimulants and animal food. The old
Quaker remarked, if thee will stop the medicine
and stimulants, and give heiv fatty matter she will
recover — and the result justified the old doctor's
skill in diagnosis. I have had to take this advice
twice in the past eighteen months, from other par-
ties, when I should have recognized it myself ; in
both it was the one thing necessary to success.

With regard to excretion, we must be thoroughly
impressed with the fact that it is wholly a vital pro-
cess, and not a process of straining. When we
come to understand that a secreting organ is con-
tinually growing secreting cells, and that these
withdraw from the blood the worn-out materials of
our bodies, we will be ia a position to use remedies
with better success. Evidently it is possible to so
over-stimulate or over-work an excretory organ,
that this function of cell-production will be very
much diminished or altogether arrested. Just in
this proportion must secretion be impaired or wholly
arrested. The best remedies to increase secretion are
those that act mildly and stimulate vital function.

Thus far direct medication is very plain sailing.
All can succeed with it, yet successes will be in pro-
portion to the physician's acuteness of observation,
and to some extent upon his knowledge of remedies.
But beyond this we have a field that requires a very
thorough knowledge of vital processes, accurate ob-


BIFIBRBNCS FROM H0M(EOPATHY. 21

servation, and an extended knowledge of remedies.
We study not so much the grosser manifestations
of disease, but*the more delicate shadings and com-
binations, aiid our therapeutics requires that we
have a most intimate knowledge of the influence of
remedies upon the human body. In this field of
study the physician will find a beauty and certainty
in the practice of medicine that will give zest to in-
vestigation, and as it is pursued he will find greater
and greater success.

DIFFBRBNCE. PROM HOMCBOPATHY.

The question has been asked, "In what does your
theory of specific medication differ from Homoeop-
athy?" The question is a' pertinent one, and I
will endeavor to answer it briefly.

The law, similia similibuSj upon which the Ho-
moeopathic practice is based, is defined in two ways.
One contends that the drug, used for cure. " pro-
duces the essential morbid condition " when proven
in health. The other, " that it produces similar
symptoms," but not the exact pathological condi-
tion.

The truth in this law of similia similibtts, is, that
certain agents, called medicines, act on particular
organs, parts, and functions of the human body in a
uniform manner. They act equally on the organ,
part, or function, in health and disease; and thus
acting in health, they produce such change in the
phencmena of life as to render the action sensible .


22 SPBCIFIO MEDICATION.

to the person — symptoms. If an agent directly and
uniformly produces an influence upon a particular
part, it is more likely to be used as a remedy in dis-
ease of that part than another which does not influ-
ence the part at all.

Remedies are, therefore, those agents which
directly and uniformly influence an organ, part, or
function. The question then comes up, are they
remedies because " they will produce a similar state
of disease," or because they are opposed to diseased
action?

The HomcBopaths will not admit any explanation
of their law of similia. The remedy is a remedy
because it will produce the exact diseased condition,
or at least the exact symptoms of such condition.

I contend that a drug is a specific remedy : first,
because it influences uniformly and directly the
part or function diseased ; and second, because it
opposes such diseased action. I would, therefore,
write the law of cure opponens opponenda, instead of
similia similibus.

I find a late authority in Homoeopathy agrees
with me in this. Dr. v. Grauvogl, in his " Lehr-
buch Der Homoeopathy," says: — "The conception
of a specific remedy expresses the mutual relation
existing between it and parts of the organism,
which has to be ascertained empirically by physio-
logical provings of drugs. For some part of the
organism is in a relation of immunity, for other
parts of attraction, for others again one of repulsion,-
and always viee versa. For instance, there is a spe-


DIFFBBENOE FROM HOM(E0PATHY. 23

cific form of fever and ague which, for these very
reasons, is cured by Quinine, a dose or quantity of
Quinine being given which corresponds to the. in-
tensity of the attack.''

Again with reference to the dose of medicines :
" All we have to do is to determine, independently
of all subjective persuasions and incomprehensibili-
ties, what quantity of a substance is necessary in
order to produce in any morbidly affected part of
the organism a chemical or physical counter-move-
ment of equal intensity, and in an opposite direction
to the. movement originated by the morbific cause-,
with a view of arresting, or at least, retarding this
latter, and finally discontinuing it altogether by re-
peating the dose. * * * "phe problem
is simply to determine what remedial movement
quantities will antagonize as their equivalent the
movements that had been excited by the morbific
agent; for the measure of the force is the effect,
nothing else. To solve this problem we have the
natural law according to which quantity contains
the measure of the movement and counter-move-
ment; consequently for therapeutic purposes, the
correct dose consists in a quantity of force of the
indicated quality which is equal to the quantity of
force of the morbific agent, and in its movements
runs in a contrary direction to the quality of the
latter."

In ordinary practice, whether it be Old School or
Eclectic, there is no principle or law of cure. Rem-
edies are not given because they are opposed to or


24 SPECIFIC MEDICATION.

agree with diseased action, but simply b^pause they
have been previously used with reputed good suc-
cess. It is, in fact, pure empiricism. The old dog-
ma of phlogosis and antiphlogistics, and the new
doctrine of impaired vitality and restorative medi-
cation, guides the empirical use of remedies in the
one or other direction.


THE ADMINISTEATION OF MEDICINES.

We may lay it down as an axiomy from which it
is never safe to depart, that — No medicine should be
giveUy unless the pathological condition and the indica-
tions for its use are clearly defined. It is much better
to employ a placebo^ than run the risk of doing harm
by medication.

Good nursing is an essential element in the suc-
cessful practice of medicine, and always requires
direction by the physician ; keeping the stomach in
good condition for the reception of food and medi-
cine, is of first importance, and requires attention.
Following this is the selection of proper food, its
preparation, and the time for its administration.
These alone very well repay the careful attention
and thought of the physician, even if he can not
see an indication for the employment of remedies.

When we recollect that the cause of disease is
always depressing, and a source of constant renewal,
we will see that the removal of the cause from the
patient or the patient from the cause, or the antag-
onism of remedies to remove the cause, is a proper


ADMINISTRATION OF MEDICINES. 25

field for our efforts. If we can see clearly that the
condition of disease is one of depression — that in
proportion as a man is sick, his vitality is lessened,
such means as will increase the power to live, or
the resistance of the body to death, will be sug-
gested.

As we have stated before, we make an analysis
of the disease and divide it into its component
parts, before making a prescription of medicine.
There are certain basic functions or conditions upon
which all others rest, and which are essential to life.
These demand our first consideration. Thus the
circulation of the bbod, the temperature, the condition
of the nervous system^ waste, excretion, the condition of
the bloody blood-making and nutrition, are examined
separately. Determining the lesion of these, we
the function toward the healthy standard. Some
one of them will stand first in the series of patho-
logical changes, and will serve as a basis for others,
and this will receive first attention. Thus we pre-
they seem to be arranged.

As a rule, it is best to do one thing at a time. We
chain of morbid action^ Then maintaining the in-
fluence obtained by a continuation of the remedy,
we do that second which is second, and that third
which is third, and so on.

In the cure of disease time is an important ele-
ment, and it is never best to be in a hurry. Here,
3


26 8PBCIFIC MfiDICATION.

the old proverb ^^ haste makes waste/' is a very
true one. As a rule, the severer the disease, the
slower its developmeat ; the slower the departure
from health the greater the impairment of function
and structure, and necessarily the slower its restora-
tion.

The manifestations of life in man are from a
highly developed organism, the perfection of which
is a work of time. Every manifestation of life ne-
cessitates a continued renewal of structure, requir-
ing an expenditure of that force we know as vital.
Therefore, when the manifestations of life are ab-
normal (disease), we must necessarily allow time far
the development of the organism, increased because
the vital force is impaired.

As a rule, it is best to change the manifestations of
diseased life slowly j giving sufficient time for the or-
ganism to adapt itself to the change, and gain in-
creased strength as it returns to the condition of
health. It will never do to suppress a process of
disease at the ri8k of suppressing the organism upon
which natural function depends.

As a rule, it is best to effect these changes insensibly^
or without shock to an organ or to the entire body. In
this, as in all other things^ it is the slow but con-
tinued application of an opposing force, that ac-
complishes the greatest results. Many thousands
of sick have been hurried to their graves by the
sudden and forcible eftbrts of the physician to re-
move disease. This is one of the most prominent


THB I'ORM OP MEDICINE. 27

errors of the old practice, and will require consid-
erable effort to avoid.

As a rule, it is best to employ remedies singly j or in
simple combination of remedies acting in the same way.
The reasons for this rule are obvious. It prevents
random or scattering prescriptions. We either
know a single remedy that will accomplish the ob-
ject, or we know nothing and have no right to
make a prescription. There can not be anything in
a combination that is not in the individual articles
composing it, and in some one of them par excellence:
this is the remedy to use. In direct medication we
want no modifying influences ; we want the plain
and constant action of a simple remedy.

THE FORM OP MEDICINE.

The common action of many medicines obtained
in the old practice is the poisonous action. The
agent is given in such large doses and is so nauseous^
that the human body in self-preservation is forced
to act upon and expel it. Thus, an emetic forces
the stomach to an act of expulsion, and we have
emesis ; a cathartic influences the intestinal canal
in like manner and we have catharsis ; and so with
diaphoretics and diuretics. A different class, which
may be represented by mercury, antimony, and
arsenic, obtain entrance to the blood, and depressing
this, they depress every manifestation of life until
they are finally slowly removed.

If we desire to obtain these grave influences of


28 8PBCIFI0 MBDICATIOV.

medicine, the form is not particular, neither is the
size of the dose — if the patient can stand it. But
if we desire that slow, insensible, but direct action
that I have spoken of, we want our remedies in such
form that they will be kindly received and have a
kindly action upon the organism.

We have also to take into consideration the pre-
servation of the article, uniformity of action, pleas-
antness to the sick, portability, and ease (5f pre-
scription. These hold a secondary place, yet are
very important.

A class of remedies may be regarded as chemicals,
and these we desire in greatest purity, and only
purchase such as bear the names of the best manu-
facturers. Such are Quinia, Morphia, Sulphite of
Soda, Phosphate of Soda, the Bromides, etc.

The largest class is obtained from the vegetable
world, and are products of nature's laboratory.
These we wish unchanged by art, as nature has
prepared them, simply reducing the bulk, and using
a vehicle to preserve them.

Very certainly the best menstruum for all vege-
table remedies is alcohol and water in varying pro-
portion. There is no vegetable product that does
not yield its medicinal properties to these, in a very
concentrated -form, the alcohol being insufficient
proportion for preservation. iJ'ot only so, but with
modern apparatus for percolation, the fluid may
easily represent the strength of ounce for ounce,
giving sufficient concentration to make it portable.

The tincture thus prepared is miscible with water,


THB FORM OF MEDIdMS. 29

which is nndonbtedly the best vehicle for the intro-
duction of a remedy into the blood. In using a
hypodermic injection, we employ water as a vehicle
for the medicine, and not simple syrup, syrup of
lemon or ginger, an extract of quassia or other
nasty substance, and so in introducing remedies
into the circulation we will find water decidedly the
best vehicle.

Remedies in pura naturalibus are not offensive, it
is the covering them up, and mixing them that
makes them unpleasant. Doctors' potions are pro-
verbially nasty, and the public mind has been culti-
vated to believe that a mixture in a bottle must be
an offence to smell, taste and stomach. The
thoughts of such medicines are enough to make
some sick. •

My prescriptions are uniformly made with water
as a vehicle,* the tincture being added to it in such
proportion that the dose will be a teaspoonful. If
the tinctures are carried in the pocket case, we add
them to a glass of water in proper proportion, and
renew the medicine at each visit that it may be
fresh.

In the treatment of diseases of children this ex-
temporaneous dispensing is especially desirable.
Children are naturally adverse to anything im-
pleasant, and one ordinary drugging is sufficient to
" put them against medicine." It is very unpleasant
to be required to force medicine upon a child against
its wishes, still more to throw it down, hold it for-
cibly, and grasping its nose make it swallow the


80 SPSCIFIG MBDICAHOH.

mixture. No wonder parents turn from saeh prac-
tice to Homoeopathy.

It has been my practice to have the little patient
see all the operations of preparing the medicine.
It sees the pocket case, inspects the bottles, and is
convinced that everything is clean and there is
nothing ol^jectionable. The glass of water is placed
before it, and the few drops of medicine added, and
to the request, " My dear, taste this and see if the
medicine is not good," it offers no objection, is sat-
isfied, and you have obtained the little patient's
confidence, and will never lose it until you abuse it,

THE DOSE OF MEDICINE.

As a rule, the dose of medicine should be the smallest
quantity thai vnU produce the desired result. The
proper dose, or that which gives the best result, is
very much smaller than one who has been used to
the large doses of indirect medicine would suppose
possible. Yet it is not infinitesimal, as our Homoeo-
pathic friends would have us believe. It is diflicult
to state what the dose should be as yet, but I be-
lieve those named in connection with the remedies
are the maximum.

A few examples may serve to illustrate this. In
the olden time we thought the dose of a strong
tincture of Macrotys was from half to one teaspoon-
ful, repeated every two or three hours, until " the
head felt like bursting." I now find the remedy
much more certain in the pi'oportion of Sj. of the


PRBPARATION OF RBMBDIES. ftl

tincture to water Siv. a teaspoonf ul every two hours.
The common directions for using Veratrum (Nor-
wood's Tincture) were to commence with a dose of
three drops every three hours, increasing one drop
each hour, until its full eflfect was produced. Now
the dose is always less than one drop. Aconite was
formerly ^ven in doses of drops, now in fractions
of drops.

The dose will vary in dift'erent cases, and with
different practitioners. If it falls below the grass
or poisonous action of the drug, it will have specific
influence, and the diagnosis being right, will accoiA-
that the size of the dose does not make such differ-
ence as has been thought, and that the essential
element of success is to get the rigkt remedy.

THE PREPARATION OF REMEDIES.

The majority of physicians will prepare but few
remedies themselves, yet it is just as essential that
they know how they should be prepared, as if they
made them all. With an intelligent underetanding
of the simpler processes of pharmacy, he will have
a mucli better knowledge of the physical properties
of medicines, and be enabled to judge somewhat of
their purity and efficiency when purchasing.

The general drug trade has been a miserable
fraud upon the profession. Whether selling crude
or manufactured articles, the chances were ten to
one that they were adulterated, and not what they


82 BPBCIFIO MEDICATION.

were represented, (Morphia, Qaiuia, and some of
the eOmmoii chemicals, have been exceptions.)

Bo far has this sophistication been carried that
all certainty in medicine, even in gross drugging
for indirect effect, has been lost. Solid or fluid ex-
tracts are found of all degrees of strength, from
the highest named in the pharmacopoeia to nothing,
in many cases they are prepared from old and
worthless crude material, that has partly or wholly
lost its medicinal properties, yet it is sold in the
same packages and at the same prices, as if good.

There is but one safe plan for the physician in
procuring remedies, and that is by personal experi-
ment to satisfy himself that a good remedy can be
readily prepared, and learn to know it when he
sees it. Deal with houses that claim to prepare
remedies from- recent crude material, of full
strength, without heat, and return every package
that does not come up to the full standard of
strength and excellence.

It is well to adopt a simple nomenclature for fluid
medicines. Let them be called tinctures^ as they are
prepared with alcohol, and specify the strength ounce
for ounce, of crude material to fluid preparation.

I insist that all vegetable remedies should be pre-
pared from the recent crude material obtained at its
proper season. In some cases the remedy does not
materially deteriorate within the year, and may be
kept in stock until the next season for gathering.
But in all cases it is better if prepared at once after
gathering, and in many the preparation should be


•*


PRBPA&ATION OF RBMBDIES. 88

from the fre^h article before any dessication. The
reasons are obvious — the medicinal properties are
found in the juices of the plant, or stored in its
cells, principally of the bark. In both cases drying
removes the medicinal principle, to a greater or less
extent. The medicinal principles of plants are to
a considerable extent complex and unstable organic
bodies, and time, with its constant processes of
change and decay, changes, deteriorates, and finally
destroys them.

Strength of Fluid Remedies. — As before re-
marked, a remedy is desirable in proportion as it is
easily carried and dispensed, (leaving out of the
question its medicinal action), hence concentration
becomes an important element of pharmacy. A
skilled manufacturer who has the proper appliances,
has no difficulty in removing all the medicinal prop-
erties from vegetable products, so that one Troy
ounce of crude material will be contained in one
fluid-ounce of the tincture.

This may be accomplished by the simple process
of percolation, in most cases. In some pharmacies
this is supplemented by powerful pressure ; in other
cases, the hydraulic press being employed with ad-
vantage. Iti other establishments, the new process
of percolation under atmospheric pressure, has been
adopted with great advantage. Either of these
methods if carefully and honestly conducted . will
give reliable and uniform remedies. If we can
make up our minds that it is quality, rather than
quantity, that we should look after, slight variations


84 SPSCIFXC MBDIGATION.

of strength will make but little difference. I do
not wish to be understood, however, as admit-
ting that there can be any great variation of
medicinal strength, if recent crude material is used,
and the product represents ounce for ounce, and
the pharmaceutical processes have been skillfully
conducted.

Physical Properties of Fluid Remedies. — The
fluid preparations should possess the exact physical
properties (intensified), as regards odor and taste,
of the fresh crude material. It will have the color
of the chlorophyll of the article, but should be
clear and transparent, and give no sediment, or
muddiness when shaken. These may seem like
minor matters, yet we will find it profitable to give
them attention. Skilled pharmacy gives fine look-
ing remedies, and they are likely to be good. Un-
skilled pharmacy gives dirty-looking preparations,
and they are likely to be inferior.

We may judge to a considerable extent of the
goodness of chemicals in the same way. If we find
our Sulphate of Quinia and Morphia presenting the
clear white silky or feathered crystals, we are satis-
fied that we have good remedies. But if it is dull,
discolored, crystals faint, broken, or amorphous, we
want none of it. So in the purchase of the Bro-
mides, Iodides, Salts of Potash and Soda, Iron, etc.,
we expect to find the highest physical qualities,
associated with purity and efliciency. If a salt is
discolored, or in any wise deficient in its appear-
ance, we want none of it.


QFFIOB PHABMAOr. 86


OPFIOK PHABMACY.

There are good reasons why every physician
should have such knowledge of pharmacy^ that he
can perform or direct all the simpler operations for
preparing medicines. Without this knowledge, his
education is deficient, in that he has not that know-
ledge of his tools which is so essential to good work.
He is in a condition to be imposed upon by imper-
fect and worthless remedies, and must surely lose
confidence in medicine, except given in large doses^
for its gross effects.

In country practice, a knowledge and practice of
office pharmacy is an important element of success.
The preparation of a remedy gives an interest in it
that leads to thorough study and careful use^ ^ We
learn what a good preparation is, and its advantages
over the common stock in the drug trade, and we
will afterward use more care in making our pur-
chases. It economizes time, saves money, and cul-
tivates habits of thrift, all of which are deficient in
the medical profession.

It is not only an excellent school for the physi-
cian himself, but is also an admirable school for the
student. It is a study of the Materia Medica, that
gives a practical knowledge of remedies, and im-
presses the mind through the organs of sense, leav-
ing lasting impressions.

I do not wish to be understood as advising the
preparation of aU medicines ; or keeping the office


86 BPBOIFIC MBDICATIOK.

dirty ana unsightly with the refuse of roots, barks^
and herbs. This is the opposite of what we desire;
skill is associated with neatness and cleanliness. I
know some pharmacists that are so slovenly and
dirty in peraon and surroundings, that I should not
like to take their medicines. (The only one who
ever oftered an objection to office pharmacy, had
these faults- in excess.)

A half dozen neat tin percolators of the capacity
of two to ten poimds, hung in a closet or cupboard,
with a large mortar, comprises the apparatus. The
alcohol is kept in stock, and the crude material is
procured at proper seasons and used fresh, or in
some cases is ordered of the wholesale druggist
when obtaining other medicines.

The process of percolation is a very simple one.
The crude material requires to be as finely commi-
nuted and as closely packed in the percolator as
possible. It is then covered with alcohol, and
allowed to stand for forty-eight hours, when the
tincture is drawn oif. Filter it through paper, and
you have a fine looking remedy, that will give sat-
isfaction whenever used.

In office pharmacy I have advised the strength
to be Sviij. of the crude material to the pint of
alcohol, because it is more easily manipulated by
one who is not expert. All the formula in this
work are of this strength, for every remedy named
may be prepared in the office.

The physician in the country will probably pre-
pare only those remedies that are indigenous, and


OLABSIFICATION OF RBMBDISS. 87

at the proper season the year's supply. It is not
veiy difficult to find some one to gather the crude
material, and the preparation comes at that season
when there is least to do.


CLASSIFICATION OP RKMEDIBS.

I have been in doubt in regard to the best plan
of arranging the remedies in this study. Evidently
the old classification will not serve our purpose, for
it deals with indirect action ; and the influence of
remedies in poisonous doses. We have not ad-
vanced far enough to make a new classification ; at
least, to make one that would facilitate our study.
I have, therefore, concluded to take up the different
articles in alphabetical order, and so far as possible
make a brief review of our entire Materia Medica.

When a remedy has no especial value, it will be
named so ; and when it seems to have a specific ac-
tion, not fully determined, this will be pointed out
for future experiment. Self-deception is a very un-
profitable pursuit, and great care will therefore be
employed to insure accuracy, and no statement
made unless pretty thoroughly proven.

The best preparations, and the best process lor
office manufacture will be given, also the form in
which we deem it desirable to use them.

When we have thus given the Materia Medica a
review, we will be better able to make a classifica-
tion.

Some suggestions, however, as to the general in-


38 SPECIFIC MEDICATION.

dications for treatment, and use of remedies, maj
not be out of place, aud will serve as a further illus-
tration of our idea of specific . medication.

In all acute, and most chronic diseases, our exam-*
ination of the patient and our therapeutics will take
this order : 1. With reference to the condition of
the stomach and intestinal canal — ^bringing them to
as nearly a normal condition as possible, that reme-
dies may be kindly received and appropriated, and
that sufficient food may be taken and digested. 2.
With reference to the circulation of the blood, and
the temperature — obtaining a normal circulation as
regards frequency and freedom, and a temperature
as near 98° as possible. 3. With reference to the
presence of a zymotic poison, or other cause of dis-
ease — which may be neutralized, antagonized or re-
moved. 4. With reference to the condition of
the nervous system — ^giving good innervation. 5.
With reference to the processes of waste and excre-
tion — that the worn-out or enfeebled material may
be broken down and speedily removed from the
body. 6. With reference to blood-making and
repair — that proper material be furnished for the
building of tissue, and that the processes of nutri-
tion are normally conducted.

These are general outlines for the study of dis-
ease, and the action of remedies in antagonizing it,
and may aid in giving direction to our study, and
enable each one to make a classification of remedies
for himself. A brief consideration of each one,
with examples of the application of remedies,


CLASSIFICATION OF RBMBDIE8. 89

though it will be a repetition, may be of advantage
to the student.

1. The condition of the stomach is of first im-
portance in the treatment of disease. It must be
in such condition that it will receive remedies
kindly, and permit their speedy absorption, in order
that they give us the desired results. Surely, it is
not difficult to see the necessity of this, if we take
no further view than to obtain the curative ac-
tion of remedies. If the stomach does not receive
a remedy kindly, is irritated by it, we can not ex-
pect ready, absorption, or the complete curative
action. If the stomach throws out its juices, which
digest or decompose a remedy, we can not expect
its curative action. If the stomach is secreting
mucus in large quantity, if it is in that condition in
which it is but a receptacle or retainer, then we can
not expect the ready absorption of remedies, and
will not get their curative action.

We are accustomed to specify two conditions of
the stomach, which may be tolerably easily deter-
mined by constant symptoms, and which should
always be corrected. These are : —

Irritation of the stomachy marked by a reddened
(bright) tongue, elongated and pointed, with some-
times reddened and erect papilla. It is accom-
panied with unpleasant sensations of constriction,
and tenderness on pressure over the epigastrium.
There may be nausea, retching, or vomiting ; and
in the severer cases, when prolonged, an irritation


40 SPECIFIC MEDICATION.

of the sympatlietic, and finally of the spinal and
cerebral nervous systems.

Its treatment takes precedence of everything
else, for until removed we can not expect the kindly
or definite action of remedies.

The remedies employed for its removal are:
minute doses of Aconite ; small doses of Ipecac or
Lobelia; Hydrocyanic Acid, or bettef, a prepara-
tion of the bark of the Peach tree; Rhubarb;
JBismuth. These may be aided by the external use
of the cold pack, hot fomentations, or rubefacient
application, and sometimes an enema to remove the
torpor of the lower bowel. From twelve to forty-
eight hours, is usually the time required to effect it.

But, the reader may ask, why if remedies are
specific^ name so many for the relief of so simple a
patholpgical condition as gastric irritation ? The
question is. pertinent, and we will endeavor to
answer it. Each of these remedies has a direct ac-
tion in this condition, and each may be relied upon
as a remedy. We choose the remedy, however,
with reference to the association of diseased action,
and in some cases one will be found best, in others
another.

6. The atonic stomach, with increased secretion
of mucus, and sometimes with considerable accu-
mulations. It is marked by the broad tongue,
heavily coated at its base, bad taste in the mouth,
and feeling of weight and heaviness in the epigas-
trium. The symptoms are distinct, and can not be
mistaken.


GLASSnriOATION OF BBMXDIBS. . * 41

When the condition is pronomiced, in severer
forms of disease, there is no means which will reach
it so directly and speedily as an emetic. It needs
to be prompt and thorough in action, not producing
debility or leaving the organ irritable. If not re-
quiring this, we may accomplish the same object
by the use of the Alkaline Sulphites, followed by
Nux Voniica.

We have many minor lesions that can not be
classified under these, to which we will find single
remedies specific. Thus in simple nausea and vom-
In typhoid disease, with tumid mucous tissues, the
Baptisia. Increased mucous secretion with irrita-
bility, Oxide of Zinc. Imperfect gastric secretion,
Hydrastis. Increased mucous secretion with im-
paired functional activity, minute doses of Podo-
phyllin, etc.*

2. We recognize the fact, that just in proportion to
the variation of the circulation and temperature from the
normal standard is the severity and activity of disease.
The more frequent the pulse, and the higher the
temperature, the more active a zymotic poison, the
more rapid the progress of local or general disease,
and the le^ able the body to protect itself, or expel
the cause of disease. The rule here is absolute, and
there is no variation from it.

In therapeutics we find — that just in proportion as
the circulation and temperature can be brought to^ and

*S6e Practice of Medicine, page 27.
4


42 SPBGIFIC MSDICATION.

maintained at the normal standard, just in that propor*
tion are the processes of disease arrested^ and vital pro-
cesses re-established.

These facts must surely have been noticed by ob-
servers, and we can only wonder that they have
never been clearly stated, and practiced upon.

If we take as an example a case of fever, we will
find that remedies that will reduce the pulse to a
normal frequency, giving freedom to the circula-
tion, will reduce the temperature, and that just in
proportion as this is accomplished, the febrile symp-
toms disappear, and the various vital functions are
re-established. If we maintain the circulation and
temperature at this point, the fever must cei-tainly
cease.

In acute inflammation, the rapidity of the local
disease and destruction of tissue, is in the ratio of
frequency of pulse and increase of temperature.
Just in proportion as we get a normal circulation
with reference to frequency and freedom, and
diminished temperature, just in that proportion the
inflammatory process is arrested.

In asthenic inflammation we find another element
in the pathology of the disease — a want of vital
power, either in the whole or in the part. This
must be antagonized by appropriate remedies. In
others there is a zymotic or animal poison, which
must be antagonized,. destroyed, or removed.

In chronic disease the law is just as absolute as
in the acute. Given, any disease of function or
structure, with a pulse maintained constantly above


CLASSIFICATION OF AEMBDIES. 48

100 beats per minute, and a temperature above 100%
and the patient must die. The disease, as a general
rule, will run its course rapidly to a fatal termina-
tion just in proportion to the extent of this devia-
tion.

Recovery from chronic disease never takes place
until the circulation and temperature approximate
a normal standard. In any given case, the proba-
bilities of cure are as the possibility of bringing and
maintaining the circulation and temperature* at the
standard of health. The first evidences of amend-
ment are announced by a diminution of fre<juency
of pulse and a better circulation of blood, and by
an equal temperature of the body, approximating
98°. These seem like dogmatic statements, and
many will be inclined to dispute them, because op-
posed or not named by the common authorities on
medicine, but it only requires observation without
prejudice to prove each position.

We may claim then, that remedies influencing the
circulation and temperature, toward the normal
standard, are the most important of the Materia
Medica.

In very many cases the lesion of the circulation
is a basic lesion, upon which others arise and are
continued. When this is the case, the remedy that
gives us normal circulation removes all the diseased
processes which rest upon it. Thus we will find
that arrest of secretion and excretion, lesions of in-
nervation, of waste and nutrition, as well as the in-
tensity of zymotic causes, are in proportion to the


44 0P8CIFIG MBDICATION.

rapidity of the circulation. Conversely, as the
pulse comes down to the normal standard, and the
blood circulates freely, just in that proportion we
have a restoration of the secretions and excretions,
better innervation, better digestion and blood-mak-
ing, and a more active waste and repair.

Have we remedies that influence the circulation
directly, giving a free and equal circulation, with
diminution of frequency ? Many of our readers
will have asked this question before this, and an-
swered it in the negative. Certain remedies will
have been recommended to them as special sedativeSy
which they have used without the good results
named and expected. How is this ? It is a com-
mon failing with physicians to expect a desired re-
sult too soon, and endeavor to force it by large doses
of medicine. This has been a common cause of
failure in the use of Veratrum and Aconite. Others
have purchased worthless medicines, which will
readily account for the failure. Taking the article
of Veratrum alone, and excepting Norwood's Tinc-
ture, nine-tenths that has been sold was wholly
worthless as a medicine.

The theory with regard to the action of the class
of special sedatives was erroneous. They were re-
garded as depressants^ and diminished frequency of
pulse was supposed to depend upon their depressing
influence upon the heart. It was the common error
of large doses and poisonous action. All of these
remedies are active poisons in large doses, and
death occurs in all by cardiac syncope. In the cases


CLA8SIFI0ATI0N 09 RBMSDIES. 46

m

of Veratrum, Digitalis, Lobelia and Qelseminum,
dlowness of pulse is a prominent symptom of the
poisonous action. In the case' of Aconite, extreme
frequency of pulse isf produced by the poisonous
action.

In medicinal doses (small), the influence of these
remedies is that of a cardiac stimulant, and is un-
doubtedly through the sympathetic system of
nerves, which controls the entire circulation of the
blood — not only the action of the heart, but of all
the blood-vessels to the most minute capillary. I
contend that this influence removes obstruction to
the free circtilation of the blood, as well as gives
power to heart and muscular fibre of arteries. As
obstruction to free circulation is removed, it requiAs
less effort to move the blood ; as the power of mov-
ing the blood is increased there is less necessity of
frequency of contraction upon the part of the heart.

As a rule, the time required to effect sedation
will bear a distinct relation to the time required *f or
the development of disease, and its average dura-
tion. Thus in an acute fever or inflammation from
cold, the influence of the sedative may be promptly
obtained, and the disease speedily arrested. In
continued fever, the accession of the disease (in
most cases), is slow in proportion to its duration and
severity. Here there are grave lesions of function,
possibly of structure, and we expect to obtain the
influence of the sedative slowly.*

«

, *See Principles of Medicine, pp. 219, 264. The Eclectic P^^c
tice of Medicine, page 94.


46 SPECIFIC MEDICATION.

Whilst each of the remedies named as arterial
sedatives, Aconite, Veratrum, Digitalis, Gelsemi-
num, Lobelia, exert a direct influence in this direc-
tion, they are not equally valuable in all cases.
The two first are pre-eminently the sedatives, their
action being more definite and stronger, and adapted
to a larger number of cases. The special adapta-
tion of each to special forms of diseased action is
named in the description of the remedy.

The temperature bears such a constant relation
to the frequency of pulse, and general condition of
the circulation, that a remedy which will correct
the one will also correct the other. Thus we find
in practice that just as we bring the pulse to the
nbrmal standard by the use of an arterial sedative,
in the same degree we reduce the temperature.
This is the case in chronic as well as in acute dis-
ease. For instance, in a case of phthisis we find a
temperature of 101° associated with a pulse above
100 beats per minute ; if it is possible to bring the
pulse down to 80 the temperature comes down to
98° and a fraction. If this can be maintained we
find a cessation of tubercular deposit, and a repara-
tive process set up in the lungs.

We have some special means to influence the
temperature, outside of the remedies acting upon
the circulation. A full description of them would
be out of place here, but may be found in my Prin-
ciples of Medicine, p. 40.

3. The field of therapeutics embraced in our third
proposition is very large, and will well repay careful


0LAS6IFICATI0N OF REMEDIES. 47

study. Whilst zymotic causes have been recog-
nized in many of the severe acute diseases, but little
has been done to determine their character, or the
means to antidote them. Possibly the observations
of Prof. PoUi, with regard to the influence of the
Alkaline Sulphites, was the first important step in
this direction..

The presence *of such blood poison is readily de-
tected, and we have advanced so far in our knowl-
edge of remedies, that in many cases we can select
the antidote with much certainty. I do not wish
to be understood as claiming that we have any
remedies that will immediately unite with all of a
zymotic poison in the blood, destroy it, and at once
restore health. Such an influence could not reason-
ably be expected. But we have remedies which,
introduced into the blood, will antagonize the zy-
motic poison, as it comes in contact with it, arrest-
ing its septic influence, or wholly destroying it. In
some cases they act rapidly, in others slowly, but
in all, if properly selected, with great certainty.

The principal remedies of this class are the Alka-
line Sulphites, (Sulphite of Soda being in most
common use) and the mineral acids. The rules for
the selection of the one or the other of these are
quite simple, and very definite :

In any given case presenting a pallid tongue,
with white, or dirty-white, pasty coating, use the
Alkaline Sulphites.

In ^ny given case presenting a deep-red tongue
with brownish coatings, or deep-red glossy tongue,


48 gPKCIFIC MEDICATION.

and dark sordes, use mineral acids. In some cases
we employ Sulphurous Acid, but in the majority,
Muriatic Acid.

Of our indigenous Materia Medica we have but
one remedy that markedly possesses these proper-
ties, and it possesses it in high degree. This rem-
edy is the Baptisia Tinctoria, which may be used in
either of the cases named, but is especially valued
in the last.

The reader will bear in mind that the activity of
a zymotic poison is in exact proportion to the 'de-
parture from normal function. With a rapid pulse,
high temperature, and arrest of secretion, its devel-
opment is rapid and its devitalizing influence
marked. Or in the rare opposite case of congestive
intermittent and cholera, as the circulation is en-
feebled, and the temperature lowered, its progress
is rapid.

Hence, in order to antagonize a zymotic process,
it is necessary, so far as possible, to obtain a normal
circulation and temperature. This proposition can
not be too strongly insisted upon. In a given case, •
the circulation and temperature being favorably in-
fluenced by Aconite and Veratrura, Sulphitie of
Soda exerts an immediate and marked- ^controlling
influence over the fever poison. Whilst if it had
been given without such preparation it would have
had no influence at all, or but slight influence.

Some causes of disease are destroyed and removed
by remedies that increase waste and excretion. Pre-
parations of Potash and Soda,. especially the alka-


CLASSIFICATION OF REMEDIES. 49

line diuretics act in this way. There are some
organic remedies that exert a direct influence upon
causes of disease, modifying or destroying them, as
may be instanced in the action of Phytolacca In
diphtheria. This action, however, in the majority
of cases, is feeble.

Causes of disease acting in and from the blood,
are frequently rem*oved by stimulating the excretory
organs. Some are removed principally by the skin,
others by the bowels, others by the kidneys.

The cauge of periodic disease, whatever it may
be, plays a very important part in the diseases of
some localities. . Antagonize this cause, and the
disease ceases, or at least is very muck modified.
Hence in the treatment of the diseases of the West,
antiperiodics become the most important remedies.

Quinia is a true specific, and may be taken as the
type of these remedies. It fails frequently, possibly
it is administered nine times where its specific action
is obtained once. But it is not the fault of the
remedy, but of the doctor. If the diagnosis is cor-
rectly made, and the system is prepared for its ad-
ministration, it will rarely fail, even when given in
a single sufGicient dose.

I am satisfied that the study of the direct antag-
onism of remedies to causes of disease, must ad-
vance the progress of ratioiial medicine. It is pos-
sible, and I deem it probable, that such research
will give us remedies controlling all zymotic disease
in its early stage.

4. The human body is a complex structure, united
5


60 SPECIFIC MEDICATION.

in functional activity by a nervous system. As this
exerts a controlling influence, we should expect that
its lesions would form a very important element of
the study of pathology. This has not been the case,
however, and we find pathologists and therapeutists
giving it but very little attention. It is a wide field
for study, and its cultivation will greatly advance
medical science.
A few suggestions may not be out of place here :
Those functions which we have been accustomed
to speak of as vegetativey are associated together, and
to some extent governed by the ganglionic or sym-
pathetic nervous system. It comprises digestion,
blood-making, the circulation of the blood, nutri-
tion, and secretion and excretion — these are the es-
sentially vital functions, in the performance of
which man has life. If they are properly performed,
he has healthy life, if there is an aberration in
either of them, one or more, he has diseased life.
Is it possible to have disease, without a lesion of one
of these ? I think the reader will say it is not.
If this be so, then this ganglionic system of nerves
must play an important part in every disease.*

Control and association of these vital processes
being in the ganglionic system of nerves, we would
naturally expect it to furnish the readiest means of
reaching them and correcting their lesions. If
there are remedies then that influence the gangli-
onic nerves directly, and through them the vital

♦See Principles of Medicine, page 306.


CLASSIFICATION OF REMEDIES. 51

processes of the body, they must become our most
direct and important therapeutic means. It is in
this way that a large number of specific remedies
act, as I believe. The sedatives, Aconite, Veratrum,
Gelseminum, Lobelia and others, as Cactus, Bella-
donna, Eryngium, Phytolacca, Hamamelis, Pulsa-
tilla, etc., very certainly produce their effects
through it.

The association of the spinal-cord with the sym-
pathetic brings vital functions in relatioli with our
conscious life, and through its superior expansion
the brain, adds suffering from disease. Conversely,
mal-conditions of conscious life are reflected through
this association and influence vital processes.

Whilst, therefore, it is very important to reach
lesions of vegetative life directly through the gan-
glionic system of nerves, it is no less important to
control any disease producing influence that might
be extended from the cerebro-spinal centres,

5. Lesions of waste and excretion are elements of
every disease. In some they form a principal part,
in others in less degree, but in all they require to
be estimated in diagnosis and therapeutics. They
range themselves under the common classification
of excess, defect, and perversion, and usually it is
not difficult to determine their character, and select
means that exert a direct influence.

Constant waste is a necessity of life, as is constant
removal of this waste. If the materials of the body
are not broken down and removed as they have
served their purpose, the body is old, imperfect, and


52 8PKCIVIC MBDICATION.

has lost fahctional power to this extent. If the
material is broken down and removed to the blood,
but not carried out by the excretions, we will have
ail impairment of life from its presence in the
blood. I have given this subject full consideration
in my Principles of Medicine, pp. 116 to 186, to
which the reader is referred.

Too rapid waste of tissue is sometimes an impor-
tant element of disease, requiring care in diagnosis
and the application of remedies.

A perversion in waste and excretion is a common
element of disease. In the breaking down of a
protean body, it passes through many phases, and
in its metamorphosis,** it assumes forms that, are
noxious to life, if they have any degree of perma-
nency, or are in any considerable quantity. Lesions
in retrograde metamorphosis are therefore to be esti-
mated, and remedies which influence it become im-
portant.

We have already noticed that many causes of
disease act in and from the blood. They are zy-
motic poisons, or animal matter undergoing change,
and influence the blood and life in diflEerent degree,
in proportion to their quantity, and especially in
proportion to their activity in setting up the septic
process. These may be antagonized or destroyed
in many cases ; in others the natural process of re-
trograde metamorphosis is stimulated, and they are
transformed into urea and other innocuous bodies
fitted for excretion by kidneys, skin and bowels.
Means that increase the activity of these excretions


OLASSIPICATION OF RBMEDIE8. 58

are frequently sufficient for the removal of such
causes of disease.

6. The necessity of regarding the nutritive pro-
cesses during. the progress of disease, is now admit-
ted by all advanced physicians, and insisted upon
by such writers as Chambers, Anstie, Bennett and
others. Experience has conclusively proven that
proper food with good condition of the digestive
apparatus, without medicine, give a success in the
treatment of the graver acute diseases, that was
never obtained by any other method of jireatment.

As we have already seen, the condition of the
stomach and digestive apparatus is oi first impor-
tance in all forms of disease; and its lesions demand
first attention in our therapeutics. We Iteve shown
that (bis was essential to the successful administra-
tion of remedies, it is no less necessary that the
patient may take and appropriate proper food.

The administration of remedies that increase
functional activity of the digestive apparatus, or aid
in the digestive process, are sometimes important
means. The selection of appropriate food, and the
use of restoratives is supplemental to this. The
object is to place the digestive organs in good con-
dition to receive and prepare food for admission to
the blood; to furnish such material to the blood
as may be necessary for its perfect organization,
and for the renewal of tissue.


54 8PB0IFIC MBDICATIOK.

A.BIBS CANADENSIS.

(HSICLOCK.)

This agent has been employed in medicine for a
long time — ^the bark in decoction as an astringent,
the foliage in hot infusion as a diuretic and diapho-
retic, and the oil as a stimulant local application.
It undoubtedly possessess valuable properties. The
following properties and uses are suggested to those
who live where it may readily be obtained :

1st. A tincture of the recent inner bark in diluted
alcohol ; use in general asthenia with pallid mucous
membranes, and feeble digestion : also, in diseases
of the respiratory mucous membranes.

2nd. A^lincture of the foliage in dilute alcohol ;
use in irritation of the urinary organs, and in dis-
ease of the skin.

iESCULUS GLABEA,

(BXJCKXYS.)

Preparation, — Whilst the bark possesses medicinal
properties in considerable degree, and may be used,
a tincture of the nuts will probably be the best
preparation.

Take of the recent nuts, fully ripened, four
ounces ; bruise them thoroughly, and cover with
alcohol 76® one pint ; let it stand for two weeks ;
strain and filter.

Of this tincture add from one to two drachms to
four ounces of water — the dose being one teaspoon-
ful.


iBSCULUS GLABRA. 65

The buckeye has been used to but a limited ex-
tent in medicine, yet its activity is such (as a
poison), that it will probably prove very valuable
when thoroughly studied. In my boyhood, I well
remember persons carrying " buckeyes '^ in their
pockets as a sovereign cure for " piles," and at a
later period as a remedy for rheumatism. Doubt- ^
less this suggested the first use of the ^sculus in
medicine.

It has been used in the treatment of hemorrhoids
with much success, and I am satisfied that in some
forms of the disease it is the most certain remedy
we possess. I have also given it in a few cases of
diseased uterus with good results — cases in which
the entire organ was enlarged, the cervix tumid,
with too frequent recurrence of the menstrual flow.

The marked influence of the -^sculus on the ner-
vous system would suggest a line of experiment
likely to lead to the development of valuable prop-
erties. It has already been employed as a stimu-
lant to the nervous system in some cases of paraly-
sis.

We may reason in this way : a remedy that cures
hemorrhoids must exert a powerful influence upon
the circulation ; whilst its poisonous action, often
witnessed — vertigo, diminished sight, wry neck,
fixed eyes, paralysis, convulsions, etc., show its in-
fluence upon the nervous system.


66 SPECIFIC . MEDICATION.

JESOUtUB HIPPOCASTANUM.
(HoBsx Ohxbtkttt.)

Preparation. — Take of the recent nut, fully ripe,
four ounces, bruise it thoroughly, and cover with
alcohol 76^ one pint ; let it stand fourteen days and
filter.

Dose, two to four drops, in water.

The bark of this variety has been employed to a
limited extent as a tonic, and possesses feeble anti-
periodic powers. Quinine being employed to break
the chill, this agent was sufficient to prevent its re-
currence. The pulverized kernel has been used as
a sternutatory for the relief of headache and facial
neuralgia. The nuts were also thought to possess
some special influence over hemorrhoids and rheu-
matism.

The influence upon the nervous system is similar
in kind to the buckeye, though not so active. This
probably will be its best field of action, standing
midway between Belladonna on the one hand and
Nux Vomica on the other.

It exerts the same influence upon the circulation
as the -^sculus Glabra, and has been successfully
employed in the treatment of hemorrhoids. It will
doubtless be found to improve the circulation gen-
erally, and may be employed whenever there is
want of power in the heart, capillary stasis, or ten-
dency to congestion.


ACIDS. 67


ACIDS.

There is a specific use for acids in the treatment
of disease, which we wish to study carefully. In
any form of disease we may have an excess of the
alkaline salts of the blood. This may be the basis
of diseased action, or but a complication rendering
it more intense, but whether the one or the other,
it needs to be recognized and have direct tre^it-
ment.

The indications of excessive alkalinity are very
plain, and need not be mistaken by the youngest
practitioner. The color of the mucous membranes
is deep redy especially of mouth and tongue; the
coating of tongue, sordes, or any exudative mate-
rial, has a dark color, usually brownish. It makes
no difference what the diseased action is, in its to-
tality, or what it is called, the deep red, somewhat
dusky color always demands the administration of
acids.

There is but one exception to this, and that is a
rare one, in which the excess is of Soda, but with a
defect of Potash. In this case the administration
of a Salt of Potash will answer a better purpose
than the Acid, or may be combined with it.

The Muriatic Acid is preferable in most acute
cases, and should be used so diluted, and in such
quantity, as to be pleasant to the patient, and until
the indication for its use is removed. Lactic Acid
is sometimes preferable with children, and in some


58 SPECIFIC MEDICATION.

cases of chronic disease, especially when associated
with indigestion. The vegetable Acids may be used
in acute disease, but are not so good as those
named.

ALKALIES.

It is well to consider the specific use of alkalies in
this relation ; as they are the opposite of acids.
We may say of these, as of acids, that their defi-
ciency is found as a constituent element in all forms
of disease — in some cases being the basis of a mor-
bid action, in others but a complication ; but, when-
ever found, an important element and demanding
direct treatment.

The symptoms of deficiency of these salts of the
blood are very plain, and, using the language of the
Prophet, " He who runs may read." The tongue
is pallid and broad, its coating pasty and white, or
yellowish white. The mucous membranes are uni-
formly pallid. As these evidences are absolute and
readily determined, it .is not necessary to name
others not so constant.

Whenever we find this deficiency of the alkaline
salts we will observe, as the result : loss of power
in the stomach, enfeebled digestion and slow ab-
sorption, impairment of the circulation, arrest of
nutrition and waste, and enfeebled innervation.
These will correspond in degree to the deficiency.

So marked are these results, that I have long re-
garded the diagnosis, with regard to excess or defi-
ciency of the alkaline salts, as of the highest im-


ALKALIES. 59

portance. Indeed in some forms of disease, espe-
cially of a typhoid character, it is the principal ele-
ment upon which a successful treatment is based.

Soda is the natural salt of the blood, and exists
in the body in the largest proportion. Whenever,
therefore, we have the evidence of deficiency of the
alkaline salts, and no special symptoms indicating
others we will give a Salt of Soda. In many cases
I order Bicarbonate of Soda in water, in such quan-
tity that it will make a pleasant drink, and let the
patient have it freely.

If, at the same time, we wish an antiseptic influ-
ence, we may give the Sulphite or Hoposulphite of
Soda or the Chloride of Sodium.

I am satisfied that *I have seen patients die from
deprivation of common salt during a protracted
illness. It is a common impression that the food
for the sick should not be seasoned, and whatever
slop may be given, it is almost innocent of this es-
sential of life. In the milk diet that I recommend
in sickness, common salt is used freely, the milk
being boiled and given hot. And if the patient
can not take the usual quantity in his food, I have
it given in his drink. This matter is so important
that it can not be repeated too often, or dwelt upon
too long.

The most marked example of this want of com-
mon salt I have ever noticed has been in surgical
disease, especially in open wounds. Without a
supply of salt the tongue would become broad,
pallid, pufly, with a tenacious pasty coat, the effusion


00 SPBCIFIO MEDICATION.

I

at tne point of injury seronsy with an unpleasant
watery pus, which at last becomes a mere sanies or
ichor. A few days of a free allowance of salt would
change all this, and the patient would get along well.

A Salt of Potash is indicated where there is fee-
bleness of the muscles to greater extent than can be
accounted for by the disease. Occasionally such
want is expressed in a marked manner by feebleness
of the heart.

Ammonia will, occasionally, prove the best salt
for temporary use, especially where there is great
debility. But when so used, it should be followed
by the freiB use of common salt, or some salt of
soda.

ACHILLEA MILLEFOLIUM.

(Yarrow.)

Preparation. — Prepare a tincture of the recent
herb, Sviij. to Alcohol 50° Oj. Dose, gtts. v. to 5ss.

This agent, though feeble in its action, is much
better than many in common use. It acts directly
on the urinary apparatus, and the reproductive
organs of the female. I have used it to allay irri-.
tation of the kidneys and vesical and urethral irri-
tation. In these cases its influence is somewhat
similar to Buchu and Uva Ursi. It is employed
with advantage in atonic amenorrhcea, menorrhagia,
and vaginal leucorrhoea.


AOONITUM NAPELLUS. 61

ACONITUM NAPELLUS.

(AcoifiTX.)

Preparation. — ^A tincture of the root (imported
from Germany) is the strongest and most uniform
preparation. It should be prepared by percolation,
the strength being ounce for ounce; though, if
constantly made in the office, it will be easier to
make it Sviij. to the pint, the dose being propor-
tionately increased.

The medium dose two-thirds of one drop, and
the form of administration : I^ Tincture of Aconite
Root, gtts. XX ; Water, 5iv. ; a teaspoonful every
hour in acute disease, every two or three hours in
chronic disease. To a child two years old the pro-
portion is gtts. V. to Water 5iv.

Aconite is a stimulant to the sympathetic system
of nerves, and increases the power of the heart to
move the blood, at the same time that it places the
blood-vessels in better condition for its passage.
It will be recollected that the same system of nerves
governs the movements of the heart and of the en-
tire system of blood-vessels. What will influence
one, therefore, will influence the other in the same
manner.

But Aconite is said to be a sedative ; and by a
sedative we are to understand a remedy that dimin-
ishes the frequency of the pulse. How can Aconite,
therefore, be a stimulant and a sedative ?

There is no doubt but that Aconite is one of the
most certain remedies we have to reduce the fre-


62 SPECIFIC MEDICATION.

quency of the pulse in certain conditions of disease.
And the condition is that in which there is a want
of power on the part of the heart, and a like want
of innervation to the capillary system of blood-
vessels. Aconite in small doses lessens the fre-
quency of the pulse, because it removes obstruction
to the free flow of blood in the vessels, and gives
greater cardiac power.

We employ it in all forms of fever, to control the
circulation, and diminish the temperature. Used in
the doses named, it gives greater freedom to the
circulation, at the same time that it diminishes the
frequency of the pulse. It seems to remove ob-
struction to the free circulation of the blood, at the
same time that it removes irritation of the cardiac
nerves, and gives increased power to the heart.

Its action in inflammation is as pronounced as in
fever. It directly antagonizes inflammatory action,
and in the early stage will arrest it speedily — if this
is the sedative indicated.

There are some diseases of an inflammatory char-
acter to which Aconite is specijicj that deserve men-
tion. The first of these is Tonsillitis, in which we
employ it by internal administration, or better by
the use of the steam atomizing apparatus. In some
forms of mucous croup, with enfeebled circulation,
in muco-enteritis, and in simple colitis or dysentery
from cold, I never think of making any other pre-
scription.

To point out the special indications for the use
of Aconite I can not do better than reproduce the


ACONITUM NAPBLLUS. 63

editorial in September Journal of 1868 on the
"Differential Therapeutics of Veratrum and
Aconite :"

To determine which of a class of remedies
is applicable in a given case, is the most difficult
task of the physician, and any information in this
respect is of much value. I doubt whether any one
using the two remedies named, would be willing to
risk giving this estimate. Many may have an em-
pirical intuition in regard to it, but most could ven-
ture nothing but a guess.

In general terms, Veratrum is the remedy in
sthenia. Aconite in asthenia; but there are too
many exceptions to this to make it a safe rule for
our guidance.

Veratrum is the remedy where there is a frequent
but free circulation. It is also the remedy where
there is an active capillary circulation, both in fever
and inflammation. A full and bounding pulse, a
full and hard pulse, and a corded or wiry pulse, if
associated with inflammation of serous tissues, call
for this remedy.

Aconite is the remedy when there is difficulty in
the capillary circulation, a dilatation and want of
tonicity of these vessels, both in fever and inflam-
mation.

It is the remedy for the frequent, small pulse, the

hard and wiry pulse (except in the cases above

named), the frequent, open and easily compressed

. pulse, the rebounding pulse, the irregular pulse, and


64 SPECIFIC MEDICATION.

indeed wherever there is the evidence of marked
enfeeblement of the circulation.

It is the sedative I associate with Belladonna in
congestion, especially of the nerve centers, and to
relieve coma. Whilst I would use Veratrum with
Gelseminum in determination of blood to the brain,

and in active delirium.

«

Veratrum acts more efficiently upon the excre-
tory organs ; indeed I believe it to be one of the
most certain remedies we have to increase excre-
tion. Hence it is employed with great advantage
for those purposes usuatUy called alterative.

Aconite controls excessive activity of the excre-
tory organs, whether of the bowels, kidneys or
skin. Thus it is our most certain remedy in the
summer complaint of children, associated with Bel-
ladonna in diabetes insipidus, with the bitter tonics
and Strychnia in Phosphuria and Oxaluria, and
with the mineral acids in night sweats.

ACT^A ALBA.

(White Cohosh.)

Preparation. — Two preparations may be used :
first, a tincture of the recent root, Sviij. to Alcohol
76° Oj. ; second, a tincture of the dried roof in the
same proportion, but using Alcohol of 98°. Let the
dose range from one to twenty drops.

The White Cohosh has had but a limited use in
medicine, yet it possesses such properties that it
will undoubtedly prove useful when stadied. The
direction of experiment will be to determine its in-


AGAYS AMERICANA. 65

fluenee on the functions of waste and nutrition, and
its special action on the reproductive organs of the
female.

Bloomington, III., Sept. 30.
Dr. Souddbb: I intended to have written to you,
in regard to one specific property of the Actma Alba.
As you have reached it in your order, you can do
as you wish in regard to iuserting this. It is spe-
cific in continuing after-pains. There is probably
no remedy known that equals it. Make a tea of it,
and drink freely. This power in controlling after-
pains, suggests that it will prove invaluable in con-
gestion and neuralgia of the womb.

W. Fulton, M. D.

AGAVE AMERICANA.

(Century Plant.)

The only report we have of this agent is from
Dr. Penn, XJ. S! A., in the treatment of scurvy:
" Every case has improved rapidly ; the' countenance,
so universally dejected and despairing in the patient
affected with scurvy, is brightened up by content-
ment and hope in two days from the time of its in-
troduction. The most marked evidences of im-
provement were observable at every successive visit.
From observing the effects of the Maguey in the
cases which have occurred in tMs^ommand, I am
compelled to place it far above that remedy which,
till now, has stood above every other— lime juice.
The manner in which I use it is as follows : The
leaves are cut off close to the root. They are placed
6


66. 8PBCIFI0 MBDIGATION.

in hot aahes until thoroughly cooked, when they are
removed, and the juice expressed. The expressed
juice is then strained, and given in doses of S^. to
Siij. daily."

I should be glad if some of our southern readers
•would try a tincture of the recent leaves, made by
cutting them in small pieces and covering with
alcohol. We want to determine its influence on the
circulation and on the nervous system. The dose
would be about ten drops.

AGRIMONIA EUPATORIA.

Preparation. — ^Prepare a tincture from the fresh
herb Sviij. to Alcohol 50° Oj. Dose from gtts. j. to
3ss.

. Agrimonia exerts a slight stimulant influence
upon all the vegetative processes, and under its use
we find an improvement of appetite, digestion and
nutrition.

It exerts a specific influence upon mucous mem-
branes, checking profuse secretion, and giving tone.
Thus it has been employed with advantage in cases
of chronic bronchitis, phthisis with increased secre-
tiou, and humoral asthma.

But it is especially useful in chronic catarrhal
dise^^se of the kidneys and bladder, aud will fre-
quently prove curative. It gives tone and strength
to these organs, and may well replace the more
common tonic diuretics in manv cases.


1


ALNtJS RUBRA. 67

ALETRIS FARINOSA.

The Aletris is a gastric stimulant and improves
digestion. It has also proven a valuable tonic in
uterine diseases. It is deserving a thorough exam-
ination, which I hope some of our readers will give
it and report. Prepare a tincture from Sviij. of the
root to Alcohol 76° Oj. ,The dose would be from
two to ten drops.

ALNUS RUBRA.
(Tag Alder.)

Preparation. — Prepare a tincture from the recent
bark Sviij. to Alcohol 76° Oj. Dose gtts. j. to xx.

We may employ the Alnus in infusion, or in the
form of tincture with dilute alcohol ; the first being
preferable if we wish its greatest influence.

It exerts a specific influence upon the processes
of waste and nutrition, increasing the one and stim-
ulating the other. It is thus a fair example of the
ideal alterative, and is one of the most valuable of
our indigenous remedies.

Its special use seems to be in those cases in which
there is superficiitl disease of the skin or mucous
membranes, taking the form of eczema or pustular
eruption. In these cases I have employed it us a
general remedy, and as a local application with the
best results. It does not seem to make much dif-
ference whether it is a phlyctenular conjunctivitis,
an ulcerated sore mouth or throat, chronic eczema,


68 SPECIFIC MEDICATION.

or secoDdaiy syphilis presenting these characteris-
ties, it is equally beneficial.

ALOES.

The use of Aloes in medicine should be quite
limited, but still it has a place. I believe that in
small quantity and in combination with other agents
' that act upon the upper iniestinal canal, it proves a
good cathartic, as in the following: "B^ Podophyllin,
grs. X. ; Leptandrin, grs. xxx. ; Aloes, grs. xx. ;
Extract of Hyoscyamus, 3ss. Make thirty pills.
One of them at night will prove an excellent laxa-
tive, and those who employ cathartics freely will
like the formula.

But it is not for this purpose that I would recom-
mend Aloes, but for one that may seem very sin-
gular. In small doses it exerts a direct influence
upon the waste and nutrition of the nervous system.
In cases of feeble innei*vation, especially in persons
of gross habit, it will be one of our best agents. I
Vomica or with Tincture of Belladonna. The dose
of a strong tincture being from two to ten drops.

In some cases it will prove . serviceable when as-
sociated with the bitter tonics, as in this : "E^ Ex-
tract of Nux Vomica, grs. vj.; Aloes, grs. xv. ;
Hydrastine, Sss. Make thirty pills. One may be
given three or four times a day.


AMMONIUM. 69


AMMONroM, BROMIDE OP.

The Bromide of Ammonium is a stimulant to
the nerve centers ; increasing waste and improving
nutrition.

I have employed it principally in epilepsy, in
some cases of which it is undoubtedly a specific, I
do not think I can point out the exact cases in
, which it is likely to prove curative, as the evidences
of pathological states in this disease are very obscure.
Its use, therefore, will have to be empirical.

I have used it now for some ten years, and it has
given excellent satisfaction. But whilst it has
effected permanent cures in a large number of
cases, it has only proven of temporary benefit in
some, and has wholly failed in others.

We not unfrequently meet with disease^ in which
there is disordered innervation, manifesting itself
as epileptiform, partially spasmodic, or in other
ways, but in which there is undoubtedly the same
enfeeblement of the cerebro-spinal^ centers. In
these cases Bromide of Ammonium is the remedy.

In diseases of children, I have been accustomed
to employ this remedy in convulsions, following the
first influence obtained by Lobelia or Gelseminum,
and with marked success. When a child is subject
to repeated attacks of convulsions from slight
causes, the Bromide of Ammonium may be used
to remove the predisposition. •

In some cases of .whoopidg cough it exerts a


70 SPBCIFIO MBBICATION.

direct action, as it does in many cases of nervous
cough in both child and adult.

I have used it in this proportion : IB^ Bromide of
Ammonium, Sss- ; Water, Siv. A teaspoonful four
times a day. ^

AMMONIUM, IODIDE OP.

Iodide of Ammonium increases retrograde me-
tamorphosis at the same time that it exerts a stim-
ulant influence upon the nervous system, especially
the sympathetic system. Thus it can be employed
with less risk than Iodide of Potassium, when the
nutritive powers are feeble, as is the case occasion-
ally in secondary syphilis.

It has been employed in certain cases of persistent
headache with excellent results. They are those in
which the eye is dull, the face expressionless, the
circulation feeble, the patient being of a full habit.
The dose will be : 'fy Iodide of Ammonium, 3ij. ;
Water, Siv. A teaspoonful every four hours.

AMPELOPSIS.

The Ampelopsis comes under the general classifi-
cation of alteratives. It is a feeble agent in this
direction and will have but a limited use. It would
be well to have it thoroughly tested, and for this
purpose I would suggest a tincture of the fresh
bark, in doses of from one-fourth to one teaspoonful.


ANAGAIiLIS ARVfiNSIS. 71

AMYGDALU8 PERSICA.
(Peach Tree.)

Preparation. — Thus far we have employed an in-
fusion of the bark of the young limbs of the Peach
Tree; and, to a limited extent, a tincture of the re-
cent bark with dilute Alcohol. The first will be
found preferable in cases of acute gastric irritation ;
but for ordinary office use, I would suggest the fol-
lowing :

Take of the green bark of the young limbs
(suckers), a sufficient quantity, and cover with
Alcohol 50°, one pint to each eight ounces : let it
stand for fourteen days, and express — a -press of
some kind will be an aid. The dose will be from
five to thirty drops.

The ihfusion or tincture, as above prepared, has a
direct influence in quieting irmation of the stomach
and upper intestinal canal. It is also a mild tonic,
improving the functions of digestion. For these
pui'poses it is one of the most valuable articles in
the Materia Medica.

It also exerts an influence upon the circulation,
and upon the nervous system, which deserves inves-
tigation.

ANAGALLIS ARVENSIS.
(Red Chickweed.)

This agent possesses active properties, but has not
been studied. It has been extolled in hydrophobia.


72 SPECIFIC MEDICATION.

delirium, mania, epilepsy, etc., whicli will suggest
the line of experiment.

The best preparation, probably, will be a tincture
of the recent Chickweed in dilute Alcohol (50*^,
Sviij. to the pint; dose quite small — coining within
one or two drops.


ANEMONE NEMOROSA.
(Wood Anemone— Wind Flower.)

This is alfeo an active agent, and will probably re-
pay careful study. It influences the functions of
waste and repair, but acts directly upon the nervous
system. Belonging to the same family as the Pul-
^satilla, its action will be somewhat analogous.

The preparations best adapted for study will be a
tincture of the recent plant, made in the proportion
of Sviij. to Alcohol 76^ Oj. ; using pressure to re-
move the fluid. It will be well to commence with
the fraction of a drop as a dose, say — 1^ Tincture
of Anemone, gtts. x. ; "Water, 5iv. ; a teaspoonful
eveiy two to four hours, gradually increasing as we
feel our way.

APOCYNUM CANNABINUM.
(Indian Hemp.)

Preparation. — The preparation I prefer is, an alco-
holic fluid extract, representing the crude article
ounce for ounce. Of such fluid extract, the dose


APOCTNUM CANNABINUM. , 73

will vary from the fraction of one drop to ten drops,
as the maximum. If the phjsician prepares his
tincture, it should be from the recently dried root,
in the proportion of Sviij. to Alcohol 76^ Oj.

It is probable that the Apocynum Androssemifo-
lium possesses identical properties, and as the dis-
tinction is recognized with difficulty, even by those
most conversant with botanic medicines, they have
been used indiscriminately.

The Apocynum is a true specific for that atonic
condition of the blood-vessels, that permits exuda-
tion, causing dropsy. I have employed it in my
practice for some eight years, and it has not failed
me in a single case, where the diagnosis was well
made.

It is a positive remedy for dropsy, whether it
takes the form of oedema, anasarca, or dropsy of
the serous cavities, where there is no obstruction to
the circulation, and no febrile action. We would
not expect it to eflfect a cure in dropsy from heart
disease, or ascites from structural disease of the
liver, neither would we where there was a frequent,
hard pulse, and other evidences of febrile action.
Still in these cases, if we can partially remove the
obstruction in the first case, and after an arrest of
febrile action in the second, the Apocynum will re-
move the deposit.

It is not worth while to inquire how it removes
dropsical accumulations. It seems to strengthen
the circulation, and as absorption takes place there
is an increased flow of urine.
7


74 SPECIFIC MEDICATION.

I have also employed the Apocynum in cases of
passive menorrhagiat with advantage. It may be
especially recommended in those cases in which the
flow is constantly too profuse, too long, and too
frequently repeated. I use it with water, in the
following proportion : I|» Fluid Extract of Apocy-
num,'^5j. to 3ij. ; Water, Siv. ; a teaspoonful every
three hours.

ARALIA HISPIDA.
(DwABF Elder.)

The Dwarf Elder has been extensively and suc-
cessfully employed in dropsy. The infusion has
usually been employed, and given freely.

I would suggest a tincture of the recent bark, in
dilute Alcohol, in the proportion of Sviij. to the Oj.;
dose gtts. X. to 5j.

I have employed it to but a limited extent, yet
with good results. It has a very positive influence
on the circulation, and upon secretion. Does it not
act on them through the sympathetic nervous system f
and may we not influence all the vegetative func-
tions with it, as we do with some others ? It is de-
serving thorough investigation,

ARNICA MONTANA
(Arnica.)

Preparation, — Prepare a tincture from the recent
flowers, Sviy. to Alcohol 76® Oj. Dose, the fraction
of a drop.


ARNICA MONTANA. 75

It is not necessary to refer to the common local
use of this agent, or discuss the question whether a
tincture of Arnica is preferable to Alcohol alone as
a local application. Every one has employed it in
this way, and each has formed his own opinion, I
think its local use valuable, but greatly over-esti-
mated.

Can it be employed as an internal remedy with
advantage ? I am satisfied that it can. It is a val-
uable stimulant in many grave diseases where a
stimulant is most required. But if used as a gen-
eral stimulant, like Alcohol, it would be as apt to
do harm as good.-

It is a specific stimulant to the spinal nervous sys-
tem, and will be found useful where there is want
of innervation from this. I have seen most marked
benefit from it in advanced stages of disease, where
there was feeble respiratory power; diflGiculty of
sleeping from impeded respiration ; want of control
over the excretion of urine and feces, etc. ; evidences
of impairment of spinal innervation. In such cases
its beneficial influence may be noticed in a few
hours.

back-ache, and feelings of debility, soreness, etc., in
the small of the back. It is only useful in those
cases where there is feebleness, with deficient circu-
lation ; but in these the influence is direct and per-
manent.


76 SPECIFIC MEDICATION.

ARTEMESIA ABSINTHIUM.
(Wormwood.)

Preparation. — ^For experiment, I would suggest a
tincture with dilute Alcohol, 76°, in the proportion
of Sviij. to the pint; vary the dose from one drop
to one drachm.

This agent has been used principally as a vermi-
fuge, but lately it has given place to the Chenopo-
dium, and to Santonine. It possesses very decided
medicinal properties, however, and deserves a thor-
ough examination. It influences the nervous sys-
tem, especially the sympathetic.

ARTEMESIA SANTONIOA.
(Wormwood.)

We only wish to consider the crystallizable prin-
ciple — Santonine — here. Its principal use has been
as a vermifuge in cases of ascaris lumbricoides, for
which it has been found quite efficient. But in
using it for thispurpose many have noticed that it
exerted a peculiar influence upon the brain, and
upon the eyes — rendering objects blue, yellow, or
green ; and that it passed off' in the urine, giving
it a peculiar color.

It exerts a specific action upon the bladder and
urethra, stimulating contraction of the first, and
allaying irritation of the second. It is especially,
valuable in cases of retention of the urine in chil-
dren during protracted disease ; in doses of half to


ASGLEPIA6 TUBBBOSA. 77

one grain y it is prompt and certain. I have also
employed it to relieve irritation of the urethra, es-
pecially in women suffering from uterine disease,
and with good success.

Its influence upon the nervous system needs to be
studied. I judge it to be a nerve stimulant, and
have employed it for this purpose to a limited
extent.

ASCLEPIAS.

(SiLKWEED.)

Preparation. — The best preparation for experi-
ment will be a tincture of the recent root, in the
proportion of Sviij. to Alcohol 76° Oj. ; note its
effect in small as well as large doses.

The A; Incarnata, A. Syriaca, etc., deserve a care-
ful investigation. In weak infusion they all prove
diaphoretic, and to some extent diuretic. It is
claimed by those who have made considerable use
of them, that they stimulate all the secretions.

ASCLEPIAS TUBEROSA.

(Milkweed.)

Preparation. — Whilst I prefer a tincture made as
above, I have used the alcoholic fluid extract of the
dried root, made to represent ounce for ounce ; the
dose being from one drop for a child two years old,
to ten drops for an adult.

It is especially a child's remedy, being feeble in
action, though. quite certain. When given freely,


78 SPECIFIC MSDICATIOM.

it is one of the moat certain diaphoretics we have^
providing the pulse is not frequent^ and the tempera-
ture increased. Even in the small dose of one
drop, following the use of the special sedatives, it
will markedly increase true secretion from the skin.

Recollect that there is a difference between
sweating and secretion. There may be a profuse
exudation of water, the surface being bathed in
perspiration, and yet but little secretion. Excretion
by the skin is a vital process, and takes place by
means of secreting cells. It goes on best where the
skin is soft and moist, and not when covered with
drops of sweat.

I employ Asclepias in diseases of children, believ-
ing that it allays nervous irritability, is slightly se-
dative, and certainly increases secretion from the
skin. I use it with Yeratrum and Aconite, in febrile
and inflammatory diseases, and in mild cases, very
frequently give it alone. Bear in mind that it is a
feeble remedy and too much must not be expected.

ASPIDIUM FILIX MAS.
(Male Fsrn.)

This agent is only used as a vermifuge, especially
for the removal of the tapeworm. For this purpose
the Ethereal Oil is used in doses of twenty drops to
one drachm.


ATBOPA BBLLADONNA. 79


ASAFOETIDA.


Whilst I think but little of the foetid gum as an
antispasmodic, I regard it as a valuable gastric stim-
ulant, and also as a nerve stimulant. In nervous
dyspepsia, especially, it will be found valuable. The
following is a good form : IB^ Asafoetida, Sss. ^
Hydrastine, Sss. ; Aloes, grs. x. Make thirty pills,
and give one three times a day. As a nerve stimu-
lant I have used : IB^ Extract of Nux Vomica, grs.
X. ; Aloes, grs. xl. Make twenty pills, and give one
at night.

ATROPA BELLADONNA.

(Belladonna.)

Preparation. — Whilst for some purposes a solution
of the Alkaloid Atropia will prove the best prepara-
tion, I prefer for general use an Alcoholic fluid ex-
tract of the recent plant, representing the crude
article ounce for ounce. Of this the maximum dose
will be one drop, but frequently one-fifth to one-
half of this will serve a better purpose.

For hypodermic use, we employ a solution of
Atropia, in the proportion of one grain to the ounce
of distilled water. The dose would be five to ten
drops. This is also the best proportion for use to
dilate the pupil. As a colly rium, we would add 5j.
of this solution to .^. of distilled water.

The specific use of Belladonna is as a stimulant to
the capillary circulation, especially of the nerve


80 SPECIFIC MBDICATION.

centers — a remedy opposed to congestion. My at-
tention was first drawn to it by an article from
Brown-Sequard, giving the results of his experi-
ments with the drug, stating that with the micro-
scope he had seen marked contraction of the capil-
laries following its use. It at once suggested itself
to me, that if it would cause capillary contraction,
it would be the remedy for congestion ; and I at once
commenced experimenting with it in this direction.

I well recall my first marked case : a boy about
eight years old, suffering from malignant rubeola.
The entire surface was swollen and dusky ; the eyes
dull; the pupils dilated; the face expressionless;
breathing labored, and wholly unconscious for forty-
eight hours. The administration of Belladonna
alone (in small doses) was sufficient to restore con-
sciousness, and a free circulation, with good appear-
ance of the eruption, in twenty hours.

The evidences in its favor rapidly accumulated,
so that in eighteen months I used it with a feeling
of almost certainty for this purpose.

Whilst it exerts the same influence on all persons,
and at all ages, the true pathological condition being
determined, it is especially valuable in treating dis-
eases of children. In the young, the immature ner-
vous centers suffer more severely, and we find the
opposite conditions, of irritation with determination
of blood, and atony with congestion.

The symptoms calling for the use of Belladonna
are usually veiy plain : the patient is dull and
stupid — and the child drowsy, and sleeps with its


ATROPA BSLLADOKNA. 81

eyes partly open ; the countenance expressionless ;
the eyes are dull, and the pupils dilated, or immo-
bile; whilst, as it continues, respiration becomes
affected, and the blood imperfectly aerated.

adult, in the proportion of gtts. x. to gtts. xx., to
Water Siv. ; in the child gtts. v. to Siv. ; in each a
teaspoonf ul every hour. As these are mostly febrile
cases, or at least have a feeble, frequent circulation
as an element, I give Aconite in the usual doses.

Belladonna is also a specific in incontinence of
urine. Not that it will cure any cafee, but those in
which an enfeeblement of the pelvic circulation is
the principal cause. Probably a lesion of the spinal
cord has also much to do with it. Of course, it
gives no relief where the incontinence arises from
vesical irritation. The dose in this case will be the
same as above named, but only repeated four times
a day.

Belladonna is also a specific in diabetes insipidus ;
even a Belladonna plaster across the loins being
suf5.cient in many cases for its arrest.

Belladonna is undoubtedly a prophylactic against
scarlatina, as I have thoroughly proven in my prac-
tice. Recollect, however, that it is only prophylac-
tic in small doses ; in doses sufficient to produce
dilatation of the pupil, it has no such influence.

Belladonna has other special uses, but they may
be briefly summed up : if in any case there is an
enfeebled circulation, with stasis of blood, Bella-
donna is the remedy. Of course, acting upon some


82 SPECIFIC MEDICATION.

parts more directly than others^ its influence will be
more decided, but there is no case, with condition
as above, in which it will not be beneficial.

I may say in conclusion, that we want a good
preparation of the recent herb ; and then it miLsthe
used in small doses to obtain the influences named.
The doses given are the maximum. As we have
had occasion to say before, the druggists care lit^tle
about the quality of medicines sold ; they are simply
articles of merchandise, and there is little, if any,
professional esprit with them, to aid us in having
them good. Therefore every physician must be on
his guard when purchasing, and had better buy of
first hands, and of those of proven honesty.

APIS MELLIFIOA.
(Honey Bee.)

The Honey Bee possesses marked medicinal prop-
erties, but from a prejudice against such remedies,
has been but little employed.

An infusion of twelve to twenty Honey Bees in a
pint of boiling water, is one of the most certain
diuretics I have ever employed in cases of suppres-
sion of urine from atony. It is also a very eflicient
remedy in retention of urine, and in some cases of
irritation of the urethra.

I have used a tincture for the same purpose, and
also for inflammation of subcutaneous structures,
with tensive and lancinating pains, and in irritation
of the skin. I have prepared my own tincture, in


AOARIC. 88

the proportion of ^. to .Alcohol 98^ Oj. Dose one
to two drops.

AGARIC*

History. — This is obtained from various fungus
plants of the mushroom tribe. These plants afford
a great diversity of form and structure, being in
their simplest character little articulated filaments,
composed of chains or cellules, as in the mildew of
the rosebush, and in moldiness, mucor ; again, they
may present an evQn and imperforate surface, and
another separated into plates or cells, in which the
sporules are deposited. They absorb a great
amount of oxygen with evolution of hydrogen and
carbonic acid gas, and contain considerable propor-
tions of nitrogen. They are destructive to nearly
all organic matter upon which they grow. Accord-
ing to Dr. M. A Curtis, of N. C, the genus boletus,
as now constituted, includes only fleshy species, with
a hymenium composed of sparable tubes. Those
species formerly included in Boletus, and whose
hymenium is composed of poreSy now form the genus
Polyporus."

The Polyporus Officinalis (Boletus Laricis), known
by the name of White Agaric^ Purging Agaric^ etc.,
is procured from Asia, Corinthia, Russia, Central
America, and the Rocky Mountains, where it is
found growing upon the Larch. It is in masses,

*Th6 following is taken from the new edition of Eingfs Ameri-
can Dispensatory.


84 SPSOIFIG MEDICATION.

varying from the size of an ordinary apple to that
of a large nutmeg-melon ; its shape somewhat re-
sembles a horse's hoof ; it is reddish-gray or yellow
externally, whitish internally, and of a spongy, fri-
able consistence ; hymenium concrete ; substance of the
pileus consisting of subrotund pores, with their sim-
ple dissepiments; pileus corky-fleshy, ungulate,
zoned, smooth ; pores yellowish ; it has a feeble
odor, and a bitter, acid, somewhat sweetish taste.
Braconnot found in it 72 parts resinous matter, 2
bitter extractive, 26 of a nutritious animalized prin-
ciple, which he termed fungin. Benzoic acid and
several salts have likewise beea found in it. It is
collected in August and September, deprived of its
outer covering, and then dried and placed in the
sun.

yhe Polyyorus (Boletus) IgnariuSj Agaric of the Oaky
is a fungus found on the oak, cherry, willow, plum,
and other trees ; when young it is soft, but gradually
becomes hard and woody. In shape it somewhat
resembles the preceding ; its upper smooth surface
is marked with dark circular ridges, and its under
is very porous, and of a yellowish-white color. It
is tasteless and inodorous. The Polyporus (Boletus)
Fomentarius, growing on similar trees with the P.
Ignarius, when cut in slices, beaten, soaked in a so-
lution of nitre, and dried, forms an inflammable
substance, known as Spunk, Amadou, or German
Tinder. The Polyporus Pinicola grows upon the
pine, birch, tamarac, fir, and similar trees ; with ab-
solute alcohol the fresh ftingus forms a dark-red,


AGABIC. 86

intensely bitter tincture. A white amorphous pow-
der, called laridn^ is obtained from some of these
plants. It has a bitter taste, is soluble in alcohol
and oil of turpentine, forms a paste with boiling
water, and has the formula C,4Hi204.

Propbrtibs and Usbs. — The dust of the Larch
Agaric is irritating to mucous surfaces, causing
tears when it enters the eyes, and sneezing, cough,
and nausea, when the nostrils are exposed to it.
It has been used in half ^drachm or drachm doses
as a purgative ; in larger doses as an emetic. In
doses of from three to ten grains, gradually in-
creasing to sixty grains in the course of the twenty-
four hours, it has b^en found efficacious in arresting
the nocturnal perspiration of consumptives. Ex-
ternally, it has been used, together with the AgariQ
of the Oaky as a styptic, and said to restrain not only
venous but arterial hemorrhages, without the use of
ligatures. It does not appear, however, to possess
any real styptic power, or to act otherwise than
dry lint, sponge, or other soft applications. Pre-
pared with nitre, as for tinder, it has been used as a
species of moxa.

The P. Officinalis and the P. Pinicola^ in doses of
from three or four grains of the powder, repeated
every three or four hours, or of the concentrated
tincture in doses of five drops, have both been found
valuable in the cure of obstinate and long standing
intermittents, and other diseases common to mala-
rial districts; as, obstinate bilious remittent fever,
chronic diarrhoea, chronic dysentery, periodical neu-


86 SPBOIFIO MEDICATION.

ralgia, nervous headache, ague cake, and increased
flow of urine. They have likewise proved useful
in long standing jaundice, and in the chills and
fever common among consumptive patients.

The tincture of Boletus exerts a marked influ-
ence upon the spinal and sympathetic nervous sys-
tem, in certain cases of disease. , It has been suc-
cessfully employed in the treatment of epilepsy and
chorea, and to check the rapid pulse with hectic
fever and night sweats in phthisis. It has also been
recommended in insanity where there is a feeble
cerebral circulation and imperfect nutrition. And,
also, in neuralgia, with similar symptoms.

BAPTISIA TINCTORIA.

Preparation.— The Baptisia has been principally
employed in infusion, and I am well satisfied that
this is the best preparation for general use. Still,
as it will be inconvenient in many cases, I would re-
commend in addition, a tincture by percolation,
using Sviij. of the ground bark to Oj. of Alcohol
of 76°. Of an infusion of ^. to giv. of boiling
water, the dose is one teaspoonful ; of the tincture
as named, 5ij. to Water, Si v., dose, a teaspoonful.

With some the. Baptisia has been a favorite rem-
edy for sore mouth and sore throat, using it locally,
and for this purpose it is one of the most valuable
remedies we have. I judge, however, that if you
should ask, in what particular variety of sore mouth


BAPTISIA XINGTOBIA. 87

or throat it was found- best ? you would have difEi-
culty in getting an answer.

It is in those eases in which there is enfeebled
capillary circulation, and tendency to ulceration,
that it is specific. That is, the condition is one of
atony, with tendency to molecular death and de-
composition. The remedy is, therefore, stimulant
and antiseptic.

It may be employed with the greatest certainty
in any form of sore mouth or throat presenting the
characteristics named. Especially in stomatitis
ulcerata, or cancrum orris, in cynanche maligna,
and in the sore throat of scarlatina maligna ; but it
is not only a good local application in these cases,
but a most valuable internal remedy.

It is specific to the condition upon which such sore
mouth and throat is based, whether it is manifested
in this way, or in ulceration of Peyer's follicles in
typhoid fever. Thus I have employed it with very
marked advantage, in all cases showing putrescency,
and tendency to softening and breaking down of
tissue.

It is not a remedy for acute ii^flammation, whether
erythematous or deep seated, and in ordinary stom-
atitis or cynanche, it is not a remedy. In diphtheria
presenting acute inflammatory symptoms, it is
werse than useless. But in diphtheria with swollen
and enfeebled mucous membranes, dusky or livid
discoloration, or blanched appearance, with ten-
dency to ulceration and sloughing, there is no
remedy more certain.


88 SPBCIFIC MEDICATION.

I have BUccesefuUj employed the Baptisia in
typhoid dysentery, as have others. But as will be
seen, this is but the conditiou named above for its
specific action. So long as there is an acute in-
flammation, with stools of blood or pure mucus,
this is not beneficial, but when the discharges re-
semble "prune juice, the washing of meat, or are
muco-purulent," with general symptoms of an an-
alogous character, then it becomes one of our most
certain remedies.

BENZOIC ACID.

I prefer to use Benzoic Acid in solution in Alco-
hol, 5j. to the Oj. to the tincture of Benzoin, though
the latter wiU answer the purpose. The dose will
vary from ten to sixty drops, according to the eflfect
lesired.

Its first use is in irritable bladder, with deposits
of uric acid or triple phosphates ; in either case its
use will prove beneficial.

Its second use is in irritation of the sympathetic
and spinal system of nerves, with uric acid deposits.

Its third use is as a stimulant to the brain in
cases of exhaustion with Phosphuria. I have used
it in this case alternated with a preparation of
Phosphorus — either the Phosphuretted Oil or the
Tincture — with advantage. These are usually cased
of exhaustion from over-exertion of the mind, as
frequently met with among our business men.


BXBBKRINA SULPHAS. 89

BERBBRIS VULGARIS,
(Baebsbbt.)

•
A tincture of the recent bark, in the proportion

of Sviij. to Alcohol 76° Oj., is suggeated. Dose
varying from ten drops to one drachm.

Will some of our Eastern practitioners give us
their experience with this agent ; or if it has not
been employed alone, will some one test it thor-
oughly. Evidently it has an influence upon the
gastro-intestinal mucous membrane, and probably
on associate viscera.

BEBEERINiB SULPHAS.

This is not the so-called Berbeerin from the Ber-
beris Vulgaris, but a well-defined salt from the Nec-
tandra Rodisei. As found in commerce, it is in glit-
tering scales of a brownish-yellow color, and when
triturated forms a yellowish powder.

It exerts a specific action upon the uterus, but
thus far it has been principally employed in cases
of menorrhagia. In this case its influence is very
marked, controlling the hemorrhage, and prevent-
ing its recurrence. As we have other remedies for
the milder cases, its use might be confined to those
in which there is profuse discharge at each men-
strual period, and where they recur too frequently.
The dose will be from two to three grains every
three or four hours.
8 .


90 SnOIFIC MXDICATION.


BISMUTH.


We employ Bismuth in two forms. The sub-
nitrate ifi doses of from one to two grains ; the
liquor Bismuth (solution of Citrate of Bismuth), in
doses of from gtts. x. to 5J-

The first use of Bismuth is to allay irritation of
the gastro-intestinal mucous membrane ; and for
this purpose it has been extensively employed.
Usually the sub-nitrate in impalpable powder, is
employed in small doses frequently repeated for
gastric irritation, and in doses of five to ten grains
for intestinal irritation, with diarrhoea.

The second may be called its specific use, for
chronic gastro-intestinal irritation, or dyspepsia
with diarrhoea. Here I employ the Liquor Bismuth
in doses of from a half to one teaspoonful four
times a day. In inveterate cases, not amenable to
. treatment, and of years duration, I have had the
happiest results.

I have omitted to name the common use of Bis-
muth for water-brash, in some cases of which it is
very eftectukl.

The powdered sub-nitrate is also the most effec-
tual local application for irritation of the skin —
chafing — either in the infant or adult. For this pur-
pose the part is thoroughly dusted, and it is re-
peated as often as necessary to keep it dry.


BROMIDE OF POTASSIUM. 91

BROMINE.

Bromine is not employed as an internal remedy,
though its salts have been used largely within the
last ten years. It niay be employed with advantage
as an inhalation in croup and diphtheria, and as a
stimulant in phthisis. For croup it has been used
in the proportion of ten drops to two ounces of
water.

BROMIDE OP POTASSIUM.

Bromide of Potash is a very greatly overestimated
remedy. When I commenced practice it was only
used in cases of spermatorrhoea to relieve sexual
irritation — now it is recommended for every nervous
ill that flesh is heir to.

I think it has odc specific use, and that is as a
remedy for epilepsy when associated with irritation
of the reproductive organs, or especially in irritation
of the cerebellum. In such cases I have used it
with much success. The dose will be about twenty
grains three times a day.

I only use it in spermatorrhcBa, in those cases in
which the person is of a plethoric habit, with great
venereal excitement — cases approximating satyri-
• asis, rather than spermatorrhoea. In these I ad-
minister it in doses of thirty to sixty grains at bed-
time.


92 SPECIFIC MEDICATION.

BIDENS BIPINNATA-CONNATA-FRONDOSA.

(Spanish Needles.)

Preparation. — Prepare the.tincture from the recent
herb, in the proportion of Sviij. to Alcohol 76® Oj.,
using pressure. Dose from five to thirty drops.

The diff'erent varieties of Bidens deserve investi-
gation. Reference to the Dispensatory or Materia
Medica will give the direction it should take. I am
especially interested in the action of the B. Pron-
dosa on the heart and circulation.

BRYONIA.

This remedy is extensively employed by the
Homoeopaths ; and, as I think, grejatly overestimate4.
They use it in rheumatism, pneumonia, and other
diseases of the chest ; in typhoid fever, and many
other affections. It may be recommended for in-
vestigation — "S^ Tincture of Bryonia, Sss. ; Water,
5iv. ; a teaspoouful every one or two hours.

BRAYERA ANTHELMINTICA.

This agent is only employed as a remedy for tape-
worm ; and when of good quality it is very efficient.

CALENDULA OFFICINALIS.
(Marigolb.)

A tincture of Calendula has been employed by
the Homoeopaths as a local application in wounds ;
but without any advantage that I have been able to

see.


CAMPHOR. 98

CALX.

(Lime.)

Lime is used for the ordinary purpose of an
antacid, and in some cases is preferable to any other
alkali. This is especially the case in indigestion,
with the formation of lactic acid from decomposing
food. Here there is not unfrequently an excess of
the normal salts of the blood, and we can not use
the salts of soda and potash to neutralize gastric
acidity. It may be stated, as a general rule, that it
will be found beneficial in cases of infantile dyspep-
^a, and in dyspepsia of the adult, with acid eructa-
tions during digestion.

Its specific use is in cases of furunculus or boils,
and other inflammations of cellular tissue, terminat-
ing in suppuration. Why it has this specific influ-
ence I do not propose to say, but the fact I have
proven in scores of cases. Given a case in which
boils are being continually developed, the use of
lime water will effect a radical cure. It is given in
doses of a wineglassful three or four times a day.

CAMPHOR.

Camphor in small doses is a stimulant, in large
doses a sedative, to the nervous system. I do not
regard it as having a very extended use in medicine,
though for the purpose named, it may sometimes
be employed with advantage. In low forms of dis
ease, with insomnia and restlessness, I have used it


94 8PBCIFIC MBBIOATION.

alone, and in combination with stimulant doses of
Opium or Morphia, and Quinine.

As a topical stimulant, it may be employed with
advantage, when the integrity of the part is threat-
ened from enfeebled circulation.

CANNABIS SATIVA.
(Hemp).

The tincture of Cannabis should be prepared
from the recent wild plant whilst in flower, but as
we can not get this, we use a tincture prepared from
the chunrus, a species of extract from the recent
plant, imported from India. The dose will vary
from one to five drops.

In small doses it is stimulant to the cerebro-spinal
centers ; in large doses it produces intoxication, and
finally arrest of function. It exerts an influence
upon the urinary and reproductive apparatus that
may be rendered available in practice, and also to
some extent upon the skin.

I have employed the Cannabis specially to relieve
irritation of the kidneys, bladder and urethra. It
will be found especially beneficial in vesical and
urethral irritation, and is an excellent remedy in the
treatment of gonorrhoea.

I do not like it as a remedy for intemperance,
(chronic alcoholism), so well as a combination of
Nux Vomica and Iodine, with a bitter tonic ; though
in some cases it may be used with marked advan-
tage, and the habit finally broken up by its use.


CAOTUS GRANDIFLOBUS. 95

»

CANTHARIS VESICATORIA.

(Spanish Fly.)

I object to the use of the blister, as a means of
counter-irritation, and going further than this, I ob-
ject to counter-irritation as a means of cure, when
it can possibly be avoided, and I think it may be
avoided in nearly all cases.

As an internal remedy, Oantharis will have but
one use — as a stimulant to the urinary apparatus,
especially tiie bladder. For this purp ose it may be •
employed in small doses.

CACTUS GRANDIFLORUS.
(Night-Bloomino Cereus.)

Preparation. — We prepare a tincture from the
recent plant, in the proportion of Siv., to Alcohol
98° Oj. The dose will vary from one to ten drops.

The influence of Cactus seems to be wholly ex-
erted on the sympathetic nervous system, and espe-
cially upon, and through the cardiac plexus. It
does not seem to increase or depress innervation,
(neither stimulant, nor sedative,) but rather to influ-
ence a regular performance of function. I am satis-
fied, however, that its continued use improves the
nutrition of the heart, thus permanently strengthen-
ing the organ. It has a second influence, which is
of much importance to the therapeutist. It exerts a
direct influence upon the circulation and nutrition of
the brain, and may thus be employed with advantage
in some diseases of this organ. We can see very


96 SPECIFIC MEDICATION.

readily how this may be. The cardiac nerves are
derived from the upper part of the sympathetic, and
judging from the anatomy of the part, the first cervi-
cal ganglion being the principal uervous mass in the
cervical region, must furnish innervation through
the cardiac nerves, as it certainly controls the circu-
lation and nutrition of the brain.

The Cactus is a specific in heart disease, in that it
gives strength and regularity to the innervation of
the organ. Its influence is permanent, in that it in-
fluences -the waste and nutrition of the organ, in-
creasing its strength. It exerts no influence upon
the inflammatory process, and hence is not a rem-
edy for inflammatory disease.

Feelings of weight and pressure at the prsecordia,
diflSlcult breathing, fear of impending danger, etc.,
are at once removed. Such irregularity of action,
whether violent, feeble, or irregular, as is dependent
upon the innervation, is readily controlled. Thus,
in the majority of cases of functional heart disease
it gives prompt relief, and, if continued, will eftect
a cure. In those cases in which there is another
lesion acting as a cause, as in some gastric, enteric,
or uterine lesions, these must receive attention, and
be removed to make the cure radical.

In structural heart disease, the first use of reme-
dies is to relieve the distjessing sensation in the
region of the heart, and the unnatural fear of
danger which attends them. As these spring from
disordered innervation, in the majority of cases, the
Oaetus gives prompt relief. As we have seen above,


CAPSICUM. 97

its contintiance favors normal waste and nutrition,
as well as regular action. Hence, its continued use
is followed by the removal of adventitious tissue j
and an increase in the strength of its contractile
fibre. Hence, it is really curative in many cases of
structural heart disease.

I have some cases on my case book, of such
aggravated form, that no one would believe they
could live a twelvemonth ; yet, after a lapse of five
years, they are enjoying comfortable health.

But it will not relieve or cure cases of valvular
deficiency, dilatation of the openings of the heart,
or fatty degeneration. It is well, in estimating its
action, to bear this in mind.

In its influence upon the nervous system, it more
nearly resembles Pulsatilla ; giving relief in that
condition known as nervousness. But farther than
this, it gives regularity of cerebral function, and
permanently improves nutrition of the nervous
centers.

CAPSICUM.
(Cayenne Pepper.)

Capsicum is a powerful topical stimulant ; but its
general influence is feeble. As Capsicum, it never
gains admission to the circulation, and, in the pro-
cess of digestion, it almost wholly loses its proper-
ties as a remedy.

Capsicum is used as a topical stimulant to the
skin, and with advantage where the circulation is
feeble, and there is need of such stimulation. It
9


98 specific; mbiuoation.

also exerts the revulsive influence of other rube-
facients.

Its influence, when taken into the stomach, is of
the same character. It excites the nerves, and calls
an increased flow of blood to the part. In torpid
states of the gastric mucous membrane, such action
may be very desirable, may even be essential to life :
as, in congestive intermittent* It is the topical
action upon the gastric mucous membrane that is
beneficial in some cases of delirium tremens.

The solar plexus, the most important of the vege-
tative nerve centers, may be thus influenced from the
stomach. The stimulant influence of Capsicum
may, therefore, be extended through this, and be of
marked advantage in states of great and sudden
prostration with tendency to congestion.


OARBO-LIGNI.

(Wood Charcoal.)

Is an absorbent and antiseptic, and has this gen-
eral use, both internally and topically. Given in
water-brash, or where there is decomposition of the
food, it is sometimes quite beneficial. So in topical
disease — with free secretion and tendency to sepsis —
its local application absorbs the one and checks the'
other.

The specific use of charcoal is to arrest hemor-
rhage from the bowels. It is used in enema, 5j. to
Sij. finely powdered, to four ounces of water, thrown


GAULOPHYLLUM. 99

«p the rectum. Why It checks it I can not tell;
that it does it, I have the evidence of my own eyes.


CASSIA ACUTIFOLIA.

(Senna.)

Seuna is a mild cathartic ; bat its action is fre-
quently attended with much tormina, and to some
is very unpleasant. As it does not increase elimi-
nation by the bowels, its use as a cathartic is quite
limited, and it may well be replaced by other
remedies.

It exerts, however, a special influence in colic,
which renders it an important remedy. We have
generally employed it in the form of the Compound
Powder of Jalap and Senna, in doses of five or ten
.♦grains, frequently repeated until relief is obtained.
An infusion of Senna — or the tincture will answer
the same purpose — for the relief of colic, whether
the common wind-colic or that known as bilious, I
regard as one of our best remedies.

CAULOPHYLLUM.

(Blue Cohosh.)

We employ this remedy in infusion as a parturi-
ent, and in the form of a tincture of the recently
dried root, Sviij. to Alcohol 76** Oj. The alcoholic
fluid extract, representing ounce for ounce, is also a
good preparation.

Caulophyllum exerts a very decided influence


100 SPECIFIC MEDICATION.

upon the parturient uterus, stimulating normal con-
traction, both before and after delivery. Its first
use, in this case, is to relieve false pains ; its second,
to effect co-ordination of the muscular contractions j
and third, to increase the power of these. The
first and second are the most marked, y^t the third
is quite certain. Still if any one expects the marked
influence of Ergot, in violent and continued con-
tractions, he will be disappointed.

I judge that it exerts its influence through the
hypogastric plexus ; though to some extent it influ-
ences every process controlled by the sympathetic.
Acting in this way it influences the circulation, nu-
trition, and functions of the reproductive organs,
I have employed it in chronic uterine diseases with
some advantage ; but further study is necessary to
point out the particular cases.

It may be used with good effect in some cases of
nervous disease; especially in that condition known
as asthenic plethora.

As a remedy for rheumatism it is inferior to the
Macrotys, but in some eases it exerts a better influ-
ence. My experience has not been sufficient to
point out these cases, and in this respect the remedy
needs further study.

I would suggest, also, the trial of a tincture of
the recent root.


CHIMAPHILLA UMBSLLATA. 101

CEANOTHUS AMERICANU8.

(Redrqot.)

This agent deserves investigation, as it possesses
marked medicinal properties. The di):ection of ex-
periment may be judged by reference to the Dis-
pensatory. Use a tincture of the recently dried
root, in doses of 80 to 60 drops.

"> CELASTRUS SCANDENS. .

(Falsb Bittersweet.)

This belongs to the class alterative. It has no
special action that I am aware of, though it might
be studied with advantage.

CHELONE GLABRA.

(Balmony.)

The Chelone exei*ts an influence on waste and
nutrition, and deserves study. We would prepare a
tincture from the recent leaves, by expression, in
the proportion of Sviij. to Alcohol, 76° Oj. Dose,
ten to thirty drops.

CHIMAPHILLA UMBELLATA.

(PiPSISSEWA.)

The Chimaphilla has been used mostly in. infu-
sion or decoction : but for general use it may be
prepared in the form of tincture, both of the recent
and the dried leaves — ^though they will differ mate*


102 SPBGIFIC MBDIOATION.

rially in strength and properties — ^the fresh leaves
possessing a volatile principle which is lost in drying.

The Chimaphiila has been principally employed
as a tonic diuretic, influencing the urinary apparatus
in a similar ioaanner to the Buchu and [Jva-Ursi,
though I think it preferable to either. It relieves
irritation of the entire urinary tract, and improves
the circulation and nutrition of these organs.

It also influences the processes of waste and
nutrition, and possesses the properties termed alte-
rative. In this respect it has not been thoroughly
studied, though highly spoken of by some in the
treatment of scrofula and secondary syphilis.

CHIONANTHUS VIRGINICA.
(Frinqe-Tbee.)

This agent comes to us with the recommendation
of Dr. I. J. 'M. Goss, of Georgia, who says :

" It possesses important alterative properties. As
a catalytic, it has the most decided influence over
the glandular system of any article I have tried.
It pervades the whole system, combining with the
materies morbi, and conveying it out of the system.
I have used it in mercurial cachexy with the most
happy success, in quite a number of instances.
But the most important therapeutical property that
it possesses, is its specific power over morbid condi-
tions of the liver. I have tried it in hypertrophy
of that organ, and with uniform success ; and also
in obstruction of the liver, in malarious districts,


CHLOROFORM. 103

with like success. Some years ago I called the at-
tention of the profession to its specific effects in
jaundice, and gave several cases in proof of the fact.
Since then I have used the Chionanthus in a great
many cases of jaundice, and have never failed to re-
move it in but one single case, aiid that one I think
was a case of obstruction of the gall ducts by cal-
culi ; in that case, I tried all the reputed cholagogues,
without success. It removes jaundice of years
standing, in from eight to ten days. I have treated
several persons that had been subject to jaundice,
annually, in summer, for several years, and had been
dosed with blue pill, calomel, and other articles,
without any benefit, and I have not failed in a
single instance, to remove the disease entirely.
And when it is relieved with the Chionanthus, it
does not return ; at least it has not, in any instance
to my knowledge. It is as near a specific in jaun-
dice, as quinine in periodicity. The mode in which
I have used it is to make a tincture of the bark of
the root in gin, say Sij. to the quart of gin, and
give Sss. of this every three hours^ or the fluid ex-
tract, and give from one to two drachms every
three hours."

CHLOROFORM.

Chloroform by inhalation exerts a specific influence
upon the cerebral center, arresting its power to re-
ceive impressions — a condition known as ansesthesia.
If carried still farther, it influences the spinal center


104 SPECIFIC MEDICATION.

in the samd manner, and arrests automatic move-
ment — respiration. This action is so well known,
that it is not worth while occupying our space
with it.

Administered by mouth, in small doses, it is a
cerebral stimulant; in large doses, it lessens con-
sciousness, the effect being more like poisoning by
Alcohol, than the an»sthetic influence from its in-
halation.

In small doses (gtts. x. to 5j.) it is successfully
employed to arrest convulsions. The small doses
are safe, but it will not do to repeat it often in the
larger quantity named. It is also used to relieve
gastro-intestinal pains, especially in the form of
common colic.

In cases of biliary calculus it is used as a prophy-
lactic, preventing the deposit of cholesterin, and
causing its solution when deposited. For this pur-
pose it is used in doses of gtts. xx., three times a
day.

CHLORAL HYDRATE.

The introduction of this new remedy has been
attended with the same enthusiasm displayM in the
case of Bromide of Potassium. It is evidently good
for something, but what, has not yet been satisfac-
torily determined.

It is a hypnotiCy and may be employed for this
purpose, where there is an enfeebled condition of the
brain, with impaired nutrition. It relieves pain,


CHLORAL HTDRATB. 105

when the nervous centers are suffering from im-
paired circulation and irritation, and may be advan-
tageously employed in these cases.

Ji has been successfully employed in the treat-
ment of delirium tremens^ but in some cases it has
failed. I have not used it for this purpose, but ap-
plying the above principles would conclude that it
is a remedy only in those in which the nervous
centers are suffering the exhaustion of over stimula-
tion, and not in those in which there is irritation
and determination of blood. These cases require
opposite remedies, and if I am correct in the view
I have taken of the action of Chloral, it will
doubtless prove a very important remedy.

The remedy also suggests itself as one adapted
to allay irritation and produce sleep in a majority
of cases of puerperal mania. Dr. Play fair reports
a case in which it was used with excellent success.

I am satisfied Ifrom its action that it will prove a
boon to the opium eater who desires to break off
the destructive habit. Whilst its influence upon the
nerve centers is the same as stimulant doses of
Opium, and will thus give present relief, it gives
strength to the cerebral circulation, and will thus
favor normal nutrition ; then the dose can be les-
sened, and finally the remedy dispensed with.

To give the estimate in which the drug is now
held, I quote from the London Lancet:

" This interesting drug has now been sufficiently
tested by a large number of eminent practitioners
to enable us to form a tolerably dear idea both of


106 SPSCIPIC MEDICATION.

its merits and its defects ; and as we perceive that
(after the usual fashion in matters medical) there is
going to be an epidemic rage for the new remedy,
it may be well to call the attention of the public to
the principal features of its action which can be
sa^ to be fairly made out.

^' In the first place, the term ^ ansesthetic ' should
no longer be applied to chloral, for it has entirely
failed to make good its claim to this reputation ;
even the largest doses do but produce a heavy and
prolonged sleep, which is, however, essentially dif-
ferent from true ansesthesia. On the other hand, as
a producer of sleep. Chloral is, in many respects,
unrivaled ; for though, like every other remedy, it
fails in a considerable number of cases, it does suc-
ceed in a very large number ; in fact, it is inferior
in certainty, as a hypnotic, to Opium alone. More-
over, it is very greatly superior to Opium, and
almost every other drug, in • the character of its
sleep-producing action; there are no attendant
symptoms of cerebral oppression; the sleep, though
often prolonged, is light and refreshing, and no un-
pleasant after-symptoms are experienced. It is im-
portant to observe, however, that this description f
only applies to the use of moderate quantities, and i
that not only unpleasant but highly dangerous
symptoms have been produced by doses which we
regret to see are very commonly used. Very careful
inquiry leads us to assert that it is both unnecessary
and dangerous to give larger doses than twenty to
thirty grains, repeated once or twice if necessary,


CHLORAIi HYDRATE. 107

for hypnotic purposes. Doubtless it might happen
that 100 consecutive patients might take much
larger doses with impunity, but the lOlst might
Reynolds, in a recent number of the Practitionery^s
produced by a dose of fifty grains, and these symp-
toms might easily take a fatal turn.

" As a remedy for pain. Chloral holds a very
varying place in the estimation of medical men,
some rating it highly, and others thinking it almost
worthless. Perhaps the safest estimate of its power
over pain is that it only exerts an indirect influence
by inducing a disposition to sleep, in which the pain
is forgotten. Certainly it has entirely failed, in the
hands of the present writerj to relieve severe pain
of a pure neuralgic type. On the other hand, there
is a good deal of evidence that it relieves suffering
where the parts are very tense j and where mere arte-
rial throbbing counts for much in the production of
pain ; thus it has been very favorably spoken of for
its effects in gout. And this fact, if it be correct,
corresponds with certain observations which have
been made as to its action on the circulation. Both
from sphygmographic experiments on healthy per-
sons and on patients, and also from the details of
the nearly fatal case reported by Dr. Reynolds, there
is reason to think that Chloral exerts a contracting
influence upon the arteries, powerful in proportion
to the dose ; and it may well be that arterial throb-
bing is checked by this kind of influence*

" On the whole, however, there can be little doubt


\


108 8PEGIFI0 MSblCATION.

that the great function of Chloral is^that of a hyp-
notic and calmer of general nervous irritability.
In delirium tremens it is excellent : and it is prob-
able that with two such weapons for choice as Bro-
mide of Potassium and Chloral we shall be able
ahnost entirely to dispense with the use of Opium,
which is so uncertain and dangerous a remedy in
that disease. In the state of sleeplessness which
threatens the access of puerperal mania. Chloral is
probably an unequaled remedy. In melancholia
its action as a hypnotic appears to be powerfully and
remarkably sure. In mania , also, it acts well
enough as a hypnotic, though there seems, some
division of opinion as to whether it does permanent
good. We may also state that in the irritable con-
dition of aged persons who find it difficult to sleep
for any length of time continuously, the use of a
single dose of thirty grains of Chloral appears often
to answer excellently welt. The minor uses of the
drug in relieving more trivial conditions of nervous
irritation, and in alleviating painful spasmodic
symptoms of various kinds, are probably consider-
able."

CINCHONA.-(&e Quinia.)

CIS'TUS CANADENSIS.
(Rock-Rose.)

Preparation. — A tincture is prepared from the
recent plant, in the proportion of Sviij. to Alcohol
76® Oj. The dose is from ten to thirty drops.


CINNAMON. 109

The Cistus has a direct and positive influence on
the processes of waste and nutrition, and hence
possesses the properties known as alterative. It has
been used with especial advantage in scrofula, and
in chronic diseases dependent upon an enfeebled
nutrition, or deposit of imperfectly formed plasma.

It is also reported to have a specific influence
upon the intestinal catial, curing chronic diarrhcea
and dysentery. It deserves a thorough investiga-
tion, which I trust some of our practitioners will
give it.

CINNAMON.

Preparation. — We prepare a tincture from the oil,
in the proportion of 5j- to Alcohol 98° Sviij. Dose
five to thirty drops.

Cinnamon thus prepared exerts a direct influence
upon the uterus, causing contraction of its muscular
fibre, and arresting hemorrhage. To a limited ex-
tent, it exerts an influence on the entire circulatory
Isystem, checking hemorrhage from any part.

It is the most certain remedy we have for uterine
hemorrhage, either during parturition or at the
menstrual period. I have used it since I com-
menced practice, and have never failed to arrest
post-partum hemorrhage with it, though I have
had some very severe cases.


110 SPECIFIO MBDICATION.

CLEMATIS VIRGINIANA.

(Vikgin's Bowsb.) /

This agent has not been studied, though it de-
serves investigation. Prepare a tincture from the
recent leaves, in the proportion of Sviij. to Alcohol
76° Oj., using pressure. Dose, gtts. v. to gtts. x.
To determine its influence upon the nervous system
and upon the secretions.

COFFEE, (Java ob Rio.)

Take of the berries of Coftee, ground (not roasted)
Sviij., Alcohol, 76° Oj. Make a tincture by perco-
lation. Dose gtts. ij. to gtts. x.

Coflfee is a stimulant to the cerebral nervous sys-
tem, and may be employed in many cases where
there is atony, with disordered function. Were it
not for the general use of coffee as a beverage, it
would prove a valuable remedy ; but when persons/
are habituated to its use, it exerts but little influ-
ence.

COLLINSONIA CANADENSIS.

(Stone Root.)

We employ an alcoholic fluid extract of the Col-
linsonia, representing the crude article ounce for
ounce. As there are a great many imperfect prepa-
rations in the market, I would advise that it be
procured from one of our own houses in this city.

GoUinsouia is a specific in ministers' sore throat ;


COLCHICUM, XH

administered in the proportion of: ^ Fluid Extract
of Collinsonia, Simple ISyrup, aa., half teaspoonful
to a teaspoonful four times a day.

It proves beneficial in other cases of chronic laryn-
gitis, in chronic bronchitis, and phthisis, allaying
irritation, and checking cough.

It also exerts a favorable influence upon the
digestive processes, improving the appetite, facilitat-
ing digestion, and acting as a general tonic.

It passes oft' through the kidneys, and exerts a
tonic influence upon the entire extent of the urinary
tract.

I have thought that its influence was specially ex-
erted upon and through the pneumogastriCy relieving
irritation of, and giving strength to parts supplied
from this source.

Collinsonia is a specific in the early stages of he-
morrhoids, and will sometimes eftect a cure in the
advanced stages of the disease. In this case it is
employed in small doses : ^ Fluid Extract of Col-
linsonia, Sj. ; Water, giv, ; a teaspoonful four times
a day.,

I have given the therapeutics of Collinsonia thus
briefly, that the points named might make the
greater impression upon the reader. I regard it as
one of the most direct and valuable agents of the
Materia Medica, and one that will give satisfaction
to whoever employs it.


112 BPBOIPIC MEDICATION.

COLCHICUM.

It is difficult to procure a reliable preparation of
Colchicum, aud we have been obliged to use the
English wine of Colchicum. Our manufacturers in
this city now prepare a fluid extract, representing
ounce for ounce of the crude article. The medium
dose is one. drop; we do not desire a cathartic
action.

Colchicum has long been used as a remedy for
rheumatism and gout; and, though probably the
best of the old Materia Medica, it failed of giving
its best results, because used in poisonous doses.
In acute and chronic rheumatism it should be em-
ployed in small doses, following or alternated with
the sedatives. We only obtain its anti-rheumatic
influence when the pulse and temperature are re-
duced to nearly a normal standard.

It is also beneficial in some cases of intestinal dis-
turbance, especially when there are gaseous accu-
mulations. Thus in colic from intestjiial irritation,
it may be employed in the proportion of gtts. xx.
to water, giv., a teaspoonful every two hours, with
prospect of success.

It exerts an influence upon the skin, and may
occasionally be employed with advantage in chronic
disease of the surface.

COLOC YNTH.

*

Colocynth has been employed as a cathartic, but
for this purpose it is harsh and uncertain, and may
well be dispensed with.


CTPBIPBBIUM PUBBSCBNS. 113

I use it wholly as a remedy for dysentery. And
for this purpose employ the alcoholic fluid extract,
in small doses, usually 3ss. to Water giv, A tea-
spoonful every hour will give the best results.

It will also prove beneficial in some cases of colic,
and in diarrhoea attended with tormina and tenes-
mus. I am satisfied that a thorough investigation
of the remedy in small doses, will develop other im-
portant uses.

CYPRIPEDIUM PUBESCENS.

(Lady's Slipper.)

Preparation. — ^Prepare a tincture from the recent
dried root, in the proportion of Sviij. to Alcohol
76° Oj. The dose will range from gtts. ij. to 2(j.

The Cypripedium is a nerve stimulant, improving
the circulation and nutrition of the nerve centers.
Hence it proves useful in sleeplessness, nervous irri-
tability from atony, in neuralgia, delirium, and
other disturbances from the same cause.

It is a feeble agent, and too, much must not be
expected from it. It is a stimulant, and will only
be applicable in nervous atony.

Its best use will doubtless be found in children, to
soothe irritation of the nervous system. I make
the following prescription which is an admirable
" Soothing Syrup."

9 Tinct. of Cypripedium, •

Comp. Tinct. of Lavender, a*. S^.
Tinct. 9f Lobelia, S^j.
Simple Syrup, Biiiss. K.


10


114 8PS0IFIG MBDICATIOK.

DATURA STRAMONIUM,

(Jamestown Weed.)

The Stmmonium is a very active agent, and yet
I have not been able to determine any important
medicinal use for its internal administration. I
doubt whether it exerts any medicinal effect in its
common external application ; the good influence,
if any, coming from the fomentation in the one
case, or the alcohol when used as a tincture.

An ointment, prepared by boiling the fresh leaves
in mutton tallow, furnishes an excellent local appli-
cation for hemorrhoids, and ulceration of mucous
surfaces.

DELPHINIUM STAPHISAGRIA. '

(Stavesacre.)

Preparation. — A tincture is prepared from the
ground seed, (it having been pressed between bibu-
hus paper to remove the fixed oil), in the propor-
tion of Sviij. to Alcohol 98° Oj.

The Tincture of Staphisagria has a specific action
upon the reproductive organs of both male and
female ; but more marked in the first. It quiets ir-
ritation of the testes, and strengthens their func-
tion ; it lesse ns irritation of the prostate and vesi-
culsB ; arrests prostatorrhoea, and cures inflamma-
tion of these parts. It also exerts a marked influ-
ence upon the urethra, quieting irritation and
checking mucous, or muco-piirulent dischargees; it


DIGITALIS PURPUREA. 116

influences the bladder and kidneys, but in less
degree.

The action of Staphisagria upon the nervous sys-
tem is peculiar. It exerts a favorable influence
where there is depression of spirits and despondence,
in cases of hypochondriasis and hysteria, especially
when attended with moroseness, and violent out-
bursts of passion.

I employ it in the proportion of: "fy Tincture of
Staphisagria, 3j ; Water, Siv. A teaspoonful every
four hours.

The seed of the Delphinum Consolida or Larkspur j
possesses similar medical properties, but is not so
active ; a tincture may be prepared in the same way,
and used in the same dose.

" DIERVILLA CANADENSIS.

(Bush HoneyIuckle.)

Preparation. — A tincture may be prepared from
the recent leaves -and twigs, Sviij. to Alcohol 76°
Oj. Dose gtts. X. to 5j.

We have no positive knowledge with regard to
this agent, though it is credited with active proper-
ties. It would be well to test its influence upon the
urinary apparatus, and to increase waste and nutri-
tion.

DIGITALIS PURPUREA.
(Foxglove.)

Prepare a tincture from the recent diyed leaves in
the proportion of Sviij. to Alcohol 76® Oj. Dose,


116 SPECIFIC MEDICATION.

from a fraction of one drop to five drops. — ^ Tinc-
ture of Digitalis, gtts. x. to xx. ; Water, Siv. A tea-
spoonful every one or two hours.

Digitalis may be employed for the general pur-
poses of a sedative, to lessen the frequency of the
pulse, and the temperature, in cases of fever and
inflammation. It is somewhat analogous to Aco-
nite, and exerts the best influence in atonic condi-
tions. For these purposes, however, it must be used
in small doses.

It is a powerful cardiac tonic when used in small
doses, and may be employed in any case of heart
disease where the organ is enfeebled. It not only
gives the necessary stimulation for the present, but
it gives a permanent improvement; doubtless
through an improved nutrition. ^

It e)certs an influence upon the capillary circula-
tion, and may be employed with much certainty to
arrest asthenic hemorrhages. It also influences the
absorption of dropsical deposits, and increases secre-
tion from the kidneys, probably in the same way.

There is no cumulative efiect when Digitalis is
used in small doses.

DIOSCORBA VILLOSA
(Wild Yam.)

An infusion of the recent Dioscorea will un-
doubtedly give the best results. A tincture may be
prepared from the recent root in the proportion of
.5viij. to Alcohol 76° Oj. Dose gtts. x. to Sjj.


DBOSERA ROTUNBIFOLIA. ' 117

The article that has been sold for Dioscorea by
most of our druggists for the past ten years, and
from which the Dioscorein has been prepared, is a
species of smilax. A very good joke on Dioscorein !
but unpleasant to. those who have expected it to
relieve pain in the bowels.

True Dioscorea, when recent, is a specific in
bilious colic, when given in infusion, or even in
tincture. In any case it allays gastro intestinal irri-
tation, and favorably influences the vegetative pro-
cesses. It is a feeble but certain diaphoretic, and
allays irritation of the nervous system.

DROSERA ROTUNDIFOLIA.

(Sundew.)

We employ a tincture of the fresh plant prepared
in Germany, using it in the proportion of : !^ Tinc-
ture of Drosera, gtts. x. to 3o« J Water, Jiv. A tea-
spoonful every three or four hours.

I use the Drosera as a specific in the cough at-
tending and following measles, especially where
there is dryness of the respiratory mucous mem-
branes. An experience of ten years with it, in a
large number of cases, has given me great confidence
in the remedy.

We also use it in cases of whooping cough, espe-
cially where there is dryness of the air-passages,
and much irritation of the nervous system.
Whilst it is not a remedy for all cases of whooping
congh, it is a true specific in those to- which it is


118 SPECIFIC MEDICATION.

adapted.. I have often seen a serious case of the
disease relieved in twenty-four hours, and an entire
arrest of the cough in two weeks.

We also employ it in cases of chronic cough, with
dryness of the air-passages and nervous irritation,
vnth much advantage. It makes little difference
whether it arises from bronchial irritation or inflam-
mation or phthisis, if associated with irritation of
the basilar portions of the brain, and pneumogastric.

EPIG^A REPENS.
(Tbailinq Abbuttts.)

This remedy deserves further and careful investi-
gation. We wish to determine its influence upon
the urinary apparatus, and the intestinal canal.

For this purpose a tincture of the fresh leaves
may be prepared with dilute alcohol.

EPILOBIUM PALUSTRB.

For general use the infusion is the preferable form
for administration ; but we have a tincture prepared
with dilute alcohol, employing pressure.

The Epilobium exerts a specific influence upon
the intestinal mucous membrane^ relieving irritation,
and promoting normal function. Thus, it is em-
ployed in acute diarrhoea and dysentery, and in colic,
the irritation and check the diarrhcea in typhoid
fever, with marked benefit.

It is especially valuable, however, in chronic


BRIQBRON CANADE^SE. * 119

diarrhoea and dysenter}^; sometimes effecting cures
where all other means had failed. Thus, I employed
it extensively in the treatment of the chronic diar-
rhoea during the recent war, and with a success not
to be obtained from other remedies. I do not pre-
tend to account for its action, but its curative influ-
ence is well established.

ERECHTHITES HIERACIFOLIUS.

(FiREWEED.)

Preparation. — A tincture may be prepared from
the recent plant, in the usual proportions, using
alcohol of 76°. Dose from gtts. x. to 5j«

We have here another remedy that requires
study. It influences mucous tissue, especially of
the bowels and lungs, and this will be the direction
of the investigation.

ERIGERON CANADENSE.
(Canada Fleabane.)

We employ the Oil of Erigeron in practice, for
the arrest of hemorrhage. For passive hemorrhage
it is one of the most valuable remedies we have,
and may be relied upon in hemorrhage from any
organ or part. For this purpose the dose will be
from five to ten drops on sugar, as often as may
seem necessary.

The Erigeron influences the kidneys in a manner
similar to Buchu. It may be employed in diabetes
and albuminuria with advantage ; also, in chronic


120 ^PKGIFIG MEDICATION.

inflammation of the kidneys, bladder and urethra.
Latterly it has been recommended for gonorrhoea.

ERYNGIUM AOUATICUM,
(Water Ertngo.)

The Eryngium may be employed in infusion, or
in the form of a tincture of the recent dried root,
Sviij. to proof spirit, Oj. Dose, gtts. x. to gtts. xx.

The Eryngium exerts a specific influence upon
the bladder and urethra, relieving irritation. It is
one of the most certain remedies that can be em-
ployed in dysuria from irritation, and in st>asmodic
stricture; continued, it proves curative in these
cases.

It has been employed for other purposes, and we
find it highly recommended. It undoubtedly de-
serves a thorough investigation.

EUONYMUS ATROPUBPUREUS.

(Wahoo.)

Preparation. — Prepare a tincture from the bark of
the recent root, in the proportion of Sviij. to Alco-
hol 76° Oj. Dose, gtts. x. to 3j.

The Euonymus stimulates the nutritive processes,
and in some cases improves digestion. Usually,
however, it will need to be combined with a pure
bitter, as the hydrastis, to get its full action in this
direction.

It exerts a marked influence in malarial diseases,
and deserves the name of an antiperiodic, though it


EXTPATORIUM. 121

is much feebler than Quinine. It may, however, be
used in these cases with marked advantage, after
the fever has been once broken.

"•* EUPATORIUM AROMATICUM.

(White Snakeroot.)
«

Preparation. — Prepare a tincture from the recent
dried root, in the proportion of Sviij. to Alcohol
76° Oj. Dose, gtts. x. to 3j.

This variety of the Eupatorium exerts a marked
influence upon the brain, relieving irritation and
promoting normal action. It is also diaphoretic,
and probably influences, to a slight degree, all of
the functions governed by the sympathetic. It will
repay careful investigation.

EUPATORIUM TEUCRIFOLIUM.
(Wild Hoarhound.)

Preparation. — Prepare a tincture from the recent
plant, using dilute alcohol. The dose will vary
from one drop to one drachm:

In small doses it stimulates all the functions con-
trolled by the sympathetic nervous system ; im-
proving digestion, blood making, and stimulates
waste and excretion. It may be combined with a
simple bitter tonic, or preparation of iron, qt the
hypophosphites, for its restorative influence, or with
the vegetable alteratives for its other use.

In large doses it is a powerful diaphoretic.
11


122 sPECnno mbdioation.

BUPATORIUM PURPUREUM.
(Queen of the Meadow.)

Preparation. — Prepare a tincture from the recent
root, in the proportion of Sviij. to Alcohol 98° Oj.
Dose, gtts. X. to f58s."

Its principal 4nfluence is upon the kidneys, and it
may be employed whenever an increased volume of
urine is desirable.

It has been mostly employed in the treatment of
dropsy, with reported success.

Its influence upon the urinary organs may doubt-
less be made valuable, but it requires further study.

EUPATORIUM PERPOLIATUM.

(BONESET.)

Preparation. — Prepare a tincture from the recently
dried herb in the proportion of Sviij. to proof spirit
Oj, Dose from gtts. v. to 3j.

The Eupatorium increases functional activity of
the skin, and to a less extent, secretion from the
kidneys. It also influences the circulation, to a
slight extent, and does well combined with the
sedatives.

In quite small doses it stimulates the sympathetic
nervous system, and improves all the vegetative
functions. It is not an active remedy, and too much
must not be expected from it ; yet, in many cases,
it may Well supplant costly foreign drugs.


FBRKUM. 128

EUPHORBIA COROLLATA.— B. IPECACUANHA.
(Bowman's Root— Wild IPBCAaj

Preparation, — Prepare a tincture of the first from
the bark of the root, of the second, from the root,
(dried), Sviij. to Alcohol 76*^ Oj. Dose, gtts. j. to x.

These remedies have not been sufficiently studied;
yet, possessing active properties, they are lil^ly to
prove valuable. The Euphorblk CoroUata exercises
a direct influence upon the mucous surfaces, reliev-
ing irritation, and promoting functional activity.
This is noticed more especially in the digestive
tract. In quite small doses it improves digestion,
both stomachic and intestinal, tends to overcome
constipation and irregularity.

It may be employed with advantage in some
forms of diarrhoea and dysentery, using it in the
place of Ipecac. To arrest inflammatory action in
the intestinal canal, seems to be its specific use.

FEBRUM.

(Iron.)

We employ two preparations of Iron — Metallic
Iron in powder, and the Tincture of Chloride of
Iron. The first is Iron by Hydrogen or Quevenne's ;
a good article may be known by its iron-gray color
and its effervescing with acids, the spurious is black,
and effervesces but slightly. The Tincture of Chlo-
ride of Iron should be ordered of a reliable manu-
facturer. It will be a dear, deep-colored tincture,


124 SPBCIFIC MBDICATIONv

without a trace of yellowness or deposit at the
bottom of the bottle.

We employ Iron as a restorative. It is a compo-
nent part of .the red corpuscles, and experience has
shown that its administration stimulates the forma-
tion of these bodies. In proportion as the red cor-
puscles are increased, blood-making becomes more
active and nutrition is improved. It thus becomes
a very important reHedy in cases of anaemia, with
impaired nutrition.

As a restorative, it is better to administer the
necessary quantity of Iron with the food. Experi-
ment has demonstrated that at other times it is ap-
propriated slowly or not at all. It does not require
a very large amount to accomplish the object, for
Iron exists in small quantity in the body. The dose
of Metallic Iron need never be more than five grains,
often not more than one ; whilst of the Tincture,
the dose will be from five to twenty drops.

In the selection of the preparation I would be
guided by the appearance of the mucous membrane.
If it is dark-red, use the Tincture of Chloride, if
pallid, Metallic Iron.

We also employ Iron as a specific against certain
zymotic poisons. The reader has probably employed
The Tincture of Chloride in erysipelas, and many
regard it as a true specific in the disease, rarely
making any other prescription. I think we may
say, that in all cases of erysipelas presenting the
deep-red discoloration of mucous membranes, with
the same deep color of the local disease, the Tine-


PRASBRA OAROLINBNSIS. 126

my experience with the disease has shown me that
where the mucous membranes are pallid, the coat-
ing of the tongue white and pasty, the Sulphite of
Soda is the best remedy. In these cases Quevenne's
Iron might be tested.

Rademacher claimed that Iron was specific to one
of his three epidemic constitutions. This was charac-
terized by pallor of the skin, moderate heat, with a
small, thin or soft, empty pulse. His description,
BO far as I have seen it in translation, is so meager
that we can hardly determine the condition in
which he valued it so highly, even treating all the
cases of pneumonia in a season with Iron alone.

FRASERA OAROLINBNSIS.
(American Columbo.)

Preparation. — Prepare a tincture from the fresh
root, in the proportion of Sviij. to Alcohol 98P Oj.
Dose, gtts. j. to V.

. This remedy has been but little used, and that
little has been of the dried root as a tonic. The
recent root possesses quite active properties, and is
likely to repay investigation. It is stimulant to the
circulation, and will doubtless exert the same influ-
ence upon all the vegetative functions. Will some
one give it a thorough study and report ?


126 8PSCIFI0 MEBIOATION.

FEAXINUS SAMBUCIPOLIA-E. ACUMINATA.

(Ash.)

Preparation. — Prepare a tincture from the recent
bark, in the proportion of Sviij. to Alcohol 76° Oj.
Dose from gtts. ij, to fSss.

Both the black and white ash deserve study. The
first, for its influence in skin diseases, especially of
an herpetic character, and as a general alterative.
The second, to improve secretion, and for its influ-
ence upon the chylopoietic viscera.

GALIUM APARINE.

(Cleavers.)

Galium is most frequently employed in infusion,
especially for its influence upon the urinary appara-
tus. A tincture may be prepared from the recent
herb by expression, using only sufficient alcohol for
preservation.

The first use of Galium is to relieve irritation of
the urinary apparatus, and increase the amount of
urine. For this purpose it will be found one of our
best remedies. In dysuria and painful micturition,
it will frequently give p;'ompt relief.

It has recently been employed in cancer^ used
locally and internally. A case of hard nodulated
tumor of the tongue, apparently cancerous, is re-
ported in the British Medical Journal, as having
been cured with it. Whether it was cancerous or
not, it suggests a line of experiment which* may
develop an important use of the remedy.


GELSBMINUM 8EMPXRVIBSNS. 127

GAULTHERIA PROCUMBENS.

(WlNTEBQ&EEN.)

Preparation. — Prepare a tincture from the fresh
plant, in the proportion of Sviij. to Alcohol 98*^ Oj.
Dose from gtts. ij. to gtts. x.

In this form and in these doses, the Gaultheria
^xerts a special influence upon the bladder, prostate
and urethra, allaying irritation and inflammation.
It may also be employed in dysuria. Probably one
of its most important uses is, as an anaphrodisiac,
exerting a direct and quite certain influence upon
the reproductive organs of both male and female.
For this purposs it is employed iti some cases of
spermatorrhoea. It will not do, however, to mis-
take the case, afld use it where the venereal func-
tion is already impaired.

GELSEMINUM SEMPERVIRENS.

(Yellow Jessamine.)

The commercial tincture has been so variable in
strength that much harm has resulted from its use.
In some cases the harm has been direct from over
doses, in others, indirect from depending upon a
feeble or worthless remedy. Before the war, we
had a very crude tincture prepared from the green
root, with proof spirits (whisky?), containing about
as much of the medicinal properties as could be held
by such spirtt. During the war, there being diffi-
culty in obtaining a supply of the root, and greater


128 SPBCIFIC MEDICATION.

difficulty in having it shipped green, the tincture in
the market gradually deteriorated until it was
worthless. Even yet it has not regained its medici-
nal properties with many druggers.

We have thought that a good tincture could only
be made from the fresh root. But some who have
employed the dried root (not old), claim that it
makes fully as reliable a tincture. Dr. Locke, of
Newport, prepares his tincture from the dried root,
and claims that it is more reliable than any he can buy.

It is not worth while to give a formula for the
preparation of a tincture, as it will be purchased
by a great majority of our readers. That which
bears the label .of "Specific Medicine" will be
found very strong. Dose from gtts. j. to gtts. vj.

Gelseminum exerts a specific influence upon the
brain, and to a less extent upon the spinal center
and sympathetic. It relieves irritation and determi-
nation of blood, and the disordered innervation that
flows from it. Probably there is no remedy in the
Materia Medica that is more direct and certain in
its action. Given, a case of inntation and determi-
nation of blood to the brain, marked by flushed
face, bright eyes, contracted pupils, restlessness and
This being a common complication in diseases of
childhood, it is especially the child's remedy.

Acting in this direction, it lessens the frequency
of the heart's action, and removes obstruction to
the free flow of blood — a sedative. It also increases
secretion in the same way.


GBNTIANA LXTTEA. 129

t do not think the Q-elseminum exerts any impor-
tant influence, other than through this action upon
the nervous system. But, as will be observed, this
is a very important action.

It is contra-indicated where the circulation is
feeble, and there is tendency to congestion. Espe-
cially if there is a feebl| circulation in the nerve
centers. AVe never give it if the eyes are dull,
pupils dilated, and the countenance expressionless.
In such cases, it may prove fatal in quite moderate
doses. A number of these cases are on record,
three or four in which death was produced by as
small a dose as gtts. xxx. of a common tincture.

It has one other specific action, which is. worthy
of mention. It is the remedy in dysuria from stric-
ture, and will rarely fail in enabling the patient to
pass urine in from four to eight hours.

GENTIANA LUTBA.
(Gentian.)

The Gentian is an excellent stomachic bitter, and
resembles, in its medicinal action, our Hydrastis.
I do not think, however, it has the same kindlyin-
fluence in irritable conditions of the stomach.

A very fine preparation may be made by taking
five parts of Gentian, and one part of Podophyl-
lum ; and making a tincture by percolation, using
dilute Alcohol. It is one of the most efficient
remedies I have ever used in atony of the stomach
and bowels, with feeble or slow digestion.


•


180 SPSCIFIO MEDICATION.

V

aBRANIUM MACULATUML
'. (Cbanesbill.)

The Geranium is an astringent from the presence
of Tannic and Gallic Acids in large quantity ; and
hence will possess the medicinal properties of these.
It is claimed, however, to possess other properties,
acting more kindly, an# giving tone to mucous
membranes. Whilst I believe the remedy has been
over-rated, I am confident that experiment will de-
velop some special use.

It may be employed in infusion with good results,
especially when a topical action on the stomach and
bowels is wanted, or in chronic cases when we
desire the action of Gallic Acid. For general use I
would suggest a tincture by percolation, using
Alcohol of 30®. The Geranin, though not entirely
worthless, is a feeble and costly medicine.

GERARDIA PBDICULARIA.

Will some of our Southern physicians give this
remedy a trial and report. For experiment, make
a tincture by percolation, Sviij. to the Oj., using
dilute Alcohol. Test it as a sedative, a diaphoretic,
and an antiseptic.

GILLENIA TRIFOLIATA-G. STIPULACEA.

(Indian Physic.)

Preparation. — ^Prepare a tincture from the root, in
the proportion of Sviij. to proof spirit, Oj. Dose
from gtts. V, to 23.


0LToaBira» 181

These indigenoiifi remedies possess marked me-
dicinal properties, yet they have been so little nsed
of late years that most physicians know nothing
about them.

They deserve careful study. First, to determine
their relation to Ipecac, and whether they will re-
place it in practice. The direction of the experi-
ments may be seen by reference to this agent. We
also wish to determine their influence upon the
functions of digestion and secretion.

GLYCERINE.

Glycerine is principally employed in medicine for
its topical action. It is slightly stimulant to both
skin and mucous membrane, and shields the skin
from the action of the air. In many cases of simple
cutaneous irritation, it will prove curative alone.
In others, it will prove a good vehicle for the appli-
cation of other remedies. In some cases of dys-
pepsia. Glycerine is a true remedy, allaying irrita-
tion, and giving gentle stimulation.

Glycerine is an admirable solvent, and may be
used as a basis for many preparations, both for local
use, and internal administration.

Notwithstanding the opposition, I still prefer the
che?ip Glycerine, manufactured in this city, to the
higher priced Eastern and Foreign article. An ex-
tended use of Gordon's No. 1 Perfumer's Glycerine,
has proved to me that it is the most bland of any
article in the market. The slight odor is not as


182 SPECIFIC MBDICATIOH.

objectiotiable as the irritant properties developed
by repeated distillation.

GNAPHALIUM POLYCEPHALUM.
(White Balsam.)

Preparation. — Prepare a tincture from the leaves,
using Alcohol of 30°. Dose gtts. v« to Sss.

This agent has been but little used, yet we think
it worthy of investigation. The line of experiment
will be, to determine its influence upon the urinary
and reproductive organs — in acute and chronic ulce-
rations — and its action on the digestive apparatus.

GOSSYPIDM HERBACEUM.

(Cotton.)

Some years since the cotton-root was in consider-
able demand as an abortive. It was claimed that
the Negro women of the South made common use
of it, and that it was so certain and safe that they
could rid themselves of the prbduct of conception
whenever they wished, and without impairment of
health. It was singular what a demand sprung up
for cotton-root bark ; but fortunately for the un-
born it had no influence on the gravid uterus.

Still the reports from the South seemed well
authenticated, that, at least in some cases, it was
abortive, and was a very certain emmenagogue, and
a stimulant diuretic. It is only another example of
a fact I have insisted on, that many plants possess-
ing medicinal properties when fresh, lose them when


6TMN0GLADU8 CANADWSIB. 188

driedy and especially when gathered at the wrong
season and kept in stock.

If some of our manufacturers will get the bark
of the cotton-root before the boll opens, and will
prepare a tincture from it whilst fresh, we will
probably find it possessing marked medicinal prop-
erties.

aUAIACUM OFFICINALE.

We prepare a tincture by percolation from the
wood, in the proportion of Sviij. to Alcohol 76° Oj.
Dose, from ten to thirty drops.

The tincture thus prepared may be occasionally
used with advantage in the latter stages of acute,
and in chronic rheumatism. It may also be asso-
ciated with the vegetable alteratives in the treat-
ment of some chronic diseases, where stimulation
of the skin is required. Occasionally it will prove
useful in functional diseases of the uterine organs,
especially in amenorrhcBa.

GYMNOCLADUS CANADENSIS.
(American Coffee Tree.)

This agent has been but little used in medicine,
yet if we are to judge from its common use as a^y
poisoriy it possesses active properties that may be
made available. For experiment, a tincture may be
made of. the bark, beans, or pulp of the seed-pod ;
the last being regarded as the most active.

Dr. Herring concluded from his experiments that
it might be given with benefit in cases of " couji^b


184 SPBOIFIG MBDIGATION.

accompanied or followed by tonsilitis ; in erysipelas
of the face; in scarlet fever ; in so-called hives; in
typhoid fever ; remittent or intermittent epidemic
fever, with a typhoid character, etc."

The dose would be small. Of a tincture of Siv.
of the pulp to the Oj. ; gtts. x. to Water, Siv. ; a
teaspoonful every three hours would be suflBlcient.

HAMAMELIS VIRGINICA.
(Witch-Hazel.)

I prefer a distilled extract of the fresh leaves to
any other preparation. That known to the trade
as " Pond's Extract '' is employed by most physi-
cians who make use of the remedy. The ordinary
fluid extract may be used as a topical application,
as a gargle for the throat, and for the general pur-
poses of an astringent.

Where the Witch Hazel can be readily obtained,
I would advise that the leaves be gathered in June
or July, and if no apparatus for distilling is at hand,
that they be packed in a percolator, and a tincture
prepared with a very weak spirit, say 30°.

I might say in this connection, that when. I specify
the strength of Alcohol by degrees, I ha,ve no refer-
ence to an imaginary standard of proof, but the
figures represent the number of parts in one hundred.

The Hamamelis has a specific action upon the
venous system, giving strength to it, and facilitating
the passage of venous blood. It may, therefore, be
employed with advantage in any case where a part


HAMAMBLIS YlROtVnCA. 186

is enfeebled, and there is a sluggish circulation.
Thus we use it in cases of catarrh and ozoena ;
chronic pharyngitis, disease of the tonsils, pillars
of the fauces, vellum and uvula, and in chronic
laryngitis. The indications for its employment are,
thickening of mucous membranes, with enfeebled
circulation, and increased secretion, either mucous
or muco-purulent.

It is especially a valuable remedy in the treatment
of hemorrhoids, sometimes effecting a cure in old
JBind very stubborn cases without the use of other
remedies. Usually, however, I use the solution of
the Persulphate of Iron as a local application.

It is also a very useful remedy in the treatment
of diseases of the uterus and vagina. Given, a case
with the conditions named, thickening, with relaxa-
tion, enfeebled circulation, and increased mucous,
or muco-purulent secretion, and its action is very
positive.

- We employ it also in the treatment of various
lesions of the lower extremities, both as a local ap-
plication and an internal remedy, and many timea
with excellent results.

It is an excellent dressing for erysipelas, and for
burns, giving that slight stimulation that seems to
be required in these cases. %

I i^ed not name other cases, as the indications
for its use first given, will suggest its application.
I value the remedy very highly, and feel confident
that a trial in the cases named will bring it into
general use.


186 SPBOIFIC MBBICATIOir.

HEDEOMA PULEGIOIBES.

(Pbnnyeoyal.)

ThiB is a much neglected article, probably be-
cause it is so common. I regard it as one of the
mo^t valuable stimulant diaphoretics ; very kindly
received by the stomach, and quite certain in its
action. As a remedy for colds it will prove very
useful. To two ounces of the tincture add gtts. x.
of Tincture of Veratrum, or 5ss. of Tincture of
Ipecac, and give it in teaspoonful doses every one
or two hours.

It is an admirable remedy for amenorrhoea from
cold ; the safest and most certain we have, I think.
It may be given in doses of a teaspoonful every
hour or two hours, or two or three times in the
evening, with the hot foot bath.

Prepare your own tincture in this way : In July,
gather a sufficient quantity of the herb, stem it, and
at once pack the leaves in a percolator. Then add
dilute Alcohol, or even common whisky, in the pro-
portion of Oj. to each Sviij. Let it stand twenty-
four hours, and then draw oft', putting on water
until the tincture measures Oj. to each Sviy.

HELIANTHEMUM CANADENSE.
(Rock Rose.)

Preparation. — We prepare a tincture from the
plant, Sviij. to Oj. with Alcohol of 30°. Or we may
prepare a decoction, using pressure, and add suffi-
cient Alcohol to preserve it. Dose, gtts. x. to 3j.


/


HELONIAS BIOICA^ 187


It is a valuable remedy in the treatment of scro-
fula and secondary syphilis ; exerting a direct influ-
ence upon the processes of waste and excretion. It
is to be preferred to some alteratives, because it also
facilitates digestion and blood-making. Will some
of our practitioners test it thoroughly and report ?

HELLEBORUS NIGER.
(Black Hellebore.)

Preparation, — A tincture is prepared in the usual
way, using Alcohol of 76°. Dose gtts. ss. to gtts. x.

The black Hellebore is but little used, as in the
dose recommended in the books it is an irritant
poison. In small doses it is a stimulant to the spinal
and sympathetic nervous systems, and it is probable
that for this purpose it may be employed advan-
tageously. I have used it with advantage in ster-
ility of the female, and ^o increase virility in the
male. ,

HELONIAS DIOICA.
(Unicorn Root.

True Helonias undoubtedly exerts a marked in-
fluence upon the reproductive organs of the female,
but as it is so frequently suppRed from the Aletris,
but little dependence can be placed upon it.

It exerts the general influence of a tonic, and a
special tonic action upon the uterine and urinary
organs. It is possible that if we can obtain a reli-
able preparation, it will be found superior to other
remedies for these purposes. One of the special in-
12


188 SPBGIHC MEDICATION.

dications for its use is in the mental depression and
irritability that attends many of these affections. I
am of j^he impression that, in many cases, the relief
of this cerebral disturbance is its most important
action.

HEPATICA AMERICANA.

(LiVERLBAP).

Preparation. — Prepare a tincture from the fresh
leaves, using proof spiriti Dose gtts. v. to 3s8«

The Hepatica exerts a slightly stimulant and
tonic influence upon the stomach and small intes-
tines, relieving irritation and promoting functional
activity. Thus it may be employed in atonic condi-
tions of these and associate viscera with advantage.
Culpepper wrote, " It is a singular good herb for
all diseases of the liver, both to cool and cleanse it,
and is serviceable in yellow jaundice. It is a sin-
gular remedy to stay the spreading of tetters, ring-
worms, and other fretting and running sores."

It exerts an influence upon all mucous surfaces.
Probably its best action is upon the bronchial
mucous membrane, when enfeebled from irritation
or inflammation, attended with profuse secretion.
In thdse cases it may sometimes be given with great

benefit. x

HERACLEUM LANATUM.

♦

(Masterwort.)

This remedy has been but little used, but it might
repay careful study. It has been employed as an
antispasmodic, and we would judge that it was a


HYDRASTIS CANADENSIS. 189

spinal stimulant. For experiment a tincture should
be prepared from the green root.

The Wild Parsnip (Pastinaca Sativa) might also
be tested. In poisonous doses, it produces great ex-
citation of the nervous system, sometimes with con-
vulsions, followed by coma and difficult respiration.
This would suggest its use as a cerebro-spinal stim-
ulant. Of course it would be used in smaU doses.

HYDRANGEA ARBORESCENS.
(Seven Barks.)

Preparation. — Prepare a tincture from the fresh
or recently dried root, Sviij. to the Oj., using Alco-
hol of 76°. Dose, gtts. x. to 3ss.

This is a valuable remedy in diseases of the uri-
nary apparatus. It gives tone to the kidneys, im-
proving their functional activity, and thus tends to
arrest the formation of urinary deposits and calculi.
We do not believe, as Dr. J. W. Butler stated, that
it will cure stone in the bladder, though it may
prove prophylactic. It relieves irritation of the
bladder and urethra, and hence proves serviceable
in cases of gravel. It also exerts an influence upon
the respiratory mucous tract, relieving bronchial
irritation.

HYDRASTIS CANADENSIS.
Golden Seal.)

I will give the Hydrastis a brief notice, as it is in
such general use for all the purposes of a tonic, that
my readers know as much about it as I do. It im-


140 SPBCIFIC MEDICATION.

proves the appetite and facilitates digestion ; bat
beyond this it relieves gastro-intestinal irritation.

Its topical action, wherever applied, is that of a
tonic, strengthening the circulation and nutrition.
It is in common use for these purposes in diseases
of the skin, diseases . of the eyes, and diseases of
mucous surfaces.

As a stomachic and tonic, I like the action of the
finely powdered root, as well as the more costly
preparations. Indeed, in most cases, I would prefer
this, in equal quantity, to the Hydrastine.

A tincture made with Alcohol of 30® will be
found a good preparation. It is more convenient
for carrying, and added to water, gives a pleasant
stomachic. A very good, prescription would be:
IJj Tincture of Hydrastis, 5ij.; Tincture of Nux
Vomica, gtts. xx. ; Water, 5iv. A teaapoonful every
three or four hours.

The Sulphate of Hydrastia is (when properly made)
soluble in water in the proportion of four grains to
the ounce. It makes a valuable colly rium in chronic
conjunctivitis, or the latter stages of the acute. It
is also an admirable injection in the second stages
of gonorrhoea, and in gleet.

HYOSCYAMUS NIGES.
(Henbane.)

Preparation. — We prepare a tincture from the re-
cent dried leaves in the proportion of Sviij. to Alco-
hol 76® Oj. Dose from gtts. ss. to gtts. v.


HTOSCYAMUS NIQBR. 141

•

In medicinal doses, the Hyoscyamus is a stimulant
to the cerebro-spinal centers, and may be employed
whenever such action is desirable. It is from this
that it has its sleep-producing properties, as well as
the relief of pain. With some persons the tolerance
for Hyosciamus is very great, and even drachm
doses exert this s£imulant influence.

It exerts a similar influence upon the vegetative
system, in a slight degree favoring every process
that is performed under its influence. It is not only
stimulant, but it allays irritation. Thus, in some
cases, when a frequent pulse is dependent upon irri-
tation and debility of the cardiac nerves, it exerts
the influence of the special sedatives. It never
arrests secretion, but, as before remarked, it favors
it. Thus small doses of Podophyllin, combined
with Hyoscyamus, is not only less irritant, but more
effectual. So we find in irritable states of the
digestive apparatus, the addition of a small portion
of Hyoscyamus to the bitter tonics improves their
action.

Because Hyoscyamus is poisonous, it is no reason
why it should be an active remedy. Poisoning and
curing are too different things. Whilst it will be
found a valuable curative agent, and quite direct in
its action, its influence is rather feeble than other-
wise, and too much must not be expected from it.


142 SPBCmC MBDIGATION.

INULA HELENIUM.
(Elecampane.)

Preparation, — Prepare a tincture from the fresh
root, in the proportion of Sviij. to Alcohol 50*^ Oj.

Elecampane is a feeble stimulant and tonic, but
may sometimes be used for these properties with
advantage. It not only exerts this influence upon
the digestive tract, but also upon the skin, and is
sometimes beneficial in chronic cutaneous diseases.

Its principal use, however, is in bronchial disease,
with increased secretion. It may be used also in
combination with Stillingia. Its action is slow, and
it needs to be continued for some time to experience
its benefits.

IODINE.

Iodine, in all its forms, increases retrograde meta-
morphosis, and, in some degree, stimulates excre-
tion. We have no reason to believe that it stimu-
lates blood-making or nutrition, other than as it
facilitates the removal of worn-out tissues.

In quite small doses Iodine stimulates the sexual
organs, and increltses their power. For this pur-
pose we may use it in the proportion of: ]^ Tinc-
ture of Iodine, gtts. xx. ; Simple Syrup, Siv. ; a
teaspoonful four times a day.

Iodide of Potassium is doubtless its most active
form as a resolvent and a stimulant of waste. There
is great difference of opinion with regard to the
proper dose ; some think it best in doses of one to


P^V-XWPV^


lODINB.


US


five grains ; others in doses of grs. xx. to xl. three
or four times a day. Of course our choice of dose
will depend upon the strength of the patient, the
character of the disease, and the rapidity of action
desired. As a remedy, it is greatly over-estimated.

The Iodide of Sodium ha.B been but little used and
is obtained with difficulty in the market. I believe
that it is a better preparation than Iodide of Potas-
sium, especially where there is asthenia and a feeble
circulation. The Iodide of Sodium may be em-
ployed with especial advantage in those cases that
present a pallid tongue and mucous membranes.

The Iodide of Ammonium should be selected when
Stimulation of the nervous system is desirable.
Like the others, it increases waste, but it also im-
proves nutrition, and does not impair digestion.
In secondary syphilis of an asthenic type, with ner-
vous symptoms, this salt will be found an impor-
tant remedy.

I would call especial attention to its action in
certain forms oi chronic headache, depending upon
an enfeebled circulation and mal-nutrition. In
some of these cases it gives prompt relief, and eflfects
a permanent cure.

We prepare an Iodide of Ammonium for local
use as follows : "B^ Tincture of Iodine (strong),
Aqua Ammonia (strong), aa., put in a bottle aiid
allow it to stand until colorless. Its influence is
much better than the Tincture of Iodine alone ; it
is less irritant and does not discolor the skin. It is
a favorite preparation with me in the treatment of


144 SPKCIFIC MBDICATION.

boils, local inflammatioiiB, buboes, etc., in the early
stage, when we may expect resolution.

Iodide of Starch is an excellent preparation, afford
ing the best means of giving Iodine without gastric
irritation. It may be readily prepared in the office
as follows : Triturate twenty-four grains of Iodine
with a little water in a mortar, adding gradually an
ounce of finely powdered starch, continuing the
trituration until it assumes a uniform blue color.
It is then dried with gentle heat, and kept in a well
stopped bottle. The dose will vary from five grains
to a teaspoonful, given in gruel.

IPECACUANHA.

(Ipecac.)

Preparation. — Prepare a tincture from the root (a
good article) Sviij. to Alcohol 76° Oj. Dose from
the fraction of a drop to gtts. v.

Ipecacuanha exerts a specific influence upon
mucous membranes, relieving irritation, and arrest-
ing the inflammatory process. It also stimulates
a better circulation and innervation, increases nutri-
tion, and thus favors functional activity.

We employ it as a specific in most cases of cholera
infantum. It allays irritation of the stomach, grad-
ually checks the frequency of the discharges from
the bowels, and restores tone and functional activity.
In a large experience in the treatment of this dis-
ease, we have found nothing to equal it. It is usu-


IPOM^A JALAPA. ]145

Tincture oIF Ipecac, gtts. v. to gtts. xxx. ; Water,
Siv. A teaspoonful every hour.

We employ it with very marked advantage in the
treatment of infantile pneumonia, associated with
Aconite and Veratrum. In some cases, the pre-
scription of Ipecac alone will be sufficient to arrest
the disease in two or three days, especially if given
in the first stages. It is also employed with excel-
lent results in diseases of the respiratory apparatus
of the adult.

If there is little constitutional disturbance. Ipecac
is used alone ; if there is some hardness and in-
creased frequency of the pulse, it is given in combi-
nation with Aconite.

We employ it in Dysentery, especially in the
sporadic form from cold. The simple prescription
of Ipecac is frequently successful, but with much
febrile action it is associated with a sedative.

In small doses we employ it as a stimulant to the
entire digestive tract, associating it with the. bitter
tonics, or the restoratives. For this purpose, it will
prove very valuable, especially where there is some
gastro-intestinal irritation.

IPOM^A JALAP A.
(Jalap.)

So far as I know, this remedy has only been em-
ployed as a cathartic. It would be well to test it in
doses so small that no cathartic action would follow ;
some desirable property might be developed.
13


146 SPECIFIC MEDICATION.

IRIS VERSICOLOR.
(Blub Flag)


" among the most valuable of our medicinal plants,"
" termed the mercury of Eclectic practice/' and yet
1 am safe in saying that there has not been a good
article in the market for a dozen years. The dried
root of the drug trade possesses no more medicinal
property than sawdust, and preparations from it,
whether in the form of fluid extract or Irisinj are
an imposition.

We would prepare a tincture from the fresh root,
using Alcohol of 76°. There are two varieties of
it, and that should be selected which presents a
bluish mottled color on incision.

When prepared as above, the Iris is one of our
best remedies. It is directly stimulant to waste and
excretion, and also influences the lymphatic system.
It may, therefore, be employed in all diseases in
which there is bad blood, and imperfect nutrition.
I regard it as one of our most certain remedies in
the treatment of secondary syphilis.

It exerts a specific influence in cases of enlarge-
ment of the thyroid gland, and has eflfected cures
in very severe cases. Hei'e, as in other cases, we
employ it uncombined, giving it internally, and
using it as a local application. The dose of the
tincture of Iris will vary from five drops to 5).


JUGLANS CINBREA. 147

JBFFBRSONIA DIPHYLLA.

(TWINLBAP.)

Preparation, — ^Prepare a tincture from the recent
root, Sviij. to Alcohol 76° Oj. Dose from gtt. j. to

gttS. XX.

The Jefiersonia is a stimulant to mucous mem-
branes, increasing their circulation, and checking
profuse secretion. It may be employed in any case
where these influences are desirable, and will give
satisfaction. It exerts a feebly stimulant influence
upon the skin, sufficient, however, to make it useful
in chronic skin diseases. It is also claimed to be
diuretic and anti-rheumatic. The remedy requires
study, and may develop valuable properties.

JUGLANS CINEKEA.
(Butternut,)

Preparation. — Prepare a tincture from the fresh
inner bark, in the proportion of Sviij. to Alcohol

76° Oj. Dose from a fraction of a drop 4,0 five

drops.

In minute doses, the Juglans exerts a marked in-
fluence upon the skin, and may be employed iu
either acute or chronic skin disease. Its influence
in thisidirection requires study.

It also allays irritation of mucous membranes,
and promotes their normal function. In some cases
of intestinal dyspepsia, it will be found to give
much better results than the bitter tonics.


148 SPECIFIC MSDICATIOK.

A valuable laxative may be formed by making a
watery extract of the Juglans, adding some aromatic
to render it pleasant. I have a distinct recollection
of the use of Butternut extract in the olden time
to cure ague. It was given in large doses, and the
catharsis would last for days, its influence being so
constant and powerful that the patient would not
have inclination or time to shake. In small doses,
it leaves the bowels in a soluble condition, and is
one of the few cathartics that may be employed to
overcome obstinate constipation.

JUNIPERUS SABINA.

(Savin.)

Preparation. — Prepare a tincture from the Savin,
in the proportion of Sviij.to Alcohol 76° Qj. Dose
from gtt. j. to gtts. V.

Thus prepared, the Savin is a stimulant. It may
be employed in menorrhagia, and in atonic leucor-
rhcBa, with advantage. It may also be used as a
stimulant in vesical catarrh, and in diseases of the
urethra. In some cases of amenorrhoea it may be
employed as a stimulant, but never in those cases
presenting excitement of the circulation.

KALMIA LATIFOLIA.
(Sheep Laurel.)

Preparation, — Prepare a tincture from the recent
leaves, in the proportion of Sviij. to Alcohol 76° Oj.
Dose from a fraction of a drop to five drops.


LAURUS SASSAPRA8. 149

This is a favorite remedy of Prof. "King, and he
remedy in primary or secondary syphilis, and will
likewise be found invaluable in febrile and inflam-
matory diseases, and hypertrophy of the heart,
allaying all febrile and inflammatory action, and les-
sening the action of the heart. In active hemor-
rhages, diarrhoea, and dysentery, it has been em-
ployed with excellent eflfect. I have extensively
used this ageut, and regard i\ as one of the most
efficient agents in syphilis; and have, likewise,
found it very valuable in inflammatory fevers, jaun-
dice, and ophthalmia, neucalgia and inflammation."

I have employed it in secondary syphilis and
atonic chronic inflammations with marked advan-
tage, but have not used it for other purposes. Will
some of our readers test it in the treatment of
fever and inflammation to determine its analogy to
the sedatives ?

LAUEUS SASSAFRAS.
(Sassafras.)

A very good preparation pf the . Sassafras for
office use, is a tincture of the bark of the root by
percolation, using dilute alcohol or whisky. It
forms a pleasant vehicle for many remedies, when
we desire the gently stimulant and astringent action
of the remedy. Tincture of Podophyllum added
to it, in the proportion of 5ij. to Siv., in teaspoonful
doses four times a day, forms an admirable altera-
tive.


160 8PBCIFIC MBDICATIOH.

In the treatment of secondary syphilis, especially
when manifesting itself in disease of the skin^.the
infusion will be foand preferable. In this case I
would direct an infusion of Sassafras with a small
portion of Podophyllum, Sss. of the first, grs. x. of
the second, to the pint of water, three times a day.
It may be associated with the vapor bath, spMt-
vapor bath, or sulphur bath in stubborn cases.

LAKIX AMERICANA.

The American Larch deserves study, not in com-
bination, as it has been employed, but singly, to de-
termine its real medicinal va^jie. For this purpose a
tincture may be prepared from the recent bark, in
the proportion of Sviij. to Alcohol, 80° Oj. It has
been employed in combination for a large number
of diseases, but its influence upon mucous mem-
branes and upon the skin, is probably most definite.

LAVANDULA VERA.
(Lavender.)

Lavender is the child's stimulant, and nothing, so
far as I am aware, exercises so kindly an influence
upon the digestive apparatus aud the nervous sys-
tem. A tincture may be formed of Oil of Lavender,
gij.; Dilute Alcohol, Oj. But the Compound Spirit
will probably answer the needs of most physicians.
I would like to test a tincture of the fresh he4>, and
if any of our readers are so located as to grow it.


LBPTANDRA VIBGINIGA. 161

and prepare such tincture, we will beobliged if they
will report.

LEONURUS CAEDIACA.
(Motherwort.)

Prepare a tincture from the fresh root^ with dilute
Alcohol in the usual proportions. The line of ex-
periment will be to determine its influence upon
the reproductive organs, and upon the nervous sys-
tem. The dose may vary from five drops to 5jv

LEPTANDEA VIEGINICA.
(Black Eoot.)

For general use prepare a tincture of the Leptan-
dra, Sviij. to Oj., using Alcohol of 50°. For some
purposes the infusion would be preferable, but is so
nauseous that most persons object to it. The dose
of the tincture as above will vary from gtts. ij. to

gttS. XX.

The Leptandra exerts a gentle stimulant influence
upon the entire intestinal tract, and its associate
viscera, and in medicinal doses strengthens func-
tional activity. Its action in this direction is so per-
sistent that it might be called a gastro-intestinal
tonic. There are some functions not well under-
"^tood, as of the liver and spleen, and it would not
much improve our knowledge to say that it acted
upon these. But it exerts a marked influence in
those diseases in which there is enfeebled portal
circulation, and tendency to stasis of blood. Thus


152 SPBCIFIG MSBIOATION.

in some cases of typhoid fever occurring in mala-
rial localities the Leptaiidra has proven a very valu-
able medicine.

We do not believe there is any remedy that acts
upon the liver, according to the old idea of medicine.
It has been conclusively proven that preparations
of Mercury do not, and that Podophyllin does not ;
and it is probable that we v^ill have to give up the
idea bf cholagogues entirely. There is no doubt in
my mind, however, that Leptandra does influence
the function of the liver ; not always to increase
secretion of bile, but rather to bring the organ back
to normal functional activity, whatever may have
been the deviation.

Associated with the milder bitter tonics the Lep-
tandra improves the digestive function, and stimu-
lates normal excretory action from the bowels.
This latter influence sometimes makes it a valuable
adjunct to those remedies called alterative.

It lias been employed in the treatment of inter-
mittent fever with excellent results. Dr. Rolph
writes, that "for many years my father's family
employed it exclusively, and though living in a
malarial region they were entirely exempt from
ague. They used a tincture of the recent root, tak-
ing it before each meal." Quite a number of my
acquaintances employ it after the chill has been
broken with Quinine, and claim that- its influence in
preventing a recurrence is more decided than any
other remedy.


LIQUIDAMBAR 8TYRACIFLUA. 158

LEPTANDRIN.

The best Leptandrin of the market is a dried alco-
holic extract, the strongest is obtained by adding a
portion of Podophyllum before tincturing. The
resin is nearly worthless. The dried extract proves
a very good remedy in many cases, and may be used
for the same purposes as named for the tincture or
infusion.

LIATRIS SPICATA.
(Button Snakeroot.)

Preparation. — Prepare a tincture from the recent
root, Sviij. to Alcohol 76° Oj. Dqse from gtts. v.

to 5^«

.The Liatris is gently tonic, and stimulates secre-
tion from all the emunctoi'ies. Hence it has been
added to various alterative combinations, and with
some practitioners is very highly esteemed. It acts
more directly upon the urinary apparatus, and prob-
ably upon the reproductive apparatus of both male
and female.

LIQUIDAMBAR STYRACIFLUA.
(Sweet Gum.)

Some years since we had sweet gum, the exudation
from this tree, recommended for the cure of asthma,
and a number of cases from the South were given
as proof. But experiments in the Northern States
were not favorable. I judge, however, from some
reports of Southern physicians, that the recent bark


154 SPECIFIC MEDICATION.

contains valuable medicinal properties, as does the
fresh exudation. For experiment I would suggest
the preparation of a tincture from the fresh bark,
using Alcohol of 76°. Its influence is probably
most marked on mucous membranes, and probably
it influences innervation from the pneumogastric
and from the spinal cord.

LIBIODENDRON TULIPIFERA.
(Yellow Poplae.)

Preparation. — Prepare a tincture from the fresh
root bark of the Yelloiv Poplar ^ using dilute Alcohol.
Dose from gtts. v. to 5j.

The great abundance and wide distribution of
these trees, and the ease with AvhicVh it may be ob-
tained and prepared, and the really valuable char-
acter of the remedy, should bring it into general
use. It is stimulant and tonic to the digestive ap-
paratus, improving digestion and blood making.
It also exerts an influence upon the nervous system,
strengthening innervation arid relieving those symp-
toms called nervous.

LOBELIA INFLATA.
(Lobelia.)

Preparation. — Prepare a tincture from the ground
seed, Sviij. to Alcohol 98° Oj. Dose, from the frac-
tion of a drop to ten drops.

The common use of Lobelia as an emetic is so
well known that little need be said about it. In


LOBELIA INFLATA. 155

the form of the Compound Powder of Lobelia, or
the Acetous Emetic Tincture of the Dispensatory,
it gives us our most valued emetic when properly
used. To obtaiu the curative eftects of a lobelia
emetic, the remedy should be given in small quanti-
tities frequently repeated, as it can be absorbed
from the stomach, so that emesis when it does occur
shall be from the general influence of the remedy
in the blood, and not from its local irritant influence
upon the stomach. Many physicians fail to obtain
the benefit they have reason to expect because of
its improper administration ; it is not absorbed, but
simply irritates the stomach.

Lobelia as prepared above is one of the most
powerful vital stimulants in the Materia Medica.
It strengthens the circulation, improves innervation,
and by its influence upon the sympathetic nervous
system gives increased activity of all the vegetative
functions. These influences come from minute
this proportion : 1^ Tincture of Lobelia, gtts. x. to
XX. ; Water, giv.. A teaspoonful every one or two
hours.

In some cases where there is necessity for a
speedy action, as in cases of angina pectoris or neu-
ralgia of the heart, I give one or two full doses of
tvventy drops.

This preparation of Lobelia is speciflc in difficult
labor from rigid os, vagina, or perineum. It also
stimulates the contractile function of the uterus,
and thus strengthens the pains. This use of Lobelia


A I


166 SPBCIFIO MBDIOATION.

will be greatly prized when known. In tardy or
difficult labor add 3j. of the tincture to giv. of water,
and give a teaspoonf ul every fifteen minutes until
slight nausea is produced, then in smaller quantities.
In rigid os or perineum, I frequently employ it in
the same way, and with excellent results, but in
other cases give it in larger doses until nausea is in-
duced.

Lobelia is a sedative, occupying a place between
Veratrum and Aconite. I would be glad if each
reader would put the tincture of the seed in his
pocket case and employ it in fevers and inflamma-
tions in the same doses in which he uses Veratrum.
I think it will prove very valuable, especially where
there is necessity for stimulation.

LYCOPUS VIRGINICUS.
(Bugle Weed.)

Preparation. — Prepare a tincture from the fresh
plant gathered in July and August at the time of
flowering, using Sviij. to Alcohol 76^ Oj.

The tincture of Lycopus prepared as above, will
be found a very valuable remedy, and will take
place with Veratrum and Aconite. It is a very cer-
tain sedative, where increased frequency of pulse is
dependent upon want of power. For this purpose
we employ it in all fonns of chronic disease with
frequent pulse, and in the advanced stages of acute
disease where there is great debility. No remedy is
more certain in its action in these cases ; and we


MAGNESU, 8ULPHXTB OF 157

will find that as the pulse is reduced in frequency^ it
is increased in strength, and there is a more regular
and uniform circulation of blood.

The remedy evidently acts upon the sympathetic
system of nerves, and we not only have an improve-
ment in the circulation, but every vegetative func-
tion feels its influence. Thus it improves the appe-
tite and blood-making, nutrition and secretion.

It has been employed more extensiv^ in the
treatment of hemoptysis than in any other disease.
In these cases its action is slow, but very certain,
and its influence seems to come from its sedative
action — in this it resembles Digitalis. Employed in
phthisis, we find it relieving the cough, checking
night sweats and diarrhoea, lessening the frequency
of the pulse, improving the appetite and giving
better digestion. We observe the same influence
from the protracted use of Veratrum in these -cases,
evidencing the relationship between the remedies.

Those who live where the Bugle weed can be
gathered, should not neglect the opportunity of
procuring the fresh plant and preparing a tincture
for the coming year. I am satisfied that it will
well repay the trouble.


MAGNESIA, SULPHITE OF.

■

Sulphite of Magnesia was one of the anti-zymotic
remedies recommended by Prof. PoUi. We find in
all that class of acute diseases which develop typhoid


N


158 SPBGIFIC BiEDICATIOfT.

symptoms as they progress, a need for remedies
which control the septic process in the blood.
Most physicians will have employed Sulphite of
Soda in these cases, and have found marked advan-
tage from its use, yet in other cases, presenting
somewhat similar general symptoms it has done no
good, and in some has done harm.

We say that Sulphite of Soda is indicated where
the tongue is broad, pallidy and covered with a pasty
white coat. In these cases it will rarely disappoint
the practitioner.

But we have need of the same antiseptic remedies
in cases in which the tongue is deep-red or djasky,
whether covered with a brown fur, or presenting
the smooth glistening appearance noticed in some
of the more severe cases of typhoid fever, or typhoid
disease. Whenever the tongue is thus dark-red,
w^e can not give the Salt of Soda, for there is present
a prominent indication for the use of an acid. We
may use Sulphurous Acid as the antiseptic, but fre-
quently it is not well borne by the stomach. ^

In these cases the Sulphite of Magnesia will be
found an admirable remedy. We may say that it
may always be administered when the tongue is
dark-red; and shows a dark fur, and there is need
for a remedy to antagonize the septic process in the
blood. It is given in doses of grs. x. to grs, xxx.,
repeated every three hours.


MABRUBIUM VULGARE. 159

MAaNOLIA.

The Magnolia Glauca and Accnminata possess
tonic and stomachic properties, which may prove
useful in medicine. Will some of our Southern
readers prepare a tincture from the recent bark, and
test it thoroughly. It may not prove better than a
dozen similar articles, and yet supply a very good
medicine to those who live where it is abundant.

MARRUBIUM VULGARE.

(HOARHOUND.)

Preparation. — Prepare a tincture from the fresh
plant when in flower, using Sviij. to Alcohol 76° Oj.
Dose from gtts. j. to gtts. x.

The Hoarhound exerts a marked influence upon
the respiratory apparatus. It is stimulant to all
mucous surfaces, but especially to the laryngeal and
bronchial, and it may be employed for this purpose.
HuU it evidently has an action beyond this, and in-
fluences the function of respiration. Any one who
has employed it will have seen this very marked in
some cases.' Let us have it thoroughly tried, and
it may be another instance of a very valuable rem-
edy, in a common article.


160 SPBCIFIO MBDICATXON.

MARUTA COTULA.
(Mayweed.)

In testing these indigenous remedies, will some
01) e prepare a tincture from the fresh May weed and
give it a thorough trial ? The direction of the in-
vestigation will be shown by reference to the Dis-
pensatory or Materia Medica.

MENISPERMUM CAMADENSE.
(Yellow Parilla.)

The Yellow Parilla has been considerably em-
ployed for the indejQnite purpose of an alterative.
We have the testimony of the Dispensatory that :
" In small doses, no obvious eftects are produced on
the general system." It may be worth while, how-
ever, to examine it further, and it will offer a good
subject of study to some of our readers.

For experiment, prepare a tincture from the fresh
root, gviij. to Alcohol 76° Oj. Use it in doses of
from gtts. V. to 3j-

MENTHA VIRIDIS.
(Spearmint.)

Preparation. — Prepare a tincture from the fresh
herb, Sviij. to Alcohol 76° Oj. Dose from gtts. v.
to 3j.

Mentha Viridis is not only a stimulant, but is one
of the most kindly of the aromatics, and is rarely
rejected by the stomach. As a stimulant, it will


MITCHELL A RSPENS. 161

f uruish a cheap and pleasant vehicle for many med-
icines.

Bat it is more than this. I regard it as one of
the most certain of the vegetable diuretics, and em-
ploy it frequently for this purpose. In suppression
of urine in children, a teaspoonful of the tincture
is added to two ounces of water, sweetened, and
given freely. So certain is its action in childhood,
that I rarely think of giviug anything else, except
in cases where there is great irritation of the ner-
vous system, and then Gelseminum is added to it in
the usual doses.

MITCHELLA REPENS.
(Partridgeberry.)

Preparation. — Prepare a tincture from the fresh
plant, Sviij. to Alcohol 76° Oj. Dose from gtts. v.
to 3ss.

The Mitchella exerts a direct influence upon the
reproductive apparatus of the female, giving tone
and improving functional activity. It has been ex-
tensively used as a uterine tonic, to promote men-
struation, to remove false pains and unpleasant sen-
sations in the latter months of pregnancy, and has
been thought to be a good preparative to labor, ren-
dering the birth of the child easier, and less liable
to accidents.

Many have failed to obtain these influences from
the use of the common preparation " Compound
Syrup of Partridgeberry," because it was prepared
14


162 sPBonric msdioation.

from old materialB. If made from the green plant,
as named above, we think it will give satisfaction.

ELATERIUM.

The common use of £laterium, as a hydragogue
cathartic is well known. I desire to call attention
in the Eclectic Medical Journal, January, 1870, page
16. He claims that it is specific for " Chronic In-
flammation of the Neck of the Bladder." Since
the article was published I have received reports
from two physicians as to its efficiency. He pre-
pared the tincture by adding one drachm of Elate-
rium to one pint of Alcohol. Dose, half a fluid
drachm three times a day until it acted upon the
bowels, then six or eight drops.

MANATROPA UNIFLORA.

(Ice Plant.)

from the Ice-plant, and test it in the cases named
in the Dispensatory. We especially want to know
its influence upon the nervous system, and it^ action
as a sedative. It is claimed to be remedial in con-
vulsions, epilepsy, chorea, etc.


MYRICA C£BIFERA. 168

MYRICA CERIFERA,
(Bayberry.)

Preparation. — We prepare a tincture from the re-
cent bark, in the proportion of gviij. to Alcohol
76° Oj.

As the Bayberry deteriorates unless carefully
kept, it would be better to test a tincture of the
fresh bark of the root. The dose will range from
gtt. j. to 3ss.

I do not know that anything can be added to
what is known of this agent. It has been exten-
sively employed as a general stimulant, and as a
special stimulant to mucous membranes, and with
excellent results. Thomson recommended it in
all cases where there was increased secretion from
mucous membranes, whether it was catarrh or sore
throat, bronchitis, disease of stomach or intestinal
canal, or leucorrhoea.

It is in these cases especially that it will be found
of advantage. I have employed it in chronic gas-
tritis in small doses, associated with minute doses
of Lobelia, with good success. The same combina-
tion will prove very valuable in typhoid fever, in
typhoid dysentery, and in diarrhoea with increased
mucous secretion.

The tincture prepared as above, will furnish a
much better form for dispensing, as well as a more
reliable remedy than much of the powder sold, and
when once used, will become a prominent agent in
the Office and the pocket case.


164 8PSCIFX0 MEDICATION.

MOMORDICA BALSAMINA.
(Balsam Apple.)

The Balsam Apple is an annual climbing plant,
grown in our gardens for its fruit, which is em-
ployed in domestic practice as a vulnerary, and au
application to old sores, chapped hands, piles, etc.
It is commonly prepared for use with alcohol or
whisky. It evidently possesses medicinal proper-
ties, and I have seen good effects from its local use.

It is claimed to be poisonous when taken inter-
nally, yet I have known it taken with safety in
doses of ten to thirty drops. Cures of dropsy are
reported from its use. The limited use I have
known made of it internally, was to relieve muscu-
cular pains, lame back, and stiffness of joints ; in
some cases it seemed to do good. As the agent is^
very common, and easily cultivated, it would be
well to prepare aHincture from the fresh fruit Sviij.
to Alcohol 76° Oj., and test it thoroughly, both as
a local remedy, and. used internally. Of such a
preparation the dose would be quite small, say com-
mencing with one 4rop.

^NABALUS ALBUS.

(Lion's Foot).

Preparation. — Prepare a tincture from the fresh
plant, Sviij. to Alcohol 76® Oj. Dose from gtt. j. to

gttS. XX.

This remedy has been but little employed. It
was claimed to be specific to the poison of the rat-


NICOTIANA 'TABACDM, 166

tlesnake, and to have been used with much success.
It influences the nervous system directly, and ex-
periment may develop a valuable use for it. It is
not in the market, and we will therefore have to
depend upon those who can procure it green, to de-
termine its properties.

NEPETA CATAKIA.

(Catnip.)

Preparation, — Prepare a tincture from the fresh
herb when in blossom, Sviij. to Alcohol 76° Oj.

Catnip is a feeble remedy, and yet is as good as
many in general use. Employed in the form named
it will give satisfaction and well repay its prepara-
tion. It is a mild diaphoretic, but associated with
the hot-foot bath, it will be found to place the skin
in a soft moist condition, and relieve nervous irrita-
tion. It is especially to be recommended as a car-
minative for children. A teaspoonful added to
four tablespoonfuls of hot water and sweetened,
may be given freely, and is better than a tea of the

dried herb.

«

NICOTIANA TABACUM.

Dr. Unziker, of this city, recommends the prepa-
ration of a tincture ' from the green plant, and its
use as a sedative and in the treatment of diseases
of the respiratory apparatus of children.

We value the local u^e of tobacco as a fomenta-
tion in cases of strangulated hernia, i^ some acute


166 8PXGIFIC MEDICATION.

local inflammations, and in pseudo-membranons
croup when the danger is imminent. It will also
prove the best application to wounds and injuries
where there are symptoms of tetanus.

In tetanus the alkaloid, Nicotine, has been em-
ployed with marked success, and it is probably our
most certain remedy. It is ^ven in doses of half
to one drop, or if not tolerated by the stomach, it
may be used by hypodermic injection. If the alka-
loid can not be procured, an infusion may be used
by mouth, by injection, or if not retained in suffi-
cient quantity in these ways, it may be given by
hypodermic injection.

NYMPH^A ODORATA.
(White Pond Lily.)

Preparation. — Prepare a tincture from the fresh
root of the White Pond Lily, in the proportion of
Sviij. to Alcohol 50° Oj. Dose from gtts. x. to 3j.

My use of this remedy has been but limited,
though from the reports of others, I deem it to pos-
sess decided medicinal properties. The general
term alterative will express the kind of action that
may be obtained from it. It exerts a special influ-
enqe upon mucous tissues, and has been employed
with advantage in diseases of the bronchise, the gas-
tro-intestinal mucous surfaces, the bladder and the
urethra. This will suggest the line of experiment,
and we hope the remedy will be thoroughly tested
and reported.


ORIGAKUM VULGABI. 167

OLEUM MORRHU-ai;.
(Cod Liver Oil.)

We employ a bland and slightly odorous Cod-
liver Oil in practice; probably Caswell & Mack's
will give most satisfaction.

There is no doubt but benefit follows its use in
appropriate cases, and sometimes the advantage is
much greater than from the use of medicines. The
principal indication for its use, is when an exalted
temperature is maintained at the expense of the
tissues. Cod-oil in such cases saves the tissues, and
the burning of histdgenetic food.

I employ it in cases of tuberculosis, scrofula, and
in many forms of chronic disease, when the above
indications exist. Especial attention is called to its
use in local disease, with cacoplastic or aplastic de-
posits.

As the increased temperature is associated with
increased frequency of pulse, we commonly associate
it with Veratrum Viride, As a general rule the
stomachic bitters are not advantageous at the same
time. Many physicians fail to obtain advantage
from the use of Cod-oil because they give tonics in
excess at the same time.

ORIGANUM VULGARE.
(Origanum.)

Preparation. — ^Prepare a tincture from the fresh
herb, using Sviij. to Alcohol 76® Oj. Dose, gtts. x,
to 5j.


168 sPBCuric mbdication.

This agent is a stimulaut diaphoretic, and influ-
ences the reproductive organs of the female. It
has been used in the treatment of colds, and in sup-
pressed menstruation from cold.

OROBANCHE VIRGINIANA.
(Beech Drops.)

Beech drops contain a large proportion of tannic
and gallic acids, and may*be used for the general
purposes of an astringent. I do not know that there
is any advantage in taking a crude material that is
scarce and high priced, when we can obtain its med-
ical action from that which is common and cheap.

P^ONIA OFFICINALIS.

Preparation. — Prepare a tincture from the fresh
root of the garden peony, in the proportion of gviij,
to Alcohol 76® Oj. Dose from drops gtts. v. to Sss.

This remedy has been but little used, yet the evi-
dence i8 pretty conclusive that it posfiesses a marked
influence upon the nervous system. It has been em-
ployed as an antispasmodic, and to relieve irritation
of the nerve centers. Will some of our friends
prepare a tincture in the summer and test it ?

PANAX QUINQUEFOLIUM.
(Ginseng.)

Preparation. — ^Prepare a tincture from the fresh
or recent root, in the proportion of Sviij. to Alcohol
50° Oj. Dose from gtts. v. to gtts. xx.


PAPAVEi; 6QMNIFERUM. 169

We have laughed at the Chinese for their use of
Ginseng, which we have deemed inert, but I ana
pretty well satisfied that in this, as in some other
things, they have the advantage of us. A limited
use of the article has given me a very favorable
opinion of its influence.

Its first use, and a very import&nt one, is in the
treatment of nervous dyspepsia. I have obtained
more benefit from it in my own person, than from
any other remedy, and I have employed it with
others with equal advantage. It exerts a decidedly
beneficial influence in exhaustion of the brain from
over work, and it is probable that its influence is as
much in this direction as upon the stomach.

It is one of those remedies, however, that pro-
duces no marked improvement at first, and must be
continued for weeks to obtain its good eflTects.

PAPAVER SOMNIFERUM.

Before describing the action of aOpium, I want to
draw the attention of niy readers to the importance
of having it good, and of not using Morphia as a
substitute. Never buy Opium in powder, and in
selecting the gum, take that which when broken
gives the characteristic odor. Lastly, prepare your
own tincture of Opium.

Opium in medicinal doses is a cerebral stimulant,
and we will find this its most important use. From
this stimulation comes sleep and re6t to the nervous
system.

15


170 SPBCIPIC MEDICATION.

In less degree it is a stimulant to the spinal-cord,
and increases functional activity of all parts supplied
from it.

Opium or its salts may be administered for the
relief of pain, to produce sleep, or as a general
stimulant to the vegetative processes, when the fol-
lowing conditions are present ; A soft, open pulse,
or where there is not the element of hardness and
smallness; a soft (not dry) skin; a moist tongue;
pallid face; and eyes dull, immobile or dilated
pupils. It is contra-indicated, where there is a dry,
contracted skin ; small hard pulse ; dry tongue ;
flushed face ; bright eye, with contracted pupils.

There is no remedy that has been so much or so
badly used as this. It is highly prized by the pro-
fession, and yet every physician can recall cases
where its administration has proven injurious rather
than beneficial. It has gained this extensive use
because of the marked relief it gives from pain,
and even though it fails so frequently, the successes
are estimated, not.the failures.

I believe the reader, by carefully studying the
above indications and contra-indications, will be en-
abled to use the remedy so as to obtain its full pal-
liative and curative action ; not having the un-
pleasantness of failure to accomplish the desired ob-
ject, or injury to the patient, to regret.

Hypodermic Use op Morphia. — In this connection
we may consider the advantages to be obtained
from the hypodermic use of Morphia. It has been
extensivelv employed for the' relief of pain, and


PAPAVER SOMNIEERUM. 171

many physicians would hardly practice medicine if
forced to give up their hypodermic syringes.

The advantages to be obtained from this use of
Morphia has not been over-estimated. But every
one who has employed it, will recollect cases of
failure, sometimes of injury, which were very mor-
tifying. Why the failure?

The indications for the hypodermic use of Mor-
phia are the same as those just given for Opium^
and where there is present the contra-indications,
the use will not give the expected results, and may
prove injurious. Fortunately, in the majority of
cases of neuralgia, there is a soft, open pulse, the
cool pallid skin, and the evidence of an enfeebled
cerebro-spinal circulation. In such cases, the hypo-
dermic use of Morphia gives present relief, and from
its topical stimulation, may effect a radical cure.

We never employ the hypodermic injection of
Morphia where there is a hard, small pulse, dryness
and constriction of skin, dry tongue, flushed face,
bright eyes and contracted pupils. He who uses it
in such cases, will very certainly be disappointed in
its action. In many cases of fever and inflamma-
tion, though the patient suffers pain, and the ordi-
nary influence of Morphia in this way would be
very desirable, we withhold it.


172 BPBCJOriO ICSDICATIOH.

PEROXIDE OF HYDROGEN.

Water receivps an additional equivalent of oxygen,
when it is presented to it in a nascent state. This
combining with the hydrogen forms a deutoxide
(H 02.)

It was first brought to the notice of the profes-
sion by Dr. B. W. Richardson, of London, in 1860,
and since has been used to a limited extent. He
employed it in acute and chronic rheumatfsm, and
jn chronic inflammation with aplastic deposits. It
improved digestion and nutrition, increasfti waste,
oxidation and excretion.

PHOSPHORUS.

Preparation.'^We prepare a tincture of Phospho-
rus, by taking Sij» to Alcohol 98° Oj.

The Phosphorus is divided under water, which
being removed the Alcohol is poured on ; it is
allowed to stand for ten days, when it is ready for
use. We use an excess of the Phosphorus, because
in the commercial article there is but a small por-
tion which can be acted upon by Alcohol. When
of full strength, the tincture will contain about four
grains to the ounce. We prepare it for use by add-
ing one or two drachms of the tincture to four
ounces of water, of which the dose will be one tea-
spoonful.

We employ this preparation of Phosphorus prin-
cipally for its action upon the urinary and repro-


PHOSPHATS 07 SODA. 178

ductive apparatus. It is especially useful to relieve
vesical and prostatic irritation, especially when
arising from or a8so<^iated with sexual excess.

We also use it as a nerve stimulant. In some
cases its influence will be quite marked, relieving
irritation and improving nutrition.

THE HYPOPHOSPHITES.

The Hypophosphites, when well prepared, gives
us Phosphorus in the best form as a restorative.
There is great difficulty, however, in obtaining re-
liable preparations, and many have been disap-
pointed on this account.

I now use the Compound Syrup of the Hypophos-
phites (Gordon's), and it has given good satisfaction.
It is especially useful when it is desirable to improve
the nutrition of the nerve centers, though it exerts
a favorable influence over the entire process of
spoonful three times a day after meals. Its action
is slow, like food, and time must be given to obtain
its full benefit.

PHOSPHATE OF SODA.

We employ a pure article of Phosphate of Soda,
and demand that it be finely powdered; probably
Powers & Weightman's will give the most satisfac-
tion.

The Phosphate of Soda has two uses — as a re-
storative, and for its influence upon the intestinal


174 SPBOIFIO MBDIOATION.

tract. As a restorative I employ it extensively with
children, in those cases where there is impaired nu-
trition, with pallidity of tongue and mucous mem-
branes. In these cases it will be found to exert a
markedly beneficial influence. It is generally ad-
ministered in milk in doses of one to three grains,
four times a day. We occasionally find a case in
the adult where it will prove beneficial. These are
uniformly marked by the pallid mucous membranes,
and inaction of the bowels. The dose will vary
from five to fifteen grains.

Its second use is as a laxative for children. We
find cases of constipation that will yield to no reme-
dies, the child suflers from indigestion, and occa-
sionally from colic. In these cases Phosphate of
Soda in doses of from three to five grains, three
times a day, will give permanent relief.

Phosphate of Soda is also an excellent laxative
for the adult, especially in cases of habitual consti-
pation, with hardened feces. In this case twenty to
thirty grains in a large glass of water, is taken on
going to bed at night

PHYTOLACCA DECANDRA.

(POKB.)

Preparation. — We prepare a tincture from the
fresh root, gviij. to Alcohol 76® Oj. Dose gtts. ij.
to 5ss.

This is one of those remedies that loses its medi-
cal properties by drying, and the crude article fur-


PIPER NIGRUM. 175

nlshed from drug stores is wholly worthless, as are
the preparations from it.

The tincture of t\ke fresh root is one of my favor-
ite remedies. It exerts a direct influence upon the
processes of waste and nutrition, and therefore pos-
sesses those properties called alterative in a high
degree. I have used it in secondary syphilis, in
chronic skin disease, and in scrofula, with excellent
results.

It has- a direct influence upon the mammary
glands, and will generally arrest inflammation if
given in the early stage. I also employ it in cases
of sore nipples, both internally .and locally, with
good results.

It has been considerably employed in diphtheria,
and many believe it will be found a specific to the
sore throat. In this disease it is given internally,
and employed as a local application.

It will be found a very valuable remedy, and as it
is so common, I would advise every one to prepare
them a tincture in the fall and test it in practice.

PIPER NIGRUM.
(Black Pepper.)

We make a tincture of Black Pepper in the pro-
portion of Sviij. to Alcohol 76^ Oj. The Pepper
should be finely ground and packed in the percola-
tor, moistened with Alcohol and allowed to stand
twenty-four hours, then run the remainder of the
Alcohol through it. Dose, gtts. y . to 3tj.


l76 dPfiCIFIC MEDICATION.

Black Pepper is a remedy I value very highly.
As a gastric stimulant it certainly has no superior,
and for this purpose we use it in congestive chills,
in cholera morbus, and othir cases of a similar
character. In atonic dyspepsia it may be associated
with Hydrastis or other stomachic bitter, or some-
times with Nux Vomica or Strychnia. I have used
it associated with Tincture of Macrotys in atonic
amenorrhoea with advantage, and sometimes the
same combination will be found beneficial in dys-
menorrhoea.

It maybe used with excellent results in the treat-
ment of intermittents, preparing the way for Quinia
and associated with it. In these cases it is used in
full doses.

PIX LIQUIDA.
(Tab.)

We prepare a glycerole of tar for local use in the
following way : Heat a pound of glycerine and of
tar in separate vessels ; whilst heatii)g, rub up an
ounce of starch in a mortar with a portion of the
glycerine, and stir it in until thoroughly mixed ;
when hot pour the two together, boil for a moment,
then stir until cool..

Glycerole of tar prepared in this way is a specific
for many forms of pruritus. In pruritus-ani it is
almost positive certainty that it will not only give
present relief, but will effect a radical cure. In
eczema with pruritus, it has proven an admirable


POIK)PHTLLUM. 177

remedy, and has effected cures in protracted and
very stubborn cases. The indication for its use is
itching.

Tar has been used internally, with reported good
effects. To test it in chronic bronchial disease, and
for the relief of cough, I would suggest one part
of tar to nine parts of glycerine, combined with
heat.

PLANTAGO COBDATA.

(Water Plantain.)

Preparation. — Prepare a tincture from the fresh
root, Sviij. to Alcohol 76° Oj. Dose from gtts. x.
to 5s8.

This remedy has been but little used, yet from
what we know of it, we think it deserves careful
investigation. It exerts a direct influence upon the
nervous system, allaying irritation and giving better
innervation. It was employed in the cholera of
1832 with marked success, and Prof. Jones thinks
it likely to prove one of the most certain remedies
we have in that disease. Let some of our physi-
cians prepare the remedy, and report.


PODOPHYLLUM.
(May Apple.)

For common use, prepare a tincture from the root
in the proportion of Sviij. to Alcohol 76° Oj. Dose

gtt. j. to 08S.


178 SPECIFIC MEDICATION.

I am satisfied that a trial of a tincture of Podo-
phyllum will satisfy any one that it is preferable to
Podophyllin in general practice. It makes no dif-
ference whether it is to be used as a stimulant to
the digestive tract, as an alterative, for its general
cathartic effect, or as an emeto*cathartic.

For its stimulant influence and to improve diges-
tion, I frequently use it in combination with th^
stomachic bitters, or Nux Vomica, Quinia, and
Iron ; necessarily the dose is small. As an altera-
tive, a remedy to increase waste, it may be combined
with other agents that act in the same direction,
with the bitter tonics and restoratives, or many
times with Veratrum. A common prescription of
mine is : "B^ Tincture of Veratrum, 5s8. ; Tincture
of Podophyllum, Tincture of Nux Vomica, aa 5j. ;
Water, Siv. A teaspoonful every four hours. In
place of water, the vehicle may be simple syrup or
glycerine, a tincture of Mentha Viridis or of Amyg-
dalus. The case in hand will suggest the best
vehicle.

I am well satisfied that in small doses, associated
with the bitter tonics and restoratives and good
food, it is decidedly the best remedy we have in the
treatment of old syphilitic lesions. Its action may
be greatly aided sometimes by the use of the vapor-
bath, or by sulphur and iodine baths.

For common use in malarial fevers, where the
tongue is uniformly coated yellow, I would suggest
its combination with Veratrum and Aconite, as in
the following : ^ Tincture of Veratrum, gtts. xx. ;


PODOPHYLLIN. 179

Tincture of Aconite, gtts. x. ; Tincture of Podo-
phyllum, 5as. to 5j. ; Water, Siv. A teaspoonful
every hour.

For the ordinary routine of medicine, as a cathar-
tic, combine it with neutralizing cordial, as "B^ Tinc-
ture of Podophyllum, 3ij. to Sss. ; Compound Syrup
of Rhubarb, ,^88. A teaspoonful every two or three
hours. The addition of a small portion of Tinctures
of Lobelia or Ipecac will render its action more
efficient and kindly. As an emeto-cathartic give it
with a ginger-tea, or other stimulant taken freely.

PODOPHYLLIN. .

To obtain the direct action of Podophyllin, we
prepare it for use by thorough trituration with sugar
of milk or white sugar. I prefer the trituration one
part of Podophyllin to one hundred of sugar.

The specific use of Podophyllin in this form is to
arrest increased mucous secretion from the small
intestine and give it power to perform its function.
It will cure acute or chronic diarrhoea with mucous
discharges, and in some cases of cholera infantum
it " acts like a charm.*' No one who has used the
trituration of Podophyllin in these cases would be
willing to dispense with it, and many will find it of
advantage in other cases.


180 SPBOIFIG MXDICATION.

POLEMONIUM BEPTANS
(Jacob's Laddeb.)

This remedy has been but little used, yet it might
repay study. If some of our friends will pcepare a
tincture from the fresh root and test it, we would
be glad to hear the report.

POLYGALA SENEGA.

(SSNEQA.)

Preparation. — Prepare a tincture from the recent
dried root, Sviij. to Alcohol 60° Oj. Dose, gtts. ij.

to gtts. XX.

The stimulant iuflueuce of Senega upon the
throat and bronchial mucous membrane is well
known, and is probably its most important use*
For this purpose I prefer to use it in the form of
tincture to that of syrup so commonly employed.
In chronic bronchitis with profuse secretion, it may
be combined with small doses of Ipecac and Vera-
trum.

Its influence upon the kidneys and reproductive
organs needs to be studied, and I have no doubt
some important uses will be found for it. I have
employed it in squamous disease of the skin, and
like its action very much ; it is one of a very few
remedies that influence these diseases.


POLYTBIOHUM JUNIPBBUM. 181

POLYGONUM PUNCTATUM.
(Watee Pepper.)

Preparation. — ^Prepare a tincture from the fresh
herb, in the proportion of Sviij. to Alcohol 76° Oj.
Dose gtts. ij. to Sss.

I regard the tincture of Water-Pepper as one of
our most certain stimulant diaphoretics. It is also
one of the best emmenagogues, especially when the
arrest is from cold. It influences the urinary and
reproductive organs, but its action in these direc-
tions needs to be studied. ^

POLYPODIUM VULGARE.
(Polypody.)

This remedy is now but little used, yet will prob-
ably repay study. For experiment, a tincture
should be prepared from the fresh root with dilute
alcohol, in the usual proportion

POLYTRICHUM JUNIPERUM.
(Hair-Cap Moss.)

The hair-cap moss has been especially employed
as a diuretic, and so loug as it could be readily pro-
cured without admixture, gave good' satisfaction.
I do not know that it has any direct influence,
other than to increase the secretion of water in the
urine — a hydragogue diuretic ; but it might be well
to study its action more closely.


182 8PB0IFIC MSDIOATION.

P0PULU8 TREMULOIDBS.
(Poplar.)

Preparation. — ^Prepare a tincture from the fresh
bark of the white poplar, in the proportion of Sviij.
to Alcohol 76® Oj. Dose Sss. to 3j.

This remedy is so common and may be so easily
prepared, that it shoald come into more general use
as a tonic and stomachic. It improves the appetite
and strengthens digestion, exerting its influence
more especially upon the upper intestine. It influ-
ences the urinary organs, but its action in this direc-
tion needs to be studied.

■

PRINOS VERTICILLATUS.
(Black Aldeb.)

Pi*eparation. — Prepare a tincture from the recent
bark of the Black Alder, in the proportion of Sviij.
to Alcohol 50° Oj. Dose from gtts. v. to 3bs.

This remedy is a stimulant to the digestive and
blood-making organs, and may be advantageously
employed for the general purposes of a tonic. But
beyond this, it influences thie vegetative processes,
probably through the sympathetic system of nerves,
streugthening the circulation, aiding nutrition, and
the removal of waste. We have used it but little,
yet the testimony in its favor is such, that we
strongly recommend its trial.


PTBRIS TKIFOLUTA. 188

PRUNUS VIRGINIANA.

(Wild Cherry.)

The tincture of Prunus should be prepardB. from
the fresh inner bark, in the proportion of Sviij. to
Alcohol 50° Oj. Dose from gtts. v. to 3ss.

In addition to its tonic influence, which it pos-
sesses in common with many of our indigenous bit-
ters, it has other valuable medicinal properties. It
allays irritation of mucous menibrane, both of the
gastro-intestinal canal, the respiratory tract, and
urinary apparatus. This will probably prove its
most important use. The influence upon the circu-
lation and upon secretion is not decided, but in
atonic states will sometimes be found very desirable.
In some of these cases I have combined it with the
Tincture of Nux Vomica or Solution of Strychnia,
with excellent results.

The remedy is so common, and so easily prepared,
that it should find a place in every office, and I have
no doubt that as it is eniployed, other uses than
those named will be developed.

PTELEA TRIFOLIATA.
(Wafer Ash).

Preparation. — ^Prepare a tincture from the bark
of the root, Sviij. to Alcohol 76® Oj. Dose gtts.
X. to 5ss.

Ptelea is an excellent tonic, hardly surpassed in
its general uses by any agent of our Materia Medi-
ca, if we except Hydrastis. It may be employed


184 SPBCIFIO MEDICATION.

in all atonic states of the stomach and upper intes-
tinal canal, when it is desirable to increase the ap-
petite and digestion. It is claimed to exert an in-
fluence upon the respiratory apparatus, but we have
never noticed any action other than as a tonic.

PTERIS ATROPUKPUREA,
(Rock Brake.)

A tincture should be prepared from the entire
plant freshj Sviij. to Alcohol 76° Oj. Dose from
gtts. V. to gtts. X.

This remedy has been but little used except in
domestic practice. It exerts a marked iufluence
upon the excretory apparatus, controlling diar-
rhoea, dysentery, night sweats, hemorrhages, etc.
This may depend to some extent upon its tannic
acid, but there is an influence beyond this. Will
some of our practitioners prepare a tincture and
test it, and report ?

PETROLEUM.

There are two varieties — tlje heavy and the light
coal-oils, which differ as much in their medicinal
properties as they do in use — probably the heavy
should alone be used.

A very pure and heavy oil, known as Mecca Oil
from the well that yields it, is recommended. It \&
a dark, bland oil — not unpleasaqt to the taste, and
is furnished by the gallon from our druggists at
♦2.00.


PROPTIiAMIK. 185

It has been employed with advantage in chronic
bronchitis and laryngitis, and phthisis, with bron-
chial irritation. *8ome contend that for bronchial
disease it is unsurpassed. It has also been em-
ployed in scrofula, chronic disease of the urinary
apparatus, and in chronic skin diseases. It would
be well to test it thoroughly in these cases, and also
for its influence upon the nervous system. The
dose will vary from one drop to a teaspoonful.

PROPYLAMIN.

The Propylamin of commerce is obtained from
herring fichtey and is in the form of a colorless trans-
parent liquid ; the muriate is in the form of powder
and is about two-thirds of its strength. We pre-
pare it for use by adding twenty-four drops, or thir-
ty-six grains of the Muriate of Propylamin to six
ounces of mint water, the dose of which will be
from a tea to a tablespoonfiil.

Investigation has determined that Propylamin is
the same as the Secalin derived from Ergot. My
use of the remedy clearly proved the analogy be-
tween the Propylamin and Ergot in its poisonous
effects.

The remedy was introduced by Dr. Owenarius of
St. Petersburgh, Russia, as a specific for rheuma-
tism, and a large number of cases were reported in
which it had proven curative in a short time. This
was in 1856, and it was tested in this country as
well as in Europe, but without very satisfactory
results.

16


186 SPBCmO MEDICATION.

I employed it in quite a ntimber of cases of rheu-
matism, and at first thought veij favorably of its
action, but developing marked typhoid disease in
some cases I became alarmed and dropped it. I
am confident it possesses a marked influence upon
the animal economy, but unless used with care^ it
is as likely to be for evil as good. I developed a
typical typhoid fever with it, that ran a course of
five weeks, with intestinal irritation, rose-colored
spots and typhomania. It was evidently due to the
medicine, as when its administration was com-
menced it was a case of simple inflammatory rheu-
matism about the fifth day, and there was no such
thing as typhoid fever that year.

In employing the Propylamin in the treatment
of rheumatism, I think it necessary to first bring
the circulation fully under the influence of the seda-*
tives, and then establish secretion — now the remedy
may be used with safety.

In doses much smaller than named, I feel confi-
dent the Propylamin will be found a stimulant to
the entire vegetative functions. It strengthens the
circulation, improves nutrition, and stimulates
waste and secretion. In these directions it deserves
thorough investigation. The proportions I would
recommend would be gtts. v. to gtts. x. to mint
water 5iv., a teaspoonful every three or four hours.
Or better, ^ Muriate of Propylamin, grs. x. ; Sugar
of Milk, grs. 1000 ; triturate thoroughly ; dose one
to five grains.


PULMONAKIA OPFICIKALIS. 187

PTEROSPORA ANDROMEDA.
(Crawley.)

Preparation. — ^Prepare a tincture from the fresli
plant and root, Sviij. to Alcohol 76® Oj. Dose from
gtts, j. to V.

The Crawley is a very scarce article, and in the
market commands a high price. When the practi-
tioner can obtain it and prepare it himself, he will
find it one of the most valuable of the Materia
Medica. It possesses decided sedative properties,
and may be employed for this purpose, but its prin-
cipal use is to establish waste and secretion. Fol-
lowing or associated with Veratrum or Aconite,
there is no remedy that will more quickly and cer-
tainly establish secretion from skin and kidneys.
It is probable that other uses will be developed by
experiment.

PULMONARIA OFFICINALIS.

(LUNOWOET.)

Preparation. — ^Prepare a tincture from the fresh
leaves, Sviij. to Alcohol 60*^ Oj. Dose, from ten
drops to 5ss.

The Lungwort has a popular reputation as a
remedy in diseases of the chest. It would be well
to test it thoroughly and determine its medicinal
action in this direction.


188 SPBCIFIC MEDICATION.

PULSATILLA NIGRICANS.
(Pulsatilla.)

We employ the German tiucture prepared from
the fresh herb according to the Homoeopathic phar-
macy. That prepared from the imported dried
herb will not give good satisfaction. We usually
satilla, 3j. to 5ij. ; Water,* 5iv- A teaspoonful every
four hours.

The principal use of Pulsatilla is to relieve certain
cerebral symptoms with difficulty relieved by other
remedies. In some diseases of women, in sperma-
torrhoea and prostatorrhcea, in heart disease, and
some other chronic affections, we find certain head
symptoms playing an important part, and giving a
good deal of trouble. The patient is nervous, rest-
less, has an active imagination for disease, a fear of
impending danger, etc. These symptoms are very
unpleasant, and not unfrequently prevent the cura-
tive action of remedies. Pulsatilla reaches them
and gives prompt and certain relief.

I would not treat some cases of spermatorrhoea
without I could employ this remedy. For with the
unnatural excitement of the mind, no remedy would
exert a curative influence. So in some cases of
heart disease, the head symptoms are the most
prominent and unpleasant features. Relieve the
unpleasant mental sensations and dread of danger,
and we have removed a permanent cause of excite-
ment.


PTRBTHRUM PARTHBlll^IUM. 189

Though Pulsatilla is the remedy for nervousness,
it must not be given with any expectation of benefit
when the excitement depends upon irritation and
determination of blood. In this case it will either
exert no influence or it will be unfavorable.

The Pulsatilla exerts a marked influence upon
the * reproductive organs of both male and female.
. I regard it as decidedly the best emmenagogue,
when the suppression is not the re,sult of or attended
by irritation and determination of blood ; where
there is simple suppression from atony or nervous
shock, it may be used with confidence. In male or
female it lessens sexual excitement. It does not
diminish sexual power, but rather strengthens it by
lessening morbid exciteihent.

There are other uses for the remedy, but those I
have named are prominent ones, and readily recog-
nized. I value the remedy very highly, and am
satisfied from an experience of ten years in its use
that I do not ovcypestimate it.

PYRETHRUM PARTHENIUM.
(Feverfew.)

Preparation. — Prepare a tincture from the fresh
plant, Sviij.. to Alcohol 50° Oj. Dose from gtts. v.
to 5ss.

The Feverfew has the reputation of being an ad-
mirable tonic, at the same tipae being one of the
most pleasant of its class. It influences the entire
intestinal tract, improves the appetite and digestion,
and stimulates secretion. It also exerts an influence


190 SPBCIFIO MBDIOAITION.

upon the skin and kidneys. This is one of the little
used medicines that deserves carefal study, and as
it is cultivated in our gardens it is within the reach
of all.

PYROLA ROTUNDIFOLIA.
(Falss Wimteroreen.)

Preparation. — ^Prepare a tincture from the fresh
plant, Sviij. to Alcohol 50° Oj. Dose from gtts. v.
to 3ss.

This also is likely to prove a valuable remedy and
deserves to be studied. It has marked tonic prop-
erties, and exerts an influence upon the urinary
organs, relieving irritation.* It is claimed to exert
an influence upon the nervous system, and to have
been successfully employed in convulsions and
epilepsy.

•

PYRUS MALUS.
(Apple Tree.) *

Preparation, — Prepare a tincture from the fresh
root-bark of the apple-tree, Sviij. to Alcohol 76® Oj.
Dose from gtts. v. to 5bs.

Though so common and easily prepared, this
remedy has been but little studied. It possesses
tonic and antiperiodic properties, and may be 'em-
ployed in a great many oases instead of more costly
remedies. The only use I have made of it was in
intermittent fevers, and whilst it was not a substi-
tute for Quinia, it evidently exerted a good influ-


QUINU SULPHAS. 191

ence upon the disease, especially in preventiiig a
recurrence of the paroxysms.


QUERCUS RUBRA.
(Red Oak.)

The Red Oak is not only astringent from its tan-
nic acid, but it possesses other properties that will
render it usefnl in some cases. Among them is its
tonic influence, and its action upon skin and kid-
neys. I have used it in chronic eczema associated
with Rnmex, both as a local and internal remedy,
with marked advantage. A combination of Quei*-
cus Rubra, Rumex and Alnus is my favorite remedy
in obstinate cases of scrofula where there are old
ulcers, feeble tissues and cicatrices. In these cases
I use it as a local application and as an internal
remedy.

I have employed it principally in infbsion and de*
coction, but for experiment would recommend the
preparation of a tincture, Sviij. of the fresh inner
bark to Alcohol 76^ Oj. Dose from gtts. v. to Sss.

QUINIA SULPHAS.

(QUININB.)

There is no occasion to give a lengthy description
of the specific action of Quinine, as every one of my
readers is thoroughly conversant with it. But it
may be of use to some, to state the conditions neces-
sary to its kindly and medicinal action.


192 SPBCIFIC MEDICATION.

Probably there is no remedy in the Materia
Medica that gives so many failures as this, and I
think we may be safe in assuming that it is given
ten times where its specific actioa is obtained once.
Every one will recollect cases in which it did not
break up peripjjLic disease, many more cases in which
its influence was but temporary, a large number
in which it produced unpleasant cerebral symptoms,
and some in which a Quinia disease was developed,
which was much worse than the original malady.

Why is this ? Is it the fault of the remedy, the
fault of the patient, or the fault of the practitioner?
O, the doctor answers, it is from idiosyncrasy ! So
we believe, but we locate the idiosyncrasy in the
doctor's head, and not in the patient.

I have taught for years, that if we are to expect
the kindly and curative action of Quinia, the
stomach must be in condition to receive and absorb
it, and the system in condition for its action. If
we have a proper condition in ^ese respects, we
will hear nothing of roaring in the ears, vertigo,
etc., but its action will be most kindly. The rule is
very simple — Given, a soft and open pulse, a moist skinj
moist and cleaning tongue, and Quinia will act kindly,
antidote the malarial poison, or in small doses im-
prove innervation. Always get this condition before
prescribing the remedy, and you will never be dis-
appointed in its action.

As an antiperiodic I believe in prescribing single
doses. Put the stomach in proper condition, regu-
late the circulation, establish secretion, and then


QUINIA SULPHAS. 193

give one full dose of the re6iedy, (10 to 15 grs.)
The best form of the remedy is in solution with one
or two ounces of water, using a sufficient quantity
of sulphuric acid.

This is not only the most certain method of admin-
istration, but I think it will be found the most
pleasant.

It is hardly necessary to impress upon the reader
the necessity of determining the periodic element
in disease. Whilst we may not know what it is, or
how Quinine antidotes it, we know that its removal
cures, or at least paves the way to a cure.

But Quinine is not specific to all agues. We see
it given day after day, week after week, in many
cases, without any advantage. But on the contrary,
it excites the^nervous and vascular systems, and at
last produces a chronic erythism of them, that is
correctly named " the Quinine disease." From this,
recoveiy is far more difficult than from the mala-
rial affection.

Is it possible then, to determine the cases in which
Quinine will prove specific, and the cases in which
it will fail ? I think it is. It antidotes the mala-
rial poison only when kindly received and absorbed,
and when the system is in such condition that it
can be readily excreted. Given, the condition of
pulse, skin and tongue, that we have already
named, and its action is as certain as could be de-
sired.

In some cages, the general treatment directed to
obtaining normal activity of the various functions,
17


194 SPECIFIC MEDICATION.

is the most successfuL la some cases Kux Vomica
or Strychnia is preferable. In others minate doses
of Arsenic antagonizes the malarial poison. Whilst,
in some rare cases, I have treated the disease most
successfully with Aconite and Belladonna.

As a stimulant to the cerebro-spinal centers, its
use is very important. In many forms of disease,
especially in the advanced stages, we find an im-
paired innervation, preventing functional activity,
or its restoration and continuance by the use of
remedies. It is essential to success that innerva-
tion be increased, not temporarily by the use of
stimulants, but somewhat permanently. This we
accomplish by the administration of small doses of
Quinine (grs. J to grs. ij). Even here, we find it
necessary to observe the rules for its administration
already noticed — the patient must be prepared for
its use.

It favorably influences the nutrition of the nerve
centres, and hence is employed in the treatment of
chronic disease with enfeebled innervation, with
marked advantage. There are two .classes of
chronic disease in which it is useful — the one in
which there is a malarial influence, with obscure
periodicity, and the other the enfeebled innervation^
as named above.

Its general tonic and stomachic influence, (when
obtained) is most certainly from this action upon
the nervous system — the influence extending to the
sympathetic ganglia, as well as to the cerebro-spinal
centers. In some cases this action is very impor-


P0TA8SII FSHBOCYANUBBTUM. * 195

tant, improving digestion and blood-making, and
nutrition, as well as waste apd excretion — aiding
** the renewal of life."

POTASSII FERROCYANUKETUM.
(Prttssiatb op Potash.)

The Prassiate of Potash was omitted in its
proper place by mistake. It is a remedy I value
highly, and though little used it is certain to become
a favorite.

We find it in market in the form of prismatic
crystals of a clear lemon-yellow color, inodorous,
possessed of a sWeetish-bitter saline taste. If the
salt is dirty, dark-colored, or parti-colored, it should
be rejected. We prepare it for use by adding gss.
to Water, Siv. Dose, one teaspoonful every three
hours.

In chronic disease where there is marked irrita-
bility of the nervous system, with frequency of.
pulse, we will find it an excellent remedy. It les-
sens irritation of the nervous system, and acts as a
special sedative to the circulation. In chronic dis-
ease of the reproductive organs in women, with
hysterical manifestations, it exerts a direct and
marked influence — so in hypochondriacal aflfections
m the male.

It exerts a decided influence upon mucous mem-
branes. When they are pallid, lax, and give in-
creased secretion, the Prussiate of Potash may be
used with advantage. It makes little difference,
whether of nose, throat, bronchial tubes, intestinal


196 SPECIFIC MEDICATION.

mftcouB membrane, or chronic vaginitis with leu-
corrhoea, the influence is the same.

This will suggest to the practitioner the cases in
which it may be tested : where there is excitation, but
impaired nutrition of the nerve centres, and wLere
there is feebleness of mucous membranes with in-
creased secretion of mucus.

•

RANUNCULUS BULBOSUS.
(Crowfoot.)

Preparaiion. — ^Prepare a tincttire from the fresh
root in the proportion of Sviij. to Alcohol 76® Oj.
Dose, the fraction of a drop, very largely diluted
with water. The remedy is exceedingly acrid, and
must be used with care.

Prof. King reports the cure of nursing sore mouth
by its internal administration in small doses in in-
fusion. It has also been employed as a stimulant
to the vegetative processes, with reported good re-
sults. It should be thoroughly tested, and we will
be obliged to any one of our readers for a report.
Tincture of Ranunculus, gtts. x. ; Water, Siv.
Dose, a teaspoonful.

RHAMNUS CATHARTICUS.
(Buckthorn.)

Two preparations of this agent may be used.
Prepare a tincture from the fresh bark in the pro-
portion of Sviy. to Alcohol 50° Oj. Dose, gtts. yj


RHBUM PALMATUM* 197

to gtts. XXX. Prepare a tincture from the berries,
in the proportion of Sviij. to Alcohol 76° Oj, Dose,
from the fraction of a drop to two to five drops,
largely dilated with water.

Buckthorn berries have been employed as a
cathartic, but their activity, attended with nausea,
dryness of the throat, thirst and tormfna, made
their use limited. The tincture of the berries in
small doses may be tested for its influence on the
digestive apparatus, in diseases of the nose, throat,
and respiratory organs, and as a stimulant to the
vegetative processes.

It is claimed that a preparation from the bark
gives one of the most efficient alteratives of the
Materia Medica. Dr. William Goltry claimed that
a tea made of the bark or berries would cure cancer
and scrofulous diseases generally. Dr. William S.
Knight writes, " I have been using the Rhamnus
Catharticus in all forms of scrofulous disease for
the last two years (1866) with good effect. I make
an infusion from the bark and let the patient drink
as much as he well can during the day, so as not
to act too much upon the bowels."

RHEUM PALMATUM.

(Rhubarb.)

Preparation. — Prepare a tincture from the best
Russian, Turkey, or India Rhubarb, in the propor-
tion of Sviij. to Alcohol 50® Oj. Dose, from the
fraction of a drop to ten drops.

It is not worth #hile to speak of the common use


198 SPBCIFIO MEDICATION.

of Bhubarby as there is no remedy better known
and more used. But it will be noticed that we
have recommended a wholly different preparation,
and we propose to dispense it in small doses for its
direct action. •

In the proportion of "E^ Tincture of Rhubarb, 5j-,
Water, Siv., a teaspoonful every half hour or hour,
it will be found one of our best remedies to control
irritation of the stomach, and arrest vomiting. In
children it is especially useful, where there is ner-
vous irritability, manifested by restlessness, screams,
and convulsive contraction of muscles.

In the same doses, less frequently repeated, it
will prove an excellent tonic, strengthening the
functions of both stomach and intestines, giving
improved digestion. In indigestibn, with some
diarrhcBa, of a papescent character, it will be found
a good remedy.

In some cases it will prove our best remedy in the
treatment of obstinate constipation. The cases are
those in which there is an unnatural sensation of
constriction in stomach and bowels, and contraction
cases in doses of ten drops in a large glass of water,
on rising in the morning. In the severer cases it is
associated with thorough fatty innunction over the
abdomen, and friction.

I employ it as a restorative, where there is special
need of increased nutrition of nerve tissue. It is
thus associated with the preparations of Phospho-
rus, and with Ood Liver Oil. 4


RHUS GLABRUH. 199

RHODODENDRON CHRYSANTHUM.
(Rhododendron.)

A tincture is prepared from the fresh leaves col-
lected in September ; that we employ is imported
from Germany. Two native species — ^the R. MaS^i-
mum and R. Punctatum possess similar properties,
but much milder, and should be tested.

The influence of the Rhododendron on the circu-
lation is very marked. It undoubtedly acts like
Veratrum and Aconite, stimulating the circulatory
apparatus through the sympathetic, and diminish-
ing the frequency of the pulsfe by increasing the
power of the heart, and removing capillary obstruc-
tion. Acting in this way, it has been employed with
advantage in rheumatism, gout, syphilis, and some
acute diseases. It is claimed to exert an influence
upon the reproductive apparatus, being used in or-
chitis,, in suppression of gonorrhoea, and in hydro-
cele. It has been but little employed in this coun-
try, but our native specimens deserve a thorough
examination.

RHUS GLABRUM.
(Sumach.)

Preparation. — Prepare a tincture from the fresh
root bark, Sviij. to Alcohol 76® Oj. Dose from gtts.
V. to gtts. XX.

The Sumach as thus prepared exerts a direct in-
fluence upon the processes of waste and repair — al-
terative. It has not been much used, and we can


200 SPECIFIC MEDICATION.

not tell whether it will prove better than others of
this class ; still it deserves a thorough trial. It is
claimed to be antidotal to the action of mercury,
especially in chronic mercurial disease, and has
been employed in the treatment of secondary
syphilis, after mercurialization, with advantage.

RHUS TOXICODENDRON.
(Poison Oak.)

Prepare a tincture from the recent leaves, Sviij.
to Alcohol 76*^ OjL Added to water in the propor-
tion of gtts. V. to gtts. X. to Siv., the dose is a
teaspoonful. The lEi. Kadicans, R. Venenata, and
R. Pumilum may be prepared in the same manner,
and deserve a thorough investigation.

The Rhus is likely to prove one of our most
valuable medicines, and will be highly prized when
its use is learned. It is antidotal to such animal
poisons (zymotic) as determine to the skin, in ery-
sipelas or erysipeloid disease, or in low grades of
inflammation of cellular tissue, or in low grades of
inflammation of mucous membranes. A frequent,
small pulse, redness of mucous membranes, brown
sordes, bright superficial redness of skin, tympani-
tis, acrid discharges from bowels or bladder, are in-
dications for its use. So also is inflammatory action,
presenting tumid, bright reddened tissues, deep
seated or superficial burning pain, inflammation
giving an ichorous discharge, in which the tissues
seem to melt away without sloughing. Old ulcers,
that present reddened, glistening edged, scrofulous


RHUS TOXIOODEKDBON. 201

or syphilitic disease, with tumid-red, glistening
swellings.

I have preferred to thus point out distinctly the
indications for the use of the Ehus, without refer-
ence to the disease, according to our present nomen-
clature. It will be seen to point to erysipelas,
typhoid fever and typhoid disease in general, and
the entire list of zymotic diseases.

Our HomcBopathic friends give the following in-
dications for its use :

" Affections of the ligaments, tendons and syno-
vial membranes ; tensions, drawing and tearing in
the limbs, worse during rest, and in the cold season,
or at night, in bed, frequently attended with numb-
ness of the affected part after moving it ; creeping
pains; sensation in inner organs as if something
would be torn loose; lameness and paralysis, also
hemiplegia; vesicular erysipelas; rhagades; pus-
tules which break and discharge a fluid; hang-
nails ; red, shining swelling ; violent and spasmodic
yawning ; evening fever, with diarrhoea ; sweat dur-
ing the pains, frequently with violent trembling;
illusions of the fancy, and delirium ; pain as if the
brain would be torn ; painful creeping in the head ;
swelling of the head ; phagedenic scald-head ; small,
soft tumors on the hairy scalp ; swelling and in-
flammation of the parotid glands; acne rosacea
around the mouth and chin ; nightly discharge of
yellowish, or bloody saliva ; ulcerative pain in the
pit of the stomach as if something would be torn
off, especially when stooping or making a false


202 SPSOiFIO MSDIOATION.

Step ; the email of the back feels as if braised, es-
pecially when lying still on it."

ROBINIA PSBUDO-ACACIA.
(Black Locust.)

Preparation. — ^Prepare a tincture from the fresh
inner bark of the Black Locust, Sviij. to Alcohol
76° Oj. Dose from gtts. j. to gtts. x.

This remedy has been but little used, yet its ac-
tivity is such that we may reasonably expect that
experiment will develop some valuable medicinal
use. It acts on the stomach aud bowels in large
doses, and exerts an influence upon the nervous sys-
tem. Will some of our readers test it and report ?

RUMEX ACETOSELLA.
(Sheep Sorrel )

Preparation. — Prepare a tincture from the fresh
sorrel, Sviij. to Alcohor60° Oj. Dose, from gtts. x.
♦o 3ss. It is employed locally in the treatment of
cancer, the following formula being employed :

" Cancer Balsam. — ^Take the common Sheep Sorrel
when in bloom, bruise well in a mortar, and add a
small quantity of water ; then press the weed so as
to obtain all the juice, strain it and place in the
sunshine in a pewter dish, and let it evaporate to
the consistence of honey. It is then ready for use,
and should be put up in sealed boxes or closely
stopped bottles, in order to prevent evaporation."

A tincture of the Sorrel has a very decided action


RVMBX CRISPUS. 208

•

in those cases where there is a tendency to degene*
ration of tissue. It makes no difference whether it
is called syphilis, scrofula, or cancer, the indication
for use is the replacement of tissue with lower or-
ganizations. To what extent it opposes the pro-
cess of degeneration we are unable to say, the use
has been so limited, but it deserves a thorough in-
vestigation. It influences the secretion of urine
and urinary apparatus, but its medicinal action in
this respect has yet to be determined.

Its use in the treatment of cancer has been quite
extensive, and if we can believe the reports given,
it has proven fully as successful as any other reme-
dy. A full description of this method of treatment
will be found in the Eclectic Journal for May, 1870,
page 142.

RUMEX CRISPUS.
(Yellow Dock.)

Preparation. — Prepare a tincture from the fresh
root, Sviij. to Alcohol 76° Oj. Dose gtts. x. to 3j.

We employ Eumex in cases of bad blood with dis-
ease of the skin ; in these cases it is certainly one
of the most valuable alteratives we have. In these
cases we not only use it internally, but as a local
application. In scrofulous disease, with deposit in
glands and cellular tissue, with tendency to break
down and feeble repair, I think the Rumex un-
equaled ; here also, we use it internally and locally.

Dr. Hale reports cases of dyspepsia, with sensa-


204 SPECIFIC MEDICATION.

tions of fullness and pressure in pit of stomach,
pain in the chest, etc,, cured by Rumex. Dr.
Dunham employed it in catarrhal affections of the
larynx, trachea and bronchia with advantage. I
have used it in chronic sore throat with free secre-
tion, and in broncorrhoea with good results.

The general action of the remedy is to increase
waste and improve nutrition.

EUTA GRAVEOLENS.

(Rue.) •

iVg^ara^ion.— Prepare a tincture from the fresh
plant, Sviij. to Alcohol 76° Oj. Dose gtts. j. to
gtts, X., largely diluted with water.

Though little used, this remedy will be found to
possess valuable medicinal properties. It exerts a
direct influence upon the nervous system, relieving
irritation and pjain, and in small doses, continued,
improving nutrition of the nerve centers. It acts
upon the urinary and reproductive apparatus, and
has been employed with advantage as a stimulant
to them. In large doses, it is capable of exciting
menorrhagia, inflammation, and miscarriage. Th^
Homoeopaths claim that it is a remedy " in eructa-
tions of hysteric females ; prolapsus of the rectum,
at every alvine evacuation ; frequent urging to uri-
nate, with scanty emission, also of green urine, or
with renewed ineffectual urging after micturition ;
gravel ; miscarriage ; sterility ; corrosive leucor-
rhcea after suppression of the menses.'*


SALIX NIGRA. 206

SABBATIA ANGULARia

(American Centaury.)

Preparation. — Prepare a tincture from the fresh
herb Sviij. to Alcohol 76° Oj. Dose, gtts. j. to gtts.

XX.

The Sabbatia has had a considerable reputation
as a prophylactic against periodic diseases, and in
their treatment — it would be well to thoroughly
investigate this action. As a bitter tonic, it may be
successfully employed in atonic states 'of the intes-
tinal canal with increased mucous secretion. Pro\)-
ably it will prove useful in all diseases of mucous
membranes, where there is profuse secretion. It has
been but little used of late, but it deserves study.

SALIX NIGRA.

(Black Willow).

.

Preparation. — ^Prepare a tincture from the recent
bark, Sviij. to Alcohol 60° Oj. Dose from gtts. v.

to 3d*

Whilst this, as well as other varieties of the wil-
low, possess feeble tonic and antiperiodic proper-
ties, there are so many better remedies of this class
that it would be well to dispense with its use alto-
gether, had it no other action. But there is a class
of cases in which the Salix is a very decided anti-
periodic, and if these can be distinguished, the rem-
edy will be valuable. I believe it is in those in
which there is increased secretion from mucous
membranes, and especially where there is the septic


206 6PBCIFIG MSDICATION.

tendency^ marked by fetid discharges, foul tongue,
etc. In typhoid disease it may be employed both
as a tonic and antiseptic, using the smaller dose
named. The remedy is easily prepared, and may
well replace some inferior articles that have hitherto
been employed.

SALVIA OFFICINALIS.

(Saqb.) .

» fc.

Preparation. — Prepare a tincture from the fresh
plant when in flower Sviij. to Alcohol 76® Oj.
Dose from gtts. j. to gtts. xx.

The Sage exerts a specific tonic influence on the
skin, and to a less extent upon the kidneys and
mucous membranes. It is not an active remedy,
and hence too much must not be expected from it.
We employ it where the skin is soft and relaxed,
with an enfeebled circulation and cold extremities.
In the treatment of colliquative perspiration it an-
swers an excellent purpose, if the condition above
is maintained. If, however, the night sweat is pre-
ceded with hectic fever, and a dry, harsh skin, it
will be useless.

It will prove a good remedy in increased secre-
tion of urine of low specific gravity ; in such cases
it may be associated with Belladonna. It may also
be associated with the bitter tonics in all cases in
which there is atony and increased secretion from
mucous membranes.


SAMBI7CUS OANABBNSIS, '207

SAMBUCUS CANADENSIS.
(Elder.)

Preparation, — Prepare a tincture from the fresh
inner bark of the Elder, Sviij. to Alcohol 60® Oj.
Dose gtts. ij. to gtts. x.

The Elder is a stimulant to all the excretory or-
gans increasing secretion. It may be employed for
the general purposes of an alterative — increasing
waste, in syphilis, scrofula, and other diseases at-
tended by deposits or depravation of tissues. It is
especially useful in these cases where there is an
oedematous condition, or fullness of tissue from an
increased amount of water. We meet a case of
chronic disease occasionally, in which the tissues are
full and flabby, evidently from too much water ; in
these Sambucus is a good remedy. It may be em-
ployed in dropsy, though its action is not so decided
as the Apocynum.

As a local application the Sambucus is specific to
those eruptions that arise on full tissues (as above),
and are attended with abundant serous discharge.
Thus in some forms of eczema, especially eczema
infantilis or mUk sealiy and in the above form of the
disease, it will alone effect a cure. We also employ
it in indolent ulcers, with soft oedematous borders,
and serous secretion, and in mucous patches with
free secretion. An ointment is pre|)ared by sim-
mering the inner bark in fresh butter (old style), or
a glycerole may be made, with the addition of the
usual quantity of starch.


208 8PB0IFX0 MSBICATION.

SANGUINARIA CANADENSIS.
(Blood Root.)

Preparation. — Prepare a tincture from the recent
dried root, Sviij. to Alcohol 76° Oj. Dose from a
fraction of a drop to five drops. Nitrate of San-
guinarina is a valuable preparation, and maybe dis-
pensed in syrup, in the proportion of grs. ij. to ^.*
Dose, gtts. X. to 3j.

In full doses we employ the Sanguinaria as a
stimulant to mucous membranes. This use is valu-
able in bronchitis with increased secretion, and in
atonic conditions of stomach and bowels with in-
creased secretion of mucus. In minute doses we
employ it in cases of cough with dryness of the
throat and air passages, feeling of constriction in
the chest, difficult and asthmatic breathing, with
sensation of pressure. In the same doses it is a
stimulant to the vegetative system of nerves, and
under its use there is an improvement in the circu-
lation, in nutrition, and secretion.

As a remedy in diseases of the respiratory tract,
I prefer the Nitrate ot Sanguinarina to the tincture.

SANIOULA MARILANDICA.

(Sanicle.)

•

Preparation. — Prepare a tincture from the recent
root in the proportion of Sviij. to Alcohol 76° Oj.
Dose from gtts. ij. to gtts. xx.

The Sanicula has had considerable reputation as
a domestic remedy, and like most of them it has


SAKRAOBKIA PURPUBBA. 209

been employed for very different purposes. It evi-
dently exerts a direct influence upon the nervous
system, relieving irritation, and this probably ex-
tends to the sympathetic. It would be well to give
it a trial in those cases in which there is enfeebled
function with nervous irritability.

SARRACENIA PURPUREA.
(Sabraoenia.)

Preparation, — ^Prepare a tincture from the fresh
root^ in the proportion of Sviij. to Alcohol 76® Oj.
Dose from gtts. j. to gtts xx.

The experiments of Dr. Porcher, of South Caro-
lina, showed that it exerted a marked influence on
the sympathetic. From a large dose there was
congestion of the head, with irregularity of the
heart's action, lasting several days. Following this
first effect, the general vigor of the digestive appa-
ratus was increased, and the appetite was unusually
active. It is claimed that it has been successfully
employed in chlorosis, and other diseases of a simi-
lar character.

It was introduced to the notice of the profession
by Dr. W. Morris, of Halifax, in 1861, as an anti-
dote to the virus of smallpox. He made the fol-
lowing statements in a letter to the American Medi-
col Times:

" Sir — ^You have by this time, in all probability,

heard something of an extraordinary discovery for

the cure of smallpox, by the use of * Sarracenia

Purpurea/ or Indian cup, a native plant of Noyu

18


210 ' SPECIFIC MBDIGATION.

Scotia, I would beg of you, however, to give full
publicity to the astonishing fact, that this same
humble bog-plant of Nova Scotia is ihe remedy for
smallpox, in all its forms, in twelve hours after the
patient has taken the medicine. It is also as curious
as it is wonderful that, however alarming and
numerous the eruptions, or confluent and frightful
they may be, the peculiar action of the medicine is
such that very seldom is a scar left to tell the story
of the disease. I will not enter upon a physiologi-
cal analysis now ; it will be sufficient for my pur-
pose to state, that it cures the disease as no other
medicine does — not by stimulating functional re-
agency, but by actual contact with the virus in the
blood, rendering it inert and harmless ; and this I
gather from the fact that if either the vaccine or
variolous matter be washed with the infusion of
the Sarracenia, they are deprived of their conta-
gious properties. The medicine, at the same time,
is so mild to the taste, that it may be mixed largely
with tea or coffee, as I have done, and given to
connoisseurs in these beverages to drink, without
their being aware .of the admixture. Strange, how-
ever, to say, it is scarcely two years since science
and the medical world were utterly ignorant of this
great boon of Providence ; and it would be dishon-
orable in me not to acknowledge that had it not
been for the discretion of Mr. John Thomas Lane,
of Lanespark, County Tipperary, Ireland, late of
Her Majesty's Imperial Customs of Nova Scotia, to
whom the Mec-Mac Indians had given the plant.


6ARRACENIA PURPUREA. 211

»

the world would not now be in possession of the
secret. No medical man before me had ever put
this medicine upon trial, but in 1861, when the
whole Province of Nova Scotia was in a panic, and
patients were dying at the rate of twelve and a half
per cent., from May to August, Mr. Lane, in the
month of May, placed the ^Sarracenia' in my
hands to decide' upon its merits ; and, after my
trials then and since, I have been convinced of its
astonishing efficacy. The only functional influence
it seems to have, is in promoting the flow of urine,
which soon becomes limpid and abundant, and this
is owing perhaps to the defecated poison or changed
virus of the disease exclusively escaping through
that channel.'" The ' Sarracenia.' I have reason to
believe a powerful antidote for all contagious dis-
eases, lepra, measles, varicella, plague, contagious
typhus, and even syphilis, also a remedy in jaun-
dice. I am strongly inclined to think it will on-e
day play an important part in all these."

This report was confirmed by Dr. Herbert Miles,
of the British Army, and Captain Hardy of the
Royal Artillery. The evidence in its favor from
physicians and residents of Nova Scotia would
seem to be complete, that the Sarracenia has a*
direct prophylactic influence, and a direct and
prompt curative action when the disease is devel-
oped.

The remedy, however, has been thoroughly tried
by a number of physicians in the United States, and
by physicians in private practice, and in the hospi-


212 SPECIFIC MEDICATION.

«

tals in England, with the report that if not entirely "
inert, it has no such antidotal power as has been
positive as that in its favor.

What conclusion can we come to then ? The

*

only way we can reconcile these opposing state-
ments is, that the same agent was not employed in
both cases. In Nova Scotia, wh'ere the plant is
abundant, we may suppose it was used fresh; in the
United States and in England, it was dried and so
old that it had lost its medical properties. I am
confirmed in this opinion by my experience. Wish-
ing to try this remedy, I obtained three samples,
and neither of these possessed in the least degree
the physical properties attributed to Sarracenia.
When fresh, it is bitter and astringent, leaving a
somewhat pungent impression on the fauces. TMe
specimens I obtained had no taste.

In order to give the remedy a fair trial, let us
have it prepared from the fresh root, obtained at
the proper season. If an antidote to smallpox, its
value can not be over-estimated ; if it only exerts
the influence over the sympathetic first named, it
will prove a valuable remedy.

ft

SCUTELLARIA LATERIFLORA.
(Skullcap.)

Preparation. — ^Prepare a tincture from the fresh
herb, gathered whilst in flower, Sviij. to Alcohol
76° Oj. Dose, from gtt. j. to gtts. xx.


8SCALB CORNUTUM. 218

We have here another remedy that loses its
•medical properties by drying, until by age they are
entirely dissipated. I have seen specimens furnished
physicians by the drug trade that were wholly
worthless — no wonder they were disappointed in its
action.

The Scutellaria exerts a direct influence upon the
cerebro-spinal centers, controlling irritation. It is
possible that it may also exert a tonic influence,
favoring nutrition. It has been employed with suc-
cess in chorea, convulsions, epilepsy, mania, etc.,
.and especially in hysteria, monomania, and that un-
defined condition that we call " nervousness." I
value the remedy highly, but only recommend it
when prepared from the fresh plant as above.

SECALE CORNUTUM.
(Ergot.)

Preparation. — Prepare a tincture from recent
Ergot Sviij. to Alcohol 50° Oj. Dose from the frac-
tion of a drop to 5J. (Ergot loses its properties
with age, and it is essential, if we wish its specific
action, that the tincture be prepared from the grains
of the present season.)

The Ergot may be taken as the type of a specific
medicine. Its action on the uterus, when fresh and
good is so certain and decided, that no one can fail
to see that at least one remedy acts directly. It is
true, that there have been many failures in obtain-
ing this action, but this can be attributed to worth-
less medicine; a large amount of that fuimished


214 SPBGIFIC MBDIOATION.

physicians from drug-houses being inert from age.

Ergot may be employed in two ways, to facilitate
labor. In quite small doses, say — ^ Tincture of
Ergot, oj* ; Water, Sij. ; a teaspoonful every half
hour or hour, it exerts a stimulant influence,
strengthening uterine contractions, and aiding dila-
tation of the OS. It is especially useful in those
cases in which there is a feeble circulation, with
pufliness of face, and oedema of the feet — among
the worst cases we are called to treat. Associated
with small doses of Lobelia, it is an admirable rem-
edy in rigidity, the os being thick and doughy.
Its common use in large doses, in the second stage
of labor, is so well known that it need not be de-

We employ Ergot in small doses, in the latter
months of gestation, when there are false pains,
with weight and pressure in the pelvis, fullness of
labia with uneasiness, oedema, and especially if
there is dullness aud hebetude, with tendency to
coma. In these cases no remedy will give greater
satisfaction.

Ergot is a spinal stimulant, and influences the
vegetative system of nerves. In some respects its
action is similar to Belladonna, especially upon the
circulation. Not unfrequently, we find it necessary
to alternate them in order to"maintain this influence.

In any case, marked by an enfeebled capillary
circulation, with tendency to congestion, especially
with advantage.


SCROPHULABIA MARILAKDICA. 215

This stimulant influence upon the spinal-cord and
sympathetic is manifested in contraction of non-
striated muscular fiber. Hence Ergot becomes an
important remedy in hemorrhage when dependent
upon atony.

SCILLA MARITIMA.
(Squill.)

Preparation. — Prepare a tincture irom the bulb
Sviij. to Alcohol 60° Oj. Dose from gtt. j. to gtts. x.

In the larger dose, the Squill is a stimulant to
mucous membranes, especially those of the air pas-
sages, and may be employed to check profuse secre-
tion. In minute doses it relieves irritation of
mucous tissues and stimulates secretion.

In dropsy, presenting a dry, harsh skin, parched
tongue, fevered lips, and contraction of features,
the Squill may be employed as a diuretic. In the
majority of cases it has been used with Digitalis,
the dose being large, but it then proved beneficial
in the opposite class of cases — where the circula-
tion was feeble.

Though it has been so extensively employed, it
needs to be re-studied.

SCROPHULARIA MARILANDICA,

(FiGWORT.)

Preparation. — ^Prepare a tincture from the leaves
and root, Sviij. to Alcohol 76® Oj. Dose from gtts.

V. to gtts. XX.


216 SPECIFIC MEDICATION.

The Scrophularia stimulates waste and excretion,
and is probably as certain in its action as any of our
vegetable alteratives. Beyond this it seems to exert
a marked influence in promoting the removal of
cacoplastic deposits. We employ it in scrofula, in
secondary syphilis, in chronic inflammation with
exudation of material of low vitality, and in chronic
skin diseases. In the latter case it is frequently
used as a local application, as well as an internal
remedy.

It exerts an influence upon the urinary and re-
productive organs, and has been employed in soma
obscure affections of these with advantage. Still it
is . feeble and slow, and too much must not be ex-
pected from it.

SENBCIO AUREUS.
(Life Root.)

Preparation. — Prepare a tincture from the fresh
herb and root, Sviij. to Alcohol 76*^ Oj. Dose from
gtt. j. to gtts. X. (Much disappointment has been
experienced from the purchase of the crude article
when old, and from worthless preparations. I
would advise the practitioner, when it can be ob-
tained, to prepare his own tincture from the fresh
plant.)

The Senecio exerts a specific influence upon the
reproductive organs of the female, and to a less
extent upon the male. It relieves irritation and
strengthens functional activity. Hence it has ac-


SILPHIUM PJSBFOLIATUH. 217

quired the reputation of a " uterine tonic." It may
condition of ovaries or uterus, with derangement
of function. It makes little difference whether it
is ameuorrhcea, dysmenorrhcea or menorrhagia, or
whether it takes the form of increased mucous or
purulent secretion, or displacement. The remedy
acts slowly, and sufficient time must be given.

and weight in the perineum, dragging sensations in
the testicle, and difficult or tardy urination. In
both male and female we sometimes use it with ad-
vantage in painful micturition with tenesmus.

SILPHIUM PERFOLIATUM.
(Inman Cup-Plant )

Preparation. — Prepare a tincture from the fresh
root, Sviij. to Alcohol 76° Oj. Dose from gtt. j. to
gtts. X. in water.

The action of this variety of Silphiuna. if we
are to believe the reports of the few who TOe it, is
very direct and certain upon the chylopoietic vis-
cera. It is claimed that it is one of the best reme-
dies in the treatment of ague-cake, and congestion
of liver and spleen, so frequently associated with
chronic intermittents. It is but little employed,
but deserves thorough investigation.


19

i


218 SPBCIFIC MBDICATION.

SILPHIUM aUMMNIFBRUM.
(BosiN Weed.)

Preparation. — Prepare a tincture from the fresh
plant, Sviij. to Alcohol 76° Oj. Dose, from gtt. j.
to gtts. X. The tincture of the^ root may be em-
ployed in some cases of cough, but is not so good
as from the plant.

The Rosin Weed exerts a direct influence upon
the respiratory tract, especially upon the nerve cen-
ters controlling the function. Its principal use thus
far has been in the treatment of asthma, in some
cases of which its action has been very decided. I
think the cases in which it has proven most bene-
ficial, are those in which there is a spasmodic dry
cough, with sensations of dryness and constriction
in the throat. I have not found it beneficial in
lymphatic persons, or where there was congestion
of mucous membranes, or profuse secretion.

I have employed it in the treatment of cough,
with some advantage, but can not specify the cases
in whi||i it was useful or those in which it failed.
It deserves thorough investigation, and will proba-
bly prove a valuable remedy. The tincture of the
root has been furnished the profession by druggists,
and the want of success with it is no evidence that
the preparation from the plant is not anti-asth-
matic.


t


BOJ>M HYPOSULPHIS. 219

SODiB HYPOSULPHIS.
(HyfosuIiPhitb of Soda.)

SOD^ SULPHIS.
(SuLPHiTB OF Soda.) y

It is well to procure these salts of reliable manu-
facturers (say Powers & Weightman), as there are
many imperfect specimens in the market. The first
is in the form of large colorless transparent crystals,
freely soluble in water, the second in white pris-
matic crystals soluble in four parts of cold water :
a want of solubility should cause the preparation
to be rejected. It should be kept tightly corked,
for it changes by exposure to the air. Dose, grs.
X. to grs. XXX. every two or three hours.

In the first part of this work (Alkalies), will be
found the general indication for the use of alkaline
salts. They are very distinct, and can not be mis-
taken — ^pallid mucous membranes, and white coat-
ing on the tongue.

We employ the Sulphite and Hyposul||hite of
Soda as antizymotics, where there are the indica-
tions for the iise of an alkaline salt as above. As a
general rule, the indications for these salts will be —
pallidity of mucous membranes, with a thick,
pasty, white or dirty-white fur upon the tongue.

The influence of zymotic causes of disease on
the fluids and solids is not well understood, but we
know that it impairs their life, even if it does not
cause more rapid sepsis. In some cases this im-


f


220 SPECIFIC MEDICATION.

pairment of vital power is all the change that can
be noted, retrograde metamorphosis progressing
more slowly than in health or ordinary disease.
But the remedies we are studying are more than
antiseptics — they antagonize the zymotic cause
whether it produces sepsis or not.

In local diseases from a zymotic cause, as diph-
theria, cynanche maligna, some forms of catarrh
and influenza, erysipelas, surgical fever, etc., these
remedies exert their specific action when locaUy
employed, as .well as in their internal administra-
tion. The indications, however, must be as named
above — pallidity, with pasty exudates upon tongue.

Their action in arresting the growth of micro-
scopic fungi, and during diseases arising from this
cause, is specific. In yeasty vomiting, presenting
garcina ventriculi, the disease is speedily checked
by the Sulphites. In some forms of apthous sore
mouth and throat, speedy relief is given by their
local application. Some chronic skin diseases are
rendered very stubborn by these minute growths,
and here also the Sulphites will prove valuable.

SULPHUROUS ACID.

We consider the Sulphurous Acid here, rather
than under the head of Acids, from its relations to
the Sulphites just noticed. We employ it as an
anti-zymotic, and a parasiticide, and not for the
common purposes of an acid, though here, as in the
cases of the Alkaline Sulphites, there must be the


SULPHUBOUS -AOIP. 221

general indications for an acid, as there was with
them for an alkali.

The Sulphurous Acid, like the Alkaline Sul-
phites, specifically antagonizes zymotic causes of
disease. It is well to keep in mind the fact that
this IS something more than simply arresting or
modifying the septic process, for we have al-
i-eady seen that the zymotic influence frequently
destroys the life of the fluids and solids without
producing putrescency.

in those cases which present reddened mucous
membranes, with brownish coatings of tongue and
sordes. Given, the indications for the use of an
anti-zymotic, with the indications for the use of an
acid, we select the Sulphurous Acid.

Sulphurous Acid may be employed in yeasty vom-
iting, in apthous mouth and throat, or wherever tKfe
presence of microscopic fungi is suspected, with the
same certainty as the Sulphite of Soda. We also
use it in porrigo, trichosis of sealp^ ptyriasis versi-
color, with excellent results. As a local application
it should be diluted with from two to six parts of
water.

I wish to call especial attention to its use in some
diseases of the throat, by the spray or atomizing
apparatus. In diphtheria, with dark-redness of
mucous membranes, and fullness with relaxation,
there is no local remedy equal to Sulphurous Acid
spray. It is equally beneficial in those cases of
cynanche maligna, with dark-redness of mucous


222 8PB0IFI0 MBDIOAnON.

membranes. Whilst in ordinary sore tiiroat from
cold, with dusky discoloration^ it offers one of the
best local applications in the Materia Medica.

80LANDM DULCAMARA.
(BrrrxBswEST).

Preparation. — ^Prepare a tinctare from the fresh
twigs gathered in the fall, when the leaves have
fallen, Sviij. to Alcohol 70° Oj. Dose, from gtt. j.
to gtts. X.

The Bittersweet has the reputation of being a
good alterative, in cutaneous diseases, syphilis,
scrofula and inflammatory deposits, and we con-
clude that it increases waste and excretion. It ex-
erts a marked influence upon the cerebro-spinal
centers, when used in large doses, but this has not
\feen studied.

I would advise the employment of the remedy in
small doses in those cases of chronic disease in
which the circulation is feeble, the hands and feet
cold and purplish, with fullness of tissues and ten-
dency to oedema. I do uQt know that it will prove
better than other remedies, but it deserves investi-
gation.

SPONGIA USTA.
(Bu&NT Sfonos ).

Take of ordinary sponge a sufficient quantity, cut
it in pieces, and burn it in a close iron vessel until
it is brown and can be pulverized without much


. 6P0K6IA URTA. 228

trouble. Kow, take of this powder four ounces,
pack in a percolator, and gradually add Alcohol
76° Oj Dose of the tincture from the fraction of a
drop to 5s8.

I give the formula for the preparation of a tinc-
ture of burnt sponge, not because I think it pos-
sesses all the properties attributed to it by Homoeo-
paths, but that it may be tested. I have used it in
some cases with seeming advantage, and have seen
results following its prescription by others, that in
the ordinary use of medicine we would call remark-
able • cures. A quotation from Jahr's Eepertory
will show the Homceopathic uses :

" Diseases of the lymphatic vessels and glands ;
heat, with dry, hot skin, thirst,, headache and de-
lirium ; redness of the eyes; with burning and
lachrymation ; frequent eructations, with cutting
and tearing in the stomach ; relaxed feeling in the
stomach, as if the stomach were* open ; orchitis ; in-
duration of the testes; pain in the larynx on touch-
ing it and turning the head ; burning in the larynx
and trachea ; dryness^ husky and hoarse voice ; inflam-
mation of the larynx J trachea and bronchi ; croup; laryn-
geal and tracheal phthisis; cough, deep frbm the
chest, with soreness and burning, pr chronic cough
with yellowish expectoration and hoarseness ;
wheezing inspirations; asthma with amenorrhoea;
goitre ; hard goitre.'


224 SPECIFIO MBDIOATION.

STAPHYLEA TRIFOLIA.

(Bladder Nut.)

Preparation. — Prepare a tincture from the bark of
the root, Sviij. to Alcohol 76° Oj. Dose from gtts.
V, to 5j.

The Staphylea has been confounded with the
Ptelea, until we hardly know whether a writer in
the olden times was describing one or the other.
The probabilities are, however, that the articles de-
by him as a tonic, was the article under considera-
tion. At least it would be . well for some of our
friends who know the article, to procure specimens
and thoroughly test it.

Dr. Jones claimed that it was a pure unirritating
tonic, having a soothing influence upon mucous
membranes. He employed it in the convalescence
after fevers and inflammations, and whenever the
stomach was feeble and irritable.

STILLINGIA SYLVATIOA.
(Stilungia.)

Preparation, — ^Prepare a tincture from the recent

dried root, Sviij. to Alcohol 98"^ Oj. Dose from

gtt. j. to gtts X.

Stillingia increases waste and excretion, but its

principal action probably is upon the lymphatic sys-
tem, favoring the formation of good lymph, hence
good blood and nutrition. Experience shows that
,it favorably influences the system in secondary


♦*


STILLINQIA STLVAXIOA. 2S25

syphilis, in Bome form^ of Bcrofala, and in cases of
chronic disease where the tissues are feehle and not
readily removed and renewed.

I believe it to be more especially useful in those
cases where there is predominant affection of
mucous membranes, and secondly, where the skin
is involved. In these cases I have used the simple
tincture as above, largely diluted with water, with
much better results than I have obtained from any
of the compounds of Stillingia or alterative syrups.
Evidently in the ordinary manufacture of " Com-
pound Syrup of Stillingia,*^ the virtues of Stillingia,
if it has any, are wholly lost, simply because water
or dilute alcohol is not a proper menstruum.

Stillingia exerts a specific influence upon the
mucous membranes of the throat, larynx, and bron-
chii, relieving irritation and favoring normal nutri-
tion and functional activity. Some cases of chronic
pharyngitis of years' standing, have been relieved
by this remedy, affcer other treatment had failed.
It is an excellent remedy in the treatment of some
cases of chronic laryngitis, speedily relieving the
irritation and cough, and we also employ it in
chronic bronchitis with like good results. Now if
it is possible to determine the class of cases in
which it is thus beneficial, the reader may use it with
advantage.

So far as my experience extends, they are those
with tumid, red, glistening mucous membranes,
with scanty secretion. This condition indeed seems
to be the index for the use of the remedy for every


226 SPECIFIC MEBICATION.

purpose. In syphilis, iu scrofula, in chronic inflam-
mation with deposits, the same red glistening color,
with scanty secretion, is my guide to the use of
Stillingia.

STRYCHNOS NUX VOMICA.
(Nux Vomica.)

Preparation. — Prepare a tincture from freshly
powdered seeds, Sviij. to Alcohol 76° Oj. Dose,
from the fraction of a drop to five drops. A solu-
tion of Strychnia may be prepared after the follow-
ing formula: 'B^ Sulphate of Strychnia, grs. iv. ;
Water, Si v. ; dose, gtts. v. ^^ gr. to gtts. xx. ^'^ gr.

Nux Vomica exerts a specific influence upon the
intestinal canal and associate viscera that renders
it a most valuable remedy.

In minute doses we employ it to arrest nausea
and vomiting, when this arises from gastric irritabil-
ity and not from irritant material in the stomach.
The cases are those in which there is feebleness of
the organs, and not where there is irritation and in-
flammation. For this purpose we employ it in
cholera infantum with marked benefit, and in
cholera morbus and Asiatic cholera to relieve this
symptom.

It is the remedy in all cases of congestion of liverj
spleen, or portal circle. Given, a feeling of fullness
in right hypochondrium, pain in side or shoulder,
sallowness of fac^ yellowness of eyes, yellow coat
that I never felt in the olden time.


STBY0HNO8 JXXJX VOMIOA. 227

If an intermittent fever presents these evidences
of visceral derangement, Nax Vomica is the antipe-
riodic, or at least it prepares the way for the kindly
and^rative laction of Quinine. In bilious remittent
fevers with these symptoms, Nux Vomica is the first
remedy indicated. In diarrhoea with these symp-
charges will be speedily arrested, and the stomach
and intestinal canal left in good condition. In dys-
pepsia with these symptoms, we obtain speedy and
permanent relief from the use of the remedy.

It is here, as we have found it in the considera-
tion of other remedies, if you can once determine the
exact indication for its use, you may employ it
whenever you find these indications, no matter what
may be the name of the disease, or the condition of
the patient otherwise.

The influence of Nux Vomica and Strychnia upon
the spinal cord is well known, and this seems to be
its principal use in medicine. Whilst I think it
better, in the majority of cases, to restrict its use
as above, there are some in which we employ it for
its influence upon the aervous system alone. These
are : — •

In typhoid and asthenic disease, where there is
impairment of spinal innervation, and in conse-
quence imperfect or enfeebled respiration, we give
Strychnia or Nux Vomica with advantage. Indeed,
in those cases in which the respiratory function can
only be carried on under the influence of the will,
it is the only remedy we can rely on.


228 SPBOIVIO MBDICATION.

In the Bame dasBes of disease^ the tendency to
retention of urine is met by the UBe of the same
remedy.

In some cases of the same diseases, where a feeble
circula^on is associated with general impairment
of mifscular power, and inability to co-ordinate
muscular movement, we use Nux Vomica with ad-
vantage.

Nux Vomica or Strychnia should never be em-
ployed in the treatment of paralysis so long as any
evidence of inflammatory action exists ; neither
should it be used, if there are marked evidences of
cerebro-spinal congestion, until this is removed. It
is the first remedy employed in cases of paralysis
presenting the symptoms of visceral derangement we
have already named. In other cases it is only em-
ployed as a nerve stimulant, when the nerve centers
are free from disease.

SULPHUE.

Preparation. — ^Prepare Sulphur for dispensing, by
thorough trituration with two parts of Sugar of
Milk. Dose from gr. j. to Sss.

We employ Sulphur as a restorative in those cases
in which there is a deficiency of this element in the
blood. *'A11 the protein-compounds contain Sul-
phur, which seems to be one of their essential con-
stituents, not capable of entire separation without
the complete destruction of the organic substance,"
(Carpenter). There are few, probably, who have


SULPHUR. 229

thought of .Sulphur in this relation ; they supply
Iron as the basis of red corpuscles, Phosphorus for
the nutrition of the nervous system, but the protein
tissues must get their supply of Sulphur from the
food, or do without.

The indication for the use of Sulphur as a resto-
rative is, enfeebled nutrition associated with de-
coloration of tissues, and secretions. The skin is
blanched, the iris loses color, the hair is lighter in
color in the young, changes rapidly to gray in the
middle aged, and the urine is light colored as is the
feces. The presence of cystine in the urine is an
indication for the administration of Sulphur.

We also employ Sulphur in those cases in which
there is excessive fetor of the excretions. We will
occasionally find a case of chronic disease, in which
the breath, the secretion from the skin, the urine,
and the feces have a peculiar cadaverous^ odor, and
we notice that with this there is a remarkable ten-
dency to decomposition, and to breaking down of
tissue.

It is possible that this may be explained, by the
necessity of Sulphur in the formation of the tau-
rine of the bile. If this secretion of the liver Is

*

the normal antiseptic, and controls putreecency in
the body, we can see why a deficiency of Sulphur
may lead to the condition above named^ and its ad-
ministration be directly curative.


280 SPECIFIC MEDICATION.

SYMPLOCARPUS FCETIDUS.
(Skunk Cabbage.)

Preparation, — ^Prepare a tincture from the fresh
root, Sviij. to Alcohol 76° Oj. Dose from gtt. j. to
gtts. V.

Though the Skunk Cabbage has been extensively
used, it has been in combination with other reme-
dies, and the reports are so vague that we can not
estimate its remedial action. It exerts a very de-
cided influence upon the nervous system, relieving
irritation and preventing normal functional activity.
This, probably, will be its principal use. The
remedy deserves to be thoroughly studied.

TANACETUM VULGARE.

(Tansy.)

Preparalion. — Prepare a tincture from the fresh
herb gathered in August, using Sviij. to Alcohol
76° Oj. Dose gtts. j. to gtt. xx. As a local ap-
plication to the throat use one part of the tincture
to four to ten parts of hot water, with a spray appa-
ratus ; or not having this, vaporize the fluid and let
the patient inhale the steam.

In small doses the tincture as above prepared
will furnish a cheap and agreeable stomachic, reliev-
ing irritation and improving functional activity.
It exerts a decided stimulant influence upon the
female reproductive organs, and may be employed
in functional diseases when such influence is desir-
able. ♦


TELA ABANEiE. 2S1

As a local application by spray or inhalation, it is
a very valuable remedy in the treatment of diph-
theria, and some forms of acute inflammation of
the throat, and in epidemic catarrh. I have em-
ployed it in these cases with most marked advan-
tage, and value it very highly.

TARAXACUM DENS LEONIS.
(Dandelion.)

Preparation. — ^Prepare a tincture from the fresh
root gathered in July or August, Sviij. to Alcohol
76° Oj. Dose from gtts. v. to Sss.

The Taraxacum loses its medical properties by
drying, hence that usually supplied by the drug
trade is wholly inert. Prepared as above, it will
prove a valuable remedy.

It exerts a stimulant influence upon the entire
gastro-intestinal tract, promoting functional activity.
Whilst its action is feeble, it is very certain, and
will frequently prove more desirable than the more
active remedies.

TELA ARANE^.
(Spidee's Web.)

Prom the web of the common house spider, pre-
pare a tincture by macerating Sij-*iu Alcohol 98° Oj.
for ten days. Dose, gtt. j. to gtts. x.

It is claimed to be a very certain remedy in the
cure of intermittents. I give a formula for its
preparation, that it maybe tested. > The tincture of


282 8PE0IFIC MSDIOATION.

the Aranea Diadema is employed in Germany by
some HomoBopathS) and cases reported in which the
cure was speedy and permanent.

■

THUJA OCCIDBNTALIS.
(Arbor VrriB.)

"Preparation. — Prepare a tincture from the fresh
leaves, Sviij. to Alcohol 76° Oj Dose from gtt, j.

to gttS. XX.

The leaves of the Arbor Vitce has been a popular
remedy in the treatment of intermittent and re-
mittent fever, rheumatism, scurvy, etc. It would
be well for some of our practitioners to prepare a
tincture and test it.

TRIFOLIUM PRATENSE.
(Red Clover.)

Preparaiion, — ^Prepare a tincture from the recently
dried blossoms of Red Clover, Sviij. to Alcohol 50®
Oj. Dose from gtt. j. to gtts. x.

The Red Clover exerts a specific influence in
some cases of whooping cough, and in the cough
of measles. It is not curative in all, but when it
does good, the benefit is speedy and permanent.
cough, in laryngitis, bronchitis and phthisis. We
should be able to tell the exact condition where it
proves beneficial, and where it fails, but thus far the
use has been wholly empirical. In the further use
of the remedy all the symptoms should be noted.


UBTICA DIOICA. 288

It lias given mach satisfaction thus far, and is
likely to prove a very valuable remedy.

TRILLIUM PENDULUM. •
(Bbthboot.)

Preparation. — ^Prepare a tincture from the fresh
root, Sviij. to Alcohol 76° Oj. Dose from gtt. j. \o
gtts. X.

The common use of Trillium in large doses ob-
tained its astringent influence, possibly from the
tannin it contains. The preparation from the fresh
root named above, is but slightly astringent.

We would employ it in disease of mucous mem-
branes with increased secretion, and expect decided
benefit. In the earlier part of my practice I used
Trillium in chronic bronchitis, in chronic catarrh*
in cough with free expectoration, with excellent re-
sults. It needs to be thoroughly studied, and it will
probably supply a want in our Materia Medica.

URTIOA DIOICA.
(Common Nettlb.)

Preparation. — ^Prepare a tincture from the fresh
plant, Sviij. to Alcohol 76° Oj. Dose from gtts. j,
to gtts. X.

The Urtica has been employed in some diseases

of the bowels, with reported good results. An old

practitioner informs \rne, that in chronic disease of

the large intestine with increased mucous secretion,

20


284 8PEGIFI0 MIDIOAXION.

he has never found anything so beneficial as this
remedy. It has also been used in diseases of the
urinary organs. ^

It is noyir but little used, but deserves investiga-
tion.

VALERIANA OFFICINALIS.
• (Yalxrian.)

Preparation. — Prepare a tincture from the root (as

recent as can be obtained), Sviij. to Alcohol 50° Oj.

Dose from gtts. ij. to gtts. xx;
Valerian is a cerebral stimulant, and may be em-

ployed wherever a remedy of this character is iudi-
cated. It allays nervous irritability, modifies or
arrests pain, promotes rest, and favors sleep, where
these conditions result from an enfeebled cerebral
circulation. It is very extensively used, and . many
times without benefit, as the condition of the ner-
vous centers is very rarely taken into consideration.

VERATRUM VIRIDK
(Veeatrum.)

Preparation. — ^Prepare a tincture from the recent
root, not fully dried, 5viy. to Alcohol 76° Oj. Dose
from the fraction of a drop to three drops. Vera-
trum from Western New York furnishes an excel-
lent remedy, as is that from North Carolina and
Northern Georgia. Specimens I have seen from
the Western States were worthless. The root
should be dug in August or September, freed from


VSRATBUM. 285

dirt, and dried sufficiently to permit of shipment
to the place of manufacture. Now, it should be
immediately crushed, and the year's supply of tinc-
ture prepared.

As commonly prepared for the drug trade, (Nor-
wood's excepted), it is made of the dried root kept
in stock from year to year^and possesses veiy feeble,
if any medical properties. In this case, as wfth
some other remedies, the process of drying destroys
that finer medical action upon which we depend to
influence the sympathetic nervous system.

■

We employ the Veratrum to lessen the frequency
of the heart's action. When •properly used it not
only lessens the frequency of the pulse, but it re-
moves obstruction to the free circulation of the
blood, and thus gives slowness, regularilry, freedom,
and an equal circulation in all parts of the body.
This action we call arterial sedation, though the
name is not a good one.

To obtain this action it is necessary that the
remedy be used in small doses, frequently repeated,
and -that sufficient time be given to accomplsh the
object without disturbing function or producing
depression.

Veratrum is sedative in large doses, and its influ-
ence upon the heart may be speedily obtained in
this way. But in this case its influence is depress-
ing. It evidently causes slowness of the pulse by
paralyzing the cardiac nerves. If the influence is
continued there is impairment of the circulation,
with tendency to congestion. As a general rule,


4


286 SPBCIFIC ' MBBIOATION.

the influence of large doses can not be maintained ;
either the ' remedy produces irritation of the
stomach, so that it will no longer be tolerated, or
its depressing influence upon the circulation becomes
so great that it must be suspended.

In small doses the Veratrum is a stimulant to all
the vegetative processes. Acting though the sym-
pathetic or ganglionic system^ of nerves, it removes
obstruction to the capillary circulation, gives tone
to the vascular system, and strength to the heart.
As the obstacles to a free circulation are removed,
aud the vessels through which the blood is distrib-
uted and returned, i%gain their normal condition,
there is les0 necessity for increased action upon the
part of the heart ; and as the power of the heart is
increased, tkere is less necessity for frequent con->
traction.

I give this as a theory of the action of Veratrum,
but whether true or not, there is no question with
regard to the facts as above stated.

Veratrum is the remedy for sthenia, where there
is a fftquent but free circulation. It is also the
remedy where there is an active capillary circula-
tion, both in fever and inflammation. A full and
bounding pulse, a full and hard pulse, and a corded
or wiry pulse, if associated with inflammation of
serous tissues, call for this remedy.

As was remarked when describing Aconite, the
Veratrum exerts a similar influence in acute inflam-
mation, and directly controls the inflammatory pro-
cess in its firat stages. As a rule, the remedies


I


VBBATRUM. 287

that will cure fever will cure inflammation. To
this I believe there are no exceptions, if a proper
diagnosis is made, and we are governed by the same
indications for prescribing. Aconite, Veratrum,
Gelseminum, Belladonna, ISux Vomica, Quinia, and
same certainty in inflammation as in fever. There
is the same necessity for securing a good condition
of stomach and upper intestine for digestion, and
giving proper food. The same necessity for secur-
ing normal waste and excretion, and having the tis-
sues renewed from good blood. The pallid tongue
calls for alkalies, the dark redness of mucous mem-
branes for acids, the pasty white coat for the sul-
phites, etc.

My experience teaches me that local inflamma-
tions are reached directly by this direct medication,
and with a certainty a hundred times greater than
by the old routine of internal and external counter-
irritation. It makes no difference where its loca-
tion, how great or how little, the treatment is ex-
actly the same as for a fever presenting the same
symptoms or indications for remedies.

It must not be expected that the indications for
remedies will be as pronounced in the case of in-
flammation as in fever, but they are always suffi-
cient.

I have treated inflammation of the lungs with
Veratrum alone, Veratrum with Gelseminum, Vera-
trum with Ipecac, Ipecac alone, Aconite alone, with
a success I never saw obtained from the use of nau-


238 SPECIFIC MBBICATIOK.

seants and counter-irritation. Other cases required
the use of the Sulphites, of Quinia, or the mineral
acids. I am not alone in this experience, for scores
of our more recent students, who have learned this
practice in lectures, give testimony to its success.

The local application of Veratrum, in the early
stages of a superficial inflammation, will not unfre-
quently arrest its progress. In this way we use it
in erysipelas, in phlegmons inflammation of cellular
tissue, in felons, diseases of the bones, tonsilitis, etc.

We employ Veratrum in the treatment of chronic
disease for its stimulant influence upon the vegeta-
tive processes. Properly used, we find that it lessens
the frequency of the pulse, giving a free and uni-
form circulation ; it lessens the temperature ; Jt in-
creases waste and excretion ; and finally it stimu-
lates digestion and nutrition.

My friend. Prof. Howe, regards it as one of the
most direct and certain " Alteratives '^ in the Mate-
ria Medica, and in this opinion he is supported by a
large number of practitioners. If the remedy has
the action above named, we can readily see how it
favorably influences chronic disease, and how fre-
quently it may be employed with advantage.

VERBASCUM THAPSUS.
(Mullein.)

Preparation. — Prepare a tincture from the fresh
tops and smaller leaves when the plant is in flower,
SviiJ. to Alcohol 50° Oj. Dose from gtts, v. to 3j.


VIBURNUM PBUNIFOLIUM. 289

The Yerbascum exerts a mild influence upon tlie
nervous system, quieting irritation and promoting
sleep. It also allays bronchial irritation, and checks
cough. It is very feeble, and has but a limited use.

VIBURNUM OPULUS.
(HiQH Cranbebby.)

Preparation. — ^Prepare a tincture from the recent
bark, Sviij. to Alcohol 50° Oj. Dose, from gtts. v.

to gtts. XX.

The Viburnum has been employed as an anti-
spasmodic with reported success, hence its name,
cramp bark. If we are to be guided by the descrip-
tions of our earlier practitioners, we would conclude
that it exerted a direct influence in controlling
spinal irritation, and spasmodic action arising from
this. I have never used it, though I think it worthy
a triaL

VIBURNUM PRUNIFOLIUM.
(Black Haw.)

Ireparation. — Prepare a tincture from the recent
bark of the root, Sviij. to Alcohol 50*^ Oj. Dose
from gtts. V. to gtts. xx.

It is claimed in the Southern States that the
Viburnum is a speciflc against abortion. I have
been told by several parties, that it was a common
practice among planters to make their slaves drink
an infusion of the Viburnum daily whilst preg-
nanty to prevent abortion from taking the Cotton-


240 SPBCIFIO MEDICATIOK.

root. A pbyfiician from Texas assured me, that
from an observation of fifteen years, be was confi-
dent tbat it exerted this influence, and tbat be bad

If it exerts tbis influence upon tbe uterus, it will
prove a valuable remedy, not only as anti-abortive,
but in diseases of tbe reproductive organs.

XANTHOXYLUM FRAXINEUM,
(Pbioklt Ash.)

PreparaHon. — Prepare a tincture from tbe berries,
Sviij. to Alcobol 98° Oj. Dose from tbe fraction of
a drop to five drops.

Tbe Xantboxylum bas been employed as a diffu-
sible and topical stimulant. Its general stimulant
action is not very marked, and tbere are many
otber remedies preferable. But as a stimulant to
mucous tissues it, bas no equal in tbe. Materia
Medica. Whenever it is desirable to obtain such
influence, wbetber of tbe tbroat, tbe gastro-intesti-
nal tract, tbe mucous membranes of tbe air-passages,
or of tbe urinary organs, we are rarely disappointed
in its action. Upon tbe tbroat, tbe stomacb, and
upon tbe intestines, it exerts a topical influence be-
fore absorption.

In small doses we occasionally employ it in
cbronic diseases of mucous surfaces, witb good re-
sults. Tbe cases are as above, wben tbe mucous
membranes are enfeebled and relaxed, witb hyper-
secretion.


INDEX.


Analysis of Disease 11

Administration of Medicines 24

Atony of Stomacli 40

Alkaline Sulphites 47

Abies Canadensis 54

JBsculus Glabra 64

.JSsculus Hippocastanum — 56

Acids 57

Alkalies 68

Achillea Millefolium 60

Aconitum Napellus 61

Actflsa Alba « 64

Agave Americana 65

Agrimonia Eupatoria....*. ^ 66

Agrimony 66

Aletris Farinosa 67

Alnus Bubra...... 67

Aloes 68

Ammonium, Bromide of 69

" Iodide of. 70

Ampelopsis Quinquefolia * ^ 70

Amygdalus Persica y. 71

Anagallis Arvensis 71

Anemone Nemorosa 72

Apocynum Gannabinum •« 72

Aralia Hispida 74

Arnica Montana 74

Artemesia Absinthium ^ 76

Artemesia Santonica i » « 76

Asdepias «....;; • ^ •• 77

21


242 INDEX.

Asclepias Taberosa m ^ ... ^..^ ..•• «..., 77

ABpidium i^ilix Mas^ «•••..• 78

ABafntida 79

Atropa Belladonna « 79

Atropia ., • ^«.: 79

Apis Meltiflca ^•.... ^....... « ~ 82

Agaric - ^ ^ ^ ^ 83

Ash ^ 126

American Coffee Tree 133

Apple Tree • - « 190

American Oentaury 206

Arbor VitSB ^ 232

Best Menstraam for Medicines 28

Blood Poisons ^ • ^, 47

Buckeye « 54

Bromide of Ammoniam 69

Belladonna ^ 79

Boletus Laricis ^ 83

Baptisia Tinctoria 86

Benzoic Acid 88

Berberis Yulgaris ^ 89

Barberry — 89

Bebeerina Sulphas 89

Bismuth , ^ 90

Bromide of Potassium „ 91

Bromine ^ 91

Bidens Bipinnata 92

Bryonia ••••••••• „ 92

Brayera Anthelmintica t ^ 92

Blue Cohosh : 99

Balitony « 101

Bush Honeysuckle .*. 115

Boneset « ^ 122

Bowman's Boot 123

Balsam Apple : 164

Black Hellebore „ „ 137

Blue Flag , 146

Butternut 147


IKDB2C. 248

Blackroot ^ m..- ^...^^ISl

Batton Snakeroot».««M • —153

Bugle Weed 156

Bayberry • — —163

Beech Drops .* • U68

Black Pepper 175

Black Alder 182

Buckthoi^ ^ .....196

Black Locust ^ 202

Black Willow 205

Blood Root , 208

Bittersweet « 222

Burnt Sponge ••••••.•• 222

Bladder Nut .• 224

Beth Root *., 233

Condition of Digestive Organs • 17

Olassification of Medicines. ..••• ••.....• •••,••• ••... 37

Condition of the Stomach m. 39

Circulation , 41

Chloral Hydrate 104

Cardiac Stimulants 45

Cohosh White 64

«* Black ..64

" Blue...., 99

Century Plant 65

Calendula Officinalis 92

Calx .*. 93

Camphor 93

Cannabis Sativa 94

Cantharis Vesicatoria 95

Cactus Grandiflorus 96

Capsicum • 97

Cayenne Peppei 97

Carbo Ligni 98

Charcoal 98

Cassia Acutifolia 99

Caulophyllum :, 99

Ceanothus Americanus 101


S44 INDSX.

Oelaftms Scandent ...•••• ....^lOl

Cbelone Glabra 101

Chimapbilla UmbellaU ^101

Obionantbtu Yirginica •...».1Q2

Gbloroform 103


OiBtaB GanadensiB .\. 108

Cinnamon • ...109

OlematU Yirginiana 110

Coffee -110

OoUinsonia Canadensia 110

Colchicum ...Ill

Colocynth ..112

Cypripedium Pubeacens • ..113

Canada Fleabane * 119

Columbo 125

Cleavers ..127

Cranesbill ...130

Cotton 132

Catnip 166

Cod Liver Oil 167

Crawley 167

Crowfoot 196

DiBease, Analysis of...... ^ 11

DiagAosis Specific » 14

Disease, Bale for Measuring 15

Digestive Apparatus, Condition of. 17

Difference from Homcsopatby 21

Dose of Medicine 30

Differential Tberapoutics of Acconite and Yeratrum........ 62

Dwarf Elder 74

Datura Stramonium 114

Delpbinum Stapbisagria 114

Delpbinum Consolida. 115

Diervilla Canadensis 115

Digitalis Purpurea 115

Dioscorea Yillosa 116

Drosera Botundifolia... 117


I


IKOBX. 246

Excretion t 20

Spigea Bepens * 118

Epilobium Palustre 118

Erechthites Hieracifoliua 119


Eryngiom Aquatioom • 120

EuonymuB Atropurpureus 120

Eapatorium AromaticiuD 121

Eupatorium Teucrifolium. 121

Eapatorium Furpuream 122

Eupatorium Perforatum 122

Euphorbia Gorollata 123

Elecampane ^.142

Elaterium 162

Elder 207

Ergot ^ ^213

Ferrum J ^.123

Frasera Carolinensis — 12ft

FraxinuB Sambucifolia. 126

False Bittersweet «101

Fringe Tree ^.102

Foxglove , 115

Fireweed 119

Fleabane 119

Five Fingers 70

Fresh Medicines 32

Form of Medicine , • 27

Feverfew 186

False Wintorgreen • ^ 190

Figwort ^ ^ ^ 216

Good Nursing • • -..••• 24

Galium Aparine •••••^ 126

Gaultheria Procumbent 127

Gelseminum Sempervirens 127

Gentiana Lutea „ 129

Gentian ^ —129

Geranium Maculatum ....^130

Gerardia Pedicularia 130

Gillenia Trifoliata .130


246 IHBBX.


Qlycerffte -..«•.•. 131

Gnaphaliam Polycephalum ^ ••••.....132

Gk)fisjpium Herbaceum - '^ —132

Goaiacum Officinale....; .v. 133

Gymnoclados Canadensis ^•.•.•. —133

Golden Seal .« -—...139

Ginseng - ...••••- — «. ..^ ....^.168

Glycerole of Tar » - 176

Hemlock • - 54

Horse Chestnut - 56

Hemp, Indian. • • 72

Honey Bee... - 82

Hemp .••.... ...••• 94

Hamamelis Yirginica •* •...• — • 134


Helianthemum Canadense**......* •.•••• ^••••••a •••••• ...••• ....136

Helleboras Niger - ••..^ 137

Helonias Bloica - .•••m 137

Hepatlca Americana 138

Heracleum Lanatum 138

Hydrangea Aborescens —139

Hydrastis Canadensis ...139

Hyoscyamus Niger •«•.••... —140

Henbane *140

Hoarhound • - 169

Hypodermic Use of Morphia— ••.... • 170

Hypophosphites 173

Hair-Cap Moss ..181

High Cranberry 239

Haw, Black 239

Irritation of Stomach ;. 39

Innervation 50

Innla Helenium 142

Iodine 142

Iodide of Potassium 142

" " Sodium 143

u tt Ammonium..... 70, 143

« « SUrch 144


INDBX. • 247
Ipecacuanlia.. • 144

Iris YersiooloT -••••• 146

Iron ~ 123

Iron by Hydrogen 123

Iron, Tinctare of Chloride of. 123

Indian Physic - .! 130

Ice Plant 162

Indian Gup-Plant 21 7

Jamestown Weed • 114

Jalap • ...146

Jeffersonia Biphylla 147

JuglanB Cinerea 147

Juniperus Sabina • 148

JaooVs Ladder » 188

Kalmia Latifolia 148

Lifo, Benewal of • 18

Laws of Cure 21

Liquor Bismuth 90

Lime - 93

Lady's Slipper 113

Larkspur 116

Liverleaf 138

Laurus Sassafras 149

Larix Americana .160

Lavandula Vera 160

Lavender • 160

Leonurus Cardiaca ...161

Leptandra Yirginica ....161

Leptandrin 163

Liatris Spicata • 1 63

Liquidambar Styraciflua 163

Liriodendron Tulipifera... ..* 164

Lobelia Inflata 164

Lycopus Yirginicus..... 166

Lion's Foot 164

Lungwort 187

Life Root 216


248 INDEX.

Meuaring DiseaM , .....^. 15

Medicines, Administraiion of. • 34

<( Should act slowly ^ 26

« Pleasant 29

« Dose of. 30

^ PrQportion of .31

Malaria : 49

Maguey * 65

Milkweed 17

Marigold ; 92

Masterwort 138

Motherwort. 151

Magnesia, Sulphite of. ...157

Magnolia 159

Marrubium Yulgare *. 159

Maruta Gotula 160

Mayweed...*. 160

Menispernum Oanadense 160

Mentha Yiridis »160

Mitchella Repens ..161

Manatropa TJniflora 162

Myrica Gerifera ^ 163

Momordioa Balsamina 164

Male Fern 78

Morphia.. 170

May Apple ....177

Mullein 238

Nosology 11

Nutritive Processes i.. 63

Night Blooming Oereus «.... 95

Nabalus Albus < 164

Kepeta Cataria i4 :...165

Kicotiana Tabacum ..165

Nym^lna Odorata 166

Nux Vomica 226

Nettle ...233 *

Opposition to Disease 9

Opponens Opponenda. 22


INBBX. 249

One thing at a time ^ 25

Office Pharmacy - 36

Objects of Treatmeat ^ 38

Oleum Morrhu89 167

Origanum Vulgare ^. 167

Orobanche Yirginiana 168

Opium 169

Proper Pood 19

Percolation 36

Physical Properties of Bemedies 34

Pharmacy, Office - 35

Peach Tree 71

Polyporus Officinalis ; B3

" Pinicola 84

Pipsissewa ^ 101

Pennyroyal 136

Partrigeberry 161

Paeonia Officinalis..... 168

Panax Quinquefolium 168

Papaver Somniferum 169

Peroxide of Hydrogen....^ 172

Phosphorus , 172

Phosphate of Soda ...173

Phytolacca Decandra 174

Poke .-..m 174

Piper Nigrum ; » 176

Pix Liquida ; • 176

Plantago Cordata 177

Podophyllum : 177

Podophyllin „.177

Polemonium Reptans 180

Polygala Senega 180

Polygonum Punctatum 181

Polypodium Yulgare .'....181

Polytrichum Juniperum 181

^Populus Tremuloides 182

Poplar 182

Prinos Yerticillatus 182


"1


260 I5DSX.

Prunos Yirginiana •• — « 183

Ptelea Trifbliata »..^«^ I..183

Fteris Atroporpurea ~ - %.....« • .184


Propylamin ^ 185

Pterospora Andromeda 187

Pulmonaria Officinalis 187

Pulsatilla Nigricans .188

Pulsatilla 188

Pyrethrum Parthenium 189

Pyrola Rotundifolia 190

Pyrus Malus 190

Potassii Ferrocyanuretum 195

Prussiate of Potash 195

Poison Oak 200

Queen of the Meadow ^...122

Quercus Bubra ..^ 191

Quinia Sulphas 191

Kule for Measuring Disease 15

Bemoval of Worn-out Tissue 17

Retrograde Metamorphosis 52

Bed Ghickweed 71

Bed Boot 101

BockBose. 136, 108

Bock Brake 184

Bed Oak 191

Banunculus Bulbosus 196

Bhamnus Catharticus 196

Bheum Palmatum 197

Bhubarb 197

Bhododendron Chrysanthum 199

Bhododendron - 199

Bhus Glabrum «.199

Bhus Toxicodendron 200

Bobinia Pseudo-Acacia 202

Buniez Acetosella 202

Bumex Crispus. 203

Buta Graveolens 204


INDEX. 251

Bue - -204

Boein-weed .•.••••« ..•218

Red Clover ^ 232

Specific Medication, Theory of «. - 9

" Use of the Word 10

Selection of Bemedies.^ 13

Specific Diagnosis • 14

'Single Bemedies 16

Similia Similihus..^^ ^.....^. 21

Strength of Fluid Bemedies 33

Sedation, Theory of. - - 44

Santonine • *,,». 76

Silkweed.... 77

Spanish Fly 96

Spanish Needles ^ 92

Senna 99

Stone Boot 110

Staphysagria - 1 14

Sundew ^ 177

Seven Barks 139

Savin .-148

Sweet Gum 163

Spearmint 160

Senega - « „ .180

Sumach ; 199

Sheep Sorrel • 202

Sabbatia Angularis < 205

Salix Nigra...; 206

Salvia Officinalis ^ 206

Sage 206

Sambucus Canadensis 207

Sanguinaria Canadensis 208

Sanicula Marilandica 208

Sanicle 208

Sarracenia Purpurea * 209

" Scutellaria Lateriflora- ...• .^ 212

Skull Cap 212

Secale Gornutum \ 213


252 INDBX.

Scilla Maritima ^ 215

Squill ^ ^ «216

Scrophularia Marilandica 216

Senecio Aureas - 216

Silphlom Ferfoliatam......^ 217

Silphium Gumniferum - 218

Sods HypoBulphig 219

Sod© Sulphis ^ ^ .219

SulphuToufl Acid .^••..« ^.220

Solanum Balcamara 222

SpongiaUsta ^ « 222

Staphyllea Trifoliata^ ^..^ ..224

Stillingia Sylvatica 224

StrjchnoB Kux Vomica..... 226

Strychnia - 227

Salphur 228

SymplocarpuB Foetidus .*...230

Skunk Cabbage » 230

Theory of Specific Medication ^ 9

" " Sedation 44

Temperature 46

Tag Alder 67

Trailing Arbutus 118

Twinleaf. 147

Tobacco 166

Tar 176

Thuja Occidentalis 232

Trifolium Fratense 232

Trillium Fendulum 233

Tanacetum Yulgare ..233

Use of the Word Specific 10

Unicorn Boot 136

Urtica Dioica ^ 233

Virgin's Bower 110

Vegetative Frocesses 50

Valeriana Officinalis ; 234

Valerian 234

Veratum Viride 334
