Sepher Yetzirah: A Book on Creation (Isidor Kalisch (trans.), 1877)
==========================================================
The Book of Formation — the earliest extant work of Jewish mysticism, on the 32 paths of wisdom and the creation of the world through letters — in Rev. Dr. Isidor Kalisch's 1877 English translation with preface, notes and glossary: the first English rendering. Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive 1877 scan (https://archive.org/details/1877-kalisch-sepher-yezirah).

ספר יעירה.
SEPHER YEZIRAH.‏


A BOOK ON CREATION;


n5‏ אגודת
אהל יהדזיצת
ליוב.. ויטש

USA = uns


THE JEWISH METAPHYSICS


הועתק והוכנס לאינטרנט
OR, www.hebrewbooks.org‏
ע"י חיים תשס"ט


OF


REMOTE ANTIQUITY.


With English Translation, Preface, Explanatory Notes and Glossary,


BY


Rev. Dr. ISIDOR KALISCH,


Author of the “Guide for Rational Inquiries into the Biblical Scriptures,”
‘‘Toene des Morgenlandes," Translator of “Nathan the Wise"
from the German, etc., etc., etc.


NEW YORK:
L. H. FRANK ₪ CO., PUBLISHERS AND PRINTERS,
No. 321 Bowery.


17.


PREFACE.


This metaphysical essay, called “Sepher Yezirah,”
(book on creation, or cosmogony,) which I have en-
deavored to render into English, with explanatory :
notes, is considered by all modern literati as the first
philosophical book that ever was written in the He-
brew language. But the time of its composition and
the name of its author have not yet been ascertained,
despite of the most elaborate researches of renowned
archaeologists. Some maintain that this essay is
mentioned in the Talmud treatise Sanhedrin, p. 66 b.
and ibid. 67 b. which passage is according to the com-
mentary of Rashi, to treatise Erubin, p. 63 a., a re-
liable historical notice. Hence this book was known
already in the second or at the beginning of the third
century of the Christian Era. The historian, Dr.
Graetz, tries to show very ingeniously in his work,
entitled “Gnosticism,” p. 104 and 110, that it was
written in the early centuries of the Christian Church,
especially when the ideas and views of the Gnostics
were in vogue. This opinion, however, he afterwards
revoked. (See Dr. Graetz’s “History of the Jews,”
Vol. V, p. 315 in a note.)

Dr. Zunz, the Nestor of the Jewish Rabbis in
Europe, maintains that we have to look for the gen-
esis of the book “Yezirah” in the Geonic period, (700
—1000), and that it was consequently composed in
a post-talmudical time. Butif so, it is very strange


PREFACE. 4


that Saadjah Gaon, who lived in the tenth, and Judah
Halevi, who lived in the twelfth century, represented
tho book “Yezirah” as a very ancient work. There-
fore it seems to me, that Dr. Graetz had no sufficient
cause to repudiate his assertion concerning tho age
of this book; because all the difficulties which ho
himself and others raised against his supposition,
fall to the ground, when we consider that the most
ancient works, holy as well as profane, had ono and
the same fate, namely, that from age to age more or
less interpolations were made by copyists and com-
mentators. Compare also Prof. Tenneman's "Grond.
riss der Geschichte der Philosophie," improved by
Prof. Wendt, p. 207.


Tradition, which ascribes the authorship of this
book to the patriarch Abraham, is fabulous, as can
be proved by many reasons; but the idea that Rabbi
Akiba, who lived about the beginning of the second
century, composed the book “Yezirah,” is very likely
possible. Be thisas it may, it is worth while to know
the extravagant hypotheses which ancient Jewish
philosophers and theologians framed as soon as they
began to contemplate and to reason, endeavoring to
combine oriental and Greek theories. Although there
is an exuberance of weeds, we will find, nevertheless,
many germs of truisms, which are of the greatest im-
portance. A Christian theologian, Johann Friedrich
von Meyer D. D., remarked very truly in his German
preface to the book “Yezirah,” published in Leipzig,
1830: “This book isfor two reasons highly important:
in the first place, that the real Cabala, or mystical


b PREFACE.


doctrine of the Jews, which must be carefully dis-
tinguished from its excrescences, is in close connec-
Don and perfect accord with the Old and New Test-
aments; and in the second place, that the knowledge
of it is of great importance to the philosophical in-
quirers, and can not be put aside. Like a cloud per-
meated by beams of light which makes one infer that
there is more light behind it, so do the contents of
this book, enveloped in obscurity, abound in corus-
cations of thought, reveal to the mind that there is &
still more effulgent light lurking somewhere, and thus
inviting us to a further contemplation and investiga-
tion, and at the same time demonstrating the danger
of a superficial investigation, which is so prevalent
in modern times, rejecting that which can not be
understood at first sight."


I shall now try to give a sketch of the system as
it is displayed in the book “Yezirah,” which forms a
link in the chain of the ancient theoretical specula-
tions of philosophers, who were striving to ascertain
the truth mainly by reasoning a-priori, and who im-
agined that it is thus possible to permeate all the
secrets of nature. It teaches that a first cause, eter-
nal, all-wise, almighty and holy, is the origin and
the centre of the whole universe, from whom gradu-
ally all beings emanated. Thought, speech and
action are an inseparable unity in the divine being;
God made or created, is metaphorically expressed
by the word: writing. The Hebrew language and its
characters correspond mostly with the things they
designate, and thus holy thoughts, Hebrew language


PREFACE. 6


and its reduction to writing, form a unity which pro-
duce a creative effect."

The self-existing first cause called the creation into
existence by quantity and quality; the former re-
presented by ten numbers, (Sephiroth,) the latter by
twenty-two letters, which form together thirty-two
ways of the divine wisdom. Three of the twenty-two
letters, namely, Aleph, Mem, Sheen, are the mothers,
or the first elements, from which camo forth the prim-
itive matter of tho world: air, water and fire, that
have their parallel in man, (male and female): breast,
body and head, and in the year: moisture, cold and
heat. The other seven double and twelve} simple
letters are then represented as stamina, from which
other spheres or media of existence emanated.

Manis a microcosm, as the neck separates rational-
ity from vitality, so does diaphragm the vitality
from the vegetativeness.


*Thus for instance, they imagined that the name of Jehovah,
יהוה,‎ is by reversing the alphabet; py (mrpz); mem signifies the
letter jod, zaddi, the letter he, and pe, the letter wav. These un-
meaning sounds, they said, have magic power. Some maintained
that the Hebrew language consists of twenty-two consonants, be-
cause being the complex of all beings, its number is equal to the
most perfect figure, namely, of the periphery, as it is well known
that the diameter is always to tho periphery as seven to twenty-two.


116 was frequently observed by Jewish and Christian theolo-
gians, that the Marcosianic Gnostic system, as well as that of the
Clementinians of the second century, contain many analogies and
parallels with the book “Yezirah.” Marcus divides the Greek al-
phabet into three parts, namely: nine mute consonants apwra,
eight half vowels 719ova,and seven vowels pov7tvra,in order
to give a clearidea of the peculiar constitution of his “Aeons.” (re
naeus Haer, I, 16.)


7 PREFACE.


God stands in close connection with the Universe,
and just so is Tali connected with the world, that is,
an invisible, celestial or universal axis carries the
whole fabric. In the year by the sphere, in man by
the heart, and thus is the ruling spirit of God every-
“where. Notwithstanding the decay of the individual,
the genus is produced by the antithesis of man and
wife.


Hebrew commentaries on the book “Yezirah” were
composed by: first, Saadjah Gaon, of Fajum in
Egypt, (802—942); second, Rabbi Abraham ben
Dior Halevi; third, Rabbi Moses ben Nachman;
fourth, Elieser of Germisa; fifth, Moses Botarel; sixth,
Rabbi Eliah Wilna. The book “Yezirah,” together
with all these commentaries, was published in 1860,
in the city of Lemberg. But although the commen-
tator Saadjah was a sober minded scholar in a
superstitious age, a good Hebrew grammarian, a re-
nowned theologian and a good translator of the He-
brew Pentateuch, Isaiah and Job into the Arabian
language, his ideas and views were, nevertheless,
very often much benighted. See his comments on
Yez. Chap. I, etc., etc.; his notes on “Yezirah” Chap.
III, 2, prove undoubtedly that he had no knowledge
whatever of natural science, and therefore his anno-
tations on the book “Yezirah” are of little or no use
at all All the other commentaries mentioned above,
together with all quotations of other expounders of
the same book, contain nothing but a medley of ar-
bitrary, mystical explanations and sophistical distor-
tions of scriptural verses, astrological notions, orient-


PREFACE. 8


al superstitions, a metaphysical jargon, a poor know-
ledge of physics and not a correct elucidation of the
ancient book; they drew mostly from their own im-
agination, and credited the author of “Yezirah” with
saying very strange things which he never thought
of. I must not omit to mention two other Hebrew
commentaries, one by Judah Halevi, and the other
by Ebn Ezra, who lived in the first part of the twelfth
century. They succeeded in explaining the book “Ye-
zirah in a sound scientific manner, but failed in
making themselves generally understood, on account
of the superstitious age in which they lived, and the
tenacity with which the people in that period adhered
to the marvelous and supernatural; they found, there-
fore, but few followers, and the book “Yezirah” re-
mained to the public an enigma and an ancient curios-
ity, giving rise to a system of metaphysical delirium,
called Cabala.


Translations of the book “Yezirah” and comments
thereon by learned Christian authors are: first, a
translation of the book *Yezirah" with explanatory
notes in the Latin language, by Wilhelm Postellus,
Paris, France, 1552; second, another Latin version is
contained in Jo. Pistorii artis cabalistical scriptorum,
Tom 1, p. 869, sqq., differing from that of Postellus.
Some are of the opinion that John Reuchlin, while
others maintain that Paul Riccius was the author of
it. (See Wolfii Biblioth. Hebr. Tom., I, Chap. 1.)
Third, Rittangel published the book “Yezirah,” 1642,
at Amsterdam, entitled: “Liber Yezirah qui Abra-
hamo patriarchae adscribitur, una cum commentario


9 PREFACE.


Rabbi Abraham F. D. (filii Dior) super 32 Semitis
Sapientiae, a quibus liber Yezirah incipit. Translatus
et notis illustratus, à Joanne Stephano Rittangelio,
ling. Orient. in Elect. Acad. Regiomontana Prof.
extraord. Amstelodami ap. Jo. and Jodoc. Jansson-
ios," 1642, in quarto; fourth, Johann Friedrich von
Mayer, D. D., published the book “Yezirah” in He-
brew with a translation and explanatory notes in the
German language, Leipzig, 1830.

All these translations are out of print and are
rarely found even in well regulated libraries. I was
so fortunate as to obtain a copy of Dr. Mayer's
edition of the book “Yezirah.” He states in the pre-
face to it, that he had a copy of Postellus’ transla-
tion in manuscript as well as some others, and com-
pared them. The explanatory notes given by this
author are, nevertheless, insufficient and sometimes
very incorrect. The present translation is, as far as
I could ascertain, the first that was ever published
in the English language. Again, I have to add that
I have not only endeavored to correct a great many .
mistakes and erroneous ideas of my predecessors, but
I have also endeavored to give more complete anno-
tations. Itherefore hope that tho candid reader will
consider the great difficulties I had to overcome in
this still unbeaten way of the ancient Jewish spirit-
ual region, and will receive with indulgence this new
contribution to archaeological knowledge.


Dg. ISIDOR KALISCH.


oC Glch o. (Qa:


ic en:
Di, ae icta LCL Ka ₪4 MAC usc
xau Zou bel clea ideo CETL eu eco
RAL 5 ₪ KAL ix UA KAG א‎
662 C'


cody Dell (COAG cac:
bia eth bia ÉL 0. CL ENGR
KAG 0 CAL AAEL KAL NACA
₪68 ים‎
Kalu Ganu:
SO (AL? ÄGA Seu Laer 6 ALT
(GGL: SO. OGL KE ALO uaa
CLs ÑU 60 ₪060 GELO COL ide.
Lu el Co tw mel a. Gua Oo aa
H MALY Sau Nalin aao GE ₪ Re Ab


CACAO uada DOC icc occu add
OGL יא‎


Gud uyal-


Q GL Raul L


SEPHER YEZIRAH.


CHAPTER I.
SECTION 1.

Yah, the Lord of hosts, the living God, King of
the Universe, Omnipotent, All-Kind and Merciful,
Supreme and Extolled, who is Eternal, Sublime
and Most-Holy, ordained (formed) and created the
"Universe in thirty-two? mysterious paths? of wisdom
by three‘ Sepharim, namely: 1) S’for "£5; 2) Sip-
pur “ED; and 3) Sapher "EG which are in Him one and
the same. They consist of a decade out of nothing?
and of twenty-two fundamental letters. He divided
the twenty-two consonants into three divisions: 1)
three MIYAN mothers, fundamental letters or first ele-
ments; 2) seven double; and 3) twelve simple con-


sonants.
SECTION 2.


The decade’ out of nothing is analogous to that of
the ten fingers (and toes) of the human body, five
parallel to five, and in the centre of which is the
covenant with the only One, by the word of the
tongue and the rite of Abraham.


SECTION 3.

Ten are the numbers out of nothing, and not the
number nine, ten and not eleven. Comprehend this
great wisdom, understand this’ knowledge, inquire
into it and ponder on it, render it evident and lead®
` the Creator back to His throne again.


1) Bee Notes commencing on Page 47.


35D 12‏ יצירה.
02025 7
Cn? pst? wy on ra minab py‏
סוף phi) MENT pot‏ אַחֲרִית עוֹמָק טוב Dou‏
רֶע MAN Dm cin DO‏ עוֹמַק potu) my»‏
מערב poly‏ צַפוֹן וְעוֹמָק דָרוֹם אָדון ao ow m‏
piven abas Le ONI‏ קדשו עד עדי ער:


MIDNA‏ ה.
ֲשֶׂר jambu. Cla mimba‏ כְּמַראָרז DDD‏
bsa‏ אִין להזן Fan Jaa Man yp‏ [שוב
on NDI veo ITT ADDI Tox‏ משפחוים:


משנה ן.
עֲשֶׂר IDn mona pio yaya 7272 NITED‏
naby? e‏ קשורהי ra TM AN! nono‏
לו שני ולפני em new np "DW‏


T "Am D
722 2750 rg Dia npa niveo ֲשֶׂר‎
שוב‎ wb 325 er רץ פיף‎ on move.
nan b שב‎ wi) pir ow BP Opa?
iD maim


iw bp bya ana וז"ל‎ ge "502 3n2 הַאיינָאון זיל‎ aan )* =
bns שורה‎ nandyis


13 SEPHER YEZIRAH.


SECTION 4.
The decade out of nothing has the following ten
infinitudes:
1) The beginning? infinite. 6) The depth infinite.


2) “ end 6 7) “ East i
3) 66 good tt 8) 66 West 66
4) " evil? 66 9) > North “
b) “ height = 10) * South “


and the only Lord God, the faithful King, rules over
all from His holy habitation for ever and ever.


SECTION 5.


The appearance of the ten spheres out of nothing
is like a flash of lightning, being without an end, His
word is in them, when they go and return; they run
by His order like a whirlwind and humble them-
selves before His throne.


SECTION 6.


'The decade of existence out of nothing has its end
linked to its beginning and its beginning linked to
its end, just as the flame is wedded to the live coal;
because the Lord is one and there is not a second
one, and before one what wilt thou count?!


SECTION 7.


Concerning the number ten of the spheres of ex-
istence out of nothing keep thy tongue from speak-
ing and thy mind from pondering on it, and if thy
mouth urges thee to speak, and thy heart to think
about it, return! as it reads: “And the living creatures
ran and returned," (Ezekiel 6,14.) and upon this" was
the covenant made.


4 פפר יצירה.
מ שנה ח.

עֲשֵׂר סְפִירוֹרז Gin mn NAN mada‏ חיים
Sw iow ym "rm‏ חַי madiya‏ קול Mim‏
wa?‏ וְהוּא רוח One gen‏ רוח PEN mmo‏
Nios Wow TID? nns eme DWY ma 2m‏
miy ong nie» yau‏ פשוטוֹת NAN nmm‏
ro‏ שלש D'So ppn nno p»‏
eme‏ אותיות) הו vg» vin‏ וטיט חקקן כְּמִין
pos "aen Tung‏ חוֹמָה AWE pos CH‏
KKK‏
EE‏
NDI‏ הַכְּבוֹד OD IW‏ וְאופַנִים Rn Gier Nim‏
[oops Cen‏ יסד Guo‏ ָנְחְמַר "ëm‏
מַלְאָכָיו vow mm bib vw rg nimm‏
אותיות Tina nien IO‏ שלש UN IDS‏
וקכעם Dn we od onm om iowa‏ :

*) נוסחא אחרינא: JAWA‏


N“ 1‏ סִיבָבָן:
(I‏ יש subuh nya m Bnn pin‏


15 SEPHER YEZIRAH.


SECTION 8.


The following are the ten categories of existence
out of nothing:

1) The spirit of the living God, praised and glori-
fied be the name of Him who lives to all eternity.
The articulate word of creative power, the spirit and
the word are what we call the holy spirit.


2) Air emanated from the spirit by which He
formed and established twenty-two consonants, sta-
mina. Three of them, however, are fundamental
letters, or mothers, seven double and twelve simple
consonants; hence the spirit is the first one.

3) Primitive water emanated from the air. He
formed and established by it Bohu (water, stones)
mud and loam, made them like a bed, put them up
like a wall, and surrounded them as with a rampart,
put coldness upon them and they became dust, as it
reads: “He says to the snow (coldness) be thou
earth." (Job 37, 6.)

4) Fire or ether emanated from the water. De
established by it the throne of glory, the Seraphim
and Ophanim, tho holy living creatures and the angels,
and of these threo He formed His habitation, as it
reads: *Who made His angels spirits, His ministers
a flaming fire." (Psalm 104, 4.) He selected three
consonants from tho simple ones which are in the
hidden secret of three mothers or first elements:
א''מ''ש,‎ air, water and ether or fire. He sealed them
with spirit and fastened them to His great name and
sealed with it six dimensions.!5


16 ספר יצירה.
nyai om onn won‏ לְמַעֵלָה onm‏ | ביהו
שש denm nep? n3 nmn onm‏ בהן
mp | Won) 32 nog mm onn yat‏
Ort nj anya onn nia‏ והי
ppm irpo ni ni onn von‏ | ביוה
עֲשֶׂר nadi pix onn‏ לשָמאלו onm‏ בהוי
משנה ט.
Za‏ עשר DIAN OM rg na niveo‏
mw m an‏ מים NANTON ovo dw mne‏
mm‏ ומערב צפון וְדְרוֹם:


פרק שני.
מהשנה א.
DWA amy‏ אוֹחְיוֹת "ic^‏ שלש אמות וְשְׁבַע


WIN פשוּטות שלש אמות‎ ANY one nie |
Da מַכָריע‎ pn jit nain וכף‎ mor n PTC
“ANN nome שי‎ DO On שלש אמות‎
pm yo רוח‎
משנה ב.‎
SS Gë) סוד‎ rima DOE mwy


17 SEPHER YEZIRAH.


5) He sealed the height and turned towards


above, and sealed it with יהו‎
6) He sealed the depth, turned towards below and
sealed it with היו‎
7) He sealed the east and turned forward, and
scaled it with ויה‎
8) He sealed the west and turned backward, and
sealed it with והי‎
9) He sealed tho south and turned to the right and
sealed it with יוה‎
10) He 808100 the north and turned to the left and
sealed it with הוי‎
SECTION 9.


These are the ten spheres of existence out of
nothing. From the spirit of the living God emana-
ted air, from the air, water, from the water, fire or
ether, from the ether, the height and the depth, the
East and West, the North and South.


CHAPTER II.


SECTION 1.


There are twenty-two letters, stamina. Three of
them, however, are tho first elements, fundamentals
or mothers, seven double and twelve simple conso-
nants. The three fundamental letters א"מ"ש‎ have as
their basis the balance. In one scale” is the merit
and in the other criminality, which are placed in
equilibrium by the tongue. The three fundamental
letters א"מ"ש‎ signify, as » is mute like the water and
w hissing like the fire, there is א‎ among them, 8
breath of air which reconciles them.


SECTION 2.
The twenty-two letters which form the stamina


8 פפר יצירה.
prom Lë‏ עָר ny cone‏ כָּל היצור וְאֶת Op‏
TOUS‏ לָצור:.
à 12907 i‏
ninis epe Gr‏ יסור jawa Dipa op‏
wan nea PR nma‏ מקומות PTN. ris‏
C33 yana jiwa napa FMA pi maa‏
Dream‏
02707 1
DWA Gr‏ אותיות יסור Ip‏ 91913 כְמִין
nove» nato pw WDD jo‏ מענג nya rei‏
EE‏
1202 ה.
je wa‏ שקלן Tom‏ א DJ 7221 [22 CJ‏ א
ב cy jo js cx‏ ב niim‏ חָלִילָה וְנמְצָאוֹת
בּרליא שָערים Rulo‏ 02 היצור )52 הדכור Nuh‏
SUD "OUD‏
מ שנה 0
יצר nëm wind uso‏ אָרז אֵינוֹ 2um ix‏
עמוּדים גְדוֹלִים inm DDA DRA "res‏ סִימָן אות


soya נ''א‎ (*


19 SEPHER YEZIRAH.


after having been. appointed and established by God,
He combined, weighed and changed them, and formed
by them all beings which are in existence, and all
those which will be formed in all time to come.


SECTION 3.

He established twenty-two letters, stamina, by the
voice, formed by the breath of air and fixed them on
five places in the human mouth, namely: 1) gutturals,
א ה ח ע‎ 2) palatals, גיכק‎ 3) linguals, nèbun
4) dentals, זש סרץ‎ 5) labials, כומף‎

SECTION 4.


He fixed the twenty-two letters, stamina, on the
sphere like a wall with two hundred and thirty-one
gates, and turned the spheres forward and backward.
For an illustration may serve tho three letters, XJ
There is nothing better than joy, and nothing worse
than sorrow or plague.


SECTION 5.

But how wasit done? He combined,” weighed and
changed : the א‎ with all the other letters in succession,
and all the others again with א‎ ; 3 with all, and all
again with 2; and so the whole series of letters.?!
Hence it follows that there are two hundred and
thirty-one? formations, and that every creature and
every word emanated from one name.”


SECTION 6.

He created a reality out of nothing, called the
nonentity into existence and hewed, as it were, co-
lossal pillars from intangible air. This has been
shown by the example of combining the letter א‎ with


20 ספר יצירה.
א DY Ga ]92 cy‏ א צוֹפָה וּמִימַר b> nw nim‏
vt oo mw CU WIAD 52 nw wen‏
עֲשְׂרִים OCH‏ חַפצִים Pm‏ א:


פרק שלישי.
מ שנח א.
שלש אמות אִימִישׁ יסודן main n mor AD‏
riso‏ חק Coma» yo‏ שלש אמות Gun‏ סור
5i‏ מוּפְלָא WUS cnm noo‏ טַבָעוֹת “Nun‏
Dn we) OD TIN DIN‏ נוֹלְרוּ אבות Fra‏
הולדות ;
| משנה ב.
שלש שמת eg eg a ppm goe‏
cna wn) Tem‏ שלש אֲמוֹת ga goe‏
nw‏ אִימָישׁ nya‏ וְשָלש Upja oos HON‏
שר
à 1202‏
שלש WAN D TR cotya Gun Nine‏ שמִים
TN] OD nec) YANI WENG INT‏ מַרוּח
DR YUH‏


wy oco) NG )*‏ ים wow napn 331 Openness DAUN‏ אֲטוֹת
toot niaw ybi i nio WON‏ 833 הבל:


91 SEPHER YEZIRAH.


all the other letters, and all the other letters with
Aleph (x). He% predetermined, and by speaking
created every creature and every word by one name.
For an illustration may serve the twenty-two cle-
mentary substances by tho primitivo substance of
Aleph” (x).


CHAPTER III.


SECTION 1.

The threo first elements, w'n”x are typified by a
balance, in one scale the merit and in the other the
criminality, which are placed in equilibrium by the
longue. These three mothers, א"מ"ש‎ are a great,
wonderful and unknown mystery, and are sealed by
s1x% rings, or elementary circles, namely: air, water
and fire emanated from them, which gave birth to
progenitors, and these progenitors gave birth again
lo some offspring.

SECTION 2.

God appointed and established the three mothers
apen combined, weighed and changed them, and
formed by them three mothers א"מ"ש‎ in the world,
in the year and in man, male and female.


SECTION 3.

The three mothers א"מ"ש‎ in the world are: air,
water and fire. Heaven was created from fire or
ether; the earth (comprising sea and land) from the
elementary water; and the atmospheric air from the
elementary air, or spirit, which establishes the bal-
ance among them.


22 ספר יצירה.
0202 ד.
שלש mga Gg nios‏ חום וקור Din mm‏
two wt?‏ קור np mn OVID wo‏ מַכְרִיע


DDJ
משנה ה.‎ |


Joa ראש‎ rapa TI Oe אִימָישׁ‎ now שלש‎
CO CD KDI JON Zw» NWI ראש‎ rin
Dë yo mo
«030
וקשר לו כְתָר‎ mma אות אי‎ qoom א.‎ w22
mawa mn c?iva ww OAD NYI AN nr jenen
בְּאֵישִים:‎ napa בְּאֵימִישׁ‎ "i21 2233 n
. המשנה‎
וקשר לו כָתָר‎ OA את מ‎ qoa .2w22
nawa וקור‎ OPE yw OTD om np m jen
בְּמַישִׁיא:‎ NIP בְּאִימִישי‎ "i31 7533 ON
maton
sn לו‎ gi שי בְּאֵשׁ‎ Dn ג. המליף‎ 832
nawa Dim בלס‎ oou OTD MW nma m EW
mapa AD WDN וראש‎


WNDI נ"א‎ )*


98 SEPHER YEZIRAH.


SECTION 4.


The three mothers א"מ"ש‎ produce in the year?':
heat, coldness?? and moistness. Heat was created
from fire, coldness from water, and moistness from
air which equalizes them.


SECTION 5.


The three mothers א"מ"ש‎ produce in man, male
and female, breast, body and head. The head was
created from fire, the breast from water, and the
body from air, which places them in equilibrium.


SECTION 6.


Fmst DIvISION: God let the letter Aleph (x) pre-
dominate in primitive air, crowned” it, combined one
with the other,? and formed by them tho air in the
world, moistness in the year, and the breast in man,
male and female; in male by א"מ"ש‎ and in female
by : Gë

SECTION 7.

Seconp Drvision. He let the letter Mem (>) pre-
dominate in primitive water, and crowned it, combined
one with the other, and formed by them the earth,
(including land and sea) coldness in the year, and
the belly in male and female; in male by ,w’nx*! in
female by : מ"ש'"'א‎

SECTION 8.

Tampo Division. He let the letter Sheen (v) pre-
dominate in primitive fire, crowned it, combined one
with the other, and formed by them, heaven in the
world, heat in the year, and the head of male and
female.


24 350 יצירה.
פרק רביעי.
משנה א.
‘nwa minang mada Ta ne» yat‏
לשונות 33 גיג ריר כיכ פיפ ריר תית man‏
רף rm Ha ng‏
משנה ב.
vau‏ כְּפוּלות 733 n2‏ יסורן "wv maan‏
van‏ וחיים am ciu noun‏
משנה ג.
vag‏ כפולורז pono wur rye ws‏
תמורת maan now nozn‏ עשר עוני תמורת
mien noo vy‏ הייכז mowing Can nig‏
reg‏ הְמורַת שָלום מִלְחָמָה MON‏ חַן כִיעוּר:


02702 ד.
nop noyp MED ma Fe yaw‏ מורֶח
om OND jing IWA‏ הקוש pura goo‏
NIT‏ נושא אֶת 23]:
02772 ה.
| שבע כּפולורז $33 new wo nyawi memba‏


25 SEPHER YEZIRAH.
CHAPTER IV.


SECTION 1.
The?! seven double letters, בכר כפרת‎ with a duplicity
of pronunciation, aspirated and unaspirated, namely:
רר, תת,‎ EE בב, גג, חר, ככ,‎ serve as a model of softness and


hardness, strength and weakness.


SECTION 2.


Seven% double letters, בגר כפרת,‎ shall, as it were;
symbolize wisdom, wealth, fruitfulness, life, dominion,
peace and beauty.

SECTION 3.


Seven double letters serve to signify tho antithesis
to which human life is exposed. The antithesis of
wisdom is foolishness; of wealth, poverty; of fruit-
fulness, childlessness; of life, death; of dominion,


dependence; of peace, war; and of beauty, ugliness.


SECTION 4.


The seven double consonants are analogous to the
six dimensions: height and depth, East and West,
North and South, and the holy temple that stands
in the centre, which carries them all.


SECTION 5.


The double consonants are seven, בגר כפרת‎ and not


six, they are seven and not eight; reflect upon this


1 it


Gët | cul ete 1
(ALGL Ou e Clo באש‎ Enda qa dc.
Car: KAE wu c 6 Vo q CL
662 Hi
tatu (al cal eta teu du:
(ALL iu Ciu (RL clio actu qaq ua Laval
Can: La nu Ge (dat a CL
UACL Ur
ב‎ Al Sito (at. Ede, UNG ër
אסקם‎ actu acc eaa ic titu aa.
Ou cc déi CML ב‎ Cate SCHU dà
acu ב‎ Cen aea. ald GL. Cou
42 A
(deu:
ERU Ga TANG actu כ‎ era icc
ace ole CuO actu Acco ca
Ae CSO EL EG A1. 100 acl ACël
68 U


LCL fig EA (LIC MRL KO aac:
₪ א‎ GOU Cul eco du Cun 286


96 0 6 6 «het ₪


27. SEPHER YEZIRAH.


fact, inquire about it, and make it so evident, that”?
tho Creator bo acknowledged to bo on His throne
again.

| SECTION 6.

The seven double consonants, stamina, having
been designed and established, combined, weighed,
and changed by God, He formed by them: seven
planets in the world, seven days in the year, seven
gates, openings of the senses, in man, male and
female.

SECTION 7.


The seven planets in the world are 39 Saturn, Jupi-
ter, Mars, Sun, Venus, Mercury, Moon. Seven days
in the year are tho seven days of the week; seven
gales in man, male and female, are: two eyes, two
ears, two nostrils and the mouth.


SECTION 8.


First Division. He let the letter 3 predominate in
wisdom, crowned it, combined one with the other and
formed by them: the moon in the world, the first
day in the year, and the right eye in man, male and
female.

SECTION 9.


SECOND Division. He let the letter 3 predominate
in wealth, crowned it, combined one with the other,
and formed by them: Mars in the world, the second
day in the year, and the right ear in man, male and
female. .


Gëtu Gu Crea iéu titu:
lALGL iu Ou iku Elo ALd ema uc atu
Cat: Lk wo u, cdl dë c Qo
Mack .L'


ët 4 GONG Cra iC. totu:
RUGL iu Cll (AL CL aea. ₪ 4o ad.
Ew ok wu ₪ cade (dac a, ₪
WAGU uc
שש‎ inil Bang eta ICL ocu:
RUAL iu ₪ (AL Elo acc Gan uc acá.
Cou: acl wu G, 600/06 WAL q DO
68 יש‎


Gët l aos, tiba ICL dtu:

Le äu (AL Cua fw ¿ao שא‎ LE
Een Le Lack wu ₪ tuwa dac q Cac

UARU N’

etu בנ‎ ad cta iéa täu:

(ALGL Cu e tia Dë CAGO ya AGA
Een rr GG wu L. cium ical q Cac

UACH e


97 AGUL RL


29 SEPHER YEZIRAH.


SEcTION 10.


Ton Division. He let the letter q predominate
in producibility, crowned it, combined ono with the
other, and formed by them: the sun in tho world,
the third day in the year, the right nostril in man,


male and female.
SECTION 11.


Fourt Drvigrow. He let the letter 5 predominate
in life, crowned it, combined one with tho other,
and formed by them: Venus in the world, the fourth
day in the year, and the loft eyo in man, male and
female.

SECTION 12.

FrrrH Division. He let the letter £ predominate
in dominion, crowned it, combined ono with tho other,
and formed by them: Mercury in the world, the fifth
day in the year, and the left ear in man, male and


female.
SECTION 13.


SixrH Division. He let tho letter 5 predominate
in peace, crowned it, combined ono with the other,
and formed by them: Saturn in the world, the sixth
day in the year, and the left nostril in man, male and
female. |

SECTION 14.

SEVENTH Division. Ho let the letter n predominate
in beauty, crowned it, combined one with the other,
and formed by them: Jupiter in the world, the
seventh day in the year, and the mouth of man,
male and female.


80 450 יצירה.
משנה CD‏
yao‏ כְפוּלות 172 nyawi PPM jang NI.‏
nyag nina‏ רקיעין nyawi‏ אֲרְצוֹת Da? rg‏
nya‏ נְהָרוֹת nyag‏ מרְבָרוֹת nyawi c» nyawi‏
שבועות Du nyag‏ שבעה שמיטין nyau‏ יובלות
MAN DEn ny 220 ADB?‏ כל SOWA‏


מ שנה TD‏

DIN שלש‎ Cou Cum Oy nw
MYDS אַרנֵּע אֲכָנִים בּונוֹת‎ cona neu בונות‎
ועִשְׁרִים‎ rp run אֲכָנִים‎ en Dro Ce
Com מָאוּת‎ vod nia Cp UD Co
Deo Den misi cux yaw Ce
וחשוב‎ wy TON JNO D Dyz0W (וארבע)‎
הָאוֹן יכלת‎ pw map ro nen pag no
לשְׁמוֹע:‎


פרק המישי:
משנה MW‏
שְׁתִּים DOWO mw y‏ הויו YOR‏ לניים עציק


81 BEPHER YEZIRAH.
SECTION 15.


By the seven double consonants, בגר כפרת‎ were also
designed seven worlds (araves), seven heavens, seven
lands, (probably climates,) seven seas, (probably
around Palestine,) seven rivers, seven deserts, seven
days a week, seven weeks from Passover to Pente-
cost, there is a cycle of seven years, the seventh is
the release year, and after seven release years is ju-
bilee. Hence, God loves the number seven under


the whole heaven.’ (In the whole nature.)


SECTION 16.


Two stones build two houses, three stones build
six houses, four build twenty-four houses, five build
one hundred and twenty houses, six build seven
hundred and twenty houses and seven build five
thousand and forty?? houses. From thence further


go and reckon what the mouth cannot express and


the ear cannot hear.


CHAPTER V.


SECTION 1.
The twelve simple letters psy p": vyen Pwa


symbolize, as it were, the organs of speaking, think-


— -—


32 ספר יצירה.
niya ppp row qon mana nme [aia‏
ny un nre m vega‏ שְׂתוֹק:

8202 ב.
Dag rg CDU -‏ הויז D'3o “ON‏ עצ"ק
rm ou) Te Yana "gy ug puo‏
MAND remo 0:3 mies rm 5:53 mpi‏
mois bing‏ רומית 223 דרומית Aaa mama‏
rap o; mania vorm‏ רוֹמִית "am‏
Lan mor mangya‏ מַערָבִית bina mann‏
mjay‏ הוֹמִית bisa mawy maie Dini‏ צפונית
mana‏ וּמִהְרַחֲבִין papim‏ ער עדי ער jm‏ הזן
niox‏ עוֹלֶם:

משנה ב.

Dën לנ"ס‎ MON rn פשוטורז‎ my Dny

bna wi vom (Log JEW Ga Tap TOY
Dën "py cup piya nio Mey owe
STAPH "it Waaa OID Wy od naga

1 02707

Doan שור‎ noo apa nib miy שתים‎


33 SEPHER YEZIRAH.
ing, walking, seeing, hearing, working, coition, smell-


ing, sleep, anger, swallowing and laughing.


SECTION 2.


The twelve simple consonants עייצייק‎ p"2"5 en ה"ו"ז‎
symbolize also twelvo oblique points: east height,
north east, east depth, south height, south east, south
depth, west height, south west, west depth, north
height, north west, north depth. They grew wider
and wider to all eternity, and these are the boundaries


of the world.


SECTION 3.


The twelve simple letters psy ח"ט"י לייני'ם‎ r^"
stamina, having been tlesigned, established, com-
bined, weighed and changed by God, He performed
by them: twelve constellations in the world, twelve
months in the year, and twelve leaders (organs) in the


human body, male and female.


SECTION 4.


The twelve constellations in the world are: .ArieS,


35D ` 4‏ יצירה.
DTN DER DIY p'ata nana nw Ep‏
דָנִים: Ow‏ עְשֶׂר nawa Gen‏ נִיסָן Jo TAN‏
S mom‏ אֲלול nao toos pon WH‏ שׁבְט אֲדֶר:
DT pU napa 721 WEI OMI "y OW‏
mo niba pu pn mg‏ דקין Gem ma?‏
x sing nap mr‏
משנה ה.
N22‏ אי מַהָא. המליך nix‏ הי "wo nmüs‏ לו
nm m jen TI‏ וְצֶר [a oiya not coa‏
or nawa‏ יָמִין mapa BL Wa‏
משנה ו.
NI‏ בי מַהָא. hpa‏ אות 1 בְּהַרְהוּר py‏ לו
cns wp an AL ETI AWD‏ שר TN Dia‏
on PI WEI nap KD nga‏
T IDA‏
N23‏ מַחָא. wo Ta Dën qoo‏ לו
ena Wy) n m jen AN?‏ תְּאֹמִים jro] Ca‏
ipa zy Waga only TT nau‏


95 ^ BEPHER YEZIRAH.


Taurus, Gemini, Cancer, Leo, Virgo, Libra, Scorpio,
Sagitarius, Capricornus, Aquarius and Pisces. The
twelve months of the year are: Nisan, Iyar, Sivan,
Tamus, Ab, Elul, Tishri, Marcheshvan, Kislev,
Teves, Schevat and Adar. The twelvo organs of the
human body are: two hands, two fect, two kidneys,
gall, small intestines, liver, gullet?? or esophagus,
stomach and milt.


SECTION 5.
First Part.


First Division. God let the letter n predominate
in speaking, crowned it, combined one with the
other, and formed by them: Aries (the Ram) in the
world, the month Nisan in the year, and the right
foot of the human body, male and female.


SECTION 6.


SECOND Division. He let the letter 1 predominate
in thinking, crowned it, combined one with the other,
and formed by them: Taurus (the Bull) in the world,
the month Iyar in the year and the right kidney of
the human body, male and female.


SECTION 7.


Tarp Division. He let the letter + predominate
in walking, crowned it, combined one with the other,
and formed by them: Gemini (the Twins) in the
world, the month Sivan in the year, and the left foot
of the human body, male and female.


45b 36‏ יצירה:
משנח ח.
NI‏ אי p‏ הַשִׁניֶה. Tapa‏ אות חי Tp mea‏
לו Ga OI cna ow nmn Jang SD‏
mapa TP] gem To 0 nawa nom‏
משנה ט.
NI‏ בי מן spo mawa‏ אורז טי nyawa‏
WwW}‏ לו Dya rw ena wn nra Nang AND‏
SBP WD] WDD MANE wi naga aw‏
משנה ה
NDB‏ ג' nis spoon mawa ja‏ ^ בְמַעְשֵׂה וקשר
Gaz rap Dä wi nn n jn AND Ë‏
אלול un mawa‏ שמאל map 731 Ge‏
מ שלח "א.
822 אי IO‏ הַשָלִישִית. nix spoon‏ לי Gogo‏
en‏ לו כָחָר ow) ns AL jew‏ כּהֶם מאוניכז
pa AZ] EE MIN nawa mum cota‏
cas 57024‏
wz2‏ ב'מַןְהַשְׁלשִׁית. המליף nis‏ 2/2 וְכָשֶׁר
לו כָתֶר nm ni Jama‏ וְעֶר coo‏ עַקָרֶב maya‏
WEI PPD naa perma‏ בָר mapa‏


37 SEPHER YEZIRAH.


SECTION 8.
Second Part.

First Division. He let tho letter n predominate
in seeing, crowned it, combined one with tho other,
and formed by them: Cancer (the Crab) in the world,
the month Tamus in the year, and the right hand of
the human body, male and female.


SECTION 9.


Srconp Division. He let the letter v predominate
in hearing, crowned it, combined one with the other,
and formed by them: Leo (the Lion) in the world,
the month Ab in the year, and the left kidney of the
human body, male and female.


SECTION 10.

Tarp Division. He let the letter ` predominate
in working, crowned it, combined one with the other,
and formed by them: Virgo (the Virgin) in the world,
the month Elul in the year, and the left hand of the
human body, male and female.


SECTION 11.
Third Part.

First Division. He let the letter ל‎ predominate
in coition, crowned it, combined one with the other,
and formed by them: Libra (the Balance) in the
world, the month Tishri in the year, and the gall of
the human body, male and female.


SECTION 12.

Second Division. He let the letter ` predominate
in smelling, crowned it, combined one with the other,
and formed by them: Scorpio (the Scorpion) in the
world, the month Marcheshvan in the year, and the
small intestines of the human body, male and female.


38 ספר יצירה.
מש לח ^34
IO 222‏ השלישית. המליף אות סי mwa‏
wp‏ לו np ana wn nm MOAI AND‏ בְּעוֹלֶם
nap mawia YO‏ 0532 וָכֶר mapa‏
LO 419 0‏
po. a ww‏ אורז עי בְּרוגן
e‏ לו wi ma AT DAI AND‏ בָּהֶם ma‏ בְעוֹלֶם
mapa "2t wasa WD) nawa nao‏
4o 12190‏
822 2 מן oon nyawi‏ את צ' Moye!‏
SGD‏ לו כָחָר TY} n n jew‏ 073 07 בְעוּלֶם
npa AD! wan nana AP WP) ngga eae‏
SUO nmn‏
892 ג' מן pinks p mis Tana YI‏
WHI‏ לו Gaang mi ma nr jen AND‏
napa 72] Waaa Pino novis Tw‏ שא pop‏
maran pe» Jang nain pes rre ne"‏


IX WIND K“) )*‏ מרינה:


39 SEPHER YEZIRAH.


SECTION 13.


Tab Drvision. He let the letter n predominate
in sleep, crowned it, combined ono with tho other,
and formed by them: Sagittarius (tho Archer) in the
world, the month Kislev in tho year, and tho stomach
of the human body, male and female.


SECTION 14.
Fourth Part.


Fmst Drvision. Ho let tho letter y predominate
in anger, crowned it, combined one with the other,
and formed by them: Capricornus (the Goat) in the
world, the month Teves in the year, and tho liver in
the human body, male and female.


SECTION 15.


SECOND Drvision. He let the letter $ predominate
in swallowing, crowned it, combined one with the
other, and formed by them: Aquarius (the Water-
man) in the world, the month Schwat in the year,


and the esophagus of the human body, malo and
female.
SECTION 16.


Tamo Division. He let the letter p predominate
in laughing, crowned it, combined one with the other,
and formed by them: Pisces (the Fishes) in the world,
the month Adar in the year, and the milt of the
human body, male and female.

He made them as a conflict, drew them up like 4
wall; and set one against the other as in warfare.


app 40‏ יצירה.
פרק ששי.
משנה א.
on de‏ שלש אמות אִימִישׁ on wu‏ שלשה
WAN co ms cm nias‏ וּמְאָכות תולדות new‏
mi‏ וְתוֹלְדוֹחֲיהֶם ושבעה Casi»‏ וְצִבְאוֹחֲיהֶם
וּשׁנִים עָשָר sponds “Dina‏
02302 ב.
ADT? mm‏ ערים גְאָמָנִים Ub) mawi Daya‏
Coen pn ey ce‏ וּשׁלשָׁרה OND ue‏
he‏ .»2


rant, אש‎ mov UN TIN On אמות‎ vou
וְסִימְן‎ DAI מַכְרִיע‎ PA רוח‎ we nep» ומים‎
דוּמָמֶת שי שורקת‎ OA NS האש נושא‎ 270
| SORIA Yo po רוח‎ TN אי‎
מ שנה ר.‎
7202 nawa 51» wp» על‎ qoo rots on
כְּמַלְמָה:‎ pp? Ub לב‎ n3


°( נ*א על :npin‏


41 SEPHER YEZIRAH.
CHAPTER VI.


SECTION 1.


These are the three mothers or the first elements,
א''מ''ש‎ from which emanated three progenitors; prim-
itive air, water and fire, and from which emanated
as their offspring, three progenitors and their off-
spring, namely: the seven planets and their hosts,
and the twelve oblique points.


SECTION 2.


To confirm this there are faithful witnesses; the
world, year and man, the twelve, the Equipoise, the
heptade, which God regulates like the Dragon,“
(Tali) sphere and the heart.


SECTION 3.


The first elements א"מ"ש‎ are air, water and fire;
the fire 1s above, the water below, and a breath of air
establishes the balance among them. For an illus-
tration may serve, that the fire carries the water is
the phonetic character of » which is mute and v is
hissing like fire, there is א‎ among them, a breath of
air which places them in egilibrium.“4


SECTION 4.


Dragon (Tali) is in the world like a king upon his
throne, the sphere is in the year like a king in the
empire, and the heart is in the human body like a
king? in war.


42 ספר יצירה.
72390272 ה.
Cie niyy mp NAYA m nw o‏ טוב לְעמַת
רֶע רֶע May?‏ טוב טוב aito‏ רדע VD‏ רזטוב
rao‏ אָרז IT IT‏ מַבְחִין אָרז CD TOI‏
mmo‏ לטובים AY‏ שמורה לְרְעים:
à 0202‏
noe‏ 29 אֶחָד 1025 TBI WY WW‏ וְאֶחָר
[OID yo MY) amo‏


T משנה‎
D get "mw nu מול‎ ng»? nag
om nebu tie עוֹמְדִין‎ ny cx
"Dron שלשה‎ Det AWW שֹׂנְאִים‎ rte


משנה ח.
mubu‏ אוֹחֲבִים Damp meow om son‏
man 222‏ וְהַלְשון שלשַח מחיים שני 213 ANG‏
i nen oapin ww ooo "pe Hen‏
ny 25 P" ne DR DN‏ סה
על 23" נִים HI ny opns 072) WY‏


43 SEPHER YEZIRAH.
SECTION 5.


God has also set the one over against the other;
the good against the evil, and the evil against the
good; the good proceeds from the good, and the evil
from the evil; the good purifies the bad, and the bad


the good; the good is preserved for the good, and
the evil for the bad ones.


SECTION 6.


There are three of which every one of them stands
by itself; one is in the affirmative, the other in the
negative and one equalizes them.


SECTION T.


There are seven of which three are against three,
and one places them in equilibrium. There are twelve
which are all the time at war; threo of them produce


love, and three hatred, three are animators and three
destroyers.


SECTION 8.


The three that produce love are the heart and tho
ears; the three that produce hatred are the liver, the
gall and the tongue; the three animators are the two
nostrils and the ו‎ alts and the three destroyers are
the mouth and thy two openings of the body; and
God, the faithful King, rules over all from His holy
habitation to all eternity. He is one above three,


three are above coven, seven above twelve, and all
are linked together.


35D 44.‏ יצירה.


202 ט.
on NS‏ עָשָרִים OMA‏ אותיות mw ppn jaw‏


GO n אֲלהִים‎ nim שרי‎ x צבָאות‎ mim m
rra Ty) למ‎ bp ny pop וא‎ eo rie
את 55 היצור וְאֶת 52 הָעָתִיד לְצוּר:‎
^ מ שנה‎

2t PAN וְרְאָה‎ Dai MS LU ER par
אֹהֲבִי‎ aqp ָדון הזכל‎ voy 12:3 עלְתָה בדו‎
ברית‎ sa vv אֲצִכְּעוֹת‎ wy pana לו‎ m9
npe בְרִית‎ wm von niyat "ivy J pn
TAYT ORD WS pota roy NPI


n. ny i npn es אוֹתְיוֹת‎ DAYA nis "Pp נ"א‎ )*


^u


סליק Ste‏ . וסליק ספר יצירה:


45 SEPHER YEZIRAH.


SECTION 9.


There® are twenty-two letters by which the I am,
Yah, the Lord of hosts, Almighty and Eternal, de-
signed, formed and created by three Sepharim, His
whole world, and formed by them creatures and all
those that will be formed in time to come.


SECTION 10.


When* the patriarch Abraham comprehended the
great truism, revolved it in his mind, conceived it
perfectly, made careful investigations and profound
inquiries, pondered upon it and succeeded in contem-
plations, the Lord of the Universe appeared to him,
called him his friend, made with him a covenant
between the ten fingers of his hands, which is the
covenant of the tongue, and the covenant between
the ten toes of his feet, which is the covenant of cir-
cumcision, and said of him: “Before I formed thee
in the belly I knew thee." (Jer. I, 5.)


NOTES.


1) Our author maintains that there is a first intelligent, self-existing,
almighty, eternal ruling cause of all things, and that an everlasting entity
produced nonentities by a progression of effects. The divine knowledge, he
adds, differs from the human knowledge in such a degree, that it gives ex-
istence to all that is. Nay רה ה'‎ Dn is a talmudical expression. (See ;
Treatise Bava Bathra p. 73.) It seems to me, that the author not only
wanted to contradict Plato's assertion that the Supreme Being had need of a
plan, like the human architect, to conduct the great design, when he made
the fabric of the Universe, but also the common belief that God reasons
and acts by ideas like a human being. As the prophet Isaiah exclaimed:
“Behold! God has no ideas like you, and his ways of acting are not like
yours.” (Isaiah 55, 8—9.)


2) The number thirty-two is not only the fifth power of two, and the
sum of ten units and twenty-two letters, but is also the sum of the first and
last letter of the Hebrew Pentateuch, namely: 3 2 and ל‎ 3o, equal thirty-
two. (See Kusari p. 343, translated into German by Dr. David Cassel.)


3) Paths denote powers, effects, kinds, forms, degrees or stages.


4) These Sepharim or three words of similar expression signify: first,
number, calculation or idea; second, the word; third, the writing of the
word, The idea, word and writing (of the word), are signs to man for a
thing, and is not the thing itself, to the Creator, however, idea, word and
writing (of the word) are the thing itself, or as some ancient Rabbis re-
marked: מחשבח דבור ומעשה הכל הוא 23^ אחד בהק"ב"חי*‎ Idea,
word and work are one and the same to God." There is an ideal world in
the divine intellect, according to which this sensible world was made. The


difference between the human and divine manner of thinking admits no
comparison.


$) This means to say, that there has not been any matter or hyle ex-
isting from all eternity, containing different kinds of primitive atoms or
molecules etc., as the Greek philosopher, Anaxagoras, taught, but that all
things are the gradual emanations of one everlasting being. This idea is
then symbolically explained in the next paragraph.


6) The design of the author is evidently to deduce the proof of the de-
cade from the phenomena in the nature of man, who is generally considered
the crown or the final cause of the terrestial creation, and upon whom God
vouchsafed two most precious gifts, mame: the articulated word, and the


NOTES. 48


religious element (spiritual purity). This passage is explained by Isaac
Satanow in his Hebrew Dictionary entitled Sephath Emeth, p. 44, b:
לתולדות השכלים ואכר המוליד‎ spi c» הלשון הוא‎ mm
לקיים את האדם‎ Gg לתולדות החמרייס וכל אחד הוא ברית‎
צכעותיו חמרו וצורתו האי כדאיתיה‎ snp לפמיטה נצחרת על‎
The tongue is, as it were, the והאי כדארתרח זה בחמרו וזה בצורתו.‎
descriptive pen of all the spiritual issues, and the genital parts are the or-
iginators of the corporeal substances. Every one of them is an eternal
covenant in order to preserve the human race for ever, according to its two-
fold being: body and spirit. Each working after its own way, physically
and spiritually.

7) Like Pythagoras, who taught that the digits inclusive number ten
which are typified in Tetraktys, (Terpaxrvus) namely: 1 plus 2 plus 3
plus 4 equal ro, and which comprise the whole arithmetical system of
nature, etc. Our author endcavors to show the gradual emanation of all
things from God, which were completely finished in ten spheres.


8) My Hebrew reading is š 122272 רהושב רוצר על‎ There are various
readings; therefore Postellus rendered it: "restitue figmentum in locum
suum ;" Rittangel, “‘restitue formatorem in throno suo;" Pistorius, “fac
sedere creatorem in throno suo." The author seems to ridicule here the
Gnosticians who maintained that Demiurg was the creator of man and the
sensual world.


9) In God is the beginning and he is the boundary of the Universe,
Compare also the Talmud treatise Chagigah p. 12.

10) Here is contradicted the system of ditheism, consisting of an eternal
God, the Author of all good and of **Hyle" or “Satan,” the co-eternal and
co-equal principle of evil, maintaining that an all-perfect God alonc is the
author of all good and evil, and has in his infinite wisdom so wonderfully
contrived the nature of things, that physical and moral evil may produce
good, and hence contribute to carry out the great design of the Supreme
Being. Compare also Chap. 6 $5.


11) As the infinite series of numbers starts from one unit, so was the
whole Universe formed a unity, that centres in the Godhead.


12) The meaning is, that as the living creatures which the prophet saw
in his vision were stricken with such an awe, that they could not go any
further to see the divine glory, and had to return, so is the decade an eter-
nal secret to us and we are not permitted to understand it. We find this
very idea in the Pythagorean system. The disciples of Pythagoras looked
upon the decade as a holy number, and swore by it and by the Tetraktys
which contain the number ten.


13) See above Note 1, God, idea and word are indivisible.


49 NOTES.


14) I adopted here the reading of Judah Halevi, namely: 122201 ppr
בהר רפש וטרט רגרי‎ with the exception of the word NMG because it is
obvious from “Yezirah,” Chap. II, that the author signifies by the word
“Tohu,” nothing, and not something, as Judah Halevi erroneously thought.
Moses Butarel and others tell us that they had before them a correct copy
of *Sepher Yezirah,” where it reads: D33228 SR רכר' בחר‎ pa^ חהר זה קר‎
מפרל מדת!‎ The same passage is mentioned in the Talmud treatise Chagi-
gah, p. 12, a, with the addition of המשוקעות בתהום שמהן רורצארן‎
מרםי‎ The word המפרכמרת‎ is translated by Rashi, moist. Some say it is
a compound word of D מפול‎ others of פלונר אלמונר,‎ etc. But the
word is not of Semitic origin; it is, according to my opinion, borrowed from
the Greek as the word »'2"O etc., ITAun flood. אבנרס מפלמות‎ flood-
stones. The same word is used treatise Beza, p. 24, b, דגרם המפולמרן.‎
fish that are caught from out of the flood.


15) According to the author, the space and six dimensions emanated
from the ether.


16) Judah Halevi in his book entitled “‘Kusari,” p. 356, illustrates it
thus: The Creator is one, and the space has in the figurative expression
six dimensions. The book “Yezirah,” having ascribed to the Creator some
names in the spiritual language, chooses now in the human language the
finest sounds which are, as it were, the spirits of the other sounds, namely:
הדר"‎ and says, that when the divine will was expressed by such a sublime
name, it became that which the Exalted by praise wished to call forth ac-
cording to the combination of “aq” Hence it follows, that the material
world was created in such a way and manner which corresponds with the
material, namely, by the sublime spiritual name, which corresponds with
the material name, חרר, הרר, ררה רה"י‎ (m רחר,‎ and out of each of them
became one dimension of the world, the sphere.


17) The author shows here by the symbol of a scale and the phonetic
character of the fundamental letters "NR that the opposite forces and


the struggle which prevail in the smallest as well as in the largest circles of
creation are appeased and calmed.


18) Meaning outlets, outgates of the creative power, formations.


19) The word 227 signifies joy, and when transposed, forming the word
322 it signifies just the contrary, trouble, plague. He means to say, that
the letters of the words 229 and 222 are the same, but they signify never-
theless, opposite ideas on account of transposition. Just as the sphere re-
mains the same during the rotation on its axis in its setting and in its rising;


yet it appears to us as if it had undergone a great change on account of its
different position,


50


NOTES.


צרפ


T


21) The combination of the twenty-two letters without permutation is


20) My reading is fom apo `
reprcsented in the following table:


אב אנ אד אה או DN DN IN‏ אי אכ אל אמ אנ DN‏ אע אפ אצ אק אֶר אש את
בג 33 בה בו בו בח בט בי בכ בל במ בנ בס בע בפ בצ בק בר בש בת
גר גה גו גו גח נט גי גכ גל גמ גנ גס גע גפ גצ גק גר גש גת
דה רו רז רה דט די דכ דל דמ דנ דס רע דפ רצ דק דר רש רת

הו הז הח הט הי הכ הל המ הנ הס הע הפ הצ הק הר הש הת

וז ות וט וי וכ ול ומ תע וס וע ופ וצ וק ור וש ות

ח וט s:‏ זכ זל זמ Dt o‏ זע pr‏ וצ pr‏ ד vr‏ ות

en‏ חי הכ הל המ yn on on‏ הפ הצ pn‏ חר חש הת

טי טכ טל טמ טנ DD‏ טע טפ טצ pn‏ טר טש no‏

יכ יל ימ ינ יס יע יפ P u‏ יר יש יח

כל כמ בב כס b5 y3‏ כצ כק כר כש כת

למ לנ לם yb‏ לפ לצ לק לר לש לת

no מצ מק מר מש‎ po מע‎ DD Jp

נס נע נפ נצ נק נר נש נת

סע ספ gp‏ סק סר סש DD‏

ny wy ער‎ py sy עפ‎

פצ pb‏ פר פש פת

צק צר צש צת

l‏ קר קש קת

רש רת

שת


22) The number of combinations of twenty-two letters two and two


without any permutation is according to the mathematical formula


23) The ancient philosophers maintained that if God is the first cause,
and He is necessarily, He, the immediate effect of Him, as an absolute unity,


51 NOTES.


can only be again a unity. Hence from a being that is in every respect a
unique being, there can only emanate one being; because would two essen-
tially and truly different things issue conjointly from one being, they can
only proceed from two different things of substance, that would consequently
admit a division that is inconceivable, They then put the question, how
came so many various beings into existence? Our author is therefore en-


deavoring to show that the whole universe emanated gradually from the
spirit of the one living God.


"צר מתרהר The reading of Von Jo. Meyer and others is as follows:‏ )24
cnn‏ ועשח אינו רשנו והצב עמודים גדולים מאורר טאינו נתפס
וזה סרמן צופח ומרמר עופח כל היצור ואת כל הדבררם בשם "FN‏
My reading according‏ רסרבין לדבר כשרים ושתים מנררנם וגוף SMR‏
to a manuscript of Rabbi Isaac Luria, which I have preferred to all others,‏
רצר ממש Win‏ ועשה את איגו רשנו Sx m‏ עמודים גדוכים isthus;‏
מאורר שאינו נתפס וזה סרמן אות א עם 532 וכולן עם א nb‏
ומימר ועשה את כל היצור ואם כל הרבור שם אחד וסרמן לדבר
עשרים ושתים חפצים בגוף א:

25) It has been already mentioned above Chap. i, $1, that God, his idea
and his word are a unity; hence the author signifies by the letter Aleph
the air from which emanated the creative speech, etc,


26) Hereis meant: ethereal air, ethereal water, ethereal fire, the macro-


cosm, the courses of time and microcosm. Many offspring or derivations


came from the latter three, as their progenitors, as it is explained after-
wards in the chapter.


27) The author endeavors to show how the creative divine word became


morc condensed and how a new series of productions came out of three
elements.


28) In ancient times coldness was considered to oe a substance, [See
Psalm 147, 17.]


29) Id est, made it the reigning power.
30) Namely, with the two other elements.
31) That is to say a different combination of the elements.


32) According to the opinion of the author, it may be arranged as follows:


Aleph. Mem. Sheen.
World: Air, Earth, Heaven or Atmosphere.
(Inclusive of Land and Sea.)
Man: Breast, Bellv, Head.
Year: Moistness, Coldness, Heat.


33) The aspirating pronunciation of p in the Greek, was adopted by the
ancient Jews in Palestine for the Hebrew letter ©» They pronounced it
partly aspirated and partly unaspirated. [See Dr. Geiger's Lehr-und Lese-
buch der Mischnah, p. 22, and Dr, Graetz’s Gnosticismus, p. 117.]


NOTES. 52


34) According to the idea of our author, there emanated from the unity
of God three ethereal elements: primitive air from the spirit, from the air,
primitive water, and from the water, primitive fire or ether, out of which
came other spheres of existence in the significant and highly important
number, seven, from which descended smaller spheres and which produced
again others. He endeavors to show how the ideal became, after numerous
emanations, more condensed, palpable and concrete. The whole creation is
thus contemplated as a pyramid, terminating in a point at the top with a
broad basis. [See Dr. Gractz's Gnosticismus, p. 224.[


35) Compare Chapter I, Section 5, Note, 8.


36) The order of the planets (including the Sun) is stated here according
to the Ptolemaic system which was in vogue even among the learned men
til] the middle of the fiftcenth century, namely: Moon, Mercury, Venus,
Sun, Mars, Jupiter and Saturn. But this arrangement is undoubtedly an
interpolation of a later time, as the author of the book “Yezirah” lived
many years before Ptolemy. And indeed Prof. Jo. Friedrich Von Meyer
and others of reliable authority had in their copies of “Yezirah” the follow-
ing order: מאדרם.‎ PTS חמה נוגה 2232 5225 שבתר‎ Mars, Jupiter,
Saturn, Moon, Mercury, Venus, Sun.


37) Philo (Allegor 1, 42,) after having called attention to the fact that
the heptade is to be found in many biblical laws, in the vowels of the Greek
language, in the gamut and in the organs of the human body, exclaims,
similar to our author: “The whole nature exults in the heptade !"


38) The rule for permutation is as follows: (n—1).n.1x2x3x4x5x6
+7===5040. In our edition it reads: בת"ס/‎ JINNI חמשת אלפים‎ Five
thousand and four houses, which is obviously a mistake, it should read:
$040 houses. חמשת אלפים וארבעים בתרם,‎


39) I read ברברת‎ instead of קורקובן‎ for two reasons. In the first
place, the same thing is mentioned afterwards, and in the second place, itis
proved by the expression כערסה‎ that the author meant [11373 and not
קורקובן.‎

40) Some maintain that by the expression Tali is understood the con-
stellation Draco or Dragon, which is a very large constellation extending
for a great length from East to West; beginning at the tail which lies half
way between the Pointers and the Pole Star, and winding round between
the Great and Little Bear by a continued succession of bright stars from 5
to 10 degrees asunder, it coils round under the feet of the Little Dear, sweeps
round the pole of the ecliptic, and terminates in a trapezium formed by four
conspicuous stars from 30 to 35 degrees from North Pole. Dr. Steinshneider
(see Magazin fuer Literatur des Auslandes, 1845) and Dr. Cassel (in his
commentary to the book entitled Kusari,) maintain that the ancient Jewish


b3 NOTES.


astronomers signified by the word Tali, not the constellation Draco, but
the line which joins together the two points in which the orbit of the moon
intercepts the ecliptic (Dragon's head and tail). Dr. Cassel is of the opinion


that our author meant here, probably the invisible, celestial or universal
axis that carries the whole Universe.


41) Our author means to say that the water has a great disposition to
unite itself with the caloric, thus for instance is the fire latent in steam,
but the air equipoises them.


42) The meaning is, as God is the centre of the Universe, so have the
macrocosm, the seasons and temperature and the microcosm, their centres
receiving power from the principal centre to regulate and rule.


43) The substance of this Mishnah is mentioned in the Talmud treatise
Berachoth, p. 55, a. It reads there: אמר רב רהודח אמר רב ^271 הרה‎
לצרף אותרות שנבראו בהן שמים וארץ:‎ babag “Rab Jehudah stated
in the name of Rab, that Bezalel understood to combine letters by which
heaven and earth were created.” To this the commentator Rashi adds:
“as it is taught in the book Yezirah.” It is undoubtedly certain that the
book Y'ezirah, or a cosmogony as it is represented there, was known to Rab,
who was a disciple of Jehudah Hanasi, during the second part of the second


century, (C. E) See treatise Berachoth, p. 55 a, where the commentator
Rashi referred to the book Yezirah,


41) This whole paragraph is an interpolation of an unknown hand, as it
can be easily proved.


45) I have translated according to the reading of Rabbi Judah Halevi.
The reading of Rabbi Luria is as follows: DINK 9"Dz1 וקשר כשריס‎
בכשרנו רגרלה לר את סודו משכן במים דכקן באש רעשן ברוה בערך‎
“He fastened twenty-two letters on + בשניס עשר מזלות‎ yim בשבעה‎
his tongue and revealed to him His mystery, He drew them by water, kin-
dled them by fire and thundered them by the wind, He lighted them by
seven, and rules them by twelve constellations.” Pistor. renders it: **Tranat
per aquam, accendit in igne grandine signavit in aere.


Disposuit cum sep-
tem et gubernavit cum duodecim."


Postellus’ version is: ‘‘Attraxit cum
in aqua, accendit in spiritu, inflammavit in septem aptatum cum duodecim
signis." Meyer translates it: “Er zog sie mit Wasser, zündet sie an mit


Feuer, erregte sie mit Geist, vebrannte sie mit sicben, goss sic aus mit den
zwoelf Gestirnen.”


GLOSSARY


OF


RABBINICAL WORDS.


N
ארק‎ > To adhere, cohere. VI, 8.
אויר‎ = [Syriac ,ANN Greek ago] Air. II,..


nix m - Sign, letter; יסור‎ nisnix fundamental letters. I, 1.
JON adv. מכאן ואילף‎ hinc et ulterius; from now further. IV 16
אלו‎ adj. These. Equals the biblical Dx VI, J.

WER adj. [Greek Aó£ov] Oblique, diagonal direction. V, 2.
mon n. Middle. centre. I, 2. '


2
בורי‎ m Clearness, perspicuity. I, 3. 103 by KEN "pam
and put the subject in a clear point of view.
N23 n. Division. V, 5.


pina or בינותים‎ Composed of DAY pa omitting W between them.
I,1. [See Duke's Sprache der Mischnah, p. 68.]


ג
upon the back id est, upon or above,‏ על 23* m. Back.‏ 33
VI, 8.‏ ו
m. Body, substance II, 5.‏ $13
Circle, celestial orb, or sphere. II, 4.‏ גלנל
d s‏


54


55 GLOSSARY.


ר
Word. 1,‏ .= דבור
ה
Think, muse, meditate, reflect. 1,7.‏ > הרהר


Reflection, meditotion. 1‏ = הרהגר


1
זכגת‎ n. Innocence, purity, godliness, merit. 1
3
n
nain m. Misdeed, trespass. II, 1.
חזר‎ > To return, to turn one's self round. IT, 5.


to dance round. II, 5.‏ חלל n. Rotation; from‏ חֲלִילָה


ט


bing m. Milt, spleen. V, 4.


3
IR? or IS adv. Here, there; JN3D thence, from thence. IV, 16.
335 m. Star; especially the planet Mercury. IV, 7.
R3 pielha v. Direct; pam directed, situated. I, 2.
WD = Ugliness. IV, 3.
3 or 25 adv. So, thas. I, 7.


IND Hiph. gon *. To intervene in any thing, to mediate the
6800, accomodate a quarrel. II, 1.


ל


noy» n. Eating, swallowing. V, 1.
q2'55 adv. Composed of the words לפי‎ and ,]3 According to
that, therefore. IV, 15.


pop n.


nay =
TM n.


GLOSSARY. 56


מ
The planet Mars. IV,7.‏
Measure, quality, divine attribute. 1,4.‏
Doctrine, lesson, paragraph.‏


Constellations; especially the twelve signs of the
Zodiac. V,3. מל טוב‎ a happy constellation.


It is a particle like ,3 as; it is added the word pb
kind, denoting: as a kind of, like, as. II, 4.
Chald. inf. מאמר‎ or ממר.‎ To speak, command. IT, 6.


Substance, reality. II, 5.
Rampart, a floor, pavement. I, 8.
Gall. V, 4


See n3 IV, 1.


J


With a 3 following after it, signifies: to make use


of any thing. IV, 1.


The planet Venus. IV, 7.


Chald. Stick in, fasten, conjoin, connect. I, 6.


Opening. IV, 8.
D
Arrange. 6


onueiov Sign, illustration. II,4. [See Geiger's
Lesestucke der Mishnah, p. 121.]


Finished; the end (cf a book or chapter.)


y
Contention, rivalry. V, 6.
Future. II, 2.


GLOSSARY.


D


pan Chapter, section.
wwe adj Divested of clothes, undressed, simple. I, 8.


S

n. The planet Jupiter. IV, 7.‏ צרק

n, Appearance. I, 5.‏ צפיית

mw > Refine, melt together, connect, combine. II, 2.
H

Yap t. To fix, to fasten. 1,8. II,3.


na3'pornap n. Stomach. TV, 4.


Stomach. V, 4.‏ ^ קורקבן or‏ קרקבן


ר
n. Argument, evidence. VI, 2.‏ ראיה
MNI = Sight. V, 1.‏
mm n. Redundancy of water, moistness. III. 4.‏
nao e. Smell. V, 1.‏
ש


"nad n. The planet Saturn. IV, 7.
nme n. Speaking. V. |,
שְׁמִיעָה‎ n. Hearing. 1.
שרת‎ > To serve. 6
n
bn n. The constellation Draco or Dragon. VI, 2.
תשמיש‎ f. Coition. 1.


DBR or Wan t. To seize, to take hold of.


A SKETCH


OF THE


TALMUD,


THR’


WORLD RENOWNED COLLECTION


OF


JEWISH TRADITIONS,


BY


REV. DR. ISIDOR KALISCH.


NEW YORK:
L. H. FRANK & CO,, PUBLISHERS AND PRINTERS,
No. 394 DÉ' WERY.


1877.


“It is the essence of the Talmud which is ridiculed by those wha
understand it the least, and which is terribly abused in our own midst
by those who hold themselves out as its sincere devotees,”


(Dr. Ad.
Jellinek's Sermons, Vol. II, p. 290.)


PREFACE.


It is my design in publishing a “Sketch of
the Talmud,” to recall men from prepossessed
partial views, to truth.

The fate and history of the literary pro-
ductions of the Jewish people in the different
countries all over the habitable globe, found
everywhere interpreters and expounders.

But the Talmud, which is the principal
source of Judaism and is an important his-
torical document of a period of seven hundred
years, showing and explaining clearly the
development and retardation of Judaism, and
containing much which is of great impor-
tance to the knowledge and history of the
Bible, although it still requires that the torch
of criticism should throw light upon it, is
very seldom used properly, or is ignored
altogether. (See Dr. A. Geiger's posthumous
works, Vol. II, p. 127.)

Yes, it was and is often subject to the worst
abuse.*


* The governments of Italy, France, etc., influenced by
priestly fanaticism, condemned the Talmud as heretical and
consequently it suffered several times the martyrdom of
heresy.


iv PREFACE.


It requires no prophet to see that gross
ignorance and misrepresentation are the real
causes of it. For among millions of Jews
and Christians, there are only very few who
read and studied the Talmud all through, as it
takes a whole life-time merely to read all the
books bearing that name, and what makes it
most difficult is, that although one part of it,
namely, the Mishnah, is written in the Hebrew
language, the second part, however, called
Gemara, is composed in a style where fre-
quently are used Chaldaic, Persian, Syrie,
Greek and Latin idioms, which are written
with Hebrew characters without vowels.

It is therefore no wonder that it cannot be
studied by many, and some know only that
which they have read somewhere, quoted '
from another secondary source.

Having for nearly half a century devoted
my time and energy to the study of the tal-
mudical literature, I hope that I am fully
prepared to give to the kind reader a true,
clear and succinct “Sketch of the Talmud.”

May it be as favorably received by every
friend of literature and enlightenment, as
many portions of it have been, when I pub-
lished them some years ago in a popular
Christian paper, read by tens of thousands.


Ne ewark, August, 1877. ISIDOR KALISCH.


SKETCH OF THE TALMUD.


The word Talmud is derived from the Hebrew
verb 125 (lamod) to learn, to teach ; signifying, oral
instruction, or traditional teaching, and is the title
of a collection of Jewish traditions and laws.

It is called Talmud emphatically, as the Law of
Moses is called with emphasis “Min” “4 vayos” “the
Law,” instead of משה‎ min the Law of Moses.

It contains, as Buxtorf filius in dedic. ad Lex.
-Talm. correctly remarked, sound theological doc-
trines, although, as Maimonides somewhere says,
they are occasionally concealed in useless shells.

It contains, as it were, a collection of a great many
small coins, and of faithful and very useful vestiges
which have escaped the destruction of Jewish an-
tiquity to the shame of the perfidy of some modern Jews,
to the enlightening of the history of both Testaments,
and to a right explanation of ceremonies, precepts
and customs of the former Jewish nation. We find
therein the noblest proverbs of antiquity, beautiful
sentiments, acute, tasteful and deep thoughts, and
innumerable allusions which will make the reader
not only better, but also wiser and more learned, and


6 SKETCH OF THE TALMUD.


which, like brilliant jewels, do not grace the Hebrew
language in a less degree than the elegant phrases
which the classics, the languages of Greece and Rome
contain.

The Talmud consists of two parts: first, 72% Mish-
nah, (from the Hebrew verb rix? shanoh, to teach),
traditional precept; second, 723 Gemarah, (from the
Hebrew verb ib: gamor, to finish, to conclude), be-
cause therein was rendered the final judgment or
decree, after a thorough discussion of the matter.


THE FIRST EDITOR OF THE MISHNAH.


The first collection of the Mishnah was made by
Hillel Hanasi, (the prince) a contemporary of Jesus
of Nazareth, who acknowledged the authority of his
learned countryman, as appears from Matt. xxiii, 3:
“The Scribes and the Pharisees sit on Moses’ chair,
therefore observe and do whatever they enjoin upon
you.” It is said (treatise Chagigah, p. 14 et seq.)
that the traditions were so many that they could fill
up six or seven hundred books, but Hillel rejected a
great many and reduced them to six books.

Hillel was a native of Babylon and settled in
Jerusalem, when forty years of age. Having no pro-
fession whatever, and being destitute of all other
means of obtaining a livelihood, he obtained his daily
bread by cutting and splitting wood. Impelled, how-
ever, by an unquenchable thirst for truth and know-
ledge, he even offered his services as wood-cutter


SKETCH OF THE TALMUD. 7


gratuitously to poor Rabbis, so that they might allow
him tolisten to theirlectures. Having acquired somo
knowledgo, ho desired then to attend a regular course
of studies at the most celebrated academy of that
time, where the two ingenious and renowned teachers,
the proselytes Shemajah and Abtalion, presided.

The poor wood-cutter tried all that lay in his
power to earn enough to pay the admission fee to
the door-keeper. One day in winter he worked very
hard, but in spite of his steady and heavy labor, he
could not gain the usual amount he needed, on ac-
count of the shortness of the day. He could, conse-
quently, neither buy for himself the necessary meals,
nor, much less, could he pay the door-keepers fee at
the college. Hillel then—like a thief in the night—
climbed to the roof, and regardless of cold and danger,
- listened with close attention to the word of God and
the explanations of the sages. The heaven was over-
cast with clouds, the storm raged fearfully and the
snowflakes fell thick and fast upon him; but still
poor Hillel listened on. His limbs began to stiffen,
he became benumbed and all sense of feeling at last
was lost. He was found in the morning apparently
dead; but after applying many restoratives he was
brought to consciousness again.

When the Scribes or Sophrim were informed of
his intense longing for truth, they granted him free
admission to their lectures. Hillel made great pro-
ficiency in all his studies, and soon the title of Nasi,
prince, was conferred on him. He performed his


8 SKETCH OF THE TALMUD.


official duties during the term of forty years with
great distinction, so that it was said of him that ho
was worthy to be in the rank of the prophets. His
great erudition and sound principles, as well as his
excellent character, entitle him to be always remem-
bered among the brightest examples of human in-
tellect and nobility of heart.


NOBLE TRAITS OF HILLEL, THE FIRST
EDITOR OF THE MISHNAH.


Experience teaches us, that patience and sweet-
ness of disposition conquer always tho hearts of men.
These traits subdue the passionate, disarm tho iras-
cible and draw forth love and admiration. Hillel
posessed these virtues in the highest degree. There-
fore he was appointed Nasi, prince, by King Herod,
which office he held with the greatest dignity until
his eightieth year. This honorable position was
retained by his descendants for ten generations.

It is related (treatise Sabbath, p. 31) that two men
were once wagering four hundred dinars whether
Hillel could be provoked to anger or not. He who
thought that he could make Hillel angry, entered his
residence on a Friday afternoon and unceremoniously
rushed towards the door of the bath-room where he
was just taking a bath, shouting in a gruff voice: “Is
Hillel here? Where is Hillel?" without adding the
title of Nasi. Hillel dressed himself hastily, and


SKETCH OF THE TALMUD. 9


replied: “What do you wish my son?” “I want to
ask you a question.” ‘ What is it, my son?”

“I would like to know," said the man, “why do
the Babylonians have pointed heads?" Hillel replied,
“It seems to mo that the midwives are to blame for
it.” The man went away, but soon returned, crying
out: * Hillel! Hillel! where is Hillel?” Hillel, who
had returned from his bath, speedily put on his cloak
and asked: “ What do you wish, my son?”

* [ want to be informed why the Thermodeens have
weak eyes?" “That is a very important question,
my son. I suppose they are subjected to dullness
of sight because they live in a sandy country, and
tho wind drives tho sand into their eyes." Tho man
left, but soon returned in the same impudent manner.
Hillel asked again with a pleasing countenance:
* What do you wish, my son?"

“Tell me," said the stranger, “why the Africans
have such broad feet?" “Indeed! that is a question
of great moment, my son!" answered Hillel, “but I
think the reason of it is, because they are obliged to
walk mostly barefooted, on account of their living
in marshy countries."

* I would ask you,” continued the stranger, “many
more queries, but I fear you will be angry with me."
Hillel seated himself and said: “Let me hear all
your questions and I will try to answer them." “Are
you," rejoined the stranger, “he whom the people
call the Prince of Israel?" “Yes,” said Hillel.
* Well," continued the stranger, *I wish that there


10 SKETCH OF THE TALMUD.


be no more such men as you in Israel" "Why,
my son?” interrogated Hillel. ‘Because I have lost
on account of you a wager of four hundred dinars,”
said the stranger, and related to him the whole story.
Hillel kindly reprimanded him, and advised him to
be more prudent, and the pecuniary loss he had met
with would serve him as a lesson in the future.

Three heathens being desirous to embrace Judaism
made their applications personally for this purposo
to Shamai, a colleague of Hillel; but, notwithstand-
ing he was a disciple of the latter, he adopted the
great virtue which distinguished his master and friend
merely theoretically, and not practically. Shamai
taught: (see Proverbs of the Fathers, Chap. I, § 15)
“Let it be thy business to study tho law; say little
and do much, and receive all men with affability.”
In spite of this wise teaching, however, he did not
control his propensity to anger, and when the above
mentioned three strangers had an interview with him
concerning their conversion to Judaism, he becamo
so irritated at them on acccount of the peculiar con-
ditions they suggested, that he launched into in-
vectives against them and sent them away.

They then went to Hillel, who received them kindly
and endeavored to gain their hearts by his usual
mildness. One said, *I wish to become a Jew, pro-
vided I can be elected to the office of a high priest.”
Hillel replied, “My son, whoever desires to hold an
office should know all the duties connected with it,
in order to discharge them faithfully. Let us, there-


SKETCH OF THE TALMUD. 11


fore, mako ourselves familiar with all the laws and
privileges concerning the priesthood.” He read with
the heathen tho third and fourth books of Moses,
and when they camo to tho tenth verse of the third
chapter in Numbers, whero it reads: “And the
stranger that cometh nigh shall bo put to death,"
Hillel remarked, that even King David, not being a
descendant of Aaron, would havo suffered the samo
punishment, if he had attempted to usurp the priestly
dignity. The heathen, satisfied with this explanation,
embraced Judaism unconditionally.

Tho second said, “I am desirous to become a Jew,
provided that I may keep the written, but not the
oral law.” Hillel then taught him the letters of the
alphabet in their usual order, and afterwards reversed
them. “Why is that?" asked the heathen. “Well!”
answered Hillel, “why do you reject the statement
that one teacher handed down to another the correct
` statement of the law?” Prompted by this pertinent
observation, the stranger also embraced Judaism un-
conditionally.

Tho third said, “I wish to become a proselyte,
provided the Jewish religion can be taught to mo in
so short a time as I can stand on one foot." “What-
ever 1s not pleasant unto thee, do not unto thy fellow-
man. This is the substance of the law and the pro-
phets; all the rest is but the commentary thereon.
Go and reflect on it,” replied Hillel, and thereby
won over the third by his kindness and skill.

The above principle is also quoted, Tobit iv, 15:


19 SKETCH OF THE TALMUD.


“Do that to no man which thou hatest." Compare.
also Matt. vii, 12: “Therefore all things whatever ye
would" etc.

It would not be out of placo to mako tho reader
acquainted with many moro maxims of Hillel.


— o .—yəau,o.a a


HILLEL’S PROVERBS.


Be of the disciples of Aaron, loving and pursuing
peace; loving mankind and bringing them to the


study of the law. Proverbs of the Fathers, Chap. i, Sec. 12.


He who is ambitious of magnifying his name, de-
stroyeth his name; and he who doth not increase his
knowledge, diminisheth it; and ho who doth not
study tho law deserves death ; and whosoever useth
for himself the crown of the law will perish. Ibid 13.


If I do not act for myself who can do it for me?
When I am alone by myself, what am I? If I act
not now, when shall I? Ibid 14.


Hillel once saw a skull floating on the surface of
the water, and he said to it: “Becauso thou didst
drown others, thou wast drowned, and at the end
will those who drowned thee also be drowned.”

Ibid Chap. ii, Sec. 4


If the great I AM is here, ail is here, and if the I
AM is not here, who is here? Therefore reflect
thereon continually, for all is in Him, and according


SKETCH OF THE TALMUD. 13


` to the labor which thou wilt undergo, so shall be
thy recompense.* Aboth derabbi Nathan, Chap. xii.


Separate not thysclf from the congregation; nor
havo confidence in thyself until the day of thy death.
Judgo not thy neighbor until thou art placed in the
same circumstances; neither utter anything which is
* incomprehensible, in the hope that it afterwards may
be comprehended ; nor say, When I shall have leisure
I will study; for verhaps thou mayest never have
the leisure. Proverbs of the Fathers, Chap. ii, Sec. 5.


The rude man feareth not sin; the ignorant cannot
be pious; the bashful cannot become learned, nor
the passionate be a teacher; nor will he who is most-
ly engaged in commerce become wise.


In a place where there are no eminent men en-
deavor thou to become eminent. Ibid Sec. 6.


He who increaseth his flesh multipheth food for
worms; he who multiplieth riches increaseth care ;
he who increaseth female servants increaseth lewd-
ness; he who multiplieth man servants increaseth
robbery ; but he who increaseth his knowledge of the
law increaseth life.


He who attends much at school increaseth wisdom;


- he who increaseth in reflection increaseth in pru-


dence; he who exerciseth much charity multiplieth
peace.


CN"‏ אני כאן הכל כאן אם אני לית כאן מאן כאן היפכה
והופך בה דכולא בה ולכולהון לפום צערא אנרא.


14 SKETCH OF THE TALMUD.


If one has acquired a good name, he has acquired
it for himself; if one has acquired a knowledge of


the law, he has obtained immortal life.
Ibid Sec. 8.


Hillel was the first Jewish scholar who mado many
critical, exegetical and paleographical remarks on the
Bible, when he lectured thereon in Jerusalem. These
wero partly written on the margin of the book and
partly handed down orally from ago to age until they
were finally collected as Masora, (מסורה)‎ tradition,
which was finished in the eleventh century.

** Progress and developement” was Hillel's motto.
He did not endeavor to maintain everything in tho
Jewish religion in statu quo, but he tried earnestly
and zealously to evoke an unceasing activity in the
field of religion. His intention was not to make the
law more onerous and to interpret it at pleasure ; but
he always strove earnestly to harmonize it with the
circumstances of time and place.

That he did this, however, without any religious
scruple, arose from the fact that this had already
been done in many instances by the prophets. In
this manner it was that the ceremony of circumcision
was dispensed with under Moses, while the Israelites
were sojourning in the wilderness, and the Day of
Atonement under Solomon. The prophet Elijah, who
was not a descendant of Aaron, sacrificed at an un-
holy place. Furthermore, Ezra altered a biblical
law in order to punish the Levites, because they did


SKETOH OF THE TALMUD. 15


not accompany him when he went up with the exiles
from Babylon to settle Jerusalem. Ho ordered the
first tithes to bo given to the priests, and not to the
Levites, as tho Bible commands. (Treatise Jeba-
moth, p. 86, b.)

Hillel suspended an express biblicallaw when he
was convinced that it had become impracticable and
might prove detrimental to tho general welfare. Wo
find accordingly tho following departure in treatiso
Shebiith, Chap. xii, 3—1£: “When one has filed a de-
claration in court that he will not consider his debtor
released at the release year, then does the seventh
year not extinguish debt." Ho termed such docu-
ments פּרוזבול‎ «pbc Bova prosbole, which is a Greck ex-
pression meaning “before tho court.” He made this
institution, as it is explicitly stated in treatiso Gittin,
Chap. iv, 3,in order to preservo the well-being of the
Jewish state; as the rich had refused to lend to the
. poor, notwithstanding the Jaw makes benevolence
obligatory, in view of the debt at the advent of the
release year.

Since Hillel considered all the religious Jaws as
instrumental to tho advancement of the temporal and
spiritual welfare of man, ho handed down seven
hermeneutic exegetical rules, (Aboth derabbi Nathan
Chap. xxxvii, and Siphra, at tho beginning), by which
tho oral and written law should be interpreted, ac-
cording to the wants of the time.

He stated, “An inference may be made: first,
from minor to major and from major to minor; sec-


16 SKETCH OF THE TALMUD.


ond, from a similarity of phrases used in different
passages; third, from the principal idea contained
in ono verse; fourth, from the principal idea con-
tained in two verses; fifth, from comparing a general
view of a subject with its descriptivo details; sixth,
from a particular expression followed then by a gen-
eral one; seventh, from whatever may be learned
from the connection." *

The noble and praiseworthy intention of Hillel
was, however, not quito understood by his own dis-
ciples, nor by those of his hasty-tempered antagonist
Shamai.

About ono hundred years later Rabbi Ishmael
taught that there are thirteen hermeneutic exegetical
rules. (Seo Thorath Kohanim, in the beginning.)
Some timo still Jater Rabbi Elieser, the son of Jose,
the Galilean, added again nineteen hermencutic ex-
egctical rules. These thirty-two rules were then
gencrally adopted to expound the biblical scriptures,
and laws were thus accumulated upon laws, so that
every breath of a Jewish life was besieged by rab-
binical requirements, and tho small sacred volume
was drowned in the ocean of Mishnahs.

Besides this, the discord which took place between
the school of Hillel and the school of Shamai added


*שבעה moe‏ ררש הלל הזקן לפני בני בתירה אלו הן: ק"ו
וגזירה שוה, ובנין אב מכתוב אחר, ובנין אב משני כתובים,
ומכלל ופרט ומפרט וכלל, וכיוצא בו במקום אחד, ורבר
הלמר מענינו (אבות ררבי נתן פרק ל"ז):


SKETCH OF THE TALMUD. 17


& great deal to the accumulation of new laws and
regulations; because the disciples of Shamai mostly
forbado that which those of Hillel allowed. (Idioth,
Chap. iii-iv. It went so far that tho Mosaic law
. appeared to bo like two different codes, and on ac-
count of the contradictory regulations of the teachers,
(Tanaim, Din), who acted as they thought proper.
the religious people of one place were considered
irreligious at another.


THE SECOND EDITOR OF THE MISHNAH.


To remedy this evil, Rabbi Jehudah Hanasi, the
son of Rabbi Simeon, the son of Gamliel, or as they
used to call him, Rabenu Hakadosh, “our holy
teacher," or simply “Rabbi,” as Aristotle was em-
phatically called in tho Middle Ages, “tho philos-
opher,"— collected all traditions as well as the dis-
. cussions on the particulars of all ceremonies, re-
arranged and revised all tho rabbinical laws and
explanations given in the various academies during
the former centuries. He arranged them also like
the first edition, in six principal parts, (Sedarim) each
of these again into single books or treatises, (Masech-
toth) which were sub-divided into chapters, (Perakim)
and these again into paragraphs, which are strictly
called Mishnahs. He finished this work one hundred
and twenty years after the destruction of the sec-
ond temple at Jerusalem.

Rabbi Jehudah was the first teacher who ven-
tured to reduce all traditions and rabbinical laws to


18 SKETCH OF THE TALMUD.


writing; because in former times only the prophets,
heads of congregations and colleges were allowed to
have copies of the traditional laws, which they called
“ Megilloth Setarim,” “Secret Scrolls.” They had to
study them secretly in order to commit them to
memory, that they might then be able to teach them
in publie orally. But when tho Israelites continued
to emigrate into distant countries, and were thus
prevented from attending the Jewish academies,
Rabbi Jehudah considered it much better to break
a time-honored custom and reduce the oral law to
writing, so that it might be in every man's hand, and
be thus accessible to all, than to expose tho whole
tradition to the risk of being misunderstood or for-
gotten.

Although many short-sighted zealots and fanatics
decried this innovation as a heresy, Rabbi Jehudah
did, nevertheless, carry out his view, and justified it
by referring to the words of the Psalmist, cxix, 126:
“It is time for the Lord to work, for they have made
void thy law.” This verse he interpreted thus: It
is time to act in behalf of the Lord, means, that
single biblical laws may be violated in order to pre-
serve the fundamental principles of the whole law.
(Treatise Berachoth, p. 54, a, etc.)

He was a contemporary of the Roman Emperor
Antonine the Pious, who was his intimate friend.
Having been appointed Nasi by the Emperor, he
used his influence on his imperial friend to the best
advantage of his co-religionists. Therefore it is said


SKETCH OF THE TALMUD. 19


of him, that sinco Moses he was tho first who com-
bined in a high degree erudition with worldly power.

He commanded thus the respect of all, and his
collection of the Mishnah was acknowledged and
adopted by all Jewish congregations as a religious
text book. But after the publication of the Mishnah
by Rabbi Jehudah Hanasi, his disciples busied them-
selves in making collections of the expositions of the
various opinions to be met with therein, respecting
the same subject, and to complete them. Thus
originated the work called  אתפסות‎ ( Thosephta) a “Sup-
plement,” or “Addition.” That of Rabbi Chija and
Rabbi Oshaja was preferred on account of its ac-
curacy. The same composed also a book, ברייתא‎
(Daraitha), which contains the excluded portion of
the Mishnah code by Rabbi Jehudah.

There were other collections made, called Mechil-
"tha, cf Rabbi Ishmael; Sifra or Thorath Kohanim,
Siphrai of Rav, Pesicta d'rab Kahana, ete., etc.

Here I must remark, that all the Rabbis from the
days of Simon tho Just until tho time of Rabbi Je-
hudah Hanasi had the title of Thanaim, teachers, or
סופרים‎ Scribes. The Rabbis and chiefs of academies
who afterwards presided were called mawn (Amo-
raim), preachers, expounders.


As there were accumulated many commentaries
on the Mishnah, it became then necessary to compile
a new text book. This was entitled גמרא‎ (Gamara),
the final judgment or decree.


90 SKETCH OF THE TALMUD.


There are two collections; first, the Hierosolmitic
or Tiberianic; second, the Babylonian, both called
Talmud. First, הלמור ירושלמי‎ (Talmud Jerushalmi);
second, 32 חלמוד‎ (Talmud Bavly). The first was
edited by Rabbi Jochanan, in Palestine, about three
hundred years after the destruction of Jerusalem,
and the latter by Rabbi Ashe, president of the Baby-
lonian academy of Sura,— from 365 to 425 — and by
his pupil and friend Abina.


THE SYSTEM OF THE PHARISEES.


The men educated in the rabbinical colleges at
Jerusalem before the destruction of the second temple
were generally called Gg Pharisees,* expounders.
Tho word tns is derived from the verb פרש‎ Parosh,
to explain, to interpret.

I will now endeavor to sketch with an unbiassed
mind the system of these Pharisces, as it is to be
found in the vast rabbinical literature.

It seems to me that, led by the principle of enjoy-
ing the substance and casting away the shell, the
Pharisees made an eclectic use of the Grecian phil-
osophy, assigning as they did, high authority to tho
Socratic, Platonic and Aristotelian schools. (See
my “Guide for Rational Inquiries into the Biblical
Writings," p. 63—71.)

*Philo calls them 20/00, the pious, the religious. He took the
word und Parush inthe Aramaic sense, meaning: one who sge-


cludes himself from worldly passions and devotes himself to the
duties of piety.


SKETCH OF THE TALMUD. 21


They were votaries of supernaturalism and enter-
tained the following opinions: God is an infinite,
(Midrash Rabba Genes. Chap. 68,) unique, spiritual,
(treatiso Chagigah, fol. 15,) eternal, necessary, provi-
dential being (Midrash Rabba Exod. Chap. 3, and
treatise Berachoth, fol. 9,( who cannot be conceived
by human understanding, (treatise Berachoth, fol. 31).
He does not exist in the world, but the whole universe
exists in him, (Midrash Rabba, Chap. 68;) wherefore
God is also called the infinite space, Mahom. He
can be perceived only through His works. (Ibid,
Chap. 1.)

As regards the creation, they taught that out of
the many systems of worlds which were present to
His wisdom, he created the best possible one, and
instituted the best order, Optimism. (Ibid Genes.
Chap. 3. Hence the principle laid down by Rabbi
. Akiba: “Whatever God does is well done." (Ibid
Genes. Chap. 3, and treatise Berachoth, p. 60.)

This is illustrated by the following story. It is
related, (treatise Berachoth, p. 60, b,): Rabbi Akiba
was once on a journey, and when reaching the last
inhabited place bordering on an extensive forest, he
wanted to stop there over night. But as he had
applied everywhere in vain for lodging, he said to
them: *Whatever God does is well done." He con-
tinued his way and resolved to stay all night in the
forest.

He tied his jaded mule to a tree, lighted a torch
and fastened it on a dry stump, because the night


99 SKETCH OF THE TALMUD.


was very dark. He let the rooster, (the alarm clock
in the night of past ages,) which he carried with him
to tell him the time, perch. He had hardly climbed
up ם‎ high tree in order to spend tho night in safety,
when a lion came and tore his mule to pieces, a wild
cat devoured his rooster and the wind blew out his
torch. After observing all that had happened, he
said to himself, ** Whatever God does is well done."

During the same night, the enemy, who were en-
camped in that vicinity, took that very place by
surprise where he had wanted to stay all night, laid
it low, and made nearly all its inhabitants prisoners.
Ho then addressed all the fugitives who took to the
woods for a refuge: “Was I not right in maintaining
that whatever God does is well done? If I had re-
mained in the city, or my torch continued to burn,
or had my mule neighed, or the rooster crowed, the
enemy would have detected, plundered and taken
me prisoner too."

As a consequence of this principle, which they
applied to both physical and moral evils, the Phar-
18008 taught that we should thank God also for events
that seem to us to be evil. (Treatise Berachoth, p. 54.)

I will now relate an instance which is illustrative
of the pious character and just reasoning of Rabbi
Akiba, and which is also worthy of the close attention
of the reader.

There was once a decree of the Roman Emperor,
that any one who would study the holy law should
be put to death. Notwithstanding this prohibition,


SKETCH OF THE TALMUD. 23


Rabbi Akiba kept preaching publicly on the divine
scriptures, undaunted and with incomparable courage.
Papus; the son of Judah, met him just when he
was addressing a vast audience. He accosted him
thus: “Dear Rabbi, art thou not afraid of being
punished by the government?" Rabbi Akiba replied:
“Our situation reminds me of a story, which I shall
tell you now, from which you may learn a lesson."


THE FOX AND THE FISHES.


“A fox was walking on the brink of a river and
observed that there was a great commotion among
the fishes therein. They were swimming uneasily
to and fro. He asked them, “Why are you so rest-
less to-day? By whom are you pursued?' They
answered, "We want to escape the perils of nets and
hooks which men throw out to catch us.'

“Then said the fox, “I pity you my dear ones, but
` Í will tell you now what you have to do in order to
be rescued. Come to me on dry land, where we will
then lead a happy life together.'

“But they said, ‘Art thou the same beast that is
regarded by all as the wisest among the brutes?
Thou seemest not to be wise at all, but a fool. If
we are in danger of losing our lives in the water, our
natural element of life, how much more dangerous
would it be for us to be on dry land, where we could
not exist at all!” ”

“This,” continued Akiba, “is exactly the case with
us, in these times of persecution. If trouble and


24. SKETCH OF THE TALMUD.


danger threaten ₪8 even when we are studying the
holy scriptures, which are tho means of a happy
existence and the source of ₪ happy life, how much
more are we exposed to all kinds of trouble and woe,
if we neglect to study our holy books!”

A short time had elapsed since the above interview
between the two Rabbis, when both Akiba and Papus
were arrested and thrown into ₪ dungeon. Papus,
broken-hearted, said to Akiba: “Happy art thou,
Akiba! Thou art here for having battled for the
cause of our holy religion; but woe to me! I am
imprisoned for having spent my time in temporal
and vain efforts, and I did not mind the wise hint
thou hast given me. Woe to me, that I did not
heed thy sound judgment, and did not follow thy
noble example!" (Treatise Berachoth, p. 61, b.)

Furthermore, the Pharisees taught: there is no
fatalism on earth, but all that happens is so ordained
by God, (treatise Chullin, fol. 7, b,) except virtue and
piety, which are entirely left to man's free choice.

In reference to this, Rabbi Akiba expresses him-
self thus: “Everything that is done is foreseen by
Providence, although freedom of choice concerning
moral actions, is left to man. God judges the
world for its own well-being, and the judgment de-
pends on the balance of deeds. Man goes bail with
himself for all that he receives and for all that he
does; his life is always in the net of retribution that
is spread over all men. On the mart of life, the
warehouse is open, the merchant (God) crediteth,


SKETCH OF THE TALMUD. 25


the journal is open and the hand recordeth, and
whosoever wishes may como and borrow; yet the
collectors (death in various forms) are continually
going around, and sometimes get paid with the con-
sent of the debtors, and sometimes without it; and
the collectors have good authority on which to rest
for support, for the Court renders its decision in
conformity with truth and justice, and everything
is thus arranged in order to prepare for the feast.”
(Ethics of the Fathers, Chap. 3, § 15-16.)

And although good and evil are entirely left in this
sublunary world to man’s choice, they taught that he
who pursues or endeavors to pursue the path of virtue
receives the support of God ; whereas the designs of
him who chooses the way of wickedness are not fixed
from above, but entirely the fruits of his own choice.
(Treatise Joma, fol. 38.) These principles are based
“upon Psalms xxxvii, xxiii and Proverbs xx and xxiii.

As the most ancient talmudical gnomology is con-
tained in פרקי אבות‎ Pirke Aboth, (the Chapters of the
Fathers,) I will quote here some of these beautiful
maxims and sayings.


ETHICS OF THE FATHERS.


CHAP. L—$ 1. The men of the great Synod laid
down three principles: Be carefulin giving judgment;
train up many disciples, and make a fence for the
law. (Meaning [sepes legis] guard laws, precaution-
ary ordinances.)


$9. Simon the Just, who was one of the last of


26 SKETCH OF THE TALMUD.


the great Synod, taught: The welfare of the human
race in this world is sustained by virtue of three
things, viz: the law, divine worship and charity.

$3. Antigonus of Socho, who flourished in the
third century before the common era, taught: Be
not like servants who serve their master with a view
of receiving rewards; but like servants who serve
their master without the view of being rewarded, and
then will you truly be God-fearing.


This sage was probably acquainted with the doc-
trines of Socrates, (Xenophon's Memorabilia, I, 1, §
2-8, III, 9, $ 15,( and therefore he pronounced the
above sentence, that doing right even because it is
right and without regard to future reward, is wor-
shiping God, is religion.

It is not only historically certain, that in conse-
quence of the invasion of Asia by Alexander the
Great, the Grecian language, literature and culture
were transplanted to Palestine, but the very name
* Antigonus" leads us to suppose that the Chaldaic
and Hebrew languages had to yield their places to
the Grecian.


THE ORIGIN OF SADDUCISM.


The conciseness of the language, however, used
by Antigonus in this sentence, caused his disciples
Zadok and Baithos to misunderstand its meaning,
so that they drew false conclusions from it and


SKETCH OF THE TALMUD. 27


adopted the system of the Stoics then flourishing in
Greece.

But as the Bible was and remained the centre and
appeal of all their investigations, it was but natural
that their new philisophical system produced a now
mode of interpreting the sacred books, and with it
à now religious sect. Allured probably by Grecian
stoicism, some teachers strove to vindicate this sys-
tem of Antigonus. They remarked; From what
motives was this principle advanced, and why has it
been upheld by later teachers? Is it to be imagined
that a laborer should work the whole day without
receiving due reward ih the evening? If our fathers
had acknowledged a life to come and the resurrection
of the dead, they would never have adopted this
principle of Antigonus. (Aboth of Rabbi Nathan,
Sec. 5.)

By these and similar reflections, they gained many
votaries, established a school of their own and as-
sumed, after the names of Zadok and Baithos, the
appellations of Sadducees and Baithosians. The
former, however, remained preponderant. (Vide
Jost’s History of the Israelites, [larger work in 12
vols.], Vol. I, p. 66, and Appendix No. 31; Universal
History of the Israelites, [smaller work in 2 vols.],
Vol. I, p. 519.)

They assumed like the Stoics, two eternal princi-
ples of all things, a passive one, (YAy Hyle, in Hebrew,
Tohu Wawohu, ובהו‎ mn) and an active principle, God;
hence their system is the dualistic one. It was for


98 SKETCH OF THE TALMUD.


this reason that they were designated by their oppo-
nents as heretics, as wo read in the Talmud Horioth,
fol 11: “Who is a Sadducee? Every idolater."
(Compare also Talmud Synhedrin, fol. 38, a and b,
and Midrash Rabba Genes. Chap. viii.)

Although they regarded the soul as a part of the
Deity, they nevertheless held it to be perishable, like
every other material being, for they professed the
conviction that 16 was absurd to believe in the exis-
tence of immaterial things.


86. Procure thyself a teacher and acquire thyself
an associate; and judge all mankind favorably.


§ 7. Keep thyself aloof from an evil neighbor and
associate not with the wicked; nor flatter thyself to
escape punishment.

§ 8. Consider not thyself when called on to judge
in a litigation, as an advocate of either side; and
when the parties are before thee to try their cause,
presume them both guilty; but when they are gone
look upon them both as innocent, provided they
submitted to the judicial decree.

§ 9. Cross examine the witnesses and be careful
of your inquiries, lest they learn from your own
words to utter a falsehood. f

§ 10. Love labor, loathe playing the master, and
aspire not after dominion.

$11. Ye learned men, be cautious of your words,
that your disciples may not misconstrue and hence
misunderstand them. Ete., etc.


SKETCH OF THE TALMUD. 29


Cuar. II.—§ 2. It is proper to combine the study
of the law (erudition) with practical life, because he
Who occupies himself with both of these, thinks not
of sin.

$4. Sacrifice thy will for the will of God, that
He may sacrifice the will of others for thy will. Ete.

$9. Ifthou art highly learned, do not pride thy-
Self upon it; because for this purpose wast thou
created. |

It is related, (Aboth of Rabbi Nathan, Chap. ze,
that Rabbi Jochanan, who laid down this principle,
lost a hopeful son in the prime of hislife. His dis-
ciples came to console him and found him in all the
dignity of woe. Every one related to him a similar
calamity that had happened, but they could, never-
theless, not conquer by the recital of such melancholy
facts, the deep emotion of his excessive sorrow and
- grief. Rabbi Elieser finally approached him very
modestly and accosted him: “Rabbi, allow me to
tell thee to what thy great loss which thou hast
suffered would be comparable. There was a king
who gave one of his servants a very costly and pre-
cious vesselin keeping. He wished and sighed daily:
'Oh! may I be so happy that I can deliver it un-
damaged and faultless when demanded of me by the
king. Dear Rabbi, thy son was such an inestimable
vessel, full of knowledge, wisdom, piety of disposi-
tion and urbanity of manners, and that thou didst
return it to the owner in the most perfect state, must
render thee now very happy."


90 SKETCH OF THE TALMUD.


“My son,” said the mourning Rabbi, “thou hast
comforted me; I am perfectly consoled.”

§ 15. Let tlto honor of thy fellow-man be as dear
to thee as thy own; do not get easily into passion ;
repent one day before thy death; and warm thyself
by the fire of wise men, but be careful that the heat
does not scorch thee, for all their words are words
of fire.

Rabbi Elieser, the teacher of these maxims, when
asked by his disciples how any man could strictly
follow that rule, to repent one day before his death,
as no one knows the time of it, answered: “Therefore
be ready every day with penitence and good deeds,
as though the next day were thy last.” (Aboth
of Rabbi Nathan, Chap. xv.)

$16. Envy, unbridled passion and misanthropy
cause the death of man.

Rabbi Joshua, who taught this maxim, distin-
guished himself by his piety as well as by his wit,
so that he became a favorite of the imperial court
at Rome; but they sometimes made him the butt of
their raillery on account of his ugliness. A princess
once asked him: “How does it come that an excellent
mind lodges often in an ugly body?”

“Why,” he replied, “does your father keep his
best wine in earthen jars, and not in vessels of gold
and silver?"

The princess ordered at once that vessels of gold
and silver should be filled with the best wine; but it
soon grew sour. The emperor, who heard the story,


SKETCH OF THE TALMUD. 31


then remarked that he knew many excellent men
Who were handsome too, but that they would be still
more excellent if they were less handsome. )
Parshath Toldoth.)

I repeat now that which I said in my “Guide for
Rational Inquiries into the Biblical Writings,” p. 63.

“As Grecian philosophy began with single sen-
lences and proverbs of the so-called Seven Sages, so
must we regard the profound maxims and ascetic
doctrines of the first teachers, which are contained
in the “Ethics of the Fathers,” and the “Aboth of
Rabbi Nathan," as the beginning and origin of phil-
isophical studies among the Jews."

Many of the Jewish sages have distinguished
themselves by erudition as well as by piety. Ihave
Selected here a few instances which will acquaint
the reader with their true and exalted ideas and
views, and which will perhaps at the same time
afford some entertainment.

It is remarked in the Mishnah: Why did God
create only one man in the beginning?

It was for many reasons: first, That we may learn
from this fact, as the earth was once in existence for
the benefit and happiness of one human being, the
ruin of one pious and honest human soul is equal
to the destruction of a whole world, with all its
forces, and the preservation of a human soul from
perdition is equal to such a meritorious work, as if
one had preserved a whole world with all its beautiful
creations. Second, That no man shall be bloated


32 SKETCH OF THE TALMUD.‘


with pride of high pedigree, and that one shall not
say to another, *My father was of nobler blood than
yours." (Treatise Synhedrin, p. 37, a.)

It is related that a caviling heathen, an acquain-
tance of Rabbi Gamliel, once said to him: “If your
God, as you assert, is the source of all righteousness,
please tell me, why did He steal a rib from the first
man when asleep, as it is stated in Genesis, Chapter’
1, 21?”

The amiable and accomplished daughter of Gam-
liel, who happened to be present, requested her father
for the permission to set this infidel to rights. “Well,
do so, my dear," answered Gamliel.

She then addressed the heathen and said: ‘Sir,
before arguing our subject, will you have the kind-
ness to do mo a favor by calling in a justice of the
peace?"  * Why," said he, "for what purpose?"
She then rejoined: “Some robbers invaded our
house last night, purloined a silver goblet and re-
placed it by a gold one."

*Is that all?" asked the heathen, *I would wish
that my house might be pillaged in such a manner
every day."

“Well,” said she, “since you are of such an opinion,
you will probably coincide with me that it was much
better for Adam to receive for one rib a beautiful
companion for his whole life, who would share his
pleasures and woes, and would nourish him faithfully
when old and infirm."

"T admit that," said the caviler, “but I would like


SKETCH OF THE TALMUD. 33


to know, why did God make him unconcious when
He performed for him the sweetest blessing of his
existence?”

She then remarked, “I will answer your question,
but before all things, get me a piece of raw meat.”
He did her bidding with alacrity. She at once took
it, washed, salted, dabbed and roasted it in his
presence; then she asked him if he would like to
have a slice of it; but he politely declined, declaring
that he would have had perhaps some appetite, if he
had not witnessed the dressing of it.

“Well,” she reiterated,“ exactly so was the case
with the first man. If he would have seen how God
formed Eve, he might not havo liked her so well as
when she stood before him, graced with womanly
loveliness and beauty." (Treatise Synhedrin, p. 39.)

Rabbi Mair was the first who remonstrated against
the blind faith in the authority of eminent men. He
enjoined his pupils to use their own intellectual
faculties and rely on the result of their own un-
biassed criticism.

He laid down the maxim: Look not at the jar
but at that which is therein; for there are new jars
full of wine, and old jars which do not contain even
new wine. (Aboth, Chap. iv, Sec. 27.)

He was also considered the best of the talmudical
fable writers. The morals contained in three hun-
dred verses of the Bible he illustrated by fables, but
only three have been preserved to us. (Treatise
Synhedrin, p. 38, b.)


34 SKETCH OF THE TALMUD.


THE FOX AND THE BEAR.

A fox persuaded a bear to enter the court-yard of
a Jewish family on a Friday, late in the afternoon,
when they were busy in preparing their meals for
the Sabbath, to offer them his services, providing
they would allow him to spend the Sabbath with
them. But he had hardly entered the premises,
when he was welcomed by an armed company who
with their sticks assaulted him with such formidable
blows, that he had to run for life.

The bear chagrined and growling, rushed towards
the fox, intending to tear him to pieces. The fox,
however, succeeded in appeasing his wrath by apol-
ogising that they mistook him for his father, who had
also offered once his help for the preparation of the
Sabbath meals, and at the same time unceremon-
iously helped himself to the best dainties that they
had in the house. * What," asked the bear in great
astonishment, “shall I suffer the punishment due
to my father?”

“Yes,” rejoined master fox, “because it is a well-
known proverb: ‘The fathers have eaten sour grapes
and the children’s teeth are set on edge.’ (Ezekiel
xviii, 2.) My dear, I will prove my genuine friend-
ship to you forthwith; I know a place where you
can eat and drink to your hearts desire."

He then led his snarling companion to a draw-
well with two buckets each fastened to the end of 8
rope attached to a pole laid across the well. He took
two stones of equal weight, each of them heavier
than himself. He then seated himself in the sus-


SKETCH OF THE TALMUD. 35


pended bucket, taking one of the stones with him,
and descended the well while the other bucket slowly
ascended. The bear, astonished at the strange freak
of his companion, asked him: “Why do you go
down?”

The fox reiterated: “Oh, how does this place
abound with meat and cheese! Do you not see the
luscious cheese?” calling his attention to the reflec-
tion of the full moon then shining brightly in the sky.
The bear, enticed by the prospect of a good supper,
inquired anxiously: “How can I get down.”

“Well,” said master fox, “place the stone which I
have selected in the suspended bucket and then you
seat yourself comfortably on it.” Advising him to
do so, that in case the stupid bear should follow him
he would nevertheless be able to ascend by throwing
out the stone from his own bucket and then be out-
balanced by the other.

The bear, however, unwittingly put the stone in
the bucket and seated himself thereon, to the great
joy of master fox, who having thrown his stone into
the well, was instantly drawn out of his perilous
position and jumped from the bucket to dry land.

The bear finding himself deluded, growled: “How
am I to get out?" And the fox answered: “The
righteous is delivered out of his trouble and the
wicked cometh in his stead.” (Proverbs, Chap. xi, 8.)
And as it reads in the Bible, (Leviticus xix, 36):
“Just balances, and just weights,” which rule you
have grossly violated.


36 SKETCH OF THE TALMUD.
JUDICIARY OF PALESTINE.
It is stated in Treatise Synhedrin, p. 2, that there


were three different courts in the land of Isracl.

First, Synhedrin Gedolah, supreme court, which
was composed of seventy-one members. Second,
Synhedrin Ketanah, the inferior court, consisting of
twenty-three members. Third, Beth Din, local court,
which consisted of three members.


The qualifications for any one to become a judge
of the common court, were intelligence, modesty
and popularity. (Treatise Synhedrin, 88 b.) When
he practised to the satisfaction of the people, he was
promoted to the court at the gate of Har Habayith,
(Temple Mountain), from thence to the court at the
gate of the Asarah (yard), and then he was advanced
to the supreme court.


Besides the literary attainments, however, every
aspirant to the judicial chair of the supreme court
had to be possessed of an exalted, unblemished
character, learned in sciences, as in mathematics,
medicine and natural philosophy, and well versed
in many languages. (Treatise Synhedrin, p. 71.)

The seat of the supreme court was at Jerusalem,
in a large hall in the temple called Lishchath Hagga-
sith, (the hall of hewn stone), and sometimes in the
palace of the High-priest. There were also two
inferior courts in Jerusalem; one held its session at


SKETCH OF THE TALMUD. 37


the gate of temple mountain, and the other at the
gate of Asarah.

Cases involving capital punishment concerning
false prophets, High-priests and a whole tribe, were
exclusively cognizable in the supreme court, in the
large hall adjoining tho temple.

On Friday, Saturday, on the day previous to a
biblical festival and on the seven biblical holidays,
ho court was allowed to hold any session. (Treatise
Synhedrin, p. 32, Beza, 36.)

The punishment in capital crimes was performed
in four modes: stoning, burning, beheading and
strangling. (Treatise Synhedrin, 49, b.) The corpses
of those that were stoned to death, were hung by
the neck to a gibbet, where they were exhibited until
sunset.

The supreme court (Synhedrin Gedolah), had two,
and according to some, three secretaries to record
all the proceedings.

But forty years before the destruction of Jeru-
Salem, the supreme court ceased to try any case
where capital punishment was inflicted. (Treatise
Synhedrin,* p. 41, a.)


“The word סנהדרין‎ is borrowed from the Greek “‘ouvédpiov” a
deliberative assembly or council, and consequently must be pro-
nounced Synhedrin, and not Sanhedrin; it is feminine gender, and
the plural is Synhedrioth. (See Treatise Synhedrin, p. 2.)


36 SKETCH OF THE TALMUD.


A translation of the six divisions of the Mishnah
was rendered in Latin by Surenhus in the city of
Amsterdam, (1698—1703). A Spanish version ap-
peared in Venice in 1606; one in German by Rabe,
in Onolzbach in 1761; and another in Berlin, 1832
— 1834, by the renowned Jewish historian Dr. Jost,
the modern Josephus, who added also vowels to the
Hebrew text of the Mishnah. In former times the
Mishnah was accentuated as stated (Tosefoth on
treatise Megillab, p. 32, a,) similar to that of the
Hebrew Bible.

Only some single treatises of the Talmud were
translated into Latin and German by Drs. Hirschfeld
and Pinner; but many talmudical antholigies, with
translations and annotations, have been published
by Plantavitius, Hurwitz, Firstenthal, Furst and
others.
