A New Light of Alchymie (Michael Sendivogius, 1650)
==========================================================
The 1650 English translation of Sendivogius' Novum Lumen Chymicum; the Polish adept's treatise that taught Boyle and Newton. Public domain. Digitized from Internet Archive (https://archive.org/details/newlightofalchym00sedz).

PI'     nMMm


^m


1^


Ti


Research  Library,  The  Getty  Research  Institute


(Ue.:


-E^'


_S^/  ^/  5^


^   ANEWLIGHT

A  L  C  H  Y  M  I  &


Taken  out   of  the  fountaine  of

NATURE,  and  Manuall

Experience.

To  which  is  added  aTREATISEof

SVLPHVR:

Written  by  Mkbeel  Sandwogius:

i.e.  Anagram  matically,
DIFI   LESCHI    GENUS    AMO,


Alfo  Nine  Books  Ofth^  "Nature  of  Things^

Written  hy  f  AKACELSVSy  visa.
^Generations     ^rRenew'iH^        T

Cfrbv"<^      /-       ^-      ><r  ^  -^  .•  >of  Natural  things.

""      jConjervAttonsCjSefaration       (  ^

(.Life  :  Deiith^Csigfiatures       -J

Airo  a  Chymicall  Didionary  explaining  hard  places

and  words  met  withall  in  the  writings  oi  Paraceljus^

and  ether  cbfcurc  Ajthois.

All  which  are  hithfully  tranilatcd  on:  of  the
Latin  into  the  ErigUjh  tjngue.

By  f.F.  M.D.


London,  Printed  by  KichardCotcs,  for  Ihomas  WillUms^  at  the
Bible  in  Little-Britain,  1650.


\J


To  the  Reader


judicious  Reader ,

Hereis  abundance  of  know,
ledge,  yet  but  little  truth
known.  The  generality  of
our  kno wiedgis  tut  as  Ca-
ftles  in  theaire,or  ground-
Jeffe fancies.    I  know  but
two  waysthat  are  ordained  for  the  getting
of  wifdome,  '^//x^the  book  of  God^^nd  or
Nature^and  theie  aUo,but  as  they  arc  rea4
with  reafon^  Many  look  upon  the  former
as  a  thiivg  below  them,  upon  the  latter  as
a  g'-ound  of  Atheifme,  and  therefore  neg-
leS  both^     It  is  my  judgement,  that  as  to
fearch  the  Sciptures  is  moft  nectfTary,  fo
without  reafon it  is  impofffble.  Faith  wrrh-

A  2  out


The  Epijile

out  reafon  is  but  implicitcjf  /cannot Uit-
dcrftand  by  reafon  how  every  thing  is,y<c
i  wil  lee  lomereaton  that  a  thing  is  lo,  be-
fore /  beleeve  it  to  be  fo  J  will  ground  my
belecving  of  the  Scripture  upon  reafon,
I  will  improve  my  reafon  by  Philofaphy^
How  (hall  we  convince  gain-fayersofthe
truth  of  the  Scriptures,  but  by  principles
of  Reafon?  When  God  made  Man  after  his
own  image,How  was  thai?But  by  making
him  a  rational  creature?Men  therforc  that
lay  afide  Reafon  in  the  reading  of  facrcd
myfteries^do  butun«man  themfelvcs,  and
become  further  involved  in  a  Labyrinth  of
crrors^Hencc  it  is  that  their  Religion  is  de^
generated  into  irrationall  notions^Now  to
fay,  that  pure  Philofophy  is  true  Divi-
nity, will  haply  bee  a  paradox,  yet  if  any
one  Ihould  affirm  it,he  would  not  be  hete-
rodox* When  7^^  had  been  along  time
juftifyinghimfelfe  againftGod,  which  I
conceive  was  by  reaion  of  his  ignorance
of  God,andhimfelfei,  God  undertakes  to
convince  him  of  his  errour  by  the  princi^:
plesof  N;^ture,  and  to  bring  him  to  the
knowledge  of  both ;  as  you  may  fee  at

large,.


to  the  Reader]

large,  Job  jS^  Can  any  deny  that  Hermes^

^Uto^  ^riflotle  (^though  pure  Naturalifts  )

were  not  moft  deep  Divines?  Doc  not  all

grant  that  the  two  fii  ft  cha.of  Gf/^^are  true

Divinity?  I  dare  alio  afBrm  that  they  arc

the  moft  deep  and  the  trueft  PhilofophyJ

Yea,  they  are  the  ground,  and  /um  of  all

Divinity, and  Philofophy  t  and  if  rightly

undcrftood,   will  teach  thee  more  knows:

ledge  olGod,   and  thy  felfe^then  all  the

books  in  tke  world  befides4    Now  for  the

better  underftanding  of  them,make  ufeof

moft  profound  5^/7 J/'Z'f^^/fw  the  author  of

thcfirft  of  the  enfuingTreatifes,as  the  beft

Expofitor  oi  them  :  in  that  treatifeof  his

thou  flialtfee  themyftery  of  the  Deity  j6c

Nature  unfolded, even  to  admirationtas  to

fee  what  that  light,And  fire  is  which  is  the

throne  ofGods  Majefiy  4.  How  he  is  in  the

heaven  moft  glorioufly,  &  in  the  creatures

providentially.  How  he  is  the  life  of  that

univerfall  vSpirit  which  is  diffufed  through

the  whole  worlds.  What  that  Spirit  of  his.

15  that  moved  upon  the  Waters*     What

thofe  Warters  are  which  are  above  the

Firinament,and  which  arc  under  the  Firss

A  J  mamcntj,


The  Fpijile
mamenr^  What  that  Sperm  and  Seed  was
which  God  put  into  all  creatures  by  which
they  fhould  he  multiplyed4  The  true  man^
nerof  MansCreatioii^and  his  degenerating
hvto  Morcality^The true  nature  ot the  Gar-
den of  Eden^ox  Paradiie^  Alio  the  reafon
why  Gold,  which  hid  a  Seed  put  into  it,as
well  as  other  crearares,  whereby  itfliould
be  nwiltip'Iyed,doth  not  multiply ^  What
tfce  obftru^ion  is,  and  how  it  may  bee  res
movcdjthat  fo  it  may  be  digefted  into  the
kigbeft  pia fifty ^and  become  the  true  Elixir,
or  Pbilofopbers  ftoaiei  the  poffibility
whereof  is  fo  plairi'fy  iUuftrated  in  this
book  oiSandk^agms,  tJaat  Je  t  any  judici^
Otasman  read  it  over  without  all  partiality
amd  prejudioejhut  t  brec  or  four  times,  and
hefhaM  fiolens  iwkns  be  convinced  of  the
rTuthiofit,and  not  only  of  this,  but  of  ma-
ny other  my  fteries  as  incredible  as  thig^So
that  iiiiny  onefhouldask  anc,  What  one
book  did  moft  conduce  to  the  knowledge
of 'God  and  the  Ci^ature.,  and  the  myite-
ries  tliereof,  I  ftiould  fpeake  contrary  to
my  judgment^itl  (hould  not^next  to  the
fiicfcd  Wrkjfay  £aniU<z^agiu>s^  All  this  I
..I'^^i.Uii  fpeak


totbcKeaJer*
Ipcak  for  chy  encouragement ,    that  thou
fliouldft  lay  afide  other  frivolous  bookcs ,
and  buy  this,and  read  itover,»Sc  thou  wile
i^I  queftion  not)thank  mee  for  my  advice.
And  as  this  booke  doth  in  general!,  £o
the  fccond  oi  thcfe  Trcatifes  doth  in  parfs
ticular  illuftratc  thepoflibiiity  of  Nature,
and  the  myfteiies  thereof,  as  alfo  the  na-
ture  and  manner  of  the  Generation,
Growth,  Confcrvation,  Life,  Death,  Re-
newing, Tranfmutation5,^eparations,and
Signatures  of  ail  naturall  things,  in  the  ex-
plication of  which  many  rare  experiments
and   excellent   myfteries  are  diicovered
and  found  out^.

To  thefe  is  added  a  Chymical  Di^ionary^
explaining  hard  places^ and  words  msc
iwithall  in  obicure  Auchoi>8.  But  this,  and
the  other  I  fpeak  mom  fparingly  in  the
commendatioiis  of,  bccau  fe  it  read  they
will  fpeak  more  for  them  fel  v<es  thjco  I  caa
fpeak  fox  them  t  only  i  was  wiHing  for  the
EngUfh  nations  lake ,  "whofo  fplrips  are
^xnuch  drawn  forth  after  knowledge,  to
trajnflatc  tiiem  into  the  E»gU(h  tongue,
idid  notibe  it  to  multiply  books ,  (  iot

there


the  Epijf.
there  are  too  many  books  already  ^an  d  the
multitude  of  them  is  the  greiteft  caufc  of
our  ignorance,  and  in  them  is  a  great  vani-
ty) but  to  let  thee  fee  the  light  of  Nature,
by  which  thou  maift  judg  of  truths ,  and
the  better  conceive  of  the  God  of  Nature,
of  whom  all  naturall  things  are  full^and
whofe  goings  forth  in  the  way  of  Nature
are  moft  wonderfull,even  to  the  conviQi^
on  of  the  greateft  Athcifts^

CoHrteoHsKeader^thou  mufi:  excufe  me  for
not  afFe&ing  elegancies  in  thcfc  Tranflatii=
ons,for  if  I  were  skilled  in  them,  yet  the
matter  of  the  books  would  not  bear  them.
If  I  have  fometimes  ufcd  uncouth  words,  it
was  becaufe  the  fenfe,towhich  1  kept  me
clofcjWoald  not  properly  bear  any  other ,
jor  at  Icaft  better  can*c  not  at  the  prefent
into  my  mind  4/f  any  Errata's  have  paded
through  the  flips ofmypen,or  the  ^linters
miftake^be  thou  candid,and  mend  thera^Zt
thou  (halt  not  approve  of  what /have
done,convince  mee  of  my  errour  by  doing
bctcei^  for  thereby  thou  flialt  oblige  the
lovers  of  truth,  and  amongft  the  refl^  thy
friend  J^  fV  cu  ■

A


The  Preface,

The  Author  wifheth  all  health  to,'  and  prays
to  God  for  ableffitiguponall  the  Sear-
chers oi  Alcbymie^  namely  the  true  Sons
ot  HfrWwV.

Courteous  Render^

Hen  I  confidered  with
my  felf  that  many  adul-
terated bookS;,  and  falfe
Receipts  (  as  they  call
them  )  of  Akhymijis  y
compofed  through  the  fraud^and  cove-
toumeflcoflmpoftors^jin  which  not  fo
much  as  one  fpark  of  truth  appears ,
were  in  requeft  with  the  Searchers  of
Natural],  and  myfterious  Arts ,  by
which  even  very  many  have  been,  and
ftill  arc  deceived :  I  thought  1  could  do
no  better  fervice^then  to  communicate

A  that


The  Preface.

that  talent^  committed  to  my  truft  by
the  Fatherof  LightS;,tothcSons  and
Heirs  of  Wifdomc.  And  to  this  end^
that  future  ages  may  take  notice,  that
this  fingular  Philolophicali  bleflfmgof
God  hath  not  been  denyed  to  fome
men,  not  only  in  former  ages,  but  alfb
in  this.  It  fecmed  good  to  me  for  fome
Rcafbns  to  conceal  my  name,  whilfl:  I
doe  not  feek  praife  to  my  felfe ,  but  en-
deavour to  beaflfifting  to  the  lovers  of
Wifdome,  Therefore  I  leave  that  vain
defire  of  honour  to  thofe  that  had  ra-
ther feem  to  bee  ,  then  to  bee  indeed.
What  here  I  write  by  way  of  teftimo-
fty  to  that  undoubted  Philofophical!
truth,  comprehended  in  few  lines,  have
been  taken  out  of  that  Manuall  experi-
ence, which  the  moft  High  hath  vouch-
fafed  to  mee,  that  they  which  have  laid
the  principall,  and  reall  foundations  in
this  commendable  Art,  may  by  this

cncou-


The  Preface*

encouragement  not  forfake  the  pradife
of  the  beft  things ,  and  fo  bee  fecured
from  that  wicked  f\varm  of  finoke-fel-
IerS;,who{e  dehght  is  to  cheat.They  are
not  dreams^as  the  ignorant  vulgar  call
them^neither  are  they  foolifh  inventi-
ons of  idle  men^as  fools^and  men  void
of  underftanding(who  deride  the  Art)
conceive  them  to  be.  It  is  thePhilofo-
phicall  truth  it  felfc^  which  as/  am  a
lover  of  the  truth,  I  ought  not  ^  nay  I
could  not  for  fupporting  and  confirm-
ing the  truth  oiAlchymie^  undeferved-
ly  cryed out  againft,keep  clofe^or  bury
in  filence.  Although  it  may  bee  much
afraid  in  thefc  times  (  when  vertue  and
vice  are  efteemed  alike)by  reafon  of  the
unworthineffe  of  this  age,  and  ingrati-
tude, and  treachery  of  men  (to  fay  no-
thing of  the  curfes  of  PhilofophersJ  to
come  forth  upon  the  publick  fta^e  of
the  world.  J  could  produce  witneffes

hi  of


The  Preface^

of  this  Chymicall  tmth.vi^.  fagc  Au-
thors ,  according  to  the  unanimous
confent  of  clivers  honorable  Ancients
info  many  fever  all  nations  :  but  thofe
things  wliich  are  manifeft  by  ocular  cx-
periment,necd  no  further  proof.  Many
men  both  of  highland  low  condition  in
thefc  laft  years  paft;,  have  to  my  know-
ledge feen  Diana  unvailed.  And  al-
though there  may  be  found  fome  idle^,
and  ill-employed  feilowes ,  who  cither
out  of  en  vy,  or  malice^or  fear  of  having
their  own  frauds  di(covered\,  cry  out
that  the  foulc  may  bee  extraded  out  of
Gold;,  and  with  the  ipecious,  and  de-
ceitfull  delufion  of  oftentation ,  fay  it
may  be  put  to  another  body -not  with-
out loffe  and  detriment  of  time,painsj
and  cofts :  yet  let  thefonncs  of  Hermes
know  for  certaine,  that  fuch  a  k'nd  of
cxtradion  of  fouls  (as  they  call  themj
whether  out  of  G0I4  or  out  of  Silver

by


The  Preface.

(by  what  vulgar  way  o^Alcbymie  foe-
verj  is  but  a  meer  fancy  :  which  thing
indeed  is  not  bekevcd  by  many^  but  at
kngth^by  experience,  theonely,  and
true Miftris of  truth  is  verified,  and
that  with  loffe.  On  the  contrary,  hee
which  (in  a  Philofophicall  way  )  can
without  any  fraud  and  colourable  de-
ceit make  it,  that  it  (hall  really  tinge
the  bafcft  metall,whethcr  with  gain,  or
without  gain,  with  the  colour  of  Gold,
or  Silver  ("abiding  aUrequifite  tryalls
whatfoever)  lean  juftly  averre  hath  the
gates  of  Nature  opened  to  him,  for  the
enquiring  into  further,  and  higher  ie-
crcts,  and  with  the  bleffing  of  God  to
obtain  them, Moreover,  I  prefent  thefe
prefent  Treatifes  ,  compoftd  out  of
mine  own  experience,  to  the  Sonnes  of
Art, that  whilft  they  are  bufied  with  all
their  thoughts  and  intentiveneffe  of
mind  in  fearehing  into  the  fecret  opera^

A  3  tiona


The  Freface^

tions  of  Nature  ,  they  may  thence
know,and  clecrly  underftand  the  truth
of  all  things  J  and  Nature  it  felfe  :  in
which  thing  alone  the  perfection  of  the
whole  facred  Philofbphicall  Art  con-
fifts;,  fo  that  they  go  on  in  the  common
high-way  of  Nature^  which  fliec  pre-
fcribes  in  all  her  opcrations.Thereforc
/would  have  the  Courteous  Reader
be  here  admonidied^that  he  underftand
my  Writings  not  fo  much  from  the
outfide  of  my  words^  as  from  the  pofli-
bility  of  Nature;  left  afterward  he  bc-
waile  his  time^pains^and  cofts^allfpent
in  vain.  Let  him  confider  that  this  Art
is  for  the  wife,not  for  theignorant;and
that  the  fenfe,  or  meaning  of  Philofo-
phers  is  of  another  nature  then  to  bee
underftood  by  vapouring  Thrafoes  or
Letter-learned  fcoffcrs,  or  vicious  a-
gainft  their  owne  confcienceS;,  (  who
whilft  theycannot  rife  by  their  vertueS;,

attempt


The  Preface,

attempt  ft  by  their  villanies^  and  mali-
cious detraftings  from  honeft  men^  or
ignorant  Mountebanks^who  moft  un-
worthily defaming  the  moft  commen-
dable Art  oi Alchymie^diWtviith  their
Whites^andReds  deceived  almoft  the
whole  Vv  orld.  For  it  is  the  gift  of  God,
and  truly  it  is  not  to  be  attained  tO;,but
by  the  alone  favor  of  God^  enlightning
the  under ftandingtogether  w'*"  a  patient
and  devour  humility  (  or  by  an  ocular
demonftration  from  fome  experienced
M  afttr.-y  wherefore  God  juftly  thrufts
them  far  from  his  fc  crets  that  are  ftran-
gers  to  him.  Finally,  My  only  requeft
to  the  Sonnes  of  Art  is  this,  that  they
would  take  in  good  part  my  endea-
vouring to  dcftrve  well  of  ihem  ^  and
when  they  (hall  have  made  that  which
is  occult  manifeft,  and  through  the
good  pleafure  of  God  in  a  conftant
way  of  diligence  fhall  arrive  to  the

longed


The  Vreface.

longed  for  haven  of  the  Philofophers,
that  they  would;,  according  to  the  cu-
ftomeof  Philofophers^  debarre  all  un-
worthy men  from  this  Art;  and  not
forgetting  to  love  their  poor  neighbor
m  the  fcare  of  God  (  ietting  afide  all
vain  oftentation  )  let  them  fing  ever-
lafting  praifes  of  thankfulncflfe  unto
the  great  and  good  God^  for  fo  fpcci-
all  a  gift^and  ufe  it  wel  with  a  filent  and
religiousjoy—

Simplicity  or  plainncffcis  thefcalof
truth.


A


NEW    LIGHT

A  L  C  HY  M I  E


THE  FIT^sr  tREAllSB:


Of  NaturCy  what  jhe  is^  and  r^hat
her  fiar^hers  ought  to  be.

^  Any  wifcj  and  very  learned  men  ma^"
ny  ages  fince,  yea  (Hermes  tcftify-
ing  the  fame )  before  the  floud
wrote  many  things  concerning
the  making  the  Philofophers  ftonej
and  have  bequeathed  fb  many
writings  unto  us,  that  unleffe  Na-
ture lliould  daily  worke  things  cre-
dible to  us,  (carce  any  one  would  belecve  it  as  a  truth
that  there  were  any  nature  at  all :  becaufe  in  former  ages
there  were  not  fo  many  devifcrs  of  things,  neither  did
our  Anceftors  regard  any  thing  befides  nature  it  felfe,
and  the  polfibility  of  naturCi   And  although  they  were

B  i;on-


^  A  new  Light  ofAlchymiel

contented  with  the  plaine  way  alone  of  nature,  yet  they
found  out  thofe  things,  which  we  now  imploycd  about
divers  things  could  not  with  all  our  wits  conceive.  This
is  becaufc  nature;  and  the  generation  of  things  in  the
world  is  efteemed  ofusmeanc,  andplainc.  And  there-
fore  we  bend  our  wits  not  to  things  knowne,  and  fami-
liar, but  to  fuch  things,which  not  at  all,  or  very  hardly
can  be  done.   Wherefore  it  happens  that  we  are  more
dexterous  in  devifing  curious  fubtilties,  and  fuch  which
the  Philofophers  themfelvcs  did  never  thlnke  of,then  to
attain  to  the  true  proceffe  of  naturc»<^  the  right  meaning
of  Philofophers.  And  fuchistbedifpolition  of  mens  na-
tures, as  to  negled  thofe   things  they  know,  and  to
be  aUvaies  feeking  after  other  things  5    fuch  alfo  artd
much  more  is  that  of  mens  wits ,   and  fancies,  to
which  their  nature  is  fubjedcd.   As  for  example  5  You
fee  any  Artificer,  when  he  hath  attained  to  the  high-
eft  perfedion  of  his  Art,  either  fcarcheth  into-  other
Arts,,  or  abnfeth  the  fame,  which  he  already  hath,  or
clfe  leaves  it  ofFquite.  So  alfo  is  generous  nature  alwaies
fldlive  and  doing  to  its  very  Iliad  (/)utmoflperiod,and
afterward  ceafeth.  For  there  is  given  to  nature  from
tfie  beginning  a  certnine  kindc  of  grant,  or  permiffion
ftill  to  attaine  to  things  better,  and  better  through  her
\vhole  progreffe,  and  to  come  to  her  full  reft,  towards
which  ftie  tends  with  all  her  might,  and  rejoyceth  in
her  end,  as  a  Pifmire  doth  in  her  old  age,  at  which
time  nature  makes. her  wisigs.  Even  fo  our  wits  have
proceeded  fo  farre,erpecially  in  the  Phylofophicall  Art,
or  praxis  oftheftone,  that  now  we  are  almoft  come  to
the  Iliad  it  felfc.  For  the  Art  of  Chymiftry  hath  now
found  out  fuch  fubtilties,  that  fcarce  greater  can  be  in-
-vttitcd,  and-difier  as  much  from  the  Art  of  the  AbcI-
'^^  -  cut


A  HeipLightofJlchymiel  3

cnt  Philofophers  as  a  Clock-fmithdothfroma  plainc
Black-fmith :  And  although  both  worke  upon  Iron,
yet  neither  underftands  the  others  labours,  although
both  are  makers  of  their  Art.  If  Hern:ies  himfelfe^thc
father  of  PhilolbpherSj  (hould  now  be  alive,  and  fubtil-
witted  Gehr,  together  with  mod  profound  R^itnundus
Z«///Mf,thcy  wouldnotbc  accounted  by  o|urChymifts
for  Philofophers,  but  rather  for  Scholars  :  They  would
be  ignorant  of  thofe  fo  many  diftillations,  fo  many
circulations,  fo  many  calcinations,  and  fo  many  other
innumerable  operations  of  Artifls  now  adayes  ufed,
which  men  of  this  age  devifcd^and  found  out  of  their
writings.There  is  one  only  thiug  wanting  to  us,that  is,to
know  that  which  theyeffedcd,  i//;(.  the  Philofophers
ftonc,  or  Phyficall  Tindure,  we  whilefl  we  feeke  that,
finde  out  other  things  .•  and  unleilc  the  procreation  of
man  were  fo  uluali  as  it  is,  and  nature  did  in  that  thing
ftill  obferve  her  owne  law,  and  rules,  we  fhould  fcarce
notbutcrre.  Buttoreturne  to  what  I  intended*,  Ipro-
mifcd  in  this  ^'firft  treatife  to  explaine  Nature  ,  left
every  idle  fancy  fhould  turne  us  afide  from  the  true  and
plaine  way.  Therefore  I  fay  Nature  is  but  one,  true ,
plaine,  perfe(5t,  and  entire  in  its  owne  being,  which  God
made  from  the  beginning,  placing  his,  fpirit  in  it :  but
know  that  the  bounds  of  nature  is  God  himfelfe,  who
alfo  is  the  originall  of  nature.  Por  it  is  certaine,  that  eve-
ry thing  that  is  begunjCnds  no  where  but  in  that,in  which
it  begins.  I  fay  it  is  that  only  alone,  by  which  God
workes  all  things :  not  that  God  cannot  worke  without
it  (fortruelyhe  himfelfe  made  nature,  and  is  omnipo-
tence) but  fo  it  pleafeth  him  to  doc.  All  thing  proceed
from  this  very  nature  alone-,  neither  is  there  any  thing
in  the  world  without  nature.  And  although  it  happens

B  2  "   lomc-


4  A  new  high  oJAlchymU,

fomctlmcs  that  there  be  abortives  •,  this  is  not  natures
fault,  but  of  the  Artift,or  place.  This  nature  is  divi-
«ied  into  foure  places,in  which  fiie  w-orkcsall  thcfe  things,
which  appc are  to  us  under  fliadowes  5  for  truely  things
may  be  faid  rather  to  be  ihadowed  out  to  us,  then  really
to  appeare.    She  is  changed  in  male,  and  femaie,  and  is
likened  to  Mercury,  bccaufe  flie  joynes  her  ff  Ifc  to  vari-
ous places  •,  and  according  to  the  ooodnellc,  or  the  bad-
rcflc  of  the  place  flic  brings  forth  things  •,  although  to  us
there  fceme  no  bad  places  at  all  in  the  canh.  Now  for
qualities  there  be  only  foure,  and  thefe  are  in  all  things,
but  agree  nor,  for  one  alwaies  exceeds  another.  More-
over, nature  is  not  vifible,  although  fhe  acts  vifibly  •,  for
it  is  a  volatile  fpirir,\^hich  executes  its  office  in  bodies,
and  is  placed,  and  feated  in  the  will,and  minde  of  God.
Nature  in  this  place  ferves  us  for  no  other  purpofe,  but
to  underftand  her  places,  which  are  more  lutablc,  and
of  nearer  affinity  to  her  -,  that  is,  to  underftand  how  to
joyne  one  thing  to  another,  according  to  nature,  that
wc  mixe  not  wood  and  man  together,  or  an  oxe  or  any
other  living  creature,  and  metals  together :  but  let  every
thing  ad  upon  its  ownc  like  :  and  then  for  certaine  na-
ture (hall  performe  her  office.  The  place  of  nature  is
no  other  then,  as  I  faid  before,  what  is  in  the  will  of
God.

The  fearchers  of  nature  ought  to  be  fuch  as  nature  her
felfe  is,true,  plainCjpatientjConftant^&c.  and  that  which
is  chiefcftof  all,  religious,  fearing  God,  not  injurious
to  their  neighbour.  Then  let  them  diligently  conitder,
whether  their  purpofe  be  agreeable  to  nature;  whether
it  be  poffible,  let  them  learneby  clcare  examples,  vi^,
Gutof  what  things  any  thing  maybe  made,  how,  and
jawhatTcfTcll  nature  workcs.  For  if  thou  wilt  doe  any


'Jnerp  Light  ofAkhjmie*  5

thing  plainly,  as  nature  kcr  k\k  doth  doe  it,  follow
nature  ^  but  if  thou  wilt  attempt  to  doe  a  thing  better
thcnnatiirehathdoneit,  confiderwell  in  what,  and  by
what  it  is  bettered, and  let  it  alwaies  be  done  in  its  ownc
like.  As  for  example,  if  thou  delireft  to  exalt  a  mc-
tall  in  vertuc  fwhich  is  our  intention)  further  then  na-
ture hath  done  5  thou  muft  take  a  metalline  nature  both
in  male  and  female,  or  elfe  thou  ihalt  cffdcl  nothing-.
For  if  thou  doft  purpofe  to  make  a  metall  out  of  hearbs-,
thou  (halt  labour  in  paine,  as  alfo  thou  fhalt  not  bring
forth  wood  out  ofadog^or  any  other  beaft.


THE   SECOND  T71EATISE.

of  the  o^erAtion  of  Nature  in  onr  intettr.
tiofty  ana  in  Sferme. , .

Said  even  now  that  nature  was- truc^but  oncj
every  where  fecne,  conftant,  and  is  knownc
by  the  things  which  are  brought  forth,  as
woods,  hearbs,  and  the  Hkc.  I  faid  alfo  that
thefearchcr  of  nature  muft  be  true,"  (imple  hearted,
patient ,   conftanr,    giving     his  mindc  but  to    one
thing  alone,  &c.  Now  we  muft:  begin  to  treat  of  the
ading  of  Nature .   As  nature  is  in   the  will  of  God,
and  God  created  her,  or  put  her  upon  every  imagina-
tion •  fo  nature  made  her  felfc  a  ktd^  ( i )  her  will,  qnd'
plcafureinthe  Eements.  She  indeed  is  but  one,  and?
yet  brings  forth  divers  things  5  but  workes  nothing-
t^ithout  a  fpejme, ; .  N^tiire  workes  whwfocver.  tho

?5  fpcrmc-


^  A  new  Light  of  Alchymls,

fperme  pleafcth,  for  it  is  as  it  were  an  inftriimcnt  of
feme  Artificer.  The  fperme  therefore  of  every  thing  is
better, and  nciox^advantagious  to  the  Artificeft,-  then'na-
tureher  fclfe.  For  by   nature  without  feed,  you  fliatf
doe  as  much  as  a  Gpldfmith  fli all  without  fire,  gold,  or
filver,  or  a  husbandman  without  corne,  or  feed.  If  thou
haft  the  fperme,  nature  is  prefently  at  hand,  whether  it
be  to  bad,  or  good.  She  workes  in  fperme,  as  God  doth
in  the  free  will  of  man  :  andtha$iisagfeatmyfteri€,bQ-
caufe  nature  obeyes  the  fperme,  not  by  compulfion,
but  voluntarily.evenas  GodfufFers  all  thiQgs,which  man
wills,  not  by  conftraint,  but  out  of  his  owne  free  plea-
furc  :  Therefore  he  gave  man  free  wilWhether  to  bad,
or  to  good.  The  fperme  therefore  is  the  Elixir  of  every
thing,  or  Quint- eflencc,  or  the  moft  perfe<fi  deco(flion,OL*
digeftion  of  a  thing,  or  the  Balfome  of  Sulphur,  which
is  the  fame  as  the  Radicall  moifture  in  metalls.  There
might  trucly  be  made  a  large  difcourf  e  of  this  fperme ;
but  we  lliallonely  keep  to  that  which  makes  for  our
purpofc  in  the  Chymicall  Art.  Fourc  Elements  beget
a  fperme  through  the  will,and  pleafure  of  God ,  and
imagination  of  nature  .'for  as  the  fperme  of  man  hath
its  center,  orveffcll  of  itsfcede  in  the  kidniesj  fo.thc
fourc  Elements  by   their  never  ceafing  motion  (every
one  according  to  its  quality)  caft  forth  a  fperme  into
the  Center  of  the  earth,  where  it  is  digefted,  and  by
motion  fcnt  abroad.   Now  the  Center  of  the  earth  is
a  certainc  empty  place,  where  nothing  can  reft.  The
fourc  Elements  fend  forth  their  qualities  into  exccntrall
parts  of  the  earth,  or  into  the  circumference  of  the
Center.  As  a  man  fends  forth  his  feed  into  the  entrance
of  ithe  wombc  of  the  woman  ;  in  which  place  nothing
of  the  fccd  rcmaincSp  but  after*  he  wombe  hath  received
-  '"  a


A  new  Li^bt  ofAlchymie^  ^

a  due  proportion,  cafts  out  the  reft  .•  fo  alfo  it  comes
topaftcinthe  Center  of  the  earth,  that  the  magnetick
vertuc  of  the  part  of  any  place  drawes  to  it  felfe  any  thing
that  is  convenient  for  its  fclfc  ,  for  the  bringing  forth
ofany  thingjtherefidue  is  caft  forth  into  fiones,  and
other  excrements*  For  all  things  have  tlieir  originall
from  this   fountaine ,  neither  hath  any  thing  in  the
world  any  beginning  but  by  this  fountaine.  As  for
example  •,let  there  be  fet  a  veffell  of  water  upon  a  fmooth
even  table,  and  be  placed  in  the  middle  thereof,  and
roundabout  let  there  be  laid  divers  things,  and  divers
colours,  alfo  fait,  and  every   one  apart :  then  let  the
water  be powrcd forth  into  the  middle-,  and  you  fliall
fee  that  water  to  runne  abroad  here  and  there,and  when
one  ftreamc  is  come  to  the  red  colour,  it  is  made  red
by  it,-  if  to  the  fait,  ic   takes  from  it  the  tafle  of  the
fait,  and  fo  of  t lie  reft.  For  the  water  doth  not  change
the  place,but  the  diverfity  of  the  place  changeth  the  wa-
ter. In  like  manner  the  feed,  or  fperme  being  by  the
foure  Elements  caft  forth  from  the  center  into  the  cir-
£umference,paflreth  through  divers  placeS; and  according
to  the  nature  of  the  place,  it  makes  things :If  it  comes  to
a  pure  place  of  earth,  and  water,  a  pure  thing  is  made.
The  feed,and  fperme  of  all  things  is  but  one,  and  yet
it  produceth  divers  things,  as  is  evident  by  the  following
example.  The  feed  of  a  man  is  a  noble,  feed,  and  was
created,and  ordained  for  the  generation  of  man  onely  5
yet  neverthelefs  it  a  man  doe  abufe  it,  as  is  in  his  free
will  to  doe,  there  is  borne  an  abortive.  For  if  a  man
contrary  toGods  moft  expreffe  command  {hould  couple
with  a  cow,  or  any  other  beaft,  the  beaft  would  prefent-
\y  coiKeive  the  feed  of  the  man ,  bccaufe  nature  is
but  one  3  and  then  there  would  not  be  borne  aman^but


8  A  new  Light  ofAlchymie.

a  bea(l,and  an  Abortive ;  becaufc  the  feed  did  not  find  a
place  futable  to  it  fclF.By  fucli  an  inhumane,&  detcftabic
copulation  of  men  with  beafts  there  would  be  brought
forth  divers  bcafts,  like  unto  men.  For  foit  is,  if  the
fperme  goes  into  the  center,  there  is  made  that  which
fliould  be  made  there;  but  when  it  is  come  into  any
other  place,  and  hath  conceived,  it  changeth  its  forme
no  more.  Now  whiicft  the  fperme  is  yet  in  the  center,
there  may  as  eafily  be  brought  forth  a  tree,  as  a  metall
from  the  fperme,  and  aflbonc  an  hearbe,as  a  ftone,and
one  more  pretious  then  another,  according  to  the  pu-
rity of  tlie  place :  But  how  the  Elements  beget  a  fperme
is  in  the  next  place  to  be  treated  of,  and  it  is  done  thus  :
The  Elements  are  foure:  two  arc  heavy  and  two  arc
light,  two  dry,  and  two  moift,  but  one  which  is  mod
^ry,  and   another  which  is  moft   moift,  arc  males,
and  females  &cc.  Every  one  of  thefcetit  fclfcismoft
apt  to  produce  things  like  unto  it  (eUc  in  its  ownc  fpherc,
and  foit  plcafed  God  it  fhouldbc  :  Thefc foure  never
are  at  reft,  but  are  alwaies  afSing  one  upon  another ;  and
cveiy  one  by  it  fclfe  fendeth  forth  his  ownc  thinncfs,and
fubtlety,  and  they  all  meet  in  the  center:  now  in  the
center  is  the  Archcus ,  the  fcrvant  of  nature,  which
mixeth  thofe  fpermes,  and  fends  them  forth.    And
howlthat  is  done  is  to  befecne  more  fully  in  the  Epi-
logue of  the  I  a  treatifcs.


A  nen?  Light  of  Alcbymie ^  5


THE  THIRD  TT^E^T/SE.

of  the  trac  firfl  mattercfUetaHs.

I  He  firft  mdttcr  of  Metalls  is  twofold,  but
the  one  cannot  make  a  metall  without  the
othcr.Thc  firft  and  principall  is  the  humi-
dity of  the  aire  mixed  with  heat ;  and  this
the  Philofophers  called  Mercury,  which  is  governed
by  the  beams  of  the  Sunnc,  and  Moon  in  the  Philo-
fophicall  fea :  the  fecond  is  the  dry  heat  of  the  earth,
v/hich  they  called  Sulphur.  But  becaufe  all  true  Phi-
lofophers chiefly  concealed  this ,  wee  will  a  little
more  cleerly  explain  it  5  cfpecially  the  weight  or
poife,  which  being  unknown,  all  things  are  fpoiled.
Thcnceitis,  that  many  bring  forth  an  abortive  out
ofthat  which  is  good;  for  there  bee  fome  that  take
the  whok  body  tor  the  matter,  or  feed,  orfperme;
and  fome  that  take  a  piece^and  all  thefe  go  befide  the
right  way.  As  for  example  ♦,  ifany  one  fhould  take
tfie  foot  of  a  man,  and  the  hand  of  a  woman,  and
would  by  mixing  thefe  two  together  make  a  man,  it
were  not  poiTibletobedone.  For  there  is  in  every
body  a  Cen[er,and  a  place  or  the  point  of  the  feed  or
Iperme,  and  isalwaiesthc  8200^^- part,  yea  even  in
every  wheat  come*,  and  this  cannot  bee  otherwife*
Pornot  the  whole  corne,orbody  is  turned  into  feed>
but  only  a  fpark,  or  fome  certain  fmall  ncceffary  pare
in  the  body,  which  is  preferved  by  its  body  from  all
cxccflive  heat  and  CQld.    If  thou  haft  cares ,  or  any

C  fenfe


iir  Anew  Light  ofAlcbymie.

fcnfc,  marlc  well  what  is  here  faid,  and  thou  flialtbc
fafe,   and  out  of  the  number  not  only  of  thofc  who
are  ignorant  of  the  place  of  the  fpcrm^and  endeavour
to  convert  the  whole  corn  into  ^^c^l-^  but  alfo  of  them
all,  who  are  employed  in  the  fruitlelTe  diiTolution  of
metalls,    and  are  deiirous  to  diflblve  the  whole  of
metalls,  that  afterwards  by  their  mutual!  commix-
tion  they  may  make  a  new  metall.    But  thefe  men,
if  they  coniidered  the  procefle  of  Nature,  fhould  fee
that  the  cafe  is  far  other  wife  ^  for  there  is  no  metall
fo  pure,  which  hath  not  its  impurities,,  yet  one  more,
or  tcwcr  then  another^    But  thou,  friendly  Reader,
flialt  obferye  the  firft  point  of  nature ^as  isabovefaid,
and  thou  haft  enough  :  but  take  this  caution  along
withthee^  that  thou  doft  not  fcek  for  this  point  in
the  nfietalls  of  the  vulgar,in  which  it  is  not.  For  thefe
m€talis,elpccially  the  gold  of  the  vul|ar,are  dead^but
ours  are  living,  full  of  fpirit,, and  thefe  wholly  muft
betaken  :    for  know,  that  the  life  ofmetalls  is  fire
whilffthey  are  yet  in  their  minesj  and  their  death  is-
the  fire,  'vi\.  of  melting.     Now  the  firft  matter  of
metals  is  acertaine  humidity  mixed  with  warm  aire  ,
and  it  rcfcmbles  fat  water ,  flicking  to  every  thir^
purCjOr  impure  ,   but  in  one  place  more  abundantly
then  inanothcr,  by  rcafonthe  earth  is  more  open,
and  porous  in  one  place  then  in  another,  having  alfo
an  3ttra<flive  power..    It  comes  forth  into  the  light
fomtimes  by  it  felf,with  fome  kind  of  coveringjefpe-
ciallyinfuchplaces  wheretherewasnothing  that  it
could  well  ftick  to  5  it  is  known  thus ,  becaufe  every
thing  is  compounded  of  3  principles  ;  but  in  reference
to  the  matter  ofmetalls  is  but  one,  without  any  con-
)un<5tion  to  any  thing ,  excepting  to  its  covering  or
ibadow,  'z//^.  fulphur,  &c»  TH  £


jinewh  tghi  ofAlchymie.  \  \


THE  F0V71TH  TliEATISE.

lictv  Metals  are  generated  in  the  htvefts  of
the  earth,

trails  arc  brought  forth  in  this  mannerr
After  the  fov.rc  Elements  have  fent  forth
their  vertucs  into  the  center  of  the  earth,
the  Archeus  by  way  of  diftillation  fends
them  up  unto  the  fupcrficies  ot  the  earth,    by  vertue
of  the  heat  of  its  pcrpetuall  motion  :  for  the  earth  is
porous,  and  this  wind  by  diftilling  through  the  pores
of  the  earth,  is  refolvcd  into  water  ^  out  of  which  all
things  are  made.  Therefore  let  the  fons  of  wifdome
IcnoWjthat  the  fpcrm  of  metalls  doth  not  differ  from
the  fperm  of  all  i\mq^s^vi\.  the  moift  vapour :  there-
fore in  vain  do  Artifts  look  after  the  reducing  of  me-
talls  into  their  firft  matter,  which  is  only  a  vapour*
The  Philofophers  meant  not  fuch  a  firfl  m^itter,  but
only  the  (econd  matter^as  Bernardus  Trevifmus  kar*
nedly  difcLTifeth  it,  though  not  fo  cleerly,  becaufe  hec
fpeaks  of  the  foure  Elements,   but  yet  hee  did  fay  as
much,  but  he  fpake  only  to  the  fons  of  Art.     But  /,
that  I  might  the  more  cleerly  open  the  Theoric ,
would  have  all  be  admoniftied  here  to  take  heed  how
they  give  way  to  fo  many  folutions  ^  fo  many  circu-
lations, fo  many  calcinations,  and  reiterations  of  the
fame ;    for  in  vain  is  that  fought  for  in  a  hard  thing,
when  as  the  thing  is  ioft  of  it  felf ,    and  every  where
to  be  had.  Let  not  the  firfl ,  but  the  fecond  matter
only  be  fought  ahcr^v/^.  that,  which  as  foon  as  it  is

C  2  con*


IS  'J neno  Light  ofAlchjmis*

conceived,  cannot  be  changed  into  another  form. But
if  thou  inquired  how  a  mctall  may  bee  reduced  into
fuch  a  matter,  in  that  I  keep  clofeto  the  intention
of  the  Philofophers."  This  thing  only  above  all  the
reft  1  deGre ,   that  the  fons  of  Art  would  underftand
thefenfe,andnotthe  letter  of  writings,  and  where
nature  doth  end,  i^/^.  in  metallick  bodies ,  which  in
our  eyes  feem  to  be  pcrfed ,     there  muft  Art  begin.
But  to  return  to  my  purpofc,(for  nfiy  intention  is  not
here  tofpeak  of  the  ftonc  onlyj  let  us  now  treate  of
the  matter  of  metalls.  A  little  before  I  faid,  that  all
things  were  made  of  the  liquid  aire,  or  the  vapour,
which  the  Elements  by  a  perpetuall  motion  diftill  in-
to the  bowells  of  the  earth  5  and  then  the  Archeus
of  Nature  takes  and  fublimesit  through  the  pores,
and  according  to  its  difcretion  diftributesit  to  every
place  (as  we  have  declared  in  the  foregoingt  reatifes)
(b  from  the  variety  of  places  proceeds  the  variety  of
.  things.    There  be  fome  that  fuppofe  Saturne  to  have
one  kind  of  feed,  and  Gold  another,  and  fo  all  the  reft
of  the  metalls.   But  thefe  are  foolifli  fancies-,there  is
but  one  only  fecd,the  fame  is  found  in  Saturne  which
is  in  Gold,  the  fame  in  Silver  which  is  in  Iron  j  but
the  place  of  the  earth  is  divers,  if  thou  underftandeft
me  arighr,although  in  Silver  nature  fooner  hathdonc
its  work,  then  in  Gold,  and  fo  of  the  reft.  For  when
that  vapour  is  fublimcd  from  the  center  of  the  earth,
it  pafleth  through  places  either  cold,  or  hot:If  there-
fore it  pafTeth  through  places  that  are  hot,  and  pure,
where  the  fatncffe  of  Sulphur  fticks  to  the  walls-,    I
fay  that  vapour  which  the  Philofophers  have  called
the  Mercury  of  Philofophers  applyes  it  felf  to,  and  is
joined  to  that  fatnefle,which  then  it  fublimes.  with  it

felf:.


A  new  Light  ofMchymiei}  15

fclfjand  then  becomes  an  unduofiry,and  leaving  the
name  of  a  Vapoiir>is  called  by  the  namcof  Fatnefic;
which  afterward  coming  by  fublimation  unto  other
placeSjWhich  the  fore-going  vapour  hath  clcanfcd,
where  the  earth  is  fnbtill,  pure,  and  moift,  fills  the
pores  thereof,  and  is  joined  to  it,  and  fo  it  is  made
Goldjbut  if  that  fatnefle  come  to  impure,  and  cold
places^  it  is  made  Leadjbut  if  the  earth  bee  cold  and
purc,and  mixed  with  fulphur,it  is  made  Copper^&c.
For  by  how  much  more  a  place  is  depurated,  orckn-
fed,  by  fo  much  the  more  excellent  it  makes  the  me-
talls ;  for  wee  muft  know,  that  that  vapour  goes  out
continually  from  the  center  to  the  fuperficies ,  and
eleanfeth  thofe  places  through  which  it  paflfeth.
Thence  it  comes  to  paffe ,  that  now  there  may  bee
found  Mines  in  thofe  places  where  a  thoufand  yeers
agoe  were  none-,  for  in  itspaffage  it  alwaics  fubtili^
zeth  that  which  is  crude  and  impure ,  carrying  it  by
degrees  with  it:  And  this  is  the  reiteration^and  circu-
tion  of  nature;  it  is  fo  long  fublimed  in  producing
new  things,  untill  the  place  be  very  well  purified;  and
by  how  much  the  more  it  is  purified,  by  fo  much  the
nobler  things  it  brings  forth.  Now  in  the  winter
when  the  air  is  cold  ,  binding  faft  the  earth,  that
unduous  vapour  is  congealedjwhich  afterward  when
the  fpring  returns,  is  mixed  together  with  earth,  and
water,and  fo  becomes  a  Magnefia,  drawing  to  it  felf
the  Mercury  of  air,  like  unto  it  felfc,and  gives  life  to
allthingsthro;ugh  the  concurrence  of  the  beams  of
the  Sun,Moon  and  Stars,and  fo  it  bringsforth  grafs,
flowers,andfuch  like  things.  For  Nature  is  not  one
moment  oftime  idle.  Now  Metalls  are  thus  made,
the  earth  by  long  difliilation  is  purified,  then  they

C3  arc


1*4  AnewLightofAlchynrie.

are  generated  by  the  accdle^or  coming  thither  of
thcfatneffe  .-they  are  brought  forth  no  other  way,
as  is  the  fooUfli  opinion  of  ibme  that  mif-interpret
the  writings  of  Philofophers.


THE  FIFTH  TREAriSE.

of  the  generdtton  ♦/  all  kinds  of
Stones,

;H  E  matter  of  Stones  is  the  fame  as  of
other  things-,  and  according  to  the  purity
of  places  they  arc  made  in  this  manner.
When  the  four  Elements  diftill  their  va-
pour into  the  center  of  the  earth-,  and  the  Archeus  of
Jiaturc  fends  forth  the  fame,  and  fublimes  it;  this
whilft  it  paifeth  through  places,  and  the  pores  of  the
earth,  takes  along  with  itfclfall  the  impurity  of  the
earth  unto  the  very  fupcrficies ,  which  afterward  the
air  congeals  (for  what  the  pure  air  makes,  the  crude
aire  congeals,becaufe  aire  hath  ingrcfle  into  aire,  and
they  jointhemfelves  together,  for  nature  is  delighted
in  nature.-  )  and  foare  made  rocks,  and  ftony  moun*
tains,  according  to  great  and  little  pores.  And  by
how  much  the  greater  arc  the  pores  of  the  earth,  by
fo  much  the  better  is  the  place  purified.  Siixre  there-
fore by  fuch  a  breathing  place  or  vent,a  greater  hear,
and  a  greater  quantity  of  water  paffeth,  therefore  the
fooncr  is  the  earth  depurated  ••  andfo  afterward  in
thofc  places  me  tails  arc  more  cafily  brought  foith.

Even


A  new  Light  afAkhymie,  15

Evenfo  very  experience  teftifies,  t-hat  gold  cannot  be
gotjOr  found  any  where  but  in  mountains ,  and  fcl-
dome  or  never  in  plain,andlevell  ground  :  for  mofli
commonly  fuch  places  are  moift ,   not  with  the  va-?
pour, but  with  Elementary  water ,  which  drawes  ta
it  felf  that  vapour,  and  fo  they  embrace  one  another,
as  that  they  can  hardly  be  feparated-,  afterwards  the
fun  of  the  heavens  digefting  them ,    makes  that  fat
clay  which  the  Potters  ufe.  But  in  places  where  there
is  groiTe  fand  ,   and    whither  the  vapour  doth  not
bring  with  it  that  fatnefle^or  fulphur,  it  brings  forth
herbs  and  graffe  in  Meadows.    There  be  other  kind
of  (tones,  which  are  called  precious  ftones,  as  the.
Diamond,  RubieSjEme raid,  and  fuch  like  gen[is  a^
thefc,  all  which  are  generated  after  this  manner.
When  the  vapour  of  Nature  is  fublimed  by  it  felfc ,
without  being  joined  to  the  fatnelfe  of  fulphur  >  and
comes  to  a  place  of  pure  fait  water,  there  are  made
Diamonds;  and  this  is  in  cold  places,  whither  that
fatneffe  cannot  come,bccaufe  that  fatnefs  would  hin-
der the  making  of  thefe  floncs.  For  wee  muff  know,
that  the  fpirit  of  water  is  fublimed  cafily ,  and  that
with  a  fmall  heat-,  but  oil, and  fatncfTe  cannot  be  car-
rycd  up  but  with  a  great  heat ,  and  that  alfo  into  hot
places-,for  when  it  is  come  from  the  center,if  it  meet
with  any  little  cold^  it  is  congealed,  and  is  at  a  fland^
but  the  vapour  afcends  to  its  due  places,  and  in  pure
water  is  congealed  into  ftones  by  grains.    But  how
colours  are  made  in  gems*,  wee  muft  know  that  they
are  made  by  reafon  of  the  fulphur  in  this  manner  :  if
the  fatneffe  of  the  fulphur  be  congealed,then  by  that
perpetuall  motion  ,   the  fpirit  of  the  water  paiTing
through,  it  digcfts  and  purifies  it  by  virtue  of  the

fair,.


f6  A  new  Light  of  Alchymie^

lalt ,    iintlll  it  bee  coloured  with  a  digcftcd  hcatc>
red  or  wliite  ,     which  colour   tending  toward  a
further  pcrfedion,  is  carrycd  up  by  that  fpirit ,  be-
caufe  it  is  fubtilized  and  made  thin  by  fo  many  reite-
rated diftillations  •,  the  fpirit  afterward  hath  a  power
to  enter  intoimperfcd  things,  aild  fo  brings  in  a  co-
lour to  them,  which  afterward  is  joined  to  that  wa-
ter, being  then  in  part  congealed ,  and  fo  fills  up  the
pores  thereof,  and  is  fixed  withit,withaninfeparablc
iixation.For  all  water  is  congealed  with  heat,  if  it  be
without  fpirit5&congcled  with  cold,if  it  hath  a  fpirit?
but  he  that  knows  how  to  congeal  water  with  hcat,&
to  join  a  fpirit  with  it,  (liall  certainly  find  out  a  thing
more  pretious  then  gold,  and  every  thing  elfe.    Let
him  therefore  caufe  that  the  fpirit  be  feparated  from
the  water,  that  it  may  putrifie ,  and  bee  likea  grainc.
Afterwards  the  feces  being  caft  away,  let  him  reduce
and  bring  back  the  fpirit  again  from  the  deep  into
water,  and  make  them  be  joined  together  again  .•  for
that  conjundion  will  generate  a  branch  of  an  unlike
iliapetoitsparentSp


THM


A  new  Li^bt  ofAlcbymie^


THE  SIXTH  TREATISE.

of  the fecofid  matter^  and  putrefaction  of
things.

^EE  hrivefpoken  of  the  firft  matter  of
things,  and  how  things  are  produced  by
Nature  without  (tQd,  that  is^how  Nature
receives  matter  from  the  Elements,   out
of  which  flie  makes  {^d :  But  now  we  intend  to  treat
ohhe  feed  it  felfe  ,  and  things  generated  of  feed
For  every  thing  that  hath  (ccd  is  multiplyed  in  it  but
without  the  help  of  Nature  it  i§  not  donerfor  the  Iced
IS  nothing  dk  but  the  air  congealed  in  fome  body:  or
It  IS  a  moift  vapour^  and  unleffe  this  be  refolved  by  a
warm  vapour.  It  is  of  no  ufe.  Let  therefore  the  fear-
chcrs  of  the  Art  underftand  what  Seed  is,    left  thev
feek  after  a  thing  that  is  not :  and  let  them  know  that
that  is  threefold,  which  is  brought  forth  by  the  foure
Elements.  The  iirft  is  Minerall,  and  is  that  u-hich  we
novv  fpeak  ofnhe  fecond  is  Vegetable^the  third  Ani-
mal!.   The  Minerall  feed  is  known  by  Philofophers
atone.-   the  Vegetable  is  common ,  and  vulear ,  as
we  may  fee  in  fruits :  the  Animall  is  known  by  ima*
gination.    The  Vegetable  doth  fliew  to  us,  how  Na-
ture  made  it  of  the  four  Elements.      For  wee  muft
know  that  the  winter  is  the  caufc  of  putrefaction,  fee-
ing  It  congeals  the  Vitall  fpirits  in  trees  5  and  when
thofe  by  the  heat  of  the  Sun(in  which  there  is  a  mag-

^  netick


v8  Anerp  Light  ofAlchymit.

netick  vcrtuc5attra(5iivc  of  al  manner  ot  moifturcjafe
rcfolvcdjthen  ihe  hcnt  of  naturc,Airrccl  up  by  morio:^
drives, or  forceth  the  fubtill  Vapour  of  the  water  to
the  circumference,ancl  this  vapour  opcneth  the  pores
otthe  tree,  and  makes  drops  diftill,  alwaies  feparating
the  pure  from  the  impure.  Yet  the  pure  fometimcs
gocthb."  fore  the  impure;  the  pure  ftayes,  and  is
congealed  into  flowers,  the  impure  goes  into  leaves,
the  grolTe,  and  thick  into  the  bark :  the  bark  of  the
tice  remains  faft,  and  firm>  the  leaves  fall  with  cold,,
or  beat,  when  the  pores  thereof  are  ftopt :  the  flowers
in  congealing  receive  their  colour  according  to  the
heat  whereby  the  colour  is  made,  and  bring  with
tbem  fruit,  and  feed  (as  an  Apple,  in  which  there  is,
fperm  out  of  which  a  tree  is  not  brought  forth  •  but
in  the  infidc  of  that  fpermc  is  a  kcd  or  kcrncll,  out  of
which  even  without  the  fperm  is  brought  forth  atrec^
for  multiplication  is  not  in  the  fperm^but  in  the  feed.)
So  wee  fee  with  our  eyes,  that  Nature  creates  a  (czd
out  of  the  four  Elements,  left  wee  fliould  labour  irv
vain  about  it;  for  what  is  created  already  need  not  a
Crwtor.  Let  this  by  way  of  example  bee  fufficient
for  the  advcrtifement  of  the  Reader  •,  but  now  I  re-
turn to  my  purpofe  concerning  the  Mineralls. Nature
Creates  the  Mineral  fecd^or  the  ktd  of  Metalls  in  the
bowels  of  the  CvUthrwhcrefore  it  is  not  belecvedthat
there  is  any  fuch  feed  inrtrum  ;tf4/*ri,becaufe  it  is  in-
viflble.  But  it  is  no  wonder  if  ignorant  men  doubt  of
it,  feeing  they  cannot  perceive  that  which  is  before,
their  cys^much  lefs  that  which  is  hid  from  their  eyes:
but  it  is  mofl:  true  that  that  which  is  fuperiour,  is  but
3s  that  which, is  inferiour,  and  foon  the  contrary.
^IfQthat  which  is  brought  forth  aborc  is.  brougnt;

forth


ji  mtp  Light  ofAlchymie*  i  j>

forth  of  the  fame  fountalne,  as  that  beneath  in  the
bowcUs  of  the  earth.  And  what  prerogative  fliouJd
Vegetables  have  before  Metalls^tbatGod  fliould  put
a  kcd  into  them,  and  without  caufe  withhold  it  from
thefec*  Arc  not  Mctalls  of  as  much  eflecm  with  God
as  Trees/* Let  this  be  granted  for  a  truth^that  nothing
grows  without  feed  :  for  where  there  is  no  feed,  the
thing  is  dead.  Itis  necelTary  therefore  that  four  Ele-
ments (hould  make  the  feed  of  Metal!  s,or  bring  them
forth  without  a  feed  :  if  they  are  produced  without
feed,  then  they  cannot  be  perfcd-,  feeing  every  thing
without  (eed  is  itnperfcct,  by  the  rule  of  compofiti-
on  :  hee  which -gives  no  credit  to  this  undoubted
truth,  is  not  worthy  to  fearch  into  the  fecrets  of  na-
ture^  for  there  is  nothing  made  in  the  world,  that  is
deftitute  of  feed.  The  feed  of  Metalls  is  truely ,  and
really  put  into  them.-and  the  generation  of  it  is  thus.
The  foure  Elements  in  the  firft  operation  of  Nature
doc  by  the  help  of  the  Archeus  of  Nature  diftill  into
the  ccntcrof  the  earth  a  ponderousjor  heavy  Vapour
of  water,  which  is  the  feed  of  Metalls,  and  is  called
Mercury  by  rcafon  of  its  fluxibillty ,  and  its  conjun-
dion  with  every  thing;  not  for  its  cflence;  and  for  its
internall  heat  itis  likened  to  Sulphur,  and  after  con-
gealation  becomes  to  be  the  radicall  moifture.  And
although  the  body  of  Metalls  be  procreated  of  Mer-
cury (  which  ^is  to  bee  undcrftood  of  the  Mercury
of  Philofphers^  yet  they  are  not  bee  hearkncd  to,
that  think  the  vulgar  Mercury  is  the  feed  of  Metalls,
and  fo  take  the  body  in  ftead  of  the  feed,not  confide-
ring  that  the  vulgar  Mercury  fpoken  of  hath  its  own
feed  in  it  felf.  The  errors,  and  miftakes  of  all  thefc
men  will  be  made  apparent  by  the  following  cxam-

D  2  pic.


ga  ^  '^^w?  hi^t  of  Alih)mii.

pic.  It  is  manifcftthat  men  have  feed,  in  which  they
arc  multiplyed  .•  the  body  of  man  is  Mercury*  biir
the  feed  is  hid  in  the  body,  and  in  comparifontothe
body  IS  but  httle,  and  light  ••  he  therefore  that  will
bcgft  a  man,  let  him  not  take  Mercury,  which  is  the
body,but  the  feed  ,  which  is  the  congealed  Vapour
of  water.  Soin  the  regeneration  of  Metalls,  the  vul-
gar Chymifts  goe  prepofteroully  to  work:  They
diflblve  Metal  lick  bodies,  whether  it  be  Mercury,  or
Gold,orLead,or  Silver,  and  corrode  them  with
fliarp  waters,  and  other  Heterogeneous  things  not
requiiite  to  the  true  Art,  and  afterward  joine  them
together  again,  not  knowing  that  a  man  is  not  gene-
rated of  a  mans  body  cut  to  pieces,  becaufe  by  this
means  the  body  is  marred,  and  the  feed  before-hand
is  deftroyed.  Every  thing  is  multiplyed  in  Male  and
pemale,  as  I  have  already  mentioned  in  the  Treatife
of  the  twofold  Matter  :Thc  divilion  of  the  fcxes  cau-
fcthjOr  produceth  nothing,  but  a  due  joining  of  them
together,  brings  forth  a  new  forme  :  the  feeds  there-
fore ,or  fpermes,  not  bodies  arc  to  bee  taken.    Take
therefore  a  living  Male,  and  a  living  Female  5  joinc
thefe  together,  that  betwixt  them  there  may  be  con-
ceived a  fperm  for  the  bringing  forth  of  fruit  after  its
kind :  There  is  no  man  livif7g  can  beleevc  that  he  can
make  the  firft  matter ;   The  firft  matter  of  Man  is
earth,  and  no  man  can  of  that  make  a  man;  only  God
knows  how  to  doe  this^  but  of  the  fecond  matter,
which  is  a  heady  made,  if  it  be  put  into  its  due  place,
may  eafily  by  the  operation  of  Nature  be  generatedi
a  thing  of  that  fpecics,  or  kind ,  which  the  feed  was
of.  The  Artift  here  need  doe  nothing,oncly  to  fepa-
latc  the  thin  from  the  thick,  and  to  put  it  into  its  due

veffclL


A  new  Light  ofMchymiei  2 1

vclTcll.  For  this  is  to  be  confidcred,  that  as  a  thing  is
begun,  To  it  ends ;  Of  one  are  made  two,of  twoone,
and  then  you  have  done.  There  is  one  God',  of  this
one  God  the  Son  is  begotten  ••  One  produceth  two,
two  hvive  produced  one  holy  Spirit  proceeding  from
both  :  fo  the  world  is  made ,  and  fo  flaall  be  the
end  thereof.  Confider  the  four  former  points  moft
exa*flly ;  thou  haft  in  them  t  he  Father ,  the  Father
and  the  Son,  and  laftlv  the  holy  Spirit :  thou  haft  the
four  Elements  :  thou  haft  four  great  Lights,  two  Cc-
leftialljandtwoCentrall  :  This  is  all  that  is ,  hath,
been,or  {hall  be,that  is  made  plain  by  this  forenamed
fimilitude.  If  I  might  lay  down  all  the  myfteries  that
might  be  raifed  from  hence,  they  would  amount  to  a
great  volume.  I  return  to  my  purpofe,and  I  tell  thee
true,  my  fon!  one  is  not  made  of  one  naturally ,  for
thus  to  doe  is  proper  to  God  alone  :  let  it  fufficc  thee
that  thou  art  able  out  of  two  to  make  one,which  wil
be  profitable  to  thee.  Know  therefore  that  the  (perm
doth  multiply  the  fecond  matter,  and  not  the  firft:
for  the  firft  matter  of  all  things  is  not  feen,  but  is  hid
either  in  nature,  or  in  the  Elements  5  but  the  fecond
matter  fomctimes  appcares  to  the  fons  of  wifdomc.


D  5  THM


21  A  new  Light  ojAlchymk.

THE  SEVENTHTKEATISE.

of  the  vertue  of  the  fecond  matter.

iUT  that  thou  maift  the  more  cafily  con-
ceive what  this  fccond  matter  is,I  will  de-
fcribc  the  vertues  ©f itjby  which  thou  maift
know  it.  And  firfl  of  all  know,  that  Nature
is  divided  into  three  Kingdomsjtwo  of  them  are  fuch
that  either  of  them  can  fubfift  of  it  felf,  if  the  other
two  were  not-  there  is  the  Minerall,  Vegetable ,  and
Animall  Kingdom. The  Mineral!  can  fubfift  of  it  felf,
although  there  were  no  man  in  the  world,nor  tree,or
berb.  The  Vegetable  likewifc^  although  there  were
no  Metall,nor  AnimalljCan  ftand  by  it  klf:  thcfc  two
ar-cof  one  made  by  one :  But  the  third  hath  life  from
the  other  two  which  wee  have  mentioned ,  without
which  it  could  not  fubfift,  and  is  more  noble  and  ex-
ccllent  then  thofe  two,as  alfo  it  is  the  laft  of  the  three,
and  rules  over  the  other :  bccaufc  alwaics  vertue,  or
excellency  ends  in  a  third  thing,  and  is  multiplyedin
the  fecond.Doft  thou  fee  in  the  Vegetable  Kingdoms
The  firft  matter  is  an  herb ,  or  a  tree ,  which  thou
knoweft  not  how  to  make,Natnre  alone  makes  it:  In
tliis  Kingdom  the  fccond  matter  is  Seed,  which  thou
feeft,  in  this  the  hearb,  or  tlie  tree  is  multiplyed.  In
the  Animall  Kingdome  the  firft  matter  is  a  beaft,  or
a  manjwhich  thou  knoweft  not  how  to  makcjbut  the
fccond  matter  or  the  fperm,  in  which  they  are  multi-
ply:


4  nen?  Light  ofAlchymie.  25

plyedjthou  knoweft.  In  the  Minerall  thou  knoweft
not  how  ro  make  a  Metall,  and  if  thou  braggeft  that
thou canft,  thou  art  a  foole,and  a  ]yar,Nat*rc  makes
tto,  and  although  thou  fliouldft  have  the  firft  mat-
ter, according  to  the  Philolophcrs,  yet  it  would  bee
impofTible  for  thee  to  multiply  that  Centrall  fait
without  GoldrNow  the  feed  ofMetalls  is-known on-
ly to  the  fons  of  Art.  In  Vegetables  the  feed  appears
outwardly;  the  reins  of  its  digeftion  is  warm  aire.  In
Animalls  the  feed  appears  inwardly ,and  outwardly}
the  reins  of  Its  digeftion  are  the  reins  of  a  Male.  Wa-
ter in  Mineralls  is  tlic  feed  in  the  Center  of  their
heart;and  is  their  liferthe  reins  of  its  digeftion  is  fire.
The  receptacle  of  the  Vegetable  feed  is  the  earth:
the  receptacle  of  the  feed  Animal  is  the  womb  of  the
female :  the  receptacle  ofwater^which  is  the  Minerall
feed,  is  aire.  And  thofe  arc  the  receptacles  of  feeds ,
\vhich  arc  the  congealations  of  their  bodies  :  that  is
their  digeftion,  which  is  their  folution :  that  is  their
putrefaCiion  which  is  their  deftrudlion.   The  vcrtue
of  every  ktd  is  to  join  it  felf  to  every  thing  in  its  own
Kingdome,  becaufc  it  is  fubtill ,  and  is  nothing  elfc
but  aire,  which  by  fatnelTe  is  coagealed  in  water :  Itis
known  thus,  becaufe  it  doth  not  mixe  it  felf  naturally
to  any  thing  out  of  its  own  Kingdome :  it  is  not  dif-
folvcd,  but  congealed  ,  becaufc  it  doth  not  need  dif-
folution,butcongcalation.  Itis  neceflary  therefore
that  the  pores  of  the  body  be  opened,that  the  fpermc
may  be  fent  forth,:  in  whofe  Center  the  fcedlycs'^
which  is  aire :  that  when  it  comes  into  its  due  matrix,
is  congealed,  and  congeals  what  it  finds  pure,  or  imr
pure  mixed.with  what  is  pure.  As  long  as  the  feed  is
in  thcbOidy^  the  body  lives ,  whcnit is  all  coiifumcd
"  '■     '  the.


04  -^  *i^^  Light  ofAlchymie\

confumed  the  body  dies  •,  nlfo  all  bodies  after  the  c

inifTion  of  feed  arc  wcakncdicxpericncc  likewife  tefti-

fics  that  men  which  give  themfelves  over  too  much

to  venery  become  feeble,  as  trecs^that  bear  too  much

fruit,  become  afterwards  barren.  The  (ttd  therefore,

as  oftentimes  hath  been  repeated  ,  is  a  thing  invifi-

ble-,  but  the  fpcrmc  is  vifible,  and  is  almoft  a  living

foiile;  it  is  not  found  in  things  that  are  dead  .•  It  is

drawnforth  two  way es,  plea fantly,  and  by  force  :

But  becaufe  wee  arc  in  this  place  to  treat  of  the  ver-

te  of  it  onely  ,  I  fay  that  nothing  is  mvidc  without

feed  :  all  things  are  made  by  vertue  of  feed ;  and

let  the  Ions  of  Art  know,  that  feed  is  in  vain  fought

for  in  trees  that  are  cut  off,  or  cut  down,becaufe  it  is

found  in  them  only  that  are  green.


rHE  EIGHTH  TREATISE.

How  hj  Art  Nature  works  in  Seed,

I L  L  feed  is  nothing  worth  of  it  felf^  if  it
be  not  either  by  Art,  or  Nature  put  in-
to its  proper  matrix.  And  although
feed  be  of  it  felf  more  noble  then  every
creature,  yet  the  matrix  is  the  life  of  it,
&  makes  the  fpcrm,or  corn  to  putreficjand  caufeth  a
congealation  of  the  pure  point,  and  alfo  by  the  heat
of  its  body  nouriflicth  it,  and  makes  it  grow- and  this
is  done  in  all  the  forefaid  Kingdomesof  Nature^and
is  done  naturally  by  months,  years,  and  ages.  But

that


A  mw  Light  ofAlcbymie^  1 5

that  is  a  witty  Art,  that  can  fhortcn  any  thing  in  the
Mincrall,  and  Vegetable  Kingdome,  but  not  in  the
Animall  :  in  the  Mincrall  Kingdome  it  peifeds
that,  which  Nature  could  not ,  by  rcafon  of  the
crude  air,  which  with  its  vehemcncy  filled  the  pores
of  every  body-,  not  onely  in  the  bowells,  but  alfo  in
the  fuperficies  of  the  eanh.  As  I  have  already  faid
in  the  foregoing  Chapters.  But  that  this  may  bee
the  more  eafily  underftood,  I  will  adde  hereunto ,
that  the  Elements  driving  amongft  themfelves  fend
forth  their  feed  into  the  Center  of  the  earth,  as  into
their  reins;  but  the  Center  by  help  of  motion  fends
it  into  its  Matrix.  Now  the  Matrixes  arc  innume-
rable, as  many  Matrixes,  as  places,  one  purer  then
other,  and  fo  almoft  in  infinitum*  Know  therefore,
that  a  pure  Matrix  will  afford  a  pure  conception  in
its  own  likeneffe :  As  for  example,  in  Animalls  there
are  Matrixes  of  Women,  Gowcs,  Mares,  Bitches,
and  the  like.  So  in  the  Mineral! ->  and  Vegetable
Kingdomes,  there  arc  Metalls,  Stones,  Salts/orthc
Salts  in  thefe  two  Kingdomes  are  to  bee  confidcrcd
of,  as  alfo  their  places,  according  to  more  or  leflc*


^  THE


2$  A  new  Light  ofAlchymie.

THE  NINTH  TREAriSE.

of  the  Ccmwixtion  of  Mitalls^  or  tht
dramng  forth  their  feed,.

^E  have  fpokcn  of  Nature,  of  Arjc,of  the
Body,  of  Sperm,  and  of  Seed,  now  Ice
us  dcfcend  to  Praxis,  i^/^.  how  Mctalls
ought  to  be  mixed  together ,  and  what
their  correfpondency,  or  agreement  is
one  with  another.  Know  therefore  that  a  Woman
doth  not  vary  from  a  Manj  both  arc  bred  of  the  fame
Seed,  and  in  one  Matrix ,  there  was  nothing  bcfides
digeftion ,  and  tliat  the  Matrix  had  m  it  purer
bloud,  and  fah :  fo  Silver  is  made  of  the  Tame  Seed
as  Gold  is,  and  in  the  fame  Matrix  ^  but  the  Matrix
had  more  water  in  it  then  digefted  blood,  according
to  the  fcafon  of  the  Moon  in  the  heavens.  But  that
thou  maift  the  more  cafily  imagine  with  thy  felf  how
Metalls  couple  together,  that  their  Seed  may  be  fenc
forth,and  received-,  behold  and  fee  the  heavens ,  and
thefpheresof  the  Planets  :  thoufecft  x\\zx.Saturne
is  placed  the  uppermoft5or  higheft^next  to  that  lupi-
/tr,.thcn  Mars^  then  Sol,  or  the  Sun,  then  FenHs^xhzn
Mercnrj^  and  laft  of  all  Luna,  or  the  Moon.  Confider
alfothatthevertuesof  the  Planets  doe  not  afccnd,
but  dcfcend  .-Experience  teacheth  as  much,  vt"^  that
ofr^;?«j,  or  Copper  is  not  made  .A^^r/^  or  Iron,  but

of


A  new  Light  ofAlchjmii*  a  7

of  Man  is  made  Venm,  as  being  an  infcriour  fpherc :
So  alfo  lupiter,  or  Tin  is  eafily  changed  into  Mercury
or  Quick-filver ,  becaufe  lupiter  is  the  fecond  from
the  firmament,  and  Mercury  the  fecond  from  the
earth :  Saturate  is  the  firft  from  the  hcavenSjand  Luna
the  firft  from  the  earth  ;  Scl  mixethit  felf  with  all,
but  is  never  bettered  by  its  inferiors.      Now  know
that  there  is  a  great  agreement  betwixt  Saturne ,  or
Lead,  and  Lund^  or  Silver,  in  midft  of  which  the  Sun
is  placcd:as  alfo  betwixt  lupjter  and  Mercury ^m  midft
oivfhlchSd  is  alfo  placed :  and  in  the  fame  manner
betwixt  Mars  and  ye»uf^  which  alfo  have  5p/ placed
in  the  midft  of  them.Chymifts  know  how  to  change
Iron  into  Copper  without  Gold :  they  know  alfo  to
makeQuick-ulveroutof  Tin  ••  and  there  are  fome
that  make  Silver  out  of  Lead  .•  But  if  they  knew  by
thefe  mutations  to  give  or  minifte'r  to  them  the  nature
of  Gold,  they  would  Certainly  find  out  a  thing  more
pretious  then  any  treafure.  Wherefore  I  fay  we  muft
not  bee  ignorant  what  Metalls  arc  to  be  joined  to
each  other,who(e  nature  is  agreableone  to  the  others.
Moreover  there  is  granted  to  us  one  Metall ,    which
hath  a  power  to  confumc  the  reft,  for  it  is  almoft  as
their  water,&  mother.-  yet  there  is  one  thing,and  that
alone,  the  radicall  moifture,  1^/^.  of  the  Sunnc,  and
Moon  that  wirhftands  it,  and  is  bettered  by  it  •,    but
that  I  may  difclofe  it  to  you,  it  is  called  Chalybs,  or
SteeU  If  Gold  couples  eleven  times  with  it,  it  fends
forth  its  feed,  and  is  debilitated  almoft  unto  death  5
the  Chalybs  conceivcs,and  bears  a  fon,  more  excel-
lent then  his  father  .•  then  when  the  Seed  of  that
which  is  now  brought  forth  is  put  into  its  own  Ma-
trix^ it  purifies  it,  and  makes  it  a  thoufand  times

E  2  more


^8  A  mro  Light  of  Akhymte,

more  ^i,  and  apt  to  bring  forth  the  bcft ,  and  moft
excellent  fruits.  There  is  another  Chalybs,  which
is  like  to  this,  created  by  it  felfe  of  Nature ,  which
knows  how  to  draw  forth  by  vcrtue  of  the  fun  beams
(through  a  wonderfull  power ,  and  vcrtue  )  that
which  10  many  men  have  fought  after ,  and  is  the
beginning  of  our  work.

rUE  TENTH  TREATISE.

of  the  SufemMturdl  Generation  of
the  Son  of  the  Sun,

E  E  have  treated  of  things ,  which  Nature
makes,  and  which  God  hath  madcj  that  the
Searchers  of  Art  might  the  more  ealily  un-
derftand  the  pofTibility  of  Nature.    But  to  delay  no
longer,  I  will  now  enter  upon  the  Manner,  and  Art
how  to  make  the  Philofophers  ftone.    The  Philofo-
phers  ftone,or  tindure  is  nothing  elfe,  but  Gold  di-
gcftedtothe  highcft  degree  :  For  vulgar  Gold  is
like  anherb  without  feed  5  when  it  is  ripe  it  brings
forth  feed-,  fo  Gold  when  it  is  ripe  yeelds  feed,  or
tin(5ture.  But,  will  fome  asKWhy  doth  noi  Gold,or
any  other  Metall  bring  torth  feed:'  thereafon  given
is  this,  becaufe  it  cannot  bee  rip  e,  by  reafon  of  the
crudity  of  the  air,  it  hath  not  fulficient  heat ,  and  it
happens ,  that  in  fome  places  there  is  found  pure
Gdd,  which  nature  would  have  perfedcd ,  but  was

hindrcd


A  ne)x>  Light  ofAlchymiel  2p

hindred  by  the  crude  aire.  As  for  example,  wee  fee
that  Orcnge  trees  in  Ptf/(J»M  doe  indeed  flourifhas
other  trees-,  in /W/^,  and  elfewhere,  where  their  na-
turall  foil  is ,  they  yecld,  and  bring  forth  fruit,becaufc
they  have  fufficient  heatj  but  in  thefe  cold  places  they
doe  otherwife,  for  when  they  begin  to  ripen,  they  arc
at  a  ftand,  becaufe  they  are  oppreflcd  with  cold^  and
fo  in  thefe  places  we  never  have  their  fruit  naturally :
but  if  at  any  time  Nature  'be  fweetly ,  and  wittily
helped,  then  Art  may  perfed  that ,  which  Nature
could  not.  The  fame  happens  in  Metalls:  Gold  may
yeeld  fruit,  and  {ced,inwhichitmultiplyesitfclfby
the  induftry  of  the  skilfull  Artificer,  who  knows  how
to  exalt  Nature,but  if  he  will  attempt  to  do  it  with-
out Nature,  he  will  be  miflakcn.  For  not  only  in  this
art,  but  alfo  in  every  thing  elfc,  we  can  doe  nothing
but  help  Nature;  and  this  by  no  other  medium  then
fire,  or  heat^  But  feeing  this  cannot  be  done,{ince  in
a  congealed  MetalUck  body  there  appear  no  fpiritSjit
is  neceffary  that  the  body  be  loofcd,or  diffolved,  and
the  pores  thereof  opened ,  whereby  Nature  may
work.  But  what  that  diifolution  ought  to  be  ,  here  I
would  have  the  Reader  take  notice  ,  that  there  is  a
twofold  diffolution,  although  there  be  many  other
dilfolutions,  but  to  little  purpofej  there  is  onely  one
that  is  truely  naturall,  the  other  is  violent ,  under
which  all  th^efl:  are  comprehended.  The  naturall  is
this,  that  the  pores  of  the  body  bee  opened  in  our
water,  whereby  the  kt^^  that  is  digefted,  may  bee
fcnt  forth,  and  put  into  its  proper  Matrix :  Now  our
wateris  heavenly ,not  wetting  the  hands ,  not  vulgar,
but  almofl  rain  water  :  The  body  is  gold,  which
ycclds  feeds  our  Lune  or  Silver,  (not  common  Silver)

E3  is


go  A  mn?  Ligr)t  ojAlchynjie.

is  that  which  receives  the  k^d.  of  the  gold:afrenvaids
it  is  governed  by  our  continual  fire,for  fcvcn  months,
and  fomctimes  ten,  untill  our  water  confumc  three ,
and  leave  one;  and  that  in  iiuph,ox  a  double. Then  it
is  nouriflied  with  the  milk  of  the  earth,or  the  fatnclTe
thereofjwhich  is  bred  in  the  bowclls  of  the  earth,and
is  governed,  or  prefcrved  f rom  putrcfadion  by  the
(alt  of  Nature.  And  thus  the  infant  of  the  fccond
generation  is  generated.  Now  let  us  pa{Ic  from  the
Thcoric  to  the  Praxis.


THE  ELEVENTH  rREATISE.

of  the  Pr^^is^  and  Making  of  the
Stone,  or  Tin^nre  by
Art.

I  Hrough  all  thefc  foregoing  Chapters,  our

'  difcourfc  of  things  hath  been  feat  lered  by

way  of  examples,  that  the  Praxis  might

be  the  more  eafily  undciftood,which  muft

be  done  by  imitating  Nature  after  this  manner

Take  of  our  earth,  through  eleven  degrees,  eleven
graines,of  our  Gold,and  not  of  the  vulgar  one  grain,
of  our  Lune,  not  the  vulgar,  two  grains.*  but  be  thou
well  advifed,that  thou  takeft  not  common  GoId,and
Silver,  for  thefe  arc  dead,  take  ours  which  are  living:
then  put  them  into  our  fire,  and  let  there  be  made  of
them  a  dry  liquor^firfl  of  all  the  earth  wil  be  refol  vcd
into  water,  which  is  called  the  Mercury  of  Philofo-

phers


d  new  Light  ofAlchymk.  3 1

phcrS',  and  that  water  fliall  rcfolve  thofc  bodies  of
Gold5and  Silvcr^and  fiial  confume  them  fOjthat  there
fhall  remain  but  the  tenth  part  with  one  parr^and  this
ftall  be  the  radical!  moiftiire  of  Metalls.   Then  take
water  of  fait  -nitre,  which  comes  from  our  earth  ,  in
which  there  is  a  river  ofliving  water,  if  thoudiggcft
the  pit  knee  deep,thcrefore  take  water  outof  thaCjbiit
take  that,  which  is  cleer-,  upon  this  put  that  radicall
moifture-,  and  fet  it  over  the  fire  of  putrefadion^and
generation^not  on  fuch  a  one  as  thou  did  ft  in  the  firft
operation  ;  govern  all  things  with  a  great  deale  of
difcretion,  untill  colours  appear  lik^  a  Peacocks
tailj  govern  it  by  digefting  it,  and  be  not  weary,  un-
till thefe  colours  be  ended,  and  ther€  appear  through-
out the  whole  one  green. colour ,  and  fo  of  the  reft  y
and  when  thou  ihalt  fee  in  the  bottome  afhes  of  a  fie-
ry cobur,  and  the  water  almoft  red,  open  the  vcfTcI,
dip  in  a  pen,and  fmeare  fome  Iron  with  it,  if  it  tinge>
have  in  readincflc  that  water,  which  afterwards  I  fliall
fpeak  of,and  put  in  fo  much  of  that  water  as  the  cold
aire  was,  which  went  in,  boil  it  again  with  the  former
fire,  until!  it  tinge  again.  So  far  reached  my  experi-
ence, 1  can  doe  no  more,  I  found  out  no  more.Now
that  watermuftbethemenftruumof  the  world,out
of  the  fphere  of  the  Moon,  fo  often  redified ,  untill
it  can  calcine  Gold   :  I  have  been  willing  here  to
difcover  totj^all  thmgs  5    and  if  thou  fhalt  under-
ftand  my  mC3ing  fometimes,  and  not  the  letter ,    1
have  revealed  all  things^  cfpccially  in  the  firfl,  and
fccond  work.   Now  it  remains  that  we  fpeak  next  of
the  fire.The  firft  fire,  or  of  the  firft  operation  is  a  fire
of  one  degrce5Continuall,whichgoes  round  the  mat-
ter^ the  fccond  is  anaturall  fire,  which  digcfts ,.  and

fixethi


J  a  A  nen?  Light  ofAlchymie\

fixcththc  matter :  I  tell  thee  truely  that  I  have  open-
ed to  thee  the  governance,  or  rules  of  the  firejif  thou
underftandeft  Nature  ••  The  velfell  remains  yet  to
be  rpoken  of.  It  muft  be  the  vefTel  of  Nature,  and
two  are  fufficientj  the  veiTell  of  the  firft  work  muft
beround  j  but  in  the  fecond  a  glaife,  a  little  lefiTe  like
unto  a  viall,or  an  cgge.  But  in  all  thefe  know ,  that
the  fire  of  Nature  is  but  one  ,  and  if  it  works  vari-
oufly,  it  is  by  reafon  of  the  difference  of  places.  The
veflell  therefore  of  Nature  is  but  one  •,  but  wee  for
brevities  fake  ufe  a  couple :  the  matter  is  one,  but  out
of  two  fubftances.  If  therefore  thou  wilt  give  thy
mind  to  make  things,  confidcr  firft  things  that  are  al-
ready made;  if  thou  canft  not  reach  5  orundcrftand
things  prefentcd  to  thy  eyes,  much  Icffc  things  that
arc  to  be  made  5  and  which  thou  defireft  to  make.
For  know  that  thou  canft  crevitc  nothing ,  for  that  is
proper  to  God  alone,  but  to  make  thingSjthacarc  not
perceived,  but  lye  hid  in  the  ihadow,  to  appear ,  and
to  take  from  them  their  vaile,  is  granted  to  an  intel-
ligent Philofopher  by  God  through  Nature.  Confi-
dcr,I  befecch  thee,  the  fimple  water  of  a  cloud  ;  who
woiitd  ever  belccvc  that  that  contains  in  it  felfe  all
things  in  the  world,  hard  Stones,  Salts,  Airc,Earth,
Fire,  when  as  yet  ofit  felfe  it  fcems  to  be  fimple  ?
What  fhall  I  fay  of  the  Earth,  which  contains  in  it
Water,  Fire,  Salts,  Aire,  and  ofit  fclffecms  to  be
but  meet  earth. ^O  wonderfull  Natur^SS^hich  knows
how  to  produce  wonderfull  fruits  out  of  Water  in  the
earth,  and  from  the  Aire  to  give  them' life.  All  thefe
are  done  ,  and  the  eyes  of  the  vulgar  doe  not  fee
them;  but  the  eyes  of  the  underftanding ,  and  imagi-
nation perceive  them,  and  that  with  a  true  fight.  The

eyes


A  nen?  Light  ofAlchymie*  g  5

eyes  of  the  wife  look  upon  Nature  othenvife ,    then
the  eyes  of  common  men.  As  for  example,  the  eyes
of  the  vulgar  fee  that  the  funis  hot-,     but  the  eyes
of  Philofophers  on  the  contrary  fee  it  rather  to  bee
cold,  but  its  motion  to  be  hot.  The  ads  and  effeds
of  it  are  underftood  through  the  diflance  of  places.
The  fire  of  Nature  is  one  and  the  fame  with  it:  for  as,
the  Sun  is  the  Center  amongft  the  fpheres  of  the
Planets;    and  our  of  this  Center  of  the  heaven  it
fcatters  its  heat  downward  by  its  motion  j  fo  in  the
Center  of  the  earth  is  the  fun  of  the  earth,  which  by
its  perpetual!  motion  fends  its  hear,  or  beams  up-
ward to  the  fuperficies  of  the  earth.     That  intrinfe-
cali  heat  is  far  more  efficacious  then  this  Elementary
firej  but  it  is  allayed  with  an  Earthy  water,  which
from  day  to  day  doth  penetrate  the  pores  of  the
earth,   and  coolcsit  .•  So  the  Aire  doth  temper,
and  mitigate  the  heavenly  Sun,and  its  heat ,  for  this
aire  doth  day  after  day'  fly  round  the  world  :  and  un-
leiTe  this  were  fo,    all  things  would  be  confumed  by
fo  great  a  heat ,  neither  would  any  thing  be  brought
forth.     Foras  that  invifible  fire,  or  Central  1  heat
would  confume all  things,  if  the  water  coming  be-
twixt (^\d  not-prevent  itjfo  the  heat  of  the  Sun  would
deftroy  all  things,  if  the  Aire  did  not  come  betwixt.
But  iiowthcfe Elements  work  one  with  another ,    I
will  briefly  declare.    In  the  Center  of  the  earth  is
the  Centrall  Sun,  which  by  its  own  motion,  or  of  its
firmament  doth  give  a  great  heat ,  which  extends  it
fclf  even  to  the  fuperficies  of  the  earth.     That  heate
caufeth  aire  after  this  manner.    The  Matrix  of  aire
is  watery  which  bringeth  forth  fons  of  its  own  na-
ture^  but  unlike ,  and  far  more  fubtill  then  it  felfe .

F  for


2  i{.  A  mw  Light  of  Alch)mie»

for  where  the  water  is  dcnycd  entrance,  the  aire  en-
ters:    when  therefore  that  Centrall  heat,  which  is
perpctuall,doth  ad,  it  makes  water  diftill^and  be  hea-
ted, and  fo  that  water  by  reafon  of  the  heat  is  turned
into  aire,  upon  this  account  it  breaks  forth  to  the
fupcrficiesof  theearth,  becaufc  it  will  not  fufiPcr  it
fclf  to  be  fliut  in :  then  when  it  is  cold ,  it  is  refolvcd
into  water.    In  the  mean  time  it  happens  alfo  that  in
oppofitc  places  not  only  air  but  water  goes  out  5   fo
you  fee  it  is,  when  black  clouds  are  by  violence  car-
ryed  up  into  the  aire :  for  which  thing  take  this  as  a
familiar  example.   Make  water  hot  in  a  pot,    and
thou  (halt  fee  that  a  foft  fire  caufcth  gentle  vapours ,
and  winds;  but  a  ftrong  fire  maketh  thick  clouds  ap-
pear.   Juft  in  the  fame  manner  doth  the  Centrall
heat  worke;  it  lifts  up  the  fubtill  water  into  aire,thac
whichis  thick  by  reafon  of  its  fait  orfetncfTe,  it  di-
ftributes  to  the  earth ,   by  meanes  of  which  divers
things  arc  generated,  that  which  remaines  becomes
ftoncs, and  rocks.  But  fomc  may  obje(^,if  it  were  fo,
it  would  be  done  conftantly,  but  oftentimes  there  is
no  wind  at  all  perceived.     I  anfwer,  if  water  be  not
poured  violently  into  a  diftillatory  vcfTcU ,   there  is
made  no  wind,  for  little  water  ftirs  up  bur  little  wind:
you  fee  that  thunders  are  not  alwaics  made,akhough
there  be  rain,  and  wind ;  but  only  when  by  force  of
the  aire  the  fwelling  water  is  carried  to  the  fphcre  of
the  fire-,  for  fire  will  not  indure  water.  Thou  haft  be-
fore thine  eyes  an  example,  when  thou  poureft  cold
water  into  a  hot  furnace,  from  whence  a  thundering
Boife  is  raifed.    But  why  the  water  doth  not  enter
Hniformly  into  thofe  places,  and  cavities,  the  reafoi*
is,  hccaiiletkefefortsof  vcffcilsjand  places  are  rna-^


ny  5  and  fometimcs  one  cavity  by  blafts ,  6r  winds
drives  awiy  from  it  felf  water  for  fome  daycs  ,  and
monthS)  untill  there  be  a  rcpcrcuflion  of  the  water  it-
gain  .'  As  wee  fee  in  the  fda,  whofe  waves  arc  mo-
ved and  carryed  a  thoufand  miIes,before  they  find^or
meet  with  a  repercuflion  to  make  them  return  back;
but  to  return  to  our  purpofc.  I  fay  that  Fire »  ot
Heat  is  the  caufc  of  the  motion  of  the  Aire ,  and  the
lifeofallthings^  and  the  Earth  is  the  Nurfe  of  all
thcfcthings,  or  their  receptacle.  But  if  there  vtttt
not  Water  tocoolc  our  Earth,  and  Aire ,  then  tht
Earth  would  be  dryed,  forthefe  two  rcafons,  vi7^
by  reafonofthe  Motion  of  the  Gemrall  Sun,  and
heat  of  the  Cclcftiall  :  NcverthelcfTe  it  happens^
fbmetimes  in  fome  places ,  when  the  pores  of  the
earth  are  obfttu(5tedy  that  the  humidky,or  water  can-
not penetrate,  that  then  by  reafon  of  the  correfpon-
dency  of  the  Celeftiall,  and  Central!  Sun  (  for  they
have  a  magnetick  vcrtue  betwixt  therafclves  )  the
CQrth  is  inflamed  by  the  Sun:  fo  that  even  fonietimes
there  are  made  great  chops,  or  furrows  in  the  earth,
Gaufc  therefore  that  there  b^  fuch  an  operation  in
our  earth,  that  the  Ccntrall  heat  may  change  the
Water  into  Aire,  that  it  may  goe  forth  into  the
plaines  of  the  world,  arid  fcatter  the  refidue  ,  as  t
faidjthroughthe  pores  of  the  earth-,  and  then  contra^
riwife  the  Aire  will  be  turned  into  Water ,  far  more
fubtill  then  the  firft  Water  was  :  and  this  is  done
thus,  if  thougiveftouroldmanGoldjor  Silver  t^
fwallow,  that  he  may  confume  them,  and  then  hce
alfo  dying  naay  be  burnt  3  and  hisafhes  (carterdd  into
water,  and  thou  boil  that  water  untill  it  be  eno\igh,
5indchou  ihak  have  a  medicine  to  cy^it  the  kpro-

fa  fic.


5^  A  new  Light  efAlchymiek

lie.  Mark,  and  be  fure  that  thou  takeft  not  cold  for
hot,  or  hot  for  cold,  but  mixe  natures  with  natures^
and  if  there  be  anything  that  is  contrary  to  nature
(for  Nature  alone  is  neccflary  for  thee  )  feparate  it,,
that  Nature  may  be  like  Nature.  Doe  this  by  fire ,
and  not  with  thy  hand  ::  and  know  that  if  thou  dofc
not  follow  Nature,all  is  in  vain.*  and  here  I  have  fpo-
ken  to  thee  through  the  help  of  God ,  what  a  father
fhould  fpcakto  his  fon-  Hee  which  hath  ears  let  him.
heare,  and  he  which  hath  his  fenfcs,  let  him  fee  his
mind  upon  what  I  fay.


^


THE  TWELFTH  TT(EATISE.

of  the  Stone y  and  its  vert ue.

iN  the  foregoing  Treatifcs  it  hath  been
fufficiently  fpoken  concerning  the  pro-
duftionof  Naturall  things,  concerning
the  Elements,  the  Firft  matter,  and  Se-
cond matter,  Bodies,  Seeds,  and  concerning  the
UfeandVcrtueofthem  :  I  wrote  aJfo  the  Praxis
of  making  the  Philofophers  Stone.  Now  I  will
difcover  fo  much  of  the  vcrtuc  of  it,  as  Nature  hath
granted  to  me,  and  experience  taught  me.  But  to
comprehend  the  argument  of  all  thcfe  Treatifcs
bricfly,and  in  few  words,that  the  Reader  which  fears
God  may  undcrftand  my  mind  and  meaning,  the
thing  is  this.  If  any  man  doubt  of  the  truth  of  the
Art,  kt  him  read  the  vGluminous  writings  of  anciT

ent


A  mvp  Light  ofAlchymie*  37

cicnt  Philofophers,  verified  by  rcafon,  andexperi-
tnct'y  whom  wee  may  dcfervedlygive  credit  to  in
their  own  Art :  but  if  any  will  not  give   credit  to
them,  then  we  know  not  how  to  difpute  with  them,
as  denying  principles  .-for  deaf,  and  dumbe  men
cannot  fpeak.     What  prerogative  fhould  all  things
in  this  world  have  before  Mctalls  f    Why  ftiouid
tliefe  alone  by  having  feed  without  caufe  denyed  to
them,  be  excluded  from  Gods  univerfall  blefling  of
multiplication,    which  holy  writ  affirms  was  put  in,
and  beftowed  on  all  created  things  prcfently  after  the
world  was  made?   Now  if  they  have  Seed,  who  is  fo
ibttiih  to  think  that  they  cannot  bee  multiply ed  in
their  Seedr*    The  Art  of  Alchymiein  its  kind  is
true.  Nature  alfo  is  true,  but  the  Artificer  is  feldome
true :  there  is  one  Nature,,  one  Art,,  but  many.  Ar-
tificers.   Now  what  things  Nature  makes  out  of
the  Elements ,  fhe  generates  them  by.  the  will  of
God  out  of   the  firft  matter,  which  God  cnely
Icnowcs   ••    Nature  makes   and   multiplies   thoic
things  of  the  fecond  matter,  which   the  Dhilofo-
phers  know.    Nothing  is  done  in  the  world  without
the  pleafure  of  God,  and  Nature.  Every  Element
is  in  its  own  fphere-,  but  one  cannot  be  without  the
other  ^  oac  lives  by  vertue  of  the  other,,   and
yet  being  joined  together  they  doe  not  agrecj  but
Water  is  of  more  worth  then  all  the  Elements,bcr
caufe  it  is  the  mother  of  all   things  .*   upon  this
fwims  the  fpirit  of  Fire.    By  reafon  of  Fire  Water  is
the  firft  matter ,  vi^,  by  the  ftriving  together  of
Fire,and  Water,  and  lb  are  generated  Winds ,  and
Vapours  apt,  and  eafy  to  bee  congealed  with  the
earth,  by  the  help  of  the  crude  airc,which  from  the


5§  A  new  Light  ofAlchymiel

beginning  was  feparatcd  from  it.    And  this  is  done
without  cefTation,  by  a  perpetuall  motion^  bccaufe
fire^orheatisftirred  upnoothcrwife  then  by  mo-
tion ,  which  thing  you  may  eafily  conceive  by  a
Smith  filing  Iron ,   which  through  vehement  mo-
tion waxeth  hot  in  that  manner,  as  if  it  were  heated
in  the  Fire.  Motion  therefore  caufeth  heat,   heat
moves  the  water,  the  motion  of  the  water  caufeth
aire,  the  life  of  all  living  things.    Things  therefore
grow  after  this  manner  (as  I  faid  before  )  ^'/^.  out
of  water^  for  out  of  the  fubtill  Vapour  ofitjfubtil
and  light,  things  proceed-,  out  of  the  oylinelfe  of  it,
things  that  are  heavy,  and  of  greater  price;  but  of
the  fait  things  far  more  excellent  then  the  former*
Now  becaufe  Nature  is  fometimcs  hindred ,  that
it  cannot  produce  pure  things*,  feeing  the  Vapour,
FatnefTe,  and  Salt  are  fouled  or  ftained ,  and  mixc
themfclves  with  the  places  of  the  earth :  Moreover ,
experience  teacheth  us  to  feparate  the  pure  from  the
impure.  Therefore  if  thou  wilt  have  Nature  be  bet-
tered, or  naended  in  her  a  dings  ,  difTolve  what  body
you  pleafe,  and  that  which  was  added  or  joined  to
Nature,  as  heterogeneous,  feparate,  cleanfe,  joinc
pure  things  with  pure,  ripe  to  ripe,  crude  to  crude,
according  to  the  poifc  of  Nature,  and  not  of  Mat-
ter. And  know  that  the  Ccntrall  fait  Nitre  doth
not  receive  more  of  the  Earth  then  it  hath  need  of^
whether  it  be  pure  or  impure :  but  the  fatneffe  of  the
water  is  otherwife,for  it  is  never  to  be  had  pure ;  art
purifies  it  by  a  twofold  heat,and  then  conjoins  it.


Anew  Light ofjlchymiei  jp

THE

ETILOGVE,  or  CONCWSIOU

OF   rUESB

TWELVE  TREATISES.

Wrote  the  Twelve  foregoing  TrcatifeS'
inlovetothefonnesofArt,  that  befoit
they  fet  their  hand  to  the  worke  they

^^^^ may  know  the  operation  of  Nature,

*vij^  how  fhc  produccth  things  by  her  working-  left
they  fhouJd  attempt  to  enter  in  atthe  gate  without
k^ycs,  or  to  draw  water  in  a  fieve  :  for  he  laboureth
in  vain,  that  putteth  forth  his  hands  to  labour  with-
out the  knowledge  of  Nature ,  in  this  facred  and
moft  true  Arr,hc  lies  in  nodurnal  darkneflc  to  whom
rhe  fun  doth  not  iliine^nd  he  is  in  thick  darkncffe,  tO'
whom  after  it  is  night  the  Moon  doth  not  appearc.
Nature  hath  her  proper  light,  which  is  nor  obvious
to  our  eyesjthe  iliadow  of  Nature  is  a  body  before
ourcyes  :  but  if  the  light  of  Nature  doth  enlighten
any  one,  prcfcntly  the  cloud  is  taken  away  from  be-
fore his  eyes,  and  without  any  let  he  can  behold  the
point  of  our  loadftone,anfwcring  to  each  Center  of
th€.beams,:i'/:(;OfthcSun  and  Earth  :  for  fo  farrc

doth>


/JO  A  new  Light  ojAlchymie.

doth  the  light  of  Nature  penetrate  ,  and  difcovers
inward  things^  of  which  thing  take  this  for  an  exam*
pie.  Let  a  boythat  is  twelve  yeares  old ,  and  a  gitlc
of  the  fame  age,  be  cloathed  with  garments  ol"  the
fame  falhion,  and  be  fet  one  by  the  other  ,  no  body
can  know  which  is  the  male ,  or  which  is  the  female;
our  eyes  cannot  penetrate  fo  far,  therefore  our  fight
deceiveth us, and  takes  falfe  things  for  true.*   Buc
when  their  garments  arc  taken  off,  and  they  arc
raked,  that  foit  miy  appear  what  Nature  made
them  5  they  are  eafily  diftinguiflied  by  their  icxcs,
Juft  after  the  fame  manner  doth  our  inrelledi  make  a
Ihadowoftheihadowoi  Nature-,  forthe  nakedbo-
dy  ot  Man  is  the  fliadow  of  the  feed  of  Nature :  As
therefore  mans  body  is  covered  with  a  garment ,  io
alfo  mans  nature  is  covered  with  the  body ,    which
God  referves  to  himfelf  to  cover,or  uncover.I  could
here  difcourfe  largely,and  Philofophically  of  the  dig-
nity of  Man,  his  Creation  and  Generation :  but  fee-
ing they  are  impertinent  to  this  place ,  I  will  pa(Te
them  over  in  filence;  only  I  will  treat  a  little  con-
cerning the  Life  of  Man.  Man  was  created  of  the
Earth,  and  lives  by  vertue  of  the  Aire-,  for  there  is
in  the  Airea  fecrct  food  of  lite  ,  which  in  the  night
wee  call  dew-,  and  in  the  day  ratified  water  ,  whofe
invifible,  congealed  fpirit  is  better  then  the  whole
Evarth.  O  holy,  and  wonderfull  Nature,    who
dofl  not  fuffer  the  fons  of  Wifdome  to  erre,as  thou  *
dofl  manifertinthelifc  of  man  daily!  Moreover  in  '
thefc  twelve  Trcatifes   I  have  produced  fo  ma-
ny naturall  reafons,  that  he  which  is  defirous  of  the
art,  and  feares  God^may  the  more  eafily  underhand
all  things,  which  through  Gods  blcfling,  with  my

eyes


^  new  Li^ht  ofAlchymie.  4  r

eyes  I  have  fcen,  with  mine  own  hands  have  made
without  any  deceit  of  fophiftication :  for  without  the
light  >  and  knowledge  of  Nature ,  it  is  impoffibic
to  attain  to  this  Arc ,  unlcffe  it  come  to  any  by
Gods  fpeciall  revelation,  or  Tome  fpeciall  friend  doth
privatelyfhewit.lt  is  a  thing  of  little  account,  yet
moft  pretioiis,  which  being  divers  times  defcribcd,  I
doe  now  again  repeat.  Take  10  parts  of  aire,  i  part
of  living  gold,  or  living  filver  5  put  all   thefe  into
thy  veftell-,  boyle  this  aire  firft  untill  it  be  water,and
then  no  water.  If  thou  art  ignorant  of  this ,    and
Icnowft  not  how  to  boyl  aire,without  all  doubt  thou
fhalt  erre  5  feeing  this  is  the  matter  of  the  ancient
Philofophcrs.    For  thou  muft  take  that ,  which  is,
and  is  not  feen,  untill  it  be  the  Artificers  pleafure  •,  it
is  the  water  of  our  dew,  out  of  which  is  extra(fled  the
Salt  Petre  of  Philofophers ,  by  which  all  things
grow,  and  are  nourished  .•  the  matrix  of  it  is  the
Center  of  the  Sun,  and  Moon,  both  celcfliall,  and
tcrreftiall :  and  to  fpeak  more  plainly,it  is  our  Load-
ftone,  which  in  the  foregoing  Treatifes  I  called  Cha.'
lybs,  or  Steel :  The  Aire  generates  this  Load-flone,
and  the  Loadflonc  generates,  or  makes  our  Air  to  ap-
pear,andcome  forth. I  have  here  entirely  fhcwed  thee
the  truth  5  Bcgge  of  God  that  hee  would  profper
thine  undertakings  :  Andfo  in  this  place  thou  fhalt
have  the  true,  and  right  explication  o^Hermes^whcn
he  faith,that  the  father  of  it  is  the  Sun,and  its  mother
the  Moon,  and  that  which  the  wind  carrycd  in  its
belly,  vt"^  Sal  Alkdi^vA\\c\\  the  Philofophcrs  have
called  Sal  Jrmomacum, :xnd  vegetable,hid  in  the  belly
oftheJV/4g-;?f/i4,   The  operation  of  it  is  this,  to  dif-
folvc  the  congealed  aire,  in  which  thou  fhali  dilfolve

G  the


M'x  A  new  Light  ofAlchjmie.

the  tenth  part  ofGolcI;rcale  this  up,  and  work  with
our  fire,  untill  the  air  be  turned  into  powders  5  and
there  appear  fthe  fait  of  the  world  being  firft  had)di-
vers  colours.    I  would  have  fet  down  the  whole  pro-
ceiTeinthefeTreatifes;  but  bccaufethat,  together
with  the  multiplication,  is  fufficiently  fet  down  in
the  books  o{ Lullim  ,    and  other  old  P  hilofophers  5
it  therefore  fufficcd  me  to  treat  only  of  the  firft,  and
Tccond  matter  ^  which  is  done  faithfully,  neither  do
thou  ever  think  that  any  man  livinghath  done  it  more
cleerly,then  I  have  done  it*,  (ince  I  have  done  it  not
put  of  many  books  but  by  the  labour  of  my  hands,
and  mine  own  experience.    If  therefore  thou  dofi
not  underftand,  or  beleeve  the  truth,  doe  not  blame
pie,  but  thy  felf  5   and  perfwade  thy  felfe  that  God
was  unwilling  to  reveal  this  fecret  to  thee :  Be  there-
fore earneft  with  him  by  prayer ,   and  with  ferious
meditation  read  over  this  book  ofcentimcs,efpccially
the  Epilogue  of thefe  twelve  Trcatifcs :  alwaies  con-
£dering  the  pofTibility  of  Nature,  and  the  adions  of
the  Elements,  and  which  of  them  is  the  chicfeft  ia
thofe  actions ,  and  efpecially  in  the  rarefadion  of
water,  or  aire,  for  fo  the  heavens  are  created,  as  alfo
the  whole    world.    This  I  was  willing  to  fignifie
to  thee ,  as  a  father  to  his  fon.    Doe  not  wonder
that  I  have  wrote  fo  many  Treatifes ,  for  I  did  not
make  them  for  my  own  fake,  feeing  I  lack  m)t  books,
but  that  I  might  advertife  many,  that  work  infruit-
Icflc  things,  that  they  flwuld  not.  fpend  their  cofts,
in  vain.  All  things  indeed  might  have  been  compre-
hended in  few  lines,   yea  .in  tew  words  :  but  I  was^
willing  to  guide  thee  to  the  knowledge  of  Nature  by
Eeafons^and  Examples^  that  thou  mightcft  in  the


'A  neiao  Light  of  Alcbymie^  4g[

firft  place  know,  what  the  thing  is  thou  fcekeft  after,
whether  the firft,  or  fccond  matter,  alfo  that  thou
mighteft  have  Nature^her  light,&  (hadow  difcovercd
to  thec.Be  not  difpleafcd  it  thou  meeteft  fometimes
with  contradi(flions  in  my  Treatifcs,  it  being  the
cuftome  of  Philofophers  to  ufe  them  ^  thou  haft
need  oi  them ,  if  thou  underftandeft  them  ,  thou
fhall  not  find  a  rofe  without  prickles.  Weigh  dili-
gently what  I  have  faid  before,  vi\,  how  four  Ele-
ments diftill  into  the  Center  of  the  earth  a  radicall
moifturc,  and  how  the  Ccntrall  Sun  of  the  earth,by
its  motion  bringeth  it  forth,  and  fublimethit  to  the
fupcrficies  of  the  earth.  I  have  faid  alio  that  the  Cc-
lelliall  Sun  hath  a  correfpondency  with  tlic  Centrall
Sun ;  for  the  Celertiall  Sun,  and  the  Moon  have  a
peculiar  power,  and  vertue  of  diftilling  into  the  earth
by  vertue  of  their  beams :  for  heat  is  eafily  joined  to
heat,  and  fait  to  fait.  And  as  the  Ccntrall  Sun  hath
its  fea,  and  crude  water^that  is  perceptible  5  lo  the
Celefliall  Sun  hath  its  fea,  and  fubtill  water  that  is
not  perceptible.  In  the  fuperficics  the  beams  of  the
one,  arc  joined  to  the  beams  of  the  other,  and  pro-
duce flowers,  and  all  things.  Therefore  when  there  is
raine  made,  it  receives  from  the  aire  that  power  of
life,  and  joins  it  with  the  fait -nitre  of  the  earth  Cbe-
caufe  thefalt-nitreof  the  earth  is  like  calcined  Tar-
tar, drawing  to  it  felfby  rcafon  of  its  dryncfle  the
aire,  which  in  it  is  refolved  into  water:  fuch  attra^ivc
power  hath  the  falt-nitre  of  the  earth,  which  alfb  was-
aire ,  and  is  joined  tothefatneffeof  the  earth )  and
by  how  much  the  more  abundantly  the  beams  of  the
Sunbeat  upon  it,the  greater  quantity  of  fait- nitre  is
made,  and  by  confequence  the  greater  pl«nty  of

G  2  Come


44  ^  ^^^w?  Light  ofAkhymie*

Corn  grows,  and  is  increafed,  and  this  is  done  daily.
Thus  much  I  thought  good  to  fignifie  to  the  igno-
rant of  thccorrefpondency,  or  agreement  of  things
amongft  themfelves,  and  the  efficacyof  the  Sun,and
Moon^  and  Starsj  for  the  wife  need  not  this  inftru-
ction.    Our  fubjecfl  is  prcfented  to  the  eyes  of  the
whole  world,  and  it  is  not  known.    O  our  Heaven  I
O  our  Water!  O  our  Mercury!  O  our  Salt-nitre  z-
biding  in  the  fea  of  the  world!  O  our  Vegetable!  O
our  Sulphur  fixed,  andvolatill!  Oour  Cafnt  Mor^
?jj^»«;,  ordeadhcadjOrfecesof  ourSea!  Our  Wa-
ter that  wets  not  our  hands,  without  which  no  mor-
tall  can  live,    and  without  which  nothing  grows,
or  is  generated  in  the  whole  world !    And  thefc  arc
the  Epithites  o{  Hermts  his  bird,' which  never  is  at
reft..  It  is  of  very  fmall  account,yet  no  body  can  bee
without  it :  and  fo  thou  haft  a  thing  difcovcred  to
thee  more  pretious  then  the  whole  world  ,  which  I
plainly  tell  thee  is  nothing  elfc  but  our  Sea  water,,
which  is  congealed  in  Silver,and  Gold^and  extraded
out  of  Gold,and  Silver  by  the  help  of  our  Chalybs,,
by  the  Art  of  Philofophers  in  a  wonderful!  man^
ner,  by  a  prudent  Ton  of  Art.   It  was  not  my  pur-
pofc  for  forae  reafons  before  mentioned  in  the  Pre-
face, to  publidi  this  book,  but  a  defire  to  deferve  well
of  thofe  that  arc  ftudioufly  given  to  liberalijand  Plii-
lofophical  Arts,prevailed  with  rnc,that  I  might  hold
forth  to  them,that  I  bear  an  honeft  mind^alTo  that  I
might  declare  my  felf  to  them,  that  underftand  the
Arr,tobe  their  equal  and  fellow,and  to  have  attained
their  knowledge.  I  doubt  not  but  many  men  of
good  Gonfcicnccs,and  affedions  do  enjoy  this  gift  of
Cod (ecietlyi  thefc  being  warned  by  my  example,

and


A  new  Light  ofAlchymk.  45

and  dangers  arc  made  more  Gautious,and  wife^having
that  commendable  filence  oiHarfocr/ites.  For  as  of-
ten as  I  would  difcover  my  felic  to  great  men ,  it
ahvaies  turned  to  my  lofTc  and  danger.    By  this  my
writing  I  make  my  felf  known  to  the  adopted  Tons  of
Hermns^  I  inftru^the  ignorant ,  and  them  that  arc
milled,  and  bring  them  back  into  the  right  way.  And
let  the  heirs  of  wifdome  know,  that  they  fhall  never
have  a  better  way,thcn  thatjwhich  is  here  demonftra-
ted  to  them^  for  I  have  fpoken  all  things  eleerly :
Only  I  have  not  fo  eleerly  fhewed  the  extradion
of  oiir  Salt  Armoniacke,  or  the  Mercury  of  Philo-
fonhers,  out  of  our  Sea  water,  and  the  ufc  thercof>'
becaufe  I  had  from  the  Mafter  of  Nature  no  leave
to  fpeake  any  further,  and  this  only  God  muft
reveale,  who  knows  the  hearts,and  minds  of  men»
He  will  haply  upon  thy  conftant,  and  earneft  pray-
ers, and  the  frcc^uent  reading  over  of  this  booke^
bpen  the  eyes  of  thy  underftanding.    The  veirell,as
I  faid  before,  is  but  one  from  the  beginning  to  the
cnd,or  at  raoft  two  are  lufficient:  the  fire  is  cominuall
in  Uoth  operations^for  the  fake  of  which  let  the  igno»
rant  read  the  tenth  ,  and  eleventh  Treatife.  If  thou
fhalt  operate  in  a  third  matter  ,    thou  (halt  cf-
fed  nothing :  they  medle  with  this,  whoever  work
not  in  our  Salt,  whkh  is  Mercury ,  but  in  Herbsj^.
Animals,  Stones,  and  all  Minerals,  excepting  our
Gold,  and  Silver  covered  over  with  the  fphere  of
SatHrne,       And  whofoever  de fires  to  attainc  to>
kis  defired  end ,  let  him   underfland  the  convcu-
fion  of  the  Elements  to  make  light  things  hcavy^
and  to  make  fpirits  no  fpiritSy    then  hce  fh^
not  workc  in  a  ftrange  thing*     The  fire  'i&  the

9^


/^$  A  nen>  Light  ofAlchymiel

Rule ,  whatfocver  is  done  ,  is  done  by  Fire  •  as
fufficiently  before,  fo  here  we  havefpoken  enough
by  way  of  Condufion.  Farewell  friendly  Reader  1
and  long  maift  thou  enjoy  thefe  labours  of  mine,
(  made  good,  or  verified  by  mine  owne  experi-
ence, )  to  the  glory  ot  God,  the  welfare  of  thine
ownc  foule,  and  good  of  thy  neighbour.


to


A  Htw  Light  ofMchymiel  J^j


TO  THE

SONS  ofTRVTH:

A  Preface

To  the  Philofophicall  MNIGMA,

Ot%lDLE,

Sons  of  WisooMr,

Have  now  opened  to  you  all  things  from
theveryfirftrifingofthc  univerfall  foun-
taine,  that  there  is  no  more  left  to  be  dif-
covered.  Forinthe  foregoing  TreatifesI
hare  fufficlently  explained  Nature  by  way  of  ex-
ample .'  1  have  (hewed  the  Theorie  and  Praxis,  as
plainely  as  it  was  lawful!.  But  left  any  fhould
complain  of  my  bricfnefTe ,  that  by  reafon  of  it  I
have  omitted  fomething,  I  will  yet  further  defcribc
to  thecthcwhole  Artby  wayofRidlc,  oriEnigma-
ticall  rpcechj  that  thoumaift  fee  how  farre  through
Gods  guidance  lam  come.  The  bookes  that  treat
of  this  Art  are  infinite-,  yet  thou  fhalt  not  find  in
any  of  them  the  truth  fo  much,.as  it  is  in  this^of
mine,  made  known^or  difcovercd  unto  thee.    The

ijcafon


4?  A  mw  Light  ofAkhymie.

rcafontbat  encouraged  mee  to  make  it  fo  plain ,  was
chis,  iz/^-Bccaule,  when  I  had  difcourfed  with  many
men,  that  thought  they  undcrftood  the  writings  of
Philofophcrs  very  well;  I  perceived  that  they  did  cx-
plaine  thofe  writings  far  more  fubtilly  then  Nature,
which  is  fimple  and  plain,did  require  :  yea  all  my  true
fayings  did  feem  to  them  being  profoundly  wife,  or
favouring  of  high  things,   to  bee  of  no  value  and
incredible.  It  hapned  (ometimes  that  I  would  inti-
mate the  Art  to  fome  from  word  to  word  ^  but  they
could  by  no  meanes  underftand  mee ,  not  beieeving
there  was  any  \i?ater  in  our  Sea ,  and  yet  they  would
be  accounted  Philofophcrs.   Since  therefore  they
could  not  underftand  my  words,  which  I  delivered
by  word  of  mouth,  I  doc  not  fear-Cas  other  Philofo-
phcrs were  afraid  )  that  any  one  can  fo  eafily  under-
ftand what  I  have  wrote^It  is  the  giftj  fay,  of  God.
It  is  true  indeed ,    if  in  the  ftudy  of  Alchymic
there  were  required  fubtilncllc,  and  quicknclTc  of
wit,  and  things  were  of  that  Nature  as  to  be  percei-
ved by  the  eyes  of  the  vulgar,!  faw  that  their  fancies,
or  wits  were  apt  enough  to  find  out  fuch  things :  but
I  fay  to  you,bce  fimplc,  or  plaine ,  and  not  too  wife
iintill  you  have  found  out  the  fecretjwhich  when  you
have,itwillofneceirity  require  wifdome  enough  to
ufe,  and  keep  itj  then  it  will  be  eafy  for  you  to  write
many  booksj    bccaufe  it  is  eaficr  for  him ,  that  is  in
the  Center,  and  fees  the  thing,  then  for  him  that
•walks  in  the  Circumference,  and  only  heares  of  it.
You  have  the  fecond  matter  of  all  things   moft
cleerly  defcribed  unto  you  :but  let  mee  give  you  this
Caution,  that  if  you  would  attaine  to  this  fecret,
itnowthatlirftofallGodistobcc  prayed  to,  then
'A.   -  your


A  ntw  Light  ofAlcbymie^  4p

ydur  neighbour  is  to  bee  loved  :  and  laftly,  doe  no^
fancy  to  your  felvcs  things  that  arc  fr.btill ,     which
Nature  knew  nothing  of;  but  abide,I  fay,    abide  in
the  plain  way  of  Nature;    becaufeyou  may  fooner
feel  the  thing  in  plainnefTe,  or  fimplicity,  then  fee  it
in  fubtilty.     In  reading  therefore  my  writings  dot  -
notftickin  the  letter  of  them,  but  in  reading  of
them  confider  Nature,  and  tfec  poffibility  thereof.
Now  before  you  fet  your  fclves  to  work,  confider  di-
ligently what  it  is  you  feek,  and  what  the  fcope  ,    and .
end  of  your  intention  is  .•  for  it  is  much  better  to
learn  by  the  brain,  and  imagination ,  then  with  la-
bour,  and  charges.    And  this  I  fay  to  you,  that
you  muft  feek  for  fome  hidden  thing,out  of  which  is
made  (after  a  wonderfull  manner  j  fuch  a  moifturc,
or  humidity,  which  doth  diflblve  Gold  without  vio-
lence, ornoifejyeafofweetly,and  naturally,  as  ice
doth  melt  in  warms  water  :  if  you  find  out  this,you
have  that  thing,out  of  which  Gold  is  produced  by
Nature:  and  although  all  Metalls,  and  all  things
have  their  originall  from  hence ,  yet  nothing  is  fo
friendly  to  it~as  Gold  5    for  to  other  things  there
fticks  faft  fome  impurity,  but  to  Gold  none,  befides
it  is  like  a  Mother  unto  it.    And  fo  finally  I  con-
clude^    if  you  will  not  be  wife,  and  wary  by  thelc
my  writings,  and  admonitions,  yet  excule  mee  who
defire  to  deferve  well  of  you :  I  have  dealt  as  faith-
fully as  it  was  lawfuU  for  mee,and  as  becomes  a  man
of  a  good  confcience  to  doe.    If  you  ask  who  I  am,
I  am  one  that  can  live  any  where:  if  you  know  mee,
and  defire  to  fhew  your  fclves  good  and  honeft  men  ,
you  (hall  hold  your  tongue  :  if  you  know  mee  nor ,
doe  not  enquire  after  mee ,    for  1  will  rcveale  to  n  o

H  mor»


to^  A  new  Light  ofAlchymie.

mortall  man,  whikft  I  live,  more  then  I  have  done
intbis  publick  writing.    Bcleeve  mee,  if  I  were  not
a  man  of  that  rankcand  condition  as  I  am,  nothing
would  be  more  pleafant  to  mec  then  a  folitary  life ,
or  with  Diogents  to  lie  hid  under  a  tub:  for  I  ice  all
things  that  are  to  be  but  vanity^and  that  deceit,  and
covetoufneffe  arc  altogether  in  wfe,  where  all  things
are  to  be  fold,  and  that  vice  doth  cxccU  vertue.I  fee
the  better  things  of  the  life  to  come  before  mine  cys.
I  rejoice  in  thefe.  Now  I  doc  not  wonder^as  before  I
did,  why  Philofophers,  \vhen  they  hive  attained  to
this  Medicine,   have  not  cared  to  have  their  dayes
fliortned-,    becaufe  every  Philofopher  hath  the  life  to
comefet  fo  cleerly  before  his  eyes,  as  thy  face  is  feen
in  a  glaffe.    And  if  God  fhall  graunt  thee  thy  defi-
red  end,  then  thou  ftiak  belecve  mce,  and  not  reveal
thyfelfto  the  world*


'THE


JfKvi>UihtofAkbymie.  51

THE

PARABLE,

OR

PHILOSOPHICALL  RIDLE.

Added  by  way  of  Conclufion,

and  Superaddition.

IT  fell  out  upon  a  time  >  when  I  had
failed  almoft  all  my  life  from  the  Anick
pole,  to  the  Antarticke  ,  that  by  the
fingular  providence  of  God  I  was  cafl
upon  the  lliore  of  a  certain  great  fea^and
air  hough  I  well  knew  and  undeiftood  the  pafiages,
and  properties  of  the  fea  of  that  Coaft  ,   yet  I  knew
not  whether  in  thofe  Coafts  was  bred  that  little  Rdi,
which  was  called  ^emfira,  which  fo  many  men  of
great  and  fmall  fortunes  have  hitherto  fo  itudioufly
fought  after.    But  whilft  I  was  beholding  the  (wcet
finging  Mermaides  fwimming  up  and  down  with  the
Nymphs,and  being  weary  with  my  foregoing  labors,
and  opprefTed  with  divers  thoughts,  I  was  with  the
noife  of  waters  overtaken  with  Seep,  5  and  whilcft  I
was  in  a  fweet  fltep^therc  appcar'd  to  mc  in  my  deep

Ha  a


t2  ^  f^^"^  Light  of  Ale  h)Mh.

a  wonderfull  vifion ,  which  is  this.  I  faw  Neptune
a  man  of  an  honorable  old  age,  going  forth  out  of
our  fea  with  his  three  toothed  inftrumcnt,  called  Tri-
Jefis jwho  after  a  friendly  falute  led  mcc  into  a  moft
pleafant  Hand.    This    goodly  Hand  was  fituated
towards  the  South,  being  rcpleniilied  with  all  things
refpefting  the  necefTiry,  and  delight  of  man:  Firgtls
Blifian  field  might  fcarce  compare  with  it.   All  the
banks  were  round  about  befet  with  green  Mirtlcs ,
CyprefTe  trees, and  Rofemary.  The  green  meadowcs
were  covered  all  over  with  flowers  of  all  forts  ,  both
fair,and  fwcet .     The  hills  were  fct  forth  with  Vines,
Olive  trees,  and  Cedar-trcesin  a  moft  wonderful!
manner.  The  woods  were  filled  with  Orcnge  ,  and
Lemon-trees.  The  high  waycs  were  planted  on  both
fides  with  Bay -trees,  and  Pomegi'anate- trees,  wove  a
moft  artificially  one  within  the  other,  and  affording
a  moft  pleafant  fbadow  to  Travellers.  And  to  bee
ihort,  whatfoever  is  in  the  whole  world  was  fetn
there.     As  I  was  walking,  there  was  fliewed  tome
by  the  forefaid  Neptune  two  Mines  of  that  Hand  ly-
ing under  a  certain  rock,  the  one  was  of  Gold ,  the
other  of  Chalybs,or  Steel.     Not  far  from  thence  I
w:s  brought  to  a  Meadow  in  which  was  a  peculiar
Orchard  with  divers  forts  of  trees  moft  goodly  to  be-
hold,  and  amongft  the  reft ,  being  very  many  hoc
ftiewed  to  mee  feven  Trees  marked  out  by  fpcciall
names*,  and  amongft  thefe  I  oblerved  two  as  chief  eft,
more  eminent  then  the  reft,  one  of  which  did  bearc
fruit  like  the  Sun  moft  bright,  andftiining,  and  the
leaves  I  hereof  were  like  Gold.   The  other  brought
forth  fruit  that  was  moft  white,  yca,whitcr  then  the
Lillies,and  the  leaves  therof  were  as  fine  SilvcnNow

tlicfc


A  ntn>  Light  ofjlchymie,  5  3

thefe  Tces  were  called  hyNeptont^the  one  the  tree  of
theSuntl^e  otI«r  .he  tree  oFthe  Moon.  And  d^^^^^^
nthis  iland  all  things  were  at  ones  pleafure ,  and
command  yetthere  fvas  one  thing,and  but  one  wan-
trn^  there  was  no  water  to  be  had,  but  w.th  great
difficulty.  There  were  indeed  many  that  partly  en-
deavored to  bring  it  thither  by  p.pes,  and  partly
S  out  of  divers  things  ••  but  tteir  endeavours
:Z  n  vain,  becaufe  inthofe  places  it  could  not  bee
hadby  any  means  or  medium,  andif  it  were  at  any
dme  had  vet  it  was  unprofitable,  andpoifonous,  un-
ffe  they  fetched  it  (  as  few  could  doe  )  frorn  the
be"msof  theSun,  and  Moone;  and  he  which  was
Snateinfodoing  could  nevergetabovetenp^^^^^^
and  that  water  was  moft  wonderfdl :  and  beleeve
mee  for  I  faw  it  with  mine  eyes,  and  felt  it  that  that
water  ws  as  white  as  the  fnow,  and  wh>leftl  was
Contemplating  upon  the  water,  I  was  in  a  great  won-
der  Wherefore  W./*-^^  being  in  the  mean  while
wearied  vaniihedaway  from  before  mine  eyes  ,  and
there  appeared  to  me  a  great  man,  upon  whofe  foie-
head  was  written  the  name  of  S.tur»e.   This  man
Sg  tk  veflell  drew  ten  pans  of  water,  and  tooke
prefcmly  of  the  tree  of  the  Sun,  and  put  it  in ,  and  I
Fawth  fruit  of  the  tree  conrumed,and  refolved  like
Swarm  water.  1  demanded  of  him.  Sir,  I  fee  a
wondSull  thing,  water  tobce  as  it  were  of  nothing;
1  fee  th  fruitofthe  tree  confumed  in  it  with  a  moft
fvJ^r  and  kindly  heat,  and  wherefore  is  all  this?  But
hTXcrKemoftlovinely.  MySon,  it«  true

this  is  a  thing  to  be  wondered  at ,  but  do^  no   thou

wonder  at  it,  for  fo  it  muft  b=- ^°' 'f.'J^^^'Jiis
Water  of  life,  having  power  to  better  the  frmt  of  his

H3


treefOjthat  afterward  neither  by  planting,or  grafting,
but  only  by  its  own  odour  it  may  convert  the  other
ilx  trees  inco  its  own  likenefTc.  Moreover  this  water
is  to  this  fruit  as  it  were  a  woman  ,  the  fruit  of  this
tree  canbc  putrefied  in  nothing  but  in  this  water,  and
although  the  fruit  of  it  be  of  it  felf  moft  wondcrful,&
a  thing  of  great  price-,yet  if  it  be  putrefied  in  this  wa-
ter, it  begets  by  this  putrefadion  a  SaUmander^  abi-
ding in  the  fire,whofe  blood  ismorc  pretious  then  any
l<ina  of  treafure  or  riches  in  the  world,  being  able  to
make  thofefix  trees,  which  here  thou  {eeftjfriiitfull,
and  to  bring  forth  their  fruit  fwecter  then  the  honey.
But  I  asked,  Sir,How  is  that  done  .-'I  told  thee  ("faith
hcc)  that  the  fruit  of  that  tree  isliving,and  fweet  5
but  whereas  one  is  now  futficed  with  it ,  when  it  is
boyled  in  this  water,  a  thoufand   may  then  bcc
fatisfied  with  it.      I  demanded  moreover  ,   Sir,  is
it  boiled  with  a  ftrong  fire,    and  how  long  is  it
in  boyling:'  But  faid  he,  that  water  hath  an  intrinfe-
call  fire,  and  if  it  be  helped  with  a  continuall  heat,  it
burns  three  parts  of  its  body  with  this  body  of  the
fruit jand  there  wil  remain  but  a  very  fmal  part, which
is  fcarce  imaginablc,but  of  wonderful  vertue-,it  isboi-
Jed  by  the  skilful!  wit  of  the  Artificer^firft  7  months,
then  io,butinthemcantimetherc  appeared  divers
things,  and  alwaics  in  the  fiftieth  day,or  thereabouts.
I  demanded  again,  Sir,  cannot  this  fruit  be  boiled  in
other  waters,  or  fomething  be  put  to  it  ?  Hee  an-
fwered,  there  is  but  this  one  water  that  is  ufef  uU  in
this  Country,  or  Ifland*,  and  there  is  no  other  water
can  penetrate  the  pores  of  this  apple,  but  tliis  :  and
know  alio  that  the  Tree  of  the  Sun  hath  its  originall
kom  this  water,  vyhich  is  extracted  out  of  the  beams

of


A  new  Light  of  Alchymic,  ^^

of  the  Sun,ancl  Moone  by  a  magnetick  vertuciBefidcs
they  have  a  great  corrcipondency  betwixt  thcm-
felvcs,  but  if  any  ftrange  thing  be  added  to  it,  it  can-
not perfo  ime  that  which  it  can  do  of  it  felf.  It  muft
therefore  be  left  by  it  felf^and  nothing  added  to  it  but
this  apple:  This  fruit  afcer  boiling  becomes  to  bee
immortalljhaving  Iife,and  blood, which  blood  makes
all  the  trees  bring  forth  fruit  of  the  fame  nature  with
the  Apple.  I  asked  him  further.  Sir,  is  this  Water
drawn  any  other  way, or  to  be  had  every  where  r*  And
he  faid,  it  is  in  every  place,  and  no  man  can  live  with-
out  it5  it  is  drawn  divers  ways,  but  that  is  the  beff,
which  is  extracted  by  vcrtue  of  our  Chalybs,  which  is
found  in  the  belly  oi  Aries.  I  faid,  to  what  ufe  is  it  <
He  anfwercd,  before  its  due  boiling  it  is  the  greateft
poi{bn,but  after  a  convenient  boiling  it  is  the  greateft
medicine ,  and  yedds  nine  and  twenty  graines  of
bloodi  and  every  grain  will  yecld  to  thse  the  fruit  of
tie  Tree  of  the  Sun  in  8<^4fold.  Tasked,  Can  it  not
be  made  yet  better  <  The  Philofophicall  Scripture
being  witnelTe  ( faith  hec )  it  may  bee  exalted  firft  to
ten,  then  to  a  hundred,  then  to  a  thoufand  ,  and  ten
thou{a,nd.  I  required  again  of  him.  Sir,  Doe  many
know  that  Water,  and  hath  it  any  proper  name^  He
cryed  out  faying,  Vc\v  know  it,  but  all  have
feen  it,  and  doc  fee  it,  and  love  it  .•  it  hath  many  and
various  names,  but  its  proper  name  is  the  Water  of
our  Sea,  the  Water  of  life  not  wetting  the  hands.  I:
asked  yet  further,Doe  any  ufe  it  to  any  other  things^
Every  creature  C  faith  he  )  doth  ufe  it,  but  invifibly.
Then  I  aslced,Doth  any  thing  grow  in  it^but  he  faidj ,
Ofit  are  made  all  things  in  the  world,  and  in  it  they
fe :  but  in  it  nothing  properly  is, but  it  is  that  thing


5  6  A  next?  Light  ofAlchymie^

which  mixeth  it  fclf  to  every  thing.  I  asked  againe,  Is
it  ufcfiiU  for  any  thing  without  the  fruit  of  this  trec^
To  this  he  faid,  Not  in  this  work;  bccaufe  it  is  not
bcttercd,but  in  the  fruit  of  the  Tree  of  the  Sun  alone.
I  began  to  intreat  him,  Sir  I  pray,  name  it  to  mec  by
fuchanaanifeftname,  that  I  may  have  no  further
doubt  about  it,  But  he  cryed  with  a  loud  voice/o  as
that  he  awikened  mefromflecpi  Therefore  I  could
askhim  no  further,  neither  would  hce  tell  mec  any
more  5  neither  can  I  tell  anymore.  Be  fatisfied  with
thefe,  and  beleeve  mce,  that  it  is  not  poflible  to  fpcak
more  clcerly.  For  if  thou  doft  not  underftand  thcfe
things,  thou  wilt  never  be  able  to  comprehend  the
books  of  other  Philofophers.  After  Saturn  s  un-
expeded  and  fudden  departure  a  new  flccp  came  upon
mee,  and  then  appeared  to  mec  Neftune'mdimiihlt
fliape:  He  congratulated  my  prefent  happineffe  in  the
gardens  of  the  Heffendes ,  fhcwing  ]to  me  a  Look-
ing-glafTcjin  which  I  faw  all  Nature  difcovered- After
the  changing  of  divers  words  betwixt  us,  I  gave  him
thanks  for  his  courtefies  fhewed  to  mej  becaufe  i  not
onlyentred  into  this  garden,  but  alfo  came  intoi'^-
tnrn's  moft  defired  difcourfe.  But  becaufe  by  rcafon
ofSdtur/fs  unexped^ed  departure  fome  difficulties
did  yet  remain  to  be  inquired  aftcr,and  fearched  into,
I  carneftly  befought  him,  that  by  means  of  this  hap-
py opportunity  hce  would  rcfolvc  mec  my  doubts.
Now  I  importuned  him  with  thcfe  words ,  Sir  /  have
read  the  books  of  Philofophers,and  they  fay,  that  all
generation  is  done  by  MalCjand  Female,  yet  1  faw  in
ray  dream  ^4/«r//^  put  thcfruitalone  ot  the  Tree  of
the  Sun  intoourMercury.  I  beleeve  alfo  thee  as  the
Mailer  of  this  Sea,  that  thou  knoweft  thcfe  things;

anfwer


ji  new  Light  ofAlchymie.  57

anfwer  my  Qucftion  I  pray  thcc.But  he  faid^It  is  true,
my  fon,  all  generation  is  done  in  Male,  and  Female,
but  by  reafon  of  the  diftinguifliing  of  the  three  King-
domes  of  Nature,a  foure  footed  Animal!  is  brought
forth  one  way,  and  a  worme  another:  Although
wormes  have  eyes5{ight,hearing,and  other  fenfes,  yet
they  are  brought  forth  by  putrefadion ,  and  their
place,  or  earth,  in  which  they  are  putrefied ,   is  the
Female.Soin  this  Philofophicall  work  the  mother  of
this  thing  is  that  Water  of  thine  fo  often  repeated,  &
whatfoever  is  produced  of  that,is  produced  as  worms
by  putrefa(5lion.Therfore  thePhilofophers  have  crea-
ted a  Phenix,&  Salamander.For  if  it  were  done  by  the
conception  of  two  bodies,  it  would  be  a  thing  fubjedl
to  death-,but  becaufc  it  revives  it  felf  alone,theformer
body  being  deftroyed,it  rifeth  up  another  body  incor-
ruptible.Seeingthe  death  of  things  is  nothing  elfe  but
the  reparation  of  the  one  from  the  other.  And  fo  it  is
in  this  Phcnix,  becaufethe  life  feparates  it  felf  by  its
felf  from  a  corruptible  body. Moreover, I  asked  him.
Sir,  are  there  divers  things,  or  is  there  a  compofition
of  things  in  this  work?  But  he  faid,there  is  only  one
thing,with  which  there  is  mixed  nothing  elfe  but  the
Philofophicall  Water  fhewed  to  thee  oftentimes  in
thy  fleep,  of  which  there  muft  be  ten  parts  to  one  of
the  body.   And  ftrongly,  and  undoubtedly  beleeve,  .
My  fon,that  thofe  things  which  are  by  me  and  Saturn
fliewed  thee  by  way  of  dreams,  according  to  thecu-*
flom,in  this  Iland,are  not  dreams,but  the  very  truth,
which  Experience  the  only  Miftris  of  things  will  by
theaflfiftaRceofGoddifcoverto  thee.  I  yet  further
demanded  fome  things  of  him ,  but  hee  without  any
anfwer,after  he  had  took  his  leave  of  mee,  departing

I  fcx


I*  8  A  neip  Light  of  Akhymh.

fct  me,  being  raifcd  from  fleepjinto  my  defired  region
oiEurofe.  And  fo  friendly  Reader,  let  this  fuffice
thee,  which  hath  by  mce  thus  farre  been  fully  de-
clared.

TiCed  alone  befui^cMndglory^


A  nen>  Light  of  Alchymki


JP


A  DIALOGVE

BETWEEN

MERCVRTM  ALCHTMISr

and  NATVKE.

_Pon  a  time  there  were  aflembled  divers
Jllchymifts  together  J  and  held  a  coun-
fel  how  they  Pnould  make,&  prepare  the
Philofophcrs  ftone,  and  they  concluded
that  every  one  fhould  declare  his  opinion
And  that  meeting  was  in  the  open  aire,
in  a  certainc  meadow,  on  a  faire  cleer  day.  And  many
agreed  that  Mercury  was  the  firfl  matter  thereof,  o-
thers  that  Sulphur  was ,  and  others  other  things.
But  the  chiefeft  opinion  was  of  Mercury ,  and  that
cfpecially  bccaufe  of  the  fayingsof  Philofophers^be-
caufe  they  hold,  that  Mercury  is  the  firft  true  matter
of  the  Stone,  alfo  oi  Metalls :  For  Philofophers  cry
out,  and  fay,  OUR  MERCURY,  &cAnd
fowhiieft  they  did  contend  amongft  themfelves  for

I  2  divers


With  a  vow.


^o  A  new  Light  ofAlchymie*

divers  operations  f  every  one  gladly  expeding  a  con-
clufion  )  there  arofe  in  the  medn  time  a  very  great
tempeft,  with  ftormes ,   Ihowers  of  rain,  and  an  un-
heard of  wind,  which  difperfed  that  alTembJy  into
divers  Provinces,    every  one  apart  without  a  con-
clufion.    Yet  every  one  of  them  fancied  to  himfelfe
what  the  conclufion  of  that  difpute  fhould  have  been.
Every  one  therefore  fet  upon  his  work  as  before,  one
in  this  thing,  another  in  that  thing  (ceking  the  Philo-
fophers  Stone,  and  this  is  done  till  this  day  without
any  giving  over.Now  one  of  them  remembring  the
difputation,  that  the  Philofophers  Stone  is  necefTari-
ly  to  be  fought  after  in  Mercury,  faid  to  hiralelf:  Al  -
though  there  was  no  conclufion  madejyct  I  wil  work
in  Mercury, and  will  make  a  conclufion  my  felfin  ma-
king the  blefled  Stone-,for  he  was  a  man  that  was  al-
waieswontto  talk  to  himfelfe,  as  indeed  all  Alchy-
tnifis  ufually  doe.  Hec  therefore  began  to  read  the
books  of  Philofophers,   and  fell  upon  a  booke  of>^-
Untii,  which  treats  of  Mercury-,  and  fo  that  Alchy-
mift  is  made  a  Philofopher,  but  without  any  conclu-
fion :  And  taking  Mercury  he  began  to  work  5   hec
put  it  into  a  glafs^aTid  put  fire  to  ir^the  Mercury  asit  is
wont  to  dOjVapouied  away,the  poor  filly  Alchymift
not  knowing  the  nature  of  it,bcat  his  wifc,faying:No
body  could  come  hither  befidcs  thee,  thou  tookeft
the  Mercury  out  of  the  glafs.His  wife  crying  excufctli
her  felf,  and  fpeaks  fbftly  to  her  husband :  Thou  wilt
make  a  fir-reverence  of  thcfe.  The  Alchymift  tookc
Mercury  again,and  put  it  again  into  his  vefTell,  and
left  his  wife  fliould  take  it  away,  watched  it.  But  the
Mercury ,35  its  manner  is5vapoured  away  again.  The
Alchymift  remembring  that  the  firft  matter  of  the

Phi-


A  tjert>  Light  ofAlchymie,  6 1

Philofophers  Stone  muft  be  volatile,  rejoiced  excee-
dingly, altogether  periwading  himfclfe  that  he  could
not  now  be  deceived,  having  the  firft  matter  :  Hec
began  now  to  <^ork  upon  Mercuiy  boldly,  he  learned
afterwards  to  fublime  it^and  to  calcine  it  divers  ways,
as  with  Salt,  Sulphur,  and  MerallSjMinerallSjBloud,
Haire,  Corrofivc  waters ,  Herbs,  Urine,  Vineger ,
but  could  find  nothing  for  his  purpofe-,  hee  left  no-
thing unafTayed  in  the  whole  world,  with  .which  hec
did  not  work  upon  good  Mercury  withall.  But  when
he  could  doe  no  good  at  all  with  this,  hee  fell  upon

this  faying that  it  is  found  in  the  dung' hill.  He

began  to  \70rkc  upon  Mercury  with  divers  forts  of
dung,  together,  and  afunder  .•  And  when  hee  was
weary,  and  full  of  thoughts  he  fell  into  a  lleep.  And
in  his  llcep  there  appeared  to  him  a  vifion  .♦  there
came  to  him  an  old  man,  who  faluted  him ,  and  faidj
Friend,  Why  art  thou  fade'  Hee  anfwered,  I  would
willingly  make  the  Philofophers  Stone.  Then  faid
he,  Friend,Of  what  wilt  thou  make  the  Philofophers
Stone  <  jilehymijla.  Of  Mercury,  Sir,  Senex^  Of
what  Mercury/*  Alch,  There  is  but  one  Mercury.
Sen.  It  is  true,  there  is  but  one  Mercuiy,  but  altered
varioudy,  according  to  the  variety  of  places^  one
is  purer  then  another.  Alch,  O  Sir,  I  know  how  to
purifie  it  very  well  with  vineger  and  fait ,  with  nitre
andvitriall.  Sen.  I  tell  thee  this  is  not  the  true  pu-
rifying of  it,  neither  is  this ,  thus  purifyed,  the  true
Mercury :  Wife  men  have  another  Mercury  ,  and
another  manner  of  purifying  of  it,and  fo  he  vaniihcd
away  .The  Alchymift  being  raifed  from  fleep  thought
with  himfelfe  what  vifion  this  fhould  be,  as  alfo  what
ibis  Mercury  of  Philofophers  ihould  be  :  hee  could

bcthinke.


1?a  Anert^UghtofAlchyinie^

bethinke  himfelfe  of  no  othci  but  the  vulgar  Mcrcu-
ty.  Batyethce  defiicd  much  that  hcc  might  have
had  a  longer  difcourlc  with  the  old  man  :  but  yet  hcc
worked  continually,  fometimes  in  tlie  dung  of  living
creatures,  as  boycs  dung,  and  fomcnmcs  in  his  own.
And  every  day  hee  went  to  the  place,  where  hee  faw
the  vifion,  that  he  might  fpeak  with  the  old  man  a-
gain  ;  fometimes  hee  counterfeited  a  fleep ,  and  lay
with  his  eyes  iliu:  expe(5ling  the  old  man.  But  when
he  would  not  come  he  thought  he  was  afraid  of  him,
and  would  not  bcleevc  that  he  was  afleep ,  he  fworc
therefore  faying,  My  good  old  Mafter  be  not  afraid,
for  truly  I  am  alleep-,  look  upon  my  eyes,  fee  if  I  be
not:  And  the  poor  Alchymifl  after  fo  many  labours,
and  the  fpending  of  all  his  goods,nowatlaft  fel  mad,
by  alwaies  thinking  of  the  old  man.  And  when  hee
was  in  that  flrong  imagination,there  appeared  to  him
in  his  fleep  a  falfe  viiion,  in  the  likenefle  of  the  old
man,  and  faid  to  him,  Doe  not  defpaire,  my  friend,
thy  Mercury  is  good,  and  thy  matter,  but  if  it  will
not  obey  thee,conjare  it,  that  it  bee  not  volatile^Scr-
pents  areufcd  to  be  conjured,and  then  why  not  Mer-
cury^ and  fo  the  old  man  would  leave  him.  But  the
Alchymifl  asked  of  him,  faying,  Sir,cxped5&c.  And
by  rcafon  of  a  noife  this  poore  Alchymifl  was  raifed
from  fleep,  yet  not  without  great  comfort.  He  took
then  a  veffell  full  of  Mercury,  and  began  to  conjure
it  divers  waycs,  as  his  dream  taught  him.  And  hcc  rc-
membred  the  words  of  the  old  man,  in  that  hee  faid.
Serpents  are  conjured^  and  Mercury  is  painted  with
Serpents,  hee  thought,  fo  it  muflbee  conjured  as  the
Serpents.  And  taking  a  vellcll  with  Mercury  hee
began  to  fay ,  Ux,  Vx^  ojlas,  &s.  And  where  the

name


A  mtv  Light  ofAlchymk^  6^

flame  of  the  Serpent  fliould  be  put ,  he  put  the  name
of  Mercury,  faying  :And  thou  wicked  beaft  Mercury,
&c.  At  which  words  Mercury  began  to  laugh ,  and
to  fpeat  unto  him  fayingjWhat  wilt  thou  have,  that
thou  thus  troubleft  mee  my  Mafter  Alchymift-f  Alc^,
O  ho^nowthou  called  me  Mafter,when  I  touch  thee
to  the  quick,  now  I  have  found  where  thy  bridle  is,
wait  a  little,  and  by  and  by  thou  ilialt  fing  my  fong ,
and  he  began  to  fpeak  to  him/as  it  were  angerly.  Art
thou  that  Mercury  of  Philofophers^    Merc,  (as  if
he  were  afraid  anfwered )  I  am  Mercury,  my  Mafter,
Alch,   Why  therefore  wilt  not  thou  obey  mee  ?  and
why  could  not  I  fix  thee.**    Merc,  O  my  noble  Ma-
fter, I  befeech  thee  pardon  mee,  wretch  that  I  am,  I
did  not  know  that  thou  waft  fo  great  a  Philofopher.
jikh.  Didft  not  thou  perceive  this  by  my  operati-
ons,reeing  I  proceeded  fo  Philofophically  with  thee/*
Merf,  So  it  is,my  noble  Mafter,  although  I  would
hide  my  felfc,  yet  I  fee  I  cannot  from  fo  honourable
a  Mafter  as  thou  art. ^Ar^.Now  therefore  doft  thou
know  a  Philofopher?  Merc.Ycz,  my  Mafter,  I  fee
thatyourworftiipis  a  moft  excellent  Philofopher.
Aich.  (being  glad  at  his  heart  faith )  truly  now  I  have
found  what  I  fought  for.  f  Again  he  fpakc  to  Mercu-
ry with  a  moft  terrible  voice :)  Now  go  to ,  be  now
therefore  obedient,  or  elfe  it  ftiall  be  the  worfc  for
thee.    Merc.  Willingly,  my  Mafter,  if  I  am  able,for
nowlam  verywcake.    Alc^,  Why  doft  thou  now
excufe  thy  felfe^  Merc.  I  doe  not,  my  Mafter,  but  I
am  faint  and  feeble.  Alch,  What  hurts  theeif  Af^r^.
The  Alchymift  hurts  mee.    Alch.  What,  doft  thou  ,
ftill  deride  mee?    Merc,  O  Mafter,  no,  I  fpeak  of  the
Alchymift^but  thou  art  a  Philofopher,  Alc^.  O  wel,

well;,


64  -^  ^^^  Light  ofAlchymie.

well,  that  is  true,  bur  what  hath  the  Alchymlft  done.^
Merc,  O  my  Mailer,   hee  hath  done  many  evill
things  to  mec,  for  hee  hath  mixed  mec,  poor  wretch
as  I  am^with  things  contrary  to  mee  :  from  whence  I
iliall  never  bee  able  to  recover  my  ftrength,  and
I  am  almoft  dead,for  I  am  tormented  almoft  unto
death.  A/r/'.  O  thoudefcrvcftthofe  things,  for  thou
art  difobedient.    Merc.  I  was  never  diiobedient  to
any  Philofophcr ,  but  it  is  naturall  to  mec  to  deride
fools#  A/^/'.And  what  doll  thou  think  of  mee?  J»/<?rf.
O  Sir,you  are  a  great  man,  a  very  great  Phiiofopher,
yea  greater  thenj  Hermes  himfclfe.    Alch,  Truly  fo
it  is ,  I  am  a  learned  man,  but  Iwill  not  commend
my  fclfe,  but  my  Wifealfo  faid  to  mee,  that  I  am  a
very  learned  Philofopher,  (he  knew  fo  much  by  mc«
Merc,  lam  apttobelccvethee,for  Philofophers  muft
be  fo,who  by  reafon  of  too  much  wifdome,and  pains
fall  mad.  hlch,  Goe  to  then,  tell  me  therefore  what
I  {hall  doe  with  thee;  how  lihall  make  the  Philofo-
phers Stone  of  thee.  Merc,  O  my  Mafter  Philofo-
pher,! know  not.  Thou  art  a  Philofopher,!  am  a  fcr-
vant  of  the  Philofophers,they  make  of  me  what  they
pleafe,!  obey  them  as  much  as !  am  able.  A/c^.Thou
muft  tell  mee  how  !  muft  proceed  with  thcc ,  and
how  I  may  make  of  thee  the  Philofophers  Stone.
Merc,  !f  thou  knowcft,  thou  fliall  make  it ,  but  if
thou  knoweft  not, thou  /halt  doe  nothing,  thou  ilialc
know  nothing  by  mee,  it  thou  knoweft  not  already
my  Mafter  !^hilofopher.     hlch.  Thou  fpcakeft  to
me€  as  to  fome  fimple  man ,  perhaps  thou  doft  not
know  that  I  have  worked  with  Princes,  and  was  ac-
counted a  Philofopher  with  them.  Merc.  !  am  apt  to
belccve  thee  my  Mafter,  for  I  know  all  this  very  wel,

I


J  nei»  Light  ofAlchjmie.  €^

lamyctfod,  and  unclean  by  rcafon  of  thofc  mix-
tures that  thou  haft  ufed.  hlch.  Therefore  tell  mee,
trt  thou  the  Mercury  of  Philofophcrsi*    Merc,  lanfi
Mercury,  but  whether  or  no  the  Philofophcrs ,  that
belongs  to  thee  to  know.  A/^^.Do  but  tell  me  ifthou
art  the  true  Mercury,  or  if  there  be  another,  ^^r^.  I
am  Mcrcuiy ,  but  there  is  another,  and  {o  he  vaniflied
away.    The  Alchymift  cries  out  and  fpeaks,  but  no
body  anfwers  him.  And  bethinking  himfelfe  faith :
Surely  I  am  an  excellent  man ,  Mercury  hath  been
pleafed  to  talkc  with  mec,  furely  hee  loves  mec  ;  and
then  he  began  to  fublime  Mercury ,diftil5calcinc,makc
Turbith  of  him,  precipitate,  and  diflfolve  him  divers
wayes,  and  with  divers  waters,  but  as  hee  laboured
in  vain  before,  fonow  alfo  he  hath  fpcnt  his  time,  and
cofts  to  no  purpofe.  Wherefore  at  laft  hee  begins  to
curfe   Mercury ,    and  revile  Nature  becaufe  ihec
made  him.  Now  Nature  when  fhe  heard  thefe  things
called  Mercury  to  her, and  faid  to  him  .•  What  haft
thou  done  to  this  man  f  Why  doth  he  curfe  and  re-
vile me  for  thy  fake.*'    Why  doft  not  thou  doe  what
thououghtefttodoe?  But  Mercury  modcftly  cxcu-
fethhimfelf.  Yet  Nature  commands  him  to  be  obe-
dient to  the  fons  of  Wifdome,  that  feek  after  him.
Mercury  promifeth  that  he  will,  and  faith  :  Mother
Nature,  but  who  can  fatisfie  fools. ''  Nature  went  a-
vvay  fmiling  :  but  Mercury  being  angry  with  the  Al-
chymift goes  alfo  unto  his  own  place.  After  a  few  days
it  came  into  the  Alchymifts  mind,  that  he  omitted
jfbmething  in  his  operations,  and  again  hee  hath  re-
courfe  to  Mercury ,and  now  refolves  to  mix  him  with
hogs  dung-,but  Mercury  being  angry  that  he  had  falf-
ly  accufed  him  before  his  mother  Nature/aith  to  the

K  Al-


^S  ^  ^*^  hi^  of  Akhjmis*

Alchymift,  What  vvilr  thou  have  of  me  thou  foolc.^
Why  haft  thou  thus  accufcd  mce^  Kkh,  Art  thou  he
that  /have  longed  to  izz<  Mere.  I  am,  but  no  man
that  is  blind  can  fee  mee.     hkh.  I  am  not  blind,
Merc.  Thou  art  very  blind,  for  thou  canft  not  fee
thy  felFe,  how  then  canft  thou  fee  mcer' A/<^^.0  now
thou  art  proud,  /  fpcak  civilly  to  thee,and  thou  con-
tcmneft  mee  :  thou  doft  not  know  perhaps  that  I
have  worked  with  many  Princes,  and  was  cfteemed
as  a  Philofopher  amongft  them.  CMerc,  Fools  flock
to  Princes  Courts,  for  there  they  are  honoured,  and
fare  better  then  others. Waft  thou  alfo  at  the  Court f
hlch\  O  thou  art  a  devill,  and  not  a  good  Mercury,
if  thou  wilt  fpeak  thus  to  Philofophers :  for  before
thou  didft  alfo  feduce  me  thus. i/^-r. Doft  thou  know
Philofophers r*  Ahh,  I  my  fclf  sm  a  Philofopher.
Merc.  Behold  our  Philofopher  f  fmiling  faid  :    and
began  to  talke  further  with  him  fa}  ing  )  My  Philofo-
pher, tell  mee  therefore  what  thou  feekcft  after ,  and
what  thou  wilt  have , what  doft  thou  defirc  to  maker*
A^^.  The  Philofophers  ftone.    Merc,  Out  of  what
matter  therefore  wilt  thou  make  itf    hlch.  Of  our
Mercury.  Merc,  O  my  Philofopher,now  I  wil  leave
you,  for  I  am  not  yours,  hkh.  O  thou  art  but  a  dc-
vill,and  wilt  feduce  mee.  Mere,  Truly  my  Philofo-
pher thou  art  a  dcvill  to  mee,  not  I  to  thee :  for  thou
doft  deale  moft  fordidly  with  mee  ,  after  a  dcvillifli
manner.  Akh,  O  what  doe  I  hear/*  this  certainly  is
a  devill  indeed,  for  I  do  all  things  according  to  the
writings  of  Philofophers,  and  know  very  well  how-
to  work.  Merc.  Thou  knoweft  veiy  well ,  for  thou
doft  more  then  thou  knoweft,  or  rcadft  of:  for  the
Philofophers  faid,  that  Nature  is  to  be  mixed  with

Natures


A  netp  Light  ofAlchymh^  $y

Natures^  and  they  command  nothing  to  bee  done
without  Nature-,  but  thou  doft  mix  mee  with  almoft
all  the  fordidft  things  that  bee,  as  d  ung.  Alch.  I  doe
nothing  be  (ides  Nature  .-  but  I  fowfeed  into  its  own
earth,  as  the  Philofophcrs  have  faid.  Merc,  Thou
foweft  mee  in  dung,andin  time  of  harveft  I  do  vanilh
away^and  thou  art  wont  to  reap  dung.  Ak.  Yet  fo  the
Philofophcrs  have  wrote,  that  in  the  dunghill  their
matter  is  to  be  fought  for.  Merc.  It  is  true  what  they
have  written-,  but  thou  underftandeft  their  letter,and
not  their  fenfe,  and  meaning.  Alch.  Now  happily  I
{cc  that  thou  art  Mercury  •,  but  thou  wilt  not  obey
mee*  And  he  began  to  conjure  him  again,  faying,  Fx
Vx,^\xi  Mercury  laughing  anfwered,  Thou  Ihak  doe
no  good,  my  friend,  jtf/r ?.They  do  not  fpeak  with-
out ground,  when  they  fay  thou  art  of  a  ftrange  na-
ture, inconltant,  and  volatile.  Merc,  Doft  thou  fay,
that  I  am  inconftant,  I  refolvc  thee  thus ,  I  am  con-
ftant  unto  a  conftant  Arwficer-^  fixed  t^  him,  that  is
of  a  fixed  mind,  but  thou,  and  fuchas  thou  att,  arc
inconftant,  running  from  one  thing  unto  another,
from  one  matter  unto  another.  Alch,  Tell  me  there-
fore if  thou  art  that  Mercury,  which  the  Philofo-
phcrs wrote  o  f,  which  they  faid  was,  together  withi
fulphur,andfalttheprincip2llof  all  things,  or  muft:
J  feck  after  another/* -A/^r.Truly  the  fruit  doth  not  fal
far  from  the  tree,but  I  feck  not  mine  own  praife,  lam
the  fame  as  I  was,  but  my  years  are  differing  .  From
the  beginning  I  was  young,  fo  long  as  I  was  alonCjbut
now  lam  older,  yet  the  fame  as  1  was  before.  Alclu
Now  thou  pleafeft  me,  becaufe  now  thou  art  older.-
for  I  alwaies  fought  after  fuch  a  one ,  that  was  more
ripe,  and  fiixedj  that  I  might  fo  much  the  more  eafily

K»  accord


^8  Aftew  Light  ofAkbymie*

accord  with  him.  Men.  Thoudoft  in  vain  lookaftcr
mec  in  my  old  age,  who  did  ft  not  know  mec  in  my
youth.A/f^.Did  not  I  know  thee, who  haveworked^
with  thee  divers  wayes,  as  thou  thy  felfe  haft  faid  f
and  yet  I  will  not  leave  off  till  I  have  made  the  Phi*,
lofophcrs  Sxovit,  Merc.  O  what  a  mifcrable  cafe  am  I
inf  What  (hall  I  do.**!  rauftnow  be  mixed  again  with,
dung,   and  be  tormented.    O  wrecch  that  lam!  I
befecch  thee  good  Mafter  Philofopher,  doc  not  mix
me  fo  much  with  hogs  dungi   for  othcrwi(e  I  ftiall
be  undone,  for  by  rcafon  of  this  ftink  I  am  conftrai-
ned  to  change  my  ftiape.    And  what  wilt  thou  have
mee  doc  morcr*   Am  not  I  tormented  fufficicntly
by  thee.'*  Doc  not  I  obey  thee/*  Doe  not  I  mixc  my
{elf  with  thofc  things  thou  wilt  have  me.?  Am  I  not
fublimcd/'  Ami  not  prcci{)itatcd?  Am  I  not  made  tur-
bithfAn  Amalgama^  A  Paftr"  Nowwhat  canft thou
dcfiremoreofme?  Mybody  is  fo  fcoiirgcd,  fo  fpic
iipon,thatthe  very  ftone  wmild  pity.merBy  virtue  of
me  thou  haft  milk,  fteill,bloud5butter,oyi,^vate^3and
which  of  all  the  mctalls^or  mineral  can  do  that  which
I  do  alonefand  is  there  no  mercy  to  be  had  towards
me>0'what  a  wretch  am  llkU.O  ho,it  doih  not  hurt
thee,  thou  art  wicked ,  although  thou  turncft  thy
fclf infide  out,  yet  thou  doft  not  change  thy  felfe ,
thoudoft  but  frame  to  thy  felfe  a  new  ihape,    thou
doft  alwaics  return  into  thy  firft  forme  again.  Merc,
1  doe  as  t  hou  wilt  have  me,  it  t  hou  wilt  have  mc  be  a
body,  I  a  m  a  body :  if  thou  will  have  mc  be  duft^    I
am  duft,I  know  not  how  I  fliould  abafe  my  fclf  more>
then  when  I  am  duft,  andalliadow.  Akh.  Tell  mec
therefore  what  thou  ait  in  thy  Center,  and  I  will
tormcm  thcc  no  more. iiicr/.-Now  I^raconftraincd


A  new  Light  ofAlchymre*  6$

to  tell  from  the  very  foundation.  If  thou  wHt  thou
maift  undcrftand  mec :  thoufccft  my  ihapc ,  and  of
this  thou  ncedcft  not  know  further.  But  becaufc  thou
askcftmccot  the  Center,  my  Center  is  the  moft
fixed  heart  of  all  things,  immortall ,  and  penetra-
ting :  in  that  my  Mafter  refts,  but  I  my  felfc  am  the
way,  and  the  paflcnger,.  I  am  a  ftranger  ,and  yet  live
at  nonie,I  am  moft  raithfuil  to  all  my  companions,  I
leave  not  thofe  that  doe  accompany  mee ;  I  abide
with  them,  I  perifh  with  them.  I  am  an  immor-
tall body  .•  I  die  indeed  when  I  am  llaine,  but
I  rife  againe  to  judgement  before  a  wife  Judge,
Jlck.  Art  thou  therefore  the  Philofophers  Stone  ^
Merc.  My  mother  is  fuch  a  one,  of  her  is.  born  artifit
cially  one  certain  thing,  but  my  brother  who  dwells
in  the  fort,  hath  in  his  will  what  the  Philofophers
deiirc.  A/cf?.  An  thou  old?  Merc.  My  mother  be-
gat mee^but  I  am  older  then  my  mot  her.^/i.'^.  What
devill  can  underftand the^ .  when  tliou  doft  not  an-
(wertothcpurpofef  thou  alwaics  fpeakeft  Riddles.-
Tell  mee  if  thou  arc  that  fountain  of  which  Bernard
Lord  Trevifan  writ^  M£rc. .  I  am  not  the  fountaine ,
but  I  am  the  water ,.  the  ftmmaine  compiiTeth  mec
about.  Jlch.  Is  gold  dilTolved  in  thee  ,  when  thou
art  waters  Merc,  Whatfoeveriswithmee  Iloveas
a.fricnd^  an^i  whatfocvtr  is  brought  forth  with  mee,
to  that  I  give  nourilliment,  and  whatfoever  is  naked^
J.  cover  with  my  wings.  Akh,  I  fee  it  is  to  no  pur^
pofe  to  fpeak  to  thee,I,ask  one  th  ing,and  thou  anfwe-r
reft  another  thing:  if  thou  wilt  notanfwer  to  my
<jueftioH,  truly  1  will  goe  to  woik  with  thee  again,
M£rc,  O  mafter,  I  befeechthee  be  good  to  mc^now
Iwillwillinglydocwhat  I  know.    Jjd*  Tell  mc«

K  3  '       there^:


yo  A  new  Ught  of  Alchymie^

therefore  if  thou  art  afraid  oF  the  fire.    M(rrr.  I  am
fire  my  iclfc.    Alch,   And  why  then  doft  thou  fly
from  the  firc^  Merc.  My  fpirir,  and  the  fpirit  of  the
fire  love  one  another,and  whither  one  goes,the  other
goes  if  it  can.  Alch.  And  whither  doft  thou  goe,
when  thou  afcendeft  with  the  firef  Merc,  Know  that
every  ftranger  bends  towards  his  own  countrey,  and
when  he  is  returned  from  whence  he  came,  hce  is  at
reft,  and  alwaies  returnes  wifer,  then  he  was  when  he
came  forth.  Alch,  Doft  thou  come  back  again  fomc-
timcs.^  Merc,  I  doe, but  in  another  forme,  hkh,  I  do
not  underftand  what  this  is,  nor  any  thing  of  the  fire.
Merc,  If  any  one  knew  the  fire  of  my  heart,  hee  hath
feenthatfire('adueheat)ismy  meat  :  and  by  how
much  the  longer  the  fpirit  of  my  heart  feeds  upon
fire ,  it  will  be  fo  much  the  fatter,  whofe  death  is
afterward  the  life  of  all  things,  whatfocver  they  bee
in  this  Kingdome  where  I  am,  hlch.  Art  thou  great?
Merc,  I  am  thus  for  example,  of  a  thoufand  drops  I
Ihall  be  one,  out  of  one  I  give  many  thoufand  drops:
and  as  my  body  is  in  thy  fight,  if  thou  knoweft  how
to  fport  with  mee,  thou  maift  divide  mc  into  as  much
as  thou  wilt,  and  I  fiiall  be  one  again:  What  then  is
my  fpirit  (  my  heart )  intrinfecally  ,     which  alwaies
can  bring  forth  many  thoufandsout  of  the  Icaft  part.^
A^^j'.  And  how  therefore  muftone  dealewith  thee
that  thou  maift  be  fof    }ierc.  I  am  fire  within,  fire  is
my  meat,  but  the  life  of  the  fire  is  aire,  without  airo
tlie  fire  is  extinguilhed-,  the  fire  prevails  over  the  aire,
wherefore  I  am  not  at  reft,  neither  can  the  crude  aire
conftrin?e,  or  bind  mee :  adde  aire  to  aire,  that  both
may  be  one,  and  hold  weight,  join  it  to  warme  fire ,
and  give  utime.  hlch.  What  fliall  bee  after  that?

Mcr.


A  m^  Light  ofMchymie^  j  t

Merc,  Thcfupcrfluous  fliall  be  taken  avvay,  the  refi-
dxie  thou  fhalt  burn  with  fire,  put  it  into  water ,boyl
it,  after  it  isboyled  thou  (halt  give  it  to  the  liek  by
way  of  phyfick.  hlch.    Thou  faift  nothing  to  my
queftions.  I  fee  that  thou  wilt  only  delude  mee  with
Riddles .  Wife,  bring  hither  the  hogs  dung ,    I '  will
handle  that  Mercury  feme  new  wayes ,  untill  hce  tell
mee  how  the  Philofophers  Stone  is  to  bee  made  of
him.  Mercury  hearing  this  begins  to  lament  over  the
Alchymift,  and  goes  unto  his  mother  Nature.-  accu-
ferh  the  ungratcfull  operator.  Nature  beleeves  her
fon  Mercury,  who  tells  true,  and  being  mox'Tcd  with
angercomestothe  Alchymijfl:,  and  calls  him^  Ho
thou.  Where  art  thou?    Alchym.  Who  is  that,
thus  calls  mec.^  Natura.  Whatdoft  thou  with  my
ioHythou  fool  thou?  Why  doR  thou  thus  injure  him?
Whydoftthoutorment  him?  whois  willing  co-doe
thee  any  good,  i£  thoucouldft  underftand  fo  much;
Alch.  YVhat  devill  reprehends  me,  fo  great  a  man,
and  Philofophcr?iV<rf/.0  fool  ful  of  pride,rhe  dung  of"
Philofophers,  I  know  all  Philofophers,and  wife  men,
and  I  love  them,  for  they  love  me,  and  doe  all  things
for  me  at  my  pleafurc  ,  and  whither  I  cannot  ^oe
they  help  me.    But  you  Alchymifts,  of  whofe  order
thou  alfo  art  one,without  my  knowledg,and  confent,
iot  all  tilings  contrary  unto  mc-,    wherefore  it  falls
out  contrary  to  your  expcdation.You  think  that  you
deal  with  my  fons  rationally  ,  but  you  perfe(3:  no-
thing-, and  if  you  will  confider  rightly,  you  do  not
handle  them,  but  they  handle  you :  for  you  can  make
nothing  of  them,  neither  know  you  how  to  do  it,  but
they  of  you  when  they  pleafe,  make  fooles .  Alch»  It
isi  no5  true  •*  I  *ilfo  am  a  Philofophcr ,  and  know  well

how


7  a  A  new  Light  of  Akhymk.

how  to  workc ,  I  have  been  with  more  then  one
Prince,  and  was  eftecmed  a  Philofopher  amongft
them,  my  wife  alfo  knows  rhe  fame,   and  now  alfo
I  have  a  manufcripr ,  which  was  hid  fomc  hun-
dreds of  years  in  an  old  wall,  now  I  certainly  know
I  iliall  make  the  Philofophers  Stone,  as  alfo  within
thefc  fcwdayes  it  was  revealed  to  mce  in  a  dreamc.  O
I  am  wont  to  have  true  dreams-.  Wife  thou  knowcft
it!  Natur.    Thou  flialt  doc  as  the  reft  ot  thy  fcl-
lowes  have  done,  who  in  the  beginning  know  all
things^  and  thinkc  they  arc  very  knowing ,  but  in
conclufion  know  nothing.    Alch.  Yet  others  have
made  it  of  thee  fif  thou  art  the  true  Nature.)  Nat,
It  is  true,  butonlythty  that  knew  mc5and  they  arc
very  few.  Bu'hee  which  knowesmec  doth  not  tor-  .
mcnt  my  Sons-,  nordifturbe  mec,  but  doth  to  mec
what  hec  pleafeth,  and  increafcth  my  goods,and  heals
the  bodies  of  my  fons.  A^<^^.EvcnfodocI.iNr4/«r.
Thoudoftall  things  contrary  to  mce,  and  do^  pro-
ceed with  my  Sonnes  contrary  to  my  will  :  when
thou  fhould ft  revive  ,  thou  killeft-,  when  fix,  thou
fublimeft-,  when  calcine,  thou  diftillcftj    cfpecially
jny  moft  obfervant  Sonne  Mercury,   whom  thou
tormemeft  with  fo  many  corrofive  waters ,  and  fo
many  poifonous  things.  Alch,  Then  1  will  proceed
with  him  fwcetly  by  digeftion  only.  Natur,  It  is  well
if  thou  knowcft  how  to  doe  it ,  but  if  not,  thou
fhalt  not  hurt  him^but  thy  felfe,  and  expofe  thy  fclfc
to  charges,  for  it  is  all  one  with  him,  as  with  a  gem,
which  is  mixed  with  dune,    that  is  alwaies  good,
and  the  dung  doth  not  aiminifh  it ,  although  it  be
caft  upon  it,  for  when  it  is  waflied,  it  is  tRe  fame
gemmc  as  it  was  before.  AlckBut  I  would  wib

lingly


AnervLightofAIcbjmie^  72

lingly  know  how  to  make  the  Phil ofophers  Stone.
NMur,    Therefore  cioe  not  handle  my  Son  in  that
fafhion  .•  forknow,that  I  have  many  Sonnes,  and
many  Daughters,  and  I  am  ready  at  hand  to  them
that  feek  mec,  if  they  bsc  worthy  of  mee.  Alch.
Tell  me  therefore  who  that  Mercury  is ^  Nat.Ktiovr
that  I  have  but  one  fuch  Sonne,  and  hee  is  one  of
fcven,  and  hec  is  the  iirft-,  and  hcc  is  all  things,
who  was  but  one-,  hee  is  nothing,  and  his  number
is  entire  5  in  him  arc  the  fourc  Elements ,  and  yec
himfelfc  is  no  Element*,  he  is  a  fpirit,  and  yet  hath
a  body;  he  is  a  man ,  and  yet  ads  the  part  of  a
woman-,  hee  is  a  child,  and  yet  bears  the  armcsof
a  man;  hee  is  a  bcaft,  and  yet  hath  the  wings  of
a  bird;  hee  is  poifon,  yet  cureth  the  Icprofie ;  he
is  life,  yec  kills  all  thingsj  hee  is  a  King,  yet  ano-
ther poflclTeth  his  Kingdomc;  hee  flyeth  from  the
fire,  yet  fire  is  made  of  him ;  hee  is  water ,  yet
wets  not;    hee  is  earth,   yet  hee  is  fowed ;    hee  is
aire,  yet  lives  in  water.   Akh,  Now  I  fee  that  I
know  nothing,  but  I  dare  not  fay  fo  ,  for  then  I
fhould  lofe  my  reputation,  and  my  neighbors  will
lay  out  no  more  money  upon  mee ,  if  they  fhould
know  that  I  know  nothing  .•  yet  I  will  fay  that  I
doe  certainly  know,  or  elfe  no  body  will  give  mee
fo  much  as  bread  :  for  many  of  them  hope  for  much
good  from  mee.  Natur.  Although  thou  fliouldft
put  them  oiFa  great  while  3  yet  what  will  become
of  thee  at  laft^  and  efpecially  if  thy  neighbours
fhould  demand  their  charges  of  thee  again .^  A/ch.l
will  feed  all  of  them  with  hope,  as  much  as  pofTibly
I  can.  Natur,   And  then  what  wilt    thou  doe  at
lafti'wi/f^.I  will  try  many  ways  privately  :  if  either

L  of


74  ^  ^^  Light  ofAlchymie.

of  them  fuccecd,  I  will  pay  them-,  if  not,  I  will  goe
into  fome  other  far  Country,  and  doc  the  like  there.
Natftr,  And  what  will  become  of  thee  afterward?
^/^y^.  Ha,  ha,  ha,  there  bee  many  countryes,  alfo
many  covetous  men,  to  whom  I  will  promifc  great
ftore  of  Gold,  and  that  in  a  fliort  time ,  and  fo  the
time  ftiall  paffe  away, till  at  laft  either  I, or  they  muft
die  Kings,  or  AflTcs.  Natur,  Such  Philofophers  de-
ferve  the  halter:  fie  upon  thee  ,  make  haft  and  be
hanged,  and  put  an  end  to  thy  felf,  and  thy  Philo^b-
phys  for  by  this  meanes  thou  fhalt  neither  deceive
mec,thy  neighbour,  or  thy  fclf.


A  new  Lt^t  ofAlchymk*  75


^ . m^wm-  _

A   TREATISE

O  F

S  V  L  P  H  V  R-

The  Preface.

Courteous  Reader  ,

;EEing  I  iTiight  not  wrirc  more  clecrly,  then
'  other  ancient  Philofophcrs  have  wrote;  hap-
ly thou  may  ft  not  bee  fatisfied  with  my
writings  .-  cfpecially  (ince  thou  haft  fo  many  other
bookesof  Philofophers  already  in  thy  hands  .*  but
belceve  me,  neither  have  I  any  need  to  write  books,
becaufe  I  feck  neither  profit,  nor  vain  glory  by  them^
therefore  I  doe  not  publifh  who  I  am.  Thofe  things
which  I  have  now  publiflit  for  thy  profit,  and  advan-
tage, fcem  to  mec  to  be  nrore  then  enough-,1  piirpofe
that  other  things,  which  remain,fliall  bee  referred  to
the  book  of  Harmony,  where  I  have  largely  treated
of  naturall  things  :  yet  by  the  pcrfwafion  of  fom«
friends  I  muft  needs  alfo  write  this  Treatife  of  Sul-
phur-,   in  which  whether  it  be  ncedfull  to  addc  any

L  2  thing


y 5  A  new  Light  of  Alchjwie.

thing  to  what  is  written  before,  I  know  nor.     Yea,
neither  fliall  this  fatisfic  thee,  if  the  writings  of  Co
many  Philofophcrs  cannot  fatisfic  thcc  :  And  cfpc-
cially,  if  the  daily  operation  of  Nature  bee  not  a
fufficient  example^  no  other  examples  (hall  doe  thee
good.     For  it  thouwouldft  confider  with  a  mature
judgement,  how  Nature  works,  thou  wouldft  not
have  need  of  fo;  many  volumes  of  Philofophers :  be-
caufe  in  my  judgement  it  is  better  to  learn  of  Nature
theMiftris,  thenof  herfcholars.  Thou  haft  enough
in  the  Preface  of  the  book  of  the  Twelve  Treatifes,
as  alfo'in  the  Firft  Treatife  it  felf,  becaufe  in  this  Art
there  be  fo  many,  and  fo  great  books  to  bee  found,
that  they  rather  hinder,then  help  thofe  that  are  ftudi-
Gus  of  tnis  Art  .•  and  fo  indeed  it  feems  to  be,becaufe
the  Writings  of  Philofophers  are  out  of  that  little
Schedule  oX Hermes  grown  up  unto  fogreat,and  erro-
neous a  Labyrinth,  and  daily  doe  decline  into  obfcu-
rity:   And  this  I  belecve  is  done  only  by  envious
Philofophers,  when  as  the  ignorant  doe  not  well
know  what  ought  tobe  added,  or  left  out,  if  haply
the  Authours  hand  cannot  well  be  read.      If  in  any
Science,  or  Art  it  doth  much  help,  or  hurt  to  have
one  word  lacking,  or  added,  then  much  more  in  this:
As  for  example :  It  is  written  in  one.placc :  Then  mix
thefe  v^Aters  together,  another  addcs  iVo/,  hce  indeed
added  but  a  little,and  yet  by  this  he  turned  the  whole
Chapter  quite  contrary :  yet  let  the  diligent  Student
know,  that  a  Bee  doth  gather  honey  out  of  poifo-
nous  hearbs.  But  if  he  judgeth  what  nee  reads,  accor-
ding to  the  poffibility  of  Nature,  hee  will  eafily  get
beyond  all  the  Sophiftry  of  Philofophers  :  yet  let
him  not  give  over  reading,  becaufe  one  booke  cxr

plaincs


A  nen?  Light  ofjlchymiei  yj

plaines  another.    And  by  this  meancs  I  under  ft  ood
thatthebookesoto^rrthcPhilofopher  (  and  who
could  know  it,  but  they  that  read  other  Authours/')
are  fo  wonderfully  enchanted,  that  they  cannot  pof-
fibly  be  underftood,unlellctheybe  readovcrathou-
fand  times,   and  this  alfo  by  a  witty  Reader ;   fooles
muft  bee  utterly  excluded  from  reading  .of  them.
There  bee  indeed  many  that  undertake  to  interpret
him  as  they  doe  other  Authors-,  but  I  fee  their  expli-
catien  is  more  difficult  then  the  text :   My  advice  is,
that  thou  dofl  perilft  in  the  text ,  and  whatfoever
thou  readeft  apply  to  the  poffibility  of  Nature  •,  and
in  the  firft  place  enquire  diligently  what  Nature  is.
All  indeed  write,  that  fliee  is  a  thing   of  fmall  ac-
count, eafy,  commonj  and  indeed  it  is  true ,  but  it
Ihould  have  been  added  ,  that  fhce  is  fo  unto  wife
men.    The  wile  man  knows  her  to  be  amongft  dung,
and  the  ignorant  man  doth  not  beleeve  her  to  bee
in  gold..    And  all  thefc  men,  which  have  made  fuch
hard  bookes,  if  they  were  nowignorant  of  the  Art ,
but  muft  find  it  out  of  fuch  bookes  (  which  books  in-
deed are  very  true  j  would  with  more  difficulty  find
it  our,then  men,that  in  thefc  days  fearchinto  the  art^
doe.  I  will  not  commend  mine  ownc  Writings,  hec
iliall  judge  of  them  that  ftiall  apply  tkem  to  the  pof-
fibility,, and  courfc  of  Nature  ••  and  if  by  my  Wri-
tings, Counfell,  Examples,  hce  ftiall  not  know
the  operation  of  Nature,  and  her  miniftring  vitall
fpirits  conftringing  the  aire,  as  alfothefubjeftofthe
firft  matter,  hec  will  fcarce  underftand  tbem  by  Rai^
mnndm  Lullius,  It  is  a  hard  thing  to  beleeve  that
fpirits  have  fuch  a  power  and  force  in  the  belly  of  the
wind.^.  This  Wood  I  alfo  am  conftrained  to  goe

L  3  througk,.


78  A  new  Light  of  Akhymie.

through,   and  alfo  I  have  helped  to  multiply  Ir ,  yet
in  fuch  a  manner  as  my  plants  fliall  be  fignes,  a  light,
and  guides  to  the  true  Sons  of  Art,  and  Students  in
this  lacied  Science,  that  arewiUingto  goe  through
this  Woodi  for  my  plants  are  as  it  were  corporcall.
Thofe  times  are  now  paft ,  when  fidelity  amongft
friends  flourifhed,  and  this  Art  was  communicated
by  word  of  mouth-,  bur  now  it  is  not  obtained  but
by  the  infpiration  of  the  moll  high   God  alone.
Therefore  let  not  him  that  fearchcth  diligently,  and
fears  God  defpaii'e.If  he  feeks  after  it,  hec  fhall  find
it.     Becaufc  it  is  more  eafily  obtained  from  God ,
then  from  man :  for  hec  is  a  God  of  infinite  compaf-
iion,and  knowes  not  how  toforfake  him  that  puts  his
truft  in  himi  with  him  there  is  no  refpeft  of  perfonsj
the  contrite  and  humbk  heart  hec  will  not  dcfpife  ^
and  hec  hath  taken  eompaffion  upon  mce ,  the  moft
unworthy  of  his  crcatur-csj   whofcpowa*,  goodnefe,
unfpeakable  compafTion  which  he  hath  vouchfafed  to
fhew  to  mce,  I  am  not  able  to  cxprelTe  ••  but  if  I  am
able  to  give  no  betterthankes,  yet  I  fhall  not  ceafe
ivith  my  pen  to  fct  forth  his  praife  for  ever.     Bee  of
good  courage  therefore.  Courteous  Reader,and  hec
will  alfo  not  deny  this  favour  to  thee,  if  thou  putteft
thy  whole  truft  in  him,  worlliip  him,  and  call  upon
him,  hec  will  open  to  thee  the  gate  of  Nature  •,  then
thou  flialt  fee  hcnv  moft  plainly  Nature  works. Know
for  certain  that  Nature  is  moft  plain,  and  fi.mple,and
delights  in  nothing  fo  much  as  in  plainneftcj  and  bc-
kcve  mee,  whatfocver  in  Nature  is  more  noble,by  fo
much  alfo  the  more  eafy,and  plain  it  is ,  becaufe  all
truth  is  plain,  and  fimple :  God  the  moft  High  Crea-
tor .of  all  things  put  nothing  rhat  is  hard^or  diflicult

in


A  new  Light  ofAlchymie.  yp

inNatin-e,  If  thou  wilt  therefore  imitate  Kature,
kt  mee  perfwade  thee  to  abide  in  the  fimple  way  of-
Nature-,  and  thou  llialt  find  all  good  things.  But  if
neither  my  writings,  nor  advifc  pleafeth  thee,  then  go
to  other  authors.  Wherefore  1  write  not  great  Vo-
lumes that  thou  maift  not  lay  out  too  much  money,
pr  time  upon  them,  but  maift  read  them  over  quick-
ly, and  bee  at  the  more  Icilure  to  have  recourfeto
other  authors  ••  and  ceafe  not  to  feck,  for  to  him  that
knocks,  it  fhall  bee  opened.  Now  thofc  times  are
coming,  in  which  many  fecrets  of  Nature  fliall  bee
revealed.  Now  that  fourth  Monarchy  of  the  North
is  about  to  begin  .•  Now  the  times  are  at  band ;  the
Mother  of  Sciences  will  come  :  greater  things  fliall
bee  difcovered  then  hath  been  done  in  thefe  three  laft
paft  Monarchies.  Becaufe  this  Monarchy  fas  the
Ancients  have  foretold  )  God  will  plant  by  one  of
his  Princes,  being  enriched  with  all  manner  of  ver-
tues,  whom  haply  times  have  already  brought  forth.
For  wee  have  in  this  Northerne  part  a  moftwife
Prince,  and  moft  warlike,  whom  none  of  the  Mo'
narchs  doth  goe  beyond  in  vidories ,  or  excel!  in
humanity,  and  piety.  In  this  Northerne  Monarchy
God  the  maker  of  all  things,  will  without  doubt
bring  to  light  greater  fecrets  in  Nature ,  then  in
thofe  times,when  Pagan,and  Tyrant  Princes  reigned.
But  the  Philofophers  reckon  thefe  Monarchies ,  not
according  to  the  powerfulneffe  of  them,  but  accor-
ding to  the  corners  of  the  world  :  the  firft  was  Ea-
fterne  ,  the  next  Southerne-,  this  which  they  now
polTefTe  is  Wcfterne  :  the  4aft  which  they  ^expcd
in  this  Northerne  part  is  Northerne :  but  of  thefe
further  in  my  bookc  of  Harmony.  In  this  Nor-
thern


go  A  mw  Light  ofAlchymie^

thcrn  Monarchy,  where  the  atrradlive  pole  is  (  as
the  Pfalmifi  fpeaksj  Mercy  and  Truth  are  met  toge-
ther- Peace,  and  Juftice  fliall  kifle  each  other;
Tturh  fliall  rife  out  of  the  earth,  and  Juftice  fliall
looke  from  heaven.  One  flieepfold ,  and  one
Shcpheard.  Many  Arts  without  cnw  .•  AH
which  I  doc  tarncftly  expcd.  Doe  thou  alfo.
Courteous  -Reader,  call  upon,  love,  fcarc  God,
read  over  my  Writings  diligently,  and  then  thou
maifl:  foretell  to  thy  felfe  good  things.  And  if
thou  flialt,  through  the  favour  of  God ,  and  the
help  af  Nature  f  whom  thou  muft  imitate )  arrive
to  the  defired  haven  of  this  Monarchic ;  then  thou
flialt  fee ,  and  fay  that  all  things  that  I  have  faid  to
thcCjarcgood,3ndtruc.


OF


A  new  Light  ofAkbymie^  8 1


OF

S  V  L  P  H  V  R-

The  fecond  Trinci^k.

Ulphur  is  not  the  laft  amongft  the
Principles,  becaufe  it  is  a  part  of  the
Metall^  yea  and  the  principall  part  of
the  Philofophers  Stone:  and  many  wife
men  have  left  in  writing  divers ,  and
very  true  things  of  Sulphur.  Yea  Geber
himfelf  in  his  firft  book  of  the  higheft  pcrfec^ion^f  ^^.
2S.  faith:  Through  the  moft  High  God  it  illumi-
nates everybody  :  becaufe  it  is  light  from  light,and
Tintflure.But  before  wee  treate  of  it ,  it  feems  good
toustofirft  defcribetheoriginall  ot  the  Principles^
efpecially  fince  of  old.  Sulphur  hath  been  accounted
thechiefeftof  the  Principles.  Now  very  few  have
hitherto  fliewed  whence  the  Principles  arife,  and  it  is
a  hard  thing  to  judge  of  any  of  the  Principles,  or
any  thing  elfe  ,  whofe  originall ,  and  generation  is
unknowne  ;  what  can  a  blind  man  judg  of  a  colour.?
What  our  predeceffors  have  omitted,  that  have
wee  purpofcd  in  this  Trcatife  to  fupply ,

M  Now


8  2  Anew  Light  ofAlchymiu

Now  the  Principles  of  things ,  cfpecially  of  Me-
talls,  according  to  the  ancient  Pmlofophers  aretwa,
Sulphur,  and  Mercury :  but  according  ta  the  latter
PhilofopherSjthree,  Sal,Sulphur3and  Mercury.  Now
the  originall  of  thefe  Principles  arc  the  toure  Ele-
ments-, with  the  originall  of  which  alfo  wee  will  firft
begin.  Therefore  let  them  that  are  Students  in .
this  facred  fcience  know,that  there  are  four  Elements,
and  that  everyone  of  thefe  fourc  hath  in  its  Center
another  Element,  bywhichit  is-  slementatcd  :  and
thefe  arc  the  four  flatues  of  the  world,feparated  from .
the  Chaos  in  the  creation  of. the  world  by  divine
Vi^ifdome-,  andthefc  uphold  the  fabrick  of  the  world
by  their  contrary  a<5ting5  in  equality,  and  pro-
portion>  and  alfo  by  the  inclination  of  celeftiall
vcrtues,.bring  forth  all  things,  that  are  within,  and
upon  the  earth  :  but  of  thefe  in  their  p' aces  .'here  wc
will  rcturne  toour  purpofe;  and  firft  of  the  EJicracnt .
that  is  neereft^i//^.  the  Earth, ,


OF


J  new  U^ht  ofAlchymie^  8  ^

O  F

The  ELEMENT  of  the

EARTH-

[H  E  Earth  is  of  great  worth  In  its  quah'ty>
and  dignity  .•  in  this  Element,   the  other
three  ,  eipecially  the  fire,  reft.  It  is  the
moft  excellent  Element  to  concealc ,  and
difcover  thofe  things  which  aie  intrtfted  to  it  :  it  is
grofTe,  and  porous,  heavy  in  rerpe(5i:  of  its  fmall-
nelTe ,  but  light  in  refpecfl  of  its  Nature  5    it  is
alfo  the  Center  of  the  world  ,  as  alfo  of  the  other
Elements*,  through  irs  Center  pafTcth  the  axell  tree
of  the  world,  and  ot  both  poles.    It  is  porous ,  as
wee  faid,  as  1  fpunge,  and  brings  forth  nothing  of  it
felfcjbut  all  things  whatfoever  the  other  three  diftiJ,
and  project  into  it,  it  receives ,  keeps  all  things  that
are  to  be  kept,brings  to  light  all  things  that  arc  to  be
brought  to  light.  It  brings  forth  (  as  wee  faid  be-
fore)  nothing  of  it  fclfe,  but  it  is  the  receptacle  of
other  things,  and  it  is  that,  in  which  cveiy  thing
that  is  brought  forth,  doth  abide,and  by  heat  of  mo-
tion is  putrefied  in  it,  and  is  multiplied  by  the  fame,
the  pure  being  fepararcd  from  the  impure  :  That
which  is  heavy  in  it  is  hid ,  and  the  heat  drives  that
which  is  light  unto  its  fupcrficies.  It  is  the  nurle,and
matrix  of  all  feed,  and  commixtion.    It  can  indeed

M  2  doe


8  /J.  A  nen>  Light  of  Alchjmis.

doc  nothing  elfc,  then  prcfcrvc  the  feed ,   and  what
is  made  of  it,  till  it  be  ripe.   It  is  cold,diy,  tempered
with  water-,  vifiblc  without,  and  fixed  5   but  within
invifiblc,  and  volatile.  It  is  a  virgin  ,  and  the  Ca^ut
HortHum  left  after  the  creation  of  the  world,  which  -
toll  hereafter  at  divine  pleafure  bee  calcined,  aftci-
cxtra(5tionofitsmoifture,thatof  it  a  new  Cryftal-
line  Earth  may  be  created.  Alfo  this  Element  is  di-
vided into  a  pure  part  5  and  an  impure.    The  water
makes  ufe  of  the  pure  to  bring  forth  things ,  but  the
impure  'remains  in  its  globe.  This  Element  is  the  .hi-
ding place,  and  manfion  of  all  treafure.  In  its  Center
is  the  fire  ot  hell,  preferving  this  fabriek  of  the  world
in  its  beings  and  this  by  the  expreflion  of  water  into
the  aire.  That  fire  is  caufed,  and  kindled  by  the  pi-
mum  Mol^ile^and  the  influences  of  the  Stars:  the  heat
of  the  Sunne  tempered  with  the  aire  meets  with  this
heat  for  the  ripening,and  drawing  up  of  thofe  things,
which  are  already  conceived  in  its  Center.  Moreover
the  Earth  partakes  of  fire,  w^hichis  the  intrinfecall
part  of  it,  neither  is  it  purified  but  in  the  fire :  and  fo
every  Element  is  purified  with  its  intrinfecall  parr.
Now  the  Intrinfecall  part,  or  infide  of  the  Earth ,  or
its  Center  is  the  higheft  purity  mixed  with  fire,  where
nothing  can  refl :  It  is  as  it  were  an  empty  placcjinto
which  all  the  other  Elements  doe  project  their  ver-
tues,  as  hath  been  fpoken  in  the  book  of  the  Twelve
Treatifcs.  And  thus  much  ofthe  Element  of  Earth,
which  wee  have  called  a  Spunge,  and  the  receptacle
of  other  things,  which  fcrveth  forour  purpofe.


OE


A  netp  Light  efjlchymict  S5


OF


The  E  L  E  M  E  N  T  of

WATER


Arcr  is  the  hcavicft  Element ,  full  of
unftnous  flegme,  and  it  fs  an  Element
more  worthy  in  its  quality  then  the
Earthj  without,  volatile,  but  within  fix-
ed, it  is  cold,  and  moift,  and  tempered
with  the  aire  ••  it  is  the  fperm  of  the  world,  in  which
the  feed  of  all  things  is  kept :  it  is  the  keeper  of  the
feed  of  every  thing.  Yet  wee  muft  know,  that  the
Seed  is  one  thing ,  and  the  Spcrme  another :  the
Earth  is  the  receptacle  of  the  Sperme,  but  Water  is
the  receptacle  of  the  Sttd,  Whatfoever  the  Aire
doth  diftili  into  the  Water ,  by  means  of  the  fire ,
the  fame  doth  the  water  convey  to  the  Earth.  Some-
times the  fperme  lackes  fufficiency  of  feed  J  for  want
©fhcat  which  fhould  digeft  it  5  for  there  is  alwayes
plenty  of  Sperm,  cxpe(fting  Seed ,   which  by  the


86  ^A  newLight 0} Alchymie.

■imaglnationof  fire  through  the  morion  of  the  Aire
it  carryes  into  its  matrix  :  and  iomccimes  there  being
lackofSeed,  the  Sperme  enters,  but  it  goeth  fonh
againe  without  fiuit ;  but  of  this  more  at  large  heic-
after  in  the  third  Treatife  of  Principles,  vi^,  in  that
of  Salt.  It  happens  fometimcs  in  Nature  ,   that  the
Sperme  enters  into  the  matrix  with  a  fufficiency  of
Seedj  but  the  matrix  being  indifpofed,  by  reafon  of
being  filled  with  offenfive,fulphureous,  &  flcgmatick
vapors  5  doth  not  conceive,  neither  doth  that  come
to  pafTc  that  (hould.  Alfo  nothing  !s  properly  in  this
Element,  but  only  as  it  is  wont  to  bee  in  the  Sperm.
It  is  delighted  chiefly  in  its  own  motion  ^  which  is
made  by  the  Aire,  and  it  is  apt  to  mixe  with  things  •
by  reafon  of  its  fuperficiall,  volatile  body.    It  is,  r-S
wee  faid  before,  the  receptacle  of  all  manner  of  Seed:
in  it  the  Earth  is  eafily  purified,  and  relolvedjand  the
Aire  is  congcaledin  it,  and  is  joined  with  it  radically.
It  is  the  menftruum  of  the  world,  \vhich  penetrating
the  Aire,  by  means  of  heat,  drawcs  along  with  it
fclfe  a  warm  vapour,  which  caufeth  a  naturall  gene-
ration of  thofe  things,  which  the  Earth,  as  a  matrix
is  impregnated  withall,  and  when  the  matrix  receives
adueproportionof  Seed,  of  what  kind  foever,    it
proceeds,  and  Nature  workes  without  intermiffion
■to  the  end;  but  the  remaining  moifture ,  or  Sperme
falls  to  thciiJe,  and  by  vcrtueofthe  heat  in  the
Earth  is  putrefied  (that  which  iscaft  to  the  fide^  and
of  that  afterwards  are  generated  other  things  ,    as
fmall  vermine ,  and  wormes.    The  Artificer  of  a
quicke  wit  may  indeed  fee  in  this  Element,  as  it  were
-out  of  Sperme,  divers  wonders  of  Nature;but  it  will
hz  necdfull  to  take  that  Sperm,  in  which  the  Aftrall

Seed


A  new  Light  of  Ale  hymte.  oy

Seed  in  a  ccrtainc  proportion  is  already  imngined,  or
conecivcd;  becviiile  Nature  makes,  and  produceth
purcthingsby  the  firft-piitrc^adion,  but  by  the  fe-
eond  farre  more  pure,  worthy^,  and  noble;  as  thou
haft  an  example  in  wood,  wh  ch  is  reeet able^where
inthefirft  compofition  Nature  makcth  wood^  but
t\'hen  that  is  after  maturity  corrupted,  it  is  putrefied,
and  of  it  worms  are  bred,  and  fuch  kind  of  vermine
as  they  are,  which  have  both  life,  and  fight :  for  it  is
manifcft,  thatafenfiblethingis  alwaies  more  wor«
thy. then  a  vegetable  ••  for  to  the  organs  of  fenfiblc
things  much  more  fubtile,  and  purer  matter  is  requi*
red :  But  to  return  to  our  purpofe. .

This  Element  is  the  Menftruum  of  the  world,  and.
is  divided  mto  three  forts,  nji\,  pure,  purer,  and  moil
pure^.  Of  the  moft  pure  fubftance  of  it  the  Heavens
are  created,  the  purer  is  rcfolved  into  Aire ,  but  the
pure,  plaine,  and  grofie  remains  in  its  fphcre,  and  by
divine  appomtment,and  operation  of  Nature  doth
prefeive  and  keep  every  thing  that  is  fubtile.  It;
makes  one  globe  together  with  the  Earth  :  it  hath
alfo  its  Center  in  the  heart  of  the  Sea  :  it  hath  one
axcUtree  and  pole  with  the  earth,  by  which  all  cour-
fcs,- and  fountaines  of  water  iflue  forth,  which  after^
ward  increalc,and  grow  up  into  great  rivers. By  thcfc
iffuing  forth  of  waters  the  Earth  is  prcferved  from
burnings.and  with  this  moiftnir.sthe  univerlall  Seed
is  carryed  forth  through  the  pores  of  the  whole
Earth,  which  thing  is  caufcd  through  heat,  and
motion.  Now  it  is  manifeft  that  all  courfes  of
Waters  return  into  the  heart  of  the  Sea^  but  whither
afterward  they  run  is  not  known  to  every  body. There
be  fouK  th«  think  that  all  rivers,  vvatcr^  and  fpring$

which:


g  8  ^  n^ro  Light  ofAlcbymiei

which  have  their  courfe  into  thefea^do  proceed  from
the  ftars,  who,  when  they  know  no  other  rcafon  why
the  fca  fliould  not  increale,  and  bee  f  uller^by  rcafon  of
them,fay  that  thefe  Waters  areconfumed  in  the  heart
of  thcfea.  But  this  Nature  will  not  admit  of,    as
wee  have  ihewed  when  we  fpake  of  the  Rain.     The
flats  indeed  caufc,  but  doe  not  generate  Water*,  fee-
ing nothing  is  generated  but  in  its  owne  like  of  the
famefpecics:  Now  the  Stars  confill  of  Fire ,    and
Aire,  how  then  fliould  they  generate  Waters  .^  And
if  it  were  fo^  that  fomc  Starres  fliould  generate  Wa-
ters,thcn  ncceflarily  alfo  mufl:  others  generate  Earth,
and  alfo  others  other  Elements :  becaufe  this  fabrick
of  the  world  is  fo  upheld  by  the  four  Elements,  that
one  may  not  exceed  another  in  the  leafl:  particle,  but
they  drive  one  with  the  other  in  an  equall  ballance;
for  otherwifc  if  one  fliould  exceed  the  other,  deftru-
dion  would  enfue.  Yet  let  every  one  perfevcre  in
what  opinion  hec  pleafe,  it  is  thus  flie  wed  to  us  by  the
light  of  Nature,  that  this  fabrick  of  the  world  is
preferved  by  thefe  four  Elements,  their  equality  be-
ing proportioned  by  the  great  God,  and  one  doth
not  exceed  the  other  in  its  operation.     But  the  Wa  -
tcrsuponthebaflsofthc  Earth  are  contained  as  it
were  in  fome  velTell  from  the  motion  of  the  Aire,and
towards  the  Articke  pole  are  by  it  confl:ringed ,  be-
caufe there  is  no  vacuum^  or  vacuity  in  the  vvorld:for
this  caufe  is  there  in  the  Center  of  the  Earth  the  fire
of  hell,  which  the  Archeus  of  Nature  doth  go-
vern.

For  in  the  beginning  of  the  Creation  of  the  world,
the  greatand  good  God  out  of  the  confufed  Chaos  ,
in  the  firft  place  exalted  the  quintcfTence  of  the  Ele-


ments,


A  mw  Light  ofAlcbymie^  8p

mcntS5&  that  is  made  the  utmoft bound  ofallthings:
then  he  lifttd  up  the  molt  pure  fubftancc  of  fire  above
all  thingSjto  place  his  moft  Sacred  Majefty  in,  and  fct
andcftablifheditin  itsbound.  In  the  Center  of  the
chaosCby  the  good  pleafure  of  Gods  infinite  wifdom)
that  Fire  was  kindled,which  akerward  did  diftil  thofc
moft  pure  waters. Rut  becaufe  now  that  moft  pure  fire
hath  obtained  the  place  of  the  Firmament,  together
with  the  throne  of  the  moft  high  God,  the  waters  are
condenfcd  under  that  Fircand  that  they  might  be  the
more  ftrongly  fortified,^  fetled5the  fire  that  is  grof-
fer  then  the  former,  was  then  raifed(this  by  means  of
the  Centrall  Fire)and  remained  in  the  fphere  of  Fire
under  the  Waters.-  and  fo  the  Waters  are  congealed,
and  ftiut  up  betwixt  two  Fires  in  the  heavens.     Buc
tliat  Centrall  Fire  never  ceafeth,  but  diftilling  more
Waters,  and  thofe  lefle  pure,  did  refolve  them  into
Aire,    which  alfo  abides  under  the  fphere  of  Fire  in
its  proper  fphere,    and  is  enclofed  by  the  Element  of
Fire,  as  with  a  fure,  and  ftrong  foundation  5  and  as
the  Waters  of  the  Heavens ,  cannot  goe  beyond  that
fupercelcftiall  Fire^fo  the  Element  of  Fire  cannot  go
beyond  the  Wearers  of  the  Heavens^  neither  can  the
Aire  go  beyond,  or  be  exalted  above  the  Element  of
Fire.  As  for  the  Watetjand  the  Earth,they  remained
in  one  globe,bccaufe  they  have  no  place  in  the  Aire,
except  that  part  of  the  Water,  which  the  Fire  doth
refolve  into  Aire,  for  the  daily  fortifying  of  this  fa-
bricfee  of  the  world.     For  if  there  had  been  a  vacui-
ty in  the  Aire,  then  all  the  Waters  had  diftillcd,  and
beenrefolved  into  Aire:  but  now  the  fphere  of  the
Aire  is  full,  and  is  alwaies  filled  through  the  diftilling
Waters,  by  the  continuall  Centrall  heat ,  fo  that  the

N  reft


ja  Anev^  Light  ofAkhymtt.

reft  of  the  Waters  are  by  the  comprciTion  of  the-
Aire  rolled  round  the  Earth ,  and  with  the  Earth<
make  up  the  Center  of  the  world-,  and  this  operati-
on is  performed  dayly,  and  fo  alfo  this  world  is  for-
tified daily,  and  fhall  for  ever  bee  naturally  prefcrvcd
from  corruption,  unleiTc  it  bee  the  goodpleafurc  of
the  moft  High  Creator  ( whofe  will  is  abfolutc )  that
k  ihall be otherwife.    Becaufe that CentrallFirc ne-
ver ceafeth  to  bee  kindled  by  the  univcrfall  motion,,
and  influence  of  the  heavenly  vertues,and  fo  to  warm-,
the  Waters;    neither  ihall  the  Waters  ceafc  to  bee
ttfolvedinto  Airev  neither  fhall  the  Aire  ceafe.  to
compreffe,  and  keep  down  the  rcfidue  of  the  Waters,
with  the  Earth,  and  fo  to  contain  them  in  the  Center, .
that  they  may  not  bee  moved  out  of  their  Center :
diuseven  in  a  naturall  manner  this  world  is  made,and
continued  through  the  mighty  wifdomc  of  God-,and
fo  according  to  the  example  of  this  it  is  neceffary
that  all  things  in  the  world  bee  naturally  made^  Wc
arc  willing  to  difcover  to  thee  further  this  creation
of  this  fabrickc  of  the  world,    that  thou  maift  know
that  the  foure  Elements  have  a  naturall  fympathy
withthefuperior,  becaufe  they  were  made  out  of
one  and  the  fame  Chaos :  but  they  are  governed  by
thefuperior,  as  the  more  \wrthy-,  and  from  thence
came  this  obedience  into  this  fublunary  place.    But
know  that  all  tliofc  things  were  naturally  found  out
by  the  Philofopli€r,as  (hal  be  fhewed  in  its  own  place.
Now  to  our  purpofc  concerning  the  Courfes  ol  Wa-
ters,and  the  ebbing  &  flowin^of  the  Sca,how  by  the
polarie  Axell  tree  they  arc  carrycd  from  one  pole  to
another.  There  are  two  Poles,  the  one  is  Anick,  and
iBthatpanthatisfuperior,.  andNorthcrne,  but  the

other


^  new  Light  ofAlchymk*  Jt

t)tkcrAntartickc  under  the  Earth,  and  in  the  Sou-
thcrnc  parr.    The  Articke  pole  hath  a  magnctickc
vcrtue  of  attracting,  but  the  Antarticke  pole  hath  a
magneticke  vertue  of  expelling ,  or  driying  from  :
and  this  Nature  holds  forth  to  us  in  the  example  of
the  Loadftone.   The  Articke  pole  therefore  drawcs
Waters  by  the  Axell-trce,    which  after  they  arc
€ntred  in,  break  forth  again  by  the  Axell  tree  of  the
Antarticke  pole  :    and  becaufe  the  Aire  doth  not
fuffer  an  inequality,  they  are  conftrained  to  return  to
the  Articke  pole,  their  Center,  andfo  continually  to
ob(crve  this  Courfe.     In  which  Courfe  from  the
Articke  pole,  to  the  Antarticke  pole  by  the  midlc,
or  Axeli-tree  of  the  world ,    they  arc  difperfcd
through  the  pores  of  the  Earth,  and  fo  according  to
more  or  Icflc  do  (prings  arifc,and  afterward  meeting
together  increafc,  and  become  to  be  rivers,  and  arc
again  returned  thither,  from  whence  they  came  out-;
and  this  is  unccflantly  done  through  the  univerfaH
motion.    Some  fas  I  faid  before  )  being  ignorant  of
the  univcrfall  motion,  and  the  operations  of  the  poles
fay  that  thefe  Waters  are  confumed  in  the  heart  of
thcfea,  and  generated  by  the  ftars ,  which  produce,
and  generate  nomateriall  thing,  imprclTing  only  ver-
tues,  and  fpirituall  in  fluencies,  which  cannot  give
any  weight  to  things.     Waters  thei*efore  are  not
generated^ but  know  that  they  come  forth  from  the
Center  of  tJie  Sea,  through  the  pores  of  the  Earthf
into  the  whole  world.    From  thefe  natiirall  Conclu-
(ions, or  Principles  Philofophers  have  found  out  di'^
wrs  inftruments,  and  conveyances  of  Waters,  as^
alfofountaincs,  fince  it  is  known,  that  Waters  can-
not natUEalty  aiccnd  higher  then  that  place"  is ,  from

N  2  whence


pa  A  new  Light  of  Alchjmie.

whence  they  comc',  and  unlcfTc  it  were  fo  in  Nature,
Art  could  never  doe  it,  bccaufe  Art  imitates  Na-
ture-, and  that  which  is  not  in  Nature  cannot  fuc-
cccd  by  Art5  for  Water,  as  I  faid  before ,  doth  not
afccnd  higher  then  the  place  from  whence  it  was  ta-
kcH-'thou  haft  for  an  example  that  inftrument,  with
which  Wine  is  drained  out  of  a  barrel!.

To  conclude  therefore,  know  that  Springs  ,  or
breakings  forth  of  Water  are  not  generated  of  Stars,
but  that  they  come  from  the  Center  of  the  Sea,
whither  they  return,  and  that  thus  they  obfervc  a
contiBuall  motion.  For  if  this  were  not  fo,  nothing
at  all  either  inf  the  earth ,  or  upon  the  earth  could
be  generated,  yea  the  ruine  of  the  world  would  of
necelTity  follow.  But  left  it  may  bee  objeded,  that
in  the  Sea  all  Waters  are  fait,  and  that  the  Waters
of  Springs  are  fweet  :  Know,  that  this  is  the  rea^
fbn,  becaufe  that  Water  diftills  through  the  pores
of  the  Earth,  and  palling  many  miles  through  nar-
row places,  and  through  fands ,  the  (altnefk  being
loft,  is  made  fweet  :  After  the  example  of  which
Gifterns  arc  found  out.  There  are  alfo  in  fome  pla-
ces greater  and  larger  pores,  and  paffages,  through
which  fait  Water  breaks  through,  where  afterwards
are  made  fait  pits ,  and  fountains,  as  at  HalU  in
G^rwrf^^.  Alfo  in  fome  places  the  Waters  arc  con-
ftringed  with  heat,  and  the  fait  is  left  in  the  fands>
but  the  Water  fweats  through  other  pores ,  as  in
foloma^  at  WUlkia,  and  Bochia  :  So  alfo  when  Wa-
ters parte  through  places,  that  are  hot,  fulphureous,
and  continually  burning,thcy  are  made  hot,  from
whence  Bathes  arife :  for  there  are  in  the  bowells  of
the  Emh places,  in  which  Niiturc  diftills,  andfepa-,

rates


A  new  Light  ofjlchymiei  p  5

rates  a  fulphurcous  Mine,  where^by  the  Ccntrall  Fire
it  is  kindled.    The  Water  running  throiigh  thefc
burning  places ,  according  to  the  nccrneflc  or  re-
motencflcare  more  or  IcfTc  hot,  and  Co  breaks  forth
into  the  fupcrficies  of  the  Earth,  and  retains  the  tail
of  Sulphur,  as  all  broth  doth  of  the  fteih ,  that  is
boiled  in  it.    After  the  fame  manner  it  is^whcn  Wa-
ter paffmg  through  places  where  areMineralls,  as
Copper,  AUum,  doth  acquire  the  favour  of    them.
Such  therefore  is  the  Diftiller ,   the  Maker  of  all
things,  in  whofe  hands  is  this  Diftillatory,  according
to  the  example  of  which  all  diftillations  have  been
invented  by  Philofophers  5  which  thing  the  moft
High  God  himielf  out  of  pity,  without  doubt,  hath
infpired  into  the  fons  of  men.*  and  he  can,  when  it
is  his  holy  will,either  extinguiih  the  Centrall  Fire,  or
break  the  veffell,  and  then  there  will  be  an  end  of  all.
But  (ince  his  goodneffe  doth  intend  the  bettering  of
all  things,  hee  will  at  length  exalt  his  moft  facrcd
Majefty,  and  raife  up  higher  the  pureft  Fire  of  all,
which  is  higher  then  the  Waters  of  the  Heavens
which  are  above  the  Firmament,  and  will  give  it  a
ftronger  degree  of  heat  then  the  Centrall  Fire,    that
all  the  Waters  may  bee  exhaled  up  into)  the  Aire,
and  the  Earth  be  calcined,  and  fo  the  Fire,all  the  im-
purity being  confumed  ,  will  make  the  Waters  of
the  purified  Earth,  being  circulated  in  the  Aire,  to  be
more  fubtilc,and  will  (if  wee  may  thus  fpeak  in  a  way
of  Philofophy)  make  a  world  much  more  excellent*
'Therefore  let  all  the  Searchers  ot  this  Art  know,
that  the  Earth,  and  Water  make  one  globe,  and  be-
ing together  make  all  things,  becaufe  they  are  tangi-
ble Si^mcmSj  in  which  the  other  two  being  hid  doe

N  5  s  work.


^  A  new  Light  oJAlchymk*

work.  The  Fire  prcfervcs  the  Earrh,  that  it  bcc  not
drowned,  or  diflblvcd :  the  Aire  prefcrvcs  the  Fire
that  it  bee  not  extingui{lied:the  Water  prefcrvcs  the
Earth  that  it  bee  uot  burnt.  It  feemcd  good  to  us  to
defcribe  thefe  things-,  as  conducing  to  our  purpofe,
that  the  ftudious  may  know,  in  what  things  the  tbun-
-dations  of  the  Elements  corfift,  and  how  Philofo-
phcTS  have  obfervcd  their  contrary  a(f^ingsj  joining
Fire  with  Earth,  and  Aire  with  Water  .•  although
when  they  would  doe  any  excellent  thing,  they  have
boiled  Fire  in  Water,  confidering  that  one  blood  is
purer  then  another,as  a  tearis  purer  then  urine.  Let
that  therefore  fuflicc  which  we  have  fpoken,T;:(.that
the  Element  of  Water  is  the  Sperm,and  Menftruum
of  the  world,  as  alfo  chc.rcccptacle  of  the  Sced»


OF


daewhigbtofAkbymie.  J^


OF

The  ELEMENT  of

A  I  R.  E-


[HE  Aire  is  an  entire  Elcmcntjinoft  ^vortfiy
'  of  the  three  in  its  quality,  without, I  ightj
and  invifiblc,but  within,heavy,vifiblc5and
fixed,  it  is  hot,  and  moift,  and  tempered
with  Fire,and  more  worthy  then  Eanh,&Water.Itis
volatiljbut  may  be  fixed-,suid  when  it  is  fixed,it  makes
every  body  penetrable.  Of  its  moft  pure  fubftancc
the  vitall  fpirits  of  living  Creatures  are  made  5  that
which  is  IcfTe  pure  is  taken  up  into  its  proper  fphercof
the  Aire^  but  the  rcfidue,  vt\,  the  grofferpart  abides
inthe  Water^and  is  circulated  with  the  Water,  as
Ifre  with  Earth,  becaufe  they  are  friendly  the  one  to
the  other.  It  is  mofl  worthy,  aswcchavefaid',  and  it
is  the  true  place  of  the  Seed  of  all  things;  in  it  Seed  is
imagined  ,  as  in  man^which  afterward  by  the  circula*
dog  motion  is  caft  into  its  own  Spcrm.This  Element

hath .


^6  A  nerp  Light  of  Alcbymie^

hath  the  form  of  entircneflc  to  diftributc  the  ^tt6.
into  Matrixes  by  the  Sperm,  andMcnftruum  of  the
world.  In  it  alfo  is  the  vitall  fpirit  of  every  Crea-
ture, Hving  in  all  things,penetrating,  and  conftrii^ing
the  feed  in  other  Elements,  as  Males  doe  in  Females.
It  nouriilieth  them,  makes  them  conceive,  and  prc-
fcrveth  them^  and  this  daily  experience  teacheth,that
in  this  Element  not  only  Mineralis,   Animalls,   or
Vegetables  live  but  alfo  other  Elements.  For  wee  fee
that  all  Waters  become  putrefied,  and  filthy  if  they
have  not  freHi  Aire :  The  Fire  alfo  is  extinguifhed,  if
the  Aire  be  taken  from  it :  (Thence  Chymifts  come
to  know  how  to  difpofc  of  their  Fire  into  fcverall  de-
grees by  means  of  tne  Aire,  and  to  order  their  regi-
ftcrs  according  to  the  meafure  ofthe  AirrjThe  pores
alfo  ofthe  Earth  are  piefervcd  by  Aire  :  In  briefc,thc
whole  ftrudure  of  the  world  is  prelerved  by  Aire.
Alfo  in  Animalls,  Man  dies  if  you  take  Aire  from
him,  &c.  Nothing  would  grow  in  the  world,if  there
were  not  a  power  ofthe  Aire^penetrating  ,  and  alte-
ring, bringing  with  it  fclfe  nutriment  that  multiplies.
Inthis  Element  by  vertue  ofthe  Fire  is  that  imagi-
ned Seed,  which conftringeth the  Menftruum  ofthe
world  by  its  occult  power,as  in  trees^and  herbs,when
through  the  pores  ofthe  Earth,  by  the  a<fiing  of  the
fpirituall  heat,  there  goeth  forth  a  Sperm  with  the
Seed  5  and  the  vertue  of  the  Aire  in  a  proportion
conftringeth,  and  congeals  it  by  drops-,   and  fo  trees
by  growing  day  after  day,  drop  after  drop,  are  at
length  raifcd  to  be  great  treesj  as  wee  have  treated  in
the  book  ofthe  Tw"elve  Treatifes.  In  this  Element
are  all  things  entire  through  the  imagination  of  Fire  5
and  it  is  full  of  divine  vertue :  for  in  it  is  included  the

fpirit


A  new  Light  of  Alchymiel  pj

Spirit  of  thcraoft  High,  whiclj  before  the  Creation
wascarryed  upon  the  Waters  ,  as  faith  the  Scn^-
imCy  And  d:dfiy  u^on  the  wings  ef  the  Wind,  If
therefore  it  bee  fo,  as  indeed  it  is,  that  the  Spirit  of
thcLordiscarryedinit,  why  needs  thou  queftion
but  that  he  hath  left  his  divine  vertue  in  if  r*  For  this
Monarch  is  wont  to  adorn  his  dwelling  places .  hec
hath  adorned  this  Element  with  the  vitall  fpirit  of
every  Creature :  for  in  it  is  the  (ted  of  all  things,
difperfcd,in  which  prefcntly  after  the  Creation  was
(as  wee  faid  before  )  by  the  great  Maker  of  all  things
included  that  magncticke  verrue  which  if  it  had  not,
it  coiild  notattra(5tany  nomiflimentjbut  fothc  Seed
muftbeleftina  fmall  quantity,  neither  would  in-
creafe,  or  bee  multiply ed-,  but  as  the  Load-Aone
drawes  to  it  felf  hard  Iron  (  after  the  manner  of  the
Articke  pole^  drawing  waters  to  it  felfe,  as  we  have
fhewed  in  the  Element  of  Water  J  fo  the  Aire  by  a
Vegetable  magnetick  power,  which  is  in  the  Seed  ,
draws  to  it  felfe  the  nourilhmenr  of  the  Menftruum  of
the  world, /.e.  Water.  Allthefe  things  are  made  by
Aite,for  that  is  the  leader  of  the  Waters,and  the  oc»
cult  vertue  thereof  is  included  in  all  Seed  for  the  at-
trading  of  radicall  moifture,  and  this  vertue  is ,  as
wee  faid  before,  alwaiesthe  i^o^^-^zxi  in  all  Seed,
as  wee  have  fhewed  thee  in  the  third  of  the_  Twelve
Treatifes.  If  therefore  any  one  would  fucccffcfully
plant  trees,  let  him  bee  carefull  that  hce  turn e  the
attra(5tive  point  towards  the  Northern  part  5  fo  hee.
ihall  never  lofe  his  labour  ••  for  as  the  Articke  pole
drawes  to  it  felfe  the  Waters,  fo  the  verticle  point
draws  to  it  felf  Sced^and  every  attradive  point  doth
anfwcr  to  them.Thou  haft  an  example  in  all  manner

O  c*


jS  A  new  Light  ofAlchymie.

of  Wood,  whofe  attradivc  point  doth  naturally
tend  to  the  verticle  point,  and  is  drawne  by  it.  For
let  a  bowlc  of  Wood,  if  thou  wilt  know  which  is  the
fupcrior  point,  be  put  into  water,  and  let  it  fink  (  fo
that  the  water  exceed  the  length  of  the  Wood  )  thou
fhalt  alwaies  fee  that  point  rife  up  before  the  oppofitc
part*,  for  Nature  knows  not  how  to  errc  in  her  office:
but  of  thefe  wc  fliall  treat  further  in  our  book  called
HArmon'iA^  where  wee  (hall  fpeak  more  of  the  magne-
ticke  Tcrtue  f  although  he  fiiall  bee  eafily  able  to  un-
derftand  the  Loadftone,to  whom  the  nature  of  Me-
talls  is  knowne  ;  Let  this  fuffice  that  wee  have  faid,
that  this  Element  is  the  moft  worthy  of  the  three  ia
which  is  Seed,  and  vitall  fpirit,  or  dwelling  place  of
the  foule  of  every  Creature.


OF


A  new  Light  ofAlcbymit*  9^


OF


The  E  L  E  M  E  N  T  of

FIRE


|Irc  is  the  pureft,and  moft  worthy  Eleiricnt
"  of  all,  full  of  unduous  corrofivenefle  ad-
hering to  it ,  penetrating,  digefting,  cor-
roding, and  wonderfully  adhering,  with-
out, vifible,  but  within  invifible,  and  moft  fixed-,  it
is  hot,  dry,  and  tempered  with  Aire.    Its  fubftancc
is  the  pureft  of  all,,  and  its  eflcnce  was  firft  of  all
elevated  in  the  Creation  with  the  throne  of  d'mne:
Majcfty ,  when  the  Waters  of  the  Heavens  were
cftabliOied,as  we  have  faid  in  the  Element  of  Water:
out  of  the  lefTe  pure  part  of  its  fubftancc  the  Angells
were  created;  out  of  that  which  was  Icfle  pure  then
that,  being  mixed  with  the  pureft  Aire ,   were  the
Sun,  Moon  and  Stars  created.    That  which  is  Icfte
pure  then  that  is  raifed  up  to  terminate,  and  hold  up
the  Heavens :  but  the  impure,  and  unduous  part  of  it

O2  is


lOO  AfiiXP  Light  of  AUhymie*

is  left,  and  included  in  the  Center  of  the  Earth  by  the
wife,  and  great  Creator,  for  to  continue  the  opera-
tion  of  motion,  and  this  wee  call  Hell.  All  thefc
Fires  arc  indeed  divided ,  but  they  have  a  Naturall
fympathy  one  towards  another.

This  Element  is  of  all  the  moft  quiet,  and  like
unto  a  charriot,  when  it  is  drawed,  it  runs ,  when
it  is  not  drawed ,  it  ftands  ftill.  It  is  alfo  in  all
things  undifcernibly.  In  it  are  the  reafons  of  life, and
undeiilsnding,  which  arc  diftributed  in  the  firftin-
fufion  of  Mans  life,  and  thefe  are  called  the  rational
foulc,  by  which  alone  Man  differs  from  other  Crea-
tures, and  is  like  to  God.  This  foule  is  of  that  mod
pure  Elementary  Fire,  infufcdby  God  into  the  vi-
tall  fpirit,  by  reafon  of  which  Man  after  the  Crea-
tion of  all  things  was  created  into  a  particular
World,  or  Microcofme.  In  this  fubjcd  God  the
Creator  of  all  things  put  his  feal,  and  Majefty,  as  in
thepureft,andquieteftfubje^,whichis  governed  by
the  will,  and  infinite  wifdome  of  God  alone.Wherc-
fore  God  abhors  all  impurity,  nothing  that  is  filthy-
compounded  ,  or  blemilhed  may  come  neer  him,
therefore  no  mortall  man  can  fee  God,  nor  come  to
Jiim  naturally.-  forthat  Fire  which  is  in  the  circumfe-
rence of  the  Divinity,in  which  iscarryed  the  Scale
and  Majefty  of  the  Moft  High,  is  fo  intenie  ,  that
no  eye  can  penetrate  it :  for  Fire  will  not  fuffer  any
thing  that  is  compounded  to  come  neer  to  it  :  for
Fire  is  the  death,  and  fcparation  of  any  thing  that  is
compounded.  Wee  have  faid  that  it  is  the  mo/l
quiet  fubje(5lCfor  fo  it  is)  or  elfe  it  would' follow
fwhich  fo  much  as  to  thinkc  were  abfurd  )  that
God  could  not  reft-,  for  it  is  of  moft  quiet  iilcncc  ,

more


An^w  Light  ofAlchjmie.         lor

more  then  any  mans  mind  can  imagine.    Thou  haft
an  examf)lc  of  this  in  the  Flint^in  which  there  is  Fire,
and  yet  is  not  perceived,  neither  doth  appear,  untill
it  be  ftirred  up  by  motion,   and  kindled  in  it  that  ic
may  appear ;  fo  the  Fire  in  which  is  placed  the  facred
Majcfty  of  our  Creator,  is  not  moved,  unldOTe  it  be
ftirred  up  by  the  proper  will  of  the  moil  High  ,  and
fo  is  carrycd  where  his  holy  Will  is.  There  is  made
by  the  Will  of  the  fuprcame  Maker  of  all  things  k
moft  vehement,  and  terrible  motion.    Thou  haft  an
Example  of  this,  when  any  Monarch  ot  this  world
fits  in  his  pompc.  What  a  quictnefTc  there  is  about
him?  Whatiilencc^  and  although  fome  one  of  his
Court  doth  more,  the  motion  is  only  of  fome  one,
or  other  particular  man,  which  is  not  regarded.  But
when  the  Lord  himfelf  moves,  there  is  an  univerfall
ftirre,  and  motion,  then  all  that  attend  on  him,|movc
with  him.  What  thenr'when  that  fupream  Monarch,
the  King  oi  Kings,  and  Maker  of  all  things  ( after
whofe  example  the  Princes  of  the  world  arc  efta-
bliflicd  in  the  earth )  doth  move  in  his  own  perfon  of
Majeftyf  Whataftirrer'  What  trembling,  when
the  whole  guard  of  his  heavenly  Army  move  about
himr*  But  fome  one  may  ask.  How  doe  wee  know
thcfe  things,  fince  heavenly  things  are  hid  from  Mans
underftandinp^    To  whom  wee  anfwerjthat  they  arc
manifeft  to  all  Philofophers^  yea  the  incomprehen-
fible  wifdome  of  God  hath  infpired  into  them  ,  that
all  things  are  created  after  the  example  of  Nature,
tnd  that  Natutc  hath  its  bounds  from  thofe  (ecret
things,  and  accordingly  workes*,  and  that  nothing  is
done  on  the  earth,  but  according  to  the  example  of
tjjc  heavenly  Monaiciiy,  which  is  managed  by
.  ;•/  O  3  the


I03  A  mw  Light  oJAlchymie.

the  divers  offices  of  Angells.  So  alio  there  is  nothing
brought  forth,  or  generated,    but  what  is  done  na-
turally. All  humane  inventions, yea  and  Arts,  which
cither  are,  or  fliall  bee ,  proceed  not  otherwife  then
from  Naturall  principles.    The  moil  High  Creator
was  willing  to  manifeft  all  Naturall  things  unto  man,
wherefore  hee  fhewed  to  us  that  Celeftiall  things
themfelvcs  were  naturally  made,  by  which  his  abfo-
lute,  and  incomprehenfible  power  ,    and  wifdomc
might  be  fo  much  the  better  known^  all  which  things
the  Philofophers  in  the  light  of  Nature ,    as  in  a
Looking-glalfe,  have  the  cleer  fight  of.    Far  which
caufe  they  efteemed  highly  of  this  Art,  vi^  not  fo
much  out  of  covetoufncfle  for  Gold,orSilver,but  for
knowledge  fake ,   not  only  of  all  Naturall  things,
but  alfo  of  the  power  of  the  Creator,  and  they  were
willing  to  fpeak  of  thefe  things  fparingly ,  and  only
figuratively,  left  divine  myfterics  by  which  Nature
is  illuftrated,  fliould  be  difcovered  to  the  unworthy,
which  thouj^f  thou  knoweft  how  to  know  thy  felfc ,
and  art  not  of  a  ftiffe  neck,maift  eafily  comprehend^
who  art  created  after  the  likeneffe  of  the  great  world,
yea  after  the  image  of  God.  Thou  haft  in  thy  body
the  Anatomy  of  the  whole  world,  thou  haft  in  ftead
of  the  Firmament  the  quint effence  of  the  foure  Ele-
ments, extra(fted  out  of  the  Chaos  of  Sperms,  into  a
matrix,  and  into  a  skin,   which  doth  compaffe  it
round,  thou  haft  moft  pure  blood  in  ftead  of  Fire,in
the  vitall  fpirit  whereof  is  placed  the  feat  of  the  (bule
(  which  is  in  ftead  of  the  King-,  J  thou  haft  a  heart  in
ftead  of  the  earth-,  where  the  Centrall  Fire  continu-
ally works-,  and  prefervcs  the  fabrick  of  this  Micro-
cofm  in  its  being- thou  haft  thy  mouth  in  ftead  of  the

Artickc


A  nerv  Light  ojAlchymie*  105

Articke  pole-,3nd  thy  belly  in  fteadofthe  Antarticke,
and  all  thy  members  anfwer  to  fomc  Celeftialls  .•  of
which  in  our  booke  of  Harmony  wee  fliall  treat  more
fully,  vi^  in  the  Chapter  of  Allronomy5where  we
have  wrote  how  that  Aftronomy  is  eafy^naturall^how
rhe  afpeds  of  Planets,  and  Stars  are  efficacious,  and
why  Prognoftication  is  given  of  Raine  ,  and  other
events,  which  would  bee  too  tedious  to  reckon  up
here,  and  all  thefeare  linked  together,and  performed
inanaturall  manner,  onely  God  doiHfome  things
extraordinary.  Becaule  the  Ancients  omitted  it,  we
are  willing  to  fhew  it  to  him  that  is  diligently  ftudious
of  this  fccret ,  that  the  incomprehcnfiblc  power  of
the  moft  High  God,  may  fo  much  the  more  cleerly
come  home  to  his  heart,  and  that  hce  may  love,  and
adore  him  the  more  zealoufly.  Let  therefore  the
Searcher  of  thisfacred  fciencc  know  ,  that  the  foule
in  a  man  the  Iclfcr  world,  or  Microcofme  fubftituting
the  place  of  its  Center,  is  the  King,  and  is  placed  in
the  vitall  fpirit,  m  the  pureft  bloud.  That  govcrnes
the  mind,  and  the  mind  the  body  :  when  the  foule
conceives  any  thing,  the  mind  knows  all  things,  and
all  the  members  underftand  the  mind,  and  obey  the
mind,  and  are  defirous  to  fulfill  the  will  thereof*
For  the  body  knows  nothing ,  whatfoever  ftrength^
or  motion  is  in  the  body,  is  caufed  by  the  mind  5  the
body  is  to  the  mind,  as  inftruments  are  to  the  Artifi-
ccrj  Now  the  foule,by  which  man  differs  from  other
Animalls,  operates  in  the  body,  but  it  hath  a  greater
operation  out  of  the  body,beeaure  out  of  the  body  it
abfolutely  reigns,  and  by  thefe  things  it  differs  from
other  Animalls,  who  have  only  the  mind ,  not  the
ifoulc  of  the  Deity.  So  aifo  God,  the  Maker  of  all

things.


104.  A  mw  Light  fifAIchyftui;

things,our  Lord,  and  our  God,  works  in  this  world
thofc  things  ,   which  arc  neccfTary  for  the  world  ;
and  in  thcfc  hec  is  included  in  the  worlds     whence
wee  belecve  that  God  is  every  where.    But  hee  is
excluded  the  body  of  the  world  by  his  infinite  wif-
dome,  by  which  hee  workes  out  of  the  world,  and
imagines   much    higher  things,      then  the  body
of  the  world  is  able  to  conceive,  and  thofe  things  arc
beyond  Nature,  being  the  fecrets  of  God  alone.  You
have  the  foul  for  an  example,  which  out  of  the  body
imagines  many  moft  profound  things,  and  in  this  it  is
like  unto  God,  who  out  of  the  world  works  beyond
Nature;  although  the  foule  to  God  bee  as  it  were  a
candle  lighted  to  the  light  at  Noonday :  for  the  foul
imagines,  but  executes  notbut  inthe  mind-,but  God
dothcffed  all  things  the  fame  moment  when  hee
imagines  them;  as  the  foul  imagines  any  thing  to  be
done  at  Rome^  orelfewhere  in  the  twinckling  of  an
eye,  but  onlyin  the  mind-,  but  God  doth  all  fuch
things  cfTentially  5  who  is  omnipotent.    God  there-
fore is  not  included  in  the  world,  but  as  the  foul  in
the  body^  he  hath  his  abfolute  power  feparated  from
the  world,  fo  alfo  the  foul  of  any  body  hath  its  abfo-
lute power  feparated  from  the  body,    to  doe  other
things  then  the  body  can  conceive  •,  it  hath  a  very
great  power  therefore  upon  the  body,  if  it  pleafeth,
or  otherwife  our  Philofophy  were  in  vain.    By  thefc
therefore  learn  to  know  God,  and  thou  ihalt  know  in
which  the  Creator  differs  from  the  Creature.  Thou
thy  felfe  {halt  be  able  to  conceive  greater  things,
when  as  now  thou  haft  the  gate  opened  by  us.     But
left:  this  Treatifefliould  grow  too  big,  let  usreturnc
to  our  purpofc.

Wcc


A  mw  Light  ofAlcbymie^  105

Wee  faid  before  that  the  Element  of  Fire  is  the
moft  quiet  of  all,  and  that  it  is  ftirrcd  up  by  motion,
which  ftirring  up  wife  men  knew.It  is  ncccfTary  that
a  Philofopher  know  the  generation,  and  corruption
o?  all  things,  to  whom  not  only  the  Creation  of  the
Heavens  is  manifeft,  but  alfo  the  compofition ,  and
mixture  of  all  things :  but  although  they  know  all
things,  yet  they  cannot  doe  all  things.We  know  in-
deed the  compofition  of  Man  in  all  refpe6ts,yet  wee
cannot  infufe  thefoulc^becaufc  this  myftery  belongs
only  unto  God:&  he  exxeeds  all  things  bythefe  kind
of  infinite  myfteries.  Seeing  thefe  are  out  of  the  corfc
of  Nature,  they  are  not  as  yet  in  the  difpofition  of
Nature  :  Nature  doth  not  work  before  there  be  mat*
ter  given  unto  her  to  work  upon.  The  firft  matter  is
given  to  her  by  God,  the  fecond  by  the  Philofopher.
Now  in  the  operation  of  the  Philofophers  Nature
hath  a  power  to  ftir  up  the  fire,  which  by  the  Creator
is  fccretly  included  in  the  Center  of  every  thing  .*
This  ftirring  up  of  the  fire  is  done  by  the  will  of  Na-
ture, fometimes  by  the  will  of  the  skilfull  Artificer
difpofing  of  Nature.  For  naturally  all  impurities^
and  pollutions  of  things  are  purged  by  Fire  :  All
things  that  are  compounded,  arc  dilTolved  by  Fire  :
as  water  wafheth,  and  purgeth  all  things  imperfed ,
which  are  not  fixcdj  fothe  Fire  purgeth  all  things
that  are  fixed,  and  by  Fire  they  are  pcrfedled  .•  As
Water  doth  conjoine  all  things  that  are  dilfolvcd  ^  fo
fire  feparates  all  things  that  are  conjoined-,and  what  Is
naturall,and  of  affinity  with  it,it  doth  very  wel  purge,
and  augment  it,not  in  quantity  but  in  vcrtue.This  ele-
ment doth  fevcrallwayes  fccretly  work  upon  other
Elcments,andall  things  elfe.- For  as  the  Animall  foul

P  is


jo6  A nen^  Light  ofAlchyntie.

isof  thepureft  of  this  Element,  fo  the  Vegetable  f$
.of  the  Elementary  part  of  it  J  which  is  governed  by
Nature.  This  Element  doth  a<5l  upon  the  Center  of
every  thing  in  this  manner :  Nature  caufeth  Motion,
Motion  ftirs  up  Aire,  the  Aire  the  Fire  5  Now  Fire
fcparates,  cleanfcth^digefleth,  colourcth,and  maketh
all  feed  to  ripen^and  being  ripe  expells  it  by  the  fperm
into  places, and  matnxes5into  places  pure  or  impure,
more  or  lelle  hot,  dry  or  moiftjand  acccording  to  the
difpofitionofthe  matriXjOrplaccs^divers  things  are
brought  forth  in  the  earth ,  as  in  the  booke  of  the
Twelve  Trcatifes  concerning  Matrixes  mention  hath
been  made,  that  there  are  as  many  Matrixes,  as  pla-
ces. So  the  Builder  of  all  things ,  the  moft  High
God  hath  determined,  and  ordained  all  things,  that
one  fliall  be  contrary  unto  the  other,  yet  fo  that  the
death  of  the  one  be  the  life  of  the  other :  that  which
produceth  one,  confumeth  another ,  and  another
thing  from  this  is  naturally  produced ,  and  fuch  a
thing  which  is  more  noble  then  the  former:  and
by  this  means  there  is  prcfcrved  an  equality  of  the
Elements,  and  fo  alfo  of  the  coppofitum.  Separa-
tion is  of  all  things,  efpecially  of  Jiving  things  the
naturall  death  :  Wherefore  man  muft  naturally  die
becaufe  hee  is  compounded  of  four  Elements  ,  hce  ts
fubjed  to  feparition,  feing  every  thing  that  is  com-
pounded is  feparared  naturally.  But  this  feparation
of  Mans  compo/ition  muft  needs  have  been  done  in
thedayof  judgement,/. (f.  the  firft judgement,  when
the  fentence  of  a  naturall  death  was  palled  upon  himr
for  in  Paradife  Man  was  immortall.  Which  all  Di-
vines, as  alio  Sacred  Writ  doth  teftifie ;  but  a  fuffi-
cient  reafon  of  this  immortality  no  Philofopher  hi-
therto


A  new  Light  ef  Alchymiei  1 07

therto  hath  fhcwcd  i    which  it  is  convenient  for  the
Searcher  of  this  facred  Science  to  know,  that  he  may
fee  how  all  thclc  things  are  done  naturally  ,  and  bee
moftcalily underftood.    But  it  is  moft  true,  that
every  compound  thing  in  this  world  is  rubje(5l  to  cor-
ruption, and  reparation;  which   reparation  in  the
Animall  Kingdome  is  called  death  .*  And  man  feeing
hcc  is  created  and  compounded  of  foure  Elements  »
how  can  hee  bee  immortall  .<*  It  is  hard  to  beleeve
that  this  is  done  naturally-,but  that  there  is  fomcthing
above  Nature  in  it.    Yet  God  hath  infpired  it  into
Philofophcrs  that  were  good  men  many  ages  (ince,
that  this  is  fo  naturally.  Which  take  to  be  thus.  Parai-
difcwas^andisfucha  place,  which  was  created  by
the  great  Maker  of  all  things,  of  true  Elements,  not
clementated,  but  moft  pure,  temperate,  equally  pro-
portioned in  the  higheft  perfc(5tion  j   and  all  things
that  were  in  Paradife  were  created  of  the  fame  Ele-
ments, and  incorrupt;    there  alfo  was  Man  created
and  framed  of  the  fame  incorruptcd  Elements,  pro-
portioned in  equality,that  hecould  in  no  wife  be  cor-
ruptcdjtherefore  he  was  confecratcd  to  immortality :
forwithout  all  doubt  God  created  this  Paradife  for
men  only,  of  which  and  where  it  is  wee  have  largely
treated  in  our  book  of  Harmony.     But  when  after-
wards Man  by  his  finne  of  difobedience  had  tranf-
grelTcd  the  comandementof  the  moft  High  God, hee
was  driven  torth  to  beafts  into  the  corruptible  world
clcmentated,which  God  created  only  for  beafts; who
of  nccelfity,  feeing  he  cannot  live  without  nutriment,
muft  from  corrupt  clementated  Elements  receive
nutriment.  By  which  nutriment  thofepure  Elements
of  which  he  was  crcated,werc  infededjand  fo  by  little

P  2  and


I  o8  A  new  Lrgbt  ofAlchjmh,

and  little  declined  intocorruptionjuntill  one  quality
exceeded  anothcrjand  deftrudtion,  infirmity^  and  laft
of  all  reparation,  and  death  of  the  whole  compound
followed.  So  that  now  they  are  neer  unto  corrup-
tion and  death,  who  are  procreated  in  corrupt  Ele-
ments, of  corrupt  Seed,  and  not  in  Paradife^for  Seed
produced  out  or  corrupt  nutriments  cannot  be  dura-
blc;  and  by  how  much  the  longer  it  is  fince  the  dri-
ving forth  of  man  out  of  Paradifc^fo  much  the  nce-
rcr  men  are  to  corruption  j  and  by  confequencc
their  lives  arc  fo  much  ihorter  ,  and  it  will  come
to  this  palTe,  that  even  generation  it  felfe  by  rea-
fon  of  the  fliortnefTe  of  life  fhall  ceafe.  Yet  there
are  fome  places ,  where  the  Aire  is  more  favoura-
ble, and  the  Starrcs  more  propitious ,  and  there
their  Natures  are  not  fofoon  corrupted,  becaufe  alfa
they  live  more  temperately :  Our  Countrcy-men  by
reafon  ofgluttony,  and  inordinate  living  make  quick
haft  to  corruption.  This  experience  teacheth,  that
they  that  are  born  of  the  ktd  otinfirme  Parents  doe
not  live  long.  But  if  man  had  continued  in  Para-
dife.aplacc  futable  to  his  Nature,  where  all  the
Elements  were  as  incorrupt,  and  pure  as  a  vnrgin,  hee
had  been  immortall  for  ever.  For  it  is  certain  that
when  pure  Elements  arc  joined  together  equally  in
their  vertues,  fuch  a  fubje<5t  muft  be  incorrupted,  and
fuch  muft  the  Philofophers  Stone  bee :  Tothis  Cre-
ation of  Man  the  ancient  Philofophers  have  likened
this  Stone ,  but  Modern  Philofophers  underftanding
allthings  according  to  the  letter  doe  apply  it  to  the
corrupt  generation  of  this  age.

This  Immortality  was  the  chief  caufc  that  Philo-
fophers cxercifed  their  wits  to  find  out  this  Stone,

for


A  nm  Light  dfjlchymiei         Top

for  they  knew  that  man  was  create  d  of  fuch  Elements
which  were  found  and  pure.  They  therefore  medita-
ted upon  that  Creation,  which  ,  when  they  knew
to^bee  naturall,  began  to  fearch  further  into  it^whe-
ther  fuch  uncorrupted  Elements  could  bee  had,  or  if
they  could  be  joined  together,  and  infufed  into  any
fubjed:;  Now  to  thcfe  themoft  High  God,  and  Ma-
ker of  all  things  revealed,  that  a  compofirion  of  fuch
Elements  was  in  Gold :  For  in  Animalls  it  could  not
be  had,feing  they  muft  preferve  their  lives  by  corrupt
ElementS5in  Vegetables  alfo  it  is  not,becaufe  in  them
is  found  an  inequality  of  the  Elements.  And  feeing  all
created  things  are  inclined  to  multiplication,  the  Phi-
lofophers  propounded  to  themfelves  that  they  would
make  tryall  of  the  poffibility  of  Nature  in  this  Mine-
rail  Kingdomej  which  being  difcovered,  they  faw
that  there  were  innumerable  other  fecrecs  in  Nature,
of  which,  as  of  Divine  fecrets,they  have  wrote  fpa-
ringly.  So  now  thou  feeft  how  corrupt  Elements
come  to  bee  in  a  fubjed,  and  how  they  are  feparated;
when  one  exceeds  the  other,and  becaufe  then  putre*
ftion  is  made  by  the  firft  fcparation,andIby  putrefa<f^i-
onismadcafeparationof  thepurefrom  the  impure,
if  then  there  be  a  new  conjunction  of  them  by  ver-
tue  of  Fire,  it  doth  acquire  a  form  much  more  nobJc
then  the  firlt  was.For  in  its  firft  date,  corruption  was
byreafonof  grofTe  matter  mixed  with  it,  which  is
not  purged  away  but  by  putrefadion ,  the  fubjed
thereby  being  betteredj  and  this  could  not  be  but  by
the  vertuesof  the  foure  Elements,which  are  in  every
compound  thing,  being  joined  together  ;  for  when  a
Compofitum  muft  perifli,  it  periftieth  by  the  Ele-
ment of  Waterj  and  whilcft  they  lie  thus  confufcdiy,

P3        ■  the


no  A  new  Light  ofAlchymte^

the  Fire  together  with  the  Earth ,   and  Aire  which  it
is  in  potentially,  agree  together,  and  by  their  united
forces  do  afterward  overcome  the  Water,which  they
digeft,  boilc,  and  laftly  congeal;  and  after  this  man-
ner Nature  helps  Narnre.  For  if  the  hidden  Central
Fire,  which  is  the  life  of  all  things  overcomes ,   and
works  upon  that  which  is  neercr  to  it,  and  purer ,  as
it  felfe  is  moft  pure,  and  is  joined  with  it :  fo  it  over-
comes its  contrary,  and  feparatcs  the  pure  from  the
impure,  and  there  is  a  new  form  generated,  anc|  if  it
bee  yet  a  little  helped,  much  mo^e  excellent  then  the
former.  Sometimes  by  the  wit  of  a  skilful!  Artificer
there  are  made  things  immortall ,  efpecially  in  the
thcMinerall  Kingdome.  So  all  things  are  done  by
Fire  alone ,  and  the  government  of  Fire ,  and  arc
brought  forth  Into  a  being,  if  thou  haft  underftood
mec.

Here  now  thou  haft  the  original!  of  the  Elements,
their  Natures,  and  operations  defcribed  unto  thee
very  briefly,  which  is  fufficient  for  our  purpofc  in  this
place.  For  otherwifc  if  every  Element  were  defcribed
as  it  is,  it  would  require  a  great  volume  not  neceffa-
ry  for  our  purpofe.  All  tfiofe  things,  as  wcefaid
before,  wee  refer  to  our  book  of  Harmony  ,  where
God  willing,  if  wee  live  fo  long,wec  fhail  write  more
largely  of  Natural!  things.


OF


A  mvp  Light  ofjlchymie.  1 1 1


aje    eij    alt!    «!»    tm    tin    •*»    r^    aia    aia    32    aic    £*•    aLj    alc    aj*


OFTHE

THREE  PRINCIPLES

Of  all  things.

^Hefe  four  Elements  being  dcfcribed,  we  wil
'  nowdefccnd  unto  the  Principles  of  things.
But  how  they  are  produced  of  the  fourc
Elements,  take  it  thus.  After  Nature
had  received  from  the  moft  high  Creator  of  all  things
the  priviledge  of  being  PrincefTe  over  this  Monarchy
of  the  world,  fbce  began  to  diftribute  places ,  and
Provinces  to  everything,  according  to  its  dignity,
and  in  the  firft  place  ihce  made  the  Elements  the  Prin-
ces of  the  world-  and  that  the  will  of  the  moft  High
fin  whofe  will  Nature  was  placed)  might  be  fulfilled,
fhe  ordained  that  one  fliould  continually  ad  upon  the
other.Thc  Fire  therefore  began  to  a6l  upon  the  Aire,
and  produced  Sulphur^tke  Air  alfo  began  to  ad  upon
the  Water  ,&  brought  forth  Mercury,  the  Water  alfo
began  to  ad  upon  the  Earth,  and  brought  forth  Salt.
But  the  Earth,  fince  it  had  nothing  to  work  upon,
brought  forth  nothing,  but  that  which  was  brought
forth  continued,  and  abided  in  it  :  Wherefore  there

became


112  A  new  Light  ofAlchymiel

became  only  three  Principles ,  and  the  Earth  was
made  the  Nurfe,  and  Mother  of  the  reft.  There  were,
as  wee  raid,three  Principles  brought  forth^  which  the
ancient  Philofophers  did  not  To  ftridly  con(ider,but
defcribed  only  two  adings  of  the  Elements  (  or  if
they  were  willingly  filcnt  in  it ,  who  fliall  ccnfurc
them/eeing  they  dedicated  rheir  tvriting  only  to  the
Sons  of  Artr')and  named  thcmSulphurjandMcrcury,
which  alfo  may  fuffice  us,to  be  the  matter  of  Metals,
as  alfo  of  the  Philofophers  Stone.

Whofoever  therefore  will  bee  a  true  Searcher  of
thisfacred  Science  muft  of  neceflity  know  the  Acci-
dents, and  an  Accident  it  felf ,  that  hee  may  learn  to
what  fubje(ft,  or  Element  hcc  purpofeth  to  come  to,
that  through  mediums  hee  may  apply  himfelfc  to
that,  if  otherwife  hcedefire  to  fill  up  the  number  of
four.  Forasthefe  three  Principles  were  produced  of
four,  fo  alfo  by  diminution  muft  thefe  three  pro-
duce two,  Male,  and  Female^  and  two  produce  one
incorruptible  thing,  in  which  thofe  foure  ftiall  being
equally  perfeift,  be  purified,  and  di^efted  to  the  ut-
moftj  and  fo  a  quadrangle  Ihallanfwer  a  quadrangle.
And  this  is  that  quinteflence,  which  is  very  ncccf-
fary  for  every  Artificer,  being  feparated  from  many
contraries.  And  fo  thou  haft  in  thefe  three  Principles,
in  what  naturall  compofidon  foever,  a  body,  a  fpirit,
and  an  occult  foule;  which  three,  if  thou  fhalt  joine
them  together  being  feparated,  and  well  purified,  as
wee  faid  before,' without  doubt  will  by  imitating  Na-
ture yeeld  moft  pure  fruit.  For  although  the  foule  be
taken  from  a  moft  noble  place ,  yer  it  cannot  come
whither  it  tends  but  by  a  fpirit,  which  is  the  place,
andmanlionof  the  foule-,  which  if  thou  wilt  reduce

to


A  new  Light  efAlehymtei  115

to  its  due  place,  it  is  ncccflary  that  it  be  waflied  from
all  its  faults-,  and  that  the  place  be  purified,  that  the
foule  maybe  glorified  in  it,  and  never  more  be  fepa-
rated  from  it.  Now  therefore  thou  haft  the  o  riginall
of  the  three  Principles,  out  of  which  it  is  thy  parr,by
imitating  Nature,to  produce  the  Mercury  of  Phiio-
fophers,  and  their  firft  matter,  and  to  bring  thole
Principles  of  things,  efpccially  of  Metalls  to  thy  pur-
pofe  :  feeing  without  tnofe  Principles  it  is  impoifiblc
for  thee  19  perfed  any  thing  by  Art,fince  alfo  Nature
her  felfe  can  doe  nor  produce  nothing  without  them.
Thefe  three  arc  in  all  things,  and  without  them  there
is  nothing  in  the  world,  or  ever  fhall  bee  naturally.
But  becaufe  wee  faid  before,  that  the  ancient  Philo-
fophers  named  only  two  Principles,  left  the  Searcher
ofthe  Artlhould  crre,  heemuft  know,  that  although
they  did  not  defcribe  any  other  but  Sulphur,  and
N^ercury,  yet  without  fait  they  could  never  have  at-
tained to  this  work,  fince  that  is  the  key,and  begin-
ning of  this  facred  Science :  it  is  that,which  openeth
the  gates  of  Jufticej  it  is  that  which  hath  the  keycs
to  the  infernall  prifons,  where  Sulphur  lies  bound,as
hereafter  flialbe  more  fully  fhewed  in  the  third  Trea-
tife  ofthe  Principles,  of  Salt.

Now  to  our  purpofe, which  is  that  thefe  3  principles
are  altogether  neceffary ,  becaufe  they  arc  the  neer
matter.  For  the  matter  ofMetalls  is  twofold.  Neer,
and  remore.The  neer  is  Sulphur,  and  Mercury .  The
remote  are  the  four  Elements  :  out  of  which  God
alone  is  able  to  create  things.  Leave  therefore  the
Elements  ,  becaufe  of  them  thou  fhalt  doe  no-
things neither  canft  thou  out  of  them  produce  any
thing  but  thefe  three  Principles ,   feeing  Nature  her

Q^  fclfc


lIJ^,  A  new  Light  ofAlchymie.

fdfe  can  produce  nothing  elfe  out  of  them.  If  there-
fore thou  canft  out  ofthe  Elements  produce  nothing
but  thefe  three  J^rinciplcs,  wherefore  then  is  that
vainc  labour  of  thine  to  feeke  after,  or  to  endeavour
to  make  that  which  Nature  hath  already  made  to
thy  liandsr*  Is  it  not  better  to  goe  three  mile  then
four?  Let  it  fuffice  thee  then  to  have  three  Princi-
ples, out  of  which  Nature  doth  produce  all  things
in  the  earth,  and  upon  the  earth-,  which  three  we  find
to  be  entirely  in  every  thing.  By  the  due  feparation,
and  conjundion  of  thefcjNature  produceth  as  well
Metalis,  as  StoneSjin  the  Minerall  Kingdome^  but  in ,
the  Vegetable  Kingdome  Trees,  HerbS)  and  all  fucli
things  5  alfo  in  the  Animall  Kingdome  the  Body,.
Spirit,  and  Soule,  which  cfpecially  doth  refemble
the  work  ofthe  Philofophers.The  Body  is  Earth,thc
Spirit  is  Water,  the  Soule  is  fire,  or  the  Sulphur  of
Gold :  The  Spirit  augmenteth  the  quantity  of  the
Body,  but  the  Fire  augmenteth  the  vertue  thereof
But  becaufe  there  is  more  ofthe  Spirit  in  weight,then
is  ofthe  Fire-,  the  Spirit  is  raifed,  and  opprcneth  the
Fire,  and  drawes  it  to  it  felfe :  and  fo  every  one  of
them,  encreafeth  in  vertue,  and  the  Earth,  which  is
the  midle  betwixt  them  encreafeth  in  weight.  Let
therefore  every  fearcher  of  this  Art  conclude  in  his
mind  what  he  feeks  for  out  of  thefe  thrce,and  let  him
afTiftit  in  the  overcomeing  of  its  contrary  h  and  then
let  him  adde  to  the  weight  of  Nature  his  weight^that
the  defe(fl  of  Nature  maybe  made  up  by  Art ,  that
iliec  may  overcome  what  is  contrary  to  her.  We  faid
in  the  Element  of  Earth,  that  the  Earth  was*  nothing
clfe  bur  ihc  receptacle  of  other  Elements,*.^,  the  fub-
jed  in  which  thofe  two^Fire  and  W^tter^do  flrive,  the

Aire


J.  new  Li^ht  ofAlcbymie*  1 1  y

Aire  mediatiflg  -,  if  the  Water  be  predominant ,   it
brings  forth  things  that  arc  corruptible^  and  conti-
nue but  for  atime^  but  if  the  Fire  overcome,  it  pro-
duceth  things  that  are  lafting3&  incorruptible.  Con-
fidcr  therefore  what  is  neceffary  for  thee.    Moreover
know,  that  Fire,  and  Water  arc  in  every  thing,  but
neither  Fire,  nor  Water  makes  any  thing ,  bccaufc
they  only  drive  together ,  and  contend  concerning
fvvifcnc(I?,and  vertue,and  this  not  of  themfelves,  but
by  the  excitation  of  the  intrinfecall  heat,  which  by
the  motion  ofthe  heavenly  vertucs  is  kindled  in  the
Center  of  the  Earth;  without  which  thofe  two  could
never  doe  any  thing,  but  tvould  both  ftand  ftill  in
their  own  bound,  and  weight  :     but  Nature  afrer-
^vard  joined  them  two  together  proportionably,"and
then  ftirres  them  up  by  an  intrinfecall  heat ,  and  fo
they  begin  to  contend  one  with  the  other,  an"S  each
of  them  will  call  to  its  help  its  like,and  fo  they  afcend
and  cncrcafe,  untill  the  Earth  can  afcend  no  higher
with  them-,  in  the  mean  time  thofe  two  by  thi?  re-
taining of  the  Earth  are  fubtilized-,  ( for  in  that  fub-
je(5t  of  the  Earth  the  Fire,  and  Water  afcend  incef-
fantly,  and  a(fl  through  the  pores  which  are  referved  ,
and  which  the  A  ire  prepares )  and  out  of  their  fub-
tiliation  proceed  flowers,  and  fruit,  in  which  they  be-
come friends,as  you  may  fee  in  Trees  •,     for  by  how
much  the  bettcrthey  are  fubtilized,  and  purified  by
afccnding,fo  much  the  better  fruit  doe  they  bring
forth,cfpecially  ihhey  end  with  their  vertues  equally
joined  together.

Now  then  the  things  being  purged ,  and  cleanfed,
caulethat  the  Fire  ,  and  Water  bee  made  friends,
whic^  will  eafily  bee  done  in  their  own  earthy  which

Q^  did


ii6  A  new  Light  ofAlchymie.

did  afcend  with  them-,  and  then  thou  (hilt  in  a  flior-
ter time pcifeA it,  then  Nature  could,  if  thou  (halt
joijie  them  well  together,  according  to  the  weight  of
Nature^  not  as  it  was  before,but  as  Nature  requires^
and  as  is  needful! :  Bccaufe  Nature  in  all  compofiti-
onsputs  more  of  the  other  Elements  then  of  Fire :
alwaies  the  leaftpart  is  Fire  ^  but  Nature  according
as  llieepleafcth,  addcs  an  extrinfecall  Fire  to  ftir  up
that  intripifecall  according  to  more,  or  lefTc,  inmuch^
or  little  time-,  and  according  to  this  if  the  Fire  exceed,
orbecxccededjthings  pcrfed^or  impcrfe(^  arc  made,
as  well  in  Mineralls,  as  in  Vegetables.  The  extrin^
fecall  Fire  indeed  doth  not  enter  into  the  depth  of
the  compofition  eflentially,  but  onlyin  vertuc  ;  for
the  intrinfecall  matcriall  Fire  is  fufficient  for  it  felfc^if
only  it  hath  nourilliment,  and  the  extrinfecall  Fire  is
nouriifiment  to  it,  and  as  it  were  Wood  in  refpect  of
Elementary  Fire,  and  according  to  fiich  a  aourifh-
ment  it  increafeth,  and  is  multiplyed*  Yet  wee  muft
take  htsA  that  there  bee.  not  too  much  extrinfecall
Pire^  for  if  any  one  eats  more  then  hee  is  able,  hee  is
choaked :  a  great  flame  devours  a  little  Fire  :  the  ex-
trinfecall Fire  muft  be  multiplicative,  nourifliing,  not
devouring,fo  things  are  perfected.  Decoction  there-
fore in  every  thing  is  the  perfection :  fo  Nature  addes
vcrtue,  and  weight^nd  makes  perfect. But  becaufe  it
is  hard  to  adde  to  a  compound,fincc  it  requires  a  long
labour,.wce  advife  that  thoa  take  away  fo  much  of
that  which  is  fuperfluou?,  as  is  needful! ,,  and  as
Nature  requires  ••  The  fuperfluities  being  removed
mix  them,  then  Nature  will  (lie  w  thee,  what  thou
haft  fought  after.  Thou  alfo  fhalt  know,  if  Nature
kuh  joined  the  Elements  wcU^pr  ill  together,  feeing


A  new  Light  ofAlchymie.         1 17

all  Elements  confift  in  conjunction.  But  many  pra-
ctitioners fow  StraWj  for  Wheat ;  and  fome  both  .•
and  many  caft  away  that ,  which  the  Philofophers
love  .•  fome  begin,  and  end,  becaufe  of  their  incon-
flancy;  they  feek  for  a  difficult  Art,  and  an  eafy  la-
bour-,they  caft  away  the  beft  thingSjSc  fow  the  worft:
but  as  this  Art  is  concealed  in  the  Preface,  fo  alfo  is
the  matter  caft  away  in  the  beginning.    Now  wee
fay,  that  this  Art  is  nothing  elfe,  but  the  vcrtues  of
the  Elements  equally  mixed :  it  is  a  naturall  equality
of  hot,  dry,  cold,  moift-,  A  joining  together  of  Male,
and  Female,  which  the  fame  Female  begot ,  /.  e,  a
conjunction  of  Fire,  and  the  radicall  moiftureof  Me-
talls.  By  confidering  that  the  Mercury  of  Philofo-
phers-hath  in  itfelfe  its  owne  good  Sulphur^  more  or
leflc,  depurated,  and  decocted  by  Nature,  thou  maift
perfect  all  things  out  of  Mercury  :  but  if  thou  ftialt
Know  to  adde  thy  weights  to  the  weights  of  Nature,
to  double  Mercury,and  triple  Sulphur,it  will  quickly
be  terminated  in  good,  then  in  better,  untill  into  beft
of  all .'  although  there  be  but  one  appearing  Sulphur,
and  two  Mercuries,  but  of  one  roor^  not  aude,  nor
too  much  boiled,  yet  purged,  and  diftblved,  if  thou
haft  underftood  mee.

It  is  not  needf  ull  to  defcribe  the  matter  of  the  Mcr*
cury  of  Philofophers,  and  the  matter  of  their  Sul-
phur I  no  mortal!  man  ever  could ,  or  ever  hereafter
Ihall  bee  able  to  defcribe  it  more  openly,  and  clccrly
then  it  hat!h  already  been  deferibcd ,  and  named  bj
the  Ancient  Philofophers,  unlefTe  he  will  bee  an  Ana-
thema of  the  Art.  For  it  is  fo  commonly  named,
that  truly  it  is  not  efteemcd  of,  therefore  doc  Stu»
dents  of  this  Art  bend  their  minds  rather  to  other

Q^  fubtihies^.


1 1 8  A  new  Light  ofAlchymie.

(ubtilties,  then  abide  in  the  fimplicity  of  Nature.  Wc
doc  not  yet  fay,  that  Mercury  of  Philofophers  is  a
common  thing,  and  openly  na-med,  but  the  mutter
of  which  Philofophers  doe  make  their  Sulphur ,  and
Mercury  :  for  the  Mercury  of  Philofophers  is  not  to
be  had  of  it  felfe  upon  the  Earth ,  but  it  is  brought
forth  by  ArtQut  of  Sulphur,and  Mercury  joined  to-
gethcr-yit  doth  not  come  forth  into  light,  for  it  is  na*
ked,but  yet  is  covered  byNaturc  in  a  wonderful  man*
ner^To  conclude,we  fay  with  repeating  Sulphur^and
Mercury  to  be  the  Mine  of  our  Quick-filver  (but  be-
ing joined  together  j  that  Quick -filver  can  diffolvc
Metalls,  kill  them ,  and  make  them  alive ,    which
power  it  receiveth  from  that  fharp  Sulphur,  which  is
of  its  own  nature.  But  that  thou  maift  yet  better  con-
ceive it,hearken  to  me  whilfl  I  tell  thee  the  difference
which  is  betwixt  our  Quick-filver ,    and  common
Quick -iilver,  or  Mercury.    Common Mercuiy  doth
not  diffolve  GoldjOr  Silver  fo,that  it  cannot  be  fepa-
ratcd  from  them-,   but  our  Argent  vive  doth  diffolve
Gold,  and  Silver,  and  is  never  feparated  from  them,
but  is  as  Water  mixed  with  Water.  Common  Mer-
cury hath  combuftible  cvill  Sulphur,  with  which  it  is
made  black :  but  our  Argent  vive  hath  in  it  incom-
buflible  Sulphur,  fixed,  good,  white,and  red.  Com-
mon Mercury  is  cold ,  and  moift,our  Mercury  is  hot,
'  and  moift.  Common  Mercury  makes  bodies  black ,
and  ftains  them  :  our  Argent  vive  makes  bodies  as
white  as  CryftalL  Common  Mercury  is  turned  by
precipitation  into  a  Citrine  powder,  and  an  evill  Sul-
p!iur.our  argent  five  byvertue  of  heat,into  mod  white
Sulphur, good,  fixed,  andfliixible.   Common  Mer-
cury by  how  much  the  more  it  is  decocted,  the  more

fluxible


A  new  Light  ofAlchymie.  up

luxible  it  is ;  our  Argent  vivc,  by  how  much  the
more  it  is  decocted,  the  more  it  is  tnickned.  By  thefe
circumftances  therefore  thou  maift  confider  how  the
Common  Mercury  differs  from  the  Mercury  of  Phi-
lofophers.  If  thou  doft  not  yet  undcrftand,  do  not
expect  it,  for  no  mortall  man  will  ever  fpeake  more
plainly,  and  clcerly,  then  wee  have  done  :  but  now
of  the  vertues  of  it.  Our  Argent  vive  is  of  fuch  ver-
tue,that  it  is  of  it  felf  fufficient  for  theCjand  for  it  felf
without  any  addition  of  any  extraneous  thing ,  it  is
diflblved,  and  congealed  by  anaturall  decoction  on*
ly  :  but  Philofophcrs  for  brevities  fake  adde  to  it  its
own  Sulphur  well  digcfled,  and  ripened,  and  fo  they
work.

Wee  could  cite  the  Writings  of  Philofophcrs  to
confirmvvhat  we  have  faidjbut  becaufe  we  have  wrote
clearer  things  then  are  in  their  Writings^  they  need
not  any  confirmation,  he  fhall  underfland  who  looks
into  other  mens  writings.  If  therefore  thou  wilt  fol-
low our  advice.  Wee  advife  thee  ,  that  before  thou
fctteft.thy  felf  to  this  Art,  in  the  firfl  place  thou  learn
to  hold  thy  tongue,  and  that  thou  inquire  into  the
Nature  of  Mines,  and  Mctalls ,  as  alfo  of  Vegeta-
bles, for  thou  fhalt  find  our  Mercury  in  every  fub-
ject,  and  from  all  things  the  Mercury  of  Philofophers
may  bee  extracted,  although  it  be  neererin  onefub-
ject,  then  in  another.  Know  alfo  for  certain,that  this
Art  is  nor  placed  in  fortune,  or  cafuall  invention,  but
in  a  reall  Science,  and  that  there  is  but  this  one  mat-
ter in  the  worldj  by  whi-ch,  and  of  which  the  Philo*
fophers  Stone  is.made.  It  is  indeed  in  all  things, ,  but
in  extracting  of  it  a  mans  life  would  fail,  and  not  be
fufficieatv  Yet  witliput  the  knowledge  of  naturall

things.


1 20  A  new  Light  ofAlchymie^

things,efpecially  in  the  Minerall  Kingdomc,  thou
ilialc  be  hke  a  blind  man  that  walkcth  by  ulc.  Truly
fuch  a  one  feeks  after  the  Art  but  cafually  •,  and  al-
though, as  it  oftentimes  falls  out ,  that  a  man  may
by  chance  fall  upon  the  matter  of  our  Argent  vivc,
yet  then  he  ends  the  workc  when  hee  fliould  begini
and  fo  as  hee  found  it  out  cafualJy,  hee  lofcth  it  cafu-
ally, becaufe  hee  knows  not  upon  what  hee  fliould
ground  his  intention.  Therefore  this  Art  is  the  gift
of  the  moft  high  God  :  and  unlcife  God  revealcs  it
by  means  of  a  good  wit^or  fricnd,it  is  hardly  known;
for  wee  cannot  bee  all  as  Geber ,  nor  as  Lullius :
And  although  Lu/lius  was  a  man  of  a  fubtill  wit,  yet
if  hee  had  not  received  the  Art  from  Arnoldtts^  cer-
tainly hee  had  been  like  unto  thofe  which  find  the
Art  with  difficulty :  So  alfo  Amoldus  confefTcth  that
lice  received  it  of  a  friend.  For  it  is  eafy  to  write
what  Nature  dictates  :  It  is  a  Proverb,  Jthcafy  u
adde  to  things  already  found  out.  Every  Art ,  and
Science  is  cafy  to  the  Mafter,  but  to  a  young  Scholar
not  fo  .•  and  to  find  out  this  Art  there  is  a  long
time  required,  many  vcfTclls,  great  expence  ,  and
continuall  labour,  with  much  meditation,  although
to  him  that  knows  it  already  all  things  are  eafy,  and
light.  To  conclude  therefore  wee  fay,that  this  Art  is
the  gifc  of  God  alone,  which  being  known,  he  mufl
alfo  bee  prayed  to  that  he  would  give  his  blefling  to
the  Art*,  for  without  this  divine  blefling  it  would  be
of  no  ufe ,  and  unprofitable ,  which  wee  our  felves
have  had  experience  of,  feeing  wee  have  by  reafon  of
this  Art  undergone  great  dangers,  yea  wee  have  had
more  mifchief ,  and  misfortune  by  it,  then  advan-
tage :  but  there  is  a  time  when  men  arc  wife  too  late.

The


A  mw  Light  ofAlcbymie^  1 2 1

The  judgements  of  the  Lord  are  a  great  depth.  Ycc
I  admired  at  divine  providence  in  thefe  my  misfor-
tunes :  for  I  alwaics  had  the  protection  of  our  great
Creator  alwaies  at  hand,  that  no  cnemie  could  bee
too  hard  for  me,  or  reprcfTe  mee.  The  Angell  of  the
Lord  of  this  Treafury  hath  alwaies  been  my  Keeper,
into  which  Treafury  the  moft  High  Creator  hath
fliutclofe  this  treafure  only,  which  hee  will  alwaies
defend,  and  fecurc.  Fori  have  heard  that  my  Ene-
mies have  fell  into  that  fnare  which  they  laid  for  mee.
They  vvhich  would  have  taken  away  my  life  have  loft
their  own  5  and  fome  of  them  which  would  have
taken  away  my  goods  have  loft  Kingdomes  ••  More-
over, I  know  many  that  would  have  detra<5led  from
my  good  name,  have  perifticd  with  difgrace.So  great
prefervation  have  I  alwaies  had  from  the  great  Crea-
tor of  all  things,  who  prefently  took  mee  from  my
Mothers  wombe,  put  mee  under  the  fliadow  of  his
wings ,  and  infufed  the  Spirit  of  underftanding  all
natural!  things,  to  whom  be  praife,  and  glory,  for
ever,  and  ever.  So  great  bleilings  have  I  received
from  the  moft  High  God  our  Creator,  ihat  it  is
impofliblc  not  only  for  my  pen ,  but  my  mind  to
comprehend.  Godfcarce  ever  conferred  upon  any
mortal  1  man  greater  things,yca  fcarce  fo  great. I  willi
I  had  fo  much  affedions,  romuchfpirit ,  eloquence,
and  wirdome,that  I  might  render  meet  thankes  to
him  5  for  I  know  wee  have  not  deferved  fo  great
things,  only  this  I  beleeve  my  felfe  to  bee,  that  in
him  alone  I  have  alwaies  trufted ,  doe  truft,  and
fliall  truft.  For  I  know  that  there  is  no  mortal!  man
is  able  to  help  mee,  only  this  God,  and  our  Creator?
for  it  is  a  vain  thing  to  truft  in  Princes,  becaufe  they

R  are


1  a  :i  A  mtx>  Light  ofAlchymte.

are  men  fas  faith  the  Pfalm!fi)and  that  all  thefc  ha  ve
thcu*  breath  of  life  from  God,  and  this  bwring  taken
aWviy  they  arc  dufti  but  it  isafafc,  and  fecurc  thing
to  truft  in  the  Lord  God,  from  whom  as  from  the
fountain  of  goodncffe  all  good  things  doe  molt  abun-
dantlyflow.  Thou  therefore  that  defcft  toattaine
to  this  Art,  in  the  fnd  place  put  thy  whole  truft  in
God  thy  Creator,  and  urge  him  by  thy  prayers,  and
then  affuredly  beleeve  that  hce  will  not  forfake  thee :
for  if  God  (hall  know  that  thy  heart  is  fincere ,  and
thy  whole  truft  is  put  in  him,  hee  will  by  one  means
or  another  {hew  thee  a  way,  and  aflift  thee  in  it,thac
thou  ftialt  obtain  thy  dcfire.    The  fear  of  the  Lord-
is  the  beginning  of  wifdome.    Pray,  but  yet  worker
God  indeed  gives  underftanding,but  thou  muft  know
how,  and  when  to  ufe  it:  for  as  a  good  underftanding,
and  a  good  opportunity  arc  the  gifts  of  God,fo  alfo  is
the  punifhment  of  (inne,whcn  a  good  opportunity  is
omitted.    But  to  return  to  our  purpole^wee  fay,  that
Argent  vivc  is  the  firft  matter  of  that  work,and  truly
nothing  elfc^  whatfocver  is  added  to  ir,  arilcth  from-
it.     Wee  have  Did  oftentimes  that  all  things  in  the
world  are  made,  and  generated  of  the  three  Princi-
ples-, but  wee  purge  fomethings  from  their  accidents,
and  being  purged,  joine  them  together  againe;  and
by  adding  what  is  to  be  added,  wee  fupply  what  is
clefc(5tive,  and  by  imitating  Nature,  wee  boile  them
to  the  highcft  degree  of  perfc<5lion  ,  which  Nature
could  by  reafon  of  Accidents  never  doe,  and  fo  ended
where  Art  muft  begin.  Moreover,  if  thou  dciircft  to
imitate  Nature,  imitate  her  in  thofe  things,in  which
flaeeworkes.     And  let  it  not  trouble  thee  that  our
Writings  feem  t©  contradid  one  another  in  fome

places-j


ji  netp  Light  ofAlchymk.  125

places-,  for  fo  it  muft  bee,  left  the  Art  be  too  plain  -
ly  difclofed :  But  do  thou  make  choice  of  thofe  things
which  agree  with  Nature,  take  the  rofes ,  and  leave
the  prickles.    If  thou  doft  intend  to  make  a  Mctall,
let  a  Metall  be  thy  ground  work ,  becaufe  of  a  Dog  is
generated  nothing  but  a  Dog^a^nd  of  Metall,nothing
but  a  Metall:  for  know  for  certain,  if  thou  fhdt  not
take  out  ot  Metall  the  radicall  moifture,  well  fcpara-
ted,  thou  flialt  never  doe  any  thingjwithout  grains  of
Wheat  thoufhalt  till  thy  ground  in  vain  :  there  is  but
one  thing,  but  one  Art,  but  one  operation.    If  there-
fore thou  wilt  produce  a  Metall ,  thou  (halt  ferment
with  a  Metall-,    and  if  thou  wilt  produce  a  Tree,  let
the  feed  of  the  Tree  be  thy  ferment.  There  is  as  we
faid,  but  one  operation,  and  befidc  it  there  is  none
other  that^is  true.  All  they  therefore  are  miftaken
that  fay,  that  any  particular  thing  ,  befides  this  one
way,  and  naturall  matter  is  true ;  for  a  bough  is  not
to  bee  hadjbut  from  the  trunk  of  a  Tree  :  It  is  an  im-
poflfible,  and  fenfcleffe  thing  to  go  about  to  produce
a  bough-,  it  is  eafier  to  make  the  Elixir  it  fclfe ,  then
any  particular  thing,  although  moft  fimple,that  will
bee  advantageous,  and  abide  a  naturall  examination,
andtryall.  Yet  there  bee  many  that  boaft  they  can
fix  Silver,  but  it  were  better  for  them  if  they  could
fix  Lead,  or  Tinne,  feeing  in  my  judgement  it  is  all
one  labour,  becaufe  they  doe  not  rcfift  the  tryall  of
the  fire,  whileft  they  abide  in  their  own  nature  5  but
Silvet  is  in  its  nature  fixed  enough,and  needs  not  any
Sophifticali  fixation.  But  feeing  there  are  as. many
opinions,  as  men ,  wee  will  leave  every  one  to  his
own  opinion  :  Let  him  that  will  not  follow  our
counfellj  and  imitate  Nature,  continue  in  his  errour;

R  2  Indeed


134  ^  ^^^  ht^t  ofAlchymie.

Indeed  prrticiilars  may  cafily  bee  made,  if  you  have
a  Tree,  whofe  young  twigs  may  bee  graffed  into
divers  trees-,  as  if"  you  have  one  water,   divers  kinds
of  flcfh  may  be  boiled  in  it,  and  according  to  the  di-
yerfity  of  theflcdi  thebrothhathitstaft  5   and  this
from  the  fame  foundation.    Wee  conclude  thercfoie
that  there  is  but  one  Nature,  as  well  in  Mctalls  as  in
other  things,  but  her  operation  is  various*,  alfo  there
is  one  univerfall  matter  according  to  Hermes.      So
from  this  one  thing  ^U  things  froceed.  Yet  there  bee
many  Artificers^who  follow  every  one  his  own  fancy^
They  feek  a  new  Nature,and  new  matter^and  in  con-
clulion  they  find  a  new  nothing,  becaufe  they  inter-
pret the  Writings  of  Philofophers  not  according  to
the  pofiTibility  ot  Nature,but  the  letter.  But  all  thefe
arc  ofthac  Afferably,  of  which  mention  hath  been
made  in  the  Dialogue   of  Mercury  with  the  Akhy-
mift,  who  return  home  without  any  Conclufion^
they  looke  after  the  end,  without  any  medium ,    oi*
indeed  beginning-  and  the  rcafon  of  this  is ,  becaufe
they  endeavour  not  to  attain  to  the  Art  out  of  the
Principles, and  grounds  of  Philofophers, and  reading
oi  the  books  of  Philofophers,  but  from  repoiTS,  and
receipts  of  Mountcbankcs  :   {  although  now  indeed
the  books  of  Philofophers  are  perhaps  deftroycd  by
the  envious,by  adding  in  fome  places,and  detra<5ting
in  others)  afterwards  when  things  doc  not  fucceed,
thcybetakethemfelvcsto  Sophiftications,.  andaffay
divers  vaine  operations  ,  by  making  whites,    by
making  reds,  by  fixing  Silver,  and  extra<5ling  out
the  foul  of  Gold^  which  in  the  Preface  of  the  bookc
of  the  Twelve  Trcatifes  hath  been  fufficiently  deny-
cd.    We  doe  not  deny^yea;,  wc  doe  fay  that  it  is  al-
together


A  new  Light  ofjlchymie^  125

together  ncccfTary^that  the  Metallick  foule  bee  ex-
traced,  but  not  For  any  Sophifticall  operation,  but
for  the  Philofophlcall  work,  which  being  extraded,
and  purged,  muft  againc  bee  reftored  to  its  owne
body,  that  there  may  bee  a  true  refurrcdion  of  a
glorified  body.  This  was  never  our  purpofe ,  to
be  able  to  multiply  Wheat  without  the  ktd  of
Wheate,  but  that  that  extracted  foul  bee  able  in  a
Sophifticall  way  to  tinge  another  Metall ,  know
that  it  is  a  thing  moft  falfe,  and  that  all  thofe
that  boaft  ot  doing  of  it ,  arc  Cheaters  :  but  of
that  more  fully  in  the  third  Principle  of  Salt^
fincc  here  is  not  place  for  any  further  Difcourfc.


O'F


m  !■


126  A  ntvQ  Light  ofAkhymie.


OF


S  V  L  P  H  V  R:


^jj^^HE  Philofophers  have  not  undefcrvcdly
placed  Sulphur  in  the  firft  place  amongft
the  three  Principles ,  as  being  the  moft
worthy  Principle,  in  the  knowledge  of
which  the  whole  Art  confifts.  Now  there  is  a  tnrec-
fold  Sulphur,  and  that  is  to  be  chofen  above  the  reft:
a  Sulphur  tinging,  or  colouring  :  a  Sulphur  congea-
ling Mercury  ••  the  third  is  cdentiall,  and  ripening.  Of
whichwe  ought  to  treat  fcriouily-but  becaufc  we  have
fct  forth  one  of  the  Principles  by  way  of  Dialogue^fo
alfo  wee  {ball  conclude  the  reft ,  left  weJfliould  fecm
to  be  pirtiall,  and  detrad  from  cither  otthem.  Sul-
phur is  more  mature  then  any  of  the  other  Princi-
ples, and  Mercury  is  nor  coagulated  but  by  Sulphur:
therefore  our  whole  operation  in  this  Art  is  nothing
elfe  but  to  know  how  to  draw  forth  that  Sulphur  out
of  Metalls,  by  which  our  Argent  vive  in  the  bowels
of  the  Earth  is  congealed  into  Gold ,  and  Silver  ••

wnich


A  mvp  Light  oJAlchymie.  1 27^

which  Sulphur  indeed  is  in  this  work  in  ftead  of  the
Male,  but  the  Mercury  in  ftead  of  the  Female.   Of
the  compoilrion,  and  a(5ting  of  thefc  two  arc  genera'
ted  the  Mercuries  of  Philofophers.

Wee  told  you  in  the  Dialogue  of  Mercury  with  the
Alchymift^of  an  AfTembly  of  Alchymifts  that  were
met  together  to  confult  out  of  what  matter^and  how
the  Philofophers  Stone  is  to  be  made,  and  how  that
by  the  mistortune  of  a  tempeft  they  were  without
any  conclufiondifperfedalmoft  through  the  whole
ivorld.  For  there  arofe  a  ftrong  tempeft ,  and  very
great  wind,  which  difperfcd  them  all  abroad^and  fo
blovved  through  fome  of  their  heads ,  that  till  this
time  they  cannot  yet  recover  themfelves,  by  meanes
of  which  divers  fort  of  worms  are  bred  in  their
brains. Now  there  were  amongft  them  men  of  divers
opinions,  and  conditions,  and  among  the  reft  there
ivas  this  Alchymift ,  which  in  this  Treatife  I  fhall
riifcourfc  of  ;  hee  was  otherwife  a  good  man ,  but
without  a  Concluiion,  or  unrcfolved ,  alfo  of  the
number  of  thofc  ,  who  propound  to  themfelves  ta
find  out  the  Philofophers  Stone  cafually,and  he  was
companion  to  that  Philofopher,  who  difputed  with
Mercury.  Now  this  man  faid,  if  it  had  been  my
fortune  to  have  fpoke  with  Mercury,  I  fhould  have
fiihed  him  dry  in  few  words ;  that  other,  faith  hee,
was  a  foole,  hce  knew  not  how  to  proceed  with  him.
Mercury  indeed  never  pleafed  mee,  neither  indeed  do
I  think  there  is  any  godd  in  itj  but  I  approve  of  Sul-
phur, becaufe  at  that  meeting  wee  difcourfed  moft
excellently  of  it :  if  that  tempeft  had  not  difturbed
us,  wee  had  concluded  that  that  had  been  the  firft
matter,  for  I  am  not  wont  to  trouble  my  fclfc  with

lights


120  A  mvp  lutgm  of  Alcbymiel

light,  and  triviall  matters,  my  head  is  full  of  pro-
found imaginations.  And  lo  being  full  of  confidence
hec  refolves  to  work  in  Sulphur,  hee  began  therefore
todin:illic,tofublime,calcine,  tofixitjto  make  oylc
fer  Campannmofit^  fometimes  by  itfclfe,and  fomc-
mes  with  Cryftals,  and  Egge-lliels ,  and  hee  trycd
divers  other  operations  about  it :  and  when  hee  had
fpcnt  much  time  and  cofts,  and  could  find  nothing
to  his  purpofe,  he  was  fad,  and  being  in  a  miferablc
perplexity  pafTed  over  many  nights  without  lleep ;
alfo  oftentimes  hee  went  forth  out  of  the  City ,  to
behold  things,  that  hee  might  the  more  conveniently
devifcfomething  that  was  certain  in  his  operation  .•
Now  it  fell  out  upon  a  time ,  as  he  was  walking  up
and  down,  hec  fell  Into  an  extafy  with  beholding  of
things,  and  came  unto  a  certain  green  Wood ,  very
full  of  all  manner  of  thingSi  in  which  were  Mines  of
all  Mineralls,and  Metalls,and  all  kinds  of  bea{ls,and
birds,and  abundance  of  TrceSjHerbSjand  fruit  .-there
alfo  were  divers  conduits  of  water,for  in  thofesplaces
there  was  no  water  to  be  had,  but  what  was  brought
thither  by  divers  inflrumencs,  and  pipes,  and  this  by
divers  Artificers  from  divers  places  ••  that  was  the
chiefefl,  and  clearer  then  the  reft,  which  was  drawne
by  the  beams  of  the  Moon  •,  and  this  was  procured
only  for  the  Nymph  of  the  Wood.    There  alfo  did
feed  Bulls,  and  Rams,  and  the  Shepheards  were
two  young  men,  whom  the  Alchymift  asking,  faid.
Whole  Wood  is  this:"    whom  they  anfwcred  faying.
This  is  the  Wood,  and  Garden  of  our  Nymph
Fe;st^.  The  Alchymift  walks  up,  and  down  in  it:and
the  place  pleafed  him  well,  bu-r  yet  hee  did  ftill  thJnk
of  hisSulphurj  andfo  being  weary  of  walking,  and

in


A  aerp  Light  of  Alchymie^  i  a  p

m  a  fad  condition  (ate  by  the  fide  of  the  channel^undcr
a  certain  tree-,  and  began  to  lament  mod  miferabJy,
bewailing  his  time,and  charges^which  he  fpent  in  vain
with  operating  (he  could  not  els  have  deceived  others,
bat  have  damnified  himfclf  only  J  and  faid.  What  is
this ^11  men  fay  it  is  a  thing  common,of  fmall  cfteem,
eafy,  and  lama  learned  man^^  I  cannot  find  out  this
wretched  Stone.  And  To  in  his  lamentation  he  began
to  curfe  Sulphur,  becaufe  he  had  fpent  fomuch  coft,
and  labour  in  vain  upon  him  .•  and  Sulphur  alfo  was
in  that  Wood,  but  this  was  unknown  to  the  Alchy-
mift. Whilft  he  was  thuslamcnting5he  heard  thisvoicc
as  it  were  of  fome  old  man  :  Friend,Why  doft  thoa
curfe  Sulphur?  The  Alchymift  looked  every  way
round  about  him,  and  feeing  no  body,  was  afraid.
But  that  voice  faid  to  him  again ,  Friend  why  art
thou  fo  ladf    The  Alchymift  taking  courage,  faid  ,
Sir,  The  hungry  man  is  alwaies  thinking  upon  bread,
f  J  doe  I  alwaies  upon  the  Philofophers  Stone.    Vox^
And  why  dolt  thou  curfe  Sulphur/ y^/^r^.Sir,  I  belce-
ved  that  that  was  the  firft  matter  o£the  Philofophers
Stone,  and  therefore  in  working  upon  it  many  years,
I  fpent  much,  and  could  not  find  that  Stone.    Vox,
Friend, truly  I  know  that  Sulphur  is  the  true,  and
principallfubjed  of  the  Philofophers  Stone,   but  I
know  not  thee,nor  any  thing  of  thy  labour,and  inten-
tion:thon  doft  without  caufe  curfe  Sulphur  •,  bccaufe
he  is  in  cruell  prifons,]and  cannot  be  at  hand  to  every
bodyi.  feeing  hee  is  put  bound  in  a  moft  dark  dunge-^
on,  and  ^oes  not  forth,  but  whither  his  Keeperscarry
him.    Alch.  And  why  isheimprifoned.^    r^Ar.  Be-
caufc  hee  would  bee  obedient  to  every  Alchymift,
and  doc  what  they  would  have  him,  contrary  to  his

S  Mothers


1 20^  A  new  Light  ofAUbymtu

Mothers  will,  who  forbad  him  to  obey  any,  but
fuch  as  knew  her,  wherefore  fhcc  put  him  into  prifon,
and  commanded  that  his  feet  iliould  be  bound ,  and
fet  Keepers  over  him,   that  without  their  knowledg,
and  pleafure  hee  (hoiild  goe  no  whither.    Alch,    O
wretch!  for  this  reafon  hee  could  not  come  to  mce  :
truly  his  Mother  doth  him  great  wrong  :  and  when
flmll  hee  bee  let  out  of  thofe  prifonsf  VoXyO  friend  1
The  Sulphur  of  Philofophers  cannot  goe  forth  hence
but  in  a  long  time,and  with  a  great  dcalcof  labour.
Alch,  Sirl  And  who  be  his  Keepers  that  keep  him  f :
y.ox^  Friend!  His  Keepers  are  of  the  fame  ftockc,  but
Tyrants.    Alch»    And  who  art  thou ,   and  how  art
thou  called.^  Vox^  I  am  Judge,and  Governour  of  the
prifons,  and  my  name  is  SAturnc,    Alch.  Then  Sul-
phur is  kept  in  thy  piifons.    Vox^  Sulphur  indeed  is
kept  in  my  prifons,but  hee  hath  other  Keepers. y^/c^.
And  what  doth  hee  doe  in  the  prifons:"  Vex^Ht  doth
whatfoever  his  Keepers  will  have  him.    Alch.  And
what  can  hee  doe^  Fox^  Hee  is  the  maker  of  a  thou- ,
£nnd  things,  and  is  the  heart  of  all  things^  hee  knows
how  to  make  Metalls  better,  and  correds  Mine  rails?
tcacheth  Animalls  underftanding ,    knowes  how  to
make  all  kind  of  Flowers  in  Hcarbs,  and  Trees,  and
is  chief  over  them  ,  corrupts  the  Aire,    which  hee
amends  again  .♦  hee  is  the  Maker  of  all  Odours,  and
Painter  of  all  Colours,    ^/c^.  Out  of  what  matter
doth  hee  make  Flowers?  Vex,  His  Keepers  afford
matter,  and  veffells,  but  Sulphur  digefts  the  matter,
and  according  to  the  variety  of  his  digcftion ,  and
weight,various  Flowers,  and  Odours  are  produced,
AlchAshctoW  yox^  Friend,  Know  that  Sulphur
is  the  vcriuc  of  all  things,  and  is  the  fccond  by  birth,

bii^


AmtpLi^tofAlcbymie*  35K

■but yet  older  then  all  things,ftrongcr5  and  more  wor-
thy, yet  an  obedient  child.    Ahh,  Sir,  How  is  hcc
known/*  Vox^T>Wcxs  wayes,butbeft  by  the  State
of  che  Vitalls  in  Animalls,  by  the  colour  in  Metalls,
by  the  odour  in  Vegetables :  without  him  his  Mother
works  nothing.    Alch.  Is  hee  the  fole  heir ,  or  hath
hee  brethren^   Vex^  His  Mother  hath  but  only  one
fon  like  him,his  other  brethren  areafTociated  with  evil
things,  hcc  hath  a  fifter  which  he  loves,  and  is  againc
beloved  by  her,  for  lliee  is  as  it  were  a  Mother  to
iiim.     Ahh.  Sir,  is  hce  every  where  uniform/KtfAr,
According  to  his  Nature ,  but  hee  is  changed  in
the  prifons^  yet  his  heart  is  alwaies  pure,  but  his  gar-
ments arc  ftained.    Alcb.  Sir,  Was  hee  ever  at  li-
berty?  Vox ,  Yea,  cfpecially  in  thofc  times  when
there  were  fuch  wile  men,  betwixt  whom ,    and  his
Mother  there  was  great  familiarity ,  and  fricndiliip.
Alch,  And  who  were  they?  V&x,  There  wercvciy
many :    There  was  Hermes y  ivho  was  at  it  were  one
-with  his  Mother :  After  him  wer^  many  Kings ,  and
Princes,as  alfo  many  other  wife  men,in  ages  (ince,as
AriflotU^A'uiceny  &c.  who  fet  him  at  liberty:  Thefc
knew  how  to  unloofc  his  bonds.    Alch.  Sir,  What
did  hee  give  them  for  fetting  of  him  at  liberty  f  Vox^
Hee  gave  them  three    Kingdomes  :   for  when  any
doth  unbind  him,  and  releafeth  him,  then  he  over-
comes his  Keepers ,  which  before  did  govern  in  his
Kingdome,  and  delivers  them  being  bound  to  him
that  releafed  him,  for  to  bee  his  fubjeds,  and  gives
him  their  Kingdomes  to  poirefTc :  but  that,  which  is
more^  in  his  Kingdome  is  a  Looking -glaffe, in  which
is  fecn  the  whole  world.    Whofocver  lookcs  in  this
GlalTc  may  kz\  and  learn  in  it  three  parts  of  the
'       '  S  %  wif"


132  ^  nsv!>  high  ofAlch)mie*

wifdome  of  the  whole  world ,  and  fo  (liall  become
very  wife  in  thcfe  three  Kingdomesj  fuch  were  Art-
fiotle^  AvJceu, and  many  others,  who  as  well  as
,thcy  before  them,  faw  in  this  glalTe  how  the
world  was  made :  By  this  they  learned  what  were  the
influences  of  the  Celeftiall  vertues  upon  inferiour  ~
bodies,  and  how  Nature  by  Jthc  weight  of  Fire
compounds  things-,  asalfo  the  motion  of  the  Sun,
and  Moon  .•  efpccially  that  univcrfall.  motion,  by
which  his  Mother  is  governed  ••  by  this  they  knew
the  degrees  of  heat,  cold,  moifture  ,  drynclfe ,  and
the  vertues  of  hearbs ,  and  indeed  of  all  things,
whence  they  became  mod  excellent  Phyiitiansw
And  truly,unIeiTe  a  Phyfitian  be  fuch  a  one  as  knows,
why  this  hearb,  or  that,  is  hot.  dry,  or  moiil  in  this
degree,  not  out  of  the  books  of  Galen  ,  ox  Avicert^
but  out  of  the  originall  of  Nature>  from  whence
they  alfo  underftood  tlicfe  things,  hee  cannot  bee  a
well  grounded  Phyfitiaru  All  thefe  things  they  dili-
gently confidered,  and  bequeathed  their  Writings  to
their  iuccelTors,  that  men  might  bee  (lirred  up  to  ftur
dies  of  a  higher  Nature,  and  learn  how  to  fet  Sul-
phur at  liberty,  and  unloofe  hisboruis  ••  but  men  of
this^age  take  their  Writings  for  a  fulficient  i^round^
and  authority,  and  feck  no  further^  and  it  fui?iccrh
them  ifthcy  know  how  to  fay.  So  faith  ArtfiotUj  or;
Thus  faith  Galen,  Alch,  And  v/hat  fay  you,  Sir5Can
an  herb  bee  known  wichoutan  Herballf  Vox^  Thofe
ancient  Philofophers  wrote  their  Receipts  out  of  the
very  Fountain  of  Nature. >4/f/'.  How  SirrT^x,  Know
that  all  things  in  the  earth,  and  upon  the  earth,  are
generated,  and  produced  of  three  Principles  •,  fome  -
limes  of  two,  to  which  the  third  is  joined  •*  he  there^

fore


A  mw  Light  ofAkhymie.         1 5  j

fore  that  knows  thefe  three  Principles*  and  the
weight  of  them,  how  Nature  joins  them  together,
maybe  eaffly  able  bydcco(5lion  tounderftand  the
degree  of  Fire  in  the  fiibje^,  whether  well ,  or  ill,
or  indifferently  decocted  ^  and  that  according  to
more  or  lefTe :  For  all  Vegetable  things  are  known
by  thofe,  who  know  the  three  Principles.  J/cL
And  how  is  this  doner*  Fex^  By  fight,  tafl,  and
fmell',  in,  and  from  thefe  three  fcnfes  are  gathered
the  three  Principles  of  things ,  and  the  degrees  of
their  digeftions.  ^/c^.  5ir,  They  fay  that  .Sulphur
is  a  Medicine.  Fox^  Yea,  and  the  Phyfitian  him-
felfe,  and  to  them  that  fet  him  free  from  prifon ,  by
way  of  thankfulnefTe  hee  gives  his  blood  for  a  Me-
dicine* AlcL  iSir,  the  univerfall  Medicine  being
had,  how  long  may  a  man  preferve  himfelfe  from
death/*  f^f?.v^  Even  to  the  term  of  death  ;  but  this
Medicine  mufl  bee  taken  cautioully  ,  for  many  wife
men  have  been  deftroyed  by  it  before  their  time.
Alch.  And  what  fay  you  5ir,  Is  itpoifon.^  r<J.v,Haft
not  thou  heard  that  a  great  flame  of  fire  deftroyes  a
little  oner'  There  were  many  Philofophers,  which
reeeived  the  Art  from  other  mens  experience^which
did  not  fo  throughly  fearch  into  the  vertue  of  the
Medicine^  yea,  by  how  much  the 'more  powerful!,
fiibriler  the  Medicine  was,  it  fecmed  to  them  to  bee
the  more  wholfome;  and  if  one  grain  of  it  can  pallc
through  many  thoufands  of  Metalls ,  much  more
Mans  body.  Alch,  5ir,  How  then  mull:  it  be  ufed  r
Ffix,  Itmuftbee  fo  ufed ,  that  it  may  flrengthen
th^Naturallheat,  but  not  overcome  it.  jdlch.  Sit,
1 , know  how  to  make  fuch  a  Medicine.  Fox,  Thou
art  happy  if  thou  doH  know.  For  the  blood  of  that

S .  3  Sulphur  ;


134  ^  ^ew  Light  ofAlchymie,

Sulphur  is  that  intrinfccall  vertuc ,  and  ficclty  that
lurnes,  and  congeals  Quick- filvcr ,  and  all  Mctalls
into  Gold,  and  Mens  bodies  into  health.  Alch.Sir^
Iknowhowtomakeoyleof  Sulphur,  which  is  pre-
pared with  calcined  Cryflalls-,  Iknowaifo  another,
which  IS  done  by  a-Bell.'  Vox^  Certainly  then  thou
artaPhQofopher  of  that  Aflcinbly-,  for  thou  doft
underftand,  and  expound  my  words  aright,  as  alfo,
unleffe  I  am  deceived,  of  all  the  Philofophcrs.
-4/^^.  ^ir.  Is  not  this  oyle  the  blood  of  5'ulphur^
F9x^  O  Friend.'  the  blood  of  5*ulphiir  is  not  given
to  any  but  to  thofe,  who  know  how  to  fet  him  free
from  prifon.   Alch.  5ir,  doth  Sulphur  know  any
thing  in  the  Metalls/*  Vox,  I  told  thee,  that  hce
knows  all  things,  and  efpecially  in  Mctalls,  but  his
Keepers  know  that  there  he  could  bee  eafily  fet  at
liberty,  wherefore  they  keep  him  there  bound  faft  in
raoft  ftrong  prifons,  fo  that  hee  cannot  breath,  and
they  arc  afraid  left  hce  fhould  come  into  the  Kings
palace.  PJch,  Is  hee  imprifoncd  fo  in  all  Metalls  <*
Fox^  In  all-,  but  not  alike,  m  fome  not  fo  ftri(5Hy.
hlch.  S]xy  And  why  in  Mctalls  in  fuch  a  tyrannical]
manner^    Vox,  Becaufc  hee  would  Jftand  in  awe  of
them  no  longer,  when  hee  fhall  once  come  to  his
Kingly  palaces,  for  then  hee  can  be  fcen ,  and  lookc
'fi-cely  out  of  the  windows-,bccaufe  there  he  is  in  his
proper  Kingdome ,  although  nor  yet  as  hee  defircs,
hlch,  ^ir,  and  what  doth  hee  eat .«'   Vox,  His  nKac
is  wind,  wlien  hee  is  at  liberty  ,it  is  decoded-,  but  in
prifon  hce  is  conftrained  to  cat  it  raw.  A^^.Sir,Can
thofe  enmities  betwixt  him  and  his  Keepers  bee  re-
conciled-''  Vcx^  Yes,  if  any  one  were  fo  wife.  hUh,
Whvdoth  no:  he  treat  with  them  concerning  a  paci-
fication^


Anet^  Light  oJAlchymk,  135^-

fication?  Vqx^  That  hee  cannot  doe  by  himfdfc ,
hccaufe  prefemly  hce  waxeth  hot  with  anger,  and
rage..  Alch,  Let  him  doc  it  by  a  CommifTioner.
;^(7Ar,  Certainly  hee  would  bcethemoft  happy  man
in  the. world 5.  and  worthy  of  cternall  memory,
who  could  tell  how  to  make  peace  betwixt  them  5
but  this  no  man  can  doc  but  hee  that  is  very  wife,
and  can  agree  with  his  Motherland  have  co-intclli-
gence  with  her ;  for  if  they  were  friends,  one  would
not  hinder  the  other,  but  joining  their  forces  to-
gether would  make  things  immortall.  Truely  hee
that  would  reconcile,  them  together  would  bee  a
man  worthy  to  be  confccrated  to  eternity.  A/^i&.Sir,,
I  will  compofe  thofe  differences  betwixt  them,  and
freejiira,  J  am  in  other  matters  a  man  very  learned,
and  wife  :  Bcfides,  I  am  very  good  at  operations.
VfXj  Friend,  r fee  truly  that  thou  art  big  enough, ,
and  thou  haft  a  great  head,  but  I  know  not  whe-
ther thou  canft  doc  thofe  things  or  no.  Klch,  Sir,
Perhaps  thou  art  ignorant  of  what  the   Alchy-
mifts  know,  in  matter  of  treaty  they  have  alwaics
the  better  of  it,  and  truly  I  amnotthclafl.  To  that
his  enemies  will  but  treat  with  mce  ,  if  they  will
trcatjafTurc  your  felfe  that  they  will  have  the  worfto .
Sir,beleeve  mce,  the  Alchymifts  know  how  to  treaty
if  they  only  will  but  treat  with  mee ,  Sulphur  fhali
prefently  be  at  liberty^  Vax^  I  like  your  judgement  -
well,  I  hear  that  you  are  approved  of.   Alch»  Sir, ,
Tell  mce  if  this  bee  the  true  Sulphur  of  the  Philofo-
phers  f*    r^ATjThis  truely  is  Sulphur,  but  whether
it  be  the  Philofophcr,  that  belongs  to  thee  to  know^
I  have   faid  enough  to  thee  concerning  Sulphur.
hkh,  iSir,  If  I  can  find  his  prifons  5  ihall  I  bee  able

to-


\i-^6  A  new  Light  (^fAlchymh;

tofethimat  liberty .«'  Fax  ^  If  thou  knowefl  well,
thou  Oialt-,  for  iris  caiicr  to  free  him  then  find  them.
Alcb,  5ir,  I  befeech  thee  tell  mce  but  this  ,  it  I  find
him,nial  I  make  the  Philofophers  ftone  of  himrT^Ar,

0  Friend!  It  is  not  for  mee  to  judge ,  doe  thou
look  to  that,  yetif  thouknowcft  his  Mother,  and
followell  her,  Sulphur  being  at  liberty,  the  Stone  is
at  hand.  Alch.  Sir,  in  what  fubje^l  is  this^Sulphur:*
r^.  Know  for  certain  that  this  Sulphur  is  of  great
vertuCi  his  Mineareall  things  in  the  world,  forhec
is  in  Meralls,  Hearbs,  Trees,  Animalls,  Stones,  and
Mineralls.  Alch.And  what  Devill  is  able  to  find  him
out  lying  hidamongft  fo  many  things,  and  fubje(fls  f
Tell  mee  the  matter  out  of  which  the  Philofophers
takehim.  Ffi.  Fricnd.tboucomeft  too  necr,yet  that

1  may  fatisfie  thec,know  that  Sulphwr  is  every  where,
but  lliee  hath  fome  certaine  palaces ,  where  fliee  is
wont  to  give  audience  to  the  Philofophers  •,  but  the
Philofophers  adore  himfwimming  in  his  owncfca,
and  playing  with  Vulcanjwhen  the  Philofophers  goe
to  him  unknown  iri  his  vile  garments.  Alch,  Sir ,  in
rhe  fea,  why  then  is  hee  not  mine ,  fince  hee  is  hid
here  fo  neer/  roA  told  thee  that  his  Keepers  put  him
into  mofl  dark  prifons,left  thou  lliouldft  fee  him,  for
hee  is  in  one  fubjeft  alone,  but  if  thou  haft  not  found
him  at  homc,thou  wilt  fcarce  find  him  in  the  Woods.
But  doe  not  thou  dcfpaire  in  finding  of  him  out:
I  tell  thee  of  a truth,that  lic^  is  in  Gold,  and  Sil-
ver moft  perfeifl,  but  in  Argent  vive  moft  cafy.
Alch,  Sir,  I  would  very  willingly  make  the  Philofo-
phers Stone.  Fo.  Thou  d^reft  a  good  thing, Sulphur
alfo  would  willingly  bee  out  of  bonds.  And  fo  Sa-
tftrn  departed. Now  a  dccplleep  fcaicd  upon  the  Al-

chymift,


*A  mtp  Light  ofAlchymU.  137

thymlfl:,  being  weary  5  and  there  appeared  to  him
this  Vifion,  Hecfawinthat  Wood  a  fountain  full
of-  water,  about  which  walked  Sal,  and  Sulphur^con-
tending  one  with  the  other,  untill  at  laft  they  began
to  fight-,  and  Sal  gave  Sulphur  an  incurable  wound,
out  of  which  wound,  in  ftead  of  blood,  there  came
out  water,  as  it  were  moft  white  milk,  and  it  became
to  be  a  great  river.    Then  out  of  that  Wood  came
forth  Diana  a  moft  beautiful!  Virgin,  who  began  to
wafli  her  felf  in  that  river :  whom  a  certain  Prince  ,  a
moft  ftout  man  f  and  greater  then  his  fervants)pafring
by,  and  feeing,  began  to  admire  at  her  beauty  5  and
becaufc  fhee  was  of  a  like  nature  with  him,  hce  be-
came enamoured  with  her,    which  when  (lie  percei-
ved, ibee  was  inflamed  with  love  towards  him«
Wherefore  as  it  were  falling  into  a  fwoun  Ihc  began
to  be  drowned :  which  that  Prince  feeing,  comman-
ded his  fervants  to  help  her-,  but  they  were  all  afraid
togoe  to  the  river^    to  whom  the  Prince  faid.  Why
doe  you  not  help  Diana  that  Virgin/*  To  whom  they
replyed.  Sir,  this  river  is  indeed  little,  and  as  it  were
dryedup,  but  moft  dangerous :    Once  upon  a  time
W2e  were  willing  to  go  into  it  without  thy  knowledge,
and  wee  hardly  efcaped  the  danger  of  eternall  death;
Wee  know  aUb  that  others  that  were  our  predecef-
fors  peridied  in  it.    Then  the  Prince  himfclfc  laying
afide  his  thick  mantle,  even  as  hee  was  armed,leaped
into  the  river,  and  to  help  faire  P/V?;?^  hee  ft  retched
forth  his  hand  to  her-,  who  being  willing  to  fave  her
fclfc, drew alfo the  Prince himfelfe  to  her,  and  ^o
were  both  drowned .     A  little  after  their  fouls  came
out  of  I  he  river,  flying  above  the  river,  and  faid.  It'
was  weildoncof  us,  forelfe  wee  could  not  have

T  becii


13?  v^  ftetp  Light  ofAlchjmie.

been  heed  from  rhofe  bodies  which  are  polluted,  and
ftained.  Alch.  But  doe  you  ever  return  into  thofc
bodies  againe^  Amme,  Not  into  fuch  filthy  bodies ,
but  when  they  be  purged,  and  this  river  fliall  bee
throughly  dryed  up  by  the  heat  of  the  funne,  and  this
Province  flvill  bee  often  tryed  by  the  Aire„     Alch,
What  lliall  you  doe  in  the  mean  time.    Antfft.   Here
wee  fliall  fly  upon  the  river  till  thofe  clouds ,    and
tempefts  (liall  ceafe.  In  the  meantime  the  Alchymift
fell  into  a  more  defired  dream  of  his  Sulphur  5  and
behold  there  appeared  to  him  many  Alchymifts
coming  to  that  place  to  feek  after  Sulphur, and  when
they  found  the  carkade  of  that  Sulphur  that  was
ilain  by  Sal  by  the  fountain,  they  divided  it  amongft
themfelves:  which  when  the  Alchymift  faw  hce  alfo
cook  a  part  with  them  •,    and  fo  every,  one  of  them
returned  home,  and  began  to  work  in  that  Sulphur,
and  till  this  day  they  doe  not  give  over.  But  ^Atume
meets  this  Alchymift,  and  faith  to  him,Friend,  how
is  it  with  thcef  AUh.  O  Sir,  I  have  feen  many  won-
derful! things,  my  wife  would  fcarcc  beleeve  thcm^
now  alfo  1  have  found  Sulphur ,  I  befeech  you  Sir
help,  let  us  make  the  Philofophcrs  Stone.     Satur-
nus.  With  all  my  heart,  my  friend,  make  ready  then
Argent-vivc,  and  Sulphur,  and  give  hither  a  glaffe,
hlch*  Sir,  have  nothing  to  doc  with  Mercury,  for  he
is  naught,  he  hath  deluded  ray  companion,  and  many
others.  Sat,  Without Argcntvive, in whofe  King-
dome  Sulphur  is  the  King ,  the  Philofophers  have
done  nothing,  neither  doe  I  know  what  to  doe  with-
out it.  A4^.Sir,Let  us  make  it  of  Sulphur  alone.^^r.
Well  then,  my  friend,  but  it  will  fucceed  according-
ly. Then  they  took  that  Sulphur,  which  th|  Alchy-
mift


'A  nerp  Light  ofAlcbyntie^  13^

mift  found,  and  they  did  what  the  Alchymift  would
have  done,  they  began  to  work  divers  ways,  and  to
make  experiments  of  Sulphur  in  divers  ftrangc  kind
of  furnaces,  which  the  Alchymift  had  :  but  in  the
conclufion  of  every  operation  there  was  brought
forth  nothing  but  Matches,  fuch  as  old  women  ufu-
ally  fell  to  light  candles  withall.  Then  they  began  a
new  work,and  fublimcd,  and  calcined  Sulphur  accor-
ding to  the  jAlchymifts  pleafurc;  but  in  what  way
foever  they  worked  it,  it  fucceeded  as  before,  for  ftifl
they  made  nothing  but  Matches  5  then  faid  the
Alchymift  to  Saturn,  Truly  Sir,  I  fee  it  will  not
fucceed  according  to  my  fancy,  I  befecch  thee  doe
thou  work  alone,  what  thou  knoweft.  Then  Saturn
faid.  Sec  then,  and  learn.  Hce  then  took  two  Mer*
curies  of  a  differing  fubftance,  but  of  one  originall,
which  Saturn  waftied  in  his  owne  urine,  and  called
them  Sulphurs  of  Sulphurs,  and  mixed  the  fixed
with  the  volatile,  and  the  compofition  being  made,
hee  put  it  into  its  proper  vefTell,  and  left  the  Sulphuv
ftiould  fly  away,  hee  fet  a  keeper  Over  him ,  and  then
put  him  into  a  bath  of  a  moft  gentle  heat,  according
as  the  matter  required,  and  hee  made  all  things  very
well.  Then  they  made  the  Philofophers  Stone ,  be-
caufe  of  the  true  matter  a  true  thing  muft  needs  bee
made. The  Alchymift  being  very  glad  took  the  Stone
withtheglafTe,  and  beholding  the  colour  thereof,
which  was  like  burnt  blood,  hee  was  amazed ,  and
by  reafon  of  too  much  joy  hee  began  to  leap,  in
which  leaping  the  glalTe  fell  out  of  his  hands  upon
the  ground,  and  was  broken.  And  fo  Saturn  vani-
fhed  away.  The  Alchymift  alfo  being  awaked  out  of
his  dr€am>  found  nothing  in  his  hands  but  Matches

T  2  which


1 40  A  new  Light  ofAlcbymie.

which  hee  made  of  brimftone  :  but  the  Stone  flew
away,  and  doth  ftill  fly-,  whence  it  is  called  Volatile:
and  fothat  miferable  Alchymift  learned  nothing  clfe
by  that  Vifion  but  how  to  make  Matches :  who  after ,
wards  laying  afide  the  Stone,  became  to  be  a  Phyfiti-
ani  by  (carching  after  the  ftone  of  the  Philofophers
hee  got  the  ftone  of  the  Kidneys.  Laft  of  all  hee
Icdfuch  a  life,  asfuchkindof  Alchymifts  are  wont
todoc,  who  for  the  moft  part  become  PhyiitianSj  or
Quackfalvers,  which  thing  will  happen  to  all ,  who
betake  themfelves  to  the  Art  cafually  without  any
foundation,  but  only  by  hcarefay,  or  bymeancs  of
Receipts.

Some  of  them,  when  things  fucceednot^fay-Wt

are  wife  men  ,.  wee  hear  that  the  grafl'e  grows,  if  the

Art  were  true  wee  fhould  have  had  it  before  otlicr

men  :  And  fo  having  brazen  faces,  left  wee  fliould

bee  accounted  undeferving  men  ('as  indeed  they  are,

and  alfo  perverfe  j  contcmne,  and  undervalue  the

Art.  This  Science  hates  fuch  men,   and  alwaics

Ihews  themthe  beginning  in  the  end.  Now  we  grant

unto  the  unworchy,  that  this  Art  is  nothing ,  but  to

the  Lovers  of  vertue,  and  the  true  Searchers,  anti

Sons  of  Wifdome,  wee  doe  moft  highly  commend

it,  anddoeaflirmeitnotonly  to  be  true,  but  alto--

gethcr  the  trueft  :  which  fometimes  wee  have  re^

ally  made  good  before  men  worthy  of  fuch  a  fighr,

1  fay  before  men  of  high,  and  low  condition  :.  (  yet

this  Medicine  was  not  made  by  us ,  but  received

from  a  friend,  and  yet  moft  true  )  for  the  fearching

out  oi   which  wee  have  fufficiently  inftrudcd  the

Searchers  thcrcofj  whom  if  our  Writings  doe  not

pleafe,  let  them  read  thofc  ofother  Authors,  which

are.


A  netp  Light  oJAlcbymie.  1 41

arc  eaficr,  but  with  this  Caution,  That  whatfo-
cvcr  they  (hall  read ,  they  fliall  aluaies  compare
it  with  the  poflibiJity  of  Nature,  left  vhey  affay
any  thing  contrary  to  Nature.  Neither  let  them
beleeve,  although  it  were  written  in  the  bookes  of
Phiiofophers,  that  Fire  burns  not ,  becaufc  this  is
contrary  to  Nature  :  but  if  it  bee  writ ,  that  Fire
hath  a  drying,  and  heating  faculty ,  this  is  to  bee
belecvedjbecaufe  it  is  according  to  Nature  :  For  Na-
turedoth  alwaics  agree  with  afound  judgment,  and  in
Nature  there  is  nothing  difficult,  all  truth  is  plain.
Then  alfo  let  them  Icarne,  what  things  in  Nature
are  of  affinity  with  each  other,  which  wee  conceive
may  be  eader  done  by  our  Writings ,  then  any
other,  feeing  wee  think  wee  have  wrote  fufficient-
ly ,  untill  fome  other  ffiali  come ,  who  flivill  fet
downe  the  whole  Receipt  fo  plaine ,  as  to  make
cheefe  of  Milkc,  which  is  not  lawful!  for  us  to-
doe.

But  that  I  may  not  dircd  all  things  I  fay  to  the
new  beginner  only,  wee  fhall  fay  fomething  to  you
alfo  who  now  have  paflfed  over  thefc  painfull  la-
bours. Have  you  feen  that  Countrey,  where  a^
man  marryed  a  wife,  whofe  nuptialls  were  celebraa
ted  in  the  houfe  of  Nature:*  Have  you  underftood
how  the  vulgar  with  you  have  feen  this  Sulphur  i  If.
tlierefore  you  will  that  old  women  iliould  pra(5life
your  Philofophy,  iliewthe  dealbation  of  yourSul-
phursj  fay  unto  the  vulgar,Come  and  fee,  for  now
the  water  is  d.vided,  and  Sulphur  is  come  out;  hee
will  return  white,  and  congeale  the  Waters. Burn
therefore  Sulphur  from  ijicorabuftible  Sulphur,  then
waihit,  make  it  white,  and  red,  umill  Sulphur  be-

T3  come


tJ^2  A  nerp  tight  ofAlcbymiel

come  Mctcury,  and  Merciiry  bee  made  "Snphur^
which  afcerwards  you  fliall  bcautific  with  the  foule
of  Gold  :  For  if  you  doe  not  fublime  Sulphur,
from  Sulphur,  and  Mercuiy  from  Mercury ,  you
have  not  yet  found  out  the  Water,  which  out  of
Sulphur,  and  Mercury  is  created  by  way  of  diftil-
lation  •  hce  doth  not  afcend ,  that  doth  not  de-
fccnd,  Whatfoever  in  this  Art  is  remarkable  ,
by  many  is  loft  in  the  preparation  ,  for  our  Mer-
cury is  quickened  with'SuIphur ,  elfc  it  would  bcc
of  noufe.  A  Prince  without  a  people  is  unhappy ;
fo  is  an  Alchymift  without  Sulphur,  and  Mercu-
ry, If  thou  haft  undcrftood  mee,  I  have  faid
enoughs


THE


A  itetp  Light  ofjlchymiel


^43


THE


GONCLVSlON.


'Very  fearcher  of  this  Art  muft  in  the
firft  place  with  a  mature  judgement
examine  the  creation,  operation ,  and
vertues  of  the  four  Elementstogethcr
'■  with  their  adings  :  for  if  hee  be  igno-
rant of  the  original! ,  and  Nature  of  thefe ,  hec
(hall  not  come  to  the  knowledge  of  the  Principles,
neither  fhall  hee  know  the  true  matter  oi  the
Stone,  much  lefTe  attain  to  any  good  conclufionj  be-
caufc  every  end  is  terminated  upon  its  beginning,
Hec  that  well  knowes  what  hee  begins ,  fhall  well
know  what  fhall  bee  the  end.  For  the  originallof
the  Elements  is  the  Chaos  ,  out  of  which  God  the
Maker  of  all  things  created,  and  feparatcd  the  Ele-
ments, which  belongs  to  God  alone  :  but  out  of
the  Elements  Nature  produccth  the  Principles  of
things,  and  this  is  Natures  worke^  through  the  will

oi


144  "^  ^^^  Light  ofAichymie.

of  God  alone  ••  Out  of  the  Principles  Nature  after-
wards producer h  Mmcralls,  and  all  things  ;  out  of
which  the  Artrft  alfo  by  rmitating  Nature  can  doc
many  wonderfull  things. Becaufe  Nature  out  of  thcfe
Principles, which ar^  Salt,  Sulphur,  and  Mercury,
doth  produce  Mineralls,  and  Metalls,  and  all  kinds
of  things;  and  it  doth  not  fimply  produce  Metalls
out  of  the  Elements,  but  by  Principles  ,  which  are
tke  ni^dium  ber^vixt  the  Elements,  and  Metalls:
Therefore  if  Nature  dorh  not  make  thofe  things,
much  lefle  lliall  Art.  And  not  only  in  this  example,
but  alfo  in  every  naturall  procefTc  a  middle  difpofiti-
on  is  to  bee  obferved.  Wherefore  herein  this  Trea-
tifc  wee  have  fufficiently  defcribed  the  Elements ,
their a<5tings,  and  operations,  as  aUo  the  originall
of  the  Principles  (becaufe  hitherto  no  Philofopher
hath  difcovered  things  more  cleerly  )  that  tlie  well
minded  fcarcher  might  the  more  cafily  confide r  in
what  degree  the  Stone  differs  from  Metalls ,   and
Metalls  trom  Elements*    For  there  is  a  difference
betwixt  Gold,  and  Water,  but  leffe  betwixt  Water,
and  Mercury;  and  Icaft  of  all  betwixt  Mercury,and
Gold.     For  the  houfe  of  Gold  is  Mercury,  and  the
houfe  of  Mercury  is  Water  :  but  Sulphur  is  that
which  coagulates  Mercury-,  which  Sulphur  indeed
is  moft  difficultly  prepared ,  but  more  difficultly
found  out.  Forinthe-Sulphur  of  Philofophers  this
fccret  confifts  ,  which  alfo  is  contained  in  the  in-
ward rooms  oi  Mercury,  of  whole  prepararion,with-
out  which  it  is  unprofitable,  Vvce  lliall  difcourfe  here-
after in  the  third  Princple  of  Salt,  feeing  here  wee
treat  ofthcvertue,  and  original),  not  Praxis,  of  Sul-
phur.

Where-


A  new  Light  djAlchymiei  r  45

Wherefore  now  wee  have  not  writ  this  Treatife
that  wee  would  difprove  any  of  the  ancient  Philo-
fophers,   but  rather  confirm  their  Writings ,  and
fupply  thofe  things,  which  they  have  omitted :  fee-
ing that  Philofophers  themfclvcs  were  but  mcn^they
could  not  be  accurate  in  all  things^neither  is  one  man
fufficientforall  things.  Miracles  alfo  have  fcduced
fomc  men  from  the  right  way  ot  Nature,  as  wee  read
liappencd  in  Alhertus  Magnus zmoO:  witty  Philofo-
pher^who  writjthat  in  his  times  there  were  grains  of
Gold  found  betwixt  the  teeth  of  a  dead  man  in  his
gravc.Hee  couldnot  find  out  this  Miraclc,but  judged
it  to  be  by  rcafbn  of  the  Minerall  vcrtuc  in  man, being
confirmed  in  his  opinion  by  that  faying-  of  Merien:
And  this  Mattery  0  King^is  extracted  from  thee  :  but
this  iscrroncous,foriJ/<?r/>»  was  pleafed  to  underftand
thofe  things  Philofophically.  For  the  Minerall  ver-
tuc  is  placed  in  its  own  Kingdome,  as  the  Animalljs
in  its  Kingdome,  as  in  the  book  oi  the  Twelve  Trea-
tifcs  wee  have  diftinguifhed  thofe  Kingdomes ,  and
divided  them  into  three  Kingdomcs-,   becaufe  every
one  of  tbefe  without  the  ingrelTe  of  any  other  thing
ftands  in  it  felf,and  is  multiplycd.  It  is  true  indeed
that  in  the  Animall  Kingdome ,  Mercury  is  as  the
matter,  and  Sulphurasthevertue,  butihe  An-mall
is  not  Minerall.  The  vettue  of  the  Animall  5ulphur
if  it  were  not  in  Manjit  could  not  congeal  the  bloud
Mercury  into  fiefh,  and  bones :  fo  alto  if  there  were
not  a  vertue  of  the  Vegetable  Sulphur  in  the  Vege-
table KingdomCjit  coulcl  not  coagulate  Water ,   or
the  Vegetable  Mercury  into  Herbs,  and  Trees.   So
alfo  it  is  to  bee  underftood  in  the  Minerall  King-
dome.  Thcfe  three  Mercuries  doe  not  indeed  difer

V  in


1 4<$  ^  tievp  Light  ojAlchjniie.

in  vertuc ,  nor  the  three  Sulphurs ,  bccaufc  every
Sulphur  hath  a  power  to  coagulate  its  own  Mercury;
and  every  Mercury  hath  a  power  to  bee  coagulated
by  its  owne  proper  Sulphur  ^   and    by  no  other
that  is  a  ftrangcr  to  it.      Now   the  reafon'why
Gold  was  found,  and  generated  betwixt  the  teeth  of
the  dead  man  isthis^becaufe  in  his  life  time  Mercury
was  by  fome  Phylitian  conveyed  into  his  infirme
boL^y,  either  by  un<5tion,or  by  Turbith,or  fome  other
way,  as  the  cuftome,  and  manner  was  ,   and  it  was
the  nature  of  Mercury  to  goe  up  to  the  mouth,  and
through  the  fores  thereof  to  be  evacuated  with  the
fl.gme.  If  therefore  in  cime  of  fuch  a  cure  the  fick
man  dyed ,  that  Mercury  not  finding  any  egreflc,
remained  in  his  mouth  b.^twixt  his  teeth ,  and  that
ca.kalTe  became  thenaturall  vefTell  of  Mercury  ,  fo
being  {hut  up  faft  lor  a  long  time  was  congealed  in-
to Gold  by  Its  own  proper  Sulphur,  biring  purified
by  the  naturall  heat  of  putrefadion,  caufcd  by  the
eorrofive  phlegmc  of  the  Mans  body.   But  if  Mi-
nerall  Mercury  had  not  been  brought  in  thither,
there  could  Gold  never  have  been  produced.  And
this  is  a  moft  true  example ,  that  Nature  in  the
bowells  of  the  earth,  doth  of  Mercury  alone  pro-
duce Gold,  and  Silver,  and  other  MctallSjaccording
to  the  difpofitionof  the  place,  or  matrix;  for  Mer-
cury hath  in  its  fclf  its  own  proper  Sulphur,  with
which  it  is  coagulated  into  Gold,  unleflc  it  bee  hin-
dred  by  fome  accident,  or  hath  not  a  requifite  heat>
oraclofe  place.  The  vertue  therefore  of  Animall
Snlphur  doth  nor  congeal  Mercury  into  Gold,  but
into  Flerti;  for  if  there  were  fuch  a  venue  in  Man,   it
wouldhappeotobcib  io  all  bodies  j  which,  it  doth

not.


it  wtf n?  Light  ofAlcbymie^  1 47

not.Many  fuch  miracles^and  accidents  fall  out,which
being  not  well  confidcrcd  by  the  Writers,  occafion
the  Readers  to  fall  into  errors: yet  the  honeft  ftarcher
muft  apply  all  things  to  the  poflibility  of  Nature  •  if
they  doe  not  agree  with  Nature,  they  muft  be  let
alone,  and  waved.

It  fufficeth  the  diligent  Student,  that  he  hath  here
heard  what  is  the  Originall  of  the  Principles  (fincc
the  beginning  being  unknown,  the  end  is  alwaies
doubtfuU)  of  which  wee  have  in  this  Treati.e  not
iEnigmatically,  but  as  cleerly  as  we  could,  and  as  it
was  lawful!  for  us  ,  fpoken  unto  the  fearchcr
thereof  .•  by  means  of  which,  if  God  /hall  enlighten
any  ones  mind,  hcc  fhall  know  what  a  fuccelTor  owes
to  his  predece(rors,feeing  this  Art  is  alwaies  acquired
by  the  fame  kind  of  w't?^  and  difpofitic/ns.  Which  Art
wee  after  this  kind  of  clear  manileftation  of  it,  lay  up
intothebofomeof  God  the  moft  high  Creator,and
our  Lord,  and  commend  our  feivs  together  with  all
honeft  hearted  Readers  to  his  grace,and  infinite  mer-
cy. To  whom  be  praife,  and  glory ,  for  ever ,  and
ever.


FINIS.

V*


')-dT


A  TABLE


OF  THE


CONTENTS

Of  this  BOOK*

F  Nature^  rvh/tt  Jbee  is  ^  nnd  rvhat  her
Searchers  ought  t  o  bee*  page    i .

cf  ihf  cferaticn  of  Nature  Mcord'wg
t6  our intentton  in  Sterw,  p.  5.

of  the  true  frfi  matter  of  Met  alls.  p.  f,

Eerv  Metalis  are  genemtid  in  the  hwells  »f  the
"Earth.  '  p.  11.

of  the  generation  of  all  Winds  of  Stones,       p»i4«

of  the  fee  end  Hatter^  and  ptrefa^ion  »f  things

p.  17.
of


The  Contents.
of  the  'vertue  of  the  fec0r$d  MAtterl         p.  22^

fforv  By  ArtNatttTgwtrkshSeed,  p.  24J

of  the  ccmmixtioH  ofUetdls^er  the  drawing  forth
their  Seed,  p.  iS,

of  the  fupern  At  until  generation  of  the  Son  of  the
Sun,  p. zS.

of  the  Tr^xis^  undm^ing  of  the  Stone^or  TinBure
hj  Art.  p.  30.

of  the  Stone,  And  its  vertue*  P»  3^»

The  Bplogue^or  Condufton  of  thefe  Ttvelve  treA-
tifes.  p.  3P.

A  FrefAce  to  the  PhilofofhkaH  JEnigma^    or
^idle.  P»  47»

The  P Arable^  or  Thilofofhicall  Kidle^  Added  bf  way
of  conclufio»y  And fufer Addition,  P«5i«

A  DiAlogue between  jiercurj^  the  hUhym'tft ,  And
lUture.  P'  5^.

A  TreAtife  of  Sulphur,  The  Preface,  p.  75.

of  Sulphur^  thefecondPrincifle.  p.  81.

of  the  Element  of  EArth,  p.  S5 .

of  the  Element  of  Water,  p.  8y.

Of


The  Contents;

of  the  Element  of  Aire.

P-P5-

of  the  Element  of  Fire.

^'99*

of  the  three  FrincifUs  of  41  tkhgs.

p.  hi:

\OfSulfhur.

p.  li6»

7beConcluftpf$:

P-I4S*

Fwm


vw'a^^noD  ful


~;^^


.1  *;>>.•.  i  i\h  1^  ',


.  V  mil


LlB^I*


OF  THE

N  A  T  V  R  E

Of  Things.


THEFIRST  BOOKE.


Of  the  generations  ofNaturall
things.


He  generation  of  all  natural  things  the  gcnerati^
IS  twofold :  Naturall.and  with-?.  ''^  "^'"""

^.,^A„^  1     A.    •/<   .',,        ...      tniitgs  IS  tw&»


out  Art.,  and  Artificiall,  w;(.byfoidf
Alchymie.  Although  in  gcnerall
it  may  bee  faid  that  all  things  are
naturally  generated  of  the  Earth
by  means  of  putrefadion.  For
Putrefadion  is  the  chiefe  decree  Aiirhingspro:
andfirft  ftepto  Generation.  Now  Putrefadion  isXtoT,'""''

A  a  occafioncd


t  Of  the  Nature  of  things^  L  i  b*  T^^

""".^r^'flA^.^^c  ^c<^^^^o"f <^ by  amoifthear.  For  a  continuall  moift
amoift  heat.    Hcat  caulcth  putrchaiop,  and  changeth  all  naturall
things  from  their  firft  form,  and  elTcn'ce,  as  'aifo  their
J^^^jP°}''^|^^"^'*  vertu^^  into  another  thing.  For  as  pu-

feftion.  '  trcfadion  in  the  ftomach  changcth,  and  reduccth  all
meats  into  dung  •  fo  alfo  putrefadion  out  of  the
flomachin  a  glafle  ;^  changerh  all  things  from  one
form  into  another  ,  from  one  effencc  into  another,
from  one  colour  into  another ,  from  one  fmell  into
another,  from  one  vcrtue  into  another ,  from  one
power  into  another,  from  one  property  into  ano-
ther, and  generally  from  one  quality  into  another.
For  it  is  evident,  and  proved  by  daily  experience,
that  many  good  things,which  are  wholfomc,and  me-
dicinablc,  become  after  putrefadion  naught,  urr-
whoilbme,  and  meer  poifon.  So  on  the  contrary,
there  are  many  bad,  unwholfome,  poifdnous,  and
hurrfull  things,  which  after  their  putrcfadion  be-
come good,  lofe  all  their  unwholfomnefl'e,  and  be-
come wonderfiill  medicinable  :  becaufe  putrefadion
iproduceth  great  matters,  as  of  this  wee  have  a  moft
famous  example  in  thehoh  Gofpel,  where  Chrift
laith :  Unlcfie  a  grain  of  Wheat  bee  caft  into  the
Earth,  and  bv  putrefied,  it  cannot  bring  forth  fruit
in  a  hundred  fold.  Hence  alfo  we  muff  know,  that
many  things  are  multiplyed  in  putrefadion  fo  as  to
Whit  purre.  bring  forthexcellent  fruit.  For  putrefadion  is  the
faaioRis.  change,  and  deathof  allthinrs,  and  deftrudion  of
the  firft  effence  of  all  Naturall  things-,  whence  there
arifeth  a  regeneration,  and  new  generation  a  thou-
iand  times  better,  &c.

Seeing  thciefore  putrefaction  is  the  firft  degree,
andfteptogcncrationj  it  is  very  ncceflary  that  wee

know


LiB^r.  Of  the  "Nature  of  things^  5

know  putrefaction  well.    Now  there  arc  many  kinds  fhJ^jf/j**j°g  J^
of  putrefactions,  and  one  produceth  its  generation  to  g«ncratJo<i
in  another  manner,  then  doth  another.  One  alfo  foo-
nerthen  another.  Wee  faid  alfo  that  moifture  ,  and  ^'^'^^['^j^*  '*
heat  were  the  firft  degree,  and  ftcp  to  putrefaction,  "^*"' °  •
which  produceth  all  things,  as  a  Hen  doth  her  egs.
Wherefore  through,  and  in  putrefaction,  all  mucila-
ginous flcgme,  and  matter  is  made  Iiving,whatfoever
it  prove  to  be  at  laft.

An  example  ofthis  you  hive  in  cgs,in  which  there  An  artiScufi.
is  a  mucilaginous  humour,which  by  any  kind  of  mo-  chLkcm.  ^
derate  continuall  heat  is  putrefied,  and  turned  into  a
living  Chicke,  not  only  by  the  heat  of  the  Hen ,  but
any  fuch  kind  of  heat.  For  in  fuch  a  degree  of  Fire
cgs  may  be  brought  to  maturity  in  a  glalTe ,  and
afhes,  and  become  living  birds :  yea  any  man  may
ripen  an  egge  in  his  arm-hole,  and  hatch  a  Chicke,  as
well  as  the  Hen.

And  here  wee  mufttake  notice  of  fomething  that  The  raifing  of
is  greater,  and  more  then  this  :  'vt'{,  if  that  living  •li'"'*  M  to
Ch'ckc  be  in  a  vefTell  of  glaffe  like  a  gourd,  and  fea-  '  ^*
led  up,  burnt  to  powder,  or  aflies  in  the  third  degree
of  Fire,  and  afterward  fo  clofed  in,  be  putrefied  with
the  exacrefl:  putretacrion  of  Horfe-dung,  into  a  mu-
cilaginous flegm,  then  that  flegm  may  be  brought  to
maturity,  and  become  a  renewed ,  and  new  made
Chicke.- to  wit,  if  that  flegm  bee  againe  inclofed  in
its  former  fliell,  or  receptacle.  This  is  to  revive  the
dead  by  regeneration,and  clarification,  which  indeed
is  a  great,  and  profound  miracle  of  Nature.   Accor*
diag  to  this  procefle  may  all  Birds  bee  killed ,  and
made  alive  againe,  and  made  new  :  and  this  is  the
higheii:,  and  greateft  miracle,  and  myftcry  of  God,

Aa2  which


4  Of  the  Nature  of  things^         L I  b^  I^

which  hee  ever  difcovcred  to  mortall  man.
The  Arificiaii    Wccmiift  alfo  know  that  after  this  manner  men
|i""^^^°"  ^  may  bee  generated  without  naturall  Father,  or  Mo-
ther, i,e,  not  of  a  Woman  in  a  naturall  way  :  but  by
the  Art,  and  induftry  of  a  skilful)  Alchymift  may  a
Man  bee  borne ,  and  grow,  as  afterwards  fliall  bee
fhewed.
The  generan-      j^  jg  poffible  alfo  that  men  may  be  born  of  beads,

on  of  men  by  „^         ,}  ..         ^       .       J         ,  .  ,     '

brufo.  according  to  naturall  caules,  but  yet  this  cannot  bee

done  without  much  impiety,  and  herefie-,  to  wit,  if  a
man  fhould  couple  with  a  beaft,and  that  bealt  ihould  j
as  2  woman  doth,  receive  the  Sperm  of  the  man,with
defire  and  luft  into  her  matrix,  and  conceive.-  then
the  fperm  doth  of  neccflity  pucreiie,and  by  the  conti-
nual heat  of  the  body,a  man^and  not  a  beaft  Is  thence
As  rh«  feed  i^  produced.  For  alwaies  as  the  feed  is  that  is  fown^
fo  IS  th?  Uuir.  ^  ,^j^Q  J5  ^l^g  ^^Ij.  ^i^^^  jj  brought  forth^  and  unleffe  it

lliould  be  fo,it  would  be  contrary  to  the  light  of  Na-
ture, and  to  Philofophy.  Wherefore  as  is  the  kcd^
fuch  is  the  hearb  that  fprings  from  thence.  So  of  the
Seed  of  an  Onyon  is  brought  forth  an  Onyon,  not  a
Rofc,noraNut,  not  a  Lettuce.  SoofCorne,  Corn
is  brought  forth;  of  Barky,  Barley-,  of  Oats,  Oats.'
and  fo  it  is  with  all  other  fruits,  which  have  ktd^  and
arefown,&c.
*rhe force  o»  Inlikc  manner  alfoit  is  polTible ,  and  not  contrary
wonsensinug-^Q  Naturc ,  that  an  irrationall  bruit  fhould  bee
produced  by  a  woman,  and  a  man.  Neither  are  wee
to  judge  of,  or  cenlure  the  woman,  as  the  man,(as  in
the  former  cafe)  ilice  therefore  is  not  to  bee  accoun-
«d  impious,  or  hercticall,  as  if  fliee  aded  contrary
to  NaturCjbnt  it  is  to  be  imputed  to  her  imagination.
Eor  her  imagination  is  alwaies  the  caufc  of  ir.    And


the


]^  I B  ♦  T^  of  the  Natnre  of  things  c

the  imagination  of  a  breeding  woman  is  fo  powerful,
that  in  conceiving  the  feed  into  her  body ,  ihcc  may
change  her  infant  divers  wayes  ••  bccaufe  her  inward
ftarresarefo  ftrongly  bent  upon  the  infant,  that  they
beget  an  imprelTion,  and  influence  upon  it. Wherefore
the  infant  in  the  Mothers  wombe  in  its  forming  is  put
into  the  hand,  and  will  of  its  Mother ,  as  clay  in  the
hand  of  the  Potter,  who  thence  frames ,  and  makes
what  his  will,and  pleafure  is  :  fo  the  Woman  that  is
breeding,  forms  the  fruit  in  her  body,  according  to
her  imagination,  and  her  ffarres.  Therefore  it  often
falls  our,  that  of  the  feed  of  a  man,Cattle,  and  other
horrid  Monfters  are  begot,  according  as  the  imagina-
tion of  the  Mother  is  ftrongly  directed  upon  the
Embryo,&c.

Now  as  you  have  heard,  that  by  'putrefajfiion  ma-
ny, and  various  things  ate  generated,an<l  made  alive,
fo  alfo  youmuft  know,  that  of  many  hearbs,  by  pu-
trefadion  divers  living  creatures  are  bred,which  they
that  are  skilled  in  thefe  thiugs  know.

Here  alfo  wee  muft  know,  thatallfuchAnimalls,  ah  animals  thai
which  are  bred,and  made  of  putrefaction,  containe  «"^«  ^icd  mecriy
fomepoifon,  and  are  poifonous  ,  yet  one  far  more  ^fg^^Q^f^*^!**"
ftrong  then  another,  an<l  one  after  another  manner
then  another :  as  you  fee  in  Serpents,  Vipers,  Toads,
Frogs,  Scorpions,  Bafiiiskes,  Spiders,  Wood-bees,
Pifmires,  and  many  forts  of  Wormes  ,  as  Cankers,
Maggots,  Locufts,&c.  All  which  are  bred  in,  ajid
through  putrefaction.  Alfo  amongft  Animalls  there
are  bred  divers  Monfters  ^  And  there  are  Monfters
alfo  which  are  not  bred  of  putrefaction  of  themfelves,
but  arc  made  by  Art  in  a  glaffe ,  as  hath  been  faid;
becaufe  they  oftentimes  appear  in  a  very  wonderful!

fhapc.


What  Mon
fieri  «re*


Of  the  Nature  of  thifi^sl  1,ib.  I^

ihape,and  form/carfiil  tobehold,as  oftentimes  with
many  feet,  manytailes  ,  many  colours,  oftentimes
many  heads,worms  with  the  tailes  of  Piilies  ,or  fca-
therSjandlothcr  unufuall  formSjthat  the  Hke  have  not
been  fcen.

Wherefore  not  only  all  Animalls,  which  have  not
proper  Parents,  and  are  not  borne  of  things  like  to
themfelves are  Mongers,  but  alfo  thofe  which  are
bred  of  other  things.
Thefrcret  pcii  Sq  you fee  it  Is  conccrning  a  Bafiliskc,  which  alfo
Siisk.  ^  *  "'isaMonfter,and  indeed  a  Monifer  above  all  Mon-
fters,  and  then  which  none  is  to  bee  more  dreaded,
becaufc  hee  can  kill  any  man  with  his  meer  looks,ar.d
fight :  and  becaufc  his  poifon  is  above  all  poifons,  to
which  nothing  in  the  world  is  to  bee 'compared.  Hee
carries  his  poifon  in  a  mcft  fecret  manner  in  his  eyes ,
and  it  is  a  conceived  poifon,not  much  unlike  a  men-
ilruous  woman,  whoalfocarrietha  fe.:ret  poifon  irt
her  eyes,  fo  that  only  by  her  looks  a  Looking -glafle
is  fouled,  and  tainted.  So  alfo  if  lliee  looke  upon  a
wound,  or  an  ulcer,  ihee  in'ects  that  in  the  like  man-
ner, and  hinders  the  cure  thereof:  fo  alfo  with  her
breath,  as  well  as  fight,{hee  infects  divers  things,cor-
-rupts,  and  weakens  them-,  and  fo  alfo  with  her  touch.
For  you  fee  if  (liee  medle  with  wine  in  time  of  her
mcnilrues ,  thatitisfuddainly  changed  and  made
thick;  The  Vincgcr  alfo  that  flie  medies  withall,  be-
comes dead,  and  nfeleflc  :  fo  alfo  Hot-waters  lofe
their  flrcngth .'  In  like  manner  Civet,  Amber,Gryfe,
Musk,  and  fuch  like  perfumes,  lofe  their  odour  by
fuch  a  womans  carrying,  or  handling  of  them
So  alfo  Gold ,  and  Coralls  lofe  their  colour,
alfo  many  GcmmcSj    and   Looking-gUffcs  arc

felled


1 1 B  I.  Of  the  Nature  of  things.  j

foiled  thcrewith,&c.But  to  return  to  what  I  propofcd
concerning  the  Bafiliske,  by  what  reafonjand  in  what
manner  hec  carries  poifon in  his  Jooksjand  eyes-,  you
miift  know  that  hce  hath  that  property ,  and  poifon
from  mcnftruous  women,as  is  aforefaid.  For  ihe  Ba-
filiske  IS  bied  of,  and  proceeds  from  the  greateft  im*
purity  of  a  Woman,  vi^  her  Menftrues ,  and  from
the  blood  of  the  Sperm  ,  if  it  bee  put  into  a  gourd
glaffe,  and  putrefied  in  Horfe-dung,  in  which  putre-
hction  a  Bafiliske  is  brought  forth.  But  who  is  fo
couragious^  and  bold  to  make,  take  him  out ,  and
kill  him  again,  unleffe  hec  cover,  and  fortifie  himftlfe
well  firft  with  glaffcs  :  I  fhould  pcrfwade  none  to
doe  it,  nay,  I  would  advife  them  to  take  heed  af

But  that  I  may  procetd  in  treating  of  Monflers,  Monnersdoe  ^
Know  that  Monfters  amongfl  brutes,  which  arc  n»fi»^c  ^o"g»
brought  forth  of  other  things,  and  not  of  their  like,
fcldome  live  long,  efpccially  if  they  fhall  live  necr,
or  amongft  other  brutes ,  becaufc  of  an  imbred
difpofition,  and  Gods  difpofing,  all  Monfters  arc
odious  unto  brutes  that  are  genuinely  brought
forth,  and  fo  alfo  Monfters  of  men,  which  are
generated  by  man ,  feldomc  live  long.  And  by
how  much  the  more  wonderfull,and  remarkable  they
are,fo  much  the  f  ooner  they  dye,  fo  that  none  exceed  .
the  third  day  amongft  men,  unleffe  they  bee  prefent-
ly carryed  into  fome  fecret  place,and  kept  apart  from
all  men.  Moreover  you  muft  know  that  God  abhors
thefc  kind  of  Monfters,  and  that  they  are  difpleafing
to  him,  and  that  none  of  them  can  be  faved,  feeing
they  bear  not  the  image  of  God  :  whence  wee  can
conjcdure  nothing  elfe,  but  that  they  are  fo  formed

byv


a  Of  the  Nat  nre  of  things^         L  i  b^  I^'

?**""  ^"n^T  ^Y  ^^1^  OeviLand  are  made  for  the  Devills  ferviccja-
tner  tnenGods,becaule  no  good  work  wjs  ever  donC
by  any  Mon(ler,but  ratherall  manner  of  cvill,  wic-
kednefle,  and  devillifli  deceits.  For  as  an  Executio-
ner marketh  his  fons  in  cutting  off  their  ears,  putting
out  their  eyes,  burning  their  cheeks ,  fingers,  hands,
and  cutting  off  their  heads  ;  {o  doth  the  Devil  mark
his  fons  through  the  imagination  of  their  Mothers,
which  in  their  conceiving  they  drew  from  cvill  de-
fires5lufl:s,  and  cogitations.

!?r.^^"*«„V/    Alfo  all  men  arc  to  be  fliunncd.which  abound  with,

to  be  fnunnea>  ,  ,  ?     i  i  i  r>

or  want  any  member,  or  have  a  double  member.  For
that  is  a  prefage  of  the  Devills,  and  a  mofl  ccrtainc
figne  of  fome  occult  wickednefTe,  and  deceit ,  which
follows  upon  it.  Wherefore  they  feldome  dye  with-
out the  Executioner ,  or  at  leafl  from  fomc  marice
made  by  him.
The  artificiail  But  wcc  muft  by  no  means  forget  the  generation
gnwationof  of  Artificiall  men.  For  there  is  fome  truth  in  this
thing,  although  it  hath  been  a  long  time  concealed ,
and  there  have  been  no  fniall  Doubts,  and  Queflions,
raifed  by  fome  of  the  ancient  Philolophers,  Whether
it  were  poffible  for  Nature,  or  Art  to  beget  a  Man
out  of  the  body  of  a  Woman,  and  naturall  matrix?
To  this  I  anfwer,  that  it  is  no  way  repugnant  to  the
Arcof  Alchymie,  and  Nature^  yea  it  is  very  poili-
ble  :  But  to  effed:  it,  we  muft  proceed  thus.

Let  the  Sperm  of  a  man  by  it  felfe  be  putrefied^  in  a
gourd  glnllc,  fcaled  up,  with  the  higheft  degree  of
putrefaAioninHorfe  dung,  for  the  fpace  of  forty
days,  or  fo  long  unrill  it  begin  to  bee  alive5move,and
iftir,which  may  eafily  be  fcen. After  this  time  it  will
beeromeihing  like  a  Man,  yet  tranfparent,and  with-
out


L I B^  f .  Of  the  'Nature  of  things^  9

out  a  body.  Now  after  this,  if  it  bee  every  day  wa-
rily, and  prudently  nouriihed  and  fed  with  the  Are^-
;?«/??  of  Mans  blood  ,  and  bee  for  thefpace  of  forty
weeks  kept  in  a  conftant,eqiiall  heatof  Horfe-dung^ic
will  become  a  true,  and  living  infant,  having  all  the
members  of  an  infant,  which  is  born  of  a  woman,but
it  will  bee  far  lefTc.    This  wee  call  Homunculm  ^  or
Artificial).  And  this  is  afterwards  to  be  brought  up
with  as  great  care,  and  diligence  as  any  other  infant,
untillit  come  to  riper  years  of  underftanding.  Now
this  is  one  of  the  greateft  [ccrets,that  God  ever  made
known  to  mortall,  linfull  man*    For  this  is  a  mi-
racle; and  one  of  the  great  wonders  of  God^  and  fc-
crct  above  all  fecrcts,  and  defervedly  it  ought  to  bee
kept  amongft  the  fecrets  until  the  laft  times,when  no*
thing  ihall  be  hid,  but  all  things  be  made  manifcft.
And  although  hitherto  it  hath  not  been  known  to
men^yet  it  hath  been  known  to  Fairies  of  the  Woods,  Fairies ;
Nymphs,  and  Gyants  many  a^es  fince,becaufc  they  Nymphs,  Gy-'
come  trom  them.     For  or  iuch  Artinciall  men,  made  of  auifi-
when  they  come  to  Mans  age,  arc  made  Pygmies ,  ciali  men.
Gyants,and  other  great  and  monftrous  men, who  are
inftruments  of  great  matte i"s ,  who  obtaine  great
vi<ftories  againft  their  Enemies,  and  know  all  fecrets,
and  myfteries  .*  becaufe  by  Art  they  receive  their
lives,  by  Art  they  receive  their  bodies,flcl]i,bones,
and  blood :by  Art  they  are  borne  ^  wherefore  Arc  is
now  incorporated  with,  and  imbred  in  them,  and
they  need  not  learn  of  any,  but  others  are  conftrained
to  learn  of  them,  for  by  Art  they  have  their  originall
and  prefent  exiftency  ,as  a  rofe,or  flower  in  a  garden,
and  they  are  called  the  children  of  Fairies  ,    and
Nymphs,by  rcafon  that  in  power  jandvcrtue  they

B  b  stre


10  of  the  Nature  of  thingil         LlB^I^

are  like  not  to  Men ,    but  Spirits ,  $cc.

Here  it  is  necclTary  that  wee  fpcak  fomething  of

the  generation  of  Metallsibut  becaufc  we  have  wrote

fufficiently  oFthatin  our  book  of  the  generation  of

Metals,  wee  fliall  very  briefly  treat  of  it  here ,  only

briefly  adding  what  was  omitted  in  that  book.  Know

f\L  ^Mc'rauy  ^^^^^  ^^^  ^^^^  ^^v^"  Metalls  are  brought  forth  after  this

the  Spirit,rui-  manner,out  of  a  threefold  matter, T^/5^Mcrcury5Sul-

?"y  s.f^^     phurj&  Salt^yet  in  diftind^jand  peculiar  colours.  For

hody.  this  reafon  Hermes  did  not  fpcak  amilTe^when  he  (aid,

that  of  three  fubftances  are  all  the  feven  Metalls  pro-

duced^and  compounded,  as  alfo  the  Tindures ,  and

Philofophers  Stone.  Thofe  3  fubftances  he  calls  the

Spirit,  Souljand  Body  :  but  hee  did  not  fliew  how

thisistobee  underftoodjOr  what  hee  did  mean  by

this,  although  haply  hee  might  know  the  three  Prin-

cipleSjbut  did  not  make  mention  of  them.  Wherefore

we  do  not  fay,that  he  was  here  in  an  error ,  but  only

was  filent  now,  that  thofe  3  diftind  fubftances  may

be  rightly  underftood,i^/^.SpirirjSoul,and  Body^wc

muft  know,  that  they  fignifie  nothing  clfc  but  the

three  Principles, /.e.Mercury,Sulphur,Salt,  of  which

all  the  fcven  Metalls  are  generated.    For  Mercury  is

the  Spirit,  Sulphur  the  Soule^and  Salt  the  Body,but

a  Mctali  is  the  Soul  betwixt  the  Spirit,  and  the  Body

(as  Hermes  faithj  which  Soule  indeed  is  Sulphutjand

unites  thefe  two  contraries ,  the  Body,  and  Spirit,

and  chan^eth  them  into  one  cfTencej&c.

Now  this  is  not  to  bee  underftood  fo  as  that  of

l\7hethcr  me- £very  McrcuryjCvcry  Sulphur,  or  of  every  Salt,  the

^^^  d  artific^-  ^^^^"  Metalls  may  be  generated,  or  the  Tincture,  or

^fy  by'fire.'^^'  the  Philofophers  Stone  by  the  Art  of  Alchymie,

oc  indiiftry,  wich  the  help  of  Fire  3  but  all  the  feven

Metalls


L  IB*  I.  of  the  KatHre  of  things]  x  i

Metalls  muft  be  generated  in  the  mountains  by  the
Aicheius  of  the  Earth.  For  the  Akhymift  .fliall
fooner  tranfmute  Metalls,  then  generate  ,  or  make

them.

Yet  ncverthelcfTe  living  Mercury  is  the  Mo-  Living  5  J*
ther  of  all  the  feven  Metalls ,    and  defervedly  it  '^^^X!'''
may  be  called  the  Mother  of  the  Metalls. For  it  is  m     '    *
open  Metall,  and  as  it  contains  all  colours ,  which
it  manifefts  in  the  Fire,  fo  alfo  occultly  it  contains
all  Metalls  in  it  felfe ,  but  without  Fire  it  cannot
fhew  them,  &c.

But  generation,  and  renovation  of  Metalls  is
made  thus :  As  a  man  may  return  into  the  womb  of
his  Mother,/.^,  into  the  Earth,  out  of  which  hee
was  firft  made  a  man,  and  fhall  again  bee  raifed  at
the  laft  day  ifo  alfo  all  Metalls  may  returne  into  living  The  rcgenera^
9  againe,  and  become  5,  and  by  Fire  bee  regene-  "on  of  metalls

^j        '  ,  c  J    CL        I     r  c  c  ^1      into  nn<aiuc$5

rated,  and  purihedjil-ror  thelpace  01  forty  weeks,
they  bee  kept  in  a  continuall  heat,  as  an  infant  is  in
his  Mothers  wombe.  Sothat  now  there  are  brought
forth  not  common  Metalls,but  Tinging  Metalls  .For
if  Silver  bee  regenerated  (after  the  manner  as  wee
havefpoken)  it  will  afterward  tinge  all  other  Me-
talls into  Silver,  fo  will  Gold  into  Gold,  and  the
like  is  to  bee  underftood  of  all  the  other  Me-
talls. .

Now  forafmuch  as  Hermes  faid,  that  the  foule
alone  is.  that  medium  which  joines  the  fpirit  to  The  Sod  ^
the  body  ,  it  was  not  without  caufe  hee  faid  fo.  ^^f-   ^-^^^T
For  feeing  Sulphur  is  that  foule,  and  doth  hke  Fire  J^  Je  iruniSi
ripen,  and  digeft  all  things  5  it  can  alfo  bind  the  to  the"body.
foule  with  the  body,  incorporating,  and  uniting
them  together,  fothat  from  thence  may  bee  pro-»

B  b  2  duced


tTk  Of  the  Nature  oftbtngs^         L  ib^  I^

duccd  a  moft  excellent  body.  Now  the  common
combuftibic  Sulphur  is  not  to  bee  taken  for  the
foulc  of  metalls  ,  for  the  foule  is  another  man-
ner of  thing  then  a  combuftibic ,  and  corruptible
body.

•fS^^^^^^^  Wherefore  it  can  beedeftroyed  by  no  Fire,  fee-
ing indeed  it  is  all  Fire  itfelfe  :  and  indeed  it  is  no-
thing elfe  but  the  quinteflcnce  of  Sulphur,  which
is  cxtra<5ledout  of  reverberated  Sulphur  by  the  fpi-
ritof  wine,  being  of  a  red  colour,  and  as  tranfpi-
rentasaRubie  .-and  which  indeed  is  a  great,  and
excellent  Aramm^  for  the  tranfmuting  of  white
metalls,  and  to  coagulate  living  5  into  fixt ,  and
true  Gold.  Efteeme  this  as  an  enriching  trea-
fure,  and  thou  maift  bee  well  contented  with
this ,  onely  fecret  in  the  Tranfmutation  of  Me-
talls.

Concerning  the  generation  of  mineralls, and  halfe
metalls  nothing  elfe  need  bee  known  then  what  was
at  firft  faid  concerning  metalls,  vi^.  that  they  arc  in

Where  is  the  iji^enaanner  produced  of  the  three  Principles,  vi'X,


met


alls  and  Mcrcury,  Sulphur,  and  Salr^  although  not  as  metalls
niaeialls.  of  perfe(5l,but  of  the  more  impcrfe(5t5and  bafer  Mer-
cury, Sulphur,  and  Salt,  and  yet  with  their  diftin(f^
colours.
Whence  the  ^^^^  generation  of  Gemmcs  is  from  the  fubtilty
generation  of  of  the  Earth,  of  ttaufparcnt  and  cryftalline  Mercury,
Ccmnoes,       Sulphur,  and  Salt,  even  according  to  thcij;  diftindl

colours.
Airo  of  Com-  ^^i  the  generation  of  common  Stones  is  of  the
fubtilty  of  Water,  of  mucilaginous  Mercury,  Sul-
phur, and  Salt.  For  of  the  mucilaginoufneffe  of  Wa-
icr  are  produced  all  ftoncs^  as  alio  fand,  and  gra-
ve]]


^n  St«ncso


L I  b\  I.  Of  the  Uatnre  of  things.  1 5

veil  are  thence  coagulated  into  Stones,  as  wce.of-
ten  fee.

For  any  ftone  put  in  the  Water,doth  fuddenly  con-
tratfl  a  mucilaginoufneflc  to  itfelf.  Now  if  that  muci-  ^"  artificiaU
laginous  matter  bee  taken  from  this  Stone ,  and  itoner°"
coagulated  in  a  glaffe,  it  becomes  fuch  a  Stone ,  as
was  in  that  Water ,  but  it  would  require  a  long
time  before  it  would  be  coagulated  of  it  fclfe.


Bbj


OR


H


L1B4II4


OF  THE

N  A  T  V  RE

Of  Things.


THE  SECOIiD  BOOK,


Heat  andMoI-
fture  the  cauk
ofthc  growth
•of  things.


Of  the  growth  :,and  increafe  of
Natnrall  things.

jT  is  fufficiently  manifeft  ,  and  knowne  to
every  one,  that  all  naturall  things  grow,
and  are  ripned  through  hear,and  moifture,
^^^.^^^  which  is  fufficiently  demonft rated  by  rain,
andtheheattof  the  fun.  For  no  man  can  deny  that
rain  doth  make  the  Earth  fruitfull,  and  it  is  granted
by  all,  that  all  fruits  arc  ripened  by  the  fun.

Seeing


Li  B^  IC  Of  the  "Nature  ofthtngf^  i^

Secin?  therefore  this  is  by  divine  ordination  natu-  -^'^  artifiaall
rally  poilibic,  who  can  gain-iay,  or  not  bekeve  that  things.
a  man  is  able,  through  the  wife,  and  skilful!  Art  of
Alchymie,  to  make  that  which  is  barren,fruitfull,and
that  which  is  crude,  to  ripen^and  all  things  to  grow ,
and  to  be  increafed.  For  the  Scripture  faith,  that  God  God  hath  fub;
fubjeded  all  creatures  to  man,  and  put  them  into  his  ^^^[02!  to  man,
hands  as  being  his  own,  that  hee  might  ufe  them  for
his  necelTityj  and  rule  over  the  fiili  of  the  fea,  fowles
of  the  aire,  and  all  things  upon  the  Earth,nothing  ex-
cepted. Wherefore  man  might  well  rejoice  that  God
fliould  fo  endow  him  with  the  excellency  of  Nature,
t  hat  all  the  creatures  of  God  fliould  be  forced  to  obey,
and  be  fubjecfl  to  him,  cfpecially  the  whole  Earth,and
all  things  which  are  bred,live,and  move  in,  and  upon
ir.  Since  therefore  wee  fee  with  our  eyes ,  and  are
taught  by  daily  experience ,  that  by  how  much  the
oftner,&  more  abundantly  therain  doth  moilkn  the
earth,and  the  fun  doth  again  with  its  heat  and  warmth
dry  it,fo  much  the  fboner  doe  the  fruits  of  the  Earth
come  forth  and  are  ripened ,  yea  all  fruits  doe  cleerly
grow,  and  increafe,what  time  of  the  yecr  focver  it  be^
Let  no  man  henceforth  wonder,  that  the  Alchymift  The  aitifidali
alfobya  manifold  imbibition,  and  diftillation  fliould  f',"'""""  ^"^
not  doe  the  fame.  Forvvhat  elfe  is  rain  but  the  imbibi-
tion of  the  Earth/'  and  the  heat  of  the  Sun  ,  but  the
diflill:flion  of  the  un,  which  drawes  up  thofe  humi-
dities again?  Wherefore  I  fay  it  is  pofTible  by  fuch  a
kind  oF  Art?  even  in  the  midle  of  Winter  to  bring
forth  green  Herbs ,  Flowers,  and  other  fruit,through
Earth^and  Water,  out  of  the  ktd^  and  root :  If  then
this  can  bee  done  in  all  Herbs,  and  flowers,  it  may
aJfo  bee  done  in  many  other  like  things,  as  in  all  mi-

aeralls.


14  Of  the  Nature  ofthtngsl  L  i  b.  II^^

neiMlIs^whofe  imperfed  metalls  by  vertueof  a  mine-
rail  water  may  bee  brought  to  maturity  through  the
induftryjand  Art  of  a  skiUull  Alchymift/
The  ripening  jj^  \^^  manner  may  all  Marcdfites^  Grariatij  Zinetd^
Ar\emcA^  TalkayCachjmie,BijemHtajAn^i?HdnieSy^c^
Call  which  carry  with  them  crude  Gold^and  Silver,)
bee  lb  ripened,  that  they  may  bee  equalized  to  the
moflrich  veins  of  Gold,  and  Silvcr,only  by  this  Art.
So  alfo  the  Elixir,and  tintflures  of  metals  arc  brought
to  maturity ,  and  perfeded;
What  the  Seeing  thercfore,as  it  hath  been  faid,  moifture,  and

beard  of  3°dead*^c^^  ^^c  Hpen  all  things,  and  make  them  grow ,  Let
pian  fignihes.  none  wondcr,  that  the  beard, haire,  or  nailes  ofama-
Icfa^flor  hanging  on  a  Gibbet,or  Wheel  do  for  a  long
time  grow,  neither  let  it  be  accounted  for  a  fign  of  his
innocency,asthc  ignorant  beleeve^for  this  is  natural),
and  from  naturall  caufes .  For  whileft  that  any  moi-
fture  remains  in  him^his  beard,  hadre,and  nailes  grow,
even  till  the  fecond  year^or  till  hce  bee  wholly  putre-
fied,&c.

Wee  muft  alfo  know,  that  there  arc  many  things

that  grow  for  ever ,  and  are  irxreafed  in  bignefTe  ,

weight ,and  vertuc,in  the  Watcr,*and  Earth,  in  which

they  continue  good,  and  efficacious,  as  are  Metalls,

Marcafites,Cachymic,  Talka,  Granuty,  Antimony,

The  angmcn-gifemuta,  Gemmes,  Pearles,  Corals,  all  Srones,and

tarionof'i;.    q^^^  So  alfo  it  may  be  ordered,  that  Gold  may

grow,  and  bee  increafcd  in  weight,  and  body,  if  only

itbecburyedinthcEarth  looking  towards  the£^/,

and  becalwaies  foiled  with  the  frelli  urine  of  a  man.

Hew  Gjld     and  pigeons  duns.

Sma^'''''     It  is  pofTible  alfo  that  Gold,  through  induftry,  and
giriTc.  s^iil  of  an  expert  Alchymift  may  bcc  fo  far  exalted  ,

that


XiB^IL  Of  the  Nature  of  tbingh  Mf

that  it  may  grow  in  a  glafTc  like  a  tree .'  witti  m&ny
jvondcrfull  boughs,  and  IcareSgWhich  inaced  is  plea-
fant  to  behold,  and  moft  wonderful,     i  :  w\  (vy.u

Tht/procefTe  is  this.  Let  Gold  bee  calcined;  with  How  the  Phi*
Aqua  Reps,  till  it  becomes  a  kind  of  chalke  ,  which  ^^^op^'^ll
put  into  5  gourd  glalle,  and  poure  upon  it  good  new    ^^^  **"^«^'
Aqua  R^gis ,  fo  that  it  may  cover  it  foure  fingers
breadth,  then  again  draw  it  oflF,  with  the  third  de-
gree of  fire,  untiil  no  more  afcend.    The  water  that
IS  diftilled  off,  poure  on  againe,    then  diflill  it  off  a*
gaine.  This  doe  fo  long  untiil  thou  feefl  the  Gold  to
rile  in  the  glaffe,  and  grow  after  the  manner  of  a  tree,  ^

having  many  boughes,  and  leaves  :  and  fo  there  is
made  of  Gold  a  wonderful,and  pleafant  fhrub, which
the  Alchymifls  call  their  Golden  hearb,  and  the  Phi-
lofophers  Trec.In  like  manner  you  may  proceed  with
Silver,and  other  Metalls,yet  fo  that  their  calcination
bee  made  after  another  mvtnner  ,  by  another  ^^«<i
fortisj  which  I  leave  to  thine  experience.  If  thou
art  skilled  in  Alchymie ,  thou  flialt  not  crre  in  thele
things.

Know  alfo  that  any  flint  taken  out  of  River  water,  To  make  an
(and  put  into  a  gourd  glaffe ,   having^  River  water  =»"ificiaii  ftonc
poured  upon  it,  that  the  glaffe  may  bee  filled  ;°^ '"^ ^°''^-
which  Water  is  againe  to  bee  diflilled  off  as  long
as  a  drop  will  arife  ,   and  the  Stone  dryed  ,    and
the  Glaffe  againe  filled  with  this  Water ,  and  a-
gaine  diftilled  off,  and  this  done  fo  long  till  the
Glaffe  bee  filled  with  this  Stone  )   may  in  a  few
dayes  by  the.  Art  of  Alchymie  bee  made  ve-ry
great,    which  the  Archeius  of  the  Waters  could
fcarce  doeinmanyyeers.

Cc  If


ll  Of  the  Uatkt0  of  things^  Li  b  JI^

If  then  thou  brcakc  the  Glafic,  thou  (halt  have
a  Flint  in  the  forme  of  the  GlafTc,  as  if  it  had
been  put  into  the  Claffe ,  and  although  this  bee
not  for  profiti  yet  it  is  a  thing  that  is ilrar^e^and
wofidccfull*


OF


la^      .  m


Lii.ni.  S|


OF  THE

N  A  T  V  R,  E

Of  Things.
THE  THIRD  BOOK.


Oftbep'efervations  ofNaturali
things.

rHat  things  may  bcc  preferved,  and  kept
'  from  harm,  it  is  neccAary  in  the  firft  place
to  know  what  is  an  cnemic  to  them,that  fo  of  "?n^s*are
thcymay  be  preferved  from  thar,&  not  be  w  ^  knowne.
hurt,  or  corrupted  by  it  cither  in  fubftance,  venue,
power,  or  any  way  whatfoever.  Much  therefore  in
this  cafe  depends  upon  the  knowing  of  the  Enemic
of  all  Naturalhhings.  For  who  can  take  heed  of
danger  when  hec  doin  not  know  what  caa  hurt  himcr

Qq  %  Truly


:>a  'Of  the  Nature  of tbingf,         Lib;IIR

Truly  no  body-,  Wherefore  i:  is  necefTaryto  know
ones  Encmiei  '  For  there  arr  many  forts  of  Enemies.
Wherefore  it  is  as  neccflary  to^know  evill  ihings,a9
good  thingsrfor  who  can  know  what  is  §ood,without
the  knowing  of  what  is  evill.''TruIy  no  body. So  no
©lancan  know  yvlut  a  bjefltng  health.  is,;hat  was  nev^cp
llck.Who  knows  what  joy  is,  that  was  never  heavy,
or  fad/*  And  who  can-  riglrtly  uoderftand  what  God
is,  who  knew  nothing  ot  the  Devil r'  Wherefore  when
God  made  kncjwnto  uithe  Ehemie.of  our  50^,0^/^.
the  DeviH,  he  alfo  figtiitied  to  us  rhe^nefnie  of  our
Death  is  the  life,  vi^.  Death,  which  is  the  Enemie  of  our  body,,
of  our  health,  and  the  Ehemie  of  ■Medicinall,and  all.
naturall  things  :  alfo  he  made  known  to  us  how,and
b^  which  means  it  maybefliunned.  For  as  there
isnodifeafe  againft  whicluhereis  not  created,  and"
found  fomc  remedy,  which  fliould  cure,and  expel  1  it:
fo  alfo  there  is  alwaies  one  thing  ordained  againft
another,one.  Water  againft^another^ne  Stone  againft
another^  one  Minerall  againft  another,  one  Poilbn  a-
gainft  another,one  Maall  againft  another :  and  fo  in
many  more  things^all  which  it,is  not  requifite  here  to
recite.  - .  ^    .    i

Now  how,  and  by  what  means  every  thing  is  to  •
hee  prefervedj.and  kept  from ijurt,^^  muftknowj
that  many  things. are  to  bee-prefcrved  in  the  Earth,
and  efpecially.  allrootcsdoc  for.alongtimeremainc
in  the  Earth  without  iQ{]x\^t}im-vc:p.KyQt  being  cor-
rupted :  in  likeibahner'llerbs;  flowers, .  andalliruitcs^
continue  in  the.  water  incorrupted  j^andgteen ;  there!
are  alfo  many  fruits.and  apples  thar  maybe  prefcrved.
in  water  from  all  manner  of  putrefaction,  unullnew,

fruit  come  agaioei*.-  Jh-iod

So


encmic  of
things


*Thett\s^
Contrariety
found  in  all
things*


L I B.  nil  of  the  Katttre  of  things.  1 1

Saalfo  flefli>and  blood ,which  indeed  arc  putrefied,  pw  ^  prc-
and grow unfavoury  quickly,  are  prefcrved  in  cold bioo'd.       "'^
fountain -water,and  not  only  lb,but  by  the  addition  of
new  aud  frefli  founrainc-watcr ,  may  be  turned  into
a  quinteflence,   and  bee  forever  preferved  fronr  pu^
trcfa(5tion3  and  an  ill  favour ,  without  any  balfome.
And  this  doth  not  only  prefervc  the  flcfli,  and  blood"
of  dead  things,  but  alfo  of  the  living,wherefore  Mans
body  may  bee  pre ferved  from  all  manner  of  putrc-
fa<5tion,  and  divers  difeafes  that  proceed  from  putre-
fadion,  better  then  common  Mummie.     Now  thar
blood  may  be  prcfervcd  of  it  felf  from  putrcfadion,
and  ftinkingjand  not  as  a  quintefTence,  &  fo  as  it  may
prefervc  the  Wood  of  the  livingfas  we  now  faid  jthou-
muft  follow  this  procefle;  .       .  -  .  ,     •  .^

Let  the  blood  bee  feparated  from  its  fl'egm>  which  How  the  Ar-
isfeparated  of  its  felfe,    and  is  driven  to  the  upper  """{"°^"**"*

part.  This  water  poure  gently  out  of  the  ve{rell,andprcparcV°    ^
in  ftead  of  it  put  as  much  of  the  water  of  the  fait  of

blood,  which  water  wee  teach  to  make  in  our  Chi--
iHirgcrie :  That  \vater  doth  prcfently  mixe  with  the
blood,  and  preferves  it  fo,  that  it  will  never  bee  pu-
trefied, or  grow  unfavory ,  bnt  continue  niany  yearS'
as  frerti,  and  very  red  as  it  was  the  firfl  day :  and  this-
indeed  is  a  great  wonder.  But  if  thou  doft  not  know*
howto  makethis  water,or  hafl  it  notinreadinefs,thcn  -
poure  upon  it  fa  much  of  the  befl,  and  mofl  excel-
lent balfome,and  this  will  doe  the  fame.  Now. this
blood  is  the  balfome  of  balfomes,  and  is  called  the
Arcanum  of  blood,and  it  is  fo  wonderful,and  of  fuch
great  vertue,  that  it  is  incredible  to  be  fpoken5where'
tore  thou  fhalt  conccale  it  as  a  grCvU  fecrct  iivPhy-
iick;  ,.  :\i^.i-v;j..

C  c  3^  la


%t  Of  the  Nature  of  thing/.         Lf  B.IH

How  mctalls     Inprcfei'ving  ofMetalU,  their  Enemies  arc  firft  to
raa^y  beprcfcr-  ^^^  known,  that  fo  much  the  better  they  may  bee
What  arc  the  pfeferrved  from  harme.    The  chiefeft  Enemies  of
cncmcs  ©f      details  are  all  fliirp  corroding  Waters ,  all  Corro-
^'    **        five  things,  all  Salts,  crude  Sulphur,  Antimony ,  and
Mercury.     But  that  you  may  know  particularly
how  they  fticw  their  enmity,  ids  thus.    Sharp  Wa*
ters,  and  Tuch  things  as  arc   Corrofive ,  and  Salts
{hew  their  enmity,  in  that  they  mortifie,  diifolve,  cal-
cinic,    corrupt  Metalls,  and  reduce  them  to  no-
thing.
How  the  fume   Crude  Sulphur  flic  ws  its  enmity  in  the  fume  thereof:
of  Sulphur      £^j.  jjy  ^^  fyji^^  j,.  j^jjgg  ^yj.^y  fj-QjYj  Copper  its  co-
doth  difcolour  ,  ^      J        ]  '  rr         j        i       •       i  •        r  l-

mc;alii»         w^^  ^^d  rednefle,  and  ixiakcs  It  white.  From  white
Metalls,  as  Silver,  Tinne,  Lead,  and  Iron  it  takes
away  the  whitcneiTc,  and  makes  them  red,  and  ycl-
lowillv    From  Gold  it  takes  away  that  fairc  ami-
able ycllowneife ,  and  golden  colour ,  and  makes
ix  black,  ^i^fo  foulc,  that  Rothipg  can  bee  more
foule.
How  Antimo-      Aotimony  flicws  its  enmity  in  this,  in  that  all  Mc-
ny  fpoiies  and  taUs  with  which  it  is  melted,  or  mixed,  it  fpoiles,
diicoiQurs  mc-  ^ji^j ryctfi  away,  and  pr^ys  upon,and  alCo  not  unlike  to
"  ^'  $plphMr ,  Ixy  ijts  fume  it  takes  ^way  from  Mctalls

thei?trw€,  ^nd  natufali  colour,   an4 brings  in  an*
other.
Qiiick-filver       Quick-fiW^r  doth  dcftroy  Metalls  upon  this  ac-
diUroycs  mc-  compt,ipthc\t jt  cpt^rs  into  Mctalls,  with,  which  it  is
tails,  and  how.  joined,  a^d  diiprolves  them ,  fo  as.  that  it  makes  an
AmalgAma  of  them ;  Wherefore  the  fume  thereof,
wiiich  wee  call  copimon  Mercury,  makes  allMetalli
britt-le,  that  tlyyQaanQt  fee  mtjilcatcd,  and  calcines
them,  alfo  it  makes  all  red   Metalls  ot  a  golden  co-
lour.


LkBjIL  Oftbe  nature  of  things.  3|

lour,  to  bcc  white :  but  it  is  the  greatcft  cncmic  of  all
to  Iron,  and  Steel-,  for  if  common  Mercury  doc  but;
touch  a  barre  of  Iron,  orStcel^or  that  be  but  fmearcd
over  with  Mercurial!  oile,  that  bar  will  afterward  be
broken  like  glafTc,  and  be  bowed^  which  indeed  is  a
great  fecret,  and  deferves  to  be  kept  exceeding  clofe.
in  like  manner  muft  the  Loadftonc  be  kept  from
Mercury,  for  the  like  enmity  it  ihews  to  that  as  to
Iron.  For  any  Loadftonc  that  Mercury  hath  but  ^^^^^^^,^^^3^.
touched^or  wnich  hath  been  fmeered  with  Mercurial!  fton«  may  fit
oyle ,  or  only  put  into  Mercury ,  will  never  draw  ^poylcd^v
Iron  more.  Let  no  man  wonder  at  this ,  for  there
is  a  naturiU  caufe  for  it,  and  it  is  this ,  vi\.  becaufc
Mercury  extracts  the  fpiritof  Iron,which  was  hid  in
the  Loadftone,  which  Ipirit  draws  the  fpiritof  Iron
to  it  .♦  and  this  is  not  only  in  the  Loadftone,  but  in
all  natural!  things  elfe,  fo  that  alwaies  a  ftrange  (pi-
rn in  a  body  which  is  not  of  the  fame  Nature  with
it  felfe,  drawes  to  it  felf  a  body  which  is  of  th^
fame  Nature.*  and  this  wee  muft  know  to  bee  fo^
not  only  in  the  Load-ftone,  but  alfbin  all  other
naturaH  things^as  Mincralls,  Stones,  Hearbs^Roots,
Men,  and  Brutes*

That  Mctalls  have  an  enmity,  and  hate  one  the  What  amIfiJi-
other  natur3lly,as  you  fee  in  Lead,which  is  naturally  J^r  *!*"*  '*^
a  very  great  enemy  to  Gold.  For  it  breaks  afunder  taurthcm^'*
all  parts  of  Gold,  it  makes  it  foije,  weak,  fpoiles,  fclv<^  -f
and  dcftroyes  it  even  to  death,  more  then  any  other
Mctall.

Tin  alfo  hates,  and  is  an  enemy  to  all  Mctalls  /  for
it  makes  them  b3fe,Immalleable,  hard,  unprofitable^
if  it  bee  mixed  with  them  in  the  fire,or  in  meltings

Since  therefore  you  have  now  heard  of  the  Enemies


^4  OftheNatHrefiftbittgsl         Lib.  m^

of  Metalls,  you  muft  next  know  their  prefcrvatives,
which  keep  them  from  all  manner  of  hLirt,or  corrup-
tion, alfo  ftren^thcn  them  in  their  Nature,  and
G  U  •         yertue,  and  ex^t  their  colour,
fcrrcd  in  boy« ,  Hr(l  thercfofc  conccming  Gold,  you  muft  know,
urine,       '    thatitjcannot  tec  prefcrved  better,  2nd  fairer  then
in  boyes  unne,in  which  Salt  Armoniack  is  diffolved,
or  in  water  alone  of  Salt  Armoniack.  In  them  in
time  the  colour  is  fo  highly  exalted  that  jt  can  bee

prefcrveZ"  '^    Silver  canuoc  te better prerervcd t1ien irit  be boi-^
led  in  common  Water,  or  Vinegcr,  invvhich  Tartar
or  Salt  have  been  diflblvcd.  So  any  old  Silver,  that
is  made  black,  and,  fouled,  is  renewed  by  being  boi-
anTsteX      l^d  HI  thcfc  wiitcrs  :  The  beft  prcleivative  for  Iron
may  be  pic- End  Steel  is  the  lard  of  a  Barrow-hog  not  faked,
fcmd.  which  indeed  preferves  Iron ,  and  Steel  from  ruft,

if  once  every  moneth  they  be  fmeered  over  with  it,
Alfo  if  Iron  bee  melted  withfixt  Arfcnicke^it  will  be
„  ^^  fo  renewed  and  fixt,  that  it  will  like  Silver  never-con-
i,  prefervd?  tradl  ruft.  Copper  may  be  prelervcd ,  if  it  bee  only
mixed  with  fublimed  Mercury,  or  bee  fmeered  over
with  the  oyle  of  Salt-,and  fo  it  will  never  any  ixio^f.bp
grown  over  with. verdegreafe.  -,,;£-;  .^r-IT

^reibr^d^''  '^       Lead  Can  no  wayes  bee  better  preferved  then  in
^^    ^  '       cold  Earth,  and  in  a  moift  place,  according  to  the
L°Y^     ■  'Nature  thereof.     The  Load-Hone  is  preferved  bell
prefei'vcr^  '^  of  all  with  the  filings  of  Ir9n ,  and  Steel  ^  for ;  by
this  mtanes  it  is  never  weakenedjbut  daily  fti?eng-:
ihened.
The  preferva-     >jo\v  conccmins  the  prefervation  of  Salts,  and  all
tion  of  Salts,  tj^j^gs^  that  are  ofa  faltiili  Nature,  and  may  be  com-
prehended under  the  name  of  Salt  (of  which  there  are

more


Li  bjii.  Of  the  Nature  ofthin^.  ^5

more  then  an  hundred  forrs  )  you  muftkrtowthat
they  arc  to  bee  preferved  in  a  hot  dry  place, «nd  in
woodden  veflclls,  not  in  Glalfe ,  Stone ,  or  Mctalls:
for  in  thofc  they  are  diflblvcd  and  become  a  Water,
and  an  Amalgama  which  cannot  be  in  Wood.

Moreover  you  muft  know  how  feme  kind  of
Waters,  and  Liquors  prefTcd  out  of  hearbs^roots,and  '^.^'^  Fe^erva-
all  other  fruits ,  and  Vegetables  ,  which  doe  easily  wUhoilsT^"
contra(5t  filth,  and  flimc  as  if  a  skin  were  fprcad  over
them^may  be  prefcived.Thefe  Waters  thereforejand
Liquors  muft  bee  put  up  into  glaffes  that  are  narrow
towards  the  top,  and  wide  below,  and  the  glaffes  be
filled  to  the  top,  then  adde  a  few  drops  of  oyl  01iv<e,
that  all  the  Water,  or  Liquor  may  bee  covered.*  fo
the  Oyl  will  fwim  on  the  top,  and  prefervc  the  Li-
quor, or  Water  along  time  from  filth  or  flimc.  For
there  is  no  Water,  or  liquor  if  it  bee  covered  with
oyl ,  that  will  bee  mufty,or  of  an  ill  favour.

By  this  means  alfo  may  two  fores  of  Water,  of
Liquors  of  Wine  bee  kept  apart  in  one  veflell ,  that
they  may  not  bee  mixed :  and  not  only  two  forts, but
three,  four,  five,  and  more,  ifonly  theoylebec  put
betwixt :  For  they  are  fevered  by  the  Oyle,  as  by  a
walljwhich  wil  not  fnffer  them  to  be  joined  together,
and  united,  for  oyl  and  water  aretwo  contraries,  and
neither  can  bemixed'with  the  other.- For  as  the  Oyle
will  not  fuffer  the  Watres  to  be  united,  fo  on  the  con-
trary ,the  Water  will  not  fuffer  the  Oyls  to  be  mixed.

Now  to  prcferve  Cloath ,  and  Garments  from  How  clothes
moths,    there   is  no  better  way  then  with    Ma^aieprefmed.
ftick ,  Camphire  ,  Amber   Gryfc ,  and   Muske ,
and   Civet,     which  indeed  is   the  beft  of   all,
which  doth  not  only  prefervc  them  from  moths ,

Dd  but


i^  Of  the  nature  ofthtngsl         L  i  Mil  I

but  alfo! drives  away  moths^and  allother  verminc ,  as
Fleas,  Lice,  &c.
How  all  Tom       Alfo  all  manner  of  Woods^as  in  Houfcs^Bridges,
fee  prcfervcd^'*^  Ships,  or  whcrefoever  they  be,  may  bee  prcferved  fo
thvit  they  will  never  bee  putrefied,  either  in  waters5or
under  warers,orout  of  water  in  the  earth,  under  the
earth  or  above  the  earth,,  whether  they  be  fetin  the
rain^  or  wind,  aire,fnow,  or  ice,  in.wintcr,or  fummerj
alfo  that  they  be  not  worm-catcn^nor  that  any  worms
may  breed  in  them  whcnfoever  they  bee  cut*  Now
this  prefcrvativc  is  a  great  Arcanum  againft  all  kinds
of  putrefactions^  yea  fo  excellent  a  fecrct  that  none
may  bee  compared  to  it.  And  it  is  nothing  clfebiit
Fixed  oylc  of  Qyle  of  Sulphur,  the  proccffe  whereof  is  this.  Let
."  P  ^^'         common  yellow  Sulphur  bee  powdered ,  and  put
into  a  Gourd  glaflc,  upon  whichlet  there  be  poured
fo  much  of  the  ftrongeft  AquAfortid\i\m.  may  cover
it  three  fingers  breadth :  then  draw  it  oft  by  diftilla^-
tion,thrce,or  four  times-,  and  laft  of  all,  till  it  be  dry.
Let  the  Sulpliur  that  remaines  in  the    bottome  be-
ing of  a  black,  fad  red  colour,be  put  upon  marble,  or
in.aglaffe,  andit  will  eafily  bee  diflbWedintoOyle>
which  is  a  great  fecret  in  preferving  of  Wood  from
putrefadon,  and  wormes.   For  this  Gyle  doth  fo
tinge  the  wood  that  is  nointed  with  it,  that  it  can
never  bee  waflied  out  of  it  againe.   Many  more
things  may  beepreferved  with  this  Oil  of  Sulphury
from  putrefa<ftion,as  ropes,  cords  in  i]iips,and  mafts
of  fliips,  in  carts,   fifliing-nets\,    and  gins  which
Fowlers,and  Hunters  ufe,and  fuch  like," which  arc  of*
tcntimcs  ufed  in  watcrs,or  raine,.  and  are  otherwifc
eafily  rotted,  and  broken,fo  alfo  linncn  clothes>    and
many  other  fuch  like  things*

Alfo


L I B^  III.         Of  the  Nature  ofthingfl  vfi

Alfo  you  muft  know  how  potable  things  are  tobe^'»»<^^  ^'^?^
preferved^by  which    wee  underftand  Wine,  Beer,  :;^]'how?he,
Meade,    Vincgcr,  and  Milke.     Now  it  wc  would  aic  piefei-ved. '
prcferve  thefe  from  harm,  and  in  their  full  vertue,  it
is  very  neceft-iry  that  you  know  well  what  is  an  E-.
ncmictothem,  and  that  is  msnftruous  women  :  for
if  they  doe  handle  the  forefaid  things,    or  have^'^'iM".^
any  thing  to  doc  about  them,  or  looke,   or  breath
upon  them,  they  corrupt  them.  For  Wine  is  thereby
changed,  and  become  thick,Beer ,  and  Mead  grow
fowrc,  Vineger  grows  dead,  and  lofcth  its  iliarpneiTc:
and  Milke  grows  fowre,and  curded.  ^  '

This  therefore  you  muft  well  know,  before
you  come  to  preferve  each  of  thcfc  in  particu-
lar^

Wine  is  prefervcd  chiefly  by  Sulphur,  and  thcHo^r  Wine  is
Oyle  of  Sulphur,by  which  all  Wine  may  bee  prefer-  pieferved  by
ved  a  long  time,  fo  that  it  be  neither  thick,  nor  any  ^"^P^"'"'
other  way  changed.

Bcercis  prefcrved  with  Oyle  of  Cloves,  if  fomcBeereisprefei,:
drops  thereof  bee  put  into  it,  to  every  Gallon  two  ''f  ^"^  oy^e
or  three  drops,  or,  which  is  better,  with  the  Oyl  of^  ^^''''"'
the  root  of  ^vif^j,  which  doth  prcferve  Beer  from
fowring.

Meade  is  prefcrved  with  Oyl  of  Sugar,which  muft  i^ead  is  pre:
bee  ufedas  the  Oyle  of  Cloves  abovefaid.  fcrvcdwith

Vineger  is  prefcrved  with  Oyle  of  Ginger,  which  How  Wga*
muft  be  ufedas  the  Oyle  of  Cloves  abovefiid.        is  prefervcd.

Milke  is  prefcrved  with  Oyle  of  Almonds  made  How  Milke  i$
by  cxprcffion ,  which  muft  bee  ufed  as  the  Oyle  of  prefcrved.
Cloves  abovefaid.

Cheefc  is  prefervcd  with  St.  lehm  wort  from  Cheefc  is  prc-
worras,  for  if  it  doth  but  touch  it ,  no  worme  will  ^^rved  with  su

Dd2  breed  J°^"'^°^*


ai  Ofth  Uature  of  things^         Li  f^  IIIJ'

breed  ink:  and  if  there  bee  any  in  before,  it  will
kill  them, and  make  them  fall  out  of  the  Cheefe.
How  Honey  Is  Honey  hath  no  peculiar  prcfervative,  onely  that  it
to  beprefervcd.  j^^y  j^^g  j^gp^  fj^Q^i  its  Encmie.  Now  its  chief  Enc-
What  its  chief  ^^^  -^  j^j.^^^ .  f^j.  jf  ^  ^mXc  bread  made  of  Corne  bee
---^■-*  but  pur,  or  fain  in  into  it,  all  the  Honey  is  turned
into  Emmots,  and  fpoiled.


O  F


LlB.IV.  2i


4fe   •    ^   fill!   ale  sis   4lt    He   9I?   9I2   s!^   sib   ft   sis   sif   alls   aSc   sli>  <^
^^\llr\^'tjP  €^  ^%ir\>^\^   tff^  ttf"  ^\^   t^  (^  tp^  €^  t^  tjy

OFTHE

N  A  T  V  R  E

Of  Things.
THE  FOVRTH  BOOK*


Of  the  life  of  Natnrall
things^

p  man  can  deny  that  Aire  gives  life  to  all  What  nfe  tke
things,  bodies,  iJand  fubftances,  that  are  .t^'hciifro?
produced  ,  and  generated  of  the  Earth,  things.
Now  you  muft  know  what ,  and  what
manner  of  thing  the  life  of  every  thing  in  particular
isj  and  it  is  nothing  elfe  then  a  fpirituall  cffence,  a  What  the  life
thing  that  is  invifiblc,  impalpable,  a  fpirit,  andfpiri-  ^^^^^"S^'^-
tuall.  Wherefore  there  is  no  corporeall  thing,which  What  things
hath  not  a  fpirit  lying  hid  in  it,  as  alfo  a  life^which,  as  ^^^*^^^^i


30  Oftht  Nature  ofthtngf^  L is^ IV;

I  faid  before,  is  nothing  but  a  fpirituall  thing.    For
not  only  that  hath  life  which  moves,  and  ftirres ,
as  Men,  Animalls,  Vermineof  the  earth  ,  Birds  in
the  Aire^  Fifh  in  the  fea,  but  alfo  all  corporeal] ,  and
fubftantiall  thinss.For  here  wee  miift  know  that  God
in  the  beginning  of  the  Creation  of  all  things,  crea-
ted no  body  at  all  without  its  fpirit,which  it  fecrctly
contains  in  itr
What  1$  the        For  whatis  the  body  without  a  fpirit/*  Nothing  *
fw^xt^thc'spku  ^^  ^^^'  Wherefore  the  fpirit  contains  in  it  fecretly  the
andtbc  E«dy.  vert  uc,  and  power  of  the  thing,  and  not  the  body.
For  in  the  body  there  is  death,  and  the  body  is  the
fubje(5l  of  death,  neither  is  any  elfe  to  be  fought  for
in  the  body,  but  death.
Th«  Spirit  nc-    For  that  may  fevcrall  waycs  bcc  dcftroyed  ,  and
jfcr  dyes,        corrupted,  but  the  fpirit  cannot.   For  the  living  fpi-
rit remains  for  ever,  and  alio  is  the  fubjed  of  lite :
andpreferves  the  body  alivc;  but  in  the  ruinc  of  the
body  it  is  feparated  from  it ;  and  leaves  behind  it  a
dead  body,and  returncs  co  its  place,  from  whence  it
came,  'vj\,  into  the  Chaos,and  the  Aire  of  the  upper
and  lower  Firmament.    Hence  it  appears  that  there
arc  divers  fpirits,  as  well  as  divers  bodies.
Thedlvifionof    For  there  are  fpirits  CeleftiaI!,Infernall,  Humane,
c!irdS"'tothe  Metalline,  Minerall,of  Salts,  of  Gemmes,  of  Mar-
vtrict^of  bo-cafites,  of  Arfenicks,  of  Potable  things,  of  Rootes,
«ii^  of  Juices,  of  Flefli,of  Blood,  of  Bones,&c.  Where-

Thc  Spirit  is  fore  alfo  know  that  the  fpirit  is  moft  truly  the  life,
the  life  of  all  antibalfome  of  all  Corporeall  things.  But  now  wee
SE"^^      will  proceed  to  the  fpecies,  and  briefly  defcribe  to  you
in  this  place  the  life  of  every  natural!  thing  in  parti-
cular.

The


L I B  J  vl  of  the  Nature  ofthingsl  31

The  life  thererorc  of  all  men  is  nothing  clfe  but  What  the  lifd
an  Aftrall  balfome,  a  Balfamick  impreffion,  and  a°  "''"'*-
cclcftiall  invifible  Fire,  an  included  Aire,  and  a  tin-
ging fpirit  of  Salt.  I  cannot  name  it  more  plainly,
although  it  bee  fet  out  by  many  names.  And
feeing  wee  have  declared  the  bcft ,  and  chiefeft ,
wee  Ihall  bee  filent  in  thcfe  which  are  IcfTc  mate-
riall.

The  life  of  Metalls  is  a  fecrct  fatncfTe,  which  they  Whai  the  fife
have  received  from  Sulphur,  which  is  manifeft  by  °^^«^^si$,
their  flowing ,  for  every  thing  that  flowes  in  the
fire,  flowes  "by  reafonot  thatfecret  fatneiTe  that  is
in  it :  unlelTe  that  were  in  k^  no  Metall  could  flow,
as  wee  fee  in  Iron  ,  and  Steel ,  which  have  leflc
Sulphur,  and  fatneflc  then  all  the  other  Metalls,
wherefore  they  are  of  a  dryer  Nature  then  all  the
reft.

The  life  of  Mercury  is  nothing  elfe  but  the  inter"  What  the  life
nail  heat,  and  externall-  coldncfle,  /  e.  it  makes  the  of  Mercury  is.
internall  part  of  its  body  hot,  and  the  outward  ^^'^^J/J^^''*^
part  cold,  and  therefore  might  well  bee  compa- of skinv.
red  to  a  garment  made  of  skins^,  which  doth  even
as  Mercury  mike  hot,  and  cold.     For  if  a  man
wears  fuch  a  garment  it  makes  him  warme,  and
keeps  him  from  the  cold  .•  but  if  the  fmooth  part
of  thofe  skins  bee  put  upon  his  naked  body,    it
makes  him  cold ,    and  is  good  againft  too  much
heatv  wherefore  it  was  a  cuflome  in  ancient  time^
and  ftiil  isinfome  places,  to  weare  skins  as  well  in.
Summer,  as  in  Winter,  as  againfl  cold  in   the
one,  io  againft  heat  in  the  other  .^  in  Summer  they
turn  the  fmooth  iide  inward,   and  the  hairy  (ide-
outwardj.andin  Winter  the  hairy  fide  inward,  and

the


3^


Wh«  "the  life
of  Sulphur  is.


Of  the  Nature  of  tbingf,  Lf  biv.

the  fmoothfide  outward.   As  therefore  you  have

heard  of  the  garment  of  skins,  foaUbitmay  bee

faid  of  Mercury.
The  Ufeof  Sulphur  lsacombuftible5ftinkingfat-

neff',  for  whilft  it  burns,  and  ft  inks,  it  may  be  faid  to

beahve.
ivhat  the  life     Mow  the  life  of  all  Salts  is  nothing  elfe  but  the
of  Salts  is»      ^  •  j^  Qf  Aqu.€  fort  is  :  for  that  water  being  drawne

from  them,rhvit  which  remains  in  the  botiome,   is

called  Dead  earth.
What  the  life      The  life  of  Gemmes,  and  Coralls  is  only  their
of  Gemtncs     colour.which  with  fpirit  of  Wine  may  be  taken  from

and  Coralls  is.    ,

them.
What  the  life     The  life  of  Pearls  is  nothing  elfe  but  their  fplendor ,
of  Pearls  is.     ^yhich  they  lofe  in  calcination.
What  the  life     The  life  of  the  Loadftone  is  the  fpirit  of  Iron ,
!  ?Ac  ^°^'^'  which  may  bee  extradcd,  and  taken  away  with  fpirit
of  Wine.

The  life  of  Flintes  is  a  mucilaginous  mat-
ter.

The  life  of  Marcafites ,  Cachymia ,  Talcum^
Cobaltum,Zimri,Granata,Wifmat,  and  of  Antimo-
ny is  a  tinging  Metalline  fpirit.

The  life  of  Arfenickes,  Auripigment,  Opcrment,
Realgar,  and  fuch  like  matters^is  a  MineralJ,and  co-
agulated poifon.

The  life  of  Excrements,  /.if.  of  mans  dung,orbeaft
duns  is  their  ftinking  fmcll,  for  this  being  loft  they
arc  dead.

The  life  of  Aromatkall  things,  'ui :{.oiMus\iC,
Amber  Gryfe .,  Civet,  and  whatfoev^r  yeelds  a
ftrong,  good,  and  fweet  fmell  is  nothing  elfe
but  that  gratefull  odour:forif  they  lofe  this  they  are
dead  and  of  no  ufc.  The


•t

ftonc  is.

The  life  of
•thnts  what.

The  life  of

Marcafites

what.

The  life  of
Arfenicks.


The  life  of
Excrements.


The  life  of
aromaticall
things.


L I B  J  V.  Of  the  Nature  of  tbingK  31

The  life  of  Tweet  things,  as  of  Sugar,  Honey,  ^^^^^f^^
Monna^Caffiajand  fuch  hke  is  in  their  tinging^ndfub-  ^    ^  ^"^*
tile  fwcetnede,  for  ifihatTweetncfTe  bee  taken  from
them  by  diftilhng,or  fubliming  they  are  dcadjUnpro-
fitable,  and  nothing  worth.

The  life  of  all  Rozzens,  as  Amber,  Turpentine,  The  life  of  ;
Gumme,is the  muciliginousfhiniog  fatneffc,  which ^0"**^
gives  that  excellent  vernifli  to  them  all  :  for  when
they  will  yceld  no  more  vernifh,and  lofe  their  fhinin^,
they  are  dead.

The  life  of  Hearbs^Roots^Apples,  and  other  fuch  The  life  of
like  fruitjis  nothing  elfe  but  the  liquor  of  the  Earth/'^^^""*
which  they  lofe  of  their  own  accord,  if  they  do  but
want  water^and  Earth.

The  life  of  Wood  is  a  certaine  Rozzcn,    for  The  life  of    ]
any  wood  if  it   want   Rozzen  can  live  no  Ion-  ^°°^'^
ger.

The  life  of  Bones  is  the  liquor  of  Mummie.  ^^^  ^'^^  of

The  life  of  flefh,  and  blood  is  nothing  elfe  but  the  xheUfe  offleili
fpiritofSalt,  which  preferves  them  from  (linking,
and  putrefadion,  and  is  of  it  felfe  as  water  feparated
from  them.

Now  concerning  the  life  of  Elements,  you  mufl  The  life  of
know  that  the  life  of  Water   is  its  running.    For  ^^^"^^    cmen^i  ^
when  by  the  coldnefTe  of  the  Firmament  it  is  con%
gealcd  into  ice ,  it  is  dead ,   and  its  mifchievouf-
nefTe  is  taken  from  it,  that  nobody  can  bee  drowned
inir.

ThelifeofFireisAire,forAir«s  makes  fire  burne  What  the  life
with  greater  vehemency ,    and  hcate  :  Alfo  there  ^^^'''^  ^^
Cometh  forth  from  all  Fire  a  kind  of  Aire,  which
will  blow  out  a  candle,  and  drives  up  a  feather,  as
you  may  dayly  fee  before  your  eyes.    Wherefore

£e  the


2^  OfthtUatureof things^         Lib*  iv>

the  flame  of  Fire  is  choaked  if  it  bee  fo  ftopt  up,
that  it  can  neither  receive  in  Aire  jand  let  out  its  own
Aire.

What  the  life     The  Aire  lives  by^and  of  it  felfe^and  gives  life  to  all

ef  Aire  is.      other  things.

VVhat  the  life      The  earth  of  it  felfc  is  dead,  but  the  Element  of  it
of  Ej5th  tt.     ^  2iXi  invifible,and  fccrct  life.


OF


Lib.  v.


ti


OF  THE


N  A  T  V  RE

Of  Things.


THE  FIFTH  BOOK,


OftheDeatby  or  mine  of  all
things.

[He  death  of -all  naturall  things  is  nothing  What  Death  ^
elfe  but  an  alteration  and  dcftru(5iion  of
their  povvers,and  venues,  a  predominancy
of  that  which  is  evill ,  and  an  overcoming
of  what  is  good,  an  abolifliing  of  the  former  nature
and  generation  of  anew,  and  another  nature.    For
you  muft  know  that  there  are  many  things  that,
whilft  they  arc  aHve,  have  in  them  fcverall  vertucs
but  when  they  arc  dead  rctainc  httle  or  nothing  of

Ec  a  their


3^  Of  the  Nature  of  things^  Lib^V^

their  vertuc,  but  become  unfavory,  and  unprofita-
ble. So  on  the  contrary  many  thin^Sjwhileft  they
live,  are  bad,but  after  tney  arc  dcad,and  corrupted,
manifeft  a  manifold  power,  and  vertuc,  and  arc  very
ufcfull.  Wee  could  bring  many  examples  to  con-
firmc  this ,  but  that  doth  not  belong  to  our  pur-
pofe.  But  that  I  may  not  fecm  to  write  accor-
ding to  mine  own  opinion  only,  but  out  of  my  ex-
perience, it  will  bee  ncccilary  that  I  produce  one
example,  with  which  I  fliall  filencc  thole  Sophifters,
who  fay^  that  wee  can  receive  nothing  from  dead
things,  neither  mud  we  feek,  or  cxpeS  to  find  any
thing  in  them.  The  reafon  is,  bccaufc  they  do  efteeai
nothing  of  the  preparations  of  Alchymifts,by  which
many  fuch  like  great  fecrets  are  found  out.  For  looke
upon  Mercury,  crude  Sulphur,  and  crude  Antimony,
as  they  are  taken  out  of  their  Mines,  i,€,  whilcft  they
arc  living,  and  fee  what  little  vertuc  there  is  in  them,
how  {lowly  they  put  forth  their  vertues,  yea  they  do
more  hurt,  then  good,  and  are  rather  poifon,  then  a
Medicine.  But  if  through  the  induftry  of  a  skilful!
Alchymiftjth.y  bee  corrupted  in  their  hrft  fubflancc,
Thcercparati-  ^^d  wifely  prepared  ( t^/^.  if  Mercury  be  coagulated,
Suiphur^aTr^  precipitated,fublimed,  diiTolved,  and  turned  into  an
JkfitisiQuy*  oylcj  if  Sulphur  bee  fuWimed,  calcined,  reverbera-
ted, and  turned  into  an  oyle  ^  alfo  if  Antimony  bee
fublimed,  calcined,  and  reverberated  and  turned  into
oyle)  you  (hall  fee  how  ufcfull  they  are,  how  much
ffrength,  and  vertuc  they  have ,  and  how  quickly
they  put  forth,and  fliew  their  efficacy,  which  no  man
}$  able  to  fpcak  enough  in  the  commendation  of,or
todefcrlbc.  For  many  are  their  vertues,  yea  more
then  Will  ever  bee  found  out  by  an^  man.  Wherefore

kt


LiB.y.  Of  the  Uatnre  of  things,  jy

let  every  faithful!  Alchymift,  and  Phyfitian  fpend
their  whole Hvcs  in fcwirching into thcfe  three:  For
they  will  abundantly  recompcnfc  him  for  all  his  la-
bour, ftudy,  and  cofts.

But  to  come  to  particulars,  and  to  write  particu*
larly  of  the  death,  and  deftrudion  of  every  natural!
thing,  and  what  the  death  of  every  thing  iSjand  after
what  manner  every  thing  is  dcftroyed  ^  you  muft
know  therefore  in  the  firft  place,  that  the  death  of^'^^J^^^*
man  is  without  doubt  nothing  el  fe,  but  an  end  of  his  is."^  ^  *'"
daily  work,  the  taking  away  of  the  Aire,the  decaying
of  the  Naturall  balfome,  the  extinguifhing  of
the  naturall  light,  and  the  great  feparation  or  the
three  fubftances,  "ut^,  the  body,  foule ,  and  fpirit  ^
and  their  return  from  whence  they  came.  For  be-
caufca  naturall  man  is  of  the  earth ,  the  Earth  alfb
is  his  Mother,  into  which  heemuft  retum,and  there
muft  lofe  his  natural  earthly  flcfli,and  fo  be  regenera-
ted at  thelaflday  in  a  new  celeftiall ,  and  purified
flcfh,  as  Chrift  faid  to  Nicodemus^htn  heecame  to
him  by  night.  For  thus  muft  thefe  words  bee  under-
ftood  of  regeneration.

The  death,  and  deftrudion  of  Metalls  is  the  ^i^- ^J^^^*^^«^
joining  of  their  bodies ,    and  fulphureous  fatneflfc  ^  Mctallsisr
which  may  bee  done  feverall  ways,  as  by  calcination^
rcverberation^diffolution,  cementation,  and  fublima-
.tion.

But  the  calcination  of  Metalls  is  not  of  one  fort:  Cardnanottoi
for  one  is  made  with  5alt5another  with  Sulphur,ano-  ^^^\^  **  ^'
ther  with  Aqua  fortis ,    and  another   with   com-
mon   Sublimate,    and   another   with   Quickfil-

-  What  Calcfr^

Calcination  with  Salt  is  that  the  Mecallbemade„atioa  witj»

Ec3  intoSahi|.


gS  Oftbe  Nature  of  thingf^  LfB.V.

into  very  thin  platcs,andftrowed  with  Salt,  and  ce-
mented.
Calcination        Calcination  With  Sulphur  is,  that  the  Mctall  bee
with  Sulphur,  j^j^^g  jj^^Q  ^|-^^j^  plates,and  flio wed  with  Sulphur^  and

reverberated.
Calcination        Calcinaiott  with  jdqtia  fortii ^  is  that  the  Mc-
iwith  Aqiu  for-  ^^jj  ijgg  jYiade  very  fmall,  and  diflblved  in  AquA  for-

tiSy  and  precipitated  in  it.
Calcination         Calcination  with  fublimcd  Mercury  is  this,  that
withSubli.     fjic  Metall bee  made  into  thin  plates,  and  that  the
"  *  Mercury  bee  put  into  an  earthen  vellell  narrow  to-

wards the  top,  and  wide  at  the  bottome-,  and  then
let  it  be  fet  into  a  gentle  fire  made  with  coales,which
muftbeebloweda  little  unrillthe  Mercury  begin  to
fume,  and  a  white  cloud  goe  forth  of  the  mouth  of
the  vedel,  then  let  the  Plate  of  the  Metall  bee  put
intothetopoftheveflel,  and  fo  the  fublimed  Mer-
cury wil  penetrate  the  Metall,  and  make  it  as  brittle
asaftoneofcoal.
^•^^^^alickfil-  Calcination  with  Quick  filver ,  is  that  the  Mc-
vcu  t^Il  t)^^  made  very  fmall,  and  thin,  and  be  amalgama-

ted with  Quick  filver,  and  afterward  the  Quick-filver
bee  ft  rained  through  Leather,  and  the  Metall  remain
in  the  Leather  like  chalke,  or  fand.
Divers  other      Now  befides  thefe  mortifications  of  Metalls ,  and
forts  of  morti-  ^eftru«^ions  of  their  lives,  know  alfo  that  there  are
taU$^.°^  °        yct^  moi  c.   For  ruft  is  the  death  of  all  Iron,and  Steel,
and  all  vi!:riall,burnt  braffe  is  mortified  Copper  /  all
precipitated,  fubhmated,  calcined  Cinnabar  is  mor-
tified Mercury,  all  Ccrufe,  and  Minium  of  Lead  is
mortified  Lcad-,a]l  Lazurc  is  mortified  Silver:  alfo  all
Gold  from  which  its  tin(fture ,  QuintefTence  ,  Roz-
zcn.  Crocus,  Vitriall ,  or  Sulphur  is  extradcd,  is

dead.


LiB^V*  Ofthe  "Nature  of  things.  39

dead,  becaufc  it  hath  no  uiorc  the  form  of  Gold,  ^

but  is  a  white  MetalUikc  fixed  Silver.

But  lee  us  proceed  to  fhew  how  Merallsmaybce
yet  further  mortified.  Firft  therefore  of  Iron,  know  ^  ^^^  ^^^i
that  that  is  mortificd,and  reduced  into  Crocus  this  preparation  of
way.  Make  Steel  into  very  thin  plates :  Make  thefe  ^^^'^"^  ^^^"^^
places  red  hot,  and  quench  them  in  the  beft  Wine-  ^'^
Vineger,  doe  this  fo  often  til  the  Vineger  hath  con-
tra(5led  aconfidcrable  redncffe,  then  diftilof  the  Vi-
ncger,  til  there  bee  nothing  but  a  dry  powder  re-
maining.   This  is  a  moft  excellent  Crocus  Mar-
tis.

There  is  alfo  another  way  of  making  Crocus
Martis,  which  doth  partly  exceed  the  former,  and  is
made  vvitt  firrc  Icfie  cofts ,  and  pains ,  and  it  is
this.

Strow  upon  the  plates  of  Steel ,  Sulphur,  and
Tartar,  being  both  in  a  like  quantity  5  then  reverbe-
rate them,  and  this  wil  produce  a  moft  excel-
lent Crocus ,  which  muft  bee  taken  off  from  the
plates.

Alfo  you  muft  know,  that  every  plate  of  Iron,
or  Steel,  ifit  bee  melted  with  Aquafertis-^  will  alfo
make  a  very  fair  Crocusj  fo  alfo  it  is  made  with  oylc
ofVitriall,  fpirit  of  Salt,  Allum  water,  the  water
of  Salt  Armoniacke,  and  of  Salt  Nitre*,  as  alfo
with  fublimated  Mercury,  all  which  raortific  Iron,
and  bring  it  into  a  Crocus  5  but  none  of  thefe
latter  wayes  is  to  bee  compared  to  the  two  for*
mer,  for  they  arc  only  ufcd  in  Alchymie,  and
not  at  all  in  Phyficke  5  wherefore  in  this  ,  ufe
only  the  two  former,  and  let  alone  the  reft.

Thfr


4^  OfthelfatHreofthingu  Lib.  VJ

Thcmortifica-  Thc  mortification of  Coppcr,'u/;{.  that  it  maybe
non  ©t  op-  j-^^y^^^  jpi^^  Vitriall,  Verdcgreafc  ,  may  bee  done
many  vvayes,and there  are  more proccfles  in  it,  yet
The  Vitriall  one  far  better  then  another,  and  one  more  profitable
madc'mo"  '^  ^^^^  another.  Wherefore  it  is  moft  convenient  here  to
ivaycs.  fetdown  thcbeft,  and  mofl:  profitable,  and  to  bee

filent  in  the  reft.The  beft  therefore^the  moft  eafy^and
cxa(5teft  way  of  reducing  Copper  into  Vitriall  is  this.
Let  plates  of  Copper  bee  dipt  in  fpirit  of  ^alt^
orSalt-Petre,  and  let  them  bee  hanged  in  the  Aire
until  they  begin  to  be  grccn,which  indeed  wil  quick*
ty  be,  wafii  off  this  greenncffe  with  cleer  fountainc-
water,  dry  the  plates  with  fome  cloath,and  wet  them
again  with  the  fpirit  of  5alt,  and  5alt  Nitre,  and  do
again  as  before,  fo^long  until  the  water  bee  appa*
rently  green,  or  much  Vitriall  fwim  on  the  top  .*
then  poure  away  the  water,  or  evaporate  it,and  thou
haft  a  mofl  excellent  Vitriall  for  medicine  In  Al«
chymie  there  is  not  a  fairer,  more  excellent,  and  bet-
ter Vitriall  then  what  is  m«de  by  Aqui  fortis,  or  A-
qua  regis,  or  fpirit  of  5alt  Armoniackc.  And  the  pro-
ccfTeisthis.

Let  plates  of  Copper  be  melted  with  one  of  the  a-
forefaid  watcrs,&as  toon  as  the  greenefs  is  extracted,
and  the  plates  dryedjlet  the  greenefs  be  taken  off  with
the  foot  of  a  Hare,or  fome  other  way  as  you  plcafe,
as  Cerufe  is  taken  offfrom  the  plates  of  Lead  :  let
them  bee  again  wetted  as  before,  until  the  plates  bee
wholly  confumcd,  thereby  is  made  a  moft  glorious
Vitriall ,  that  thou  canft  not  choofe  but  wonder  at
it.

SrpmTand     '^^^  ^^^^^  ^^^^^^  ^^^^^  ^^  ^^^^  ^^^^'  P^^ific,  and
Sak-armoni-  powdcr  itj  aftcrwaids  difTolve  it  of  it  felfe  in  a  blad-

ackismade.  jj^j;


L I B*  V . .         Of  the  Nature  of  things;  ^t

bladder,  put  in  boyling  water.  So  thou  flialt  have
the  water  of  Sale  Petre.

The  water  of  Salt  Armoniackc  is  made  thus: Cal-
cine Salt  Artnoniack ,  and  difTolvc  it  in  a  Cellar
upon  a  Marble,  and  this  is  water  of  Salt  Armoni-
ack.

But  to  make  Verdegreaieoutof  Coppcr^therearcVeidcgrcaf^c
divers  wayes  which  it  is  not  needful  here  to  recite,  "^,^y''^"^'^*^
Wee  fliall  defcribe  only  two^but  with  a  double  pre-  '^^°  ^*^*^^*
paration,  i//^.  The  one  for  Phyfickc ,  the  other  for
Alchymie.  The  procelTc  therefore  of  Verdcgrcafe
to  be  ufed  in  Phy fie  k  is  this  ,

Ta^v'C  plates  of  Copper,  which  wet  over  with  the  ^°J7to  tT
following  matter.     Take  Honey,  and  Vincgcr>  oi  Ifed  in°pby-
each  a  like  quantity,  of  Salt  as  much  as  wil  fcrvc  to  ^'"^^  '^ '°  ^
make  them  up  into  a  thick  pad.  Mixcthem  well  to- ^"^^^^
gcther,  then  put  them  into  a  reverberatory,  or  Pot-
ters furnace  folong  as  the  Potter  isburnifig  his  pots,
and  thou  ilialt  fee  the  matter  that  i^ickcs  to  the
plates  to  bee  very  bkck,butlct  not  that  trouble  thee.
For  li  thou  fcttcll:  thofe  plates  in  the  Aire ,  all  the
black  matter  wil  in  a  few  days  become  grtcn  ,    and
become  a  moft  excellent  Verdegreafc,  wliich  may
bee  called  the  Balfome  of  Copper,  and  is  commen-  The  Balfomof
^cd  by  all  Pliyfitians.  But  nevenhelefle  do  not  ihou  ^opP*^'^-
wonder  that  this  Verdegreafc  becomes  green  in  the
Aire,  and  that  the  Aire  can  change  the  bi2A:k  colour
into  fo  faim  green.

For  here  thoumuft  know  that  daily  experience  in  Ahc  cbangeth
Alchyniic-doth  ihcw,  that  any  dead  earth,  or  Caput  ^^^.  Colours  of
3/tfrr««/w,as  foon  as  it  comes  out  of  the  Fire  into  the  ^'""^^     '^^*
Alre,dorh quickly  gctanother  colour,  and  leaves  its
own  coloni' which  It  got  in  the  fire.  For  the  changes

Ff  V


^i  Of  the  Nature  oftbingf^  L  i  b*  V^^

of  thofe  colours  arc  various.  For  as  the  matter  is/o
are  the  colours  that  are  made,  although  for  the  moft
part  they  flow  from  theblacknefle  oft  he  dead  earth.
For  you  that  are  skilful  in  Alchymie  fee  that  the  dead
earth  of  yif^«^/<3r/;^  comes  black  from  the  Fire,  and
by  how  many  more  ingredients  there  bee  in  it ,
by  fo  much  the  more  variouily  doe  the  colours
Ihevv  themfelves  in  the  Aire.-  fometimes  they  .feem
red  J  as  Vitriall  makes  them  .•  (ometimes  yellow ,
white,  green,  blew :  fometimes  mixt,as  in  the  Rain-
bow, or  Peacocks  taile.  All  thofe  cololours  fliew
themfelves  after  the  death,  and  by  the  death  of
the  matter.  For  in  the  death  of  all  naturall
things  here- arc  (ben  other  colours,  which  are  chan-
ged from  the  firft  colour  into  other  colours5every  ona
according  to  its  nature,  and  property.
The  preparati-  '^ow  wc  wil  fpcak  of  that  Verdcgreafc  which  is  to
on  of  Verde-  bee  ufcd  in  Alchymie.  The  preparation,  and  proccfls

^, !"  ^  ^'  Make  very  thin  phtes  of  Copper,  flrow  upon  them
Salt, Sulphur,  and  Tartar  ground,  and  mixed  to^cs
ther,  of  each  a  like  quantity  in  a  great  calcining  pot*
Then  reverberate  them  twenty  foure  boures^  with  a
ftrong  Fire,  but  fo  that  the  plates  of  Copper  do  not
melt,  then  take  them  outjand  breafe  the  pot^  and  fet
the  plates  with  the  matter  that  flicks  to  them  into
'*■■  thcAire  forafewdayes,  and  the  matter  upon  tlic

plates  wil  bee  turned  into  a  faire  Vcrdegreafe,  which
in  all  fliarp  Corroding  waters,  waters  of  Exaltation,
and  in  Cements,3nd  in  colouring  of  Gold,doth  tinge

How  X.^  V'  Gold,and  Silver  with  a  moil  deep  colour.

ftum,  orCia-      ^q^^  ^q  ^.^.j^g  Coppcr  into  JBs  uftum^  which

^"to  be  mad?"  is  called  the  Crecu^  of  Copper^  the  procefTc  is
this,  Let


L I  B^V.  Of  the  Nature  of  things;  4  j

Let  Copper  be  made  into  thin  plates,-  and  be  fmee-
red  over  with  Salt  made  into  a  paft  with  the  bcft  Vi-
neger,  then  let  it  be  put  into  a  great  CrucibJc,  and
fet  in  a  wind  furnace,  and  be  burnt  in  a  ftrong  Fire
for  a  quarter  of  an  houre^  but  fo  that  the  plates  melt
not  .•  let  thefc  plates  being  red  hot  bee  quenched  in
Vineger,  in  which  Salt  Armoniack  is  dilTblved  ,31-.
waies  half  an  ounce  in  a  pint  of  Vineger*  let  the  plates
bee  made  red  hot  again^and  quenched  in  Vineger  as
before,  al waies  fcraping,  or  knocking  offthe  fcales
which  ftick  to  the  plates  after  quenching,  into  the
Vineger.  Do  this  fo  long,  until  the  plates  of  Copper
bee  m  good  part  confumcd  by  this  means  :  then  diftil
off  the  Vineger,   or  let  it  vapour  away  in  an  open
veflel,  and  bee  coagulated  into  a  mofl  hard  ftonc.  So
thou  haft  the  beft  Crocus  of  Copper,  the  ufe  whereof
is  in  Alchymie  .Many  make  Crocus  of  Copper  by  ex-
trading  of  it  with  the  fpirit  of  Wine,  or  Vineger,  as
they  d'o  Crocus  Mart  is :  But  I  commend  this  way  far
above  ir.

Now  the  mortification  of  Quickfilvcr  that  ic  may  The  rubljmati.'
bee  fublimed,  is  made  with  Vitriall,  and  Salt,  with  ^^f^°//^^^^- '
which  it  is  mixed,and  then  fublimcd,  fb  it  becomes
as  hard  as  Cryftall^and  as  white  as  fnow.-but  to  bring
it  to  a  Precipitatc,thc  procefTe  is  this:

Let  it  firft  be  calcined  with  the  h^^Aquafortis^xhtn  f  ^^t  p'"-^
diftil  offthe  Aquafortis^  and  do  this  about  fi\'^  times,  tac  DiaphoK
until  the  Precipitate  become  to  bee  of  a  fairc  red  co-  "caiu
lour :  Dulcifie  this  precipitate  as  much  as  thou  canft;.
And  laftly  poure  upon  it  the  bcft  rectified  fpirit  of
Wine  you  can  get,diftil  it  off  from  it  eight ,  or  nine
times,  or  fo  often  until  it  be  red  hot  in  the  fire,and  ,  i

doe  not  fly :  then  thou  haft  a  Diaphoretical  precipita-
ted Mercury,  rfz  Moreover


4#  Of  fht  KdtHre  of  things;  Li  ^y  1

How  to  make    Morcovcr,  you  muft  take  notice  of  a  great  ftcrct

pitater    ^"^  concerning  precipitated  Mercury,  w^.if  after  it  i^

coloured,  it  bee  dulcified  with  water  otTalt  of  Tartar,

pouring  it  upon  it,and  diftilling  of  it  off  fo  often, until

the  water  rifeth  no  more  iharp  from  tlie  Precipitate,

butbcemanifcftlyfweec-,  then  thou  hall  a  precipi-

■Attd  tbc  ufe  of  tate  as  fweet  as  fugar,  or  honey , which  in  all  wounds,

*'  Ulcers^and  Venereal  Difeafe  is  fo  excellent  a  fecret ,

that  no  Phyfitian  need  defirc  a  better.

Befidesitis  a  great  comfort  to  defpairing  Alehy-
mifts.  For  it  doth  augment  Gold  ,  and  hath  ingrcfte
into  Gold  ^  and  with  it  Gold  remaincs  liable,  and
good.  Although  there  is  much  pains,ar.d  fweat  requi-
red to  this  Precipitate,   yet  it  wil  Sufficiently  recom-
penfe  thee  for  thy  pains^and  coftsj  and  wil  yecld  thee
more  gain,  then  can  bee  got  by  any  Art  or  Trade
whatfoevrr ;  Thou  maift  wel  therefore  rejoice  in  this,.
aftd  give  God, and  mee thanks  fork.
How  Quick-       t>^ow  that  Quickfilv^r  may  bee  coagulated , ' I  faid
C^agSaiS?    that  that  mufl  bee  done  in  fliarp>i^«rf/<?m/,  which
muft  bee  drawn  off  by  Diftillation,  and  then  the  Pre-
How  Qjickiii- cipitate  is  made.    But  that  Quick{ilver   may  bee
^""d^^Cn  ^^^^S'^^  into  a  Cinnabar;youmuilfir(lmortific,and
n"bar,      '  '  mclt  it  with  Salt, ^snd  ycllow  Sulphur,  and  bring  it
into  a  white  powder,  then  put  ir  in  a  gourd,  and  pu^
upon  it  Alud«l,or  head, and  fublime  it  in  the  greatcfl'
:fiux  you  can,as  the  manner  is,  fo  the  Cinnabar  will
afcend  into  the  Aludel,  and  ftick  as  hard  as  the  Itone
Hematites,
There  arc  two     The  mortification  of  Lead  to  bring  it  to  a  Ccrufe^
Wrifcof  Cc-    is  twofold^  the  one  for  Medicine,ihc  other  for  Al-
^hcVreparati-  ^hymk.  The  preparation  of  Ccrulcfior  Mcdicmeis^

Hang


JLisWr  O/theNamreofthiftgil  45

Hang  plates  of  Lead  in  a  glazed  pot  over  ftrc||g
Winc-vincgcr,  the  pot  being  we^  ft  opt  that  tlic,/^
rirs  doe  not  exhale :  put  this  pot  into  warm  aflK§i  ^
in  the  Winter  into  a  furnace,  then  ahvaies  after  ten  or
fourteen daycs,  thou  (halt  find  very  goqd  Ceri^
kicking  to  the  plates,  which  ftrike  off  with  the  f^o^
of  a  Hare :  then  put  the  plates  over  the  Vineger  ag^in,
untill  thou  haft  enough  Ccrufe.

Now  the  other  preparation  of  Cerufe  fpr  Alchy-
mieis  like  the  former,,  only  that  in  the  Vinisgcr  nFj^fl:
bee  diflblved  a  good  quantity  of  the  beft,  and  (aireft
SaltArmoniack,forby  this  means  thou  flialt  pm>
chafe  a  moftfaire,  and  beautifiill  Cerure,for  the  pur-
ging of  rinne,  and  Lcad,andthe  whitening  pf^'op-

per  .,       ;  .;:..:■!::     :;/;;

But  if  wee  would  make  Minium  of  Lea^^w^  ipuft  'raepi-eparatu
firft  calcine  it  with  Salt  into  Caljfjandthcn  burn  it  k  °"  °^  L'^d"'"
a  glazed  vcifd,  al waics  ftirring  k  with  an  Iron  rod^till  °"  °
it  be  red.  This  is  the  bcit^and.clijefcft  Minium,a,nd  it
is  to  be  ufcd  as  wel  in  Phylick  as  Alchyiig^e :  but  the
other  which  Mercers  fell  in  their  ll^ops  is  nothing
worth. It  is  madeonly  of  the  ailxes,which4"ieEnaine  of
t-he  Lesd  in  the  tnciting  of  ir^ivhlch  .ilfo  Pottery  ufc
to  glaZc  their  v^fTeite ,    and  fuch  Minium  i^  \\^i
for  Painting,    but  not  for  Phyfick€>  or  Alghy*

!v«ow  that  Leadmaybec  brm^ht -into  ycllojv-  TheCrcxiisor
nefifj  the  preparation  of  it  is  noteUr^tfee  to  the  pifcpa-  ^*^*
ration  of  Minium.  iFor  Lead  mii^  here  be  c^cined
with  Salt,  and  brought  to  a  Calx,  and  afterwards  be
iVirred  with  an  Iron  rod  ina  Broad  bafon,fuch  as  try-
crs  of  Mineralls  ufe,  in  a  gentle  Fire  of  Coales>  dili-
gently taking  heed,  that  there  be  not  to©  much  hcat>

Ff  5  nor


j^  Ofthel^atHrefiftbmgsl  Lib.  "v,

ilfea  ncglc«ft  in  ftirrmg,  for  elfe  it  will  flow ,  and  be-

X^mc  a  yellow  glaflc.  And  lb  cliou  haft  a  fair,  yellow

Kr$ctu  of  Lead.

How  the  The  mortification  of  Si!  ver,that  of  it  may  be  made

Axuic  Colour^tfie  Azure  colour ,     or  fomcthm^  like  to  it ,    is

II  made  of         j,  '  o  3

filver*  vhUS:

"Take  plates  of  Silver,and  mix  them  with  Quickfil-
yer,  and  hang  them  in  a  glazed  pot  over  the  beft  Vi-
neger,in  which  Gilt- heads  hav^  been  firft  boilcd,and
afterward  Salt  Armoniack^ind  calcined  Tartar  have
beendiifolved-,  inallthe  reft  doe  as  hath  been  laid
of  Ccriife^thenalwaies  after  fourteen  days  thou  (halt
ha\^e  amoft  excellent,  and  faire  Azure  colour  flick-
ing to  the  plates  of  Silver,  which  rauft  be  wiped  off
with  a  Hares  foot.

The  Mortifis      The  Mortification  of  Gold  that  it  may  he  brought

cauonofGoli.into  itsAtcana,  as  into  a  Tinfture,  Quintcffence,
Refine,  Crocus,  Vitriall,  and  Sulphur ,  and  many
other  excellent  Arcana^  which  preparations  indeed
arc  mmy.  ^it  becaufe  for  the  moft  part  wee  have
fnfficicntlytreatcdof  fuch  Arcana  in  other  bookes,
as  thecxtriftionof  the  Tindture  of  Gold,  the  Qyin-
tefTence  of  Gold,  the  Mercury  of  Gold,  the  Oilcof
Gold,  Potable  Gold,the  Refint  of  Gold,the  Crocus
of  Gold,  andinthe  Archidoxis,andelfewhere,  wee
conceive  it  needlefTe  here  to  repeat  them.  But  what
Arcana  were  there  omitted,  wee  fhall  here  fet  down,
As  the  Vitriallof  Gold,  Sulphur  of  Gold,which  in-
deed are  not  the  leaft,  and  ought  very  much  to  cheer
wp  every  Phyfitian.

But  to  extrad  Vitriall  out  of  Gold,  the  procefTe
is  this.

Take


L I B.  V.     Of  the  Natnre  of  things.  47

Take  of  pure  Gold  two,  or  three  pound,  which  How  the  fui"
beat  into  thin  plates,  and  hanging  them  over  BoyS^^^j^Jj^n"^/^* ,;
urine, mixt  with  the  flones  of  grapcs,in  a  large  gouif^  Gold  are  made.*
glafle,  well  clofedjwhich  bury  in  a  hot  heap  of  fio'nd^
of  Grapes,  as  they  come  from  the  prclle^  when  it        '»•
hath  flood  fourteen  dayes,or  three  weeks,  then  open
it,  and  thou  flialt  find  a  moft  fubtil  colour,  whicii  is
the  Vitriallof  Goldftickingtothe  plates  ofGbld,
which  take  off  with  the  foot  ofa  Hare,,   as  thou  haft
beard  concerning  other  Metalls  -,    as  of  the  plates  of
Iron,  Crocus  Martis,  of  the  plates  of  Copper ,  the
Vitriall  of  Copper  and  yerdegrcafe,of  the  plates  "of
Lead,  Ccrufe,  of  the  plates  of  Silver  the  Azure  co-
lour, &c.  comprehended  under  one  proceffe,  but  not
with  one  manner  of  preparation.    When  thou  haft
enough  of  the  Vitriall  of  Gold ;  boyle  it  well  in
Rain-water  diftilled,.  alwaies  ftirring  it  with  a  fpatic,
then  the  fulphur  of  the  gold  is  driven  up  to  the  fupcr-
ficies  of  the  water,as  fat  ,which  take  off  with  a  fpoon;
Thus  alto  doe  with  more  Vitriall..   "Niow  after  all
the  Sulphur  is  taken  off,  evaporate  thar'raine  water
til  it  bee  all  dry,  apd  there  will  remajrfthe  Vitriall
of  Gold  in  the  bottomc ,  which  tKoo'lhaift  eafily
diflblv.e  of  it  fclfe  .upon  a  marble;  in  amoiftplace.  In
thefe  two  Arcana's,  -y/^.  the  Vitriall  of  Gold,  and
the  Sulphur  of  Gold  lies  the  Diaphoreticall  vertue^
I  flial  not  here  fct  down  their  vertues*,  for  in  the  book
of  Metallick  Direafes,.and  alfo  in  other  b.ookes  woe
have  fet  them  down  at  large.

The  mortification  of  Sulphur^thatthe  combuftible
tind  ftinking  farnefTe  may  .bee  taken  away,  and  ir
brought  into  afixed  fubftance ,  is  thus?

Take


48


00  and  fixation
of  Sttlphir.


The  Mortifi-
cation of
Salts,


The  Mortlfi:
cation  of
Gcmmes.


The  Mottlfij
cation  of  the
ioad-ftone.


The  Mortifi-
cation of  Hin:
and  ftoncs.
1  he  Mollifi-
cation of  Miu
^fites.


Ojth  Nairn  ^fthvigsl         L  n\  V ;

Takecoiiimon  y^llOAt  Sitbluvr  finely  powdered,
Snddraw  fromitbydiftillation  Aquafortis  ^  that  is
very  (Inrp^and  this  doe  three  times,  then  the  SuU
phur  which  is  in  the  bottome  of  a  black  colour  dnlci^
fie  with  diftilled  \^atef5  until  the  water  come  from  it
f\veet,arld  if  (retains  r.o  more  the  ftink  of  Sulphur.
Then  reverberate  this  Sulphur  in  a  clofe  reverberato-
ry  as  you  doe  Antimony,  then  it  will  firft  be  white,
then  yellow,artd  kftly  as  red  as  Cinnabar.  And  when
it  is  fo,  then  thdu  maift  rejoice  .•  For  it  is  the  begin-
ning of  thy  richesiThiS  reverberated  Sulphur  tingeth
Silver  mcA  deeply  into  moft  excellent  Go!d,and  the
body  of MafHiito  tnoft  perfed  health*  This  rcvci-bc-
raced,  and  fij^ed  Sulphut  is  of  more  vtrtue  then  it  is
lawfulltofpeak.

The  mortification  of  all  Salts,  and  wl-iatfoevcr  is
faltifli,  is  the  taking  away,  and  diftilling  off  the
aquofity,  and  oylirtefleyand  of  the  fpiritot  them.  For
if  thefe  be  taken  ^way,they  are  afterwards  called  the
Jdi^ad  Eart1i,<5)r  Cdftu  Mcrtmm,

ThettKxtificfitionof  G-em^nes,  and  Coralls,  is
to  cakifte,  fubUn-je,  and  difTolve  them  into  a  liquor,
ias  Oyftalk  T  he  rnoi'tificatiofl  of  Pearls  is  to  cakme
rhc«i,and  'di'ffolvt  fhem  in  fliirp  Vineger  into  the
Foi'm  olMiUce.  -■;'^'

The  fnort:ifica'ti6rH)fthe  Loadflone,  is  to  anoint  it
withtheo'yk  of  Mercury,  or  to  ptit  it  into  Qukk-
^'K^^ir,  fe -afterward  it  will  not  draw  Iron  at  all
toit.'

Thb  mortification  of  PlimSj  and  Stones  ,  is  to

^  calcine  theoT.  V

The  irorti'fication  of  Marcafires ,  Cachyma's,

'  Talke,  Cobakus,  Zinrl,  Granuti^ZunitterjUnifmur,

and


L1B4V4  OftbeDiamreofthmgil  j^p

and  of  Antimony  is  their  Sublimation ,  /.  e,  that
they  bee  fublimed  with  Salt,  and  Vitriall,  then  their
life  which  is  a  Metallick  fpirit,  together  with  the  fpi-
ritof  Salt^afcends.  And  let  whatfocver  remains
in  the  bottome  of  the  Sublimatory  ,  bee  waflied  ,
that  the  Salt  may  bee  diHolved  Irom  it,  and  then
thou  haft  a  dead  Earth,  in  which  there  is  no  vertuc.

The  mortification  of  Arfenickes,  Auripigmenr,  The  Mortifi-
Operment,  Realgar,  &c.  is,  that  they  flow  wirh  Salt  "tion  ot  Real-
Nitre,  and  bee  turned  into  an  Oyl,or  Liquor  upon  a  ^^'^*
Marble,  and  be  fixed.
The  mortification  of  5xcremcnts,*is  the  coagulati-  *rhe  Mortifi-

On  of  Aire.  aem^ms'"''

The  mortification  of  Aromaticall  things  is  the  ta-  xhe^Mortifi-
Icing  away  of  their  good  fmell.  <^^"o"  of  Aro.

The  mortification  of  fweet  things,  is  to  fublimc  Sf  Swcet'"^**
and  diftill  them  with  corrofivc  things.  things.

The  mortification  of  AmberSjReiiineSjTurpentine,  Of  Refines.
Gummc,and  fuch  like,is  to  turn  them  into  Oyle,  and
Verniili.

The  mortification  of  Hearbs,  Roots,  and  fuch  like,  of  Hearbsand
is  todiftil  off  from  them  their  oyle,  and  water ,  and  ^^°"*
prcfTe  out  their  liquor  with  a  prellc,  and  alfo  to  make
their  Alcali.

The  mortification  of  Wood,  is  to  tiirne  it  into  Of  Wood;
Coalcs,and  Allies.-

The  mortification  of  Bones,  is  their  Calcination.    Of  Bones.

The  mortification  of  Flefli,  and  Blood,  is  the  ta-  of  Flefh.
king  away  of  the  fpirit  of  Salt.

The  mortification  of  Water  is  by  Fire,for  all  heat  Of  Water.
dries  up,  and  confumes  water.

The  mortification  of  Fire  is  by  Water,  for  all  Wa-  Of  Fire.
ter,  qucnchcth  Firc,and  takes  from  it  itspower,and
force.  Gg  So


•^ci  Of th't  nature  of thingr^  Lib^V.

So  now  you  are  fufEcicntly  inftruded  in  few
words  how  death  lyes  hid  in  all  naturall  things ,  and
how  they  may  be  mortified,  and  bee  brought  into
another  form^and  nature,and  what  vertues  ftow  from
them.  Whatfoevcr  fliould  have  been  faid  further,\ve
put  in  the  following  book,  of  the  Refurredtion  of  Na-
tural! things.


O  F


Lib.  VI.  51


s&   lilL  s^   tis  ate   tie  Jtt   ^   ^   Ste  i)&!  ^-  ib   $S(i   tgit   t&t   ib   s(to   ^


OF  THE

N  A  T  V  R  E

Of  Things.

THE  SIXTH  BOOJiT;

.  Of  the  Refum&ion  of  Naturall
things.

H  E  RefurrcifiionjancI  renewing  of  Natu-  The  raifo*^
rail  things,is  not  the  leaft,bat  a  profound,  a^ain  of""
and  great  fecret  in  the  Nature  of  things,  Jjj-^"^^^*'
and  rather  Divine,  and  Angelicall ,  then  ^  ^^^'
Humane,  and  Naturall.

I  defireto  bee  here  undcrftood  with  great  diftin-
<5lion,  and  no  otherwife  then  my  opinion  is ,  and
Nature  doth  daily,  and  manifeilly  (hew,  and  experi-
ence make  good^  left  I  Ihould  bee  expofcd  to  the  lies,

G  g  2-  and


52  OJ the  Nature  ofthifigsl  L ib^  VI^

and  flanders  of  Mountebankes,  my  enemies  (  which
doe  coaftruc  all  that  I  doe  in  the  worft  fenfe  )  as  it  I
would  ufurp  the  Divine  power,  and  attribute  this  to
Nature ,  which  fliee  was  never  able  to  performe-*
Wherefore  wee  muft  cautioully  confiderthat  there  is
Death  is  two<  a  twofold  Death,  i^/:(.  violent,  and  voluntary.  The
-°  -  one  can  raife  a  thing  again,  the  other  not.Wherefore,

doe  not  beleeve  thofc  Sophillers  that  fay,  that  a  thing
that  is  once  dead,  or  mortified,  can  never  bee  raifed
again,and  that  make  no  account  of  refufcitarion,and
rcftaurationofthingSywhlch  error  indeed  of  theirs  is
not  the  lea{l.    And  indeed  it  is  true,  that  whatfoevcr
dyeth,  or  perifheth  with  a  natural!  dcvith,   and  what
Nature  mortifies  by  reafon  of  her  predeftination,
God  alone  can  raife  again,  or  muft  of  necefliry  bee
done  by  his  command  :  fo  whatfoever  Nature  de-
What  things    ftroyes,  Man  cannot  reftore  again.    But  whatfoever
Snt  "^^''^  Mandeftroyes  heecan  reftore  again^and  being  rcfto-
'^     '  red  fpoil  a^ain ,  and  Man  hath  no  further  power  of

bimleik,  and  if  hee  fhould  attempt  to  doe  any  thing
more,  hee  would  arrogate  the  power  of  God  to  him-
felfe,  and  yet  hee  would  labour  in  vain,  and  be  con-
founded, unlcfle  God  did  afTift  him  ,  or  hee  had  fo
much  faith  as  to  remove  mountains  .•  Even  to  fuch  a
man,  this  is polTible, and  greater  things  then  this.
Becaufe  the  Scripture  faith,  and  CErift  himfelfc
fpake  it.  If  thouhaft  faithasa  grain  of  Muftard-
fced,  and  faift  unto  this  Mountaine,  Goeand
bee  removed  thither,  and  it  fhall  bee  removed,  and
all  things  beepolTibie  tothee,  and  nothing  impof-
fible.

But  to  return  to  ourpurpofe,  what  difference  then
there  is  betwixt  dying ,  and  being  mortified,  and

which.


LiB^^VI.  Ofthe  Nature  of  things;  51

which  of  thefe  may  be  raifed  again,  fo  thcfe  are  to
bee  iindcrftood.  Whatfoever  naturally  dies  hath
its  end  by  prcdeftination,  and  fo  the  will  and  ordi-
nation of  God  permits.  Yet  it  happens  that  this  is  JJf^^'^j'oJ'^^*^^^
alfo  done  by  divers  difeafeSjand  variouscafuakics,and  fed  againc.
this  can  never  be  raifed  again,neithcr  is  there  any  pre-
Icrvativeto  bee  ufed  againft  prcdeftination,  and  the
naturall  term  of  life.  But  that  which  is  mortified^
may  bee  both  raifed  again,  and  revived,  which  may
bee  proved  by  divers  arguments,which  «vceihall  fet
down  in  the  end  of  this  book.

Wherefore  there  is  a  great  difference  betwixt  dy-  it  is  one  thing^
ing,and  being  mortified,  neither  muftthey  bee  taken  ^^  i^y^^"«^  °-.
for  one,  and  the  fame  things,  under  the  fame  name.  J^fj^o^rtS;
For  in  the  very  example  they  are  far  different.     For.  ^
look  upon  a  man  that  dies  a  naturall,  and  predeflina-
ted  death,  what  further  jgood,  or  profit  is  therein
him.''  Nothing,  hee  is  only  caft  into  the  earth  to
worms.  For  hee  is  a  ftinking  carkaffe ,  and  due  co
the  earth*

But  the  fame  is'not  to  be  underflood  of  a  man  that
is  llain  with  a  fword,  ordicsbyfome  fuch  like  vio-
lent death.  For  his  whole  body  is  profitable,  and
good,  and  may  bee  prepared  into  a  mofl  pretious
Mummie.  For  although  the  fpirit  of  life  went  out  of
fuch  a  body,  yet  the  balfomc  in  which  lies  the  life
r;mains,which  indeed  doth  as  balfome  prefervc  other
mens  bodies.

So  you  may  fee  in  Metalls,  when  a  Metall  is  about
todie,it  begins  to  bee  overcome  with  rufl,  and  as
much  as  is  thus  overcome,  is  dead:  and  when  all  the
Metall  is  devoured  with  rufl,  it  is  all  dcad,and  fuch  a
riift  can  never  bcQ  reduced  into  true  Metall  againe,

0^$  but


t±  OftbelslatHireoftbingf.  LrB.VI.

but  it  becomes  only  drolTe,  and  not  a  Metall.  For  it
it  is  dead ,  and  death  is  in  it ,  neither  hath  it  any
moL-e  ballbme  of  life ,  but  is  quite  dcftroycd  in  it
felfe.
The'differeacc     -^q^jj  ^[^^  Q^^i^  of  Mctalls,  and  their  afhes  arc  two

oIxoVmc-  things  :  And  chece  is  a  great  difference  betwixt  thefc
tails,  and  thcii  two,for  onc  may  be  revived,  and  brought  back  again
aihes.  jj^^Q  ^  Metall,  but  the  other  not  .•  the  one  is  volatile,

the  other  fixed  ,  the  one  died ,  the  other  morti-
fied.
What  the  A-      The  Aflies  is  volatile,  and  cannot  be  brought  back
fiKs  of  Mecalls  j^to  a  Metall,  Only  into  glafTe ,  and  droflc  :  but  the
**'  Calx  of  Metals  is  fixed ,  and  may  be  be  brought  back

into  its  own  Metall.
What  the  But  to  undciftaud  the  difference ,  and  the  caufc^

Calx  of  M«-   i^i^ovv,  that  in  the  Allies  there  is  IcfTe  fatnefle ,  and
more  drynefle  then  in  the  Calx,  which  indeed  makes
it  fluxil :  but  the  Calx  is  farter,  and  moifter ,  then
the  Allies,  and  doth  ftill  retain  its  refine,and  fluxible- .
ncfs,  and  efpecialiy  the  Salt,  nvhich  naturally  is  fluxil,
and  makes  Metalls  flow,  and  reduceth  them.  Hence
now  it  follows,  that  the  Salt  muit  bee  extraded  out
of  the  Alhes  of  Metals,that  they  may  not  be  brought
back  into  a  Metal,then  they  are  per tcdJy  volatile^and
this  difference,  and  this  claufe  is  chiefly  to  bee  taken
notice  of,  for  much  depends  upon  it.
The  crrours  of     for  amongft  Mountcbankes  tiiis  is  no  finall  error,
^^nTrnSf ''  who  in  flcad  of  Potablc  Gold  ,  the  QuintcfTence  of
Gold.  ^         Gold3TindureofGold,&c.  have  given  to  men  an
impure  Calx  of  Gold,not  conlideringthc  difference,
2nd  evill  that  follows  upon  it.    For  there  are  two  re-
markable, and  necelTary  things  to  be  taken  notice  of
here,  v/Z.

^  Firft,


L I  B^VI.  Of  the  nature  of  things^  5  5

Firltj  that  Gold  calcined,  or  powdered,  if  it  be  gi-
ven to  Men,  is  gathered  into  one  heap  in  the  tlo-
mach,  or  goeth  forth  again  with  the  diing,and  fo  it  is
taken  in  vain,  without  doing  any  good:  or  that  which
is  reduced  by  the  great  inward  heat  in  mans  body,
it  gilds  over,  and  makes  hard  in  a  cruft,  both  the
bowells,  and  ftomach,  by  rcafon  of  which  the  con-
co(^ion  of  the  ftomach  is  hindred,  whence  many,  and
various  fickneffes  follow ,  and  at  length  death  it
felfe.

As  you  have  heard  of  Gold,  fo  alfo  naufl:  it  bee  When  Mcul-
underftood  of  all  the  other  Metalls ,  'vi\.  that  you  l^l^^  bc'ukca
take  not  any  MtidWidi  Arcanum ,  or  Medicine  into  inwardly.
your  body,  unlefle  it  bee  firft  made  volatikjanditbe
reduced  into  noMetall.

Wherefore  the  firft  degree ,  and  beginning  to  How  to  make
prepare  Potable  Gold  is  this  :fo  may  fuch  a  Volatile  jjfff^'^j^ljr
bee  afterwards  diflblved  in  fpirit  of  Wine,that  both  ducible.
may  afcend  together,  bee  made  volatil,  infepa-able.
And  as  you  prepare  Gold,  fo  may  you  alfo  prepare
potable  D  "i  cf  ¥  T?  and  5 .

But  to  return  to  our  purpofe,  let  us  prove  by  exam-  The  raifing  a-
ples,  and  fufficientreafons,  that  things  mortified  arc  ^^*^'J^°Jj'^'"S'
not  dead,  and  forced  to  abide  in  death,  but  may  bee  Ihrwhdpes  oi
reduced,  raifed  again,  and  revived,  and  this  truly  by » Lyon,
man,  and  according  to  the  courfe  of  Nature.  Yoii^
fee  Lions  how  all  of  them  are  brought  forth  dead,
and  firft  of  all  are  made  alive  by  the  horrible  roa-
ring of  their  Parents,  as  one  that  is  afleep  is  raifed
with  a  noife,  fo  alfo  arc  Lions  raifed ,  not  that  they  How  LyoAs
arc  thus  afleep.  ( for  they  which  fleep  a  naturall  fleep  J^JJJ^f^  --*^*
muft  of  necelfity  rife  again,  which  the  Lions  of
thcmfclves  doc  nott )  For  if  they  were  not  raifed

by


56  Of  the  nature  ofthingsl         LiB.VI  J

by  this  roaring,  they  would  remain  dead ,  and  life
would  never  bee  perceived  in  them.  Whcereforcit
is  apparent,  that  by  this  roaring  they  receive  their
life.
The  reviving      So  alfo  you  fee  in  all  Animalls  which  are  not  ingen-
of desd  Flicst  ^^^^^^  but  proceed  from  putrefadion,  as  Flies,which
if  they  bee  drowned  in  water,  that  no  life  at  all  is
perceived  in  thcm,and  if  they  were  fo  lefr,they  would
continue  dead ,  and  never  return  to  life  of  them-
felves  any  more.  But  it  you  caft  fait  upon  them^and
put  them  in  the  warme  Sunne  ,  or  behind  a  warme
furnace,    they  will  recover  their  former  life,  and
this  truly  is  a  railing  of  them  up  againe.    For   if
this  were  not  done,  they  would  continue  dead  for
ever.
The  ecnerati-     So  alfo  you  fee  in  a  Serpentiif  hee  be  cut  into  pie-
on  of  many     ^^5^  and  the fc  piecesput  into  a  gourd  glaffe,  and
-"^*"°  °"^' bee  putrefied  in  Horfe-dung,   the  whole  Serpent
will  become  living  againe  in  the  glaffe,     in  the
form  either  of  Worms,  or  fpawn  of  Fifhes.  And  if
fhofe  Wormes  bee  in  a  fitting  manner  brought  out
of  putrcfa(ftion,and  nouriflied,  many  hundred  Ser-
pents will  be  bred  out  of  one  berpent,whereof  every
one  will  be  as  big  as  the  firfl-  which  is  done  only  by
putrefadiorh.    And  as  it  is  faid  of  the  Serpent,  fo
alfo  many  other  Animalls  maybe  raifed,and  reftored
again.
|/(jr«f/,an(^        According  to  this  proccffe  Hermes  ,  and  Virgil
^onfl'o  raf "'  ^^^e  attempted  fby  the  affiftance  of  Necromancy )to
thcmfelvcs  af-  rencw  ,  and  raife  rhemfelves  after  death,  and  to  bee
tcr  Death,      ^or  n  again  as  infants,  but  it  fuccecded  not  according
to  their  purpofe.

But


L I  B^VI.  Of  the  Nature  of  things:  ^J

But  to  omit  examples,  and  fall  upon  the  Praxis  of  '^^.^  ^fj^J^'
Rcfurredion, and  Reftauration, it  is  ncccfTary ,  and  JSs  uuvofofd'
mod  convenient  to  begin  with  Mctalls ,  forafmuch
as  Metalline  bodies  do  oftentimes  refemble  Mens
bodies.

Wee  muft   know   therefore,  that   the  Refur-  Tjie  rediidng
re(aion5and  Reftauration  of  Metalls  is  twofold. The  t^  (^Sciii* '
one  which  doth  reduce  calcined  Mcralls  into  their  ver,
fiift  Metallickbody  ••  the  other  which  doth  reduce
Metalls  into  their  firft  matter ,  i.e.  into  Quickfil-
ver.

The  procelTe  of  the  latter  is  this :  Calcine  a  Metall
with  common  Quickfilver ,  put  this  Calx ,  and  as
much  Quickfilver  into  a  Sublimatory,  and  let  them
ftand  fo  long  till  both  be  coagulated  into  an  Amal-
gama-,  then  fublime  the  Mercury  from  the  Calx,then
grind  it  again  with  the  Mctallick  Calx,and  fublime  it
as  beforCjthis  do  fo  often,  till  the  Metallick  Calx  fhal
over  a  candle  melt  like  wax,  or  ice,  and  then  it  is  well
done. Put  this  Metall  in  digeftion  for  a  timc,and  it  wil
all  be  turned  into  Quickfilver,/.  f  .into  its  firft  matter,
which  Mercury  of  Metalls  is  indeed  called  the  Mer-
cury of  Philofophers,  which  many  Alchymills  have
fought  afteir ,  but  few  have  found.  Now  after
this  manner  may  Quickfilver  bee  prepared  out  of
all  Met  alls, ^'/:{;   9  aurt^  i)  2  cf  ¥  b.

Now  theraifingagnin,  orrefloring  of  coagulated  The  rcduaioh
Mercury  is  done  by  diftillation  in  a  retort  :  for  °^/ u^^l'^l^^n'
Qoicklilver  alone  afcends  mto  cold  water,  the  Afiies  purging  oti^,
of  '^  2  or  Sulphur  being  left  behind.

Now  the  raifing  again,  or  reftauration  of  Mercury
fublimedjis  done  in  leething  hotwater;but  it  muft  firft
be  ground  very  fmaiyo  the  hot  water  wil  feperates  it

H  h  from


58  Of  the  Kaiure  of  things^  L  i  b^  Vl,

from  it  the  fpirit  of  Salt,andVitrialI,  which  it  car-
ries up  wi'h.  itjthe  quickfilver  running  in  the  bottome
of  the  water.  Now  if  this  Quickfilver  fhall  be  again
fublimed  with  Salt,andVitriall, and  revived  againe
in  Hot  water ,  and  this  done  fcvcn ,  or  eight
times ,  it  can  never  bee  better  purged ,  and  re-
newed.

.    And  this  may  bee  kept  for  a  great  fecret  In  Alchy-
mie^and  Phylick,  and  be   much  rejoiced  in.    For
by  this  means  all  the  impurity,  biackneflc ,  and  poi-
fonoufnelTej  is  taken  away.
The  leduaion      Mcrcury  calcined  can  never  bee  reftored  againe
of  calcined  and  without  fublimation-,  for  unlefTe  it  be  fublimed  after
McmiryT'^     calcination^itwiUnever'bce  revived,  wherefore  thou
"^  ihalt  fitft  fublime  it,  and  then  reduce  it  as  other  Sub-

limate.

The  rcfufcitation  of  Azure  CAnnzhOiX^Aurnm  viu,
alfo  of  Prccipitate,that  they  may  bee  reduced  into
Quickfilver  is  thus:

Take  either  of  thefe,  grind  it  fmall  upon  a  marble,
make  it  up  into  a  paft  with  the  white  of  anegge ,  and
fopcthcn  make  pills  of  the  bignefs  of  Filbeards,
which  put  into  a  ftrong  earthen  gourd  ,  upon  the
mouth  of  it  put  a  plate  of  Iron,with  many  littlt  holes
in  it,  and  lute  it  on^and  diftill  it  per  defcei^fum  with
a  ffrong  fire ,  fo  that  it  may  fall  into  cold  wa-
ter^and  thou  flialt  have  the  Quickfilver  again.
The  renewing  Kow  the  refufcitation^^^and  refioring  of  Wood  is
tZTu  '^'''liard,  and  difficult,  yet  poffible  to  Nature,  but
without  much  skilfulnefs ,  and  induftry  it  can  ne-
ver bee  done  :  But  to  revive  it ,  the  procellc  is
this:.

Take


L I B4  VI.  Of  the  Nature  of  things^  ij^

Take  Wood  which  muft  firft  bcc  a  Code,  then
Aihes,  which  put  into  a  gourd  together  with  the  Re-
fine, Liq'jor,  and  Oylc  of  that  tree  ,  of  each  a  like
weight,  mingle  them ,  and  melt  them  with  a  foft
hear,  and  there  will  bee  a  mucilaginous  matter,  and
fo  thou  haft  the  three  Principl<*^i  (!^  Which  all  things
are  produced,  and  generated,  i//:(.  flegm,  fatncfle,
and  Afhes.

TheFiegmis  Mercury,  the  Fat  is  Sulphur,  the  Theflegmeof
Aihes  is  Salt.     For  whatfoever   fumes,  and  e- ^^)^^°°'^  ^^  "*
vaporates  in   the    Fire  is  Mercury  :     wnatfoevcc  fat  hSphur,
flames ,  and  is  burnt  is  Sulphur,  and  all  Aihcs  is  ^^.^  ^^^^  "s
Salt.  .     ^  ^^^•

Nowfceingthouhaftthefe  three  Principles  toge-
ther, put  them  in  Horfe-dung,  and  putreiie  them  for
a  time.  If  afterward  that  matter  bee  put  in,  and  buri-
ed in  fat  ground,thou  ihalt  fee  it  live  again,and  a  little
tree  fpring  from  thence,  which  truly  in  vertue  is  farrc
more  excellent  then  the  former.  This  Tree  or  Wood
is,  and  is  called  Regenerated  Wood  ,  renewed,  and
reftored,  which  from  the  beginning  was  Wood,  but
mortified,deftroyed,  and  brought  into  coalcs,afhes*
and  almoft  to  nothing,  and  yet  out  of  that  nothing  is
made,  and  renewed.    This  truly  in  the  light  of  Na-
ture is  a  great  myftery,  fi:^  that  a  thing,  which  had
utterly  lofi:  its  form,  and  was  reduced  to  nothing,
fliould  recover  its  form ,   and  of  nothing  bcc  made
fomething,  which  afterward  becomes  much  more
excellent  in  vertue,    and  efficacy  then   it  was  at
firft.  •  '

But  to  fpeake  generally  of  the  Refurredion  ,  and  Aigencvali  rule
Reftauration  of  Naturall  things,you  muft  know,that  J^f  "^^  ^^"1  °^
the  chicfeft  foundaticHi  here,is,that  that  bee  rcftored '  ^"^^  '^*^"'^-

Hh  2  10


^o  Ofthe  Nature  of  things^  LibAL'

to  every  thing,and  made  to'agree  with  it,  which  was
.  taken  from  it  in  mortification,  and  fcparatcd  from  it,
which  is  hard  to  bee  here  fpecifically  explained.
Wherefore  wee  (hall  conclude  this  book ,  and  (hall
fpeak  of  thefe  things  more  at  large  in  the  next  book.
Concerning  the  tranfmutations  of  natural!  things.


OF


LiB.VIl.


6i


OF  THE


N  A  T  V  R  E

Of  Things.
THE  SEVENTH  BOOK^


Of  the  Trdnfmntation  of  Naturall
things.

V  wee  write  of  the  Tranfmutation  of  all
Naturall  things,  it  is  fit,and  nccefTary  that
in  the  firft  place  wee  fhew  what  Tranfmu-
tation  is.  Secondly,  what  bee  the  degrees
to  it.  Thirdly,  by  what  Medium's,  and  how  it  is
done.

^  Tranfmutation  therefore  fs,  when  a  thing  lofeth  ^ytatiln^sf'
its  form,  and  is  fo  altered,  that  i  t  is  altogether  unlike
toitsforraerfub^anc€,andform,  but:  alTumcs  ano-,

Hh3  thct


Si  Of  the  Nature  ftftbtftgsl         Lib.  VII.

thcr  form,  another  efTcnce,  another  colour,  another
vertuCj  another  nature,  or  property,  as  if  a  Mctaii  bee
madeglaffejorftonc  .-ifaftonebeemadeacoale  :  if
wood  be  made  a  coal;clay  be  made  a  ftone,or  a  brick:
a  skin  bee  madegleW  ;  c!oth  bee  made  paper,  and
manyfuchJik-c  things.  All  thefe  arc  Tranfmutati-
ons  of  Naturall things.
There  arc  After  thisjit  IS  Very  nectfTary  alfo  to  know  the  de-

dcg'^fs'of''^'^  grees  to  Tranfmutatlon,  and  how  many  they  be.  And
tranfmutati-  thcy  are  no  Riore  then  feven.-  For  although  many
?^'  doe  reckon  more,  yet  there  are  no  more  but  feven,

which  are  princtpalljand  the  reft  may  bee  reckoned
betwixt  the  degrees,  being  comprehended  under
thofe  fevcn :  And  they  arc  thefe.

Calcination ,  Sublimation  ,  Solution ,
^utnfaSiion ,  Dijlillation ,  Coagulation ,
TinBure*

If  any  one  will  climbethat  Ladder,  he  fliall  come
intoa  moft  wonderfull  place,  that  hee  iliall  fee,  and
have  experience  of  many  fccrets  in  the  Tranfmutation
of  Naturall  things.

The  firft  degree  therete«  is  Calcination ,  under
which  alfo  are  comprehended  Reverberation,  and
What  Calci,  Omcntation.  For  betwixt  tliefc  there  is  but  little
itskmVarcr  difference  as  for  matter  of  Calciriation :  Wherefore
it  is  here  the  chicfeft  degree.  For  by  Reverberation;
and  Cc4ticnt^ibii,  many  corporcall  things  are  calci-
ned, and  brougk  into  Alftes^and  efpccially  Metalls,
Now  what  is  calcined  is  not  any  further  reverberated^
Or  cemented.

By  Calcination  tlicrefore  all  Metalls ,  MincrallSi
Stottes,  Glafle,  &;c.  and  all  corporeal!  things  arc

made


Lib.  VII.  0/ the  Nature  of  thingr.  tfj

made  a  Coal,  and  Afhes5and  this  is  done  by  a  naked
ftrong  Fire  with  blowing ,  by  which  all  tenacious,
foft,  and  fat  earth  is  hardened  into  a  ftone,  Alfo  all
ftones  arc  brought  into  a  Calx^as  wee  fee  in  a  Potters
furnace  of  lime,  and  brickcs.

Sublimation  is  the  fccond  degree,  and  one  of  the
moft  principall  for  the  Tranfmutation  of  many  Na-  Il^a^on^isfJd
turall  things  .-under  which  is  contained  Exaltation^  its  kinds,
Elevation,  and  Fixation-,  and  it  is  not  much  unlike
Diltillation.  For  as  in  Diftillation  the  water  afcends
from  all  flegmatick,  and  watery  things ;  and  is  fepa-
rated  from  its  body^  fo  in  Sublimation,  that  which
is  fpirituall  is  raifed  from  what  is  corporeall ,  and  is
fubtilized,  volatile  from  fixed,and  that  in  dry  things,
as  are  all  Mineralls^and  the  pure  is  fcparated  from  the
impure.

Befides  Sublimation,  many  good  vertues ,  and
wondcrfuU  things  are  found  out  in  Minerails ,  and
many  thingsare  made  fixed,  and  become  conft 5 nt,
fb  as  to  abide  in  the  Fire,  and  that  in  this  manner^

Let  that  which  is  fublimed  be  ground,  and  mixed
with  its  feces,  and  bee  againe  fublimed  as  before,
which  mufl  bee  done  folong,  till  it  will  no  longer
liiblime,but  all  will  remaine  together  in  the  bottom,
and  bee  fixed.

So  there  will  bee  afterward  a  ftone,  and  oylc  when
and  as  oft  as  thoupleaieft,i//^.  if  thou  puttcft  it  a-
into  a  cold  place,    or  in  the  aire  in  a    Glafs.
For  there  it  will  prefently   bee    difTolved    into  J^*'^^^^^^'?.^
an  Oyle.     And  if  thou  putted  it  againe  into  the  into  a  ftone]  ,
fire,  it  will   againe  bee  coagulated  into  a  Stone
of  wonderfull ,  and  great  vertue.       Keep  this  as
a  great  (tctct  >   and  myftery  of  Nature ,   neither

difcovcx:


<►  4  Of  the  Nature  of  tmngf»  L  r  b.  vil ,

difcover  it  to  Sophifters.    Morc^over,  as  in  Sub-
limation many  Cot  roiivc  things  are  made  fwcct  in
the  conjun«5tion  of  two  matters,  (o  on  the  contrary,
many  fweet  things  are  made  Corrofivc  ••  many  fwcet
vhin?s  are  made  fowre,  harfli,  or  bitter-,  and  on   the
confrary,  many  bitter  things  as  fweet  as  Sugar.
Rules  concer-     Y{txQ,  alfo  wec  muft  take  notice,  that  every  Metal
monUck!  ^"  which  is  brought  into  Sublimation  by  Salt  Armo-
niack,  may  afterward  in  the  cold,  or  in  the  aire  bee
brought  into  an  oyle,  and  againe  bee  coagulated
into  a  ftone  in  the  Fire,  which  indeed  is  one  of
the  chiefeft,  and  greateft  Tranfmutations  inallna-
turall    things,  vi"^,  to  tranfmute  Mctall  into  a
Stone.
Whac  Solution     jj^^  ^j^lj.^  degree  is  Solution,  under  which  are  to

kinds.  to  bee  underftood  DifTolution,    and  Refolution,

and  this  degree  doth  moft  commonly  follow
Sublimation,  and  Diflillation,  vi\,  that  the
matter  be  refolvcd  which  remain^sin  the  bottomc.
How  Solution  is  twofold  :  the  one  of  Cold,
the  other  of  Heat 5  the  one  without  Fire,  the
other  in  Fire.

A  cold  diflblution  diflblves  all  Salts,  all  Corrofive
things,&  all  calcined  things*  What  foever  is  of  a  Salt,
and  Corrofive  quality,  is  by  it  dilTolved  into  Oyle
Liquor,  or  Water.  And  this  is  in  a  moiO,  cold  cel-
lar, or  elfe  in  the  Aire  on  a  marble,  or  in  a  glade.
For  whatfoever  is  diffolved  in  the  cold,  contains  an
Airy  fpirit  of  Salt ,  which  oftentimes  it  gets  ,  and
aflumes  in  Sublimation,  or  Diftillatioa  And  whatfo-
ever is  difTolved  in  the  cold,  or  in  the  Aire,m:y  again
by  the  heat  of  the  Fire  bee  coagulated  into  powder,
or  aftone.

But


Li  B^  ViTt  Of  the  Nature  of  things^  65

But  a  hot  Solution  diflblves  all  fat,  and  fulphu-  ^^'j^sJl;!"^^'  *
reous  things.     And  what  foe  vcr  the  heat  of  the  Fire  dlirolv«r*
diflblves ,   the  fame  doth  coldncfle  congeal  into  a
Maflb.

And  whatfoever  heat"coagulates,is  again  difTolvcd  ttJ°.f  ^^^hIw
by  cold,  or  in  the  Aire.  Here  alfo  wc  muft  know  and  Coil  "
that  whatfoever  Aire,  or  the  Cellar  doth  refolve  ^
is  of  a  very  great  drynefTe,  and  hath  a  fccret  cor-
rofivc  Fire  hid  in  it  .*  fo  whatfoever  is  diffolved
in  Fire,  or  in  the  heat  thereof,  hath  a  fwectifli
frigidity  out  of  the  Fire.  Thus,  and  no  othenvife  is
Solution  to  be  undcrftood.

Putrefaflion  is  the  fourth  degree,  under  which  is  ^'^^J^«^^^^^^^^
comprehended  Digeflion,  and  Circulation.        '       its  kind. "'    '

Now  then  Putrefaction  is  one  of  the  principal!
degrees,  which  indeed  might  defervedly  have  been
the  firft  of  all,  but  that  it  would  be  againft  the  true
order,  and  myftery,  which  is  here  hid,  and  known
to  few :  For  thofe  degrees  niuft ,  as  hath  been  al-
ready faid,fo  follow  one  the  othcr,as  links  in  a  chain,
or  flcps  in  a  ladder.

For  if  one  of  the  linkcs  fbould  bee  taken  ^'^^Y^'l^^^f^^'^f}
the  chain  is  difcontinued,  and  broken,  and  the  pri-  greesistobe
foners  would  bee  at  liberty,  and  runne  away.    So  o^^ei-ved  in
in  a  ladder ,  if  one  flep  bee  taken  away  in  the  ^^'^^^ """   '
middle,  and  bee  put  in  the  upper ,  or  lower  part,
the  ladder  would  be  broken,  and  many  would  fall
down  headlong  by  it  with  the  hazard  of  their  bo-
dies, and  lives.

So  you  mufl  underftand  the  matter  here,that  thofc
degrees  follow  one  the  other  in  a  juft  order,  or  el(e
the  whole  work  ofourmyllery  would  bemar'd,  and
our  labour,and  pains  would  bcc  in  vain ,  and  fruit-
kflc.  I  i  Now


i6

"The  force  of
futrefa^on.


VVhatDiftiUa-
tion  isjand  its
kinds  arc*


Cohobation.

Fixation  by
Deftillation,


Of  the  Nature  of  things^         L  ib^VIT.

Now  putrefa(flion  is  of  fuch  efficacy ,  that  it  a-
bolillieth  the  old  Nature,  and  brings  in  a  new  one.
All  living  things  are  killed  in  it,  all  dead  things
putrefied  in  it ,  and  all  dead  things  recover  life
in  it.

Putrefaction  takes  from  all  Corrofive  fpirits,  the
fharpneffe  of  of  the  Salt,  and  makes  them  mild,and
fweet,  changeth  the  colours,  and  fcparates  the  pure
from  the  impure,  it  places  the  pure  above ,  and  the
impure  beneath.

DiftiUationis  the  firft  degree  to  the  Tranfmutati-
on  of  all  naturall  things.  Under  it  arc  underftood
Afcenfion,  Lavation,  and  Fixation.

By  Diftillationall  Waters,  Liquors,  and  Oyles
are  iubtilized  out  of  all  fat  things  Oyle  is  extradtcd,
out  ot  all  Liquors ,  Water ,  and  out  of  all  Fleg-
itiaticke  things  Water ,  and  Oyle  are  fepara-
ted,

Bcfides  there  are  many  things  in  Diftillation
fixed  by  Cohobation,  and  efpccially  if  the  things
to  bee  fixed  conraine  in  them  Water,  as  Vi-
triall  doth,  which  if  it  bee  fixed  is  called  Coke-
thar.

Allum,  if  it  bee  fixed  with  its  proper  Water,  i$
called  the  Sugar  of  Allum,  which  alfo  is  reiblved
into  a  Liquor,which  Liquor  if  it  bee  putrefied  a
moneth,  produceth  a  Water  of  the  fweetncfle  of
Sugar,  which  is  of  great  vctiie,  and  an  ex-
cellent fecrct  in  Phyficke,  to  extin^uifh  any
Metalline  heate  in  Man,  as  wee  have  wrore
more  at  large  in  our  Booke  of  Metalline  Difea-
fcs.


And


LlB^Vn.  Of  the  Nature  fif  tbiffgi;     '  fj

And  as  you  have  heard  of  Vitriall,and  All  urn,  fo
alfo  .Salt  nitre,  and  other  Watery  Mineralls  may
bee  fixed  by  Cohobation.

Now  Cohobation  is,that  the  dead  head  be  often-  What  Cohos
times  imbibed  with  its  own  wiccr,  and  that  again  ^^"°" '*•
bee  drawn  off  by  Diftiliation.

Moreover,  in  Diftiliation  many  bitter,  har/li,  and  The  force  of
(harp  things  become  as  fwect  as  Honey,  Sugar,  or  ^i^^'^^^^onia
Manna.,    and  on  the  contrary,  mimyfweet  things,  xSmt^.
as  Sugar,  Honey,  or  Manna,  may   bee  made  as
harlh  as  Oyle  of  Vitriall,  or  Vineger,  or  as  bit-
ter  as  Gall,  or  Gentian,  as  Eager,   as  a  Corro-
five.

Many  Excrementitious  things  iofc  their  great
{link  in  Diftiliation,  which  indeed  goeth  forth  ia
the  water.

Many  Aromaticall  things  lofe  their  good  fa-
vour.

And  as  Sublimation  alters  things  in  their
Quality ,  and  Nature ,  fo  alfo  uoth  Diftilia-
tion.

Coagulation  is  the  fixt  degree :  Now  there  is  a  ^Vfaat  Coagu;
twofo!d^Coagnlation,theone  by  Cold,  the  other  |^f^°^J5'^"'^  ■
by  Heat,  /'  e,  one  of  the   Aire,   the  other  of  the
Fire  :  and  each  of  thefc  again  is  twofold  ,  fo  that
there  are  foure  forts  of  Coagulations,  two  of  Cold,
and  two  of  Fire.

The  Coagulations  of  Fire  are  fixed,  the  other  of
Cold  arc  not.

The  one  is  done  only  by  common  Aire,  or  with-
out Fire.  The  other  by  the  fuperiour  Firmament
of  Winter  ftarres,  all  which  coagulate  Waters  into
fnow,  and  ice.

I  i2  But


6$  Of  the  Nature  of  things^         L  i  b^  VII;

But  the  Coagulation  of  Fire,  which  alone  is  here
to  bee  taken  notice  of,  is  madcbyanArtificiaU,an<i
Graduall  Fire  of  the  Alchymifts,  and  it  is  fixedjand
permanent.  For  whatfoever  fuch  a  Fire  doth  coa-
gulare,  the  fame  abides  fo.

The  other  Coagulation  is  done  by  the  ^tnean^,
and  Minerall  Fire  in  in  Mountains,  which  indeed  the
Archeiusof  the  Earth  governs,  and  graduates  dof
unlike  to  the  Alchymifts,  and  whatfoever  is  coa-
gulated by  fucha  Fire,  isalfo  fixed,  and  conftant;
as  you  fee  in  Mineralls,  and  Metalls,  which  indeed'
at  the  beginning  are  a  mucilaginous  matter,  and  arc
coagulated  into  Metalls,  Stones,  Flints,  Salts ,  and
other  bodies,  by  the  i^tncan  fire  in  Mountaines,
through  the  Archeius  of  Earth ,  and  operator  of
Nature.
Whatthingt         ^ifo  ^yec  muft  know  that  Fire  can  coagulate  no
cSa^gui^ed.    water,  or  moifturc,  but  only  the  Liquors^and  Juices
of  all  Naturall  things.

Befides  alfo  there  can  no  flegm  bee  coagulated,
unlefle  in  the  beginning  it  was  a  corporeall  matter,
into  which  by  the  induftry  of  a  skilfuil  Alchymift  it
may  return.

So  alfo  any  mucilaginous,  matter,  or  fpermaticke
flimynefle  may  by  the  heat  of  Fire  be  coagulated  into
a  body  and  corporeall  matter,but  never  bee  refolved
into  water  again.

And' as  you  have  heard  of  Coagulation,  fo  alfo
know  concerning  Solution,  vi\,  that  no  corporeall
matter  can  bee  diflblved  into  Water ,  unlefTe  at  the
beginning  it  was  water  :  and  fo  it  is  in  all  Mine-;

Tin^urc


LibIvIL         Oftbe  Nature  of  thingfl  ^g

Tin<5lur€is  thcfevcnth,  and  laft  degree,  which  What  Tine-,
concludes  the  whole  worke  of  our  rayftery  for  JJlJ^y ^^  *"<^  ^^
Tranfmutation  ,  making  all  impcrfed  things  per-
fc6l,   and  tranfmiiting  them  into  a  moft  excellent
eflbnce ,  and  into  a  moft  perfect  foundncffe ,  and
alters  them  iuto  another  colour.

TinBure  there  fori  ii^a  mafl  excellent  matter,r9here'
wthaH  Mineral  I ,  md  Humane  bodies  are  tinged^    *
And  Art  changed  into  a  better ,  and  more  noble  ef-  •
fence  y  and  into  the  higheft  ferfeiiion^   and  fu-
r/ty,

For  Tin6^ure  colours  all  things  according  to  its
own  nature,  and  colour.  '  '-^^

Now  there  arc  many    TinAures,  and  not  Only  ah  things  that
for  Metalline  ,  but  Humane  bodies,  bccaufe  every  sie  to  be  tin- ^
thing  which  penetrates  another  matter,    or  tin-|^4j^"^—  --^
getlfit  with  another  colour,  orelTence,  fo-thatit
bee  no  more  like  the  former,  may  bee  called  a
Tindurc.

Wherefore  there  are  many  ,  and  various  forts  of
Tini^ures,  i^/^.  of  Metalk,  Mineralls,  Mens  bodies.
Waters,  Liquors,  Oyls, Salts,  all  fat  things,  and
indeed  of  all  things  which  may  bee  brought  to  flux,
out  of  the  FirCjOr  in  the  Fire.

For  if  a  Tmcture  muft  tinge,  it  is  necelfary  that  the
body,  or  matter  which  is  tobeetinged,bee  opened,
and  continue  in  flux,  and  unlefs  this  Ihould  bee  fo,
the  Tincture  could  not  operate.  But  it  would  bcc,as
if  any  one  fliould  caft  faffron,or  any  colour  upon  co-
agulated Water,  or  Ice  .•  for  fo  it  would  not  fo
fuddenly  tinge  the  Ice  with  its  colour ,  as  if  it  were
caft  into  other  water.  And  although  it  fhould  tinge,
yet  it  would  at  the  fame  time  refolvc  the  Ice  into


yo  Of  the  Nature  of  thifigsl         Lib.  Vll.

Water.  Wherefore  thofc  Metallsthat  wee  would
tinge,  muft  firft  bee  melted  in  the  Fire,  and  bee  freed
from  Coagulation.

And  here  w.^e  mnft  know,  that  by  how  much  the
flonrger  fire  is  requifite  for  their  melting,fo  much  the
fooner  the  Tm(^Lire  runs  through  them,as  Leaven
penetrates,  and  infe(fts  the  whole  mafic  with  fowre-
•  nefs;  and  by  how  much  better  the  mafle  is  covered
and  kept  warm.  To  much  the  better  is  it  fermented,
and  makes  the  better  bread:  for  ferment  is  the  Tin-

Tece  are  of  a  ^^"^^  ^^  Dowe,  and  Bread.  *

more  fixtnar       Wce  muft  alfo  notc,  that  all  feces  arc  of  a  more
ture  then  their  fixed  fubftancc  then  the  liquor  of  ft  is,  alfo  of  a  ihar-
H^^'         per,  and  more  penetrating  nature :  as  you  fee  in  tfie
ipirit  of  Wine  which  is  made  of  the  feces  of  Wine ,
>  and  oi  AquA  vita^    which  is  diftilled  out  of  the

i  grounds  of  Beer,  and  burns  likefpirit  of  Wine,  and

is  inflamed  as  Sulphur.
Theprcparati-     Alfoifof  the  tecesof  Vincger  another  Vincger
of  dUtllS'"''  J^e  diftilled,  as  commonly  fpirft  ot  Wine  is  diftilled,
Vinegcr.        thctc  Will  bcc  thereby  made  a  Vineger  of  fo  fiery,
and  fliarp  a  nature ,   that  it  confumes    all    Me-
talls ,  Stones ,  and  other  things ,    as  AquA  fgr^
tis.
How  the  Tin-    Morcovct,  itis  necefTary,  that  Tindures  be  of  a
wUsmuftbc''^^^    fluxil,  and  incombuftible  nature,  fo  that
made.  if  a  little  ot  a  plate  of  any  Mctall  red  hot  bee

caft  into  them,  they  ^^ill  prefently  flow  like  wax  ^
without  any  manner  of  fume  at  all,  and  they  pene-
trate the  Metalls,  as  oylc  doth  paper  ,    or  water  a
fponge,  and  tinge  all  Metalls  into  white,   and  red,  .
that  is,into  Silver  or  Gold.

Now


L I B.  Vir.  of  the  Nature  ofthingf.  71

Nowthefe  aretheTin(ftures  ofMctalls,  which  it
is  neccfsary  muft  bee  turned  into  an  AIcool,  by
the  fiift  degree  of  Calcination,  then  by  the  fecond
degree  of  Sublimation,  muft  get  an  eafy,  and
light  flux.  And  laftly,  by "  the  degree  ot  Putre-
fadion ,  and  Diftillation  are  made  a  fixt ,  and
incombuftible  Tin<5turc ,  and  of  an  unchangeable
colour.

Now  the  Tinciures  of  Mens  bodies  are,that  they  The  Tindures
bee  tinged  into  the  higheft  perfedion  of  health ,  o^  ^«"«
and  all  Difeafes  bee  expelled  from  them,  that
their  loft  ftrcngth ,  and  colour  bee  reftorcd  ^
and  renewed ,  and  they  are  thefe  ,  'vi:^.  Gold  ,
Pearles,  Antimony,  Sulphur,  Vitriall,  and  fuch  like,
whofe  preparation  wee  have  diverfly  taught  in  other
booksj  wherefore  it  doth  not  feem  to  us  necefsary
here  ro  repeat  them.

Wee  flialU  write  no  more  of  Tiniflures,  feeing  eve-  Of  Dying
ry  extraded  colour  may  bee  called  a  Tincture  ,  ^"^  ?^»""ngt
which  doth  indeed  tinge  things  with  a  permanent
colour,which  doe  not  go  into  the  Fire ,  or  prefervc
'Colours  fixed  in  the  Fire.

All  thcfe  are  in  the  hand,  and  power  ofthe  Dyer,
and  Painter ,  who  prepares  them  according  to  his
pleafure.
It  is  very  neceffary  in  this  book  to  know  the  degrees  How  many  de-
of  Fire,  which  many  wayes  may  bee  graduated,and  grees  ofthe
intended,  and  every  degree  hath  a  peculiar  opcrati- ^^^^^^jj^'^*  ^-^
on,  and  one  producer h  the  fame  cfFe<fl,   as  ano-   "  '    *'
thcr^as  every  expert  Alchymift,by  the  daily  experi-
ence, and  exercife  of  the  Arcknows*

For  one  is  as  living,  and  flaming  Fire,which  rever*
berates,  and  Calcines  all  bodies :  Another  is  the  Fire

d


yi  Of  the  Nature  of  things^         Lib^VII*

of  a  Candle,  or  Lamp,  which  fixeth  all  volatile
bodies  :  Another  is  a  Fire  of  coals,  which  cements,
colours,  and  piirgeth  Mctalls  from  their  drofs,  exalts
Gold  and  Silver  to  a  higher  purity,  whitens  Copper,
and  in  brief  renews  all  Metalls.

Another  Fire  is  of  an  Iron  plate  made  red  hot ,  in
which  the  Tindures  of  Metalls  are  proved ,  which
alfois  profitable  for  other  things.

The  Filings  of  Iron  heat  after  one  faihion.  Sand
after  another,  Aihesaher  another,  a  B.Uneum  MarU
afteranbther,  in  which  manifold  Diftillations,  Sub-
limations, and  Coagulations  arc  done.

BAlneumroris  after  another,  in  which  there  arc
made  many  Solutions  of  corporeall  things.

Horfc-dung  after anorher,in  which  the  chiefeft  pu-
trefa(ftions,and  digeftions  are  made.
The  Olcftiall     ^^d  after  another  f  afliion  works  the  invifible  Fire,
-  —  by  which  wee  underftand  the  rayes  of  the  Sun ,  and

that  which  is  manifeftcd  by  a  glafs,  or  Cryftall,  and
ihews  it  operations  and  effe<5ls,of  which  Fire  the  An-
cients wrote  nothing  at  all-,  and  by  this  fire  the  three
Principles  of  every  corporeall  thing  may  bee  fepa-
rated.

'  This  Fire  is  of  fuch  wonderfull  forcc,that  by  it  Me-
talls may  bee  melted,  aud  all  fat,and  fluxible  things,
may  upon  the  table  without  any  Fire  bee  together
with  all  combufttble  things,  reduced  into  coales,  and
afhes.

Therefore  after  I  have  propofed,  and  opened
to  you  the  degrees  of  the  Art  of  Alchymie ,  -and
the  degrees  of  the  Alchmyifts  Fire  ••  I  will  yet  fur-
ther fhew,  and  declare  to  you  in  general! ,  various
Tranfmutations  of  naturail  things :  of  Mctalls  'firft  ^

fecondJy


Lf  B^VII.  Of  the  N4tHre  ^fthingU  ^5

fecondly  of  Stones,  and  thirdly  of  divers  things  in
gcncrall.  The  tranfmutation  of  Metalls  therefore  is
a  great  fccret  in  Nature,  and  it  can  hardly  bee  done
by  reafon  of  many  impediments,  and  repugnancies.
Yet  it  is  not  againft  Nature,nor  Gods  ordination,  as
many  falfly  affirm.

But  that  the  five  lefler,  and  impurcr  Metalls ,  vi\.  The  Xranrmu.
3  V  h  cf  and  0  may  be  tranfmutcd  into  the  greater,  "n*'!^^^?*'^*

n  1  n  1'    n    %  r  i^  .w     •  "        1  '  tails  mCO  Sllv«l»

pureft,and  moft  perfect  Metalls,  'vi^.  into  0  aod  ^  ,  and  G^w,     "
it  cannot  be  done  without  the  Tlndure ,  or  philofo-
phers  flonc.

Now  feeing  we  have  before  fufficiently  opened  the
fecrets  of  Tindures  in  the  feven  degreSjSnd  delcribed
them  there,  it  is  not  neceffary  that  wee  fpend  any  f  ur-
therlabourinthiSjbut  rather  bee  fatisfied  with  thofc
things,  which  we  have  wrote  in  other  books  concer-
ning the  Tranfmutations  of  Metalk.

Nowthere  are  other  Tranfmutations  of  impcrfe<5t,  '^^^  Tranfmni
and  impure  Metals,as  the  tranfmutation  of  cf  into  s ,  |nw  Coier"
which  may  bee  done  divers  waycs*

If  plates  of  Iron  bee  boiled  in  .w^ter  of  VitriaU,  or
bee  cemented  with  calcined  Vitriall,or  being  red  hoc
be  quenched  in  oyl  of  Vitriall.

Thefe  three  ways  Iron  may  be  tranfmuted  into  very
good,  and  ponderous  Copper ,  which  indeed  flows
well ,  and  hath  its  weight  as  well  as  any  naturail
Copper.

Plates  of  Iron  may  bee  as -it  jwere  reduced,  and  TheTranfmu.
tranfmuted  into  Lead,  fo  that  it  bee  as  foft  as  natu-tation  of  iron
rail  Lc^dy  but  doth  not  flow  fo  ealily  :and  the  proceflc  *^°  ^"^'  ;
isthis:

Take  Filings  of  <f ,  ^md.fomuch  of  the  powder  of

Borax,  mingle  them  well  together,  put  them  in  a

K  k  crucible  ^


'  74  Ofthe  Nature  of  things^  L1B4VII.'

crucible,  and  into  a  wind  furnace,  let  there  bee  made
aftrong  Firejbutfothatthc  d"  doe  not  flow,  but
Hand  as  it  were  in  a  Cement  for  a  whole   hourc,
then  cncreafc  the  Fire  ,    that  it  may  bee  red  hot,
and  flow  :  then  let  the  crucible  cool  of  it  felfe ,    and
thou  (halt  find  the  regulus  of  Lead  in  the  bottomc
of  the  crucible,  foft,  and  raalleablejas  naturall  Lead
can  be.
ThaTranlmu-    Buttotranfmutc  2  into  Ti  theproccfTeisthis:'
tatioaoiCop-      Firftofall  bring  Copper  with  5  fublimate,  and
yermw  Lwd..£j^^  Arfenick  to  bee  vvhicc,  yea  as  white  as  ^  ,  then
beat  it  fmall..  Take  this,and  the  powder  of  Borax,of
each  a  like  quantity ,and  firft  cement  it,  then  let  it  bee
melted  into  a  regulus,  and  thou  haft  a  true  regulus
of  Leadw
ThcTianTmH-      Novv  OH  the  Contrary,  it  is  cafy  to  tranfmutc
tation  ofLcad  j^^^^  Jj^^q  Coppcr,  ncithcr  doth  it  require  much
pams^  and  it  is  done  thus.

Take  plates  of  Lead,  ftrow  them  over  with  calci-
ned Vitriall,  or  Crocus  of  Venus  ,    cement  them , .
and  then  melt  them,  and  thou  (lialt  fee  naturallLead,
tranfmuted into  good  ,  ponderous,  and  malleable:
Copper.
A  Metalline       \io\\  if  this  Coppcr,  or  any  other  Copper  be  bea-
Qo^T  '  ^     ten  into  plates ,  and  ftrowcd  over  with  Tutia^    or
Capri  Celatni»Aris-^  and  be  cemented,  and  laftly  mel-
ted,  it  will  bee  tranfmuted  into  an  excellent  red-
dilb  £/e<^^*w  like  to  Cold.
*Eo  make  If  thou  wilt  turnc  1?  into  V  make  plates  oft  I

^^"1^^^'^*"°*^  ftrow  them  with  Salt  Armoniack,  cement,  and  melt
*        '        themjas  abovcJaid,  fo  will  all  the  blackneffe ,    and
darfenelTe  bee  taken  away  from  the  Lead,  and  it  will
be  in  whiicncflc  like  fair  Englifh  Tin*
,  -  How-


Lisivil.  Of theUature  of  things.  J^\

Now  as  you  have  in  bricfc  heard  of  fome  Mu-
tations ot  Mctalls ,  fo  alfo  know,  that  there  arc
Tranfmutations  of  Gemmes,  which  indeed  arcva-
nous,and  in  no  wife  like.

For  you  fee  how   great    Tranfmutations  ofOyiofSuiphw
Gcmmes  there  lies  in  oylc  of  Sulphur.  For  any  Cry  q^^^^^cj"*
flail  may    bee  tinged ,     and  Tranfmuted  in  it ,
and  in  time  bee  exalted  with  divers  colours ,    as
to  bee  made  like  to.  the  Hyacinth,  Granat,  or
Rubie.  ;

Know  alfo  that  the  Loadflone  may  be  tranfmu- To  Tranrmute
ted  into  a  tenfold  greater  power,  and  vertue,and  it  is  \^^q  g°eat  '^^ '

done  thus:  ftrength.

Take  the  Loadftone,3nd  heat  it  very  hot  in  coales,
but  fo  that  it  bee  not  fired ,which  prefently  quench  in
the  Oylc  of  Crocus  Martis^  made  of  the  bcft  Ca-
rinthian  Steel,  that  it  may  imbibe  as  much  as  it
can*

Thouihalt  by  this  mcanes  make  the  Loadftonc
fo  powerfull,  that  thou  maift  pull  out  Nailes  out
of  a  wall  with  it ,  and  doe  fuch  like  wonderful!
things  with  it,  that  the  conwnon  Loadftonc  can
never  doe.

Moreover ,  in  Tranfrautation  of  Gemmcs  you
muft  know  that  the  world  is  placed  in  two  degrees  of
Tindurc,  and  Coagulation,

For  as  the  white  of  an  Egge   may  bee  tinged  To  rranfmuM
with  Saffron,    and  then   bee  coagulated  into  a  e'^^^
faire  yellow  Amber  .•  with  the  fmoke  of  a  Pine^  berotany
tree   into  blackc  Amber   -  with  Verdegrcafe  in-  ^®''^"'^*  •
to  green,  like  Lafis  Armenim :   with  green  juice
into  Amber,like  the  Emerald:  and.wuh  the  A-
zurc  ftonc,  into  blew   Amber',  like  a  Saphir  :

K  k  2  with


7§  Of  tbeNatHn  of  things^         Liiyit

With  the  Wood  called  red  Wood,  Into  red ,  like
a  Granar,  or  Rubric  ;  with  a  purple  colour,  like
to  an  Amcthyft  .•  with  Cerufe ,  like  to  Ala-
blafter.

So  dl  Li<;[uors,  efpecially  Metalls,  :ind  Mine-
talk^  may  bee  tinged  with  fixed  colours ,  and  af-
terwards bee  coagulated^,    and  tranfmutcd  into
Gcmmes.
How  coiifltcr-     Soalfoitiay  Pearles  be  nnade  like  true  Pearfesin
fcit  Pearls  arc  fornfijCo  that  for  fplendor^and  beauty  they  can  hardly
^  *^  bee  difcerned  from  the  true  :  And  they  are  made

thus :.

Cleanfc  the  white  of  Egges  through  a  fpunge ,,
as  pilrely  as  may  bee,  then  min^e  with  it  thefai-
fceft  white  Talkcjor  Mother  of  Pearle,  or  Mercury
coagulated  with  Tinne ,  and  brought  into  an  Al-
cool,.then  grinde  them  all  together  on  a  Marble ,  {xy
that  they  become  a  thick  Amalgama,  which
muft  bee  dryed  in  the  Sunne ,  or  behind  a  fur-
nace fo  long,  untill  it  bee  like  Chccfc,  or  a  Li-

Then  of  tills  mafle  make  Pearles  as  big  as
thou  wilt,,  which  hang  upon  the  briilles  of  a,
Mog^  and  being  thus  boared  through ,  dry  themi
^s  Amber,and  then  thou  haft  finiihed  them.

If  they  are  not  beautifull  enough,  anoint  themi
OTcr  with  the  white  of  an  Egge,and  dry  them  again,
tnd  they  will  bee  moft  goodly  pearls^in  form  like  the  •
uaturalljbutnotinvertue.  '^'^'-^

In  the  like  manner  are  Coralls  madt,  with  which
men  endeavour  to  deceive  one  the  Other  as  with .
Fearlc. .  The  groccfft  is  this ; .


L I  i  VII.  Of  the  NatHTi  of  things.  ^  rjj

Take  Cinnabar,  erinde  it  on  a  Marble,  withthcP°w  toT^*^'

,  .  r  T-  r  L       r  £•  i  ffit  CoralU

white  or  an  Egge ,  ror  the  fpace  ot  an  hourc,„aybcmadc.
then  dry  it ,  as  Potters  doe  their  Earth  ^  then
make  it  into  what  forme  thou  pleafeft  ;  After-
wards dry  thenfi  as  much  as  may  bee  ,  and  noint
them  over  with  the  white  or  an  Egge,  as
thou  didft  Pearle,  and  dry  them  by  thcmfclvcs
again.

So  thou  (halt  have  CoralUike  to  the  naturall  in
form,but  not  in  vertue.

Thou  muft  alfo  know,   That    the  white  of_AGoMcnor  ;
an  Egge  may  bee  of  it  felfe  coagulated  into  moft  ^^^^"  vci«i^
cleer  Verniih,  in  the  coagulation  of  which  Silver,  or
Gold  may  bee  flrewed.

There  are  alfo  many  other ,  and  various
Tranfmutations  of  Naturall  things  .*  Whereof
thofe  which  I  know,  and  have  had  experience
of,  I  will  by  the  way  fet  down,  and  briefly  declare  to
you.

And  firft  of  all  knowy.  That  any  Wood ,  if  it  How  wood  r»
bee  put  for  a  certaine  time  into  the  water  of  Salt^^^'^^^^o'*^
Gemme,  is  turned  with  much  admiration  into  a
Stone.

Alfo  Stones  in  the  ^Etnean  fire  are  tranfmutcd  into  Coaics  of
Coales,which  arc  called  ftony  Coals.  itones. .°  '

Alfo  Gle  w  is  boiled  out  of  Skinnes.  Gkw  of  skins:

Of  Linnen  cloth  is  made  Paper,  Paper  oi  lAvi^i

Of  Flax  boiled  in  iharp  Liemadcofthe  Aflics  of  ?S;tf  Fhjt
Wood  is  Silke  made.

Alfo  the  feathery  parts  pulled  offfrom  quills,  and  reatherrmay l^
boiled  in  that  Lie,,  may  bee  fpun ,  and  weavcd  like  ^^ ^^
Cotton.

Kk|  Any-


^S  Oftbe  Nature  of  thingf.  LfB.viL

Any  Oylcor  Spcrmacick mucilage  may  bcc  coa-
gulated intoVernifli.

Any  Liquor  into  Gummc5&c.
All  thcfc  arc  Tranfmutations  of  Naturall  things,
of  which  Science  wee  have  fpokenenoughjand  t-hcrc-
wcc  ihall  here  make  an  end.


O  F


Jtr-liV


Lib,  VIII.


OF  THE


N  A  T  V  R.  E

Of  Things.


THE   EIGHXH  BOOK,


79


Of  the  Separation  ofNamrall  \
things.  )

["N  the  Creation  of  the  world,  the  firft  fcpa-  The  Chaos  th«
ration  began  from  the  foureElemcnts,fce-  Ij^j]  «f  *H
ingthcfirftmatterof  the  world  was  one
Chaos,
Of  this  Chaos  God  made  the  greater  world,  being
divided  into  four  diftinft  Elements,  t//^.  Fire, Aire,
Waier,and  Earfrh.Fire  is  the  hot  part,Airc  the  moift.

Water,.


Worl4t


What  fe
on  fhall


8^  Of  the  Nature  ofthingil         Li  B.  Vj  II.

Water  the  cold,  and  Earth  the  dry  part  of  the  greater
world.
paratir  But  that  you  may  in  brief  iinderftand  the  rcifon  of
here  r  okctt  ouipurpolc in  this  8^^- book, you  muft  know,that  we
of.  ^°  "  doe  not  purpofe  to  treat  here  of  the  Elements  of  all
Natiirall  things,  feeing  wee  have  fufticiencly  difcour-
fed  of  thofe  Arcana  in  the  Archidoxis  of  the  (epara-
tion  of  Naturall  things  .-whereby  every  one  of  them
is  apart,  and  diftindly  feparated,and  divided  materi-
ally, and  fubftantially,  vt\.  feeing  that  two  ,  three,
or  foure,  or  more  things  are  mixed  into  one
body,  and  yet  there  is  feen  butonc  matter.  Where  it
often  falls  out ,  that  the  corporcall  matter  of  that
thing  cannot  bee  known  by  any,  or  fignified  by  any
cxprelTe  name,  untill  there  bee  a  fcparation  made.
Then  fomctimes  two.thrcc,  four, five  or  more  things
come  forth  out  of  one  matter  ;  as  is  manifcfl
by  daily  experience,  in  the  Art  of  Alchy-
mie.
What  Elec-  p^^  fgj.  example,  you  have  an  £/<r(f?r«w,  which  of  it
^^^-  felfeis  noMetall.but  yet  it  hides  all  Metalls  in  one
itlecall.  That  ifit  be  anatomized  by  the  induflry  of
Aldhymie, and  feparated.*  alithe feven Mecalls,w:(.
Cold^  Silver^  Cepfer,  Tinne,  L^ad^  Iron^  and  ^kk-
filver  come  out  of  it,    and  that  pure,  and   per-

fea.

•What  Scpara-     Buttkit  you  may  under ftand  what  Separation  is ,
aion.is.  note,  that  it  is  nothing  eifc  then  the  fevering  of  one

thing  fk)m  another,  whether  of  two,  three,  four,  or
more  things  mixed  together  .•  I  fay  a  feparation  of
the  three  Principles,  is  t)f  Mercury,  Sulphur,  and
Salt^and  the  cxtraiSiDnQf  pure  out  of  the  impure,  or
the  pure,  excellentfpirit,  and  quintcifencc,  Jrom  a

grofTe


Li  b*  VIII*        Of  the  Nature  ofthingsi  8 1

grofTe,  and  elementary  bodyj  and  the  preparation  af
two,  three,  four,  or  more  out  of  one  :  or  the  diflbluti*
on,  and  letting  at  liberty  things  that  are  bound ,  and
compa;^ ,  which  are  of  a  contrary  nature ,  ading
one  agarnft  the  other,  untill  they  deftroy  one  the
other.

Now  there  are  many  kinds  of  fqjaration ,'  many  of  How  many
which  arc  unknown  to  us;  thofc,  which  wee  have  ex-  ^^^^^  **^  ^^^*"^
perienced  out  of  elementary,    diffoluble  naturail '^  "
things,  (hall  in  this  place,  according  to  their  kinds,  be
defcribed.

The  firft  reparation  of  which  wee  fpeake,  muft  be-  The  fcparation
gin  from  man,  becaufe  hee  is  the  Microcofme ,  or  clfmc.^'"^'
Kttle  v/orld,  for  whofe  fake  the  Microcofme  or  grci-
tcr  world  was  made,  vi^,  that  hec  might  be  the  fcpa-
rator  of  it.

Now  the  fcparation  of  the  Microcofme  begins  at  TheWyof
his  death.  For  in  death  the  two  bodies  of  Man  are  fe-  ^^^  ^^y^^  '^"tb
paratcd  the  one  from  the  otfjcr,i'/;(.his  Celeftial,and  "  ^^°^®^'^-
Terreftialbody;?>.Sacramental,andElementary:onc
of  which  afcends  on  high  like  an  Eagle^thc  other  falls
downward  to  the  earth  like  lead-

The  Elementary  is  putrefied,  confumed  ,  and  What  the  tk^
becomes  a  putrid  ftinking  carkafe,    which  being  ."^^'"^''y  ^o^^y
burycd  in  the  carch,  never  comes  forth,  or  appearcs  "*
more,

ButthcSacramcntall,/.  ^.  Syderiall,  or  Cclefti- What  a  Sacra-
all,is  never  putrefied,  or  buried,  neither  doth  it  pof- memali  Body
fcflc  any  place.  This  body  appears  to  Men,andalfo^^*
after  death  is  fecn.

HmctGhofis^rifiO'/js^  and  Suferrtaturall  A^fa-
ritions.

Hence  by  the  ancient  Magicians,  the  CMifiicAU  Caba'iiSicaU

LI  ^r(»«.


8  a  Of  the  Nature  of  things.  L  i  b^V  HI.

Art  took  it  s  beginning,  of  which  wc  fliall  treat  more
at  large  in  the  books  of  CabaUc.

After  this  reparation  is  made,  then  after  the  death
of  the  Man  three  ^\ihik^r\c^s^'vi\.Body^Soule^'3ind  Spi-
rit are  divided  the  one  from  the  other,  every  one  go-
ing to  its  own  place,  'vi^  its  own  fountaine  ,    from
tvhence  it  had  its  originall ,    i//^.  the  body  to  the
Eanh,  to  the  firft  matter  of  the  Elements  .•  the
foul  into  the  firft  matter  of  Sacraments,     and
laftly,    the  fpirit  into  the  firft  matter  Oi  the  Airy
Chaos.
The  reparation      What  now  hath  been  fpoken  of  the  feparation  of
totoc.^^"'''  theMacrocolme,  the  fame  alfo  may  bee  underftood
in  the  greater  world  which  the  gitar  Ocean  hath  di-
vided into  three  parts,  fo  that  the  univerfall  world  is
fevered  into  three  p2LVts,'V!'^.Europe^Ajia,:ind  Africa^,
the  World '  °^  which  feparation  is  a  certain  rcpreientation  of  three
^  '      Principles^  which  can  be  feparared  from  any  Ter-

rene, or  Elementary  thing.  Thcfe  three  Principles
arc  Mercury,  Sulphur,  and  Salt ,  of  which  three  the
world  was  made, and  compofed.
The  reparation  Thc  ncxt  thin^  tobec  known  is  the  feparation  of
«C  M«trUk  J4eta]]s  from  their  Mountains,  /.  f •  the  feparation  of
Metalls,  andMineralls.

By  vertue  of  this  feparation  many  things  come
forth  out  ofone  matter,  as  you  fee  out  of  Mineralls
come  forth,  The  droffe  cf  Met  alls ,  Glaffe,  Sajsd^  Piipi-
tis^  Marcdfite^  Gra»atu^,  Cobaltum^  Talke^  Cachinna^
Z^wetum^  B J femutiim^  Antimony ^Lttharge^  Sulphur^
Vitriall,  y  erdeg  rc/ife^  Chrjfocotla ,  the  A'^ire  St  one  ^
Aur.'ptgmemum^  Arfenic'ke,  Realgar^  Cinnahar,  Clay
tf  Iron,  SpathuSfGfphm^  Ocrce  ^  and  many  more
like  to  theie  ,  as  alfo  the'  Waters,  Oyies ,  B^e-

[ims :,


L I  B^VIII.        Of  the  Nature  of  thingU  8  3

fims^  Cdxes^  Mtrcury ,    Sulphur^  and  Salt,  &c.

Vegetables  in  their  reparation  yeeld.  Waters ,  Oylts^  Of  Vegetables
lukes^  RefweSj  Cums^  EleBuartes ,  Powders ,  jp^es^
Mtrctsry^  Stilfhur^  and  Salt »

Animalls  in  their  reparation  yeeld  ,  Watery  Bloud^  Of  Animails.
Ilejh^  Faty  Bortes^  Skiff ^  B^dy  ^  Hairs,  Mercurj^  Sul-
phur, and  Salt,

Hee  therefore  that  boafts  himfelfe  to  bee  able  to  what  a  good
feparate  allnaturall  things  afterthis  manner,  muftof  %^i^«oroug,h«
neceflity  have  long  experience,and  pertedt  knowledge  ^'^^
of  allnaturalkhings.

Moreover,  hee  nnuft  bee  a  skiirull,and  well  pra(fli-
(td  Alchynaift,  that  hee  may  know  what  is  combufti-
ble,  and  what  not;  what  is  fixt,  and  what  notj  what
■  wil  floWjfind  what  not',and  what  thingsjare  more  pon-
derous one  then  anotherfalfo  he  mirft  be  experienced
in  the  naturall  colour,  fmelUacidiiy^harflmede/owre-
neffe,  bitterneffe,  fweetnefle,the  dcgreejComplexion,
and  quality  of  every  thing.

Alfo  heemuft  know  the  degrees  of  Separation,  as  Thejegieesof
of  Diftillation,R£lolution,Putrefaaion,Extraaion,  whaYand"i;ov»
Calcination,  Reverberation,  Sublimation,  Redudi-  many  tWe  tT*
on.  Coagulation,  Powdering,  and  Wafliing.

By  Dflliilation  is  fcparated  Water,  Oylefrom  all  What  diftiilati-

COrpOreall  things.  ^  onfepararcs.

By  Refolution  are  feparated  Metals  from  Minerals,  What  refolutt;
and  one  Metall  from  another, and  Salt  from  the  other  ^^•
Principles,  and  fat,  and  that  which  is  light/rom  that
which  is  heavy.  :  :;nr:oi:»ur:  !?!!.-■  r^j  ■'

ByPutrefadion  is  feparated  fat  from  lean^pure  from  Putrefaaion^
impure,putrid  from  not  ^putrid.

By  Extradion  is  feparated  pure  from  impure,  and  Extraaioiu
fpirit,  and  quimcllence  from  body,  and  chinnc  from
thick.  LI  z  By


84

Calcin»iofi;


Of  the  Nature  of ihi figs  ^         Lib^VIII^

By  Calcination  is  feparated  watery  moifture  ,  fat ,
naturall  hcat.odour.and  whatfocvcr  elfc  is  combufti*
ble.
RcYtibeuwa.  By  Reverberation  is  feparated  colour,  odour,'
what  is  combuftible,  all  humidity ,  aquofity ,  far,
and  whatfoever  is  inconftant ,  or  fluxil ,  in  any
thing,  dec.

By  Sublimation  is  feparated  the  fixed  from  the
volatile,  fpirituall  from  the  corporcall,,  pure  from
impure ,  Sulphur  from  Salt,  Mercury  from  Salt,&c.
By  Redudion  is  feparated  what  is  fluxil,from  what
is  folid,  a  Metall  from  its-Minerall,  and  one  Metall
from  another,  a  Metall  from  its.  drolTe,  fatfrom  what
is  not  fat.

By  Coagulation  is  feparated  wateriflincs  from  humi-
dity, water  from  Earth.

By  Powdering  are  feparated  powder,and  fand,3fhcs, .
and  Calx,Minerall,  Vegetable,  and  Animall  one
from  the  other,and  all  powders,which  arc  of  an  une-
quall  weight  are  feparated  ,  and  by  winnowing.,  as
chaffe  from  corne.

By  wafliing  are  feparated  aflies,  and  fand,  a  Mine-
rail  from  its  Metall,  that  which  is  heavy  from  what
is  light,  a  Vegetable,  and  Animall  from  what  is  Mi-
nerall.  Sulphur  from  Mercury,  and  Salt,  Salt  from;
Mercury*
The  Prejyjrati-     But  palTing  by  thc  Thcoric,  wc  will  now  fall  upon
•n  of  Me«u  is  ^j^^  praaife,  and  come  to  particulars.
^^  -  You  muft  therefore  note ,  that  the  Separation  of

Metallsisthefirftbyright,  and  wee  fhall  therefore
jrcat  of  it  after  this  mctnod,  and  manner.


^iblimation.


Rcdudion.


Coagubtiont


ing.


Waflilog;,


iKS.


h  IB^VIII.      Of  the  Nature  of  thing/;  ^  ij


Oftbe  Separation  of  Metais

from  their  Mines*

npHe  reparation  of  Metalls  from  their  Mines  Is  g^  fluxjng
■*-  done  divers  way s,  ^'/^.  by  boiling ,  and  melting  powders.
with  fluxing  powders,fuch  as  are  fait  Alcalij  Lithar-
ge, fait  fluxikjthe  drofTe  of  GlafTe,  Salt  Gemme,  Salt
Tctre5&c.  Let  them  bee  put  in  a  Crucible, .  and
melted  in  a  furnace  5  fo  will  the  Metall ,  or  rcgulus
fall  to  the  bottomeof  the  Crucible;  but  the- other
matter  will  fwim  above,  and  become  droffe.  Thou
fhallboil  this  Metalline  regtdus  in  a  reverberating
furnace  fo  long,  till  allthe  Metall  become  pure ,  and
freed  from  all  its  droffe^  by  this'  means  the  metaU  is
well  digeited,  and  as  I  may  fay  refined  from  all  its
drofTe,

Many  times  one  mine  contains  more  then  one  Me-
tall,as  Copper  and  Silver,  Copper  and  Gold,  Lead
.  and  Silver,  Tinne  and  Silver,  you  fhallknowit  by
this,  if  the  Metalline  Regulus  after  Reverberation  in
a  melting  pot  bee  fufficiently  after  the  true  manner
difTolved.  Forinitareallimperfed  Metalls  fepara-
ted,  as  are  Iron,-  Copper,  Tin,  and  Lead:^  and  fo  with
a  double  quantity  ot  Lead  to  the  Regulus  being  put
to  it,  they  all  goe  into  a  fume,  and  only  fine  Silver,or
Gold  are  left  behind  in  the  pot.

Alfo  two  OP  three  Metalls  mixed  together  may  bee  ^1  AqiaforiJ^
fcparatcd  in-4^»4/(/;'/A>',and  extracted  the  one  jfrom    *

LI  3  .  the.  '  '


ver.


^  Of  the  Nature  ofthingsl        Lib.  Vlir.

the  other.  If  two  Metalls  or  one  bee  rcfolved,  the

other  will  fall- to  thcbottome  like  fand^and  be  prcci-

'"■."  pirated:  and  be  afcer  this  manner  feparatcd.    Alfo

Metajls  may  be  (cparatcd  by  flowing  after  this  pro-

cefsrMakc  mentals  iflow^and  when  they  are  in  flux,cafl

By  Sulphui.    ji^tQ  jj-j^j^-j  ji^g  beft  llower  ot  Sulphur  as  you  can  ger,

vi\.  an  ounce  to  every  pound  of  the  mctvall,  and  let  it

burn,  andby  that  means  it  wil  draw  up  the  lighted

metalltothctop,  the  heavy  falling  to  the  bottqme.

Thenlet  them  (land  together  till  they  be  cold:  And

'  lb  in  one  Rcgulus  two  metalls  are  found,  not  as  be-

A  wondei  fall  fore  mutually  mixed  ,  but  one  feparated  from  the

Einlal'o'l'"  by  the  Sulphur,  as  by  a  partition ,  as  OyTc

tion,  divides  two  Waters,   that  they  cannot  bee  joined

By  qiiUkfil-  /tcgcther  or  mixed :  Sulphur  therefore  is  a  fingular

i  Arcanum  worthy  of  great  commendations.

Fixt  m€talls,as  Gold  and  Silver,  becaufe  they  can-
not wcl  bee  extracted  with  Fire  or  Aqua f  mis,  muft
bee  amalgamated  with  QiBck{jlver,andfo  feparated
and  cxtracted,cheQuickfilver  beiflg  afterwards  extra-
cted and  feparated  by  a  certaine  degree  of  Diftilk-
tion  from  tne  Calx  of  the  metals,'z//^.Gold,&  Silver.
After  this  manner  alfo  may  other  metalls,not  only
'•Gold,  and  Silver,  but  Copper,  Iron,  Tin,Lead,&c.
as^lfo  whatfocver  are  prepared  out  of  them  ,  as  red
Electrum,  the  white  Magnefia,  Aurichalcum,  calci-
ned tcad,  Laton,  Brafle  of  Cauldrons,  and  whatfo-
€ver  met,ills  of  this  kind  are  tr?ninnuted ,  bee  with
■Qjick(ilver,but  firft  being  powdered,  abftractcd,and
■'feparated  from  what  is  heterogeneous.    For  the  na-
ture, and<:onditionof  Qui_ckiilveristhis,that  it  wil
bee  united  ,  and  amalgamed  with  metalls  ,  but  yet
with  one  f.)oncr  then  with  another,  according  asth  c
metall  is  of  greater  or  lefTe  affinity  to  it.  In


L I B.  VIII.        Of  the  Nature  of  things.  87

In  this  confideration  fine  Gold  is  the  chiefeft,  then
fine  Silver,  then  Lead,  then  Tinnejthen  Coppcr,and
laftly  Iron.

So  amongft  tranfmutedmetalls,  thefirftis  part
with  partjthen  Afh  coloured  Lead,  then  Laton^thea  '
BralTc  of  Caldrons  ,  then  red,  and  the  neweft  white.
Although  for  the  firftcourfe  Mercury  may  take  no
more  then  one  metall,  with  which  it  is  amalgama-
ted :yct  that  Amalgama  is  to  be  ftrained  hard  through
Leather,  or  Cotton  cloatb.  For  by  this  means  no-
thing but  the  Quickfilver  will  pafle  through  the
Leather,  or  Cloath*  and  that  metall  which  it
did  attract  remains  in  the  leather,  or  cloth  like  Caly,
which  aftenvards  thou  maift  with  fait  AlcalijOr  fome
other  fait  reduce  into  a  metalline  body  by  mcltincr,
Notv  by  this  Art  Quickfilver  is  much  fooner  fcpa-
rated  from  all  manner  of  mctalls  y  then  by  Diilifla-
tion,&c.

^y  this  procelTe  with  Mercury  all  metalls  may
after' calcination,and  powdering  be  by  a  skilfulj>  and
induftriousAlchymift  extracted,  and  feparated  one
from  the  other.

In  the  fame  manner, and  that  cafily,  may  TinnCg
and  Lead  bee  feparated  from  Copper ,  or  Copper
vefTcls,  from  Iron,  and  Steel  overlaid  with  Tin  with^
out  any  fire,  or  water,  by  the  Amalgama  of  Quick*
fiiver  alone.  v     tj^i.-

Alfo  Beaten  Gold,  or  Leafiffiotd','  or  Silver,  as^
aifo  any  other  metall  beaten,  or  ground ,  being,
written,  or  laid  over  with  a  pcncill ,  or  quill  upon
•  cloth,  parchment,  paper,  leather,  wood,  itones,  or
any  thing  elfe,may  bee  refolved  by  Qmckfilver,  and
(Oj  that  the  Quickfilver  may  bee  atteward  feparated
againfromthoferacialls*  Now


y


88  OftU  Nature  of  things,     L I  B^VHjj

By  Corrofivc        Now  the  feparation  of  metalls  in    Aqua  fortis^
waters.  ji^qua,  Regis ^  and  like  corrofive  waters,  is  after  this  *

manner.

Let  a  metall  that  is  mixed,and  joined  with  another,
be  taken,  and  beaten  int.to  thin  platcs,or  brought  in-
to powder.  Put  it  into  a  feparating  velTel,  and  pourc
upon  it  co:nmonAquafirtis  as  much  as  is  fufficicntjlet
them  ftand  and  bee  macerated, until  ail  the  metall  bee
refolved  into  a  clear  water.If  it  be  Silver,  and  contain
any  Gold  in  it,all  the  Silver  wil  bee  refolved  into
water,and  the  Gold  wil  alfo  bee  calcined,  and  fettle
in  the  bottome  like  black  fand.  And  after  this  man-
ner Gold^and  Silver  are  fcparated.  If  now  thou  wilt
fcparatc  the  SiK'cr  from  the  Aqua  fort  is  without
Diftillation,  put  a  plate  of  Copper  into  the  water,
and  the  Silver  will  prefently  fettle  in  the  bottome  of
the  water  like  fnow5and  the  Copper  plate  will  begin
to  be  confumed  by  little^and  little.

Tbc  (eperation  of  Silver*,  and  Copper  by  common
^Aquafortis  is  done  after  this  manner,Lcr  the  Copper
which  contains  Silver,  or  the  Silver  which  contains
Copper  be  brought  to  thin  plates  or  powder,and  put
into  a  glafs  vcfrel,upon  which  pour  as  much  common
Aquafortis  as  is  fufficientrand  bythis  means  the  fifver
will  bee  calcinedjand  fettle  to  the  bottome  like  white
chalk.-but  the  copper  wil  be  difTolvedjand  turned  into
a  clear  water.If  this  water,together  with  the  diifolved
coppcfjbe  by  a  GlafTe  funnel  fcparated  from  the  filver
calx  into  another  Glafle :  then  the  Copper  that  is  di(''
folved  in  the  water,  may  bee  fo  precipiatcd  with
common  water,  or  rain  water,  or  any  other  water,
that  it  wil  fettle  to  the  bottom  of  the  Glafs  like  fand.
Now  the  feparation  of  hid  Goldjfrom  any  metall,

is


L I  B^VIIL  Of  the  Nature  of  things;  8^

isby  the  degree  of  Extraction  mAejua  Regis,  For
this  kind  of  water  will  attempt  to  difTblve  no  metall,
but  only  p«re,finc  Gold,  &c.

The  fame  ^(j'w^ij^^^Af  doth  feparate  alfo  finepold
from  gilded  plate.  For  if  that  be  wartied  over  witli  ity
the  Gold  will  be  icparated  from  itj&c.

Moreover  alfo  with  cememby  thedegrec'^ofRc- Bythe  aegice
verberation  two  Mctalls  mixed  togethermay  be  fcpa-  °/  Rcvcrbcu-
rated  the  one  from  the  other ,  but  efpccially  if  they  "°"*
arc  not  in  the  like  degree  of  Fixation ,   as  Iron  and
Copper.  For  that  Metall^which  is  but  little  fixed,3S
Tin,  and  Lead,  is  all  of  it  confumed  by  the  degree  of
Reverberation  in  ccmcnt.For  by  how  much  the  more
a  Metall  is  £xcd,fo  much  the  Icflc  is  it  confumed  by
cemcnr.

Youmuft  know  therefore  that  fine  Gold  is  the
moft  fixt,  and  pcrfe<5t  Metall,  which  can  bee  deftroy-
cd,  or  confumed  by  no  cement.  Next  to  this  is  fine
Silver.  If  then  Gold,  and  Silver  be  mixed  together
in  one  body,  which  IS  wont  to  bee  called  part  with
part,  or  if  Silver  contain  Gold,  or  Gold  Silver :  I  fay
thefe  being  thus  mixt  if  they  bee  reverberated  into  ce*
ment,  then  the  Gold  remains  entire,  and  not  at  all  in-
jured, but  the  Silver  is  confumed  by  the  cement,and
fo  is  €xtra(5ted  from  fine  Gold:  fo  alfo  is  Copper  from
Silver,  and  Iron,and  Tinne  from  Copper, and  Iron,
or  Lead  from  Tinne,  and  fo  forth.


'Mm  OF


9^  Of  tbin^wt€0f things        LiB^Vni,


Of  the  Sef  oration  ofMmrallu


Ftcrthatwcc  have  explained  ('as  hitherto  wee
^have  done )the  reparation  of  Mctalls  from  their
Earth,  and  matter,  as  alfo  of  one  Metall  from  ano-
ther, and  how  it  is  done  having  paffcd  through  it  with
as  much  brevity  as  might  be  :  it  will  in  the  next  place
bee  neceflary  that  wee  treat  alfo  of  thofc  things  out.
of  which  Metalls  grow,  and  are  generated,  as  are  the.
ihrte  Principles.  Ivicrcury^  Sulphur,  and  Salt,  as  alfo..
all  Mineralls ,  in  which  the  firft  being  of  Metalls, .
u  t,  the  fpirit  of  Mctalls  is  found,  as  is  manifcft  in.
MatcafiteS)  GranatSj Cachymiics ,  red  Talkc,,  the
Azure  ftonc,and  the  like, in  which  the  firft  being  of
Gold  is  found  by  the  degree  of  Sublimation.  So  in.
white  Marca(ite,white  Taikc,  Auripigmentum,Arfc--
nick,LithargC3&c»the  firft  being  of  Silver  isiound.'In
Cobaltus,Zinetus,&c.the  firft  being  of  Iron: In  Zinc-
tus,Vitriall,Verdcgreafe,  &c.the  firft  being  of  Cop-
perrln  Zinetus,  Bifemutus,  <&c.thc  firft  being  of  Tin:
In  Antimony,  Minium, &c  the  firft  being  of  Lead;
In  Cinnabar  ^   the  firft   being  of  Quickiilvcr  is
found.

Concerning  this  firft  beginning  you  muftknow,
that  it  is  a  volatile  fpirit ,as  yet  confifting  in  volatility,,
as  an  infant  lies  in  tnc  wombc  ol  its  Mother  ,  which

fomctimcs-


LiB^VIIL        OftheUatwecfthingt^  f^

fomctimes  is  made  like  to  Liquor, fometimes  to  AI-
cool.

Whofocver  therefore  dcfires  to  bufic  himfclfc
about  the  getting  of  the  firft  being  of  any  fuch  body,
or  to  fcparate  it ,  muft  of  neccflity  have  much  ex-
perience, and  knowledge  in  the  Art  of  Alchy-
mie.

For  if  hee  fliall  not  diligently  and  skilfully  work  in
Alchymie,  hee  fbal  attempt  many  things  in  vain,  an^
accompliib  nothing.

But  after  what  manner  the  firft  being  is  to  be  (epa-
rated  out  of  any  Minerall5is  fufiiciently  explained  in
the  booke  called  Archtdoxk,znd  need  not  here  tedi*
ouily  bee  repeated.

But  as  concerning  the  feparation  of  Mineralls,  you
muft  note,  that  many  of  them  are  to  bee  feparated
by  the  degree  of  Sublimation  as  fixed  from  thofe
which  are  not  fixed ,  fpirituall  and  volatile  bodies
from  fixt  bodies,  and  fo  accordingly  of  all  the  mem-
bers, as  is  declared  concerning  Me  vails.  For  of  all
Mineralls  there  is  one,  and  the  like  procelTe  through
-all  degrees,  as  the  Art  of  Alchymie  teacheth,&c*


M  m  4  oB


jap  Ofthe  Nature  of  thhgf^         LiR*VIlL'

Of  the  Separation  of  Vegetahles.

How  Vegcta--  T'Hc  fepa ration  of  thofc  things,  which  grow  out
ties  arc  fepa.  A  of  the  Earth,  and  arc  combuftiblc,  as  fruits,
f»t€d.  hcarbs,  flowers,  leaves,  grafTc,  roots,  woods,  ^fc.  is

made  many  wayes.
For  firft  by  Diftillation  the  Flegm  is  (epara'cd  from
them,  then  the  Mercury,  then  the  Oylc,thcn  the  Re-
fine, then  the  Sulphur,  and  laftly  the  Salt.

All  thefc  Separations  being  made  according  to  the
Spagiricall  Art  many  notable,  and  excellent  medi-
cines.come  from  thence,  which  are  to  be  ufed  as  well
within,  as  without  the  body.

But  now  feeing  idlencflc  is  fo  much  in  requeft  a-
mongft  Phyfirians5and  all  labour  and  ftudy  is  turned
only  to  infolcncyjtruly  I  do  not  wonder ,that  all  fuch
preparations  are  every  where  negkdlcd,  and  coalts
lold  at  fo  low  a  price,  that  if  Smiths  could  be  focafily
without  coalcs  in  forging,  and  vvorkingtheir  Mctalls,
as  Phy  fitians  arc  in  preparing  their  Medicines ,    cer-
tainly Colliers  would  long  uncc  have  been  brought
to  extream  want.
A  ifipvehenfi-    In  the  mean  time  I  will  give  to  Spagiricall  Phyfiti-
cnofPbyfiti-  ansthcirduc  praifc.  For  they  arc  not  given  to  idlc-
nefTc,  and  floth,  nor  goe  in  a  proud  habit,or  phifh  and
velvet  garments,  often  fhewing  their  rings  upon  their
fingers,  or  wearing  fwords  with  lilvcr  hilts  by  their
fides,  or  fTneand  gay  gloves  upon  their  hands,  but  di-
ligently follow  their   labours,    fwcating  whole
nightSjand  daycsby  their  furnaces.

.   Thcfe


Li  5  VI  ll*^  Of  the  Nature  rfthingf.  p  j

Thcfc  doc  not  fpend  their  time  abroad  for  rccrca- J^^J^^^^'^Jhy-
tion,  but  take  delight  in  their  laboratory.  They  wear  mifts,and  how
Leather  garments  with  a  pouch ,  and  Apron  where-  ^^^Y  ^^^^^
with  they  wipe  their  hands.    They  put  their  fingers  phyfttUnt,
amongft  coalcs, into  clay, and  dung,  not  into  gold
rings^  They  are  footy,  and  black,  like  Smithes,  or
Colliers,  and  doe  not  pride  themfclves  with  cleane,
and  beautihill  faces.     They  are  not  talkative  when
they  come  to  the  fick,  neither  doe  they  cxtoll  their
Medicines  :  feeing  they  well  know  that  the  Artificer
muft  not  commend  his  work ,  but  the  work  the
Artificer,  and  that  the  fick  cannot  be  cured  with  fine
words.

Therefore  laying  afide  allthefe  kinds  of  vanities.  How  many  de^
they  delight  tobee'bufied  about  the  fire,  and  to  learn  ^\^therc£'^
the  degrees  of  the  fciencc  of  Alchymie.-Of  this  order
arc  DifiilUtien^  R  foltttion^VutrefaStioji^Extra^ion^
Calcimtion  ^  Reverbention ,    Sublimation  y    FixA-
tten^  S  e^aratiQH  y  Kcdu6tim  ,  .  CoagHUtieA  r .  Tin-^

But  how  thcfe  feparations  may  bee  done  by  the
help  of  diftin(5t  degrees  according  to  the  Art  of
AFchymie,  hath  been  in  generall  fpoken  of  already.
Wherefore  it  is  needlcflc  here  to .  make  repeti-
tion. S

But  to  proceed  to  particulars,  and  briefly  to  cx-
plainc  the  pradife,  you  muft  know  that  Water,
Spirit  J  Ltqutfr^  Oyte  ^  &c.  cannot  bee  feparated
after  one  and  the  fame  procefTe,  out  of  Fl6werS|
Hearbes,Seeds,Lcgvcs,Roots,Trees,Fruits,WoodSi,
bythe  degree  of  Djflillation.

For  Hearbs  require  one  procefTe^FIowcrs  another,'
Seeds  anothcrj  Leaves  anothcr,Rootsaiiothcr,Tree5

Mm  3  another;^


Pij,  Of  the  NatKr€(>fthingil        t  ife.  vilT;

another,  the  Stalkes another,  the  Fruitc  another,
'ru  Woods  another.

firc&'Sa!    And  in   this  degree  of  DifHllation,  there  arc
jatioii,  ilfo  foure  diflin(5l  degrees  of  Fire  to  bee  confide-

red.

The  firft  degree  of  Fire  in  Diftillation  is  SaU
neum  Maris  ^  this  Diftillation  is  made  in  Wa-
ter.

Another  degree  of  Fire  is  Diftillation  made  in
Aihes.
The  third  in  Sand.

The  fourth  in  a  naked  Fire  :  as  alfo  Diftillation
may  bee  made  by  Aqua  fonts ,    and  other  ftiarp
Waters.
With  what        To  the  firft  degree  of  Fire  bclon?,  Hearbs,  Flow-
cvfrT Veg«J!  CIS,  Seeds,  and  fuch  like,
bicistobe    "     To  the  fecond.  Leaves,  Fruits,  &c.
OiftilH  Xo  the  third,  Roots,  and  Boughes  of  trccs^&c^^

To  the  fourth  Wood,  and  luch  like.

Note,  that  every  one  of  thefemuft  bee  beaten
(mall ,  and  bruifcd  before  they  bee  put  into  tlic
5tiil.

And  thus  much  bee  fpoken  concerning  the  Di*
filiation  of  Waters  out  of  the  Vegetable  fubfton-
ccs.  #

As  concerning  the  Seperation  and  Diftillation  of
Oyls,  the  procefle  is  the  fame  as  that  of  Water,  only
fome  of  them  are  to  bee  .diftilled  fer  defctnfum^  and
cannot  ^ccnd  as  Waters,  the  procefTe  of  thelc  in  this
^aic  is  to  bee  changed.

But  Liquors  are  not  feparated  in  Diftillation  as
Waters,  or  Oyles,  but  are  cxprellbd  from  their  cor*
.{potcall  fubftanccs  with  a  prefic.

And


L I  i  VIET-       Of  the  Kature  of  things.  yj

And  here  wcc  mufl  know ,  that  there  arc  fomc
Oylcs  that  arc  prcfTed  out,  and  feparated  after  the
fame  manner,  by  a  PrefTcas  liquors  arc ,  and  that
for  this  rcaibn ,  bccaufc  they  fhould  not  contrad
an  ill  odottf  from  the  Eire,  as  otherwifc  they  would;
doe*

Of  this  Order  is  the  Oylc  of  Almonds^Nuts^hard
eggcs,  and  the  like,

Alfo  wee  muft  note,  that  all  Oyles^if  they  be  pre-
pared>  and  coagulated  according,  to  the  Spagiricall
Art>  ycdd  a  kind  of  Ycrnifh,  Gummc,  Amber,  or
Refine ,  which  may  bee  alfo  called  Sulphur,  and
that  which  remaincs  in  the  bottome  of  the  Still
may  bee  calcined ,  and  brought  to  afties,  and
from  it  may  bee  with  warme  water  alone,  the
Alcali  extracled,and  feparated  from  it.

The  Aihes  which  is  left  behind  is  called  the  Dead
Earth,  out  of  which  never  any  clfc  can  bee  extra?

Of  the  Sefdratt&n  ofAnimallr.

TT  is  neccffary ,  that  Anatomic  goe  before  the
^reparation  of  Animalls ,  that  the  bloud  may  bee
apart,  the  flcfh apart,  the  bones  apart,  the  skinnc
apart,  the  bowels  apart,  the  tendons  apart,  &e.  and
^tcr  this  muft  every  one  of  thcfc  bee  feparated  by  \t
felfc  by  the  help  of  the  Spagiricall  Art.

JPhcrcfojfe:


Q  5  Of  the  Nature  of  things.  L  r  b.  VIII .

.  Therefore  the  reparations  in  this  place  are  chiefly  4,

Foure  degreci      The  firft  draws  forth  a  watcrie^and  flcgnnatick  hu-

dan^o/ff*"  midity  from  the  bloud.  For  from  the  bloud  being

naiu.    '  "     after  this  manner,  according  to  the  proceiTe  fliewcd

in  the  book  ot  Confervations,prepared, there  comes

Mummic,  &c.  forth  a  mod  excellent  Mummie,  and  fo  excellent  a

Sfctifcum^  that  any  frefh  wound  may  bee  cured,  and

confolidatcdin  the  fpace  of  twenty  four  hours,  only

with  one  binding  up.

Bairome,3cc.         •jhg  fccond  is  the  reparation  ot  fat '  from  flefh;

for  that  being  feparated  from  Mans  flefh  is  ^  ntioft

excellent  balfomc  allaying  the  pains  of  the  Gout,

and  Cramp,  and  fuch  like  pains,  if  any  part  affe<5led

bee  anointed  with  it  warm.  It  helps  alfo  the  tendons

of.  the  hands,  or  feet,  being  drawn  together,  if  they

bee  daily  anointed  with  it*  It  cures  alfo  the  fcab ,  and

all  kinds  of  Leprofy.

Therefore  it  is  the  chiefeft  Chirurgical  fpecificum ,
and  in  all  cafes,  as  in  wounds  and  the  like  mofl  pro-
fitable, &c.

The  third  is  the  reparation  of  waterie,  and  fieg-
matick  moifture,  together  ivith  the  fat  extraded  out
of  bones.  For  if  thefe  two  bee  carefully  by  the  Art
of  Alchymie  feparated  from  Mens  bones  by  the  de-
gree of  Diflillation ,  and  the  bones  bee  reduced,  or
burnt  into  moft  white  allies  by  the  degree  of  Calci^
nation^  and  then  thefe  three  bee  again  after  a  right
manner  joined  together,fo  that  they  refemb'e  butter,
they  become  a  moft  wonderfull  fpecificall  ArcAnufHy
with  which  thou  maiftfoundly  cure  any  fracfture  of
bones  without  any  pain  at  three  bindings  up ,  fo
that  thou  doft  hmdle ,  and  fet  the  fradurc  ac-
cording to  the  rules  of  Chirurgery  ,  and  then  apply
that  fpecificum  by  way  of  plaifter,  &c.  This


LiB^VIIl*        Ofthe  Nature  of thingf^  §f

Thisalfo  doth  moft  fpeedily  cure  the  wounds  of
the  skull,  and  any  other  contufion  of  bones  whatfo-
ever.

The  fourth^and  the  laft  is  the  reparation  of  Refines,
and  Gummcs  from  the  Skin,  Bowels ,  and  tendons.
For  this  Refine  being  exrraded,  and  fcparated  out
of  them  by  thedfgrecof  Extradion,  according  to
the  Spagiricall  Art,  and  coagulated  by  the  bt  ams  of
theSun,becomeacleer  tranfparent  Glew.  Out  of
tihis  glew  being  prepared,extra^cd^nd  feparated  out
of  Mans  body, as  is  prcrcribed,  a  moft  excellent  Ah
«r.«»«W3 and fpccifkail ftiprick  comes  forth,  where-
with Wounds,  and  Ulcers  may  fpeedily  bee  confo-
lidated,  and  their  lips  bee  brought  together:,,  (.evert
as  two  boards  are  glewed  together  with  glewput  bc^
twixt  them  )  (o  that  you  put  two  or  three  dvops  of  it
being  refolvcd  into  the  wound.  This  alfo  is  a  fingu-
Jar  Arcamm  for  Burns,Falling  of  the  nails,Scabs5&c.  '
if  the  place  affeded  bee  nointed  with  it*  For  the  skin
will  prefently  bee  brought  over  the  raW:  flefh.      /     !

There  might  many  other  fcparations  of  thefe  and
other  things  bee  reckoned  up.  But  feeing  wee  Live
mentioned  them  in  other  placcs,it  would  bee  but  loft
labour  here  to  repeat  them.  It  wil  bee  neceffiry  tbac
wee  fpeak  of  thoic  things  here ,  of  which  wee  hive
made  no  mention  cUcwhere.

And  laftly  in  the  end    of  all  things  fliall  bee  The  laft  SepaJ

the  laft  feparation.,  in  the  third .  generation  ,   the  [aftTudgmcnt.
great  day  wlicn  the  S<(m  of  God  ilial  come  in  ttiajcfty,
and  glory,  before  whom  fhal  be  carried  not  f  words,
garlands,  diadems,  fceprcrs,  &Cv  and  Kingly  jewels.  The  Manna
with  which  princes,  Kings,  Cefars,  &c.  doe  pom-  f^^^
poufly  f$t  fonh  themfelvcs^  but  his  Croffe^his  crown  "  ^^

Nn  Qt


)f  the laft


^8  Of  theKature  of  things^         LiB^VHr..

of  thorns,  and  nails  thruft  through  his  hands,  and
fecr,  and  fpear  with  which  his  fide  was  pierced ,  and
thq  reed,  and  fpiinge  in  which  they  gave  him  vincger-
to  drinke,  and  the  whips  wherewith  hee  was  fcour-
ged,  and  beaten..  Hccomcs  not  accompanycd  with
troopcsofHorre,ajid  beating  of  Drums,  but  fourc
Trurapctsiliall  bee  founded  by  theAngells  towards
the  fourc  parts  of  the  world,  killing  ail  that  are  then
.  alive  with  their  horrible  noife,  in  one  moment,  and
then  prefcntly  rajfing  thefc  again,  together  with  them-
that  are  dead,  and  buryed.
]gatih.»j.  For  the  voice  fhall  bee  heard  .*  Arife  yee  dsad:^

and  come  to  judgment.  Then  ihal  the  twelve  Apoftles
fit  down,  their  (eats  being  prepared  in  the  clouds,  and
ihal  judge  the  twelve  Tribes  of  Ifrael,  In  that  place
the  holy  Angels  fliall  feparate  the  bad  from  the  good,
thecurfcd  from  the blciled,  the  goats  from  the  (liecp.
Then  the  curfcd  fliall  like  ftones,  and  lead  be  thrown
downward  /  but  the  blelltd  fliall  like  eagles  fly  on-
high.  Then  from  the  tribunall  of  God  llial  go  forth
this  voice  to  them  that  (land  on  his  left  hand :  Goeyee
Curfedinto  everiaflhg  fire  prepared  for  the  Devi f I,
and  his  AngtUs  from  nil  eternify  :  For  I  was  an  hun-
gry^  andjeefedme  not-^  thirjly,andyouga'L'e  no  drink-:,
fick^  infnfon^  andnaked^  and  you  v  j  fit  ed  me  not  ^  freed
mee  not^cloathedme  net^and you  fhexved  nf  pJty  to-.
wards  me  y  therefore  fhalt  you  expf^  neftty  from  me.
On  the  contrary,  hee  fhal  fpeafc  to  them  on  his  right;
hand  :  Cejr. eyee blejfed,  and  chefen  into  my  Fathers
Kingdome^  which  hath  hem  pre  fared  for  you^andhis .
Angells  fremthe  foundation  of  the  rvorld.  For  I  was
hungry^  andyou gave  me  meaty  thirfiy,.  andyeugavC'
medrink'y  Irvas  aflranger^andymtiok  me  f/f;  naM^:

mi.


Li  b^VIII.        Of  the  "Nature  ofthingi;  p^

and  you  covered  me-jfick^and  you  vifitid  mt-^irt  Prifon^
And  you  came  unf  me. "Theref ore  livtU  receive  youfnto
my  Fathers  Kingdom^xvhere  are  provided  many  majtfi'
ons  for  the  Saints,  Tou  took  fity  on  me^  therefore  rvilL
I  take  pity  onyou,

AH  thefc  being  finiflied,  and  difpatchcd,  all  Ele-
mentary things  wilreturnc  to  the  firft  matter  of  the
Elements,  and  bee  tormented  to  eternity  ,  and  never
bee  confumed,  &c.  and  on  tiie  contrary^  all  holy
things  flnll  return  to  the  firft  matter  of  Sacraments :
/.  f.Thall  be  purified,  and  in  eternall  joy  glorifie  God
their  Creator,^nd  worship  him  from  age  to  agejfrom
eternity,  to  eternity,  Amen.


Nna  OF


too


LibJX,


zmmiuvjiid  lo  ;  ^^^Q  p  THE


N  A  T  V  R  E

Of  Things.


THE   NINTH  BOOK,


Of  the  Signature  of  Naturall
things.

iN  this  Bookc  it  is  convenient  for  us  fpea-
king  of  the  Signature  of  things  in  the  firft
place5to  declare  by  whom  things  are  fign*
ed,  and  who  the  Signator  island  how  ma-
ny things  there  be  that  are  figned.Youmuft  therefore
Icnow,  that  things  that  are  fiened  arcof^forts.Thc

firft  fort  of  them  Man  figns:  the  Cccond^the  Archeius:.
-  -         ■■-■  ^^


L  ii^X'       of  the  Nature  oftbingsl  |  ojr

the  third,  the  ftars  of  fupcrnaturall  things.  Therefore
upon  this  account  there  are  three  Signators;  Man,
the  Archeius,  and  Stars,

Moreover, you  muft  note,  that  iraprelTions  figned
by  men  do  bring  with  them  a  perfcd  knowledge,  and
Judgement  of  hid  things^and  impart  the  knowlcdg  of
their  hid  vertucSjand  faculties.

The  markes  of  the  Stars  caufe  Prophecies^and  Prc-
fages,  and  declare  the  fupernaturall  vertues  of  things,
and  take  out  the  true  judgements^and  fignes,  in  Geo-
mancy.  Chiromancy,  Phyfiognomy,  Hydromancy,
Pyromancy,  Necromancy,  Aftronomy,  the  Bcrilli-
fticall  art, and  other  Aftrall  fciences.

But  that  wee  may  explain  briefly,  and  truly  all  the
fignes,  or  markes,  it  wil  be  neceffary  in  the  firft  place,
that  wee  fpeak  of  thofe  fignes  of  which  Man  is  the
Signer.  Thofe  being  underftood^you  may  the  more
rightly  underftand  the  reft,whcther  naturaIl,or  fuper-
naturall. It  is  therefore  known,  that  the /<f)rj  carry
about  them,  upon  their  cloak, or  coat  a  yellow  fign.
And  this  is  nothing  elfc  but  that  mark,by  which  they
would  have  you ,  when  you  meet  them,  to  know
that  they  are  lervsm  So  a  Serjeant  Js  known  by
his  divers  coloured  coat,  or  fleevc.  So  every  Magi-
grate  apparclls  his  fervants  with  his  own  colours,  and
hvcrics.

Every  Mechanick  marks  hiswork  witha  certainc
figncy  that  every  one  may  know  whofc  wOrk  it  is.

For  which  end  Carriers  wear  the  livcric  of  their
Biafter,or  city, that  it  may  be  known  whom  they  fcrvc
and  from  whence  they  travcll,that  thereby  they  may
goc  the  fafcr»


♦I  02         *  Of  the  Nature  (pftbingsl  Lib.  IX

SoeveiySouldier  wears  am  arke,  or  badge,  asco-*
lours,  black,  white, yellow, green, blew, or  red, Sec'.
that  he  maybe  diftinguillied  from  the cnemie. Hence
it  may  bee  inown  that  this  is  Cefurs  rouldier,that  the
Khgs^  this  an  Italian^  this  a  French  rou!dicr,&c.
Thcfc  are  figncs  which  belong  to  order,  or  officc,of
which  many  more  may  bee  reckoned  up.  But  ycc
bccaufewfc  have  intended  to  dcfcribc  the  fignes  of
naturalljandfupernaturall  things,  wee  dial  not  fill  up
this  booke  with  other  fignes .

As  concerning  thofelignes,  which  Man  makes,
which  doc  not  only  refpe^  ordcr,oflice,  or  name,but .
conduce  to  the  knowing  of  his  knowlcdge,age,  digni- ''
ty,  degree,  &c.  You  muft  know  concerning  Money
that  every  kind  thereof  hath  its  peculiar  trial!,  and
marke,  by  which  it  is  known  how  much  it  is  valued
at,  whoisthcMafterofit,  and  in  what  place  it  is
ufually  entrant.    Hence  is  that  German  Proverb^Mo-
ney  is  no  where  more  in  requeftthcn  where  it  was  coi-
ned.

Thefamealfoistobecunderftood  of  things  that
are  looked  upon  and  examined  by  men  fworn  and
appointed  forihat  purpofc,  before  they  bee  figned:
as  Cloth  which  is  marked  with  peculiar  marks ,  by
which  it  may  be  known,  tliat  in  examining  they  were
found  good,  and  proved.  Why  is  a  fcal  put  upon
Letters,  but  that  tliereis  a  certain  bond,  which  it  is
lawfijll  for  no  man  to  violate  ?  For  a  feal  is  a  con-
firmation ofLetters,  whence  they  are  of  all  men  ac-
counted ratified.  Without  a  feale  an  Acquitance  is
void,  and  of  no  force.

After  the  fame  manner  many  things  are  marked
with  few  letters,  namcSjOr  words,  as  books ,  which
/  being


Li  B.IX.  Of  the  Nature  of  things.  log

being  writ  upon  the  outfide  but  with  one  word  ,  doe
prefently  flicw  what  is  contained  within.

The  fame  rule  alfo  there  is  for  glafTes  and  boxes  in
Apothecaries  iliops,  all  which  are  difcerned  by  pecu-
liar names,  or  papers  put  upon  them.  Unlcffe  that
were  done,  who  could  difcern  £o  many  Waters ,  Li-
quors^ SyrupSjOyIes,Powders,Seeds,Unguents.  &c.
and  all  nm pies ^  After  the  fame  manner  dotn  the
Alchymift  in  his  Elabatorie  mark  with  names,  and
papers  all  Waters,  Liquors,  Spirits,  Oyles,  Flegms,
Crocus, Alcali,  and  all  fpecies,  that  thereby  hee  may
when  there  is  occafionmake  ufeofany  of  them,and
know  them  .-without  the  help  of  which  his  memory
could  never  bear  them.

So  alfo  may  all  hotifcs  and  buildings  bee  marked
with  numbers  or  figures,  that  the  age  of  every  one  of
them  by  the  firft  fight  of  the  number  may  prefently
be  known.

Thefcand  other  things  that  are  marked  I  was  wil-
ling to  fhew  to  y0U5that  thefe  being  comprehended,  I
might  bee  the  better  underftoodby  you  in  the  reft^,
and  fo  the  fignification  of  every  thing  might  bee  the
more  plain,  and  clear.


O-F


1 04::  Of  the  Nature  of  thing  r^      L  i  b*  IX*

Of  the  MonflmmSignes  of


"K/lAny  men  are   brought  forth  deformed  with
ftrousfignes'    "^"^nionftrous marks,  or  fignes  :  fo  one  abounds
orMarkcs.      With  One  finger,  or  Toe,  another  wants  one.  The  fin-
gers of  Come  grow  all  together  in  the  mothers  womb.
Another  hath  a  wry  foor^  arm,or  neck,&c.and  brings
it  with  him  out  of  the  womb.  Another  hath  abunch
in  his  back :  io  alio  arc  Hermaphrodites  born ,  /.  e,
they  which  are  both  Male,  and  Female,  and  have  the
members  both  of  Man,  and  Woman ,  or  clfe  want
both.I  have  obfervcd  many  of  thefe  monftrous  figns,
as  well  in  Males,  as  in  Fcmales,all  which  are  to  bee
accounted  for  monftrous  lignes  of  fecret  evil  afcen-
What  mon-     ^^^^^*  Whence  that  proverb  is  made  good^Thc  more
ftrous  G§nc8    crooked,thc  more  wicked :  Lame  members ,   lame
(hew.  deeds. For  they  are  fignes  of  vices,feldomc  fignifying

any  good.

As  the  Executioner  marks  his  fons  with  infamous
markes  ;  fothe  evil  Afccndents  imprefic  upon  their
yong,fupcrnatural  mifchicvous  marks^that  they  may
bee  the  better  taken  heed  ot,  which  iliew  fome  marks
in  their  forehead,  cheeks,  ears,  finders,  hands ,  eyes,
tongues,&c.being  fiiort,or  cutted. Every  one  of  thefe
infamous  fignes  denotes  a  peculiar  vice.  So  a  mark
burnt  upon  the  face  of  a  Woman,  or  the  cutting  off
hcrcars,for  the  moft  part  fignifies  theft :  the  cutting
off  the  fingers,  cheating  Diceis-  the  cutting  off  the

hand^


L 1  B^IX,  Of  the  Nature  af  thiffgh  icyy

handj^  breakers  of  the  peace:  the  cutting  ofFtwo  of  the
fingers  perjured  .*  the  pulling  out  of  the  eyc,cunning,
and  fubtilc  villains  ;  the  cutting  out  of  the  tongue,
blafphemers,  (l.mdererSj&c.  So  alfo  you  may  know
them  that  deny  the  Chriftian  Religion  by  a  crofic
burnt  in  the  foles  of  their  feet,  bceaafc  vi^,  they  have
dcnyed  their  Redeemer.

But  that  pafllng  bychefe  we  mayprocecd  to  the  mon-
ftrous  figns  of Malignants  afcendingj^ou  muft  know,
that  all  monftrous  fignes  do  not  arife  from  an  A  fccn-
dent  only^but  oftentimes  alfo  from  the  flars  ol  Mens
minds,which  continually  and  every  moment  afccnd,
and  defcend  with  the  fancy, eftimation ,  or  imagina-
tion, no  othcrwife  then  in  the  fuperiour  firmament.
Hence  cither  from  fear,  or  terrour  of  breeding  !Wo-
mcn,  many  monfters ,  or  children  marked  with  mon-
ftrous fignes  in  the  womb,  are  borne.  The  primary
caufc  of  thcfe  is  fear,  terror ,  appetite  from  which  is
raifed  the  imagination.  If  a  woman  with  child  begirt
to  imagine,  then  her  heaven  by  its  motion  iscarryed
round,  no  otherwifc  then  the  fuperiour  firmament
every  moment,  with  Afcendents,  or  rifings,  or  Set-
tings. For  according  to  the  example  of  the  greater
firmament ,  the  ftars  of  the  Microcofme  alfo  arc
moved  by  Imagination ,  untill  there  be  anafTault,
whereby  the  flars  of  the  Imagination  convey  aji
influence,  and  imprelfion  upon  the  Woman  that  is
breeding,  juftas  it  anyone  lliould imprelTe a  fealc,
orftamp  money.  Whence  thefe  fignes,  and  geniall
marks  are  called  Impreflions  of  infcriour  ftars ,  of
which  many  Philofophcrs  have  wrote  many  things,
and  men  have  endeavoured  much  togiveafull,and
rationall  account  of ,  which  could  never  yet  bee

O  o  done.


io8  Ofthc  Nature  of  things^  LibJX^

done.  Yet  they  doe  adhere,  and  are  impreffcd  on  the
infants,  as  the  ftars  of  the  Mother,  whether  frequent
or  violentjdoe  reft  upon  the  Infants,  or  the  Mothers
longing  is  not  fatisfied  .*  For  if  the  Mother  long  for
this,  or  that  meat,  and  cannot  have  it,  the  ftarrcs  arc
fuffocated  as  it  wcrcinthemfelves,  and  dye  :  And
that  longing  doth  follow  the  infant  all  its  life  time,
that  it  can  never  bee  well  fatisfied.  The  like  reafon  is
there  of  other  things,of  which  we  Ihall  not  hear  Dif-
courfeany  further.


■*-"*"|5f'*


[^^^jSi'LSniL


me.


Of  the  AjlrallSigner  ofThyfiognomy

in  Man^

ThcOngmsU  T?^  figtjcs  of  PliyiiognoiTiy  receive  their  original
^f  .Phyfiogno*  f  fom  the  luperior  ftars-,  this  art  of  Phyfiognomy
was  greatly  eftecmed  of  by  our  Anceftors,and  efpeci-
ally  by  Heathens,Tartars,  and  Turks,  &c.and  other
people,  amongft  whom  it  was  the  cuftomc  toftl  mcrr
For  flaves,  and  it  is  not  yet  altogether  laid  afide  a-
mongft  Chriftians.  Yet  together  with  it  many  errors
crept  in,  not  yet  taken  notice  of  by  any,  whileft  every
blockiih  ignorant  fellow  would  take  upon  him  with-
out any  manner  of  judgement  to  judge  of  any  one.
Where  it  is  worthy  of  admiration  that  thofe  crours
ihould  never  bee  taken  notice  of  from  the  workes ,
dbcds,  and  abilities  of  the  men.

Now  if  any  one  fliall  in  this  place  argue  againft  us,
faying,  that  the  figncs  of  Phyfiognomy  arc  from  the
fiars^and  that  the  ftars  have  no  power  to  compell  any

one.


L I B  JX.  Of  the  NatHre  of  things.  i  o^f

One  or  ftiriiim  up-, he  indeed  doth  not  fpcak  amifle.-but
yet  there  is  fome  difference  in  it  which  muft  be  taken
notice  of,  becaufe  the  ftars  compell  fome,  and  others
they  doe  not  compell.

For  here  we  muft  know,  who  can  rule  or  con-
ftrain  the  ftars,  and  who  can  be  governed  by  them.
Therefore  for  this  you  muft  note ,  that  a  wife  man
can  rule  the  ftarSjand  not  be  fubjc^  to  them.  The
ftars  are  fubje(5l  to  a  wile  man,  and  are  forced  to  obey
him, and  not  he  the  ftars.  But  the  ftars  compell  an
Animall  man,  that  whither  they  lead  him  hce  muft
follo\5^,  juft  as  a  thief  doth  the  gallows,  and  a  high-
way robber  the  wheel,  ihc  fifher  the  fiflics^the  fowler
the  birds^  the  hunter  the  wild  beafts.  And  what
here  is  the  caufe  of  this,  but  that  fuch  a  kind  of
man  doth  neither  know  himfelf,nor  his  own  ftrength,
never  confiders,  or  thinks  that  he  is  the  Icffcr  world,
and  that  he  hath  the  univerfall  Firmament  with  the
powers  thereof  hidinhim^  Wherefore  he  is  called
an  Animall,  an  ignorant  man^and  a  flave  to  any  bafc
fervice ,  and  all  earthly  matters  ^  yet  whereas  he
received  t  hat  priviledge  from  God  in  Paradife ,  that
hee  ftiould  rule,  and  reign  over  all  other  creatures  of
theUnivcrfe,  and  fliouldnot  bee  obedient  to  them  5  ^jjj-jj,,^
therefore  God  created  him  laft  of  all,  all  the  reft  be-  Lerd  of  all  o-'
ing  made  before  him.This  priviledg  man  afrer»vards  ^^"  Creatures,
loft  by  his  fall  :  but  yet  the  wifdome  of  man  was
not  made  fcryile,  nor  did  hee  let  that  liberty  goe  out
of  his  hands.  Whence  it  is  requifite  that  the  ftarres
fliould  follow  him,and  obey  him,and  not  he  the  ftars.
And  although  hee  indeed  be  the  fon  of  Saturne^and
Saturn  his  Afcendcnt^  yet  hee  can  remove  himfclfc
from  him,  and  fo  overcome  him ^t hat  he  can  be  the

O  o  2         off-fpring


no  t>f  the  Nature  0f things,         LfBjJCj

^r  uhdr"    off-<*P*'i"gof  theSun;  and  bring  himfclfc  under  any

Sm  ^ifefiom  ^^^^^  planet,  and  make  himfclfe  its  Son.   And  it  is

cBcftar,and    thc  fame  cafc  hereas  with  a  Digger,  who  for  a  time

^j"^,^;^^/hcr!^^^^  the  Mafter  of  the  Mmcs,

and  with  the  hazard  of  his  life  hath  performed  his  (er-

vicc  faithfully, at  length  reafons,and  difcourfeth  wit!i

himfelfe  thus.

What  will  become  of  thee  at  laft,if  thou  fpendeft
all  thy  life  under  theearth,and  by  thy  continuall  la-
bours doft  alfo  bring  thy  body  >and  life  into  danger  ?
I  will  get  a  releafe  from  my  Mafter,  and  I  will  fervc
another  Mafter,  where  my  life  may  be  made  fweeter,
where  I  may  have  plenty  of  meat,  and  drink,  where  I
may  wear  better  clothes,  have  Jittle  work  and  much
wages,  where  there  ftiall  bee  no  danger  of  the  moun-
tain hanging  over  mee,and  ready  to  tall  upon  me,&Co
After  this  manner  hee  would  bee  at  liberty ,  when  as
otherwife  hee  muft  remainc  a  Mercenary  (crvant,
find  flave,  pining  away  with  much  labour*,  and  low
feeding,  &c.

Now  you  fee  how  a  wife  man  commands  the  ftars  ^^
and  can  remove  himfelfe  from  any  malignant  planet ,
and  bring  himfelfe  under  another  better,  how  he  can
bring  himfelfe  out  of  flavery  into  liberty, and  can  free
himiclfe  out  of  the  prifon  of  an  ill  planet^,

So  alfo  an  Animall  man,  who  is  the  fon  of  the  Sun,
of  lufiter^  Ventts^  and  Mercury^m^y  remove  himfelf
from  a  benigne  planet,  and  fubjcd  himfelf  to  Saturfte^
or  Mars :  fuch  a  man  is  like  to  a  man ,  who  runs  from
arelii;iousColledge,andbeing  impatient  of  an  cafy
life  becomes  a  Souldier,  or  clfe  a  man  of  no  repute,
who  afterwards  fpends  all  his  life  in  forrow ,  and  mi*
fery.

Such


Li  B.IX.  Of  the  Uature  of  things .  i  ti

Such  an  one  alio  is  a  rich  man,  who  being  given  to
lc\'ity  ,fpcnds,and  vvafts  all  his  goods ,  in  Dicirg  ,
Fcafting,  Whoring,  &c.  which  hce  gives  himfclfc  ta
folonguntillallbecfpent,  thcnhcc  comes  to  want
•-and  being  miferably  afflided  with  infamous  want,
becomes  defer vediy  a  laughter  and  (corn  to  all  men,
yea  even  to  the  very  boyes  in  the  flrcets,  whom  you
may  hear  faying  ;  Behold  a  beggerly  man  worth
nothing,  who  when  hee  was  a  Maftcr  difdained  h^
Ma{l:crfiiip^and  had  rather  be  a  llavc,a  begger,a  llave
to  fervants^iccing  he  caa  never  come  to  his  priviled^^
again.

And  hither  doth  a  Malignant  ftar ,  or  Afcendcnt
drive  him.  Unlcffe  he  had  been  a  foole,  and  difho
neft,  he  had  not  left  fo  certain  a  Dominion,  which  hcc
Jiad  over  the  flars,  buthadftrove  againft  it  .--And
although  of  himfelfe  hee  knew  not  how  to  rcfift  the
ftars^  yet  hce  might  have  bent  his  mind  to  the  exam-
ples ©f  others j  thinking  thus  with  himfelfe  .-.Sec  how
rich  that  man  was,  but  foolifhly,  and  fhamefully  hath
brought  himfclf  to  poverty.Alfo  he  lived  gallantly,
withoutmuch  labour,had  fo  much  meat,fuch  wages,
that[hc  could  not  live  better.Now  he  lives  fparingly,
andibrdidly,  andin  fteadof  Wine  hee  fmnft  drinke
Water,  his  labours  daily  incrcafe ,  his  wages  de«
creafe.

Now  how  often  doth  fuch  a  kind  of  Man  talkc
after  this  manner  with  himfelfe.  What  have  I
jdonef  Whither  aav  I  running  headlong,  fo  bafely
fpcnding  my  goods  that  I  got,  who  will  repairs
my  cftatei*  If  ever  I  ihall  receive  what  hath  been
^hus  fpent,  I  will  take  a  far  other  courfc  of  life,
and  will  by  my  harms  Icarneto  bee  wife,  and

Oo  3  will


Ill  Of  the  Nature  oftblngt.  L  [  b.Xi;

will  make  amends   for  my  ev'.ll  deeds.
No  man  is  But  it  is  Convenient  to  know  ,  that  no  man  can

h«m«^buT  ^^^  ^^^^  ^y  ^^^  ^^"^  harme.     For  it  is  a  fooliih,

4^?«. '"  ^  and  fcnfcleflc  thing  to  bee   wife    by  ones  ownc

harme.      Let  him  that   mil  be  wife ,    be  wife  b/

another  mans  example  ^    not  by  his  owne.     For

heethat  hath  once  fpcnt  his  eftaie,    would  fpcnd

it  againe  if  hec  Ihould  have  it ,  and  he  that  once

periiheth,    periflieth  for  ever.     Hee  which  once

hath  caft  a  Dice,  cafts  it  again.    Hee  which  once

fiolc,   and  efcapcd  the  gallowes  ,    will  endeavour

to  (leal  the  fecond  time  alfo.     For   hee  thinkcs

thus  with  himfelfc.    My  cnterprizes  have  fuccce-

dcd  once  ,   and  again,  and  why  not  the  third  ,   or

fourth  time-f     If  God  fhould  once  reftore  what  I

have  loft,  hee  would  reftore  it  the  fecond,  and  third

time,  &c.      If  hee  did  not  forfake   mcc  in  my

firft  raifcry,    hec  will   not  in  the   fecond,    or

,  third,&c.

.!  All  thcfc  doth  an  Animall  man  doe,    the  fcr-

vant,  and  ilave  of  the  ftars,  who  is  turned  every
where,  and  moved  by  the  ft*rres ,  as  a  Rccd  in
water.

And  this  is  the  reafon  why  his  life  is  fpcnt  in  mi-
fery,  and  he  dies  in  infamy.

Who  therefore  will  fuftain  fuch  'fervitudc,  and
not  deliver  himfelfc  from  fuch  a  naftyprifon/  For
any  one  may  by  his  owne  wifdomt ,  together
with  the  help  of  his  ftar,delivcr,  and  free  himfclfe
from  thence.  Coniidcr  the  matter  thus:

A  Fowler  by  his  prudence ,   and  help  of  his
ftar,   overcoming  another  ftarre,  needs  not  goc
after  birds ,    for  they  will  come  after  him  fly-
ing


LibJX;  Of  the  Nature  rf  things.  n?

ing   to  unufuall  places,    contrary  to  their  na-
ture.

So  a  Fifherman  can  by  making  ufc  of  the  wif-
domc  which  God  hath  given  him  make  fifhes  fwim
to  him  of  their  own  accord ,  fo  that  he  may  take
them  up  with  his  hands.

A  Hunter  improving  his  wifdomc ,  doth  by  his

ftar  fo  compell  the  wild  bcafts,  that  hee  need  not  ^

follow  them ,  but  they  will  follow  him  without

any  impulfc  of  nature.  So  alfo  of  the  reft  of  living  J

creatures.

Now  for  the  better  underftanding  of  thefe  things,  |^«5 «« ^^®^-
you  muft  know,  that  Stars  are  twofold^'ierrcttriall ,  ^  '
and  celeftiall,    thefc  of  wifdomc,    the  other  of
folly.

And  as  there  are  two  worlds,the  greater,  and  the
IciTer,  and  the  greater  governs  the  IcfTcr :  fo  alfo-
the  ftarres  of  the  Microcofmc  doe  rule,  and  over-
come theccleftiall.

"Neither  did  God  create  the  planets,  and  other  The  end  of  tbt
ftars  of  the  heaven,  that  they  (hould  rule  over  man^  f^^vf  no?
but  that  they,   as  all  other  crcatures,nioijld- obey, command,
andfervchim.  And  although  the  ii:pcriour  ftars  *"*"•
doe  incline  men,  and  figne  them  -s  alio  all  other
tcrreftiall  bodies,  with  naturall  fioacs,  according  to
the  manner  of  their  generation?  y^t  that  is  no  power,
or  fovcraigmy,    but  only  a  predeftinated  com-
mand,   and  office,     whereby  nothing  may  re*
maine  hid,  or  concealed ,  but  the  inward  force^
and  power  may  bee  brought  forth  by  cxtcriour

%n€S.  ..H*^:"

But  to  return  to  our  purpofc  of  the  Phyfiognomt-S'ga<3  «>??«??
callfigncs  ot  M€n,you  mult  know5t{^t  they  arc  two-  ^°^'

iold


tr4  OftheNatHnnftJjiKgfl  Lib.  IX.

fold,  in  extemall  (liape  indeed  alike,  but  in  power^and
cffed  unlike.

Some  are  fromfupcrnatiirall  ftars  of  the  heaven ,
the  other,  from  the  infcriour  ftarrcs,  "ji:^.  of  the  Mi-
crocofmc.

Whatfocver  the  fuperiour  ftar  figncs  according  to
generation,  even  to  the  midle  age*,  that  thing  figncd
is  prcdcftinated ,  not  wanting  peculiar  powers.
For  it  doth  teftific  of  the  nature ,  and  condition
of  Man,  Whatfocver  therefore  the  infcriour  Har  of
the  Microcofme  doth  fign  in  generation ,  hath  its
originall  from  the  Fathe r,  and  Mother,  vi:[.zs  oft  as
the  Mother  by  her  imagination,  or  appctite,feare,or
terror  hath  by  contad  afFe<^ed'  her  infant  in  her
womb  with  fupernaturall  fignes,  which  arc  called  the
Mothers  marks,  or  the  Womb  marks,of  which  fincc
wee  have  fpolce  already,  wee  fhall  now  fave  the  la-
bour of  itcratioiT.,fceing  our  purpofe  is  only  to  treat  of
Phyfiognomicall  fignes,  where  wee  fliall  fpeak  only
WbM  we  Pby-  Qf  fh^  prcdcftinated  fignes  of  the  ftars,  under  which
figncs?"^  wecunderftandthofe  fignes  of  Men,  which  neither
their  Father ,  or  Mother  had  any  likenefTe  of  in
their  body.

Of  this  fort  are  black,  gray,  little,  or  great  eyes,
long,  crooked,  (harp,  nofe,  pits  in  their  cheeks,  the
check -bone  being  raifed  up,a  flat,  or  broad  nolc,
imalljOr  great  cars,  long  neck,  long  face,  wide,  or
little  mouth,  thick  or  fn*ll,  npany  or  few,  black,ycl-
low,  and  red  haires,  &c.

If  one,  or  more  of  thefc  fignes  appear  in  Man,
you  muft  know,  that  they  dot  not  want  their  fig-*
nification.  '

But


Li  B  JX.  Of  the  Nature  ofihifigs^  ,  1 1 5

But  it  fs  ncccfTary  that  you  coniider  them  accor.
ding  to  the  Phyfiosnomicall  art,  and  that  you  have
certain  knowledge  of  the  Art  of  Signatures,  where-
by you  may  know  through  the  cxtemalJ  fignes  the
inrernall  man.

But  to  proceed  to  the  praclife  of  wliat  we  inten-  What  Black
ded,    and   to  reckon  up  fome  of  the  figncs  of  ^^^**'^"'°^'
Men,  and  their  fignification  in  part.

You  muft  knowjthat  black  eyes  befi  -"'es  a  healthful
conftitution ,  a!fo  many  times  fignifie  a  conftanc
mind,  not  wavering,  or  tcarfull,but  lufty,hearty,true
and  loving  vcrtue.

Gray  eyes  are  afigne  of  a  deceitfully  and  change » ^^«  ^"y.
tjble  mitn.

Weak  eyes  fignifie  good  judgement ,  witty,  and  Weake  Eyes,
profound  deliberation.

Purblind  eyes,  and  fuch  as  turnc  upward ,  and  ^uiW'nd,
downward,  and  to  both  fides  ,  fignifie  a  falfe  man,
and  crafty,  that  cannot  eafily  be  deceived,  treache-
rous ,  hating  labour  ,  flothfull ,  getting  his  living
flothfuUy,  by  Dice,  Ufury,  Whoring,  Kobbe-
ry,&c.

Small  and  deep  eyes  doe  for  the  moft  part  figni-  ^'^^il  and
fie  weak,  and  feeble  eyes ,    and  blindnefic  enfuing  "^'
in  old  age, as alfo ftrong  men,  warlike,  bold,   de-
ceit full  ,    nimble  ,   fa(flious  ,  patiently  undergoing
their  condition, yet  the  end  of  whofe  life  is  for  the
moflparttragicall,&c.  :

Great  eyes,  a  covetous,  ravenous  man ,  efpecially  Gf"f •        1
if  they  hang  out  of  the  head.  ^

Eyes  that  are  alwaies  winking,declare  a  weak  iJght,  wiS"
and  a  mm  to  be  fearefull,  and  folicitous .

P  p  Rol-


ii5

Roling.


Of  the  t{ature  of  things^         L  i  b  JX.

Rolling  Eyes  fliew   an  amorous  affediion,  and
a  prudent    man,    and    a   man   of  quickc   inten-


tion.


Continnslly
dej«ftcd.

Ked.


Clcare.


Eares  great.


Eyes  contiuually  dcjc(fled  fhcvv  a  baflifuH,  modeft:
man^&c.

Eyes  that  are  red ,  fignific  a  bold ,  and  ftrong
man,&c.

Clear  eyes,  and  not  eafily  moveable, (lie w  an  hcro-
ick,  magnanimous,  ftrong,  chearfull,  and  a  man  for-
midable to  his  enemies,  &:c.

Great  eares  fhew  a  good  hearing,  a  good
memory,  attention,  diligence,  a  found  brain ,  and
head,  &c.

Low  eares  arc  an  ill  omen.    For,  for  the  moft
part  they  fignifie  a  man  to  be  malitious ,  fraudulent,
unjuft,and  a  bad  hearing,  a  bad  memory,  a  bold  man,
and  eafily  cxpofing  himfelfe  to  dangers.
Along  nofe,  and  crooked  downwards  is  a  good
A  long  Nofc.  ngn,it  fignifies  a  man  to  bee  valiant,  prudent,  clofe,
rigorous,  and  yet  juft,&c.
'A  flat  nofc  fignifies  a  man  to  be  malic ious,lufl:full^
AaatNoCe.    givcn  tolying,inconftant,  &c.

A  fliarp  nofc ,  a  man  to  bee  a  turne-coatc ,    a
Sharp.  mocker,  &c.

A  long  nofc  a  man  to  be  flow  in  all  his  adlionSjand
i^ng-  to  be  ofa  very  quick  fmell.

The   chtckes    with    pits    in  them  fignifie   a
Hollow  checks  man  to    bee    talkative ,     a  Scorncr ,     contenti-
ous, &c.
A  long  chin,  with  a  long  facc,fignifie  a  man  to  be
Along  CbiPigivcmQ  angcr^and flow to labour,&c.


A


L I B^  VIlT*        Of  the  Nature  of  things  1 1 7

A  divided  chin   fignifies  a  man  to  bee  faithful!,  ^^^^^'^^
officious,  fubtile^and  various  in  his  vvords/pcaking
one  thing ,  and  meaning    another ,   angry ,    yet
forry  for  his  anger,  ingenious,  and  given  to  inven-
tions,

A  great  and  large  mouth  fignifies  a  man  to  bee  a  a  grc«
great  devourer ,    filly ,  fooliili ,  imprudent,  dare-  ^oi"**'
ing ,  &c.         A  little  mouth  fignifies  the  con-
trary.

Lips  drawnc  to,  where  the  upper  is  greater  Lip, atawnc*^
then  the  lower,    fignific  a  man  to  bee   angry ,
warlike ,    couragious ,    yet  for  the  moft  part  of
rode,  and  uncivfll  behaviour,  and  manners  like  to  a
fwine.

Lips  great  beneath,  fignific  a  man  to  be  dull,  foo-  Lips  great
lifli,andblockilh,&c.  ^"^^^^•

Judgement  by  the  haircs  either  of  the  head,  or  Hairc  fignifies
beard,  is  not  very  certain,  becaufeufe  teacheth  that  "°^^'"§  ^7.   *!
they  can  be  divers  wayes  varycd,  as  to  bee  made    "*
black,  or  yellow,  or  red,  or  white,  and  hoary,  or
curled,  foft,  or  hard,  as  any  one  defires  to  have
them.

Hence  it  will  come  to  pafie ,  that  many  who
are  othcrwife  skilfull  enongh  in  the  Art  of  Phyfi-
ogmony,would  be  moft  iliamefully  deceived,  whilft
they  (hould  raihly  judge  by  the  hairs,  imputing  thac
to  the  ftars,  which  fiiould  rather  be  afcribw^d  to  men
themfclves.

Yet  it  cannot  bee  denyed ,  but  that  haires  firm-
ly iaftened  on  the  head ,  doc  fignific  a  good
health  of  the  head,  as  alfo  of  the  whole
body.

And  this  is  the  reafon,  why  they  that  buy  Horfcs

P  pz  pull


1  v8  Of  the  Nature  of  things^         L  i  b  JX^

pull  theirtails,  that  by  this  means  they  may  judge  of
ihcirfoundneffc.

So  Hoggcs  arc  tryed  by  their  briftles,  Fidi.
by  their  flieils ,  and  fcales ,  a  Bird  by  his  fea-
thers, &c.

Ln'' Necks        Thenccke,    ifitbe tdolong,{ignifiesa  manto
° '    *  '   bee  follicitous,prudenr,  and  attent,  &c.

Broad  Shoicicrs     Broad   fliouldcts  y    and  backe ,   fignific  a  man.

andtacb.  ^.o  btc  ftrong ,  and  able  for  carrying  or  remo-
ving, &c.

Mufciilouj  Armes  that  are  mufculous,  fignifie  a  man  to  be

^'""*  ftrong  and  able  for  any  exercife,as  bcating^poundingi-

fliooting,  &:c..

Hard  hands.  Hands  that  bee  hard  fignifie  a  man  to  bee
laborious ,  and  a  hireling, &c.  Soft  hands,the  con-
trary.

^fhortBody..  A  fliort  body,  and  long  legs  fignifieaman  tobe
a  good  runner,'  to  bee  eafilyfatisBed  with  meat,,
anddrinke,  and  for  the  moft  part  to  bee  of  a  fliort
life.

Great  and  clear  veines  under  the  middle  age  of
man  fignifie  a  man  to  be  full  of  bloud  and  juicc,but
above  the  midle  of  his  age  to  be  commonly  fick,  yet
long  lived*

b^^'Ifd'oibJ'       ^^  much  as  concerns  the  manners,  gefluresof

by {L  man?'    men,  nothing  can  be  fo  eafily  known,  and  judged  by

ncrs,and  be-     them.

havioiir  o  P^j,  experience  teachcth  that  thefe  can  every  mo-

ment bee  changed,  as  to  deceive  the  Signator ,  and
make  him  erroneous  in  his  judgement :  And  becaufe
it  hath  not  been  obferved  hitherto  fo  accurately  by
all  Aflronomers;  It  is  therefore  the  Signators  pare
not  alwayes  to  look  to  the  manners  and  anions  of

men


L I  bJX.  Of  the  NatHfe  of  things.  1 1  p

men ,  but  rather  to  other  figns  of  the  body, which  arc
fixed,  and  can  by  no  Art  be  counterfeited  or  chan*
ged.

For  if  red  hairs,  moving  the  forehead  ,  and  eye-
lids,  a  cheerfulljraifed,  and  unmovcahle  countenance,
a  frequent  agitation  of  the  mouth ,  a  ftout  mufed
walking,  and  a  light  mind,  iliould  neceflarily  declare
a  man  to  be  a  gallant  fouldierand  ftout,  every  one
could  by  his  induftry  and  art  make  himfelfe  feem  to
be  fuch  an  one-,  that  hee  might  by  his  lookcs  bee
the  better  approved  of,  and  obtaine  greater
pay.

The  like  alfo  may  be  judged  of  other  kinds  of  be-
haviour, which  pretend  to  vvifdom,folly,truth,lyiags
fortune,  vi<^ory,  &c.


Ppj  e/


I30


Of  the  Nature  of  things,     L  i  i\  IX*


%Mi^mtMM^}fim^MSMmmm


What  Chlros
Hiancy  is.


Of  the  Afirall  Signes  of

Chiromancy*

/^Onccrnlng  the  Signes  of  Chiromancy,  we  mud
^^hold  that  they  doe  arife  from  the  fuperiouf
ftars  of  the  feven  planets^  and  that  wee  muft  know
and  judge  of  them  by  the  feven  planets.

Now  Chiromancy  is  an  Art,  which  doth  not
only  look  into  the  hands  of  men,  and  make  judge-
ment by  their  lines  and  wrinkles,  but  alfo  confiders
all  hearbs,  woods,  hard  ftones,  carthcs,  and  ri-
vers, and  whatfocver  hath  lines ,  veins ,  or  wrin-
kles.

Neither  doth  this  Art  want  its  crrours,which  thofc
Aftronomers  were  guilty  of.

For  they  afligned  the  fingers  of  both  hands  to  the
planets,  and  chicfeft  ftars,   whereas  there  arc  but
-     five  fingers  in  one  hand,  and  in  both  ten,  yet  the  pla-
nets are  reckoned  but  feven.

How  then  can  thefc  things  agree  amongft  them-
felves  't

Now  if  there  were  (tvt^  fingers  on  each  hand,  it
then  might  bee  granted,  that  every  finger  might  bee
afcribed  to  fevcrall  planets.

Whether  the  "^"^  V^^  ^^  ^'^^^"^  °"^  many  times,that  fome  men  may
fingers  be  havc  but  fcvcu  fingcrs  on  both  hands,  the  reft  being
afligned  to  ;hc  ^afually  cut  off:  but  fein^  that  they  were  cutoffaand

Flanks.  ^^^


L  IB  JX.       Of  the  Nature  of  things^  i  ^j

juft  fcven  were  not  at  their  birth,  this  matter  cannot
be  related  hither.

And  if  it  lliould  be  fo,  that  a  man  fhould  bee  borne
with  feven  fingers,  whether  on  one  hand^,  or  onboth.-
yet  that  were  monftrous,  and  bcfide  the  ufuall  order
of  Nature,  and  not  fubjcwtto  theftars.  Therefore
this  alfo  cannot  belong  to  this  place.

But  if  there  muft  be  but  five  fingers  on  each  hand,
and  fcven  planers,  andthefc  mutually  bee  compared
amongft  themfelves,it  would  then  be  convenient  that
the  lots  of  the  planets  fliould  be  put  into  a  box ,  to
know  which  two  planets  muft  give  place,  and  bee
left  out.

-  Yet  becaufe  this  cannot  bee,  and  the  planets  have
neither  dice,  nor  lots  in  the  Firmamentj  It  would  be
worth  wondering  at,  if  any  one  iliould  ufurp  this
power  to  himfclf,  as  to  allot  by  the  name  of  the  pla-
net, and  figne,  the  thumb  to  Venu^^  the  fore-finger  to
lupter^  the  midle-finger  to  Saturne,  the  ring  -finder
to  the  Sun,  and  the  little-finger  to  Mercury ,  in  the
meane  time  carting  out  LM^rs^  and  the  Moon ,  as  it
were  out  of  their  tribe  and  liberty.

Which  things  being  fo-,  who  can  wonder  that
Mdrs  doth  ftir  up  his  fons  with  juft  indignation  to  kill
thatcafteroflots,  ortobearea  perpetuall  hatred  a-
gainft  himr'jjWho  can  wonder  why  the  Moon  fhould
enfeeble  the  brain  of  that  player  3  or  take  away  his
reafon  ?

And  this  is  their  firft  errour ,  which  \  as  wee
have  faid,  they  have  committed  in  Chiroman-
cy.

The  fecond  erroux  in  it  is  this :


133  Of  the  Nature  (ffthings~l  Lib.  IX,

It  oftentimes  happens  that  the  original! ,  and  na-
turall  lines  of  the  hands  are  changed  by  hurts,  and
cafualties,  or  arc  made  greater,  or  IcficT,  or  doe  ap-
pear in  other  places.

For  as  if  there  be  a  high-way  obftruded  by  any
thing  or  be  flopt  up  by  the  fall  oi  a  mountain,  or  be
fpoiled  by  the  overflowing  of  waters,  men  go  about
in  another  way  neer  to  it ;  fo  it  happens  in  the  old
lines  of  the  hands,  that  fometimes  after  the  curing  of
wounds,  or  ulcers,  together  with  new  flefli,  alfo
new  lines  doe  grow  out,  and  the  old  are  quite  abo-
liflicd.

In  the  fame  manner  alfo  by  reafon  of  hard  labours
the  lines  are  defaced ,  or  they  which  were  original!
grow  great  •,  as  it  is  in  trees :  For  if  a  young  tree
icnd  forth  many  branches  on  all  fides ,  thefe
being  cut  off,  the  tree  it  fclfe  becomes  big-
ger.

But  that  wee  may  at  length  proceed  to  the  pra<5li(c
of  the  Art  of  Chiromancy ,  and  brfefly  declare
ouropinion;  I  would  have  you  know ,  that  I  will
indeed  change  nothing  of  what  concerns  the  hands  ,
but  acquiefce,  and  be  fatisfied  with  the  oblervations,
and  defcriptions  of  the  Ancienrs.  Yet  I  purpofe  in
this  pradife  of  Chiromancy  to  write  of  thofe  things,
of  which  the  Ancients  have  made  no  mention  of,  as
of  the  Chiromancy  of  Hearbs,  Woods,  StoneSjand
the  like.
The  Chiro-  And  it  mufl  firftbe  noted,  that  all  Hcarbs,wh:ch
mancy  of       ^^c  of  ouc  kind  muft  be  of  one,  and  the  fame  Chiro-

Hcarbs  and  ^

Woodf.          mancy.

But  if  tfxir  lines  bee  unlike,    and  appearc  grea-
ter^ or  IclTer  in  fome  of  them  ••  that  AS,  by  reafon  of

their


L I S^  Villi        oft  be  Nature  of  things^  i^  5

their  age.     Wee  doe  therefore  clearly  profcffe,  that  What  ufe  is  of
the  Chiromancy  of  Hcarbs,  condiiceth  to  nothing  ^'^^'"'
t\k  bucto  know,  and  underftand  the  age  of  any
Hcarb5orRoot.

But  by  way  of  arguing  any  may  heT€^>b|ed ,  that
there  is  no  hcarb  as  long  as  it  growes  is  older  tfien
another,  four  or  five  monthes  at  the  raoft,  if  the  fup-
putation  begins  from  May  till  Autumne ,  at  which
time  hcarbs  die,and  fall  from  their  root.

To  this  I  anfwer,  that  from  God  there  is  but  one  The  condinoti
vertuc  in  ^  root,  which  is  the  firfl:  being  and  fpirit  of  °,[j5Hea?b  "  ^^
the  hearb,  by  rcafon  of  which  the  hcarb  grows^and  is
fupported  untill  the  prcdcftinated  time ,  and  untill  it
bee  exalted  to  the  produiftion  of  feed.     And  this  is
a  fign,  and  a  mark,  that  the  vertue  returns  back  to  the
root,  and  fo  the  hearb  is  drycd.  As  long  as  that  fpi-
rit which  is  the  chiefcft  vertue  of  the  hearb  rcmaines
in  the  root,  the  hearb  every  yeer  is  renewed.-  unlefic
it  be,  that  that  fpirit  together  with  the  hearb  be  taken
way,  and  decayes.  Then  the  hearb  is  not  renewed  .For
the  root  is  dead,3nd  hath  no  more  life  remaining  in  it.
But  after  what  manner  that  fpirit  together  with  the
hearb  is  taken  from  the  root,  or  with  the  root  from
the  earth,  that  the  vertue  thereof  cannot  goe  backc
into  the  root,  or  from  the  root  into  the  earth,  is*  not*
tobeconfideredin  this  place.    For  that  is  a  fublimc
myftery  of  Nature,  and  not  to  be  openly  difcovcrcd -
by  rcafon  of  ignorant  Phyfitians,  who  doe  not  only
fcoffe  at  but  contcmne  fuch  fecrets.    Therefore  what
here  wee  have  omit. ed,  wee  fliall  fet  downc  in  our
Hcrbdl.      ,     .^ ,  ^^,y,  ^:^,.p-jr -1-;  ^^Jq  ^^i^. ,

Moreover,  by  how  much  the  yonngcr  hcarbs  arc,
fo  much  the  mofc  doe.  they  excell  in  power  and  ver-
tue.     '-  i—   -^       ^         ^  As


124  Ofthe  "Nature  of  things^  LibJX*

As  by  age  a  man  is  weakncd,and  fails  in  flrcngth/o
alfo  doe  hcarbs.

But  to  know  what  the  Chiromancy,  and  age  of
hcarbs, and  fuch  Uke  things,  is ,  daily  experience  is
required,  feeing  the  number  of  their  years  is  not  writ-
ten upon  them,  but  it  mult  be  divined,  as  I  have  fliid,
b^  Chiromancy  only.

Now  Chiromancy  doth  not  confidei  numbers,  let*
ters,  orchara(fters,butlines,vcins,aFKi  wrinkles  on-
ly 5&:c.  according  to  the  age  of  any  thing.  For  by
how  much  the  older  a  thing  is,  fomuch  the  greater,
andeafier  tobefeenare  the  lines,  and  thevertue,  and
operation  of  the  thing  fo  much  the  duller.

For  as  a  difeafe  of  one  moneth  or  yeare ,  is  more

eafily  cured  then  that  which  is  of  two ,  three ,  four,

^°ft"fe  a"i^-  ^^  ^^^  moneths,  and  years:  So  an  hearb  doth  looner

cTto  ola        cure  a  difeafe  of  one  moneth,or  year,  then  that  which

difeafesj  and  fo  is  of  tv^o,  three,  or  four  moneths,  or  years.  And  for

ttary^*^°"'      ^^^^  caufe  youn^  hearbs  muft  bee  applyed  to  old

griefs;    and  old  hearbs  or  medicines  to  young  or

new  difeafes.     For  if  an  old  hearb  fhould  be  applyed

to  an  old  difeafe,  the  blind  would  lead  the  blind,and

both  would  fall  into  the  ditch.

^  This  is  the  reafon  why  many  medicines  doe  not

wofK,  but  are  taken  into  the  body ,  and  pofTcilc  the

members,  as  dirt  flicks  to  the  fhoocs,w^hencc  difeafes

are afrenvard doubled,  &:c.

Now  ignorant  Phyfitians  never  confidered  this,'
but  by  their  ignorance  have  deftroycd  more  then  ever
they  cured.

In  the  firft  place  therefore,  you  that  are  Phyfrtians
muft  know,  tfiat  the  medicine muftbcyounger  then
the  difeafe,  that  it  may  bcc  ftronger  to  expeirit.  For

it


L I  B,1X.  Of  the  Nature  of  things.  1 2  5

ifthe  medicine  be  more  powerfull  then  the  difeafe^thc
direafe  will  be  overcome  as  fire  is  quenched  with  wa«
ter.  But  if  the  difeal'cbee  ftronger  then  the  medicine,
it  turncs  the  medicine  into  poiron,whence  difeafes  arc
afterward  doubled,  and  increafed.

So  if  a  difeafe  bee  like  Iron,  it  muft  be  cured  with  a
Chalybtat  medicine.  For  Steel  cannot  be  overcome
by  Iron.  The  more  powerful  doth  alwaies  overcome,
and  the  weaker  is  overcome.

Although  therefore  it  was  not  our  purpofe  in  the
beginning  to  write  in  this  place  of  Phylick,yet  for  the
iake  of  true,  and  genuine  Phyfitians,  I  could  not  pafs
over  thcfc  things  in  (ilcncc.


%M'MMM;ri^^^M^'Mt'4^t-Mfii^.


Of  Mineral!  Signes.

MIneralls  alfo,  and  Mctalls  before  tbey  come  to  ^f^^"^'
the  fire  have  their  true  fignes^and-fignifications,  "^^^ differ.
which  they  have  received  from  the  Archeiu&,  and  the
fuperiour  ftars,  every  one  of  them  refembling  fomc    -
kind  of  them  by  diftinit  colours  ,  and  differences  of
the  earth.     FortheMincrall  of  Gold^is  d'ld'md  from
theMinerall  of  Silver:  fo  alfo  is  the  Minerall  of  Sil-
ver from  that  of  Copper  :  and  the  Minerall  of  Cop-
per from  that  ot  Iron :  fo  the  Minerall  of  Iron  from
that  of  Tinne,  and  Lead,  and  fo  of  the  reft.

No  man  can  deny,  but  that  the  Minerall ,  and  all
Metallick  bodies  of  Mines,  which  lie  hid  in  the  earth,

Qqi  may


12^  Of  the  Ujit  ure  of  things^         L  i  b  JX.

may  be  known  by  art  of  Chiromancy  by  their  cxte-
riourfignes.  That  is,  the  Chiromancy  of  Mines,
Vcines,  and  Conduits^Scc.  by  which  not  only  thofe
thingSjWhich  being  hid  within  them  ,  are  brought
forth5but  alfo  a  certaine  depth ,  and  richneffe  of  the
Mine,  and  plenty  of  Mctall  is  manifefted.And  in  tl.is
Chiromancy  three  things  are  neceflary  to  be  knowr^
'vi^.  the  age,  depth,  and  breadth  of  the  veins, as  hath
been  faid  a  little  before  of  hcarbs.  For  by  how  much
the  older  the  veins  are,by  fo  much  the  richer,  and
more  augmented  are  the  Mines.

Concerning  this  we  muft  know  thus  much,  that  all
Metalls,  which  as  yet  lie  hid  in  their  matrix  doe  con-
ftantly  grow.

Whence  alfo  it  is  manifeft,  that  every  thing  that
grovves,although  it  be  placed  out  of  its  matrix  cannot
be  made  lelTe,  but  forthwith  grows,  (  i.e.  )  is  muhi-
plycd,  and  accordiug  to  its  fubftance  ,  meafure,  and
weight,  grows  untillthe  predeftlnated  time.  Now
this  predcftinated  time  is  the  third  part,  of  the  ap-
Thcre  arc  pointed  agc  of  all  Mineralls,  Vegetables,  and  Ani-
Tfuc£  cwefc    malls,  which  arc  the  tiiree  chief  heads  of  all  carchly.

heads  ot  all  •■

,hiB"s.  thingSi.

"Now  whatfocvcr  doth  yet  remaine  in  its  matrix,

doth  grow  fo  long  untill  the  matrix  dies.  For  the

matrix  hath  its  appointed  time  to  live,and  die,  efpeci-

ally  if  it  be  fubje^  toexternall  Elements.

Wiiatisthe        That  which  is  not  fubjeatothem,  hath  no  other

tearmecf       ^^j^c  ortcrm  thcn  the  Elements  thcmt'elvcs  have,

EUmcntj.       ^vith  which itaHo  IhaUdie  and  perifli  in  the  day  of

Renovation  (which  is  their  term.)

Henccit  follows,  that  all  things  which  arc  within
the  earih^are  not  fubjci^cd  to  the  cxternali  Elements,

nei«-


L I  bJX.       Of  the  Nature  of  things^  tif

neither  v^re  they  fenfible  of  cold,  or  moifturc,  or  dry-
nefTcjOrwind,  or  aire,  by  which  they  may  bee  dc-
ftroyed.  Such  kind  of  bodies  therefore  cannot  bee
putrefied,  or  contracft  any  filthine{re,or  ftink,or  die,
as  long  as  they  continue  within  the  earth,  in  their
Chaos.

So  much  be  fpoken  of  Metalls,  and  as  of  them,
fo  alfo  it  may  bee  faid  of  many  men,  who  in  the
caves  of  mountaineshvc  fome  hundreds  of  years,as
if  they  were  gyants,  or  pygmies,  of  which  we  have
wrote  a  particular  book.

'  But  to  defcend  to  the  pradifeof  the  Chiromancy  of
,  Mines,  which  wee  fliall  give  you  to  underftandin
■  few  words ;  you  mufi  know  that  the  veines  by  how
much  the  deeper,  and  broader  they  are,    fomucfi  .
the  older.  For  where  the  courfe  of  the  veins  is  a  great
way  extended,  and  at  length  decay ,   and  are  not  hid-
den, it  is  a  bad  figne.    For  as  the  courfcs  of  the  veins
doe  decay,  fo  alfo  doe  the  Mines  themfelves  decay,
which  they  fignifie  by  their  depth.    Although  fome«
times  there  are  good  Mines  found,  yet  by  how  much
the  deeper  they  goe,  they  doc  more,and  more  decay,
fo  that  it  is  not  worth  while  to  worke  in  them.    But
when  the  veins  are  enlarged  with  other  additions ,  or
oftentimes  cut  off,  it  is  a  good  ligne,  iliewing  that  the
Mines  are  good  not  only  in  the  top,  but  that  the  fame
alfo  are  increafed,  and  multiplyed  in  depth,  and
length  for  the  mofl  part,  the  Mines  being  made
more  rich,  afford  pure  gold,  and  fo  a  moft  large
treafure.

It  is  without  ground,  that  many  Miners  commend
thofe  veins  only  which  go  diredly  downward,3nd  in-
cline from  the  Eaft  to  the  Weft.For  the  nature  of  the

Qc[j.  Minc$3


Xa8  Vftbe  Nature  ofthingu  L  f  b.  IX;

"'  Mines  and  experience  tcachcth,  that  veing oftentimes

which  bend  trom  the  Wcfl  to  the  Eail: ,  or  from  the
South  to  the  North,  and  fo  contrarily  from  the
Korth  to  the  South,are  not  IcfTe  rich  then  others  arc.
'  Therefore  there  is  no  vein  to  be  efteeincd  before  ano-
ther. But  we  think  it  convenient  to  difcourfc  of  this
no  longer.
By  what  Nowconccming  the  Other  fignes  of  the  intcrnall

figncs  Mines    earth,  OS  olfo  thc  colours  of  Minerallsj  wc  fhallbricf-

As  oft  as  Miners  fall  upon  a  fat  earth,  which  doth
iigmfle  a  vein  of  a  pure,  and  new  mctall,  that  is  a  very
goodfigne  afluringthat,  that  Metall,ofwhichitisa
vein/  is  not  faJ^  off.

So  alfo  it  the  earth  that  is  digged  have  no  Metall
ink,  but  be  fat,  of  a  white  colour,  or  black  ,  or  like
clay  or  green^or  blue,  &c.  then  that  alfo  is  a  good
Cgne  of  fome  good  Metall  that  is  hid  under  it.
Therefore  you  muft  continue  digging  5  and  not  give
over.

Miners  in  thc  firft  place  have  refpeft  to  thc  excel-
lentjbeautifuljand  chiefeft  colourSjas  are  green  earth,
or  ChryfocolJ^Vcrdegreafe,  Azure,  Cinnabar,  San-
darachajAuripigmcntum,  Litharge  of  Gold,  and  Sil-
ver, &c.  every  one  of  thefe  almoft  doc  for  the
moft  part  figniiie  a  peculiar  Metall,  or  Mine-
rail.

So Verdegrcafe,  Chryfocolla,  green  earth,  for
moft  part  fignifie  Copper.

So  Azure,  or  white  Arrenick,or  Litharge  of  Silver
fignitie  the  Metall  of  Copper.

So  Cinnabarjaod  Sandaracha  do  fome  times  fig nific
Goldjfoixiciimcs  Silvcr53nd  fometimes  a  mixture  of
both.  So


Li  B.IX*  Of  the  'Nature  rf things.  129

So  Auripigtncntum,  red  Sulphur,  and  Litharge  of
Gold,for  the  moft  part  fignific  Gold.

So  when  ChryfocoU  is  found  mixt  with  the  A-
ziire^or  the  Azure  with  ChryfocoU,  and  Anripig-
nientjfor  the  molt  part  they  fignific  an  excellent  and
rich  Minerall.

Where  ftones,or  earth  are  found  ofanlron  colour,
they  doc  certainly  betoken  an  Iron  Mine.

Youmuft  note,  that  fometimes  it  comes  to  palfe ,
that  the  Archeius  of  the  earth  doth  by  forae  fecret
palTagecaftup  fome  Metall  from  the  more  inward
part  of  the  earth.  And  that  is  a  good  figne.

Miners  therefore  muft  not  bee  difcouraged  when
they  fee  fuch  certainc  fignes,  and  hope  of  forae  excel-
knt  Mine  lying  under.  And  ifthin  leaves  of  Met  alls ,
like  TalkCjdo  adhere  to  rocks,or  ftoncs,that  is  a  moft
furc  fign.

Now  concerning  Conifcations  they  muft  bee  dili-  ^'^^^^^rlTtSt*'
gently,  and  ttLidiouily  obfcrvcd,  for  tney  are  molt  in  Mines.
certain  fignes  of  Metalls  lyin^  hid  under  them,as  alfo
of  the  fame  extcnt,and  fame  kind.  Where  yet  wee
muft  note,  that  thofe  Metalls  are  not  yet  come  to
perfc(ftion>but  are  as  yet  in  their  firft  being.  And  whi-
ther foever  the  Corufcation  reacheth,fo  far  alfo  rea*
cheth  the  courfe  of  Metalls,  &c.

Mor<:over  you  muft  know,that  Corufcation  is  of  a  Corufcatiom .
threefold  colour,  as  White,  Yellow,and  Red,  where  ^^5^°/^^^'"^
by  all  Metalls  are  difcoveredto  us.  For  a  white  Co-
rufcation fignifies  white  Metalls,  as  Tinne,  Lead,  Sil-
ver, &c.  a  red  Corufcation  iignifies  red  Metalls,  as
Copper,and  Iion,&c.a  yellow  Corufcation  fignifies
golden  Metalls,

Add^


1 30  of  the  Nature  of  things^      L  li]  IX4

Add  moreover,  that  a  t hin,and  fubtil  Coriifcation
is  the  beft  figne.

For  as  you  fee  it  is  in  trees^  that  by  how  much  the
fewer  flowers  thereare/o  much  the  better,  greater,
and  more  Hivory  nrc  the  fruit  •  fo  alfo  fmall  and  fub-
tile  Corufcations  fignifie  fubtile  and  excellent  Mc-
talls,as  the  contrary  doe  the  contrary.

Moreover  you  mufl  know,  that  as  long  as  thofc
Corufcations  appcar^whether  they  be  grcar,or  fmall,
or  of  this  or  that  colour,  the  Metalls  in  thofe  Mines
have  not  yet  attained  to  perfe<ftion,but  are  yet  in  their
firft  being  as  the  fperm  of  a  man  in  the  matrix  of  a
woman.
W'hatCorurca-  -But  now  what  Corulcation  is ,  wee  muft  confider
tionis.  in  this  place  .-and  wc  muft  know  that  it  appears  in  the

Mines  by  night  like  a  fparkling  fire,no  othervvifc  then
gunpowder  that  is  laid  in  a  long  train,  andbeing  kin-
dled at  one  end  makes  a  long  fialliing.

After  the  fame  manner  is  Corufcation  carried
along ,  from  the  Eaft  to  the  Weft ,  or  from  the
Weft  to  the  Baftpfrom  the  South  to  the  North,  or
contrarily.

All  thcfe  CorufcationSjhow  ever  they  appear,  are  a
certain fignc of  Courfes of  Metalls,  that  by  them
they  may  be  known,  and  Metalls  as  certain  gifts  of
God  may  be  brought  forth  out  of  the  earth.  For
what  God  created  for  mans  ufe,  hee  put  that  nature
into  it  that  it  fliould  not  be  hid  .-and  although  it  were
hid, yet  he  made  peculiar  externall  fignes  which  con-
duce to  the  finding  of  it  out,by  which  the  wonderful
predeftination  of  it  maybe  known.

In  the  fame  manner  if  men  hide  treafures  they
markc  the  place  with  fome  certain  marks,  and  bury

them


L I BJX4  Of  the  'Nature  of  things^  1 5 1

them  by  fomc  bound,  ftatue,  or  fountaine ,  or  any
other  thing,  that  when  there  is  occaiion  they  may
find,  and  dig  them  up  again.

The  ancient  ChaUeans  and  Grecians^  if  in  times  of  How  Chalde-
v/ar  fearing  to  be  driven  away,or  baniflied,theywOLild  ^"^  ^nd  Gred-
hide  their  treafure,  would  markc  the  place  no  other-  aeafurt!^^*^""
wife,  then  propofe  tothemfclves  a  certain  day,  hour,
and  minute  of  the  year,  and  did  obferve  in  what  place
the  Sun,  ot  Moon  fliould  caft  their  fliadow,  and  there
did  bury,  and  hide  their  treafiirc.  ;.;.

This  Art  they  cdWSciomamy ,  /.  e.  the  Art  ofwkatScio-
Shadowing.  By  thefc  ihadowings  many  Arts  have  ^^^^'^y  '«•
had  their  ground  ,  and  many  hid  things  have  been
revealed, and  all  Spirits,   and  Ailrail  bodies  arc
known.

Thefc  are  Cabalifticall  fignes,  that  cannot  de-
ceive ,  and  therefore  diligently  to  bee  taken  notice
of.

You  muft  therefore  take  heed,  that  you  fuffer  not  Divining
your  fclves  to  be  feduced  by  the  divinations  of  uncer-  ^P'^*  ""^^'^-.
tain  Arts*  for  they  are  vain,  and  fruitlefle,  efpecially  '^'"^*
Divining  rods,  which  have  deceived  many  Miners.
For  if  they  ihew  a  thing  truly  once,   they  failc  ten
times.

A  Ifo  wee  muft  not  truft  other  fraudulent  fignes  of
the  dtvill,  which  ave  made,  and  appeare  in  the  night,
and  at  fome  inconvenient  times  preternaturally,  fuch
as  arc  gholh,  &  vilions.For  I  would  have  you  know,^
that  the  devili  can  (liew,  and  caufe  fignes,  bur  out  of
m-cer  fraud,  and  deceit.

So  there  is  no  Church  built, but  the  devili  hath  his
Chappell  there.  There  is  no  Chappell  built,but  hee
fcts  up  his  Altar.  There  is  no  good  feed,  but  hee  fo  ws

Rr  amongft


ija  Qf  theNature  of  things^.         LibJX^

amongft  it  his  tares.  The^fame  is  the  nature  of  Vifi  •
lions, and  fupernaturall  Apparitions,  in  Cryftalls,
Berills,  Looking-glaiTes,  and  Waters^  as  they  arc
by  Ccremoniall  Negromancers  contrary  to  Gods,
command^and  the  power  of  the  hght  of  Nature  bafe-
ly  abufed.

Vilions  indeed  are  not  abfolutely  to  be  rejeded  .
for  they  have  their  place,  but  then  they  muft  bee
done  after  another  proccflc.  For  now  wee  arc  not
any  longer  in  the  iirft  generation,  but  the  fc-
cond.-  Ceremonies  therefore,  and  Conjurations  are
not  any  longer  to  be  ufed  by  us  Chriftians  in  the  rege-
neration, as  the  Ancients  in  the  old  Tcftament,\vho
lived  in  the  firft  generation  utcd  them. For  thole  prc-
figurations  were  for  us  who  were  to  live  in  tlic  New
Teftament..

Whatfoever  things  therefore  the  Ancient$  that
were  under  the  Old  Teftament,and  in  the  firft  Gene-
ration did  doe  by  Ceremonies  ,  Conjurations,  &c.
wee.Chriftiansafthefecond  Generation,  and  in  the
New  Teffament  muft  doe  by  prayer,  knocking,  and-
fceking,  and  procure  by  faith.
In  what  ehiefe    In  tiicfc  5  chicf  points  confif^s  all  the  foundation  of
poi"^?'*?^      .theMaoicall.  and  Cabalifticall  Art,  by  which  wee
M-is;ick  and     may  obtain  whatlocvcr  we  denrc,  lo  that  to  us  Chri-
Cabaiiccon-   fjians  nothing  is  impoffible.
•'  *'  But  wee  fliall  dcfiil  to  treat  here  of  more  things

concerning  thefe  and  other  monuments  of  Cabalie,
fpokcnof  fufficiently  inthe  bookofy//'/<?;?j\  I  refer
you  thirher,that  you  may  fee  how  wonderfuUyChrift
the  Son  of  God  works  by  his  Angclls  in  us  Chrifli-
aos,  and  the  faithfuil^and  how  brotherly  he  is  con-
vcrfanc  with  us.  Whence  we  arc  the  true  Angels,andr

members


Li  B  JX.  Of  the  Nature  of  things  ^  i  j  5

members  of  Chrift^  as  hee  is  our  head,  as  hec  is  in  us,
fo  wclivcinhira,asis  taught  in  the  booke  of  the
Lords  S  upper ♦

Buctoreturretoourpurpofe  concerning  Mineral!
lignes ,  and  efpccially  concerning  the  Corufcarion  of
Nferalline  veins^we  muft  know,  that  as  Mctalls,which
areyetin  their  firft being,  fend  forth  their  Corufca-
tion,/.  e.  Signcs,foairotheT'/;?r7//r5  of^hjlofopherSy  What  is  the
which  changeth  all  imperfect  Me  tails  into  Silvcr,and  ^^^"'^  o^ ''l^
Gold  (ox  White  Metalls  into  Silver,  and  R^d  into  phUoibphers,
Gold)puts  forth  its  proper  figns  like  unto  Corulcati-
on,  if  It  be  Aftrally  perfected,  and  prepared.  For  as
foon  as  a  fmall  quantity  of  it  is  caft  upon  a  flay il  me  -
tall,  fo  that  they  mixc  together  in  the  hre^  there  ari-
feth  a  naturall  Corufcation,  and  brigthnelTe,    like  to
thatof  fine  Gold,  or  Silver  ina  teft  ,  which  then  is
a  fignc  that  that  Gold ,   or  Silver ,   is  freed  and
purged  without  all  manner  of  addition  of  other  Me-
talls.

But  how  the  Tincture  of  Philofophers  is  made  A-  ^^'^'\'T\'''
ftrall,  you  muft  conceive  It  arter  this  manner:  fophersismadc

Firft  of  all  you  muft  know,  that  every  Mctall ,  as  ^^^l^*
long  as  it  lies  hid  in  its  firft  being ,  hath  i'S  certainc
peculiar  ftars.

So  Gold  hath  the  ftars  of  the  Sun,  Silver  the  ftars
of  the  Moon,  Copper  the  ftars  of  Venus ,  Iron  the
ftars  of  Mars,  Tinne  the  ftars  of  Jupiter,  Lead  the
ftars  of  Saturnc ,  Quickfilver  the  ftarres  of  Mer-
cury.

But  as  foon  as  they  come  to  their  perfection,  and
are  coagulated  into  a  fixt  Metalline  body,  their  ftars
fall  off  from  them ,  and  leave  them ,  as  a  dead
hody.

R  r  2  Hence


1 3  4  Of  the  T^ature  ofthingf^         L  i  b  JX.

Hence  it  follows,that  all  fuch  bodies  are  afterwards

dead,  and  inefficacious, and  that  the  unconquercd  ftar

of  Metalls  doth  overcome  them  all ,   and  converts

them  into  its  nature, and  makes  them  all  Allrall.

Gold  that  is         For  which  caufealfo  our  Gold,  and  Silver,  which

ma.kby!ihc     is  tinged,  and  prepared  with  our  tin(5ture,  is  much

beucJ'tbe^na-  "^^^^  excellent,  and  better  tor  the  preparation  of  Me-

turaU.  dicinall  fccrets,then  that  which  is  naturall ,   which

Nature  generates  in  the  MineSjand  afterwards  is  fepa-

rated  from  other  Metalls.

So  alfo  the  Mercury  of  a  body,  is  made  Aftrally
of  another  body,  and  is  much  more  noble  ,  and  fixt
then  common  Mercury.  And  fo  of  the  other  Me-
talls.

I  fay  therefore,  that  every  Alchymift ,  which  hath
that  ftar  of  Gold,  can  turne  all  Red  Metalls  into
Gold  by  tinging  of  them.

So  by  the  ftar  of  Silver  all  White  Metalls  are  chan-
ged into  Silver :  by  the  ftar  of  Copper  into  Copper  :
by  the  ftar  of  Quickfilver  into  Mercury  of  the  bodyj
andfo  of  the  reft.

But  now  how  all  thcfe  ftars  are  prepared  according

to  the  Spagiricall  Art ,    it  is  not  our  purpofe  at

this  time  to  declare  ••  but  the  explication  of  them

belongs  to  our  bookes  of  the  Tranfmiitation  of

Metalls.

The  nature  of    But  as  for  that  which  concerns  their  fignes,!  would

the  red  Tin-    bave  you  know,  that  our  Red  tindurcjwhich  contains

^'^^'  the  ftars  of  Gold  to  bee  of  a  moft  fixt  fubftance ,  of

nioft  quick  penetration,  and  ofa  moft  intenfc  rcdnefs,

in  powder  rcfcmbling  the  colour  of  Saffron,  but

in  its  whole  body  the  colour  ofa  Rubie  ^    1  fay  it

is  a  Tindurcas  fiuxil  as  Wax,   as  tranfparent  as

Cry-


L I B  JX*       Of  the  Nature  of  things  ^  1 2  r

Cryftall,    as  brittle  as  Glaffe,  and  for  weight  moft
heavy.

The  white  tindure,  which  containcs  the  ftarofthe  Tbe  nature  of
Moon  is  after  the  fame  manner  of  a  fixt  fubrtance,  of  ^^e  white.
an  unchangeable  quantity^of  wonderfiill  whitcncfTe ,
as  fluid  as  Refine,  as  tranfparent  as  Cryftall ,   as
brittle  as  Glafle ,  and  for  weight  Uke  to  a  Dia-
mond.

The  flat  of  Copper  is  of  a  wonderfull  citrine  co- The  ftarof
lour,  like  to  an  Emrald ,  as  fluxill  as  Refine,  much  ^°^"*
heavier  then  its  Metall.

The  flarre  of  white  Tinne  is  as  fluid  as  Refine,  The  flarof
of  a  darke  colour  with  fomc  mixture  of  yel-  ^^"e  Tin.
low.

The  ftar  of  Iron  is  very  red,  as  tranfparent  as  Theftarof
a  Granate,  as  fluxil  as  Refine,  as  brittle  as  GlafTe,  ^'^°"'
of  a  fixt  fubftance,    much  hcaricr  then  its  Me-
tall.

The  ftar  of  Lead  is  like  Cobaltum,  black,  yet  The  ftar  of
tranfparent,  as    fluxile  as  Refine ,    as  brittle  as  ^"'^*
Glafle,  equall  to  Gold  for  weight,  heavier  then  other
Lead.

The  ftar  of  Quick  filvcr  is  of  a  wonderfull  white  , '^''f  ^"  °^
fparkling  colour,  like  to  fnow,inthe  cxtreameft  cold.^"'^^^'^''*'^"
weather,  very  fubtile,  of  a  penetrating ,  eorrofivc  a-
crimony,  as  tranfparent  as  Cryftall,  flowing  as  eafi-
ly  as  Refine ,  very  cold  to  the  taft ,  but  very  hot
within,as  if  it  were  fire,but  of  a  very  volatil  fubftance
in  the  fire.

By  this  defcription  the  ftars  of  the  Mctalls  arc  to
be  known,  and  undcrftood.

Alfo  you  muft  underftand,that  for  the  preparation
of  J^oth  tin^ures,  vi\.  of  the  Red  and  White ,  you-

R  r  3  muli


\J  3  5  Of  the  Nature  ofthingfl  L  i  b.  IX.

muft  not  in  the  beginning  take  of  yontworkthc  body
of  Gold,or  Silver,  but  the  firft  being  of  Gold,and
Silver.  For  if  in  the  beginning  there  be  an  errour
committed  all  your  pains,  and  labour  will  be  in  vain.
So  alio  you  mull:  underfland  of  Metalls ,  that
everyone  of  them  receives  a  peculiar  fignc  in  the
fire,  by  vvhichitisknowa

Of  this  kind  are  fp^irkSjfiameSjglifterings,  the  co-
lour, fmell,  tafte  of  fire,&c.

So  the  true  figne  of  Gold,  or  Silver  in  the  teftis
gliftering.

That  appearing,it  is  certain  that  Lead ,  and  other
Metalls  that  were  mixed,are  fumed  away ,  and  that
the  Gold,and  Silver  is  fully  purged.

The  fignes  of  Iron  being  red  hot  in  the  fLirnace,arc

cleertranfparentfpatks  flying  upward..    Thofe  ap-

pearing,theIron  unleflfeitbc  taken  from  the  fire  is

burnt  like  ftraw,&c.

WcttKave*     After  the  fame  manner  any  earthly  body  fhews

moreoilcffof  its  peculiar,  and  diflmd  fignes  in  the  fire,  whether

the  three  prin-  it  havcmoreof  Mercury,SuIphur,  or  Salt,and  which

^'^  ^^  of  the  three  principles  it  hath  moft  of.    For  if  it  fume

before  it  flame,  it  is  a  figne  that  it  containes  more

Mercury  then  Salphur.

But  if  itprefcnllyburn  witha  flame,  and  without
any  fume,  it  is  a  figne  that  it  contains  miich  Sulphur,
and  little  or  no  Mercury.

This  you  fee  in  fat  fubflances,  as  Tallow ,  Oylc  >
Refine,  and  the  like  :  but  if  without  any  flanrw;  it  goes
all  into  fumejit  is  a  figne  that  there  is  in  it  much  Mer-
cury,and  little  or  no  Sulphur.

This  you  fee  happens  in  hearbs  ,  and  flowers,  &c.
and  otlKr  Vegetable  fubfiances,  and  volatile  bodits,

as


L I  B,1X.  Of  the  Nature  of  things.  1 3  /^

as  are  Mineralls,  and  Metalls,  remaining  yet  in  their
firft  being5and  are  not  mixed  with  any  fulphurcous
body,  which  fend  forth  a  fume,  and  no  flame.

Mineralls,  and  Metalls ,  which  fend  forth  nei-
ther fiimc  nor  flame ,  doe  flicw  an  equal  1  mix-
rion  of  Mercury,  and  Sulphur,  and  a  perfc<5l  fixa-


tion.


Offome  peculiar  Signes  of  Naturall

ani  SHpernaturall  things -


E  E  muft  yet  further  fpeak  of  fome  peculiar
fignes,  of  which  hitherto  we  have  faid  no-


VV

thing.

In  which  Trcatife  it  will  be  very  neceflary  for  you,
that  boaftyour  felves  to  have  skill  in  the  Art  of  Sig-
natures^and  defire  to  be  called  Signators ,  that  you
rightly  underfl:and  mee.  For  wee  fliall  not  in  this
place  write  theoretically,  but  prai5tically ,  and  ihalli
declare  our  opinion  in  few  words.

And  firft  know,  that  the  Art  of  figning  doth  teach  ^^at  th«art
how  true,  and  futable  names  are  to  bee  put  upon  gH^^  %"«&*«
things, all  which  Adam  truly  knew.  For  prefently  af-
ter tlie  Creation  hce  gave  to  everything  its  proper
name,asto  Animalls,  fo  to  Trees,  Hearbs,  Rootes,
Stones,  Mineralls,  Metalls,  Waters,  &c.  And  to  all
the  fruits.of  the  earth,Watcr,Air,Fire,&c.And  what
names  he  put  upon  them  all,vverc  ratified ,  and  ap  •
proved  of  by  God.  For  from  the  true,  and  intrinfc-

calli


138  Of  (he  Nature  of  things^      L  i  B^  IX^'

call  foundation  he  tocke  them  all-,  nor  from  opinion, .
or  from  a  predeftinated  fcicncCj  o^/^.  the  Art  of  Sign-
ing.
fignaTeu'  ^^^^  therefore  was  the  firft  Signator .  And  it  can-

not be  denyed,  that  alfo  from  the  Hebrew  :ongue  true
and  proper  names  doe  flow,  and  are  put  upon  every
thing  according  to  its  nature,  and  condition.
The  nature  of   For  what  nam^es  are  put  upon  them  from  the  Hehrero
the  Hebrew     tonsuc-doe  with  tlic  fumc  labour  li^nifie  their  vertue,

tongue*  "^  1  *^

power,  and  property.

So  when  wee  fay,this  is  a  Hog,  a  Horfe,  a  Cow,  a  .
Beare,  a  Dog,  a  Fox,  a  Sheep.
Tkc  (ignifici-    fhc  name  of  a  Hog  fignifies  together  with  it  afll-
Ho"rft^Co"°^  thy  and  unclean  Animalh  fo  a  Hoifefignifics  a  ftrong
Bcare/pox, '    and  patient  Animall :  a  Cow,a  devouring,and  infatia-
Dog,{hcep,  in  blc  bcaft:  a  Bear,a  ftrong, vi(5lorio us >and  an  untamed
long^e!"'"'     brute ;  a  Fox,  a  ftiifcing,and  crafty  beaft  :  a  Dog,  an
animall  falfe  to  thofe  of  his  own  kind  .-a  Shecp,a  mild
and  profitable  beaft,and  hurtful  to  none.

Hence  it  is  that  a  man  is  called  a  Hog ,  for  his  for-
did and  fwinifti  life.

And  a  Horfe  for  his  bearing ,    for  which  hee  is
eminent.

And  a  Cow,  becaufc  fhee  is  unfatiable  with  meat,
and  drink,  and  knows  no  meafure  oi  her  belly.

And  a  Bear,becaufc  he  is  mifhapen ,  and  ftronger
then  other  men.

A  Fox,becaufe  he  is  a  turncoat,  and  dcccitfull,jac-
commodating  himfelfe  toall,  and  offending  none.
A  Dog,  becaufe  he  is  faithfull  to  none,  but  his  own
mouthjis  falfc,and  inofficious  to  all.

And  a  Shecp,becaure  hee  hurts  no  body  but  him-
felfe, and  is  ufcfull  to  all,  rather  then  to  himfelf,&c.

After


L'l  B  vlX,  Of  the  Nature  of  things.  i  j  9

Aftcrthis  manner  alfo  many  Hcarbs,  ancj  Rootcs  ^p^  *'^«  jl""**

L,„^  1    •  .  there  IS  a  Cga»-

mve  got  their  name.  ture.

So  Eye -bright  is  fo  called,  bccaufeit  cures  weak ,
and  fore  eyes.

So  the  Root  Bloudwort  is  fo  called ,  becaufc  it
flops  bloud  better  then  any  other.

So  the  Hearb  Pile-wort  is  fo  called^becaufe  it  cures
the  piles  better  then  other  hearbs.

The  fame  alfo  may  be  faid  of  divers  other  hearbs^of
Tvhich  fort  I  could  reckon  a  great  number,  all  which  »

were  fo  called  from  their  vertue,  and  faculty,  as  iliall
more  largely  be  declared  in  our  Herball.

Moreover ,  there  bee  many  Hearbs,  and  Rootcs,
which  arc  denominated  not  only  from  their  imbred
vcrtuc,  and  faculty,  but  alfo  from  their  figure,  forme,
and  rcprefentation  :  As  ,  Devills-bit ,  FivC'leaved
graffe,  or  Cinquefoile,  Hounds-tongue,  Adders-
tongue,  Horfe-taile,  Liver- wort,  Cx-tongue,  Lung-
wort, t  he  hearb  Chameleon,  St .  Johns  -  wort,  or  the
hearb  boared  through,the  hearb  Dog.  ftone,Tongue  -
laurell ,  Thorow-leafe,  Turne-  fok,and  many  others
which  Ihall  not  here,  but  in  the  Herball  bee  feverally
confidercd.

The  fame  alfo  holds  concerning  the  fignes  of  Ani-  What  fignature
malls}  for  by  the  bloud,  and  its  circle,   and  by  the  there  is  in  A.
urine  and  its  circle  all  difeafes  that  lie  hid  in  Man  may  "^'"^  '*       ^
be  known.

By  the  liver  of  a  flain  beaft  the  flefh  is  known  whc^
thcr  it  be  wholfomc  to  be  eaten  or  no .  For  unlcfTe  the
liverbeclear,andof  a  red  colour,  but  blew,  *  or  yel-
low, orroughjOrfullof  holes,  thebcifl  is  difcafcd,  '
and  therefore  his  flefh  unwholfomc .

S  r  And


140^  (Df  the  Nature  of ibhgs^         LibJX^

The  Liver  the.     And  It  is  no  wonder  that  the  Hver  can  (liew  that  by
Bl'IrT    °      natuiallfigncs.  Fortheoriginall  of  the  bloiid  is  m
the  liver,  and  hence  through  the  veinsit  is  diffafed  in-
to the  whole  body, and  is  coagulated  into  flclli.

Therefore  from  a  difeafed,and  ill  afFc(f^cd  liver,  no
found  or  frefli  bloud  can  be  produced^as  of  bad  bloud
BO  wholfome  flcfli  can  be  coaoulated.

Alfo without  infpe^ion  into  the  liver,  fJefliand
bloud  may  be  known.  For  if  both  be  found ,   they  •
have  their  true,  and  natural!  colour,  which  is  red,  and
clear,  mixed  with  no  other  ftrange  colour,  as  yellow,
or  blew.  For  thofe  ftrange  colours  do  llgnific  difea-
fcs,andl]cknefles.
What  the  knot$     Alfo  thc  re  are  other  (Ignes  worthy  of  admiration,
of  Ihe  inilnt   '^^X;  ^^^^^"  ^'"'^  Archclus  istlie  Signator ,  and  fignes
^gnific.  the  navcU  in  thc  infant  with  liule  knots  ,  by  w-hicli

it  may  bee  conjcdurcd,  what  the  Mother  of  the  in*
iant  did  bring  forth,or  fliall  bring  forth.
The  branches       Tiic  fame  Signator  figns  thc  horrs  of  a  Hart  with
c^  ^f  "^^°J"  branches,  by  which  iiis  age  is  known.  For  as  many
^^'^"^'branches  as  the  horn  hath,  fomany  years  old  is  thc
Hart.,  And  feeing  he  hath  every  year  a  new  horn,  the
age  of  the  Hart  may  be  knowato  twenty  y  or  thirty
, ,  .years.
T]^  cir<jic5 of    So  the  S'gnaror  of  a  Cow  markcs  her  homes  with
Cow°Xu^^^  circles,  by  which  itjiaay  he  known  how  many  Calves
ilice  hath  brought  forth.  For  every  Click  fi^nifics
aCalfe.
The  teeth  of  a     jf^e  fame  Signator  puts  forththe  firft  teeth  of  a"
•  °'  ^'  Horfe,rhar  thc  nrft  fcvcn  ycers  his  age  may  be  known

by  his  teeth.  For  at  iirft  a  Horfc  is  brx)ught  for<rh,^
with  fourteen  teetji,  of  wlncin  every  yccr  hec  iiafeclv'
two, and  fo  in  thc  fpaccof  fevcn  ycaics  hcc  lofcrh*

all.


L I B  JX.  Of  the  Nature  ofthtnp^  j^t

all.     So  that  after  fcven  yearcs  his  age  can  hard-
ly be  known,  iinldfe  by  on^  that  is  very  skillfull.

The  fame  Signator  doth  fignetre  bills  and  claws  of  The  b  lis  and
Birds  with  peculiar  figncs,  that  the  skilful!  Fowler  ^^l^w*  of  Biids
Jiiay  know  the  ir  age  by  them.

The  fame  Signator  doth  marke  the  tongues  of  xhctojigiicsof
difcafed  Hogs  with  little  pudies,  by  whichtheir  im- ^ogs-
purity  is  known,  and  as  their  tongue  is  impure,  fo  is
their  whole  body.

The  farne  Signator  doth  figne  clouds  with  divers  Colours  of
colours,  by  which  the  feafons  of  the  heaven  may  bcc  ^lo"<is.
foreknown.

So  alfo  he  figns  the  circle  of  the  moon  with  diftinc^  cSie°cf  ti^^'^*
colours,of  which  every  one  is  of  peculiar  interpreta-  Moon.  ^
tion.So  rednefs  fignlfies  that  there  wil  be  wind-,grecn-
ncfre,and  bhcknclTe,  raine,thefe  two  mixed  togetha
wind  and  rain,  the  fame  in  the  fea  is  a  figne  of  great
ftorms,  and  tempcftsjclearnclfe,  and  a  bright  whitc-
nefle  is  a  good  fign,cfp£cially  in  the  ocean. For,for  the
moft  part  it  fignifies  a  quiet,  faire  fcafon.

Whatfocver  the  Moon  portends  by  her  figns,  (hall
come  to  pafle  the  next  day*

And  fo  much  for  Naturall  fignes.  Now  for  Supcr-
faaturall  fignes^they  are  things  of  a  particular  fcience,
as  of  {4ag  cal  Aftronomyj&c.ar.d  thelike.lt  is  there*
fore  nccclfaiy  that  you  be  skilled  in  them.

Hence  alfo  many  other  Arts  proceed,  as  Geoman-  The kinas  of,
cy.  Pyromancy,  Hydromancy,  Chaomancy,  and  ^^f^"^^j^
Necromancy,  whereof  every  one  hath  its  peculiar
ftars,  which  ftars  doe  {o  figne  them  after  a  fupernatu-
rall  manner.  And  you  muft  knoWjthwat  t  he  ftarres  of
Oeomancy  imprefTc  their  figns  upon  the  earthy  bo-
dies ofthc  whok  Univcrf€,and  that  divers  v^^ayes.For

U\  they


IJ^:  Ofthe  Nature  of  things^  LibJXZ

they  change  the  earth,  and  caufe  earthquakes,  and
gapingSjthcy  produce  hills,  and  valleys,  and  bnng
many  new  VcgetableSj  they  produce  alfo  Garaa-
bcaus  with  naked  figures ,  and  images,  having
wondcrfullvertues,  and  powers,  which  indeed  they
receive  from  the  feven  planets,as  the  But  or  mark  re*
ceives  the  arrow  from  the  Archer.

Buthowthofc  figns  ,  and  images  of  Gamahcaus
may  be  known  apart,  and  what  they  fignific  magical-
ly •,there  is  required  a  great  experience  ,and  knowlcdg
of  the  nature  of  things,  which  canby  no  mcancs  bee
here  perfedly  taught.

Here  you  muft  well  note,thatthe  ftonc,  or  every
Gamahcaus,cannot  excell  in  the  prpcrty ,.  and  ver-
tue  but  of  one  (tar,  and  fobe  quahficdbut  by  one 'pla-
net.

And  although  there  bee  two  or  more  planets  in
earthly  bodies,  as  they  arc  joined  together  in  the  fu-
periour  firmament.-  yet  one  is  reprcHcd  by  the  other,
for  as  one  houfc  cannot  bear  two  Mafters ,  but  tlic
one  thrufts  out  the  other :  fo  alfo  it  is  here  5  the  ore
rules,thc  other  fcrves:6ras  one  that  overcomes  him
that  keeps  any  houfe,  cafts  him  out  by  force  •,  and
and  fets  himfelf,  as  mailer  of  the  houfe,  difpofing  of
all  things  according  to  his  pleafure,  and  making  the
other  his  fcrvanti

So  alfo  one  ftarrccxpelis  another,  one  planet
ancKher,  one  Afcendant  another ,  one  influence
another,  one  imprcifion  another,  one  Element
another-,  For  as  water  quencheth  the  firc^  fo  one
planet  deftroyesthe  property  of  another ,  and  brings"
ipits  ownc*

T-hc  Xajiic  is  after  the  fame  manner  to  be  undct*

.  ftoodi


Lf  bJX^^^  Of  the  Nature  rf  things*  r4'5

flood  of  their  (igncs,  which  are  manifold,  and  not
only  characfterSjas  many  conceive,but  all  thofc^which
are  found  in  the  whole  map  of  the  planets,/,  e,  what-
foever  are  of  affinity  with,  orfubjed  to  the  planets.

But  that  you  may  the  better  underftand  mee  by  What  things  •
adding  an  example  :  I  would  have  you  know,  ^^^^t^^^gj^j^^^*
unto  the  planet  of  the  Sun  are  fubjedcda  crownc ,  a-
fcepter,  a  throne,  and  all  kingly  power,  majefty,and
rule,  and  all  riches>treafnres,ornamentS3and  furniture
of  this  world.

Unto  the  planet  of  the  Moon  are  fubjecled   all  What  t©  the
husbandry,navigation,  travelling,  and  travellers,  and  ^°°"'^*
fuch  things  as  belong  to  thcfe.

Unto  the  planet  of  Mars^rc  fubjccted  all  forrifica-  What  to  Mais.
tionSjarmour,  coats  for  defence,  Ordnance  of  War,
fpears ,  and  all  weapons ,  and  whatfocver  belongs
CO  war.

Unto  the  p-anet  of  Mercury  are  fiibjedcd  all  What  to  'Mcr-
ArtiftSjallMechanickinffruments,  and  wharfoevcr '^"^^^
is  required  to  Arts.

Unto  "he  pliiner  of  jHri-'^r  arc  fubje(5led    all  What  to  inpU
judgmcrts,  and  rights,  r he  whole  Leviticall  order,  "^'
all  Miniftcrs  of  Ch  arches, ornaments  of  Temples,  all
Jewells,  and  fuch  hke.

Unto  the  planer  oiVcnus  arc  rubje(5tcd  whatfoever  What  to  v«.
thingsbclongtoM'jfick  ,  as  Muficall  inftrumc-ncs ,  ""^*
ycnereali  exercircs,lorcs,whorin^s,  &c.
•   Unto  Satume  arc  fubjected  whofoever  work  in  and  What  to  Sa-
bcncaththe  earth,  as  Miners,  Pioners,  Bearers  of  the  ^"^"*
dead,Diogers  of  Wells,  as  alfo  aU  fnflruments  fcr-
ving  to  citkr  of  thcfc^&c

Pyromancy  drav;8  forth  its  fignes  by  the  ftars  o^Jfl^JjoVp^   \
,thc  fire ,  in  com  mon  fire  by  par  tic  ular  fparkeS;  flames>  Sey!    ^*^"

S  f  3  or


^'44"  Oft]}€  J^atHreoftbingu  Lib.  IX.

ornoife,  &c.  inthcminesby  Corufcations  .•  in  the
Firmament  by  ftars,  comets,  flafli!ng,and  lightning,
and  Noftock,  and  the  like  .•  in  Vifionsby  Salaman-
dnnc,aad  fiery  fpiiits.
What  the  Hydromancy  gives  its  fignes  by  the  flats  of  the

f'gn«otHy.  "Water,  by  their  overflowings,  their  fcarcity,  difco-
romancy  •^''f- jg^j-jp^^^g^  commotions,ne^v  ftrcames,  the  walhings
away  of  earthy  things  :  in  Magick,  and  Necromancy
by  Nymphs,  vifions  and  lupcinaturall  Monfters  in
tnc  waters,  and  fca.
^'^^^^frL  Chaomancy  iliews  its  fisnes  by  the  ftnrsof  the
omancy.  Aire,  and  Wind,  by  the  ducolounng,  deitroying  of
all  tendcr,andrubtillthings,to  which  the  Windis  an
cnemie,  by  beating  offthe  flowers,  leaves,  boughes,
and  branches.  If  the  ftars  of  (Chaomancy  arc  moved,
fpirits  fall  from  the  fuperioiir  Airc,and  voices,and  an-
fwers  are  often  heard:  Aifo  Trees  arc  pulled  up  by  the
rootes,  and  Houfcs  are  thrown  down.  There  are  feen
Hobgoblins,  HouPnold  Gods,airy  fpiri'-Sjand  Wood-
men, &c.  alfo  a  heavenly  dew,  and  manna  falls  upon  ,
Trees,andHearbs.
Thcfignetof  Necromancy  draws  forth  its  figns  by  the  ftars  of
■iUeath,  which  we  call  £'y(/rr^,vvnich  are  prophetical
fpirits,  figning  the  body  ohhe  fick  ,  and  dying  man
with  red,  blue,  and  purple  fpots,  which  are  ccrtaine
figns  of  death,  in  the  third  day  of  their  rifing.  They
fign  alfothe  hands,and  fingers  of  men  with  aclay  co-
lour,which  are  certain  figns  of  change,cither  good  or
bad. When  thcrfore  the  ftars  olNecromancy  are  mo-
ved, then  the  dead  (liew  fome  wonderful  fign,as  Blee-
ding,and  voices  are  heard  out  of  the  graves.*  tumults,
Sc  tremblings  arife  in  the  places  where  bones  are  laid,
and  dead  mcnappcai  in  tlie  form,  and  habit  of  living

men.


Li  B.IX.  Of  the  Nature  ofthingf.

men,  and  are  feen  in  Vifions,  in  Looking-glafTes ,  in
Berills,  in  Stones,  and  Waters,  and  divers  fliapcs.
Bvejlrdj  i.e,  fpirits  give  their  figns  by  beatincr ,  ftri-
king,  knocking,  falling,  caftlng,  &c.  where  there  is  a
great  liurly  burly  and  noife  only  heard,  but  nothing
{een^all  which  are  certain  /ignes  of  death,  prefaging
it  to  him,in  whofe  habit  they  appear,  or  to  fome  in.
what  place  they  are  heard.

Beddes,  thcfe  fignarures  many  more  may  be  recko-
ned up.  But  feeing  they  bring  with  them,  evilljhurt-
full  and  dangerous  fancies ,.  and  imaginations ,  and
fuperftitions,  which  may  be  an  occafion  not  oncly  of
fome  misfortune,  but  alfo  deaths  I  {hall  paffe  them
over  in  filence.  They  are  prohibited  from  being
revealed  to  us,  feeing  they  belong  to  the  fchoole  of
fecrets,  and  divine  power.  Theiciorcnowl  fliaJl  put
an  end  to  this  booL


F  INIS.


ACHYMICALL

DICTIONARY:


EXPLAINING


m


<^
m

•>v.


Hard  Places  and  Words  f

met  withall  in  the  Writings  of    it

Taracilfus^  znd  other  obfcure  ^*

AUTHOURS.  K

^8-


London   Printed  by  Richard  Cotes ,  for  Thomas
iniliamsit  the  Bible  in  Little  brittainj  1650.


m

m

m


^*


m^


^Mmwmmmwsm^mm^mmm^i


A  TREATISE


OF  THE  ^


Explication  of  hard  Places,

and  Words  met  withall  in

the  Writings  o£Paracelfusy
and  other  hard  Chymicall
Authors.


A


Cetum  fhilofo^hornm  is  a  Mercu-
riall  water,  or  other  wife  is  called
Virgins  n:iilkc  ,  wherein  they  fay
Metalls  are  diflblved.

Acetttmradicale  is  Vineger  di-
ftilled  out  of  its  owne  rootc ,
andnoatrix,  and  is  called    the


DifTolving  Water,
AdamitA  is  a  certain  kind  of  Tartar.

Aaa


Adcch


A  Chymicall  DiBionary ,

Adech  is  our  intcriour,  and  invifiblc  man ,  which
rcprcfents  the  formes  of  all  things  in  our  mind,which
afcerward  our  outward  man  doth  frame,  and  imitate
with  its  own  handsj  both  of  them  work  according  to
their  nature.

Aerd^di  are  corporeall  fpirits  living  in  the  air.

Ri  doth  not  alwaies  fignifie  Copper  ,  but  fomc-
tim.es  Gold,  or  Silver,  or  any  other  Metall  that  is
pure,  and  generated  by  it  felf,  without  the  mixtion  of
any  otherMetall50r  Stone^out  of  fome  fuch  kind  of
Metall ,  they  formerly  made  and  coined  money.

Mthna  is  called  Subterranean  fire,invifiblejand  ful-
phurcous,  which  burnes  ftones  into  coales,  like
Jeat  in  the  mountains,  which  arc  full  of  Refine,  and
Bitumen.

Aflphara  is  the  burning  of  flefli,or  the  fubftance  of
the  body  into  afhes.

Mthmci  are  called  fiery  fpirits  ,  or  fpirituall  men
burning  in  the  fire,  which  appear  in  divers  forms,and
iliapes,  as  fiery  flames ,  firebrands,  round  balls  of
coals,  and  that  efpecially  in  Sulphur  mountains. .

Alcali  is  called  all  manner  of  Salt,  which  is  cxtra-
^ed  out  of  afheSjOr  calx  of  any  matter  by  boiling  in
lie.

Alcaefiy  or  Altdefi ,  is  faid  to  be  prepared  Mercury,
fome  will  have  it  to  bee  Tartar,  but  the  mind  of  the
Authouris  more  eafily  undei  flood  by  the  defcripti-
on  of  the  preparation  of  it.

Alchymia'is  the  feparation  of  that  which  is  impure
from  a  purer  fubftance.

Alcol^  Alcool^  otAlcoholh  a  moft  fubtil  powder  of
anything.

Akoolvim  is  the  fpirit  of  Wine  redlified.

Atcahrith  I


J.  Chymicall  DiSliomtyl

Alcnhrith^  or  Alcur^  or  AU'{ar\s  the  fame  that  Sul-
phur is.

Alcofol^  or  fas  feme  will  have  it  Alcohol  )\%fiibiuf»,
OK  Antimony.

Alandahal^  or  Alfjandal'is  ColoqitimUa,

Alembroth\%  fait  of  Mercury ,  or  fait  of  Philofo-
phers.

Alemhnt  purified  is  fait  of  Tartar^  and  the  Magiflc-
ryofit.

-(4/»»/.{^^?i/>  is  Verdegreafe.

Altey  flumbi  is  the  fweet  matter  of  Lead.

Ahtfar  is  Manna.

Amnlgamaiszh^  making  of  Gold,  Silver,  or  any
other  Metall  into  a  paft  with  Quickfilver.

Amianthus  is  a  ftone  like  to  Aiumcn  flumofum  in
naturc,and  conditionjit  is  not  burnt  in  the  fire,wherc-
fbre  it  is  alfo  called  the  Salamander.

Amidum^  or  Amilum  is  the  vvhiteft  flowre  made  in-
to bread  in  the  Sun.

Amygdai'i ,  with  Cbirurgions  is  called  the  fuper-
fluous  flcfh  which  growes  at  the  rootc  of  the
tongue.

Amnis  alcalifatm  is  water  palling  through  the  chalk
of  the  earth, out  of  which  Alcali  is  taken.

AnAchmm  is  an  incorporeall  fpirit.

^»<!/f/?^  is  Steel  brought  from  the  oriental!  coun-
tries, which  melts  in  the  fire  like  other  Metall,  and' 15,
caff  into  feverall  forms.  vr

Annthroriy  or  AnAchthron  is  a  kind  of  Salt  growing
upon  rocks  hke  white,  and  flony  molTe ,  fome  call  it
fait  nitre.  The  ancients  falfly  thought  it  to  bee  the
gall  of  glaffe,  feeing  it  is  rather  the  gall  of
fiones.

Aaa  a  Anatrum


AChymcaU  Di^ionaryl

Aftatrumis  glaffc  melted  into  divers  colours,  which
they  caWfmalhm^Oi'  terra  Sarafemca,

^;;?^^/ in  Vegetables  fignifies  Rofcmary  flowers,
and  in  Mctalls  it  fignifies  the  Elixir  or  quintcffence
of  Gold.

jincitomiii  Bffata  is  the  mother  of  difeafes.

Anticarls  Borax,

Anatris^  or  Ant  Arts  is  Mercury.

AniadAj  fignifies  an  eternall  (pring,a  new  world  ta
come,  or  paradife.

Amadum  is  a  a  ccleftiallbody  planted  in  us  Chrifti-
ans  by  the  Holy-gholt,  by  the  holy  facraments,  or  it
is  rhefpirituallman  regenerated  in  us.

AnUda.  are  the  fruits,  and  vertucs  of  paradife ,  and
heaven,  alfo  the  facraments  of  Chriftians,  in  natural]
Philofophy  it  fignifies  the  Aftrall  vercues ,  and  cele-
toJl,  as  they  conduce  by  their  infl.uencc  unto  long
life.

hnUdus  is  the  efficacy  of  things.

AniTna  is  our  Mercury.

A»9dyna  are  Medicines  procuring^  fleep.

hnedta  is  that  which  is  Separated  from  the  nutrii-
mentby  thckidnies.

hnontagius  is  the  Philofophcrs  ftone.

Anima  Sattirm  is  the  fwcetncfie  of  Lead,

hnnm  fUtonkm  is  a  common  moneth ,  or  an


age.


hnniis  hniAdln^  is  along  life.

Annora  is  the  aihcs  of  Egs ,  or  Quick-lime,

Anptafur  y,

Aliocah     Sare  Salt  Armoniackf

AUm7^Addr>i

Afitcr/tiiMQVCuvY.

Anttr*


AChymicallDiSlionaryl

hntem  is  a  Medicine  extradlcd  out  of  hyacmths,
alfo  that  yellow  which  growes  in  the  middle  of  Lil-
Les^and  the  like.

Anthonor^ox hthon^ris  a  furnace.

Afhonfinm  is  agenerall  rule  in  Phyfick^taken  for
granted.

Aqua  Celeflis  is  redified  Winejbeing  in  fome  fort
made  like  to  the  heaven  for  fubtilty ,  and  pure-
nelTe.

A^^^i^^/^/W'^  is  Mercurial!  water.

Aqua  corrodcns  is  Vineger,  and  all  Corroflvc  Li-
quor.

Aquafecum  vini^  is  that  which  is  made  of  the
aflies  of  the  lees  of  Wine^diflblved  upon  a  marble  like
oylc  of  Tartar.

Aqua  lubricatals  made  of  mucilaginous  things,  as
Sugar,  Juleps,and  the  like.

Aqua,^erm^ens  is  that  which  is  made  oftwo  moft
perfect  Metalline  bodies  by  a  Philofophicall  folu-
tion.

Aqua  Saturnia  is  that  which  retains  in  it  felfc  the
nature  of  the  three  Prmciples ,  as  are  Bath-waters,
which  are  naturally  medicinable.

Aquttfihens  is  diftillcd  Vinegcr.

Aquafier  is  a  vifion  reprcfenting  fbmething  to
our  eyes  ,  fometimes  which  truly  is  not,  but  only  in
appearance.

Aquila  istheQuecn  of  birds,  and  it  is  iifed  for
fait  Armoniack  by  reafon  of  itslightneffe  in  fublima-
tion.  But  Faracelf^  will  have  it  in  many  places
to  be  pken  for  Mercury  precipitated  with  gold.

Aq^iU  Philo[ofhorum  is  the  Mercury  of  Metalls
hi.  Metall  leducjed  Into  its  firft  matter.

Arbor


A  Chymlcall  DiSllonary,

hrhor  Maris  is  Corall,  which  grows  like  a  flirub
inthefca.

Arcanum  in  generall  as  it  fignifies  any  thing  that  is
hid,  fo  in  Paracelfus  it  ilgnifies  any  fecret  incorporeall
vertuc  in  natiirall  things  ,  partaking  of  a  perpetually
and  immortal  life, derived  upon  it  frona  heaven^which
alfo  may  bee  multiplyed  by  the  Spagiricall  art  above
its  former  condition.

Archaltesj  is  in  P4rrfr<r///i^/ the  foundation  of  the
earth,  or  a  pillar,which  feems  not  to  be  upheld  by  its
fellowsjbut  as  it  were  by  a  wonderfull  providence  of
God.

Ar^:^^//^  is  the  higheft,  exalted,  andinvifible  fpi-
rit,  vvliich  is  fcparated  from  bodies,  is  exalted ,  and
afcends,  the  univerfall  occult  nature,  operator,  and
Phyfitian  in  all  things.  So  Archiatrus  is  the  fuprcam
Phyfitian  of  Nature^which  diftributes  to  every  thing
and  every  member  their  peculiar  Archeius  occultly
by  Arcs.  Alfo  Archeius  is  the  firft  in  Nature,  the
moft  fecret  vertuc ,   producing   all  things  out  of
lliaftc,  being  fupported  by  a  divine  power.  Arcs  is  the
difpcnfcrof  Nwirure  hid  in  all  the  three  principles,
whence  every  thing  hath  its  being,  and  which  difpo-
feth  to  all  thmgs  in  a  particular  form,lliape,  and  lub-
ftancc,that  it  may  put  on  its  own  proper  fpecifical  na-
turcj&not  anothers.But  you  muft  note,the  difference
betwixt  thefc  3  in  naturCjto  fpcak  after  the  manner  of
fchools.  Iliaftes  is  the  fublbnce  of  the  higheft  genus,
or  kind  confifling  in  the  firft  univerfall  matter  of  all
things,which  it  doth  firft  clifpofe  into  three  kindsj-v/^.
into  Sulphur,  Mercury,  and  fait.  The  Archeius  is  the
firft  difpenfer  of  Nature  ,  and  then  it  produccth  all
tilings  into  its-ncxt  genera  or  kinds.Then  comes  Ares
Nv^^A  another


A  Chymtcall  UitiWHary^

Arcs  another  difpcnfer  of  Nature,  which  prodiiceth
from  kindSjOr  gcncrajforms,  and  fpecies  into  indivi-
diialls.

hrdentU  are  fuch  things  which  having  received
no  food,  are  by  their  owne  nature  fubjeft  to  bur-
nings ,  as  Amber ,  Turpentine ,  Jeat ,  and  fuch
like.

hrUttrA  is  the  totall  confumption  of  the  body,and
parts  thereof.

hrUs  crudttm  is  drops  falhng  in  the  moneth  of
Junsy  hkc  May  dew.

Aromata,zrc  all  fuch  things,  which  yeeld  a  fwcet,
and  gratefiill  fmell.

Aroph'is  Mandrake.

Ar[a»eck  is  fublimcd  Arfenick.

hrfenkum  is  the  flafhing  of  Metalls,  or  the  fait  of
themjOrofSaturne,  which  infomc  places  is  called
ArUfiek^  or  Artanech,  •

hrtetifcui  is  he  that  wants  any  member.

Arthoicnm  is  red  ^oyle ,  artificially  exrraded
outof  thcrootesof  Hcarbs  digefted  with  bread  in
dung.

Afp^ahum  is  a  Bitumen  extra(fled  -from  the
mudde  of  the  earth ,  and  water ,  and  is  like
pitch.

Afiendentia  ftgna  are  called  either  the  ftars  of
the  Firmament  of  heaven ,  or  the  fydereall  fpi-
rits.

AfcifhdtHm  is  an  itch  bred  betwixt  the  skin,and  the
fle{h,like  worms :  and  if  theskinnc  bee  crufhed^long
threds  with  black  heads  come  forth.

A/f*i/4is  called  a  Nutmeg.

hQdiA  I'^rw^/arethofewormcs  which  breed  in

wood;*


A  Chywicall  DiBianary,

wood,  or  betwixt  two  board s,and  they  are  called  Te^
redoxes,

AHhmd  is  a  difeafe  of  the  lungs  caufing  difficulty
of  breathing.

A  sir  urn  \s  in  this  place  called  the  verf  ue  and  power
got  by  the  preparations  of  I'lingsasthe  ftar  ot  Sul-
phur is  its  inflaming  whit  his  tuned  into  moft  excel-
lent oyle:  fo  the  ftar  ot  fait  is  its  refolurion  into  water,
oroyle,whichthereby  receives  more  vertues  then  it
had  before.  Tlieftar  of  Mercury  is  its  fublimation,
by  which  it  acquires  a  wonderfull  power,  and
verrue,  greater  and  more  fubtile  then  its  natu-
ralL

hshim  ex  igne^  is  a  burning  Fire  of  great  impref*
fion.

htha?ior^  or  hthanarls  a  furnace  in  the  fpagirical
Art,  but  efpecially  a  reverberatory  ,  fometimes  of
other  ufe  as  the  artificer  plea^eth.

A^^r/fw//;/«wfignifies  divers  things  according  to
the  adjciflivc  that  is  put  to  it :  as  that  which  Shoo-
makers  ufc  ,  is  Copperis,  fuch  as  is  red  within*
that  which  Writers  ufe,  is  called  inke,  footy,
and  it  is  called  blacking,  alio  all  kinds  of  Coppens.
httraBiva  are  called  magnetick  medicaments  ,
which  have  a  power  to  draw  to  them  fuch  thingsas
are  compounded  of  the  like  attradivcs.

hngur'tsU  is  called  a  fuperflitious  A rtift  who
pra(5tifeth  his  Art  in  Looking-glafles,  Chryffalls,and
in  Waters,  efpecially  in  the  finging,  and  flying  of
birds,  that  he  may  prefage  by  them  5  he  alfo  obferves
other  rites  for  the  fame  caufe.

huYum  f  Limit  urn  is   that  which  they  call  Lcafe
Gold^or  malleated  Gold.

Anrum


A  Chymicall  Dictionary^

KurumfotAbiUls  liquor  ofG>ld,  without  any
Corrolivc,  which  very  few  know,  yea  of  thofe  who
daily  prepare  it  rather  to  the  deftru&ion,then  health
ofmen.

-^«r/^^  wV^  Is  precipitated  Golijand  reverberated
into  the  higheft  degree  of  rednelle, like  ground  Cin?
nabar.  That  is  the  beft  which  is  made^and  precipita-
ted with  its  proper  Mercury.

Avis  Hermetis  is  the  Mercury  of  Philofophers,
which  arcends,and  then  defcends  for  nourifliment.

Anrum  vivum  is  fomctimes  taken  for  Quick-
lilver.

AHstromMntU  is  a  certain  kind  of  fupcrftition  invcn-i
tcd5C0ncerningthe  obfervation  of  of  Winds5as  when
the  ftars  of  the  Winds  break  forth  into  great  vehc-
mency,  contrary  to  their  cuftome,  whence  men  that
are  more  idle  then  rationall,  pronounce  a  prefagc  of
fomething  to  come.

Axmgia  de  Mumia^  or  Mumia  de  MeduHis  is  the
marrow  of  Bones.

A^mafor  is  Minnium,  or  Cinnabar,

A^th  isQuick-filverextradcdoutof  anybody,
and  it  is  properly  called  the  Mercury  of  the  body,
but  in  Faracelfus  it  is  the  univerfall  medicine  of
things.


Bbb  B


A  ChymicaU  DiUionar/,


B


Alneum  M^rU^ov  Maris ^zs  many  call  it,  is  a
furnace  for  diftiilation  containing  water^in
which  being  warm  Chymicall  veflells  arc
put  for  the  putrefadion  of  the  matter
which  they  contain^  as  alfo  for  their  feparadon^  and
for  the  performing  the  opa'ations  of  that  kind  of
moift  afcenfions.

BAlntum  roris  is  a  furnace,  in  which  the  veffclls  of
Diftiilation  are  put  over  the  vapour  of  the  water  only^
that  the  vapour  doc  not  touch  the  body.*  alfo  it  is  cal-
led a  vaporousiui  nace.

Balfamum  is  a  fubftance  of  bodies  prcfcrving  things
from  putrefadion.  It  is  intcrnall,and  externall.Intcr-
nall  in  man  is  a  certain  temperate  fubftance^  not  bit-
ter, norfwect,  nor  foure,  not  Mincrall  fait ,  but  the
fak  of  liquor,  which  prefcrves  the  body  ftrongly  from
putrefadlion.  Externall  is  Turpentine^which  hath  ne-
ver come  to  the  fire,  but  is  dfgefted.

Balfamum  de  Mnmiis  is  that  which  is  cxr railed
fiomflefli.

Balfamum  Elementerum  externum  is  a  liquor  of  ex-
ternall Mercury, /.  tf.  theMummie  of  externall  ele-
ments, one  of  the  three  principles,  the  firmamentall
cflcnce  of  things,

^'J*/ is  urine*

BMtrac


A  Chymicall  Dkthnary]

lattrdc  Is  any  kind  of  brine.

Berillus  is  a  Cryftalline  Looking-glaflc  fupcriliti-
oufly  confecrwitcd  by  the  Augurs.

Berilhfiica  is  an  art  of  obfcrving  vifions  in  thofc
kinds  of  glaflcs.  ^

Bifmutumis  the  lighteftjwhitcftjand  bafeft  kind  of
Lead.

Bitumen  \s  acertaine  kind  of  flimie  mudextra(5ted
out  of  water,  and  is  like  to  pitcb,and  is  as  it  were  the
pitch  of  the  earth.

Botin'is  Turpentine.

Bothor  are  wheales,  or  puftles.

Braffadella^  or  Br^//^/^//^  is  Addcrs-tonguc*

Bruntts  is  St.  Anthony's  £re.
•  Bruta  is  an  influence  of  a  Celeftiall  vertue,  which
by  Brutes  is  manifefted  to  men ,  as  in  the  Sal-
lendine  by  the  Swallow,  in  Salt  the  ufe  of  a
Glyftcr  by  the  Storke ,  and  many  more  of  that
Isind.

Btit'jrum  SMttrni  is  that  which  above  is  called  Al'
tey^  and  it  is  the  fweetncflc  of  Lead,


Bhh^


^A  Chymhall  Dietienary;


\AkU^  or  CdaiU  is  a  moft  fccrct  fciencc  ^
which  is  faid  to  be  delivered  by  divine  in-
ipiration,  together  with  the  law  of  Mofus ,
the  Hebrew  Kabbies  aflerting  the  fame. The
P^r//^;^/ were  moft  diligent  feekcrs  of  this  Art^being
alfo  profeiTbrs  of  the  fame,  as  appears  by  their  cal-
ling of  their  wife  men*  They  call  their  Priefts  wife
men,  and  moft  skilfull  of  all  fecrets,  fuch  as  were
thofc  three  that  came  to  Chrift  out  of  the  Eaft  to
woriliiphim,andnot  Kings,  as  the  ignorant  vulgar
think  them  to  be.  It  was  not  fet  down  in  writing,but
delivered  by  word  of  mouth.  Now  after  a  while  fu-
perftitious  men,a  kind  of  apes ,  began  to  fpatter  it
with  their  pen,  (o  that  at  laft  it  is  degenerated  into
monftrous  fuperftitioni  by  which  means  alfo  Mag'ck,.
which  is  the  true  wifdomc  that  is  received  by  divine
iufpiration,  is  accounted  in  thefc  times  Necromancy,
and  Nigromancy,  fo  that  it  is  an  offence  to  be  a  wife
man,  and  hce  that  profeffeth  it  openly  fhall  caft  him-
felfe  into  danger.  But  to  teach  t  he  f  boli/hneffc  of  In-
fidels publickly  is  commendable,and  a  gift  of  lingu*
lairwifdome,and  no  man  is  judged  wife,  but  hee  that
is  the  gieateft  foole.

Caballi^  or  c Abates  are  ghofts,  and  Aftrall  ftars  of
men  that  dyed  before  their  time<


A  Chymlcall  Dicthnaryl

Cdlcedenium  tartarum  is  an  ofFcnfive  matter  In  mans
body,which  comes  by  reafon  of  the  dcfcdl  of  the
cxpulfivc  faculty  in  not  expelling  what  is  fcpara-
ted.

Cafa  isChamphir.

Calcanthum  is  Vitriall.

Calcinatum  majt44  is  called  all  that  which  is  made
fwcet  by  the  Spagiricall  art,  which  of  its  own  nature
was  not  fo,  as  the  fwcetneilc  of  Mercury ,  of  Lead ,
of  Salt  or  the  like^which  alfois  called  their  foul^  and
doth  quickly  confolidatc  any  wound.

CalcifjAtum  minus  is  all  that  which  is  natural  fweer,
and  is  very  healing,  as  Sugar,  Manna ,  Honey  of  the
Wood,  Noftock and  the  like.

Crf//^/7/«  is  a  kind  of  Saltpetre*

Cderuth  is  a  figne  of  a  defire  to  the  firft  perpetM.
um  5  as  when  any  thing  defires  to  return  into  its
firft  matter  from  whence  it  had  its  originall.

CAlliette  are  yellow  mufliromes  upon  Juniper
trees.

Calx  Mercurii  is  precipitated  Mercury.

Calx  Veneris  is  Verdegreafe.

CalxSaturm'\sM\m\\m,

Cdlx  Jovu  is  fpirit  of  Tin.

Cdx  Martk  is  Crocus  of  Steel  or  Iron.

Calx  Solis  is  calcined  Gold.

Calx  Lunx  is  the  Azure  flower  of  Silver.

Cdx  permAnens  or  ^xa^  is  an  incombuftiblc  mat^

tcr.

Calx  peregrintrtmt  is  Tartar.

CaIx  lignorum  is  the  afhes  of  Wood.

Calcit  is  is  a  flone  out  of  which  braffe  is  boiled.

ChAomanq  is  an  art  of  prcfaging  by  the  aire*


A  ChymuallDiSiienary.

C^^tf/^hefidesthcconfufcdjand  unfhaped  matter
of  all  things,  is  mFarace/fus  taken  for  the  Aire-,  it  is
alfotalten  For  Illiafte,  or  lUiaftro.
Claret ta  is  the  white  of  Egs.
CambucA  is  an  apoftcme,  or  ulcer  in  the  groin.
Cn^ut  corvi  is  Antimony.
-4  C4^/i</«?<7r/«ffw  is  the  feces  remaining  after  diftii-
lation5and  fublimation,
Carbones  ccelt  arc  the  ftars.
Carbmculu^  is  an  apofteme,  or  pcftiJcnt  iiJccr.
Cnrdoninm  is  a  medicinablc  Wine  made  of  Heirbs.
Carem  is  the  tvventyeth  part  of  a  drop.
C/?(pr//^;»is  weak,  and  dead  bloud  in  the  veins  ob-
ftru(5iing  the  motion  of  the  good  blood.

Cafeus pr£paratf^  is  the  vifcous  rcfidcncy  remaining
in  the  bottomc  of  the  milke  that  runnes  out  of  the
chcefe,

Catkimid  is  the  fpumc  of  SiVer.
Cauiia  vulfis  ruhicundi  is  Minium  of  Lead.
C4«.r^/rfin  Spagiricallartisa  certune  kind  of  in-
duftry  gotten  by  a  habit,  whereby  the  profcflbrs  of
the  art  doe  more  eafi:yundergoc  their  labors,  and
pcrfed  their  operations.

Cauterium  is  a  chirurgicali  inftruraent,  which  opens
the  skin  with  burning-,  alfo  it  is  a  medicine  that  etfc^s
the  fame,  but  without  pain.
C^^«r/>;i  arc  dull  wits.

Cemgd^ifff'i  or  Ceningotam  is  a  Chirurgicali  in-
ftrument  wherewith  the  Cramum  is  opened  in  fits  of
the  Epilepfic.

Ceniotemium  is  Mercury  prepared  for  the  Venereal
difcafe.
CimficAtnm  is  tlic  fame  as  QdctMHtum^  /'.  ^.burnt  to


A  0>ymicallDiBiQn(iTyl

QervlcuU  is  the  fpirit  made  out  of  the  bone  which
is  in  the  heart  of  a  Hart.

Qharafier  veneris  is  love,  which  is  in  ftcad  of  a
iliicld  in  keeping  off  danger.

Chxrva  is  Cntafutiay  t.  e.  the  Hearb  Spurge.

Chef  ri  in  Paracelfm  if  it  be  piitabfolutely  without
any  adjedion,  and  if  it  befpokenof  Mineralls,  it
figniiics  Quickfilver,  if  of  Vegetables ,  Vegetable
flowers.  But  when  it  is  found  with  an  adje(5tion  aft^i?
thismanner5/?^jC7/'^;>/,  it  flgnifies  the  white  Elixir
made  of  filvcr^as  Flos  Anthos  fignifies  the  red  Elix/r.

Cherio  is  the  occult  accidental!  vertue  of  the  exter-
nal! EIemcms,and  not  the  qualities  of  heat,and.c<5ld,
:tnd  thclike.

Cheriomum  is  that  in  which  Natture  cannot  be  alte*
red^as  Cryflal^which  is  fo  hardened  by  nature,that  ic
cannot  bee  melted  as  that  which  is  made  byArt^

Qherubin  is  a  celeftiall  vertue,  and  influence,  da-
mination,  and  power  above  all  dominurionsy  and
powers,  proceeding  from  God,  and  ccfcending  upon
the  earth,  and  upon  all  men.  Of  this  divine  glory
Paracelftts-  fpcaks  largely  in  the  cxpofitions  of  the
Pialms  of  X)Jv/V.

Qhifir  Minerale  is  of  fomejntdrpreted  Gold,  but
I  judg  it  by  what  goes  before  to  bee  the  Sulphur  of
any  Metall.

Qhirom\inq  according  ro  Paracelfus  doth  not
treat  of  the  lineaments  of  the  hands  only,but  alfo  of
the  whole  body,  and  not  only  of  men,  but  all  naturall
things  befides,

Chym/a  is  the  art  of  Separating  pure  from  impure,
and  of  making  efitnces.

Qhjbiir^  or  Qibnr'\%  Sulphur,

Qhrj[0coll4


A  Chymicall  Dictionaryl

ChryfocolU  is  a  kind  of  green  earth  like  Vcrdc-
greafcii

Chryfos  is  Gold.

Chymm  is  Feces,

C/W/>/#w  is  Ciment  of  Gold,  or  Silrcr,  which
fomc  call  Regale.

Citn^tflus  is  pale  Cryftall.

Citrinulum  is  atranfparent  falr^made  out  of  calci-
ned vitriall.

CitrinuWis  a  bliftering  Hearb  called  Crow-foot.

C/i?,  or  K:I},is  the  quantity  of  two  Gallons  of
Wine.

djffus  is  the  occult  vertue  of  things  returning
from  whence  they  cameras  the  vertue  of  an  hearb  into
the  root  in  Autumnc.

CoAguUtio  is'  the  making  of  a  thin  thing  thick,

Qcelum  Sfagiricum  is  the  upper  part  of  a  Philofo'
phicallvcdell.

Qcelum  Philofojfh0rum  is  any  quinteilencc ,  or
univcrfall  medicine,  efpccially  the  Philofophers
ftone.

Qceli  fUnetarum  are  the  proper  orbs,  and  their
{pheres.

Qememnm  i$  a  dry  Corrofion,  when  any  Metal-
line body  is  calcined  with  falts ,  or  fuch  like  drying
things.

QohobdUBxs  the  often  drawing  off  a  liquor  from
its  body,being  oft  put  upon  it.

Qohopbj  orC^^<?/>isthefameas  Cohobation.

Cshos  is  whatfocver  the  skin  contains  in  the  whole
body.

Colcotkir  is  calcined  Vitriall,  or  the  cajut  Mtrtu-
ftm  of  oyle  of  vitriall.


A  Chymicall  DiSlionary]

Qolldtenmxs  an  hcarb  called  Lyons- foot ,  or  a
certain  ftiptick  medicine.

ColltqHAtion  is  melting,  as^^ialls  are  melted^
Qolicii  is  Tartar  refolved  in  the  bowelis,  or  a  fixt
difeafc  in  the  Colon  gut.  :.

Cderitiumis  a  Liquor  compounded  oFthe  corro-
five  materialls  of  Metalls,
Comef^  is  halfa  drop.

C^mpUxio  is  the  nature  of  any  part,  or  the  quali'
ty  of  heat ,  and  cold,  and  the  like.

Q^mfofttum  put  abfoktely  is  a  body  not  fcpa-
fated.

Coftfrmimcntum  is  the  body  of  a  flat  in  man^or  an
Aftrall  body.

QonfortAtivA^Qx.  CtnftrtantU  are  medicines  which
comfort  the  heart,  and  ^rengthen  Nature.
QongeUtiva  are  medicines  which  ftop  any  flux.
Ctngluten  is  that^whichbyputrefa^ionis  turned
ktoavifcons  matter.

Confelidativa  are  extcrnall  medicines  which  Chi-
TUrgions  ufc  in  healings  and  drying  wounds ,  and
ulcers,

Cfnjldlatifi  is  the  impreflion  of  fuperiour  ftars ,  or
their  vertues  uponififenour  bodies.

C«';?/?r/iJ?/^'4  are  ftiptick  medicaments  which  Chi*
rurgions  ufc.

Conterfio  is  a  torment  of  the  bo  wells.
CoHtraiiio  is  a  weakneflc  of  the  members  ,  and
drawing  of  them  together.

ConfervstivA'^  are  medicaments  which  preferve
Nature  from  putrefa(5tion,  being  fuch  things  as  arc
full  of  Aftrall  vertue.
CQ0ftr»m  is  the  middle  part  of  the  Diaphragma.

C  c  c  C0r''


OraftVJr^ftMetalh  is  called  Gold.

CorbMum  is  Copper.

€ormcer'v'i\% araohgft  the  Chymifts  the  nofeofa
ftill,amon^{i>^l^rtr4^f//«*^  a  vulnerary  hearb.

Corfm~\%  the  fubjci^  in  which  the  vertues  of  things
Bshid.

Corpora  ccslefiia Spagjrfirtm  arc  Aftrall  vertues  ia
their  matter.

Xor^orafu^trcakHia^xc  fuch bodies  that  ar^^  not
known  by  fenfe,  but  by  reafon.

CorfHs  in'vifibiie  is  the  foul^which  is  corporcail  in
rcfpcd  of  its  fuftcntation  ^  and  invifible  by  rcafoiv
4»f  its  fpirituality.

Corrofiva  are  medicines  that  Chirurgipns  lafc  x^
cat  off luperfluous  flefh.     ifTvx*")  ;,

Cortex  Maris  is  the  Vincger  of  Philofophers.

Cwufciu  is  mouic-carc.
\-€osoronium'is^\A(\\kOt*.

Cruor falls  is  fait  feparated  from  l^c  firfb  ^t  bj5
feuir  o^  the  fecond  digcftioB.

Cucurbtu  is  a  reffell  like  a  gourd» '
Cyeimdis  Litharge.

CjAirv&Iupwr^     '■-)-'::•:',.: u  vije!^\u.ih^

Cy)'^^;;//^wisa^iftillialtoryTdrcH,  ©r  the  Art  h
felf^..


D


D


i^^*^(?  is  a  fucccffive  generation  by  propaga-
tion.
Vattrais  Hellehr*
Demotinus  la^p^  is  fuddain  death.

Defcenforium  is  a  Chymicall  furnace  in  ^which  the
liquor  falls  downward  front  the  grofTc  matter.

Derfcs  is  an  occult  vapour  of  the  earth ,  by  rcafon
of  which  all  kind  of  Wood  grows^and  incrcaieth,

Deliquium  is  a  cold  defcenflon ,  when  coagulated
bodies  are  diffolved  into  a  liquor  in  any  cold  place.

I>iaceltate([fin  is  a  fpcciall  remedy  againft  feavers,

Hiatneter  Sfagirictts  is  a  temperament.

Diafeajia  is  Alchamilla^  /,<?.  Ladies  mantle.

Diaphaffumis  that  which  is  tranfparent.

Dtafhoreticum  is  a  fweating  medicine,

Diafatyr/o/t  is  a  contedion  provokirtg  luft,

I>iAte([adelton  is  precipitated  Mercury.

I>iene\  are  fpirits  that  dwell  amongft  hard  ftoncs.

Vigeltio  is  a  Chymicall  operation  ,  alluding  to
the  digeftion  of  a  Mans  ftomach ,  in  which  ,  and  by
which  the  matter  isdecO^^ed  into  a  Reparation  of  pure
from  impure.

Difcu^folisis  Quickfilver  made  out  of  Gold,

Diviftatio  is  prophecy ing,or  foretelling.

DivertAliam^  or  Divmcllnm  is  a  generation  made
by  Elements,

Ccc  1  I?r4-


A  Chymicdll  DiBioaary>,

VracHriculus  is  BraffKtclU^ i.e.  Adders  tongue,.

Dubdcch  is  the  cavity  of  an  impofteme..        ^_

Vuckch  is  a  kind  of  Tartar  in  Mans  body ,  or  the
ftone  in  the  bladdcr,or  any  other  part  which  is  fpon-
gious,and  dangerous.

Z)«^;w^c^  is  Antimony.

Dulcedo  Satnrni^  is  Altcj,  or  Cerufc.

DurdaUs  are  corporeall  fpirits  inhabiting  trccs»

Dhta  is  a  circulating  vefTell.


E.


lD^//>Wisanyonethat  prognofticatcs  by
the  Nature  of  the  Elements.

£^/risfteelorIron.
Ehifrum  is  fomctimcs  taken  for  Amber,
but  in  ?dracelft4s  it  is  a  mixture  of  a  compound  metall
made  by  melting  all  the  feven  planets  into  one
body.

Ehmentum'm  F^racelfu^  is  the  corruptible  ,   and
tranfient  cfTenee  of  the  worldjand  of  all  things,which
are  fubj  eft  to  change,
Elefhas  is  J  qua  fortU,

Elixir  is  properly  a  fermenr,the  leaft  part  of  which
turnes  the  whole  mafle  of  any  thing  into  its  ownc
kind  :  alfo  it  is  the  effcnce  of  any  thing.-
Elfvatioms  making  a  thing  fubtile.
Emm^omm  is  the  place  of  expalfion  of  any  ex-
crement.

Enccit-


A  Chymtcall  DiSitonaryl

EmchdianHm  is  that  which  hath  long  life.

£;?m/;  is  flaked  All  urn,  and  fomctimes  it  is  made
(pagirically  of  fair  gemme.

Emr  is  an  occult  vapour  of  the  water ,  by  which
ftones  are  bred.
Erodinium  is  thefignofany  thing  to  come.

EjeurA,  or  Ejlfhara  is  black  and  dead  flefh  caufcd
hy  a  cauftick,and  is  commonly  called  the  Efcar.

E([arA  are  Wheales.

Effdtum  e(fe»fialg,  is  the  eflcntiall,  and  power  that
is  in  Vegetables,  and  Mineralls.

E(pittim  vimm  is  re<ftified  fpirit  of  Wine.

E(fe»t/a  quinta  according  to  Parked frs  his  definiti-
on, is  acertain  matter  extracted  from  things  purified
from  all  manner  of  impurity,  and  corroption,  where-
by it  is  made  incorruptible,

EffiU  is  a  tin(5ture  made  by  the  heat  of  the  fun  in
the  tace,  or  any  other  part  of  the  body.

Efj'odimm  is  a  certain  prefage  of  things  to  come  by
their  raarksi

Efihionemus  is^mo^coxxwpi  impofteme  feeding
upon  the  whole  member,as  a  Wolfe.

£ve/ifr»»?isaprophencallfpirit,  which  prefagcth
by  figns,orfomething  going  before.  /

Excremefftaarc  all  fuperfluous  things  ejected  by
Nature. .

Ex/turd  is  any  apofteme  which  cafts  out  matter.

Exalt atio  is  the  fubtilizing  oi  any  thing.

Exorcifla  is  a  fuperflitious  artift  which  calls  up-  {pi-
rits.

Extractumis  that  which  is extraded  out  ofcorpo-
reairconcretion,the  groflcnefle  being  left  behind

£^^^/f^isSalc.

Ccc3,  F


4»  ChymuaUDi^QnoTj.


F

-^ — ' ^ St^^rV-"- — ^~-^

\AhA  is  the  third  part  ofa  fcruplc,
FakhU'i^  the  flcnvcc  of  Beans.
Fe!  Draeonis  is  Qyickfilver  out  of  Tm%
Fel  vitri  is  thelpumcofgiaifc.
Ftrmentum  isa  fixt  matter,  which  reduceth  a  mat-
ter to  its  own  nature,  and  fixedncffe.

Ficsis  cuth  is  a  wart  growing  to  the  skinne  upon
Horfes  legs,and  it  is  a  medicine  to  help  difeafes  of  the
matrix.

Fido  is  called  Quckfilver,  and Tometimcs  Gold*
Fida  is  Silver,  and  fometimes  Gold.
Filitis  nnins  Biei'is  the  Philofophers  ftone.
^    Filum  arfe»uaU  is  the  Philofophers  ftone.

Fiptus  equinus  is  a  digeftion  made  any  way,  either
by  Horfe-dung,  or  warm  afccs,  or  water.

Filtratio  is  ftraining  a  thing  through  a  woollen
cloth,  or  paper,  &c,

Flagx.  are  fpirits  \vfiich  know  the  occult  fccrets  of
men.

Floscheiri  istheefTcnce  of  Gold.
Flos  feet  arum  Crot  i%  the  flower  of  Nutmeg,  or  as
fome  willjof  Saffron.

FddttU  is  a  kind  of  muflirome.
Ftxatie  is  making  that  which  flies  in  the  fire  to
endure  the  fire,

FilU


A  Chymicall  DiSH^mry;

fsJU  dAKTi  are  leaves  of  Gold,

loKS  Vbdofe^omm  is  BaUeum  Mar  it,

Form&  rerum  are  called  the  influences  of  celeftiall
bodies^which  inferiour  bodies  receive  from  them,  or
they  are  the  vcrtues  of  any  thirtg.

'J^^rwj/V^  are  little  impoftemes  like  warts,

F,tigiU  is  an  apofteme  in  the  cares.

Fulige  Metallorum  is  fometimes  called  Arfcnickc,
and  fometimes  it  is  taken  for  Mercury.

Fulmen  is  purified  Silver.

Fuml^Atio  is  calcining  any  thing  with  a  to'p  CQt^
rodingfume.

Fujio  is  melting,  or  making  any  thing  flow  in  tfic
fire.


G


)A9mhet  arc  ftoncs  in  which  celeftiall  ver*
tues,    and  fupernaturll  conftcUations  arc
impreffcd,  being  myked  with  wonderful!
characters,  and  images.
GamAheizxt  images  imprclTed  by>  ftp^ralefliall
influence.  -       ,- '

GamoTtjnum  is  that  one  only  Anatomic  of  all
things.

Glades  dura  is  Cry ftall .

GUdialis  is  an  Art  whereby  according  to  tlie

courfs


A  Cbymicall  DiSlionary.

courfcofthe  firmament  of  the  fhrs  fwordsdrc  To  for-
gcdjthat  anvills  cannot  refill  them^  whence  it  other-
wife  called  weufma.
Gel/Oft  is  a  Leafe.

Ceomartcy  is  the  mod  known  Art  of  the  earth,  but
in  this  place  it  is  taken  for  thr  liars  of  the  earth,  m"a-
nifeflingthemfelvcs  to  men,  fo  that  thereby  i^hey
may  takefome  ground  for  prefaging.
Ceiuta.  is  the  hearb  called  Chameleon,
Gemma  tartar ea  is  called  the  (lone  that  is  generated
ef  diaphanous,  and  perfpicuous  tartar.

GemU  is  a  plant  degenerating  by  tranfplaating
of  a  parfnip.

Gil^ar  is  a  Metallick  medicine.
;    Gigantes  are  men  exceeding  the  bounds  of  Nature.
Gluten  is  any  vifcous  matter  in  the  body  ,  from
whence  proceed  many  .obftinatc  difeafes.
^Itftijtu'  tendcita^  is  the  Minerall  Hefine.
Gluta  is  the  efficacy  of  tenacious  pitch.
Gnomi  are  called  homurKionesy  or  rather  corporeall
fpirits,livin^  under  the  earth^or  elfe  Pygmies  of  a  cu-
bit long.

GrAcaMiigtA  is  a  fuperflitious  Art  invented  by  the
Grecians  ^h^  which  they  made  things  appear,  which
really  were  not.

•     Gravus  isihc  {iono^  fir fbyrkes^  the  ufe  of  which  is
as  of  a  marble  to  dilTolvc  things  in  the  cold.

Gr/ffa,  ovGriUuffis  vitriall  diffolved  of  its  ownc
accord  into  water.

Gnarini  arc  men  living  by  the  influence  of  the  hea-
ven.
Gnma  is  Quickfilver.
'Ct$mHuJn  is  Valerian.

Cttttd


A  Chymcall  Dictionaryl

Gutu  nfacea  is  a  rcdnclTc  efpecially  in  the  f:icc  like
that  tin«5lurc  which  is  in  the  beginning  of  a  Lc^
profic.


H


[Aiii^  is  h'0\'\,
mils  Salt.

Hnrmel  is  the  feed  of  wild  rue
Haro  is  a  kind  of  Feme.  '

Helis  Honey.

Henrkus  rnkeus  is  the  Colcatharof  Vitriall,

HelUbrid  is  a  kind  of  black  Hellebore  bearing  red
flowers.

HdiotropHm  is  Pancclfu^  his  balme.

Helifmidan  is  aibalfamicall  Mummie.

HlntcuU^genlcuU^  ox. gumicuht  is  Valerian.

Homunciilus  in  Paracelfm  is  a  man  made  artificial-
ly^theprocefTe  whercoFyou  may  fee  at  large  in  the
foregoing  treatife  the  eight  pagCjand  fomctimes  they
arc  taken  for  fuperftitious  im'ages.

Hsrioyt  is  the  Mercury  of  Gold.

Httmer  vita  is  the  radicall  moifture.

Hydri  are  juices  or  fruits.

H'jdromancy  is  an  Art  taken  from  the  ftars  of  the
water^when  they  manifeil:  themfelves  to  men,as  from
unufuall  inundations,  and  the  like.

i/y^r^^y^^r.isArfmart  tinged  with  red  fpecks,  or
fpots.  Ddid  I


^iChywicsll  DictUmry^


I


^^  is  the  hearb'of  the  Trinity.
I^eruU rubea  is  zn  Brtftfelas^
idea-,  is  a  figure  of  a  thin?  conceived  in\
the  imagination  as  a  perpetuall  being,  or  a
pattern  of  all  things  of  that  nature.

/<j//^/^^  are  contemners  of  true  arts,  although  they
are  skilful!  profefTors  of  the  falfe..
lefahach  is  fupernaturall.
Ignis  leonis  is  the  Element  it  felfc  of  fire*
Ignis  Ttrfictts  is  a  hot  burning  ulcer.
Ignhfrumus  adeftus  is  the  quintelTence  of  vitriall
rcdified  with  tartar.

Ikch  frimum  is  the  firft  Principle.
iJecbfupernutura/e  is  a  conjunftion  of  the  fuper-
naturall, and  firmamentallftars,   with  the  infcriout
ftars  of  tcrrrcftial  tiiings,and  with  wine.

lUch  w^gttuw  is  an  Afcendcnt  or  a  flar  of  a  medir
cine^which  together  is  taken  with  it,in  which  alio  it  is
hid;  and  asthe  (uperiour  flars  are  in  the  firmament,,
lb  alfo  are  the  inferiour  in  man..

Ilech  arudKtn  is  a  compoiltion  of  the.  firflmatter  of
the  thrf  e  ftrft  principles..

lieidus  is  the  Elementary  aire  •  but  in  men  it  is  the^
ipirit  which  pafleth  through  all  his  members.
lUafierj  or  I/Jajles^  or  lUadim  ^  is  the  firft  matter

of


A  Chyntkall  Dictionary.

of  all  things 5Con{iftirg  of  Sulphur,  Mercury ,  and
Salr-,  and  it  is  foiircfold  according  to  the  number  of
the  Elements.  The  firft  is  the  chaos  of  the  Earth,
the  fecond  is  the  chaos  of  the  Water,tlic  third  is  the
chaos  of  the  Aire,  the  fourth  the  chaos  of  the  Fire.
Alfo  there  are  four  IliaHri  of  men  refpeding  long
life.

Ilidflerfrimus  is  the  term  of  life ,  or  the  life  it  felfe,
or  the  balfome  ot  life  in  man.

IlUflcr  fectindtts  is  the  tearm  of  the  balfome  ,  and
the  life  which  we  have  by  Elements^  and  tilings  ele-
mcntated.

Iliajler  terms  the  term  of  the  balfome ,  or  life
which  we  have  by  the  quinteflence  of  things.

Iliafier  wagnus^  or  qtMrtHs  is  of  the  minid,  or  foule-
caught  up  into  another  world,  as  E»och^  and  BliAh
were.

///4/^rineenerallis  called  the  occult  vertue  of
Nature,by  which  all  things  are  increafed,  nourifhed,
multiplyed^and  flourifliiof  which  you  fliall  read  more
atlargeinthebookofP^nifW/«/  concerning  the  ge-
nerations of  Meteors.

Imagines  are  Metallick  figures,  or  effigies,  in  which
the  celcftiall  powers  operate.

Imagimtio  is  a  ftar  in  man,  a  celeftiall  and  fupercc-
leftiall  body.

Jmpreffiofjes  are  fruits  as  of  flars  in  inferior  things.

Imfurum  aleali^  is  fpume  which  is  taken  from  it  in
purging  of  it.

Inanimate  1XXQ.  Pigmies.

Inclimtio  is  a  power  of  Nature  which  is  manifefted
tt  man  as  he  is  prone  to  this  or  that  thing.

^^ncArnatwA  are  Chirurgeons  medicaments  brec-

D  d  d  I  ding


A  ChymicaU  DiSlhnaryl

ding  flcfh  and  skinnc  in  the  wounds  or  ulcers.

Imulu!  is  a  no6turnall  fpirit  deceiving  Women  m
their  llcep,as  if  they  coupled  with  them.

Jriflae fjth is  thc'z^in^  of  fuperiour  bodies  upOQ

inferiours.
jfjnAtural/a  arc  fupcrnaturall  bodies.
Z^^ispoifon.
jHfiter  is  Tin.
lumni\um  is  Leaven>  or  Ferment.


K


\AchimiAy  or  K^himU  is  the  unripe  Mine  of
any  Metall,as  it  is  in  its  firft  being.
Kaldis  Vine^er.
K/tli  is  Sopc  aflies.
Kamir  is  Ferment.
Kaprili  is  Sulphur.         ,    .
Karens  is  the  twcntyeth  part  of  a  drop.
KarlinA\s  wild  dill.
Kihr'itb is  Swlphur.

Kimit  devAtum  is  whiteCinnabar  fubllmed.
■    Kifl^  or  O/^fshaifagaUon,  or  four  pints.

Kob/iltyOxCobAltHm^orCobletHm,is  a  metallick  mat-
ter blacker  then  Lead,  or  Iron,  without  a  Metallick
iplcndor,  yet  will  be  mcltcdjand  mallcated*
Kywerwa  is  a  buble.
i^y/am  is  Snow.

L


A  ChymicallDiSiionarjil


L.


'Jhr  Sefhia  Is  Paradifc,  or  another  world.
Lac  Virginis  is  Mercurial!  water.
Zrf^/^is  taken  for  any  fixt  thing.
LdfisPhihfofhorum'is  the  higheft  ver-
tue  of  all  terrene  things,  giving  tincture.

Loffus  J>^«/tf//>«j  is  a  fuddainedcath^morc  dange-
rous then  an  A  poplexy  •

Z4/^r/«;» arc  capitall  lees  which  Sope-boilcrs  ui^,
of  which  Chirurgions  make  their  caufticke  called  La^
fis  mfernAlts.

Lato  is  copper  tinged  with  U^ii  cdaminarls  into  a
golden  colour.

Laudanum  Ts  a  compound  medicine  made  of  Gold,
Corall,  Pcarle,  &c.  by  Paracelpts,

LaudirtAxs  Angelica.

Laxa  Chmolea  is  fait  growing  to  ftones.

Laxativa  are  medicines  working  upwards ,  and
downwards.

L  'ffa  is  called  the  prcdeftination  of  hearbs.

Lefas  is  an  occult  boiling  vapour  of  the  earth,  by
which  hearbs  and  plants  grow.

Lephante^ov  Lephantes  is  the  firftkind  ofTar-
tarjor  Bolc5holding  the  midle  betwixt  ftoncs^Sc  clay;

Lemures  are  fpirits  of  the  Element  ot  Aire,  which
i(e^then  think  to  bee  ghofts  of  men  departed*

Ddd^  hcthargU


Athymieall  Diethnaryl

Lethdrgfrinm  in  Parace/fus  is  the  fpumc  of  Mer-
cury ,or  of  Silvcr,or  of  Lead  ^  which  is  fcparatcd  in
their  piirifying,and  purging.

Lethargius  is  the  finder  of  Mines.

Lirnhns  in  Faroe eljm  is  the  great  and  univcrfall
world  5   the  feed ,  and   lirft   matter  ofman.

Liquer  Aqmlegins  is  deftilled  Wine.

Liquor  e^'enti nils  IS  xhdit  humour  which  is  turned
Into  flcfh,  and  bloud.

Liquor  Merct^ii  isthebalfomcof  things,in  which
the  vcrtue  of  curing  or  healing  confifts.

Liquor  Mtmu  is  the  fat  of  a  Man.

Liquor  \'=,mz.wj  times  taken  for  oyle,  when  the
name  of  the  thing  of  which  it  is  a  Liq^uor^is  put  to  it.

Liquor  Mumid  degummt  is  oyle  of  Gumme.

Liquidnm  de  refohto^xs  that  which  is  liquid  of  it$
own  nature.

Liquor  herbarum  is  made  of  hearbs  pounded  and
prcfled,  and  digeftcd.

Liquor  falis  is  the  balfome  of  Nature ,  by  which
the  body  is  prefcrved  from  putrefaction.

Locus  'vitd  is  the  feat  of  the  mind  or  foul.

X<7f«/?^aretopsofboughsoftrees3  as  yet  tender
and  green.

Lorindt  is  the  commotion  of  watcrs,or  a  harmony
made  by  them.

Ludus  is  a  medicine  that  cures  the  flone  by  difTol-
ving  of  it.

Lumhrici  Nitri  are  worms  found  in  the  earth ,  or
mud,  fo  called  for  their  (lipperinefTe,

Luna  comfaBa.  is  Quickfilver.

Luna  is  Silv<rr,

Lujlrum  is  the  creame  of  Milk.

LunartA  is  the  Sulphur  of  Nature.  M


A  Chjmicalt  Dictmary^


M


,AchA  is  a  flying  worm,
MAgtA  Meta^hyficA  is  an  art  lawflill  for
Chriftians  to  ufc^by  which  any  occult  fc-
crcts  arc  difcovcred.

MagtA  in  gcncrall  is  vvifdomc^and  it  is  twofoId.Na-
turall,which  is  lawful!,  and  is  the  ground  of  all  true
Phyficlc,and  the  occulc  wifdome  oi  Nature  without
which  all  mans  rcafon  or  knowledge  is  ignorance.
The  other  is  Diabolicall,  fuperftitious,  and  unlawful
and  is  called  Necromancy,  whereby  men  attainc  to
the  kaowlcdgc  of  things  by  the  ailiftancc  of  cvill
ipirits.

Magiftermm  is  in  Tdracelfrs  any  fccret  extracted
out  of  naturall  things  without  any  Elementary  fcpa-
ration,  with  which  other  things  are  wont  to  bee  pre-
pared; yet  with  the  addition  only  of  other  thing$.
from  which  that  which  is  extracted  is  fcpara^-
ted.

M^gr  s-id  are  peculiar  works  of  God..

IdAgnefuL  is  commonly  taken  for  a  Marcafite ,  but
that  which  isartificiall  is  melted  Tinne  into  which  is
put  Qoickfilver,  and  both  mixt  into  a  brittle  matter,
and  white  maffe.

MAgneticus tArtarusis^doucy  in  a  man  as  hard:
asa  Loadftone,and  fpongious..

MAgortnmi


,A  ChymkaUDiSionary*

MAg^renm  is  a  Magick  medicamentjOr  fccret.

Jkf4/«j»(y?^risoui*  dew  3  and  the  philofophicall
Loadftone.

Mdek  is  Salt.

MnndelUis  the  feed  of  black  Hellebor,

UangoyiAYtA  is  an  art  ufed  in  wcightS5whcreby  tha^
which  is  made  heavy  is  eafily  made  light.

MmdihuUrnm  liquor  is  oyle  of  jaw  bones.

A/^;;;?^  is  not  only  called  a  dew  fain  from  heavenj
vuhich  is  a  kind  of  baUbme  or  fruit  of  the  aire ,  but
alfo  it  is  taken  for  any  fwect  matter  extra(fled  out  of
any  thing.

Marcafiu  is  an  unripe  matterof  Metalls,  and  it  is
of  as  many  kinds  as  there  be  Metalls.

K^armoretfs  t/trtarus^  is  a  ftone  in  man  as  hard  as
a  marble.

Martath,  or  Mdrtach  Is  Lethargc.

Mater  metallorum  is  Qo^ckfilver.

Mdteriafeip/firea  is  an  homogeneal  liquor,in  which
there  is  no  offending  matter.

Matrices  rerum  are  Elements.

Mdturativa  arc  medicines  tliat  Chirurgeons  ufe  to
-  ripen  any  apoff  erne.

Mec/jar/epeot/ca  is  an  invention  of  watcr-workes  to
carry  watersby  pipes  into  high  places,  or  the  like.

\s{ehones^  or  Md-Z^^^^  are  Beetles  that  fly,  and  are
of  a  golden  colour,  and  being  rubbed  make  a  fweet
fmell',  they  are  commonly  found  in  Meadows  in  the
monethofM^)'.
'    Meljifdum  is  Copper.

Me!f([a  is  in  Alchymie  taken  for  Manna  extracted
i^OUtof  thebifthcarbs.


rrav.riTi' \.r


lAcfifii


A  Chymcall  Dictionary.

Menfif  Philofaphicas  is  the  full  time  of  Digeftl  on,
•r;^.  forty  d:iyes.

Me  rem  t  PIS  a,  nntura  coAgnlAitts  is  a  folid  Metal.

Mercuriui  Crj flail  inns,  is  that  which  by  often  Tub-
limations  is  brought  into  a  clcernefTc  like  Cryftall.

Mercunus  Corallinus ,  is  that  which  by  yclkes  of
cgges,and  other  waters ,  is  brought  into  a  redneflc
likeCorall.

Mtrcuritpi  Crudus  is  that  which  is  not  yet  fcparatcd
from  its  Mine.

Mercunus  lax  us  is  Turbith  Mineral.

Mercur'tfis  metaUorttm  pr^c/pitatus  is  Mercury  ex-
tra($ted  out  of  Mctalls  and  precipitated.

}AerctmusmincraliHm  is  an  oylineiTe  cxtraded  out
of  the  Mines  of  Gold,  and  Silver.

Merfurms  regencratus  is  the  firfl  being  of  Mer-
cury.

iAercurialis  fevAis  the  water  of  Allum.

Menfiruum  is  a  liquor  wherein  any  ,thing  is  diffol-
Vcd,ordigcfled.

yietaUtim  currensh  Quickfilver.

Microcofmtts  is  a  little  world,  or  man.

Minium  is  the  Mercury,  or  rather  Crocus  of  Lead
precipitated.

^i[ptdam  is  Quickfilver.

Mttigativa  arc  Chirurgicall  medicines  which'allay
painc.

Monftra  arc  Animalls  which  cither  have  not  proper
paronts,and  are  not  born  of  things  like  tothemfelves,
or  have  fomc  dcfed,  or  excefle  in  Nature  .but  of  this
fee  more  in  the  firfl  book  of  the  foregoing  Treatife.

Morus  is  an  apofteme  like  tcJ  a  Mulberry.

MuU  arc  puftlcs  arifing  from  hcatj  or  cold,

Eec  *      MumtA


A  Chymicall  DiEiionary,

lAumh  is  not  only  mans  flc(h  fcafoncd  with  balfom,
but  any  other  fleduhus  prepared.

lAumia  Blementortm  is  the  balfome  of  externall
Elements.

Mumia  tranfmarina.  in  Paracelfm  is  Mmm,

tAumia  verfi  is  the  liquor  of  mummic.

Mttfcihgff  isa  vifcous  liquor.

lAundifutiva  are  cleanfing  medicines.

lAuHus  is  the  white  Calx  in  urine.

l/iyfj'adar  is  Mercury.

Myfcritim  mugnum  is. the  firft  matter  of  all  things.

lAmAi^  brine.


N


Act  A  is  an  apofteme  of  the  brcaft.

Narcot/c.i  are  medicines  caufing  flccp.
Nafda  or  NMta  is  a  bunch  in  the  back.
NehulgeA  is  fait  of  the  moifture  of  a
loud  falling  upon  ftoncs  inmeadowes^ani  hardened
vith  the  heat  of  the  fun.

NecromAM)  is  an  unlawfull  artjwhich  did  in  time  of
old  worke  with  the  dead,  as  when  the  ftars  were  ma-
nifefted  with  the  dead.  And  he  is  truly  called  a  Ne-
cromanccr,w]io  can  make  the  dead  appcarc,  and  can
draw  wordb  and  anfwers  from  chcin.

JiiicrolkA


AChyimcall  DiSi'tonify\

NecroJic^zvc  medicaments  expelling  death,  and
prcfeivin^life.

Nenttfarem^  are  fpirits  dwelling  in  the  aire.

Neutha^  or  Neuta,  is  a  little  skin  growing  to  the
<ares,  or  eyes  of  inlanrs,  and  fometimes  covering  the
whole  body.

Njgromancy  is  a  wicked;and  execrable  art,whereby
devils ,  and  wicked  fpirits  fuffer  tbemfclvcs  to  bee
commanded  by  man,  and  obey  them ,  but  only  to
their  hurt.

Nitrumis  Salt-petrc.

Nitriales  are  all  burning  things  which  conduce  to
calcination.

Nehoch  is  an  inftrument  ufed  in  Necromancy.

Nodi  are  hard  tumours  of  the  joints.

Nofiech  is  that  which  we  call  a  falling  ftar ,  a  kind
of  gelly  or  flirae  found  oftentimes  in  the  fummer  in
fields,  and  meadowes.
Nuba  is  a  kind  of  red  Manna  which  falls  in  Ireland,
Nymph^yOv  Nymphfd/ca^2rc  {piiiiuall  men,  or
women,  or  corporeall  fpirits  dwelling  in  waters,  fuch
a  one  was  Melufina,

Nymfhidica  are  metaphorically  fpirits  of  diflblving
waters  in  the  (pagiricall  art.
Njfadir  is  fait  Armoniack.


Eee  2  Ob'


jtChymicall  Dicthnary^,


o


^^^^Sri^m  is  pure  gold  calcined  by  art  into  a
<  lif^ht  red  colour.

Or^^isfalt  Armoniack.
i^^     odorifera  are  medicines,  which  by  their
odour, whcthergood  or  bad,expcll  difeafes.

Olclta^  rernm  is  the  fulphur  in  all  things.

oUum  nrdens  is  oylc  of  Tartar  corrc<^ed  to  the
bighcft  degree.

oUtim  Vitrieli  mrificatum^  is  that  which  is  dulcifi-
ed with  gold  artificially.

oUtim  CaJcotharinum  is  red  oyle  of  Vitriall.

okttm  fquamiwim  is  oyle  of  Tartar.

olynificMfpsritm  is-a  ftar  inman,that  makes  him^
to  yeeld  a  Oiadow  of  himfelf.

Qferimethioltm  is  the  fpirit  of  Mineralise.

O/j^./.r/zi/^arcmcciicineswhichftop  fluxes.

Opyoddtoch  in  P^racelfus  is  an  ointment.

Opcpopyrcn  Laudam  is  faracdftts  his  medicine  to
flop  fc  a  vers.

Ordelctmhz  little  apoftcme  like  a  barley -corne..

Orexjs  is  a  heat  caufed  by  tartarous  matter.

Orgarjopeoticfl  is  an  Art  finding  out  warlike  inftru-
mcnts..

Ori'^onidternitAtk  is.thc.fupcrcclcfliall  vertue  of


things.


Ori^um^


A  Chymicall  Dictienarj^

Ori:^um  is  Gold.
Ort\(nm foli4tum  is  Leaf-gold.
Ori^eum pracipiutum  is  Gold  brought  into  a  Cro-
s,  by  the  help  of  the  Crocus  of  Mercury.
oroh  is  the  glaffe  of  Metalls.
offaparaleli  area  univerfall  medicine  in  the  Gout.
Ovum  Philofofhicum  is  a  glafTc  of  the  form  of  an
cggc  which  Philofophers  ufe  in  their  operations.
<>^(?  is  ArCenick.


^^^AKdditiuin^  VAnmtium^  or  ?^fpt^\s  an  apo-
^ftenie  in  the  ends  of  the  fingers,  called:
:a  white  flaw.

Pa;jna  is  a  naturall  {por.
Varscufnp'irte  is  a  mafs  confiHing  of  equal  parts  of
Gold,  and  Silver.

'PauUJad/im is^^ind of ttnaJi^iHata  growing  in
Italy.

Ven/tteszxz  fpirits.of  the  Element  of  Fire ,  called
Familiars.

^etttneuU  are  figns,or  delineaments  engraven  with
^vonderfull  and  ftrange  letters,and  images,  which  be*
ir.g  hanged  about  theneck,are  faidtobe  prcicrvadves>
againftevill  fpirits^and  witcheries*

Peycfpioium  is  any  medicine  that  is  approved.
"Purdct^i-^K  rapes  fmall  and  yellow.


Ai^bymicali  uutionary,

Verdomium'is  wine  made  out  of  hearbSi
Vertodus  is  the  term  of  life.
Peticedamftm  is  Englifli  Angelica.
V/j^ntafmata  are  fpirits  of  the  wood,  or  the  defcrt,
which  live  in  any  obfcure  place.
PhaU  is  a  viall^or  glafle  bottle.
Vionitides  are  naturall  enemies  which  perfecntc
one  the  other  to  death,as  th:  Storke,and  Frogs ,  &c.
V el t emus  is  a  circulatory,  or  circulating  veflell.
Vhenfx  is  the  quintcflencc  of  Fire-,  aU'o  the  Philo-
fophers  ftonc.

Phjfiognomy  is  an  Ar;  whereby  mens  natures,  and
conditions  arc  perceived  by  their  faces.

Vlumbum  Vhilofopherum  is  that  which  is  extraded
out  of  Antimony.

V  or  of  a  is  S.Johnf-wort*

VrsfAgium  is  Tome  notable  fign  of  fomcthing  to
come. ,

VrefervAtivA  are  medicines  preferving  bodies  from
corruption.

V rf males  zrc  called  fallacious  bodies  which  are  by
the  ftars  put  before  our  eyes.

Vruinum  is  the  firft  kind  of  Tartar,
VruinA  is  Ignis  Perficus.

Vulfe'\ia\s  a  fuddain  aftonifliment  or  change  in  a
mans  body  by  rcafon  of  the  ftars.

Vufla  is  the  digeRion  of  corrupt  matter.
V'jgmeA  are  called.artificiall  men ,  and  fometimcs
fubtcrrancall  fpirits.

Vyramis  is  a  vefTell  made  like  a  Vyamis.
Vyromavcy  is  an  arc  pre  Gaging  by  fire.

Qiiat


A  Cbymkall  Di^knary]


Q


^^Fditai  is  called  a  compkxion,whcther  hot
^  or  cokJjdry  or  moift,according  to  the  pre-
dominancy of  any  Element.
^artatiOyOV  ^artura  is  the  highcft  try-
all  of  Gold,and  that  this  way,  ^'/;(,.  that  nine  parrs  of
Silver  bee  mixed  wiih  one  part  ot  Gold  in  melting
by  the  fire.  Then  let  them  both  bee  dilTolvcd  with
Aqtu  fortis :  All  the  Silver  is  turned  into  water  ,  and
the  Gold  fettles  to  the  botcomc  like  a  dark  powder.
cijitnte^entU  is  called  a  certame  fpirituall  matter
extracted  corporeally  out  of  hearbs,  plants ,  and  all
things  that  have  life ,  and  the  exalting  of  it  to  the
higheft  degree  of  purity,  by  feparating  all  in  purities.
^Imntum  e(fe  cuyujlibet  Element i  fer fe  folum^  is  an
animall  produced  out  ot  that  alone.


R


'^^^^^j^(td:£  are  apoftcmes  of  the  privities.

N  ^}fi*>     ^'^''^  '^  an  apofteme  under  the  tongue.

i£\>S)     R-'^lg'^risxiiQ  fume  of  Mincralls  bein«y

>^i^*^  properly  taken,  but  being  metaphorically
it  5  any  vitious  matter  in  mans  body,  of  which  grow
apoftcmes,  ulcers,  or  the  like.  B^bis


A  Chymicall  Dictionary^

Kehh'  is  the  excrement  of  the  belly.

Mdu^  is  the  Isft  matter  of  things.

RebifoU  is  a  iecret  urine  againft  the  jaundire.

:p.ebona  is  the  fame  as  Mummie.

Kedue  is  a  powder  whereby  calcined  Metalls^  and
Mmeralls  are  melted.

legale  is  a  Ciment  whereby  Gold  is  purged.

Regulu^  is  the  pureft  metalhnc  part  of  any  mctall^
or  the  pureft  part  of  a  mmcrall,  the  feces  being  fcpa-
rated.

RelhUumis  a  vcrtac  from  the  complexionn ,  as  in
St.  Johnf-wortjtht  iirft  vcrtuc  is  in  heat,  and  is  hea-
lingjthcotherisaccidcntalljand  occult,  and  is  a  prc-
fcrvative  againft  wormSjand  corruption.

itiefina.  aur't  is  a  Crocus  cxtra(ficd  out  of  Cold.

Sejina  terra  is  Sulphur.

Kejif^a  terra  fotabilis  is  fublimed  Sulphur,  brought
into  a  liquor,  balfome,  or  oyl.

iff-^fm^^/i^rf  arc  ^medicines  which  drive  back  any
flux.

Reverhemmum  is  a  furnace  in  which  the  matter  is
calcined  by  a  flame.

Rillus  is  an  inftrumcnt  which  Goldfmiths  ufc  to
pourc  their  melted  metalls  into  long  forms,  and  it  is
called  a  Jngat.

Rofea  is  the  fame  as  Erifi^el^,
Rubella  is  a  fpirituall  cflencc  extra(fting  by  its  dif-
folving  power,  the  tin^ure  out  of  bodies*


Sa.


J  Chjmleall  DiSiiomry*


s.


[>^^4;?/arcfpirits  of  the  four  Elements.

SalawAndri  are  fpirits  dwelling  in  the  firCj
or  fiery  men.
_ '    Sddini  the  fame  as  SaUmandri,
Sal  alumirfofam  is  [ixh  which  is  cxtraded  out  of
aluinen  ^Inmojum,

Salan^thron  is  fait  extraded  out  of  the  ftoriy

moffe.

Sal  crylfallifjuw  is  fait  made  out  of  mans  urine.

Sal  Calcetharimm  is  fait  which  is  made  out  of  the
Colcotharof  Vitrial.

Sal cor^ge latum  is  -fait  which  grows  in  baths.

Sal  emxum  is  fait  diflblved.

Sal  Mercurii  is  the  fpirit  of  the  wine  which  caiifeth
drunkennefle.

54//?^rr^  is  that  which  grows  in  cold  places  upon
ftoncs,  coffgealcd  by  the  cold  aire.

Sal  nitrttm  isf  alt  which  is  boiled  out  of  the  earth,
cfpecially  fat  carth^as  in  flables^or  any  place  ol  excre-
ments. ,-'      ."^^

Salpra^icum  is  a  mixture  made  of 'e<^tfall  f^artSjOf
Salt-petre,  and  Salt  Armoniack.

SAlfdJfum^^nd  alumen  fciffum  are  all  one.

Salt:^falt^^  SeUmfum^  is  brine.

Saltaber^et^  is  whitelt  Tartar  of  all.

Sdtabari  is  [al  Alemhret.

5^//^/?rfisthcakindof  Salt-pctrc.

F  f  f  Sa-


A  ChymicaU  DiUionarj^

Smech  is  Tartar.

SiindarMhA  is  Amfigmentum^

SAngnis  Ciilcetu6  is  that  which  is  of  as  quick  a  taft,
as  Calx,  and  as  white.

SA^hiredmAterid'\s:i\\<\i\ox^  in  which  there  is  no
impurity,  or  corruption,  the  pure  being feparatcd
from  the  impure.

Safofafientia  is  common  fait  prepared.

SnxifrAga  are  all  fuch  things  which  break  the
ftonc,  or  gravdl.

SixifragHs'Mi^t  Cryftall.

ScacunuU  is  the  fpirit  of  a  bone  in  the  heart  of  a
Halt.

S<:4/VA<  arc  the  fpirituall  powers,  and  faculties  of
the  noifld^and  arc  four^according  to  the  nwnber  of  the
tleracnts.

Scirifrta  is  the  dew  of  Autunfvnc.

Scuma  is  the  fame  as  fqmmA,

Sedaiva  are  medicines  that  allay  pain.

Sewen  vtmris  are  called  fqudm^  xris,

Seftifi  maximus  is  the  Author  of  long  life.

Sfphirm  is  a  hardjanddry  apofteme.

Serdvhin  is  an  unutterable  vertue,an  infinite  power
of  the  heaven^and  efpccially  the  alTcmbly  of  Angels.

Serpheta  is  a  medicine  melting  a  ftone.

Sibarls  Qiilckfilvcr.

S//tf  is  earth,

SimiUtttdtHes  are  called  cclcfliaU  appearances.

Simft^'xs  Gilla..

^inonid  is  white  glew  of  the  joints.

Sironrs^ixc  puAles  or  wheals,in  the  handscfpccially.

Sir'^i  is  e^chnra^

Solm  homing  is  the  invifibk  fire  flowing  from  the

ccIelUall


A  Chymicall  Dictionaryl

ccleftiall  Sun^prcfcrving  and  nourifhing  that  natural!
fire  in  man.

SoUdini  are  corporeall  fpirits  dwelling  in  the  iiwi'
(ible  fire.

Somnia  are  operations  which  arc  made  in  man  by
the  ftars  when  hee  is  lleeping.

Sifnathis  Anthes,

Sofhia  herba  is  the  bcft  kind  of  bone- wort.

Sfphhf.t  are  fometiraes  taken  for  Mailers  of  any
art,or  the  wifeft  in  any  art;  or  fomctimes  for  fophi-
ftcrs,/>.  Deceivers,  or  Mountcbankcs.

S firtilegi urn, is ^prcQigchy  ^irits.

Stagirus^  or fiagiricus  is  he  which  knows  to  diftin-
guim betwixt  good,  and  bad,  to  fcparate  pure
from  impure,ora  Chymift5or  Alchymift.

SfagirU  is  commonly  taken  for  Alchymie.

SfAra  is  the  Minerall  vertue  out  of  the  firft  being
ofmetalls.

Sferma  ac^tufortU  is  its  fcculency.

Sj/eniiolum  is  a  mucilaginous  liquor  of  frogs.

Spirituf  Auimalis  is  a  power  of  the  foul  whereby  it
becomes  like  to  the  heavens.

Stanmr  is  called  the  mother  of  metaHs,  an  occult
fume  out  of  which  Elements  are  generated.

Stdraphaxat  is  a  rcflnging  or  reperquflive  vertue.

Stellto  adtifltis  is  Cinnabar.

Stibium  is  Antimony.

Stiftica  are  drying  medicines.

Struma  is  Butium,

Sublimatio  is  when  any  dry  matter  is  forced  upward
by  the  heat  of  fire.

Succubm  is  a  noAurnall  fpirit,whercby  men  arc  de-
ccivcd>thinklng  they  are  coupling  with  women.

Fffa  Snifkur


A  Chymicall  DiShionary*

Sulfhur  'vitriol  at  urn  is  fulphur  cxtradcd  out  of
vkriall  by  common  water  fwiming  on  the  top  of  it.

Sulphur  rerum  is  many  times  taken  for  their  quin-
teflcnce.

Sufermenicum  is  ^Enigmatical!.

S)^  is  the  whole  world.

Sylph es  are  Pigmies.

Sylvejlres^  oxjylvani  are  aicry  men,  and  aiery  fpi-
rits,  fomctimes  they  are  taken  for  woodmen  that,  arc
ftrong  giganticall  men.,

Syfhitafrava'is^^xkdL^c  called  S.^/V/^j  his  dance.-

S^/>^/>^/^/^'tis  aphantaftickfpirit  of  them  that
walkc  in  their  flcep..


^^^ffl|  J/iC%or  Talcum  is  a  clear  fliining  mattcrjlikc
^^^^^  to  pearls  in  colour,  compared  with  thinnc
leaves  or  flakes,  whereof  there  bee  foura
« kindsj.w^.  white,  yellpw,red,  and  blacke.

T4////jisa  wormc.  ,■"'"'

Tartarum  is  a  hard  faltini  dregs  that  flicks  to  the
(ides  of  Wine  vefielSiaUb  it  is  often  taken  for  ftones
or  gravcll  in  mens  bodies.

Telon'is  as  it  were  a  dart  of  fire.

T^mferatum  is  that  which  exceeds  not  in  any  qua-
lity.

Temcitit6  glutinis  is  mineralt  refine.

Tiremahinis  the  fatncfTeof  manna,or  wood-hony^
which  is  found  in  good  quantity  in  the  moneths  of
Jnmt^ulyiAugujh,  '"  '         Terrj:


A  Chymkall  DiSiiofgaryl

Terra  auri  is  Litharge  of  Gold.

Terra  ar^enti  is  Litharge  of  filver.

Terra  f  belt's  is  filvcr.

Terra  Hifpamca  is  Vitrlall.

Terrelati  are  corporeal!  fpirits  living  in  the  earth,

TeHa  is  the  skin  of  mans  body.

Thamatica  is  an  art  of  inventing  engines  which  arc
moved  by  airc,and  water.

Thafhneus  is  a  clean  purified  medicine.

Thifma  is  minerall  veins.

Tinkar  is  Borax.
^    Titt5tura  is  that  which  tlngcth  any  body  with  its
colour.

Torufcula  is  a"  drop.

Track  fat  is  a  metall,  as  yet  in  its  mine.

Trarames  are  actions  ot  fpirits  not  feen,  but  heard.

Trifertes  are  called  fpirits  dwelling  in  the  fire.

Trigonum  is  a  fourefold  tranfmutation  of  the  fpi-
rits of  t  he  ftars  according  to  the  number  of  the  four
Elements.

Trmuf ,  or  TrofTo(fa  is  called  the  celcfliall  dew
made  ot  the  air,or  the  iwcetcft  kind  of  Manna.

Trii-phat  is  an  occult  verrue  of  Mineralls,  by  .which
they  a(^  toward  that  end  for  which  thcywere  ordaind.

Turha  magna  is  an  innumerable  multitude  of  the
ccleftiall  Ihrs,  and  is  a  prcfage  made  by  any  of  them,

Turifith  minerale  is  Mercmy  precipitated  into  a
fwcctncffe  without  any  conoiive.

Fff3.  Ve.


A  CbymicaUDtSi&nayy.


V


EgetMia  arc  things  that  grow  by  hi-
ving a  root  fixt  in  the  carch,  and  having
ftockj  branches  in  the  airc^  as  hearbcs,
plants^and  trees,  Sec.
Veocru gr adits  isgLVciM  and  fvvcct  na-


ture.


Ferto  is  the  fourth  part  of  a  pound.

Viltrum  ^hilofefhfirum  is  an  Alcmbick,  but  being
taken  abfolutely  is  a  ftraincr.

yitfuw  ccrreif  urn  is  the  fiilcool  of  Wine.

yimm  ejfatum  is  Wine  impregnated  with  the  vcr-
tues  of  hearbs  or  any  thing  clfc.

yiriditas  falis  is  the  green  oyle  of  fair.
,.   virgHlufo^'orum  arc  certain  rods  which  Miners
life  to  oilicovcr  mines  withall.

f^ipdltusis  Mijleto.

ypfctts  is  properly  pitch  boiled  out  of  the  tender
tops  of  trees.

Vtfcui  fecundd  gencrationis  is  bloud  dropping  from
(alts.

r{/?<^  is  a  fupcrnatiTraU  apparition  of  fpirirs  after  a
manner  fcen  by  men.

VitrioUtum  is  Vitriali  which  is  liquid  ,  and  never
can  be  coagulated.

Vitriolum  Novum  is  white  Vitriali.
Vlcus  dsi'tomennm  is  a  cancerous  apofleme  that
feeds  upon  the  place,  VmhrA-


X.


Vmhrdgines  arc  Pigmies^
Vmbratiles  arc  aftrall  bodies.
Fnda,  or  VndenA  are  aiery,  and  earthy  fplrits.
Vrdofs  arc  called  the  excrements  of  any  An^nafe.
VmtatTrithemii  is  the  rcduiftionof  the  number  of
Three  into  a  unity  by  cafting  away  the  number  cf
Two,and  it  isfupcrnaturall,and  fpagirtcalU
ynimes  arc  pretious  pearls,  or  gemincf.
VoUns^  or  Frtq^fi  is  Quickfilvcr,
Volatile  is  in  gcnerall  any  light  matter  which  is
carryed  upward.

Vrina  vini  is  Vi»cgcr,  and  fomctimes  it  is  ufcd  for
the  urine  ota  man  that  alwaics  drinks  wine.

rttlcami,ox  Ftthanici  arc  fucb  as  aiwaics  workc
about  the  fire.
VulcAnttsls^rQ,
fH^rfrh  Ommbar.


W;


XTXTjirmis  is  the  Vincgcr  of  PhiJofophers*
^    ^  ^//5»<7^jV  in  Tin  that  is  fotdc  and  immallca-
We,  and  cannot  be  wrought  upon.


4  Chymicall  DiSllonary,

X.

\Bne^um \s^r\y  outward  medicine  hanged
about  the  body  as  a  prefervativc  againft
the  Plague.
Xeninefhidei^x^  fpirits  which  delight  to
dircover  the  fecretor  occult  properties  of  nature  unto
men^the  power  ohvhich  is  granted  to  them.
-   Xtfinum  is  Vinegcr.


"jOi  .j,.i.


.oaivv'  2>lnnb  i*:!!'..;


YRcus\s2.  Male  Goatjwhofc  blood  is  faid  to
foften  glafrc,and  flints,  &c.
Tfefus  is  the  art  of  Alehymy  to  fcparate  pure
froni  impure.


Z//


X


sAidar  is  Mercury:,.^

Zaidir  is  Copper  or  Verdegreafe.
Zeroes  is  Gold.,
Zatfi'isliin,
•■  ':^^<r/^;»  is  ftony  Mercury;

Zoruha  is  VitrfaH.  '      "'  ' '     '

Zinck  is  a  metallick  marcafite,  And  a  certain  natu-
ral! mixture  of  four  immature  metails,whcreof  Cop-
per is  moft  apparent.
ZintAr  is  Verdegreafe.
Zu'tttcr,  or  Z/>?fr,is  a  Marcafite.
Zymar,QxZjftr  is  Verdegreafe.
FINIS.


^^^^  1^7


' '  JaSSS^B9^^^tkm

■

ip/f/|

t

%JW^

H

llyif

i

m

1

\MjfWt
