Seneca's Tragedies, Vol. II (Miller) (Seneca, 1917)
==========================================================
Volume II of the complete Loeb Seneca tragedies (first printed 1917; this scan a 1929 reprint): Agamemnon, Thyestes, Hercules Oetaeus, Phoenissae, Octavia, in Frank Justus Miller's translation. Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive (https://archive.org/details/tragedieswitheng02seneuoft).

THE  LOEB  CLASSICAL  LIBRARY

EDITED    BY  V    ^      I'J

T.   K.  TACJE,  LiTT.D.
CAPPS,  PH.D.,  Li.n.     W.   H.  D.  ROUSE,  mtt.d.


SENECA'S  TRAGEDIES

II


'^SENECA'S
TRAGEDIES

WITH  AN  ENGLISH  TRANSLATION  BY
FRANK  JUSTUS  MILLER,  Ph.D.,  LL.I).

PBOFKSSOB    IN   THE    UNIVERSITY   OV   CHICAGO

IN  TWO  VOLUMES
II

AGAMEMNON        THYESTES

HERCULES   OETAEUS        PHOENISSAE

OCT AY  I A


LONDON    :  WILLIAM   HEINEMANN
NEW    YORK    :    G.    P.    PUTNAM'S   SONS

MCMXXIX


Firgt  printed  1917
Reprinted  and  reviled  1929


PRINTED  IN  OHEAT  BRITAIN


CONTENTS


TAOV
AOAMEMNOK


THYE8TES

HKRCULES  OETAECS
PHOENISSAK  .  .  .  .
OCTAVIA


1
89

183
34.1
399


APPENDIX.       COMPARATITB    ANALYSES 491


INDEX


511


AGAMEMNON


DRAMATIS   PERSONAE

A  GAM  ESI  N  ON,  king  oj  Argos,  and  leader  of  all  the  Greeks  in
their  tear  against  Troy.

Ghost  of  Thyestes,  returned  to  earth  to  urge  on  his  son  to  the
vengeance  which  he  ivas  hoiii  to  accomplish.

Aegisthus,  son  of  Thyestes  by  an  incestuous  union  with  his
daughter  ;  paramour  of  Clytemntstra.

Clytkmnestra,  ivife  of  Agamemnon,  who  has  been  plotting
with  Aegisthus  against  her  husband,  in  his  absence  at
Troy.

Chorus  of  A  rgive  women.

Edbtbates,  messenger  of  Agamemnon.

Cassandra,  daughter  of  Priam,,  captive  of  Agamemnov,^

Electra,  daughter  of  Agamemnon  and  Clytemnestra.

Stropuius,  liing  of  Phocis.

Orestes,  son  of  Agamemnon  (persona  muta).

Pylades,  son  of  Strojyhius  (persona  muta).

Band  of  captive  2Vojan  women.

The  Scene  is  laid  partly  within  and  partly  without  the
palace  of  Aganieniuon  at  Argos  or  Mycenae,  on  the  day  of
the  return  of  tlie  king  from  his  long  absence  at  Troj',  begin-
ning in  the  period  of  darkness  just  preceding  the  dawn.


ARGUMENT

The  hlood-Jcnd  belivecn  Alreiis  and  Tliijcstes  was  nof
ended  iiilh  the  terrible  vengeaiiee  which  Atreus  wreaked
upon  his  brother.  It  was  yet  in  fate  that  Thyestes  should
live  to  beget  upo7i  kis  o/vn  daughter  a  son,  Aegisthus,  who
shoidd  slay  xitreus  and  bring  ruin  and  death  upon  the
{Treat  Alrides.  Ammemnon.

The  Trojan  war  is  done.  And  now  the  near  approach
of  the  victorious  king,  bringing  his  captives  and  treasure
home  to  Arnos,  has  been  announced.  But  little  does  he
dream  to  what  a  home  he  is  returning.  For  Clytemnestra,
e7iraged  at  Agamemnon  because  he  had  sacrificed  her
daughter  Iphigenia  at  Aulis  to  appease  the  winds,  and
full  of  jealousy  because  he  brings  Cassandra  as  her  rival
home,  estranged  also  bi/  the  long-continued  absence  of  her
lord,  but  most  estranged  by  her  oivn  guilty  union  fvifh
Aegisthus,  is  now  plolting  to  slay  her  husband  on  his
retaiii,  gaining  thus  at  once  revenge  and  safely  jroni
his  wrath.


B    2


AGAMEMNON

^  THYESTIS    VMBRA

I  Opaca  linquens  Ditis  inferni  loca

adsum  profiindo  Tartar!  emissus  specu^

incertus  utras  oderim  sedes  magis —

fugio  Thyestes  inferos^  superos  fugo.

en  horret  animus  et  pavor  membra  excutit :

video  paternos,  immo  fraternos  lares.

hoc  est  vetustum  Pelopiae  limen  domus  ;

hinc  auspicari  regium  capiti  decus

mos  est  PelasgiSj  hoc  sedent  alti  toro

quibus  superba  sceptra  gestantur  manu,  10

'L_locus  hie  habendae  curiae — hie  epuHs  locus.
Libet  reverti.     nonne  vel  tristes  lacus

incolere  satius,  nonne  custodem  Stygis

trigeniina  nigris  colla  iactantem  iubis  ?

ubi  ille  celeri  corpus  evinctus  rotae

in  se  refertur,  ubi  per  adversum  irritus
n    redeunte  totiens  luditur  saxo  labor,

ubi  tondet  ales  avida  fecundum  iecur,

et  inter  undas  fervida  exustus  siti

aquas  fugaces  ore  decepto  aj)petit  20

poenas  daturus  caclitum  dapibus  graves.

sed  ille  nostrae  pars  quota  est  culpae  sencx  }

reputemus  omnes  quos  ob  infandas  manus


AGAMEMNON


GHOST    OF    THVESTES


Leaving  the  murky  regions  of  infernal  Dis,  I  come,
sent  forth  from  Tartarus'  deep  pit,  doubting  which
world  I  hate  the  more — Thyestes  flees  the  lower,  the
upper  he  j^uts  to  flight.  Lo,  my  spirit  shudders,  my
limbs  quake  with  fear ;  I  see  my  father's,  nay  more,
my  brother's  house.  This  is  the  ancient  seat  of
Pelo})s'  line  ;  here  'tis  the  custom  of  the  Pelasgians
to  crown  their  kings ;  on  this  throne  sit  high  lords
whose  proud  hands  wield  the  sceptre  ;  here  is  their
council-chamber — here  they  feast.^

1-  Fain  would  I  tui-n  me  back.  Is  it  not  better  to
haunt  even  the  gloomy  pools,  better  to  gaze  upon
the  guardian  of  the  Styx,  tossing  his  three-fold  neck
with  sable  mane .''  where  one,-  his  body  bound  on
Ihe  swift-flying  wheel,  is  whirled  back  upon  himself ;
where  vain  uphill  toil  ^  is  mocked  as  the  stone  rolls
ever  backward  ;  where  a  greedy  bird  tears  at  the
liver  ^  constantl}'  renewed  ;  and  the  old  man,^  thirst-
parched  midst  waters,  catches  at  fleeing  waves  with
cheated  lips,  doomed  to  j)ay  dearlv  for  the  banquet^
of  tlie  gods.  But  how  small  a  part  of  my  offence  is
liis  ?       Let    us    take    count    of  all    whom    for    their

^  He  is  rcmiiifled  of  his  own  horrid  banquet  in  this  very
place.

■^  Ixion.  '  Of  Sisyphus.  *  Of  Tityus.

'  Tantalus.  ^  See  Index  s.v,  "Pelops."

5


THE   TRAGEDIES   OF   SENECA

quaesitor  urna  Cnosius  versat  reos  :
vincam  Thyestes  sceleribus  cunctos  meis.
a  fratre  vincar,  liberis  plenus  tribus
in  me  sepultis  ;  viscera  exedi  mea.

Nee  hactenus  Fortuna  maculavit  patrem,
sed  maius  aliud  ausa  commisso  scelus
natae  nefandos  petere  concubitus  iubet.  30

non  pavidus  hausi  dicta^  sed  cepi  nefas.
ergo  ut  per  omnes  Hberos  irem  parens,
coacta  fatis  nata  fert  uterum  gravem,
me  j)atre  dignum.     versa  natura  est  retro ;
avo  parentem,  pro  nefas  !  patri  virumj
natis  nepotes  miscui — nocti  diem.

rSed  sera  tandem  respicit  fessos  mails
post  fata  demum  sortis  incertae  fides  ;
rex  ille  reginn,  diictor  Agamemnon  ducum,
cuius  secutae  mille  vexilhmi  rates  40

Iliaca  velis  maria  texerunt  suis,
post  decima  Phoebi  lustra  devicto  Ilio
adest — daturus  coniugi  iugulum  suae.
iam  iam  natabit  sanguine  alterno  domus  :
enses  secures  tela,  divisu.m  gravi
ictu  bipennis  regium  video  caput ;
i;im  scelera  prope  sunt,  iam  dolus,  caedes,  cruor —
jiarantur  epulae.     causa  natalis  tui,
Aegisthe,  venit.     quid  pudor  vultus  gravat?
quid  dextra  dubio  trepida  consilio  labat  ?  50

quid  ipse  temet  consulis,  torques,  rogas,

Lan  deceat  hoe  te  .''     respice  ad  matrem  ;  decet.

^  Minos.  '*'  i.e.  Tliyestes.

'  i.e.  Thyestes  acted  bj'  direction  of  an  oracle,  which  de-
clared tliat  by  this  means  he  might  gain  vengeance  on
Atroiis'  line.

•*  It  will  not  be  his  braneli  of  the  family  that  sliall  suffer
this  time.


AGAMEMNON

impious  deeds  the  Cretan  jud2;e^  with  wliirling  urn
condemns;  all  of  them  by  my  crimes  shall  I^  Thyes-
tes,  coiKiuer.  But  by  my  brother  shall  I  be  con-
(juered,  full  of  my  three  sons  buried  in  me  ;  my  own
riesh  have  1  consumed.

23  Nor  thus  far  only  has  Fortune  defiled  the  sire,^
but,  daring  greater  crime  than  that  committed,  she
bade  him  seek  his  daughter's  incestuous  embrace.
Fearlessly  and  to  the  dregs  did  I  drain  her  bidding,
but  'twas  an  impious  thing  I  did.  And  th.erefore,  that
a  ftither's  power  might  extend  o'er  all  his  children,
my  daughter,  forced  by  fate,"  bore  child  to  me,  wor-
thy to  call  me  father.  Nature  has  been  confounded  ;
father  with  grandsire,  yea,  monstrous  !  husband  with
father,  grandsons  with  sons,  have  I  confused — and
day  with  night.

"2''  But  at  length,  though  late  and  coming  after
death,  the  promise  of  dim  propliecy  is  fulfilled  to  me,
worn  with  my  woes  ;  that  king  of  kings,  that  leader
of  leaders,  Agamemnon,  following  whose  banner  a
thousand  ships  once  covered  the  Trojan  waters  with
their  sail?,  now  that,  after  ten  courses  of  Phoebus,
Ilium  is  o'erthrown,  now  is  he  near  at  hand — to  give
his  throat  into  his  wife's  power.  Now,  now  shall  this
hou^e  swim  in  blood  other  than  mine;^  swords,
axes,  spears,  a  king's  head  cleft  with  the  axe's  heavy
stroke,  I  see ;  now  crimes  are  near,  now  treachery,
slaughter,  gore — feasts  are  being  spread.  The  author
of  tiiy  birth  has  come,  Aegisthus.^  Why  dost  hang
thy  head  in  shame  ?  Why  doth  thy  trembling  hand,
doubtful  of  purpose,  fall  ?  Why  dost  take  counsel
with  thyself,  why  turn  the  question  o'er  and  o'er
whether  this  deed  become  thee?  Think  on  thy
mother  ;  it  becomes  thee  well.

'  These  and  the  remaining  lines  of  tlie  paragraph  are
addressed  to  Aegisthus,  seemingly  as  if  he  were  present.

7


THE   TRAGEDIES    OF   SENECA

Sed  cur  repente  noctis  aestivae  vices
hiberna  longa  spatia  producunt  mora,
aut  quid  cadentes  detinet  stellas  polo  ?
Plioebum  moramur?     redde  iam  mundo  diem.


CHORVS

O  regnovum  magnis  fallax
Fortuna  bonis,  in  praeeipiti
dubioque  locas  nimis  excelsos.
numquam  placidam  sceptra  quietem  60

certumve  sui  tenuere  diem  ;
alia  ex  aliis  cura  fatigat
vexatque  animos  nova  tempestas.
non  sic  Libycis  syrtibus  aequor
furit  alternos  volvere  fluctus,
non  Euvini  turget  ab  imis
commota  vadis  unda  nivali
vicina  polo,

ubi  caeruleis  immunis  aquis
lucida  versat  plaustra  Bootes,  70

ut  praecipites  regum  casus
Fortuna  rotat.     metui  cupiunt
metuique  timent,  non  nox  illis  ^

alma  recessus  praebet  tutos,
non  curaruni  somnus  domitor
pectora  solvit.

Quas  non  arces  scelus  alternum
dedit  in  praeceps  ?  impia  quas  non
arnia  fatigant  ?  iura  pudorque
et  coniugii  sacrata  fides  80

fugiunt  aulas,     sequitur  tristis
sanguinolenta  Bellona  manu
quaeque  superbos  urit  Erinys,


AGAMEMNON

^^  But  wliy  suddenly  is  tlie  summer  iiiii^ht  pro-
longed to  winter's  span  ?  or  what  holds  the  settinf>-
stars  still  in  the  sky  ?  Are  we  delaj'ing  Phoebus  ?
^Preparing  to  go.'\  Give  back  the  day  now  to  the
universe.     [Ghost  va7iishesJ\


O  Fortune,  who  dost  bestow  the  throne's  high
boon  with  mocking  hand,  in  dangerous  and  doubtful
stjite  thou  settest  the  too  exalted.  Never  have
sceptres  obtained  calm  peace  or  certain  tenure ;  care
on  care  weighs  them  down,  and  ever  do  fresh  storms
vex  their  souls.  Not  so  on  Libyan  quicksands  does
the  sea  rage  and  roll  up  wave  on  wave ;  not  so,
stirred  from  their  lowest  depths,  surge  Euxine's
waters,  hard  by  the  icy  pole,  where,  undipped  in  the
azure  waves,^  Bootes  follows  his  shining  wain,  as
does  Fortune  roll  on  the  headlong  fates  of  kings.
To  be  feared  they  long,  and  to  be  feared  they  dread  ;
kindly  night  gives  them  no  safe  retreat,  and  sleep,
which  conquers  care,  soothes  not  their  breasts.

""  What  palace  has  not  crime  answering  crime  -
hurled  headlong  ?  What  palace  do  impious  arms  not
vex  ?  Law,  shame,  the  sacred  bonds  of  marriage,
all  flee  from  courts.  Hard  in  pursuit  comes  grim
Bellona  of  the  bloody  hand,  and  she  who  frets  the

1  i.e.  the  Northern  constellations  never  set  beneath  the
sea.

2  i.e.  waged  hy  one  member  of  a  royal  house  against  another.

9


THE  TRAGEDIES   OF   SENECA

nimias  semper  comitata  domos,
quas  in  planum  quaelibet  hora
tulit  ex  alto.

Licet  arma  vacent  cessentque  doli,
sidunt  ipso  pondere  magna
ceditque  oneri  Fortuna  suo.
vela  secundis  inflata  notis  9^

ventos  nimium  timuere  sues,
nubibus  ipsis  inserta  caput
turris  pluvio  vapulat  Austro,
densasque  nemus  spargens  umbras
annosa  videt  robora  frangi ;
feriunt  celsos  fulmina  colles,
corpora  morbis  maiora  patent
et  cum  in  pastus  armenta  vagos
vilia  currantj  placet  in  vulnus
maxima  cervix.  TOO

Quidquid  in  altum  Fortuna  tulit,
ruitura  levat.     modicis  rebus
longius  aevum  est  ;  felix  mediae
quisquis  turbae  sorte  quietus
aura  stringit  litora  tuta
timidusque  mari  credere  cumbam
remo  terras  propiore  legit.

CLVTAEMNESTRA


Quid,  segnis  anime,  tuta  consilia  expetis.''
(juid  riuctuaris  ?     clausa  iani  melior  via  est.
licuit  pudicos  coniugis  quondam  toros  110

ct  sceptra  casta  vidua  tutari  fide  ;
pericre  mores  ius  decus  ])ietas  fides — -
et  qui  redire  cum  perit  nescit  pudor.
da  frena  et  omnem  prona  nequitiam  incita ;
jier  scelera  semper  sceleribus  tutum  est  iter.
10


AGAMEMNON

proud,  Erinys,  forever  dogging  homes  too  higli,
wliich  any  hour  brings  low  from  liigh  estate.

8^  Though  arms  be  idle  and  treachery  give  o'er,
great  kingdoms  sink  of  their  own  weight,  and  For-
tune gives  way  'neath  the  burden  of  herself.  Sails
swollen  with  favouring  breezes  fear  blasts  too
strongly  theirs ;  the  tower  which  rears  its  head  to
the  very  clouds  is  beaten  by  rainy  Auster ;  the
grove,  spreading  dense  shade  around,  sees  ancient
oak-ti-ees  riven  ;  'tis  the  high  hills  that  the  lightnings
strike ;  large  bodies  are  more  to  disease  exposed,
and  while  common  herds  stray  o'er  vagrant  pastures,
the  head  highest  upreared  is  marked  for  death.

i*^^  Whatever  Fortune  has  raised  on  high,  she  lifts
hut  to  bring  low.  Modest  estate  has  longer  life  ;
then  happy  he  whoe'er,  content  with  the  common
lot,  with  safe  breeze  hugs  the  shore,  and,  fearing  to
trust  his  skiff  to  the  wider  sea,  with  unambitious  oar
keeps  close  to  land.

CLVTEMNESTRA

Why,  sluggish  soul,  dost  safe  counsel  seek  ?  Why
waver  ?  Already  the  better  way  is  closed.  Once
thou  mightest  have  guarded  thy  chaste  bed  and  thy
\\idowed  sceptre  with  pure,  wifely  faith;  gone  are
good  fashions,  right  doing,  honour,  piety,  faith, — and
modesty,  which,  once  'tis  gone,  knows  no  return.
Fling  loose  the  reins  and,  forward  bent,  rouse  onward
all  iniquity  ;  through  crime  ever  is  the  safe  way  for

1]


THE   TRAGEDIES   OF  SENECA

tecum  ipsa  nunc  evolve  femineos  dolos, —

quod  ulla  coniunx  perfida  atque  impos  sui

amore  caeco,  quod  novei'cales  manus

ausae,  quod  ardens  impia  virgo  face,

Phasiaca  fugiens  regna  Thessalica  trabe  ;  120

ferruni,  venena ;  vel  Mycenaeas  domos

coniiincta  socio  profuge  fui'tiva  rate.

quid  timida  loqueris  furta  et  exilium  et  fugas  ?

sovor  ista  fecit ;  te  decet  niaius  nefas.


r— ^  NVTRIX

Regina  Danaum  et  inclitum  Ledae  genus,
quid  taeita  versas  quidve  consilii  impotens
tumido  feroces  impetus  animo  geris  ?
licet  ipsa  sileas,  totus  in  vultu  est  dolor,
proin  quidquid  est,  da  tempus  ac  spatium  tibi :
quod  ratio  non  quit  saepe  sanavit  mora.  ISO


CLYTAEMNESTRA

Maiora  cruciant  quam  ut  moras  possim  pati ;
flammae  medullas  et  cor  exurunt  meum,
mixtus  dolori  subdidit  stimulos  timor,
invidia  pulsat  pectus  ;  hinc  animum  iugo
premit  cupido  turpis  et  vinci  vetat.
et  inter  istas  mentis  obsessae  faces,
fessus  quidem  et  devinctus  et  pessumdatus,
pudor  rebellat.     fluctibus  variis  agor,
ut  cum  hinc  profundum  ventus,  hinc  aestus  rapit,
incerta  dubitat  unda  cui  cedat  malo.  140

proinde  omisi  regimen  e  manibus  meis —
quocunique  me  ira,  quo  dolor,  quo  spes  feret,

^  Medea.  *  Helen.

12


AGAMEMNON

crime.  Devise  now  in  thine  own  heart  a  woman's
wilcSj — what  any  faithless  wife,  beside  herself  with
blind  passion,  what  step-mother's  hands  have  dared,
or  what  she  dared,  that  maid  ^  ablaze  with  impious
love,  -who  fled  her  Phasian  realm  in  that  Thessalian
bark ;  dare  sword,  dare  poison ;  or  else  flee  from
Mycenae  with  the  partner  of  thy  guilt,  in  stealthy
bark.  But  why  timidly  talk  of  stealth,  of  exile,  and
of  flight .''  Such  things  thy  sister  ^  did;  thee  some
greater  crime  becomes.


Queen  of  the  Greeks,  Leda's  illustrious  child,
what  ponderest  thou  in  silence,  what  mad  deed,
ungoverned  in  thy  purpose,  art  planning  with  rest-
less soul  ?  Though  thou  say  no  word,  thy  face
discovers  all  thy  anguish.  Wherefore,  whate'er  it  be,
give  thyself  time  and  room ;  what  reason  cannot,
delay  has  ofttimes  cured.

CLVTEMNESTRA

Passions  rack  me  too  strong  to  endure  delay ;
flames  are  burning  my  very  marrow  and  my  heart ;
liere  fear^  blent  with  anguish  plies  the  spur,  and
my  breast  throbs  with  jealousy;^  tliere  base  love
forces  its  yoke  upon  my  mind  and  forbids  me  to
give  way.  And  midst  such  fires  that  beset  my  soul,
shame,  weary  indeed  and  conquered  and  utterly
undone,  still  struggles  on.^  By  shifting  floods  am
1  driven,  as  when  here  wind,  tliere  tide  harries  the
deep,  and  the  waters  halt  uncertain  to  which  foe
they  will  yield.  Wherefore  I  have  let  go  the  rudder
from  my  hands — where  wrath,  where  smart,  where

•*  i.e.  of  Againeninou'3  vengeance.

*  Of  Cassandra.  ^  i.e.  against  lust.

13'


THE   TRAGEDIES   OF   SENECA

hue  ire  pergam  ;  fluctibus  dedimus  ratem.
ubi  animus  errat,  optimum  est  casum  sequi.


NVTRIX

Caeca  est  temeritas  quae  petit  casum  ducem.

CLVTAEMNESTRA

Cui  ultima  est  fortuna,  quid  dubiam  timet?

NVTRIX

Tuta  est  latetque  culpa,  si  pateris,  tua.

CLVTAEMNESTRA

Perlucet  omne  regiae  vitium  doinus.

NVTRIX

Piget  prions  et  novum  crimen  struis  ?

CLVTAEMNESTRA

Res  est  profecto  stulta  nequitiae  modus.  150

NVTRIX

Quod  metuit  auget  qui  scelus  scelere  obriiit.

CLVTAEMNESTRA

Et  ferrum  et  ignis  saepe  medicinae  loco  est.

NVTRIX

Extrema  primo  nemo  temptavit  loco.

CLVTAEMNESTRA

Rapienda  rebus  in  malis  praeceps  via  est.


14


AGAMEMNON

hope  shall  carry  me,  there  will  I  go ;  to  the  waves
have  I  given  my  bark.  Where  reason  fails,  'tis  best
to  follow  chance.

NUHSE

Blind  is  he  and  rash  who  follows  chance.

CLYTEMNESTRA

When  fortune  is  at  its  worst,  why  fear  its  hazard  ?

NURSE

Safe  is  thy  sin  and  hidden,  if  thou  allow  it  so.

CLYTEMNESTRA

Open  to  view  is  a  royal  house's  every  sin.

NURSE

Dost  repent  the  old  crime,  yet  plan  the  new  ?

CLYTEMNESTRA

Surely  'tis  folly  to  stop  midway  in  sin.  "   ■        '

NURSE

Whoso  piles  crime  on  crime,  makes  greater  what
he  dreads.^

CLYTEMNESTRA

Both  knife  and  cautery  oft  take  the  place  of  drugs.

NURSE

Desperate  remedies  no  one  tries  at  first.

CLYTEMNESTRA

In  midst  of  ills,  we  must  snatch  at  headlong  ways.
^  i.e.  tlie  penalty.

15


THE   TRAGEDIES   OF   SENECA

NVTRIX

At  te  reflectat  coniugi  nomen  sacrum.

CLYTAEMNESTRA

Decern  per  annos  vidua  respiciam  virum  ?

NVTRIX

Meminisse  debes  sobolis  ex  illo  tuae.

CLYTAEMNESTRA

Equidem  et  iugales  filiae  memini  faces
et  generum  Achillem ;  praestitit  matri  fidcm  '

NVTRIX

Redemit  ilia  classis  immotae  moras  l60

et  maria  pigro  fixa  languore  impulit.

CLYTAEMNESTRA

Pudet  doletque — -Tyndaris,  caeli  genus,
lustrale  classi  Doricae  peperi  caput  !
revolvit  animus  virginis  thalamos  raeae
quos  ille  dignos  Pelopia  fecit  domo^
cum  stetit  ad  aras  ore  sacrifico  j)ater
quain  nuptiales  !     horruit  Calclias  suae
responsa  vocis  et  I'ecedentes  focos.
o  scelera  semper  sceleribus  vincens  domus  !
cruore  ventos  emimus^  bellum  nece  I  170

sed  vela  pariter  mille  fecerunt  rates  ?
non  est  soluta  prospero  classis  dec :
eiecit  Aulis  impias  porta  rates,
sic  auspicutus  bclla  non  melius  gerit.
amore  captae  caj^tuSj  immotus  prece

16


AGAMEMNON

NURSE

But  let  the  hallowed  name  of  wedlock  turn  thee
back.

CLYTEMNESTRA

For    ten    years   widowed^   shall     I    still   think    on
husband  ?

NURSE

Thine  offspring  of  him  thou  shouldst  remember.

CLYTEMNESTRA

I  do  remember  my  daughter's  ^  wedding  fires,  my
son-in-law,  Achilles  ;  true  faith  he^  showed  a  mother !


She    freed    our    becalmed    fleet   from    delay,    and
roused  the  sluggish  sea  from  its  deep  repose.

CLYTEMNESTRA

Oh,  shame  !  oh,  anguish  !  I,  child  of  Tyndarus,  of
heavenly  lineage,  have  borne  a  sacrifice  for  the
Cirecian  fleet!  Once  more  in  memory  I  see  my
daughter's  wedding  rites,  which  he  made  worthy  of
Pelops'  house,  when,  with  prayer  on  lip,  the  father
stood  before  the  altars,  how  fit  for  nuptials  !  Calchas
shuddered  at  his  own  oracles  and  at  the  recoiling
altar-fires.  O  house  that  ever  o'ertops  crime  with
crime  !  With  blood  we  purchased  winds,  and  v,'ar  with
murder  !  But,  say  you,  by  this  means  a  thousand
ships  spread  sail  together?  'Twas  by  no  favouring
god  the  fleet  was  freed  ;  no !  Aulis  from  port  drave
forth  the  impious  ships.  Thus  beginning,  not  more
happily  did  he  wage  the  war.  With  love  of  a  captive
'  Iphigenia.  ^  i.e.  Againeuinon.

17

VOL.  U.  C


THE  TRAGEDIES   OF   SEXECA

Zminthea  tenuit  spolia  Phoebei  senis,

ardore  sacrae  virginis  iam  turn  furens.

non  ilium  Achilles  flexit  indomitus  minis,

non  ille  solus  fata  qui  mundi  videt,

(in  nos  fidelis  augur^  in  captas  levis),  180

non  populus  aeger  et  relucentes  rogi.

inter  ruentis  Graeciae  stragem  ultimam

sine  hoste  victus  marcet  ac  Veneri  vacat

reparatque  amores  ;  neve  desertus  foret

a  paelice  umquani  barbara  caelebs  torus,

ablatam  Achilli  diligit  Lyrnesida,

nee  rapere  puduit  e  sinu  avulsam  viri —

en  Paridis  hostem !     nunc  novum  vulnus  gerens

amore  Phrygiae  vatis  incensus  furit,

et  post  tropaea  Troica  ac  versum  Ilium  190

captae  maritus  remeat  et  Priami  gener  I

Accingere,  anime  ;  bella  non  levia  apparas.
scelus  occupandum  est.    pigra^  quern  expectas  diem  ?
Pelopia  Phrygiae  sceptra  dum  teneant  nurus  ?
an  te  morantur  virgines  viduae  domi
patrique  Orestes  similis?     horum  te  mala
Ventura  moveant,  turbo  quis  rerum  imminet.    .
quid,  misera,  cessas  ?     en  adest  natis  tuis
furens  noverca.     per  tuum,  si  aliter  nequit,
latus  exigatur  ensis  et  perimat  duos.  200

misce  cruorem,  perde  pereundo  virum  ;
mors  misera  non  est  commori  cum  quo  velis.

^  Chryses,  father  of  Chrysels.

^  Cassandra,  his  second  infatuation.         '  Calchas.

■*  i.e.  Agamemnon  behevcd  him  when  he  demanded  the
death  of  Iphigenia,  l)ut  not  when  he  required  the  return  of
Briseis.

18


AGAMEMNON

smitten,  anmoved  by  prayer,  he  held  as  spoil  the
child  of  SmyiiLhean  Apollo's  aged  priest,^  then  as
now  mad  with  passion  for  a  sacred  maid.^  Neither
Achilles,  unn)oved  by  threats,  could  bend  him,  nor
he  ^  who  alone  sees  tlie  secrets  of  the  universe,  (for
me  and  mine  sure  seer,  for  slave-girls  of  no  weight),'
nor  the  plague-smit  pco[)le,  nor  the  blazing  pyres.
M  idst  the  death-struggle  of  falling  Greece,  conquered,
but  by  no  foe,  he  languishes,  has  leisure  for  love,
seeks  new  amours ;  and,  lest  his  widowed  couch  ever
be  free  from  some  barbaric  mistress,  he  lusted  for  the
Lyrnesian  maid,^  Achilles'  spoil,  nor  blushed  to  bear
her  away,  torn  from  her  lord's  embrace — he,  the
enemy  of  Paris  !  Now,  wounded  afresh,  he  rages
with  passion  for  the  inspired  Phrj-gian  maid;"  and
after  Troy's  conquest,  after  Ilium's  overthrow,  he
comes  back  home,  a  captive's  husband  and  Priam's
son-in-law !

i'J3  Now  gird  thee  up,  my  soul  ;  no  trivial  strife  art
thou  preparing.  Crime  must  be  forestalled  J  Slug-
gish, what  day  dost  thou  await?  Till  Phrygian
wives  shall  wield  our  Pelops'  sceptre  ?  Do  the  virgin
daughters  of  thy  house  and  Orestes,  image  of  his
father,  hold  thee  back  ?  Nay,  'tis  the  ills  that
that  threaten  them  that  should  urge  thee  on  ;  o'er
them  a  storm  of  woes  hangs  lowering.  Why,  wretched
woman,  dost  thou  hesitate  ?  For  thy  children  a  mad
step-dame  is  at  hand.  Through  thine  own  side,  if
not  otherwise  it  can  be  done,  let  the  sword  be  driven,
and  so  slay  two.  Mingle  thy  blood  with  his,  in  thy
death  destroy  thy  husband  ;  death  hath  no  pang  when
shared  with  whom  thou  wouldest.

*  Briseis.  ®  Cassau(h\a.

'  i.e.  I  must  take  revenge  on  .Agamemnon  before  ho  does
the  like  to  ii;e.

19


THE    TRAGEDIES    OF   SENECA

NVTRIX

Regina^  frena  temet  et  siste  impetus
et  quanta  temptes  cogita  ;  victor  venit
Asiae  ferocis^  ultor  Europae,  trahit
captiva  Pergania  et  diu  victos  Phrygas.
hunc  fraude  nunc  conaris  et  furto  aggredi,
quern  non  Achilles  ense  violavit  fero^
quamvis  pi'ocacem  torviis  armasset  manum,
non  melior  Aiax  morte  decreta  furens^  210

non  sola  Dan.ds  Hector  et  bello  mora^
non  tela  Paridis  certa,  non  Memnon  niger,
non  Xanthus  armis  corpora  immixtis  gerens
fluctusque  Siraois  caede  purpureos  agens^
non  nivea  proles  Cycnus  aequorei  dei,
non  bellicoso  Thressa  cum  Rheso  phalanx,
non  picta  pharetras  et  securigera  manu
peltata  Amazon?     hunc  domi  reducem  paras
mactare  et  aras  caede  maculare  impia  ?
victrix  inultum  Graecia  hoc  facinus  feret  ?  220

equos  et  arma  classibusque  horrens  fretum
propone  et  alto  sanguine  exundans  solum
et  tota  captae  fata  Dardaniae  domus
regesta  Danais.     coniprime  adfectus  truces
mentemque  tibimet  ipsa  pacifica  tuam.

j-^  AEGISTHVS

Quod  tempus  animo  semper  ac  mente  horrui
adest  profecto,  rebus  extremum  meis.

*  i.e.  Ajax  son  of  Telamon  in  contradistinction  to  Ajax  the
son  of  Oileus,  called  Ajax  "  the  Less,"

20


AGAMEMNON


O  Queen,  restniiu  tliysclf,  check  thine  impetuous
\vr;vth  and  think  what  thou  art  daring  ;  the  conqueror
of  wild  Asia  is  at  hand,  Europe's  avenger,  dragging
in  triumj)h  captive  Pergama  and  the  Phrygians,  long
since  subdued.  Against  him  now  with  guile  and
stealth  dost  tliou  essay  to  fight,  whom  Achilles  with
his  savage  sword  hurt  not,  though  in  grim  wrath  lie
armed  his  insolent  hand,  nor  the  better  Ajax  ^  raging
and  bent  on  death,  nor  Hector,  sole  bulwark  against
the  warring  Greeks,  nor  the  sure-aimed  shafts  of
Paris,  nor  swarthy  Memnon,  nor  Xanthus,  rolling-
down  corpses  and  arms  commingled,  nor  Simois,  its
waves  running  red  with  blood,  nor  Cycnus,  snowy  2
offspring  of  the  Ocean-god,  nor  warlike  Rhesus  and
his  Thracian  horde,  nor  the  Amazon,  with  her  painted
quiver,  battle-axe  in  hand,  and  crescent  shield  ?
Him,  home-returning,  dost  thou  prepare  to  slay  and
to  defile  thine  altars  with  slaughter  impious  ?  Will
victorious  Greece  leave  sucli  a  deed  unavenged  ?
Horses  and  arms,  the  sea  studded  with  ships,  set
these  before  thine  eyes,  the  ground  flowing  with
streams  of  blood,  and  the  whole  fate  of  the  captured
liouse  of  Dardanus  turned  'gainst  the  Greeks.^
Control  thy  fiei'ce  passions,  and  do  thou  thyself  set
thine  own  soul  at  peace.  [E.rit.

[Fjiler  AEGisTnus.]

AEGisTHUS  [in  soliloqm/]

The   hour  which   always   in  my  heart  and   soul    I
dreaded  is  here   indeed,  the  hour  of  fate    for   me.

2  He  was  changed  into  a  snow-white  swan.
^  i.e.  Agamemnon's  death  will  be  as  terribly  avenged  as
was  the  injurj'  to  Helen.

21


THE   TRAGEDIES   OF   SENECA

(juid  terga  vertis,  anime  ?     quid  pvimo  impetu

deponis  arma  ?     crede  perniciem  tibi

et  dira  saevos  fata  moliri  deos.  230

oppone  cunctis  vile  suppliciis  caput,

ferrumque  et  ignes  pectore  adverse  excipe,

Aegisthe ;  non  est  poena  sic  nato  mori.

Tu  nos  pericli  socia,  tu,  Leda  sata,
comitare  tantum  ;  sanguinem  reddet  tibi
ignavus  iste  ductor  ac  fortis  pater,
sed  quid  trenientes  circuit  pallor  genas
iacensque  vultu  languido  optutus  stupet  ?

CLVTAEMNESTRA

Amor  iugalis  vincit  ac  flectit  retro :
referamur^  illuc,  unde  non  decuit  prius  240

abire  ;  vel "  nunc  casta  repetatur  fides^
nam  sera  numquam  est  ad  bonos  mores  via :
quem  paenitet  peecasse  paene  est  innocens.

AEGISTHVS

Quo  raperis  aniens  ?     credis  aut  speras  tibi
Agamemnonis  fidele  coniugium  ?     ut  nihil
subesset  animo  quod  graves  faceret  metus,
tamen  superba  et  impotens  flatu  nimis
Fortuna  magno  spiritus  tumidos  daret.
gravis  ille  sociis  stante  adhuc  Troia  fuit ;
quid  rere  ad  animum  suapte  natura  trucem  250

'I'roiam  addidisse  ?     rex  Mycenarum  fuit,
veniet  tyrannus  ;  prospera  animos  efferunt.^
efFusa  circa  paelicum  quanto  venit

1  refereinus   E:   Leo  referemur:     Oronovius,  followed  by
Jiichter,  referamur  :  remeemus  A.

-  So  Peiper,  following  Gronovius  ;  Leo  with  MSS.  sed.
^  So  the  MSS.  :  Leo,  folloxcing  Bincheler,  efferant

22


AGAMEMNON

Why,  soul,  dost  fear  to  face  it  ?  Why  at  the  first
onslaught  dost  lay  down  thy  arms  ?  Be  sure  that  for
thee  destruction  and  dread  doom  the  pitiless  gods
prepare.  Then  set  thy  vile  life  to  face  all  punish-
ments, and  with  confronting  breast  welcome  both
sword  and  flame,  Aegisthus ;  for  one  so  born,  'tis  no
penalty  to  die.

[To  clytemnestra]
23*  Thou  partner  of  my  peril,  thou,  Leda's  daughter,
be  but  my  comrade  still  ;  then  blood  for  blood  shall
he  repay  to  thee,  this  coAvardly  warrior  and  valiant
sire.  But  why  does  pallor  o'erspread  thy  trembling
cheeks,  and  why  in  thy  listless  face  is  thine  eye  so
dull  and  drooping .''

CLYTEMNESTRA

Love  for  my  husband  conquers  and  turns  me  back.
Return  we  thither  whence  'twere  well  never  to  have
come  away.  E'en  now  let  us  reseek  purity  and
truth,  for  never  too  late  is  trod  the  path  to  honesty ;
whoso  repents  his  sin  is  well-nigh  innocent,

AEGISTHUS

Whither  art  borne,  mad  one  ?  Dost  believe  or  hope
that  Agamemnon  is  still  true  to  his  marriage  vows  ?
Though  there  were  nought  in  thine  own  heart  to
rouse  grave  fears,  still  would  his  arrogant,  immoderate,
o'er-inflated  fortune  swell  his  pride.  Harsh  to  his  allies
was  he  while  Troy  still  stood ;  what  thinkest  thou
Troy  ^  has  added  to  a  spirit  by  its  own  nature  fierce  ?
Mycenae's  king  he  was ;  he  will  come  back  her
tyrant ; — prosperity  urges  pride  beyond  itself.  With
what   magnificence    the   surging   throng   of    harlots

1  i.e.  the  fall  of  Troy.

23


THE   TRAGEDIES   OF   SENECA

turba  apparatu  !     sola  sed  turba  eminet
tenetque  regem  famula  veridici  dei.
feresiie  thalami  victa  consortem  tui  ?
at  ilia  nolet.     ultimum  est  nuptae  malum
palam  mariti  possidens  paelex  domum.
nee  regna  soeium  ferre  nee  taedae  sciunt.

CLYTAEMNESTRA

Aegistbe,  quid  me  rursus  in  praeceps  agis  260

iramque  flammis  iam  residentem  incitas  ?
pei-misit  aliquid  vietor  in  captam  sibi  ;
nee  eoniugem  hoe  respieere  nee  dominam  decet,
lex  alia  solio  est,  alia  privato  in  toro.
quid  quod  severas  ferre  me  leges  viro
non  patitur  animus  turpis  admissi  memor  ?
det  ille  veniam  facile  cui  venia  est  opus.

AEGISTHVS

Ita  est  ?     paeisci  mutuam  veniam  licet  ?
ignota  tibi  sunt  iura  regnorum  aut  nova  ?
nobis  maligni  indices,  aequi  sibi  270

id  esse  regni  maximum  pignus  jmtant,
si  quidquid  aliis  non  licet  solis  licet.


u


CLYTAEMNESTRA

Ignovit  Helenae  ;  iuncta  Menelao  redit
quae  Europam  et  Asiam  paribus  afflixit  malis.

AEOISTHVS

Sed  nulla  Atriden  Venere  furtiva  abstulit
nee  cci)it  animum  coniugi  obstrictum  suae.


24


AGAMEMNON

conies !  But  one  stands  out  among  the  throng  and
holds  the  kino  in  thrall,  the  handmaid  '  of  the  fate-
revealing  god."^  Wilt  thou  give  up  and  endure  a
sharer  in  thy  marriage  bed  ?  But  slie.  will  not.  A
wife's  utmost  of  woe  is  a  mistress  openly  queening
it  in  her  husband's  house.  Nor  tln'one  nor  bed  can
brook  a  jiarlnership.

CLYTEMNESTRA

Aegisthus,  why  dost  thou  again  drive  me  headlong,
and  fan  to  flame  my  wrath  already  cooling.^  Suppose
the  victor  has  allowed  himself  some  liberty  tOAvard  a
captive  maid  ;  'tis  meet  neither  for  wife  nor  mistress
to  take  note  of  this.  There  is  one  law  for  thrones,
one  for  the  private  bed.  What.''  Does  my  own
heart,  itself  conscious  of  base  guilt,  suffer  me  to  pass
Iiarsii  judgment  on  my  husband?  Let  her  forgive
freely  who  forgiveness  needs.

AEGISTHUS

Sayst  thou  so  ?  Canst  bargain  for  mutual  foi'give-
ness?  Are  the  rights  of  kings  unknown  to  thee  or
strange  ?  To  us  harsh  judges,  partial  to  themselves,
they  deem  this  the  greatest  pledge  of  kingship,  if
whate'er  to  others  is  unlawful  is  lawful  to  them
alone.

CLYTEMNESTRA

He  pardoned  Helen ;  joined  to  her  Menelaiis  she
returns,  who  Europe  and  Asia  to  like  ruin  dashed.

AEGISTHUS

Aye,  but  no  woman  with  stealthy  love  has  stolen
Atrides  and  caj)tured  his  heart  close-barred  against
^  Cassandra.  *  A})ollo.

25


THE   TRAGEDIES   OF   SENECA

iara  crimen  ille  quaerit  et  causas  parat.

nil  esse  crede  turpe  commissum  tibi ;

quid  honesta  prodest  vita,  flagitio  vacans  ?

ubi  dominus  odit  fit  nocens,  non  quaeritur.  280

Spartamne  repetes  spreta  et  Eurotan  tuum

patriasque  sedes  profiiga  ?     non  dant  exitum

repudia  reguna.     spe  metus  falsa  levas.

CLYTAEMNESTRA

Delicta  novit  nemo  nisi  fidus  mea.

AEGISTHVS  ,

Non  intrat  umquam  regium  limen  fides.

CLYTAEMNESTRA

Opibus  merebor,  ut  fidem  pi-etio  obligera.

AEGISTHVS

Pretio  parata  vincitur  pretio  fides.

CLYTAEMNESTRA

Surgit  residuus  pristinae  mentis  ])udor  ,
quid  obstrepis  ?     quid  voce  blandiloqua  mala
consilia  dictas  ?     scilicet  nubet  tibi,  290

regum  relicto  rege,  generosa  exuli?

AEGISTHVS

Et  cur  Atrida  videor  inferior  tibi,
natus  Tbyestae  ?

26


AGAMEMNON

his  wife.^  Already  thy  lord  seeks  charge  against
thee,  intends  cause  of  strife.  Suppose  no  baseness
has  been  done  by  thee ;  what  boots  an  honest  life
and  sinless  ?  Whom  a  master  hates  is  condemned  of
guilt  unheard.  Spurned  away,  wilt  thou  go  back  to
Sparta  and  thy  Eurotas,  wilt  flee  to  thy  father's
house  ?  The  rejected  of  kings  have  no  escape.  With
false  hope  dost  thou  relieve  thy  fears.

CLVTEMNESTRA

None  knows  my  guilt  save  one  faithful  friend.

AEGISTHUS

Faith  never  crosses  the  threshold  of  a  king.

CLVTEMNESTRA

With  wealth  will  I  purchase,  with  bribes  will  I
bind  faith.

AEGISTHUS

Faith  gained  by  bribes  is  overcome  by  bribes.

CLVTEMNESTRA

The  remnant  of  my  old  time  chastity  revives  ;  why
dost  thou  cry  against  it  ?  Why  with  cozening  words
dost  give  me  evil  counsel  ?  Deserting  the  king  of
kings,  shall  I  wed  with  thee,  a  high-born  woman
with  an  outcast  ?

AEGISTHUS

And  wherefore  less  than  Atreus'  son  do  I  seem  to
thee,  who  am  Thyestes'  son  ?

1  i.e.  in  Menelaiis'  case  his  heart  was  not  already  hardened
against  his  wife  by  another  mistress,  as  is  the  case  with
Agamemnon.

27


THE   TRAGEDIES   OF   SENECA

CLYTAEMNESTRA

Si  parum  estj  adde  et  nepos.

AEGISTHVS

Auctore  Phoebo  gignor  ;  baud  generis  pudet.

CLYTAEMNESTRA

Pboebum  nefandae  stirpis  auctorem  vocas,
quern  nocte  subita  frena  revocantem  sua
caelo  expubstis  ?     quid  deos  probro  addimus  ?
subripere  doctus  fraude  geniales  toros,
quem  \'enere  tantum  scimus  inbcita  virum,
facesse  propere  ac  dedecus  nostrae  domus  300

asporta  ab  oculis  ;  haec  vacat  I'egi  ae  viro.

AEGISTHVS

Exilia  mibi  sunt  baud  nova^  assuevi  malis.
si  tu  imperas,  regina,  non  tantum  domo
Argisve  cedo  :  nil  morov  iussu  tuo
aperire  ferro  jiectus  aeruranis  grave.

CLYTAEMNESTRA

Siquidem  hoc  cruenta  Tyndaris  fieri  sinam.
quae  iuncta  peecat  debet  et  culpae  fidem.
secede  mecum  potius,  ut  rerum  statum
dubium  ac  minacem  iuncta  consiba  expHcent.  )


Canite,  o  pubes  incUta,  Pboebum  !  310

tibi  fcsta  caput
turba  coroiiat,  tiV)i  virgineas,

laurum  quatiens.


28


AGAMEMNON

CLVTEMNESTRA

If  that  is  not  enough^  say  grandson,  too.

AEGISTHUS

Plioebus  was  the  source  of  my  begetting ;  my
birth  slianic'S  me  not.

CLVTEMNESTRA

Dost  thou  name  Phoebus  as  source  of  an  inces-
tuous birth,  whom,  calling  back  his  steeds  in  sudden
night,  you  ^  drove  from  heaven  ?  Why  besmirch  the
gods  ?  Thou,  trained  b}^  guile  to  steal  the  man'iage
bed,  whom  we  know  only  as  man  of  unlawful  love,
depart  at  once,  take  from  my  sight  the  infamy  of
our  house  ;  this  home  is  waiting  for  its  king  and  lord.

AEGISTHUS

Exile  is  not  new  to  me  ;  I  am  used  to  woe.  If
thou  commandest,  O  queen,  not  alone  from  home
and  v\rgos  do  I  flee:  I  am  ready  at  thy  bidding  to
plunge  sword  into  my  heart,  o'erweighed  with  grief.

CLVTEMNESTRA  [aside]
Yet,  should   I,  cruel  daughter  of  Tyndareus,  let
this  be  done.

[To  AEGISTHUS.]

's^Who  jointly  sins  owes  also  faith  to  crime.  Come
thou  with  me,  that  the  dark  and  threatening  state
of  our  attairs  joint  plans  may  set  in  order.  ]     [Exeimt.

CHORUS

Sing  ye,  O  maids  renowned,  of  Phoebus  !  To  thee,
Phoebus,  the  festal  throng  wreaths  the  head,  to  thee,
waving    laurel-bough,  the    Argive   maid    in    wonted

'  i.e.  your  house.  At  the  horrid  feast  of  Tliyestes  the  sun
veiled  his  face  in  darkness  that  he  might  not  see.

29


THE  TRAGEDIES   OF  SENECA

de  more  coinas  innuba  fudit

stirps  Inachia  ;  315

quaeque  Erasini  gelidos  fontes,  318

quaeque  Eurotan,
quaeque  virenti  taciturn  ripa  320

bibis  Ismeiion  ;
tu  quoque  nostros,  Thebais  hospes,  3l6

comitare  choi'os/  317

quam  fatorum  praescia  Manto,  322

sata  Turesia,
Latonigenas  nionuit  sacris
celebrare  deos.
Areus,  victor,  pace  relata,
Phoebe,  relaxa
umeroque  graves  levibus  telis

pone  pharetras
resonetque  nianu  pulsa  citata  330

vocale  chelys.
nil  acre  veliiii  magnumque  modis

intoiiet  altis,
sed  quale  soles  leviore  lyra

flectere  carmen
sim})lex,  lusus  cum  docta  tuos

Musa  recenset.
licet  et  chorda  graviore  soues,

quale  canebas
cum  Titanas  fulmine  victos  StO

videre  dei,
vel  cum  moiites  montibus  altis

super  iinpositi
struxere  gradus  trucibus  monstris,

stetit  imposita
Pelion  Ossa,  pinifer  ambos
pressit  Olympus,
^  Lines  316,  317  were  transposed  by  Bolhe.


30


AGAMEMNON

fashion  spreads  forth  her  virgin  locks ;  and  thou  who
drinkest  of  Erasinus'  cool  waters,  who  of  Eurotas,
and  who  of  Ismenus  drinkest,  silently  flowing  along
its  green  banks ;  thou,  too,  though  stranger  in
Thebes,  come  join  in  our  chorus,  whom  Manto,
reader  of  fate,  Tiresias'  daughter,  warned  with  due
rites  to  worship  the  gods,  offspring  of  Latona.

3^^  Thy  bow,  now  peace  has  come  back,  all-con-
quering Phoebus,  loose,  and  thy  quiver,  full  of  swift
arrows,  lay  down  from  thy  shoulder  and  let  resound,
smit  by  thy  flying  fingers,  the  tuneful  lyre.  No
stern,  high  strains  in  lofty  measures  would  I  have  it
sound,  but  such  simple  song  as  'tis  thy  wont  to
modulate  on  lighter  shell,  when  the  learned  Muse
surveys  thy  sports.  'Tis  thy  right,  too,  on  heavier
strings  to  sound  such  strain  as  thou  sangest  when
gods  saw  Titans  by  thunder  overcome,  even  when
mountains,  on  lofty  mountains  set,  furnished  pathway
for  grim  monsters,  when  Pelion  stood  on  Ossa  set
beneath,  and  cloud-capped  Olympus  weighed  on
both.


31


THE   TRAGEDIES    OF   SENECA

Ades,  o  niagnij  soror  et  coniunx,

censors  sceptri,
regia  luno  !     tua  te  colimus  350

turba  Mycenae,
tu  sollicitum  supplexque  tui

numinis  Argos
sola  tuerisj  tu  bella  manu

pacenique  regis.
tu  nunc  laurus  Agameninonias

accipe  victrix.
tibi  multifora  tibia  buxo

solemne  can  it,
tibi  fila  movent  docta  puellae  360

carmine  molli,
tibi  votivam  matres  Graiae

lampada  iactant,
ad  tua  coniunx  Candida  tauri

del u bra  cadet,
neseia  aratri,  nullo  collum

signata  iugo.
Tuque,  o  magni  nata  Tonantis,

incluta  Pallas,
quae  Dardanias  cuspide  turres  370

saepe  petisti,
te  permixto  matrona  minor

maiorque  choro
colit  et  reserat  veniente  dea

templa  sacerdos.
tibi  nexilibus  turba  coronis

redimita  venit,
tibi  grandaevi  lassique  senes

compote  voto
reddunt  grates  libantque  manu  380

vina  trementi.
Et  te  Triviam  nota  memores

voce  precamur  :


32


AGAMExMNON

^^^  Thou,  too,  be  near,  who  as  wife  and  sister
sharest  the  sceptre's  might,  Juno  t!ie  royal  !  We,
thy  cliosen  band,  in  Mycenae  adore  thee.  Thou  art
the  soIl'  [)rotcclor  of  Ari;os  that  calls  on  thee  with
anxious  prayers  ;  thou  in  thy  hand  boldest  war  and
peace.  Accept  now  the  laurels  of  Agamemnon,
victorious  goddess.  To  thee  the  box-wood  flute  of
many  openings  soundetli  its  solemn  strains  ;  to  thee
skilled  maidens  touch  the  strings  in  soothing  melody  ;
to  thee  Grecian  mothers  wave  the  votive  torch  ;  at
thy  shrines  shall  fall  the  bull's  white  mate,  which
knows  not  the  plough,  whose  neck  the  yoke  ne'er
scarred.

2*'^  And  thdu,  child  of  the  great  Thunderer,  glorious
Pallas,  who  oft  with  thy  spear  didst  attack  the
Dardanian  towel's,  to  thee  in  mingled  chorus  mothers,
younger  and  older,  kneel,  and  at  thy  coming  the
priest  throws  wide  the  doors  of  the  temple.  To  thee
the  throng,  crowned  with  woven  wreaths,  advances  ;
to  thee  aged  and  spent  old  men,  their  petitions
heard,  give  thanks  and  with  trtnibliug  hand  pour
wine  in  libation.

38"2  Thee,  too,  O  Trivia,^  with  mindlul  hearts  and
prayer  familiar  we  adore.  Thou  biddcst  thy  natal
^  i.e.  Diaua.

VOL.   II.  D


THE   TRAGEDIES   OF   SENECA

tu  niaternam  sistere  Deloii,  .

Lucina,  iubes,
hue  atque  illuc  prius  errantem

Cyclada  ventis  :
nunc  iani  stabilis  fixa  terras

radice  tenet,
respuit  auras  religatque  rates  390

assueta  sequi.
tu  Tantalidos  funera  niatris

victrix  nunieras  ;
Stat  nunc  Sipyli  vertice  sumnio

flebile  saxum,
et  adhuc  lacrimas  mai-mora  fundunt

antiqua  novas,
colit  impense  femina  virque

numen  cremiiunn.
Tuque  ante  omnes,  pater  ac  rector       400

fuhnine  pollens,
cuius  nutu  siniul  extrenii

tremuere  poli,
generis  nostri,  luppiter,  auctor,

cape  dona  libens
abavusque  tuam  non  degenerem

respiee  proleni.

Sed  ecce,  vasto  concitus  miles  gradu
manifesta  pi'operat  signa  laetitiae  ferens
(nanique  hasta  sumnio  laureara  ferro  gerit)  410

fidusque  regi  semper  Eurybates  adest.

EVRYBATES

Delubra  et  aras  caelitum  et  patrios  lares  392'"'^

post  longa  fessus  spatia,  vix  credens  mihi,

^  Leo  in  line  notation  has  followed  Gronovius  except  in  the
chorus  ju6t  ended,  which  Gronovius,  with  E,  prints  in  dimeters,

34.


AGAMEMNON

Delos  to  stand  firm^  Luciiia/  erstwhile  a  Cyclad^
drifting  liither  and  yon  at  the  will  of  the  winds  ;  now
'tis  a  stable  land  with  root  firm  fixed^  repels  the
winds  and  gives  anchorage  for  ships,  though  wont  to
follow  them.  Victorious,  thou  countest  o'er  the
corpses  that  their  mother/  child  of  Tantalus,  be-
moaned ;  noAV  on  Si})ylus'  high  top  she  stands,  a
weeping  statue,  and  to  this  day  fresh  tears  the
ancient  marble  drips.  Zealously  both  maid  and  man
adore  the  twin  divinities.^

^*^  And  thou  before  all  others,  father  and  ruler,
god  of  the  thunder,  by  whose  mere  nod  the  farthest
I)oles  do  tremble,  O  Jove,  thou  author  of  our  race,
kindly  accept  our  gifts,  and  with  a  father's  care  take
thought  for  thine  own  true  progeny.

•*o^  But  lo,  a  soldier,  hurrying  with  huge  steps,
iiastes  hither  with  signs  of  joyful  tidings  clearly
visible,  (for  his  spear  bears  a  laurel  Avreath  on  its  iron
tip,)  and  Eurybates,  the  ever  faithful  servant  of  the
king,  is  here.

\_Kiitcr  EuiiVBATEs  ivU/i  laurcl-wrcailied  spearJ\

EURYBATES

Ye  shrines  and  altars  of  the  heavenly  gods,  ye
liousehold  deities  of  my  fathers,  after  long  wanderings
wearied,  and  scarce  trusting  mine  own  eyes,  I  humbly

^  Diana.        '^  Niobe.       ^  i.e.  Phoebus  and  Phoebe  (Diana).

while  A  alternates  dimeters  with  monometers.  Leo  follows  A ,
and  adopts  the  notation  302'^-410'^,  "  t'l  order  not  to  break  with
Gronovius  throufjhout  the  remainder  of  the  play  "

35
D    2


THE  TRAGEDIES   OF  SENECA
supplex  adoro.      vota  supevis  solvite  ;
telluris  altuni  renieat  Argolicae  decus
tandem  ad  penates  victor  Agamemnon  suos.

CLYTAEMNEsTRA

Felix  ad  aures  nuntius  venit  meas  !
ubinam  petitus  per  deeem  coniuux  mihi
annos  moratur  ?     pelagus  an  terriis  premit  ?

EVRYBATES

IncolumiSj  auctus  gloria,  laude  inclitus  400*''

redueem  expetito  litori  impressit  pedem.

CLYTAEMNESTRA

Sacris  colamus  prosper um  tandem  diem
et  si  projiitios  attamen  lentos  deos.
tu  pande  vivat  coniiigis  frater  mei
et  pande  teneat  quas  soror  sedes  mea.

EVRYBATES

Meliora  votis  posco  et  ohtestor  dcos  ;
nam  certa  fari  sors  maris  dubii  vetat.
lit  sparsa  tumidum  classis  excepit  mare,
ratis  viderc  socia  non  potuit  ratem.
qiiin  ipse  Atrides  aequore  immenso  vagus  410"

graviora  pelago  damna  quam  bello  tulit
reraeatque  victo  similis,  exiguas  trahens
Incerasque  victor  classe  de  tanta  rates.

36


AGAMEMNON

pive  reverence.  [To  ihe  people.]  Pay  now  your  vows
to  the  high  gods  ;  the  pride  and  glory  of  the  Argive
land  returns  to  his  own  house  at  last,  Agamemnon,
victorit)us !

[Enter  clvtemmcstra  in  time  to  hear  the  herald's  con-
cluding words.]

CI.YTEMNESTRA

Blessed  news  this  that  falls  upon  mine  ears!  But
wliere  delays  my  husband  whom  I  have  sought
through  ten  long  3'ears  ?      Rests  lie  on  sea,  or  land  ?

EU?YBATES

I'nharmcd,  increased  in  glory,  illustrious  with
praise,  he  hath  set  liomeward  foot  upon  the  longed-
for  shore.

CLVTEMNESTRA

With  sacred  rites  let  us  hail  the  day,  fortunate  at
last,  and  the  gods,  even  if  propitious,  yet  slow  in
urantiiig  our  request.  But  tell  me,  thou,  does  my
husband's  brother  live,  and  where  is  my  sister,^  tell.

EIJRVBATES

Better  than  our  hopes  I  pray  and  beseech  the
gods ;  for  the  sea's  dubious  lot  forbids  to  speak
certainty.  When  our  scattered  fleet  met  swollen
seas,  one  ship  could  scarce  descry  her  sister  ship.
Nav,  e'en  Atrides'  self,  on  the  boundless  ocean  wan-
dering, eiidured  losses  heavier  by  sea  than  war,  and
like  a  vanquished  maTi,  though  victor,  he  returns,
bringing    but    few   and    sliattered    vessels    from    his

miirhty  fleet.

1  Helen.

37


THE   TRAGEDIES   OF   SENECA

CLYTAEMNESTRA

Effare  casus  quis  rates  hausit  meas
aut  quae  maris  fortuiia  dispulerit  duces.


EVRYBATES

Acerba  fatu  poscis,  infaustum  iubes
miscere  laeto  nuntium.  refugit  loqui
mens  aegra  tantis  atque  inhorrescit  malis.


CLYTAEMNESTRA

Exprome  ;  clades  scire  qui  refugit  suas
gravat  timorem  ;  dubia  jilus  torquent  mala.  420


EVRYBATES

Vt  Pergamum  omne  Dorica  cecidit  face,
divisa  praeda  est,  maria  properantes  jietunt.
iamque  ense  fessum  miles  exonerat  hitus,
neglecta  summas  scuta  per  puppes  iacent ;
ad  militares  remus  aptatur  manus
omnisque  nimium  longa  properanti  mora  est
signuni  recursus  regia  ut  fulsit  rate
et  clara  laetum  remigem  monuit  tuba,
aurata  primas  prora  designat  vias
aperitque  cursus,  mille  quos  puj^pes  secent.  430

Hinc  aura  primo  lenis  impellit  rates
adlapsa  velis  ;  unda  vix  actu  levi
tranquilla  Zepliyri  mollis  alflatu  tremit,
spleiidctque  classc  j)elagus  et  pariter  latet.
iuvat  viderc  luida  Troiae  litora,
iuvat  relicti  sola  Sigei  loca.
properat  iuventiis  omnis  adductos  simul
.'J  8


AGAMEMNON

CLYTEMXESTRA

Tell  what  calamity  has  sivallowed  up  my  ships^
or  what  mishap  by  sea  has  dispersed  the  chiefs.

EURYltATES

A  tale  bitter  in  the  telliiiji-  thou  demandest ;  thou
hiddest  me  mix  the  unlucky  message  with  the  glad.
Mv  sick  mind  shrinks  from  speech  and  shudders  at
the  thought  of  such  disasters.

CLYTEMNESTRA

Tell  on  ;  who  shrinks  from  knowledge  of  his
calamities  but  aggravates  his  feflr ;  troubles  half
seen  do  torture  all  the  more.

EURYBATES

When  all  Pergamum  fell  'neath  the  Doric  fire,  the
spoil  was  divided  and  in  eager  haste  all  sought  the
sea.  And  now  the  warrior  eases  his  side  of  the
sword's  wearv  load,  and  unheeded  lie  the  shields
along  the  liigli  sterns  ;  the  oar  is  fitted  to  the  warrior's
hands,  and  to  their  eager  haste  all  tarrying  seems
over  long.  Then,  when  the  signal  for  return  gleamed
on  the  royal  ship,  and  the  loud  trumpet-blast  warned
the  glad  rowers,  the  king's  gilded  prow,  leading,
marked  out  the  way,  and  opene<l  up  the  course  for  a
thousand  ships  to  follow.

431  \  gentle  breeze  at  first  steals  into  our  sails  and
drives  our  vessels  onward  ;  the  tranquil  waves,  scarce
stirring,  ri))ple  beneath  soft  Zephyr's  breathing,  and
the  sea  reflects  the  splendour  of  the  fieet,  hiding  the
while  beneath  it.  'Tis  sweet  to  gaze  on  the  bare
shores  of  Trov,  sweet  to  behold  deserted  Sigeum's
wastes.     The  young  men  all  haste  to  bend  the  oars,

S9


THE   TRAGEDIES   OF   SENECA

lentare  remos,  adiuvat  ventos  manu

et  valida  nisu  braccliia  alterno  movet.

sulcata  vibrant  aequora  et  latera  increpant  440

dirimuntqiie  canae  caerulum  spumae  mare.

ut  aura  plenos  fortior  tendit  sinus,

posuere  tonsas,  credita  est  vento  ratis

tususque  transtris  miles  aut  terras  procnl,

quantum  recedunt  vela,  fugientes  notat,

aut  bella  narrat :   Hectoris  fortis  minas

currusque  et  empto  redditum  corpus  rogo,

sparsum  cruore  regis  Herceum  lovem.

tunc  qui  iacente  reciprocus  ludit  salo

tumid  unique  pando  transilit  dorso  mare  450

Tyrrhenus  omni  j)*scis  exultat  freto

agitatque  gyros  et  comes  lateri  adnatat,

anteire  naves  laetus  et  rursus  sequi  ;

nunc  prima  tangens  rostra  lascivit  chorus,

millesimam  mmc  ambit  et  lustrat  rateni.

lam  litus  omne  tegitur  et  campi  latent
et  dubia  parent  montis  Idaei  iuga  ;
et  iam,  quod  unum  pervicax  acies  videt,
Iliacus  atra  fumus  apparet  nota.

iam  iassa  Titan  colla  relevabat  iugo,  460

in  astra  iam  lux  prona,  iam  praeceps  dies,
exigiia  nubes  sordido  crescens  globo
nitidum  cadentis  inquinat  Phoebi  iubar ;
suspecta  varius  occidens  fecit  freta.

Nox  prima  caelum  sjiarserat  stellis,  iacent
deserta  vento  vela,      turn  murmur  grave,
maiora  minitans,  collibus  summis  cadit

^  i.e.  of  Achilles,  by  which  Hector's  body  was  dragged.

2  Priam  was  slain  at  the  altar  of  Hercean  Jove  (Zeus
'E()if6?os,  protector  of  the  courtyard)  in  the  courtjard  of  his
palace.

'*  The  dulpliin  is  so  called   here   in   remembrance   of   the

iO


AGAMEMNON

V.  itli  strokes  together,  aid  winds  with  liands  and  move
tiieir  sturdy  arms  with  rhytlimic  swii)<r.  The  fur-
rowed waters  quiver,  the  vessel's  sides  hiss  throuoh
the  waves  and  dash  the  blue  sea  into  hoary  spray.
When  a  fresher  breeze  strains  the  swelling  sails,  the
warriors  lay  by  their  oars,  trust  ship  to  wind  and,
stretched  along  the  benches,  either  watch  the  far-
fleeing  land  as  the  sails  retreat,  or  rehearse  their
wars — brave  Hector's  threats,  the  chariot  ^  and  his
ransomed  body  given  to  the  pyre,  Hercean  Jove
sprinkled  with  royal  blood. ^  'I'hen,  too,  the  Tp-rhene
fish  3  plavs  to  and  fro  in  the  smooth  water,  leaps  over
the  heaving  seas  with  arching  back,  and  sports
around,  now  dashing  about  in  circles,  now  swimming
bv  our  side,  now  gaily  leading  and  again  following
after ;  anon  the  band  in  sheer  wantonness  touch  the
leading  prow,  now  round  and  round  the  thousandth
ship  they  swim.

•'^'^  Meanwliile  all  the  shore  is  hid  and  the  plains
sink  from  view,  and  dimly  the  ridges  of  Ida's  mount
ajipear  ;  and  now,  what  alone  the  keenest  eye  can  see,
the  smoke  of  Ilium  shows  but  a  dusky  spot.  Already
from  the  yoke  Titan  was  freeing  his  hoi*ses'  weary
necks  ;  now  to  the  stars  his  rays  sink  low,  now  day
goes  headlong  down.  A  tiny  cloud,  growing  to  a
murky  mass,  stains  the  bright  radiance  of  the  setting
sun,  and  the  many  coloured  sun-set  has  made  us
doubt  the  sea.^

•^'^^  Young  night  had  spangled  the  sky  with  stars ;
the  sails,  deserted  by  tlie  wind,  hung  low.  Then
from  the  mountain  heights  there  falls  a  murmur
deep,   worse    threatening,    and    the    wide-sweeping

Tyrrhene  pirates   who   under   the   wrath  of   Bacchus  were
cl)anged  to  dolphins.     See  Oedipus,  449  ff.
••  This  is  one  of  numerous  weather-signs.

41


THE   TRAGEDIES   OF   SENECA

tractuqiie  longo  litus  ac  petrae  gemunt ;

agitata  ventis  unda  Venturis  tumet —

cum  subito  luna  eonditur,  stellae  latent,  470

in  astra  pontus  tollitur,  caelum  perit.

nee  una  nox  est  ;  densa  tenebras  obruit

caligo  et  omni  luce  subducta  fretum

caelumque  miscet.     undique  incumbunt  simul

rapiuntque  pelagus  infimo  eversum  solo  ^

adversus  Euro  Zephyrus  et  Boreae  Notus.

sua  quisque  mittit  tela  et  infesti  fretum

emoliuntur,  turbo  convolvit  mare.

Strymonius  altas  Aquilo  contorquet  nives

Libycusque  harenas  Auster  ac  Syrtes  agit ;  480

nee  manet  in  Austro  :  flat  gravis  nimbis  Notus,

imbre  auget  undas,  Eurus  orientem  movet

Nabataea  quatiens  regna  et  Eoos  sinus.

quid  rabidus  ora  Corns  Oceano  exerens  ?

mundum  revellit  sedibus  totum  suis,

ipsosque  rupto  crederes  caelo  deos

decidere  et  atrum  rebus  induci  chaos.

vento  resistit  aestus  et  ventus  retro

aestum  revolvit  ;  non  capit  sese  mare

undasque  miscent  imber  et  fluctus  suas.  490

nee  hoc  levamen  denique  aerumnis  datur,

videre  saltern  et  nosse  quo  pereant  malo.

jM-emunt  tenebrae  luniina  et  dirae  Stygis

inferna  nox  est.     excidunt  ignes  tamen

et  nube  dirum  fulmen  elisa  micat,

miserisque  lucis  tanta  dulcedo  est  malae  ;

hoc  lumen  optant.

Ipsa  se  classis  prcmit
et  prora  prorae  nocuit  et  lateri  latus.

'  So   A  :  Leo  infiimun  t  everso  polo   with  E,  conjecturing
infiinum  venti  polo,  and  deleting  l.  4^0.

4,2


AGAMEMNON

shore  and  rocky  headlands  send  foi'th  a  moaning
sound  ;  the  waves,  lashed  by  the  rising  wind,  roll
hijrh — when  suddenly  the  moon  is  hid,  the  stars  sink
out  of  sight,  skyward  the  sea  is  lifted,  the  heavens
are  gone.  'Tis  doubly  night ;  dense  fog  o'erwhelms
the  dark  and,  all  light  withdrawn,  confuses  sea  and
skv.  From  all  sides  at  once  the  winds  fall  on  and
ravage  the  sea,  from  its  lowest  depths  upturned.
West  wind  with  East  wind  striving.  South  with
North.  Each  wields  his  own  weapons,  with  deadly
assault  stirring  up  the  deep,  while  a  whirlwind  churns
the  waves.  Strymonian  Aquilo  sends  the  deep  snow-
whirling,  and  Libyan  Auster  stirs  up  the  sands  of
Svrtes;^  nor  stands  the  strife  with  Auster:  Notus,
heavy  with  clouds,  blows  up,  swells  waves  with  rain,
while  Eurus  attacks  the  dawn,  shaking  Nabataean
realms,  and  eastern  gulfs.  What  wrought  fierce
Corns,  thrusting  forth  his  head  from  ocean?  The
whole  sky  he  tears  from  its  foundations,  and  you
might  think  the  very  gods  falling  from  the  shattered
heavens,  and  black  chaos  enveloping  the  world,
flood  strives  with  wind  and  wind  backward  rolls  the
Hood.  The  sea  contains  not  itself,  and  rain  and
waves  mingle  their  waters.  Then  even  this  comfort
fails  their  dreadful  })light,  to  see  at  least  and  know
the  disaster  by  which  they  perish.  Darkness  weighs
on  their  eyes,  and  'tis  the  infernal  night  of  awful
Styx.  Yet  fires  burst  forth,  and  from  the  riven
clouds  gleams  the  dire  lightning  flash,  and  to  the
jioor  sailors  great  is  the  sweetness  of  that  fearful
gleam  ;  even  for  such  light  they  pray.

■*^"  The  fleet  itself  helps  on  its  own  destruction,  prow
crashing  on  prow  and  side  on    side.      One   ship  the

'  The  Syrtes  were  shallow  sand-bars  off  the  northern  coast
of  Africa.

43


THE   TRAGEDIES   OF   SENECA

illam  dehiscens  pontus  in  praeceps  ra])it

liamitqiie  et  alto  redditam  revomit  mari ;  500

liaec  onere  sidit,  ilia  convulsum  latus

submittit  undis,  fluctus  hanc  decimus  tegit.

haec  lacera  et  omni  decore  populate  levis

fluitat  nee  illi  vela  nee  tonsae  manent

nee  rectus  altas  malus  antemnas  ferens,

sed  tvunca  toto  puppis  Icario  natat.

nil  ratio  et  usus  audet  ;  ars  cessit  malis.

tenet  horror  artus,  omnis  officio  stupet

navita  relicto,  remus  effngit  nianus.

in  vota  miseros  ultinius  cogit  timer  510

eadenique  superos  Troes  et  Danai  rogant.

quid  fata  possunt !     invidet  Pyrrhus  patri,

Aiaci  Vlixes,  Hectori  Atrides  minor,

Aganiemno  Priamo  ;  quisquis  ad  Troiani  incet

felix  vocatur,  cadere  qui  meruit  manu/

quern  fama  servat,  victa  quern  tellus  tegit.

"nil  nobile  ausos  pontus  atque  undae  ferunt  ?

ignava  fortes  fata  consunient  viros  ?

perdenda  mors  est?     quisquis  es  nonduni  malis

satiate  tantis  caelitum,  tandem  tuum  520

numen  serena  ;  eladibus  nostris  daret

vel  Troia  laorimas.     odia  si  durant  tua

j)1acetque  mitti  Doricum  exitio  genus,

quid  hos  simuLperire  nobiscum  iuvat,

quibus  perimus?     sistite  infestum  mare;

velut  ista  Danaos  dassis  et  Troas  vehit."

nee  plnra  possunt ;  occupat  vocem  mare.

^  So  A  :  Leo  gradu.


'  Every  tenth  wave  was  supposed  to  be  tlie  greatest  and
most  destniftive.

-  i.e.  in  safety.     The  contrast  here  is  between  timorous

+4


AGAMEMNON

yawning  deep  sucks  into  the  abyss,  engulfs  and  spews
tortli  again,  restored  to  the  sea  above  ;  one  sinks
of  its  own  weight,  anotlier  turns  its  wrecked  side  to
the  waves,  and  one  the  tenth  i  wave  o'erwhelms.
Here,  battered  and  stripped  of  all  its  ornament,  one
floats,  with  neither  sails  nor  oars  nor  straight  mast
hearing  the  high  sailyards,  a  broken  hulk,  drifting
wide  on  the  Icarian  sea.  Reason,  experience,  are  of
no  avail ;  skill  yields  to  dire  calamity.  Horror  holds
their  limbs;  the  sailors  all  stand  stupefied,  their
tasks  abandoned  ;  oars  drop  from  hands.  To  prayer
abject  fear  drives  the  wretches,  and  Trojans  and
(ireeks  beg  the  same  things  of  the  gods.  What  can
near  doom  accomplish  ?  Pyrrhus  envies  his  father,
Ulysses  Ajax,  the  younger  Atrides  Hector,  Agamem-
non Priam  ;  whoever  at  Troy  lies  slain  is  hailed  as
blessed,  who  by  deeds  of  arms  earned  death,  whom
glory  guards,  whom  the  land  he  conquered  buries.
"  Do  sea  and  wave  bear  -  those  who  have  dared
naught  noble,  and  shall  a  coward's  doom  o'erwhelm
brave  men?  Must  death  be  squandered.''  Whoe'er
of  heaven's  gods  thou  art,  nut  yet  with  our  sore
troubles  sated,  let  thy  divinity  be  at  last  appeased  ;
o'er  our  calamities  e'en  Troy  would  weep.  But  if
thy  hate  is  stubborn,  and  'tis  thy  pleasure  to  send
the  Greek  race  to  doom,  why  wouldst  have  those  ^
perish  along  with  us,  for  whose  sake  we  perish.''
AUav  the  raging  sea  :  this  fleet  bears  Greeks  but  it
bears  Trojans  too."  They  can  no  more  ;  the  sea
usurps  their  words.

folk  who  have  safely  sailed  the  sea  and  these  brave  men
who  must  perish  in  it  and  throw  away  their  lives  for  no
icturn.

^  i.e.  the  Trojans,  on  whose  account,  it  is  here  assumed,
the  destructive  storm  has  been  sent  upon  the  Greeks.

45


THE   TRAGEDIES   OF   SENECA

Ecce  alia  clades  !     fulmine  irati  lovis
amiata  Pallas  quid([uid  haut  ^  hasta  miiiax,
haut  ^  aegide  liaut^  furore  Gorgoneo  potest,  530

at  ^  igne  patrio  temj)tat,  et  caelo  novae
spirant  procellae.     solus  invictus  malis
luctatur  Aiax.     vela  cogenteni  hunc  sua
tento  rudente  flamma  perstrinxit  cadens.
libratur  aliud  fulnien  ;  hoc  toto  impetu
certuni  reducta  Pallas  excussit  manu,
imitata  patrem.     transit  Aiacem  et  ratem
ratisque  partem  secuni  et  Aiacem  tulit.
nil  ille  motus,  ardua  ut  cautes^  sale
ambustus  extat,  dirimit  insanum  mare  540

rtuctusque  rumpit  pectore  et  navem  manu
complexus  ignes  traxit  et  caeco  mari
conlucet  Aiax,  omne  resplendet  fretum.
tandem  occupata  rupe  furibundum  intonat:
•'  superasse  cuncta,"*  pelagus  atque  ignes  iuvat,
vicisse  caelum  Palladtm  tulmen  mare,
non  me  fugavit  bellici  terror  dei,
et  Hectorem  una  solus  et  Martem  tuli  ;^
Phoebea  nee  me  tela  pepulerunt  gradu.
cum  Phrygibus  istos  vicimus — tene  horream  ?         550
aliena  inerti  tela  mittis  dextera.
quid,  si  ipse  mittat  • — "  "  plura  cum  auderet  furens,

^  So  M.  Mueller  cmoidinf/  u,  folloiccd  by  lUchter :  Leo  aut.

"^  eb  (11,  emended  by  AT.  Mueller :  Leo  et.

'■^  aut  w,  emended  by  M.  Mueller :  Leo  aut.

■*  So  Richter :  nunc  E :  nunc  se  A  :  iuvit,  Leo  conj.

*  71iis  line  is  properly  deleted  by  Leo,  as  applicable  to  the
ejrealer  Ajax  and  not  to  the  present  speaker.  Farnabius,  how-
ever, allows  the  line  to  stand,  as  befitting  the  boastful,  ivild
words  of  Ajax  Oileus.

*  All  editors  read  quid  si  ipse  mittat  ?  a  meaningless  phrase.
J  have  changed  the  2>unctuation  as  indicated  above,  leaving  the
sentence  unfinished.

46


AGAMEMNON

^2^  But  lo  !  disaster  on  disaster  !  Pallas^  armed  with
the  bolt  of  angry  Jove,  threatening  essays  whate'er
she  may,  not  with  spear,  not  with  aegis,  not  with
Gorgon's  ^  rage,  but  with  lier  father's  Hghtning,  and
throughout  the  sky  new  tempests  blow.  Ajax '^
alone,  undaunted  by  disaster,  keeps  up  the  struggle.
Him,  slit)rtc!iing  sail  with  straining  halyard,  the
iiurtling  lightning  grazed.  Another  bolt  is  levelled  ;
tiiis,  with  all  her  might,  Pallas  launehed  true,  with
hand  back  drawn,  in  imitation  of  her  father.  Through
Ajax  it  passed,  and  through  his  ship,  and  part  of  the
ship  with  it,  and  Ajax  it  bore  away.  Then  he,
nothing  moved,  like  some  high  crag,  rises  flame-
scorched  from  the  briny  deep,  clea\es  the  raging  sea,
with  his  breast  bursts  through  the  floods  and,  holding
to  his  wrecked  vessel  with  his  hand,  di*ags  flames
aloug,  shines  brightly  midst  the  darkness  of  the  sea
and  illumines  all  the  waves.  At  last,  gaining  a  rock,
in  mad  rage  he  thunders:  " 'Tis  sweet  to  have
conquered  all  things,  flood  and  flame,  to  have  van-
quished sky,  Pallas,  thunderbolt  and  sea.  I  fled  not
in  terror  of  the  god  of  war  ;  both  Hector  at  once
and  Mars  did  I  with  my  sole  arm  withstand  ;  nor  did
Plioebus'  shafts  force  me  to  give  way.  Such  warriors,
together  with  their  Phrygians,  I  conquered  ; — and
shall  1  shrink  from  thee  ?  Another's  weapon  with
weakling  hand  thou  hurlest.  What,  if  he  himself
should  hurl  —  ?"^    When  in  his  madness  lie  would


'  The  shield  (aegis)  of  Mineiva  was  set  with  the  terrifying
Gorgon's  head  given  to  her  by  Perseus.

-  i.e.  Ajax  "the  Less,"  son  of  Oileus.  This  scene  recalls
Vergil,  .-leii.  i.  41  fF.

'  Ajax  apparent]}-  would  have  finished  by  saying — "  his
bolt,  even  then  I  would  not  fear."

47


THE   TRAGEDIES   OF   SENECA

tridente  riipeni  subruit  pulsam  pater
Neptunus  imis  exerens  undis  caput
solvitque  niontem  ;  quem  cadens  secum  tulit
terraque  et  igne  victus  et  pelago  iacet.

Nos  alia  maior  naufragos  pestis  vocat.
est  humilis  uuda,  scrupeis  mendax  vadis,
ubi  saxa  ra})idis  clausa  verticibus  tegit
fallax  Caphereus  ;  aestuat  scopulis  fretum  560

fervetque  semper  fluctus  alterna  vice,
arx  imminet  praerupta  quae  spectat  mare
iitrimque  geminum.      Pelopis  hinc  oras  tui
et  Isthmon,  arto  qui  recurvatus  solo
Ionia  iungi  maria  Phrixeis  vetat,
liinc  seel  ere  Lemnon  nobilem  et  Calchedona
tardamque  ratibus  Aulida.     hanc  arcem  occupat
Palamedis  ille  geuitor  et  clarum  manu
lumen  nefanda  vertice  e  summo  elferens
in  saxa  ducit  perfida  classem  face.  570

haerent  acutis  rupibus  fixae  rates  ;
has  inopis  undae  brevia  comniinuunt  vada,
pars  veliitur  huius  prima,  pars  scopulo  sedet ;
hanc  alia  retro  spatia  relegentem  ferit
et  fracta  frangit.     iam  timent  terram  rates
et  mavia  malunt.     cecidit  in  lucem  furor  ;
postquam  litatum  est  Ilio,  Phoebus  redit
ct  damna  noctis  tristis  ostendit  dies.

CLYTAEMNESTRA

Vtrumne  doleam  laeter  an  reducem  virum  ?
remeasse  laetor  vulnus  et  regni  grave  580

*  i  e.  of  the  women  who  killed  all  their  men,  except  that
Hypsipyle  saved  her  father,  Thoaa.

48


AGAMEMNON

be  dariniT  more,  father  Neptune,  pushini!^  with  his
trident,  o'erwhehned  the  rock,  thrusting  forth  his
iicad  from  his  waves'  dej)ths,  and  broke  off  the  crag.
Jliis  in  his  fall  Ajax  bears  down  with  him,  and  now
he  lies,  by  earth  and  fire  and  billows  overcome.

^^^  But  us  shipwrecked  mariners,  another,  worse
ruin  challenges.  There  is  a  shallow  water,  a  deceitful
shoal  full  of  rough  boulders,  where  treacherous  Capher-
eus  hides  his  rocky  base  beneath  whirling  eddies  ;
the  sea  boils  upon  the  rocks,  and  ever  the  flood
seethes  with  its  ebb  and  flow.  A  preci])itous  head-
land o'erhangs,  Avhich  on  either  hand  looks  out  upon
both  stretches  of  the  sea.  Hence  thou  mayst  descry
thine  own  Peloj)ian  shores,  and  Isthmus  which,
backward  curving  with  its  narrow  soil,  forbids  the
Ionian  sea  to  join  with  Phrixus'  waves;. hence  also
Lemnos,  infamous  for  crime,^  and  Calchedon,  and
Aulis  which  long  dela3'ed  the  fleet.  Seizing  tliis
summit,  the  father  of  Palamed^s  with  accursed
hand  raised  from  the  high  to;*-  a  beacon-light  and
with  treacherous  torch  lured- the  fleet  upon  the  reefs.
There  h.ap.g  the  ships  caught  on  jagged  rocks  ;  some
are  broken  to  })ieces  i;,ithe  shallow  water;  the  prow
of  one  vessel  is  earned  away,  while  a  part  sticks  fast
u|)on  the  rock  ;  one  ship  crashes  with  another  as  it
(haws  back,  both  wrecked  and  wrecking.  Now
t-hips  fear  land  and  choose  the  seas.  Towards  dawn
the  storm's  rage  is  spent  ;  now  that  atonement  has
been  made  for  Ilium,  I'hoebus  returns  and  sad  day
reveals  the  havoc  of  the  night.

CLYTEMNESTRA

Sh  ill  I  lament  or  rejoice  me  at  my  lord's  return  ?
1  do  rejoice   to  see   him   home   agaiu^  but  o'er   our

4P


THE   TRAGEDIES   OF    SENECA

lufjere  cogor.     redde  iain  Grais^  pater
altisona  quatiens  regna,  placatos  deos.
nunc  omne  laeta  fronde  veletur  caput,
sacrifica  dulces  tibia  effundat  modos
et  nivea  magnas  victima  ante  aras  cadat.

Sed  ecce,  turba  tristis  incomptae  comas
Iliades  adsunt,  quas  super  celso  gradu
efifrena  Phoebas  entheas  laurus  quatit.


Heu  quam  dulce  malum  mortalibus  additum
vitae  dirus  amor,  cum  pateat  malis  590

cffugium  et  miseros  libera  mors  vocet
portus  aeterna  placidus  quiete.
nullus  hunc  terror  nee  impotentis
procella  ?^ortunae  movet  aut  iniqui
riamma  Tonantis.
pax  alta  nullo^^

civium  coetus  timet  aut  minaces
victoris  iras,  non  maila  asperis
insana  coris,  non  acies  leras

pulvereamve  nubem  600

motam  barbaricis  equitum  catervis  ;
non  urbe  cum  tota  populos  cadentes,
hostica  muros  populante  flamma,
indomitumve  bellum.
])errumpet  omne  servitiuni
contemptor  levium  deorum,
qui  vultus  Aelierontis  atri,
qui  Slvga  tristem  non  tristis  videt
audetque  vitae  ponere  finem.

'   This  aickward   duplication   of  half-lines  Richter  avoids,
n-hile  at  the  same  time  obtaining  a  presumably  more  logical

50


AGAMEMNON

realm's  heavy  loss  am  I  forced  to  grieve.  At  last
O  father,  that  dost  shake  the  high-resounding  heavens,
restore  to  the  Greeks  their  gods  appeased.  Now
let  every  head  be  crowned  with  festal  wreaths,  let
the  sacrificial  flute  give  forth  sweet  strains,  and  the
white  victim  at  the  great  altai's  fall.

'•'^'^  But  see,  a  mournful  throng  with  locks  unbound,
the  Trojan  women  are  here,  while  high  above  them
all,  vv'ith  proud  step  advancing,  Phoebus'  mad  priestess
waves  the  inspiring  laurel  branch.

[Enter  band  of  Trojan  tromcn  led  hij  cassandra.]

CimRUS    OF    TROJAN    WOMKN

Alas,  how  alluring  a  bane  is  appointed  unto
mortals,  even  dire  love  of  life,  though  refuge  from
their  woes  opes  wide,  and  death  with  generous
hand  invites  the  wretched,  a  peaceful  port  of  ever-
lasting rest.  Nor  fear  nor  storm  of  raging  Fortune
disturbs  that  calm,  nor  bolt  of  tlie  harsh  Thunderer.
Peace  so  deej)  fears  no  citizens'  conspiracy,  no  victor's
threatening  wrath,  no  wild  seas  ruffled  by  stormy
winds,  no  fierce  battle  lines  or  dark  cloud  raised  by
barbaric  squadrons'  hoofs,  no  nations  falling  with
their  city's  utter  overthrow,  while  the  hostile  flames
lav  waste  the  Avails,  no  fierce,  ungovernable  war.
All  bonds  wiil  he  break  through,  who  dares  scorn
the  fickle  gods,  who  on  the  face  of  dark  Acheron,  on
fearful  Styx  can  look,  unfearful,  and  is  bold  enough
to  put  an  end  to  life.     A  match  for  kings,  a  match

arrangement,  ly  reading  II.  605-609  after  I.  595.  He  then
2orints  I.  596  with  a  lacuna :  Alta  pax  .  .  .  nuUos.

51


r

S     c


THE  TRAGEDIES   OF  SENECA

par  ille  regi,  par  superis  erit.  6lO

o  qiiam  miserum  est  nescire  mori !

\'idimus  patriam  ruentem  nocte  funesta,
cum  Dardana  tecta  Dorici  raperetis  ignes.
nou  ilia  bello  victa^  non  arniis,
ut  quondam,  Herculea  cecidit  pharetra ;
quam  non  Pelei  Thetidisque  natus
carusque  Pelidae  nimium  feroci
vicit,  acceptis  cum  fulsit  armis
fuditque  Troas  falsus  Acliilles,
aut  cum  ipse  Pelides  animos  feroces  620

sustulit  luctu  celeremque  saltu
Troades  summis  timuere  maris,
perdidit  in  malis
extremuni  decus  fortitcr  vinci ;
restitit  quinis  bis  annis
unius  noctis  peritura  furto.

Vidimus  simulata  dona
molis  immensae  Danaumque
fatale  munus  duximus  nostra
creduli  dextra  tremuitque  saejie
limine  in  primo  sonipes,  cavernis  630

conditos  reges  bellumque  gestans  ;
et  licuit  dolos  versare  ut  ij)si
fraude  sua  caderent  Pelasgi.
saepe  commotae  sonuere  parmae
tacitumque  murmur  percussit  aurcs,
ut  fremuit  male  subdolo
parens  I'vrrhus  Vlixi.

Secura  metus  Troica  pubes
sacros  gaudet  tangere  funes.
hinc  aequaevi  gregis  Astyanax,  640

*  Patroclus.

"  i.e.  at  the  death  of  Patroclus.


52


AGAMEMNON

for  the  high  gods  will  he  be.  Oh,  how  wretched  'tis  to
know  not  how  to  die  !

•^12  We  saw  our  country  fall  on  that  night  of  death,
when  you,  ye  Doric  fires,  ravished  Dardania's  homes.
She,  not  in  war  conquered,  not  by  arms,  not,  as
aforetime,  by  Hercules'  arrows,  fell ;  her,  not  Peleus'
and  Thetis'  son  o'ercanie,  nor  he,^  well-beloved  by
overbrave  Pelides,  when  in  borrowed  arms  he  shone
and  drove  Troy's  sons  in  flight,  a  false  Achilles  ;  nor,
when  Pelides'  self  through  griefs  gave  o'er  his  fierce
resentment,'  and  the  Trojan  women,  from  the  ram-
parts watching,  feared  his  swift  attack,  did  she  lose
amid  her  woes  the  crowning  glor}'  of  suffering
conquest  bravely  ;  for  ten  long  years  she  stood,  fated
to  perish  by  one  night's  treachery.^

627  vVe  saw  that  feigned  gift,  measureless  in  bulk,
and  with  our  own  hands  trustfully  dragged  along  the
Greeks'  deadly  offering  ;  and  oft  on  the  threshold  of
the  gate  the  noisy  footed  monster  stumbled,  bearing
within  its  hold  hidden  chiefs  and  war.  We  might
have  turned  their  guile  against  themselves,  and
caused  the  Pelasgians  by  their  own  trick  to  fall.
Oft  sounded  their  jostled  shields,  and  a  low  muttering
smote  our  ears,  when  Pyrrhus  grumbled,  scarce
yielding  to  crafty  Ulysses'  will.

^^^  All  unafraid,  the  Trojan  youth  joy  to  touch  the
fatal    ropes.^     Companies    of    their    own     age    here

^  i.e.  against  Agamemnon.
*  i.e.  liy  till;  tT'ick  of  the  wooden  horse.
^  With  tills  whole  passage  compare  Vergil's  description,
and  especially  Aen.  ii.  239.

53


i_'


THE   TRAGEDIES   OF   SENECA

hinc  Haemonio  desponsa  rogo

duciint  turmas,  haec  femineas,

ille  viriles.     festae  mati-es

votiva  ferunt  munera  divis  ;

festi  patres  adeunt  aras,

unus  tola  est  viiltus  in  urbe  ;

et,  quod  numquam  post  Hectoixos

vidimus  ignes,  laeta  est  Hecuba.

quid  nunc  primum^  dolor  inftlix,

quidve  extremum  defleve  paras  ?  650

moenia,  divum  fabricata  manu,

diruta  nostra  ?

an  tenipla  deos  super  usta  suos  ?

non  vacat  istis  lacrimare  malls — ■

te,  magne  parens,  flent  Iliades.

vidi,  vidi  senis  in  iugulo

telum  Pyrrlii  vix  exiguo

sanguine  tingui.

CASSANDRA

Coliibete  lacrimas  omne  quas  tenipus  petet,
Troades,  et  ipsae  vestra  lamentabili  660

lugete  gemitu  funera  ;  aerumnae  meae
socium  recusant,     cladibus  questus  meis
removete.     nostris  ipsa  sufficiam  malis.  ^


CHORVS

Lacrimas  lacrimis  miscere  iuvat ;
magis  exurunt  quos  secretae
lacerant  cui-ae,  iuvat  in  medium
deflere  suos  ;  nee  tu,  quamvis
dura  virago  patiensque  mali,
poteris  tantas  flere  ruinas.
non  quae  verno  mobile  carmen  670

ramo  cantat  tristis  aedon


54-


AGAMEMNON

Astyanax  leads,  there  slie,^  to  the  Thessalian  pyre
betrothed,  slie  leading  maids,  he  youths.  Gaily  do
mothers  bring  votive  offerings  to  the  gods  ;  gaily  do
fathers  approach  the  shrines  ;  each  wears  but  one
look  the  city  o'er ;  and,  what  never  we  saw  since
Hector's  funeral,  Hecuba  was  glad.  And  now,
unhappy  grief,  what  first,  what  last,  wilt  thou
lament  ?  Walls  by  divine  hands  fashioned,  by  our
own  destroyed  ?  Temples  upon  their  own  gods
consumed?  Time  lacks  to  weep  such  ills — thee,  O
great  fathei',  the  Trojan  women  weej).  I  saw,  I  saw
in  the  old  man's  throat  the  sword  of  Pyrrhus  scarce
wet  in  his  scanty  blood.

CASSANDRA

Restrain  your  tears  v.hich  all  time  will  seek,  ye
Trojan  women,  and  do  you  yourselves  grieve  for
your  own  dead  with  groans  and  lamentations  ;  my
losses  refuse  all  sharing.  Cease  then  your  grief  for
my  disasters.  I  myself  shall  suffice  for  the  woes  of
mine  own  house.

CHORUS

'Tis  sweet  to  mingle  tears  with  tears  ;  griefs  bring
more  smart  where  they  wound  in  solitude,  but  'tis
sweet  in  company  to  bewail  one's  friends  ;  nor  shalt
thou,  though  strong,  heroic,  and  inured  to  woe,
avail  to  lament  calamities  so  great.  Not  the  sad
nightingale,^   which    from    the    vernal    bough   pours

1  Polyxena.  *  Into  which  Philomela  was  changed.

55


THE   TRAGEDIES   OF   SENECA

Ityn  in  varios  modulata  sonos,

non  quae  tectis  Bistonis  ales

residens  summis  imiiia  diri

furta  mariti  garrula  narrat,

lugere  tuam  poterit  digne

conquesta  doniiim.     licet  ipse  velit

clarus  niveos  inter  olores

Histrum  cycnus  Tanainque  colens

extrema  loqui,  licet  alcyones  680

Ceyca  suuni  fluctu  levitcr

plangente  sonent,  cum  tranquillo

male  confisae  credunt  iterum

pelago  audaces  fetusque  suos

nido  pavidae  titubante  fovent ;

non  si  moUes  comitata  viros

tristis  laceret  bracchia  tecum

quae  turritae  turba  parenti

pectora,  rauco  concita  buxo,

ferit  ut  Phrygium  lugeat  Attin, — •  69O

non  est  lacrimis,  Cassandra,  modus,

quia  quae  patimur  vicere  modum.

Sed  cur  sacra tas  deripis  capiti  infulas  ?
'    miseris  colcndos  maxime  superos  puteni.

CASSANDRA

Vicere  nostra  iam  metus  omnes  mala,
equidera  nee  ulla  caelites  place  prece
nee,  si  velint  saevire,  quo  noceant  habent.
Fortuna  vires  ipsa  consumpsit  suas.
quae  patria  restat,  quis  pater,  quae  iam  soror  ?

^  The  swallow  (hinindo)  into  which  Proone  was  changed.
^  Cycnus  (see  Index)  is  here  conceived  of  as  swan  rather
than  man.

56


AGAMEMNON

forlh  hei'  liquid  song,  piping  of  Itys  in  ever  changing
strains;  not  tlie  bird  ^  which,  perching  on  Bistonian
battlenicjits,  tells  o'er  and  o'er  the  hidden  sins  of
her  cruel  lord,  will  e'er  be  able,  with  all  licr  passionate
lament,  worthily  to  mourn  thy  house.  Should  bright
Cycnus'  -  self,  haunting  midst  snowy  swans  Ister
and  Tanai's,  utter  his  dying  song  ;  should  halcyons
mourn  their  Ceyx  midst  the  light  wave's  lapping,
when,  though  distrustful,  boldly  they  trust  once
more  to  the  tranquil  ocean,  and  anxiously  on  un-
steady nest  cherish  their  young ;  should  tlie  sad
throng  which  follows  the  unmanned  men  ^  bi'uise
their  arms  along  with  thee,  the  throng  which,  by  tlie
shrill  flute  maddened,  smite  their  breasts  to  the
lower-crowned  mother,^  that  for  Phrygian  Attis  they
may  lament, — not  so,  Cassandra,  is  there  measure
fur  our  tears,  for  wU.il  we  suffer  has  outmeasured
measure.

1=^3  But  why  dost  tear  off  the  holy  fillets  from  thy
head  ?  Methinks  the  gods  should  be  most  reverenced
by  unha})py  souls.

CASSANDRA

Now  have  our  woes  o'ermastered  every  fear.
Neither  do  I  ap})easc  the  heavenly  gods  by  any
jtrayer,  nor,  should  they  wish  to  rage,  have  they
wherewith  to  harm  me.  Fortune  herself  has  ex-
hausted all  he;  powers.  What  fatherland  remains?
What    i't'ivr.''      What    sister    now?      Altars'^    and

»  Priests  of  Cybele.         *  Cyl)cle.

'  Boll)  lier  brother  Polites  and  lier  father  Piiam  liail  been
slain  at  tlie  altar  of  Hercean  Jove,     fcjee  Aen.  ii.  5"2(J  If.

57


THE   TRAGEDIES   OF   SENECA
bibere  tumuli  sanguinem  atque  arae  mcum.  700

quid  ilia  felix  turba  fratevni  gregis  ?
exhausta  iiempe  !     regia  miseri  senes
vacua  relicti  ;  totque  per  thalamos  vident
praeter  Lacaenam  ceteras  viduas  nurus.
tot  ilia  regum  mater  et  regimen  Phrygum,
fecunda  in  ignes  Hecuba  fatorum  novas
experta  leges  induit  vultus  feros  :
circa  ruinas  rabida  latravit  suas,
Troiae  superstes,  Hectori,  Priamo,  sibi !


Silet  repente  Phoebas  et  pallor  genas  710

creberque  totum  possidet  corpus  tremor  ;
\  stetere  vittae,  mollis  horrescit  coma,
anhela  corda  murmure  incluso  fremunt,
incerta  nutant  lumina  et  versi  retro
torquentur  oculi,  rursus  immoti  rigent.
nunc  levat  in  auras  altior  solito  caput
graditurque  celsa,  nunc  reluctantes  parat
reserare  fauces,  verba  nunc  clauso  male
custodit  ore  maenas  impatiens  dei.

CASSANDRA

Quid  me  furoris  incitam  stimulis  novi  '7'20

quid  mentis  inopem,  sacra  Parnasi  iuga,
rapitis  ?     recede,  Phoebe,  iam  non  sum  tua,
extingue  flammas  pectori  infixas  meo.
cui  nunc  vagor  vaesana  ?     cui  bacchor  furens  ?
iam  Troia  cecidit — falsa  quid  vates  ago  ?

58


AGAMEMNON

tombs  1  liave  drunk  up  my  blood.  What  of  that
h.ippy  throiii;-  of  brothers  ?  (ione,  all  !  in  the
einptv  palace  only  sad  old  men  are  left ;  and
throu<>hout  those  many  chambers  they  see  all
women,  save  her  of  Sparta,  widowed.  That  mother
of  so  many  kin<>s,  queen  of  the  Phrygians,  Hecuba,
fruitful  for  funeral-fn-es,  proving-  new  laws  of  fate,
has  put  on  bestial  form  :  "^  around  her  ruined  walls
madly  she  barked,  surviving  Troy,  son,  husband —
and  herself!

CHORUS

The  bride  of  Phoebus  suddenly  is  still,  pallor
o'erspreads  her  cheeks,  and  constant  tremors  master
[all  her  frame.  Pier  fillets  stand  erect,  her  soft  locks
\  rise  in  horror,  her  labouring  heart  sounds  loud  with
pent  murmuring,  her  glance  wanders  uncertain,
her  eyes  seem  backwai'd  turned  into  herself,  anon
they  stare  unmoving.  Now  she  lifts  her  head  into
the  air  higher  than  her  wont,  and  walks  with  stately
tread  ;  now  makes  to  unlock  her  struggling  lips,  now
vainly  tries  to  close  them  on  her  words,  a  mad
priestess  fighting  against  the  god.

CASSANDRA

Why,  O  Parnassus'  sacred  heights,  do  ye  i)rick  me
with  fury's  goads  anew,  why  do  you  sweep  me  on,
bereft  of  sense .''  Away !  O  Phoebus,  I  am  no
longer  thine ;  quench  thou  the  flames  set  deep
within  my  breast.  For  whose  sake  wander  I  now  in
madness  ?  for  whose  sake  in  frenzy  rave  ?  Now
Troy  has  fallen — what  have  I,  ftdse  prophetess,
to  do  ?

^  Polyxcna  had  been  slain  on  Achilles'  tomb.
*  i.e.  she  was  changed  into  a  dog.

59


THE   TRAGEDIES   OF   SEXECA

Vbi  sum  ?     fiigit  lux  alma  et  obscurat  genas
nox  alta  et  aether  abditus  tenebris  latet.
sed  ecce  sjjemino  sole  praefulget  dies
geminumque  duplices  Argos  attollit  domus.
Idaea  cerno  nemora  ;  fatalis  sedet  730

inter  potentes  arbiter  pastor  deas. —
timete  reges,  moneo,  furtivum  genus  ;
agrestis  iste  alumnus  evertet  domum.^
quid  ista  vaecors  tela  feminea  raanu
destricta  praefei-t  ?     quem  petit  dextra  virum
Lacaena  cultu,  ferrum  Amazonium  gerens  ? —
quae  versat  oculos  alia  nunc  facies  meos  ?
victor  ferarum  colla  sublimis  iacet
ignobili  sub  dente  Marmaricus  leo,
niorsus  cruentos  passus  audacis  leae. — ■  7-10

quid  me  vocatis  sospitem  solam  e  meis,
umbrae  meorum  ?     te  sequor  testis,  pater^
Troiae  sepultae  ;  frater^  auxilium  Phrygum
terrorque  Danaum^  non  ego  antiquum  decus
video  aut  calentes  ratibus  exustis  raanus,
sed  lacera  membra  et  saucios  vinclo  gravi
illos  lacertos ;  te  sequor^  nimium  cito
congresse  Achilli  Troile  ;  incertos  geris,
Deiphobe,  vultus,  coniugis  munus  novae,
iuvat  per  ipsos  ingredi  Stygios  lacus,  750

iuvat  videre  Tartari  saevum  canem
avidique  regna  Ditis  !     haec  hodie  ratis
Phlegethontis  atri  regias  animas  vehet,
vicUimque  victricemque.      vos,  umbrae,  precor,
iurata  sujieris  unda,  te  pariter  precor  :

^  WUamovntz  conjectures  that  several  lines  have  fallen  out
after  I.  733,  concerning  the  fates  of  Troy  ami  the  crimes  of  the
Atridfie.     Lines  7S0-733  seem  to  Leo  to  be  spurious.

^  These  words  have  no  logical  connection  with  her  previous
utterance,  and  are  a  dark  allusion  to  Aegisthus.

60


AGAMEMNON

"26  Where  am  I  ?  Fled  is  the  kindly  Hglit,  deep
darkness  blinds  my  eyes,  and  the  sky,  buried  in
ulciom,  is  hidden  away.  But  see !  with  double  sun
the  day  i^leams  forth,  and  double  Argus  lifts  up
twin  palaces !  Ida's  groves  I  see  ;  there  sits  the
shepherd,  fateful  judge  midst  mighty  goddesses. —
Fear  him,  ye  kings,  1  warn  you,  fear  the  child  of
stolen  love ;  ^  that  rustic  foundling  shall  overturn
your  house.  What  means  that  mad  woman  with
drawn  sword  in  hand  ?  What  hero  seeks  she  with
her  right  hand,  a  Spartan  in  her  garb,^  but  carrying
an  Amazonian  axe  ? — What  sight  is  that  other  which
now  employs  mine  eyes  ?  The  king  of  beasts  with
his  proud  neck,  by  a  base  fang  lies  low,  an  Afric
lion,  suffering  the  bloody  bites  of  his  bold  lioness. —
Why  do  ye  summon  me,  saved  only  of  my  house,
my  kindred  shades.''  Thee,  father,  do  I  follow,  eye-
witness of  Troy's  burial  ;  thee,  brother,  help  of  the
Fln-vgians,  terror  of  the  Greeks,  I  see  not  in  thine
old-time  splendour,  or  with  thine  hands  hot  from
the  burning  of  the  ships,  but  mangled  of  limb,  with
tiiose  arms  wounded  by  the  dcc]5-sunk  thongs ;
thee,  Troilus,  I  follow,  too  early  with  Achilles  met  ;
unrecognisable  the  face  thou  wearest,  Deiphobus,^
the  gift  of  thy  isew  wife*  'Tis  sweet  to  fare  along
the  very  Stygian  pools  ;  sweet  to  behold  Tartarus'
savage  dog  and  the  realms  of  greedy  Uis  !  To-day
this  skiff  of  murky  Phlegethon  shall  bear  royal
souls,^  vanquished  and  vanquislier.  Ye  shades,  I
pray  ;  thou  stream  on  wliich  the  gods  make  oath,
thee    no    less    I    pray :     for    a    little    withdraw    the

^  Slie  has  a  clairvoyant  picvisiou  of  the  act  of  CI  ytcnmestra.

^  See  Vergil,  Aen.  vi.  494  IT.

•»  i.e.  Ilelfii.

^  Her  own  and  Agamemnon's.

61


THE   TRAGEDIES   OF   SENECA

reserate  paulum  terga  iiigrantis  poli,

levis  ut  Mycenas  turba  prospiciat  Phrygum.

spectate^  miseri ;   fata  se  vertunt  retro.

Instant  sorores  squalidae,
sanguinea  iactant  verbera,  760

fert  laeva  semustas  faces
turgentque  pallentes  genae
et  vestis  atri  funeris
exesa  cingit  ilia,
strepuntque  nocturni  nietus
et  ossa  vasti  corporis
corrupta  longiuquo  situ
palude  liniosa  iacent.^
et  ecce,  defessus  senex

ad  ora  ludentes  aquas  770

non  captat  oblitus  sitim^
maestus  futuro  funei-e ;
exultat  et  ponit  gradus
pater  decoros  Dardaiius.


lam  pervagatus  ipse  se  fregit  furor,
caditque  tlexo  qualis  ante  aras  genu
cervice  taurus  vulnus  incertuni  gerens.
relevemus  artus.     en  deos  tandem  suos
victrice  lauru  cinctus  Agamemnon  adit,
et  festa  coniunx  obvios  i!li  tulit  780

gressus  reditque  iancta  concordi  gradu.

AGAMEMNON

Tandem  rt'vcrtor  sospes  ad  patrios  lares ;
o  cara  salve  terra,     tibi  tot  barbarae

'  Leo  remarks  upon  the  unintelliyibUity  ofU.  766-76S.
62


AGAMEMNON

covering  of  that  dark  world,  that  on  Mycenae  the
shadowy  tlirong  of  Phrygians  may  look  forth.  Be-
hold, poor  souls  ;  the  fates  turn  backward  on  them-
selves.

'''^  They  press  on,  the  squalid  sisters,  their  bloody
lashes  brandishing  ;  their  left  hands  half-burned
torches  bear  ;  bloated  are  their  pallid  cheeks,  and
dusky  robes  of  death  their  hollow  loins  encircle  ;
the  fearsome  cries  of  night  resound,  and  a  huge
body's  bones,  rotting  with  long  decay,  lie  in  a  slimy
marsh. ^  And  see  !  that  spent  old  man,^  forgetting
thirst,  no  longer  catches  at  the  mocking  waters,
grieving  at  death  ^  to  come;  but  father  Dardanus
exults  and  walks  along  with  stately  tread.

CHOllUS

Now  has  her  rambling  frenzy  spent  itself,  and
falls,  as  before  the  altar  with  sinking  knees  falls  the
bull,  receiving  an  ill-aimed  stroke  upon  his  neck.
Let  us  lift  up  her  body.  But  lo  I  at  last  to  his  own
gods,  wreathed  with  victorious  bay,  Agamemnon
comes ;  his  wife  with  joy  has  gone  forth  to  meet
him,  and  now  returns,  joining  her  steps  in  harmony
with  his.

[Efiter  AOAMKMNON.  IJc  Iius  becii  met  and  greeted  by
/lis  wife,  >r/io  enters  with  him  and  goes  on  ^ilone  into
the  palace.]

AGAMEMNON

At  length  am  I  returned  in  safety  to  my  father's
house.      O  dear  land,  hail !     To  thee  many  barbaric

^  If  Seneca  wrote  lines  766-768,  he  may  have  had  some
(lefinile  reference  in  his  mind  unknown  to  us,  or  he  may  have
meant  merely  to  add  further  gruesome  detail  to  the  picture.

-  Tantahis.

'  i.e.  of  Agamemnon,  great-grand.son  of  Tantalus.

63


THE   TRAGEDIES   OF   SENECA

dedere  gentes  spolia^  tibi  felix  diu

potentis  Asiae  Troia  summisit  manus. —

quid  ista  vates  corpus  effusa  ac  tremens

dubia  labat  cervice  ?     famuli,  attollite,

refovete  gelido  latice.     iam  reci{)it  diem

marcente  visu.     suscita  sensus  tuos  !

optatus  ille  jjortus  aerumnis  adest.  790

festus  dies  est.

CASSANDRA

Festus  et  Troiae  fuit.

AGAMEMNON

Veneremur  aras.

CASSAN'JRA

Cecidit  ante  aras  pater.

AGAMEMNON

lovem  precemur  pariter.

CASSANDRA

HerccLim  lovem  ?

AGAMEMNON

Crcdis  videre  te  Ilium  ?

CASSANDRA

^  Et  Prianium  simul.

AGAMEMNON

Hie  Troia  non  est.

CASSANDRA

Vbi  Helena  est  Troiam  puto.

*  Cassandra.  *  See  Vergil,  Aeti.  u.  249.

*  It   was  at  tlie  altar  of  Herccan  Jove  that  Priam  was
slain  '^Aen.  ii.  512  ff.).

64


AGAMEMNON

nations  liave  f^iven  spoil^  to  thee  proud  Asia's  Trov,
long  blest  of  heaven^  has  yielded. — ^Vhy  does  the
priestess  ^  there  faint  and  fall  tottering  Avith  droop-
ing head  ?  Slaves,  lift  her  up,  revive  her  with  cool
water.  Now  with  languid  gaze  she  again  beholds
the  light.  [To  cassandra.J  Awake  to  life  !  that
longed  for  haven  from  our  woes  is  here ;  this  is  a
festal  day,

CASS.\NURA

'Twas  festal,"  too,  at  Troy.

AGAMEMNON

Let  us  kneel  before  the  altar.

CASSANDRA

Before  the  altar  my  father  fell.

AGAMEMNON

To  Jove  let  us  i)ray  together.

CASSANDRA

Hercean  Jove  ?  ^

AGAMEMNON

Dost  think  thou  lookst  on  Ilium.''

CASSANDRA

And  Priam,  too.

AGAMEMNON

Here  is  not  Troy.

CASSANDRA

Where  a  Helen  *  is,  I  think  is  Troy.

*  i.e.  an  evil,  adulterous  woman  such  as  Helen.  Helen
was  not  in  Greece  at  this  time.  The  reference  is  obviously
to  Clytemnestra.

65

VOL.   II.  F


THE  TRAGEDIES   OF  SENECA

AGAMEMNON

Ne  metue  dominnm  famula.

CASSANDRA

Libertas  adest.

AGAMEMNON

Secura  vive.

CASSANDRA

Milii  mori  est  securitas.

AGAMEMNON

Nullum  est  periclum  tibimet.

CASSANDRA

At  magnum  til)i

AGAMEMNON

Victor  timere  quid  potest  ?

CA^ANDRA

Quod  lion  timet.

AGAMEMNON

Hanc  fida  famuli  turba,  dum  excutiat  deum,      800
retinete  ne  quid  impotens  peccet  furor,
at  te,  pater,  qui  s;ieva  torques  fulmina
pellisque  nubes,  sidera  et  terras  regis,
ad  quern  triumphi  spolia  victores  feruut,
et  te  sororem  cuncta  pollentis  viri,
Argolica  luno,  pecore  votivo  libens
Arabumque  donis  supplice  et  fibra  colam.

*  Cassandra  is  supposed  to  be  still  under  the  influence  of
Apollo.

66


AGAMEMNON

AGAMEMNON

Fear  thou  no  mistress,  though  a  slave.

CASSANDRA

Freedom  is  near  at  hand.

AGAMEMNON

Live  on,  secure.

CASSANDRA

For  me,  death  is  security.

AGAMEMNON

For  thee  there  is  naught  to  fear.

CASSANDRA

But  much  for  thee.

AGAMEMNON

What  can  a  victor  fear  ?

CASSANDRA

What  he  doth  not  fear.

AGAMEMNON

Ye  faithful  slaves,  restrain  her  till  she  throw  off
the  god,i  lest  in  her  wild  frenzy  she  do  some  harm.
But  thee,  O  father,  who  the  dire  thunder  hurlest,
and  driv'st  the  clouds,  who  the  stars  and  lands  dost
rule,  to  whom  in  triumph  victors  bring  their  spoils;
and  thee,  sister  of  thine  almighty  lord,  Argolian
Juno,  gladly  with  votive  flocks,  with  gifts  ^  from
Araby,  and  with  suppliant  offerings  of  entrails  will
I  adore.

[Eail  into  the  palace.'^

*  Incense.  c-r-


THE   TRAGEDIES   OF   SENECA


Argos  nobilibus  nobile  civibus,
Argos  iratae  caruni  novercaCj
semper  ingentes  alumnos  810

educas,  nunierum  deorum
imparem  aequasti.     tuus  ille
bis  seno  meruit  labore
adlegi  caelo

niagnus  AlcideSj  cui  lege  inundi
luppiter  rupta  geminavit  horas
roscidae  noctis  iussitqiie  Plioebum
tardius  eeleres  agitare  currus
et  tuas  lente  remeare  bigas,
pallida  Phoebe  ;
rettulit  pedem

nomen  alternis  stella  quae  mutat  820

seque  mirata  est  Hesperum  did  ;
Aurora  movit  ad  solitas  vices
caput  et  relabeus  imposuit  seni
collum  marito.
sensit  ortus,  sensit  occasus
Herculem  nasci ;  violentus  ille
nocte  non  una  poterat  creari.
tibi  concitatus  substitit  munduSj
o  puer  subiture  caelum.

Te  sensit  Nenieaeus  arto
pressus  lacerto  fulmiueus  leo  830

cervaque  Parrhasis,
sensit  Arcadii  populator  agri,

'  i.e.  to  Juno,  constantly  angered  by  the  children  of  Jove's
mistresses.

2  Farnabius  thus  explains  this  curious  statement :  the
deification  of  Hercules  (to  which  Juno  at  last  consented)
added   to   the  number,   not   of  the   great   gods,    who   were

68


AGAMEMNON

CHORUS    OF    ARGIVE    WOMEN

O  Argos,  ennobled  by  thy  noble  citizens,  Argos,
dear  to  the  step-dame  though  enraged,^  ever  mighty
sons  thou  fosterest  and  hast  made  even  2  the  odd
number  of  the  gods.  That  hero  of-  thine  by  his
twelve  labours  earned  the  right  to  be  chosen  for  the
skies,  great  Hercules,  for  whom,^  the  world's  law
broken,  Jove  doubled  the  hours  of  dewy  night,  bade
Phoebus  more  slowly  drive  his  hastening  car,  and  thy
team  to  turn  back  with  laggard  feet,  O  pale  Phoebe.
Backward  the  star  turned  his  steps,  the  star  who
changes  from  name  to  name,*  and  marvelled  still  to
be  called  Hesperus,  evening  star.  Aurora  stin*ed  at
the  accustomed  hour  of  dawn,  but,  sinking  back,  laid
her  head  and  neck  upon  the  breast  of  her  aged  hus-
band.^ The  rising,  yea,  and  the  setting  of  the  sun
felt  the  birth  of  Hercules ;  a  hero  so  mighty  could
not  be  begotten  in  a  single  night.  For  thee  the
whirling  universe  stood  still,  O  boy,  destined  to
mount  the  skies.

^29  The  lightning-swift  lion  of  Nemea  felt  thy
power,  crushed  by  thy  straining  arms,  and  the
Parrhasian  hind,  the  ravager  ^  of  Arcady's  fields,  felt

twelve  in  number,  but  of  the  gods  of  the  second  rank  (diis
communihus),  three  in  number — Mars,  Bellona,  and  Victoria
— thus  making  even  the  number  wliich  had  been  odd.

^  i.e.  for  his  begetting.     See  Ileir.  Fur.  11.  2-1  and  1158.

■*  i.e.  it  is  now  called  Lucifer  and  now  Hesperus,  according
as  it  is  morning  or  evening  star.

^  Titlionus.

''  The  Er^niantiiian  boar.


THE   TRAGEDIES   OF   SENECA

gemuitque  taurus  Dictaea  linquens

horridus  arva.

morte  fecundum  domuit  draconem

vetuitque  collo  pereunte  nasci,

geminosque  fratres

pectore  ex  uno  tria  monstra  natos

stipite  incusso  fregit  insultans,

duxitque  ad  oitus  Hesperiuni  pecus,  SIO

Gerj'oiiae  spoliuni  triformis.

egit  Threicium  gregem^

quern  non  Strymonii  gramine  fluminis

Hebrive  ripis  pavit  tyrannus  ;

liospitum  dims  stabulis  cruorem

praebuit  saevis  tinxitque  crudos

ultimus  rictus  sanguis  aurigae.

vidit  Hippolyte  ferox

pectore  e  medio  rapi

spolium^  et  sagittis

iiube  percussa  Stymplialis  alto  850

decidit  caelo  ;

arborque  pom  is  fertilis  aureis

extimuit  manus  insueta  carpi

fugitque  iii  auras  leviore  ramo.

auciivit  sonitum  cre})itante  lamua

frigidus  custos  nescius  somni,

linqueret  cum  iain  nemus  omne  fulvo

plenus  Alcides  vacuum  rnetallo.

tractus  ad  caelum  canis  infcrorum

triplici  catena  tacuit  ncc  ullo  860

latravit  ore,

Incis  ignotae  metuens  colorem.

^  It  was  the  nature  of  the  hydra  tliat  as  each  liead  was  cut
off  two  appeared  in  its  place.

■•^  (jeminoa  here  =  Iriijeminos,  referring  to  the  triple-man
monster,  Geryon.

70


AGAMEMNON

thee,  too,  and  loud  bellowed  the  savage  bull,  leaving

the  fields  of  Crete.     The'  hydra,  fertile  in  death,  he

overcame   and  forbade  new   births  from  each  neck

destroyed;^    the  mated-  brethren,  springing  three

monsters  from  a  single  bod\',  he  crushed,  leaping  on

them    with    his  crashing   club,  and  brought  to  the

east   the   western   herd,  spoil    of  the    three-formed

Geryon.     He  drove  the  Thracian  herd  ^  which  the

tyrant  fed,  not  on  the  grass  of  the  Stryraon  or  on

the  banks  of  the  Hebrus  ;  cruel,  he  offered  his  savage

horses  the  gore  of  strangers — and  the  blood  of  their

driver'*  was  the  last  to  stain  red  their  jaws.     Warlike

Hippolyte  saw  the  spoil  ^  snatched  from  about  her

breast ;  and  by  his  shafts  down  from  the  riven  cloud

from  high  heaven  fell  the  Stymj^halian  bird.     The

tree,  laden  with  golden  fruit,  shrank  from  his  hands,

unused  to  such  plucking,  and  the  bough,  relieved  of

its  burden,  sprang  into  the  air.     The  cold,  sleepless

guardian  '^  heard  the  sound  of  the   clinking  metal,

only  when  heavy  laden  Alcides  was  leaving  the  grove

all  stripped  of  its  tawny  gold.    Dragged  to  the  upper

world  by  triple  fetters,  the  infernal  dog  was  silent,

nor  with  any  mouth  did  he  bay,  shrinking  from  the

hues   of    unex})erienced    light.      Under    thy    leader-

^  The  man-eating  liorses  of  Diomedes,  tyrant  of  Thrace.
*  i.e.  Hercules  gave  Diomedes  to  his  own  horses  to  devour.
^  The  famous  golden  girdle.
'  Tiie  dragon,  set  to  guard  the  golden  apples.

71


f*


THE   TRAGEDIES   OF   SENECA

te  duce  succidit

mendax  Dardanidae  doinus

et  sensit  arciis  iteriim  timendos  ;

te  duce  concidit

totidem  diebiis  Troia  quot  annis.

CASSANDRA

Res  agitur  intus  magna,  par  annis  decern,
eheii  quid  hoc  est  ?     aninie,  consurge  et  cape
pretium  furoris — vicimus  victi  Pliryges  !
bene  est,  resurgit  Troia  ;  traxisti  iacens,  870

parens,  Mycenas,  terga  dat  victor  tuus  !
tarn  clara  numquam  providae  mentis  furor
ostendit  oculis  ;  video  et  intersum  et  fruor  ;
imago  visus  dubia  non  fallit  meos  ;
spectemus.

Epulae  regia  instructae  domo,
quales  fuerunt  ultimae  Phrygibus  dapes,
celebrantur  ;  ostro  lectus  Iliaco  nitet
merumque  in  auro  veteris  Assaraci  trahunt.
en  ipse  picta  veste  sublimis  iacet,
Priami  superbas  corpore  exuvias  gerens.  880

detraliere  cultus  uxor  hostiles  iubet,
induere  potius  coniugis  fidae  manu
textos  amictus — horreo  atque  animo  tremo !
regennie  perimet  exul  et  adulter  virum  ?
venere  fiita.     sanguinem  extremae  dapes
domini  videbunt  et  cruor  Bacclio  incidet.
mortifera  vinctum  perfide  tradit  neci
induta  vestis  ;  exitum  manibus  negant


^  In  the  time  of  Laoiiiedon.

^  The   arrows    of    Herculen    in    the    liands    of    Pliiloctetes
assisted  in  tiie  final  fall  of  Troy  under  Priam.

^  She  either  stands  where  she  can  see  the  interior  of  tlie

72


AGAMEMNON

ship  fell  the  lying  house  ^  of  Dardanus  and  suffered
the  arrows,  once  again  ~  to  be  feared ;  under  thy
leadership  in  as  many  days  Troy  fell  as  it  took  years
thereafter.


CASSANDHA  [cilone  upon  the  stage]  ^

A  great  deed  is  done  within,  a  match  for  ten  years
of  war.  Ah  !  What  is  this  ?  Rise  up,  my  soul,  and
take  the  reward  of  thy  madness — we  are  conquerors,
we  conquered  Phrygians  !  'Tis  well  !  Troy  has  risen
again  I  In  thy  fall,  O  father,  thou  hast  dragged
down  Mycenae ;  thy  conqueror  gives  way !  Never
before  did  my  mind's  prophetic  frenzy  give  sight  to
mine  eyes  so  clear ;  I  see,  I  am  in  the  midst  of  it,  I
revel  in  it;  'tis  no  doubtful  image  cheats  my  sight;
let  me  gaze  my  fill.

^"^  A  feast  is  spread  within  the  royal  house  and
thronged  with  guests,  like  that  last  banquet  of  the
Phr}'gians ;  the  couches  gleam  with  Trojan  purple,
and  their  wine  they  quaff'  from  the  golden  cups  of
old  Assaracus.  Lo,  he  himself*  in  broidered  vest-
ments lies  on  lofty  couch,  weai-ing  on  his  body  the
proud  spoils  of  Priam.  His  wife  bids  him  doff  the
raiment  of  his  foe  and  don  instead  a  mantle  her  own
fond  hands  have  woven — I  shudder  and  my  soul
trembles  at  the  sight !  Shall  an  exile  ^  slay  a  king  }
an  adulterer^  the  husband?  The  fatal  hour  has
come.  The  banquet's  close  shall  see  the  master's
blood,  and  gore  shall  fall  into  the  wine.  The  deadly
mantle  he  has  put  on  delivers  him  bound  treacher-
ously  to  his    doom ;    the    loose,  impenetrable    folds

palace,  and  describes  what  is  going  on  within,  or  else  she
sees  it  by  clairvoyant  power.

*  Agamemnon.  *  Aegisthus.

7S


THE   TRAGEDIES    OF   SENECA

caputque  laxi  et  invii  claudunt  sinus,
haurit  trementi  semivir  dextra  latus,  890

nee  penitus  egit ;  vulnere  in  medio  stupet.
at  ille,  ut  altis  hispidus  silvis  aper
cum  casse  vinctus  temptat  egressus  tamen
artatque  motu  vincla  et  in  cassum  furit, — ■
cupit  fluentes  undique  et  caecos  sinus
disicere  et  hostem  quaerit  implicitus  suum.
armat  bipenni  Tyndaris  dextram  furens,
qualisque  ad  aras  coUa  taurorum  popa
designat  oculis  antequani  ferro  petat,
sic  hue  et  illue  impiam  librat  manum.  900

habet !     peractum  est !     pendet  exigua  male
caput  amputatum  parte  et  hinc  trunco  cruor
exundat,  illic  ora  cum  fremitu  iacent.
nondum  recedunt ;  ille  iam  exanimem  petit
laceratque  corpus,  ilia  fodientem  adiuvat.
uterque  tanto  scelere  respondet  suis —
est  hie  Thyeste  natus,  haee  Helenae  soror.
stat  ecee  Titan  dubius  emerito  die,
i      suane  currat  an  Tiivestea  via.


u


ELF.CTHA

Fuge,  o  paternae  mortis  auxilium  unicum,  910

fuge  et  scelestas  hostium  vita  manus.
eversa  domus  est  funditus,  regna  occidunt.

Hospes  quis  iste  concitos  currus  agit .''
germane,  vultus  veste  furabor  tuos.

1  i.e.  Clytemnestra,  daughter  of  Tyndareiis.
^  i.e.  the  wound.     The  formula  is  taken  from  the  gladia-
torial contests.

74


AGAMEMNON

refuse  outlet  to  his  hands  and  enshroud  his  head.
With  trembling  right  hand  the  lialf-nian  stabs  at  his
side,  but  hath  not  driven  deep;  in  mid  stroke  he
stands  as  one  amazed.  But  he,  as  in  the  deep  woods
a  bristling  boar,  though  with  the  net  entangled,  still
tries  for  freedom,  and  by  his  struggling  draws  elose
his  bonds  and  rages  all  in  vain, — he  strives  to  throw
off  the  blinding  folds  all  around  him  floating,  and,
though  closely  enmeshed,  seeks  for  his  foe.  Now
I'vndaris  ^  in  mad  rage  snatches  a  two-edged  axe
and,  as  at  the  altar  the  priest  marks  with  his  eye  the
oxen's  necks  before  he  strikes,  so,  now  here,  now
there,  her  impious  hand  she  aims.  He  has  it !  ^  the
deed  is  done  !  The  scarce  severed  head  hangs  by  a
slender  part ;  here  blood  streams  o'er  his  headless
trunk,  there  lie  his  moaning  lips.  And  not  yet  do
they  give  o'er ;  he  attacks  the  already  lifeless  man,
and  keeps  hacking  at  the  corpse  ;  she  helps  him  in
the  stabbing.  Each  one  in  this  dire  crime  answers
to  his  own  kin — he  is  Thyestes*  son,  she,  Helen's
sister.  See,  Titan,  the  day's  work  done,  stands
hesitant  whether  his  own  or  Thyestes'  ^  course  to  run.

[Remains  beside  the  altar.

[Kjiler  ELEcTiiA,  leading  her  young  brother,  orestes.]


Fly,  O  sole  avenger  of  our  father's  death,  fly  and
escape  our  enemies'  miscreant  hands.  O'erthrown
is  our  house  to  its  foundations,  our  kingdom  fallen.

^^•^  But  who  is  yonder  stranger,  driving  his  chariot
at  speed  ?    Come  brother,  I  will  hide  thee  'neath  my

^  i.e.  backward  as  on  the  occasion  of  Thyestes'  banquet  on
his  own  sons.

75


THE   TRAGEDIES   OF   SENECA
quid,  anime  demens,  refugis  ?     externos  times  ?
domus  timenda  est.     pone  iam  trepidos  metus,
Oresta  ;  araici  fida  praesidia  intuor.


STROPHIVS

Phocide  relicta  Strophius  Elea  inclutus
pal  ma  revertor.     causa  veniendi  fuit
gratari  amicOj  cuius  impulsum  manu  920

cecidit  decenni  Marte  concussuin  Ilium,
quaenani  ista  lacrimis  lugubrem  vultum  rigat
pavetque  maesta  ?     regium  agnosco  genus.
Electra  !     Hetus  causa  quae  laeta  in  domo  est  ?

ELECTRA

Pater  peremptus  scelere  materno  iacet,
comes  patei-nae  quaeritur  natus  neci,
Aegisthus  arces  Venere  quaesitas  tenet.

STROPHIVS

O  nulla  longi  temporis  felicitas  '

ELECTRA

Per  te  parentis  memoriam  obtestor  mei,
per  sceptra  terris  nota,  per  dubios  deos  ;  930

recipe  hunc  Oresten  ac  pium  furtum  occule.


76


AGAMEMNON

robe.  Why,  foolish  heart,  dost  tlioii  shrink  away  ?
Strangers  dost  fear?  'Tis  our  liome  that  must  be
feared.  Put  away  now  thy  trembling  dread,  Orestes  ;
the  trusty  protection  of  a  friend  I  see.

[Enter  strophius  in  a  chariot,  accompanied  by  his  son

PYLADES.]
STROPHIUS

I,  Strophius,  had  Phocis  left,  and  now  am  home
returning,  made  glorious  by  the  Elean  palm.  The
cause  of  my  coming  hither  was  to  congratulate  my
friend,  o'erthrown  by  whose  hand  and  crushed  by
ten  years  of  w^ar  has  Ilium  fallen.  \He  notices
electra's  distress.^  But  who  is  that  yonder,  watering
her  sad  face  with  tears,  fear-struck  and  sorrowful  ?
One  of  the  royal  house  I  recognize.  Electra  !  What
cause  of  weeping  can  be  in  this  glad  house  ?


My  father  lies  murdered  by  my  mother's  crime  ;
they  seek  the  son  to  share  in  his  father's  death ;
Aegisthus  holds  the  throne  by  guilty  love  secured.

STROPHIUS

Alas  !  no  happiness  is  of  lengthened  stay.

ELECTRA

By  the  memory  of  my  father  I  beseech  thee,  by
his  sceptre  known  to  all  the  world,  by  the  fickle
gods  :  ^  take  this  boy,  Orestes,  and  hide  the  holy
theft.

^  Who  may  bring  quick  downfall  to  thee  also.

77


THE   TRAGEDIES  OF   SENECA

Etsi  timendum  caesus  Agamenanon  docet,
aggrediar  et  te,  Oresta,  ftirabor  libens.
fidem  secunda  poscunt,  adversa  esigunt.^
cape  hoc  decoriun  ladicri  certaminis,
insigne  frontis  ;  laeva  victricem  tenens
frondem  virenti  protegat  ramo  capat,
et  ista  donum  palma  Pisaei  lovis
velamen  eadem  praestet  atqiie  omen  tibi.
tuque  o  pateriiis  assideos  frenis  comes,  9^

condisce,.  Pvlade,  patris  eseuaplo  fidem.
vos  Graecia  nunc  teste  veloces  eqai
infida  eursu  /agite  praecipiti  lo^a.

iXECTRA

Excessit,  abiitj  cumis  effireno  impetu
effugit  aciem.  tuta  iam  opperiar  meoS
hostes  et  ultro  vulneri  opponam  caput.

Adest  craenta  coniugis  victrix  sui
et  signa  caedis  veste  maculata  gerit.
manus  recenti  sanguine  etianmunc  madent
vTiltusque  prae  se  scelera  tmicolenti  ferunt.  950

concedam  ad  aras.     patere  me  vittis  tuis,
Cassandra,  iangi  paria  metuentem  tibi.

CL\TAE5PIESTHA

Hostis  parentiSj  irapium  atque  aodax  caput,
quo  more  coetias  pablicos  virgo  petis  r

*  Zeo  deletes  £&*s  ?«»«,  /o/Joidii^  Puiper.

'  Of  alira.        '  Of  pakn.        *  In  the  Oljnpie  gamfa..
7S


AGAMEMNON

STROPHIUS

Although  murdered  Agamemnon  warns  me  to
beware,  I  will  brave  the  danger  and  gladly,  Orestes,
will  I  steal  thee  off.  Good  fortune  asks  for  faith,
adversity  demands  it.  yFakes  orestes  into  the  ckaiiol.^
Take  thou  this  crown,^  won  in  the  games,  as  an  orna-
ment for  thv  head,  and.  holding  this  victor's  bough  -
in  thy  left  hand,  shield  thv  face  v/ith  its  great  branch,
and  may  that  palm,  the  gift  of  Pisaean  Jove,  afford
thee  at  once  a  covering  and  an  omen.  And  do
thou,  Pylades,  who  standest  as  comrade  to  guide  thy
father's  car,  learn  faith  from  the  exam{)le  of  thy  sire.
And  now,  do  you,  my  horses,  whose  speed  all  Greece
has  seen,^  flee  from  this  treacherous  place  in  head-
long flight.  [Exeunt  at  great  speed.

ELECTRA  ]Jooking  after  them]

He  has  departed,  gone,  his  car  at  a  reckless  pace
has  vanished  from  my  sight.  Now  free  from  care
shall  I  await  my  foes,  and  willingly  oppose  myself  to
death.      [She  sees  clytemnestka  approaching.^

^^"^  Here  is  the  bloody  conqueror  of  her  lord,  with
the  signs  of  murder  on  her  blood-stained  robe.  Her
hands  are  still  reeking  with  blood  fresh-spilled,  and
her  savage  features  bear  tokens  of  her  crime.  I'll
take  me  to  the  altar.  Let  me  be  joined,  Cassandra,
with  thy  fillets,^  since  I  fear  like  doom  with  thee.
[Enter  clytemnestka.]

CLYTEMNESTRA

Foe  of  thy  mother,  unfilial  and  froward  girl,
by  what  custom  dost  thou,  a  maid,  seek  public
gatherings .''

*  i.e.  let  me  join  her  who  with  the  sacred  fillets  on  her
head  has  taken  refuge  at  the  altar.

79


TrIE   TRAGEDIES   OF   SENECA

ELECTUA

Adulterorum  virgo  deserui  domum.

CLYTAEMNESTRA

Quis  esse  credat  virginem  ?

ELECTRA

Natam  tuam  ?

CLYTAEMNESTRA

Modestius  cum  matre !

ELECTRA

Pietatem  doces  ?

CLYTAEMNESTRA

Animos  viriles  corde  tumefacto  geris
sed  agere  domita  feminam  disces  malo.

ELECTRA

Nisi  forte  fall  or,  feminas  ferrum  decet.  960

CLYTAEMNESTRA

Et  esse  deniens  te  parem  nobis  putas  ?

ELECTRA

Vobis  ?     quis  iste  est  alter  Agamemnon  tuns  ?
ut  vidua  loquere  ;  vir  caret  vita  tuus.

CLYTAEMNESTRA

Indomita  posthac  virginis  verba  impiae
rcgina  frangam  ;  citius  interea  mihi
edissere  ubi  sit  natus^  ubi  frater  tuus.


80


AGAMEMNON

ELECTRA

Because  1  am  a  maid  have  I  left  the  adulterers'
home.

CLYTEMNESTRA

Who  would  believe  thee  maid  ?

ELECTRA

A  child  of  thine  ?  ^

CLYTEMNESTRA

More  gently  with  thy  mother  !

ELECTRA

Dost  thou  teach  piety  ?

CLYTEMNESTRA

Thou  hast  a  mannish  soul,  a  heart  puffed  up ;  but,
tamed  by  suffering,  shalt  thou  learn  to  play  a
woman's  part.

ELECTRA

If  perchance,  I  mistake  not,  a  sword  befits  a
woman.

CLYTEMNESTRA

And  thinkest  thou,  mad  one,  thou  art  a  match
for  us  ?

ELECTRA

For  you  ?  What  other  Agamemnon  is  that  of
thine  ?     Speak  thou  as  widow  ;  lifeless  is  thy  lord.

CLYTEMNESTRA

The  unbridled  tongue  of  an  unfilial  girl  hereafter
as  queen  Til  check  ;  meanwhile  be  quick  and  tell
where  is  my  son,  where  is  thy  brother.

^  i.e.  surely  no  one,  since  I  am  thy  cliild.

81

VOL.   II.  O


THE   TRAGEDIES   OF   SENECA

ELECTRA


Extra  Mycenas.


CLYTAEMNESTRA

Redde  nunc  natura  mihi.


ELECTRA

Et  tu  parentem  redde.


CLYTAEMNESTRA

Quo  latitat  loco  ?


Tuto  quietus,  regna  non  metuens  nova  ;
iustae  parenti  satis.

CLYTAEMNESTRA

At  iratae  parum.  970

morieris  hodie.

ELECTRA

Dumniodo  hac  moriar  manu.
reccdo  ab  aris.      sive  te  iugulo  iuvat
inersisse  ferrum,  praebeo  iugulum  tibi ;
seu  more  pecudum  colla  resecari  j)lacet,
intenta  cervix  vulnus  expectat  tuum.
scelus  paratum  est;  caede  rcspersam  viri
atque  obsoletam  sanguine  hoc  dextrani  abluc.


CLYTAEMNESTRA

Censors  pericli  pariter  ac  regui  mei,
Acgisthe,  gradere.     nata  genetricem  impie
probris  lacessit,  occulit  fratrem  abditum.  980

82


AGAMEMNON

ELECTRA

Far  from  Mycenae.

CLYTEMNESTRA

Restore  nie  now  my  son.

ELECTRA

And  do  thou  restore  my  father.

CLYTEMNESTRA

Where  does  lie  hide  ?


In  peace  and  safety,  where  he  fears  no  new-made
king;  for  a  righteous  mother  'tis  enough.

CLYTEMNESTRA

But  too  Httle  for  an  angry  one.  Thou  slialt  die
this  day.

ELECTRA

So  but  it  be  by  this  hand  of  thine.  I  leave  the
altar.  If  'tis  thy  pleasure  in  my  throat  to  plunge
the  sword,  I  offer  my  throat  to  thee ;  or  if,  as  men
smite  sheep,  thou  wouldst  cut  off  my  neck,  my  bent
neck  waits  thy  stroke.  The  crime  is  ready  ;  thy
right  hand,  smeared  and  rank  with  a  husband's
slaughter,  purge  with  this  blood  of  mine.

\_Enler  aegistiius.]

CLYTEMNESTRA

Thou  partner  equally  in  my  perils  and  my  throne,
Aegisthus,  come.  My  child  undutifully  insults  her
mother,  and  keeps  her  brother  hidden.

83
G  2


THE   TRAGEDIES   OF   SENECA

^  AEGISTHVS

Fuvibunda  virgo^  vocis  infandae  sonum
et  aure  verba  indigna  materna  opprime.

ELECTRA

Etiani  monebit  sceleris  infandi  artifex,
per  scelera  natiis,  nomen  ambiguum  siiis,
idem  sororis  natus  et  patris  nejjos  ?

CLYTAEMNESTRA

Aegisthe,  cessas  impium  ferro  caput
demetere  ?     fratrem  reddat  aut  animam  statim.

AEGISTHVS

Abstrusa  caeco  careere  et  saxo  exigat
aevum,  et  per  omnes  torta  poenarum  modos
referre  quern  nunc  occulit  forsan  volet.  990

inops  egens  inclusa,  paedore  obruta,
vidua  ante  thalamos^  exul^  invisa  omnibus
aethere  negato  sero  subcumbet  malis.

ELECTRA

Concede  mortem.

AEGISTHVS

Si  recusai-es,  darem.
rudis  est  tyrannus  morte  qui  poenam  exigit.

ELECTRA

Mortem  aliquid  ultra  est  ?
84


AGAMEMNON

AEGISTHUS

Mad  gill,  hold  thy  impious  tongue,  and  speak  not
words  unworthy  thy  mother's  ears.


Shall  he  e'en  give  instructions,  the  worker  of  an
impious  crime,  one  criminall}-  begot,  wliom  even  his
own  parents  cannot  name,  son  of  his  sister,  grandson
of  his  sire  ?

CLYTEMNESTRA

Acgisthus,  why  dost  hesitate  to  strike  off  her
wicked  head  with  the  sword  ?  Let  her  at  once  give
up  her  brother  or  her  life.

AEGISTHUS

Mured  in  a  dark,  rocky  dungeon  shall  she  spend
her  life  and,  by  all  kinds  of  tortures  racked,  perchance
she  will  consent  to  give  back  him  she  now  conceals.
Resourceless,  starving,  in  prison  pent,  buried  in  filth,
widowed  ere  wedded,  in  exile,  scorned  by  all,  denied
the  light  of  day,  then  will  she,  though  too  late,  yield
to  her  doom.

ELECTRA

Oh,  grant  me  death.

AEGISTHUS

Shouldst  plead  against,  I'd  grant.  An  unskilled
tyrant  he  who  punishes  by  death.

ELECTRA

Is  aught  worse  than  death .''

85


THE   TRAGEDIES   OF  SP:NECA

AEGISTHVS

Vita^  si  cupias  mod.
abripite,  famuli,  monstviim  et  avectam  procul
ultra  Mycenas  ultimo  in  regni  angulo
vincite  saeptam  nocte  tenebrosi  specus,
ut  inquietam  virginem  career  domet.  1000

CLVTAEMNESTRA

At  ista  poenas  capite  persolvet  suo
captiva  coniunx,  regii  paelex  tori,
trahite,  ut-sequatur  coniugem  ereptum  niihi.

CASSANDRA

Ne  trahite,  vestros  ipsa  praecedam  gradus.
perferre  prima  nuntium  Phrygibus  meis
propero — repletum  ratibus  eversis  mare,
captas  Mycenas,  mille  ductorem  ducum,
ut  paria  fata  Troicis  lueret  malis,
perisse  dono  feminae — stupro,  dolo.
nihil  moramur,  rapite,  quin  grates  ago.  lOlU

iam,  iam  iuvat  vixisse  post  Troiam,  iuvat.

CLYTAEMNESTRA

Furiosa,  morere.

CASSANDRA

Veniet  et  vobis  furor.


86


AGAMEMNON


A  EG  I  ST  H  us


Yes,  life,  if  thou  longest  to  die.  Away,  ye  slaves,
with  this  unnatural  girl ;  far  from  Mycenae  bear  her,
and  in  the  remotest  corner  of  the  realm  cliain  her
immured  in  tlie  black  darkness  of  a  cell,  that  prison
walls  may  curb  the  unmanageable  maid,  [electra
is  dragged  awai/.^

CLYTEMNESTRA  [indicating  cassandka]

But  she  shall  pay  her  penalty  with  death,  that
captive  bride,  that  mistress  of  the  royal  bed.  Drag
her  away,  that  she  may  follow  the  husband  whom  she
stole  from  me.

CASSANDRA

Nay,  drag  me  not,  I  will  precede  your  going.  I
hasten  to  be  first  to  bear  news  unto  mv  Phrygians —
of  the  sea  covered  with  the  wrecks  of  ships,  of
Mycenae  taken,  of  the  leader  of  a  thousand  leaders
(that  so  he  might  meet  doom  equal  to  Troy's  woes)
slain  by  a  woman's  gift — by  adultery,  by  guile.  Take
me  away ;  I  hold  not  back,  but  rather  give  you
thanks.  Now,  now  'tis  sweet  to  have  outlived  Troy,
'tis  sweet.

CLVTEMNESTRA

Mad  creature,  thou  shalt  die.

CASSANDRA

On  you,  as  well,  a  madness  is  to  come.'

^  Referring  to  the  madness  of  Orestes,  wlio  is  later  to  slay
both  Aegisthus  and  Clyteninestra.


87


THYESTES


DRAMATIS   PERSONAE


Thyestes,  brother  of  Atreus,  in  exile  from  his  fatherland.

The  Ghost  of  Tantalus,  doomed  for  his  sina  to  come  hack  to
earth  and  inspire  his  house  to  greater  sin.

The  Fdry,  who  drives  the  ghost  on  to  do  his  allotted  part,

Atreus,    ling    of  Argos,   grandson   of    Tantalus,   who  has
quarrelled  with  his  brother  and  driven  him  into  exile.

An  Attendant  of  Atreus.

Three  Sons  of  Thyestes,  Tantalus,  PUdhtnes,  and  another,
only  one  of  whom,  Tantalus,  tabs  part  in  the  dialogue.

A  Messenger.

Chorus,  Citizens  of  ifyrenae.

The  Scene  is  laid  partly  without  the  city  of  Ai-gos,  and
partly  within  the  royal  palace.


ARGUMENT

Pei-ops,  llie  son  of  Tantalus,  had  hanished  his  sons  for
the  murder  of  their  half-brother,  Chrysippns,  with  a
curse  upon  them,  that  they  and  their  posterity  might
perish  by  each  others'  hands.  Upon  the  death  of  Pelops,
Atreus  returned  and  took  possession  of  his  father's
throne.  Thi/estes,  also,  claimed  the  throne,  and  sought  to
gain  it  by  the  foulest  means.  For  he  seduced  his
brother  s  wife,  Aerope,  and  stole  by  her  assistance  the
magical,  gold-fleeced  ram  from  Atreus"  jlocks,  upon  the
possession  of  ivhich  the  light  to  rule  was  said  to  rest.
For  this  act  he  was  banished  by  the  king.

But  Atreus  has  long  been  meditating  a  more  complete
revenge  upon  his  brother  ;  and  now  in  pretended  friend-
ship has  recalled  him  from  banishment,  offering  him  a
place  beside  himself  itpon  the  throne,  that  thus  he  may
have  Tliyestes  entirely  in  his  j}0wer.


THYESTES

TANTALI     VMBRA

Quis  inferorum  sede  ab  infausta  extrahit
avido  fugaces  ore  captantem  cibos,
quis  male  deoruni  Tantalo  vivas  ^  domos
ostendit  iteruni  ?     peius  inventum  est  siti
arente  in  iindis  aliquid  et  peius  fame
hiante  semper  ?     Sisyphi  numquid  lapis
gestandus  umeris  lubricus  nostris  venit
aut  membra  celeri  difFerens  cursu  rota,
aut  poena  Tityi  qui  specu  vasto  patens
visceribus  atras  pascit  efFossis  aves  10

et  noete  reparans  quidquid  amisit  die
plenum  recenti  pabulum  monstro  iacet  ?
in  quod  malum  transcriber  ?     o  quisquis  nova
supplicia  functis  durus  umbrarum  arbiter
disponis,  addi  si  quid  ad  poenas  potest
quod  ipse  custos  cai'ceris  diri  horreat,
quod  maestus  Acheron  paveat,  ad  cuius  metum
nos  quoque  trcmamus,  quaere,     iam  nostra  subit
e  stirpe  turba  quae  suum  vincat  genus
ac  me  innocentem  faciat  et  inausa  audeat.  20

regione  quidquid  impia  cessat  loci
complebo  ;   numquam  stante  Pelopea  domo
Minos  vacabit.

^  So  A  :  Leo  visas,  with  E :  invisas  N.  Ileinsius.
92


THYESTES


THE    GHOST    OF   TANTALUS

Who  from  the  accursed  regions  of  the  dead  haleth
ine  forth,  snat(;hing  at  food  which  ever  fleeth  from
my  hungry  lips  ?  What  god  for  his  undoing  slioweth
again  to  Tantalus  the  abodes  of  the  living  ?  Hath
somethings  worse  been  found  than  parching  thirst
midst  water,  worse  than  ever-gaping  hunger  ?  Cometh
the  slippery  stone  of  Sisyphus  to  be  borne  upon  my
shoulders  ?  or  the  v.'heel  ^  stretching  apart  my  limbs
in  its  swift  round  ?  or  Tityus'  pangs,  who,  stretched
in  a  huge  cavern,  with  torn  out  vitals  feeds  the  dusky
birds  and,  by  night  renewing  whate'er  he  lost  by  day,
lies  an  undiminished  banquet  for  new  monsters  ?
To  what  new  suffering  am  I  shifted  ?  O  whoe'er  thou
art,  harsh  judge  of  shades,  who  dost  allot  fresh  pun-
ishments to  the  dead,  if  aught  can  be  added  to  my
sufferings  whereat  e'en  the  guardian  of  our  dread
prison-house  would  quake,  whereat  sad  Acheron  would
be  seized  with  dread,  with  fear  whereof  I,  too,  should
tremble,  seek  thou  it  out.  Now  from  my  seed  a
multitude  is  coming  up  whicli  its  own  race  shall
ouF-do,  Avhich  shall  make  me  seem  innocent,  and
dare  things  yet  undared.  Whatever  space  is  still
empty  in  the  unlioly  realm,  I "  shall  fill  up ;  never,
while  Pelops'  house  is  standing,  will  Minos  ^  be  at
rest.

^  Of  Ixioa.  2  i.e.  with  my  descendants.

•*  A  judge  in  Hades.

93


THE   TRAGEDIES   OF   SENECA

FVRIA

Perge,  detestabilis
umbra,  et  penates  impios  furiis  age.
certetur  omni  scelere  et  alterna  vice
string;vtur  ensis  ;  ne  sit  irarum  modus
pudorve,  mentes  caecus  instiget  furor,
rabies  parentum  duret  et  longnm  nefas
eat  in  nepotes  ;  nee  vacet  cuiquam  vetus
odisse  crimen — semper  oriatur  novum,  80

nee  unura  in  uno,  dumque  punitur  seel  us,
crescat.      superl)is  fratribus  regna  excidant
repetantque  profugos  ;  dubia  violentae  domus
fortuna  reges  inter  incertos  labet ;
miser  ex  potente  fiat,  ex  misero  potens
fluctuque  regnum  casus  assiduo  ferat.
ob  scelera  pulsi,  cum  dabit  patriam  deus
in  scelera  redeant,  sintque  tarn  invisi  omnibus,
quam  sibi  ;  nihil  sit  ira  quod  vetitum  putet :
fratrem  expavescat  frater  et  natum  parens  40

natusque  patrem,  liberi  pereant  male,
peius  tamen  nascantur  ;  immineat  viro
infesta  coniunx,  bella  trans  pontura  vehant,
effusus  omnes  irriget  terras  cruor,
supraque  magnos  gentium  exultet  duces
Libido  victrix.     impia  stuprum  in  domo
levissimum  sit  ;  fratris  et  fas  et  fides
iusque  omne  pereat.     non  sit  a  vesti-is  malis
immune  caelum — cur  micant  stellae  polo
flammaeque  servant  debitum  mundo  decus  ?  50


^  Let  the  brothers,   Atreiis  and  Thyestes,  reign,  fall,  be
exiled  and  recalled,  each  in  turn.    In  the  present  case  Atreus

94


THYESTES

THE   FURY

Onward,  damned  shade,  and  goad  thy  sinful  house
to  madness.  Let  there  be  rivalry  in  guilt  of  every
kind  ;  let  the  sword  be  dr.nvn  on  this  side  and  on
that;  let  their  passions  know  no  bounds,  no  shame;''
let  blind  fury  prick  on  their  souls ;  heartless  be  ,
parents'  rage,  and  to  children's  children  let  the  long  /
trail  of  sin  lead  down ;  let  time  be  given  to  none  to
hate  old  sins — ever  let  new  arise,  many  in  one,  and
let  crime,  e'en  midst  its  piinishment,  increase.  From
haughty  brothers'  hands  let  kingdomsHTall,  and  in
turn  let  them  call  back  the  fugitives ;  ^  let  the  waver-
ing fortune  of  a  home  of  violence  midst  changing
kings  totter  to  its  fall  ;  from  power  to  wretchedness,
from  wretchedness  to  power — may  this  befall,  and
may  chance  with  her  ever-restless  waves  bear  the
kingdom  on.  For  crimes'  sake  exiled,  when  God
sliall  bring  them  home,  to  crime  may  they  return,
and  may  they  be  as  hateful  to  all  men  as  to  them-
selves;  let  tliere  be  naught  which  passion  deems  un-
allowed ;  let  brother  brother  fear,  father  fear  son,
and  son  father ;  let  children  vilely  perish  and  be  yet
more  vilely  born  ;  let  a  murderous  wife  lift  hand
against  her  husband,  let  wars  pass  over  sea,  let
streaming  blood  drench  every  land,  and  over  the
mighty  chiefs  of  earth  let  Lust  exult,  triumphant.
In  this  sin-stained  house  let  shameful  defilement  be
a  trivial  thing ;  let  fraternal  sanctity  and  faith  and
every  right  be  trampled  under  foot.  By  our  sins  let  ,\>'
not  heaven  be  untainted — why  do  the  stars  glitter  in
the  sky  ?  Why  do  their  fires  preserve  the  glory  due
the  world  ?     Let  the  face  of  night  be  changed,  let

is  on  the  throne,  and   Thyestes,  who   has   been    exiled,    is
recalled.

95


THE  TRAGEDIES   OF   SENECA

nox  alia  fiat,  excidat  caelo  dies,
misce  penates,  odia  caedes  funera
arcesse  et  imple  Tantalo  totam  domum.^
Ornetur  altum  columen  et  lauro  fores
laetae  virescantj  dignus  adventu  tuo
splendescat  ignis — Thracium  fiat  nefas
inaiore  numero.     dextra  cur  patrui  vacat  ?
nondum  Thyestes  liberos  deflet  suos —
et  quando  toilet  ?     ignibus  iam  subditis
spument  aena,  membra  per  partes  eant  6o

discerpta,  patrios  polluat  sanguis  focos,
epulae  instruantur — non  novi  sceleris  tibi
conviva  venies.     liberum  dedimus  diem
tuamque  ad  istas  solvimus  mensas  famem  ;
ieiunia  exple,  mixtus  in  Bacchum  cruor
spectante  te  potetur  ;  inveni  dapes
quas  ipse  fugeres — siste,  quo  praeceps  ruis  ?

TANTALI    VMBRA

Ad  stagna  et  amnes  et  recedentes  aquas
labrisque  ab  ipsis  arboris  plenae  fugas.
abire  in  atrum  carceris  liceat  mei  70

cubile,  liceat,  si  parum  videor  miser,
mutare  ripas  ;  alveo  medius  tuo,
Phlegethon,  relinquar  igneo  cinctus  freto.

Quicumque  poenas  lege  fatorum  datas
pati  iuberis,  quisquis  exeso  iaces
pavidus  sub  antro  iamque  venturi  times
montis  ruinam,  quisquis  avidorum  feros
rictus  leonum  et  dira  Furiarum  agmina

^  imple  scelere  Tantaleam  doimnn  A.

^  Procne  and  her  wronged  sister,   Philomela,   served    up
Itys  as  a  banquet  to  his  father,  Tereus,  king  of  Thrace.
■^  i.e.  with  the  murder  of  three  sons  instead  of  one.

96


THYESTES

day  foil  from  heaven.     Embroil  thy  household  gods,  '
summon   up    hatred,    slaughter,  death,  and    till    the   ^
whole  house  with  'rantalus.

^*  Adorn  the  lofty  pillar  and  with  laurel   let  the
festal  doors  be  green ;    let  torches  worthy  of  thine
approach  shine  forth — then  let  the  Thvacian  crime  ^
be  done  with  greater  number."     Why  is  the  uncle's^
liand    inactive  ?     Not  yet  does   Thyestes  bewail  his
sons — and  when  will  he  lift  his  hand  ?     Now  set  o'er
the  flames  let  cauldrons  foam ;  let  the  rent  members
one  by  one  pass  in  ;  let  the  ancestral  hearth  be  stained
with  blood,  let  the  feast  be  spread — to  no  novel  feast
of  crime  *  wilt  come  as  banqueter.     To-day  have  we  'H-y,
made  thee  free,  have  loosed  thy  hunger  to  the  banquet    ',
yonder ;  go,  feed  full  thy  fasting,  and  let  blood,  with
wine  commingled,  be   drunk  before  thine  eyes.     I    1
have  found  feast  which  thou  thyself  wouldst  flee —
but  stay!     Whither  dost  headlong  rush.'*  ^

GHOST    OF   TANTALUS

Back  to  my  pools  and  streams  and  fleeing  waters,    i
back  to  the  laden  tree  Avhich  shuns  my  very  lips.
Let  me  return  to  the  black  couch  of  my  prison-house ;
let  it  be  min^,^  if  I  seem  too  little  Avretched,  to  change
my  stream;' in  thy  bed's  midst,  O    Phlegethon,  let     '
me  be  left,  hemmed  round  with  waves  of  fire.

"^■i  W'hoe'er  thou  art,  by  the  fates'  law  bidden  to
suffer  allotted  punishment ;  whoe'er  liest  quaking
beneath  the  hollowed  rock,  and  fearcst  the  downfall
of  the  mountainous  mass  even  now  coming  on  thee  ;  '
whoe'er  shudderest  at  the  fierce  gaping  of  greedy
lions,  and,  entangled  in  their  toils,  dost  shudder  at

'  i.e.  Atreus.  *  See  Index  x.v.  Pclo])s.

^  A  common  conception  of  punishment  in  Hades.  See
Vergil,  Aen.  vi.  601.

97


THE   TRAGEDIES   OF   SENECA

implicitus  horres,  quisquis  immissas  faces

semiustus  abigis,  Tantali  vocem  excipe  80

properantis  ad  vos  :  credite  experto  mihi,

amate  poenas.     quando  continget  mihi

efFugere  supei'os?

FVRIA

Ante  perturba  domum
inferque  tecum  ])roelia  et  ferri  malum
reffibus  amorem,  concute  insano  ferum

o  '  ..,^^

pectus  tumultu.  '

*"^  TANTALI    VMBRA

Me  pati  poenas  decet,
non  esse  poenaxu.     mittor  ut  dirus  vapor
tellure  rupta  vel  gravem  populis  luem
sparsura  pestis^  ducam  in  horrendum  nefas
avus  nepotes.      magne  divorum  parens  90

nosterque,  quamvis  pudeat,  ingenti  licet
taxata  poena  lingua  crucietur  loquax,
nee  hoc  tacebo  ;  moneo,  ne  sacra  ^  manus
violate  caede  neve  furiali  malo
aspergite  aras.     stabo  et  arcebo  scelus —
Quid  ora  terres  verbere  et  tortos  ferox
minaris  angues  ?     quid  famem  infixam  intimis
r-agitas  medulHs?     llagrat  incensum  siti
j  cor  et  perustis  flanima  visceribus  micat —
j  sequor.2  100

FVRIA

Hunc,  hunc  furovem  divide  in  totam  domum  !
sic,  sic  fcrantur  et  suum  infensi  invicem
sitiant  cruorem.     sentit  introitus  tuos

1  So  A  :  Leo  sacras.  -  Leo  deletes  this  ivord.

98


THYESTES

the    dread    ranks    of    furies ;    whoe'er^   half  burned,
shunnest  their  threatening  torches,  hear  ye  the  words
of  Tantalus   now   hasting   to  you :    believe  me   who
know,  and  love  your  punishments.     Oh,  when  shall  l/<^
it  fall  to  meTo  escape  the  upper  world  ?  [

THK    FURY

First  throw  thy  house  into  confusion  dire,  bring
strife  with  thee,  bring  lust  for  the  sword,  an  evil
thing  for  rulers,  and  rouse  to  mad  passion  the  savage
breast.

GHOST    OF    TANTALUS

'Tis  meet  for  me  to  suffer  punishments,  not  be  a
))unishnient.  I  am  sent  as  some  deadly  exhalation
from  the  riven  earth,  or  as  a  pestilence,  spreading
grievous  plague  among  the  people,  that  I  a  grandsire
may  lead  my  grandsons  into  fearful  crime.  O  mighty
sire  of  gods,  my  father,  too,  however  to  thy  shame  I
say  it. though  to  cruel  punishment  my  tattling  tongue
be  doomed,  I  will  not  hold  my  peace  ;  I  warn  ye,  de-
file not  your  hands  with  accursed  slaughter,  nor  stain
your  altars  with  a  madman's  crime.  Here  will  I  stand
and  prevent  the  evil  deed.  [To  the  fury.]  Why  r
with  thy  sc-our^e  dost  fright  mine  eyes,  and  fiercely  .  uf
threaten  with  thy  wTJthing  snakes?  Why  deep  in"\
my  inmost  marrow  dost  rouse  hunger  pains  ?  M^
Hieart  is  parched  with  burning  thirst,  and  in  my
'.  scorched  vitals  the  fire  is  darting — I  follow  thee.  _


^


THE   FURY

This,  this  very  rage  of  thine  distribute  throughout
thy  house  !     So,  e'en  as  thou,  may  they  be  driven  on,
raging   to  quem-Xi^ their    thirst  each    in    the   other's    ^^^
blood.     Thy  house  feels  thy  near  approach,  and  has

99


THE   TRAGEDIES   OF   SENECA

domus  et  nefando  tota  contactu  honuit.
actum  est  abiinde  !     gradere  ad  infernos  specus
amnemque  notum  ;  iam  tuum  inaestae  pedem
terrae  gravantur.     cernis  ut  fontes  liquor
i_introrsus  actus  linquat,  ut  ripae  vacent
ventusque  raras  igneus  nubes  ferat  ?
pallescit  omnis  arbor  ac  nudus  stetit  1 10

fugiente  pomo  ramus,  et  qua  fluctibus
ilbnc  propinquis  Isthmos  atque  illinc  fremit
vicina  gracili  dividens  terra  vada,
longe  remotos  litus  exaudit  sonos.
iam  Lerna  retro  cessit  et  Phoronides
latuere  venae  nee  suas  profert  sacer
Alpheos  undas  et  Cithaeronis  iuga
stant  parte  nulla  cana  deposita  nive
timentque  veterem  nobiles  Argi  sitim.
en  ipse  Titan  dubitat  an  iubeat  sequi  120

cogatque  habenis  ire  periturum  diem.


CHORVS

Argos  de  superis  si  quis  Achaicum
Pisaeasque  domos  curribus  inclitas,
Isthmi  si  quis  amat  regna  Corintliii
^et  portus  gemiuos  et  mare  dissidens,
si  quis  Taygeti  conspicuas  nives,
quas  cum  Sarmaticus  tempore  frigido
in  sumniis  Boreas  composuit  iugis,
aestas  veliferis  solvit  Etesiis,
quem  tangit  gelido  flumine  lucidus  130

Alpheos,  studio  notus  Olympico,
advertat  placidum  numen  et  arceat,
alternae  scelerum  ne  redcant  vices
nee  succedat  avo  deterior  nepos


100


C    sT-  THYESTES

A  vt

^fCjishriink  in    utter  liorror  from  tliine  accursed   touch.

^  Enough  !  more  than  enough  !  Go  thou  to  the  infernal
caves  and  well-known  stream ;  now  is  the  grieving
earth  weary  of  thy  presence.  Seest  thou  how  the
,watcr,  di'iven  far  witliin,  deserts  the  springs,  how
/river  banks  are  empty,  how  the  fiery  wind  drives
/  away  the  scattered  clouds  ?  Every  tree  grows  pale,
and  from  the  bare  branches  the  fruit  has  fled ;  and
where  this  side  and  that  the  Isthmus  is  wont  to  roar
Avith  neighbouring  waves,  dividing  near  seas  with
narrow  neck  of  land,  the  shore  but  faintly  hears  the
far  oft'  sound.  Now  Lerna  lias  shrunk  back,  the  ■■'*^-
Phoronean  stream  ^  has  disappeared,  the  sacred  Al-
pheus  no  longer  bears  his  waters  on,  Cithaeron's
heights  have  lost  their  snows  and  nowhere  stand
hoary  now,  and  the  lordly  Argos  fears  its  ancient
drought.-  Lo  !  Titan  himself  stands  doubtful  whether
to  bid  dav  follow  on,  and,  plying  the  reins,  compel
it  to  come  forth  to  its  undoing.

CHORUS
If  any  god  loves  Achaian  Argos  and  Pisa's  homes '"/'»^-«
renowned    for    chariots ;    if    any    loves    Corinthian  ^
Isthmus'    realm,,  its    twin    harbours,'   its  dissevered
sea ;  if  any,  the  far-seen  snows  of  Mount  Taj^getus,
snows  which,  when    in    winter-time    the    Sarmatian
blasts  have  laid  them  on  the  heights,  the  summer
with  its  sail-filling    PLtesian   breezes  melts  away;  if
any  is  moved  by  the  cool,  clear  stream  of  Alpheus,
famed  for  its   Olympic   course — let   him   his   kindly
godhead    hither    turn,  let  him   forbid  the  recurrent
waves  of  crime  to   come   again,   forbid  that  on    his
grandsire  follow  a  worse  grandson,  and  greater  crime

^  i.e.  the  river  Inaclius.

'  i.e.  in  the  time  of  Phaethon.

101


THE   TRAGEDIES   OF   SENECA

et  maior  placeat  culpa  minoribus.

tandem  lassa  feros  exuat  impetus

sicci  progenies  impia  Tantali.

peccatum  satis  est ;  fas  valuit  niliil

aut  commune  nefas.     proditus  occidit

deceptor  domini  Myrtilus,  et  fide  140

vectus  qua  tulerat  nobile  reddidit

mutiito  pelagus  nomine  ;  notior

nulla  est  loniis  fabula  navibus.

exceptus  gladio  parvulus  impio

dum  currit  patrium  natus  ad  osculum,

immatura  focis  victima  concidit

divisusque  tua  est,  Tantale,  dextera,

mensas  ut  strueres  liospitibus  deis.

lies  aeterna  fames  persequitur  cibos,

hos  aeterna  sitis  ;  nee  dapibus  feris  150

decerni  potuit  poena  decentior.

Stat   lassus  vacuo  gutture  Tantalus  ;
impendet  capiti  plurima  noxio
Phineis  avibus  jiraeda  fugacior  ;
hinc  illinc  gravidis  frondibus  incubat
et  curvata  suis  fetibus  ac  tremens
alludit  patulis  arbor  hiatibus.
haec,  quamvis  avidus  nee  patiens  morae,
deceptus  totiens  tangere  neglegit
obliquatque  oculos  oraque  comprimit  l60

inclusisque  famem  dentibus  alligat.
sed  tunc  divitias  omne  nemus  suas
demittit  propius  pomaque  desuper
insultant  foliis  mitia  languidis
accenduntque  famem,  quae  iubet  irritas


^  A  retention  of  the  rhetorical  element  in  this  line  results
in  an  obscurity  impossible  to  avoid  in  English.  1'iie  meaning
is  :  Let  not  the  descendants  (77iinoribus)  do  worse  sin  than
their  ancestor.


102


THYESTES

please  lesser  men.^   Wearied  at  last,  may  the  impious
race  of  thirsty  Tantalus  give  o'er  its  lust  for  savagery.
Enough  sin  has  been   wrought ;    nothing    has   right
availed,  or  general   wrong.      Himself  betrayed,   fell
Myrtilus,  beti-ayer  of  his    lord,  and,  dragged  down
by  the  faith  which  he  had  shown,  he  made  a  sea  ^
famous  by  its  change  of  name ;  to  Ionian  ships  no
tale  is  better  known.      While  the  little  son^  ran  to  i
his  father's  kiss,  welcomed  by  sinful  sword,  he  fell,  '
an  untimely  victim  at  the  hearth,  and  by  thy  right
hand    was   carved,   O   Tan_tdus,  that  thou  mightest
spread    a  banquet  for  the   gods,  thy  guests.     Such
food    eternal    hunger,   such   eternal    thirst    pursues ;  ^     i,
nor  for  such  bestial  viands  could  have  been  met^ed
penalty  more  fit.  _''    >-'-'-     >

1^'-  Weary,  with  empty  throat,^  stands  Tantalus ;  \^  4'
above  his  guilty  head"  hmigs-  food  in  plenty,  than  i
Phineus''*  birds  more  elusive ; /mi  either  side,  with
laden  boughs,  a  tree  leans  over  him  and,  bending
and  trembling  'neath  its  weight  of  fruit,  makes  sport
with  his  wide-straining  jaws.  The  prize,  though  he
is  eager  and  impatient  of  delay,  deceived  so  oft,  he
tries  no  more  to  touch,  turns  away  his  eyes,  shuts
tight  his  lips,  and  behind  clenched  teeth  he  bars  his
Ininger.  But  then  the  whole  grove  lets  its  riches
down  nearer  still,  and  the  mellow  fruits  above  his
head  mock  him  with  drooping  boughs  and  whet
again  the  hunger,  which  bids  him  ply  his  hands  in

*  The  Myrtoan  sea,  that  portion  of  the  Aegean  south  of
Euboea.  The  name  is  here  fancifully  derived  from  Myrtilus.
For  the  whole  incident  see  Index.

*  Pelopa.         *  The  Harpies.

103


THE   TRAGEDIES   OF   SENECA

exercere  mauus.      has  ubi  protulit

et  falli  libuit,  totus  in  arduum

autumnus  rapitui*  silvaque  mobilis.

instat  deinde  sitis  non  levior  fame  ;

qua  cum  percaluit  sanguis  et  igneis  170

exarsit  facibus,  stat  miser  obvios

fluctus  ore  petens,  quos  profugus  latex

avertit  sterili  deficiens  vado

conantemque  sequi  deserit ;  hie  bibit

altum  de  rapido  gurgite  pulverem.

ATHEVS

Ignave,  iners^  enervis  et  (quod  maximum
probrum  tyranno  rebus  in  summis  reor)
inulte,  ]wst  tot  scelera,  post  fratris  dolos
i'asque  omne  ru})tum  questibus  vanis  agis
iratus  Atreus  ?     fremere  lam  totus  tuis  180

debebat  armis  orbis  et  geminum  mare
utrimque  classes  agere,  iam  flammis  agi-os
lucere  et  urbes  decuit  ac  strictum  undicjue
micare  ferrum.     tota  sub  nostro  sonet
Argolica  tellus  equite  ;  non  silvae  tegaiit
hostem  nee  altis  montium  structae  iugis
arces  ;  relictis  bellicum  totus  canat
populus  Mycenis,  quisquis  invisum  caput
tegit  ac  tuetur,  clade  funesta  occidat.
haec  ipsa  ])ollens  incliti  Peloj)is  domus  190

ruat  vel  in  me,  dunmiodo  in  tratrem  ruat.
age,  anime,  fac  quod  nulla  posteritas  probet,
sed  nulla  tace.it.     aliquod  audendum  est  nefas
atrox,  cruentum,  tale  quod  f'rater  meus
suum  esse  mallet,     scelera  non  ulcisceris,
nisi  vincis.     et  quid  esse  tarn  saevum  potest

^  Not  beoanse  he  failed,  but  because  he  ahnost  succeeded.
104


THYESTES

vain.  When  he  has  stretched  these  fovtli  and  gladly  ^  "
has  been  batHed,  tlie  whole  ripe  harvest  of  the  bending
woods  is  snatched  far  out  of  reach.  Then  comes  a
raging  tliijst,  harder  to  bear  than  hunger;  when  by
this  his  blood  has  grown  hot  and  glowed  as  with
fiery  torches,  the  poor  wretch  stands  catching  at
waves  that  seem  to  apf)roach  his  lips ;  but  these  the
elusive  water  turns  aside,  fuilijig  in  meagre  shallows,  -C
and  leaves  him  utterly,  striving  to  pursue;  then  deep
from  the  whirling  stream  he  drinks — but  dust.  ^,+1

n<^fl.  ATUEUs  [/«  soli/oqiii/]

O  undaring,  unskilled,  unnerved,  and  (what  in
high  matters  I  deem  a  king's  worst  reproach)  yet
unavenged,  after  so  many  crimes,  after  a  brother's
treacheries,  and  all  right  broken  dov.n,  in  idle  com-
j)laints  dost  busy  thyself — a  mere_  wr.yLthful  Atreus  ?
By  now  sliould  the  whole  world  be  resounding  with
thy  arms,  on  either  side  thy  fleets  be  harrying  both
seas ;  by  now  should  fields  and  cities  be  aglow  with
flames  and  the  drawn  sword  be  gleaming  evervwhere.
Let  the  whole  land  of  Argolis  resound  with  our
horses'  tre;id  ;  let  no  forests  shelter  my  enemy,  nor
citadels,  built  on  I;ig!i  mountain  tops  ;  let  the  whole
nation  leave  Mycenae  and  sound  the  trump  of  war ;
and  whoso  hides  and  protects  that  hateful  head,  let
1  him  die  a  grievous  death.  This  mighty  palace  itself,  ^^'x*-
j  illustrious  Pelops'  house,  may  it  e'en  fall  on  me,  if
Ijonly  on  my  brother,  too,  it;,  fall.  Up!  my  soul,  do
jwlat  no  coming  age  shall  approve,  but  none  forget.
I  must  dare  some  crime,  atrocious,  bloodv,  such  as
mv  brother  would  more  wish  were  In's.  Crimes  thou
dost  not  avenge,  save  as  thou  dost  surpass  them.
And  what  crime  can  be  so  dire  as  to  overtop  his  sin  ?

105


THE   TRAGEDIES    OF   SENECA

quod  siiperet  ilium  ?     numquid  abiectus  iacet  ?

uumquid  secundis  patitur  in  rebus  modum,

fessis  quietem  ?     novi  ego  ingenium  viri

indocile  ;  flecti  non  potest — frangi  potest.  200

proinde  antequam  se  firmat  aut  vires  parat,

petatur  ultro,  ne  quiescentem  petat.

aut  perdet  aut  peribit ;  in  medio  est  scelus

positum  occiipanti.


adversa  terret  ?


SATELLES

Fama  te  populi  nihil


Maximum  hoc  regni  bonum  est,
(juod  facta  domini  cogitur  populus  sui
tarn  ferre  quam  laudare.


Quos  cogit  metus
laudare,  eosdem  reddit  inimicos  metus.
at  qui  favoris  gloriam  veri  petit,
animo  magis  quam  voce  laudari  volet.  210

ATREVS

Laus  vera  et  humili  saepe  contingit  viro,
non  nisi  potenti  falsa,      quod  nolunt  velint.

SATEI.LES

Rex  velit  honesta :  nemo  non  eadem  volet.

ATHEVS

Vbicumque  tantum  honesta  dominanti  licent,
precario  regnatur.
106


THYESTES

Does  he  lie  downcast  ?  Does  he  in  prosperity  endure
control,  rest  in  (Kfeat  ?  I  know  the  untamable  spirit
of  the  man  ;  bent  it  cannot  be — but  it  can  be  broken.
Therefore,  ere  he  strengthen  himself  or  marshal  his
powers,  we  must  begin  the  attack,  lest,  while  we
wait,  the  attack  be  made  on  us.  Slay  or  be  slain  will
he  ;  between  us  lies  the  crime  for  him  who  first  q
shall  do  it.  ^n  ;    ^   :  ^c^^


ATTENDANT

Does  public  disapproval  deter  thee  not?


ATREUS


The  greatest  advantage  this  of  royal  power,  that
their  master's  deeds  the  people  are  compelled  as
well  to  bear  as  praised"


ATTENDANT


Whom  fear  compels  to  praise,  them,  too,  fear  makes
into  foes  ;  but  he  who  seeks  the  glory  of  true  favour,
will  wish  hrart  ratlier  than  voice  to  sing  his  praise.


True  praise  even  to  the  lowly  often  comes ;  fajse,
only  to  the  strong.  What  men  choose  not,  let  them
choose.

ATTENDANT

Let  a  king  choose  the  right ;  then  none  will  not
choose  the  same.


Where  only  right  to  a  monarch  is  allowed,  sove-
reignty is  lield  on  sufferance.

°    ^  107


THE   TRAGEDIES    OF   SENECA

SATELLES

Vbi  non  est  pudor
nee  cura  iuris  sanctitas  pietas  fides,
instabile  regnum  est.

AT REVS

Sanctitas  pietas  fides
privata  bona  sunt ;  qua  iuvat  reges  eant.

SATELLES

Nefas  nocere  vel  malo  fratri  puta.

ATllEVS

Fas  est  in  illo  quidquid  in  fratre  est  nefas.  220

quid  enim  reliquit  ci-iniine  ijitactum  aut  ubi
sceleri  pepevcit?     coniugem  stupro  abstulit
regnunique  furto  ;  specimen  antiquum  imperi
fraude  est  adeptus,  IVaude  turbavit  domum.
est  Peloiiis  altis  nobile  in  stabulis  pecus,
arcanus  aries,  ductor  opulenti  gregis.
huius  per  omne  corpus  eff'uso  coma
dependet  auro,  cuius  e  tergo  ^  novi  ^

aurata  reges  sceptra  Tantalici  gerunt ;
possessor  huius  regnat,  hunc  tantae  domus  230

fortuna  sequitur.     tuta  sejjosita  sacer
in  parte  carpit  prata,  quae  claudit  lapis
fatale  saxeo  pascuum  nun-o  tegens.
hunc  facinus  ingens  ausus  assumj)ta  in  scelus
consorte  nostri  perfidus  tlialami  avehit.
hinc  omne  cladis  mutuae  fiuxit  malum  ;
per  regna  trepidus  exul  erravi  mea,

^  Lto  coiijtcture.s  tracto  :    Wihimowitz,  texto.

^  A  ram  wiLli  golden  fleece,  whose  possession,  according  to
an  oracle,  guaranteed  possession  of  the  throne.     See  Index
s.v.  Thyestes.
108


V


/>)    (f  THYESTES

^         \  ATTENDANT

^     Where  is  no  shame,  no  care  for  right,  no  honour,
virtue,  t'ailli,  sovereignty  is  insecure.

ATREUS

Honour,  virtue,  faith    ai'e    the  goods  of  common
len  ;  let  kings  go  where  they  please.

ATTENDANT

O  count  it  wrong  to  harm  even  a  wicked  brother.

ATREUS  C^^•^^,(S

Whate'er  is  wrong  to  do  unto  a  brother  is  right  to  r-f?*^
do   to  him.      For    what    iias    he  left    untouched    by  >
crime,  or  where  has  he  failed  to  sin.''     My  wife  has
he    debauched,    my    kingdom    stolen  ;    the    ancient
token  ^  of  our  dynasty  by  fraud  he  gaine(I7T)y  fraud
o'erturned  our  house.     There  is  within  Pelops'  lofty
folds  a  lordly  flock,  and   a  wondrous  ram,  the  rich
Hock's   leader.     O'er   all   his  body  a   fleece  of  spun
gold  hangs,  and    from    his   back  •^   the  new-crowned
kings  of  the  house  of  Tantalus  have  their  sceptres
wreatlied  with  gold.    His  owner  rules;. him  does  the
iortune  of  the  whole  house  follow.     Hallowed  and
apart  he  grazes  in  safe  meadows  fenced  with  stone,
that  guards  the  fated  pasture  witli  its  rocky  wall.   Him
did  tiie   perfidious  one,-'  daring  a  monstrous  crime,     ,
steal  away,  witli  the  partner  of  my  bed  iiclping  the
sinful  deed.  \  From  this  source  has  flowed  the  whole
evil  stream  of  mutual  destruction  ;    throughout  my  ^i"^"^'
kingdom  have   I  wandered,  a  trembling  e.\ile ;   no  ^ttM'

2  i.e..  frf)m  the  golden  fleece  upon  ib.
*  Thj'estes.

109


THE   TRAGEDIES   OF   SENECA

pars  nulla  generis  tuta  ab  insidiis  vacat,
corrupta  coniunx,  imperi  quassa  est  fides,
domus  aegra,  dubius  sanguis  est — certi  nihil  240

nisi  frater  hostis.      quid  stupes  ?     tandem  incipe
animosque  sunie  ;  Tantalum  et  Pelopem — aspice  ;
ad  haec  manus  exempla  poscuntur  meae.
Profare,  dirum  qua  caput  mactem  via.


SATELLES

FeiTO  peremptus  spiritum  inimicum  expuat.

AT REVS

De  fine  poenae  loqueris  ;  ego  poenam  volo.
perimat  tyrannus  lenis  ;  in  regno  meo
mors  inijietratur.

SATELLES

Nulla  te  pietas  movet  ?

AT REVS

Excede,  Pietas,  si  niodo  in  nostra  dome
umquam  fuisti.      dira  Furiarum  cohors  250

discorsque  Erinys  veniat  et  geminas  faces
Megaera  quatiens  ;  non  satis  magno  meum
ardet  furore  pectus  ;  impleri  iuvat
maiore  monstro.

SATELLES

Quid  novi  rabidus  struis  ?


Nil  quod  doloris  capiat  assueti  modus  ;
nullum  relinquam  facinus  et  nullum  est  satis.

^  i.e.  by  which  tlie  two  brothers  were  to  reign  alternately.
110


THYESTES

part  ot  1113-  family  is  safe  and  free  from  snares ;  my
wife  seduced,  our  pledge^  of  empire  broken,  my
house  impaired,  my  offspring  dubious — no  one  thing
certain  save  my  brother's  enmityT^  Why  standest  in-
active ?  At  last  begin,  put  on  tliy  courage  ;  Tantalus
and  Pelops — look  on  them  ;  to  work  like  theirs  my
hands  are  sunmioned.

-^^  Tell  thou,  by  what  means  1  may  bring  ruin  on
his  wicked  head.

ATTENDANT

Slain  by  the  sword,  let  him  spew  forth  his  hateful
soul.

ATREUS

Thou  speakest  of  j)unishment's  completion;  I
punishment  itself  desire.  Let  the  mild  tyrant  slay  ;
injiiy^  dominion  death  is  a  boon  to  pray  for.  — -

ATTENDANT

Does  piety  move  thee  not?

ATREUS

Be  gone,  O  Piety,  if  ever  in  our  house  thou  hadst
a  place.  Let  the  dread  band  of  Furies  come,  the
fiend  Discord,  and  Megaera,  brandishing  her  torches
twain  ;^not  great  enough  the  frenzy  with  which  my
bosom  burns ;  with  some  greater  horror  would  I  be
filled.  \,

ATTENDANT

What  strange  design  does  thy  mad  soul  intend  ?


'     Naught  that  the  measure  of  accustomed  rage  can
hold  ;  no  crime  will  I  leave  undone,  and  no  crinie  is     -V
eiioughn^

111


H^


.->>


THE   TRAGEDIES    OF   SENECA

SATELLES

Ferrum  ?

AT REVS

Paiuai  est.

SATELLES

Quid  ignis  ?

ATREVS

Etiamnunc  parum  est.

SATELLES

Quonam  ergo  telo  tantus  utetur  dolor  ?

ATREVS

Ipso  Thyeste,

SATELLES

Mains  hoc  ira  est  malum.

ATREVS

'      Fateor.     tumultus  pectora  attonitus  quatit         260
penitusque  volvit ;  rapior  et  quo  nescio^
sed  rapior.     imo  mugit  e  fundo  solum,
tonat  dies  serenus  ac  totis  domus
ut  fracta  tectis  crepuit  et  moti  laves
vertere  vultum — fiat  hoc^  fiat  nefas
quod  J  dij  timetis.

SATELLES

Facere  quid  tandem  paras  ?

ATREVS

Nescio  quid  animo  maius  et  solito  amplius
supraque  fines  moris  humani  tumct
instatque  pigris  nianibus — baud  quid  sit  scio,
112


THYESTES

ATTENDANT

The  sword  ?

ATI'.KUS

'Tis  not  enough.
Fire;,  then  ?
Still  not  enough.

ATTENDANT

What  weapo^i,  pray,  will  thy  great  anguish  use  ?


ATTENDANT


ATREU3


Thyestes'  self.

\  y  „.  •  ^

Tirtg  plague  is  worse  than  ps


ATTENDANT

ission.


ATREUS

I  do  confess  it.  A  frantic  tumult  shakes  and
heaves  deep  my  heart.  I  am  hurried  I  know
not  whitlier,    but    I    am    hurried    on.  \  The    ground  _

rumbles  from  its  lowest  depths,  the  clear  sky  thun-  '^'^  '  ^
ders,  the  whole  house  crashes  as  though  'twere  rent
asunder,  and  the  trembling    Lares   turn  away  their
faces — let  it  be  done,  let  a  deed  of  guilt  be  done
whereat,  O  gods,  ye  are  affrighted.

ATTENDANT

What,  pray,  would st  do  ?

ATREUS

Some  greater  thing,  larger  than  the  common  and
beyond  the  bounds  of  human  use  is  swelling  in  my
soul,  and  it  urges  on  my  sluggish  hands — I  know  not

113    '

VOL.    II.  I


THE   TRAGEDIES    OF   SENECA

sed    grande    quiddain    est.       ita    sit.       hoc,    anime.
occupa.  270

dignum  est  Thyeste  facinus  et  digmim  Atreo ;
uterque  faciat.     vidit  infandas  domiis
Odrysia  mensas — fateor,  inunane  est  scelus,
sed  occupatum  ;  maius  hoc  aliquid  dolor
inveniat.     animuni  Daulis  inspira  parens
sororque  ;  causa  est  similis  ;  assiste  et  manum
impelle  nostram.    Uiberos  avidus  pater
gaudensque  laceret  et  suos  artus  edat.
bene  est,  abunde  est.     hie  placet  poenae  mod  us.  ^

Tantisper^  ubinam  est?    tamdiu  cur  innocens    280
versatur  Atreus  ?     tota  iam  ante  oculos  meos
imago  caedis  errat,  ingesta  orbitas
in  ora  patris — anime,  quid  rursus  times
et  ante  rem  subsidis  ?     audendum  est,  age  !
quod  est  in  isto  scelere  praecipuum  nefas,
hoc  ipse  faciet.

SATELLES

Sed  quibus  captus  dolis
nostros  dabit  perductus  in  laqueos  pedem  }
inimica  credit  cuncta.

ATREVS

Non  poterat  capi,
nisi  capere  vellet.     I'egna  nunc  sperat  niea ;
hac  spe  minanti  fulmen  occurret  lovi,  2.Q0

hac  spe  subibit  gurgitis  tumidi  minas
dubiumque  Libycae  Syrtis  intrabit  fretum,
hac  spe,  quod  esse  maximum  retur  malum,
fratrem  videbit.

^  All  editors pimctucUe  modus  |  tantisper.     ubinam  est?
114


THYESTES

what  it  is,  but  'tis  some  mighty  thing.      So  let  it  be.
Haste,  thou,  my  soul,  and  do  it.     'TL?  a  deed  worthy  r"'
of  Thyestes,  and  of  Atreus  worthy  ;/let  each  perform
it.     The  Odrysian^  house  once  saw  a  feast  unspeak-
able— 'tis   a  monstrous   crime,    I    grant,   but    it    has
been   done    before ;    let   my  smart   find   something
worse   than    this.       Inspire   my   soul,    O    Daulian-^
mothei-,  aye  and  sister,^  too  ;  my  case  is  like  to  yours  ;
help  me  and  urge  on  my  hand.    (Let  the  father  with  g
joyous  greed  rend  his  sons,  and  his  own  flesh  devour.   I
'lis  well,  more  than  enough.     This  way  of  p^nish::Jl
ment  is  pleasingly'

""^^^leanwhilc,  where  is  he  .^  VVhy  does  Atreus  so
long  live  harmless?  Already  before  mine  eyes  flits
the  whole  picture  of  the  slaughter ;  his  lost  children
heaped  up  before  their  father's  face — O  soul,  why
dost  shrink  back  in  fear  and  halt  before  the  deed  ?
Come  !  thou  must  dare  it !  What  is  the  crowning
outrage  in  this  crime  he  himself  shall  do.

ATTENDANT

But  with  what  wiles  caught  will  he  be  led  to  set
foot  within  our  snares .-'     He  counts  us  all  enemies.


He  could  not  be  caught  were  he  not  bent  on
catching.  Even  now  he  hopes  to ^ain  my  kingdom;
in  this  hope  he  will  face  Jove  as  he  brandishes  his
thunder-bolt,  in  this  hope  will  brave  the  whirlpool's
rage  and  enter  the  treacherous  Avaters  of  the  Libyan
sands ;  in  this  hope  (what  he  deems  the  greatest
curse  of  alT)>  he  will  see  his  brother.

\  i.e.  Thracian.     See  Index.         '  Procne.         '  Philomela.
\^  115

I    2


THE   TRAGEDIES   OF   SENECA


Quis  fidem  pacis  dabit  ?
cui  tanta  credet  ?


Credula  est  spes  irnproba.
natis  tamen  mandata  quae  patriio  ferant
dabimus  :  relictis  exul  hospitiis  vagus
regno  ut  niiserias  mutet  atcjue  Argos  regat
ex  parte  dominus.     si  nimis  durus  preces
spernet  Thyestes,  liberos  eius  rudes ''  300

malisque  fessos  gravibijs  et  faciles  capi
prece  commovebunt.  /hiuc  vetus  regni  furor,
illiiic  egestas  tristis  ac  durus  labor
quamvis  rigentem  tot  mulis  subigeiit  viruni.

SATEI.LF.S

lam  tempus  illi  fecit  aeruninas  leves.

ATREVS

Erras  ;  malorum  sensus  accrescit  die.
leva  est  miserias  ferre,  perferre  est  grave.

SATEl.LES

Alios  ministros  coiisili  tristis  lege.

ATIIEVS

Peiora  iuvenes  facile  praecepta  audinnt.

SATEI.I.ES

In  patre  facient  quidquid  in  patriio  doces ;  .310

saepe  in  magistrum  scelera  redierunt  sua.

'  i.e.  other  tliaii  Atreus'  own  sons.

116


THYESTES

ATTENDANT

Wlio  will  give  him  confidence  in  peace  ?  Whose
word  will  lie  so  greatly  trust  ?

ATREUS

Base  hope  is  credulous.  Still  to  my  sons  will  I
give  a  message  to  carry  to  their  uncle  :  let  the  exiled
wanderer  quit  strangers'  homes,  for  a  throne  exchange
his  wretched  state  and  rule  at  Argos,  a  partner  of
my  sway.  If  too  stubbornly  Thyestes  spurns  my
prayer,  his  sons,  guileless  and  spent  with  hard  mis-
fortunes and  easy  to  be  entreated,  will  be  moved.
On  this  side,  his  old  niacl  thjrst  for,  p.ower,  on  that,
grim  want  and  unfeeling  toil  by  their  many  w'oes  v^ill
force  the  man,  however  stiff,  to  yield.

ATTENDANT

By  now  time  has  made  his  troubles  light.

ATREUS

Not  so ;  a  sense  of  wrongs  increases  day  by  day.
'Tis  easy  to  bear  misfortune  ;  to_kee£  qn_bearingjt_a
heayy^  task.

.\TTENDANT

Choose  other  ^  agents  of  thy  grim  design.

ATREUS

To  the  worse  schooling  youth  lends  ready  ear.

ATTENDANT

Toward  their  father  they  will  act  as  toward  their
uncle  thou  instructest  them  ;  often  upon  the  teacher
have  his  bad  teachings  turned.

117


THE   TRAGEDIES   OF   SENECA


Vt  nemo  doceat  fraudis  et  sceleris  vias,
regnum  docebit.     ne  mali  Hant  times  ?
nascuntur.     istud  quod  vocas  saevum  asperum
agique  dure  credis  et  nimium  impie^
fortasse  et  illie  agitur.

SATELLES

Hane  fraudem  seient
nati  parari  ?

ATREVS

Tacita  tam  rudibus  fides
noa  est  in  annis  ;  detegent  forsan  dolos  ;
tacere  multis  discitur  vitae  malis.

SATELLES

Ipsosque  per  quos  fallere  alium  cogitas  320

falles  ?

ATKEVS

Vt  ipsi  crimine  et  culpa  vacent.
quid  enim  necesse  est  liberos  sceleri  meos
inserere  ?     per  nos  odia  se  nostra  explicent. — ■
male  agis,  recedis,  anime  :  si  pai'cis  tuis,
parces  et  illis.     consili  Agamemnon  mei
sciens  minister  fiat  et  patri  sciens
Menelaus  assit.     pi'olis  incertae  fides
ex  hoc  petatur  scelere  :  si  bella  abnuhnt
et  gerere  nolunt  odia^  si  patruum  vocant,
pater  est.     eatur. — multa  sed  trepidus  solet  830

detegcre  vultus,  magna  nolentem  quoque
consilia  produnt :  nesciant  quantae  rei
fiant  ministri.     nostra  tu  coepta  occules.

'  B\'  Thyestes  against  Atreus.
118


THYESTES

ATREUS

Criiough  none  should  teach  them  the  wavs  of
treachery  and  crime,  the  throne  will  teach  them!]
Lest  tliey  become  evil,  fearest  thou  ?  They  were
born  evil.  What  thou  callest  savage,  cruel,  thinkest
is  done  ruthlessly,  with  no  regard  for  heaven's  law,
perchance  even  there  ^  is  being  done.

ATTENDANT

Shall  thy  sons  know  that  this  snare  is  being  laid  ?

ATREUS

Sileht  discretion  is  not  found  in  years  so  in-
experienced ;  perchance  they  will  disclose  the  plot ;
the  art  of  silence  is  taught  by  life's  many  ills.

ATTENDANT

Even    those    by  whom    thou  plannest  to  deceive

another,  wilt  thou  deceive  .''

ATREUS

That  they  themselves  may  be  free  even  from
blame  of  crime.  What  need  to  entangle  my  sons  in
guilt  ?  By  my  own  self  let  ray  hatred  be  wrought
out. — Thou  doest  ill,  thou  shrinkest  back,  my  soul.
Let  Agamemnon  be  the  witting  agent,  of  my  plan,
and  Menelaus  wittingly  assist  his  father.  By  this  deed
let  their  uncertain  birth  be  put  to  proof:  if  they
refuse  the  combat,  if  they  will  not  wage  the  war  of
hate,  if  they  plead  he  is  their  uncle,  he  is  their  sire.
Let  them  set  forth. — But  a  troubled  countenance  oft
discloses  much  ;  great  plans  betray  their  bearer  even
against  his  will  ;  let  them  not  know  of  how  great  a
matter  they  are  the  ministers.  And  do  thou  conceal
my  plans.    ■

iiy


THE   TRAGEDIES   OF   SENECA


Haud  sum  nionendus ;  ista  nosti-o  in  pectore
fides  timorque,  sed  magis  claudet  fides.


Tandem  regia  nobilis^
antiqui  genus  Inaehi,
fratrum  composuit  minas.^
Quis  vos  exagitat  furor,
alternis  dare  sanguinem  340

et  sceptrum  scelere  aggredi  ?
!  nescitis^  eupidi  arciuui,
'.  I'egnum  quo  iaceat  loco,
regem  non  faciunt  opes,
non  vestis  Tyriae  color,
non  frontis  nota  regiae,
non  auro  nitidae  fores  ^  ;
rex  est  qui  posuit  metus
et  diri  mala  pectoris,

quern  non  ambitio  inpotens  350

et  numquam  stabilis  favor
vulgi  praecipitis  movet,
non  quidquid  fodit  Occidens
aut  unda  Tagus  aurea
claro  develiit  alveo,
non  quidquid  Libycis  terit
fervens  area  messibus,
quern  non  concutiet  cadi^ns
obliqui  via  fulminis,

non  Eurus  rapiens  mare  360

aut  saevo  rabid  us  freto
ventosi  tumor  Hadriae,
quem  non  lancea  militis,
'  Jiichter  deletes  S36-S3S.  ^  trabes  A.

liiO


THYESTES

ATTENDANT

No  need  to  admonish  me;  both  fear  and  lojialty
shall  shut  them  in  my  heart,  but  rather  loyalty.

^^        CHORUS

At  last  our  noble  house,  the  race  of  ancient  Inachus,
hath  allayed  the  strife  of  brothers.

3:js)  VVhat  madness  pricks  you  on  to  slied  by  turns
each  others'  blood,  and  by  crime  to  gain  the  throne  ?
Ye  know  not,  for  high  place  greedy,  wherein  true
kingship  lies.  A  king  neither  riches  make,  nor  robes
of  Tyrian  hue,  nor  crown  upon  the  royal  brow,  nor
doors  with  gold  bright-gleaming ;  a  king  is  he  who
lias  laid  fear  aside  and  the  base^  longisgs  of  an  evil
iuart ;  whom  ambition  unrestrained  and  tlie  fickle
favour  of  the  reckless  mob  move  not/ neither  all  the
mined  treasures  of  the  West  nor  the  golden  sands
wliich  Tagus  sweejjs  along  in  his  shining  bed,  nor  all
the  grain  trod  out  on  burning  Libya's  threshing-
Moors  ; /whom  no  hurtling  path  of  the  slanting
thunderbolt  will  shake,  nor  Eurus,  harrying  the  sea,
nor  wind-swept  Adriatic's  swell,  raging  with  cruel
\\:i\e  ;  whom  no  warrior's  lance  nor  bare  steel  ever

121


122


THE   TRAGEDIES   OF   SENECA

non  strictus  doniuit  chalybs,
;  qui  tuto  positus  loco
j  infra  se  videt  omnia
1  occurritque  suo  libens
'  fato  nee  queritur  niori.
Reges  conveniant  licet

qui  sparsos  agitant  Dahas,  370

qui  rubri  vada  litoris

et  gemmis  mare  lucidis

late  sanguineum  tenent,

aut  qui  Caspia  fortibus

recludunt  iuga  Sarmatis,

certet  Danuvii  vadum

audet  qui  pedes  ingredi

et  (quocumque  loco  iacent)

Seres  vellere  nobiles —

mens  regnum  bona  possidet.  380

nil  ullis  opus  est  equis,

nil  armis  et  inertibus

telis  quae  procul  ingerit

Parthus,  cum  simulat  fiigas,  >.

admotis  nihil  est  opus

urbes  sternere  machinis,

longe  saxa  rotantibus.

rex  est  qui  metuit  nihil,

rex  est  qui  cupiet  nihil. ^

hoc  I'egnum  sibi  quisque  dat.  390

Stet  quicumque  volet  potens

aulae  culmine  lubrico  ;  _^

me  dulcis  saturet  quies  ;

obscure  positus  loco

leni  perfruar  otio,

nullis  nota  Quiritibus

aetas  per  taciturn  fluat.
*  Leo  deletes  lines  38S,  389.


TH  TESTES
'mastered ;  who^  in  safety  'stablished,  sees  all  things
beneath  his  feet^  goes  gladly  to   meet  his  fate  nov
grieves  to  die.

'■^^^^  Though  kings  should  gather  themselves  to-
gether, both  they  who  vex  the  scattered  Scythians
and  they  Avho  dwell  upon  the  Red  Sea's  marge,  who
hold  wide  sway  o'er  the  blood-red  main  with  its
gleaming  pearls,  they  who  leave  unguarded  ^  the
Caspian  heights  to  the  bold  Sarmatians ;  though  he
strive  against  him,  who  dares  on  foot  to  tread  the
Danube's  waves  ^  and  (wheresoe'er  they  dwell,)  the
Serians  ^  for  fleeces  famous — 'tis  the  upright  mind
that  holds  true  sovereignty.  He  has  no  need  of
horses,  none  of  arms  and  the  coward  weapons  which
the  Parthian  hurls  from  far  when  he  feigns  flight,
no  need  of  engines  hurling  rocks,,  stationed  to  batter
cities  to  the  ground.  A^king^ is  lig  who  has  no  fear;
a  king  is  he  who  shall  naught  desire.  Such  kingdom
on  himself  each  man  bestows.  2    c-

^'•'^  Let  him  stand  who  will,  in  pride  of  power,  on  ^j     .
empire's  slippery  height ;  let  me  be  filled  with  sweet  \ji
repose  ;    in  humble  station  fixed,  let  me  enjoy  un-       3
troubled  ease,  and,  to  im'  fellow  citizens  ^  unknown,
let  my  life's  stream   flow  in   silence.     So  when  my

^  Because  they  do  not  fear  these  enemies.

^  i.e.  the  frozen  surface.

'  The  poet  here  conceives  of  the  Serians  as  near  by  Scj'thia.

*  Quirites  must  be  taken  in  a  general  sense.  Specifically,
it  would  be  impossible,  since  it  applies  only  to  Roman  citi-
zens, who  at  this  time  had  not  come  into  existence.

123


THE   TRAGEDIES    OF   SENECA

sic  cum  transierint  mei

nullo  cum  strepitu  dies,

plebeius  moviar  senex.  400

illi  mors  gravis  incubat

qui,  notus  nimis  omnibus,

ignotus  moritur  sibi.

THYESTES

Optata  patriae  tecta  et  Argolicas  opes
miserisque  summum  ac  maximum  exulibus  bonum,
tractum  soli  natalis  et  patrios  deos
(si  sunt  tanien  di)  cerno,  Cyclopum  sacras
turres,  labore  mains  humano  decus,
celebrata  iuveni  stadia,  per  quae  nobilis
palmam  paterno  non  semel  curru  tuli  410

occurret  Argos,  populus  occurret  frequens-^
sed  nempe  et  Atreus.     repete  silvestres  fugas
saltusque  densos  potius  et  mixtam  feris
similemque  vitam  ;  clarus  hie  regni  nitor  i
'fulgore  non  est  quod  oculos  falso  auferat  i
cum  quod  datur  spectabis,  et  dantem  aspice.
modo  inter  ilia,  quae  putant  cuncti  aspera,
fortis  fui  laetusque ;  nunc  contra  in  metus
revolvor  ;  animus  liaeret  ac  retro  cupit
corpus  referre,  moveo  nolentem  gradum.  420

TANTALVS

Pigro  (quid  hoc  est  ?)  genitor  incessu  stupet
vultumque  versat  seque  in  incerto  tenet.


124


THYESTES

(lays  have  passed  noiselessly  away,  lowly  may  I_  die
and  full  of  years.  I  On  him  does  death  lie  heavily,
who,  but  too  well  known  to  all,  dies  to  himself
unknown.

[Enter  THYESTES,  returning  from  banishment,  accompanied
by  his  three  sons.^


THYESTES

At  last  I  see  the  welcome  dwellings  of  my  father-
land, the  wealth  of  Argolis,  and,  the  greatest  and
best  of  sights  to  wretched  exiles,  a  stretch  of  native
soil  and  my  ancestral  gods  (if  after  all  gods  there
are),  the  sacred  towers  reared  by  the  Cyclopes,  in
beauty  far  excelling  human  effort,  the  race-course
thronged  with  youth,  where  more  than  once,  lifted
to  f;ime,  have  I  in  my  father's  cliariot  won  tlie  palm.
Argos  will  come  to  meet  me,  the  thronging  populace
will  come — but  surely  Atreus  too !  [Rather  seek
again  thy  retreats  in  the  forest  depths,  the  impene-
trable glades,  and  life  shared  with  beasts  and  like  to
theirs ;  this  gleaming  splendour  of  the  throne  is
naught  that  should  blind  my  eyes  with  its  false  tinsel
show  ;  when  thou  lookcst  on  the  gift,  scan  well  the
giver,  too..  Of  late  midst  such  fortune  as  all  count
hard,  1  was  brave  and  joyous ;  but  now  I  am  i:eturned
to  Jears ;  my  courage  falters  and,  eager  to  go  back,  I
move  unwillinjj  feet  along.


TAN'TALUS    [cisidc^

My  father  (what  can  it  mean  r)  with  faltering  pace
goes  as  if  dazed,  keeps  turning  his  face  away,  and
holds  uncertain  course.

125


X


THE   TRAGEDIES   OF    SENECA

THYESTES

Quidj  anime,  pendes  quidve  consilium  diu
tarn  facile  torques  ?     rebus  incertissimis,
fratri  atque  regno^  credis  ac  metuis  mala
iam  victa,  iam  mansueta  et  aerumnas  fugis
bene  collocatas  ?     esse  iam  miserum  iuvat.
reflecte  gressum,  dum  licet,  teque  eripe.

TAXTALVS

Quae  causa  cogit,  genitor,  a  patria  gradum
referre  visa  ?     cur  bonis  tantis  sinum  430

subducis  ?     ira  frater  abiecta  redit
partemque  regni  reddit  et  lacerae  domus
componit  artus  teque  restituit  tibi.

THYESTES

Causam  timoris  ipse  quam  ignoro  exigis.
nihil  timendilm  video,  sed  timeo  tamen.
placet  ire,  pigris  membra  sed  genibus  labant
alioque  quam  quo  nitor  abductus  feror.
sic  concitatam  remige  et  velo  ratem
aestus  resistens  remigi  et  velo  refert.

TANTALVS

Evince  quidquid  obstat  et  mentem  impedit        4t0
reducemque  quanta  praemia  expectent  vide,
jviter,  potes  regnare.

THYESTES

Cum  possim  mori.

^  i.e.  made  the  best  of  by  learning  how  to  bear  them.
"^  Blessings  are  being  poured  into  his  bosom  and  he  will
not  receive  them.

1!26


THYESTES

THYKSTES  [m  soliloqtiy'\

Why  O  soul,  dost  liesjijite,  or  why  dost  so  lonjif
turn  o'er  and  o'er  a  plan  so  simple  ?  Dost  thou  trust
to  things  most  unsure,  to  a  l)rotlR'r  and  to  kingship?
Dost  fear  hardships  already  mastered,  already  easier
to  bear,  and  dost  flee  from  distresses  well  employed  ? '
'Tis  sweet  now  to  be  wretehed.  Turn  baek,  while
still  thou  maycst,  and  save  thyself.

TANTALUS

^^'hat  cause  eompels  thee,  father,  to  turn  thee
back  from  sight  of  thy  native  land  ?  Why  from  so
great  blessings  dost  withhold  thy  bosom  ?  ^  Thy
brother  returns  to  thee  with  wrath  given  o'er,  gives
thee  back  half  the  realm,  unites  the  members  of  thy
sundered  house,  and  to  thyself  restores  thee.

THYESTES

My  cause  of  fear,  which  I  m3'self  know  not,  thou
demandest  of  me.  Naught  to  be  feared  I  see,  but
still  I  fear.  Fain  would  I  go,  but  my  limbs  totter
with  faltering  knees,  and  other-whither  than  I  strive
to  go  am  I  borne  away  in  thrall.  Just  so  a  sjiip,
urged  on  by  oar  and  sail,  the  tide,  resisting  both  oar
and  sail,  bears  back.

TANTALUS

O'ercome  thou  whate'er  opposes  and  thwarts  thy
will,  and  see  how  great  re^vards  await  thee  on  thy
return.     Father,  thou  canst  be  king.

THYESTES

Yea,  since  1  can  die.^

^  The  power  to  die  is  more  _greci0us  than  the  power  of
kings  ;  since,  therefore,  he  can  die,  Thyestes  has  indeed  regal
power.

127


THE   TRAGEDIES   OF   SENECA

TANTALVS

Siimma  est  potestas —


THYESTES

Nulla,  si  cupias  nihil.

TANTALVS
THYESTES

Non  capit  regnum  duos.


Natis  relinques.


TANTALVS

Miser  esse  mavult  esse  qui  felix  potest  ?

THYESTES

Milii  crede,  falsis  magna  nominibus  placent,

frustra  timentur  dura,     dum  excelsus  steti,

numquam  pavere  destiti  atque  ipsum  mei
'"Terrum  time^-e  lateris.     o  quantum  bonum  est
•  obstai'e  nulli,  capere  securas  dapes  450

humi  iacentem  !     scelera  non  intrant  casas,

tutusque  niensa  capitur  angusta  cibus  ;

vcneuuni  in  auro  bibitur.     expertus  loquor :
Inalam  bonae  praeferre  fortunani  licet.

non  vertice  alti  montis  impositam  domum

et  eminentem  civitas  humilis  tremit

nee  fulget  altis  splendidum  tectis  ebur

sonmosque  non  defendit  e.xcubitor  meos  ;

non  classibus  piscamur  et  retro  mare

iacta  fugamus  mole  nee  ventrem  improbum  460

alimus  tributo  gentium,  nulkis  mihi


128


THYESTES

TANTALUS

The  hci<>lit  of  power  is —

THVIiSTES

Naught,  if  nothing  thou  desirest.

TANTALUS

To  thy  sons  wilt  thou  bequeath  it.

TIIVESTES

The  throne  achnits  not  two.

TANTALUS

Would  he  wish  wretchedness  who  can  be  blest?

THYESTES

False,  believe  me,  are  the  titles  that  give  greatness
charm ;  idle  our  fears  of  hardship.  While  I  stood
Jiigh  in  power,  never  did  I  cease  to  dread,  yea,  to  /^^  y,i,
fear  the  very  sword  upon  my  thigh.  X)h,  how  good  /  f
it  is  to  stand  in  no  man's  road,  care-free  to  eat  one's  '
bread,  on  the  ground  reclining !  Crime  enters  not
Lowly  liomes,  and  in  safety  is  food  taken  at  a  slender
board  ;  )ioison  is  drunk  from  cu[)s  of  gold.  I  speak
tliat  I  do  know:  evil  fortune  is  to  be 'preferred  to
good.i  The  lov,  ly  citizen  fears  no  house  of  mine  set
liigh  and  threatening  on  a  mountain  top  L/my  tower-
ing roofs  Hash  not  with  gleaming  ivory,  no  guard
watches  o'er  my  slumbers ;  with  no  Heet  of  boats  I
fish,  with  no  piled  break-water  do  I  drive  back  the
sea  ;  I  gorge  not  my  vile  belly  at  the  world's  expense;
for  me  no  fields  are  harvested  beyond  the  Getae  and
'  Having  tried  both,  he  comes  to  this  co7iclusiou.

129


THE   TRAGEDIES   OkF   SENECA

ultra  Getas  metatur  et  Partlios  ager  ;

non  tare  coliraur  nee  meae  excluso  love

ornautur  arae  ;  nulla  culminibus  meis

iniposita  nutat  silva  nee  fumant  manu

sueeensa  multa  stagna  nee  somno  dies

Baeehoque  nox  iungenda  pervigili  datur :

sed  non  timemur,  tuta  sine  telo  est  domus

rebusque  parvis  magna  praestatur  quies.

immane  regnum  est  })osse  sine  regno  pati.  470

TAXTALVS

Nee  abnuendunij  si  dat  iniperium  deus,
nee  appetendum  est ;  frater  ut  regnes  rogat.

THYESTES

Rogat  ?     timendum  est.     errat  hie  aliquis  dolus.

TANTALVS

Redire  pietas  uude  submota  est  solet
reparatque  vires  iustus  amissas  amor.

THYESTES

Amat  Thyesten  frater .''     aetlierias  prius
perfundet  Arctos  pontus  et  Sieuli  rapax
consistet  aestus  unda  et  lonio  seges
matura  pelago  surget  et  luccm  dabit
nox  atra  terris^  ante  cum  flammis  aquae,  480

cum  morte  vita^  cum  mari  ventus  fidcm
foedusque  iungent.

TANTALVS

Quam  tamen  fraudem  times  .''

THYESTES

Oinnein  ;  timori  quern  meo  statuam  moduui  ?
tantuni  potest  quantum  uc!it.
130


THYESTES

the  Partliians ;  no  iiuciise  burns  forme,  nor  are  ni}'

shrines    adorned    in    neglect    of  Jove ;    no    planted

grove  waves  on  my  !)attlements,  nor   does   many  a

\  pool  heated  by  art  steam  for  me  ;  my  daj^s  are  not

1  given  to  sleep  nor  are  my  nights  linked  with  wakeful

^  revelry:  but  I  am  not  feared,  safe  without  weapons

■  is  my  house  and  to  my  small  estate  great  peace  is

granted.      'Tis    a    boundless    kingdom, — the    power

without  kingdoms  to  be  content. 3

TANTALUS

Neither  is  empire  to  be  refused  if  a  god  bestows  it,
nor  needst  thou  seek  it ;  thy  brother  invites  thee  to
be  king.

THYESTES

Invites  ?  Then  must  I  fear.  Some  trick  strays
hereabouts.

TANTALUS

Brotherly  regard  ofttimes  returns  unto  the  heart
whence  it  was  driven,  and  true  love  regains  the
vigour  it  has  lost.

THYESTES

His  brother  love   Thyestes .''     Sooner  sliall  ocean  /Y«f  ■/"
bathe  the  heavenly  Bears,  and  the  devouring  waves       /
of  the  .Sicilian  tides  stand  still  ;  sooner  shall  ri|)ening  ^  "
grain  spring   from  the    Ionian   sea,   and   dark   night
illume  the  world  ;  sooner  shall  fire  with  water,  life
with    death    commingle,  and    winds   join    faith    and
treaty  with  the  sea.

TANTALUS

And  yet  what  treachery  dost  thou  fear?

THYESTES

All  treachery  ;  to  my  fear  what  limit  shall  I  set  ?
His  power  is  boundless  as  his  hale.

131

K    2


TirlE    TRAGEDIES   OF   SENECA

TANTALVS

111  te  quid  potest?

THYESTES

Pro  me  nihil  i;im  inetiio  ;  vos  ftieitis  milii
Atrea  timenduin.

TANTALVS

Decij)i  cautus  times  ?

THYESTES

Serum  est  cavendi  tem])us  in  mediis  malis  ;
eatur.     uiium  genitor  hoc  testor  tamen  :
ego  vos  sequor,  non  duco.

TANTAI.VS

Respiciet  deus
bene  cogitata.      pcrge  non  chibio  gradu.  490


ATREVS

Plagis  tenetur  clausa  dispositis  fera  ;
et  ipsuiii  et  una  generis  invisi  indolem
iunctani  parenti  eerno.     lam  tuto  in  loco
versantur  odia.      venit  in  nostras  inanus
tandem  Thyestes^  venit,  et  totus  quidem  .
vix  teinpero  animo,  vix  dolor  frenos  capit.
sic,  cum  feras  vcstigat  et  longo  sagax
loro  tenetur  \'niber  ac  presso  vias
scrutatur  ore,  dum  procul  lento  suem
odore  sentit,  paret  et  tacito  locum  500

132


THYESTES

TANTALUS

What  power  has  lie  ajrainst  thee  ?

THYESTES

For  myself  I  have  now  no  fear ;  'tis  j^u,  my  sons^     -f"
who  make  Atreiis  cause  of  dread  to  me.

TANTALUS

Dost  fear  to  be  entrapped  if  on  thy  guard?

THYESTES

'Tis  too  late  to  guard  wlieii  in  the  midst  of
dangers;  but  let  us  on.  Yet  this  one  thing  your
fatlier~duth  declare  :  I  follow  you,  not  lead.

TANTALUS

God  will  protect  us  if  we  heed  well  our  ways.
With  assured  step  haste  thou  on.

[Killer  ATRKUs.     -S^'/z/o- THYESTES  (tiid  /lis  soiix,  he  glocits
over  t  lie  fad  thai  his  h  rot  her  is  at  last  in  his  po/rer.^

ATREUS  [aside]

The  prey  is  f;ist  caught  in  the  toils  I  spread ;  both
the  sire  himself  and,  together  with  the  sire,  the
offspring  of  his  hated  race  I  see.  Now  on  safe
footing  does  my  hatred  fare.  At  last  has  Thyestes
come  into  my  power ;  he  has  come,  and  the  whole  ^
of  him  !  Scarce  can  I  control  my  spirit,  scarce  does
my  nige  admit  restraint.  So  Avhen  the  keen  ( Jmbrian
hound  tracks  out  the  jirey  and,  held  on  a  long  leasli,
with  lowered  muzzle  snutfs  out  the  trail,  while  with
faint  scent  he  perceives  the  boar  afar,  obediently  and

*  i.e.  sions  and  all.

133


THE   TRAGEDIES    OF   SENECA

rostro  pererrat ;  praeda  cum  pvopior  fuit,

cervice  tota  pugiiat  et  geniitu  vocat

dominum  morantem  seque  retinenti  eripit.

cum  sperat  ira  sanguinem^  nescit  tegi ;

tamen  tegatur.     asjiice,  ut  multo  gravis

squalore  vultus  obruat  maestos  coma,

quam  foeda  iaceat  bai'ba.     praestetur  fides —

fratrem  iuvat  videre.     complexus  milii

redde  expetitos.     quidquid  iraruin  fiiit

transiei'it ;  ex  hoc  sanguis  ac  pietas  die  510

colantur^  animis  odia  damuata  excidant.

THVESTES

Diluere  possem  cuncta,  nisi  talis  fores,
sed  fateor,  Atreu,  fateor,  admisi  omnia
quae  credidisti.      pessimam  causam  meam
hodierna  pietas  fecit,     est  prorsus  nocens
quicumque  visus  tam  bono  fratri  est  nocens.
lacrimis  agendum  est;  su])plicem  primus  vides  ;
hae  te  j)recantur  pedibus  intactae  manus  :
ponalur  omnis  ira  et  ex  animo  turner
erasus  abeat.     obsides  fidei  accipe  520

lios  innocentes^  frater.

ATREVS

A  genibus  manum
aufer  nieosque  potius  amplexus  pete,
vos  quoquCj  senum  praesidia,  tot  iuvenes,  meo
pendete  collo.     squalidam  vestem  exue
ociiHsque  nostris  parce  et  ornatus  cape
])ares  meis  laclusque  fraterni  imperi
134


THYESTRS

with  silent  tongue  he  scours  the  field ;  but  when  the
game  is  nearer^  with  his  whole  strength  of  neck  he
struggles^  loudly  protests  against  his  master's  loitering,
and  breaks  away  from  his  restraint.  When  rage
scents  blood,  it  cannot  be  concealed;  yet  let  it  be
concealed.  See  how  his  thick  hair,  all  unkempt,
covers  his  -woeful  face,  how  foul  his  beard  hangs
down.  [In  hitler  ironi/.]  Now  let  me  kee{)  my  pro-
mise.^ [To  TuvESTEs.]  'Tis  sweet  to  see  my  brother
once  again.  Gi\'e  me  the  embrace  that  I  have
longed  for.  Let  all  our  angry  feelings  pass  away  :
from  this  day  let  ties  of  blood  and  love  be  cherished
and  let  accursed  hatred  vanish  from  our  hearts.


I  might  excuse  all  my  deeds  Avert  thou  not  such  as
this.  But  I  confess,  Atreus,  I  confess  that  I  have
(lone  all  that  thou  believedst  of  me.  Most  foul  has
thy  love  to-day  made  my  case  appear.  Sinful  indeed
is  he  who  has  been  proved  sinful  toward  so  good  a
brother.  My  tears  must  plead  for  me  ;  thou  art  the
first  to  see  me  suppliant.  These  hands,  which  have
never  touched  man's  feet,  beseech  thee  :  put  away
all  thy  wrath  and  let  swollen  anger  pass  from  thy
heart  and  be  forgot.  As  pledge  of  my  faith,  O  brother,
take  these  guiltless  boys.

ATREU3

From  my  knees  remove  thy  hand  and  come  rather
into  my  embrace.  /And  you,  too,  boys,  all  of  you,
comforters  of  age,  come  cling  about  my  neck.  Thy
foul  garments  put  off,  spare  my  eyes,  and  put  on
royal    trap))ings    equal    to    my  own,  and   with   glad

1  Which  he  had  made  Ihrough  his  sons.     Hgq  i.  296.

135


THE   TRAGEDIES    OF   SENECA

capesse  partem,     raaior  haec  laus  est  mea,
fratri  patenuim  reddere  incolumi  decus ;
habere  regnum  casus  est^  virtus  dare.


THYESTES

Di  paria,  frater,  pretia  pro  tantis  tibi  530

meritis  repeiidant.     regiain  capitis  notam
squalor  recusat  noster  et  sceptrum  nianus
infausta  refi'.oit.      liceat  in  media  mihi
latere  turba.

ATREVS

Recipit  hoc  regnum  duos.

THYESTES

Meum  esse  credo  quidquid  est,  frater,  tuum.

ATREVS

Quis  influentis  dona  fortunae  abnuit  ?

THYESTES

Expertus  est  quicumque  quam  tacile  effluant.

ATREVS

Fratrcm  potiri  gloria  ingenti  vetas  ?

THYESTES

Tua  iam  peracta  gloria  est,  restat  mea  ;
resjmere  certum  est  regna  consilium  mihi.  540

ATREVS

Meam  rclinquam,  nisi  tuam  parlcm  accipis.


136


THYESTES

heart  sliare  a  brother's  kingdom.  Mine  is  the  greater
glory,  to  restore  to  a  brother  all  unharmed  ancestral
dignity ;  [wielding  of  power  is  the  work  of  chance,
bestowjn^  of  itj_virtuej.  J

THYESTES

May  the  gods^  iny  brother,  fitly  repay  thee  for  so
great  deserts.  The  kingly  crown  my  wretched  state
refuses,  and  the  sceptre  my  ill-omened  hand  rejects.
Let  it  be  mine  to  hide  amidst  the  thvong.

ATREUS

Our  throne  has  room  for  two.

THYESTES

I  count,  my  brother,  all  of  thine  as  mine.^

ATHEUS

Who  j)uts  aside  inflowing  fortune's  gifts  ?

TUYESTES

Whoso  has  found  how  easily  they  ebl).

ATHEUS  /'.    i

Dost  forbid  thy  brother  to  gain  great  glory  ?

THYESTES

Thy  glory  is  won  already  ;  mine  is  still  to  win  :  to
refuse  the  throne  is  my  fixed  intent.

.\TI!EUS

Mv  gliirv  must  I  abandon,  uidcss  thou  accept  thy
share.

^  But  I  will  not  take  possession  of  it.

137


THE   TRAGEDIES   OF   SENECA

TflVESTES

Accipio  ;  regni  nomen  impositi  feram,
sed  iura  et  arma  servient  mecum  tibi.

ATREVS

Imposita  capiti  vincla  \  enerando  gere ;
ego  destinatas  victimas  superis  dabo.

CHORVS

Credat  hoc  quisquam  ?     ferus  ille  et  acer
nee  potens  mentis  truculentus  Atreus
fratris  aspectu  stupefactus  haesit.
nulla  vis  maior  pietate  vera  est ;
iurgia  externis  inimica  dm-ant,  550

quos  amor  varus  tenuit  tenebit.
ira  cum  magnis  agitata  causis
gratiam  rupit  cecinitque  bellum,
cum  leves  frenis  sonuere  turmae,
fulsit  hinc  illinc  agitatus  ensis
quem  movet  crebro  fui-ibundus  ictu
sanguinem  Mavors  cupiens  recentem — -
opprimet  ferrum  manibusque  iunctis
ducet  ad  Pacem  Pietas  negantes.

Otium  tanto  subitum  e  tumultu  560

quis  deus  fecit  ?     modo  per  Mycenas
arma  civilis  crepuere  belli  ;
pallidae  natos  tenuere  matres,
uxor  armato  timuit  marito^
cmii  manum  invitus  sequeretur  ensis,
sordidus  pacis  vitio  quietae  ;
ille  labentes  renovare  muros,
hie  situ  quassas  stabilire  turres,
ferreis  portas  cohibere  claustris
ille  certabatj  pav\dusque  pinnis  570

nnxiae  noctis  vigil  incubabat — •
138


jr^   t  c  • —    o    —


D«.  c/'^c'r  pi^    <^^


THYESTES


THYKSTES


I_(1q  acce])t ;  the  name  of  king  set  on  me  will  I
wear  ;  but  unto  thee  shall  laws  and  arras  along  with
myself  be  subject.

ATREUs  [placing  the  cronm  upon  his  brother's  head]

This  crown,  set  on  thy  reverend  head,  wear  thou  ;
but  I  the  destined  victims  to  the  gods  will  pay.   [Exit.


Such  things  are  past  belief.  Atreus,  there,  the
fierce  and  savage,  reckless  of  soul  and  cruel,  at
sight  of  his  brother  stood  as  one  amazed.  There  is
no  power  stronger  than  true  love  ;  angry  strife 'twixt
strangers  doth  endure,  but  whom  true  love  has  bound
'twill  bind  for  ever.  When  Avrath,  by  great  causes
roused,  has  burst  friendship's  bonds  and  sounded
alarms  of  war  ;  when  fleet  squadrons  with  ringing
bridles  come ;  when  the  brandished  sword  gleams
now  here,  now  there,  which  the  mad  god  of  war,
thirsting  for  fresh-flowing  blood,  wields  with  a  rain
of  blows, — then  will  Love  stay  the  steel,  and  lead
men,  even  against  their  will,  to  the  clasped  hands  of
Peace.

'^^  This  sudden  lull  out  of  so  great  uproar  what
god  has  wrought  ?  IJut  now  throughout  Mycenae
the  arms  of  civil  strife  resounded  ;  j)ale  mothers  held
fast  their  sons,  the  wife  feared  for  her  lord  full
armed,  when  to  liis  hand  came  the  reluctant  sword,
foul  with  the  rust  of  peace  ;  one  strove  to  re])air
tottering  walls,  one  to  strengthen  towers,  crumbling
with  long  neglect  ;  anotlier  strove  to  shut  gates  tight
with  iron  bars,A\  hile  on  the  battlements  the  trembling
guard  kept  watch  o'er  the  troubled  night — for  worse

139


THE   TRAGEDIES   OF   SENECA

peior  est  bello  timor  ipse  belli.

iani  minae  saevi  cecidere  ferri,

iam  silet  murmur  grave  classicorum,

iam  tacet  stridor  litui  strepentis  ;

alta  pax  urbi  revocata  laetae  est.

sic,  ubi  ex  alto  tumuere  Huctus

Bruttium  Coro  feriente  poutum,

Scylla  pulsatis  resonat  cavernis

ac  mare  in  portu  timuere  nautae  580

quod  rapax  haustum  revomit  Charybdis.

et  ferus  Cyclops  metuit  pareiitem

rupe  ferveiitis  residcns  in  Aetnae,

ne  superfusis  violetur  undis

ignis  aetcrnis  resonans  caminis,

et  i)utat  mergi  sua  posse  pauper

regna  Laertes  Ithaca  tremente — ■

si  suae  ventis  cecidere  vires,

mitius  stagno  pelagus  recumbit;

alta,  quae  navis  timuit  secare,  590

hinc  et  Imic  fusis  speciosa  velis

strata  ludenti  patuere  cunibae,

et  vaeat  uiersos  numerare  pisces
hie  ubi  ingenti  modo  sub  procella
Cyclades  pontum  timuere  motae.

Nulla  sors  longa  est  ;  dolor  ac  voluptas
invicem  cedunt;  brevior  voluptas.
ima  pcrniutat  levis  hora  suminis.
ille  qui  donat  diadema  fronti,
quern  genu  nixae  tremuerc  gentes,  COO

cuius  ad  nutum  posuere  bclla
Med  us  et  Piiocbi  propioris  Indus
et  Dahae  Farthis  equitem  minati,
anxius  sceptrum  tenet  et  moventes
cuncta  diviuat  metuit(]ue  casus
nuihilis  rci'uiu  dubiuMHjuc  tcmpus.


1+0


TIIYESTES

tlian  war  is  the  very  fear  of  war.  Now  the  sword's
dire  threats  have  fallen  ;  now  still  is  the  deep
Irunipet-blare  ;  now  silent  the  shrill  t^farion's  blast  ;
deep  peace  to  a  glad  cit^^  is  restored/  So,  when  the
Hoods  heave  up  from  ocean's  depths  and  Corns  '
lashes  the  Briittian  waters;  when  Scylla  roars  in
her  disturbed  cavern,  and  mariners  in  Iiarbour
tremble  at  the  sea  which  greedy  Charybdis  drains
and  vomits  forth  aojain^wdien  the  wild  Cyclops,
sitting  on  burning  Aetna's  crag,  dreads  his  sire's  ^  l\^'^\
rage,  lest  the  o'erwhelming  waves  put  out  the  fires
that  roar  in  immemorial  furnaces  ;  and  when  beg-
gared Laertes  thinks,  while  Ithaca  reels  beneath  the
shock,  that  his  kinj^dom  may  be  submerged-^then,
if  their  strenglh  has  failed  the  winds,  the  sea  sinks
back  more  peaceful  than  a  pool  ;  and  the  deep  waters
which  the  shij)  feared  to  cleave,  now  far  and  wide,
studded  with  bellying  sails,  a  beauteous  sight,  to
pleasure-boats  spread  out  their  waves ;  and  you  may
now  count  the  fish  swimming  far  below,  where  but
lately  beneath  the  mighty  hurricane  the  tossed
Cvelads  trembled  at  the  sea.

'  ''9'5  No  lot  endureth  long ;  pain  and  pleasure,  each
in  turn,  give  place  ;  luorejjuicklyj  pleasure..  LoAvest
with  highest  the  fickle  hour  exchanges.  He  who
wears  crown  on  l)^"OW,  before  whom  trembling  n.-itions
l)end  the  knee/nt  whose  nod  the  Medes  lay  down
their  arms,  and'the  Indians  of  the  nearer  sun,-*^  and
the  Dahae  who  hurl  their  horse  upon  the  Parthians,
— he  with  anxious  hand  holds  the  sceptre,  and  both
foresecsandfearsficklechar.ee  and  shiftin<>-  time  that
change  all  things.

1  The  North-west  wind.  *  NepUiiie.

'  The   sun    was   supposed   to   be    nearer    to   the   oriental
nations.

14)


THE   TRAGEDIES   OF   SENECA

Vos  qiiibus  rector  maris  atque  terrae
ius  dedit  magnum  necis  atque  vitae,
ponite  inflates  tumidosque  vultus  ;
quidquid  a  vobis  minor  expavescit.  6 10

maior  hoc  vobis  dominus  minatur ;
omne  sub  regno  graviore  regnum  est.
quem  dies  vidit  veniens  superbum,
hunc  dies  vidit  fugiens  iacentem.
nemo  confidat  nimium  secundis^
nemo  desperet  meliora  lapsis  :
miscet  haec  illis  prohibetque  Clothe
stai-e  fortunam,  rotat  omne  latum,
nemo  tam  divos  habuit  faventes,
crastiuum  ut  posset  sibi  polliceri :  620

res  deus  nostras  celeri  citatas
turbine  versat.

NVNTIVS

Quis  me  per  auras  turbo  praecipitem  vchct
atraque  nube  involv5.tj  ut  tantum  nefas
eripiat  oculis  ?     o  domus  Pelopi  quoque
et  Tantalo  pudenda !

CHORVS

Quid  portas  novi }

NVNTIV8

Quaenam  ista  regie  est  ?     Argos  et  Sparte,  pios
sortita  fratres.  et  maris  gemini  j)remens
fauces  Corinthos,  an  feris  Hister  fugam
praebens  Alanis^  an  sub  aeterna  nive  6.S0

H^rcana  tell  us  an  vagi  passim  Scythae  ?
quis  hie  nefandi  est  conscius  monstri  locus .''

'  i.e.  Castor  and  Pollux.     See  Phoeiiisaae,  128.
142


THYESTES

607  Q  you,  to  wlioiii  tile  ruler  of  sea  and  land  has
<^iven  unbounded  rif>lit  o'er  life  and  deaths  abate  your
inflated,  swelling  pride ;  all  that  a  lesser  subject
fears  from  you,  'gainst  you  a  greater  lord  shall
threaten  ;  all  power  is  subject  to  a  weightier  power.
Whom  the  rishig  sun  hath  seen  high  in  pride,  him
the  setting  sun  hath  seen  laid  low.  Let  none  be
over-conrident  when  fortune  smiles  ;  lej/ none  despair
of  better  things  when  fortune  fails.  /Clotho  blends
weal  and  woe,  lets  no  lot  stand,  k^eps  every  fate
a-turning.  No  one  has  found  the  gods  so  kind  that
he  may  p.romisc  to-morrow  to  himself.  God  keeps
all  mortal  things  in  swift  whirl  turning.

[Enter   MEssENGKR    brcalfi/c'.sslij    announcing    the    horror
which  has  just  been  enacted  behind  the  sccnes.'\         .

MESSENGER

Wliat  whirlwind  will  headlong  bear  me  through
the  air  and  in  murk}-  cloud  enfold  me,  that  it  may
snatch  this  awful  horror  iVom  my  sight  ?  O  house,
to  Pelops  even  and  to  Tantalus  a  thing  of  shame  !

CHORUS

What  news  bringst  thou  ?

MESSENGER

What  place  is  this?  Is  it  Argos?  Is  it  Sparta,
to  which  fate  gave  loving  brothers.''^  Corinth,
resting  on  the  narrow  boundary  of  two  seas  ?  Or
the  Ister,  giving  chance  of  flight  to  the  barbarous
Alani  ?  Or  the  H}Tcanian  land  'neath  its  ever-
lasting snows  ?  Or  tlie  wide-wandering  Scythians  ''
What  place  is  this  that  knows  such  hideous  crime .''

143


THE   TRAGEDIES   OF   SENECA

CHORVS

Effare  et  istud  pande,  quodcumque  est,  malum.

NVNTIVS

Si  steterit  animus,  si  metu  corpus  rigens
remittet  artus.     haeret  in  vultu  trucis
imago  fact!  !     ferte  me  insanae  procul,
illo,  procellae,  ferte  quo  fertur  dies
hinc  raptus.

CHORVS

Animos  gravius  incertos  tenes.
quid  sit  quod  liorres  ede  et  auctorem  indiea.
non  quacro  quis  sit,  sed  uter.     effare  ocius.


640


NVNTIVS

In  arce  summa  Pelopiae  pars  est  domus
conversa  ad  austros,  cuius  extremum  latus
aequale  monti  crescit  atque  urbem  premit
et  contumacem  regibus  populum  suis
liabet  sub  ictu  ;  fulget  hie  turbae  ca})ax
immane  tectum,  cuius  auratas  ti'abes
variis  columnae  nobiles  maculis  ferunt.
post  ista  vulgo  nota,  quae  populi  colunt,
in  multa  dives  spatia  discedit  domus ;
arcana  in  imo  regio  secessu  iacet,  650

alta  vetustum  valle  compescens  nemus,
penetrale  regni,  nulla  qua  lactos  solet
praebere  ramos  arbor  aut  ferro  coli,
sed  taxus  et  cupressus  et  nigra  ilice
obscura  nutat  silva,  quam  supra  eminens
despcctat  alte  quercus  et  viucit  neiiius.
141.


THYESTES

rtionus
Speak  out  .'ind  tell  this  evil,  wliate'er  it  is.

MESSKNGKR

When  my  spirit  is  composed,  when  numbing  fear
lets  go  its  hold  upon  my  limbs.  Oh,  but  I  see  it
still,  the  picture  of  that  ghastly  deed  I  Bear  me  far
hence,  wild  winds,  oh,  thither  bear  me  whither  ^  the
vanished  day  is  borne.

CHORUS

More  grievously  dost  tliou  hold  our  minds  in
doubt.  'IV'll  thou  what  is  this  thing  which  makes
thee  shudder,  and  point  out  the  doer  of  it.  I
ask  not  who  it  is,  but  which. ^  Speak  out  and
quickly.

MESSENGER

On  tlie  summit  of  the  citadel  a  part  of  Pelops'
palace  faces  south  ;  its  farthest  side  rises  to  moun-
tainous height,  and  o'erlooksthc  city,  having  beneath
its  menace  the  people,  insolent  to  tlieir  kings.  Here
fleams  the  gre.it  hall  that  could  contain  a  multitude,
whose  gilded  architraves  colunms  glorious  Avith  varied
hues  upbear.  Behind  this  general  hall,  which  nations
throng,  the  gorgeous  palace  stretches  out  o'er  many
a  space  ;  and,  deep  Avithdrawn,  there  lies  a  ^«:et
sp_ot  containing  in  a  deep  vale  an  ancient  grove,  the
kingdom's  innermost  retreat.  Here  no  tree  ever
affords  cheerful  shade  or  is  pruned  by  any  knife  ;  but
the  yew-tree  and  the  cypress  and  woods  of  gloomy
ilex-trees  wave  obscure,  above  Avhich,  towering  high,
an  oak  looks  down  and  overtops  tlie  grove.      From

1  i.e.  to  the  other  side  of  the  world.

2  It  must  be  one^of  the  two  brothers.

145


THE   TRAGEDIES    OF   SENECA

hinc  auspicari  regaa  Tantalidae  solent,

hinc  petere  lapsis  rebus  ac  dubiis  opem.

affixa  inhaerent  dona  ;  vocales  tubae

fractique  currus^  spolia  Myrtoi  maris,  660

A'ictaeque  falsis  axibus  pendent  rotae

at  omne  gentis  facinus  ;  hoc  Phrygius  loco

fixus  tiaras  Pelopis,  hie  praeda  hostium

et  de  triumplio  picta  barbarico  chlamys.

Fons  stat  sub  umbra  tristis  et  nigra  piger
haeret  palude  ;  talis  est  dirae  Stygis
defonnis  unda  quae  facit  caelo  fidem.
hinc  nocte  caeca  gemere  ferales  deos
fama  est,  catenis  lucus  excussis  sonat
ululantque  manes,     quidquid  audire  est  metus      670
illic  videtur  ;  errat  antiquis  vetus
emissa  bustis  turba  et  insultant  loco
maiora  notis  monstra  ;  quin  tota  solet
micare  silva  flamma,  et  excelsae  trabes
ardent  sine  igne.     saepe  latratu  nemus
trino  remugit,  saepe  simulacris  domus
attonita  magnis.     nee  dies  sedat  metum ;
nox  pro})ria  luco  est  et  superstitio  inferum
in  luce  media  regnat.     hinc  orantibus
responsa  dantur  certa,  cum  ingenti  sono  680

laxantur  adyto  fata  et  inmugit  specus
vocem  deo  solvente.

Quo  postquam  furens
intravit  Atreus  liberos  fratris  trahens,
ornantur  arae — quis  queat  digne  eloqui  ?
post  terga  iuvenum  nobiles  religat  manus

146


THYESTES

this  spot  the  sons  of  Tantalus  are  wont  to  enter  on
their  reiyn,  liere  to  seek  aid  midst  calamity  and
doubt.  Here  hang-  their  votive  <;il"ts  ;  resounding
trumpets  and  broken  ehariotSj  spoils  of  the  Myrtoan
Sea/  and  wheels  o'ereome  by  treacherous  axle-trees
hang  there,  and  memorials  of  the  race's  every  crime  ;
in  this  place  is  Pelops'  Phrygian  turban  hung,  here
spoil  of  the  fjnemy,  and  the  embroidered  robe^  token
of  triumjih  o'er  barbaric  foes.

6^^  A  dismal  spring  starts  forth  beneath  the  shadow,
and  sluggish  in  a  black  pool  creeps  along  ;  such  arc
the  ugly  waters  of  dread  Styx,  on  which  the  gods
lake  oath.  'I'is  said  that  from  this  place  in  the  dark
night  the  gods  of  death  make  moan  ;  with  clanking
chains  thc'grove^  resounds,  and  the  gliosts  howl
mournfully.  ~  Whatever  is  dreadful  but  to  hear  of,
there  is  seen;  throngs  of  the  long-since  dead  come
forth  from  their  ancient  tombs  and  walk  abroad,
and  creatures  more  monstrous  than  men  have  known
spring  from  the  place;  nay  more,  through  all  the
wood  flames  go  flickering,  and  the  lofty  beams
glow  without  help  of  fire.  Oft  times  the  grove
re-echoes  with  three-throated  hayings  ;  oft-times
the  house  is  affrighted  with  huge,  gliostly  shades.
Nor  is  terror  allayed  by  day  ;  the  grove  is  a  night
unto  itself,  and  the  horror  of  the  underworld  reigns
even  at  midday.  From  this  spot;  sure  rcs})onses  are
given  to  those  who  seek  oracle^  with  thundering
noise  the  fates  are  uttered  from  the  shrine,  and
the  cavern  roars  when  the  god  sends  forth  his  voice.

6«-  When   to   this   place  maddened    Atreus    came,
dragging  his  brother's  sons,  the  altars  were  decked
—  but  who  could  worthily  describe  the  deed?     Be-
hind  their    backs    he    fetters    the    youths'    princely
^  See  Index  s.r'.  "MviliJus."

147
I.   2


THE  TRAGEDIES   OF  SENECA

et  maesta  vitta  capita  purpurea  ligat ;
non  liira  deyunt,  nou  sacer  Bacclii  liquor
tangtnsque  salsa  victiniam  culter  mola.
servatur  omnis  ordOj  ne  tantuui  nefas
non  rite  fiat.

CHORVS

Quis  manum  ferro  admovet  ?  690

NVNTIVS

Ipse  est  sacerdos,  ij)se  funesta  prece
letale  carmen  ore  violento  canit,
stat  ipse  ad  aras,  ipse  devotos  ncci
contrectat  et  componit  et  ferro  admovet  ^  ;
attendit  ipse — nulla  pars  sacri  perit.
lucus  tremescit;,  tota  succusso  solo
nutavit  aula,  dubia  quo  pondus  darct
ac  fluctuanti  similis  ;  e  laevo  aetlicre
atrum  cucurrit  limitem  sidus  trahens,
libata  in  ianes  vina  mutato  fluunt  700

cruenta  Baccho,  regium  capiti  decus
bis  terque  lapsum  est,  flevit  in  temi)lis  ebur.

Movcre  cunctos  monstra,  sed  solus  sibi
immotus  Atreus  constat  atque  ultro  deos
terret  minantes.     iamque  dimissa  mora
adsistit  aris,  torvum  et  obliquum  intuens.
ieiuna-  silvis  qualis  in  Gangeticis
inter  iuvencos  tigris  erravit  duos,
utriusque  praedae  cupida  quo  primum  ferat
incerta  morsus  (flectit  hue  rictus  suos,  710

illo  reflcctit  et  famem  dubiam  tenet),
sic  durus  Atreus  capita  dcvota  impiae
speculatur  irae      quern  jirius  maclet  sibi

1   The  full  form  of  this  technical  phrase  is  seen  in  line  690.
14-8


THYESTES

lumds  and  their  sad  brows  lie  binds  with  purple
fillets.  Nothing  is  lacking,  neither  incense,  nor
sacrificial  wine,  tlie  knife^  the  salted  meal  to  sprinkle
oil" the  victims.  The  accustomed  ritual  is  all  ob-
ser\  ed,  lest  so  great  a  crime  be  not  duly  wrought,

CIIOIUJS

Who  lays  his  hand  unto  the  knife  ?

MESSENGER

Himself  is  priest  ;  himself  with  baleful  prayer
chants  the  deuth-song  with  boisterous  utterance ;
himself  staiuls  by  the  altar;  himself  handles  those
doomed  to  death,  sets  them  in  order  and  lays  hand
upon  the  knife  ;  himself  attends  to  all — no  part  of  \.  |
the  sacred  rite  is  left  undone.  The  grove  begins  to  '  ^  ""
tremble  ;  the  whole  palace  sways  with  the  quaking
earth,  uncertain  whither  to  fling  its  ponderous  mass^
and  seems  to  waver.  From  the  left  quarter  of  the
sky  rushes  a  star,  dragging  a  murky  trail.  The
wine,  poured  ujion  the  fire,  changes  from  wine  and  .

Hows  as  blood  ;  from  the  king's  head  falls  the  crown  (^^-"^
twice  and  again,  and  the  ivory  statues  in  the  temples
weep.

"0=^  These  portent.  '  moved  all,  but  Atreus  alone,
true  to  his  purpose,  stands,  and  e'en  appals  the
threatening  gods.  And  now,  delay  at  end,  he  stands
before  the  altar  with  lowering,  sidelong  glance.  As
in  the  jungle  by  the  Ganges  river  a  hungry  tigress  '
wa\'ers  between  two  bulls,  eager  for  each  prey,  but
doubtful  where  first  to  set  her  fangs  (to  the  one  slie
turns  her  jaws,  then  to  the  other  turns,  and  keeps
her  hunger  waiting),  so  does  cruel  Atreus  eye  the
victims  doomed  by  his  impious  wrath.     He  hesitates

149


THE   TRAGEDIES   OF   SENECA

dubitat,  seciinda  deinde  quein  caede  immolet.
nee  interest,  sed  dubitat  et  saevum  scelus
iuvat  ordinare.


CHORVS

Quern  tamen  ferro  occupat  ?

NVNTIVS

Primus  locus  (ne  desse  pietatem  putes)
avo  dicatur  :  Tantalus  prima  hostia  est.

CHORVS

Quo  iuvenis  animo,  quo  tulit  vultu  necem  ?

NVNTIVS

Stetit  sui  securus  et  non  est  preces  720

perire  frustra  passus  ;  ast  illi  ferus
in  vulnere  ensem  abscondit  et  penitus  premens
iugulo  manum  commisit  :  educto  stetit
ferro  cadaver,  cumque  dubrtasset  diu,
hac  parte  an  ilia  caderet,  in  patruum  cadit.
tunc  ille  ad  aras  Plisthenem  saevus  trahit
adicitque  fratri ;  colla  percussa  amputat ;
corvice  caesa  truncus  in  pronuni  ruit,
querulum  cucin-rit  murmure  incerto  caput.

CHORVS

Quid  deinde  gemina  caede  perfunctus  facit  ?     780
puerone  parcit  au  scelus  sceleri  ingerit?


150


THYESTES

witliin  himself  wlioni  first  to  slaV:,  wliom  next  to
sacrifice  by  the  second  stroke.  It  matters  not^  but
still  he  hesitates,  and  gloats  over  the  ordering  of  his
savage  crime.


Whom,  for  all  that,  does  he  first  attack  with  the
steel  .^

MESSENGER

The  place  of  honour  (lest  you  deem  him  lacking
in  reverence)  to  his  grandsire  ^  is  allotted — Tantiilus
is  the  first  victim.


With  what  spirit,  with  what  countenance  bore  tlie
lad  his  death  ?

MESSENGER

Careless  of  self  he  stood,  nor  did  he  plead,  knowing
such  prayer  were  vain  ;  but  in  his  wound  the  savage
buried  the  sword  and,  deep  thrusting,  joined  hand
Avith  throat.  The  sword  withdrawn,  the  corpse  still
stood  erect,  and  when  it  had  wavered  long  whether
here  or  there  to  fall,  it  feU  _uppn  tlie  uncle.  Then
Plisthenes  to  the  altar  did  that  butcher  drag  and  set
him  near  his  brother.  His  head  with  a  blow  he
severed ;  down  fell  the  body  when  the  neck  was
smitten,  and  the  head  rolled  away,  grieving  with
murmur  inarticulate.

CHORUS

What  did  lie  then  after  the  double  murder  ?  Did
he  spare  one  boy,  or  did  he  heap  crime  on  crime  ?

'  i.e.  the  boy,  Tantalus,  is  named  after  liia  graivlfathei-.
This  "  jjlace  of  honour  "  is  a  ghastly  jest.

151


THE   TRAGEDIES   OF   SENECA


Silva  iubatus  qualis  Armenia  leo
in  caede  multa  victor  armento  incubat
(cruore  rictus  madidus  et  pulsa  fame
non  ponit  iras  ;  hinc  et  hinc  tauros  premens
vitulis  minatiir  dente  iam  lasso  piger) —
non  aliter  Atreus  saevit  atque  ira  tumet,
ferrumque  gemina  caede  perfusum  tenens,
oblitus  in  quern  fureret,  infesta  manu
exegit  ultra  corpus  ;  ac  pueri  statim  740

pectore  receptus  ensis  in  tergo  exstitit.
cadit  ille  et  aras  sanguine  extinguens  suo
per  utrumque  vulnus  moritur.

CHORVS

O  saevum  scelus !

NVNTIVS

Exhorruistis  ?     hactenus  si  stat  nefas,
pius  est.

CHORVS

An  ultra  maius  aut  atrocius
natura  recipit  ?

WNTIVS

Sceleris  hunc  finem  putas  ?
gradus  est.

CHORVS

Quid  ultra  jiotuit  ?     obiecit  feris
lanianda  forsan  corpora  atque  igne  arcuit?

NVNTIVS

Vtinam  arcuisset  !  ne  tegat  functos  hmnus
nee  solvat  ignis  I     avibus  epulandos  licet  750


152


THYESTES

MESSENGER

E'en  as  a  maiicd  lion  in  the  Armenian  woods  with
Qiuch  slaiigliter  falls  vietorious  on  tlic  herd  (his  jaws
reek  with  gore,  and  still,  thougli  hunger  is  appeased,
he  rages  on  ;  now  here,  now  there  charging  the  bulls,
he  threatens  the  calves,  sluggishly  now  and  with
weary  fangs) — not  otherwise  Atreus  ra\es  and  swells
with  wrath  and,  still  grasping  his  sword  drenched
with  double  slaughter,  scarce  knowing  'gainst  Avhoni
he  rages,  with  deadly  hand  he  drives  clean  through
the  body  ;  and  the  sword,  entering  the  boy's  breast,
straightway  stood  out  upon  his  back.  He  falls  and,
staining  the  altar  with  his  blood,  dies  by  a  double
wound.

CHORUS

Oh,  savage  crime  !

MESSENGER

Are  you  so  horror-stricken  ?  If  only  the  crime
stops  there,  'tis  piety.

CHOIILS

Does  nature  admit  crime  still  greater  or  more
dread  ?

MESSENGEIt

Crime's  limit  deemst  thou  this  ?  'Tis  the  first
step  of  crime.

CHORUS

What  further  could  he  do?  Did  he  perchance
throw  the  bodies  to  the  beasts  to  tear,  and  refuse
them  fire  ?

MESSENGER

Would  that  he  had  refused  !  I  pray  not  that  earth
cover  or  fire  consume  the  dead  !  He  may  give  tliem
to  the  birds  to  feast  upon,  may  drag  them  out  as  a

15S


THE   TRAGEDIES   OF   SENECA

ferisque  triste  pabulum  saevis  trahat —
votum  est  sub  hoc  quod  esse  supplicium  solet — -
pater  insepultos  spectet !     o  nullo  seel  us
credibile  in  aevo  quodque  posteritas  neget—
r  erepta  vivis  exta  pectoribus  tremunt
spirantque  venae  coi-qiie  adhuc  paviduni  salit.
at  ille  fibras  tractat  ac  fata  inspicit
et  adhuc  calentes  viscerum  venas  notat.

Postquam  hostiae  placuere^  securus  vacat
iam  fratris  epulis,     ipse  divisum  secat  760

in  membra  corj^us^  amputat  trunco  tenus
umeros  patentes  et  lacertorura  moras^
denudat  artus  durus  atque  ossa  amputat ;
tanturn  ora  servat  et  datas  fidei  manus.
haec  veribus  haerent  viscera  et  lentis  data
stillant  caminis,  ilia  flammatus  latex
candente  aeno  iactat.     iinpositas  dapes
transiluit  ignis  inque  trepidantes  focos
bis  ter  regestus  et  pati  iussus  moram
iavitus  ardet.     stridet  in  veribus  iecur  ;  770

nee  facile  dicam  corpora  an  flammae  magis
gemuere.     piceos  ignis  in  fumos  abit ;
et  ipse  fumus,  tristis  ac  nebula  gravis,
non  rectus  exit  seque  in  excelsum  levat^
ipsos  penates  nube  deformi  obsidet.

O  Phoebe  patiens,  fugeris  retro  licet
medioque  ruptum  merseris  caelo  diem,
sero  occidisti.     lancinat  natos  pater
artusque  mandit  ore  funesto  suos  ;
nitet  fluente  madidus  unguento  comam  780

gravisque  vino  ;  saepe  praechisae  cibum
tenuere  fauces,  in  malis  unum  hoc  tuis
154


//


THYESTES

<>hastly  meal  for  ravenous  beasts — oh,  after  wliat
befell,  one  mio-ht  pray  for  what  is  oft  held  punish-
ment— unburicd  may  the  father  gaze  upon  his  sons  !
O  crime  incredible  to  any  age,  which  coming  genera-
^  tions  will  deny — torn  from  the  still  living  breasts  the
vitals  quiver;  the  lun^  still  breathe  and  the  flutter-
ing heart  still  beats./^^ut  he  handles  the  organs  and
"  enquires  the  .fates,  and  notes  the  markings  of  the
still  warm  entrails.  \

759  When  with  the  victims  he  has  satisfied  himself,
he  is  now  free  to  prepare  his  brother's  banquet.
With  his  own  hands  he  cuts  the  body  into  parts,
severs  the  broad  shoulders  at  the  trunk,  and  the
retarding  arms,  heartlessly  strips  off  the  flesh  and
severs  the  bones ;  the  heads  only  he  saves,  and  the
hands  that  had  been  given  to  him  in  pledge  of  faith.
Some  of  the  flesh  is  fixed  on  spits  and,  set  before
slow  fires,  hangs  dripping  ;  other  parts  boiling  water
tosses  in  heated  kettles.  The  fire  overleaps  the
feast  that  is  set  before  it  and,  tw  ice  and  again  thrown
back  upon  the  shuddering  hearth  and  forced  to  tarry
there,  burns  grudgingly.  The  liver  sputters  on  the
spits ;  nor  could  I  well  say  whether  the  bodies  or  the
flames  made  more  cum])laiiit.  The  fire  dies  doAvn  in
pitchy  smoke  ;  and  the  smoke  itself,  a  gloomy  and
heavy  smudge  does  not  rise  straight  up  and  lift  itself
in  air — upon  the  household  gods  themselves  in  dis-
figuring cloud  it  settles.

"^"^^  O    all-enduring    Phoebus,    though    thou    didst
shrink  afar,  and  in  m[d-sky  didst  bury  the  darkened
day,  still  thou  didst  set  too  late.     The  father  rends /^/"'.f
liis  sons  and  with  baleful  jaws  chews  his  own  flesh  ;
with  hair  dripping  with  liquid  nard  he  sits  resplendent,  ^
heavy   with  wine;  oft-times  the  food  sticks    in  his   ioa
choking  gullet.     In  the    midst  of  these  thy  woes,


THE   TRAGEDIES   OF   SENECA

bonum  est,  Thyesta^  qiiod  mala  ignoras  tua.
sed  et  lioc  peribit.     vcrterit  currus  licet
sibi  ipse  Titan  obviiim  ducens  iter
tenebrisque  facinus  obniat  tetruni  novis
uox  missa  ab  ortu  tempore  alieno  gravis,
tamen  videndum  est.     tota  patefient  mala.


Quo  terranim  superumqiie  parens,
cuius  ad  ortus  noctis  opacae  790

decus  omne  fugit,  quo  vertis  iter
medioque  diem  perdis  Olympo  ?
cur,  Phoebe,  tuos  rapis  aspectus  ?
nondum  serae  nuntius  horae
nocturna  vocat  luniina  Vesper  ;
nondum  Hesperiae  flexura  rotae
iubet  emeritos  solvere  currus  ;
nondum  in  noctem  vergente  die
tertia  misit  bucina  signum  ;
stupet  ad  subitae  tempora  cenae  800

nondum  fessis  bubus  arator.
quid  te  aetherio  pepulit  cursu  ?
quae  causa  tuos  limite  certo
deiecit  equos  ?     numquid  aperto
carcere  Ditis  victi  temptant
bella  Gigantes  ?     numquid  Tityos
pectore  fesso  renovat  veteres
saucius  iras?     num  reiecto
latus  ex})licuit  monte  Typhocus  ?
numquid  struitur  via  Phlegraeos  810

alta  jier  hostcs  et  Thessalicum
Thressa  premitur  Pelion  Ossa  ?

*  i.e.  the  day's.        ^  i.e.  in  mid-heaven,  at  noon.
156


THYESTES

Thyestes,  this  only  good  remains,  tliat  thou  knowest
ii&£-_thy  woes.  But  even  tliis  will  perisli.  'J'lu)ugh  ,y,^^
Titan  iiimself  should  turn  his  chariot  back,  taking
the  opposite  course  ;  though  heavy  night,  rising  at
dawn  and  at  another's  ^  time,  with  strange  shadows
should  bury  this  ghastly  deed,  still  it  must  out.
There  is  no  sin  but  it  shall  be  revealed.

[U/iiia/ural  darkness  has  sellled  over  the  tror/d.]

■^     CHORUS

W'hilhcr,  O  father  of  the  lands  and  skies,  before  ,  .
whose  rising  thick  night  with  all  lier  glories  flees,  /
whither  dost  turn  thy  course  and  why  dost  blot  out  ^
the  day  in  mid-Olympus  ?  ^  Wlty,  O  Phoebus,  dost
snatch  away  thy  face  ?  Not  )'et  does  Vesper,
twilight's  messenger,  summon  the  fires  of  night  ;  not
yet  does  thy  wheel,  turning  its  western  goal,  bid  free
thy  steeds  from  their  completed  task;  not  yet  as  day
fades  into  night  has  the  third  trump  sounded  ;  ^  the
ploughman  with  oxen  yet  unwearied  stands  amazed  at
his  supper-hour's  quick  coming.  What  has  driven
tlicc  from  thy  heavenly  course.''  What  cause  from
their  fixed  track  has  turned  aside  thy  horses  ?  Is
the  prison-house  of  Dis  thrown  wide  and  are  the
conquered  Giants  again  essaying  war  ?  Doth  sore-
wounded  Tityos  renew  in  his  weary  breast  his  ancieiit
wrath  ?  Has  T}  phoeus  thrown  off  the  mountainous
mass  and  set  his  body  free."^  Is  a  highway  being  built
by  the  Phlegraean^  foe,  and  does  Thessalian  Pelion
press  on  Thraeian  Ossa  ?

^  The  Greek  day  was  divided  into  tlireo  parts  of  four
hours  eacli.  The  third  trump  souiuliiig  wouhl  indicate  the
l)eginniiig  of  day's  last  third.

■*  i.e.  tiie  Giants,  so  called  from  Phlegra,  a  valley  in  Tlirace,
uhere  started  their  battle  against  the  gods.

157


THE   TRAGEDIES   OF   SENECA

Solitae  inimdi  periere  vices  ;
nihil  occasus,  nihil  ortus  erit.
stupet  Eoos^  assueta  deo
tradere  frenos  genetrix  primae
roscida  lucis,  perversa  sui
liniina  regni ;  nescit  fessos
tinguere  currus  nee  fumantes
sudore  iubas  mergere  ponto.  820

ipse  insueto  novus  hospitio
Sol  Auroram  videt  occiduus^
tenebrasque  iubet  surgere  nondum
nocte  parata.     non  succedunt
astra  nee  iillo  niicat  igne  polus,
non  Luna  graves  digerit  umbras.

Sed  quidquid  id  est,  utinain  no.x  sit !
trepidant,  trepidant  pectora  magno
percussa  metu :

ne  fatali  cuncta  ruina  830

quassata  labent  iterunique  deos
lioniinesque  premat  deforme  chaos^
iterum  terras  et  mare  cingens
et  vaga  picti  sidera  mundi
natura  tegat.     non  aeternae
facis  exortu  dux  astrorum
saecula  ducens  dabit  aestatis
brumaeque  notas,  non  Plioebeis
oi)via  flammis  demet  nocti

Luna  timores  vincetque  sui  840

fratris  habenas,  curvo  brcvius
limite  curiens.     ibit  in  uniini
congesta  sinum  turba  deoruni.
hie  qui  sacris  pervnis  astris
secat  obliquo  tramite  zonas
flectens  longos  signifer  annos,
lapsa  videbit  sidera  labens;


158


THYESTES

^^^  Heaven's  aecustomed  alternations  are  no  more;
no  setting,  no  rising  shall  there  be  again.  The  dewy
mother  ^  of  the  early  dawn,  Avont  to  hand  o'er  to  the
god  his  morning  reins,  looks  in  amaze  upon  the
disordered  tln-eshold  of  her  kingdom ;  she  is  not
skilled 2  to  bathe  his  w'eary  chariot,  nor  to  plunge  his
steeds,  recking  with  sweat,  beneath  the  sea.  Startled
himself  at  such  unwonted  welcoming,  the  sinking
sun  beiiolds  Aurora,  and  bids  the  shadoAvs  arise,
though  night  is  not  yet  ready.  No  stars  come  out ;
the  heavens  gleam  not  with  any  fires :  no  moon
di,s})els  the  darkness'  heavy  pall.

*-'  But  whatever  this  may  be,  would  that  night
were  here  !  Trembling,  trembling  are  our  hearts,
sore  smit  with  fear,  lest  all  things  fall  shattered  in
fatal  ruin  and  once  more  gods  and  men  be  o'erwhelmed
by  formless  chaos  ;  lest  the  lands,  the  encircling  sea,
and  the  stars  that  wander  in  the  spangled  sky,  nature
l)lot  out  once  more.  No  more  by  the  rising  of  his
(juenchless  torch  shall  the  leader  of  the  stars,  guiding
the  procession  of  the  years,  mark  off  the  summer  and
the  winter  times  ;  no  more  shall  Luna,  reflecting
Phoebus'  rays,  dispel  night's  terrors,  and  outstrip
iicr  brother's  reins,  as  in  scantier  space  ^  she  s{)eeds
on  her  circling  path.  Into  one  abyss  shall  fall  the
hea|>cd-up  throng  of  gods.  The  Zodiac,  which,
making  jwissage  through  the  sacred  stars,  crosses  the
zones  oblicpiely,  guide  and  sign-bearer  for  the  slow-
moving   years,    falling    itself,    shall     sec    the    fallen

'  Aurora.

^  As  is  Tetliys  of  the  western  .sea.

*  i.e.  her  monthly  orbit.

159


THE  TRAGEDIES   OF  SENECA

hie  qui  nondum  vere  benigno

reddit  Zepliyro  vela  tepenti,

Aries  praeeeps  ibit  in  undas,  850

per  quas  pavidam  vexerat  Hellen  ;

hie  qui  nitido  Taurus  eornu

praefert  Hyadas,  secuni  Geiiiinos

trahet  et  curvi  bracchia  Cancri ;

Eeo  flammiferis  aestibus  ardeiis

iterum  e  eaelo  cadet  Hereuleus,

cadet  in  terras  Virgo  relictas

iustaeque  cadejit  pondera  Librae

seeunique  trahent  Scorpion  aerem  ;

et  qui  nervo  tenet  Haemonio  860

pinnata  senex  spicula  Chiron,

rupto  perdet  spicula  nei'vo  ;

pigram  referens  hiemem  gelidus

cadet  Aegoceros  frangetque  tuam,

quisquis  es,  urnam  ;  tecum  exeedent

ultima  caeli  sidera  Pisces^

Plostraque  numquam  pcrfusa  mari

inerget  condcns  omnia  gurges  ;

et  qui  medias  dividit  Vrsas,

fluminis  iiistar  lubricus  Anguis,  870

magnoque  minor  iuncta  Draconi

frigida  duro  Cynosura  gelu,

custosque  sui  tardus  plaustri

iam  non  stabilis  ruet  Arctoj)liy]ax.


^  This  lion  and  other  monsters  were  said  to  have  fallen

from  the  moon.

'■^  Astraea.     See  Index.

•''  Chiron  is  Sagittarius  in  the  constellations  of  the  Zodiac.

*  Capricornus.

"  A  reference  to  the  Zodiacal  sign,  Aquarius,  the  "Water-
man," concerning  whose  identity  ancient  authorities  have
not  agreed.

160


THYESTES

constellations  ;  the  Ram,  who,  ere  kindly  spring  has
come,  gives  back  the  sails  to  the  warm  West-wind,
headlong  shall  plunge  into  the  waves  o'er  which  he
had  borne  the  trenibling  Helle  ;  the  Bull,  who
before  him  on  bright  horns  bears  the  Hyades,  shall
drag  the  Twins  down  with  him  and  the  Crab's  wide-
curving  claws ;  Alcides'  Lion,  with  bui-ning  heat
inflamed,  once  more^  shall  fall  down  from  the  sky  ;
the  Virgin  ^  shall  fall  to  the  earth  she  once  abandoned,
and  the  Scales  of  justice  with  their  weights  shall  fall
and  with  them  shall  drag  the  fierce  Scor{)ion  down ;
old  Chiron,^  who  sets  the  feathered  shafts  upon
Haemonian  chord,  shall  lose  his  shafts  from  the
snapped  bowstring;  the  frigid  Goat*  who  brings
back  sluggish  Avintei",  shall  fall  and  break  thy  urn,
whoe'er  thou  ^  art ;  with  thee  shall  fall  the  Fish,  last
of  the  stars  of  heaven,  and  the  Wain,*^  which  was
ne'er  bathed  by  the  sea,  shall  be  plunged  beneath
the  all-engulfing  waves  ;  the  slippery  Serpent  which,
gliding  like  a  river,  separates  the  Bears,  shall  fall,
and  icy  Cynosura,  the  Lesser  Bear,  together  with  the
Dragon  vast,  congealed  with  cold  ;  and  that  slow-
moving  driver  of  his  wain,  Arctophylax,''  no  longer
fixed  in  place,  shall  fall.

*  Otherwise  known  as  the  "Bear."  The  constellation  i?
unfortunately  named  here,  since  there  was  no  mythological
reason  why  the  Wain  should  not  be  bathed  in  the  Ocean,  as
was  the  case  with  the  Bear.

'  Seneca  badly  mixes  his  mythology  here.  Arctophylax,
the  "bear-keeper,"'  is  appropriate  only  if  the  Bear  is  'men-
tioned in  his  connection  ;  he  should  be  I5ootes  if  the  com-
panion constellation  is  thought  of  as  the  Wain.

161

VOL.  n.  M


THE  TRAGEDIES   OF  SENECA

Nos  e  tanto  visi  populo
digni  premeret  quos  everso
cardine  niundus  ?
in  nos  aetas  ultima  venit  ?
o  nos  dura  sorte  creates,

seu  perdidimus  solem  miseri,  880

sive  expulimus !

abeant  questus,  discede,  timor  !
vitae  est  avidus  quisquis  non  vult
mundo  secum  pereunte  mori.


Aequalis  astris  gradior  et  cunctos  super
altum  superbo  vertice  attingens  polum.
nunc  decora  regni  teneo,  nunc  solium  patris.
dimitto  su})ei-os  ;  summa  votorum  attigi.

ene  est,  abunde  est,  iam  sat  est  etiam  mihi.
sed  cur  satis  sit  ?     pergam  et  impleto  patre  ^  890

funere  suorum.^     ne  quid  obstaret  pudor,
dies  recessit.     perge  dum  caelum  vacat.
utinam  quidem  tenere  fugientes  deos
possem  et  coactos  trahere,  ut  ultvicem  dapem
omnes  viderent !     quod  sat  est,  videat  pater,
etiam  die  nolente  discutiam  tibi
tenebras,  miseriae  sub  quibus  latitant  tuae.
nimis  diu  conviva  securo  iaces
hilarique  vultu,  iam  satis  mensis  datum  est
satisque  Baccho  ;  soDiio  tanta  ad  mala  900

opus  est  Thyeste.

Turba  famularis,  fores
templi  relaxa,  festa  patefiat  domus.

^  So  L.  MiiUer,  followed  by  Bichier:  MSS.  implebo  patrem.
'  Leo  deletes  linen  890'',  891".

^  Probably  referring  to  the  golden  ram.     See  11.  223  flF.
2  i.e.  I  need  make  no  more  prayers  to  them.

162


THYESTES

^'^^  Have  we  of  all  mankind  been  deemed  de-
serving that  lieaveii,  its  poles  uptorn,  should  over-
whelm us  ?  In  our  time  has  the  last  day  come  ?
Alas  for  us,  by  bitter  fate  begotten,  to  misery
doomed,  whether  we  have  lost  the  sun  or  banished
it  !  Away  with  lamentations,  begone,  O  fear  !
fircedy^  indeed  for  life  is  he  who  would  not  die
when  the  world  is  perishing  in  his  company.

[Enler  atreus,  exulting.^

^'^  ATREUS

Peer  of  the  stars  I  move,  and,  towering  over  all,
touch  with  jn-oud  head  the  lofty  heavens.  Now  the
glory  '  of  the  realm  1  hold,  now  my  father's  throne.
I  release  the  gods,-  for  the  utmost  of  my  prayers
I  have  1  attained.  'Tis  well,  'tis  more  than  avcII,  now
'tis  enough  even  for  me.  But  why  enough  ?  Nay,
1  will  go  forward,  e'en  though  the  father  is  full-fed  '
with  h[s^  dead  sons.^  That  shame  might  not~hoid
me  back,  day  has  departed.  On !  while  heaven  is  '
teiiantless,/  O  that  I  might  stay  the  fleeing  deities,*
might  force  and  draw  them  hither  that  they  all
might  see  the  avenging  feast !  But  'tis  enough  if
but  the  father  see.  Even  though  daylight  refuse
me  aid,  I'll  dispel  the  darkness  from  thee,  beneath
which  thy  woes  are  lurking.  Too  long  thou  liest  at
feast  with  care-free  and  cheerful  countenance  ;  now
enough  time  has  been  given  to  tables,  enough  to
wine  ;  for  such  monstrous  ills  there  needs  Thyestes
sober.  [To  the  slaves.]  Ye  menial  throng,  open  the
temple  doors,  let  the  banquet-hall  be  disclosed.     'Tis

^  'I'he  horror  of  the  draught  of  blood  and  wine  is  still  to
follow.
*  i.e.  the  stars  which  have  fled  in  horror  from  the  sky.

163


THE   TRAGEDIES   OF   SENECA
libet  videre,  capita  natorum  intuens
quos  det  coloi'eSj  verba  quae  primus  dolor
effundat  aut  ut  spiritu  expulso  stupens
corpus  rigescat.     fructus  hie  operis  mei  est.
miserum  videre  nolo,  sed  dum  fit  miser.

Aperta  multa  tecta  conlucent  face,
resupinus  ipse  purpurae  atque  auro  incubat,
vino  gravatum  fulciens  laeva  caput.  9^0

(^eructat.     o  me  caelitum  excelsissimum,
regum  atque  regem  !     vota  transcendi  mea.
satur  est,  capaci  ducit  argento  merum —
ne  parce  potu  ;  restat  etiamnunc  cruor
tot  hostiarum  ;  veteris  hunc  Bacchi  color
abscondet.     hoc,  hoc  mensa  cludatur  scypho.
mixtum  suorum  sanguinem  genitor  bibat  :
meum  bibisset.     ecce,  iam  cantus  ciet
festasque  voces  nee  satis  menti  imperat.


THVESTES

Pectora  longis  hebetata  malis,  920

iam  sollicitas  ponite  curas.
fugiat  maeror  fugiatque  pavor,
fugiat  trepidi  comes  exilii
tristis  egestas  rebusque  gravis
pudor  atflictis  ;  magis  unde  cad^s
qu;mi  quo  refert.     magnum,  ex  alto
culmine  lapsum  stabilem  in  piano
figere  gressum  ;  magnum,  ingenti
164


THYESTES

sweet  to  note,  Avhen  lie  sees  his  children's  heads,
what  hue  his  checks  display,  what  words  his  first
grief  pours  forth,  how  his  body^  breathless  with  the
shock,  grows  stiff.  This  is  the  fruit  of  all  my  toil.
To  see  him  wretched  I  care  not,  but  to  see  the
wretchedness  come  uf)on  him .

[The  doors  are  thrown  open,  showing  thyestes  at  the

hanqnet-tahle.]

^^^  The  oj^en  hall  with  many  a  torcli  is  gleaming.

There  he  himself  reclines  at  full  length  on  gold  and

purple,    propping   his   wine-heavy  head   on   his    left

f  hand.      He  belches  with  content.      Oh,  most  exalted

^^f  the  gods  am  I,  and  king  of  kings  !      I  have  o'er-

topped    my   hopes.       His   meal   is   done  ;    from    the

great  silver  cup  he  quaffs  the  wine — spare  not  thy

drinking;    there  still  remains  the  blood  of  all  the

victims,   and  this   the  colour  of  old  wine   will  well

disguise.     With    this,    this   goblet  let  the  meal    be

done.       His    sons'    m[ngled_  blood    let   the    father

drink ;  he  would  have  drunk  my  own.     Lo,  now  he

raises  his  joyous  voice  in  song,  nor  well  controls  his

spirit.

[Tn\ESTES  sits  alone  at  the  hanijuet-tahle,  halj  overcome
with  wine  ;  he  tries  to  sing  and  be  gay,  but,  in  spite
of  this,  soine  vague  premonition  of  evil  weighs  upon
his  spirits.^

T.'IVESTES

O  heart,  dulled  with  long  miseries,  now  put  aside
anxious  cares.  Away  with  grief,  away  with  terror,
away  with  bitter  Avant,  the  companion  of  hunted
exiles,  and  shame  that  weighs  heavy  on  misfortune  ;
.Inore  matters  it  whence  thou  falleSt,  than  to  what.
~'Tis  a  great  thing,  when  fall'n  from  a  lofty  pinnacle, -
to   set   foot   firmly   on    the   plain  ;   great,  midst  the

165


THE  TRAGEDIES   OF  SENECA

strage  malorum  pressum  fracti

pond  era  regni  non  inHexa  930

cervice  pati  nee  degenevem

victumque  malis  rectum  impositas

ferre  ruinas.     sed  iam  saevi

nubila  fati  pelle  ac  miseri

teniporis  omnes  dimitte  notas  ;

redeant  vultus  ad  laeta  boni,

veterem  ex  animo  niitte  Thy  est  en.

Proprium  hoc  niiseros  sequitur  vitium,
numquam  rebus  credere  laetis  ;
redeat  fehx  fortuna  licet^  9-*0

tamen  afflictos  gaudere  piget.
quid  me  revocas  festumque  vetas
celebrare  diem,  quid  flei'e  iubes,
nulla  surgens  dolor  ex  causa  ?
quid  me  prohibes  flore  decenti
vincire  comam  ?     prohibet,  prohibet
vernae  capiti  fluxere  rosae,
pingui  madidus  crinis  amomo
inter  subitos  stetit  horrores,
imber  vultu  nolente  cadit,  950

venit  in  medias  voces  gemitus.
maeror  lacrimas  amat  assuetas,
flendi  miseris  dira  cupido  est.
libet  infaustos  mittere  questus,
libet  et  Tyrio  saturas  ostro
rumj)ere  vestes,  ululare  libet.
mittit  luctus  signa  futuri
menSj  ante  sui  praesaga  mali ;
instat  nautis  fera  tempestas,
cum  sine  vento  tranquilla  tument.  96O

quos  tibi  luctus  quosve  tumultus
fingis,  demens  ?  credula  praesta
pectora  fratri.     iam,  quidquid  id  est,


166


THYESTES

ruins  of  huge  and  crushing  woes,  with  unbending
neck  to  endure  a  wrecked  kingdom's  weiglit,  and
with  soul  heroic,  by  woes  unconquered,  erect  to  bear
tlie  burden  of  misfortune.  But  now,  banish  the
clouds  of  bitter  fate,  and  remove  all  marks  of  those
unhajipy  days  ;  greet  present  hapjiiiiess  with  joyful
countenance,  and  dismiss  the  old  Thyestes  from  thy
thouglits.

^2s  But  this  peculiar  failing  dogs  the  wretched,
never  to  believe  that  happiness  is  liere ;  though
lucky  fortune  come  again,  still  they  who  have  suffered
find  it  liard  to  smile.  Why  dost  restrain  me  and
oppose  my  celebration  of  this  jojful  day  ?  Why  dost
bid  me  weep,  O  grief,  that  rise^  from  no  cause  ?
Why  dost  forbid  with  beauteous  flowers  to  wreathe
my  hair  ?  It  forbids,  it  does  forbid  !  The  spring
roses  have  fallen  from  my  head  ;  m\;_hair.  drij)ping
with  precious  nard,  has  started  up  in  sudden  liorror,
a  rain  of  tears  falls  down  my  unwilling  cheeks,  and
in  the  midst  of  speech  comes  groaning.  Grief  loves
her  accustomed  tears,  and  to  the  wretched  comes  an
ominous  desire  for  weeping.  Even  so,  I  long  to
utter  ill-omened  lamentation,  I  long  to  rend  these  gar-
ments, rich  dyed  with  Tyrian  purple,  I  long  to  shriek'
aloud.  My  mind  gives  warnings  of  distress  at  hand,
l)resaging  its  own  woe  ;  oft  does  a  fierce  storm  draw
nigh  to  mariners,  when  without  wind  the  tranquil
waters  heave.  What  distresses,  what  upheavals  dost
thou  imagine  for  thyself,  thou  fool  ?  Let  thy  heart
trust^thy  brother.      Already,  whate'er  it   be,  either

167


THE  TRAGEDIES  OF   SENECA

vel  sine  causa  vel  sero  times,
nolo  infelix,  sed  vagus  intra
terror  obeiTat,  subitos  fundunt
oculi  fletuS;,  nee  causa  subest.
dolor  an  metus  est  ?     an  habet  lacrimas
magna  voluptas  ?


Festum  diem,  germane,  consensu  pari  970

celebremus  ;  hie  est,  sceptra  qui  firmet  mea
solidamque  pacis  alliget  certae  fidem.

THVESTES

Satias  dapis  me  nee  minus  Bacchi  tenet,
augere  cumulus  hie  voluptatem  potest,
si  cum  meis  sraudere  felici  datui*.


Hie  esse  natos  crede  in  amplexu  patris  ;
hie  sunt  eruntque  ;  nulla  pars  prolis  tuae
tibi  subtrahetur.     ora  quae  exoptas  dabo
totumque  turba  iam  sua  implebo  patrem.
satiaberis,  ne  metue.     nunc  mixti  meis  980

iucunda  mensae  sacra  iuvenilis  colunt ;
sed  accientur.     poculum  infuso  cape
gentile  Baccho.

THYESTES

Capio  fraternae  dapis
donum  ;  paternis  vina  libentur  deis,
tunc  hauriaiitur. — sed  quid  hoc  ?     nolimt  manus
parere,  crescit  pondus  et  dextram  gravat ;
admotus  ipsis  Bacchus  a  labris  fugit
l6S


THYESTES

causelessly  or  too  late  thou  feai*est.  I  would  fain
not  be  unhappy,  but  within  me  va^ue  terror  wanders,
sudden  tears  pour  from  mine  eyes,  and  all  for  naught.
Is  it  from  grief  or  fear  ?  Or  doth  great  joy  hold
tears  ?

ATREUS

[advanchig  to  his  brother  with  show  of  effusive  affection]

With  mutual  accord,  brother,  let  us  keep  this
festal  day  ;  this  is  the  day  which  shall  make  strong
my  sceptre  and  bind  firm  the  bonds  of  peace  assured.

THYESTES  ^pushing  the  remains  of  the  feast  from  him]

I  have  had  my  fill  of  fot)d,  and  no  less  of  wine.
My  pleasure  by  this  crowning  joy  can  be  increased,
if  with  my  sons  I  may  share  my  happiness.

ATREUS  ^^^^c

Be  sure  that  here,  in  their  father's  bosom,  are  thy
sons  ; — here  now,  and  here  shall  be  ;  no  one  of  thy
children  shall  be  taken  from  thee.  The  faces  which
thou  desirest  will  I  give,  and  wholly  with  his
family  will  I  fill  the  sire.  Thou  shalt  be  satisfied,
have  no  fear  of  that.  Just  now,  in  company  with
mv  own,  at  the  children's  table,  they  are  sharing  the
joyful  feast ;  but  I  will  summon  them.  Take  thou
this  cup,  an  heirloom,  filled  with  wine.

THYESTES

I  accept  this  bounty  of  my  brother's  feast ;  let  wine
be  poured  to  our  ancestral  gods,  and  then  be  quaffed.
— But  what  is  this  ?  My  hands  refuse  their  service,
and  the  cup  grows  heavy  and  weighs  down  my  hand  ;
the  lifted  wine  recoils  from  my  very  lips ;  around  my

169


THE  TRAGEDIES   OF   SENECA

circaque  rictus  ore  decepto  fluit

et  ipsa  trepido  mensa  subsiluit  solo.

vix  lucet  ignis  ;  ipse  quin  aether  gravis  990

inter  diem  noctemque  desertus  stupet.

quid  hoc  ?     magis  magisque  concussi  labant

convexa  caeli  ;  spissior  densis  coit

cahgo  tenebris  noxque  se  in  noctem  addidit ;

fugit  omne  sidus.     quidquid  est,  fratri  precor

natisque  pai'cat,  omnis  in  vile  hoc  caput

abeat  procella.     redde  iam  natos  niihi !


ATREVS

Reddum,  et  tibi  illos  nullus  eripiet  dies.

THVESTES

Quis  hie  tuniultus  viscera  exagitat  mea  ?
quid  tremuit  intus  ?     sentio  impatiens  onus  1000

meumque  gemitu  non  meo  pectus  gemit.
adeste,  nati,  genitor  infelix  vocat,
adeste.     visis  fugiet  hie  vobis  dolor —
unde  oblocuntur?

ATllEVS

Expedi  anaplexuSj  pater ;
venere. — natos  ecquid  agnoscis  tuos  ?

THYESTES

Agnosco  fratrem.     sustines  tantuni  nefas
gestare,  Tellus  ?     non  ad  infernam  Styga
tenebrasque  mergis  rupta  et  ingenti  via

*  Time  itself,  as  indicated  by  the  heavens,  is  in  suspense.
170


THYESTES

gaping  jawsj  cheating  my  mouth,  it  flows,  and  the  very
table  leaps  up  from  the  trembHng  floor.     The  lights
burn  dim  ;  nay,  the  very  heavens,  grown  heavy,  stand  ^'
in  amaze  'twixt  day  and  night,^  deserted. ^  What  next  ?
Now  more,  still  more  the  vault  of  the  shattered  sky
is  tottering ;  a  thicker  glooin  with  dense  shades  is.
gathering,  and  night  has  hidden  away  in  a  blacker!
night;  every  star  is  in  full  flight.     Whate'er  it  is,  I
beg  it  may  spare  my  brother  and  ray  sons^  and  may]
the  storm  break  with  all  its  force  on  this  vile  liead.
Give  back  now  my  sons  to  me !

ATREUS

I  will  give  them  back,  and  no  day  shall  tear  them
from  thee.  [Exit.

THYESTES

What  is  this  tumult  that  distui-bs  my  vitals  ?  What
trembles  in  me .''  I  feel  a  load  that  will  not  suffer
me,  and  my  breast  groans  with  a  groaning  that  is
not  mine.  O  come,  rny  sons,  your  unhappy  father
calls  you,  come ;  this  pain  will  pass  away  at  the  sight
of  you^whence  come  their  reproachful  voices.''
[Re-enter  atreus  nilh  a  covered  platler  in  his  Iiands.]

ATREUS

Now,  fathei-,  spread  out  thine  arms  ;  they  are  here.

[He  uncovers  the  platter,  revealing  the  severed  heads  of
TMVESTEs'  S071S.]     Dost  rccognizc  thy  sons  ?

THYESTES

I  recognize  my  brother.  Canst  thou  endure,  O
Earthj^  to  bear  a  crime  so  monstrous  .''  Why  dost  not
burst  asunder  and  plunge  thee  down  to   the  infernal

^  i.e.  by  sun,  moon,  and  stars.

171


THE   TRAGEDIES   OF   SENECA

ad  chaos  inane  regna  cum  rege  abrii^is  ?

non  tola  ab  imo  tecta  convellens  solo  1010

vertis  Mycenas  ?     stare  circa  Tantalum

uterque  iam  debuimus.     hinc  compagibus

et  hinc  revulsis,  si  quid  infra  Tartara  est

avosque  nostros,  hue  tuam  inmani  sinu

demitte  vallem  nosque  defossos  tege

Acheronte  toto.     noxiae  supra  caput

animae  vagentur  nostrum  et  ardenti  freto

Phlegethon  harenas  igneus  totas  agens

exilia  supra  nostra  violentus  fluat —

immota  tellus  pondus  ignavum  iacet,  1020

fugere  superi.

ATREVS

lam  accipe  hos  potius  libens
diu  expetitos.     nulla  per  fratrem  est  mora  ;
fruere,  osculare,  divide  amplexus  tribus.

THYESTES

Hoc  foedus  ?     haec  est  gratia,  haec  fratris  fides  ?
sic  odia  ponis  ?     non  peto,  incolumes  pater
natos  ut  habeam ;  scelere  quod  salvo  dari
odioque  possit,  frater  hoc  fratrem  rogo  :
sepelire  liceat.     redde  quod  cernas  statim
uri ;  nihil  te  genitor  habiturus  rogo,
sed  perditurus.

ATREVS

Quidquid  e  natis  tuis  1030

superest  babes,  quodcumque  non  supercst  habes.


172


THYESTES

Stygian  shades  and^  by  a  huge  opening  to  void  chaos,
snatch  this  kiiigdom  Avith  its  king  away  ?  Why  dost
not  raze  tliis  whole  palace  to  the  very  ground,  and
overturn  Mycenae  ?  We  should  both  of  us  long  since
have  been  with  Tantalus.  Rend  asunder  thy  prison -
bars  on  every  side,  and  if  there  is  any  place  'neath
Tartai'us  and  our  grandsires,^  thither  with  huge  abyss
let  doAvn  thy  chasm  and  hide  us  buried  beneath  all
Acheron.  Let  guilty  souls  wander  above  our  head,
and  let  fier}''  Phlegethon,  with  glowing  flood  down-
pouring  all  his  sands,  flow  tempestuous  above  our
})lace  of  exile — but  the  earth  lies  all  unmoved,  an
insensate  mass ;  the  gods  have  fled  away.


Now,  rather,  take  these  with  joy,  whom  thou  hast
so  long_d_e^sired.  Thy  brother  delays  thee  not ;  enjoy
them,  kiss  them,  divide  thy  embraces  'mongst  the
three.

THYESTES

Is  this  thy  bond  ?  Is  this  thy  grace^  this  thy
fraternal  pledge  ?  Thus  puttest  thou  hate  away  ?
I  do  not  ask  that  I,  a  father,  may  have  my  sons  un-
harmed ;  what  can  be  granted  with  crime  and  hate
intact,  this  I,  a  brother,  of  a  brother  ask  :  that  I  may
bury  them.  Give_me  back  what  thou  mayst  see
burned  at  once.  The  father  asks  naught  of  thee
with  hopes  of  having,  but  of  losing  it.

ATKEUS

Whatever  of  thy  sons  is  left,  thou  hast ;  whatever
is  not  left,  thou  hast.

^  He  means  Tantalus  alone,  using  the  plural  for  the
singular  by  enallage.

173


THE  TRAGEDIES   OF   SENECA

THYESTES

Vtmmne  saevis  pabulum  alitibus  iacent,
an  beluis  sevvantur,  an  pascunt  feras  ?

ATREVS

Epulatus  ipse  cs  impia  natos  dape.

THYESTES

Hoc  est  deos  quod  puduit,  hoc  egit  diem
aversum  in  ortus.     quas  miser  voces  dabo
questusque  quos  ?     quae  verba  sufficient  mihi  ?
abscisa  cerno  capita  et  avulsas  manus
et  rupta  fi'actis  cruribus  vestigia — -
hoc  est  quod  avidus  capere  non  potuit  pater.        1010
volvuntur  iutus  viscera  et  clusum  nefas
sine  exitu  hictatur  et  quaerit  fugam.
da,  frater,  ensem  (sanguinis  multum  mei
habet  ille)  ;  ferro  liberis  detur  via.
negatur  ensis  ?     pectora  inhso  sonent         -
contusa  planctu — sustine,  infelix,  manum,  \
parcamus  umbris.     tale  quis  vidit  nefas  ?
quis  inhospitalis  Caucasi  rupem  asperam
Heniochus  habitans  quisve  Cecropiis  metus
terris  Procrustes?     genitor  en  natos  prcmo  10.50

premorque  natis — sceleris  est  aliquis  modus  ?


ATREVS

Sceleri  modus  debetur  ubi  facias  scelus,
non  ubi  reponas.      hoc  quoque  exiguum  est  mihi.
ex  vulnere  ipso  sanguinem  calidum  in  tua
defundere  ora  debui,  ut  viventium
biberes  cruorem — verba  sunt  irae  data
174


THYESTES


THVESTES


Do  tliey  lie  a  prey  for  the  wild  birds  ?  Are  they
reserved  for  monsters  ?     Are  they  food  for  beasts  ?

ATUEl'S

Thyself  hasl  feasted  on  ihy  sons,  an  impious  meal.

THYESTES

'Twas  this  that  shamed  the  gods  ;  this  drove  the
day  back  aoainst  its  dawning.  What  cries  in  my
misery  shall  I  utter,  what  complaints  ?  What  words
will  suffice  for  me  ?  I  see  the  severed  heads,  the
torn-off  hands,  the  feet  wrenched  from  the  broken
legs — this  much  the  father,  for  all  his  greed,  could
not  devour.  Their  flesh  is  turning  round  within  me,
and  my  imprisoned  crime  struggles  vainly  to  come
forth  and  seeks  way  of  escape.  Give  me  thy  sword,
O  brother,  the  S}vord  reeking  with  my  blood ;  by  the
steel  let  deliverance  be  given  to  my  sons.  Dost
refuse  the  sword  ?  Then  let  my  breast  resound,
bruised  by  crushing  blows — hold  thy  hand,  unhapjiy
man,  let  us  spare  the  shades.  Who  ever  beheld  such
crime?  What  Heniochian,  dwelling  on  wild  Caucasus'
rough  rocks,  or  what  Procrustes,  terror  of  the  Ce-
cropian  land .''  Lo,  I,  the  father,  overwhelm  my  sons,
and  by  my  sons  am  overwhelmed — of  crime  is  there
no  limit .''

ATREUS

Crime  should  have  limit,  when  the  crime  is  wrouglit,
not  when  repaid.      E'en  this  is  not  enough  for  me.  j-
Straight  from  the  very  wound  I  should  have  poured
the    hot  blood  dqwrL  thy  throat,  that  thou  mightst
drink  gore  of  thy  living  sons — my  wrath  was  cheated

175


THE   TRAGEDIES   OF   SENECA

dum  pvopero.     ferro  vulnera  inipresso  dedi,

cecidi  ad  aras,  caede  votiva  focos

placavi  et  artus,  corpora  exanima  aniputans,

in  parva  carpsi  frusta  et  haec  ferventibus  IO6O

demersi  aenis,  ilia  lentis  ignibus

stillare  iussi.      membra  nervosque  abscidi

viventibus^  gracilique  traiectas  veru

mugire  fibras  vidi  et  aggessi  manu

mea  ipse  flammas.     omnia  haec  melius  pater

fecisse  potuit,  cecidit  in  cassum  dolor :

scidit  ore  natos  impio,  sed  nesciens,

sed  nescientes  !

THYESTES

Clausa  litoribus  vagis
audite  maria,  vos  quoque  audite  hoc  scelus,
quocumque,  di,  fugistis  ;  audite  inferi,  1070

audite  terrae,  Noxque  Tartarea  gi"avis
et  atra  nube,  vocibus  nostris  vaca
(tibi  sum  relictus,  sola  tu  miserum  vides,
tu  quoque  sine  astris),  vota  non  faciam  improba,
pro  me  nihil  precabor— et  quid  iam  potest
pro  me  esse  ?     vobis  vota  prospicient  mea.
tu,  summe  caeli  rector,  aetheriae  potens
dominator  aulae,  nubibus  totum  horridis
convolve  mundum,  bella  ventoruni  undique
committe  et  omni  parte  violentuni  iiitona,  1080

manuque  ^  non  qua  tecta  et  immeritas  domos
telo  petis  minore,  sed  qua  montium
tergemina  moles  cecidit  ct  qui  montibus
stabant  pares  Gigantes, — haec  arnia  expcdi

'  So  A :  Leo,  icith  E,  inaiiuiiKjue.

176


THYESTES

by  my  haste.     With  the  deep-driven  sword  I  smote
tiieni ;  I  slew  thein  at  the  altars  ;  with   tlieir  offered
blood  I  appeased  the  sacred  fires  ;  hewing  their  life-
less bodies,  into  small  scraps  I  tore  them,  and  some
into  boiling  cauldrons  did  I  i)lunge,  and  some  before
slow  fires   I  set  to  drij).      Their  limbs  and  sinews  I
rent  asunder  while  still  they  lived,  and  their  livers,
transfixed  on  slender  spits  and  sputtering  I  saw,  and ;
with  my  own  hand  I  fed  the  flames.   All  these  things  1
better  the   fjither  might  have   done  ;   my   grief  has  i
fallen  fruitless ;  with  impious  teeth  he  tore  his  sons,  '
but  unwittingly,  but  them  unwitting.^


Hear,  O  ye  seas,  by  shifting  shores  imprisoned,  and
ye,  too,  hear  this  crime,  whithersoever  you  have  fled,
y^^iids  ;  hear,  l()rds  of  the  underworld  :  hear,  lamls,
and  Night,  heavy  w  ith  black,  Tartarean  fogs,  give  ear
unto  my  cries;  (to  thee  am  I  abandoned,  thou  only
lookest  on  my  woe,  thou  als'^  forsaken  of  the  stars  :)
no  wicked  pleas  will  I  make,  naught  for  myself  im-
plore—  and  what  now  can  I  ask  in  my  own  behalf  ?
For  you  '  shall  my  prayers  be  offered.  O  thou,  ex-
alted ruler  of  the  sky,  who  sittest  in  majesty  upon
the  throne  of  heaven,  enwrap  the  whole  universe  in
awful  clouds,  set  the  winds  warring  on  every  hand,
and  from  every  quarter  of  the  sky  let  the  loud
thunders  roll  ;  not  with  what  hand  thou  seekest
houses  and  undeserving  homes,  using  thy  lesser  bolts,
but  with  that  hand  by  which  the  threefold  mass  of
mountains  fell,  and  the  Giants,  who  stood  level  with

^  Atrcus  would  have  had  both  father  and  sons  conscious  of
whfit  they  did  and  sufTered.

-  i.e.  the  gods  of  heaven,  who  have  fled  from  the  sight  of
crime,  and  vmonTEe  now  addresses.

177


THE  TRAGEDIES   OF   SENECA

ignesque  torque,     vindica  amissum  diem,

iaculare  flammas,  lumen  ereptum  polo

fulminibus  exple.     causa,  ne  dubites  diu,

utriusque  mala  sit ;  si  minus,  mala  sit  mea  :

me  pete,  trisulco  flammeam  telo  facem

per  pectus  hoc  transmitte.     si  natos  pater  lOpO

humare  et  igni  tradere  extremo  volo,

ego  sum  cremandus.     si  nihil  superos  movet

nullumque  telis  impios  numen  petit,

aeterna  nox  permaneat  et  tenebris  tegat

inmensa  longis  scelera.     nil,  Titan,  queror,

si  perseveras.

.  AT REVS

Nunc  meas  laudo  manus,
nunc  parta  vera  est  palma.     perdideram  scelus,
nisi  sic  doleres.     liberos  nasci  mihi
nunc  credo,  castis  nunc  fidem  reddi  toris.

THYESTES

Quid  liberi  meruere  ?

ATIIEVS

Quod  fuerant  tui.  1100


THYESTES


Natos  parenti-


ATREVS

Fateor  et,  quod  me  iuvat,


certos.
178


THYESTES

the  mountains — these  arras  let  loose  and  hurl  tliy
fires.  Make  compensation  for  the  banished  day,
brandish  thy  flames,  and  the  light  that  was  snatched
from  heaven  with  thy  lightning's  flash  supply.  Let
the  cause,  lest  long  thou  hesitate^  of  each  one  of  us
be  evil ;  if  not,  let  mine  be  evil ;  aim  thou  at  me,
tlu-ongh  this  heart  send  thy  three-forked  flaming
bolt.  If  I  their  father  would  give  his  sons  to  burial
and  commit  them  to  the  funeral  flames,  I  must
myself  be  burned.  But  if  naught  moves  the  gods,
and  no  divinity  hurls  darts  against  the  impious,  may
ni^it.  sta}-  on  for  ever,  and  cover  with  endless  dark-
ness boundless  crimes.  No  jjrotest  do  I  make^  O
sun,  if  thou  continue  steadfast.^

ATREUS

Now  do  I  praise  my  handiwork^  now  is  the  true
paIm_won.  I  had  wasted  my  crime,  didst  thou  not
suffer  thus.  Now  do  I  believe  my  children  are  my
own,  now  may  I  trust  once  more  that  my  niarriage-
bed  is  pure.

THVESTES

What  was  my  children's  sin  ?

ATHEUS

That  they  were  thine.

THVESTES

Sons  to  the  father ^

ATHEUS

Yea,  and  what  gives  me  joy,  surely_thy  sons.


*  i.e.  in  liiding  thy  face,  as  at  present.
2  thoi\  didst  give  to  be  devoured.


179


N   2


THE   TRAGEDIES   OF   SENECA

THVESTES

Piorum  praesides  tester  deos.

ATREVS

Quin  coniugales  ?

THVESTES

Scelere  quis  pensat  scelus  ?

ATREVS

Scio  quid  queraris :  scelere  praerepto  doles,
nee  quod  nefandas  hauseris  angit  dapes  ;
quod  non  pararis.     fuerat  hie  animus  tibi
instruere  similes  inscio  fratri  cibos
et  adiuvante  liberos  matre  aggredi
similique  leto  sternere.     hoc  unum  obstitit —
tuos  putasti.

THVESTES

Vindices  aderunt  dei ;  1110

his  piiiiiendum  vota  te  tradunt  mea.

ATREVS

Te  puniendum  liberis  trado  tuis.


180


THYESTES

THYESTES

I  call  on  the  gods  who  guard  the  innocent.

ATREUS

Why  not  the  marriage-gods  ?

THYESTES

Wlio  punishes  crime  with  crime  ?


I  know  Avhat  thou  complainst  of:  thou  grievest
that  I  have  forestalled  thee  in  the  crime,  and  art
distressed,  not  because  thou  hast  consumed  the
ghastly  feast,  but  because  thou  didst  not  offer  it
to  me.  This  had  been  thy  purpose,  to  prepare  for
thine  unwitting  brother  a  like  feast,  and  with  their
mother's  aid  to  assail  his  sons  and  lay  them  low  in
like  destruction.  This  one  thing  stayed  thee — thou
didst  think  them  thine.  i,  -^  ;■

THYESTES

The  gods  will  be  present  to  avenge ;  to  them  for
punishment  my  prayers  deliver  thee.

ATREUS

To  thy  sons  for  punishment  do  I  deliver  thee.


181


HERCVLES   OETAEVS


DRAMATIS    PERSONAE

Hercules,  son  of  Jupiter  and  Alcmena.
Hyllus,  son  of  Hercules  and  De'ianira.
Alcmena,  daughter  of  Electryon,  king  of  Mycenae.

Ueianira,  daughter  of  Oeneus,  king  of  Aetolia,  and  wife  of

Hercides.
loLE,  daughter  of  Etirytus,  king  of  Oechalia.
NuKSE  of  Deianira.

Philoctetes,  a  prince  of  Thessaly,  son  of  Poeas,  and  the
faithful  friend  of  Hercules.

LicHAS,  the  7nessenger  (Tpersona  mnt<i)  of  De'ianira  to  Hercules.

Chorus  of  Aetolian  iromen,  faithful  to  Deianira.

Chorus  of  Oechalian  maidens,  suffering  captivity  in  company
u-ith  lole.

The  Scene  is  laid,  first  in  Euboea,  and  later  at  the  home
of  Hercules  in  Trachin.


ARGUMENT

The  lo>ig,  heroic  life  of  Hercules  has  neared  its  end.
His  tire! re  great  tasks,  assigned  him  by  Euri/sthens
through  Juno's  hatred,  have  been  done.  His  latest
victory  was  over  Eurytus,  king  of  Occhalia.  Him  he
sletv  and  overthrew  his  house,  because  the  monarch  would
not  give  him  lole  to  wife.

And  now  the  hero,  having  overcome  the  world,  and
Pluto's  realm  beneath  the  earth,  aspires  to  heaven.  He
sacrifices  to  Cenaean  Jove,  and  prays  at  last  to  be
received  into  his  proper  home.


HERCVLES   OETAEVS


HERCVLES

Sator  deorum,  cuius  excussum  nianu
utraeque  Phoebi  sentiunt  fulmen  domus,
secure  regna  ;  protuli  pacem  tibi,
quacumque  Nereus  porrigi  terras  vetat.
non  est  tonandum  ;  perfidi  reges  iacent,
saevi  tyranni.     fregimus  quidquid  fuit
tibi  fulminandum.     sed  mihi  caelunij  parens,
adhuc  negator  ?     pai-ui  certe  love
ubique  dignus  teque  testata  est  meum
patrem  noverca.     quid  tamen  nectis  moras  ?  10

numquid  timemur  ?     numquid  impositum  sibi
non  poterit  Atlas  ferre  cum  caelo  Herculem  ?
quid  astra,  genitor,  quid  negas  ?     mors  me  tibi
certe  remisit,  omne  concessit  malum
quod  terra  genuit,  pontus  aer  inferi.
nullus  per  urbes  errat  Arcadias  leo,
Stymphalis  icta  est,  Maenali  nulla  est  fera;
sparsit  peremptus  aureum  serpens  nemus
et  hydra  vires  posuit  et  notos  Hebro
cruore  pingues  hospitum  fregi  greges  20


1  East  and  West,  or  both  hemispheres.

2  The  Arcadian  stag.     Its  capture  was  the  third  labour  of
Hercules.

186


HERCULES    OETAEUS

[/«  Euboea,  near  Oechalia,  ajler  the  overthrow  of  Eurylus,
king  ojthat  cilyJ\

HERCULES

O  SIRE  of  gods,  hurled  by  whose  liand  both  homes  ^
of  Phoebus  feel  the  thunderbolt,  reign  thou  un-
troubled ;  peace  have  I  'st;iblished  for  thee  wherever
Nereus  forbids  the  land  to  extend  its  bounds.  Thou
needst  not  thunder  now ;  ffilse  kings  lie  low,  and
cruel  tyrants.  I  have  crushed  all  who  merited  thy
bolts.  But  to  me,  father,  is  heaven  still  denied  ?
Of  a  surety  have  I  everywhere  proved  worthy  Jove ;
and  that  thou  art  sire  of  mine  my  stepdame  testifies.
Vet  why  dost  still  contrive  delays  ?  Am  I  cause  of
fear  ?  Will  Atlas  not  avail  to  bear  up  Hercules
placed  upon  him  together  with  the  sky .''  Why,  O
father,  why  dost  thou  deny  the  stars  to  me  ?  Verily
hath  death  given  me  back  to  thee  ;  and  every  evil
thing  which  earth,  sea,  air,  the  lower  world,  produced,
hath  yielded  to  my  might.  No  lion  prowls  amidst
Arcadia's  towns ;  the  Stymphalian  bird  is  smitten  ;
the  beast  of  Maenalus-  is  no  more;  the  dragon,^
slain,  hath  sprinkled  the  golden  orchard  with  his
blood;  the  hydra's*  strength  is  gone;  the  lierds,^
well  known  to  Hebrus,  fat  with  strangers'  blood,  have

'  Which  guarded  the  apples  of  the  Hesperidea.  See  Index
8.V.  "  Hesperides."

*  See  Index.  *  i.e.  of  Dioniedea.

187


THE  TRAGEDIES   OF  SENECA

hostisque  traxi  spolia  Thermodontiae.
vidi  silentum  fata  nee  tantum  redi,
sed  trepidus  atrum  Cerberum  vidit  dies
et  ille  soleni.     null  us  Antaeus  Libys
animam  resumit,  cecidit  ante  aras  suas
Busiris,  una  est  Geryon  sparsus  manu
taurusque  jiopulis  horridus  centum  pavor.
quodcumque  tellus  genu  it  infesta  occidit
meaque  fusum  est  dextera  ;  iratis  deis
non  licuit  esse.

Si  negat  mundus  feras  SO

animum  novereaj^  redde  nunc  nato  patrem
vel  astra  forti.     nee  peto  ut  monstres  iter  ;
permitte  tantum,  genitor  ;  inveniam  viam.
vel  si  times  ne  terra  concipiat  feras,
properet  malum  quodcumque,  dum  terra  Herculem
habet  videtque  ;  nam  quis  invadet  mala
aut  quis  per  urbes  rursus  Argolicas  erit
lunonis  odio  dignus  ?     in  tutum  meas
laudes  redegi,  nulla  me  tellus  silet.
me  sensit  ursae  frigidum  Scythicae  genus  40

Indusque  Phoebo  subditus,  cancro  Libys.
te,  clare  Titan,  tester  :  occurri  tibi
quacumque  fulges,  nee  meos  lux  prosequi
potuit  triumphos,  solis  excessi  vices
intraque  nostras  substitit  metas  dies,
natura  cessit,  terra  defecit  gradum  :
lassata  prior  est.     nox  et  extremum  chaos

^  So  Ricliter,  loith  A  :  Leo  f  animum  novercam,  conjecturing
tandem  novercae.


^  i.e.  tlie  golden  girdle  of  Hippolyte,  queen  of  the  Amazons.

2  The  gods,  in  wratli,  were  supposed  to  have  sent  monsters
on  the  earth,  and  by  slaying  these  Hercules  has  frustrated
that  wrath.

188


HERCULES   OETAEUS

I  destroy edj  and  have  brous^lit  away  Tliermodon's
spoils  ^  of  war.  The  lot  of  the  silent  throng  have  I
beheld ;  and  not  alone  have  I  returned,  but  shuddering
day  hath  seen  black  Cerberus,  and  he  the  sun.  No
longer  doth  the  Libyan  Antaeus  renew  his  strength  ;
before  his  own  altars  hath  Busiris  fallen  ;  by  my  sole
hand  hath  Geryon  been  o'crthrown,  and  the  bull,
dread  terror  of  a  hundred  tribes.  Whatever  hostile
earth  hath  'gendered  is  ftvllen,  by  my  right  hand
laid  low  ;  the  anger  of  the  gods  hath  been  set  at
naught.^

'^'^  If  the  earth  is  done  with  monsters,  if  my  step-
dame  is  done  with  wrath,  give  back  now  the  father  to
his  son,  yea,  the  stars  unto  the  hero.  I  ask  thee  not
to  show  the  way  to  me  ;  but  grant  thy  permission,
father,  and  the  way  Lll  find.  Or,  if  thou  fearest  that
earth  shall  yet  give  birth  to  monsters,  let  the  ill  make
haste,  whate'er  it  be,  while  yet  the  earth  doth  hold
and  look  on  Hercules  ;  for  who  else  Avill  attack  evil
thmgs,  or  who,  throughout  the  Argive  cities,  will  be
worthy  Juno's  hate  ?  I  have  my  honours  safe  be-
stowed ;  there  is  no  land  but  sings  my  praise.  The
race  that  shivers  'neath  the  Scythian  Bear^  hath
known  me  ;  the  sun-scorched  Indian  and  the  tropic
African.  O  glowing  Sun,  bear  witness  :  I  have
encountered  thee  Avhere'er  thou  shinest,  nor  could
thy  beams  keep  pace  with  my  triumphant  course  ;
I  have  gone  beyond  the  changes  of  the  sun,  and  day
hath  halted  far  within  my  bounds.  Nature  hath
yielded  to  me,  and  earth  hath  failed  my  feet ;  she
hath  been  weary  Hrst.^     Night  and  utter  chaos  have

^  i.e.  the  Scythians,  dwelling  far  north  beneath  the  Bear.

*  It  is  as  if  the  whole  earth,  trying  to  keep  pace  with
Hercules,  and  to  give  him  new  land  to  travel  over,  has
become  weary  of  the  attempt.

189


THE  TRAGEDIES   OF   SENECA

in  me  incucurrit ;  inde  ad  hunc  orbem  redi,

nemo  unde  retro  est.     tulimus  Oceani  minas,

nee  ulla  valuit  quatere  tempestas  ratem  50

quamcimique  pressi.     pars  quota  est  Perseus  mei  ?

iam  vacuus  aether  non  potest  odio  tuae

sufficere  nuptae  quasque  devincam  feras

tellus  timet  concipere  nee  monstra  invenit.

ferae  negantur  ;  Hercules  monstri  loco

iam  coepit  esse,     quanta  enim  fregi  mala,

quot  scelera  nudus  !     quidquid  immane  obstitit,

solae  manus  stravere  ;  nee  iuvenis  feras

timui  nee  infans.     quidquid  est  iussum  leve  est,

nee  ulla  nobis  segnis  illuxit  dies.  60

o  quanta  fudi  monstra  quae  nullus  mihi

rex  imperavit !     institit  virtus  mihi

lunone  peior.

Sed  quid  inpavidum  genus
fecisse  prodest  ?     non  habent  pacem  dei ;
purgata  tellus  omnis  in  caelo  videt
quodcumque  timuit ;  transtulit  luno  feras.
ambit  peremptus  cancer  ardentem  plagam
Libyaeque  sidus  fertur  et  messes  alit ;
annum  fugacem  tradit  Astraeae  leo,
at  ille,  iactans  fervidam  collo  iubam,  70

austrum  madentem  siccat  et  nimbos  rapit.
invasit  omnis  ecce  iam  caelum  fera
meque  antecessit ;  victor  e  terris  meos
specto  labores,  astra  portentis  prius

^  i.e.  he  is  the  only  unconquered  creature  left  on  earth— a
marvel,  past  the  bounds  of  nature.

2  On  the  very  day  of  his  biith  he  killed  two  huge  snakes
which  Juno  sent  against  him.  *  i.  e.  Eurystheus.

190


HERCULES   OETAEUS

assailed  me,  and  thence  to  this  world  have  I  come
again  whence  none  e'er  returns.  I  have  borne
Ocean's  threats,  and  no  storm  of  his  has  availed  to
wreck  the  ship  which  I  have  weighted  down.  How
trivial  Perseus'  deeds  compared  with  mine  I  Now
can  the  empty  air  no  more  suffice  the  hatred  of  thy
wife,  and  earth  fears  to  produce  beasts  for  me  to
conquer,  nor  can  she  find  monsters  more.  Beasts  are
at  end  ;  'tis  Hercules  now  begins  to  hold  the  place
of  monster.^  For  how  great  evils  have  I  crushed,
how  many  crimes,  and  all  unarmed  !  Whatever
monstrous  thing  opposed  me,  with  but  my  hands  I
laid  it  low ;  nor  was  there  ever  savage  thing  which
as  youth  or  babe  -  I  feared.  '  All  my  commanded
toils  seem  light,  and  no  inactive  day  has  ever  dawned
for  me.  Oh,  how  great  monsters  have  I  overtiirovvn,
which  no  king-^  bade  me  meet  I  My  courage,  more
relentless  than  Juno's  self,  has  urged  me  on.  ;

'^^  But  what  avails  it  to  have  freed  the  race  of  men
from  fear  ?  Now  have  the  gods  no  peace  ;  the  freed
earth  sees  in  the  sky  all  creatures  which  she  feared  ;
for  there  hath  Juno  set  them."*  The  crab  I  slew
goes  round  the  torrid  zone,  is  known  as  Libya's
constellation,^  and  matures  her  grain  ;  the  lion  to
Astraea  gives  the  flying  year ; ''  but  he,  his  burning
mane  upon  his  neck  back  tossing,  dries  up  the
dripping  south-wind  and  devours  the  clouds.  Behold,
now  has  every  beast  invaded  heaven,  forestalling  me  ;
though  victor,  I  gaze  upon  my  labours  from  the
earth  ;  for  to  monsters  first  and  to  wild  beasts  has

■•  i.e.  she  has  changed  them  to  constellations  in  tlie  sky.

■*  The  zodiacal  constellation  of  the  Crab,  in  which  the  sun
attains  his  suraincr  solstice.

"  i.e.  tlie  sun  passes  from  Leo  into  Virgo.  For  Astrea  see
Index,  6.  i;.


THE  TRAGEDIES   OF   SENECA

ferisque  luno  tribiiit,  ut  caelum  mihi

faceret  timendiim.     sparserit  mundum  licet

caelumque  terris  peius  ac  peius  Styge

irata  faciat,  dabitur  Alcidae  locus.

si  post  feras,  post  bella^  post  Stygium  canem

baud  dum  astra  merui,  Siculus  Hesperium  latus      80

tangat  Pelorus^  una  iam  tellus  erit ;

illinc  fugabo  maria.      si  iungi  iubes^

comtnittat  undas  Isthmos,  et  iuncto  salo

nova  ferantur  Atticae  puppes  via.

mutetur  orbis  :  vallibus  currat  novis

Hister  novasque  Tanais  accipiat  vias.

da,  da  tuendos,  luppiter,  saltern  deos  :

ilia  licebit  fulmen  a  parte  auferas,

ego  quam  tuebor.      sive  glacialem  poluni,

seu  me  tueri  fervidam  partem  iubes,  90

hac  esse  superos  parte  securos  puta.

Cirrhaea  Paean  templa  et  aetheriam  domum

serpente  caeso  meruit — o  quotiens  iacet

Python  in  hydra !     Bacchus  et  Perseus  deis

iam  se  intulere  ;  sed  quota  est  mundi  plaga

oriens  subactus  aut  quota  est  Gorgon  fera !

quis  astra  natus  laudibus  meruit  suis

ex  te  et  noverca  ?     quem  tuli  mundum  peto.

Sed  tu,  comes  laboris  Herculei,  Licha,
perfer  triumphos,  Euryti  victos  lares  100

stratumque  regnum,     vos  pecus  rapite  ocius

'  i.e.  Italian.

^  The  Isthmus  of  Corinth.

192


HERCULES   OETAEUS

Juno  given  stars,  that  to  me  she  might  make  the  sky
a  place  of  dread.  Yet,  though  in  her  rage  she  scatter
them  o'er  the  sky,  though  she  make  heaven  worse
than  earth,  yea,  -worse  than  Styx,  to  Alcides  shall
room  be  given.  If  after  beasts,  after  wars,  after
the  Stygian  dog,  I  have  not  yet  earned  the  stars,  let
Sicilian  Pelorus  touch  the  Hesperian  ^  shore,  and  the};
both  shall  become  one  land  ;  thence  will  I  put  seas
to  Hight.  If  thou  bidst  seas  be  joined,  let  Isthmus  "^
give  passage  to  the  waves  and  on  their  united  waters
let  Attic  ships  along  a  new  way  be  borne.  Let
eartli  be  changed ;  along  new  valleys  let  Ister  run
and  Tanais  receive  new  channels.  Give,  give  me,
O  Jujnter,  at  least  the  gods  to  guard  ;  there  mayst
thou  put  aside  thy  thunderbolts  where  I  shall  be  on
guard.  Whether  thou  bidst  me  guard  the  icy  pole,
whether  the  torrid  zone,  there  count  the  gods  secure.
Cirrha's  shrine^  and  a  place  in  heaven  did  Pean*
earn  by  one  serpent's  ^  slaughter — oh,  how  many
Pythons  in  the  hydra  lie  o'erthrown  I  Already  have
Bacchus  and  Perseus  reached  the  gods  ;  but  how-
small  a  tract  of  earth  was  the  conquered  east,**  or  how-
meagre  a  spoil  was  Gorgon  !  ^  what  son  of  thine  and
of  my  stepdame  has  by  his  praises  merited  the
stars  ?     I  seek  the  skies  which  I  myself  have  borne.^

[He  (itru.s  lo  LiciiAs]

^  But  do  thou,  Lichas,  comrade  of  the  toils  of
Hercules,  proclaim  his  triumphs — the  conquered
house  of  Eurytus,  his  kingdom  overthrown.  [To  l/ie
other    attendants.^     Do    you    with    speed    drive    the

'  i.e.  Delphi.         *  Apollo.        «  The  Python.

•  i.e.  India,  the  scene  of  Bacchus'  conquests.
'  Slain  by  Perseus.

*  i.e.  when  he  relieved  Atlas  of  his  burden.

VOL.    II.  O


THE   TRAGEDIES   OF   SENECA

qua  templa  tolleiis  acta  Cenaei  lovis
austro  timendum  spectat  Euboicum  mare.


Par  ille  est  superis  cui  pariter  dies
et  fortuna  fuit ;  mortis  habet  vices
lente  cum  trahitur  vita  gementibus.
quisquis  sub  pedibus  fata  rapacia
et  puppem  posuit  Huminis  ultimi,
non  captiva  dabit  bracchia  vinculis
nee  pompae  veniet  nobile  ferculum  ;  110

numquam  est  ille  miser  cui  facile  est  mori.
ilium  si  medio  decipiat  ratis
ponto^  cum  Borean  expulit  Africus
aut  Eurus  Zephyrum,  cum  mare  dividunt,
non  puppis  lacerae  fi-agmina  conligit,
ut  litus  medio  speret  in  aequore  ;
vitam  qui  poterit  reddere  protinus,
solus  non  poterit  naufragium  pati.

Nos  turpis  macies  et  lacrimae  tenent
et  crinis  patrio  pulvere  sordidus  ;  120

nos  non  flamma  rapax,  non  fragor  obruit.
felices  sequeris,  mors,  miseros  fugis.
stamus,  nee  patriae  ^  messibus  ^  lieu  locus
at^  silvis  dabitur,  lapsaque  sordidae
fient  templa  casae  ;  iam  gelidus  Dolops
hac  ducet  pecudes  qua  tepet  obrutus
stratae  qui  superest  Oechaliae  cinis.

1  So  JRichter,  with  A  :  patriis  E.

^  messibus  N.  Heinsixis :  moenibus  A  :  Leo  marls  the  line
zorrvpt,  and  conjectures  stamus  nee  patiia  est :  messibus  h.  1.
'  Leo  et,  with  o>,  corrected  by  Scali'jer,

194


HERCULES   OETAEUS

herds  to  where  the  shore^  lifting  on  high  tlie  shrine
of  Cenacan  Jove,^  looks  out  upon  the  Euboic  sea,
fearsome  with  southern  gales.

[Exit  HERCULES  OH  his  woy  to  the  Cenacan  Promontory,
intending  there  to  sacri/iee  to  Jove.]

CHORUS  OF  CAi'TlVE  OECUALI AN   MAIDENS  IN  COMPANY
WITH    lOLE

Mate  of  tile  gods  is  he  whose  life  and  fortune
have  gone  side  by  side  ;  but  when  'tis  slowly  dragged
out  midst  lamentations,  life  has  the  lot  of  death.
Whoe'er  has  set  beneath  his  feet  the  greedy  fates,
and  the  last  river's  barque,^  he  will  not  give  his  captive
arms  to  bonds  nor  fare  in  the  victor's  train  a  noble
spoil ;  ne'er  is  he  wretched  for  whom  to  die  is  easy.
Should  his  boat  be  wrecked  far  out  upon  the  deep,
where  South  with  North-wind  strives,  and  East  with
West,  rending  the  sea  asunder,  he  does  not  gather
up  the  wreckage  of  his  broken  ship,  that  in  mid-
ocean  he  may  h()|)e  for  land  ;  he  who  can  straightway
render  up  his  life,  he  only  from  a  wreck  can  suffer
naught.

^^^  But  us,  foul  wasting  claims,  and  tears,  and  hair
defiled  by  the  dust  of  fatherland  ;  us  nor  greedy
flame  nor  crashing  wall  has  overwhelmed.  The
happy  dost  thou  pursue,  O  Death,  the  wretched  thou
rieest.  Here  we  stand,  yet  alas  !  the  spot  shall  no
more  be  given  to  our  country's  crops,  but  to  forests
wild,  and  s(pialid  hovels  shall  our  fallen  shrines
become.  Here  soon  shall  the  chill  Dolopian  lead
his  flocks  where  the  buried  ashes,  sole  remnant  of
Oechalia's  ruins,  still  are  warm.     Here  in  our  very

'  So  called  because  his  temple  stood  at  Cenaeum,  a  lofty
promontory  on  the  north-west  point  of  the  island  of  Euboea.
^  I.e.  he  who  does  not  fear  death.


THE   TRAGEDIES   OF   SENECA

ipso  Thessalicus  pastor  in  oppido
indocta  referens  carmina  fistula
cantu  nostra  canet  tempora  flebili ;  130

et  dum  pauca  deus  saecula  contrahet,
quaeretur  patriae  quis  fuerit  locus,
felix  incolui  non  steriles  focos
nee  ieiuna  soli  iugera  Thessali ;
ad  Trachina  vocor.  saxa  rigentia
et  dumeta  iugis  horrida  tori'idis,
vix  gratum  pecori  montivago  nemus.
at  si  quas  nielior  sors  famulas  vocat,
illas  aut  volucer  transferet  Inachus
aut  Dircaea  eolent  moenia,  qua  fluit  140

Ismenos  tenui  flumine  languidus  ;
hie  mater  tumidi  nupserat  Herculis.  142

Falsa  est  de  geminis  fabula  noctibus,^  147

aether  cum  tenuit  sidera  longius
commisitque  vices  Lucifer  Hespero
et  Solem  \etuit  Delia  tardior.  150

quae  cautes  Scythiae,  quis  genuit  lapis?  143

num  Titana  ferura  te  llhodope  tulit,
te  praeruptus  Athos,  te  fera  Caspia,^
quae  virgata  tibi  praebuit  ubera?  146

nullis  vulneribus  pervia  membra  sunt ;  151

ferrum  sentit  hebes,  lentior  est  chalybs  ;
in  nudo  gladius  corj^ore  frangitur
et  saxum  resilit,  fataque  neglegit
et  mortem  indomito  corpore  provocat.
non  ilium  poterant  figere  cuspides,
non  arcus  Scythica  tensus  harundine,
non  quae  tela  gerit  Sarmata  frigidus
aut  qui  soliferae  suppositus  plagae
vicino  Nabatae  vulncra  dirigit  l60

The  transposition  ofU.  147-150  after  I.  142  is  Leo's,
So  Avantiun,  icith  a  :  caseta  A  :  Leo  Caspias,  icith  E.


196


HERCULES   OETAEUS

city  a  Thessalian  shepherd^  on  rude  pipe  going
o'er  liis  songs,  shall  sing  of  our  story  with  doleful
notes  ;  and  ere  God  shall  bring  a  few  more  generations
lo  an  end,  men  will  be  asking  where  our  country  lay.
Once  I  was  blest  ;  not  barren  the  hearth  nor  hungry
the  acres  of  Thessalian  soil  whereon  I  dwelt;  but  now
to  Trachin  am  I  called,  to  a  rough  and  stony  land,  to
brambles  bristling  on  her  parched  hills,  to  woods
which  e'en  the  wandering  goats  disdain.  But  if
some  captives  by  a  milder  fate  are  called,  then  either
swift  Inachus  will  bear  them  o'er,^  or  within  Dir-
caean  ^  walls  shall  they  abide,  where  flows  slow
Ismenus  with  scanty  stream,  where  the  mother  ^  of
haughty  Hercules  once  was  wed."*

1^"  False  is  the  story  ^  of  the  double  night,  when
the  stars  lingered  in  the  sky  o'erlong,  when  Lucifer
changed  place  with  Hesperus,  and  Delia,''  too  slow,
kept  back  the  sun.  What  Scythian  crag,  what  rockv
cliff  begot  thee.''  As  some  fierce  Titan,  did  Rhodope
bring  thee  forth,  or  Athos  rough  ?  Did  some  wild
Caspian  beast,  some  striped  tigress  give  thee  suck  ?
By  no  Avounds  may  his  limbs  be  assailed  ;  iron  he
feels  blunt,  steel  is  too  dull ;  upon  his  naked  body
swords  are  broken,  and  stones  rebound  ;  and  so  he
scorns  the  fates,  and  with  body  all  invincible  defies
mortality.  Sharp  s{)ear-points  could  not  pierce  him,
nor  Scythian  arrows  shot  from  bended  bow,  nor  darts
which  cold  Sarmatians  wield,  or  the  Parthians  who,
in  the  land  of  the  rising  sun,  with  surer  aim  than
ever   Cretan's    was,    direct   their  shafts  against  the

^  i.e.  either  to  Argos  or  Mycenae.

^  Theban,  so  called  from  the  neighbouring  fountain  of
Dirce.  ^  Alcmena.  *  i.e.  to  Anipliitryon.

*  See  Index. 9.17.  "  Hercules,"  first  part.  The  cliorus  means
to  say  that  Hercules  is  not  the  son  of  Jove  and  Alcmena.

®  The  moon.


THE  TRAGEDIES   OF  SENECA

Parthus  Cnosiacis  certioi*  ictibus.

muros  Oechaliae  covpore  propulit,

nil  obstare  valet  ;  vincere  quod  parat

iam  victum  est.     quota  pars  vuliiere  concidit !

pro  foto  patuit  vultus  iniquior

et  vidisse  sat  est  Herculeas  minas.

quis  vastus  Briareus,  quis  tumidus  Gyas,

supra  Thessalicum  cum  stetit  aggerem

caeloque  inseruit  vipereas  manus,

hoc  vultu  riguit  ?     commoda  cladibus  170

magnis  magna  patent :  nil  superest  mali—

iratum  miserae  vidimus  Herculem.


lOLE

At  ego  infelix  non  templa  suis
conla])sa  deis  s})arsosve  focos,
natis  mixtos  arsisse  patres
hominique  deos,  templa  sepulchris,
nullum  querimur  commune  malum  ;
alio  nostras  fortuna  vocat
lacrimas,  alias  flere  ruinas

me  fata  iubent.     quae  prima  querar  ?  180

quae  summa  gemam  ?     pariter  cuncta
deflere  iuvat —  ^  nee  plura  dedit
pectora  Tellus,  ut  digna  sonent
verbera  fatis.

Me  vel  Sipylum  flebile  saxura
fingite,  superi,  vel  in  Rridani
ponite  ripis,  ubi  maesta  sonat
Phaetontiadum  silva  sororum ;

^  Afttr  iuvat  D.  Ileinshis  recognized  a  lacuna,  luhirh  Gro-
novius  thought  should  be  filled  as  follows:  cur  non  oculoa
plures  nobis.

198


HERCULES    OETAEUS

neighbouring  Arabians.  With  his  bare  hands  did  he
o'erthrow  OechaHa's  walls,  and  naught  can  make
stand  against  him  ;  for  whate'er  he  plans  to  over-
come is  overcome  already.  How  few  the  foes  who
by  his  wounds  have  fallen  !  His  angry  countenance
was  death  in  open  view,  and  but  to  have  seen  the
threats  of  Hercules  is  enough. ^  What  huge  Briareus,
what  Gyas,  puffed  with  pride,  when  upon  Thessalia's
mountain-heap  2  they  stood  and  clutched  at  heaven
with  snaky  hands,  had  countenance  inflexible  as  his  ?
But  mighty  ills  have  mighty  recompense.  No  more
is  left  to  suffer — we  have  seen,  oh,  woe !  the  angry
Hercules.


But  I,  unhappy  one,  bewail  not  temples  fallen  on
their  gods,  or  hearth-fires  scattered,  or  fathers  burned
in  mingled  heaps  with  sons,  and  gods  with  men,
temples  with  tombs, — nay,  no  common  misfortune
do  I  mourn  ;  elsewhither  doth  fortune  call  my  tears,
for  other  ruins  the  fates  bid  me  weep.  What  lament
shall  I  make  first  ?  What  last  shall  I  bewail  ?  Equally
all  things  is  it  meet  to  mourn.  Oh  me,  that  Mother
Earth  hath  not  given  me  more  eyes  for  tears, "^  more
breasts,  that  blows  worthj^  of  my  losses  might
resound.

1^3  Me  to  a  weeping  rock^  on  Sipylus,  ye  heavenly
gods,  transform,  or  set  me  on  the  banks  of  Po,  where
the    woods    give   back  the  grief  of    Phaethon's  sad

^  i.e.  was  enough  to  kill  his  opponent.

^  The  giants  piled  up  Ossa,  Pelion,  and  01yinpu3  in  tii<jir
efi'ort  to  reacli  tlie  skies.

'  Translating  the  suggested  insertion  of  Gronovius.
*  She  is  thinking  of  the  fate  of  Niobe.

199


THE  TRAGEDIES   OF  SENECA

me  vel  Siculis  addite  saxis,

ubi  fata  geniam  Thessala  Siren,  190

vel  in  Edonas  tollite  silvas

qualis  natum  Daulias  ales

solet  Ismaria  flere  sub  umbra ;

formam  lacrimis  aptate  meis

resonetque  malis  aspera  Trachin.

Cyprias  lacrimas  Myrrha  tuetui-,

raptum  coniunx  Ceyca  gemit,

sibi  Tantalis  est  facta  superstes;

fugit  vultus  Philomela  suos

natumque  sonat  flebilis  Atthis  :  200

cur  mea  nondum  capiunt  volucres

bracchia  plumas  ?     felix,  felix,

cum  silva  domus  nostra  feretur

patrioque  sedens  ales  in  agro

referam  querulo  murmure  casus

volucremque  lolen  fama  loquetur

Vidi,  vidi  miseranda  mei
fata  parentis^  cum  letifero
stipite  pulsus  tota  iacuit

sparsus  in  aula.  210

a  si  tumulum  fata  dedissent,
quotiens,  genitor^  quaerendus  eras  !
potuine  tuam  spectare  necem,
nondum  teneras  vestite  genas
necdum  forti  sanguine,  Toxeu  ?
quid  vestra  queror  fata,  parentes,
quos  in  tutum  mors  aequa  tulit  ?
mea  me  lacrimas  fortuna  rogat.
iam  iam  dominae  captiva  colus
fusosque  legam.     pro  saeve  decor

1  i.e.  make  me  one  of  the  number  of  the  Sirens  who  haunt
those  rocks.
^  i.e.  Thracian.  '  Procne.     See  Index  s.v.

200


HERCULES   OETAEUS

sisters;  or  add^  me  to  the  rocks  of  Sicily,  where  as
a  Siren  I  may  weep  Thessalia's  fate  ;  or  bear  me  to
Edonia's  -  woods  where  I  may  mourn  as,  beneatli
Ismarian  shade,  the  DauHan  bird  ^  ever  mourns  her
son.  Give  me  a  fonii  to  fit  my  tears,  and  let  rough
Trachin  ret-cho  with  my  woes.  Myrrha,  the  Cyprian
maid,  yet  guards  her  tears  ;^  tlie  wife  ^  of  Ceyx
mourns  his  taking  off";  and  Niobc  lives  on,  surviving
e'en  herself;  her  human  form  has  Philomel  escaped,
and  still  the  Attic  maid  bewails  her  son."  Why  not
yet  do  my  arms  become  swift  wings?  Happy,  ah,
hap])y  shall  I  be  when  the  woods  shall  be  called  my
home,  and,  in  my  native  meadows  resting,  witli
plaintive  strains  I  shall  recall  my  fate,  and  fame  shall
tell  of  winged  lole.

^'^'^  I  saw,  I  saw  my  father's  wretched  fate,  when,
beaten  down  by  the  death-dealing  club,  he  lay  in
scattered  fragments  throughout  the  hall.  Ah  me,  if
fate  had  given  him  burial,  how  often,  father,  must
thou  have  been  sought !  How  could  I  have  looked
upon  thy  death,  O  To.xeus,''  with  thy  boyish  cheeks
as  yet  unbearded,  and  thy  veins  not  yet  filled  with
manly  vigour  ?  But  why  do  I  lament  your  fates,  my
parents,  whom  kindly  death  has  to  a  place  of  safety
borne .''  'Tis  my  own  fortune  that  requires  my  tears.
Soon,  soon  in  captive  state  shall  I  whirl  the  distaff"
and  the  spindle   of  my  mistress.     O   cruel  beautv,

*  Tlie  exuding  guin  of  the  myrrh  tree  into  which  the  maid
was  changed.

^  Alcj'one,  still  alive  in  feathered  form.

*  Itys  was  not  the  son  of  Philomela,  but  of  her  sister,
Procne.  '  Har  brother.

801


THE  TRAGEDIES   OF   SENECA

formaque  mortem  paritura  mihi,  220

tibi  cuncta  domiis  concidit  imi,
dum  me  genitor  negat  Alcidae
atque  Herculeus  socer  esse  timet,
sed  iam  dominae  tecta  petantur.


Quid  regna  tui  clara  parentis
casusque  tuos  respicis  amens  ?
fugiat  vultus  fortuna  prior,
felix  quisquis  novit  fomulum
regemque  pati  vultusque  suos
variare  potest,     rapuit  vires  230

pondusque  malis  casus  animo
qui  tulit  aequo.


O  quam  cruentus  feminas  stimulat  furor,
cum  patuit  una  paelici  et  nuptae  domus  !
Scylla  et  Charybdis  Sicula  contorquens  freta
minus  tiinendae,  nulla  non  melior  fera  est.
namque  ut  reluxit  paelicis  captae  decus
et  fulsit  lole  qualis  innubis  dies
purisve  clarum  noctibus  sidus  inicat,
stetit  furenti  similis  ac  torvum  intuens  240

Herculea  coniunx  ;  feta  ut  Armenia  iacens
sub  rupe  tigris  hoste  conspecto  exilit
aut  iussa  thyrsum  quatere  conceptum  ferens
Maenas  Lyaeum,  dubia  quo  gressus  ferat
haesit  parumper  ;  tum  ])er  Herculeos  lares
attonita  fertur,  tota  vix  satis  est  domus.
incurrit,  errat,  sistit,  in  voltus  dolor
processit  omnis,  pectori  paene  intimo

^  Lyaeus.
202


HERCULES   OETAEUS

and  fomi  doomed  to  bring-  dealli  to  me,  for  thee
alone  is  all  my  house  undone,  for  that  my  sire  refused
me  to  Alcides  and  feared  to  have  Hercules  for  son-
in-law.  But  now  nmst  I  betake  me  to  a  mistress'
home/

CHORUS

Why  dost  thou,  foolish  one,  ever  look  back  upon
thy  sire's  illustrious  kingdom  and  thine  own  misfor-
tunes ?  Banish  from  thy  face  thy  former  fortune.
Hai)])y  is  he  whoever  knows  how  to  bear  the  estate
of  slave  or  king  and  can  match  his  countenance  with
either  lot.  For  he  who  bears  his  ills  with  even  soul
has  robbed  misfortune  of  its  strength  and  heaviness.

\_Tlie  scene  changes  lo  the  space  before  the  palace  of
Hercules  and  De'ianira  at   Trachin.     Enter  nurse

OF  DEIAMRA.]

NURSE

O  how  bloody  is  the  rage  that  goads  women  on,
when  to  mistress  and  to  wife  one  house  has  opened  !
Scylla  and  Charybdis,  whirling  Sicilia's  waves,  are
not  more  fearful,  nor  is  any  wild  beast  worse.  For
when  her  captive  rival's  beauty  was  revealed,  and
lole  shone  like  the  unclouded  day  or  a  bright  star  in
the  clear  night  glittering,  even  as  one  distraught  the
wife  of  Hercules  stood  there  with  lowering  gaze  (as
a  tigress,  lying  big  with  young  'neath  some  Armenian
rock,  at  sight  of  an  enemy  leajis  forth ;  or  as  a
maenad,  bidden  to  toss  the  thyrsus,  what  time  she
l)ears  the  god^  within  her  breast,  in  doubt  where  she
shall  take  her  way,  stands  still  a  while)  ;  then  through
the  house  of  Hercules  she  madly  dashed  and  scarce
(lid  all  the  house  give  space  enough.  Forward  she
rushes,  wanders  aimlessly,  stands  still.  All  her  pas-
sion  has  come  forth   into  her  face ;  in  her  heart's


THE  TRAGEDIES   OF  SENECA

nihil  est  relictum  ;  fletus  insequitur  minas.

uec  unus  habitus  durat  aut  uno  furit  250

contenta  voltu  ;  nunc  inardescunt  genae,

pallor  ruborem  pellit  et  formas  dolor

errat  per  omnes  ;  queritur^  implorat,  gemit.

Sonuere  postes — ecce  pi'aecipiti  gradu
secreta  mentis  ore  confuso  exerit


DEIANIRA

Quamcumque  partem  sedis  aetheviae  preniis,
coniunx  Tonantis,  mitte  in  Aleiden  feram
quae  mihi  satis  sit.     si  qua  fecundum  caput
palude  tota  vastior  serpens  movet,
ignara  vinci,  si  quid  excessit  feras  260

irqmane  dirum  horribile,  quo  viso  Hercules
avertat  oculos,  hoc  specu  immenso  exeat,
vel  si  ferae  negantur,  hanc  animara  precor
converte  in  aliquod — quodlibet  possum  malum
hac  mente  fieri,     commcda  effigiem  mihi
parem  dolori ;  non  capit  pectus  minas.
quid  excutis  telluris  extremae  sinus
orbemque  versas  .''     quid  rogas  Ditem  mala  ?
omnes  in  isto  pectore  invenies  feras
quas  timeat ;  odiis  accipe  hoc  telum  tuis.  270

ego  sim  noverca.     perdere  Aleiden  potes  ;
perfer  manus  quocumque.     quid  cessas,  dea  ?
utere  furente — quod  lubes  fieri  nefas  ?

^  i.e.  the  Hydra.
',^04


HERCULES   OETAEUS

depths  almost  naught  is  left;  tears  follow  hard  on
threats.  Nor  does  one  posture  last,  nor  can  one
countenance  contain  her  rage  ;  now  do  her  cheeks
Hanie  with  wrath,  now  pallor  drives  the  flush  away,
and  from  form  to  form  her  smarting  anguish  wanders  ;
she  wails,  she  begs,  she  groans.

254  "pijg  doors  have  sounded— behold,  at  headlong
pace  she  comes,  with  confused  words  revealing  all
the  secrets  of  her  soul.

[Enter  DEiAfiiRA  from  wilhin  ike  palace.]


Wife  of  the  Thunderer,  whatever  portion  of  thv
heavenly  home  thou  treadest,  send  'gainst  Alcides  a
wild  beast  which  shall  suffice  for  me.  If  any  ser-
pent,^ vaster  than  all  the  marsh,  rears  up  its  head,  to
conquest  all  unknown ;  if  anything  is  worse  than
other  beasts,  monstrous,  dire,  horrible,  from  sight  of
which  Hercules  would  turn  away  his  eyes,  let  this
from  its  huge  den  come  forth.  Or,  if  beasts  be
denied,  change,  I  pray  thee,  this  heart  of  mine  into
some — any  evil  thing  there  is  can  I  with  this  present
mind  become.  Give  me  a  form  to  match  my  smart-
ing grief;  my  breast  carmot  contain  its  rage.  Why
dost  thou  search  out  the  folds  of  farthest  earth,  and
overturn  the  world.''  Why  dost  ask  ills  of  Dis?  In
such  a  breast  thou'lt  find  all  beasts  to  cause  him
dread ;  take  thou  this  weapon  for  thy  hate — let  me
be  step-dame.-  Thou  canst  destroy  Alcides  ;  use  but
these  hands  for  any  end  thou  wilt.  Why  dost  thou
hesitate,  O  goddess .''     Use  me,  the  mad  one — what

*  She  tliinks  of  the  possible  children  of  Hercules  by  lole
and  her  chance  for  vengeance  on  them.

205


THE   TRAGEDIES   OF   SENECA

reperi.     quid  haeres  ?     ipsa  iam  cesses  licet,
haec  ira  satis  est.


Pectoris  sani  parum^
alumna,  questus  comprime  ct  flaiiimas  doma  ;
frena  dolorem.     coniugem  ostende  Herculis.


lole  meis  captiva  germanos  dabit
natis  lovisque  fiet  ex  famula  nurus  ?
non  flamma  cursus  pariter  et  torrens  feret  280

et  ursa  pontum  sicca  caeruleuni  bibet —
non  ibo  inulta.     gesseris  caelum  licet
totusque  pacem  debeat  mundus  tibi,
est  aliquid  hydra  peius  :  iratae  dolor
nuptae.     quis  ignis  tantus  in  caelum  furit
ardentis  Aetnae  ?     quidquid  est  victum  tibi
hie  vincet  animus,     capta  praeripiet  toros  ?
adhuc  timebam  monstra,  iam  nullum  est  malum  ;
cessere  pestes,  in  locum  venit  ferae
invisa  paelex.     summe  pro  rector  deum  290

et  clare  Titan,  Herculis  tantum  fui
coniunx  timentis  ;  vota  quae  superis  tuli
cessere  captae,  paelici  felix  fui,
illi  meas  audistis,  o  superi,  preces,
incolumis  illi  remeat. — o  nulla  dolor
contente  poena,  quaere  supplicia  horrida,
incogitata,  infanda,  lunonem  doce
quid  odia  valeant ;  nescit  irasci  satis,
pro  me  gerebas  bella,  propter  me  vagas
Achelous  undas  sanguine  infecit  suo,  300

*  See  Index  s. I'.  "Bears."
206


HERCULES   OETAEUS

crime  dost  bid  me  do  ?  Decide.  Why  dost  thou
falter?  Though  now  thou  dost  thyself  shrink  back,
this  rage  of  mine  suffices.


Dear  child,  thy  mad  heart's  plaints  restrain,  quench
passion's  fire  and  curb  thy  grief.  Show  thyself  wife
of  Hercules.


Shall  captive  lole  give  brothers  to  my  sons?  Shall
a  slave  become  daughter-in-law  of  Jove  ?  Together
will  flame  and  torrent  never  run,  and  the  thirsty
Bear  ^  from  the  blue  sea  ne'er  will  drink — nor  will  I
go  unavenged.  Though  thou  didst  bear  the  heavens
up,  though  the  whole  Avorld  owes  its  peace  to  thee,  a
worse  j)est  than  Hydra  waits  thee — the  wrath  of  an
angered  wife.  What  fire  as  hot  as  this  rages  to  heaven
from  burning  Aetna  ?  Whate'cr  has  been  conquered
by  thy  might,  this  passion  of  mine  shall  conquer. —
And  shall  a  slave  seize  on  my  marriage  bed  ?  Till
now  did  I  fear  monsters,  but  now  is  no  evil  more ;
the  pests  have  vanished  and  in  the  ))lace  of  beasts
has  come  the  hated  harlot.  O  most  high  ruler  of  the
gods,  O  lustrous  Sun,  I  have  been  wife  to  Hercules
but  in  his  perils  ;  the  prayers  which  to  the  heavenly
ones  I  raised  have  been  granted  to  a  slave ;  for  a
harlot  have  I  been  fortunate  ;  for  her  have  ye  heard
my  prayers,  O  gods,  for  her  is  he  safe  returned. — O
grief  that  can  be  satisfied  with  no  revenge,  seek  thee
some  dreadful  punishment,  unthought,  unspeakable  ;
teach  Juno's  self  what  hate  can  do ;  she  knows  not
to  rage  enough.  For  me  didst  thou  do  battle ;
on  my  account  did  Acheloiis  dye  his  wandering
waves  with  his  own  blood,  when  now  he  became  a

207


THE   TRAGEDIES   OF   SENECA

cum  lenta  serpens  fieret,  in  taurum  trueem
nunc  flecteret  serpente  deposita  minas,
et  mille  in  hoste  vinceres  uno  feras.
iani  displicemuSj  capta  praelata  est  milii —
non  praeferetur  ;  qui  dies  thalami  ultimus
nostri  est  futurus,  hie  erit  vitae  tuae.

Quid  hoc  ?     recedit  animus  et  ponit  minas.
iam  cessat  ira  ;  quid  miser  langues  dolor  ?
perdis  furorem,  coniugis  tacitae  fidem
mihi  reddis  iterum. — quid  vetas  flammas  ali  ?         310
quid  frangis  ignes  ?     hunc  mihi  serva  impetum,
pares  eamus  ^ — non  erit  votis  opus  ;
aderit  noverca  quae  manus  nostras  regat
nee  invocata.

NVTRIX

Quod  paras  deniens  scehis  ?
perimes  maritum  cuius  extremus  dies
primusque  laudes  novit  et  caelo  tenus
erecta  terras  fama  suppositas  habet  ?
Graiorum  in  istos  terra  consurget  lares
domusque  soceri  prima  et  Aetolum  genus
sternetur  onme  ;  saxa  iam  dudum  ac  faces  S20

in  te  ferentur,  vindicem  tellus  suum
defendet  omnis.     una  quot  poenas  dabis  !
effugere  terras  crede  et  humanum  genus
te  ])osse — fulmen  genitor  Alcidae  gerit.
iam  iam  minaces  ire  per  caelum  faces
specta  et  tonantem  fulmine  excusso  diem,
mortem  quoque  ipsam,  quam  putas  tutam,  time ;

*  So  Leo  and  Rkhter,  foUowiivj  an  emendation  of  Madvig  :
patres  erimus  E :  pares  eramus  A.
208


HERCULES   OETAEUS

stubborn  serpent,  now  to  a  fierce  bull  changed  his
threats,  the  serpent  form  discarded,  and  tliou  in  that
one  foe  didst  conquer  a  thousand  beasts.  But  now  I
please  tliee  not ;  a  captive  is  preferred  to  me — but
she  shall  not  be  preferred ;  for  that  day  which  shall
end  our  marriage  joys  shall  end  thy  life.

2'^''  But  what  is  this  ?  My  passion  dies  away  and
abates  its  threats.  Now  anger  ceases  ;  why  dost
thou  languish,  O  wretched  grief?  Thou  givest  o'er
thy  madness,  makest  me  again  the  faithful,  uncom-
plaining wife. — Why  dost  forbid  the  feeding  of  tlie
flames  ?  Why  checkest  the  fire  ?  Keep  but  this
passion  in  me  ;  hand  in  hand  let  us  go  on — there
will  be  no  need  of  prayers ;  a  step-dame  ^  will  be
near  to  direct  my  hands  and  unbesought.


W^hat  crime,  distraught  one,  dost  thou  purpose  ?
Wilt  slay  thy  husband  v.  hose  praises  the  evening  and
the  morning  -  know  full  well,  whose  fame,  towering
to  the  sky,  holds  all  the  world  beneath  .''  The  land
of  Greece  will  rise  to  defend  that  home,  and  this  thy
father's  ^  house  and  the  whole  Aetolian  race  will  be
the  first  to  be  o'erthrown  ;  soon  rocks  and  firebrands
will  be  hurled  against  thee,  since  every  land  will
rally  to  its  defender.  How  many  penalties  wilt  thou,
one  woman,  pay !  Suppose  thou  canst  escape  the
world  and  the  race  of  men — ^the  father  of  Alcides
wields  the  thunder-bolt.  Now,  even  now  behold  his
threat'ning  fires  flashing  athwart  the  sky,  and  the
heavens  thundering  with  the  lightning  shock.  Even
death  itself,  which  thou  deemest  a  place  of  safety,

^  Juuo.  ^  i.e.  East  and  West.

'  Deianira's  father,  the  father-in-law  (socer)  of  Hercules.

209

VOL,  n.  p


THE  TRAGEDIES   OF   SENECA

doniinatur  illic  patruus  Alcidae  tui.
quocumque  pei'ges,  niisera,  cognatos  deos
illic  videbis.

DEIANIRA

Maximum  fieri  scelus  330

et  ipsa  fateor^  sed  dolor  fieri  iubet.

NVTRIX

Moriere.

DEIANIRA

Moriar  Herculis  nempe  incluti
coniunx  nee  ullus  nocte  discussa  dies
viduam  notabit  nee  meos  paelex  toros
captiva  capiet.     ante  ab  occasu  dies
nascetur,  Indos  ante  glacialis  polus
Scythasve  tepida  Phoebus  inficiet  rota,
quam  me  relictam  Thessalae  aspiciant  nurus.
meo  iugales  sanguine  extinguam  faces,
aut  pereat  aut  me  perimat ;  elisis  feris  340

et  coniugem  addat,  inter  Herculeos  licet
me  quoque  labores  numeret ;  Alcidae  toros
moritura  certe  corpore  amplectar  meo.
ire,  ire  ad  umbras  Herculis  nuptam  libet,
sed  non  inultam.     si  quid  ex  nostro  Hercule
concepit  lole,  manibus  evellam  meis
ante  et  per  ipsas  paelicem  invadam  faces.
me  nuptial  i  victimam  feriat  die
infestus,  lolen  dum  supra  exanimem  ruam —
felix  iacet  quicumque  quos  odit  premit.  350

NVTRIX

Quid  ipsa  flammas  pascis  et  vastum  foves
ultro  dolorem  ?     misera,  quid  cassum  times .''

'  Pluto,  the  brother  of  Jove.  ^  i.e.  lole's.

210


HERCULES   OETAEUS

fear  ;  for  there  the  uncle  ^  of  thine  Alcides  rein;ns.
Turn  wliere  thou  wilt^  poor  woman,  there  wilt  thou
see  his  kindred  gods.

DEIANIRA

That  I  am  doing  a  fearful  crime,  e'en  I  myself  con-
fess ;  but  passion  bids  me  do  it.

NURSE

Tiiou'lt  die.

DEIANIRA

Yea,  truly,  will  I  die,  but  the  wife  of  glorious
Hercules  ;  neither  shall  any  dawn,  banishing  night,
brand  me  as  widow  ;  nor  shall  captive  creature  make
capture  of  my  bed.  Sooner  shall  day  be  born  in  the
western  sky,  sooner  shall  Indians  grow  pale  'neath
the  icy  pole,  or  Scythians  tan  'neath  Phoebus'
burning  car,  than  shall  the  dames  of  Thessaly  see  me
abandoned.  With  my  own  blood  Avill  I  quench  her  2
marriage  torches.  Either  let  him  die  or  do  me  to
death.  'J'o  slaughtered  beasts  let  him  add  wife  as
well,  and  let  him  count  me,  too,  'mongst  the  toils  of
Hercules;  to  Alcides' couch,  aye  with  my  dying  body,
will  I  cling.  Ah,  sweet,  'tis  sweet  to  go  to  the
shades  as  bride  of  Hercules, — but  not  without  my
vengeance.  If  lole  from  my  Hercules  has  conceived
a  child,  with  mine  own  hands  will  I  tear  it  forth
untimely,  and  by  her  very  wedding  torches'  glare
will  I  face  the  harlot.  Eet  him  in  wrath  slay  me
as  victim  on  his  nuptial  day,  so  I  but  fall  on  the
corpse  of  lole.  Happy  he  lies  who  crushes  those  he
hates.

NURSE

Why  dost  thyself  feed  thy  flames  and  wantonly
foster  an  unmeasured  grief?  Poor  soul,  why  dost
thou  cherish  a  needless  fear .''     He  did  love  lole  ;

21  1
p  2


THE  TRAGEDIES   OF   SENECA
dilexit  lolen  ;  nempe  cum  staret  pai-ens
regisque  natam  peteret.     in  famulae  locum
regina  cecidit ;  perdidit  vires  amor
multumque  ab  ilia  traxit  infelix  status,
illicita  amantur,  excidit  quidquid  licet.

DEIANIRA

Fortuna  amorem  peior  inflammat  magis  ;
amat  vel  ipsum  quod  caret  patrio  lare,
quod  nudus  auro  crinis  et  gemma  iacet,  36o

ipsas  misericors  forsan  aerumnas  amat ;
hoc  usitatum  est  Herculi,  captas  amat.

NVTRIX

Dilecta  Priami  nempe  Dardanii  soror
concessa  famula  est ;  adice  quot  nuptas  prius,
quot  virgines  dilexit.     erravit  vagus.
Arcadia  nempe  virgo,  Palladios  chores
dum  nectit,  Auge^  vim  stupri  passa  excidit,
nullamque  amoris  Hercules  I'etinet  notam.
referam  quid  alias  ?     nempe  Thespiades  vacant
brevique  in  illas  arsit  Aleides  face.  370

hospes  Timoli  Lydiain  fovit  nurum
et  amore  captus  ad  leves  sedit  colus,
udum  feroci  stamen  intorquens  manu.
nempe  ilia  cervix  spolia  deposuit  ferae
crinemque  mitra  pressit  et  famulus  stetit,
hirtam  Sabaea  marcidus  myrrha  comam.
ubique  caluit,  sed  levi  caluit  face.

*  Hesione.
212


HERCULES   OETAEUS

but  'twas  while  yet  her  father  reigned  secure^  and
'twas  a  king's  daughter  that  lie  sought.  The
])rincess  has  now  fallen  to  the  place  of  slave  ;  love
has  lost  its  power,  and  much  from  her  charm  her
unhappy  lot  has  stolen.  What  is  forbidden  we  love  ;
if  granted  it  falls  from  our  desire.


Nay,  but  fallen  fortunes  fan  hotter  the  flames  of
l(»ve  ;  for  this  very  cause  he  loves  her,  that  she  hath
lost  her  father's  house,  that  her  hair  lies  stripped  of
gold  and  gems  ;  out  of  pity,  perchance,  he  loves  her
very  woes ;  'tis  the  wont  of  Hercules  to  love  captive
maids.

NURSE

'Tis  true  he  loved  the  captive  sister  ^  of  Dardanian
Priam,  but  he  gave  her  to  another  ;2  add  all  the
dames,  all  the  maids  he  loved  before.  A  wanderer
on  earth,  a  wanderer  in  love  was  he.  Why,  the
Arcadian  maiden,  Auge,  while  leading  Pallas'  sacred
dance,  suffered  his  lust's  violence,  but  fell  from  his
regard,  and  Hercules  retains  no  trace  of  his  love  for
her.  Why  mention  others  ?  The  Thespiades  are
forgotten ;  for  them  with  but  a  passing  flame  Alcides
burned.  When  a  guest  on  Timolus,  he  caressed  the
Lydian  woman  ^  and,  daft  with  love,  sat  beside  her
swift  distaff,  twisting  the  moistened  thread  with
doughty  fingers.  His  shoulders,  indeed,  had  laid
aside  the  famous  lion's-skin,  a  turban  confined  his
hair,  and  there  he  stood  like  any  slave,  his  shaggy
locks  dripping  with  Sabaean  myrrh.  Everywhere  has
he  burned  with  love,  but  burned  with  feeble  flame.

2  i.e.  to  Telamon,  who  assisted  him  in  the  capture  of  Troy.
*  Oniphale,  queen  of  Lydia.

813


THE   TRAGEDIES   OF   SENECA

DEIANIRA

Haerere  amantes  post  vagos  ignes  solent.

NVTRIX

Famulamne  et  hostis  praeferet  natam  tibi  ?

DEIANIRA

Vt  laeta^  silvas  forma  vernantes  habet,  380

cum  nemora  nuda  primus  investit  tepor,
at  cum  solutos  expulit  Boreas  Notos
et  saeva  totas  bruma  discussit  comas,
deforme  solis  aspicis  truncis  nemus  ;
sic  nostra  longum  forma  percurrens  iter
deperdit  aliquid  semper  et  fulget  minus,
nee  ilia  vetus  '^  est.      quidquid  in  nobis  fuit
olim  petitum  cecidit,  aut  pariter  labat.^
aetas  citato  senior  eripuit  gi-adu,*  390

niaterque  multum  rapuit  ex  illo  mihi,  389

vides  ut  altum  famula  non  perdat  decus  ?  391

cessere  cultus  penitus  et  paedor  sedet ;
tamen  per  ipsas  fulget  aerumnas  decor
nihilque  ab  ilia  casus  et  fatum  grave
nisi  regna  traxit.     hie  meum  pectus  timor,
altrix,  lacessit,  hie  rapit  somnos  pa\  or.
praeclai'a  totis  gentibus  coniunx  eram
thalamosque  nostros  invido  voto  nurus
oj)tabat  omnis  ;  quaeve  mens  quicquam  decs
orabat  ullos,  nuribus  Argolicis  fui  400

mensura  voti.      quem  lovi  socerum  parem,
altrixj  habebo  r     quis  sub  hoc  niundo  mihi

^  alta  MSS.,  corrected  hy  Madvig.

*  So  liichter:  nee  ilia  Venus  E :  haec  ilia  Venus  Kiessling,
followed  by  Leo,

214


HERCULES   OETAEUS

DEIAMRA

Oft  after  wandcrinc^  fires  lovers  have  clunff  to  one.


A  slave  and  daugliter  of  his  foe  shall  he  prefer  to
thee  ?


As  a  gladsome  beauty  covers  the  budding  groves
when  the  first  warmth  of  spring  clothes  the  bare
forest  trees,  but,  when  the  North-wind  has  put  the
mild  South  to  flight,  and  savage  winter  has  shaken
off  all  the  leaves,  thou  seest  but  a  shapeless  grove  of
trunks  alone ;  so  does  my  beauty,  pursuing  a  length-
ening way,  lose  something  ever,  and  less  brightly
gleams,  nor  is  it  as  of  yore.  Whate'er  in  me  was
sought  in  former  days  has  vanished  or  is  failing  along
with  me.  Old  age  with  hastening  steps  hath  taken
much,  and  much  of  it  hath  motherhood  stolen  from
me.  But  seest  thou  how  this  slave  hath  not  lost  her
glorious  charm  .''  Gone  are  her  adoriiings  and  squalor
clings  close  upon  her ;  and  yet  through  her  very  dis-
tresses beauty  shines  and  naught  have  misfortune  and
this  hard  stroke  of  fate  stolen  from  her  .save  her  realm.
O  nurse,  this  fear  of  her  racks  my  heart ;  this  dread
doth  destroy  my  slumbers.  I  was  a  wife  celebi'ated
in  every  land,  and  for  marriage  such  as  mine  all
women  prayed  with  envious  prayer ;  or  whatever
soul  asked  aught  of  any  gods,  for  the  prayers  of
Grecian  dames  I  was  the  measure.  What  fathei--in-
law  like  to  Jove,  O  Nurse,  shall  I  e'er  have  }  Who
beneath  these  heavens  will  be  given  me  as  husband  .''

'  So  Richter:  et  .  .  .  labat  E :  et  partu  labat  A  :  Lto  con-
jectures labor.  *  Leo  deletes  this  line.

215


THE  TRAGEDIES   OF   SENECA

dabitur  maritus  ?     ipse  qui  Alcidae  imperat
facibus  suis  me  iungat  Eurystheus  licet,
minus  est.     toris  caruisse  regnantis  leve  est :
alte  ilia  eecidit  quae  viro  caret  Hercule.

NVTRIX

Conciliat  animos  eoniugum  partus  fere.

DEIANIRA

Hie  1  ipse  forsan  dividet  partus  toros.

NVTRIX

Famula  ilia  trahitur  interim  donum  tibi.

DEIANIRA

Hie  quem  per  urbes  ire  praeclarum  vides  410

et  fulva  tergo  spolia  gestantem  ferae,
qui  regna  miseris  donat  et  celsis  rapit^
vasta  gravatus  horridam  clava  manum,
cuius  triumphos  ultimi  Seres  canunt
et  quisquis  alius  orbe  concepto  ^  iacet, —
levis  est  nee  ilium  gloriae  stimulat  decor ;
errat  per  orbem,  non  ut  aequetur  lovi
nee  ut  per  urbes  magnus  Argolicas  eat :
quod  amet  requirit,  virgiinnn  thalamos  petit,
si  qua  est  negata,  rapitur  ;  in  populos  furit,  420

nuptas  minis  quaerit  et  vitium  impotens
virtus  vocatur.     eecidit  Oechalia  inclita
unusque  Titan  vidit  atque  unus  dies
stantem  et  cadentem ;  causa  bellandi  est  amor.

^  So  Richter  after  tmeivdation  of  N.  Heinsius :  sic  MSS.
and  Leo.

*  Leo  fconcepto,  with  "iA  :  consepto  j-;  Qrotiua  conjectures
consumpto  :  Oronoviua  conpecto.

216


HERCULES   OETAEUS

Though  Eurystlieus'  self,  who  rules  Alcides,  should
wed  me  with  his  own  torches,  'tis  not  enough.  'Tis
.1  trivial  thing  to  have  lost  a  royal  couch  ;  but  from  a
far  height  has  she  fallen  who  loses  Hercules.

NURSE

Children  ofttimes  win  back  the  love  of  husbands.


These  children  themselves  perchance  will  dissolve
the  bond.^

NURSE

Meanwhile  that  slave  is  brought  as  gift  to  thee.


He  whom  thou  seest  going,  big  with  fame,  from
town  to  town,  wearing  the  spoil  of  a  tawny  lion  on
his  back ;  who  gives  kingdoms  to  the  lowly  and
takes  them  from  the  proud,  his  dread  hand  laden
with  a  massive  club ;  whose  triumphs  the  far  otF
.Seres  sing,  and  whoe'er  besides  dwells  in  the  whole
known  world, — he  is  a  trifler,  nor  does  the  charm  of
glory  urge  him  on.  He  goes  wandering  o'er  the
earth,  not  in  the  hope  that  he  may  rival  Jove,  nor
that  he  may  fare  illustrious  through  Grecian  cities.
Some  one  to  love  he  seeks ;  his  quest  is  maidens'
chambers.  If  any  is  refused  him,  she  is  ravished  ;
against  nations  doth  he  rage,  midst  ruins  seeks  his
brides,  and  unrestrained  excess  is  called  heroic.
Oechalia,  the  illustrious,  fell ;  one  sun,  one  day
beheld   her   stand    and   fall ;    and    passion    was   the

^  i.e.  if  one  woman's  child  holds  her  liusband  to  her,
another's  child  (lole's)  will  turn  him  from  the  old  to  his  new
love.

217


THE   TRAGEDIES   OF   SENECA

totiens  timebit  Herculi  natam  parens

quotiens  negabit,  hostis  est  quotiens  soeer

fieri  recusat ;  si  gener  non  fit^  ferit.

post  haec  quid  istas  innocens  servo  manus,

donee  furentem  simulet  ac  saeva  manu

intendat  arcus  nieque  natunique  opprimat  ?  430

sic  coniuges  expellit  Alcides  suas,

haec  sunt  repudia.     nee  potest  fieri  nocens ;

terris  videri  sceleribus  causam  suis

fecit  novercam.     quid  stupes,  segnis  furor  ?

scelus  occupandum  est ;  perage  dum  fervet  manus.

NVTRIX

Perimes  maritum  ?

DEIANIRA

Paelicis  certe  meae

NVTRIX

At  love  creatum.

DEIANIRA

Nempe  et  Alcmena  satum.

NVTRIX
DEIANIRA


Ferrone  ?

Ferro.


NVTRIX

Si  iiequis  ?


DEIANIRA

Perimam  dolo.


218


HERCULES   OETAEUS

mother  of  tliat  strife.  As  oft  as  a  father  sliall  deny
his  cliild  to  Hercules,  as  oft  as  a  foeman  refuses  to  be
liis  father-in-law,  so  oft  shall  he  have  cause  to  fear ;
if  he  is  not  accepted  as  a  son-in-law,  he  smites.  After
all  this,  why  do  I  harmlessly  keep  back  these  hands  un-
til he  feign  another  fit  of  madness,^  with  deadly  hand
bend  his  bow,  and  slay  me  and  my  son  ?^  Thus  does
Alcides  put  away  his  wives  ;  such  is  his  manner  of
divorce.  Yet  naught  can  make  him  guilty  !  He  has
made  the  world  believe  his  step-dame  answerable  for
his  crimes.  Why  art  inactive  then,  thou  sluggish  rage?
His  crime  must  be  forestalled;  act  while  thy  hand
is  hot !

NURSE

Wilt  slay  thy  husband  ?

DEIANIRA

Truly,  mv  rival's  husband.

NURSE

But  the  son  of  Jove  ?

DEIANIRA

Yes,  but  the  son  of  Alcmena,  too.

NURSE

With  the  sAvord  ?

DEI  AN  IRA

The  sword.

NURSE

If  thou  canst  not  ?

DEIANIRA

I'll  slay  with  guile.

^  The  reference  is  to  the  death  of  Mcgara  and  her  sons  at
tlie  hands  of  mad  Hercules.  -  Hyllus.

219


THE  TRAGEDIES   OF   SENECA

NVTRIX

Quis  iste  furor  est  ?

DEIANIRA

Queni  mens  coniunx  docet.

NVTRIX

Quem  nee  noverca  potuit,  hunc  perimes  virum?  440

DEIANIRA

Caelestis  ira  quos  premit,  miseros  facit ;
humana  nullos.

NVTRIX

Parce^  miseranda,  et  time.

DEIANIRA

Contempsit  omnes  ille  qui  mortem  prius  ;
libet  ire  in  enses.

NVTRIX

Maior  admisso  tuus,
alumna^  dolor  est ;  culpa  par  odium  exigat.
cur  saeva  modicis  statuis  ?     ut  laesa  es  dole.

DEIANIRA

Leve  esse  credis  paelicem  nuptae  malum  ?
quidquid  dolorem  pascit,  hoc  nimium  })uta.

NVTRIX

Amorne  clari  fugit  Alcidae  tibi  ?


*  i.e.  whatever  else.
220


HERCULES   OETAEUS

NURSE

What  madness  that  ?

DEIAMRA

That  which  my  husband  teaches  me.

NURSE

Whom   e'en   his   step-dame   could    not    slay — wilt
thou  slay  him  ?

DEIAMRA

Celestial    wrath   but   makes    wretched    those    on
whom  it  falls  ;  man's  wrath  makes  them  naught.

NURSE

Spare  him,  O  wretched  one,  and  fear.

DEIANIRA

He    has   scorned  all  men,  who  first  has  scorn  of
death  ;  'tis  sweet  to  go  against  the  sword.


Thy  smart  is  too  great  for  the  offence,  my  child  ,
let  his  fault  claim  but  equal  hate.  Why  dost  so
fiercely  judge  a  light  offence  ?  According  as  thou
hast  been  injured,  grieve.

DEIANIRA

Thinkst  thou  a  mistress  is  light  evil  for  a  wife  ?
Whatever  ^  fosters  anguish,  count  this  -  beyond  all
bounds.

NURSE

Has  thy  love  for  glorious  Alcides  fled  away  ?

2  i.e.  llie  situation  described  in  the  preceding  line.

221


THE   TRAGEDIES   OF   SENECA

DEIANIRA

Non  fugit,  altrix,  remanet  et  penitus  sedet        450
fixus  medulliSj  crede  ;  sed  magnus  dolor
iratus  amor  est.

NVTRIX

Artibus  magicis  fere
coniugia  nuptae  precibus  admixtis  ligant.
vernare  iussi  frigore  in  medio  nemus
missumque  fulmen  stare  ;  concussi  fretum
cessante  vento^  turbidum  explicui  mare
et  sicca  tellus  fontibus  patuit  novis ;
habuere  motum  saxa,  discussi  fores  ^
umbrasque  Ditis/  et  mea  iussi  prece
manes  locuntur,  tacuit  infernus  canis  ;  460

nox  media  solem  vidit  et  noctem  dies  ^  ;  462

mare  terra  caelum  et  Tartarus  servit  mihi  46 1

nihilque  leges  ad  meos  cantus  tenet,
flectemus  illum^  carmina  invenient  iter.

DEIANIRA

Quas  Pontus  herbas  generat  aut  quas  Thessala
sub  rupe  Pindus  alit  ^  ubi  inveniam  malum
cui  cedat  ille  ?     carmine  in  ten-as  mago
descendat  astris  Luna  desertis  licet
et  bruma  messes  videat  et  cantu  fugax
stet  deprehensum  fulmen  et  versa  vice  470

medius  coactis  ferveat  stellis  dies :
non  flectet  ilium.

^  fores  CD  .•   regarded  as  corruj^t   by  Leo,   who  conjectures
inferos  :  arbores  Birt.
^  So  Richter :  Leo  umbrae  stetistis,  with  w.

222


HERCULES   OETAEUS

DEIANIRA

Not  fled,  dear  Nurse  ;  it  still  remains,  believe  me,
deep-seated  and  fixed  in  my  heart's  core  ;  but  out-
raged love  is  poignant  misery.


By  magic  arts  and  prayers  commingled  do  wives
oft  hold  fast  their  husbands.  I  have  bidden  the
trees  grow  green  in  the  midst  of  winter's  frost,
and  the  hurtling  lightning  stand  ;  I  have  stirred  up
the  deep,  though  the  winds  were  still,  and  have
calmed  the  heaving  sea ;  the  parched  earth  has
opened  with  fresh  fountains ;  rocks  have  found
motion ;  the  gates  have  I  rent  asunder  and  the
shades  of  Dis,  and  at  my  jirayer's  demand  the  spirits
talk,  the  infernal  dog  is  still ;  midnight  has  seen  the
sun,  and  dav,  the  night ;  the  sea,  land,  heaven  and
Tartarus  yield  to  my  will,  and  naught  holds  to  law
against  my  incantations.  Bend  him  we  will ;  my
charms  will  find  the  way.

OKI  A  XI  HA

What  herbs  does  Pontus  grow,  or  what  does  Pindus
nourish  'neath  the  rocks  of  Thessaly,^  wherein  I  may
find  a  bane  to  conquer  him  ?  Though  Luna  should
leave  the  stars  and  come  down  to  earth,  obedient  to
magic  ;  though  winter  should  see  ripe  grain  ;  though
Lhe  swift  bolt  should  stand  still,  arrested  by  thy
charm  ;  though  times  be  changed,  and  midday  burn
amid  the  crowding  stars  :  'twill  not  bend  him.

1  Where  Medea,  the  famous  witch,  gathered  magic  herbs.

'  Lines  467,  46^  transposed  by  Bothe.

*  Leo,  faluit,  u-ilh  E:  comclcd  by  Pcipcr,  followed  by
Richter.

223


THE  TRAGEDIES   OF   SENECA

NVTRIX

Vicit  et  superos  Amor.


Vincetur  uni  forsan  et  spolium  dabit
yVmorque  summus  fiet  Alcidae  labor. —
sed  te  per  omne  caelitum  numen  precor,
per  hunc  timorem  :  quidquid  arcani  apparo
penitus  recondas  et  fide  tacita  premas.

NVTRIX

Quid  istud  est  quod  esse  secretum  petis  ?

DEIANIRA

Non  tela  suntj  non  armaj  non  ignis  minax.

NVTRIX

Praestare  fateor  posse  me  tacitam  fidem,  480

si  scelere  careat ;  interim  scelus  est  fides.


Circumspice  agedum,  ne  quis  arcana  occupet,
partemque  in  omnem  vultus  inquirens  eat.

NVTRIX

En  locus  ab  omni  tutus  arbitrio  vacat.

DEIANIRA

Est  in  remoto  regiae  sedis  loco
arcana  tacitus  nostra  defendens  specus.
non  ille  primos  accipit  soles  locus.


224


HERCULES   OETAEUS

NURSE

But  love  has  conquered  e'en  heavenly  <»ocls.


]]v  one  ^  alone,  })erchance,  will  he  be  conquered
and  yield  liis  spoils,  and  Love  beconie  Alcides'
crowning  toil. — But  thee  by  all  the  deities  of  heaven
1  {)ra\-,  bv  this  niy  fear  :  whatever  secret  thing  I  am
preparing,  hide  it  deep,  and  in  faithful  silence  hold
it  fast.

NURSE

What  is  it  that  thou  seekst  to  keep  in  secret?

OKIANIRA

It  is  not  spears,  not  arms,  not  threatening  fire.

NURSE

That  I  can  keep  faithful  silence  I  confess,  if  it  be
free  iVom  crime  ;  but  silence  itself  sometimes  is
criminal.

DEIANIRA

Come,  look  about,  lest  someone  grasj)  my  secret,
and  in  all  directions  turn  thy  questful  glance.

NURSE

Behold  the  place  is  safe  and  free  from  all
observers.

DEIANUtA

In  a  remote  corner  of  the  royal  dwelling  is  a
recess  that  silently  guards  my  secret.  Neither  the
first  rays  of  the  sun  can  reach  that  spot,  nor  yet  his

^  Herculea.

'225

VOL.   II.  H


THE  TRAGEDIES   OF   SENECA

tion  ille  seroSj  cum  ferens  Titan  dieiu  ^

lassum  rubenti  mergit  Oceauo  iugiim  ^

illic  ainoris  pignus  Herciilei  latet.  490

altriXj  fatebor  :  auctor  est  Nessus  niali

quem  gravida  Nephele  Thessalo  genuit  duci,

qua  celsus"^  astris  inserit  Pindus  caput

ultraque  nubes  Othrys  eductus  riget.

namque  ut  subactus  Herculis  clava  horridi

Achelous  omnes  facilis  in  species  dari

tandem  peractis  omnibus  patuit  feris

unoque  turi)e  subdidit  cornu  caputs

me  coniugem  dum  victor  Alcides  habet,

repetebat  Argos.

Forte  per  cam])os  vagus  500

Euenos  altum  gurgitem  in  pontum  ferens
iam  paene  summis  turbidus  silvis  erat.
transire  Nessus  verticem  solitus  vadis
pretium  poposcit.     meque  iam  dorso  ferens
qua  iungit  hominem  sj)ina  deficiens  equo,
frangebat  ipsas  fluminis  tumidi  minas.
iam  totus  undis  Nessus  exierat  ferox
medioque  adhuc  errabat  Alcides  vado,
vasto  rapacem  verticem  scindens  gradu,
at  ille  ut  esse  vidit  Alciden  procul  :  510

"  tu  ])raeda  nobis  "  inquit  "  et  coniunx  eris  ;
proliibetur  undis/'  meque  complexus  ferens
gressum  citabat.

Non  tenent  undae  Herculem  :
"  infide  vector  "  inquit  "  immixli  licet
Ganges  et  Hister  vallibus  iunctis  eant,

'  Leo  thinks  there  is  a  lacuna  after  line  488  and  fills  it  thus.
exurgit  undis,  cunique  gennanam  vocans.

'^  So  llichter :  diein  Leo  with  E.

^  So  A:  fU-ei)idiis  Leo,  ivilh  E,  conjecturing  aethcrius :
rigidus  0.  liosslach.

226


HERCULES   OETAEUS

last,  when  Titan,  bringing  the  day  to  rest,  plunges
his  Aveary  yoke  in  tlie  ruddy  sea.  I'liei'e  lurks  the
surety  of  Alcides'  love.  Xurse,  I'll  confess  to  thee  :
the  giver  of  the  baleful  thing  was  Nessus,  whom
Nephelc,  heavy  with  child,  to  the  Thessalian  chief-
tain ^  bore,  where  lofty  Pindus  to  the  stars  lifts  up
his  head  and  Othrys  stands  stiff,  towering  above  the
clouds.  For  when  Aehelous,  forced  by  the  club  of
dread  Hercules  to  shift  with  ready  ease  fi'om  form  to
form,  his  beast-shapes  all  exhausted,  at  last  stood
forth  and  bowed  his  head,  marred  and  with  single
horn,'-  victorious  Hercules,  with  me,  his  bride, set  out
for  Argos.

^o*^  It  chanced  that  Evenus,  wandering  through  the
plains,  rolling  his  deep  eddies  to  the  sea,  was  now
in  flood  almost  to  the  tree-tops'  level.  Ncssus,  ac-
customed to  ford  the  whirling  stream,  offered  to
take  me  over  for  a  price;  and,  bearing  me  on  his  back,
where  the  backbone,  leaving  the  equine  enters  the
human  form,  soon  was  stemming  even  the  threatening
waves  of  the  swollen  flood.  Now  had  wild  Nessus
entirely  left  the  waters  and  Alcides  was  still  wander-
ing in  mid-stream,  cleaving  the  down-sweeping  flood
with  his  mighty  strides;  but  when  the  centaur  saw
Alcides  still  afar,  "  Thou  shalt  be  spoil  of  mine,"  he
cried,  "  and  wife  ;  he  is  ke])t  from  thee  by  the  waves" ;
and,  clasping  me  in  his  arms  as  he  bore  me  on,  was
galloping  away.

^^'  But  the  waves  did  not  hold  Hercules  ;  "  C)
faithless  ferryman,"  he  cried,  "though  Ganges  and
Hister  commingled    in    united   beds  should  How,  I

^  Ixion.

"^  Hercules  had  wrenched  away  one  horn  from  Aehelous
while  the  latter  was  lighting  iu  bull-form.

227
Q   2


THE   TRAGEDIES   OF   SENECA

vinceinus  ambos^  cciisequar  telo  fii_<;;nTi."
praecessit  areas  verba  ;  turn  longuni  fercns
harundo  vulnus  teniiit  Iiaerentem  fugam
inortemque  fixit.     ille^  iani  quacrens  diem^
tabiim  Hueiitem^  volneris  dextra  excijnt  520

traditque  nobis  ungulae  insertum  suae,
quam  foi'tc  saeva  sciderat  avolsana  manu
tunc  verba  moriens  addit ;  "  hoe  "  inquit  "  magae
dixere  aniorem  posse  defigi  malo ;
hoc  docta  Mycale  Tliessalas  docuit  nurus,
unam  inter  omnes  Luna  quam  sequitur  magas
astris  relictis.     inlitas  vestes  dabis
hac"  inquit  "ipsa  tabe,  si  paelex  tuos
invisa  tlialamos  tulerit  et  coniunx  levis
aliam  pareiiti  dederit  altisono  nurum.  530

hoc  nulla  lux  conspiciat,  hoc  tenebrae  tegant
tantum  remotae  ;  sic  potens  vires  suas
sanguis  tenebit."     verba  deprendit  quics
mortemque  lassis  intulit  membris  sopor.
Tu,  quam  meis  admittit  arcanis  fides,
perge  ut  nitenteni  virus  in  vestem  datum
mentem  per  artus  adeat  et  taciturn  means  ^
iutret  medullas

NVTIHX

Ocius  iussa  exsequar,
alumna,  precibus  tu  dcum  iuvictum  advoca,
qui  certa  tenera  tela  dimittit  manu.  540

'  So  E :  Leo  fluente  :  tabem  fluentis  A .
^  <So  Richter  ■  tactus  sinu8  A  :  tacitus  mas  E    Leo  tactu
sinus.

228


HERCULES   OETAEUS

shall  o'ercoine  them  both  and  with  my  shaft  o'ertake
thy  flight."  His  bow  was  swifter  than  liis  words.
Then  tlie  reedy  sliaft,  wounding  from  afar,  stayed
his  ham})cred  flight  and  implanted  death.  The
Centaur,  now  groping  for  light,  in  his  right  hand
caught  the  jioison  ^  flowing  from  tJie  wound,  and  this
he  gave  me,  jjouring  it  into  his  hoof,  whieli  with
uiad  h.ind  he  had  chanced  to  wrench  away.  Then
with  his  dying  words  he  s])oke  :  ''  13y  this  charm
magicians  have  said  love  can  be  firmly  fixed  ;  so  were
Tiiessalian  wives  by  the  wise  Mycale  instructed,
whom  only,  midst  all  wonder-working  crones,  Luna
will  forsake  the  stars  and  follow,  A  garment,
smeared  with  this  very  gore,  shalt  thou  give  to  him,
if  ever  a  hated  mistress  should  usurp  thy  chamber,
and  thy  fickle  husband  should  gi\e  auotlier  daughter
to  his  high-thundering  sire.  This  let  no  light  be-
liold  ;  let  darkness  only,  thick  and  hidden,  cover  it ;
so  shall  the  potent  blood  retain  its  powers."  Silence
seized  on  his  words  and  to  his  weary  limbs  came  the
sleep  of  deatii.

^^^  Now  do  thou,  whom  loyalty  makes  sharer  of
my  secret,  haste  thee  that  the  poison,  upon  a
glittering  robe  besmeared,  go  through  liis  heart
and  limbs  and,  stealing  silently,  enter  his  very
marrow.

NURSE

With  s])eed  will  I  do  thy  bidding,  dcartst  child  ;
.ind  do  tluui  pray  to  the  god  ^  invincible,  who  witii
tender  hand  doth  send  unerring  shafts.     yExil  nuk.se.

•  Coininiinicated  to  the  bloud  by  the  Hydra-poisoneti  arrow
of  Hercules.
^  Cupid.

229


THE   TRAGEDIES   OF   SENECA

deTanira
Te  deprecor,  quein  niiindus  et  siiperi  tinieut
et  aequor  et  qui  fulmen  Aetnaeum  quatit,
timeude  matri  te  aliger  saevae  puer  :
intende  certa  spicnlum  velox  manu,
non  ex  sagittis  levibus.      e  niimero  precor
graviore  prome  quod  tuae  nonduin  manus
misere  in  aliqueni  ;  non  levi  telo  est  opuSj
ut  amare  possit  Hercules,     rigidas  manus
intende  et  areuin  cornibus  iunctis  para,
nunc,  nunc   sagittam   prome   qua   quondam   hor-

ridum  550

lovem  petisti,  fulmine  abiecto  deus
cum  fronte  subita  tumuit  et  rabidum  mare
taurus  puellae  vector  Assyriae  scidit  ;
immitte  amorem,  vincat  exempla  omnia — ■
amare  discat  coniugem.     si  quas  decor
loles  inussit  pectori  Herculeo  faces,
extingue  totas,  perbibat  formam  mei,
tu  fulminantem  saepe  domuisti  lovem,
tu  furva  nigri  sceptra  gestantem  poli,
turbae  ducem  maioris  et  dominum  Stygis ;  5fiO

tuque  o  noverca  gravior  irata  deus,
cape  hunc  triumphum  solus  et  vince  Herculem.

NVTRIX

Prolata  vis  est  quaeque  Palladia  colu
lassavit  onmem  texta  fomularum  manum.
nunc  congeratur  virus  et  vestis  bibat


1  The  bolts  of  Jove  were  forged  in  Vulcjin's  siuitliy  umler
Aetna.  ^  Europa.

'230


HERCULES   OETAEUS

DEfANinA

Thee  do  I  pray,  by  earth  and  heaven-dwellers  held
in  fear,  by  sea,  by  him  who  wields  Aetnaean  ^  thunder-
bolts, and  by  thy  ruthless  mother  to  be  feared,  O
winged  boy  ;  with  unerring  hand  aim  a  swift  shaft,
and  not  of  thy  lighter  arrows.  Choose  thee,  I  pray^
one  of  tliy  heavier  shafts,  whieh  thy  hands  have
ne'er  yet  sliot  at  any;  for  no  light  wca])on  must  thou
use  that  tiercules  may  feel  the  j)ower  of  love.
Stretch  thy  hands  stiffly  forth,  and  bend  thy  bow
until  the  tips  shall  meet.  Now,  now  that  shaft  let
loose  with  which  once  thou  aimedst  at  Jove  tlie
terrible,  what  time  the  god  threw  down  his  thunder-
bolt and  as  a  bull,  with  liorns  quick-sprouting  on  his
brow,  clove  through  the  boisterous  sea,  bearing  the
Assyrian  maid."  Fill  him  with  love  ;  let  him  outstrip
all  precedents,  —  let  liim  learn  to  love  his  wife.  If
lole's  beauty  hath  kindled  fires  in  the  breast  of
Hercules,  extinguish  them  every  one,  and  of  my
beauty  let  him  deeply  drink.  Oft  hast  thou  con-
([uered  Jove,  the  thunderer,  oft  him  who  wields  the
dark  sceptre  of  the  dusky  world,  king  of  the  greater
throng,  and  lord  of  Styx  ;  and  now,  O  god  moi-e
dreadful  than  a  step-dame's  wrath,  win  thou  this
triumph  all  alone,  and  conquer  Hercules.

[Hc-eniei'  nursk,  iri/h  rohe  and  cliarm.'\

NUKRE

The  charm  has  been  brought  out  and  a  robe  from
Pallas'  3  distaff,  at  wdiose  weaving  thy  maidens  all
have  wrought  with  weary  hands.  Now  let  the
poison    be  prepared  and   let  the   robe   of   Hercules

^  The  arts  of  spinning  and  weaving  were  of  Pallas'  in-
ventiou.

231


THE  TRAGEDIES   OF   SENECA
Herculea  pestem  ;  precibus  augebo  malum.

In  tempore  ipso  navus  occurrit  Lichas  ;
celauda  vis  est  dira,  iie  pateant  doli.

DEIANIRA

O  quod  superbae  non  habent  umquam  domus^
fidele  semper  regibus  nomen  Licha,  570

cape  hos  amictus,  nostra  quos  nevit  manus,
dum  vagus  in  orbe  fertur  et  viotus  mere
tenet  feroci  Lydiam  gremio  nurum,
dum  poscit  lolen.     sed  iecur  fors  horridum
flectam  merendo  ;  merita  \icerunt  malos.
non  ante  coniunx  induat  vestes  iube
quam  ture  flammas  paseat  et  placet  deos,
cana  rigentem  populo  cinctus  comam.

Ipsa  in  penates  regios  gressus  feram
precibusque  Amoris  horrid i  matrem  colam.  580

vos,  quas  paternis  extuli  comites  focis,
Calydoniae,  lugete  deflendam  vicem.

CIIORVS

Flcmiis  casus,  Oeiiei.  tuos

comitum  primos  turba  per  annos,
232


HERCULES   OETAEUS

soak  up  its  mairic  power;    and   by  my  incantations
will  I  increase  the  charm.

[fVkile    ihey    are   occupijing    themselves    with    the    robe,
LiCHAS  is  seen  approaching.^
^^'  But   in  the  nick    of  time   the   zealous   Lichas
comes;  the  dire  potency  of  the  robe  must  be  con-
cealed lest  our  wiles  be  punished.
[^Enter  liciias.]


O  Lichas,  name  ever  loyal  to  thy  lords,  thougli
loyalty  proud  houses  ne'er  possess,  take  thou  this
garment  which  my  hands  have  woven  while  he  was
wandering  o'er  the  earth,  or,  spent  with  wine,  was
holding  in  his  doughty  arms  the  Lydian  queen,  or
seeking  lole.  And  yet,  percliance,  I  may  turn  his
rough  heart  to  me  again  by  my  deserving ;  for
deserts  oft  conquer  those  who  work  us  ill.  Before
my  husband  puts  tliis  garment  on,  bid  him  burn  in-
cense and  appease  the  gods,  his  stiff"  locks  wreathed
the  while  with  hoary  poplar.
[lichas  ia/ces  the  robe  and  departs  upon  his  missiou.]
^''■^  I  will  myself  pass  within  the  royal  palace  and
\\  ith  prayers  worship  the  mother  of  relentless  Love.

[To  her  AeloUan  attendant s.~\
Do  ye,  whom  I  have  brought  as  comrades  from  my
father's  house,  ye  Calydonian  maids,  bewail  the  for-
tune that  demands  your  tears.  [Exit.

CHonUS    OF    AETOLIAN    WOMEN

O  child   of  Oeneus,  truly    do    we   weep    for  thy

misfortunes,  the    band   of    thy  companions  througli
thy  childhood  years,  we  weep  thy  couch  dishonoured,

233


THE   TRAGEDIES   OF   SENECA

flemiis  dubios,  veneranda,  toros.

nos  Acheloi  tecum  solitae

pulsare  vadiuiij  cum  iam  tumidas

vere  pevacto  poneret  undas

gracilisque  gradii  ser})eret  aequo,

nee  praecipitem  volveret  amnem  590

flavus  rupto  fonte  Lycormas  ;

nos  Palladias  ire  per  aras

et  virgineos  celebrare  choros,

nos  Cadmeis  orgia  ferre

tecum  solitae  condita  cistis,

cum  iam  pulso  sidere  brumae

tertia  soles  evocat  aestas

et  spiciferac  concessa  deae

Attica  mystas  cludit  Eleusin.

nunc  quoque  casum  quemcuuique  times,     600

fid  as  comites  accipe  fatis  ;

nam  rara  fides  ubi  iam  melior

fortuna  ruit.

Tu  quicumque  es  qui  scc])tra  tenes,
licet  omne  tua  vulgus  in  aula
centum  pariter  limina  pulsct ;
cum  tot  populis  stipatus  eas,
in  tot  populis  vix  una  fides,
tenet  auratum  limen  Erinys,
et  cum  magnae  patuere  fores,  6lO

intrant  fraudes  cautique  doli
ferrumque  latens  ;  cumque  in  populos
prodire  paras,  comes  invidia  est.


1  Identified  by  Strabo  with  the   Evenns,  a  neighbouring
river  of  Aetolia.

~  The  sacred   objects   used   in    the    orgiastic    worship   of
Bacchus.

»  CaUcd  in  the  text  Cadniacan  from  Cadinus,  founder  of
Tliebea.
'234


HERCULES  OETAEUS
lady  whom  we  revere.  Often  with  thee  have  we
splashed  in  Aeheloiis'  shallows,  wlien  now,  the
springtime  })assed,  he  allayed  his  swollen  waters
and,  a  slender  stream,  crept  on  with  (piiet  course,
and  Lycormas  ^  no  longer  rolled  his  headlong  waters
on,  dark-hucd  with  bursting  fountains.  Together
were  we  wont  to  fare  to  Pallas'  shrines  and  join  in
virgin  dances,  to  bear  the  mysteries  ^  in  Theban  ■'
baskets  hidden,  when  now  the  wintry  star  had  fled,
and  each  third  summer*  called  forth  the  sun,  and
when  the  grain-giving  goddess'  ^  sacred  seat,  Attic-
Eleusis,  shut  in  her  mystic  worshippers.  Now  too,
whatever  lot  thou  fearest,  take  us  as  trusted  comrades
of  thy  fates  ;  for  rare  is  loyalty  when  now  better
fortune  fails.

*^'^*  O  thou,''  whoe'er  thou  art  who  the  sceptre
boldest,  though  all  the  people  throng  within  thy  hall,
pressing  together  through  its  thousand  doors :
though  when  thou  walkst  abroad  whole  nations  hem
thee  round  ;  in  all  those  nations  scarce  one  man  is
true.  Erinys  keeps  the  gilded  gate,  and  when  the
great  doors  have  opened  wide,  there  come  in
treacheries  and  cunning  wiles  and  the  lurking
dagger ;  and  when  amongst  the  people  thou  wouldst
walk,  envy   walks  by   thy  side.      As  often  as  dawn

*  The  festival  of  Bacchus  was  celebrated  every  tliird  year
in  honour  of  his  con(|ue.st  of  India.

^  Ceres.  Tlie  reference  is  to  the  Kleusinian  nij-steries.
All  these  festivals  these  women  had  been  wont  to  attend
together  in  childhood.

*  Addressed  to  kings  in  general.

235


THE  TRAGEDIES   OF   SENECA

noctem  quotiens  suramovet  Eos,

regem  totiens  credite  iiasci.

pauci  regeSj  non  regna  colunt ;

plures  fulgor  concitat  aulae.

ciipit  liic  regi  proximus  ipsi

clams  latas  ire  per  urbes  ;

urit  miserum  gloria  pectus.  620

cupit  hie  gazis  iniplere  faniem  ;

nee  tamen  omnis  plaga  geranriferi

sufficit  Histri  nee  tola  sitini

Lydia  vincit  nee  quae  Zephyro

subdita  tellus  stupet  aurato

flumine  claruni  radiare  Taguni ;

nee  si  totus  serviat  Hebrus

ruraque  dives  iungat  Hydaspes

intraque  suos  currere  fines

spectet  toto  flumine  Gangen.  630

avidis,  avidis  natura  parum  est.

Colit  hie  reges  regumque  lares,
non  lit  {jresso  voinere  semper
numquam  cesset  curvus  anitor
vel  niille  secent  arva  coloiii ;
solas  optat  quas  ponat  opes,
colit  hie  reges,  calcet  ut  omnes
prrdatque  aliquos  nulluniqiie  levet ;
lantuin  ut  noceat,  cupit  esse  potens.

Quota  pars  moritur  tempore  fati !  640

quos  felices  Cynthia  vidit,
vidit  miseros  eiiata  dies,
raruni  est  felix  idemque  senex.
caespes  Tyrio  m(}llior  ostro
solet  inpavidos  ducere  somnos  ;


^  i.e.  so  many  dangers  to  the  king's  life  hirk  in  the  night
that  if  he  survives  tlicsc  it  is  as  if  he  were  born  anew  iu  the
morning.

236


HERCULES   OETAEUS

drives  out  tlie  night,  so  often  believe  a  king  is  born.'
lew  worship  kings  and  not  their  tin-ones  ;  for  'tis  the
glitter  of  the  royal  hall  that  stirs  the  most.  One
man  is  eager  to  fare  illustrious  through  ])road  towns
next  to  the  king  himself;  for  greed  of  glory  bums
his  wretched  breast.  Another  longs  with  treasure
to  appease  his  hunger ;  and  yet  not  all  gem-bearing
Mister's  tract  would  satisfy,  nor  would  the  whole  of
Lydia  sate  his  thirst,  nor  tlie  land  ^  which,  lying
'neath  the  west-wind,  marvels  to  see  bright  Tagus
gleam  with  golden  water;  nor  if  all  Hebrus  were
his  own,  and  rich  Ilydaspcs  should  be  added  to  his
fields,  and  he  should  gaze  on  Ganges  flowing  with  all
its  stream  within  his  boundaries.  For  greed,  for
greed  all  nature  is  too  little.

•^^^  One  man  courts  kings  and  homes  of  kings,  not
tliat  his  ploughman,  forever  stooping  o'er  the  deep-
driven  share,  may  never  cease  his  toil,  or  tliat  the
peasantry  may  till  his  thousand  fields  ;  but  wealth
alone,  which  he  may  hoard  away,  he  seeks.  Another
man  courts  kings  that  he  may  tramjile  all,  may  ruin
many  and  establish  none  ;  he  covets  power  only  to
harm  therewith.

"'"  How  few  live  out  their  allotted  span  !  Whom
Cynthia  ^  saw  in  Iiappiness,  the  new-born  day  sees
wretched.  'Tis  rare  to  find  old  age  and  happiness
in  one.  The  couch  of  turf,  softer  than  Tyrian
purple,  oft  soothes  to  fearless  slumber ;    but  gilded

^  .Spain.

^'  i.e.  the  moon  of  llif  previous  uight.

237


THE   TRAGEDIES   OF   SENECA

aurea  rumpunt  tecta  quietem
vigilesque  trahit  imrpura  iioctes
o  si  pateant  pectora  ditum  !
quaiitos  iiitus  sublimis  agit
fortuna  iiietiis !      Bruttia  Coro  650

pulsante  fretuni  lenior  unda  est.
pectora  pauper  secura  gerit ;
tenet  e  patula  pocula  ftigo,
sed  rion  trepida  tenet  ilia  nianu  ;
carpit  faciles  vilesque  cibos,
sed  non  strietos  respicit  enses.
^    aurea  niiscet  pocula  sanguis.
"--    Coniunx  niodico  nupta  marito
non  disposito  clara  nionili

gestat  pelagi  dona  rubentis,  660

nee  gemniiferas  detrahit  aures
lapis  Eoa  lectus  in  unda^
nee  Sidonio  mollis  aeno
repetita  bibit  lana  rubores,
nee  Maeonia  distinguit  acu
quae  Phoebeis  subditus  euris
legit  Eois  Ser  arboribus.
quaelibet  herbae  tinxere  eolus
quas  indoctae  nevere  nianus  ;
sed  non  dubios  fovet  ilia  toi'os.  670

seqiiitur  dira  lanipade  Erinys
quariim  ])opuli  coluere  diem  ;
nee  sibi  felix  pauper  habetur
nisi  felices  cecidisse  videt.

Quisquis  medium  defugit  iter
stabili  numquam  tramite  ciu'rit.
dum  petit  unum  ^ii'aebere  diem

^  The  north-west  wind.

^  The  reference  is  to  the  story  of  the  sword  of  Damocles.
See  Index.

238


HERCULES    OETAEUS

ceilings  break  our  rest,  and  purple  coverlets  drag  out
wakeful  nights.  Oh,  if  the  heai-ts  of  rich  men
were  laid  bare !  What  fears  does  lofty  fortune  stir
within  I  The  waves  of  Bruttiuni,  when  Corus^
lashes  up  the  sea,  are  calmer  far.  The  poor  man's
heart  is  free  from  care  ;  he  holds  cuj)s  carved  from
the  wide-spreading  beech,  but  holds  them  with  hand
untrembling  ;  he  eats  but  cheap  and  common  food^

et  sees  no  drawn  sword  -  hanging   o'er  his  head !

lis  in  golden  cups  that  blood  is  mixed  with  wine.^

^''^  The  wife  who  is  wed  to  one  of  modest  means
is  not  bedecked  with  necklaces  of  pearl,  the  red  sea's
gift,  nor  do  stones  gathered  on  Orient  shores  weigh
down  her  gem-laden  ears  ;  for  her  no  soft  wool  twice
dipped  in  Sidonian  cauldrons  drinks  scarlet  dyes  ;
not  hers  with  Maeonian  ■*  needle  to  embroider  stuffs
which  Serians  under  sunlit  skies  gather  ^  from  eastern
trees.  'Tis  but  common  herbs  that  dye  the  webs
wliich  her  unskilled  hands  have  woven ;  but  she
therishes  a  marriage-couch  all  undisturbed.  With
cruel  torch  doth  Fury  pursue  the  bride  whose  wed-
ding-day great  throngs  have  celebrated  ;  nor  does  the
poor  man  count  himself  full  blest,  unless  he  sees  the
!)lessed  fallen  from  their  height.

075  Whoever  has  left  the  middle  course  fares  never
in  path  secure.     While  for  one  day  the  youth  "^  sought

•'•  The  author  may  have  the  story  of  Atreua  and  Thyestes
in  inind.

^  The  Lydian  (Maeonian)  women  were  famous  for  their
skill  in  embroider}'.

^  The  reference  is  to  silk-culture,  for  which  the  Seres  (the
Chinese)  were  well  known  among  the  ancients.

*  Phaethou.

'i39


THE   TRAGEDIES   OF  SENECA

patrioque  piier  constitit  axe

nee  per  solitum  decurrit  iter,

sed  Phoebeis  ignota  petens  680

sidera  flammis  errante  rota,

secum  pariter  perdidit  orbem.

medium  caeli  dum  sulcat  iter,

tenuit  placitas  Daedalus  oras

nullique  dedit  noniina  ponto  ;

sed  dum  volueres  vincere  veras

Icarus  audet  patriasque  puer

despicit  alas  Plioeboque  volat

proxumus  ipsi,  dedit  ignoto

nomina  pouto.      male  pensantur  690

magna  ruinis.

Felix  alius  magiuisque  sonet ;
me  nulla  vocet  turba  potentem.
stringat  tenuis  litora  puppis
nee  magna  meas  aura  phaselos
iubeat  medium  sciudere  })ontum  ;
transit  tutos  Fortuna  sinus
medioque  rates  quaerit  in  alto,
quarum  feriunt  sipara  nubes.

Sed  (juid  pavido  territa  vultu,  700

qualis  Haccho  s;uicia  maenas,
fertur  dubio  ^  regina  gradu  ?
quae  te  rursus  fortuna  rotat?
miseranda^  refer  :  licet  i])sa  neges,
vultus  loquitur  quodcunique  tcgis.

DEIANIUA

Vagus  per  artus  en-at  excussos  tremor,
C  erectus  liorret  crinis,  impulsis  adhuc

*  So  Groiiovius :  fmcdio  Leo,  with  E :  rai)ido  A:  trcpido
RaphtUvg :  fert  in  mediura  .  .  .  gradum  liichltr.

240


HERCULES   OETAEUS

to  fiirnisli  li<;lit  and  took  his  stand  witliin  his  father's
car,  and  while  he  passed  not  o'er  the  accustomed
track,  but  sought  the  stars  unknown  to  Phoebus'  rays
Avitli  wandering  wlieel,  himself  he  ruined  and  the
world,  as  well.  Daedalus,  cleaving  his  path  midway
the  heavens,  reached  peaceful  shores  and  to  no  sea
gave  his  name ;  but  while  young  Icarus  dared  rival
true  birds  in  flight,  looked  down  upon  his  father's
wings  and  soared  aloft  close  to  the  sun  itself,  to  an  un-
known sea  ^  he  gave  his  name.  To  our  undoing,
high  fortunes  are  by  ruin  balanced.

*^^'-  Let  another  be  noised  abroad  as  blest  and  great ;
but  let  no  throng  hail  me  as  powerful.  Let  my  frail
craft  keep  close  to  shore,  and  let  no  strong  wind
compel  my  bark  to  plough  the  mighty  deep  ;  mis-
fortune jiasses  by  quiet  ports,  and  seeks  for  ships
sailing  the  open  sea,  whose  topsails  smite  the  clouds-

[df.ianira  appears  Inirrjjivg  didracledly  from  the  palace.^

"•^•^  But  why  in  terror  and  with  f;ice  of  fear,  like
some  rage-smit  Bacchante,  comes  the  queen  with
step  uncertain  r

\_Enter  deianira]

What  new  reverse  of  fortune  whirls  thee  about .''
Poor  lady,  tell  us.  Though  thou  thyself  sayst  naught,
thy  face  speaks  out  whate'er  thou  hidest.


Vague  shivers  steal  through  my  trembling  limbs,
/"my  hair  starts  up  in  horror  ;     fear  sticks  in  my  soul

^  The  Icaiian  sea.

241

VOL.    II.  H


THE   TRAGEDIES   OF   SENECA

stat  teiToi"  aniniis  et  cor  attonitum  salit

pavidumque  trepidis  palpitat  venis  iecuv.

lit  fractus  austro  pontus  etiamnum  tumet,  710

quamvis  quiescat  langiiidis  ventis  dies,

ita  mens  adhuc  vexatur  excusso  nietu.

semel  pi-ofecto  premere  felices  deus

cum  coepit,  urget.     hos  habent  magna  exitus.

NVTRIX

Quis  tarn  ini})otens,  miseranda,  te  casus  rotat  ?

DEIANIRA

Vt  missa  palla  est  tabe  Nessea  inlita
thalamisque  maerens  intuli  gressum  meis,
nescio  quid  animus  timuit  ^  et  fraudem  struit  ?
libet  experiri.     solibus  dirus  ferum
flammisque  Nessus  sanguinem  ostendi  arcuit ;        720
hie  ipse  fraudes  esse  praemonuit  dolus.

Et  forte,  nulla  nube  respersus  iubar,
laxabat  ardens  fervidum  Titan  diem. — ■
vix  ora  solvi  patitur  etiam  nunc  timor. —
medios  in  ignes  solis  eiceram  facem  ^
quo  tincta  fuerat  palla  vestisque  inlita.
abiectus  horret  sanguis  et  Phoebi  coma  ^
tepefactus  ardet — vix  queo  monstrum  ekxpii.'*
nives  ut  Rums  solvit  aut  tepidus  Notus,
quas  vere  })rimo  lucidus  perdit  Mimas,  730

^  Leo  conjectures  a  lacuna  here  and  suggests  an  inoriens
viro  I  poenas  parat  Centaurus  :  Bichier  reads  timuit.  an
fraudem  struit?

-  f  eiccrain  facem  Leo,  with  E,  conjecturing  medios  in  ignes
vellus  eieci  madens  :  solis  et  claram  facem  A .

242


HERCULES   OETAEUS

till  now  so  passioii-tosscd  ;  my  heart  leaps  wildly
and  my  (juaking  liver  throbs  with  pulsing  veins.  As
when  the  storm-tossed  sea  still  heaves,  though  the
skies  are  elear  and  the  winds  have  died  away,  so  is
my  soul  still  troubled,  though  my  fear  has  been
allayed.  Surely  when  God  has  once  begun  to  oppress
the  fortunate,  he  bears  down  hard.  To  such  an  end
do  mighty  foi'tunes  come.


What  headstrong  fate,  })oor  soul,  whirls  thee
about  ?

DEIANIRA

When  I  had  sent  away  the  robe  anointed  with
Nessus'  blood,  and,  sad  at  heart,  betook  me  to  my
chamber,  my  soul  feared  I  know  not  what — did  the
dying  centaur  'gainst  my  husband  plan  revenge,^  and
plot  some  treacliery  ?  I  was  pleased  to  make  the  test.
Dread  Nessus  forbade  me  to  expose  the  wild  blood
to  the  sun's  rays  and  to  fire  ;  and  this  artifice  itself
forewarned  me  of  treachery.

"--  It  chanced  the  burning  sun,  its  radiance  by  no
cloud  dinnned,  was  setting  free  the  day's  fervid
heat. — Even  now  my  fear  scarce  suffers  me  to  speak. —
Right  into  the  hot  sunlight  I  had  thrown  the  blood-
soaked  fleece  ^  with  which  the  robe  had  been
moistened  and  the  garment  smeared.  The  bloody
fleece  I  flung  writhed  horribly  and,  warmed  with  the
sun's  rays,  burst  aflame — I  liave  scarce  words  to
tell  of  the  awful  thing.  As  the  East  or  the  warm
South-wind  melts  the  snows  which  glistening  Mimas
^  Translating  Leo's  conjecture.

^  So  g- ;  Leo  f  comani.

*  So  A  :  Leo  fastris  vix  quoriue  est.     m.  elocor.

21..S


THE   TRAGEDIES   OF   SENECA

utque  evolutos  frangit  lonio  salo

opposita  fluctus  Leucas  et  lassus  tumor

in  litore  ipso  spumatj  aut  caelestibus

aspersa  tepidis  tura  laxantur  focis,

sic  languet  onme  vellus  et  perdit  comas.

dumque  ista  miror,  causa  mirandi  })erit ;

quin  ipsa  tellus  spumeos  motus  agit

et  quidquid  ilia  tabe  contactum  est  labat.^

Natum  paventem  cerno  et  ardenti  pede  74-0

gressus  ferentem.     prome  quid  })ortes  iiovi.^

HYLLVS

I,  profuge,  quaei'C  si  quid  ulterius  patet
terris  freto  sideribus  Oceano  infevis^ —
ultra  labores,  mater^  Alcidae  fuge  !

DEIANIRA

Nescio  quod  animus  grande  ])raes;igit  malum.

HYLLVS

Regnat,  triumphat  ^ ;  temjjla  lunonis  pete,
haec  tibi  patent ;  delubra  praeciusa  omnia.

ni;iANiRA
EfFare  quis  me  casus  insontcin  premat.

'  Following  line  738  in  A  stands  the  unintelligible  line
tuinensquc  tacita  sequitur  et  (juassat  caput.

^  Leo  deletes  lines  74O,  741,  assuming  a  considerable  lacuna
between  738  and  742.

244.


HERCULES   OETAEUS

loses  in  early  spring ;  as  'gaiiist  Leucadia's  crags,
breasting  the  Ionian  sea,  the  iip-fiung  waves  are
broken  and  \vith  spent  fury  foam  ujjon  the  shore,  or
as  incense  sprinkled  on  holy  shrines  is  melted  in  tlie
liot  altar-fires  ;  so  all  the  wool  withered  and  lost  its
fleece.  And  while  I  stood  wondering  at  it,  the
object  of  my  wonder  disappears;  nay,  even  the  very
ground  begins  to  foam,  and  whatever  that  jjoison
touched  begins  to  shrink.

[uYLLUS  is  seen  approacIiing\
"""'But  I  see  my  son  apjn-oaching  with  face  of  fear
and  hurrying  feet.

\_To   HYLLUS]

Sj)eak  out — what  tidings  dost  tliou  bear  ?

nvLLUs  \Jiurrijmg  upon  the  scene\

Go !  flee !  seek  out  whatever  place  lies  far  away
on  land,  on  sea,  'mongst  stars,  in  Ocean,  under-
world— far  beyond  the  labours  of  Alcides,  mother,
flee!

DEIANUIA

Some  great  disaster  doth  my  mind  ])resage.


She  1  reigns,  she  triumphs  ;  Juno's  temple    seek.
This  sanctuary  waits  thee  ;  closed  is  all  refuge  else.

DEIANHJA

Tell  what  disaster  my  guiltless  self  o'erwliclms.
^  i.e.  Juno.

*  Lto^s  conjecture  for  regna  triiunphi  of  AISS.

2i5


THE   TRAGEDIES    OF   SENECA

HVLLVS

Decus  illud  orbis  atque  praesidium  unicum,
quern  fata  terris  in  locum  dederant  lovis,  750

o  mater^  abiit.     membra  et  Herculeos  toros
urit  lues  nescio  qua ;  qui  domuit  feras^
ille  ille  victor  vincitur  maeret  dolet.
quid  quaeris  ultra  ?

DEIANIRA

Miserias  properant  suas
audi  re  miseri,     fare,  quo  posita  in  statu
Qiam  nostra  domus  est  ?     o  lares,  miseri  lares  !
nunc  vidua,  nunc  expulsa,  nunc  ferar  obruta.

HVLLVS

Non  sola  maeres  Herculem,  toto  iaeet
mundo  gemendus.  fata  nee,  mater,  tua
privata  credas  :  iam  genus  totum  obstrepit.  760

hunc  ecce  luctu  quern  gemis  cuncti  genunit,
commune  terris  omnibus  2)ateris  malum,
luctum  occupasti :  prima,  non  sola  Herculem,
miserauda,  maeres.

DEIANIRA

Quam  propc  a  leto  tamen
ede,  ede  quaeso  iaceat  Alcides  mens,

HVLLVS

Mors  refugit  ilium  victa  quae  in  regno  sue
semel  est  nee  audeiit  fata  tarn  vastum  nefas
admittere.      ipsas  forsitan  trej)ida  coins
Clotho  manu  proiecit  et  fata  Herculis

246


HERCULES   OETAEUS


That  glory  aiul  sole  guardian  of  the  world,  whom
the  fates  had  given  to  the  lands  in  the  place  of  Jove^

0  mother,  is  no  more.  The  limbs  and  thews  of
Hercules  a  mysterious  plague  is  wasting ;  and  he
who  conquered  monsters,  he,  he,  the  victor,  is  van-
quished, is  in  grief,  in  agony.     What  more  dost  ask  ?

DEIAMRA

The  wretched  are  in  haste  to  hear  their  wretched-
ness.    Tell   me  :  in  what  condition  now  stands  our
(house  ?     O  home,  O  wretched  home  !     Now  truly  am

1  widowed,  exiled,  overwhelmed.

HYLLUS

Not  thou  alone  dost  lament  Hercules ;  low  he
lies  for  the  whole  world  to  mourn.  And  think  not,
mother,  thine  is  a  pi'ivate  loss ;  now  the  whole
race  is  clamorous  with  woe.  Lo,  all  men  utter  thy
self-same  groans  of  grief;  common  to  all  lands  is  the
ill  thou  sutferest.  Thou  hast  forestalled  their  grief;
first,  but  not  all  alone,  poor  soul,  dost  thou  mourn
Hercules.

nF;i.\NiRA

Yet  tell  me,  tell,  I  beg,  how  near  to  death  does
my  Aleides  lie.

HVLLUS

Death,  who  once  in  his  own  realm  was  overcome,^
flees  from  him  ;  nor  do  the  fates  dare  countenance
so  great  a  crime.  Perchance  Clotho  has  thrown
aside  her  very  distaft' from  her  trembling  hand,  and

^  A  probaljle  reference  to  the  struggle  of  Hercules  witli
Death  for  the  recovery  of  Alcestis.

247


THE  TRAGEDIES   OF    SENECA

timet  pevagere.     pro  diem,  infandum  diem  !  770

liocne  ille  summo  magnus  Alcides  erit  ?


DEIANIRA

Ad  fata  et  umbras  adque  peiorem  polum
praecedere  ilium  dicis  ?     an  possum  })rior
mortem  oceupare  ?     fare,  si  nondum  occidit.

HYLI.VS

Euboica  tellus  vertice  immense  tumens
pulsatur  omni  latere.      Plirixeum  mare
scindit  Caphereus,  servit  hoc  Austro  latus  ;
at  qua  nivosi  patitur  Aquilonis  minas,
Euripus  undas  fleclit  instabilis  vagas
septemque  cursus  volvit  et  totidem  refert,  780

dum  lassa  Titan  mergat  Oce.ino  iuga.
hie  rupe  celsa,  multa  quam  nubes  ferit,
annosa  fulgent  templa  Cenaei  lovis.

Ut  stetit  ad  aras  oinne  votivum  pecus
totumque  tauris  gemuit  auratis  nemus,
spolium  leonis  sordidum  tabo  exuit
posuitque  clavae  pondus  et  pharetra  graves
laxavit  umeros.      veste  turn  fulgens  tua,
cana  revinctus  ptipulo  horrentem  coniam,
succendit  aras  ;.  "  aceipe  has  "  inquit  "  foeis  790

non  false  messes  genitor  et  largo  saccr
splendescat  ignis  ture,  quod  Plioebum  colens
dives  Sabaeis  colligit  truncis  Arabs,
pacata  tellus  "  inquit  "  et  caelum  et  freta,

1  i.e.  the  Aegaean.     See  Index  s.r.  "  Phrixus."

2  Seneca's  description  in  tliis  passage  of  tiie  topograi>hy  of
Euboea  is  not  correct.  The  Cenaean  Promontory  is  at  the
far  north-western  point  of  the  island,  while  the  Strait  of

248


HERCULES  OETAEUS

is  afraid  to  coin})lete  the  fates  of  Hercules.  O  day,
O  awful  day  !  And  shall  this  for  the  great  Alcides
be  the  last  ?

UEIANIHA

To  the  shades  of  death  and  to  that  darker  world
dost  say  he  has  gone  already  ?  Can  I  not  go  before
and  anticipate  his  death  ?  Speak,  if  he  is  not  yet
fallen,

nvM.us

Euboca's  shore,  swelling  with  mighty  headland,
on  every  side  is  beaten  by  the  waves.  Caphereus
cleaves  the  Phrixean^  Sea,  on  this  side  the  south-
wind  blows ;  but  on  the  side  which  feels  the
blasts  of  snowy  Aquilo,  restless  Euripus  turns  his
wandering  waves,  whose  currents  seven  times  flow
and  seven  times  ebb  again,  till  Titan  plunges  his
weary  horses  in  the  sea.  Here  on  a  lofty  cliff,  by
many  a  storm-cloud  beaten,  an  ancient  temple  of
Cenaean  Jove  stands  gleaming.^'

"^^  When  all  the  votive  herd  stood  at  the  altars,
and  the  whole  grove  was  filled  with  the  bellowing
of  the  gilded  bulls,  he -^  put  off  his  lion's  skin,  all
stained  with  gore,  laid  down  his  heavy  club  and
freed  his  shoulders  of  the  quiver's  weight.  Then
radiant  in  thy  robe,  his  rough  hair  wreathed  with
huary  poplar,  he  lit  the  altar-fires.  "Accept  these
gifts,"  he  said,  '"'upon  thy  shrine,  O  father,  not
falsely  claimed,  and  let  thy  sacred  fire  blaze  brightlv
vv'ith  copious  incense  which  the  rich  Arab  gathers
from  Sabaean  trees,  in  worship  of  the  Sun.  Peace
has  been  given  to  earth,  to  sky,  to  sea  ;  all  monsters

Euripus  is  very  nearly  off  the  middle  point.  Caphereus,
moreover,  is  exposed  not  to  the  south  but  almost  directly  to
the  east  wind.  '  i.e.  Hercules.

249


THE   TRAGEDIES   OF   SENECA

feris  subactis  omnibus  victor  redi.
depone  fuhnen."

Gemitus  in  inedias  preces
stupente  et  ipso  cecidit ;  liinc  caelum  horrido
clamore  complet.     qualis  iinpressa  fugax
taurus  bipenni  volnus  et  telum  ferens
delubra  vasto  trepida  niugitu  replet^  800

aut  quale  mundo  fulmen  emissum  toiiat,
sic  ille  gemitu  sidera  ct  pontum  ferit,
et  vasta  Chalcis  sonuit  et  voces  Cyclas
excepit  omnis  ;  hinc  petrae  Capherides,
hinc  omne  voces  reddit  Herculeas  nenius.
flentem  videmus.      volgus  antiquam  ])utut
rabiem  redisse  ;  turn  fugam  famuli  peluat.

At  ille  voltus  ignea  torquens  face
unum  inter  omnes  sequitur  et  quaerit  Lichan.
complexus  aras  ille  tremibunda  manu  810

mortem  metu  consumpsit  et  i)arvum  sui
poenae  reliquit.     dumque  ^  tremibundum  manu
tenuit  cadaver  :  ''  hac  manu^  hac  "  inquit  ''  I'crar,
o  fata^  victus  ?     Herculem  vicit  Lichas  ?
ecce  alia  clades  :  Hercules  perimit  Lichan.
facta  inquinentur  ;  fiat  hie  summus  labor."
in  astra  missus  fertur  et  nubes  vago
spargit  cruore.     t^ilis  in  caelum  exilit
harundo  Getica  visa  dimitti  manu

aut  quam  Cydon  excussit  :  inferius  tamen  820

et  tela  fugient.     truncus  in  pontum  (  adit,
in  saxa  vertex ;  unus  ambobus  iacet.

^  Leo  conjectures  semianimuin  pareus.
2. 'SO


HERCULES   OETAEUS

have  I  subdued  and  in  triunipli  come  again.  Lay
down  thy  thunderbolt."

^36  As  he  thus  prayed  a  groan  fell  from  liis  lijjs,
even  he  standing  aghast;  then  with  dreadful  cries
he  filled  the  air.  As  when  a  bull,  Heeing  the  deep-
driven  axe,  bearing  both  wound  and  weapon,  fills
with  his  huge  bellowings  the  affrighted  shrine,  or  as
the  launched  thunder  crashes  in  the  sky  ;  so  did  he
with  his  roarings  smite  the  stars  and  sea ;  towering
Chalcis  reechoed  and  all  the  Cyclades  heard  his
cries ;  then  all  Caphereus'  crags  and  the  whole
forest  resounded  with  the  cries  of  Hercules.  We
saw  him  weep.  The  commons  thought  his  ancient
madness  had  returned ;  then  his  attendants  fled.

^•'^  But  he,  his  face  writhing  with  pain  of  the
burning  heat,  pursued  and  sought  out  Lichas  alone
among  them  all.  The  boy,  embracing  the  altar  with
trembling  hands,  through  sheer  terror  tasted  the
pangs  of  death,  and  left  small  part  of  his  life  for
punishment.  Then  Hercules,  by  his  hand  seizing
the  quivering  corpse,  exclaimed :  "  By  such  a  hand,
by  such  a  hand  as  this,  ye  fates,  shall  I  be  said  to
have  been  undone  ?  Has  Lichas  conquered  Hercules  ?
Behold  another  slaughter  ;  Hercules  in  turn  sla^^s
Lichas.  Be  my  deeds  dishonoured ;  be  this  my
crowning  task."  To  the  stars  the  boy  went  hurtling
and  sprinkled  the  clouds  with  his  scattered  blood.
So  does  a  Getan  arrow,  from  the  hand  let  fly,  go
speeding  skyward,  or  the  sliaft  a  Cydonian  has  shot ;
but  far  below  1  even  these  weaj)ons  will  wing  their
flight.  His  body  falls  into  the  sea,  his  head  upon  the
rocks  ;  one  youth  lies  slain  in  both.'-'


i.e.  below  tlio  height  reached  by  Licliag.
».e.  both  head  aud  body.


2.51


THE   TRAGEDIES   OF   SENECA

"  Resistite  "  inquit  "  noii  furor  inentem  abstulit,
furore  gravius  istiul  atque  ira  malum  est :
in  me  iuvat  saevire."     vix  pestem  indicat
et  saevit ;  artus  ipse  dilacerat  suos
et  membra  vasta  carpit  avellens  manu.
exuere  amictus  quaerit ;  hoc  solum  Herculem
non  posse  vidi.     traliere  conatus  tamen
et  membra  traxit ;  cor])oris  palla  liorridi  830

pars  est  et  ipsa ;  pestis  iinmiscet  cuti.^
nee  causa  dirae  cladis  in  medio  patet^
sed  causa  tamen  est ;  vixque  sufficiens  malo
nunc  ore  terram  languidus  prono  }:)reniit,
nunc  poscit  undas — unda  non  vincit  malum  ;
fluctisona  quaerit  litora  et  pontuin  occupat ;
famularis  ilium  retinet  errantem  manus —
o  sortem  acerbam  !     fuinius  Alcidae  pares  !

Nunc  puppis  ilium  litore  pAiboico  refert
Austerque  lenis  jxnulus  Herculeum  raj)it ;  840

destituit  animus  membra^  nox  oculos  premit.

DEIANIRA

Quid,anime,  cessas?  quid  stupes?  factum  est  scelus.
natum  rcposcit  lujjpiter,  luno  aemulum  :
reddendus  orbi  est.     quod  potes  rcdde  exiiibe :
eat  per  artus  ensis  exactus  meos.
sic,  sic  agendum  est.     tarn  levis  pocnas  manus
tantas  reposcit?     perdc  fulminibus,  socer,

^  FoUoirhm  Iiichle7-'s  recoiistr action:  pars  (parum  E)  est  et
ipsaiii  (ipsa  A)  3ISS.,  for  tvhich  Leo  conjectures  ipsum  pestis
iinmiscet  cutem  {scil.  pallae).

'  AikI  not  against  others  as  heretofore.
252


HERCULES   OETAEUS

^-3  "But  liold  !  "  said  Hercules  ;  "  'tis  not  madness
has  robbed  me  of  my  wits ;  this  bane  is  worse  than
madness  and  than  rage ;  I  am  fain  to  rave  against
myself."  ^  Scarce  has  he  named  tlie  plague  when
lo,  he  raves,  he  tears  his  own  flesh  apart,  with  his
own  hand  wounding  and  rending  his  huge  limbs.
He  seeks  to  throw  aside  the  robe  ;  in  this  alone  have
1  seen  Alcides  fail.  Yet  striving  to  tear  the  robe,
he  tears  liis  limbs  as  well.  The  robe  is  part  and
parcel  of  his  rugged  body  ;  the  pest  blends  it  witli
the  skin.  The  cause  of  his  dire  suffering  is  hid,  but
still  there  is  a  cause ;  and,  scarce  able  to  endure  his
j)ain,  now  he  lies  spent,  face  down  upon  the  ground,
now  calls  for  water — water  checks  not  his  pain  ;  he
seeks  the  wave-resounding  shore  and  plunges  in  the
sea,  but  a  slave's  hand  restrains  him  wandering
aimless  there — oh,  bitter  lot !  we  were  Alcides'
c-cjuals  !  -

^3^  And  Jiow  a  vessel  is  bringing  him  from  Eiiboea's
sliore,  ;nid  a  gentle  south  wind  wafts  his  huge  bulk
along;  his  spirit  has  left  his  body;  night  seals  his
eyes.

DEIANIRA

Why,  soul,  dost  hesitate  ?  Why  art  amazed  ?  The
crime  is  done.  Jupiter  demands  back  his  son  of
thee,  Juno,  her  rival  ;  yea,  to  the  world  must  he  be
restored.^  What  still  thou  canst,  give  back,  make
restitution  ;  let  the  sword,  deep  driven,  through  mv
body  pass.  So,  so  must  it  be  done.  But  does  so
frail  hand  as  this  exact  punishment  so  great  ?  With
thy  thunderbolts,  O  sire,  destroy  thy  guilty  daughter.

-  i.e.  in  the  liei'o's  present  weakness,  common  men  were
al)le  to  control  him.

^  She  has  robbed  tlie  world  of  Hercules,  and  now  mu.st
make  such  restitution  as  she  maj'.

25.3


THE  TRAGEDIES   OF   SENECA

nurum  scelestaiii,     nee  levi  telo  manus

ai-metur;  illud  fulmen  exiliat  polo,

quo,  nisi  fuisset  genitus  Alcides  tibi,  850

hydvam  cremasses.     pestem  ut  insolitam  feri

et  ut  noverea  potius  irata  malum.

emitte  telum  quale  in  errantem  prius

Phaethonta  missum  est :  perdidi  in  solo  Hercule

et  ipsa  populos.

Quid  I'ogas  telum  deos  ?
iam  parce  socero  ;  coniug^em  Alcida£  necem
(Optare  pudeat ;  haec  erit  voto  manus,
a  me  petatur;,  oecupa  ferrum  ocius.
jcur  deinde  ferrum  ?     quidquid  ad  mortem  trahit
telum  est  abunde — rupe  ab  aetheria  ferar.  860

haec,  liaec  renatum  prima  quae  poscit  diem,
Oeta  eligatur,  corpus  hinc  mitti  placet,
abrupta  eautes  scindat  et  partem  niei
ferat  omne  saxum,  pendeant  lacerae  manus
totumque  rubeat  asperi  montis  latus.
levis  una  mors  est — levis  ?     at  extendi  potest,
eligere  nescis,  anime,  cui  telo  incubes  ;
utinam  esset,  utinam  fixus  in  thalamis  meis
Herculeus  ensis  !     huic  decet  ferro  ininori.
una  perire  dextera  nobis  sat  est?  870

coite,  gentes,  saxa  et  immensas  faces
iaculetur  orbis,  nulla  nunc  cesset  manus,
corripite  tela,  vindicem  vestrum  abstuli.
impune  saevi  sceptra  iam  reges  gerent,
impune  iam  nascetur  indomitum  malum  ;
repetentuv  arae  cernere  assuetae  hostiam
similem  colenti.     sceleribus  feci  viam  ;

254


HERCULES   OETAEUS

And  witli  no  common  weapon  let  thy  hand  he  armed  ;
let  that  holt  leap  from  heaven  with  whieh^  had
Alcides  not  sprung  from  thee,  thou  wouldst  have
scorched  tlie  Hydra.  Destroy  me  as  some  strange
pest,  as  a  scourge  far  worse  than  step-dame's  wrath.
Launch  such  a  bolt  as  once  thou  didst  hurl  at  stray-
ing Phaethon  ;  for  I,  e'en  I  myself,  in  Hercules  alone
have  ruined  nations.

^^^  But  why  dost  ask  weapons  of  the  gods?  At
last  spare  thy  father.^  The  wife  of  Hercules  should
•iTe  ashamed  to  pray  for  death ;  this  hand  shall  gi-ant
my  prayer  ;  from  myself  let  death  be  sought.  Then
quickly  seize  the  sword. — Whj^  then  the  sword  .^
Whatever  brings  to  death  is  weapon  all-sufficient —
from  a  sky-piercing  cliff  I'll  cast  me  down.  Let  this,
this  crag  of  Oeta,  which  is  the  fii'st  to  greet  the  new-
born day,  be  chosen ;  from  this  'tis  well  to  fling  me.
May  its  broken  crags  rend  asunder,  and  every  rock
take  its  share  of  me ;  may  my  mangled  hands  hang
there,  and  may  the  whole  rough  mountain-side  run
red.  One  death  is  all  too  light — light  ?  but  still  it
can  be  prolonged.  Thou  canst  not  choose,  O  soul,
on  what  weapon  thou  shalt  fall.  Oh,  would  that  the
sword  of  Hercules  were  hanging  in  my  chamber!
Upon  that  steel  'twere  well  for  me  to  die.  But  is  it
enough  that  by  one  right  hand  I  perish  ?  Come  all
ye  nations ;  let  the  world  cast  rocks  and  huge  fire-
brands on  me  ;  let  no  hand  shrink  its  task  ;  seize
weapons,  for  your  avenger  have  I  done  to  deatli.
Now  with  impunity  shall  cruel  kings  wield  sceptres  ;
yea,  with  imi)unity  now  fierce  monsters  shall  be  born  ;
again  shall  altars  be  found  wont  to  behold  victim
like  to  worshipper.^      A   highway  to  crime  have   I

'  i.e.  do  not  impose  thy  punishnien!  on  .Jove.
*  i.e.  where  human  sacrifices  are  oliued  up.

255


THE   TRAGEDIES   OF   SENECA
ego  vos  tyrannis  regibus  monstris  feris
saevisque  rapto  vindice  opposui  deis.
cessas,  Tonantis  socia  ?     non  spargis  lacem  880

imitata  fratrem  et  niittis  ereptam  lovi
meque  ipsa  perdis  ?     laus  tibi  erepta  iucluta  est,
ingens  triumphus  ;  aemuli,  luno,  tui
mortem  occu^javi.

HYLLVS

Quid  domum  impulsam  trahis  ?
erroris  est  hie  omne  quodciimque  est  nefas.
liaiit  est  nocens  quicumque  non  sponte  est  nocens.

DEI  AN  IRA

Quicumcjue  fate  ignoscit  et  parcit  sibi,
errare  meruit,     morte  damnari  placet.

HYLLVS

Nocens  videri  qui  mori  quaerit  cupit.

DEiANIIlA

Mors  iunocentes  sola  deceptos  facit.  890

HVLLUS

Titana  fugiens —

DEIANIRA

Ipse  me  Titan  fugit.

HYLLVS

Vitam  relinques  ?

'  i.e.  tlie  "nation"  addicsscd  in  line  871.
256


HERCULES   OETAEFJS

j^repared  ;  I  liave  exposed  yoii  ^  to  tyrants,  kings,
monsters,  wild  beasts  and  cruel  gods,  by  slaying  your
avenger.  Dost  shirk  tliy  task,  wife  -  of  the  thun-
derer  ?  Why  dost  tliou  not,  in  imitation  of  tliy
l^rother,"  scatter  fire,  snatch  from  Jove's  hand  his
bolt,  hurl  it,  and  thyself  destroy  me  ?  Illustrious
praise  and  mighty  triumph  have  been  snatched  from
thee  ;  I  have  forestalled  thee,  Juno,  in  thy  rival's
death.

HYLLUS

Why  dost  drag  down  a  house  already  shaken  ?
From  error  springs  wholly  whatever  crime  is  here.
He  does  no  sin  who  sins  without  intent.


Who  casts  the  blame  on  fate  and  spares  himself,
has  deserved  to  err.      My  sentence  is  for  death.

HYLLUS

Fain  would  he  seem  guilty  who  seeks  to  die.

DEIANIRA

'Tis  death  alone  can  make  the  beguiled  ^  innocent.

HYLLUS

Fleeing  the  sun —

DKIAMllA

The  sun  himself  flees  me.

HYLLUS

Wilt  abandon  life  f

'  Juno  was  both  sister  and  wife  of  Jf)ve.
'  i.e.  those  who  have  been  ensnared  into  sin.

257

VOL.   U.  S


THE   TRAGEDIES   OF   SENECA

DEI  AN  IRA

Miseram,  ut  Alciden  sequar,

HYLLVS

Snperest  et  auras  ille  caelestes  trahit.

DEIANIRA

Vinci  Hercules  cum  potuit^  hinc  coepit  mori.

HYLLVS

Natum  relinques  fataque  abrumpes  lua  ?

DEIANIRA

Qiiaincumque  natus  sepelit  haec  vixit  diu.

HYLLVS

Virum  sequeris.

DEIANIRA

Praegredi  castae  solent.

HYLLVS

Si  te  ipsa  damnas.,  scelere  te  misera  arguis.

DEIANIRA

Nemo  nocens  sibi  ipse  poenas  abrogat.

HYLLVS

Multis  remissa  est  vita  quorum  error  nocens,     900
non  dextra  fuerat.      fata  quis  dainuat  sua?


258


HERCULES   OETAEUS

DKIANIRA

Ay  !  a  wretched  life — that  Alcides  I  may  follow.

HYI.LUS

But  he  still  lives  and  breathes  the  air  of  heaven.

OEIANIRA

When  Hercules  could  be  conquered,  then  he
began  to  die.

HVLLUS

Wilt  leave  thy  son  ?  Wilt  break  thy  thread  of
life  ?

DEIANIRA

She  whom  her  son  has  buried  has  lived  long.

HVLLUS

Follow  thy  husband.  1

DEFANIHA

Faithful  wives  go  before.

HVLLUS

If  thou  thyself  dost  doom  thee,  thou  convictest
thyself,  unhappy  one,  of  sin.

DEI  AN  HI  A

No  guilty  one  himself  annuls  his  punishment.

HYLLUS

Life  has  been  granted  many  whose  guilt  lay  in
wrong  judgment,  not  in  act.  Who  blames  his  own
destiny  ?

^  i.e.  do  not  die  until  he  is  dead.

259
s  2


THE   TRAGEDIES   OF   SENECA

DEI  AN  IRA

Quicumque  fata  iniqua  sortitus  fuit.

HYLLVS

Hie  ipse  Megaram  nempe  confixam  suis
stravit  sagittis  atque  natoruni  indoleni
Lernaea  figens  tela  furibunda  manu  ;
ter  parricida  factus  ignovit  tamen
sibi,  non  fiirori.     foute  Cinj-phio  scelus
sub  axe  Libyco  tersit  et  dextram  abluit.
quo,  niisera,  pergis  ?     cur  tuas  damnas  manus  ?

DEIANIRA

Damnat  meas  devictus  Alcides  manus.  910

placet  scelus  punire.

HYLLVS

Si  novi  Herculem,
aderit  cruenti  forsitan  victor  mali
dolorque  fractus  cedet  Alcidae  tuo.

DEIANIRA

Exedit  artus  virus  ut  fama  est  livdr;ie  ;
iuimensa  pestis  coniugis  membra  abstulit.


Serpentis  illi  virus  enectae  autumas
haut  posse  viiici  qui  malum  vivum  tulit?
elisit  liydram,  dente  cum  infixo  stetit  ^
media  palude  victor,  efFuso  obrutus
artus  veneno.     sanguis  hunc  Nessi  opprimet,         920
qui  vicit  ipsas  horridi  Nessi  manus  ?

^  So  Peiper,  with  A  :  tcum  fixo  tenens  Leo,  with  E,  ajid
conjectures  dum  iiifecto  tumet :  Richter  conjectures  iam  infixo
tunieua.
260


HERCULES   OETAEUS

DEIANIRA

Whoever  has  fallen  on  iiiikiiid  fates.

HVl.LUS

But  Hercules  himself  slew  Megara,  pierced  by  his
arrows,  and  liis  own  sons  as  well,  shooting  Lernaean
shafts  with  furious  liand ;  still,  though  thrice  mur-
derer, he  forgave  himself,  but  not  his  madness.  At
the  source  of  Cinyps  'neath  Libyan  skies  he  washed
away  his  guilt  and  cleansed  his  hands.  Whither,
poor  soul,  dost  haste  thee  ?  Why  dost  condemn  thy
hands .''

DEIANIHA

'Tis  Alcides'  overthrow  that  doth  condemn  my
hands.       Tis  well  to  punish  crime.

HYLLUS

If  I  know  Hercules,  he  will  soon  be  here,  per-
chance victorious  o'er  the  cruel  plague ;  and  pain,
subdued,  will  yield  to  thy  Alcides.

DEIANIRA

The  hydra's  poison,  as  report  declares,  hath  con-
sumed his  frame  ;  the  deadly  plague  hath  wasted  his
giant  limbs.

in  i.Lus

Thinkst  thou  the  poison  of  a  serpent,  slain,  cannot
be  overcome  by  him  who  met  and  overcame  the
monster,  living  .-^  He  crushed  the  hydra,  and  deep
in  the  marsh,  with  the  fangs  fixed  in  his  flesh,  he
stof)d  victorious,  while  his  limbs  were  bathed  in
venom.  Shall  Nessus'  blood  destroy  the  man  who
overcame  e'en  the  hands  of  s.Ava"e  Nessus  ?


£61


THE   TRAGEDIES   OF   SENECA

DEIANIHA

Frustra  tenetur  ille  qui  statuit  mori ;
proinde  lucem  fugere  decretum  est  mihi.
vixit  satis  quicumque  cum  Alcide  occidit.

NVTRIX

Per  has  aniles  ecce  te  supplex  comas
atque  ubera  ista  paene  materna  obsecro  :
depone  tumidas  pectoris  laesi  niinas
mortisque  dirae  expelle  decretum  horridum.

DEIANIRA

Quicumque  misero  forte  dissuadet  mori,
crudelis  ille  est  ;  interim  })oena  est  mori,  930

sed  saepe  donum  ;  plui-ibus  veniae  fuit.

NVTRIX

Defende  saltern  dexteram,  infelix,  tuam
fraudisque  facinus  esse,  non  nuptae,  sciat.

DEIANIRA

Defendar  illic  ;  inferi  absolvent  ream,
a  me  i})sa  damnor ;  purget  has  Pluton  manus.
stabo  ante  ripas  immemor,  Lethe,  tuas
et  umbra  tristis  coniugem  excipiam  meum.

Sed  tu,  nigrantis  rcgna  qui  torques  poli,
para  laborem  (scelera  quae  quisqiiam  ausus  est,
hie  vincet  error  ;  luno  non  ansa  Herculem  est      QW
eripere  terris)  horridam  poenam  para.
Sisyphia  cervix  cesset  et  nostros  lapis


262


HERCULES   OETAEUS


Vainly  is  he  restrained  wlio  is  bent  on  death  ;  my
will  is  fixed  straightwa}^  to  Hee  the  light.  Whoever
has  died  with  Hercules  has  lived  enough.

NURSE

Lo,  by  these  aged  locks  and  by  these  breasts
which  were  almost  as  a  mother's  to  thee,  I  humbly
pray ;  put  by  the  wild  threatenings  of  thy  wounded
heart,  and  banish  thy  dread  resolve  of  cruel  death.


Whoever,  perchance,  dissuades  the  wretched  from
death,  he  is  the  cruel  one ;  sometimes  death  is  a
punishment,  but  often  'tis  a  boon,  and  to  man}^  a
way  of  pardon  has  it  })roved.

NURSE

At  least  absolve  thy  hand,  unhappy  one,  that  he
may  know  that  the  deed  was  a  treaclierous  foeman's,
not  his  wife's.

DEIANIRA

Tiiere  ^  shall  I  be  absolved  ;  the  lower  gods  will
acquit  the  criminal,  though  I  condemn  myself.  Let
Pluto  cleanse  these  hands.  Upon  thy  banks,  O
Lethe,  shall  I  stand,  the  past  forgotten,  and  my
grieving  shade  will  welcome  its  lord  again.

^2s  But  do  thou,  who  torturest  the  realms  of  the  dark
under-world,  prepare  a  toil — for  this  fault  of  mine
outweighs  all  sins  that  man  has  ever  dared  ;  Juno
was  never  bold  enough  to  rob  the  world  of  Hercules
— some  dreadful  toil  prepare.  Let  Sisyphus'  neck
'  lu  the  lower  world.


THE  TRAGEDIES   OF   SENECA

impellat  uineros  ;  me  vagus  fugiat  latex

meanique  fallax  unda  deludat  sitim.

merui  manus  jiraebere  turbiiiibus  tuiSj

quaecumque  regem  Thessalum  torques  rota  ;

effodiat  avidus  hinc  et  hinc  vultur  fibras.

vacat^  una  Danais,  lias  ego  explebo  vices —

laxate  manes,     recipe  me  comitem  tibi,

Phasiaca  coniunx ;  peior  haec,  peior  tuo  950

utroque  dextra  est  scelere^  seu  mater  nocens

sen  dira  soror  es ;  adde  me  comitem  tuis,

Threicia  coniunx^  sceleribus  ;  natam  tuam.

Althaea  mater,  recipe,  nunc  veram  tui

agnosce  prolem — quid  tamen  tantum  manus

vestrae  abstulerunt  ?     claudite  Elysium  mihi

quaecumque  fidae  coniuges  nemoris  sacri

lucos  tenetis  ;  si  qua  respersit  manus

viri  cruore  nee  memor  castae  facis

stricto  cruenta  Bellas  ferro  stetit,  Q60

in  me  suas  agnoscat  et  laudet  manus.

in  banc  abire  coniugum  turbam  libet — -

sed  et  ilia  fugiet  turba  tam  diras  manus.

Invicte  coniunx,  innocens  animus  mihi,
scelesta  manus  est.     pro  nimis  mens  crcdula!
pro  Nesse  fallax  atque  semiferi  doli !
auferre  cupicns  paclici  erij)ui  mihi.
recede.  Titan,  tuque  quae  blanda  tenes
in  luce  miseros  vita  ;  caritura  Hercule
lux  vilis  ista  est.     exigam  poenas  tibi  970

reddamque  vitam — fata  an  extendo  mea
mortemquc,  coniunx,  ad  tuas  servo  manus  ?

^  So  Rkhier :  Leo  vacet,  ivilh  w,  corrected  hy  Raphcling,

^  The  punishment  of  Tantalus.
-  Ixion.  '■  Hypennnostra.

*  Medea.  ^  Procue.

264


HERCULES   OETAEUS

be  eased  and  let  his  rock  press  hard  upon  my  shoul-
ders ;  let  the  inconstant  water  fly  my  lips,  my  thirst
let  the  elusive  waves  deceive.^  Unto  thy  whirlings
have  I  deserved  to  give  my  hands,  whatsoe'er  wheel
thou  art  which  rackest  Thessalia's  king  ;  -  from  every
side  let  the  greedy  vulture  tear  ray  entrails  out.  There
still  lacks  one  2  from  the  Danaides;  I  will  fill  up
their  number — ye  ghosts  make  room  for  me.  Take
me  as  thy  companion,  O  Phasian  wife ;  '*  my  deed  is
worse,  far  worse  than  both  thy  crimes,  whether  as
mother  or  as  cruel  sister  thou  hast  sinned  ;  let  me  be
conu-ade  also  to  thy  crimes,  thou  Thracian  wife ; ''
Althea,  mother,*'  welcome  thy  daughter,  now  recog-
nize in  me  thine  own  true  child — yet  what  crime  so
great  have  your  hands  ever  done  ?  Shut  Elysium
against  me,  O  all  ye  faithful  wives  who  have  your
dwelling  in  its  sacred  grove ;  but  if  any  has  be-
spattered her  hands  with  her  husband's  blood  and
her  chaste  marriage  torch  forgot,  has  stood  with
drawn  sword  like  Belus'  bloody  child,  in  me  let  her
recognize  and  praise  her  own  handiwork.  To  such
a  company  of  wives  'tis  well  to  pass — but  e'en  that
company  will  shun  hands  so  accursed.

9*^^  O  my  unconcpiered  husband,  my  soul  is  inno-
cent, though  my  hands  have  sinned.  O  mind  too
credulous !  O  Nessus,  false  and  of  half-bestial
guile  !  Striving  to  snatch  him  from  a  concubine,  I
have  snatched  him  from  myself.  Away  !  thou  sun,
and  life,  who  by  thy  cozening  arts  dost  keep  the
unhappy  in  the  light  of  day ;  worthless  that  light
without  my  Hercules.  I  will  exact  penalty  for  thee,"
will  give  up  my  life — or  shall  I  put  off  my  fate,  O
husband,  and  save  myself   for  deatli   at  thine    own

*  For  Althaea's  crime  see  Index.
'  i.e.  will  see  that  he  is  avenged.

265


THE   TRAGEDIES   OF   SENECA

virtusne  superest  aliqiia  et  armatae  manus

intendere  arcum  tela  missurum  valent  ?

an  arma  cessant  teque  langueiiti  manu

non  audit  areas  ?     si  potes  letum  dare,

animose  coniunx,  dexteram  expecto  tuain.

mors  difFeratur  ;  frange  ut  insonteiu  Liclian,

alias  in  urbes  sparge  et  ignotum  tibi

inmitte  in  orbem.     perde  ut  Arcadiae  nefas  980

et  quidquid  aliud  cessit  ^  ;  ab  illis  tamen,

eoniuux,  redisti.

HYLLVS

Parce  iam,  mater,  precor,
ignosce  fatis  ;  error  a  culpa  vacat.

DKIANIRA

Si  vera  pietas,  Hylle,  quaerenda  est  tibi,

•am  perime  matrem — trepida  quid  tremuit  manus  ?

quid  era  flectis  ?     hoc  erit  pietas  scelus.

ignave  dubitas  ?     Herculem  eripuit  tibi

haec,  haec  peremit  dextra  cui  debes  patri

avum  Tonantem.     maius  eripui  decus,

quam  in  luce  tribui.     si  tibi  ignotum  est  nefas,      990

a  matre  disce.     seu  tibi  iugulo  placet

mersisse  ferrum  sive  maternum  libet

invadere  uterum,  mater  intrepidum  tibi

praebebit  animum.      non  erit  tantum  scelus

a  te  peractum  ;  dextera  sternar  tua,

sed  mente  nostra,     natus  Alcidae,  times  ?

ita  nulla  perages  iussa  nee  franges  mala  ^

^  fccssit  Leo,  irith  E :  restitit  A.

*  Lint  09S,  omitted  by  E,  deleted  by  Leo:  erres  per  orbem.
si  qua  nascetur  fera.

266


HERCULES   OETAEUS

hands  ?  Hast  still  some  strength,  and  can  thy
armed  hands  still  bend  the  bow  and  send  the  arrow
darting  ?  Or  do  tliy  weajwns  fail  thee,  and  does  thy
how  no  more  lieed  thy  enfeebled  hand  ?  If  thou
canst  deal  destruction,  C)  undaunted  husband,  I
await  thy  stroke.  Let  death  be  stayed  awhile  ^ ;
crush  me  as  thou  didst  the  unoHending  Lichas  ;  to
other  cities  scatter  me,  yea,  hurl  me  to  a  world  to
thee  unknown.  Destroy  me  as  thou  didst  the
Arcadian  monster,^  and  whatever  else  succumbed  to
thee ;  yet  from  them,  my  husband,  thou  didst
return.

HYLLUS

Give  o'er  now,  mother,  I  beseech  thee,  pardon  thy
fate ;  an  error  is  not  counted  as  a  crime.

DEI  AN  IRA

If,  Hyllus,  thou  wouldst  be  truly  filial,  come,  slay
thy  motiier — why  does  thy  hand  quake  and  treiiible.^
VVliy  turnst  thy  face  away  ?  This  crime  will  be
filial  piety.  Tamely  dost  hesitate  .^  This  hand
robbed  thee  of  Hercules,  yea,  this  right  hand
destroyed  him  to  whom  as  father  thou  owest  descent
from  Jove.  Of  greater  glory  liave  I  robbed  thee
than  I  gave  thee  at  thy  birth.  If  thou  art  un-
skilled in  monstrous  crime,  learn  from  thy  mother.
Whether  in  my  throat  it  j)leases  thee  to  plunge  the
sword,  or  'tis  thy  will  to  assail  thy  mother's  womb,
thy  mother  herself  will  give  thee  unshrinking
courage.  Not  by  thee  will  this  dreadful  crime  be
done  ;  by  thy  hand,  truly,  shall  I  fall,  but  by  my
will.  Son  of  Alcides,  art  afraid  ?  Wilt  thou  not  do
as  bidden,  wilt  not  crush  monsters,  and   so   be  like

^  i.e.  until  she  may  die  at  her  husliaiul's  haiuls.
*  The  Krymanthiau  boar,  Hercules'  fourtli  labour.

267


THE  TRAGEDIES   OF   SENECA
referens  parentem  ?     dexteram  intrepidam  para.  999
patet  ecce  pleDum  pectus  aerumnis  :  feri ;  1000

scelus  remitto,  dexterae  parcent  tuae
Eumenides  ipsae — verberum  crepuit  sonus.

Quaenam  ista  torquens  angue  vipereo  ^  comaiu
temporibus  atras  ^  squalidis  pinnas  quatit  ?
quid  me  flagranti  dira  persequeris  face,
Megaera  ?     poenas  poscis  Alcidae  ?     dabo.
iamne  inferorunij  dira,  sedere  arbitri  ?
sedent.    reclusas  ^  carceris  video  fores,
quis  iste  saxum  immane  detritis  gerit
iam  senior  umeris?     ecce  iam  victus  lapis  1010

quaerit  relabi  ?     membra  qiiis  quatitur  rota  ?
hie  ecce  pallens  dira  Tisipbone  stetit,
causam  reposcit,     parce  verberibus  precor,
Megaera,  parce,  sustine  Stygias  faces ;
scelus  est  amoris.

Sed  quid  hoc  ?     tellus  labat
et  aula  tectis  crepuit  excussis — minax
unde  iste  coetus  ?     totus  in  voltus  meos
decurrit  orbis,  hinc  et  hinc  populi  fremunt
totusque  poscit  vindicem  mundus  suum.
iam  parcite,  ui'bes.  quo  fugam  praeceps  agam  ?    1 020
mors  sola  povtus  dabitur  aerumnis  meis.
testor  nitentis  flammeam  Phoebi  rotam
superosque  testor  :  Herculem  in  terris  adiuic
moritura  linquo.

'  f angue  vii>ereo  Leo:  aiigui  E:  igue  N.  Heinsius :  angue
vibrato  Feiiter.

268


HERCULES   OETAEUS

thy  sire  ?  Thy  dauntless  hand  make  ready.  Behold
my  breastj  so  full  of  cares,  lies  open  :  smite ;  J
forgive  the  deed,  the  Eumenides  themselves  will
acquit  thy  hand — but  I  hear  their  scourges  hissing.

1003  Oh,  who  is  that  in  whose  locks  viperous
serj)ents  coil,  who  brandishes  deadly  shafts  at  her
foul  temples  ?  Why  dost  })ursue  me,  awful  Megaera,
with  blazing  torch  ?  Penalty  for  Alcides'  murder
dost  demand  ?  I'll  pay.  Already,  dread  one,  have
the  arbiters  of  hell  passed  judgment  on  me  ?  They
have.  I  see  the  prison  doors  opened  wide.  Who  is
that  ancient^  who  bears  a  huge  stone  on  his  toil-worn
back  ?  But  see  !  already  does  the  mastered  stone
seek  to  roll  back  again .''  Whose  ^  limbs  on  the
wheel  are  racked .''  Look !  here  has  Tisiphone
taken  her  stand,  ghastly  and  dread ;  she  demands
revenge.  Oh,  spare  thy  scourge,  I  pray  thee,
Megaera,  spare !  Keep  back  the  Stygian  torches  ;
mine  Avas  the  crime  of  love.

^•'^^  But  what  is  this  ?  The  earth  quakes,  the
palace  resounds  with  the  noise  of  crashing  roofs —
whtiice  comes  that  threatening  throng.^  The  whole
world  comes  rusliing  'gainst  me,  on  every  side  the
nations  rage  and  the  whole  universe  demands  of  mc
its  saviour.  Oh,  s])are  me  now,  ye  cities.  Whither
shall  I  rush  in  headlong  flight?  Death  alone  will
Ik;  granted  as  a  haven  for  my  cares.  By  gleaming
Phoebus'  flaming  car  1  swear,  I  swear  by  the
heavenly  gods  :  though  to  my  death  I  go,  1  leave
Alcides  still  upon  the  earth.

[She  runhes  wildly  from  the  scene.]

^  Sisyphus.  -  Ixion.

^  So  A  :  Leo  f  hastaS)  with  E  :  Madviy  aplas.
"  So  Bichter:  Leo,  with  A,  fsed  ecce  diras.

269


THE  TRAGEDIES   OF  SENECA


Fugit  attonita,  ei  niihi,
peracta  iam  pars  matris  est — statuit  mori ;
nunc  nostra  superest^  mortis  auferre  impetimi.
o  misera  pietas  !  si  mori  matrem  vetas,
patri  es  scelestus ;  si  mori  pateris,  tamen
in  matre  peccas.     urget  hinc  illinc  scelus.
inhibenda  tamen  est,  verum  ut  eripiam  scelus.     1030


Verum  est  quod  cecinit  sacer
Thressae  sub  Rhodopes  iugis
aptans  Pieriam  chelyn
Orpheus  Calliopae  genus,
aeternum  fieri  nihil,
illius  stetit  ad  modos
torrentis  rapidi  fragor,
oblitusque  sequi  fugam
amisit  liquor  impetum ;

et  dum  fluminibus  mora  est,  1040

defecisse  putant  Getae
Hebrum  Bistones  ultimi.
advexit  volucrem  nemus
et  silva  residens  venit ;
aut  si  qua  aera  pervolat,
auditis  vaga  cantibus
ales  deficiens  cadit.
abrumpit  scopulos  Athos
Ceutauros  obiter  ferens

et  iuxta  Rhodopen  stetit  1050

laxata  nive  cantibus ;
et  (piercum  fugiens  suam
ad  \'atcm  pro})crat  Dryas.
ad  cantus  veuiunt  tuos

270


HErxCULES   OETAEUS

HYLLUS

All  me  !  in  frenzy  has  she  fled.  Already  has  my
inolher  played  her  part — she  has  resolved  on  death  ;
MOW  does  my  part  remain,  to  thwart  her  deadly
purpose.  O  wretehed  plight  of  love !  if  thou
forbidst  thy  mother's  death,  thou  wrongst  thy  father  ;
if  thou  sufferest  her  to  die,  still  'gainst  thy  mother
dost  thou  sin.  Crime  drives  from  either  hand  ;  still
nnist  I  eheek  her,  that  from  true  ^  crime  she  may  be
saved.  [Ea-it  ajler  his  mother.']


True  sang  the  bard  beneath  the  heights  ot
Thracian  Rhodope,  fitting  the  word  to  his  Pierian
lyre,  e'en  Orpheus,  Calliope's  blest  son,  that  naught
for  endless  life  is  made.  At  his  sweet  strains  the
rushing  torrents'  roar  was  stilled,  and,  forgetful  of
their  eager  flight,  the  W'aters  ceased  their  flow ;
and,  while  the  river  stayed  to  hear,  the  far
Bistonians  thought  their  Hebrus  had  failed  the
Getjin.  The  woods  came  with  their  birds  to  him,
vea,  perched  among  the  trees  they  came  ;  or  if,  in
the  high  air  soaring,  some  wandering  bird  caught
sound  of  the  charming  song,  his  drooping  wings  said-;
earthward.  Athos  broke  off  his  crags,  bringing  the
Centaurs  as  he  came,  and  next  to  Rhodope  he
stood,  his  snows  melted  by  the  music ;  the  Dryad,
leaving  her  oaken  haunts,  sped  to  the  singer's
side.     To  hear  thy  song,  with  their  very  lairs  the

^  i.e.  the  true  crime  of  her  own  deatli  as  contrasted  witli
the  fancied  crime  of  her  act  against  Hercules.

271


THE  TRAGEDIES   OF   SENECA

ipsis  cum  latebris  ferae,

iuxtaque  inpavidum  pecus

sedit  Marmaricus  leo

nee  dammae  trepidant  lupos

et  serpens  latebras  fugit,

tunc  oblita  veneni.  IO6O

Quin  per  Taenarias  foi*es
manes  cum  tacitos  adit
maerentem  feriens  chelyn,
cantu  Tartara  flebili
et  tristes  Erebi  deos
vicit  nee  timuit  Stygis
iuratos  superis  lacus.
haesit  non  stabilis  rota
victo  languida  turbine ;

increvit  Tityi  iecur,  1070

dum  cantu  volucres  tenet ;  1071

et  vinei  lapis  improbus  1081

et  vatem  potuit  sequi.^  1082

tunc  primum  Phrygius  senex  1075

nndis  stantibus  immemor
excussit  rabidam  sitim

nee  pomis  adhibet  manus.  1078

audis  tu  2  quoque,  navita ;  1072

inferni  ratis  aequoris  1073

nullo  remigio  venit.  1074

sic  cum  vinceret  inferos  1079

Orplieus  carmine  funditus,  1080

consumptos  iterum  deae  1083

supplent  Eurydices  colus.  1084

sed  dum  respicit  immemor

*  The  arran</cmf:nt  of  lints  1070-1084  as  they  stand  in  Leo
following  the  MSS.  is  more  or  less  illogical,  besides  presenting
syntactic  difficulties.  The  re  arrangement  of  Richter  has  been
adopted  here.

272


HERCULES   OETAEUS
wild  beasts  came,  and  close  to  the  fearless  herds  the
Marmaric  lion  crouched ;  does  felt  no  fear  of  wolves,
and  the  serpent  fled  her  gloomy  den,  her  venom  at
last  forgot.

lOCi  jNjay^  when  through  the  gates  Taenarian  to  the
silent  ghosts  he  came,  smiting  his  mournful  lyre,
Avith  his  sad  song  he  conquered  Tartarus  and  the
sullen  gods  of  Erebus ;  nor  was  he  daunted  by  the
pools  of  St3x,  by  which  the  high  gods  swear.  The
never  staying  wheel  ^  stood  still,  listless,  with
conquered  whirling ;  the  liver  of  Tityus  grew,
undevoured,  while  spell-bound  the  singer  held  the
birds.  The  impisli  stone  ^  allowed  defeat  and
attended  on  the  bard.  Tlien  first  the  aged  Phrygian,^
though  the  waves  stood  still,  banished  his  raging
ihirst,  forgetful  quite,  nor  to  the  apples  stretched
his  hand.  Thou  also,  ferryman,^  didst  hear,  and  thy
boat  that  plies  the  infernal  sea  came  oarless  on.
So  when  by  his  song  Orpheus  had  utterly  o'ercome
the  infernal  gods,  then  did  the  goddesses  ^  renew-
again  Eurydice's  exhausted  thread.  But  while
Orpheus  thoughtlessly  looked  back,  all  unbelieving

^  On  which  Ixion  was  bound.
^  Which  Sisypluis  was  rolling.
»  Tantalus.  *  Charon.

^  i.e.  the  fatal  sisters,  the  Parcae.

^  So  Birl'e  emendation  of  tlw  impossible  MSS.  rending  audito
quoque  :  JRichttr'i  auditum  quoque  is  also  impossible.

27:5
VOL.  II.  r


THE   TRAGEDIES   OF   SENECA

nvc  credens  sibi  redditam
Orpheus  Euiydicen  scqui,
caiitus  praemia  perdidit ;
quae  nata  est  iterum  perit.

Tunc^  solamina  cantibus  lOpO

(luaerens^  flebilibus  modis
1  haec  Orpheus  cccinit  Getis :
leges  in  superos  datas,
et  qui  teinpora  digerit
quattuor  praecipites  deus
anni  disposuit  vices
nulli  noil  avidi  cohis
Parcas  stamina  nectere,
quod  natum  est^  quod  erit.  niori.^

Vati  credere  Tliracio  1100

devictus  iubet  Hercules,
iani,  iam  legibus  obriitis
mundo  cum  veniet  dies,
australis  polus  obruet
quidquid  per  Libyam  iacet
et  sparsus  Garamas  tenet ;
arctous  polus  obruet
quidquid  subiacet  axibus
et  siccus  Boreas  ferit.

amisso  trepidus  polo  1110

Titan  excutiet  diem,
caeli  regia  concidens
ortus  atque  obitus  trahet
atque  omnes  jwviter  deos
perdet  mors  aliqua  et  chaos,
et  mors  fata  novissima
in  se  coiistituet  sibi.
quis  mundum  capiet  locus  ?

^  Leo  ia  of  the  opinion  that  the  beginning  and  the  end  of
Orphetui'  song  have  fallen  out,  and  that  lines  1097-1099  are  to

274


HERCULES    OETAEUS

his  Eurvdice  restored  to  hiiu  and  following,  he  lost
his  singing's  recompense  ;  and  she  had  come  to  the
verge  of  life  only  to  die  once  more.

1000  'rhen,  solace  in  song  still  seeking,  in  mournful
measures  Orpheus  thus  to  the  Getans  sang :  that  the
gods  are  under  law,  e'en  he  who  rules  the  seasons,
who  has  arranged  the  four  changes  of  the  flying
year ;  that  for  no  one  the  Parcae  spin  again  the
threads  of  the  greedy  distaff",  and  that  all  which  has
been  and  shall  be  born  shall  die.^

1100  I'lie  overthrow  of  Hercules  bids  us  believe  the
Thracian  bard.  Soon,  soon,  when  to  the  universe
shall  come  the  day  that  law  shall  be  o'erwhelmed,
the  southern  skies  shall  fall  upon  Libya's  plains  and
all  that  the  scattered  Garamantians  possess  ;  the
northern  heavens  shall  overwhelm  all  that  lies
beneath  the  pole  and  that  Boreas  smites  with
withering  blasts.  Then  from  the  lost  sky  the
aff'righted  sun  shall  fall  and  banish  day.  The  palace
of  heaven  shall  sink,  dragging  down  East  and  West,
and  death  in  some  form  and  chaos  shall  o'erwhelm
all  gods  in  one  destruction  ;  and  death  shall  at  last
bring  doom  upon  itself.  What  place  will  then
receive    the    world  ?      Will    the    gates    of    Tartarus

^  Reading  according  to  the  arrangement  of  Ricliter.  See
critical  note  ^


he  joined  ivilh  the  following  lines.     Richter  reads  109S-1099  as
Orpkeui  soiHj.
^  Richter  proposes  quod  natuiu  est,  poterit  niori.

275
T  2


THE   TRAGEDIES   OF  SENECA

disced et  via  Tartari,

fiac'tis  lit  ])ateat  polis  ?  112C

ail  quod  dividit  aetliera

a  terris  spatiiini  sat  est

et  miindi  niuiiuni  malis  ?

quis  tantum  capiet  (nefas)

fatum,  quis  superos  locus  ?

pontum  Tartara  sidera

regna  unus  capiet  tria.

Sed  quis  non  modicus  fragor
aures  attonitas  movet  ?
est  est  Herculeus  sonus.  1 13C

HERCVLES

Converte,  Titan  clare,  anhelantes  equos,
emitte  noctem  ;  pereat  hie  mundo  dies
quo  morior,  atra  nube  inhorrescat  polus  ;
obsta  novei'cae.     nunc,  pater,  caecum  chaos
reddi  decebat,  hinc  et  hinc  conipagibus
ruptis  uterque  debuit  frangi  pohis.
quid  parcis  astris  ?      Herculem  amittis,  pater,
nunc  jiartem  in  omnem,  luppiter,  specta  poU,
ne  quis  Gyas  Thessahca  iaculetur  iuga
et  fiat  Othrys  pondus  Encelado  leve.  1140

laxabit  atri  carceris  iam  iam  fores
Pluton  superbus,  vincula  excutiet  j)atri
caekimque  reddet.     ille  qui  pro  fuhnine
tuiscjuc  facibus  natus  in  terris  eram,
ad  St\-ga  revertor ;  surget  Enceladus  ferox
mittetque  quo  nunc  pi'emitur  in  superos  onus ;
regnuin  omne^  genitor,  aethcris  dubiuin  tibi


1  Let  the  world  be  shrouded  in  darkness,  that  Juno  may
not  see  the  death  of  Hercules.

276


HERCULES    OETAEUS

spread  wide^  that  room  for  the  shattered  heavens
may  be  found  ?  Or  is  the  space  'twixt  lieaven  and
earth  great  enough  (perchance  too  great)  for  the
evils  of  the  world  ?  What  place  will  be  gi-eat
enough  to  hold  (oh,  horrible  !)  a  death  so  vastj  what
place,  the  gods  ?  Sea,  Tartarus  and  heaven — three
kingdoms  shall  one  place  contain.

11'-^  But  what  outrageous  clamour  this  that  assails
our  startled  cars?     It  is,  it  is  the  sound  of  Hercules.

[Enter  hercules  in  the  extremity  of  su/J'ering.^


HERCULES

Tui-n  back/0  shining  Sun,  thy  panting  steeds,  and
let  loose  the  night  ;  let  this  day  wherein  I  die  perish
ibr  the  world,  and  let  heaven  shudder  in  the  pitchy
dark.  So  thwart^  my  stepdume.  \ow,  father,  were
it  fitting  to  restore  blind  chaos  ;  now  this  side  and
that  should  heaven's  frame  be  burst  and  both  poles
rent  asunder.  Why  dost  thou  spare  the  stars  ?
Thou  art  losing  Hercules,  O  father.  Now,  Jupiter,
look  well  to  every  part  of  heaven,  lest  any  Gyas
hurl  Thessalian  crags  and  Othrys  become  a  slight
missile  for  Enceladus."  Now,  now  Avill  haughty
Pluto  open  his  dai-k  prison  gates,  strike  off  his
father's  ^  chains  and  give  him  back  to  heaven.
Since  I  thy  son,  who  on  earth  have  been  in  place  of
thy  bolt  and  lightning  flash,  am  turning  me  back  to
Styx,  Enceladus,  the  fierce,  will  rise,  and  the  mass
'neath  which  he  now  is  crushed  will  he  hurl  against
the  gods  ;  yea,  father,  thy  whole  realm  of  air  will
my  deatli  put  to  hazard.     Then  ere  thou  art  utterly

-  The    n^ference   is   to    tlie   former   battle   of   the   Giauta
against  Jupiter.     See  Index  s.v.   "Giaiita."
^  Saturn.

277


THE   TRAGEDIES   OF   SENECA

nioi'S  nostra  faciet.     antequain  spoliuni  tui^

caelum  omne  fiat,  conde  me  tota,  pater,

mundi  ruina_,  frange  quern  perdis  polum.  1150

CHORVS

Non  vana  times,  nate  Tonantis.
nunc  Tliessalicam  Pelion  Ossam
premet  et  Pindo  congestus  Atlios
nemus  aetlieriis  inseret  astris  ;
vincet  scopulos  inde  Typlioeus
et  Tyrrhenam  feret  Inarimen  ;
feret  Aetnaeos  inde  caminos
scindetque  latus  mentis  aperti
nondum  Enceladus  fulmine  vjctus.
iam  te  caeli  regna  secuntur.^  II60

HERCVLES

Ego  qui  relicta  morte,  contemj^ta  Styge
per  media  Lethes  stagna  cum  spolio  redi
quo  paene  lapsis  excidit  Titan  equis,
ego  quern  deorum  i-egna  senserunt  tria,
morior ;  nee  uUus  per  meum  stridet  latus
transmissus  ensis,  haut  meae  telum  necis  2
est  totus  Othrys,  non  truci  rictu  gigans  11 68

Pindo  cadaver  obruit  toto  meum :

sine  hoste  vincor,  qiiodque  me  tovquet  magis        1170
(o  niisera  virtus  !)  sunimus  Alcidae  dies
nullum  malum  prosternit  ;  inpendo,  ei  mihi,
in  nulla  vitam  facta.

Pro  mundi  arbiter
superique  quondam  dcxterae  testes  meae,
pro  cuncta  tellus,  Plerculcm  vestrum  placet

^  tibi  E.  ^  signa  sequenLur  A.

^  Leo  deletes  line  1167,  saxiuii  est  uec  instar  nioiitis  abrupti
latus.

278


HERCULES   OETAEUS

{lesj)oile(l  of  heaven,  burv  me,  father,  'iicatl!  the
whole  ruined  world ;  shatter  the  skies  which  thou  art
doomed  to  lose.


Not  vain  thy  fears,  son  of  the  Thunderer.  Soon
now  shall  Pelion  weigh  down  Thessalian  Ossa,  and
Athos,  on  Pindus  heaped^  shall  thrust  his  forests
midst  the  heavenly  stars ;  then  shall  Typhoeus
overcome  the  crags '  and  upheave  Tuscan  Inarime  ;
the  Aetnean  furnaces  then  shall  Enceladus  uplieave,
not  yet  by  thy  bolt  o'ercome,  and  rend  the  gaping
mountain's  side.  E'en  now  the  kingdoms  of  the  sky
are  following  thee.^

HERCULES

Lo  I,  who  have  escaped  from  death,  who  scorned
the  Styx,  who  through  the  midst  of  Lethe's  pool
have  returned  with  spoil,'^  at  sight  whereof  Titan
w;is  almost  flung  from  his  falling  car,  I,  whose
presence  three  realms  of  gods  have  felt,  am  perishing.
No  deep-thrust  sword  grates  through  my  side,  nor  is
all  Othrys  the  instrument  of  my  death  ;  no  giant
with  fierce  and  gaping  jaws  has  buried  my  body
beneath  the  whole  of  Pindus  ;  no,  without  enemy
am  I  overcome  and,  thought  which  racks  me  more,
(shame  to  my  manhood  !)  the  last  day  of  Alcides  has
seen  no  monster  slain.  Ah,  woe  is  me  !  I  am
squandering  my  life  for  no  return.

^'^3  O  thou  ruler  of  the  world,  ye  gods,  once
witnesses  of  my  deeds,  O  earth  entire,  is  it  resolved

'  Beneath  which  he  is  buried.

2  i.e.  Jupiter  is  falling  and  his  kingdom  with  him.

s  Cerbeiua.

279


THE  TRAGEDIES   OF   SENECA

morte  hac  perire  ?  ^     dims  o  nobis  pudor,

o  turpe  fatum — femina  Herculeae  necis

auctor  feretur  !     morior  Alcides  quibus  ?

iiivicta  si  ine  cadere  feminea  manu

voluere  fata  perque  tam  turpes  colus  1180

mea  mors  cucurrit,  cadere  potuissem,  ei  mihi,

lunonis  odio.     feminae  caderem  manu,

sed  caelum  habentis.     si  nimis,  superi,  fuit,

Scythico  sub  axe  genita  domuisset  meas

vires  Amazon,     feminae  cuius  manu

lunonis  hostis  vincor  ?     hinc  gravior  tibi,

lioverca,  pudor  est.     quid  diem  hunc  laetum  vocas  ?

quid  tale  tellus  genuit  iratae  tibi?

mortal  is  odia  femina  excessit  tua.

adhuc  ferebas  esse  te  Aleidae  imparera  ;  1190

victa  es  duobus — pudeat  irarum  deos  I

utinam  meo  cruore  satiasset  suos

Nemeaea  rictus  pestis  aut  centum  anguibus

vallatus  hydram  tabe  pavissem  mea  I

utinam  fuissem  praeda  Centauris  datus

aut  inter  umbras  vinctus  aeterno  miser

saxo  sederem  !     spolia  nunc  traxi  ultima

Fato  stupente,  nunc  ab  inferna  Styge

lucem  recepi,  Ditis  evici  mox-as —

ubique  mors  me  fugit,  ut  leto  inclitae  1 200

sortis  carerem.     pro  ferae,  victae  ferae  !

non  me  triforniis  sole  consjiecto  canis

ad  Styga  revexit,  non  sub  Hesperio  polo

Hibera  vicit  turba  pastoris  feri,

^  So  N.  Heinsius :  fniorte  ferire  Leo,  with  IS,  conjecturing
inertem  obire  :  mortem  perire  A  :  perire  inertem  L.  Miiller.

*  He  is  thinking  of  the  many  monsters,   beasts,  tyrants,
whom  lie  has  slain,  he  who  must  now  die  by  a  woman's  hand.
■■*  i.e.  than  for  rae.

280


HERCULES   OETAEUS

vour  Hercules  should  perish  by  such  death  as  this  ?
Ohj  cruel  shame  to  me,  oh,  end  most  foul — a  woman
will  be  called  author  of  Alcides'  death !  And  for
whom^  is  Alcides  dying?  If  the  fates  unchanging-
have  willed  that  by  a  woman's  hand  I  fall,  if  through
distaft'  so  base  the  thread  of  my  death  has  run,  ah
me  !  that  I  might  have  fallen  by  Juno's  hate  !  'Twould
be  by  woman's  hand,  but  of  one  who  holds  the
heavens.  If,  O  ye  gods,  that  were  too  much  to
ask,  the  Amazon,  born  'neath  Scythian  skies,  might
have  o'ercome  my  strength.  But  by  what  woman's
hand  is  Juno's  foe  o'ercome  ?  This  is  for  thee,  my
stepdame,  heavier  ^  shame.  Why  callest  thou  this
day  joyful  ?  What  monster  such  as  this  has  earth
produced  to  sate  thy  wrath  3. '^  A  mortal  woman
has  outdone  thy  hate.  Till  now  thou  deemdst
thyself  by  Alcides  alone  outmatched  ;  by  two  hast
thou  been  surpassed — of  such  wrath  let  heaven  be
ashamed  !  Oh,  that  the  Nemean  lion  with  my  blood
had  sated  his  gaping  jaws,  or  that,  hedged  by  a
hundred  snakes,  I  had  fed  the  hydra  with  my  gore  !
O  that  I  had  been  given  to  the  Centaurs  as  a  prey,
or  that  midst  the  shades  I,  bound  to  an  everlasting
rock,  in  wretchedness  were  sitting!  But  now  have  I
dragged  here  my  latest  spoiH  while  Death  looked
on  amazed;  now  from  infernal  Styx  have  I  regained
the  light,  the  bars  of  Dis  I've  conquered— on  every
hand  death  shunned  me,  that  I  might  lack  at  last
a  glorious  end.  O  beasts,  O  conquered  beasts  I
Neither  did  the  three-formed  dog,  when  he  saw  the
sun,  drag  me  back  to  Styx,  nor  'neath  western  skies
did  the  Spanish  rout  of  the  wild  shepherd  "->  conquer

3  He  counts  Doianira  as  worse  than  all  monsters  Juno  has
sent  against  him.  She  has  outdone  even  Juno's  hate.  Hence
Juno  is  i3ut  to  shame.  *  Cerberus.  ^  Geryon.

281


THE   TRAGEDIES   OF   SENECA

non  gemiiia  serpens — perdidi  mortem,  ei  milii,
totiens  honestam  !     titulus  extremus  quis  est  ?


CHORVS

Viden  ut  laudis  conscia  virtus
non  Lethaeos  horreat  amnes  ?
pudet  auctoris,  non  morte  dolet ;
cupit  extremum  finire  diem  1210

vasta  tumidi  mole  gigantis
et  montiferum  Titana  pati
rabidaeque  necem  debere  ferae,
sad  tua  causa  est,  miserande,  manus,
quod  nulla  fera  est  nullusque  gigas  ;
nam  quis  dignus  necis  Hei'culeae
superest  auctor  nisi  dextra  tui  ?

HERCVLES

Heu  qualis  intus  scorpios,  quis  fervida
plaga  revulsus  cancer  infixus  nieas
urit  medullas  ?     sanguinis  quondam  capax  1220

tumidi  igne  cor  ^  pulmonis  arentes  fibras
distenditj  ardet  felle  siccato  iecur
totumque  lentus  sanguinem  avexit  vapor,
primam  cutem  consumpsit,  hinc  aditum  nefas
in  membra  fecit,  abstulit  pestis  latus,
exedit  artus  j^enitus  et  costas  malum,
hausit  medullas,     ossibus  vacuis  sedet ;
nee  ossa  durant  ipsa,  sed  com])agibus
discussa  rujjtis  mole  conlapsa  Huunt.
defecit  ingens  corpus  et  })esti  satis  1230

Herculea  non  sunt  membra — pro  quantum  est  malum
quod  esse  vastum  fateoi-,  o  dii'um  nefas !

^  So  Itichler:    Leo,   tumidi   fiecur,   vith   w,   coiijecl tiring
tumeb  igne  cor  :  tumidi  cor  en  N.  IJeinmts.

282


HERCULES   OETAEUS

ine,  nor  the  tv.aiii  serpents  ^ — ah,  woe  is  me  !  how
often  have  I  missed  a  glorious  death !  My  final
claim  to  glory — what  is  it  ?


CHORU8

Seest  thou  how  virtue,  conscious  of  its  fame,
shrinks  not  from  Lethe's  stream  ?  He  grieves  not
at  death  but  blushes  for  its  cause  ;  he  longs  'neath
some  towering  giant's  vasty  bulk  to  end  the  last
day  of  life,  to  suffer  some  mountain-heaving  Titan's
weight,  to  owe  his  death  to  some  wild,  raging  beast.
But  no,  poor  soul,  because  of  thine  own  hand,  there
is  no  beast,  no  giant ;  for  what  worthy  author  of
the  death  of  Hercules  is  left  save  thy  right  hand  ?

HERCULES

Alas,  what  broyp'ion,'^  what  crab,^  torn  from  the
torrid  zone,  burns  deep  fixed  in  my  marrow?  My
heai-t,  once  filled  with  pulsing  streams  of  blood,
hotly  distends  the  parched  fibres  of  my  lungs  ;  my
liver  glows,  its  bile  dried  quite  away,  and  a  slow  fire
has  exhausted  all  my  blood.  First  did  the  dread
plague  feed  upon  my  skin,  next  to  my  limbs  it
passed,  devoured  my  sides,  then  deep  in  my  joints
and  ribs  the  pest  ate  its  way,  and  drank  my  very
marrow.  In  my  hollow  bones  it  lurks ;  nor  do  my
bones  themselves  retain  their  hardness,  but,  shattered
with  broken  structure,  fall  in  a  crumbling  mass.  My
huge  frame  has  shrivelled,  and  even  the  limbs  of
Hercules  sate  not  the  ))est.  — Oh,  how  mightv  the  ill
which  I  admit  is  great !     Oh,  cruel  curse  !      Behold,

^  Whicli  Juno  sent  against  liini  iu  bis  infancy.
^  Pestilent  creatures  from  among  the  constellations  of  the
zodiac  (fervida  plaga).

283


THE  TRAGEDIES   OF   SENECA
en  cernite,  urbes,  cernite  ex  illo  Hei'cule
quid  iam  supersit.     Herculem  agnoscis,  pater  ?
hisne  ego  lacertis  colla  Nemeaei  mali
elisa  pressi  ?     tensus  hac  ai'cus  manu
astris  ab  ipsis  detulit  Styin})halidas  ?
his  ego  citatam  gressibus  viei  feram
radiante  clarum  fronte  gestaiatem  caput  ?
his  fracta  Calpe  manibus  emisit  fretum?  12-1.0

his  tot  ferae,  tot  scelera,  tot  reges  iaeent  ?
his  mundus  umeris  sedit  ?     haec  moles  mca  est,
haecne  ilia  cervix  ?     hasne  ego  opposui  manus
caelo  ruenti  ?     quis  mea  custos  manu
trahetur  ultra  Stygius  ?     ubi  vires  prius
memet  sepultae  ?     quid  patrem  appello  lovem  ?
quid  per  Tonantem  vindico  caelum  miser  ?
iam,  iam  mens  credetur  Amphitryon  pater.

Quaecumque  pestis  viscei-e  in  nostro  lates,
procede — quid  me  vulnere  occulto  petis  ?  12,50

quis  te  sub  axe  fi-igido  pontus  Scythes,
quae  pigra  Tethys  genuit  aut  Maurum  premens
Hibera  Calpe  litus  ?     o  dirum  malum  !
utrumne  serpens  squalidum  crista  caput
vibrans  an  aliquod  et  mihi  ignotum  malum,
numquid  cruore  es  genita  Lernaeae  ferae
an  te  reliquit  Stygius  in  terris  canis  ?
omne  es  malum  nullumque — quis  voltus  tibi  est  ?
concede  saltem  scii-e  quo  peream  malo.
quaecumque  pestis  sive  quaecumque  es  fcra,        I2t)0


284.


HERCULES   OETAEUS

ye  cities,  behold  what  now  remains  of  tliat  great
Hercules.  Dost  recognize  thy  Hercules,  my  father?
Was  it  with  these  arms  I  crushed  and  overwlielmed
the  Nemean  plague  ?  Was  it  with  this  liand  I
stretched  the  bow  that  brought  down  the  Styni-
jihalian  birds  from  the  very  stars?  With  these  feet
did  I  o'ertake  the  swift-fleeing  beast  ^  with  golden
antlers  gleaming  on  his  head  ?  By  these  hands
shattered,  did  Calpe"^  let  out  the  sea?  So  many
beasts,  so  many  monstrous  things,  so  many  kings,
have  these  hands  of  mine  brought  low  ?  Upon
these  shoulders  did  the  heavens  rest  ?  Is  this  my
massive  frame,  is  this  my  neck  ?  These  hands  did  I
oppose  to  the  tailing  sky  ?  What  Stygian  watch-dog
will  hereafter  be  dragged  forth  by  my  hand  ?
Where  are  my  powers,  buried  before  my  burial  ?
Why  on  Jove  as  father  do'  I  call  ?  Why,  wretched
man,  by  right  of  the  Thunderer  do  I  claim  heaven  ?
Now,  now  will  Amphitryon  be  deemed  my  sire.

^^^^  O  pest,  whate'er  thou  art  that  lurkest  in  my
vitals,  come  forth — why  dost  attack  me  with  a
hidden  smart?  What  Scythian  Sea  beneath  the
icy  pole,  what  sluggish  Tcthvs,  what  Spanish  Calpc,
crowding  the  Moorish  coast,  begot  thee  ?  O  cursed
bane  !  Art  thou  some  seri)ent,  brandishing  his  foul,
full-crested  head,  or  some  evil  thing  even  to  me
unknown  ?  Ai*t  thou  begotten  of  the  Lernaean
monster's  '^  gore,  or  did  the  Stygian  dog  leave  thee
here  on  earth  ?  Every  ill  thou  art  and  yet  no  ill —
what  form  hast  thou  ?  Grant  me  at  least  to  know-
by  what  ill  I  am  perishing.     Whatever  pest  or  what-

^  The  Arcadian  stag.

*  When  Hercules  rent  the  clilTs  of  C'alpe  and  Altyla  (the
pillars  of  Hercules)  asunder  and  gave  outlet  to  the  Mediter-
ranean Sea.  *  The  hydra.

285


THE   TRAGEDIES   OF   SENECA

palara  timere  !     qiiis  tibi  in  medias  locum
fecit  medullas  ?     ecce  direpta  cute
viscera  manus  detexit ;  ulterior  tamen
inventa  latebra  est — o  malum  simile  Herculi  !

Unde  iste  fletus  ?     unde  in  has  lacrimae  genas  ?
invictus  olim  voltus  et  numquam  malis
lacrimas  suis  praebere  consuetus  (pudet)
iam  flere  didicit.     quis  dies  fletum  Herculis,
quae  terra  vidit  ?     siccus  aerumnas  tuli.
tibi  ilia  virtus^  quae  tot  elisit  mala,  1270

tibi  cessit  uni ;  prima  et  ante  omnes  mihi
fletum  abstulisti ;  durior  saxo  horrido
et  chalybe  voltus  et  vaga  Symplegade
rictus  meos  infregit  et  lacrimam  ^  expulit.^
flentem  gementem,  sumnie  pro  rector  poll,
me  terra  vidit,  quodque  me  torquet  magis,
noverca  vidit.      urit  ecce  iterum  fibras,
incaluit  ardor — unde  nunc  fulmen  mihi  ?

CHORVS

Quid  non  possit  superare  dulor?
quondam  Getico  durior  Haemo  1280

nee  Parrhasio  lenior  axe
saevo  cessit  membra  dolori
fessumque  movens  ])er  colla  caput
latus  alterno  pondere  flectit,
fletum  virtus  saepe  resorbet.
sic  arctoas  laxare  nives
quamvis  tepido  sidcre  Titan
non  tamen  audet  vincitque  faces
solis  adusti  glaciale  iubar.

^  lacrimas  E.  ^  extulit  A .

286


HERCULES   OETAEUS

ever  beast  thou  be,  ojipose  me  openly  !  Who  gave
ihee  ])laec  witliin  my  inmost  marrow  ?  See,  my  hand
has  vip])ed  away  the  skin  and  the  flesli  uncovered  ;
vet  deeper  still  must  its  lurking  place  bo  found — O
woe,  invincible  as  Hercules  !

1-^''  But  whence  this  lamentation  ?  Whence  tears
upon  these  cheeks  ?  My  face,  before  unmoved,  and
never  wont  to  expi'ess  its  woes  in  tears,  at  last  (oh,
shame !)  has  learned  to  weep.  What  day,  what
country  has  seen  the  tears  of  Hercules  ?  Dry-eyed
have  I  borne  my  cares.  To  thee  ^  that  strengtii,
which  lias  crushed  so  many  monsters,  to  thee  alone
has  yielded  ;  thou  first  of  all  hast  forced  tears  from
mine  eyes ;  my  face,  harder  than  rough  rock,  harder
than  steel  and  the  wandering  Symplegades,  has  re-
laxed my  visage  and  driven  forth  my  tears.  Me,
weeping  and  groaning,  O  most  high  ruler  of  the
heaven,  the  earth  has  seen  and,  thought  which
racks  me  more,  my  step-dame  has  seen.  But  lo,
again  the  scorching  heat  flames  up  and  burns  my
vitals.  Oh,  where  is  the  lightning  flash  to  bring
me  death  ?


What  may  not  suffering  overcome  ?  But  now,
harder  than  I'hracian  Haemus'  crags,  than  Par-
rhasian  skies  more  calm,  to  dire  agony  has  he
yielded  him  ;  his  head  drops  wearily  uj)on  his  neck,
from  side  to  side  he  turns  his  mighty  bulk  and  oft
does  his  fortitude  drain  back  his  tears.  So,  with
however  fervent  beam  he  shine.  Titan  avails  not  to
melt  the  arctic  snows,  w  hose  icy  splendour  defies  the
torches  of  the  burning  sun.

^  Addressed  to  the  hidden  pest.

287


THE  TRAGEDIES   OF  SENECA

HERCVLES

Converte  voltus  ad  meas  clades^  pater.  1290

nuniquam  ad  tuas  confugit  Alcides  manus,
non  cum  per  artus  hydra  fecundum  meos
caput  explicaret ;  inter  infernos  lacus
possessus  atra  nocte  cum  Fato  steti
nee  invocavi ;  tot  feras  vici  horridas,
reges,  tyrannoSj  nee  tamen  voltus  meos
in  astra  torsi — semper  haec  nobis  manus
votum  spopondit ;  nulla  propter  me  sacro
micuere  caelo  fulmina — hie  aliquid  dies
optare  iussit.     primus  audierit  preces  1300

idemque  summus.     unicum  fulmen  peto  ;
giganta  crede.     non  minus  caelum  mihi
asserere  potui ;  dum  patrem  verum  puto,
caelo  pepei-ci.     sive  crudelis,  pater^
sive  es  misericors^  commoda  nato  manum
properante  morte  et  occupa  hanc  laudem  tibi.

Vel  si  piget  manusque  detrectat  nefas,
emitte  Siculo  vertice  ardentes^  pater,
Titanas  in  me,  qui  manu  Pindon  ferant
aut  te,  Ossa,  qui  me  monte  proiecto  opprimant.^     1310
abrumpat  Erebi  claustra,  me  stricto  petat
Bellona  ferro  ;  mitte  Gradivum  trucem,
armetur  in  me  dirus.     est  frater  quidem,
sed  ex  noverca.     tu  quoque,  Alcidae  soror
tantum  ex  parente,  cuspidem  in  fratrem  tuum
iaculare,  Pallas,     supplices  tendo  manus
ad  te,  noverca  :  sparge  tu  saltern,  precor,

^  So  A  :  Madvig  aut  te,  Ossa,  quae  me  .  .  .  opprimat :  Leo
taut  Ossa  qui  .  .  .  opprimat  u-ilh  E,  covjccturing  Ossanique
ut  in  me  .  .  .  oppriinar.
288


HERCULES   OETAEUS

HERCULES

O  fatlier,  turn  thou  thine  eyes  on  my  calamity.
Never  till  now  has  Alcidcs  fled  to  thee  for  aid,  not
even  when  around  my  limbs  the  hydra  entwined  its
fertile  heads.  Midst  the  infernal  pools,  by  the  black
pall  of  ni<rht  enfolded,  I  stood  with  Dt-atii  nor  did  I
call  upon  thee.  So  many  dreadful  beasts  have  I
o'ercome,  yea  kings  and  tyrants ;  yet  have  I  ne'er
lifted  my  face  unto  the  stars.  This  hand  of  mine
has  ever  been  surety  for  my  prayers;  no  bolts  for
my  sake  have  flashed  from  the  sacred  sky — but  this
day  has  bidden  me  ask  somewhat  of  thee.  'Tis  the
first  to  hear  my  prayers,  'twill  be  the  last.  Just  one
thunderbolt  I  ask  ;  count  me  a  giant.^  I  could  have
laid  hands  on  heaven  no  less  than  they ;  but  while  I
thought  thee  my  sire  in  very  truth,  I  spared  the
skies.  Oh,  whether  thou  be  harsh,  my  sire,  or
merciful,  lay  hands  on  thy  son  with  speedy  death
and  claim  thee  this  great  renown. ^

1307  Q,.^  if  ^j^y  Jiand  shrinks  reluctant  from  the
impious  task,  'gainst  me  release  from  Aetna's  mount
the  burning  Titans,  who  in  their  hands  niav  heave
Pindus  up,  or,  Ossa,  thee,  and  by  the  hurled  moimtain
overwhelm  me  quite.  Let  Bellona  burst  the  bars  of
Erebus  and  with  drawn  sword  rush  upon  me  ;  or
send  fierce  Mars  ;  let  the  dread  god  'gainst  me  be
armed.  He  is  my  brother,  true,  but  of  my  stej)-
dame  born.  Thou  too,  Alcides'  sister,  but  by  our
sire  alone,  hurl  thy  spear,  O  Pallas,  against  thy
brother  hurl.  And  to  thee,  my  step-dame,  do  I
stretch  su])pliant  hands ;  do  thou  at  least,  I  pray,  let

^  Think  of  me  as  one  of  the  old  giants  storming  heaven,  anrl
Inirl  a  bolt  at  me.
'  i.e.  of  killing  Hercules  ere  Juno  can  do  so.

289
vol..  a.  u


THE  TRAGEDIES   OF   SENECA

telum  (perirc  ft-ininae  possum  manu)

iam  fracta^  iam  satiata^  quid  pascis  minas  ?

quid  quaeris  ultra  ?     supplicem  Alciden  vides,     1320

et  nulla  tellus,  nulla  me  vidit  fera

te  deprecantem.     nunc  niihi  irata  quidem  ^

opus  est  noverca — nunc  tuus  cessat  doloi*  ?

nunc  odia  ponis  ?     parcis  ubi  votum  est  mori.

o  terra  et  urbes^  non  facem  quisquam  Herculi,

non  arma  tradet  ?     tela  subtrahitis  mihi  ?

ita  nulla  saevas  terra  concipiat  feras

post  me  sepultum  nee  meas  umquam  manus

imploret  orbis  ;  si  qua  nascentur  mala,

nascatur  ultor.-     undique  infelix  caput  1330

mactate  saxis,  vincite  aerumnas  meas.

ingrate  cessas  orbis  ?     excidimus  tibi  ?

adhuc  malis  ferisque  suppositus  fores,

ni  me  tulisses.     vindicem  vestrum  malis

eripite,  populi  ;  tempus  hoc  vobis  datur

pensare  merita — mors  erit  pretium  omnium.


ALCMENA

Quas  misera  terras  mater  Alcidae  petam  ?
ubi  natus,  ubinam  ?     certa  si  visus  notat,
reclinis  ecce  cordc  anhelantc  aestuat  ;
gemit;  peractum  est.    membra  conplccti  ultima,   1340
o  nate,  liceat,  spiritus  fugiens  meo
legatur  ore  ;  bracchia,  amplexus  cajje —
ubi  membra  sunt?     ubi  ilia  quae  mundum  tuiit
stelligera  cervix  ?     quis  tibi  exiguam  tui
partem  reliquit  ?

^  So  A  :  t  pater  Leo  with  E,  conjedurhuj  ac  fera.
*  So  Ilichler :  nascatur  alius  A:  uascetur  oiliuin  E :  Leo
conjectures  nascatur  opifer.

290


HERCULES   OETAEUS

fly  thy  bolt  (I  brook  to  perisli  by  a  woman's  hand)  ;
oh,  at  last  yielding,  at  last  glutted,  why  still  feed  thy
vengeance  ?  What  seekest  thou  further  ?  Thou
seest  Alcides  suppliant ;  whereas  no  land,  no  monster
has  ever  seen  me  begging  thee  for  quarter.  Now
have  I  need  of  a  wratliful,  raging  step-dame — now
has  thy  passion  cooled  ?  Now  dost  lay  by  thy  hate  ?
Thou  sparest  me  when  my  prayer  is  all  for  death.
O  earth  and  cities  of  the  earth,  have  ye  none  to
bring  torches  'gainst  your  Hercules,  none  to  bring
arms  ?  Do  ye  withhold  weapons  from  me  ?  So  ^
may  no  land  produce  savage  monsters  more  when  I
am  dead,  and  let  the  world  ne'er  ask  for  aid  of
mine ;  if  any  evils  rise,  let  avenger  rise  as  Avell.
From  every  side  crush  out  my  luckless  life  with
stones,  o'erwhelm  my  woes.  O  ungrateful  world,
dost  falter?  Hast  quite  forgotten  me?  E'en  now
wouldst  thou  be  prey  to  ills  and  savage  beasts  hadst
thou  not  borne  me.  Then,  O  ye  peoples,  rescue  your
champion  from  his  woes.  This  chance  is  given  you
to  requite  my  services — death  will  be  reward  for  all.

[En/er  alcmena.]

ALCMENA

What  lands  shall  Alcides'  wretched  mother  seek  ?
Where  is  my  son,  oh,  w  here  ?  If  mine  eyes  see
aright,  yonder  he  lies,  panting  and  fever-tossed  ;  he
groans,  his  life  is  at  an  end.  In  a  last  embrace  let
me  enfold  thee,  O  my  son,  and  gather  thy  parting
spirit  in  my  mouth  ;  take  my  embracing  arms  to  thine
— but  where  are  thy  limbs  ?  Where  is  that  star-
bearing  neck  which  propped  the  heavens  up?  Who
is  it  has  left  to  thee  but  a  shadow  of  thyself?
*  I.e.  according  as  ye  grant  my  prayer.

291
u  2


THE  TRAGEDIES   OF  SENECA

HERCVLES

Herculem  spcctas  quideirij
mater,  seel  unibram  et  vile  ncscio  quid  mei.
agnosce,  mater — ora  quid  flectis  retro
voltumque  mergis?     Herculem  dici  tuura
})artum  erubescis  ?

AI.CMENA

Quis  feram  niundus  novam,
quae  terra  genuit  ?     quodve  tam  dirum  nefas       1350
de    te  triumpliat  ?     victor  Herculeus  quis  est  ?

HERCVLES

Nuptae  iacentem  cernis  Alciden  dolls.

ALCMENA

Quis  tantus  est  qui  vincat  Alciden  dolus  ?

HERCVLES

Quicumque,  mater,  feminae  iratae  sat  est.

ALCMENA

Et  unde  in  artus  pestis  aut  ossa  incidit  ?

HERCVLES

Aditum  venenis  palla  feniineis  dedit.

ALCMENA

\'binam  ista  palla  est  ?     membra  nudata  intuor.

HERCVLES

Consum})ta  mccum  est.

ALCMENA

Tantane  inventa  est  lues  ?
292


HERCULES   OETAEUS

HERCULES

Hercules  thou  seest  indeed,  my  mother,  but  'tis
the  shadow  and  the  vile  somewhat  of  myself.  Behold
lue,  mother  — why  dost  thou  turn  thine  eyes  away  and
hide  thy  face  ?  Art  ashamed  to  have  Hercules
called  thy  son  ?

ALCMENA

What  world,  what  land  has  given  birth  to  a  fresh
monster  ?  What  so  dread  horror  is  triumphing  over
thee  ?     Who  is  a  victor  over  Hercules  ?

hkhcuLes
By  his  wife's  wiles  thou  seest  Alcides  low.

ALCMENA

What  wile  is  great  enough  to  worst  Alcides  ?

UEHCULES

Whatever,  mother,  suffices  a  woman's  wrath.

ALCMENA

And  how  gained  the  pest  entrance  to  thy  joints
.md  bones  ?

HERCULES

A  robe,  poisoned  by  woman's  hands,  gave  entrance
to  it.

ALCMENA

Where  is  that  robe .''     I  see  but  naked  limbs.

IIHKCULES

'Twas  consumed  with  me.

ALCMENA

Was  so  destructive  pestilence  ever  found  ?

293


THE  TRAGEDIES   OF  SENECA


HERCVLES


Errare  niediis  crede  visceribus  meis,
o  mater,  hydrani  et  mille  cum  Lerna  feras.  1360

quae  tanta  nubes  flamma  Sicanias  secat,
quae  Lemnos  ardens,  quae  plaga  igniferi  poli
vetans  flagranti  currere  in  zona  diem  ?
in  ipsa  me  iactate,  pro  comites,  freta
mediosque  in  amnes — quis  sat  est  Hister  mihi?
non  ipse  terris  maior  Oceanus  meos
franget  vapores,  omnis  in  nostris  malis
defieiet  umor,  omnis  arescct  latex,
quid,  rector  Erebi,  me  remittebas  lovi  ?
decuit  tenei-e  ;  redde  me  tenebris  tuis,  1 370

talem  subactis  Herculem  ostende  inferis.
nil  inde  ducam,  quid  times  iterum  Herculem  ?
invade,  mors,  non  trepida  ;  iam  possum  mod.


ALCMENA

Compesce  lacrimas  saltem  et  aerumnas  doma
malisque  tantis  Herculem  indomitum  refer
mortemque  differ  ;  quos  soles  vince  inferos.

HERCVLES

Si  me  catenis  horridus  vinctum  suis
praeberet  avidae  Caucasus  volucri  dapem,
Scythia  gemente  flebilis  gemitus  mihi
non  extitisset;  si  vagae  Symplegades  1380

utraque  premerent  rupe,  redeuntis  minax^

1  So  Bichter:    redeinites  fininas  Leo  with   E,  suggeating
silens.


'  i.e.  the  hydra.

2  He  compares  these  flames  with  the  fires  of  Aetna.


294


HERCULES   OETAEUS

HERCULES

Believe  nie,  mother,  throuirh  my  inmost  parts  the
livdra  is  wandering-  and  with  the  Lernaean  one  ^  a
thousand  savage  beasts.  What  flames  ■^  as  hot  as
these  pierce  tlie  Sicilian  clouds^  what  Lemnian  fires,
or  heaven's  biirnini>-  tract,  within  whose  scorching-
zone  ^  the  sun's  path  may  not  he  ?  O  comrades,
throw  me  into  the  sea  itself,  into  the  river's  midst —
alas!  what  Hister  is  enough  for  me?  Though
greater  than  all  lands,  the  Ocean  itself  will  not  cool
my  burning  pains ;  to  ease  my  woe  all  water  will  dry
up,  all  moisture  fail.  Why,  ruler  of  Erebus,  didst
send  me  back  to  Jove  ?  'Twere  more  seemly  to  have
held  me  fast.  To  thy  glooms  restore  me,  and  show
such  Hercules  as  this  to  the  ghosts  ^  I  conquered.
Naught  will  I  take  away  ;  why  dost  fear  Hercules  a
second  time  ?  Assail  me,  Death,  and  fear  not ;  now
do  I  brook  to  die.

ALCMENA

Restrain  thy  tears,  at  least,  master  thy  pains  ;  even
to  such  woes  show  Hercules  invincible;  put  death
away  ;  conquer  the  lords  of  hell  as  is  thy  wont.

IIEIICULES

If  rugged  Caucasus  should  offer  me,  bound  by  its
chains,  as  a  feast  to  greedy  birds,'^  while  Scythia
mourned  around,  no  doleful  cry  would  issue  from  my
lips ;  should  the  wandering  Symplegades  crush  me
'twixt  both  their  cliffs,  their  returning  rushes  would

^  i.e.  the  space  between  the  ecliptic  and  the  celestial
equator.

*  All  the  creatures  he  conquered  on  earth  are  now  ghosts
in  the  lower  world.

'  He  is  thinking  of  the  sufferings  of  Prometheus.

295


THE  TRAGEDIES   OF   SENECA
ferrem  ruinas  ;  Pindus  incumbat  mihi
atque  Haemus  et  qui  Thracios  fluetus  Atlios
frangit  lovisque  fulmen  excipiens  Mimas  ;
non  ipse  si  in  me,  mater,  hie  mundus  ruat
superque  nostros  flagret  incensus  toros
Phoebeus  axis,  degener  mentem  Herculis
clamor  domaret.     mille  decurrant  ferae
pariterque  lacerent,  hinc  feris  elangoribus
aetheria  me  Stymphalis,  hinc  taurus  minax  1390

cervice  tota  pulset  et  quidquid  fuit
sohim  quoque  ingens  ;  surgat  hinc  ilHnc  nemus
artusque  nostros  durus  immittat  Sinis  :
sparsus  silebo — non  ferae  excutient  mihi,
non  arma  gemitus,  nil  quod  impelli  potest.

ALCMENA

Non  virus  artus,  nate,  femineum  coquit,
sed  dura  series  operis  et  longus  tibi
pavit  cruentos  forsitan  morbos  labor.

HERCVLES

Vbi  morbus,  ubinam  est  ?    estne  adhuc  aliquid  mali
in  orbe  mecum  ?     veniat ;  hue  aliquis  mihi  HOO

intendat  arcus — nuda  surticiet  manus.
procedat  agedum  hue.

ALCMENA

Ei  mihi,  sensum  quoque
excussit  ille  nimius  impulsans  dolor.

296


HERCULES   OETAEUS

I  bear,  defiant ;  were  Pindus  lying  on  me,  and
Haemus,  and  Athos  which  resists  tlie  Thracian
waves,  and  Mimas  which  welcomes  the  bolts  of
Jupiter  ;  mother,  if  even  this  sky  should  fall  upon
my  head,  and  over  my  shoulders  the  fiery  car  of
Phoebus  should  go  Haming,  no  coward  cry  would
subdue  Alcides'  soul.  Though  a  thousand  beasts  at
once  should  rush  against  me  and  rend  me  sore  ;
though  here  from  the  skies  Stymphalus'  bird,
swooping  Willi  clangour  wild,  and  there  with  full
strength  the  tlireatening  bull  should  push  upon  me,
and  whatever  huge  monster  has  sprung  from  eartli ;
though  Sinis'  groves  should  arise  this  side  and  that,
and  the  rough  giant  shoot  my  limbs  ^  afar  ;  rent  limb
from  limb,  still  will  I  hold  my  peace — no  beasts,  no
arms,  naught  that  can  be  met  and  vanquished  shall
extort  one  groan  from  me.

ALCMENA

Son,  'tis  no  woman's  poison  melts  thy  frame  ;  but
thy  hard  round  of  labours,  thine  unceasing  toil,  per-
chance has  fed  some  deadly  disease  in  thee.

HERCULES

Disease.''  Where  is  it?  Wlici-e  is  it,  pray?  Is
there  still  aught  of  evil  in  the  world  with  me  alive  ?
Let  it  come  on  ;  let  some  one  reach  hither  my  bow
to  me — nay,  niy  bare  hands  will  be  enough.  Let  it
come  on,  I  say.  [He  sinh  into  a  deep,  swoon-like
slumber. '\

ALCMENA

Alas  !  the  too  great  shock  of  agony  hath  reft  e'en
his  sense  away.    [To  attendants.']    Remove  his  w^eapons,
^  See  LiJcx  8,c.  "Siuis."


THE   TRAGEDIES   OF   SENECA

removete  quaeso  tela  et  infestas  precor

rapite  hinc  sagittas  :  igne  sufFuso  genae

scelus  minantur.     quas  petam  latebras  anus  ?

dolor  iste  furor  est :   Herculem  solus  domat.

cur  deinde  latebras  aut  fugam  vaecors  j)etam  ?

obire  forti  meruit  Alcmene  manu :

vel  scelere  pereat,  antequam  letum  mihi  1410

ignavus  aliquis  mandet  ^  ac  turpis  manus

de  me  triumphet.

Ecce  lassatus  malis
sopore  fessas  alligat  venas  dolor
gravique  anhelum  pectus  impulsu  quatit.
favete,  superi.     si  mihi  natum  inclutum
miserae  negastis^  vindicem  saltern  precor
servate  terris.     abeat  excussus  dolor
corpusque  vires  reparet  Herculeum  suas.


Pro  lux  acerba,  pro  capax  scelerum  dies !
nurus  Tonantis  occidit,  natus  iacet,  l-tSO

nepos  supersum  ;  scelere  materno  hie  perit,
fraude  ilia  capta  est.     quis  per  annorum  vices
totoque  in  aevo  poterit  aerumnas  senex
referre  tantas  ?     unus  eripuit  dies
parentem  utrumque  ;  cetera  ut  sileam  mala
parcamque  fatis^  Herculem  amitto  patrem.

ALCMENA

Compesce  voces,  inclutum  Alcidae  genus
miseraeque  fato  similis  Alcmenae  nepos  :
longus  dolorcm  forsitan  vincet  sopor.

*  So  A  :  niandat .  .  .  triumphal  Leo  with  E.
298


HERCULES   OETAEUS

take  these  deadly  shafts  out  of  his  reach,  I  pray  you  ;
his  burning  cheeks  portend  some  violence.  Where
shall  an  old  woman  hide  herself?  That  is  the  smart
of  madness  ;  it  alone  masters  Hercules.  But  why
should  I,  foolish  that  I  am,  seek  flight  or  hiding  ?  By
a  brave  hand  Alcmena  deserves  to  die  ;  so  let  me
perish  even  impiously,  before  some  craven  decree  my
death,  or  a  base  hand  triumph  over  me.

^*^-  But  see,  all  spent  with  woe,  his  pain  holds  his
worn  heart  fast  bound  in  slumber,  and  his  panting
chest  heaves  with  laboured  breathing.  Help  him,  ye
gods  !  If  to  my  misery  ye  have  denied  my  glorious
son,  at  least  spare  to  tlie  world,  I  pray,  its  champion.
May  his  smart  be  driven  quite  away,  and  the  body  of
Hercules  renew  its  strength.

[Enter  hvllus.]

HYLLUS

O  bitter  light,  O  crime-filled  day!  Dead  is  the
Thunderer's  daughter,^  his  son  lies  dying,  and  I,  his
grandson,  still  survive.  By  my  mother's  crime  is  he
perishing,  but  she  was  by  guile  ensnared.  What
aged  man,  throughout  his  round  of  years,  in  his
whole  life,  will  be  able  to  recount  woes  so  great  ?
Both  parents  has  one  day  taken  oft';  to  say  naught
of  other  ills  and  to  spare  the  fates,-  Hercules,  my
father,  am  I  losing.

ALCMENA

Restrain  thy  words,  child  of  illustrious  sire,
wretched  Alcmena's  grandson,  like  her  in  fate ;  per-
chance long  slumber  will  o'ex'come  his  pains.     But

^  Deianira,  who  lias  just  killed  herself  offstage.
^  i.e.  not  to  speak  too  hardly  of  them  by  recounting  all
their  cruelty.

299


THE   TRAGEDIES   OF   SENECA

sed  ecce,  lassam  deserit  mentem  quies  1430

redditque  morbo  corpus  et  liictum  mihi.

HERCVLES

Quid  hoc  ?     rigeuti  cernitur  Tracliin  iugo
aut  inter  astra  positus  evasi  genus
mortale  tandem  ?     quis  niihi  caelum  parat  ?
te  te,  pater,  iam  video,  placatam  quoque
specto  novercam.     quis  sonus  nostras  ferit
caelestis  aures  ?     luno  me  generum  vocat  !
video  nitentem  regiam  clari  aetheris
Phoebique  tritam  flammea  zonam  rota,
cubile  video  Noctis  ;  hinc  tenebrae  vocant.^         14'tO

Quid  hoc  ?     quis  arcem  cludit  et  ab  ipsis,  pater,
deducit  astris  ?     ora  Phoebeus  modo
afflabat  axis,  iam  prope  a  caelo  fui —
Trac'hina  video,     quis  niihi  terras  dedit  ?
Oete  modo  infra  steterat  ac  totus  fuit
suppositus  orbis.     quam  bene  excideras,  dolor  !
cogis  fateri — parce  et  hanc  vocem  occupa.

Hoc,  Hylle,  dona  matris  hoc  munus  parant.
utinam  liceret  stipite  ingesto  impiam
effringere  animam  quale  Amazonium  malum         1450
circa  nivalis  Caucasi  domui  latus.
o  cara  Megara,  tune  cum  furerem  mihi
coniunx  fuisti  ?     stipitem  atque  arcus  date,

^  So  Richicr  xoUh  MSS.  order:  Leo  reads  thi.^  line  after
300


HERCULES   OETAEUS

see,  repose  is  desertin<;  his  weary  heart,  and  gives
back  Ills  frame  to  suficring,  me  to  grief.

HERCULES  [aivakening  in  delniinti^

Why,  what  is  this  ?  Do  I  see  Trachin  midst  her
lugged  hills,  or  have  I,  set  'mongst  the  stars,  at  last
left  behind  the  race  of  men  ?  Who  opens  heaven  for
me?  Thee,  thee,  my  father,  now  do  I  behold,  and
my  step-dame  also,  at  last  appeased,  I  see.  What
heavenly  sound  strikes  on  mine  ears  ?  Juno  calls
me  son  !  I  see  bright  heaven's  gleaming  palace,  and
the  track  worn  by  Phoebus'  burning  wheels.  I  see
Night's  couch  ;  her  shadows  call  me  hence.
[Begins  to  come  out  of  his  deliriwn.]

i^^i  But  what  is  this  ?  Who  shuts  heaven's  gates
to  me,  O  father,  and  draws  me  down  even  from  the
stars?  But  now  the  car  of  Phoebus  breathed  hot
upon  my  face,  now  was  I  near  to  heaven — but  I  sec
Trachin.  Who  has  given  me  earth  again?  A
moment  since,  and  Oeta  stood  below  me,  and  the
whole  world  lay  beneath  my  feet.  How  well,  O
pain,  hadst  thou  fallen  from  me  !  Thou  compellest
me  to  confess— but  stay,  forestall  that  word.^

[To  HVLLU.S.]

144S  Q  Hyllus,  this,  this  is  thy  mother's  boon,  her
gift  to  me.  Would  that  with  lifted  club  I  might
crush  out  her  wicked  life  just  as  I  smote  down  the
Amazonian  pest  -  upon  the  slopes  of  snowy  Caucasus.
O  Avell-loved  Megara,  wast  thou  wife  ^  to  me  when
madness    came    upon    me  ?     Give  me   my  club  and

1  He  thus  checks  himself  on  the  brink  of  an  unmanly
confession  of  his  weakness.

2  i.e.  the  Amazons  themselves.

^  It  should  have  been  Deianira.

301


THE   TRAGEDIES   OF   SENECA

dextra  inquinetur,  laudibus  maculam  imprimam,
summus.legatur  femina  Herculeus  labor.


Compesce  diras^  genitor^  irarum  minas  ;
habet,  peractum  est^  quas  petis  poenas  dedil;
sua  perempta  dextera  mater  iacet.

HERCVLES

Cecidit  dolose  ^ ;  manibus  irati  Herculis
occidere  meruit;  perdidit  comitem  Lichas.  1460

saevire  in  ipsum  corpus  exanime  impetus
atque  ira  cogit.     cur  minis  nostris  caret
ipsum  cadaver  ?     pabulum  accipiant  ferae.

HVLLVS

Plus  misera  laeso  doluit ;  hinc  aliquid  quoque
detrahere  velles.     occidit  dextra  sua^
tuo  dolore  ;  plura  quam  poscis  tulit.
sed  non  cruentae  sceleribus  nu])tae  iaces
nee  fraude  matris  ;  Nessus  hos  struxit  dolos
ictus  sagittis  qui  tuis  vitam  expuit.
cruore  tincta  est  palla  semiferi^  pater,  1470

Nessusquc  nunc  has  exigit  poenas  sibi.

HERCVLES

Habet,  peractum  est,  fata  se  nostra  explicant  ;
lux  ista  summa  est.     quercus  banc  sortem  mihi

^  SoRichler:  relicte  dolor  es  Leo:  caeci  dolores  ^  ;  recte
<lolor  es  E :  iacet  ?  ei  dolori  est  Ptiptr.

302


HERCULES   OETAEUS

boWj  let  iny  right  hand  be  defiled,  let  me  put  stain
upon  niv  glory,  and  let  a  woman  be  chosen  as  the  last
toil  of  Hereules.

HYLI.US

Check  the  dire  threatenings  of  thy  wrath,  my
father  ;  she  has  it,^  'tis  over,  the  penalty  which  thou
desirest  she  has  paid  ;  slain  by  her  own  hand,  my
mother  lies  in  death.

HERCULES

Treacherously  has  she  fallen ;  by  the  hands  of
enraged  Hercules  should  she  have  died ;  Lichas  has
l(jst  a  comrade.  I  am  moved  to  rage  e'en  'gainst
her  lifeless  body,  and  wrath  impels  me.  Why  is
even  her  corpse  safe  from  my  assaults  ?  Let  the
wild  beasts  make  banquet  on  it.

HYLLUS

The  unhappy  woman  has  suffered  more  than  him
she  injured ;  somewhat  still  of  this  thou  wouldst
wish  to  lighten.  By  her  own  hand  has  she  fallen,
through  grief  for  thee ;  more  suffering  than  thou
demandest  has  she  borne.  But  'tis  not  by  crimes  of
a  murderous  wife,  nor  by  my  mother's  guile,  thou
hcst  low  ;  Nessus  contrived  this  snare,  who,  by  thine
arrow  smit,  spewed  out  his  life.  Father,  'twas  in
tliat  half-beast's  gore  the  robe  was  dip})ed,  and
Xessus  by  these  thy  sufferings  doth  requite  his
own.

nEllCULES

'Tis  well, 2  'tis  over,  my  fate  unfolds  itself;  this  is
my  last  day   on  earth.     This   oracle    the    prophetic

1  The  formula  of  the  gladiatorial  contest  when  one  of  the
contestants  has  received  his  death  stroke.
■■'  See  note  ou  1.  1457.

SOS


THE  TRAGEDIES  OF   SENECA
fatidica  quondam  dederat  et  Parnassio
Cirrhaea  quatiens  templa  mugitu  specus  :
"  dextra  perempti  victor,  Alcide,  viri
olim  iacebis  ;  hie  tibi  emenso  freta
terrasque  et  umbras  finis  extremus  dulur."
nil  querimur  ultra  ;  decuit  hunc  finem  dari,
ne  quis  superstes  Hcrculis  victor  foret.  1480

nunc  mors  legatur  clara  memoranda  incluta,
me  digna  prorsus.     nobilem  hunc  faciam  diem,
caedatur  onniis  silva  et  Oetaeum  nemus
conripite,  ut  ingens  Herculem  accipiat  rogus,
sed  ante  mortem,     tu,  genus  Poeantium,
hoc  triste  nobis,  iuvenis,  officimn  appara ;
Herculea  totum  flamma  succendat  diem.

Ad  te  preces  nunc,  Hylle,  supremas  fero.
est  clara  captas  inter,  in  voltu  genus
regnumque  referens,  Euryto  virgo  edita  1490

lole.     tuis  hanc  facibus  et  thalamis  para,
victor  cruentus  abstuli  patriam  lares
nihilque  miserae  praeter  Alciden  dedi ;
et  ipse  rapitur.     penset  aerumnas  suas,
lovis  nepotem  foveat  et  natum  Herculis  ;
tibi  ilia  pariat  quidquid  ex  nobis  habet.

Tuque  ipsa  planctus  pone  funereos,  precor,
o  clara  genetrix  ;  vivit  Alcides  tibi.
virtute  nostra  paelicem  feci  tuam

^  The  oracle  of  the  talking  oaks,  sacred  to  Jupiter,  was  at
Dodona,  in  Ki)irus  ;  tlie  oracle  of  Apollo  at  Delphi  was  in
Phocis,  on  Mount  Parnassus.     The  poet  either  means  that

S04


HERCULES   OETAEUS

oak  ^  once  gave  me,  and  the  Parnassian  grot,^  shaking
the  shrines  of  Cirrha  with  rumbling  tones,  declared  :
"  ]5y  the  liand  of  one  whom,  conquering,  thou  hast
slain,  Alcides,  one  day  slialt  thou  lie  low  ;  this  end,
when  thou  liast  traversed  seas  and  lands  and  shades,
awaits  thee  at  the  last."  We  complain  no  more  ;
such  end  was  meet,  that  no  living  thing  might
conquer  Hercules.  Now  let  me  choose  a  death
glorious,  renowned,  illustrious,  full  worthy  of  myself.
'I'his  day  will  I  make  famous.  Go,  cut  down  all  the
woods,  heap  Octa's  grove  together,  that  a  mighty
pyre  may  receive  Hercules,  and  that  before  he  dies.
Tliou,  son  2  of  Poeas,  dear  youth,  perform  this  sad
office  for  me ;  set  the  whole  sky  aglow  with  the
flames  of  Hercules.

I'^s  And  now  to  thee,  Hyllus,  I  bring  my  latest
prayer.  Among  the  captives  is  a  beauteous  maid,  in
feature  revealing  her  race  and  royal  state,  lole,
daughter  of  king  Eurytus.  Lead  her  to  thy
chamber  with  wedding  torch.  Victorious,  blood-
stained, I  robbed  her  of  her  fatherland  and  home,
and  to  the  wretched  girl  gave  naught  except
Alcides  ;  and  now  e'en  he  is  reft  from  her.  Let  her
find  recompense  for  her  sorrows,  and  cherish  Jove's
grandson  and  tlie  son  of  Hercules ;  to  thee  be  born
whatever  seed  she  has  conceived  by  me.

[To    ALCMENA.]

'*^^  Do  thou  thyself  cease  thy  death-wails  for  me,
I  pray,  illustrious  mother ;  thy  Alcides  lives ;  by  my
heroic  deeds  have  I  made  my  step-dame  seem  but

two  oracles  foretold  the  same  fate,  or  simply  mingles  the  two
references  by  way  of  emphasis  on  the   oracular  utterance
itself.
^  Philoctetea.

305
VOL.  n.  X


THE   TRAGEDIES   OF   SENECA

credi  novercam.     sive  nascente  Hercule  1500

nox  ilia  certa  est  sive  mortalis  meus

pater  est — ^licet  sit  falsa  progenies  mei,i

merui  parentem  ;  contuli  caelo  decus

materqiie  me  concepit  in  laudes  lovis.

quin  ipse,  quamquam  luppiter,  credi  meus

pater  esse  gaudet.     parce  iam  lacrimis,  parens  ;

superba  matres  inter  Argolicas  eris.

quid  tale  luno  genuit  aetherium  gerens

sceptrum  et  Tonanti  nupta  ?     mortali  tamen        J  510

caelum  tenens  invidit,  Alciden  suum

dici  esse  voluit.

Perage  nunc,  Titan,  vices
solus  relictus  ;  ille  qui  vester  comes
ubique  fueram,  Tartara  et  manes  peto.
lianc  tamcii  ad  imos  perferam  laudem  incUitam,
quod  nulla  pestis  fudit  Alciden  palam
omnemque  pestem  vicit  Alcides  palam.

CHORVS

O  decus  mundi,  radiate  Titan,
cuius  ad  priuios  Hecate  vapores
lassa  nocturnae  levat  ora  bigae,  1520

die  sub  Aurora  positis  Sabaeis,
die  sub  occasu  positis  Hiberis,
quique  sub  j)laustro  patiuntur  iirsae
quique  ferventi  quatiuntur  axe,
die  sub  aeternos  properare  manes
^  Lto  dehtes  I.  1503 :  materna  culpa  cesset  et  crimen  lovis.

^  By  bearing  such  a  son  to  Jove,  Alcmena  is  proved  to  be
real  wife,  and  Juno  the  mistress.

306


HERCULES   OETAEUS

the  concubine.^  VNIietlur  the  talc  ^  of  the  night  of
Hercules'  begetling  be  the  truth,  or  wliether  my  sire
be  mortal  •* — though  I  be  falsely  called  the  son  of
Jove,  I  have  deserved  to  be  his  son  ;  glor}'  on  heaven
have  I  conferred,  and  to  Jove's  glory  did  my  mother
bring  me  forth.  Nay,  he  himself,  though  he  be
Jupiter,  is  glad  to  be  believed  my  sire.  Dry  now
thy  tears,  my  mother ;  proud  'mongst  the  Grecian
mothers  shalt  thou  be.  What  son  like  thine  has
Juno  borne,  though  she  wield  the  sceptre  of  the
skies,  and  be  the  Thunderer's  bride  ?  Still,  thougli
queen  of  heaven,  she  envied  a  mortal  woman,  and
wished  that  Alcides  might  be  called  her  own.

1512  Now,  O  Sun,  must  thou  speed  thy  course
alone,  for  I,  who  have  been  thy  companion  everj'-
where,  am  bound  for  Tartarus  and  the  land  of
shades.  Yet  to  the  depths  shall  I  bear  this  glorious
fame,  that  no  pest  openly  has  laid  Alcides  low,
and  that  all  pests  openly  has  Alcides  slain.

[//e  goes  Old  totrard  the  pyre  which  has  been  prepared  J'or

CHORUS

O  glory  of  the  world,  O  ray-girt  Sun,  at  Avhose
first  warmth  Hecate  loosens  the  bits  from  the  wear}'
steeds  of  lier  nocturnal  car,  tell  the  Sabaeans  who
lie  beneath  the  dawn,  tell  the  Iberians  who  lie
beneath  thy  setting,  tell  those  who  suffer  'ncath  the
Wagon  of  the  IJear,^  and  those  who  pant  beneath
thy  burning  car :  Hercules  is  hasting  to  the  endless

*  See  Index  s.v.  "  Hercules,"  at  beginning.

*  I.e.  Amphitrj'on.

*  This  noitliern  con.stellation  is  eitiier  tlie  Wain  (wagon)
or  the  Bear.     The  poet  confuses  the  two  conceptions.

307
X  2


THE   TRAGEDIES   OF    SENECA

Herculem  et  regnuni  caiiis  inquicti,

unde  non  umquam  remeabit  ille.^

sunie  quos  nubes  radios  sequantur,

pallidus  maestas  speculave  terras

et  caput  turpes  nebulae  pererrent.  1 530

quando^  pro  Titan,  ubi,  quo  sub  axe

Herculem  in  terris  alium  sequeris?

quas  manus  orbis  miser  invocabit,

si  qua  sub  Lerna  numerosa  pestis

sparget  in  centum  rabiera  draconcs,

Areadum  si  quis  populis  vetustis

fecerit  silvas  aper  inquietas.

Tliraciae  si  quis  Rhodopes  alumnus

durior  terris  Helices  nivosae

sparget  humano  stabulum  cruore  ?  1540

quis  dabit  pacem  populo  timenti,

si  quid  irati  superi  per  orbem

iusserint  nasci  ?     iaeet  omnibus  j)ar,

quern  parem  tellus  genuit  Tonanti.

planctus  immensas  resonet  per  urbes

et  comas  nullo  coliibente  nodo

feminae  exertos  feriant  lacertos,

solaque  obductis  foribus  deorum

temi)la  securae  pateant  iiovcrcae.

Vadis  ad  Lethen  Stvgiumque  litus,         1550
unde  te  nullae  referent  carinae  ;
vadis  ad  manes  miserandus,  uiule
Morte  devicta  tuleras  triumphum,
umbra  nudatis  veniens  lacertis
languido  vultu  tenuique  collo  ;
teque  non  solum  feret  ilia  puppis  ^

1  So  Richter :  unde  non  umquam  remcavit  uUus  A:  Leo
iunde  non  numquam  remeavit  inde  u'/.'/i  E,  Leo  conjcclirriiiy
denuo  numquam  remeabit  inde.

-  Pciper  notes  a  lacuna  after  I.  1556,  tchich  Leo  thus  sup-
plies :  quae  tulit  solum  metuitque  mergi.

308


HERCULES   OETAEUS

sliades,  to  the  realm  of  sleepless  Cei-beruSj  whence
he  will  never  more  return.  Let  thy  bright  rays  be
overcast  with  cloiuls  ;  gaze  on  the  grieving  world
^\■ith  pallid  face  and  let  disfiguring  mists  roam  o'er
thy  head.  When,  O  Titan,  where,  beneath  v/hat
sky  wilt  thou  follow  another  Hercules  on  the  earth  ?
To  whose  aid  will  the  wretched  world  appeal  if
within  Lerna's  swamp  some  many-headed  pest  in  a
hundred  snakes  shall  spread  its  poisonous  rage ;  if
for  the  ancient  tribes  of  Arcady  some  boar  shall
disturb  the  quiet  of  the  woods  ;  if  some  son  ^  of
Thracian  Rhodo})e,  harder  th.in  the  ground  of  snow-
clad  Helice,  shall  spatter  his  stalls  with  the  blood  of
men  ?  Who  to  the  trembling  nations  will  give  peace,
if  the  angry  gods  shall  raise  up  new  monsters  o'er
the  world  ?  Level  with  all  men  he  lies,^  whom
earth  produced  level  with  the  Thunderer.  Through
countless  cities  let  cries  of  brief  resound ;  let
women  with  streaming  hair  smite  their  bare  arms  ;
let  the  temples  of  all  gods  be  closed  save  his  stej)-
(lame's  only,  for  she  only  is  free  from  care.

i5iO  Xhou  farest  to  Lethe  and  the  Stygian  shore
whence  no  keel  will  ever  bring  thee  back  ;  thou
farest,  lamented  one,  unto  the  ghosts  whence,  over-
coming Death,  thou  didst  once  return  in  triumph,
now  but  a  shade,  with  flesliless  arms,  wan  face  and
drooj)ing  neck  ;  nor  will  that  skiff,  which  once  bore
thee  alone  and  feared  'twould  l)e  plunged  beneatii

*  Like  Diomedes,  the  bloody  tyrant  of  Thrace.

*  i.e.  brought  to  the  common  level  by  death.

309


THE  TRAGEDIES   OF   SENECA

non  tamen  viles  eris  inter  umbras,

Aeacon  ^  inter  geminosque  Cretas

facta  discernens,  feriens  tyrannos.

pareite,  o  dites,  inhibete  dextras.  J560

laudis  est  purum  tenuisse  fen-uni,

cumque  regnabas,  minus  in  procellis

in  tuas  urbes  licuisse  fatis.

Sed  locum  vii'tus  habet  inter  astra.
sedis  arctoae  spatium  tenebis
an  graves  Titan  ubi  promit  aestus  ?
an  sub  occasu  tepido  nitebis,
unde  commisso  resonare  ponto
audies  Calpen  ?     loca  quae  sereni
deprimes  caeli  ?     quis  erit  recepto  1570

tutus  Alcide  locus  inter  astra  ?
liorrido  tantum  procul  a  leone
det  pater  sedes  calidoque  cancro,
ne  tuo  vultu  tremefacta  leges
astra  conturbent  trepidetque  Titan,
vere  dum  flores  venient  tepenti
et  coniam  silvis  liiemes  recident,
vel  coraam  silvis  revocabit  aestas
pomaque  autumno  fugiente  cedent,
nulla  te  terris  rapiet  vetustas  ;  1580

tu  comes  Phoebo,  comes  ibis  astris.
ante  nascetur  seges  in  profundo
vt'l  fretum  dulci  resonabit  unda,
ante  descendet  glacialis  ursae
sidus  et  ponto  vetito  fruetur,
quam  tuas  laudes  po])uli  quiescant.

Te,  j)ater  rerum,  miseri  precamur  :
nulla  nascatur  fera.  nulla  pestis,
non  duces  saevos  miseranda  tellus
liorreat,  nulla  dominetur  aula  1590

*  So  Gronoiijis :  Aeacos  Leo  with  E:  Aeacumque  A.
310


HERCULES   OETAEUS

the  waves,^  hear  thee  alone.  And  yet  thou  shalt
not  dwell  midst  common  shades  ;  midst  Aeacus  and
the  two  Cretans'-  shalt  thou  be,  sitting  in  judgment
on  men's  deeds,  scourging  tyrannic  kings.  Spare,  O
ye  mighty,  restrain  your  hands.  'Tis  thy  praise  to
have  kept  the  sword  unstained  and  that,  what  time
thou  didst  bear  sway,  late  midst  its  storms  had  less
power  against  thy  cities.

1564  gjj^-  jjQ^y  jj^g  ^i^y  niauliood  place  amongst  the
stars.  Wilt  occupy  the  spaces  of  the  north,  or
where  Titan  sends  forth  his  oppressive  rays  ?  Or  in
the  warm  western  sky  wilt  shine,  where  thou  wilt
hear  Calpe  resound  with  the  charging  sea  ?  What
region  of  the  cloudless  heavens  wilt  thou  weigh
down  ?  What  place,  when  Alcides  comes,  will  be
safe  amidst  the  stars  ?  Only  may  Jove  give  thee  thy
seat  far  from  the  dread  Lion  and  the  burning  Crab,
lest  at  sight  of  thee  the  affrighted  stars  make  turmoil
of  their  laws  and  Titan  tremble.  While  Howers  shall
bloom  as  the  spring  days  grow  warm  ;  while  winter
shall  strip  the  foliage  from  the  trees,  and  summer  to
the  trees  recall  their  foliage  ;  while  fruits  shall  fall  as
autunui  takes  his  flight,  no  lapse  of  time  shall  snatch
thee  from  the  world  ;  comrade  of  Phoebus,  comrade
of  the  stars,  shalt  thou  pass  on.  Sooner  shall  wheat
sprout  from  the  surface  of  the  deep ;  sooner  the
roaring  waves  of  the  sea  be  sweet;  sooner  shall  the
icy  Bear  come  down  and  enjoy  the  forbidden  waters,
than  shall  the  nations  be  silent  of  thy  praise.

1587  Xo  thee,  father  of  all,  in  wretchedness  we
pray  :  let  no  dread  beast  be  born,  no  pest ;  from  the
fear  of  savage  kings  keep  this  poor  world  free ;  let
no  one  lord  it  in  palace  hall  who  deems  it  the  sole

^  Translating  Leo's  suggested  line,
*  Minus  and  Rhadamauthus.

311


THE  TRAGEDIES   OF   SENECA

qui  putet  solum  decus  esse  regni
semper  impensum  tenuisse  ferrum.
si  quid  in  terris  iterum  timetur,
vindicem  terrae  petimus  relictae.

Heu  quid  hoc  ?     mundus  sonat.     ecce  maeret,
maeret  Alciden  pater ;  an  deorum
clamor,  an  vox  est  timidae  novercae  ?
Hercule  an  viso  fugit  astra  luno  ?
passus  an  pondus  titubavit  Atlas  ?
an  magis  diri  tremuere  manes  I6OO

Herculem  et  visum  canis  inferorum
fugit  abruptis  trepidus  catenis  ?
iallimur  ;  laeto  venit  ecce  voltu
quem  tulit  Poeans  uraerisque  tela
gestat  et  notas  populis  pharetras,
Herculis  heres.

Effare  casus,  iuvenis,  Herculeos  pvecor
voltuque  quonam  tulerit  Alcides  necem.

PHILOCTETES*^

Quo  nemo  vitam.

CHORVS

Laetus  adeone  ultimos
invasit  ignes  ?

PHILOCTETES

Esse  iam  flammas  nihil  l6lO

ostendit  ille.     quid  sub  hoc  mundo  Hercules
immune  vinci  liquit  ?     en  domita  omnia.

CHOllVS

Inter  vapores  quis  fuit  forti  locus  ?

*  The  didhgue  (hrouyhoxt  this  scene  is  given  hy  Leo  and
Richler  to  2^iinliris  and  Chorus,  foil oicing  E  ;  to  Nutrix  and
Philoctetes  A  ;  since  the  messenger  is  obcious/i/  Philoctetes  (see

312


HERCULES   OETAEUS

i>lory  of  his  realm  to  liave  held  the  sword  e'er
threatening.  If  some  dread  thing  should  come
again  to  earth,  oh,  give  to  forsaken  earth  a  champion.
^^'^^  But  what  is  this  ?  The  universe  resounds.
IJchold,  he  mourns,  the  father  mourns  Alcides  ;  or  is
it  the  outcry  of  the  gods  or  the  voice  of  his  frighted
stei)-dame?  At  the  sight  of  Hercules  does  Juno  flee
the  stars  ?  Under  the  mighty  weight  has  Atlas
staggered?  Or  is  it  that  tlie  awful  ghosts  have
trembled  and  at  sight  of  Hercules  tlie  hell-hound  in
affright  has  broken  his  chains  and  fled  ?  No,  we  ai'e
wrong ;  behold  with  joyful  face  comes  Poeas'  son
and  on  his  shoulders  he  bears  the  shafts  and  the
quiver  known  to  all,  the  heir  of  Hercules.

[Elller   PHILOCTETES.]

^^0''  Speak  out,  good  youth,  and  tell  the  end  of
Hercules,  I  pray,  and  with  what  countenance  Alcides
bore  his  death.

PHILOCTETES

With  such  as  none  e'er  bore  his  life.

CHORUS

So  joyous  did  he  mount  his  funeral  i>yre  ?

PHILOCTETES

He  showed  that  now  flames  were  as  naught  to
him.  What  'neath  the  heavens  has  Hercules  left
by  defeat  unscathed }  Lo,  all  things  have  been
subdued.

CHORUS

Midst  the  hot  flames  what  room  was  there  for
valour  ?

/.  Iii04)  (Did  there  is  no  pertinency  in.  the  introduction  of  the
nurse,  loe  have  given  the  diulotjue  to  Philocleles  and  the  Choru-<i.

313


THE   TRAGEDIES   OF  SENECA

PHILOCTETES

Quod  unum  in  orbe  vicerat  nondum  malum,
et  flamma  victa  est  ;  haec  quoque  acccssit  feris  :
inter  labores  ignis  Herculeos  abit.

CHORVS

Edissere  agedum^  flamma  quo  victa  est  mode  ?

PHILOCTETES

Vt  omnis  Oeten  maesta  eorripuit  manus,
huic  fagus  umbras  perdit  et  toto  iacet
suecissa  trunco,  flectit  liic  pinum  ferox  l620

astris  minantem  et  nube  de  media  vocat ;
ruitura  cautem  movit  et  silvam  tulit
secum  minorem.     Chaonis  qualis  loquax
stat  vasta  late  quercus  et  Phoebum  vetat
ultraque  totos  porrigit  ramos  manus  ;
gemit  ilia  multo  volnere  impresso  minax
frangitque  cuneos,  resilit  incussus  chalybs
volnusque  ferrum  ])atitur  et  rigidum  est  parum.
commota  tandem  cian  cadens  latam  sui
duxit  ruinam,  protinus  radios  locus  6S0

admisit  omnes  ;  sedibus  pulsae  suis
volucres  pererrant  nemore  succiso  diem
quaeruntque  lassis  garrulae  pinnis  donms.
iamque  omnis  arbor  sonuit  et  sacrae  quoque
sensere  quercus  horridam  ferro  manum
nuUique  priscum  |)rofuit  luco  nenuis.
aggeritur  omnis  silva  et  alternae  trabes
in  astra  tollunt  Herculi  an"ustum  rt)gum  :


'  See  Index  s.v.  "Chaonian  Oaks."

2  Oak-tiees  wore  especially  sacied  to  Jove,

314


HERCULES   OETAEUS

PHILOCTETES

The  one  enemy  on  earth  which  he  had  not  o'er-
come,  e'en  fire^  is  vanquished  ;  this  also  ^has  been
added  to  the  beasts ;  fire  has  taken  its  place  midst
the  toils  of  Hercules.

CHORUS

But  tell  us,  in  what  wise  were  the  Hames  o'er-
come  ?

PHII.OCT£TES

When  the  whole  sorrowing  band  fell  upon  Oeta's
woods,  by  the  hands  of  one  the  beech-tree  lost  its
shade  and  lay  full  length,  hewn  to  the  ground  ;  one
fiercely  felled  a  pine-tree,  towering  to  the  stars,  and
from  the  clouds'  midst  he  summoned  it ;  in  act  to
fall,  it  shook  the  rocky  slope  and  with  itself  brought
down  the  lesser  woods.  A  huge  oak  stood,  wide
spreading,  such  as  Chaonia's  oak  ^  of  prophecy,  ex-
cluding the  light  of  day  and  stretching  its  branches
far  beyond  all  the  grove.  Threat'ning  it  groaned,
by  many  a  blow  beset,  and  broke  the  wedges  ;  back
bounded  the  smiting  steel  ;  its  edge  Avas  dulled,  too
soft  for  such  a  task.  When  the  tree,  at  last  dis-
lodged, falling,  brings  widespread  ruin  down,  straight-
way the  place  lets  in  the  sun's  full  rays  ;  the  birds,
driven  from  their  j)erches,  flit  aimless  through  the
day  midst  the  felled  grove,  and,  loudly  complaining,
with  wearied  wings  seek  for  their  nests.  And  now
every  tree  resounded,  and  even  the  sacred  oaks  ^  felt
the  dread  steel-armed  hand,  and  its  ancient  woods
availed  no  holy  grove. '^  The  whole  forest  was  piled
into  a  heap  ;  and  the  logs,  starward  in  layers  rising,
made  all  too  small  a  pyre  for  Hercules — the  pine-

'  A  deep,  primeval  forest,  for  agea  left  untouched,  had
acquired  a  special  sanctity.

315


THE   TRAGEDIES   OF   SENECA

raptnra  flammas  pinus  et  robur  tenax

et  brevior  ilex  silva  ;  sed  complet  rogum  l640

populea  silva,  frontis  Herculeae  deciis.

At  ille,  ut  ingens  nemore  sub  Nasamonio
aegro  reclinis  pectore  imniugit  leo,
fertur — quis  ilium  credat  ad  flammas  rapi  ?
voltus  petentis  astra,  non  ignes  erat,
ut  pressit  Oeten  ac  suis  oculis  rogum
lustravit  omiiem.     fregit  impositus  trabes.
arcus  poposcit.     "  accipe  haec  "  iuquit,  "  sate
Poeante,  dona  et  munus  Alcidae  cape,
lias  hydra  sensit,  his  iacent  Stymjihalides  l650

et  quidquid  aliud  eminus  vici  malum,
virtute  felix/  iuvenis,  has  numquam  irritas
mittes  in  hostem ;  sive  de  media  voles
auferre  volucres  nube,  descendent  aves
et  certa  praedae  tela  de  caelo  fluent,
nee  fallet  umquam  dextenmi  hie  arcus  tuam.
librare  tela  didicit  et  certam  dare
fugam  sagittis,  ipsa  non  falkmt  iter
emissa  nervo  tela,     tu  tantum  precor
accommoda  ignes  et  facem  extremam  mihi.  I66O

hie  nodus  "  iiiquit  "  nulla  quem  cepit  manus,
mecum  ])er  ignes  flagret ;  hoc  telum  Herculem
tantum  scquetur.     hoc  quoque  acciperes  "  ait
"si  ferre  posses,     adiuvet  domini  rogum."
turn  rigida  secum  spolia  Nemeaei  mali
arsura  poscit  ;  latuit  in  spolio  i-ogus.

Ingemuit  omiiis  turba  nee  lacrimas  dolor
cuiquam  remisit.      mater  in  luctum  furcns
diduxit  avidum  pectus  atque  utero  tenus

So  Gronoviiis  with  ^  :  tvictrice  felix  Leo  loith  E:  victure
felix.  has  enim  numqnani  irritas  A  :  his  utere  felix  Peiper  :
arifuing  from  sive  (Z6'.75)  Leo  thinks  the  other  alternative  muH
have  begun  in  1. 1053  with  some  such  wordu  aa  sive  eris  in  acie.

316


HERCULES   OETAEUS

tree,  quick  to  burn,  the  tough-fibred  oak,  the  ilex
of  shorter  trunk  ;  but  poplar  wood,  whose  foliage
adorns  Alcidcs'  brow,  filled  out  the  pyre.

i'""-  But  he,  like  some  huge,  suffering  lion,  which,
in  Libyaai  forest  lying,  roars  out  his  pain,  hurried
along, — who  would  sui)pose  him  hasting  to  the
flames  ?  His  gaze  was  of  one  who  seeks  the  stars,
not  fires  of  earth,  when  he  set  foot  on  Oeta  and
with  his  eyes  surveyed  the  pyre  complete.  The
great  beams  broke  bencatli  him.  Then  for  his
shafts  and  bow  he  called,  and  said  :  "  Take  these,
thou  son  of  Poeas,  take  them  as  Alcides'  gift  and
pledge  of  love.  These  did  the  Hydra  feel ;  by
these  the  Stymphalian  birds  lie  low,  and  all  other
pests  Avhich  at  distance  I  overcame.  O  youth  with
valour  blest,  never  in  vain  shalt  thou  send  these
'gainst  a  foe  ;  or  if  birds  from  the  very  clouds  thou
wouldst  fetch  away,  birds  will  fall  down,  and  out  of
the  sky  will  thy  shafts,  sure  of  their  prey,  come
floating ;  and  ne'er  will  this  bow  disappoint  thy
hand.  Well  has  it  learned  to  poise  the  feathered
shafts  and  unerringly  send  them  flying  ;  while  the
shafts  themselves,  loosed  from  the  string,  fail  never
to  find  their  mark.  Only  do  thou,  I  pray,  apply  the
fire  and  set  the  last  torch  for  me.  Let  this  club,"
he  said,  "  which  no  hand  but  mine  has  wielded,  burn
in  the  flr.mes  with  me;  this  weapon  alone  shall
follow  Hercules.  This  also  shouldst  thou  have,"
said  he,  "  if  thou  couldst  wield  it.  Let  it  add  fuel
to  its  master's  pyre."  Then  did  he  call  for  the
Nemean  monster's  shaggy  skin  to  burn  with  him  ;
'neath  the  skin  the  pyre  was  hidden.

1667  i"he  whole  throng  set  up  a  lamentation,  and
sorrow  filled  the  eyes  of  all  with  tears.  His  mother,
passionate  in  grief,  her  eager  bosom  stript,  and  she

yi7


THE  TRAGEDIES  OF  SENECA

exerta  vastos  ubera  in  planctus  ferit.  1670

superosque  et  ipsum  vocibus  pulsans  lovem

implevit  omnem  voce  feminea  locum.

"  deforme  letum,  mater,  Herculeum  facis  ;

compesce  lacrimas"  inquit,  ^Mntrorsus  dolor

femineus  abeat.     luno  cur  laetum  diem

le  flente  ducat  ?     paelicis  gaudet  suae

spectare  lacrimas.     comprime  infimium  iecur,

mater ;  nefas  est  ubera  atque  uterum  tibi

laniare,  qui  me  genuit."     et  dirum  fremens,

qualis  per  urbes  duxit  Argolicas  canem,  I68O

cum  victor  Erebi  Dite  contempto  redit

tremente  fato,  talis  incubuit  rogo.

quis  sic  triumphans  laetus  in  curru  stetit

\ictor?     quis  illo  gentibus  voltu  dedit

leges  tyrannus  ?     quanta  pax  habitum  tulit !

haesere  lacrimae,  cecidit  impulsus  dolor

nobis  quoque  ipsis,  nemo  periturum  ingemit.

iam  flere  pudor  est ;  ipsa  quam  sexus  iubet

maerere_,  siccis  haesit  Alcmene  genis

stetitque  nato  paene  iam  similis  parens.  1 690


CHORVS

Nullasne  in  astra  misit  ad  sujieros  prcces
arsurus  aut  in  vota  respexit  lovem  ?


PHII.OCTETES

lacuit  sui  securus  et  caelum  intuens
quaesivit  oculis,  parte  an  ex  aliqua  pater
despiceret  ilium,     turn  manus  tendens  ait :
"  quacumque  parte  jirospicis  natum  pater
(iste  est  pater,  cui  nocte  commissa  dies

318


HERCULES   OETAEUS

smote  her  breasts,  naked  e'en  to  the  waist,  in  endless
lamentation  ;  and  with  her  cries  assaihng  the  gods
and  Jove  liimself,  she  filled  all  the  region  round
with  womanish  bewailings.  "Mother,"  he  said,
"thou  dost  disgrace  the  death  of  Hercules  ;  restrain
thy  tears  and  confine  th}'  womanish  grief  within  thy
heart.  Why  for  thy  weeping  should  Juno  count  this
day  joyful  ?  For  she  rejoices  to  see  her  rival's  tears.
Curl)  thy  faint  heart,  my  mother ;  'tis  a  sin  to  tear
the  breasts  and  the  womb  that  bore  Alcides."  Then
with  dread  mutterings,  as  when  through  Argive
towns  he  dragged  the  dog,  what  time,  triumphant
over  hell,  in  scorn  of  Dis  and  trembling  death  he
returned  to  earth,  so  did  he  lay  him  down  upon  the
jnre.  What  victor  ever  stood  in  his  chariot  so  joy-
fully triumphant?  W^iat  tyrant  king  with  such  a
countenance  ever  gave  laws  to  nations  ?  How  calmly
he  bore  his  fate  !  Even  our  tears  were  stayed,  griefs
shock  subsided,  none  grieves  that  he  must  perish.
Now  were  we  'shamed  to  weep ;  Alcmena,  iierself,
whose  sex  impels  to  mourning,  stood  with  dry  cheeks,
a  mother  now  well-nigh  equal  to  her  son.

ClIOUUS

Sent  he  no  supplications  heavenward  to  tlie  gods
e'er  the  fire  was  lit.''  Looked  he  not  to  Jove  to  hear
his  pravers  ?

PHILOCTETES

Careless  of  self  he  lay  and,  gazing  at  heaven,
quested  with  his  eyes  whether  from  any  quarter  his
sire  looked  down  at  him.  Then,  with  hands  out-
stretched, he  spoke  :  "  O  fatlier,  from  what  quarter
soe'er  thou  lookest  on  thy  son,  (he  truly  is  my
father,  for  whose  sake  night  joined  with  day  and  one

319


THE  TRAGEDIES   OF  SENECA

quievit  unus),  si  meas  laudes  canit

utrumque  Phocbi  litus  et  Scythiae  genus

et  omnis  ardens  ora  quam  torret  dies,  1700

si  pace  tellus  plena,  si  nuUae  gemunt

urbes  nee  aras  impias  quisquam  inquinat,

si  scelera  desiint,  spiritum  adniitte  luinc  precoi

in  astra.     non  me  mortis  infernae  locus

nee  maesta  nigri  rcgna  conterrent  lovis  ;

sed  ire  ad  illos  umbra,  quos  vici,  deos,

pater,  erubesco.     nube  discussa  diem

pande,  ut  deorum  voltus  ardentem  Herculem

spectet ;  licet  tu  sidera  et  mundum  neges,

ultro,  pater,  cogere — si  voces  dolor  1710

abstulerit  ullas,  pande  tum  Stygios  lacus

et  redde  fatis  ;  approba  natum  prius.

ut  dignus  astris  videar,  hie  faciet  dies.

leve  est  quod  actum  est ;  Herculem  hie,  genilor,  dies

inveniet  aut  damnabit."

Haec  postquam  edidit,     1715
flammas  poposcit.     "hoc  age,  Alcidae  comes        1717
non  segnis  "  inquit  "  corripe  Oetaeam  facem  ;
noverca  cernat  quo  feram  flammas  modo.^  I7l6

quid  dcxtra  tremuit  ?  num  manus  pavida  impium  1719
scelus  refugit  ?     redde  iam  pharetras  mihi,  17~0

ignave  iners  inermis — en  nostros  manus
quae  tendat  arcus  !     quid  sedet  pallor  genis  ?
aninio  fixces  invade  quo  Alciden  vides
voltu  iacere.     respice  arsurum,  miser.

Vocat  ecce  iam  me  genitor  et  pandit  polos,
venio,  pater."     voltusque  non  idem  fuit.
tremente  pinum  dextera  ardentem  iinpuli  ;^

*  Leo  deletes  (his  line  with  E:  Bichter,  folloiving  tironovius
places  it  after  I.  171S.
^  So  A  :  Leo  impulit  loith  E.

320


HERCULES   OETAEUS

day  ceased  to  be,)  if  both  the  bounds  of  Phoebus
sing  my  praise,  the  tribes  of  Scythia  and  every  burn-
ing strand  whicli  dayHght  j)arches ;  if  peace  fills  all
the  earth  ;  if  no  cities  groan  and  no  man  stains  with
sin  his  altar-fires ;  if  crimes  have  ceased,  admit  this
soul,  I  pray  thee,  to  the  stars.  I  have  no  fear  of  the
infernal  realm  of  death,  nor  do  the  sad  realms  of
dusky  Juve  ^  aH'right  me  ;  but  to  go,  nauglit  but  a
shade,  to  those  gods  I  overcame,  O  sire,  I  am
ashamed.  Dispel  the  clouds,  spread  wide  the  day,
that  the  eyes  of  gods  may  gaze  on  burning  Hercules.
Though  thou  deny  me  stars  and  a  place  in  heaven,
O  sire,  thou  slialt  even  be  compelled — ah  !  if  pain
will  excuse  any  words  ^  of  mine,  then  open  the
Stygian  j)ools  and  give  me  to  death  again  ;  but  prove
me  first  thy  son.  This  day  will  make  me  seem
worthy  ot  the  stars.  Worthless  is  all  that  has  been
done;  this  day,  my  father,  will  bring  Hercules  to
light  or  doom  him."

^•^■'  When  he  had  thus  said,  he  called  for  fire,
"Up  now,  Alcidcs'  willing  friend,"  said  he,  "catch
up  the  Oetaean  torch  ;  let  my  step-dame  see  how  1
can  bear  the  flames.  Why  did  thy  right  hand
tremble?  Did  thy  hand  shrink  timid  from  such
unholy  deed  .^  Then  give  me  my  quiver  back,  thou
undaring,  unskilled,  unwarlike — that  the  hand  to
bend  my  bow !  Why  do  thy  cheeks  grow  pale  ?
Come,  seize  on  the  torch  with  courage,  with  face
thou  seest  on  prone  Alcides.  Poor  soul,  have  some
regard  for  him  who  soon  will  burn.

i"^^  But  lo  I  now  doth  my  father  call  me  and  he
oj)ens  heaven.     I  come,  O  sire."     Then  was  his  face
no  more  the  same.      With  trembling  hand  1  applied
1  Pluto.
*  i.e.  tiie  latest  defiant  word,  "compelled."

321

VOL.   II.  Y


THE   TRAGEDIES   OF   SENECA

refugit  ignis  et  reluctantur  faces

et  membra  vitant,  sed  recedentem  Hercules

insequitur    ignem.      Caucasum  aut    Pindum   aut

Athon  1730

ardere  credas  ;  nullus  erumpit  sonus^
tantum  ingemescit  ignis,     o  durum  iecur  !
Typhon  in  illo  positus  immanis  rogo
gemuisset  ipse  quique  convulsam  solo
imposuit  umeris  Ossan  Enceladus  ferox.

At  ille  medias  inter  exurgens  faces,
semiustus  ac  laniatus,  intrepidum  tuens  :
"  nunc  es  parens  Herculea  ;  sic  stare  ad  rogum
te,  mater,"  inquit,  "sic  decet  fieri  Herculem."
inter  vapores  positus  et  flammae  minas  1740

immotus,  inconcussus,  in  neutrum  latus
correpta  torquens  membra  adhortatur,  monet,
gerit  aliqiiid  ardens.     omnibus  fortem  addidit
animum  niinistris  ;  urere  ardentem  putes.
stupet  omne  volgus,  vix  habent  flammae  fidem,
tam  placida  frons  est,  tanta  maiestas  viro.
nee  propcrat  uri ;  cumque  iam  forti  datum
leto  satis  pensavit,  igniferas  trabes
liinc  inde  traxit,  minima  quas  flamma  occupat,
totasquc  in  igncs  vertit  et  quis  pluriums  1750

exundat  ignis  re))etit  intrepidus  ferox.
tunc  ora  flannnis  implet.     ast  illi  graves
luxere  barbae ;  cumque  iam  voltum  minax
appcteret  ignis,  lamberent  flammae  caput,
non  prcssit  oculos. — sed  quid  hoc  ?     maestam  intuur
.322


HERCULES   OETAEUS

the  blazinw  pine  ;  the  flames  slirunk  back,  the  torch
resisted  and  would  not  touch  his  limbs;  but  Hercules
followed  up  the  shrinking  flames.  Thou  wouldst
suppose  that  Caucasus  or  Pindus  or  Athos  was
ablaze ;  no  sound  burst  forth,  save  that  the  fire
seemed  groaning.  O  stubborn  heart  !  Had  huge
Typhon  been  lying  on  that  pyre,  he  Avould  have
groaned  aloud,  and  fierce  Enceladus  who  upon  his
shoulders  bore  Ossa,  uptorn  from  earth.

1'"^''  But  Hercules,  midst  roaring  flames  upstarting,
all  cliarred  and  mangled,  gazed  dauntless  round  and
cried  :  "  Now  art  thou  parent  true  of  Hercules  ;  thus
'tis  meet  that  thou  shouldst  stand,  my  mother,
beside  the  pyre,  and  thus  'tis  meet  that  Hercules  be
mourned."  Midst  scorchino;  heat  and  threat'nino-
flames,  unmoved,  unshaken,  to  neither  side  turning
his  tortured  limbs,  he  encourages,  advises,  is  active
still,  though  all  aflame.  To  all  his  ministrants  stout-
ness of  soul  he  gives  ;  you  would  deem  him  all  on
fire  to  burn.  The  whole  crowd  stands  in  speechless
wonder  and  the  flames  have  scarce  belief,^  so  calm
his  brow,  the  hero  so  majestic.  Nor  does  he  speed
his  burning;  but  when  now  he  deemed  that  courage
enough  had  been  shown  in  death,  from  every  side  lie
dragged  the  burning  logs  which  the  fire  least  fed
upon,  and  into  that  blazing  mass  he  strode  and
sought  where  the  flames  leaped  highest,  all  unafraid,
defiant.  Awhile  he  feasted  his  eyes  upon  the  fires.
Hut  now  his  heavy  beard  burned  bright;  and  even
when  threat'ning  fire  assailed  his  face  and  the  hot
tongues  licked  about  his  head,  he  did  not  close  his
eyes. — But  what   is    this  ?     I    see    the   sad   mother


*  The  people  hardly  helieved  tliat  the  fire  was  real.

323
Y  2


THE   TRAGEDIES   OF   SENECA

sinu  gerentem  reliquias  rnagm  Herculis  ^
crinemque  iactans  squalidum  Alcmene  gemit.

ALCMENA

Timete,  snperi,  fata  !  tarn  parvus  cinis
Herculcus,  hue  hue  ille  decrevit  gigaiis  !
o  quanta,  Titan,  ad  nihil  moles  abit !  1760

anilis,  heu  me,  reeipit  Alciden  sinus,
hie  tumulus  illi  est.     ecce  vix  totam  Hercules
complevit  urnam ;  quam  leve  est  pondus  mihi,
cui  totus  aether  pondus  incubuit  leve.
ad  Tartara  dim  regnaque,  o  nate,  ultima
rediturus  ibas  — quando  ab  inferna  Styge
remeabis  iterum  .''     non  ut  et  spolium  trahas
rursusque  Theseus  debeat  lucem  tibi —
sed  quando  solus  ?     mundus  impositus  tuas
compescet  umbras  teque  Tartareus  canis  1770

iiihibere  poterit  ?     quando  Taenarias  fores
pulsabis,  aut  quas  mater  ad  fauces  agar
qua  mors  aditur  ?     vadis  ad  manes  iter
habiturus  unum.     quid  diem  questu  tero  ?
quid  misera  duras  vita?     quid  lucem  tenes?
quern  parere  rursus  Herculem  jjossum  lovi  ?
quis  me  parentem  natus  Alcmenen  suam
tantus  vocabit .''     o  nimis  felix  nimis,
Thebane  coniunx,  Tartari  intrasti  loca
Horente  nato  teque  vcnientem  inferi  1780

timuere  forsan,  quod  pater  tantum  Herculis,

^  Leo  deletes  II.  1155,  175C,  liichter  1755-1757 :  the  last  2)art
of  the  speech  of  Philocletes  is  supposed  lo  hace  fallen  out.

3^24


HERCULES    OETAEUS

1)0.1  rin<j  in  her  bosom  the  remains  of  great  Alcides,

and  Alcmcna,  tossini:;  her  squalid  locks,  bewails  her

son.

[Enter  ai.cmena,  carrying  in  her  bosom  a  funeral  urn.^

ALCMENA

Fear  ye  the  fates,  O  powers  above!  (^Holding  tip
the  urn.)  See  the  scant  dust  of  Hercules— to  this,
to  this  has  that  mighty  body  shrunk  !  O  Sun,  how
great  a  mass  has  passed  away  to  nothingness  !  Ah
me,  this  aged  brcjist  can  hold  Alcides,  tins  is  a  tomb
lor  him.  See,  Hercules  has  scarce  filled  all  the  urn;
how  light  for  me  his  weight  uj)on  whose  shoulders
the  whole  heavens  as  a  light  weight  rested.  Once  to
the  farthest  realms  of  Tartarus,  ()  son,  didst  thou  go
l)ut  to  return — Oh,  when  from  infernal  Styx  wilt
thou  come  again  ?  Not  in  such  v.ise  as  to  bring  e'en
spoil  with  thee,  nor  that  Theseus  again  may  owe
tiiee  the  light  of  day, — but  when,  though  all  alone?
Will  the  whole  world,  heaped  on  thee,  hold  thy
shade,  or  the  hell-hound  avail  to  keep  thee  back?
When  wilt  thou  batter  down  the  Taenarian  ^  gates,
or  to  what  yawning  jaws  shall  thy  mother  betake
herself,  Avhere  is  the  approach  to  death  ?  Thou
takest  thy  journey  to  the  dead,  and  'twill  be  thy
only  one.  W^hy  do  I  waste  time  in  wailing?  Why
dost  endure,  O  wretched  life?  Why  clingest  to  the
light?  What  Hercules  can  I  again  bring  forth  to
Jove  ?  What  son  so  great  will  call  me  mother,  will
call  me  his  Alcmena  ?  Oh,  too,  too  happy  thou,  my
Theban  husband,'^  for  thou  to  the  realms  of  Tartarus
didst  descend,  thy  son  still  living  ;  at  thy  ajiproach
the  infernal  ones,  perchance,  were  filled  with  fear,
merely  because  thou  Avast  the  sire  of  Hercules,  even
'  Sec  Index  s.r.  "  Tacnarua."         *  Amphitryon.

S25


THE   TRAGEDIES   OF   SENECA

vel  falsuSj  aderas — quas  petam  terras  anus,
invisa  saevis  regibus,  si  quis  tamen
rex  est  relictus  saevus  ?     ei  miserae  mihi !
quicumque  caesos  ingemit  natus  patres,
a  me  petet  supplicia,  me  cuncti  obruent.
"si  quis  minor  Busiris  aut  si  quis  minor
Antaeus  orbem  fervidae  terret  plagae,
ego  praeda  ducar  ;  si  quis  Ismarius  greges
Thracis  cruenti  vindicat,  carpent  greges  1790

mea  membra  diri.     forsitan  poenas  petet
irata  luno  ;  totus  hue  verget  ^  dolor  ;
secura  victo  tandem  ab  Alcide  vacat,
paelex  supersum — a  quanta  supplicia  expetet
ne  parere  possim  !     fecit  hie  natus  mihi
uterum  timendum.

Quae  petam  Alcmene  loca  ?
quis  me  locus,  quae  regio,  quae  mundi  plaga
defendet  aut  quas  mater  in  latebras  agar
ubique  per  te  nota  ?     sic  patriam  petam
laresque  miseros  ?     Argos  Eurystheus  tenet.         1800
marita  Thebas  regna  et  Ismenon  petam
thalamosque  nostros,  in  quibus  quondam  lovem
dilecta  vidi  ?     pro  nimis  felix,  nimis,
si  fulminantem  et  ipsa  sensissem  lovcin  !
utinam  meis  visceribus  Alcides  foret
exectus  infans !     nunc  datum  est  tempus,  datum  est
videre  natum  laude  certantem  lovi,
ut  et  hoc  daretur,  scire  quid  fatum  mihi
eripere  posset.

^  So  Ilichter  with  N,  lleinsius :  Leo  reads  furetur  tcith  a.-,
and  conjectures  exurget.

3^6


HERCULES   0P:TAEUS

llioufrh  falsely  called. — What  lands  shall  an  aged
woman  seek,  hated  by  savage  kings,  if  spite  of  all
any  savage  king  is  left  alive  ?  Oh,  Avoe  is  me  !  All
sons^  who  lament  their  murdered  sires  will  seek
revenge  from  me  ;  they  all  will  overwhelm  me.  If
any  young  Busiris  or  if  any  young  Antaeus  terrifies
the  region  of  the  burning  zone,^  I  shall  be  led  off  as
booty ;  if  any  Ismarian  ^  seeks  revenge  for  the  herds
of  the  bloody  king  *  of  Thrace,  upon  my  limbs
\will  his  horrid  herds  be  fed.  Juno,  perchance,  in
anger  will  seek  revenge ;  against  me  w  ill  the  whole
force  of  her  wrath  incline  ;  though  her  soul  is  no
more  disturbed  by  Alcides,  o'ercome  at  last,  I,  the
concubine,  am  left — ah  !  what  punishments  will  she
inflict,  lest  I  be  again  a  mother  !  This  son  has  made
my  womb  a  thing  of  fear.

>^36  Whither  shall  Alcmcna  flee?  What  place,
\\  hat  region,  what  quarter  of  the  world  will  take  my
j)art,  or  to  what  hiding-place  shall  thy  mother  betake
herself,  known  everywhere  through  thee  .''  Shall  I
seek  my  fatherland  and  my  wretched  home  ?
Eurystheus  is  king  at  Argos.  Shall  I  seek  Thebes,
my  husband's  kingdom,  the  Ismenus  and  my  bridal
chamber,  where  once,  greatly  beloved  by  him,  I
looked  on  Jove  ?  Oh,  happy,  far  too  happy  had  I
been,  if  I  myself,  too,''  had  known  Jove's  thunder-
bolt !  Oh,  would  that  from  my  womb  the  infant
Alcides  had  been  ripped  !  But  now  was  the  chance
given  me,  yea  'twas  given  to  see  my  son  v^'ing  in
praise  with  Jove,  that  this,  too,  might  be  given  me —
to  know  of  how  much  fate  had  power  to  rob  me,

^  I.e.  whose  fathers  Hercules  has  slain.
2  Both  these  enemies  of  Hercules  had  lived  in  Africa.
*  i.e.  Thracian.         ••  Diomedes.
She  is  thinking  of  the  experience  of  Seinele.

327


THE   TRAGEDIES   OF   SENECA

Quis  memor  vivet  tui,
o  nate,  populus?    omne  iam  ingratum  est  genus.  1810
petam  Cleonas  ?     Arcadum  pojiulos  petam
meritisque  terras  nobiles  quaeram  tuis  ?
liic  dira  serpens  cecidit,  liie  ales  fera,
hie  rex  cruentiis,  hie  tiia  fractus  manu
qui  te  sepulto  possidet  caelum  leo.
si  grata  terra  est,  populus  Alcmcnen  tuam
defendat  omnis.     Thracias  gentes  petam
Hebrique  populos  ?     liaec  quoque  est  mentis  tuis
defensa  tell  us  ;  stabula  cum  regno  iacent.
hie  pax  cruento  rege  prostrato  data  est ;  18'<iO

ubi  enim  negata  est  ?

Quod  tibi  infelix  anus
quaeram  sepulchrum  ?     de  tuis  totus  rogis
contendat  orbis.     reliquias  magni  Herculis
quis  populus  aut  quae  templa,  quae  gentes  rogant  ?
quis,  quis  petit,  quis  poscit  Alcmenes  onus  ?
quae  tibi  sepulchra,  nate,  quis  tumulus  sat  est  ?
hie  totus  orbis  ;  fama  erit  titulus  tibi.
quid,  anime,  trepidas  ?     Hei'culis  cineres  tenes  ;
complectere  ossa  ;  reliquiae  auxilium  dabunt,
erunt  satis  })raesidia,  terrebunt  tuae  IS.SO

reges  vel  umbrae.

HYLF.VS

Debitos  nato  quidem
compescc  Actus,  mater  Alcidae  incluti.
non  est  gemendus  nee  gravi  urgendus  prece,

^  Lcrna.  ^  The  Styni2)lialian  bird.

328


HERCULES   OETAEUS

1800  What  people  will  live  minclful  of  thee,  O  son  ?
Now  is  the  whole  raec  ungrateful.  Shall  I  seek
Cleonae?  seek  the  Arcadian  trihes  and  hunt  out  the
lands  made  famous  by  thy  righteous  toils  ?  Here  ^
fell  the  serpent  dire,  here  the  bii-d-monster,^  here  ^
fell  a  bloody  king,  and  here  ^  by  thy  hand  subdued,
the  lion  fell,  who,  while  thou  liest  buried  here,  holds
a  place  in  heaven.  If  earth  is  grateful,  let  every
people  shield  thine  Alemena.  Sliall  I  go  to  the
Thracian  peoples,  and  to  Hebrus'  tribes  ?  for  tliis
land,  too,  was  defended  by  thy  toils  ;  low  do  the
stables  ^  with  the  kingdom  lie.  Here  peace  was
granted  when  the  bloody  king  was  overthrown  ;  for
where  has  it  not  been  granted  ?

I'^-i  ^^'hat  tomb  for  thee  shall  a  luckless  old  woman
seek  ?  Let  the  whole  world  contend  for  ihy  remains.
The  ashes  of  mighty  Hercules,  what  people  or  what
temples,  what  races  desire  to  have  ?  Who  then,  who
seeks,  who  demands  Alcmena's  burden  '^  ?  What
sepulchre,  O  son,  what  tomb  is  great  enough  for
thee  ?  Thy  tomb  is  the  whole  wide  world,  and  fame
shall  be  thine  ejiitaph.  Why,  soul  of  mine,  art  fear-
ful ?  Thou  holdst  the  dust  of  Hercules ;  embrace
his  bones  ;  his  mere  dust  will  bring  thee  aid,  will  be
defence  enough  ;  even  thy  ghost  will  cause  kings  to
tremble.

nvr.i.us    Ur/io    seems    to    liavc    been    prcscnl    ditring  the

preceding  sccne^

Tliough   truly  they  are  due  thy  son,  restrain  thy

tears,    mother    of    Alcides    the     illustrious.      He    is

neither    to   be  mourned   nor  j)ursued   with  grievous

^  Egypt,  Thrace,  or  Libj-a,  according  as  Busiris,  Diomedes,
or  Antaeus  is  in  her  mind.        ■*  Neinca.       *  i.e.  of  Diomedes.
^  i.e.  the  urn  containing  the  allies  of  Hercules.

329


THE   TRAGEDIES   OF   SENECA

virtute  quisquis  abstulit  fatis  iter  ;
aeterna  virtus  Hcrculem  fieri  vetat.
fortes  vetant  maerere,  degeneres  iubeiit.i

ALCMENA

Sedabo  questus  vindice  amisso  parens  ?


Terra  atque  pelagus  quaque  purjiurcus  dies
utrumque  clara  spectat  Oceanum  rota^

ALCMENA

Quot  misera  in  uno  condidi  natos  parens  !         1840
regno  carebam^,  regna  sed  poteram  dare,
una  inter  omnes  terra  quas  matres  gerit
votis  perperci,  nil  ego  a  superis  peti
incolumc  nato  ;  quid  dare  Herculeus  mihi
noil  poterat  ardor  ?     quis  deus  quicquam  niihi
negare  poterat  ?     vota  in  hac  fuerant  manu  ;
quidquid  negaret  luppiter,  daret  Hercules,
quid  tale  genetrix  uUa  mortalis  tulit .''
deriguit  aliqua  mater  ut  toto  stetit
succisa  fetu  bisque  septenos  gregem  1850

deplanxit  una ;  gregibus  aequari  mens
quot  ille  poterat .''     niatribus  miseris  adhuc
exemplar  ingens  derat — Alcmene  dabo.
cessatc,  matres^  pertinax  si  quas  dolor
adhuc  iubet  lugere,  quas  luctus  gravis
in  saxa  vertit ;  ccdite  his  cunctae  malis.
agedum  senile  pectus,  o  miscrae  manus,
pulsate — et  una  funeri  tanto  sat  es,

^  Lto  delctta  this  line.

-  Eridently  there  is  a  Incmia  folhivinfi  this  Jiiie.     Leo  sue/-
(jests:  (non  sola  niaeres)  vintHce  amisso  dolent.

330


HERCULES   OETAEUS

prayers,  whoe'er  bv  his  valour  hath  lialtcd  the  march
of  rate ;  his  deathless  valour  forbids  to  weep  for
Hercules.  Brave  men  forbid  to  mourn,  cowards
command.

AI.CMENA

When  iier  deliverer  is  lost,  shall  a  mother  abate
her  grief?

HYLLUS

Both  land  and  sea  and  where  the  shininjT  sun  from
his  bright  ear  looks  down  upon  both  oceans,  (not
thou    alone   dost   grieve)    all    mourn   for   their   lost

deliverer.^

ALCMENA

How  many  sons  has  his  wretched  mother  buried
in  him  alone  !  Kingdom  I  lacked,  yet  kingdoms
could  I  give.  I  only,  midst  all  the  mothers  whom
the  earth  contains,  I'efrained  from  prayer ;  naught
from  the  gods  I  asked,  while  my  son  remained  ;  for
what  could  the  love  of  Hercules  not  grant  to  me  ?
What  god  could  deny  me  aught.''  In  my  own  hands
were  the  answers  to  my  prayers ;  whatever  Jove
denied,  Hercules  could  bestow.  What  son  like  this
has  a  mortal  mother  borne?  Once  a  mother ^
stiffened  into  stone  when,  stripped  of  her  whole
brood,  she  stood  and,  one  alone,  lamented  her  twice
seven  children  ;  but  to  how  many  broods  like  hers
could  my  son  be  comj)ared  ?  Till  now  for  mother's
grief  a  measure  vast  enough  was  lacking — Alcmena
will  furnish  it.  Then  cease,  ye  mothers,  whom
l)ersistent  woe  still  bids  to  mourn,  whom  crushing
sorrow  has  transformed  to  stone  ;  yield  ye,  yea,  all  of
you,  to  these  my  woes.  Then  come,  beat  on  this
aged  breast,  O  wretched  hands, — and  canst  thou  alone

'  Tiiinslating  Leo's  conjecture,  -  Niobe.

331


THE  TRAGEDIES   OF   SENECA

grandaeva  anus  defectaj  quam  totus  brcvi
iam  quaeret^  orbis  ?     ex})edi  in  planctus  tamen  18(^0
defessa  quamquam  bracchia  ;  invidiam  ut  deis
lugendo  facias,  advoca  in  planctus  genus.

Ite  Alcmenae  magnique  lovis
plangite  natum,  cui  concepto
lux  una  perit  noctesque  duas
contulit  Eos  :  ipsa  quiddara
plus  luce  perit.
totae  pariter  plangite  gentes,
quarum  saevos  ille  tyrannos
iussit  Stygias  penetrare  domos  1  870

))opulisque  madens  ponere  fei  rum.
Hctum  mevitis  reddite  tantis,
totus,  totus  personet  orbis.
fleat  Alcidcn  caerula  Crete,
magno  tellus  cara  Tonanti  ;
centum  pojnili  bracchia  pulsent  ;
nunc  Curetes,  nunc  Cor}'bantes
arma  Idaea  quassate  manu  ;
armis  ilium  lugere  decet ;
nunc,  nunc  funus  plangite  verum  ;  18S0

iacet  Alcides  non  miuov  ipso,
Creta,  Tonante.

flete  Herculeos,  Arcades,  obitus,
nondum  Phoebe  nascente  genus  ;
iuga  Parthenii  Nemeaeque  ''  sonent
ferialque  graves  Maenala  jilanctus.
magno  Alcidae  poscit  gemitum

'  Lto  fiam  quaerct  loith  E,  and  conjectures  iam  totus
hrevi  I  conourret  orlns  :  seqiietur  N.  Htiimut:  conveniet
Koelschan:  iam  pcragot  liichter.

2  ^Nemeaeque  Leo  la'Ch  a- •  Tegoaeque  de  Wilamowitz:
Plieiieique  Richter.

332


HERCULES    OETAEUS

suffice  for  loss  so  vast,  an  aged  spent  old  woman  r
Soon  will  the  whole  world  unite  to  mourn  with
thee.^  Vet  raise  thy  arms,  however  weary,  in
lamentation ;  that  by  thy  grief  thou  mayst  stir
envy  in  the  gods,  summon  the  whole  race  of  men
unto  thy  mourning.

[Here  follows  alcmena's  fonnal  song  of  mourning
accompanied  by  the  usual  Orienlal  gestures  of
lamentation^
1S63  Come  ye,  bewail  Alcmeiia's  son  and  mighty
Jove's,  for  whose  conception  one  day  was  lost  and
lingering  dawn  joined  two  nights  in  one;  something-
greater  than  the  day  itself  is  lost.  Together  lament,
ye  nations  all,  whose  cruel  tyrants  he  bade  descend
to  the  abodes  of  Styx  and  lay  down  the  sword,
reeking  with  blood  of  peoples.  To  such  deserts  pay
tribute  of  your  tears  ;  let  all,  yea  all  the  world  echo
to  your  laments.  Alcides  let  sea-girt  Crete  bcAvail,
land  to  the  great  Thunderer  dear  ;  let  its  hundred
peoples  beat  upon  their  arms.  Now  Cretans,  now
l)riests  of  Cybele,  with  your  hands  clash  Ida's
cymbals;  'tis  meet  tliat  with  arms  ye  mourn  liim.
Now,  now  make  him  just  funeral  ;  low  lies  Alcides,
equal,  O  Crete,  to  the  Thunderer  himself.  Weep
for  Alcides'  passing,  O  Arcadians,  who  vvere  a  people
ere  yet  the  moon  was  born  ;  let  Parthenius'  heights
and  Nemea's  hills  resound  and  Maenalus  smite  heavy
blows  of  grief.  The  bristly  boar,  within  your  fields
laid  low,  demands  lament  for  great  Alcides,  and  the
1  Translating  Leo's  conjecture.     See  critical  note  1.

3SS


THE   TRAGEDIES    OF   SENECA

stratus  vestris  saetiger  agris

alesque  sequi  iussa  sagittas

totum  pinna  velante  diem.  1890

flete  Argolicae,  flete,  Cleonae  ;

liic  terrentem  nioenia  quondam

vestra  leonem  fregit  nostri

dextera  nati  ;  date  Bistoniae

verbera  matres  gelidusqne  sonet

planctibus  Hebi'us  ;  flete  Alciden,

quod  non  stabulis  nascitur  infans

nee  vestra  greges  viscera  carpunt.

fleat  Antaeo  libera  tellus

et  rapta  fero  plaga  Geryonae  ;  1900

mecum  miserae  ])langite  gentes,

audiat  ictus  utraque  Tethys.

Vos  quoque,  mundi  turba  citati,
flete  Herculeos^  numina,  casus;
vestrum  Alcides  cerviee  meus
mundum,  superi,  caelumque  tulit,
cum  stelligeri  vector  Olynipi
pondere  liber  sjnravit  Atlans.
ubi  nunc  vestrae,  Iuj)piter,  arces  ?
ubi  proniissi  regia  mundi  ?  1910

nempe  Alcides  mortalis  obit,
nempe  sepultus.     quotiens  telis
facibusque  tuis  ille  pepcrcit,
quotiens  ignis  spargendus  cral  !
in  me  saltem  iaculare  faceni
Semelenque  j)uta.

lamne  Rlysias,  o  nate,  donuis,
iam  lit  us  liabes  ad  quod  populos
natura  vocat  ?

an  post  raptum  Styx  atra  canem
jn-aeclusit  iter  teque  in  |)rinio  1920

limine  Ditis  fata  murantur  ?


334


HERCULES  OETAEUS
huge  bird  whose  wings  hid  all  the  sky,  challenged  '
to  meet  his  shafts.  Weep,  Argive  Cleonae,  weep  ;
here  long  ago  the  lion  who  kept  your  walls  in  fear
my  son's  right  hand  destroyed.  Ye  Bistonian  dames,
beat  your  breasts,  and  let  cold  Hebrus  resound  to
your  beatings  ;  weep  for  Alcides,  for  no  more  are
your  children  born  for  the  stalls,-  nor  your  offspring
as  food  for  tlie  herds.  Weep  thou,  O  land  from
Antaeus  delivered,  ye  regions  from  fierce  Geryon
saved ;  yea,  with  me,  ye  unhappy  nations,  lament ;
let  both  seas^  re-echo  your  beatings.

1903  Yqii  too,  ye  thronging  deities  of  the  whirling
heavens,  bewail  Hercules'  fate ;  for  my  Alcides  bore
your  heavens  upon  his  shoulders,  your  sky,  ye  gods
above,  when  Atlas,  starry  Olympus'  prop,  was  eased
of  his  load  awhile.  Where  now  are  thy  heights,
O  Jove.''  Where  is  the  promised*  palace  in  the  sky?
Alcides,  mortal,  is  dead  !  mortal,  is  buried  !  How
oft  did  he  save  thee  thy  lightnings,  how  seldom  thy
fire  needed  hurling!^  Against  me  at  least  brandish
thy  lightning,  and  deem  me  Semele.

1916  And  now,  O  son,  holdst  thou  the  Elysian  seats,

holdst  now  the  shore  whither  nature  calls  all  ])eoples?

Or    after   the    dog    was    stolen    has    the    dark  Stvx

barred  thy  way,  and  on  the  very  threshold  of  l)is  do

the    fates   delay   thee .''     VVliat   confusion    now,   my

'  Hercules  roused  the  bird  from  its  Styinphalian  lair  by
tlio  noise  of  a  great  rattle.  ^  i.e.  of  Diomedes.

•*  i.e.  tiie  eastern  and  western  limits  of  the  sea.

*  Jove  had  promised  Hercules  a  place  in  heaven.

*  i.e.  Hercules  had  taken  upon  himself  the  puiiisliment  of
sinful  men.

335


THE   TRAGEDIES  OF   SENECA

quis  nunc  umbras,  nate,  tumultus

manesque  tenet  ?

fugit  abducta  iiavita  cumba

et  Centauris  Thessala  motis

terit  attonitos  ungula  manes

anguesque  suos  hydra  sub  undas

territa  mersit  teque  laboreSj

o  nate,  timent?

fallor,  fallor  vaesana  furens  !  1930

nee  te  manes  umbraeque  tinient,

non  Argolico  rapta  leoni

fulva  pellis  contecta  iuba

laevos  operit  dira  laccrtos

vallantque  ferae  tem})ora  dentes  ;

donum  pharetrae  cessere  tuae

telaque  mittet  iam  dextra  minor.

vadis  inermis,  nate,  per  umbras,

ad  quas  semper  mansurus  eris.

vox    HEUCVL.

Quid  me  tenentem  regna  siderei  poll  ]  94'U

caeloque  tandem  redditum  planctu  iubes
sentire  fatum  ?     parce  ;  iam  virtus  niihi
in  astra  et  ipsos  fecit  ad  superos  iter.     '


Vnde,  unde  sonus  trepidas  aures
ferit .''  unde  meas  inhibct  lacrimas
fragor .''     agnosco  vietum  esse  chaos.

A  Styge,  nate,  redis  iterum  mihi
frattaque  non  semel  est  mors  horrida.''
vicisti  rursus  mortis  loca
puj)pis  et  infernae  vada  tristia  ?  1950

336


HERCULES    OETAEUS

son,  seizes  the  shadowy  spirits  ?  Does  the  boatman
draw  away  his  skiff  in  flight  ?  Do  TliessaHan
Centaurs  with  flying  hoofs  smite  the  affrighted
ghosts  ?  Docs  tlic  hydra  in  terror  plunge  liis  snaky
heads  beneath  the  waves  and  do  thy  toils  all  fear
thee,  O  my  son?  Fooled,  fooled  am  I,  distracted,  mad!
Xor  ghosts  nor  shadows  are  afraid  of  thee  ;  the  fear-
some pelt,  stripped  from  the  Argolic  lion,  with  its
tawny  mane  shields  thy  left  arm  no  more,  and  its
savage  teeth  hedge  not  thy  temples  ;  thy  quiver
thou  hast  given  away  and  now  a  lesser  hand  will
aim  thy  shafts.  Unarmed,  my  son,  thou  forest
through  the  shades,  and  with  them  forever  shalt
thou  abide.

THE    VOICE    OF    HERCULES  [  /)o??/  ahoVf.^

Why,  since  I  hold  the  realms  of  starry  heaven  and
at  last  have  attained  the  skies,  dost  by  lamentation
bid  me  taste  of  death  ?  Give  o'er  ;  for  now  has  my
valour  borne  me  to  the  stars  and  to  the  gods  them-
selves. /

Ai.cMBNA  [^bewildered.]

Whence,  oh,  whence  falls  that  sound  upon  my
startled  ears  ?  Whence  do  the  thunderous  tones  bid
check  my  weeping  ?  Now  know  I  that  chaos  has
been  o'ercomc.

lyii  Ki-oni  the  Styx,  O  son,  art  come  again  to  me  ?
Broken  a  second  time  is  the  power  of  grisly  death  ?
I  last  escaped  once  more  death's  stronghold  and  the
infernal  skiff's  dark  pools  ?    Is  Acheron's  wan  stream

337

VOL.  II.  Z


THE  TRAGEDIES   OF  SENECA

pervius  est  Acheron  iam  languidus

et  remeare  licet  soli  tibi

nee  te  fata  tenent  post  funera  ?

an  tibi  praeclusit  Pluton  iter

et  pavidus  regni  metuit  sibi  ?

certe  ego  te  vidi  flagrantibus

impositum  silvis,  cum  plurimus

in  caelum  fureret  flammae  metus.

arsisti — cur  te,  cur  ultima

non  tenuere  tuas  umbras  loca  ?  196O

quid  timuere  tui  manes  precor  ?

umbra  quoque  es  Diti  nimis  horrida  ?

HERCVLES

Non  me  gementis  stagna  Cocyti  tenent
nee  puppis  umbras  furva  transvexit  meas  ;
iam  parce,  mater,  questibus  ;  manes  semel
umbrasque  vidi.      quidquid  in  nobis  tui
mortale  fuerat,  ignis  evictus  tulit ;
paterna  caelo,  pars  data  est  flammis  tua.
proinde  planctus  pone,  quos  nato  paret
genetrix  inerti.     luctus  in  turpes  eat;  1970

virtus  in  astra  tendit,  in  mortem  timor.
praesens  ab  astris,  mater,  Aleides  cano :
poenas  cruentus  iam  tibi  Eurystheus  dabit ;
curru  superbum  vecta  transcendes  caput,
me  iam  decct  siibire  caelestem  plagam  ;
inferna  vici  rursus  Aleides  loca.
338


HERCULES   OETAEUS

retraceable  and  niayst  thou  alone  recross  it  ?  And
after  thy  death  do  the  fates  hold  thee  no  more  ?
Has  Pluto  barred  thy  way,  and  tremhlinsf  feared  for
his  own  sovereignty?  Surely  upon  the  bhizing  logs
I  saw  thee  laid,  when  the  vast,  fearful  Humes  raged
to  the  sky.  Thou  wast  consumed — why,  why  did  the
bottomless  abyss  not  gain  thy  shade  ?  VVHiat  part  of
thee  did  the  ghosts  fear,  I  pray  ?  Is  e'en  thy  shade
too  terrible  for  Dis  ?


uercui.es  \_/iis  form  now  ta/ihig  shape  in  the  air  ahove.]

The  pools  of  groaning  Cocytus  hold  me  not,  nor
has  the  dark  skiff  borne  o'er  my  shade  ;  then  cease
thy  laments,  my  mother  ;  once  and  for  all  have  I
seen  the  shadowy  ghosts.  Whate'er  in  me  was  mortal
and  of  thee,  the  vanquished  flame  has  borne  away^^
my  father's  part  to  heaven,  thy  part  to  the  flames  has
been  consigned.  Cease  then  thy  lamentations  which
to  a  worthless  son  might  well  be  given.  Let  tears
for  the  inglorious  flow  ;  valour  fares  starward,  fear,  to
the  realm  of  death.  In  living  presence,  mother,
from  the  stars  Alcides  speaks ;  soon  shall  bloody
Eurystheus  make  thee  full  recompense;  o'er  his
])roud  head  shalt  thou  in  triumph  ride.  But  now  'tis
meet  that  I  pass  to  the  realm  above  ;  Alcides  once
again  has  conquered  hell.

[//e  vanishes  from  sig]il.'\

^  Both  text  ami  meaning  are  doubtful  liere.  The  sense  seems
to  be  that  though  the  mortal  part  of  Hercules  has  been
consumed  by  tlie  Hames,  they  have  in  reality  been  vanquished
by  his  spirit.

339
z  2


THE   TRAGEDIES   OF   SENECA

ALCMENA

Mane  parumper — cessit  ex  oculis,  cabit,
in  astru  fertur.     fallor  an  voltus  putat
vidisse  natum  ?     misera  mens  incredula  est —
es  numen  t;t  te  mundus  aetenium  tenet  ;  19^0

credo  triuniphis.

Regua  Thebaruni  jietam
novunique  templis  addituui  numen  canam.

CHORVS

Numquam  Stygias  fertur  ad  umbras
inclita  virtus,     vivunt  fortes
nee  Letbaeos  saeva  per  amnes
vos  fata  trabent,  sed  cum  summas
exiget  boras  consumpta  dies,
iter  ad  superos  gloria  pandet.

Sed  tu,  domitor  magne  ferarum
orbisque  simul  pacator,  ades  ;  1990

nunc  quoque  nostras  respice  terras,
et  si  qua  novo  belua  voltu
quatiet  i)opulos  terrore  gravi,
tu  fubiiinibus  frange  trisulcis —
fortius  ipso  geiiitore  tuo
fubnina  mitte.


3*0


HERCULES   OETAEUS

ALCMRNA

Slav  but  <a  little  ! — he  has  vanished  from  iny  sight,
is  gone,  to  the  stars  faring.  Am  I  deceived  or  do  my
eyes  but  deem  they  saw  my  son  ?  My  soul  for  very
grief  cannot  believe  it. — But  no  !  thou  art  divine,
and  deathless  the  heavens  possess  thee.  In  thy
triumi)hant  entrance  I  believe.

19S1  ]^Qxy  ^vill  I  take  me  to  the  realm  of  Thebes  and
there  proclaim  the  new  god  added  to  their  temples.

[Exit.

CHORUS

Never  to  Stygian  shades  is  glorious  valour  borne.
The  brave  live  on,  nor  shall  the  cruel  fates  bear  you
o'er  Lethe's  waters  ;  but  when  the  last  day  shall
bring  the  final  hour,  glory  will  open  wide  the  path
to  heaven.

^^^^  I5ut  do  thou,  O  mighty  conqueror  of  beasts,
pcace-bringer  to  the  world,  be  with  us  yet;  still  as
of  old  regard  this  earth  of  ours  ;  and  if  some  strange-
visagcd  monster  cause  us  with  dire  fear  to  tremble^
do  thou  o'ercome  him  witli  the  forked  thunder-
bolts— yea,  more  mightily  than  thy  father's  self  the
thunders  hurl.


S41


PHOENISSAE


DRAMATIS   TERSONAE


Oedipi'S,  lale.  liiuj  of  Thehes.

Antigone,  daughter  of  Oediptt^,  constant  to  him  in  his  mis-
fortnnes.

JocASTA,  imfe  and  mother  of  Oedipus.

POLYNICES,^

\  sons  of  Oedipus  and  rivals  for  the  throne.
Eteoci.es,  J

Messenger.


The  Scene  is  lairl,  first  in  the  wild  coinitn'  to  wliich
Oedipus,  accompanied  by  Antigone,  lias  l)etaken  himself;
then  in  Thebes  ;  and  lastly  in  the  plain  before  Thebes.

The  Time  is  three  years  after  the  downfall  of  Oedipus.


AUGUMENT

TiiF  stroke,  of  fate,  iluil  //as  been  threalenivg  Oedipus
since  long  hejhrc  his  hiiih,  has  fallen  at  last,  and  he  has
done  the  thing  he  feared  to  do.  And  now,  sclfhiinded
and  self-exiled  from  his  land,  he  has  for  three  tjears
wandered  in  rough  and  traclclcss  places,  attended  by
Antigone,  his  daughter,  who,  alone  of  all  his  friends,  has
condoned  his  fated  si7is  and  remained  attached  to  him.

Meanwhile  his  sons,  though  titey  agreed  to  reign  alter-
nate years,  are  soon  to  vieet  in  deadly  strife  ;  for  Eteoclcs,
although  his  year  of  royal  ])on'er  is  at  an  end,  refuses  to
give  up  the  throne  ;  and  notr  Polynices,  irlio  has  in  exile
wed  the  daughter  of  Adrastus,  king  of  Argos,  is  march-
ing against  the  gates  of  Thebes,  with  seven  great  armies
to  enforce  his  rights.

[/>?/  a  dijlerent  version  fro7n  the  "  Oedipus,"  Jncasta
did  vol  slay  herself  at  once  as  in  that  tale,  but  slill  is
living  on  in  grief  and  shame,  and  strives  to  reconcile  her
sons.^


PHOENISSAE


OEDIPVS

Caeci  parentis  regimen  et  fessi  unicum
lateris  levamen,  nata,  quam  tanti  est  mihi
genuisse  vel  sic,  desere  infaustuin  patrem.
in  recta  quid  deflectis  errantem  gradum  ?
permitte  labi  ;  melius  inveniam  viani,
quam  quaero,  solus,  quae  me  ab  hac  vita  extraliat
et  hoc  nefandi  capitis  aspectu  levet
caelum  atque  terras,     quantulum  liac  egi  manu  ?
non  video  noxae  conscium  nostrae  diem,
sed  videor.     hinc  iam  solve  inhaerentem  manuui    10
et  patere  caecum  qua  volet  ferri  pedem.
ibo,  ibo  qua  praerupta  protendit  iuga
meus  Cilhaeron,  qua  peragrato  celer
per  saxa  monte  iacuit  Actaeon  suis
nova  praeda  canibus,  qua  per  obscurum  nemus
silvamque  opacae  vallis  instinctas  dec
egit  sorores  mater  et  gaudens  malo
vibrante  fixum  praetulit  thyrso  cajnit ;
vel  qua  cucurrit,  corpus  inlisum  tralicns,
Zethi  iuvencus,  qua  per  horrentes  rubos  20

1  In  the  corresponding  Greek  play  a  chorus  of  Phoenician
maidens  on  their  way  to  Delphi  chanced  to  be  at  Thebes.
This  circumstance  gives  the  play  its  name,

346


PHOENISSAE,!   OR   THEBAIS
A  FRAGMENT

OEDtPUS

[To  ANTU.ONE,  jvfio  hus  followed  Ilim  tnln  rxUe.'\
Thou  guide  of  thy  blind  father's  ste])S,  his  weary
side's  sole  stay,  daughter,  whose  getting,  even  so,
was  worth  the  cost  to  nie,  quit  thou  thy  heaven-cursed
sire.  Wliv  into  right  paths  wouldst  turn  aside  my
wandering  feet  ?  Let  me  stumble  on  ;  better  alone
shall  I  find  the  way  I  seek,  the  way  which  from  this
life  shall  deliver  me  and  free  heaven  and  earth  from
sight  of  this  impious  head.  How  little  did  I
accomplish  with  this  hand  !  I  do  not  see  the  light,
witness  of  mv  crime,  but  I  am  seen.  Therefore,
now  unclasp  thy  clinging  hand  and  let  my  sightless
feet  wander  where  they  will.  I'll  go,  I'll  go  where  my
own  Cithaeron  lifts  his  rugged  crags ;  where,  speed-
ing over  the  mountain's  rocky  ways,  Actaeon  lay  at
last,  strange  quarry  for  his  own  hounds ;  where,
through  the  dim  grove  and  woods  of  the  dusky
glade,  a  mother-  led  her  sisters,  by  the  god  impelled,
and,  rejoicing  in  the  crime,  bore  in  advance  the
head  ^  fixed  on  a  quivering  thj'rsus ;  or  where
Zethus'  bull  rushed  along,  dragging  a  mangled
corpse,  while  through  the  thorny  brambles  the  mad

*  Agave,   who  with  her  sisters,   in  a  frenzy  inspired  by
Bacchus,  slew  her  son,  Penthcus,
'  i.e.  of  Pentheug.

347


THE   TRAGEDIES   OF   SENECA

lauri  ferocis  sanguis  ostendit  fugas  ;
vel  qua  alta  maria  vertice  immenso  prcmit
Inoa  rupes,  qua  scelus  fugiens  novum
novunique  faciens  mater  insiluit  freto
mersura  natum  seque.     felices  quibus
fortuna  melior  tarn  bonas  matres  dedit.

Est  alius  istis  noster  in  silvis  locus^
qui  me  reposcitj  hunc  petam  cursu  incito  ;
non  haesitabit  gressus^  hue  omni  duce
spoliatus  ibo.     quid  moror  sedes  meas  ?  SO

C.iportem,  Cithaeron,  redde  et  hospitiuni  milii
illud  meum  restitue^  ut  expirem  senex
ubi  debui  infans.     recipe  supplicium  vctus.
semper  ci'uente  saeve  crudelis  ferox,
cum  occidis  et  cum  parcis^  olim  iam  tunm
est  hoc  cadaver  :  perage  mandatum  patris,
fiam  et  matris.     animus  gestit  antiqua  execiui
supplicia.     quid  me,  nata,  pestifero  tenes
araore  vinctum  ?     quid  tenes  ?     genitor  vocat.
sequor,  sequor,  iam  parcey— sanguineum  gercns        40
insigne  regni  Laius  rapti  fui'it ;
en  ecce,  inanes  manibus  infestis  petit
foditque  vultus.     nata,  genitorem  vides  ?
egovideo.     tandem  spiritum  inimicum  cxpue,
deserter  anime,  fortis  in  partem  tui.
omitte  poenae  languidas  longae  moras,
mortemque  totam  admitte.     quid  segnis  traho
quod  vivo  ?     nuUum  facere  iam  possum  scelus.
possum  miser,  praedico— discede  a  patre,
discede,  virgo.     timco  post  matrem  omnia,  50

S48


PHOENISSAE

creature's  flight  was  traceable  in  blood ;  or  where
Ino's  cliff  juts  out  into  the  deep  sea  with  tower-
ing peak,  where,  fleeing  strange  crime  and  yet
strange  crime  committing,  a  mother  leaped  into  the
strait  to  sink  both  son  and  self.^  Oh,  haj)py  they
whose  better  fortune  has  given  such  kindly  mothers  !
2^  There  is  another  place  within  these  woods,  my
own  place,  which  calls  for  me  ;  I  would  fain  hasten  to
it ;  my  stc})S  will  falter  not;  thither  will  I  go  bereft
of  every  guide.  Why  keep  my  own  place  waiting  ?
Death,  O  _Cithaeron^^i\'e  me  back  ;.  restore  me  that
resting-place  of  mine,  that  I  may  die  in  age  where  I
should  have  died  in  infancy.  Claim  now  that  penalty
of  old.  O  ever  bloody,  savage,  cruel,  fierce,  both
when  thou  slayest  and  when  thou  sparest,  this  carcass
of  mine  long  since  belonged  to  thee  ;  fulfil  my  father's
behest — aye,  and  now    my  mother's   too.     My_soul

(yearns  to  suffer  the  penalty  of  long  ago.  Why,
daughtei-,  dost  hold  me  bound  by  thy  baleful  love  ?
Why  dust  thou  hold  me  ?     My  father  calls.      I  come,

.  1  come  ;  at  last  let  me  go  -'— >r>aius  rages  yonder,
wearing  the  blood-stained  badge  of  his  ravished
kingdom  ;  see  !  behold  !  there  he  assails  and  seeks  to
tear  at  my  sightless  countenance  with  his  threatening

fTiands.      Daughter,  dost  see  my  father  .^     I  surely  see

{  him.  [lie  soliloqiil.~es.]  At  length  spew  out  thy  hateful
breath,  O  traitor  soul,  brave  'gainst  but  a  portion  of
thyself.  Away  with  the  slow  delays  of  thy  long-
due  punishment ;  receive  death  wholly.  VVhy  do
I  sluggishly  drag  on  this  life  ?  Now  can  1  do  no
crime.  I  can,  wretch  that  I  am,  this  I  forebode — away
from  thy  father,  away,  while  still  a  maid.  After  my
mother  I  fear  all  happenings.

^  Sec  ludex  s.v.  "Ino."

2  i.e.  (to  his  daughter)  "  spare  mc  thy  further  opposition."

31.<)


THE  TRAGEDIES   OF  SENECA

ANTIGONA

Vis  nulla,  genitor,  a  tiio  nostram  nianum

corpore  resolvet,  nemo  me  coniitem  tibi

eripiet  umquam.      Labdaci  claram  domum,

opulenta  ferro  regna  germani  petant ;

pars  summa  magno  patris  e  regno  mea  est,

pater  ipse,     non  hune  auferet  frater  mihi

Thebana  rapto  sceptra  qui  regno  tenet,

non  hunc  catervas  alter  Argolicas  agens  ;

non  si  revulso  luppiter  mundo  tonet

mediumque  nostros  fulmen  in  nexus  cadat,  6()

manum  banc  remittam.    proliibeas,  genitor,  licet ;

regam  abnuentem,  dirigam  inviti  gradum.

in  plana  tendis  ?     vado  ;  praerupta  appetis  ?

non  obsto,  sed  praecedo  ;  quo  vis  utere

duce  me  :  duobus  omnis  eligitur  via.

perire  sine  me  non  potes,  mecuni  potes.

hie  alta  rupes  arduo  surgit  iugo

spectatque  longe  spatia  subiecti  maris,

vis  banc  petamus  ?     nudus  liic  pendet  silex,

hie  scissa  tellus  faucibus  ruptis  biat  ;  70

vis  banc;  petamus  .''     liic  rapax  torrens  cadit

partesque  lapsi  mentis  cxesas  rotat ;

in  bunc  ruanuis  ?     dum  prior,  quo  vis  eo.
("non  deprecor,  non  hortor.  /  extingui  cupis
[votumquc,  genitor,  maxinnim  mors  est  tibi  }
I  si  moreris,  antecedo ;  si  vivis,  sequor.

sed  flecte  meiitem,  pectus  antiquum  advoca
1  victasque  magno  roborc  acrunnias  doma  ;

'resiste;  tantis  in  mails  vinci  mori  est.

S50


PHOENISSAE

ANTIGONE

No  force,  mv  father,  shall  loose  my  hold  of  thee ;
no  one  shall  ever  tear  me  from  thy  side.  The
sovereignty  of  Labdacus'  noble  house  and  all  its
riches — let  my  brothers  fight  over  these  ;  the  best
jiart  of  my  father's  mighty  kingdom  is  my  own,  my
father's  self.  Him  no  brother  shall  take  from  me,
not  he  1  who  holds  the  Theban  sceptre  by  stolen
right,  not  he  ^  who  is  leading  the  Argive  hosts  ;
no,  though  Jove  should  rend  the  universe  with  his
thunders,  and  his  bolt  fall  'twixt  our  embrace,  I
will  not  let  go  my  hands.  Thou  mayst  forbid  me,
father ;  I'll  guide  thee  against  thy  will,  Fll  direct
thine  unwilling  feet.  Wouldst  go  to  the  level  plain  ?
I  go.  Wouldst  seek  the  craggy  mo^mtains?  I
oppose  not,  but  I  go  before.  Whither  thou  wilt,
use  me  as  guide  ;  by  two  will  all  paths  be  chosen.
Without  me  thou  canst  not  perish  ;  with  me  thou
canst.  Here  rises  a  cliff,  lofty,  precipitous,  and  looks
out  upon  the  long  reaches  of  the  underlying  sea;
wouldst  have  us  seek  it  ?  Here  is  a  bare  rock  over-
hanging, here  the  riven  earth  yawns  with  gaping
jaws ;  shall  we  go  here  ?  Here  a  raging  torrent
falls  and  rolls  along  worn  fragments  of  the  fallen
mountains ;  shall  we  plunge  to  this  ?  Where'er
thou  wilt,  I  go,  so  it  be  first.  I  neither  oppose  nor
Turge.  Art  eager  to  be  destroyed,  and  is  death,
father,  thy  highest  wish  ?  If  thou  diest,  I  go  before
lathee ;  if  thou  livest,  I  follow.  But  change  thy
\  purpose  ; ,  summon  up  thine  old-time  courage  ;
[conquer  thy  sorrows  and  with  all  thy  might  be
master  of  them,  resist  them;  amidst  such  woes,  to
\l)e  conquered  is  to  die.

*  Eteocles,  "'  Pulynicea.

351


THE   TRAGEDIES   OF   SENECA


Vnde  in  nefanda  speciiuen  egregium  domo  ?        80
unde  ista  generi  virgo  dissimilis  suo  ?
Fortuna,  credis  ?     aliquis  est  ex  me  pius  ?
non  esset  umquam,  fata  bene  novi  mea,
nisi  ut  noceret.     ipsa  se  in  leges  novas
natura  vertit ;  regeret  in  fontem  citas
revolutus  undas  amnis,  et  noctem  afferet
Phoebea  lampas,  Hesperus  faciet  diem  ;
ut  ad  miserias  aliquid  accedat  meas,
pii  quoque  erimus.     unica  Oedipodae  est  sal  us,
non  esse  salvum.     liceat  ulcisci  patrem  90

adhuc  inultum ;  dextra  quid  cessas  iners
exigere  poenas  ?     quidquid  exactum  est  adhuc,
Tnatri  dedisti.     mitte  genitoi-is  manum,
animosa  virgo  ;  funus  extendis  meum
longasque  vivi  ducis  exequias  patris.
aliquando  terra  corpus  invisum  tege  ;
peccas  honesta  mente,  pietatem  vocas
patrem  insepultum  traliere.     qui  cogit  mori
nolentem  in  aequo  est  quique  properantem  im])edit ;
occidcrc  est  vitare  cupientem  mori/  100

nee  tamen  in  aequo  est ;  alteram  gravius  reor.
malo  imperari  quam  eripi  mortem  mihi.
desiste  coe})to,  virgo  ;  ius  vitae  ac  necis
nieae  penes  me  est.     regua  deserui  libens,
regnum  mei  i-etineo.     si  fida  es  comes,
cnsem  parenti  trade,  sed  notum  nece
ensem  paterna.     tradis  ?  an  nati  tencnt
cum  regno  et  ilium  ?     facinorc  ubicumque  est  opus,
ibi  sit — relinquo  ;  natus  lumc  habeat  mcus,

^  Lto  deities  this  line.
352


FHOENISSAE

OEDIPUS

Wlieiice  this  rare  type  in  a  house  so  impious  ?
Whence  this  maid  so  unlike  her  race  ?  Is  it  fortune^
thinkst  thou?  lias  any  dutiful  child  sprung  from
me  ?  Never  would  it  be  so,  for  well  I  know  my  fate,
save  for  harmful  ends.  Nature  herself  has  reversed
her  laws ;  now  will  the  river  turn  and  bear  its  swift
waters  backward  to  their  source,  Phoebus'  torch
will  bring  in  the  night,  and  Hesperus  herald  the
day  ;  and,  that  something  be  added  to  my  woes,  I,  too,
shall  become  holy.  For  Oedipus  the  only  salvation
is  not  to  be  saved.  Let  me  avenge  my  father,  till
now  unavenged ;  Avhy,  sluggish  hand,  dost  thou  hesi-
tate to  exact  penalty  ?  All  thou  hast  as  yet  exacted,
to  my  mother  hast  thou  given.  Let  go  thy  father's
hand,  courageous  girl ;  thou  dost  but  protract  my
burying,  and  prolong  the  funeral  rites  of  a  living-
sire.  Bui*y  in  the  earth  at  last  this  hateful  body ;
thou  wrongst  me,  though  with  kind  intent,  and
thou  deemst  it  piety  to  drag  along  an  unburied
father.  'Tis  all  one — to  force  him  Avho  shrinks  from
death,  and  stay  him  who  seeks  to  die  ;  'tis  the  same
as  killing  to  forbid  death  to  him  who  wants  it ;  and
yet  'tis  not  all  one  ;  the  second  course  I  count  the
worse.  Rather  would  I  have  death  enforced  than
snatched  from  me.  Desist,  girl,  from  thine  attempt ;
the  right  to  live  or  die  is  in  my  own  hands.  The
sovereignty  over  my  realm  have  I  yielded  gladly  ;
the  sovereignty  over  myself  I  keep.  If  thou  art
true  conn-ade,  hand  thy  sire  a  sword,  but  be  it  the
sword  made  famous  by  his  father's  slaugliter.  Dost
give  it  ?  or  hold  my  sons  that,  too,  together  with  my
kingdom?  Wherever  is  need  of  crime, there  let  it  be
— I  relinquish  it ;  let  my  sou  have  it — nay,  both  my

353


THE   TRAGEDIES   OF   SENECA

sed  uterque.    flammas  potius  et  vastum  aggereni   110

compone ;  in  altos  ipse  me  immittaiii  rogos^

haerebo  ad  ignes,  funebri  abscondar  strue  ;

pectusque  solvam  durum  et  in  cinerem  dabo

hoe  quidquid  in  me  vivit.     ubi  saevum  est  mare  ?

due  ubi  sit  altis  prorutum  saxis  iugum,

ubi  torva  rapidus  ducat  Ismenos  vada.^  II 6

si  dux  es,  illue  ire  morituro  jilacet^  1 1 8

ubi  sedit  alta  rupe  semifero  dolos

Sphinx  ore  nectens.     dirige  hue  gressus  pedum,    120

hie  siste  patrem.     dira  ne  sedes  vacet,

monstrum  repone  maius.     hoc  saxum  insidens

obscura  nostrae  verba  fortunae  loquar,

quae  nemo  solvat.     quisquis  Assyrio  loca

possessa  regi  scindis  et  Cadmi  nemus

serpente  notum,  sacra  quo  Dirce  latet,

supplex  adoras,  quisquis  Eurotan  bibis

Spartamque  fratre  nobilem  gemino  colis,

quique  Elin  et  Parnason  et  Boeotios

colonus  agros  uberis  tondes  soh^  130

adverte  mentem — saeva  Thebarum  lues

luctifica  caecis  verba  committens  modis

quid  simile  posuit  ?     quid  tarn  inextricabile  ?

avi  gener  jjatrisque  rivalis  sui,

frater  suorum  liberum  et  fratrum  parens  ;

uno  avia  partu  liberos  peperit  viro,

sibi  et  nepotes.     monsti'a  quis  tanta  explic-at?

ego  ipse,  victae  spolia  qui  Sphingis  tuli^

haerebo  fati  tardus  interpres  mei.

2
9|c  4:  *  *  *

'  Leo  deletes  line  1J7 :  due  ubi  ferae  sunt,  ubi  fretum,  ubi
praeceps  locus.

*  A  Kpeech  of  Antigone  may  have  dropped  out  at  this  point,
or  Oedipus  may  hark  back  to  the  earlier  speech  of  Antigone

354


PHOENISSAE

sons.  Flames,  if  thou  prefer,  and  a  huge  mound
prepare  ;  myself,  will  I  fling  me  on  the  lofty  pyre,
embrace  the  flames,  and  hide  in  the  funeral  pile.
There  will  I  set  free  this  stubborn  soul  and  give  up
to  ashes  this — all  that  is  left  of  me  alive.  Where  is
the  raging  sea?  Lead  me  where  some  beetling  crag
juts  out  with  its  high,  rocky  cliff,  or  where  swift
Ismenus  rolls  his  wild  waters.  If  thou  art  my  guide,
thither  would  I  go  to  die  where  on  a  high  cliff  the
Sphinx  once  sat  and  wove  crafty  speech  with  her
half-bestial  lips.  Guide  my  feet  thither,  there  set
thy  father.  Let  not  that  dreadful  seat  be  empty,
but  place  thereon  a  greater  monster.  On  that  rock
will  I  sit  and  propound  the  dark  riddle  of  my  fate
which  none  may  answer.  All  ye  who  till  the  fields
once  ruled  by  the  Assyrian  king,^  who  suppliant
worship  in  tlie  grove  of  Cadmus  for  the  serpent
famed,  where  sacred  Dirce  lies  ;  all  ye  who  drink  of
tlie  Eurotas,  who  dwell  in  Sparta  for  its  twin
brethren  -  famous ;  ye  farmers  who  reap  Elis  and
Parnassus  and  lioeotia's  fertile  fields,  give  ear.  That
dire  pest  of  Thebes,  who  wrapped  death-dealing
words  in  puzzling  measures,  what  riddle  like  this
did  she  ever  propound?  What  maze  so  bewildering?
He  was  Iiis  grand  father  s  son-in-law  and  his  father's
rival,  brother  of  his  children  and  father  of  his  brothers  ;
at  one  birth  the  grandmother  bore  children  to  her  husband
and  grandchildren  to  herself.  Wlio  can  unfold  a  coil
so  monstrous  ?  Even  I,  who  gained  spoils  from  the
conquered  Sphinx,  shall  prove  but  slow  in  unriddling
mine  own  doom.

4:  4=  >H  4:  >):

^  Cadmus.         ^  Castor  and  Pollux.

after  a  dramatic  pause.  Leo  holds  that  the  hiatus  is,  as
Swohoda  thinks,  left  by  the  poet  himself.

S55
A    A    2


THE   TRAGEDIES   OF   SENECA
Quid  perdis  ultra  verba  ?     quid  pectus  ferum    140
mollire  temptas  precibus  ?     hoc  animo  sedet
effundere  banc  cum  morte  luctantem  din
animam  et  tenebras  petere ;  nam  sceleri  haec  meo
parum  alta  nox  est ;  Tartaro  condi  iuvat,
et  si  quid  ultra  Tartarum  est ;  tandem  libet
quod  olim  oportet.     morte  proliiberi  baud  queo.
ferrum  negabis  ?     noxias  lapsu  vias
eludes  et  artis  col  la  laqueis  inseri
proliibebis  ?     herbas  quae  ferunt  letum  auferes  ?
quid  ista  tandem  cura  proficiet  tua?  150

ubique  mors  est.     optume  hoc  cavit  deus  :
eripere  vitam  nemo  non  homini  potest,
at  nemo  mortem ;  mille  ad  banc  aditus  patent,
nil  quaero.     dextra  noster  et  nuda  solet
■bene  animus  uti — dextra,  nunc  toto  impetu,
toto  dolore,  viribus  totis  veni.
non  destine  unum  vulneri  nostro  locum —
totus  nocens  sum  ;  qua  voles  mortem  exige.
efFringe  pectus  corque  tot  scelerum  capax
evelle,  totos  viscerum  nuda  sinus.  l60

fractum  incitatis  ictibus  guttur  sonet
laceraeque  fixis  unguibus  venae  fluant.
aut  dirige  iras  quo  soles  ;  haec  vulnera
rescissa  luulto  sanguine  ac  tabe  ini-iga,
hac  extrabe  animam  duram,  inexj)ugnabilem.
et  tu,  parens,  ubicumque  poenaruui  arbiter
adstas  mearum — non  ego  hoc  tantum  scelus
ulla  expiari  credidi  poena  satis
umquani,  nee  ista  morte  contentus  fui,
nee  me  redemi  parte  ;  membratim  tibi  170

356


PHOENISSAE

'^*'^  Wliy  dost  thou  waste  further  words?  Why  dost
try  to  soften  my  hard  heart  with  prayers?  My  will
is  fixed  to  pour  forth  this  life  which  has  long  been
strufffflinfT  with  death,  and  to  seek  the  nether  dark-
ness ;  for  this  deep  night  is  not  deep  enough  for  my
crime  ;  in  Tartarus  would  I  be  buried^  or  if  there  be
aught  deeper  than  Tartarus ;  'tis  pleasing  to  do  at
last  what  long  ago  I  5!M)uld  have  done.  I  cannot  be
kept  from  death.  Wilt  withhold  the  sword?  Wilt
bar  paths  where  I  might  ftill  to  death  ?  Wilt  keep
my  neck  from  the  choking  noose  ?  Wilt  remove
death-bringing  herbs  ?  What,  pi*ay,  will  that  care  of
thine  accomplish  ?  Death  is  everywhere.  This  hath
God  with  wisdom  excellent  provided  :  of  life  anyone
can  rob  a  man,  but  of  death  no  one  ;  to  this  a  thousand
doors  lie  open.  I  ask  for  naught.  This  right  hand,
though  bare,  my  soul  hath  practice  to  use  well — ()
Iiand  of  mine,  come  now  with  all  thy  force,  with  all
thy  smarting  rage,  with  all  thy  might.  Not  one  spot
only  do  I  mark  out  for  the  wound — I  am  all  sin  ;
inflict  death  where  thou  wilt.  Break  through  my
breast  and  tear  out  my  heart,  which  has  room  for  so
many  crimes ;  lay  bare  my  vitals,  every  nook ;  rain
resounding  blows  upon  my  neck  until  it  break,  and
let  my  veins  flow,  torn  by  my  gouging  fingers.  Or
aim  thy  mad  attack  at  the  accustomed  place  ;  ^  these
wounds  reopen  ;  bathe  them  in  streams  of  blood  and
gore  ;  through  this  passage  drag  out  my  stubborn  life,
imjH'cgnable.  And  do  thou,  my  father,  where'er  thou
standst  as  arbiter  of  my  sufferings — I  have  never
deemed  that  this  grievous  crime  of  mine  was
sufiicicntly  atoned  by  any  suffc-ring,  nor  have  I  been
content  with  such  death  as  this,  nor  have  I  bought
my  pardon  with  a  portion  of  myself;  limb  by  limb

'His  eyes.

357


THE  TRAGEDIES   OF  SENECA

perire  volui — debitum  tandem  exige.

nunc  solvo  poenas,  tunc  tibi  inferias  dedi.

ades  atque  inertem  dexteram  introrsus  preme

magisque  merge  ;  timida  tunc  parvo  caput

libavit  haustu  vixque  cuj^ientes  sequi

eduxit  oculos.     haeret  etiam  nunc  mihi

ille  animus,  haeret,  cum  recusantem  manum

pressere  vultus.     audies  verum,  Oedipus  :

minus  eruisti  lumina  audacter  tua,

quam  praestitisti.     nunc  manum  cerebro  indue  ;    180

hac  parte  mortem  pcrage  qua  coepi  mori.

ANTIGONA

Pauca,  o  parens  magnanime,  miserandae  precor
ut  verba  natae  mente  placata  audias.
non  te  ut  reducam  veteris  ad  speciem  domus
habitumque  regni  flore  pollentem  inclito
peto  aut  ut  iras,  temporum  haut  ipsa  mora
fractas,  remisso  pectore  ac  placid  o  feras  ;
at  hoc  decebat  roboris  tanti  virum,
non  esse  sub  dolore  nee  victum  malis
dare  terga  ;  non  est,  ut  putas,  virtus,  pater  190

timere  vitam,  scd  malis  ingentibus
obstare  nee  se  vertere  ac  retro  dare,
qui  fata  proculcavit  ac  vitae  bona
proiecit  atque  abscidit  et  casus  sues
oncravit  ipse,  cui  deo  nullo  est  opus,
quare  ille  mortem  cupiat  aut  quare  i)etat?
utrumque  timidi  est ;  nemo  contemiisit  mori
qui  concui)ivit.     cuius  haut  ultra  mala
exire  possunt,  in  loco  tuto  est  situs.
358


PHOENISSAE

have  I  desired  to  die  for  thee — at  length  exact  the
debt.  Now  am  I  paying  my  penalty  ;  before,  I  did
but  offer  sacrifices  to  thy  ghost.  Come  to  my  aid,
help  me  to  plunge  my  nerveless  hand  deep  down  and
deeper ;  timidly,  aforetime,  and  with  but  a  meagre
outpouring  did  it  sprinkle  my  head,  when  it  scarce
drew  fortli  the  eyes  that  yearned  to  follow.  Even
now  this  soul  of  mine  halts,  yes  halts,  when  my  face
has  bent  downward  to  my  shrinking  hands.  Thou
shalt  hear  the  truth,  Oedipus :  less  boldly  didst
thou  pluck  out  thine  eyes  than  thou  didst  undertake
to  do.  Thrust  now  thy  hand  e'en  to  the  brain ;
through  that  door  whereby  I  began  to  die  fulfil  my
death.


ANTIGONE


r  Father,  great-souled,  I  beseech  thee  that  with
\  calm  mind  thou  listen  to  some  few  words  of  thy
L  wretched  daughter.  I  seek  not  to  lead  thee  back
again  to  the  splendours  of  thine  ancient  home,  and
to  thy  royal  estate,  flourishing  in  power  and  fame  ;
nor  do  I  ask  that  thou  bear  with  calm  and  peaceful
soul  that  tempest  of  passion  which  has  not  been
allayed  even  by  lapse  of  time  ;  and  yet  'twere  fitting
that  one  so  stalwart  should  not  yield  to  pain  nor
turn  in  flight,  by  disaster  overcome.  It  is  not  man-
hood, father,  as  "thou  deemst  it,  to  shrink  from  life,
but  to  make  stand  against  mighty  ills  and  neither
turn  nor  yield.  He  who  has  trodden  destiny  under
foot,  who  has  torn  off  and  thrown  away  life's  blessings,
and  himself  piled  up  the  burden  of  his  woes,  who  has
no  need  of  God,  wherefore  should  he  desire  death,  or
wherefore  seek  it  ?  Each  is  a  coward's  act ;  no  one
despises  death  who  yet  yearns  for  it.  He  whose
misfortunes  can  no  further  go,  is  safely  lodged.

359


THE   TRAGEDIES   OF   SENECA

Quis  iam  deoi'um,  velle  fac,  qiiicquam  potest     200
malis  tuis  adicere  ?     iam  nee  tu  potes
nisi  hoc,  ut  esse  te  putes  dignum  nece.
non  es  nee  ulla  pectus  hoc  culpa  attigit.
et  hoc  magis  te,  genitor,  insontem  voca,
quod  innocens  es  dis  quoque  invitis.     quid  est
quod  te  efferarit,  quod  novos  suffixerit
stimulos  dolori  ?     quid  te  in  infernas  agit
sedes,  quid  ex  his  pelHt  ?     ut  careas  die  ?
cares,     ut  altis  nobilem  muris  domum
patriamque  fugias  ?     patria  tibi  vivo  perit.  2 1 0

natos  fugis  matremque  ?     ab  aspectu  omnium
fortuna  te  summovitj  et  quidquid  potest
auferre  cuiquam  mors,  tibi  hoc  vita  abstnlit.
regni  tumultus  ?     turba  fortunae  prior
abscessit  a  te  iussa — quem,  genitor,  fugis  ?

OEDIPVS

Me  fugio,  fugio  conscium  scelerum  omnium
pectus,  manumque  banc  fugio  et  hoc  caeUmi  et  deos ;
et  dira  fugio  scelera  quae  feci  innocens.^
ego  hoc  solum,  frugifera  quo  surgit  Ceres,
premo  ?     has  ego  auras  ore  pestifero  tralio  ?  220

ego  laticis  baustu  satior  aut  ullo  fruor
almae  parentis  munere  ?     ego  castam  manura
nefandus  incestificus  exsecrabilis
attrecto  ?     ego  ullos  aure  concipio  sonos,
per  quos  parentis  nomen  aut  nati  audiani  ?
utinam  quidem  rescindere  has  quireni  vias

*  Leo  deletes  this  line.
360


PHOENISSAE

"""  Who  now  of  the  gods^  granting  lie  wills  it  so,  can
add  aught  to  thy  misfortunes  ?  Now  not  even  canst
thou  add  aught  save  this,  to  deem  thyself  worthy  of
death.  Thou  art  not  worthy,  nor  has  any  taint  of
guilt  touched  thy  heart.  And  for  this  all  the  more,
father,  call  thyself  guiltless ;  for  thou  art  guiltless,
though  even  the  gods  willed  otherwise.  What  is  it
which  has  so  maddened  thee,  which  has  goaded  thy
grief  afresh  ?  What  drives  thee  to  the  infernal
regions?  What  forces  thee  out  of  these?  That
thou  mayst  avoid  the  light  of  day  ?  Thou  dost
avoid  it.  That  thou  mayst  flee  thy  noble  palace
with  its  high  walls,  and  thy  native  land  ?  Thy
Tiative  land,  though  thou  still  livest,  is  dead  to  thee.
Dost  flee  from  thy  sons  and  mother?  From  the
sight  of  all  men  fate  has  removed  thee,  and  whatever
death  can  take  away  from  any  man,  this  has  life  taken
from  thee.  Wouldst  avoid  the  tumult  around  a
throne?  They  who  once  in  pros])crity  thronged
around  thee,  at  thy  command  have  left  thee.  Whom
dost  thou  flee,  my  father  ?


Myself  I  flee  ;  I  flee  my  heart  conscious  of  all
crimes ;  I  flee  this  hand,  this  sky,  the  gods ;  I  flee
the  dread  crimes  which  I  committed,  though  in
innocence.  Do  I  tread  this  earth  from  Avhich  whole-
some grain  springs  up  ?  This  air  do  I  inhale  with
pestilential  lips  ?  Does  water  quench  my  thirst,
or  do  I  enjoy  any  gift  of  kindlv  mother  earth  ?
Do  I,  impious,  incestuous,  accursed,  touch  thy  pure
hand  ?  Do  my  ears  take  in  sound  b}^  which  I  mav
still  hear  the  name  of  parent  or  of  son  ?  I  would
indeed  that  I  might  destroy  these  paths  and  might

S6l


THE   TRAGEDIES   OF   SENECA
manibusque  adactis  omne  qua  voces  meant
aditusque  verbis  tramite  angusto  patet
eruere  possem  ;  nata,  iam  sensum  tui,
quae  pars  raeorum  es  criminum,  infelix  pater         230
fugissem.

Inhaeret  ac  recrudescit  nefas
subinde,  et  aures  ingerunt  quidquid  milii
donastis,  oculi.     cur  caput  tenebris  grave
non  mitto  ad  umbras  Ditis  aeternas  ?     quid  hie
manes  meos  detineo  ?     quid  terram  gravo
mixtusque  superis  erro  ?     quid  restat  mali  ?
regnum  parentes  liberi,  virtus  quoque
et  ingeni  sollertis  eximium  decus
periere,  cuncta  sors  mihi  infesta  abstulit.
lacrimae  supererant — has  quoque  eripui  mihi.        240
-     Absiste  !     nullas  animus  admittit  preces
novamque  poenam  sceleribus  quaerit  parem.
et  esse  par  quae  poterit  ?     infanti  quoque
decreta  mors  est.     fata  quis  tam  tristia
sortitus  umquam  ?     videram  nondum  diem
uterique  nondum  solveram  clausi  moras,
et  iam  timebar.      protinus  quosdam  editos
nox  occupavit  et  novae  luci  abstuht ;
mors  me  antecessit ;  aliquis  intra  viscera
materna  letum  praecoquis  fati  tuht  ;  250

sed  numquid  et  peccavit  ?     abstrusum,  abdilum
dubiumque  an  essem  sceleris  infandi  i-eum
deus  egit ;  illo  teste  damnavit  parens
caHdoque  teneros  transuit  ferro  pedes
et  in  alta  nemora  pabulum  misit  ferig

362


PHORNISSAE

with  my  hands  driven  deep  pluck  out  every  part
wliere  voices  enter  and  where  a  narrow  passage  gives
access  to  the  words  of  men  ;  then,  daughter,  thy
wretched  father  would  have  escaped  all  consciousness
of  thee,  who  art  part  and  parcel  of  my  crimes.

231  My  guilt  sticks  fast  within  me,  threatens  each
moment  to  break  out  afresh,  and  my  ears  pour  in  upon
me  all  that  you,  my  eyes,  have  bestowed. ^  Why  do
I  not  plunge  this  life,  weighted  with  gloom,  down  to
the  everlasting  shades  of  Dis  ?  Why  here  do  I  detain
my  ghost .''  ^Vhy  do  I  burden  the  earth  and  wander
amongst  the  living?  What  evil  is  left  for  me.''  My
kingdom,  parents,  children,  my  manhood,  too,  and
the  illustrious  fame  of  my  cunning  wit — all  these
have  perished,  all  have  been  stripped  from  me  by
hostile  chance.  Tears  were  still  left  me — of  these,
too,  have  I  I'obbed  myself.

I  241  Stand  off !  My  soul  will  not  listen  to  any  prayers
(  and  seeks  some  new  punishment  to  match  its  crimes.
And  what  match  can  there  be  .^  Even  in  my  infancy
I  was  doomed  to  death.  Who  ever  drew  lot  so  sad  ?
I  had  not  yet  seen  the  light,  was  still  imprisoned  in
the  womb,  and  already  I  was  held  in  fear.  Some
there  are  whom  straightway  at  birth  night  hath
seized  upon  and  snatched  from  tlieir  first  dawn  ;  but
on  me  death  came  ei'e  birth.  Some,  while  still
within  the  mother's  womb,  have  suffered  untimely
death;  but  have  they  sinned  also?  Hidden  away,
confined,  my  very  being  in  doubt,  the  god  made
me  guilty  of  a  charge  unspeakable.  On  that  charge
my  sire  condemned  me,  spitted  my  slender  ankles
on  hot  iron,  and  sent  me  to  the  deep  forest  as  prey

'  Oedipus  paradoxically  deems  that  his  eyes  in  their  blind-
uess  bestow  on  him  the  boon  of  avoiding  sight  ;  but  his  ears
still  bring  Antigone  to  his  consciousness.

S6S


THE  TRAGEDIES   OF  SENECA
avibusque  saevis  quas  Cithaeron  noxius
cruore  saepe  regio  tinctas  alit.
sed  quern  deus  damnavit,  abiecit  pater,
mors  qiioque  refugit.     praestiti  Delphis  fideni ;
genitorem  adortus  impia  stravi  nece.  260

hoc  alia  pietas  redimet :  occidi  patrem,
sed  matrem — amavi.     proloqui  h}Tiiehaeum  pudet
taedasque  nostras,     has  quoque  invitum  pati
te  coge  poenas ;  facinus  ignotum  efferum
inusitatiim  efFare  quod  populi  horreant,
quod  esse  factum  nulla  non  aetas  neget,
quod  pnrricidam  pudeat :  in  patrios  toros
tuli  paterno  sanguine  aspersas  nianus
scelerisque  pretium  maius  accept  scelus.

Leve  est  paternum  facinus  ;  in  thalamos  nieos  270
deducta  mater,  ne  parum  sceleris  forct,
fecunda — nullum  crimen  hoc  maius  potest
natura  ferre.    si  quod  etiamnum  est  tamen,
qui  facere  possunt  dedimus.     abieci  necis
pretium  paternae  sceptrum  et  hoc  iterum  manus
armavit  alias  ;  optime  regni  mei
fatum  ipse  novi ;  nemo  sine  sacro  feret
illud  cruore.     magna  praesagit  mala
paternus  animus,     iacta  iam  sunt  scmina
cladis  futurae  ;  spernitur  pacti  fides.  280

hie  occupato  cedere  imperio  negat,
ius  ille  et  icti  foederis  testes  deos
invocat  et  Argos  exul  atque  urbes  mo  vet
Graias  in  arma.     non  levis  fessis  venit
ruina  Thcbis  ;  tela  flammae  vulnera

S64


PHOENISSAE

for  wild  beasts  and  savage  birds  which  baleful
Cithaeron,  oft  stained  with  royal  blood,  doth  breed.
Yet  him  whoni  God  condemned,  whom  his  sire  cast
away,  hath  death  also  shunned.  I  ke})t-  faith  with
Delphi ;  I  assailed  my  father  and  with  impious
death-stroke  slew  him.  For  this  another  act  of
piety  will  atone  ;  I  killed  my  father,  true,  but  my
mother — I  loved.  Oh,  'tis  shame  to  speak  of  wed-
lock and  my  marriage  torches.  But  this  punishment
also  force  thyself  to  bear  though  against  thy  will  ;
proclaim  thy  crime,  unheard  of,  bestial,  unexampled,
at  which  nations  would  shudder,  which  no  age
would  believe  ever  befell,  which  would  put  even  a
parricide  to  shame  :  into  my  fatliers  bed  1  bore  hatids
smeared  with  my  father  s  blood,  and  there,  as  the  reivard
of  my  crime,  I  did  worse  crime.

'■'■'^^  A  trivial  sin  is  my  father's  murder ;  my  mother,
brought  to  my  marriage  chamber,  that  my  guilt  might
be  complete,  conceived — no  greater  crime  than  tliis
can  nature  brook.  And  yet,  if  there  is  even  now
worse  crime,  we  have  given  the  world  those  who  can
commit  it.  I  have  flung  away  the  sceptre,  price  of
my  father's  murder,  and  this,  again,  has  armed  other
hands.  I  myself  best  know  my  kingdom's  destiny ;
no  one  unstained  by  sacred  blood  shall  bear  sway  there.
Dire  misfortunes  my  father-soul  presages.  Already
are  sown  the  seeds  of  calamit}'  to  come  ;  the  plighted
pact^  is  scorned.  The  one  will  not  retire  from  the
throne  he  has  usurped  ;  the  other  proclaims  his  right,
calls  on  the  gods  to  witness  the  broken  bond,  and,
wandering  in  exile,  is  rousing  Argos  and  the  cities
of  Greece  to  arms.  'Tis  no  light  destruction  that  is
coming  on  weary  Thebes  ;  weapons,  flames,  wounds

*  ».e.  between  Eteocles  and  Pol^nicea.

365


THE  TRAGEDIES   OF  SENECA

instant  et  istis  si  quod  est  maius  malum, —
ut  esse  genitos  nemo  non  ex  me  sciat.


ANTIGONA


Si  nulla,  genitor,  causa  vivendi  tibi  est,
haec  una  abunde  est,  ut  pater  natos  regas
graviter  furentes.     tu  impii  belli  minas  290

avertere  unus  tuque  vaeeordes  potes
inhibere  iuvenes,  civibus  pacem  dare,
patriae  quietem,  foederi  laeso  fidem.
vitam  tibi  ipse  si  negas,  multis  negas.


lUis  parentis  ullus  aut  aequi  est  amor,
avidis  cruoris  imperi  armorum  doll,
diris,  scelestis,  breviter  ut  dicam — meis?
certant  in  omne  facinus  et  pensi  nihil
ducunt,  ubi  ijjsos  ira  praecipites  agit,
nefasque  nullum  per  nefas  nati  putant.  300

non  patris  illos  tangit  afflieti  pudor,
non  patria  ;  regno  pectus  attonituni  furit.
scio  quo  ferantur,  quanta  nioliri  ])arent,
ideoque  leti  quaero  maturam  viam
morique  propero,  dum  in  domo  nemo  est  mea
nocentior  me.     nata,  quid  genibus  meis
fles  advoluta  ?     quid  prece  indomitum  domus  ?
unum  hoc  habet  fortuna  quo  possim  capi,
invictus  aliis  ;  sola  tu  afFectus  potes
mollire  duros,  sola  pietatem  in  domo  310

docere  nostra,     nil  grave  aut  miserum  est  mihi
quod  te  sciani  voluisse  ;  tu  tantum  impera  ;
366


PHOENISSAE

press  round  her  and  a  greater  ill  than  these,  if
greater  there  be, — that  all  may  know  I  have  begotten
sons.

ANTIGONE

If,  my  father,  thou  hast  no  other  cause  for  living,
this  one  is  more  than  enough,  that  as  father  thou
mayst  restrain  thy  sons  from  their  fatal  frenzy.
Thou  alone  canst  avert  the  threats  of  impious  war,
canst  check  these  mad  youths,  give  peace  to  our
citizens,  rest  to  our  land,  faith  to  the  broken  pact.
If  life  to  thyself  thou  dost  deny,  to  many  dost  thou
deny  it.


Have  they  any  love  for  ftither  or  for  right,  they
who  lust  for  blood,  power,  arms,  treachery,  they  the
cruel,  the  accursed, — in  brief,  my  sons  ?  They  vie
one  with  the  other  in  every  crime,  and  have  no
scruple  where  passion  drives  them  lieadlong ;  im-
piously born,  they  count  nothing  impious.  No  feeling
for  their  stricken  father,  none  for  their  fatherland,
moves  them  ;  their  hearts  are  mad  with  lust  of
empire.  I  know  well  whither  they  tend,  what
monstrous  deeds  they  are  planning,  and  for  this
cause  I  seek  an  early  path  to  destruction,  rush  on
my  death,  while  still  there  is  none  in  my  liouse
more  guilty  than  myself.  Daughter,  why  dost  thou
fall  weeping  at  my  knees  ?  Why  seekst  with  prayer
to  conquer  my  unconquerable  resolve  .''  This  is  the
one  means  by  which  fortune  can  take  me  captive,
invincible  in  all  else ;  thou  only  canst  soften  my
hard  heart,  thou  only  canst  teach  piety  in  our  house.
Nothing  is  heavy  or  grievous  to  me  which  I  know
thou    hast   desired.       Do    thou    but    command  ;     I,

367


THE   TRAGEDIES   OF  SENECA

hie  Oedipus  Aegaea  transnabit  freta
iubeute  tc,  flamuiasque  quas  Siculo  vomit
de  monte  tellus  igneos  volvens  globos,
excipiet  ore  seque  sei-penti  ofFeret,
quae  saeva  furto  nemoris  Herculeo  furit ;
iubente  te  praebebit  alitibus  iecur—
iubente  te  vel  vivet.


368


PHOENISSAE

Oedi])us,  at  thy  bidding  will  swim  the  Aegean  sea,
will  drink  the  flames  which  earth  from  tlie  Sicilian
mountains  belches  forth,  pouring  down  balls  of  lire,
will  beard  the  dragon  still  savagely  raging  in  the
grove  at  the  theft  of  Hercules ;  at  thy  bidding  will
offer  my  liver  to  the  birds — at  thy  bidding  e'en  will
live.

The  first  episode  seems  to  be  complete  Iicre,  except  for  the
commenting  chorus  which  would  naturally  follow.
OEDIPUS  has  tempoj-arily  yielded  to  his  daughter's
will.


S69

VOL.  II.  a  B


THE  TRAGEDIES   OF   SENECA


NUNTIUS  1
♦  *  *  *  *

Exemplum  in  ingeiis  regia  stirpe  editum  820

Thebae  paventes  arma  fraterna  invocaiit
rogantque  tectis  arceas  patriis  faces.
non  sunt  minae,  iam  propius  accessit  malum  ;
nam  regna  repetens  frater  et  pactas  vices
in  bella  cunctos  Graeciae  populos  agit.
septena  muros  castra  Thebanos  premunt.
succurre^  prohibe  pariter  et  bellum  et  scelus.

OEDIPVS

Ego  ille  sum  qui  scelera  committi  vetem
et  abstiiieri  sanguine  a  caro  manus
doceam  .'     magister  iuris  et  amoris  pii  330

ego  sum  ?     meorum  facinorum  exempla  appctunt^
me  nunc  secuntiir  ;  laudo  et  agnosco  libens,
exhortor^  aliquid  ut  patre  hoc  dignum  gcrant.
agite,  o  proj)ago  cara,  generosam  indok-m

'  Leo,  with  Eip,  assujns  this  speech  to  Antigone:  Richter,
with  A ,  gives  it  to  Nuntius.

370


PHOENISSAE


The  foUoning  passage  Jillingly  opens  the  second  episode.
Although  some  editors  would  assign  it  to  antigone,
it  seems  more  properly  to  belong  to  a  messenger  who
has  just  arrived,  for  the  double  reason  that  it  gives
fresher  information  from  Thebes  than  antigone
would  naturallij  possess;  and  that  oedipuSj  after
the  speech  to  his  daughter  rvith  which  the  previous
episode  ended,  would  hardlij  address  to  her  as  rough
a  reply  as  he  uses  in  his  next  speech.

MESSENGER

Thee,  sprung  from  regal  ancestry  to  be  our  great
exemplar,  Thebes  calls  to  her  aid,  trembling  at
fratricidal  strife,  and  prays  that  thou  fend  off  from
thy  country's  homes  the  brands  of  war.  These  are
no  mere  threats  ;  already  is  destruction  at  our  gates  ;
for  the  brother  ^  demands  his  turn  to  rule  according
to  the  bond,  and  is  marshalling  to  war  all  the  peojiles
of  Greece.  Seven  bands  are  encamped  against  the
walls  of  Thebes.  Haste  to  our  aid  ;  prevent  in  one
act  both  war  and  crime.

OEDIPUS

Am  I  one  to  forbid  crime  and  teach  hands  to
refrain  from  the  blood  of  loved  ones.^^  Am  I  a  teacher
of  righteousness  and  love  of  kin  }  'Tis  from  my
crimes  they  seek  their  pattern,  'tis  my  example  they
follow  now.  I  praise  tiiem  and  gladly  acknowledge
them  as  sons ;  I  urge  them  on  to  do  something
worthy  of  such  a  father.  Go  on,  dear  offspring,
prove  your  noble  breeding  by  your  deeds ;  surpass
'  Poly  II  ices.

371
B    B   2


THE  TRAGEDIES   OF  SENECA

probate  factis,  gloriam  ac  laudes  nieas

Kuperate  et  aliquid  facite  propter  quod  patrem

adhuc  iuvet  vixisse.     facietiS;,  scio  :

sic  estis  orti.     scelere  defungi  haut  levi,

haut  usitato  tanta  nobilitas  potest.

ferte  arma^  facibus  petite  penetrales  deos  340

frugemque  flamma  metite  natalis  soli^

miscete  cuncta,  rapite  in  exitium  omnia,

disicite  passim  moenia^  in  planum  date,

templis  deos  obruite^  maeulatos  lares

conflate,  ab  imo  tota  considat  domus  ;

urbs  concremetur — primus  a  thalamis  meis

incipiat  ignis.

ANTIGONA

C  Mitte  violentum  impetum
doloris  ac  te  i)ublica  exorent  mala,
aijctorque  placidae  liberis  pacis  veni.


Vides  modestae  deditum  menti  senem  350

placidaeque  amantem  pacis  ad  partes  vooas  ?
tumet  animus  ira,  fervet  imraensus  dolor,
maiusque  quam  quod  casus  et  iuvenum  furor
conatur  aliquid  cupio.     non  satis  est  adhuc
civile  bellum  ;  frater  in  fratrem  ruat ;
nee  hoc  sat  est ;  quod  debet,  ut  fiat  nefas
de  more  nostro,  quod  mcos  deceat  toros,
date  arma  matri.     nemo  me  ex  his  eruat
silvis ;  latebo  rupis  exesae  cavo

aut  sepe  dcnsa  corpus  abstrusum  tegam.  360

hinc  aucupabor  verba  rumoris  vagi
et  saeva  fratrum  bella,  quod  possum,  audiam.

372


PHOENISSAE

my  fame  and  praises  and  do  some  deed  whereat  your
father  may  rejoice  that  he  lias  lived  till  now.  You
will  do  it,  I  know  :  of  such  mind  were  you  born  ;  no
trivial,  no  common  crime  can  such  high  birth  per-
form. Forward  your  arms  I  With  torches  have  at
your  household  gods ;  reap  with  fire  the  ripened
grain  of  your  native  land  ;  confound  all  things,  hurry
all  to  destruction  ;  on  all  sides  throw  down  the  walls,
raze  them  to  the  ground  ;  bury  the  gods  beneath
their  own  temples  ;  the  defiled  deities  of  your
hearths  melt  in  the  fire,  and  let  our  whole  house
from  its  foundations  fall ;  let  the  city  be  consumed
— and  be  my  marriage  chamber  the  first  to  feel  the
flames.

ANTIGONE

Give  o'er  this  raging  storm  of  grief;  let  the
public  calamities  prevail  with  thee  ;  go  to  thy  sons
as  the  adviser  of  calm  peace.


Seest  thou  an  old  man  given  to  gentle  thoughts  ?
dost  summon  me  as  lover  of  calm  peace  to  take  her
part.''  My  heart  swells  with  rage,  my  smarting  grief
burns  measureless,  and  I  long  for  some  crime  more
dreadful  than  what  the  casual  madness  of  young  men
attempts.  Not  enough  for  me  is  war  that  as  yet  is
between  citizens  ;  let  brother  rush  on  brother.  Nor
is  that  enough  ;  that,  as  is  due,  a  horror  may  be
wrought  after  my  fashion,  one  that  may  befit  my
marriage-couch,  arm  )-e  your  mother.  Let  no  one
drag  me  from  these  woods  !  I'll  lurk  in  the  cliffs'
wave-worn  caves  or  hide  away  in  the  thick  under-
brush. Here  will  I  catch  at  vague  rumour's  words
and  the  dire  strife  of  brothers,  as  1  can,  will  hear.

«73


THE   TRAGEDIES   OF   SENECA

lOCASTA

Felix  Agaue  !  facinus  horrendum  raanu,
qua  fecerat,  gestavit  et  spolium  tulit
cruenta  nati  maenas  in  partes  dati  ;
fecit  sceluSj  sed  misera  non  ultro  suo
sceleri  occucurrit.     hoc  leva  est  quod  sum  nocens  ;
feci  nocentes.     hoc  quoque  etiamnunc  leve  est ;
peperi  nocentes.     derat  aerumnis  meis,
ut  et  hostem  amarem.     brunia  ter  posuit  nives      370
et  tertia  iam  falce  decubuit  Ceres,
ut  exul  errat  natus  et  patria  caret
profugusque  regum  auxilia  Graiorum  rogat.
gener  est  Adrasti,  cuius  imperio  mare
quod  scindit  Isthmos  regitur ;  hie  gentes  suas
septemque  secum  regna  ad  auxilium  trahit
genero.     quid  optem  quidve  decernam  haut  scio.
regnum  reposcit ;  causa  repetentis  bona  est,
mala  sic  petentis.     vota  quae  faciam  parens  ?
utrimque  natum  video  ;  nil  possum  pie  380

pietate  salva  facere.     quodcumque  alter!
optabo  nato  fiet  alterius  malo.
sed  utrumque  quamvis  diligam  afFectu  pari,
quo  causa  melior  sorsque  deterior  trahit
inclinat  animus  semper  iufii-mo  favens.
miseros  masris  fortuna  conciliat  suis.


1  i.e.    Pol^nices,    who  has   now   become  a  public  foe  of
Thebes.
374     .


PHOENISSAE

It  is  possible  that  the  foUotring  fragments  belong  to
another  play.  The  presence  of  antigone  in
Thebes,  notwithstanding  her  resolve  to  remain  with
her  father,  would  strengthen  this  view.

JOCASTA

Fortunate  Agave  !  she  carried  her  ghastly  crime
in  the  hand  that  wrought  it,  and  as  a  bloody  maenad
bore  spoil  of  her  dismembered  son.  She  wrought  a
crime,  but  not  Avantonly  did  the  wretched  woman
go  to  meet  her  crime.  'Tis  but  a  trivial  thing  that
I  am  guilty  ;  I  have  made  others  guilty.  This,  too,
bad  as  it  is,  is  trivial ;  I  have  borne  guilty  sons.  'Twas
as  yet  lacking  to  my  woes  that  I  should  love  even
my  enemy. 1  Thrice  have  the  snows  of  winter  fallen,
three  harvests  now  have  yielded  to  the  sickle,  while
my  son  in  exile  wanders,  expatriate,  and  as  an  outcast
begs  aid  from  the  Greek  kings.  And  now  he  is  son-
in-law  of  Adrastus,  whose  sway  is  over  the  waters
which  Isthmus  cleaves,  and  who  brings  with  him  his
own  tribes  and  seven  kingdoms  to  the  aid  of  his
son-in-law.  What  I  should  pray  for,  or  which  side
espouse,  I  know  not.  He  demands  back  the  king-
dom ;  to  reseek  it  is  an  honest  plea,  but  ill  to  seek
it  thus.  What  should  be  a  mother's  prayer  ?  On
either  side  I  see  a  son  ;  I  can  do  nothing  piously
that  is  not  impious.  Whatever  blessing  I  shall  ask
for  one,  to  the  other  will  jjrove  a  curse.  But,  though
I  love  both  equally,  whither  the  better  cause  and
the  worse  fortune  draw,  my  heart  inclines,  which
always  takes  the  weaker  side.  Misfortune  knits
the  wretched  closer  to  their  kin.

[Aw/er  MESSENGER  in  hastei]

375


THE   TRAGEDIES   OF   SENECA

SATELLES

Regina,  dum  tu  flebiles  questus  cies
terisque  tempus^  saeva  nudatis  adest
acies  in  armis  ;  aera  iam  bellum  cient
aquilaque  pugnam  signifer  mota  vocat ;  390

septena  reges  bella  dispositi  parant,
animo  pari  Cadmea  progenies  siibit,
cursu  citato  miles  liinc  atque  hinc  ruit.
viden  ?     atra  nubcs  pulvere  abscondit  diem
fumoque  similes  campus  in  caelum  e  rig  it
nebulas,  equestri  fracta  quas  tellus  pede
summittit  et,  si  vera  metuentes  vident,
infesta  fulgent  signa,  subrectis  adest
frons  prima  telis,  aurea  clarum  nota
nomen  ducum  vexilla  praescriptum  feruiit.  400

1,  redde  amorem  fratribus,  pacem  omnibus,
et  impia  arma  matris  oppositu  impedi.

ANTIGONA

Perge,  o  parens,  perge  et  cita  celerem  gradum,
compesce  tela,  fratribus  ferrum  excute,
nudum  inter  enses  pectus  infestos  tene  !
aut  solve  bellum,  mater,  aut  prima  excipe.

lOCASTA

Ibo,  ibo  et  armis  obvium  opponam  caput,
stabo  inter  arma  ;  petere  qui  fratrem  volet,
petat  ante  matrem.     tela,  qui  fuerit  pius,
rogante  ponat  matre  ;  qui  non  est  pius  410

incipiat  a  me.      fervidos  iuvenes  anus
tenebo,  nullum  teste  me  fiet  nefas  ;
376


PHOENISSAE

MESSENGER

O  queen,  whilst  tliou  art  uttering  tearful  com-
plaints and  wasting  time,  the  fierce  battle-line  with
bared  swords  is  at  hand  ;  the  trumpets'  blare  sounds
to  war,  the  standard-bearer  with  eagle  advanced
signals  for  contest ;  the  kings,  each  in  his  place,  are
setting  their  sevenfold  battle  in  array,  while  Avith
equal  courage  Cadmus'  race  advances  ;  at  the  double-
quick  the  soldiers  on  either  side  rush  on.  Dost  see
them?  A  dark  cloud  of  dust  hides  the  day;  the
jilain  lifts  heavenward  dense,  smoke-like  billows
which  the  earth,  beaten  by  horses'  hoofs,  sends  up ;
and,  if  terror-stricken  eyes  see  aught  aright,  hostile
standards  are  gleaming  there  ;  the  front  rank,  with
lifted  spears,  is  close  at  hand,  and  the  battle-flags
have  the  leaders'  names  clearly  limned  in  golden
characters.  Go,  restore  love  to  brothers,  peace  to
us  all,  and  let  a  mother  be  the  barrier  to  stay  unholy
anns.

ANTIGONE

Hasten,  mother,  hasten  on  flying  feet !  hold  back
their  weajwns,  strike  the  steel  from  my  brothei's'
hands,  set  thy  bared  breast  between  their  hostile
swords !  Either  stop  the  war,  mother,  or  be  the
first  to  feel  it.


I  go,  I  go,  and  my  own  life  will  I  set  against  their
arms  ;  I'll  stand  between  their  arms  ;  and  he  who  shall
wish  to  attack  his  brother  must  attack  his  mother  first.
Let  the  more  filial  lay  down  his  arms  at  a  mother's
prayer ;  let  the  unfilial  begin  with  me.  These  fiery
youths,  old  though  I  be,  will  I  restrain  ;  there  shall
be  no  impious  crime  committed  in  my  sight ;  or,  if

S77


THE   TRAGEDIES   OF   SENECA

aut  si  aliquod  et  me  teste  committi  potest,
non  fiet  unum.

ANTIGONA

Signa  collatis  micant
vicina  signis,  clamor  hostilis  fremit ;
scelus  in  propinquo  est ;  occupaj  mater,  preces.
et  ecce  motos  fletibus  credas  meis,
sic  agmen  armis  segne  compositis  venit.


SATELLES

Procedit  acies  tarda,  sed  properant  duces.

lOCASTA

Quis  me  procellae  turbine  insane  vehens  420

volucer  per  auras  ventus  aetherias  aget  ?
quae  Sphinx  vel  atra  nube  subtexens  diem
Stymphalis  avidis  praepetem  pennis  feret?
aut  quae  per  altas  aeris  rapiet  vias
Harpyia  saevi  regis  observans  famera
et  inter  acies  proiciet  raptam  duas  ?

SATELLES

^^^dit  furenti  similis  aut  etiam  furit.
sagitta  qualis  Parthica  velox  manu
excussa  fertur,  qualis  insane  ratis

premente  vento  rapitur,  aut  qualis  cadit  430

delapsa  caelo  stella,  cum  stringens  polum
rectam  citatis  ignibus  rumpit  viam,
attonita  cursu  fugit  et  binas  statim
diduxit  acies.     victa  materna  prece
haesere  bella,  iamque  in  alternam  neccm
378


PHOENISSAE

e'en  in  my  siglit  one  crime  can  be  committed,  it  shall
not  be  only  one.

ANTIGONE

The  opposing  standards  gleam  face  to  face,  the
hostile  battle-cry  is  sounding,  the  crime  is  near  at
hand  ;  forestall  it,  mother,  with  thy  i)rayers  !  And
see,  )-ou  might  deem  them  moved  by  tears  of  mine,
so  sluggishly  moves  the  line  with  weapons  held  at
rest.

MESSENGER

The  line  advances  slowly,  but  the  leaders  haste.

JOCASTA

What  swift  wind  with  the  storm-blast's  mad  whirl
will  carry  me  through  the  air  of  heaven  ?  What
Sphinx,  what  Stymphalian  bird,  with  its  dark  cloud
veiling  day,  will  speed  me  headlong  on  eager  wings  ?
Or  what  Harpy,  hovering  over  the  barbarian  king's  ^
famished  board,  will  hurry  me  along  the  highways
of  the  air,  hurry  and  fling  me  'twixt  the  two  battle-
lines.''

[Escit]

MESSENGER  \^looking  offer  her^

She  goes  like  a  mad  thing,  or  is  mad  indeed.
Swift  as  a  dart  hurled  by  some  Parthian's  hand,  or  as
a  vessel  driven  on  by  wild,  raging  winds,  or  as  a  star,
dislodged  from  the  firmament,when,  sweeping  o'er  the
heavens,  with  swift  fire  it  cleaves  its  unswerving  way,
so  has  the  frenzied  queen  sj)ed  on  and  at  once  has
parted  the  two  battle-lines.  Stayed  by  a  mother's
prayer  the  battle  hangs  ;  and  now  the  l)an(ls,  eager  to
^  See  Index  s.v.  "  Phineus."

379


THE  TRAGEDIES   OF  SENECA

illinc  et  hinc  miscere  cupieiites  manus

librata  dextra  tela  suspensa  tenent.

paci  favetur,  omnium  ferrum  iacet

cessatve  tectum  ;  vibrat  in  fratrum  inanu.

laniata  canas  mater  ostendit  comas,  440

rogat  abnuentes,  ini'igat  fletu  genas.

negare  matri,  qui  diu  dubitat,  potest.

lOCASTA

In  me  arma  et  ignes  vertite,  in  me  omiiis  ruat
unani  inventus  quacque  ab  In.-icliio  venit
animosa  muro  quaeque  Thebana  ferox
descendit  arce  ;  civis  atque  hostis  simul
hunc  petite  ventiem,  qui  dedit  fratres  viro.
haec  membra  passim  spargite  ac  divellite.
ego  utrumque  peperi— ponitis  ferrum  ocius  ?
an  dico  et  ex  quo  ?     dexteras  matri  date,  450

date  dum  piae  sunt,     error  invitos  adhuc
fecit  nocentes,  omne  Fortunae  fuit
peccantis  in  nos  ci'imen  ;  hoc  prinnnn  nefas
inter  scientes  geritur.     in  vestra  manu  est,
utrum  velitis  :  sancta  si  pietas  placet,
donate  matri  pacem  ^  ;  si  placuit  scelus,
mains  paratum  est — media  se  op])onit  parens,
proinde  bellum  toUite  aut  belli  moram.

^  So  Leo  and  Bichler,  tcith  m  :  matri  pacta  L.  MiiUer :  date
arnia  matri  saeva  Tachau:  domate  Martem  paco  M.  Midler.

380


PHOENISSAE

join  from  both  sides  in  mutual  slaughter,  hold  their
swords  poised  iii  lifted  hands.  They  incline  to  peace,
the  swords  of  all  are  lowered,  or  idly  sheathed ;  but
they  still  quiver  in  the  brothers'  hands.  The  mother
shows  them  her  hoary  hair,  tearing  it,  beseeching
them  as  they  stubbornly  refuse,  and  floods  her  cheeks
with  weeping.  Who  wavers  long  may  say  his  mother
"  No  !  "

[jT/ie  scene  sliifls  to  the  field  before  Thebes,  between  the
battle-lines.^

JOCASTA

[K7}eel/vg  between  her  two  hostile  sons.'\
Against  me  turn  your  arms  and  torches ;  against
me  only  let  every  warrior  charge,  both  those  who
come  with  high  courage  from  the  city  of  Inachus,^
and  those  who  from  the  Theban  citadel  descend
thirsting  for  the  fray.  Townsman  and  enemy,  to-
gether attack  this  womb  which  bore  my  husband
brothers.  Rend  these  limbs  asunder  and  scatter
them  everywhere.  I  bore  you  both — lay  you  not
down  your  arms  with  speed  ?  Or  shall  I  tell  from
what  father,  too  ?  Your  right  hands — to  your  mother
give  them,  give  while  they  are  still  filial.  Ignorance
till  now  against  our  will  hath  made  us  ^  guilty;  the
whole  crime  was  Fortune's,  who  sinned  against  us ;
this  is  the  first  crime  wrought  between  those  who
know.  It  is  yours  to  choose  which  thing  you  Avill :
if  holy  affection  please  you,  grant  to  your  mother
peace  ;  if  crime  has  pleased,  a  greater  is  to  hand —
your  mother  sets  herself  between  you.  Therefore
rid  ye  of  strife  or  of  this  stay  of  strife.^

'  Argos.  2  i  e.  Oedipus  and  Jocasta  especially.

'  i.e.  or   kill  me  who   stand   between   you   to  stay  your
fighting.

^81


THE   TRAGEDIES   OF   SENECA

Sollicita  cui  nunc  mater  alterna  prece
verba  adniovebo?    misera  quern  amplectar  prius?  460
in  utramque  partem  ducor  afFectu  pari,
hie  afuit ;  sed  pacta  si  fratrum  valent,
nunc  alter  aberit.     ergo  iam  numquam  duos
nisi  sic  videbo  ?

lunge  complexus  prior,
(jui  tot  labores  totque  perpessus  mala
longo  parentem  fessus  exilio  vides.
accede  propius,  elude  vagina  impium
ensem  et  trementem  iamque  cupientem  excuti
hastam  solo  defige  ;  maternum  tuo
coire  pectus  pectori  clipeus  vetat ;  470

hunc  quoque  repone.     vinculo  frontem  exue
tegumenque  capitis  triste  belligeri  leva
et  era  matri  redde.     quo  vultus  refers
acieque  pavida  fratris  observas  manum  ?
affusa  totum  corpus  amplexu  tegam,
tuo  cruori  per  meum  fiet  via.
quid  dubius  haeres  ?     an  times  niatris  fidem  ?

POLVNICES

Timeo ;  nihil  iam  iura  naturae  valent.
post  ista  fratrum  exempla  ne  matri  quidem
fides  habenda  est.

lOCASTA

Redde  iam  capulo  manum,  480

astringe  galeam,  laeva  sc  dipeo  inserat  ;
dum  frater  exarmatur,  armatus  mane.

*  i.e.  in  enmity.
382


PHOENISSAE

*^9  To  which  of  you  now  sliall  your  anxious  mother
with  alternate  prayers  address  her  words  ?  Whom
shall  I  in  my  wretchedness  first  embrace  ?  To  both
sides  am  I  drawn  with  equal  love.  This  son  has
been  absent  from  me  ;  but  if  the  brothers  keep  their
pact,  now  will  the  other  be  away.  And  shall  I  never
see  you  both,  save  thus .''  ^

[Turnhig  to  polynices]

*^^  Come  thou  first  to  thy  mother's  arms,  thou  who
hast  endured  so  many  toils,  so  many  misfortunes,
and,  w^orn  with  long  exile,  seest  thy  mother  at  last.
Come  nearer,  sheathe  thine  impious  sword,  and  thy
spear,  which  is  even  now  quivering  and  eager  to  be
thrown,  thrust  it  in  the  ground.  Thy  shield  keeps
thee  from  coming  close  to  thy  mother,  breast  to
breast ;  put  that  by,  too.  Unbind  thy  brow,  take
the  grim  helmet  from  thy  warlike  head,  and  let  thy
mother  see  thy  face.  Why  dost  thou  look  away,
and  with  fearful  glance  watch  thy  brother's  hand  ?
I  will  cover  thy  whole  body  with  my  protecting
embrace  and  allow  way  to  thy  blood  only  through
my  own.  Why  dost  thou  still  halt  in  doubt  ?  Dost
fear  thy  mother's  pledge  ?

POLYNICES

I  am  in  fear ;  no  longer  do  nature's  laws  avail.
Since  this  example  of  a  brother's  faithlessness,  even
a  mother's  pledge  may  not  be  trusted.

JOCASTA

Put  now  hand  to  hilt  again,  bind  on  thy  helmet,
let    thy  left    hand    clasp  its  shield  ;    and  while   thy
brother  unarms,  remain  thou  armed.
[She  turns  to  eteocles.]

383


THE   TRAGEDIES   OF   SENECA

Tu  pone  ferruni^  causa  qui  ferri  es  prior,
si  pacis  odium  est,  furere  si  bello  j)lacet,
inducias  te  mater  exiguas  rogat,
ferat  ut  reverse  post  fugam  nato  oscula
vel  prima  vel  suprema.     dum  pacem  i)eto,
audite  iiiermes.     ille  te^  tu  ilium  times  ?
ego  utrumquCj  sed  pro  utroque.    quid  strictum  abnuis
recondere  ensem  ?     qualibet  gaude  mora  ;  490

id  gerere  bellum  cupitis,  in  quo  est  optinuim
vinci.     vereris  fratris  infesti  dolos  ?
quotiens  necesse  est  fallere  aut  falli  a  suis,
patiare  potius  ipse  quam  facias  scelus.
sed  ne  verere  ;  mater  insidias  et  hinc
et  rursus  illinc  abiget.     exoro  ?  an  patri
invideo  vestro  ?     veni  ut  arcerem  nefas
an  ut  videi'em  propius  ?     hie  ferrum  abdidit,
reclinis  hasta  est,  arma  defixa  incubaiit.

Ad  te  preces  nunc,  nate,  maternas  feram,  500

sed  ante  lacrimas.     teneo  longo  tempore
petita  votis  ora.     te  profugum  solo
patrio  penates  regis  externi  tegunt,
te  maria  tot  diversa,  tot  casus  vagum
egere.     non  te  duxit  in  thalamos  parens
comitata  primes,  nee  sua  festas  manu
ornavit  aedes,  nee  sacra  laetas  faces
vitta  revinxit ;  dona  non  auro  graves
gazas  socer,  non  ar\a,  non  urbes  dedit ;
dotale  bellum  est.     hostium  es  factus  gener,         510
l^atria  remetus  hespes  alieni  laris^


384


PHOENISSAE

*^3  Do  thou  put  by  the  sword,  who  art  the  sword's
first  cause.  Jf  thou  hatest  peace,  if  'tis  thy  pleasure
to  rage  in  war,  tliy  mother  begs  brief  truce  of  tliee,
that  to  her  son  returned  from  exile  she  may  give  a
kiss — the  first,  perchance  the  last.  While  1  beg  for
peace,  hearken  ye,  unarmed.  Doth  he  fear  thee ;
thou,  him  ?  I  fear  you  both,  but  for  the  sake  of
both.  ^Vhy  dost  refuse  to  sheathe  thy  drawn  sword  ?
lie  glad  of  any  delay  ;  ye  both  seek  to  wage  a  war
wherein  'twere  best  to  be  o'ercome.  Dost  thou  fear
thy  hostile  brother's  wiles  ?  When  one  must  either
cheat  or  be  cheated  by  one's  own,  do  thou  thyself
suffer  rather  than  commit  the  crime.  13ut  do  not
fear ;  thy  mother  will  shield  thee  from  snares  on
either  hand.  Do  I  prevail .''  or  must  I  envy  ^  your
father  }  Have  I  come  to  prevent  crime  ?  or  to  see
it  done  before  my  eyes  ?  [eteocles  yields  to  her.]  He
has  sheathed  his  sword,  his  spear  droops,  his  arms
are  laid  aside.

[She  lurns  hack  to  poi.vnkes.]
500  Now  to  thee,  son,  thy  mother  will  bring  her
prayers,  but  her  tears  first.  After  a  weary  time  I  hold
the  face  I  prayed  to  see.  Thee,  an  outcast  from  thy
native  soil,  the  gods  of  a  foreign  king  protect ;  thee
many  seas  far  distant,  many  fates  have  driven  wan-
dering. Thy  mother,  at  thy  side,  did  not  lead  thee
to  thy  first  bridal  chamber,  nor  with  her  own  hand
deck  the  festal  hall,  nor  with  sacred  fillets  wreathe
the  glad  torches.  As  wedding  gifts  no  rich  golden
treasure,  no  fields,  no  cities  did  thy  father-in-law
bestow  :  war  is  thy  bridal  gift.  Thou  hast  become
thine   enemy's  son,  far  from  thy  land,  guest  of  an

*  i.e.  hia  blindness,  which  would  shield  iier  from  unhallowed
sights.

385
VOL.  II.  C    C


THE  TRAGEDIES   OF  SENECA

externa  conseeutus,  expulsus  tuis,
sine  criniine  exiil.     ne  quid  e  fatis  tibi
desset  paternis,  hoc  quoque  ex  illis  habes,
eiTasse  thalamis.

Nate  post  multos  mihi
remisse  soles,  nate  suspensae  metus
et  spes  parentis,  cuius  aspectum  deos
semper  rogavi,  cum  tuus  reditus  mihi
tantum  esset  erepturus,  adventu  tuo
quantum  daturas  :  "  quando  pro  te  desinam  "        520
dixi  "  timere  ?  "     dixit  inridens  deus  :
"ipsum  timebis."     nempe  nisi  bellum  foret,
ego  te  carerem  ;  nempe  si  tu  non  fores,
bello  carerem.     a,  triste  conspectus  datur
pretium  tui  durumque,  sed  matri  placet,
hinc  modo  recedant  arma,  dum  nullum  nefas
Mars  saevus  audet ;  hoc  quoque  est  magnum  nefus,
tam  prope  fuisse.     stupeo  et  exanguis  tremo,
cum  stare  fratres  hinc  et  hinc  video  duos
sceleris  sub  ictu.     membra  quassantur  metu  ;        530
quam  paene  mater  mains  aspexi  nefas,
quam  quod  miser  videre  non  potuit  pater,
licet  timore  facinoris  tanti  vacem
videamque  iam  nil  tale,  sum  infelix  tamen
quod  paene  vidi.

Per  decern  mensum  graves
uteri  labores  perque  pietatem  inclitae
precor  sororis  et  per  irati  sibi
genas  parentis,  scclere  quas  nullo  nocens,
erroris  a  se  dira  supplicia  exigens,
hausit — nefandas  moenibus  patriis  faces  540

averte,  signa  bellici  retro  agminis
flecte.     ut  recedas,  magna  })ars  sceleris  tamen
vestri  peracta  est ;  vidit  hostili  grege

386


PHOENISSAE

alien  house,  seeking  another's,  driven  from  tliine  own,
exiled  for  no  fault.  That  thou  mightst  lack  nothing
of  thy  father's  fates,  this  also  thou  hast  of  them,  that
thou  hast  erred  in  marriage.

*i^  O  son,  returned  to  me  after  so  many  years,  son,
fear  and  hope  of  thy  anxious  mother,  for  sight  of
whom  I  have  ever  prayed  the  gods,  though  thy
return  was  destined  to  take  as  much  from  me  as  by
thy  coming  it  could  give  :  "When  shall  I  cease  to
fear  for  thee  ?  "  I  cried  ;  and  the  god,  mocking  me,
answered  :  "  'Tis  himself  thou  shalt  fear."  Surely  if
there  were  no  war,  I  should  be  without  thee ;  surely
if  thou  wert  not  here,  I  should  be  free  from  war.
Oh,  bitter  price  and  hard,  to  pay  for  a  sight  of  thee  ;
but  thy  mother  pays  it  willingly.  Only  let  thy  hostile
hosts  fall  back  while  as  yet  savage  Mars  dares  no
impious  crime.  Even  this  is  an  outrageous  crime,
that  they  have  come  so  near.  I  am  appalled  ;  pale
am  I  and  I  tremble  to  see  two  brothers  stand,  one
here,  one  there,  'neath  guilt's  o'erhanging  stroke.
My  limbs  quake  with  fear :  how  near  did  I,  thy
mother,  come  to  seeing  greater  infamy  than  that
which  thy  wretched  father  could  not  bear  to  see.
'I'hough  I  am  free  fi-om  fear  of  so  great  a  crime,  and
now  see  no  such  thing,  still  I  am  unhappy  because  1
almost  saw  it.

^3^  By  the  womb  that  bore  thee  for  ten  weary
months,  by  the  devotion  of  thy  noble  sister,  by  thy
self-hating  father's  eyes  which  he,  though  innocent,
yet,  seeking  to  inflict  on  himself  dire  punishment  for
his  mistake,  tore  from  their  sockets — save  thy
country's  walls  from  the  accursed  torch  ;  turn  back
again  the  standards  of  this  warring  host.  Though
thou  shouldst  retire,  still  is  the  great  part  of  your  sin
already  done  ;  thy  country  has  seen  its  plains  o'errun

S87
c  c  2


THE  TRAGEDIES   OF  SENECA

campos  repleri  patria^  fulgentes  procul

aiinis  catervas  \ddit,  equitatu  levi

Cadmea  frangi  prata  et  excelsos  votis

volitare  proceres^  igne  flagrantes  trabes

fumare,  cineri  quae  petunt  nostras  domos,

fratresque  (facinus  quod  novum  et  Thebis  fuit)

in  se  ruentes.     totus  hoe  exercitus,  550

hoc  populus  omnis ;  utraque  hoc  vidit  soror

genetrixque  vidi :  nam  pater  debet  sibi

quod  ista  non  spectavit.     occurrat  tibi

nunc  Oedipus^  quo  iudice  erroris  quoque

poenae  petuntur.     ne,  precor,  ferro  erue

patriam  ac  penates  neve^  quas  regere  expetis,

everte  Thebas.     quis  tenet  mentem  furor  ?

petendo  patriam  perdis  ?     ut  fiat  tua,

vis  esse  nullam  ?     quin  tuae  causae  noeet

ipsum  hoc  quod  armis  uris  infestis  solum  5G0

segetesque  adultas  sternis  et  totos  fugam

edis  per  agros.     nemo  sic  vastat  sua  ;

quae  corripi  igne,  quae  meti  gladio  iubes

aliena  credis.     rex  sit  ex  vobis  uter,

manente  regno  quaerite.     haec  tehs  petis

Hammisque  tecta  ?     poteris  has  Aniphionis

quassare  moles  ?     nulla  quas  struxit  manus

stridente  tardum  machina  ducens  onus,

sed  convocatus  vocis  et  citharae  sono

per  se  ipse  summas  venit  in  turres  lapis —  570

haec  saxa  franges  ?     victor  hinc  spolia  auferes

vinctosque  duces  patris  aequales  tui,

matresque  ab  ipso  coniugum  raj)tas  sinu

saevus  catena  miles  imposita  trahet  ?

adulta  virgo,  mixta  captivo  gregi,

Thebana  nuribus  munus  Argolicis  eat?


888


PHOENISSAE

by  hostile  hordes,  has  seen  ai-med  squadrons  gleaming
from  afar,  the  Cadmean  meadows  trampled  by  flying
hoofs,  princes  in  their  chariots  careering  high,   the
smoke  and  flames  of  blazing  torclies  which  seek  to  burn
our  homes,  and  brothers  (a  crime  new  even  to  Thebes)
rushing  upon  each  other.     This  crime  the  whole  army
saw,  this,  all  the  people,  this,  both  thy  sisters  saw  and  I,
thy  mother,  saw — for  thy  father  owes  it  to  his  own  act
that  he  beheld  not  such  deeds.     Let  Oedipus  stand
before  thee  now,  in  whose  judgment  even  for  error
is  penalty  demanded.     Do  not,  I   beg  of  thee,  with
the    sword  destroy  thy  country  and  thy  household
gods,  nor  overthrow  Thebes,  which  thou  seekst  to
rule.     What  madness  holds  thee  ?     By  seeking  thy
land  wouldst  wreck  it.^   to  make  it  thine,  wouldst
have  it  no  land  at  all  ?     Nay,  thou  harmst  thine  own
cause    in  this    very   act   of  harrying  the   land  with
hostile    arms,   trampling  the   full-grown    crops,  and
spreading   terror   through    the    whole   country-side.
No  one  works  such   havoc  on  his  own  ;  what  thou
bidst  be  plundered  with  fire  and  reaped  with  sword,
thou  deemst  another's.       Question  whether  of  you
be  king,  but  let  the  kingdom  stand.     These  homes
dost  thou  seek  with  sword  and  fire  ?     Wilt  have  the
heart  to  batter  these   walls  which   Amphion    built,
whose  stones  no  hand  set  in  place,  moving  the  slow
weight    with    creaking    crane,    but,    marshalled    by
sound  of  singing  and  of  lyre,  each  stone  of  its  own
accord  came  to  the  turrets'  top — wilt  batter  down
these  stones  ?     Wilt  thou  bear  spoils  hence  as  victor,
and  shall  conquered  chieftains,  thy  father's  friends,
and  matrons  torn  from  their  husbands'  very  arms,  be
led    off  in    chains    by    thy    rough    soldiery.^      Shall
Thebes'   grown  maidens,  mingled   with  the  captive
herd,  go  as  gifts  to  the  dames  of  Argos  ?     Or  shall

389


THE   TRAGEDIES   OF   SENECA

an  et  ipsa,  palmas  viucta  post  tergum  datas,
mater  triuniphi  praeda  fraterni  veliar  ?
potesne  cives  leto  et  exitio  datos
videre  passim  ?     moenibus  caiis  potes  580

liostem  admoverCj  sanguine  et  flamma  })otes
implere  Thebas  ?     tam  ferus  durum  geris
saevumque  in  iras  pectus  ?     et  nonduni  imperas —
quid  sceptra  facient  ?     pone  vaesanos,  ])recor,
animi  tumores  teque  pietati  refer.

POLYNICES

Vt  profugus  errem  ?  semper  ut  patria  arcear
opemque  gentis  hospes  externae  seqiiar  ?
quid  paterer  aliud,  si  fefellissem  fidem  ?
si  peierassem  ?     fraudis  alienae  dabo
poenas,  at  ille  praemium  scelerum  feret  ?  590

iubes  abire  ;  matris  imperio  obsequor.
da  quo  revertar.     regia  frater  mea
habitet  superbus,  parva  me  abscondat  casa,
banc  date  repulso_,  liceat  exiguo  lare
pensare  regnum.     coniugi  donum  datus
arbitria  thalami  dura  felicis  ferara
liumilisque  socerum  lixa  dominantem  sequar?
in  servitutem  cadere  de  regno  grave  est.

lOCASTA

Si  regna  quaeris  nee  potest  sceptro  manus
vacare  saevo,  multa  quae  possunt  peti  600

in  orbe  toto  quaelibet  tellus  dabit.
hinc  nota  Baccho  Tmolus  attoUit  iuga
qua  lata  terris  spatia  frugiferis  iacent,

S90


PHORNISSAE

I  myself,  with  hands  bound  behind  my  back,  thy
mother,  be  borne  as  prize  in  thy  triumph  o'er  a
brother  ?  Canst  thou  bear  to  see  thy  countrymen
given  to  death  and  destruction  on  every  hand  ?
Against  these  dear  walls  canst  thou  lead  the  enemy,
canst  fill  Thebes  with  l)lood  and  fire  ?  Art  thou  so
wild,  is  thy  licart  so  hard,  so  full  of  savage  rage  ?
And  thou  art  not  yet  a  king — what  will  the  sceptre
do?  Oh,  I  beseecli  thee,  allay  the  mad  ferment  of
thy  soul,  and  come  back  to  duty's  ways.

POLYNICES

That  I  may  wander  outcast  ?  That  I  may  be  for
ever  shut  out  from  my  country  and  as  a  stranger
look  to  the  bounty  of  an  alien  race?  What  worse
should  I  suffer  if  I  had  broken  faith,  if  I  had  forsworn
myself?  Am  I  to  pay  the  penalty  of  another's  sin,
while  he  enjoys  the  profit  of  his  crimes  ?  Thou
bidst  me  go  ;  I  bend  to  my  mothei**s  will.  Show
me  whither  I  shall  get  me  back.  Let  my  haughty
brother  dwell  in  my  palace,  let  a  little  hut  hide  me
away  ;  this  grant  to  the  banished  brother,  let  it  be
mine  to  match  a  kingdom  with  a  paltry  hearth.  A
wife's  mere  chattel,  shall  I  bear  the  harsh  sway  of  a
rich  bride  and,  like  a  humble  camp-follower,  attend
upon  her  domineering  father?  To  fall  from  a  king's
estate  to  slavery  is  hard.

JOCASTA

If  thou  seekst  a  king's  estate,  and  the  harsh
sceptre  thy  hand  cannot  forego,  any  land  in  the
whole  world  will  offer  many  kingdoms  to  be  won.
Here  Tmolus  lifts  his  ridges,  the  Wine-god's  haunts,
where  stretch  broad  plains  of  grain-producing  lands,

391


THE   TRAGEDIES   OF   SENECA

et  qua  trahens  opulenta  Pactolus  vada

inundat  auro  rura  ;  nee  laetis  minus

Maeandros  arvis  flectit  errantes  aquas,

rapidusque  campos  fertiles  Hermus  secat.

hinc  grata  Cereri  Gargara  et  dives  solum

quod  Xanthus  ambit  nivibus  Idaeis  tumens ;

hinc  qua  relinquit  nomen  lonii  mare  ^  6lO

faucesque  Abydo  Sestos  opposita  premit ;

aut  qua  latus  "^  iam  propior  orienti  dedit

tutamque  crebris  portibus  Lyciam  videt.

haec  regna  ferro  quaere,  in  hos  populos  ferat

socer  arma  fortis,  has  tuo  sceptro  paret

tradatque  gentes.     hoc  adluic  regnum  puta

tenere  patrem.     melius  exilium  est  tibi

quam  reditus  iste.     crimine  alieno  exulas,

tuo  redibis.     melius  istis  viribus

nova  regna  nullo  scelere  maculata  appetes.  620

quin  ipse  frater  arma  comitatus  tua

tibi  militabit.

Vade  et  id  bellum  gere
in  quo  pater  materque  pugnanti  tibi
favere  jjossint.     regna  cum  scelere  omnibus
sunt  exiliis  graviora.      nunc  belli  mala
propone,  dubias  Martis  incerti  vices  :
licet  omne  tecum  Graeciae  robur  trahas,
licet  arma  longe  miles  ac  late  explicet,
fortuna  belli  semper  ancipiti  in  loco  est,
quodcumque  Mars  decernit.     exaequat  duos,  630

licet  impares  sint,  gladius  ;  et  spes  et  metus
Fors  caeca  versat.     praemium  incertum  petis,
ceitum  scelus.     favisse  fac  votis  decs

'  So  Richler :  Leo,   with   u,    maris  :    Biichder  conjectures
Ionium  Tlietis  :    Wi'amowitz  qua  reliquit  nomen  Inois  mari.

2  So    Leo,    with   u :  Richter   quae :  N.    Heinsius   aut  qua
Thetis  se.
392


PHOENISSAE

and  where  Pactolus,  rolling  liis  rich  waves,  o'erflows
the  fields  with  gold ;  nor  does  Meander  through
meadows  less  joyful  bend  his  wandering  waters,  and
swift  Ilermus  cleaves  the  fertile  plains.  Here  is
Gargara,  beloved  of  Ceres,  and  the  soil  which  rich
Xanthns  compasses,  swollen  by  Ida's  snows  ;  here  the
land  where  the  Ionian  sea  gives  up  its  name,  and
Sestos,  over  against  Abydos,  hugs  the  narrow  strait  ^  ;
or  where,  now  nearer  to  the  east,  it  curves  and  sees
Lycia  secure  with  its  many  harbours.  These  kingdoms
seek  thou  with  the  sword  ;  against  these  peoples  let
thy  brave  father  in-law  bear  arms  ;  these  tribes  let  him
acquire  and  deliver  to  thy  sway.  As  for  this  king-
dom, deem  that  thy  father  still  holds  it  fast.  Better
is  exile  for  thee  than  such  return  as  this.  Through
another's  sin  thou  livest  in  exile,  through  thine
own  wilt  thou  return.  With  yonder  forces,  'tAvere
better  to  seek  new  realms,  stained  by  no  crime.
Nay,  thy  brother's  self,  accompanying  thine  arms,
will  fight  for  thee.

•^-2  Go  thou,  then,  and  wage  such  warfare  that,
as  thou  fightest,  thy  father  and  thy  mother  may
pray  for  tliy  success.  Kingdoms  won  by  crime  are
heavier  than  any  exile.  Now  picture  to  thy-
self war's  mishaps,  the  wavering  chances  of  un-
certain Mars :  though  thou  bring  with  thee  the
whole  strength  of  Greece,  though  thy  armed  soldiery
spread  far  and  wide,  the  fortune  of  war  hangs  ever
in  doubtful  scale,  according  as  Mars  determines.  The
sword  makes  two  warriors  equal  though  they  be  ill-
matched  ;  both  hope  and  fear  are  in  blind  Fortune's
hand.  The  prize  thou  seekst  is  uncertain  ;  certain,
the   crime.       Grant    that   all    the    gods    have    been

*  The  Hellespout.

393


THE   TRAGEDIES   OF   SENECA
omnes  tuis  ;  cessere  et  aversi  fugam
petiere  cives,  clade  funesta  iacens
obtexit  agros  miles — exultes  licet
victorque  fratris  spolia  deiecti  geras,
frangenda  palma  est.     quale  tu  hoc  belluni  putas,
in  quo  execrandum  victor  admittit  nefas,
si  gaudet  ?     hunc  quern  vincere  infelix  cupis,        640
cum  viceris,  lugebis.     infaustas  age
dimitte  pugnas,  libera  patriam  metu,
luctu  parentes.

POLYNICE8

Sceleris  et  fraudis  suae
poenas  nefandus  frater  ut  nullas  ferat  ?


Ne  metue.     poenas  et  quidem  solvet  graves  :
regnabit.     est  haec  poena,     si  dubitas^  avo
patrique  crede  ;  Cadmus  hoc  dicet  tibi
Cadmique  proles,     sceptra  Thebano  fuit
impune  nulli  gerere,  nee  quisquam  fide
rupta  tenebit  ilia,     iam  numeres  licet  650

fratrem  inter  istos.


Numeret,  est  tanti  mihi
cum  regibus  iacere.     te  turbae  exulum
ascribe.

IOCA8TA

Regna^  dummodo  invisus  tuis.
394


PHOENISSAE

favourable  to  thy  prayers  ;  grant  that  the  citizens
have  given  way,  that  they  have  turned  and  fled,  that
soldiers,  lying  in  bloody  heaps,  cover  the  fields—
though  thou  shouldst  triumph  and  as  victor  bear  off
the  spoils  of  thy  conquered  brother,  broken  must
be  the  victor's  palm.  What  manner  of  war  deemst
thou  that,  wherein  the  conqueror  takes  on  him  the
curse  of  guilt  if  he  rejoices?  Mim  whom,  unhappy
man,  thou  art  so  eager  to  o'ercome,  when  thou  hast
o'ercome  thou  wilt  lament.  Oh,  then,  forego  this
unhallowed  strife,  free  thy  country  from  fear,  from
agony  thy  parents.

POLYNICES

That  my  cursed  brother  may  receive  no  penalty
for  his  crime  and  treachery  ?

JOCASTA

Have  no  fear.  Penalty,  yes,  heavy  penalty  shall  he
pay  :  he  shall  reign.  That  is  the  penalty.  If  thou  dost
doubt  it,  believe  thy  grandsire  and  thy  sire  ;  Cadmus
will  tell  thee  this,  and  the  race  of  Cadmus.  No
Theban  hath  e'er  borne  sceptre  without  j)enalty,  nor
will  any  hold  it  who  has  broken  faith.  Now  mayst
thou  count  thy  brother  amongst  these.

ETEOCLES

So  let  him  count  me  ;  'tis  worth  the  price,  me-
thinks,  to  lie  with  kings.

[To  POLYNICES.]

^^2  Thee  I  enrol  amongst  the  exiled  throng.

JOCASTA

Reign,  then,  but  hated  by  thy  people.

895


THE   TRAGEDIES   OF   SENECA

ETEOCLES

Regnare  iion  vult  esse  qui  invisus  timet;
simul  ista  mundi  conditor  posuit  deus^
odium  atque  regnura.     regis  hoc  magni  reor,
odia  ipsa  premere.     multa  domiiiantem  vetat
amor  suorum  ;  plus  in  iratos  licet,
qui  vult  amarij  languida  regnat  manu.

lorASTA
Invisa  numquam  imperia  retinentur  diu.  660

ETEOCLES

Praecepta  melius  imperi  reges  dabunt ;
exilia  tu  dispone,     pro  regno  velim — ■

lOCASTA

Patriam  penates  coniugem  Hammis  dare  ?

ETEOCLES

Imperia  pretio  quolibet  constant  bene.


^96


PHOENISSAE


To  reign  lie  hath  no  will  who  feareth  to  be  hated  ;
the  god  who  made  the  world  set  those  two  things
together,  hatred  and  sovereignty.  This  is  the  part
of  a  great  sovereign,  I  think,  to  tread  e'en  hatred
under  foot.  A  people's  love  forbids  a  ruler  many
things  ;  against  their  rage  he  has  more  rights.  Who
would  be  loved  reigns  with  a  nerveless  hand.

JOCASTA

But  hated  sovereignty  is  never  long  retained.


The  rules  for  sovereignty  kings  will  better  give  ;
do  thou  make  rules  for  exiles.  For  sovereignty  I
would  fain —

JOCASTA

Give  country,  home,  wife  to  the  flames  ?

ETEOCI.ES

Sovereignty  is  well  bought  at  any  price.

*  *  *  *  *


397


OCTAVIA


OCTAVIA

A  FABULA  PRAETEXTA

THE  ONLY  EXTANT  ROMAN  HISTORICAL
DRAMA

Introduction

The  Roman  liistorical  drama  had  a  place  among
the  earliest  products  of  Roman  literature,  and  seems
to  have  enjoyed  a  degree  of  poj)ularity  through  all
succeding  periods.  That  Roman  literary  genius  did
not  find  a  much  fuller  expression  tlirough  this
channel  was  not  due  to  a  lack  of  national  pride  and
patriotism,  nor  yet  to  a  dearth  of  interesting  and
inspiring  subjects  in  Roman  liistory.  The  true  reason
is  probably  to  be  found  in  the  fact  that  by  the  time
national  conditions  were  ripe  for  the  development  of
any  form  of  literature,  the  Greeks  had  already  worked,
and  well  worked,  nearly  all  available  fields,  and  had
produced  a  mass  of  literature  which  dazzled  the
Roman  mind  when  at  last  circumstances  brought
these  two  nations  into  closer  contact.

The  natural  and  immediate  result  was  an  attempt
on  the  })art  of  the  Romans  to  imitate  these  great
models.  And  hence  we  have  in  drama,  both  in
tragedy  and  in  comedy,  a  wholesale  imitation  of  the
Greek  dramas,  oftentimes  nothing  more  than  a  trans-
lation of  these,  with  only  here  and  there  an  attempt
to  produce  something  of  a  strictly  native  character,
entirely  independent  of  the  Greek  influence.

This  imitative  impulse  was  augmented  by  the  fact

401


THE   TRAGEDIES   OF   SENECA

that  the  Romans  were  following  the  line  of  least
resistance^  since  it  is  always  easier  to  imitate  than
to  create.  Furthermore,  they  had  as  yet  developed
no  national  pride  of  literature  to  hold  them  to  their
own  lines  of  national  development  ;  they  had  no
forms  of  their  own  so  well  established  that  the  mere
force  of  literary  momentum  would  carry  them  steadily
on  toward  a  fuller  develojiment,  in  spite  of  the  dis-
turbing effects  of  the  influx  of  other  and  better  models.
They  had,  indeed,  developed  a  native  Saturnian  verse
which,  had  it  been  allowed  a  free  field,  might  have
reached  a  high  pitch  of  literary  excellence.  But  it
speedily  gave  way  at  the  approach  of  the  more  elegant
imported  forms.

The  overwhelming  influence  of  Greek  tragedy  upon
the  Roman  di'amatists  can  be  seen  at  a  glance  as  we
review  the  dramatic  product  of  the  Roman  tragedians.
We  have  titles  and  fragments  of  nine  tragedies  by
Livius  Andronicus,  seven  by  Naevius,  twenty-two  by
Ennius,  thirteen  by  Pacuvius,  forty-six  by  Accius,  and
many  fragments  from  each  of  these,  unassignable  to
definite  i:)lays,  which  indicate  numerous  other  plays  of
the  same  character.  To  these  should  be  added  addi-
tional fragments  from  nearly  a  score  more  of  Roman
writers  during  the  next  two  hundred  yeaj's  after
Accius.  All  the  above-mentioned  phxys  are  on  Greek
subjects  ;  and  most  of  those  whose  fragments  are  suf-
ficientl}'  extensive  to  allow  us  to  form  an  opinion  of
their  character  are  either  translations  or  close  imita-
tions of  the  Greeks,  or  are  so  influenced  by  these  as  to
be  decidedly  Greek  rather  than  Roman  in  character.

And  what  of  the  genuine  Roman  dramatic  product  ?
Speaking  for  the  fabii/a  pracle.vfa,  or  Roman  historical
drama,  alone,  the  entire  outj)ut,  so  far  as  our  records
go,  is  contained  in  the  following  list  of  authors  and
titles.
402


OCTAVIA

From  Naevius  (265-204  d.c.)  we  have  the  Cla.itidiuvi,
written  in  celebration  of  the  victory  of  Marcelkis  (at
Chistidium  in  222  b.c.)  over  Vidumarus,  king  of  the
Transpadane  Gauls,  whom  Marcellus  slew  and  stripped
of  his  armour,  thus  gaining  the  rare  spoUa  opima.  The
play  was  probably  written  for  the  especial  occasion
either  of  the  triumph  of  Marcellus  or  of  the  celebra-
tion of  his  funeral.

We  have  also  from  Naevius  a  ])lay  variously  entitled
Lupus  or  Romulus  or  ALmonium  Eeini  el  Rojnidi,
evidently  one  of  those  dramatic  reproductions  of
scenes  in  the  life  of  a  god,  enacted  as  a  part  of  the
ceremonies  of  his  worship.  This  play  is  comparable
to  dramatic  representations  among  the  Greeks  in  the
worship  of  Dionysus.

The  Ambracia  and  the  Sahinae  of  Ennius  (239-169
B.C.)  are  ordinarily  classed  as  fahulae  praetextae,
although  Lucian  M tiller  classes  the  fragments  of
the  Ambracia  among  the  Scdurae  of  Ennius ;  while
V^'ihlen  puts  the  Ambracia  under  the  heading  Comoe-
dlarum  el  celerorum  carminum  re'ujuiae,  and  classifies
the  fragments  of  the  Sabiiiae  under  ex  incerlis  satur-
arum  libris.  The  Ambracia  is  evidently  called  after
the  city  of  that  name  in  Epirus,  celebrated  for  the
long  and  remarkable  siege  which  it  sustained  against
the  Romans  under  M.  Fulvius  Nobilior.  That  general
finally  captured  the  city  in  189  b.c.  If  the  piece  is
to  be  considered  as  a  play,  it  was,  like  the  Clastidium,
written  in  honour  of  the  Roman  general,  and  acted  on
the  occasion  either  of  his  triumph  or  of  his  funeral.

We  have  four  short  fragmeiits  from  the  Paidus  of
Pacuvius  (220-130  b.c.),  written  in  celebration  of  the
exploits  of  L.  Aemilius  Faulus  who  conquered  Perseus,
king  of  Macedonia,  in  the  battle  of  Pydna,  16S  b.c.

The    fragments    of  the   plays  already  mentioned

403
D  D  2


THE   TRAGEDIES  OF  SENECA

are  too  brief  to  afford  any  adequate  idea  of  their
character  or  content.  But  in  the  Bruhis  of  Accius
(b.  170.  B.C.),  whicli  centres  around  the  expulsion
of  the  Tarquins  and  the  estabUshment  of  the  Re-
public, we  have  a  larger  glimpse  into  the  play
through  two  most  interesting  fragments  consisting
of  twelve  iambic  trimeters  and  ten  trochaic  tetra-
meters, respectively.  In  the  first.  King  Tarquin  re-
lates to  his  seer  an  ill-ominous  dream  which  he  has
had ;  the  second  is  the  seer's  interpretation  of  this
dream,  pointing  to  Tarquin's  dethronement  by  Brutus.
Other  short  fragments  give  glimpses  of  the  outrage
of  Lucretia  by  Sextus  at  Collatia,  and  the  scene  in
the  forum  where  Brutus  takes  his  oath  of  office  as
first  consul.  This  play,  unlike  most  of  its  predecessors,
was  not  written  at  the  time  of  the  events  which  it
portrays,  but  may  still  be  classed  with  them,  so  far  as
its  object  is  concerned,  since  it  is  generally  thought
to  have  been  written  in  honour  of  D.  Junius  Brutus,
who  was  consul  in  138  B.C.,  and  with  whom  the  poet
enjoyed  an  intimate  friendship.

Ano\\\ex praetexta  of  Accius  is  presei'ved,  the  Decius,
of  v,-hich  eleven  short  fragments  remain.  This  play
celebrates  the  victory  of  Quintus  Fabins  Maximus
and  P.  Decius  Mus  over  the  Samnites  and  Gauls  at
Sentinum  in  295  B.C.  The  climax  of  the  play  would
be  the  self-immolation  of  Decius  after  the  example
of  his  father  in  the  Latin  war  of  340  b.c.

In  addition  to  these  plays  of  the  Roman  dramatists
of  the  Republic,  we  have  knowledge  of  a  few  which
date  from  later  times.  There  was  a  historical  drama
entitled  Iter,hy  L.  Cornelius  Balbus,  wlio  dramatized
the  incidents  of  a  journey  whicli  he  made  to  Pompey's
camp  at  Dyrrachium  at  the  opening  of  civil  war  in
49  B.C.  Balbus  was  under  commission  from  Caesar
404


OCTAVIA

to  treat  with  the  consul,  L.  Cornelius  Lcntulus,  and
other  optimates  who  had  fled  from  Rome,  concerning
their  return  to  the  city.  The  journey  was  a  complete
fiasco,  so  far  as  results  were  concerned ;  but  the
vanity  of  Balbus  w^as  so  flattered  by  this  (to  him)
important  mission  that  he  must  needs  dramatize  his
experiences  and  present  the  play  under  his  own
direction  in  his  native  city  of  Gades.

We  have  mention  also  of  an  Aoiens  by  Pomponius
Secundus,  and  of  two  praelexlae  by  Curiatius  Maternus,
entitled  Domilius  and  Ca/o.

These  eleven  historical  plaj's  ai"e,  as  we  have  seen,
for  the  most  part,  plays  of  occasion,  and  would  be  at
best  of  but  temporary  interest,  born  of  the  sj)ecial
circumstances  which  inspired  them.  They  are  in  no
way  comparable  with  such  historical  dramas  on  Roman
subjects  as  Shakespeare's  Julius  Caesar  or  Corio/anus,
whose  interest  is  for  all  times.

We  have  still  a  twelfth  play  of  this  class,  which
enjoys  the  unique  distinction  of  being  the  only
Roman  historical  drama  which  has  come  down  to  us
in  its  complete  form — the  Oclavia.  Its  authorship  is
unknown,  although  tradition  gives  it  a  place  among
the  tragedies  of  Seneca,  the  philosopher.  The
general  opinion  of  modern  critics,  however,  is
against  this  tradition,  chiefly  because  one  passage
in  the  play,  in  the  form  of  a  prophecy,  too  circum-
stantially describes  the  death  of  Xero,  which  occurred
three  years  after  the  death  of  Seneca.  It  is  generallv
agreed  that  the  play  must  have  been  written  soon
j  after  the  death  of  Nero,  and  by  some  one,  possibly
Maternus,  who  had  been  an  eye-witness  of  the
events,  and  who  had  been  inspired  by  his  sympathies
for  the  unfortunate  Octavia  to  write  this  story  of  her
sufferings.

405


THE  TRAGEDIES  OF  SENECA


Summary  of  the  Imperiai,  Family  History  which
FORMS  A  Background  to  the  Ocfavia  and  to
WHICH  References  are  made  throughout  the
Play.

Tiberius  Claudius  Drusus  Nero  Caesar  Ger-
MANicus,  more  commonly  known  as  Claudius^  fourth
emperor  of  Rome,  liad  taken  for  his  third  ^\ife  tlie
daughter  of  M.  Valerius  Messala,  Messalina,  who
bore  to  him  two  children,  Britannicus  and  Octavia.
Always  notorious  for  her  profligacy  and  licentiousness,
Mess;ilina  crowned  her  career  by  publicly  marrying
C.  Silius  at  Rome  during  the  temporary  sojourn  of
lier  imperial  husband  at  Ostia.  Claudius  long  wavered
as  to  her  punishment,  but  at  last,  through  the  influence
of  his  favourite,  Narcissus,  he  signed  her  death
warrant,  and  she  was  executed  by  a  tribune  of  the
guards  in  48  a.d.

In  the  following  year,  through  the  intrigue  of  the
freedraan  Pallas,  Claudius  married  his  brother's
daughter,  Agrippina,  who  brought  with  her  into  the
emperor's  household  Lucius  Domitius,  her  son  by
her  first  husband,  Cn.  Domitius  Ahenobarbus.

Immediately  Agrijipina  began  to  plot  for  the
succession  of  her  son  to  the  throne  of  the  Caesars.
In  50  A.D.  she  prevailed  upon  Claudius  to  adopt,  to
the  prejudice  of  Britannicus,  her  own  son,  who  was
thereafter  known  as  Nero.  She  had  already  caused
Seneca,  who  liad  been  exiled  at  the  instance  of
Messalina,  to  be  recalled  that  he  might  serve  as
406


OCTAVIA

Nero's  tutor.  In  53  a.d.  she  further  advanced
her  plans  by  conipassin*^  the  marriage  of  her  son  to
Octaviaj  the  emperor's  daughter.  Octavia  had  ah-eady
been  betrothed  by  Claudius  to  L.  Silanus,  who  now,
to  escape  the  vengeance  of  Agrippina,  committed
suicide.

Her  plans  being  now  fully  laid  for  the  final  act,
Agrippina  secretly  poisoned  Claudius  on  October  12th,
54  A.D.,  and  on  the  following  day  Nero  succeeded
to  the  throne,  being  then  seventeen  years  of  age.
In  the  following  year,  by  the  joint  plotting  of
mother  and  son,  the  young  Britannicus,  also,  was
poisoned.

Because  of  the  youth  and  inexperience  of  her  son,
Agrippina  enjoyed  four  years  of  pnictically  imperial
power  ;  but  at  last,  in  59  a.d.,  Nero,  tired  of  his
mother's  ascendancy,  caused  her  to  be  assassinated,
after  an  unsuccessful  attempt  upon  her  life  by  means
of  a  treacherous  vessel,  in  which  death-trap  he  had
sent  her  to  sea.

Nero  had  long  since  become  enamoured  of  Poppaea,
a  beautiful  proHigate,  who  had  left  her  husband,
Rufinus  Crispinus,  to  live  with  Otho,  and  who  now
became  mistress  of  the  emperor.  Aspiring  to  be  his
wife,  she  had  plotted  to  bring  about  the  death  of
Agrippina  and  later  the  divorce  of  Octavia.  Through
these  machinations  of  his  mistress  and  Nero's  own
more  than  ready  acquiescence,  Octavia  was  falsely
accused  of  adultery  and  in  62  a.d.  she  was  banished
to  Pandataria,  where  she  was  shortly  afterwards  put
to  death.

Poppaea  herself  died  in  65  a.d.  as  the  result,  it
was  said,  of  a  kick  by  her  brutal  husband  when  she
was  far  advanced  in  pregnancy.  In  the  same  year,
at  the  command  of  the  emperor,  Seneca  committed

407


THE  TRAGEDIES  OF  SENECA

suicide ;  and  three  years  thereafter,  in  68  a.d.,  Nero
himself,  deposed  by  the  praetorian  guards,  who  had
espoused  the  cause  of  Galba,  and  condemned  to
death  by  the  Senate,  fled  from  Rome  and,  after  vain
efforts  to  escape,  received  his  death-stroke  by  his
own  request  at  the  hands  of  a  faithful  attendant
who  had  fled  with  him.


408


DRAMATIS  PERSONAE

OcTAviA,  stepsister  and  ivi/e  of  Ne7-o.

Nurse  of  Oclavia.

PoPPAEA,  mistress  and  afterward  wife  of  Nero.

Nurse  of  Poppaea.

Ghost  of  Agrippina,  mother  of  Nero ,  slain  by  him,

Nero,  Emperor  of  Borne.

Seneca,  former  tutor  of  Nero,  and  later  one  of  his  chief
cotinscllors.

Prefect  of  Roman  Soldiers.

Messenger.

Chorus  of  Romans,  sympathetic  with  Oclavia.

Chorus,  attached  to  the  interests  of  the  court.

The  Scene  is  laid  throughout  in  different  apartments  of
the  palace  of  Nero,  aud  is  concerned  with  the  events  of  the
year  62  a.  D.


OCTAVIA


I  AM  vaga  caelo  sidera  fulgens
Aurora  fugat,  surgit  Titan
radiante  coma  mundoque  diem
reddit  clarum.

age,  tot  tantis  onerata  mails,
repete  assuetos  iam  tibi  questus
atque  aequoreas  vince  Alcyonas,
vince  et  volucres  Pandionias;
gravior  namque  his  fortuna  tua  est.
semper,  genetrix,  deflenda  mihi,  10

prima  meorum  causa  malorum,
tristes  questus  natae  exaudi,
si  quis  remanet  sensus  in  umbris.
utinam  ante  manu  grandaeva  sua
niea  rupisset  stamina  Clothe,
tua  quam  maerens  vulnera  vidi
oraque  foedo  sparsa  cruore  !
o  lux  semper  funesta  milii,
tempore  ab  illo

lux  es  tenebris  invisa  magis  !  20

tulimus  saevae  iussa  novercae,
hostilem  animum  vultusque  truces,
ilia  ilia  meis  tristis  Erinys
thalamis  Stygios  praetulit  ignes
toque  extinxit,  miserande  pater,
mode  cui  totus  paruit  orbis
ultra  Oceanum


410


OCTAVIA

OCTAVIA

Now  doth  flushing  dawn  drive  the  wandering  stars
from  heaven  ;  with  radiant  beams  the  sun  arises  and
gives  the  world  once  more  the  liglit  of  day.  On
thenj  with  all  thy  woes  Aveighed  down,  resume  thy
now  accustomed  plaints  and  out- wail  the  sea-bred
Halcyons,^  out-wail  the  birds  ^  of  old  Pandion's
house  ;  for  more  grievous  is  thy  lot  than  theirs.
O  mother,  constant  source  of  tears  to  me,  first
cause  of  my  misfortunes,  hearken  to  thy  daughter's
sad  complaints,  if  any  consciousness  remains  among
the  shades.  Oh,  that  the  ancient  Clotho  with  her
own  hand  had  clipped  my  threads  before  sadly  I  saw
thy  wounds,  thy  face  with  foul  gore  besmeared  !  O
light,  ever  calamitous  to  me,  from  that  time,  O  light,
thou  art  more  hateful  than  the  dark  !  We  have
endured  a  cruel  step-dame's  ^  orders,  her  hostile
spirit  and  her  aspect  fierce.  'Twas  she,  'twas  she,
the  baleful  fury,  who  bore  the  Stygian  torches  to  my
bridal  chamber,  and  quenched  thy  light,  O  wretched
father,  whom  but  yesterday  the  whole  world  obe3'ed,
even    beyond    Ocean's    bounds,    before    whom    the

^  See  Index  s.v.  "  Ceyx."

2  See  Index  a.v.  "  Philomela."

•  Agrippina.

411


THE   TRAGEDIES   OF  SENECA

cuique  Britanni  terga  dedere,

ducibus  nostiis  ante  ignoti

iurisque  sui.  SO

coiiiugis,  heu  me,  pater^  insidiis

oppresse  iaces  servitque  domus

cum  prole  tua  capta  tyranno.

NVTRIX

Fulgore  primo  captus  et  fragili  bono  ^
fallacis  aulae  quisquis  attonitus  stupet,
subito^  latentis  ecce  Fortunae  inipetu
modo  praepotentem  cernat  eversam  donium
stirpemque  Claudi,  cuius  imperio  fuit
subiectus  orbis,  paruit  liber  diu

Oceanus  et  recepit  invitus  rates.  40

en  qui  Britannis  primus  imposuit  iugiun,
igaota  tantis  classibus  texit  freta
interque  gentes  barbai-as  tutus  fuit
et  saeva  maria^  coniugis  scelere  occidit ;
mox  ilia  nati ;  cuius  extinctus  iacet
frater  venenis.     maeret  infelix  soror
eademque  coniunx  nee  graves  luctus  valet
ira  coacta  tegere  crudelis  viri ;
quern  sancta  refugit  semper,  atque  odio  pari
ardens  maritus  imj)ia  flagrat  face.  50

animum  dolentis  nostra  solatur  fides
pietasque  frustra  ;  vincit  immitis  dolor
consilia  nostra  nee  regi  mentis  potest
generosus  ardor^  sed  malis  vires  capit.
heu  quani  nefaiidum  prospicit  noster  timor
scelus,  quod  utinam  nunicn  avertat  dcum.

'  So  Richter:  Leo  conjectures  facie  nova.
2  So  Bichler :  Leo  sub  uno,  with  n*,  but  conjectui-ea  sxxhiio
involantis.

412


OCTAVIA

Britons  ^  fled,  erstwhile  to  our  leaders  all  unknown
and  unsubdued.  Alas,  my  father,  by  thy  wife's  plots
thou  liest  crushed,  and  thy  house  together  with  thy
child  2  bends  to  a  tyrant's  ^  will.

[Exit  to  her  chamber.    Enter  nukse.]

NURSE

Whoso,  o'erpowered  by  the  novel  splendour  and
the  frail  blessings  of  deceitful  royalty,  stands  awe-
struck and  amazed,  lo,  'neath  the  sudden  blow  of
lurking  Fate,  let  him  behold,  o'erthrown,  the  house
and  stock  of  Claudius,  but  now  all  powerful,  under
whose  rule  the  whole  world  was  brought,  whom  the
Ocean,  long  to  sway  unknown,  obeyed  and,  all  un-
willingly, received  his  ships.  Lo,  he  who  first  on
the  Britons  set  a  yoke,  who  covered  unknown  floods
with  his  mighty  fleets,  who  was  safe  midst  tribes
barbaric,  midst  raging  seas,  by  his  wife's*  crime  is
fallen  ;  she  soon  by  her  son's  hand  fell  ;  and  by  his
poison  lies  my  brother  ^  slain.  The  unhappy  sister,''
yea,  the  unhappy  wife  grieves  on,  nor  can  she  hide
her  bitter  sufferings,  forced  to  the  angry  will  of  her
cruel  husband.  From  him  ever  the  pure  girl  recoils,
and  her  husband,  though  by  equal  hate  inspired,
with  incestuous  passion  burns.  Our  fond  love  strives
in  vain  to  console  her  grieving  heart ;  her  cniel
smart  o'ercomes  our  counsels,  nor  can  the  noble  pas-
sion of  her  soul  be  governed,  but  from  her  woes  she
draws  new  strength.  Alas  !  how  my  fears  forbode
some  desperate  deed,  which  may  the  gods  forbid.

'  Claudius  had  made  an  expedition  to  Britain  in  43  a.d.
^  i.e.  herself.  '  Nero.

■*  Agrippina.  *  Britaiinicus.

*  i.e..  step-sister,  Octavia ;  she  was  also  Nero's  sister  hy
adoption.

418


414


THE  TRAGEDIES   OF  SENECA

OCTAVIA

O  mea  nullis  aequauda  malis
fortunaj  licet

repetam  luctus,  Electra  tuos.
tibi  maerenti  caesum  licuit  6o

flere  parentem,
scelus  ulcisci  vindice  fratre,
tua  quern  pietas  hosti  rapuit
texitque  fides ;
me  crudeli  sorte  parentes
raptos  prohibet  lugere  timor
fratrisque  necem  deflere  vetat,
in  quo  fuerat  spes  una  mihi
totque  malorum  breve  solameu.
nunc  in  luctus  servata  meos  70

niagni  resto  nominis  umbra.

NVTRIX

Vox  en  nostras  perculit  aures
tristis  alumnae  ;  cesset  thalaniis
inferre  gradus  tarda  senectus  ?

OCTAVIA

Excipe  nostras  lacrinias,  nutrix,
testis  nostri  fida  doloris.

NVTRIX

Quis  te  tantis  solvet  curls,
niiseranda,  dies  ?

OCTAVIA

Qui  me  Stygias  mittet  ad  umbras.

NVTRIX

Ouiina  quaeso  sint  ista  procul.  80


OCTAVIA

OCTAVIA   [heard  speaking  from  her  chamber^

O  fate  of  mine,  to  be  matched  by  no  misfortunes,
lliough  I  recall  tliy  woes,  Electra.  Thou  couldst
weep  out  thy  grief  for  thy  father's  murder,  couldst
take  vengeance  on  the  crime  with  thy  brother  as
avenger,  whom  thy  love  snatched  from  tlie  foe  and
thy  faithful  care  protected  ;  but  me  fear  forbids  to
mourn  my  parents  reft  from  me  by  cruel  fate,  forbids
to  bewail  my  brother's  taking  off,  in  whom  was  my
sole  hope,  the  fleeting  solace  of  my  many  woes.  And
now,  saved  but  to  my  suffering,  I  remain,  the  shadow
of  a  noble  name.

NURSE

Hark  !  the  voice  of  my  sad  foster-child  strikes  on
mine  ears.  Does  thy  slow  age  take  thee  to  her
chamber  with  lagging  steps  ?

yShe  advances  toward  the  chamber,  hut  is  met  by  Octavia,
coming  forth.^

OCTAVIA

Receive  my  tears,  dear  nurse,  thou  trusty  witness
of  my  suflering.

NURSE

What  day  will  free  thee  from  thy  miglity  cares,
poor  child  ?

OCTAVIA

Tiie  day  that  sends  me  to  the  Stygian  shades.


NURSE

Far  from  us  be  the  omen  of  that  word,  I  pray.


415


THE  TRAGEDIES   OF  SENECA


Non  vota  meos  tua  nunc  casus,
sed  fata  regunt.

NVTRIX

Dabit  afflictae  meliora  deus
tempoi-a  mitis  ;  tu  modo  blando
vince  obsequio  placata  viruni.

OCTAVIA

Vincam  saevos  ante  leones
tigresque  truces^  fera  quam  saevi
corda  tyranni.
odit  genitos  sanguine  claro^
spernit  superos  hominesque  simul,  90

nee  fortunam  capit  ipse  suam
quam  dedit  illi  per  scelus  ingens
infjinda  parens,     licet  ingratum
dirae  pudeat  munere  matris
hoc  imperium  cepisse,  licet
tantum  munus  morte  rependat,
feret  hunc  titulum  post  fata  tanien
femina  longo  semper  in  aevo.

NVTRIX

Animi  retine  verba  furentis,
temere  emissam  comprime  voceni.

OCTAVIA

Toleranda  quamvis  patiar,  baud  uniquam  que-
ant  "00

nisi  morte  tristi  nostra  finiri  mala,
genetrice  caesa,  per  scelus  rapto  patre,
orbata  fratre,  miseriis  luctu  obruta,
maerore  pressa,  coniugi  invisa  ac  meae
4,16


OCTAVIA

OCTAVIA

No  longer  is  it  thy  prayers  that  shape  my  life  but
the  fates.

NunsE

God  in  his  mercy  will  bring  to  thine  affliction
better  days.  Do  thou  but  be  soothed,,  and  win  thy
husband  with  gentle  courtesy.

OCTAVIA

Sooner  shall  I  win  savage  lions  and  fierce  tigers,
than  that  savage  tyrant's  brutal  heart.  He  hates  all
born  of  noble  blood,  scorns  gods  and  men  alike  ;  nor
can  he  of  himself  wield  his  liigh  fortune  which  by  a
monstrous  crime  his  impious  mother  bestowed  on
him.  Yes  !  though  the  ungrateful  wretch  count  it
shame  to  take  this  empire  as  his  cursed  mother's
gift,  though  he  requite  her  mighty  gift  with  death,
still  will  the  woman  even  after  death  win  the  fame
thereof  for  ever  through  unending  age.

NURSE

Check  thou  the  utterance  of  thy  raging  heart;
repress  the  words  thou  hast  poured  forth  too  rashly.

OCTAVIA

Though  I  should  endure  what  must  be  borne,  ne'er
could  my  woes  be  ended,  save  by  gloomy  death.
With  my  mother  slain,  my  father  by  crime  snatched
from  me,  robbed  of  my  brother,  by  wretchedness  and
grief  o'erwhelmed,  by  sorrow  crushed,  by  my  husband

417

vol..  II  E    E


THE   TRAGEDIES    OF   SENECA

subiecta  famulae  luce  non  grata  fiuor,

tre})idante  semper  corde  non  mortis  metu

sed  sceleris — absit  crimen  a  fatis  meis,

mori  iuvabit ;  poena  nam  gravior  nece  est

videre  tumidos  et  truces  miserae  mihi

vultus  tyranni  iungere  atque  hosti  oscula,  110

timere  nutus  cuius  obscquium  mens

baud  ferre  posset  fata  post  fratris  dolor

scelere  interempti,  cuius  imperium  tenet

et  sorte  gaudet  auctor  infandae  necis.

quam  saepe  tristis  umbra  germani  meis

ofFertur  oculis,  membra  cum  solvit  quies

et  fessa  fletu  luniina  oppressit  sopor.

modo  facibus  atris  armat  infirmas  manus

oculosque  et  ora  fratris  infestus  petit,

modo  trepidus  idem  refugit  in  thalamos  meos ;       120

persequitur  hostis  atque  inbaerenti  mihi

violentus  ensem  per  latus  nostrum  rapit.

tunc  tremor  et  ingens  cxcutit  somnos  pavor

renovatque  luctus  et  metus  miserae  milii.

adice  bis  superbam  paelicem,  nostrae  donuis

spoliis  nitentem,  cuius  in  munus  suam

Stygiae  parentein  natus  imposuit  rati,

quam  dira  post  naufragia  superato  mari

f'erro  interemit  sae\  ior  pelagi  fretis.

quae  spes  salutis  post  nefas  tantum  milii  ?  130

inimica  victrix  imminet  tlialamis  meis

odioque  nostri  Hagrat  et  j)retium  stupri

iustae  maritum  coniugis  poscit  caput.

emergere  umbris  et  f'er  auxilium  tuae

natae  invocanti,  genitor,  aut  Stygios  sinus

tellure  rupta  pande,  quo  praeceps  ferar.

*  j.e.  Acte.     See  line  197,  note.

-  Nero,  in  divorcing  Octavia,  alleged  adultery  as  the  cause.

418


OCTAVIA

hated,  and  set  beneath  my  slave,^  the  sweet  liglit
brings  no  joy  to  me  ;  for  my  heart  is  ever  trembling,
not  with  the  fear  of  death,  but  of  crime  ^ — be  crime
but  hicking  to  my  misfortunes,  death  will  be  delight.
For  'tis  a  punishment  far  worse  than  death  to  look
in  the  tyrant's  face,  all  swollen  with  rage  'gainst
wretched  me,  to  kiss  my  foe,  to  fear  his  very  nod,
obedience  to  whom  my  smarting  grief  could  not
endure  after  my  brother's  death,  most  sinfully  de-
stroyed, whose  throne  he  usurps,  and  rejoices  in  being
the  worker  of  a  death  unspeakable.  How  oft  does
my  brother's  sad  shade  appear  before  my  eyes  when
rest  has  relaxed  my  body,  and  sleep  weighed  down
my  eyes,  weary  with  weeping.  Now  with  smoking
torches  lie  arms  his  feeble  hands,  and  with  deadly
purpose  aims  at  his  brother's  eyes  and  face  ;  and  now
in  trembling  fright  takes  refuge  in  my  chamber;  his
enemy  pursues  and,  e'en  while  the  lad  clings  in  my
embrace,  savagely  he  thrusts  his  sword  tin-ough  both
our  bodies.  Then  trembling  and  mighty  terror
banish  my  shnnbers,  and  bring  back  to  my  wretched
heart  its  grief  and  fear.  Add  to  all  this  the  proud
concubine,  bedecked  with  our  house's  spoil,  as  gift
for  whom  the  son  set  his  own  mother  on  the  Stygian
bark  ;  and,  when  she  had  o'ercome  dread  sliipwreck
and  the  sea,  himself  more  pitiless  than  ocean's
waves,  slew  her  with  the  sword.  What  hope  of
safety,  after  crime  so  great,  have  I  ?  My  victorious
foe  threatens  my  chamber,  blazes  with  hate  of  me,
and,  as  the  reward  of  her  adultery,  demands  of  my
husband  his  lawful  consort's  head.  Arise  thou,  my
father,  from  the  shades  and  bring  help  to  thy
daughter  who  calls  on  thee  ;  or  else,  rending  the
earth,  lay  bare  the  Stygian  abyss,  that  I  may  plunge
thither  headlong.

419
E   E  2


THE   TRAGEDIES   OF   SENECA


Frustra  parentis  invocas  manes  tui,
miseranda,  frustra^  nulla  cui  prolis  suae
manet  inter  umbras  cui'a  ;  qui  nato  suo
praeferre  potuit  sanguine  alieno  satura  140

genitanicjue  fratris  coniugem  pactus  sibi
toris  nefandis  flebili  iunxit  face,
hinc  orta  series  facinorum — caedes^  doll,
regni  cupidoj  sanguinis  clari  sitis  ;
mactata  soceri  concidit  thalamis  gener
victima,  tuis  ne  fieret  h)Tiienaeis  potens.
pro  facinus  ingens  !  feminae  est  munus  datus
Silanus  et  cruore  foedavit  suo
patrios  penates,  criminis  ficti  reus,
intravit  hostis,  ei  mihi,  captam  domum,  150

dolis  novercae  principis  factus  gener
idemque  natus^  iuvenis  infandi  iiigeni,__
scelerum  capacis,  dira  cui  genetrix  facem
accendit  et  te  iunxit  invitam  metu.
tantoque  victrix  facta  successu  ferox
ausa  imminere  est  orbis  imperio  sacri.
quis  tot  referre  facinorum  formas  potest
et  spes  nefandas  feminae  et  blandos  dolos
regnum  petentis  per  gradus  scelerum  onniium  ?
tunc  sancta  Pietas  extulit  trepidos  gradus  iGO

vacuamque  Erinys  saeva  funesto  j)ede
intravit  aulam,  })olluit  Stygia  face
sacros  penates^  iura  naturae  furens
fasque  omne  rupit.     miscuit  coniunx  vii-o    *
venena  saeva^  cecidit  atque  eadem  sui
mox  scelere  nati  ;  tu  quoque  extinctus  iaces,
deflende  nobis  semper  infelix  puer,
modo  sidus  orbis,  columen  augustae  domus,
Britannice,  lieu  me,  nunc  levis  tantum  cinis
420


OCTAVIA


NURSE


In  vain  dost  thou  call  upon  thy  father's  ghost,
poor  girl,  in  vain,  for  no  care  for  his  child  abides
amidst  the  shades  with  him  who  to  his  own  son
could  prefer  one  born  of  otlier  blood,  and,  taking  his
brother's  child  to  wife,  wed  her  with  couch  incestuous
and  gloomy  torch.  Thence  sprung  a  train  of  crimes
— murders,  deceits,  the  lust  for  empire,  thirst  for
illustrious  blood  ;  as  victim  offered  to  the  father's
marriage  bed  the  son-in-law  was  slain,  lest,  wedded
to  thee  he  might  become  too  strong.  Oh,  monstrous
crime  !  To  a  woman  was  Silanus  given  as  a  boon
and  with  his  blood  defiled  the  ancestral  gods,  charged
with  a  crime  that  was  not  his.  Then  entered  the
foe,  ah  me  !  into  the  conquered  palace,  by  a  step-
mother's wiles  made  an  emperor's  son-in-law  and
son  withal,  a  youthjofbent  unnatural,  fertile  in  crime,
whose  passion  thy  crueTlnother  fanned,  and  forced
thee  by  fear  to  wed  him,  'gainst  thy  will.  Triumphant
and  emboldened  by  such  success,  she  dared  aspire  to
the  awful  empire  of  the  world.  Who  can  rehearse
the  various  forms  of  crime,  the  wicked  hopes,  the
cozening  wiles  of  her  who  by  all  crimes  would  mount
to  empire  round  by  round  ?  Then  holy  Piety  with
trembling  step  withdrew,  and  raging  Fury  with  bale-
ful feet  entered  the  empty  palace,  defiled  with
Stygian  torch  the  holy  household-gods,  and  in  mad
rage  rent  nature's  laws  and  all  things  sacred.  The
wife  for  her  husband  mingled  deadly  poison,  and
soon  by  her  son's  crime  the  same  wife  fell.  Thou
too  dost  lie  dead,  unhappy  youth,  ever  to  be  mourned
by  us,  but  late  the  world's  sbir,  the  prop  of  a  noble
house,  Biilanuicus,  and  now,  ah  me!  only  light  ashes


421


THE   TRAGEDIES   OF   SENECA

et  tristis  umbra  ;  saeva  cui  lacrimas  dedit  170

etiam  noverca^  cum  rogis  artus  tuos
dedit  ^  cremandos  membraque  et  vultus  deo
similes  volanti  funebris  flamma  abstulit.^

OCTAVIA

Extinguat  et  me,  ne  manu  nostra  cadat !

NVTRIX

Natura  vires  non  dedit  tantas  tibi.

OCTAVIA

Dolor  ira  maeror  miseriae  luctus  dabunt.

NVTRIX

Vince  obsequendo  potius  immitem  virum.

OCTAVIA

Vt  fratrem  ademptum  scelere  restituat  mihi  ?

NVTRIX

Incolumis  ut  sis  ipsa,  labentem  ut  domum
genitoris  olim  subole  restituas  tua.  180

OCTAVIA

Expectat  aliam  j)rincipis  subolem  donius  ;
me  dira  miseri  fata  germani  trahunt.

NVTRIX

Confirmet  animuin  civium  tantus  favor.

1  So  the  MSS.:  Leo,  with  Buecheler,  dedi.

*  Some  editors  siujgest  a  lacuna  of  thirty  or  more  lines  fol-
lowing 17S,
422


OCTAVIA

and  a  mournful  shade,  o'er  whom  e'en  thy  step-
mother wept,  when  on  the  pyre  she  gave  thy  body
to  be  burned,  and  when  thy  limbs  and  features,  that
were  like  a  winged  god's,  were  by  the  mournftil
flame  consumed.

OCTAVIA

Let  him^  destroy  me  also,  lest  by  my  hand  he  fall.

NURSE

Nature  has  not  bestowed  on  thee  such  strength.

OCTAVIA

Anguish,  anger,  sorrow,  wretchedness,  grief  will
bestow  it.

NURSE

By  compliance,  rather,  win  thine  unfeeling  lord.

OCTAVIA

That  he  may  give  back  to  me  my  brother,  wickedly
destroyed  ?

NURSE

That  thou  mayst  be  thyself  unharmed,  that  one
day  thou  mayst  i-estore  thy  father's  tottering  house
with  sons  of  thine.

OCTAVIA

The  royal  house  expects  another  son; 2  nie  my
poor  brother's  cruel  fates  drag  down.

NURSE

Let  thy  soul  be  strengthened  by  the  citizens'  great
love.

1  Noro.

*  I.e.  Nero's  by  Poppaeti.

423


THE   TRAGEDIES   OF   SENECA

OCTAVIA

Solatur  iste  nostra^  non  relevat  mala.

NVTRIX

Vis  magna  populi  est.

OCTAVIA

Prineipis  maior  tamen.

NVTIUX

Respiciet  ipse  coniugem.

OCTAVIA

Paelex  vetat.

NVTRIX

Invisa  cunctis  nempe.

OCTAVIA

Sed  cara  est  viro.

NVTRIX

Nondum  uxor  est.

OCTAVIA

lam  fietj  et  genelrix  simul.

NVTRIX

luvenilis  ardor  impetii  primo  furit,
languescit  idem  facile  nee  durat  diu  190

in  Venere  turpi,  ceu  le\  is  flammae  vapor ;
amor  pereniiis  coniugis  castae  manet.
violare  j)rima  quae  toros  ausa  est  tuos
animumque  doiuini  famula  posscdit  diu,
iam  metuit  eadem —
424


OCTAVIA

OCTAVIA

That  comforts  my  woes  but  docs  not  lighten  them.

NUHSE

Tlic  people's  power  is  mighty.

OCTAVIA

But  the  emperor's  mightier.

NUKSE

Of  himself  will  he  respect  liis  wife.

OCTAVIA

His  concubine  forbids.


NURSE

Surely  she  is  scorned  by  all.


OCTAVIA

But  to  her  husband,  dear.

NURSE

She  is  not  yet  a  wife.

OCTAVIA

But  soon  will  bcj  and  a  mother^  too.

NURSE

Youthful  passion  burns  fierce  at  the  first  rush  but
readily  grows  dull,  nor  long  endures  in  foul  adultery,
like  heat  of  flickering  flame  ;  but  a  chaste  wife's  love
remains  perpetual.  She  who  first  dared  profane  thy
bed,  and,  though  a  slave,  has  long  held  in  thrall  her
master's  heart,  already  herself  fears — •

4,25


THE  TRAGEDIES   OF   SENECA

OCTAVIA

Nempe  praelalam  sibi.

NVTRIX

subiecta  et  humilis,  atque  moniraenta  extruit

quibus  timorem  fassa  testatur  suum.

et  banc  levis  fallaxque  destitiiet  deus

volucer  Cupido  ;  sit  licet  forma  eminens,

opibus  superba,  gaudium  capiet  breve.  200

Passa  est  similes  ipsa  dolores
regina  deum,

cum  se  formas  vertit  in  omnes
dominus  caeli  divumque  pater,
et  modo  pennas  sumpsit  oloris
modo  Sidonii  cornua  tauri,
aureus  idem  fluxit  in  imbri ;
fulgent  caelo  sidera  Ledae,
patrio  residet  Bacchus  Olympo,
deus  Alcldes  possidet  Heben  210

nee  lunonis  iam  timet  iras,
cuius  gener  est  qui  fuit  hostis.
vieit  sapiens  tamen  obsequium
coniugis  altae  pressusque  dolor  ;
sola  Tonantem  tenet  aetberio
secura  toro  maxima  luno,
nee  mortali  captus  forma
deserit  altam  luppiter  aulam.
tu  quoque,  terris  altera  luno,
soror  Augusti  coniunxque,  graves  220

vince  dolores.


1  It  is  the  opinion  of  Gruterus  that  the  common  inter-
pretation of  this  whole  passage  is  wrong  in  its  assumption
that  the  poet  has  Poppaea  in  mind  ;  he  would  have  it  that
the  froed-woman,  Acta,  is  the  concubine  referred  to  here.

426


OCTAVIA

OCTAVIA

Aye  !  a  more  favoured  mistress.

NURSE

— subdued  and  humble,  and  gives  signs  by  which
she  confesses  her  own  great  fear.^  Even  her'''sTialI
winged  Cupid,  false  and  fickle  god,  betray  ;  thougli
she  be  passing  fair,  boastful  in  power,  hers  shall  be
but  a  transitory  joy.

201  The  queen  of  the  gods  herself  like  sorrows  suf-
fered, when  the  lord  of  heaven  and  father  of  the  gods
into  all  forms  changed,  and  now  wings  of  a  swan  2  put
on,  now  the  horns  of  a  bull  ''  of  Sidon,  and  again  in  a
golden  shower*  poured  down  ;  the  stars  of  Leda
glitter  in  the  sky,  Bacchus  •''  on  his  father's  Olympus
dwells,  Alcides^  as  a  god  possesses  Hebe  and  now
no  more  fears  Juno's  wrath  ;  he  is  her  son-in-law
who  was  her  enemy.  Yet  wise  compliance  and
controlled  wrath  won  victory  for  the  queenly  wife  ;
without  rival,  without  care  does  Juno  hold  the
Thunderer  on  her  heavenly  couch,  and  no  more
does  Jupiter,  by  mortal  beauty  smitten,  desert  the
court  of  heaven.  Thou  too,  on  earth  a  second  Juno,
Augustus'  ^  wife  and  sister,  thy  grievous  woes
o'ercome.

^  In  which  form  he  came  to  Leda.
'  Thus  he  appeared  to  Europa.
*  Thus  lie  appeared  to  Danae.
8  Son  of  Jove  and  a  ujortal  woman.     See  Index.
^  A  surname  not  only  of  the  first,  but  of  all  the  Roman
emperors.     Here,  Nero.

427


THE  TRAGEDIES  OF  SENECA


lungentur  ante  saeva  sideribus  freta
et  ignis  undae,  Tartaro  tristi  polus,
lux  alma  tenebris,  roscidae  nocti  dies,
quam  cum  scelesti  coniugis  mente  impia
mens  nostra,  semper  fratris  extincti  memor.
utinam  nefandi  principis  dirum  caput
obruere  flanimis  caelitum  rector  paret,
qui  saepe  terras  fulmine  infesto  quatit
mentesque  nostras  ignibus  terret  sacris  230

novisque  monstris ;  vidimus  caelo  iubar
ardens  cometam  pandere  infestam  facem,
qua  plaustra  tardus  noctis  aeterna  vice
regit  Bootes,  frigore  Arctoo  rigens.
I  en  ipse  dire  spiritu  saevi  ducis
polluitur  aether,  gentibus  clades  novas
minantur  astra,  quas  regit  dux  impius.
non  tam  ferum  Typhona  neglecto  love
irata  Tellus  edidit  quondam  parens  ;
hie  gravior  illo  pestis,  hie  hostis  deum  240

hominumque  templis  expulit  superos  suis
civesque  patria,  spiritum  fratri  abstulit,
hausit  cruorem  matris — ct  lucem  vidct
fruiturque  vita  noxiam  atque  animam  trahit !
pro  summ.e  genitor,  tela  cur  frustra  iacis
invicta  totiens  temere  rcgali  manu  ?
in  tam  noccntem  dextra  cur  cessat  tua  ?
utinam  suorum  facinorum  poenas  luat
Nero  insitivus,  Domitio  genitus  patre,
orbis  tyrannus,  quern  premit  turpi  iugo  250

morumque  vitiis  nomen  Augustum  inquinat !

^  A  comet  actually  did  appear  at  this  time  (Tacitus,  An-
nales,  xiv.  22).  The  appearance  of  a  comet  was  portentous,
and  was  supposed  to  prelude  the  death  of  a  king.

428


OCTAVIA


Sooner  shall  savan^e  seas  unite  with  stars,  water  with
fire,  heaven  with  sad  Tartarus,  the  kindly  light  with
darkness,  day  with  the  dewy  night,  than  with  my
accursed  husband's  impious  soul  this  soul  of  mine,
that  ever  broods  upon  my  brother's  death.  And  oh,
that  the  lord  of  the  heaven-dwellers,  who  often
shakes  the  lands  with  deadly  bolt  and  terrifies  our
souls  with  awful  fires  and  portents  strange,  would
make  ready  to  whelm  with  flames  this  impious  piince.
We  have  seen  a  glowing  radiance  in  the  sky,  a
comet  1  spreading  its  baleful  trail,  where  slow  Bootes,
numb  with  Arctic  chill,  with  endless,  nightlong
wheeling,  guides  his  wain.     Lo,  by  the  pestilential

■  breath  of  this  destructive  leader  the  very  air  is
tainted  ;  the  stars  threaten  unheard  disasters  for  the

'  nations  which  this  godless  leader  rules.  Not  such  a
pest  was  Typhon,  whom  wrathful  mother  Earth  pro-
duced in  scorn  of  Jove ;  this  scourge,  worse  than  he,
this  enemy  of  gods  and  men,  has  driven  the  heavenly
ones  from  their  shrines,  and  citizens  from  their
country,  from  his  brother  has  he  reft  the  breath  of  life,
and  drained  his  mother's  blood — and  he  still  sees  the
light  of  day,  still  lives  and  draws  his  baneful  breath  !
O  high  exalted  father,  why  vainly,  why  so  oft  at
random  dost  thou  hurl  thy  darts  invincible  with  thine
imperial  hand  ?  'Gainst  one  so  criminal  why  is  thy
right  hand  stayed  ?  Would  that  he  might  pay
penalty  for  his  crimes,  this  spurious  -  Nero,  son  of
Domitius,  tyrant  of  a  world  he  burdens  with  his
shameful  yoke,  and  with  foul  ways  pollutes  the  name
Augustus !

*  Refening  to  the  fact  that  Nero  \\ as  not  the  true  son  and
rightful  heir  of  Claudius.

429


THE   TRAGEDIES    OF   SENECA

NVTBIX

Indii^nus  ille,  fateor,  est  thalamis  tuis  ;
sed  cede  fatis  atque  fortunae  tuae,
alumna,  quaeso  neve  violent!  move
iram  mariti.     forsitan  vindex  deus
existet  aliquis,  laetus  et  veniet  dies.


Gravi  deorum  nostra  iam  pridem  domus
urgetur  ira,  prima  quam  pressit  \'enus
furore  miserae  dura  genetricis  meae,
quae  nupta  demens  nupsit  incesta  face,  260

oblita  nostri,  coniugis,  legum  immemor.
illi  soluta  crine,  succincta  anguibus
ultrix  Erinys  venit  ad  Stygios  toros
raptasque  thalamis  sanguine  extinxit  faces  ;
incendit  ira  principis  pectus  truci
caedem  in  nefandam  ;  cecidit  infclix  parens,
heu,  nostra  ferro  meque  perpetuo  obruit
extincta  luctu  ;  coniugem  traxit  suum
natumque  ad  umbras,  prodidit  lapsam  domum.


Renovare  luctus  parce  cum  fletu  pios,  270

manes  ])arcntis  neve  sollicita  tuae,
graves  furoris  quae  sui  })oenas  dcdit.


Quae  fama  modo  venit  ad  aures  ?
utinam  falso  crcdita  })crdat
frustra  totiens  iactata  fidem.


*  I.e.  C.  Siliua.


430


OCTAVIA

NURSE

Unworthy  he,  I  do  confess  it,  to  mate  with  tliee  ;
but  yield  thee  to  the  fates  and  to  tliy  lot,  my  child,
I  beg,  nor  rouse  thy  violent  husband's  wrath.  Per-
chance some  god  will  arise  as  thine  avenger,  and  a
day  of  happiness  will  come  again.


Long  since  has  the  heavy  wrath  of  the  gods
pursued  our  house,  whicli  harsh  Venus  first  o'er-
whelmed  in  my  poor  mother's  madness  ;  for  she,
already  wed,  in  mad  folly  wed  another  ^  with  un-
holy torch,  of  me,  of  her  husband  forgetful,  and  re-
gardless of  the  laws.  Against  her  to  that  hellish
couch,  with  streaming  hair  and  girt  about  with  snakes,
came  the  avenging  Fury  and  quenched  those  stolen
Avedding  fires  in  blood  ;  with  rage  she  inflamed  tlu^
cruel  emperor's  heart  to  impious  murder ;  my  ill-
starred  mother  fell,  alas,  and,  by  the  sword  destroyed,
o'erwhelmed  me  in  endless  suffering;  her  husband
and  her  son  did  she  drag  down  to  death  ^  and  shame-
fully betrayed  our  fallen  house.

NURSE

Forbear  with  weeping  to  renew  thy  filial  griefs,  and
vex  not  thy  mother's  spirit,  who  for  her  madness  has
grievously  atoned.  [E.veu?it.

cnoiius
What  rumour  has    but    now   come    to    our    ears  ?
May  it   prove    false    and    gain  no  credence  though
vainly  told  o'er  and  o'er  ;  and  may  no  new  wife  tlie

"  Because,  after  Messalina's  death,  Claudius  married
Agrippina  wlio  was  responsible  for  the  death  of  Claudius
and  Britaiuiieus.

431


THE  TRAGEDIES   OF   SENECA

nee  nova  coniunx  nostri  thalamos

principis  intret  teneatque  suos

nupta  penates  Claudia  proles  ;

edat  partu  pignora  pacis

qua  traaquillus  gaudeat  orbis  280

servetque  decus  Roma  aeternuni.

fratris  thalamos  sortita  tenet

maxima  luno  ;  soror  Augusti

sociata  toris  cur  a  patria

pellitur  aula  ?     sancta  quid  illi

prodest  pietas  divusque  pater,

quid  virginitas  castusque  pudor?

nos  quoque  nostri  sumus  immemores

post  fata  ducis,  cuius  stirpem

prodimus  aegro  ^  suadente  metu.  290

vera  priorum  virtus  quondam

Romana  fuit  verumque  genus

Martis  in  illis  sanguisque  viris.

illi  reges  hac  expulerunt

urbe  superbos  idtique  tuos

sunt  bene  maneSj

virgo,  dextra

caesa  parentis,  ne  servitium

patereve  grave  et  improba  ferret

praemia  victrix  dira  libido.  300

te  quoque  bellinn  triste  secutuni  est,'^

mactata  tua  miseranda  manu,

nata  Lucreti,  stuprum  saevi

j)assa  tyranni.

dedit  infandi  sceleris  poenas

cum  Tarquinio  Tullia  coniunx,

quae  per  caesi  membra  parentis

cgit  saevos  impia  currus

laceroque  seni  violenta  rogos

nuta  negavit.


432


OCTAVIA
emperor's  chamber  enter,  and  may  his  bride,  the
child  of  Claudius,  keep  her  rightful  home,  and  bring
forth  sons,  pledges  of  peace,  wherein  the  untroubled
world  may  rejoice  and  Rome  preserve  her  everlast-
ing glory.  Her  brother's  bridal  chamber  mightiest
Juno  won  and  holds ;  why  is  Augustus's  sister,  made
partner  of  his  couch,  driven  from  her  fathei*'s  house  ?
Of  what  avail  to  her  is  pure  devotion,  a  father  deified,
virginity,  unblemished  chastity  ?  We  too,  after  his
death  have  quite  forgot  our  leader,  and  betray  his
child  at  the  bidding  of  sick  fear.  Right  Roman  virtue
of  old  our  fathers  had  ;  in  such  men  was  the  true
race  and  blood  of  Mars.  They  from  this  city  arrogant
kings  expelled,  and  well  did  they  avenge  thy  ghost,
O  virgin,^  slain  by  thy  father's  hand  lest  thou  shouldst
suffer  slavery's  heavy  load,  and  lest  cruel  lust,
victorious,  should  gain  its  shameless  prize.  Thee  -
also  a  sad  war  followed,  daughter  of  Lucretius,  slain,
poor  girl,  by  thine  own  hand,  by  a  brutal  tyrant
outraged.  With  Tarquin  Tullia,  his  wife,  paid  penalty
for  crime  unspeakable,  who,  over  the  body  of  her
murdei'ed  father  heartlessly  drove  her  cruel  car,  and,
mad    daughter,    refused    the    mangled    old    man    a

funeral-pyre.

*  Virginia.     See  Index.

*  Lucretia.     See  Index.

^  So  Richter:  Xeo  faevo  :  A  sevo  :  i|/ evo  :  /"eipcr  eheii.
2   Leo  deletM  lines  297-301.

433

VOL.  11.  F    F


THE  TRAGEDIES   OF  SENECA

Haec  quoque  nati  videre  nefas  310

saecula  magnum^  cum  Tyrrhenum
rate  ferali  princeps  captam
fraude  parentem  misit  in  aequor.
properant  placidos  linquere  portus
iussi  nautae,  resonant  remis
pulsata  freta.

fertur  in  altum  provecta  ratis,
quae  resoluto  robore  labens
pressa  dehiscit  sorbetque  mare,
tollitur  ingens  clamor  ad  astra  320

cum  femineo  mixtus  planctu.
mors  ante  oculos  dira  vagatur  ;
quaerit  leti  sibi  quisque  fugam  ;
alii  lacerae  puppis  tabulis
haerent  nudi  fiuctusque  secant,
repetunt  alii  litora  nantes  ;
multos  mergunt  fata  pi-ofundo.
scindit  vestes  Augusta  suas
laceratque  comas  rigat  et  maestis
fletibus  ora.  330

Postquam  spes  est  nulla  salutis,
ardens  ira,  iam  victa  malis  :
*'  haec  "  exclamat  ''  mihi  pro  tanto
munere  reddis  praemia,  nate  ?
hac  suin^  fateor,  digna  carina,
quae  te  genui,  quae  tibi  lucem
atque  imperium  nomenque  dcdi
Caesaris  aniens,     exere  vultus
Acherontc  tuos  poenisque  meis
pascere,  coniunx ;  346

ego  causa  tuae,  miserande,  necis
natoque  tuo  funeris  auctor
en,  ut  merui,  fcrar  ad  manes
iiihumatii  tuos,  obruta  saevis
acquoris  undis."


434


OCTAVIA

^^^  This  age  as  well  has  seen  a  son's  dire  crime,
when  in  a  deadly  bark  the  prince^  sent  his  mother
out  on  the  Tyrrhene  sea,  by  a  trick  ensnared.  At  his
bidding  tlie  sailors  make  haste  to  leave  the  peaceful
port  and,  smit  by  the  oars,  the  sea  resounds.  The
vessel  is  borne  far  out  upon  the  deep  ;  and  there,
with  loosened  timbers,  sinking,  overwhelmed,  it  yawns
wide  and  drinks  in  the  sea.  A  mighty  outcry  rises
to  the  stars,  mingled  with  shrieks  of  women.  Death
stalks  dire  before  the  eyes  of  all ;  each  for  himself
seeks  refuge  from  destruction  ;  some  cling  naked  to
planks  of  the  broken  ship  and  face  the  floods,  while
others,  swimming,  seek  to  gain  the  shore ;  fate
plunges  many  into  the  depths  below.  Augusta  ^
rends  her  garments  and  tears  her  hair  and  waters
her  cheeks  with  grieving  tears.

331  At  last,  with  hope  of  safety  gone,  blazing  with
anger  and  now  o'ercome  with  woe,  she  cries ;  "Such
reward  as  this  for  my  great  boon,  O  son,  dost  thou
return  nie  ?  Worthy  am  I  of  this  ship,  I  do  confess,
who  brought  thee  forth,  who  gave  thee  light  and
empire  and  the  name  of  Caesar,  fool  that  I  was.
Thrust  forth  thy  face  from  Acheron,  and  glut  thee
with  my  j)unishment,  O  husband  ;  I  caused  tin-
death,  poor  soul,  was  the  author  of  thy  son's  de-
struction, and  lo,  as  I  have  merited,  to  thy  ghost
am  I  now  borne  unburied,  whelmed  in  the  cruel
waters  of  the  sea."

'  Nero.  *  i.e.  Agrijjpiiia.

435
r  F  2


THE  TRAGEDIES  OF  SENECA

Feriunt  fluctus  ora  loquentis,
ruit  in  pelagus  rursumque  salo
pressa  resurgit,  pellit  palmis
cogente  metu  freta,  set  cedit
fessa  labori.     mansit  tacitis  350

in  pectoribus  spreta  tristi
iam  morte  fides,     multi  dominae
ferre  auxilium  pelago  fractis
viribus  audent^  bracchia  quamvis
lenta  trahentem  voce  hortantur
nianibusque  levant,      quid  tibi  saevi
fugisse  maris  profuit  undas  .''
ferro  es  nati  moritura  tui,
cuius  facinus  vix  postevitas,
tarde  semper  saecula  credent.  S60

furit  ereptam  pelagoque  dolet
vivere  matrem

impius,  ingens  geminatque  nefas ;
ruit  in  miserae  fata  parentis
patiturque  moram  sceleris  nuUam.
missus  peragit  iussa  satelles  ;
reserat  dominae  pectora  ferro.
caedis  moriens  ilia  ministrum
rogat  infeliXj  utero  diruui
condat  ut  ensem  :  370

"hie  est,  hie  est  fodiendus"  ait
"ferro,  monstrum  qui  tale  tulit."
post  hanc  vocem
mixtam  gemitu  cum  supremo
animam  tandem  per  fera  tristem
vulnera  reddit.

SENECA

Quid  me,  potcns  Fortuna,  fallaci  mihi
blandita  vultu,  sorte  contentum  nieu

4^6


OCTAVIA

'*^  E'en  while  she  speaks  tlie  waves  wash  o'er  her
lips,  and  down  into  the  deep  she  j)hingcs  ;  anon  she
rises  from  the  briny  weight  and  with  her  hands,  fear
driving  her,  lashes  the  sea ;  but  soon,  outwearied,
gives  o'er  the  struggle.  There  still  lived  in  secret
hearts  ^  fidelity  which  scorned  the  grim  fear  of
death.  Many  to  their  mistress  dare  bring  aid,
when  her  strength  is  exhausted  by  the  sea,  and,  as
she  drags  her  arms,  though  sluggishly,  along,  with
their  voices  cheer  her  and  lift  her  with  their  hands.
Hut  what  availed  it  to  have  escaped  the  waters  of
the  cruel  sea  ?  By  the  sword  of  thine  own  son  thou
art  to  die,  to  whose  crime  scarce  will  posterity,
slowly  will  all  future  ages,  give  belief.  He  rages
and  grieves  that  his  mother,  snatched  from  the  sea,
still  lives,  the  impious  monster,  and  heaps  huge
guilt  on  guilt ;  bent  on  his  wretched  mother's
death,  he  bi'ooks  no  stay  of  crime.  Sent  to  the
task,  his  creature  works  his  will,  and  with  the  sword
lays  open  his  mistress'  breast.  The  unhappy  woman,
dving,  begs  her  murderer  to  sheathe  his  fell  sword
within  her  womb  :  "  'Tis  this,  'tis  this  that  must
with  the  sword  be  pierced,  which  gave  such  monster
birth  !  "  After  such  utterance,  with  a  dying  groan
commingled,  at  length  through  the  cruel  wound  she
yielded  her  sad  ghost.

SENECA  [alone]
Why,  potent   Fortune,  with  false,  flattering  looks,
hast  high  exalted  me  when  contented  with  my  lot,
^  i.e.  of  some  of  her  servants.

437


THE  TRAGEDIES   OF   SENECA

alte  extulisti,  gravius  ut  ruerem  edita

receptus  arce  totque  prospicerem  metus  ?  380

melius  latebam  procul  ab  invidiae  malis

remotus  intei*  Corsici  rupes  maris,

ubi  liber  animus  et  sui  iuris  mihi

semper  vacabat  studia  recolenti  mea.

o  quam  iuvabat^  quo  nihil  maius  parens

Natura  genuit,  operis  immensi  artifex,

caelum  intueri,  solis  et  currus  sacros

mundique  motuSj^  solis  alternas  vices

orbemque  Phoebes^  astra  quern  cingunt  vaga,

lateque  fulgens  aetheris  magni  decus  ;  390

qui  si  senescit^  tantus  in  caecum  chaos

casurus  iterum,  tunc  adest  mundo  dies  ^

supremus  ille^  qui  premat^  genus  impium

caeli  ruina,  rursus  ut  stirpem  novam

generet  renascens  melior,  ut  quondam  tulit

iuveniSj  tenente  regna  Saturno  poli.

tunc  ilia  virgo,  numinis  magni  dea,

lustitiaj  caelo  missa  cum  sancta  Fide

terris  regebat  mitis  humanum  genus.

non  bella  norant^  non  tubae  fremitus  truces,  400

non  anna  gentes,  cingere  assuerant  suas

muris  nee  urbes  :  pervium  cunctis  itei',

communis  usus  omnium  rcrum  fuit  ;

et  ipsa  Tellus  laeta  fecundos  sinus

pandebat  ultro,  tam  piis  felix  parens

et  tuta  alumnis.

I  Alia  sed  suboles^  minus

'  exjierta  mitis,  tertium  sollers  genus

novas  ad  artes  extitit,  sanctum  tamen  ;

mox  inquietum,  quod  sequi  cursu  feras

^  Leo  deities  solis  .  .  .  motus.

^  So  Bichter  with  MSS. :  Leo  casurus  itcruni  est— nunc  ades
noundo,  dies.  *  So  Jiichter  with  MSS.:  Leo  premas.

438


OCTAVIA

that,  raised  to  a  lott}'  pinnacle,  in  heavier  ruin  I
might  fall,  and  might  look  out  upon  so  many  fears  ?
Better  was  1  hid,  far  out  of  the  reach  of  envy's  sting,
midst  the  crags  of  Corsica,  facing  on  the  sea,  where
my  spirit,  free  and  its  own  lord,  had  ever  time  to
contemplate  my  favourite  themes.  Oh,  'twas  joy —
a  joy  surpassing  anything  to  which  mother  Nature,
contriver  of  this  fabric  infinite,  hath  given  birth,  to
gaze  upon  the  heavens,  the  sun's  sacred  chariot,  the
motions  of  the  universe  and  the  sun's  recurring-
rounds,  and  the  orb  of  Phoebe,  which  the  wandering
stars  encircle,  and  the  far  effulgent  glory  of  the  mighty
sky.  If  this  sky  is  growing  old,  doomed  wholly
once  more  to  fall  into  blind  nothingness,  then  for  the
universe  is  that  last  day  at  hand  which  shall  crush
sinful  man  beneath  heaven's  ruin,  that  so  once  more
a  reborn  and  better  world  may  bring  fortli  a  new
race  such  as  she  bore  in  youth,  when  Saturn  ^  held  the
kingdoms  of  the  sky.  Then  did  that  virgin,  Justice,2
goddess  of  mighty  sway,  from  heaven  sent  down  with
holy  Faith  to  earth,  rule  with  mild  sway  the  race  of
men.  No  wars  the  nations  knew,  no  trumpet's
threatening  blasts,  no  arms,  nor  were  they  used  to
surround  their  cities  with  a  wall  :  open  to  all  was
the  way,  in  common  was  the  use  of  every  thing  ;  and
the  glad  Earth  herself  willingly  laid  bare  her  fruitful
breast,  a  mother  happy  and  safe  amid  such  duteous
nurslings.

'"'^  But  another  race  arose  which  proved  less
gentle  ;  another  yet,  cunning  in  unknown  arts,  but
holy  still  ;  then  came  a  restless  r.iec,  which  dared

1  In  the  Golden  Age.  =  i.e.  Astraea.

^  439


THE   TRAGEDIES   OF   SENECA

auderet  acres,  fluctibus  tectos  gravi  410

extrahere  jnsces  rete  vel  calauio  levi,

decipere  volucres^

tenere  laqueo,  premere  subiectos  iugo

tauros  feroces,  vomere  immuncm  prius

sulcare  terram,  laesa  quae  fruges  suas

interius  alte  condidit  sacro  sinu.

sed  in  parentis  viscera  intravit  suae

deterior  aetas  ;  eruit  ferrum  grave

aurumque,  saevas  mox  et  armavit  manus  ;

partita  fines  regna  constituit,  novas  420

extruxit  urbes^  tecta  defendit  sua,

aliena  telis  aut  petit  praedae  imminens.

neglecta  terras  fugit  et  mores  fcros

hominuni  et  cruenta  caede  pollutas  manus

Astraea  virgo,  siderum  magnum  decus.

cupido  belli  crevit  atque  auri  fames

totum  per  orbem,  maximum  exortum  est  malum

luxuria,  pestis  blanda,  cui  vires  dedit

roburque  longum  tempos  atque  error  gravis.

collecta  vitia  per  tot  aetates  diu  430

in  nos  redundant ;  saeculo  premimur  gravi,

quo  scelera  regnant,  saevit  impietas  furens,

turpi  libido  Venere  dominatur  potens,

luxuria  victrix  orbis  immensas  opes

iam  pridem  avaris  manibus,  ut  perdat,  rapit.

Sed  ecce,  gressu  fertur  attonito  Nero
trucique  vultu.      quid  ferat  mente  horreo.


NERO

Perage  imperata ;  mitte,  qui  Plauti  mihi
Sullaeque  caesi  referat  abscisum  caput.

^  Lio  conjectures  a  lacuna,  and  sugycsCa  <turbidos  forti
canes >.

440


OCTAVIA

pursue  the  wild  beasts  in  tlic  chase,  draw  fish  from
tiieir  coverts  'neath  the  sea  with  Aveighted  net  or
slender  rod,  catch  birds,  on  a  strong  leash  hold
unrul}'  dogs,i  force  headstrong  bullocks  to  endure
the  yoke,  fin-row  the  earth  which  had  never  felt  the
plough,  and  which,  now  thus  outraged,  had  hidden
her  fruits  deeper  in  her  sacred  bosom.  But  into  its
mother's  bowels  did  tliat  degenerate  age  intrude  ;  it
(big  out  heavy  iron  and  gold,  and  soon  did  it  arm
savage  hands  for  war.  Marking  out  boundaries,  it
established  kingdoms,  built  cities,  hitherto  unknown,
guarded  its  own  dwellings  or,  bent  on  booty,  with
weapons  attacked  another's.  Away  from  earth  that
scorned  her,  from  the  wild  ways  of  men  and  hands
defiled  with  bloody  slaughter,  fled  the  maid,  Astraea,
chief  glory  of  the  firmament.  Lust  for  war  increased
and  hunger  for  gold  throughout  the  world;  luxury
arose,  deadliest  of  ills,  a  luring  pest,  which  acquired
strength  and  force  by  long  use  and  grievous  error.
These  sins,  through  many  ages  gathering,  are  o'er-
flowing  upon  us;  a  heavy  age  weighs  us  down,  wherein
crime  is  regnant,  impiety  runs  mad,  all-potent  lust
lords  it  with  shameless  love,  and  triumphant  luxury
has  long  with  greedy  hands  been  clutching  the  world's
unbounded  stores — that  she  may  squander  them.
[nero  is  seen  approaching.'^
^^•^  But  see,  with  startled  step  and  savage  mien  Nero
approaches.  At  thought  of  what  he  brings  I  tremble.
[Enfe7-  -HKiw ,  followed  hij  a  Prefect.]

NERO  [to  Prefect]

Go  do  my  bidding  ;  send  one  to  slay  me  Plautus
and  Sulla  and  bring  back  their  severed  heads.

^  Translating  Leo's  conjecture.

441


THE   TRAGEDIES   OF   SENECA

PRAEFECTVS

lussa  haud  morabor  :  castra  coiifestim  petam.

SENECA

Nihil  in  propinquos  temere  constitui  decet.        440

NERO

lustum  esse  facile  est  cui  vacat  pectus  metu.

SENECA

Magnum  timoris  remedium  dementia  est.

NERO

Extinguere  hostem  maxima  est  virtus  ducis.

SENECA

Servare  cives  maior  est  patriae  patri.

NERO

Praecipere  mitem  convenit  pueris  senem.

SENECA

Regenda  magis  est  fervida  adolescentia.

NERO

Aetate  in  liac  sat  esse  consilii  reor.

SENECA

Vt  facta  superi  comjjrobent  semper  tua.

NERO

Stulte  verebor,  ipse  cum  faciam,  deos.


442


OCT  A  VI A

PIIEFECT

Thy  bidding  will  I  do  :  to  tlie  camp  forthwitli  I'll
take  inc.  [K.rif.

SENECA

'Tis  not  becoming  to  proceed  rashly  'gainst  one's
friends.

NERO

'Tis  easy  to  be  just  when  the  heart  is  free  from
fear.

SENECA

A  sovereign  cure  for  fear  is  clemency.

NERO

To  destroy  foes  is  a  leader's  greatest  virtue.

SENECA

For  the  father  of  his  country  to  save  citizens,  is
greater  still.

NERO

A  mild  old  man  should  give  schooling  to  bovs.

SENECA

More  needful  'tis  that  fiery  youth  be  ruled.

NERO

I  deem  that  at  this  age  we  are  wise  enough.

SENECA

May  thy  deeds  be  ever  pleasing  to  the  gods.

NERO

Foolish  I'd   be  to  fear  the   gods,  when   I   myself
make  them.^

*  Referring  to  his  own  act  in  deifying  the  late  Claudius.

443


THE   TRAGEDIES   OF   SENECA

SENECA

Hoc  plus  verere  quod  licet  tantum  tibi.  450

NERO

I  Fortuna  nostra  cuncta  permittit  niihi.

SENECA

Crede  obsequenti  parcius ;  levis  est'dea.

NERO

Inertis  est  nescire  quid  liceat  sibi,

SENECA

Id  facere  laus  est  quod  decet,  non  quod  licet.

NERO

Calcat  iacentem  vulgus.

SENECA

Invisum  opprimit.

NERO

Ferrum  tuetur  principem.

SENECA

Melius  fides.

NERO

Decet  timeri
