LIBRARY

OF THE

UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA.

Class  -


LETTERS


FACTORY ACT,


it  affects  t&c  <2f otton  JWanufacturc,


ADDRESSED TO


THE  RIGHT  HONOURABLE


THE  PRESIDENT  OF  THE  BOARD  OF  TRADE,


NASSAU  W.  SENIOR,  ESQ.


LONDON :
B. FELLOWES, LUDGATE STREET.

1837.


LONDON :
CLAY,  FRINTEU,  BREAD-STREET-HILL.


LETTERS

FROM  MR.  SENIOR  TO  MR.  THOMSON,


York  Hotel,  Manchester,  Tuesday,  March  28,  1837.

MY  DEAR  SIR,

WE  have  now  been  for  some  time  in  the  centre  of  the
cotton  district.  Our  principal  objects  of  inquiry  have
been  the  effects  of  the  Factory  Regulation  Act,  as  respects
the  cotton  manufacture,  and  the  consequences  which  may
be  expected  from  further  legislative  interference.  And  as
Lord  Ashley's  motion  is  at  hand,  and  will  probably  be
disposed  of  before  our  return,  I  think  you  may  not  be
unwilling  to  hear  the  results  to  which  we  have  as  yet
come ;  although,  in  stating  them,  I  have  no  doubt  that  I
shall  say  much  with  which  you  are  familiar.

I  have  always  been  struck  by  the  difference  between
the  hours  of  work  usual  over  the  whole  world  in  cotton
factories  and  in  other  employments ;  and  did  not,  until
now,  perceive  the  reasons.  It  seems  to  arise  from  two
causes  :  first,  the  great  proportion  of  fixed  to  circulating
capital,  which  makes  long  hours  of  work  desirable  ;  and,
secondly,  the  extraordinary  lightness  of  the  labour,  if
labour  it  can  be  called,  which  renders  them  practicable.
I  will  take  them  separately  :—

I.  I  find  the  usual  computation  to  be  that  the  fixed
capital  is  in  the  proportion  of  four  to  one  to  the
circulating;  so  that  if  a  manufacturer  has  50,000/.  to
employ,  he  will  expend  40,000/.  in  erecting  his  mill,  and
filling  it  with  machinery,  and  devote  only  10,000/.  to  the
purchase  of  raw  material  (cotton,  flour,  and  coals)  and
I  A  2


the  payment  of  wages.  I  find  also  that  the  whole  capital
is  supposed  in  general  to  be  turned  over  (or,  in  other
words,  that,  goods  are  produced  and  sold  representing  the
value  of  the  whole  capital,  together  with  the  manufac-
turer's profit)  in  about  a  year ;  in  favourable  times  in
rather  less,— in  others,  such  as  the  present,  in  rather  more.
I  find  also  that  the  net  profit  annually  derived  may  be
estimated  at  ten  per  cent.,  some  computations  placing  it
as  low  as  seven  and  a  half,  others  as  high  as  eleven ;
ten  I  believe  to  be  about  the  average.  But  in  order  to
realize  this  net  profit,  a  gross  profit  of  rather  more
than  fifteen  per  cent,  is  necessary ;  for  although  the
circulating  capital,  being  continually  restored  to  its  ori-
ginal form  of  money,  may  be  considered  as  indestructible,
the  fixed  capital  is  subject  to  incessant  deterioration,  not
only  from  wear  and  tear,  but  also  from  constant  mecha-
nical improvements,  which  in  eight  or  nine  years  render
obsolete,  machinery  which  when  first  used  was  the  best
of  its  kind.

Under  the  present  law,  no  mill  in  which  persons  under
eighteen  years  of  age  are  employed  (and,  therefore,  scarcely
any  mill  at  all)  can  be  worked  more  than  eleven  and  a
half  hours  a-day,  that  is,  twelve  hours  for  five  days  in  the
week  and  nine  on  Saturday.

Now,  the  following  analysis  will  show  that  in  a  mill  so
worked,  the  whole  net  profit  is  derived  from  the  last  hour.  I
will  suppose  a  manufacturer  to  invest  100,000/. : — 80,000/.
in  his  mill  and  machinery,  and  20,000/.  in  raw  material
and  wages.  The  annual  return  of  that  mill,  supposing
the  capital  to  be  turned  once  a -year,  and  gross  profits  to
be  fifteen  per  cent,  ought  to  be  goods  worth  115,000/.,  pro-
duced by  the  constant  conversion  and  reconversion  of  the
20,000/.  circulating  capital,  from  money  into  goods  and
from  goods  into  money,  in  periods  of  rather  more  than  two
months.  Of  this  1 1 5,000/.  each  of  the  twenty-three  half
hours  of  work  produces  5-ll5ths,  or  one  twenty-third.  Of
these  23-23ds,  (constituting  the  whole  1153000/.)  twenty,

«*


that  is  to  say,  100,000/.  out  of  the  115,000/.,  simply  re-
place the  capital — one  twenty-third  (or  5,000/.  out  of  the
1I5,000/.),  makes  up  for  the  deterioration  of  the  mill
and  machinery.  The  remaining  2-23ds.,  that  is,  the  last
two  of  the  twenty-three  half  hours  of  every  day,  produce
the  net  profit  of  ten  per  cent.  If,  therefore,  (prices  re-
maining the  same,)  the  factory  could  be  kept  at  work  thir-
teen hours  instead  of  eleven  and  a  half,  by  an  addition  of
about  2,600/.  to  the  circulating  capital,  the  net  profit
would  be  more  than  doubled.  On  the  other  hand,  if  the
hours  of  working  were  reduced  by  one  hour  per  day
(prices  remaining  the  same),  net  profit  would  be  de-
stroyed— if  they  were  reduced  by  an  hour  and  a  half,
even  gross  profit  would  be  destroyed.  The  circulating
capital  would  be  replaced,  but  there  would  be  no  fund  to
compensate  the  progressive  deterioration  of  the  fixed
capital.

And  it  is  to  be  remarked,  that  there  are  many  causes
now  at  work  tending  to  increase  the  proportion  of  fixed
to  circulating  capital.  The  principal,  perhaps,  is  the
tendency  of  mechanical  improvement  to  throw  on  ma-
chinery more  and  more  of  the  work  of  production.  The
self-acting  mule  is  a  very  expensive  machine ;  but  it
dispenses  'with  the  services  .of  the  most  highly  paid
operatives — the  spinners.  It  has  acquired,  indeed,  the
sobriquet  of  <l  the  Cast  Iron  Spinner.'?  Though  of  re-
cent introduction,  we  found  it  employed  in  a  large  pro-
portion of  the  principal  factories.  At  Orrell's  splendid
factory,  we  found  a  new  blower  enabling  three  persons
to  do  the  work  of  four.  At  Birley's,  we  found  prepara-
tion making  for  a  newly  invented  process,  by  which  the
wool  was  to  be  conveyed  direct  from  the  willow  to  the
blowing  machine,  without  requiring,  as  it  now  does,  a
whole  set  of  work-people  for  that  purpose.  At  Boiling-
ton,  we  found  a  new  machine,  which  transfers  the  sliver
direct  from  the  cards  to  the  drawing-frame,  and  thus  dis-
penses with  another  class  of  attendants.  At  another


6

place,  we  found  a  weaving  process,  on  a  vast  scale,  dif-
fering from  all  others  that  we  observed  during  our  tour.
And  at  Stayley  Bridge  we  found  a  factory  nearly  finished,
covering  two  acres  and  a  half  of  ground,  with  buildings
only  one  story  high,  (that  is,  ground  floor  and  first  floor,)
— so  that  on  each  floor  the  whole  operations  will  be  car-
ried on  in  one  vast  apartment  or  gallery,  forming  the  four
sides  of  a  quadrangle,  each  side  450  feet  long;  thus
saving  all  the  labour  employed  in,  mounting  or  descending.
Each  of  these  five  last  improvements  is  recent, — so  recent,
indeed,  as  not  to  have  been  as  yet  copied  by  other  esta-
blishments. One  of  them,  the  new  weaving  process,  is
still  kept  so  secret,  that  we  were  allowed  to  visit  it  only
as  a  special  favour,  and  on  the  promise  of  not  revealing
its  nature.  And  the  effect  of  every  one  of  them  is  to
increase  fixed,  and  diminish  circulating  capital.

Another  circumstance,  producing  the  same  effect,  is  the
improvement  of  the  means  of  transport,  and  the  consequent
diminution  of  the  stock  of  raw  material  in  the  manufacturer's
hands  waiting  for  use.  Formerly,  when  coals  and  cotton
came  by  water,  the  uncertainty  and  irregularity  of  sup-
ply forced  him  to  keep  on  hand  two  or  three  months'
consumption.  Now,  a  railway  brings  it  to  him  week  by
week,  or  rather  day  by  day,  from  the  port  or  the  mine.

Under  such  circumstances,  I  fully  anticipate  that,  in  a
very  few  years,  the  fixed  capital,  instead  of  its  present
proportion,  will  be  as  6  or  7  or  even  10  to  1  to  the
circulating ;  and,  consequently,  that  the  motives  to  long
hours  of  work  will  become  greater,  as  the  only  means  by
which  a  large  proportion  of  fixed  capital  can  be  made
profitable.  "  When  a  labourer,"  said  Mr.  Ashworth  to
me,  "  lays  down  his  spade,  he  renders  useless,  for  that
period,  a  capital  worth  eighteen  pence.  When  one  of
our  people  leaves  the  mill,  he  renders  useless  a  capital
that  has  cost  100J."

2d.  The  exceeding  easiness  of  cotton-factory  labour
renders  long  hours  of  work  practicable,  j  With  the  ex-


ception  of  the  mule  spinners,  a  very  small  portion  of  the
operatives,  probably  not  exceeding  12  or  15,000  in  the
whole  kingdom,  and  constantly  diminishing  in  number,
the  work  is  merely  that  of  watching  the  machinery,  and
piecing  the  threads  that  break.  I  have  seen  the  girls
who  thus  attend  standing  with  their  arms  folded  during
the  whole  time  that  I  stayed  in  the  room — others  sewing
a  handkerchief  or  sitting  down.  \  The  work,  in  fact,  is
scarcely  equal  to  that  of  a  shopman  behind  a  counter  in
a  frequented  shop — mere  confinement,  attention,  and  at-
tendance.

Under  these  circumstances,  cotton  factories  have
always  been  worked  for  very  long  hours.  From  thir-
teen to  fifteen,  or  even  sixteen  hours,  appear  to  be  the
usual  hours  per  day  abroad.  Our  own,  at  their  com-
mencement, were  kept  going  the  whole  twenty-four  hours.
The  difficulty  of  cleaning  and  repairing  the  machinery,
and  the  divided  responsibility — arising  from  the  necessity
of  employing  a  double  staff  of  overlookers,  book-keepers,
&c.  have  nearly  put  an  end  to  this  practice  ;  but  until
Hobhouse's  Act  reduced  them  to  sixty-nine,  our  factories
generally  worked  from  seventy  to  eighty  hours  per  week.
Any  plan,  therefore,  which  should  reduce  the  present
comparatively  short  hours,  must  either  destroy  profit,  or
reduce  wages  to  the  Irish  standard,  or  raise  the  price  of
the  commodity,  by  an  amount  which  it  is  not  easy  for
me  to  estimate.

The  estimate  in  the  paper,  signed  by  the  principal
fine  spinners,  is,  that  it  would  raise  prices  by  16  per  cent.
That  the  increase  of  price  would  be  such  as  to  occasion,
even  in  the  home  market,  a  great  diminution  of  con-
sumption, I  have  no  doubt ;  and  from  all  that  I  read  and
hear,  on  the  subject  of  foreign  competition,  I  believe  that
it  would,  in  a  great  measure,  exclude  us  from  the  foreign
market,  which  now  takes  off  three-fourths  of  our  annual
production.

It  must  never  be  forgotten,  that  in  manufactures,  with


8

every  increase  of  the  quantity  produced,  the  relative
expense  of  production  is  diminished — and,  which  is  the
same  thing,  that  with  every  dimii  ution  of  production,
the  relative  expense  of  production  is  increased.  If  only
ten  watches  were  produced  in  a  year,  it  is  probable,  that
a  watch  would  cost  100/.  If  there  were  an  annual
demaod  for  10,000,000  of  watches,  they  would  not,  in  all
probability,  cost  a  guinea  a-piece.  And  this  general
law  applies  more  and  more  forcibly,  in  proportion  as  the
manufacture  in  question  employs  more  expensive  ma-
chinery and  a  greater  division  of  labour :  to  the  cotton
manufacture,  therefore,  beyond  all  others.  Up  to  the
present  time,  production  and  cheapness  have  increased
together.  The  yarn  that  cost  forty  shillings  a  pound
when  we  consumed  only  10,000,000  of  pounds  of  cotton,
now,  when  we  consume  280,000,000,  costs  two  shillings.
Increase  of  price,  and  diminution  of  consumption,  will
therefore  act  and  re-act  on  one  another.  Every  increase
of  price  will  further  diminish  consumption  ;  and  every
further  diminution  of  consumption  will  occasion  an  in-
creased relative  cost  of  production,  and  consequently  a
further  increase  of  price.  First  will  go  the  foreign
market — already  in  a  precarious  state,  and,  once  lost,
irrecoverable  ;  since,  according  to  the  Jaw  to  which  I
have  referred,  the  more  our  rivals  produce, — the  wider  the
markets  which  are  opened  to  their  competition,  in  conse-
quence of  the  rise  of  English  prices, — the  cheaper  they
will  be  able  to  produce.  This  again,  by  diminishing  the
quantity  produced  at  home,  will  increase  its  relative  cost
of  production  ;  and  that  again  will  increase  prices,  and
diminish  consumption  ; — until  I  think  I  see,  as  in  a  map,
the  succession  of  causes  which  may  render  the  cotton
manufactures  of  England  mere  matter  of  history.

I  have  no  doubt,  therefore,  that  a  ten  hours'  bill  would
be  utterly  ruinous.  And  I  do  not  believe  that  any
restriction  whatever,  of  the  present  hours  of  work,  could
be  safely  made.


To-morrow,  or  the  next  day,  I  will  endeavour  to  give
you  the  result  of  our  inquiries  as  to  the  working  of  the
present  Act.

Ever  yours,

N.  W.  SENIOR.

The  Right  Hon.  Charles  Poulett  Thomson,
8fc.  $c.  Sfc.


York  Hotel,  Manchester,  April  2,  1837.

MY  DEAR  SIR,

I  NOW  proceed  to  give  you  the  result  of  our  inquiries
as  to  the  operation  of  the  Factory  Act.

In  considering  that  Act,  care  must  be  taken  to  distin-
guish between  its  substance  and  its  machinery.

1st.  The  substance  is,  that,  in  factories,  children  under
nine  years  of  age  shall  not  be  employed  at  all,  and  those
under  thirteen  not  for  more  than  eight  hours  a- day ;  and
that  they  shall  pass  two  hours  a-day  in  school.  The
hours  of  working,  except  on  Saturday,  being  twelve,  it
was  supposed  that  by  means  of  relays,  the  services  of
children  might  be  obtained  for  the  whole  twelve  hours.

2d.  The  machinery  consists  of  enactments,  that  no
child  under  thirteen  shall  be  allowed  to  remain  in  a
factory  without  a  certificate  of  age  from  a  surgeon,  nor
for  more  than  eight  hours  a-day,  nor  without  a  certificate
of  its  having  attended  school  for  twelve  hours  in  the
preceding  week ;  and  also  in  the  appointment  of  inspec-
tors, empowered  to  issue  regulations  and  visit  factories,
and  superintendents  or  sub-inspectors  acting  under  their
direction,  and  empowered  to  enter  all  school-rooms  and
counting-houses,  but  not  those  parts  of  a  factory  in  which
manufacturing  processes  are  carried  on.

The  relay  system  appears  on  the  whole,  as  far  as  this
district  is  concerned,  to  have  failed.  Of  the  factories


10

that  we  visited,  only  four  employ  it.  Three  of  these  are
situated  in  country  villages,  and  the  number  of  children
in  the  whole  four  is  small,  being  only  243  out  of  4,800
operatives,  or  about  l-20th.  The  objections  urged  were,
in  some  places,  the  difficulty  of  obtaining  children,  and
in  all,  the  constant  trouble  and  difficulty  of  making  correct
entries  in  the  time-books,  the  exposure  to  disgrace  and
loss  from  the  penalties  inflicted  for  unavoidable  errors,
and  the  disturbance  arising  from  a  change  of  hands  in
the  middle  of  work.

On  the  other  hand,  the  fear  that  all  the  children  under
thirteen  would  be  everywhere  dismissed  has  proved  vain.
Of  the  factories  that  we  have  inspected,  four  only  have
adopted  that  course,  the  same  number  as  that  of  those
who  employ  relays.

The  usual  plan  is  to  employ  one  set  of  children  for  the
first  eight  hours  of  the  day,  and  to  get  on  as  well  as  may
be  during  the  remaining  four  without  them.

The  consequences  are —

1st.  Loss  to  the  parents  who  have  children  under
thirteen,  by  the  non- employment  of  those  under  nine,  and
by  the  reduced  wages  of  those  between  ten  and  thirteen.

2d.  Loss  to  the  operatives  who  are  the  direct  employ-
ers of  the  children  as  their  assistants,  first,  by  their  having
to  employ  more  assistants  above  thirteen  and  at  higher
wages,  and  secondly,  by  their  being  able  to  get  through  less
work  after  they  lose  the  assistance  of  the  younger  children.

3d.  Loss  to  the  mill-owner,  whose  produce  during
the  last  four  hours  of  each  day  is  diminished  in  quantity,
and  deteriorated  in  quality,  and  who  has  sometimes  to
repay  to  his  operatives  a  part  of  their  loss.

The  gainers  are  the  children  above  thirteen,  whose
wages  have  risen,  and  the  children  under  thirteen,  so  far
as  they  are  better  educated  and  have  less  fatigue  than
before.

As  to  the  value  of  this  gain,  however,  as  far  as  edu-
cation is  concerned,  I  am  sceptical.  If  good  schools  and


11

a  good  system  of  instruction  were  established,  no  doubt
much  could  be  learned  in  the  two  hours  a-day  of  com-
pulsory schooling.

But  those  portions  of  the  bill  which  provided  for  the  \J
establishment  of  schools  having  been  thrown  out  by  •
the  Lords,  the  school  appears  to  be  generally  rather  a
place  for  detaining  and  annoying  the  children  than  of
real  instruction.  Instead  of  the  vast  and  airy-apartments
of  a  well-regulated  factory,  they  are  kept  in  a  small,  low,
ciose^  room  ;  and  instead  of  the  light  work,  or  rather
attendance,  of  a  factory,  which  really  is  not  more
exercise  than  a  child  voluntarily  takes,  they  have  to  sit  on
a  form,  supposed  to  be  studying  a  spelling-book.  We
found  a  universal  statement  that  the. jdiildren  could  not
be  gaLiato~th£- .school  except.. by  force  ;  that  they  tried
every  means  to  remain  in  the  factory,  or,  if  excluded,  to
ramble  over  the  fields  or  the  streets.

It  may  easily  be  supposed  that  the  operatives  are
outrageous  against  this  state  of  things.  Their  original
object  was  to  raise  the  price  of  their  own  labour.  For
this  purpose  the  spinners,  who  form,  as  I  stated  in  my  first
letter,  a  very  small  (about  l-20th)  but  a  powerful  body
among  them,  finding  that  they  could  not  obtain  a  limita-
tion of  the  hours  of  work  to  ten  by  combination,  tried
to  effect  it  through  the  legislature.  They  knew  that
Parliament  would  not  legislate  for  adults.  They  got
up  therefore  a  frightful,  and  (as  far  as  we  have  heard
and  seen)  an  utterly  unfounded  picture  of  the  ill  treat-
ment of  the  children,  in  the  hope  that  the  legislature
would  restrain  all  persons  under  18  years  old  to  ten
hours,  which  they  knew  would,  in  fact,  restrict  the  labour
of  adults  to  the  same  period.  The  Act  having  not  only
defeated  this  attempt,  but  absolutely  turned  it  against
them, — having,  in  fact,  increased  their  labour  and  dimi-
nished their  pay, — they  are  far  more  vehement  for  a  ten
hours'  bill  than  before,  and  are  endeavouring  by  every
means  to  impede  the  working  of  the  existing  Act,  and  to


'


,


12

render  its  enactments  vexatious  or  nugatory.  We  hear
everywhere  of  their  conspiring  to  entrap  the  masters  into
penalties,  by  keeping  the  children  too  long  in  the  mill,
by  keeping  them  from  school,  and  by  all  the  petty  annoy-
ances by  which  trouble  can  be  created.

With  respect  to  the  masters,  we  have  found  them,  with
only  two  exceptions,  favourable  to  the  substance  of  the
Act.  They  maintain,  indeed,  that  the  long  hours  of
attendance  did  not  injure  the  health  of  the  children,
provided  the  work-rooms  were  sufficiently  ventilated :
a  thing  which  may  be  accomplished  by  the  mere  addition
of  a  fan,  worked  by  the  engine  with  little  trouble  or  ex-
pense, and,  as  we  felt  at  Ashton's  and  Ash  worth's,  with  per-
fect successjThey  maintain  also  that  the  factory  children

ere  not  worse  educated,  indeed  were  better  educated,
than  the  children  employed  in  other  trades  :  and  they  com-
plain that  they  alone  are  selected  to  be  charged  with  the
education  of  their  dependants.  But  they  admit  that  em-
ployment, however  light,  for  twelve  hours  a-day,  must
prevent  education.  They  are,  as  far  as  we  have  seen,
without  any  exception,  most  earnest  that  their  work-people
should  be  educated ;  and  they  are  ready,  for  that  purpose,
to  submit  to  their  being  restricted,  while  under  thirteen,
to  eight  hours  a-day  of  employment ;  but  they  do  com-
plain most  bitterly  of  the  machinery  of  the  Act.

1st.  They  complain  of  the  clauses  by  which  a  master
may  be  called  before  the  magistrates,  exposed,  and  fined,
"  for  overworking  a  child,"  because  a  child  has  remained
a  minute  too  long  within  the  walls  of  the  mill  from  heed-
lessness,  or  from  dislike  of  being  turned  out  in  the  snow, —
or  perhaps  as  part  of  a  conspiracy  to  make  the  act  in-
tolerable.

2d.  They  object  to  being  liable  to  be  accused,  con-
victed, and  fined,  "  for  making  false  entries  in  the  time-
book,"  because  one  of  80  children  has  one  day  come  at
half-past  eight  and  gone  at  half-past  four,  instead  of  com-
ing at  eight  and  going  at  four, the  hours  fixed  for  it;  and


13

entered  in  the  time-book,  on  the  supposition  that  they  had
been  adhered  to.  It  is  to  avoid  this  danger  that  the  relay
system  has  generally  been  unattempted  or  disused.

3d.  They  object  to  being  convicted  and  fined  "  for
neglecting  the  education  of  thg  children,"  because  they
have  been  unable  to  force  a  child  to  school,  or  have  al-
lowed one  to  work  without  a  regular  certificate  of  school
attendance.  They  say  that  the  children  will  work,  arid
will  not  go  to  school ;  and  that  the  mill-owner,  whose
time  is  filled  with  other  things,  cannot  employ  it  in  pre-
venting eighty  urchins  from  truancy.

Under  such  circumstances,  we  found,  in  some  of  the
best  regulated  establishments,  the  forms  of  the  Act  in  this
last  respect  systematically  disregarded  ;  the  master,  re-
lying on  his  general  high  character,  and  not  fearing  to  be
suspected  of  having  intentionally  violated  its  substance.
Others,  however,  were  in  constant  anxiety  lest  it  should
be  infringed  ;  and  others  we  found  in  a  state  of  absolute
exasperation  at  the  convictions  which  had  been  obtained
against  them  while  they  were  most  diligently  endeavour-
ing to  carry  it  into  effect.

The  same  may  be  said  as  to  the  clauses  which
render  the  remaining  of  a  child  in  a  factory,  without  proof
of  its  employment,  conclusive  evidence  of  its  being  over
worked.  In  some  mills,  indeed  in  most,  this  is  adhered
to.  The  children  are  turned  into  the  fields,  or  the  streets,
whatever  be  the  weather,  the  instant  the  hour  begins  to
strike.  In  others  again  it  is  systematically  violated.
Care  is  taken  that  they  shall  not  work,  but  they  are  al-
lowed to  remain.  But  this  again  can  be  done  with
tolerable  safety,  only  by  a  master  who  feels  that  he  can-
not be  suspected  of  real  misconduct,  though  he  may  be
convicted  and  fined  for  noncompliance  with  forms.

4th.  They  complain  of  the  power  of  the  inspectors  to
issue  regulations,  which,  after  having  been  twice  pub-
lished in  a  county  paper,  become  laws.  They  say,  that
regulations,  minute  and  troublesome,  are  suddenly  issued


14

and  suddenly  altered  or  withdrawn  ;  that  they  are  not
easily  comprehended,  and,  by  the  time  they  have  been
understood,  are  revoked.

5th.  They  complain  of  the  constant  recurrence  of  Par-
/  liamentary  interference. They are tired  of  having to
come  to  town,  canvass and  expostulate  every  year,  in
0f  A* j  order  to  keep  off  a  ten  hours'  bill,  or  some  other  equally
wild  proposal. They  say,  that  if  they  can  once  be  sure  that
they  shall  have  nothing  worse  than  the  present  Act,  they
shall  endeavour  to  work  it,  and  believe  that  it  may  be
made  to  work  well ;  but  that  any  further  restrictions  will
\J>e  ruinous,  and  that  even  the  fear  of  them  is  most  mis-
chievous.

It  will  appear  from  this  statement,  that  the  Govern-
ment is  not  likely  to  be  much  troubled  by  demands  from
the  manufacturers  for  improvements  in  the  Factory  Act.
The  manufacturer  is  tired  of  regulations — what  he  asks  is
tranquillity — implora  pace.  But,  if  alterations  are  to  be
made,  the  following  are  those  which  have  been  suggested
to  us  : —

1st.  That  Government  shall  provide  schools,  and,  at
least,  lolerabje  teachers.  At  present  there  seem  to  be
none  that  deserve  the  name,  except  a  few  whom  some
opulent  and  enlightened  mill-owners,  such  as  the  Gregs,
Ashton,  and  Ashworth,  have  established  themselves.

2d.  That  the  duty  of  forcing  the^chiLdren-to-be  educated,
shall  be  transferred  fcornMjie  mill-owner  to  the  parent ;
or  (which  they,  with  one  exception,  prefer)  _lhat  educa-
tion shall  be  enforced  only  by  making  a  certain  amount  of
it  a  preliminary  to  employment — by  enacting,  for  instance,
that  after  a^given  time  no  child  shall  be  admitted  to  a  fac-
tory til.l  it  can  read,  or  be  allowed  to  work  full  time  until
it  can  read  and  write  fluently.

3d.  That  the  mill-owner  shall  be  punishable  only  for
substantial,  not  for  mere  formal,  violations  of  the  law.
That  he  shall  no  longer  be  liable  to  be  fined  and  dis-
oraced  as  a  violator  of  the  law,  for  an  incorrect  entry  in


15

a  time-book,  inadvertently  made  by  his  book-keeper,  or
because  a  child  has  stayed  in  the  mill  five  minutes  too
long,  in  order  to  tie  a  shoe,  or  warm  itself  by  the  stove.

4th.  That  gome  control  shall  be  exercised  over  the
promulgation  of  rules  by  the  inspectors;  some  appeal
from  their  regulations,  and  some  better  mode  of  publish-
ing them.

These  seem  to  be  all  their  wishes  ;  and  I  must  sai
that  they  appear  to  me  to  be  reasonable. The  first  ap-
pears to  be  the  most  important ;  an.d  I  only  repeat  my
own  words  on  the  Poor  Law  Report  when  I  say,  that  the
most  pressing  duty  now  incumbent  on  the  GovernmenTis,
to  provide  for  the_j^ligiousand  moral  education  of  the  .f  1
peopled In" fact,  the  Factory  Act,  by  driving  many  chil-
dren into  other  employments,  makes  the  expediency  of
adoptmg"a~  generaFsystem of  education  for  all  children
even  rogrejargent_than  "it  wasjbefore. "  WbaLare  you
doing  herej"  said Mr.  Ashton  to  .a_Jjttle., fellow,  whom
he  founoTmorjie  of  his  coal-mines. "  Working  in  mine,
till  I  am  old  enough  to  go  into  factory."

The  general  impressionon  us  all  as  to  ther  effects  of
factory  labour  has  been _M§,^E§^l^!zJ5voura^^e-  The
factory  work-people  in  the  country  districts  are  the  plump-
est, +">** jCJgjJlfA  fl"d...hpfl.l.tliip-st  1nnl^ng^p.rsnng__nf  the

labouring_class  that  I  have  ever  seen.  The  girls,  espe-
cially, are  far  more  good-looking  (and  goodjpoks  are  fair
evidence  of  health  and  spirits)  than  the  daughters  of  agri-
cultural labourers.  The  wages  earned  per  family  are
more  than  double  those  of  the  south.  We  examined  at
Egerton  three  of  the  Bledlow  pauper  migrants.  Being
fresh  to  the  trade,  they  cannot  be  very  expert ;  yet  one
family  earned  II.  19s.  6d. ;  another,  21.  13s.  6d. ;  and  the
other,  I/.  16s.  per  week.  At  Hyde  we  saw  another.
They  had  six  children,  under  13 ;  and  yet  the  earnings  of
the  father  and  two  elder  children  were  30s.  a  week.  All
these  families  live  in  houses,  to  which  a  Gloucestershire
cottage  would  be  a  mere  out-house.  And  not  only  are


16

factory wages  high,  but, what  is more  important,  the

employment  is  constant. Nothing,  in  fact,  except  the

strikes  of  the  work-people  themselves,  seems  to  interrupt  it.

Even  now,  when  the  hand-loom  weavers  and  lacemakers

are  discharged  by  thousands,  the  factory  operatives are

in  full employ. This  is one  of  the  consequences  of

/the great proportion of  fixed capital, and the enor-

'  mous loss  which  follows its standing  idle  for  a  single

:  day. Nothing  can  exceed  the  absurdity  of  the  lament-

I  ation over the children as u  crowded in factories."

j  Crowding  in a  factory is physically  impossible. The

1  machinery  occupies  the  bulk  of  the  space ;  the  persons

1  who  have  to  attend  to  it  are  almost  too  distant  to  con-

iverse. Birley's weaving room, covering an acre of

ground,  had  not  space  among  the  looms  for  more  than

170  persons. Bailey's  factory,  covering  two  acres  and

a  half,  one  story  high,  and therefore, taking  together

the  ground-floor  and  first-floor,  containing  five  acres  of

apartment,  was  to  be  worked  by  about  800  operatives,

which  gives  more  than  J5  yards  square  to  each. I  only

wish  that  my  work-room  in  Southampton  Buildings  had

as  much  space,  in  proportion  to  the  people  in  it.

The  difference  in  appearance  when  you  come  to  the
Manchester  operatives  is  striking; they  are  sallow  and
thinner. But  when  I  went  through  their  habitations  in
Irish  Town,  and  Ancoats,  and  Little  Ireland,  my  only
wonder  was  that  tolerable  health  could  be  maintained  by
the  inmates  of  such  houses. These  towns,  for  such  they
are  in  extent  and  population,  have  been  erected  by  small
speculators  with  an  utter  disregard  to  every  thing  except
immediate  profit. A  carpenter  and  a  bricklayer  club  to
buy  a  patch  of  ground,  and  cover  it  with  what  they  call
ouses. In  one  place  we  saw  a  whole  street  following-
he  course  of  a  ditch,  in  order  to  have  deeper  cellars
cellars  for  people,  not  for  lumber)  without  the  expense
f  excavation. Not  a  house  in  this  street  escaped  cholera,
nd  generally  speaking  throughout  these  suburbs the


17

streets  are  unpaved,  witli  a  dunghill  or  a  pond  in  the
middle;  the  hj^es^iirbackto  back,  without  ventilation
or  drainage ;  and  whole  families  occupy  each  a  corner  of  .  i
a  cellar__C£_^a_£arret.  A  good  Building  Actf  strictly  t.
enforced,  might  give  health  not  only  to  the  factories"  but
to  thC^pIe^pop^la-tion .  We  tried,  indeed,  an  experi- '
ment  as  to  the  comparative  appearance  of  different  classes
of  the  Manchester  population.  We  went  last  Sunday  to
the  great  Sunday-school  in  Bennett-street,  where  we
found  about  300  girls  in  one  large  room.  We  desired
first  all  the  carders  to  stand  up  alone,  then  all  the  piecers,
then  all  the  reelers,  and  so  on  through  the  various  de-
partments. Then  we  desired  all  those  not  employed
in  factories  to  stand  up ;  then  all  those  employed  in
factories  ;  and  on  each  of  these  trials  not  one  of  us  could
perceive  the  least  difference  between  the  apparent  health
of  the  different  classes  of  factory  children,  or  between  the
children  employed  in  factories  and  those  not  so  employed.  \
We  inquired  very  sedulously  as  to  the  mode  in  which '
Mr.  Homer  has  carried  out  the  Act ;  and  the  testimony
was  generally,  I  may  almost  say  unanimously,  favourable.
The  mill-owners  are  angry,  indeed,  at  his  last  report,  and
most  vehemently  opposed  to  his  demand  for  further
powers,  and  for  authority  to  his  superintendents  to  enter
the  mills  ;  but,  notwithstanding  this,  they  agree  that  he
has  performed  his  very  difficult  duties  mildly  and  judi-
ciously. Ever  yours,

N.  W.  SENIOR.

P.S. — On  looking  back  at  this  letter  I  see  that  I  have
omitted  one  point  which  was  earnestly  pressed  on  us, —
namely,  that  the  superintendents  should  be  appointed  by
the  inspector,  and  removable  by  him  ;  and  the  inspector
made  responsible  for  their  conduct.  Under  the  present
system  they  may,  and  I  believe  often  do,  pull  different
ways.

The  Right  Hon.  Charles  Poulctt  Thomson,


18

York  Hotel,  Manchester,  April  4,  1837.

MY  DEAR  SIR,

I  MUST  own  that  I  am  somewhat  alarmed  at  the
rumours  that  the  Government  propose  to  render  the
Factory  Act  more  stringent,  in  compliance  with  Mr.
Horner's  requisitions.

Those  requisitions  are  two  : —

1st.  That  magistrates  who  are  mill -owners,  or  have
some  property  in  mills,  or  who  are  by  trade  or  near
relationship  connected  with  factories,  should  not  sit  on
the  bench  on  prosecutions  connected  with  offences  under
the  Act.

2d.  That  the  sub-inspectors  or  superintendents  should
have  free  access,  without  asking  permission,  to  every  part
of  a  factory.

1st.  The  first  of  these  proposed  enactments  would
exclude  from  the  bench  on  factory  questions,  all  manu-
facturers or  commercial  men ;  for  who  is  there  among
them,  in  the  manufacturing  districts,  who  is  not  by  trade
or  near  relationship  connected  with  factories  ?  It  would
therefore  leave  the  enforcement  of  the  Act  to  the  clergy
and  country  gentlemen,— classes  generally  opposed  to  the
mill-owners  in  habits  and  politics,  and  without  practical
knowledge  of  the  system  in  the  working  of  which  they
would  have  to  interfere.  This  might  not,  perhaps,  be  of
great  importance  if  the  offences  on  which  they  would  have
to  adjudicate  were  substantial  offences.  If  wilful  over-
working a  child,  wilful  false  entries,  or  wilful  obstructions
of  education  were  the  punishable  acts,  the  adjudication
might,  perhaps,  be  safely  left  with  the  country  gentlemen ;
but  as  the  Act  is  worded,  the  offences  may  be  mere
formal  ones.  They  may  be  the  permitting  a  child  to
remain  too  long  in  a  mill,  or  an  inadvertent  error  in  one
among  1000  entries  ;  or  non-compliance  with  the  educa-
tion clauses,  with  which  Mr.  Homer  himself  declares
that  "  in  many  cases  strict  compliance  is  nearly  imprac-


19

ticable."  If  for  such  offences  as  these  the  judge  is  to  be
a  person  without  sympathy  for  the  accused,  or  knowledge
of  the  difficulty,  I  fear  that  provisions  now  severely  vex-
atious may  become  almost  intolerable.

2d.  The  free  admission  of  the  sub-inspectors  would,
however,  be  still  more  opposed.  The  "personel"  of  a
large  factory  is  a  machine  as  complicated  as  its  "  mate-
riel," and  is,  I  think,  on  the  whole,  the  great  triumph  of
Sir  R.  Arkwright's  genius.  In  such  an  establishment  from
700  to  1400  persons,  of  all  ages  and  both  sexes,  almost
all  working  by  the  piece,  and  earning  wages  of  every
amount  between  two  shillings  and  forty  shillings  a-week,
are  engaged  in  producing  one  ultimate  effect,  which  is
dependent  on  their  combined  exertions.  Any  stoppage,
even  any  irregularity  in  one  department,  deranges  the
whole.  A  strict  and  almost  superstitious  discipline  is
necessary  to  keep  this  vast  instrument  going  for  a  single
day.  Now  how,  ask  the  mill-owners,  could  this  discipline
be  kept  up,  if  the  sub-inspectors  were  at  liberty  to  walk
over  our  establishments  at  all  hours ;  listen  to  the  com-
plaints and  jealousies  of  all  our  servants,  and  at  their  in-
stigation summon  us  as  criminals  before  the  magistrates  ?
Could  the  discipline,  they  ask,  of  a  regiment  or  of  a  ship
be  carried  on,  if  we  had  sub-inspectors  of  regiments,  with
power  to  ask  all  the  privates  for  grievances,  and  summon
their  officers  for  penalties  ?

I  firmly  believe  that  if  this  enactment  is  carried,  the
following  will  be  the  consequences  : —

1st.  That  a  considerable  number  of  the  educated  and
intelligent  mill-owners,  that  is,  of  those  who  have  the
sensibilities  of  gentlemen,  will  cease  to  follow  their  occu-
pation within  the  British  Islands.

We  have  already  found  one  who  is  preparing,  if  such
a  clause  is  passed,  to  form  an  establishment  in  the  Tyrol ;
and  others  have  told  us  that  they  shall  resist  it  by  main
force.  This  was  probably  an  idle  menace  ;  but  it  shows
the  degree  of  irritation  that  the  mere  proposal  has  excited.


20

2d.  That  from  a  large  proportion  of  the  Mills,  the
children  under  thirteen  will  be  excluded,  and  forced,
therefore,  into  other  employments,  unprotected  by  any
regulations  whatever.

I  mentioned  in  my  former  letter,  that  this  has  already
been  done  to  some  extent.  And  it  is  remarkable,  that  of
the  four  establishments  seen  by  us,  which  have  adopted
this  manner  of  escaping  from  the  Act,  three, — that  is
to  say,  Lambert  Hoole  and  Jackson's,  Cheetham's
new  mill,  and  Orrell's, — are  of  first-rate  magnitude.
A  very  slight  additional  pressure,  occurring  too  at  a
time  of  diminished  manufacturing  activity,  would  render
it  prevalent. — Mr.  Homer  disbelieves  the  probability
of  such  an  event,  because  "  it  cuts  off  the  future  sup-
"  ply  of  useful  hands  ;  as  children,  to  be  profitable  to
"their  employer,  must  begin  to  learn  their  trade  at  a
"  much  earlier  age  than  thirteen."  I  agree  as  to  this
fact, — but  not  as  to  the  inference.  A  manufacturer  who
excludes  children  under  thirteen,  may  still  carry  on  his
business  with  work-people  who  acquired  their  skill  under
the  old  regulations,  or  with  a  supply  from  other  mills.
Some  years  hence,  the  evil  may  be  great,  and  may  be
irremediable  ; — but,  by  that  time,  the  manufacturer  in
question  may  have  quitted  business.

3d.  I  fear  a  very  9angerous  state  of  feeling  among
the  work-people.  I  need  not  tell  you,  that  we  are
approaching  a  season  of  great  difficulty.  Excessive
shipments  have  injured  the  Asiatic  market, — internal
supply,  the  continental, — and  financial  embarrassment,
the  American.  Already  the  manufacturers  complain  of
diminished  or  suspended  demands,  are  holding  stocks,
and  talking  of  working  short  time.  If  the  dense  and
ignorant  population  of  the  manufacturing  districts,  trained
in  combinations,  and  accustomed  to  high  wages,  is  partly
thrown  out  of  work,  and  the  remainder. reduced  in  in-
come, scenes  of  violence  may  follow,  which  may  frighten
away  capital,  already  having  a  tendency  to  emigrate.


21

On  the  whole,  the  result  of  my  tour  has  been  a  mixture
of  pain  and  pleasure.  I  have  seen  a  vast,  well  paid,
thriving,  and  apparently  happy  population.  But  I  see,
impending  over  that  population,  calamities  which  may
be,  and  I  hope  will  be  averted — but  which  will  inevi-
tably fall  on  them,  if  the  suggestions  of  those  who  call
themselves  their  friends  are  even  partially  followed.

To  enforce  ventilation  and  drainage,  and  give  means
and  motives  to  education,  seems  to  me  all  that  can  be
done  by  positive  enactment.

Ever  yours,

N.  W.  SENIOR.

The  Right  Hon.  Charles  Poulett  Thomson,
Sfc.  8fc.  8fc.


THE END.


R,  CLAY,  PRINTER,  BREAD  STREET  HILL.


14  DAY  USE

•  *WUH-H  BORROWED

HOME  USE

CIRCULATION  DEPARTMENT
* '  LIBRARY

andreCllabeni


(R8191L) '


Berkeley


78


'


GENERAL  LIBRARY .  u.C.  BERKELEY


B000731S40
