INTRODUCTORY LECTURE


ON


POLITICAL ECONOMY,


DBLIVERBD BEFORE


THE UNIVERSITY OF OXFORD,


OM ■. ■ V .'■■ A


The 6th of December, 1826.


-r*


iJ-


By NASSAU WILLIAM SENIOR,

OF MAGDALEN COLLEGE, OXFORD, A. >/., PROFESSOR
OF POLITICAL ECONOMY.


LONDON:
PRINTED FOR J. MAWMAN,

LUD G ATE-STRBBT.
MDCCCXXVII.

^4


LONDON :
Printcfl by Wiixum Ciowb*.
StanAlrd-stiver-


TO THK


MUNIFICENT AND ENLIGHTENED


FOUNDER OF THE PROFESSORSHIP,


WHICH OCCASIONBD ITS DBLIVBRY,


THIS LECTURE


IS


RESPECTFULLY AND GRATEFULLY INSCRIBED


BY


THE AUTHOR


INTRODUCTORY LECTURE,

SfC. SfC.


It is impossible to address such an assembly as
I see before me without great diffidence and great
anxiety ; and I may^ perhaps, plead more than the
usual excuse for indulging in the egotism which is
natural to an introductory lecture. If the science
of Political Economy were in the situation in
which, I trust, a very few years, and perhaps the
exertions of some of those whom I am addressing,
will place it ; if its objects were clearly understood,
its terms precisely defined, its general principles
universally admitted ; if it ranked in public esti-
mation, as then it will rank, among the first of
moral sciences in interest and in utility, I should
feel, as I now feel, great diffidence in my own
powers, and the necessity of relying very much on

B


2 AN INTRODUCTORY LECTURE

your candour and indulgence. But this is not the
situation of the science. It is, at present, in that
state of imperfect development, which, though
most attractive to the student who has made some
proficiency, throws the greatest difficulty in the
way of a beginner, and, consequently, of a teacher,
and offers the fairest scope to the objections of an
idle or an interested adversary.

When I consider how numerous those adversa-
ries are, and how widely diffused are the prejudices
which they excite and propagate, all apprehension
for myself is lost in the fi^r that the failures of the
professor may be imputed to his subject, and that
the vague abstractions, the details, the truisms>
the obscurities, and the inconsistencies which,, with
all my care, will, I have no doubt, be found in my
lectures, may rather deter those among my hearers
to whom the subject is new from proceeding in a
study which, in my hands, may appear uninterest-
ing, than lead them to prosecute it in the writings
of the great masters of the science, and by patient
meditation on the results of their own experience.-


ON POLITICAL ECONOMY. O

To prevent^ as far as I am able, such a result,
I shall devote this lecture to an attempt to explain
the objects of Political Economy, and the inquiries
through whidi they are to be effected ; and it will,
I think, appear that the human faculties cannot be
engaged in a pursuit more usefiil in its result, or
more interesting" in its p«)gres8. '

If we compare the present situation of the
people of England with that of their predecessors
at the time of Caesar's invasion ; if we contiast the
warm and dry cottage of the present labotu-er, its
chimney and glass windows, (luxmies hot enjoyed
by Caesar himself,) the linen and woollen clothing
of himself and his family, the steel, and glass and
earthenware with which his table is furnished, the
Asiatic and American ingredients of his food, and
above all> his safety from personal injury, and his
calm security that to-morrow will bring with it the
comforts that have been enjoyed to-day ; — if, I
repeat, we contrast all these sources of enjoyment
with the dark and smoky burrows of the Brigantes,
or theCantii, their clothing of skins, their food

B 2


4 AN INTRODUCTORY LECTURE

confined to milk and fleshy and their constant ex-
posure to famine and to violence, we shall be in-
clined to think those who are lowest in modern
society richer than the chiefs of their rude predc:
cessors. And if we consider that the same space
^f ground which afforded an uncertain subsistence
to a hundred^ or probably fewer, savages, now
supports^ with ease more than a thousand labpurers,
and, perhaps, a hundred individuals beside, eac}^
ccmsuming piore commodities than the labour of a,
whole tribe of Ancient Britons could have proT
duced or purchased^ we may at first be led tq'
doubt whether our ancestors enjoyed the samQ
natural advantages as ourselves ; whether their sun^
was as warm, their soil as fertile, or their bodies^
as strong, as our own.

But let us substitute distance of space for dis-
tance of time ; and, instead of comparing the
situations of the same country at different periods,
compare different countries at the same period,,
and we shall find a still more striking discrepancy.
The inhabitant of South America enjoys a soil


ON POLITICAL ECONOMY rf O

and a climatey not superior merely to our own^but
combining all the advantages of every climate
and soil possessed by the remainder of the world.
His vallies have all the exuberance of the tropics,
and his mountain-plains unite the temperature of
Europe to a fertility of which Europe oflFers no
example. Nature collects for him, within the
space of a morning's walk, the fruits and vegeta*
bles which she has elsewhere separated by thou-
sands of miles. She has given him inexhaustible
forests, has covered his plains with wild cattle
and horses> filled his mountains with mineral
treasures, and intersected all the eastern face of

his country with rivers, to which our Rhine and
Danube are merely brooks. But the possessor of
these riches is poor and miserable. With all
the materials of clothing offered to him almost
Spontaneously, he is ill-clad ; with the most pro-
ductive of soils, he is ill-fed ; though we are told
that the labour of a week will there procure sub-
sistence for a year, famines are of frequent occur-'
rence ; the hut of the Indian, and the residence of


A.N r.NTRODUCTOHK LECTDHE


the landed proprietor are alike destitute of furni-
ture and convenience ; and South America, help-
less and indigent with all her natural advantages,
seems to rely for support and improvement on a
very small portion of the surplus wealth of Eng-
land.

It is impossible to consider these phenomena
without feeling anxious to account for them ; to
discover whether they are occasioned by circum-
stances unsusceptible of investigation, or regu-
I laticm, or by causes which can be ascertained, and
I may be within human control. To us, as Eng-
lishmen, it is of still deeper interest to inquire
I whether the causes of our superiority are still in
I operation, and whether their force is capable of
Being increased or diminished ; whether Eng-
land has run her full career of wealth and improve-
ment, but stands safe where she is ; or, whether
to remain stationary is impossible, and it depends
on her institutions and her habits, on her govern-
ment, and on her people, whether she shall recede
or continue to advance.


ON POLITICAL ECONOMY.


/Hie answer to ail these questions must ba
sought in the sdence whkdi teaches in what wealth
eonsists/^by what agents it is produced^ — and
acGOixliAg to what laws it is distributed^ — and
what are the institutions and customs by whidi
production may be facilitated and distribution
regi)l£^ted^ so as to give the largest possible
amount of wealth to each individual. And this
science is Political Economy.

If my definition be correct^ the science of Poli-
tical Economy may be divided into two great
branches^-^ihe theoretic and the {UBctical. The
firsts or theoretic branchy that which explains the
nature^ production, and distribution of wealth,
vnll {be found to rest on a very few general pro-
po$itio9s, which e^ the result of observation, or
qonscipusj^ess, md which .almost every ma^i, as
S(Oon a^ he hear^ them^ admits, as familiar to his
though^, or at leasts as included in his previous
knowledge,

. Its qouclusions are also nearly as general as its;
premises ; — those which relate to the nature and


AS INTBODUCTOBY LECTUBB


production of wealth, are universally true : and,
though those which relate to the distribution of
wealth, are liable to be affected by peculiar insti-
tutions of particular countries, — in the cases, for
instance, of slavery, corn-laws, or poor-laws, — the
natural state of things can be laid down as the
general rule, and the anomalies produced by par-
ticular disturbing causes can be afterwards ac-
counted for.

The practical branch of the science, that of
which the office is to ascertain what institutions
are most favourable to wealth, is a far more ardu-
ous study. Many of its premises, indeed, rest on
the same evidence as those of the first branch ;
for they are the conclusions of that branch : — but it
has many which depend on induction from pheno-
mena, numerous, difficult of enumeration, and of
which the real sequence often differs widely from
the apparent one. The machinery of civilized
society is worked by so many antagonist springs ;
the disUke of labour, the desire for immediate en-
joyment, and the love of accumulation are so per-


ON POLITICAL ECONOMY. 9

petually coanteracting one another^ land they pro-
duce such opposite conduct^ not only in different
individuals, but in whole masses of people, that
we are liable to the greatest mistakes when we en-
deavour to assign motives to past conduct^ or to pre-
dict the conduct which a new motive will produce.

For instance^ the questions^ whether the poor-
laws have had a tendency to diminish or increase
the population of England ? Whether the testa-<
mentary laws of France are favourable or unfavour-
able to the wealtib of that country ? Whether the
wealth of England has been increased or dimi-
nished by her colonies ? Whether tithes fall prin-
cipally on the consumer or on the landlord ? and
many others^ of which the facts seem to lie before
our eyes^ have been diligently and acutely inves-
tigated^ and are stilly perhaps^ undecided.

And, if we are often unable to trace all the con-
sequences of institutions with which we have been
long familiar, how much more difficult must it be
to predict the effects of measures which are still
untried!


10


\N IPfTHODUCTOKT LfcOTUBE


Inattention to the distinetion between the practical
and the theoretic branches of Politieai Economy,
appears to me to have occasioned much of the
difference of opinion which prevails as to the cer-
tainty of its conclusions. Those who assert that
it approaches to the accuracy of logic or mecha-
nics, must either have confined their attention to
the theoretic branch, or have forgotten that the
practical branch must sometimes draw its pre-
mises from particular facts, respecting- particular
climates, soils, and seasons ; and must sometimes
take into account the influence of every human
passion and appetite, under every modification of
government and knowledge.

On the other hand, the uncertainty which affects
many of the investigations of Political Economists,
has been rashly attributed to them all. Because
from probable premises they have deduced only
probable conclusions, it has been sometimes sup-
posed that probability, and that of a low degree,
is all they can attain.

1 hope in the course uf these Lectures to prove


ON POLITICAXi ECONOMY. H

the tmik of . my statement^ that 4he th^retie
branch of tiie J9eience, that whkh treats of the.
nstare^ productioa and distribution of wealthi — ^is
capable <Df uil the certainty .ihat ean bel(»^ to any.
sdieiice, not fbanded exclusively on definitioBS ;
a»d 1 hope;, also^ to show that many qonclusioos,^
and^1iiose.of the highest importance^ in the practi'*
cal ibrandi^ rest jso immediatdiy on the coiidusicmsi
of ike theoretic . branch as to possess equ^l cer-
tain^, and universa%.

The slight sketch, whidh 1 hate givaai of the ob-
jects' of the science^ affords me a bettar opportu-
liity than^ perhaps^ . I shall Jiave hereaft^^ of con* ,
sidering some dejections that may be made^ if not
to the atudy itself, at tea^t to the raids: in wMch
I have placed it. .

The first is^ that aa the puirsiat of wealth is one,
of itibe humblest <^ human occupations^ far inferior
to. the pursuit of yirtue, or of knowledge^ or eveo;
of xeputation; andjas Ihe possession of wealth is;
not necessarily joined — perhaps^ it will be said, is»
not conducive — to ha{q[>iness^ a science of which the


la


AN INTRODUCTORY LECTURE


only subject is wealth, cannot claim to rank as the
first, or nearly the first, of the moral sciences.

My answer is, first, that the pursuit of wealth,
that is, the endeavour to accumulate the means of
fiiture subsistence and enjoyment, is, to the mass
of mankind, the great source of moral improve-
ment. When does a labourer become sober and
industrious, attentive to his health and to his cha-
racter? — as soon as he begins to save. No insti-
tution could be more beneficial to the morals of the
lower orders, that is, to at least nine-tenths of the
whole body of any people, than one which should
increase their power and their wish to accumulate :
none more mischievous than one which should
diminish the motives and the means to save. If
we have institutions eminently calculated to pro-
duce both the benefit and the mischief, how valu-
able must the science be that teaches us to discri-
minate between them, to extend the one, and to
remove, or diminish, or, at least, not to extend, the
other !

I answer, in the second place, that it is, perhaps,


i


ON POLITICAL ECONOMY. 13

true, that the wealth which enables one man to
command the labour of hundreds or of thousands^
such wealth as raised Chatsworth, or Fonthill,
may not be favourable to the happiness of its posr
sessor; and, if this be so, Political Economy
will best teach us to avoid creating or perpetu-
ating institutions, which promote such inconvenient
agglomerations. But that diffusion of wealth
which alone entitles a people to be called rich )
that state of society in which the productiveness
of labour, and the mode in which it is applied,
secure to ihe labouring classes ail the necessaries
and some of the conveniences of life, seems to be^
not merely conducive, but essential both to their
morals and their happiness. This appears to m^
so self-evident^ that I am almost ashamed of
taking up your time by proving it, But^ if proof
be wanted, we have only to consider what are the
effects on the human character of the opposite
state of society ; a state in which the mass of the
people is habitually confined to a bare subsistence, '
and, consequently, exposed from time to time.


14


I tNTBODUrroiTT LECTURE


from the accidents of trade, or of the seiisons, tti
absolute want. I will not dwell on the misery of
those on whom actual want doea fall : it is too
painftil to be steadfastly contemplated, and forms
only a small part of the evil. The great evil is
the general feeling of insecurity : the fear which
roust beset almost every man, whose labour pro-
duces iiim only a subsistence, and who has no
resource against contingencies, that at some
period, how near he cannot tell, the want under
which he has seen otliers sink may reach himself.
The principal sources of happiness are the social
affections ; but (to use the words of a powerful
writer, and a very accurate observer of human
nature) " the man whose thoughts are perpetually
" harassed by the torment of immediate, or the
" dread of future want, loses the power of bene-
" volent sympathy with his fellow-creatures ;
" loses the virtuous feeling of a desire for their
** pleasures, and an aversion to their pains ;
" rather, perhaps, hates their pleasures as ren-
" dering the sense of his own misery more pun-


ON POLITICAL ECONOMY. 15

^^ g^ent ; desires their paibs, as rendering the ionise
'' of that misery the less. This is the ei^jdanation
^' of the cruel aod ferocious character which iiiii«-
'' formly accompanies the h^rdship» of aatage
" life. Another result of si^mng: is* that it prot
'^ duces an e^tr^ordii^ary, greediness for immediale
^- gratification ;, a violent propensity to seek comt
'^ pensation from any sensual indulgence whidi
^- is within the reach. It is a consequence that
^^ the poorest; individuals. in divilized society are
^* the most .intemperate; the least capable of
*^ denyiilg themselv^ any pleasure^ however
■^ hurtfulj, which they can comnkand. Hence theur
^^ passion for intoxicating liquors ;. and hence»
'* because he is still more wretched, the still more
^* furious passion for them in the savage."*

It is scarcely necessary to add( that such a
population must be grossly ignorant*^ . The . desire
for knowledge is one of the Itot results of refine-
ment; it requires* in general, to' have 'been im-!

♦ History of British Imiia, 1). 0. CL -6. ^ •


16


AN IMRODUCTORV LECTIfKE


planted in tlie mind during rhildhoud ; and it
is absurd to suppose that persons thus situated
would have the power or the will to devote much
to the education of their children, A further con-
sequence is the absence of all real religion : for
the religion of the grossly ignorant, if they have
any, scarcely ever amounts to more than a de-
basing superstition.

It is impossible tliat, under such circumstances,
there should be an effectual administration of jus-
tice. The law has few terrors for a man who has
l»othing to lose. Its efficiency, too, is almost al-
together dependent on the support it receives from
the general body of the people. Among a very
poor, and consequently, a very ignorant people,
sympathy is almost always in favour of the offender ;
his flight is favoured, his lurking-places are con-
cealed, the witnesses against him are intimidated,
and he escapes even after he has become the sub-
ject of prosecution : but more frequently he
escapes even prosecution. Outrages are com-
mitted in the presence of hundreds, and we are


ON POLITICAL ECONOMt^ 17

told that hot on6 of the perpetrators can be idienti-
fied; that is^ though they are well known, the wH^
nesses conceal their knowledge.

When siich is the character of the bulk of the
community, there can be no security for the per-
sons or propierty of any of its members. The
three great restraints from crime> — religion, good
feeling, and law, have, as we have seen, little
force ; while the great source of crime, the passion
for immediate enjoyment, acquires additional
strength.

I do not expect to be accused of Imving exag-
gerated the wretchedness of a country in which
the bulk of the people are subject to the pressure
or the apprehension of waiit. But I may be told,
perhaps, that I have supposed an extreme case,
a danger to which no civilized society is exposed,
to provide against which is a waste of labour.

My answer is, firist, that the miserable situation
which I have described has, up to the present
time, been that of many of the inhabitants of every
densely pec^led country.


18


AN INTRODUCTORY l.ECTUKE


Mr. Mylne has shown (Life Annuities, vol. ii.
p. 390,) that in England any material reduction in
the price of wheat is almost always accompanied
by a decrease in the number of burials ; and thai
any material rise in the price is generally attended
by a corresponding increase in the burials. This
proves that there must be almost always in this
country a considerable nmnber of persons just
vibrating between the possession and the want of
mere food ; whom an inclination of the price, one
way or the other, saves or destroys. In London
alone, when London was far less populous than it
is now. Dr. Colquhoun estimated that there were
never less than 20,000 persons who rose in the
raoming ignorant what means — whether casual em-
ployment, pillage, or mendicity — would give them
food for the day, or shelter for the ensuing night.
While I am now speaking, there are thousands
and tens of thousands of families of hand-weavers,
in Lancashire and Yorkshire, who are working
fourteen hours a day for what will scarcely support
animal existence. And those are, perhaps, still


ON POLITI€AL ECONOMY. I9

more, numerous whocanmot obtain regular employ-
ment .even on^ /such terms aa these^ but > are eking
out^the..deficiency of rtheir wagea by the gradual
sale of their little 4stook. of clothes and furniture.
Unlesa.i/re are prepared to maintain that there.can
be^no measm'es by. which the number of p^sons
80; situated can. be increased or diminished^ we are,
at least, baund to inquire into the pretensions of
the . scieaice which, professes to point out tlK>se
measures.

But it is not true thsU; the extreme case of gene^
ral .pauperisni9 which I hav^ described, is one to
which no clvilia^Qd society cai^^be, exposed. Alm-g^
port^n of thei British . Empire has beeu sinlang
into it d^r^lg the last , thirty years, and, apparently
with increased rapidity.

The liousie of Commons' Committee, appointed
in . the begiiming of this year to consider the
expediency of encouraging emigratbn from tiie
United Kingdom^ commence their, Report by stat-
ing^ a^amopg the results oC .the .evidence collected
by.them^ '^ That there are extensive districts in

C 2


AN INTRODUCTORY LECTURE


' Ireland, and districts in England and Scotland,
' where the population is at the present moment
:* redundant ; in otlier words, where there exists

* a very considerable proportion of able-bodied
' and active labourers, beyond that number to
' which any existing demand for labour can afford
' employment. That the effect of this redundancy
' is not only to reduce a part of this population
' to a great degree of destitution and misery, but
' also to deteriorate the general condition of the
' labouring classes. That by its producing a
' supply of labour in excess, as compared witli

* the demand, tlie wages of labour are necessa-
' rily reduced to a minimum, which is utterly
' insufficient to supply that population with those
' means of support and subsistence which are ne-
' ccssary to secure a healthy and satisfactory con-
' dition of the community. That in England this
' redundant population has been, in part, sup-

* ported by a parochial rate, which, according to
'' the reports and evidence of former committees
' specially appointed to consider the subject.


ON POLITICAL ECONOMY. 21

^' threatens, in its extreme tekdency^ to absorb the
" vt^hole rental of the country. And that in Ire-
^^ land^ where no such parodiial rate exists by
'^. law, and where the redundancy Is found in a still
^^ greater degree, a eonsiderable part of the popu-
'^ lation.is dependent for the means of support on
'^ the precarious source of charity, or is compelled
'* to resort to habits of plunder and spoliation
'^ for the actual means of subsistence."

If we turn to the Minutes, we shall find from
Mr. Bodkin's evidence (p. 214) that the hope of
being employed by the Mendicity Society in break-
ing stones at six-pence, or eight-pence per day, a
work from which English paupers absconded, pro-
duced such an emigration from the south of Ire-
land to London, that the Society were forced to
make a distinction between the applicants, and to
refuse the employment to any who had not rei^ded
in this country for a certain time. We shall find
Mr. Becher stating (p. 193) that ^^ almost any
^' change of situation would be for the benefit of
i' the lower class in Munster:" — the Bishop of


AN INTBODUCTOKV l.EmfRK


Ldmerick (p. 144), that " the existing state of
" things is truly frightful." Mr. Gabbitt (p. 137)
describes the county of Limerick as " the richest"
(that is, I apprehend, the most fertile) " country
" in the world." Yet he states that the best de-
scription of labourers, those best able to support a
family, as soon as they can amass a sum sufficient
to pay their passage, emigrate to America, " and
" leave all their children and families behind them,
" a load npon the bounty of the public." What
must be the general misery of this country, so
highly favoured by nature, when the least miserable
part of its labouring population are eager to
escape from tlieir wretchedness, not merely by an
eternal separation from all those connected with
them by nature and affection, but by leaving them
" a load on the bounty of the public," that is, to
be supported by the charity of those who are too
poor to emigmte / I am not sure whether I should
not infer as intense suffering from Mr. Gabbitt's
facts, as from the Bishop of Lamerick's description
of a dispossessed tenantry (p. 144), " without


ON POLITICAL ECONOMY. 23

'^ hoiise, without food, without money, si^urving^
^^ and almost dying in the ditches."

Happily there is no general misery in England
like this ; but even England, rich atid prosperous,
and well governed as she 1$ beyond ajpy 'other
European community, is not,, perhaps, quite be-
yond the sphere of a similar caJlamity. We have
among our institutions, and our modes of acting,
some which are eminently catenated to do more
than merely retard our advancement.

I confidently hope that we shall not long have
to contend with them ; but my hope is founded
solely on the expectation that the difiusion of sound
principles of Political Economy ynll aid our en-
liglitened ministers with the whole strength of
public opinion, and enable them to conquer the
ignorance, prejudice, and individual interest which
have always been opposed to every improvement.

There are, however> many reasoners, or rather
talkers and writers, who admit the importance o(
the subject, but distrust the conclusions of the
science ; and profess to be guided on all questions


AN IMTHODDCTORY LECTURE


relating to it, not by the theories of political
I economists, but by the opinions of practical men,
or their own common-sense.

By practical men are meant, I suppose, those
who have bad experience in the matters which
Political Economy considers. But who has not
had that experience ? The revenue of all men
must consist of rent, profit, or wages. Tlieymust
all exchange it for commodities or services. They
'all know, or have equally the means of knowing,
for it can be discovered only by reflection, why
they set a high value upon some things, a low
one upon others, and disregard a third class.
An academical body is not very commercial, but,

\probably, there is no one present who does not
make twenty exchanges every week. If this ex-

h'perience is not enough to enable him to under-

- stand how the human passions act in buying and
Belling, he would be unable to comprehend it,

^'though his transactions equalled in number and
amount those of Baring or of Rothschild. It is,
in fact, as impossible to avoid being a practical


ON POUTICAL £CQ(<OMY. * 25

econoipist, as to avoid beingi a practical logician.
The man who, beside the daily: jtraflic in whidb
we are all necessarily, engaged^ has devoted him-
self to any peculiar branch of trade or manufac-
ture^ (and sudii b the general character of those
vpbaare caUed practical men>) is mudi- more likely
ito'have his general views contracted than ex-
tended by it. He is apt to suppose that what he
thinks use&l and hurtful to himself, must be use-
ful and. hurtful to the community. Thus> the poor
working clothiers of Stroud attributed the public
distress to the introduction of machineiy in the
manufacture of cloth^ and Mn Webb Hall calcu-
lated that a fall in the price of com of 10^. a
quarter would be a loss to the whole country of
f 2PiOOO,000 a year. . .

Ho those who profess to be guided solely by
Common-Sense^ I will quote» in the first place.
Dr. Whately's admirable illustration of the na-
ture of Common-Sense, and of the absurdity of
trusting to; itr where a better gmde is to be
found: — . . . -


26


AN INTRODUCTOHY LECTURE


"By Common-Sense," says Dr. Whately, "is
" meant, I appi-ehendj (when the term is used
" with any distinct meaning,) an exercise of the
" judgment unaided by any art or system of rules ;
" such as we must necessarily employ in number-
" less cases oi' daily occurrence ; in which, having
" no established principles to guide us, — no line
" of procedure, as it were, distinctly chalked out,—
" we must needs act on the best extemporaneous
" conjectures we can form. He who is eminently
" skilful in doing this, is said to possess a
" superior degree of Common-Sense. But that
" Common-Sense is only our second-best guide —
" that the rules of art, if judiciously framed, are
" always desirable when they can be had, is an
" assertion, for the truth of which I may appeal
'' to the testimony of mankind in general ; which
"■ is so much the more valuable, inasmuch as it
'• may be accounted the testimony of adversaries.
" For the generality have a strong predilection
" in favour of Common-Sense, except in those
" points in which tliey, respectively, possess the


ON POLITICAL ECONOMY. 27


<<


((


knowledge of a system of rules ; but in ihese
points they deride any one who trusts to unaided
^^ Common-Sense. A saQor^ e. g., will perhaps
despise the pretensions of medical men^ and
prefer treating a disease by Common-Sense :
^*but he would ridicule the proposal of havigatmg
^^ a ship by Common-Sense, without re^rd to the
'^^ maxims of nautical art. A physician, ^g^n>
^^ will perhaps contemn Systems of* Political Eco-
^^nomy, of Logic, or 'Metaphysics; aiid'. insist on
^^ the superior wisdom of trtfeting to Common-
" Sense in such matters ; but he would never
^^ approve of trusting to Common-S^rise in the
'^ treatment of diseases. Neither, again, would
^^the architect recommend a reliance on Com-
moib-Sense alone in building, lior the musician
in music, to the neglect of those systems' of
^^ rules, which in their nespective'arts, have been
'^ deduced from scientific reasoning aided by ex-
perience. And the Induction ' might be ex-
tended to every depjtrtmeut of practice. Since,
therefore, each gives the preference to unassisted
Common-Sense, only in those cases where he


So AN INTRODUCTORY X.ECTUHE

" himself has nothing else to trust to, and invariably
" resorts to the rules of art, wherever he possesses
" the knowledge of thein, it is plain that mankind
*.' universally bear their testimony, though uncon-
" sciously and often unwillingly, to the preferable-
l *' ness of systematic knowledge to conjectui'al
" judgments."*

Dr. Whately's reasoning is unanswerable ; but
we shall be far too favourable to most of those who
profess, and perhaps sincerely, to rely on com-
mon-sense in matters of Political Economy, if
we beUeve that they actually do so.

Political Economy was an art long before it was
a science ; and neither those who first practised
it, nor their advisersj were filled by knowledge,
honesty, or singleness of purpose, to desire right
ends, or to employ proper means.

Those who first practised it in modem Europe,
(and our maxims of Political Economy have no
earlier origin,) those who 6rst endeavoured to em-
ploy the powers of government in influencing the


' Preface to the Elements of Logic.


ON POLITICAL ECONOMY* • 29

]^rodtictioni distribution, and consumption of
wealth, were semi-barbarous sovereigns, consider-
ing their subjects not as a trust, but a property,
and desirous only to turn that property to the best
and readiest account.

Their advisers were landholders, merchants,
and manufacturers, each anxious only for his own
immediate gain, and caring little how the rest of
society might be affected by the monopoly he
extorted. From the mode in which these persons
pursued what they thought their individual inter-
ests, aided by national jealousy, and by the am-
biguities of language, and unchecked by any
sound principles, arose that unhappy compound
of theoretic and practical ^rror, the ^^ Mercantile
System." T think' I may take it for granted,
that all those whom I am addressing are ac-
quainted with the outlines of that system: and I
mtist necessarily consider it somewhat at large
in my next lectures. I will say no more of it,
therefore, in this place, than that it was founded
in a belief, that the wealth of a country consists


30


AN INTRODUCTORY I.ECTORK


solely of ffold and silver, and is t<j be retained
^and increased by prohibiting the exportation of
money, and by giving bounties on the exportation,
and imposing restrictions on the importation of
other commodities, in the hope of producing a
trade in which, the imports being always of less
rvalue than the exports, the balance may be paid
l"in money ; a conduct, as wise as that of a trades-
f inan who should part with his gwods only for
money ; and instead of employing their price in
paying his workmen's wages, or replacing his
stock, should keep it for ever in his till.

As is the case, however, with every long-
' standing abuse, so many persons are immediately
jinterested in supporting particular parts of the
^ ^Stem, and the theory on which it is founded, so
r long commanded universal assent, that ninety-nine
men out of a hundred imbibe it with their earliest
f -education. Terms which imply the truth of the
Piheory, and, consequently, Ihe propriety of the
practice, have even become a part of our lan-
guage. A trade in which money is supposed to


ON P0LI1PICAL ECONOMY 31

be received in exchange for . goods, is . called a
trade with a favourable balance ; duties impos^ad
to give monopolies to particular classes of ^pro-
ducers^, are called protecting duties ; applications
of the public revenue^ to divert capital and labour
from their natural employment, are called bomities.
The consequence of all this is^ that men who
&ncy they are applying ,c(Hnmon-sense to - qu^-
tions of Political Economy, are often- applying to
them only common prejudice. Instead of op-
posing^ as they fancy, experience to theory,
they are opposing the theory- of a barbarous age
to the theory and ' exp^ience of an enlightened
one.

There never was ataman .p£ stronger commoor
sepse, a man more fij^ted to draw accurate conclu-
^ons from few or doubt&d. premises, than Napor
leon^ He had an utter horror of Political £coaor
my ;^ the pnndples of whiph> he said, if an empii^
were buUt of granite, would grind.. it ^ to powder.
On $uch. subjects he .Irusted to common-siense*
And > his. common-sense was.an.undistinguishing


33


) INTBODTJCTORY LECTURE


acceptance of the whole theory of the mercantile
system.

It appears, from his conversations at St. Helena,
that he fully believed that the continent must be
a loser by its commerce with England, and that it
must be so on account of the excellence and cheap-
ness of English commodities. These abominable
qualities must, he thought, enable us, in the jar-
gon of the theory, to undersell the continent in its
own market, and ultimately produce its ruin,
through that unfavourable balance of trade, in
which, what is received is of greater value than
what is given. He thought that he could put an
end to this trade by his continental system ; with-
out doubt the principal object of that system was
to ruin England ; but he appears to have impli-
citly believed, that it was also a blessing to the
continent. The murmurs of his subjects and allies
he treated like the complaints of spoiled children,
who do not know what is for their own good, and
who, when experience has made them wiser, wilt
embrace from choice what they have submitted to


' ON .POLITICAL ECONOMY. 33

fipm necessity. There x;an be no doubt, I think,
that these opinions, and the obstinacy into which
they led him, . were the ultimate causes of his
downfal. ;

. But can they be said to have been founded on
cprnmon-sense ? If Napoleon had trusted to his
own powerful sense, if he had not been misled by
a theory as wild as it is generally received, could
behave believed that the Continent wa^ injured by
enjoying an advantageous market, and was injured
precisely^ in the proportion in which that market
was advantageous?

. The length to which this lecture has extended
prevents me from dwelling on the many other pre-
judices which profess to derive their sanction from
the much-abused term ^^ common-sense." I will
only suggest, as instances, the common opinion
that the unproductive consumption of opulent indi-
viduals and of governments, the mere waste of
armies and of courts, is beneficial to the other
members of society, because, to use the vague
and unintelligible language of common con versa-

D


34


AN INTBODUCTOBY tECTURE


tion, " it pnHnotes the circulation of ratmeyi"
and the equally common errOFj that a fall in the
price of subsistence, arising from its abundance,
is injurious to the manufacturing classes, because
it diminishes the market for their commodities.
These opinions, setting aside their error, are so
paradoxical, that I cannot conceive a man with a
mind so constituted as to admit them unhesita-
tingly if they were presented to him when perfectly
I unbiassed. But they are favourable to the in-
terests, or to the supposed interests, of the most
influential members of every community. They
Ijave been so long repeated, in so many shapes,
and on so many occasions, that they have become
" familiar in our ears as household words ;" and
fliere is not a more common mistake than to sup-
pose, that because a proposition is trite it must be
true.

In the early part of this lecture I stated that the
theoretic branch of Pohtical Economy — -that which
explains the nature, production, and distribution
of wealth — would be found to rest oh a few general


ON POLITICAL ECONORTY. 35

JHio^^ticms^ the result of observation, or of con-
seioosn^. The i»*opositions to whidi 1 alluded
afe&ese:— -

Pirsfly. That wealth consists of all those things>
and of those thiiii^ only, vrhich are transferable ;
ivhiclk are limited in qutotity ; and which, directly
or indirectly, produce pleasure or prevent pain : or,
t^ use^n equivalent expression, which are suscep-
tibte' of exchange' ; Qnclu^h]^ under exchange,,
hire, as well as^ absiDhite purchase ;) Or, to use a
third equivalenf ejfpitessioti, which have value.

Secondly. That evety person is desirous to
ob^n, with aS little sacrifice as possible, as much
ai3 possible of the arficles oi^ wealth.

TMrcHy. T5iat the poWers of labour, and of the
other instruments which produce wealth, may be
iiid^firiitely increased by using their products as
the means of further production.

FcniFflily. That, agricdtural i^U remaining the
Banve> additional labour etnployed on the land
Wititin a given district, pi'oduces a less propor-
tionate returrf. And,

D 2


AN INTHODUCTORY LECTURE


Fifthly. That the population of a given district
is limited only by moral or physical evil, or by
deficiency in the means of obtaining those articles
of wealth, oFj in other words, those necessaries,
decencies, and luxuries, which the habits of the
individuals of each class of the inhabitants of that
district lead them to require.

The second of these propositions is a matter of
consciousness ; the others are matter of ofaserva-
vation. I shall devote my next lec-tures, and pro-
bably the whole of the present and the next year's
[•course, to the illustration (for it can scarcely be
p^flaid to require proof) of the second proposition,
^ and to the proof and illustration of the others ;
■ and in my subsequent reasonings, I shall assume
f them all as data.

If these premises are true, I shall be right

while T argue from them correctly : that I shall

always succeed in doing so, on so abstract a sub-

Pject, where the relations are so various, and the

' nomenclature is so defective, of course is not to

be hoped ; but happily I address an audience too


ON POI^ITICAL ECONOMY. » 37

acute to suffer my errors to pass undetected, and
too friendly not to inform me of them.

I shall endeavour, in all my discussions, and
particularly in the introductory ones, to make use
of as few terms as possible which^ from their
vagueness or their technicality, require explana*
tion^ without previously defining them. The rea-
sonings in Political Economy are, however, so
mutually dependent, that it is seldom possible to
define one term without introducing into the de-
finition others equally obscure. The best course
in a written treieitise is that adopted by M. Say,
who has affixed to his valuable work on Political
Economy a list of definitions. But it is impos-
sible to imitate his example in viva voce lectures :
for such a list is, in fact, an epitome of the theo-
retical branch of the science, which the attention
of no listener could follow, a&the beginning must
be unintelligible without the end. Dr. Whately s
kindness in permitting me to append to his logic
a collection of economical definitions, has a little
alleviated this difficulty. That work is probably


38


AN INTRODUCTORY LECTURE


in the hands of the greater part of my hearers ;
and, as most people begin reading a book by
the Appendix, I think I may take it for granted
that they have looked through the definitions
in question. I almost regret now, that I did not
suggest in each place the definition which ap-
peared to me the most convenient. In its pre-
sent state, however, that collection will enable
even those who are unacquainted with the outline
of the science to form a general notion of the
meaning of its principal terms, when I am forced,
as must sometimes be the case, to use them with-
out previous explanation.

Another difficulty, arising from the same source,
is the necessity which will frequently arise of
arguing from premises which have been simply
assumed, as if they have been conceded. Thus,
tlie whole reasoning of my next lectures will
assume " that every person is desirous to ob-
" tain, with as little sacrifice as possible, as
" much as possible of the articles of wealth."
I shall endeavour to avoid doing this tacitly, ex-


ON POLITICAL ECONOMY. 39

cept whare^ as is perhaps the case with the pro-
position I have just stietted, the assumed premise
is self-evident. But expressly or tacitly^ I shall
be forced to do it continually.


FINIS.


LONDON:
PrinUd by WlUUm CIowm,
